Of the Citie of God
St. Augustine, Englished by John Healey (1610)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): The complete text of Augustine's City of God in John Healey's 1610 translation — the FIRST English translation of the City of God, the only English version until 1871. Raw OCR via Internet Archive (augustinehealeycitieofgod, 1610 George Eld edition); index removed. This 1610 translation is in the public domain.

========================================================================

damnation:which name many of them as then falfely tooke vp,as a {ure fhelter 
againft the fto:mes of prefent ruine. For euen thofe that you may now behold 
moft petulantly infulting ouer Chrifts feruants, moft of them had neuer efca- 
ped the generall mflacre,had they not counterfeited themfelues to be the fer- 
_uants of Chrift. But now through their vngratefull pride ,and vngodly mad- 
neffe they fland againft chat name (in peruerfneffe of heart,and to their eternall 
captiuation in darknefle) to which they fled with a diflembling tongue, for the 
obtaining of the enioying but of this temporall light. | 


T he Commtweaeies of Iohn Lodouicus Viues,upon the firkt Chapter 
of the first booke of Saint Auguftine,of the City of God. 


| HE that bueth (a) by faith) Habacuc.2.4. The iutt fhallliue by faith, fo faith Pan? in di- 
| uerfe places : for this indeed is the prouifion of our liues voyage, In the text itis di- 
uerfly read: fome-time , 5y my faith; fome-time , by his fasth: the feuentie Interpreters 
reanilars it, ri deus’ wise tiow, he fhall liue by the faith of himfelfe, or his faith, (4) Righte- 
onfnelfe be turned into indgement | Pial.19. The true Hebrew faith ; Becaufe righteou{neffe fhall 
be turned iuto indgement :. It is meantof the end of the world , wherevnto that alfo belongs 
that followeth : The last victory: The Church vpon earth warreth daily ,and conquereth 
daily : but the end of one warte is but a ftep into another. That fhall be the laft and moft 
eG victory, when the Church fhall be wholy tranflated into heauen,to remaine for euer 


in 


List. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 3 


in peace with the King and peace-maker, Jefis Christ, (c:) Marcellinus, | There are extant 

in Auguffines Epitties,fome dedicated vnto AMarcellinus, and againe fome from him to 4x- : 
guftine , Their acquaintance it feemes begun in _Affrica: tor thus writeth Oro/us of this Lib.7.¢.42 
Marcellinus : In thofe dayes by Honotius bis command,and Conftantines affiffance, there was 

agenerall peace and unitie throughout the whole Church of Affrica,and the body of Christ (which 

we indeed are ) was cured by a willing or thaxkefullconfent on all fides : this holy command being 

pat in execution by Marccllinus, 4 man full fraught with wifdome, induftry, and endenour of all 
goodneffe. (d_) Now this which indeed is onely Gods.| Either becaufe fuch in their pride, The ee 
defire what is properly Gods, namely to refift the proud ; or, becaufe pride (in others ) is of Pe ete 
it felfe fo hated of the proud, that the proudeft nation of all (the Romaxes )reioycédto haue pation, 
this reckoned vp as parcell of their glories, that they kept downe the proud: That the Rowanes 

were proud themfelues,and by reafon of their owne pride hated it iq all others , the words. 

of Cato Cenforius do prooue, in his Oration to the Senate for the Khodians : They {ay (quoth 

he ) the Rhodians areprond : obietting that which I would not haue fpoken of my children : They 

are indeed proud : what is thatto-vs? Are you greened that any fhould be prouder then our feluesk y 

Veto which words Gellius addeth this. There is nothing can be fpoken either [harper or gentler ‘ 
then this repraofe unto thofe most proud high-minded men , that lone pride in themfelues andre-_ 
proone it in others: (¢) To {pare \Virgill hauing reckoned vp diuerfe praifes of other nations Agneid, 6:. 
wherein they excelled the Romanés,at length turning to Rome, faith thus: 


Tu regere imperio popslos Romane memento, 
Ha tibi crunt artes, pacig, imponere morem, 
Parcere {ubiettis & debellare fuperbos, 
‘But (Romane) \ct thy ftudy be to {way | 
Thy realmes with awe,to force them peace obey, 
To fpare the lowly,and to pull downe pride,&c. 
_ To obey peace,is‘all one asto keepe ot obferue it, (f) Lat after foneraigntie |: Itisanold 
Peart, The tyrants fubietts are his flanes, and wishes ye f luff, and Me fares. So 
faid Diogenes the Cynick_ of the Perfian King,and Tully in his Paradoxes of Cafar. (¢) Thesr 
wwne | that is, Chriftians. (4 ) Strangers; } namely fuchas did not worfhip ChriftsGod-. - 
head : whom Axguftine tetmeth Pagans: (#) By warre| This appeares moft plaineinthe 
Romanes,who liued more orderly in the times of warre,then at any time élfe,though in moft 
fecured peace: (k.) The paine of eternall damnation | Not onely thofe temporall and mo- 
mentari¢ punifhments. : | | 


—- 


7 There neuer was warre wherein the conquerors would [pare them 
whom they conquered, for the Gods they wor{bipped. 
| Crap 2. - ¢ 
Here hath beene thus many Warres chronicled, partly before Rome was Atthelat 
builded,and partly fince her founding : let them reade ; and finde mee any Gekof 
one Citi¢ taken by a ftranger foe, chat would fpare any that they found re- Romances - 
tired into the temples of their gods,or any Barbarian Captaine that euer Com- themfelues 
manded,that in the facke of the towne none fhould bee touched chat were fled ‘eathe 
into fuch or fuchtemples. (4d) Did not -4xeas fee Priamus {laine before the with dead 
Altar,and with his bloud | bodies. 
Sanguine fedantem quos ipfe facranerat ines - | 
| _ Sprinkling the flames himfelfe had hallowed? | 
Did not (d) Diomede & Vlifles,haning flaughtred allthe keepers of the high tower, 
weesse ~ bafis furmme cuftodsthusarcis, | | 
Corripuere facram effigiems manibu{d cruentis, 
Virginess aufi dine contingere vittds. | ~ af 
: Bz - Snatch 


‘ 


4 SAINT AVGVSTINE Cuap. 2. 
Cr ne Tn en eee 


Snatch vp the facred ftatue,and with hands 
 Befmeer’d in bloud,durft couch che (4) Virgins vaile2 


(e) Yet is not that true which followeth: 
Ex illofluere ac retro fublap{areferrs 


Spes Danaim.—— | 
From thence the Greedsns hopes decline, and faile. 


For after all this, they conquered: after this they threw downe Troy with 
{word and fire : after this they finote off Priams head before the Altar thathee 
fled vnto.Neither perithed Troy becaufe it loft the Palladssuns : for what had the 
Palladium oft firft,chat it felfe fhould perifh ? perhaps the keepers ? indeed itis 
true,cthey being flaine, ic was foone taken away : For the Image kept not che 
men,bue the menkept the lmage ( f) But why then was it adored as the prefer- 

uer of the country and Citizens , when it could not preferue the owne 
keepers? : ; 

— : ,L. VIVES. 
dnot (4) £neas,] fo faith Virgil : There faw I Priam, Hecuba, and all their hundred 
ern: D! ughters at the ee This Esepaticd cat that night when Troy was taken and 
burned by the Greekes : and Neoptolemus Pirrbus, Achilles his fonne {flue Priam at the altar, 
(6) ie had hallowed, | Wherein he thowes the greater indignity , bec aufe thofe gods 
did not affift him,which he himfelfe had made and confecrated in.that very place, I thinke 
it is meant of Vefta in whofe temple perpetuall fire was kept : Virgils Commentators doe 
not explaine it : let each man take it ashe pleafe. (c) Diomedes, | This alfo is from Usrgil 
in the {aid booke : the words are Sixons, and meant of the Palladiwm , which in the lai 
warre Djomedes and Uliffes tole out of the Temple of Pallas, Nor feared they facriledge, 
as to the which they added murther, and yet was ( their party ) the Grecians, conqucromrs 
ouer Troy. The Palladium was an Image of 


Pallas, whereof there are fo many relations ex- 

bats tant, that I fhou!dthinke ie idle to proceed in recounting all mens opinions thereof. Yet 

areata ~ will I extraét what feemes moftlikely , out of Varro, Diony/ius Halscarnaffeus , Onid, Ple- 

tarch,and Serius: Chryfas the Daughter of Pallas ‘being married vato Dardanus , brought 

with her for hir dowry this Palladiwm,and the Images of the Great gods: for which, Darda- 

nus built a Temple in Samothracia ; all which Images afterward in his Grand-childs time, 

were tranfperted from thence into J/iem ,an Oracle forewarning them , that as long as the 

Palladium was there kept , fo long the City fhou!d continue vnruined , Wherefore it was 

placed in the moft ecret part of al’ che temple, and another Palladium made like that, was 

fer in open fight, and carelefly refpected . Now when Pirrhus had heard of Helenus, a 

‘Prophet, one of Priams fonnes, that Troy was inexpugnable , as long as the Palladsnm was 

fafe,and that hee had told this vnto the Greeke Princes , Viiffes and Diemedes entred the 

cowne in difouife,and getting to the Tower, fet vpon the keepers,flew them,and tooke away 

that falfe Palladiune . But the other , after the fack of Troy , together with the other great 

gods called the Troians Penates, Sycas deliuered vnto eA.neas, who carried them all into 

Italy with him. And fo from Alba Lenca, or (as Varro thinkes ) from Laninium, the Pella- 

diuin was remooued vnto Rome’, and fet vp in the houfe of Veta, which being by chance 

fron fire, Lucius Metellus then chiefe Prieft, with the loffe of his eyes, fetcht it forth of the 

midft of the flames. The Palladinm was openly feenc at the burning of the Temple of 

Vefta,inthe time of Heliogabalus faith Herodian. There was another Palladiam,which Ni 

cias did dedicate,in the Tower of Athens, (d) Virgins vayle,| For Pallas euct was a Virgin, 

(¢ ) Yet vs not that true, } For it was fpoken by the lyer Sizon : though it may bee held’ for 

true that then the Grecrans hope was ouer-throwne. Neuertheleffe they gotte the Cittie. 

(f) But why then, an argument which the Logicians call, @ minore : how can that preferue 

the City and the countrie , that cannot preferue the owne keepers and garde , which isa 
worke of leffe moment, and yet in nature nearer concerning it ? 


 - Of 


Linn. OF THE CITIE OF. GOD. 


Of the Romanes forrdue(fe in thinking that thofe Gods could helpe es 
a them which could not belpe Troy,taher diflreffe. 


| Cuap. 30 


B Ehold vnto what Patrones the Rossanes reioyced to committe the protec: 
2” tion of their. Cittie! O too too pitteous error! Nay , they areangry arvs 
when wee fpeakethus of their Gods : but neuer .with their teachers and in- 
uentors , but pay them money for learning them {uch fooleries: yea and more- 
ouer haue vpuchfafed their: Authors, both ftipends from the common treafury 
and ample honours befides ; andnamely in Vérgé//, who.was therfore taught vns. 
to their children , becanfe that they thinke this great and. moft renowned: Poet 
being faftned in their mindes , whilft they are young, will neuer eafily be for- 
gotten:accordingtothatof-Horace. = | BEUG we eh 
(4) Qua femel ef iombata recens fernabit odorem,~-—Tefta dius >. 
‘The liquors that new veffels fir&containes, 0. | - - us,’ 
Behindethem leaucataftthatlongremaines; == =~; ! 


E uen inthe forenam ed Poet Virgill ,.is leno prefented as the Ti voians foe,inci- . 
ting _-dolus the King of windes againft chem in thefe wordes* 2 


— (b) Gens inimica mihi T ‘yrrhenum nanigat eqnor 


—Bpia: 


Mins in Italiam portams ;vitto{g penatese: 9 EE ig 3 
aoe : : 


The nation that I hate, in peacefaylesby; © 8 esl Le 

with Troy and Troyes falne Gods to /taly.. -- 
(c)Xea would any wife-man. haue commended the defence of Rome vnto Gods, 
already proued vnableto defend them-felues?but fuppofe (d) Jno {pokethis. as. 
awoman inanger.not knowing what thee faid ; what faies ( the 19-often fur-: 
named(e) godly Jd Sneas him-felferdoeshenovfayplainly- yy 
SO | pcre a1, ualtueite: Cee ae. ee yi EET = 

(f) Panvhus Otriailessarcis,Pheebig, facerdosy:: 0. vm 
- Sacra miann,Vittof 4, deos parvum, nepoters i a ae 

Ipfetrahit,curfig,,amens ad liminatenBts 
_.. , Panthds aPrigt of Phebus andthe Tower, 
. 4+, Burdnedwith his falne gods,.andinhishand | 0-0-3 5 
- . + » Hispopreyonagnephey;flyes vnto the ftrand?: ¢--- 3 es. 
2 oe ee ee ee ee ee eee ee 
Doth he not hold thefe Gods(which he dares call fadse) rather comthended vn- 
to him, then he to them: it Being faid COhiNS 26 OI ON ee 
vee ee ee ee ee ee ee ce a i ee oe Nears ere 
1 | (g) Sacra {iol a, tibt commendat. Trova pemabes.2) 0 6 
.. .\>) 2° !Fothee doch Srey commend: her-Godssherall$ © oo. ce 

“ o Mes See ae oda tect an ‘ ee = 


pues a 


eae Oe ee | 


<2 
2 t 


- 


ak ee re ee ae eee ee as ee ee ea 
‘If Virgill then call them fallen Gods,and conquered Gads; neéding mans helpe 
for their efcape after their ouerthrow and fall , how.mad re mento thinke that 
there.was.any watte (hewenin committing Rowe, to them keeping , or that ic 
could not be loft,iffirft it Jofenor chemxDy worfbip‘conquereddad caft Gods, 
as guardians,and defenders , whatis'ibbucto putby good deityés , and adore 
oe | B3 ° Wicked 


eae S38 


/ 


2 


mn 


-. + Aeneas 


= Aeneds 


Ee, 


SAINT AVGVSTINE | Cuar.3- 


wicked (é) diuells? Were there not more wifdome fhewen in beleeuing, ( not 
that Rome hadnot come co this calamitie , vnleffe ic had firft loft them , but) 
that they had long fince come tonothing had not Rome beeneas the efpecially 
carefull keeper ofthem ? Who fees nor (that will fee any thing ) what an idle 
prefumption it is,to build any impoffibility of beeing conquered , vpon defen- 
ders that have bene conquered ? andto thinke that Rome therefore perifhed be- 
caufe it had loft che Gods(é)guardiansswhen poffibly,the onely caufe why it pe- 
rifhed,was,becaufe it wall fet the reft vpon fuch foone perifhing guardians 
Norlifted the Poets to lye when they fung thus of thefe fubuerted Gods ; it 
was truth that inferced their vigorous {pirits to confeffe it. But of chis,smore 
fitly in another place hereafter: Ac this time (as I refolued at firft ) I wil haue 
alitele bout(as wel.as I can)with thofe vngrateful ‘peepee hofeblafphemous 
tongues throw thofe calamities vpon Chrift,which are onely the guerdons of 
their owne peruerfnefle: But wheras Chrifts namealone was of power to pro- 
cure them their vndeferued fafety , chat ,they do fcorne to acknowledge: and 
being madde with facrilegious petulancy, they practife their foule tearmes vp- 
pon hisname , which like falfe wretches they were’befdre glad to take vppon 
them to faue their lines by sand throfe filthy tongues which { when they were 
in Chriftes houfes)feare kept filent,to remaine there with more fafety , where 
euen for his fake they found mercy; thofe felfe-fame, getting forth againe,fhoor 
at his deity with al cheir envenomed fhafts of mallice, atrd curfes of hoftility. 


3 : 


’ 
— 


.  UVIVES. . Metall Ae -_ 
Vo (a) femel\ Horace ier 2, Commonly cited to proue the power of cuftome in 


ie aie a 


a 


vneertaine, Some fay Neptune and eApollo,who (as we read ) built the wals of Troy: Other 
fay Vefta: For VergiMhauingfaid-,.. yp © 7 aaa 
an | Sacra fuof4,, oc. ‘ = a % ee fon 7 fe icy & uh, “OES 
1 ‘To thee doth Trey conimend her Gods, &c,---Addes preferttly, .'' 

«Sic. ast manibus viteas, Veltanque petentemt, en ae 

is 


biel OF THECITIEOFGOD. = 7 


" This faid he ferchech forth th ecernall fires 
: : Almighty Vefta,and her pure attire---—-- 


Now I thinke 7efe was none of the Pewates,but the fire,acdedto them , and therefore the 
Ditlater and the reft of the Romaine Magiftrates on the day of their inftalment facrificed to 
Veffa and the Gods guardians, Of this Vea and thefe Gods thus faith 7#/y in his twentith 
booke de natura deorie. Nam vefhe nomen,8tc.The name of Vcita we haxe from the Greekes: 
at is that whith they call isis, And her powerss oxer fires and altars : Therefore inthe wor~ 
josp of that Godeffe which is the guardian tothe moft inward and internall things , alfthe praiers 
and facrifices offered are externall : Nor are the Penates far different from the power afore- 
Said : being either deriued from Penuwhich is what{oener man eateth,or of penivirs,in thir they 
are placed within,and therefore called of the Poets, Penetrales chamber or clofetary gods, Thus 
far Txlly, Buthere is no time for further difpute of this matter. Déony/ixs in his firft booke 
faith he faw ina certaine blinde obfcure temple not far from the Fors, two Images of the 
Froian gods , tike two young men, fitting, and hauing Jauelins in their hands(two very old 
peeces of worke)and vpon them infcribed D. Penates : and that in moft of the temples were 
Images in fafhion and habit like chefe old ones. I make no queftion thefe were Caffor and 
Pollsx : for in other places they are called the Romanes Penates,whichPrudentius ceftifies 


What Pe- 
no is, 


N 


wnto Symmachus in thele wordes. 


_* Gemini gud fare 
- Corraptd de matre nothi Ledeia Proles 

_ Notiurnig, equites celfe due unmina Roma Impendent 6c. 

: ——— And the two brothers ' 

The baftard twins of Leda and the Swan, | 

Night-riders,as the Patron gods do watchi 

The wals of ftately Rome,Xc, —————— 


But thefe were not the Patron Gods of Trey , for euen in the bepinning of the Treyan 

warre, prefently vpon the rape of Helles, they died, And therefarefhe being ignorant of 

their death, lookes for them amongft the other Greeke Nobles from the walles of Tray, 
Homer Ilad.3.Neither were thefe two the Dy magni,the great Gods,for Heanen and earth 

(as Varro faith in his, 2,booke de lingua Latina) are ( as the Samothracians principles doe wig vere 
teach )the Dii magni, the great Gods,and thofe whom I hane named by fo many names. For the Dy 
neither were the two mens [bapes which e£neas fet up before the gates at Samothracia , thefe wsagni, 
great Gods nor as the unlzav opinion holdeth,were the Samothracians Gods ,Caftor avd Pollux: 

Thus are Varro, The Troyan Penates were thofe §:0¥ueyzay,thofe great gods which fate 

as protectors of the Citty and Latium. Amongft which the Palladiam was one , and thé 
Sewspiternall fire another,and herevpon it is that Virgil fings this, 


. ; ——— Veflag, mater ; 

s Que Tufcum Tyberim,& Romana palatia fernas Oc. 

; es - And mother Veffa,the that lookes, 
. .To Romes feire buildings, and old Tybers brookes &c. 


" Though indeed they held it a. wicked faét to name the peculiar god Guardian of the Cit- 
ty nor hold thacit is Vefta. Valerius Soranus loft his life for being fo bold asto name that 
name. But of this too much already, (4) But (sppofe luno [poke ] For Seruins and Donate fay 
that-Zesto called chem the fallen gods to make them the more contemptible, and free Aeolus, 
from fulpeing that he went about to do oughe againft the gods. (¢)Godly|Godly in duty Piety. 
vato his gods, his Father, and his Sonne , all whome he faued ftom burning. For Godlineffe 
is a dutiful worfbip vate God ,onr Conntry, omr Parents and our kin{folkessbreefely.s thanke- 
_ fidadfle unto allta whonse we are indebted. ({,) Paxthus|This is out of the fecond of the «fe. 


néads,deginning at this verfe, 


Ecce antems telis Panthus delap fins eAchinim, | 
Panthus Orviades ce. | =a 
, : B4 (g) Sacra 


Qusmae.. 


_ what euerwas found alfo el-whereto belong to fuch places, with all a 
honor and reuerence was reftored . There,was freedome loft,here faued: 


SAINT AVGVSTINE Ciar.4. 


(g) Sacra feofgThef e are Hettors words fpoken to e£xeas in 2 dreameh)'That Rome bad 


not come } An Argument from the event of one thing, to the euent of the like : the fenceis 


corrupted in the latine : it fhould haue beene: son Romam ad iftam cladem:that it had run 
thus : V¢ fapientins multo exiftimaret fe non illnd p utaret,Romam ad banc cladem non fuiffe 
venturam, nif ills periffent fed illud potins putaret sllos olim (re. (+) dexills | for the old wri- 


~ ters acknowledged fome of thefe Damones, or Genii to be very euill , and flothfull, For 


one Genms excelled another in vertue,wifdome,and power , Augufins his Genius was more 
checrefulland lofty then was Marke eAnthonies ,asthat fame e£gsptian magician affit= 


med in Plutarke in Marke Anthonies life, Nor doth our Chriftian religion deny that rhere. 


is preheminence of fome aboue others. afwell amongtt the Angells as the Denills; 


(k) Gods guardians’) luft fuch guardians as Péate in his Podicy faith that drunken and lux-. 
~ rious Magiftrates are,that need guardians for themfelues. 


‘Of ‘the fanttuary of luno in Troy which freed not any ( that fled into x) 
vom the Greekes at th: Citties fackswhereas the Churches of the Apoptlesfaued . 
all comsmers from the Barbarians,at the facke of Rome. Czx{ats opinion 
| tonching the enemies cuftomse inthe facke of Citties. 
Cuarp 4” 


N& couldTroy it felfe that was (as I fayd before) (4)the mother of the Ro- 

manes progeny, in al her hallowed temples, faue any one from the Grecsan 

force and fury; though they worfhiped the fame gods: nay did they notin 

thevery fanctuary of Zeno, Coa =F 

by ppfalunonisafila 

: Cuffodes lecti (¢) Pheenix,¢> dérus Viiffes . 
Pradam afferuabant.Huc undique Troia gate oo 

_ dncenfis erepta adytis, menfaqne deorum, See 4 

Cratert{que aurofolid:captinaqueveftis = 5 
Concerit 05°. | ee a 


. 


————To Iwnosfan@uary = 

Comes all the prey,and whatthey thither carry 

Is kept by choifemensthe Phenscian _ is 

And dire/i/es: thether the whole ftate 

Of Troées wealth fwarmes,the gods, their temples plate, 
There lies the gold in heapes,and robes of worth, | 
Snatcht from the flaming coffers —— &c. es 


Behold , the place dedicated vnto fo great a goddefle was chofen out ( not 
toferue fora place whence they might lawfully pull prifoners, but ) for a 
prifon wherein to fhut vp all they tooke. Now compare this temple,not of a- 
ny vulgar god,ofthe common fort , but of /apéters fifter and Queene ofall the 
other gods, vnto the Churches builtas memorialls of the Apoftles. To the 
firft,all the fpoiles that were pluckt from the gods ‘and. flaming temples were 
caried, not to be be{towed backe to the vanquifhed,but to bee ared: amon 


the vanquithers.To the fecond , both that which was the places. owne and (4) 


® ce: a Cd 4 


ere, 


was bondage fhut ins here,it was {hut out : thether were men brought by their . 
proude foes , forto vndergo flauery : hicher were meri brgught by their picti- 


full foes, to be fecured from flauery. Laftly,the temple of J#zo was chofen by 
the (e)vnconftant Greekes to practife their proud couetoufneffein , whereas 
the Churches of Chrift were by (thie naturally cruell Barbarians, chofen to 

i | exercife 


Lint. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 4 


excercife their pious humility in. Perhaps the Greekesin that their vidory 
{pared thofe that fled into the temples of the (¢/Common gods , ard did vot 
dare to hurt or captivate fuch as efcaped thither : But in that,Hércsl/ plaies the 
Poet indeed, and faignesit. Indeed there he defcribes the (/)generall cuftomé 
of mo& enemies in the facking of cities, and conqueftsswhich (z:cuftome, Ce- 
far himfelfe(as Sa/uf, that noble , true hiftorian recordeth ) forgetteth not co 
auouch,in his fentence giuen vpon the confpirators in the Senate-honfe : that 
(in tkefe fpoiles ) the Virgins are rauifhed, thé Children torne from their Pa- 
rents bofomes,the Matrons madeche obicéts,of al the viGors luft,che temples, 
ahd houfes all fpoiled, all things turned into burning,and flaughter : and laftly 
all places ftopt full of weapons, carcaffles ,bloud, and lamentation, If Ce/ar had 
not nained temples, wee might have thought it the cuftome ofa foe ro {pare 
fuch places as ate the habirations of cheir gods: but the Senators feared the ru- 
ine of their temples,not by an vnknowne or ftranger enemy, but by(k)carzline, 
and his followers,who were Senators and Citizens of Rome themfelues. Bur 
thefe were villaines chough,and their countries parricides. 


L. VIVES. 


M Other (4) of the Romanes] For the Troyans that came with e£neas into Italy buile 
Laxinium;cthe Lauinians, Alba longa , the Albans , Rome, But Saluffe fayth that the 
Troyans themfelues that wandred abotie with e4xeas without dwellings, built Rome at ae 
the firft.(b) Ienonis | They are Lxeashis words eAnead, 2. (c) Phenix | Amintors Son, Phanix, 
and Achilles his Maifter, one that taught him to fay well and do well : Homer.Ilkad.3 (d) 
What ewer was|There wasat this facke of Rome a huge quantity of gold taken out of the Va- 
ticane, but by Alaricas his command,it was al reltored. Orof-Lib.7(¢ Waconftant Greeke se 
was the Greeks character at Rome,& therfore they called them Grecséi:and {ome coppics of 
Auguftines bookes haue Greculoris:Here.€icero in his oration for Flaccus faith thefe words, — 
Wherein we carneftly defire you Lo remember the rafhneffe of the multitude,and the trucly Gree- 
kith dexity . So meaneth Lucian in his Aerces fernientibas, and Lamblichas calls his Greci- 
ans Jight-witted, (f) euen naturally cruell] This is added for more fulneffe to the compari- 
fon. The Barbarians are appofed to the Greekes ; not all Barbarians , but the naturaly f2- 
uage and cruell , vatothofe that would haue al humanity to be deriued from them alone. 
Cicero writeth thus to his brother Oxistus, ruling then in A/a minor,which is Greece. Sees 
ing werule over thofe among ft whom not onely humanity isin st felfe,but [cemes {rom thence to 
be derined unto all others,verily ler vs feeketo afcribe that chicfely unto them fromwhom we 
owr feluesreceined it. (g) common gods | For the Greekes and the. Troyans worfhipped the 
famie gods, (h) generall cuftome \Truc, leaft his fpeech otherwife might hane made repre- 
henfton feeme rather peculiar vnto the Greekes then vnto other Nations in their conquelts 
of Citties.(i which cuffome\Caius Cafar being then Pretor(& afterwards Dittator Jhauing 
difcouered the confpiracy of Catiline,being asked by the Conful Cicero, what he thought 
fit fhould be done vnto the confpirators ; anfwered , as Saluffe fetreth downe ; That thefe 
euilis which he had rehearfed,muft needs haue come to effect,not only in this war,by rea- 
fon iz was domefticall, but chat it is warres cuftome , to produce fuch bloudy effeéts, which 
the vanquithed of all forts are fure to feele . Tully againtt Verres faith tha : I omit te 
fpeake of the deflowring of free Virgins , andthe rauifbing of the matrons,oc. which were com- 
mitted in that facke of the Citty,not through hoftile hate,nor military loofene{fenor cuftome of 
warre gor right of conque/?, Thus farre Tully. (k_)Catéline |The hiftory is at large in Salu/te: 
and elfe where I will tske occafion to fay fome-what of it. oe ; 


10 


SAINT AVGVSTINE | Cuar. 5. 


Yncreafe by 
remiflien. 


The Clau- 
dian family, 


That the Romanes themfelues neuer (pared the Temples 
of thofe Cities which they conqnered. 


Cuar. 5. 


BY why fhould we {pend time in difcourfing of many nations, that haue wa- 
ged warres together, and yet neuer {pared the conquered habitations of 
one anothers gods: let vs goe to the Romanes themfelues : yes; I fay, let vs ob- 
ferue the Romanes themfelues,whofe chiefe glory it was, 


Parcere fisbie tis cy debellare faperbos. 
To fpare the lowly, and pull downe the proud. 


And (4) being offered iniurie, rather to pardon then perfecute : in all their {pa- 
cious conquefts of Townes and Cities, in all their progreffe and augmentati- 
on of their domination , fhewvs vnto what one Temple they granted this 
priviledge , thacit fhould fecure him that could flie into it from the enemies 
{word ? Did they ever do fo ,and yet their Hiftories not recorde it ? Is it like 
that they that hunted thus for monuments of praife,would endure the fuppref- 


fion of this fo goodly a commendation ? Indeed that great Romane (b) Marcus 
Marcellus that tooke that goodly City of (¢) Syracufa, is faid to haue wept be- 


fore the ruine,and (hed his owne (d) teares ere he fhed their bloud : (¢) hauing 
acareto preferue the chaftitie cuen of his foes from violation. For beforehee 

auc leaue'to the inuafion,he made an abfolute Edia, that no violence fhould 

e offered vnto any free perfon: yet was the Citie in hoftile manner, fubuerted 
vtterly,nor finde we any where recorded, that this fo chafte and gentlea gene- 
rall euer commanded to {pare fuchas fled for refuge to this Temple or chat: 
which (had it beene otherwife ) would not haue beene omitted , fince neither 
his compaffion, nor his command for the captiues chatftitie, is left vnrecorded. 
So is (f) Fabius the conqueror of Tareatu:n commended for abftayning from 
making bootie of their Images. For his( g) Secretary asking him what they 
fhould do with the Images ot the gods, whereof they had as then taken a great 
many : he feafoned his continencie with a conceit , for asking what they were, 
and being an{wered that there were many of them great ones,and fome of them 
armed: O ( [aid he) ict us leane the Tarentines their angrie gods. Seeing therefore 
that the Romane Hiftoriographers neither concealed Afarcellus his weeping, 
nor Fabius his iefting,neither the chafte pitty of the one ,northe merry abfti- 
nencie of the other,with what reafon fhould they omic that,ifany of them had 
giuen fuch priviledge to fome men in honor of their gods, that they might 
faue their lives by caking fanQuarie in fuchorfucha Temple, where neither 
rape nor flaughter fhould haueany power or place? 


oe TR AS TS, 


L. VIVES. 


- 


Eing (4) offredininrie,| Salufte in his confpiracie of Catiline {peaking of theancient 


manners of the Romanes,giues them this commendation : That they increafed by pardo- 
ning, (6) Marcus Marcellus,\ There was two forts of the Clandii in Rome : the one noble, 
arifing from that Appins Claudius that vpon the expu!fion of the Ksngs_came from Regillam 
vnto Rome, and there was chofen Senatour , and his family made a Patriot : the other was 
Plebeyan,ox vulgar,but yet as powerfull as the firft,and as worthy ,as Swetonivs in the life of 
| | Tyberins 


Lis. r. _  . OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 


Tyberius dothteftifie, And of this later, this man.of whom -dxgajtize here writeth,was the 
ir(t that was called Afarcellss,as Plutarch writeth out of Poffidoxius. Now I wonder at this 
reat etror of fo great an Hiftoriographer, and one that was moft exaét in the Romane af- 
aires: for there were Clauss Afarcells a hundred yeares before.But he of whom wc {peake 
was foure times Confull : for the fecond time he was created Confull, becaufe the election 
Was corrupt, hee difcharged it rot. Now if one recken right, hee was fiue times Contull, 
firft with Cornelius Scipio ,in the warreof France , wherein hee tooke:ritch fpoiles from . 
Viridomaras the French King : and thofe were the third anu laft warres which the Romanes 
had waged with fo many nations and vnder fo many Generalls. After his fecond Confulfhip 
he tooke Syracz{a. In his fourth Confulfhip (he and Quintus Crifpixus being intrapped by 
the enemies) this great,valorous and iudicious Captaine loft his lifes in the eleuenth yeare of _ 
the fecond Carthaginian warre, after he had fouvht nine and thirty fer battailes, as Péivie in 
his feuenth booke witnefleth. (¢) Syracefa, |It is a citie in Sicily, now ancient,and whilom 
wealthy :three yeares did this AZarceilus befiege it,and at length tooke it ; bearing as much 
fpoile fom that conqueft(very neare)as from the conqueft of Carthage , which at that time 
was in the greateft height,and {tood as Romes parallell in power and authority. (4) 1Teares] 
So faith Liwy lib.a5, ALarcellas entring upon the walles,and looking oner all the citty flanding at 
that time faire and seer, xs faid to hane foed teares.partly for toy of this fo great aconquest and 
partly for pitty of the Cities ancient glory : The oner-throwe of the Athenian nauie , the wracke 
of two great armies with their Captatnes ; fo many warres and rich Kings,and all that before him 
to be in a moment on fire,came all into his minde at onte, This is alfoin Valerius Maximus.de 
bumanitate. (¢) Nay he had a care, \Linie,as before. Marcellus by a generall confent of the 
Captaines, forbad he foldsers to violate any free body leaning them all the rest for fpoile : which 
edit contained the affisrance of the fayd free women fc 
that of their chaftities, ( f ) Pabius the conqueror of Tarentum, | In the fecond Carthaginian 
warre,7 arenthm;a famous citie in Calabria fell from the Romanes vnto Haxnibal,bur Linius 
Salinator the Captaint of the Romane garrifon , retired into the tower, This Citie Fabins 
(Maximus recouered,and gaue his foldiors the {poile of it. This is thiat Fabius chat in the 
faid fecond Paxicke warre, by his fole wifdome put life into all the Romanes dying hopes, 
and by his cunning protraction blunted the furie of Hann:bal,And of him Evsas faid truly, 
Vuus homo nobis cuntlando refistust remo, | | 
One mans wife,fet delay,reftor'd vs-all. | 


Y¥neither can nor lift now to ftand vpon all the errors of the firftCommentator of this 

booke : it were too tedious,and too ttoubleforne. Buit becaufe in this place he goeth aftray 

with many others,who indeed in other mens iudgements are learned in {uch matters, but in 

their owne iudgements,moft learned, (nor,to fay trueth, are they vnicarned , ) I couldnot 

choofe but giuc the reader this admonition, that this Fabixs is not hee that was called. 
Maxima but his Grandfather was called fo : becaufe hee being Céx(or with P. Decins,di- 
uided the whole commonty of Rome into foure Tribés,which he named Vrbane : though I 

deny not that this Fabss of whom Axgu/tine Ipeaketh , deferued this name, but’ the warld 

as then did not giue ithim,(g ) Secretary , Hcreofread Lixée in his 27. Booke, 


That the cruell effects following the loffes of warve, did but follow the cuftome 
of warre : and wherein they were moderated, it was through the 
power of the name of lefus Chrift. os 
| Cuar. 6.: 
"T Hetefore all the fpoile, murther , burning , violerice and affiGtion, that in 
this frefhcallamitie fell vpon Rome , were nothing but the ordinary effeds 
following the (4 ) cuftome of warre . But that which was fo vnaccuftomed, 
that the fauage nature of the Barbarians fhould put on anew fhape.and appeare 
fo mercifull that it would make choife of great and fpacious Churches, to fill 
with fuch as it meant to fhew pitty on ,from whichaone fhould bee haled to 
: | flaughter 


ef 


om death and all other violence , as well as Fabius, 


£2 


Pfal.89,32, 
3 3° 


A defcrip- C 


tion of the 
fack of a 
citic, 


SAINT AVGVSTINE Cites. 


flanghter or flauerie,in which none fhould bee hurt, to which many by their 
courteous foes fhould be conduGed , and out of ‘which none fhould bee lead 
into bondage; This is due te the name of Chrift, this is due to the Chriftian 

rofeffion; he that feeth not this is blinde, hee that feeth it and pers it not is 
thankleffe, hee that hinders him that praifeth it ,is madde. God forbid chat 
any man of fence fhould attribute this vneo the Barbarians brutifhneffe ; Ie was 
God that ftrucka terror into their truculent and bloudy fpirits,it was he that 
bridled them,it was he that fo wonderoufly reftrained them, that had fo jong 
before fore-told this by his Prophet. (5 ) will vifit their offences with the rod, 
and their finne with [courges :yet willl not utterly take my mercy from them. 


L. VIVES. 


Vihtome (a) of warre, | Quintilian recordes the accidents that follow the facking ef Ci- 
tics in his e) eht booke,thus: The flames were {fread through the temples ,a terrible crace 
king of falling houfes was heard : and one confufed found of a thoufand fenerall clamonrs, Some 
fled they knew not whether : fome ftuck fast in thesr last embraces of their friends , the children 
and the women howled, and the old men (untuckily fpared untill that fatall day ): then followed 
the tearing away of all the goods out of houfe and temple, and the talke of thofe that had carri- 
ed away one burden and ranne for another, and the poore prifoners were driuen in chaines before 
their takers : and the mother endenouring to carry her filly infant with her, and where the most 
Saine wae,there went the vittors together by th eares, Now thefe things came thus to paffe,be- 


 caufe the foldiers (as they are a moft proud and infolent kinde of men, without all meane 


Rom.¢. 
45° 


Rom, 2,5. 


and modeftie ) haue no power to temper their auarice , luft or fuirie in their viory s and 
againe(becaufe taking the towne by force) if they fhould not do thus for terror to the ene- 
mie,they might iuftly feare to fuffer the likeof the enemy, (6)/ will vifit | Ivis Spoken of 
the fonnes of Dawid, Pfal.8 9. If they be not good ere. S at . 


Of the commodities and ds[comodities commonly 
communicated both to good and ill, 


Cuap. 7. 


Ea but(will (2) fome fay ) Why doth God fuffer his mercy to be exten- 
ded vnto the graceleffe and thankelefle? Oh ! why fhould we iudge,but be- 
caufeitis his worke that maketh the funne to{hine daily both on good and 
bad, c& the ratne to fal both on the iuft and vniuft?For what though fome by. me- 
dictating vpon this , take occafionto reforme their enormities with repentance? 
& other fome (as the Apoftle faith)defpifing the ritches of Gods goodnes,and 
long fuffering,in their hardnefle of heart and impenitency (6) do lay up unto 
them-{elues wrath againft the day of wrath,and the reuelation of Gods tuft indgement, 
whowzll (c) reward each man according to his workes? Neuerthelefle Gods pati- 


ence ftill inuiteth the wicked vnto repentance as this {courge doth inftru@. , 


the good vnto patience. The mercy of God imbraceth the good with loue, 
as his feuerity doth corre& thebad with paines. For it feemed good to the 
almighty prouidence to prepare fuch goods, in the world to come,as the iuft 
onely fhould inioy,and not the vniuft : and fuch euils,as the wicked only fhould 
feele,and not the godly. Butas for thefe temporall goods,of this world , hee 
hath left them to the common vfe both of good and badde : that the goods of 
this world fhould not be too much defired , becaufe euen the wicked doe alfo 

partake 


Lie.t. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 


13 


nt EEE me ens iy OTD 


partake them : and that the euils of this world fhould not bee too cowardly 
auoyded,where-with the good are fometimes affeted. But there is great dif- 
ferencein the (4) vfe both of that eftate in this world , which iscalled profpe- 
rous,and that which is (e) called aduerfe. For neither dothefe temporall 
poodes extoll a gocdman, nor doe the euill deie& him. Burt the euill man 
muft reeds bee {ubie& to the punifkment of this earthly vnhappincfle, 
becaufe hee is firft corrupted by this earthly Fappineffe : Yet in the: 
diftributing of thefe temporail bleffings God fheweth his prouident operation. 
For if all finne were preiently punifhed: there fhould bee nothing to do at the 
laft iudgement:and againe ifno finne were here openly punifhed , the diuine: 
providence would not bee beleeued : And fo in profperity, if God fhou!d not 
giue competency of worldly and apparant bleflings co {ome that afke them,we 
would fay he hath nothing to do with them: and thould he giue them tv all that 
aske them,we fhou!d thinke he werenot to bee ferued but for them : and fo his 
feruice frould not makevs godly , but rather greedy. This being thus, whae 
euer affli@ion good menand badde doe fuffer together in this life , ic doth not 
proue the perfons vnaifting, becaufe fo they both do ioyntly indure like painss 
for asinone fire, gold fhineth and chaffe fmoaketh , and as vader one (f) 
flayle the ftraw is bruifed, and the eare cleanfeds nor is the lees and the oyle 
confufed becanfe they are both prefled in one preffe , folikewife one and the 


fame violence ofaifliction , prooueth,purifieth, and (¢) me/teth the good, and . 


condemneth , wafteth and cafteth out thebadde. Ard thus in one and the 
fame diftrefle do the wicked offend God by deteftation and blafphemy , and 
the good do glorifie him by praife and praier. So great is the difference where- 
inwe ponder not what,but how a man fuffers his affects. For one and the fame 
motion maketh the mud {mell filchily , and che vnguent {well moft fragrancly. 


L. VIVES. 
“Ome (a) fay] becaufe the aforefaid wordes were fpoken of the fonnes of Daxid ( that is, 
the godly )How fhould the mercy of God be extended unto the witked ?(b ) Do lay up | ot heap 
together, For Thefaurus, is a laying together of euill things as weil as good : andit is or- 


dinary with the Greekes to fay 9:2aveis edz, the treafure of Tlls,and Plautus hath The- 
fanrus fixprihe treafure of whoredome. (c) Willreward |* commonly it is read, Doth re- 


Thefaurm 
what it is. 


ward: Aucuftin hatb it in better forme :for the Apoftle {peakes of the world to come : and Hamaine 


the grceke is 2retasw, Reddet willreward. (d) Vie both of that | Terence sm his Heauton- 
timorcumenos faith : {ach things as are called humane goodsnamely our parents , country , li- 
nage.friendes and wealth: all thefe are but as his mind ws that voffelfrk them : tohim that can 
vic them well, they are as ; to him that vfeth them otherwife then well , they are euil, 
This Terence hath out of P/ato in diuers places. (¢) Is called aduerfe | Nzmely of the vul- 


pe and fuch as are ignorant of the true natures of things. (f) Fiaile | Virgillin the firft of What Tri« 


is Georgtkes, reckons the Flaile amcngft the inftruments of husbandry, Pé/inye in his eigh- 
teenth booke faith : The harnef? corne us thrafbed forth upon the floore fometime with flayles, 
fomctime with the feete ofhorfes , and fometime with ftaues. So that this fame Tribulum, 
is an inftrument where-with the corne being ripe is thrafhed forth on the floore: (our fitteft 
englifh ts a flaile. ) How this is done,Varro.teacheth in his firft book De re raftica. (¢) Mel- 
teth the good | Maketh them liquid : it is a fimily taken from gold : to exclude further difpus 
tation hereof; the fcripture faith the good are melted with charity : Af7 foule melted as my 
beloned {poke faith the Canticles : but if aman will follow this theame he fhall neuer finde an 
end, The fitteft teacher in this kind is the holy {cripture. re a f 


goods what 
they arc. 


bula ts, 


14 


, accleftiall inheritance 2 


a, 


" SAINT AVGVSTINE. _ Cuart 8. 


of the caufes of {uch corrections as fall both wpon 
the good and bad together. 
_ CHAP. 8. | , 7 
BY: tell me now in all this defolation what onething did the Chriftians en- — 
4? dure, which due and faichfull confideration, might not curne vneo their edi: 
fication?F or firft they might with feareobferue to what a mafle iniquity was in- 
creafed,at which the iuftGod being difpleafed had fent thefe affliGions vps the 
world& that chough they them-felues were far fr6 the fociety of the wicked yet 
fhould they not hold them-felues fo purely feperate from all faults , that they 
fhould thinke them-felues too good to fuffer a temporall corre@tion for divers. 
faults that might be found in their conuerfations : for to omitte this , that ther 
is no man how cuer Jaudable in his conuerfation,that fh fome things (2) yeelds 

not vnto the concupifcence of the flefh; and that rhough hee decline net vnto — 
the gulfe of reprobate offence and habitation ofall brutith filthinefle , yetflips 
now and then into fome enormities , and thofe either feldcime , or fomuch 
snore ordinary as then they are leffé momentary : To omitte all this, how hard 
a thing is it to find one,that makes a true vfe of their fellowfhip, for whofe hor- 
rible pride , luxury , auarice , beftiall iniquity and irreligioufnefle, the Lord 
(ashis (2) Prophets haue threatned) doth lay his heaty hand vppon the whole 

_ World? How few do wee finde that liue with them , as good men ought to Hite 
with them. For either we keepe aloofe, and forbeare to gine them due inftruc- 
tions , admonitions orreprehenfions, or elfe wee holde their reformation too 
reata labour : either weare affraid to offend them, or elfe wee efchew their 
i for our owne greater temporall preferment, and feare their oppofition 
either in thofe things which our greedineffe longeth to inioy , or in thofe 
which our vescenctl is affraid to forgoe: fo that though the liues of the wic- 
ked be ftill difliked ofthe good , and that thereby the one do aucid that damna- 
tion which in the world to come is the affured inheritance of the other,yet be- 
eaufe they winke at their damnable exorbitances, by reafon they feare by them 


_ toloofe their owne vaine temporalities, inftly do they partake with them in 


the punifhments temporall though they fhall not do fo in the eternall s Iuftly 
do they in thefe diuine corre@ions, raft the bitterneffe of thefe tranfitory af- 
fliions with them, to whome when they deferued thofe affliGions, they 
through the loucof this life, forbare to thew them-felnes better: indeed he 


* that forbeares to reprehend ill courfes in fome that follow them, becaufe he 


will takeamore fittime, or becaufe he doubts his reprehention may tather 
tend totheir ruine then their refortnation,or becaufe he chinkés that others. 
‘that are weake,may by this correction be offended ini their Godly endeauours 
ot diuérted from the true faith: In this cafe forbeatance arifes not from occafj- 
onof greédineffe , but from the counfell of charity, (c) Buc their’s is the faule 
indeed who live a life quite contrary,wholy abhorring the courfes of the 
wicked, yet will ouerpaffe totaxe the others fins wherot A ought to be mof 
feuere reprehenders and correctors,becaufe they feare to offend them,and fo 
be hurt in their poffeffion of thofe things whofe vie is lawfull both vnto good 
and bad , affecting temporaliti¢s in this kinde farre more greedily then is fit 
for fuchas are but pilgrimes in this World, and fuch as ex e&(d)the hope of 
for it is not on¢ly thofe of the oa fort that liue in 
0 | : matriage 


ae ee oes a 


List. OF THE CITIEOFGOD, . ag 


marriage,haning (or feeking to haue ) children sand keeping houfes and famii- 
lies swhome the Apoftle inthe Church doth inftru@ how co liue, thie wiues 
with their husbands and the husbands with their wiues: children with their 


Se ee 


farré greater reaton, becaufe vnto them( g )the Prophet faith :' Hee i rahi’ beech, 34: 


| 


16 


indy 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. | Cuar. gs 


well confidered,tell me whether any thing be cafuall vnto the good, that tend- 


' ethnotto their good : vnleffe we fhall hold thatthe Apoftle talked idely when 


he faid: ( 4) wee know all things worke tozether for the bet unto them'that jowe 
God? : | 


| 1” fmaibiag ( a) yeelds | The luft of the Aeth is fo inwardly inherent in our bodies,and 


that affect is fo inborne in vs by nature (that great workeman of all thinges liuing’) who 
hath fo fubtilly infufed it into our breafts,thac euen when our minde is quiet vppon ano- 
ther obicét we do propagate our offpring in the like affection : fo that we can by nomeanes 
haue a thought of the performing of this defire , without beeing ftung within witha cer- 
taine fecrét delight:which many do make a finnc , but too too veniall; (4) by bis Prophets} 
and that very eften,as is plaine in E/ay,and Jeremy. (¢ ) But this és the fanle | Cicero inhis 
offices faith There be fome that although that \which they thinke bee very food,yet for feare 
of ensy dare not {peak it.(d) The hope | As the guide of their pilgrimage:(e ) the day of man} 
1.Cor. 4. Ipaffe little to bce indged of you or of the day of man: that is , the iudgement of 
man,whercin each man is condemned or approued of mieri : whofe contrary is the date 
the Lord, which fearcheth and cenfureth the fecrets of all heartes: (£) borse with and lone ] 
The wicked are not cnely to bee indured,but euen to bee loued alfo, God commaunding 
vs toloue euen our enemies, (Mat. 5. (¢) The Prophet | Ezechiel , Chap, 33. But ifthe 
watchman fee the {word come and blow uot the trumpet,ard the people bee not warned: and the 
Sword come & take away any perfon from among them,he is taken away for his iniquitie,but his 
bloud will [require at the watch-msans hands.(h )For unto this end were watch-men]ixitnome 
in Greeke is Speculator in latin , a watchman, a difcryer, an obferuer,andaGonernor , Cicero 
in his feauenth booke of his Epiftles to Atticus faith thus : Pompey would hane me tobe the 
étioxemor the Sentinell of Campania and all the fea-coaftes and one towhome the whole fumme 
of the bufines fhould haune fpeciall relation, Andromache ix Homer cals Hettor Troia treoubmor, 
the watchman or guardian of Troy, The Athensans called their Lesedligencers , and fuch as 
they fent out to obferue the practifes of cheir tributary citties Epifcopos ; Ouerfeers, and 
edazags, watchmen; the Lacedemonians called them dgpises, Moderatores , Gouernors, Ar 
chadins the Lawyer cals them Epé(copos that had charge of the pronifion for vittailes, 
Some thinke the prepofition iat to bee heere a Pleonafme (whereof Exftathins one of Ho- 
mers interpreters is one)and that cxomes and éxionoms is allone, 1. Nos {pate to reprebend} 
So faith faint Paw/ vnto Titus : And {fo dot our Bifhops euen in thefe times,whome with 
teares we behold haled ynto mattyrdorhe becaufe they tell the cruth in too bitter tearmes, 
and perfecute vice through all, not refpecting a whit their reuenues nor dignities, Chriff 
Tefus glosifie them. ( k_) Jobs | Fhe hiftory all men know ; and Hierome vppon the fame 


_, faith : Thefe thinges fell upon lob, that he might fhew outwardly unto men the lone that he held 
* inwardly unto God, (1) UVee know \Rom. 8. 28. Aduerfe and profperous fortune ar both 
affiftants in the good.mans faluation:and there is nothing befalleth them but he can con< 


wert it-vnto thie augmentation of his vertucs. 


That the Saints in theit loffe.of things temporall loofé 
= not any thing atal, © 


_ Cuar J. Oe 


TL Hey loft ail that they had what 3 cheir faith? their zeale> their goods of 


the () inward man ; which inritcheth the foule before God? Thefearea 


- Chriftiansritches, wheresfth¢ Apoftle being pofleffed faid : Godlineffets « 


| great 


List. OF THECITIEOF GOD . wv 


great caine if man bee content with what he hath: for we brought nothing into this ¥.Tim.b. 
world por can we cary any thing out : therefore when we haue fuode and rayment , lee °7"™* 
uscontent our-[elues there-with , for they that wilberich fall into temptation and 
fares , and into many fooli{h and burtfull defires , which drowne men tn per dition 
dnd deftruition, for (b) couetcoufneffe of mony is the roote of all eutll which while 
fore lafting after , haue erred from the faith and caft them-felues in many (c) for- 
rowes. Such therefore as loft their goods in that deftruction,ifthey held them 
as theafore-faid Apoftle (2) (poore without,butrich wichin)taughe chem:that 
is,ifthey vied the world fo as if chey vfed it not at all,then might they truly fay 
with him that was fo fore affalted and yet neuer ouerthrown (e) Naked came I ob 5, 343 
ont of my mothers wombe , and naked {ball Lreturie thether againe. The Lordhath 
wen it cr the Lord hath taken it away,as it hath ere the Lord fo commeth it to 
palfe : bteffed be the name of the Lord.Heé held his Lords will,(as a good feruant) 
for gréat poffeffions,and by attending that,enritched his‘fpirit:nor greeued he 
at all ac che loffeof that in his life time,which death perforce would make him 
Jeaue fhortly after. But thofe farre weaker foules though they preferrenot _ 
thefe worldly things before Chrift, yet ftick vnto them with a certaine exor- 
birant affetion, they muft needs feele {uch paine in the loofing of them; as. 
their offence deferued in louing of them: and endure the forrowes in the fame 
meafure that they caft chemfelues into forrowes: Asi faid before out of the 
Apoftle. For it was meete for chem to tafte a little of che difcipline of experi- 
. ence,feeing thy had fo long neglected inftru@ion by words: for the Apoftle 
haning faids They that well be rich fall into temptatsons; Gc. Herein doth hee re- 1 Tiiég 
prehend the defire after ritches onely, not the vfe of them: teaching likewife ~ 
(fJelfe-where : Charge them that ave ritch in this world that they be wot high min- s6.vekr¥ 
dedand that they traft not i their uncertaine wealth, but in the lining God,who gi- 18+® 19 
aeth us plentifully all things to enioy: That they doe good and bee ( ¢ ) ritch in good 
-workes ready to diffribute and communicate: laying up in flove for them/elues 4 good 
foundation against the time tocome, that they may obtamne the true life. They that. 
did thus with their ritches, by eafing fimall burchens,reaped great gaines 3 tak- 
ing more ioy in that part which by their free diftributié vrito others they had . 
(4 kept more fafely then they fele forrow for that which by their careto pre- 
ferueto themfclues they loft fo eafily . For it was likely that that perifh 
heare on earth which they had no minde to remoque intoa more fecure cufto- 
die. For they that followe their Lords Counfell ; when hee faith vntothem, 
Lay not up treafures for your felues upon the earth where the moth andrust corripts yi, 6+ F 
or where theeues dig through and fteale,but lay up treafures for your felses in Heam soat. 
uen where ncither raft nor moth corrupt: nor theeues digge through and fteale, 
for where your treafure is, there w:llyour heart be atfo : thee (¥ fay ) inthe time 
of tribulation were fure to find how well they were aduifed in following that 
Maifter of al truth,and that diligent and dreadles keeper of all good treafure: 
For fecing there were many that reioiced becaufe they had hidden their trea- 
fure ina ha which the foe by chance ouer-pafled & found not: how much 
more certaine and fecure might their comfortbee, thatby their Godsin- __ 
_ ftrudion had retired thither wich their fubftance,whether they were fureshe pyitiess 
foe could not come? And therefore one (:)Paw/inus being Bifhop of No/e,and. bithop of 
hauingrefufedinfinite riches for voluntarie pouertie( and yet was he ritch in 
holynefle ) when the Barbarians facked Nols ,and heldhim prifoner, thus 


C 3: | _ prayed 


mew 


18 SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuap: 9. 
Cr TD 
prayed hee in his heart ( as hee told vs afterward ) Lord let mee mot bee 
trembled for gold mor filuer : for where all my treafures are, thow knoweft: 
Euen there had hee laid vppe all his , where hee hadde aduifed him. ro 
Jay it who fore-told thefe miferi¢s to fall vppon the world. And fo o- 
thers , in that they obeyed GODS inftrutions for the choyce and 
preferuation of the true treafure indeed , hadde euen their worldly trea- 
{ures preferued from the fury of the Barbarians : Buc others paid for 
their difobedience, and becaufe their precedent wifdome could notdoir, . 
their fub-fequent experience.taught them how to difpofe of {uch temporall 
—trafh. Some Chriftians by their enemies were putte vnto torture,to make 
them difcouer where their goods lay:but that good whereby(k) them-felues 
were good,they could neither loofe,nor difcouer. But if they had rather hane 
indured torture then difcouer their (1) Mammon of iniquitie,then were they 
far from good. But thofe that fuffered fo much for gold, were to be infttu@ed 
what fhould bee indured for Chrift : thatchey might rather learne toloue 
him chat enricheth his Martyrs with eternall felicity , then goldand filuer for 
which itis miferable to indureany tormeat, whether it bee concealed by ly- 
ing , or difcouered by telling the truth. Forno man that-ever confefled 
Chrift could lofe him amongft all the torments : whereas no man could ever 
fauehis gold but by denying it. VVherefore euen thofe very torments are 
more profitable,in that they teach aman to loue an incoruptible good , then 
thofe goods in thatthey procure their owners torture through the blindloue . 
they beare vntothem. But fome that had no fuch goods,and yet were thought’ 
tohaue them,were torturedalfo, WVhy? perhaps they had a defire tothem 
though they hadthem not , and were poore againft cheir wils,not of their 
owne eleétion : And then though their poffeffions did not iuftly deferue 
thofe afflictions, yet their affections did. Butit their mindes flew a loftyer 
pitch, beholding both the poffeffion and the affection of ritches with an eye 
offcorne, Imakea doubt whether any fuch were ever tormented in this 
kinde , or beeing fo innocent , incurred any fuch imputation. But if 
they did, truly , they inthefe their tortures, confefling their fan@ified po- 
uertie, confeffed Curis 1 him-felfe- And therefore though che extor- 
ted confeflton of fuch holy pouerty could not deferue to bee beleeued of 
the enemie, yet fhould hee got bee put to this paine without an heauenly . 
reward for bis Saines. 3 


L. VIVES... 


[eed (4)man |The minde : being often fo vfed in Pans Epiftles, (6 )Conereokfheffe of 
mony |The vulgar tranflation hath Cupidstas,but Auguffine hath auaritia,a better words 
for the Grecke is ¢saapyce!dsloue of money. (¢) Aan forrowes|Thus farre Paul. (4 )Poore 
without | He meaneth the Apoftle Pal, (e) Naked |The words of Job, comfcrting himfelfe 
in the Joffe of his goodes and children, (£) elfewhere | namcly in the fame chapter, Verfe. 
17.(g) Rich in good workes | In thefe thinges they fhall bee rich indeed. (4) Kept more 
Safely | Laying vp the treafure of eternity for them-felues in heauen , in that they haue gi- 
' ” uen freely vnto the poore and needie, Which is declared by that which followeth in the 
fame chapter of ALathew,becing, Chriftes owne workes, (1) And therefore one ree ] 


t 


? . Z A 7 a 4. . ; : 


a9 


Lien. @ OF THE CITIE.OF GOD. 


bria,Salentingm, Apulia, or Aprutinm , {poyling and wafting al'as they went , like a pqwe- 
rall deluge, their fury extended as far as Confentia( a Citty in, pont: called, now Cofen— 
za )and forty yearcs afer chat Genferike with the Afoores and Vandafs ‘brake out again, 


wf 


tooke Rome, filling all Cam p.rxiz with ruine , raized the citty of NoZz. Of which Cittie at | 


that time, Pasli:ds was Bulhop(as Pastas Diacokus writeth } amo& hody anc (. 3s Saint 
Gregory faith ) dn'¢loquent man, exceedingly read yn Humaine leartiinm ind flor alroptcher 
void of the {pirit of prophecie ., who hauing {pent all hee had in redeeming Chriftian cap- 
tiues,and seeing a widow bewayling her captiue fonne , and powring forth her pious la- 


mentations mixt with teares, his pietie fovrged him that hee could not reft vneill hee had 


crofled oucr into Affricke with the widow , where her fonne was prifoner : And there by 
exchange of him-felfe for hir fonng, redeemed him, and gaue him free voto his mother. 
- Now his fandtity,growing admirable in the eies of the Barbarians ,hee had the freedome 
ofall his cirtizens giuen hin, and fo was fent baeke to his country. Thereofread at large 
in Gréegories chird booke of Dealogaes. But I thinke Axga/fine {peakes not of this lacer in- 
vafion:/for then was ‘Paul: departed this life)buc ofthe firft irruption of the Gorbes(k ) 
wheréby them-[elues were good | Namely, their yertue which no man ean depriue them offs 
and that onely is the good which makes the poffeffors goods For ef riches bee good( a5 Tak 
ly faich in his Paradoxes ) why dothey not make them good that inioy them? (1) Mamrion | 
Mammon (after Hierome) isa Abas word: foiling that vneo them that 7a¢7@ doth 
vnto the Greekes, namely Ritcbes : Auguftire el{wert faith that AZammon in the Puntke 
language is gaine, and that the e4ffrican and Hebrew tongies do accord in the fignifica- 
tion of many wordes, Serm. de verb. Dom. & quaft. Enang. — _ 


Se aoe 


<) Ofthe end of this tranfitory life whesher 7 . 


tt be long or fhort. 


Cuap. 10% 


Pat ea Se ee ee 
The.Gothes hauing facke Kowme,and ouer-running all Latism,the Volfei ;Gampania  Cala- 


Mammon 


“THe extremity of famine they fay defttoyed many Chriftians in thefe Thebenett 


'# inuafions. Well euen of this alfo the faichfull by induring ic pati- 

ently ,haue made good vfe. For fuch as the famine made an end off,it deline- 
uered irom the cui ofthis life,as well as any other bodily difeafe could does 
fuch as itended nor, it taught chem a {paring diet’, and ablenelfle to fafte. Yea, 
but many Chriftians were deftroyed by the fouleft variety that might bee, 
falling by fo many fortes of death : why thisis not to bee difliked off, fince ic 
is comrion to all chat euer haue beené borne. This-I know that'no man is 
dead that fheuld not at leng-hhaue died. For the liues ending, makes the long 
life and the fhort all onesneicher is their one better and another worfe,nor one 
longer, then another fhorter, which is not inthis end made equall. And what 


skils ic what kind of deach do difpatch out life , when he that dieth cannot bee - 


forced to die againe ? And feeing that euery morrall man, in chedaily cafual- 


ties of this life is threatied continually with inumerable forces of death, as _ 


long as he isvncertaine which of them he (hall tafte ; cell me whethér ic were 


better to (z) fuffer but one in dying once foreuer , or fillto liueincon- - 


tinual feare,then al thofe extreames of death 21 know how vnwotthry a choice 
it were to chodfe rather to line vndet the awe of fomany deathes , then by 
once dying to bee freed from all their feare for ever. But it is one thing when 
the weake fenfitiue ftefh doth feare it 5 and another when the purified reafon 


of the faule ouer-comes it. A baddeath neuer: followesa good Sg ; 


of famine® 


aaa 


ee sy “ 
pce 


’ 
P| 
Meas 


) 6 
38, 


~ world fhould any way preiudice out perfection in the world to come:Vnle 
any man will befo abfurd as to contend chat they that can kil the body are not 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. , Cuaprri. 


is nothing that maketh death bad buit that eftate which followeth death. Ther- 
fore Tet not their care thatneedes mult-dye bee imployed vppon the manner 
oftheir death,but vppon the eftate that they are eternally to inheric after 
death. Wherefore =e that all Chriftians know that the death of the re- 
higious( 6 Jbegger amongft the dogs licking his fores,was better thé the death 
ofthe wicked rich man in all his (¢) filks and purples,what power hath the 


horrour ofany kind ofdeath to affrizht their foules that haue leddea vertu- 
ous life? 7 j eo | 
ee 


ees 


— | -soL.WIVES. 


Silene A Pi. a 
Si but one \So faid Cefar; that hee had rather fuffer one death at once then feare it 
'. Icominually,.(b) Religions begger | the {tory is at large in Saint Luke, the 16. Chapter 
beginning at the 19. verfe of Lazarus andthe rich glutton, &c, (¢) Silks.) Byffus, isa 
kinde of moft delicate line, as Pé:ie faith in his xatsrall biftory, lib. 19, 


- Of buryall of the dead; that it is not preiudiciall to the ftate 
Of aChriftzan foule to be forbidden it. 


Crap 11. 


QO? but inthis great laughter the dead could not bee bufyed: Tuth our 
holy faith regards not that, holding faft the promife :It is not fo fraile as 
to think chat the ravenous beafts can depriue the body of any part to be wan- 


ting in the refurrection, where not ahayre of the head fhall bemiffing. Nor - 


would the feripture haue faid: Feare not them that killthe bodie but are not able 
to kill the foule: if that which the foe could doe vnto our dead bodies in me 

e 
tobe feared before death leaft they fhould killir,but afterdeath leafthauing 
killed ic they fhould not permic ic buriall . [sit falfe then which Chrift faith, 
Thofe that killthe body after they can do no more,and that they haue power to do 
fo much hurt vnto thedead carkafle 2 God forbid that fhouid be falfe whichis 
{poken by the truth it felfes Therefore it is faid they do fomething in killing, 
becaufe then they affli& the bodyly fence for a while:but afterwards they can 
afflict ic no more,becaufe there is no -fenfe in a dead body. So then fuppofe 
that many of the Chriftians bodies neuer came in the earth:what of thac, no 
man hath taken any of shem both from earth and heauen , haue they ?No: 


_ And both thefe doth his glorious prefence repJenifh that knowes howto re- — 


ftoreeuery U4tome of his worke in the created. The Pfalmift indeed com- 
playneth thus : The dead (4) bodies of thy feruants haue they giuen to be meat unto 


Fial,79. 2. the foules of the aad the flefh of thy Sasates unt the beaftes ofthe earth : Their 
e 


bloud haue they fbedde like waters round about lerufalem , ‘and there was none to 
bury them. But this is {poken to intimate their villany that did it,rather then 
their mifery chat fuffered it.For though that vnto the eyes of man chefe aes 
{eeme blondie and tyranous,yet,pretsous in the fight of the Lordés the deathof 
gts Saents. And therefore all ehefe ceremonies concerning the dead , the = 


PTS wet an 
ew * 


ee PTS Sa 


Lint OF THE CITIE OF GOD. at 


of the burial the fafhions of the Sepulchers; and the pompes of the funeralls, 
are rather folaces tothe liuing then furtherances to the dead.(6) For if a 
goodly and ritcli tombe bee any helpe to the wicked man being dead, then is 
the poore and meane one a hindrance vnto the godly man in like café. The 
familie of that rich(¢) gorgeous glutton, prepared hima fumptuous funeral 
vnto the eyes of men: but one farre more f{umptuous did the miniftring Ane... . 
gels prepare for the poore vicered begger,in che fight of God: They bore him 16162 . 
not inco any Sepulcher of Marble,but placed him inthe bofomeot Abraham. 

This do they (d) {coffe at , againft whom wee areto defend the citty of God. 

And yet even (¢ )their owne Philofophers haue contemned the refpect of 

buriall :and dften-times ( f) whole armies, fighting and falling for their earth- 

lie countrie, went ftoutly to thefe flaughters , without euer taking thought 

where to be laide,in what Marble tombe, or in what beafts belly . And the (¢) 

Poets wereallowed to {peake their pleafures of this theame, with applaufe of 

the vulgar,as one doth thus: : : 


Celotegitur gui nonhabetvrnams | 
Who wants a graue,Heauen ferueth for his tombe. 


Whar little reafon then haue thefe mifcreants, to infult ouer the Chriffiens, 
that lie vnburied, vnto whom, anew reftitution of their whole bodies is pro- 
mifed,to be reftored them (4) inamoment , not onely outofthe earth alone, 1.Cor.rs; 
but even out of all the moft fecret Angles of all the otherelements, wherein 5* 
any body is or can poilibly bemdladed 


D™ (a) carcaffes, Omotydze, morticinia, the dead fieth. (6) For ifa goodly.) 


Et eternos animam collegit in orbes, 

Non illuc auropofitinec thure fepults 
“Perueniunt, Lucanlib.9. ea ete ee 
The eternail {pheres his glorious {pirit.do holde, = ; Sepulchérs, 
To which come few that lye embalmd in golde,&c.. =< ~ 


(©) Gorgtons| of whomin the Chapter before. (4) Scoffe at ] The Romanes had-great 
care ouer their burials : whence arofe many obferuances concerning the religious perfor- 
snance thereof: aad it was indeed a penalty of thelaw : hee that deth this or that, let him 
bce cait forth vaburied : and fo in the declamations: hee that forfakes his parents in their — 
_neceffities, let kim bee cast forth unburied: hee that doth not declare the canfes of their death 
before the Senate, let hirs bee cast forth unburied; An homicide,cast him out unburied, And 
fo {peakes Cicero to the peoples humour for A4i/o , when he affirmes Clodisis his ¢arcafle to 
be therein the more wretched, becaufe ic wanted the folemne rites and honors of buriall. 
(e) Philofophers | thofe of the Heathen : as Diogenes the (Jnike for one , that bad his-dead 
body fhould be caft ynto the dogs and foules of the ayre : 8 being anfwered by his friends, 
that they would rent and teare it: fer a {taffe by me then, faid he,and I will beate them away 
With it : cufh you your felfe fhall be fenceleffe quoth they: nay then quoth he what needI 
feare their tearing ofme?This alfo did Afenippas,8 almott all the Cyniks.Ciceroin his Que- 
ftiones Tufcrslane recordcth this anfwer of T ae of (rene vnto Ly [machus that threat : 
ned him the croffe: let thy courtiers feare that(quoth he) but as for me I cafe not whether I> 
rot on the ayre or in the earth: and foalfo faith Socrates in Plato's dialogue called Phzdo. 
f ) Whole armies|meaning perhaps thofe legfons which (to the elder fpeake of in his Ori- 
fines that would go thether with cheerfulneffe,from whence they knew they fhould neuer 
returne. Nay, it was no cuftome before Hercules his time to burie the dead that fell in = 
= aa ee re | oF 


s a 


A USS 


22 


Tob. 2. 


Math,36. 
loh.19.43 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuap.r2. 


for eZ lian in his Hiftoria varia doth affirme Hercules the firft inuenter of that cuftome. 
(¢ ) Poets to fpeake | with the peoples approbation. Lxcax in his 7.booke of the Pharfalian 
warre, {peaking of the dead that (¢/ar forbad fhould bee burned,or buried, after hee had 
brought forth (as his cuftome is ) many worthy and graue fentences concerning this mat- 
ter,at length he fpeaketh thus ynto Cefar : 


Nu agishac ira,tabe(ne Cadauera folnat, 

An rogut,baud refert : placide natura receptat 
Cuntta finn: 

In this thy wrath is worthleffe: all is one, 
Whether by fire or putrefaétion 

Their carcaffes diffolue : kinde nature fill 
Takes all into her bofome. 


And alittle after : 


me Capit omnia tells 
Que Lercuit ; cele tegitur qui non habet vrnane. 
_ > Earths off- {pring ftill returnes vnto earths wombe, 
aa Who wants a graue, heauen ferueth for histombe, 


And fo faith the Declamer in Seneca: Nature gines enery man a grane; to the fhipwracke 
the water wherein he is loft: the bodies of the crucified drappe from their crofles ynto 
their graues : thofe thae are burned quick their very punifhment entombes them. And 
Virgill,who appoints a place of punifhment in hell for the vnburied , yet in Anchifes his — 
words, fhewes how {mall the loffe of a graue is. That verfe of ALecenas : 


(Nec tumulum curo, fepelit natura reliflos : 
_-—— I waighno tombe : nature entombes the meancft :) 


Is highly commended of antiquitie. The Urea,was a veffeil wherein the reliques and athes 


ofthe burned body was kept. (4) In « moment, 1.(orinth,1 5.52. 


The reafons why wee {bould bury the bodies of the Saints. 
CHap.12, 


Otwithftanding the bodies of the dead are not to be contemned and caft 

away, chieftie of the righteous and faithfull, which the holy ghoft vfed as 
organs and inftruments vnto all good workes. For if the garment or ring of 
ones father bee fo much the more efteemed of his pofteritie , by how much 
they held him dearer in their affe@ioa, then isnot our bodies to be defpifed, 
being we weare them more neere vnto our felues then any attire whatfocuer. 
For this is no part of externall (4) ornament or affiftance vnto man, but of 
his expreffe nature. And therefore the funeralls of the righteous in the times 
of old were performed with a zealous care, their burials celebrated, and their 
monuments provided , and they themfelues in their life time would lay char- 
ges vpon their children concerning the burying or tranflating of their bodies. 
(6 ) Tobye in burying of the dead was acceptable vnto God,as the Angell tefti- 
fieth. And the Lord himfelfe being to arife againe on thethird day, commen- 
ded the good worke of that (¢ ) religious woman , who powred the preciotis 
ointment vpon his head and body, and did it to bury him.Andthe( 4) Gofpell 


hath crowned them with eternall praife that tooke downe his body from the 


croffe , and gaue it honeft and honorable buriall. But yet thefe authorities 
proouc not any fence'to be in the dead carcafes themfelues, butfignifie that 
: the 


Laven OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 


23 


the prouidence of God extendeth even vnto the very bodies of the dead ( for 
he is pleafed with fuch good deedes ) and do build vp the beliefe of the refur- 
rection. Where by the way wee may learne this profitable leffon , how great 
the reward of almes-deeds done vnto the liuing,may be (¢ ) fince this dutie & 
fauour fiewch but vnto the déad is not forgotten of God. There are other 
propheticall places of the holy (/) Patriarkes concerning the intombing or 
the tranflation cf their owne bodies. But this is no place to handle them in, 


and of this wee haue already {pcken fufficiently : buc if the neceffaries of 


mans life, as meate and clorhing, though they bee wanting in great extremi- 
tie , yet cariniot fubuert the good mans patience, nor drawe hin) from good- 
neffe : how mitch lefle power fhall thofe things haue which are omitted in che 
burying of the dead,to afflict the foules that are already at quiet ih the fecret 
receptacles of the righteous ?And therefore, when as in that great ouer- 
throw of Rome, and of other Cities,the bodies of the Chré/tians wanted thefe 
rights: it was neitheir faule in the liuing, that could noe performe them, ner 
hurtto the dead, that could not feelg them. | 


eeuswenrimmn: eng eyes anole aoa 


L. VIVES. 
(4) ()Peament |The Tlatonifs held onely thé foule to bee mani, and the body to Bé bit 
a 


cafe or couer vnto it, or rather d prifon. But Asgu/fine holdeth the furer opini- 


on,that the body isa part of theman. (5) Toby | Toby the 2. and 12. (¢ ) The good worke 


of that religions \meaning ied Magdalen, Math. 26.10.12, (4) Gofpell| Iohn the: 


¥9.38.8c. meant of Jofeph of eArimathea and Nicodemus, (¢) Since this] adraught of 
~ colde water giuen in the name of the Lord fhall net want reward. AZath.10.42, (f) Pas 
triarches | Iacob at his death charged his fqnne Jofeph to carry his body vnto the Sepul- 
cher of his elders , and not to leaue it ine£gept, Genef. 47,29. 20. And Lofeph himfelfe 
commanded his brethren that they fhould remember, and tell their pofteritie that when 
they went away into the land of proinife , they fhould carry his bones thether with them, 
Genefis the laft Chapter and 25. verfe, 


Of the captinitie of the Saints, and that there- | 


in they neuer wanted [piri- 7 | 


tuAll comfort. 


Cuap.13. 


[2 many Chriftians ( fay they ) were lead into captiuitie’: This indeed 
had been a lamentable cafe,ifthey had been lead vnto fome place where th 

couldnot poffibly hdue found theit God . But for comforts in captiuity,the 
{criptures haué {tote s The (4) three children were in bondage : fo was Daniel, 
fo were (6) others of the Prophets : but they neuér wanted God, their com- 
forter’. No more did he here abandon his faithfull; being vrid erthecommand 


of barbarous men, who forfooke not his (<) Prophet beeing euen inthe bellie 


of a beatt. This now they with whom wee are to deale, had rather fcorne,then 
“ig a bi of that fable in their owne bookes they are fully perfwaded,nariie- 
fy chat that fanse excellent harper (4) Arion of Methymns ; beeing caft ouct 


4 


a 


Gen.47, 


&e, 


Dan,t< 


boord, | 


a 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. — Cia 


lonas 2, _ 


Arian, 


 -bootd,was taken vp ona Dolphins back, and fo borne fafe to land. 1s our hif- 


tory of Jomas more incredible then this ? yes, becaufe itismore (¢) admirable; 
and it is more admirable,becaufe more powerlull. _ = 


| He (a) Three children Dan.1.6. eAnania, Azarias and (Mifael together with Da- 
A miell himfelfe were prifoners in Babilon vnder Nabuchadnezzar. (6) Others of the Prax 


phets| As leremy,Exechiel,and others (¢) Prophet) Mcaning Jonas who was three daies in 
the Whales belly :afigure of Chrif? our Sauiours refurrection from death to life. (d)} A= 
vion| The tale of Arion and the Dolphin is common amongft authors, Herodotus was the 
firft that wrote it. A4nfar. lb. 1. Atter him Oued in his Fa/forum, and Pliny, lib.9.Gellins, 
lib. 16. Aelian in his booke de animalibus and others : Arion was a harper in Afethymnia a 
towne of Lefbos,in the time of the feauen Sages of Greece : for Persander loucd him deares 
Jy. (Some fay he firftinuented the Tragicke ver{c and the Chorus, and {ung in Dithyrame- 
ba :) This 4r:ox returning out of Lrady with great wealth, and perceiuing the faylers 
confpiring his deftruction for his money, intreated them to take all he had and faue his life, 
which when he could not obtaine , hee begged leaue but to play a little vpon his harpe to 
comfort himfelfe therewith againft death, and vnto the found of his inftrument they fay 
their gathered diuers Dolphi.as together, and Arion being skild in the nature of this fifth, 
with his harpe and all as he was , leaped out of the fhippe vpon one of their backes , who 
carried him fafe and found ynto T@n.zras : where yer is feene the Image of a Dolphin fwime 


ing with aman vpon his backe, “Pliny prooucs by many examples that the Dolphin is a 


Jouer of man, (¢) Admirable:] To be kept fo long in the Whales guts. 


- - OfMarcus Regulus,who was 4 famous example to animate all mento the en- 
: during of voluntary captiuity for thezy relsgion: which norwith- 
|  flanding,was unprofitable unto him by rea- 
(fon of his Paganif{me. 
Cuarp.14.. 


Y Et for all this our enemies have one worthy exmaple propofed by one of 


their moft fatnous men, for f willing ¢oleration of bondagein the caufe of 
religion:(4) Marcus Attilius Regulus,general of the Romanes forces was prifoner 
at Carthage: Now the Carthaginians being more defirous to exchange their 
prifoners then to keepe them , fent Regulus with their Embafladors to Rome to 
treat vpon this exchange, hauing firft {worne him, that in cafe he effe@ted not — 
what they defired he fhould returne as captiue vnto Carthage, fo he went vnto 


Rome ,and hauing a day of audience granted him , hee per{waded the dire& 


contrary vnto his ambaflage : becaufe he held it was not profitable for the Re- 


’ gaan to excharige their prifoners. Nor after this per{wafiue fpeach did the Re 


maines compell him to returne ynto his enemies, but willingly did he go backe. 


-- gagaine for fauing of his oth, But his cruell foes puchim to death with horri- 


ble and exquifite corments : for fhutting him (/) ina narrow barrell,ftrucken 
alt full of (harpe nayles,and {o forcing him to ftand vpright, beingnot able ta 
Jeane to any fide without extreame paines, they killed bim euen with ouer- 
watching bim. This vertue in him is worthy of everlafting praife,being made 
greater by fo great infelicity. Now his oth of returne , was taken (¢) —— 

oe ee, gods 


~ 


25 


Lint. | OF THE CITIE OF GOD, 


gods for the negle& of whofe forbidden worthip thofe infidells hold thefe 


plagues laid vpon mankind . Buc if thefe gods(being worfhipped onely for the 
attainement of temporall profperity either defired,or permitted thefe paines 
to be layd vpon one that kept his oth fo truly, what greater plague could they 
in their moft deferued wrath haue infli@ed vpona moft periur’d villain then 
they Jaid vpon this religious worthy? but why donot I confirme mine (4) ar- 
gument with a double sen ? Ifhe worfhipped his gods fo fincerely, that for 
keeping the oth which 

rall country to returne( not vnto whar place he liked,but)vnico his greateft e- 
‘nemies, if he held that religioufneffe of his any way beneficiall vnto his tem- 
porall eftace,(which he ended in fuch horrible paines)hee was farre deceiued. 
For his example hath taught all the werld that thofe Gods of bis neuer fur- 
ther their worfhippers in any profperity of this life; fince he.that was fo de- 
vout and dutifullaferuant of theirs, for all that they could do¢,was conquered 
and led away captiue: Now ifthe worfhip of thefe Gods returne mens hap- 
pineffe in the life to come, why then do they callumniate the profeffion of the 
Chriftians,faying,that that mifery fell vpqn the citty,becaufe it gaue over the 
worfhip of the old gods, whenas were ic neuer fo vowed vnto their worthip, 
yet might it taft of as much temporall miffortune as euer did Regulus : vnleffe 
any man will ftand in fuch braineleffe blindneffe againft the pure-truth, as 
to fay that a whole city duelie worfhipping thefe Gods cannot bee miferable, 
when one onely man may, as though the gods power were of more hability 
and promptneffe to preferue generals , then perticulars : (e) what? doth noe 
euery multicude confift of fingularities?Ifthey fay that Regu/us even in all that 
bondage andcorment might neuertheleffe bee happic in the ( f) vertue of his 
conftapt minde,then let vs rather follow the queft of that vertue by which an 


he bad taken by their deities,he would leaue his natu- 


whole cittie may be madetrucly happy,for a citties happinefleandaparticu- A Citic, 


lar mans doe notarife from any feuerall heads: the cittie being nothing bue 
a multitude of menvnited in one formality of religion and eftate « wherefore 
as yet Icall not Regw/us his vertue into any queftion . It is now fufficient that 
his very example is of power to enforce themto confefle that the worfhip ex- 
hibited vnto the gods, aymes not any way at bodily profperity,nor at things 
externally accident vnto man; becaufe that Regw/as chofe rather to forge all 
thefe,then to offend his gods before whom hee had paffedhisoth. But what 
{hail wee fay to thefe men , that dare glorie that they had had one city of chat 
quality whereof they feare to haue all the reft ?1f they have no fuch feare,let 
them then acknowledge,that what befell Regu/us,the fame may befal an whole 
Ca LarSR, their deuotion may paralell his in this worfhip of their gods; and 
therefore let them ceafe to flander the times of Chriftianiry . But feeing that 
our queftion arofe about the captiued Chriftians , let fuch as hereby take 
efpeciall occafion to derideand fcorne that fauing religion,marke but this, 8 
be filent:that if ic were no difgrace vnto their gods ,that one of theirmoft zea- 
lous worfhippers,by keeping his othe made vnto them, fhould bee neuerthe- 
leffe depriued of his cduntry,and haue no place lefc him to retire to ,but muft 
perforce bee returned to his enemies,amongft whom he hadalready endured 
an hardand wretched captiuity’, & was now laftly rorafte ofa tedious death, 
in moft execrable, ftrange,and cruel torments : then far leffe caufeis thereto 


accufe the name of Chrift for the captiuitie — scenic so 


oma g.- meee 1 1 om gens 


26 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuap.rs. 


Attilius 


Regulas, 


ting the heavenly habitation in crue faith, knew full well , that they were but 
pilgrims in their native foiles and (¢ ) habitations bere vpon earth, and fubie@ 
to all che miferies of mortalitie. , : 


‘L. VIVES. 


M Areus(a) Attiline Regulus This is a famous hiftory,and recorded by many. This 
Regulus in the firlt (arthaginian warre , was made Confull with Lueins Mankss 
Volfco: ynto which twothe African warre was committed : being the fele warre that the 
Romanes at that time waged : ‘Regu/us was the firft Romane that eucr lead armie ouer the 
Seas into eA ffricke , where hauing foiled the sabes Setar in many battailes hee droue 
them to fecke for helpe of Zanthippus of Lacedemon,a {ingular and well practifed captaine, 
by whofe meanes the warre was renewed, and ina fet fight the Romane army ouer-come,8z 
Artilins Regulus taken by his encmies. Whohauing beenekept diuers yeeres prifoner in 
Carthage together with his fellow captiucs,in the foureteenth yeare of the warre, and the 
503. ae the bui:ding of Rome,was fent Embaffador to the Romanes about the exchang- 
ing of their prifoners: {wearing vnto his enemies to returne vnleffe he attained the effe& 


of his Embafflage, Comming to Rome,and hauing a day of hearing appointed,che Confull 


defired him to afcend the Confuls feate, and thence to viter his opinion of the Embaffage; 
which he at firft refifed to veter : but being commanded by the Senate to do it , he did fo, 
and therevpon veterly difwaded that which the Carthaginians defired ; becaufe the Cartha~ 
Zinian priloners at Rome were young,and able for. the wasres, bute the Romanes at (are 
thage,old,patt militarie v{c,and not very needfull in counfell. To his opinion the whole Se« 


nate aflented : Now hee himfelfe, though hee were hindered by his children, kinfmen, fer-._ 


uants,countrimen, familiars,clients,and the moft part of the people, yet would not fta but 


needes would goe to difcharge his othe which he had {worne to his enemies,alchough hee. 


knew that the effricans would hate him deadly, and fo put him to death with fome cruel] 
torture or other. So returning vnto ( arthage, and declaring the eftcct of his embaffage,he 
was putto death indeed with ftrange and incollerable torments. (4) Jn a narrow barrell] 
forme: relate ic in another manner, but all agree chat hee was ouer-watched vnto death, 


(¢) ‘By the gods | It had beene more fignificantly fpoken , tohaue faid by thofe gods, &e. 


with an emphafis, (4) eArgument with a double proofe,| Itisa Dilemma : lf man receiue 
the rewarde following the due worfhip of thofe gods in this life, why perifhed Regulus, 
being fo deuout in that kinde ? if he haue it not vneill after chis life, why do they as whip- 
pers expect the profperous eftate of this life fromthem? (e ) What doth nor each multi- 
tude | Ho v then can the multitude bee happy, when cuery particular man is miferable? 
€f ) Vertue of bis minde\ So holds Tully inmany places , Seneca alfo, and all learned and 
wife men,fpeaking of Regulus. (¢ ) Habitations, | meaning thefe carthly ones, 


Whether the Taxes that the holy Virgins fufftred againft 
their wills in their captinities,could pollute | 
_ the vertues of their minde. 


oH CS Cuar. 15. — 
But they thinke they giue the Chriftians a foule blow, when they agera- 
uate the difgrace of theit captiuitie, by vrging the rapes which were 
‘wrought not onely vpon maried andmariageable perfons, but euen vpon fome 
Vorareffes alfo: Here are wee not to fpeake of faich, or godlineffe, or of the 
vertue of chaftitie,but our difcourfe muft runne anarrow courfe, (4) betwixt 
| 3 _  fhame 


é 


a a 7 


List OF THE CITLE OF GOD. 27. 


fhame and reafon. (6) Nor care wee fomuch to giue an anfwer vnto ftrans - 

gers in this, as to minifter comfort vnto our fellow Chriftians. Bee this 

therefore granted as our firft pofition, that that power by which man liveth 

_ well,refting enthroned, and eftablifhed in the minde, commands euery meni- 

ber of the body, and the body is fan@ified by the fan@ification of the will: eal 
; : : : f° ss . 4 

which fatimonie of the will, if ic remaine firme and inuiolate , what way fanenfies 

foever the body bee difpofed of or abufed,( ifthe partie enduring this abufe thebedy. 

cannct auoide it (4) without an expreffe offence ) this fufferance layeth no — 

crime vponthe foule. But becaufe every body is fubie& to fuffer the cffea&s 

both of the furie, and the lufts of him that fubdueth it,that which it fufferech 

in thts latter kinde, though it bee not a deftroyer of ones chaftitie, yet is ita 

procurer of ones fhame: Becaufe otherwife, icmight bee thcughr, that thar 

was fuffered with the confent of the minde, which it may bee could not bee 

fuffecc d without fome delight of the flefh: And therefore as for thofe , who 

to auoide this did voluntarily deftroy themfelues , what humaine heart can 

choofe but pittie them ? yet as touching fuch as would not doe fo, fear- 

ing by auoyding others villanie , to incurre their owne damnation , hee: 

that imputes this as a faule vneo them , is not vnguiltie of the fauke of 


folly.» 


Ls VIVES. . 


Ls Soe (a) fame andreafon | for fhame faith that the very violation of the body 
isto bee called euill; but Reafon denyes it. (6) Nor care we | This we will fpeake 
as a comforting vnto oyr Chriftian women that endured thefe violences, (¢ ):/» the 
minde | The Platonsfs place the foule and hit powers in the head, as ina Tower, fitting 
there, as the commander of our ations , and the ouer-feer of our labours , as Claxdian 
faith, (d) without finne,) for if wee can auoyde it without finne, we ough¥to endeuour 
this auoydance with all our powers. | 


Of {uch as chofe a veluntary death,fo anoyde the 
. 3 feare of paine and a:\bonour. 


| 7 Cran 16. 


OR if it bee not lawfull for a priuate man co kill any man, how éuer guil- 

tie, vnleffe the lawe haue granted 2 fpeciall allowance for ir, then furel 
whofoeuer killes himfelfe is guiltie of homicide : And fo much.the more guil- 
tie doth that killing of himfelfe make himfelfe , by how much the more guilc- 
leffe hee was in that caufe for which hee killd himfelfe. For if Zudss (a) his 
fa& be worthily derefted , and yet the Truth (6) faith, that by hanging of Math,27, 
himfelfe, hee did rather augment then expiate the guile of his wicked trea- 
cherie , becaufe his defpaire of Gods mercy in hts (c) damnable repen- 
tance, left no place in his foule for fauing repentance ;'how much more 
ought he to forbeare from being caufe of hisowne deach, that hath no guile 
in him worthy of fuch a punithment as death: for Judas in hanging himfelfe, 
hanged but a wicked man and dyed guiltie, = onely of Chrifts death — 

| 


38 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuarsi7. 


of his owne alfo : adding the wickedneffe of being his owne death, tothat o- 


ther wickedneffle of his for which he dyed. 


L. VIVES. — 


[V4* (4 ) his faét | which no man but hath heard out of the Gofpell. (6) Truth faith] 
Peter in the firft of the Aces affirmes, that hee did wickedly ati vngodlyly both in be- 
trayirig of his Lord,and in hangin p ofhimfelfe. (¢ ) Damsable repentance |For he repens 
ted indeed, but fo,as hee defpaired of being euer able to repent faffciently for fo great 
a villanie, 


a 


Of the violent lust of the Sonldiersexecuted upon the bodies 
of the captines;scaiuft their confents. 


“CHAP, 17. 


2 Ve why fhould he that hath done no man euill, do himfelfe cuill,and by de- 
—s himfelfe, deftroy an innocent man, for feare to fuffer iniurie by 
the guilte of another,and procurea finne vnto himfelfe,by auoiding the finne 
of another 2 O but his feare is , to be defiled by anothers Luft! tufh, anothers 
luft cannot pollute thee; ifft doe,it isnot anothers but thine owne. But chafti- 
tie being a vertue of the minde,and (4) accompanied with fortitude,by which 
-it learnes rather to endurealleuills , then confent to any ,and(6) nomanof | 
this fortitude and chaftitie,being able to difpofe of his body as he lift,but one- 
ly of the confent and diffent of his minde ; what man of witte will thinkehee 
loofeth his chaftity though his captiued body be forcedly proftitute vnto ano- 
thers beaftialitie? If chaftitie were loft thus eafilie, it were no vertuc of the 
minde; nor one of (¢) thofe goods , whereby aman lives in goodneffe; but 
wereto be reckoned amongft the goods of the body , with ftrength, beautie, 
health,and fuchi like: (d) which if'a man do decreafe in, yet it doth not follow 
that he decreafeth in his vprightneffe of life : but if chaflitie be of (e another 
kinde,why fhould we endanger our bodies to no end, which feare to loofe it? 
for if it be( fa good, belonging to the mind, it is not loft chough the body be 
violated. Moreouer it is the vertue of holy continencie, that when it with- 


-ftands the pollution of carnall concupifcence, thereby it fandtifies euen the 


body alfo: and therefore when the intention ftands firme , and giues no way 

to vicious affeds, the chaftitie of the body ( ¢ ) is not loft , becaufe the will re- 

maines {till in the holy vfe, and in the power too , as farre as i¢can. Forthe 

body isnot holy inthatit is whole, or vntouched in euery member, for it 

may be hurt and wounded by many other ca(ualties : And the Phyfitian of- 

tentimes for the preferuation of the health , doth that vnto the body which 

the eye abhorres tobeholde. (4) A Midwife trying a certaine maides inte- 

gretie of the Virginall pare, (whether for malice,or by chance, it is vncer- 

taine ) fpoiled it. Now I thinke none fo foolifhas to thinke that this virgin 

loft any part of her bodily fanctitie, though that part endured this breachof 
oo And therefore the intent of the minde ftanding firme,(which firm- 
nefie it is that fanQifies the body )the violence of anothers luft cannot depriue 
fo much asthe (s) body of this famttiry ,becaufe the perfeuerance of the minde 
in 


EE = << 


fee OF THE CITIE OF GOD, 


ee ee ee 2 - et ee eee ee oe 
= 


in continency euer preferueth it. But thall we fay chat any woman whofecor- 
rupt mindehach broken her promife vnto God,and yeelded her felf willingly 
to the luft of her deceiucr, (though but in purpo’e,)is as yet holy in her bodie, 
when the hath loft that holineffe of minde which fancified her body ? God 
forbid. And heereletvs learne , that the fanGity of bodie isno more loft, if 
the fancticy of minde remaine, (though the bodie bee rauifhed)then it is kept, 
if the mindés “holineffe bee polluted , though the bodice it felfe bee vn- 
touched. Wherefore if there beeno reafon , chat a woman that hath alrea- 
die fuffred an others villanie againft her owne will, fhould deftroy her felfe 
by voluntary death, how much leffe ought this courfe to bee followed before 
there bee any caufe ? and why thould murder beecommitted , when the guile 


which is feared (beeing feared from another ) is as yet ia doubt of cuent? 
Dare they (againft whom wee defend the fan@tity not onely of the Chriftian 


womens mindes , buteuenof their bodies in this laft captiuitie ) contradi@ 
this cleere reafon , wherein we affirme, that whileft the chaft refolution is vn- 
changed by any cuill confent, the guile is wholy the rauifhers, and no part of 
it imputable vnto the rauifhed ? a | 


ee ee 


SR RE Ey TIENT: 
A Raaiagy 


L. VIVES. 

A Ccompanicd (a) With fortitude] For the vertues are all combined togither as the 
_% Philofophers teach. Bur there are fome more peculjarly coherent then other fome, 
(5) No max of this fortitude\ Herevpon Pletarch(as Iremember ) affirmes out of Aenan- 
der that itis not the part ofa valiant and complete man to fay J will not fiffer this , but, I 
will not doe this. (c) Thofe goods] The vertues: for the Platoniftis,and the Peripatetike 
Philofophers diuide al goods into three forts : mentall,bodily,and fortunes,or externall, (a) 
Which if aman] This is the Pleroniftis and Peripatetikes opinion as well as the Stotkes: who 
held,that bodily and externall goods might haue reference vnto beatitude , but none at all 


wnto a good and fanctified life, (¢) Anorber kinde| If it bee but abodily good , it is notof. 


fuch worth as we fhould loofe the whole body for it : for the body is of more worth then 
it, ifit be but fuch. (f) The body bee violated | So did Bratus and Collatinus comfort tor- 
sowfull Lwcretia ,(ofwhomthe next Chapter treateth ) by turning the guilt of the falte 
from her that was offended,vpon the author of the faéts neither the minde finneth ( fayth 


Lsuy)nor the body : and where confent wanted, guile wanteth alfo, Andthe Nurfein Se _ 


necas Hippolitus {aith:the minde inferreth loofene(fe,tis not chance.(g )Is not loft} The bodies 
chaftitie flowes from that of the minde, (4) A midwife | Hee {eemes to relate a thing 
done , becaufe hee fayth A certaine maidens &c. (4) So much as the body | How fimply 
was that fpoken either of Brutus, or Liny (both being wife and iudicious men Mpeaking of 
the bloud of Lucretia being then newly flzine. I fweare by this blond, moft chafte before this 
mgs villany: as though after his villany 1t were-not as chafte ftill,if her minde were not 
touched with luft,as they hold it was not. : ay 2 Sse 


: : 

: x A, ae 
a oe | 
’ 


Of Lucretia, that flabb'd her felfe becanfe Tarquins fonnt had. _ 


rau(bed‘her. | 
| _ - Chap 18, | 
T Hey extol (4) Zucretia,that Noble and ancient Matren of Rome,with al the 
laudes of chaftity. This woman, hauitig her body forcibly abufed by Sextus 
| D3 Tarquintes 


b LJ is * 
tl 2 We 2 dk Oe 


30 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuar.id, 


fened.6. 


ee eee eee 
Targuinius {on to Targxin the proud, (hee reuealed this villany of che diffolure 
youth vnto her husband CoWatsnus , and to Brutus her kinfman, (both Noble 
and valorous men)binding them by oth, to (6) reuenge this wicked outrage. 
And then , loathing the foulneffe of the fact that had beene committed _ 
her, fhe flew her felte.. What? tha!l we fay fhe was an adultereffe, or was fhee 
chaft >who will ftand long in defciding this queftion: (¢) One , declaming fin- 
gularly well and truely hereof, faith thus: O wonder ! there were two,and yet but 
one committed the adultery ; worthyly and rarely {poken: Intimating in this 
commixtion, the {potted luft of the one, andthe chaft will of the othérs and 
gathering his pofition , not from their bodily coniunction but from thedi- 
uerficy of their mindes, There were two (fayth hee) yet but one committed the a- 
dultry. But what was that then which thee punifhed fo cruelly , hauingnoe 
committed any falt ? (d) He was but chafed out of his country , but fhee was 
flaine: ifie wereno vnchafteneffe in herto fuffer the rape vnwillingly , it was 
no iuftice in her being chafte, to make away her felfe willingly . lappealeto 
you,you lawes,& Ludges of Rome. After any offence be committed,you wil nos 
haue(e)the offender put to death without his fentence of condemnation: Sup- 
pofe then this cafe brought before you, and that your iudgement was, that the 
{laine woman was not onely vncondemned, but chafte,vnguilry, and innocents 
would you not punith the doer of this deed with full feucrity ? This deed did 
Lucretia that fo famous Lucretia: this Lucretia being innocent, chafte and 
forcibly wronged , euen by (f) Lacretza’s{elfe, was murdered: Now giue 
your fentence . But if you cannot, becaufe the offender is abfent, why 
then doe you fo extoll the murder of fo chafte and guiltletfe a woman ? you 
cannot defend her before the infernall iudges , at any hand,1f they be fuch as 
your Poets in their verfes decipher them : for according to their iudgement, 
fheis (¢) to be placed amongft thofe. is | 


| Qui fibi lethum,’ 
Infontes pepertre mana,lucemg, peroft 
Protectre antmas . | 
That(guiltleffe fpoiled themfelues thtough black defpight: 
And threw their foules to hell,chrough hate of light: 
Whence if fhe now would gladly returne 
Fata obftant,triftig, palus innabilis unde | 
Allizat. - : 
Fate,and deepe fennes forbids their paffage thence, 
And Stix-----@6. 


— 


But how if hee be not arnongft thern,as not dying guiltleffe, butas beeing 


priuy to her owne finne? what if ic were fo (4) which none could know but her 
felfe,that though Targuinsus fon offred her force, yet the her felf gaue a luftfulll 
confent , & after didfo greeue at that,that fhe held ic worthy to be punifhed 
with death ? (though fhe ought not to haue done fo,howfoeuer if fhe thoughe 
her repentance could be any way acceptedof a fort of falfe gods.) Ifit be (0,8 
that it be falfe thartherewere two & but one did the fin, but rarher that both 
were guilty of ic, the one bya violent enforcement , the other bya fecret 
confent , then fhee died not innocent : And therefore (¢) her learned de- 


fenders may well fay , that flee is not in hell amongft thofe thac de- 


ftroyed 


Lre.t. ' OF. THE CITIE OF GOD. | 31 


em ee ew wes = - 


ftroyed them-{elues becing guileleffe, But this cafeis in fuch a ftrait,that ifthe 
murder be extenuated,the adultery is confirmed, and if this bee cleared the 
other is agrauated:Nor (4) is there any way out of thisargument: Ifthe bean 
adultereffe , why is thee commended ? If fhee bee chafte why did fhee kill her 
felfe?Bur in this example of this noble woman, this is fufficient for vs to con- 
fure chofe that beeing them-felues farre from all though?of fandtitie infulro- 
uer the Chriftian women that were forced in this laft capzitiicy: chat in Lucre- 
cia’s praife , itis faid that There were two , and but one c.mmitted adultery: 
For they then held Lacrec#a for one that could not flaine her felfe with any la- 
{ciuious confent. Well then inkilling her felte for fuffering vncieaneffe , be- 
ing hir felfe vnpolluted, fhe fhewed no loue vnto chaftitie, but onely difco- 
uered the infirmity of het owne fKame: he fhamed ac the filchineffe chat was 
committed vppon hir , though it were (/jwithout ker confent: and (7) bein 
a Romais,and coueteous of glory, fhe feaced,that(»)if the liued ftil,chat whieh 
fhee had irdured by viclence, fhould be thought to haue been fuffered with 
willingneffe. And therfore fhe thought good to thew this punifhment to the 
cies of men, asa teltimony of hir mind,vnte whome fhee couldnot fhewher 
minde indeed : Blufhing to be helda partaket in the fa@,which becing by ano- 
ther committed fo filthyly, the had indured fo vnwillingly. Now this courfe 
the Chriftian women did not takesthey liue ftill, how focuer violated :neither 
for all this reuenge they the ruines ofothers vppon them-felues,leaft hey 
fhould make an addition of their owne guilt vnto the orhers,if chey fhould go 
and mutder them-felues barbaroufly, becaufe their enemies had forft them fo 
beaftially. For howfoeuer , they haue the glory of their chaftity ftil wichin 
them (0 ) being the teftimony of’ their con{cience , this they haue before the 
eies of their God, and this is all they care for ( hauing no moreto looke to but 
to do wel ‘that they decline not from the authority of the law divine, in any 
finifter indeauour to auoidthe offence of mortall mans fufpition. 


~~. 


L. VIVES. 


(a DI eretia ] This hiftory of Lweretia is common,though Dionifus relate it forme-what 

| diftcring frcm Lisie; they agree in the fumme of the matter (6) Resenge } fo fayth 

Lisse in his perfon. But gine me your right hands and faiths,to inflil sft renenge uppon the Ss 
adulterer: and they all in order gave her their faiths. (c) One declaming | Who this wasI Virgil once 
haue not yet read: One Goffe faith it was Virgil, as hee fourtd recorded by a great {chol- Pleaded. 
Jer and one thathadread much, But Virgifneuer was declamcr : nor euer pleaded in caufe | } Al this 
but one, and chat but once : perhaps that great reader ims gined that oneto bee this,which 48 left out 
indeed was neuer extant. [| Which he might the better doe, becafue he had read fuch (tore of ¥ Paris 
ofhiftories:and betrer yet,ifhe were Licentiat,or Doftor ](d) He wat chafed | Tarquin the ¢dition, 
King, and all his ofipring were chafed out of the Cittiezof this i the third book: (¢)The of- The mane 
fender \Cicero faith that touchin ga Romains life there was a decree y no Iudgement fhould 2¢rof 
paffe vpon it, without the affent of the whole people,in the great (omitia, or Parliaments, lodgement 
called Centuriata, The forme and manner of which iudgement he fers down in his oration ay pata 
for his houfe;and fo doth Plutarch in the Gracéhi. (f ) Lucretia ber felfe] which agprauats mains life 
the fact: done by Lucretia, a noble and worthy matron of the Citty, (¢) Placed among/f and deaths 
thefe \Uirgslin the 6, ofhis e&neads ditides Hell into nine circles, and ofthe third heé Hels nine 
fpeaketh 1 US, i | circles, 


D 4 | Proxima 


Ee ee OEE EE ea ae ee eT ee ee 
= SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuara8. 


Proxima deinde tenent mefti loca qui fibi lethum 
Infontes peperere mank, incemg, perofe 
Proiecere animas;quam vellent ethere in atta 
Nunc & pauperiems,c& dures perferre labores ? 
Fata obftant,triftig, palus innabilis unda | 
Alligat & nowies Styx interfufa coercet. 


In englith thus: 


O now they with a returne, t’ abide 
Extremeft need,and 


The Ro- mae ; ae ; : 
a wftine faith,that this conclufion is inextricable & vnavoidable by either way.(1) wath 
dy of, orile be confert |For thee abhorred to confent ynto this act of luft. (#) 4 Romaine] The Re 


maine Nation were alwaies moft greedy of glory,of whom it is faid: 


Vincet amor patrie,laudumg, immenfa sett : 
Their countries loue & boundles this of glory .Will conquer, &c, 


And Onid faith of Luerece,inhis Fafti: | 


Saccubnit fame vitta puella metu: 
Conquer d with feare to loofe her fame, the fell. 


(x) If fhe lined | after this yncleaneffe committed vpon hir. (0) Being the te/fimeny |for our 
glory is this ( faith Saint Past 2. Cor.1.12.) the teftimony of our con{ciences; And this 
the Stoskes and all the heathenifh wife men haue ewer taught. 


That there is no authority which allowes Chriftians to 
be their owme deaths in what canfe foener 


Cuar. I9. 


Or it isnot for nothing that wee neuer finde it commended in the holy ca- 

nonical] Scriptures(or but allowed ) chat either for at taining of immorta- 
litie , or auoyding of calamitie, wee fhould bee our owne deftru@ions:we are 
forbidden it in the law: Thox {halt not kill: efpecially becaule it addes not, Thy 
neighbowrsas it doth in the pohibition of falfe witnefle. Thos [halt not beare i @ 
witnc(fe against thy neighbour: Yet let no manthinke that he is free of this later 
crime, if he beare falfe witnefle againft him-felfe: becaufe hee that loues his 
neighbour , begins his louc from him-felfe: Seeing it is written : Thow {bale 


kixod, 30, 


bint, * OF THE CITIE OF: GOD. 3B 

loue thy neighbour as thy felfe. Now if hee bee no leffe guiltlefle of falfe Mah22- 
witneffe that teftifieth falfely againft him-felfe, then hee thar dothfoagainft 

his neighbour ( fince that in thac cemmandement, wherein falfe witneffe is 
forbidden, itis forbidden to be practifed againft ones neighbor, whence mif= 
vnderftan ding conceits may fuppofe that it isnot forbiddé to beare falfe wir- 

neffe again{t ones felfe ) how much plainer is it to bee vnderftood. that a man 

may not kill him-felfe, feeing that vnto the commandement( Thos fhals zot kil) 
nothing being added, excludes al exception both of others, &of him te whom 
the command is giuen ? And therefore fome would extend the intent of this 
precept,euen vnto beafts and cattell,and would haue it vnlawfull tokill any of 
‘them. But why not vnto hearbes alfo, and all things that grow and are nou- 
* sithed by the earthefor though thefe kindes cannot bee faidto haue (2) fence 
or feeling,yet they are faid to be liuing:and therfore they may die; and confe- 
quently by violent vfage be killed. VVherfore the Apoftle {peaking of thefe 
kinde of feedes, faith thus. Foole, that which thou fowe/t ,s not quickened, except oa | 
(fir ft) tt die.And the Pfalmift faith: He deftroyed theer vines vith baile:but what? ag. nee 

hall wee therefore thinke it finne to cutte vp atwigge , becaufe thecom- Pifal.78. 

mandement fayes , thou {halt not kill, and{o involue our felues in the foule er- *7* 
ror of the AZanichees ? VVhercfore fecting afide thefe dotages , when we read 

this precept: Thos {belt not kill 5 Uf wee hold it not to bee meant offruitesor © 
trees, becaufe they are not fenfitiue; nor of vnreafonable creatures, cither go- 
ing,flying, fwimming or creeping , becaufe they haue no fociety withvs in 
reafon, which God the Creator hath not made common both to them and vs; 

and therefore by his iuft ordinance, their deaths and liues are both moft fer- 
uiceable and vfe-full vnco vs;then it followes neceffarily that thow fhalt nor kil, 

is meant only ofmen:T how {halt act kil/,namely Neither thy felfor another. For 

he that kils him-felfc,kils no other buraman. - os oa 


L. VIVES. 


1 


O bane (a) fence ] Arifborle faith that plants ae sareeceand liuing creatures . but — 


yet not fenfitiue. But P/ate being of Empedocles his opinion , holds them both liuing or liming 
and fenfitiue:Either may be:they may die becaufe they do hue.howfocuer. + Steaturen, 


eens 


Of fame Sort of killing men, which notwith- 7 = 
Standing are no murthers. 
Car. 20. . 


ft 
7 met 


[ndeed the authority of the law diuine hath fette downe fome exceptions — 
wherein ic is !awfullto killaman. Butexcepting thofewhome Godcom-. 
maundes to bee flayne,cither by his expreffe law, or by fome particular com- 
maund vnto any perfon by any temporall occafion ( and hee committeth not 
homicide that owes his feruice vntohim that commaundeth him , beeing but 
as the {word is ahelpeto him that vfeth it. And thereforethofe men do nor 
breake the commandement which forbiddeth killing,who doe make oe 
? t 


: a en ela ci a 


34 SAINT AVGVSTINE. | _ Cuari2n. 


the authority of («) Gods commaund,or beeing in fome place ofpublike ma- 
giftracie,do putte to death malefaGtors according to their lawes, that is , ac- 
Abeshim cording tothe rule of iuftice and reafon. Abraham was not onely freed from 
becing blamed as a murtherer, but he was alfo commended asa godly man in 
that hee would haue killed his fonne //aack , not in wickednefle,but in obedi- 
Gena, ence. And itis a doub:full queftion, whether it bee to bee heldas a command 
Judges. from God that(b) Jepthekilled his daughter chat met him in his returne,feeing 
that he bad vowed to facrifice the firft liuing thing that came out of his houfe 
to meete him, when hee returned conqueror from the warres. (¢) Nor could 
Samp{ox be excufed pulling downe the houfe vpon him-felfe and his enemies, 
bar that the {pirit withinhim , which wrought miracles by him ,did prompt 
him vnro this act. Thofe therefore beeing excepted , which either the iuftice 
of the law,or the fountaine ofall iuftice, Gods particular commaund, would 


haue killedse chat killeth either himfelf,or any other, incurreth che guile of a 
homicide. 


L. VIVES. 


A Vthority (a) of Gods command | As the Jewes did: they waged warres, but it was 

f JThisis Gods expreffe command, { But ifthey were counted godly ¥ to pleafe God(thoug 

gainft natural humanitie afflicted ) his enemies with war and f{laughterstruly then cannot 
we butbe held the moft vngodly of § world that butcher vp fo many thoufand Chriftians 
againft the expreffe will of God ] (6) Leprhe | Judges the 11. Chapt. Verfe 31. Whofe fact — 
was like that , which the Tragedians write of Agamemnon, who facrificed his daughter. 
Agamem- /phigenia vnto Diana at eAnlis. Many reproue this facrifice of Jephte : for his vowe was - 
NOM. to bee interpreted,as ment of thofe things,which were accuftomed to be offred with Gods 

good pleafuresand fo was that of Agamemsmnons to haue bene conftrued alfo. (¢) Nor could 

Sampfon | Indges the 16. chapter and the 30. ve rfe, 


efre out 4 
in the 
- edition of 
Paris, 


That voluntary death can neuer be any figne of 
magnasimity,or greatnes of {pir:t. 


CuHaP 31. 


WW Ho focuer haue committed this homicide vppon them-felues,may (per- 
haps ) bee commended of fome for their greatnefle of {pirie , but never 
for their foundneffe ofiudgement. But indeed 1f you looke a little deeper in. 
to the matter,ic cannot bee rightly termed magnanimitie,when a man beein 
vnableto indure either cafua'l mifcries , or others oppreffions (to ia 
them ) deftroyeth him-felfe. For that minde difcouereth it felfe to bee of 
the greateft infirmirie, that can neither indure hard bondage in his bodie, 
or the fond opinionof the vulgar : and worthily is that fpirit entitled grear, 
that. can rather indure calamities then anoyde them: And.in refpe& 
of their owne purity and inlightned confcience , can fetce at naught 
_ the triuiall cenfures of mortall men (4) which are moft commonly 
erclowded ina mift of ignorance and erreur. If wee fhall thinke ica pare 
of magnanimity to putte a mans felfe to death , then is (4) Cleombrotus 
moft worthi¢ of this magnanimous title , who hauing read Platoes 


\ book 


Lint. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. ag 


booke of the immortality of the foule,caft himfelf headlong from the toppeofa 
wail, and fo leauing this life, wenc vnto another which hee beleeued was bet- 
ter. For neither calamity, nor guilcineffe, either true or falfe,vrged himto a- 
voide it by deftroying himfelfe, but his great {pirit alone was fufficient to 
make himcatch at his death, and breake.all the pleafing fetters of this life. 
Which deed notwithftanding,, that ic was rather great,then good , P/ato him- 
felfe, whom he read, might haue aflured him : who(be fure)would haue done 
ic,or taught it himfelfe, if he had not difcerned by the fame inftin& whereb 

he difcerned the foules eternity , that this was ac no hand tobee practifed, but 
rather veterly (¢) prohibited. | SO 


TED rng ane Tn es Nc, I ON, 


L. VIVES: 


V YV Mich (4) Are indeed} The ancient wife mien were cuer wont to call the people 

 ™ the great Maifter of Error. (b) Cleombrotus | This was the Amtracsot,whohauing The péople 
read Plato's dialogue called Phedo of the immortality of the foule, that hee mighit leaue how fled, 
this life, (which is bucas a death,) and paffe vnto immortality , threw himfelfe ouer a wall | 
into the fea, without any other caufe in the world, Of him did (albmachus make an epi- 


grame in Greeke,and in Latine,] haue feene it thus, 


Vita vale,muro praceps delapfus ab alto, - 
 Dixifti moriens Ambraciota paer: 
Nalluts in morte malum credens ; fed {cripta Platonis 
_ Non ita erant animo percipienda tno. | 
When Cleombrorus trom the turret threw 
Himfelfe to death, he cried new life,adues 
Holding death,hurtleffe: But graue Plato's fenfe, | 
He fhould haue read with no fuch reference. | | 


There was alfo another (/eombrotus King of Lacedemon,whom Epaminondas the The- 
bane ouercame. (¢) Rather vttterly probibited| For in the beginning of his Paado,hee faith _ 
it is wickedneffe tor a man to kill himfelfe : aad thac God is angred at fuch afact, like tke 
maifter of a family, when any of his flaues haue killed themfelues : and 1n many other pla< 
ces,he faith that without Gods command,no man ought to leaue this life . For here we ar¢ 
all as in afer front of barrell, euery one placed, as God our Emperor and Generall pleafech 
toappoint vs: and greater is his punifhment that forfaketh his life,then his chat forfaketh 
his colours, | ee ‘ 


Se 


Of Cato,who killed himfelfe being not able to endure 
7 | . Cefars victory, 
CuapP, 22. 


a 


¢ 


Vt many hauekilled themfelues for feare to falintd thé bands of their foes. 
We difpute not here de facfo,whether it hath been done or no,but de Jurey i 
whether it were to be done orno.For foiid reafon is before example,al autho. ean a= 
rities to the contrary,as wherevnto all examples doconfent, being fuchas by pies, . ” 
their excellence in gcodneffe are worthily imitable:neitherPatriarch,Prophet _ 

nor Apoftle euer did this : yet our Lord Yefus Chrift , when hee admonithed 

his difciples ,in perfecution to flie from city tocity ,might haue willedthem yn 74 
in fuch cafesto make a prefent difpatch gf themfelues , and fo to avoide their 33, 

oS ms | | perfecutors 


36 SAINT AVGVSTINE. | Cuaraa. 


perfecutors ( hadd hee held it fitte. ) Buc if hee neuer gaue any fuch admoni. 
tion,ot command , that any to whomehee promifed a manfion of eternity at 
their deaths, fhould paffe vnto their deaths on this fathion;(leteethen the hea- 
then that know not God produce al they can)it is plainly vnlawful for any one 
that ferueth the onely crire God to follow this courfe: But indeed befides Lu. 
cretia ( of whome I think we haue fufficiently argued before) ‘it is hard for 
them to find one other example , worth prefcribing as a fitte authoriry for o- 
thers to follow, befides that (4) Cato only that killed him-felfe at tiea:\(6) not 
that. hee alone was his owne deaths-man but becaufe he was accounted asa 
- (c) learned , and (d) honeft man, which may beget abeleefe, that todo 
as heedidde , wereto doe well. VVhat fhould Ifay of his fa@ morethen 
his friendes ( and (ec) {ome ofthem learned men ) haue faid > who fhewed far 
more iudgement in diflwading the deed , and cenfuring it asthe effe@ of 
a fpiric rather deiected , then magnanimous. And of this (/) did Cato 
him-felfe leauea teftimony in his owne famous Sonne. For if it were bale 
to liue vnderCe/ars vidory:why did he aduife his fon to this, willing him to 
" entertaine a full hope of Cs/ars clemency ? Yea why did he not vrge him to 
o willingly to his end with him ? If ic were laudable in Torquatas( ¢ )to kill 
Fis fonne that hadde fought and foyled his enemy : (though herein he had 
broken the Di@ators commaund ) why didde conquered Cato {pare his 
ouerthrowne fonne , that {pared not him-felfe ? VVas it more vile to bee 
aconquerour agaynft lawe , thento indurea conquerour againft honour ? 
What fhall wee faie then , but that even in the fame meafure that 
hee loued his fonne, whome hee both hoped and wifhed that Cz/er woulde 
{pare, in the fame didde hee enuy Cé/fars glory, which hee (4) fhouldhaue 
gotten in fparing of him alfo.or elfe(to mollifie this matter fom-what)he was 
afhamed to receiue fuch courtefie at Ce/ars hands. 


Cap, 19. 


L. VIVES. 
The Ca- 


Loess, [ee (4) Cato] The Catoe’s were of the Portian family, arifing from Tufcalem a towne: 
| of the Latines, The firlt of this ftocke that was called Cato ( that is wife and wary J 
was Marcas Portius, aman of meane difcent,but attaining to allthe honours of Confull, 
Cenfor,and of Triumph, His nephewes fonne was Marcus Portius Cato , bothofthem 
‘were great and (yet) innocent men. The firft was called AZaior,or the Elder,the later MG-' 
—-nor,or theyounger, The younger beeing aLeader in the ciuill wars of Pompey tooke his 
(that was,the common weales and the liberties ) part , again{t the vfurpation of Caius Ce- 
far : Now Pompey beeing ouercome by Cefzr at Pharfalia, and Scipio Metellus ( Pompey 
his facher in law)in Affrica,this Cato {eeing his faction fubuerted,and Cefar beareal down 
before him,being retyred vnto Vtica (a Citty in eAffrike ) and reading Platoe’s Phede 
twife ouer ss ee fame night thruft him-felfe chrough with his {word. (6) Net-bew 
caufe he alone | No , for many in other warres had {laine them-felues, leaft they fhould fall 
into the hand of the en¢mie : and in chis fame warre,fo did Scipio Metellus eA franins & 
King Inba(c)Learned } A ftoyke and excellently skill'd in the wifdom of the Greeks(d) Ho- 
nef? | the wifdomand innocencie that was in both thefe (atoes grew into aprouerb : and 
Catoes, hereof faith Jumenall, — ; | 
, Tertius @ Calo cecidit Cato, . 
Now Heauen hath giuen vs a third Cato, 


@ | | elles 


Live. _ OFTHE CITIE OF GOD. | 37 


ee eee edie = + 


Velleins Paterculas writing vntoVinicins, thus defcribeth this Caro. Hee was defcen- 
ded from Marcus Cato that head of the Porcian family ( who was bis great grandfather ) 
hee was aman like vertues felfe,and rather of disine then humane capacity : hee nexer did good 
that he cared fhould be noted : but bec .nfe hee could not doe any thing but good, as holding that 
anely reafonable which was inf: free was hee from all the corruptions of man,and exermore 
fwayed bis owne fortune to his owne liking, Thus farre Vellesss: to omit the great te(timo- 
nies of Seneca,Lucane, Tully,Salufte and others, of this worthy man.(e) fome of. them lear- 
ned | It isrecorded that Apollonsdes the Stoike , Demetris the Pe ripatetike,and Cleanthes 
the Phificion were then at Vt:ca with Cato. For he loued much the compari of the Greeke 
Philofophers , and his great grand-father neuer hated them fo much as he refpected them, 
And vpon the night that he flew himfelfe on (faith Péytarch ) at {upper there arofea difpu- 
tation about fuch things as really concerne the liberty of aman : wherein, Demetriss {poke 
many things againft (2to’s conftant affertions of the praife of fuch as killed themfelues; 
which indeed was fo vehement, that it begot a fufpicion in them all , that hee wouldfollow 
the fame courfe himfelfe,(f) Thss did Cato himfelfe | Plutarch writeth that when Cato catobié 
came to Vrica,he fent away his followers by fhipping,and carneftly prefwaded his fonne to fonne. 
goe with them , but could not force him to forfake his father , This fonne of his Cefar at= 
terwardes pardoned, as Lixy faith Lb. 114. and Cefar himfelfe in his (Commentaries of the 
African warre . Hee was(as Plutarch saith in his fathers life ) much giuen to venerie,but in 
the bartaile of Phillip:,fighting valiantly ‘on his cozen Bratus his fide for his countries frees 
dome hee was flaine,{corning to leaue the fight,when the chiefeft captaines fled.(g¢) to kill 
bis fonne | Titus Manlius Tor gnatus made his fonnes head bee cut off for fighting contrary senting 
to the edi&t,though he returned with victory,But of this elfe-where.(b) foonld bane gotten Torquarm, 
by {paring of bins} Commonly knowne is that faying of (far to him that brought newes _ 
of Cato’s death : Cato, J enny thy plory , for thou ennicdf? mine, and would not haue st reckoned 
among ft mine other famous attes, that I faned Cato, Cafar wrote two bookes called Anti 
catones,againtt Cato, as Cicero and Suetonius teftifie , The Cardinall of Liege told mee that 
he {aw them both in acertaine old librarie at Liege,and that hee would fee they fhould bee 
fent me, which ifhe do,I will not defraud the learned of their vfe and publication. 


eee 


That the Chriftiens excellRegulus in that vertae,wherein 
he excelled moft. 


Cuap. 23. 


RY thofe whom we oppofe will not hauetheir Cato excelled by our Job, that: 
holy man,who choofe rather to endure all then horribletorments (4 Jin 
his eth, then by aduencuring vpon death to auoide all thofe vexations : an 
other Saints of high credit and vndoubted faith in our fcriptures , all which 
made choyce rather to endure the tirany of their enemies , then bee their 
owne butchers. But now we will prooue out of their owne records that Re- - 
fus was Cato’s better in this glory . For Cato neuenouer-came Ce/ar,vnto 
whom he {corned to be fubie@ , and chofe ro murder himfelfe rather then bee 
feruant vnto him : But Rega/us ouer-came the 4fricans, and in his generallfhip, 
returned with diuers noble victories vnto the Romanes’, neuer with any nota- 
ble loffe of his Citizens, but alwaies ofhis foes : and yet being afterwards con- 
pa by them , hee refolued rather to endure flauery vnder them , then by 
eath to free himfelfe from them. And therein lice both preferued his paci- 
encie vnder theCarthaginians, andhis conftancy vnto the Romancs, neitner de- 
priuing the enemy of his conquered body, nor his countrymen of his vncon- 
quered minde: Neither was it the loue of this life , thatkept him from en 
| "7 


Cas Ce ae er ie Ri te eR te 


38 


Attilius his 
poucity. 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cannas, 


This hee gaue good proofe of, when without dread , hee returned back ynto 


his foes, to who he had giuen worfe caufe of offence in the Senate-houfe with 


his tongue then ever he had done before in the battaile with his force:& there- 

fore this fo greata conqueror and contemner ‘of this life, who had rather 

that his foes fhould take it from hima by any torments ,then that hee fhould 

giue death to himfelfe, howfoeuer, muft needes held , that it was a foule guile 
for manto bee his owne murderer. Rowe amongft all her worthies,and e- 

eernized {pirits,cannot fhew one better then hee was, for hee, for all his great 
victories , continued (6) moft poore :nor could mifhap amate him: for with 

a fixe refolue and an vndanted courage returned he vnto his deadlieft enemies. 
Now ,itchofe magnanimous and heroicall defenders of their earthly habi- 

tacles ,and thofetrueand found feruants of their ( indeede falfe gods ( who 

had power to cut downe their conquered foes by lawe of armes){ecing them- 

felues afterwardesto bee conquered of their foes, neuertheleffe would not 

be their owne butchers , but although they feared not death at al,yet wouldra- 
ther endure to bee f{laues to their foes fuperiority, then to bee their owne ex- 

ecutioners : How much more then fhould the Chriftians , that adore the 
true God,and ayme wholieat the eternall dwellings, reftraine themfelues from 
this foule wickedneffe , whenfoeuer it pleafeth God to expofe them fora 
time to tafte of remporall extremities, either for their triall, or for corre@ion 
fake,feeing that hee never forfaketh them in their humiliation,for whom hee 
being moft high, humbled himfelfe fo low: (4) efpecially beeing that they 
are perfons whom no lawes of armes or military power can allowe to deftroy. 
the conquered enemies? | Se 


en a a 


L. VIVES. 
| Fi (4) bis fle) ] For hee was afflicted with a fore kinde of vicere. (6) Moff poore| Liny in 


his eighteene booke, and Valerius in his examples of pouerty write this ; 77:ben Attilius 
knew that his generallfhip was prolonged another yeare more , hee wrote tothe Senate tohane 
them fend one to fupply bis place: H1s chiefe reafon why hee would refigne his charge was , bee 
canfe his feanen acres of ground (beeing all the land hee had) was {poyled by the hired fouldiers: 
which sf it continued fo,his wife and children could not haue whereon to line , Sothe Senate( gi» 
ning the charge of this unto the eLdiles ) looked better ener after unto futilius bis patrimony, 
(c)Efpecialy Seing that they| He makes fighting as far from Chriftian piety,as religious hue 
manity is from barbarous inhumanity. | | 


ree gee ep ae AO LS ATE LTD . 


- That finne is not to be ausided 
| | by finne. 


Cnap. 246 


V (Hat a pernicious error then is heere creptinto the world , tha aman 
» fhould killhimfelfe,becaufe either his enemy had iniured him,or means 


to iniure him ? whereas hee may not kill his enemy, whethes hee haue offen- 


dedhim , or bee about to offend him ? This is rather to bee feared indeede, 


that the bodie, beeing fubiec& vnto the enemies luft , with rouch of fome 


enticing 


2 ee 


Lint. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 39 


ee ee: -- + owe ee 


enticing delight do not alluretheé will to confent to this impurity : And there- 
fore(fay they )it is noc becaufe of anothers guilt, but for feare of ones owne, 
that fuch men ought to kill chemfelues before finne be committed vpon them. 
Nay,the minde that is more truly fubie& vnto God and his wifdome,then vnto 
carnall concupifcence will neuer be brought to yeeld vito the luft of the owne 
flefh be ic neuer fo prouoked by the luf% of anothers : But if ic bea damnable 
fact ,anda deteftable wickedneffe to kill ones felfe at all,/as the truth in plaine 
tearmes faith ic is ) what man willbee fo fond as to fay, let vs finne now, 
leaft we finnehereafter ? let vs commit murder now, leaft wee fall intc adul- 
tery hereafter ? If wickedneffe be fo predominant in fuch an one,as hee or fhee 
will not chu‘e rather to {uffer in innocence than to efcape by guilt: isit noc bet 
ter to aduenture onthe vncertainery of the future adultery, then the certainery 
of the prefent murder ? is it not becter to commit fuch a finne as repentance 
may purge ,then fuch anone as leauesno place ar all for repentance? This £ 
fpeake for fuch as for auoyding of guilt ( not in others but in thensfelues ) and 
fearing to confent to theluftin themfelues which anothers luft inciteth , doe 
imagine chat they ought rather to endure tke violence of death : But farre bee 
icfromaChriftian foule that trufteth in his God , that hopeth in him and reft- 
eth on hims farre bee it(I fay ) from fuch to yeeld vnto the delights of 
the flefhin ary confent vnto vncleaneffe. But ifthat (2) concupifcentiall dif 
_ obedience ‘which dvelleth as yet in our (6) dying flefh, doe ftirre it felte by 
the owne licence againft the law of our will ; how can it bee but falcleffein the 


body of him or her that neuer confenteth, when ic ftirres without guile in 
the body that fleepeth. 


L. VIVES. 
C Oxcupifcentiall (a) Difobedience| The luft of the Bodie is mooued of it felfe euen #- 


gaintt all refittance and contradiction of the will: and then the will being overcome 
by the flefh,from hence arifeth fhame , as we will fhew more at large hereafter . ( b) Dying 
fiefe| Our members being fubieét vnto death doe die cuety day , and yct feeme to haue in 
themalife diftin@ from the life of the foule : if then the luftfull motions that betide vs is 
fleepe, bee faltleffe , becaufe the will doth not confent , but nature effects them without it 
how much more faleleffe fhall.thofe bee , wherein the will is fo fo farre from refting onely, 
thacic refifts and ftriucs againft them? 


Of forme unlewfull acts done by the Saints and by what occafiors 
a they were done. — 


Cap. 25, 


BY ¢ there were (¢) fone holy women ( fay they )in thefe times of perfe- 

cution, who flying from the {poylers of their chaftities, threw themfelues 

head-long into a {witt riuer which drowned them and fo they died , and yet 

their martirdomes are continually honored with religious memorialls in the 

Catholike Church. Well , of thefe I dare not iudge rafhly in any thing. 

Whether the Church haue any fufficient ceftimonies that the er 
| | E23 Ww 


40 


Particular 
Vocation, 


will aduifed it to honorthefe perfons memories , [cannot cell, it may be tha¢ 
it hath. For what if they did not this through mortall feare , but through hea- 
uenly inftin@ ? not in error, but in obedience 2as wee muft not beleeue but chat 
Sampfon did. And if God command, and this command be cleerely and doubt- 


_ lefly difcerned to bee his , who dares call this obedience into queltion ? Who 


dare callumniate the dutie of holy loue? But euery one chat fhall refolue to 
facrifice his fonne vnto God fhall not bee cleared of guilt in fucha refolution, 


becaufe —tbraham was praifed for it. Forthe fouldier, thatin his order and: 


obeyfance to his gouernour (vnder whom hee fighteth lawfully) killeth aman, 
the citty neuermakes him guilty of homicid:nay it makes him guilty of falfhood 
and contempt ,ifheedoe not labour in all chathee can to docit. Butifhee 
had killed the man of his owne voluntary pleafure , then had hee beene guilty 
of fhedding humaine bloud, And {fo hee is punifhed for doing of that vnbid- 
den, for thenot doing of which beeing bidde hee fhouldalfo haue beene pu 
nifhed . If this be thus at the generalls command,then why not at the creators? 
He therefore that heareth it fayd ,T hou {bale not kil thy felfe,mutt kil himfelf ifhe 


- commaunde him , whom wee may no way gainefay: Onely hee is tomarke 


x.Cor, 3, 
Ile. 


whether this diuine commaund bee not involued in any vneertainety. By 
(b) the eare wee doe make coniecture of the conicience , but our iudgemene 
cannot penetrate into the fecrets of hearts: No map knowes the things of a 
man,but the [pirit of aman whch ts in him. This we fay,this we affirme,this wee 
vniuerfally approoue, that no man ought to procure his owne death for feare 
of temporall miferies; becaufe in doing this hee falleth into eternal! : Néi- 
ther may hee doe it to avoide the finnes of others , for in this hee maketh him- 


 felfe guilty of a deadly guile, whome others wickednefle could not make 


guilty : not for his owne finnés paft, for which hee had more neede to 
with for life , that hee might repent himfelfe of chem : nor for any defire 
of a better life to bee hoped for after death : Becaufe fuch as are guil- 
_ of the loffe of their owne life, neuer enioye any better life after their 

th. , | 


L. VIVES. 
Ve there were (a) fome holy women) Ambrofe lib. 3. de virginibus , writeth that Pelagia 
with his mother & fifters caft themfelues headlong into a riuer,for feare to be rauifhed 
of the foldiers that purfued them: and yet ehe Church(faith he)hath placed her amongft the 
number of the martires : And Sophronia likewife who killed her felfe to auoide the luit of 
Maxentinus Cafar as Exfebins recordeth in his Ecclefafticall hiftory. (6) by the eare| Wee 
iudge by appearances of what is withim :for our eye cannot perce into the fecrets of man, - 


whether we ought to fie finne with volun 


Cuap. 26 
I Here is one reafon of this propofition as yet to handle , which feemes to 


proucit commodious for a man to fuffer a voluntary death: namely _ 
| a either 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuapi26. . 


® 
ee th, Oller pects 


A a A 


Lint. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. gt 


——— ee. 


eitl:eralluring pleafures or tormenting paines fhould enforce him tofinneaf- , 
rerwards, Which reafon if we will giue {cope vnto,it will run out fo farre, that 
one would thinke that men fhould bee exhorted to this voluntary butchery,e- 
uen then , when by the fount of regeneration they are purified from all their 
finnes. Forthen is the time to beware of all finnesto come, when all that 
is paft is pardoned. And iavoluntary death doe this,why is it not fitteft then? 
. Why doth hee that is newly baprized forbeare his owne throat? Why doth he 
thruft his head freedagaine into all thefe imminent dangers of this life, feeing 
he may fo eafilieavoide them all by his death: and itis written , Hee that loucth 
daunger {hall fall therein ? WW hy then doth he loue thofe innumerable daungers? 
or if hee doenot loue them, why vndertakes hee them ? Is any man fo fond] 
peruerfe and fo greata contemner of truth, that if hee thinke one fhould kill 
_himfelfe to efchue the violence of one oppreffor leaft it draw himvnto finne, - 
will neuerthelefle auouch that one thould liue ftill, and endurethis whole 
world at all times, full ofall temptations,both fuch as may bee expected from 
one oppreffor , and thoufands befides without which no man doth nor can 
liue 2? What is the reafon then, why wee doe {pend fo much time in our exhor- 
tations , endeuouring to animate (4) thofe whom wee haue baptized, (6) ei- 
ther vntovirginity , or chafte widowhood , or honeft and honorable marriages 
{eeing wee haue both farre fhorter and farre better’ waiesto abandonall con- 
tagion and daunger of finne; namely in perfwading euery one prefently after 
that remiffion of his finnes which hee hath newly obtained in baptifme, to be- 
take him prefently to afpeedy death, and fo fend him prefently away vnto. 
G OD, both frefh and faire ? If any man thinke that-this is ficte to bee per-. 
{waded , I fay not hee dotes, but i fay heeis plaine madde: with what face 
can he fay vnto a man,kill chy felfe,leaft vnto thy {mall finnes thou adde a grea- 
ter by liuing in flauery vnto a barbarous vnchafte maifter ? how can hee(but 
with guilty fhame) fay vntoaman:killchy felfe now that thy finnes are for- 
giuen thee, leaft thou fall into the like againe or worfe, by liuing in this world, 
fo fraught with manifold temptation , foaluring with vncleane delights , fo fu- 
rious with bloudy facrileges , fo hate-full (c) with errors and terrors? itisa@ 
fhameanda finne to fay the one, andtherefore is it fo likewife to doethe o- 
ther. For (d) if there were any reafon of iuft force to authorize this fa, it 
muft needes bee that which is fore-alledged . Butitis not that,cherefore there 
isnone. Loath not your liues then ( you faithfull of Chrift )chough the foe 
hath made hauock of your chaftities. You hauea greatand true confolati- 
on,if your confcience beare you faithfull withefle that you neuer confented vn- 
to their finnes who were fuffred to commit fuch outrages vpon you. 


Eccl,3.27 


| LVIVES. 


Hofe (4) whom we hane baptized) [ Leaft any man fhould miftake this place, vnderftand The olg 
that in times of old, no man was brought vnto baptifime , but he was of fufficient yeares manner of 
to know what that mifticall water meant , and to require his baptifme, yeaandthat{undry baptizing, | 
times , Which we fee refembled in our baptifiag of infants vnto this day « For the infate [ Jal thi 
is asked(be it borne on that day , or a day before ) whether it wilbe baptized ? Thrife is this 1 ; = 
> sane propounded vnto it : vnto which the God-fathers anfwere, it will : ] heare thatin of § a ‘ 
om Cities of Jtaly they doe for the moft part obferue the. ancient cuftome as yet. This’ edicon: 
es E 3 Thaue : 


, 


42 


Rom.1 3 
33- 


Rom.7 2. 
x6, 
Pfal,z.18 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. — Cuaps27, 


Ihave related onely to explane the meaning of Angaffine more fullie, ] (6) Esther ro virgi~ 
wity| He toucheth the three eftates of fuch asliue well in the Church. (¢) With fo many er- 
yors and terrors| Ofthe feauenth chance, (d) For if there were any reafon| A fit kinde of ar- 
gument,by repugnance:which taking away the adiunct,takes the fubiect away alfo. Tu/ly 


mentions it in-his Topékes. 


How it was aindgement of God that the encmie was permitted to 
excerci{e his luft upon the Chriftian bodies. 


Crap. 27. 


JF you aske me now why thefe outrages were thus permitced ,I anfwere the 

prouidence of the creator & gouernor of the world, is high, and his iudge- 
ments are vnfearchable (2) and his wases pal finding out: But aske your owne 
hearts fincerely whether you haue boafted inthis good of continency and 
chaftity, or no? whether you haue not affe@ed humane commendations for it, 
and fo thereby haue enuied it in others ? I doe not accufe you of that whereof I 
am ignorant,nor doe I know what anfwere your hearts will returne you vnto 
this queftion. But if they anfwere affirmatiuely , and fay you haue done fo, 
thenwonder not at all (6) that you hauenow loft that, whereby you did but 
fecke and (¢) reioyce to pleafe the eyes of mortall men: and that you loft nor 
that which could not bee fhewed vnto men. If you confented not vnto the o- 
thers luxury, your foules hadthe helpe of Gods grace to keepethem from 


Joffe , and likewife felt the difgrace of humane glory , to deterre them from the 


loue of it. But your faint hearts are comforted on both fides :on this fide 
being approoued , and on that fide chaftifed : iuftified on rhis ,and reformed 
onthe other. But their hearts that giue them anfwere that they neuer glo- 
ried in the guift of virginity, viduall chaftity , or continence in marriage: 
but (4 ) forting themfelues with the meaneft, did (¢) with a reuerend feare 

reioyce inthis guife of God; nor ever repined at the like excellence of fanc- 
tity and purity in others; but neglecting theayre of humane fame, (which 


_alwaies is wont to accrew according to the rarity of the vertue that de- 


ferues it ) did wifh rather to haue their number multiplied,then by reafon 
of their fewnefle to become more eminent. Let not thofe thatare fuch, 
Cif the Barbarians luft haue feized vpon fome of them) (/f) alledge. thae 
this is ( meerely ) permitted : nor let them thinke that God neglecteth thefe 
things becaufe he fome-times permitteth chat whichno man euer committeth 
vnpunifhed ; for fome , as weights of finne and euill defires , are let downe by 
‘a prefent and fecretiudgement , andfomeare referued to that publique and 
vniuerfall laft iudgement. And perhaps thofe , who knew themfelues vn- 
guiltie, and that neuer had their hearts puffed vppe with the good of this 
chafticy , ( and yet had their bodies thus abufed by the enemie ) had 


* (notwithftanding ) fome infirmity lurking within them which( ¢) if they 


had efcaped; this humiliation by the warres fury might haue increafed 
vnto a faftidious pride. Wherefore (4) as fome were taken away by 
death , leaf? wickedneffe fbould alter their vnderftandings , fo thefe here 

were 


: , 7 re ve. ; 
Lear. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 43. 


were forced to forgoe( é ) fome-thing, leaft excefle of profperitie fhould haue 
depraued their vertuous modeftie. And therefore, fromneither fort,either of 
| thofe that were proud,in that their bodies were pure from all vncheane touch 
. of others, or chat might haue growne preud, if they had efcaped the rape done 
: by their foes, from neither of thefeis their chaftitie taken away, but vntothem 
both is humilicie perfwaded. The vaine-glory which is (4) immanent inthe 
one,and imminent ouer the o:her,was excluded in them both. Though this is 
not to bee cucr-paffed with filence, that fome that, endured thefe violences, 
might ‘sacs thinke,chac continencie is but a bodily good , rethaining as long 
as the body remaines vntouched, but that ic isnot foly placed in the ftrength 
of the grace-aflifted will, which fan@ifies both body and foule: nor thatit is 
a good that cannot be lott againft ones will:which error,this affliction brought 
them to vnderftand: for it they confider with what con{cience they honor God, 
and do with an vnmooucd faith beleeue this of him,that hee will not, nay can- 
not any way forfake fuch as thus and thus do ferue him, and inuocate his name, 
and donot doubt of the great acceptation which he vouchfafeth vnto chattitie, 
Then muft they neede perceiue that it followes neceflarily, that he would never 
fuffer this to fall vpon his Saints, if thar by this meanes they fhould be defpoi- 
oo of that fan@imonie which hee fo much affecteth in them, and infufeth into 
them. ar ; | 


ree ee ee mel 


L. VIVES. 


‘RR Nd (a) his ayes | che vulgar (Rom.12.35.) teades tnneffigabiles for the direét con. 
tratie, minime inneftigabsles. Inucftigabilis,is that which is found, inueftigarido,with fear- 
ebing ont. But the wayes of the Lord cannot be found out by humairie vnderftanding. The 
Greeke is artteyiasct,imperseftigabiles, wnfearchable. ( 6) That you loft that |that youloft . 
our fame,and faire report,and yet loft not your chaftitie. (¢ ) Reioyced to pleafe, | that is 
baunely defired. (d) But forting themfelues with the meanest | Rom,12.16. Bee not high 
minded, but make your felues equall with them of the lower fort : reis rereivls cloareyidva, 
faith the originall,verbally tranflated : bussilibus abdulis, (¢ ) With renerend feare | Pfalm. 
2.11. Serue the Lord with feare,or reioyce with trembling. (f ) Alledge| we interprete not 
canfari asthe Philofophcrs doe in rhe Schooles, ix caufa effe, to be the caufe, but caufam 
_proferre,to alledge'as caufe, as Uirgill doth, faying : | : : 


_Caufando noftros in longum ducis amores. 
With allegations thou prolongs our loues, 


(2) If they had efcaped this humiliation | Augaftine here vieth humilitas for bumiliane; 

(I thinke ) whichis, a deicéting of 4 man by fome calamitie : Voleffe that fome will reade it 

thus : Which dit had efcaped, the humility of this warres furie, might bane blowne them up 

into faftidious pride. (b ) As fome were taken away | The wordes are in the fourth of the 

booke of #i/dome, the eleuenth verfe,and are leche of Henoch: but they’ are not here to 

bee ynderftood as fpoken of him’: ( forhee was taken vp in his life vnto the Lord: ) but 

of others who after their death were taken vp to God for-the fame caufe that Henoch.was; 

before his death. (4) Some thing] what that fomething was, modeft fhame prohibiceth. 

to fpeake. (k_) Jmsmanent in the one] nocas the Grammarians take it, namely for wnconts- 7 
nuing or tranfitorie, but immanens, quali intus manens, inherent,ingrafted,or ftaying within, Picea 
eucuftine vicch it for to exprefie'the figure of eA gnomination, ot ‘Paranomafia, which is in ol ag 
the two words insmanent G imminent ; which figure he vfeth in many other places. 


a a amen . 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. Caria 


Pfal.42.3, 


What the feruants of Chrift may anfwer the Infidels, when they — 
°  upbrayde them with Chrifts not delinering them 
; (in their afflictions ) from the furie of 
t 


cir enemies furse. 
Crap. 28. 


V V Herefore all the feruants of the great and true God haue a comfort thats 
_ firme and fixed, not placed vpon fraile foundations of momentary and 
tranfitorie things: and fo they pafle this temporall life in fuch manner, as they. 
neuer neede repent them of enioying it : becaufe that herein they are prepared 
for that which is eternall, vfing the goods of this world butas in a pilgrimage, 
being no way entrapped in them,and fo making vfe of the euills of this world, 
as they make them ferue alwayes either to their approbation,or their reforma- 
tion, Thofe that infule vpon this their vprightneffe , and ( when they fee them 


fallen into fome of thefe temporall inconueniences ) fay vnto them (4) where. _ 


isthy God ? Let them tell vs, where their Gods are when they are afflited 
with the like oppreflions ? their gods, which either they worthip , or defire to. 
worthip onely .for the auoyding of fuch inconuen:ences. The family of Chrift 
can anfwer,my God is euery where prefent,in all places,whole and powerfull, 
no {pace includes him:he can be prefent,vn-perceiued,and depart away againe, 
vntnooued. And he, when he affli@s vs with thefe aduerfities ,doth it either 
for triall of our perfeétions or reforming of our imperfections, ftill referuing 
an eternall rewarde for our patient fufferance of temporall diftreffes. But who 


are.you, that I fhould vouchfafe to fpeake vnto you , efpecially of your gods, - 
but moft efpecially -of mine owne Ged(b) who is terrible and to bee feared. 
Pfal.96405 aboue all Gods? for all the gods of the Heathen are Diuills , but the Lord made the 

ii: he qe) ae pee OB ee 


ARES, 


Fastin, einai! . 


L. VIVES. 


‘ 


they dayly fa 


unto me : where isnow thy God? (6 ) Who is terrible and to bee feared, | 
Pfal.ys.g.5. . 


That [uch as complaine of the Chriftian times defire nothing 
but to line sn filthy pleafures. | 


| | | — Cuapr. 29. | 
| that (4) your Scipio Najica were now aliue, hee that was once your high 


Prieft, who (when in the fearefull terror of the Carthaginian warres , the 
moft perfe& man of all the citie was fought for,to vndertake the entertainment 


of the Phrigian goddefle ) was chofen by the whole Senate, he whofe face per- 
haps you now durft not looke on , hee would fhame you from this grofe impu- » 


dence of yours. For what caufe is there for you to exclaime at the profperi- 
tie of the Chriftian faith in thefe times, but onely becaufe you would follow 
your 


WV Here. ( a)is God 3 ] Pfal.42. ALy reares bane beene my bread day and i : while ) 


‘ch ee el 


> a 


, a 


Lrs.1. : OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 45 


your luxury vncontrolled,and having remoued the impediments of al trouble- 
forne oppofitions, fwim on in your difhoneft and Vnhallowed diffolution?Y out 
affections do not ftand vp for peace, nor for vniuerfal plenty and profperity, to 
the end that you might vfe them when you hauethé , as honeft men fhould do: 
that is, modeftly.foberly,temperately and religioufly : No:but that hence you 
might keepe vp your vnreafonable expence , in feeking out {uch infinite vari- 
ety of pleafures,and fo giuebirth vnto thofe cxorbitances in your profperi- 
ties, which would heape more mifchicfs vpon you then éuer befel you by your 
enemies. : 7 

(b) But Scépio your high Prieft, he whom the whole Senate iudged the beft 
man amcngft you,fearing that this calamitie would fall vppon you(that I fpeak. 
of) would not haue Carthage inthofe dayes the fole paralell of the Romaine 
Empire veterly fubuerted,but contradiaed Cato,that {peke for the deftru@tion 
of it,becaufe hee feared the foe of all weake {pirits , Securty : and held that Car- 
thage would bee vnto his fellow Cittizens(c)as ifthey were young punies both 
aconuenient tutor,andaneceffary terror. Nor did his iudgément delude him: 
the euenc it felfe gaue fufficient proofe whether hefpoke true or no:for after- 
wards when Carthage was raized downe , and che greateft curber and terror of 
the Romane weale-publike veterly extinguifhed and brought to nothing ; Pre- 
fently fuch an innumerable {warm of inconueniences arofe out of this profpe- 
rous eftate , that.the bondesof concord beeing all rent afunder and broken, 


’ firft with barbarous and (¢) bloudy feditions , and next (f) by continuall gi- 


ving of worfe and worfecaufes by ciuill warres, fuch flaughters were effe@- 
ed, fo much bloud was fhedde by ciuill warres , and fo much inhumanitie 
was pratifed in profcribings , riots and rapines , that thofe Romsaines chat 
in the good time of their liues feared no hurt but from their enemies, now. 
in the corrupt time of their lives indured far worfe of their owne fellowes :and 
thar luft after foueraiguty ; which among all other firines ofthe world , was 
moft appropriate vnto the Romaines , ahd moft immoderate in themall , at 
length getting headand happie fuccefle in a fewe of the more powerfull , ic 
ouerpreffed all the reft, wearing th¢m out and crufhing their neckes with the 
yoake of vilde and-flanith bondage. | | 


L. VIVES. 


© 


| Fa your Scipio (a) Najica | This man was the fonne of (neins Cornelius Scipio,who was 
flayne together with his brother PabLias, by the Carthaginians in Spaine , in the fecond Scipio Naf 
war of Affrica.In the 14.year of which war the Decemusri ain a verfe amongft the reft of ica, 
the Prophecies in the books of the 576i/s,which fore-told that the enemy fhould be chafed 
out of Jta/y if that the mother of the gods wete tranfported from Peffinuns, acitty of Phry- 
gia,ynto Rome, Here-vpon an ambaflage-was fert to Attalxs,who as then was King of that 
country,to demand the mother of the gods of him,in the name of the Senate and people of 
Rome, The Ambafladours as they went , tooke the Oracle of Delphos in their way, 
to know whet hope there was of attaining this mother ef the goddes of the ftranger 
King eAttalus, The Oracle badde them bee of good courage , Attalws. woulde 
not beeagaynft the fulfilling of theit requeft for the Image : but withal , willed 
em to haue an efpeciall care that when fhee came into /ta/y , the beft man of the 
whole Cittie of Rome fhould giue hix intertainment , and recejuchir into his cuftodie. 


a, ee a ~- emt ~= 


46 SAINT AVGVSTINE.: C wap.30. 


So the fhippe returning vnto Offsa with the Image of the goddefle, Publius Cornelius Scipio 
Na/ica was by the Senators (which were fworne to giue their opinions of the beft man of 
the Cittie ) adiudged as the be{t man,he being then buta youth and not out ofhis queftor- 
‘fhip, which was his firft Reppe vnto dignity;and fo hee by the decree of the Senate,receiued 
The orioi. the Phrigian goddefle : Linie in bis 29. booke and many others. (6) But Scipio | In the 600. 
mall of the yeare after the building of Rome ,;when the Romatwe Ambaffadors that had bin at Foes 
ae reported that there they had found a huge dedle of furniture for fhipping and all chinges fice 
aaWars. fora Nauall warre,the Senate held a confultation about the beginning of a warre with the 
Carthaginians, Now Marcus Portins Cato beeing (enfor , to aflure the Romains their eftate 
at lengcth,gaue counfell not onely to beginne this warre,but veterly to extirpate and demo« 
lith (this terror of theirs) Carthage. But Najfica Seiptovof whom we {poke but now )would 
- not fee the people of Rome expofed to the inconueniences of too much Idleneffe, nor that 
they fhould {wimme in too much fecurity : and therefore would haue fomething to remaine 
as a bridle to curb the head-{trong appetite of a powerful multitude: Where-vppon he gaue 
them che counfell not onely not to deftroy Carthage,but euen not to beginne a warre with 
the Carthaginians without a lawfull and fufhicient caufe. Linie and others. (¢) As if they 
tabor ber. PE7EIOUNE panies ] Valerius writeth that Appins Claudius v{ed often to fay that imployment 
tervang 44 farmore extol the people of Rome then guiet:that exceffe of leifure and reft melted them in= 
Rome then ¢0 flothfulneffe , but the rough name of bufineffe , kept the manners of the cittie in their priftine 
Quiet, frate, undeformed:when the [weet found of quiet ener ledde in great Store of corruption. (d) When 
Carthage wasraized | Salzftinhis war of Jugarth faith thus : for before Carthage was ras- 
zed,the Senate axd People of Rome gouerned the weale-publ:ke wel quietly and modeftly betwixt 
them-(elues:nor was there any contention for glory or domination ae a ats the feare 7 the 
foes kept alltheC itty in g ood arts cy orders:but that feare being ortce remoned and abolifbed,then 
the attendants of profperous eStates pride ard luxury thruft in unreflrained, (e) And blondy fe- 
ditions | As firlt ¥ of Tiberius Gracchus, then that of Cains his brother,in which two was the 
fir(t ciuill cffufion of Cittizens bloud beheld: the firft of thefe happened tenne yeares after 
Theeiul Carthage was deftroyed. (f) By continual gining of worfe and worfe canfes | For through the 
Wares, {edition of (ains Gracchus was the office of the Tribunefhip inuented, and beftowed on Li= 
wins Drufus, whom the Senators oppofed again{t the Gentlemen, who flood for the law that 
Gracchus had made.Hence arofe the war called Sociale Bellum,becaufe Drufus reformed not 
the citty as hee promifedzand hence arofe the warre of Mithridates,who taking aduantage 
of this difcord of /talie,made many thoufands of the /tadsans that traffick’d m his dominions 
to bee flaine : and hence arofe the ciuill warre of AZarius who fought to gette the vnder- 
taking of this Prouince and warre of Mithridates from Syla, And from the feedes of this 
watre,fprung the warrcs of Sertorins, Lepidus , the confpiracy of ( atsine,and laftly the warre 
of Pompey, And from that fprung the Empire of Cefar,and after his death the ciuil warres of 
Anthony,of Brutus and Caffins at the Philippi:of Sextus Pompeins in Sscilia,and that of eActi- 
#0, And laftly the common-weales freedome turned into a tiriannical monarchy, 


q s 


By what degrees of corruption the Romaines 
ambition grew to {uch 4 height. 


CHapP 30. 


Or when didd: ever this luft of foueraignty ceafe in proud mindes , vntill ie 

hadde by continuance of honours attained voto the dignitie of regall domi- 

nation? And if their ambition didde not preuaiie,they then haddeno meane to 

Ambition, Continue their honours:Now ambition would nor preuaile but amongft a peo- 

Auance. ple wholly corrupted ie coueteoufnes and luxury. And the people is al- 
- 


Pro(peity. Waies infected with thefe two contagions,by the meanes of affluent profperity, 


“4 


which 


" OT LILO CCCI, 
List. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 47 


| eaten th aad 


aera 


which Nafica did wifely hold fit to be fore-feene and preuented , by not condif- 
cending to the abolifhing of fo frong,fo powerfull, and fo ritch a citty of their 
enemies : thereby to keepe luxurie in awfull feare: that fo it might not become 
exorbitant,and by that meanes alfo couetoufnefle might be reprefled. Which 
two vices once chained vp,vertue (the citties fupporter ) might flourifh, anda 
liberty befitting this vertue might ftand ftrong, And hence it was , out of this 
moft circumfpe& zeale vnro his country, thar your faid high Prieft, who was 
chofen by the Senate of thofe times for the beft man, without any difference of 
voices,(a thing worthy of often repetition ) when the Senate would haue buile 
(a)a Theater, diflwaded them from this vaine refolution: andina moft eraue 
oration,perfwaded chem not to fuffer the ( 6) luxurie of the Greekes to crecpe 
into their olde conditions, nor to confent vnto the entrie of forraigne corrup- 
tion ,to the fubuerfion and extirpation cf their natiue Romaine perfection, 
working fo much by his owne onely authoritie,that the whole bench of the iu- 
dicious Senate being moned by his reafons , exprefly prohibited the vfe of (¢) 
thofe mooueable feates which the £ema/nes began as then to vie in the behold- 

ing of Playes, How earneft would hee haue beene to haue cleanfed the citie of % afte - 
Rome of the ( d) Playes themfelues , if hee durft haue-oppofed their authoritie the fitting 
whom he held for Gods, being ignorant that they were malitious 'Déaels : or if 2 Playes, 
hee knew it, then it feemes hee held that they were rather to bee pleafed, then 
defpifed . For as yet, that heauenly doctrine was not deliuered vato the world, 

which purifying the heart by faith , changes theaffe@ , with a zealous piety to 
defireand aime at the bleffings of heauen,or thofe which are aboue the heauens, 
andfreech men abfolutely from the flauery of thofe proud and vngracious 


Deuills. 


«~ 


| L. VIVES. 


Vilta (4) Theater.| Liniein his 48. booke, and Valerius Maximus de Inftit. antiqg, write | 
7 that Valerius Meffala,and Cajfins being Cenfors , had giuen order for a Theater to bee The Ro= 
built, wherein the people of Kome might free and fee playes. But Na/ica lavoured fo with Pee 
the Senate, that ie was held a thing vofit, as preiudiciall to the manners of the people. So by 4, on fk 
adecrce of the Senate, all that preparation for the Theater was laide afide , and it was de- ere@ed, 
creed that no man fhould place any feates , or fitte to behold any playes within the citie, or 
within a mile of the walles, And fo from alittle while after the third e4fricanz watre, yn- 
till the facke of (orinthe, the people beheld all their playes Manding , buc as then Lucius 
(Memmius fet vp a Theater forthe Playes at his Triumph, but it ftood but for the cime thar 
this triumph lafted., The firft flanding Theater Pompey the Great built at Kome of {quare 
ftone (as Cornelius Tacitus writeth, ib. 14, ) the modell whereof hee had at Afptilene , in 
the Mithridatique watre. Canea here in the cert, fignifiech the middle front of the Thea- ee ge 
ter, which afterward was diuided into feates for the Gentlemen, feuered into rankes and Theager, 
galleries. Some-times it is taken for the whole audience , as Seruixs noteth vpon the eight 
of thee4neads. (6) The luxurie of the Greckes, | the Grecians had Theaters before the 
Romaines many ages, and the very Grecke name prooues that they came firft from Greece. 
For Theater is dcriued of Sedsae . whichis, fpettare, to beho!d. (¢) Thofe moueable feates |} 
ftanding but for atime. For fuch Theaters were firft in vfe ac Rome before the ftanding, 
the continuing Theaters came in and were made with mooueable feates,as Tacitus faith,and 
the ftage built for the prefenttime. (d) The Playes themfelnes | Such as were prefented 
vpon the Stage: whereof,in the next booke we fhall difcourfe more at large. 


of 


48 


The Prief 
betrer then 


| . his Gods, 


' The deuils 


 craftineffe. 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuar.31. 


Of the first inducing of Stage-playes. 
hi CHAR ys eo 

Vtknow, ¢ you that know not this ) and marke (you that make thew as if 
~~ you knew it not,and murmur at him that hath fet you free from fuch Lords) 
that your Stage-playes,thofe ( 4 ) {petacles of vncleanneffe , thofe licentious 
vanities, were not firft brought vp at Rome by the corruptions of che men, but 
by the direé&t commands of your Gods :(4) It were farre more tolerable for 
you to giue diuine honors vnto the fore-named Seépio,then vnto fuch kinde of 
deities , for they were not fo good as their Prieft was : And now doe but 
obferue,whether your mindes being drunke with this continuall ingurgitati- 
on of error, will fuffer you to taftea fip of any true confideration: Your Gods, 
for the aff aging of che infestion of the Peftilence that feazed on their bodies, 
commanded an tnfticution of Stage Playes prefently to be effected in their ho- 
nors : but your Prieft, for auoyding the peftilence of your mindes,forbad that 
any ftage fhould be built for any {uch action. If you haue fo much witteas to 
preferre the minde before the body, then choofe which of the two faid parties 
to make your God of : for (¢) the bodily peftilence did not yet ceafe, becaufe 
that the delicate vanitie of Stage-playes entred into the cares of this people - 
(being then wholy giuen vnto warres,and accuftomed onely to the ( d) Carcen- 
Jean playes )but the wilie Diuels forefeeing ( by naturall reafon)-hat tltis plague 
of the bodies fhould ceafe by this meanes tooke occafion to rhruft one farre 


__ worfe, not into their bodies, but into their manners ;in corrupting of which, 


Plague of 
minae fol - 


low ng the 


ay of 


Famous 
men, 


— 


vvas,ind 
sr ronnie 
e670 


Kjech all cheir ioy sand fucha plague, as blinded the mindes of that wretched 
people with fuch impenetrable cloudes of darkeneffe, and befpotted them with 
fuch toule ftaines of deformitie, that euen now (though this may feeme incre- 
dible ¢> {ucceeding ages ) when this great Rome was deftroyed , fuchas were 


poffeffed with this pettilence , fying trom that facke, could come euen vnto 


Carthage,and here contend who fhould runne maddeft (e ) after {tage playing. 


LVIVES , 


Hofe (4) Spettacles of uncleanneffe, | for there was both moft beaftly fhewes prefen- 

ted and moft filthy words fpoken. (6 ) It were farre more tollerable,| Tertullsan in his 
Apologeticus faith : It were better to make Socrates the God of W:f-lome, Ariftides of Luftice, 
Themiltocles of warre, Tully of eloquence, Sylla of profperstie, Craflus of ritches , Pompey ef 
Magnificence, and Cato of granitse, for thefe men excell the gods ix thefe fpectalities. And 
many of the ancient writers neuer denied, that their good men were better then their gods: 
as Seneca for one, De vite tranguiltate,lib.2, affirmeth, that Cato of Utica was a better ex- 
ample of a wife man then either Hercules or Viifles. Lucane calles him the true Father o his 
country, worthy the Romaine Altars. (¢) The bodily peftilence | Linie in his 7. booke, aith, 
Neither did the firft inftitution of Playes for aucmentation of Religion , either angment religion 
in their minds,or dimini{h the peftilence of their bodies. (A) ( ircenfian Playes | Thofe did Ro- 
mulus inftiture at Rome, in the fourth moneth after he had built the Cittie ( as Fabins Pitlor 
recordeth ) the fame day that he forced away the Sabine Virgins, Some fay it was not vntill 
after the afore-faid time a great while , whom] had rather beleeue in this. Circenfes they 
were called (faith Serusus ) becaufe they were encompafled with fwords: of (irca and 
Enfes, for the (not as yet nice ) antiquitie,hauing not as yet built any places fit for {uch ex- 
excifes ,practifed them betweene a riuer fide,and a ranke of {words, thatthe idle might fee 
danger on both fides. Afterwards Tarquinins Prifcus appointed a ring for them, which 
was afterward called Circus Maximus:and cuery yeare once,as Lise {aith,were thefe games 
celebrated, being diuerfly named,as ALagni,ch Romani Circenfes, They were confecrated 
ynto the God ( on/xs, whom the Greekes call inwemesetovas that is, Neptune the Horfe-rider, 
| to 


aa aE 
Lis.f. : OF THE CITIE OF GOD, 49 
LR A eG SEES 
‘to whome Exander (as Dionyfuns{aith) erected a temple in Latium, and ordayned a feaft 
day forhim which the Greekes called iwwoxegzias, and the Latines Confualia , on which 
day all the horfes and mules were exempted from labour and were decked with garlands. 
Now that the Romans at that time,and yntill the forefaid command, vfed onely the Circen/fi- 
an plaies,Linie,ib.7. & valerius de inftirne are witnefles.(e) after ftage playing | not that they 
played themfelues, Axgufline doth not meane fo,but that they tan amadding with the defire 
co fee thefe ftrange plaies, | 


I 


Of fome vices in theRomaines, which their Cittses 
ruine did neuer reforme, 
Cuap, 32, 


(Y You fenceleffe men, how are you bewitched, not with error but furor, 
that when al the nations of the Eaft(as we heare)bewaile your cities ru- 
ine,and al the moft remote regions bemone your mifery with publique forrow, 
you your feluesrun head-long vnto the Theaters, feeking them, entring them, 
filling them,& playing farre madder parts now then ever you did before 2 This 
your plague of mind, this your wracke of honefty, was that, which your Scipio 
{o feared when hee would not haue any Theaters built for you: when hee {aw 
how quickly your vertues would be abolifhed by profperity,whé he would not 
haue you veterly quitted from all feare of forraigne inuafions.Hee was not of 
opinion that that comon-weale or citty was in ahappy eftate, where the walls 
ftood firme,and the good inanners lay ruined. But the feducements of the dam- 
ned {pirites preuayled more with yon, then the prouidence of circum{pe& — 
men. And hence comes it,that the mifchiefes that your feles commit, youare 
fo loth fhould be imputed to your felues , burthe mifchiefes that your felues 
juffer,you are quet ready to caft vpon the Chriftian profeffion, for you in your 
fecurity donot fecke the peace of the common-weale , but freedome for your 
practifes of luxury : youare depraued by profperity,and you cannot be refor- 
med by aduerfity. ¥ our Scipéo would haue had you to feare your foes, and fo to 
fuppreffe your lufts:but(4)you,though you feele your foes,& are crufhed down 
by them, yet will notreftraine your inordinate affects : (6) you haue loft the 
benefit of afflid@ion,& though you be made moft miferable,yet remaine you 
moft irreformable. And yetit is Gods mercy that you haue your liues fills 
"his very fparing of your liues , fummons you vnto repentance: he it was, thae 
(though you be vngrarefull ) fhewed you that fauour as to éfcape your enemies — 
fwords by calling of your felues his feruants, or flying into the Churches of 
his Martyrs. m4 


aa L.VIVES. © 
[Heng (4) you feele your foes | Becaufe you beheld the Playes at (¢ arthage , with fuch a 
diffolute,intemperate affection. (6) You hane lost the benefite of afflsctron, | whereby 
men are reformed, and by correction grow inftruéted : it being imputed vnto them for me= 

rite,totolerate aduerfe fortune with patience: Plato in his Gorgras faith , chat calamities The benefie 


and affliGtions are vfe-full both to the fufferers,and the beholders, bettering them both,one ° 
by their paine,the other by example. 


EE, 


Of the clemencieiof God in moderating this calamitie of Rome. 
| HAP.2 2, - 
i fe is faid that Romulus aud Remus built (4) a San@tuarie,where-vnto whe fo Of fanéus 
could efcape,fhouldbe free from all affaule or hurt: their endeuour in this 28° A" 
1 et. Si . 


~~ fyla, 
being : 


a esiaeeee aeiieniensieennnntnenenaiinasnemenemanmnannimneamnmnain 


5° SAINT AVGVSTINE. C nar:34. 


being to increafe the numberof their cittizens. An example making way fora 
wonderfull honor vnto Chrift : The fame thing, that the founders of the citty 
did decree, the fame doe the deftroyers of it: And what if the one did it to 
increafe che muititude of their cittizens,when the other did it to preferue the 
multitude of their foes? Let this then, (and what foeuer befides fitly may bee 
fe vied ) be vfed as ananfwer of our Lord Ieftis Chrift his flock ,and that pil- 


’ grim.citty of God, vnto all their wicked enemies. 


L. VIVES. 


(a ) Santtuarie, \Itis a facred place, from whence it is not lawfult to draw any mans 
for thence is the name deriued,comming of ceea’s, rapio, to draw or pull, and zape the 
primitiue lecrer . And fo by a figure called Lambdacifmus, is made afylum for afyram, Ser~ 
nine in 8. e/Enead. Though indeed cond is tollere, to take away , as Homer vfeth ite 
trun a,&c, He tooke away the goodly armes. After that Hereules was dead,his nephews and 
pofteritie, fearing the oppreffion of fuch as their prand-father had iniured , buile the firft 
fanQuary at Athens , naming it the temple of Aercy, out of which no man could bee 
taken, And this Statins veftifech alfo. Now Romulus and Remus built one betweene the 
tower and the Capitoll , calling the place where it ftood Jnter-montixn: ; intending hereby 
_that the multitude of offendors flocking hether for hope of pardon, wou'd bce a meane to 
augment the number of inhabitants in this new Citie, To what God or Goddeffe it was 
erected, it is ynknowne : Dionifins faith hee cannot tell. Some fay , vnto Veionss : But the 
groue of the Sasfisarie is honoured vpon the fourth of the Wones of February,as Onid wrie 
teth, Fa/tornm 3. In Greece and e4fahaue beene many fan@Quaries. Tiberins (afar being 
out of liking with their too much licence,tooke from them almoft all their liberties and pri- 
uuiledges,as Tacitus and Suetonine do report. 


. - fe 


Of [uch of Gods cles as line fecretly as yet amon oft the Infidels, 
and of fuch as are fale Chriftians. 
Cuar. 34. 


AN D let this Cittie of Gods remember, that euen amongfther enemies, 
there are fome concealed, that fhall one day be her Citizens : nor let her 
thinke ica fruicleffe labour to beare their hate (4) vntill fhee heare their con- 
feifion,as fhe hath alfo (as long as thee is in this pilgrimage of this world J 
- Some that are pertaker of the fame facraments with her, (6) that fhall not bee 
pertakers of che Saints glories with her , who are partly knowne, and partly 
vnknowne. Yea fuch thereare , that {pare not amongft Gods enemies to mur- 
mure againft his glory , whofe character they beare vpon them: going now 
vnto Playes with them, and by and by, vnto the Church with vs. But Jet vs 
not defpaire of the reformation of fome of thefe, we haue little reafon , — 
thac we haue many fecret and predeftinated friends, euen amongft our mo 
knowne aduerfaries, and fuch , as yet know not themfelues to be ordained for 
Twocities our friendfhip. For the two citties (of the predeftinate and the reprobate)are 
fecrmix in this world, confufed together, and commixt, vntill che generall — 
make a feparation : of the originall progreffe and due limits of both which cis | 
ties, what I thinke fitte to fpeake,by Gods helpe and furtherance,I will now be- 
gin,to the glory of the Cictie of God , which being (d) compared with her 
gontrary,will {pread her glories to amore full afped. | 


L. VIVES, 


-_ 


or oe OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 51 
a - tne 
L. VIVES. 


VV Neil (a) fbee here their confeffion.| Atthe laft difcouery , where euery man fhall con- 
_™ feffe himfelfe, which fhali bee then, when the bookes of mens confciences are opened, 
that is inthe world to come. (6) That fhall not be partakers, | Accoiding to the words of 
Chri(t, Many are called but few are chofen. (¢ ) Untill the generall iudgement \So itis in the 
Golpe!l, The eAngels fhall feperate the enill from the middeft of the inft in the end of the world. 
fy ) Compared with ber contrary, | So Artftotle faith, Contraries placed together , {hew bovk 


3 
: ‘ & 


= ee ee 


ed 


What (ubietts are to be handled in the following difcourfe. 
s CHAP. 35. 

B Ve we hauea little more to fay vnto thofe that lay the affliGiions of thé Ro 

A »narne eftate vpon the profeffion of Chriftianitic, which forbiddeth men to 
{acrifice vnto thofe Idols. For we mutt caft vp a fumme ofall the miferies ( or 
of as many as fhal fuffice which that Citie,or the prouinces vnder her {ubie@i- 
on,endured betore thofe facrifices were torbidden. All which they would haue 
imputed vnto our religion,had it beenethen preachedand taught againft thefe 
facrifices,when thefe m:feries befell. Secondly, wee muft thew what cuftomes 
and conditions the true God vouchfafed to teach them for the increafing of 
‘their Empire,(@ that God, in whofe hand areal the kingdomes of the earth: and 
how their falfe Gods neuer helped them aiotte , but rather did them infinite 
hurt by deceit and inducement.And laftly we will difprooue thofe who though 
they be confuted with moft manifeft proofes , yer willneeds afficme ftillthae 
their gods are to be worfhipped,and chat not for the benefites of this life, bue 
for thofe which are belonging to the life to come. Which queftion(vnleffe I be 
deceiued) will be (b) farre more laborious, and worthier of deeper confiderati- 
on, in the which we mutt difpute againft the Philofophers, (¢) not againft each 
one, but even the moft excellent and glorious of them all, and fuch as in man 
points hold as we hold,and namely of the immorcalicy of the foule,and of the 
worlds creation by the true God, and of his prouidence, whereby he fwayeth 
thewhole creation. But becaufe even thefe alfo are ro be confuted,in what they 
hold oppofite vnto vs,wee thought it our dutie not to bee flacke in this worke, 
bue conuincing all the contradidtions of the wicked,as God fhall giue vs power 
and ftrength to aduance the veritie of the Cittie of God, thetrue zeale and 
worfhip of God; whichis the onely way to attaine true and eternall felicitie, 
This therefore fhall bee the method of our worke: and now from this fecond _ 
exordiom We Wil take each thing in due order. — | : 


we eee 


| L. VIVES. 


[et God (a) in whofe hand | for Chrift faith, Math. 28.18. e4ilpower is ginen Unto meé in 

© beanen andearth, (6) More laborious | Operofiorharder, of more toyle. (c) Not againft 
each one | not againft euery common Philofopher or fmattercr,for fo is quiliber, raken fome-. 
times ,as ¢ 70x59, is often in the Greeke. In this Chapter, Anguffine fhewes briefly both what 
he hath done already, aad how he meanes to proceede. | Pe 4 


. | Finis Libri primi. 


Fa THE. 


THE CONTENTS OFTHE | 


SECND BOOKE OF THE 
Citie of God. 


1. Of the method that muft of necefity | fhewed herein that his fole worth was 
be pled tn this difputation, | better then all the Gods , who defire to bee 
2. A vepstitsonof the contents of the \ henored with Stage playes. 
‘fir booke. 15. That flattery (and not Reafon) 
3+ Of the choife of an hiftory that will \ created fome of the Romaine Gods. 
foew the miferies that theRomainesex- | 16. That éf the Romaine Gods hadhad 
dured when they wor{bippea their Idols, | any care of iuftice the Cstty (bould haue 
before the increafe of Clriftian religion. , had her forme of gouernment from them, 
4. That the wor{bippers of Pagan gods | rather then to borrow it of other nations. 
neuer receiued honest inftruction from 19. Of the rape of the sabine wemen, 
them, but ufidall filthine fe in their fam | amd diuerfe other w.cked facts, done in 
srifices. Rormes moff ancient c honorable times. 
5- Of the obfcenities ufed inthe fa- | 18. What the hiftory of Salutt reports 


orifices offred vato§ mother of the gods. \ of the Romains conditions, both in their 
6. That the Pagan gods did nener effa- \ times of danger ard thofe of fecuritie. 
blifh the doctrine of liutng well 19. Of the corruptions :uling inthe | 

7. That the Phelofophers infractions \ Romaine ftate before that Chrift abols- 

are weake and bootleffe,in that they beare ( [bedthe wor{bip of thetr Idots. 
no diuine author itie, becaufe that the ex-| 20. Of what kind of h:ppineffe, and of 
amples of the Gods are greater confirma- | what condstions the aceufers of Chriftia- 
tion of vices in men, then the wifé mens \ nitie defire to pertake. 
difputations are on the contrary. 21. Tullies opinson of the Romaine 
8. Of theRomaine Stage-playes,wher- | common-weale. : 
in the publébing of thesr fouleft impuri-| 22. That the Romaine Gods neuer re- 
bles dtd pot any way offend ; but rather \ (pected whether the Citty were corrupted, 
aclight them, and fobrought to deftruction,or no. 

9. What the Romaines opinion was | 23.That the variety of temporalleftates 
touching the reftraint of the liberty of | dependeth not upon the plea{ure or dif- 
Poefe,which the Greekes(by the councell | pleafure of thofe Denils , but vpon the 
of thety Gods) would not haue reftrained | tudgments of God Almighty. 
at all, 44. Of the acts of Sylla, wherein the 

10. That the Deuils, through their \ Deutlsfhewed them{elues his maine bel- 

Settled defire to doe men mifchiefe, were | pers ayd furtherers. : 
willing to hawe any villante reported of | 25+ How powerfully the Deuils inctte 
them,whether true or falfe. | meen to villantes , by laying before them 

11. That the Greeks admittedthePlai- | examples of dinine authority (as it were) 
ers to beare office in their commonweales,\ for them to follow in their villancus atts. 
beaft they fbould feeme uniuft.indefpifing | 26. Of certaine cbfcure infiructtons 
fuch men as were the pacifiers of their | concerning good manners, which the Dew 
Gods. ae |.sils ave [aia to haue giuen in fecret, 

12. That the Romaines in abridging | whereas all wickedneffe was taught #6 
thas liberty which their Poets would haue \ theér publique folemnities. = 
upon men, and allowing them tovfeit| 27. What a great meanes of the fub- 
upon their Gods, did herein {bew, that | werfion of the Romaine eftate the induc- 

_ they prifed them/felues abeue the Gods. tion of a Playes was, which they [ure 
13. That theRomaines mizht bane |. mized to be propitiatory unto the Gods. 
obferued thesr Gods unworthine(fe,by the 28. Of the falwation attained by the 
Aefires of (uch obfcane folemnities. Chriftian religion. 
14. That Plato, who would not alow | 29. Anexhortation to the Romaines 
Poets to dwell ina well gomerned Citi, | torenounce their Paganifme. 


a TID | 


THE 


SECOND BOOKE 
OF THE CITTY OF GOD: 
Written by Saint eAugufline Bifhop 


of Hippo, ynto Marcellinus. 


Of the method which must of nece fits be ufed in this difput ation, 
| Cuap, 7 


Nur, egeger, F the weake cuftome of humaine fence durft not bee fo 


eee bold,as to oppofe it felfe againft the reafons of apparant 
2ah 9M, truth,but would yeeld this languid infirmicie vnto whole- 
A) 4 {ome inftrudtion , as vnto a medicine which were ficteft 
OG \ ¥ to apply, vntill by Gods good ailiftance , and faiths ope- 
SA @ ration it were throughly cured; then thofe that can both 
} iudge well,and inftruG fufficiently,fhould not need many 
words to confute any erronious opinion , or to make it 
| fully apparant vnto fuch, as their defires would truly in- 
forme. Butnow,becaufe there is fo great and inueterate a difeafe rooted in the 
mindes of the ignorant, that they will (outof their extreame blindneffe,where- 
by they fee not what is moft plaine , or out of their obftinate peruerfneffe 
whereby they will not brooke what they fee J defend their irrationall and bru- 

tith opinions, after that the truth hath beenetaught them as plaine as one man 

can teach another : hence it is, that (4 ) there arifeth a necefficie , that bindeth 
‘vs to dilate more fully of what is already moft plaine,and to giue the truth, nor 
vnto their eyes to fee, but cen into their heads , as it were to touch and feele, 
Yet norwithftanding this by the way : What end fhall wee make of alteration, 

if we hold that the an{werers are continually to be anfwered ? For, as for thofe 
that either cannot comprehend what is faid vnto them, or elfe are fo obftinate 

in their vaine opinions,that though they do vnderftand the truth , yet will not 

giue it place in their minds, but reply againft it,as it is written of them: /ske /pec- 

tators of iniquitie , thote are eternally friuolous : And if wee fhould binde our 
felues to giue an anfwer to euery contradiGtion that their impudencie will 

thruft forth,(how falfly they care not,fo they do but make afhew of oppofition 

vnto our affertions) you fee what a trouble it Would be, how endleffe,and how 
- fruitleffe. And therefore (fonne Marcelline ) I would neither haue you,nor any 

other (to whom this our worke may yeeldany benefit in lefus Chrift ) to read 
this volume with any furmife , that 1 am bound to anfwer whatfoeuer you or 
they fhall heare obieted againft it : leaft you become like vnto the women of: 
whom the Apoftle faith, that chey were s/wayes learning , and newer able to come 
unto the knowledge of the truth, 


oe ee Hence 


/ 


2 Tint 33 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. — C Hari. 


| L. VIVES. | 

H Ence ts it,that (a) there arifeth aneceffity|The latine text is , fit neceffitas, fpoken by a 
Grecke figure,e2i.7870 11 ousCasvety, faith Demofthenes : vdyxnecefitas,for neceffe-and 

itis an ordinary phrafe with them, though tue Latynes fay,¢/? neceffitas,as Onintilian hath it, 


CA repetition of tie Contentes of the firftbooke. Car. 2. 

Herefore inthe former booke, wherein I began to fpeake of the City of 

God,to which purpofe all the whole worke ( by Gods affiftance)fhall haue 
reference, I did firft of all take in hand to giuethem their an{were, that are fo 
fhameleffe as to impute the calamities infli@ed vpon the world, (and in particu- 
Jar vpon Xoame in her laft detolation wrought by the Vazdales ) vnto the religi- 
onof Chrift, which forbids men to offerre feruice or facrifice vnto deuills: 
whereas they are rather bound to afcribe this as a glory to Chrift,that for his 
names fake alone, the barbarous nations ( beyond all pratife and cuftome of 
warres ) allowed many and {pacious places of religion for thofe ( ingratefull 
men )to efcape into;and gaue {uch honor vnto the feruants of Chrift, (not only 
to the rrue ones but euen to the counterfeit),that what the law ofarmes made 
Jaw full to doevnto all men, they held it vererly vnlawfull to offer vnto them. 
And hence arofe thefe queftions: How and wherefore thefe gracious mercies of 
God were extended unto fuch ungodly and uneratefull wrctches as well asto his 
trucferuants,and why the afflictions of this fiege fell upon the godly(in part) as well 
as on the reprobate? For the better diffoluing(2) of which doubtes, | ftayd fome- 


~ what long ina difcourfe of the daily g.1:ftes of God, and the miferies of man, 


falling out in the whole tra& of this tranfitory life (both which, by reafon that 

they often light confufedly togither, alike ,and vndiftinguifhed both vpen 

good liuers and impious, are very powerfull in moouing the hearts of many): 

and mine efpeciall incent herein was to giue iome comfort vnto the fandified 

and chaft women, who had their chaftities offended by fome incontinentacas 

of the foldiours : and to fhew them, that ifthofe accidents had not wrackt their 
chafte refolutions , they ought not to bee afhamed of life,having no guilcin 

them whereof to be afhamed, and then I tooke occafion to fpeake fome-what 

againft thofe that in fuch villanous and impudent maner doe infult over the 

poore Chriftiansin their aduerfities ; and chiefly ouer the deflowred v omens 

thefe fellowes themfelues becing moft vnmauly and depraued wretches, 

altogither degenerate from the true Romsé.4s,vnto whofe honors(being many, . 
and much recorded) thefe bafe creatures are fo dire@ly oppofite . For it was 

thefe,that made Rome( which was firft founded,and after increafed by che care 

and induftry of her old worthies)to thew more filthy and corrupted in ber prcf- 
perity then (hee was now in her ruine: for inthis , there fell but ftones,walles 

& houfessbut in theliues of fuch villaines as thefe,al the monuments - al the or- 

naments , (not of their walls but)of their maners were veterly demolifhed : as 

then did a worfe fire burne intheir affeGtions , then this was now that did but - 
burne their houfes:with the clofe of rhis,I gaue an end vnto the firft booke,and | 
now(as I refolued) wil procced,to caft vp a reckoning of the fundry mi{chieues 
that this City of Rome hath fuffered fince thee was firft founded, either in her- 
felfe or in fomeof the Prouinces vndeér her command: all which thofe vile per- 
fons would haue pinned vpon the backe of Chriftianity,if the doctrine of the | 
gofpel againft their falfe & deceitfull gods had in thofe times beenereucaled 

and preached. | 


a ~ [.VIVES. oF 
| Dw Jof which donb.) The fist of thefe,was ¥ chisfe queftio of thofe sai : 
"3 . t 


Lie2. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 455 
6 yt pe Se ee ee ee 


y¥ den iedthe world to be gouerned by the prouidence of God. Plat.de placit.Philofoph.Lb.t 


Of the choife of an biflory which wil floew the miferies that the Rome 
a:nsindured,when they worlhippedthezr Iduls before | 
! the increafe of Chriftian Religion | 
CuaPe 3_ | | 
BY remember this, that wheal handled thofe points, I had to do with theig- 
norant,out of whofe blockith heads this proverb was firft borne:(4)/¢ wal not 
raine becanfe of the Ch ifttan. F.rthereart fome others amongft them that are 
learned , & loue that very hiftory that makes! chefe things plain to their vnder- 
ftanding : but becaufe they loue to fer § blind & érronius yulgar at enmity and 
diffention with vs Chriftians,they diflemble & conceale this vnderftanding of 
theirs labouring to perfwade the people this,thac the whole procefle of calami- 
ties, which at divers times and in feuerall places (6) fell and were ftill to fall vp- 
ponall rhe world hadde the original, and haue had,onely and meerely from the 
profeffion of Chrift,greeuing that it {preadeth fo farre and fhineth fo glori- 
oufly again‘ all other their godsand religions. But lette thefe malicious men | 
yead but with vs,wich what exceffe of affliction the Romain eftate was wrung & 
plagued,& that oneuery fide , before that euer this name(which they fo much 
do enuy )did {pread the glory to fuch note:and then if they can,let them defend 
their goddes goodnefles fhewed vnro them in thefe extremities,and if that as 
their feruants they honour them for protection from thefe extremities,which 
if they do but fuffer now td any sb gee ready to lay al the blame vp6 our 
-necks,for why did their gods permit their feruants to bee plagued wit thefe 
great affiGions (which I amnowto recount)before that the publifhing of the 
name of Chrift gaucthem caufe of offence , by prohibiting their facrifices, 


, net aes 


17° a) will not raine | He rehearfeth this,as a common fpeach of che wicked infidels ,who How hatep - 
would impute all the cuils chachapned them vnto the Chriftian caufe. Tertullian, Pretene fullthe’ ’ 
ding for the defence of their hatefulneffe,this vanity befides that they held the Chriftians the one- nam of 
canfers of all the mifchiefes and harmes that fallvpon the fiate and cittie. If Tiber oner-flow eb ali 
is bankes sf Nilus do not water the ficldes,tf the heauens ftand,or the earth flake: sf there arife aieae 
either famine or plague , fi raight to the Lions with a Christian cryes the whole crew. Cypryan | 
againitDemetrianus. If wherzas you fay that many complaine that it is imputed unto vs that 
shere is fo often warres.peffilences famines snondations,and droughts then wee muff beeno longer 
filent Gc. (b) Fell,and were ftdl to fall | Through the ever-changing eftate of humanity, 
and that Fate which is indeed the will of almighty God, a oer 


"That the wor{hippers of Pagan gods meuer received honeft inftructi- 
on from thens,but ufedall filthine Je in thetr facrifices. | 
ae . HAP.A. if | | 
rirt,why would not cheir hauea cate to fee their feruats wel mannerd: 
the true God doth worthily neglect thofe  neglea his iuft worfhip:but as 
for thofe gods w hotn this wicked 8 vngrateful erew complain that they are for- 
bidden to‘worfhip, why do they not helpe to better the liues of their worfhip- 
pers by giuing thé fomegood laweselt was very requifie that as they carefully 
attended their goddes facrifices,fo their gods fhou!d haue grationfly amended 
their imperfections.I(but wil fome fay)euery man may be vitious at his owne ie Jes 
willand pleafure,True;who denies that?yet notwithftanding,it was the part of caught. 
thefe great gods guardias,not to conceale the formes and rudiments of good 8 Bets 
honeft life fr5 cheir fuppliants; but roto teachthem plain, and fully, and ioe 
es ; a Fe © | theirs 


56 | SAINT AVGVSTINE. C nars4. 


theis Prophets to corre@ & reftrain the offendors:to teftrain euil doers with 
publik punifhments,& to incourage good livers with ful rewards: what Tem- 
ple of al this multitude ofgods,was euer acceflary to any fuch found ? we our 
felues (once in our youth)went toview thefe {pectacles , their (2) facriligious 
_ mockeries:there we faw the (6) Enthufis/tikes,perfons rapt with fury; there we 
ena heard the (¢) pipers , and tooke (d) great delight in the filthy {ports that they 
theGods, acted before their gods and goddefles : euen before Berecynthia({urnamed the 
Celeftiall virgin,and mother to al the gods)euen before hir litter, (¢ ) vppon the 
feaft day of her very purification,their(/)beaftly ftage-plaiers acted {uch ribaul- 
dry,as was a fhame (not onely for the mother of the gods , buc)for the mother 
ofany fenatour or any honeft man, nay euen for the mothers of the players 
them-felues to giue eare too: Naturall fhame hath bound vs with fome refpea 
‘vnto our parents, which vice it felfe cannot abolifh. But that beaftlyneffe ofob- 
{czene {peaches and actions, which the Players acted in publike before the mo. 
ther of all che gods , and in fight and hearing of an huge multitude of both fex- 
es,they would be afhamed to act at home in priuate before their mothers (¢) 
were it but for repiticion fake. And as for that company that were their fpec- 
tators,though they might eafily bee drawn thether by curiofity, yet beholding 
chaftity fo fouly iniured, me thinkes they fhould haue bene driuen fromthence 
by the meere fhame that immodefty can offend honefty withall. Whatcan 
Theiun- facriledges be, if thofe were facrificestor what can bee pollution, ifthis werea 
apaataN purification ? and thefe were called (4) Juncates, as if they made a feaft where all 
Gods, _ the vncleane diuels of hell might fill heir bellies. For who knowesnot what 
kinde of fpirits thefe are that take pleafure in thefe obfcurities? vnleffehee 
knowe not that there bee any fuch yncleane f{pirits that thus illude men vnder 
_ thenames of gods: or elfe, vnleffe hee be fuch an one as wifheth the pleafure, 
_ and feares the difpleafure of thofe damned powers more then hee doth the loue 
and wrath of the true and euerliuing God. - 


ee. 


L. VIVES. 
The 


mother, Aacriligions (a) mockeries } Tnuerting this,the holy plaies ,a phrafe vfed much by the Pa- 
gan. (6) The Enthufiaftikes perfonsrapt | This place requireth fome {peech of the 

mother of the gods : Diodorus Siculus ( Biblioth lib. 4. ) tcls the ftory of this AZo- 

ther of the gods diuers waies, For firft hee writeth thus. Czlus had by his wife Titza fine & 

forty children, two of which were women , called Regina,aud Ops : Regina being the elder , and 

wifer of the two,Lrought vp all her other bretheren (to doe her mother a pleafure ) and theres 

fore fhe was called the mother of the gods,and was marryed to bir brother Hiperion , to whome 

_ Shee bare Sol and Luna; who being both murdered by their uncles wicked prattifes fhe fel mad, 
ranging up and downe the Kingdome with anoife of drummes and cimbals, and that this grew to 

a custome after fhe was dead. Then hqaddes another fable-that one Menoes an ancient King 

of Phrygia had by his wife Dindimene,a daughter whome he caufed to be cast forth ies monnt 
Cybelius,and that the infant being nourifled up by wilde beafts, grew to be of admirable beauty, 

Cibeles, and being found by a heapheardeffe, was by ber brought up as her own childeyand named Cibele 
inuention, of the mount whereon foce was found:that {bee inuented many arts of ber owne head , and taught 
them unto man:namely playing on pipes,dauncing drummes and cimbals,alfo farying of horfes & 
cures for difeafes in children , wherem fhee was fo fortunate that they named her The aa mo- 

. ther.Growing up unto yeares fhe fe in loue with a youth of that country called Atis,er eing with 
childe by him was fent for backe by her father Menoes for a Virgin:but the guilt beeing knowne, 
Atisand the Nurfes were put to death:and Cibele being extreamely in lone with Atis fell madde, 
and flying from her fathers honfe alone with a Timbrell anda alalliie came to Nifa to Dionis 
fius King there) where fome few yeares after fhe dyed: And foone after a Lreat famine toge- 
ther with a peftilence wafting allPhrigia, the inbabitants were commanded by Oracle ig sad . 


Atis, 


€ 


Lrsz.. OF THE CITI£ OF GOD. 37 


dixine worfbip to Atis and Cibele : and hence arofe the firft canonization of the Mother of 

the gods, Thus farre Diodorus , who no doubr hath declarcd the true originall of itasie 

was. But fome do guefle that fhe was the mother of Jupscer uno, Neptune and Pluto, and 
therefore was called Khea.,and in latine Ops: and Cibele , and Vefta,as all ore, Normake I 

any qucftion but that this hiftory is confounded,as is vfuall in cuery fable of the gocs : thag 

fhe was a virgin and thercfore named Veffa, and that therefore e“tys was faigned to beea ‘ 
goodly young man,whom fhe louing,and commanding that fhe fhouid neuer meddle with 

any other woman,he neglecting her command, fell in loue with a Nimph called Sangréts, 

which Cybele depriucd bim of thofe partes whercby hee was man, and for that reafon 

euer fizce will haue her Pricits deteCtue in that fafhion, Aad becaufe that fhe was moft or- 

dinari'y worfhipped of the Phrygians vpon Mount /da,therevponfheyotthenameofthé = 
Idean mother and of Berecynthia,as allo of the Parigian coddefle : Hie Priefts were calted ThePriefts 
Gall,of the riucr Gallus in 7 hrigia,the watcr whereof beeing drunke, maketh men madde, called Galk 
And thefe Ga/ii themfclues, doc whcile their heads about in their madneffe , flafhing their 

faces and bodies with kniues,and cearing cnemfelues with cheir teeth when they are either | 
- *madde in thew, or madde indeed. Their goddeffe, ( which was nothing buta great ftone 

vpon Mount /da) the Romanes tranfportcd into Jtaly , the day before the Ides of April, 
‘which day they dedicated vnto her honours, and the plaies called Aegalefia as on that day 

were acted. Liny lib. 19. fpeaking of the Mother of the gods hath thefe words. 71 hep 

brought the pid [fe into the Temple of V-ictoric: which is on the Mount Palatinc,the date be 


c 
- fore the Ides of April. So that was made her feaft daie. eAnd all the people brought giftes un~ 
to the goddeffe, unto the Monnt Palatine ,and the Tensples were fpred for banquets, and the 
Plates were named Megalefia, this is alfo in his fxteenth booke. About the fame timed . 
Temple was deticated unto the great \dean mother, which P.Cornelius réeceixed,teing brought | 
ont of Afia by fea, P. Cornelius Scipio( afterward furnamed Africanc)and P.} icinius beeing 
-son falls, M. Liuius,and C. Claudius! beeing cenfors,cane order for the building of tke Temples 
‘eAnd thirteene yeares after , it was dedicated , or confecrated by M, Junius Brutus; M. Cor- 
nelius ,azd T. Sempronius beeing Confulls ,and the Plazes that were made for the dedication 
thereof,( beeing the fi ft plates that ener came on frage, ) Antias Valerius afirmerh were name 
edMecvalefias Thus farre Licy: To whom Varro agrecth alfo /bery3. de lingua Latina. Erm 
thufiaft:ques , or perfons rapt | Were men diftraught , taken with madneffe , as Bertcynthia’s 
Galli were. Saint Axguftine vpon Genefis calls them,men taken with fpirits poffeffed. (¢) Pia 
pers] Orthe fin gers, Symphoniacos,it commeth 276 7is oy ndaviac which is Harmony , or con~ 
fort. Inthe feaftes of Cybele,was much of this numerall muficke, with P:pes and Tymbrells, 


Hcreof-Oxid fingeth thus(in his fa/tormm,/ib,4.) | 


Protinusinflexo Berecynthia-tybia cornu, | Then Berecynthias crooked pipes thall blow, 
Fibis & \dzz fefla parentis erunts _ Th ldaan mothers feaft approcheth now, | 
bunt Semimaresye> snania tympana tundent; Whole gelded Pricfts along the ftreetes dee paffe, 
Atiag tiwaitus ere rcpulf2 dabunt, With fambrells and the tunckling founds of braffe, 
And alittle after: 


Ti shia dat Phtygios wt didit antegnodos: 
The Phrygian Pipe founds now,as late before, 


Diodorus faith the pipe was Cybe/e's inuention, arid that fhee taught AZar/i , him , chat 
contended with Apollo. (4) Wee were delighted: | Some reade they were delighted but 
erronioufly : wee reade. it, with more reafon , in the firft perfon , Wee were dee 
“Lighted with the filthy plates ce. Now thonch this Berecynthia was mother to {> many 
gcds yet they held that fice was a Virgin,as beeing Veffz as well as Berecynthia,as alfo be= 
taufe he would haue ber father AZenoes to take her for fuch an one , and fo to belecue, (e). 

T be feaft day ofer purification The day before the Ides of Aprill, the Ga/i her Prices v=. 

fed to carry the Image of this great Mother in as yreat pomipe,vned the ritier A/mon(which The ablu 
falleth into Tyder not fare ee Rome ) and there ( according to the order ofan old cu 0" ores 
tome ) to wath it in the meeting of both the riuérs : 1 fay by an old cuftoins , For the firft ofthe pods 
day that it was brought from e4/a,the Prieft wafhed it there , wherevpon,that order was : 
kept euery yeare. Hereof fings Lacane. 

| - Et 


ict LLL LE TL Te a 


53 SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuarse 


Et lotam parne renocant Almone Cibe!en,oc.l-.1, | Cibelc waht in Almex they fetch backe &c, 


But Owid more plainely: 


Eft lacus in Tiberin quo lubricus influit Almon There is a place were Almons currcnt flowee 


Et nomen magno pir dit in amne miner, To Tibers ficeames, and fo his name doth lofet 
Ailic purpurea Canus cam vefte Sacerdos, There watht the aged prieft(in purple cl-d) 
‘ . Almonis dominam facrag, lant aquis, Faftorum.4, The Goddeffe and the reliques which he had, 


And Pradentins writing of Saint Remsanus his martyrdome , faith thus: 


Nudare plantas ante carpentum {cio 
Proccres togatus matiris \dzzx facris 
Lapis nigellus ewebendus cffcdo, 
~o+- Melebrisorts claufus argenio ledet, 
Quem ad lanacrum precundo ducita, 
. Pecesremots attercntis calccis, 
 Almonis iq, prcucnitis rrumam. 


Your Lords all bare-foot march before the threne, 
Whereon,in a nich chariot,the blacke ftone 
Sits in a womans fhape orc hlasered, 
Which when to pu: ifyng you do ‘ead, 
You walke before it,in ttrange vncouth thoces, 
Viitil youreach the place where 4/mon fowes, 
_(f) Beaftly Stage-players | The firft Stage-playes euery yeare were the AZegalefian,wherin the . 
Tefan ples layers aiGine rains to this new fale : {pake aah filthy and sbhominable lafciuious 
| wordes vpon Cibeland Atis:and at that time diuers of the molt ciuill Remaines » difguifing 
them-felues from being knowne , went wandring about the ftreetes in alll licentioufneffe, 
No {peach,no act of vncleane luxury was left vnpractifed, as Herodian affirmeth in the life of 
Commodus. (g) Exen for Ad ede fake] though they fpoke it but for exercifing their 
Fercula  memeories,for learning of it by heart. (4) Juncates |The text is fercula a ferendo, of cartying, 
whatthey becaufe in follemnities either of religion or try umph they carry pictures and ftatues with re- 
were,  werence , as the Images ofthe goddes and worthies were in the facrifices:and in their tri- 
umps they carryed the pictures of {uch citties as they had conquered,and {uch armes as they 
had defpoyled their foes off, the money that they had taken,and the reft of the pillage what- 
foeuer, So faith Twl/y,Swetonins and others. And {uch meates alfo as were fee on the table 


at facrifices , were called Fercula , becaufe they were brought in vppon chargers very ftate- 
fully,and with a kind of religious reuerence, | 


4 
~——. 


Of the obfcenitiesufedin ae facrifiecs offered un- 
to the mother of the goddes. 


Cap. 5. : | 

N Or willl ftand to the iudgement of thofe whome I knowe doe rather 

delight in the vicious cuftome of enormities then decline from it: I will 

haue Scipio Nafica him-felfe tobe iudge , and he whom the whole Senate pro- 

claimed for theirbeft man , one whofe onely handes were thought fittetore- 

ceiue and bring inthis Diuels pi€ure: l2thim but tell vs firft whether that hee 

Dinine ho- defire that his mothers deferts were fuch that the Senate fhould appoint him 
nour given diyine honours : (as wee read that both the Greekesand other Romaine nations, 
tom alfo haue ordained for fome particular men whofe worth they held in high 
efteeme , and whofe perfons they thought were made immorcall , and admitted | 
amoneft the gods, ) Truly he would gladly with his mother this felicity , if that 
fuch athing could be.But ifwe aske him then further,whether he wouldhaue | 

fuch filthy prefentations as Crbe/us enacted as partes of his mothers honourss 
would he not auow(think you)that he had rather haue his mother lye dead and. 
fenceleffe,then to liue a goddeffe,to heare and allow fuch ribauldry?Yes:Farre 

bee it from fuch a worthy Senator cf Rome , as would forbidde the building 

ofa Theater ina ftate maintaind by valour , to with his mother that worfhippe 

to pleafe her goddefle-fhippe , which could not but offend all woman-hood. 

Nor is it poffible that hee could bee perfwaded , that diuinity could fo farre 


alter 


| know when Cibcls feafts are honoured, 


oo 


Lisel. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 


alter the lawdable modefty ofa wotnan, as to shake her allowher feruants to 


59 


call vpon her in fuch immodeft tearmes , as being {poken in the hearing of any | 


liuing woman, if fhee ftoppe not her earesand get her gone, the whole kinred 
éfher father,husband, children andall wou!d blufh ;and beeafhamed at her 
fhamefulneffe . And therefore {uch a mother of the gods as this, (whom even 
che worft man would fhame to haue his mother a like vn:o)did neuer feeke 
the beft man of Rome (in her entrance into the peoples affeGtions)io make him 
beteer by her counfells and admonitions,but rather worfe,by her deceites and 
illufions:(like her of whom/(a) it is written. woman hunteth for the precious life 
of 4 wean:)that his great fpirit being eleuated by this(as it were dituine)reftimo- 
ny of the Senate he holding himfelf fory the beft, might bee thus with-drawne 
from thé truth of religion,and godlineffe : without which, the worthieft wit is 
ever ouer-throwne and extinguifhed iti prideand vaine glorie , what inrent 
then(faue deceit)had fhe in felecting the beft and moft honefts man, feeing fhe 


Tro. 6.26 


vfeth and defireth fuch things in her facrifices as honeftmen abhortovie, — 


were it but euen in their fports,and recreations? 


iL. VIVES. 
CF whom (a) it is witten) Pronerbs 6.26. Hieron teadeth it, Capit,raketh: Saint Anguf 
tine readeth Captat,as the Septaagints doe dypevas,V enatur,bunteth: more aptly. 


Fy 


That the Pagans gods did neuer eftabli{h the doctrine of luing 
wei; Cuar 6. —— 


¥_YErice it proceedeth that thofe gods neuer had care of the livesand mans 
ners of {uch Cities and nations as gaue them diuitie honors : but contraris _ 


wife gaue free permiffion to fuch horrible & abhominable euils ,to enter, not 


vpon their lands,vines,houfes,or treafures,no hor vp6 the body(which ferues — _ 
the minde) but vpon che minde it felfe, the ruler ofall che fleth ; and ofall the | 


reft : this they ever allowed without any prohibition at all. Ifthey did prohi- 
bire it, leaft ic be proued that they did. know their followers will ralke of cer- 
taine fecret traditions and I know not what,fomeclofely muttred inftruaions, 
tending to the bettring of mans-life,but let thé fhew where euer they had any 
publike places ordained for to heare fuch le@tures:(wherein the Plaicts did not 

refent their filthy gefture and {peeches: nor where the (4) Fegalie were 
kept with all licentioufneffe of luft , fidy called Fagalss , as the Chafers away of 


all chaftity and honefty : ) but wherethe people might come and heare their 
gods doctrine concerning the reftraine of couetoufnefle, the fuppreffionof 


ambition,and the brideling of luxury and riot: where wretches might learne 
that which (6) Per/ins thunders vnto them, faying. | | 


Difciteque dmiferieé> caufas cegnofctte rerum, | Learne wretches and conceiue the courfé of things 
Quid funus,aut quidnam vitturi gignimur sorde b What man is,and why nature for:h bien brings: 

Duis datusant mete quam mollis fexus,o Undes His fetrled¢ bounds, frd whence how foone he firaiess 
2 wis modus argenti,quid fas optare, quid afper 2 4What welths mean,&° that for which the good mayg: 

Pts'e nsmmus babet 3 patria charifquepropinguss f How ro vie mony: how to giue to friends, 
Duantum clargividecet quem te Deus effe Whatvwe in sah 

Suffit > hamena qua parte locatuses in re. : 


98 ahd God in vs,intends. &c, 


Ler them fhew where the(e leffons of their inftrudting Gods were euer read 
or rehearfed : whether cuer ther worfhippers were vied to heare of any 


(praics 


. Satyra’s. 


60 SAINT AVGVSTINE. C Harré. 


fuch matters, as wee vfé to doecontinually in our Churches , ere&ted for this 
purpofe in all places wherefoeuer the religion of Chrift is diffufed. 


= L. VIVES. | 
N Or (4) where the fugalia| Of thele feafts I doe not remember that Teuer ‘read any 


thing faue here, I would not let to fer downe fome-what out of my conieécture that 
The Fage~the reader might admit another word for it,but that 4Augu/tine himfelfe addeth, truely called 
lia. fugalia,vix of chaftity and honefty . And though I know many coniedtures which indedde 
whileft the truth is ynknowneare but truth,beeing once difcouered are ridiculous , yet I 
will fee what good may be done ynto others vnderftandings inthis refpet: that if I re- 
ueale not the truth I may ftirre vp others to feeke it. Firlt Uarro(de lingua latina lib.s.) 
_ ._-Writeth chat oxe day of the month of Iune was named Fugia becaufe the people on that day fled 
Frgia,a gro Rome in a tumult : for it was not long after the Galles,who had chafed thé out,were depar- 
goddclle, ds and then the Countries that lay about Rome , as the Ficulneates , and the Fidenates,con- 
fpired all againft them :fome- fignifications of the flight of this day doe us yet remaine in the 
woxuments whereof in our bookes of Antiquities yon may read at larce;thus farre varro . This 
was the feaft of the goddefle fugia, fo called becaufe they chafed away their enemies: For 
the next day after , the Romanes conquered all their foes about them, and therevpon thefe 
feaftes were kept with great mirth & follemnity; for they were in a great feare leaft the ree 

mainder of the Romane nation leaft by the Galles fhould haue beene vtterly deftroiedb 
Vitwle the reft.( Hilus in his booke of the gods calles this goddefle Vitulz, ( now Philo faith chat 
TONS istorii was called Vitula, as Macrobius teftifieth in his Saturnalia, ) wherefore thefe fu- 
Salia,or fugialia were featts kept with all mirth andreuells vnto the goddefle Letitia,the 
fecond of the Nones of Iune . In which feaft,it is likely that the people let themfelues loofe 
to allriotand litentioufnefle , This I {peake not intending to preiudice any other mans 
“The Fu. affertion, but onely to excitothers to looke tarther into the matter ifthey hold it a mat- 
gelia weare *¢t worth looking into *\6) Perfixs. | In his third fatire,vpon an old fentence Nofce reip fim, 
feaftsin that had wont to bee written vponthe dore of Apollo his Temple , dilatcth as aforefaid, 
Romein- (c¢) Bounds from which how foone| Inthe Hippodromi, or horfe-races there were feauen 
fituted for hounders: Domitian in certaine games ordained that they fhould runne but vnto the fifts 
the expull’ becanfe he would haue the {ports fooner performed. Seauen times they touched all thefe 


4 f Tai'« ° ° - : i ! i 
qanand bounds,faith Ssetonins im his life . And there was great care and cunning in turning of their 
the Kings ; horfes and chariots from bound to bound , leaft hee that was behind by his quicker turne 


a Fugando, {hould get before bim that led ‘Propertius. 

faith Cenfoe 

YénUS, Aut priusinfetto depofcit premia cn{u, | Or claimes his guerdon ere the courfe be done, 
Septima quam metam trimertt ante rota. Befere hit wheeles palt the feauenth marke baue run, 


And hereto belongs that of Horace: Od.1. 


Sant quos curriculo puluerem Olympicrnt,’ Some loue to fce th’ Olympick duft to lie, 
Collegiffciuuat metuG, /eruidis Aboot their chariot,and co thunder by 
wom aEbitata rotis ob. ereree The marke,with tivated wheeles &c, 


Inthe courfes amoneft the Grecians , there were fome where it was not fufficient to run 
vnto the matke, but they muft runne backe againe to the ftart : their turne at the halfe- 
courfe,they called the Diawlodromus , for s12ux@- is the going about ofa certaine fpace (as 

Merits Vt7Hmins faith :6.5.)which thofe that compafled fixe times were called Dolichodromi,and 
Yow a. ae 

Lose this is properly the fignification of Adeta ,and Flexssin the text, Per/ius either thinketh 

| that itis eafie to curne out of avertuous courfe into a vicious , or contrariwife that it is 

hard to turne fré the later to the firft, when cuftome once hath rooted it in our affections & 

giuen 1t powre to tiranizc: wherefore he wills vs to refiraine that vfe be-times, becaufe itis 

~~ notin our powre to thruft the yoake of it from our necks,when & where we would. Or he 

may meane of the variation of our age , as when wee pafle from child-hood vnto mans e- 

ftare,wherein it is fit wee alrer our conditions, ( as hee in Terence faith Jor when wee leaue 

our lufty and actiue part of life , our mans {tate,for a more fettled and retired age. Where- 

of Cicero(in his firft booke de Oratore)faith thus. If the infinste toyle of law bufineffes and the 

| employments of ambition fhonld bane concurred with the ebb of honours and the decay of our 

bodile vigor through age ec. But more plainely in his Oration for Marcus (elias : and in 

the fame Metaphore, J this declining age, (for Iwill hide nothing from yon; my truft of your 


humanity 


Lina, OF THE CITIE OF GOD == 61 


humanity and wifdome is fo great’) indeed the young mans fame flucke a little at the bound,by rea= 
fon of bis unhappy neighbourhood and knowledge of that womanyec .Wee muft not looke to thefe 
surnes in the horfe-races onely , but in onr lines allo and within ovr felnes faith Seneca (de tran~ 
guillit, Vite lib.1. ) There were bounds alfo in their water-pames , orfea-fights , when and 
where to turne. a 8 | 
Hic viridems Aeneas frondenti ex illice metam, Here did Acycasfette vpon an oke 

Conftitust fignum nautis pater undereucrti | A fignall which inform’d the Say lers plaine, | 
Scivent,e& longosvbi circumflcctere cuifus, Saith Virgil, | How tar to row,and where coturne againe. Aertddege 
I haue fecene this place of the text read thus in an old copy , Qua mollis flexus et unde , whicht 
indeed is not much amiffe: Asthony of Lebrixa,our induftrious gramarian , readeth it fo. ( d) 
Wealthes meane |Out of Plato , whence Per/ins hath all his morallitie, Inthe dialogue called 
Phedo,Socrates prayeth thus: O my deare Pan, and allyon other goddes,giue me that eternal bean 
tie: grantthat all my externall adiuntts may bee confinedto my affects within : let me thinke him 
onely wealthy that is wife, Let me haue but [o much of riches,as no man but he that is temperate can 
Spay ,or difpofe off. “Thus prayed Socrates : and indeed moderat wealth is better worth wifh« 
ing,then excefle.(¢) And that for which | This he hath from Ale:biades in Plato(lib.2. devote) 
Wherein Plate teacheth him what to pray for. The faid fentence of Socrates Valerius rehear- 


feth alfo. (Lib. 7.) Of prayers Lanenall faith thus: | 
Orardum eft ut fit mensfane in corpore fano, | Pray fora found foule , in as found a breaft. 


Perhaps this limitation of Perfiws hath reference to that which followeth. Howto ufe money. 

‘ Cf) How to ufe money | Afper in the text ioyned with Nemnus , fignifieth the roughneffe of 

the coyne being newly ftampt,and which is worne fmooth by paffing from handto hand. So Roucti 
Plinie calles carued veflells, which are graced with any boffes ér branches ftanding out, A/pera, Sila 
rough. Swetonius faith that Nere fought for triedgold , and rough or new coyned money ., with : 
exceeding greedineffe, Whether it be taken heere for newlly coyned , or becaufe rough peeces 

were better then thefmooth, or what they were I know not, Butthat the fame vneuen'd 
peeces were called rough,the definition of roughneffe in Plato his Timsexs doth fhew. Roxgh- Roughnes 
wes (faith he) is hardneffe commixt with uneneneffe. (g) Godin vs intends | This is out of Plato 4 
alfo, who maketh God the commander of al mankind , affigning euery one his particular ftati- 
on,as ina pitched field , from whence hee may not depart without his command. And it is 

a good help vnto the inftrudtion of our life,that each of vs know, in whatranke of mankind he 

is placed, fo to adapt his life to his eftate,and difcharge his funtion duly:be he a husbadman or 

a citizen,a free man or a feruant ; acraftfman ,a{choller, aminifter, afoldiour, an officer, a 


Prince, or apriuate man, : 


That the Philofophers inftructions are weake and bootle/[e,in that they 
beare no diuine authortty:becaufe that the examples of the gods are 
greater confirmations of vices in men,then the wife-mens 
difputations are onthe contrary part. Cnare7. 
[jO you think they will mention their Philofophy fchooles vnto vs?as for thei 
firft ofal they are derived from Greece , and not from Romse:or if you fay they. 
are now Romaine becaufe Greece is become a Prouince of the Romaines , Lanfwer- 
againe that the inftructions giuen there are not of the documents of your gods, 
but the inuentions ofman, whofe quicke wits efpeciall indeauour was to find ror 
by difputation (4) what fecrets were hid in the treafury-of zature:( 6) what was to phies sad 
bee defired,and what to be auoided in our Morality (¢) And what was cohzrent cept. 
by the Lewes of ds[pstation , or not following the induction , or quite repugnant. 
vnto it. And fome of thefe gaue light to great inuentions,as the grace of God af- 
fifted them, bur yet they evermore erred,as the frailty of man poffeffed them; the The phi. 
diuine prouidence iuftly oppofing (4) their vain glory to fhew the tract of piery lofophers _ 
to rife from humbleneffe vnto height, by their comparrifon : Which wee thall rr 
hereafter take an occafion to fearch into further by the will of the true and euer- uine ho. 
lafting God.But if ic were true that oa Philofophers inuented any meanes furffi- Sorecbee | 
| , 7 dens 


_ 


é2 SAINT AVGVSTINE. — Cuap.g 
ca I ee 


Cient to direct one to theattaining of a happy courfe of life, is there not far grea- 
ter rcafon to giue them (d) diuine honours then the other ? How much more ho» 
neft were it for to heare Platces bookes read ina Temple of his,then the Ga/é gel- 
ded in the diuels?To view the (e) effeminate confecratedsthe lunatike gathed with 
cuttes,and each thing elfe either cruell or beaftiall , or beftially cruell, or cruelly 
beftiall fo commonly celebrated in the follemnities of fuch poddes? Were it not 
far more worthy to hate fome good lawes ofthe gods rehearfed vnto the youth 
for their inftruGion in integrity , then to pafle the time invaine commendas 
tions of the labours of illuded antiquities but indeed ( f-) all che worthippers of 
fuch gods , as foone as they are initiate vnto thofe luxurious and venemous 
adorations, (¢) As Perfius{aith , dolooke more after Jupsters deeds: , then cither 
Platoes do&trine,or Catoes opinions. (4) And heré-vpon itis that Terence bringes 
in the luftfull youth gazing vpona table pi@ure wherein was drawne how Joue 
fent downe afhowre of gold into the lap of Dasae:and this was fit prefidenc for 
this youth to follow in his luft , wich a boaft chathe didde but imitate a god. But 
what god (faith he) : Ewen he thar {bakes the T: emples with histhunder : fince he did 
thus,fll 1 (a meane wretch to him make bones of it? No3I didit with all mine heart. - 


L. VIVES. 


WV Hat (a) fecrets were hid | Hee-touches the threc Rindes of Phylofophy:in tbis place the ) 


Neaturall, (b) what was to be defired \Herethe Morall, (c) what was coberent |Here the 
Rationall or Logicail, Of thete hereafter. (d) Their vaine Slory \ Becaufe all that they inuented 
they afcribed vnto their owne wittes{harpneffe, and nota whit ynto gods influence. Of this 
Lattantius difputeth at large. (e) Effeminate confecrated, | Al thefe Galli were al of them beatte 
ly villaines,Sodomites giuen to al filthineffe in the world. Of whome Apuleys relates moft ab- 


hominable things,in the eighth and ninth book of his Affe : So doth Lucian alfo,whence Ap= 


peleyus had his argument. (f) «4H the wor[bips | The examples of thofe whom we reucrence do 
moue ys mitch : for we indeauorto imitate them in al things,be they gods or men: the people 
affects the fafhion of the Prince,the fchollers of che maifter they honour, and all mortall men 
their conditions whom they hold immortall. And here-vppon is our Sauiour Chrs/ and his 
Saints fet before al of our religion,to be obferued and imitated. Plato lib, de Repub, 2. amongft 

- diuers reafons why he wilnot tollerate Poets in his comson-wealth,brings chis forone becaule 
their fictions of the gods , giue examples,very preiudiciall vnto the honefty of the readers , as 
their warres,thefts,feditions adulteries and fuch like. Out of which Lucian hath rhe words he 

_ gives to ALenippus in his Necromantia\faish he being a boy and bearing Hefiod and Homer fing- 
ing of [editions and wars,not onely thofe of Heroes and demi-gods but enen of the gods them-felues, 
their adwlreries,rapines tyranies,chafings out of parents,and marriages of bretheren and fifters sruly 
I thought all thefe things both lawfull and lavdable,and affetted them very xealoufly. For [ thought 


the gods would neucr haue bin lechers.nor hane gone together by th'eares among {t them-felues,unles 


th had allowed al thefe for good and decent, Thus far Lucian. We haue rcherfed it in che words 
Sic Thomas Of Thomas Moore: whome to praife negligently , or as if wee were otherwife imployed, were 
Pteore, grofenes. His due commendations are fufficient to exceed great volumes. For what ishee chat 
can worthily limme forth his fharpnes of wit,his depth of Tud gement, his excellence and varie- 
of learning, his eloquence of Phrafe,his plaufibility and mtcgrity of manners , his wdicious 
fore-fght hie exact eXecution,his gentle mode(ty and yprightnes , and his vnmoued loyaltie? 
vnles in one word he wil fay they are al perfeét,intirely abfolute,& exact inal their ful pro 
tions?ynles he wil cal them(as they are indeed) patterns and lufters,each of his kinde?l {peake 
much,and many that haue not known Aoore , will wonder at me: but fuch as haue,wil know I 
, {peak but cruth:fo wil fuch as thal eicher réad his works, or but heare or looke a his actions: 
_...”. but another time thal be more fit to {pred our failes'in this mans praifcs,as in a {pacious Ocean, 
~ . - ‘wherin we wil cake this ful and profperous wind & writé both much in fubftance,and much in 
" * value of his worthy honours:and that vnto fauourable readers.(g )As Perfius faith\Sasyra, . 
t peewee ——— Cur dira libido Weer the blackeluft of fine. 3 
+. egeuerit ingeninm ferucats tina ventne. _  Diptin hos poifon burnes the munde within’ Ik 


-_— 


Lis2. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 


It is meant indeed of any gaules; which is hotte poyfon: But eAnguftine vfeth it heare for 
the generatiue fperme , which fome call Virus, (bh) Here-vuppon it is that Terence bringes | 
In his Exnuchus : Cherea who was carried difguifed for an Exnuch by Farmenowmo Thais, 


beemy enamourd onawench , that Thrafo the foldior had given ‘to her , atid telling his 


fellow entipho how he had inioyed her,retacesit thus : While they prepare to wajn , rhe wench 


fatte in the Parlour,looking upon a pitture wherein was painted how louc fent downe the jhowre of 


golismto Dar.aeslappe: I fella look:ng at it with her : and becanfe hee hadde plaidthe fame play 
before wre,my mind gaue me greater caufe of toy feeing a Godhadae turned hum-felfe into a man, 


. aud ftalne unto a woman through another mans chimney , andwhat God ? Enen hee that fhaketh 


Temples with hrs thnder : fLoutd I ( beeing but a wretch to him ) make bones of it? No I didde 


/ ' 


63 


it enen withall my heart. Thus farre Terence, Danae beeing a faire Virgin , her father Acrifixe Danae, 


kept her ina Tower that no man fhould haue acceffe vnta her, Now Jspiter being in loue 
with her,in a fhowre of gold dropt through the chimney into the Tower , and fo inioyed her: 
that is, with golden guifcs ( againft which no locke , no guard is ftrong ynough) hee corrupted 
both che keepers and the atu her-Telfe. | ? 


Of the Romanes Stage plaies, wherein the publéfbing of their gods foulefe 
 bmspurities did not ay way offend but rather delight them. 
| 2. Crap. 8... ef 
But ( wil fome fay).thefe things are not taught in the inftitutions ofthe gods, 
but inthe inuentions of the Poets. I will not fay that the gods mifteries are 
more obicene then the Theaters prefentations: but this I fay(& wil bring hiftory 
fufficient to ¢onuince all thofe that thal denie it ) chat thofe playes which are for- 


-medaccording to thefe poeticall fiions, were not exhibited by the Romasnes vn- 


to their goddes in their follemnities through any Pani devotion of cheit 


owne., but onely by reafon that the goddes them. felues didde fo ftri@ly com- 


maund , yeaand cuen in fome fort extort from them the publike prefenting and 
dedication of thofe plaies vnto their honours. ThisI handled briefly itithe firft 
booke. For (4) when the citty was firft ofal infz@ed withthe peftilence , then 
were ftages firft ordained at Rome by the authorization of thechiefe Prieft. And 
what is he,y in ordering of his courfes , will not rather choofe tofollow the rudi- 
ments which are to be fetched out of plaies,or whatfoeuer being inftituted by his 
gods,rather then tt.e weaker ordinances of mortall men?Ifhe Pocts didde falfely 
record Jupster for an adulterer then thele gods being fo chaft,fhould be the more 
offended,and punith the world, for thrufting fuch a deale of villany into cheit ce- 
remonies,and not for omitting them. (6) Of thefe ftage-plaies the beft and moft 
tollerable are Tragedy and Comedy: being Poetical fables made to be ated at 
thefe fhewes : wherein notw ithftai:ding was much difhoneft marter, in actions, 
but none at al of wordes:and thefe the old men do caufe to be taught co their chil 
dren, amonegft their moft honeft and liberal ftudies. | 


me or tt were 


~ . = 


~ LeVIVES. 


tine doth often make mention of Srage. plares,it feemeth a fit place here to {peake fomewhat 
thereofzand what fhould haue beenc {cattered abroad vpon many chapters, Iwill here lay all 
into one, forthe better vnderftanding of thereft, And firft oftheir Originall , amonpft the 


Greckes firft,and the ‘Romaines afterwards:for imitation brought them from Greece to Rome, The | 


FF” (4) when the city was | Becaufe in this booke and in the other following , Saint Augns= | 


The old husbandmen of Greece vfing euery yeare to facrifice to Liber Pater for their fruites, pen of 
firft vied to fing fomerthing at the putting of thefire on the altars,in ftead of prayersiand then Plases, 


co pleafe him the betrer,they fung ouer all his victories , warres,conquefts, triumphs , and his 
captiuation of Kings. For reward of which paines of theirs ,a Goat was firlt appointed , er 
the Skis of an effered Goat, full of wine, So thefe jie partly,and partly oftengation, fer ma- 

3 ny 


-— a ee od ‘ x 


aaa en el 


64, | ‘SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuay. 8 


ny good wits work among ft thefe plaine countrimen,to make verfes of this theame;meane and 

few at firft,but as al thinges elfe,in proceffc of time they grew more elegant and conceited: and 

becaufe the Kings Liber had conquered,afforded not matter ynough for their yearely fohgs 
they fellin hand with the calamities of other Kings, like to the former,and fung much of them 

Tragedy. And taisfong was calleda tragedy either of redyes, 4 Geate,the reward of the conqueror in this 
contention, or of the wine-leefe wherwith they anoynted their faces;called vy the Grecks redyas 
Comedy. Now fome wil haue the Come 4y to haue had the Originall from thefe facrifices alfo:others fr5. 
the follerinities of “pollo Nomins,that isthe guardian of fheaphcards and villages, fome fay y 
Both thefe facrifices were celebrated at once, 1 wil fec down the moft common opiriion.When 

the e4tbenians lined as yet in difperfed cotages ( Thefens hauing not yet reduced them toa 

_  Citty) The husbandmen vfed after their facrifices to breake iefts,both vpon fuch as were at the 

~ facrifices and fuch as trauaild by chance that way:and by thefe mirthfull {coffes , delighted all 

the cotnpany. Now after that the citty was builded , che husbandmen at the times appointed 

or the llennities came into the cowne in carts,and iefted one while at their fellowes, and a- 

nother while at the citcizens,cheefly fuch as had offended them, And this was called a Come 

dy ,cither of xdzn a Villa:e,becaufe they liued in fuch, or of evs away , and xanage'r to be faucy, 

orto reuellsbecaufe they were profufe and {pared no man in the way with their petulent quips, 

(And this is rather the true deriuation,becaufe the Athenians asthen did not call the villages 

_ wdpas, but sipes.) This cuftome pleafed the cittizens,and made them animate thofe of the pré. 

teft wits,co write more exactly in this kinde of verfe. And fo by little and little,the countrie 
fellowes.were thruft out,whofe quips were fimple,and how euer enluious,yet not bloudy:now 

thecitty. Poets taxing at firft the vices of the attizens with bitternes, did fome good in reclai- 
ming particulars from folly,chrough feare of being perfonated : but afterwards when they be« 
gan to follow their own affects and their friends, exercifing their grudges with frarpivelle snd 
| ving their pens for their weapons , they would fometimes traduce Princes that neuer had de- 
Eupelis, {erued any fuch matter,and euennamethem, Whichtricke when Espols had plaid with 42 
cibiades in his Comedy called Bapris » hee caufed him to bee taken arid throwne into the feas 

being chen Generall of the Athenian forces , and hauing a Nauiein the Hauen Péreus : when 
hee was throwne in , it was faid eA lcibiades rehearfed thefe wordes often times ouer : thom 
Alcibiades haft often drowned me vpox the Fage Eupolis,/ will oxce drowne thee in the fea. By this example 
Three the reft of the Poets were fo cerrified, that Alcibsades got a law paft, that no man fhould dare 
kindesof %© name any man vppon theStage. So that kinde or Comedy called ap yeia that is she olde 
Comedies, (¢ emedy , wasabolifhed. Then came in the fecond,wherein many were girded at priuily fup- 
Oid. preffing of names vnder coullors,and this the Nobility fell in diflike withall , leaft their factes 
Meane, = fhould bee glanced at vnder hand. Sothat was taken quite away:and a sew kinde inuented, 
New which treated of meane perfons vnder changeofnames , the argument whereof was euer fo 
different from the facts of the Nobility, as each man might perceiue that they were fartheft frd 

the drift of thefe taxations. And befides there was fuch moderation vied in all che effects, that 

no man could iultly .comp'aine of them , thoughthey hadde {poken of him by name. 

Of this kinde Adenander was the chiefe Poet , who liued with Alexander the great, 

beieng fome-what younger then hee was. The olde kinde flourifhed in the warres of 
Peloponefus , and in that kinde Ariftophanes was molt excellent , by report fume fay thac 

he was very good at the iccond {urt alfo, But doubtleffe Antiphanes of Lariffa was the beft 

in this kinde that euer wroie. And thefe kindes were all in Greece, Butin the foure hun- 

dreth yeare after Rowse was builded, 7, Sudpitens Potitus , and (’, Licinius Stolon beeing 

Confuls , when the Cittie was ( both the yeare before , ard that yearealfo ) grieuoufly 

infected with the plague , by an Oracle outofthe books of the Sibils were Stage-playes 

called thether (anew accuftomed thing to fuch a warlike nation. ) Their players they hadde 

out of Hetruria , and they named them Hiftriones: , in the language of that countrey: 

And thefe didde daunce vnto the fluce , without {peaking any thing , but not without fuch 
conceited geftures as then were in vfe elfe-where, And then the Countrey people of: 

Ltaly afcer the fafhion of the Greekes , having facrificed after their harucft,and given theis 

_ godaes thankes for their yeares good increafe, after all , in their mirth, vfed to ieft one vp- 

pon another for fportes fake, {paring not now and then to caft forth a fluttifh phrafe , and 
fome-time a bitter quippe. And this they didde interchangeably , in verfes called Fefcenixi, 

of fuch a Cittie in Hetruria Thefethe Romaine Players beger to imitate, but neuer natned 
velcenial, for that was exprefly forbidden before by alaw in the swe/ne Tables. But thele Fefcenine vies 


wore 


a | 


. Kings or Emperours of Rome,wherein the Prete-xta , the Noblemans. habite muft needes bee 


Lie. OF THE CITIEOF GOD. _ 65 


wore out of the playes by a little arid little , and were left onely vnto marryages and cri 

umphes : And {uch plaies began to bee inuented as were delightfull and yet not offenfiue, 

which Horace touches at in his Epiltle to Auguftus, So it being not allowable to traduce any 

man by his name vppon the ftage , there {prung vppe-diuers forts of thele playing fables 

in /taly , after che manner of the Greekes , asthe New Comedie , and the Satyre + Not that 

which taxeth vices and isbound vnto that one kinde of verfe, which Horace , Perfius , and 

Iunenall wrote in : for that was firft inuented by Lacilizs ( who ferued vndcr Scipioek mie | 
Lianus inthe warres of Namance.) But that wherein the Satyres were brought in, ina fluce Satyres, 
tifh and approbrious manner , asin bayry coates , heauy paced , and altogether unhanfome 

and flonenly, Their Stage was ftrowed with flowers , leaues and graffe , to refemble the JheSas 
Mountaines , Woodes and Caues 3 even like as the tragike Stage refembleth the ftate of tyres, _ 
kingly Pallaces , andthe comicall , che fafhion of meaner mens houfes , as Vitreuixs writeth, __ 
(Lib. 5.) After thefe Satires went out of vfe; The firlt True Comedie in latine verfe was 1 he fre 
written by Linins Andrénicus , Salmators freed feruant, after Rome was builded, iuft fue 7 me 
hunared and forty yeares , in the Confulfhippes of 4ppins (landins Sonne to Cecus , and Rome, 
Sempronius Tuditanus , the ficlt Carthaginian warre beeing ended fome few yeares before , as 

Atticus doth account the time. -And this man feconded By Neuias , Plautus , Ennius , Te- 

rence and many other Comedians after them : what remaineth of this fubiea, fhall be fpoken 

in the firteft place. | , | 

(6) Of thefe Stage-plaies the bef | In thefe reuels , fometimes there were plaies prefented 

worth the hearing : and fcmetimes againe , the ae Ae would a& moft filthy geftures in fis 

lence , and fometimes {peake fome-what for the feaft they kept. Of thefe Comedies fomie 

were callea Palliate , their argument being Greeke and their actors in Greekifh cloakes:fuch pPalliva, 
are all erences and Plantus his : Others Togate, their argument concerning the Romaine 

affaires, and theit actors prefenting it in Rowsasne gownes: {uch are thofe of dfranins, And Togatar 
thefe Togata are of twoforts , either Pretextate , the plotte beeing of the deedes of fome Pretextata, 
vied; (from.which kinde I cannot fee that the Trabeate do diffcr much , thofe which C. AZel- iis 
us of Spoleto, Mecenas his free-man inuented ¢ Iknow not whether they were alloneor Tebersae 
not ,hauing hereof no certaine notice :.)or Tabernarié , wherein the actions of the vulgar " 
were defciphered. There are Tragedies , ( omedies , Satyres ,and there are Aftmikes , which are 

called otherwife, Plaine-feete , plani-pedes, wearing neither fhoves nor buskins , but comming The Mie 


_ bare-foote vponthe Stage : The Saryres notwithftanding and the Afimikes ate both included nukes, 


vader the (omedie. And fome fay fo is the Tragedie too. But the Tragedie difcourfeth of Lamene 

rable forcunes,extreame affects,and horrible villanies , but farrefrom turpitude, The Comedie 

treates of the Kxaneries and trickes of lone , being brought into it by Afenander to pleafe the 

Macedonians that ftood affected to fuch paflages, The Saryre containeth the loofer Fannes, 

and Stluanes whofe rufticall ieftes delighted much, and fometimes they would lament.: But, as 

they were vncleanely and flouenly goddes,fe were their {peeches often times foule,and difhe- 

neft ro heare, But the AZimikes forbore no beaftlineffe,bur vied extreame licentioufneffe. And 

et thefe were more tollerable then other things which were acted im the follemnities of Bac- 

chus : (which for their incredible filthineffle were expelled out of /tatie bya decree of the Se. 

nate.) Alfo in the Saturnalia , and Floralia , which twoo feaftes were celebrated by common flerglia, 
, frumpets , and che moft raskally fort of a!lmen, The actors of the Florala, though they reue- 

renced not their owne goddefle, yet when (ato came,th ey reuercnced him, and would not a&t cate, 


theminhisprefence. _ 2 


What the Romaines opinion was touching the restraint ofthe Baek 
= liberty of Poefie, which the Greekes,by the counfasle of | 
their Goddes,would not haue reftrained at all. 

| | CuaP, 9. | Pe. 4 ee 
WV Hat_ the Romaines held concerning this point , (4) Cicero recordeth in his 
bookes which he wrote of the Common wealth,where Scipio is brought in fay- 

ing thus: If that the priutledge of an oldcustome had not allowed them, Comedies > * 

could newer Laue giuen {uch proofes of their vilene(fe vpox Theaters, And fome of the —. 
ancient Greekes pretended a conucnience in their vicious opinion , and made ita 


G; law 


66 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cinses, 


Jaw that(c)the Comedian might fpeake what he would,of any man,by his name, 

herfore(as Africanus faith wellin the fame booke)#homs did zot the Poet touch, 
nay whom did he not vexe , whom {pared he? perhaphs fo, faith one,he quipt 4 ‘nie I 
wicked,fedstious vulgar fellowes ss (A) Cleo(e)Clytophon,and/ f)Hyperbolus : ¢o 
that we affent(quoth hee againe)though st were fitter for such falts to bee taxed by the 
(¢) Cenfor then by a Poet, but it was no more decent that (b) Pericles fbould bee fnsf- 
fed at bawing fo many yeares goucrhed the Citty fo well both in warre and pease then it 
were fer (¢) our Plautus , or Nzuius to deride (k) Publius of Cneius Scipio or for 
() Cecilius to mocke (ms) Marcus Cato; And againe, alictleafter , Our rwelue 
Tables ( quoth hee) hauing decreedthe obferustton but of avery few things (n) upon 
paine of death, yet thought st good to eftablifh this for one of that few,that none flsuld 
(0) write or atte any vere , derogatory from the good name a any mn sor preindiciall 
unto manners. Excellently well! for onr lines ought not to bee the obicéts for Poets to 
play upon,but for lawfull magiftracy,and throughly informed iuftice to fudge upon sor 
is it fat that men {bould bere them-felues reproached, but in Such places as they my anf- 
were and defend their owne canfe iz. Thus much outof Cicero in his fourth booke 
of The Common.wealth : (which I thought good to rehearfe word for word ones 
ly Iwas forced to leaue out fome-whac ,and fome-what to tranfpofe it , for the 
eafier vnderftanding. For it giues great light vnzothe propofition which I iffe 
be can)muft prooue and make apparant. ) Hee proceedeth further in this dif- 
courfe,and in the end concludeth thus,that the ancient Romsanes vtterly difliked, 


_ that any man fhould be either praifed or difpraifed vpon the itage. Bucas i faid 
_ before, the Greekes in this, though they vied leffe madefty , yet — followed 


Pater 
beokes 

de republa 
be. 


‘The Sci- 
Pie's, 


more conuenience , feeing they faw their gods fo well to approueo 


the ftage : whether the plaies were fictions of Poctry , or true hiftories of their 
deeds. (and I with their worfhippers had held them onely worth the laughing 
at and not worth imitation! )for itwere too much pride ina Prinéeto feeke to. 
haue his owne fame preferued, when hee fees his gods before him fet theirsar 
fix and feauen. For whereas it is faidin their defence, that chele tales of their 

ods were not true, but merely poeticall inuentions sand falfe fictions , why this 
Soth make it more abhominable,if you refpect the purity of your religions and 
if you obferue the malice of che diuil what cfinin eeror more deceitful ferch can 
there be?For when an honeft & worthy ruler ofa contry is flandered, is not the 
flader fo muchmore wicked & impardonable,as this parties lite that is flandered 
is clearer and founder from touch of any fuch matrer?what punifhment then can 
be fufficient for thofe chat offer their gods fuch foule and im pious iniury? 


L. VIVES: 


Clecro (4) recordeth ix his] If of all the ancient moriuments of learning which are either 

wholy perifhed , or yet vnpublifhed’, if I fhould defire any one extant, it-fhould bee 
Cicero his fixe bookes de Republica. For 1 doubt not but the worke is admirable , and gefle 
bur by the fragments vihich are extant, I doe hearethac chere are fome that have thefe 
bookes but they keepe them as charily as golde apples; but vntill they come forth to light 
let vs. make vfe of the conieétures , recorded in other places of (icero his wotkes. (4) where 
Scipio} The Cornelian family amongft other fur-names » got vp that of Sespio » from one of 
their bloud that was as a fraffe( Sespienis Vice to his kiade and fickly Father. Of this —_ 
: au basohy i : ra, 


the repre-_ 
fented difgraces,not onely of men, but even of themfelues,when they camevpon | 


Te ee NNR eae aS Sd 
Lies. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 67 
et . 
were many famous tmen,of whom wee meane to fpeake fome-what ii their due places .. This 
whom 7 wily brings in;{peaking in his worke De Republica, wasfonne vito L.eEmilins Pan- 
dus,that conquered “Perfeas King of Afacedsm Scipio the fonne of the greater Scipio eAfrican 
adopted him for his fonne,and fo he was called e£milanus,ofthe {tock of whence he was dif- 
cended, He razed Carthage and Numance. (c) The ( omedian, Jthis was the olde Comedy, 
aie aia t’and of this we faid before, that the citizens for feare of bein g brought vpon the ftage, Old come: 
would either begin te lite well (if fo they intended ) or at leaft forbeare to bee feene do cuill. gies. : 
Socrates {aid it was mecte to expofe ones felfe freely to the Comick Pen 3 for if they write true 
of our. vices,they are a meane to reforme vs : if they write falfe, it concernes not vs, Yet enen 
Socrates him{elfe that innocent hurtleffe man was mocked by Ariffophanes in his Nebule,a 
knauifh comedie,fet forth onely to that end. And this was one of the greateft proofes,that the Ariftopha 
Poets of this Old kindé of Comedy , at that time had mercenarie Pens, and followed peruerfe neshis 
and maleuolent affects, — , | oe Nebu 
(c) Cleon,| hee was a Lether-fellet; a feditious fellow , enciny to Nicias, Demofthenes, Cleon. 
and aln:oft ynto all honeft men : yet no euill fouldiar . if-wee may trult Thucidides and Asiftopha« 
' Pletarch : againtt him, did Ariftophanes make a comedy, and hee called it Equites, the oi his 
Kaights : and‘when the Poet would haue prefented this view of Cleons extortion and tyr- a 
ranou$ rapine to the people, the workeman durft not make a vifar like Cleons face , for feare of | 
his power : So the Poet was faine to dawbe the ators faces with wine lees: aid yet they being 
afraid to enter vpon the Stage, Ariftopbanes himfelfe came forth alone and acted Cleon, fo great 
was his rancour againft him, For which afterwards hee was accufed of Clean, and fined at fue 
talents ,as himf{clfe complaineth in his comedy called «% charnenfes,that is;hee cast up as muth 
os bee had taken in for perhaps Demoffhenes and Nicias had hired himto write it,as ALelitus 8 
eAnitus, Socrates his enemies gotte him with money to pen that comedie caljed Nephelis. He 
was aman that wrote much when he was drunke, This Cleon, Plutarch mentieneth in his | 
Politickes alto. ee. ae a 
(¢) Cleophon} This fellow ( faith Plirarch ) was. fuch another as Cleon. (f ) Hy- padeintee 
perbolus,\Thucidides and Plutarch and Lucian alfo in his Mifanthropus,do mention this fellow Hilpet 
with the additions of a wicked Cittizen,and affirme that he was banifled the Citty by the law, 
of Offracifme, (a kinde of fuffrage-giuing ) not for any feare of his power & dignitie,as others 
were,but as the common fhame an {candall ofzhe whole towne.Céiceroin his Brutus {peaki 
of Glancia faith‘ He was a man moft like Hyperbolus of Athens, whofe vile conditions aeoll 
Athenian (omedies gue fuch bitter notes of. That he was taxed by Expolis, Qusintilian intimates 
in his firft booke of his Inftitutions {peaking of Mufick, And Calins Rhodoginzs hath a whole 


Chapter of hith. Leétion.eAntiquar lib.g, (g) Of the Cenfor, |Euery fift yeare the Romaines ; 


elected two,to oner-[ee the Cenfus,that is, to eftimate and iudge of the wealth , manners, and Mew = 


efteeme of euery particular citizen,And herevpon they were called (2 enfors,(for as Feffusfaith, 
_ euery one held himfelfe worth fo much as they rated him at, ) and the Maifters of the manners. 


So faith Cicero vnto Appius Pulcher. (b) Pericles] This man,by his eloquence and other ciuill Pericles, 
inftitutions, did fo winne the hearts of the Athenians tohim sthat he was made the couernor 
of that common-weale for many yeares together,being euer both wife and fortunate, in warres 
abroad,and in peace at home, Expolis an old Comedian faith,that On his lips fat aud, thatis, 
the Goddeffe of per fivafion, whom T ily (dé oratore lib.3)calleth Lepor,Ennins Suada,and Horace 704d. 
(by the diminutiue)Suadela: of the matter of thofe verfes,Cicerg and Quintilian make very of= * a 
ten vie in Grecke fragments: for the whole Comedies of Expos ,and many more,arcnow © 
‘loft, Thefe verfes are extantin the firft Booke of ‘Plinins Cecilins his Epiftles,and part of them 
alfo in Swidas. 1 much maruell that Politiaz mentions neither of them in his Chapter of his 
Centaures where hee fpeaketh of this. The verfes hee hath out of one of Aristides his inter= 
pretours,whom he nameth not. Indeed I deny not but that there are more of his verfes, then 
are either in Susdas or Plinie. . | 
Ariftophanes alfo,the ancient Comedian faid that Pericles caft lightning and thunder from 
his lippes , and confounded all Greece, And this both Expolis and hee fpake inthe powring 
out of their callumnies againgt him, as Tully ( de orat. lib. 3. & de perfecto se ‘and 
aped 


Qsintilian (liber. 12.) doe both affirme, The Comedian {eoffed alfo at his long 
head , and therefore hee was alwayes pi€tured in his Helmitte. (#) For onr Plautus,}, Li- 
wie Was the firft Latine Poet , as I haue fayd before; and next after him, Nexins, who 


‘ G4 ferued 


68 : SAINT AVGVSTINE. C warz10. 


ss ferued asa fouldiar in the firft warre of e4ffricke : Then, Plzatus almoft of the fame time with 
Plautas, Nenins : hee left many comedies , the moft part whereof wee haue, and there was no part of 
all chat,or the following age that pleafed better then hee. Scipio callech him Osr Plaxtus,not 

that he ewer knew him,but becaufe he was a latine Poet,and he had fpokemof the Greckes bea 

fore (k_ )P. or C. Scipio} Thefe were brethren and as Sernius faith twinnes. Publius was tather 

eS to the Greater Scipio Affrican,Cneius vnto Nafica that good man ,of whom wee fpake be- 
reinag fore, They were both flaine in Spaine by the effricanes inthe fecond Carthaginian watre, 
° which began in the Confulfhip of Publius. Tully in his Oration for ( ornelins Gallus calles chefe 
wo brethren the two 7 banderbelts of the Empire : and fome fay that chat verfe of Vargell is 


meant of them, 
——- Gemines duo fulmina belli, —————«vvo thunderbolts of warre, 
Scipisdas Aened 6, The S cipies taking 1t out of Lacretins, 


_ Scipi.des belts julmes, Carthaginis borrorese@c. . | Warresthunder Scipio, Carthages dread feare &¢. 


Cacilins, So that thefe Poets liued in their times. (1) Or Cecilins | Cacilins Statins liued in thé ALd~ 
| cedontan,and eAfian warre , and was chamber-fellow with Ennis. Volcatins Sedigsus giueg 
Catothe el- him che pricke and praife for Commedy,and Horace approoueshis grauity. We haue nothing 
der, of hisnowextant. Tx/ly {eemes not to like of his phrafe. (») Mavens Cate] The Elder,hee 
that firft made the Portian family honorable: hee was borne at T#/cxlum ,and attained the 
honor of Conful, Trinmph, and Cenfor. Becing but of meane difcent,the nobility enuied him 
wholy:but his authority with the Commonalty was very great-he liued in the times of Enni- 
ws and Cecilins .(n) Few things upon paine of death} There were very few crimes with the old 
’ Romanes punifhed with death, and farre fewer in the times that followed : forthe Pertian 
lawe forbad the death of any condemned Citizen , allowing onely his banifhment, So chat it 
Cari being held death-worthy to depraue any man by writing , proues that the Romanes were ex~ 
pete dio ; ; ° : 
mins,  tteamely afraid of infamy.But here let the Reader obferue the meaning of this law,out of Fe/= 
wha, ts: who {peaking of this Capstis Dimsinutio,this Capital! Pusst{hment writeth thus ,He is faid 
tobe capite dinsinutus , capitally punithed shat is bansfhed , that of a free man is made a bende 
— flane to another,that is forbidden P and water , and this the Lawiers call, Maxima capitis dia 
minutio, che moft capitall punifhment of ai. For there are three kindes of it : the greatest, the 
\ mecane,and the fmalleft, This Ithought good to fet downe, not out of mine owne iudgements 
Horace writeth thus vnto Angufiss. . 


The Porti 
an law. 


Quin etiam lex 
Panag, ditta, malo que nollet carmine quenquams 
_ Deferibi: vertére modum formidine fuftis,oe. 
befidesapenalllaw 
Frobidding all fuch verfe as fhame prouokes: 
So changed they their notes for feare of ftroakes &es 


Porphiry vpon this place faith he that wrote infamous verfes vpon any man , was iudged 
to be beaten with clubs:But efcron maketh Horace to ase metaphorically,(¢) Ade]The 
Ocrentare 014 booke hath occenaffer, fhould fin g out,and I thinke better then otherwife: the ancient 
what itis, Latinifts(faich Feftus vied occentare,for the fame for which we vic connitium facere,to mocke, 
or reproach : which was done a/od,and as it were fing ont ynto others hearing a farre off,and - 

this was held difhoneft. | | 


That the diuslls through their fettled defire to dec men mifchiefe were wil- 
ling to hane any vsllanies hed of thens, whither true or falfa.. 
Cwar 10. 


RY thofe wicked {pirits,wh6 thefe mé take to be gods,were defirous to haue 
+ {uch beaftly ftories {pred abroad of thé, (though they themfelues had never 
acted any fuch thing)only to keep mens mindes inueigled ‘in fuch beftiall opini- 
ons,as it were in {nares,or nets,and by thacmeanes to draw them to predeftinate 
| a : : __ @amanation 


Pe a a ee nee Ba” Bie a ees a . 
Lr. ‘OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 69 


_ damation for company ! whether it bee true chae fuch menas thofe that loue to 
liue in errors , doe {elect for gods, did themfclues commit any fuch things ( for 
which the diuills fet themfelues out ro be adored , by e thoufand feuerall crickes 
of hurefull deceite!)or that there were no fuch things done at all, but onely,cthofe 
malicious and futtle diuills doe caufethetn to bee faigned of the gods ; tothe 
end thae there might bee fufficient authoritie , deriued as it were te headen 
to earth , for men to commitall filthinefle by. Therefore the Greeécas , feeing 
that they had fuch gods as thefe to ferue, thoughc it not fic to take awav any li- 
berty from che Poets in vfing thefe ftage-mockes and flames: * nde isthey 
did either for feare leaft their gods fhould bee prouoked to anger againft them, 
in cafe they went aboutto make themfeiues into mote honeft moulds then they 
swere , and fo feemeto preferre themfelues before thems or ets for defire robee 
madeliketheir gods , euen inthefe greateft enormities, And from this imagi- 
ned conuenience came it, that they hold the very (4) ators of fuch plaies , to bee 
worthy of honours in their Cities . For in the fame buoke of the Commcn-wealths 
(b) A:(chines , of —Athens,an (c) eloquent man,hauing beene an Aor of Tra- 
gedies in his youth, is fayd to haue borne office in the Common-wealth. And 
ri ftodemus (d) another actor of Tragedies was fent by the Athexiens vpon an 
Embaflage to Philip ,about efpeciall and weighty affaires of warre and peace. 
For they held it an vnmete thing ( feeing they faw their gods approue of thofe 
actions,and artes of playing, )ro repute thofe worthy ofany note of infamy, thae 
were but the actors of them. | 


L. VIVES: 


Tr very (4) ators] eAemilus Probus peaking of the Greckifh fafhions faith. Jn thofe cos 

tries st was no difgrace for any man to come upon the fiage,and fet bimfelfe as a fpettacle tothe 
people: which wee hold for partly infamous , and partly bale and unworthy of an boneft man, (b) 
eA chines) An crator of eSthens,enemieto Demoffbenes hee acted Tragedies vpon the ftage; 
A:id therefore Demofthenes in his Oration dé Corona calles him wifunoy 2: a:s2d7, An apifh trages Alchines, 
dian,or atragicall ape, Quintiliun faith hee was Hypocrita , that is Hiffrio,a ftaye-plaier. 
Plutarche ( in 10, ‘Rhetoribus ) faith hee was an Actor of Tragedies : So faith 
Philoftratus alfo in his booke De fophiffss and that, he did not leaue his country through con- 
ftraint,or banifhment,but beeing iudged to bee ouerco-:ne in a contention by {‘tefiphon, lice 
went away vnto Alexander, who as then was Emperor of Afa : but hea: ing that hee was dead 
before he came at him,hee bent his ccurfe for Khodes, and liking the fweet aptnefle vnto ftudy 
that that foile afforded, hee fettled himfelfe there. Aefchines himfelfe in an Fpiftle hee wrote 
to the Ashenians, feemes to affirme, that hee had giuen ouer his ftage-playing before hee bore 

any place in the Commor-wealth, (¢) am eloquent mat | That hee was moft eloquent,is moft 
plaine:as alfo that his voice was {weete , and full’: and fome there are that afigne bim next" 
dignity wnto Demofthenes : nature gaue him more worth then induftry : Some fay hce was 
Scholler ynto no man : but of a fudden froma fcribe hee became an oratour, and chat his firft 
oration was againft Philip of (Macedon ; and hereby hee got fuch faucr and credite amongft 
the people, chat ney fent him Embaffadour to the fame King .. Ochers afigne him Plato , and 
Tfecrates for his Mailters, and fome Leodamas : This Rhodian Rhetorike } was a certaine ineane, 
berweene the e4fian and the Athenian. Aefchines inuented and taught it in his fchoole at 
Rhodes after his retirement thether. (4) Ariftodemus azother actor] This man as Demofthenes , 9 
writeth, went Embaffadour to King Philippe with Demofthenes himfelfe,and Ae{chines. This tale C= 
18 hee, who, when Demofthenes asked him what fee hee had for pleading , anfwered, 
keri 1 but (quoth Demajthenes) I had mere for belding of my tongue « Critolaus repor- 


Fiat 


~~ 


yn ee ee ey en ee ee see 
90 | SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuap. 11. 


That the Grecians admitted their vlaiers to beare offece in their Commonwealths, 


leaft they [bould feeme untuft in defpifing fuch men as were the pacifiers 
‘of their Gods, Car. 11. : 


Gi Gaien was the Grecéans practife : abfurd inough howfocuer , but yet moft ficly 
applied vnto the nature of their gods: («) they durft not exempt the liues of 
their cittizens from the lathes of poeticall peanes and plaiers tongues, becaufe 
they faw their gods delighted at the traducing of them{elues : and they thought 
{urely,that thofe men that aed fuch things vpon the ftage , as pleafed the gods, 
ought noc to be difliked at any hand by them that were but feruats to thofe gods: 
Nay not onely , thar, but chat chey ought to bee abfolutely and highly honored 
by cheir fellow Cittizens : for what reafon could they finde , for the honoring of 
the Priefts tliat offered the facrifices which the gods accepted well of ,and yet 
-allowetheaGors to bee difgracefully thought of, who had learne their profeffion 
by the fpeciall appointment of the felte fame gods, that exa& thefe celebrations 
of them, and are difpleafed if they beenot follemnized > Efpecially {ceing thar 
(6) Labeo, (who they fay was moft exact in thefe matters )diftinguifheth the good 
{pirits fromthe baddeby this diuerfity of their worfhippes , that \c) the badde ~ 
ones arc delighted with S/eughters, andtragicallinnocattons andthe good with 
' mirthfullreue'ls, and /portfull honors, {uch as Playes ( quoth he)banquets , and (A) 
renelling on beddesare3of which hereafter({o God bee pleafed wee will difcourfe 
moreat large. Bucto our prefent purpofe: whether it bee fo chat all kindes of 
honours bee giuen vnto all the gods mixt and confufed,as vnto onely good ones: 
(for it is not fit to fay there are any euill gods , although indeede they are all e- 
Alvncean ill becing all vncleane fpirits ) or thac according as Lebeo faith, there muftbeea 
ee tis difcretion vied, and that thefe muft haue fuch and fuch particular rites of obfer- . 
ulls,  wances alt ened, and thofe other , others; howfoguer, the Greekes did moft con- 
ueniently to hold both Priefts and Plaiers worthy of honorable dignities , the 
Priefts for offcing of their facrifices,and the Péasers for ating of their enterludese 
leaft aed fhould bee guilty of offring iniury either to all their gods, if 
they all loue plaies, or ( which is worfe) to thofe whom they account as the good 
ones,if they onely affe& them. ' a 


= L. VIVES. 


Ther (2) dserfi not exempt] Sifitheus prefenting a Commedy wherein he f{eoffed at Cleanthes 
the Stoicke, whereas others were offended ar it, they fay the Philofopher himfelfe replied 
thar it werea fhame for aman to fret at fuch things,feeing that Hercules ,and Diony/ixs being 
bed gods, are dayly mocked thus, and yet are not difpleafed.(6) Labeo] There were three Labeo'ss . 
TheLabets. 311 of great skill in the ciuill law : But the moft learned of themall was Antiftius Labeo who 
liuedin Anugeftes his time :he was {chollerto Trebativs Teffa and was cunning not epe'y in 
the law, but in all antiquity and knowledge,being(as Gediews reports ) an exaéthiftorian. But 
Angufixs did not much affeét him by reafon ofhis great freedome of {peech , and largeneffe 
of wic: This opinion of his hee feemes to deriue from Platonifme , and Stoici{me, though with 
fome alteration, Forthe ‘Platonsfts held that all the gods were good : but that amonaft the 
Demones and Heroes fome were good and fome were badde. Perphiry , in his booke of facri- 
feces faith,that a true worfhipper muft neuer facrifice any liuing creature vnto the gods , but 
onely vnto thofe Demones, And the fame author in his booke De via intelligsB liam , C&- 
plaines mote fully which are good Demones,and which are cuill , But of chis,in another place. 
: (¢) the bad omes| The worfe that thefe gods are,and the more infernal! , the fadder kind of in- 
Sad factie ocations doe they defireto be vfed to them: fo doe the Hell-gods; Pluto, Proferpine,and o» 
thers : Lucane brings in Erschthe inuocating the infernall Deities thus: 


Sives 


Lina. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 71 


| wa Si ups fates ore zefando, it wes Ifeuer I inmok’d | ; 
Pollutéque voco: finunquams bee carmina fibrit, {| Invwell black'e poke 21 ere my charmes lacks pvils 
bumanis itiuna cand’: fipettora plena if _cfmangling humane brefts sif I hane {pile 


Bloud in tuch plenty : breught your quarters watht, 
in their ovwne braynes 3 it cre the membérs gathe, 
Tferu'd you in,were to reuiuc.-.—< 


Sepe dec't,c> Laut caléde profcéts cerebyes 
fiquis,qui veftris caput extdque lancibne infant 
Jw 0fust, ViCEUTUS Cratmow : 


d. reselling upon beds | Hereofin the third booke. 


That theRomaines in abridging that leberty (with the Poets would hauevfed upon 
men, ) andin allowsng them to 7 st upon their gods , did herein {bew, 
that they prizedthemfelues aboue their gods, | 
- F Cap. 12% 
Ve the Rémaines ( as Sczpio glorieth in thatbooke of the comsmon we.sith) would 
‘by no meanes haue the goodnames and manners of their cittizens liable to 
the quippes and cenfures ofthe Poets , but infli@ed a capitall punifhment vpon 
‘all fuchas durtt offend in that kind:which indeed ( in refpe@ of themfelues ) was 
honcftly and well inftituted, but in refpe& of their gods moft proudly and irre: 
ligioufly , for though they knew that their gods were not onely pacient, bue 
even well pleafed at che reprefenting of their reproaches and exorbitances, yet 
would they hold them-felues more vriworthy to fuffer fuch iniuries then theit 
gods , thrufting fuch things into their {qllemnities, as they auoyded from them. 
iclues by all rigor of lawes, Yea Scépio3 doft thou commend the reftraincof this 
poeticall liberty in taxing your perfons , when thou feeft ic hath beene ever free 
zo callumniate your gods ? Doft chou valuethe (4) Coart alone fo much more 
then theCapitoll , then all Rome,nay then all heaven, that thé Poets mutt be cur- 
bed by anexpreffe law, from flowting at the Citizens , and yet without all con- 
troll of Senator,Cenfor,Prince,or Prieft, haue free leaue to throw what {lander 
they pleafe vpon the gods? what? was it fovnfcemely for Pleatus , or Nawiyg tO 
traduce P.or Cucins Scipio,or for Cecilius to ieaft vpon C1. CatoPand was it feeme- 
ly for (b) your Terence to animatea youth to vncleannefle,by the example of the 


deed of high and mighty Jupéter. | 

L. VIVES: | 

Y Osr(a) Court} The Court, was the place where the fenate fat : here it is vfed for the Sena eurie what; 

. 4 tors ithe Capitol , forthe gods themfelues , (5) your Terence | for indeed he was very Terence, 
familiar with Sespioand Leliws , and many thinke chat they helped him in writing of his com» 

inedies,‘which he himfelfe glattceth at in his prologue to his eAdelphy, emminus thinkes he 

meanes of Scipie, (in that Oration which he made for himfelfe.) Qsintilian libj10,Inftitus. OF 

Lelins , Cornelius Nepos maketh mention , and T#iy alfo in one of his epiftles ynto Atticus: 

but from other mens reports. | | | 


1 


That the Romaineés might haue obferued their gods unworthyne ie, by their — | 
| ae of fuch obfcene folemnities. | | 
Cuar.1 3° | | 
ii might be, Scipio (were he alive againe)would anfwer mée thus; Howeanwe 
pofiibly fet any penalty vponjfuch things as our gods them-felues do make 
- “ts + oo faced 


t. 7 4 


2 SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuar.ry. - 


facred, by their owne expreffe induction of thofe playes into our cuftomes, and 
by annexing them to the celebration of their facrifices and honors,wherein fuch 
things are euer to be acted and celebrated ? But why then ( fay lagaine) doenot | 
oudifcerne them by this impurity to be no true gods,nor worthy ofany diuine 
sas at all: for if it bee alecogether vnmeete for you to honor fuch men as 
loue to fee and fet forth Playes that are ftuffed with the reproche of the Romaines, 
how then can you iudge them to bee gods , how then can you but hold them for 
vncleane {pirits,chat through defire to deceiue others, require itas part of their 
greateft honors to be caft in the ceeth with their owne filthinefles? Indeed the Roe - 
maines,though they were locke in thofe chaines of hurtfull fuperftition, and fer- 
ued fuch gods as they faw required fuch difhoneft {pectacles at their hands, yee 
had they fuch a care of their owne honeftie and dignitie, that they would neuer 
voutchfafe the actors of fuch vile things,any honor in their common. wealth, as 
the Gregkes did: but according to Scspio his words in Cécero : Seeing that (a) they 
held the art of fage-playing as bafe and unmantly, therefore they did not onely detaine 
all the honours of the Cittie from fuch kinde of men , but appointed the (b) Cenfors in 
therr views,to remooue them from being part of any tribe, and would net voutchfafe 
them to be counted as members of the Cittse. A worthy decree,and well befeeming 
the Romaine wifdome ; yet this wifdome wouldI haue toimitate and follow it 
felfe: Rightly hath the councell of the cittie in this well defiring and deferuing 
commendations,(/{hewing it felfeto be in this, (¢) truly Romazne, Jappointed that 
whofoeuer will choofe of a Cittizen of Rome to become a Player, he fhouldnot 
onely line fecluded from all honors, bug by the Cez/ors cenfure fhould bee made 
veterly vncapable of lining as amember of his proper tribe. But now tell mee 
but chis,why the. P/eyers fhould be branded with inhability to beare honors , and 
yet the Playes they acte, infertedinto the celebration of the gods honors? The 
Romaine (a) valour flourithed along time,vnacquainted with thefe theater-tricks: 
{uppofe then that mens vaine affections gauethemtheir firft indu@ion, and that 
they crept in by the errours of mans decayed members, doth it hencefollow that 
thegods muft take delight in them, or defire them ? if fo, why chen is the Player 
debafed,by whom the god is pleafed 2 and witlt what face can you fcandalize the 
actors and inftruments of fuch ftage-guilt, and yet adore the exacters and com- 
manders of thefe actions >? This now is the controuerfie betweene the Greekes 
andthe Romaines. The Greekes thinke thatthey haue good reafon to honor thefe 
Players, feeing chat they muft honour them that require thefe playes: the Ro- 
maines on the other fide, are {o farre from gracing them, that they will notallow 
them place ina (¢) Plebeyan tribe, much leffe in the court or Senate , but holds 
them difgracefull to all callings: Now inthis difputation, this onely argument 
giues the _ of all the controuerfie. ( f) The Greekes propound ; If fuch 
gods be to be worfhipped,then fuch actors are alfo to be held as honorable: The 
Romatnes aflume: But fuch ators are.no way to bee held as honorable : The 
Chriftians conclude, Therefore fuch gods areno way to be worfhipped. — 


L. VIVES. 
Theinfs S\ Eing that (4 ) they held the arte, | It muft of force be granted that the Players werethe | 
of sae moft pernicious men of conditions that could be, and the vileftin their villanies : becaufe 


players, they could not be allowed for Cittizens of that Cittie , which harboured fo many thoufands 
of wicked and vngratious fellowes,all as Cittizens, That Players were excluded from being | 

Decimus of any tribe’, and exempt from paying any taxe, Linie and Valerius doe both teftifie : wnleffe 

Eaberiws. aychotitie made them fuch; for that {eemes as aconftraint : as befell, co Decuwas Laberins, 

: ae oe 7 se i 


Lis.2. © OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 73 
whom Aero requefted ta ake a Adimike of his vpon the ftage : and yet hee neverthelefle was The Artel« 
after that,a gentleman of Rome. For hee that is forced to offend the law, is held not to offend lan come. 
it. But from this decree of plaicrs exclufion , the Actors of the Comedies called ¢Attelane =" 
were exempted , for their comedies were more graue , and their iefls came nearer tothe old theCen- 
Italian forme of difcipline: Liv: and Vader. And therefore they vfed no V:/2rs on the ftage, (ors views of 
asthe reft did. Feffus (6) The {enfors in their view] Which went ouer the eftate and conditi= the city. 
ons of euery man, eucry fifth yeare. (¢) trwe/y Romane] The text is Germane Romanum , The 
Latines v{e Germaneésfor truely natiuely expreffly, and naturally: So doth (itero (to fhut vp all 
examples in one)in his fifth oration againtt Verres: es then quoth he) I {aid much and this a= 

« mong fi the rest to fhew plainely the great difference Letweene him, and that fame Numidicum Ve- 
rum & Germanumzthat true and expreffly Numidian, Metellus : So fay we Germane Romanum, The otders 
truely Romane, Remancis here vied by Auguftine for Generons,and honeftly bent: (4) the Ro- Fn 
mane valor florsfhed a long time] Very neere foure hundred years. (e) Plebeyan} There were : 

_ three orders of Roman Citizens : the Senatorians,the Patricians,and the Plebeyans;which were 
the loweft : of thefe hereafter. He doth not fay, Plebeyan tribe; as though there were any fucti 
diftin& one, but becaufe there were Plebeyans , men of the bafe and common fort , in euery 
tribe. ( f) the Greckes prepond thus: The Logicians ,and the Rhetoricians following themy oy. arte 
diuide a perfe&t argument ( called by the Greekes Syllogifnsus,by the Latines, Ratocinatio)in- of, Syllos 
to chree parts : the ‘firft that includes and declares the f{umme of the argument : this is called gifme, 
the propo/ition, or expofition, the fecond which affurning from the propofition,felects an efpe- 
ciall thing which wee are to know more fully: and this is called the Affumption: The third, 
fhuts vp the argument, and is called the Conc/u/ion. How thefe are placed in difcourfe,it mak- 
eth no matter : the conclufion is fornetimes before,and the aflumption often-times the fecond, 
or the laft[ And here our falfe Logicians fpoile all ; out of their ignorance of all good artes:and Paris copy 
thinke that change of place doth alterthe nature of things - lying as faft as chey can in- defecuue, . 
uent sand feeming: in the fchooles more thea men, in ciuill conuerfation abroade arc leffe 
then children. ] , 


That Plato, who would not allow Poets te dwell si a well zonerned Czty [bewed that his 
fole worth was better then thofe gods , that defsre to be honoured with flage- 
lates. Cwar, 14. | ; 
"A Gaine,weaske another queftion : why the Poets that make thofe Comediés, 
(and being prohibited by a law of the twelue tables to defame the Citizens, 
etdoe difhonor the gods with fuchfoule imputations , ) are not reputed as dif- 
honett and difgracefull asthe plaiers 2 what reafon can bee produced , why the 
(4) ators of {uch poeticall figments, being fo ignominious to the gods,fhould be 
deputed infamous, and yet the authors be voutchf{afed honours ? Is not (6) Plsto 
more praife-worthy then you all , who difputing of the true perféGion ofa eitry 
would haue Poets banifhed from that fociéty ,as enemies to the cities full per- 
feGtion ? hee had both a greefe to fee his gods fo iniured , anda care to keepe out 
thefe fictions whereby the cittizens mindes might bee abufed: Now makebuta — - 
comparifon of his (c)»humanity in expelling of Poets from hiscity,leaftthey 
fhould delude it with the gods diuinity that defired fuch:Plaies and Reuellsin — 
their henourssby which the city might be deluded - He,though he did not (@) in- 
duce or perfwade them co it,yet aduifedand counfelled the light and luxurious 
Greekes in his difputation,to reftraine the writing of {uch things:But thefe gods, 
by command, and conftraint , euen forced the modeft and ftaied Romanesto pre- 
fent them with fuchthings : nay not only co prefent them, but cuen to dedicate 
and confecrate them in all follemnity vnto their honors. Now to which of thefe 
may the citty wich moft honefty afcribe diuine worfhip ? whether to Plato that 
would forbid thefe filthy obf{cznities , or tothefe diuils that exule in deluding of 
thofe men whom Pésto could not per{wade to truth? This man did (e) Labeo think | 
meet to be reckned amongft the Dem#-gods,ashe did Hercules alfo,8& Romulus: 8 py roheta 
he prefers the Demi-gods before the Heroés,but notwith{tanding ( {makes se ‘aDemigod, 
| : nee : | " Oo 


= 


i 


—2 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. — Cuar.tg. 


- ef them both: But howfocuer,I hold this man whom he calls a Dersi-god,wiorthy | 


to be preferred not only before the Heroés, but euen before all their other gods 
themfelues: And in this the Romaine lawes doe come fome-what nere his#i{fpu- 


tations: for where ashe condemnesall allowance of Poets,they depriue them of 
-_, their liberty to raile at any man. He (‘¢) excludeth Poets from dwelling in his ci- 


tie: they depriue the actors of poeticall fables from the priuiledges of citizens: 
and it may be(if they durft do ought againft gods that require fuch ftage-games } 
they would thruft them forth for alrogither. Wherefore the Romanes can nei- 
ther receiue nor expe& any morall inftruGtions, either for correGing of fales , or 


. increafing verues,from thofe gods, whom their owne lawés already doe fubuert 


and conuince. The gods require plaies for increafe of their honors : the Romans 
exclude plaiers from pertaking of theirs : the gods require their owne falts to be 
celebrated by poets inuentions : the Romaines reftraine the Poets loofeneffe fré 
gouching any of the Romaines imperfections. But Plasto, that Demi-god, heboth 
refifts this impure affection of the gods, and fhewes what ought to bee perfected 
by the (4) towardlinefle of the Romaines : denying Poetsall place in a well or- 
dered Common-welth, howfoeuer, whether they prefented the figments of their 
owne lufts and fancies, or related ought els as the guilt of the gods,& therfore of 
jmitable ex4ples:But we Chriftians make P/sto neither whole God nor Demigod: 
nor do we vouchfafe to compare him with any of Gods Angels, or his Prophets, 
not with any of Chrifts Apoftles or his Martirs,no not a, any Chriftian man, 


and why we will not,by Gods help,in the due place we will declare. Butnotwith- . 


ftanding,feeing they wil needs haue him a Demi-god,we thinke him worthy to be 
referred,(if not before Remulus or Hercules though there was neuer(s) hiftorian, 
nor (k) Poet (J) affirmed, or (m) fained , (#) chat he euer killed his brother, (0) or 
committed any other mifchiuous aG,yet at leaft)before (p) Priapus or any(g) Cy- 
nocephalus, or laftly any (7) Febris,all which the Romaines either had as (/) Gods. 
fr6 ftrangers, or fet them vp as their (r) owne in peculiar. How then could fuch 
gods as thefe by any counfel they could giue, preuent or cure fuch great corrup- 
tion of mindes and maner/whether imminent, or already infufed )feeing they re- 
rded nothing els but to diffufe and augment this contagion of wickednes,& to 
hauce it inftilled into the peoples notices from the {tage, as their own acts,or acts 
which they approue,to the end, y mans luft might runithe courfe of wickednefle 
‘freely,after the gods ex4ples ? Tudly exclaimeth all in vainevpon it(#)who being 
to {peake of Poets,when he came to them. faith: The clamor and approbation of the 


—— people,when it is ioyned with thefe poetical filtions, as the teftimony of fome great and 


AGoér, Au. 
thor, Plaier 


What Pow 


ets Plato 


Humanity, 
pudapree- 
vit Tea, 


learned Maifter,oh what darkneffe doth it involue a man in?what fears 4 snficts what 


bafis it enflames? e 


eee L. VIVES. 

[Te 4 )aétors| There are actots,ab agendo,of acting: plaiers vpon the ftage,& eAuthores,the 
* Authors,the Poets that write thefe fables:though the name of Asthor 1s taken many waieés; 
but this is aGrammer queftion.(6 )/s nor Plato| Plato(de rep./ib.2.) expels al Poets out of a well 
ordered citty,for the wickednes which they fing of the gods:8c(in the tenth booke of the fame 
worke)Socrates hauing {poken much againft them,concludeth al in this,y he holds that poetry 
only fit to be cxcluded,which giues life to vamanly affections: & that to be allowed,'which is 
manly ,& honeft:So ¥ he condemnes not all poetry, for fometimes he calls Poets,a dinine kinde 
of men,namely when they fing himmes to the Deities:more-ouer hee faith that if the Poets doe 
fing of any good man,though he be pore,he is happy:& againe that an euil manthough he bee 
ritch their fongs wil make him miferable:if they exceed not in loofeneffe,nor yeeld to rancour 
nor confent vnto flattery,nor in their fongs fowe feeds of corruption, {uch poets are profitable 


4 


‘members in Plato's commonwealth (c) His bumanity \Humanity is not taken here for any natural 


gentlenefic or courtelic of ¥ minde,or mans good wil,called in Grecke enarYgexis, not for any 
| co ge Cie arg ae Sera GO Vina knowledge 


Tinses OF THE CITIE OF GOD. ig 


. -— - 


knowledge of § liberal arts which the Greekes call ruiz, but for that nature,by which wee art 
men:as goodneffe is that by W we are good:the fence following proues it,for it is compared ynto 
divinity & in this fignification it is alfo vfed elfewere as in Tully(de orat lib.1.) (d) Though hee a 
did not induce \maruaile much that our Phslofophers 8¢ Dinines could not out of this place learn 5¥aderes 
the difference of Suadeo,& Per{uadeo , But they(which is very nerea miracle)vnderfiand latine Per faadere. 
without knowing the Jatine tongue,and are very perfect Grecians,and can read neuet 4 word of 

Greekesindeed in: Greek , mi9e is both fuzdere;to aduite or counfel,and per fadere to perfwade 

or induce. (¢) This man did Labeo| Here wil I deliuer the orders of the gods;firft out of Vars + - ~ 


‘rq, and next out of other bookes of the ‘Platonifts, The Romeins call fome of their’ goddes 


Stanmi, the highett : others Medioxumi middle-moft : others Heroes infimi , or earthi 

ones :#2¢, which the ancients ( as { <pel/a affirmeth) called Earth, The Medioxzmi werefuch Medivxutii, 
as weretaken vppe to heauen by their deferts :as Twili faith:(in his booke De legibus: gthat i Hcroes, 
Sems-gods,or as it were a kind of Afungrels begot of mortallity and immortallity ; fuch weré 
Rowsulus,Hercules,./£{tulapins,Caftor and Pollux,with others. The Heroes were born of mortal 

parents on both fides,but by their merits got amore aduariced ftate in defteny then the refidue 

of the vulgar. Some to adde vnto thefe another kinde , called Semones:but of them elie-where. 

(f) Makes Deities of them beth] Such as herein this world liued wel and holily,the old Ro- 

mains did ftil pucinto the number of the gods when they were dead , and affigned them feaftes Neftias 


ealied Necya. Cicero de legibus lib, 2.(g) He excludeth Poets | Inthe old copy of Bruges, and 


(Coleigne the verbe repellit,is left out and for Poetitarum bere,istaltum in them. (b) Fromarde . 

neffe of | By their begun vertuc , their proofe and demonftration of goodneffz, ihoug}: fomc- 

times towardlyneffe ftands for full vertye it felfe : but here it is as] faid , and is declaredby Toward 
that which goes before; What was to be performed, (i) Hifforian, | As there arc that do of Ro- lynefle, 
mulus, (k.) Poet. | As do of Hercules. (1) Affirmed, | The Hiftorian “did not (a) Feed 

The Poet didnot. (7) That be ener killed his brother | Which Romulus did,in killing of Remus, 

(e) Orcommitted any other mifchieuous act , as is true of Hercules, who defiled the whole 

world with whoredomes,rapines,robberies and flaughters : yet they thought y the world was 

purged of fuch guilts by him, (p) Before Briapus 7) Drodorws faith that Priapus was made a god Priapws 
vppon this occafion : Ofris King of Egipt beeing murthéred by the wicked villeny 

of his brother Tipbor , the con{pirators cutte all his body .in peeces , and euery one tooke 

a flrare,and becaufe no maa would take thepriuie members , they threw them into-the Riuer 

Nilus, Afterwards //s the wife of Ofris hauing ouercome Tiphon,the found all the parts of hir 
husbands body, but the fore-named , which being loft, fhee confecrated them , and inftituted 

their diuine worfhip with many ceremonies, and fuch as were admitted to be Priefts in Agepr, 

offered their firft facrifices vnto this:calling it Prizpas by an vnknowne name, which to couer , 

the difhonelty of the thing ment,the honeft ancients vied: The Greeks call this God Phallus Phallus,few 


and Ihtypballus, Of this thefe verfes are extant in Collumella: lib. 11. . 7 chyphallnd, 
Srcemarene Sed truncm forte dolatum ——— That peece ofancient tree, 
Arboris antique nun cn Vencrare \typhally, | Adore,asltyphallusDeitic, _ 
Terviblis membri ,medioqui femper tn borie, 1 hat ougly thing :which in the garden ftands _ 
Inguinibus puero,predont falce minetyr. Gamft boues & theeues, wih armed groine and honds, 


for he was the Keeper of gardens: Diodorus faith he was alto called Tiphon, and tnakeshimche | 

fon of Uenus and tego aera (as Sernius and Walerius Flaccus {ay )at Lamp{acsum,a citty 

in Hellefpont and that therefore was named Lampfafenus,and Helle/ponttacus. Virgill Georgic. 

Et cxflos furum atG, anium,cum falce faligna - . | ‘And Priap us of Hellefpont with his hooke, =. * 
Hellefpontiacs foruit zutela Priapi, Of Wilowy,wel to birds andthceues will looke, — 

And in the Lafus is Priapnm , Priapus {peaketh thus, 


ow mee Patria muléfaber , et olim— Tle loofe my country:Lamp/acws ewen hee 7 


. 


Ile taus cinis Lamplace,Galius c70, | That was borne thine,now Cjbe!sPrieft willbee, 


Some fay hee was botne in the citty Priapus, not farre from Lamp(acusneare ynto the vine- 
eards. Strabo thinks his deification was firft from Hellefpont. Butanew God he is, for Hefad. Cynacephas 
ho fachin his time:Fa/gentins makes him one of § Semones, & faith he isnat yet taken vp in, 


into heauen,his deferts ar fo flender. (7) Cnecephalas y is indeed, Dogs-head.Diedorns(lib.4.) 


ar 


76 


we wy - eeeey > - 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. C wari. 


Febrisa 


faith that the Cyzocephadi were a people of humane fhape and voyce,but headed like Dogges: 
a Barbarousand cruel! kind of creatures ,and many of them liued in the Ilands of Nélxs, 
Ojsris had a Sonne called Anwbis,who following his father in his trauells , bore the Dogge for 
his artnes ¢ and hence it came that he was worfhipped in Egype in the fhape of this creature, 
and called(by Virgil nead,8) Latrator,the barker,as alfo becaufe he was held the keeper of 
the bodies of Oftris and fis, Some thiake that this was AZercarius, and called thus for his 
quicke capacity and apprehention. (7) Febris | Tite Remsaines erected many altars vnto Febris: 
Cécere maketh mention of one ancient one that ftood in the mount Palassne(de legib Lib, 2, J 
and ofthe fame Valerius alfo (i eAntign.inftitut.) and Plage lib.2. do {peake : as alfo of anor 
ther that was placed in the Court of AZzrins hismonuments,and a third at the ypper end of the 
long fireet ({) Gods from ftrangers| Lucan {peaketh to Egypt. i 


| Nosin temple tnam Romana accepimus Ifim, | Wein Romes temples now thine I fis place. 


femicane(que Dees & fifira mouentialactum, thy Halfe-dog Gods,and hornes that woes do raife, 


(8) There owne in peculiar as Ecbris\(u)who being to fpeake of Poets\in fome bookes,the words of 
Telly begins at Acceffiffet,and not at { lamor. The whole fertence I rake it is out of the booke 


_ ofhis common-wealth,in the third of his Tufculane queftions , {peaking of the caufes which 


TheFlae 
CER 


tthe feeds of vertue,which are naturally fowne within vs ; he faith : Hereunto alfo may 
Poets be added,whe pretending a great deale of dotlrine and wif{dome, are learndgead, heard , aud 
borne away ix the mind of enery man.But when that great waifter,the multitude is added alfeand 
the whole company (warming on enery fide unto vices, then chiefely are we infetted with depra- 
ned opinion, pip a from our very expreffe nature. Like vpto this allo he hath in his fecond 
and fourth booke, and that at large : which we but touch at , to avoyd the ouer-charging of 
the reader,or the booke, With redioufnes. a | 


LY 


That flestery and not reafon created ome of the Romaine Gods. 
+ Cwap,ty. | | 


B Ve what other. reafon in the world ( befides flattery ) haue they to make 
*/ choiceof thefe fo falfe and fained gods ? Not vourfafinge P/asfo any licele 
temple , whome notwithftanding they will haue to be a dems-god (and one who 
tooke fuch paines in diffwading the corruption of manners through the («) de- 
prauation of opinions: and yet preferring Romulus before diuers of the gods, 
whom their moft fecret and exa& doCtrine doth but make(4)a femi-god, and not 
anentire deity;yet for him they appointed a(c) Flamine,(d)a kind of Priefthood fo 
farre aboue thereft as (e) cheir cre/ts did teftific chat they had onely (/) three 
of thofe F/amines for three of their chiefelt deities, the Dés/or Jouiall for Inpiters 
the Adertiaii for Mars; andthe Qsérinall,for Romulus : for ( ¢ )the loue of his citi- 


_ zens hauin§(as it were hoyfed him vp into heauen,he was then called (4).Qusré- 
. wut St. kept that name ever after :and fo by this you {ce Romu/ushere is preferred _ 


before Neptune 8 Plato Iupiters brother nay euen before Saturne, father of them 
all: fo chat to make him great,they giue him the fame Priefthood that Zepster was 
honored by,&likewife they giue one to Adars,his pretended father, it may bera- 
ther for his fake chen any other devotion. | | 


L. VIVES. a 
Biche (4) the deprauation of opinions \{ome read animi fome animus , fome leaues it out, 
bur the beft,is ansme(b) A femsgod|Let thems worfhip({aith Cicero in his de leg) (uch as bane 


Bin and are held gods and fuch as their meritts bane made celeftial and inftawled ix heaxen,as Her~ 


exles Liber Pater A [culapins,Cafter, Pollux, Onirinus(c) AF lanine | what] meaneto fpeake 
of the Flaming, thall bee our of Varro, Dienyjins, EFefine, Pixtarch, Gellins, and Seruins. 
| oo Amongft 


Linz. © OF THE CITIE OF GOD: | Tk 


Amonoft the orders of Priefts were Sothe of Numa Pompilins his inftitutioh , and called by 

the name of Flamines : their habit of their head was a hat, as the high Prieft had alfo : but yp- 

on the top of it,chey wore a tufte of white wollen thred: therefore were called Flamines qua 

jf Pilamunes hairy,or tufted crownes : fome deriue it of Pé/exs,a hat,but that cannot be, forfo 

had the high Priefts: Some agaiue fay their name came of Filwm , a thred,becaufe in the heate 
of Summer when it was to hot to weare their hats,chey wrapped their heads about with thred 

oflinnen cloth - forto yo bare headed-abroade,their religion forbad them - but vpon feaft 

daies they were bound to weare'theit hats in the ceremonies, Appian of Alexandria faththat ~ | 

the Jouiall Flamine wore his hat and vaile both vpon feaft and no feaft daies. Orhers fay that yy, ouiall 

they were called Flavsines a Flemineo , which was a kind of yellow head-tire , but more pro- : 

per to women then them, ‘Thefe kind of Priefts Numa firft ordained , and that three of them: * 

one for /upster,called.the Diail of Dios, Ione or Loniall:one to Mars, the Martial; andoneto '- 

Quirinus, the Qpirinall, Other gods might haue no Flamines , nor might one of thafe Gods © 

haue more then one , but in proceffe of time the number increafed , and became fifteene : be- 

fides thofe which flattery confecrated to the dead Cafars,as one to C. ( efar,by Antonyes law, 

(which Cicero reproueth(Péillippic 2. one to Anguftus,and fo to diuers others. But thofe that 

Noma made were the principal alwaics , and the principall of them was Jones Flamin the Di- 

alizhe onely of all the reft went in a white Hat, and was held the moft reuerend : His ceremo» 

nies and Jawes are recounted bath by Plutarch in his Preblemes and alfo by Gellins (Uib.16.)0 

out of Fabius Piitor, Maffurins Sabinus,Varro,and others. The lowit in degree of all the Fiz- Poimona 

ssines,was the !’omonall Flamine, becaule Pomona, the goddefle of Apples , was of the leaftef- Goddefe, 

teeme, Others there were of meane dignity, as M#lcanes, Furidas, Father Falacers , The Géde 

deffes that pretetted mount Palatine , and mother Floras. (a) which hind of Priefthood eer a | 

the Flamines were of yreat authority yet were all obedient vnto the chiefe Prieft: for fo the. 

people commanded it fhould be , when in the fecond warre of Affrike : L. Mettellus , being 

chicte Prieft with-held the conful Po/thsemus being Aars his Flamine, and would noc let him 

leaue his order , nor his facrifices - and likewife in the firft warreof e4fa,P. Licinins, high 

Prieft,ftaid O. Fabsus Piftor then Pretor and Oxirmall Flamine from going into Sardivia(e) | 

~ as therr crefts they wore|_Apex,is any thing that is added to the toppe,ot higheft part of a things The ci : 

here ir is that which the F/awsine bore vpon his head,his cap,or histufte of woll, Lacant. or creft pes 


Et tollens apicem generofo vertice Flament © The Flaminewith his cap,ahdlofty créftt 


Salpittes loft his Priefthood becaufe his creft fell of whilft he was facrificing , faith Valerius, 
ib-t .) The Komaines gaue not this creft but vnto cheir greateft men inteligion :4s riow we | 
giue Miters , they called it pex( faith Sersinsvpon the eight -4wtad Jab apendo whichis, -- ' 
tO ouercome : and hence comes eAprus , & Apiculum filum , that was the fmall tufted thred ee: 
which the Flamives folded their (reffs in 1 Fabins {peaketh of thefe Crefts and Virgil: : 
Hac exultantes Saliovnudofque Lapertos, Here Saliidanc’d naked Lupercithere, 5 
lanigcrofque api tes~--= | andthere thetuftedcrownes, Acnead.8, 
Cf) Oxely three of rhofe their chiefe and true Flamsines,inheritours of the auncient Fletsinfhippe 
'g) the lone of bis cettizets | Romulus being dead , the people began to fufpe& chat the Senate Se ae 
d butchered him fecretly among {ft them-felues. So /ulins Proculns, appeafed the rage of the 4 God, 
multitude by affirming that hee faw Romulus afcending vp into heauen, Lisye ix his firft baoke; - 
Exnins brings in the people of Reme lamenting for Romulusinthefe words; = = 


ORowmule ;Romuleylic, — ee ORomalus,O Romulus,thewys, 
qxalemte patrie cuftedem Dy cenuerunt, | __ how they,thy countries gard,the gods begat, 

Ts prodnxifii nos intra lumiuis oras, ; Thou brought vs firft to light,O thou our father, 
O Pater,0 genitor patrié,O fanguine dis ortandc, thy countries father borne ofheauenly feed. 


b) called Quirinus |many of fuch mens names haue beene chaunged after theit deyfying,to .',.._ 
eoke cede venerable » hauing caft of their ftiles of mriosalite for fo was Lade( fo called ae 
when fhe was aliue)after her death and deification ftiled Nemefs :and Circe, Marica: and Jno, 
¢Matura; And eA:neas, Iupiter Indiges , Romulus was called Oxirinus to gratifie the: Sabsmesy 
In which refpect alfo the Romaines were called. Quirites of Cures a towne of the Sabimes, 
or elfeas Onsd faith. | ._ £4 am & hoe eo. 


B SAINT AVGVSTINE. C wars 16. 


Sine quod Hafts, Duiris prifcis eft diéta Sabinis, Or,for the Sabines, (peares Quarites cally 
 -Belbcuse tele po in Aftra de ust | His vreapons name made him celethall, 
Spue fue Regi nomen pofuere Duirites Orels theyfo enftil'c him herevpon rn 
-" $eu quia Romanis inaxerat ille Cures. becaufe be made chem, and the Cures, one, 
: . ’ we ey gp edamasae —_—-— ~—— 


That iftheRomaine gods had had any care of Iuftice, the Citiz [bould kaue had 
‘thetr formes of good gouernment from them, rather thento goeandbor- 
| vow it of other nations, Crap. 16. | 
"The Ae’ EF the Romaines could haue receiued any good inftructions of morality from 
thens law + their gods , they wouldieuer haue beene (4) beholding to the Athenians for 
rapt Solons.lawes,as they were, fomeyeares after Rome was built: which lawes not- 
yKome ~ .., 4. : , ‘ 
withitanding , they did not obferue as they receiued them , but endeauoured to 
better them and make them more exatsand though (6) Licurgus fained that hee 
gaue the Lecedemonians their lawes by § authorization of Apollo, yet the Romanes 
very wifely would not giue credence to him, (¢) & therfore gaueno admiffion to 
thefelawes . Indeed (d) Numa Pompitins , Romulus his fuceflor is faid to haue gi- 
ven them fome lawes: but (¢) al too infufficient for the gouernment ofa Cittie. 
.+-+ . He taughethem many points of their religion (f) but it is not reported that hee 
>” had thefe infticutions from the gods: Thofe corruptions therefore of minde, 
‘conuerfation , afd conditions , which were fo great, that the ( g) moft learned 
‘men durft affirme that chefe were the cankers by which all Common-weales pe- 
rifhed , though their walls ftood neuer fo firme; thofe did thefe gods neuer en- 
deauor-to with-hold from them that worfhipped them , but as wee haue proned 
_ before,did rather {triue to enlarge and augment then», with all their care and ful- 
_ Ieft diligence. | en eee 


L. VIVES. 0 


Beaaes ( a).tothe Athenians} In the 300. yeare after Romet building : when there had 
The lawes ~~ Deene many contentions betweene the ‘Patrisians & the Plebeyans, they fent three Ambaf- 
ofthe 13, fadours to Athens, to coppy out Solozs lawes, and to learne the palicy and ciuility of the reft 
¢ ofthe Greekes sthat the Romane eftate might bee conformed and fettled after the manner of 
the Grecians. ( barephanes was then gouernor of ef thens , it bering the 82. Olympiade. The 
Ambaffadots difpatched their affaires with all diligence, and returned the next yeare after, 
and then were the Decemsiri cle&ted to decree lawes, and thofe wrote the firft ren cables of 
the Romanes ciui'l lawe,and afterwards they addedtwo more,all which were approoued in the 
great Parliament called Comitia Centuriata . And thefe were their nobleft lawes , which were 
written in the twelue Tables.(Lixy 6.3. Diony{lib.10.8iothers alfo)(6 )Lycurgas] The lawes 
which Lycurgus gaue ( ashe faigned , by e4pollo’s oracle ) to the Lacedemonians , are very fa~ 
. Padus, The Greeke and Latine authors are full of this mans honours , and of the hard lawes 
Lycurgus which he gaue the Spartans There is a worke of Xenophons extant , cnely of thefe Lawes , and 
i many of them arerecorded in Plutarche , Incede not trouble the Reader in {fo plaine a matter, 
(c) therefore gaue no admifion| And alfo,becaufe Solons lawes were more accomodate and ap- 
phiable to ciuill education, and’manfuetude, then the rough feuete ones of Lrcurgus,as Plato 
and Ariftotle doe very well obferue, For his lawes aimed at ho other end but to make the 
Spartanes warriers, (d) Numa Pompilius He was borne at Cares in the country of the Sabi- 
nes,and was the beft man of his time inthe world. Ofthismanreade Lémy lib.1. Dionyfins, 
and Plwtarch,of his whole life, befides diuers others. (¢) all to infifficient | This is plaine, for 
they ferched lawes fré others, (f.) # és not reported \Yes,he fained that he conferred with e4- 
geriasbut fhe was rather a Nimph then a goddeffle, & befides, chis is known to bea fable(g rhe 
wsoft learned | Here 1 carnmot choofe but ad a very conceited faying out of Plastus his comedy 
called Perfa.Sagariftio the feruant askes a Virgin, how ftrong doft thou think this cowne is? If 
she town{men ( quoth fhee againe bee well mannered,I thinke itis very ftrong : if rreachery, 
ee ee — couctous- — 


ag A EEL OT PC POISE SEE AED ONE SEES IEA TCE TEER GEE TE PEE NTE IDET SF OCT EEL EEE HEN, 


Revie: OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 99 


= 


couetoufneffe and extortion, bee chafed our, arid then enuie, then ambition, then dettactiony ' 


__ then perjury,then flactery,then iniury,then and laftly, (which is hardeft of ail to get out ) villas 
‘pie: if chefe be-not all thruft forth,an hundred walls are all too weake to keepe out ruine, - 


Of the rape of the Sabine women,and diners other wicked facts, done in 
| — Romes moft ancient and honorable times: 
) |  * Cap. 17, | | : 
PEt: the gods would not giue the Romaines any lawes,becaufeas Salut (4) 
ZL faith: Mffice and honeftie preuacled as much with them by nature as by lawe :very 
good: ( 6.) out of this tuftice and honeftie came it (I thinke ) that the (¢) Sabsne 
- virgins were rauifhed. What iutter or honefter patt can be plaide, chen to force 
away other mens daughters with all violence poffible , rather then to receiue 
themat the hand of their parents? Burificwerevniuftly done of the Sabines to 
deny the Romaines their daughters,was it not farre more vniuftly done of chem to 
force themaway after chat deniall? There were more equitie fhowne in making 
warres vpon thofe that would not giue their daughters to beget alliance with 
their neighbours and countrimen,then with thofe chat did but require back their 
owne,\ hich were iniurioufly forced fromthem. Therefore Afzrs fhould rather 
hanc helped his warlike fonne, in reuenging the iniury of this reieed proferre 
of marriage.that fo he might have wonne the Virgin chat he defired, by forceof 
armes. For there might haue beene fome pretence of warlike lawe , for. the con- 
queror iuftly to beare away thofe whom the conquered had vaiuttly denied him 
before.Burhe,againtt all law of peace,violently forced them from {uch as denied 
him them,and then began an vniuft warre with their parents ,to whom hee had 
giuen foiuft a caufe of anger. (d) Herein indeed he had good and happy fucceffes 
Ardalbeit the (¢) Cérceajian playes were continued to preferue the memory of 
this fraudulent acte, yet neither the Cittie nor the Empire did approoue fuch a 
prefident : and the Romesnes were more willing to erre in making Romulus a deity 
after this deed of iniquitie,then to aliow by ary Jaw ot praGife,this faQ@ of his in 
forcing of womenihus,to ftand as an example fot othersto follow . Out of this 
iuftice and honefty likewife proceeded this,thac(¢) after Tarquin and his children Tarquine 
were expulfed Rome,(becaufe his fonne Sextushad ravifhed Lucre//e.) lunius Bru- peer 
tus being coniull , compeiled (4) L.Targquinius Collatine, husband to that Lusre/fe, offce,and 
his fellow officer a good man, and wholy guiltleffe ,to giue ouer his place, and putoutof 
abandon the Citrie, which vile deed of his , was done by the approbation ( or at = 
leaft omiffion)of the people, who made Collatine Conlul, afwellas Brutus bimielf. onus 
Out ofthis iuftice and honefty came this alfo,that (b) Marcus Camillus that mot exiled by 
dluftrious worthy of bis.cime,that with fuch eafe {udued the warlike Vesentes,the his coun- 
reateft foes ofthe Romaines and tooke their cheefe citty from them : aftér that irous ine 
they had held the Romazns in ten yeares war,and foiled their armies fo often, that graticude, 
Rome hir felfe kegan totremble, and fufpeGted hir owne fafety : that this man by 
the mallice of his backe- biting enemies , and the infupportable pride of the Tri- 
 bunes, being accufed of guilt, & pereeiuing the ciety (whichhe had preferued){o 
vngrateful,that he needs muft be condemned,was glad to betake him-felfe to wil- 
ling banifhment : and yet (4) in his abfence was fined at ten thoufand .4/fes (k) Be- 
ing fooneafter to be called home again to free his thankeleffe country the fécond 
time from the Gasles. Ie yrkes me to recapitulate the multitude of foule enormi- 
ties which chat citty hath giuen a& vnto: ()) The great ones feeking to bring the Seditions 
eople vnder their fubieéticn : the people againe on the other fide {corning to be beewixe the 
fubie& to them, and the ring-leaders on both fides aiming wholy rather at fupe- great men 
riority and conqueft , then cuer giuing roome toa thought ofiuftice or honefty. people, 
on | H4  LVIVESS 


im. _e@e me. 2-6 mm mie Mm | 


80. SAINT AVGVSTINE. . 9. Cuavra7. 


7 es L. VIVES. 


Lawe, Set? (a) faith }1n his warre of Catiline, fpeaking of the ancient Romaines, he faith thus: 
| The law ss a cinilleguity either eftablifhed in literalllawes,or inftilled into the manners by verball 
Good. in ffruttions. Good, is the fount,moderatonr and reformer of alllawe : all which is done by the Ind- 
Richtand £05 prudence,adapring it felfe tothe nature of the caufe , and laying the lawe tothe caxfe., not-the 
reafon:  ¢4u{e tothe lawe. As Ariffotleto this purpofe {peaketh of the Lesbian rule,( Erhic.4. )This is al- 
equem ce forermed right > reafon;as Saluft apaine faith in his Jxgurth Bomilchar 1 gusty rather by right 
bonum, and a a any nationall lawe. (raffus (faith Tully in his Bretus ) {pake much at thac time 
againft that-writing,and yet but in right and reafon, It is allo called equstie’. That place (faith 

(Cicero for Cacinna) you feare,and flie,and fecke (as I may fay ) to draw mee out of this plaine 

field of equitie into the ftraite of words, and into all che literall corners : in this notwithftand- 

ing (faith Ovintitan ) the iudges nature is to bee obferued , whether it be rather opposed to 

the lawe,then vnto equitie, or no, Hereof wee haue fpoken fome-thing ‘in our Temple of the 

Lawes : But the moft copious and exaét reading hereof isin Budeus his motes vpon the Pan. 

detts iexplaining that place which the Lawyers did not fo well ynderftand : Jus eit ars equi 

Budeus — ¢ boi. This mans fharpenefle of witte , quickneffe of iudgement, fulneffe of diligence’, and 
his praifes. preatneffe of learning,no Frenchman euer paralleld,nor in thefe times any Jtalian, There is no~ 
thing extant in Greeke or Latize,but he hath read it,and read it ouer,and difcuffed it throughly: 
In both thefe toungs he is alike,and that excellently perfect. Hee fpeakes them both as fami- 
liarly as he doth Frencb,his naturall tongue: nay I make doubt whether hee {pcake them no 
Better: hee willread out a Greeke booke in Latine words extempore , and out of a Latine 
booke,in Grecke. And yet this which wee fee fo exaCtly and excellently written by him, is no- 
thing but his extemporall birthe, Hee writes with leffc paines both Greeke and Latine, then 
very good {chollers in both thefe tongues can vnderftand them. There is no cranke,no fecret, 
in all thefe congues, but he hath fearche it out, lookt into it, aad brought it forth like Cerberus 


from darkneffe into light. Infinite are the fignifications of words,and the proprieties of phrafe 


which onely Badaus hath fetched out of deepeft obliuion and expofed them tomens vnder- 
ftandings, And yet all thefe fingular and admirable guifts hath hee attained to by his owne 
induftry alone, without helpe of any maifter, O happy fertile witte! that init felfe alone found 
both maifter and {choller,and method of inftruétion ! That whofe tenth part others can hardl 


_ learne of great and cunning maifters, he alone without helpe of others drew wholy from him-_ 


felfe. I haue not yetfayd any thing of his knowledze in the lawe, which he alone hath begun 
to reftore from ruine : nor of his Philofophie, whereof in his bookes De Affe, he hath giuen 
{uch proofe,as no man poflibly could but fuch an one as had dayly conuerfation with fuch rea- 


ding of all the Philofophers,and deepe inftruction in thofe {tudies. To all this may bee added — 


that which indeed excells all things elfe ; an honeftie congruent to all this learning, fo rare, and 
fo admirable, that being buc confidered without the other graces of witte and learning, it 
might feeme the worlds miracle : his honefty no more then his learning acknowledgeth none 


his fuperior, A man that in all che diuerfe actions of his life, giues his religion alwayes the firft 


place: A man that hauing wife and many children,was neuer drawne from his true {quare with 
any profit or {tudy to augment his eftate : but euer-more {waid both himfelfe and his fortunes, 
and direéted both: Fortune could neuer lead him away,though fhe promifed neuer fo faire: he 


had her alwayes in his power. Aman continually in court,in Embaflages , yet neuer followed. 


Princes favours, nor noufled them with flatteries, Hee neuer augmented his patrimony, be- 


caufe he would neuer depart an haires-breadth from honefty : he was alwayesa feuerer cenfor | 


of his owne conditions then of any others : and hauing vndergone offices which were obiedts 
of the preateft enuie, he neuer found callumnie from any tongue , nor incurd {ufpition of any 
error, though he had to doe with afree nation, anda people as ready to accufe as froward ta 
fufpect. I fee I haue forgot breuities bounds,being whirled beyond them with the loue I have 


to relate the vertucs of mine honored friend : now to our purpofe , Sa/x/?s meaning therefore | 


is,that as well this ciuill equitie which they call awe, as that naturall equitie which nature 
produceth in the mindes of the iudicious, ( and then which nothing is better, it being theres 
fore called good ); were no more powerfull with the Romaines in their decretall lawes,then in 


The Sabine the naturall difcretions of vnderftanding men. (6) Oxt of this In/fice] A moft bitter Ironie: a : 
virginstae found quippe. (¢) That the Sabine Virgins |] Whenas Romsules could not obtaine women of - 
homing nations, forhis cittizeas to marry with , by che aduife of his grand-father 


k ; * e 
forceably. " = Nunsitor 


“ae 


——_—_—_— 
Lire. _ OF THE CITIE OF GOD. | 81 


Nemitor and the Senate , hee gaue it out that-hee would celebrate fome games in honour of 
Neptune the lorfe-rider, or Hippopofeidon:fo the wotnen,their neighbours , commin gto feethe 
sports , the Komanes tooke them all away by force,(efpecially the Sabines Jout of the middeft 
of che exercifes. For fo had Romulus and his companions refolued : the fourth month after the 
- building of Rome as Diony fins relateth out of Fabins Pilor. Plutarch saith itwas the i4. of 
the Calends of September , and both agreed : forthe city was begun to be buile the 12. of the 
Calends of May on the feaft day called Palilia. Though Gellins(noteulus with the Attican 
nights , but)another ancient writer affirmes it wasin the 4. ycare that this was done:which is - 
the likelier to be true, They tooke away(as Diony/ins faith )fix hundred and cighty:which I do 
hold for the more likely chen that which other talke,of three hundredsfrom whencethe names 
of the («rie , or the wards :J#ba addeth three more to the number before. Anrias Valerius Thalafins. 
names but fiue hundred twenty and feauen. Some fay that Thalaffus was not a man, but onely — 
the figne giuen to fhew them when to begin their rape. Fetus , out of Varro faith it was {fo 
taken about {pinning of woll : as a man would fay,a panier or abasker.(d) herein indeed| Both, the confee 
thofe nations , of whence the women were , whom they forced away,as alfo others whom the deration 
reft by their lamentable intreaties and the feare of theit owne dangers moued,tooke Vp armes againft Ro. 
againit che Romanes : the Sabines,the (eninenfes the (+uffumerians,and the Atennates,all com. ulus, 
bined againft them: Romelws {eeing {o dangerous a warre likely to enfue vpon hitn , confedes | 
rateth with the Hetrursans, whofe powre at that time was very great:& Calms Vibennns prince Mount 
‘of Hetruria gaue Romulus aide, of whom this Mount Celins in Rome tookethe name: His Calum 
grand-father alfo fenthim fuccors.So that with {mall adoe he ouerthrew the forces of the (ey 
‘ntnenfes , the Cruftumerians and the ¢Atennates:and contending with the Sadizes in a doubt- 
full and dangerous war,vpon a fudden by the entreaty of the women themfelues the war ceaf= 
ed,and both the parties ioyned in league and amity together, (e) the Circenfian plaies| Euery 
are was there plaies,or games eclebrated vnto Weptune Equeffer,and they were diuerfly cal- 
Ia sthe Circenfian plaics,the Great plates,the Romane plaies:and among{t the ancients, { onfua~ Confas 3 
ba of Confus a God to whom they offered facrifice, and belecued him to gouerne al Counfells: god, 
and of him Romulus asked inftruction in all his perills,& in the doubts of thofe marriages, His 
alter was hidden in the earth : becaufe as Plato faith;counfell ought not only to bee held holy, 
bur fecret alfo. (f 9 after Tarquin] Another Ironicall taunte. (g) L. Tarquin Collatine] The 
Kings being cafhcered out of Rome by the great (‘enturiall Parliament ( which Seruins Tulle = mate : 
had before infticuted )L Jussins Brutus,and L. Tarquin (ollatine,Lucretias husband wete elece 
ted Confiulls : the later of which , was {on to Egersus,T arguinins Prifcus his brother,as Liny . 
faich. But Nephew to him faith Dienyfins : Brwtus being defirous not onely to expell the King 
himfelfe,but all his name with him, difanulled the magiftracy ofhis fellow ,becaufe his name 
vas Tarquin, and fo he snap tooke his goods,and departed the citic , going to (ollatinns 
to dwell, Now Tully(Offic.lib, 3. ) confefleth that this was no very honeft part of Bratas : but 
becaufe it was moft profitable to the affurance of the cOmon-wealth,cherfore it paft for an a& 
of honefty [+ bath bes ob ferned( faith Inlins Obfequens) that no man that ener abrogated his fel- 
' lowes magiftracy lined his yeare to an end ; the firft that did fo was this Bruuus , the next Tiberius 
. Gracchus,the third P. Tarquinius, (6) Afarcas Camilius| Thiswas he that tooke the City Veii, Camillus, 
after ten yeares continual fiege:At that time began the Romanes firftto lodge in tents,& yn- 
der beaft skins in winter,becaufe they hated this people fo deadly that they would not depart 
thence vntillthe warres were ended: for euer fince the raigne of Rgrulus for three hundred 
years togither held they almoft continual! warre with the Veientes : Lininus libs. Platarche in 
Camsllus his life. This Camsllus being {aid to haue deale vniuftly in fharing the Veientane {poils 
amonegft.the people, L. Apuleius cited him toa day of hearing : But hee to auoide their enuie 
though innocent of that he was charged with, Jgot him away to liue at Ardea, in exile. This 
ell out two years before the Galles tooke Reme, (i) ten thonfand)Lixy faith he was fined inhi. 
abfence at } 5000. Affis en beige 15000. Affinm.e£s And Affis grane wasaloneas Alle& Aes 
my Budexs proues (k ) being foone after| The Galles hauing taken Romse,Camillus hauing ga~ grane, all 
thered an army togéther of the remainder of the Adan ouerthrow was releafed of his exile, ge. O8% 
jn acounfel) Cwriaté,made DiGator by them that were befieged in the Capitoll, Arfirlt hee 
elledthe Galles out of the Cittie , and afterwards in the roade way to Gabis ,cight miles 
from the Crety, hee gaue them a fore ouer-throw. (Lis, ib..5 ) Thus this worthy man choofe. 
rather to semember his countries affliction then his owne private wronge: beeing there- 
| | ; . @ He =e : "fore 


a Ene eee es ee 


e 2. 


es 


~ SAINT AYGVSTINE. C nap: 18. 


fore ftiled another Romulus. (1) the great ones | Thefe mifchieues were ftillon foote, 
for very neere fiue hundred yeares after the expelling of their kings , the Patrir:ans, and. 
the Plebevans were in continuall feditions and hatreds one againft ancther , and both conten. 
ding for foueraignty : which ambition was kindeled in the pe- ple by afew turbulent Tris. 
bunes, and in the nobles by a fort of ambitious Senatours , and heieof doth Lucas fing that 
which followeth, 


Bt cum confulibusturbantesiuva Tribmi, : Tiibunes andConfulls troubling 1 ight at once. 


what the hiftory of Salufte reports of tte Romains conditions,both in their 
| times of dauncer and thofe of fecurity. : 


Cap. 18. 


we "Hereforet will keepe a meane, and ftand rather vnto the teftimony of se- | 


luff himfelfe , who {poke this in the Romaines Praife ( whereof we but now: 
difcourfed)that iuftice and honefty prevailed as much with them by nature,as by 
lawe : extolling thofe times wherein the citry (after the cafting out of herkings) 


= grew.vp co fuch a height in fo fma'l a fpace Notwichftanding al this, this fame 


author confeffeth in (4) the very beginning of the firft bcoke ofhis hiftory, that - 
when the fway of the ftate was taken from the Kings and giueato the Confuls, 
(>) within avery lictle while after, the citty grew to be greatly troubled withthe 
opprefling power of the great ones3and (¢ ) che deuifion of the people from the 
fathers vpon that caufe, and diuers other datingerous diffentior.ss for hauing re- 
corded how honeftly,and in what good concord the Romaines \iued together(d) 
berwixt thie fecond warre of .4/r:ca, and the laft; and hauing (howed that it was 
not the loue of goodneffz , but the feare and diftruft of the Carthaginians might, 
and perfideoufneffe, that was caufe of this good order , and therfore that vpon 
this Na/cs would haue Carthage ftand {til eases ,as a fit meaneto debarre : 


the entrance of iniquity into Rome,and tokeepe in integrity by feare; he addeth 


prefently vpon this, thefe words (¢) But défcord,auarice , ambition , and all fuch mif- 
chiefes as profperity is midwife unto,grew unto their full light after the deftruction 
of Charthage,ntimating herein,that trey were fowne, & continuedamongft the 
Romarns betore: which he proues in his following reafon.For as for the violent of- 
Senfinene(fe of the greater perfons (faith he) and the diusfion b:twixt the Patricians 
and the Plebetans thence arifing,thofe were mifchiefes among! us from the beginning: 


nor was there any loager relpect of equsty or moderation smonzfi us, then whil+ft the 


kings werein expelling andthe citty and flate quit of Tarquin, aad te( f great war of 
Hetruria. Thus you fee, how that euen in tha: little {pace wherein atter the ex- 
pulfion of their Kingathey embraced integrity , ic was onely feare that forced 
them to do fo, becaufe they ftood in dread ofthe warres , which Targuss , vpon 
his expu!fion being combined with the Hetrarsans waged againft them. Now 
obferue what Salu/t addeth, for after that (quoth he) the Senators bean to make 


flanes of the people to tndge of headese,( 2) {bouldersjas bloudsly> smperioully(h)as the 
peop A (¢ pertou/ 


kings did tochafe men from their poffe(Gons:¢cy only thev,of the whole crue of factions, 


: - bare the imperial fway of al,with which eutrages(@ chiefely with their extream: taxes 
—andextortions the people being fore opprejfed,matntaining both folatoursin.continual . 


armes, and paying tribute alfo befides,at length they ftept out tooke vp armes and drew 
toanbeadvpon Mount Auentine and Mount Sacer. And then they eleited then 
Tribunes, and fet downe other lawes ; but the fecend warre of Africa gane end to thefe 
contentions on both fides. Thus you fee in how little a while, fo fooneafter the 

expelling 


Lis.2.... OF THE CITIE OF GOD. | 83 


exneliing of their Kings, the Romasnes were become fuch as.hee hath defcribed 

them: of whom (notwichftanding ) he had affirmed , that Juflece and honeftie pre~ 
usiled as much with them by nature as by lawe. Now if thofe times werefoundto 
haue beene fo depraued, wherein the’ Romaine eftate is repotted to haue beene - 

moft vacorrupt and abfolute, whacfhall wee imagine may. then bee fpoken or 
thought of the fucceeding ages , which by a graduall alteration (ta vie the au- 

thors owne words.) of an honeft and honorable citie,became moft difhoneft and 
difkonorable , namely after the diffolution of Carthage, as hee him(eife relatetly> 

How he difcourfech and defcribeth thefe times, you may at full behold in his hi- 

ftorie, and what progreffe this corruption of manners made through the mid 
of the Cities profperitie, euen (4) yntill the time of che ciuill warres. Butfrom 
that time forward,as hee reporteth , the manners of the better fort did no more 

fall to decay by littleand little, but ranne head-long to ruine, like a {wift torrent, 

{uch exceffe of luxuric and auarice entring vpon the manners of the youth, thae 

it was fitly {aid of Rome,that the brought forth fach (/) as would neither keepe 

goods them-felues nor f uffer others to keepe theirs. Then Sala? proceéds ,ina'’ “! 
difcourfe of Syi’s villanies, and of other barbgrous blemifhes inthe common, 
wealth: and to his relation in this do all other Writers agree in fubftance,though =~. 
(m) they beeall farre bchinde him in phrate . Bur here you fee (and{o I hope the com - 
doe all men) that whofoeuer will obferug but this, fhall eafilie difcouer che large moa core 
gulfeof damnable vicioufneffe into which this Gitty was fallen, long before the oa 
comming of our heavenly King. For thefe things came to paffe,not onely before pocings 2 
that euer Chrift our Sauiour taughtin the fleth, but euen before he was borne of 
the Virgirr,or tooke fiecfhat all : Seeing theréfore'that they dare notimpute vnto - - 
their owne gods thofe fo many and fo great mifcHigfes,eyther the tolerable ones” - = 
which they \uffered before, or the fouler ones which they, incurred afterthede- 
firuGion of Carthage, (how foeuer their gods are the engrafters of fuchmaligne i. 
opinions in mens mindes, ( # )as muft needs bud forth fuch vices,) whythendo = * 
they blame Chrift for the euills prefent,who forbids them to adore fuch falfe and 
deuillith gods,by his fweete and fauing do&rine, which doe condemneall thefe cii® che 
harmefull and wngodly affections of man by his divine authoritie, and from al] founder of 
thofe miferies, with-drawes his flockand familie by little and litcle out of all plae? cities 
ces of the declining world, to make of their companie an eternall and celeftiall 


a 


cittie,not by che ap plaufe of vanitie,but by the ele@ion of veritie. 


. a ae Je eS ty ogee kG 

His fame author (a) confefeth, | This hiftorie of Salufte coticerning the. civill warres © | 

of Rome, wechaue loft, Onely fome few Orations there are remaining, (4) Withig ave 
rie little while, | But fifteene yeares,(Lin,/ib.2.) Appims Claudius, and P. Serusline were-made 
Confuls for that yeare : And this yeare was made famous by the death of Tarquin the proud. The ‘death 
Hee died at Came , whether after his wrackt eftate hee retired vnto riffodemns the Tyran. . Weihua 
The newes of his death fturred both Patricians and Pupularsto.ioy and mirth :buc the Pa- a oad 
tricians reuells were too faucie : for then they began to offer iniurytq the people, whome till 
that day they had obeyed. ( ¢)The diwifion, | the people dinided themfelues from the Parris The diuifie 
ans,pecaufe of the fefle laide vpon them the feuenteenth yeare after the obtaining of their li- iat ee 
berty :and apaine becaufe of the tyrannie of the Decemsiri in making cruell law rae 50. mee st oh 
after the builting of Rome.Thirdly by reafon of their debts,and the long diffentiong becvyeedie 
the tribunes and the Senators , fome few yeares before Pirrlus fs warre-(a) erent the ecowd) 


. 


a 


84 - ss SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuar. 18. 


There werethree feuerail warres begun and ended betweene the Remaznes and the Carthage- 
The wartes miazs : The firft in Sicsle 22. yeares together, and afterwards in Affricke : it began the 390, 
of aftica, veare after the building of Reme. Appius Clandins Candax , and Qu, Fulsius Flaccus being 
Flinivs cor- Confuls, So many are the yeares in Piinies 3 3.booke, wherein I thinke for 585, muft bee read 
rected, 485. Livy and Extropins count not fo much by thirteene yeares. The fecond of thefe warres 
began fome 23. yeares after, P, Scipio, and T. Semprenius being Confuls : it went through 
Spaine,Sicily,ftaly and Affricke, and there it was ended by Scipio African the elder, feuen- 
teene yeeres after the firft beginning ofie. The third arofe 49.yeares after that, Manlins,and 
Martins Cenforinus being Confuls,it was finifhed thtee yeares after in Affrick (where it who- 
ly continued ) by Scipio African the yonger : and the endof this was the fubuerfion of Car. 
thage. Of thefe warres more at large elfe-where. (¢) But difcorde | Salufte in his Bellues In- 
Porfenna gurthinum. ( f) The great warre of Hetvuria’] With Porfenna the mighty King of Hetrsria, 
his watres. who would haue Targa reftored to his kingdome: and begire the Cittie of Rome with a hard 
and dangerous fiege : and had taken it , but chat the valour of Sceso/a terrified him from per- 
_ ifting. Lin tsb.1. ( £ ) Of the heads and {boulders | Of death, and other punifhments.Thofe that 
- ow of. Sb¢ Romaines adiudged to death, they fir{t {courged with roddes,and then killed them, Some- 
fenders «mes, if the fat were not very wicked, they did but oncly fcourge them with rodds. Befides, 
were punie thofe that were fued by their creditors and brought before the ludge , were moft villanoufly 
fhedat = and miferably abufed, their creditours being allowed to chaine them, and beate them like their 
aa . flaues: again{t which foule enormitie the Portian and the Sempronian laws were promulgated, 
ae Asi which forbid that the body of any free Roxgaine fhould bee beaten either with roddes or any 
wn... Scourges, (4) Tochafe men from their poffeffions] For, fuch fields as were wonne by the valour 
lack AG, of the people of Rome, the ritch teri would firft vndertaké by the appointment of the Senate, 
22° * totill and make fruitfull,as if they werehired by the Senate : marry afterwards, (their fellows 
The Agra oo at it) they would thruft the people from their right, and make themfelues abfolute 
rian lawes, lords of all: And hereypon were the Agrariax lawes fo often put to be paft,concerning the di- 
_ uiding of the lands amongeft the people : but were neuer mentioned without ee. inthe — 

The Patriots,and huge hurly-burlies in all the Citie. (¢) Count ae ] The people firft encam- 
deparare of ned on Monnt Sacer,or tne Holy Hill,a little beyond the riuer Anien, (now called Teserone)or 
Pook" as Prfa faith on Anentine a part of the Citie. There were the Tribunes Plebeian firlt eleGed ,as 
The Tris Tutors of the Pepalars: who fhould ftand as watches ouer the peoples good,and ftep between 

bunes, § all iniuries that the Patriots fhould offer them , and be accompted as facred men : whom if an 
man wronged, his head fhould be giuen to Jepiter for facrifice, and his goods folde all at the 
The ferond *°™Ple ef Ceres. The fecond encamping was vpon Asentine, and from thence to fill the Cittie 
departure, with prearer defolation, they departed ynto AZount Sacer. And then hauing agreed with the 
“——. Senate,they returned to Awentine againe,and there recouered their Tribunes : and from Axex- 
tine they went vp to the capitoll, where in a great Parliament held by the chiefe Prieft, the tri- 
bunes election was afhigned and confirmed, Cie. pro Cornel.de Maicftate. (kh) Vato the cinill 
warres | Firftberwixe the Senators and the Gracchs,7 iberins firft, and then ( ains; and fo yvnto 
the ciuill warres betwixt Sylla and Afarius. (1) As wonld neither keepe goods themfelues |For 
fuch exceffiue prodigalls,and {pending whatfoeuer they could feaze on, they muft needs force 
meanes from other mens eftates to maintaine this their luxurious riotte: and fo they laboured 
= to fill a barrell full of holes. (m) They are allfarre behinde him, | The pithy and fuccind ftile 
prac of Salufte was delightfome to all ages : our Gritikes haue paralelld him with the Grecke Thu- 
Syluefcere, cydides;as Onsntilian doth, lb.10. ( " Muft needs bud | as branches and woods vie to do sit 
what it 18, isa word much vied in the writers of husbandry, Cato and Colwmella : The Grecians call it 
vasurtiv Sylue(cere,te grow into woods and bufbes , which in herbes 1s igvtpiturs Luxwriare, to 

‘growe ranke. 


Of the corruptions ruling in the Romaine ftate, before that 
 Chrikt abelifbed the worfbip of their Idols. 


CHaP.19. 


Cr aad 


— QR Eholdnow this commonwealth of Rome,whichI am not the firft chat affirme, 
ast ‘bor-their owne writers, out of whom | {peake, doe auerre ,to haue declined 
3 ftom good by degrees, and of an honeft and honorable ftate , to baue fallen into 


eS eae ne Pen nee ae eT ee a ae a ee nD 
Liz.2. . OF THE CITIE OF GOD. : 85 


the greateft difhonefty and difhonour poffible. Behold , before ever Chrift was 
come, how that Carthage becing once cut of the waie , then the Patricéans man- 
ners decaied no more by degrees, but ranne head-Jong into corruptionlikea 
{wife torrent, the youth of the cittic was ftill fo defiled with luxurie and a- . 
uarice. ; | 

Now letthem readevs the good counfell chat their gods gaue them again 
this luxury and auarice: I with they had oneliebeene filent in the inftruGions 
of modefty and chaftity, and had net exacted fuch abhominations of their wor- 
fhippers,vnto which by cheir falfe diuinity they gaue fuch pernicious autho- 
rity. But letthein reade our lawes, and they fhall heare them, thundering out 
of diuine oracles and Gods cloudes ( as it were) againft auarice and luxurie, 
by the mouthes of the Prophets, by the Ghofpell , the Apotiles, their aes 
and their Epiftles , fo diuinely , and fo excellently , all che people flocking to- 
gether to heare them; notasto avaine and iangling Fhilofophicall difputati- 
on but as to an admonition from Heauen. And yer thefe wretches will noe 
blame their gods , for letting their weale-publike bee fo fowlely befpotted 
with enormous impieties , before the comming of Chrift : but what-foeuer 
miferié or afflidion their effeminate and vnmanlie pride hath tafted of fince 
this comming,that the Chriftian Religion is fure to have in their teeth withs 
atl. The good rules and precepts whereof, concerning honefty and integritie 
of mangers, if allthe Kings of the earth, andall people , Princes and all the 
iudges of the earth , young men and Virgins , olde men, Children, allages 
and fexes capable of reafon , and euen the very fouldiars, and (2) taxé-takers 
themfelues ( to whome John Baprift fpeaketh ) would heare and regard well; 
their common-wealths would not onelie adorne this earth belowe with pre- 
fent honeftie, bux would afcend vppe to Heauen, there to fit onthehigheft 
point of eternall giorie. But becaufe this man doth but heare,and that man 
doch not regard, andthe third doth defpifeit , and farre more doe loue the 
(5) ftroaking hand of vicioufneffe, then the rougher touch of vertue, Chrifts 
children are commaunded to endure with patience the calamities that fall 
_vpon them by the minifters of a wicked .common-wealth : bee they Kings, . 
Princes , Iudges', Souldiours and Gouernours , ritch or poore,bound or free, 
of what fexe or fort foeuer , they muft beare all with patience : beeing, 4 ¢. 
by their fuffrance heere , to attaine a moft glgrious place in that Royall of God he 
and (¢) Imperiall Citty of Angells aboue,andin that Heavenlie common- willis all 
wealth , where the will of Almightie GOD istheir onelie lawe,, aad his lawe eae 
their will. | , a | oo 


ee 


Ne aieamnanmaneed 


LVIVES 2s 


GQ Onidiewr sand (a}taxe-takers| Luke 3.12.13. Then came there Publicanesto bee baptized, _- 

" “and fayd unto hind, Mayfter., what fhall wee dog ?. And hee fayd unto them , Require no more seseath or 
then that which is appointed vatoyou.. Require in this place, in the vul gar Latineis Facite: taxe-takers, 
in the Greeke rgaassz': which as Era/mus firft offalinoted , istobee tranflated Exvigite ex- 
atte,or require, and hence it 1s that Saint _Auguffine doth rightly name the Exaltores , taxe- 
takers , which were the reardval, the Publicanes.(b) The fakes hand of vicioufneffe | Hee 
alludeth ynto He fieds two waies to vice and vertue ¢ which Virgil/ or as ( fome fay.) eAu- 
Sonins ) imitated in that fame poeme of Pythagoras his letter, (c) Imperial | Augustiffima Bed ee 
it mutt needes bee, and not eAirguftiffima — or narrow : But withall takeacertaine y, 
| 7 Friars 


—* 


PEE eee en ee a eee 
86 ) _SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuar.20, 
rp NN EE 
Friars note with you , [had almofttould his name,who affirmed that heauens court is called 

[]No e4xguftaheere,becaufe the way is ftraight(as Chrift our Sauiour faith ) that leadeth vito lifes 


word of andfew thera are that enter in thereat, And that his auditors might beare it the better a= 
thisin | Way,he hut it vp in this fine verfe: | 


wh Arita eff via vert,gue ducit ad gandia vite, - 
ris, The way is ftraight and quickly mift, that leads vs vp to pleries blift, 


_ He fhewed plainely that he cared not greatly for true pofition , or quantity of {yllables,fo 
that he madc it goe roundly off,and found well. ] aati is 


Of what kindcofhappine/fe,and of what conditions | 
the accufers of Chriftiansty de- 7 
fore to pertake. 


Cap. 20. 


BY fuch worfhippers , and fuch louers of thofe vicious gods , whome 
they reioyce to followe and immitace in all villanics and mifchieues, 
thofe doe never refped the goodneffe , or the integrity of the common-wealth, 

No, fay they,let ic but ftand, let ic bute bee ritch and viGorious 3 or( whichis 
beftofall) let it bue enioy fecurity and peace , and what care wee ? Yes mar- 

- rie,itdoth beelong to our care , that euerie one might haue meanes to in- 
creafe his wealth , tonourith the expenfe of his continuall riot, and where- 

withall the greater might ftill keepe vnder the meaner. Let the poore on 

bey the ritca , for their bellies fakes ; and that they may hue at eafe vn. 

der their protections: Let the ritch abufe the poore in their huge atten- 
daunces , and i mee to their fumptuoufneffe . Let the people applaude 

fuch as afford them delightes , :not {uch as proferre them good counfells. 

Let noughe that is hard bee enioyned , noughe that is impure bee prohi- 

bited . Let not the Kings care bee howe good, but howe {ubicé& his people 

“bee . Let not fubdued Prouinces ferue. their Kings as reformers of their 

_ manners , but:as the Lords of their Eftates , and the procurers of their 
pleafures : Not honouring chem fincerely, but fearing them fecuilely. Let 

the lawes looke to him that lookes after another mans poffeffions , rather 

then him that lookes not after his owne life. Let ro man bee brought bee 

' ’ fore the Judges, but fuch as haue offered violence vnto others Eftares , hou- 
fes,orperfons. But for a mans owne, let it bee free for him to vfeitas hee 

lift, and fo of other mens , ifthey confent. Let their bee ae ftore of Com- 

A defers mon Harlottes, either forall that pleafe ro vie them , or for thofe that cannot 


tion of th : | 
pablike © keepe priuate ones. Let ftately and fumpruous houfes bee erected , banquets 


conuption. and feafts follemnized , let a man drinke , cate, game and reuell day andnight, | 


where hee may or will: (2) let dauncingbee ordinarie inall places: let luxu- 
rious and bloudy delightes fill the Theater , with difhoneft wordes , and 
fhewes ,freelie, and vncontroulled.. And let him bee held an enemie to 
the publike good , that is an oppofite vnto this felicitie. Let the people 
turne away their eares from all fuch as fhall affaie to diffwade or alter 
them , let them banifh them, let them kill them. Let them bee eternized 
for gods , that fhall procure the people this happineffe , and preferue 
what chey hauc procured. Let them haue what glori¢ or ase 


eice OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 


2-2 ee 


they will , whac plaies they will, or can exa& of their worfhippers : onely lec 
them worke fo a this felicity ftand fecure from enemy , peftilence , and all o- 

ther inconueniences. Now tell mee,whatreafonable creature would wifh fuch 

aftate , (not vnto Rome , but euen )to the houfe of (6) Sardanapalus? which 

whilom King, was fo farre giuen ouer to his pleafures , that hecaufed it tobee 

written vpon his graue, that hee onely as then poffefled that , which his luxury, 
in his lifetime had wafted: Now if thofe fellowes had buta King like this, thac 

wouldnoufle them inthefe impurities, and never controull nor corre& them 

in any fuch courfes , they would bee readier to erect a Temple to him ,and giue 

him a Flemine,then ener were the old Remaszes to do fo vnto Romulus. | 


| L. VIVES. 


Et (a) Dancings| Saltationes , inthe Bruges copy it is Salutationes in Coleynes it was 

Salutiones, but the letter v. is razed out. Surely the loue of Salsting one another was 
greatin ome. Highly was hee honored that was faluted ,and well was hee mannerd , that 
did falute,bur great plaufbilicy attended on both : both were very popular , and great fteps 
topowrefulnefie. Salxf, say Sr: Truely fome are verie induftrions in faluting the people. 
All the Latines writings ‘are full of falutations. (6) Sardanapalus | The Crecians called 
Sardanapalus ,Thonos (oncoloros. Hee was the laft King of the Affyrians aman throwne 
head-long into all kinde of pleafures. Who knowing that e4rbaces the Median prepa- 
red to make warres againft him, refolued to trie the fortune of warre in this affaire. But bee- 
ing conquered (as he was an effeminate fellow, and vnfit for all martial exercifes)hee fled vn- 
to his houfe,and fet iton fire with himfelfe and all his risches in it, Long before this , when 
hee was inhis fulleft madneffe , after pleafures, hee caufes this epitaph to bee engrauen ypon 
his combe. 

Kei'y "sy ces’ spa yer ere, 
Tully cranflates it thus. 


“Hac habeo,qua edi,queg, exaturata voluptas 

Hanfit’s at illa iacent multa et preclara relitta 
Woaat I confum'd,and what my guts engroff’t, 
I haue : but all che wealth I left, I loft. 


~ Whatelfe could any man haue written(faith eFriftorle in £, icere) vpon the eraue of an Oxe 
rather then of a King ? hee faith he hath that being dead,which he neuer had whileft hee liued 


but onely while he was a wafting of it. Chry/ippus applies the verfes vnto his Stoicifme : heres 
ofreade Athenaus Lib,5. | 


Tully Lis opinion of the Romaine Common-wealth, 
| Crap. 21. : — 
Ve ifhee be fcorned that faid their common-wealth was mof difhoneft and 


36 


a] 


The falue 


ratong at 
Rome. 


Sardanapae 


hus his epic - 


taph, 


difhonorable , and that thefe fellowes regard not what contagion and cor- 
tuption of manners doe rage amongft chem , fo that their ftate may ftand and . 


continue, now fhall they heare that :it is not true that se/uff faith , chat 
their common-wealthis but kecome vile and fo wicked, but as Cécere faith , it 
is abfolutely gone, it isloft , and nothing of it remaines. For hee brings in 
‘Scipio (him that deftroied Carthage) difputing of the weale-publike , at fuch 
time.as it was (4) prefaged that it would perifh by that corruption which Saluffe 
defcribeth. For this difputation was (b) at chat time when one of the Gracché was 
flaine,from which point Sa/w/ affirmeth ae the great {editions to haue had their 
2 


Original 


ia oo et EE OE, ee ee eee ee 


$8 «SAINT AVGVSTINE. |  Cmarat. 


Originall, ( for in thofe bookes there is mention made of his death.) Now Scipio 

hauing faid( in the end of the fecond bookg ) that as in inftruments that go with 

{tricgs, or wind , or as in voices conforted , there is one certaine proportion of 
difcrepant notes,vnto one harmony, the leaft alteration whereof is harfh in the. 

-eareof the skilfull hearer: and that this concord , doth confift of anumber of 
contfary founds, and yet all combined into one perfe& muficall melody: fo ina 

Thehas cittye that is gouerned by reafon, ofall the heigheft,meane and loweft eftates,as 
cond Otte of foundes, there is one true concord made out of difcordant natures :and that 
th, Which is harmony in mufike,is vnity in a citty : that chis is the firmeft,and fureft 
bond of {afety vnto the commonweale,and that acommonweale can neuer ftand 
without equity : when hee had dilated ac large of the benefit that equity brings 
to any gouernment,and of the inconuenience following the abfence therof:then 
(c) Pilws,one of the company,begins to {peake, and intreated him to handle this 
quettion more fully and makea largerdifcourfe of iuftice,becaufe it was then be- 
comeacommon report(4)that a commonwealth could not be gouerned wWithoue 
_,, 4iniufticeand iniury:herevpon Scipio agreed, that this theame was to be handled 
.. More exadly, andreplied: that what was as yet fpoken of the commonwealth 

‘ was nothing ; and that they could not proceed any farcher,vntill ic were proued 
“not oncly that it is faulfe, that a weale publike cannot ftand without iniury , bue 
alfo chat it is true that ic cannot ftand without exact iuftice. So the difputation, 
concerning this.point being deferred vatill the next day following,in the third 
booke,it is handled with great controuerfie. Fot Pz/ws,he vndertakes the defence 
of their opinion ,that hold that a ftate cannot be gouerned without iniuftice, 
‘but with this prouifion , that they fhould nocthinke him to bee of that opinion 
himfelfe. And he argued very diligently for this iniuftice againft iuftice , ende- 
voring by likely reafons and examples , to fhew that the part hee defended was 
vfe-full in che weale publike,and that the contrary was altogether needleffe. Then 
-(¢)Lelins being intreated on all fides, ftept vp, and tooke the defence of iuftice 
in hand,and withal his knowledge,laboured ro proue that nothing wrackt a citty 
fooner then vniuftice, and that no ftate could ftand without perfec iuftice 
which when hee had concluded, and the queftion feemed to be throughly difcuf- 
A common 1° » Seépéo betooke himfelfe againe to his intermitted difcourfe, and firfthe re- 
wealth, hearfeth and approueth his definition of acommonwealth, wherein he faid ir 
was the eftate of the commonty,then he determineth this, that this commonty is not 

meant of euery rablement of the multitude, but that it is. /océery, gathered toge- 

ther in one confent of law, and in one participation of profite. Then he teacheth, ( f) 

the profite of definitions in aldifputations : and out of his definitions he gathe- 

reth, that onely there isa commonwealth, that is onely there is a good eftdte of 

the commonty,where iuftice and honefty hath free execution, whether it be 

Aneftae by(z) a King, by nobles, or by the whole people. But when the King be- 
goured comes vniuft , (whom he calleth (4) 7yranne as the Greekesdo ) or the nobles be 
faftice 1 no VHiUtt,(whofe combination hee cermeth (¢) faction) or the people them-felues 
common be vniuft,for which hee cannot finde a fitname, vnleffe he fhould call the 
weal, == whole company as he called the King, a Tyran ) then that thisis nota vicious 


Weaith, 


ccommon-wealth , (aswas affirmed. the day before) but, as the reafons depen+ 


ding vpon thofe definitions proued moft direGlly , it is iuft no common-wealth 
at all , for it is no Eftate of the people, when the Tyra vfurpeth on it by 
Fattion , nor isthe commonty , a commonty , when itis nota fociety gathered 

ia 3 errs 


~~ 


L132. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. «8g 


together in one confent of law and one participation of commodities,as hee had 
defined a commonty before. Wherefore, feeing the Romane Eftate was fuch 
as Salufte doth defcipher it to bee, it was now no difhonett or difhonorable 
Common-wealth (as hee affirmed) but it was dire€tly no common-wealth at all: 
according vnto the reafons propofed in that difcourfe of a common-wealch (k) 
before fo many great Princes and heads thereof: and as 7/fy himfelfe, not 
{peaking by Sc/péo or any other ,but in his owne perfon doth demonftratein the 
beginning of his fift booke: where haning firft rehearfed that verfe of (1) Enmins 
where he faith. | : | 

, Mor tbus antiquis res ftat Romana viri[g. 

- Old manners,and old men vpholden Rome. 

Which verfe(quoth Tu//y) whether you refpec the breuity,or the veriry mee °* 
feemeth he (m) {poake out as an oracle:for neither the men ( vnleffe the city had 
had fuch manners,nor the manners, voleffe the city, had had fuch men ) couldei- © 
ther haue founded,or preferued acommon-wealth of that magnitude of iuftice, © 
and Empire. And therefore before thefe our daies, the predeceflors conditions, * _ 
did {till make the fucceflars excell , and che worthy men ftill kept vp the ordi. “ 
nances of honorable antiquity : But now, our age receiuing the common-wealth “ 
as an excellent pi@ure, but almoft worne out withage, hath not onely no care * 
to renew it with fuch collours as it prefented at firft ,bucneuer regarded it fo “ 
much,asto preferue but the bare draught (#) and lineamentof it: For what re- “ 
mainder is there now of thofe olde manners which this Poet faith fupported “ 
Rome! doe wee not fee them focleerely worne out of vfe,and now fo farre from * 
beeing followed, that they are quite forgotten ? what neede! {peake ofthem “ 
men? The manners perifhed (0) for want of men, the caufe whereof in iuftice, ° 
wee fhould not onely bee bound to giuean account of, but euen to anfwere.it,as °* 
2 capitall offence : It is notany mif-forcune, it is not any chance,but it is our own “ 
vicioufneffe that hath taken away the whole effence of our common-wealth 
from vs,and left vs onely the bare name. — 

This was Cécero’s owne confeffion, (p) long after 4fricanus his death, whom — 
he induceth as adifpurant in this workeof his ofthe Common-wealth , but yet 
(g) fome-what before the comming of Chrift. Which mifchieues had : y 
not beene (7) divulged vntill the encreafe of Chriftian Religion , which of 
thofe wretches would not haue beene ready to callumniate Chrift tor chem ? 
But why did their gods looke to this no better, nor helpe to faue the ftate 
of this weale-publike , whofe loffe and ruine Cicero bewaileth with {uch pittifull 
phrafe, long afore Chrift came in the flefh ? Nay, let che commenders thereof 
obferne but in what cafe it was even then when ic confifted of the ancient men 
and their manners, whether thenit nourifhed true lufticeor no; and whether 
archat time it were honeft indeed,or but glofled ouer in fhew! which Cicero 
not conceiving what hee fay d confeffeth in his relation thereof. But, by Gods 
grace, wee will confider that more fully elfe-where: for in the due place ,I will 
doe what Ican to makea plaine demonftration out of Cécero’s owne definitions 
of the common-wealth and the people ( {poken by Sespio and iuftified by many 
reafons, either of Scrpéo’s owne , or fuchas Tuy giues him in this difcourfe ) chat 
the eftate of Rome was neuer any true common-wealch, becaufe ic neuer was gui- 
ded by true iuftice : Indeed according to fome other probable definitions , and 
aftér a fore,it was a kind of common-wealth: but far better gouerned by the an- 
tiquicy of cheRomaines,then by their aa But there is not any true iuftice 

| 3 


90 «SAINT AVGVSTINE. —Cuariat. 


in any common-wealth whatfoeuer,but in that wherof Chrift is the founder,and 
the ruler, if you pleafe to call that acommon-weale which we cannot deny is the 
weale of the commontie. (/) But if this name being elf-where fo common, feeme 
too difcrepant for our fubied and phrafe, truely chen there is true iuftice, but in 


Pia that Citie wherofthat holy {cripture faith:Glorions things are fpoken of thee, then 
5713. Csttie of God. 


’ L. VIVES. | 
bovis | ated (4) prefaged] 1 doe reade prefentiebat , hee forefawe,for prefciebater it was prefaged. 
Gracchus, ~(6) at that time when one of the Gracchi ] When as Tiberins Gracchus had promullgated the 
lawe ef graria, to the ereat oriefe and amazement of the ‘Patriorts and would haue his tri- 

‘ bunethippe continued Rill, thereby to haue beene more fecure againft their iniuries , and 

had effected that noone man fhould poffeffe aboue fiue hundred acres of grounde , Sespio 

' Najfica , beeing followed by the Senate killd him : ( Sespio eT fricane beeing at the famee 

_ time in warres at Namance His body was throwne into Tyber. This eAffricanus ,is hee, 

Thedeath whome Tally bringeth in difputing in his garden with Lelins and Furins of the com- 
of Aemilian mon-wealth, alittle Before his death . Hee was murthered (as it is thought) by the meanes of 
Scipio, Cayus Gracchus , Tiberius hisbrother , and Sempronia fifterto the Gracchi, and wife to Sci= 
pio. (¢) Then Pylus) When as betweene the fecond and laft African warre,the Athenians {ent 

Thethree “A mbafladors to Rome, Carneadesthe eAcademicke,Critolaus the Peripatetike ,and Diogenes 
thenian | the Stotk the moft excellent Philofophers of that age, Carneades, either to exercife his 


Ambaflae’ faculty or to fhew his wit,made an elegant and excellent oration for iuftice,in the prefence of. 


dors, = =. Catothe elder, Galba ,anddiuers other great men: and the next day after , hee made anos 
_ ther for iniuftice vnto the fame audience , wherein hee confuted all che arguments fer iuftice 
which hee brought the day before , and alleadged more ftrong ones for iniuftice : this he did, 
to thew his fe& which teacheth neuer to sien any thing , but onely to confute what a 
‘ thers afirme. Out of the laterof thefe orations hath L. Furins Py/us his proofes : who was 
LFers * held fora cunning latinift, and went about his fubiect of iniuftice with farre more dexterity 
Pye. —of learning chen the reft, to ftirre vp Lasins his inuention in commendations ofhis contrarie, 
As Glauco did in Plato's 2. booke de Republ. prayfing iniuftice to make Socrates fhew 
his cunning in praife of iuftice. (d) That a common-wealth conldnot | It isan old fayings 
_ without inftice Iupiter himfelfe cannot play the King : Plat, de doc, Princ, And fecing that 
the weale-publicke for the generall good of it felfe and liberty , is often compelled to vie exe 
4 commés tremity again{t the Citizens priuate , and alfo often-times in augmenting the owne powre, 
wealth not breaketh the lawes of equity in encroaching vpon others:both which nocwithftanding fell 
cithout in- {till very well out; the Remsasnes altered the old faying , and made it: A weale-publike cane 
fice, not bee gouerned without iniuftice. This (arneades couched ,as Lattantins afirmeth , and 
told the Romaines themfelues , who poffeffed all the world , thacif they would bee iuft,chae 
is,reftore euery man his owne,they muft ever returne to their cotages , and lead their liuesin 
all pouerty ae neceffity. (e)Then Lzlius] This controuerfie doth Cicero {peake of in his Le= 
bins alo. (f) The benefite of a definition| Plato, Ariftotle,and all the old Philofophers both held’ 
and taught that the courfe of all difpucation ought to bee deriued firft from the definition. 
The vie of For you cannot make a plaine difcourfe of any thing , vnleffe you firft lay downe whatit ise 
.  Redolphus Agricolain his firft booke'de Dialette inuentione , faith; That this manner of de- 
.... fining is very vfe-full , both for che vnderftanding of the matter, which beeing opened in the 
definition , it is maruellous to fee how it doth as it were point out the limmite of knowledge 
~ towhichall our notioms muft bende ; and alfo forthe authority of ‘the difputer , for no man 
can bee held to vnderftand a thing more perfectly,then hee that can expreffe itina pithy and 
fuccin& definition. | . 7 
Red Aqri- = Thus far Agricola, whom’ Erafmus in his Pronerbes doth iuftly praife : and -hee it is alone 
a that may be an examnple to vs that foreune ruleth in all things, (as S#/f faith ) and lightenech 
or obfcureth all, rather according to her pleafure then the merit and worth of the men 
themfelues, ] know not two authors in all our time nor. our fathers,worthier of reading & ob- 
feruing thé Rodolphus Agricole the Phryfian:There is fuch abundance of wit,art,grauity,iudg- 
mee 


Lisa. _ OF THE CITIE OF GOD. | 9X 
Thethree 
ormes of 


ment, fweetnes, eloquence & learning in al his works:and yet fo few there are ¥ do know him. 
He is as worthy of publike note,as either Politian or Hermolaus Barbarus , both which truly 
inmy conceit hee doth not onely ecuallize , but exceedeth in Maiefty ,and elegance of ftile. 
(¢) whether it be by a King | Hee touches at the formes of Rule. For a Common-wealth is . 
eyther fwayed by the people alone : and that the Greekes calla Democraticallrule : or by a cer- 
taine few :and thatthey cal Ofgarchical vader W is alfo contained the rulc of the choyceft of 
" the common-wealth which is called rifocracy : or the rule of the befi:(They call the Nobili- 

ty the beft:but indeed fuch as were moft powerfull in the State in countenance or wealth, fuch Optimates, 
were the right Ooprrmates.) And therefore there is not much difference betwixt Oligarchy and 
eAriftocracy as Tully fhewed , when he faid the fecond part of the few Nobles : now the third Tyrannus, 
kind of Rule is that of one called Afonarchy : (b) eA Tyran | In ancient times they called all whatand 
Kings Tyrans , as well the beft as the worft :as Usrgilland Horace do in their Poemes , forthe sata, 
name in Greeke , fignifieth onely Dominion, Plato who was the onely man that laid downe . 
the right forme of gouernement for a Citry, is called suparve gi azoinevs: A Tyran and a King. 

Feffns chinketh ( Lib. 5.) That che word was derijued from the notorious cruelty of the 7yrr- 
benes;But I think rather ¥ when the Athenians had brought in the Democratical gouernment, 

and other Cicties through emulation followed theirexample , that was the caufe that firft _ 
brought the word Tyrannus into hatred and contempt: and fothey called their Kings Tyrans, 
becaufe they gouerned their owne wealth,but not the Common-wealth :befides that the Ro- 

mains vied it in that manner alfo,becaufe they hated the name of aKing deadly: and in Greece 
alfo,whofoeuer bore rule in a Citty that had before bén free, was called a Tyran,but net a King. 

(4) Fattion|Memmius( in Saluf? ) {peaking of the Seniors, faith : They bane tran{ferred the feare Friendthip 
that their qwne guilt furprized them with,unte your flothfulnes:it is that which bath combined thems & taGion, 
is one hate,one affett and sme feare : this in good men were friendfhip , but in eusll ment is rightly 

termed fattion, ( k_ ) Before fa many great Princes |For itis imagined that at that difcourfe 

there were prefent , Scipto Affrican,Caius Lalas furnamed the wife,Lucius Furins : three, who 

at that time,as Porcins faith) led the Nobility as they wouldzand of the yonger fort (. Fanine, 

Q. Scesola the Sooth{aier,Lalius his fon in law; & Quintus Tubero,al of worthy families.Exnixs} 

There is nothing of this mans extant but a few fragments , which I intend to gather owrt-of the 

Writers through which they are difperfed and fer them forth together in onevolutrie, Hee 7" 
was borne at Radia(as Mela and Silins athrme) a Cittie of the Salentines , and liued firft at Ta-: 
ventuns,and afterwards at Rome,being very familiar with Cato, Galba , Flaminins , and other. 

great men : and was made free Dennizen of the Citty by Flaminins. (m) Gane ont } Effatus, 

the proper word of the religion. (2) And Lineaments \ A fimily taken from painters ; who firkt 

doe onely delineate, and line forth the figure they will draw:which is called a Afonogramme: 

and then with their coullors they do as it were giue {pirie and life ynto the dead sere (0) 
Want of men\So Saluft saith in ( ataline y the times are now barren, and bring not fortha good 
man. (p) Long after.| About fcauenty yeares, (g) Before the comming of Chrift | Threefcore 
yeares:For it is iuft fo long from Txdlies Confulfhip,at which time he wrote his bookes ‘De re- 
pub. vnto the 24. yeare of Augaftus his Empire,at which time Chrift was borne. (1) dinul- Difumeré 
ged|So Diffamata is heere reported abroad or diuulged : and fo likewife other authors how: vied. 
vie it. And warning the (itty to looke to their fafety,( Diffamauit ) he reported or cryed out :'( faith — 
Apsleins (Afinilib.4.) That bis boufe was a fire upon a fodain:| But itis pretty truly,» Remigins 

an interpreter of Saint Pauls Epiftles faith vpon that place W the tranflatour had turned vobis 

x, diffamatus eft fermo domini.Thell. 1.1.8. For from you founded out the word of the Lord: This sal 
Commentator faith, that faint P2#/being not curious in choofing of his words put Diffamatus, hag ee 
for Divxlgatas,or Manifefins. What fhall we doe with thefe School-doGors , that as yet can- Paris prins, 
not tell whether Pas wrote in Greeke or in Latine?Nay , to marke but the atrogant foole- 

ry of thefe fimple fellowes:in fuch manner as this they will talke and prate fo often about the 
fignification of wordes , as continually they doin their Logike and Philofophy leQtures: and 

yet they would not be held for profeft Gramarians:but are very eafily put out of patience ifa- 

man begin but to difcuffe their wordes of art alittle more learnedly } (s) But Ge: name | 

¥t may bee hee fpeaketh this becaufe a Common-wealth is a popular gouernment, bur Chriftes 
Kingdome is but his alone. Ma! ne 


ty. that 


- 
——— er | Fm al 


92 | SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuar.22. 


That the Romaine Gods neuer re (pected whether the Citse were 
corrapted,and fo brought to deftruction,or no. 


Cuap. 22. ~ 


BY to our prefent purpofe: this common-wealth which they fay was fo good 
A and fo lawdable,before euer that Chrift came, was by the iudgment of their 
owne moft learned writers,acknowledged to bee changed into a moft difhoneft 
and difhonorable one : nay it was become no common-wealth at all, but was fal- 
len into abfolute deftruction by their owne polluted conditions . Wherefore to 
haue preuented this ruine,the gods that were the patrons thereof, fhould (mee 
thinkes ) haue taken the paines to haue giuen the people that honored them fome 
precepts for reformatio of life & maners,feeing that they had beftowed fo many 
temples,{o many priefts,fuch varitie of ceremonious facrifices,fo many feftiuall 
folenanities;fo many & fo great celebrations of plaies & enterludes vp6 them.But 
thefe deuils minded nothing but their own affaires : they refpeGed not how their 
worthippers liued:nay their care was to fee them liue like diuels,only they bound 
them through feare to affoord them thefe honors.If they did giue them any good 
counfell,why then let ic be produced to light and read, what lawes, of what gods 
iuing were they, that the (4) Gracché condemned, to follow their turmoiles and 
feditions in the Citie: fhew which precept of the gods, (b) Marius or (¢) Cinna, 
or (d) Carbo violated , in their giuing action ynto the ciuill warres: which they 
began (e) vpon {uch vniuft caufes, followed with {uch crueltie and iniuries ,and 
ended in more iniurious cruelties : or what diuine authorities (f) Sylla himfelfe 
broke, whofe life,deeds and conditions, to heare Sa/ui defcribe (and other true 
Hiftorians) whofe haire would not ftand vpright ? What is he now that wiilnoe 
confeffe that (¢ ) chen the weale publike fell abfolutely? What is he now that will 
dare to produce that fentence of Vérgéll for this corrupticn of manners , inthe 
defence of their gods? 3 
(bh) Difeefere omnes adytis avifque relittis, | The gods by whom this Empire flood, left al} 
Dy, quibus imperium boc fleteratwe Aenz, | The templesandthe Altars bare =<s 
But admit that this were true: then haue they no reafon to raile vpon Chriftia- 
nitie,or to fay that the gods being offended at that, did forfake them: becaufe ie 
was their predeceflors manners, that long agoe chaced all their great multitude - 
of little gods from the cittie alears,like fo many flyes. But where was all this neft 
of Deities,when the (#) Galles facked the cittie, long before the ancient manners - 
were contaminate? were they prefent and yer fafta fleepe? the whole cittie was. 
all fubdued at that time, onely the Capitoll remained : and that had beene {urpri- 
zed too,if ( &) the Geefe had not fhewenthemfelues better then the gods, and 
waked when they wereallafleepe. Andhere-vpondid Rome fall almoft into the ’ 
(L) fuperftition of the -£gsptians that worthip birds and beafts , for they hence- 
forth kepta holy day,which they called the ( m ) goofes feaft. But this is but by 
the way:I comenot yet to difpute of thofe accidental euils which are rather cor- 
porall then mentall and infli@ed by foes,or miffortunes.I am now in difcourfe of 
the ftaines of the minde ,and manners, and how they firft decayed by degrees, 
and afterward fell head-long into perdition: fo that thence enfued fo great a de- 
ftruction to the weale-publike ( though their cittie walles ftogd ftill ad, donc y, 
Euill man- that their chiefeft authors doubted not to proclaime it loft and gone. Good rea- 
neischafe fon was it chat the gods fhould abandon their Temples and Altars,and leaue the 
a towncto iuft deftruion, if ic had condemned their aduices of reformation. ws 
a W. 


—————— 


Linz, -- «= OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 93. 


what might one thinke (I pray yee)of thofe gods,that would abide with the peo- 
ple thac worfhipped them, and yet would they neuer reach them any meanes to 


Jeane their vices,and follow what was good? 
ea re LeVIVES: _ ee ey 
[2% E (a) Gracchi:] Thefe were fonnes vnto Titts Gracchis ( who was twife Conful, 
triumphed twife,and held the offices of Cenfor,and Axgur ) and Cornelia,yonger daugh- 

terto African the elder: they were yong men of great and admirabie towardneffe : both 

which defending the Agrarian lawe , concerning the diuifton of lands, were murdered by 

the offended Senate, in their Tribunefhips : Tzberius by Najfica apriuate man,Casus by L. Opi- 

mins the Conful,sine yeares after: the firft with clubs,and ftooles feece: the latcer with fwords: | 

and this was the firft ciuil! diffenfion thar euer came to weapons: 4zze P.R.C, DCXXVII. dtarixs. 

(6) Marinus | Arpinas was his place of birth ; aman ignoble by defcene: put cametobe fe2- 

uen times Confull, Hee firft conquered Zagurth, then the Cymbrians, and Tentifhmer , and tri- 

umphed of all thefe: at laft enuying and hating Syl, who was his legate inthe warre of Ja- 

gurthe, he fellto ciuill watrres with him, wherein AZarins was put to the worft , and forced to 

flie into eAfrica. (c) Cinna} Marius being ouercome, Sylla going to warre vpon ALithridates, — 

left C.Cornelins Cynna,and Oftasins Confuls in the cittie.( yn 4, defirous of innouation, feue- 

red himfelfe from his fellow,and was chafed out of the Citry by him and the good fa&tion, 

which iniurie Cyaa endeuouring by all meanes poffible to reuenge, calleth back ALarins out 

of eA frica,and fo made warre ypon his countrie ,and entring it with mightie powers, he but- 

chered vp numbers, and made himfelfe the fecond time, and AZariws the {euenth time Confull, 

without the voyces of the people, in which Magiftracie AZarins dyed , after many bloudy 

maffacres,and foule ates committed. (4) (Carbo, |There were many of the Carbo’s,as Tully Carte, 

writes to Papyrius Patus,of the Papyrian family , but not ofthat of the Patriotts : This of 

whom Saint Axguffine fpeaketh,was Cueus Papyrins Carbo,one of AZarius his faction, who 

being ouer-come by Syla,fled into Sicily,&& there at LyLibenm was flaine by Pompey the great. 

(¢) Untuft caufe\L.Sylla,and Q . Pompeyus being Confuls,the Prouince of A/a, and the warre _ 

of Mitrbidates fell vnto Sylla. This ALarins Romocked becaufe of his olde grudge at P. Su/s. The origi- 
itius, Tribune, a moft {editious and wicked fellow , to gette the people to make election of Tl of the 
im for the warre againft A4ithridates. The people, though in'a huge tumule, yet tooke notice bee 

of what the Tribune propounded, and commanded it fhould be fo. Syilz not brooking this Sylla and 

difgrace , demanded helpe of his armie , and offered force to AZarixs his Ambaffadors , who Marixs. 

went to take vp legions at (apma : and fo brought his angry powers to the Cirty, with intent 

to wreake this iniurie by fraude,or force. Hence arofe the feedes of all the ciuill warres: for 

Marius with his faction mette him in the Cittie at Port E/quiline, and there fought a deadly 


The G race | 
chs. 


Cinna, 


 ferte battaile withhim. (f) Sylla, | This man was a Patriot , of the Cornelian familie : and 


hauing done worthy feruice in armes , hee was made Confull ; In which Magiftracie , hauing 
conquered CMithridates,chafed out the ciuill warres,ouer-throwne Afarins the yonger,Carbo, sy¥a, 
Norbanus Sertorins, Domitius Scipio, and the reft of the ALarian fa&tion , hce tooke ypon him 
perpetual! Dictatorfhip by the lawe Valerian; wherein hee profcribed many thoufands of the 
Romaine Citizens with outragious crueltie, He was a moft bloudy fellow,and giuen ouer Vnto 
all kinde of luft and intemperance, (g ) Then the weale publike] Lucane by the mouth of Catos 
 Olim vera fidei,Sylla Mariog,rcceptis, | Whilom,when Afavins and feirce S)Ma ftrouc, 

Libertatis obyt. | True liberty fell dead. —————__ : 
(b ) Difceffere omnes adytis,| The verf{eis in the fecond booke of Uirgils eZneads , which he‘call 
Sernins and Macrobius doe thinke belongeth vato the calling out of the gods : for when asa Perse 
citty was befieged,& the enemy had an intent to raze it to the ground, leaft they fhould feeme gods, 
£0 Peht again(tthe gods,and force them from their habications againft their wils (which they 
held as a wicked deed) they vfed to call them out of the befieged citty,by the generall that did 
befiege it,that they would pleafe to come and dwell amongft the conquerors, So did (amillus | 
‘ac the Veii,Scipio at Carthage and Numance,o@ Mummins at Corinth, (1) The Gulls facked| The The Galles 
Tran{alpine Galls burft often into Ztaly in huge multitudes, The laft of them were the Sexones, take Rome 
who firft facked C/u/ium,8 afterwards Rome : Anno P.R.C.CCCLX. whether thete werconly 
thefe,or fome Cifalpine Galls amongft them, is vncertaine. (4) The Geefe | It isa very common 
ftory,that when the Galles had found a way vp to the Sy dc ,and were climbing vp in the 
night when allthe keepers were a fleepe , they were defcried by the noife thatthe geefe did the Capi 
make which they kept ip the capiro// as confecrated ynto June. And there-vpon a tolls Geefe, 

; atcnin g 


P 4 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. C wari23. 


fnatching vp his weapons,mette a Gail vpon the very top of the battlement , and tumbled him 
downe with his bucklar : whofe fall ftruck downe the reft chat were a comming vp, and in the 
meane time, the Romaines gotte them into aimes , and fo repulfed the Galles with much adoe, 
(1) Superftition of the Egiptians ] They had certaine beafts, which becaufe of their vfe-fulneffe 


they confecrated as gods : Twllie de nat.deorJib.1.of them at large in Diodorus, Biblioth. lib.2, 


Such were the Dog,the Cat,the bird Ibis the Oxe,the Crocodile the Hawkes. (m_) The goofes 


_ feaft, | Becaufe of that good turne which the Geefe did them , che ‘Romaines did euery yeare 


The 
honois at 
Rome. 


The happy 


fucc-{fle of 
wicked 
Marist, 


vie this ceremonie : ( P/ut.de Fortuna Romanor.) | will relate it in Badeus his words, for ] cane 
not vfea more excelient phrafe. A Dogge was hangd vpon a gallowes,and a Goofe was placed 
very decently in a gallant bed or panier, for all men to vifit as chat day. For the fame caufe(fai 
Plinie l:b.29.) there were Dogges hanged vp euery yeare vpon a gallowes betweene the Tem- 
ples of Juxentxs,and Summanus, the gallowes was of an elderne tree: and the firft ching thae 
the Cexfor doth after his inftitution,is to ferue the holy geefe with meate, 


| That the varietie of temporalleftates dependeth not upon the pleafure or di[pleafure 
| of thefe denills, but upon the indgements of God almighty. | 


/ . Cap. 236 


Ay what fay you to this, that thefe their gods doe feeme to affift them in ful- 

filling their defires,and yet are notable to reftraine them from brooding vp 
fuch defires: for they that helped (4) (Marius, an vaworthy bafe borne fellow, 
to runne through the inducement and managing of fuch barbarous ciuill warrés, 
to be made feuen times Confull,to die an old man in his feuenth Confulfhip,and 
co efcape the hands of 5yde,that immediatly after bare downe all before him,why 
did aot thefe gods keepe Aferins from affeQing any fuch bloody deeds, or excef- 
fiue crueltic 2 Ifhis gods did not further him in thefe ates ac all , chen haue wee 
good aduantage giuen vs by their confeffion, that this temporall felicitie which 
they fo greatly thirft after,may befall a man without the gods furtherance: and 
that other men may be as A¢arins was, enguirt with health, power, ritches , ho- 
nours, friends, and longlife, and enioy all thefe, mauger the gods beards: and 
againe,that other men may be as Regu/ws was, ae in chaines, flauerie, mife- 
rie, ouer-watching:,and torments,and perifh in thefe extremities,do all the gods 


_ what they can to thecontrary: which if our aduerfaries doe acknowledge, then 


mutt they needs confeffe that they do nothing benefit their worfhippers(6)com- 
modity,and confequently that all the honor giuen them as out of fuperfluitie : 
for if they did rather teach the people the dire& contrariesto vertue and piety, 
the rewards whereof are to be expected after mens deaths , then any thing that 
way furthering them: and if in thefe tranfitorie and temporall benefits , they can 
neither hinder thofe they hate, nor further thofe they loue: why then are they 
followed with fuch zeale and feruencie? why do you mutter that they are depar- 
ted,as from acourfe of turbulent and lamentable times, and hencetake occafion 
to throw callumnious reproches vpon the religious chriftians 2 If that your gods 


haue any power to hurt or profir men in thefe worldly affaires,why did they ftick 


to that accurfed A¢arséus,and fhrinke from that honeft Rega/ss ? dothnot this con- 
uince them of iniuftice and villanie ? Doe you thinke that there was any want of 
their worfhip on the wretches party? thinke not fo: for you neuer read thae 
Regulus was flacker in the worthip cf the gods then Afarias was. Nor may you 
ian your felues,chat.a corrupted courfe of life is the rather to be followed, 
ecaufe the gods were held more friendly to A/arins then to Regulus: for (c) Meo 
sells the honeftcit man of all the Romatnes, (4) had fiue Contuls tohis fonnes, 
Oo 7 oS "and 


Lisa. OF THE CITIE OF GOD: 95° 


and liued happy in all cemporall eftate: and (¢) Cateline , that villenous wretch, 
was oppreffed with mifery and brought to naught in the warré which his owne 
gut had hacched:good men that worfhip that God who alone can giue felicity, 
o fhine,and are mighty in the true and fureft happinefle:wherefore, when asthe 
contaminate conditions of that weale-publike , did fubuert it, the gods never put — 
totheir helping hands to ftop this invndarion of corruption into their manners, 
but rather made it more way , and gauethe Common-wealtha'arger paffe vnto 
diftruGion. Nor let them fhadow them-felues vnder goodriefle or pretend thac 
the Citties wickednefle draue them away. No,no, they wereal! there , they are 
produced, they are conuicted, they could neither helpe the Citty by their inftruc- 
tiSs,nor conceale themfelues by their filence.l omit torelatehow (f) Afarinswas 
commended vnto the goddefle Aarica by the pittiful Adssturnias in hit Wood,8& | 
how they made their praiers to hirthat fhe would profper all his enterprizes,and 
how he hauing fhaken of his heauy difperation, returned with abloudy army eué 
wnto Rome it felfe: VV here whata dee eg oe per more then moft inhumain 
victory he obtained, let chem that liftto read it,looke in thofe that haue recorded 
it: This as I faid I omit.nor dol impute his murderous felicity vnto any Marica’s, 
or I cannot tell whome , but vnto the moft fecret iudgement of the moft mighty 
God to (hut the mouthes of our aduerfaries,and.to free thofe from error that doe 
obferue this witha difcreet iudgement and not with a preiudicate affect. For if 
the diuvels haue any power or can doany thing at all in thefe affaires, it isnomore 
then what they are permitted to do by the fecret prouidence of the almighty-and 
in this cafe,they may be allowed to effect fomwhat to the end that we fhould nei- 
ther taketoo much pleafure in this earthly felicity , in that wee fee that wicked 
men like Afarius may inioy it, neither hold it asan euil, & thérforéto be verérly 
refufed,feeing that many good honeft men,and feruants of the true & liuing God 
haue pofieffed it in {pite of all the diuels in hell:and that we fhould not be fo fond 
as to thinke that thele vncleane {pirits are either tobe feared for any hurt,nor ho. 
noured for any profit they can bring vpon mans fortunes. For they are in power, 
but euen as wicked men vpon earth are,fo that they cannot do what they pleafe, 
but are mecre minifters to his ordinance , whofe iudgements no man can either 
comprehend tully,or reprehend iuftly. | | 


L. VIVES. | 


T Hey that help ea Marius 1} Ater he returned out of ef frice ; hee called all the flaues to his M erlarhie 
ftandard,and gaue them their freedome:and with all cruelty {poyled the Collonies of O/- crueley. 
tie, Antinm,Lavinium,and Aritia.Entring the Citty,he gaue his foldiars charge that to whom- : 
foeuer he returned not the falute,they fhould immediatly difpatch him, It is ynfpeakeable to 
confider the innumerable multitude of all fortes , Noble and ignoble , chat were flaughtered 


bythis meanes, His cruelty Lveas in few wordes doth excellently defcribe, 


\ 


Wir ferns & fate cupientiperdere Romasn. | Genel de Gaef inrernene fo fate, 

Sutficiens, imam To wrack Rome by, — aaa _ 

And yet this bloudy man (as I faid-before ) in his feanenth Confulthip,died quietly inhisbed, 
as Lucan fgich: | : | | 7 

Fabx cuet[a Confull meriturus in urbes | Happy dead C1 énfull in his rain'd tovene, 


Soone after his death , came Sys out of a4 fia , and rooted out A/arins his fonne andall 
the whole faction of them viterly. (6) Commodity | Saint eAuguitine plaies with thefe 
Arenbees » Compendia Siperion: Compendia Brel vor Gompenis cot commmosiy, 

Sf ee Aa a WAL 


wwe - ow ff 


eee nee a 


96 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. | Cuar.2q.. 


Metellust 
bus felicity 


whofe contrary is Difpendinm,Exceffe or Superfluity, (¢) Metellus | Ualerms ,\ib.7* and Pls 
ny lib,7. O. Metellus Macedonicus was iudged of all men the moft happy,as a man endowed 
with all good qualities ofbody andminde, Hee was Conful,he was Centor , hee managed 
great warrcs with happy fucceffe,he attained the glory of a triumphzhee Ic ft foure fonnes, three 
of thé were Confuls,two of which triumphed:one of whicn was Cenfor: his fourth was Prz- 
tor,& prickt for the Confulfhip,and (as Vellerms faith ) hee attained it : Befides hee had three 
daughcers all married to Noble and mighty houfes , whofe children he him-felfe liued to fee; 
and by this illuftrious company,all fprung from his owne loines(becing of exceeding age )he 
wasborne forth to his funerall. (d) Five Confutsto his fonnes || This hiftory is depraued by 
fome fmattering fellow: For I do not thinke that Saint Arguflme leftitfo, Vnleffe you. will 


| { Paris take Ouing, filios Confulares for Fine fonnes worthy to be Confuls : as my fine Commentator ob- 
copy Jeaues ferued moft acutely:which hee had not done ynlefle his skillin Logike had beene fo excellent 


Out chis, 
XQ Cateline. 
( 


Marius his 
flight 


a o 


Marita. 


as it was:fo hee findes it to be Coxfulares quaft Confulabiles , or ( onfulrficabiles,thatis (in the 
macifteriall phrafe 1 potentiato become Confuls.] (e) id Cateline |The life and conditions 
of L, Sergius (atelive , are well knowne becaufe Saésst him-{elfe the author that reporceth 
them, is fo well knowne, It is faid that among(t other reafons,pouerty was one of the cheefe, 
that fet him into the confpiracy againft his countrey, for he was one whofe excefliue {pending 
exceeded all fufficient meanes for a man of his ranke, In Sy//as time he got much by rapine,and 
gauc Syila many guifts, who vied his help in the murder of AL, CALzrias,& many others.(f) f 
omit torelatethat Marius |C, AZarins hauing efcaped alone out of the firft barrell of the ciuill 
wars, fled to Minturna a town of Campania The Minturntans to do Syllaapleafure fent a fel- 


‘ low to cut his threat :but the fellow being terrified by the words,and maiefty of the man,and 


running away as one wholy affrighted,tne ALimtsernians turned their mallice to reuerence, and 
began to thinke now that A@arius was one whome the godd<s had a meferiall care of; fo that 
they brought him into the holy Wood which was confecrated to Marvica, a little without the 
towne, dnd then they {cette him freeto go wherher hee would: Plutarch ix the life of Marius 
Velleius faith they brought him to the marifh of Adarica : She that was firft calied (arce ( faith 
Lagantius) after her deifying was enftiled ALarica, Seruius(in nad, lib. 8.) faith, Marica 
was the wife of Fawuus , and that fhe was goddefle of the ALinzturnians fhores, neare the riuer 


Lyris: Horace: , : 


. : , e 6 . t id : : ° e . . e 
Innantem Marice littorribus tenniffe Lyrim, | He.d Lyvas fwimming neai e Maricas,fhores. 


But if we make her the wife of Fauwus , itcannot be fo.for the Topicz// Gods, thatis, the local. 
ods of fuch and uch places,do neuer change their habitations , nor go they into other coun- 
tries ; Buc Poeticall licence might call her Afarica of Laurentum,when indecd fhe was AZarica 
of Minturnum. Some faie that by AZarsca fhould be vndeiftood Venxs : who had a Chappel 
neere vnto Marica wherin was written yudy ays a@zposizus, the Temple of Venus, Hefrod faith chat 


"Latinas was the fonne ot Uliffes and Cyrce: which Virgil toucheth , when hee calles him His 


_ granfires forme the fonnes : Solis ani (pecimen. But becaufe the times do not agree, therefore we 


muft take the opinion of [ginins touching this point , who aifimes that there were many that 
were called by the names of Latinus : and that therefore the Poet wrefteth the concordance of 
the name,to his owne purpofe, Thus much faith Seruias. 


Of the Attes of Sylla, wherein the Deurls (hewed them-felues 


his maine helpers and furtherers. 


‘ 


Cuap. ‘246 | Te 


7 NO" asfor (4) Sylls him-felfe , who brought all to ficha paffe,as that che 


4 'S times before ( whereof he profefled him-felfe a reformer)in refpect of thofe 
that hee brought ‘orth,were wifhed for againe and againe;when he firft of -all fee 
forward againit Afarius towardes Rome , Liuie writes thattheentrailes m the 


~ facrifices werefo fortunate , that (b) Poffhumins the Sooth-fayer would needes 


haue him-felfe to bee kept vnder guard , with an vrgent and willing profferto 
loofe his head, ifall sy//es intents forted not (by the afliftance of the goddes) = 
| | “ee a amo 


, : ae a : aS : 
Li3.2. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. ° 97 


ee ee ee A ee ee 


his head, if all Sy//zs intents forted not (by the affiftants of the gods ) vnto moft - 
withed and happy effea&. Behold now, the gods were not yet gone: they had not. 

as yet forfaken their alcars,when they did fo plainly fore-fhew the euent of Sylle 
purpofes sand yet they neuer endeuouredtomend Syia’s manners . They ftucke 

not to promife him withed happineffe ; but neuer proffered to fupprefle his wic- 

ked affections. Agaitie,when he had vnder-taken the 4fian warre agairilt AMfsthri- 

dates, L. Titius was {ent to him ona meflage,euen from Jupiter himfelfe, who fent _ 

him word that he fhould not faileto (¢) ouer-come Aithridates: no more he did 
indeed. And afterwards, when hee endeuoured to re-enter the citie ,andto re- 

uenge himfelfe, and his iniured friends ,vpon the liues of che Citizens , hee was 
certified that a certaine {culdiour of the fixt legion , brought him another mef= 
{age from Jowe,how that he had fore-told him of his victorie againkt Atsthridates 
betore, and how he promifed him now the fecond time, that hee would giue him 
power to recouer the rule of the weale-publike from all his enemies,but not with 

ouc much bloud-fhed. Then Sys asking of what fauour the fouldiot was:when ; 
they had fhewed him,he remembred that it was hee that -bronght him the other 
meffage in the warre of (ALthridates and that hee was the fame man that now 
brought him this: What canbe faid to this now , that the gods fhould haue fuch 

care to acquaint Syile with the good euents of thefe his withes: and yet none of — 
them haue power to reforme his fowle conditions , being then about to fet a- 
broach fuch mifchiefes by thefe domeftique armes , as fhould not pollute, but 

even veterly abolifh the {tate of the weale-publike ? By this very acte doe they 
' proone them-felues (as [faidhere-to-fore) dire&tly to bee deuils. And weedoe 
know, our {cripture fhewes itvs , and their owne actions eonfirme it, that their 
whole care is to make themfeluesbe reputed for gods tobe worfhipped as diuine 
powers and to haue fich honours giuen them , as fhall put the giuers and the re- 
ceiuers both into one defperate cafe,at that great day of the Lord. Befides, when 
Syllacame to Tarentum,and had facrificed there, hee defcryed in the chiefe lappe oc. crowns 
of the Calues liver, 2 figure iuft like a crowne of golde: and then Pofthumins of gold in 
the Sooth-fayer anfwered him againe , that it portended hima glorious victo- theliver of 
rie,and commandéd that hee alone f{hould eate of thefe inttayles. And withing ~~ 
lictle while after, ¢d) a feruant of one Lucius Pontius came running in crying — 
out in Prophetike manner, / bring aewes from Bellona , the victory és thine Syla: 

and then added , That the Capitol {hould bee fired. Which when hee had fayd, 
prefently going forth of the tents, hee returned the nexc day in greater hafte 

then a B spa fayd that the Capitoll was now burned: and burned it was in- 
deed. This now might quickly bee done by the deuill, both for eafe in the 
knowledge of it, and {peede in the relation. But now to fpeake to the purpofe, 
marke but well what kinde of gods thefe men would haue , that blafpheame 
Chrift,for deliuering the hearts of the beleeuers from the tyrranie of the deuill. 

The fellow cryed out in his propheticke rapture: The vsctorie is thine, O Sylla, 

and co affure them that hee fpake by a diuine inftin@, hee told them of afudden 
euent that fhould fall out foone after , in a place from whence hee in whom this’ 
fpirit fpake, was a great way diftant. But hee nener cryed, Forbeare thy Villanies 

O Sylla: thofe were left free to bee executed by him with {uch horror, and com- 
mitted with fuch outrage, as is vnfpeakeable, after that vitory which the brighe. 
figne of the Crowne in the Calues liuer did prognofticate vnto him . Now if 
they were good and iuft gods, and not wicked fiends, that had giuen {uch fignes, 
then cruly thefe entrailes fhould haue exprefled the great mifchiefes ona 

SS K fhould 


7 


jp -nIEEEEDEnTeEEeE ener _a_nnt_d_cennnI Inn aERREERNRREERRREEERRREEERERERREETEEEERERRREREREEEEEEEEEREE se eeemmeennmammmeneemenesene ee 


98 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuar.24. 


Sylla his 
crueltie, 


fhould fall vpon Sy himfelfe, rather then any thing elfe: for chat.vi@ory did 
not benefit his dignitie fo much,but it hurt his affeQions ewife as amuch : for by 
it was his {pirit eleuated in vaine glory ,and’he induced to abufe his profperitie 
without all moderation, fo that thefe things made a greater maflacre of his 
manners,then he made of the cittizens bodies. But as for thefe horred and la- 
mentable cuents,'the gods would neuer fore-tell him of them, either by entrailes, 
Prophefies , Dreames , or Sooth-fayings : for their feare was leaft his enor- 
mities {hould bee reformed , not leaft his fortunes fhould bee fubuerced. 
No, theyr (e) endeuour was , that this glorious conquerour of his Citizens, 
might bee captiuated and conquered by the rankeft fhapes of vicioufneffe, 


and by thefe, bee more ftri@ly bound and enchained vnto the fubiecion of the 
deuils themfelues. " | 


L. VIVES. | 
Tila ( 2) bimsfetfe ] The Marian fadtion (during their fuperioritie ) gouerned the common. 


wealth with fuch crueltie and infolence, that all che defires and hearts of the people longed 
for Sylla,and called him home,to ‘come and reuenge thofe tyrannies, But his gacdheslantes 
lifted him vp vnto fuch intollerable pride , and blood-thirft , that afterwards they all acknow- 


ledged Marius asa meeke lambe inrefpe&t of him, Lucase,. 


' 


. Sylla quod, immenfis acceffit cladibusvlter, "| Then SyVacame to treake thewoes fuftained, 

jlle,quod exiguumreftabat fanguinis urbis And that {mall quantitie chat yet remained, 

i. é Anda little after : oo | 

Twve data libertasodsjs,refolutag, legume oe brake freely forrhand { lawes raines gone ) 
Frenis ivaruit: non uni cuntta dabantur, _ | Wrath mounted : nor lay;all the guilt onone, 
Sed fecit fibi quifquenefas, femcl emnia vitior But cach wrought his owne ftaine ¢ the vidtors to 

q4 eee | : ngue 

ufferat. Licenc’d all acts atonce, 


(5) Pofthunsins | Cicero ( De dissinatione lsb.1,) faith that hee was alfo a Sooth-fayer with 
Syllain the waste called Sociale, of the Affociates or confederates. In which warre, Cicere 
himfelfe was a fouldiour. Valerius alfo affirmes this to bee true ( de prodigsis.) (¢) Mi- 
thridates | This was a moft valiant King of Pontus ,againft whome the people of Rome de- 
nounced warres, firft of all becaufe hee chafed Nicomedes out of Bythinsa. But afterwards, 
brake the warre out beyond all bounds, becaufe that vpon one fette day, all the Romaine Ci« 
tizens that were found traffiquing in his dominions , were murthered euery man, by the 
command of (Vthridates him-felte, This Kings fortunes did Sy firft of all fhake , then 
did Lucallas breake them, and laft of all Pomspey did veterly extinguifh them , fubiecting his 
whole kingdome vnto the Romaine Empire , the King hauing killed him-felfe. Pletarch ix 
the lines of Pompey, Lucullus, Gc. Appian Alex. in Mithridarico. Florus, and others. 
(ad) A feruant ii one | So faith Plutarch in his life of Sylla. The Capitoll was built on 
mount Tarpeins by Tarquin the Proud: anda Temple, the fayreft of all them on the Capi- 
toll, was dedicated vnto Jupster by Horatins Pulutlins thon Confull, the firft yeare of the 
Citties libertie. It was burned in the (Marian warre: Cx: Carbo, and L. Scipio being Con- 
fulls, Asso P.R..C, DCL.XXI. Repaired by Syila, finifhed and confecrated by O. Cao 

tulus : onely in this (as Sylle fayd ) did fate detracte from his felicitie . Some thinke ic 
was burnt by Syiia’s meanes, others by Carbo's the Confulls : Appian faith,that it was fired 
by meere chance,no man knew how. (¢) Endenoured | Satis agebamt, had a diligent and 
anxions care te effect it. oe . - 


Hew 


L123.2. | OF. THE CITIE OF GOD. 99: 


How powerfully the Deuslls incite men to villanies, by laying before them examples of 
dinine authoritie (as it were) for them to follow in their villanous atts, | 
Cuar.25. ae 7 
WHo is hethen (vnlefle he be one of thofe that loueth to imitate fuch gods) 
that by this which is already laide open , doth not fee, how great a grace of 
God it is to be feperated from the focietie of thofe deuils ? and how ftrong they 
are in working mifchiefe,by = their owne examples, as 2 diuine priui- 
ledge and authoritie, whereby men are licenfed to worke wickednefle. Nay,they Thedeuits 
were feene in a(4) certaine large plaine of Campania,to fighta fet battell amongft togerher by 
themfelues,a lictle before that the citizens fought that bloudy conflict in the fame te“ 
piace. Forat ficft there were ftrange & terrible noyfes heards& afterwards it was themiclues, 
afhrmed by many,that for certiine dayes together , one might {ee two armies in 
continuall fight one againft the other. And after that the fight was ceafed, they 
found the ground all trampled with the fteppes of men,and horfes,as if they-had 
beene made in that battaile. If the deities were truly and really at warres amongtt 
themfelues,why then indeed their example may giuea fufficient priuiledze unto 
humaine conflicts: ( but by the way, lec elris bee confidered , that th: fe deities.in 
the meane {pace muft either bee very malicious,or very miferable: ) but ifthey 
did no: fight, but onely illuded the eyes of men with fuch afhew , what intended 
they inthis, but onely chat the Romaines fhould thinke that they might lawfully 
wage ciuill warres,as hauing the practifes of the gods themfelues tor their pri- 
uiledges? for prefently vpon this apparition, the ciuill diffentions began to bee 
kindled,and fome bloudy maffacres had beeneeffected before. (6) And already 
were the hearts of many greeued at that lamentable.acte of acertaine fouldiour, 
who (¢ ) in taking of the {poiles of his flaine foe,and difcouering him by his face, 
to be his owne brother,with a thunder of curfes vpon thofe domeftique quarrels, 
he ftabd himfelfe ro che heart, and fell downe dead by his brothers fide. To enue- 
lop and ouer-thadow the irkefomneffe of fuch euents , and to aggrauate the 
ardent thirft after more bloud and deftruction,did thofe deuils (thofe falferepu- 
ted gods ) appeare vnto the Remazines eyes in {uch fighting _— to animate the 
cittie not to be any whit in doubt to imitate {uch a&ions , as hauing the example 
of thegods for a Jaw full priuiledge far the villanies of men. And out of this 
{ubtilcy did thefe maleuotent powers giue command for the induction of thofe 
Stage-playes, whereof we haue fpoken at large already ,and wherein {uch difho- 
neft salicles of the gods were portraited forth vnto the worlds eye , vpon their 
ftages,and in the theaters ; that all men ( both thofe that beleeue that their gods 
did fuch acts,and thofe that doe not beleeue it, but fee how pleafing itis tothem 
to behold fuch impurities ) may hence be bolde totake afree licence to imitate 
them,and practife to become like them in their liues. Leaft chat any man there- 
fore fhould imagine, that the Poets haue rather done it asa reproche tothe gods, 
then as athing by them deferued,(d_) when they haue written of their fightings 23 tce 
and brablings one with another,to cleare chis mifconftruion, they them-felues furthered 
haue confirmed thefe Poefies to deceiue others : and haue prefented their com- ¢veares 
bats,and contentions,not onely vpdn the Stage by players, bur euen in the plaine 
fields by themfelues. This wasI enforced to lay downe; becaufe their owne au- 
thors haue madeno doubt to affirme and record,that the corrupt and rotten man- 
ners of the Cittizens, had confumed the ftate of the weale-publike of Rome vnto 
nothing, long before that Chrift Iefus came into the world: for which fubuerfi- 
on of their ftate they wiJlmot call their gods into any queftionat all, but all the 
K 3 tranficoric 


= ea —=2 
1a0 SAINT AVGVSTINE. C uap.25. 


tranfitorie miferies of mortalicie ( which notwithftanding cannot make a good- 

man perifh whether he liue ordye ) they are ready to heape on the fhoulders of 

our Saviour Chrift .Our Chrift , that hath fo often powred his all-curing pre- 

cepts vponthe incurable vicers of their damned conditions , when theit falfe 

gods neuer put to anhelping hand, neuer vp-held this their religions common- 
wealefrom ruining, but cankering the vertues that vpheld it with their vilea@s 

and examples, rather did all that chey could to thruft ic on vnto deftruGion. No 

i man (Echinke) will affirme that it perithed becaufe that 3 | 
‘ae z Difce(fere cmues adytis ari{G, relritis ,—Dy 
| _ The gods were gone,and lefe their Altars bare. — 

As though their loueto vertue , and their offence taken at the wicked vices of 
the eittie had made them depart : no, no, there are too many prefages from in- 
trailes footh-fayings, and prophecies, ( whereby they confirmed and animated 
their feruants,and extolled them-felues as rulers of the fates, and furtherers of 

_ the warres) that prooue and conuince them to haue beene prefent: for had they 
beene abfent,the Romaines in thefe warres would neuer haue beene fo farre tranf- 
ported with their owneaffeQions,as they were with their Gods inftigations. 


Ts (a ) 4 certaine plaine of Campania}. LZ. ae and C. Norlanmns being Confuls, betweene 


Capua and Uslturnums was heard a huge clafhing of armes,and founding of martiall inftru- 
ments, with an horrible noyfe and crying , as if two battels had beene there fighting in their 
Prodigious tCatctt furie. This was heard for many dayestogtther, Julius Obfequens, Now this Scipio'and 
foundsof this Norbanas were the two firft Confuls with whom the great Syila had the firftconflid, aftee 
battles hisreturneinto Jraly, for they were both of CMarixs his faktion, (6) end already | for 
heard.  whenfriends and acquaintance meete, and know one another in contrary fronts of battell: 
then know they well whiat kinde of warre they are fallen into; and haue a full view of the 

fruites of ciuill hate: So faith Lucane in his Tharfatia,lib.4, 


as Poftquam fpaciolangucntia nulle ~+=~when they from their confronting places, 
‘Mutua confpicuostabuerunt lumina vultus, Gazeda good while in each others faces, 

Et fiatrces, natofque fos videre patrefqncy Andfathers me:te their fonnes,and brethreathere, 

Depreher fins c5t crutle nefas,-ooe Then fhew’d the war ctsue ciuill .- 


(<) Taking of the fooyles| Lixie lib.79. This fell out when Cynva and (Marins fought that 
defperate battle with Cz, Pompey , father to Pompey the great. Valerius ( lib.5.) faith thae 
Brethren one of “Pompeys fouldiours killed his owne brother that ferued Sertori#s in his warres. Liste 
killing one putteth Cyne for Sertorins ; but both might come to paffe: for all the armies were of Cyne 
anctner, : . ° . es . . 
za'stayfing, which not-with-ftanding were diuided into foure. Cynna Jed one , (Marinas ana 
other, Q. Sertorins the third, (%. Carbo the fourth . Orofixs writeth that Pempey fought.a 
~ battle with Sertorixs, wherein this tragedy of the two brethren fell out. (4) When they bane 
written of their fightings, and their | Homer in the warres of Troy , makes the gods to bee at 
ereat variance,euen vnto ftroakesamongft them-felues : (Mars, Venus, and ¢ pollo , againft 
“Pallas,luno,and Neptune, 


Of certaine obfcure infiructions concerning good manners which the 
Denills ave fayd to haue giuen sn fecret, whereas allwicked- 
neffe was taught in their publike folemnities. 
Cuap. 26. 


Herefore feeing that this is fo,fceing that all filthines confounded with crus 

'"  elties,all che gods fowleft faas and fhames , whether true or imaginary, by 
their owne commandements ; and vpon paine of their difpleafures, if it — 
; omer 


\ 


ee ESI IE EDIE ATI IES SLL AIO AS aT LE TC TS ee TE OIA SLND IESE DE LE EEO POOL DIELS, 


Lix.2. | OF THE CITIE OF GOD. | IoI 
otherwife, were fet forth to open view ,and dedicated vnto themfelues, inthe 

moft holy and fet folemnities , and produced as imicable {peCtacles to all mens 
eyes : to what end isit then, (4) that feeing thefe deuils, who acknowledge their 
owne vncleanneffe , by taking pleafure in fuch ob{cxnities, by beeing delighted 
with their owne villanies and wickedncfles,as well performed as inuented; & by 
their exacting thele celebrations of modeft men in fuch impudent manner , doe 
confeffe themfelues the authors of all pernicious and abhorred courfes ; yet 
would feeme ( forfooth) and are reported to haue given certaine fecret inftrudti- 

ons againft euill manners,in their moft priuate habitacles,and vnto fome of their 
moft feleted feruants 2? If it be fo take here then an excellent obferuation of the 
crafte and malicioufneffe of thefe vncleane fpirits. The force of honefty,and cha- 
ftitie,is fo great and powerfull vpon mans nature,thacall men, or almoft ali men, 

are mooued with the excellencie of it, nor is there any man fo.v holy abandoned 

to turpitude , but he hath fomefeeling of honefty left him. Now for the deuills 
depraued nature,we muft note, that vnleffe hee fometime change him-felfe into _ 

an angell of light, (as we read in our {criptures that hee will do) tee cannot fully 2.Coz. :, 
effect his intention of deceit. Wherefore he {preads the blafting breath of all im- 
puritie abroad,and in the meanetime,whifpers alittle ayre of diffembled chafti- 

tie within. He gives light vnto the vileft things,and keepes the beft inthedarke, 
honeftie lyeth hid , and fhame flies about the ftreetes : Filthineffe muft not bee 
acted, but before a great multitude of {pectators : but when goodnefle is to bee 
taught,the auditorie,is little or noneatall: as though puritie were to be blufhed 
at,and vncleanneffe to be boafted of : But where are thefe rules giuen , bur in the 
deuills temples 2? where,but in the very Innes , or exchanges of deceit? And the 
reafon is,becaufe that {uch as are honeft ( being but few ) fhou'd hereby bee en- 
ueighled,and fuch as are difhoneft,(which are multitudes) remaine vnreformed. 

But as for vs,we cannot yet tell when thefe good precepts of celeftiall chaftitie 
were given : butthis we are fure of, that before (6) the very temple gates , where 

the Idoll ftood,we beheld an innumerable multitude of people drawne together, 

and there faw a large traine of Strumpets on one fide, anda (¢) virgin goddeffe 
onthe other ; here humble adorations vnto her; and there, foule and immodeft 
things ated before her. We could not fee one modeft mimike,not one fhamefaft 
agtor amongft them all: but all was full of ations of abhominable obfcenitie, 

_ They knew weil whac that virgin deity liked ,and pronounced it for the nations 

to learne by looking on,and to carry home in their mindes . Some there were of 

the chafter fort,chat turned away theit eies from beholding the filthy geftures of 

the players,and yet though they blufhed to looke vpon this artificial beaftlineffe, 
they gaue {cope vnto their affections to learneit . For they durft not behold the 
impudent geftures of the actors boldly , for being fhamed by the men : and leffe 
durft they condemne the ceremonies of that deity whom they fo zealoufly ado- 
red.But this was that prefented in the temples, and in publike which none will 
commit in their owne priuate houfes,but in fecret. It were too great a wonder 

if there were any fhame left in thofe men of power,to reftraine them from a@ing 

that which their very gods doe teach them , even in their principles of religion 3 

and tell them that they fhall incurre their difpleafures ifthey do not prefent them 

{uch fhewes. What fpirit can that be,which doth enflamebad minds with a worfe The devi 
inftin&,which doth vrge on the committing of adulterie, and fattes it felfe vpon rotagiaas 
the finne committed , burt fuch an one as is delighted with {uch reprefentations, % mitchref 
filling the temples with diabolical! Images,exaGing the prefenting of loathfome °77"k4 

| XK 


~~ infligations 
iniquity 


fa 
al a mame Sm ee - — 


102, 


The God- 
defic Flora, 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. C wap.27. 


iniquity in Plaiesymuttering in fecret, know not what good counfels,to deceiue 
and delude the poore remainders of honefty , and profefling in publike all incite- 
ments to perdition,to gather vp whole haruefts of men giucn quer vnto ruine? 


ee 


_L.VIVES. 


T? what exdis it (a) that) A diuerfity of reading. We follow the beft copy. (6) before the 
temple| Hee {peaketh of the follemnities of the Goddefle Flora; which were kept by all 


the {trumpets and ribalds in the Citty, as Plutarch, Onid ,and others doe report. For Flora | 


her felf was an whore:Lattantins lib.1. The ars of Flora are celebrated with all lafciniou/neffe 
befitting well the memory of {uch a whore , For be 

not to [pew forth in all uncleaneffe ) the whores ( at the peoples earneft intreaty ) put off all their ap- 
parell( thofe I meane that were the atlors did this) and there they atted their sasmodeft Leftnres 
before the people untill their luftfull eyes were fully fatiffied with gazing onthem. (c) The virgin 
goddeffe| That was Vefta, Vpon the day before the Calends of May,they kept the feafts of F/- 
ra, Vefta,Apollo,and Auguftas,vpon Mount Palatine.Onia. Faftorum.4. 


Tunc repetam,nunc me grandius vr get opus: Reft rill chey come : now,to a greater faires 
Aufert Vefta diem, chznali, lea vecepta eft This day is Veita’s ; fic is entertained, 
Limine : fic sufti conftétuere Patres. In her fonnes houle : our fathers fo ordained, 
P hebus babct partem : Vests pars altera cepitt ' | Phzbus hath pare, Vefta hath part affign’d 
Duod fipercft illis-tertins ipfe tenet, (The third’s Auguftus fhare that’s left bebind. 
State Paletine Laurus,pretextag, quercus : | Liue grcene thou noble oke , and Palatine —_(thrine, 
Stet: domus eternos tres habet una dees, 1 Keepe greene thy daics, three gods poffeife one 


Exit & in Maias feftum Florale Calendaas, | Let Flora’s feafts that in Mayes Calendes are, 


_ What agreat meanes of the fubuerfion of the Romaine eftate the induction of thofe 
fcurrilous plates, was,whichthey furmized to be propitiatory unto their 
gods. Car. 27. = 


. 
. 


Ertulliws (4) a graue man,and a good Ph ilofopher,being to be made Edsle,cri- 


edout inthe eares of the whole City , that amongft the other duties of his’ 


magiftracy,he muftneedes goe pacifie mother Flora,with the celebration of fome 
follemne plaies : (6) which plaies, the more fowly they were prefented,the more. 
deuotion was held to be fhewen. And (¢) in another place( being then Conful, 
he faich that when the City was in great exctremity.of ruine , they were faineto 
prefent plaies continually for ten daies togither ; and nothing was omitted 
which might helpe to pacifie the gods,as though it were not fitter to anger them 
with temperance, then to pleafe them with luxurie: and to procure their hate 
by honefty,rather then to flatter them with fuch deformity. For the barbarous 
inhumanity of thofe (4) men, for whofe villanous ats the gods were to bee ap- 


peafed were itneuer fo great, could not poffibly doe more hurt, then that fil-_ 


thinefle which was a@ted as tendingto their appeafing , becaufe that in this,the 

ods will not bee reconciled vnto them, but by fuch meanes as muft needes pro- 

uce a deftruétion of the gocdnefl¢ of mens mindes , in lieu of their pre- 
uenting the daungers imminent onely ouer their bodies : nor will thefe Deities 
defend the citties walls , vntill they haue firft deftroied all goodneffe within 
the walles. This pacification of the gods , fo obfcene , {o impure, fo wicked, 
fo impudent , fo vncleane , whofe actors the Romaines difl-enabled from alk 
magiftracie , (¢) and freedome of City , making them as infamous as they 
knew them difhoneft : this pacification( I fay) {fo beaftlie , and fo dire@lie 
oppofite vneoall truth of Religion ,and modeftie, thefe fabulous inventions 
of their gods filthineffe , thefe ignominious fads of the gods themfelues 

| : either 


fides the bawdery of fpeeches , ( which they fuck 


Linz. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. — 103 


—————-s ce, 


(either fouly fained , or fowlier effeted )the whole citty learned borh by feeing 
and hearing: obtecuing plainly, that their gods were well pleafed with fuch pre- 
fentations,and therefore they did both exhibite them vnto their Idols, and did 
imitate them themfelues : But as fot that (I know not indeed well whar) honeft 
inftruction, and good counfell which was taught in {uch fecret,and vnto fo few; 
thac I am fure was not followed,ificbe true, that it were taught belike it was ra- 


ther feared, that too many wouldknow.it, then fufpe@ed that any few would 
follow it. : | | 


_L. VIVES.- a 
[ Evtaliins (a) a graue man |Iefhould furely be Tullius: for this that Saine Auguftine quo- 

teth isout of his orations : Wherefore it muft either be : Talbus that fLraue mun, and that 
fmatrerer in Philofsphie: (Saint Auguftine fo deriding his fpeculation, that could not free him 
from fuch grofie errors, ) or Tulisas that graue man and thrife worthy Philofopher : to fhew, that 
the greatcft Princes were infected with this fuperftition , and not the vulgar onely , nor the 
Princes onely but the graueft princes,and thofe that were Philofophers,not meane ones,but of ° 
chiefe note : adding this, to amplifie the equitie of his Philofophie, as Ter wsaximus, the thrife | 
mighty. Now ( faith Tally in verrem, Ablio 6.that Lam made Acdile,let mee reckon up the charge The office 
that the citte hath epalel upon mee. I muft firft prefert the moft facred Playes ae ceremonial ry 7 
folemnizies unto Ceres, Liber and Proferpina : then, I muff recencile mother Flora unto the Citie = 
and people of Rome , with the celebration of her enterludes,cre. (b) which playes | They were 
fuch that the aCtors would not play them as long as Cato the elder was prefent, Seneca, Valeria: 
us, Plutarch and Martiall doe all report this. ( ¢ ) In another place] In Catilinam . eA Ris. 3> 
(d) Aden for whofe. |he meaneth (ate/ixe and his confpiratours, (e ) Freedome of (itie ] fome 
copies read Tribsta amouit but the ancient ones do read it Tribw msouit,with more reafon, 


Of the faluation attained by the Chriftian religion. 
-Cuap. 28. - os 


WV By then doe thefe men complaine thinke you ? becaufe that by the natneof . 

Chrift, they fee fo. many difcharged of thefe hellifh bands that fuch’ vn- 
cleane {pirits held them in, and of the participation of the fame puni(hnient 
with them. Their ingratcfull iniquitie hath bound them fo ftrongly in thefe de- 
uilifh enormities,thar they murmure and eate their galls, when they fee the peos 
ple flock vnto the Church,to thefe pure folemuities of Chrift,where both fexes 
are fo honeftly diftinguifhed by their {euerall places 5 where they may learne 
how wellto lead their temporal lives here ,to become worthy of the eternall 
_ here-after:where the holy dotrine of Gods word is read from an eminent place; 
that all may heare it allure a reward to thofe that follow it, and a indgment to 
thofe thatnegleé it. Into which place if there chance tocome any fuch as {coffe 
at fuch precepts,they are prefently either conuerted by afudden power, orcured 
by a facred feare : for chere is no filthy fights fet forth there. ,nor any ob{cznities 
to be feene, or to be followed sbut there, either the commandements of the true 
st are propounded, bis miracles related , his guifts commended, or his graces 
implored. - oe : = 3 _ 


' 
noes 


An exhortation to the Romaines to renounce their Paganifme, 9° 


; , Cuap, 29.5 7 e ; 
L Bes thefe rather bee the obiedts of thy defires,thow couragious nation of the 
Romaines thou progcnice of the Regul, = Sczpises, and (a) ~— 

| 4 ong 


‘104 SAINT AVGVSTINE. C uap.29- 


long after thefe,difcerne but the difference betweene thefe , and that luxurious, . 


filthy fhameleffe maleuolence of the diuills. (6) If nature haue given thee any 
lawdable eminence, it muft be true’piety that muft purge and perfect it : jmpie- 

ty contaminates and confumes it. Now then , choofe which of thefeto follow, 

that thy praifes may arife not from thy felfe that may bee mifled,but from the 

true God,who is without all error.Long agoe, waft thou great in popular glory: 

but as then (as it pleafed the prouidence of the high God) , was the true Religion 
wanting, for thee to choofe and embrace. But now, awake,and row(e thy felfe (c) 

it is now day,thou art already awake in fome of thy children , of whofe full ver- 

tue,and conftant fufferings for the truth we doe iuftly glory:they euen thefe who 

fighting at all hands againft the powers of iniquity , and conquering them all by 

#He mean: dying vndaunted,haue purchafed this * poffeffion for vs with the price of their 
gat , bloud. To pertake of which poffeffion wee do now inuite and exhorte thee, that 
‘eaten. thou wouldeft becomea Citizen, with the reft ,in that citty wherein true re- 
Excement miffion of finnes ftandeth asa glorious fanctuary. Giue no eare vnto that de- 
Caer eg generate brood of thine, which barketh at the goodnefle of Chrift and Chrifti- 
God, vpon anity,accufing thefe times of badneffe,and yet defiring fuch as {hould bee worfe, 
rake, ,, by denying tranquillity to vertue,& giuing fecurity vnto al iniquity: thefe times 
conftarily, did&t thou neuer approue nor euer defiredft to fecure they temporall eftate by 
them. Now chen reatch vp at the heauenly ones, for which, take but alittle paines, 
andthou (hale reape the poffeffion of them, vneo alleternity . There fhalt thou 

finde no veftall fire, nor (e) {tone of the capitoll , but one true God, (f) who will 

neither limmit thee bleffedneffe in quality, nor time , bur giue thee anEmpire, 


both viiuerfal,perfect,& eternall.Be no longer led in blindneffe by thefethy illu. — 


_ ding and erroneous gods; reiect them from the, and taking vp thy true liberty, 
The hap- fhake of their damnable fubie@tion. They are no gods,but wicked fiends 3 and all 
pinesthat the Empire they can give themis but poffeffion of euerlafting paine. (gz) Juno 
Fpaeayierty ', did neuer greeue fo much that the Troyans(of whom thou defcendeft ) fhould 
oamen, atife againeto the ftate of Rome, as thefe damned deuills ( whomas yet thou 

holdeft for gods ,) doe énuie and repine, that mortall men fhou'd euer enioy the 

glories of eternity. And thou thy felfe haft cenfured them with no obfcure note, 


in affording them fuch plaies, whofe actors thou haft branded with expreflein- _ 


famy. Suffer vs then to plead thy freedome againft all thofe Impure deuills hae 
impofed the dedication and celebration of their owne fhame & filthineffe vpon 
thy neckand honor . Thou couldft remoue and dif-inable the plaiers of thofe vn- 
cleaneffes, from all honors: pray likewife vnto the true God , to quit thee from 
thofe vile fpiries that delight in beholding their owne {pots , whither they bee 
true, (which is moft ignominious Jor faigned,(which is moft malicious) . Thou 
didft well in clearing the ftateofthy Citty ftom all fuch fcurrilous off-fcummes 
as ftage-plaiers : lookea little further into it: Gods Maiefty can neuer delight 
in that which polluteth mans dignity . How then canft thou hold thefe powers, 
that loued fuch vncleane plaies, as members of the heauenly fociety , when thou 
holdeft the men that onely a@ted them, as vnworthy to bee counted in the 
worft ranke of the members of thy Cittie ? The heauenly Cittieis farreaboue 
thine, where rrath is the viGory ; holinefle the dignity ; happineffe the peace, 
and eternity the continuance. Farre is it from giuing place to fuch gods, ifthy 
cittie doe caft out fuch men . Wherefore ifthou wilt cometo this cittie , fhunne 
all fellowfhippe with the deuill. Vnworthy are they of honeft mens feruice , thae 
muft bee pleafed with difhonefty. Let chriftian reformation feuer theefrom 

aan  hauing 


Lis. OF THE CITIEOF GOD. © 103 


_ hauing any commercewith thofe gods, euenas the Cenfors view feperated fuch 
men from pertaking of thy dignities . But as concerning temporal felicity,which 
isall that the wickeddefire to enioye; and temporall affli€tion , which is all chey 
feeke to auoide,, hereafter wee meane to fhew,chat the deuills neither have nor 
ean haue any fuch power of either, as they are heldro haue, ( thouga if they had, 
wee are bound rather to contemne themall , then to worfhippe them ; for thefe 
benefites;which feeing that thereby we fhould vrterly debarre.our felues of that, 
which chey repine that wee fhould cuer attaine : ) hereafter (I fay ) fhall it bee 
rooued,that they haue no fuct powre of thofe things,as thefe thinke they hapie, 
that affirme that they areto bee worfhipped for {uch endes . And here fhall this 
booke ehd. . : i - 


bad * 3? “~ 
wg - 


2 wungrese 


| 


. B] r 4 


A (4) Fabricii.| Fabrieins was Cobfull in Pyrrbas his watre at which time the Romaines Fabricius, 

vertue was at the heightshe was,valoutous,poore,continent,and a ftranger to all pleafure, 

and ambition. (2) If nature bane ginen thee} The Stotkes held that nature gaue cuery man Vertues 
fome guifts :fome greater fome leffer sand that they were graced , increafed, and perfitted by feedes, 
difcipline,education, aid excercife. (c) st is new day] Alluding vnto Panl, Rom. 12.12, The Dawiliows 
nicht is paft,and the day is at band The day, isthe cleere vnder fee of goodneffe,in whofe wee : 
owre the Sanne is, ag the Pfalmift faith? The night is darke and obfcure. (4) in fome of t bb ae 
(hildren\ Meaning, that fome of the Remaines were already conuested vtito Chtift. (2) #0 fone : | 

of the Capitel\ loves \doll,vpon the capitol was of ftone : and the Romaines vfed to fweare by Pieris 

Loxe,that moft holy ftone : which oth became afterwards a prouerbe. (f) who will neither lim- 

mit] They are the words of Jo#e in Virgil, eEneid,1. promifing the rayfing vp of the Romaine 

Empire, But with farre more wifdome did Salsfte (orat.ad Cainm Cefarem fenen) affirme,that 

the Remaine cftate fhould haue a fal: And African the yonger feeing Carthage burne,with the 

teares in his eyes,recited a certaine verfe ott of Homer , which intimated that Rome one day 

{tiould come to the like ruine. (¢) luno did not} ~/LEnéides the firkt, 7 y 


e ' 


106 


THE CONTENTS OF THE 
third booke of the City of God. 


1. Of she aduerfe cafualties which onely the 
wicked doc feare,and which the world bath al- 
wastes beene (ubiett unto, whileft it remained in 


| Paganifme. chapter i. 


2.K ether the Gods to whem the Romaines 
and the Greekes exchtbited like cell G97 fife 
ficient canfe ginen them to let Troy be deftros- 
ed. chap.2. 

3. That the gods could not infily be offended 


| 


| 


a wound ginen him by bis wounded foe.chap.16 
17, Of the vexations of the Romaine eftate 
after the firft beginning of the confulls rule: 
And of the little good that their gods all thes 
while did them.chap.¥.7 
18. The miferies of the Romaines in the A-~ 
frican wars, and the {mall ftead their gods feed 
them there in.chap.18 : 
19. Of the fad accidents that befellin the fe- 


at the adultery of Paris ufing it fo freelyand | cond African warre, wherein the powres ongeth 


frequently themfelues. chap.3. 

4. Of Varo's opinion,that st is meete in pol- 
licy that fome men flouldfaigne themfelues to 
be begotten of the gods. chap.4. 

"5. That it is allsogither unltkely that the 


fides were wholy confumed.chap.19 

20.Of the ruse of the Saguntines , whe peu 
rifbed for their confederacy with Rage, she Ro- 
maine gods nexer helping them.chap.20 

21, Of Romes ingratstude to Scipio thas 


gods renen ged Paris bis fornication , fince they | freed it from imminent wast Sg of the con= 


permitiea Rhea’s to paffe unpunifhed. chap.s. 
6, Of Romulus bis murrherig of his bro- 
ther which the gods neuer I chap6. 
7. Of tke fubuerfion of lium by Fimbria 4 
captaine of Marius his faction. chap.7. 
8. Whether st was connenient to. commit 
Rome to the cuftody of the Troian gods chap.8, 
go Whether it bee credible that the gods pro- 
cured the peace that lafted all Numa's raigne. 
chap.o. 3 
fs whether theRomaines might defire inft- 
ly that their citties eftate fhould arife to prehe= 
minence by (uch furions warres when it might 
haue refted firme and quiet , in fuch a peace as 
Numa procured. chap.10. , 
13. Of the ftatue of Apollo at (ume , that 
fied teares ( as men thought ) for the Grecians 
miferies,ttoneh he could not help them.cap.1 1. 
12. How frustleffe their multitude of gods 
was unto the Komaines, who indxced the beyond 
the inffitution of Numa.chap.1 2 
13. By what right the Romaines attained 
their firff wines, chap.13 
14. How tmpions that warre was which the 
Romaines began with the Albanes , and of the 
nature of thofe vittories which ambition feekes 
to obtaine.chap,t 
5. Of the lines and deaths of the Romaine 
Kings.chap.v§ 
16. Of the firft Romaine Confills , bow the 
one expeiled the other ont of his country : and 


be himfelfe after many bloudy murthers fell by 


| 


ditions of the cittizens in thofe times that San 
lufte.commendeth to haue beene fo vertuons, 
chap.21 jee | 

22, Of the editt of Mythridates , comman= 
ding exeryRomaine that was to be found is A- 
fia,to be put todeath.chap.22 0 | 

23. Of the more prinate and interior mi [= 
chienes that Rome indured, which were prefag- 
ed ty that prodigious madneffe of all the crea- 
tures that ferued the ufe of man.chap.23 

24, Of the cinill d:[cord that arofe from the 

feditions of the Gracchi chap,24 

25. Of the temple of Concord buils by the 
Senate the place ,where thefe feditions and 
flaughters were cffetied.chap.r5 

26.Ofth: diners warres that followed af- 
ther the building of Concords temple. chap, 26 

27. Of Stila and Marius. chap.27 

28. How Sillarexenged Marius his murders, 
chap.28 

29. ef comparifon of the Gothes irrupfi-~ 
ons, with the calamities that the Romaines ina 
dured by the Gaules , or by the authors of their 
cinill warres. chap. 29 

30.Of the great and pernitious multitude of 
the Romaines warres a little before the com- 
ming of Chrift. chap.30 

31. That thofe men that are mot fuffered as 
now to worllip Ldolls fhew them(elnes fooles im 
imputing their prefent miferies unto Chrift. fee~ 
eng that they endured the like when they did 
worlbip the dinslls, chap.3%. 


FINIS. 


| i. ar i ans 
THIRDBOOKE 

OF THE CITTY OF GOD 

"Written by Saint eAugufline Bithop 


of Hippo,vnto Marcellinus. 


Of the aduerfe cafaaltzes which onely the wicked do feare : ad which the world hath le 


_ wates beene fubiect untowhileft st remained in paganifme. 

| : C HAP. I. : eS 

I 1 Hat we have already fpokenI thinke is fufficient, concerning 

¢ AWA ey cipally to be auoyded : that in thefe cafes thefe faulfe imagina- 
\ i} fel ry gods did never endeuour to lighten their feruants of” any 

AY Y/S@21 of thefe incenueniences , but rather added vnto their loades 

“} and furtheredtheir depriuations. Now ,I fee it is time to take 


| 3 bei of good 
oftheir liues ;as if man wete made to enioy all things except himfelfe: But nor- 


great God to illuminate. But becaufe Iftudy tobe briefe , I will not ftand vpon 
the worlds miferies in generall : onely what is Romes peculiars , or the Romaine 


Empires, I meane to relate: t 
Chrift,fell either vpon the citty it felfe,or vpon fuch prouinces as belonged vnto 
it,either by conquett or fociety,as members of the body of that commonweale, 
ofthofe I meaneto {peake fomewhatin particular. n> gee . 


EL VIVESS- 


T the (a )badneffe of their lands | Some read it, (Filla mala, others, ( and the more aunci- 


d more acutely by afigure called Denomination (5) fome 


ent) fi villam malam , better, an q 
that’ ptoportioned their liues by the lawes of 


erber peculiar\As Job , and fome other gentile¢s , 
nature,of whom heareafter: ae > | 
whether the gods to whome the Romairies and the Greekes exbsbited like worbip had 
Sufficient canfe giuen them to let Troy be deftroyed. | C wap. 2. | 

P(t therfore of Troy, Or Niam, whence the Romaines claime the difcent(for we 
may not omit nor negie& what.ve rouched.at in the 1.booke: why was Troy 
befeeged,& deftroyed by the Greekes that adared the fame gods that it ae 

re , ; 


| che depraued ftateofmens mindes and manners,which is prins 


107. 


LCE 


108 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuap.2. 


Apollo and 
Ne; 


tune 


priuity off) Leomeden:the father(fay fome)was wreaked in this fack,vpon Préems 
the fon, Wel then it is true that(b) Apollo & Neptune ferued as workmen vnder the . 


workethe fame Leomcedon,for otherwifethe taleis not true that faich that he promifed them 
rey of pay and brake his oth vnto them afterwards. Now cannot I but matuell that fuch 


Iliad 2, 


Aencid,5, 


a great fore-knower , as Apollo was, would worke for Leomedon , and could not 
foretell thathe would deceive him : nor is it decent to affirme that Neptune his 
vncle /wpiters brother 8 king of al the fea, fhould hau¢ no forefight at al in things 
to come.For(c)Homer brings him in foretelling great matters of the progeny of 
eéncas,whofe {ucceflors builtRome(yet is Homer(d}reported to haue liued before 
the building of Rome) nay more,he faueth e£neas from Achilles by acloud, defi- 
ring to raze this periurd citty of Trey though it were his own handy-worke,as(e) 
Virgsll declareth of him. Thusthen thefe two gods , Neptune and sto » were 
viterly ignorant of Lzomsedons intention to delude them,and builded thewalles of 
Troy(f for thankes and for thankeleffe perfons.Looke now whether it be aworfe 
matter to put confidence in fuch gods,or to confumethem. But Homer him-felfe 
(it feemes)did hardly beleeue this tale,for he maketh(z) Weptane to fight againft 
Troy, and Apollo for it ; whereas the fable giueth them both one caufe of being of- 
fended, namely Laomedons periury. Let thofe therefore that beleeue fuch re- 
ports be afhamed to acknowledge {uch deities:and thofe that beleeue them not, 
Jet them neuer draw cauills fromthe Trorans periuries, nor maruell that the gods 
fhould hate periuries at Troy, and loue them at Rome, For otherwife , how could 
it come to paffe, chat befides the aboundance of all other corruption in the city 
of Rome , there fhould bee fuch a great company in Catilnes confpiracy that 
liuedonely by their tongues practife in periury and.their hands in murder? what 
other thing did the fenators by taking bribes fo plentifully and by fo many falfe 
iudgments?what other thing did thee(s)people by felling of their voices,8z play- 
ing double in all things wherein they deale, bu t(k)heape vp the finne of periury? 
for euen in this vniuerfall corruption,the ould cuftome of giuing & taking othes 
was ftill obferued, but that was notfor the reftraint of wickedrefle by aweof 
religion , but to ad periury alfo vnto the reft of their monftrous exorbitances. | 


— L. VIVES. 
A eperiurie (a) of Laomedon | Virgillin the firft of his Georgékes: 


wonm- Satis sampridem faneuine nefire, ~--~- Oar bloud hath long agene, 


' Laomedontac lusmus perinria Troje, | Paid for the faith-breach of Laomedor, 


, 


— (a)Then it 6 trne| Apolloand Neptune feeing Laomedon the King of Phrygia,laying the founs 


Ww 
Prophecy, 


dations of the walles of Zroy, and marking the hugenefle of the worke hee went abour, 
agreed fora great fumme of gould,to make an end ofthis worke for him,which hauing done, 
he denied that he promifed them any thing (c) Homer brings | e4:neas vpon a certaine time 
being in fight with Achilles and being put to the worft, in fo much that he was almoft flaine, 
Neptune {peaketh thus ; Homer Iliad.s. 


Gan ccd” iiss wig guy Ox" tx Barciry dydyaypdu. &c. as followeth in Englith thus, 

But let vs fane hem yet ere he be flaine, 

Leaft great Achilles fury éf againe 

It burft into effett,we helpe too late: 

Whileft it is tinse, let us deceiue his fate: ‘ 

Leaft all the frecke be quite abolifbed 

OfDardanus whoml fo valued: : 
Whome louc his father prifed abone all eo 
" His fonnes, whofe nsoshers were terreftrial, | 

Bo facing Towed eam dare bis 


Be “1.8 OR aes ee ° 


we MM FY 


oY 


Lina. | | OFTHE CiTIE OF GOD. | 199 


eee | 


This man,in birth and valour neare dinine, 
‘Shallrule the Phrygians : and through him,their King, 
| There to an éndleffe nation flall they [pring, 7 
Becaufe of thefe verfesin Homer , Dionifins Halscarnaffeus writeth that many haue affirmed, 
that e£xeas leauing his fellowes in /taly , returned into Phrigia , and there hauing repawed 
Trey seigned as King, and left the crowneto his pofterity after him, But Homer fpeaketh of 
the /talan Troy,and the kingdome which arofe from that Phrygian Tyoy,namely of the Albi 
ans & the Lasinians;boch which nations defcended fromm the 7 rotans thar accompaniede4xe~ 
as(d) Homer reported | at what time Komse was built , or at vshat time Homer liued the auncient 
writers do not iuftly and viiformely define though the firft be Icffe dubitable then the latter, 
Plutarch inthe hfe of Romulus faith thathee and Remus firlt founded the walles in the third 
yeare of the fixe Osimpiad on which day wasn eclips ofthe moone: Diomsfins and Enfebizes 
fay che 1.yeare of the 7, O/ympiade:afcer the deftruction of Troy CCCCXXXII. yeares. Solin, 
in ‘Polshift.Cincins will haue it.buile in the twelth Olympiad : Psttor in the eighth: Nepos,and 
Luttatms, (to whom Eratofthenes and Apollodorus agree )the feauenth Olympiade,the fecond — 
yearc, “Pomponins Atticus and Tully, the feaventh and the third Neca el by all corref 
pondency of the Greeke computations to ours, it was built in the beginning of the feauenth 
Olympiad CCCC XX XIII. yeares after the rnine of Troy, About Homers time of liuing, 
his country,and his parentage,the Greeke writers keepe a great adoe: Some fay he was prefent 
atthe warres of Troy: Indeed he himlelfe brings in his Faemius finging in the banquet ofthe 
wooers(Odiffi.) But whether he do it through an ambiticus defire to grace his Mt. in beyond 
the reach of the time or no,it is doubrful.Others fay he liued not vntil an hundred yeares after 
this warre of Phrigia : and fome there bee that ad fifty more vntothe number. e4riferchus 
gives him to thofe times about which there was a Colonye planted in Jonia, fixty yeares after | 
the fubuerfion of the Heraclide : CX XX. yeares after the Troians warrs.Crates thinketh that 
there was not foure-fcore yeares becweene the demolifhing of Troy and the birth at Homers 
Some affirme,him to haue beene fonne to Telemachus Viiffes his fonne, and 7 olycaffa, daughe 
terto Neffor.In the cronicle of Exfebins Bifhop of (4farea we find this recorded:1e find(faith 
he jin the latine hiftory , that Agrippa reigning amongft the Latines, Homer florifhed amongft 
the Greekes , as Appollodorus the Grannmarian , ad Euphorbeus rhe Hifforiographer de both 
tefbifie,C XX IIIL yeares before the building of Rome, and as Cornelius Nepos (aith before the 
Juft Oiyonpiade an (. yeares. How foeuer then it fall out Homer was before the building of 


Rome: which Twlly alfo doth beare witnefle of in his Onsftiones Tufculane, (e )Virgill decla- 


reth.) eEncid.5. _ e 
owe--Palite tane ego firti, | * wee T hen in an hollow cloud, 

Congreffum Aeneam ec asis nec viribus equity J fau'd him, when he combatred that Greeke, 

Nabe cdwa erspui scupercm cum vertercabimo, ~ ' Thoughbhauing nesther fate,nor force alike . 


Stracta meis maribus perituva mania Troie ane. 4-7 hen when atine own: woikeT roy, fought to raze &e, Hlo Fre 
po & 


(f) for thankes and thankeleffe|Gratis ch ingratis : that,an aduerbe, this an adie€tiue, (¢)Nep- uoreth the 
tune | Neptuse after that Laomedon had thus cheaced him , was alwayes a heauy enemy of the Troians, _ 
Troyans : But-Apollo,being more gentle,and remiffe, was as good friends with them as before. 

Virgil, Eneid.6. | | 


Phate granesTroiefemper miferate labsres, } Fhebus, chat alwaies pitied Troies diftrefle, | 
Dardana qué Paridis direxts tela manu{ques And gave the hand of Paris good fucceffe, | 
Corpus in Acacide Gc. Againft Achulles life.&c, 


(b) the fenators |by the Sempronian law which (ains Gracchus preferred , the Gentlemen of 
Rome had the iudging all caufestwenty yearestogether without any note of infamy and chen | 
bythe Lew Plantian were felected fiftcene out of cucry tribe ,'by the fuffrages of the people i lave 
to be judges for that yeare , this was done in the fecond yeare of the /taliax warre, Cx.Pom- pi Phi 
peius,fonneto Sextus,and L.Cato being confuls, Afterwards by the law Cornelian which Sille oe 
inftituted,the authority was reduced to the fenat : who judged ten yeares rogether moft pare The Plane 
tally , and moft corruptedly when the greater fort indgedfaith Tully azainft Verres ) there was tian. | 
great complaning of uninft indgements, Lalt of all by the law Axrelian,preferred by Af Aureli- # bes Cornee 
xs Cotta being pretor,both fenat and peoplé combined, had the hearing and cenfuting of cau= Tp? Ape. 
fes(s)the people |Lucane in his firft booke.  ¢ ! ee lian, 

| | ine 


1x6 SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuap.3. © 
Hine rapti fafces precio,{cltevaue F:neris Hence. ynebou coafalthips,throug rough this deieftion 
Ipfe fist populus,lethalisquc piaedls urbit __} The people fola as voices:thns infeaion, 
Annuavenali re{crenscirtamima camps. Fild Mars his field wath ftrife at each eledtion, 


CR )But heap vp |for the iudges were fworne to itidge truly, and the people before they gaue 


their voices were fworne at a facrifice , not to hold any reward, ot fauour of the worth of the 
commonwealths eftate and fafety. — 


ewema—en 


Thas the Sods could not tufily be offended at the adultry of Paris, ufing itfo _ 
freely and frequently themfelnes. oO 


C wap, Ze 


W Herefore there is no reafon to faythatthefe gods who fupported theem- 

pire of Troy were offended with the Trofans periury ,when the Greekes did 
preuaile againft all their prore€tions.Nor is it,as fome fay, in their defence, that 
theanger at Paris his (4) adulcery made them giue ouer Troyes defence, for itis 
their cuftome to praife finne them -felues,and not to punith it in others. (6)The 
Troians (fasth Salu fer 1 hawe heardywere the firft founders > inhabitants of Rome: 
thofe were they that came away with Aeneas and wandered without any certaine abode. 
If Paris his fa were then to be punithed by the gods iudgements, icwas either 
tofall vpon the Trotans,or elfe vpon the Rom aines, becaufe(c)e&neas his mother 
was chiefe agent therein.But how fhould they hate it in Paris, when as they hated 
it not in Venue one of their company,who(to omit her other pranks committed 
adultery with xchifes and by him was begotten (4) Les. Or why thouldhis 
falt anger Afenelans , and hers (c) pleafe Vw/cane? ldo not thinke the gods fuch 


abafers of their wiues , or of themfelues , as to vouch{afe mortall mento partake 


with them id theirluues, Some perhaps will fay I {cofte at thefe fables :and 
handle trot {6 graue a caufe with fufficient grauity:why then ifyou pleafe let vs 
not beleéue that e£acas is fonne to Venus Jam content, fo (f) that Romulus like- 
wifebe notheldto be Marshis fonnei(g) If the one be fo , why is not thecther 
fo alfo , Is ic lawfull for the gods to medie caraally with wosnen , and yet vnlaw=, 
full for the men to meddle carnallie with Goddefl¢s:a hard,or rather an incredi- 


ble condition, that what was lawfull for 44ers (4) by Vevas her law fhouldnot be 


lawfull for Venus by her owne law. Butthey areboth confirmed by the Roman au- 
thority, for(s) Cefer of late,beleeued no leffe that(é)/enus was his grand-mother 
then(/) Romulus of old beleeued thac Aders was his father. ) 


L. VIVES. 


pi bis (a) adultery | This! thinke is knowne toall , both blind men and barbers(as they 
fay )chat the warres of Troy atofe about Alexander Paris his rape of HeHen,wife ynto Afe~ 


| pelans<b the Troians)at what time,and by whom Rome was built, Dionifins,Solnas, Plutarch, 
_ and diuers others , difcourfe with great diucrfityshe that will know further, let him looke in 
- them.(¢ ; eéneas his mother\for Paris vfed Venus as his baud, in the rape of Hellen and Uewss 


in the contention ot the goddefles for beaury,corrupted the iudgement of Paris with promife 


ot Hellen,(d) Acneaslhe was fonne to eAnchifes and Venns, Virgil, 


Tawe 


- » 
ba - : > > 
; . 


L1s.3. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. | Int 
Tune slle Aeneasquem DardanioAnchifa | Art thou that man whom beavteous Uenus bore, 
Alma Venus Phr)gas genuit Symotntis ad undas? got by Anchifes on{mooth Symois thore? 
: a And Lacretins. — , . | 
Acntadum genitrixhominum,dinumd, voluptas, | Mothert’ Aeneas liue,the gods delight 
Alma Venus. ) a | Faire Venus, -—————— 


(e) Vulcan} Hasband vnto Venus, (f) Romulus nor be] Dionyfius. Ilia,aVeftal Virgin, Soing | 
toMars bis wood to fetch fome water was ranifbed in the ( hurch( fome fay }by fome of her futors, Romulus 
fome,by her vncle eAmulins being armed, others by the Genigs of the place. But I thinke ra- hus father, 
ther that Revsx/as was the fon of fome foldiar,and Aereas of fome whore: and becaufe the fol- 
diars are vnder CMars,and the whores vnder Venus , therefore were they fathered vponthem, Aeneas his 
Who “as e4feneas his true mother, is one of the found qucftions that the grammariins ftand Mother. 
vpon in the foure thoufand bookes of Dydimens , as Seneca writeth. (¢) If the ome bee fo) IInd, 
and illwd , for hoc and ilud , a figure rather Poeticallthen Rhetorical. (4) By Venus her law] 

&: clofe,buta conceited quippe. ALars committed adultery with Venus. This was lawfull for 

Mars by Venus lawe , thac is by the law of luft , which. Venss gouerneth: then why 

fhould not the fame priviledge in luft bee allowed to Venus her felfe,bceing goddeffe thereof: 

that which is lawfull to others by the benefit of Vexus , why fhouldit not bee permitted to 

Venus to vie her felfe freely in her owne dominion of luft, feeing fhe her-felfe alloweth it fach / 
free vfc in others.(i) Cefar} This man was of the Julian family, who was derived from Judas, 

Aeneas his fonne,and fo by him to Venas. This family was brought by King Tixilus from Alba Crfars fac 
lenga to Rome, and made a Patrician family . Wherefore Cefar beeing dictator built atemple muy, 

to Venus which hee called the temple of mother Venus : my Aunt Julia ( faith Cefar in Suete- 


mus) onthe mothers fideis defcended from Kings, and on the fathers, from-gods, For from 


encns Martins , aKing , the Martii defcended, of which name her mother was : and from 
Venus came the [utsty of which ftocke our family is {prung.(k) His grand-mother] Set for any 


| progenitrix , as itis often. vfed, (/) Romulus of old] And Cafar of late,becaufe of she times 


wherein they liued, being at leat fixe hundred yeares diftane, 


ofV arro’s opinic 5 , that it is meete in policy that fome men fhould faicne them- 
Ds es. ek “lelack bo be begotten of the gods. Cuar 4. — 
BY doe you beleeue this will fome fay ? notl truly. For Varro, one of their. 


moft learned men, doth ( though fainely , yet almoft plainely Jconfeffe chat 
they allarefalfe. But that itis (4) profitablefor the citties(faith he)tohavetheir 


_ greateft men their generalls and gouernours , beleeue that they are begotten of 


gods, though it be neuer fo faife : that theic mindes being as illuftrate, with page 
of their parents deitie, may bee the more daring to vndertake, more feruent to 
aét,and fo more fortunate to performe affaires of value. Which opinion of Var- 
ro,(by me here laid downe ) you fee how it opens a broad way to the falfhood of 
this beleefe : and teacheth vs toknow,that many fuch fiGions may be inferted in- 
to region, whenfoeuer it {hall feeme vfe-full vnto the ftate of the city ,toinuent 
fuch fables of che gods. But whether Vesus could beare .tencas by Anchifes,or 
Mars beget Romulus of Syluta, (b) Numsitors daughter that we leave as we findit, 
vndifcufied. For there is almoft fuch a queftion arifeth in our Scriptures. Whe- 
ther the wicked angells did commit fornication withthe daughters of men,and Gen,é 
whether that therevpon came Giants, that is , huge and powrefull men , who in- 
creafed andfilledalltheearth? = : 7 
a L. VIVES. | _ 
Kg is (4) profitable] Itis generally more profitable vnto the great men themfelues, who hereby | 
haue the peoples loue more happily obliged to then . This made Seépéo that he would neuer aa ae 
feeke to change that opinion of the people, who held , that hee was ee by fome god : and pig dinine” 


Alexander in Lucias faith it furthered him in — gteat defignes , ro bee counted the fonne nine, 
| " 3 of 


a 


= 


112 | SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuar.s. 


of Iupiter Hamon, For hereby he was feared, and none durft oppofe him that they held a god. 
& BaeCacor (faith he ) wrevaagurdy uiyrgd cde's in enbisare cibpduos O60 patycds ios pov txparur dure, 
The Barbarians obferued mee with renerence and amazement ,and none durit with-ftand mee, 
thinking they foould warre against the gods ,whofe confirmed fonne they held mee, (6) Numitors 

Numitor & daughter, | Numitor was fonne to Procas the Albian King, and elder brother to Amutins, But 

bis children jy ¢\0 thrutt by his brother from his crowne, he liued priuately, Amulixs enioying the crowne 
by force and traude. Numiter had Lanfus to his fonne,and Rhea or Ilia Syluia to his daughters 
the boy was killed,the daughter made Abbeffe of the Ve/tals by Amsulins , meaning by colour 
of religion to keepe her from children-bearing ¢. who not-with-ftanding had two Tonnes, Ro- 
mulus and Remus, by an vnknowne father as is afore-faid, | 
a ct ees 

That st is altogether unlikety that the gods renenged Paris his fornication, 
fince they permitted Rhea’s to paffeunpunifbed. Car. 5. 


WV Herefore now let vs argue both the caufes in one. It itbe certaine that wee 
read of e£seas and Romulus their mothers , how can it bee that the gods 
fhould difallow of theadulteries of mortall men,tollerating it fo fully and freely 
in thefe particulars 2 If it be not certaine, howfoeuer,yet cannot they diftafte the 
difhonefties of men,that are truly a@ed, feeing they take pleafure intheir owne, — 
though they be but faigned: Befides,if that of Mars with Rhea be of no credit, 
why then no more is this of Hesus with Anchifes. Then let not Rhea’s caufe be co- 
uered with any pretence of the like in the gods. She was a virgin Prieft of Veffa, 
and therefore with farre more inttice fhould the gods haue fcourged the Ro- 
maines for her offence , then the Troians for that of Paris: for. the (4) ancient 
Romaines them-felues did punith fuch veftalls as they tooke in this offence, wd 
burying them quick: (6 ) neuer cenfuring others ¥ were faultie in this kind wit 
death , (but ever with fome fmaller penalty, ) fo great was their ftudy to corree 
the offences of perfons appertaining to religion, with all feuerity aboue others. 
yu . : i ee 


ss FE, VIVE Se ac 
The punith. JH E (4) ancient | Ifa virgin veftall offended bur lightly , the high Prieft did beage here 


mencotthe ~ but being conuidted of negleé& of chaftitie , or whoredome , fhee was caried inaccfhn to 
offending the gate Coilina , as if fhee went to buriall , all her friends and kinfolkes bewailing her,-the 
veltall, —_Priefts and other religious following the hearfe with a fadde filence, Neere to the gate wasa 
caue ,to which they went downe by a ladder, there they let downe the guilty sen lenes 
tooke away the ladder,and fhutte the caue clofe vp : and leaft fhe fhould ftarae to death,they 
fer by her, bread. milke, and oyle, of each a quantitie , rogether with a lighted lampe : all this 
finifhed,the Pricfts departed : and on that day was no caufe heard in law; but it was as a vaca~ 
tion, mixt with great forrow and feare : allmen thinking that fome great mifchiefe was pree 
— faged to befall the weale publick by this punifhment of che Veftall, The vowes and duties of 
__ thofe Veftals, Gellius ( amongft others ) relateth at large, (Wolk. Atticaram lib.) (6) Newer 
cider tenfuring others | Before Augustus , there was no law made again({t adulterers , nor was euer 
dultery bee Caufe heard (that I know of ) concerning this offence, (Zodias indeed was accufed for pollue 
fore Awe ting the facrifices of Bona Dea, but not for adulterie, which his foes would not haue omnitted, 
guftus. had it laine within the compaffe of lawe. Aagaftus firft of all inftituted the law Julian again® 
The lawe Mcnadulterers,it conteined fome-what againft vnchafte women alfo, but with no capital pus 
Juliane, nifhment: though afterwards they were-cenfured more fharpely, as we read in the (fare ane 
fwers in Iuftinians (ode,and the 47: of the Pandetts. Dionyfus writeth,that at Romes firft ori- 
ginall Romulus made a lawe againft adultery,but I thinke hee fpeakes it Grecamicé,as hee doth 

prettily well in many other matters, 


Of Romulus his murther of bis brother,whichthe gods nener renenged. 
| Cuap. 6. — oe 

N Ow I will fay more: If thofe Deities tooke fuch grieuous and heinous 

_ &.“ difpleafure at the enormiti¢s of men, that for Paris his mifgemeaniour they 

ee ee cae 


=. 


Linz. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 113 


would needes vererly fubuere the citty of Troy by fire and fword : much more 

then ought the murder of Romulus his brother to incenfe their furies againft the 

Romasnes then the rape of AMenelaus his wife againft the Trosans : Parricide (4) in 

the firft originall of a Citry, is far more odious then adulcery in the wealth and 

height ofic. Norvis it acall pertinent. vnto our purpofe (b) whether this murdet 

were commanded or committed by Romulus , which many impudently deny,ma- | 

ny doe doubt,and mariy.do diffemble.: Wee will not intangle dur felues‘inthe 

Laborinth of Hiftory,vpon fo laborious a queft:Once, fure 1t is, Romulus his bro- 

ther was mutdered:and that neither by open enemies , not by ftrangers. If Ro- 

maius either willed it,orwrought it, fo’ itis: Romulus was se the cheefe of 

Rome then Paris of Troy.'WVhy fhould the one thenfet all his goddes againft his 

countrey for but rauifhing another mans wife,and the other obtainé the protec- 

tion of /¢) the fame goddes for arte of his owne brother ? If Romulus bee 

cleare of this imputation,then is the whole civty puilry of the famecrime how- 

foeuer , in giving fo torallan affent vnto fuch a 6, piapwerk ns in fteed of kil-: 

ling a brother, hath done worfe in killing a father. “For both the bretheren were 

fathers and founders toitalike , though villany bard che one from dominion, 

There is {mall reafon to be fhowne(in mine opinion) why the Troiazs deferued 

fo ill chat their gods fhouldleaue them-to defttuGion, and the Romaines fo well, 

that they would ftay wich them co their augmenitation;vnleffe it bee this,that be- 

ing fo ouerthrowne and tuned in one place, they were glad to flie away to prace 

rife their illufions in another ; nay they were curininger then fosthey both ftayed 

ftill ae Troy to: deceiue (after their old cuftome){uch as afterwards were to inhabit 

there;andlikewife departed vnto Rome,that hauing a greater fcope to vie their im- 

poftures there they might haue more glorious honours affigned them to feede - 

their vaine-glorious defires. ee ee a | 

- REVIVES. 2 Josh ee 
Arvicile (4) in\Parricide is not onely the murther of the parent, but of any other equall: Parricide.. 

fome fay Parricidinm,quafi ali cadis,committing of flaaghter. It is an old law of Nume= : 

a's:He that willingly doth to death a freeoman,fiall be counted a Varricide.(6) Whether this mur- Numa’s, 

ther | There be that affirme,that Remus being in contention for the Kingdome , when both the £7¥- s his 

faGtions had faluted the leaders with the name of King, was flaine in tne byckering between gesh, 

them:but whether by Romulus or fome other,none can certainely affirme. Others and more in 

number, faie that he was flaine by Fzéivs, Tribune of the light horfemen of Romulus , becaufe 

he leaped in fcorne ouer the newly founded walles of Rome;and that Fabins did this by Romie 

Jus his charge:Which fact Cscero tearmes wicked and inbumaine. For thus in his fourth booke 

of Offices he difcourfeth of it, Bur ix that King that buélt the citty st was not fo. The gloffe of 

comsmodity daxeled his fpirits:and {ince it feemed fitter far bis profit to rule without a partner then 

with ae murdered his owne brother.Here did he leape ouer piety, nay.and humanity alfo:to reach 

theendhee aimed at , profit-though his pretence and coullour ,abent the wall, was neither pro« 

bale,nor {ufficient,wherfore be st [poken with renerence to Quirinus or te Romulus,Romulus sn ths 

did well.(c) The fame goa Which were firlt brought to e£neas to Lasininn , & from thence 


to Alba by Afcanius , and from Alba the Romaines had them by Remawes , with the Affent of 
WNeansttor:and fo laftly were by Tw//us tranfported.all ynto Rome, — 


oNe Sea 


Of the fubuerfion of Vium by Fimbria,e Captaine : 
ae | ofMariushis faction, es 
C wap. 4. 


—. firft (4) heate of the (5) cinill wars, what hadde. poore J/sum done thac 
(6) Fimbris, they verieft villaine: ofall (d) Afarins' his fette , fhould raize ic 
: | L 3 | downe 


Re amram cme em pg aa aaa aaa aaa aaa 


114 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuar. 7. 


Sylia’s fide 
ftronger 
then Maris 
his, 


downe with more fury and(e) crueley then ever the Grecians had fhewed vpon 
it before? For in their conqueft,many efcaped captivity by flight,and many avoi- 
ded death by captivity : Bue Fémbria charged inan exprefle edie , that nora 
life fhould bee pared: and madeone fire of the Citty and all the creatures 
Within it. Thus was Jéwm requited , not by the Greekes whom her wronges had 
prouoked, burby the Romaines whom her ruines had propagated: their gods 
in this cafe (alike adored of both fides) doing iuft nothing; or rather beeing able 
to do iuft nothing : what,were the gods gone from their fhrines , thar protected 
this towne fince rhe repayring of it after the Grecian viGory ? If they were,fhew 
me why ? bur ftill the better citizens I finde,the worfe gods . They fhut out Fém- 
bria,to keepe all for Sy/s; hee fet the towne and them on fire, and burned chem 
both into duftand afhes. And yet in meane-time (f) Syl/a’s fide was ftronger, 


ne 


and euen now was hee working outhis powre by. force ofarmes: his good be- 
ginningsas yet felt nocroffles. Howthen could the sexs haue dealt more ho- 
neftly or iuftly ? or more worthy of the proreQion of Rome? then tofaue a cit 
ty of Ronies, for better endes,and tokeepe outa Parricide of his countries com- 
mon good ? But how they fped , let the defenders of thefe gods obferue. They 
for-fooke the Jéans beeing adulterers, and left their cittic. to the fires of the 
Greekes : that from her afhes , Chafter Rome might arife: But why did they. 
leaue her the fecond time , beeing Romes allied, nos rebelling againft her Noble 
daughter,burkeeping her faith fincerely vnto Romes beit parts and powers? why 
did they let her be demolifhed fo veterly not by the valorous Grecians, butby a 
barbarous Romaine ?.Or, if the gods fauoured not Sy//s's endeauours,for whom 
this cittiekept her felfe , why did they attend his forcunes with fuch happy fuc- 


_ ceffeelfe-where?doth not this proue them rather flatterers of the. fortunat,then 
' fauorers of the wretched? And therfore they had not forfaken sans veterly whé. 


The. denills 


careto dé. 
ceiue. 


©. Fimbsis. 


it was veterly deftroied : no, no, the diuells will ftill keepe a watehfull eye for ad- 
uantage to licens . For (g) when all the Images were burned together with the 
towne, onely Adéneruas was found vnder all cheruines of her Temple,as Lésy — 
writeth,vntouched:not that it fhould bee fayd, Yow Patrom gods that alvaies Troy 


protecé : buc that it fhould not be fayd. The gods were gone and left their altars bate: 


in their defence they were permitted to faue that Image , not that they mighe 

thereby prove themfelues powrefull,but that we might thereby proue them co 

haue beene prefent. | | 
: . sisi : , ; 


: 3 L. VIVES. | 
| Fed the(a) fir/t} Marine dying in his feauenth Confulthip,Ci#ne ioyned Valerius Flacens wich’ 
him in office, committing A/a to his rule, (which Sy//a then pouernéd) and Rrengthning 

him with two legions « This Flaceus by his couetife ( the fouldiotr-hated vice Jand other’ 
crimes growing very odiotis,was killed by C. Fiasbrie,Embaffador at Nitomedia: which Fim 
bria by the fouldiors affent, entred vpon his place,and warred againft Afishridates with good 
fortune : hauing almoft takets hii prifonerin the fiege of Pergamsus : leading his army into 
Phrygia, and hearing that the //iahs were of Sylla's faction,he entred the city cunningly(faith 
eppian)forcibly (faith Lény)and killed all the Cittizens , man, woman, and child, without all 
mercy, {paring nothing neither hallowed nor prophane : after the Greekes had deftroied it be= 
fore M.L. yeares. (6) cinsll warres) After the firlt AZarian warre,before Sylla came into Italy 
to the vtter fubuerfion of that faction, this fell out.(¢)Fanbria} This was amoft audatious and 
impudent fellow,moft prompt vnto all villany. He killed (vaffs,and in the funeral of Afarins, - 
made of Linear anoble and honeft man to Bee fore hurt. But {ceing that the wound was not 
mortall,he cited him to an{were an accufation: The whole city wondring that the chiefe priéft 
fhould accufe the moft honeft man of the whole ftatesand flocking to heare the crime: lic rg 

: : thy 3e¢ 


Lr2.3. OF THE CITIE OF GOD.” 


115 


he accufed him for not taking thé thruft of the weapon deepe jnough into his body. This Ti#//y 
sehatech in his Oration for Rofcius Ametinus; (d) A4erins his] Rather (ynma’s bur all che facti- 
on againtt SyHa was called Afarian. (e) cruelty.) Appianus in Mithridate , faith shat the dai¢ 
after the burning of //isws,Finbria himfelf went all ouer the ruines,prying and fearching whee 
ther onghe was left ftanding , intending to raze that downe alfo,fo that hce left no houfe,no 
temple,no nor no ftatue flariding in all Jlisrs. (f) Splla’s fide] Salujte. Sylla of late being viktor, 
swhen he cowsmanded Dathafippus ded others that had patched up their eftare by the mifertes of the 
weale-publike to be flaine who did not applawd him? exery man Jayd that fuch wicked creatures at 
bad kept the fires of fedition fill burning in the common-wealth were now well rewarded , But in~ 
ded tbs was the reste whence fprung 2 wobd of miferies , Thus farre Salulte'in bis Catilines ton- 
fpiracyzand alittle betore , Lucius Sylla basing recenered the fivay of the fate by armes,beganne 
wel but ended badly inongh: Which faying,S. Augeftine here aera » (g) when all the mages) 
Appian,and Ixdins Obfequens alfo fay thatthe Palladsem remained Rill vnburnt. Sersins(is 2. 
eEneid. faith that Fimbria fhowed it,and brought it yntd Rome, Truly I wonder ifthat were 
the old Palladium that e£neas (they fay ) brought from Trey into /ta/y , with the othet Great 
Gods which was placed by Hoftilidt itt the Temple of Vefta after eAlba was deftroied : which 
Temple being fired, ALetedins the Prieft fecched the Palladinm from forth the greateft flares; 
for which deede the Romaines afligned him ample honours: which fell out foone after thé 
‘a concluded betwixt Rome and Carthage , after the ende of che firlt e4frican watre,bes 
his fellowes, returned vnto Phrigia with the Palladsuns {bur this wee have elfe-where-difals 
owed of. The Letedemonians indeed beleeued that they had the spay i Palladsnts necte the 


ore Frmbrras time, C. L. yeares, § ome thinke that a 4eneas leauing the Latine Kingdometo - 


temple of the Lencippide : which one Temon ftole‘from Ergiaws a kinfman of Diomedes at 


 @Argos,andbtought it to Lavedemion , Whofe Cittizens beeing watned by oracle to keepe it, 
they erected it vato Viifesjone of the Herets,But that is the Padadinws which Uliffes and Di» 
emedes bore away as wee faid befere inthe. Zreyan warre . Serwins faith that AZamurrini the 
Smith made many figures of this Palladian ; lealt che true one indeed fhould bee knowne, 
Whereiti no doubt but Seraias forgot himfelfe and tooke the Palladinm for the Ancylia, . 


Whether itsoas conuenitnt te commit Rome to the suftody of the. 
Ee * Troyangeds; Crap. 8. | < 


VV Herefore feeing Trey had left fo plaine aleffon for all pofterity to obferues 
- what difcrétion was there fhewne in the commending of Rome to the’ 
proteaion of the Troyan gods? O bur, will fone fay , they Were fetcled ar Rome . 
when Fsmbria {poiled Jésus: were they fo? wherice comes the Image of Adinerus 
then? But well : ic may be they were at Rome when Fsmbria razed Mium,andat J. 
diam when the Galles facked Rome. And being quick of hearing, and fwift in mo-’ 
tion,as foone aseuer the geefe calledthem ,; they came all on a clufter d 
what was left,the Capsto/, Bat they werenot called foone inoughto Idoke to the 
reft,or elfe it fhould not hauebeene as it was, - _ 


~ whetber it be credsble, thas the gods procured the peace that laffed all 
Numa's ¢aigné. Cuar. 9. a 


, to defend | 


Ti isthoughtalfo that thefeare they that hélped Numa Fompilins, Remulushis’ . 


fucceffor,to prefertie that continuall peace that lafted all the time of his raign, 
and to fhurthe gates of Jszus his (4) temple ; and that becaufe hee deferued it: 
at their handes , in inftituting fo many facrifices for théRomaines to offer- 
vntotheirhonour. Inearneft; the peace that this Prince procured was thankev: 
worthy , could hee haue: applied it accordinglie , and. by- avoiding f° 

ermicious a curiofitie , ) hage taken‘imore’ paises in enquirie after che’ 
trye diuiniti¢. But beeing asif was, tie _— never gane him that quiet. 


4 —— teyfure 


. 
4 


t 


116 SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cairo, 


Jeafure : but it may bee they had not deluded him fo fowlely , had they not found 

him foidle. Forthe:leffe that his bufinefle was , the more time had they toen- 

trappe him: for Varro recordeth all his courfes,and endeauours to affociate him. 

felfe and his Citty with thofe imaginary gods : all which ( ific pleafe God )thall 

be reherfed in their due place. But now, fince wee areto fpeake of the benefits 

which are pretended to come from thofe fained deities: peace is a good be- 

nefic: but it isabenefic giuen by the (6) true God onely,as the raine , che funne 

Peace bes andall other helpes of mans tranfictory lifeare; which are common euen tothe 

fowedon vngratious, and Yngratefull perfons as well as the moft thankefull. Burit thefe 

thy, Romaine gods had any powre to beftow fuch a benefit as peace is vpon Numa,or 

| vpon Rome, why did they neuer do it after,when the Romaine Empire was in grea- 

ter maiefty and magnificence? was their facrifices more powreful] at their firft 

infticution,then at any time after ? Nay , many of them then were not as yet ins 

ftitured, but remained vnf{poaken of vntull afterwardes , and then they were infti- 

tuted indeed, and kept for commodity fake. How commeth it then fo paffe thae 

Num:'s Nam's 43.Oras foine fay 39. yeares were paffed in fuch full peace ? and yee 

peaceof = thofe facrifices beeing neither infticuted nor celebrated vntill afterwardess 

yeres, > and the gods whom thefe follemnities inuited , beeing but now become the 

rene and patrons of the ftate,afcer fo many hundred yeares from Romes foun. . 

Jation vntill che reigne of augu/fas, there is but (¢) one yeare reckned,and that 

is held as wholy miraculous which falling after the firlt —4/rcaw warre,gaue the 
Romainesiuft leaueto fhut vp the gates of warres Temple’. © 


| L. VIVES. | : 2 he 
Ans (4) his temple) Ianus was acod,whofe temple-dore beeing opened, was a figne of wars, 
saints p “a td yNnto Rome on all pares, This was erected by Niiasnete Argiletiis 
his Sepulchre,as a monument of the fight againft the Sabises , whescin’.a great deale of water 
burfting in at chat gate,gaue the Romaines much furtherance to the victorie, And therevpon 
it was ed thac chat gate fhould be opened as it were to giue affiftance in all defignes of 
warre. He (chat is Nasea)was the firtt chat fhur the gate that he builded , as faith Afacrebie 
ws,Saturnal.1.) and Manlius the fecond time,after the firft Punike warre. Amguftus thirdlie, ° 
Liu, lib, 1,6) true God | Therefore Chrift our Sauiour gaue his difciples that peace which the 
-— world cannot piue (¢) One yeare reckned|T. Manlius T orquatus Gc. (. Attilius were Con- 
falls this yeare, if wee thall beleeue Estropins , who is no bad hiltorian. Thefe Confulls hae 
uing triumphed ouer the Serdes , and hauing procured a fettled peace both by fea and land, 
Shue the gates of fans Onirinus , which not many monthes after was opened againe : ef, L 
Fofthumus Albinus, and Cn, Fuluins (entimalus beeing Confulls : of as others faic , Sp: (are 
bilins was in Falsins his place : In the Ldirian ware: 3 


meee 


Whether theRomaines might iuftly defire that their Citties eflate fhould arife topre- 
beminence by [uch furious warres , when it might haue refled firme pnd queet , in 
| (uch peace as Numa procured. Car. to. 


VV Hthey.reply ( thinke you ) that the Imperiall ftate of Rome hadno other 

" Meanes of augmentation but by continuance of wartes, nor any fitter 
courfe to diffufe the honour thereof then this 2 A fic courfe furely! why thou'd 
any Empire make difquiet the fcale vnto greatneffe ? In this little world of mans 

- body , isi nor better tohaueameane ftacure with an vamooued health, then a 
huge bignefle with intollerable ficknefle? to cake no reft at the point where thou 
Shouldft reft , che end ? but ftill co confound the greater grouth with the greater 
gtiefe? whaccuill had there beene, nay what. good had there. nor beene if thofe 


L133. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 197 
times had lafted that Se/a/t foapplawded , faying : Kings in the beginning ( for this The fet 
(a) was firft Imperial! name on earth) were dsuersin thesr goodneffe : fome exerci(ed Kings peice 
their corporal powers, ome thetr fpirituall, and mens lines 1n thofe times were without wks, 
allexorbitence of habit or affect each one keeping in his owne compaffe:why thould the 
Empire be aduanced by thofe practiles that Virgil fo derefteth?faying. 

Deterier donec paulatim cr decolor atas (6) Vall pcruerfe declinmg timeslacceed: 

Bt bells rabicsyer amor fuccepit babendi, _ | World-frighting wearres,and ill “preeended need. 

But indeed the Romaines as yer bad aiuft defence for their fo continued con- 
tentions and warres : becaufestheir foes engirting them with {uch vniuerfall in- 
wafions,it was very neceffity to faue them-felues , and not their endeatiour to be- 
come powrefull ouer others that put weapons into their bands . Well bee it fo. . 
For,(as Sa/ejfe writeth ) when they had well feerled their eftate by lawes ,cuf- 
tomes and pofleffions,and feemed fufficiently potent,then,as it is in moft affaites 
of mortality,out of their eminence arofe enuy in others , which armed many of 
their neighbour Kings againft them, and with-held moft of their reputed friends 
from affifting them; they reft ftanding affcaid,and afarre off. Buc the Romaines 
them-felues,fticking to warres tackling cheered vp one another,to encounter the 
foe with courage, ftanding in their armes as the bulwarkes of their freedome, 
their countrey, and their kinred. Aud hauing made their vertue breake through 
all miftes of oppofed daungers , they aided thofe thacaffeted them, returning 
more gaine of friend-fhippe cotheir eftate by beeing the agents of bount 
then the obiedts,rather by doing good turnesto others , then by receiuing fi ich 
efochers. In thefe formes of augmenting her {tlfe,Rome kept a good Decorum, 

But now , in Nama’s raigne, was thereany iniuries of enemy or inuafions , con. 
curring to-difturbe this peaceof his time, or was there not? If Rome were as 
then molefted with wars, & yet did not oppofe hoftility withhoftilicysthen thofe 
meanes that kept the foe from beeing ouerthrowne in fight, and yet without: 
ftroakes compelled themzo compofitidn; thofe very meanes alone fhould bee 
fill of powre-to thie Jesus his gates , and keepe this peace continually. in Rome.’ 
Whichif it were not in their powre to doe, then verily the Romaines had noe 
their peace as longas it pleafed the goes toallow it them , bucas long asthe 
neighbour Princes liftednotto inuade and trouble thems (c) vnleffe thofe gods 
had farmed chat which lieth notin theirs but others powre,ynto each one at their 
pleafure,as it it were by she letter pattent. There ts much difference truly in thefg 
deuills working vpon mens proper infirmities, whether they worke withterrors; 
or with incitations. But howfoeuer , were they of this powre alwaies., and were 
not controuled by a fuperior foueraignty,they would ftill be pra@ifing their an- 
chorities in warres and flaughters: which(as they fall our in truth)ordinarily, are 
rather the effeéts of mortall mens peculiar paflions and affections , then dire& 
practifesof the dammed fpirits, ee So sa 
an Oe ae cn “ES VIVES. 3 e" 
LlOr this (4) was] So faith Luftine Lb. 1, Herodotus, and Pliny. This inftitutior deriued ftom The Gi 
eZ gape, where they fay that AMenes was the fir ft King : though Disdorss affirme that O- Kings 
is,Hores, and diuers others of the gods raigried before him, Our fcriptures fay that em~ : 
éroth -wasthe firft King,arid raigtied at Babilon. (6 ) Vintill peruer{e} Hesiod in his Opera G@ Die 
es faigneth fine ages of inottality, which placehebeginneththus, oo. 
Se Fe peecternee Qg05 Ornate: 2" evBpwre rc, | | a 

—-—— The gods didfirtofalt - Their habicatioris were : InSaturnesraigae * 

ae | The world athorded tuch.-—--~ . oS 


Make men in golden moldes:celeftiall = - . . - Fie age ; 
This, Virgil , Onid , and others did immitate . The figft age the Gaides one, they fay was on 
Te 7 vnder. 


118 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. _ Cuap. 11. 


ynder Saturne : without warres, or will to warres, humanity was lockt in vnity;neither were 
men contentious nor clamorous, Thefe were called Saturmias daics, Thenextage Silver, 
vader Jose, then warre began to buffle:{o did her daughter, care , hate ,and deceit. The third,. 


_ Brazen warre hurles all vpon heapes , aud quaffcth liues and bloud. The fourth of the Ha/fe- 


Gods, Herots, who thouzht they loued iuftic e,yet their bofomes harboured an eager thirft of 
warres. The firlt , Jron, wherein mifchiefe goeth beyond bound and limit , and all miferies, 
breaking their prifons,affaule mans fortunes; open deceit, open hate, open warres,flaughters, 
vaftations, burnings, rapes , aud rapines , all open vjolentand common (¢ )wmleffe] vnleffe the 
godsbe fo impudent,that they will fell that vnto men,as a benefit from them, which hath the 
original from another mans wil,and fo require thankes of them as though it were there guift 
when it is rather the gift ofanother, [ One interpreter vnderftanding nor the figure , rappeth 
out what came firft on his tonguesend, and vpon that, as vpon amarble foundation, Lord 
what a goodly building he raiteth,concerning felling, and the powers of deuills,mans affects, 
and many good morrowes :euen fuch like as this in foundation is much of our Philofophers 
and Schou.e-diuines trattle for all the world, what wounderfull maters do they wring out of 
fuch or fuch places of Arifforle or the feriptures , as(indeed) they neuer could truly vnder- 
ftand. Ohappy builders , that vpon no foundation but onely a meere fmoke , can rayfe fuch 
goodly buildings, as are held abfolutely sky-towring,fo eleg ant,and fo durable!] 


Ofte fatus of Apollo at Cums , that fled teaves(as men thought for the Grecians 
miferies though he could not helpe them. a 


. T Orwithftanding, that chereare many of thefe warres and conquefts that fall 

\ out quite againft thofe gods likings the Romaine hiftory it felfe ( toomig 
thofe fables that do not tel one truth for a thoufand lies)thall giue cleare profe, 
fortherein we read that the ftatue of pollo (4) Cumiane , in the time of the Ro- 
manswarres againe the Achesans and (b) King ariffonicus , did perfift foure daies 
together in contiunall weeping: which prodigy amazing the South-fayers,they 
held it fit to caftthe ftatue into the fea, but che auncients of Cume diflwaded it, 
and fhewed them that it had done fo likewife in the warres both againft (¢) anti- 
ochus,and (a) Perfeus teftifying alfo, that both thefe'wars fucceeding fortunatly 
vnto Kome,the fenat fent ther guifts and oblations vnto the ftatue oF Apollo, And 
then, the South-fayers hauing learned wit, anfwered, that the weeping of pole 
was lucky to the Romaines , becaufe that (¢) Cums was a Greeke collony, and that 
the ftatues cearcs did but portend mifhap vnto the country from whence ic came, 
namely.vnto Greece. And foone after,they heard how _4ri/fomicus was taken pri- 
foner,and this was the caufe of 4polos woes, fhewen in his tearés. Andas touch- 
ing this point,not vnfitly, though fabuloufly, are the diuells trickes plainely dif- 
couered in the fictions of the Poets : Diana was fory for Camillain Vergill ; And 
Hercules wept for the death of Pa/Les.And it may be that vpon this ground Nees 
in his great — giuen him , hee neither knew nor fouighe co know by whome, 
bethinking him-felfe in his idleneffe vnto what gods he fhould commit the pre- 
feruation of the Romasnes fortunes , (neuer dreaming that it is onely the great 


andalmighty God that hach regard of thefe inferior things )and remembring 


himfelfe , that the gods that e£neas brought from Trey, could neither preferug 
the eftate cf che Trosans , nor that of the Lausnzans erected by evens, into any 
good continuance,he thought fit to feeke out fome others,to ioyne with the for- 
mer were gone with Remulus to Rome and that were afterwards to go, at the 
diftruction of alba cither.to keepe them from running away,or to helpethem 
when they faw them too weake. SS is 


L.vI- 


Lisz3. - | OFTHE CITIE OF GOD. 119 


L.VIVES. 


Pollo (a) (umane| King Attalus at his death, made the people of Romeheyrestohis , 
al A er se gy Fr toes his brothers baftard me oficfiion before them: eae 
hence grew there warres,, in which , Licisins Confull and Pricft,was fent as General], whom 
afriftenicus oucr-came, MM. Perpenna the next yeares Cor full hearing of (raffis his fortune, 
came with {peedinto Afa,and hauing ouer-throwne Ariffonicus,and forced hitn into. Stratc~ 
nica,through famine he forced him to yeeld, and fo fent himto Kome, In this warre Nicome- 
des, Mithridates, Ariarathes and Pylemanes, Kings of Bythinia, Pontus, Cappadocia.and Pa- Cia 
4 : . , Estie : P / ‘ 3 Us 
phlagonia fauoured the Romaines : -ichaia oncly , affited Ariffonicus. (b} King Ariftonicus] death, 
This weeping of Apollo happened in the Confulfhippe of Appius ( Ladins,and A4. Verpenva, 
as /ulins Obfequens(Fragm. lib. de prodigits)in thefe wordes affrineth - App. Cladus. and AG 
Perpenna being Confulls;P, Craflus was flame in battatle againf? Ariftonicus.. Apollo's fatue 
twept fouce daies , The prophets prefaged the deftruttion of Greece , from whence it came. The Ro~ \he gods 
maaines offered it facrifice and brought giftcs unto the temple , Thus farre Ob/equens, The weeps 4 lweate. 
ing ofa {tatue portended mif-fortune tothofe that it fauoured , as ype the weeping of June — 
Sofprta at Lasinium (Conlulls,L. Aemilins Panlus,& Cn. Bebins Pamphilus:) followed a great 
peftilence. So faith Lacane of the prodigies in the ciuill warres. : 


Ind:ectes fl-niffe deosyurbifg, lzborem i te —. } the cities pains, | 


Te fates {adore Lares:-— Re | w oa 
(c) Antiochus] King of Spria,conquered by L. C. ornelins Scepio,brather co Africanus: Linie Anxiochys) 
at large Decad. 4. (d Der exs| Some write Xerxes,but itis better, Perfexs,fonne to Philip Kin g 


of Macedon,whom. L: Aemilus Paalus conquered ina few houres, in the fecond Macedoni- 
ax warre. Plutarchin Aemilias his life: and others. (e J) Cume| The.Chalcidians , andthe Cro 
sreans(Strabo.lib.s: } being people of Greece, failed inso /taly with a great.nauy, and landing 
in Campania acre built acitty: The Camseans captaine was Higpocles ,the Chalesdians Mea 
gafthenes: thefe agreed amougtt themfelues that the one people fhould inhabice the towne, 
and the others fhould name it : and fo they did : It was called (#me,and the inhabicants were 
(balcidians, Of this Cume,Virgil hath this verfe, Aenead.6. . Cuma! 
| 7 | Chaleidicag, lenis tandem fiperaftivit arce: oe. ey 

And light at laft on the Chalcidian towre. Bae. a4 bg 


This City (faith Strabo)is the moft ancient Citty both ofall /ralyand Sicily, 


i 


How frustle(fe their maltitade of gods w1s vate the Romaines , who induced them ,be- 
yond the inftitution of Numa. Car. 12. , 
. TOr couldRome bee content with thofe facrifices which Name had in {uch 
plentifull meafure prefcribed, for ithad not as yet the great temple of Jupé- 

ter. For itwas Tarquin that (4) builtthe Capitolla goodwhileafter. And(4) 
CAdefculapins came afterwards from Epidauras vnto Rome: becaufehebeinga(c) | 
moit expert Phifitian , might pra@ife in fo famous a Cictie wich the greater cre- . 
dite. The Mother of the godsalfo (of (d) whence , whocan tell) camethether = 
from (¢) Pefizuns, It being a thing vnmeete for the fonne to beethechiefeGog 2°. | 
of the Capitol, andthe mother to ly obfcured I know not where: But iffhiee bee 
the mother ofall the gods, fhe did not follow all her children vnto Rome, but left 
fometo follow her thither.I wonder whether fhee were dam vnto Cynocephalus, 
thar (f) came our of e£¢pt long after or no. Whether the goddeffe.(¢g)  —_«' 
Febris bee one of her Chi dren or no, (A)-let eE/feulapins, @)her Nephew. ..- 
looke to that. But wherefoeuer fhee was borne , I hope the ftranger 
goddes dare not call a goddefle bafe , that is (&) a Romaine Cartizen, 
Well, Rome beeing placed vnder the protection of fo many gods (as: who 
can recken vppe? ) both of Italians,and Forreyners , both of Heanen, Earth, 


Hel, Seas, Fountaines,and Riuers,& as.“rro faith, both (/) certain & vnceértaine, 


oe 


120 | SAINT AVGVSTINE. | CHap.12. 


and as it is in creatures both male & female of all thefe feuerall kinds: me thinkes 
that Rome hauing all thefe co be her Tutors,(hould never haue tafted of fuch intol- 
_ lerable troubles as I meane.to relate briefely out of their huger multitude. The 
great (» ) {moake the fent'vp was like (#) abeacon , and called to many gods to 
her defence : vntoall which the Priefts ereGing feuerall monuments, and feuerall 
myfteries,enflamed the furie of the true God in farre greater meafure,to whom 
onely all chefe inftitucions & rights were belonging. Truly Rome thrived a great 
deale better, when fhee had farre fewer protectors: But growing greater, like as 
a fhip callech in more faylers, fo call’d fhe in more gods : doubting (I thinke ) that 
thofe.few, (vnder whom the had paffeda mar reuolution before,in compa- 
_ sifonof chat chat followed)were not now of fufficiencie to defend her greamefie, 
it was fo much augmented .. For at firft, vnder the Kings chem/elues, ( excepting 
Numa ,of whom wee fpake before ) what a mifchieuous beginning of diffention 

was that,wherein Romsa/us killed his owne and onely brother? | 

_ 7 L.VIVES. oe 

Aefcniapine, Gost 2a (a) bile] The prowd, (Lini.ib.1.) (b) e£ feulapins In the warre of the Sam- 
 pites he was brought from Epjdawrus to Rome , by Ogolnius the Legate, in the fhape of a 
tame Sngke,and he fwamme otier into'the Mle of Tyber, where his temple was built, and a feaft 
infticuted to him inthe (alengs of Iannary. Epidonr (once called Epitanrus: Strab. ) isa 
towne in Achaia, abouc (orinthe, onthe Eafterne fhore , which Pliny called Saroninm, and is 
named at this day Golfo ds Evgsa: it was famous fer the Temple of Aefculapius which ftood 
in chat territorie,fome fiue miles from the Cittie, (¢) 4 moff expert Phifitian | Cicero holds 
there were three e(cxlapis, Firft eApolle’'s fonne,worfhipped in Arcadia. Second brother to 
+. the fecond Mercxry,who was fonne to Valens and Phorons : hee was truck with thunder, and 
icis faid hee is buried at Cynofwre.- The third, fonneto Arfppus and Arfinoé , firft inuentor of 
purging,and tooth-drawing : his fepu!cher and his graue is to bee feene in Arcadia , not farre 
from the river Lafius. 7 arguinins {pcaking of the famous men (this we haue from Laftantius) 
faith chat Ae{culapins was borne of vnknowne parents,and being caft out, and found by hun- 
ters , was fed with bitches milke , and nea committed to Chyron, of whom hee learned 
Phificke : that by birthe he was a Afcffentan, but dwelt at Epidaurus. Hippocrates faith,that he 
wrote the booke-called Nasicnla (as we haue faid.in our principles of Philofophie )< orn. (ek 
fies faith, he was numbred amongft the gods, for giuing excellence and luftre vnto Phificke, 
which before was but rude and vnpolifhed. (d) Of whence, | She was of ignoble and ob- 
{cure defcent,as Saturne her brother a!fo was, For fhee they fay was Ops: and therefore they _ 
held them as the children of Ce/ws,knowing not indeed of whence they were, who not-with- 
But beft eran Laurus fo famous and admired. Such as thefe were , the people thought to come 
allby Li- downefromheauen: (¢) Peffinus, | Some write Mount Preneftine: chis place is faultie in all 
wie his leave the copies that euer Icould finde, Others write (Mount Pefinunt , but it were better to fay, 
ia with Afount Patatine,for there was the mother af the gods placed , at her firft comming to Rome, 
Pe ‘finns, for (Limlib.36.)and Vittor de Regionibus urbis, (f) ( ame out of Egipt |eApuleius in his Affe faith, 
Peffiaus was that the Deities of Egspt were brought thence vnto Rome about Syila's time, that is , aboue an 
atowne hundred yeares sfter the mother of the gods came to Rome. But L.Pi/o,and .4. Gabinins being 
in Phrygia, Confuls decreed by edi, that they fhould not come in the Capitoll , chough afterwards they 
lr peda " did.Tertall, Apologetic, (g) Febris,|Some read, the god Februas , which cannot be good : for 
ple, before Februus is Pluto, vnto whom they facrificed in February , called fo becaufe of Purgation: this 
she had any is not doubted of, But tharit mutt bee Febris here,that which followeth of efculapius, doth 
St Keme. approoue ,and other fubfequences, (4) Let Aefculapins, | Wittily applyed, becaufe hee is a 
Phifition. (4). Nephew } Or grand-childe: hee was fonne to Apollo,hee to Ixpiter,and hee yn- 
to Ops. (k) A Romaine Cittizen | This is conceited alfo: for the Romaines made Febris a god- 
deffe, (/) ( exrtaime and uncertaine, | For fome of their Deities were doubefull : as Paws, the 
Sylwans,and the Nimphs. Owid brings in Iupiter {peaking thus : 
a Sunt mibi fensidei, funtraftica Numina, Fanmi, 


— eee 


Es 


Lrs.3. - OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 13% 


x 


Et Nymphe,Satyrique cy monticole Syluaui, 
Ques gxoniam celi nondum 5 eel honore, 7 
Quas dedimns certe terras habstare finamus. Metamorph. . | 
We hauie of Semy-gods,and Syluanes,ftore: 
Nymphs,Fawnes,and Satyres, and many more: | 
‘Whom fince as yet we haue debard the skies, 7 
Wenecds muft guard.en earth from iniuries, | a 
Such alfo are (orybantes, Hyppolitus,eAtys and Sabbaxins, whom Lucian calleth t.cwseneing 
usrciees Bess, x aupiCorss, aliens and donbtfull gods, (m) Smoake | Of the facrifices :’or meaning 
their vanitie,is an allufion vnto {moake , for fmoake is often taken for a vaine and friyolous 
thing, as to fell fmoake. (») Asa Beacon | In time ofwarre, or fufpition, the watchmen 
placed bundels of drye {mall ticks , vpon their high -watch-ftands, that when ‘the enem 
g eal ona fudden, they might fire the fticks, and fo giue notice vnto their owne foul. 
iers and the neighbouring townes: The Greekes called thofe bundels gpexrés, and by thefe 
fires within leffe then halfe an houre , notice might bee giuen ynto the contrey an hundred 
mile about,to come betimes to the prewenting of their danger. Itmay alfo bee vnderftood 
of the figne giuen in bartels. _ # ae a oe eo 


Sellers of | 
moake, - 


By what right the — attained their frit wines, 00... 
— sHAP.I3.. Rats ©, YE ee, 2 
[N like manner , neither Jwao (for all thatfhee was now.as her husband was, 
2 ood friends with the Romaines.) nor Venus, could helpe her fonnes progenie 
to honeft and honorable mariages , but fuffered this wancto growe fa: hiunfull 
vnto theni,that they weredriuento get them wiues by force , and foone afrer 
were compelled to ga'into the field againft their wiues owne fathers}and the 
wretched women beeing yet fcarcely reconciled to their. husbadds for: this 
wrong offered them, were now endowed with their fathers murthiets and kin- 
dreds bloud : but in thiaconflia& the Romaines had the lucketo .be comynerors, 
But O what worlds afywounds,what numbers of funerals,what Oceansofblond. 
fhed did thofe vi@ories coft! for one onely father (2) in lawe Ce/arjand for one 
— fonne in law Pompey; (the wife of Pompey, and daughter to Cz/ar being 
dead 
a Bellaper Emathios plus quam ciu:lia campos, |. | Tee 
Jusg, datum [celert canimus: . . es 658 Ret 
Warres wore then ciuill in th’(b)Emathianplaines, «2 
And right left fpoiletorage we fings——-—- tre 
Thus then the Romaines a that they mightnow retittne and embrace 
the danghrers with armes embrued in the bloud of the fathers: nor ducft the 
poore creatures weepe for their {laughtered parents , for feare to offend their 
conquering husbands: but all the time of the battle, ftood with their vowes in 
their mouthes(¢) and knew not for which fideto offer them. Such mariages 
Bellona, (and not Venus ) beftowed vpon the Romaznes: or perhaps (d) Alecfo 
that filchy hellifh furie, now that Jeo was agreed with them.;had more power 
vpon their bofomes now , then fhee hadthen,; when Jue entreated her helpe 
againft e£ncas. Truly (¢) Andromacha’s captivitie was farre more tollerable 
then thefe Romaine mariages ; for though the liued feruile,yet Pyrrhus after hee 
had once embraced her, would neuer kill 77oza% more.But the Romaines flaugh- 
tered their owne ftep-fathers in the field , whofe. daughters they had already 
enioyed in their beds. Axdromacha’s eftate fecured her from further-feares; 
though ic freed her not from precedent forrowes: But thefe poore foules being 
matched to thefe fterne warriours,could not but feareat their husbands goin 


a 


J with what crue feeling,and iuft caufe ot forrow doth Lucane cri¢ aut... sehen 


Rarer canna PIE ELT ET EEE EES TESTED TLE ELIT IL ID EE DEDEDE EEL LLL DELL LEA DEED DEEL ELE ALL LESLIE ADEN ADI, 


123 SAINT AVGVSTINE. / Cuar.13. 


to battell, and wept.ac their returne,hauing no way to freedome either by their 
feares or teares. For they muft either (in piety ) bewaile the death of their 
friendes andkin{folkes,or (in cruelty )reioice at the victories of their husbands. 
Befides,(as warres chance is varizble)fome loft theit hufbands by their fathers 
{words3and fome loft both, by the hand of each other, For it was no {mall war 
that Rome at that time waged. Itcame to the befteging of the citty it felfe,and 
the Roma‘nes were forcedto rely vppon the ftrength of their walls and gates 
which (f) being gotten open by awile,and che foe being entred within the wa!s 
(¢ )euen in the very market-place was there a moft w ofull and wicked battell, 
_ ftruck betwixt the fathers in Jaw and the fons. And here were the rauifhers cé- 
-quered imaugre their beards,and driuen to Aye into their owne houfes , tothe 
great fiaine of all their precedent (chough badly and bloudily gotten) (4) con- 
‘quetts : for here Romulus him-felfe difpairing of his foldiors valors,(#)praidvn- 
:to Jnpiter to make them ftand,and (&)here-vpon got Japster his fur-name of Sta- 
tor) (4) Nor would thefe butcheries haue ever beene brought vnte any end, 
-bue thaeche filly rauifhed women came running forth, with torne and difhe- 
ueled haire, and falling at their parents feere with paffionate intteacies,initeed 
of hoftile armes,appeafed their iuftly inraged valors. And then was Romadws 
that could not indureto fhare with his brother . compelled todiuide his King- 
‘dom with Tativs,che King of che Sabénes:but(/m)how long vould heaway with 
Jhim, chat mifliked the fellowfhip of his owne twin-borne brother?So Tatisas be- 
ing flaine,h¢ to become the greater Deity , tooke poffeflion of the whole king- 
.dome.O-what rights of mariage were thefe , what firebrands of war 5 what 
Jeagues cf brother-hood,affinity,vnion, or Deity ! And ah what (#) lines the 
cittizens laftly led , vnder fo huge a béd-roll of gods Guardians: You fee what 
copious: matter this place affordeth , but that our intention bids vs remem- 
‘ber what is co follow, and fails on difcourfeto other particulars. | 
a rr L. VIVES. ee | 
| Fsbo in law (a) Cafar\iulia the only daughter of (- Lefer was married vnto (». Pome~ 
Amt peins the great. Stice died in child-bed , whilft her father warred in Fraxce.And after that 
thia, he and his fous in law waged ciuils wars one againft another: (£6) Ensathian | That which 
; iscalled Afacedonia now,was called once Emathia.(Plin. lib. 4.) There did Pomspey and Ce- 
Sarfight a fer field. (c) end knew not. Onid ( Faftor. 3.) hath thefe wordes of the Se- 
6ixe women when the Romasnes battell and theirs were to ioine : Mars {peaketh, 
2 Conueninnt nuptadittam Innonis in adem, | | 
Quas inter mea fic eft nurus anfa loqui: 
0 pariter rapte,quontam hoc commune teremus,, 
Non ultra lente pofumus effe pie. 
Stant acies: fed viraay funt pre parte rozanAr 
Eligite,binc Coniunx binc pater arma tenet. 
Qnerendsas eft vidna fieri malitis,an orbaddee 
The wiues in Joes church a meeting make, 
Where met, thy daughter thus chem all befpake: 
Poore rauifhe foules,fince all our plights are one, 
Our zeale ha’s now no meaneto thinke ypon. — 
The barails ioine;whom fhall we pray for rather? 
| Choofezhere a husband fights , and there a father: 
| Would you be fpoufeleffe(wiues Jor fatherleffe.&c, 
(ec) Or perbaps Ale&to|The 3. furies, Alette, Mégera,be Ts/iphone , are called the daughters of 
-— spight 8 Acheren, Alette affeGts $ hart with ire,hate,turmiult,fedition,clamors, war, flaughters, 
“Tn potes unaninees armarein pralia fratves, [ Tis chou can make fworne bretheren mortall foe, : 
. — daquacdiis verfare ¢ LU Conbounding hase wah hatteos <= 


~ 


nem ont op oP GE SUD Pah 


fairy. 


L 13.3. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 


133 


Saith Lune to Alette,ftirring her vp againft the Trosans, -£-neid,7. (e ) Andromache | Hettors Androa 


wife , daughter to Tetrion King of Thebes in Cilicia  Pyrrhus matried her after the de- 
Rtruction of Troye. (f ) Beeing gorte open | Sp. Tarpeius was Lieutenant of the Tower , whofe 
daughter Tarpeia, Tatms the Sabine King with great promifes allured to let in his fouldiors 
when fhee went out to fetch water. Shee affented, vpon condition that fhee might haue that 
which each of his fouldiors wore vpon his left arme. 7atise agreed , and being let in , the Sol- 
diours fmothered the maide to death with. their bucklers : for them they wore on their left 
armes alfo, whereas {hee dreamed onely of their golden bracelets which they bore on that 
arme. Plutarch ( out of eAriftides Milefins) faith , chat this happened to the Albanes , not to 
the Sabines. In Parallelis, Buc I do rather agree with Linse,Fabius, Pifo,and Ciciusjof the La- 
tine writers,and Dioxzy/ius of the Greekes. (g) Inthe very market place ) Betweene the (apstolf 
and Afexnt Palatine. (h) Conquefts |Not of the Sabines , but of the Ceninenfians , the (+x 


Tatpeia, 


tumerians,and the Attennates, (i) Praid unto lupiter | In thefe words: But O thon father of 


Gods and men,keepe but the foes frows bence., take away the Romames terror , and fray their flight; 
Vut0 thee O lupiter Stator,doe [ vowe to busld a temple in this place, Ad .a monument unto all pee 
freritie,that by thine onely helpe the city was faued. Lisins lib.1. (k) Herevpon | flato a fiftendo, 
of fraying ,or a ftando,of ftablifhing, that is, ere€ling the Romaine {pirits that were dejected. 
Cicero calleth this Jupiter, the preferuer of she Empsre,in many placcs. I thinke itis becaufe his 
houfe wasneere this temple. Saint Hierorse faith, that this Jupiter was formed {landing : not 
that he thinketh he was called Stator , becaufe he {tandeth fo vpright , but becaule Jupiter To- 
nans (as Hermolaus Barbarus hath noted ) was alwayes tamped and engrauen vpon ancienr 
coynes fitting : and Stator, {tanding,as being in readineffe to helpe and affilt men: Seweca viues 
a Beco ales of his name. Hee és not called ftator ( faith he ) oe as hiftory reporteth ) hee 
frayed the Romaine armie afeer the vowe of Romulus , but becaufe by his benefits allthings cou/ist, 
| andarecftablifbed. De beneficisb.4. And Tully likewile : When we call jupiter, Almighty, Salus 
taris, Hofpitalis,8¢ Stator, wee meane, that all mens bealth, and ftabilitie is confiftine of bim and 
from bim,being under his proteEtion. But both thefe authors doe here {peake Stoically. For Tully 
maketh (ato the Stoike iheake thefe fore-alledged words. De finib./ib.3. For all thefe affertions 
of the gods the Stokes reduced toa miorg Metaphyficall or Theologicall fence. (2) Nor would 
shefe Butcheries |\n. the middeft of the fight the women gaue in beewixt the battels all bares 
headed and laofe haired : and calling on their parents on this fide,and their husbands on thar, 
with ceares befought them both to fall to agreement: So the battell ceafed,a league was made, 
the Sebines became citizens , and Tatias was ioyned King with Romulus. (m ) But.how long | 
The Lasrentians of Lauinium flew Tarius the fift yeare of his raigne with Romnlws, becaufe 
his friends had iniured their Embafladors. Hereof was Romulus very glad. () Lines} fome 
read Ivra,lawes, But in.the old manufcripts,fome haue vita, and fome vite, liues, both berter 
then lara — 


How impious that warre was which theRomaines began with the 
Albans, and of the nature of thofe victories which 


ambition feekes to obtaine. 


Cuap. 14. 


(aswellonthe Romasnes fide as on the WMbanes) was that warre betweene 
Rome and ibe 2? Becaufe (forfooth ) the peace of Numa was growne loath- 
fome,therefore muft che Romssines and the Asanes begin alrernaté maffacres , to 
fo great an endamaging of both their eftares: And Alba (4) the daughter of .4/- 
canins, eEneas his fonne, (a more appropiate. mother vnco Rome then Troye ) 
mutt by Tales Hoftilius his prouocation, bee compelled to fight wichRome it 


Stator, 


BY T when Nama was gone, what did the fucceeding Kings? O how tragicall . 


felfe,her owne daughter. And fighting with her,was afflicted, and did affli@, vn- 
till che concinuall confli&s had vtterly tyred both the parries. And then they | 
were faine to put the finall — of the whole warre( 5) to fixe bretheren, ~ 


three Heraty on Romes fides,and three a on Albas. Sotwo'of same 
‘ ‘ : ; { 


3 


enna re ne tee LE CL LL PD . 


124 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuar.t4. 


fell by the three other : and the three other fell by the third onely of the Horaty. 


“Thus gotre Rome the vpper hand, yet fo hardly , as of fixe combatzants, onely 


one furuiued. Now who were they that loft on both fides? who were they chat 


_ lamented but e£neas his progenie , 4fcanins his polteritie , Veaus . of:{pring, 


and Jwpéters children? for this warre was worfe then ciuill, where the daughter 
citty bore armes againft the mother. (¢ ) Befides,this brethrens fight was clofed 
‘with ati horrid and an abhominable mifchiefe . For in the time of the league be- 
tweene both cities , a fifter of the Horsty , was efpoufed toone of the Curdsty, 
who feeing her brother returne with the {poiles of her dead fpoufe, and burfting 
into teares at this heauy fight, was runne thorow the body by hir owne brother 
in his heate and furie. There was more true affetion in this one poore woman 
(in my iudgement ) then in allthe whole Romaine nation befides. Shee did not 
deferueto be blamed for bewailing that hee was flaine to whom thee ought her 
faith ( or that her brother had flaine him to whom he him-felfe perhaps had pro- 
mifed her his fifter) For Pious £neas is commended in Virgsil for bewailing (4) 
him whom hee had flaine as an enemie. And Marcellus, viewing the faire cittie 
Syracufa, being then to bee made a prey to ruine by the armes of his condu@, re- 
uoluing the inconftancie of mortall affaires, pittied ic,and bewailed it: 1 pray you 
then ginethus much leaueto a poore woman, in tender affeCion, faultlefly to be- 
waile her fpoufe,flaine by her brother, fince that warlike men haue beene praifed 
for deploring their enemies eftate in their owne conquefts. But when this one 
wretched foule lamented thus, that her loue had loft his life by her brothers hand, 
contrarywifegid all Rome reioyce,, that thee had giuen their mother fo mighty 


- afoyle,and exulted in the plenty of the allyed bloud that the had drawne. What 


Rome had 


no iuft 
caule of 
war ag i 


Alba. 


Pfal,10.3¢ 


@s they 


did in Rome 


to fight for 


sei lines, 


A 


bur afide the maske of mad opinion, and all thefe villanies will appearenaked, to 
view,perufe,and cenfure: weigh but -4/ba’s caufe and Troyes together , and you 
fhall Gnde a full difference. Tuilss began thefe warres,onely to renew the difcon- 
tinued valours and triumphs of his country-men. From this ground, arofethefe 
horrid warres, betweene kindred & kindred,which not-withftanding Saluffe doth 
but ouer-run, /icco pede: for having briefly recolle&ed the precedent times,when 
men liued, without afpiring or ather affe&s, each man contenting himfelfe with 
his owne. Bat after that (e) Cyrus (quoth he) és Alta, and the Lacedemonians and 
Athenians 42 Greece, began to fubdue the ssc . cities within = ae 
defire of (oueraignty grew acommon caufe of warre,and opinion placed the ereate 

pate leet pits c. Thus farrehe. This was of Gocaiane is a 4cdly 
corrafiue to humaine fpirits. This made the Romaines triumph ouer Alba, and 
aue the happy fuccefl: of their mifchiefes, the {tile of glories. Becaufe, as our 
anaes faith; The wicked maketh boaft of his hearts defire, and the vainft dealer 
ble eth bimfelfe. Take off then thefe deluding vayles from things, and lecthem 
appeare as they are indeed. Let none tell me,Hee,or Hee is great,becaufe he hath 
coped with and conquered fuch and fuch an one. Fencers can fight & conquer, & 
thofe bloudy aéts of theirs in their combate ( f) doe neuer pafle vngraced .Bur I 
hold it rather fitto expofea mans name toall aint of idleneffe, then to purchafe 
renowne from fuch bad emploiment.But iftwo Fencers or fword-plaiers fhould 
come vpon the ftage,one being the father,& another the fonne,who could endure 
{uch a fpectacle?how then can glory attend the armes of the daughter city againft 
the mother? do yee make a difference in that their field was larger thé che fencers 
ftage, & y they fought not in view of the theater but che whole world, prefenriag 
*< | _ = a {peGacle 


face then haue youto talke of your victories ie your glories hereby gorren?Cak 


wows 


Linz. OF THECITIEOF GOD. —— ths 


a {peGtacle of eternall impiety both to the prefent times, “and co all pofteritie? But 
your great guardian-gods boreall this vnmooued, fitting as {pearors of this 
tragedy, whileft for the three Cariatg that were flaine,the filter of che Horaty muft 
be ftabbed by the hand of her owne brother ,to make euen the ‘number with hir 
two other brethren, that. Romes conqueft might coft no leffe bloud then s/b1s 
loffe did : which, as the fruite of the viGory (4 ) was veterly fubuerred : even this 
place,which the gods ( after //:um, which the Greckes deftroyed , and Laxinium, 
where Latinus placed fugitiue e£meas as King ) had chofento beetheir third | 
agin habitation. Bur it may be they were gone hence alfo, and fo it came td 
crazed :yes fure, all they shat kept the ftate of it vp, were departed from cheir 
fhrines: Then they left a/b where Amulins had raigned , hauing thruft out his — 
brother,and went todwell at Rome,where Romulus had raigned, having killed his 
brother. Nay, but before this demolition ( fay they) the people of Alba were all 
tranfported vnto Rome,to make one Cittie of both. Well be 1t fo,yet the C ii, 
that was the feateRoyall cf .4/cames,and the third habitacle of the Tvosa” ecds, 
was viterly demolifhed, And much bloud was fpilt, before they came to make 
this miferable confiifion of both thefe peoples together. Why fhould I particu- 
Jarize the often renouation of thefe warres vnder fo many feuerall kings ; which 
when they feemed to be ended in viGory began fo often againe in flaughters,and 
after combination and league,brake out fo frefh betweene kindred and kindred, 
both in the predeceffors anc their pofteritie ? No vaine Embleme of their'mifery 
was that continuall ftanding open. of Janus his gate: fothat forall the helpe of 
thefe gods-guardians,there was not one King of them that continued his raigne 


° 


in peace. 


. 4 L. VIVES. 3. oy eee Ser et pateadl gf 
(a) A Lba,\ There were many e4/ba's : one in y se , called alfo Virgao, Anothesin that Alba, 
yart.of France called Pronence, a towne of the Heluii. & third in Italy , by the Lake. 
Fucinus now called Lago de, Marfo,or Lago di Celeno,éc. A fourth i Lombardy called Pows- 
peia. The fift vpon Mount Albanus called Alba Longa. And Rome (not onely that which 
Romulus built ) was a collony of the eAlbanes brought out by‘ Romulus and Remus >but many 
thinke that the old Rome alfo,that was long before, was built by Romalus, e£veas lis fonne x 
which being at length through peftilence and often inuafion left defolate,was by. the ef Baus 
(pitying the inbabitants cafes ) reftored , and diuerfe of them fent to repaire and Loe it, 
(4 } Three bretheren, | (Lin lib.t. ) Ie is commonly knowne that Aetins Suffetins the Ditar 
cor of eAlba,counfelled and agreed with Tullus the King of Romeé,to take a courfe to faye the 
liues of fo many innocent people on both fides, and to haue the controuerfie decided by g 
few onely : fomaking a league, fixe men were appointed to fight for both the ftares fouéraign- 
ties. Nowthere were three bretheren in either armie,thefe were tutried together into che tifts; 
and whofe fide conquered, that people fhould bee foueraigne. (¢ ) Befides, } Saint Nagaffine 
may be hisowne comment herein, hee tells it.fo plaine. (d) Bewayling bins } anus, Adtzen- 
tins his fonne, e£neid 10, (¢) Cyrus | There were two Cri the g-eater meant here,C Th 
of Afia, Scythia, and all the Eaft, reigning in the time of Tarquin the proud, Hee tooke refus ae 
the ritch King of Lydia : but by Tomiris Queene of Scythia , himfelfe was taken , beheaded, 
and his head. fouced in atubbe of bloud, to fatiffie his cruell thirft. Platarch , Strabo , Trogas, 
Herodotus,o-¢. Herodotus calleth him pydnor Basaite, the great King, Aud there-vpon the Aiabdis 
other Perfian Kings are viually fo ftiled. The other was Cyrus the leffer, fone to Darias , bro- ae 
therto Artaxerxes, whofe iourney into Perfis, Xenophon wrote. (f) Doe meacrpaffe| With ~ 
éerowneshung all with labells and pendants. ( ¢ ) Amphitheater | The Theater was like halfé ThetThea< 
acircle,the Amphitheater like a full circle: it was ftrowed with Sand , and there the Fencets. ter & Am- 
fought. (4) Was vtterly | Lin In the firft cian warre,when Metins of Alba ftood as neuter phitheater, 
with his armie,and would not helpe Twilxs according to the conditions of the league , Thue | 
made him be dsawne im peeces with horfes,deftroted .4/b2,& remoued all the Albans to Rome. 


M 3 Of 


Ct SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuar.ts. 


Of the Lines ated deaths of the Romaine Xings. 
ae Cu AP. 15. 


TQ Vt how ended their Kings ftill > for Romalws, let that Aattéring fablelooketo. 


_&“him,which hath fene him vp into heauen. Let'fome of theit owne (« writers 


iudge,that affirme him torne in peeces by the Senate for his pride, and that (6) 


I know not whom, one /e/iwe Proculas, was {uborned to fay,that he appeared vnto 

The fannies him,commanding him to bid Rome give him diuine honor , and fo was the furie 
Fclipte a Of the people furprifed. Befides, an Ecclipfe of the funne falling our at the fame 
Romulus time,wrought fo vpon the (¢) ignorance of the rude vulgar , that oy! afcribed 
hisdeath, allthis vnto Romulus his worthe and glories. As though that if the funne had 
mourned,as they thought it did, (4) they fhould not rather imagine that it was 

becaufe Romulus was murdered, and therefore that che funne turned his lighe 

from fuch a villanie; as it did indeed whén our Lord and Sauiour was crucified 

Lucs3, by thebloudy & reprobate /ewes. (e.) That the Eclipfe which befell at our Sani- 
ours death, was quite againft thé régular courfe of the ftars,is hence moft plaine, 

becaufe it was the ewes Eafter:which is continually kept at the ful of the Moone, 

But ( f)the regular eclipfe of the Sunne neuer hapneth but in the chan ing of 

the Moone. Now Citero intimates plainely that this admiffion of Romslesinto 

heauen; was rather imagined then performed 5 there where in Sctpio's words(De 

vepub.) {peaking of his prayfes, Hee attained fo much (faith hee ) that being not to 

be found after the funnes Eclipfe,be was acconnted as admitted into the number of the 

gods : which opinion, there ts no man without admirable merit of vertue can purchafe. 

ow whereas hee faith , that hee was notto bee found, hee glanceth doubtleffe 

eytherat the fecrecie of the murther, or intimateth the violence of the tempeft. 

For other writers ( g J adde vnto this Ecclipfea fudden ftorme, which either was 

_ the agent or the o¢cafion of Romu/us his murther. Now Tay in the fame 
[bookes , {peaking of (b ) Hoffslius (third King after Romelus)) who was ftriken 

to death with thunder, faith , chat hee was not reckoned ‘amongft the gods, be- 

caufe that which was prooued true( thatis,that w hich they beleeued was fo) in 
Romulus:the Romaines would not (4) embafe, by making it too common, in 

- gluing itto the one as well as theother. And in his /aveéFincs hee faith plainly. 

It is‘ouv good-will and fame, that hath made Romulus (this citties (founder) « God. 

To thew that it was not foindeed, but onely {pred intoa reporte by their good- 

will to him for his worthe and vertues. But in his Dialogue called (4) Horten- 


darkene(fe as was made by the Eclipfe of the Sunne at Romulus his death. Here he 


frus , difputing of regular Eclipfes , hee faith more plainely: To produce fuch 4 


= 


feared nor to fay dire@ly his death, by reafon hee futtained the perfonofa dif — 


putant ; rather then a Panegericke. But now for tlie other Kings of Rome,. 
excepting Nima, and Ancus Martius , that dyed of infirmities, what horrible 
_ends did they all come to? Hoftélixs, the fubuerter of 4/ba ,asI fayd,was con- 
fumed, together with his whole houfe by lightning. (/) Taraqninius Priftas 
was murthered by his predeceflors fonnes : And Seruius Tullius, ty the villanie 
of his fonne in lawe Tarquix the proude , who fucceeded him in his kingdome. 
Nor yet were any of the gods gone from their fhrines, for all this fo haynous 

. @parricide, committed vpon this fo good a King though it bee affirmed that 
they ferued wretched Troe in worfe manher,in leauing it tothe licentious fu- 

_ feof the Greekes , onely for Parts his adulterie. Nay , Tarquin having fhedde 
his father in lawes bloud, feazcd on his eftate himfelfe, 7 his parricide gotte 

| Oe oo "ag his 


. 


sac SERGE LATS BEDI AGS BAA SEIS EE TC IE TS TE CT AeA AOS aR SESSA IEE CEE GLO ETAL O DE AIOE, 


Lin.3. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. : 127 


his crowne by his ftepfathers murder, andafter-wards glorying in monftrous 
warres and maffacres,and eucn building the Capstollvp , with hence -got fpoiles: 
This wicked man, the gods were fo far from forfaking, that they fat and lookedon 
him, nay and would haue Jepiser their principall to ficand {way all things in chat 
ftately temple, namely inthac blacke monument of parricide,for Targuss was 
not inndécent , when he built (m) che Capitoll, and for his after-guile, incurred 
expulfion: No , foule and inhumaine murder was his very ladder to that ftaté 
whereby he had his meanes to build the Capirol. And (#) whereas the Remains 
‘expelled him the ftare and Citty afterwards , the caufe of that (namely Lacreffes | 
rape)erew from his fonne and not from him , who was both ignorant and abfent 
when that was done: for then was he at chefiege of Ardea, and a fighting for the 
Romaines 200d : nor know we what he woold hauedone had he knowne of this 
fac of his fonne , yet without all triall or iudgement, the people expelled him 
from his Empire: and hauing charged his army toabandon him, tooke them in 
ac the gates,& {but him out.But he himfelfe after he had plagued the Romasxes(by 
their borderers meanes)with eztreame warres , and yet at length being not able 
to recouer his eftate, by reafon his friends fayled him : retired himfelfe ( as ic is 
reported) vnto (0) Tw/cu/um,a towne fourteene miles frorn Rome;and there enioy- 
ing a quiet and priuat eftate, liued —— with his wife, and died farre more 
happily then his Bather in law did , who fell fo bloudily by his meanes , and/p) 
his owne daughters confent, as itis credibly affirmed , and yet this Taquin was 
neuer furnamed creel nor wicked by the Romaines, but the Proud; it may be (4) 
becaufetheir owne pride would not let them beare with his:As fot thé crime of 
killing that good King his i em , they fhewed how light they made of 

_ thar ,. ig making him murder the King , wherein I makea queition i the 
gods were not guilty ina deeper manner then he, by rewarding fo highly a guilt 
{o horrid, andnot leaning their fhrines all at thac inftane when it was done, vn- 
leffe fome will fay for them , that they ftaid ftill at Rome , to take a deeper reuenge: 
vpon the Komaines , rather thento affift them , feducing them with vaine vito- 
" vies, and toffing them in vnceafing turmoiles. Thus liued the Romaine; in thofe 
fo happy times,vnder their Kings, even vntil the expelling of Targuine the proud, 
_ which was about two hundred forty ard three yeares together, paying fo much 

~ bloud, and fo many lives for euery victory they got, and yet hardly enlarging 
their Empirethe diftance of (7) twenty miles compaffe without che walles : 
How farre chen haue they to conquer, and what ftore of ftroks to (hare, vatill 
they cometo conquera City of the (s)Getulans? 


_ | L. VIVES. | | 

Heir ewne(a)writkrs|\Dionifins(ib.2, )[aith that the fenators tore hin in peeces. and cuery separ 
3 onebore away a peece wrapped in his gowne : keping it by this meanes from the notice 
of the vulgar (6) J know not whome } this hee addeth either becaufe the author is obfcure, or 
becaufe the lye that Procu/us cold was vile & perlured. (¢) [gnorance Before that their Philo- 
fopers fhew éd men the canes of eclipfes, men when they faw them, feared indeed éithet fome 

reat mifchiefe,or the deach of the planets themfelues,nor was this feare only vulgar, euen thé 

arned fhared in it,as Stefchorus,and Pindarus,two lyrick Poets(d)T hey [bold xot rather not Ecliples, 
_ jsput into the reformed copies otherwife the fence is nuerted, (€) that that eclipfe | the partly 
meeting of the Sun and Moone depriues vs of the Suns light , and this is the Ec/ypfe of the Sun 
but the fhade of the earth falling from § funs place lineally vpon the moone,makes the moones 
eclipfe. So that neither can the Sunne bee Eclipfed but in the Moones change, and par- 
tile coniunction with him;neither can the Moone be eclipfed but at her ful,and in her fartheft 

a | M 4 | polture 


u 
. wT Se Se 8 ae. ee eee = 


128 SAINT AVGVSTINE. _ — Cuarné: 


pofture from the funne : then is fhe proflitute to obnubilation. (f) The regular) Regular and 
Canonicallis all one: of Canon the Greeke word : well was this waighed of the Auguftine 
Monkes,who holding the one infufficient, would be called by them both. (g) 4dde unto this] 

Linie , A tempeft fuddainely arofe , with great thunder and lightning: (b) Of Hoftilius ] Some 

Tallus write that he and his whole houfe was burnt with lightning.Some,thac it was fired by (Mar. 
Hoftilius. tins Ancus his fucceffor. (#) Embafe\ Vilefacere faith Saint Augn/fine , but this is not well, 
nor learnedly : no, ifany of our fine Ciceronians correct it , it muft be Uilificare : for this is 

their vfuall phrafe: Hominsficare , ansmalificare , accidenrificare , afinificare.(k) Hortenfius } 

Taravini Wee hauc loft it: that which fome take to bee it,is the fourth of the Ta/cwlanes, Marcellus, 
a al (1) Targuinius Prifcus \ The fift Romaine King, Demaratus his fonne of Corinth ,hee was 
_ flaine by fhephards fuborned by the fonnes of Martins Ancas. After him came Sernius Tul- 

las his tep-fonne , powrefull in peace, and warre:who adotned his Citty with many good in- 

Ricutions . Hee was flaine by the meanes of Tarquin the proude . This Tarquin was brutith 

TheCa- andcruellto his people: but exceeding valourous in warre and peace. (m) The (2 apitol | On 
pitol, the hill Saturnins,afterwardes called Tarpeius,did hee dedicatethe Capitc/ to almighty Some. 
(2) sAnd whereas) The feauenth and laft King of the Romaines , hee was expelled by Brutus, 
Collatinus, Lucretins,Valerss, Horatius Gc. Partly becaufe of many old iniuries,but chiefely 
for his fonne Sextus his Rape of Lucre(fe. Hee was befieging Ardea when the people beganne 
this depriuation , and when he came tothe Citty , Brutus , that came into the campe another 
waie,with-drew all his army from him. (0) T#{culwns| Ic is more commonly beleeued thathee 
died at (ame with King Ariffodemsus, liuing neere at the age of 90. yeares.I doe not denie his 
{tay fome yeares at Tu/cxlum with Octanins Mamilins his fonne in law, vntill at thatmemos 
rable filed at Lake Regs//ns ( now called Lago, di, S. “Praffede) \Mamilis was flaine by T. 
Herminius , Legate ot Rome. Which perhaps is caufe of Saint Augu/tines forgetfulneffe ina 
matter of fo finalla moment , caring not whether it bee reported thus or thus, (p) His ewne 
danghters confent|Nay, furtherance itis fayd , and continual vrging her husband to the fad, 
(7) There owne pride] A pithy andelegant faying. (7) twenty miles] Eighteene,faith Rufus, 
won by eAncus from Rome to Oftia by the fea. Eatropizs hath but fixteene, (f) Getulians} 
Getulia, Getulia isa part of Affrike ,neere the inhabitable Zone , as Afe/a faith, Sals/? writeth thus of 
them. The rude and barbarous Getulians\dwel: at firftin Africa:the flefh of wild beaftes & graffe 

was their meate,as beafts , bane allo their apparell. Law had they none , nor gonernment, nor place 

of abeade. This and more hath Sa/uf of the Gerulans. Adela faith they area great and popu- 


- lous country, 


Of the frrft Romaine Confulls,how the one expelled the other out of his country and 
hee himsfelfe,after many bloudy murders, fell by 4 wound, ginen him by 
= his wounded foe. CHar. 16. : 


Vos thefe times, addethe other , wherein (as Sa/uf faith) things were mo- 
deftly and iuftly caried’, vntull the feare of Tarquin and the Hetrurisnwarre 
were both ended. For whileftthe Herrursans aflifted Tarquins endeauours of 
re-inftalment, Rome quaked vnder fo burthenous a warre. And therefore ( faith 
Saluft)were things caried modeftly and iuftly, feare beeing the caufe hereof by 
reftraint,not iuftice,by perfwafton. In whichthort fpace,O howcruell a courfe 
had the yeare of thetwo firft Confulls! The time beeing yet vnexpired , Brtus 
debafed Col/stine,and banithed him the Citty: And fooneatter, perifhed he him- 
felfe,hauing (2) enterchanged a many wounds with his foe, (4) hauing firk {laine 
his owne fonnes,and his wiues brothers, becaufe he found them agers ina plot 
torecall Tarquin. Which deed , Vérgi/hauing laudably recited, prefently doth 
in gentle manner deplore it : for having fayd. <7 


~—- Natofg, Pater mala bells mouentes : | His fonnes,conui& of turbalent tran(ereflion 
4%; : gt 
Ad panam pulcra pro libertate vocabit, . | Hekalls,to quit his country from oppresfion, 


Prefencly in lamenting manner headdeth. 


Infalix, 


‘ 


a A SY 
Lrs.3. OFTHE CITIE OF GOD. 129 
a TT 
| Infalix,vtcang, ferent éa facta minores. : 
| | Hapleffe,how ere fucceedirig times fhall ringe. 

.. Howfoeuer his pofterity thall er the praife of fuchana@ , yet hapleffe 

is he,that giues deathes {ummonsto his ovwne fonnes : But to giue fome folace 

to his forrowes,he addeth after all. : | fee a 4 

—-Viest amor patria lasdumg, immenfa cupido, 

. © . + Ceriquer’d by countries loue,andlawds high thirft. 
Now in Bratus his killing of his owne fonnes ,and(c) in beeing killed by 

Tarquins fonne, whome hec had hurt, and Targass himfelfe furuiuing him, is noe 

(4) Collatines wrong well — , who beeing fo good a cittizen was banifhed 

(onely becaufe his name was but Tarqvin ) as wellas Tarquin the tyranc: (e) It 

was thename ( you fay ) that was thé caufe of this : well , hee fhould haue beene aid Breas 

made to change his naniz then and not to abandon his country. Againe( /) this was Tar- 

w6rd would haue beene but litle miffed in his name, ifhee had beene called Z. _ 

Collatine oncly : This therefore was no fufficient caule , why hee , beeing one of =~ 

the firft Confulls, fhould bee forced to abiure both his honours and his Citie. 

But is this vnivftice, being fo deteftable,and fo vfe-leffeto the ftate.firto bee thé 

foundation of Bratashis glory 2 Did he thefe things, being Conguer'a by our conn- 

tries loues, and laudes hich thir ft ? Tarquin beeing expelled, L. Tarquin Collatine, 

Lucretia s-husband was ioyned Confull with Jeasss Bratus: how iuftly did the 

ae iy refpec& the conditions of the man and notthé name? But how vniuft- 

y did Bratas( hauing powre to depriue him onely of the caufe of the offence, 
his name ) in depriuing him both of his country , and placé of honour ? Thus 
thefe evills, thus chefe chwart effeés fell out cuen then when things Were [aid co 
be carried fo modeftly and fo iuftly.And (g) Lacresins, that had Bretss his place, 
died erethis yeare ended: So that P. Valerius that fucceeded Collatine,and A, — 
Horatins that had Lucretius his place , ended that Hellifh and murderous 
yeare , which faw it felfe paffe by fiue Confulls . This was the yeare, where- 
in Rome deuifed her platforme of new gouetnmenc , their feares now be- 
ginning to furceafe, not becaufethey had no warres, but becaufe thofe they 

ad were but light ones : But the time beeing expired whereinthings were mo- 
deftly and iuftly carried, then followed thofe which Sa/s# doth thus breeflie 
deliniate. Ther becanne the Patriots to oppreffe the people with feruzle conditions, 
toiudge of isfe and death as Imperioufly asthe Kings had done before, to thruft men 
from thesr poffe/sions , to put by all others, and tofwaye all themfelues ; with which 
outrages , and cheefly with their extorted taxes , the people becing to.much vexed, 
(beeing bound both to maintaine an armie and Alfo to pay contributions befid:s) 
they rufht vppe to armes , and entrenched themfélues vpon Mount Sacer,and 
Aucntine: and there they made thers Tribunes , and diners lawes 3 but thefe difcords 
and tumultuous contentions ended not till the fecond African warre. ee 


LH Axing @ enterchanged| With Areas King Targuinius fonne: beeing flaine , the matrons 

edawhole yeare for him, and his Colleague , Valerius made. an oration in his 
praife , the firft of that kinde in Rome. (6) Haweng firft flaine] The Vitelii , Brutushis 
wiuesbrethren , confpired with certaine fecret meflengers of Targuin , to bring him fecrets 
Ty in againe,and made Titus and Tiberias, Bratus the Confull fons, privy ahd pertakers in this 
affaire.Bratws difcouering the plot, put themall to death ‘(c) /» beeing ksHed| The manufcripts 
paue this diuerfly: wee hauo it the beft, (d) Collatines wrong} noted before , That thofe that 


‘ 
c+ 2 
. 


2 


a rs, ce oat : 


130 , 


was brought in fufpition of affgAing Monareby , and at 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. | C uap.17. 


deprined tbeér fellowes in Confiull-fbip lined not a yeare after.(e) For it is fayd|Hee was fonne to 
M. Iunins , and Targuins fifter, (f ) This name wonld | Some hereof tranfpofe the word #f, 
buccrroneoufly. (g) Lucretins| This firft yeare had fiue Confulls : firft Brutus and (ollatine: 
tnen P, Valerius Poplicola in Collatines place , Then Sp: Lucretins(after the death of Breas in 


warte, )had Brutus his place « and hee dying ere the end of the yeare, AZ, Horatins Puluillus 
fucceeded him. | | | 


Of the Vexations of the Romaine effete , after the firft beginning of the the Con- 
fallsrale: And of the little good that thesr gods all this while did them 
. C HA Pe °I 7 e . 7 


Ve why fhould! fpend: fo much time in writing of thefe things , or make o- 

thers (pend itin “pret. them ? How miferakle the ftare ofRome ftood all 
that long time vntill the fecond Pwsske warre , how forely fhaken by forraine 
warres,and inteftine difcord, Sa/u/t hath already made a fuccin@& demonftratign. 
So that their victories neuer brought any true felicity to the good , but onely 
vaine folaces to the wretched, and indu@ions & inticements tothe turbulent,to 
continue difquiets progreffe. Let no wife Romaine then bee angry with vs for 


_ faying this s but we need not intreate,wee are already aflured,they will nor. For 


wee vie but the words oftheir owne writers, and that with farre leffe gall, then 


_ themfelués meant it, and in leffe gloffe then they fpoakeit . Yet thofedoe they 


learne,and thofe they make their children learre: Then why ftomack they mee 
for faying as Saluf? fayes : Many troubles, fedétions and laftly cinill warres bur ft ont, 
whilf. a Fos (4) of the greateft, under the boneft flile of fathers, uled the licence of ty 
van: s,nor didthe Csttizens attaine the titles of goodandbad , according to their ( b) 
deferts in the aig all being fowle a lske) but he that had moff wealth and powre to ine 
dure ,becaufe hee defended the prefent gouernment(as fitte/t for his turne) hee was the 
onely good man. lf thefe wricers now held it as pertinent to an honeft mans libér- 
ty,to be fo free tongued againft their owne citties corruptions, which other-wife 
they haue beene often enforced tocommend, in that they had no knowledge of 
any better ftate,wherein they might become denizens eternall ; what then {hall 
wee doe , whofe truftin God by how muchit is firmer, fo much ought our 
tongues to bee the freer, in repelling the fcandall they caft vponour ae 
‘Chrift , with intent to feduce vnfettled and vnfound mindes from that citty, 
where happineffe is mans poffeffion vntoall eternity > Neicher do we loadetheir 
gods with any more horrid guilt , then their owne writers doe,whom they reade 
and reverence: what wee fay,we fay it from them, beeing vnable to recite all,or 
all cha: chey haue of this kind. (c) where then were thefe gods,(which men hold 
fo venerable for the attayning of worldly vanities ) when the Romaines , whofe 
feruices they angled for focunningly were affli@ed fo extreamely ? where were 
they when Confell Valerius was flaine in defence of the Capitol;when it (d) was 


» {called by flaues and exiles ? Ie was rather in his powre to protect the temple of 


Japeter , then inthe powres of all that kennell of gods ,and their great King, to 
yeeld him any helpe at all. Where were they when the citty being {0 ouer-borne 
with fediticns,was faine to fendto Athens to borrow lawes, and in that little ex- 
pectation of quietneffe , was vnpeopled by fucha fore famine and peftilence 2 
Where were they befides , when the people in this great famine, ele@ed their 
firft Prefe@ of the prouifion, and when that inthe increafe of this dearth, (e)Sp: 
e£milius,for diftribu:ing of corne ouer bountifully amongft the ftarued people, 
#3 inftance of the fayd 

Prafea, 


OF THE CITIE OF GOD. | 
prefect , by the meanes of L. Quéntsus Dictator , anaged weake man, hee was 
flaine by the hand of Q. Seruélsus the Generall of the horfe-men,; not withouta 


moft dreadfull and dangerous tumult in the whole Citty. where were they 
when at the beginning of a waftefull peftilence , the people beeing wholy tyred 


Li3.3. 


with fruftrat inuocations , thought it ficte toappeafe them withnew (f) Bed- 


I 31 


Yio thing never done before > Then were there beddes brought into — 
the 


Temples and {preadin honour of the goddes , and hence this facrifice ( nay 
facriledge, rooke thename. Where were they when for ten full yeares together 
the Romasnes neuer fought againft the Vesans but they had the worfe, until Farius 
Camillus was faine to help them,whome they kindly banithed afterwards for his 
good feruice?Where were they when the Galles tooke Rome, facked it, fpoyledit, 
burned it,and madeavery fhambles ofic ? Where were they when that great 

Jague deftroyed almoft all che Citty , and Camillus amongft the reft, who 
adde faued his thankleffe country from the Vesens and after fromthe Galles? 
In chis peftilence they firft brought vppe their Stage-playes ,a greater plague 
shenthe orher , to their conditions though notta their carkafles. Where werd, 
they , when (¢) another fadde contagion arofe (as ic is faid ) from the poyfoning: 
trickes of the Matrons ', yeaof the moft and Nobleft , whofe conditions here- 
in proued worfe then all thofe peftilene ayres ? Or when the two Confuls with 
aheir armie beeing fhutte in the Candee Straices by the Semnites, were gladde 
zo make a bafe compofition with them? And delivering fixe hundred Gentle- 
men for hoftages , went away with all the reft , withour artnes , without bag. 


gage, without any thing but their very vpper garments ¢ Or when the army pes — 


rithed almoft wholly , part by the plague, and part by thunders2?Or when in ano_ 
thergreat mortallity the Citty was forced to fetch «4/culapéus (as aPhifition 
for her ) from Epsdaurus , becaufe /apster ithe a ofthe Capitoll , hadde cuer. 
beene fo imployed in his youth in rapes and adulteries , thacthefe exercifes 
gauehim notimetolearnePhyficke. Or when the Bratians, Lacans Samsnites,He- 
traviesis and Seviotian Galles, confpiring altogether, firft lew their Ambafladours, 
and then a whole army with the Pretor,ten tribunes, and thirteene thoufand fol- 
diours? Or then when the long and fatall fedition in the Cittie, wheteéin the 
peoplearlaftincamped them-felues on Janiculus hauing booty-haled all the 
whole Cittie? Which mifchiefe grew to fucha lamentable paffe, that they were 
ladde (for the laft refuge in all defperate cafes ) to create a. Di@tator : Horten- 
as, who hauing re-vnited the people,and recalled them, died in his office, as no - 
Di@ator had done before, which was a great fhame to the god snow that e£/ex- 
dapins was come to make one.And(/)then grew wars fo fat vpon thé, thae their 
Proletarii their Brood-men,thofe that they alwaies fotbare for getting of childré, 
being fo needy they could not follow the wats themfelues,were now for wantof 
foldiars , compelled to ferue them-felues? For now did (2) Pyrrbus that famous 
and warlike Epirot (beeing calledin by the Tarentines ) become Romes hea- 
uiefoe: (k) Andasking the Oracle of his fuccefle, truly pelo anfwered him 
very neatly , in fuch ambiguous manner , that which way fo ere it happes' 
ned , his deity might ftand vnblemifhed : sto te Zacida Romanos vincere | 
poffe : faith hee : So that whether Pyrrhws or the Romaines hadde the vpper 
fond , the Oracle neede not care, for «pollo {peakes true how euer. 
After this , followed a fore and bloudy fight , wherein notwithftanding (J) . 
Pyrrkus was conquerour , fo that now a might iuftly efteeme PE 


a truc fore-reller , as he vnderftood him ; but chat in the next conflia the - 


Romiing 


ebus ° 


or swe 
oe * 


) 


ceastnanetenaremntnngrsadheeetan tapas ncaa eA ES LO EI SES 


132 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. Carty. 


Romeaines hadde the better (m) and in this great hoftility , arofe as great a plague 
amongtt the women : For , ere they could bee deliuered,being bigge with childe, 
ftillthey dyed. Now heere ze/culapus hadde an excufe , hee profefled him-felfe 
(#) the Prince of Phyficke and not of Mid-wifery. Cattell dyed alfo fo fore , that 
one would lave thought the worldes veter vaftation wasentered. And then 
there was a winter how ftrangely vnfeafonable ! The {now lying inthe Market- 
place forty daies together ina monftrovus depth ; all Téber beeing frozen quite 
ouer : If this hadde hapened in our times , Lord how it would haue beene fcan- 
ned vppon. And then for that (o) great peftilence , how many thoufand tooke it 
herice: (which maugre all Ae/culapiws his druggs ) lafting till che next -yeare,they 
were faine to betake them-felues to the bookes of the Sybéls: (p) In which kind 
of Oracles (as Tully faith well in his booke De diusnat.) the expounders of them 
are oftener trufted, then otherwifesgeffe they neuer fo vnlikely : and then it was 
faid that the peftilence raged fo becaufe that (q) many of the Temples were put 
vnto priuat mens vies: Hereby freeing 4¢/culapius either from great ignorance, 
or negligence. But why were thefe Temples turned vnto priuate habitations 
without prohibition , but onely becaufe they faw they hadde loft too much la 
bour in praying to fucha crue of goddes fo long : and fo becomming wifer by 
degrees,had lefe haunting of thofe places by little and little , and at length abane 
doned them wholy , for the priuate vfes of fuch as would inhabit them. For thofe 
houfes that as then , for auoiding of this peftilence, were fo dilligently repared 
if they were not afterwards oun. 3 neglected , and fo incroched vppon by priuat 
men as before; Varro{hould bee too blame to fay ( {peaking of Temples ) that 
many of chem were vnknowne. But in the meane time this fetch was a pretty exé 
cufe for the goddes,but no cure at all for the Peftilence. eS 


e 


L. VIVES. a 


dR Few(a) of the greateft | The Plebeians , either through hate to the Nobles,or ambition in 

them-felues,difturbed the common ftate exceedirgly,to affure and augment their owne; 
pretending the defence of the peoples freedome, notwith{tanding in all their courfes the Pa- 
triots oppofed them, abftracting from the peoples meanes to fhare among ft them-felues,preten- 
ding the defence of the Senates dignity, which the {tate would haue moft eminent: but indeed 
they did nothing but contend & bandy factions , each with other,according to his power. (6) 
deferts |Some books put in incefferant,but ithurteth the fence, (¢) Where then were | All this 
relation of eAugastines is out of Linie: readitinhim Jeaft our repitition becomme both tes 


| dious and troublefome. (4) /t was {caled | Incenfum {caled , and not incen{um fired: (e) SP, 


. Beddprea- 
ding 


Pevions 
vfed at 


cE milins | This mult be Melius affuredly , by the hiftory. (f) Bed-/preadings |.It was an old 
fafhion to banket vpon beds, But in their appeafiue,and facrifical banquets,in the Femples,and 
in the night orgies they made beds in the place, for the gods to lye and reuel vpon,and this was 
called Lettsfferium,Bed-fpreading, che Citty being fore infected with the plague (faith Lise 
lib, 5.) afew yeares ere it was taken by the Galles , the. Sybils bookes direéted the firft Bed- 
fpreading to laftcight dayes :three beds were fitted: one for e4pollo and Latona, one for Dia 
naand Hercules , oue for Mercxry and Neptune. But how this can bee the firft Bed-fpreading 


I cannot fee,feeing that in the fecular games ¥ Poplicola, Brutus his Collegue ordayned, there - 


were three nights Bed-/preadings:Valer lib.2 .( enforin de die Natall.(g ) Another } In § Conful- 
fhip of CL. Marcellus & T. Valerius was a great queftion in the Court about poifans becaufe 
many great men had bene killed by their wiues ving fuch meanes. (b) Then grew wars|Acaintt 
the Samnites Galles, Tarentines,Lucans,Brutians,an 

bus the King of Epirus his warre. But now a word or two of the Proletary, the ‘Brood-men here 
named:Seruins Twllns the fixt King of Rome,diuided the people into fix companies or formes, 
in the firft was thofe that were cenfured worth (; AZ. A/fes;or more , but vnder that King the 
greateft Cenfure was but C X.44,( Pés: lib. 33.) the fecond contained all of an eftate —— 

. C. an 


Hetrurians:after al which,followed Pyrr- 


i¢ ws 7€ Fait ia . 
aes aa a ae . F_ 


eer & > ces ar 


Liz3. | OFTHE CITIE OF GOD. ggg 


Cand LXXV eAffes. the third , chem vnder L. the fourth , them vnder XXXV.. the fift, them 
vnder XT, the laft was a Century of men freed from warre-fare , Proletarii or Brood-men , and | 
(apiti-cenfi, A Brood-man was hee that was rated CML, Affes in the Cenfors booke more or A Brood: . 
\effe,and fuch were ever forkorne from all offices and vfes in the Cittie, beeing referued onely man. . 
to begette children,and therefore were {tiled Proletarit, of Proles , brood ot of[pring. The Ca= 
pite Cenfi were poorer and valued but at CCCLXXV. affes. Who becaufe they were not cen- 
fared by their {tates ', were counted by the poll,as augmenting the number of the Cittizens: 
Thefe ewo laft forts did Serw. 7 wllius exempt from all {eruice in warte , not that chey were vnfit 
sher-felues , or hadde not pledges to leaue for their fealty , but becaufe they could not beare 
the charges of warre;for the foldiers inthofe daies maintained them-felues. Je may be this old 
cuftome remained after the infticution of tribute , and the people of Reme thoughtit not fitte 
that fuch men fhould go to warre,becaufe that they accounted all by the purfe. This reafon is 
giuen by Valerins and Gellins. But thefe Brood-mex were diuers times ledde forth to the wars Capita conf 
afterward,mary the Capite Cenf neuer,vntill ALarins his time,and the warre of Ingurthe:Salaf. 
Valer. Qu:ntillianalfo toucheth this J milite mariano, And here-vppon Marites their Gee | 
nerall was called Capite (enfus. (i) Pyrrbus |Defcended by his mother from eA ehilles, byhis 
father from Hercales,by both from lone : This man dreaming ou the worlds Monarchy , wene. P77! 
with {peed at the Targntines intreaty againft the Romaises : hence hoping to fubdie /tate, ahd 
then the whole world, as eS /exander had done a while before him. (k.) Whoaskigg |Cicerodé = 
diainct. (lib. 2) faith that it isa verfe in Exmins: Ato and as in the text, Which the Poet affir« 
meth chat the Oracle returned as anfwer to Pyrrhxsiin his inquiry hereof. Whence Tally wri- 
teth thus. Baz xow to thee Apollo,thon that fietest upen the earths nauell, from whence this cruel 
~and fupetftitious voice firft brake. Chry/fippxs fill’d a booke with thine Oracles , but partly fai- 
ned(I thinke)and partly cafuall,as is often feene in ordinary difcourfes:and partly equiuocall, ¢¢ 
that che interpreter fhall need an interpreter ,and the lotre muft abide the tryall by lorte :and__, 
partly dourful,8¢ requiring the skil of Logike, Thus farre he: feeming to taxe Poets yer{e with 
alfhood: Pyrrhus is called e£acides, for Achilles was fon to Peleus, and Peleus vnto e4acus. 
Virgil. ipfumg, Lacidem Ge, meaning Pyrrbas. (1) Pyrrhus was conqueror | Pyrrbus at Hera Héracleas | 
clea ouerthrew Valerixs,Confull;but got a bloudy viGtory:whence the Heraclean vittory grew may 
to rprouerb ; but after Su/pitins and Decins foyledhim , and Curixs Dentatas at length ouers — 
threw him and chafed him out of /ta/y. (ms) And ix this \This is out of Orofins (hb. 4.)hapning 
in the Confulthip of Gurges and Genatins,in Pyrrbus his warre. (a) Prince of plyficke \eexdarpert aochigrrt. 
Latres is a Phyfitian,Obferrix,a mid-wifezand eArchiatri were alfo the Princes Phyfitians:/af= | 
tin, Codie. Of the Comites,and Archiatriwhich the Spaniards cai! Protomedici, @c, (0) Great 
pefRilence | (Orof. lib. 4.) Inthe entrance of the firft eAffricas warre. (p) In which | Cice. de 
_ Biusri: (ib, 2) at large of the Sybils and their books. (¢)ALeny of the temples | The Sooth-faiers 
an{wer in Tadlies time concerning the prodigies, was ¥ very fame.Cic.Orat.de Arnjpic.refponf, 


The miferies of the Romaines #n the Affrican warres and 
the {mall fread their gods flood them therein. 
Crap. 18. a. | 
BY: now in the wars of Affrita  vitory ftill houering doubrfully betwixt both 

fides,and twomighty and powerful nations vfing all cheir might 8 power to- 
teciprocrall ruine,how many petty Kingdomes perifhed herein?How many faite .. 
citties were demolithed,or afflicted , or veterly loft 2 How far didthis difaftrous. 3:41. 
contention fpread,to the ruine of fo many Realmes and great Eftates?How often’ 
were the conquerors on either fide conquered ? What ftore of men (armed and 
traked)was there that perifhed > How many fhips were funke at feas by fight and 
tempeft?Should we particularize , wee fhould become a dire& Hiftoriographer, 
Then Rome beeing in thefe deep plunges, ran head-long vnder thofe vaive andre. 
diculous remedies:for then (4) were the eng of sane renued by the admonition, 
ef the Sibils books:which inftitution ~—— ordained an hundred yeares before, 
os Oo bug 


aA. ae 


134 '.SAINTF AVGVSTINE. Cuar.38, - 


but was now worn ont of al memory,in thofe fohappy times. The high priefts alfo 
(b)renued the facred plates to the hel-gods Ww the beter times had in like manner a- 
bolifhed before:nor was it any wonder to fee thé now reuenged,for the hel-gods 
defired now to becom revellers being inriched by this continual vncefing world 
of men:who/like wretches) in following thofe blody & vnrelenting wars,did no- 
thing but act the diuels reuels , and prepare banquets for the infernal fpirits. Nor 
was therea more laudable accident in al this whole war, then that Regulus fhould 
be taken prifoner:a worthy man, and before chat mifhap a {courge to the Cartha- 
ginians:who had ended the African wat long before,but that he would haue bod 
the Carthaginians to {tricter conditions then they could beare. The moft fodaine 
captiuity,& the moft faithful oth of this man,and his moft cruel death, ifthe gods 
* do not blnth at (6) furely they are brazen-fac'd, and haue no blood in them. Na 
for all this , Romes wals ftood not fafe, but tafted of fome milchiefe ,andallrhofe 
Tibersin= within them, for the riuer Téber(d)ouer-flowing,drown'd almoft al the level parts 
mandation. of the citty:turning fome places as it were into torrents,and otherfomce into fens 
Fire in the Of lakes:this plague vfhered in a-worfe of fre,(¢)which beginning in the market 
_Caty. place, burned al the higher buildings therabouts,fparing not the owne/(f) harbor 
| and temple of Velawints it was fo duly kept in,by thofe (¢) not fo honorable as 
damnable VotareJes. Now it did not only continue here burning but raging: with 
the fury wherof the virgins being amazed(h) Metcllis the high Prieft ran into the 
fire,and was half burned in fetching out of thofe fatal reliques which had bin the 
_ ruin of/i,)chree citties,where they nad bin refident.(£) The fire neuer {pared him 
_ for all he was the Prieft. Or elfe the true Deity was not there,but was fled before 
_ though the fire were there ftil!:but here you fee howa morta! man could doVefte 
". |, More good then fhe could do him: for if thefe pods could not guard them-felues 
_ from the fire,how could they guard their citty W chey were thought to guard f16 
burnings and inundations? Truly not a whit, as the thing {hewed it felfe . Here- 
.. ., a. we would notobieé thefe calamities againft the Romaias,if they would affirme 
_ thar al chefe their facred obferuations only aime at eternity ,and nor at che goods 
of thistranfirory world;and that therefore when thofe corporall things perifhed, 
there was yerno loffe by that, vnto the endes for which they were ordained,be- 
caufe thar they might foone be made fit for the fame vies againe. But now fuch is 
their miferable blindneffe, that they think ¥ thofe idols chat might haue perifhed 
in this fiery extremity , had power to preferue the temporal! happines of the 
citty:but now feeing.that they remained vnconfumed,and yet were able to thew 
how fuch ruins of their fafeties and fuch great mifchiefs hath befalne the citty, 
thismakes them afhamed to change that opinion which they fee they cannot 
poffibly defend. Bae ge 
eT _*, L. VIVES. | Ee 4 
Te were(a )the fecular plaies|1 think it will not be amiffe if T fay fomwhat of thofe plaies, 
The fecu- . from their firft original. Ualefims Sabinas,aruftick,as the beft were then , praying for his 
Jarplaies, three fick children,heard 4 voice y faid they fhould récouer,ifhe would carry them ouer Tiber 
to Térentorm,& there recreate them with the warm .water.of Dis and Proferpina. Valefius drea- 
ming of the citty Terentum, though it were far of,and'no fuch riueras Tider neer it,yet hiring 
a fhip, failed with his fons ta Offa's fetting them on.fhore to refrefh them-felues ia ALezs his. 
field,he afked $ thip-mafter where he might haue fom fireshe replied at the adioining Terenté, 
for ther he faw fom that § fheapheards had made:(it was called Terest#ms of Teroto weare,be- 
caufe the rivet ware away the fhore:ot becaufe Dis his alter was there inhumed) Uale/ius hea 
ging the ndme‘commanded'the fhippe to’pat ouerthethet , thinking this was’the place meane 
by the Oracle.:.and departing to the eitty ,to buy anf altar, hee: had ‘his feruants meane while 


so 


e.: 


en emnREIEREREEREETE eRe a eet 


Ling. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 135 


to digge a place for it. They digged 20. foot decp, and there they found an old altar infcrib’d, 
Te Dis and Proferpina.( This the Romaines had inhumed after their infernal] facrifices,beeing 
to fight with the eAlbasnes , for fo thedeuil bad them doe ere they ioyned battaile. ) Valefius 
returnes,and finding the altar, offers blacke offrings to Dis and Proferp. and {preading beddes 
for the gods , ftaied there three nights ( for fo long after werethey ficke ) with feuells and 
dances , that thefe children had efcaped this fickneffe :: This cuftome. P. Y. Poplicola,one of 
Vatefius his progeny brought into the Citty , in the firft yeare of the freedcme. Three daies — 
and nizhts the people watched ac the altars of Jove and 4pollo,offring a white bull, and cer= 
taine children whole parents were living fung a fong to “pollo, Then watched they at Jw 
ne's: offring a white Heifer; this was in the day time: onthe night at Dianas, Proferpina’s, 
Terra’s and the Deffenies offring black creatures,and burning of tapers : and then were Stage- 
plaies prefentedto Apollo ,and Diana ,and the Ciretan Games : and thole {lately and famous 
fpeCtacles were called ¥ Secular plaies becaufe they were acted once cuery age, taking an age 
here forthe longeft {pace of mans life : Some giuc it more yeares , fome leffc,as it is in Cenfo~ 
vinus . TheRomaines called anC yeares,an age : asValerins, Antias, Varro, cy .Linie ib. 136. An Age. 
doe report. But by the Quindecimvirs commentaries , and Asuguftus his Edit, together with 
Horace his verfe, itincludesa {pace of ten yeares more , and euery C. X. yeare, thofe plaies 
were kept. Though this verfe of Horace,Certus undenos decies per annos, which (enforinus and 
others truft to , ] cannot fee but may be read (ertus ut denos decies per annos,and fo diuers doe 
reade it. Bucthere is another Greeke verfe cited by Zofimus , out of the Sybillsbookes, hee 
faich, wherein is te 67007 exo-7erdéxg vexacy ode.av without point or accent. Befides, thecriet 
galled the people inthefe words Come to thofe plates that none of you ener faw, nor hereafter ener 
foall fee. Hence came Vitellinus flattery to ( laudius , prefenting thofe plaies : May you doe it 
often , Poplicols, as wee said, firlt prefented them: 46 urbe cond. CCX LILI yeares: they 
were renewed Ab.ur.(on. D.I. Confulls,P, CL. Palcber and L. Jusi. Brutus , the XI. yeare of 
the firt eAfrican warre :acted againe, the third yeare of the fecond Panick warre :Confulls, 
M. Munlins M.Cenforinas, Fourthly before their time,L.e 4m. Lepidus,and L. Anrel.Oreftes, 
Confull. ,the fife: Anguffus andeArippa prefented ,hauing brought them tothe iuft times 
Confulls , Farvins and Sillapus : the fixt, CL. Cefar, too foone for the time : Himfelfe and L. 
Vitellins the third Confulls. The feauenth, Domitian,after a true computation , Himfelfe and 
L. Minutins Ruffus being Confalls:the eight Sepesmins Severus, at their iuft time: Conf Chilo; 
and V7ée.the ninth Phillip Voftrenfis ab urbe Cond.aM. years: Aemilianus and Aquilinus being os rang 
Conf, Caffiodore, Thus much of the Secular plaies from Varro,Valer. Horat. L.Florus, Fefius; an games. 
Zofimus, Herodian,S, netonins,Cenforinus,Caffiodorus,Porphiry, eAcron, and Pelstian,nowtothe — 
re{t. (6) Renewed } Here feemes a difference betweene the plaies of Dis and Proferpsma , and 
the Secular plates , but indeede there is none , vnlefle uzuffine divide the infetnall Orgies, - 
from the facrifices offered atthe fame time to other gods : and truely the /xfernall Orgies 
and the Secular plaies feeme to differ in their originall : for Fefus faith thus: The Tari were 
games made in honour of the infernall gods, vpon this occafion. In the raigne of Tarquin 
‘the proude, there faliing a Brent death amongft the child-bearing women, arifing cut of the 
too great plenty of bulls-fleth , chat was fold to the people , hereypon they ordained games 
in honour of the Jufernalls , calling them Tari, Thus farre Feffus. Befides,the Secular plaies 
were kept vnto fpolloon the day , and Dsana on the night, but the 7awrs were kept to the 
Anfernall powres. (¢) Swrely braffe} Some put -Aéres,ayry,for eref,brazen,and more fitting to 
Auguflines opinion : for the Platonifts {ay thé diuells are. ayrie creatures, whofe dodtrine 
Axguftine’ doth often approue in fome things, as wee will fhew hereafter. 3n-blufhing the 
 bloud ademes the face with red-neffe. (d) Oner-flowing] Oref. L.4.(e) Fire] Ib, Lindib.19. 
Onid. Faff. 6. Seneca’s dcclamers difpute whether Afetel/xs fhould bee depriued of his Prieft- 
hood or no beeing blind; the law commanding themto hauea perfect man to théir Prieft. 
) Parkour and temple) Becaufe there was the fire worfhipped asis itnmediately declared. 
_ (¢) Howonred | Their honour was voiuerfall great , their very Magiftrates gauethe waywnté 
Veftas Priefts. (b) Metellus\ L. Cectlins Metellus was High Prieft , twice Confull , Dictator, — 
Maifter of the Horfe, Onindecemer in the fharing ofthe landes, and hee wasthe firft that yfertellus, 
Jed Elephants in-Triumph in the firft Africas warre, of whom Q." Aerellus his fonne left re- 
corded in his funerall oration , thathe attained the ten things fo powrefull and fo admirable 
that the wifeft haue {pent all their time in their queft, That is, to bee a fingular warrionr,aw — 
sxecilent oratera tweadleffe commander , 4 lat fd undertaker , a efpecialladnancer of benc?, 
: z an 


n 


wer! 


136 SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cur. 19, 


an abfolute man of wifdome ,aworthy common-wealths man,a man of a great eftate well gotten, 
a father to a faire progenie,and the moft illuftrious of the whole cittie. Plin. lib.7. cap.4. (6) Three 
cities) Ilinm, Laninium, Alba. (k) The fire neuer] This place is extreamely depraued,we haue 
giuen it the beft fenfe befitting it. | _ 
Of the fad accidents that befell inthe fecond African warre wherein the powers 
es on both fides were wholy confumed. CHAP. 19. | 
B Veall too tedious were itto relate the flaughters of both nations in the fe- 
cond -4fricen watre ,they had fomany fightes both farreand ncere,that by 
(a) their owne confeffions who were rather-Romes commenders then true 
Chroniciers , the conquerours were ever more like tothe conquered then o- 
therwife. For when Hannibal arofe out of Spaine,and brake ouer the Pirenean 
hilles , all France, andthe very Alpes , gathering huge powres,and doing horri- 
ble mifchicues in all this long trac, ruthing like an inondation into the face of 


_ Tealy ,O what bloudy fields were there pitcht , what battailes ftruck ! how often 


did che Romaines abandon the field , how mans citties fell to the foe ,how many 
were taken , how many were razed ? what viGtories did that Hannsbal/winne,and 


what glories did he build himfelfe vpon the ruined Romaines .. In vaine fhould 


I fpeake of (6) Cannas horrible ouer-throwe , where Hanniballs owne exceffiue 
thirft of bloud was fo fully glutted vpon his foes, that hee (¢) himfelfe bad hold: 
(4) whence hee fent three bufhells of rings vnto Carthage, to fhewhow hugea 
company had fallen at that fight,that,they were eafierto be meafured thé num- 
bred:and hence might they conie@ure,what a maffacre there was of the meaner 


fort,chat had no rings to weare,and that the poorer they were the more of them 


perifhed. Finally, fucha defe@ of fouldiars followed this ouer-throw , thae 
the Romaines were faine to get (e) malefaGors to goe to warre for quittance 
of their guilt;( £) co ferall their flaues free, and out of this graceleffe crue, not to 
fupply their defective regiments; but euen to (g) make vp awholearmy. Nay 
thefe flaues , (O(4) let vs not wrong them, they are free men now ) wanted euen 


‘weapons to fight for Rome wichall: chat they were faine to ferch them out of 


The maf. 
{acre of 
Cannas, 


the temples , as ifthey fhould fay to their gods , come , pray let thefe weapons 
oe,you haue kept them long inough to no end: wee will fee whether our bond- 
aon can doe more good for vs with them , then your gods could yetdoe: And 
then the treafury fayling, the priuate eftate of each man became publike,fo that 
each one giuing what he was able, their rings,nay their very Bo//es,(the wretched 
marks of their dignities)being al beftowed,the fenat them{elues (much morethe_ 
other companies & (4) Tribes ) leftnot themfelues any mony in the world: who 


could haue endured the rages of thofe men,if they had bin driuento this pouerty 


in thefe our times? feeing we can very hardly endure themas $ world goethnow, 
although they haue ftore now to beftow vpon ftage-plaiers, which as then, they 
were ful faine of, for cheir vttermoft means of fafety, to fpend vpon the foldiars2 
VEG ee 
Br (4) their owne | Lin. Proam. 3. Decad, The vitors were the nearer vnto ruine,continue 
4J7ally, Sid./tal..1. This Poet,and Lésy, the firft in verfe,and later in profe,haue recorded thefe 
warres at large, Befides others, reade them. (6) Cannes] There Haniball gaue the Roweimes 
a fore ouer-throw in the third yeareofthe warre. L. em, Paulus, and L. Terent. Varro, 
Confulls. Lin, Lb. 12. Cantas is not the towne Carn fixns,but a towne in Apalia,nerethe riuer 
eAufidus now (Cannella. Sabbellic. Annet. (c) Himfelfe badde hold) Perhappes Auguftine 
meaneth of the wordes that Hanniball {aid to Mabarball , that willed him to match 
ftraight vnto Rome; no faithihee, Let our foes leade the waie, all is well ,wee will follow 
them at leafure. For 1 reade riot that Hansiball euer {pared the Romeines , either in the 
fight orafter it. Vaileffe it bee their shat Léwie faith, that after the fight at Cannas, Hannsbal 
galled che Remaines vo him ( which hee newer did before ) and gently told chem, tharis was 

| Re 


rrr SSE ERR SEREREENE SOT y we, 


Ling. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 


not for loud , bur for Empire and dignity that he warred with then, allowing them leaue 
to redeeme the prifoners , rating an hor{e-mans ranfome at fiuc hundred peeces,a footmans at 
three hundred,a{eruants at ahundred. (4) Three bufhels | fome adde halfe a bufhell , fome 


diminifh two bufhels , which Liwie faith is moft likely. The Ring was the Gentlemans. 


marke or cc gnifance,diftinguifhing them fromthe common fort : the Senate alfo and the No- 
bilicy wore them.But they were generally vfed about this time. (“Piin, lib. 33.)E/e (faith he) 
they could not bane fent three bufhels of them te Carth age. A buflell what itis Budeus declares, 
in his booke De A/je,among{t other meafures the difcourfe is long, look it there.(e) Maleface 
tors | Iunins Bubsicus his deuice, in imitation of Romulxs,that madc his citty populis by al- 
lowing fanctuary to malefactors. Orof- lib. 4. Tunis (faith Lisie) alii ghted fiom his horfe 
and proclaimed, that all fuch as were capicall offenders , or defperate acbrers,fhould go with 
him to warre,vpon condition to bee freed ofall their aff. tions. (f) To fet all the flaues Jeighe 
tioufand of flaues were freed , imbanded , and called Volones - becaufe becin g asked if they 
would fight,each one {aid Vo/o,I will. Liaie. ¢) Make a whole }For there were eight thoufand 


The Ring, 


Lhe volons 


of cacfe and fix thoufacd of chem Malefa¢tors,whom they armed with French fpoiles of C Fla- _ 


munius histriumph. (6) Nay let vs not | Though they were not free yntil! they had ouerthrown 
Hanno at Benenentum , and were thercfore freed by the Generall Gracchus,vnder whome they 
fougi.t moft ttoutly. (#) And tribes | Whether this word bee added by fome ocher or no, I 
krow not. Truly the Senate them-felues were of the tribes,which were three in the whole, as 
Romulus appointed them at firft , but in time increafedto thirty fiue. The Senators, Gentle- 
men and Plebeyans were parts of each of thefe : nor was there any Romaine cittizen but he 
was offome tribe, Js there any of you ( faith ‘Cicero Antonian, 6.4 Pop. Rom. ) that hath ne 

tribe? none. They hane made him Patron of therty fine tribes, Wherefore what fhould this 
micanc:The Senate was as well diuided from the tribes,as it was from the Gentlemen and Ple« 
beyan:;or itmay be {fpoken as this is: The Senate and people of Rome, or ,the Senate People 
and commonty of Reme ; both , or all three,being al} included one 1: another: This hold] the 
moft likely. | 


Of the rine of the Saguntines,who pers{hed for their confederacy with 
————-_ Romesshe Romaine gods neuer helping them. 


Cap. 20. 


utinall the difafters of thefecond African warre , there was none more la- 

inentable chen the diflolution of the (4) Sagumtines : thefe inhabiting in a citty 
in Spaine being {worne friendes to the Romaines,were deftroied for keeping their 
faichtothem. For Hanibl/breaking the league with Rome,gauc here the firft oc 
cafion of warre,inguirting the citty of Sangustum with a cruell and ftraight — 
W hereof che Romaines hauing intelligence , fentan Ambaflage to with Hamiball 
- toraize his fiege: but che Legats being difpifed by him,went to Carthage,whence 
(hauing donc nothing)they returned without any redreffe for the breach of the 
league,and in the meane time, this cicty(whilom (0 ftately_) was now broughtro 
thac mifery,thae about eight or nine months after the beginnirg of the fiege, the 


Africans tooke it and raized it to the very ground. Vo reade how it perifhed 


were a horror; much more to write it ; yet I wil run over it bricfely ,feeing it is ve- 
ry pertinent co the argument we profecute ,firft ir was eaten downe with famines 


for fome fay it was driuen to feed vppon the carkafles which it harboured. And. 


then being in this laborinth of languors,yet rather then it would take in Hanibals 
as a conqueror,the cittizens made a huge fire in the Market- place,and therein ine 
tombedall their parents , wiues , children and friends (after they had flaine them: 
firft )and laftly them. felues (1) Here now thefe glutcenous , trecherous , wafte- 


Tribes, 


full , coufening, dauncing gods fhould have done fomew-hat : heere they fhould ° 


hane done fome-what to helpe thefe diftreffed faichfull friendes of the Romaines, 


N 3 . an. 


138 | SAINT AVGVSTINE. | | '  Cuar.20 


and to faue them from perifhing, for their loyalties fake. They werecalledas 
witneffes betweene both , when the league was made betweene Rome and thefe 
poore menswho keeping that faith which they hadde willingly paffed, follemnely | 
f{worne, and facredly obferued,vnder their protections , were befieged , afflicted, 
and fubuerted by one that had broken all faich,all religion. (¢) Ifthe goddes with 
thunder and lightning could fright Hasnébail from Romes walles , and make him 
keepe aloofe from them, they fhould firft haue praGifed this here: For I darea- - 
verre,that wich farre more honefty might they hauchelped the Romasnes friends, 
beeing in extreames,for keeping their faith to them, and hauing then no meanes 
nor power , then they did the Romaises them-felues , that fought for them-felues, 
and had very good forces , and purfes able to repell Hasnibals powers. If they 
hadde beene carefull guardians of Romes glory, they would neucr haue left it ftat- 
ned with the fufferance of this fadde calamity of the Sagantives. But now how 
fortith is their beleefe that thinke thefe goddes kept Rome from perifhing by the 
hand of viGtorious Hanniballand the Carthaginians , that could notfaue Sazun- 
tum from perifhing for keeping hir faith fworne fo follemnly to the Romsasnes ? If 
Sacuntum hadde beene Chriftian and had fuffered fuch an extremity for the Gof 
pell,(though it ought not as then to haue wracktit felfe by firenor {word) yet had 
itinduredfuch for the Gofpell, it would have borne it ftoutly , by reafon of chae 
hope which it would hauc held in Chrift to haue beene after all crowned by him. 
with an eternall guerdon. But as for thefe falfe spect defireto bee and are 
-worthipped onely for the affurance of this tranficory tearme of our mortallitie, 
what can their Atturneies , their Orators,fay for them in this ruine of the Segua. 
tines,more then they faid in that of Regu/us?only he was oneman,this a whole clt« 
ty, but perfeuerance in faith was caufe of both calamities. For this faith would he 
returne to his foes, and for this would not they turnetotheir foes. Doth loyal 
then greeue the goddes?Or may vngratefull citties (as well as men)be deleovell, 
and yet ftand in their gods liking ftill?» Let them choofe whether they like : Ifthe 
goddes ‘bee angry at mens keeping of their faith , lette them feeke faithleffe 
wretches to ferue them. But if they that ferue them and haue their fauours, bee 
neuer-the-leffe affliGted and {poiled;then to what endare they adored? VVherfore 
let them hold their tongues that thinke they loft their Cicty becaufe they loft 
their gods: for though they had them all, chey might neuer-the-les not only com- 
plaine of mifery,but feele icat full, as Regu/us and the Saguntines did. . 


L. VIVES, 


Seguatas, Par Fe diffolution (a)of thé Saguntines] (Lite, lib av. ) Saguntum is acitty of chat part of Spaixe 


which is called Arragon:a mile from our fea, built and inhabited by the Zacynths and the 
oA rdeates (faith Silins ) people that came into Spasne before the deftruction of Troy. It was 
made famous by the fall,and crue faith kept to the Remasnes, The ruives at this day doe thew 
the inodels of diuers ancient,and moft magnifical houfes:and diuers in{criptions & monuments 
are to be feene there as yet, It is called now in Spanifh Morsedre;the old wall, belonging to the 
County & iurifdi&tion of Valencia. There is a peece of the Towre yet ftanding vpon the moun- 
taine that divides almoft all Spaine, Polsb. (ib. 3.) faith that ic excelled al the citties in Spaine, 
both for plenty, populoufites,& arts military. Hanibal hated it,for fticking fo to $ Romains:for it 
had done eal bute to the Carthaginian confederats in Spain:fo he made war vppon it, both to 
reuenge the wrongs it had done others, and alfo to turne the whole aime of the war vpon the 
Romsaines which he had defired moft feruently ever fince he was 9, yeares old. (6) Here zow | 
fome copies want Dii , goddes , but they are imperfect. Glutton is vied by Ty in an ho- 
weft fence , calling Cato a Glutton of Bookes, (De fin. lib 3.) (€) If the goddes } — Fae 

re eae para 


Lis.3. OF THE GITIE OF GOD. (139 


Hasnibail handing before the walles of Rome, being now to throw'watres dice: at the citty 
it felfe,a great tempeit arofe, and parted the armies, who were no fooner retired ; the one to 
their tents,and the other into the.Citie, but immediatly ic grew admirably fajre and ¢leare ¢ 
And this happened the fecond day alfo, both armies being in the field,and ftaying but for the 
fignall to ioyne battles. Which Hannibal obferuing, prew fuperftitious , doubting the gods 
difpleafure with him for ftaying there,and fo commanded the campe to rcmoue from thence. 


Of Romes sxgratituae to Scipio , that freed st from imminent 
danger and of the conditions of the Cittizens in thofe times 
that Salufte commendeth to haue beene fo vertuous. 
Cuap, 21. 


Vithermore,in the {pace berweene the firft and fecond Carthaginian warre 
whenas Saluffe faith the Romaines liued inall concord and content(the rez 
‘membrance of my theme makes me omitte much): In thofe times of concord | 
and content, S¢spto, (a) that protector and raifer of his countrie, the tare,admirablé 
ender of that fo extreame,fo dangerous and fo fatalla warre as that of Carthage 
was,the conqueror of Hannsball , che tamer of Carthage, whofe very youth is 
raced with all praifes of ( 6) religioufneffe,and diuine conuerfation : this man 
fo greatand fo gratious,was forced to giue place tothe (e¢) accufations of his. 
enemies,to leaue his country, which bur for him had beene left to deftrudction, 
and after his high heroicall triumph, to bequeath the remainder of his dayes to 
the poore towne of (4) Linternum: banifhing all affeé of his countrie fo farre 
from him, that it is faid that he (¢) gaue expreffe charge at his death , that his 
‘body fheuld not in any cafe bee buried id that fo vngrarefull foyle of Rome, 
(f) Afterwards, in the triumph of Ca. Manlius (vice-Confull ) over the Galo- 
recians,the ( ¢) luxtirie of fe entred, the worlt foe Rome cuer felt. Guilded, 
Hepes pretious cougrings gorte then their firft ingreffe, Then beganthey to 
haue wenches to fing at their banquets , and many other licentious diforders. 
But] am to fpeake of the calamities chat they fuftered fo vnwillingly,not of the 
offences that they committed folauifhly. And therefore what I fpoake of Scipio, 
that left his country for his enenties (hauing firft preferued it from: veter ruine) 
and died a willing exile,that was to our purpofe,to fhew that the Romaine gods; 
from whofe temples he draue Hanniball did neuet requite him with any che leaft 
touich of temporall felicitie,for which onely they are adored . But becaufe S2- 
Infie faith that Rome was fo well mannered in thofe dayes , I thought goodto 
touch at this -4/i2x luxurie , that you might vnderftand that Se/¢fe fpoake in. 
comparifon of the after-times , wherein difcorde was at the higheit floud ,and 
good manners at their loweft ebbe. For then, (that is becweene the fecond and 
alt Africas warre,the (h) Yetonsan law was Ai ep ipa none fhould make 
a woman his heyre, no were {lice his (#) onely daughter 5 then which.decree, I. 
can fee nothing more barbarous and vniuft. But indeed the mif{chieues that the 
' cittie fuffered were not fomany nor fo violent in the {pace becwixt the two 
Panicke Wares, as they wereat othertimes : for though they felt the {marte. 
of warre abroade, yet they enioyed the fweet of vi@orie; and at home they 
agreed better then they did in the times of fecuritie, . | 
— But in the laft 4/7#cex warre, by the onely valout of that Scipio, that there. 
fore was furnamed 4frican , that Cittie , that compared and..contended 
with Rome , was vtterlye razed to x and ruined 3 And then brake 
: 4 in 


gf OLE LLL A . 


| 140 SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuar.21 


in fuch an inundation of depraued conditions,drawne inco the ftate by fecuritie 

\. and profperitie,that Carthage might iuftly be faid co haue beenea more dange- 
rous enemy to Rome in her diffolution , then fhee was inher oppofition. And 
this continued vntill 4zgu/fus histime, who (me thinkes ) did not abridge 
the Romaines of their liberty,as of aching which they loued and prifed, but as 
though they had veterly defpifed ic,and lef it for the taking: Thenreduced he 
all chings vnto an imperiall command , renewing and repairing the common- 

> weale,chat was becomeall moth-eaten and rufty with age,vice and negligence. 
I omitte the diverfe and diuerfly arifing contentions and battels of all this 
whole time: that league of (£) Nwmance, tained with fo foule an ignominie, 
where the ( /) chickens flew out of their cages, as prefaging fome great ill luck 
(they fay) vnto Mancinus then Confull : fo that it feemed (#s) that little cittie 
thac had plagued the Romaine armie that befieged it fo many yeares , did now 
begin to bea (.#) terror tothe Romaines whole eftate , and boded mifforcune 
vaco thofe her powers that came againtt it. | 


L. VIVES. 


ee SS (a) that protettor | P.Cornelins Scipio eA frican, who pafling ouer into Africke, fer- 
Afi a J ched Hannibal out of Italy, fixteene yeares after his firft entric,ouer-threw himin Africk, - 
- chafed him thence,and gaue end to this moft dangerous warre. (b )Redigion/ueffe |\Lin sb. 26. 
Befides from the time that he tooke on his gowne of ‘man-flate, hee would neucr meddle in 
ahy matter publike or priuate,before he had beene in the-cemple,in the Capitoll,and had me- 
ditated there awhile alone. This he vfed all hislife time. (¢) Accufations ]Linib.38. Plat. in 
his life. (d) Linternum | Itisin Campania,called now Torre della ‘Patria. (¢ ) Gane cared 
Linie reciteth diuerfe opinions of the place of his death, For itis vncertaine whether he die 
The Gallo» at Rome,or no. (f ) Afterwards | LinJib.39. The Gallo-grecians were a people of the /effer 
grecians §=Afiz called in Greeke Galate,of the Galles that went thecther ynder Brenne , and inhabited 
Thelawe there. (g) Luxurie of Afia] the leffer : whereof hereafter. (b ) Voconian } preferred by Q.) 
Veconian, VoConins Saxa,tribune. Approoued by (ato the elder,a littie before Perfens warre. Léw.dib.g., 
where Volwmnins is read for UVoconins. (i) Onely deaghter | Though he had no other children 
but her.(k) Lezgue of Numance | Hoffiliss Aancinus Confull with an armie of 30000. was 
ouer-thrownc by the Numantines, being but 4000. and forced to make a fhamefull peace 
with them. (/) Chickins flew | The Romasnes in theit warres vfed to carry chickens about 
with chemin Cages,and he that kept them was called Pullarins , the chickin-keeper. If they 
fead greedily it was a good figne, if fo greedily chat part of their vituales fell to the earth, it 
Tripudium was the beft of all. For that was called Tripsdisms Solsffimum, and once it was called Terripaa 
Soliftxewm, stm ,a paviendo,of ftriking the earth in the fall of it, And Soli/fimum of Soltm , the ground. 
For thus it was written in the Augurs bookes , that if any of the Chickens meate fell from 
chem, it was 7ripsd:um . But an vnluckly figne it was, if they fedde noc, as happened to 
PClandins,(acus his fonne, But a worfe if they flew out of their cages, The Socth-fayers(as 
Feftus faith ) obferued the fignes of fiue feuerallthings-: the beanens, birds, thele Tripudia, 
beafts,and curfes. (ms) Little citty, |\Without walles or Fortes, keeping but an armie of 4000. 
men. The warre began, becaufe they receiued che Sedigen/es ( people that the Romaines hae 
ted,and had ouer-throwne ) into their cite aod houfes, (% ) Terror | Cicero calles ( aFrhage 
and Namance the two terrors of the Romaine Empire. Pro Murana. 


—— 


Of the Ediét of Mithridates, commanding exery Romaine 
that was to be found in Afia,to be put to death. 
Cuap. 22. 


DD Veas! faid,chefe thall paffe : marry not that of ALithridates, (4) King of Affe 
who gauc dire& command, that what cuer Romaine was to bee found 
| : traffi- 


’ . 3 
ng . 
’ 


Ling. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. ge 


traffiquing or trauelling any where in al :4/4, vpon one certaine day he fhould be 
immediately flaine:and ic was effected. How dolorous a fight was this,to fee men 
flaine in fuch numbersgwherefocuer they were taken, in field,way, towne,honfe, 
{treete,court,cemple,bed or table, or wherefoeuet ; fo fuddenly and fo wickedly? 
what forrowes would poffeffe the ftanders by , and perhaps the very doers of the | 
deeds themfelues , toheare the fad grones of the dying men ? vnto what extremi- 
ty were the hofts of Lodgings brought now, whenthey mutt not onely behold 
thofe murders committed in their houfes,but eucn helpé to performe them them- 
{elues.To turne fo fuddenly from gentle humanity vnto barbarous cruelty ? todo 
the aé&t of an enemy in peace, and that on his friend, enterchanging indeed 
wounds with the murthered, the murthered being ftriken in the body, & the mur- 
gherer inthe mind?& did al thefe chat were thus flaine,negle@ A uguries?Had they 
no gods publike nor priuat to aske counfell of ere they betooke them vnto this 
trauell from whence they were neuer to returne? Itchis bee true, then haue they 
‘of our times nocaufe tocomplaine of vs , for the negle@ of thofe things , the 
Romaines of culd contemned them as vanities. But if they did not , but vfed to 


-aske counfell of them , then tell me(I pray.) to what end was it when other mens 


powers fell fo heauy vpon thefe wretches without all prohibition , or meanes to 
avoyd them? | : . 


L. VIVE Sy 


Itbvidates (a) King.| The'firt Mithridates was of the bloud ofthe feauen Perfans that Dinerle 
bt tooke the kingdome fromthe Magi. Antigonns King of Syria was his foe and chaced him Mithridates. 
into Cappadocia,where he was afterwards Ene :and fo left his crowne to his fonne,he to his, — 

and{o downe to the fixt of his defcent, the fixe was the CMithridates that warred.with the 

Romaines, aman of a ftrong body , and of as ftouta fpirit,he guyded fixe horfes in his chariot, 

he fpake two and twenty {cuerall languages , and was furnamed rbe great. Firft hee was friend 

to Rome, forheefent Craffus ayde againkt Ariffonicas , but by teafon of the warre hee had 
“with Nicomedes King of Byrhynia , he fell from affecting the Romazmes ; inuaded the. Romaine | 
'Prouinces in Thrigia , expelled the legate Aquilins , and dale teh imprifoned both himand — 

‘Q . Oppias , viceconfuls together : and fest his letters forth ¢ a out all A/a, that vpon 

one fet day, what euer Romaine were refident, in all his dominions , fhouldbe forthwith flaine 
_ without all refpect of dignity, age , fexe or place that heé fhould fly into, And ic was done as 
he commaunded, a | | 


Of the nore privat and interior mi[chienes that Rome endured,which were prefaged by 
| + shat prodigtous madne fie of all the creatures that ferued 
| the ufe of man. Cuar. 23. | 


B Ve now let vs do what we cah to recite thofe euills which the more domef- 

SY tique they were to Rome , the more niiferable they made it: I meane the ciuill 

or ra‘hervnciuill difcordes , beingnow no more feditions but plaine warres ,and 

thofe in the very bowells ofthe Citty , wherei fo much bloud was fpilt: whére 

the Senators powers were now no more bent to altercations (4) and wranglings, 

but direély to armes and weapons. O what rivers of Romaines bloud flowed 

from the Sociall , Serusle,and Ciwill wares ? how fore awatt fell vpon the breft of 

all stay from hepce? For before that (6) Latiwm, (being affociate and confederate: 

with the reft)arofe againft Reme (¢ ) allthecreatures that were vfe-full vnto Many, progisies 

dogges,horfes,afles, oxen, and all others befides, that ferued humane occafions, in the cate, 
a. | | , - growing 


a 


142 SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cwar.3.4 


The con- 
federa:s 
WvairTe, 


| growing fuddenly ftarke mad , and lofing all their m.ckneffe ,-runne wild out of 


the rownes into the deferts, fieldes and forrefts , fying the company not onely of 
all others,but even of their owne maifters, and endangering any man that offered 
tocome neare them, What (d) a prodigious figne was heare ? but if this , being 
fo great a mifchiefe of it felfe,werebut the prefage of another, what amifchiefe 
mutt that be chen, that was vfhered in by fuch a mifchieuous prefage. If this had 
befallen in our times , wee fhould bee fure to haue had thefe faichlefle mifcreants 


a great deale madder then the others dogs were. | 


- 3 _ L.VIVES. - 
A Ltercations(a)and[Forbefore,they did but wrangle,reuile,and raile,their fights were only 
in words,no weapons, (6) Latium being affociate | when as the Senate had fet vp OM. Ls- 
wins drufus tribune againtt the power of the Gentlemen, who had as then the iudging of all 
caufes,throughGracebus his law, Drufue to ftrengthen the fenates part the more , drew all the 
feuerall nations of Lra/y to take part withhim, vpon hope of the pofleffing the citty, which 
hope the /talians catching hold vpon,and being fruftrate of it by Drajus his fudden death, firft 
the Picenians tooke armes,and after them the Veffines, Marfians, Latines, Pelignians , Marna 
cians Lucanes,and Samnits Sext.Inl.Cefar,& L.Marcins Philippus being coniulls:ia the yeare 
of the cicty, DCL XII. They fought often with divers fortunes, At Is{t,by feuerall generalls, 
the people of /raly were all fubdued, The hiftory is written by Lisy , Flores , Plutarch , Ores 
fous J elleins, Appian (b Jafociats\the Latins begunthe ftirre rcfoluing to kill the confulls, (efar- 
and “Philip vpon the Latine featt daies, (c) allthe creatures | Orofi.lsb. 5. The heards about this 
time fell into fuch amadneffe that the hoftility following was here-vpon conie@tured , and 
many with teares fore-told the enfuing calamities.(d a prodigions figne Here the text is diuerf= 
ly written in copies,but all to one purpofe, : | 


Of the cinill défcord that arofe from the [editions of the Gracchi. 
_Cuar. 24. | 


| T He fedition (4) of the Gracchi about the law Agrariam , gaue the firtt vent 


vnto all the ciuill warressfor the lands that the nobility wrongfully poffeffed, 
they would needeshaue (hared amongft the people,but it was a daungerous thing 
for them to vndertake the righting of nibs of fuch continuance, and in the: 
end,it proued indeed their deftruction:what a flaughter was there, when Tiberius 


Gracckus was flaine?and whe. his brother followed him within a while after2 the 


noble and the bafe were butchered together in tumults and vproars of the people, 
not in formal iuftice norby order of law but al in huggermugger. After the later 
Gracchushisflaughter , followed that of LZ. Opimins confull , who taking armes in 
the Citty agaiit this Gracchws and killing him and all his fellowes , had madea 
huge flaughter of Cittizens, by this meanes hauing caufed three thoufand to bee 
executed,that he had condemned by law. By which one may gueffe, what amaf- 
facre there was ofall in that cumuleuous condi, fich that 3. thoufand were mar- 
ked out by the law, as orderly condemned , and iuftly flaine. Hee that (4) killed 
Gracchus , had the waighe of his head in gould, for that was his bargaine before. 
And in this fray was (¢) 44. Fulwéusflaine,and all his children. . SO 


a L.VIVES... 


He (a) Gracchi]we haue fpoken of them before, Tiberius was the elder and Cains the youn 
a. ger, Tiberius was flaine nine yeare before Cains:read of them in ‘Plutarch, “ppian, Valerius, 
Cisero, Orofs , Salufte , Pliny and others (6) kihked Gracchus } (: Gracchas fecing his band 


_ expelled 


L13.3. OFTHE CITIE OF ‘GOD. ens 7 


expelled by the Confull and the Senate,hte fled into the wood of Furnia, Opimins proclaiming 

the weight of his head in gold, for a rew arde for him that bronyhe it. So Seprinsuleius A- 

ragninus 2 familiar friend of Gracchus his , came into the wood quietly ,-and Laung talked a’Scp:imue 

while friendly with him,on a fades ftabbeth him to the heart , cuts off! his head , and 

it weigh heauier,takes out the braines and filles the place with lead .Opimsivs was Confull with, }1nus 
Fabius Maximus , nephew to Paulus, and kinfman to Gracchus. ( c) MM. Faluins | one 

ebac had beene Confull with Marcus Plasrins but fiue yeares before’ | es 


. ee 


Of the temple of C oncord spilt by the Sonate in the place where « 
thefe feditions and flaughters were effected. © 3 
_ — Cuap, 25. a — - 
A Fine decree furely was it of thé Senate , to giue charge fot the building of 
L£% concords( «temple, init (6) in the place where thafe cut-rages were acted: 
char che monument of Gracchue his punifhment might bee ftill in the cye of the 


(6) pleaders,and ftand freth in their memory. But what was this but a dire& fcof- 


fing of their gods? They builea goddeffe a temple, who had the beene gmongft 
them, would neuer haue fuffered fuch grofe breaches of her lawes as thefe 
were; vnleffe Concord being guilty of this crime , by Jeauing the hearts of the 
citizens,deferued therefore to be imprifoned in this temple. Otherwife,to keepe 
formality with their deedes, they {hopld have built D:/cord a Temple in that 
place. Is there any reafon that Concord {hould be a goddeffle and not Dsfcord ? or 
that ( according to Labeo his diuifion) (hee fhould not bee a good goddeffe and 
Difcord an euill one ? Hee fpoake vpoo grounds, becaufe he fawe that Feuer had _ | 
a Temple built her , as wellas Health. By.the fame reafon fhould Dé/cord haue Oia 
had oneas well as Concord. Wherefore the Romaings were not wife , to liue in 
the difpleafure of fo threwd a goddefie : they haue forgotten that (4') fhee 
was the deftruétion of Troy aby fetting the three goddeffes together by the 
eares for the golden Apple becanfe fhee was. not bidden to their. feaft: 
Where-vpon the goddefles fell a sais Venus {hee gotte the Apple, Pa- 
vis, Hellen and Treye vtter deftruction. Wherefore if it were through her 
anger becaufe fhee had no Temple there with the reft, that. fhee fette the 
Romaines at fuch variance , how much more angrye would: fhee bee to fee 
her chiefefk enemic haue.a Temple, buile in. that place , where fhee had 
fhowne fuch abfolute power? Now their greateft Schollers doe ftomackevs, 
for deriding thefe vanities , and yet worthipping thofe promifcuall gods , they 
cannot for their lives cleare them-felues of this queftion of Concord and Dif 
cord, whether they let them alone vaworthipped, and preferre Febris and Bel- 
bona before them (to whome their_ moft ancient Temples were dedicated ) 
or that they doe worfhip them both as well as the reft. How-fo-ever, they 
are in the bryers, feeing that Concord gotte ‘her gone, and left’ Dé/cerd to play 


hanock amongft them by her tele oe, 


F Bip a) Temple | There were may Temples of Cénéord in Rome: the mot anci- Cencords 
ent , buile by Camillus, for the acquitretice of the Galles from Kome. Iknow nor whe- Temple, 
Mier icwas that which Flauiks dedicated in Fulcans court 5 which the Nobles did fo’ enuie | 
Shim for , P. Satpitins and P.Sempronins being ‘Confults: |} thinke it is not thac: Anéthet 
‘was vowed by 'L. CManlins Prator; for the ending of ‘the: Souldiérs {edition -in Fréiite. 
eg Dee. nen | ; Ie 


co make laws Anage © 


144 SAINT AVGVSTINE. —  Cuar.26, — 


The cauf= 


Te was letten forth to bee built by the Das-viri Gu. Puppins (efo , and Onintins Flaminine 
were for this end made Dasm-virs. It was dedicated jn the towre by CA.and Gn. Arsilis. Lin, 
4b.32.and 23. A third was in the Romaine court neere to the ‘Greeke monuments , built by 
Opinsins Confull,hauing diffo!ued Graechi his faction, and there alfo is the Opimsan Palace. 
Varro, de Ling. Latlib 3. The building of this temple vexed the Romsaines extreamly: and at 
the building there was written in it, Opse vecordia : the worke of floath, A fourth was built b 

Lixia eAngufta, vnleffe it were but Camillus his olde one which fhe repared.Ontd.faft.1. Cona 
cords fealts were in Februaries (alends the xviii. (6) Inthe place | Appian faith in the plea- 
ding place,and fo doth Varro and Vittor de region, urb. puts it in the eight Region, thatis,in | 
the Komgine court,the fight ending in duentinus though it began in the Capitoll.(¢ ) Pleaders) 

Tribunes,and fuch as {pake to the ‘nag oa in Couenticles : that they fhould {peake nothin g bur 
well of the Senate,taking example by Gracchus, whofe memory that monument {till remembe- 
ted. (d) She was | Difcord alone being not bidden to the mariage of Pelexs and Thetss being 


of Troy s agry hercat’, fenta golden ballinto the feafters , with this infcription, # ead retire, let the 
dediruG.on frireft haue ic. Herevpon grew a ftrife betweene Pallas, Juxo,and Venus. So they came to Parss 


to hau iudgment,whence arofe all that deluge of deftruction that ouer-whelmed Trey. 


Of the dinerfe warres that followed after the building of Concords temple. 
C war.26. | 


N Ow they all thought that this new temple of Coscord,and teftimony of Gras. 
LS chus,would be an excellent reftraint vnto all feditious fpirits. But how farre 
they fhorte wide,let the fubfequent times give aime . For from that time forth, 
the Pleaders neuer went about to auoide the examples of the Graccht,but labou- 
red to exceed them in their pretences. L. (4) Saturninas Tribune, (6) C.Céfar, 
Seruillins Prztor,and ( ¢) not long after that,(d). -.Drafus , all thefe began more 
bloudy feditions,whence there arofe not onely ciuill flaughters ,bue at laft th 

brake openly outinto the Confederates warre,which brought all Italy vnto mo 

miferable and defperate extremities. Then followed the (¢) Sleses warre ,and 
other ciuill warres, wherein it is ftrange to recorde what fields were pitched, 
what bloud-fhed and what murther ftucke vpon the face of all sra/y, as farre as 
the Romaines had any power or fignorie . And how fmalla company, leffe then 
feuentie Fencers , beganthis Sleses warre, which mounted to that terrour and 
danger. What muleitudes of Generalls did this raskall crew ouer-throw ? what 
numbers of Romaine citties and Prouinces they deftroyed,it is more then worke 
enough fora profeffed Hiftorian to declare? For the warre held out not onel 

in /éaly ,but thefe flaues ouer-ranne all Macedonia , Sicily ,andthe fea coaftes. 
Andthen what out-ragious robberies at firft,and what terrible warres after- 


_ wards were managed by the (f) Pyrates , what penne is them fufficient to re- 


pa 
¢ 


capitulate? 


L. VIVES. 


(4) Saturninus,| This man being Tribune,and troubling the ftate with the Agrarian law, 

was killed by (. -Marius,and L, Usler. Flaccus, Confuls, to whom the Senate had com- 
mitered the protection of the {tate : yet did Saturainus preferre this law to doe Marius a plea- 
fure. (6) C- (afar. | This name is not in the old copyes, but onely (- Seruilins Glancia, Pree 
tor pf Saturninus his faction : Of the Seditious, Lucius Apuleins Saturninas came neareft the 
Gracchi in eloquence , for he attra&ted all mens affeQions by his gefture and apparell , more 
then by his tongue or difcourfe, But C. Sextdins Glaucia was the moft wicked villaine that 
ever was,and yet moft furtle and quick witted, but yet hee was very ridiculous , He had beeng 
Confull for all his filehinefle of meanes and manners , if ithad beene heldfic hee fhould have 
ftoail for it : For bee had the people fure for him,and had wonne the Gentlemen by pleafuring 
Cm, 


—_— 


L1s.3. OFTHE CITIE OF GOD. 145 


them. But being Prator he was publikely flaine on the fame day with Satsernine , Marine 

and Flaccus being Confuls, All this is out of 7 #lées Orator cr —— 

~ Buciffome will haue it Cefar,they are not much amiffe; excepting for the times : mary hee 

thar was L. (efars brother,mooued the Romaines againft Suipitins the Tribune,which conten- 

tion gaue beginning tothe warre of Marius , as‘Pedianus hath recorded. This Cefar faith 

Tully being Aedile,made euery day anOration. In Brato.(c) Nor long after \Seatien yeares 

pafled iuftbetweene the Tribunefhips of Saturnine and Drufus.:and fromthe Confulfhips of 
Marinsand Flaccus,to Flaccus and Herennins.(d) M. Drufus\ he was of good birth , but 

the proudeft man in Rome:quicke to {peake : and being called to the Senate , hee fent the Se# 

nate worde to come to him: and {6 they didde. The Senate called his father theit Patron. 

(¢) Slanes warre. }\t began in Cicilie before the Confederates warre, by one ExnusaSyrriat ty. ties 
chat fained him-felfe to bee infpired withthe Cibeds {pirit. “Hee gotte together fixtie thou- warre, 
fand men: ouerthrew foure Prztors and tooke their tents. At length Perpenna betieged 

and conquered them, A little aftcr Cleon a (icilian, began {uch another warre in the fame 

Tland, getting huge powers, ouerthrowing the Prztors as before , and ipoyling the Tents. 

This warre AL, e£guilins ended. In Italy Spartacus and Chryfus began it , who broke out of 

the fchoole of Lentulus,when hee was at Capua , and gotte forth to the number of feauentye 

foure , to whome a great many flaues adioined them-felues foone after, P. Varenss Pra 

tor, and (/andins Pulcher Legate , that metthem.firft in armes ,they ouercame. Afterward =... 
Chryfis atid his bands were defeated by Q. Uarius Prztor. Spartacus. continued the warre 
with great good fortune, againft Lentullus the Confull firft,and then again{t"Z. Gellius and Q., i 
efrins Prztor,and afterward with Caffins, Vice-Confull , and Gr. Mantins Pretor. Laftly AZ, 

Craffus being Prator ouercame him,and put his armie to the fword, (f) Pyrats. | The Celician 
Pirats troubling the fea P. Serxélius Vice-Conful was fent azainit them,who took //awrum and The pirats 
diuers of their Citties but hee retyring home , they rofe with greater powers,and boote-hal’d 

all che Coaft vito Caserta, Miffennm and Oftia , to the great terror and reproch of the Romase 

mame. At length Cx, Pompey beeing made Admirall by the Gabimsan Lawe , quitte the feaof — - 
them in forty daies.(Liw,lib.99.) Cicero pre leg. Manil, L. Florus,and others, a 


Of the ciusll werres betweene Sylla and Marius 
| Crap. 27. 


Hen Marius being now imbrued with his countrymens bloud,and hauing 
flaine many of his aduerfaries , was at length foyled and forced to fie 
thecitty , chat now gotte timeto takea little breathsprefently(to vfe (4) Tallses 
wordes)vpon the fodaine Cinaa and (Marius began to bee conquerours againe. 
And then out went the heart blouds of the moft worthy men, and the lights of 
all che cittie. But foone after came (4) Syi/z,and reuenged this barbarous mafla- 
cre;but with what damageto the ftateand cittie, icisnot my purpofe to veters 
For that this reuenge was worfe,then if all the offences that were punifhed , had 
bene left vnpunithed. Let Lwcax teftifie: (c) in thefe wordes. : 
Exceffit medicina modum, nimiumg, fecnta eff 
Qua morbi duxére manus:peritre nocentes 
Sed cum sam fols poffent fupcreffe nocentes 
Tunc data libertas odys refolutag, legum 
Frenis tra riit-- 
The medicine wroiight too fore,making the cute 
Too cruell for the patienttoindure: 
The guilty fell:sbuc none yet fuch remaining, 
Hate rifeth at full height,and wrath difdsining : 
— Lawes reines brake our. ——_—., : 
For in that war of syllsand Marius, (befidesthofe that fell in the field,) the whole 
cittie ,ftreetes. , Market-places , ee Temples were filled with dead 


_ 


7 : SS : Se : 


146 SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuap.27. 


_ bodies:that it was a queftion whether the conquerors flaughtered fo — to at- 
taine the conqueft , or becaufe they had already atrained it. In Marius his firft 
vidory,at his returne from exile, befides infinite other flaughters, Ocfesiws his 
head (the Confuls)was polled vp in the pleading-place:Ce/ar and(d) Fimbrawere 

-flaine in their houfes , the two (¢) Craffi, father and fon,killed in one anothers 
fight,(f) Bebius and Nwmitorius trailed about vpon hookes till death : ( 2) Catulas 

oifoned him-felfe to efcape his enemies,and (4) Menuls the Joutal Flamine cutte 
fis owne veines and fo bled him-felfe out of their danger , Afaréus hauing giuen 


order for the killing ofallchem whome he didde not (é) re-falute,or profer his 
hand vnto. | | 


L. VIVES. | 
T? ufe (4) Tullies words ] For the following words are Tellyes in his 3. InuetFine again{t Cae 
teline : Where men were flasine by Cinna and Marius (faith he ) wee bane already rehearfed in 
our third Oration for S ylla:namely the two bretheren C, and L, I uly ,( efars,Attillins Sovanus, 
P, Lentulus, L. Craffus, V7. Anthony the Orator,Gu. Olfanins, L. Cornelias , (Merula the Diall 
Nebles  Flansine:Confuls, L. (atulus, QO. eArcarins , M. Bebins, Numitorins Sext. Licinins, (5) Syllay 
flane, and renenged | Tullyes wordes alfo sbid, (c) In thefe wordes } Lib. 2, 


by cyan 
& Martins Sylla queg,immenfis acce/fit cladibas vlier, 
Kile quod cxiguum reflabat fanguinks vi bi 


Haxfit:dsmg, minis iam putrida membrarecidit, 


Then Sylla came to auenge the worthi's {laine 
And that {mall Romaine bloud that did remaine 
He drew:but clean fing full the parts impure 
The medicine wrought to {urc-e-ns 


4 


Exceffit medicina modum=ecue | 
_, . (4) Fimbria\ There was one £, Fiisbria,whomeVelleius calles Flanius , he was a Maerian,and 
rekesas * the razer of /linm. There was an other C. Fimbria , {ur-named Licinéxs , who liued with the 
Gracchi,and entring inro the ciuil wars,was flaine in his own houfe,as Cefar was:of this Fine 

bria {peaks Tully de clar, orator. Andhe it was (ithinke ) tnat would not giue his iud gement 

in the contention about a good man.(Cic. offic. lib 3, Vater, lib. 7.) .) Craffi.] The fon felby 

the hands of the foldiors of / smbria, Cinna s Lieutenantsche father ftabbed him-felfe, (f) Be- 


; bins] He was torne in peeces by the executioners like a beaft,without any vie ofyron yppon 
aia him, (Lucan. lib, 2.) | 


7 Vix te {parfum per vifcera Bebi 
Innumeras inter carpentis membra corone, 
Difcerpfiffe manus 
Nor thee poore Bebins,torne, 

And {cattered through a thoufand bloudy hands, 
Renting them in aring~-—--r----- 


(g) Catules |L. Luttatins Catulus was ioynt Confull with Afarivs in his 4. Confulfhip in 
Catalue, — the Cimbrian warre,and tryumphed with him ouer them:The whole Senate intreating AZarins 
for him,he anfwered he muft die,which Cata/us hearing of, ftifeled himefelfe with coales:whe- 
ther {wallowing them as Portia did, ot inclofing the fmoake clofe in his chamber,hauing newly 
limed it fo he died, it is not certaines(for this later is a prefent way to death, vnleffe remedies be 
_ forth-with gotten)Some think he died of poifon,as Augustine faith here.(b)Merxdla | He cut his 
_ weinesin Jones fhrine. (4) Re-falute | That was the figne that Marins gaue for life and death. 


How Sylla resenged Marius his murthers. 
: Cc HAP, 28. 
Now as for Syl/a’s vitory,§ reuenger of al this cruelty, it was not got without 


much ftore of cittizens bloud , and yet the wars only hauing ended and not 
the grudges:chis vi&tory brake out into a far more cruell waft, in ¥ midft of al chis 


Peace. For alter the butcheries that che elder a¢erins had made (becing ah 


ee ee 


Ling. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 


147 


freth and bleeding,thcre followed worfe by the handes of the yonger Marine 8¢ - 


Carbo both of the old faction of Marius. Thefe wo perceiuir 2 


both of them-felues and others ; For befides the maffacre they made elfe-where 
in the citty,they befieged the Senate in the very Court,and from thence as from 


se Sjllato: come vp- 
pon them, being defperate both of fafety and viGtory , filled all with flaughters, | 


a prifon,dragged them out by the heades to execytion. (4) Aéatins Seangls , the 
Prieft was flain iuft as hehad hold of the alear of Veta the moft reverend relique: 


of all che cittie(c) almoft quenching that fire with his bloud, which the Virgins 
carekept alwaies burning. Then entered victorious Syleintp the city (d) and in 
the common ftreete, (wars cruelty now done , and peaces beginning) pit feauen 
thoufand vnarmed men to the fword,not in fight , but by a exprefle commaund. 


Andafter that he put een whom he lift co death , throughout the whole citty, 


jn fo much that the flaughters grew fo inumerable (¢) that.one was gladde to put 
Sylle in wind that he muft either let fome liue,or elfehe fhould haue nonéto bee 


- Lord over. And then indeed this ravenous murtherer began to bereftrained by 


degrees; and a(f) table was fet vp(with great applaufe) # profcribed: but 2000, 
of the Patriots and Gentlemen , appointing them all to bee prefently killed. The 
number madeall men fad,but the manner cheered them againe:nor were they fo 
{ad,that fo many fhould perifh ; as they reioyced,that the teft fhould efcape, Ne- 
uertheleffe this cruell'carelesneffe of theirs gronéd az the exquifire corménts,thac 
{ome of tke condemned perfons fuffered in their deaths. For ‘gone of them was 
torn in peeces by més hands without touch of iron,wher the executiders fhew- 
ed far more cruelly in rending this living man thus, then they vfe ordinarily vpoa 
4 dead beaft. (4) Another hauing firft his eiesspluckt out , arid. then all the’parts of 
his body cut away ioint by ioint,was forced to liue,or rather to die. , thus tong in 
fuch intollerable torment. Many alfo of the nobleft citties and towne’ Wee put 
vnto the facke:afid'as one guilty man is vfed to beled outto death , {6 was one 
whole Citry as tlten laid out andappointed for execution. Thefe were the fruits 
of their peace after their warres , wherin they hafted not to gette- the ‘conquett, 
bit were {wift to abufe it being gor. Thus this peace bandied in blowd Wich that 
war,anid quite exceeded it. for then war killed but the armed, but this p¢ace neuet 
{pared the naked. In the war he that was ftriken,ifhee could might ftrike againe: 
but in this peace, he that efcaped the war,niuftnot live, but ‘cooke his death witlt 
patience perforce. } " pa aa ee 


ae L. VIVES. eo ee eee 
9 He yonger (4) Marius] Son to the elder:ioined Conful with Carbo ere he were,25. yeares 
Va [ by forced meanes, He commanded his man Dama/ippus to kill all the Patriots in the 
citty,who (Being cae | Prztor)like a good feruant did al that his maifter bad him, & vnder 
“fhew of calling a Senate,killed them euery one.(6) Afurins Scenola | (Lin, lib. 87.) But Lucan 
{lib 2.)feemes to hold that Scemo/a was flaine by the elder Mfarins: mary fo do net the Hiltort- 
egrahers;butby the yonger. (¢,) Almoft quenfhing | Inimitation of Lxcax, ) : 
: 2 | nn Varun fed felfa fenettus a. e 4 
‘Sangninis efaditvagulosflammig, pepercit, ° 3. . 
-— Nor did the aged fire _ 
Bleed much:but fpared the prophaned fire. - 


(d) In the common ftreete] Lisse faith, eight thouifahd, and the author of the booke De viris 
ile ftribus faith nine thoufand, (¢) One was | This Entropins and Orof. thinke was Q. Catulus, 
Others fay thar (. Afereties trufting to his kindred with Syélz.{pake this in a youthfull for- 
wardneffe : Phtarch'and Florus fay it was Fufidins ( though Péstarch call him Offidéns that 
is bure afalt as a creat many moreéare in ‘him cither through him-felfe, his ranflators , or the 
- O- | copiers 


- Marius his 


= 


rr a A TD 


7 SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cur. 39 


iers, }Orofins faith Furfidus. This Fu/idins, Saluf remembers in his oration of Lepsdusthe | 
Tables of Confull, (£) d table] The table of profcription,fhewing the certaine number of fuch as fhould 
profcupti~ bee flaine , that each might know what fhould become of him. Such as were profcribed ic 
oa, was lawfull to kill,cheir goods were fhared, part to Sy//a,part to the executioner. Their chil- 
dren were depriued of honors and forbidden by Syélz's law to fue for any . This was the firft 
_ profctiption table,that Reme euer faw. (g) One] This was Bebins,a Matian,the other was for 
The Bebii Sylie :andthey died both one death . For the Sy//ens returning like cruelty for like vpon the 
6 COs Marians , vied their Bebsns after che fame fort as the other was viedby them. Florus names 
them both. (b)} eAnether| AZ. Marius Gratidianns', Cains his kinfman. This deed was Cats 
lines , at the Graueof L. (acalus,vpon this Marius, amoft gratious and horeft ran, hauing 
Marius Deene twice tribune, and twice Pretor, Q.Cicero in Parane{ad.MFratr, He firlt cus offhis. 
Gratidiae armes and legges , then his eares , tongue, and nofe : then puld out his eyes , and laftly cut off 
nushis his head. (s) Put to the’facke | Subbaftate , doth Lanrinus reade it , moft songraencle tothe 
death. hiftory. The faire bolds of Italy (faith Florus) Sabbaftate {unt,came to the fouldiors fpoyling: 
Spoletum; Interamna,Pranefte, Fluentia. But Sulmo,a» ancient friend of Romes, (Ob unwerthy 
cede being unbefieged , enen as warres pledges beeing condemned to die are ledde forth to executis 
an, fo was this City by Sylla, fingled ont and appointed for a dsrett {poile and flanghter. Fler, lib,3, 
Liase ib, 88.Saith that SyZa commanded all the Preneftines, beeing difarmed to bee flaine, 
Subhajfate..wasaword of vie in eAnguftines time, for Theodofins , and eArchadins Emperors 
doe both vieit. (.demfeind. vend, | 


A camparifon of the Gothes coruptions with the calamities that the Romaines ex 
_.. . dred either by the Galles, or by the authors of thesr ¢iusll warress 
een aa _ a ° : | Cuap. 29. . 


VV Hat barbaroufneffe of other forraigne nations,what cruelty of {trangers 
is comparable to this conqueft of one of their Citizens ? What foe did 
Rome cuer feele, more fatall,inhumane and outragious ? Whether in theirry 
tions firftof the Galles, and fince of the Gothes , or the invndations that Sy/ 
(Marius,and other great Romaines made with the bloud oftheir owne citizens, 
more horrible,or more deteftable? The Galles indeed killed the Senate,and {poi- 
Jedall but the Capirol,that was defended againft them. But they notwithftand- 
ing foldtlic befieged their freedome for golde , where as they might haue cx- 
torted it from them by famine,though not by force. Butas for the Gothes,th 
{pared fo many of the Senate , that it was a maruell that they killedany. But (4) 
Sylla,when as Marius was yetaliue , fatonthe very Capitol, ( which the Galles 
entrednot ) to behold from thence,theflaughters which hee commanded to bee 
erformed. And Marius, beeing but fled, to returne with more powre and fury, 
ec, keeping ftill in the Capicol , depriued numbers of their liues and ftates,co- 
louring allthis villany by the decrees of the Senate. And when he was gon 
what did the Aarian faction refpea or {pare , when they would not rh 
to kill old Scesols,a cittizen,a Senator , the chiefe Prieft , embracing that very al- 
tar,where on they fay the fate of Romeit felfe was adored? And for that(é)laft ta- 
ble of spile’s, (to omit the inumerabledeathes befides)it cut the throates of more 
Senators , then the Gothes- whole army could finde ia their hearts but to offer, 


Yanfacke,or fpoile. 
| L. VIVES. | 
B” (a) Spe Inhis firft vidtory aintt Afarins ; proclaming Sulpitias , the Mars : and di- 


uers others his foes,enemies to the ftate by adecree of the Senate. (6) Leff table} Platarch 
faich,that as then in a'litdle fpace, were diuers profcxiption tables hung vp. soe of 


oAL 


L 13.3. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 4g 


Of the great and pernicions multitude of the Romaines 
warres 4 little before the comming of Chrift, 
Cap. 30. | 

VV Ith what face then, with what heart ; with what impudency, folly, nay mad- 

nes ,do they impute thefe later calamities vnto our Sauiour,and yet wil not 
impofe the former vpon their Idols? Their ciuil difcords by their own writers 
confeffions haue beene ever more extreamely bloody then their forraine warres. 
The meanes which did not affli& , bue veter!y fubuert:their ftate arofe long be- 
fore Chrift, by the combination of thefe wicked caufes arifing from the warre 
of SyHaand Marius,vnto that of (4) Sertorius and (b) Catcline,the one of whome, 
Sylla profcribed,and the other he nourifhed :and then downe-wards to the wars 
of (¢) Lepidus and Catulws,w herofthe one would confirme sys ordinances , and 
the other would difanull them:Then to the warre of (4) Pompey and Ce/ar:where- 
of 7 was a follower of Syl,and either equalled , or atleaft exceeded him in 
flateand powers And.(¢} Cefar was-one that could not beare the greatnefle of 
Pompey becaufe hee lackt ic him-felfe : which sea eee gabe hadde o« 
verthrowne him and made him away , hee went far beyond. From hence they 
come downe to the other Cefar,called (f) au gu/tus,in whofe raigne our Sauiour 
Chrift was born. This 4¢4/tus had much ciuil Wars, wherin were loft (¢) many 
excellent men,&(h)Tx//y that excellent common-wealths-man was one amongft 
the reft For C. (4) Cefar,the conqueror of Pompey though hee fed his viGory with 
mercy ,reftoring the {tates and dignities to al his aduerfaries : notwitftanding alf 
this, by acoafpiracy of thenobleft Senators he was ftabbed to death in the court, 
for the defence of theit liberty, who held himrco affeét a Monarchy. After this 
(k) Antanie(aman neither like him in meanes,nor manners, bat given ouer to al 
fenfuality)feemed to affect his power: Whome Tally didde ftoutly with.ftand 
in defence of the (aid liberty. And then(/) ftepped vp that yonger C@/ar,the other 
Cefars adopted fonne, afterwards ftiled (as I {aid ) aguffus : Him did Tully fa- 
uour and confirme againft Csthony,hoping that hee would be the man, who ha- 
uing demolifhed Anthonies pretences and xowers , would re-ere& the liberty of 
his country. But (wz) farre miftaken was hee and mole-eid in this matter, for this 
young man whofe power he hadde augmented, firft of all fuffered Anthony to cut 
_ Of Crceroes head,as if it hadde beene a bargaine betweene them,and then broughe 
that liberty which the other wrought fo for,vnto-his owne fole commaund, and - 
wnder his owne particular f{ubie&tion. | 


L.VIVES.. 


F (4) Sertorins | Q. Sertorins Mirfinius, feeing the faction of Martus( which he fauoured) 
to go downethe winde,by the leaders follies,gotte away with the forces hee led, through 
all the ragged and difficult paflages into Spaize,and there warred valiantly apainft the Sy/ans. 
At laft being put to the worft by Pompey,hee was {tabbed at fupper by the treafon of Perpenna, 
eAntonins and others his fellowes:A worthy Captaine hee was , haddehe hadde 2 worthier’ 
meane to haue fhewed him-felfe in. (6) (ateline | Hee was for Syila , and cutte many throates ... 
at his command. Afterward rebelling and taking armes againft his country , hee was ouer- Cateline, 
throwne and flaine by Cicero and (. Antony Contuls . (c) Lepidus] In his,and QO. Lsttatins Lepidma, 
Catulus his Confulfhip Syl4 dyed and was buried in AZars hisfield, Athisburiall the catuiase 
two Contuls were at great wordes about the reformation of the ftace , Lepidss dehiring - 
to recall Sy//a's profcripts , and to reftore them their goddes, and Carwhus contradicting him 
together with the Senate ¢ not that i¢ was not iuft, but becaufe it would bee the Original 
|  O3 of 


Serterkas, 


150 - SAINT AVGVSTINE. | Cuarzo. 


of a new tumult , the moft dangerous ofall in that little breathing time pf the ftate. from 

wordes they fell to weapons. G. Pompey and Q. Carulus ioined bartell with Lepidus , ouer- 

threw him with eafe , and defpoyling him of his whole ftrength returned to Rome without 

any more ftirre or other fubfequence of war. The victory was moderately vfed , and armes 

Cs. Pome  prefently laid afide. (d) Pompey. | (2. Pompey the great, C. Pompey Strabo's fonne mette Syl- 
py. la comming out of e/a , with three legions which hee hadde taken vppe amongft the Psfe~ 
ves : hereby furthering Syile greatly in his vidtory,who vfed him as oneofhis chiefe friendes, 

and fureft Captaines in ending the ciuill warre in Cicilie, eA frike , Italy and Spaine. Hee trye © 

umphed twife beeing but agent of Rome , no Senator. Heehadde great good fortune in 
fubduing the Pyrats. He conquered Aithridates and all the Eaft , getting greate and glorious 

triumph therby,and wondrous wealth. He was of mighty power and authority.in the State, 

allwhich I haue more at largerecorded in my Pompeins fugiens. Laftly, warring againft Ce- 

. far for the Conmon-wealth hee was foiled , fledde away to Ptolomey the.young King of 
cégept , where to doe Céfara pleafure, hee was murdered. (¢) Cefar.|This man was fonne 

‘Ful. Cofer, to L. Cefar,whofe Aunt Julia was wife ynto Marixs 3 beeing Confull , by Pompeys meanes, 
hee gotte the Prosince of France for fiue yeares : and thofe expired , for fiue more, of the Con. 
fuls,Pomspey and Crajfxs. In which tenne yeares hee conquered all France: and frétting that 

Pompey could doe more in the ftate then hee , pretending other caufes, hee brought his forces 

againtt his countty. Lacan. | A an re \ 


Nec quenquam iam ferre pote/t Cafarue priorens 
. Pompceiusue parem, _ | 
Cefar indureth no fuperiour, 


Pompey no equall 


——-Swetonias in Cafars life writesa Chapter ofthe caufes of thefe warres, But Pompey 
becing dead , Cefar gotte to bee perpetuall Dictator and then gouerned all che ftate like 
a King, | a y | ie: _ 

Ofthis ciuill warre wrote hee him-{elfe , Plutarch, eAppian , Florus , Eutropins, and Ci- 
___,_ ero who was prefent, and pertaker in the whole bufineffe. (4) Anzuftus |C. Ottanius , Cneins 
COlauiat. 15 fonne (aPretorian ) and Aitia's, the daughter of Altins Balbus and Julia, Cefars fitter, 
Cefar made him heire of the nineth part of his eftate , and called him by his name, Sweton. 
Many of the old foldiers after Ce/ars death came vnto him for his Vncles fake, by whofe 
meanes (as Twi faith }) hee defended the caufes of the Senate again{t Anthony when hee was 
but a youth: ouer-threw him , chafed him into France ynto Lepidus: at whofe returne , hee 
made a league trium-virate with them, which was the direét ruine of the Common-wealth. 
Thetyis he Trism-viri were Anthony Lepidus and hee him-felfe.. The. conditions were, that Arztho-< 
geviri, ny fhould fuffer his Vncle Sexe, /x/. Cefar tobe proferibed : Lepidus his brpther Lucius , and 
Oftaniné Cicere ; whome hee held asa father. This was enthanies requeft,becaufe Cicere 
in his Orations hadde proclaimed him an enemy to the Common-weale :Of thefethree , Tally 
was killed by e4nthonies men , the other two efcaped, The Ollamtans warred with Bratus 
and Caffins ,and at Phillippi by Anthonies helpe ouerthrew them. Then hee warred with LZ, 
Anthony the Tryumvirs rother,and at Persfia made him yeelde the Towne him-felfe : After- 
ward with Pompey che greats fonné , and tooke the Nauy from him:and then with Lepidus 
depriuing him of the Trixmvirfoip: Laftly with CAarke Anthony the Tryumvir whome 
hee conquered , and foremayned fole Emperour of Rome , hauing ended all the ciuill wars, 
and beeing faluted Anugafius by Uslerius Meffala in the name of the whole’ Senate and 

people of Rome. | - 4 
- Inthe foure and fortith yeare ofhis reigne ab V.¢. DCCLI, an happy peace breathing on 
- the bofome of alltheearth both by Sea and Land , mankind beeing in abfolute quict from 
contention, THE Princt Or Natvre, THE CREATOR, THE KING OF 
Chiff  Kinos, AND Tut Lorp OF Lorns, IESVS CHRIST was borne én Bethelem 
Inca, 4 cittie in Luda. (¢ ) Many excellent) The Trinmviri profcribed fatre more of euery fort then 
“" — Sylla didde. Thofe three /wnenal calls (bitterly) Sy//a’s Shollers , and faith they .excelled 

theirmen in theart of profcription. : 
(4) Cocera Jee was flaine being 63. yearesof age : After the reckoning of Lisie and Asfidins 


Heach. Balue 


L 13.3. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. a 150. 


Baffus The divers opinions ofhis death are to be read in Seneca. ( Suafer. lib. 15) Anguftine 
calles him an excellent Common-wealths-man , becaufe his tongue ( likea fterne ) did turne 
the Shippe of the State which way hee would:which he knowing, vied shis verfé to the great 
vexation of his enemies, 


Cedant armatoge,conceduat lanrea lingne. 


That armes fhould yeeldto arts tis fie 
Stoope then the wreath, ynto the witte, 


Pliny the elder meeting him , Haile thot (.quoth hee ) that firft deferueda bbythé 
gowne,and'a garland by thy tongue, (i) (. (afar Bratus , Cafint , and fixty Senators more pair 
confpired againft (2/ar,andin Pompeies court killed him with daggers the Ides of Mareb. 
(kh) Anthony | He and Dolabella were then Confuls. Anthony hailing the contimand of the 

armies , affected the Soueraignty of the ftate exceedingly , which at firft TxLy by his Orati~ 
ons fuppreffed : but then ( as I faid ) he becane Trimmvir. The ftoty of his warre is as well. 
recorded in Tullyes Philspques as can bee. (1) Kept vp: | Tully by his eloquence armed him and 
Hircies and Panfa the Confuls againft Anthony. (m ) Far miftaken | Brutus hadde giuen Tad Bratus, 
4 (uffictent warning of Ofawims , not to make him too powerfull, nor truft him too muchs 

that his witte was childifh , though good , and better fortunesmight make him infolent, 

And here are yet two moft graue Epiftles of Brutus vpon his theame,one to Tully and another 

to etritns : wherin Brutws his manlyneffe and iudgement is clearly apparent. I think not Tre 

fy fo feclith, though that he could not fore-fee this as well as he didde many other events noe 

fo apparant:which he fhewed in his frequent vie of thefe wordes , Olfanins Cefar is to be come 
ended Adorned , extolled, Velleius and Brutus in an Epiftle to Cicero do both make mention 

OF tnis, . a 


OM. Antony, 


' 
» jae? 


That thofe men that are not [uffered as now to wor{bip Idols 
do fbew hw tft ih smputine ta 3 f 
' + webfertes untoCbrift,feeing that they iudured : 
_— the like when they didde wor- : 
| hippe the Dinels. 


> Craw ge 
es 


Vut lettre them blame théi¢ owne goddes for fuch mifchiefes, chac will not 

thanke our Saviour Chrift for any ofhis benefits. For when-foeuer they be- 
fellthem before their goddes altar fteamed with Ssbesm perfumes, and freth - 
flowers , their Pricftes were gallane, their Temples fhined , playes, facrifices and 
furies were all on foote amongft them. Yea even when there was {uch an effufi- 
on of ciuill blood , that the altars of the very goddes were befprinkled with 
it. (6) Tully choofeno Temple for refuge , becaufe he fawe it auailed not Sca- 
wole. But thofe that are now fo ready with their faucy infultations againft Chrif- 
tianity’, of late either fledde them-felues into fuch placesas were dedicatedto 
Chriit,or elfe were broughcthethet by the Barbar sans. 

This I knowe , and euery vnpartiall iudge may know as well as I , chat 
if man-kinde hadde receiued Chriftianity before the Ufrieaw warres ( to 
omitte the other that I haue rehearfed , and that is too long to rehearfe ) and: 
withall thae fucha defolation fhould haue happened , as fell vppon Ewrope and — 
Africke in the faid warres; there is none of thofe Infidels that oppofevs now, 
byt would hane laid onely the caufe of it all vppon the backe of Chriftendome. 
But much more intollerable would their railings bee , if that either the irrup- 
tion of the Galles ,'or the inundation of Tiber , and that great {poyle by 

— O48 fire 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. _ Cuangr. 


fire had immediately followed,vpon the firft preaching and receiuing of Chrifti- 
an religion : but worftofall, ifche ciuill w arres , that exceeded all , had followed 
therevpon. And thofe evills which fell out fo incredibly , fo farre beyond all be- 
liefe,that the world reputed them as prodigies,had they come to paffe in Chrifti- 
an times,who fhould haue borne the blame thereof, but the Chriftians 2 for thofe 
things which were rather ftrang®,then pernitious,as the (¢) {peaking of the oxe, 
the exclamations of children in their mothers wombes , the(d)flying of ferpenrs, 
and the (¢) alreration of female creatures, both hens, and women into,mafculine 


-- formes , and fuch as thefeI willingly omit,thofe things are recorded in-theix hif- 
- + tories,not in their fables , but be they true or falfe ,they do not bring fo much af- 
_. fiion vnto man as admiration. But when ( f) it rained earth ,and (¢) chalke , and 


Locuks in 
ica. 


Peftilencee 


Sabza, 


Prodigics, 


-euer thefe latter times produced... 


(hb) ftones,(not concrefcences , that might be called haile,but(z)dire@ ftones)this 


verily might greatly endomage the earths inhabitants. In the faid: auehors wee 
read,that the fires of (&) Actus brake out (o far, that the feaboyled therewith, the 
rockes were burned, & the pitch dropt of the (hips. This was noe light hurt, buta 
large wounder.Againe,(/) Sicily was fo ouerwhelmed another time with the athes 
cherof that che houfes ot()Catina were all turned ouer into the duft:wherevpon 
the Komaines pitying their calamity , releafed themof (#) thatyeares tribuce. Icis 
recorded alfo, that che number of the (0) Loea4s in Africa was moft wonderfull, 
and prodigious, it being as then a prouince of the Romaines -and that haiiing con- 
fumed al the fruites & leaves of the trees,they fell al into the fea likea moft huge 
& vnmefurable cloud.And bein e dead,and caft vpon the fhore againe,arofe fuch 
a peftilence of their ftinkethat thereof died(p}8-00 0 o.men(g)only in AfsfGxs/- 
fahis kingdome,and(r)many more in other coupsries thereabouts, and of the (/) 
0000. Romaine fouldiars that remained at V#éea,there werebut only ten that fur- 
uiued.So that this foolery of theirs, which we muft both endure and anfwer,what 
wronge would it not offer to the profeffion ofthe ghofpell, had it beene preached 
before the birth of thefe prodigious accidents ? yet it will not call the meaneft of 
their gods to account, for any of thefe mifforcurtes whatfceuer and yet (+) chefe 
fooles will worfhip them ftill in hope to be prprected by them from thefe incon- 
ueniences , when they fee neverthelefle , how thofe that worfhipped the fame 
gods before haue beene opprcfied ,and ouer-horne with the fame burdens of eal- 
amity , nay with loades of miferies , farre more ponderous and intolléerable then 


é 


~~ te ee 


| L.VIVES. 


S Absan(a)perfumes\Saba is the mother of Fraxkencence, lying betweene Syria,and Arabia. 
India mitit ebur.molles fea thura Sabei,faith Virgil:Ebon fiom Inde,from laua,Frankencenfe, 
Sernius faies they are fo calied of cctscdax, toworfhip : becaufe frankincenfe is anexpiation, 
(6)Tally chofe. He died in his farme Formiansm, being kept by tempett from croffing the feato 
Brutus.(c\fpeaking of | often fallingout,once in the fecond Puxicke warre , in the confulfhips 
of Fabius Maxinns and Marcellas , the fourth of the firfts confulfhippe and the third of the 
laters , and in the fame yeare,a woman became aman at. Spolezams and aninfant in the mothers 


- wombe at ALaru ‘a, cried out Lo trinmphe.Liuib.24.)another time, in the warre of Antiochus 


Flying (ere 
poms, 


an Oxecried Kome looke to thy felfezand in Antonies ciuill warre, the Maifter whipping his 
Oxe to worke,the beaft told him, There would want no corne,but there would want mento eate 
ss. And often befides. (4) flying. | The Southwelt wind brings many of ‘chofe flying Serpents 
out of Lybia into Egypt , tothe great annoyance of the inhabirants.;- And therefore Tilly 
faith,they adore the /6:5,for driuing away thefe peftilent creatures from them. So faith He- - 
vedotas in his Exterpe.(¢) Of femates)| Changing of fexes , women into men and hennets ri to 

| COCKES 


8 =. 2 tA LLL, 


ae wo we »* i, eso 
e -y eR SS -Z_ = ‘~~ ws 

aS Or. 
- 


mE ERE EERE tn eT et een 


Lim. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. - 153 


cockes. There is no faulcin the text :( Our interpreter knew not the force of the coniun@i- |. 
on: and thought that Female , Femina ,had belonged onely ynto man, and that bomo was one- soba .- 
ly of the mafculine gender. Sce what fort of men the age before vs refpected and reueren- jn Eoupe, 
ced: they would take vpon them the interpretation of worthy authors,and yet knew not that 

komo might. belong to. a woman; hos femina toabealt. Wee doe wonder how wee haue our [ 

liberall artes fo sls at , but confidering that thefe men haue had the medling with them, 
‘wee haue more reafon to wonder how wee haue any fparke of them left vs at all} This Paris co- 
alteration, Ply faith , is pofible : brin; ing confirmation of divers examples , and his owne. piedoth | 
aredite faying hee had feeng it verefied hjmfelfe: Bur confidering the feuerall nacures of the, jeaue out 
fexes , ic is hatd for a male, to become. female: but not fo hard fcr the other change. For this be- 
the mafculine member to be drawne in,and dilated into the feminine receptacles,isexcceding tweene 
hard,mary for the female partes to bee excrefcent , and coagulate into the malculine forme, thefe 
may be tome-what, but not neare fo difficule as is thought,though it bee feldon feene. (f) /* markes. |] 
rained |\Often,fay authors. Linins Iul.Ubfequ. oc. (¢) chalke} Confulls Q. Metelles,and Ted. 
Didins. Obfequ. (b) Stones) This is not rare. Firft it did fo.in-Tallus Hoffedlsus his time,and then 

it was ftrange. But afterat grew ordinary , to perticularize in this were idle, (i) Dirett anes] 

Some reade,diretly earth; &cc. (k ) eSetnal eLtnais ahillin Sicily , facted to Vuleaw,caliing 

out fire in the night bya veng, ten furlongs about; the vent is called the cauldron. Solinus 

faith ic hath two of them, -£tna,Briareus Ciclops his fon, or e£tna,fonneto (elus and Terra 

otherwife called Thalia, gaueitthe name. Seruins, Virgill defcribes it in a large Poeme, 

which fome fay is Oxsds: but Seneca faith , Ouéd durft not deale with it, becaufe Vsrgsl had 

done it before himi. Others fay Cornelius Seerns did it. The fire doth much harme to Aen x 
the bordering partes of the Ifland. This that e4uguftine declareth , happened in the Conful. : 
fhins of Cx. Serasl. Scipio, and C, Lelins: and in A1.eEmslas and L. Asrelius their Confula 

{hips , the flames burft forth with an earth-quake ; and the fea was heated therewith , as farre 

as the Ifland Lipare, fo that diuers fhippes were burnd , and diuers of the faylours ftifled with 

the fulphurous vapor, It killed an inumerable company of fifh which the Liparians feeding 

ypon , gocapeftilent difeafe in their bellies , which vopeopled almoft all the whole :{. 
land. Obfeq. This was alittle before Gracchus his {edition , and it was fuch , that many were © 
driven to flie from their dwellings into other places, Qrof, (2) Sicély} Orof. lib. g-and 12. (m) 
(tina) Or Catana, itis called by both names, thoughtheir be one (atésa in Spaine,and ano« 

ther in Arcadia. This that Axgu/fine relateth of is recorded by Pliny lib. 3. (”) That. yeares} 

And nine yeares more , faith Ovofsas. (9) Locufts} This was in the Confulfhips of P. Plastins 
Hipfeus (M.Fuls. Flaccus, before C, Graschus his {edition Liv, lib.9. Orof-Eutrep.Inl, Obfeq. 
(p)80000.}So faith Orofins but of Afscipfa his Kingdome.Of this fickneffe in al,died 800000, | __ 
men, faith Obfequens.goooco. faith lh pe (who is indeede no good computator ) in Ne- ©atina. 
wsidia,about Carthage, 200000. of th¢ Romaine fouldiars that kept the legion there, 30000, 
fo faith Oroftus , putting onely 80. for 90. (q) Onely in Mafinyflas} Or rather Adicspf2’s his 

fonne, For Mafiniffz himfelfe was dead , But it might bee called his , becatsfe Rome gaue it 

him, for his worthy deferts. (7) AZany mere] Our hiftorians write not fo; perhaps eAugufine 
followed others,or els like an Orator, applied the hiftory to his owne vfe and purpofe , which 

(eer doth allow in his Bratus,and hath practifed fome-times bimfelfe,as wee haue obferued 

in his Orations , and as. Pediazns hath noted therein alfo. (/) 30000.] Beeing left at Veica as 

the Guarifonof Afrike. (1) a difference of reading : we haue ginen it che crueft fence. 


Finislib.3. 0 


1§4 : 


a 


HE CONTENTS OF THE -~ 


i meee : fourth boeke of the City of God. 


“ty +, Bonnt it as part of their felicities , fi effean | 
- Empire that is inlargea by noe meanes but war. 


, ey en t 


rae chia 


| "'n, Ofthe contents of the firft bovke. 


“ g,Of the contents of the fecond othird booke. 
--g.Whether happy and wife mex fhould ac- 


: 4, Kingdomes withont ixftice , how like they 


> @re unto theenifh purchafes. 


_ barged.and preferued , feeing that they dur ft not 


5. Of thofe fugstine fword-plaiers whofe pow- 
er grew paralel ‘awitharoyal dignity, 

- 6, Of the conetife of Ninus,who made the firft 
war upon his neig bbeurs, sins dees greedy dee 
fire he had to increafe bis kingdome. 

: 9, whether the Pagan gods haueany power 
either to further or hinder the progreffe,increafe 
or defetts of earthly kingdomes. so 

_ 8, what pretious ods thofe were by whofe 
ower the Romaines held their empire to bee in 


truft thens with the defence of meane and perti- 
cular matters. a Oe 
9. Whether it was loue, whome whe Romaines 

held the chiefeft GO D,that was their protector 
and exlarger of their empire. _ 

" 10.What opinions they fallowed that fet diners 
gods to rule in dinerfe parts of the world, 

11.0f the multitude of gods which the Pa- 
gan Dotters avoxch to bee. 
Jupiter. a | 
13.Of their opinion that held God to bee foule 
and the world the body, | 


_ 13. Of fuch as hold that the refonable crea- 
| thofe Pagax Gods, from their owne mouthes. 


tures ,onely are parts of the dsuine. 
14.That the angmemations of kingdomes are 
unfitly afcribedto loue.vittory(whome they call 


truethat thefe were gods. 


ene and the fame | we 


38. Why Fortune and Felicity were made 
Goddeffes. je 
 39.Of a Geideffe, called Fortuna tniliebris, 
20. Of the Deificatson of Vérwue cad Faith 
by the Pagans : and of thetr omiffion of the wor- 
Joip that was dueto diners other Gods , tf it bee 


23. That fuchas knew not the'trne and onety' 
God had better hane bin contentéd with Vertue 
andFelicity, «°° aa 
aa. Ofthe kuowledge of thefe Pagan Gods 
which Vatro boafteth he taught the Romaines, 

23. Of the abjolate fafficiency of Felicity'a- 
lone; whomethe Romaines (who worfhipped fo 
many Gods) ded for a great while ne lett, and 


| gare no dinine honors unto. 


24. What reafon the Pagans bring for their 
worfhipping of Gods guifts for Gods themfelues. 
- 25. Of the worfbip of one God onely , whofe 
name although they knew not , yet the tooke bis 

fortheginer of Felicity, = = - | 

26. Ofthe flage playes which the gods exate 
ted of thesr Saas | eS 
_ 27. Of the three kinds of gods whereof Scx- 
wel ifpored mess ca oF, | 

28. Whether the Romaines diligence in thié 
Sippe of thofexods did their empire any good 

ale Pees i. 


29.Of the falfeneffe of that angury that pre- 
faged courage and fabiliy to hepa fRome. 
30. The confeffions of {uch as doe worfbeppe 


at 


31.Of Varros reietting the popular opinion, 
aud of bis belecfe of one God, though hee knew 


agoadeffe ) being fufficient of herfelfe to gimea + siot the true God. 


full ds{patch to all fuch buifineffes. - 

15, Whether an honeft man ought to enter- 
taine any defire to enlarge his empire. 
_ 16. The reafon why the Romaines # their 
appointments of fexeral gods for enery thing and 
enery attion , would needs place the Temple of 
Reft or Quiet without the gates. 


32. What reafons the kings of the worldhad 
for the permitting of thofe falfe religions in fuck 
places as they conquered, : 

33. That God hath appointed 4 time for the 
Continuance of enery late onearth, = = 

34. Of the Iewes Kingdome , which one god 
alone kept unmooned as long as they kept the 


17. Whether if loue bee the chiefe God of all | truth of religion. 


wittory, Gf to be accounted as one of the nnneber, | 


FINIS, 


155 
THE FOVRTH BOOKE 
. Written ye Banas cm — of Hippo, ce 


Of the Contents of the frit Booke. Cudp. 1. 


Koay) 1 ny firft entrance vpon this Dé/courfe of the Citty of God, Theld 
Sy it convenient, firft of all co ftop their mouthes, who in their ex. 
treame defire of oncly temporall bliffe and greedineffe after 
wordly vanicies,doe make their exclaime vpon Chriftianity ( the paeepet 
crue and onely meane of faluation) whenfoeuer it pleafés Godin 
§ his mercy to corre@ and admonifh them , (rather chen in his iu- 
| " {tice , to punifh or affi@ them ) with any temporall incoaueni- 
ence. And becaufe the vnlearned, and vulgar fort of thofe perfons, are incited 
againit vs thé more, by the endeuours and examples of thofe whom they holde 
Jearned, thinking (vpon their affertions ) that fuch calamities as have befallen 
them of late,never befell in times paft : and being confirmed in this error , by 
furch as know it for an error, and yet diffemble their knowledges wee thought it 
ficte to fhew , how farre this their opinion {warued from the truth ; out of fuch 
bookes as their owne authors haue left vnto pofterity, for the better vnderftand- 
ing of the eftates of precedent ages : and to make it plaine 8 apparant,that thofe 
_ imaginary gods,whichthey either did worfhip as then in publick ,or as now in 
il AAO but moft foule, vncleane fpirits, and moft deceitfull and ma- Falle gods. 
lignant deuils:fo chat their onely delight was to haue moftbeftiall & abliominable 
practifes either publifhed as their true exploits, or faigned of them by poeticall 
inuentionssthefe they c6manded to be publikely prefented in playes & at folemne 
feaftes : to the end, that mans infirmitie prefuming vpon thefe patternes,as vpon 
diuine authorities might neuer be with-drawne from acting the like wickednefle; 
This we confirmed,not by meere coniecturés , but partly by what of latetimes 
our felfe hath beheld in the celebration exhibited vnto fuch geds: and partly by 
their owne writings,that lefe thofe reports recordéd,not as in difgrace,butas in 
the honour of the gods: So that Yarro,(a man of the greateft learning-and autho- 
ritie amongft chem of any writing of diuinity and humanitie, and giuing each verre, 
obie& his proper attribute according to the worth & due refped& thereof ) ftick- 
eth not to affirme that thofe ftage-playes are not mattérs of humaine inuention, 
but meerely diuine things , whereas if the citti¢ were quit of all but honeft men, 
fiage-plaiers fhould haue no roomein meere humanity . Nor did Varro affirme 
this of himfelfe,but fer it downe as he had feene the vfe of thefe playes in Rome, 
beingthereborneandbroughtvp. __ 
— L. VIVES. | ae 
Now muft we paffe from the hiftoricall a&ts of the Romaines, vnto their religion, facrifices 8 
ceremonies : In the firft bookes we asked no pardon,becaufe for the Romaise aéts,thoueh 
they could not be fully gathered out of one author (a great part of them being loft with the 
writings of eloquent Lixie)yet out of many they might.But in the foure bookes following we 
mu({t needes intreate pardon, if the reader finde vs weake, either in diligence or abjlitie. For Vorve’s ane 
there is no author now extant, that wrote of this theame, Uarro's eAntiqnities are loft, rqurties, 
. with a many more : if wee had buc them,we might haue fatiffied Saint Angu/five,that had his 
affertions chence.But now we mutt pick y vp fro feuerall places, which we here produceJeaft 
gomming without any thing we fhould feeine both to want ornaments, & bare neceffaries. If ic 


e 


A 


156 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. CHAP.2. 


haue not that grace that isexpected,we are content, in that our want is not wholy to bee fha- 
med at,and our endeuours are to bee pardoned in this refpect , that many learned and great 
Schollers ( to omitte the ee fort ) haue beene willingly ignorant in a matter of fuch intri- 


cate ftudy, and fo little benefice ; which makes our diligence the leffe faultie . This Varro te~ 


Rtifies. Juwenall {eemes to bee ignorant whether AZoney were worfhipped in Rome fora gode 
deffe or no, Satyra. 1. 


, Et fi funefia pecunia templo Thovgh fatall money doth not fie 
Nondumbabitas, nullas nummorum creximus aras, 4 Ador'd in fhrine,nor hath an altar yet, 


Notwithftanding Varre reckoneth vp her with God Go/d,and God Silwer,amongft the deities, 
Who wonders then if we be not fo exaét(inathing that the goodneffe of Chgift hath al- 


-geady abolifhed out of humaine bufineffes) as fome of thofe idolators were, or as Varre him» 


felfe was, who not-with-ftanding did truly obiect vnto the Priefts, chat there was much in 
their deities which they vnderftood not, hee being the beft read of all chat age? Befides, hus 
maine learning fhould fultaine no loffe, if the memory , as well as the vfe of thofe fooleries 
were-veteily exterminate.For what is onc the better fcholler, for knowing Jomes tricks of luft, 
or Venus hers ? what their facrifices arc? what prodigies they fend? which God owes this 
ceremonie,and which that ? J my felfe know as much of thefe dotages as another : yet will! 
maintaine thac the ignorance of thefe things is more profitable , then in any other kinde : and 
therefore I hane had the Ieffe care to particularize of the deities,kindes, temples, altars, feafts, 
and ceremonies of euery God and Goddeffe,though I would not fend the reader empty away 
that defireth to haue {ome inftruction herein, a 


The contents of the fecond and third booke. 


C Hap.2. mag 


AN D hauing propounded a methode of our difcourfe in the end of the firft 
booke,whereof we haue profecuted fome parcels in the bookes fgllowing, 
now we know that we are to proceed in thefe things , which our order obliget 


vs to relate. We promifed therefore to fay fome- what againft chofe that impute 
the Romaines calamities vnto Chriftianities and to makea peculiar relation of the 


euills that wee fhould finde their cittie, or the prouinces thereof, to haue endu- 


red eretheir facrifices were prohibited: all which queftionleffe they would haue 
blamed vs for,had they befallen them in the times of our religious lu(tre and au- 


thoritie: This we performed fufficiently (1 thinke) in the two [aft bookes,in the 


former of them, reciting the euills which were eithet the onely ones, or the fo- 
reftand moft extreamesI meane thofe corruptions of manners: In this laft of 
thofe which thefe fooles haue fo mainea feare to fuffer , as afflictions («) of body 
and goods which the beft men often-times pertake of, as wellas the worft. Bue 
for the things that make them euill,and depraue their foules, thofe they detaine, 
with more then patience, with extremitie of defire. Then I touchta littleat the 


citry,and fo came downe fpeedily to Augu/tus . Buc if I would haue dilated ( not 


vpon thefe reciprocall hurts, that one man doth to another, as was defolations, 
&c.but) vpon the things that befall chem by the very elements,and from nature, 
which( 6 ) Apulesus briefly {peakes of in one place of his booke De Afundo, fay- 


_ ings that all earthly things haue their changes, (¢ ) reuolutions,and diffolutions: 
for (he faith) that by an exceeding earth-quake, the ground opened at acertaine 


time,and {wallowed vp whole citties,and all that were inthem: fhowers and in- 
undations ouer-whelmed whole countries: continents were cut into themaine 
by ftrange rides,and made [lands 3 and the fea elfe-where caft vp large grounds 
and left chem bare : Stormes and tempefts ouer-turned whole cities: liphening 
confumed many of the Eafterne countries ,and deluges as many of the Weft. 
Fire fprang from the cauldrons of e£sme , as fromatorrent, and ranne downe 


the 


, 


5 : : . 
7 ie | 


Lis4. OFTHE CITIE OF GOD. 157 


x 


the hills : if I fhould haue colleGedall of chis kinde that I could, which happe- 
ned lang before-thac the name of Chrift beate downe thofe ruinés.of faluation, 
what end fhould I euer make 21 promifed alfo tomake.deimdnttration of the Ro- 
maines conditions, and why the true God did vouichfafe them that increafe of 
their Empire,euen hee,in whofe hand are all kingdomés, when their owne pup- 
petries nevier did them a peny-worth of good,but confened them in all chat euet 
they could. Now thenam I to difcourfe of their coufenage , but chiefely of the 
Empires increafe. For, as for their deuills deceites , the fecond booke opened 
them reafonable fully, And in all the three bookes paft , as occafion ferued, wee 
noted how much afile and comfort the great God did vouchfafe both the good 
andbad.in thefeaffliGions of warre, onely by the name of Curtis 1, which the 
Baibarians fo highly reuerenced, beyond all vfe and cuftome of hoftilitie. Eueh 


he did this, that zketh. the funve to [bine both vpox good and bad , raipeth bath up-Mat.§, 


on the tuft and the uniuft. 


a 
ee 


LL WIVES. 


, 


leins\ Hee was of AZatlaura, a Plaronift, a great louer and follower of antiquitie , both in 
learning and language, Hise fe hee had from Lucian , but added miich to the tranflation: 
His booke de Mundo,from eAriftorld, cunningly diffembling his author ( which | much ade 
mire off) though he profeffe to follow -Ariffotle and Theophraftus inthis worke ina new and 
civil! phraife ; forftealing an imitation is all one herein with him , which is more ciuill, then 
tocall fying , géuing place : thefe are new fignifications, giuen the wordes to grace the ftile, 
Juftine Martyr and Fhemiffins (to émicte the later writers ) fay diretly that the worke de 
mundo is Ariftortes Exphrade though the phirafe feeme to excell his in elegance. But this is 
no fitte argument for this place. Surely it is either Ariforles , or Theophraftus-his, or fome 
of the Ariffotelians of thofe times : being(as Juftine faith ) 4 compenisnws-of the Perpatetiqnes, 
phyfiology. Auguffines quotation of him heere, is not in the Florentine copy, which Pretro 
e“gidio,a great icholler. and my moft kinde and honeft friend Jent me i nor in the elder Venice 
copie, which I fawe at Saint Pietro e+fpoftolio 5, nor in the new one which eA filanus, eAldus 
his father in law Printed : for in all thern it isthus. el! earthly things haue their changes, reno 
futions and dsffoltetions. Laftly, that which the gouernour vs inthe fhip, crc. Yer that Apuleites 
wrote the reft, which e4ugaftize relateeth, appeareth by thé very ftile and phrafe, both trulie 
eApuleyan: as alfo becaufe it is ine triftotles worke it felfe, beginning at thefe wordes, 
Mira 28 ra tgdeie. os. asfolloweth, wheich -Apieleins hath tranflated, there where hee faith, 
dress dw udpn xolipascay. The Eafferne regions were confumed aud burned, The burning of 


Phaeton, Ariftorle defcribeth plainely, that hee was Apello's fonne, and through want of skill Phaetoxi, 


fet heauen and hell on fire. But the burhing of e£t#2, (both mentioned in the fayd words 


of Ariftotle) wastthe firft eruption of fire from that mountaine, happeniig in the fecond Aemss ' 
yeare of the 88, Olympiade; three yeares before Platé's birth, if Exfebine his account bee buming 
tue ‘which is neuer otherwife, vnleffe the copiers of hish bee in fault. In this fire cettaine , 


godly men were faued from burning by a miracle, which —47ifforle toucheth at in. this his 
Booke de Mundo, and more at large in his Phyfickes ,but I make a queftion whether thefe 


Ariitions (a) of body |Bodily goods are three-fold,arid foate their contraties. (5) eApue Apuleias 4 
Plazonilf, ' 


in baaaoe LA. _. 


beehis or no. (c) Renolutions,| {mine interpreter had beene vndone, had hee not put in 
Intenfiones cy remiffiones, that hee might 1 nake Augu/tine talke of his formes and formalities : [ 
about which thefe fellowes keepe a greatet adoe, then eter did the Greekes and the Troy- This note 
ans about Hellens fayte forme, for they thtinke their forthes are as worthy to bee wrangled isleft ont 
for,as hers was. Bur in the olde manufcripts are not guiltie of any two fuch words as ie 
fonmes et remiffioxes, nor Ariftotle neither , inthis place ¢zepadous x xa8), hee hath renolutin 1 
ones G interisus , fo that the firft mult be changes, and not fibuerfions:} es aes 


5S 24 ie , she rot indie 
p a Whether cee 


as 


z - . e € 
ence ; $ 
Lo t a - > - F ~ a‘. Se 
. | en oe So se. we Bea 


158 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. — Cuaz. x. 


~ pwhether happy and wife men \hould accoumpt it a8 part of their felicstie , to 
i: : poffe(fe an Empire that ts enlarged by no meanes but warre. 


aprae. Car. 3.. | 

N Ow then let vs examine the nature of this fpacioufnefle,and continuance of 

Empire,which thefe men giue their gods fuch great chankes for: to whom 
alfo they fay they exhibited thofe playes ( that were fo | both in a&ors and 
the action ) without any offence of honeftie: But firft, I would make a little inqui- 
rie,fecing you cannot fhew fuch eftates to bee any way happy, as are in continu- 
all warres , being ftill in terror, trouble , and guilt of fhedding humaine bloud, 
though it be their foes: what reafon then, or what wifdome fhall any man fhew, 
in glorying in the largeneffe of Empire, all their ioy being butas a glaffe,bright 
and brittle,and euer-more in feare and danger of breaking : To diue the deeper 
into this matrer,let vs not giue the failes of our foules to euery ayre of humaine 
breath, nor fuffer our vnderftandings eye to bes fmoaked vp with the fumes of 
vaine words, concerning kingdomes, prouinces, nations, or fo: No, let vs take 


Thecom- two men, (for euery particular man is a part of the greatett cittie and king- 


parifon 


= de dome of the world, as a letter isa part of a word ) and of thefe two men, let vs _ 
and ric 


imagine the one to be poore,or but of a meane eftate, the otherpotent and weal- 
thy : but with-all, let my wealthy man take with him,feares, forrowes,couetife, 
fulped , difquier, contentions, let thefe bee the hookes for him to hale in the 
augmentation of his eftate , and with-all the increafe of thofe cares, together 
with his eftate: and let my poore man take with him, fufficiencie with little, 
loue of kindred , neighbours, friends , ioyous peace , peacefull religion, found- 
hefle of body, fincereneffe of heart, abftinence of dyet , chaftitie of carjage, 
and {fecuritie of confcience : where fhould a man finde any one fo fortith, as 
would make a doubt which of thefe co preferre in his choyfe ? Well then,euen 
as wee haue done with thefetwo men, fo let vs doe with two families , two nati- 
ons, or twokingdomes: Laye them both to the line of equitie : which done, 
and duly confidered, when it is done, here doth vanitie lye bare to the view, and 
there fhines felicitie, Wherefore it is more conuenient, that fuch as feare and 
follow the lawe of the true God,fhould haue the {waying of fuch Empires: not - 
fo much for them-felues , as for thofe ouer whome they are Emperors. For 
them-felues, their pietie ;and their honeftie ( gods admired gifts ) will fuffice 
them, both to the enioying of true felicitie in this life, and the attaining of 


- that eternall and true felicitie in che next. So that here vpon earth, the rule, 


and regalitie thatis giuento the good man , doth not returne him fo much 
good, as it doth to thofe that are vnder this his rule and regalitie. But contrari- 
wife, the gouernment of the wicked , harmes them-felues farre more then their 
fubiects : for it giueth them-felues the greater libertie toexercife their lufts: 
but for their fubieéts » they have none but their owne iniquities to anfwer 
for : for what iniurie fo-euer the vnrighteous maifter doth to the righteous 
feruant, ic is no {courge for his guile, buta triall of his vertue. And therefore 
hee that is (2) good, is free, though hee bee a flave: and he that is euill, a flaue 


_ though hee bee aKing: Nor is hee flaue to one man; but that whichis work 


b.Pet.2.39 


of all, vnto.as many maifters as hee affeGeth vices : according to the Scripture, 
fpeaking thus hereof: Of wh at-fo-ener aman is ouer-come,to that hee %s iw bondage. 


L. VIVES. 


L. VIVES.” - | 


HE that 1s ¢ a ) good \ A Stoicall paradoxe mentioned by Tally. In Paradox, pro Muren. Stoicifme 


Wherefore: Hieromse thinkes that Stoicifme commeth neerer to Chriltianitie, then any of 
the Sectesbefidesix, = . - Ye Be Binge ty = 


a 


Kingdomes with-out _—— leke they ave unto theenifh purchafes. 
| cet) Cmap.g. :, ae eee 
SE T iuftice afide chen,and what are kingdomes but faire theeuith purchafes? 
becaufe what (4)dre thecwes purchafes but little kingdomes ? for in thefts,the 
hands of the ynderlings are directed by the commander, the confederacieofthem 
is{worne together,and the pillage:is {hared by-che law among (t them. And if 
thofe ragga-muffins grow but vp to be able enough to keepe forts , build-habira- 
tions, poflefle cities,and conquer adioyning nations , then.their goueramentis 
no more called theenifh, but graced with the eminent name of a kingdome,gi- 
uen and gotten,not becaufe they haueleft their pra@ifes ; but becaufée that now 
they may vie them with-out danger of lawe: for elegant and excellent was (6) 
that Pirares anf{wer to the Great Macedonian Alexander,who had taken him : the 
king asking him how he‘durft moleft the feas fo , hee replyed with a free {piric, 
‘How dareft thou moleft the whole world? But becanfet doe it with a little {hip onely 1 
ancalleds theefe: then doing it with a great Nante, art called an Emperour, 


ee ees ee i 4 L. VIVES.. 3 ae a 
Hat ave (a) theenes |The world (faith Cyprian very elegantly to Donatus) is bathed in 


| Si eek ieee dan oo). A pirates 
Terrarum fatale malum, fulmenque quod omnes; ee Oe, ee a —— 
: a oe 43 Ciel ae bie at - : ‘ Alex tie 
Percuteret populos.pariterque o [ydus tniqUuews. +. a te 
Gent ibus,—————~ 7 


Rending the world; aftarre that ftruck in funder - 
The Nations eis 


Of thofe fugitine Sword players, whofe power grew | 


a . 


fay thar the very Empi f e-albei } WE ; 1 } 

at the very Empire of Rome,albe it was paw prowne fogreat and fo power- 
full by fubduing of fo many nations ,and fo became foletérror of allthe reft, 
: Was neuertheleffe extreamly danted,and driyen into a'terrible feare ofan inuafi- 
had ae hardly. to bee auoyded , bya {mall crew.of raskally: fword:players:, that: 


Pa mightie 


OF.THE-CITIE OF GOD. © 359. 


liketco 
Chriftiani« 


160 SAINT. .AVGVSTINE. Cuars 


mightie armie,that vnder the conduét of three (4) Captaines they had madea 

- moft lamentable and cruell wafte and {poile of the moft part of the countrie. 
Let chem tell mee now, what God it was that raifed vp thefe men from a fewe 
poore contemptible theeues , to a gouernment fo terrible to the ftate and 
ftrength of Rome it felfe: will ic be anfwered that they had no helpe at all from — 
the Gods, becanfethey continued (5) buta while? As though that euery mans 
life maft of neceffitie bee of long continuance: why then the Gods helpe no 
King to his kingdome,becaufe that moft kings dye very foone : nor is chat to bee 
-accounted as a benefite which euery man loofeth in fo little a time , and which 
vani(heth (like a vapor) fo foone after it is | : for whacis it vnto them thac 
worfhipped thefe god; vnder Rewulus , and are now dead , though the Romaine 
Empire be never fo much encreafed fince, feeing they are now pleading their 
owne particular caufes in hell : of what kinde,and in what fafhion they are there, 
belongs not tothis place to difpute. And this may bee vnderftood likewife of 
allchac haue ended their Jiues in few yeares, and beare the burthens of their 
deeds with them, how- fo-euer their Empire be afterwards augmented, and con. 
tinued through the liues and deaths of many fucceffors.But if this be noc fo,bue 
that chofe benefits(though of fo fhort fpace)be to be afcribed to the gods good- 
neffes,then affuredly the Sword-players had much to thanke them for, who by 
their helpe did caft of their bonds of flauerie, and fled and efcaped ,and gottean 
army of that {trength and good difcipline 5 anere Rome it {elfe began to be 
terribly afraide of chem,and loft diuerfe fields againft them . They gorte the vp- 
per hand of diverfe generalls, they vfed what pleafures they woulds they did 
even what they lufted; and vn:ill heir laftouer-chrow , which was giuen them 
with extreame difficulrie, they lived in all pompe and regalitie. But: now ¢nto 


mmatter of more confequence. 


rte 5 | Freres ) Captaines | Spartacus, Chryfus, and Oenomaus: worthy of memory is that of 

Plinie.tib. 3.8 30, that Spartacus forbad the vie of golde and filuer in his Tents; fo that ¥ 
wonder not that he became fo powerfull. That lawe in the tents of thofe fugitiues, was bet= 
ter chen all che Othet UALidad lawes in the Cities of mighty Kings, (6) But awhile |In the 
third yeare of their rebellion, 4. Licinins Craffus veterly difperfed and killed them, _ 


e . 


— Of the couctoufne(fe of Ninus,whe made the firft warred upon his neighborsy 
through the greedy defire he hadtoincreafehiskingdome. 


C HAP. 6. 


[4 that wrote the(«) Greek ( of tather vniuerfall )hiftorie after Torgua 

| Pompeyas, not onely in Latine ( for fo didhee) but ina maore fuccin& manner, 

ee beginneth his bockethus. (b) The fway and rule of nations at the frit was in 

= kingdom the hands of Kings , who gotte their heights of Maieftie , not by popular ambztson, 

but by their owne maderete tarriage 5 approoned by good men. The people had so 

| bawebut(c) the Kings will. Their tare and éuftome was the keeping , not. the ang 

menting of their dominions limiiittes. Euety mans kingdome was bounded wt 

$n his owne conntrie. (d) Ninus of Affyria was the firit that followed the lui? 

of Soneraigntie in breaking the olde heveditaty lawe of Nations. (e) Hee firft 

warred on the adioyning conatries , fabduing the people ( 45 yet unacquainted 

| +g . with 


wr? 


ny Lr age OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 164 


tt with Arts milstary ) as farre as Lybia. Anda litcle after : Ninus confirmed hi 
ti conquest by continuing poffefion of tt. And hauing fubdaed the neighbouring nats- 
en ons, from thee hee l:used frronger powers, and [et farther footing into the world,vn- 


ud till by making one vittorte the continnall meanes of another , hee had made anentire 
om conquest of all the Eaft..(f) How truely fo-euer hee or Trogws wrote this (for 
ws Thaue found them both elfe-where erronious by true proofes ) : yer it is cer- 
10 taine by the recorde of other writers , that Wésws enlarged the. 4//jriens Mo- 
bee narchie exceedingly : And that it continued longer then the (¢) Romasnes hath 
lh doneas yet. For as the Chroniclers doe deliuer vp account, it was MCC XL. 
‘at yeares from Ninus his reigne , to the tranflation of this Monarchie to the 
vit Mediaxs. Now to warrevpon ones neighbours, and to proceede to the hurt of 
rit _ fuch as hurts not you, for greedy defire of rule and foueraigntie ; what is this 
or, but flatte theeuery ina greater excefle and quantitie chenordinary? == 

10) | | Pe eee 

S 7 L. VIVES. . a 

yut TE E ( 4) Greeke | Trogus Ponspeyus wrote an vniuerfall hiftorte from the beginning ‘of che 
a¢- # nations vnto his owne times. This great worke did Juffine contraét into-an Ep#onse ; cal- 


by ling it fo : as Florus did Lixies workes :though more at Jatge. I would Florms had rrot beédme Fleets, 
fo biiefe . Jn/fine is now read for Tregus. Ihaue heard fome fay they haue feene Trogus while 


an in Italy : it may bee fo,in adreame, (6) The fway\ Euery family at firft had a Kin ther The firft - 
»be the eldet,witelh or moft iuft of the houfhold ; ecbbomeed one king began to rule ees fq SPS 
vp:  tnilies,and fome-times many Kings ouer one, whom the people were compelled to recejue as 

did guides andl gouernours , ot watch-men ouer the weale-publike : nor did this ele€tion follow 

eff chance, nobilitie,sor ambition ; euery mans owne priuate good,and the common good with- 


all, which each man =) refpected, made him choofe the beftand fitceft man. (‘¢.) Thi Rings 
will for if hee bee good, his will is better then alaw, eAriit.de Rep. (ad) Nesus'] Sohne to Nas, 
Belas,of him elfe-where. (¢) Hee first] There were warres before him: the «Zgiptsans and 
the eS fricans warred with ftaues hardned with fire, which they called Phalanges,Plisie faith, The fri 
that the Phenicians were the firtt fighters, ib.5. Vexeres the Egiptian King , and Tenais the Wate | 
Scithian faith [uftine,did firft inuade the adioyning nations,fot defire of glory.And Nixus firlt, | 
of for defire of Soueraigntie. (f) Hewstruly, | The Greekes either through defire to floarith in a 
J their ftiles, or for cheir countries admiration, or for delighting their readers , or by fome na~ 
turall puift , haue not failed to lye wonderfully in all their Hiftories. And the Larines that 
We medled with their affaires, being forced to follow them, fell into the fame defect ,-as Trogns 
and Cartins Ruffus did. (¢ ) Romaizes hath] Of the continuance of the Affprian Monarchy, the Afly= 
there isno certaintie. It lafted MC CXL. yeares faith Exfebins. MC CC L X. faith Diodo- nan Moe 
- ris Siculus, Thirtieleffe faith Ctefes , whofe computation /x/fme followes in the Afian af= narchic. , 
faires: nor is the number of the a knowne. They were thirtie faith Diedorns, thirtie fixe 
faith Exfebins,chirtie three VeNeixs, Succeffiuely the fonne to the father, from Nuwus to Sarda- sd ae = 
napalus., eAnguftine wrote this worke in the bginning of the raigne of Honorins and T heode- Se tile 


fous the yessuger about M C L X X. yeare after Rome was built, 7 ae -— worke. 


° 


eee 


Whether the Pagan Gods haue any power either to further or binder 

: _ the progreffesncreafe,or defects of earthly kingaomes. 
. | Crap. | ae Oe | 
F this kingdome continued pi lagen fo fpacious, wich-out the affiftance 
“of any of thofe gods , why are they reputed as the enlargers and prefere . -. 
uers of Romes Monarchie? There is the like reafon for both . But if Afjrid °°: 
were bound to thanke the gods ,I demand which gods ? for the nations thar 
Nisus conquered hadnone. And if the 4//jréens had any peculiar ones, thae 
a | | P 3 were 


“162 SAINT AVGVSTINE:: Cuar7, 
were better ftate-wrights , what, were they deadthen when the Monarchy was 
tranflated to the Medes ? Or were they vnpaid, or had the (s) Medians promifed 
thenr better wages, that they would needs thither & (4) fromthem againeinto 
Perfia ac the inuitation of Cyrus,as promifing them fome-what that better liked 
them? The (¢) Perfians ever fince,a little after the (hort ( though {pacious ) Mo- 
narchy of Alexander the great,confirmed their-eftate in that large country of the 
Eaft,andarea Kingdome ac this day. If chisbee fo,then either the gods hane no 
faith , in that they keepe this fitting fromthe friend tothe foe ( which Cem/les 
would not doe , though Rome were moft vnthankfull to him for his moft auay- 
leable conqueft of the Vezz,but burying the wrong, freed it the fecondtime from 
the Galles) Or elfe they are not fo valiantas gods (hould bee : but may bee con- 
quered and chafed away by humaine ftrength and cunning. Or when they doe 

“fight, it isthe gods onthe one fide that beate the gods on the tother, and northe 
men. Oh then, belike they are foes anongft chemfelues afwell as humaine’ crea- 
tures. Good:the citty fhould neuer giue them any more worfhip then it held to 
be due to any other people or nation what-foeuer that helpeth thé.But how{oe- 
uer this flightjor this remoouall, or this killing of thefe gods fell out, the nameof 
Chrift. was not yet: knowne in thofe times and places, when and wherein thefe 

“changes of {tates did thus follow the effets of warre. For ifthat (d) after thofe 
MCG. yedres, andthe ouer-plus, when the Ailyrian Monarchy was remooued, 
chriftian religion had come in, and preached of another , an eternall Monarchy, 
and-condetnined all their gods for falfeand faigned,and their facrifices for facri- 
ligious Fooleries. What would the vaine mé of that nation haue replied,butthat 
the Kingdome was ouer-throwne becaufe they had left their old religion ,and 
recotyed this of ours 21n which foolith anfwere, let-thete-our later antagonifts 
beholdthemfelues as ina glaffe : and bluth(if they be not paft grace)to follow fo 

_ fondsa-grefident.(e) Though indeed the Romaine Empire bee rather afflided 
-" then altered or tranflated,as ic was often before Chrifts‘;comming : and as it re- 
courted from thofe atfliGions before, fo may it fiom thefe’; there is no caufe of 


ne Loan 


.. :* defpaite, Who knowes the will of God herein. ae, 


satis ba oo a a 
oe ne re L.VIVES. oes 

He (4): Medians] By eArbaces prefect of Media who killed Sardasapalus,as {corning that 
L fo many thoufandmen fhould obey a beat. Luffin, Orof. Plutar.Enfeb, &c, (6) From then 

~ © The Monarchy of Afia rethained with the Medians from Arbaces to (yrus, (: amby fes fonne, 
Aftiages, CCCL, yeares. eAfyages was the laft King, whofe daughter (Afandane,(ambyfes wile, was 
—. - mothérto Cyrus. (yras being borne, his grand-fire(throu pt a dreame he had)cauted himto be 

| caft out to the wild beafts in the woods. But by chance he was faued. And beeing becomea 
lufty youtit,entring into Perfepolis , hee commanded the people to make ready their axes,and 

cut downe a great wood : next day he made them a delicate banquet, and in the midft thereof 

asked them whether they liked this day better thenthe other. They all replied , this day:well 

faith hee, as long as you ferue the Medians, the world fhalbe as yefterday to you,bur bee your 

owne Lords your felues,and it wilbe this day. Herevpon,leauying an army,he over-threw his 

yncle , and tranfferred the Monarchy vnto Perfia.(¢) Perfians] Their Kingdome continued 

from (yrus to Alexander , Philips fonne, GCXXX. yeares, Alecander ruled Afia. VI. yeares. 

his fucceffors after him vnto Selencus and eAntiochus the two brethren, that is from the 104. 

— Olympiade vnto the 13.4. at which tiie Arfaces , ameane buta valorous fellow, fet his coun- 

ThePer- < ery free,by meanes of the two brethrens difcord and taigned King himfelfe . Thence arofe the 
fan Mo Parthian Kingdome,laftinig vnto Ax. Seneras Cafars time, at whichtime Xerxes the Perfian 
mereny: = fubdued them and annexed them to the Perfian crowne , and this Kingdome was daring in 
Anguftines ime. Whereof read Heredian in Antoninus, (d) After thofe| The text of fome 
: copies 


i 


a = SO a RRERRERERAIIREEETDEn ore . ve oomapatyitianin setutaaieans : 
Lrs.qi? OFTHE CITIE OF GOD. 163 
copies, followes Exfebins but the old bookes doe leaue out e¢ gquadraginta .So that Auguftine 
did not fet downehis opinion amongft this diuerfity of accounts ; but onely the onerplys, 
to fhew onely,that it was more then MCC. yeares,but-how much more he knoweth not;{ure- 
ly it was notan C. (¢) Though] The'tame.of it remaineth as yee in the aficient dignity,but 
with no powre. We gReS Oy, eee eS A : eet 


Pes uae eee 


h nat piectons gods thofe were by whofe powsr the Romarnes hela their Empire to bee 
enlarged and preferned,feeing that they dur/t not truft thems with the defence 
of meane atid perticular matters, Cuar. 8. 
Et vs now make inguiry, if you will, which God (or gods) of all this fwartie 
that Rome worfhipped,was it that did enlarge and protect this their Empire. 

Ina world of {uch worth , anddignicy, they durit noc fecretly commirany deal- | 
ing to the goddefle: Cloaciua (4), nor to the goddefle (6) olupéa, the lady of plca- > 
fure,nor to (c) Libentina,the poddeffe of luft,nor to (a) Vaticanus the god of chil- 
drens crying, nor to (¢) Canina the goddefle of their cradtes. Buchowcanthis | > 
one little booke poffibly haue roome to containe the names ofall their gods and 
goddeffes, when as their great volumes will not doe it, fecing they hauea feue- 
sail god to fecto euery perticular ad they take in hand? Durft they truft one 

od with their lands thinke you ? No,R«/iza muft looke to the country, Jugatinus 
tothe hill-roppes : Ccd/etina to the whole hills befides and VaHoni4 to the vallies. 
‘Nor could (f) Segetéa alone bee fu ficient to protect the corne : but while ie was 
in the ground , Seéa muft looke to it: when it was vp,and ready to mow ,.Segetia: 
when it was miowne and !aid vp, then (g) Tutilina tooke charge of it, who'did not 
like that Segetza alone fhould haue charge of iz all the while before it came dried 
wnco her hand: nor was it fufficient for thofe wretches,that their poore feduced 
foules,that {corned to embrace onetrue god,fhould become proftitute vnto this 
meaner multitude of deuills , they mufthaue moré: fo they made (4) Proferpina 
goddefle ofthe cornes firft leaues, and buddes: the (4) knots -Nodctus looked vn- 
to:Volutina to the bladesjand when the eare began to looke out, it was Patelena’s 
charge: when the eare began to be even bearded (becaufe (k) Hoftire wastaken ©*" 
of old for 20 make euen’) Hoffilinas worke Cameins w hen the flowres blaomed, z «..::. 
(Q) Flora was called forth: when they grew (m) white, Lacfertia; becing ripe (s) 
CMatuca,becing cut downe (0) Runcina.O let them pafie , that which they fhame 
notat,I loathat. Thefe few I haue reckoned , to fhew that they durft at no hand 
affirme,that these gods were the ordainers,adorners,augmenters or preferuets of 
the Empireof Rome, hauing each onéfuch peculiar charges affigned them, as 
they hadnoleafure in the world te deale it any other matter. How fhouldSee =>. 

etia guard the Empire,that muft nct meddle but with the corne?or Caninalogke 
to the warres , that muft deale with noughe bur childrens cradles ? or Nodotus 

iue his aide in the battaile,that cannot helpe fo much as the blade of the coine, 
Pit is bound to looketo the knot onely ? Euery (7) houfe hath a porter tothe 
doré: and though hebe buta fingle man,yet hee is fufficient for that office : but 
they muft haue their three gods , Forculus forthe dore,(q) Cardea for the hinge, 
and Limentins for the threa-fhold . Be-like Forcu/us could not paflibly keepe path 
dore,hinges,and thréa.fhold. — Se | a 
oe fem Le VIVES. 2 5 Ge a ee 
™ Loacina (4) Somé reade (ludcina’and fome Lauacing , bat (loatina is the beft : her Cloacine: 

\ frarue wasfound by 7atins(who raigned with Romudss,)in a great Privy or Takes of Rome ome 

and knowing sot whole it was, named it after the - Cloacina, of Cloaca, Lattant, Cipriak 

- 4, | calleg 


SAINT AVGVSTINE: Cap. 8. 


164 — 


calles it Chuacina,but it is fau'ty, Ithinke, There was Venws firnathed Cluacina , or the figh- 
Venus Clo- ter : for Cluo is to fight . Her ftatue ftood where the Romaines.and Sabines agreed , and ended 
aciaa, the fight for the women. Piin.lib.1 5. (6) Uolupia} She had a chappell at the Theater Namal 
Volois, Dear the gate Romannula Varro de Ling. Latlib. 3, Macrob.Saturn. The 12. Cal. of Janne 
olopia, is Angeronia's feaft kept by che Priefts in Volspia's chappell : Verrins Flaccus faith fhee was i 
Pasiec: called, for eafing the angers and-troubles of che minde. WMafierius faith her ftatue ftood on | 
MECN Yolupia's alter , with the mouth fealed vp , to fhew that by the pacient fuppreffing of griefe, is 
‘Libentina, Pleafure attained.(c) Libentina] Varro. 3.of Lébet,it ufteth, there was Venus Libentina,and 
Vaucanus, Venus Libitina , but Libithixeis another. (a) Vaticanus| Not Uagstarins as fome reade. Gell, 
lib.16. out of Varro, As ynder whome(faith hee) the childes firft cry is , which is va , the firkt- 
Cunina, fylable of Paticanus, whence Vagire alfo is derived ; and in old bookes 1t is Uatiganus not 
Uagitanus.(e) (nina) The cradle-keeper and wich-chafer. (f) Segeria] Or Segefta. Plix.Jib. 
Turmus, 18. for thofe gods were then beft knowne . Sesa to bee the goddefle of Sowing and Segetia of 
Teulina, the corne ; their ftatues were in the Theater. ‘g) 7utilsna] And Txtanus,hee and the,guarders 
; of all things. Now. Marcell , They were called vpon,in fuddaine charmes ; as Hercules was, 
_ surnamed Alexicacns,the euill-driuer. Varre. It was a finne toinuocate 7 xtiliva in an vufor- 
Proferpina. eunare thing. (4) Proferpina| Daughter to Ceres and Ione, rauifhed by Plato her vncle. (icere 
de nat.deor. lib. 2, Shee is Proferpiza,which the Greekes call Perfephone,and will haue herto 
be nothing but the feede ef harueft,which beeing hid in the earth,was fought by her mother. 
Varrewill haue her the moone,with Ennms and Epicharmns. (1) The knots] Piss lib.18. Some 
gtaine begins'‘to pur forth the eare at the third ioynt , and fome at the fourth , wheate hath 
q-ioynts,rie fix,barley eight:bur they that haue thofe, neuer bud the eare , vntill all the ioynts 
bee prowne out. Varr, de re ruff. lib. 1. The huske of theeare, ere it open is called vaginea,in 
the care,is the praine,and the eare is in the huske : the awne , or beard , is as a rough needle, 
Hofire, fticking forth from the eare,which ere it bee died is called AZutica, (k.) Becaufe Hoftire] Hor 
frire,is to fuppref[e,and fo gine back ,andhereof comes Hoftis. Non, ot tofrrike : Feffus,alfo to 
Flora, dee iuftice, to recompence, whereof comes redoftire , and heffimentum ; both vied by Plantus. 
Chioris. (2) Flera|Some take her for Acca Lawrentia,the Courtizan,fome for Mekbea,Niobes daugh- 
cer,called (bloris for changing her colour through feare of Apollo and Diana. Hence fhee 
‘was called Flora,ywhom with her fitter eAmicla, Niobe hauing preferued, and pleafed Latona, 
fhe bore Neffor vnto Neleus, Neptanes fonne, Homer, Odyff. 11. who faith that the other pe- 
tifhed with her brethren. Owid makes her wifeto Zepbirus , becaufe the is gaddeffe of lowe 
Lateurcia, ©tS-(m) White] Some reade Laéticina, There was alfo Lattans, the god that whitned the corne 
with milke, Serw. Geor.1.(#) Afatuta] Daughter to Cadmus , wite to Athamas; cafting her 
Maca, felte downe head-long from a rocke into the fea, fhee changed her name {from Jno,into Leuco-: 
 &be the white goddefie,called by the Latines, Afother Matuta,who fay fhe is Aurora,wherof 
Comes tempus matutinam,the morning time. Melecerta her fonne was alfo made a fea-gcd,and 
called Palemon. Onid, Lait. crc. her temple was in the tight region of Rome. (0) Runcina] 
Varro de ling at. Runcare isto pull up. Anerrsincus, the god that pulls away euills from men. 
Runcina. (p) Exery one] One man fufficech , when three gods cannot. (9) (ardea} (arna rather : fir 
called Carne, [anus lay with her,and then made her the sodeli of hinges. Shee rules in mans 
Cans. |  vitall partes,her feaftis in /wxes Calends. Onid. Faf? 5. Brutus hauirg expelled Tarquin , kept 
her feaft at the fore-faid time, with beanc-flowre,and bacon. Macrob. Satur, 


whether st wes Ioue,whom the Romaines held the chiefeft god, that was this protector 
ana enlarger of theiy Emptre, Cuar.g. oe 


erefore fetting afide this neft of inferior gods ( for a while ) let vs looke 

into the offices of the greater 3 and which of them brought Rome to fuch 

a preeminence ouer the other nations. This fame furely was owes worke . For, 
him they made the King ouer all their gods befides,as his {cepter,and his feate on 
the higheft («) partof all che Capitoll doe fufficiently teftifie. And of him,they 

- dhaucavery conuenient faying ( though it bee from a Poet) (6) Allis fucl — 


{ 


aa OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 65 


Asrd Vérre(c) is of opinion, tharthofe that worthip buc one God, and that with: 
out any ftatue,do meane this Yose,though they’call him by another name. Which 
being fo,why is he fo euill vfed at Rome,and by others alfo in other places,as to 
haue a ftacue made him? This euill vie fo difliked Varro,that although he wereo- 
ner-borne with the cuftomeof fo preata citty , yet hee doubted not both to af. 
firme,and record , that in making thofe ftatues,they both banifhed all feare,and 
brought in much error | _ 


L.VIVES. | 
Hitter art]On Tarpeins ?) Alis fall ofloue] Virgil out of Aratiss wasas de ive wee a Ot. 
and Lucane in his eight booke. | | 


P . et ey a: ght # ' . q 6 : : ition F 
EPG dei fedes ubiterrayybi Pontus, atry | Jeue Gs where earth, where aire, where fea and fhore 


Et Calan er virtus Siperos guid querbhns lira: Where heaven, and verwe,is, why, aske we mere, 


(c) Is of opinton| The Greckes call Lome, 2us,and aiec,both of Lining .becaufe he was heldto . 
giue all things life. Orphens in Cratere . Piete deriues them both of J\*dvror ti ,t0 lie by bite Tsp} 
felfe, In Cratylo, The Romaines called him Jone ,a Jswando of helping, The old Philofophers ‘ 

dall things , Jouve, And therefore the wife men !e4, 


calledthat fame Adens that Jntelleé char-created : 
worfhipped this,who otherwife held no tortall creature for any God, but onely that immor- 
tall,almighty Prince of natute , hauing diucrs names,one amongft the Greekes , another with 


er 


the Perfians,a third wich the Phenicians,a fourth in Egipt 8c. Plutarch. Saturnes {on of Crete 


‘was called Ziv, becaule he was the firlt of Seswrnes male children that liued. Laltantins. 


what opinion they followed, thas fet diners gods to rule in diners parts of 

a ce pheworlds Cithp to, | : — 
RY why had he /u#d added to him, both as his fifter and wife ? becaufe («) wee 
D place iupiter in the skie (fay they) and /#no in theaire ,and thefe two arecon- 
tiguall one immediately next abouethe other. Very well,chen all is not full of 
Joue as you faid but now, if Juno doe fillapart. Doth the one fill the other,/be- 
ing manand wife ) andare they difting in their feuerall elements ,and yet coh- 
Joyned inthem both? why then hath fone the skie affigned him and Jano a ayre? 
Againe, ifonely thefe two fufficed for all:, what fhould (6) Neptune dot with the 
‘{ea,and P/sto with the earth? Nay, and for feare df want of broods Neptune muft 
haue a(c) Salatia,and Pluto(d) a Proferpina for wiues to breedevpon. For as J#- 
no poffeffeth the heauens inmoft part the aire( fay they: ) fodoth Sa/aczethe 
inner parts ofthe fea and Proferpina the bowells of the earth. Alas good men, 
they would faine fticch vp their lies rate ae , and cannot finde which way. 
‘For ifthis werd rrue,the world fhould haue but three elements,(and not (e) 4.a$ 
their ancierit writers haue recorded) if euety coupleof gods fhould haue their 
element. But they themfelues haue there affirmed, that the/f)skie is one thihg 8 
the aire another . But the water,within and without is all but water , (there may 
bec fome diverfiry cothe dyet, but neuer any alceration of the effentiall forme:) 
and earth is earth ,how ener it bee feuerally qualified: Now the world beeing 
complete in thefe foure, where’s (¢) Ménerua’s fhare? fhee hatha fhare (4) inthe 
_ Capitol chough fhee bee not daughter to /owe and Juno both. Ifthe dwellin the 

 highett part of the skie, & that therefore the Poets faigned her tobe the birth of 


‘Joues owne braine,why is not fhe then miade the abfolurEimpreffe of heaven, fee- | 


ing } (he fitteth aboue Jowe? Becaufe it isnot meet to tiake the child Lordouer. 
the parent?why then was not that equity kept between Saturne & a 9 hao fe 


_Saturne was conquered? why then belike they fought/no ¥ gods forbid, fay theys¥- 


tee 
focale 


- - © 


166. 


SAINT AVGVSTINE..-- = Cueto, 


is but a poeticall fi@ion, a fable: well, thus you fee they will truft no fables , they 

do thinke. better of their gods then fo , but how chanceth it thenthat Setarne 
(feeing hee might not fit ee his. fonne Jove ) had not a feate equall wich him? 
Becaule.(#) Saturne (fay they )is nothing but the /engeh of seme , well then , they 
that worfhip Saturne , worthippe Time and Jone , the King of all the gods is faid 
to be borne of Time, and what wrong doe we to Joye and Juno in Bying they are 
borne of Time, feeing that by the Paganes owne confeffions they fignifie Heauen 
and Earth, both which were created in time,for this the greareft {chollers and‘) 
wifeft of them all commend to our memory ,nor did Vergzil {peake out of fiion, 
but out of Philofophy,when he faid. | 


Tum pater ommipatens fecundis tmbribus Aether | Almighty Aether in a fatning thower. 
Coniug’sin grcmium laiae defcendit.—-= Dropt in the lappe of his glad fpoufe-- 


That was,che Earth.In which they make a difference alfo,for herein(/)Terra,and 


fonoand Tellus and Telsmon are al feueral things, they fay,And all chefethey haue as gods, 


Terrathe 
earch al one 


diftin& in name,office,and ceremoniall rites. Terra (m) is alfo called the mother 


Var, de ling. of the Gods befides , that the poets may now faigne with farre more toleration, 


lat, 


Saturnes 
Sonne, 


Salacia, 


 feeing that their very bookes of religion affirme,that/aso is not only wife and fi- 
fter bur()mother alfo vnto Jove. The fame Earth they file both(o)Ceres,8c Vefta, 
yet(p)Vestathey fay moft commonly is the fre,and guardeth that which the citty 
cannot want ? And thereforethe Virgins kept it , becaufe fire,and Virginity do 
never bring forth anything. All which vanity, it was fichee onely fhould abo- 
lith that was borne of a Virgin. Bue whocan endure to hearethem afcribe fo 
much honor and chaftity to the fire,and yet not fhame to call(q)/efta Venus,that 
her. Virgins might haue the leffe care of the honor of virginity for if Venus were | 
Vefta(r how fhould the Virgins do her good feruice in abitayning from venerya 
or( /)are there two Venuffes,the one aVirgin,the other a wanton?or three rather, 
one of the virgins(Veffa)one of the wiues,& one of the whores,to fuch an one as 
this laft is,the(t)Phenscans colecrated the proftitution of their daughters, before 
that they maried them:now which of thefe,is #/caxs wifepnot the Virgin, fhene- 
ver had husband, nor the whore,oh no, not(v)/upes fonne,& (x) Minersas f orger, 
be wronged. Well chen,it was Venus the wife: yet we would haue her to ftand as 
a patterne to bee imitated for her trickes that fhee playd with Afars, ohnow 
(fay they) yourunne tothe fables againe, why what reafonis there that you 
{hould grecue to here thofe things at our tonges and yet explaud them oa 
your owne ftages ewhy doth ic vexe you that we fhould fay(a thing veterly incre- 
\dible but that itis fo fully proued)chat thofe foule and open crimes of their gods 
infticuted and celebrated in their pnblike honors ,and by their own. commaunds. 


L. VIVES. . 


Ecaufe (a) we place. |(ir.rde nat, deor, TheSkie as Ennins,Ewripides , the South-fayers 
LJand the whole world-affirme, is Jone : the Ayre, becrweene that and the: Sea, (as the 
Stoicks hold )is Jao fifter and wife to Jone .by reafon of the ayres likeneffe , and neareneffe ro 
Heauen,now they made theayre.a woman,hecaufe ig is the fofteft chingthat(b)is. Neptune |Sa- 
turnes three fonnes fhared the world-Jowe had Heauen, Neptune che Sea : Pluto the. Earth. Juno 
martied Joue , and was made Lady of the Ayre, this fable arofe from thence, becaufe that in 
che deuiding of the fathers kingdome, Toue got the Eafi, refembling Heauen , ( wherein alfo 
mount Olimpus {tood, whofe likelyhood of name added to the fiction. ) Neptune had the - 
nauy : Dis or Pheto the weft part of the realme fained to bec hell : Saturne was faid to bee 
banifled into Hel becaufe he fled from the Eaft,into /rady,lying in-the Welt:(c )Salacia of Sa- 
: | bum 


- : , ee : ; . 


Lin4. OFTHE CITIE OF.GOD. i67 


lam the fats fome varrothe water old of(f aith fe/?. was called Salacia,a falum cienda,of moving 
the froth fo the Poet Pacwsins vfeth it. Neptane was a cunning feaman,and made Adrnirall by 
Tone,for whien potterity deified him, (4) Proferpina. Of hir, before. Hir mother finding her in 


Hell, begged and obrayned of Joxe that fhe might be halfe the yeare with her on earth and 


halfea yeare with Plato. Shee had hername ef proferpendo,becaufe fhe crept fome while this 
way and fome while that, being all one with the AZcone and the earth. Varro :you may read 
of her rape almoft euery where,(e) foure Firlt fre,then ayre,then water and laltly earth.( f skie} 
Heauen it felfe and the vpper region ofthe aire,they called Ether or the fhie _ the lower parts, 
ayre onely, though the Poets confound them.(g) Minerva daughter of one and Themis, faith 
Ewhemerus,Hiff.facr. There were flue Mineruas,but the Poets confound them all, T#ll.de nat 
deor, One was borne (they fay)of Joves braine and is the Goddeffe of all wifdome,and there- 
fore was held fo borne anda Virgine:and her throne was counted the higheft in heauen, Mars 
tian, Nupt :b.6, j 

Paflas,thou armed Virgin,wifdomes wonder, 

Fate judging faire,fount of Aethereall light: 

Worlds yvnderitanding,and arbritreile ot thundes, 

2 Artsardor,{pting wherein man cleares his fight, 
Difcretions arch, which reafon raigneth vniery 

Ejjence,in gods,anj men,{ui mounting brights 

Vira terga means rapsdi ac (plendentis Olyn:pt, Towning beyond the Sphcares, and all in fire, 

Celfior una ione flanmantss ctrculus etbre. Thron’d.aboue Ioue,far brightcr,and far higher. 


(b)in the capitol | Now Lone almighty ( faith Ts/)chat ruleft all,and then Jxzo his fellow,and 

thou Pallas (Uinerua, and all you gods that inhabite the capitoll 8c. Pro equit in exil. Tar- 

guinus Prifcus in the Sabine warre vow d a temple to Joue,Juno,and (Minerua,and playned the 

top of (Mount Tarpeins to make a place for it to ftand in , but was flaine ere hee fad laid the 

foundation, fo it was renewed and finifhed by Tarquin the proud,and called the capitoll becaufe 

ofamans head that was found in digging the foundation. Before this , there wasa temple to 

Tone,Inno,and Adinerna,on Floras cliffe, Diodor.Sicul.(})Becanfe. \Saturne was fonne to ( elsS garuine. 

and Terra,a moft vngratious flellow , but quitted by his Sonne Jone, who expelled him, as he 

had expelled his father,and fo made the prouerbe true. Do as as you wonld be done unto. Hete- 

after he was called the godoftime. Hefiod, Euhem, Dod, Cicero. Saturne, ishe(they fay that 

diuides and diftinguifhes the times : and therefore the Greekes call him rgévos , which is, xplvef. 

fpace of time, Hee was called Saturnus , quai Satur annis, full of yeares , and was fayg~ 

ned by the Poets to deuour his children , becaufe time deuoures all things. He was imprifo- 

ned by Jowe,that is limited by the ftarres from running too wild a courfe.( b \their wifeft \Uarre 

de ling lat lib. 3. calles Ixnoboth Terra and Tellus. Flstarch inteipreteth Lune the earth,and 

the nuptial coniunttion of man and wife.Enjeb,de prep. Exang Seruias faith that Jone is put for the Terra 

sky,and the ayre ; Juno for earth and water Oo Tellus, 
(1) SHerein Terra | Terra,is the earth it felfe Tellus, a diminutiue,the goddeffe of the earth, 

though the Poets confound them,yct they alwaies faid Tellus her temple and not Terra’s.Pluto 

alfo and Proferp , were called Tellsmo, and Telus, alfo Altor , and Runfor were both his names, 

and hee had charge of all earths bufineffe : fo that fome fay hee was (eres Sonne Dioder, 

16.6. Porpheryus calles one part of the earth , Vizy the fat and fertile , Ceres , and the craggy, 

hilly and ftony,Ops,or Rhea.Ewfeb. de prep Evang , where he faith much of thefe things. 40.3. 

(m) is alfo| namely Rhea. (2) Mother ] for as fhe was Juno fhe was his wife and fifter ; and as 

fhe was Ops his mother.(o) Ceres |the earth is called Ceres ,a Gerendo, of bearing corne,ot of 

Cereo to create V arrnTully.out of Chrifppus, for the earth is mother to all.Pluto in (ratyl. She 

was daughter ynto Saturne and Ops,Sifter to Veffa and./no,all thefe filters and mothers they. 

fay is but onely earth.Onsd.Fa/t.6, | | 


Vefia cadem eff,c> terra(ubelt,fubit ignis vtrique, Vefta is earth,and fire : earth yndergoeth, 


Virgo armata decens rerum (apicatia Pallisy 
Aetherius fomesymcnse folertia futt, 

Incenium mundi,prudentsa facra tonantis, 
Ardor dottificus,no(tr eg, induftria fortis. 

Que facis arbirinm [aprentis preuta cure, 
Acrations apex dinumg bom numque facer vise 


Significas fodem terra focn{g, (uam, The name, aud fo doth fire 3 V2ita’s both. 
; +» Anda lictle after. 
Stat us tesva fied,vi landeVcfta vocaturt * Earth ftands alone,and therefore Vefta hight, Vefta, 


To this doth Orphens and Plato both affent (p) yet Vefta] (ic. de nat deor. for Vefta is deriued 
from 


alee 


a a a a RT Re aa a ar 
168 \ SAINT AVGVSTINE. Caap.to 


from the Greekes being called with them He/fia ; her power is ouer fires and altars, de hegib.2° . 
Vefta ts as the citties fure,in Greeke, which word we ufe almoft unchanged.Onid Faft.6. 


Nec tn alind Veflam quam vinam intellige flammam, Thinke Velta is the fire that burneth full, 
. Nataquc de flamma corpora nulla vides, That nere brow, ht creature forth,ncr ever will, 


And being afire,and calleda Virgin , therefore did vitgins attend it , and all virginicy was fa- 
cred vnto it,firft for the congruence of fociety and then of nature which was alike in both:this 
cuftome arole in e£gepr , and {pred farre , through the Greekes , and the Barbarian countries. 
Diodor. kt was kept fo at Athens, and at Delphos , Plutar. Strabo , Veftas Sacrifices and rites 
came from /hum to Latium , and {oto Rome by Romulus his meanes,and therfore Vergik calles 


her often times,the Phrigtan vefta. 


Ste ait ct manibus vittas,ucflamaue porenten, | This faid,he bringeth forth eternall Fire, 
Aeternumauc adytis effirt penctraliousignem, . § Almighty Vzfta,and her pure attire: 


Speaking of Panthus the Trey. Prieft. There was then for eucty Curia ,aVajfta , Dionsf, 

but Numa built the temple of the firft publike Veffa , In the yeare of the citty,X L.as Onid ace 

compteth.(9)Veffa Venss Jnaturally, for the naturalifts call che vpper heailphere of the earth 

Venus and Vefta alfosthe nether, Proferpina , Plotinns calleth the earths vertue , arifing from 

the influence of Venus , Vefta, Befides,Ve/f2 being the worlds fire, and the fatnefle comming 

from Venns, thete 18 litcle difference, in refpet of the benefit of che yniuerfe; fo that Ve/fa was 

euery where worfhipped , not as barren,but as fruitfull and augmentatiue, making the citties 

and nations happy in eternall and continuall increafe. (r.) How (boxld.| The punifhment ofan 

‘Trio vnchaft Veftall was great : but after thirty yeares, they might leaue the profeffion and 
Venufles, marry, | | 

(3 )is there twolfo faith Plato In Conniuio. Héanenly, procuring excellence of conditions,earth/p, 

ptouoking vnto luft ; the firft, daughter to (elws, the later to Jone and Dione, much vomiger 

~ then the firft. There was alfoa Uenus that ftitred vp thaft thoughts. And therefore when 

the Komaine women ranne almoft mad with luft , they confecrated a {tatue af Venus verticore 

The Cipri- dia , out of the Sibills bookes, which might turne the héatts from that foule heate vnto ho- 

, of virgines nefty. Valer.isb.8.Onid Faft,a.(t) Phenicsans | This /s/fix reporteth of the Cipprians,Jib.18. Lt 

aon’ was their cuftom( faith he) at certen fet daies to bring their daughters to the fea fhore ere they were 

married ; and thereto proftitute them for getting of their dowries,offring to Venus, for thewilling 

loffe of their chaftsties. I thinke this was Venus herlaw left vnio the Ciprians whome thee 

taught firft to play the mercenary whores. Laftant. The Armenians had fuch anther cuftome 

Strabo,and the Babilonians being poore,did fo,with their daughters for gaine. The Phenicians 

hortiored Vensss much for Adonis his fake who was their countryman, they kept her feafts 

with teares, and prefented her sisters Ut him, AZacrob. She had aStatue on Mowat Libae 

nus; whichleaned the head vpon the hand and was ofa very fad afpect: fo that one would. 

have thought that true teares had fallen fromhir eyes. Thacthe deuills brought man-kind. 

to this,wilbe more apparant (faith Exfebias ) if you confider brit the adulteries of the Phanici- 

dvs,at this day ini Heliopolis and elfewhere they offer thofe filthy actes as firft fruits vnto their 

gods,Ex{eb. de. preparat. Exang:which I] haue fet downe that men might fee what his opinion 

was heteof,though my copy of this worke of his be exceeding falfly tranfcribed. This cuftome 

of proftitution, the Augilares of Africke did alfo vfe,chat maried in the night.Herodot. Solin, 

Mela, oo | | | 

Mars. The Sica alfo ( of the farne country’) practifed the fame inthe Temple of Uenns the maa 

tren,Ualer. The Lotrians being to fight, vowed if they conquered,to profticute all their daugh-_ 

ters at Venus fealt. (uv) Innos Sonne.| Itmay bee Mars that lay with Venus , and begot 

Yolen; Harmonias ,( for hee was Jxnos fonne , borne ( they faigned )without a father , becaufe they 

rs knew not who was his father ) It may, be A@ars,by that which followes, cooperarius Minerne, 

for both are gods of warre: but, It is rather ment of Vadean, fonne to Jone and Juno, (though 

vfually called Jwzos fonne and 4pator) who was a Smith in Lemaos, and husband vnto Venus 

that lay with AZars. So it were Vadcans wtong.to call her whore, for to be a cuckold isa dif- 

gracefullthing. (x) Admmerna’s forger |.Or fellow workers , for they both hane charge a — 


L 13.4. . OF THE CITIE OF GOD. — 169 
thunder, and fomtimes through his bolts, Virgil 


Ipfa louis rapidum iacnlata ¢ nubibus igner, 
Quite through the cloud thee threw Jewes thundring fire, 


Which there are but three may do(faith Sernius )Iupiter, Bdinerua and Uulcan , though Pliny 
‘bee of another mind, De dé(csplin, Etrufc. & Rom (lib. 2.) Miweraa looketh vnto Joues eg, 
which was indeed his apparrell; made by AZinerna’s wifdome and Vulcans labour:And though 
Ienes bonnet be fire,yet Pallas made it. Afart. Nupt. Or is Vulcan her fellow forecr , becaute 
he begat Apollo on hir,that hath the tuition of Arhens 2? Cic. de nat. (lib. 3.)Buc Axgu/tives 
minde I thinke rather is this , that Uslean is Minerua’s fellow forger. Becaule fhe is called the - 
goddeffe of all arts,euen the mechanicall :and he is godde of the Inftruments vied in a'l hefe 
mechanicall artes. Fire is the inftrument of all artes ( faith P/etarch) ifone knew how to vie 
it. De vtilit, ssimic. Befides Vulcan is faid to gouerne artes him-felfe. The warlike artes (faith — 
Exfebsus ) were Minersa’'s charge, the pyrotecknical,or fuch as worke in fire, Vulcans - Theo- 
doret faith that the Greekes vied the word Vulcan for artes , becaufe few artes can be pradtifed 
without fire, Pharnutus faith that all arts are vnder Afinerna and Vulcan , becaufe thee is the 
Theory,and he the Inftrument of practife. And therefore Homer faith of a worke-man thus: 
oy nedises Petasy ugl wands & Oly Whowe Vulcan taught and Minera. a 


Of the multitude of Goddes which the Pagan Doctors 
anonch to bee but one and the fame lupiter 

7 a. Cap. It. 
WH erefore let them flourifh with their phyficks as long as they like. Lette 

Jupiter be one while the (4) foule of this terrene world , filling the whole fa- 
brike of the foure Elements,more,or leffe,as they pleafe; and another while but a 
quarter-rulerwith his bretheren and fifters: lette hit be the skie now, imbracin 
Juno which is the aire Vnder him,and let him by and by be skyeand aire both, fil- 
ling the lappe of the earth,his wife and mother with fertile fhowers and {eedes; 
(6) This is no abfurdity in their Diuinity ; And (to omit the ai tedious ca- 
talogue of his remooues and ftrange tranfmutations ) lette him forch-wich 
bee i one , and that onely God , of whonze the famous Poet was thought 
to fay: : 3 
Denmq a sre per omnes, 

Terrafq, trattufg, 4 profusdum. 
——_——————  (¢ ) For God his fpirit imparts, 
| To thearths,the feas,and heauens profoundeft parts, 

(d\Lethim be Jupiter in the sky,/uno in the Aire, Neptuse in the Sea,Salecia in the 
feas depth, P/uto in the earth,Proferpinain the earths loweft part,Veffa in § houfe- 
holds fire, Vudcan in the Smiths fhop,So/, Lan. and the ftars in the {phears,(e) .4- 
pollo in diuination (f) Adercery in trafficke , in(g) Jemus (hb) the Saree »in the 
Bounds Terminus,intime Saturne, in war,Mars and (#) Bellona,in the vineyards, 
Bacchus,in the Corne,Ceres,in the Woods, (k) Diana, in mens wits , Mincrus,\et 
him rule the (/) feedofman as Liber,and of women,as Libera , as hee is father of 
the day,let him be (7) Die/péter as ruler of the monthly difeafe of women, lette 
him be the goddefle Zena: and (2) Lucina that helpes in their child-birth. And 
helping the fruits which increafe,let him takethe name of Ops. Let him bee ( o ) 
Vat scanus chat opens the childes mouth firft,to cry,and Lesaza,that takes vp from 
the mother : and Cunisa , that guards the Cradle. Let none but him das the 
deftinies of the new-borne childe , andbe called (p) Carmentes , lette him {wa 
chance,and bec {tiled Fortunc,or womens dugges , and bee called (q) Rumns; 
_ a | Q_ ”” -becaute 


=". lu aE et a. 


170 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. | C war. rr 


(becaufe the ancients called a dugge Ruma ) lettehim bee(r) Petinaand fuckle 
che hog-babes:or Educaand feed them : Or Pasentia , for frighting them, or (#) 


 Wenilia for fodaine hope: Volapéa for pleafure , Agenoria tor action , Stimulsfor 


ee 


prouacation , Strenss for confirming mans courage , Nwmeria for teaching chil- 
dren to tell twenty (# ) and Camena for finging. Nay lette vs make him 
(x ) Confusfor his counfaile,/y) Sentis for his fententious infpirations, (=) Js- 
wentas for the guiding of our (4 )egreffe from youth,ro fuller age. For our chins 
fake ( which if he louevs,he clothes in haire)let him be(6) Fortus Barbata: Nay 
free, becaufe he is a male-Godde , lette him cither bee Berbatus, as Nodotusis,or 
becaufe hee hath abeard ,lette him not bee Fortune , but Fortunius. Well, on, 
lette him bee dugetine; to looke tothe Hills , andat the loofing ofa virgins nup- 
tiall guirdle lecte him bee inuoked by the name of Varginenjis : lette him bee 
(c) Mutinas:which amongft the Greekes was fe » but that (it may bee ) hee 
will bee afhamed off. Lette /upster alone bee all thefe that I haue reckoned, and 
that I haue not reckoned(for I haue though fit co omit a great many, Jor as thofe 
hold, which make him the foule of the world (many of whome are learned men) 
et all thefe bee bur as parts and vertues of him:Ifit be fo ,as I doenot yet inquire 
how it is, what fhould they loofe if a tooke a fhorter courfe,and adore but one 
God?what one thing belonging vnto his power were difpifed, ifhim-felfe intire- 
ly were duly worfhippedelf they feare that fome of his parts would be angry for 
being negle&ted,why then it is not as they fay, thar al this is but as the life ofone 
foule,containing all thofe gods as the parts,powers,vertues and faculties therof 
but cuery part hath a life,really and diftinGtly feperate from the other:This mutt 
needs be truc,if one of them may be offended,and another bee pleafed , and both 
with oneact.And to fay that whole Jove would be offended, ifal his parts were not 
feuerally worfhipped, this were foolifh?for ther were not one of them left out, if 
the per{6 were adored in whom they ar al ioincly included.For to permic the reft, 
(being ioumerable)wheras they fay that the ftars areal & euery one real parts of 
Joue,and live, haue reafonable foules,and therfore areabfolute godssthey fay they 
know not what,and fee not how many of them they leaue without Altars 8 with- 
out worthip, both which not-withftanding they haue exhibited them-felues and 
commanded others to exhibit vntoacertaine {mal number of them: Wherfore if 
they doubt the anger of che reft,why are not they affraid to line in the difpleafure 
of the moft patt of heauen,bauing giué content but vnto fo few?Now ifthey wor- 
fhipped al § ftars inclufiuely in Jupsters particular perfon,they might fatisfie them 
all 4 this meanes in the adoration of him alone:for fo,none of them would think 
much, fecing they all were worthipped in him:nor fhould any have caufe to think 
they were contemned ¢ VVhereas otherwife the greater part may conceiue 
iuft anger for beeing thus omitted by thofe that giue all the honor vito 2 
very few: And their anger may wel bee the greater in that they fhine aboue 
i ia ,» and behold filthy Prstpas ftand naked below , in great refpe& 
and credit. | | 
ee ee 


_L.VIVES. 


T He foule (a) of this |The opinion of Theles,and Demecrstus. The Stoicks held with Plate, 
that God was a fpirit,but chat hee vfed not the World as a body, That the World wasa 
GOD, and hadde a foule , and an ineelleét, bue that ic was not the fore-faid GOD. 
The olde writers,(as Tu/y and Pliny following Homer ) thought that rhe Sun was the fole = 

the 


Ling, | OF THE CITIE OF GOD © | I7t 
the world. Phursutus faith the world hath afoule called Japster , that rules ie euen as ourlupiter, 
foule doth vs. (6) This is no | Earth (faith Hefod) bore Calas and then lay-with him , and bore 
him eleuen children wherof Saturne was one.-(¢) For God } Mott of the old writers held God 
to be a power-diffsfed through the vniuerfe. (4) Let bixs | The wifeft Gentiles held chat there 
was but one God, ditrerfly filed, by his diuers:qualities. erif?. de mundo. Plut.deplacit,Phie 
bof. Adacrebius puttes the fon for al the goddes. Saturnal, (e):eApolle | Ho Iding him to bee the Apollo, 
worldes eye,they might eafily thinke he could fee al shinges.path prefent and future, So was 
he fought vnto,far and neare,but gauc anfwers efpecially at Delphos, Diodor, Which Oracle 
had this originall: There was a deep and obfcure caue ,there where the fhrine in De/phos was 
firft:where-vnto aGoate comming by chance to feed ,was infpired with an extraordinary {pi- ty ae 
rit,and began to leape and dance beyond meafure. Which the fheap-heard wondring at,and sie ae 
comming tothe mouth of the Caue , hee grew rapt him-felfe , and began to prophecy.. And Oracle, 
otbers vpon tryal,did fo alforwhere-upon it grew to that paffe that fuch as would know thin gs 
to cotne, would but bring one to leane his head into the Caue and he fhonld anfwer thein the 
truth toall that they would aske: Which afterwards they finding to bee dangerous/for it had 
beene the death of diuers)they buile a Temple there vnto e4polle,and ordained a Virgin to re« 
ceiue the infpiration,vpon a frame a good height from the Caue, and fo to giue an{wers to the 
inquirers,which frame they named a Tripos,of three feet, hauing the fame fhape that the bra- The Tri 
_ zen Tripodes had afterwards, This Virgin Prieft was called the Pythéa,at firft a Virgin,like Di- pos. 
anes Prieft, Afterward Echechratus lying with $ Pythia,they ordained that the Prieft fhould be The Py- 
vnder 50. yeates of age:medling no more with Virgins at any hand:only fhe went virgin-like, “™* 
to keepe forme memory of the ancient cuftome. Diodor. (f) Mercury | Accounted the God of Mercury. 
— eloquence,of bargaines and contracts, becaufe words doe al thefe. The Marchants feaft was in 
the Ides of Afaie,that day that (Mercuries Temple was dedicated : The Greekes called him 
edyoesics that is a Market-man , and he had a ftatue in the market-place:P/antus defcribeth his 
_ office in his Amphitruo:whereof here-after. (¢) Js anus | being the eldeft god of all,heeruled — 
the beginning of things. He was indeed King of Latiwm in Saturnes time. Some (as Onid.and 
Feftus) took him for the the old Chaos , and that his name Janne was thence deriued, Others 
ab exndo,of going. (ic. de Nat. de, wherof comes Lanna gates.Cornificins faith that Tw/y called fanuse 
him Eanus,and not Janus, The hill Lanicu/us bare his name , fome fay becaufe hee was buried 
there,others becaufe they went Guer it into Hetruria, Hee had two faces, as the lord of begin- Ianiculus.: 
nings andendes, of him read Oxids Fafforum,and Macrobias. (b) Porter |To look to the gate, 
_ for which Janus is put in the text. (4) Bellona | Of Bellum warre ,and Daellona alfo. Shee was 
thoughtto bee Paillas,becaufe Pallas ruled warre alfo. The Greekes called him Ennno,Hefichzhir 
face was full of terror and contention. Homer calls hir s]eaéavg6es3 as he doth AZars, and the 
Poets fained hir to bee AZars his mother ,and therfore calls him any, Shee was called En. 
nno, quafi aitoa bouor,&c, Of putting [pirit and fury into thofe that were to fight, ox of being fue 
rious bir felfe. Hir Temple ftood in the ninth region , and before it a pillar, from which the 
fic ne of war was cuer giuen,by putting forth a fpeare. Onid. (k_) Diana | The Moone had ma- 
ny names:Ewcina,Proferpina Hecate and Dsana.She was fained to be a virgin, giuen all to hunt 
much in the Woodes,and fhooting, Wher-vpon e£xeas meeting his mother in the Woodes 
thought ithadde-been Diana, eEneid. 1. Lhaue read thefe two verfes ofthe Moone , but I 


know not where, | 


\ 


Terret,Lufirat,a it,Proferpina,Luna Diana, Diana, Luna Proferyinedoth ftrike,ceth {pread,doth fighe, 
 jmay, Healers (eeptro,fulgore,fagita, The beafts,che Deities and divels with (cepter, thafts & light, 


| They are none of the profictt : Predentinein his third booke againft Symmachus , hath thefe 


VCrieS 


Terg,fuaseademvariare fignras, | ———=Threetimes fhe tures hir fhape, 
Denigque dum Luna ef , fubluptri (plendet Amitin, She is the Moon,when bright her fpheare doth thewes 
Cum (uccinéta tacit calzmos, Latonia virge eft. Laton as daughter when fhe hunts below 
Cum Subnixafedet folio Plutonia coninx But thronde in hell, thees’ Plutocs wife,and avves 
Jmperitat fur ys & diflat iura Mepeiz, j The furies, pining fterne Megera lawes, 


- (1) Seed of \ Liber and Libera were Ceres children , faith Tully de nat. deor, (lib. 2.) Mae 
ny think they ateSo/ and Lua ,who haue power ouer generation. Liber ofthemenandther - 
: . Q3 fore 


172 , SAINT AVGVSTINE. . °. Crar.t2: 


a er NOOO 
Diefpiter. fore the Satyres were {aid to. accompany him,and ‘Pyrapus was worshipped inhis Temple : Lie 
Eucina, Sere for the women. (ws) Die(piter | Quafe Dios Pater,or the father of the day. Varro, (a) Luci- 
na. | This was Lana, Dianaor Inno, Cicero. [uno Lucina helpe me, cryes Glycerinms in Terences 
Opigena, Andria. Shee was alfo called Opigena , of hir helpein the womens trauels,and worfhipped at 
. Rome of the Matrens. Fafius. Tymans faith that the night thar Alexander the great was 
‘borne, Diana's Temple at Ephefse was burned , becaufe fhe would not be abfent from Olympi- 

as his mother in her labour,and fo was far from hir Temple when it wds fired, The Romasnes 

Alythia, §=— worfhipped //yrhia-alfo for this end, who wasa fate or fayry (faith Pax{aniac and came from 
_ the North to Delos to helpe Latona in hir trauellzand was placed at Acheus amonglt her Geni- 
tullides the gods that looked vnto natiuities: They vfed to.place kneeling Images before them, 

becaufe Naxplins his daughter was born in that manner. Such alfo were thethree Nexida in 
the Capitol before Afizeraa's fhtine , where-vnto the Matrons offered , asthe protectors of 
Childe-birth. A, Artill. Glabriobrought them from the conqueft of Astiochns. They were 
Casmentes, kneeling ftatues, (0) VaticAnus | Of him before.(p )Carmentes|Called firtt Nicofrate, daughter 
to Jonis the King of Arcadia, who had Exznder by Mercury, and had the fpirit of prophecy: 

she was called in Greeke The/piodon,in Latine,( 2remente:. Dionyf, Ofhir Onid faith 


Ipfa Mone,que nomen babes de caimine diftum, \ Andthouthat fom the verfe deriues thy name, And againe 


Que fimul ethereos anime conccp:rat igues: And being filled with zthenall fyre, 
Ore dabét plene carmina veraNei, — * She fpake,as Phebus did hér breaft infpire. 


PortScclee 2 here was the gate Carmentall in Rome,called afterwards Sc¢lerata, and neare to it an Altar in 
tata. the Capitoll, where fhee was placed, There were alfo the Carmene which told the deftinies of 
new borne children, whence Nicoffrata had hir name. Varro, They werealfo called Cafmene, 
and Camane without S, and they that honoured them were called Prophets, of their — 
cies. There was alfo Fansxs and Fauna ,brother and fifter, he-mens fortune-teller, and the-wo= 
Rumina. mens. (7) Rumina |goddefle of dugs. Péin, Fest. There was the fig-tree Rewméxall , where the 
the-wolfe gaue Romulus and Remus. fucke, They offered milke and {princkled the facrifices 
with milke that were offered to this goddeffe. (r) Potina}Or Potica, Donat. ix Terentii Pher- 
ie wsio, The children were confecrated to Educa,Potica, and (xba,goddefles of meate,drinke,and 
e Vs £7; ° : ‘ oA . 
sai | : Nec Deus hunc Menfa,dea nec dignata cubilicft, 
Nor would the god giue meat,nor goddeffe fleepe, 


()) Educa Not Edslica. (t) Vienilia | Twrnus his mother., fifterto Latins his wife eSmata. 
Venilin = enilia of Ventus, winde, ot of Vento tocome Varro. (4) Gumais) (mane werethe Mufes, of 
Cane, to fing. Serw,or Camenc , of (afta mens ,achaft minde faith Feffus. Their Temple 
wasat Port Capena in the firit ward or region of the cifty. 'Camanain Latine, is AZufa in 
ua Grecke. They ruled humanity,and learning as wel as fong: (ic. Tx/. quaf?. 1.) They were cal- 
The Mufess 4 Maufes of inquiringdme 7 ved, and of Phylofophy. (x) (onfus This was Hippopofeidon. Lin, 

| Dion. Plat. The Arcadans built hima Temple before Romulus and Reneus, calling him $ god 
of Counfels. Wherfore his Altar neucr came out of the earth where it lay hidde , but only at his 

feaft. He directed Rowsulus in the rape of the Sabines: the Greekes fay he ftrucke the earth with 

his mafe,and it brought forth the firtt horfe,and thence hath he his naine, True itis that he firft 

tamed horfes in thofe parts,add made them fit for mans vfe. ( y) Sentia | Or Senta,or Fausa , ot 

Fatua fifter and wife to Faanus daughter to Picas. So called 4 Fando,becaufe fhee helped chil- 

dren to fpeake: Sexta,becaule we fpeake our thoughts: But this is but coniecturall: we lcauc ic 

with the reft, (x )Jusantas | Of hit hereafter. Se ay Sele ee youth |The text is, Poff pretextams, 

Thepres Prétexta was a velture of dignity anid magiftracy brought from Hetrariato Rome: not worne 
bleed by boies yntill Tarquinius Prifexs his fon had the wearing of that,and the golden Boffe,for be- 
ing valorous in the wars:from that time all free children wore it:mary the Boffe was only theirs, 

whofe fathers had bin Head-Officers,Curules. Macrob, At fourteene yeares they laid it by and 

took $ mans gowne,T oga virilis, 8 the Senators fons, the Latus clanus, which fome fay Angus 

tus firftput onat yage: the Latus ( lawns was a purple coat , but not a gown.(6) Fortuna are 

bata|The men of old offered ¥ firlt (hauings of their chins vnto Apollo:as Thefens did for one, 

* going to Delos, Plutarch (c) Muatinus [Some ad Txtines,but it hath bin the fale of fom copier of 

tswhate O14. 8z fo he hath paffed vn-obferued,1 do not think ic was Axzu/tins-for in his 6, book,he vfech 
sedis a Priapus for both thefe : Lathantins readeth it well, A4utinus , though fome of his aig th 
is See 7% aue 


Lieg. - OF T HE. CITIE OF GOD. 


turezand co liue one life,as a man liueth, — | 


Of their opinion that heldGod to bee the foule. , See 
.  * andthe werld to bee the bodie. ot te ee 
4 eS ‘ Crap. | \ é Pe Bt 
VV Hat of this?Ought not this tomoue the fharpeft witres, nay all in génerall3 
For indeed there is no-great fharpnefle of wit requiréd tothe laying afide of 

all wrangling,and to attend but whether God be the worlds fonleorno and whe- 
ther the world his body-or no , both making one creature,whether he benatures 
(a) tore-houfe containing all things in him-felfe?whether that out cfhis¢)foule, 
that animateth al this whole maffe, the lives and beings of all living creatures be 
taken or no, each one according to their natures?and whether that there beeno- 
thing on earth which is not part of God ? If his weretrue, marke but the irre- 
ligious confequence hereof: A man, ific were {fo , fhould not tread , but ftill hee 
treades part of God vnder his feetesand in every creature that he killed,hefhould 
killa partof the Deitie.l willnot relate what others may thinke vpon. I cannot 
fpeake it without exceeding fhame. 2 | 


L. VIVES. 


K. 7 Atures Store-honfe| Lucan, Placido natura receptat. (untla fnw,( b) Soule] A Pythagori- | 


AN call fentence which Virgil/ exprefleth. 
Principio celum & terras campo4, liquentes, 
Lucentemg, globum lume ,Titamaque aftra, 
Spiritus mius alit, totamdinfufa per attus, 
Mens agitat molem,@ magnofe corpore mifcet. 


And likewife in his Georgikes , lib. 4. 


Heauen , Earth ris i — in zy proper bound, © - 
The meones bright globe, and all the fpangled round 

A [pirit within doth feed, doth mouc,and peftee iis : 
Through cucry parcel of this fpacious, mafle 


His quidam fignis at, hec excmpla fecute, Thefe fignes made fome affirme that inaBee, | 
Effe apibus partem dinine mentis e& hanftus Was part of that celettiall Deity © PU 5 
Ethereos dixére:Deum nam, ive per omues For Gods diftufed effence doth appeare, 


Terra(g, tratta(q, mar is,Caluma, profundun. | Regent, in earth,aize,fca,and cuery {phere, 

Hine pecudcs,armenta,viros, genus omne ferar, } Towhich for life,beafls,birds,ard men do runne, 

Duem que fbi tenucs nafcentem arcfcere vitas, { andwhen their flender vitall threedes are fpunne, | 
Seilicet buctedals deinde e-velistavifeir!. To this they all rerurne,death hath no right, : 
Omnicsnec morti effelocumfed viva volare To ought of this,but to the ftarry height | 
Sider is in numcrumyatg, alto fuccedere caley rcs , They towre,and there fic rancke in heauens high frame,&c. 


(c) eA ccording to) Scme more fome leffe,and fome leffer:The nearer him,the more,the farthet 
the Icffe. This is the opinion of many,and amongft others of eAristotle de mundo, 


Of fuchas hold that the reafonable creatures onely 
are parts of the diuine e(fence. 
Cuarp 13,0 _ | 

] E they fay indeed, tliatall things in the whole world do not participate effence 

with God, but yet all reafonable creatures doe truly, I cannot fee how that can 
fland. Thenall the worldis not God ; for otherwife how can they keepe bruce 
beaftes from beeing part ofhim? But what needes all this? Lette vs go but vn- 
to this reafonable creature,man;can there be a more damnable abfurdity , then to 
beleeue that part of Gods effence is beaten, when an offending childis beaten? To 
make the fubfiftence of almighty God,be fo la{ciuious,vniuft,wicked and damna- 
ble, as diners men are: What man can indure to heare it but hee that is abfolutely 


Q 3 - madde? 


173 
hauc Futians. (a) One fonle,| Plato, Cicero and the Stoscks held the world to be butane crea- 


Acutid, 5 


174 


mcn. , 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. | Cnar.t4. 


madde : laftly how can God bec inftly angry with thofe that doe not worfhippe 
him , when as they are partes of his owne felfe thatare guilty? So chen, the 

are forced to fay that euery particular gadde hath his life and fubfiftence by 
him-felfe,and that they are not peeces of one another, but each one that is partiv 
cularly knowne,mutt haue his peculiar worfhippe: thas is knowne I fay, becaufe 
they cannot all bee knowne. Ouer all whome , Japéter beeing King , chenceit 
comes(as I imagine ) that they beleeue him tobee the fole ereCter and protector 


of Romes Monarchy. For ifit werenot hee that didde it, whome fhould they 


thinke able to performe fo great aworke ? each one hauing his peculiar taske 
already fo diftin€tty affigned:, that one muft by no meanes meddle with that 
which was vader the charge of another. So then the conclufion is, it muft needs 
bec onely the King of goddes , that erected and preferued this Kingdome of 


nS 


That the augmentations of. Kingdomes are unfitly a[cribed to 
Joue.Vidtory ( whome they call 4 godde(fe)being /uf- 
| fuient of her felfe to giuc a full di(patch 
ito all fuch bufineffes. : 
HAP. I 4. 


No heree is a queftion;why may not Soueraigaty it {elfe beea God 2 What 
fhould hinder| it more then («) hinders Vs¢fory? Or what need men trouble 
lone, ifviéfory be but fanourable ynough , and will ftay with fuchas fhe meaneth 
to make conquerors? If fhe be but propitious,let/ove mind his own bufineffe, the 


~ nations fhall come vnder. (6) Yea but it may bee they are good menandlothte 


Vidoria a 
Goddefie, 


wrong their neighbours that wrong not hem , or to ao them to warre, 
without a iufter caufe then mecre defire to inlarge their Kingdome. Nay bee 
they of that minde,I commend them with all mine heare. 


| L. VIVES. 


1 (4) Vilkory | Cato the elder built hir alittle Temple by the Market place. She had al- 
fo a greater Temple by chat little one:which P Poth, Afegellus beeing Aedile buile with 
the mulct-money hee hadde gathered ; and dedicated it in his Confulfhip,with A, Attéll, Re- 

ulus in the Samnstes warre. Sylla ordained playesfor her in the ciuill warres, {con.Ped. 
Cicer. in Verr. Attio, 1. She was daughter to Styx and Pallas.(Hefiod.)and had Zeale,“Power 
and Force to her bretheren,which alwaies fitte by /owe,nor raigneth he nor any King without 
chem, (6) It may be | There are fome copyes that differ from vs heere, but they are corrupted. 


whether an honeft man ought to intertaine any defire 
, toinlarge his Empire. | 
Crap. 15. 
herefore lette them obferue , whether it befitte 2 good and vpright 
man to reioyce in the inlarging of his dominions. For it was thebadneffe 
of thofe againft whome inft warres were whilome vnder-taken , thathath 
aduanced earthly foueraignties to thac port they now hold: which would haue 


beenc little ftill,ifno enemy had giuen caufe nor provocation ta war by offring 
: | i$ 


Lis.4q. | OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 


his neighbour wrong.If men had alwaies beene thus conditioned,the Kingdomes 
of the earth would have continued Litele in quantity , and peacefull in neighbour- 
lyagrcement. And then a many Kingdomes would haue beene in the world,as a 
many families are now inacitty. So that the waging warre , and the angmenta- 
tion of dominions by conqueft may feeme to the badde as a great felicity bur che 
good mutt needs hold ita meereneceffity. But becaufe it would bce worfe if the 
badde fhould gette allthe Souercaignty , and {o ouer-rule the good , therefore 
in that refpect,the honeft men may eftecm their owne foueraingry a felicity.But 


- 


175 


eo 


doubrleffé , hee is farre more happy that hath a good neighbour by him in qui- ~~~ 


et, then hee thac mutt bee forcedto fubduean euil neighbour by contention. 
Iris an euill wifh , co with for one that thou hateft, or feareft, or for one to trou- 
ble thee that thou mighrft haue one to conquer. VVherfore. if the Romaines ats 
tained to fo great an Empire by honeft,vpright & iuft wars,why fhould they nos 
reuerence their enemies s#équity,& take itor their goddefles good? For we fee 
that Znéquity hach giuen good afiiftance to the increafe of this Empire by fetting 
onothers vppon vniuft provocation to iuft warre , that fo the Romeines might 
haue iuft caufeto fubdue them, and foconfequently to inlarge their owne do- 
minions. And why fhould not /s/quity be a goddeffeCat-leaft among forreyne 
Nations ) as well as Feare and Paleneffe and Feuer was at Rome ? So that by 


thefetwo Deities , /siquéty and Victory, the firft beginning the warres, andthe — 


latter ending them with the conqueft , Romes Empire was inlarged infinitely, 
whileft Jowekept holyday in the Capitoll. For what hath Jupiter to doe heere 


where thofe(which they may fay are but meerely his benefirs )are worfhipped, - 


inuocated and accoumpted for dire@ deities and partes ofhis effence? Indeed 
hee fhould hane hadde a faire good hand in this bufineffe , if that hee were 
calletfSoseraignty as Well as Mecis called Véfory. ~Bheifthat (2) Seseraigaty 
bee but.a meere guift of Jowes,then why may not ¥scfory bee fo too ? Both would 
bee he}d to bee fo ifthe Romaimes diddenot worfhippe adeadftone in the Capi- 
toll,but the true King of Kinges andLord of all domination both in earth and 
Heauen. | 

Tene eee ne eesnanneinenmnenemennessnstinnsmrtasiam tpnstaa anaes tasinacertaeaenanneiameaancesasacaiadcmaaaasemmamsaa ial 


L. VIVES. 
| the(a) Kingdome ]So faith Homer in diuets places, 


The reafon why the Romaines in theer appointments of fenerall Goddes 
for euery thing andeuery action , would needes place the 
Temple of Reft or Quiet with-out the Gates. 


Cwap. 16. 


Vc I wonder much that the Romaines appointing particular goddes ouer 


every thing , and almoft every motion , Agenorsa, that ftirred men to dc- 
tion, Stimula- (4) thatforced them fotward , (6) Afwrcia that nevet went ouc 
other pace: Andas(¢) Pomponius faith, made men flouthfull , and difabled 
them from action , Strenua that made men refolute: Vnto all which goddes 
and goddefles they offered publike facrifices , and kept follemné feafts , Bee- 
ing to difpofe (4) of Quiet, the goddefle of Ref# ; het they oriely vouchfafed 
a Temple without Port Collins but allowed hir no publike honors at:all in the cit- 
ty. VVhether was this a figne of their vnquiet and turbulent fpirits, or ir 


Q4 thot¢ 


LS SS PE, 


176 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. | C nap. 17. 


thofe who hadde fuch a rable of diuell-gods. No worfhip and reverence, fheuld 


Math, It, 


29 


Stimula, 


Hora, 


Murcia, 


never come to inioy that Rc#,where-vnto the true Phfition inuiteth vs, Saying: 
Learne of me that Lam mecke, Math. 11.29. 4nd lowly in heart , and you {ball fad reft 
unto your foules. | | 


L. VIVES. 


Timula (a) This may bee Horta , that in her life-time was called Her/ilia, Romulus his wifes 
called Horta of exhorting men to action. Labeo. Her Temple was ncucr fhutce , to fignifie 
that fhee would ncucr haue men idle : Shee was after called Fora , goddeffe of Prouidence, of 
theGreeke word -xagopuiy, to inforce. Plat. Of this goddeffe, Oxid,Gellivs and diuers others 
do {peake. Afurcia. | Hereof read Hermolaus Barbarus his note vpon Plinies 15. booke. Pliny. 
There was an old al:ar unto Venus Mytta,now called Myrtia.(c) Hermolaus | lread it ALurcia, 
out of Fe/fus,Liny,PlutarchVarroand( ornelins Nepos.For Murcia is the goddefle of f.-rh as 
Agenores,Strenna and Stimula are of indultry:Pomponins, Auguftinus 8 _Apsuleins {peaking of 
the AZercian bounds,mean thofe that were dedicated ynto Venus. Some fay that Asentine was 
called AZurtizs, becaufe it was like a wal, AZarus,not of Murcia the goddefle,nor the potters, 
Ammianns faith, there was fom in Jtaly,that becaufe they would not go to the war,cut cf their 
thumbes,and were called Afurci. Murcide,faith Plastns toa fluggith fellow. Thus far Her- 
molaus, the moft dillicert Author of our times, So that whereas Festus faith there was a Chap- 
pell at Anentines Foote facred vnto AMurcia,itis better to read AZurcie, (Liu. lib. 1.) Then ma~ 
ny thonfaid of the Latins were receiued into the cittie and for the ioixing of the two billes Palatine 
and Auentine,rere arpcinted to build the hsufes by Murcias Chappell, Venus Murcia:ther was al- 
foone called Afyrtca, Plat, Problem. (c) Pompeius|Hermolaus, Beroaldus,and others cite Pom- 
ponins herein,buc fhew not plaincly which Pomponius itis,for there were many ofthatname, 


> that were writers;as namely Articus,and the Author of Atelane , and the Orator(all of Tallies 


tine )A4ela,and Inkius the Tracedian,whome Quintilian names,and the Lawyer , all Pomponii. 
(4) Quiet | thinke this Oujer belonged to the dead, for Hell of old was called Owieradjs ,and 
theretore was this godde dif-worfhipped without the citty, Her Temple was in the way to 
Labicana,( Linie in his 4. book.) | 


Whether if loue being the chiefe' godde of all Vidory 


be tobe accounted as one of the nsmber. 


Cwap.17. 


V Viiithey fay (thinke you ) that /upéter fendeth this goddefle icfory,whether 
fhee pleafeth,and fhee obeying him, fecteth vp her reft on that fide that he 
commandeth?l: is trueindeed:bur not of that Jove which their fondnes dreameth 
is King of the goddess but of him that is the true King ofall times and all thinges, 
that can fend (not victory , which isno fubftance, but ) his Angels, and make 
them conquer whome heepleafeth ; whofe counfels may bee vnknowne, bue 
neuer vniutt. For ifVécfory bea goddefle,why is not Try#mph a God and hufband 
vnto hir,or hir brother, or fonne, or fom-what? For they beleeue fuch abfurdities 
of the goddes,as ifthe Poets fhould but faine,or we but caft (2) them in the teeth 
with , they would prefently anfwer,it werea ridiculousfigment , not to bee attri- 
buted to the true goddes : and yet they laugh not at them-felues,who,didde more 
then read thofe dotages in the Poets , when they adored them in their Temples. 
Wherefore they fhould worfhippe and adore onely Jupiter indeed and lette all 
this multitude paffe. For if () Vecfory be a goddefle and fubie& vato that King , 
fhee dares not refift him,but mutt bee ready to fulfill his pleafure whither.focuer 
hee fend her. | 


L.VIVES. 


Lin. _ OF THE CITIE OF GOD. ay 
7 | L. VIVES. 


AASt (4) them in the \Some read Epaggerarentur , buc not fo well. (6) Vittory be \Porphy. 
C3 faith that Jone was pictured holding a {cepter in his left hand , and in his ri ht,fome- 
times an Eagle , fometimes Victory, The Eaple to fhew that he was King of all , as the was of 
the birds :/sffory to fhew all thinges to bee fubie&vnto him. Or as Pharnates faith » be~ 
caufe none could conquer him. Porph, Ret. natur. deor, . 


Why Fortune andF-xlicity were made Goddeffes 
C HAP, I 3. ; 


Ay Falicity (4) isa goddeffe alfo now : Shee hath gotte her an Altar, a 
Temple , facrifices', and cuery thing fitte: VVhy fhould notthee haue all 
the worfhippe to her felfe ? VVhere-foeuer thee is ,there fhould all good 
be. But why is Fortane preferred to thehonour of a Deity? Is Felicity one thing 
and Fortune another ? Yes , Fortune may bee both good and badde , bu if Felics- 
ty once grow badce, thee loofeth her name. Truly Ithinke wee fhould haue all Felicity al 
the goddes , ofboth fexes (ifthey haue fexes )tobee ftill good ones: and fo pas8” 


but For 
thought P/ato and diuers other excellent Phylofophers and States-men. tune nesta 


How then can the goddefle Fortaze benow good and now euil ? Is the no god- 
deffe when fhee is not good , but is turned imediately into a Diuell > Why then _ 
how many goddefles are there  Euenas many asthere bee fortunate men, 

that is good fortunes. For many badde fortunes and many good , that is, 
at one time falling together ; Fortune fhould bee both good and euill at once, 
if fhee bee all thefe : good to thefe and badde tothe other. But thee that is 
the goddefle is alwaies good: Well,fuppofe, is fhee Falécty her-felfe : Why 
changeth fhee her name then? Yes , that may bee tollerated, For many thinges 
haue two orthree names. Butwhy then hath thee (d) diuers Temples, Altars, 
and ceremonies ? Becaufe( fay they ) that is Fedscsty that doth follow a mans 


deferts: That good Fortuxe which lights cafually vppon good and euill , (¢ ) Fortune. 


without any refpect of deferts:and is therefore called Fortwse. How can thee 
then bee good , comming with no difcretion as well to euill men as good? And | 
why is fhee adored , beeing fo (¢) blinde that fhee commonly ouer-runnes 
thofe that honour hir,and ftaies with thofe that feorne hir 2 Ifher feruants ob- 
taine grace at her hands, and gette her to ftay with them, then thee followes me- 
rits and is Fort#xeno more. Where is her definition then 2 How then doth 
allgo by chance ? Ifthee bee Fortave . invaine is all hir worfhippe: but if thee 
difcerne, and help hir {cruants,then the is Fortwae no more. Butdoth not Jupiter 


— (e)fend hir alfo whether his pleafure is 2 Well if hee doe , then lette him 


have all the worfhippe to him-felfe: for fhe cannot gaine-fay him, ifhe bid her 
depart to fuchorfuch aman. Or it may bee that the euill doe honour her, to 
gettethem-felues fome merite whereby they may purchafe Felicitie , and fo 
inioy her company in fteed of Fortunes. | 7 


L. VIVES. , 


eLlicity (a) is a \Pliny nameth her Temple often. eArchelans the Statuary fold hir Image to 
Lucullus fot LX. HS. Plin. lib. 53. (6) Disers Temples | Enill Fortune hada Temple at Port 


_— -Efqniline. Valiant Fortune had ene vpon Tibers banke:Réding Fortune by the Theater, There | 
was alfothe Temple of Little Fortune,and Fertune the Virgin : another of 


Fortuna Primogenia, 
anotheg 


178: 


SAINT AVGVST INE. | — Crap.tg. 


another of Ogfequens,at Port Capena,and there was alfo Fortuna prinata,U1(cata,Publica ,Vi- 
vilis,and (onnertens , allon Monst Palatine : there was alfo Hopefull fortune, Saning fortune, 


_ Smooth and doubtfull fortune in eAuéntine , and Fortuna Mammofa in the 12. region of the 


Citty : as alfo Barbata,and Mulrebris nto all which Seruias Tullus gaue Original , partly be- 
caute that from a flaue he was preferred to the Kingdom, & partly becaufe he ewe that Fortune 
had an efpecial hand in the occafions of humain affaires, Pir. Prob.(c) Without any re(pect | As 
far as we know:and therfore the is faid to come without caufe , becaufe we cannot perceiue 
them, as Arifforle and Plato faith. Spex/ppws faith-that fortune is amotion from one fecret 
caufe vnto another:Hereof read _Ariffotles Phyfickes (lib, & de bono Fortune. lib, ) being apart 
of his moralty. (d) Blind | This Ariftophanes reciteth very conceitedly of P/atus,who is godde 
of paine. Lucian hath vied the argument in his Mifanthropus, (e) Send her | So faith Arif- 


-_tophanes , and that Plutus being fent by Jone vnto good men, goeth lamely: but ynto the bad, 


with {peed, 


of 4 Godde(fe called Fortuna Muliebris 
3 - Crap - | 


| Nayetey are in fuch dotage vppon this fame Fortune , that they doe ftedfaft. 


Fortunes 
Image did 
fpeake by © 
the diuels 
' ‘Meanes, 


Fortuna 
Muliebris. 


Jet icbee obtained of him, that alone hath power of the guift of it,and farewell all 


ly affirme that the Image (4) whichthe Matrons dedicated and named Forts- 
naMuliebris , the womans fortusedidde fj peake particular wordess and that noe 
once but often, faying that they hadde (6) dedicated her ina very good order and 
refpect:which if it were tgue,we cught not to wonder at. For the Diuells can vie 
this coufenage with eafe;which was the more difcouerable, in that it was fhe that 
{poke,who followeth chance, and not defert. Fortune {poke , but Felicitie was fi- 


Jent:vnto what other end was this , but onelyto make men negle@ liuing well, - 


feeing that without any defert this Lady Fortune might make them fortunate? 

But yet if Fortune did {peake, the (c) mans fortune(methinks)fhould haue fpoken, 

and not the womans , becaufe otherwife, (d) the women that confecrated the 

ftatue might bee thought to faine that the Image {poke , becaufe they loue fo 

well to be heard {peake them. felues. . . | 

Gig ee SN : eta ee ee 
| | L. VIVES. 2 


ae Imace(a) which] After Romes freedom from the Kings, 18, yeares,(orsolanus warring 


inexorably againft his countrey ,neither departing for threates nor teares,the womens la- 
mentations turned him away:and here-vpon they erected a Temple to Fortuna Muliebris , in 
the Latine Road,foure miles from Reme: In which dedication the Image fpoke twife.Firft thus, 
Matrons well hane you feene mee and dedicated me. Lin. Valer,Plut> Lattantins faith chat fhee 
fore-told a danger to infue : Which were queftionleffe the wordes that fhee fpake the 
fecond time, It was facriledge for any but fuch as had once bin marryed to touch this Image, 
Feftus.(b) Dedicated. | Propter inthe Latine is {uperfluous. (c) Mans fortune | Whole Tem- 
ple was on Tybers banke:and hir feaft in Aprils Calends, Onid faft. 4. (4) Women| For men 
would bee fooner trufted then women, | 


Of the Deifiaction of Vertue and Faith by the Pagans,and of their 
omiffion of the worfbip that was ducto diners other gods,if 
| «tt bee true that thefe were goddes. 
Cuap. 20. _ 


rey tnadea poddetfe ait of (a) Vertue : which if thee were fuch fhould take 
place ofa great many of the reft. But beeing no goddeffe , but a guiftof God, 


the 


as etn EE + Ce = 


Ling. OF THE CITIEOF GOD. — ag 


he buryed roll of thefe counterfeit gods. But why isFasthmadeagoddefle, and 
graced witha Temple and an Altar 2 VVho-foeuer knowes faith well , maketh 


his owne bofome hir Temple. But how know they what Fast is,when her cheefe pin 
office is to beleeuein the true God? And why may not Vertse faffice ? isnot Faith 


there where Vertue is? They diuide (b ) Vertue but into foure partes,Prudence, ; rue* 
luftice , Fortitude, and Temperance; and becaufe euery one of thefe hath feue- : 
yall fub-diuifions , therefore fallech (¢) Faith tobec apart of lufisce, and is of Habuc.s, 
cheefe power with vs, that know that the Juf {hall line by faith: Bat 1 wonder 

of thefe men that doe fo thirft after ftore of goddes ,that hauing made Fastha. 
goddefie , they will fo neglecta great many goddeffes moréofher nature, to . 
whome they fhould afford Temples and Altars as well asto her? VVhy is not y 
Temperance made a goddefle , hauing giuen fuch luftre to diuers ( d) Romaine 
Princes ? Nor Fortitude that‘held (¢) Sceuolas hand in the fire; and wene with 
( f- ') Curtius into the fpatious gulfe for the loue of his country: And ftood by = 
the two Decy (¢) the father and (4) thefonne, when they vowed their liues ” 
to their nation? (2 ) If by the way,this were true valour in them, as it is.a quefti- 
on, (but not difputable heere ? ) VVhy are not. Prudence and Wifedome made 
Deities as well as che seft ? Becaufe they are all worfhipped vndet the gene- 

rall name of Yertue ? So might all the fuppofed partes of one GOD bee 
intyrely worfhipped in his fole and particular worfhippe. But in Vertwe , there 

is Faith, and (k) Chaffity, as partes indeed , and yet thofe muft haue- peculiar 

Alcars and Sacrifices, But it is vanity and noc verity that turnes fuch qualy-. 


ties into Deities, : 


L. VIVES. ae 
F (a) Vertwe) Meancellss in his firft Confulfhippe vowed a Temple to her in Gallia: 
‘And his fon built ic av, Pert Capena. ( Lin. lib. 29, ) The next Marinas buile to Vertue 


and Hononr , lower then.the other, leaft the e4ugurs fhould pull ic downe for hindering 
of chem in beholding the, Birdes flight. ( Cie, de leg. lib. 2. ) Lette thems worfhippe thofe thinges 


Verrues; 
Temples 


shat helpe men to Heauen ¢ Fash , Wifdome , Psety and Vertue, Faithes Temple was in 


the (apitoll , ( Plin. lib, XXXV, Cie. offic. 3. ) neare vnto Jones ,-and was his oth as 
Tally iaith out of Exnins, arid Cicero de nat. deo.2, It is faid that Atrillius (alatine con- 
fecraced her : Some fai¢ eAmeas didde long before. Romulus. Feftus. Liz. Then were 
rwo Diumuirs elected , fcr dedicating the Temples. Q. Fab, Afaxim. and eAttilins (vaffes. 


‘The Temples were dedicated to Afens , and Venus Erycina : both in the Capitol, and but a Mensa 
gutter betweene them. Dioniffus. Plut, fay that Numa dedicated the Image of Faith , and Goddefle, 


made hir name the greateft oth of all. (4) Vertue but | Plato, eAriftotle crc. (¢) Faith tobee} 
Faith is the foundation of infiice : (ic. office 1. Piety is inftice towards the goddes whereof Faith ss a Faith, 
part. (De xat. deo. lib. 1.) So faith Spenipps. (4) Romaine Princes | Here were a place for Va- 
lerins his examples of moderation, profit by foes, abftinence, continence, neceffity,and fhame+ 
faftneffe : for all thefe ( faith Tully ) depend on Temperance, (e) Stauola's ] Porfenna befieging’, _41,'+. 
Rome , Sceuola went difguifed into his Tents,and got fo neare,that he killed the Kings Scere- 
tary in ftead of the King:and when Porfenne bad torture him,he put his hand boldly into the 
fire of facrificc,being at hand,and held it there , till the King and all about him. were amazed 
with feare and admiration. (f) Curtins | They fay there wasa lake in the Marker-place of Curtiess 
Rome, which afterwards dryed vp it was called Curtins his lake :fome fay of Metins Curtins ; 
the Sabine , chat fwamme ouer it with his horfe : Others of 44, Curtins the Gentleman of 
Rome that vpon the Oracles bidding the Romaines caft the thing of beft worth they had intoir, 
caft him-felfin cherat.(Liw.lib.1.)But Corwelins 8¢ Luttatins write that it came by thunder,and 
chat ( #rtins the Confull payled itabout ; hee with whem AL, Geistias was Confull : Hence 

| : sii : nf 


-_ 


180 


Deceus, 


C 


(Pence emer nc OE any 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. - C wap. 2a 


it wasnamed Carfixs his lake,faith Varro. (g) Father |He was a Plebeian,but a tall foldior,and 
a deare louer ofhis country:Becing Conful with T. Afanl, Torquatus in the Latine warre, and 
feeing in a vifion that the life of one of the Generals mutt be loft for the wars conclufion , and 
the whole army of the other(they being two Generals for Rome ) agreed thaton that Nag of ¥ 
Romain army W firft gaue back the General fhould giue vp himfelf to death for the fafegard of 
his country. The bartels ioine, the Remaines left-wing gaue back, and Decias feeing that , fol- 
lemnly vowed him-felfto deathfor the foldiers ,and putting {purres to his horfe brake forth 


into the thickeft of the aduerfe troops,& there was flain.(4) Sox ] He was the 4. time Conful 


with Fabiss his 5. time,he thatia the Galles wars was firft called Afaximns,of any Romaine. In 
one of the battels, Deciushis troopes thrinking,hee followes his fathers example,and into the 
midft of his foes he {purreth,dying,a facrifice to honour & his country. Léw.( lib. 10.) (4) If ey 
the way | Valla in aucclamation of his vppon the pleafures of an Epscwre,excols this brauery of 
the Romaine valour highly , and with arguments both witty and worthy. The booke is com- 
mon:read it. (k.) ( bajesty |Her fhrine was in the Beaft-market , neare to Hercules his round 
Temple. (Liz, lib, 10.) Some tooke hir ftatue for Fortunes. Fest. There was alfo alittle Tem- 
ple in Long-ffreet, dedicated to f haftity Plebeian by Virgins but it wore out of vfé and memo- 
ry afterwards. Line. © 


That juch as knew not the true and onely Ged had better bane 
beene contented withV ertue and Felicity. 
Le | Cuap. 21. 
Fo thefeare the guifts of God, not goddes them-felues. But where Vertue and 
Felicity is,what needeth any more? What will fatisfie him whome thefe two 
cannot {atisfie ? Vertue confineth all good aes, and Fe/scéty all good («) defires. 
If it were for thefe that /upeter was worfhipped,( and what is the extente &con- 
tinuarce of dominion, but an appurtenance of felicity.) why perceiued they noe 
thatthefe were but his guifts,and not deities chem -felues? But ifthey were dei- 
ties, what needesany befide them?For let them caft ouer all the fumme of their 
oddes and goddeffes funétions , as their inuentions haue diftributed them , and 
Fade if chey can,that hee that hath Vertwe and Fa/sesty, needeth any of their helps, 


Vutte wha: or hath any vfe of cheme What need he trouble (6) Aercary or Minerus for lear- 
ise 


s 


ning vertue,including it al in her felfe?For vertue is but (c) an art of lining wel and 
iufily,as all che old writersdoe define it. And therfore fome fay thatthe word art 
(d) comes of dem in greeke which is Vertae. But (¢) ifnone but witty men could 
bee vertuous,what viethenis there of father (f) Catews ,agod that maketh men 
accute,\\ henas Felicity can do all chis?For to be born witty, is a felicity. VVher- 
fore,though the childe being yet vnborn could nor merit this fzlicity 5 yet fhe be 


ftowes wit vppon the childe as a benefit vnto the parentsthat honoured her.But 


what need the women in Trauell call on Lucéna , Felicity being able with her pre- 
fence both to make their labour eafie, and their offpring happy? What need. 
Ops be troubled with the children when they are new borne, Vatscanus when they 
cry? Cunina when they fleepe,Ramsina when they fucke,Ssats/éws when they learne 
to ftand, ddeona and Abeona when they go, (g) Afens for 4 good minde for them, 


- Yolumnus and Volumpa for a good will for them? The //) ouptiall gods for their 


grandfather,as well as Jowe had aboue Saturze : what need men run vnto fo many 


marriage,the field gods for their harueft,and chiefely (s) Fractefia ; Mars and Bel- 
lona for their fights ,7soria for their viGtories ,Hoxor for their honours, (k) Pecu- 
nia for their ritches,-£/cwlesus and his fon Argentus for coyne ynough both of 
braffe and filuer :che(firtt is the (/) father,becau {e(m)brafle money was in vie be- 
fore filuer ) | wondet that Argestinus begot not durinus,tor gold followed foon 
after. Ifthey had had durinus, fure as death he fhould haue had place of father & 


for 


ee eee 


wo 


- «¢«- eo N™Ne ee EO 


as = 


7 “ee @™} 8 eo. = tr 


Lom | 


Qa. 


“——C EO eel OO Sl 


z : ; : 


Ling. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 181 


for this good or that; (co fuch a crew as neither I can recken nor themfelues dif- 
cerne , hauing’ a god tor every little act and accident of men) whenas felicity 
would haue beftowed a.l, in farreleffe time and with farre leffe toyle; nor neede 
any other be troubled , either for beftowing of good, or diuerting of bad. Why 
fhould Fe//onia bee called vnto the weary, Pellonioto chafe away the foe , Apollo 
or e£/culapins tothe ficke, or both,and few inough in a difeafe of daunger? Nor 
needed Sprnenfis meddle with the thornes, nor any intreaty to keepe away (”) 
Rubigo: Onely Felicétses prefent aide would keepe all miufchieues away , and re- 
pulfe chem at their firftapproach . But now to (hut vppe this difcourfe of thefe 
twoertue and Felscity; if Felscéty be thereward of Vertue,then is itno goddefle; 


butaguift of GO D,but if it beeag. ddeffe, it muft needes bee the producer of 


Vertue,lecing that to attaineto Vertue,is the greateft Fediczty. 


- L. VIVES. 


Ood (a) defires| Optanda , not Obtinenda.(b) Mercury] Hee is Lord of eloquence, thee, 

of artes and wittes. (¢) Vertue is but] The old writers called all the vertues,artes and {cien- 
ces of lining well; and ( whichis allone ) pradences;Plato in Afemnox. The habite of liuing 
well and iuftly 1s an arte ,as well as that whereby wee play on In{truments, wraftle..or make 
fwordes , apparell, or any thing. [ But our fellowes conceiue nothing but in {choole-tearmes, 
them they are beaten to,come with others(though better ) and then you grauell them, then 
they are to fecke, and chinke all that is fpokenis abfurdity |(d) Comes off |Donat.in Andr.Te- 
rentii. artcomes of aps} by contraction.(e)/f zone] 1 deny not but a groffe-brained fellow may 
be an honeft man : more {uch are fo , then otherwife, but the excellent perfection of vertue,is 
proper to the witty alone. Vertue is feldome well laid up sn dull braines(faith Tully) Tue. que. 
(f) (atus | Not Cantins.The ancients vied Catas for wife,politike and induftrious : and there- 
fore that wife Portins was fur-named Cato. ( g) Mens]Her temple was vowed at the fight by 
Thrafimenns lake.Lis. lib. 22. dedicated three yeares after by Artilins, beeing made Danmusr 
for chacend. Ic ftood in the Capitol next to Venus Ericina’s , as I faid before : and was confe- 
erated by Aemilins Scanrus alfo,in the (ymbrian ware Her feaft was on the feauenth of Juzes 
Ides. Onid. (b) Nuptiall gods) They that were to marry,offred to-fiue gods: to Jupiter adultus, 
Fano Adulta,Venus,Lepor, and to Diana chiefly : Herevpon they lighted but fiue toarches at 
weddings,neither more nor leffe : Leporsws not an Epithite of Venus, as Acron thought it was 


' Of Suadela, but a goddefie by her felfe, called Peitdo,the goddefle of perfwafion, Quintil. Hy- 


menans alfo was a chiefe god inuoked at marriages, as in Catullus is plaine. Sernins(in 1. 
Acucid. faith hee was an Athenian,that deliuered the Virgins ina moftextreame warre : and 


therefore was invoked at marriages, as the difcharger of Virginity. CMartian calles him the 


fonne of Bacchus and:Calliopeia, (#) Fruttefia} Not Fruges. (k_) Pecunia\ Inuenall,Sar, 


Et f fancita pec sia te mplo | -T hough fatal! money doth not fit; 
Nonedam habitas,nullcs nummorum ercximus aras, ——«4|-s Ador’din fine, nor hath an Altar yee, 


Vertue, 


] The 
louanifts | 
like not 
this buc | 
leaue it. 
Arte 
whence. 
Cate. 
Mens 


her comple, 
The nuptis 
E 


Peitho. 
Hymenzus. 


- Seeing to fay fheehad neither Temple nor Altar. Tt may bee hee knew not that fhee wasa 
goddeffe,for Varro {gith that many pointes of the Romaines religion was vnknowne euen vn- 
to the learned. (/) Father\ This is diuerfly read , but all toone fence. (m) Braffemoncy|Phin. 
lib. 33. The firft ftampe was {et vpon filuer in the yeare after Rome was built, D. L X XX V. pains Erft 
Q. Fabeus beeing Confull, fiue yeares before the firft African warre : where for D. You muft coined, 
reade but CC CC. For that warre beganne in the Confulfhippes of Ap. (landixs , brother to 
Caens sand Q. Fuluins, CC CC XC. yeares after Rome was founded . Extropins faith it was 
ft atpped in that war : but he miftaketh the time herein,as he doth in many things befides. But 
of this wee haue fpoken fufficiently already. The ftampe was two horfes in a yoake,and foure 
im ayoake, and thereafter were they named. Forthe ftampe of Viifory came notvp.vatill a Gold coine 
lictle before the Confederates warre , beeing fet Pe filuer , mixt with Copper, The golden frft, 
: : pececes 


182. SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuarpa2  |* 


. peeces were coined inthe fecond African warre: L XII. yeares after che filuer came vp. (#) 
Rabigo, = Rubizo] Rubigo,is the putrified dewe , eating and cankring the young plaots: ih che morning Es 
(faith Pziny) and in quiet weather doth this fall vpon corne’, and on cleare nights in vallies 
and places-where the aire is not mooued hor is it perceiued vntill it be done. High hilles and 
windy places are never troubled with this inconuenience’. This feaft Nama ordained to bee 
kept on the feauenth of Maies Calends, for then doth this canker the moft mifchiefe. This 
time Varro doth appoint to be when the funne is in the tenth degree of Tasrus ,'as the courfe 
went then : but indeed the true caufe is, that 29. daies after the equinoctiall of the {pring for 
the {pace of foure daics ,on the 4.0f Maies Callends , the vehement ftarre called the ri 
ferceth :to which itis neceflary to offer a dogge. This from Varro. A dog indeed was {acri. 
ficed ynto this Rebigo. Owid.Faft.4. Varro talketh of a god called Robigus alfo, that is ioyned | 
with Flora.(Rer.ruftsc.lib.1.) making them one of the fixe paire of gods that hee calles Vpon, | 
“eng. ripe Rodigus,of Rodo,to gnaw or eate away. Rudigois properly a fore or vicer gotten 
by or luft. Ruft vpon Iron alfo is called r#bigo, gtowing vpon it (as vpon corne ) for | | 


want of motion. | 
| Of the knowledge of the ¢ Pagan gods, which Varro bea fteth bee “ 
taught the Romasnes, CRAP. 23. : 


VV Hat great good turne then doth Varro boaft that hee ‘hath done vnto his 
Cittizens , in the particularizing of the gods, and their worfhippes that 
the Romaines muft obferue 2 For what booteth it (faith hee) to know a Phifiti- 
an by nameand by face , and yet to bee ignorant whata Phifician is? fo likewife 
it booteth not (faith hee)to know e&/culapsxs vnlefle you know that he cures dif- 
eafés : otherwife you know not whatto pray to him for. And this heecon- 
-firmes in another fimyly faying: A man cannot liue well , nay hee cannot liue 
at all,ifhee know not the Smith, the Painter, the Carpenter &c. diftin@ly where 
to haue this neceflary , wherethat , where to bee tavghe this orthat. So iris. 
plaine that to knew what powre euery god hath , and vpon what obie@ , is won- 
derfull vfe-full. Forthence may wee gather whomecto fue vnto for euery needeé 
wee shaue , and not follow the (4) Adsmickes ,inbegging water of Bacchus and 
wineof the (b) Nymphes. Who wouldnot giue this man thankes now, if his 
doGrine were trus, and did fhew the worfhippe of the true G O D, of whoma- 
lone weare to askeall things? | | 


. 


2 SED 


| L.VIVES. 


T (4) Mimikes] To make port. (6) The Nynsphes} Or hie stot rape is all moifture, 

The {nets and ouer all moyiture doe the ep rule : The Nereides inthe fea, The Nayades in 

Me the fountaines,the Napee inthe moifture o flowres and herbes: The Drsides and Hamadryades 

yorphes, over che fappe of trees: The Oreades oucrthe humid hilles . The Nymsphes arein number 
3000. all daughters of Oceanus and Tethis, Hefiod. Theog. 


thane 


| the a ab folate uffictency of Felicity alone,whome the Remaines(who wor{bi ed 7 
™ mas eed did for a great while neglect, and gaue no dinine - : 
_ honoursunto. Cuap, 23. 


Ve if their bookes béé true , and that Felicity bee a goddefle , how 

FJ comes it to paffe that fhee hath not all the worfhippe vnto her felfe, 

beeing of her felfe fufficient for all needes ? Who wifheth any thing but 
-happineffe 2 And why was it fo (4) late , before (6) Lucalys , the an of 
all the Romaines , though it fitte to erect her a Temple ? Why did noc 
| Remulss, 


r--— 


‘= 


ie 
=~ J 


WA ERS PTR Ase se eS 


Romalus , that wifhed the citty fo well, prouidea placefor her, feeingthather - 

prefence might haue faued him all bis labour in praying to the other gods ? hee 
had neuer beene King, nor eucr cometqhaue beenea god, had not fhee ftucke 
to him. Why then did hee clogge the Romaines wich fuch a noyfe of gods, 
lanns, Jone Mars (c) Picus (d) Faunus (e) Tibevinas, Hercules; and all thereft. And 
what did Tatias bringing in Satarne , Ops, Sol , Luna Vulcan, (f) Lux, and to clofe 
vppe all , fweete Cloacina , leauing Felicity in the dufte? Andwhat was Nwme's 
minde to gather fuch an hofte of hee gods , and thee gods , and leaue her out? 
Could hee not finde her for the multitude ? Verily (¢) Hofféiws wouldneuer | 
haue brought Feare , and Pa/lor to bee templified , if hee had had any know- 
ledge of this Fedscéty. For had thee come there, Feareand Pallor muft needes 
haue beene a packing. Againe , in all the increafe of the Empire, fhee was 
not thought of ,no man ferued her , what was the reafon of this ? Was 
the Empire more great then happie ? Perhappes fo: For how can truc Felscsty 


beetheir where true Peery is not > And (4) Péety is the true worthippe of the 


rrueG O D, not the adoration of thofe multitude of falfe godes , or deuills, 
whether you will. Bue afterwardes , when Felsesty was entertained , and 
had gottea place with the reft , the great infelicitie of the ciuill warres follow. 
edprefentlie vpon it . Was noc Felscity angrie ( thinke you ) that fhee was 
lecten paffe fo long ,.and chen taken in at laft , notto her honour but toher 
difgrace , beeing ranked with Préapws , and Cloactwa, and Feare, and Pallor, 
and Fewer , and a forte that were no godesto bee worfhipped , but defe@s in 
the worfhippers? Laftly , feeing fhee muft bee faine to {hare honours wich 
fo vnwotthie a rable, at leaft why had fhee not a better part of honours then 
the others ? Who could endurethat the goddefle Felicity fhould ftand by, 
and neither bee reckned amongft the godes (s) Cos/entes, that were of Jones 


Linge OFTHE CITIE OF GOD.. 


Councell , nor the Seled gods neither 2? Nor had not a Temple that fhould — 
haue excelled all the reft in hight of pofture 2 and magnificence of fabricke?.. 
why fhould fhee not haueabecter then Jupster? For thee her felfe gaue him his ‘ 
Kingdome, if euer hee were a happie King , that happinefle is of better worth 
then reer pe bo is moft plaine. For many men doubtleffle may bee found, 
that would not bee Kings , but none that would not bee happie. So thar if 
the gods were asked their mindes , by augury, or otherwife , whether they 
would giue place to Feiscity or no , I will vndertake , that if all the roome 
befides were filled with other gods Altares , that Felicity could not haue a 
fitte place built , Jspiter himfelfe would giue place , and let Felsésty haue his 
owne feate vpon the toppe of the Tarpetan hill . Nor is there one of them 
that would not doeas much , vnleffe ( which is impoffible ) fome of them would 
bee fo madde as to loofeher fauour and growemiferable. Jepster would neuer 
vie her. , as (t) hee was vfed by Afars ,(!) Ternsinus and (m) Iunentas who by 
nomeanes could bee perfwaded to giue their King place . For (as they write) 
Tarquin beeing defirous to build the Capitoll, and feeirg the placehee thought — 
fitreft , already taken vppe by other ftrange gods ,durit not controule them, . 
but thoughe that good manners would teach them to gice place vnto their 
King: a beeing that there was.a great fore there, where hee meant to build, 
bee asked chem by augurie whether they were willing to refigne the placeto 


their King or no ? All were content , except A¢475, Terminas and lssentas: And . 
f che Capitol! was built ,and chey for oy fawcinefle had fuch {mall monu- TH Cis 
_ Ra ments. 


pn = 


“184 ) SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuar.23; | 


2 en Ee © See Doe 


ments left ,that the Romaines greaceft diuines did fcarcely know where they 

ftood. But Jose would neuer deale. fo vnciuilly with Felscity,as Mars , Terminas 

and Jwuentas deale with bim. And then thofe that would not yeelde to him, 
affuredly would yeelde to her, that made him their King. Or if they would 

not; why then it were becaufe they had ra:her abidein obfcurity in Felscities 

houfe , chen ro fitin eminence without her company, fo that:had thee but 

the higheft place , the Cittizens would foone learne where to pray for good 
guiftes,and in time, by che very perfwafion of nature : Put away that {warme of 

gods, and pray onely to Fel:céty, offer onelyto her, and frequent her Temple 

onely ,if they defired tobee happie, as all would doe ; and foall men would 

come and begge lerfelfe of her felfe,for who would begge any thing but Fee 

bsctty ,ofany god ? fo that Feliczty hauing powre to bee abiding with whome 

fhee lift (as fhee may if thee bee a goddefle ) what man were {o faolifh to goe 

and intreate her company of another god, when hee may obtaine it of her 

{elfe? So tharthe dignitie of place alfo fhould of right bee hers from al] the 

other godes . For they write that the ancient Romaines.did. worfhippe one 

' Sammanus, 977~anKS , one that ruled the thunder of the night, aboue Jwpster that ruled 
the daie thunder. But after that Jwpéter had gotten him fuch a fumpruous 

houfe , the company came in fo faft vnto him, that ong could(o) fcarce finde 

one within a while, that had heard , nay more, that had reade fo muchas the 

name of Summanus. But now if Felicity bee no goddeffe , — in. cruth buta 

wk: | [guite of GOD. Then is ic fit to finde out that GO D that can beeftowe it, and 

ge a - 


want hunger that licketh the 
we ee that hath itto giuehim. . 


. 


Ho: __ delle ; 
> 


@:' 


L. VIVES. oa 7 


Lucullus, ©O (4) Late] Lucullus was Confull with (Cotta in the Citries D CLXVI. yeare. (6) Lae 

“cnlins| Hee warred againtt Mithridates , and Pompey emredivpon his place , contrary té 

the mindes of che Nob‘es. Hauing {ped well in the warre with this King and’ Tigrazes,hec 

Pieus,  buile this goddefle a Temple. (c) Picus} Satarues fonne. enei.7, Hee raigned in Latins 
| in thetime of the eA borigines , and was turned by his wife (érceinto apie, forlouing of Pow 

Feunus, mona: and theretore the Romaines held the pie for an holy birde. (d) Fawnxs | Sonneto 

Picus father to the Fawnes andthe Satyres and Field-gods,Virg. ibid. Plutarch calleth him 

Mercuries fonne. Paralell. Hee raigned in Latinum inthe eAborigines time , and brought 

his péople from barbarifme to a ciuill manner of life: and was the firft chat-gauenamesto 

places, and dedicated certaine Temples and Groues to the gods,from whome they were cal- 

led Fana; his Oracle was in e4lbunea ,a wood of the Lasrentes sfome offered co him yeare~ 

ly,fome monethly, Val. Probss in 1. Georg. his feaft was: kept.at Rome in the Nones of De- 

cember, Horat. Car. 2.(e) Tiberins| Sonne to Gapetus , King of the eA lbanes , a notable 

theefe , and beeing drowned in Tyber , gaue it that name by his death, beeing bee- 

flats, fore called elbuls. (f) Lux] The Romaines worfhipped Jupiter Luceias , as the 

Salsifang , becaufe hee was held Lord of the light , and the caufe thereof Fe/?. Tatins 

brought into Rome thefe godes : Ops or Flora , Ditoue' , Satnrze , Soll , Luna, Unloan ;Sum- 

. manus, Larunda , Terminus, Curinns,Vorrandus , the Lars ; Diana,and Lucina. Warrede tiny. 

lat.4.(g) Hoftilus] Ja the wasre betweene the Romaines and the Ves, a 

oe | | ing 


L 124. OF THECITIE OF GOD . 185 


being told that the Albanes were fallen from him, and feeing the Romaines pale and amazed 
hereat,in this curbulent {tate vowed a Temple to Feare and Pallor. (bh) Piety is| Piety is mffice Feares and 
towards the gods, Cit.de nat.deor. (+) Prety is alfo reucrence vnto our elders,and kindred,when FPallers 
it hath reference co che gods, it is called re/igion . There was in Rome a chappell of Piety de- cemple, 
dicated by eeslins, there where fhee dwelt, that fedde her mother being in prifon,withthe |. 
milke of herbrealts , Fefus. There was alfo a ftatue erected that reprefented this, Vader. lib. atin 
5.Obfequens mentioneth a temple of Prety that {tood in Flaminins his Theater. (i) Confentes} sie 
Twelue of thofe there were,fix of either fexe. Their Images ftood guilded in the maxket-place. 
Varrorer.ruft.lib.1. Thole were Luno. Veffa, Minerna,( eres. Diana Venus, Mars,Mercnry, 
Iupiter,Vulcane, Neptune, Apollo, Enn. They were called Confenres becaufe they all confented 

what was to bee done, /spiter vfing them as counfellours in his greateft affaires as Augu/tine 

faich heere, and Sencta more plainely Natar. quaft. liv. 2. Pomponius Letns ; anekcellent and 
diligent antiquary obferued (they fay ) and wrete to Lorenzo (Medici ; that each of thefe 

gods hada peculiar month dedicaced to them. Juno had Janwarie , Neptune Fe , Min 

nerua March, Venus Aprill, Apollo May , Merciry lune, Inpiter lulie, (eres eAuguft,Vulean 
September, Mars O&ober , Diana Nouember , Vefta December... Diodor faith that the (hale 

des called rwoand thirty ftarresthe gods confulters, and the twelue fignes of the Zodiake 

which rule ouer each month , they called the principall gods.The egsptians had alfo their 

twelue chiefe gods, but not them that the mee i(k) Het was vfed| Nama dividing 

the Romaines lands bothinto priuate poffeffions and Commons , fer bounders at each one: 

and therevpon erected a chappell to Zod Termings on the hill Tarpeiss sto whome they of- Terthints, 
fered no liuing ching,but onely fourmenty, and the firft of the fruites, chouph afterwards this 

vfe was left, with others , This god was a ftone, and all che bounders were ftones: which if 

any man remooued out of the place, it was lawfull eo killhim forth-with . But Tarqnénins 
Prifcus hauing vowed.to build a temple to Joxe, Ind and Afinerua,vpon the hill Tapeius,and 

laying the foundationsy of this magnificent worke , hee found imany Altars inhumed there, 

which were dedicated by Tarsus,aiid diuérs other Kings : which when he would haue remo~ 

ued thence that the place _— be free for Jome,he asked the opinion of Affixs Nessus the au- 
gur,who hauing beheld the birds of each perticular god, all fignitied willingneffe of departure, 

excpt the birds of Termsinus,and Inuentas.So Tarquin the proud his Nephew,building the Ca- 

pitoll after him , was faine to leaue them two there. where they were found before. It was a 

good figne Accias faid and portended ftability vnto the confines of the Romaine Efupire,and 

that their youth fhould bee inuincible. P/at. Dionjf. Liny and Floras fay that this remoouall 

fell out in T4rgue the Prondes time :though their words may be reduced ynto this wee haue 
already faid. Ifnot, 1hadrathernuft them in this mrattet then the Greekes, chat (Afars was 

a third in this obftinacy ofthe gods, I haue not read tthac the other cwo-were, I have. (/) 
Terminas\Saturne and his brother Titan agrecing ina league vpon the condition that Saturne 

fhould bring vppe no man-childe of his owne,and Satwrxe beeing againe forestold by Oracle 

that his fonne fhould thruft him from his throne, hee refolued prefently to.deuoure and make 

an end of allhis male-children : Jupiter beeing borne,and hee commirig to difpatch him,they 

had laid a great {tone in the childes place:which ftone Jupiter(haning attained the Kingdome) 
confecrated vpon Moxnt Pernaffus, and it was called in greeke Basones, Hefiod. Hefycbius. 
Wherevpon it grew a psouerbe vpon Gluttons. Thow wouddeff rhe the flone Batylus. Bao Batyhe, 
ty/us(faith Exfeb. out of Sanchoniaton)was fonne to ( ales and Rie, brother to Sarerne. Hee 

was aftet called zepuxy;in latine Termsinies, and would not yeeldto great ee ith di te ea 
Lattant.) becaufe hee had faued him from his fathers chaps, Hee ftood alwaies openly at 

Rome and fo was worfhipped: Fe/t. Laftant.(ws) luxentas| There is Ixuentas and Inuenta, but 
Tuneutas ith Acronisthe true name. Horace. et parts comis finéte Tuuentas Mercuriusque. __ 
Juuentasiend Mercury are both ruffich without thee: In Horace it-Randeth for youth it fle Tugentiie 
elfe-where . Olim Iuuentas @& Patruus Vigor; Oxce youth and Priftise valour: andagaine 

ie Iuuentas, oo verectndus (olor , the ha ,and modeft red are vanifht, now, and fled: 

ee goddelle iscalled Hebe in Grecke , daughter to Jno alone, without afather , as AZars 

was her fonne: Though the Greekes make Jomé her father,fhee was Hercules wife , and Jones 
eup-bearer till Garymede had her place #64 properly is vigor of youth. Shee had acemplein 
the Great circuite, dedicated by Luculins the Dusmsvir. M. Linius beitg Confull had vowed 

jt,1 6.yeares before for the conqueft of “— And being Cenfor,pucitto 44, act 


186 


SAINT AYGVSTINE. C uar.ag 


and 7. Semspronius Confulls to buildand had plaies at the dedication of i: Liulib. 36 Lhee bad 


~ alicele oratory in the market-place alfo.(# )S#manus| ie asl Samad maninws,tne Prince of 


firits.His temple was neare to that of Jusentas. Plin. His facrifice was round cakes, Fef?. Hee 
ruled the night chunder, and Jone the daies, which was therefore called Dia. The thunderchar 
was doubrfull , happining at twielight or fo,they called Proser/a : and offrings was brought 
vnto both the gods, at thofe times. So the Romaines had but thefe two gous to rule all cheir 
thunder, but the Tufcanes had nine and eleauen kindes of thunder. P/in lib. 2. Fe/fus,and the 
common doétrine of Romeheld three kinds of thunder, the Poft#/arian, requiting fome facri- 


Thunders fices. The Peresralian, Hgnifying the orher to be well and fufficiently expiated. The AZann 
ofhow ma 4iaz,which were the ftrokes of the thunderbolts, Seneca alfo fets downe as many : the firft of 


ny forts, 


“Ais feat’ w 


-the Capitol. 


Lupiter alone,giuing men warning : the 2.from the (on/entes , warning,but not without hurts 
the third,from the decree of the fuperiour gods, wholy mifchieuous and burtfull. Thus much 
éf thunder-out of (ecinne , Velaterranus , Araldus , Seneca Nat.queftlib. 2. and fome out of 
Péény,but briefly and {catered here & there inhim as many other things befides are, (0) Scarce 
finde | This god was very bafe,and few knew him. They knew he was one of the gods that rule 
ed the night, but his name was vnknownes Onid Faft.6. _— oa | 
Reddita , guifquis is es, Sunmmano témspia feruntur, 
' Tune faa Roadie Pirrhe tismendus eras. 
ie ~ — Sammanus houfe(what ere he be) was reared, 
po When _Pirrbas of great Rome.fo much was feared. 
asthe 13. (a/. of July: his temple neare the great { trcnite, and his chappell in 


J ar) 


hat reafons the Pagans bring for their worlbipping of gods giftk - 
eo ee for gods themfelues. Cuar.2gar. 0 oa. 

Lvs examine their teafons. Doe you thinke (fay theiy Jour anceftours were 

fuch fooles that’they knew northofe cobee gods giftes; dnd not guds > no 


can 
‘ , 
cer 
ry 
. 


truely: butbecaufe they knew that they could’not hate thethbue from fome 
_ god , they called their gods which they Hite had the gift of chem, by the 


names ofthe things themfelues : fome-times deriving woids from thence; (as 
Bellona of Bellum,warrenot Bellum.ir {elfe, and Canina of Cuneneedies,not Cans. 
‘Segetia of Seges corne, not Seges it felfe, Pomona of Pomum an apple not Penman: 
‘and Bubonaof Bos an oxe, not Bos)and fome. times neuer altring the word at all, 
but calling them inftas the ar called: As Pecunia the goddeffe , that giues 
money,(not holding money it felfe for a goddeffe ) and vrtss, that giueth ver- 
tue,(2) Honor for honour, victoria for vitory, Coucordia for Concord,and fo Feliti. 
ty beving called a goddeffe, is not ment of the thing gitten,but of the powreé chae 


- giveth it. Well, oucof this reafon will we findgan eafie way to perfwadeall fuch 


Honours 


r¢ 


as hauenothardned their hearts,tobeof ouropiniomn .- =), 


<= Onont (a) for ] You fee( faith Tul) CMarcellus hath renewed thie Tetnple'of ‘Hosewr, 
the which Ox. Maximus built long before in che Ligarian warte. De nate; tb, 4, 
There was one temple in Rome both toVerrwe and Honoxr,which C, Marins built but it- was 
in divers pertitions ! for Otte ‘roomie might hot ferue them both , as the Colledge of Prictts aris 


| Lwered Marcellas in bis eight Confulfhippe. The old Romaines facrificed bare-héaded votre 


Honour but coucred t6 all befides. Plat. Prob, 


‘ Vv. 


' . tas és . 
a- . 
. oan ee 
a ad ‘ 


A 


| ‘ - Of the flage-plaivs which the gods exatted oftheir Jordanei ; Ks ay | 
See Tg, Y Gee eos EY aH 2 a re BSE RS 


Righs he was warnedagaine vpon paine of a greater mifchiefe, ie 
Cie fe te 2s ge ee a, TRS Cee tas a 


of the werf ippe of one God onely, whofe mame although'they keew not, 
a tt they tooke hime for the giner of felseity. - | 


C wap. 25.- 


| Fo: if mans weakeneffe obfériied thus much, that felicitie could not come 


but from fome god , and that this was perceiued by thofe thar worfhipped 


‘Cian gods, who therefore would call him thar they thought could giucic, 


by the name of the thingit felfe knowing no other name hee had ; this proou- 
eth fufficientlie that Jupzter could 26h felicity, whome they worfhipped 
alreadie,but oriely hee whiome théy worfhipped vnder the name of Felscity ...So 
then , is it tonfirmed that they thought Pelictty could nat bee giuen burt by. 
aGod that chey knew not well , feeke' but him out then and giue him his due 
worfhippe and ft fufficeth. Cafheére this returne of innumerable andas vn- 
neceflary gods , nay deuills: letwiot that god fuifice the worfhippe , whofe 
guift is not fufficient : hold not (I fay ) that God fora fufficient giuer df felici- 
ty whofe felicity is wholy infufficiene. But in whom is it fufficient ? in the. 
true and onely. GOD , she giuer of-all felicitie: ferue him. Icisnocthee that. 
they call Jowe. For ifit were hee, they would neuer fant? feeking this euift of 
another , who goeth vnder the name of Felicity: befides they would net doe: 
Jowes honour that wrong , as for to count him as Jone is counted 3 an adulte- 
ret (2) with other mens wiues ,and an vnchafte lover » and rauither of (4) 
fairebeies ae = | 7 


° ia 
- ' 
\ 


mena,Leda 81C4(b) Fasre beies| As of Ganymede s ofwhome here-after, | 


Dv: thefe were fictions (2) of Homer (‘quoth Tuy, ) tranfferring humaine af 
mi fects-unto the gods.t badyather they had tranfferred diusne affects vntous. This 
graue man indeed was much difpleafed with the vnfeafonable fidions of thofe 
times . I but why then did the wifeft and moft learned men of all the Romaines, 


-prefent ftage-plaies , writing them, and.adting therh to: the honour of theix 


gods,andas partes and pointes of their religion? Here T#//y exclaimeth nota- 


-gainft poetike fiGions but againft the old ordinances. And would noctheor- 


dainers exclaime tod, ‘and fay; why what doe wee? out gods intreated vs, hay 
forced vs vpon paine of deftruGiontoexhibite them fuch: things as honours: 
punifhing the:negle& thereof with fenerity , and fhewing therhfelues pleafed. 


ina | _ OF THE CITIE OR GOD. 8 


Nadalterer (4) which] Toues foule adultery are the Poets common fongs 2as which fr ‘Joues adtil 
Oe ESE ie aa tS an <3 


in the amendement of chat negledt. That whieh I will now relaté, isreckoned-as’. 7 
one of their moft verraous ,and memorable ‘deedes. (5) Ttws Latinus »atuftike Tims! Lav 


houfe-keeper. was warnedin a. dreame to bidds theRomainé Senate reftore the 
ftage-plaies; becaufe veon their 'firft'day of prefentation ‘an‘offender catied 
out and whipped. to:death. before all the people , had’ fore drfpleafed: the’ 
fees that doc not loue {uch fade fpedacles , but ate all-for mirth arid iol.’ 


_ Mry.: Well ;hee negle@ed to tell the Senate this , but was wathed againe the 


HCxt. night... Negleéting it againe‘, fuddenly-his fonne died: And the third 


tinpus hif. 


tary, 


Meg | 


188 | 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. C wap.az 


Henot daring as yet to reueale it, fel into a fore and horrible difeafe.And then ha- 
uing imparted it to his friends,they counfelied him to open ic to the fenate,fo he 
wascaried tothem in his coach, andhauing roldhis dreame, grew well inan 
inftant , and went home on his feet. The fenate being amazed with his miracle 
renewed the plaies with treble charges,who feeth not now(that feeth at al Jhow 
villenoufly thefe deuills abufe thofe men that are their flaves , in forcing thefe 
things from them, as honors, which an vpright iudgement would cafily difcerne 
to be ob{cznities. (¢)From this flauery can nothing deliver man but the grace of 
God through Iefus Chriftour Lord: In thofe plaies , the gods crimes, thatthe 
Poets faigne , are prefented : yet by the gods exprefle charge , were they by the 
Senat renewed. And there didthe ftage-plaiers,a@,produce and prefent Joue, for 
the verieft whore-maifter in the world, had this beene falfe , hee fhould haue 
beene offended at it : but taking deligh(as he did)to haue villaines inventedvpon_ 
him, who would ferue him that would not ferue the deuill ? Is this the founder, 

enlarger,and eftablifher of the Roman Empire ? and is he not more bafe and ab- 

ie@ chen any Romaine that beheld him thus prefented? can hee give happineffe 

that loued this vnhappy worfhip,and would bee more vnhappily angry if ic were 
not afforded him ? =e | | - 


LL. VIVES. 


F I&tions(4)of H. amer faith Tully) I approne not Homer for faring that loue did take up Gany- 


med for his forme and perfon, this was not a inft canfeto anger Laomedon. But Homer fained, 


tranfferring humane affects unto the gods: bad rather be had traffered theirs te vsawhich of theirs? 


to florifh,to be wi(e,witty,and memoratine. A moft graue Sentence, taxing their impious fuper- 


-ftition that proportion gods attributes ynto our frailty , fuppofing him as tefty, crabed, cruel, 
-enuious,proud,contentious, arrogant, inconftant , finally as wicked as our felues , were it not 


better to eleuate our felues ynto 7 height of his diuine-vertue.Cic. Ta/e.quef?.(6) Titus Latinas] 

This hiftory ismentioned by Cscero, De dininat.out of Fabius,Gellins,3 (elias Avis alfo in oy 

bb.2V al Max.lib.4.Anl.Gell Macrob.Lattantins.Jt fell out inthe yeare of the ciety,CCLII. 

Confulls,A4, Adinutens,and A Sempronins.Some call the man Lariaus:Laflantas calls bim Tia 

berius Arinus (c) from this flanery | Alluding ynto that exclamation of Paul Rom.7. wretched 

vin that I am,who {hall deliner me froms the body of this death ? the grace of G.O D through Iefas 
brift. is | 


times awe 


 Oftthe three Kinds of Gods whereof Scseuola di/puted, 
— Cuar.27. | os 


I T is leaft in memory that Scenola , (4) their learned high Prieft, difputed of 


three kinds of gods that were taught by authors;one by the Poets , one by the 
Phylofophers;one by the Princes of che City. (6) The firft fort hee faith, were 


- but fooleries,much of their do&eine being fictious:the fecond,difagreeing from 
apoliticke ftate,hauing much fuper@uity,anddiuers incenueniences , for the fu- 


eee is no great mater,for itis afaying amongft men:/sperflaity hurteth nots 
ut what are the inconueniences;to deny openly that Hercules «£/culepius,Caftor, 
and Pollux are gods;for the Philofophers teach that they were men , and died as 
other mendo. Towhat endisthis, butchat the citties fhould bee filled with 
ftatues of fuch as arenotrue gods, the true god hauing neither fex,age nor bodys 
But this, Seewola would not haue the people to know , becaufe he did not thinke 
it was faulfe himfelfe. Sothat he holds it fit citties fhould bee deluded in religi- 
on,which indeed erro ftickes not plainely to affirme.De.re.vin.A godly religion, 

| whereto 


Lig. OF THE CITIE.OF GOD. 


whercto when weake mindes going for refuge, and feeking to bee freed by the . 


cruth , muft bee colde , that it is ficte chat they bee illuded.’Nor doth the fame 
booke conceale the caufe why Scesols.reieteth the Poets gods . Ie is becaufe 
they. doe fo deforme them with chefr ftories , chat they are not fitte ro keepe 
good men company, (¢) one being defcribed to fteale, and another to commit 
adulterie: as alforo doe and fay fo filthily and fondly, as that the (4) three gods 
defies, ftrining for eminence of beauty, the other two being caft by Venws, de- 


ftroyed Troy: That Jove was turned to (¢ ) aBull, or a (f) Swanne , to haue the - 


company of fomewench or other : chat ( ¢) a goddefle married a man ,.and that 
Satarne cate vp his fonnes. No wonder! No vice,but there you haue it fecdowne, 
quite againft the natures of the deities. O Scuola; abolith thofe playes if it bee 
in thy power ! tellrhe people what abfurd honors they offer the gods, gazing 
on their guile,and remembring their prankes , as‘a licence for their owne prac- 
tife! If they lay,you Priefts brought them vs, intreate the gods that comman- 
ded them, to fuffer their abolifhment : If they. bee bad,and therefore at.no hand 
credible , with reuerence to the Gods Maiefties , then the greater is the iniurie 
that is offered vnto them , of whome they are fo freely inuented. But they are 
Deuills ( Scevo/a) teaching guileineffe, and ioying ‘in filchineffe , they will not 
hearethee. They thinke it no ihiurie to have fuch blacke crimes imputed vnto 
them, but rather holde them-felues wronged if they bee not imputed , and exhi- 
bired. Now if thou calleft on Jome againft them, were there no other caufe for it, 
but che moft frequent prefenting of his (4 ) enormities, ( though you call him 
the God and King of the world) would hee not thinke ltimfelfe highly wrong- 
ed by you, in ranking him in worfhip with {uch filthy companions, and. making 
him governor of them? -. se oe ee NEA Ste 


whe . PVIVES.. - > Pee Ry ee G 
Sonn (2) their ] There were many of this name + but this mar was prieft in CAZarins his 
t_Sciuill warre, and killed by Marinsshe yonger:  Talyy faith hee went often to heare him 
difpste,after Scenole the Augur was dead. (6 ) | be first | Dionyfine wriceth that che Ropsaines 
reiected all the factions of the pods fights, wranglings, adulceries,6¢c, which were neither to 
bee fpoken of gods,nor good men: and that Romsu{us. made his Oxirites v{e to fpeake well of 


the gods, Antigu.Rom.lib.2. Enfeb.de prep. Enang. (¢) One,\ Aercurse , that ftole Tyrefias ie | 


Oxen, Mars his fword, Unlcans tonzes, Neptunes Mace,sApollos bow and fhafts, Venus her 


girdle ,and Jones Scepter. (4) Three }euery childe knowes this. ( ¢) 4 Bull | for Europa, - 
(f) eA Swanne for Leda, of thefe read Onid. lib.6.* Afetamorph. (¢) A  goddeffe married 
onsT betzs t0 “Pew | 


Ceres to Lafius, Harmonia co Cadmus Cailirrhoeto (bryfaoras, Aurora to Ty | 
bens, Uenns to eAnchifes, (arce and (allipfo to Viyffes, Read Hefeds. Theoguia.( b) Enore 
mities, )of letchery, cruelcy, and fuchlike, — . @ eee ee. ot 


é 


| Whether the Romaines dsligence in this worfbip of thofe gods, ~ 
a didtheir Empire any goodatal, ~~ = | 

_ _ CHa. 28, “he. oe 

BY no meanes then could thefe gods preferue the Romaine Empire being fo 
criminous in theirowne filthy defiring of fuch honors: as thefe are ; which 
yather ferue to condemne them, their appeafe them. For.if they :conld have 


done that, the Greekes fhou'd have had their helpes before , who afforded . 


them farre better ftore of fuch facrifices as thefe, with farre more. ftage- 
playes and fhowes . For they, feeing: the Poets taxe their gods fo freelye, 
a ee - 7 | _ Neuer 


i 


_ 190 | SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuar.29 


neuer thought fhame to let them taxe them-felues, but allowed them free leave 
to traduce whom they'pleafed , and held the Stage-players worthy of the beft 
honors of their ftate. But euen as Ronse might hauce had golden coynes,yetnever 
worfhipped auriaws for it, fo might they haue had filuer and braffe ones with- 
out C4rgentinas or his father e£/culanns, and fo of allother neceffaries. But fo 
could they not poffeffe their kingdome, againft the will of the true God , but in 
defpite of all che other, let them doe what they lift, chat one vnkowne God be- 
ing well and duly worfhipped,would haue kept their kingdome on earth in bet- 
ter eftate then ever, and afterward haue beftowed a kingdome on each of them 


in heauen (had they a kingdome before or had they none ) that fhould endure 
or cucr. = | 


Of the falfene(fe of that Augury that prefaged courage and flabilitie 
, tothe flate aioe, Cuare 29. 

Or what a goodly prefage was that which I {pake of but now, of the obftinacie 

of Mars,Terminys and Juwentas that it fhould fignifie that Afers (4) his nation, 

the Romaines , fhould yeeld the placetono man; that no man fhould remooue 

the limittes of their Empire , becaufe of Terminus , and that cheir youth fhould 

yeeld tonone,becaufe of Jesentas. Now marke but how thefe gods mifufed their 

King, daring to giue thefe Auguries as in his defance,and as glorying in the kee- 

ping of their places ; though if thefe antiquities were true, they neede feareno- 

thing. For they confeffed not that they muft giue place to Chrift that would 

+, motgiue place to exe: and they might giue Chrift place without preiudice to 

the Peopiees tics, both out of the tempies,and the hearts that they held . Bue 

this we write was long before Chrift came, or that Augurie was recorded: not- 

withftanding after that prefage in Tarquins time,the Romaines loft many abartel, 

and prooued Jawentas a lyer in hir Prophefie,and AZars his nation was cut in pee- 

ces within the very walles,by the conquering Gafes; and the limites of the: Em- 

pire were brought to anarrow compaffe in Heansbals time, when moftof the 

citties of Jtaly fell from Rome to him. Thus was this fine Augurie fulfilled , and 

the obftinacie of the prefagers remained to prooue them rebellious deuils. For 

it is one thing not to giue place, and another to giue place and regaine it after: 

wards. Though afterwards the bounds of the Empire were altered in the Eaft 

theree DY (5) Hadréanus meanes , who loft ~frmenia, Mefopotamia and Syria voto the 

mousllof Per/ians,to fhew god Terminus that would not giue place to /owe him-felfe , but 

the Romait guarded the Romaine limites againft all men,tolethim fee, that Hadrian a King of 

ean -men,could doe more then Jove the King of gods. (¢) The fayd Prouinces bein 

recoucred afterward, now almoft in our times,god Terméxus hath giuen grou 

againe, (d ) Iwisan ( that was given fo to the Oracles ) defperately commanding 

allthe fhips to bee burned that broughe the armie vi@tuals, fo that the fouldi- 

ours fainting , and hee himfelfe being flaine by his foes hands, there was no 

meanes for one manto efcape, but by ycelding to the foe fo much of the Em- 

pire as now co this day they poffefle: making a bargaine not altogether fo bad ds 

Hadrians was , but taking a (e) middle courfe betweenetwo extremes. So that 

Terminus his ftanding out with Jove was but an vnlucky figne and foolith au- 

gury , feeing thac Hadrcans. will, Indians rathneffe, and (f) Jouéans necefiitie, 

all made him give roome to them. The Romasnes that were of difcreation, 
obferued this well., but they: could not ouer-turne the inueterate idola 

Wwhercin. the Deuills had bound the citty fo faft : and they themfelues, chough 

| ) 


Ling. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 491 


holding thefe things vaine , thought not-with-{tanding Nature fhould haue that. - 
diuine worthip allowed her,which indeed is the true gods onely peculiar , vnder 
whom fhe is at command . The/eferued the creature, rather then the Creator (as the Rom.i. 
Apoftle faith) who ss se big or ener-more . This Gods helpe was needed , to fend 

fome godly men to fuffer death for che true religion, and thereby to take away 

thefe erronious illufions from the world. - : _ 


L. VIVES. | 


Me: (4 ) bis nation |The Romaines, both for their valors, and their originall from ALars 

his fonne. So many of the writers call diverfe Romaines, (Vartiall minded b ) Hadria- Hadtian, 
mss | Fourteenth Emperourof Rome,adopted by 7raiaz,whom he fucceeded But enuying his 
Fachers glory amongft othets,he gaue the Perfians back Armenia, Mefopotamia and Alfyria 
(which Trasan had wone from them by conqueft) fetting Exphrates as bounder to the Em= 
pite,and calling home the armie. Essrop 446.8. The reafon I thinke was becaufe it was anolde 
faying chat chat generall thatledan army beyond Esphrates and the cittie Ctefiphon, fhould 
neuer haue good fortune : which hapned to (raffuss;and Traian himfelfe neuer came into Italy 
from the Parthian conqueft, (¢.) The faid} Extrop, Affyria by the Antonini Pis , bretheren, 
Mefopotamia by Galienns,vnder the condu& of Odenatus : Armenia for Diocletian vnder Ga- 
lerias. ( d) Iulian | He began his raignein the Cities MC XVI. yeare : Confuls, Afansertinus Tulias;, 
and Nesitta: A great foe to Chriftianitie,being oucr-throwne by the ‘Parthians at Ctefphon, = 
by his death hec left che whole armie and ftate in a defperate cafe, (e) Middle |Sothatthe 
bounds were not remooued by force,but by condition of peace. (f ) Jouianus | A Pannonian, peer 
being made Emperoe by the foldiours,in this excremitie of Jw/ians procuring ,he wasfaineto 
conclude a difgracefull peace with the Parthians; bur neceffitie hath no law. Hee gaue them _ | 
the towne Nifibides,and part of the vpper A4efopotamia, and fo came the Bini bored to 
be remooued, 


The confe(Sons of {uch ab doe wor{Dip thofe Pagan gods, from 
| thesr ewne monthes, .Cuar. 30. . 
- < Zero (4 ) becing Augur, derideth the Auguries , and (4) blames mén for 
letting their actions relie vpon the voyce of a Croweor a Dawe. O but 

this (¢ ) Academick faith, that all things are vncertaine; hee is not worthy to bee 
truitedin any of thefemyfteries. (d) Q:Lucél. Balbus in Tallies {econd booke, 

De nat.deor. difputeth hereof, and hauing prooued thefe fuperftitions to be Phy- 

ficall in nature, yet condemneth the infticution of Imaces and their fables, in 
thefewords. Perceive yon not then that from the vfefull obferuation of thefe things Tullies dif- 
in nature , the tract was found to bring stn thofe imaginarie and forged gods ? hence keofima- 
came all the falfe opinions, errors and old wines tales: for now are wee acquainted B bles of 
with the fhapes, ages, apparel, kindes, mariages, kindreds ,and all are [quared out by the gods, 
humaine fancies: nay they hawe turbulence of effects alfo. wee hane hued of their 

defives ,forrowes and pafsons. Nor wanted they warres, if all tales bee trae : They 
fought in (c ) pacties, net onely in Homer , but allon = allo againft the (f) Ti- ihe gods 
tans, and Giants : and hence arifeth a [otti{h beleefe of their vanitie 5 and ex- 
treame(g) inconftancie. Behold now what they them-felues fay that worthip 

thefe forgeries; hee affirmeth that thefe things belonged to fuperftition, but he 
teacheth of religion as the Stoikes doe. For (quoth hee ) not onely the Philo 
Sophers ,but ell our anceftors made a difference betweene religion and [s uper fittion. 

For (h ) {uch as prayed whole dayes together , and offered for their childrens lines, 

thofe were called Super ftitions. WV bo perceiuech net now that hee, ftanding (4) in: 

awe of this citties cuftome,did not-with-ftanding commend the religion of his 


anceftors 


9300” SAINT AVGVSTINE. | Cuar.3! 


aunceftors and would faine haue feuered it from fuperftition,buc that he cannot 
tell how ? for if the auncients called thofe Superftstions, that prayed and facrificed 
whole daies together, werenot they worthy of that name alfo , whome he repre- 
hendeth for inuenting fo many diftinct ages,images, and fexes.8cc.for the whole 
number ofthe gods? if the inftitutors of thofebe culpable , ic implieth guile alfo 
vnto thefe ancients that inuented and adored {uch idle foolerjes :and vnto him 
alfo ( for all his eloquent euafions ) that muft be tied by neceffiity to this abfurd 

-_ worfhip : and dare not {peake in a publike oration what hee deliuereth herein 
a priuat difputation. Thankes therefore be giuen to otir Lord Iefus Chrift, from 
all vs Chriftians,not to (&) Heauenand Earth/as he would haueit ) but vnto him 
that made Heauen and Earth , who hath ouerturned and abolifhed thofe fuper- 
ftitions(which Balbas durft {carcely mutter at)by his heauenly humility his A pof- 
tles preaching and his martirs faith. that died for the truth and liued in the truth, 
hauing by thefe meanes rooted all errors not only out of the hearts of the religi- 
ous, but even out of the Temples of the fuperftitious. 7 


orn 


L. VIVES, 


| . C Icero being(4)a4ugur.] And of their College : eleed by O. Hortenfins the Orator. (6) 
An accades 4 Blameth. | ‘De dininatib.2.(c) Academike. \That fect would affirme nothing, but contute 
mike, © the affertions of others,which ( seero vieth in many of his dialognes , profeffing himfelfe a de- 
fender of that {e&t,de na,de.lt.2.(d)Balbus.\An excellent Stoike,(e)On fides. |On the one fide/uso 

_ ‘Palas, Neptune :againft them, Apollo Venus and Mars in the Troyan wars. ( f )Titans. ] Sonne 

The Titans 54 Earth and Titan,Saturnes brothert they claimed the Kingdome of Jupiter ,by the agreement 
of their fathers, firft they did but wrangle , but afterwards to armes. Jt was a great warre, yer 

the Titans were fubdued. Buu then tollowed a greater , the reft of the Titans reneuing their 

forces and chafing Jone and all his friends into e£gipt,The firlt was called the Titans war, this 
the Giants.(g)Inconftancy. \Thus farre Tully.(h)Such as\Laétantius difliketh this deriuation of 
Superftitions and Religrous , deriuing religions of religo to bind,becaufe they are bound to God: 

Super ftitions of fuperfies , ale, becaufe they were of the falfe religion , which was profeffed in 


Sureha confine the name to thofe praying fellowes, but faith it was of large vfe afterwards in other 
on, refpects(s)in awe, |In the bookes, De nat. deor,and De dswinat , it is plaine that Tw//y durft not 
{peake his mind freely of thofe gods,becaufe of the inueterat cuftome ofhis country.(k )heanen 


and |\whome Tully with the Stocks maketh the chiefe of the gods, 


tes 


_ Of Varros reiecting the popular opinion,and of his beleefe of one God,though a 
: he knew not the true God. =. = 
| | Cua P37. | 


Nd what fay youto Yarro(whom we are fory fhould make plaiesas an honor 

- Sto rrue gods in religion,though not in iudgment,feeing he exhorteth mento 
the adoration of the gods fo religioufly)doth not he confeffe,that he is not of the 
~ Opinion of thofe that left the Xomaines their religion, and that ifhe weretoleaue 
the citty any inftirutions , hee would rather giue them their gods after the pre- 
feript of nature? But feeing that the former hath beene of fo long a continu- 
ance, hee faith that ic was but his duty to profecute his difcourfe hereof 
from the eldeft antiquities , to the end that the people fhould not be induced ra- 
ther to honor then to contemne them, wherein this iuditious writer theweth 
that che things. whereof he writeth would be contemptible tothe people as well 
as to him-felfe,if they were mot kept in filence. I fhould haue thought oné mighe 
. *- Out 


the liues of their aunceftors. /ib.4. of Religions ,and read Gellus. ib, 4. But Tally doth not - 


” 


ee ee | a7 — _ - 


Lis.4. OFTHE CITIE OF GOD. | 

but haue coniectured this, but that himfelfe faith in many places that there is 
much truth, which che people ought not to know: nay and if it were all falfe- 
hood,yet it were fit rhe people fhould neuer-the-leffe thinke thae it were truth : 
and therefore the Grecéans {hut vp their (4) Telete,and their ( 6) moft fecret my- 
fteries in walles. Hete hee hath made a difcouerie of all the politique gouern- 
ment of the world. But the Deuills take great delight in this playing double; 
making them-felues the maifters both ouer the deceiuers arid the deceiued,from 
whofe dominion nothing freeth vs but the grace of God , through Iefus Chrift 
our Lord. This acute and learned man faith further, that hee chinketh onely 
thofe to difcerne God,who teach that hee is a foule, moouing, and fwaying the 


the gouernor of the world: fo thac wee fhould but haue this onely controuer- 
fie with him, whether God were a foule, or the foules maker . He faith alfo that 
the old Romaines were a hundred three-{core and ten yéares with-out Idols: and 
had they beene fo ftill ( quoth hee ) religion had beene kept the purer’; to prooue 
which , hee produceth ¢ amongft others ) the Iewes ; and concludéeth, chat 
who-fo-ever they were that firft inuented Images, they freed the citty from all 
awe and added vnto errour : be¢ing well aduifed that the fencelefneffe of the 
Idols would make the gods heat feem¢ contemptible. But wheréas hee 
faich they added vnto errour,that prooues , chat there was fome errour there, 
before that Images came in. And therefore his faying, chat chefe onely difcer- 
ned God which called hima foule gouerning the worlds dnd his opinion thae 
the gods honours would haue beene purer with-out Images , thefe pofitions 
declare how neare the truth hee drdwes. Fot-could hee haue done.any. good 
againft fuch an ouer-growne error , hee would: haue fhewed chem how that one 
onely God fhould haue beene adored, euen hee that gouerneth the world, and 
that hee is not to bee pictured : and the youth of the Citrie beeing fet in fo 


 nearea path to the truth, might eafily haue beene per{waded afterwards, that 
God was an vnchangeable nature , creating the-foule alfo. Thefe thingsbeing _ 


thus , what ever fooleries thofe men haue difcouered of theit gods in their 
Bookes,they haue beene laide open by the immediate hand of God, (compelling 
them to confeffe chem) rather then by their owne defire to diffwade them: 
Wherefore that wee alledge from them, isto controule thofe that will norfee 


from what a damned {lauery co the Deuill,that fame fingular facrifice of fo holy 


blond,and the voutchfafing of thefpirichath deliueredvs. 


L. VIVES. 


[# E (4 We clete | A {actifice moft fecret-and moft fumptuous :So-called, becaufe jtconie: The Telets xls Bee 


ned fo much, of rsadTir; to end , or to confume, that fome thinke they had their name from 
their perfection. They belonged to the Sane and (Maone , as Porphyry writeth ; and were 
befides , expiations to Bacchus , recorded in Orpheus and Mufeus (Plat. de Reptb.2.) that 
zaught how to purge the finnes of the Citties, the lining, the dead, and euery priuate man 
by facrifices ; playes,and all delights, and the whole forme.of it all was-called.7 elete. Though 
Plato faith the Telete belonged onely.to the dead , ahd freed men from all the euills in hell. 
(4S ) Secret | Of (eres and others. (¢) The old | Numa forbad the Romaines to thinke thar 
God had any. fhape of manor .wWoman les New.) Nor had they any pidtureatall 


of any God for the firft hundred three {core and ae yeares ; they built onely temples and 
. | | > ‘Atle 


whole world: and here-by, though hee yet haue no firme holde of the truth (¢ for God no 


Godis no foule, but the joules maker ) yet ifthe Citties cuftome had permitted ae foules 
him , affuredly hee would haue taught them the worfhip of one onely God, and maker, 


ocr ae SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuariza 


dictle Orarories,but neuer an Tmageinthem, for chery held it a finne to liken the better to 
the worfe, or to conceiueGOD in any forme but their intelligence : Eujeb, Dyonyf, alfo 
faith that Numa built the gods temples but no Images came in them, becaufe hee beleeued 
that God had no thape, 7; argquinius Prifcus following the Greekes foolery and the Tafcans, 
firft tauche the erection of Qatues, which Tertullian intimareth , faying ; Gee to, sow religion 
‘hath profited. For though Numa innented a great deale of curious {uperftition , yet neither was 
there temples nor fatues as yet entred into rhe Romaines religion, but a few poore thrifty cere- 
monies tno skie-towring Capitols, but a fort of little altars made of Soddes,carthen difbes,the per- 
fumes out of them , and the God in no plase. For the Greeke tnd Tulcane artes in Sculpture 
were not yet entred the Cittie. 


een. 
we 


What reafon the Kings of the world had, for the permittin 1g of thofe 
fable religions infuch places as they conquered, 
CuHap. 32. 


, H EE faith alfo,that inthe gods genealogies , the people followed the Poets 
‘more then the Philofophers, and thence the olde Romasnes their anceftoss, 

had their beliefe of fo many fexes, mariages , and linages of the gods. The rea- 

fon of this (I fuppofe ) was, becaufe the politique and wife men did efpecially 

endeuourto noufle their people in this illufiue maner,and to make them not 

.onely worfhippers, but euen immitators of the deuills chat delighted to delude 
them. For cuenas the Deuills cannot poffeffe any , but firch as they haue decei- 

ued, fo vniuft and Deuil-like Princes perfiwaded their people to their owne vaine 

inuentions,vnder the name of religion,thereby to binde their affections the fir- 
«mer to their feruice,and fo to keepe them vnder their foueraignties . And what 


ignorant and weake man can auoide both the charmes of Princes and Deuils? 


3 That God hath appointed a tivse for the continu | 
ee | ate of enery fate oncarth, . . 
rr 7 Crap, 33. 
QV Herefore G OD, that onely and true author of felicitie, hée giueth king- 
domes to good and to bad; not rafhly, nor cafually , but as the time is ap- 
pointed, which is well knowne to him , though hidden for vs , vnto which ap- 
poinement not-with-ftanding hee doth not ferue,but as a Lord fwayeth ic, never 
giuing truc felicitie but to the good. For this, both (2) fubie&s and Kings may 
ther haue or wante, and yet bee as they are, feruants and gouernours. The 


_fulneffe indeed of it thall bee in that lifewhere(4) no man fhallferue. And 


Sia (a) re Stoicifme : eA flan’ wife , isa free eh a King ve @ flaxe. 


therefore here on earth, hee giueth kingdomes to the bad as well as tothe good, 
leaft his feruants, chat are but yet profelites fhould affe& them as great mat- 
ters. And this is the myfterie of his oldé Teftament, wherein thenew was in- 
cluded : that (c ) there, all che gifts and promifes were of this world,and of the 
world tocome alfo, to thofe that vnderftood them, though the eternall good 
that was meant by thofe temporall ones,were not as yet manifefted : nor in what 
gifts of God the true felicitie was refident. : 


 L VIVES. 


(4) No man foal! ferne,| Some bookes wante the whole fentence which followeth. 


And 


Ling. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 195 


Aud therefore.ec.(c)T bere all,| The rewards promifed to the kepers of the law in tle old Tel 
canent were all temporall,how be it they were mifticall types of the Celeftiall. : 


——— eee eo eee eS ot eee 


Of the 1ewes kingdome, which one God alone kept vamoued as long as 
they kept the truth of religion. 
: C HaP.34. | | 
T O thew therefore that all thofe temporall goods which thofe men gape 
after,that can dreame ofno better, are in Gods hands alone , and in none of 


their Idolls,therefore multiplied he his people in -£gipr, from(a)a very few and 
then deliueredthem from thence by miraculous wounders. Their womenneuer 


called vpon Lwcina when their children multiplied vpon them incredibly ; and 
when he preferued them from the(b)e£¢sptians that perfecuted them,and would — 
haue killedall cheir children. They fucke without Rwminashelpe; flept without 
Cunina, eate and dranke without Educa and Potica, and were brought vp without 
any of chefe puppy-gods helpes : married without the Nuptiall gods , begot chil- Gen.ge, 
dren without Preapas, crofied a the diuided fea without calling vpon Nep- 
tune, and left al cheir foes drowned behindthem. They dedicatedno Goddeffe 
cMannéa , When heauen had rained Alanna for them: nor worfhipped the Nym- 
phes when the rocke was cleftand the waters flowed out? they vfedno Afarsnor 
Bellona in their warres,and conquered , not without ¥#éfory , but without making 
Vittory agoddefle. They had corne,oxen,hony,apples , without Segetia , Bobona, 
Mellsor Pomona. And to conelude,all things that the Romasnes begged of fo many 
falfe gods ,theyreceiued of one true God in far happier meafure: And they per- 
fifted not in their impious curiofity in running after ftrange gods, as if they had 
beene enchaunted , and laftly in killing of Chrift , in the fame kingdome had they 
liued happily ftill, ifnot in alarger. And that they are now difperfed ouerthe 
wholecarth,is gods efpeciall prouidence,that what Alters,Groues,Woods,and The diptt- 
Temples of the falfe gods he reproueth,and what facrifices he forbiddeth,might fewgs, 
all be difcerned by their bookes as their fall it felfe was foretold them by their 
rophets : And this leaft the Pagansreading them with ours , mph thinke wee 
dfaigned them.But now toour next booke,to make an end of this tedious one 


~ 


L. VIVES. 


Roms 4 very few} The Sonnes of J/ra ell that went into o£, ipt,were 70.Gen.49.(6 in 
tians:) Here is a diuerfity of reading but all one fence: aad fo is there often fae 
which ] forbeare to particularize,or to note all fuch occurences, 


F inis, lib.4. 


Z3 | THE 


196 


THE CONTENTS OF THE 
fitth booke of the City of God. 


1. That neither the Romaine Empire,nor a- 
sy other Kingdome had any eftablifhment from 
the powre of Fortune ,nor from the flarres. 
chapter . | 

2. Of the mutuall Sympathie, and dffimill- 
trde of the health of body, and many ether ac- 
Cidents in twinnes of one bsrth. 

—-3- Of Nigidius the affrologians argument, 
sn this gueftion of the twinnes drawne from the 
potters wheele. 


4. Of Efau and Jacob two twinnes ,and of 


the diner fity of their conditions and quallitees. 
5. How the Mathematicians may bee conn 
nitted of profeffing dirett vanity. 
6. Of twinnes of different fexes, 


_ 7-Of the elettion of dases of marriage, of 


planting,and of fowing. 


8. Of their opinion that gine not the nante of 


Fate the pofition of the farres,but unto the de- 
pendance of caufes upon the will of Ged. 
9. OF Gods foedoonledie and mans free- 


dome of elettion againft the opinen of Cicero. 


10. Whether Neceffity bawe any domsinion o-- 


ner the will of MAN» 
11, Of Gods vninerfall pronidence , ruling 
all and compr fing all, 


12. How the ancient Romaines obtained 
this encreafe of their Kingdome at the true 
= hand , beeing that they newer worfhipped 

sm, 


13. Of ambition which beeing avice,isnote | flowed vpon Conltantine 4 chriftian Emsper 
withftanding herein held avertue , that it doth 


reftraine vices of worfe natures. 


14. That we are to anoide this defire of bn- 
“maine benour, the glory of the rightcous beeing wrote againft the beokes already publifbed. 


wholy in God. 


t5. Of the temporall rewardes that God bea 
flowed upon the Romaines vertues ,and good 
conditions, a | 

16. Of the reward of the eternall (tttizens 
of heanen ,to whonre the examples of the Row 
maines vertues were of good Ufe. 

17. The fruites of the Remaines warres,both 
to them/{elues and tothofe with whom they war- 
red. 

18. How farre the Chriftians fhould bee 
from boafting of their deedes, for thes eternall 
coustry, the Romaines haning done fe much 
for thetr temporall city and for humaine glory, 

19. The dsfference berweene the defire of glo- 
ry and the defsre of rule, | 

20, That vertne is as much di(graced in [ere 
97 lapse Slory as in obeying the pleafures 
of the body. | 

21. That the trae God in whofe hand and 
prosidence all the ftate of the world confifteth, 
didorder and d:{pofe of the Monarchy of the 
Romaines, | | 

22. That the Originalls and conclufcous of 
warres are all at Gods difpofe, — 

33. Of the battaile wherein Radagaifus as 
idolatrous King of the Gothes was flaine with 
all bis army. , 

24. The flate and truth of a chriftian E 
vors felicity, | 

25.Of the profperous effate that Ged bes 


ow, 


26. Of the faith and denotion of Theodo- 
fius Emsperor, 
27. Auguftines invettine againf? fuch at 


FINIS. 


- 


OF THE CITTIE OF GOD: 


497 


; Written by Saint _Auguffine Bifhop of Hippo, 


- 


- That neither the Romaine Empire nor any other Kinedome had any eftablihment 


se aoe. @ 


. Cinap.le, ke : ae a 
Hereas it is apparant fo all mens difcretion , that felicity is the 
ss hopeofal numane defires,and that the is no goddeffe, but mere- 
V/ALGH ly the gift of a god , and confequently that there is no god wot- 
Og, AVA ei thy of worthippe,but he in whofe power it lieth to beftow this 
nea 282! felicity vpon men; fo that if fhee were a goddefle herfelfe, the 
ga S2s=— § worthip ofal thereft (hould beintirely herssnow let vs looke in 
to the reafons why that God that can giue thofe earthly goods,afwel to the good 
as the euill, (andconfequently to fuch as are rot happy } fhould vouchfafe the 
‘Romaine empire fo large a dilaration,and fo longa contiunance:for we hauealrea- 
dy partly proved, and hereafter in conuenient place will proue more fully, ae 
Gg was not their rable of falfe gods that kept icin the {tate it wasin,whercforethe 
caufe ofthis was neither (4) Fortane, nor Fate, as they callthem,holding Fortupe Fortune & 
- to be an euent of things beyond al reafonand caufe:and Fate,an event from fome Fae ea 
neceflity oforder , excluding the will of god and man. But the god of Heauens 


by his onely prouidence, difpofeth of the kingdomes of Earth, whichifany man 
will fay is 


wayd by fate,and meane by chat fate ( 6) the will of God , he may hold 

his opinion ftill,but yet he muft amendhis phrate of {peach, for why did hee nor 

Jearne this.of him that-taught him what fate was. The ordinarycuftomeofthis  -- 
hach made men imagine fate to bee (¢ ) a power of the ftarres, fo or fo placed, in 
natiuities or conceptions; which (4 ) fome do feperate from the determination vulpes hala 
of God, and other fome do affirme to depend wholy therevpon. Burthofe that fate. 
hold that the ftarres do manage our ations, or our paffions , good, or ill, 

without gods appointment , are tobe filenced and not to be heard, be they of 
thetruereligion, or bee they bondflaues to Idolatry , of what fort foeuer ; for 

what doth this opinion, but flately exclude alll deity 2 Againft this error, we pro- 

feffe. noc any.difputation , bu: onely againft thofe: chac calumniat Chriftian re- 

ligion, indetence oftheir imaginary goddes. As for thofe that makethefeope- 
rations of the ftarres in good or badto depend vpon Gods will, if they fay thae 

they haue this power giuen them from him, to vfe according to their owne wills 

they do Heaven much wronge, in imagining that any wickeda@s, or iniu- 

ries are decreed in fo glorious afenatc , and fuch as if any earthly city had but 
inftituted, the whole generation of man would haue confpired the fubuerfion of 

it. And what part hath GOD left him ia this difpofing of humaine affaires , if — 

they be fwayed by aneceffity from the ftarres,whereas he is Lord both of ftarres The Afr 
and men? If they do noc fay that the ftarres aré caufes of thefe wicked arts, lopians ne, 
througha power that god hath giuen them,but that they effect them by his ex- celliry of | 
preffe commaund ; is this fit to be imagined for true of God, that is ynworthy the ftares, 
to be heldcrue of the ftarres, (¢) Buc.if one {aid to portend this onely 

~— | —8B | and 


198 SAINT AVGVSTINE. - Crap.r' 


And not to procure it, and that theif pofitions be but fignes, not caufes of fuch 
effe&s ( for fo hold many great {chollers hough the Aftrologians Vfe not to fay 
Cf) Mars infuch an houfe fignifieth this, or that :no,but maketh thechild-borne 
an homicide , to (/¢) grant them this error of {petch , whichthey muft learne to 
_ reformeofthe Philofophers in all their prefages derived from the ftarres po- 
fitions:)how commeth it to paffe that they could neuer fhew the reafon of chat 
. dinerfity of life, a&ions,forrune, profeffion, arte, honour, andfuch humaine ac- 
cidentes, that hath befallne cwo twinnes 3 nor of fuch a great difference , both in 
thofe afore-faid courfes , and in their death, that in this cafe , many ftrangers 
have come nearer them intheir courfes of life , chen the one hath done the o- 
ther, beeing notwithftanding borne both within a little it oftime the one 
r 


of the other, and conceiued both in ‘one inftane and from one aGe of g¢- 
neration? | | 


~_L. WIVES. 
| Forme (2) Nor fate] Seeing Aaguptint — at large in this place sraarogn | fate,I 


will diue a littlle deeper into the diuerfity of olde opinions herein , to make the reft more 
laine, Plato affimed there was one GOD , the Prince and Father of all che reft, at whofe 
tt: all the gods,and the whole world were obedient:that al the other gods,&& celeftial vers 
tues were but minifters to chis Creator of the vniuerfezand 9 they gouerned the whole world 
Fatewhac in places and orders by his appointment : that the lawes of this great God were vnalterable, _ 
isis, and ineuitable, and called by the name of Neceffities : No force,arte , or reafon,can floppe,ot 
_ hinder any of cheir effeétes t whereof the prouerbe arifeth: “he gods them/felues unf? ferne neu 
eeffity : But for the ftarres, fome of their effeéts may be auoided by wifdome, labour or indu&. 
ry,whercin fortune confifteth : which,ifthey followed certaine caufes, and were vnchangea : 
‘ble , fhould bee called fate, and yet inferreno neceflity of election . For itis in ourpowre to 
choofe,beginne,or wifh,what wee will: but hauing begunne,fate manageth the reft chat fol 
Joweth. It was frée for Lins ( faith Exrspides ) to haue begotten a fonne , or hots but hauin 
begotten hitn,then e4poife's Oracle mutt haue the events prooue true which it prefaged. This 
_- The def&eoand much tore doth ‘Plate difpute obfcurely ypon, in his laft de repab. For there hee puttes 
— fles3. = the three fatall Lifters ; Neceffities daughters , in heauen : and faith that Lechefis telleth the 
* _ foules that are to come to liue on earth, that the deuill {hall not poffefle them, butthcy hall 
~ father poffeffe the deuill : But the blamie liech wholy vpon the choile , if the choife bee 
_., naught, GO Dis acquit of all blaine sand then Lachefis cafteth the lottes. Epicurus dee 
Epicurus. idech all this, and affirmes all to bee cafuall, without any caufe at all why it fhould bee 
thus of thus, or if there bee any caufes, they are as eafie to bee auoided , as amothe is to bee 
{wept by . The Platonifts place Fortune in things ambiguous, and fuch as may fall out diuer= 
fely : alfo in obfcure things, whofe true caufes , why they are foor otherwife , are vnknownet 
fo that Fortune dealeth not in things that follow their efficient caufe, but ¢ither fuch as may 
Cue bee changed, or ate vndifcouered ; Now ¢friffotle (‘Phyf, 2. ) and all the Periparetikes 
Seheat a after him ( Alex. aAphrodsfienfs beeing ote) is more plaine. Thofe things (faith hee ) are 
areas A- Cafuall,whofe adte isnot premeditated by any agent :as if any mindigge his ground vppe, - 
gold - toiriake it fatte, finde 4 deale of treafure bid en; this is Fortaxe ,for hee came not to digge 
he chinketh, for chat treafure, but to fatten his earth : anid in this, the cafuall event , followed the notcae 


powre both ower all thé other gods and Joxe theie King himfelfe . Which is veiified 
f be, ale loue to hold from beeing, Onod fore paratuns eft, 


id fammum exuperat louem ; For in Homer, fone lamenteth that hee could not faue his fonne 


~ eee 


Tafols 


’ ae ee a 


Fo S33” oS Fee Cs 


a a 


Be Aww Feo OC SEF R nm 


vas 


ay 


Lig.’ (OFTHE -CITIE OF GOD. _ 19 


. 7 is 
ee ee eee ee me ar ys 
—Tufalainfuperabile fatum gd Pee Daughter’cis onely thou 

a tana ce aI ‘Canft mooue relentlefic fate, coernotanah 


Naté motere pitas. 
oe Sa a Oe Ure ea ak see eS 
| _ SaithherAndalicdeafters 9 8 

Que neque consi {um cali, nee fulminis ram, wie’, | Which feave nor thunders, gods “nor powers infertia | 
| “7 metuunt vilastulaatquegternarumas, | | But ftand vnaw'd, yntnooued, and eternal,  *t 
There were fome that held nothing cafuall, bur all fixed, certaine and immutable: Demetri 
sus,Emspedocles,and Feraclitus, were all of this opinion , which many others maintained after 
chem, as others did the pofitions of Epicurns. Lucane Pharf-ib,2, declareth both the opini« 
onsinthefewords —~= <= ~ i a ek a ee a Samal 


- Siue pavens rerum primiminformia regné, — 2 y Or natures God (when firft he bound the Fte, — 
- Materiamirudem flammd cedenterecepit, = = nd wrought this maife into one forme intire) 
Finxitin aterunm caufas,qua cuntta cocreet. -- - Forged eternal caufes,all eff: Ging,, 


Se quog loge temens,c> feculasafafereniem, ° - 
Fatoruus immsoto diutf: limite mundan, | 

Siue nibil pofttuss ef, fed fors incerta vagatur, 
Férique refertg, vices, & babent mortaliacafum, Or. 


Him elfe,and all the worlds eftace fabieQing 
To deftenies inchangeable direGing 2. 
Or bene our ftates in fortunes gonernance; 
Torife,orfalljandall by oncly chance... 


Fortune is often vied for deftenie,and the euents of things : which when they fall out a3 wee 

defire, that we call Felicitie : if contrary, Jnfelicstie : Thus much hete , more elfe-where, ( b) 

The wil of God | Of this by and by. (¢ ) A power of the fartrs j whetein the Stortkes, Plato, 

and almoftall the other Philofophers do place Fate - following the Chaldées and Ly iptians, 

to whom all the Mathematitians alfo doe giue their voyces, (d) Some do feperate ] Some fay; 

the operation of che ftaeres is a diftin® power from the will ef God: and in attributing this 
vniuerfall power to them, exclude Gods prouidence from humaine affaires. Befides,there are 

that affirme,that although God doe looke to the {tate of the world, yet the ftarres haue their 7p, Suns 
peculiar dominion in vs neuerthelefle. So hold (Maniline and Firmsicus and the Poets molt dominion 
commonly. Oo tae Raa: 

Others fabled them all vnto the will of GOD omnipotent, as Plate and the Stoikes 

dot, affirming all their operations to bee but the pra{criptiawestof hith,(¢) But if the farres] 
Grige ypon that place of Genefis: Let thems be for fignes,Chapt.x.verf:14, Saith chat che ftatres 
doe fignifie, but effect nothing, are (faith he ) as 4 booke opened , wherein may bee read all 
things to come, which way bee prooned by this, that they haue often fignified things past . But this 
booke cannot bee read by any witte of man, Plotine was of Origens opinion alfo , denying che Plotine; 
ftarres any aéte in thofe chings,but onely fignification. Sexeta, {peaking of the Starres, faith, 
they cither caufe or fignifie the effects of all things,but if they doe caufe them, what auaileth senecs 
it vs to know,that we cannot alter ? and if they bur fi nifie chem, whae good doth it thee , ro 


. fore-fee that thou canft riot audide? () Mars in fach | Mars is a ftarre, bloitdie, ea and 


violent. Being in the feuenth houfe ( faith Firmicus3:b.3,) ina pattile afpe& with the Horof- Mars a Sést 
cope (that is,in the Weft) hee portendeth huge mifchieues, ftayning the nativities with mure - 
thers,and many other villanies. (g)Togrant them } Hee alludeth vnto Twiies Chryfippas (de 
Fato) that would teach the Mathetntaticians, how to {peake io theit art. ees : 


Of the mutuall fimpathie and difimilitude of health of bodyand. 
many other accidents in twins of ome births - 

| —— ; | Chap: 3. rn : 
Ieero (4 ) faith , that Hippocrates chat ‘éxcelleric Phifitian wrote , that two 
children that were brethren, falling ficke,and the fickneffe waxing and wa- 
ning in both alike,were here-vpon fufpected to be twinnes. (6) And Pofidomin 
a Stotke, and one much affeted to A ftrologie,|aboureth to-prooie theim'to haue 
bin borne both vider one conftellation,and(c)conceiuéd both vnder one.So that 
which the Phifitian afcribeth to the fimilicude of thar temperatures of body,the 
Aftrologian attributes to-che power and tg of che ftarrs in their natiuitiéé, 
4 Bac 


7 


ee i Ee, oe a Te Be OT eT eT Pe 


Zan 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuan, 


But truly in this queftion, the Phifitians.conie@ure ftandeth vpon more proba- 
bilitie,becaufe their parents temperature might bee eafily cranftufed into them 
both alike at their conception: and their ficft grawth might participate equally 
of their mothers difpofition of body,& then being nourifhed both in one houfe, 
with one nowriffiment, in one ayré , countrie;and other things correfpondent, 
this now might have much power in the proportionating of both their natures 
alike, as Phyficke will teftifie: Befides,vfe of oné exercife equally in both, might 
forme their bodies into a fimilitude, which might very well admit all aleerations 
of health alike, and equally in both. But to drawe the figure of heauen, and the 
ftarres vnto this purity of paffions (it being likely that a great companie of the 
greateft diuerfitie of affects thatcould bee might haue originall in diuerfe parts 
ofthe wor'd,at oneand the fame time ) were a prefumprion vnpardonable. For 
(‘4 ) we have knowne twotwinnes,that haue had both diverfe fortunes, and dif- 
ferent fickneffes,both in time,and nature: whereof ( meethinkes ) Hépocrates gi- 
ueth a very goad reafon, from the (¢) diuerfitie of nourifbment, and exercife, 
which might bee caufe of different health in them: yet that diuerfitie was effec- 
ted by their wills and eledtions at firft and not by their temperature of body. 
But neither Po/iagnzes,nor any patron.of this fare in the ftarres , cantell what to 
fay in this cafe,;and.doe not illudethe fingle and ignorant with a difcourfe of that 
they know not, for that they talke of the {pace of time, between that:point which 
they call the ( /) Horofcop@; in both the twinnes natiuities : it is ether not fo 
fignificant as the diverfitie of willyaGe , manners , and fortune of the rwinnes 


§ borne doth require,or elfe ic is more fignificant, then their difference of honors, 
“+ ftate,nobilitie,or meanneffe will permit : both which diuerfities they place onely 


in the figure of the natiuitie. Buc if they fhould be both borne ere the Horofcope 
were fully varied; then _ require an vnitie in each particular of their for- 
tunes,which ( ¢) cannot be found.in any rwo twinnes that euer yet were borne. 


‘But ifthe Horofcope be changed ere both bee borne, then for this diuerfitie I will 


Foffidon'ss 


Horolc Cy 
creeps 


require a ( b) difference of parents which twins cannot pofitbly haue. 2 


ao ran ) L. VIVES. | | | 
Ci (a) faith | 1 cannot remember where: I beleeue in his booke De fate: which is 
~~ wonderfully mutilate,and defectiue as we haue it now,and fo fhallany one finde that will 
obferue it. (4) Whom Poficonius ] A Rhgdian,ard a teacher of Rhodes .Hee was alfo at Reme 
afollower of Panatins. Cicero (c.) conceined both \for the conception is of as much moment 
as the natiuitie. (4 ) We bane knowne | Such were Procles and (yrefteus, Kings of Lacedemox. 
(ic. de dininat, lib,2. ( € ) Dinerfitie of | This is one of the caules why an Aftrologian cannot 
judge perfedlly of natiuities,Pro/, Aporelen(maton.lib.1. (f) Horofcope | ieboxoms 1s the look- 
ing vpon an houre : andis that part of the Zodéake, which afcendeth our Hemifhbere , at any. 
euenr. For the revolution of this Zodiake is perpetuall ; and ftill one part of it arifeth in our 
Horifon, and the part direétly oppofite , fetteth: all the other are diuided among{t the other 
houfes of heauen. (¢) (‘assxot be found | Nature neuer bound any one thing to another in 
fuch proprietie,but the fet fome differencs betweene them: what skilleth ic whether thofe 
two had originall from one feede ? Euery man is framed and borne to his owne fortune ,and 
be they two or three brechren borne at once, their deftinies promife no fraterniti¢ , but each 
one mult yndergoe his particular fate. Onintil, In Geminis Languentibus. (hb) Difference of 


parents) why fhould not the rivers be like that flow both from one head ? 


Of Nigidius the Aftrolog jams argument , 9n this gueftion.of the twinnes, 7 
: Aarawne from the potters wheele. Crar.3. , 


PRuthare therefore is that notable fiction of the Potters wheele 5 which 


Nicidins 


Lins, § | OFTHECITIEOF GOD. got 


Nigidius(a) (they fay) anfwered to one that plunged him in this controuerfie, 
whervponhe was called(b) Poster. Turning a potters wheele twice or thrife about 
as faft as he could,he tooke inke,& in the turning made two markes(as it feemed) 
in one place of the wheeles egde; and then, ftaying the whecle;the markes were 
found far a {under one from anothervpon the edge of the wheele,(c)euen fo(faith 
he) in the {wife courfe ofheauen , though one child be borne after another in as 
fhort atime as] gaue thefe two markes , yet in theheauens will be paffed a great 
{pace . And that ( quoth he) is the caufe of the diuerfity of conditions, and fer- 
tunes betwixt two twinnes. (4 ) Here isa figment now farre more brittle then 
the Portes that weremade by that wheele, for ifthere bee thus much power in 
Heauen ( ahd yet cannot bee comprehended by che conftellations ) that one of 
the twins may bee anheyre and inherite , and not the other , how dare thofe Af 
* trologians giue fuch prefages vnto others that are noc twinnes;when as they are 
included in thofe fecret points in natiuities which none can comprehend ? But 
if they fay they do prognofticate this to others,becaufe they knowthat it belong- 
eth vnto the knowne and difcerned fpaces that paffe in natiuities, and that thofe 
moments chat may come betweene the birth of cwo twins do but concerne flighe 
things , and fuch as the Aftrologian vfeth not to bee troubled with ; for no 
man will afke the calculator when he fhould fie, walke, or dine ? How can this be 
{aid when wee fhew fuch diuerfity in the manners, ftates, aGtions,and fortunes of 
two twinnes. | he as , 


L. VIVES. 


Nite a) they fay| P.Nigidins figules was borne ofa very honeft family , end cameto be 

Prator : he was of great wit,and exellent both in many other worthy fciences (forhat hee nioidins 
was compared with Varro , in whofe time , or thereaboutes, he liued ) and efpecially inthe Figulus, 
Mathematiques . T#/ynameth him often. Suetonius faith that out of Ottawins his eure of 
natiuity,he prefaged that he fhould be Lord of all che world. Lacane.lib.t. 


At Figulus.cus cura deos Secretagne cali, But Figulus whofe ftudy wvas to {can, 
Noffe fst quem non Rcllarum Aegiptia Membis, Heauens high prefage,whome no Aegiptian, - 
Aequaret uifsnumeri{que monentions aflra.crc. in Mathemarique skill could paralel, &c, 


(5) Called Potter, |Intatine Figulus. This man was of the Nigidéan family ; there were other 
Figuli ofa more honored houfe,namely the (Martians, whereof one was confull with L, Iwi: 
Cafar,two yeares before Ciceros confulfhip. Another,with Na/ica,but was put from his place, 

becaufe the auguries were againft his election.(c)So (quoth he.) How much time thinke you: 

(faith Ovintiian ) was betweenc the firft birth , and the fecond? but a little truely in moriall | 

mens iudgement, but if you will confider the immenfity of this vniuerfe , you fhail find much 

paffed betweene their two productions.Jn geminis langu, (d) Here is a figment.| This one an- ; 

their prefages , pofitions and calculations in natiuities , for iffo little a {pace of time bee | 

{were of Nigsdsns ( which the Mathematitians thinke was mofl acute,doth viterly fubuert all ' 

capable not onely of ‘diuerfities but euen of contraries , who can prognofticate any thing of - 

any childe borne, when as the moment both of his conception his and inatiuity is fo hard to be . 
knowne?So that were it graunted,that the ftarres haue power in vs, yet vnto man itis income |, 
prehenfible : the moments wherero the figure muft be ereéted beirig impoffible to bee found, | 

and the fwift courfe of che Heauens ouettunning our flow confideration, Jx/ins firmicus,aman 

idlely eloquent, hauing obietted this reafon againft him-felfe and his arte, and promifingto _._ - 
diffolue it,after he hath tumbled himfelfe fufhiciently in a multitude of common places, lets it Tbe ars, . 
alone with filence,and thinkes he hath done very wel,fuppofing that this whirle-winde of his 2 ™ 
eloquence had caft duft inough into the readers cies to make him forget the aduerfe argument, thoughtes; 
But itis neither he,nor any ¢ 4alde of them al that can anfwer it, Thomas Aquinas in tke rhan- 

ner entangleth himfelfe exceedingly in circumftances of times,and minuitcs, and places;for in 

his booke De fato,he faith that twins are of dinets difpofitions ,becaufe the feed of generation 

| was 


202 | SAINT AVGVSTINE. —. C uarg 
ie a 


_ was not receiued into the place of conception al at one time, fo chat the center of the heatt,be- 
ing notone in both, they muft needs haue different egreffes and Horizoxs . But how fmalla — 
{pace is their {pent in the full receiuing of the fede how little a time paffeth betweene the 
coagulation of the hearts, that this fhould be fufficient to trafmute the whole nature of man? 
Sothat hereby it is not fufficient to tel the Mathematician that {uch an one was bome at Paris 
or Valencia, but hee muft know in which ftreete , in which chamber, nay in what pare of the 
chamber But in another worke,I will handle this theame of another fafhion, and proue , that 
there is no truft to be putin thofe vaine {uperflitions , but that all dependeth vpon our Lord 
and Sauiour Iefus Chrift,whome we aretointreatforthemall, oy mn 

Of Efau andlacob two twinnes,and of the diner ity of their condstions 
| and qualities. CMAP. 4. — 


‘ds N the memory of our fore- fathers ( to fpeake of men of note ) there were two 
0a.2§- 3(4)rwins borne,fonere to gether,that the fecond held the firft by the heele, yet 
in their lives, maners andactions, was fuch a maine difparity , chat chat very 
difference made them enemies one to another. I meane not this, that the one far, 
when the other ftood,nor that the one flept, when the other waked, thefe belong 
to thofe firft markes and moments which they cannot comprehend who ere 
thofe figures of natiuity for the A ftrologers to iudge vpon:()one of them bound 
him felfe to ferue for wages: the other ferued not at all : che one was loued by his 
mother, fo was not the other: the one loft his honor and inheritance (a matter of 
reat momentamongft them) and the other obtained it: And how great a diuerft- 

ty was there in their mariages ,wiues,children and goods? exceeding much. 


L.VIVES. 


Tr 4) Twins borne\[acob and Efau,of Ifaac and Rebecca Gene.2 5.25.26.(b)One of \Taceb 
he ferued Laban his father in law, for Rachell ¢ he was dearely beloued of his mother Re- 
becca,and got Efau his patrimony from him, which was a thing in thofe daies of moft honor, 


and vic,of all things betides. 


| ec ee | 
How the Mathematicians may be connitted of profe(ing vanity. 
QLHAP. 5: 2 
V Vilerefore if chefe chings belong to thofe {paces of time that pafle betwixt 
the birchsof twins, andarenot wrought vpon by the conftellations , why 
| then arethey prefaged out of the Horofcopes of others. But if they be prefaged as 
Hipocrates pertinent vnto the arger {paces of time that fal vnder thenotice of Artifts,&not 
hisguelle, der chefé momentary minuits that are indiftinguible, then what vie is there of 
the potters whele , but only toturne leaden heads about till they become braine- 
ficke , and paft difcerning thofe Afathematicians vanities 2? And thofe whofe 
difeafes(fo fimpathizing in all circumftances ) made Hypocrates out of the rules 
of Phifike , iudge them to be twines , do not they fufficietnly put downe thofe 
that will needes make that proceed from the ftarres which arifeth out of 
the temperature of their bodies ? For why did they not ficken as they were 
borne, one after an other ? ( for borne together they could not bee) or if their 
different times of birth be no caufe of different times of fickneffe , why do they 
alledge it to be the caufe of other accidents ? why (hould they trauell, marry, 
beget children , and do ft ‘ich like at divers times , onely becaufethey wereborne 
at divers times, and yet not be ficke at diuerstimes by the fame reafon 2 If their 


difference of birth changed their Horofcope, andall other matters thereon depen- 


| 


Lrs.5. OFTHE CITIE OF GOD. © 203 


9 ne Een a ne 


ding, why then did that equality remaine with the times of their fickenefle,that 
Saae mthe time of their conception: of if they fay that the courfe of ficke- 
neffe onely followeth the conception , and all the reft the natiuity , theti ought 
they not to prognefticate any thing concerning ficknefle at natiuities , vnlefle 
they haue the houre of conception, but if the Aftrologian prefage fickneffe with- 
out {eeing the figure of che conception becaufe the fayd prefage is included in 
thofe interpofed moments of the birth, how would hee tell either of thofe rwins 
when hee thould bee ficke, who hauing each adiuers Horofcope , yet muftne- 
aertheleffe fall ficke both at one time? Finally I aske againe , if the intermiffion 
in the birch of two twinnes bee fo much; that ic alters their whole fortunes, be- 
caufe of their Horofcopes: and in altering of the (a) foure angles , (wherein the 
put all the powre, ) alrereth alfo their whole deftentés , How can this cometo 
paffe,when as the time of their conceptions was both at one inftant? Or if two 
that are both conceiued at one point of tithe, may fortune to bee bornetheone 
before the other, why may tot two that are borne both in one moment of time, 
hane fortune to die the onc before the other?for if that one & the fame moment 
Of their coriception hindered not the fucceffion of their birth, why fhould the 
fame moment that is one in both the birthes, hinder the fucceffiue time of their 
deathelftheit conceptid ;being in ore thinut,permit thé co haue diuers fortunes 
in, their mothets wombe , why (hould not their natinity being of the fame fate, 
permit themto haue diuers fortunes while oe vpon earth?& to take away 
ail the fiGions of this arte,(or rather vanity)of theirs , in this one queftion , what 
is the caufe,that fuchas are conceiued bothin one moment of time, both vnder 
one conftellation ; ‘fhould neuvertheleffe haue their deftinies in their mothers 
wombe;to bee borne at feuetall times ? and yet,that two being borne of two mo- 
thers, both in one moment of time, cantor hdué diuérs deftenies , whereby the 
one may die before the other, or out-liue the other ? did not their defteny enter 
vpon their conception , or could they not haue it vnleffe they were firft borne? 
why is it faid then that ifthe houre of conception bee knowne,they cari prefage 
many things mof oraculoufly ? And here vponit is faid offome,thata cercaine 
wife mah did make choife of anhoure of copulation with his wife , whereby to 
beget a fonne woofe after worth fhould be admired? And laflly , whereofcom- 


“meth ir, that Péfidowiai the Afttologian gaue this reafon for thétwo brethrens 


perticipated fickenéfle, that it was becaufe they were botné,and conceiued both 
togither ? he added , Conceined , becaufe it fhould not bee obie&ed to him thatit 
was not certaine that fuchas were conceiuedtogither fhould bee borne both 
at the fame inftant: and that hee might draw this mutuall affe& of theirs, 
not from their paritie of temperatures, but from the powre of the- ftarres. 
But iftheré bee {uch a powre of equallizing the defteny of twinnes in their con- 
ception, then verily the diuerfiry of time in their birth ought nor ro alter ir. 
Ifthe defteiiies of rwinnés bee changed by their feuerall cimes of birth, why 
may we riot rather conceitie that before their birth, they were appointed by de- 
Atenie to feueral birchs?Shall not then the will of the man living, change the Fate 
ofhis nativity,when as his oder of birth doch change the fateof his conceptid? 


| L. VIVES." 


[4 (a) Angles] Foure chiefe arigles the easly put in euery natiuity.r. the Hon The Ane. 
rofcope,the figne of the orient; afcending 2. The oppofite to which is the figne of the Weft gles of hea:, 

fallingedemesraly diftany fromthe Eorofcope 180.degrecs.3 ALid-heanex,the point between &,' - 

aya * : | 7 7 ~ the 


204. 


the goddeffe,the Sood fortune the Sood Genins.Thefe angles are nothin g but the fig 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. —- Cuare, 


the Horofcope and the weft angle, 4. the oppofite mid-heauen vnder the earth. The Greekes 
call thefe foure : LPAT AM AO oreeTenaric, vvbyeny, there are foure other’ angles alfo, in the 2.6.8. 
and r 2. fiene from the Horofcope : the Greekes call Giov, Bear, zvabluistuy ev. raBodespores The God 


which they 


ly. The angle of the Horefcope concerneth the life : the 2.money or hope : the 3.brethren, the 


+P . 
relateth out of the fooleries of (Waternus . But wee 


Of twinnes of different fexes. Cuar.é. } 
cE: often falleth out notwithftanding, that in thefe concurrences and vnions of 
time, conception and conftellation,the children conceiued arethe one a male 
the other a femalle. Iknowe ewo twinnes of diuers fexes, both ofthem aliue, 
and lufty at this day. They are as like in fanour,one to another as their difference 
of fexe can permit: but in their fathion,and order of life > fo vnlike that(befides 
the actions which muft of neceffity diftinguith betweene men and women ) hee 
is continually in warre in the office of a/4)Cosnt and neuet commeth home:{hee 


continually in her country where fhe was borne, and neuer goeth abroad. Na 


Manis not 
conceiued 
after the 
firft con~ 


which is more incredible ( re{pecting the powres of the ftars andnot the wills of 
God and men Jheis a married man,and fhee is a holy Virgin; hee hath many chil. 
dren,& fhe was neuer maried.O but theit tice OS ened mel Jesar 
things : tuth,I haue fhowen the powre of that to bee iuft noth ing, already : I but 
whatfocuer it doth, it is there, in the nativity that it mutt doit. What, and not in 
the conception, wherein it is manifeft that there was butone generative a& con 
current? (for (6) natures powre is fuch thata woman hauing once conceiued, 


cannot fecond any conception, vntil the bee deliuered of the Grit. and therefore it 


is nieceffary thatthe twinnes conceptions fall'both in one moment : were their 
diuers Horofcopes ( thinke you) the caufe that in their birth, hee became a man- 
child,and fhe a womanewherefore fince it is no fuch abfurdity to fay , chat there 
are fome planetary influences that haue effe onely vpon diuerfity of formes in 
bodies,as wé fee the alteration of the yeare, by the funnesacceffe and departure, 
& diuers things to incréafe, and decteafe, iuftas the moone doth :(crabs for éx- 
ampleandall fhel-fithes : befides the wonderfull (c) courfe of the fea : ) but thar 
the minde of man is not fubie@ vnto any of thefe powres of the flares: thofe 
artifts how prran to binde our ages vnto this that wee fee them free from, 
doe fhew vs plainely , chat the effeétes of the ftarres haue not powrefo much 
as vpon oir bodies. (4 ) For what is {o pertinent vnto the bo i¢, as the fexe 
thereof: and yet wee fee ; that ewo twinnes of diuers fexes’ may bee conceiued 
both vnder one conftellation. Wherefore what fonder affection can there 
bee,then to fay chat that figure of Heauen which was one in the conception of 
them both had not powre to keepethe fifter ftom differing in fexe from her 
brother,with whom fhe had one conftellation sand yet that that figure of heauen 
which ruled at their natinity had powre to make her differ fo far from him in her 
Virgins fan&timony. | | | 


L.VIVES. 


(A Cote COfice ofa (4) Count) A Const is a hang of dignity , yfed but of thefe moderne times, 


 darcelinns 


: 
* * - ens : . Ss 
P * : , 
‘ 


Lins. § OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 05 


Marcellus nameth it in his 14. booke calling Nebridixns (ount of the Orient, and Gerox- 

tins count of Magnentia,and in his fxteeneth booke Ur{uées,Count of the beneuolences, and 

twenty one Philagrinus Count ot the Orient. 1 know noc whether thefe connts were thofe that 

were called in Greeke Acoliths,and were alwaies at the Emperors clbowe,(6) Nateres |. Of all Creatures - 
; ; a ae Li : ; - fuperfztant 

ereatures,onely thc Hare and the Cony do conceiue double,vpon the firft conception,and ha- giv is bree 

uing young in their bellies, will conceiue 4 frefh. e4riff. Plin. A worhan (faith Ariftetle:Hift. ding vpon 

animal.lib.7. {eldome conceiueth vpon her firlt young : but fometimes fhe may - it there paffe blood, 

but alictle {pace betweene the conceptions , as Hercales and /phyclus ( by report)were con- 

ceiued. There was an adultereffe alfo,that bore rwo children at a birth, one like her husband, 

and another like her lemman, This out of -4rsfotle and Ptiniib.7 but they ate rare examples, 

And ifa man would expofe them , hee could not bee brought by reafon to confeffe that thofe 

children were concciued one after ancther - though I know that Era/iftratus ,a worthy Phifie 


ian holdeth,that all twins are conceived orie after another, and fo do diuers Stoscal/ Philofo~ Treinties 


phers alfo hold of many twins bur not ot all: But Hippon'and Empedocies held that of one a& both begots 


. of generation by reafon of the abundance of feed, were all twins conceiued, Afclepiades afcri- ten and _ 


beth it to the verene not the aboundance of feed. (¢) Wounderfullcom fe of the fea. | Worthily borhe, 
wounderfull , whereof the true caufe is not fully knowne ynto this day , neither of the double vasthds 
flowing dayly,nor double flowing monethiy,which the Saylers cal the {pringt.des, falling out Tm vical 
at the moones full and the change, (4) for what, | The male and female in all creatures arecor- | = 
refpondente in all things but generation, but in that be és the male that generateth is another What male 
and of bins felfe:/be the female that can generate of an other and in her felfe,cherfore they talke of & female is 


many women that haue beenc chang¢d into men: 


! 


-- . Of theelettion of daies of maryage of planting and of fowing. 
7 ~ Cuar. 7° | 


BY ¢(4)who can indure this foolety of theits, to inuenta new defteny for euery 
D4 Gion a man vndertaketh; That wife man aforefaid it feemes , was not borne 
to haue'an admirable fonne, but rather a contemptible one,and therefore elected 
he his houre,wherein to beget a worthy one.So thus,did heworke himfelfe a def- 
teny,more thenhis ftarres portended,and made that a part ofhis fate, which was 
not fignified in his nativity. O fondneffe moft fatall! A day muft now-be chofen - - 
for marriage: becaufe ocherwife one might light of an vnlucky day,and fomake . 
an ill marriage. But (2) where then isthe defteny of your natiuity ? canaman 
change what his fate hath appointed, by choofing this day or thatand cannot the 
the fate of that day which he choofeth be altered by another fate ?againe , ifmen 
dione of all the creatures of earth bee vnder this {tarry power , why do they (cy 
choofe daies to plant, and daies to fowe, and fo forth ; daies tame cattle, 
daies to put tothe males for increafe of oxen , of horfes, and {uch like? Ifthe 
eleGion of thofe daies bee good, becaufe the ftarres haue dominion in all earth- 
ly bodies , liuing cteatures and plants, according asthe times do changes let 
them but confider how many creatures haue originall from one and the. 
faine inftant , and yet haue fuch divers ends, as hee that but noteth will de- 
ride thofe obferuations as childrens toyes , for what fotte will fay thae all 
herbes , trees, beafts, birds, ferpents , wormes, and fifhes, haue each onea. 
particular moment of time to bee brought forth in ? yet men do vfe for trying of 
the mathematicians skil, to bring them the figures of the births of beafts , which. 
ehey haue for this enddeligently obferuedat home ;and him they hold themoft 
skild Mathematician , that can fay by the figure ,thisprotendeth the birth of a 
deaftand not of a man ,nay they date goe vnto what beatt it is whether fic for 
bearing woll, for carrages ,for the plough , — cuftody of the houfe , forthe 


eo. 


206 - - SAINT AVGVSTINE. — Cuar8 


are often asked counfell of the deftenies of dogs, and giue an{fweres breeding 
great admiration. Nay men are now growneto thar grofeneffe of braine , thae 
they thinke when a man is borne, creation is tyed to {uch an order , that not fo 
-. muchas a fly is brought forch in that region at that tithe ; for if they giue vs but 
bicth-rome for a fly we will draw them by gradation till we come to an elephant. 
_;. | Nor haue they wit to confider this, that in their fele@ed day of {owing corne, ig 
{pringeth and groweth vp altogether , and being growne totheheight it ripens 
altogether , and yet the canker fpoyleth one peece and the birds another, and 
men cut vp the thitd,of al this corne,that neuertheleffe grew vp alcogether. How 
will they doe with the conftellation of this , that hath partaken fomany kindes of 
ending ? Or doth it not repent them of electing daies for thefe things , denying 
» _-” them ro belong to heauens difpofing,and putting onely men vader the ftarres,to 
*  -  whome onely of all the creatures vpon earth God hath pining free and vncon- 
_ {trained wills. Thefe being confidered,it is no euill beleefero thinke that the Af 
Afrolngers Ologers(d) do prefage many things wonderfully and truly, but that is , by a (e) 
howe  fecret inftin&of éuill {pirits (whiofe care it isto infecét,noufle,and confirme mens 
Prefazers. minds inthis falfe and dangerous opinion of fate in the ftarres ) and not by any 
| artofdifcerning ofthe Horofcope,for fuch is therenone. | | 


L. VIVES. | ae 
WwW Ho can(a)endwre.] The Aftrologers, Haly,eAbenragel , Meffahalach , and othets write 
of thefe elections, Haly, Ptolomies interpretor as Pitas Mirandula writeth,faith, this part 
of Aftrology is friuolous and fruitleffe. ( 6) Where then. | If your natiuitiés deftinie be againft 
your enterprife, it fhall neuer haue good end,as Ptofomy holdeth : Picws writeth much againtft 
Affrologers.&6,2.and of this matter alfo, But eugu/fize hath the fumme of all here.(c\(boofe 
Hefiod, daies.| Hefiod was the firft that diftinguifhed the dates of the moone , and the yeare,for coun- 
try bufineffes : and him did all che writers of husbandry follow , Greekes Latsnes and others: 
writersof Democritas, and Virgil, Cato Sentor, Varro, Colwmella,‘Palladius, Plinie.ore. (d). Deo preface] 
husbandry. He that often fhooteth muft needes hit fome-times, few of the Mathematicians falfe anfweres 
Sup Gen, f¢ obferued,but all their crue ones are,as miraculous.(e)Setret inffink. | The prefayes from the 
aditet,2, farres\ faith Arguftine elfe where)are,as by bargaine from the denills and inftintts of thetrs which 
de.doG.chr, the minds of men feele but perceine not and be prefageth best shat ss in greateft credit with bis dine. 
ll eet « 
- Of their openton that gine not the name of Fate the pofttion of the frarres,but vn- 
5 "to the dependance of canfes upon the will of God. ee 
; HAP. 8. : 
A S for thofe that do not giue the pofition of the ftarres iti natiuicies and con- 
ceptions the name of fate, but referue it onely ro that connexion of (4) 
caufes, whereby all things come to paffe, wee neede not vfe many words to them: 
becaufe they conforme this coherence of caufesto the willof God , who is well 
and fuitly beleeued , both to fore-know al things before the event,and to leaneno 
Gos fore- euent vndifpofed of ere it be an event: from whomeé are all powers,though front 
knowledge. him arife not all wills for that it is the will of that great and all-difpofing God, 
which they call Fafe,thefe verfes(. (b) of Anneus Senecas I thinke will proue. 
Duc me fiiime pater, ltique dominater pols, Léad me,Great Lord,King ot eternity, | 
> woctngue placucrit, nulla parendd moraef. Euen where thou wilt, He not refilt theeL. 
A{fum impiger : fac wolle,comitabor gemens: Chang thou my will yer fill | vow (abie&tion, 


Malufque patiar facere quod licuit bono, Being led,to that that’s in the goodeleGion.. 
. Ducwt volentem fata nolentem trabunt. < Fate leads the wilhiny,hales the obftimate 


. Thus inthe laft verfe , hee dire@ly calleth that Fete, which inthe former hee 
called the wilof the great Lord, to whome hee promifeth obedience,and to be led 
willingly, leaft hee bee drawne on by force, becaufe,Fate /eads the willing bales the 
shflipate.-And(c) Homers verfes tranflated into Latine by Tw/y areas thefeare.:: : 
ae : | Tales 


Cad . 
~ 


Pn NE CN SS IE 


Liss. OF THE CITIE OF GOD.  -\207 
Tales {unt hominum mentes qualis pater ipfe, | | Such are the mindes of men as Jouc the great 
Lupicer auctifferas luffrauit lunsine terras. Vouchfafes,that hls the earth with light, and heate. 


Wee would not bring Poetique fentences for confirmation of this queftion, but 

‘because chat Tu//y faith , chat the Stokes , ftanding for this power of Fate’, vfe to 

quote this place of Homer , wee now ailedge them ,not as his opinion, but as_ 
theirs , who by thefe verfes of Fate fhewed in their difputations what they 

thought of Fate, becaufe they call vppon Joxe_, whome they held tobe that great 

God , vppon whofe directions thefe caufes.did depend. | 


\ | L. VIVES. 


C Onnexion( a) of cafes | (Cic.de diuin. lib, 2.) Reafon therefore compels vs to confes that all The Soiks 

_s things come to paffe by fate:by fate I mean the Grecks tszepuavn, that is,an order or courfe of tate. 

things @: canfes,arifing one from another:that is the enerlasting truth flowing fro al eternity. (. bry- 

Sippus in Gellius faith , that Fate is custnla catreatirjemc, A natural compofition of caufes gud things 

arifing one from another from al eternity being an rmmutable combination of them all.(b) Anneas 

Senecas | Epift. lib,8, ) The verfes were (leanthes his,Seneca but tranflated them : they are all 

Senarian. Buttae firlt of chem is not perfectly readsit were better to read it. Dac me parens 

celfig, dominator Poli : Coleyne copy hathit,Duc fimme Pater altig, dominator Poli. Indifferent 

well. The faid thing hath Sexeca in his book de beneficys, Speaking of God:if you call him Fate 

(faith he )st és not amiffe-for he is the firf? canfe whence all the reft hane originall : and fate ts no- 

’ thing but a coherence of canfes This is the common opinion of the Stotkes,to hold one God, cal- 

ling him Fate, and Adens,and Jupiter , andraany other names, Thete are the foure ancient 

opinions of Fate,which Picus(Contra Aftrolog. lib. 4. ) rehearfeth. The firftheld Fate to be na- Foure opi- 

ture,fo that the things which fell out by eleétion,or chance,they excluded fromFate, as Virgill Bae 

faith of Dido,that killed her-felfe,and dyed nat by Fate’: and (cero : If any thing had befalne : 

me , as many things hung oner mans head befides nature and befides fate; This opinion is Phfielo- 

_ gicall,and imbraced by Alexander,one of Ariffotles interpreters. The fecend held fate to be an 
eternall order and forme of caufes , as aforefaid. Third put all in the ftars. The fourth held fare 

to be oxely the execution of the will of God. (¢) Homers] Odyf. eng? ae 


SE STEED 9 OE Ee 
o 


Tosyap veos, ec, Such are the mindes ofmen, &c : 

V lifes Speaketh them to Phemins , affirming a mutabiity of rnens mindes,and that they are not Godthe 
of power to keepe them-felues fixe,but alter continually ‘as it pleafeth the great-Jupster to in- changer of 
{pire and tranftorme them. The later of che latine verfes in the text doth not exprefle Homers the Will, 
mind But | fufpectitto be wronged incopying. .. | ae 

Of Gods fore-knowledge and mans freedome of eleHtionsagain? . > > 

the opinion of Cicero. Cuarn9 © 2 oe 
Gainft thefe men, T#//y thinketh hecannor hold argument,vnlefle hee ouek- 
throw diuination,& therefore he laboureth to proue that chere isno prefci- 
~ ence,nor fore-knowledge of things to come, (4) either in God or mans there is di- 
reG@ly no fuch matter. Thus denieth he Gods fore-knowledge,& idely feekethto 
fubuert the radiant luftre of true prophecies, by propounding a fore. of ambigu- 
ous and fallible oracles,whofe truch not-withftanding he doth not confute: Bur 
thofe conieGturesof the Mathemsatiques he layeth flat, for indeed they are the or. . 
dinance to batter them-felues. But for al that,their opinion is more tollerable,} 2:.1.~- 
afcribe a fate (6) vnto the ftars, chen his, reiects al fore-knowledge of things to 7 
comne:For to acknowledge a God, & yet to deriy that,is monftrous madnes:which 
he obferuing,went about to proue euen that W the foole hath fata in his heart: theve pts.rg, 1 
23 no God: Mary not in his own perfon,he faw the danger of mallice too well ;: and 
therfore making Cotta difputehand-fmooth againft the Stozkes vpon this theamé, 
in his books De satura Deorum:there he feemes more willing to hold with ( ¢) Le- 
ciliss Balbus that ftood for the Stoskes,then with Cotta, that argued againft the di- 
) T. 


208 


SAINT AVGVSTINE | Cues 


renee eer res 
uineeffence. But in his bookes Of diuination , hee directly oppofeth the. 
fore-knowledge of thinges , (4) of him-felfe and in his owne perfon: all 
which it feemeth hee didde leaft hee fhould yee'de vnto fate , and fo loofe 


_the freedome of election : For hee fuppofed that in yeelding to this fore- 


know-ledge , fate would follow neceflarily there-vpon , without all deniall. 
But how-foeuer the Phylofophers winde them-felues in webbes of difputati- 
ons, wee , as wee confeffe the great andtrue GOD, fodowe acknowledge 
his high will, power , and fore-knowledge : Nor lette vs feare that wee doe 
not performe all our actions by our owne will becaufe he,whofe fore-knowledge 
cannot erre,knew before that we fhould do thus or thus:which 7 #//y feared , and 
therfore denied fore. knowledge;and the Stosks that held not al things to be done 
by neceflity, thought that they were done by fate. Whatthen did Tf feare in 
this prefcience,that he framed fuch dereftable arguments againft it? Verily this, 
that ifall euents were knowne ere they came to paffle, they fhould come to paffe 
according to that fore-knowledge. And if they come fo to pafle,then God know- 
eth the certain order of things before hand: and confequently the certaine order 
of the canfes;and if he know a certaine order of caufes in all events, then arealle- 
uents difpofed by fate:which if it be fo, wee haue nothing left in our power, no- 
thing in our will:which granted ( faith be) the whole courfe of humanity is onertur- 
pana tail He ¢,di/grace,exhortation,prohibition,al art to no end: ner is ther 


_ any infisce in panifbing the badand rewardsng the good. For auoiding of which in- 


conueniences ( fo abfurd and fo pernitious ) he veterly reiecteth this fore-know- 
ledge of things,and draweth the religious minde into this ftrait,that either there 


- mutt be fem-what in che power of our will,or elfe that there is a fore-knowledge 


of thingsto come,but the granting of the one is the fubuerfid of the other: choo- 
fing of the fore-knowledge,we mutt loofe the freedome of election,and choofing 
this,we muft deny the other. Now this earned and prouident man , of the two 


maketh choyfe of freedome of election:and to confirme it denieth the fore-know- 
~ ledgevtterly. And fo inftead of makingmen free , maketh them blafphemous. 


But the religious mind choofeth them both,confefleth & confirmeth them both, 
How(faith he? )For granting this fore-knowledge, there followeth fo many confequents 
that they quite fubuert all power of our will:and holding thus by the fame degrees we af- 
cend sill we find there is no prafetence of future things at all,for thus we retire through 
them. If there be any freedome of the will all things do not follow deftiny:If all thinges 
follow not deftiny then is there nofet order in the caufes of things : Now sf there bee no 
Set order in the caufes of all things,thents there no fet order of the things them-felues, 
in Gods fore-knowledze , fince they come from their caufes. if there bee not afette or- 


| der of all thingesin GODS fore-knowledge , then all things fall not out according to 


Fateofno 
force. 


the faydknowledge. Now sf allthinges fall not out as hee hadde bis fore-knowledge of 
them, then is there in God no fore-knowledge of thinges to come. To thefe facriligi- 
ous and wicked oppofers , thus weereply : GO D doth both know all thinges 
ere they come to paffe ,. and wee doe all thinges willingly , which wee doe 
not fecle our felues andknowe our feluesdire@ly inforcedto. Wee hold noe 
that all chinges, but rather that nothing followeth fate: and whereas Fate vfeth 


_.. tobe taken for a pofition of the {tars in nativities and conceptions , we hold thisa 


‘waineand friuolous affumption : wee neither deny an order of caufes wherein the 
will of God is all in all,nether do we calit by the name of Fate.(¢)vnles Fate be de- 
siued of feri to fpeak,for we cannot deny that the fcripture faith , God /pake once 
thefe two things : I hane heard,that power belongeth vate God to thee OLora wmsercy 
a 7 for 


\ 


ae Cu = “ ~~ ad 


Liss, §§.§ #§§. OF THECITIEOF GOD. ___”.......409 . 
for thon wilt reward enery man according to his workes. For whereas hee faith ; 
God fpake once , it ismeant- that hee {pake wamooneably , and eager ) that 
all hinges fhould fall outas hee fpake, and meant to hauethem. In this retpec& 
‘wee may deriue fate from farito fpeake , but we muft needes fay wichall tliat ict 
is vfedinanother fence then we would haue mento thinkevppon. But it doth 
not fol!ow that nothing fhould bee left free to-our will , becaufe God knowech 
the cettaine and fette orderofalleuents. For Our very wills are in that order 

of caufes,which God knoweth fo furely,and hath in his prefcience,humain wils,. 
beeing the caufe ofhumaine actions: Sothat hee that keepeth'a knowledge of 
the caufes ofall thinges , cannot leaue mens wills out of that knowledge , know- 
ing them to bee the caufes of their actions. (g) For Tullées. owne wordes ¢ No- 
thing commeth to palfe without an efficient caufe ) is {ufficient alone to {way downe 
this matter quite againft him-felfe: for what auailes the fubfequence : Nothing 
‘ss without acaufe , bat enery caufe ts not fatall , becaufe there are caules of chance, mas 
tuve and willltis fufficient that nothing is done but by precedent caufe. For 
thofe caufes that are cafuall,giuing originall to thename of Fortune , wee deny 
themnot : wee fay they are fecret, and afcribe them citherto the willofthe 
true God, or of any other {pirie : The ( 4) naturall caufes wee doe never. diuide 
from his will,who is natures Creator:But the caufes voluntary , God ; Angels, v.10, 
Men, and diuers other creatures haue often in theit wil and power:(4) Ifwe may. caufes, 
call that power a will by which the bruce beaftes flye their owne hurt , and 

defire their good by Natures inftin@. That there is awi'l in Angels , I doe 
abfulutely afirme;be they good whom we call Gods Angells,or euill whome we 

call the diuels Angels, fiends , or diuels them-felues. So men good and bad haue 

all their wills:and hereby it is apparanc,that the efficient caufes of all effe@s,are 
nothing but the decrees of that nature,which is The fpirit of ife: Aire or wind is arene Tr. 
called a Spirit : But becaufe it isa body , it is notthe fpiric of life. Bur the {pirie |R™° 

of life,chat quickneth all things, is the Creator of all bodies andall created fpirits: 

this is God 4 /pirst from eternity uncreated: in his wil there is that height of pow- 

er, which affifteth the wills of the good fpirits,iudge:h the bad, difpofeth ofal, gi- 

uing power to whomhe pleafeth,and holding it from whome he lift. For as he is 

a Creator of all natures , fo is hee ofall powers : but not the giuer ofall wills:sfor | 
wicked wills are notofhim , beeing againft that nature which is of him. So the Euill willes 
bodyes are all fubie& vnto divers wills : fometo our owne wills (that is the wills ia - 
rather of men then of beafts ) fom tothe Angels , but all tothe will of Ged: vnto | 
v hom al wills are fubie@,becaufe they haue no power but what hee gineth them. 

The caufe then that makerch all,and is not made it felfeis God The other.caufes 

do both effect and are effeted : fuchare all created {pirits , chiefly the reafonable 

ones. The corporal caufes, which are rather effects then otherwife ,are not to be 
counted as efficient caufes,becaufe they came but to do that which the will ofthe 

{piric within them doth inioine thé: how then can that fer order of caufes in Gods’ 
foreknowledge depriue our wils of power,feeing they bear {ucha {way among . 4, 
the very caufes them. felues?But(é) fee Cicero rangle , & his fellowes, that fay this wares 
order is farall,or rather fate it felfe;which we abhor ,becaufe of the word; chiefly 

being vied in a falfe beliefe ; but wheras he denieth that God knoweth affuredly 

the fet order of thofe caufes,we deteft his aflertion,worfe then the stotks do: for. 
he either denisth God(which he indeuoreth vndet a falfe perfon in his bookes De pr2e,e° 
wat. de-) Or if he doacknowledg: him, yet in denying him this fore-knowledge,he and deny” 
faith but as the foole faid in his heart, There 2s wo God:for if God want the pre. ‘ 

| T3 7 fcience 


3210 SAINT AVGVSTINE. | Cuarg. 


EE ~- Oven een 


{cience ofall fure euents heeis not God. And therefore (/) our wills are of as 
much power,as God would haue them,and knew before that they thouldbe, and 
the power that they haue is theirs free, todo whatthey fhall dotruly and frecly: 
becaufe he fore-knew that they fhould haue this power,and do thefe aé&s, whofe | 
fore-knowledge cannot be deceiued: wherfore if [lift to vfethe (m) word fate 
in aay thing, 1 would rather fay that ic belonged to the weaker , and that will be- 
longedto the higher , who haththe ether in his power , rather then grant thae 
our liberty of will were taken away by that fette order , which the Stoskes (-af- 
ter a peculiar phrazeoftheir owne ) call fate. 7 


L. VIVES. 
Ither (a) in God | De dininat, lib 2. where in a difputation with his brother Qscutus,he ine 
deauoureth to ouerthrow diuination,for which Q. had ftood in the booke before. For he 
faith that. There ts nothing fo contrary to reafon and conftancy as fortune is, fo that (mee thinkes J 
God him-felfe fhould haue ne fere-knowledge of thofe cafuall enents, For if he haue, st muff come fo 
ta paffe,as hekuoweth and then it is not cafnal l: but cafuall enents there are ,and therefore there ig 
wo fore-knowledge of thems, This in the faid place , and much more pertaining to the explaining 
of this chapcer,which it futhceth vs to haue pointed out. (6) 4 fate tothe Stars] They all doe 
fo,but fome giue fate the originall from them,excluding God. (¢) Lucilins Balbas |In the end 
of the book thus he concludeth: This (aid we departed,Velleids holding Cocta's di(putation for the 
sriver,and I being rather inclined to Balbus fast, (d) Of bim-felfe |For in his 2. booke hee {pea- 
keth him-felfe,and contureth his brothers affertions for diuination. (e ) Stoikes ] Of this in the 
next chapter. (f ) Vxleffe fate, Var.de Ling. lat.l,8, ) The deftinies giue a fortune to the 
childe at the birch,and this is called fate,of fart to /peake, Lucan. lib. 9, 
T he Deities neuer need, : 
Nucren coctdbxitane tmmch nafcentibus anchor, Much Isnguageifate but oncc(no more) doth read, 
Dricquidfeire licep—mces The fortune ofeach birth. : 
Ie feemes hee borrowed this out of the Pfalme heere cited s or our of ob. chap’ 33, v.14 
| Hee hath fpake onceand hath not repeated it againe. Both which places demonttrat the cone 
_ ftaricy of Gods reuealed knowled ze by that his once fpeaking : as ehe common interpretation 
is:the which followeth in the Palme thefe two things &c. fome refer rq.them which follow- 
eth: Th.zt power belongeth,oc. Others , to thetwo teftaments. The, Thargam of the Chaldees 
commeti neere this later opinion:faying , Ged hath [poken one law , and wee bane heard it twife 
ont of the noubs of Moyles the great ferthe,c&r vertue is before our God, and thos Lord that thon 
world} be bountifullanto the inft. (g) For Tulles \\n his booke de fato following (arxeades ,he 
“sof ferteth down three kinds of caufes; xatwrall axifing from nature,as for a {tone to fal downward, 
thgeekinds, for the fire to burne:Volentary confilting in the free wills of men,(w herein itis neceflary there 
be no precedent caufes,but that they be left frec:)and Ca/wall, which are hidden and vnknown 
~ in diuers eueuts:Herein he is of the Naturals opinion, that will haue nothing cometo pafle 
without a caufe, (6) Natsrail |Fire hath no other caufe of heate,a fone of heauyneffe , aman 
Nature. of re2fori, procreation of like,8cc. then the will of natures Creator :who, had hee pleafed,might 
haue made the fire coole,the {tone mount vpwards , the man a brute beaft, or dead or vnableto 
beget histike, (s)/fwe mszy cal | Arift, de anima. |, 3.) Putteth will only in reafonable creatures, 
and appetite(being that inftin&t wherby they defire,or refufe any thing)in beaftes. #74l/in crea- 
cures of reafon,is led by reafon,and accompanied by e/ectson,or rather is efecion it felfc. (k) But 
Cicero | With the Stoikes. (1) Onr wills are \ God created our wils free:andthat becaufe it was 
his will:fo they may make choyce of contraries,yet cannot go againft Gods predeftination:nor 
Ged queftionleffe euer would although they could:for fure it is,chat much might bee done, which 
neuer fhal:fo that che events of things to come proceed not from Gods tnowledee » but chis 
from themwW not-withftanding in him are not tocome , but already prefent,(wherein a great 
many are deceiucd)wherfore he is not rightly {aid to fore-know , but only in refpe& of our 
actions , but alreadytoknowe , fee and difcerne them, But is ic feen vnfit that this eternall 
"knowledge fhould deriue from fo tranftory an obieét,then we may fay that Gods knowledge 
 arifeth from his prouidence and will ,that his will decreeth what (hall bee , and his know- 
ledge conceiueth whathis will hath appointed. That which is to come( faith Origex vpe 
pon Genefis) is the caufe that God knoweth it fhall come : fo it commeth not to pafle = 


4 ; e ry 
(Grsrenes meso, Non vacibus x 2 lbs, 


Lins: | OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 


2Ir 


God knoweth it fhall come fo to paffesbur God fore-knoweth it, becaufe it fhal come fotd 


pafle. (m) Vfe the word |So do mott of the latines,Poets,Chroniclers and Orators:referring faré 
tomen, and will to Godsand the fame difference that is here betweene fate Swill, Boethins puts 


' betweene fate and prouidence, eApuleins faith that prowtdence is the diuine thought,preferuing 


him for whofe caufe fuch a thing is vndertaken:that fate is a diuine law fulfilling the vnchang~ 


able decrees of the great God. fo that ifccught be done by prouidence , itis done alfo by fater 


and if Fate petforme ought,Prouidence worketh with it. But Fortune hath fomething to doe 
about vs,whofe caufes we vtterly are ignorant of:for the euents runne fo vncertaine, that they 
mixing them-felues with that which is premeditated and (we thinke) well confulted ofjneuer 
Jec it come to our expected end:and when it endeth beyond our expectation fo well , and yet 
thefe impediments haue intermedled , that wee call bappyneffe : Bue when they peruert it yato 
the worft,it is called mi/fortune or unhappyneffe. In Doxmata Platonis. | . 


whether nece/fity haue any dominion ousr the willof man.  Ciar.x. 
Or need we feare that (4) Nece/fity which the stoskes were fo affraid off, hae 
Nin their diftin@ions of caufes ,they put fome vnder Neceffity and fome not 
vnder it,and in thofe chat did not fubieé& vnto it,they gat our wé/salfo ; that they 
might bee free though they were vrged by zece//ity. But if chat bee sece (ity in vs, 
which is not inour power, but will be done do whac wee can againft it, as the ne- 


eeffity of death;then isiit plaine, that our wills are fubie@ to no fuch meceffity, vle 


we them howfoeuer,well or badly:For we do many things which wee could not 
do, againft our wils, And firft ofall to w#//it felfe:sifwewillathing , there is our 
willsIf we will not,it is not. For we cannot will againft our wills. Now ifneceffiry 
be defined to be,that whereby fuch a thing muffs needes fall out thus,or thus , Ufeeno 
reafon wefhould feare , that it could hinder the freedome of our wills in any 
thing. (6) For we neither fubie& Gods being,nor his praf{ciences vnto neceflity, 
when wee fay God mutt needes live eternally, and God muft needes fore-know 
all thinges;no more then h:s honour is diminithed, in faying hee cannot erre,hee 
cannot die; He cannot dothis, why2becaufe his power were leffe , ifhe could doe 
it,then now ic is in chat he cannot. luftly is he calledalmighty , yec may hee not 
dye.nor erre:He is called alinighty becaufe he can doall thatis inhis will , not 
becaufe hecantuffer whatis noe bis wills which if he could he were not almi gh- 
ty. Sorhat he cantiot do fome things,becaufe he can do all things. So when wee 
fay that if we wiliany thing ofnecefficy,we muft will it with a Zreedome of will, 


tis:true:yet putwe not our wil vnder any fuch neceflity asdepriues it of the free. 


dome.So that our yils are ours,wil. ing whateve will,and if we will it not,néither 
do they wiilit: and ifany man fuffer any thing by the will of another againft his 


God ale 


Wiigh 


own will his will hath the own power ftill , & his fufferance commeth rather fro 


the power of God then from his own will:for if hee vvilled that it fhould be other 
wife,and yet could not haue it fo , his will muft needes bee hindered by a greater 
power: yet his will thould be free ftill,& not in any others a his that.wil- 
Jed it,though he could not haue his will performeds:wherfore what-foeuera. man 
fuffereth againft his wil he ought not attribute it vnto the wils of Angels,Men, or 
any other created fpirits,but even to his who'gaue their wils this power. So then, 
(c) our wils arenot vfe-les,becaufe that God fore-feeth what wil be in thetn:,he y 
fore-faw it what-euer it be,fore-faw fomwhat:and if he did fore-know fomewhat, 
then by his fore-knowledge there is fom-thing in our wvils: Wherfore vveare nei 


ther compelled to leaue our freedom of will by retayning Gods fore-knowledge,. 
Pee(cfence 


nor by holding our willes freedome to denie GO DS fore-knowledge ; GOD 
forbid vvee fhould: ve beleeue and affirme them both conftantly and truly, 


mel 


the laerasa partof our good faith , the formeras a rule for our good life ahdotwil 
| - | T4 | badly i. 


312 


How man 


pus, 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. Carte: 


badly doth hee liue that beleeueth not aright of GO D. So God-forbid that 
wee fhould deny his fore-knowledge to be free , by whofe helpe wee cither are 
or fhall bee free. (4d) Therefore law , correction , praife, difgrace , exhortati- 
on, and prohibition are not in vaine:becaufe hee fore-knew chat there fhould bee 
fuch : They haue that power which hee fore-knew they fhould haue: and 
de arepowerfull co attaine thofe thinges , which hee fore-krtoweth that 

ce will giue to fuchas pray for them. Good deedes hath hee predeftinated to 
reward, and euil to punifhment. (¢) Nor doth man finne becaufe God fore-knew 
that he would fin:nay,therfore it is doubtleffe that he finneth , w hen he doth fin, 
becaufe that God, whofe knowledge cannotbe miftaken , fore-faw that neither 
fare nor fortune,norany thing elfe,but the man himfelfe wou!d fin, who if he had 
not bin willing, he had not finned:but whether he fhould be vnwilling to finne,or 
no, that alfo did God fore-know. | 


| | L. VIVES. 
i ie (4) anecelfitie | Me thinkerh (faith Tully that in the two opinions of the ne Se 
SL the one holding fate the doer of all things, by avery law of neceffity ( of which opinion Demo- 
cricus ,Heraclitus,Empedocles and Ariftotle were) and the other exempting the motions of the wil 
froms this law:Chryfippus profe/jing to frep into a meane,as an honorable arbitrator berweene them, 
inclineth rather to thofe that fiand for the minds freedom, De fato. lib, Therfore did Ocnomans } 


- Cynike fay that Democritus had made out mindes flaues , and ¢ bry/ippus halfe flaues, Exfeb. 


prep. Exang.|. 6. Therin is a great difputation about Fate : The Sroskes bringing all vnder fate, 
yet binde not our mindes to any neceffity,nor let them compel vsto any action. For all things 
come to paffe in fate by caufes precedent,and fubfequent , but not principall and perfect : Be 
firft of which doe but affift vs in things beyond our power , but the lacer do effet that W is in 
our power. Plutarch relating the Stoikes opinion , faith that- they hold the. eucnts of 
things to haue a diuerfe originall:ome,trom that great neceffity;fome ee fate, fome from li- 


_ berry of will,fome from fortuue , and ssisabe setatargs They follow Plato indeed in all ther 


Fine. 


do&rine of fate. Which P/atarch both witneffeth,and the thing it felfe fheweth. But whereas 
they fay y all chings comes of fate , and that in fate there isa neceflity,then they {peake of the 
prouidence and wil of God.For as we haue fhewen they called Joue fate, and that {aid Pronee, 
that prosidence , wherby he rulethall fate like-wife, (5) We neither [ubiett] The Platonifts fay 
the gods muft needs be as they are,and that not by adding any externcl neceflity, but that na- 
tural one;becaufe they cannot be otherwife;being alfo voluntary , becaufe they would bee no 
otherwife, Wherfore I wonder at | /usins Secandus his cauillation againft Gods omnipotency, 
chat he cannot do al chings,becaufe he cannot dye,nor giue him-felfe, that he can giue a man, 
death. It is vnworthy fo learned a man, Nay he held ita great comfort in the troubles of this 
life,to thinke that the gods fomtimes were fo afflicted , tnat like men, they would with for 
death and could not haue it: he was illuded (bee-like with the fables that maketh Peto gricue 
at his delay of death as Lucian faith, Ex rettor terra quem longa fecula torquet. Mors delata deo 
um—Earths god that greeued fore,his welcome Death fhould be fo long delayed. (¢) Oxr 
wils are not | Ahard queftion,and of divers diuerfly handled : whether Gods fore-knowlede im- 


| pofe anece(jity uppow thinges? In the la{t chapier | touched at fomthings correfpondent: Many 


Gods peas 
icience no 
caule of 
SUCN, 


come out of the new {chooles, prepared fully to difputation with their fine art of combinati« 

ons,that if you affume,they will nor want a peece to defend, and if you haue this,they wil haue 
chat, fo long till the queftion be left in greater clouds then it was found in at firft: as this put 
cafe,God knoweth I will run to morrow, fuppofe I will not run,put cafe that, fuppofe § other: 
And what vie is there of thefe goofe-traps ? To fpeake plainly with Asguffmne here,a man fine 
neth not becaufe God knoweth that he wil fin:for he need-not fin vnies he lift:and if he do nor, 
God fore-knoweth that alfo:or as Chryfoffeme faith vpon the Corinthians. Chrift indeed [aith, it 
is neceffary that foandal fhould be,but herem be neither violateth the willnor mforceth the life, but 
fore-telleth what mans badnelfe would effect: which copsmeth not foto pele becanfe God fore-faw it, 
but becanfe mans will was fo bad:for Gods prafcience did net caufe thofe effetts , but the corruption 

5 be pe mindes caufed his prafcience. Thus tar Chry foffome interpreted by learned Donatus. 
d truly Gods prafcience i si the euent of any thing,aomore then a mans corns on 

| archereth 


Liz.s. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 


furchereth any acti] feé you write,but you may choofe whecher to write or na; foisitin him:. 
furthermore all future things are more prefent ynto God,then thofe things which we call pre- 
* fent are to vs:for the more capable the foule is,ic comprehendech more time prefent. So Gods 
effence being infinize,fo isthe time prefent before him:he,the only eternity being only infinice. 
The fuppofition of forne future things, in refpect of Gods knowledge,as wel as ours hath made 
this queftion mote intricate then otherwife ic were. (d) Therfore law | This was obieéted ento 
them that held fate to be manager of all euents:fince that fome muft needs be good , and foe 
bad,why fhould thefe be punifhed and thofe rewarded, feeing that their attions ( being necef- 
ficies and fates could neyther merit praife nor difpraife ? Again fhould afty bee animated to 


‘ood, or diffwaded from vice,when as the fate beeing badde , or howlotuer,muft needes bee , 


tollowed?This Manilias held alfo in thefe wordes, 


“AQ hominin menti tanto fit gloria maior # Mans goodneffe fhincs merebright, becanfe glad fate, 
2 nod calo gaudente venit,rurfifG, nocentes, Andheauen inspires it: So the bad we hate 

Odcrimus magis, in culpam,penafg, creatos. « Far wore,’ caute fate hath bene their deeds amiffe, 
Wee refers feelus unde cadat,fcelus eff fatendwm cf? \ Nor skils se whence guile comes,when guilt it is 

Hoc quog,fatate eft fic ipfum cxpendere fa'um: Cte v Fates aced it iso heare it felfe thus cane. &c, 


But wec hold that the good haue their reward , and the bad their reproch;each one for his freé 
adtiohs,which he hatn done by Gods permiffion , buc not by his dire@tion. (¢) Nor dorh man } 
His fin arifeth not from Gods fore-knowledge, but rather our knowledge rifeth from this fin, 
For as our will floweth from Gods will , fo doth our knowledge from his knowledge, Thus 
much concerning fate, out of their opinions,to make e4ugaffines the Playner. 


Of Gods uniuerfall pronidence, ruling all, end 
| comprifing sil, Car. II. | 

YVHerefore the great and mighty GOD with his Word and his holy spirit 

~ (which threeare one) God only omnipotent , maker and Creator of euery 
foule,and of euery body, in participation of whom,all fuch aré happy that follow 
his truth and reieét vanities:he that made man areafonable creature of foule and 
body,and he that did neither let him paffe vnpunifhed far his fin,aor yet excluded 
him from mercy :héethat gaue both vnto good and bad effence with the ftones, 
powerof produdion with the trees, {enfes with the beafts of the field, a: dvnder- 
ftanding with the Angels;he,from whomce is all being beauty, forme and order, 
number,weight and meafire;he,from whom al nature,meanc & excellent,al feeds 
of forme,all formes of feed,all motion, both of formes and feedes deriue and have 
-being:He that gaue fleth the originall,beaury,ftrength, propagation , formeand 
fhape,health and fymmetry:He chat gaue the vnreafonable foule, fence, memor 
oe appetite, the reafonable befides thefe, phantafic, vnderftanding and will: He 
(1 fay Jhauing left neither heauen,nor earth;nor Angel,nor man jno nor the moft 
bafe and contemptible creature,neither the birds feathef,nor the hearbes flower, 
nor thetrees leafe , without the true harmony of their parts , and peacefull con- 
cord of compofition ; Itis no way credible ,that he would leaue the kingdomes 
of men ,and their bondages and freedomes loofe and vncomprized in the lawes 
of his cternall prouidence. | 


How the ancient Romaines obtained this increafe of theit 
Kingdome at the true Gods hand , being that they at- 
ae ner worlbippedhim. Citar, 13. | 
N Ow letvs look what defert of the Romains moued thetrue God to augment 
their dominion,he in whofe power al the Kingdoms of the earth are. For the 
better performace of W we wrot our laft book before,to proue} their gods whom 
they 


213 


214 


Loue of 
glory. 


Kings. 


Confuls 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. | Cap. 12° 


they worfhipped in fuch ridiculous manner,had no fuch power ; & thus far haue 
we proceeded in this book,to take away the queftid of deftiny & fare, leaft fome 


man being per{waded that it was not the deed of the gods fhould rather afcribe it’ | 


--vnto fate then to gods wil,fo mighty & fo omnipotent. The ancient Romans ther- 


fore(as their hiftories report) though like to all other nations (exceping the He- 
brewes they worfhipped Idols and falfe goddes offering their facrifices to the di- 
uels,not to the true Deitysyet their defire of praife made them bountifull of their 
purfes, they loued glory & wealth honeftly gotten: honor they dearly affected & 
honeftly,offering willingly both their lines, and their ftates for them Thezea- 
lous defire ofthis one thing fupprefled al other inordinate affects:and hence they 
defired to keep their country in freedom,and then in foueraingty,becaufe che faw 
how bafeneffe went with feruitude,and glory with dominion. Where-vpon they 
reiected the imperioufneffe of their Kings , and fet downe a yearely gouernment 
betweenetwo heads, called Con/uls a Confulendo,of prowiding;not Kings,nor Lords 
of reigng and rule:(though Rex do feeme rather to come 4 iicadack eats 
regnum,the Kingdome,ot Rex,then otherwife: ) but they held the Rate ofa King to 
confift more in chi imperious domination, then either in his difcipline of gouer-_ 
nance,or his benevolent providence: fo hauing expelled Tarquin, and infticuted 
Confuls,then(as(4)Sa/uf faith wel in their praife)the citty getting their freedom 
thus memorably, grew vp in glorie,as much as it did in power:the defire of W glo 
ry wroughtal thefe world-admireda&s which they performed:Sa/s/t praifethal 
{fo M. Cato and C. Cefar,both worthy men of his time, faying § Cémon-wealth had 
not had afamous man ofa long time before, but that thé it had a couple of illuftri- 
ous vertue,though of diuers conditions she praifeth Ce/ar, for his defireof Em- 
pire,armes and war,wherby to exemplifiehis valour : trufting fo in the fortune 
of a great {pirit,that he roufed vp the poore Barbarians to war , tofling Bellona's 
bloudy enfigne about , that the Romaznes might thereby giue proofe ‘of their 
vigors. This wrought he for defire of praife and glory. Euen fo in the precedent 
ages, their loue, firft of liberty,and afterward of foueraignty and glory » whetted 
them to all hard attemps. Their famous Poet gives teftimony for both:faying: 


Por{czna guirts them witha world of men, 
Commands that Tarquin be reftor'd, Bue then 
Toarmesthe Remaines forcheir treedome runne. 


Nec non Tarquinium eicctum Porfenna iabcbat 
Accipere,ingentig, urbem obfidsonc premebat? 
Aencadz in ferrum pro ibertate ruchant rte 
For then was it honour to die brauely,or to liue freely, but hauing got their free- 
dome,then fucceeded fuch a greedynefle of glory in them , that freedomealone 
feemed nothing , without domination , hammering vponthat, which the fame 


Poet maketh /owe to fpeake in prophetique-wife. 
-~- Duin afpera Tuno r i» Ahd Zune though thee yet 

ue mare nunc,terralg, mets, celumaue fatigat, Fill heauen and earth with her difquiet fitte, 
Confitia in meliusveferet,mecumg, fouebtt Shali curne her minde at length,and toyne with me, 
Romanos, rerum dominos gentema, logatum. To guard the Romaines (c)gowned progeny, 
Sit placitam,venient luftris labentsbus etas, — 1 It ftands,tucceecing times fhall (ee the day, 
Cum domus Affaraci Phithiam,chara/q, Mycenas That old (a) Affaracus his ftocke thal {way 
Seruitiopremet,ac vittis dominabitur argis, (¢) Phéthéa,Micene and all Argostound &c,  « 
VVhich Virgsi! maketh Jupéter {peake , as prophetically , beeing falne out true 
before he wrote thefeverfes: But this by the way to fhew that the Romasnes af- 
fection of liberty and domination,was a parcell of their moft principall glory and 
luftre. Hence it is, that the fame Poet in-diftributing the. artes amongft the Na- 


tions, giues the Remains the art of Domination & foucraignty ouer others faying. 


Exendent aly [pirantia mol'ius era Others can better carve in braffe perhaps, 
Credeequidem,viues ducent de marmore vultus. . (/)Tis nuesor cutte the ftone to humaine 


Orabaunt 


Se ES ey 


A aod 


en SEEPS are, 


Lins, | | OF THE CITIE OF GOD. ats 


Orabunt caufas melus, celity meatus | . | Otchers can better pradhfe Lavees loud iatres, 
Defcribent radio ce furgcnira fytera diccnt, _ | Orteach the motions of the fulgid@arres, - - 
Yu,regere impcriopopslos Romane,memento, . 4 But(Romanes)be your astes,torule,in warres, 

Ha tibi,ersust dvies,p cig, impenere morem : Te make all knees to facred peace be bow'd, 

Parcere fubicétss @ d:bellare fuperbos, _ £ TF To fpare the lowly and pull downe the proud, 

- Thefe artes they were che more perfe@ in,through their abftinence from pleas 
fures, from couetoufneffe after ritches, (che corrupters both of body and minde) 
from extorting from the poore cittizen Seftow ing on beaftly plaiers. So that in 
the dominion of thofe corruptions which befell afterwards, when Hirgs/and Sa- 
Iufte did both write ,the Romaines vfed not the fore-faid arts , but deceites and 
trickes,to raifetheir glories. And therefore Sa/uft faith, at fir/t mens hearts caue 
place to ambition,rather then coucton[ne([e, becaufe that was more neere to vertue : for 


the induftrions and the floathful haue both one defire of honor,glory and fouerainty.But 
the forfifaith he) gocth the true way to worke,the later by craft cy falfe means, oe 
he . 


ath wot the true courfe. The true sre thee ,to come to honor by vertne,not by ambi- 
tion:which honor, Emptre,and glory, good and bad wilh both alike. But the good goeth 
the true way,that is,by vertuc leading him directly to his poffefion of honor,glory,fone- 


yainty. That this was the Romanes courfe,their cemplesfhewed,vertues @ bomors 
being fo(¢) clofe togither:/chough herein they tooke Gods gifts for gods theme Verties _ . 


{elues:) wherein you might eafily fee, that their end was,co fhew that their was © abet 


no accefleto bonor but by vertse, wherevnto all they chat were good referred it: 


for the evil had it nor,thou en they laboured for honor by indire@ means,name- | 


ly by deceite and illufion . The praife of Cetoexcelléth,of whom he faith that the 
more he fbuxwed glory,the more it pur{ued him .For this glory that they feeké,is the 


good(h opinion of men concerning fuch or fech.And therefore that is the beft vertue, Glory. 


thar ftandeth not vponothers iudgements, but vpon ones own confcience,as the 
Apoftle faith: Owr glory isthis,she teftimony of our confcrence:and againe: Let emery 


man prooue bis owne worke,and (0 {bail bee hane glory inhimfelfe oncly and not in ano- ei 


ther.So that glory & honor. which they defire fo,& aime fo after,by good means, 


muft not go before vertue , but follow it:for there is no true vertue,butlenelicth = 
at mans chiefelt good, And therefore the honors that Cato required (¢) he fhould Tre vere 
not hauerequired,but the city fhould haue returned him them,as his due defart: ™ 


But whereas chere were but two famous Romaines in thac time,Cefar & Cato,Ca- 
toes vertue feemes far nerer the truth of vertue,then Ca/ars.And let vs take Cato’s 
(k)opinion of the ftate of the city,as it was then,& as it had bin before. Thinke not 
(faith he)ehat our anceftry brought the citty unto this hight by armes, If it were fo,we 
{ould make it far more admirable then ener. But they had ether meanes which we want: 


‘anduftry at home, equity abroad,freedome in con{ultation, and purity of mindes in all 


men free from inft and errbr.Fot the/e hane we gotten riot, and auarice,publike begge- 


vy and prinate wealth:ritches we pratfe,and floath we follow:good cy bad are now undi-~ 


ftingnilbed ambition deuouring all the guerdon due to vertuc. Nor wonder at tt,whem 
cach one patcheth wp aprinate eftate when you ferue your lufts at home, and your profit 
or affect bere. This 15 that that layeth the ftage open to all incurfion of others.(l) Hethat 
readeth thefe words of Cato in Saduftymay think that = Romaines were al fuch 
as chofe,whom we haue fhewne to be fo praife-worthy before :it is not fo: for o- 


cherwife his words which we related in our fecond booke fhould be falfe, where 
he faith:that the citygrew troubled with the oppreffing powre of the great ones, 


& that the people grew to 2diuifion from their fathers vpon this caufe:that there 
werediuers other dangerous diflentions, and that they agreed in honefty& con- 


cordno longer then they ftood in feare of Tarquin, 8 of the great war of Hetrué- ris: 
via:which being ended, the Senators began to make flaues of the people, to fudg Cap. 18 
— | of 


/ 


216 -- SAINT AVGVSTINE: — Cuanirzi 


of their liues.as imperioufly as the Kings had done,to chafe men fr6 their poffef- 
fions,& only their factid bare the fway of all;vnto which difcords(the one defy- 
ring torule,& the other refufing to obey)the fecond African warre gaue end be 
caufe.a feare began then to returne vpon them,and called their turbulent fpirits 
from thofe alterations to looke to the maine , and eftablith a concord : But 


all rhe great affaires were managed 4 a few that were as honeft as che times 


Confulls, 


afforded , and fo by tolerating tho‘ tuills , the ftate grew well vp , through 
the prouidence ofa few good gouernors: for aschis writer faith , chat a 
heard & read of many memorable inilitary deeds of the Romaines by fea & land, 
he hada great defire to know what it was that fupported thofe great bufyneffes, 
wherein the Romaines very often with a handfull of men (to count of ) haue held 
out war with mott powreful,rich & vidorious Kings:8& hauing fookt wel into it, 
he findeth, that the egregicus vertue of a very few citizens hath bin caufe of this 
happy firccefle of al the reftfurmodting wealth by pouerty,& multitude by fcar- 
city.But after that corruption hadcatex through the City faith hee) then the greatne(fe 
of the common-wealth (upported the viciou[nelfe of her magiftrats. So the vertuéofa 
few,ayming at ce Lose & foueraignty by a true line:that fame vertue,is that 
which Cato, fo preferreth: This was the induftry at home,that he fo commended, 
which inade their publike treafury rich, though the priuate were but meane (7) 
And the corruptionofmaners he bringeth in as the iuft contrary producing pub- 
like beggery through priuate wealth. Wherfore,whereas the Monarchies of the 
Eaft iad bin along time glorious,God refolued to ere@ one now inthe Weft al- 
fo, which alchough it were after thé in time, yet fhould bee before themin great. 
nefle and dignity. And this he left inthe hands of fuch men as fwaied it,¢fpecially 
to punifh elie vicious ftates of other nations : and thofe men were fuch,as for ho- 
nor & dominations fake would haue an abfolut care of their cotitry, whence the 
received this honor:and would not ftick to lay down their own liués for their fel: 
lowes, fupprefling couetoufneffe,& al other vices,only with the defire ofhonor. 


ee LVIVES. 7. 
C Aled (a) Confulls\Thae(onful comes of Confulo,this all do acknowledge:but Confielo fig. 


nifieth many things , and here arifeth the doubr in what fence ( o2/#l is deriued from ir, 
Quine. lib. 1. Whether (ox{nl come of Proxiding for , or of Judging , for the old writers vfed 
( onfilo to indge, and it is yet a phrafe , bot confulas,indge well. Liny and Ovintil. fay that the 
Confil was once called Jadge, But I rather hold with Varro’, that the Cowfn/ is a name of mini(- 
tery, implying that he hath no powre nor authority in the ftate,but onely to be the warner of 
the Senate,and to aske the peoples ¢ounfell, what they would haue done. For the Senate of 
old,neuer did any thing but the Confu/firftasked the peoples mindes,and brought them word 
how it pafled, whence this ordinary phrafe arifeth: He intreated the Canful to bring word backe 
how this or this paffed : Cefars letters rie brought by Fabius to the Confuds , The Trebunes 
could very hardly with much contention obtaine that they fhould be read in the Senate, but. 


* thae their contents fhould bee related to the Senate,they could not be perfwaded. Cef- Coma 


men, de bello Pompes lib.1. Whereby it appeareth that the Senate gaue not their verdits vpon 
any thing,but what was related to the by the (onfids which cuftome was duly obferued in old 
times . Bucafterwards fome of the magiftrates got powre to enforce the fenates voices to an 
thing what they lifted prefer. Uarro's words are thefe(de ling. lat.ib.4,) He was called ¥ Con ful 
for confnlring with the people and fenaré . Vnleffe it be as Aétins faithin Brutus hee that Ludgeth 
right [ Oui recte covfulat, \Lechim bee Conful.(b) Salufte] Jn bello Catiliz.(c) Gowned|Ri ghely 
gowned laith Serusus )for al ages and fexes theré ware gowses.(d) Affaracus|Grandfirée to 4n~ 
chifes,father to Capis., of whom came eEneas ; of him [ulus , of himthe Alban King and of 
them Romulus.(e) Phthia]This is touching the reuenge of Troy’, that their countries that bur= . 
ned Troy fhould be fubdued by a progeny of Troyaws,So faith the eLncads, | | 


_ 


Liss. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 217 
Eruet ille Arges, Agamemnoniaf, Mycenas, The towers of Argos he thall vndermine, 
Fp{umg, Acacidem genus Armipetentis Acislli And wrack(Pelides)that giear fonne of thine, 

Vitus anos Troie, & templatemerata Minerue. Reuenging Prey and Pallas wi onged fhrine, 


— Phrhia was Achilles his natiue foile »atowne in Phtheiasa part of ALacedonta . Hee was Phthia, 
brought vp tho at Lariffa ,and therefore called ‘Larsfeus: though Phithia and Lariffz bee Lastia, 
both in e4chaia, as ele where! will make plaine , as alfo that the Argine towre was called - 
Lariffa. Phthia in Macedoxea was fubdued by L. e£milins,after he had ouerthrowne Per- Micznz. 
fens , Mycana;is in -Argolis,as Mela teftifieth,and from thence the K ingdome wastransferred | 
to Argos. L. Afummins conquered it,together with all Achaia: Argos is neere AMycena {aith “tg 
Adela, Fhe King domme was the Argines from Inachns to Pelops DX LIITI Lyeares. Eufeb.Su- 
bus Higinus faith that Usrerlé erreth in thefe verfes , for hee that conquered virgos did net 
ouer-throw Pyrrhws , fo that hee wouldhaue the middle ver{e taken owt, But Sersixs{aith 
there is [Meg acd hee,to be vnderftood, it beeing vnderftood of (urixs. (f) Tis true} Nay all 
one: Marixs built them after the Cymbrian watre : but becaufe there was a gutter Det wixt 
them, they feemed a couple, (5) Opixtow of men | This is glory in general] : but the true glorie 
is a folid andexpreffe thing ({aith Tully)nofbadaw : and that is the uniforme rraife of them that 
are good,the uncorrupted voice of (uch as judge aright of wertues exellence - which anfweres vera 
tue like an Eccko, and followeth it like a Shadow. Tufe. quaft. lib. 3- (8) Should not\ This Cato of 
Utica(of whom he fpeaketh){ued for the tribunefhi pe.and got it :the pretorfhip,and( after 
one repulfe , Vatinins (a fellow hated of GOD ad, man ) beeing preferred before him ot 
that coo :the confulfhip , andthere had a finall repulfe. Hee was aman (faith Phetarch jfie 
to bee bought for a magiftrate , and more fitto bee forced vnto dignities ; thento {ue for 
them. (k ) Opssion} In his oration which(beeing Tribune) hee made in the Senate , againit the 
Con/piratours. Saluft, Catilin.(L) Hee thaz heareth } The later Romaines were alwaies a talk- 
ing of the vertues of their anceftry, extol ing them to heauen: either becaufe all things de- 
clined from betterto worfe, or becaufe they thought fill that the times paft were beft. (m) 
eAnd the corruption | A diuerfity of reading , vstinms effe contrariuns cy é contrério , all toone 
fence - the latter is in all che old manufcripts. eae —s 


Of Atwbition,which beeing avice , is notwithftanding heerein held aver= a 
tuc that it doth reftraine vices of worfe natures.” Cuarrd ee | 


Glory. 


Catoof y« 
t1C2. 


Ve hee is better fighted, that can fee this defireof glory to beea vice: Horaie 
7 faw it,and therefore fayd, | pat 

Landis amere tumes, (unt certa piacula quate, You {well with thirft of raile : bur I can tell . Epi f 

(b); er puré lecio porer unt recreare iibeilo, A medecine: readthis booke thrice over (&) weil.- P o Se 
And in his Odes hee fung this, to the fame purpofe of fuppreffing ambitious . 

thoughts, —— Pe oN 


(¢) Latins regnes auidum domando : He that can conquer his affe@s rebelling, os Hues os 
Spirstum,quam fi Lybiam remotis _ | Hathlarger Monarchy,then he thatfwaies: Ss; s« Ca lib 4 
juny as,& vicrg Penus, | The Bybians, (¢) Gades,and both Africas, ° 
Seruiat vii. _ oo=e~And more excelling, 


But narwithftanding , thofe chat doe not bridle their exorbitant affes by 
faith , by the powreof the holy {pirit , and the loue of that intelleCtuall beauty, 
though they cannot bee happy, yet they may bee leffe vnhappy,in auoyding this 
thirft of humaine glory howfoeuer : Tully could not ( f) diffemble chis,in his 
booke Of the Common-wealth, where {peaking of the inftrudtion of a Prince, for Glor’s 
a Cicty , hee faith bee uf? bee (g) noxrilbed with glory: and fo there-vpon infer- Princes : 
reth what worthy deedes this glory had drawne from his anceftors. So that nourith< 

they were fofarre from refifting this vice , that they did wholy give themfelues ™™ 

to augment andexcite each one , thinking it vfe-fullto che ftate: Though in 

his bookes of Philofophy, Tu/ly neuer diffembles (4) this contagion,but confef- 

ferh ie as eleare as day. For {peaking of ftudies,ayming at the true.good,and 
7 Vv contemning = 


288° SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuap.314 


contemning the vaine blafts of humaine praifes,hee inferreth this axione,(#) Ho- 
nour nourifbeth artes ,and glory keepeth all men on worke sn fiudics,and what men ap- 
prooue not Jicth unrezarded. 

= L. VIVES. 


S74 (4) ]Ep:f.lib,1.to Adecenas. ter pure : thrife ouer (6) ell] The Philofophers bookes 
Philofophy ~ of manners are to bee read purely, diligently not again({t the will, but defiroufly, that wee 
tobewell may reape profit thereby, for io doing,wee fhall, Prophyry faith wee muft come with cleane 
read, handes , as vntoa facnfce (c) Latius|}Carm.dib. 2.ad Saluft. (d) Gades] An Mand of Spaine, 
famous for Hercules his tra.ells and pillers: (e) Beth Africa's | Acroz and Porphyry thinke 
that by the one, hee meaneth Ly4eans , and by the other the Gadetanes whom the Africans 
firft placed there : as ifthe Poet intended a coniunétion of Empire in lands diuided by feas,as 
hee faith in che faid place,before. (f ) Diffemble] Some read Silere; conceale , but the old Co-~ 
pies 1ead it as wee haue fer it downe. ( ¢) Nosrifbed | Stoicifme. A wife man is a creature of 
Slory ; Symonides,(quoted by Xenophon in his Hseron )diftinguifheth aman from all ether creae 
tures in this efpeciall thing,that hee is touched by glory and honour. (4) This contagion] The 
propofition (25; in the Latine text is fuperfluous ¢ our reading is in the better. (+) Hononr} 
Proam, Tufc.queft. | 
That wee are to anoide this defire of humaine honour: the glory of the righteous 
being wholyinGOD. Car. 14. } 


\7 Herefore without doubr, wee had better refiit this defirethen (4) yeelde 

toic. For much the nearer are we to G O D, as we are purer from this im- 

Theloue ‘purity: which although in this life , it bee not fully rooted out of the heart , be- 
ofwuftice caufe itis atemptation that troubleth euen the beft proficients in religion, yet let 
ee loge tH¢ loue of righteoufneffe fuppreffe the thirft of ambitioufneffe. And thus: if 
of glory, fomethings lie vnrefpected, becaufe men approoue them nor, and yet bee good 
and honeft,then let the loue of humaine praife bluth,and gine place to theloue of 
truch.For this is a great enemy to our faith, if that the affe@& of glory haue more 
roome.in our hearts then the feare or loue of our GOD: and therefore hee faith: 
How can you beleene, that expect honor one from another and fecke not the honour that 
commeth of GOD? And likewife it is faid of fome that beleeued in him and yee 
4O%2 43- durft not profefle ic 3 They liued the praife of men more then the praife of GOW. 
7 Which the holy Apoitles didnot : for they preached the name of Chrift, where 
it was (6) not onely not approoued of, (as Ts//y faith ,and what men approoue 

not, liech vnregarded but where it was euen detefted , holding the rule that their 

Wats10.33 Maifter (the mindes phifition ) had taught them. *#ho/ocuer fhall deny mee before 


2uc.33.9 men, him will! alfe deny(c) before my Father which is in Heauen,and(d) before the 


Angells of G O D: So that all their reproaches, by their cruell perfecutions , cheir 
extreame paines, couldnotdriue them from preaching this faluation, let the 
madneffe of man oppofe what it could. And whereas this diuine life,conuerfa- 
tion,and doctrine of cheirs , hauing fuppreffed all hardneffe of heart,and erected 
the peace ofrightcoufnefle,was crowned with.an vnbounded glory in Chrift his 
church: this did noc they reft,as in the expected guerdon of their vertues,butre- 
ferredicall vnto Chrift his glory , by whofe grace they were what they were. 
And the fame did they tranf-fufe into fuch, as they conuerted vnto the loue 
of him, whereby they might become fuch as they were before them : for 
to keepe them from touch of humaine ambition their Maifter caught = 

: is 


~ 


; Se ete 


. «et 
* ™ S 


Line OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 


this, Take heede that you doe not your zood deedes before men,tobe fecne of them,or elfe 
yee fbsilhaue no rewarde of your father which w in heaven. But leaft they fhould mif- 
conceiue this, and feare to doe well before men: and fo become leffe profitable 


by ftriuing to keepe their vercuous acts in fecret,then other-wifeshe faith againe, ‘ 
a 


Let your lig ht fo {bine before men, that they may fee your good workes and alerifie your 
father which is in heauen. Doe not well with an intent that men fhould fee you 
doe fo, ana fo turne to Behc!d you ; who are not what youare by them: but 
‘doe fo that they may glorifie your father in heauen , vnto whom if they turne 
they may bee fuchas you are. Thas did the Martirs , that excelled the Sceuola’s, 


Curty and Dec, ( not by punifhing them-felues,but by learning the infliGions of | 


others ) in true vertue,piety and innumerable multitude.But the others, liuing in 
an earthly citty, wherein the end of all their endeuours was by them-felues pro- 
pounded tothemfelues , the fame ( namely) and domination of this world, and 
noctthe eternitieof heauen,not in the euerlafting life,but in their owne ends,and 
the mouthes of their pofteritie : what fhould they loue,but glory,whereby they 


defired to furuiue after death in the (e ) memories and mouthes of {uch as com- 


mended them. 
a L. VIVES. | 
Hen yeeld (4 ) tot ]Somuft the fence be: wee muftrefift the defire of glorie , and not 
yeeldro it. (4 ) Not onelynot | wee haue giuen it the beft reading of all J thinke and the 


neareft to likelyhood, ( ¢ ) Before my father | Matt: 10. 33. (d) Before the Angels of God} 
Luc.12 9. (¢ ) Memories and monthes\ I flie,as lining through the monthes of men,iaith Ennine, 


Of the temporall rewards that God befowed upon the Romaines 
vertues and good conditions. Cuap. I5. | | 
Vch therefore as we haue {poken of, if God did neither meaneto bleffe them 
J with eternitie in his heauenly cittie , amongft his Angels (to which focietie 


ere ERASERS 
219 


Mat.6, 1. 


5016; 


that true pietie brings men, which affordzch that true diuine worfhip «which the True pietie, 


Greekes call (4) #zpia )to none but onely the true God) nor to vouchfafe them 


_anearthly glory or excellence of Emperiall dignity; then fhould their vertues, 


the good actes whereby they endeuoured to afcend to this glory ,paffe vnrewar- 
ded. But the Lord faith even of fuchas doe good for humaine glory 5 Verely L/ay 
unto you they haue their reward: Thefe therefore that neglected their priuate 
eftaces for the common-wealth and publike treafurie,oppofing couetife,hauing 
a full care of their countries freedome,and liuing according to their lawes,with- 
out touch of luft or guile , thefe feemed to goe the right way to get them-felues 
honour, and did fo : honored they are almoft all the world ouer, all nations very 
neare,receiued their lawes honored were they then in all mens mouths,andnow 
in moft mens writings through the world: Thus haue they no reafon to com- 
plaine of Gods iuitice ; they haue their reward. | 


ee ee OO or 


Of the reward of the erernall cittizens of heaven, to whom the examples 
of the Romaines vertues were of good ufe. | 


BY for their rewarde that endure reproches here on earth for the cittie 


V 2 


Call (4) rarena] of raspouw, to worfbip, orto ferme, a & Labria 


- 920 SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuap.17 


sf h e ‘etére 


nall city. 


Rom.8, 
Mat.s. 


s,.Cor,5. 


ly country for glory fo temporall. 


of GOD, ( which thelouers of the world doe hate and deride ) that is of ano- 


ther nature. That City is eternall ; No man(4)is borne in it, becaufeno man 


dieth in it. Felicity is there fully, yet no goddeffe, buca Gods guift : of this ha- 
bitation haue weea promifeby faith , as long as wee arehere in pilgrimage on 
earth, andlonge for thatreftaboue. The Sunne.arifeth not there both vpon 
good and bad , but the Sonne of righteoufneffe fhineth onely ouér the good. 
There fhalbe no neede to re{peat the common treafury more then the priuate, 
truth is al] the treafure that lieth there. And thereforethe Romaine Empire 
had that glorious increafe, not onely to beea fit guerdon to the vertues of fuch 
worthies as wee fore-named,but alfo that the cittizens of heauen in their pilgri- 
mages vpon earth, might obferue thofe examples with a fober diligence,and 
thence gather how great care , loue,and refpe& ought to bee carried to the hea- 
‘uenly country for life eternall, if thofe men had fuch a deare affeG to their earth- 


—— LIVES. 
O man (a) is borne] Thatis, their is no increafe of them,no more then there is deceafe,their 
iuft number being predeftinate and fore-knowne by the eternall GOD himfelfe. 


The fruites of the Romaines warres both tothemfeluesandtothofe 
- with whom they warrede CHAr. 17. 


| Fo: what skilleth it in'refpea of this fhort and tranfitory life, vider whofe 


dominion a mortall man doth liue, fo hee bee not compelled to aces of impi- 
ety or iniultice. But did che Romaines ever hurt any of the nations whom they 
conquered and gaue lawes vato, but in the very fury and warre of the conqueft? 
If they could haue giuen thofelawes by agreement,it had beene better (but chen 
hhad beenie no place for triumph) for the Romaines liued vnder the fame lawes 
themfeluts that chey gaue to others, This (4) had beene fufficient for the ftate, 
but that Afars, Bellona and Victory (hould then haue beene difpleafed, and difpla- 
ced alfo, if chey had had no wars,nor no vi&tories. Would not then the ftates of 
Rome,and other nations haue beene al! one? ¢fpecidlly that beeing done,which 
was moft grauely and worthyly performed afcerwardes , (b) euery man that be- 
longed to the Romaine Empire , beeing made free of the citty ,as though they 
were now all citcizens of Rome, whereas before there was but a very few,fo that 
fuch as had no landes, fhould liue of the common ? this would haue beene gran. 
ted vritd good goutrnours by other nations , fooner by intreaty then force. 
Fort whac doth conquering , or beeing conquered hurt, or profit mens liues, 
manners ,or dignitits either ? I fee no good it doth, but onely addeth vnto 
their intollerable vaine-glory ; who aymie at fuch matters , and warre for them, 
and laftly receiue them as theit Idbours rewarde . Doth not theif land pay 
tribute to the. ftace as well as others? Yes. May they learne any thing thar o- 
thers may not? No. (c¢) And ate there not many Senators that neuer fawe 
Rome ? True. Take:away vaine-glory and what are mén but men ? And 
if the peruerfenefle of the age would permit the verie beft meanes for to 
beare away the greateft honours, thenfhould not this Humaine honour bee 
fo prize-worthy how/foeuer , beeing bur a breath and.a light fume? But yet let 
vs vfe thefe things , to doe ourfelues good towardes GOD. Let vs con- 


fider what obftacles thefe meh haue fcorned:; what paines thiey haue taken, 


what 


\ 


A A SP SSS OPENS 


L s5:5, . OF THE CITIE OF GOD: ! 221 


what affects they haue fupprefled , and onely for this humaine glorie which af- 

terward they rece¢iued as the reward of their vertues; and let this ferue to 

fuppreffe our pride alfo , that feeing the cittie wherein wee haue promifed ha- 

bitation and Kingdome’, isas farre diffrent ftom this in exeellence , as Heauen 

from earth, life eternall from mirth temporall , firme glory from fuming vaine- 

glory,angells company from mens,and his light that made the Sunne & Moone, 

from the light ofthe Sunne and Moone: then haue the cittizens ofthis heauenly 

region done inft nothing , in-doing any thing for ‘attaining this celeftiall dwel- 

ling ,feeing thac the other haue taken fuch painesin that habitation of earth, Renin’ 

_which they had already attained : efpecially, the remiffion of finnes,calling vs as of fnnes, 
cittizens,to thac eternall dwellingsand hauing akinde'of refemblance with Ro- 

mulus his fanctuary,by which hee gathered a. multitude of people into his citrie Romulus. 

through hope of impunity. | 


his fanctue 


we 


. Ye, 


TES OY REE. AED tS 


His had beene(a)] The olde bookes reade Hot fi fieret fine Marte &¢.if this couldhaue 
beene done without (Mars , making it runne,in one fentence vnto the interogation. 


° 


(6) Enery man} The Latines were made free denizens of olde: and.from them it {pred fur- °° beer 
ther into Italie ; ouer ‘Po, ouer the eA/pes, and the fea. (Zandins Cefar made many Barbari- free of the 
ans free of Rome: affirming ; that it was theruine ef Athens and Lacedzmon, that they city, 
imade not fuch as they conquered free of their Citties. Afterwardes’, ynder Emperours 
that were Spaniardes , Africans , and Thracians , whole Prouinces at firft, and afterwardes the Barhatyaad 
whole Empire was made free ofRome. And wheteas before ; all were called Barbarians whe they 
but the Greekes,now the Romaines beeing Lords , exempted themfeluies , and afterward the are, 
Latines , and all the Italians from that name: but after that, all che Prouistces beeing 
made free of the Cittie , onely they were called Barbarians which were not vnder the 
Enppire of Rome: And thus doth Heredian , Spartianns , Entropins, and latet Hiftoriogra- |. 
phers vie it.So the riuer Rhine had two bankes,the neithet of hem was Romaine,the further, Bhines 
Barbarian,(landianns:; | | oes gp PRE 
© quoties dolait Rhertas qué Barbarusibat; | © how Rhine wept,on the Barbarian thore, 

nad te non geminis frnerctur indice ripis, That both his bankes were not withinthy powré, _ 

(c) And are there not] Many nations beeing made free of the Citty,many of the chiefe 
men of thofe nations wete made Senators, though they neuer faw Rome,no more thén amany - 
that were Cittizens. 5 


How farre the Chriftians fhould bee from boafting of their dee de : fr rth jee sitecoe 
wali country ,the Romaines hauing done {o much for their temporall Cit- . 
-byand for humaine glory, Cunr. 18. - 


VVH is it then fo much to defpife all this worlds vanities for eternitie 
whenas Brstss could kill his fonnes ( beeing not enforced to it)for feare 

his country fhould loofethe bare liberty? Truely it isa more difficule matterto 

kill ones children,then to let goe thofe things which weedoebut gatherfor our |. 

children , or to giuethem to the poore, when faith or righteoufnefle bids vs. 

Earthly ritches can neither bleffe vs nor our children with happineffe ; we mut 

either loofethem in this life or leave them to be enioyed after our death sby one, 

we cannot tell whom, perhaps by thofe wee would not fhouldhaue them, No,ie 

is GOD, the mindes true wealth, that makes vs happy. The Poet reares Britys a God the 7 

monument of vnhappineffe for killing his fons , though otherwife he prdife him. oe 


V3 Nahe 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. ss Cua 


222 


a= Natofg, pater fera bella mouentes, His fonnes,conuié of tarbul ent rranfgreffion, 
Ad penam patcid pre libertate veca bit He kulls,to free his country from opp 
‘nfalix,vtcumg, ferent ea fata minores, 4 Hapleffe hove ere fucceeding times fhall ringe. 


Burin the next verfe hee giueshim comfort: Vicst amor patric laudumé, ime 
menfa cupido. Conguer'd by scountries lone, andthirft of prey, (¢) Thetwo ae 
that: fet all che Romaines vpon admirable a@ion. So then if the Father 
could kill his owne fonnes , for mortall freedome , and chirft of praife , ( both 

_ tranfitory affeQs ) what a great matter is it, if wee doe nor kill our fonnes,but 
count the poore of Chrift our fonnes ; and for that eternall liberty , which 
freeth vs from finne, death and hell; not for humaine cipidity,buc for Chriftian 

_ |. Charity ;to free men,not from Targsin , but from the deuills , and their King? 

Torquans} {04 if Torquatus, another Romaéne, flew his owne fonne,not for fighting againft 

ee his country, but for aan pd again{t his command, beeing generall,(he bee- 

ing a valorous — prouoked by his enemy , yea and yet getting the vic- 
tory): becaufethere was more hurt in his contempt of authority , then good in 
_, his conqueft: why fhould they boaft, whe for the lawes of that never-ending 
Caine, COUDtY doe forfake onely thofe things which are heuer fo deare as childrens 
“— Mamely earthly goods and poffeffions 2 If Furius Camiilus after his banifhment, 
‘- «by his vngratefull country, which he had faued from becing oppreffed by the va- 
—— Jaureus Veians,yet would daigne to come ro free it the fecond time,becaufe hee 
had ‘no better place to thew his glory in : why is hee extolled (as haying done 
great dnatcers ) who hauing ( perhaps fuffered fome great difgrace and intury in 

the church, by his carnall enemies ) hath not departed to the churches enemies, 

the Herétikes,, or inuented fome herefie -againft it him felfe , but rather hath. 

guarded it,as farreas in him lay, fromall the pernitious inuafions of herefte,be- 

+. gafe their is no («) other place toliue in ento cternalllife , though there bee o- 

-  Seanola,” thers enouph to attaine humaine glory in? If Sc.ewola, when he faw he had failed 

to kill Porfentaa fore foe to Rome,) and killed another for him,to make a peace 

with him, put his hand into the fire that burned on the Altar, faying that Rome 
had a multitude fuch as he that had confpired his deftrution,and by this fpeech 

__ fo tetrified him that hee madea prefent peace with them and got him packing: 
why fhall any man talke of his merits in refped of the Kingdome of Heauen, if 
he loofe, (not his hand but) his whole body inthe fire for it, (not by his owne 

Curius. choife but) by the powre of the perfecutor >If Curtins , (to fatisfie the Oracle 
thas enensinded Rome to caft the beft lewell it had into a great gulfe , and the 
Romainés being refolued that valour and men of armes were their beft Iewells) 
tooke his horfe and armout ; and willingly leaped into that gaping gulfe; 
why fhalla man fay hee hath done much for heaven that fhall ( not caft himfelfe 
todeath byt ) endure deathat the hands of fome enemy of his faith, feeing 
that G OD, his Lord, and the King ofhis country,hath giuen him this ruleasa 

Mat.10.28 certaine Oracle:Fearé sot them that kill the bodie, but are not able to kil/the foule lf 

Decii. she ewo Decii confecratéd themfelués to their countries good & facrificed their _ 
bloud( as with praiers ) ynto the angry gods for the deliuerance of the Ro- 
maine armic , let not thé holy Martites bée proude of doing any thing for 
the alma of their éternall poffeffions , where felicity hath neither errour 
nor ende, ifthey doe conténd in charitable faith and faithfull charity , euen 

. vnto the thedding of their bloid both for theif brethren , for whom and alfo 
- fox their enemics by whomeic isfhedde. (&) If Marcus Pulvilles in his dedi- 
¢ ee Rey eee es ee ~— ma ~ cation 


“ 


Lins. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 223 


cationofthe Temple to Jone , Janoand Minerua falfe newes beeing brotight (c) 
(by thofe thar enuied his honour) ofhis fonnes death , that fo hee might leaue 
all the dedicationto his fellowe, and goe perturbed away , did neuertheleffe 
fo contemne the newes, that (d) hee bad them‘caft hith torch vnburned , his 
defire of glory vitérlie conquering his eticfe of beeing childleffe:: 
why fhould that man fay hee hath done much for che preaching of the gof- 
pell, ( which freeth and gathereth-Gods cittizens out of fo many errours) to 7 
whome beeing carefull of bis Fathers funerall, che LOR D fayd. Fo/low mee, Regulus. 
andlet the dead bury their dead? lt MM. Regulus , notto deale failely with his moft 
cruell enemies , returned backe. co them from Rome it felfe, becaufe( as hee 
an{wered the Romaines that would haue ftaid him )hee could fot line in the dig- 
nitie ofan honett citkizen in Rotne , fiance hee had beeneaflaue in Africke:and | 
thatthe Carthaginians put him to an horrible death for {peaking againft them 
in Romes Senate : Whattorments are not bee fcorned, for the faith of the coun- 
try, vnto whofe eternall happineffe faich it felfe conductech vs? Or what reward 
had GO D for all his benefits, if, for the faith which euery one owes to; him, heé 
fhould fuffer as much torment as Regulus fuffered for the faith which he ought to 
his bloudieft foes ? Orhow dareany Chriftian boaft of voluntary pouerty(the 5,0 ic 
( f) meanes to make his trauell vnto his country , where GOD, the crue tiches elec 
dwelleth more light and eafie)when he fhall heare or read of (2) L. Valerius, who "Y poucny. 
dying confull , was fo poore , that his buriall was paid for out of the, common Valerius 
purfe.or of Q. (h) Cénctnatas,who hauing but 4. acres of land , and tilling ic him- A aptarets 
{elfe with his owne hands, was fetched from the plough to bee Dscfator ? anoffice ws, 
(4) more honorable then the Confulls ? and hauing (4) conquered his foes ,and) 
gotten great honor,returned to his old {tate of pouerty ? Or why fhould any man 
thinke it 4 great matter,not to bee feduced from the tellowthip of céleftial pow~ 
ers,by this worlds vanities , when as hee reades how (/) Fabricius could not bee i. 
drawne from.the Romaines by all Pyrrhus the King of Epirus his promifes, 
though extended cuen to the 4. part of his Kingdome, but would live there fill 
in his accuftomed pouerty ? for whereas they hada ritch and powréfull weale- 
pub! ike,and yet wete fo poore themfelues that (m)one that had been twife Con- | 
full was put out of that Senate of (#) poore men by the Cenfors decree,becaufe + 9°.” 
hee was found to bee worth ten pound in filuer 3 ifthofe men chat inricchéd the | 
treafury by their triumphs were fo poore themfelue:,then much moreoughtthe _- 
chriftians,whofe ricches are (for a better intent ) all incommon,as the Apoftles - 
ats record:to be diftributed to euery man according to his neede: xesther any of. . 
them {aid that any thing hepoffe(fed was his owne,but all was in common : much more A&4 
I fay ought they to know that thisisno iuft thing to boaft vpon,feeing chac 
they doe bur that for gayning the fociety ofthe Angells , which the othet 
did (or neere did ) for their preferuing of the glory of the Romaines . Thefe 
now,and other fich like,in their bookes,how fhould they haue beene fo knowne, 
and fofamous,had nor Romes Empire had this great and magnificent éxaltati~ 
onand dilatation? Wherefore that Empire, fo fpacious,and fo continuant & re- 
nownedby the vertues of thofe illuftrious men was giuen, both ro ftand as 2: 
rewarde for their merrites , and to produce examples for our vfes. Thacif “°°, : 
wee obferue not the lawes of thofe vertues for attaining the celeftiall = =. - 
Kingdome , which they did for preferuing one but terreftriall , wee mighe 
bee afhamed: 'buc if wee doc,then that wee bee not exalted, foras the Pe oe Resea 8 vex | 
faith. The affisctions of this prefent ~ are not worthy of the glory which oon 13, 
‘4 Cd 


\ 


-e - ef. Bataes 


224 SAINT AVGVSTINE. — Cuar.rg 


The'di@i. 
torthip, 


fhewed untovs. But thoir liuesfeemed worthy of that prefenc cemporall glory, 
And therfore the Iewes,that executed Chrift,(the Newteftament revealing what 
dhe old c6ceiled, thaeGod was not be worfhipped for the earthly benefices which 
he beftowes vpon bad as wellas good , but for life eternall , and the perpetual 
bleffing of chat fupernall ciety) were iuftly giuen to be the flaues and inftruments 
of cheir glory :that thofe that fought earthly glory by any vercue focuer , might 
ouercome and fubdue thofe that refufed and murdered the giver of true glory 
and eternall felicity. | | 


L. VIVES. 

O other (4) place. | Some texts want the fecond negating , bur erroneoufly , It 

muft bee read :as wee haue placed it. (4) (U.Pulusllus. | Lin, lb, 2. Ualer. lib.s, Piut. 
i Poplicol.Dsonyf,and others, This temple to /one,/ano and Adinerna;Targuin.Prifcus vowed, 
Tarquin the proud built, and the-dedication falling to the Con/uils , Padusilus had it , and was 
informed ( as Axguftine faith) that his fonne.&c.(c) by thofe that | by M. Ualerins brother to 
P. Valerius Conjul, who greeued thatthat magnificent temple fhould not be dedicated by 
oneof his family and fo brought that news of ‘Pwlwilfus his fonnes death chat the ereefe of 
his family , might make him giue ouer the dedication.( d) Hee bad them caft bins.| Plutarch, 
Liuy faych hee bad them bury him theny, (¢) Let the dead | Liuing to the world , but dead in 
deed , fince dead to God , let them bury fuch as they thinke are dead.{ f)) the meanes.] In ones 
life,as in ones trauell , che leffe Burthen he hath about or ypon him, the lighter he goeth on his 
iourny,(g¢ )L.Ualerins|Lin,Plutarch and Valerius write ¥ this Valerius Poplicola was {o poore 
thar they were faine to bury him at the charge of the citty, Sodeth Evtropias and others.Ic is 
faid each one gaue fomewhat to his buriall-P/wf, farthings a peece faith Apuleins, Apolog. de. 
Magia . eAugnftine doth but touch at the ftory , refpecting neither his furname nor 
the yeare of his Feath, for he was called Psbiins not Lucius and died a yeare after his 4; conful- 
fhip , Verginins and Caffixs being Conff-the fixt bias after the expulfion of the Kings Lix. Dia. 
(hb) Q.Cincinatus Lin Jlib,3 Usaler lib.4.(s) More honorable. JThe dsttator{hippe was a regall office, 
from it was no apeale,, toit were confulls and all obedient, it continued by the Jaw but fixe 
monethes,and was in vfe onely in dangerous times, the election was made alwaies in /taéy,and 
inthe nighe : Hee was called the maifter of the People , and had the Maifter of the horfemen 
ioyned with him. This office had originall in the CCLII.yeare of the Citty after (e/ars death, 
by the law of Antony the conful ; and for enuy of ( ¢/ar perpetuall di@atorifhip was abolifhed 
for euer(k)\ conquered. |The e£gni,and triumped ouer the(/)Fabritiat, |One notrich,but a {cort 


Fabricius a Der ofricches, Being fent Embaffador to Pyrrhus King of Epsrus abut the ranfoming of the 
Kcomerot prifoners,he asked him if he would go to Epéras with him:& he would giue him the forth pare 


rieches, 


of his kingdorh, he replied it was not fit,for al the people would with rather to be wnder his c5- 
mand then Perrhus his. Pirrbus content with this an{wer admired the plaine ma nanimity of 
the man,offered him mony as a friend, he would none.(7) One that. (Cornelius Ruffinus this was: 
Fabritins the Cenfor put him off the Senat for being worth ten pound in coined filuer, Liw.ib 

nay he had beene Dictator faith Gellius,/1b.4.this was the firft Cornelius that was called Sybille 


and then Silz,of all the (ornelian family. Maerob,he was firft confull with Azul. (ur.dentatus, 


Deire of 
vweith- 


and thirteen yeares after, with (. Jsnias. (n\poore men | Rome was neucr more fertile of conti- 
nent honeft men then in the warre of Pirrbas. 


The difference betweene she defive of glory,and the defire of rule. 
Cuap.ig. | : 
“1 Here isa difference betweéne defire of glory and defire of rule: for though 
© the firft doincline to the fecond, yet fuch as affect the true humane glory, 
hauea defire to be pleafing vnto good iudgments, for ther is much good is man- 


om loue of ners, whereof many can iudge well although many againe haue not this good,nor 


glosy: 


go that honeft way to Bory yhonor and foueraigaty that S2/s/t faich of : He goeth 
the true way. But whofocuer defires to rule without that defire of glory which 
keeps men in awe of good iudgments,he careth not by what villany he compaffe 
mCCps Il vey aie ae “8 


- —_ =~ — -_ =e © oe 


Ser 4.- 25 wes ee g=- ss ope 


OFTHE CITIE OF GOD. 825 


Lis. 5’ 


affect,and fo his going about itwill fhew. And therefore the hunter of glory €i- pare of 
ther followeth tlre true tra@ or couers his courfes fo well, that he is held to bee rulewith-. 
ftill in che true tract,and thoughtto be good when hee is not {o,wherefore to the out loue of 
ver(uous,contempt of glory isa great vertue:becaufe God beholdethitaadnot’ ** 
the iudgemét of man, tor whatfoeuer he doth before men,to fhew this concempt, Contempt 
hee hath no reafon to chinke they fufpect him arniffe , that chinke hee doth ic for of glory.” 
his more glory. But he that contemneth their opinatiue praife ; contemmneth alfo 

with ic their vnaduifed fufpect : yet noc their faluation(ifhe be good jbecaufehe 

that hath his goodneffe from Ged, is of that iuftice , that he loueth his very ene- - 
mies,and fo loueth them that he wifheth his flanderers &backe-bicers retormed, 

and to become his companions,not here but ia his eternal! country, for his com- 
mandets,as he refpecteth not their praifes,fo hee neglecteth not their loues, defi- 

ring neither to falfefie their prayfes,nor delude their loues:and therefore vrgeth 

thé co the praife of him,from whom euery one hathaihis praife.worthy endow- 
ments.But ¥ man that defpifing glory doteth on dominatio,is worfe then a beaft, 

both in(a)manners barbarifme, & luftes extremity. Such men Rome hath had: for 

though it had loft the care of credit, yet it retained ftil the affe@ offouerainty:inay |. 
Rome(faith Hzstory) had many fuch, But (6) Nero Cefar was he that got firft of all eed ae 
to the top-turret ofall this enormity: whofe luxury was fuch thar one would not ir $ rafetts. 
haue feared any manly aé of his-& yet was his cruelty fuch,as one ignorat of hima the mcked, 
would not haue thought any effeminat fparke refidét in him,yet even fuch as this peer? 
man was have no dominion but from the great Gods prouidence, holding mans. 
Vicés {octimes worthy of {uch plagues. The feripture of him is plaine:By me kings... - 
raigne,c Princes: Tyrans by me Youerne the earth. But(c) leaft Tyrannus herethould — 

be taken only for vild & wickedkings,&not(as it ic meant)for al the old worthies, 
heare. Vir. pars mibi pacis crit dex tr tetigiffe Tiranni,(d)Some peace I hope,by touching your kingshands, _ 

But elfewhere it is more plainely {pokenof God, that he maketh an hepocréte, 
bovatgne, becaufe the people are [nared in peruer(nefe. WWhereforethough Lhaue © ?* 
done what I can to fhow the caufe why the true and iuft God gaue the Romasnes 
flich affiftance in erecting their Empires and Cicties earthly, glory vpon fucha 
frarhe of Monarchy,yet there may bea more fecretcaufethen yet wefee;name- 
ly the diuers deferts of the world , opento God, though not tovs : it being Ea lia 
piaine to all godly men,that no man can haue true vertue without true picty,that ie nee 
15, the true adoration of the oneand true God; nor isthatvertuetrue neither, =~ 
when it ferueth but for humane oftentation. But thofe that are not of the eter- 
éternaillcitty called in the fcriptures the citty of God, they are more vie-full to 
their earthly citty (¢) in poffeffing of that world-refpecting vertue, thenif they 
wanted thatalfo. But if( f)thofe that are truly Godly,and vp-right of life, come 
to hauethe government of eftates,there can no greater happines befall che world 
then through themercy of God tobe gouerned by fuchi men. And they do attri- 
bure all cheir vertues(be they neuer fo admired)vnto the grace of God only , (¢) 

who gauethem,to their defires,their faith and prayers : befides,they knaw how 
far they are fromtrue perfection of igftice 3 I meane fuch as is inthe angelicall . 
powers,for whofe fellowfhip they make them-felues fit. But let that vertue that 
ferueth humaine glory withoutpiety be neuer fo much extolled, it is not com- 

p arable fo much as with the ynperfect beginnings of the Saints vertues ,;whofé 


affured hope ftandeth fixed in the grace and mercy of the true God, | 


oe a ee eee 


oe eo a ae ee VANE Oe ce, 4 eee — 
| Mi AAnners( a ) Barbarifme | or vices barbarifme, tead whether you will ( 6 ) Nero] on 
-_ ta 


226 : SAINT AVGVSTINE. 


C HaAP.20 


to Domitius eLnobarbus and Agrippina , daughter to Germanicus : adopted by (7. (4/ar, his 
Stepfather,and named Nero (efar,after him he fucceded him, and was the laft of Cefars bloud 

that was emperor : aman of ftrange cruelty and beaftlinefle , and for thefe vices left noted to 

7 all pofterity : otherwife,as Suetonius faith,he was defirous of eternity of fame.He called Aprill, 
Franngs. after him-felfe Neroxeus , and ment to haue named Rome Neropolis. (c) Leaft Tirans. J Of 
this before,the King 8 the tyran,diftred not of old,che word comes of z-pavraw,to command or 

Ancad, {way.Urrgill.Te propter lybica gentis Ne omadumaque Tyranni Odere ineenfi : for thee , the Libi- 
ans and Numidian K ings, hated him fore.@e.and Horace carm.3. ‘Princeps et innantem Marice 
Littorsbus tenuiffe Lyrim,late Tyrannus.G@c. Tyrannus is fome-times Lord & fome-times a cruell 
Prince,fometimes a Potent Prince, Acrox,So Auguftine here pucterh worthy, for Potent, quyapyss 

"in Greeke being both power,and fortitude:as Homer & Pindarus,often vie it:/s Nemeis deHer- 

Crile fuvopay vis, my fonnes valor.(d)Some peace, | Latsnus his words of Aeneas, whom he held to 

be a good man. (¢)/n poffeffing. JA falty place , the fence is : when they haue that defire of bu- 

man glory they are of more vfe in an earthly ftate,thé when they want it.(f) Thofe that. \They 

are the true Philofopers and if they fhould rule,or the rulers were like them,happy fhould the 


flates be , faith Plato. (¢) who gane. | Iames.1.5,6, If any of you lacke wifdome , let him afkeof 
God , which gineth,to all men liberally and reprocheth no man nd he (hall gine it him. But let him 
aske in faith and wauer not.e. | 


That vertue is as much diferaced in feruing humaine gloryas in obeying 
the pleafures of the body.C wip.20. 


‘ “THe Philofophers that (2) make vertue the fcope of all humaine good, do vfe 
- in difgrace of {uch as approved vertue and yet applied it all to bodily delight 
(holding this to be defired for it felfe , and vertue to be fought onely forrefpe@ 
The piGure tO this pleafure ) to deliniate a Picture (as it were with their tongues)wherein 
of pleafare. pl¢afure fitteth on a throne, like a delicate Queene,and all the Vertwes about her, 
ready at abecke to do her command. There fhe commands prudence to feeke 
out a way whereby plea/ure may reigne in fatety : /e/f:ce muft go do good turnes, 

to attaine friends, for the vfe of corporall delights , and iniury none: fortstudes 
taske is, that ifany hurt (not mortall ) inuade the body, fhe muft hold pleafure fo 
faft in the mind,that the remembrance of delights paft,may dull che touch of the 
paine prefent. Temperance muftfo temper the norifhment, that immoderation 
come not to trouble the health, and fo offend Lady p/ea)wre,whome the Epscures 

do fay is chiefly refident in the bodies foundnefle. Thus the vsrtues being in 
their owne dignities abfolute commanders , muft put all their glories vnder the 
feete of pleafure : and {ubmit them-felues to animperious and difhoneft wo- 
man. Then this pi@ure,there cannot bea fight more vild , deformed , and abho- 
minable to a good man , fay the Phylofophers,and itis true._ Nor thinke I that 
the picture would be fo faire as it fhould be, #f humaine glory were painted in the 
throne of pleafure: for though it be not a( 6 ) nice peece, as the other is, yet it is 
turgid,and fullofempty ayre, fo that ill fhould it befeeme the fubftantiall ver- 
tues,to be fubied co {uch a fhadow, that prudence fhould fore-fee nothing , zuftice 
diftribute nothing , fortitude endure nothing , temperance moderate nothing, 
but that whichaymeth at the pleafing of men & feruing of windy glory. Nor are 
they quite from this blot,who contemning th: tudgements of others(as {corners 

of glory) yet in their owne conceit hold their wifdome at a high prife, for their 
vertue(haue they any) ferueth humaine glory in another maner,for he that plea- 
fech him-felfe is (¢) butaman, but he chat builds and beleeues truly and pionfly 
_vpon God, whome he loueth, applieth his thoughts more vpon that which hee 
difpleafeth himfelfe in,then vpon thofe things,which if they be in him,do rather 
pleafe the trutb,then him :nor doth heafcribe the power he hath to pleafe,vnto 


any 


< ; oa 


' 


Lins: OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 2b7 


other,but vnto his mercy,whom he feareth to difpleafe : giuing thankes for the 


cure of this,and praying for the cure ofthat. 
oe | LL. VIVES. . | 
PBitefephers that/a) makeThe Stoikes,as ( leanthes. This pidture Talf ralketh of, De finsb.L.2: 


(b) Niee. | For glory is got by {weat and paines, (c) Buta mas | bends his affeéts no fur- 
ther then mans prefent being. 


~— 


we pa nn emetnnnmenen ann aa Sata 
That the true God in whofe hand and prouidence all the flate of the world confiftcth, 
did oraer and difpofe of the Monarchie of the Romaines. Cuape2r, 
B tice being thus.the true God (4) that giveth the heavenly kingdome onely 
Z tothe godly, but the earthly ones both to good and bad, as himfelfe liketh, 
whofe pleafure isall iuftice; heis to haueall power of giuinig or taking away foue- 
raignty,afcribed vnto himfelfe alone, and no other, for though we Have fhewen 
{ome things that he pleafed to manifeft vnto vs, yer far, fat is it beyond our pow- 
ers to penetrate into mens merits,or fcan the deferts ofkingdoms aright. This one 
God therefore, that neither ftaieth from iudging , nor fauduritig of man-kinde, 
when his pleafure was, and whileft it was his pleafure,let Rome haue foueraignty: 
fo did he with.4//jria & Per fta(b)who(as their bookes fay )worfhipped onely two 
ods,a good & abad:)ro omit the Hebrews of whom([ thinke)f ufficientt is already 
Poken both of their worfhip of one God, & of their kingdome. But he that gaue 
Pevfia corne without Ségetsa's helpe,and fo mariy gifts of the earth, without any of 
thofe many gods(that had each one a fhareinthem, ot rather were three or foure 
toa fhare,, healfo gaue them their kingdom without their belpes,by whofeado- 
ration they thought they kept their kingdome. And {o for the men: he that gaue weer 
(c) Marius rule,gaue = rule,he that gaue Augu/fus it,gaue Nero it: he that gaue 
Ve(patian rule or Titus his fonneé (4) both fweet natured men, gaue it al{ to Do= 
wnitian,that cruell blood-fucker.. Andto be briefe, he chat gaue it to ‘Conflantine. 
the Chiiftian,paue it alfo to Julian ( e ) the Apoftata , whofe worthy towardneflé 
was wholy blinded by facriligious curiofity , and all chrotugh the defire. of rule: 
whofe heart wandered after the vanity of falfe oracles , as hee found , whien vpon 
their proniife of victory he buirned all his fhips chat victualed his armie: and then 
being flaine in onéof his many ra(h aduentures , heé left His poore armie in the 
jawes of their enemies, without all meanes of efcape , but that God Terminus (of 
whom we {pake before) was faine to yecld,and to remoue the bounds ofthe Em- 
ires Thus did he giueplace to sece/fity that would not giue place to Jupiter. All 
thefe did the True, facred and only God difpoe and direct as hee pléafed , & if 
thecaufés be vakowne why he did thus,or thus,ishetheteforevniufte 
Od that (a) ginet | Here is a diuerfity of reading in the text :+bur all comes to one fence. | 
(b) Who as their \The Perfian Magi (whofe chiefe Zoroa/fer was ) held two beginnings : Zoroaltet. 
a good and abad: that the God of heauensthis the god of hell:. This they called P/#to and A> Two kinds | 
vimanins,the euill Demon: that loue and Horofmades,the good Damon, Hermipp.Endox: Theo of foules ith 
p ad Laért.Thofe Plato feemes to follow (de leg.J.10.)putting two forts of foules in the Plato's 
world, originals of good and originall ofbad: vnlefe he do rather Pythagorize: viho held, that ihe Ze 
the vnity was God,the minde,the nature,and the good of euery thing : the number of two, th en, 
gnfinite.materiall rnultiplicable,the Gensus and euill. The Afanichees alfo ( Aug.de a. ).held bers. 
gwo beginnings,contrary,and coeternall: and two natures and fubftances of good an of euil: The Manis 
wherein they followed the old heretikes. ( c) Marins| He coupteth a good dnd a bad together. chees. 
Marius mot cruell,Cefar moft courteous, Anguffus the beft Emperor, Vero y worft that could . 
be.(4)B oth fweetly|T Vefpatian had two fonnes, Titus cr Domitian. Their father was conceited 7 
and full of delicate mirth: and Titas the fonne fo gentle,and indeed fo full a man, that hee = Welpafiase 
calle 


. eer 
ee, oe 


a a ea aaa sareaaaaaaaamacaaaaaa a tamamaaaaiaaammmmamaed 


Warres 
foone eis 


Warres 
hardly em 
ded, 


“SAINT AVGVSTINE. C nap.22 


called (Maneksndes Delicacy: Sueton, I bane refolued (faith Py the fecond in his prefact 
of his naturall Hiftorie to Titus the fonne ) to declare unto you ( most mirthfull Ensperer, 
for that ftile us the fitteft, as being your olde inheritance from your Father.crc. 

Domitian was neither like father nor brother,but bloody and hated ofallmen. (e) The Apo- 
frata } a fugitiue,or turne-coate : for being firlt a Chriftian , Lébansus the Sophifter peruerted 
him,and from that time hee was all for oracles, lottes, with crafts and promifes of Magicians, 
where-by he came to deftruction, being otherwife aman of a great fpirie, and one as fitte for 
Empire as the world afforded, 


That the originals and conclufions of warres are allat Gods dz{pofe. 
‘ Cuap. 22. 7 | 

Olikewife doth he withthe times and ends of warre,be it his pleafure iuftly to 

correét,or mercifully to pitty mankind ending them fooner or later,as he wil- 
lech. Pomspeyes (a) Pirate warre,and Scépio his (6) third African warre,were ended 
with incredible celeritie. The Slsses was alfo, (¢) though it coft Rome two Con- 
fuls and many Capraines , making all /sa/y feele the fmart of it; yet in the third 
yeare after it was begun, it was finifhed. The Pécenes, Afartians,Pelignians,(ItsL- 
ans all) fought to pluck their necks from their long and ftricke feruitude vnto 
Rome though it now had fubdued huge dominions, and razed Carthage. In this 
warre the Romaines were forely foyled (4) two Confulls killed , and many atall 
fouldior and worthy Senator left dead: yet this warre had continuance but vn- 
tothe §.yeare: mary the fecond Cs#frican warre lafted a great while, eighteene 
yeares : to the great weakning of the common-weale,and almoft the vtter ruine 
there of, 70000.foldiors falling in (e) two batrels. The firft African warre held 

ree and twenty yeares: Méthridates watre(f) forty yeares. And leaft any one 
fhould thinke that in the ancient lawdable times the Romaines had any better 
rules to difpatch warre fooner then the reft,che Samnzites warre lafted ( ¢ ) almoft 
fiftie yeares, wherein the Komeincs were conquered, euen ynto flaveric . But be- 
caufe they loued not glory for iuftice,but iuttice for glory, they (4) broake the 
peace and league which they had made. Thefel write, becaufe fome being igno- 
rant in antiquities,and other-fome being diflemblers of what they know, might 
other-wife vpon difcouery of a long warre fince the time of Chriftianitie, fl:ein 
the face of our religion,and fay if it were not fo petent,and if the old adorations 
were reftored,that warre would haue beene ended by the Romaznes vertues , and 
the affiftance of Afars and Bellona,affoone as the reft were. Let them that reads of 
their warres,recolle@ but what ( #) vncertaine fortune the ancient Romaines had 


_ inthe warres with che whole world , being tofled like a tempeftuous fea , with 


thoufard ftormes of inuafions and armes: and then let them needes confeffe, 
what fo faine they would conceale , and ceafe in this oppofition againft Gods 
power,to poffeffe others with errors,and be the butchers of their owne foules. 


L.VIVES. | | 


Onspeys (4) Pyrates warre| Ended in fortie dayes after Pomspeys departure from Brande- 
Pp fs AS Liege leg, Manl. (6) Third African | Becunne ce ended in three yeares, 
(¢) Although | Arius the Prator and two Confuls, ('. Lestulus and L. Gelliws. were ouer- 
throwne by Spartacus.(d ) Two Confuls | L.Jul.(efar,and P.Retiline.Limie. (¢) Two bateles,} 
Ac Thrafymene,and at ( annas. (f) Forty yeares \ Florue, but it was firlt ftaied by a peace made 
with Sy//a: then renewed by L. Lucullus, and laftly ended by Pompey the great. (g) eAlmost 


 fiftie.} fortie nine,as Extropius and Orofius account. Florss faith fiftie , eAppsan eightie , and 


he is neereft Lésses account, that faith the Romsaimes warre with the Sansnites lafted neare an 
hundred yeares,in vncertainty of fortune. lib,23. But if Fabins Gurges ended it in his Con- 
| | | fulthip 


f 


Liss. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 


aR - 
fulthip, it is buf fiftie yeares from the Confulthips of CZ. Val. Coruinus and (Cornelius (offus. 
But indeed the Samstes ioyned with Pyrrbws , and liad had aconfli& before with Dentatus, 
becweene Garges his Coniulfhip and Pyrrhus his comming into Italy.(b ) Broake the peace } 
This Lisée fheweth crookedly inough. 4.9. wherein hee faith, that the Komaines childifhly 
deluded the faith, league, and othe, which they had pafled to Pontius Captaine of the Sam- 
mites: it was truc. For they fought forth childifh euafions for thar owne profit. (#) Vacer- 
taine fortune) {ome haue Exentus here for Fortune, will not dispute whether Enentus may haue 
che plurall number : Vadéa faith it is rare,but yet fometimes it is fo vfell:she doth not deny ic. 


Of the battell wherein Rhadagaifus, an idolatrous Kin ¢g ofthe Gothes 
| was flaine,with all bisarmie. Cuar.23. 

Ny thar wonderfull mercy of Gods, in ari acte done with in our mémories; 

+ “ they will not fo muchas mention with thanks-giuing but endeuour as much 


as inthem lieth, cofmotherit in evernall oblivion; which fhould wee doe, wee 


{hould bee as gracelefle and vngratefull as they. Rhadagaifus (42) King of the 
Gothes,hauing brought a huge armie euen before the walles of Rome , and hold- 
ing his {word cuen ower their necks (as it were) vpon one day was ouer-thtowné 
fo. {uddenly , chat not fo much as one Komaéne being flaine ; flaine? no nor yet 
wounded, his whole armie confifting of aboue ten choufand men,was veterly de- 

feated, hee himfelfe and his fonnes taken and iuftly beheaded. If chis wicked Bar: 
barian had entred Rome with thofe forces , whom would hee haue {pared ? what 
places would hee haue honored, what God woiild he haue feared 2 whofe blond, 
whofe chattitie fhould haue efcaped him 2. But 6 how thefe wretches boafted of 
his precedent conquefts ,that he iad beene fo viGtorious , that hee had gotten 
fuch and fuch fields,onely becaufe he was a dayly facrificer to thofe gods which 

Chriftianity had chafed from Rome! For at his approach thether , where by the 

beck of Gods Maieftie hee was crufhed to nothing , his fame was fo {pacious 

thar it was tolde vs hete at Carthage ,thatthe Pagans belecued , reportéd, and 

Boafted that hee could no: bee conquered by any of thofe that would not fuf: 
fer the Rom ines to adore thofe gods whofe good fauours he had obtained by the 
dayly facrifices hee offered. Thus they neuer gaue thankes for the mercifull 

goodnefle of God, who hauing refolued to chaftife the worlds corruption witha 

reater Barbarsan itcuption,yet did moderate his iuftice with fuch mercy, that at 

Frit he gaue their leader into the hands of his enemies, becaufe the Deuils whom 

__ he ferued fhould gaine no foules by the perfwafion of the glory of his conquefts. 

And then when fuch Barbarians had taken Rome ,as againft all cuftome of hoftili- 

tie defended, fuch as fled into the holy places, onely in reuerence of Chriftianity, 

profeffing them-felues farre greater enemies for the name of Chrift, vnro the 

Deuils and facrilegions facrifices, (in which the other repofed his truft)then vn- 
to the oppofed fouldiers chem-felues : Thus God did giue the Romaines this mer- 

cifull correGion,and yet by deftroying the Deuils adorer,(hewd them that there 

was neither any helpe in thofe facrifices for the ftate of this prefent life (as they 

may fee that will bee atcentiue and not obftinate ) nor that the true religion is 

to oe refufed for earthly neceffities , but rather held faft, in hope and expectati- 
on of the licauenly gloryes. : 3 7 


o~eeaeeemem « 


a | L. VIVES. — _ 7 
Rhadageifes ( 4) King J This was in Honoris his time, of whom read the preface. 


229 


eo cnmeemany 


Euentns. 


x The 


‘ 


230 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuar. 240 


The flate and truth ofa Chriftian Emperors felscitie. 
Cc HAP. 2A. es | 


Fo wee Chriftians doe not fay, that Chriftian Emperors are happy, becaufa 


they haue along reigne,or die leauing their fonnes in quiet poffeffion of their 
Empires,or haue beenc ever vi@torious, or powerfull againft all their oppofers. 
Thefe are but gifts and folaces of this laborious,ioyleffe life; [dolarers, and {uch 
as belonz not to God (as thefe Emperors doe ) may enioy them : Becaufe God 
in his meicy will not haue thefe that know him, to béleeue that fuch things are 
the beft goods hee giveth. But happy they are (fay wee ) if they reigne iuftly, 
free from being puted vp with the gloxing exaltations of their attendance. or 
the cringes of their fubiects , if they know them-feluesto bee but men, and te- 
member that:ifthey make their power their trumpetter,to diuulpe the true ado- 
ration of Gods Maieftie, if they loue,feare and honor him : if they long the moft 
for that Empire (¢) where they need not feare to haué partners : ifthey be flack 
to auenge, quick to forgiue : if they vfe correQion for the publick good, and'noe 
for priuate hate: if cheir pardons promife not liberalitie of offending but indeed 
onely hope of reformation : if they counterpoyfe their enforced a&tes of feueri- 
tie, with thelike waighe of bounty and clemencie ,(6) if their lufts bee the leffer 
becaufe they haue the larger licence:if they defires to rule their owne affe@s, ra- 
ther then-others eftates : andif they do all chings, not for glory, bue for chariry, 
and with all and before all,giue God the due facrifice of prayer,for their imper- 
fections ; Such Chriftian Emperors wee call happy, here in hope, and hereafter, 
when the time wee lookefor,commethindeed. > = a a 

ee L. VIVES, = 
Fire (a) where ]On earth Kings loue no conforts: power is impatient of participation, 


faith Lecz,but in heauens ioyes,the more fellowes,rather the more ioy then the leffe. (5) 
Ef their} A prouerbe, the more leaue,the lefle luft fhould follow, a> we 


Of the profperows eftate that God beftoved vpom Conttantine 
— aChrifisan Emperor. Car. 25. 


| Fo the good God, leaft thofe that worfhip him for the life of eternitie,fhould 


Chriftian 
Emperors 
dying vn- 


fortunately , 


thinke chat no man can attaine co this earthly glory , but fuch as adore the De- 
uills, ( whofe (4) power in thofe things bearcth a great {waye ) beftowed ftich 
ftore of chofe earthly benefits as no other ma: durft with for, vpon (6) Conffan- 
tine the Emperour , one that ane oom no Deuills, but onely the fayd true 
God. To him did hee grant the building of ( ¢) anew Cittie, pertaker of the 
(4 ) Romaine Empire, asthe Daughter of Rome her felfe ; but(e) excluding 
all diabolical temples,or idols. Long did hee reigne therein , and alone fwayde 
(f) the whole Romaine worlde: hee was in warre moft viGtorious: in fuppreffin 
(¢) tyrants moft fortunate. Heedyed an aged man, and left his (4 J fonnes ail 
Emperors; But leaft any Emperor after him, fhould turne Chriftian for hope of 
attaining Conffantines felicity,(the {cope of Chriftianitie being not that, but life. 
eternall.) He cut off (7) /owénian far fooner then he did Jwlan,& 1uffred (k) Gratian 
tobe flaine by his enemies {word : yet with far more refped, then (J) Pompey was 
killed,chat worthipped the Romasee gods.For Cato, whom hee left as his {uceeflor 
: : an 


en 
Lis5. OFTHE CITIE OF GOD. 7 233i. 


——— 


in the warre hee waged, could neuer reuenge his death ; But Gratianus (though 
the foules of the godly regarde not fiich folaces ) was fully reuenged by ( #) 
Theodofins, with whome hee fhared the Empire, though hee had (2) a yony 
ger brother : ‘being more refpedtiue of a faithfull friend chen of a too awfull 


power: | | | 
VV ele (a) power | In the earth there ts none like Behemoth, {2ith lob. Chap.qr.verfi2g. 

forhe knowes indeed where all treafure lyeth,which is the meanes to heighr,and the 
ruining of foes. (2) Conftantine | fonneto (onftantine and Hellen : borne in Brittaine, fir contane 
Chriftian Emperour of Rome, aftet Phillip : he ouer-threw his oppofers, and lied and dyedan tine, 
happy old Empetor,at Nicomedia,the 31.yeare of his Empire. (c¢ ) 4 new Citie | Umrgill. 


. Oreginanonam cui condere \upiter vrbem,cc, | 
#3 ~ * O Queené,whom Jose voutchfafes to build anew, &c. : | | 
Gonftantiné having gotten an vniuerfall peace;and ridde himfelfe of troubles; began to thinke 
of building a new citty; to beecalled by his name! firfthee, beganne one at Sarde ine fa, 
then at Sigenm in Troas : thirdly at Chadcedon , and there hee ctegted, walles . Rytiasthey ,, 
wrought , the birds tooke the lines of the Mafons, and cartyed them to Bizantinm in Threce, Pasar eke 
and fo by Gods appointment (as it were ) they built ic vp there, naming it Con/fantinople, nople. * 
agit is called yet: and Byzantinm alfo , becaufe of the other towne that Paxfanias the Spar=_ 
tan King built there : which Sewerué almoft, and Galienus fouldiours veterly fubuerted: (4) 
‘For thether did (on/fantiné tranfport many Senatofs , and rioble families ; and the Emperors” 
laye more at {onffaxtineple then at Rome: fo contended it with Rome in-ftate anddignitie® =» 
(e) Excluding | Hee dedicated it to the Bleffed Virgin CMary . (f) Romaine world, | TheRo. 
World, for that part of the world that the Romaines had vnder them: fo fay wee the Chria maine 
frian world, for that part wee holde. Lurane vfeth the Iberean world, for Spaine,and the wes 
Northren world for France and Géermanit: And when (far wasto remooueé out of Spaine 
into Ltaly,and fo into Greece : _ | —— ? 
Vittrices aquslas aliam Laturusin orbem: ae ae 
| _ Bending his Eagles to another world : faithhe ost 
The phrafe CMarcellinas vfeth often: atid eAurelan to Zenobia wrote himfelfe Ensperor of 
the Romaine world, Trebell. Pollio, Now itis foolith to call them Emperors of that,part of the 
world that they never conquered : or of that which they once had conquered, and now haue 
loft , becaufe they loft it by the fame law they gotte it, by warre and bloud-fhed . But thefe 
vainc titles make Princes goe riadde , whereas in-deede they are. nothing but the worlds 
fire-brands , and man-kindes deftrugtions: Shame on the doltifh Lawyers , for idngling fo 
aboutthem. (g) Tyrants | Maxentins and Licinins. (b ) Sonnes | (onftantius, [onftane 
tine, and (onffans: {t is not certaine whether hee him-felfe fhared the Empire amongft ___ 
them, ofthey amongft then}-felues after his death . (1) Jouinian | hée dyed at Dadafax in Touinian, 
eA fia; of a paine in the ffomacke , the feauenth monéth of his Empire. Usrromayus and 7 
hee being Confulls. Hee was 4 Chriftian, and cannonized a Saint by Valentinian. (kh) Gra- Gratian, 
tian | Valentinians{onne, The Romaine bandes conf{pired again{t him whilett hee liued at 
Treners, and clected one (Maximus for their leader, who flew him as hee was vpon going Yn- 
to Italy, Hee was a religious Chriftian Prince. This of him, and the reft here mentioned, I 
’ haue on Extropins, Paulus Diaconis, Orof. and Pomp. Lats, (1) Pompey | Prolomyes guard Pompey, 
flew him in aboate before all the people of eAlexandria , looking on hen. Anvnworthy 
death for fo worthy a man. Lis. Flor. Plutarch, Lucane,eAppian. (m ) Theodofius | He was Theodofius 
a Spartlard,Gratian at Syrminm made him his fellow Emperor,with the peoples great applaufe, 
being a man both vertuous and valiant , defcended from Traian , and ( they fay ) like him in 
perfon. He tooke Maximus at Aquileia, and beheaded him. (2) A yonger| Valentinian. 


. 


_. Of the faith and denotion of Theodofus Emperor. 
ee Cuan 26 2 t 
S° he did not onely keépe the faith which hee ought him in his life time, but 
| | De 3 | like 


ne | SAINT AVGVSTINE. —— Citapiad, 


like a Chriftian indeede , received his little brother ¥/entimian into his protec- 

tion and defence , when A4aximus his murderer had chafed him fiom his ftate: 

and held the care ofa father ouer him, which he needed not haue done, but might 

eafilyly haue taken all to himfelfe , hadhis ambition ouerpoyfcd his religion. 

But he preferuedhis ftate imperiall for him,and gave him all the comfort,honett 

courrefie could beftowe.And when as the good fortune of Maximus begot hima 

terrible name, Theodo/ius did not creepe into acorner of his Palace, with wizards 

Jobnan | and coniurers , but fent to (b) John , that lined in a wildernefle of -£¢spe, whome 

aProphe, hehad hard was graced from God by the fpiric of prophecy : to him fent hee 

and receiued a true promife of viory. So foone after hauing killed thetyrant 

Maximus he reftored the(e)child Valentinian to this empire, from whence he was 

driuen fhewing him all the reuerend loue that could be‘ and when this child was 

flaine ,( as hee was foone after , either by treachery , or by fome other cafualty) 

and that Zugemius another tyrant was vnlawfully ftept vp in his place, receining 

another aniwer from the prophet , his faich being firme , hee fetched him downe 

from his vfurped place , rather by prayer then power , for thé foldiors that were 

,- inthe battell on the vfurpers fide told it vnto vs, thacthere came fuch a violent 

wend ayded Wind from Theodofius his fide , that itfmote their darts forth oftheir hands and 

Theodofius jfany Were throwen , ittooke them prefently in an inftant , and forced them vp- 

on the faces of thofethat threw them. And therefore (4) Claudsan (though no 
Chriftian)fings this well of his praife. 7 


O nimium diledie deo cui militat atber, | | O gods belou’d, vehome povvers dereall, 
Etc oniurati veniant ad clafica venti, ib Anuyyinds come arm’d to helpe,yshen thou doft callf 


And being viGor ( according to his faith and prefage ) hee threw downe cet- 

taiue Images of -_ a which had beene confecrated (1 know not with what ce- 

| Pasa im,and mirthfully and kindly (¢) gaue bis footemen their 
thunderboults , who (as they well might ) iefted vpon them : becaufe they were 

lad ,and faid they would abide their flaflies well inoughi: for the fonnes of his 

i , fome of them fell in the fight ( not by his command: ) others being not yet 
Chriftians, but flying into the Church, by this meanes hee made Chriftians , and 

Joued them with a Chriftian charycy:nor diminifhing their honoures a whit but 

adding more to them. He fufferedno privat grudges to bee held againft any oné 

after the vidtory.He vied not thefe ciuill warres “Tike as Cynna, Martius ,and Sylle 

did, that would not haue them ended, ( £) when they were ended ; but herather 
forrowed that they were begun , then ended then, to any mans hurt. And inall 

thefe troubles, from his reignes beginning , hee forgot not to aflift and fuccour 

, the labouring Church, by all the wholefome lawes which Fee could promulgate 
againft the faithlefle:(¢ ) Valens an C4rrian heretike hauing done much hurt 
therein wherof he reioyced more to bea member then an earthly Emperour.He 
commanded the demolition of all Idols of the Gentiles , knowing x not fo 

much as earthly bleffings are in the diuells power, but all andeach particular 

in Gods. And what was there euet more memorable then that religious ( 4 ) 
humility of his, when being euen forced by his attendants to reuenge the in- 
Thendofus LUTY stieed him by the Thefelonicans , ( vnto whome notwithftanding at thé 
hishami- Bifhoppes intreaties hee had promifed pardon ) hee was excommunicate 
: and fhowed fuch repentaunce, that the people intreating for him, rather did 
lament to fee the imperiall Maicfty fo deicéted, chen their feared his ie 


ee ere EOE, 


Lins: OF THE CITIE.OF GOD. 233 


- 


when they had offended. Thefe good workes,and a tediotis roll of fuch like,did-he 

‘beare away with him out of this tranficory {moake ofall kinde ofhumaine glory: 
their rewarde is eternall felicitie,giuen by the true God, onely tothe good. Fort 
the reft,be they honers,or helpes of this life, as che world it {elfe,light, ayre, wa- 
cer,earch,foule,ferice,and {pirit of life, chis he giueth promifcually to. goed and 
bad: and fo he doth alfo with the greatnefle and-continuance. of the temporal 
Empires ofall men, which he beftoweth on cither‘fort,as hé pleafeth, ~ © °- 


; : » 


7 | a, Fs Li: VIVES. Pe ee ee 
Wien (a) a6} Andragathinus one of Maximiss his Coantes ; an excellent {culdior,and a 
“gunning leader,managed all the warre, and with his trickes brong ht Theonofizs to many ae 
fhrewd plunges, (4 ) John ] An Anchorite , that had the fpirie of prophecie prefaging many anchor, 
things,and this victory of Theodofizs amongft others. Profper Aquitan. Theodofiasfene often 
to him for counfel! in difficute matters. Diacon. (c) The childe | He made him, beitig’Grateans 
brother;Emperor of the Weft,but Arbogaftes, Count of Vienna flew him by treachery, fer vp 
Eugenius,and with a mighty power of Barbarians {topped the paflage of the Alpes , to keepe 
Theodofivs back. The godly Prince fafted and prayed all the night beforethe batrle , dnd the 
hext day fought with them , though being farre their iriferiour in number yand yet by gods 
ereat and miraculous power, gotte a famous victory. Exgenss was taken and las death, 
Arbogaftes flew himfelfe. (4) Claudian | Mott men hold him an -4goprian, and fo Pofidoni= Clandian,” 
ws that lived with him,and was his familiar affirmech: Not Poftdonins the Rhodian, but a éer- : 
taine Prelate of e4frica. He was borne to Poetry, elegantly wittied, but ‘a little fupertticious, 
There is a Poeme of Chrift vnder his name, perhaps he made it to pleafe Honoris, for he was 
a preat flattcrer. The verfes here cited, are in his Panegyrike vpon Honorius his third Conful- . 
fhip,written rather in his praife then vpon Theodofius, though he {peake of this viGtory at the 
Alpes,whtch like a fcurrilous flatterer ,hee rather afcribeth to Hovorius his fate and felicity, . 


then to Theodofins his piety. For thus hee faith : 
| ————- Vittoriavelox 
eAluppiciis effetta tuis: pugnafiisvterg, 
Tw fatis,genttorg, manu : tepropter G Alpes 
' Innadi faciles : canto nec profuit bofti | 
CMunitishafiffe licis - fpesirrita valle | 
(oncidit cy {copulss patuerunt clauftra reaulfis. 
Te propter gelidis Aguilo de monte precellés 
Obrmit aduerfas actes,renolutaque tela 
Vertit in auttores, turbine repulit baftas, 
_ Ontmuum dilette deo cui fundit ab antris 
Aeolus armatas hyemes,cui militat ether, 
Et coniurativeniunt adclaficaventi! ~ » 


: Swift victory needs not be fought, 
’ Shee’s thine: this fight,thou and thy fatherfought; 
- Their natiue ftrength : nor diditboote the foe 
- 4 To man his fortes : the trench and rockes fell flatre, 
: And left away for theeto-enter at. — a | 
. For thee, the North-winde from the heights defcended, 
Jn whirle-windes raining all the darts they bended... 
Ar thee,on their owne brefts,in pointed fhowers «.. 
O Gods belou’d! to whom the ftormy powers | 
Raifd fromthe deepe in armes ethereall, | 
| ' And windes are preft to helpe,when thou dooft call. | 
Thus Claudian hathit, differing fome-what from Augu/tizes quotation :It may be the verfes > 
were {pred atfirftas Aaguffne hath chem, for he liued in Claudians time. In the copie of Colesne 
{5 read tuft as itis in che tcxt.O niminm ‘dilptte deo cui militet ether! ec.And fo in Orofrus and 


art 


bd 
Diaconns. (¢) Footenien | An.office in court, that was belon gittg to the {peedy difpatch of the’ Fooe-men, 
. X 3 | Princes 


- 


j 


ar LLL LL LLL TT A ALTE 


334 SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuar.27, 


Princes meflage not much valike our Lackeys at this day: Footmes they were called both of 
old by Twiy, and of late times by (Martial. Suetonins mentioneth them in his Nero: He nexer 
tranelled nor made a iourney (faith he of Nero ) without 4 thoufand Caroches, their mules fhodde 
all with filuer,bis muletonrs all in filken raiments, and all his coatch-men and foote-men im their 
bracelets and ritch coates. Andin his Titus: Prefently be fent his foote-meen to the otbers mother, 
who was a farre off ,totell her very carefully that ber fonne was well, The Romaine Emperor te- 
moouing into Greece,gaue Grecke names to all the offices about them: and amongft other’ 
thefe foot-men were called ¢eitss, raners. Such they had: of‘oldalfo as Alexander the great 
| had Philonides, that ranne 1200.furlongs in one day:Plinie. ( f.) When they were} They would 
Valens, 20t be quiet when the warres were finifhed : but hauing no foes left to kill, made them-felues 
fome continually to praétife murther vpon. (g) Valens} A chiefe Arrian, hee did extreame 
harme to the Bithops and religious men in the Church , and put many of them to death , and 
| fent Arian Bifhops to the Gothes,that defired to be inftruéted in the Chriftian faith. (6) Hae 
| Thehniallae wsilstie ] The Theffalonicans (cittizens of acowne of ALacedonia fo called Jhaning by acumult 
cre at Thef- bepun in the Theater, expelled che Magittrates out of the tayine ; Theodofins being here-at 
grecuoufly offended, intended to punifh thisiniurious a& moft feuerely : yet by the Bifhops 
intreati¢s,pardoned them, Not-with-flanding , the wronged parties hauing many friendsin 
court that ceafed not dayly to animate and vrge Theodofins to this réuenge , at length being 
oucr-come by their intreaties,hee fent an armie, and put a many thoufands of the citizens to 
death. For = ich deed, Ambrofe Bifhop of A4illaine, on good-Friday , excommunicated him, 
Hr — him the Church, vntill he had fatisfied for his crime by a publick repentance,He obey- 
tie, -—-d, and proftrating himfelfe humbly before the world Gs the old cuftome was ) profelfed him- 
: {elfe repentant,and forry for his offence ,intreated pardon firft of God and the whole hoaft of 
heauen,next of the Bifhop,and laftly of all the whole church, and being thus purged , was re~ 

ftored-to the vfe of Church and Sacraments, — ee | 


° <asenminnes 


. Auguftines innettine ageinit Such as verote against the Beokes already 
: pablifbed. Crap. 270 | - 


‘ R Ve now I feel muft take thofe in hand , that feeing they are conuicted by iuft 
: ~~ plaine arguments in this,that thefe falfe gods haue no power in the diftribu- 
tion of temporall goods (which fooles defire onely) now goeto affirme that they 
are Worfhipped, not for the helpes of this life prefenc , but of that which isto 
come. For in thefe fiue bookes paft , wee haue fayd enoughso fuch as (like little 
babyes) cry out that they would faine worfhip them for thofe earthly helpes,bue 
cannot be fuffred. The firft three Bookes 1 had no fooner finifhed, and let them 
paffe abroade vnto fome mens hands, but I heard of fome that prepared to make 
(Iknow not what ) an an{wet to them,or a reply vponthem.< frerward I heard, 
Astee, that they had written them, and did but watch (4 )a time when to publihh it fe- 
curely, But I aduifethem not to wiflia thing fo inexpedient: (5) It isan eafie 
thing for any man to feeme to haue made an anfwer,that is not altogether filents 
but what is rhore talkative then vanitie , which cannot haue the power of truth, 
Vantte we by reafon ic hath more tongue then truth? But let thefe fellowes marke each 
tongoe thing well: and if their impartiall iudgements tell chem, that their i 
thentath Sarvrifme may more eafily difturbe the eruth of this world, then fubuert it , lec 
them keepe in their ttumperies , and learne rather to bee reforrhed by the wife, 
then applainded by the foolifh . For if they expec a time (not for the freedome 
of truth but) for the licenfing of reproch, God forbid that that fhouldbee true 
of them,which Taly {poakeof a certaine man, that was called happy, in bani 
free leane to offend. (¢) O wretched hee that hath free libertie to offend! An 
therefore what euer hee be,that thinketh himfelfe happy in his freedome of re- 


_, (proching others, giuc him to vaderftand chat farre happyer fhould he be : the 


ah 


“4 cS ie ee or - 
= 8 2 Ewe em Pw mw ew ow ow. ew om ee — 


Ys. wo 


1 
. 
. ae 2 ® ¥ ‘ . ; 
. . . 


Lins. OFTHE CITIE OF GOD. 


235 


lacke of that licence,feeing tharas now , hee may in formeof confultation con- 
tradi or oppofe what hee will, fetting’ afide the affecting of vaine applaufe: 
and heare what hee will,and what is fic in honeft, graue, free,and friendly difpu- 
tation. 7 


ee Sw eee Ss aaa. 


L. VIVES. 


[fettcch (1a ) 4 time | Many write againftothers,and watch a time for the publication,to the 
hurt of che aduerfary and their 6wne profit. Such men writing oncly to dée mifchiefe,are 
to be hated as the extcrable enemies of all good iudgment$’, For who cannot doe iniurie > 
Ard what a minde hath hee that thinketh his guifts and learning mutt ferue him to vfe ynto 
others ruine ? If they feeke to doe good by writing , let them publith them then, when they 


eve eS eee 


* may doe others the moft good , and their opponents the leaft hurt. Let them fet them fort 


whileft theit aduerfary lives, is lufty, and can'reply vpon them , and :deftnd his owne caufe. 
Plinie writes that Ajinins Pollio had Orations again ft Plencas , which, hee meantto publith 


In prefat. 


biftor.xat, 


after his death, Jeafthee fhould come vpon him with a reply. Plances hearing of it, euth faith - 


hee,there is none but ghofts will contend with the dead: which an{wer fo cutte the combes 
of the Orations , that all Schollers made icafts and miockes of them, (4 ) Jt is eafye | The 
blinde vulgar, (the voluntary cenfitret of the coritentions betweene the greateft Schollers ) 
ifa man be filent) prefently condemne him, and giue him for conquered , without any other 
tryall : and holding him the fufficient anfweter , that doth not hold hisspeace, If both write 
mitch ; O then ( fay they ) itis a hard controuerfie,and 10 leaue it : nenter looking (nor if they 


~pyould,could they difcerne) whofe caufe is better defended 5 Becaufe they doe not ynderftand 
‘it: But even as e-Anguffine faith here, Vanity haning more words then veritie,thofefqolesoftes 


neft iudge on that fide, that kept the moft oe in (¢) O wretched | Tufe.l.5. fpaking of Cix- 
wa: Is hee that flew thofe men : no, I rather thinke bim wretched, not enely for dooing it, but 
iu that be carried himfelfe fo togette the licknce to doe it : Thoughto offend is vnlawfull, and lia 
eenfed to no man, wee abyfe the world : for that is lawful] which each mans good hath left 
free yntohim,toperformeorfollow., 8 3 aa resi 


Finis, lib... 


FS: t 


X 4 THE 


THE CONTENTS OF THE. - 
fixt booke of the City of God. 


1. Of thofe that af firme they do worlbip 6:Of the Fabulous and Politique Dini- 
thefe Gods for eternall life, and not for | nityagain#Varro. 
temporall re(pects. | 7. The coherence and fimilitude between 
2, What may bethought of Varroes opt- | the fabulous Deuinitie andthe ciwill. 
nion of the gods,who dealeth fo with them \ 8. Of the naturallinterpretations which 
in his difcouery of them and their ceremo- | the Paynim. Docters pretend fer their 


pies that with more reuerence unto them \ Gods. oe | 
he might hawe held his peace. 9. Of the offices of each peculiar God. - 
3. The dinifion of Varroesbockeswhich \ 10. Of Senecaes freer reprehesfion of 
he fisleth. The Antiquities of Dinine 8¢ | the csuill Theology then, Vatrots was of 
Humaine affaires. | theFabulouss = 7 
" g. That by Varroes di/putations the | 11. Senecaes opiaion of the lowes. - 
+ Affaires of thofe men that worlbipped the | 12. That it is plaine ,by shis.dsfeonery 
Gods are of far more antiquitie then thofe \ of the Pagan Gods vanity, that. thay can- 
ofthe Godsthemfelues. - wot gine eternall life, haning no power te 
5. Of Varroes three kinds of Déninity : | helpe in the temporal. 
Fabulous Natural and Politique. a 


s | 
ct 


- FINIS. 


“~~ 


Wwe? ek” WAC 


L136. 337 


OF THE CITTIE OF GOD: 

| Writren by Saint Ctugufline Bifhdp of Heppo, 

ee vnto CMarcelinus. ca : 

ai affirme they do worlbip thefe gods far eternall life and ne t 

for temporallre/pectss .C map. Roo 


7 eee 


Of thefe th 


5 
‘ é 


ea. Saas N the fiue precedent bookes I thinkethey be fufficiently con- 
atl hen founded that hold that worfhip iuftly: given ynto thefe falfe 
Oe eg, gods,which is peculiar oncly to one trut,G O D,and in greeke 
eee EE i a ; Li aap apa ae. age 
ed Wee, iscalled aerwpie, and that this werfhippe ought to bee. offered 
<>) aoe them for temporall commodities,all which Gods,Chrif- 
SZ INGE cianicy conuinceth either to bee. friuilous and-vnprofitable 
| | Images, and damned fpirits,or at leaft,and'at belt no Creators, 
but Creatures .But whoknoweth not that neither thofe flue bodkes tor all char 4 
man could make; would flay and fatiffie excefie of obftinacy ? for it is forne mens 
glory(vaine indeed neuer to yeeld to the truth, but oppofe it to their owne per- 
ition,in whofe bofornes finne hath fo large an Empire,for theit difeafe exceed- 
shall curenot through the Phificians want of skill, but the patients impatient 
frowardnefie. But’as for fuch as read the fayd bookes without any dbftinate in- 
rent,or with little and ponder the things they reade¢ inan vopartiall diftretion; 
 thofethall approue,that our labour in their fatiffation, hath rather perforined 
‘ more then the queftion required then otherwife :and that all the matice,where- 
in they make Chriftianity ecauife of all the affiGtions falling vpon this ctranft- 
tory world , (the beft Icaxned of them diffembling their knowledge againft their 
owne con{ciences )isnot onely voide of all reafon and bonefty, but freughe — 
witb light rafhneffe and pernicious impudence. Now therefore(as our method 
exaéteth) are they to bee deale withall chat make eternity the end of this erroni- 
ous worfhip,which Chriftian religion fo reie&tcth: let vs take our beginning . |, | 
from the holy and oraculous Pfalmift-that faith (s) Ble(fed ss the man that pipes Pharr 40.4e 
sheLord his traftand regardcth not the proude nor {uch as turne aftde to lies.But of al 
fuch as doe got aftray in thofe errors, the Philofophers are leaft falty, thar could 
newer abide the fond opinions of the vulgar,who made their gods images , 8 fa- 
bled divers thirigs of them,moft falfe and vnworthy the Deities,or els belecued 
them from the reports of others, and from that beleefe ineruded them into the 
ceremonies , andmade them parts of their worfhips. Wherefore with fuch as 
(4) though they durft not openly,yet fecretly difliked thofe things,this queftion | 
may be diy difputed of: Whether it bee fit to worfhip one God thé maker ofak 
bodies and {pirits, for the life to come, or many gods (c) beeing all (by their beft 
Philofophers confeflions, ) both created and aduanced. Bur who can éndure 
to heare it faid that the gods which I reckned vp in partsinthe 4.booke,and haue — 
culiar charges can giuc one lifé eternall . Andthofe fharpe witted men chat 
yaft of the good they doe by writing of thefe things, in inftruGing the people . 
whatto. intreate at each of their hands, would they commit fuch a grofle 
abfurdity as that which the Mimiickes doe in feaft, asking water of Bacchus and 
wine of the Nymphes ? As thus : would they teach a man that praicd vn- 
to the Nymphes tor wine, if they anfwered him ; wee haue no wine; goe 
to Bacchus for that : Then to replic , if you haue no wine I praic you ther 
ee ¢ 


62338 SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuap.te 


giue mee life erernall ? what groffer foolery gould there bee then this ? would 

not the Nymphes fall a laughing (for they are (4) proneto laughter when they do 
notaffect deceiteas the deuills vfe to do)and fay to. him,why fond man doft thou 

thinke we haue life eternall at command, that haue not a cuppe of wine at com 

Life eternal MAnd as thou heareft ? Such fruitlefle abfurdity fhould it & to aske eternall 
in vaine af- life or hope for it of fuch Gods as are fo bound to peculiar charges in things re- 
kedofthe fpecting this fraile and tranfitory life, that it were like mymicall fcurrility co de- 
= maund any thing of any one of them which refteth vnder the difpefing of ano- 
ther. Which when the témikes doé, men doe very worthily laugh at chem in 

the Theater,and when ignorant fooles doe it , they are farre more worthyly de- 

rided inthe world. Wherefore the peculiar pofitions that wee ought to make 

vnto every god, by the gouernonrs of cities , their keaarned men haue compiled, 

and left vnto memory: which muft bee made to Bacchus, which to the Nymphes, 

Vulcan cc. part whereof] recited in the fourth booke,and part I willingly omit- 

ted .Now 6 ifit bee an error to aske wine of Ceres , bredd of Bacchus,water of 
Vulcan,and fire of the Nymphes : how much more were it anerror to aske life e. 

ternall of any one of them ? wherefore if that in our difputation about the earth. 

ly Kingdomes , and in whofe powre they fhould bee, wee fhewed that it was di. 

reétly falfe to beleeue that they confifted in the powre ofany one of thofe ima. 

ginary gods , wereiit not outragious madnefle then to beleeue chat thelife eter. 
nall,with which the Kingdomes of che earth areno way watthy tobe compared, 

fhould bee in the guift of any of them # Nor can their ftate,and hight,oompared 

with the bafeneffe of an earthly Kingdome in refpe& ofthem , bee a fuficient 

cloake for their defeét in not beeing ableto gine it: becaufe (forfooth)chey doe 

not refpe@it . No, what euer hee bee that confidering the frailty of mans nature 

maketh a f{corne of the momentary ftate ofearthly dominion,he will thinke iran 
vaworthy — to. the godsto haue the giuing and guarding of fuch vanities 
impofed.vpon them. And by this, if thac(according as wee proued fafficiently in 

J the two bookes laft paft )no one godof all this catalogue of noble andignoble 
| - were fit to beholdthe. beftower of earthly ftates , how much leffe fit were 

ey allto makea mortall man pertaker of immortality ? Befides (becaufe now 

wee difpute againft thofe that ftand for their worfhip in refped of the life to 
come)they are not to bee worhipped for thofe things which thefe mens erroni- 

ous Opinion/farre from all truth ) haue put as their proprieties,and things pecu- 

liarly intheit powre: as they beleeue that hold the honouring of them very vfe- 

. fullin things of this prefent life,againft whom Lhaue {poken to my powre in the 

- fiue precedent volumes - Which being thus, if {uch as adore Juseatas, flourith in 

vigor of youth , and thofe that doe not, either die vnder age, or paffe ic with the 

cefes of decrepite fickneffe : If the chinnes of Fortuna Berbete her feruants 

grow full of haire,and all others be beardleffe: then iuftly might we fay that thus 

farre thefe goddefles are limited in their offices : and therefore it were no asking 

life eternall of Jewentas ;that couldnot giueone a beard, nor wereany good to 

bee expected of Fortuna Barbata after this life , that had not powre to make one 

liue til} he had abeard . But now, their worfhip beeing of no vfe for thofe things 

in their powre, feeing many haue worfhipped Jssentas chat lined nottobee 

youthes 5 afid as many honoured Fortuna Barbata that neuer had good beards: 

-and many without: beardes that worfhiped her were mocked by them thathad 
beardsand fcorned her ; is any man then fo mad , thac knowing the worfhipping 
“pf shem to bee vnefi¢Guall in thofe things whereto cheir pretended 

o exten 


‘\ 


L is.6.  . OF THE CiTIE OF GOD, 


239 
extendech, yet willbeleeue it tobe effectuall in the obtayning life erernall ?Nay | 
euen chofe that did fhare out their authoricy for them , ( leatt beeing fo many, 


there fhould fome fit idle, Jand fo taught their worlhippe t6 thé rude vulgar nor 
thetechemfelues durft affirme that the life eternall was a gift comprifed inany 


of their powers. 


oy i < 
a) See a . : 
: Py : 


a SP wives. 


Leffed (4) is the man The Septuagints tranflate it 10 trove xelefarte curd. That maketh the 
name,ofthe LORD bis hope. But the Hebrew, ori ginall hath it as Auguftine citethit. Ine 
decd,the difterence is not of any moment, (6) Though they durft noe | They feared the laves; 
a.tney didthe Arcopagires at Athens: as Tully faich of Epicurus. (c) Being all| Plato in Ti 
weco. (4) Prone to laughter) Alluding to Virgil iti his Palemon, ad. oe es thes, of 


Et guofed faciles Nympbe rifere facelle he, | > 


a be 
O26 veel 


i ___ The fhrine wherein the pleafant Nymphes wete merry Me 4 TS 
_ He doth not call them Facses;pleafant,or kind, becanfe they wete.foone moouedto laughs 
ter,but beeaufe they were foone appéafed;and eafie to bee intreated.:-«-=Faciles vencrare Naa 
paas,faith he in his Georgikes, to adore the Sentle Napae, And in the fame fence are-men called: 
Gentle, Faciles. — = ee See 


Wi but may bee thought of Var 10's opinion of the gods , wha dealeth fo with theme 
in his difconery of them and their ceremonies that with more reucrence 
unto them he might hane held hispence.. Cuneo, of). 


VV Ho was ever 2 mitore curious inquifitor of thefe mattérs then. Hero 3-4 
_ more leatned inwentot ,'a morediligent indge, a more elegant diuider,or \ 
amore eka recorder ? And though he be not eloquent yét is hee (6 documen-. 
tall, and fententious , thatto reade his vniuerfall learning will delight one that 
loues maiter,as much as Ta//y will one that loueth wordes » Yea Tully (4) himn- 
{clfc Jeaueth this cettimony of him, thae the fame difpucation, that lice handleth 
in his Acacemicke dialogues, hee had ¢ hée faith ) wich Adarcus Varro, amanthe 
moft acuce.and (d) doub:leffe the moft learned of his time. (c) Hee faithnotthe 
mcft eloquent , becaufe herein hee had his betters: but » moft acne: and in his 
Academikes whete hee maketh doubts of all things ; hee calleth him: Deatleffe 
the moft learned being fo affured hereof that he would take away all doubt which 
hee vfed to induce into al! queftions , onely inthis Academicall difputacion for- 
getting himfelfe to bee an Academike . Andin his fir bodke, Paain com- 
mended-his workes, (4) wee faith hee in the Cstty were but as wandring pilerimes: 
thy bevkes brought, vs home , and taught us to know what 5 42a whom weewere. Thy 
countries age,time, religious and politig, atfcspline hrbitations order , all the formes, 
canfes and kindes of dinine and cinill dsftipline by the/e are fuily difeouered, So great 
was his learning, 45(¢) Terentius al//o teftsfieth of him in the 'verfe. Vir dottiffi- 
mus undecundg, Varro : Varro, aman of viiverfall skill: wBo hath reade fo much 
thst wee wonder how hee hath had time to write, and Uf ) hath written fomuch that we 
wonder how any man {bould read fo much. This man( I fay ) fo learned and fo Witty, 
had he bin a dire& oppofer of that religion he wrote for, & held the ceremohies, 
no way religious, but wholy fuperftitious,coald noc(l imagine Yhaué recorded 
more deréftable abfurdities theredfithen heé hath already .But being aworfhip- 
per of thie fame gods; & a teacher of that worfhip,that lieé proffeffeth he feareth 
| . , that 


240 SAINT AVGVSTINE. . Cuap. 3 


that his worke fhould bee loft , not by the enemies incurfion , but by the 
citizens negligence ,and affirmeth that with 2 more worthy and commodious 
care were they co bee preferued,then that wherewith Adete/lus fetched the Palle- 
digs from the flaues,and e£nexs his houfhold gods from the facke of Troy tyet 
for all this,doth hee leaue fuch things to memory , as all, both learned and igno. 
rantdo iudge moft abfurd and vnworthy to bee mentioned in religion? Whar 
ought wee then to gather , bur that this depely Skid man ( becing not freed by 
the holy fpirit)was ouer-prefled with the cuftome of his city and yet vnder fhew 
of commending their religion gaue the worldnotice of his opinion. | 


Sat 


L. VIVES. 


TY (4) bimfelfe | What Telly ment to handle in his Academikes , his thirteeneth Epiftle 
ofhis firft booke to -Articus openeth fully : beeing rather indeed a whole volume,then an 
Epiftle. He wriceth alfo(de disinat.lib.2.) that hee wroté foutth bookes of Academicall quef 
tions. And though he certifie Atticus that hee hath drawne them into two, yet wanteth hee 
much: and of thetwo that wee haue extant, Nosins (Marcellus quoteth the fecond divers 
times by the name of the fourth. The place Augu/ffine citeth,is not extant in the bookes wee 
Varro white Aue: (4) Donthtleffe the moft | Varro in his life ume (when enuy ftitre oft ) was called che 
be liedhed MOft learned of the Gowned men , and ( which neuer man had befides him ).in his life had his 
bis Seatue Ratu fc yp in che library which Afisins Pollio made publike at Rome. (c) He faith not | Vare 
fetyp. reas by his bookes left vs doth appeare) either regarded not, or els attained nor any pleafing 
Terentiae formality.of ftile. (d) We faith hee} Academ. qneft lib.t, and the like is in Phslippic. 2. (ce) Tee 
Rus, rentiaxts) A Carthaginian , liuing in Diocletsans cime,hee wrote a worke of letters ; {yllables 
and meeters, in verfe, whichis yet extant. Seraias and Prifeian cite him very often. The 
verfe eAngaftixe quotcth isin the chapter of Phalenciakes. (f) hath written |] Gellius.lib.3, 
selaceth out of Varrohis firft booke Hebdomarnm , that becing foure-fcore and foute yeares 
of age, hee had written. 490. bookes of which fome were loft at che ranfacking of his library 

when he was profcribed. .  # | ; 


. The diwifion of Narto’s bookes which he fiileth, The antiquity 
OF diuingand humaine affaires, Cuar.3. 
HE wrote one and forty bookes of antiquities : diuiding them into affaires di- 
uineand humaine: thefe hee handled in fiue and cwency of them, the divine 
in fixteene fo following the diuifion,that every fix bookes of humanity he diui- 
ded into (4) foure parts : profecuting the perfons,place,time,and nature of them 
all; in his firft fixe hee wrote of the men , inthe fecond faxe of the places. in his 
_ third fixe of the times, in his laft fixe ofthe ations: One fingular booke, as the 
argument of them all, hee placed before themall : Inhis (d) diuinitiealfo hee 
followeth the fame methode touching the gods , (for their rites are performed 
by men in time and place). The foure heads I reherfed hee comprifethin three 
bookes peculiar. Inthe firft three of the men, the next three of places, the third 
of the times , the laft of the: facrifices, herein alfo handling who offred , where, 
when,and what they offered with acuity and iudgement. But becaufe the chiefe 
expeation was to know to whom they offered, of this followed full difcourfe 
in his three laft bookes , which made them vp fifteene. Butin all 16. becaufe 
a booke went asan argument by it felfe before all that followed: which. beein 
ended , confequently out of cha five-fold divifion the three firft bookes did fol- 
Jow of the men, fo. fub-diuided chat the farft was of che Priefts, the fecond of 
| | . the 


Line, OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 


the 3. of the fifteene (d) rite-obferuers. His fecond thrée books of the places, 
handled 1. the Chappels , fecond the Temples: 3. the religious places. The 
three bookes of the times , handled firft their holydaies. 2. the Circenfian 
games: 3. the Stage-playes. Of the three concerning the facrifices, the 1. handled 
confecrations: 2. the priuate offerings: 3. the publike. All thefe as the partes 
of their precedent pompe , the goddes them-felues foliow in the three lait, they 
en whomeall this coft is beftowed: Inthe 1. the goddes knowne. 2. the goddes 
vricertaine: 3. the whole company of them: 4. the felected principals of them. 
Now inthis goodly frame and tabrike of a weil diftinguifht worke, itis appa- 
rant to all that are not obftinately blinde,chat vayneand impudent are they that 
begge or expect erernall life of any of thefe goddes: both by that we haue fpoken 
and that wee will fpeake. Thefe are but the inftitutions of men, or of diuels : nor 
good diuells as hee faith , but to bee plaine wicked fpirits , that cut of their 
itrange mallice , inftill fuch pernitious opinions into mens’ phantafies , by abu- 
fing their fences , and illuding theic weake capacities , thereby to draw their 


foules into vanity more deepe , and vnloofe the holdthey have , or might haue~ 


of the inchangeable and eternall verity. Varro profeffech him-felfe to write of 
humanity before Diuinity , becaufe firft (faith hee ) there were Citties and foci- 


eties , which afterward gaue being to thefe inftitutions. But the crue religion. 


hath no origina:Ifrom earthly focieties : God the giuer of eternall comfort in{pi- 
reth it into the hearts of {uch as honour him. : 


—. 
e 


| | - i: . L. VIVES. 

Nro (2) 4.parts | diuided them into foure fections , not inducing parts of contrarieties of 

fuch like. (4) In bis Dinizity alfo | Identidem the old books read,but it may be an error in the 
copyers. Itidem is bettersIa like manner. (¢) e4ugars | Their order is of great Antiquitie,deri- 
ued from 4/1 to Greece,thence to Hetruria and the Latine Aborigines, and fo to Rome, Roma 
dus.was an Augur,and made 3, others. Déowifies, He fet an Augur in every Tribe, Liz. In pro- 
ceffe of time they added a fourth : and afterwards fiue more which made vp nine: And fo the 
did with the Priefts:Con{uls-A1. Valerins,and O, Apulems.(d) Fifteene rite-obferuers. | Tar- 
guin the proud hauing bought the books of the ie ear eas two men to looke in them 
{till as need was:thofe were called che Dusmvirs of the facrifices. Afterwards thefe two were 
madetenne ; by the Sextian Licinian law in the contention of the orders , ewo yeares before 


the Plebcians were made capable of the Confulfhip:and a great while after , fiue more added, | 


which number {toed firme euer after, 


That by Varro’: difputations , the affaires of thofe men that 
worlbipped the goddes , are of farre more Antiquitity 
then thofe of the goddes them-[elues. 
. _— _ Crap. 4. 

B Bic therefore is the reafon Varre giueth why heé writes firft of the men 
L and after of the goddes who had their ceremonious infticutions from men: 
Euen as (faith hee ) the Paenter is elder then the picture , and the Carpenter then the 
houfefo are Citties before their ordinances But yet hee faith ifhee were to write of 
the full nature of the goddes , hee would haue begun with them, and haue deale 
with men afterwards : As though heerehee writ bucof part of their natures, 
notofall: Orthat (4) fome part of the goddes nature ( though not all ) fhould 
not alwaies be preferred before men ? Nay what fay you to his difcourfe in his. 
three laft bookes of goddes certaine , goddes vncertaine , and goddes feleéted? 
Heere hee feemes toomit no nature of the gods. Why then fhould he fay. ifwee 
were to write of all the naturé of gods and men , wee would haue done with the 
Y goddes 


24 


242 


a 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuarg. 


goddes ere wee would begin with themen ? Eyther hee writes of the goddes 
natures in whole , in part,or not all : ifin whole, then fhouldthe difcourfe have 
hadde firft place in his worke if in part,why fhould it noebee firft neuertheleffez 
Is it vnfit co preferre part of the gods nature before whole mans ? If it be much to 
preferre it before all the worldes , yet itis not fo to preferre it before all the 
Romasnes. Andthe Bookes were written only in Romes refpe&,not inthe worlds, 
yet ( faith he )the men are fitteft before , as the Painter to che piGure , and the 
Carpenter tothe ee intimating that the Deities affaires had(as pic- 
tures and buildings haue ) their originall dire@ly from man. So then remayneth; 
that hee wrote not all of the goddes natures , which hee would not fpeake plain. 
ly out , but leaucto the readers collection. For where hee faith, (4) not all, 
Ordina‘ily it is vnderftood ( Some) but may bee taken for ( None )For none 
neyther 4// nox fome. For as hee faith (c ) Ifie were all the goddes nature thathe 
wrote of, hee would haue handled it before the mens . But truth ( hold hee his 
peace ) cryethout, it fhould neuertheleffe haue the place of the Romaimes par- 
ticular,though it bee but particular it felfe. But ic is rightly placed as itis, the 
Jaft ofall , therefore it is none at all. His defire therefore was notto preferre 
Humanity before Divinity , but truth before falfhood. For in his proceffe of 
humanity hee followeth hiftory : but in his diuinity nothing but vaine relations 
and idle opinions. This is the aime of his fubtile intimation , in preferring 
the firft, and giuing the reafon why hee doth fo: Which hadde hee not ginen, 
fome other meanes perhaps might haue beene inuented for the defence of his 
methode. But giuing it him-felfe , hee neyther leaueth others place for other 
fufpitions , nor fayles to fhew that hee doth but preferre men before mens in- 
fiicutions , not maris nature before the Deities : Heerin confeffing that bis 
bookes of Divinity are not of che truth pertaining to their nature, but of their 
falfhood effeGing others error:which (as we faid in our 4.booke ) heeprofeffed 
that hee would forme nearer to the rule of nature ifhee were to build a Citty: 
he finding one eftablifhed already,he could not choofe but follow the grounded 
cultomes. | 


of 


RY 


og oe L. VIVES. 


Kien 4) fome part] There is no part of the goddes nature were it neuer fo fmall but 
is to bee preferred before mans whole, (8) Nor a! | Icisawonder that our Comment- 
ators miffed to make a large difcourfe of equipalences in this place , and of the Logicians ax- 
fomes and dignities out of cheit fellow Petrus Hi[panus : nor nothing of mobilities,and immo- 
bilitics. eAnguffine in this place fpeaketh of the Logitians precepts, of, not al/men difpute, 
and fome mex doc not difpute , which runne contrary’: But not all affirmeth nothing : fo that 
whether fome men do not difpute , or none difpute , not all is truly faid of either, Forifit bee 
true that no man do this , then truc it is that not all men do it,becaufe fome doe it not , ifie be 


_ falfe to fay al men do it: Thefe arife out of the repugnances of contraries & contradifories:for 


if it be rrue that no man is,and falfe that fome man js not furch,then thal it be crue chat [al men 
are fuch] all is beeing contradictory to[ fome is not Jand fo fhould{ all] and[ none ] light 
true in one fence , which cannot bee ; thefe precepts of. aging truth and falfhood , Arifterle 
taught, and the Greeke Logitians afterhim , aslikewife Apuleius Peribermenias , Martian 
Capella and Sexerinus Boethins , whome wee may call Latines, (¢ ) Uf st were | Anguffine ta 
Ring away the adiunct taketh that alfo away to which icis an adiunét : Our Logitians fay that 
reieQing the conditionall conclufion,the precedent is reiected , fo ifhe wrote of any nature of 
the gods, it were to come before humaine affaires:but that which he doth write is not to come 


before them: Therefore hee writeth not of Gods nature : Ocherwife the confequence were 


falfe 


@ 


Like. - OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 


confequent fhould concurre with the antecedent. Now this difcourfe of mine were logical} 
if the termes were fuch, that is fchoole-termes, filled with barbarifme and abfurdity ; but be- 
caufe they are grammer , that is fome-thing nearer the latine;though not fully latine , yee they 
are Gramarian , not Logical], : 


Of Varro his three kindes of diuinity,fabulous naturall, : 

. andpolitique.  Crar. §. _ 

"A Gaine , what meaneth his three-fold diftinion of the do@rine concerning 
“Athe gods, into mythicall Phyficall, & ciuillzand(to giue him a latine cee 
That is the firft,(4) fabulare, but we will call it fabulous , for axes in greeke,it isa 
fable or tale. The fecond Naturall as the vfe of the word teacheth plaine. The 
third hee namech in latine., Ciuill : Andthen proceedeth.: Mythical) the Po- 
es vfe principally : Phyficall the Phylofophers: Ciuill the vulgar. For the 
firft (faith hee ) icis fraught with fi@ions moft difgracefull tothe Deities: As 
this,that this godde is borne of ones head, that ofones thigh, that of droppes 
of blond: And this , that the goddes were theeues , adulterers and feruants to 
man: And finally they attribute fuch thinges to the goddes , as cannot bee re- 
fidenc but in the motk contemptible wretch of all mortality , nor happen but 
vnco fuch flauifh natures. Here now as farre as feare permitted , hee makes a 
faire difcouery ofthe iniury offered to the goddes by fuch yngodly fables : And 
heere hee might, feeing he {peaketh not of the naturall nor ciuill phylofophy,but 
of the fabulous which hee thought hee might reprehend freely. But now to the 
next. The (b) fecond,faith heeis thac where-with the Phylofophers haue filled 
their volumes : Wherein they difpute what, whence ,and when the goddes 


ie 


"were falfe if the antecedent were true and the confequent falfe, For the repugniance of the 


were, whether from eternity of fire, as(¢) Heraclitus held, ot of (d) numbers as __ 


Pithagoras taught : Or of(e).Atomes as Epseurus belecued : and {uch like as are far 
more tollerable witbin the {chooles then without, in the place of orations. Here 
hee blameth nothing in this kinde , but onely relates the controuerfies which di- 
uided them into fexes and factions. Yet this kinde he excludeth from the peoples 
cares, but not the other, which was fo filthy and fo frivolous. O the religious 
cares of the people, and euen with them,of Rome! The Phylofophers difcourfés 
of the goddes they cannot any way indure : but the Poets fidtions,and the Play- 
ers aGions, being fo much difhonourable to the diuine effences , and firte to bee 
{poken of none but the moftabied perfons , thofe they abide and behold with 
patience:Nay. with pleafure. Nay thefe the gods them-felues do like,and there- 
fore haue them decreed as expiations. 1 but fay fome , wee makea difference of 
thefe two kindes, the mythicall and the phyficall , from the Ciuill, whereof you 
now are to {peake : and fodoth he diftinguith themalfo. Well lettevs fee wha 
hee faith to that: I fee good.caufe why the fabulous fhould bee feperate from 
thereft ,becanfe itis falfe , foule and vnworthy. But in diuiding the naturall 
and che ciuill what doth hee but approoue that the ciuill is faulty alfo? For 


if itbe naturall, why is it excluded ? And if ic beenot naturall why is it ad- 


mitted? This is that chat makes him handle the humaine things befote the di- 
uine , becaufe in the later hee followed that which men hadde ordained ; nor 


that which the truth exaded. But let vs fee his ciuill diuinity: The third kinda’ 


(faith hee) is that which men of che Cittry, cheefely the priefts ought to bee 
cunning in: as,which gods to worfhip in publike, and with what peculiar fort of 
facrifices eachone mutt bee ferued : But let vs go on with him. The firft of thofe 


the 


ita 


p 


~ 


kindes faith hee was adapted to the Stage. The 2. to the World, The 3. to. 


: SA INT. AY GVST. INE. . Cuar.é. 


the Cittie. VVho feeth not which he preferreth ? Euen his fecond Philofo- 


‘Seremoreat ire belongeth( hee: faith ) to the VVorld , (f) then which they 
holde nothing more excellent. Bue the other cwo , the firftand the third , them 


Ke diftinguifheth and confineth to-the Stage and the City : for wee fee that 
that the pertinence of them to the Cittie hach no confequence why they fhould 
' pertaine tothe VVorld , though there bee Citties in the VVorld 5 for falfe Opi- 


nion may gette that abeleefe of truth in a Citey which hath not any nature 
nor place in any part ofthe VVorld. And forthe Stage ,where is that bue in 
the'Cittie 2 There ordained bythe Citry , and for what end but Stage-playes? 


_And what Stage-playes but of their goddes , of whome thefe bookes are. penned 


-with fo much paynes? - : er _ 
_ .. LVIVES. _ 


Ft (a )febulare The word Snetonins vfeth: Hee !oued (faith hee of T. sbevins.) the reading 


ot Fabstar Hiltory , euen were it ridiculous and foolith, (6) Second ] The Platonifts, 


| (chiefly the Stotkes ) reduced all thefe gocdes fables vnto natural caufes and natures felfe , as 


‘their heads, (Pdsto in Cratylo Cic. de nat. deor, Pharnut. and others.) But this they doe 


wring for fometin.cs in fuch manner that one may {ce they do but dally. (¢ ) Herachtus | an 


Ephefianzhe wrote a book that needed an Oedipus or the Delian Swimmer,aid therfore he was 
galled Scotinus,darke. He held fire the beginniag,and end ofall thinges , and that was full of 


foules and demones {pirits. His opinion of the fire, Hippafas of Metapontns followed.(d) Nume 


| bers | Puthagorits held that God, our foules,and all things in the world confifted vpon numbers 
_ and that from their harmanies were all things produced, Thefe numbers Plato !earning of the 


Tealian Pythagoreans,explained them and made them more intelligible : yet not fo but thae the 
reader muft let a great part ofthem alone :This Ciceroto Artrexs calleth an obfcure thing, 


Plato his numbers. ( ¢) Or of Atomes | Epicurns in emulation of Democritus taught thar all 


things confifted of little indiuifible bodies , called therefore a’zixes, from which notwithftan- 
ding he excluded neither forme, magnitude , nor waight. (f ) Thex which they held J Nature 


_ knoweth os more faire,or more {pacious. Seneca. Plato in Timeo. Tull, de nat. deor, 2. 


and other Phylofophers hold chis. 


Of the fabulous and pollstike dininity againft Varro.. 

_—_ ‘Cuap 6: a 8 | 
Arro feeing thou art moftacute , snd-doubtleffe. moft leamed , yet buta 

- man, neither God , nor affifted by Gods fpiritin the. difcouery oftruthin 

divinity , thou feeft thisthac the diuine affaires are to bee excluded from hu- 

maine vanities; and yet thou fearett to. offend the peoples vitious opinions and 

euftomes in thefe publike fuperftitions being notwithftanding fuch , as both thy 


‘felfeheldand thy written workes affirmeto bee dire@ly oppofite to the nature 


of the Deitiés,or fuch as mens in firmitie {urmized was included in the Eiements. ' 
Whar doth this humaine(chough excelling) wit of thine in this placeswhat helpe 
doth thy great reading afford thee.in thefe {traits?Thou art defirous to honor the 
natural) gods, & forced to worfhip the ciuill:thou haft found fome fabulous ones 
whom thou dareft {peak thy minde againft:giuing (4) the ciuill fome part of their 
difgrace whether thou wilt or no: for thou faift the fabulous are for the Theater, 
the naturall for the world,the ciuill for the citty : che world beeing the worke of 
God, the Theater & C nit of men:nor arethey other gods that you laugh at, then 
thofe you worfhip: Nor be your plaies exhibited to any but thofe you faerifice 
vnto:how much more fubtile were they diuided into fome natural,and fome infti- 
euted by men 2 Andof thefe later ,the Poets bookes taught one part, and the 
pric(ts another:yet notwithftanding with fuch a cohzrence in vneruth ¥ the diuels 
shat likeno truch approac thé both:but fetting afide your natural sag) nt 
~ » ewe Oe . ereafter 


Ling, OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 


heceatter ) pleafeth it youto afke or hope for life eternall of your Poetique ridi- 
culous Stage-goddes ? No at nohand. GO D forbid fuch facriligious madneffe!. 
Willyouexped them of thofe goddes whome thefe prefentations.do pleafe and 
appeafe,though their crimes bee the thinges preiented : Ithinke no man fo brain« 
Jeffly fortifh. Therefore neither your fabulous diuinity nor your politicuecan 
giue you euerlafting life. For thefirft foweth the goddes turpitude , and thela- 
ter by fauouring it, moweth ic. The firft fpread lies, the later colle them. The 
firft hanteth the deities with outragious fixions, & the later imputeth thefe fixi~ 
onsto the honour of the deities. The firit makes fongs of the geddes lafciuious 
pranks,and the later fings them on the gods feaft daies. The firft recordeth the 
wickednefles of the goddes, and the !ater loucth the rehearfall of thofe recordes, 
The firft either fhameth the goddes , or fayneth of them: The later either wit- 
neffeth the truth or delighteth in the fixion. Both are filthy and both are 
damnable. But the fabulous: profeffeth turpitude openly , and the politique 


_ maketh that turpitude her ornament. Is there any hope of life eternall where 


the temporal fuffers fuch pollution ? Or doth wicked company and aétes of dif 
honeft men pollute our lives ,and not the fociety of thofe talfe-adorned , and 
filthyly adored:fiendes ? If their faulces be true, how vile are they worthipped? 


If falfe,how wicked the worfhippers ? But fome ignerant perfon may gather 


from this difcourfe that ic is the poeticall fixions only and Stage-prefentments 
that are derogatory from the Deities glory,but not the Do@rineof the Priefts, 
at any hand; that is pure and holy. Is itfo? No, ifit were, they would never 


_ hauegiuen order to ere& playes for the goddes honour , nor the goddes would 


neuer haue demaunded it. But the Prieftesfeared not to prefent fuch hinges 
as the goddes honours in the Theaters, when as they hadde pra@ifed the like 


in the Temples. Laftly our faid Author indeauoring to make Politike Diui- 


nity of athird nature from the naturall and fabulous , maketh it rather to bee 
producédfromthem both, then feuerall from eycher. For hee faith that. the 


243 - 


Poets. write not fo much as the people obferue, and the Phylofophers write | 


too much for them to obferue: both W notwithftanding they do fo efchew that 
they extra& no {mall pare of their ciuill religion from either of them: Where- 


fore wee will write of fych thingesas the Poetiqueand the politique diuinities. 


do communicate: Indeed we {hould acknowledge a greater fhare fromthePhy- 


jofephers, yet fom we mutt thank the Poets for. Yetin anotherplaceofthe gods. 


~ generations, hee faith the’ people: rather followed the Poets then the Phylofo- 
_phers, for he teacheth what fhould be don, there what was done: that the Philo- 


fophers wrote for vfe, the Poets for delight:and therfore the poefies that the peo- 
ple muftnot follow,defcribethe gods crimes,yet delight both gods and men:for 


the Poets (as he faid) write for delight, and not for vfe, yet writefuch thinges as 


the gods effect,and the people prefent them with. 
— EVIVES. | 


C3 Tuing ( a | ) the cinill | Tae Coleine readeth Perfandas{ which wee tranflate. | Verro’s res 


~~ proches of the fabulous gods muft needes light in part vpon the politique dee .4 
deriue fromthe other,and indeed are the very fame. : a — | P “ ia sath 
|; ‘TheCohercnce axd fimilitude between the fabulous = : 
| déuinityand the civil, Cuar. | a me ae 


CT Herefore this fabulous Seenicall, filthy and ridiculous diuinty hathal vee 
Deiat the ciuill, And all that which all cohdemne, is = san of thts 
| Which, 


| Y 3 


244° 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. —Cuapg 


which al muft bebound to reuerence:Nor is ita part incongruent , (as I mean to 
thew) or flightly depending vpon the body of the other but as conformed & con- 


fonant asa member is vnto the fabrike ofthe whole body. For wu hatare al thofe 


Images,formes,ages,fexes and habits of the gods? The Poets haue Jowe with a 
beard, and Aéerc#ry with none , haue not the Prieftes fo? Haue the ALsmites 
made Pryapys with fuch huge priuities , and not the Prieftes ? Doth the Temples 
expofe him to bee honoured inone forme, and the Stage to bee laughr atin an 
other ? Doe (4) not the ftatues in the Temples as well as the Players onthe 
Stage prefent Satarne old and Apollo youthfull 2 Why are Forcules and Linsen- 
sinus ( goddes of dores andthrefholds ) of the mafculine fexe , and Cardea god- 
deffe of hinges , of the feminine ? Becanfe thofe are found fo in the booke of 
Prieftes which the graue Poets held too bafe to haue places in their Poems, 
Why is the Stage-Déana'(b) armed, and the citties a weaponleffe Virgin? 
VVhy is the Stage-pollo a harper , and Apollo of Delphos none: ? But thefe 
are honeft in refpe& of worfe: what held they of Zowe , when they placed his 
Nurfe in the Capitoll 2 Did they not corifirme (c ) Esemerus that wrote truly 
(not idely ) that all thefe gods were mortall men ? And thofe that placed afore 
of (d) glutton parafite goddes at Jowes table , what intended they but to make the 
facrifices(¢ Jridiculous ? If the ~Mémike had faid that Joue badde his Parafites 
to a feaft , the people would haue laughe at it. Bur Varro {poke it notin the 
goddes derifion but their commendation , as his diuinity ,not his humaine 
workes doe keepe the record : He {poke itnor in explayning the Stage-lawes, 


bucthe Capitols : Thefe and firch like conuinceth him to this confeffion, that as 


they made. the goddes of humaine fhapes, fo they beleeued them pronetohu- 
maine pleafures: For the wicked f{pirits loft no time in inftilling thofe illufions 
into their phantafies : And thence it came that Hercules his Sexten beeing idle 
fell to dice with him-felfe , making one of his. handes ftand for Hereules and 


another for-him-felfe : and plaid for this: chat if hee.got the viory of Hereules,. 


hee would prouide him-felfe a rich fupper , anda ( f ) wench ofthe Temple 


ftocke : and if Hercules ouer-came , hee would prouide fuch another fupper for 


him of his owne purfe: having there-vpon won of him-felfe by the hand of Her-' 


| Ksmnentioa sues, hee prouided a ritch {upper , and adelicate curtizan called (¢) Larentine. 
ac 


ia dee NOW fhe lying all night in the Temple, ina vifion had the carnall company of 


fed, 


Berenkes , who cold her that the firft man fhee mette in the morning after her 
departure fhould pay her for the fport that Hercules ought her for. She departin 
accordingly met with one Tarstns aritch yong man,who falling acquainted with 
her and vfing her company long,ar laft dyed and left her his heire. Shee hauing 
yorte this-great eftate , not to bee vngratefull to the Deities whofe reward thee 
eld this to bee,made the people of Rome her heire : and thenbeing gone (none 
knew how,,Ja writing was found that affirmed that for thefe deedes {he was dei- 
fied. If Poets orPlayers hzd giuen firft life tothis fable , ic would quickly haue 
beene packt vppe among fabulous diuinicy -, and quite fecluded from the poli- 
tike fociety.-But fince the people not thePoets , the Minifters not the Mimikes, 
she Temples not the Theaters.are by this author taxed of fuch turpitude , The 


Players doe not vainely prefent the goddes beaftiality , itbeeing fovile , buc- 


the Pricftes doe in vayne to ftand fo carneftly for their honefty , which is none 
atall. There arethefacrifices of Jw#o , kept in her beloued Iland (4°) Samos, 
where Joue masryedher. There are {acrifices to Ceres , where thee fought her 
davighter Préferpina when Plate hadde rauithed her : To Venus (4) where her 


tae {weete 


Lis. 6, OFTHE CITIBOFGOD -° 245. 


fweete delicace 4donis was killed by a bore : To Cébele ; where her fweete 
heart C#ss , ataire and delicate youth being geldedby chaft fury, was beway- | 
ledby the reft of the wretched gelded Gadlz. Thefe facrifices becing more beatt- 
ly then.all Stage-abfurdities ( yet by them profeffed and practifed) why doe 
they feeke to exclude the Poets figments from their politike Diuinity , as vn- 
worthy tobe ranked with fuch an honeft kind2 They are rather beholding to 
the Players. that do not prefent all their fecret facriledges vnto’ thé peoples 
view. What may wee thinke of their facrifices done in couert , when the pub- 
like ones are fo deteftably praphane ? How they vfe the Eunuchs , and theit 
Gaynimedes in holes and corners,, looke they to that : yet can they not conceal¢e — 
the beftiall hurt done vnto fuch by forcing them. Let them perfwade any man 
thaz they can vfe fuch Minifters to any good end : Yet are fuch men part oftheir - 
facred perfons. VVhat their a&s are we know not, their inftruments wee knows _ , 
But what the Stage prefents wee know , and what the whores prefent : Yet. 
there is no vfe of Eunuch nor Pathike : Yet of obfcane and filthy perfons there 
is: For honeft men ought not to a& them, But what facrifices are thefe (thinke | 
you) that require fuch minifters for the more fandtity as arenot admitted, nd— 
not cuen in (t) Thymelian bawdery. 


L. VIVES. 


| Dp? (4) not] Interrogatiuely , not to ae ire, but to fixe the intention of the fpeech more . 

firmely in the auditors eare.( Qxéntill, lib.g.) The matter is, Saturne is figured with a beard 
in Temples,and eApole without one:And there is Dionifias of Syracufa's ieft of taking away 
eAle(culapius his beard of gold, faying it is not fit the fon haue a beard and the father none. .4- 
pollo's tatue at Delos held in che right hand:a bow,on the left the three graces,one with a harp, 
another with a pipe,the third with a flute, (4) Armed] With bow and quiuer. ( ¢ ) _— Euemerus, 
Of Meffina in Sscilie-he wrote the true {tory of Jowe & the other gods out of old records,mif- 
reries and Hieroglyphikes called by the Greeks the holy ftory.Ennius interpreted.it Csceros He 
is mentioned by ¥ Greek authors, by Cicero, Varro,Lattantius, Macrobius; Seruias , andmany 
more, Sextus.Empericus calleth him Arhes/? , for writing the truth of the gods. So doth Theo=, 
doricus of Cyrene;& numbers him with § Diagora and the 7: heodoristymon in Syllés calleth him 
“pseorre daatéve, an infolent old fellow, & an vniuft writer.(d)Glutton.JTo the Priefts Colledge, 
three were added to look to the gods banquets,and called the Trismsviri Epulones, Afterward 
they were made two more,fiue:Laftly ambition added two more to thefe,& this number ftood 
of ¥ Septenvirs Epulons,that looked to § prouiding of Jones banquet,before whofe Image they ’ 
banquetted alfo them+felues.Cicero.(in paris ae, ealleth ché Parafites,becaufe fuch euer 
feed at other mens tables,as 7 greeke word intimateth : Varro calleth them fo by the nature of — 
the word,Paraficés,qua/i,lones guelts meanzds Of seegerrin,to feek his meat abroad. (¢) Ridicu- — 
lous| Mimical.( f ) A wench) Flora{ome fay , others Acca Laurentia,whofefeaftes are called 
Larentinalia, Therofread A4acrob, Saturnall, 1. Lathantins glanceth at ir. Hir fur-name(faith 
Verrens Flaccus) was Flana : of this alfo read Platarch. Probl. (g) Larentina | Laurentia Com- 
monly Larentia:for Acca Laurentia they fay was nurfe to Romulus , and the Lasrentalia are 
hir feafts:but his curtizans are the Floralia. (b) Samos] An Ile inthe e£gean fea, fo called for 
the height and craggineffe thercof. Varro writeth that it was firlt called Parthenia , Inno being 
ther brought vp,& married to Joxe:wherfore fhe hath a moft worthy and anciét Temple there 
erected:a ftatue like a bride & yearly feafts kept in honor of hir marriage. This(Latfant.lib.1:) A iss 
Samos was deare to Juno, for there fhe was borne. Virg. eEneid. (i) where her fweet | Fynara reg = 
begotte e4donis vppon his daughter Myrrha’ , by che deceipt ofher Nurfe:ddenisreignedin 
Cyprus. Ual.Probus vppon Virgils Eglogue callediGallxs following Hefiod , faith that hee — 
was Phavix his forne,and that Loxe begot him of Philoftephanus without vfe of woman, Penns 
Joued him dearely ; buthe beeing giuen all. co hunting , was killed by a Boare, They fable 
that Mars becing iealous,fent the Hoare to doe it,and ae Venus bewailed him long; and tur= 
eee , ) v4 


ned 


246 SAINT AVGVSTINE. - Cuar.8 


a 
Venusher ned him intoa fower,called by his name. AZacrobins :telles of Venxs hir ftatue on mount Li- 
eemeayy banus,with a fad fhape of forrow, hir head vailed,and hir face couered W her hand:yet fo as one 
banus, Would thinke the reares trickled down from her cies. The Phanicians called Adonts,Gyngras. 
(Pollux. lib..4.) and fo were the pipes called that were vfed at his ycarly funeral] feafts,though 
Feftus {ay they were named fo becaufe the goofe is faid to gingrire,when fhe creaketh. Befides, 
becaufe e4donis was flainein his prime , theréfore they dedicated fuch gardens to Censs as 
made a faire fhew of flowers and leaues without fruite : Whence the proucrb came of Adonis 
gardens,which Erafmus with many other things explaineth in his 4dagses , or as Budaus cal- 
lech the worke in his Mercaries feller,or Adinerua’s ware-houle. (k.) 7 bymelian.| A word the 
Greckes v{e often:and of the Latines Vitrunins ( Architett, lib. 5.) but obfcurely in mine opi- 
nion, which { will fet downe that others may {ec down better, if fuch there be. The Stage ftood 
in the Thearer berweene the two points fartheft extendedi,and there the Players aéted comedy 
and tragedy: The Senators had their feat between that and the common galleries, wherin there 
was a place fiuc foote high which the Greekes called TAymele and Logeus,wheron the tragedian 
( 4orus danced;and the comedians too,when they had one,fomtimes co the Players,fometimes 
to the people when the Players were within;there alfo ftood the mufique , and all fuch as be- 
longed to the Play and yet were no actors-and the place got thename of Orcheffra , from the 
greek opxtouas to dance:and the Greeks call T hymele evaiciun, belonging to the pipes:and al the 
Mufitians there playing were called Thymelics. They thinke it tooke the name Thymele,of the 
Altars therein erected to Bacchus and Apollo , for byusan is taken for an Altar, Donate applieth 
Thimele erence his werds in Andria, take vernin from the Altar: vnto this Apsleius vfeth Thymelicum 
wife to La» Choragium for the Players apparrel.(In Apolog. 1.) Thymele was alfo the wife of Latinus a Mi- 
tinusa Mi- mike,and fellow-actor with him in his momery, Domitian delighted much in them both as 
mike ator » Af artial! fheweth in his Epigram to him. : 
| Qua Thymelem fpeftas derifovemque latinum As Thymcle and Latinus were in place, 
Illa fronte precor carminanoftra lege, (Good) reade our verfes With the felf.fame face, 
| Of the naturall interpretations which the Paynim Doctors pre- 
tend for their goddes, | Car. 8.  & 
| But thefe things (fay they)are all to be interpreted naturally & Phifiological: 
ly. Good,as though we were in queft of Phyfrology and not of Theology , as # 
we fought natureand fet God afide. For though the true God be God in nature 
and not in opinion onely,yet is not all nature Godsfor men, beatts, birds, trees & 
ftones , have each a nature that is no deity. Butif your interpretation of diiemo- 
ther of the gods,be,that fhe is the earth, what need we feek further? what do they 
fay more that fay al your gods were mortal men ? Foras the earth isthe mother, 
fo are they earths children:but refer his facrifices to what nature you can, for men 
to fuffer (4) womens affects isnot according but contrary tonature. Thus this 
crime,this difeafe,this shame is profeffed in hir facrifices, that the vildeft wretch 
liuing would {carcely confefle by tortures, A gaine if thefe ceremonies, fo much 
fouler then all Scage-obfcznity, hauetheir naturall interpretations for their de- 
fence;why fhouldnot the like pretended excufe be fufficient for the fidtions Poe- 
ticall? They interpret much inthe fame manner : fothat in that it is countedte- 
Satumea horrid a thing to fay that Satura deuoured his fons: they haue expounded it thus, 
denourer that(b) length of time, fignified by Saturns name, confumeth all chinges it produ- 
of his fons, cech:or as Varrointerpreteth itthat Setarxe belongeth to the feeds,which beeing 
produced by the earth,are intombed in it.again : others giue other fences and fo 
_ of thereft. Yet is this called fabulous Theology,and catt out , {corned and exclu- 
~ ded for all che expofitions ; and becaufe of the vnworthy fictions , expelled both 
"from coherence with the naturall and Phylofophycall kind, as alfo with the ci- 
vill and politique. Becaufe indeed, theiudicious and learned compilers hereof, 
faw both the fabulous and the politique worthy reprehenfion; but they durft nor 
reprooue this'as they might doe the other. That. , they madeculpable, _ 
| | this 


Gingrire 
what 1t 18, 


: 
pe oe en ST CPE OT STII cI Be 
‘ ve arate 


Lin6. | OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 


this they made comparable with chat, not to preferre eyther before other’, bue 
10 fhew them both fitto bee reie&tedalike : and fo having turned them both out 
of credite without incurring the danger of openly condemning the later : the 
third the naturall kinde might gette the leffe placein mens opinions. For the ci- 
will and the fabulous are both tabulousand both ctuill, both fabulous, witneffe 
hee that obferues their obfcenities , both ciuill , witneffe hee.tnat obferués theix 
confufing them together in playes and facrifices. How thencan the powerof 
eternity ly in their handes whome their owne ftatues and facrifices do prooue 
10 bee like thofe fabulous reie&ed gods , in forme, age, fexe, habire »difcent, 
ceremonies,&c. Inallwhich they either are conuicted of mortallity , and attai- 
ning thofe erroneous honours by the diuels affiftance , in or after their lifeogr 
death,or elfe that they were true diuels them-felues that could catch all occafions 
of filling mens hearts with errors contagion. infocus 


oo _ L. VIVES. 2°, * 
WY Omens (a) affetls} The P.ieftes of (sbele , the Galli,who not beeing able to doe like 
. ‘men , fuffered like women. (6 ) Length of Time} Cicero de nat. Deo. ib, 2.Saturneis 
e2lled epics in greeke and time, xeor0s, Of this hereafter. | a » la SHE 
- Of the Lae of cach pecustar God. 


HAP. Je jr. 


V Via fay you to the obfurd Numitary diuifion of the goddés charges. | 


where each one muft have prayers madeto him for .thae which heeconi, 
maundeth 2( Of thefe we haue recited part but not al]):Is it nor more likea fexzne 
of {currillity thenaleQure of Diuinity ? Ifa manfhould fetrwo Nurfes to looke 
to his childe , one forthe meate , and another for the drinke, as they doe two 


goddeffes, Educa and Petica , hee fhould bee taken for a Cumane affe, ora Mimicsll .. 


foole. And then they haue a Liber,that letteth loofethe mafculine {perme in men, 


at carnall copulation,and one Libera for the women, whome they hold Venus (for ° | 


(4) women ,they fay , doe lette forth fpermealfo ) and therefore they dedicate 
amans priuie member toLsber , andawomans to Libera : Befides (6) wine and 
women they fubiedt vnto Liber , as the prouvokers of luftiand in fuch mad manner 
keep they their Bacchanalian {eafts:where Varro contefleth thatthe Bacche women 
could not poffibly doe fuch fuch hinges vnlefle (¢’) they were madde (d) yet 
the Senate eran growne wifer , diflikedand abolithed thefe facrifices.1¢ may 
be heere they difcryed the power of the diuels in fuch mess mindes as held them 


to be gods. Truly this could not haue bene vppon the Stage : there the players’ ’ 


are neuer madde , though it bee akinde of madnefle to honour the goddes that 
delight in fuch graceleflueffe. But whata ftrange diftin&tion hath hee of the reli- 
gicus and the fuperftitious,that che later do ftand in feare of the gods,and the firft 
doe but reverence themas parents ,not fearing them as foes’: and to call'al the 
gcds fo gocd that they wil far fooner {pare the guilty then hurt the guileles : and’ 

et for all this the woman in childz-bed muft haue three gods to look to her after 
hir dehiuerance,leaft Sy/sanxs come in the night and torment her: in fignification 


wherof three men muft go.about che houfe in the night, & firft {trike § thretholds’ 
W,an hatchet,then witha peftle, and then {weep thé w ith beefomes that by thefe 


Signes of worthip, they may keep Sylvanus out:becaufe the trees are not pruned’ 


avithoutiron,nor corn is not made into meal without peftlessnor the fruits fwepe’ - 
vp togither without beefoms:fr6 thefe three aéts,three gods got names: (¢) Jwter> 


sidona,ofthe hatchets cutting /apercsfiex(f) Pélumaus,ot Pils the peftle or morter.. 
wf 8 : - q Os ; ’ 


“" Denerra 


= t 


350 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuarg. 


Demerra, of Verroto {weepe: And thefe kept Sy/aanus from the woman in bed. 
Thus were they fayneto haue three good againtt one bad, or all hadde beene too 
little:and thefe three muft with their handfomeneate culture, oppofe his rough, 
fauage brutifhneffe. Is this your goddes innocence ? is this their concord ? Are 
thefe your fauing Cittie Deities , tarre more ridiulous then your Stage-goddes? 
When man and woman are wedde together , godde /wgatinus hath to dee: Nay 
that’s collerable. When the bride muft bee ledde home, godde(¢) Domiducus 
looke to your charge :now who muft keepc her at home ? godde Domitius :1 but 
who mutt make her {tay with her husb :nd ? why that can goddeffe Afanturna do. 
Oh why proceed wee further ! fpare, {pare mans chafter eares : let carnall affe& 
and fhamefait fecrefie giue end to thereft! What doth allthat crew of goddes 
in the Bride-hall chamber vppon the departure of the (4 ) Paranymphs ,che feat 
maifters?Oh fir,not to make the woman more fhamefaft by their beeing prefent 


_ bucbecaufe thee is weake and timerous, tohelpeher to loofe her virginity wich 


% 
_ Itfignifes 


leffe difficulty. For there is goddefle Vérginensis , Godde Subigus, goddefle Pre- 
ma, goddefle Partunaa, and Venus and Priapus. lf che man ftood in need of helpe 
in this bufineffe , why were not one of them fufficient to helpe him ? Would not 
Venus her power ferne , who they faid was fo called becaufe virginity could not 
be loft without her helpe ? If there bee any (hame in man, that is not in the gods, 
when the marryed couple fhall thinke chat fo many goddes of both fexes to 
fiand by at their carnall coniun@ion , and haue their handes in this bufineffe, 
will not thee bee leffe forward and fhee more froward 2? If (7) Virginenjis 
bee there to loofe the Virgin girdle , Subigus to fubie& her vnder the man,and 
Prema to preffe her downe from moouing after the a&, what thall * Partumde 
haue to doe but blufh and gette her out of dores , and leaue the husband to 
doe his bufineffe. For it were very difhoneft for any one to fulfill her name 


blinpofthe vppon thebridc , but hee. But perhaps they allow her prefence becaufe thee 
wominto is afemale. Iffhee were amale and called Partundus , the husband would call 


bring 
3 childe, 


more protectors of his wiues honefty againfthim , then the childe-bearing wo- 
man doth againft Sy/eanus. But what calke I of this, when( & ) Préapus ( that 
vnreafonable male ) isthere vppon whofe (/) huge and beaftly member: the 
new bride was commanded ( after a moft honeft, old and religious order ob- - 
ferued by the Matrons ) to gette vppeand fitte ? Now ,now lette themgo, and 
cafheere their fabulous theology from the political, che Theater from the Cit- 
tie,the Stage from the Temple,the Poets verfes from the Priefts Documents , as 


turpitude from honefty, falfhood from truth , lightneffe from grauity , foolery 


~ thacall oficbecing nought buca lumpe of abfurdity framed of fuch falfe goddes, 


from ferioufneffe ! Now lette them vfe all the furtle art chey can inic.! Wee 
know what they doe that vnderftand the dependance of the fabulous theology 
vppon the ciuill , and that from the Poets verfes ic redoundes to the Citty 
againe as an Image from a glaffe, and therefore they , not daring to condemne 
theciuill kind, prefent the Image thereof and chat they fpare not to fpit true dif- 

race vppon , thatasmany as can conceive them , may lothe thething that 
a prefenteth and refembleth: Which the goddes nctwithftanding behold 
with fuch pleafure , chat chat very delight of theirs bewrayes their damned effen- 


‘ces 3and therefore by terrible meanes haue they wrung chefe Stage-honours 


from their feruantes in the facrifices : Manifefting heereby that them-felues 
were moft vncleane fpirits , and making that abie& , reprobate , and abfurd 
Stage-diuinity a part of this ciuill kinde chat was held feleGted and approued, 


a 


ise OF THE CITIE OF GOD. agg 


as neuer were , one part of ic might bee preferued in the Prieftes writings , and 
another inthe Poecs. Now whether it haue more parts is another queftion. 
As for Varro’s diuifion, I thinke 1 haue made it playne inough that the divinity 
of the Stage and the Citty belong both to that one politike kinde : And fee- 
ing they are both markeable with the like brandes of foule , falfe and vnwor- 
thy impiety , farre bee it from religious men to expec eternall life from eyther. 
otthem. Laftly Varro him-felfe reckons his goddes from mans originall , be- 
ginning with Janas,and{o proceedes through mans life to his age , anddeath, 
eiding with (m) Nenia , a goddefle whofe verfes were fung at old mens fu- 


‘nerals. And then hee mentions goddes that concernes not man, but his acci- 


dents , as apparrell , meate and fuch neceflaries of life, fhewing what cach 
onely could , and confequently what one fhould aske of each one. In which 
vniuerfall dilligence of his hee neuer thewed whome to aske eternall life of, for. 
which onely ie is that wee are Chriftians. Who is therefore fo dull , that. 
hee conceiueth not that this man in his dilligene difcouery of politike Di-. 
ch ht his dire@ and apparant comparifon of ic withthe fabulous kinde , and 
his playne affirmation that this fabulous kinde wasa pareof the ciuill , defired 
onely (#)to gette aplace for the naturall kinde ( which hee called the Phy- 
lofophers kinde) in the mindes of men? Fully reprehending the fabulous kinde, 
buthotdaring meddle with the ciuill , onely fLewit fubie& to reprehenfion, 
fo that it beeing excluded together with the fabulous , the naturall linde 
might haue.fole place in the elections of all good vnderftandings . Of which 
kinde GOD willing I meane to fpeake more peculiarly and fully in place 
conuenient. _ 7 7 


Rea 


* 


_ L.VIVES. a a 

Or (a) women] ipfam, or ipfas, It is a great queftion in Phylefephy. Plato atid Ariffole fay. 

no,only they fet down in copulation a certain humor like vnto {weat,which hath no vie in 
generation;/ythageras and Democretus fay they are {permatiquerand Epscarss alfo after them, - 
ashe vfeth to follow: Democritus, Hipponax as ameane between them both, faith it is fperm, 
but nor vfeful in generation, becaufe it remaineth not in the veflel of conception. (6) Wine and — 
womsen | The Satyrs and. mad-women called the How/ieg-Bacche followed Bacchus. Here-vpon 
Exftarhius faith he had his name from that confufed cry. ( sexsi7 is to be mad) andthata[ ¢ } 
more was added to help the found. Fhe women were alfo called A4imallonides, of a hil in Afra 
minor called msinans 8: ch prime Thyiades of Thyia where Bacchus his rites had firft infti. 
tution. Plutarch defcribet their pomp thus:Ferft, was carryed a flagon of wine ch a fprig of 4 vines. 


then one led-a goate:after a boxe,a pine apple,and a vine-prop:allwhich afterward grew out of v[é,. 


and gaue piace to better. De cupia. opums. There was.alfo the vanne(Vrgsll.) which is otherwife. 
called the creele. Sersins. Varre names the vine-prop and the pine-apple, W were like the Iuy: 


_ Tanelins y the Baccha bore, which followed Bacchus into India. Thefe Iauelins were all guirt: 


round with branches of the vine and Iuy,this luy they added becaufe onc kinde of it procureth: 
madnes,and makes men drunk(faith Péstareh) without wine, and 0 ee thé chat are ready 
to fal into fury:indeed al Iuy is called xseers of xscvar, to prouoke luftsthe Thir/e is alfo the nup=. 
tial crown;alfo the lamp chat they bore in honor of Dionyfss:but when it ftriues for 7 crowne | 


‘cis wriceen Sepeés sthe laft fillable acuce. In thofe facrifices, the offers were rapt with fury,& 


thence came the name of Bacchus Val.Preb,Bacchari,is to rage,and the Bacché werethoferas, 
ping bedlein women that performed this facrifice to Liber Pater-they were called ALexades,8c Manades, 


¢ Menoles quafiall mad as Clement {aith.Enfeb. © They were mad | Quiet mindes would not. 


haue committed fuch fooleries , filthyneffe and buccheries; formiany flaughters wete com-: 


‘mitted inthofe facrifices. Pesthens, inns King of India,Lycargas of Thrace,and Orphens,were, 


alk thus. nwurdered. (d.) Yee the Sexate | of the expulfion by adecree , read Liwy lib, 39. 


(¢ ) Intercidona }So it is in moft of the old copyes.( f) Piaapens | Pilemons and Picum- prrnnns’ 


t 


t 


— Ma" 


Para. 
nimphs r) 


Priapuse 


Nenia, 


“pinity outofimens hearts,and leaue place onely for the naturall, 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. —  Suarg 


mus were bretheren gods, Picumuus found out the mannuring of grounds , and therefore was 
called Stergquidinus,Pilumnus found out the manner of braying or grinding of corne,and there- 
fore was worfhipped by the Bakers,and,the peftle called Pr/um after him. (Serse, ins encid.9.) 
Italy({aith Capella)afcribeth the grinding of corne to Pilumsnus. (lib. 2.) Pilum was alfo a Ko- 
mame weapon with a three {quare yron head:, nine ncheslone , the ftaffe fiue foote S:and 
alfo an infttument where-with they beat any thing to poulder ina morter. tModeftus. The 
ancient Heturians and Latines made all their meale by mortets with hand-labour. After. 
wards were Milles inuented for fit vie:which had alfo plaine and wodden peftles. ( Péin, 1, 18. ) 


| Marcellus saith that Pélemnss and Picumanus were :ulers of marriage fortunes. Varre de vita 


pop. Rom, |. 2.) Ifthe child liued,that the Midwife placed it vppoo the earth, for to bee ftraighe 
and Jucky,and then was there a bed made inthe houfe for Filamnus and Picusnys. (4) Domi- 
ducus) Capella cals Inno forlnterduca, Domiduca,Vnxia,and Cyathia(faith he)thou art to be in- 
uoked at marriages by § virgins,to protect their Iourney. (1.2.) he fpeaketh to Jeno:thou mutt 
lead them co fortunate houfes, & at the anoynting of the pofts,ftick down al good luck there, 
and when they put of their girdle in their beds,tchen do not faile themeal this Capella) (b) Pa- 
ranymps | Hserome called them the pronubi , fuch as brought the Bride.ro hir hufbands bed : the 
Latines alfo called the n amjpices, becaufe (as Tully faith ) they hand-fifted them and refaged 
good luck to the marriage:thefe came fromthe Bridegroom to the Bride,and reeurned fromhir 
to him for the vaile. Tacét#s hath thefe words of Nero:he was obfcane in all things lawfull, and 
Lawleffe , and left no villany unpratlifed, but for more filthinef[e,made a follemne marriage with one 
of bis kennell of his unnassrall letchers called Pythagoras : hee wore bis vaile [ent two aulpices 
to him.ordained the brid-bed and the nuptiall tapers. (i) Virginenfis\ Capella feemes ‘to call her 
(Cinthia Inno, The virgins of old wore a Virgin fillet. Hom, Odyff. 11, which cuftome Rome got 
vp,& kept it vitil che ruine of the Empire. Martia, Qui zona foluit disc Ligatam :-wholoof'd 
¥ long knit-fillet,&c, In Sp.én they vie them yet. (k) Priapus|he was expelled from Lamp flack 
where he was borne, for the hugenefle of his ula) act de Lattantinus writes that he 8 
Silenss his affe,being alin Bacchus his company,ftroue who bore the better toole:and that the 
Affe ouer-came him,and therfore Pryapus killed him. Co//umsella calleth him the terrible-mem- 
berd-cod, Oxid in his Priapesa hath much hereof, which for fhames-fake I omit, (4) Huge and 
beaft-Like \On:d cowfirmeth this. | | 


Priape quod fos fafcine eranis scnteger ce _& Since ( Pryapus ) thou haft fo hugeatoole, 

. Andalitdleafter, 0. ¢-. © + , Soak GS | 
Solves fa:rumveninhus pampino caput, Thou crown’d in vines with fiery face doft fittes . 
Ruber federecuis rubente fufesso, .-- . .  L-Yetlooks thy coole as fiery every whitee. 


Horace alfo'vieth fafcinum in the fame fence : becaule (faith Porphyry ) that the witches often 


: praGtited their crafts vpon thismember : but I chink rather becaufe it kept away witch-crafts: 


for in. Diony/ins his featts , Pryapxs being rightly ccniccrated and crowned witha garland by 
the moft honieft Matron ofthe town,this was an auoidance of al witch-craft from the corne,ias 
Anguftine fheweth in the next book,out of Varro-and for the aucidance of witchcraft was the 
Bride bidden to fit vpon iv:for Pompeins Pefiew faith that the fefcenine.verfes that were fung at 
marriages {eem'to-deriue their name fr6 driuing away this.fa/cinumcfo was Pryapas the god of 
feed'in marriages as wel as the fields, and:werfhi pped that witch-craft fhould not hinder their 
fruitfulneffe, Vinles ic be as Lattantins faith (1.1.) ¥ Adutinus was a pod vpon whofe privy pare 
the bride vfedto fir, in figne that he had firlt tafted their chafticy:that this was Priapus we fhew- 
cdin the 4, book , his cftice was to make the mah more adtiue and the woman more patient in 
the firft copulation,as Auguftix here implieth. Feffss faith alfo that the bride vied to fitte ona 
fheep-skin,to fhew either that the old attire was fuch,or that hir chief office now was pinning 
of wooll:P/starch faich that when they brought the bride they laid a fheep-skin wnder hir,and 
fhe bore homie adiftaffe anda fpindle, ( ms ) Nenia] Jt was indeed a funerall fong, fang to the 


‘flute in praife of the dead, by the hired moasner , all the reft weeping : Simonides his inuention, 
' Horace. fhe was alfo a goddeffe,hauing a Chappel without Port Vsyimail : hir name-was derj- 


ued from the voyce of the inournerssfome it fignifieth the end : other thinke it is drawne from. 
the collicke gue which is called't797 the out-moft and treble ftring in In{truments is called reve 


and hereof was the laftfong fung to one , called Newia. ( Foft. lib, 12, ( ) Get aplace.}The 


fence is Varro’s ; endeavour vnderehand is to worke out both the poctique and politique Di- 


Of 


Lis.6.- OF THE CITIE OF. GOD. 253 


Of Seneca’s freer reprehen/tox of the crusll Theologie then Varro’s 
| was ofthe fabulous.: Cuapio. 
Ve the liberty that this man wanted in teprehending that ciuill diuinjty 
| whichwas fo like to the ftages, 4smeus Seneca(whom fome proofes confirmé 

to have lived in the (4) Apoftles times )wanred it not fully,chough in part he did: 
In his workes written he had it,but in his life he lackt it. For in his (6) booke a- 
gain ft fuperititions, farre more free is he in beating downe the poliricall kindeof 
Theology , then Varrowas againft the poeticall. For {peaking of Images, the. 
‘Immoriall and facred gods (faith he) doe they confecrate ina vile, dead,and de- *m** : 
ie&ed fubftance,confining them to (hapes of men, beatts, fithes and ainbiguous on ofthe 
monfter-like creatures ¢ calling them deities; which if one fhould meete aline 8°dsaltars, 
were monfters and prodigies. Anda little after , fpeaking of natural divinity, 
hauing rcie@ted fome opinions propofeth himfelfe a queftion thus : fhall I be- 
leeue(faich one) that Heaven and Earth are Gods, that their are fome vnder the 
moone, and fome aboue it? fhall Lrefpe& Plato, or (¢) Strato the Peripacetique 
while this makes God without a foule,and that,without a body ? Anfwering He 
to the queftion: what then faith he / doft thou thinke there is more truth in the 
dreams of Romulus, Tatéus,or Tallus Hoftilius?Tatius dedicated goddefle Closcinia, 
Romulus,Picus and Tiberinus: Hoftilixs, Feare and Palenes, two extreame affects 
of man: the one beeing’ perturbation of an affrighted minde, the other of the 
~ bodie: nota difeafebutacolour . Are thefe more like Gods , inhabicants of hea- 
uen? Andof their crudll and obfczne ceremonies , how freely did hee ftrike at 
them ? One geldeth himfelfe, another cuts off his torne-partes :and this is 
their propitiation fot the gods anger : but no worfhipat alf ought they'to-haue 
thac delight in fuch as thisis . The fury and difturbance‘of minde ini forme 1s 
raifed to that hight by feekeing to appeafe the gods, that (@) not the moftbarba- 
rous and (/¢) recorded_tyrants would defireto behold ic. Tyrants indeed have 
rent off the parts of fome men, but never madethem their owne tormentors. (f) 
Some haue. beene gelded for their Princes luft: but neuer commanded to bee 
their owne gelders. But thefe,kill chemfelues in the temples, offring their Vowes 
in bloudand wounds. Ifone hadtime to take enterview of: their actions, hee 
fhould fee them do things fo vnbefeeming honefty, fo vnwoxthy of freedame, & 
fo vnlike to foberneffe, that none would make queftion of their madneffejifthey 
were fewer: butnow their multitude is their priviledge. Andthen . the capitol 
trickes that hee recordeth , and feareleffly inueigheth at; who would hot held 
them mad ones, or mockeries ? For firft in the loofipg of (¢) O/rris in the Aegip- 
tian facrifices, and then in the finding him againe , firft the forrow and then 
their great ioye , all this is a puppettry and a fiction, yet the ford people 
though they finde nor loofe not any thing, weepe,for all chat,and reioic¢ againe 
as heartily as if they had: I but chis madneffe hath bis cime:.’ Ie -is. colerable 
(faith heeto bee but once ayeare madde. But come into the Capitol, and you 
will fhame at the madde ads of publike furor. ‘One fers the gods vider their 
King, another tells Jose whataclocke it is , another is his ferieant ,and another 
maketrha rubbing of him as if hee anointed him, Others.dreffe Juno and Miner~ 
wa’s haire , ftanding a farre off the temple, not onely of the Image, and tricking 
withcheir fingers as if they werea combing and crifping itz anacher holds the 
’ ‘giaffe, and'another bids the gods t0 (4) bee his aduocates:. Some prefent — 

3 a / | Ww 


ek SAINT AVGYSTINE. Cuando, 


with {crolles,and propound their caufesto them. Oneold (#) arch-plaier plaid 


the Mimike continually in the Capiroll , as if the gods had found great {pore in 
him whom the world hadreiefted. Nay there yee haueall trades worke to the 
gods: Andalittle after: But thefe though they bee idle before the gods, yer they 
are not bawdy , or offenfiue. But fome fit there,that thinke Jove is in loue with 
thém :neuer refpeGting Juno's poetically {uppofed (i) terrible afpea. This free: 
dome Varro durft not affume, Lee durft goe no farther then Theology poeticall: 
but not to the ciuil which this man crufheth in funder.But if we marke the truth, 
thetemples where thefe things are done, are worfe then the Theaters where 
they arebut fained. And therefore Seneca fele&eth thofe parts of this ciuill The- 


- ology fora wife man toobferue in his a@ions, but not to make a religion of. 


Iohannes 


endrezs 


| Straneus, 


Strato, 


deceite. .,-: 


— A wife man (faith he) will obferuc thefe as commands of the lawes , not as the plea 


fares of the gods ,and againe : ce can makemariages , sy and thofe valawfull ones, 
among ft the gods joyning brother and lifer: Marsand (/) Bellona, Vulcaw and Venus: 
Neptune and Salacia: ret fome we leaue fingleas wanting (Mm) nicanes of the bargaine, 
chsefly fome beeing wrdow:s, as Populonia,Fulgura.asd Rumina,sor wonder sf thefe 
want {utors . But this rable of bafe gods forged by inucterate fuperftition,wee 
will adore ( faith hee ) rather for lawes fake then for religions’, or any other re- 
{pect . So that neither law nor cuftome gaye induction te thofe things either 
as gratctull roche gods or vfe-full vnto men. But this man whom the Philofo- 
phers made as (a, free,yet becing a great (o) Senator of Rome,worfhipped that 
he difayowed, protefled that he condemned,and adored that he accufed:becaufe 
his philofophy had raughe him chis great matter , noc to bee {uperftitious in the 
world,but for law and cuftomes fake,to imicate thofe things inthe Temple.but 
notiatt¢ chem in the. Theater : fomuch the more damnably,, becaufe that which 
he counterfeited, hedid it fo,that the (p) people thought hee had nor.counterfei- 
ted: Burshe plaierrather delighted them with {port, then wronged them with 

ait a e ae ae 


"yb opt of { 2 


OF ee me cig cole VEVESe sce e 
A ‘Poltles.(a) times It may bee the proofes are the Epiftles that are — vnder the 


name pf him to Paxd, and Pas:fvnto him: bur I thinke there was no fuch matter. But 


fure it is,that he liued in Nero's time, and was Coniull then : and chat Peter and Paxd {uffred 


Mmartirdome about the fame time . For they , and hee lefe this life both within tworyeares : it 
may bis both in one yeare,when Silins Nerua and Atticus Veftinus were Confulls, £6) Books 
againft {yperftitions } Thefe, and other workes of his are loft : one of matrimony , quoted by 
Hisyome agaiuft Ionixian: of timely death , Laétant, of carth-quakes mentioned by himfelfe. 
Thefe,and other loffes of old authors Andrew Straneo my countriman in his notes vpon Se- 
neca,deploreth : a taft of which he fent me in his Epiftle,that vniced vs in friendfhip.He is one 
highly learned,and honeft as highly, furthering good ftudies with all his power himfelfe , and 
fauoting dll good enterprifes in others. (¢) Strate] Sonto Archelaks of Lampfacds9 whe was 
called the Phificall becaufe it was his moft delightfull ftudie , hee was Theoplraftns his {chol- 
ler, his:extcutor’, his ‘fucceffor. in his fchoole , asd maifter to Prodomy Philadelphus : There 
were.eight Stratos; Laért.in-Uit.(d) That et the | The; grammarians cannot ¢ndure Ne 
and quidem .to come together : but wee reade it foin fixe hundred places of Twlly,Pliny, Line 
and others: vnleffe they anfwere ynto all thefe places that the copiers did falfify them, 
Idoe.not thinke but an interpofition doth better: this I fay. (¢). Recorded] As Dyonsfins, 
Phalaris , (“Mexentins , Tarquin’ the Prond , Sylla , Cynna , Marms , Trberins ,“Claudias, 
and Calignla. (f) Some bane’) The Perfian Kings had theit Bunuches , in whome they 


Ofyris. put efpeciall truft. [So had Nero ].(g) Ofyrss |: Hee beeing ‘ut in peeces :by ‘his bro- 


ther Typbow , and that Js and Orus erSpelle hadscuenged his death..vpon Typhor, they — 
| - is . ee 


PWNS 


~ 


aE A SS TTT TT 


Cia. OF THE.CITIE OF GOD. agg 


= 


went to feeke the body of Ofjris with great lamentation , and to /fs her great ioy,found it, 
though it were difparkled in diuers places : and herevpon a yearely feaft was inftituced on the 
feeking of Ofyris with teares,and finding him with ioy. Lacaze faith herevpon Nanguam fa- 
tis quafitus Ofyris: thenere wel-fought Ofyris. (b) Be his aduotates| Uadari isto bring one 
tothe iadge at a day appointed, Vadsmoninm,the promife to bee there. So the phrafe is vied in 
Txily,to come into the Court , and the contrary of itis , zo obire , not to A aa the. 
preface of his hiftory,'and many other authors vie it: the fence here is , they made the oods 
their aduocates like men , when they went to try their caufes. (2) Arch-plaier| Archimimus, 
comes of tsueouz:,to imitate becaufe they imitated their geftures whom they would makeri- 
diculous,as alfo their conditions, andthen they were called Erhopet, and Erhologs whereof 
comes Ethopeia. Quintil, Pantomims were vniuerfall imitators; Archimimi, the chiefe of all 
the Mimikes,as Fano was in Vefpafians time. Who this was that Seeca mentions, know not. 
(k.) Terrible} She was icalous and maligned all her flep-fons and /oses harlots , fo that fhee 
would notforbeare that fame Dedaisan ftatue which Jone beeing angry threatned to mar 
in Beotia . For being reconciled to him, fhe made it be burnt.Pé#t. Hence was Numa's old law: 
No harlot touch \uno's altar.Sacrifice a female lambe to luno, with difbeneled hayre.(l)Bellona} 
Some make her his mother,and Nerioxe (or as Varro faith, Neriene his wife : which is(as Gel= 
deus faith )a Sabine word,& fignifieth vertue and valour, and thence came the Nero's furname. 
The Sabines had it from the Greekes: who call the finewes vtép2,and thence comes our| Ver= 
westand the Latine Nerans.Plaut.Trucul. Mars returning from aiourney falutes his wife Ne- 
rione : Gell.Nott.eAftt.lib.10. (ms) Meanes of the bargaine | Thatis one tobee coupled with: 
hence comes the Latine phrafe Oxerere condicionem filie ,to {eckea match for his daughter 
Lisnie \ib. 4. Cic. Philipp . It was vied alfo of the Lawiers in diuorfes , (onditione tua 
| zon utar. je not vfe thy company.(n) 4s free] We muft feeme Philofophy (faith Seneca)to be 
| free : ving free,as with a refpect, not fimply, (0) Sexeca] Hee was banifhed by Clamdins : but 
Meffalina being executed,and Agrippina made Empreffe,fhe got his reuocation, and fenator- 
fhip,and prztorfhip of che Emperor, thathee might bring vp her fonne Nero . So afterward 
Trebell. Maximus and he were Confulls, Ulp.Pandeét. 36, Hee was won derfull ritch. Tran- 
quill, Tacitus. The gardens of ritch Seneca. (p) People] His example did the harme , which EZ- 
azar died to auoide LMacchab.2.6. with far more holineffe and Philofophicall truth, 


Seneca his opinion of the Iewes. Cuar. tt. 


“Tis man amongft his other inuedtiuesagainft the fuperftitions of politique 
+ Theology condemnes alfo the Iewes facrifices, chiefly their faboaths : fay- 
ing that by their feauenth day interpofed ,they {pend the feauenth part of their 
life in idlegefle , and hure themfelues by not taking divers things in their 
| time. Yet dares he not medle with the Chriftians(chough then the lewes deadly 
| foes)vpon either hand, leafthefhould praifethemagainfthis countries old cuf 
rome,or difpfaife them perhaps againft (4) hisowne con{cience. Speaking of the 
Tewes,he faith: The cuftomeof that wicked nation getting head through all the 
world, the vanquifhed gaue lawes to the vanquifhers. This hee admired,noe 
{ . knowing the worke ofthe god-head. But his opinion of their facraments hee 
t {ubfcribetb. They know the caufe of their ceremonies(faith hee but moftof the 
people doe they know not what . But of the Iewifh facrifices how farre gods in- 
fticutions firft dire&ed them,and then how by the men of God that had the mifte- 
ry of eternity reucaledto them , they were by the fame authority abolithed , wee 
hauc both elf-where fpoken chiefly againft the (6) Manichees , and in this worké 
in conuenient place meaneto fay {ome-what more. 


L. VIVES. 
A Gainft (4) his owne | Nero hauing fired Rome , many were blamed for the fact by the 
| Z 3 villens 


256 


Ecernail 
life, 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. | Cues: 


villens of his Court,and amongft the reft the Chriftians whom Nere was aflured thould {mare 
for all, becaufe they were of 2 new religion 3 fo they did indeede and were fo extreamely 
tortured that their pangs drew teares from cheir feuereft fpefators. Sencea meane while 
begged leaue to retireintothe contrie for his healths fake: which not obzayning , hee kepe 
himtlIfe clofe in his chamber for diuers moneths : Tacitus faith,ic was becaufe hee would not 
pertake in the malice that Nero's facriledge procured : but I thinke rather, ic was for thar hee 
could not endure to {ee thofe maffacres of innocents. (5) ALanichees}They reuiled the old Te 
tament and the Iewes lawe. Auguft, de Harefiad Quodunledenm , Them {criptures they fayd 
GOD didnot giue, but one of the princes of dakenefle. Againft thofe Auguffine wrote 
many bookes. | 


That it is plaine by this difccuery of the Pagan gods vanity,thst they canned 
giue cternall life baning net power to helpe inthe temporal. - 
: , C HAP. 12. © 


Ow for the three Theologies , mythycall, phyficall and political : or fabu: 

lous, naturall and ciuill: That che life eternall 1s neither tobe expeed from 
the fabulous, for that the Pagans themfelues reiect and reprehend,nor from the 
ciuill , for that is prooued buta part of the other: if this bee not {ufficienc ro 
proue,let that bee added which the fore-paffed bookes containe,chiefely the 4. 
concerning the giuerof happineffe: for if Felicity werea geddeffe ,trowhom 
fhould one goe for eternall life but to her ? But being none,bura gift of GOD,to © 
what god muft we offer our felues, but to the giver of char felicity,for that eter. 
nalland true happineffe which wee fo Intirely affe@t? But let no man doubethae 
none of thofe filth-adored gods can giue it: thofe chat are more filthyly angry 
voleffe chat worthip be given them in that manner , and herein proouing them- 
felues dire& deuills : what is fayd1 thinke is fufficient to conuince this. Now hee 
that cannot giue felicity how can he giue eternall life 2? erernall life, wee call end- 
leffe felicity,tor ifthe fouleliue eternally in paines,as the deuills do,that is rather 
eternall death. For there is no death fo fore nor fure,as that which neuer endeth, 
But the foule beeing of thac immortall nature, that ic cannot but liue fome way, 
therefore the greateft death it can endure is the depriuation of it from glory,and 
conftitution in endleffe punifhment. Sohee onely giueth erernall life(chat is 
endleffely happy Jthat giveth crue felicity . Which fince the politique gods can- 
not giue,as is proued: they are nor to bee adored for their benefits of this life as 
wee (hewed in our firft fiue precedent bookes: and much leffe for life erernall, as 
this laft booke of all, by their owne helpes hath convinced. But if any man thinke 
(becaufe old cuftomes keepe faft rootes that we have not fhewne caufe fufficient 
forthe reieéting of their politique Theology , lethim perufe the next booke, 
which by the affiftance of GOD I intend fhall immediately follow this former. 


Finis lib.6. 


THE 


L137. 7 


BR cee eutsneepcannacenennniniononntecnon 


THE CONTENTS OF THE 
feauenth booke of the City of God. 


* 
1, Whether dininity be tobe found in the fen 
lot? gods 5 jince it isnot extant in the polstique 


Theology. chapter... 
4. th feletied gods and whither they be ex- 


 empted from the bafer gods fanttions. 


3. That thefe gods elettions are without all 
reafon,fincethat bafer gods bane nobler char- 


the 
: 4. That the meaner gods beeing buried in fi- 


lence were better ufed then the fele® , whofe 


units were [o{bamefully traduced. 
, 5. Of : Pagans ali abftrufe Phifiolo- 
gicall doftrine, P | 
6. Of Varro his opinion that G O D was the 
fosle of the world , and yet had many foules un- 
der hime ins bes parts,al which were of the dinine 
wature. | . 
7. Whether it ftand with reafon that anus 
and Terminus fhould be two gods. 

8. Why the worfuppers of Tanus made him 
two faces,cr yet wowl bane him fet forth with 
fonre alo. -_ 

9. Of loues power , and lanus bis compared 
together, , baa 

10, Whether lanus and loue bee rightly di- 
Bingnifhed or no. : 

_ 18. Of loues furnames , referred all unto 
him as one God,not as to many, 

13. That lupiter is calledPecuniaalfo, 

13. That the interpretation of Saturne and 
Genius prone them both to be lupiter. | 

14. Of the funttions of Mars and Mercury. 

15. Of certaine flarres that the Pagans cal 
their gods. 

16, Of Apollo,Diana aud other feleit gods, 
called parts of the world. 

17. That Varro himfelfe held his opinions of 

the gods tobe ambiguous. 

18. The Lkelieft can fe of the propagation of 

Paganifme a 


19. The interpretations of the werfbip of Sa- 


| turné. 


20. Of the facrifices of Ceres Elufyna. 

21, Of the obfcanity of Bacchus facrifice. 
22. OfNeptune,Salacia amd Venillia, 
23. Of the earth held by Vatro to be « god- 

deffe, becaufe the worlds fonle ( his God) doth 

penetrate his loweft part and communicateth 
his effence there-with. | 

24. Of Earths fiarnames and fignifications 
which though they arofe of diners originalls,yet 


& 


| foould they not be accounted diners gods, 


25. What expofition the Greeke wife-men 


| gine of the gelding of Atys. 
(26. Of the filthineffe of this great Mothers. 


Sacrifice, 
27. Of the Naturallifts igments , that nei- 


thereto belonging. 
28. That Varro's dottrine of Theology hang- 
eth no way togither. , | 
29. That all that the Naturalifts refer te 
the worlds parts Jbould be referredtoGOD. - 
30. The means to difcerne the (reator from 
the Creatures, aud to asoide the worfbipping of 
| fo many gods for one, Lecanfe their are fo many 


powers i one. 


| ther adore the true Diety,nor ufe the adoration 
| 


31. The peculiar benefits ( befides his coma 
mon bounty that GOD beftoweth upon his fere 
wants. 

32. That the miffery of our redemption 
Chrift was not obfcure in the piles we 


33- That Chriftianity onely is of power to 
open the divills {ubtelly fei Lighten “ladie, | 
of sgnorant men. 

34. Of Numa his bookes which the Senate 

| for keeping their mifteries in feeret , did come 
mand fbould be bur | 


but continually intimated in diners fignificatio 
ons 


a 
35. Of Hydromancy whereby Numa was 
mocked with apparitions, 


FIN IS. 


Z 3 


THE 


OF THE CITTIE a QOKE 


Written by Saint tuguftine Bithop of Hippo, - 
— -vnto Marcelbnns. 


Whether diuinity be to be found inthe [elect Gods ince it is not extant 
| in the Politique Noeologie. Cuar.t. 


ey Hereas I employ my moft diligent endeauor about the extirpa 
\i//\;, tion of inueterate and depraued opinions , which the continu. 
\/EVZ4E ance of error hath deeply rooted in the hearts of mortall men: 
Nis AA and whereas I workeby that grace of GOD ( whoas therrue 
| wee | (| GO Disable to bring this worke to effe@ ) according to my 
= es_8 poore talent: The quicke and apprehenfiue {pirits chat haue | 

drawne full fatisfaQion from the workes precedent, mutt beare my proceedings 

with pardon, and pacience : and not thinkemy fubf¢quent difcourfe to bee fuper- 

Ditiney _{ltious vnto others becaufe ic is needleffe vntothem. Theaffirmation that divi- 
wherefore nity isnot tobee fought for terreftriall vies ( though thence wee muft defire all 
pas earthly {upplies that we neede ) but forthe celeftiall glory which is neuer note- 
ternall, isa great matter. This diuinity,or , let mee fay deity ; for this (4) word 
_ our Chriftians haue now in vfe as exprefily traduced from the Greeke gudres:T his 
-diuinity therefore or deity is not in that politique Theology which a4. Varro dif- 
courfeth of in his 16. bookes: that is, the worfhipofany god there expreffed 
will notyeeld to man eternall life: hee chat willnor bee per{waded this is true, 
_outof our fixth booke laft finifhed, when hee hath read phis , I beleeue fhall not 
finde any point of this queftion left vndifcuffed : for fome perhaps may thinke 
thar the felected gods of Varro’s laft booke ( whereof wee fayd fome-what) and 
none but they are to bee honored for this eternall beatitude . I fay not herein as 
/(b) Tertullian faid,with more conceite prehaps then truth: if the gods be chofen 
like (c)icallions , thenthereft are counted wicked. This I fay not, for I fee that 
out of an eleGted fort another perticular eleion may be made: as out ofacom- 
pany of elected fouldiars one is eleGted for this office in armes and another for 
one not fo weighty :and in the church, when the elders are elected , the others 
_arenotheld reprobate: beeing all GODS good faithfull ele&. In archite@ure, 
corner and foundation ftones are chofen, yet the reft are not refufed but will 
fit ottier places . Grapes are chofen to eate: but theyare not worth nought 
which we leaue for wine. The matter is plaine and needes no farther proceffe. 
Wherefore neither the gods nor their fervants are falty , in that they are felec- 
ted from many : but let vs rather looke what the fele@ed are, and what is the end 
of their {eleion. : 


L. VIVES. — 
A Es (a) word | Vied by Hierome , Lattantius and Fulgentins : the Greekes deriued the fub- 


ftantiue Sess7ne,diuinity from %%er,diuine swhich fubftantiue the Chriftians tooke in as large 
a fence as the word it felfe Diwine : and when the would expreffle Gods nature with the fit- 
teft rearme , they vied batras. So doth eAthana/.both the Gregories and other Grecians:which 
they tight rather do(faith Qnierid/ian chen the Latines.But yet all the ftrict rules of art could 


Rene | ee aed ‘ 


waa 


2 a LL eee 


a 
Liy7. | OFTHE CITIE OF GOD. | (259 


not keepe the latines from vfing Deitas,the deity in cxpteffing Gods proper nature :noris it. 
extended fo farre as Dixine,is,or diuinity:for they are fpoken of bookes, deeds, men,&c. But 

neither Deitas , or Deus are predicates for them, though they bee diuine. And thereforeme= . 
thinkes Ualla dcth blame the Chriftian writers vndeferuedly , to fay they vfe a new word,not 

heard of before. ( J Dialeftica.) For totake away the Greekes authority of framing them- 

felues words,is to cancell their old priuiledges.(6)Tertsdllian. |Othim read Hierome de {criptor. 

Eccl. Hee wasa Prieft of ( arthage Sonne to a vice confull : quicke witted and yehement: 

he liuedin the times of Senerus and (aracalla, and wrot much ; which being recorded I fure 

ceafeto recount. Ciprian the Maitir paffed not a day without reading a peece of his workes: 

but called him his Maifter , yet fell hee to bee a CMontanif? , through the enuy and malice of 

the clergy of Rome.All this hath Hicrome His bookes,lay many ages loft,at laft this very yeare 
-when this booke came forth, Beats Rhenanus of Sletftad , alearned {coller found them in Ger. ' 
manie,and fet them forth at Frobenius his prefle.( ¢) Scallions. | Bulbus is a name to all rootes Merearid 
that are like onions. Palladéns vfeth it for the lilly roote : bucthe proper Bal/bi are th pede ue 
thatthe erabians all Mergarides , and prouoke luft as Afartiall fhewes. Plinny Lb. faith Enghith pes 
the chiefe of thofe Budbi are che {qusile or fea vnions,of which fort the roote called Epimsensdéa tatoes. 


is onely fit to eate. Theophraff.lib.7. The reft are not fot meate. 


» 


The feletted godsend whether they be exempted from the bafer gods 


fancitons. CHAP. 2. 


if Bena: 4 ) {elected gods , Varrocommendethin onewhole booke, and thefe 
they are Janus loue,Saturne,Genins, Mercury, Appollo, Mars Vulcan,Neptune,Sol, 
Orcus, Leber Pater, Tellus,Ceres,luno,Luna,Diana MincruaVenus,ind Vefta.inthefe 
20.are 12. males and 8.females. Now(>)whether are they called fele&, for their 
principal charges in the world,or for that they weremore knowne & adored then 
the rett? if becaufe of their greater charges , then may they not cometo meddle 
in the petty bufineffes of the bafer gods. But at she conception of thechild, 
whence all thofe petty gods charges arife,/aaus is making fit receit for the feede: 
(¢) Saturne hath bufineffe in the feed alfos( 4 ) Liber is making the mans feed flow 
aboundantly : and Libera whome they fay is Vexus, the is working the like in the 
woman : all thefeareof your feleted gods. Bur then thereis Afena, the god- 
deffe of the female luxe, a daughter of /owe but yera bafe one. And (/)ehis {way 
in thefluxe , he giueth to /wvoalfo,in his bouke of the fele& ones amongft whom 
fhe is Queene:and here is Jano Lucina together with her ftepdaughrer Afens,tule 
both onc bloud. And thenthere are two obfcure fellowes (of gods ) Vitwunus 
and Sentinus , one giueth vitall breth , and another fence to the child be- 
gotten. Thefe two bafegods do more feruice here then all che other great 
feleGted gods , for what is all thatthe heape together in the womans wombe, . 
without life and fence,but as alumpe of (g) clay and duft, 7 


et ee eee 


L. VIVES. 


Hofe. (4)Seleéted. | To the twelue counfellor gods ( before remembred ) were twelue 

other added, as Nobles but not Senators : yet {uch as had greate charge in the world,and 
a fhare in divers confultations , as others of other meaner fort haue fometimes, Seneca 
faith that [owe made Janus one of the (on{cript fathers-and confull of the afternoone :bur 
there -hee fcoffeth , though indeed all thefe god-ftories are but meere fopperies, And 
here are the couples Jupiter and June , Saturne and Tellus , Mercury and Minerna ( but 
not maricd , but both M one {cience ) as —— and Ceres, epolle Diana and, are ) then 
aa 4 Mars 


pe 


260 | SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuar.3. 


(Mars and Verns the two louers, Unican and Vefia the two fires: Sol and Lusa the worlds 
two lights : marry Janus, Neptune,Genius and Orcas the goddefle vochofen,are all too bafe for 
them. (6 ) Whether A problematique forme of argument. (c) Satwrxe | comming of Satum, 
athing fowne. Var.de Linlatl.4.(d) Liber | Cicero (de nat.deor.2. ) faith that Liber Bacchus, 
fonne to Jone and Semele,is one,and Lsber that the Romaines worfhip fo reverently with Lé 
bera and (eres is another. That thefe two later were (eres children,and fo called Liberi: Libera 
was daughter to Ceres,and called Proferpina,faith he. fx Verr. Aftio.6.Thefe three had atem- 
pleneare the great Circuite , vowed by e. Pofthumsxs Difator ,and renewed by Tibersus 
Cefar. Tacit.Jsb.2. (e) Mena] the Moone: iva in the Greeke , becaufe the womens fluxe 
follows her motion. rift, de anima. fhee was the daughter of Jove and Latona : and therefore 
he calleth her Luno's {tep-daughter:But by this name fhe is ynknowne to the Latines.( f) This 
fway\ The women adored Juno Flxona,for {topping this fluxe at conceptions.Fefius. ( ¢ ) = 

t bee 


and duff, | alluding to mans beginning and end. Genefis 1. Jn claye hee began , and in du 
Shall end, | 


ee ne eoandugnseee on 


That thefe gods elections are without allreafon fince that bafer gods - 
haue nobler charges. Cwat.3. 


BY why doth hee call fo many of the feleéted gods to this charge , and then 
2 Vitamnus and Bextinus get the principall offices of all the reft ? Sele@ Jamas, 
he maketh way for the feed: feleé& Saturne hee brings it: fele&t Lsber,hee puts 
‘it fteely forth: and fo doth Libera (4) be fhee Ceres or Venus,to the women, fele& 
Inno with her daughter Afena’s helpe, brings fluxe of blood to (6 ) nourifh the 
_ birth. But bale Wstumnus,he brings life to it : ob{cure Sentinus, he giues it fence. 
Which two guifts are as farre aboue the reft,as they are {hort of reafon. Foras 
the reafonable creature excelleth chat which is but onely fenfitiue,as the beat : 
fo the fenficiue muft needes excell chat which hath neither fence nor life. So 
that Vstamnus the quickner,and Sentinus the {ence-giuer had more reafon to be 
feleGted,then either /enus the feed-guider, Saturne the giuer, or Liber and, Lsbere 
the loofers s which feede it were vnworthy to imagine, vnleffe ic were animated 
and made fenfitiue: which fele& gifts the fele& gods giue not, but onely acou- 
leof poore obfcure fellowes that muft ftand at the doore when thefeare let in. 
Fr the reply , Janus is god of all beginnings , and therefore iuftly openeth the 
wombe : Séturne of all feede,and therefore iuftly worketh in the mans fowing of 
it: Liber and Lebera of the diftillation of feede in all {permaticall creatures, and 
therefore muft worke in this difperfing of mans : /e#o of all births and purgati- 
Ons ,and therefore iuftly muft haue a hand inthe womans at this time : Well 
what of ¥¥temnus and Sentinus, haue they dominion ouer all things liuing and 
fenfitiue 2 If it bee granted, then fee how thefe two are aduanced. For feedesto 
growe on earth is earths nature: but to live and haue fence,that comes from the 
gods of the ftarres,they fay. Bur if they fay that thefe two haue fwaye onely 
ouer flefhly fenfitiues; why then could not hee that giueth fence to fifhes and 
ali things elfe, giue fiefh fence alfo,and extend his generall power eit, © each 
peculiar ? what need then of Vitumnus and Sentinus? If hee that rules life and 
fence, rule all things elfe , and gaue the charge of flefhly fenfitiues to thefe his 
two feruants ,as a place of no credite: Kept thefe felected gods fo fewe atten- 
dants, that they couldnot commit the faid bafe offices to fome of their follow- 
ers, but muft debafeall (their caufe of fele@ion ) their nobility to bee ioyned 
fellow-worke-men with fuch a bafe couple? Nay Juno the fele&ed Queene of 
ali che feleGted (¢ ) Jomes wife and filter, yet is /sterduca to the children,and wor- 
beth wich a couple of bafe goddefles —deosand tbeowa. And there is god 
| | , 


L 1%7. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 261 


a a alia ee 

defle Afens, that fends the childea good minde, fhee’s na fele@ , and yec'(d ) how 

cana greatet guift be giuen to man ? Now /avo playes Iterduca, and Domiduca, as 

though it were fuch a matter to make a iourney or to come well home, ifone bee. 

not in his rightminde: yet the goddeffe of this good guift was none of the fele@. 4 cood 

Truely thee deferued it before Aféneraa (¢) that had charge of the childes me- mince bete 

mory in this quartering of duties. For who doubteth that itis better to hauea ter then 
ood minde, then amemory neuer fo capable ? for hee that hath a good minde ™"°”" 

isneuer euill.Buc (f£) many wicked men haue admirable memiories, and are fo 

much worfe becaufe they cannot forget their euill cogitations. Yet is Mincrus 

felected. And for Vertue and Felititie, (of whom our fourth booke treateth ) 


* thofe goddeffes they had,but neuer fele&edthem, while Afars arid Orcs, the 


one the caufer of death, and the other the receiver, thefe were felected. Seeing 
therefore that in chefe worthleffe affaires,fhared amcneft fo many, the Patritian 
and Plebeéan God, worke all cogether in huggermugger :and that fome gods that 
were not held worthy of feleétion , had more honorable charges in the bufinef- 
fes,then the feleGted : itrefteth to beleeve,that their being knowne to the vulgar 
more then the other ,and not their bearing charge aboue the other, put in their 
names into this bill of felection.And therefore Warro himfelfe faith,that ( ¢) mae 
ny father-gods and iia ig be growne ignobte, like mortall men. If 
therefore felicity beenot to bee placed amongtt chofe {elects becaufe they gorte 
their places rather by chance then defere : yet furely fortune fhould bee one 
amoneft them,or rather aboue them,who giveth not her gifts by reafon,but euet 
cafually,asit tallech out. Shee of right fhould haue beene their chiefe , as fhew- 
ing hit power chiefly vpon them 3 when as we fee it was no vertue nor reafona- 
ble felicitie of theirs but onely the power of fortune/(as ail their adorers doe be- 
Jecue ) that made them bee fele&ted. For witty Sa/ui it may bee excluded noe 
the gods when he fayd.Fortune raleth in enery thing : difpofing them rather accord 
ing to her will then unto truth. For they can fhew no reafon why Venue fhould bee 
famous and Vertue obfcure,feeing both are made goddeffes ,and their meritsare 
not comparable . lf Vewas deferued her enhanfement in this; that more aff€é: her 
then vertue, why then is Adénerus famous,and Lady Afoney ob{cure, feeing thae 
in all forts of men there is (4) more loues coyne then knowledge? and even in 
ehe artes,you fhall not finde one butit is fet to fale, and ftill there is more refpect 
to that which refpecteth other ends (#) chen to that whieh othér ends doe moft 
refpedt. If therefore the fond vulgar were the electors, why was not Money put 
before Adinerua,fince all theirtrades aime at AZoney? But the wife-men {elected 
them, why was ess preferred before Vertue, which all reafon will of righe 
preferre ? Certainely (as I fayd ) if forcune( whoas they thinke, that thinke her 
fo powerfull) rulech in every thing ( difpofing them rather according to her luft 
and liking then ro right or reafon ) had fo much power ouer the gods , that fhee 
could aduanceandobfcure whom fhee lift, then fhould the firft place of the 
feleéted of right haue beene hers, that had fuch authoritie ouer the ftate of the 
ods. Bur may wee not thinke that Fortune was Fortunes owne foe,and fo kept 
Fer from the place? Sure it was fo: fhee was her owne foe, that could giuead- 
vancements to others,and tooke none her felfe. | | 


L. VIVES. | —- 


_ ere @) bee poet] Wee faid thee was fiftet to Diony/us, and that they two betokén the 
. . Sunne 


262 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. Car. 4. 


Sunne and Moone, that rule in naturall feedes of all forts,we wil fhew that Luna is alfo Venus 
and (eres. Apulei. Metamorph lib.11.Macrob.Saturn .1.Val,Prob.Seruins in Georg. 1.Propbyry 
faith the Moones generatiue vertue is called (eres. Virgil, following Varro , ioynes liber and 
Ceres : whence it is plaine teat (eres was alfo called bere. (6)To norifh. \ Hereof Plin.dsb.7. 
Icis che matter or fubftance fitted for generation the mafculine feed congealing in it, and b 
growing to perfetion,when it flowes in women with child, their burthen is dead, or corrup- 
ted. Nigidius. Then this bloud menftruall there cannot be a more filchy, nor venemous thing: 
which alone is inongh to curbe and dath the proud heart of man, (c) Wsfe and fifter. } Usrgull: 
It is common. ( d ) How can. | This is all che Philofophers faying : aman is the wonder of the 
world , andthe mind the wonder of theman. (e ) That bad charge, | 1n Mineruas feafts the 


children caried new yeares-gifts to their maifters and made a play day of that, to do feruice to 


Minerva that ruled the memory , the ftore-houfe of difcipline, and the efpeciall figne of wit 
in little children as Qsintilian faith ; thee ruleth the wit alfo and was called the birth of Lowes 
braine.Ownid faffor. | 


Pallida nunc puri tene:ag ornate puclle: Now Pallas temple(youthes and daméells)&ll, 
Lui bene plicarit Pallada detius evit. . | He that can pleafe her thall haue wit at wiil, 


_ And fohe proceedeth. ( f ) Many wicked. \ Plato inhis Thetetus , faith that the cholericke 
perion is the beft memoried : geffing doubtleffe by the hot and dry braine: (g ) ALany father 
ods.| lone is aboue Saturne, and he aboue ( ¢/us, whofe parents are vnknowne, though Phare 
nutus calls his father by the name of e&mon,luno alfo is more famous then Ops , and fhee then 
her mother,( 4 ) More loues coyne.] 
Querenda Pecunia primum eff : vertus poft nummos 
Hec lanusfummus ab imo Perdocets . 
Fac recinunt inuenes diltata,fene[qne. 
Firft coyne,then vertue : this doth Jans fing, 
And this through mouthes of youth and age doth ring, 
Euripides prefents one in ahumor negledting alchings , all reproches for wealth : his reafon 
is : why what ? doe they aske how good one is ? how honeft ?1no, how ritch ? each one is that 
which hee poffeffeth. (4 ) Then to that which. | A difference of reading , but it isreformed,the 
Axiom is Ariftotles, Pofter.t. That , whofe end refpecteth another is not fo good as the end it 
re{pecteth,and principles are both plainer and before their conclufions,in precedency, though 
here he {peake not fo much of the finall caufe as of the efficient. Butin his Ethickes he tea-. 
cheth ac the things refpected are better then the things refpecting. 


we ee ee 


That the meaner gods being buried in filence were better ufed then the feled, - 
| whofe falts were fo fhame fully traduced. | 
HAP. 4. 
Ow any one that longed after honor might gratulate thofe fele&ted gods 
N and fay their fele@ion had bin good if ithad not rather beene vfed to their 
difgrace then their honors , for the bafeneffe of the meaner fort kept them from 
{cornes. Indeed we do laugh when wee fee how fond opinion hath parted them 
into fquadrons, and fet chem to worke vpon criflles Itke(){pictle men , or the/b) 
old-finith in the filuer-ftreete, where the cup goeth through fo many hands ere’ 
it bee done,when as one good worke-man might do all himfelfe. But I thinke 
they had each fuch little fhares, to learne their worke the fooner , leaftthe 


‘whole (hould haue beene too Jong in Jearning. But we can fcafely finde one of 


the vnfelected gods that is be come infamous by any foule act doing: but {carcel 
one of the felect , bueonthe contrary. The latter came downe belike tothe bate 
workes of the firft , but the firftafcended not to the high crimes of the later . In 
(c)deed of Janus I finde nothing blame-worthy:perhaps a lined honeftly and out 
of the (d) ranke of villaines, he receiued Saturxe courteoufly , being expelled his 
kingdome, and fhared his ftate with him, and they built two cities, the one 
7 | — | -_ laniculass., 


f 
}: 
I 
; 
Hi 


Eis.7. OFTHE CITIE QF GOD. . 263 


See 


Taniculum,the ocher Saturaia. But thofe fenceleffe adorers of Idolatry and filthi- 
nefle,haue made hima very monfter: fome-times with two faces , fume-times 
with foure. Did they defire that fince the other gods hag loft all (e) honefty of 
face by their fowle ates , his innocence fhould bee the more apparant by his 


many fore heads ? | 


— ee eee + 


L. VIVES. 


The (a) Spittle-men | A diuerfe reading : ours is the beft as I thinke. Hee doth meane fuch 
Aamen as had the gathering of {ome abicct pence, of little or no vie to the ftate : fome frag- 
ments of colleétions. (6) Goldfmths | One carues,one guildes,one {ets on an care, or a cotnet 
or fa-hlike,though the place {cllers are not Gold-{miths,but put their worke out to the gold- 
{mitirs chent-felues or rathet bankers,or exchangers: the workemen ket fhops about the great 
market place. Vitra. 1.5 oLin.tb.2.6. To getthee out of the market place, is Plantus phrafe in 
this Perfa. Anguftine vieth the Syluer-ffreete here,for a place where the gold-fmiths wrought. 

(¢) Of lanxs | Hee was borne in Jtaly , andraioned there with (amefes. borne there a'fo: the pecs! 
country was called (-2mefena, the Cittie Laniculem: but he dying, Janus ruled all, and enter- 


tained Satsrne in his flight from Crete : learned husbandry of him, and thared his kingdome Aenéa 


with him: giuing him Mount Tarpeius,whereon there ftood a tower and a little towne which would have 
he called Saturnia : eEneas would haue called it e£meopolts afterwards , but it kept the olde Sarurnia 
name!Satsrara (till : there were fome rhonuments of ‘it remained !ong after: the Saturnian called Aes 
gate called ateerward Padana, as the writing on the wall reftifieth 5 and the cemple of Saturne® s 
in the entrance. 7 arguin the proud afterwards building /wos temple, and Saturne beirp as ic 

were expelled fiom thence alfo by his fonne, the whole Capitoll was dedicated in the name of 

Great omnipotent \upiter, Virg.cfAEncid.8.Sernibid.Onid fast.1.Estrop. Solin. Macrob. Diony. 


& Prusen:ins; Theteis a booke vnder Berofis the ( baldeans name that faith Janus was Noah: 


Fhold that booke nothing but meere fables, worthy of the Asian Commentaries. Of Lanny, sig 
here-after you fhall-heare more. (d} Renke of villaines }-Onid, ( fait 6. faith hee rauifhed 
namph Crane,who was afterwards called Carua,and made goddefle of hinges: But ugu/tine Thenimph 
either had forgot it,or elfe held it but a falfe fiction, (e) Honefty of face} the face and the. fore. Crane, 
head arerakeofor fhame. Henceis Piinies Perfricare faciem & frontem in Qnintilanumg 
make one afhamed. Lacan. | | | em 
"Nee color imperii,nec frons erit vila fenatud: 7 ee ee 
The Court will want all fhame,the ftat¢ all fhape, © 6. > ! 
And Perfius. Exclamet Mzlicerta periffe—-Frontem de rebus --+- 
) Let AMeligerta ctye----All fhame is fledde. 


od Sse eieaeties . ae : Ee . a. , 
| Of the Pagans more abftrufe Phyfiologicall doffrine, -  - * 
ae ee os, . ne on © ge 
: Cuar.5. ; oe | Bae 


B Veletvs rather heave their naturall expofitions ; where-with they would 
feeme to éldake their pitious errors as in cloudy myfteries, ‘Rirft Yerrv fo 
eommendsthem, that he faith che pictures fhapes and veftures ofthe pods were 
ebeated of old for the deuoute, thereinto conremplate the worlas fouke yand the 
parts thereof, that is the crue God: in their mindese wheréof fuch as ereéted hu- 
Mane fhapts,feémed tocompare the immortal eflence vatothefoulein.nianand 
as ‘ifthe veffeltvhould bee put for the thiag it felfe, anda flaggom (4d) fet in Labers 
temple, to fignifie wine ; taking the continent for iecontarted s‘to by: that he. 
fi¥aine fhape,, the reafonable foule in the like included might.bée expreffed,of 
wtich naruretHey fay chat:‘God,or the gods are. Thefelare theatyfti¢all:doGrinss 
Whielvhis(harpe wice went deepe into | and fo delivered . ‘But tell mee chow-2e- 
cute man,baft thou loft that iudgement in theft myficcies that made thee fay,chac 


they that furtt made Images, freed the Cittie from all awe, and added error to 
Ree ae error, 


© ee eis . 


= ree Sed 


oe —. SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuar, 


error,and that the old Romsaznes ferued the gods in better order without any fta- 
tues at all ? They were thy authors for chat chou fpokeft againft their fucceffors, 
For had they had {tatug alfo, perhaps feare would haue made thee. haue{uppref- 
fed thy opinion of abdtlithing Images , and have made thee haue fought further 
for thefe vaine 44 thologies and figments: for thy foule , fo learned and fo ingeni- 
ous (which we much bewaile in thee) by being fo ingrarefull rothac God (by 
whom,not with whom it was made: nor was a part of him but a thing made by 
him,who is not the life of all things, buc all lifes maker ) could neuer cometo his 
knowledge by thefe myfteries.But of what nature and worth they are, let vs fee. 
Meane time this learned man affirmeth, the worlds foule intirely to bee truly 
God,fo thar all his Theologie being naturall ,extendeth it felfe euen to the na 
ture of the reafonable foule. Of this naturall kinde hee fpeaketh briefly in his 
booke whence we have this: wherein wee mutt fee whether all his myfticall wreft- 
ings can bring the naturall tothe ciuill,of which he difcourfeth in his laft booke 
of the fele& Gods : if he can,all fhall be nacurall . And chen what need hee bee fo 
- caretullincheir diftin@ion? But if they be rightly divided, feeing that the natu- 
rall chat he liketh fo of is not true, (for hee comes bur to the foule, notto God 
that made the foule: Jhow much more is the ciuill kinde vntrue and fubieG, 
that is,all corporalland converfant about the body as his owne interpretations 
being dilligently called out,(hall(by my rehearfall) make moft apparent. 


|  L. VIVES. | 


| | ai (a) Ocnophorum,of sives, wine,and edo to carry, /usenall vfeth the word, Sat.6, 
and Jdpudeins Afin,t.2.8¢8, and Martiall. Pliny faith ,it was a worke of the rare painter 
Praxitales : but he meanesa boy bearing wine. Berealdus out of this iplace gathereth that 
"they vied to fet aflaggon of wine in Bacchus temple: It is more then hee can gather hesice, 
though it may be there was fuch an vie. 3 


| : | a 
Of Varro his opinion that God was i des of the world and yet had many foules 
onder bins ia his parts ell which were of the diuine nature. 
C HAPe 6- id 7 


TT He fame Varro {peaking further of this Phyficall Theology ( 4 ) faich, chat 
he holds God to be the foule of the world, which the Siakes call xéoper, an 
(6) that this world is God.But as a whole man, body and foule,is called wife of 
the foule onely,fo is the world called God in refpe& of the foule onely , being 
both foule and body. Here( feemingly ) he confeffeth one God, but itis co bring 
in more, for fo he dinides the world into heaven and earth : heauen into theayre 
and the skie,earch into land and water : all which foure parts he filles with foules, 
theskye(¢) a ayre next,then the water,and then the earth : che foules 
of the firft two hee maketh immorcall,che latter mortall. The {pace begweene the 
higheft heauen and the Moonc hee fills with foules ethereall and ftarres,affrming 
that they both are and feeme celeftiall Gods: (d@) Becweene the Moone and the 
toppesof the windes he beftoweth ayry foules, but inuifible ({aueto the minde) 
‘calling them Heroes Lares,-and Geny. This he briefly r¢cordeth in his prologuete 
his naturall Theologie , which pleafed not him alone, but many Philofophers 
more: whereof-with Gods helpe we will difcourfe at full, when wee bandle the 
ciuill Theologieas it refpectcth the fele& gods, _. : 


afer ~ E, VIVES. 


a Lr. OF THE CITIE OF GOD, | 265 . 


_ oe 8 L. VIVES. 
- T Heology (4) faith) The Platonifts,Stoiks,Pythagorians and thig onikes before them all, held 
a God to bee 4 foule:but diuerfly:Péeto gave the world a foule, and made them conioyned, 
| god. But his other god, his AZans,he puts before this later,as father to him. The Stoikes and. hee 
- agree,that agree at all, Thales and Democritus held the worlds foule the hicheR god. (6) Thas 
shar Plato;the Stoikes and many Phylofophers held this. (¢)Skie the higheft | Ariffotle puts the 
ig! fire aboue the ayre and the heauensthe P/aroni/Fs held the heauen to be fiery,arid therefore cals 
My led e£ther. And that the ayrenext it was a hurtleffe fire, kindled by it, This many fay that Ple~ 
a to held:following Pythagoras, who made the vniuerfall globe of 4. bodies. But Varro heere 
ie maketh ayre. to be next heanen,as the Stoskes did efpecially,and others alfo. Thou gh the Plate- 
etfs andchey differ not much,not the Peripatetiques,if they {peak as th cy meane,and be tightly 
xX ‘waderftood. But ether is the aire as well as the skie and fire,as celum is in latine. Virgil. 


. | ; s Va Lenem fagiens raptios fecat athera pennis: 

With {wift-wing’d fpeede the cutstlie yeelding aire, 7 . 

\ (d) Berweens sbe moon | The firft region of the A re(eArifterle in his Phyficks) ending at the 
-toppe of the cloudes;che fecond coatayning the cloudes, thunder , rayne , hayle and {hows 

a the third from thence to the Element of fire. . ae 7 ; 


“a Whether it fland with reafom that Yanus and Terminus 
| — Goouldbee swogedees, Cuar. 7. 


SS [o therfore whonte I begun with, what ishe? The'/) world. Why this isa 
plaine and brief anfwer:but why hach(6Jhe the rule and beginnings then,and a- 
sf nother (one Terminus ) of the endé?For therfore they haue two( ¢ ) months dedi 
iw cated cothem Jssuaryto Janus,and February to Terminus. And{fothe (d) Terminae 
Sf &aare then kept,when the(e) piirgatory facrifice called (f) Februm was allo kept, 
whence the moneth hath the name : Doth then the beginning of things belong to 
the world,to /aaus and not the end but vnto anocher? Isnot al things beginning 
in the worldto haue their end alfo therein ? What fondneffe is this,to giue him 
2 but balf¢ a power,and yet a double face? were it not better ( e&)tocallthatdouble. 
faced ftatuc both /emus and Terminus,and to giué the beginnings one face and the - 
ends to another,becaufe he thatdoth an a& muft refpect both 2 For inall a@ions 
he that regardeth not the beginning fore-feeth not the end. So thats refpectiue 
memory and dmemoratiue prouidence matt of force 6° together: But ifthey 
imagine that bleflednes of life is but begunand not ended in this world, and that - 
therefore theworld ( Jaxus ) is tohaue but power of thie beginnings: why thers 
they fhould put Terminus amongftthe {elected gods before him:For thoug they 
were both imploiedabout one fubie&, yet Terminus fhould haue che better places; 
for the glory is in the conclufion of every aGt,and the beginnings are ful of doube 
and feare till they bee brought to perfeGion , which euery one at his begin. 
ning ofan a& doth defire, intend and expe& , nor ioyeth hee inthe beginning, 
but in the confummation ofhisintents. - . ea eee 


He(a)world\ Macrob Saturn.1.(b) Therule of | Xenon faith, becaufe he didfirRtinducere- 
BE ion into Jtaly;thereforehe deferued to be ruler of the beginnings of facrifices she that 
would know moreof this,let him read Macrobius,a known author - (¢) Months |The Romaine 
eare before Numa had but 10. months W the Albasies,. Numa added the 2. laft,lanwary & Fe= 
Varro. Plutarch, Onid thinketh that Lanxary of old begani'the yeate. ( Faft. 2. )& Fea 
ébruary ended it the laft day wherof was Zcrasinns ieee that afterwards the piace 
ap A! . Aa 


266 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. Swany 


~ inthe 12.tablesioyned Ianuary and February together. (d) Terminatia| the laft feaft of Febra- 


¢ 


fohn,10. 


before the expulfion of Tarquin: but after they kept the kings-flight feaft after the other. 

The Terminalia (faith Bede) were the 23,0f February. De nat. rerum. (e) The purgatery) The 
Terminalia wete no purgations , but the Febrwa were, which were kept that moneth alfo, ( f) 
Februit|Onid faftoris.2. Februa Ronsani dixere pia wina ‘Patres. 

Our fathers faid the Febraa were purgations. 
And alittle after. Denig, quocumg, est quo corpora noftra piantur, 
_ Floc apud miele nomen babebat auos. 

What euer wafht the bodies guile away, 

Vakempt antiquity call'd Februa. ” | 
And hence came our Bebruary.( g | To call that doxble-faced |Cicero feemes to make Janus God 
both of beginnings & ends.De nat.deor.2.acrob.doth the like,following f opinion of many. 

See 


why the wor(bsppers of lanus made him two faces, and yet wenld haue him fet 
” ee oth fouresifo. Cwar.8. 

BV now to the meaning of Janus (4) his two faces .Two hee had (fay they ) one 

before,another behind, becaufe when we gape,our mouth is like the world(& 
therefore the Greeke called them (6) palate, sev, heauen. And fome Latine po- 
ets haue called the palate Ce/wm , heauenalfo: from whence is a way out-ward, 
to the teeth,& inward to the throate.See now to whata paffe the world is come, 
for your Greeke or poetical name of the palate. What is all this to life eternall2 
or the foule? here is gods worthip all beftowed , for a little {pittle to fpit oyt, or 
{wallow downe,as the gates fhall open or fhut. But who is-fo foolifh that cannot 
finde in the world two contrary paflages , whereat one may enter in or out? but 
ofour mouth & throte (whofe like is not in the world) muft frame the fimilitude 
of the world in /exus,onely for the palate,(c)whofe fimilicude is not in Janus,And 


whereas they make him 4.faces , calling his ftatue double /a#us,thefe they attri- | 
bute to the 4.corners of the world, as if the worlds foure corners looked all for- 


watd,as his 4.faces do.Againe if Janus be the world,& the world confift of 4.parts 
then the piCture of wo faced (d) /anusis falfe (for though he be foure-faced fom- 
times,yet he neuer hath foure — if the two-faced picture be true, becaufe 
eaft & weit includeth vfually all the world,will any man when we name the north 
and the fouth, call the world double, as they do¢ amas with his 4. faces? nor haue 
they any fimilitude in the world correfpondent to their foure gates of ingreffe 8 
eprefic;as they haue found for the 2- faces in the mouth ofa man: (e) volefie Wep- 
tune come with afith,there indeed in his mouth is a paflage in and a paffage our, 
and waies forth on either fide his chaps But of all thefe wayes there is none lead- 
eth any foule from vanity,but fuch as heare the truth fay 3 / 4% the way. 
. VIVES. | 


Bas Homer faith of a valiant fellow: du2 7es0qe xo bnisow asuoow » hee looked both before & 
behinde at once. Plutarch gaue two reafons for this ftatue,Firft becaufe he was firft a Grecian 
called Perlnsbus (as is recorded) and then comming into /taly, changed both name, language, 
and conditions.Secondly becaufe he taught the /talians both husbandry and pollicy,Problens, 
Others (as Onid, which reafon Augu/tine here toucheth ) fay hee fignifieth the world, one face 
being the eaft,and another the weft.Some fay he had reference to the rifing and fetting of the 
funne,& fignified the fun, Nigédins he alfo faith that the Greekes worfhipped Apollo Thypannes, 
and eyiee-s the Porter,and the er » But I chinke not in that fhape that the Re- 


maines worthipped Lanns : for Owid {ai 


Quem tamen effe.denm dicam te lane biformss ? | 
Nase tibi par aullum Grecia namen habet. 


. In Engh oo br ap (two-fronted Jawms) fhould& thoube? 


Ofall che gods.of Greece is none like thee. 


TF Anus (4) bis] Some fay his wifdom & prouidence procured him this double fronted ftatue, 


Linz. * OF THE CITIE OF GOLD. 


bam a 
—_ 


He was framed with foure faces-alfo. C.Baffde diis apnd Macrob, Ianus hath two faces as the 
doore-keeper of heauen and hell : foure faces , becaufe in his Maicftie hee comprifeth all the 
earths climates. This is ¥ Janus who in their ceremonies they called double Janms:the two faced 
one was called Jax#s the fimple: the others Temple was open in war and fhut in peace. (6) Pa- 
late, iegvis ) Arift.de part. Animal, And Pliny imitating him, vfeth ce/um for the palate (1. 11.) 
speaking of the brainsthis(quoth he)is the moft excellent of the fpermatiue parts nearelt to the 

heauen of the head, | palate. (¢ ) Whofe fimilitude |or , from whole fimilitude Janus hath 
his name. (4) Janus is falfe] Some hold the reft, vnto { Or if the two fac'd picture |to bee 
foifted in, Itisnot very vnlikely by the fubfequence. (¢) Valeffe Neptune | for in men it 
cannot bee found. — — or : 


cy ae me 


compared to gether. 


. Of: loues power, andlanus his 
BY! let them tell vs now whom they meane by Jone (4) or Jupiter. He isa God 
(quoth they) that rules the caufes of all effects in the world. This is a great 
charge. Aske (6) Virgéls excellent verte elfe. 
| Feelixe qui potnit rerum cognofcere can[as. _ 
O bleffed he, and excellent,that kens the caufe of each euent. 
But why then is /azus preferred before himelet the great abfoluce fcholler fpeake. 
Becaufe faith he, lanus rules the first things,and loue the greateft . Why then Jone - 
is ftill worthy of the fuperioricie : the greateft things concroule the firft: and 
excell them in dignity though they be fhort of them in time. If the beginnings, 
and the excellencies of all ates be compared together this is true: To goe is the 
beginning of an acc; but to finifh the tourney is the perfection. To begin to 
Jearne,is another but the habite of learning is the excellence,and fo in all things, 
the beginning.is the firft,and the end the beft.But the caufe of Janus 8 Terminus 
is alteady heard. But the caufes that owe {wayeth are not effects , but efficients: 
nor canthe faéts begun or ended be before them, for the agent is alwayes before 
the acte. Wherefore let Janus haue {way in beginnings of acts, Jove yet hath do- 
minion in things before his. For nothing is either ended or begun without a 
precedent efficient caufe. Now as forthis great natures maifter,and caufe-difpo- 
fing God, if the vulgar call him /owe, and adore him with fuch horrible imputa- 
tions of villanie as they doe,they had berter and with leffe facriledge , beleeueno 
Godatall. They had better call any one ove that were worthy of thefe horred 
and hatefull horrors,or fet a ftocke before them and call it Jose, with intent to 
_blafpheme him (as Saturne had a ftone laide him, to deuoure in his fonnes ftead ) 
then tocall him both thunderer , and Letcher, the worlds ruler , and the womens raui- 
fer the giuer of all good caufes to nature,ind the recetuer of all bad inhim/elfe.Againe 
if Jenus bee the world, I aske where Jowes {eate is is? our author hath faid thatthe 
true Gods are but parts of the worlds foule, and che foule it felfe : well then hee 
that is not fuch, is no true God. How then ? Is Jouve the worlds foule,and Janus 
the body, this vifible world ? If it be fo, Jamas is no god, for the worlds body is 
none: but the foule and his parts onely , witneffe them-felues. So arre faith 
plainly, hee holds that God is the worlds foule, and this {ouleis god: But as a 
wife man hath body and foule,and yet his name.of [ wife] is onely in refpe@ of 
his foule. So the world hath foule and body, yet is called God onely in reference 
tothe foule. So then the worlds body alone is no god : but the foule, either fepe- 
rate or combined with the body, yet fo that the god-head reft onely in it felfe: if 
Janus then be the world and a god; how can Jowe be apart of Janus onely, and yet 
fo great a god ? for they giue more to Jone then Janus , Jonis omnia plena; ahis fal 
of loue,fay shey. Therefore if Jone be a god, & the king of gods, they cannot make 
any but himto bee the world , becaufe hee muftreigne ouer the reft, as ouer his 
- Aaa owne 


=e 


CHAP. 9. 


Ee : estat ane eas . ™ —", PS I i TEL EE OC IC IE 
268 SAINT AVGVSTINE. Caasc 


owne parts.T6 this purpofe Varro in his booke of the wotthip of the gods which 
he publithed feverall frons thefe other , fer downe a diftich of Valersus ( ¢) Sors- 
wus his making : it is this; ae 
Jupiter omnipotens regu; vex ipfe deu|gue, 
“Progenitor, genitrsxg, deum,dens vue CF omnis; 
High /one,Kings King; and Parent Generall; 
To all the gods : God onely,4nd God all. | 
Thefe verfes Varro expoundeth,and = the giuér of feed,the male,and the 
receiuer the female , accounted lowe the world , that both giueth all feed ir felfe, 
and receiueth it into it felfe. And therefore Soranus (faith hee)called lowe, Proge- 
nitor,genttrixg, father and mother, Fas/ Parent generall,to all -c.and by the fame 
reafon is it that he was called, one and the fame,all : for the (() world is one,and 
all chiags are in that one. 


L. VIVES. a 
[One (4) er Iupiter] For they are both declinable nominatiues : Genersmo, lenis and Inpiteris: 
+ though wee vfe the nominatiue onely of the later, and the other cafes of the firft , as the 
Greckes doe zsés and Jos (6) Usrgils | Georgic. 2. calling the inuecftigaters of caufes hap. 
py , ‘as the Philofophers did, of the ‘Perspatetiques and Academekes, Arift, Ethic. 10. (icero 
de finib. 5.(¢) Soranus | Mentioned by Cicero, de Oratore. 1. Plin. lib. 3. Solin, Polibsft. Plat. 
Probl, Macreb, Saturn. Sern. in Georg. 1. Hee was a learned Latine , counted the beft fchol- 
ler of the Gowned profeffors, Cic. de orat.1. Varro was {o held alfo but Sorazus before him, 
as Ennins the beft Poet before Wsrgsll. Hee had honors at Rome , and the tribunefhip for 
one :and becaufe hee {poake the fecret name of Rome which no man might vtter, hee loft his 
life. Plex. Solis, Macrob.and Plutarch,though in Pompeyes life Phetarch faith that Q.Valerins 
the Philofopher(which moft vnderftood to Be Soranus)was put to death by Pompey.But this is 
bur at the fecond hand (faith he )from Oppias: let vs beware how wee truft a friend to (¢/ar in 
aftorie of site . Some fayhee died fuddenly : Others, that hee was crucified. Serw.(d) 
Inpiter \The old copies read Lupiter onsnipotens,regws rerum 7, ,dexmd,,for the firlt verfe.(¢)Gi- | 
ner of feede} Orph. Hymn. | 
— Z665 apeny che, 
| God as a man begets,as woman, breedes. : 
( f) World is|So held all the beit Philofophers againit Anaximander, Anacxinsenes, Ariftars 

ehus,X. enophanes, Diogenes,Lencipps, Democritus and Epicuras,all which held many worlds. 


whether Ianus and loue be rightly diftingu:{bed or no. 
HAP. IO. 

V Vlerelore Lexus being the world,and Jone the world alfo,and yet the world 

_ butone, why then are not Tass and Iowe one ? Why haue the feuerall 
Temples , feuerall altars, rites and ftatues all {euerall? Becaufe the originall is 
one hing and the caufe another, and therefore their names and natures are dif- 
tina herein? Why how can this bee? If one man haue two authorities, or two 
{ciences,becaufe they arediftin@,is he therefore two officers,or two tradefmen? 
So then if one GOD haue two powers over caufes, and ouer originalls,muft hee 
needs therefore be two Gods, becaufe they are two things? Ifthis may bee faith 
then let Iowe be as many gods as he hath furnames for his feuerall authorities, for 
all his powers,whence they are deriued are truly diftin&t : let vs looke in a few of 
them,and fe¢ if this be not true. 


Of loues farnames,referred all unto him,as one god pot as 
tomany, Cuap. II. 


if Be galled nim(a)¥ittor Lamsmcible, Helper lmpatfor Stator,{b)Hunaredfooted, 
* | <e |.  Sapioeals, 


> | 


o> eee 


— —s we - = ~_- i _ 


_  ar- we 


Ling. OF THECITIEOF GOD 269 


the Rafter,(c)the Nowri{ber,Ruminus,and inunmerable other namzs too long (.d) 
to rehear{e.All rhe names they gaue one God for diuers refpect and powers, yet 
did they not make hima god for each peculiar,becaufe he conquered,was vncon- 
quered,helped the needy ,had power to inforce,to ftay,to eftablifl,co ouerturne, & 
becaufe eo vp the world like a(¢) rafier , becaufe he nourifhed all , andas it 

were gave all the world fuck. Marke thefe powers conferred wirh the epithites: 
Some are of worth, fomeidle: yet one gods worke they ate( /) all, as they fay. I 
thinke there is morencerenefle of nature betweene the caufes and the begin- 
nings of things , for which they make one world two gods , /aaus and Inoue, who 
(they fay) both conrayneth all, and yet giveth creatures iucke: yet for thefe two 
works of fuch different qualities,is not Jowe compelled 10 become two gods,but 
playeth the one part asheis Tzgslus The Rafter and che other as he in Ruminus, 
the Dagg-bearer.L will not fay that it were fitter tor /wxoto fuckle the words créa- 
tures then Jupiter , efpecially hauing power to make a wayting maide of goddefft 


Rumina : for it may bee they will reply: why J##o is nothing but Japéter , as Sora- 
nus faith. | : | 


Lupiter omnipotens regumyeruma, deumd, 
“Progenitor, genetrixque deorum,-———- 


He is god only and god all:but why is he called Raminus then,whenif you looke 
a lictle farther into a thal find him to be Ramina che goddeffe, for ifit feeme 
(g)iuftly vnworthy ef the maiefty of the gods, to fer one to looke to the knot of 
the corne,and another ro the blade, how much more is it vnreucrently ridiculus 
to put a bale office, the fuckling of whelps,lambes, calues or {0 , vnto the perfor- 
mance of two gods, the one whereof is Lord of the whole vniuerfe:I, and not this 
neither with his wife, but with a bafe goddefle, I cannot tell whom Rumina ,vn- 
lefle t ce be both Ramznus and Rumina,this for the females ,and that for the males, 
For I dare fay that they (4) would not haue giuen Jose a female naine,bur that he 
is called a father and a mother , or a full parent generall in the {aid verfes. Nay I 
findhim alfo named Pecunia, anameof one of the fhake-rag goddefles in our 
forth booke. But fince men and women both haue mony, why is henot Pecunins 
and Pesaniaafwellas Ruminus and Remina,but let them looke to that. 


e a od 


L. VIVES. 


L_¥Im(4)Viktor.} Lone had many furnames both greeke and latine, which Orphens purpofely 
collecteth in his Himnes,and Homer difperfedly in both his Poemes and Himnes,as that he 

is giases friendfhips Lord:Zevsos,Hofpitablesizaupé'es , fociable,épxscs god of othersand other like 
more natural to him then vfefull to men.Befides there was /up:ter eA nxur,and Terracina,guaf 
avey Zved, beardleffe sand here-vpon was Terracina called Anxur. Sern. There was alo J#= 
piter,eApomyas in Olympia confecrated by Hercules, to chafe oie the flies, nwas which troub- 
led his facrifices, and ¢edzeses,at eSthens, thekinfman : his feaft was the fecond day of 
the dyarupiz , that is the deceitfull daies , and ic was. called e4narrhy/is , of. the 
bloud that ranne from the flaughtered offrings. There was. ad¢pasexe the Hatchet bearer, 
in (aria with an axe in his hand in ftead of athunderboulr, called by the Lidsans,rcBen. Plat. 
Prob. \n Greece there was inerbipsos, the deliuerer, that freed them from Pez/ian armies, Dodo- 
nevus in (haonia, Milefinsin Afia Minor, Hammon in Afryca, pndsyis at Athen?, that had 
no facrifice,but fraite,and apples. Thucydides. There was allo aescies, the Pardoner,at Argos, 
xéanog ,the cuckow, and e%fss , dedicated by Phrixas, as the fellow of his flight: and 


Aa 3 there 


SAINT AYGVSTINE. C Harry 


‘chere was the golden fleece that e4ppofonins fpeaketh of. : | 
~ Aratrins alfo amoneft the Phznicians, (elas his fonne , Saterxes brother, called 


; ‘Dagon , the firft inuentor of plowes, and therefore called Jupiter Aratrins , of Aratrama 


plough : there was surelwies common to allGreece. Agorens ,the Courtier in Sicily , for 
in che Court hee hada Ratue. Herodor. There wasin Rome befides thofe that Angufting 
reckéneth , Jupiter Feretrins, of the ritch {poyles that Romsxlas bore [ Ferebzt) from the foes he 
dedicated him Capitolinus , of the place s Edicius , dedicated by wna on Auentine , for get» 
ting knowledge of [ Edioéendss |the gods pleafures for the expiation of thunder. Psfor, 
the Baker of the bread the befieged threw downe from the Capitol when Rome was taken: 
his feaft wasthe fixth of lunes Ides . Ussinins of the Hill Viminall : Predator, the prey- 
aaa to whom a part of euery prey was diic. Sere. Ultor, the Reuenger, dedicated 
by eAgrippa. The thunderer, which Augujfus dedicated after the Spanifh warre: The 
keeper , Domitian erected in the Capitol , ‘The Latine, Tarqnis the Proud on mount 
Alba. Th’ Iavincible , his feaft, Jd. Inns, The-finder, dedicated by Hertwles for finding 
his oxen. Hisalear was neare PortTergemina , atid his offting wasa heifer. Aduleus , ho« 
nored at mariages. Li, Dionyf. Plut. Sueton. Lattantins writeth that Jowe got the fure 
names ofall his hoftes,or friendes,as of Athabyrinus, and Lapriandus,that ayded him in warre, 
as alfo Laprius » Molion and (affius. Thefens dedicated a Temple to lone Hecalefius , and 
ordained him facrificesin Athens territory , becaufe of his olde Hoftefle Hecalefia, Arifte- 
tle {faith that GOD beeing but one,is called by many names, the Lightner,the thunderer, the 
Ethereall , the Celeftiall , the Thunder-ftriker , the Rayne-fender and the Fruite-fender , the 
(itty-quide and the Birth-ruler,the Fortifier , the Homogeniall,Fatherly : as alfo all Fate, and all 
that belongsto Fate , Neeeffity , Renenge, and Adrafteian. 
| (6) Hundred-footed | For his ftability , as Augujtine expoundeth it ftanding on many feete: 
There is a worme called Cenotnpes,| wee call her aPalmer. | (¢) Noxrsfber | Altmems , of 
Alo to nourifh, Not Aliennms . Venus was called Alma , fo was (eres and the earth , as the 
nourifher of all. Some readeit Alsmnus ,ibut they miftake the meaning exceedingly. (d) 
Tereherfe| The (ommentators not vnderftanding the Latine fo well as they might tooke 
out [ Perfequs, to reherfe ] and depraued the place , with Perfe profequi, thinking perfequs was 
onely to perfecute. (¢) Rafter} A peece of wood whercon the frame of the houfe refteth: 
Arifiotle compareth the knotte where the arche is ioyned in the middeft,vntoG OD in the 
world,who were he abfente but one oe hee)the whole frame of nature muft needes 
fall, as the whole arche muft vpon the leaft of their ioynt. Nor farre from this purpofcis 
the verfe of Orpheusinhis hymnes , concerning Some. Zt'us miuiy rams re x)spave csepcorrog 
GOD is the linke , of th’ earth and ftarry Heauens : and afterward, Ztcos révpite, God 
is the feasroote. (f) i] Great and litele,worthy and idle. Cf) luftly unworthy} The crew 
of gods about the corne , was derided in the fourth booke. (4) Would not] The copies that 


- Ieauc out [not]}are depraued. 


That Iupiter éscahledPecuniaaifo. Crar.12. 


BY doc you heare their reafon for this name? Hee is called Pecunia (fay they) 
rcoyne, becaufe hee can doeall things. O fine reafon fora name of a god! 
Nay hee that doth all things is bafely iniured that is called vecunis, coyne. For 
what is that which all (4) mortall men poffeffe vnder the name of coyne, or 
money , in refpe@ of the things conteyned in heaven and earth ? But auarice 
gaue him this name, that hee that loued money might fay his god wasnot eue- 
ti¢ bodie, but the King of all the reft. Farre more reafontherefore had the 
to callhim Ricches :for Ritches and Money are to feuerall things. (6) wife, inkt 
& honeftmen we call ritch, chough they hauelitele or no money, for they are the 
richer in vertues : which maketh little fuffice them for neceffaries, whereas the 
greedy conctous man that alwaies gapeth after mony, him we count ever poore 
and needie. 7 4 7 

| Such 


A Th WD GB Roa 


ee ee ee 


Lr ».9. 


Such may haue ftore of money, but therein they fhall never lack ftoré of wanted. 
And God,wefay well, is ritch, not in money, but fn omnipotencie. So likéwife, 
monied menare called ritch, but be they greedy, they are euer needy , and mony- 
leffe men are called poore , but be they contented, they are euet wealthy. Whas 
ftuffe then fhall a man haue of chat diuinity, whofe {cope and chiefe God (¢) no 
wife.man in the world would make choice of ? How much likelier were itcif their 
religion in any point concerned eternall life ) to call their chiefe vniuerfall God 

rd) Wi{dome,the loue of which cleanfeth one from the ftaines of auarice , that is 
the fone of money. Oo 


Ate (4) mortall) All mens poffeffions , haue reference to money: fo that it is faid , thas 
A \ Peculinn,gaine,commeth of Pecudes,fheepe (Columell. Sern. Fefts.) becaufe thefe were 
all che wealth of antiquitie : for they were almoft all fheepheards , and from them this word 
came firft,and afterward fignified cittie-wealth alfo. Usar. de ling. lat. lib.4. (6) wife.taiB,] 4 
Scoicall Paradoxe. of covol pores atcrcs, onely the wife are ritche. Ty prooues it ftrongly : and 
many Philofophers haue confirmed it , all whofe mindes were againft money. (c.) Ne wife 
man | — faith Sainf? ) is the loue of Money, which no wife man euer affected : it isa 
oyfon that infeéteth all the manlineffe of the minde, and maketh it effeminate : being euer 
fo nite = atiable, neither coftented with want,meane nor excefle. (d) Wifdome]as well 
¢all our God. © ) | 


That the interpretations of Saturne asd Genius, 
: prooue them both to bee Lupiter. 
C HAP. I 4 e 


BY what fhould we do faying mote of Zupitersto whom al the other gods haue 
 fuch relation, that the opinion of many gods will by and by proouea bable, 


and Joxe ftand for them all,whether they bee taken as his parts and powers, or — 
thatthe foule that they holdis diffufed through all che world: gorte it felfe fo 
re diuerfe names by the manifold operations which it effeted in the parts of | 


this huge maffe,whereof the vifible vniuerfe hath the fabrike and compofition 2 
For what is this fame Satarne ? A chiefe God (faith he) and one that is Lord of all 
feedes and fowing. What? but doth not the expdfition of Sorases his verfes fay 


that Jone is the world,and both creator and conceiuer of all feedes ? He therefore 


muft needs rule the fowing of them. And what is ( 4) Genius ? Gad of generation 
{faith he.) Why tell me,hath any one that power,but the world,to whom it was 
faid, High loud, full parent general of all? Befrdes, hee faith in another place, thac 
the Genius (b is the reafonable foule , peculiar in each peeuliar man. Arid that 
the foule of the world isa God of the famenature, drawing icto this , that that 
foule is the vniuerfall Genius toall thofe particulars. Why then it is the fame 
that they call /owe.(¢) For if each Genius bee a god,and each foulejreafonable a 
Genius then is each foule rcafonablea god by all confequetce , which fuch ab- 
furdity vrgeth them to deny,it refteth that they make the worlds fingular foulé 
their Medeed Genius and confequently make their Gensns direCtly Jone. 


e 
- Pn) 


| L.VIVES. 


QF AT (4) & Genius ? | The Lord of all generation Feit, Pompey. The fonne 
a4 | of 


4 


OF THE CITIE OF GOD. agi” 


272 SAINT AVGVSTINE.: _Cuany 


of the gods and the father of men, begerting them: and fo itis calledmy genius {For it begae. 
me.e4ifujtins . The learned haue had much a doe about this Gexixs , and finde it manifoldly . 
: vied. Natures Genius is the god that producedher : the Heauens haue many Genii , read theny 
| in Capella his Nuptie. Melicerta is the feas Gensus. Parthen:thte foure elernents,fire,ayre , wae 
tér,and earth are the genii of all things corporall. The Greekes call chem rss "8 Geis scarring 
geniall gods. Such like hath Macrobins of natures “Penates : Iupiter and [uno are the ayre, 
low¢{t,and meane: AZizerna the higheft, or the ethereall sky : to which three Targuinius Prif- 
cus erected one Temple vnder one roofe. Some call the moone and the 12, fignes Genis : and 
chiefe Genii too.(for they wil haue no place without a predominant Genius: ) Eugry manialfo 
hath his Genins,either that guardeth him in his life , or that lookesto his generation , or that 
hath originall with him,both at onetime , (enforin, Genius, and Lar,fome fay are all one.C, 
Flaccus de Indigitaments. The Lars (faith Onsd) were twinnes to ALercury and Nymph Lara, 
or Larunda . Wherefore many Philofophers and Exclide for one,giues each man two Lars, 
a.good and abad : fuch was that which came to Bratus in the night,as he was thinking of his 
warres hee had in hand. Plwtarch. Flor. Appian. (6) Genius is | Of this more at large in the 
booke following. (c) For ifeach] Atrue Syllogifme inthe firft forme of the firft moode , vfual- 


ly called Barbara... 


Of the functions of Mars and Mercury. 
| Cuap.14, 


BY! in allthe worlds parts they could finde neuer acorner for Afars and Afer« 

curyto practife in the elements , and therefore,they gaue them power in mens 
actions, this of eloquence,& the other of warre. Now for A¢ercary (2) ifhehaue 
power.of the gods language alfo, then is he their King , if Zepéter borrow all his 
phrafe from him: but this were abfurd. Buc his power ftretcheth but vnto mans 
onely , itis vnlikely that Jove would take fuchabafe charge in hand as fucklin 
of not onely children, but cattell alfo, calues or foales , as thence he hath his 
name Romulus and leaue the rule of our fpeech ( foglorious a thing and thas 
wherein we excell the beafts )vnto the fway ofanother,his inferiour. I but how 
if Afercury be (b) the fpeech onely it felfe, for fo they interpretehim:and there- 
fore he is called Mercurius,(c) quali Medins currens ,the meanecurrant,becaufe 
to fpeak is the only currant meane for one man to expreffe his minde to another 
by, and his greeke name (4) ipujs,is nothing but interpreter &/pecch,or, évterpre- 
tation which is called in greeke alfo iptosa,and thence is hee(e¢) Lord of mer- 
chants , becaufe buying and felling is all by wordes and difcourfes . Herevpon 
they (f) wing his head and his feete , to fignifie the {wift paflage of {peech,and 
call him (g) the meflenger, becaufeall meffages , and thoughts whatfocuer are 
tranfported from man to man by the fpeech. Why very well. If afercury then 
be but the fpeech, I hope hee is no god then, by their owne confeffions. But they 
make gods ofno gods, and offring to vncleane {pirits.in ftead of beeing infpired 
with gods , are poffeffed with deuills . And becaufe the world and elements 
had no roome for A475 to worke in nature,they made him god of war, which is a 
worke of man not to be defired after. But if A¢ars be warre as Mercury is fpeech, 
I would ic were as fure thatthere were no warreto bee falfly called god, as it is 
plaine that Mars is no god. : 


—w —-- oe 


L. VIVES. 


M Ercury (a)\There were fiue (Mereuries (Cicero.) The firft, fonne to (elus and Dies,the 
fecond to Valens,and Pheronis,this is he that is ynder the carth calleth otherwife Tryphe- 
nins, third fonne to Jone and A4asa , fourth father to Ns/ns , him the Egiptian held it facri- 


. 
' an . 
! 7 + : a - . - 2 ve 
» 


Lrs.7. OFTHE CITIE OF GOD. 


Iedge to name. ¢. Hee that the Pheneates worfhipped hee killed .4-gas, they fay , and there- 
fore gouerned Egipt , and taught the Egiptians lawes and letters. They call him Tent, Thus 
farte Tilly. Thent is named by Plato in bis Phadon, and Eufeb. de preparar. Evang.lib.1. who 
faith the Egiptians called him Thoyth, the eAlexandrsans , hot ,the Greekes gocne and that 
he firft caught letters and looked iro the fecrets of Theology. Drodorus faith hee firft inuen- 
ted fpelling of Words, and viuing of names to things,as alfo rices and ceremonies, Léb. 1, for 
the wordes ; Horace doth teflifie it out of eS leans: and therefore the Egiptians thought him 
the inuentor and god of languages, calling him the interpreter of God and men: Se atccante 
hee brought religion as it were from the gods to men, and alfo becaufe the {peech,and prai- 
er paffeth from men to the gods ; with whichis nocommerce , Thence comes Ariftides his 
fable,thcre was no cornmerce nor concord between man and man,vntill A¢ercery had iprink~ 
Jed them with language ; and the inuenting of letters m:ffiue was a fit occafion to make them 
thinke that hee was a god, hauing power by their fecrecy to difpatch things with fuch cele- 


rity. () The /peech onely | Mercury ( they fay ) is the power of fpeech, and is faigned to bee 


Rtraight, {eeing the tongue runnes fo fmoothe, bur ina fet fpeech fome will haue 4 folar 
vertue ; which is (Mercury, others a Lazary , that is Hecate , other a power yniueriall cailed: 
Hermwopis, Porph.Phy/iologus. One of the caufes of his beeing named Cyllewins is ({aith Fe/frs 
Pompeins (becaufe , the congue doth all without hands ; and them that want handes are 
called xyxx93: though this is a hame common to all lame perfons: Others hold that he had ie 
from fome place. (¢) Mercirins quafi|Ot Merx,marchandife, faith Fefas,and Ithinke truely 
it comes of CMercor, to buy or fell , whence our word Merchant alfo commeth: (d) cpus | Of 
dppartes dy,to interprete. Thisit is tobe the gods meffenger : not to incerprete their fayings,but 
faithfully to difcharge their commaunds , which the {peech can doe, transferring things from 
foule to foule , which nought but fpeech can doe: and fince foules were taken for gods 
thence was hee counted the gods interpreter. Platoin (ratylo si 70 sip oc. They that oth 
sipwy,(daith he chat is fpeake , wee iuftly call Jronies, But now hauing gotten, as wee thinke, 
bec word,wee call it Hermes. Iris allo may bee deriued ispsiv, to fpcake, for thee isa 
meffenger allo. Hee that dealeth in any other rhans affaire, is cailed an interpreter, a 


meane, and an arbitrator. Ser. in e£neid.g. and (iteroi diners places. Urigilalfo, InDss 


dos words to /une,the meane of attonciment betweene her and Aeneas , faith thus. 
Tx baritm thterpres curarum et con{tta [uno, 
Thou funo art rhe meane,and knowes my grieties, ae 

(e) Lord of (Merchants|Without language farewell traffique. Dioderms faith that fome 
repert (Aercury to haue found out weights,and meafurcs : and the way to gaine by trading. 
There isa Greeke prouc:be wiros ture, common gaine. (f) Winged , His feete wings are called 
Zalaria,& in Homere,waimashe had head-wings alfo behind each of his eares. Apuleius. Ape~ 
logus his wings were aboue his hat, as he faith in Plastus his Amphitrno. | weare thefe fethers 
in my hat. Beroald. Sweton in Auguft. (g) Meffenger|Diodor. Sicullib, 6. Atron in Herat. 


Car lib. i. 


Of certaine flarres that the Pagans call their gods, 
3 Cuap.t5. : 
PEs thefe (4) ftarres are their gods that they call by their gods names. 


For one they call Afercury, another Mars : nay and there is one lowe alfo, 
though all che world be but lowe. So is there a Seturne,yet Saturne hath no {mall 


Place befides , beeing the ruler of all feede. But then there isthe brighteft of 
9M 


enus,though they will needes make her (5) the Moone alfo ¢ though fhe and 

I#x0 contend as much for chat glorious far , in their opinion,as they did for the 
(¢)golden apple.For fome fay that Lucifer is Venus: others, ] 4#0,but Venws(as fhe 
doth ever)gets it from I#o.For many more cal it Vewus,then luso,theié are few 
or none ofthe later opinid.But who wil not laugh to have owe named the King of 
ods arid yet fee Venus hauea farre brighter ftarre chen his ? His fulpor fhould 


ue beene as fuper-cminent as his power ; butit feomes leffe( they reply ) and 


- * 


— ee es 


LE LL ELE IE ALLL IE AT TRS 


274 SAINT AVGVSTINE. — Cuar.rs. 


hirs more,becaufe one is nearer the earth then another. Why butif the high: 
eft place deferue the honour why hath not Saterne the grace from Jupster ? Or 
could not the vanity that made Jove King , mount fo high as the ftarres ¢ So that 
Saturne obtaineth that in heauen which, hee could neither atraine (4) in his 
Kingdome nor inthe Capitoll ? Bue why hath not Jazus a ftarreafwell as Zoac, 
beeing all the world , and comprehending all aswell as (¢) Joxe? Didhee fall to 
compofition for feare of law, and for one ftar_ in heauen was content to take ma- 
ny faces vpon earth? And if two ftarres onely made them count Afars and Afer- 
cury for deicies,being notwithftanding nothihg but fpeech and warre, no parts of 
the world,butaé@ts of men: why hath not Artes, Taurus, Cancer , Scorpio Crc. that 
are inthe (f) higheft heauen , and haue more. (¢) certaine motions, why haue 
not they Temples, Altars and facrifices ?nor any place either amongft the pepu- 
Jar gods or the felected? 3 . 


| L. VIVES. | , 
[He ftarres| Plato faith that the Greekes (and many Barbarians ) whilom vfed to adore ° 
no gods, but the Sunne,Moone and Starres, calling them naturall gods( as Berstins wrot to 
Sanchaniates)affirming that of the ancient, men the Phznicians and Egipt ians firft began to 
crec&t temples and facrifices for their friends and benefactors:naming them by the ftars names: 
one Heaucn, another Saturne,a third the Sun, and fo forth. Thus far P/ato.Doubrleffe the gods 
themfelues being cunning Aftrologians either gaue themf{clues thofe names, or fuch as held - 
thofe greac powers of theirs to be in the ftars,caue the Inuentors of Har-skil thofe names.For 
the ftar Afercury they fay maketh men witty,eloquent,and fitting to the planet hee is ioyned 
with ; and Seneca liketh this caufe of his name of the gods interpretor. For with Jwpiter and 
the Sun,he is good, with A@ars and Afercury,maleuolent.AZars is violent,a war-breeder, & as 
Porphyry faith , che Lo: of wrath, becaufe of firy ardor , arifeth fury and warre. Hence is the 
Stoikes Theology referring all the gods natures to the worlds: and confequently fo obfcure 
that the truth is nor poffibly to be extracted:as Exfebins faith both out of Saxchoniato,& pro~ 
ueth alfo by argument:De preparat.Euarg.lib.1.As e4ucu/tine doth alfo here..(b) The msoone 
alfo\|\Mae.Sat. 1. alledging Philochorus in eAtis : that Venus is the Moone,and that men in| 
womens apparell {acrificed to her,and women in mens, becaufe fhe was held both: Thou hea- 
uenly Vesus(faith Apuleins tothe series} caufed all copulation in the beginning, propagae 
ting humane original,thou art now adored in the facred oratory of Paphos. Transform lib.11. 
(¢) Golden apple | The goddeffes contention about the golden apple is plainer then thatit 
needs my reherfall:of Lucifer,P/iny faith thus. Vader the Sun is the bright {tar Ves#s moouing 
diurnally,and planetarily : called both Venus and Luxa, in the morning being Sols harbinger, 
fhe is called Lucifer:as the pety-fun, and light-giuer of the day:at night following the fun, fhe 
is ftiled Vefper, as the light continucr and the moones vice-gerent.lib.2. Pithagoras firft of all 
found her nature,magnitude, and motion. Ol/ympiad.41. about the yeare of Rome 142.fhee is 
bigger then all the other ftarres,and fo cleare thas (fome-times) her beames make a fhadowe. 
That maketh her haue fuch variety of names,as,[uv0,//is,Berecynthia,crc.(d) In his Kengdome] 
~ Whence he was driuen by his fon Jone, as alfo from the Capitol that before was called Satur- 
nia,yntill it was dedicated to Lupiter (apitolinus.(e) [ove | Viing Louis the Latine nominatiue, 
as Txily doth in 6. De Papi. tha happy ftarre called Jane, (f) Highe/?| The Zodiake in the 
8, Sphere, fo called-of zy, a creature : euery figne whereof conteyneth divers bright ftarres. 
(g) Certaine motion | Perpetually and diurnally once about from Eaft to Weft in 24. houress 
making night and day,and euer keeping place : whereas the Planets arenow ioyned,now op- 
pofice,now fwift,now retrograde,which change gaue them the greeke name Planet of wnavi, 
errorsthough they keepe acertaine motion neuertheleffe:yet feemingly they erre and wander 
through their alteration in motion,which the Zodiake neuer alters, as ficuate in the 8. Sphere 
called daaavis. | . 


Of Apollo,Dianasad other feleé gods called parts ofthe world, Cuar. 16. 
AN though they make (4).Apollo,a (b) wizard & a (c) phifitian, yet to making 


hima part of che world,they fay he ts che Sunne,& Déane his fiftér isthe Moone, 


rR IE ID NELLA LEST LCD A IEE DOLE AP A AACA OIA ET TST OAT EATS OTE EEL AD TITTIES LETS LENOIR ETE A NG 


Lis. OF THE GITIE OF GOD. 


OO 0 en 


and ( 4) goddefle of iourneyes. So'is thee (e )'4 Virgin alfo,vntouched,and they 
both beare fhafts, (f) becaufe thefe 2. ftars only do fend to the earth. Yu/can they 
fay , isthe worlds fire. Neptune the water : father Dis , the earths foundation and 
depth, Bsechus and Ceres {ced-gods, heto the mafculine, thee of the feminine; or 
hee of themoyfture and thee of the dry part of the feedes All this now-hath 
reference to the world , to Lowe, who is called the ful! parent general, bécaufe hee 
both begets and brings forth all things fersinsf. And Ceres the great mother, 
her they make the earth and Jwxobefides. ‘Fhus the fecorid caufes of things are 
in her power , though Jouve be called the full parent , as they affirme him to beeall 
the world. And Ad@izerua becaufe they had made her the artes goddeffe , and. 
had neuer a ftarre for her, they made her alfothesky , or(¢) the Moone , Vefia 
they accounted the chiefe of all the. goddeffes , being taken for the earth: and 

et gave her the protection of the #) worlds fire, morelight and not fo vio- 
fene asthat of Vulcanswas. And thus by all thefe {ele& gods they intend but the 
world: in fome tota/, and in others partéall : toall, as Jowe is : partéall,as Genius, the 
great mother, Solland Zana, or rather —4polloand Dsana ; {ometimes one god 
ftands for many things, and fometimes one thing prefents many gods, the 
firft is true in Jupiter , hee is all the world ; hee but onely (4) Heauen, and hee is 
onely a ftarre in Heauen: Sois /eso, goddefle of all fecond caufes , yetonely the 
ayre, and yettheearth, though thee might (& ) gerthe ftarre from Venss. Sois 
Minerua the higheft sky, and the Moone in the loweft sky as they hold. The {e- 
cond is true in the world, which is both dome and Janus : and in.the earth which is 
both Juno,the Great mother,and Ceres. | 


‘A Pollo. (4)| Tully de.dat deor.ib.3.makes 4. Apollos,and 3. Dianas. The 3. Apollo. and the 


_ £44, Diana were the children of Jone and Latona, ( 6) Wizard. |\Commonly affirmed in all 


authors of this fubie& , Greeke and Latine, Pero faith the Theffalozians called him not - 
dxénora, but cxair fimple,becaufe af his diumation , wherein was required , 12 aauder gdaaity, 
gciitrov ye ire. struth, and fimplicity,which are all one. J Crarslo. Glancas-taught him his diui- 
nation,he that was afterward made a Sea-god and called (Melscerta, Nicand in A toleis(e) 
Phifitian.\\Macrob Satur. Fhey counted the veftalls seri er it ra nae Peau Gc, He 
proues himto bee e£/cwlapixs , that is a ftrenght of health, arifing foly trom the fubRtance of 
animated creatures. Much of Apollo yea may read in the faid place. (d) Goddeffe of. | Her {ta- 
tues were cut all youthfull, becaufe that age bearethirauell left Fe/fus /ib.9. for Diana was 
héld.ayoddeffe of waies and iournies: fhee ruled alfo mountaines: and groues , and vfed the 
pathes often inher hunting , as fhalbeefhew ed hereafter,(e)V agin. | So. xis reported , that it 
was not lawfull for men to come in her temple at Rome , becaufe one cauifhed a woman there 
ence that came to falute the goddeffe,and the dogs tare him in peeces irnmediatly P/atpcalleth 
her dpzequs, tax. 8c. becaufe of the integrity and modefty that the profeffed 1n her loueof vir- 
gitiiry : or, #7 &c, becaufe fhe hath the copulation of man and woman. Though the fables 
gothet fhee lay with Endymyon : and that Pan , Mercuries fone , gaue her a white fheepe for 
a cat. Uirg.3.Georg. | rr ; 
a ne Muanere fic niueo lane ficredere digum-eft, 
a er Pandeus Archadie captam te Luna fefellit; - 

i In Nemora alta vocans,nec tu afpernata vocautem €5.7. 
; Arcadian Pans white fleece(tis {id) fo blinded, 

Thine eyes(faire Phabe:)he being breefely minded, 

Biba, aa és Call’d the,thou yeeldeft,and to thethicke you went,&c. , 
Adds Shaftes. | Apollo beareth thofe that hee killed cheferpent Pythgn withal ; and:there- 


: fore 


296 SAINT AVGVSTINE. | C wae.17 
fore Homer calleth him oftentimes tafeace, that is far-darting, x andere ,that is fhooting 
“high :and ¢ igdmor , etetnall archer : Now Diana , vowed a perpetuall virgine, haunteth the 
woods and hills, hunting as Virgill defcribech Uenms when eLneat {aw her buskind, and 
tucked round, and a quiver at her backe, as ‘ready for thie purfute. Thefe thaftes are noe 
- thing(all fay bur the beatnes of thofe ftarres as Lactantsas faith of the Sonne. 
eArmatis radiis elementa liqnemtia luftrans; 
Arrried with rates he vewes the watry playnes: | 
— (£) The Mewne.| Porph.Natsrall dest interpretat. That in the Sunne ( faith he) is eApeLlo, 
that in the Moone CMasarwa; fgnifiyng wifdome.(4) worlds fire. \Ours that we vfe on earth, 
belonging(as I fay)to generation ¢ Though herein, as in all fictions is great diuerfity of opinie 
ons. Phsrnatas faith Vwlan is the groffes fice , that wee vie,and Jupiter the more pure fire , and 


Provdéntins faith. are 
es san= Ipfz ignis qui noftrums fernit ad fume, 
| Vulcanus, ac perbibetur et in virtute fe : 
Fingitur ac delubra dens,ac nomize ¢t ore, 
Affanulatus babet,nec nom rpms Cameinis, 
Fertur 5 Acolie fammusfaber effe vel Aetna, 

. The fire that ferues our vie, 

Hicht Vulcan,and is held a thing diuine, 

Grac’t with a ftile,a fatue and a fhrine, 
a: Sf The chimeys god he is,and keepes they fay. 
( hi : ia Ee Great fhopsin ery and Aeolia. , | 
; eANH, $0653 Alpice he lime candens SRNOCANS CMNC Ss 
| 7 Jouem ----=----bebold ae flaming light which rey Iohe. 
(&)Get the ftarre.\In the contention for Lwcsfier or the day ftarre. 


That Varro hins-felfe held his opinions of the Gods to be ambiguons. 
HAP.I7. 

B Ve euen as thefecited examples do, fo all the reft, rather make the matter 
intricate then plaine :and following the force of opiniatiue error , {way this 
way,and that way,that “erro himfelfe liketh better to doubt of them , then to de- 
liver this or that pofitiuely , for of his three laft bookes hauing firft ended thax of 
thecertaine gods , then hee came into that of che («) vncertaine ones , and there 
hee faith : if /et downe ambiguities of thefe gods , 1am not blame worthy. Hee thas 
thinketh I ought te indge of thempr might fet him indge when hereadeth them. 2 hed 
rather caliall my former = bade into queftion then propound all that 1am to handle im 
shisbeeke , poftively. Thus doth hee make doubts of his doctrine of thecertaine 
gods afwell as thereft. Befidesin his booke of the fele& ones hauing made his 
preface out of naturall theology,entring into thefe politique fooleries , and mad 
Gions,where truth both oppofed him ,& antiquity opprefied him,here(qdhe)z 
wilwrite of the gods towhone the Romaines hawe built temples, diser {ity of flatues but 
1 wil write fo as xenophanes(b)Colophonus writeth:what [thinke not what lwil deq 
fend, for man may thinke but God is he that knoweth. Thus timeroufly he promifeth 
to fpeakz of things not knowne nor firmely beleeued,but only opinatine,8 doub- 
ted of being ro {peake of mens infticutions.He knew that ther was the world, hea- 
- uen,and earth, ftars,8al thofe together with the whole vniuerfe fubie@ vnto one 
powerfull and inuifibleking: this he firmely beleeued , but hee durft not fay that 
Janus was the world, or that Saturne was Joes father and yet his fubiect , nor 

of che reft of this nature durft he affirme any thing confidently. 


LVIVES. 
He (4) Vncertaine. | OF thefe I haue fpoken before : now a little of the vnknowne, 
for itis an ector co hold them both one : The territories of ¢Athenshad altars to many 
| vaknowng 


om 


Linz, OFTHE CITIE OF GOD... a 3 


#nknowne gods: 4&es.47. and Pasfanias in Attic,teor dyvovwyCayer, the altars of the uns 
Rsowne gods : Thefe Epimenides of Creete found:for the peftilence,being fore in that country, 
ehe oracle aduifed them toexpiate their fields, yet not declaring what god they fhould invo- 
cate,in this expiation, Epimesides beeing then at Athens, bad them turne the cattell that they 
would offer into the fields , and the pricfts to follow them, and where they ftaied , there kill 
them and offer themto the ynknowne propiciatory God. Therevpon arcfe the ereétion of 
thefe altars which continued euen vnto Laértins his time. This I haue beene the willinger 
to relate’, becaufe of thatin the Actes. (6) Xenepbanes | Sonne to Orrhomenes of Ionia where 
CMimernus the Poet was borne. Apelederus , out of Colophon, Hee held all chings incompre- 
henfible, againft the opinion of Laertins Sotion. Exfebins Eeowing Sotion , faith hee did hold 
ali our fences falfe and our r¢afon,far company : he wrote of the gods again{t Homer and He- 
fred, \here was another Zenophaxes,a lesbian and a Poet, - ae 


The likelieft can{2 of che propagation of pagenifine. 


| Cuar.i e 


(YF all thefethe moft credible reafon is this: that thefe gods were men that ~ 
“/ by the meanes of fuch as were their flarceress, (4) had each of them rites 
dnd facrifices ordained for them corre{pondent vnto fome of their deedes,man. 
hers, wictes , fortunes and fo forth: and that other men ( rather.diuells ) fuck. 
ing in thefe errors, arid-delighting in their ceremonies nouclties , fo gaue 
them their propagation , beeing furthered wich poetiall fiGiions , and diabo- 
Jieall illufions. For ic were a likelier macter that an vngratious fonne did 
feare killing by as vngratious a father, and fo expelled him from his kingdome, 
osha 24 hee faith , that sone is aboue Satarne becaufeche efficient caule 
which is Jowes , is béfore the materiall which is Ssturses. For were this 
true, Saterné'(hould neuer haue beene before sose , nor confequently his fae 
ther. For the caufe goeth alwaies before the feede, but che feede neuer ge- 
nerateththe:caufe. Butin this endeauorto honour the vaine fables , or impi- 
ous aces of men with naturall interpretations , their moft learned men are 
brought into fuch quandaries, that wee cannot choofe but pitty their vanityaf- 
wellas the others. " : : 


L. VIVES. 
Hx (a). each | In this place the Copies differ, but our reading isthe moft authene 


ticall , and moft ancient . Some Copies leaue out[ By rhe meanes of {uch as were thesy 
fatterers Butitis not left out in the olde manufcripts , wee reade it as antiquitie leaue 
\ 


eth ic. 


2 


‘The interpretations of the wor{bip of Saturne, 
 Cwap. 19. 


S370™.( fay they ) devoured all his children, chatisall feedes returne to 
Jthe earth from whence they came: anda clod of earth was laide in fteed of 
Jone for him to deuoure , by which is meant that men did vfe tobury their 
come in the-earth before that plowing was inuented . So then fhould Saturne 
bee called the earth it felfe , and not the feedes, for itis the earth thar doth as 
if were deuoure the owne of-Jpring , _—_ ag {eedes it produceth are all 


returned — 


. 


278 


SAINT AVGVSTINE: = Cuaniy 


returned into itagaine. But what correfpondence hath mens couering of corne 
with cloddes, vntothe laying of Satarnea clod in fteed of Jone ? is not the corne 
which is couered with the clod, returned into the earthes wombe as well as 
the reft? For this is fpoken as if hee that laid the clod, ‘tooke away the feede. 


. ¢ 


This fay they, by the — ofthis clod was Joke takeh from Saturne , when as 
the laying of the clod vpon a feede maketh the earth to deudure it the'fooner. A- 
—s fo, Jowe is the feed, not thefeedes caufe as was fayd butnow. But 
thefe mens. brainesrunne fo farrea ftray. with thofe fond interpretations , that 
they know not well what to fay. A fickle heebeareth for bis husbandry they 
fay: Now in (4) his raigne was not husbandry inuented ,and therefore (as our 
author interpreteth ) the firft times ‘were calledhis, beeaufe as then men did 
liue vpon the earthes voluntary increafe and fruites .Whether (6) tookehe the 


- fickle vpon the loffe. of his feepter as one that hauing beene an idle King in his 


Sacrifices 


Of men. 


Falthood 
ouecre 
chrovecs i 
&lfe, 


‘not fpoken at all of Satarne. 


owne raigne would become a painefull laborer ii his fonnes ? Then hee proceed- 
eth ,and faith that (c) fome people, as the Carthaginians offred infants in fa 
erificetohim,and others, as the (d) Galles , offered men , becaufe mankinde és 
chiefe-of all things produced of feede . Buc needeth njor¢ of this bloudy vanity? 
This.is the obferuation of ie allchat none of chefe interpretations haue reference 
tothe true, liuing,incorporeall,changeleffe nature, whereof the eternall life is to 
bee craued: buc all their ends ace in chings corporall,, temporall , mutable and 
mortall,and whereas Saturze they fay did (¢) geld his Fagher Cedws,that is(quoth 


‘hee):to bee underffood thus ,tbat the dinine feede ,is in Saturnes power and net ia 


Heanens : that is,nothing in hesuen hath oviginall from (ced. Behold here is Setwrme 
made Heauens fonne , that is ones. Fot-they.affirme ftedfaftly that Zone is hea 
tren . Thus doth falfhood without any oppofer ouerthrow je felfe : Hee faith fur- 
ther,chat hee was called (f),pires that is, fpace of time, without the which no feed 
can come to perfection. This and much likes fpoken of Ssturae in reference to 
the feed: Surely Saturne with all this power fhould haue beene {ufficient alone 
to haue gouerned the feede: why fhould they call any more — to this charge, 
as Liber,and Libera, or Ceres 2 of whofe power ouer {eed hee {peakethas if he had 


L. VIVES. 


[” (a) his raigne | Who firtt inuented husbandry , it is vncertaine. Some (as the common 
fort hold Jtake it to bee Ceres : qther, Trsptolenmus(at leaft for him tha firft pus it in practife,) 
as Inftine,and Ouid : Some, Diony/ins, as Tibulius , Diodorus calleth him Ofyris , and therefore 
Vergil faith. : | 
| Ante Touem nulli fubigebant aruaceloni, 
Votill Jemes time there were no husband-men. 


Somethinke that Saturne taught -it-vnto Laxas and the Icalians - beeing driuen co inuent 
fome-what of neceffity after hee was chafed from Crete. So that ftill husbandry was not in~ 
uented in his raigne but after. The ‘Sei will haue no husbandry in the golden age,the daies 
of Saturne:: Uirgill faith, the earth brought fruites Nudlo pofcexte., no man ae paines for 
them - and Onid,frages tellus ixarata ferebat, the earth bore corne vnplowed. fed zagmod? 
sespecec, Theearth brought fruice vnforced , both good and in aboundance. (6) Toské hee} 
His fickle was found at Zancle a city in Sicily & thence the towne had that name, Sit. ralLBb. 
14.For.zamaw in the Sicilian congue,was 2 fickle. Thacydid. (c) Some people| Orof. lib.4cap.6. 
Trogus,Latt.lib.x.and Pofcenninus Feftus Some fay the Cart apiolans offred childremto Here 
cules Pliati.36-but others fay it was to Saturue,Plato in Adinoé.Diony{Halicarn. T heederitses 


Li 3.7. OF THE CITIE. OF GOD. 899 


ae a ors 


(Greneny.. in Sacrific. Eufeb. and Tertullian who addeth that at the beginning of Feberins his 
reione he forbad it hen , and crucified their priefts : yet chey.did continue ic Secretly euen 
atthe time he wrot this. Some referre the caufe of this cruelty ynto Janos hate, Bur Exfebs= 
ws out of Sanchoziato reciting the Phanicians theology faith ‘hor Saturne King of Paleffine 
dying, turned into the ftar we call Saturne, and that foone after Nimph e4xobreth hauing buc 
one oncly fonne by Saturxe who was therefore called Lewd (for that is one onely fonne in the 
Phenitian tonge) was compelled to facrifice him for to deliuer her contry from a daungerous 
watte : and that it wasan ould cuftome in fuch perills to pacifie the wrath of the reuenging 
Demon with the bloud of the Princes deareft fonne. Butthe (arthagians (being come of 
the Phenicians\facrificed aman ynto Satsrne, whofe fonne had beene fo facrificed : either of 
their own firft inftitution in _4frica,or elfe traducing it from their anceftry. De pre.Exan. How ' 
thefe cisildren were fatrificed Drodorss telleth : Bibliorh. lib.20. They had (faith he a brazen 
flatne of Saturne,of monftrous bigneffe, whofe hand hung downe tothe Earth fo kuit one within ana 
other,that the clldren tbat shal a in them, fellinto a bole fll of fire. Thus farhee. When wee 
publifhed this booke firft,our fea-men difcouered an Iland calling it after our Princes name; 
(arolina , wherein were many ftatues of deuills, hollow within , brazen all; and their hands 
joyned , wherein the Idolaters fed to Jay theirchildren they facrificed,and there were, they 
cruelly burned by the extreame heate of the braffe caufed by the fire that they imade within 
them.(d) The Gunles. |Not vnto Saturne,but to Efns,and Thestantes.PlinJib. 30. Solin, Adela, 
(efar.Lucane,and Lattantias. To Mercary faith Tertullian : but thatis7 beatantes.Flin,men= 
tioneth Tiberius his prohibition of fo damnable a fuperftition. Clandéas farbad themas Saetos 
wins faith : Indeed -4ugn/tus firft forbad it but that was but for the city on¢ly, A-decree was 
made in the yeare of Kome. DCL VII. confulls;P.Licinins (raffus: and (».Cornelins Lent 
lus forbidding humane facrifices all the Empire through : andin Hadrians time it ceafed al- 
moft all ouer the world, /wpiter Latialis was worfhipped with ablation of mans bloyd in 7ers 
wlliansnay and Enfebius and Lattantins his time. And before Hercules was Saturur fo wos, 
Shipped in Latium , which facrifice Fasnus brought vp for his giandfire Sainrne , becaufe of 
au oracle chat was (as Latlantins and CMacrobins recite out of Varro) this : wixspaas,&e, bring 
beads for Dis, and lightes for Dés his father : Dés his father was Saturne. Lallantiws readeth 
it 4 xepanas xpridn.oas is a word doubrfull s¥s circumflexe is light and e«s acute is a man, Homer 
dung dt’, &e, on | 
“Streight gainft the fucers went this heauenly map. — 


And oftenelfewhere. “Plutarch in his booke intitled \a6s Arwsas, live in private,piweth the 
seafon why %s fhould bee both light and a man. But Here#/es comming into Iealy and fee~ 


“ ing the eSborigsmes that dwelt there continually take of the Greekes for facrifice that were 


come thether to inhabite , and asking the caufe, they told him this oracle, which hee did 
interpret light , not man: and fo they decreed that yearely each ldes cf May the Priefts and 
Veftalls fhould caft chirty mens images made of offers or wickers into Tyber , from of the 
bridge CMilusus : calling them rget, (for the old latines held all thie Gretians Argiues) and 
that Saturne fhould haue lights offred to him.Dionif. Plutarch. Uarre. Fefius , Gel. Macrob: 
Propert. Lattant. Ouid .yet Ousd telleth this tale of another fafhion Faffor.5.. Manethox faith; 
the eegsptians vied to facrifice three men to J#xo in the city of the fnne, but King Amafis 
changed the facrifice into thtee lights, (¢) Geld his father.| Exfebins difcourfing of the Pheni= 
cians diuinity faith thus : after (4/us had raigned. 32. yeeres , his Sonne Saturze lay in waite 
for him about flouds and fountaines and hauing gottenhim, guelded him : his holy bloud 
dropped into the {pring and the place is to bee feene at this day. Hee was(faith Déodorss) an 
excellege Aftsologian, and diftinguifhed the yeare, and by this skill got his name, hee 
caught the rude ciuility and {ciences,and reigned in the northweft of Africa, hauitg 45. chil- 
drep by feuerall wiues.( f)) sores | Onefs. reeves, time. (scero giueth another interpretation 
of CelnsIoue ,and Saturne , de nat. deor. lib.2. But Saturne is xens , andtime seevos . The Ro= 
maines called Seaturne the father of verity becaufe truth will out in time. Pletarch. 


| Ofthe facrifices of Ceres Eleufinas Cwar.20. 


O F Ceres (a)her facrifices, them of Eeafine , vied at Athens were the moft : 
| Bbe | noblé, 


220 SAINT AVGVSTINE. a C nav. 200 


noble. Ofthem doth Varro fay lictleor nothing onely hetalkes alictle of the 

corre that Cere’s found out ,and of her loffe of Proferpina that was rauithed by 

Pluto. And the(he faith)doth fignifie fruitfulnes of feed,which one time fayling, 

and che earth feeming to bewaile that want of fertility, it grew to an opinion that 
Proferpina, Hell, or Péutohad taken away the daughrer of Ceres , the faid fruitfulneffe, which 
of creeping forward, is called Proferpina, which thing they deploring in publike 

- manner, becaufe that fertiliry came againe,all théir ioy returned at the returne 

of Proferpena, and fo had Ceres feafts inftitution , furthermore hee faith this ,chae 


fhee hath many things inher facrifices which haue no reference but to the 
corie. | 
Eres (a) her facrifices |To hauc alittle difcourfe hereof more then is vulgar, will neither 
porseag Bx al — sit Laer . Cereshad Proferptnaby Lone, Pinto rauifhed her out of 
Sicily and her mother fought her almoft all the world ouer. At laft comming to Eleufis,one 
ofthe twelue townesin the Athenian territory , one Celws the King thereof tooke hir to’ 
| harbour and let hir haue the education of Triptolemus,his( ot as Strabe faith) Letinus his fonne’ 
Triptoles by Hyyoxa , What euer hee was,hee loued Ceres well,ordered her a follemne yearely facrifice 
mus, calling the feaft Eleufiva, and Ceres and ‘Proferpsna the fecond Elesfine goddefles : Some fay 
that Eritthens brought them out of Egipt, I de not difproue them,for thence catne the moft 
of the worlds Idolatry. Thefe facrifices none might fee but votaries,the cticr badde aneide aff 
‘ prophaine : and hence had Virgil his verfe.Procul 0 proc#l efte propbani,Fly fly farre hence, pro=- 
haine: Serw.and Alcibiades was fore troubled for being at (eres her facrifices before hee was 
initiate. The firft chae publifhed them was the Philofopher Numerius , to whom afterwards 
the goddeffes(they fay) in a dreame appeared, in whores habite aad complained thar hee had 
made them common.Which certaincly prooued thcir ceremonies whorifh:for had they beene 
boneft, they would haue feared divulgation. Socrates in Plato glanceth at this and much moret 
commanding the gods turpitudes to bee kept in all tacicurnity, and threatning that hee 
would difcouer the fecrets of Lfs , which is all one with (eres. In which wordes hee maketh 
Lfis acknowledge plaine inough chat they are filthy. Hereof faith Nazianzene thus,Wee bane 
The filthi+ #0 rani/bt Proferpina,ner wandring Ceres,nor Tripto!emus , nor Dragons, sor fuch as partly doe 
pie - and partlie fuffer :] [oame to lay the night-facrifices in the light , and to turne a myftery inte 4 
artices, * barpit nde, Etcufine,knoweth & fuch 2s louke upon thefe concealed matters fit indeede for conceale- 
; ment. Thus hee in his Epiphanie, beginning at thefe words :és6 ris dudy ap rahtai.ec And hap- 
py Lafon ( faith 7 heocritus)that attained more than men prophaine beleeue, Zead or gach. 
Whetein hee clofely girdeth at the adultery of (eres and /afos. What thefe facrifices did 
containe 5 Enfebins fheweththus out of (/emsent : Some fay ( quoth hee ) that CMelanpes 
Perephattes eAmythaons fonne brought the follemnities of Ceres from Egipt into Greece. Ceres was 
| deliucred , the daughter was brought vppe:fome called her Perepbatce 1 Lone begot her in 
forme of a Dragon, and fo comes the Dragon to bee fhewne roulled vppe in the Samatians 
Myficries,as a memorial of the godssor I fhould fay of fo fowle a turpitude. Perephatte al~ 
fo brought forth a fonne like 4 Bull: wherevpon fome poets haue fung of the Bull , the Dra~ 
gons father, andthe Dagon, the Bulls father: Thofe memoriall fecrets they beare vppe wn= 
to ahill,and chey celebrated the fhepards poade , ycsI thinke the fhepards goade , akinde 
ofrod thae the Bacchanalianes did beare . Further of thefe fecrets I cannot relate, of the 
basket ,the rape, the /donerian gulfe , Exboleus his fonne, all whom together with the two 
goddeffes that one gulfe did {wallow vp, and therevpon they haue a hogiyin their ceres 
monies: which the women in the citties there-aboutes obferue in diuers fafhions : there is 
the Thefmophoria, the Scirophoria , and the Jnephabiliphoria , in all which wasthere diuers la- 
ments for Ceresher loffe and Periphattestape. This Enfebses ,as Trapexuntins interpreceth 
him, forthe greeke booke I haue not. The women priefts caried baskets alfo couered,one full 
of flowers, portending ehe {pring , another with eares of corne,for autumne. Thefe Virgins 
Were called,xgrtesu,basket-bearers : Tally mentioneth them againft Varro, though Porphi 
Carepheri, VPON Horace affirme that che Camephere were June's feruants at her facrifices at — 
7 The 


| | | | — 
Lin7 OFTHE CITIE OF GOD. | 899 


Thefe wee fpeake of; (Zement faith were called orgies, of che anger that was betweene Ceres 
and Jome.(atullus. 2 8 | | 
| Pars obfcura canis celebrabant Orgia ciftis: 
Orgia que fraftra cupinnt audtre prophani. 
Part keeping th’ Orgies, hollow baskets bare: _ 
| Th Orgies,which none ynhallowed mult come neare: __ | 
But all che Greek facrifices almoft,were called Orgies, StrabJ:b.10. Ser.in 4. eAneid. Therein 
were thus many images, 1. The creators,borne by the chiefe-prietts,che mifteries expounder.2. 
the fonnes , borne by the taper-bearer. 3. the Mcones , by the altar-feruant, or facrificer, 
Mercuries, by the crier and .a womans.( °° _—+d) as Préap's was borne in Diony/ins his fae 
ctifices,as Theoderitus witneffeth s who affirines that Joe lay both-with Ceres the mother artd 
P, oferpina the daughter : And to thofe facrifices might none bic the inuited bce admitted, 
nor any whofe oar a aay him of any crime ; for fo the crier proclaimed. Nero dur 
not come there,for his guile : and Astoninas would needes bee inuitcd,to prooue himfelfe ine 
nocent. Yet whether it were ae the great facrifices orno , 1 know not,for at Athens it was a 
Jaw that ro ftranger fhould be admitted then. Arifteph. (emmentator.So Hercules defiring 
initiaticn,though he were afriend,and Jowes fonne, yet it being againtt the law, they ordaineé 
“the fmaller facrifices Elenfixe,where any ee might haue acceffe, calling the former,Ceres 
het facrifices,the later Proferpina's ! which he faith were but asap qrergSutoererc.As a purgadion 
and preparation to the greater, The coate which they put‘on at their initiation muft neuer come 
of vntill it be fo ragged, that it bee paft — Some fay they kept them to make childrens 
{wadling cloathes off. And thus for Greece , Rome had a great ycarely fealt of (eres , which 
mourners might not be prefent at. Lew. They had alfoche mariages cf Ceres or Orcas,wheres 
in it was an offence to bring wine ,‘but frankincence onely and tapers, whereof Plastus faith, 
F thinke you ave about (eres feafts , for I {eene wine: Anlular.. Of chis facrifice read ALatreb, 
Satnrnand Sernins ypon Vsresls Georgikes lib.t. ypon this place. me 
— Crentta ribs Ceretn pubes agreftis adcret, 
wi tu latte fanes ,& miti Lice Bacches 
; Call.all the youth ynto thefe tites diuine, 
= a And offer Ceres hony,milke,or wine. | | 
There were alfo the (ereala,garries in Ceres honour, whereof Politian a great {choller hath Cetealia, 
written in his M1fcellanea : whofe iudgement leaft fome bec miftaken by, I will write mine 
opinion hercof . Firft che old Circian games that Romsslss ordainedto Hippefeidoe and thefe 
Cerealia are not al one; thefe are. farre later in origiaall: Againe thefe lacer, were kept long 
before Memmins his time. Lin. nainely the fixteenth yeare of che fecond African warre b 
the Senates decree. Ga. Seruillus Geminus becing diétator , an5 eelins Petus Maiftet of the 
horfe. Nor doe Tacitus or Ovid comptroll this, in faying the Cereals were kept inthe great: 
Circuite. The Cereal Aediles were thade for the cores prouifion nat for the plaies though 
they.madefometo (eres. But I maruell that Pelswan thinketh thae that A4emmins whome 
(far made eLdile,was hee to whom Lucretins dedicated his booke or(if it thall pleafe you) Politias, 
- his fonne, when as Lacretixs died in the fecond confulfhips of Pompey and (raffus ,and the 
worke was written in A¢emmias his youthfull daies.True it is one error begets many. would 
not have any man thinke this {Spoken in derogation from the glory of fo great afcholler;for 
Polits: is not to bec reiected for — decciued , hee was but. a man. wy words ayme at 
the profit of the moft, not at detraCtion from him or any. Ifany-man thinke otherwife (which 
is falfe)know hee, that itisno iniury to reprehend cicher. Po/stiax or any man elfe of the cuns 
 ningeft,in matter of antiquity : Buc of the Cerealialec this fuffice. 


Orgies, . 


Of the obfcantty of Bacchus Sacrifices. Cuar. a1. 


BY now for Libers (4) facrifices, who rule th not onely all moifture of feedes 
S/ and fruites whereof wine feemes principall , bue of creatures alfo: To 
defcribe their full turpitude, It irkes me for loffe of time , but not for thefe mens. 
blockifh pride. Amongft a greatdeale of — omiffion,let this goe, whereas — 
ha ~ | | ° 3° | hee 


282 


SAINT AVGVSTINE: C nap.2 


hee faith that Zebers facrifices were kept with fuch licence in the high-waies in I+ 
- taly, tharthey adored mens priuitiesin his honour: their beaftlineffe exulcing, 


and {corning any more fecrecie. This bealtly fight vpon his feaft daies was ho~ 
norably mounted vpon a(6) waggon, and firftrode thus through the country, 
and then was brought into the city in this pompe. But ar(¢) Lauinium they kepe 
a whole month holy to Léber,vfing that {pace all the beaftly words they could de- 
vife, vneill che beaftly {pedtacle had paffed through the market place, and was 
placed , where it vfed to ftand. And then muft the moft honeft matron of the 
townecrowne it witha garland. Thus for the feeds fuccefle was Liber. adored: 
and toexpell witch-craft can the fields, an honeft matron muft doe that in pub- 
like,which an whore fhould not do vpon tlie ftage if the matrons looked on. For 


_. this was Saturne accounted infufficient in this chatge, thatthe vncleane foule 


Bacchus his 
{«csthces, 


Phallus,! 
Philagogia. 


_ bandmen with great ioye . Now Deodores fait 


finding occafion to multiply the gods ; and by this vncleaneffe being kept from 
the rrue G OD, and proftitute vnto the falfe , chrough more vncleane defires, 


might giue holy names to thefe facriledges,and entangle it felfe in eternall pol- 
lucion with the diuells. | 4 | 


7 L. VIVES. 
| Past (a) facrifites | Kept by the Thebans on mount Cythzron euery third yeate :iri the 
a nights and called therefore Nyctiléna, Sern, and of the yeares , Trieretica, or Triewnalin. 
Herein were the Phally, (that is huge priuy members ) vied. Herodet. Plutarch, de cupid.ep. 
The Agiptians vfed litele ftacues with fuch huge perpendents : the other nations catied the 
members onely about , for fertility fake. The fealts were called Phallogagia. Theoderet.lib.3 ; 
Why ‘Priapus and Bacchus: have feafts together , there fice’ diuets reafons, 1. Becaufe they 
were companions. 2. becaufe without Baccbas’, Priapas can doe naught , and therefore was 
held the (onne cf Bacchus and Venus. 3. becaufe Bacchus is Lord of feede , whereof Priapas 
is the chiefe inftrumenc, and therefore god of eta . and hath his feafts kepe by the huf 


that Ofyris(whome hee counteth Bacchus) 


_ being cut in peeces by Typhon, and eucry friend bearing pare away, none would take the pri-. 


. his body againe,onely that fhee wanted , and fo’ confecrate 


Schyphale 
dus 


Plofclua:. 


Lauinium, 


Venilia, 
Salacia, 


uy member , fo it was caft into Nyle. Afterwards /fs ae teuenged his murther, got all 


comfort honored it more then all the other parts, making feats to it,& calling it Phad/ws at che 
Priefts firft inftirution ; Naxsanzene reckneth both Phadli and Jshyphalli: but I thinke they 
differ not, but chat for the more ere€tion it wascalled Tehyphallus of the precke, (b) waggens} 
To yoake mife in waggons faith Horace in his Satyres. lib. 2. Itis adiminutiue of wayriess 
Plauffra: much difference is about Plauftra and Plofra, U. Probus is for Ploftra: Florins 
told Vefpafian hee muft fay plzuft,2,fo the next day he called him Flawrus, for Flores. Sactonie 
as.(¢) At Lasinium| Acownein Latinum, built by Aeneas and named afterhis wife. Abs 
longa was a colony of this:of A/ba,before is fufficient {poken. | 


| Of Neptune,Salacia,end Venilia. Cuasv.22. - | 
Now Neptune had one Selacéato wife, gouerneffe(they fay) of theloweft parts 
of the fea, why is Vems/s ioyned with her, but to keep the poore foule profti- 
tute toa multitude of deuills?Bur what faith this rare Theology to ftoppe our 
mouthes wich reafon? Venilia is the flowing tide. Salacés the ebbing : What?two 
oddcffes,when the watter ebbing, and the water flowing is al one? See how the 
foules luft (4) flowesto damnation! Though this water going bee the fame re- 
turning , yet by this vanity aretwo more deuills inuited , to whom the foule (4 
— sand neuer returneth .I pray the Mer7e,or you that haue read fo much,and 
raft what you haue learned, explayne mee this, not by the eternall vnchangin 
nature which is onsly god,but by che worlds foule,and the parts, which yowho 
frucgods . The error wherein you make Neptune to-bee that part of the warlds 
| : foule 


j 


an Image thereof, and for her - 


-73 FF SR Bae RR KF Eo 


Se Se 


Sow eh wer To. Sf re 


Lr7: JF THE CITIE OF GOD: 283 


fonle that is in the fea,that is fome-what tolerable : but is che watet ebbing and 
the water flowing two parts of the world, or of che worlds foule? whith of all 
your wits conteineth this vnwife crederice ? Bue why did your anceftors ordaine 
yee thofe two goddeffes, but that they would prouide that you fhould not bee 
ruled by any more gods , but by many more deuills, that delighted in {uch vani- 
ties: But why bath Se/acée, that you call the inmoft fea,being there vnder her huf- 
band, lofther place? for you bring her vp abotie when fhee is the ebbing tide: 
Hath thee thruft ber husband downe into the bottome for entertaining Venslia 
tohis harlot. | | 


is mas. 


Off (4) flawes } Alluding to the fea. (6) Goeth and wener returneth | Spoken of the dani 
J ned, that neither haue eafe nor hope at all. He alludeth to /eb.10.verf-21. Before I goe and Hell. 
fralinet returne,tothe land of darkenelfe and foadow of death,enen the land 6f msfery and darkueffe, 
which both the words them-felues fhew,and the learned comments affirme is meant of hell. 


Of the earth, heldby Vatro to be a goddeffe, betanfe the worlds foule( his god) 
ae doth penetrate his loweft part,and communicateth his — 
ee — offencethere-with, Cuare23. 7 | 
Vv E fee oncearth, filled with creatures-yet being a maffe of elemental bodies 
_™™ and the worlds loweft part,why call they ita goddéffe ? becaufe it is fruie- 
full? why are not mer gods ghen that make it fo wich labour , hot with worfhip? 
No, the part of theworlds foule( faysthey ) conteined in her, maketh bir dinine: 


| good: as thotgh thac foule were hot more apparant in man: without all queftion, 
‘yet men areno gods: and yet which is moft lamentable, are fubieGed fo that they 
‘adore the inferiors as gods , fuch is Heit miferable error, Varroin his booke of Vstro bis 


‘the fele& gods,putteth ( 4 ) three degrees of the foule inallnature. One; living. i ig a 


iy all. bodies vnfenfitiue, onely hauing life: tbis he faith we haue in our bones, .' . 

nailes and haire: and fo haue trees living without fence; Secondly,the power of _ 

fence diffufed through our eyes,eares,nofe,mouth andtouch. Thirdly,the high. " bos 

eft degree of the foule , called the mindg , or intelle& : confined (b ) onely vnto ied 

mans fruition : wherein becaufe men are like gods, that pare inthe Worldhecal 

lethagod ahd in vie aGenius. So dinideth hee the worlds fouleinto three de- 
rees.Firft ftories and wood, andthis earth infenfible which we tread on.Seconds 

Jy the worlds fence,the heauens,or e£ther: thirdly, liet {oule fer in the ftdrres 

(His beleeued gods) and 2 them defcending through the carth,goddeffe Tells ; 

and when it comes in the fea, itis Neptane:ftay now backalictlefromthismorall =~ 

tHeslogie whether hee weirt to refreth him-felfe after his toile in thefe ftraices¢ 

Hack againe I fay to the ciuill, let vs plead in this courca little, I fay not yet, that. 

sfifie earth and {tonés, bee like our nailés and bones, they haue tio'more intellea, 

then fence. Orif our bones and siailes be faidto haue intelle@, Becaufe weehaue 

it, hee is as very a foole that calleth them gods in the world, asheethatfhould, - . 

termethem menin vs. But this perhaps is for Philofophers:; let vs to our ciuill 

theame: For it may bee though heelift vp his head a little to the freedome of 

this natural! cheologie, yet comming to this booke and knowing what he hadta 


‘doezhee lookes now and then back ,and faith thissleaft his anceftors and others. 


{hould be held to haue adored Tels and Neptun¢to no end. But this I fay féeing 
earth onely isthat part of the worlds fowle that penetrateth earth : why is it hot 
made intirely one goddeffe, and fo called Tellus? which done , where is Orem, 
Jone} and Neptines brother, father Distand where is Proferpina his wifethat fome 
5 «Bog | opinions 


( 


980 SAINT AVGVSTINE. | Cuap.24: | 


— there recorded, hold to be the earths depth not her fertility? Ifthey fay 
the foule of the world that paffeth in the vpper part is Dés,and chat in the lower, 
Proferpina,what thall then become of Tedss? for thus is fhe intirely diuided into 
halfes : chat where fhe fhou!d be third, there is no place,vnleffe fome will fay that 
Orcus and Proferpins together are Tellus; and fo make not three but one or two of 
. themsyet 3.they are held,% worthiped by 3.feuerall forts ofrites,by cheir alears, 
priefts & ftatues,and are indeed three deuills that do draw the deceiued foule to 
damnable whoredome. But one other queftion : what pare of the worlds foule is 
Tellumo? No,faith he, the earth hath two powers, a mafculine to produce, and a 
feminine to receiue,this is Teflas and that Tefwmo: But why then doe the Priefts 
(as he fheweth) adde other two and make them foure ? Telex, Tellus, (¢) Alter 
Rufor ? for the two firft,vou are anfwered: why /tor20f Als,to nourith,earth nou- 
rifheth all chings. Why Rafor 7 of Rur/us,againe,all things turne againe to earth. 


Of earths furnames and fignifications which thon gh they arofe of. dinerfe 
_ eviginals, yet [bould they not be accompted dinerfe Gods. 
| | _Cuas, 24. ; 


J Herefore earth for her foure qualities ought tothaue foure names , yet not to 
'# make foure gods. One sowe ferues to many furnames ,and fo doth one Jase: 
inall which the multitude of their powers confticute but one God and one god- 
deffeynot producing multitude of gods. But asthe vileft women are fome-times 
afbamed of the company that their luft callech them into, fo the polluted foule, 
. profticute vnto all hell though it loued multitude of falfe gods, yet it forn-times 
foched them. For Yarro,as {ham‘ng at this crew,would haue Tellss to be but'one 
goddeffe. They ( 4) call her’( faith hee) the Great mother , and her Tymbrell isa 
ne of the earths roundnetfe: the turrets on her Hiead,of rhe cownes: the feates- 
about her, of her eternall ftabilicy when all things elfe aremooued : her Geli 
Priefts fignifie that fuch as want feede mutt follow the earth that conteineth all: 
their violent motions about her doe aduife the tillers of earth not to fitte idle, for 
cherc is ftill worke for them. The Cymballs fignifie the noyfes with p!ough- 
irons,&c. in husbandry they are of braffe, for fo were thefe inftruments (b) be- 
fore Iron was tound our. Therame Lion fignified that the rougheft land mighe 
by tillage be made fertile. And then he addesh,chat thee was called Adother = 
i ! a. 


$F > +S re bre Fo ow 


we, =f SS 


- 


Ling. OFTHE CITIE OF GOD. | 285 


and many other names , which made them thinke her feuerall gods. They heid 
earth to be Ops (faich he becaufe helpe,(Opss)makech her more fruitfull : azother, 
for hir generall production. Great for giving meate. He Sa st fe the fruit - ahs fare: 
doe creepe ( Proferpuat) outof her. Veffa, for that the hearbes are her vefture: ams, 
and fo faith he are other deities fitly reduced vrito her by feuerall refpeds. Buc if 
fhe be oné goddeffe,(as ia truth fie is not ) why tunne yee to fo many ? Let one 
haue all chefe names,and not bee many goddefles. But errors power preuailed to 
draw Varro fearefully after it: for he faith; neither doth this controule their opi- 
nions that take thefe for many gods. There may be one thing (faith he) and many 
things therein. Well fuppofe chat many things are in a man: therefore many 
men? many things arein a goddeffe , therefore many goddeffes ? But let them 
diuide,combine,nuitiply,teply and imply what they will. Thefe are the myfte- 
ries of great AMether-carth,all referred to {sede and husbandry . But doth your 
tymbreill, curret<, eunuches , rauings , cymballs and Lions in all this reference, 
proinife erernall life 2 doe your gelded Gal ferué her to thew chat feed-wanters 
muft follow the earth,ind noz rather that che following of her brought them to 
this wane? for whether doth the fetuice of this — fupply their want or 
- bring them to want ?.is this to exp'aine,ct toexplode rather ? Nor isthe deuills 
pox er herein ever a iotte obferued,that could exaa fuch cruelties, and yer pro- 
mife noughe worth the withing. If earth were held no goddeffe , men would lay 
their hands vpon her and ftreng then them-felues by her,& not vpon themf{clues, 
to eneruate them-felues for her : Iffhe were no goddeffe, (he would bee made fo 
feccaile by others hands, that fhee fhould neuer make men barren by their owne 
hands. And whereas in Lebers {acrifices an honeft Matron muft crowne that 
beaftly member,her husband perhaps ftanding by blufhing and fweating ( ifhee 
haut dity fhame) and whereas in mariages the bride muft ride vpon (¢ ) Priapys 
his Collftaffe,thefe are farre more (d) lighter and‘ contemptible then that cruell 
obfcznity,and ob{cane cruelty: for here the deuils illude both fexes,bur maketh 
neicher of chem their owne murtherers. There they feare the bewitching of their 
come,here they feare noe the vn-manning of them-‘elués: There the bride (¢) is 
thot fo fhamed that fhe either loofeth chatftitie or virginity, here the maflacre of 
man-hood is fuch,the geldéd nerfon is left neither man nor woman, | : 
| | L. VIVES. aes: ae 7 
[% (a) call her} Onid Faf?, 4. giues another reafon of the Great hecthers worfhip, The pS Analg 
Cymballs and Tymbrils were imitations of the Corybantes , that kept one with tbe noyfe das 
of their fhields and helmes : the tymbrels ftand for the bucklers being Jether,and the Cymbals 
for the helmes being braffe, The turrets are for that fhe built firft towers in Cieties , the Exnss 
ebes fhe hketh for Atys his fake: fhe is borne by Lions becaufe fhee cameth them. (5) Before 
Lron;} This is left out by fomie. (¢) Preapas his (oleftaffe |] A Metaphor; Seapas isthe ftalke of 
any hearbe,but vfed in Varro and’Pliny for amans priuy member , th tis ercéted Jike a ftake 
or ftalke : Scapus is a'fo a beane or iuncture in building. Vier. (a) Lighter } fois the old maa Seapus. 
nufcripts, (¢) Js not fo \ Priapus was vied to helpe the husband in taking away the maiden- 
head of the wife,and the wife in fruicfulneffe of off-fpting. - - | ra. % 


Libers fae 
Cri; eh 


whet expofition the Grecke ws[e men gine of the gelding of ‘Atys. Cuar. 256 


BY we haue forgotten Atys & his meaning all rhis while, in themory of whofe 
foue the ( 4) Gal are ge'ded But the wife Greekes forget not this goodly mats | 
ter. Becaufe of the earths front in the {pring being faitet than,then ever.(6) Por- 
phrry a famous Philofopher faith Aeys fi alee the flowers, & was therfore guel- 
ded,becaule the fowre falleth off before the fruite. Sothen,not (¢) Uatys, man, 
of 


ene ES 
286 : . SAINT AVGVSTINE. | C uar.26 


or manlike, but his priuy parts onely were compared to the flowers, for they fell 
of inhis fpridg: nay many fell not of, were cut of; nor followed any frit vpon 
this, but rather lafting fterility, what then doth all that which remained of him af- 
ter his gelding fignifie ? whether is that referted 2 the meaning of that now ? or 
becaufe they could finde no référence for this remainder,doe they thinke that he 
~ became that which the fable theweth,& as is recorded? Nay Varro is ours againft 
them in that iuftly, and will not affirine it,for his learning told him it was falfe.. 


! i 


L. VIVES. 


Why the HeGalli (a) are] Cybele’s prieft: of thefe wee haue fpoken, Fe/tus faith they gelded them- 

re felues, becaufe hauing violated their parents nate théy would ncuer be parents, Bardefa- 

themiclues: wo6 the Syrian faith that King Abgarus made alt their hands to be cut off that had vied them- 

felues fo : and fo thisceremonie ceafed: CMacrobins interpreteth the paflages of Cybele and 

Atys Venus and Adonis, [fys and Ofyris, all one way : calling the women the earth , and the 

~ menthe funne. (6) Porphrry ]Of him elfe-where : this place is in his booke De ratsonal. nat, 

Deor.rAtys and Adonis (faith he )are the fruites , but Atys efpecially the flowers that fall ere 

the fruice bee ripe, and fo they fay hee was gelded,becaufe the fading flowers beare no fruite, 

(¢) Atys man or mans lke | Alluding to Plato's riddle. De rep.5. eA mah and no man,baning 

Plato his Sight and no fight, fmore and {mote not,a bird and no bird,with a flone and no ftonesvpon a tree and 

nddie, 79 tree: that 1s, vAnennuch, purblinde, threw and but touched a Batte with a pumyce flene, fitting 
in an Elderne tree. ; . | 


ee, 


ae eee gine, 


Of the filthine(fe of thes Great Meothers facrifices. 


HAP. 26. 


N O more would Varro {peake of the Gazymedes that were confecrated vnto 
: the faid Great mother ,againft all fhame of man and woman: who with anoia- 
ted heads, painted faces,loofe bodies and lafciuious paces, went euen vnitill ye- 
fter-day vp and downe the ftreetes of Carthage, bafely begging/«) of the people 
where-withall to fuftaine them-felues, Of thefe have not I (co my knowledge) 
(b) read any thing : their expofitions, tongues and reafons were allafhamed and 
to fecke. Thus the Great mot her exceeded all hit fonne-gods , not in greatnefle of 
deity, but of obiczenity. sans him felfe was not fo monftrous as this (¢) montter: 
hee was but deformed in his ftatue: bue this was both bloudy and deformed in her 


w- " facrifices. Hee had members of ftone giuen him, but fhe takes members of fieth - 


from all her actendance. This fhame,all James letcheries come fhort of: he befides 
his female rapes,defamed heaué bur with one(d)Gassmedebut fhe hath both tha- 
med heauen,and polluted earth with multitudes of (¢) profeft and publike Sode- 
mites. It mav be tought that Saturne that gelded his father comes neere, or ex: 
ceedes this filthineffe: O but in his religion men are rather killed by others then 
guelded by them-felues. He eate 7 his fonnes fay the Poets, let the Phyficall fay 
what they will : hiftory faith he killed them: yet did not the Romaznes learneto 
facrifice their fonnes to him from the 4ficans. But this Great mother brought her 
Euauches even into the Romaine temple ,keeping her beftiall reakes of cruelty 
cuen there : thinking to helpe the Romaines to ftrength , by cutting away their 
ftrengths fountaines. What is Afercuries theft, Venus her luft , the whoredome 
andthe turpitude of the reft (which were they not commonly fung vpon ftages, 
wee would relate) what age they all to this foule euill that the A¢other of the gods 
onely had as her peculiar ? chiefly the reft being held but poeticall fi ions , as 
if che Poets bad inuented this too,that they were pleafing to the gods ? So then 
7 | . 
: / 


L137. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 


«cwasthe Poets audatioufneffe that recorded them , but whofe is it to exhibire 
them at the gods vrgent exacting them,but the gods dire& obfcxaicy,the deuills 
confeffions , andthe wretched foules illufions ? But this adoration of Cibele by 
gelding ones {felfc the Poets neverinuented,but did rather abhorre ic then men- 
tion ic : Is any: one to bee dedicated to thefe fele€&t Gods for bleffedneffe of life 


hereafter, that cannot liue honeftly vnder them here,but lies in bondage tofuch 


vncleane filthineffe , and fo many: dammed deuills ? but all this ( fay they ) hath 
referencetothe world : nay looke ifitbe not to the wicked.(f) W hat cannot bee 
referred.tothe world that is found to bee in the world ? But we doe feeke aminde 
chat trufting in the true religion doth not worfhippe the world as his God, bue 
cotamendeth it for his fake, ashis admired worke, and being expiate from all the 


they 


ftaines ofthe world; fo approcheth to him that made the world: weefec thefe | 


{eleted gods more notified then the reft : not to the aduancement of their me- 


sits, But the diuul ging of their thames ; this proues ther men, as not onely Po« 


emes but hiftaries alfo do explaine : for that which Virgéll faith £.8. 


Primus ab ethercovenit SaturnusOlympo, 
eA rma Tonis fugiens,& regnisexnlademptis, 
| ( JWhence Saturue came Olimpus was the place, 
— ying Ioues armes , exil'd in wretched cafe. 


Aind fos followeth; the fame hath (4) Eacmeras written ina continuatehiftory, 
tranflatedinto latineby Exnss : whence becaufe much may bee taken both in 
Greekeandatfo in Latine that hath bin fpoken againft chefe errors by others 
before vs , 1 ceafero vrge them further. | | 


Se - 3 4 L. VIVES. 
Bret ha JOF\Thefe Gall were allowed to beg of the people by a law that A4erellns made 
Ons | | : a 


wes the reafon in thefe veries. 
- Die inquamparua Cur fiipe guarat opes? 
Contulit as pepulus de qxo delabra Mccellus — 


Fecit,ait,dande mos ftipis inde manet. _ Sy RS ge 


Tell me (quoth I) why beg they bafely fie gee 
Metellus,buile the fhrine o' th’ cownes expence, a 
(quoth he )and fo the begging law came thence, | 


- Cicero inhisfacred and fcuereft lawes (ofthofe times ) charged that None but the Idean 
oddeffes: Pricfts fhould beg shis reafon is becaufe it fillsthe mind with folly and empties 
ah purfe ofmony. [ But what if Augnftine or Cicero faw now how large and ritch focieties 


go a begging to thofe oni whome they might better beftaw fomething ? whileft hee (meane Thet euss 
time ) that giueth it ficceth wich a peece of browne bread, and a few herbes, drinking out of nifts omiz 


an earthen put full of nothing but water, and apreat fort of children about him for whofe ful 
tenance he toyleth day and night‘and he that beggeth of him is aritch begger, fed with white. 
and pureft bread, partridge and capons : and foaked in fpiriefull and delicious wines ? ](6) Red 
any thing \Of their incerpretation.(¢) Monfters.| He feemeth to meane I’riapus.(d)Gansmede. | 
Sonne to Trees King of Phrigia, a delicate boy : Tantalus in hunting forced him away, and 
gauchimn-to Joxein (rete: Jone abufed his body: : The Poets fable how /one catcht him vp in 
the fhape ofan cagle , and made him his chiefe cupbearer, in place of Hebe and Vidlcan'Iano’s 
children,and turned him into the figne e4querz. ( ¢) Prefeft. | Openly avowing theit beftiall 
obfcgenity. f what cannet,| There is not any other reading true but say e- Saturne.} 
Euander to eEncas.Virg.eEnead(b )Enemerns.| Some sead Horweras , fi 

aseres as 1 faid that wrot the Hiftory called Sacred, nr 


this. 


Ganimedes 


y :foric was Euee, 
Of 


238 


SAINT AVGYSTINE. Cuaray, 


Of the Naturalifts figments that neither adore the true detty, 
| es wor ufe the adoration thereto belonging. | 
| : ~ Crap. 2% | | ae 
WV Hen I confider the Phy/islogies which learned and quick witted men haue en- 
devoured to turne into divine mattets,! difcouer as plaine as day.that th 
cannot haue reference to ought but naturall and terreftriall ( though inuifible ) 
obieés,all which are farre from the crue God : If this extended no further then 
the congruence which true religion permitted , chen were their want of che 
knowledge of the true God,to be deplored,and yet their abftinence pire ee 
or authorizing obf{cznity,to be in part approued. But fince that it is wickednefi¢ 
toworfhip either body or foule for the true God ( whofe onely dwelling inthe 
foule maketh ichappy ) how much more vile is it to adore thefe things witha 
worfhip neither attaining faluation nor temporall renowne ? and therefore if 
any worldly clement be fet vp for adoration with temple, prieft or facrifice,which 
are the true Gods peculiar,or any created {pirit all were it good and pure: it is 
not fo illathing becaufe the things vfed in the worfhip are cuill , as becaufe they 
are fuch as are due onely to his worfhip , to whom all worfhip is due. But if any 
one fay hee worfhippeth the true God in monftrous ftatues, factifices of men, 
crowning of priuities, gelding paiments for fodomy, wounds, filthy and obfcene 
feftiuall games , hee doth not offend becaufe hee that hee worfhippeth is tobee 
worthipped, but becaufe he is not to be worthipped fo as heedoth worfhip him, 
But he thac with thefe filthinefles,worthippeth not God the creator of all, but a 
creature, be it harmleffe or no , animate or dead; double is his offence to Gods 
once for adoring that for him which is not kee 3 and once for adoring him with 
fuch rites as is (4) not co be afforded vnto either. But the foulneffe of thefe mens 
worthip is plaine: but what or whom they worfhip, is not fo ,wereit not for 
their owne hiftory that recordes the gods that exacted thofe beftialities fo terri- 
bly : fo therefore doubrlefle they were deuills, called by their politique Theolo- 
gie into Idols,and paffing from thence into mens hearts. | 
| L. VIVES. 
[Is (a) xot te be | Nothin Bis to be worfhipped in that manner,neither God, nor chat which is 
not God ; for the worfhip of it felfe is wicked, : : 


| ThatNatto his doctrine of Theologie hangeth no way together. 
Crap. 28. | 7 
Bb Rencrern what is ie to the purpofe, that fo learned a man as Varro hath ende- 
vouredto reduce all chefe gods to heauen and earth, and cannot? they fli 
from his fingers and fall away do what he can : for being to {peake of che goddef- 
fes: feeing that as I taid ( quoth he) s my firit booke of the places there are obferncd 
swo beginnin7s of the gods.producing deities cclefttall andterveftriall,as before being to 
Speake of the mafculine gods,we began with heauen, concerning lanus calied Feauen of 


the world: fo now of the femznine beginning with the earth, Tellus. fee how fore fo 


good a witte is already plunged. Hee is drawne by a likelyhood ro make heaven 
the agent and earth the pacienr,& therefore giveth the firft the mafculine forme, 
and the latter the feminine : and ver vnderftandeth not that hee that giveth thofe 
vnto both thefe two,made them both. And here-vpon he interpreteth (4) the Sa- 
mothratians noble myfteries fo , {aying that hee will lay open fuch things thereof 
to his nation as it neuer knew : this he promifeth moft religioufly.For he faith he 
hath obferued in Images that one thing fignifieth carth anothers heauen,another 

| : | the 


= es owe SS Owe ST ee — = ee = See Sr ee ata 
= . 
bad ? 


we. 


E* this their natural theologie referreth all chefe things tothe world, which 
| Cec | would 


Lr 2.7. OF THE CITIE OF GOD: 289 | 


the abftrats of formes, (6) Plato’s Idee: hee will haue Jowe to bee heauen ; Lune 


—_— dit egiplena ta ia atimanis SD ARIE, scien 


earth , Minerva the Ideas: Heauen the efficient, earth the fubftance, Idea the 


forme of each effet: Now here [ omit co fay that Plato afcribed fo much to thefe 
formes, that hefa:ch heauen doth nothing without them, but it felfe was made by 
them. This I fay, that avro in his booke of the Sele& gods ; hath veterly ouer- 
throwne this ditinQion of thofe three: Heauen hee placeth for the mafculine, 
for the feminine,earth : amongft which he putreth Afenerua , that but now was 
abouc heaven. And Neptune a mafculine God,.is in the fea ; therefcre rather in 
earth then heauen. Father Dés,or(c)P/uto a male-god,and their brother,he is alfo 
in earth vpmoft, and Profer pina his wife vnder him. How can thofe heauen-gods 
new be earth-gods, ot thele earth-gods haue roomes aboue or refetenceto hea- 
uen ? what fobriety, foliditie, or certaintie is in this difcourfe? And earth is all 
theiz mother,that is ferued with nothing but fodomy ,cutting and gelding. Why 
then doth he fay, /anus the gods chiefe and Tellus the goddefies,where error nei- 
ther ailoweth one head, nor furiea like time? why goe they vainely about to re- 
ferre thefe to the world, (¢) as if it could be adored for the true God , the worke 
for the maker? That chefecan have no re‘erence thether,the truth hath conuin- 
ced: referre them but vnto dead men, & deuills,and the controverfie is at an end 


L. VIVES. 


[% (4) Samotbracians }OFf thefe gods | haue already fpoken. They are Heauen and earth, The Sainbe 


Toue and Inno that are the great Samothracian gods, Uarro de ling. lat.1.4. And Minerna “261an 
alfo. To thefe threc the ftately cemple of che Capitoll was dedicated, In Greeke it is not well ® 


knowne who thcfe Samothracian gods were. eApollonins his interpretor hath thefe-words, 
they call the Samothracian geds,( abiri, Nnafeas fasth that their names are Axierus, tha’ is,(e 
res, Axtecer{4, Proferpmma, Aziocer(us,father Dis, and Mercury their attendant as Dionyfodorus 
faith. Athenson faich that Lone begorte /afion and Dardanus vpon Eletira: The name Caberra 
ferues to deriue from the mountaines Cader: in Phrygia, whence chefe gods were brought. 


Some fay thefe gods werebut two , Jone the elder and Diony/ins the yonger. Thus farre hees . 


Hee that will read the Greeke , ic beginneth ac thefe words: K2Ceigus rhs & re oaycbca'xn,&c, 
Now Jafion they fay was Ceres fonne,and called (aberas the brother of Dardanns: thers fay 
Jafion loued and lay with (eres and.was therefore flaine by thunder. Hee that will read more 
ofthe Cabeciri\ethim goto Strabo.ib.1o. (6) Plato's Idea, ) So called of téos,a fortne or 
fhape,fer hee that will make a thing firft contemplateth of the forme, and fitteth his Wworke 


Cabeisi; 


thereto: A Painter drawes one picture by another: this is his Jdea, and therefore it is defi- Plates 
ned,a forme of a future acte. The Jdee of all things are in God, which in framing of the world Idea, 


and cach part thereof , hee did worke after: and therefore P/atomaketh three beginnings of 
all: the minde ; that is God the worker : the matter or fubftance of the world : and the forme 
that it is framed after: And God (faith he in his Tymens)had an Idea or forme which kee folow- 
ed in his whole fabricke of nature, So that not onely the particuler {paces of the world,but the 
elements,heauen and the whole vniuerfe (+3 wav ) had the beginning from an Jdea. T hey are 


eternall, vncorporall, and fimple formes of things ( faith e4puleias Dogmat.Platex) and from 


hence had God the figures of all things prefent and future , nor can more the one /dea bee 
found in one whole kinde ofcreature , according to which all of that kinde are wrought as 
out of waxe. Where thefe /dea’'s are, is a deeper queftion and diverfly held of the Platonifts = 
of that here-after, (¢} Pluto | Of zaczor, gaine. Das in Latine,gua/s dines,ritche : for out of the 
earths bowels,(his treafuric)do men fetch vp ftones of worch,and mettalls, And therefore was 
he faid to dwell vnder the land of Spaine,as Strabo faith:becaufe there was {uch ftore of mettal- 
mines,corne,cattle,and meanes of commodity.(d)Oxe bead lfor [anus had two heads;8 Gytels 
Pricfts were mad. (¢).4s if it}or,which if they could no’gocly perfon would worthip § world. 


——~ «ame one 


That allthat the Naturalifts referre tothe worlds parts,(Vouldbe = = 
/ veferredAteGod. CHnar,29. 


. 
. - 
as a 


+. SAINT AVGVSTINE, C HaAP.30 


(would they auoide {cruple of factiledge they fhould of right referre to the true 
God the worlds maker and creator of all foules and bodies. Obferue bur this, we 
worfhip God,not heauen,nor earth ( of which (4) two parts of the world con- 
fifteth: Jnor a foule or foules diffufed through all the parts thereof:buta God that 


_ made heauen and earth and all therein, he made all creatures that liue, brutifh, & 


fenceleffe,fenfitiue,and reafonable : (6) And new to runne through the operati- 


Theworkes ons of this true andhigh GOD, briefly, which they reducing to abfurd and ob- 
st me fcene myfteries induced many deuills by. We worfhip that God that hath given 


motion,exiftence,and limits to each created nature, thatknowes , conteines and 
difpofeth of all-caufes,that gaue power tothe feedes , and reafon to fuch as hee 
vouch{afed: that hath beftowed the vfe of fpeech vpon vs, that hath giuen know- 
ledge of future things to {uch {pirits as he — : and prophecieth by whom 
he pleafe,that for mans due corre&tion,ordereth and endeth all warres 8 world- 


~ by eribulations : chat created the violent and vehement fire cf this world, for the 


temperature of this great & huge maffe : that framed and guideth all the waters : 
that fet vp the funneas the worlds cleareft light , and gaue it congruent a@ and 
motion: (¢) that taketh not all power from the fpirits infernall; that afforded nou- 
tifhment moift or dry vnto every creature according tothe temperature: that 
founded the earth and maketh ic fertill: that giueth the fruires thereofto men 


__.. and beafts: that knowes and orders all caufes , principall and fecondary : chat gi- 
:., ,.. wech the moone her motion : and hath fet downe waies in heauen and earth to di- 
‘ pect our change of place: that hath grac’d the wit he created, with arts and {ci- 


— . v 
_ “Por ofhim,belidesthele benefits whereof wes haue {poken partly, fuch as “e 


ences, as ornaments to nature: that infticuted copulation for propagation fake: 
thar paue menthe vie of the earthly fire to meet by and vfe in their conuentions. 
Théfe are the things that learned Verro either from others do@rine ot his owne 
conieture ftriucth to afcribe vntothe feleGted Gods by afore of ( I wotte nere 
wha) iatarall interpretations. : - 


VV Hick (a) two parts \ Gen.1.t. Inthe beginning God created heauen and earth. which two 
make the whole world, including in beauen all things celeftiall , in earth all thin g: mortall, 
(6) Audnow] An Epilogue of all the gods powers which he hath difputed of. (¢) That taketh} 


Read Job.40.8& 41, of the deuills power from God. 


The meanes to difcerne the Creator from the creatares,and to auvyde the wor{bipping 
.  , of fomany gods for.one,becanfe there are [o many powers in one.C WAP. 30 
BB thefe are the operationof one onely and true Ged : yet as one & the fame | 
*— pod in all places,all in all,not included in place,not confined to locall quanti-+ 
tie,indiuifibl¢and immutable, filling heauen and earth with his prefent powerg 
his nature (2) necding no helpe.So doth he difpofe of all his workes of creation, 
that each onehath the peculiar motion permitted it. For though it can doe no~ 
thing without him, yet is not any thing thas which heis.He doth much b; his An- 
par onely he maketh them alfo bleffed.. So that imagine he do fend his An 
els so: men for fome caufes, yet he maketh not the men bleffed by his Angels,bue 
y himlelfe as he doch the angels : from this true and euverlafting God., and from 
none other hope we for lifeeternall. | : : 
(a) Needing jas the other gods do,that muft be faine to haue affiftance in their faculty& powers 
The peculiar benefits (befides bis common bounty) that God be ftoweth 
on bis feruants. Car. 26. 


le 


Lis. - OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 291 


left co the adminiftration of nature and beftowed both vpon good and bad, wee 
haue a particular gore | of his loue percicular only to the good:for although we 
can neuer yee!d him fufficient thankes for our being,life,fence and vnderftanding 
ofhim, yet tor that he hath not forfaken vs when we were inuolued in finne, tur- 
ned away from his contemplation , and blinded with loue of blacke iniquity , for 
that hee hath fent vs his “ord, his onely Sozae, by whofe incarnation and ex- 
treame paffion for vs we might conceiue how(a) dearely god efteemed vs , and 
by chat finguler facrifice bee purged from our guilt , and by the illumination of 
his holy {pirit in our hesrs,tread downe all difficulties,and afcendtothateternall ~ 
reft,and ineffable {weetnes of his contemplation:what heart,how many tounges 
can fuffice to returne fufficient thankes for this laft benefit? : 


a ae L. VIVES. - , eae 
Ho- (4)dearely, | Rom.8.32 5¥bo [pared not bis owne fonne but gane him for vs alte death. Ges 


{ 


That the Mitlery of our redemption by Chriit was not obfcure inthe | 
ae | precedent timesbut continually sntimated in diuers 
| Significations, — CaP. 32. 


“THis Miftery of Ecernail life, euen from the firft originall ofmankinde , was _ 
‘firft by the angells declared vnto fuch as God voutehfafed, by divers fignes 
and mifticall thadowes congruent to the times wherin they were fhewed. And 
then the Hebrewes being gathered into acommon wealth tokeepe the memory 
of this mifery,had divers chat prophecied che things that fhould fall out from the 
comming of Chrift vnto(«)this very day:fome of which Prophets/b)vnderftood 
the Prophecies,and fome did not. Atterwards they were pifperfed amongft the 
gentiles to leaue chem/(c):he teftimony of the {criptures which promifed ecernal 
faluation in lef{us Chrift:for not only al the Prophecies,which were in words, & 
all the precepts which had reference to actions and manners , were therein con- 
tayned, burail their facrifices alfo,the Priefthoods , temple or tabernacle, altars, 
ceremonies, feafts, and what ever hath reference to that ciuine worfhip ot God, aly things 
“were all prefages,and propheticall fignifications of that eternall life beftowed by , i ag 
Chrift, all which we now beleeue either are falfilled,or fee are now in fulfilling, 


or truft fhalbe fulfilled hereafterinhim. — 


LL. VIVES. 


‘Y Nto (a) this very day.| For the Prophecies are not yet at an end : and though the fum 
Ve eho nerd fi blled in Chrift, yet by him diuers things fince are sy a to aft 
which haue particularly beene intimated in the prophecieszas that(not in one prophet onely) Hove tite 
Nofthe gathering cogether of the difperfed Ifraell, at the end of the world.(6)OUnder/food. | All Pret hers 
the Prophets vnderftood not their prophecies , nor did thofe that vnderftood part wnders yndei food 
dand all ; for they fpoake not them-felues but by Gods infpiration , whofe counfelles they the prophee 
were not fully acquainted with : nor did God vfe them as men skilfullin future cuents , but 9 both 
as fuch as hee ment to fpeake to the poeple by:yet deny we not but that the fumme ofall their tice 
vifions,the comming of the CMeffias was revealed to them by Godalmighty. The gentiles ° 
_ alfo were of opinion that the Sydsis and the other Prophets vnderftood not all their prefages, 
for they {pake them at fuch times as they were rapt 7 pee their reafon , and hauing put 
of eheir proper mindes, were filled with the deity. And therefore Lamb/icus faich that the 
tore ftaid and fdber that the Ssbiles and prophets aS intheir prophecying, the dasker and 
Sieg re | obfcurer 


aga - SAINT AVGVSTINE. Caarzy 


ob{curer their prophecies are : and then they fpeake plainely and clearly when they are wholy 
Enthufafticall, In nay fteriis. (c) The te imenie(That the fcriptures might be difper'ed througtt- 
out the world,wherein the confequents of Chrifts comming and fuffering were fo mara 
defcribed,that none that had feene or heard of Cbriffs life and doings, could deny that he it 


was of whom they were prophecied. 


T. hat Chriftianit yonely is of power to lay open the Deuills fabtétty 
and delight, in illuding of Senor ant men. Lo 


| - HAP. 33. . 
Who were T Ais onely true religion is of power to lay open that the Gentiles gods are 
a oar moft vncleane fpirits,defiring vpon the occafion of fome departed foules,or 


vnder the fhapes of {ome earthly creatures , to bee accounted gods, andin cheir 
roudimpurity taking pleafure in thofe obfcenities as in diuine honours ,ma- 
fignin the conuerfion of all mens foules vnto the trae God.From whole beaftly 
and abhominable tyranny aman then gecteth free , when hee layeth his beliete 
vpon him, who by his rare example of humillity declared from what height and 
for what pride thofe wicked fiendes had their fall. Hence atofe thofe routes of 
gods , whereof partly wee haue {poken , and others of other nations,as well as 
thofe wee now are in hand with,the Senate of fele&ed ae :feleG&ed indeed, bute 
for villany,not forvertue. Whofe rites Varro fecking by reafon to reduce tona- 
ture,and to couer turpitude with an honeft cloake, can by no meanes makethem 
{quare together : becaufe indeed the caufes that hee held (or would haue others 
hold)for their worfhip,are no fuch as he takes them,nor caufes of their worfhip, 
For if they,or their like were fo,though they fhould not concerne the true God, 
nor life eternall which true religion mutt affoord, yet their colour of reafon 
would be fome mitigation for the abfurd ates of Ignorance ; which Varro did 
endeuour to bring about in diuers their theater-fables , or temple-my fteries 
wherein hee freed not the theaters for their correfpondence with the temples, 
_ but condemned the temples for their correfpondence with the theaters; yet en- 
deuouring with natural] reafons to wipe away the filchy fhapes chat thofe pre- 
fentments imprinted in the fences. | , _— | 


Of Numa his bookes,which tie Senate for keeping their myfieries — 

in fecres, did command {bouldbe burned. . = 

HA Pe 2ae | pike em ah 

Vecontrarywife,we do finde (as Varro hiontelfe faid of Numa his bookes hae 
thefe naturall reafons giuen for thefe ceremonies could no way be allowed of: 
nor worthy of ‘their priefts reading , no not fo much as-their fecret referuing. 
For now I will tell yee what I promifedin my third booke to relate in conuent- 
ent place: One (4) Terentins (as Varro hath it in his. booke de Cults deorum. ) had 
fome ground neare to mount Jénzcalas.and his feruants plowing neareto Nama 
his tombe,the plough turmed vp fome bookes, conteining the ceremonies infti- 
, _-— tutions:/6) Terentins brought them into the citcy to the Prator »who hauing loo~ 
_ _ked in them,brought this fo weighty an affaire before the Senate: where hauing 
read fome of the firft caufes why hee had inftituted this and that in their 
religion; The Senate agreed w ith dead Numa ,and like (c ) religious fathers, 

gaue order to the Pretor fortheburningof them =] ~~ 


4 


Buery one here may beleeue ashe Jift: nav lee any contentious mad patron of 
abfurd vanity fay here what he lift. Sufficeth it, I fhew that che caufes that Wane 
their King gaue for his owne infticutions , ought neither:to bee fhewed . 
é 7 | end | peopie, 


sa web _o_" = 


= a we eee Ue 
a ee hn ihe 


_ 


— Caf-Hemina) that Gn. Terentins found t 
- Confulls, (. Bebits Pamphilus,and M, Amilins. Lepidus : for whom Hemina putteth P..Cor- 


people, fenare,nd not to the Prieftsthem-felues? and that Numiaby his volawfull _ 
curiofity came tothe knowledge of fuch deuillith fecrets as he was worthy tobe Num 


es ; | founder of 
reprehended for writing of . Yet though hee were a King that feared no man, hee regen 


durft not for al! that either publith them ,or abolifh chem : publith them he would maine relie 


not for feare of reaching wickedneffe: burne them he durit not for feare ofoffen: 8°" 
ding the deuils: fo he buried them where he thought they would be fafe, (d) not 
fearing the turning vp of his graue by a plough, Bur the Senate fearing to re- 
proouc their anceftors religion, and foagrgeing with Nama’s doctrine, yet held 
thefe bookes too pernicious tither to bee buried againe (leaft mens madder cu- 
riofitie fhould feeke them out ) or to bee put toany vfe but burning: to the end 
that feeing they muft needs itick to their old inverhision dies might doe ic with 


bed the whole cittie. 


‘leffe blame by concealing the caufes of it, whofe knowledge would haue diftur- 


7b VIVES. 
O”™ (2) Terentins | The ftorie is written by Liny, Ualeriss,Plutarch and Lattantins, Lin 
“and Valerins his ordinary sera that Q. Perslins found the bookes. Pliny, { outof 

emin one cheft; not two. Liwy calles that yeares 


nelins Cethegus: afer Numa his reigne DX X XV. of the bookes the fcuerall opinions are 
in Plinie /1b.13,cap.13. (6) Terentins | Petslins they fayd: fonie fay he defired the Pretor they 
fhould be read : others that he brought a Scriuenct to read them. The hiftorie in Liny Lib. 40. 
in Calerins,and Plinie lib.t. ’ Tis fufficient to thew the places: He faith he broughc them in- 
ta the Citry, fot though Numa's tombe were in the cittie ( namely in che foureteerith region, 
on Janiculus). yer being beyond Tyber, {uch as came to the Senate houfe feemed to cotne out 
of the fuburbes;or countties (¢) Relegtons fathers \as touched with feare that relipion fhould 
have hurt by the publication of thofe bookes. Some read religious in reference ynto bookes : 
thar is,ftirring f{cruples of religion in mens mindes, for that is the fionification of the Latine 


phrafe:vnlefle any man will read ie irreligious: (d) Not fearing | It was a great andreligious 
care that was had ouer Sepulchers of old; none might violate or pull them downe, it wasa The led 
law inthe twelue tables,and alfo one of Solos and Numa’s,&& of moft old Jaw-giucrs,Greekes ‘cay heide 
and Latines : belonging tather to their set og then cheir ciuill law, for they held Sepulchers | 


the cemples of th'Infernall gods, and therefore they wrote vpon them thefe letters: D, M.S: 
Dis, Manibus facrim: K place facted to the gods of Hell : and their follemnities'were 
called Necia. Cicere de legib. lib.2. | 


OfHydro mancie,whereby Numa was mocked with apparitions. 
7 | Cuap. 35. | 
| Nama hiai-felfe , —_ riot inftruéted by any Prophet or Angell of God; Eyed 
e ; ae : e ° 4™ : ry’ r e 
A. was faineto fall to (d) Hydremancie : making his gods (or rather his deuillsJto mancies 
appeare in water, and inftcué him in his religious inftitutions: Whichkinde of 
divination faith Yarro,came from Perfie, and was.vfed by Numa, and afterwards 
by (6) Pythagoras,wherein they vfed bloud alfo, and called forth fpirits infernal, 


Necromancie the greekes call it,buc Necromantie or Hydromancie whether ye like, yy. sa 


there itis thar the dead feeme to fpeake. How they doe thefe things , looke they mance. 
co that: for I will not fay that their lawes probibiced the vfe of fuch things in 
their cities before the comming of our Sauiour, I doe not fay fo ; perhaps they 
were allowed it. Buc hence did Néma learne his ordinances which he publifhed 


without publifhing their caufes: fo aftaide was he of that which he had Jearned. 


and which afterward the Senate burned. But why then doth Varro give them = _ 


Cc 3 fuch 


= 


"294 SAINT AVGVSTINE. |. C nar.3s 
; 


fuch a fort of other naturall reafons , which had they beenein Ngma’'s bookes, 
they had not beene burned, or elfe Varro’s that were dedicated to /¢) Cefar the 
rieft fhould haue beene burned for company ? So that, Nwma's hauing nymph 
(d) A geris to his wife was( as Varro faizh)nothing but his vfe of water in Hydro. 
mani. For fo vfe ations to bee {piced with falfhood and turned into fables, 
So by that Hydromancy did this curious King learnehis religious lawes that hee 
gauethe Romaines,and which the Priefts haue in their bookes : marry for their 
catifes them hee leatned alfo ,butkept to himfelfe: and after a fort entoumbed 
them in death with himfelfe , fuch was his defire to conceale them from the 
- world. Sothen either were thefe bookes filled with the deuills beft:all defires, 
and thereby all the politique Theology that prefenteth them fuch ‘fithynefles, 
made altogether execrable, orels the gods were fhowne by them,to bee none 
bue men na whome worm-eaten antiquity perfwaded the world to bee 
gods, whereas they were deuills that delighted in thofe obfcene mynifteries, 
and vnder their names whom the people held divine, got place to play their 
Gods pro- impoftures , and by illufiue miracles to captiuate all their foules. Buc it was 
by gods eternall fecret prouidence, that they were permitted to confefle.zitto 
| = who by his Hydromancy was become their friend and yet not to warne 
im rather to burne them at his death, then to bury them: for they could nei 
ther wichftand the plough that found them , nor Varro's penne , that vnto all/ 
memory hath recorded them. For the deuills cannot exceed their direct per- 
miffion, which G O D alloweth them for their merits that vnto his iuftice feeme 
either worthy to be onely affli@ed, or wholy feduced by them. But the horrible 
danger of thefe bookes,and their diftance from true diuinity may by this bee ga- 
thered, thatthe fenate chofe rather to burne them that Names hadbut hidden, 
then (c) to feare what hee feared chat durft not burne chem’. Wherefore he that 
| will neither haue happineffe in the fucure life , nor pane in the prefenc, !ee 
Troerelien ™ ufethefe meanes for eternity . Buthee that will haue no fociety with the 
on comit: deuill let him not feare the fuperftition that their adoration exacteth, butler 
eth the de- him fticke to the true religion which conuinceth and confoundeth all their vil- 
lanies and abhominations. | 4 


woe tL VIVESS 


The kinds "LOG Hydromancy Diuination by water.Diuination generally was done by divers means: 
ofDiuinati- © either by Earth, Geomancy : or by fire,Pyromancy (or /gni/picina , found by Amphiarams as 
‘wa, Pliny faith: ) or by fmoake,( apmoneancy : ot by birds, Augary : or by intrailes, Ars{picina: ( vie, 
ed much by the Hetrurians,and by /anxs, Apollo's fonne , among{t the Heleans,and after him 
_ by Thrafibulus who beheld a dosee holding the cut liuer)or by a fiue,called Cofcinomancy,or 
__ byhatchets, Axinomancy,or by Hearbes,Botinomancy,the witches magike,or by dead bodies, 
Necromancy’, orby the ftatres , Afrologie (wherein the moft excellent are called Chaldees, 
though neuer borne in Caldza ):or by lottes,(Zeromancy: or by lines in the hand,(biromancy, 
or by the face and body , Phy/iognomy : or by fithes, Jéthyomsancy ( this Apwleins was charged 
with :)or by the twinckling and motion of the eies called Saliatio,& the Palmig, augury.Then 
__ wasthere interpretation of dreames, and vifions , or fights of thunder or lightning , noyfes, 
_ + {neezings,voices,and a thoufand fuch arts of inuoking the deuills , which are far better vama- 
med. Hydromancy Uhaue kept voto the laft : becaufe it is my theame : It is many-fold - done 
either in a glaffe bottle full of water , wherein a Childe muft looke, ( and this is called, Gaftre- 
mancy of the glaffes belly )or ina bafen of water , whichis called Lecanomancie , in 
which Strabe fayth the Afians are fingular. Pfelles de damenibus , affirmech this alfo and 
‘fheweth how it is done: thas the deuills crecpe in the boctome , and fend forth he on 
confufe 


~ 


_ iy Ry eb 
he 2 ee 


Linz. _ OF THE CITIE OF GOD agg 


confufed found, which cannot bee fully vnderftood ,that they may be held to fay what euer 
commeth to paffe, and not tolye. Many alfo in {prings did fee apparitions of future things. 


- Panfaniasfaich,that in eLgina( apart of Achaia) there isatemple of (eres , and a fountaine 


neare it, wherein fick perfons after their offring facrifice behold the end or. continuance of 
their fickneffes . Ja:blichus tells of a caue at { olophon wherein was a Well that the Prieft ha= 
uing kept facrifice certaine {ct nights, tafted of, and prefently became inuifible ,and gaue an- 
fwers to all that asked of him, And a woman in Branches (faith he) fat upon an Axxle-tree, and 
either holding a rod that one of the goddeffes gane her, or dipping her feote or skert in the water, fo 
Became rapt,and prophecied. eApulems wtiterh out of Varro, that the Trallians inquiring by | 
this magike of the end of the warre of Afithridates , one appeared in the water like Afercurie 
ynto the boy that looked in it,and fung the future fuccefle of che wat in 360.vetfessbut becaufe 
of his mention of the boy, Ithinke hee meanes Gafromaucie. Apolog. de (Magia. This laft 
kinde did Numa vie in afountaine - Phstarch faith, that there were women in Germanie that 
vould prefage euents by the courfes, noyfe and whirle-pittes of riuers. Inhis life of (afar. 
(6) afterward Pythagoras \ A carefull refpcct of thetimes: for Numa was dead long before 
Pythagoras was borne.Some fay that he was Pythagoras his {choller,and Owsd for one } they all 
erre: but error is lighter in a Poet then in an Hiftoriographer. (¢) (4/ar | Di&tator and Prieft, 
to whom Farre dedicates his Antiquities.(d)e£geria}Some held her to be one of the Mufes, 
and therefore called the wood where fhee vfed Lucas (amenarum, the Mufes wood. Some 
other held her but a water-nimphe , and that after Nama his death Diana turned her into a 
fountaine. Osid faith fhe was called ef geria, ab egerende, of putting forth, becaufe ‘the great 
bellied women facrificed ynto her for the ayde fhee was thought to giae them in the deliue- 
rance of children.Fe/tus, '(¢) To feare } For. Neaea dusit not burne them for feare of prowos 


v 


king the deuills anger againft him, 


4 

Dry? ; t Pu ® ~ foe . ; cual eo. .—. m# Z2 ond Fi ‘y 

: 

eee aan € a 

‘ | 
.ar ‘ 

‘ + 8 Bd s 

ak 


< . ‘ . ¢ 
’ vate . , : 
\ ‘ ‘ 
eo. : ' 
U 2 e é ® . ove oe ‘ 
- e oe ’ 
7 a. a RS - 
Ints i r ea... owiehe, SoH XN 3 
vT- . . ’ ‘ : 
‘ ‘ - : 126% tye er -e ie, eee a tee 
. ° : . . ate 
. ‘ : 
a & : 
. ° 


296. — 


THE CONTENTS OF THE 
eight booke of the City of God. 


£. Of the queftions of naturall theolog tobe | Men. 


handled with the moft excellent Philofophers. 
chapter... 

2. Of therwo kinds of Philofophers , Italian 
and lenzan. 

3. Of the Socraticall di/cipline. 

4. Of Plato the chiefe of Socrates his febol- 
lers who dinided philofophy into three kinds. 

5. That, the saab contronerfie with the 
Platonifts is about theologie , and that all the 
Philofophers opinions beereof are inferior to 
theirs, | 
_ 6. How the Platonifts conceined of the na- 
turall part of Philofophy. 7 
7. The excellency of the Platonifts abone 
the reff in logickh, 

8. That the Platonifts are to be preferred in 
Morallity alfo, 

9. Of the Philofophy that commeth neareft 
sigh ages | 
10, What the excellence of a religions chrif- 
tian is sn thefe philofophicall artes. 

1%. Whence Plato might bane that knowe 
ledge that brought bin fo xearethe chriftian 
dotirine, . 

12. That the Platonitts for all their good o- 


piston of the true GO D,yet nenertheleffe held } 


that worfhip was to be ginen to many, 


13. Of Platoes affirmation that the gods | 


were all good,and loners of vertne. 
14, Of fuch as hold three kinds of reafona~ 
ble foules : In the gods, In ayery fpirits sand in 


art 


1g. That neither the ayry fpirits bodies ,ner 
hight of plate make thems excell men. 

16; What Apuleius the Platonift held cone 
cerning the qualisies of thofe ayry fpirits. 

17. Whether it becomesa Manto werfbip 
thofe Lesh boas whofe guilt be foould be pure, 

18. Of tat religion that teacheth that thofe 
Spiriss mut bee mens Aduocates to the good 

OAS; 
4 19. Of the wickedueffe of art magick, dt~ 
pending on thefe wicked {pirsts miniffry. 

20. Whether it bee credible that good Gods 
had rather conuer{e with thofe {pirits then with 
(Men, . 

21. Whether the Gods vfe the dinills as 
their meffengers and be willing that they foould 

22. The renouncing of the worfbip of thefe 
fprrits egaurft Apuleius. 

23.Hermes Trifmegiftus bis opinion of Ia 


| dolatry,and bow hee might come te know that 


the Lgiptian fuperfiitions were to be abrogas 


ted.. 


24. How Hermes confelfed bis 
mre error,and yet Pai Sa bp th 
st. 

25. Of fach things as bee commente 
Angels and Men, is 

26. That all paganifme was fully containtd 
in dead men, 

27. Of the honor that (briftians gine to the 
CMartirs. 


FINIS. 


THE 


@ 


THE ELGHTH BOOKE 
OF THE CITTIE OF GOD: 


Writcen by Saint tugufline Bifhop of Hippo, 
3 wntocMarcelinus, — | 


L138. 297 


rl - s 7 = = 


Of the gu:ftions of. naturall T heologie tobee handled with the 
moftexcetlent Philofopherss Cwar. 1. 


") Ow had weeneed to call our witres together in farre moreexs 
aéte manner then we ved in our precedent difcourfes; for now — 
| APA L | wee aréto have to doe with the Tkeology called naturall , nor 
BRS VS Ml deale wee againit each fellow ( for this is neither the ciuill nor 
ore : Me ftage-theology , the one of which recordes the gods filthy 
7 crimes, andthe other their more filthy defires , and bosh fhew 

‘them diuills and not gods ) but againft Philofophers whofevery name (4) truely 
interpreted , profefletha loue of wifdome. Now if GOD (6) bee wifdoimeas witaome. 
. gruth and {cripture teftifieth, then atrue Philofopher isa louer of GOD. Bur 7.10.taeb, 
becaufe (¢) the thing thus called, is notin all men that boaft of tharname (for * 

(4) all chat arecalled Philofophers arenot louersof thetrue wildome,)we muft 

jele& fuchas wee know: how they ftand affeG&ed by their writings , and with 

them difpute of this queftion in due fafhion. Ivndertcake not here torefute all 

the Phulofophers affertions thar. concerne o her matters , but fuch onely as per- 
taine.o this Theology , (which (e) word in precke fignifieth fpeech of diuinity) 
norall of thac kinde either - but onely fuch as holding a deity refpeGing mat- 

ters terrestrial, yet affirme thatthe adoration of one vnchangeable GOD fuf- 

Sceth nor wnto eternail life, buc chat many fuch are made and ordained by bim, 
to bee adored alfo for this refpe&. For thefe doe furpafle Varro his opinion in 

their ayme at the truth: for hee could carry his naturall Theology no farcher 
-then the word and the worldes fovle: but thefe beyond all nature liuing , ac. 
knowledg aGOD, creatornot only of this vifible world,(vfually called Heaven 

and Farth) but of every liuing foule alfo:and one that doth make the reafon- 

able foule bleffed , by the perticipation of his incorporeall and vricbangeable 

Jight : that chefe Philofophers were called Platonifs, of their firft founder Plate, 
I thinke thac none chat bath heard of thefeopinionsbutknoweth, 

a ae ae aso ; 

L.V lV E S: 
YX (4) name’ trta eszhac wifdomes loue s site costae; wifdomes louer whofe contrary is Philof: 
-_ ang Sei to wifdome , as Spenfppws faith. (6) Bee wsfdome | Wildome the 7. phy “= 

Panlto the Hebrewes chapter 1, Doe call the fonne,the wifdeme of the father,by whichhee 
mace the world. ¢. 7 be thing) Lactantius holds this point ftrongly againft the’ Philofophers: 

‘and Pacwxins hath an elegant faying. J hare ( faith hee the men that art idle indeede und Phi. 
bofophicall in word, But many hauc handled :this theme. (d) 41 that | A different reading, all 

to one purpofe. (e) werd in greeka] Gis rsyos,{peech , of di courfe , or reafon coneerning GOD 
for rgposisalithefes 9 ie ee 


(Of 


a ee en a ge ee 


298 ‘SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuar.z 


Of the two kinds of Philefophers\talianyesdlonianysndof =, 
| their authors, Cwar.2. - 
V VHereforeconcerning this P/so,as much as fhall concerneour purpofe] - 
will fpeake in briefe, with a remembrance of fuch.as before him heldthe 
fame pofitions . The greeke monuments ( a language the moft famous of all the 
nations ) doe record (4) two kinds of Philofophers : th’ Italian , (4) out of thae 
‘The Yealian part of Italy which was whilom called Afagna Grecia: and the (¢) Jonian ,in the 
Philofo- country now called Greece . The Italian had their originall from (4) Pythagoras 
Py’ of Samos, (¢) who alfo was the firftauthor (they fay ) of the name of Philofo- 
| phers. For whereas they were before called wife men,that profeffed a reformed 
, courfe of life aboue the reft ,hee beeing asked what hee profefled an‘wered, 
| em hee was 2 Philofopher that ts a loner and alonger after wifdome : butto call himfelfe, 
phy,  awifeman,heehelda partof too great arrogance. But the Jonskes were they 
whofe chiefe was (f) Thales Mulefies, (¢) one of the feauen Sages. But the (4) 
other fixe were diftinguifhed by their feuerall courfes of life, and the rules they 
gaue for order of life: But Thales,to propagatehis do&rine to fucceffion , fearch- 
ed into the fecrets of nature and committing his pofitions vnto monuments 
and letters, grew famous :buc moft admired hee was, becaufe hee got the know- 
ledgeé of (4) Aftrologicall computations,and was able to prognofticate the eclip- 
fes of Sunne and -Moone, yet didhee thinke thacall the world was made of (J 
water : that it was the beginning of all the elements , and all chereof compofed. 
(m) Nor did hee teach that this faire admired vniuerfe, was gouerned by any di- 
uine or mentall power. After him came (#) Anaximander his {choller,but hee 
_-changed his opinion concerning the natures of things :-holding chat che whole 
world wasnot created of one thing (as Tha/es held of water ) but that euery 
thing had originall from his proper beginnings, which fingular beginnings hee 
held to be infinite, 8 that infnit worlds were thereby gotten,all which had their 
fucceffiue original,continuance and end:(o)nor did he mention any diuine minde 
as rector of any part hereof. This man left (p) azaxtmenes his {choller and fue- 
ceffor,who heldall things to haue their caufes from the(q Jinfinite ayre : but hee 
profefled their was gods: yet made them creatures of the ayre not creators 
thereof. But (r) Avaxagoras his {choller firft heldthe diuine mindeto bee the 
efficient caufe ofall things vifible, out ofan infinite matter confifting of (/) vn- 
like parces in themfelues, and that every kinde of thiag was produced according 
to the Species,but all by the workeof the diuine effence. And (¢) Déogenes another 
of Anaximenes his followers held that the (#) ayre was the fubitance produ: 
_ cing all chings , but that it was ayded by the diuine effence without which 
of it felfe ic coulddoe nothing . To Asexagoras{ucceeded (x) Archelans, and 
(7) hee alfo held all things to confift of this diffimilitude of partes, yet fo, 
as there was adiuine effence wrought inthem,by difperfing and compacting 
of this (z) confonance and diffonance . This mans fcholler was (4) Socrates, 
Pleto his Maifter , for whofe fake 1 haue made this fhore recapitulation of 


—, 


- ghefeocher. 


|  L. VIVES. 


Te (4) kindes'\The fects of Philofophers at firft were fo great in Greece , that they were 
_ # diftinguifhed by the names of the Scigniories they liued in: One of Iealy , the country 
| _— | where 


Lis.8. OF THE CITIE OF GOD; 299 


where Phythagoras the firft Maifter of one opinion , taught : another of Ionia , Tha/es his na- 

tive foile,wherein Miletum ftandeth, called alfo (faith AZe¢2 ) Ionia ; becaufe it was the chiefe 

Citty of that country. So did Plato and Ariffotle diftinguifh fuch as were of more antiquity 

then thefe. (6) Owt of that part] At Locris/ faith P/zy) beginmeth the coaft of that part of Itae 

ly called A4agna Grecia: itis extended isto three bates : and confronteth the Hadriatique fea 
(now called Ge/fo De Venetia) which the Grecians vfed oftentimes to crofle ouer: I wonder 
that fome haue held al Italy to be called fo;becaufe Pliny doth write thus: What haue the Gres 

cians ( a moft vanie-glorious nation )fbewne of themfelues , in calling fuch a part ef Italy, Magna 

Grecia, Great Greece? Whereby hee fheweth that it was bura little part of Iraly,chat they 

named thus.Of the 3. baies | fpoke of,one of them containes thefe fiue Citties, farentum, Me- 
rapontus,Herarlea,Croto, and Turii: and lieth betweene the promontories of Sales, and La= 
cinium. Afefa, It is called now,Golfo di Taranto. Here itis faid Pythagoras did teach: (¢) Jo= Jonta,; 
nian \lonia isacountry in Afia Minor , betweene the Lydiars , the Lycaonians , and our fea 

having e£ohaand Caria onthe fides: this onthe South-fide that on the North : Miletus is 

the chiefe Citty ( faith AZeL2) both for all artes of warre and peace : the natiue foile of Thales 
the Philofopher, Tymotheus;the Mufician, Anaximander the Naturalift,and diuers other whofe 

wittes have made it famous. Thales taught his fellow cittizen, 4saxtmander,he his fellow cit 

tizen alfo Anaximenesthee , Anaxagoras of Clazomene, Pericles, Archelans and Socrates of 

Athens sand Socrates almoft all Athens. (4) Pythagoras} Ariffoxenus faith hee was of Tyrthe= Phythagos - 
num,an Ile that the Greekes tooke from the Italians,hee went into Evipt wich King eAmafis, ta% 

and returning backe;difliking the tyrannous rule of Polycrates of Samos hee paffed ouer to I- 
taly.(e) who alo) (icero(Tufc.5 out of Heraclides of Pontus) relateth that Pythagoras beeing 

siked of Leontes the Phliaftan King what hee profeffed, hee anfwered that whereas the reft of 
bis profeffion had called themfelues wife men,Sophi, hee would bee called., But alouer 6f ws{dome, 

a Philofopber;with amore modeft refpect of his glory : And herevpon the riame Sopbi grew 

uité out of cuftome, as ambitiousand arrogant : and all were called Philofophers after that, o4.14 of 

or indeed the name of wife,is Gods peculiar onely. (f) Thates} The tirft Naturalift of Greece yateruss 
borne inthe firft yeare of the 35. Olympiad , after Apollodorus his account in Laertins.(g) =” 
One of the) A fortcf youthes having bought ( ata venture ) adraught of the Milefian fithers, 
and had drawne vp a tablet of gold,they fell'to ftrife about it, each would haue had it,foynto | 

eApollo his oracle they went , who bad them giue it vnto the wife. So firft they gaue it vn- 

to TAales,;whom the Jonians held wife : he fent it vnto another of the feauen,and hee to ans 
other,and fo till ic came to Solon, who dedicated it to fpolfe,as the wifelt indeed. And thefe 

feauen had the fame of wifdome ouer all Greece , and were called the feanen Suges. (hb) The o- 

ther fixe|.Chilo of Lecedzmon,Pitracas of Mitilene.Bids of Priene, (leobulus ot Lindus, Per Ps Sac 
aniler of Corynthe,and Solow of Athens : of thefeat large inthe eighteenth booke. (4) Comm ges, 
mitting his| Some fay that the Aftrology of the Saylers was his worke : others afcribe it ynto — 
Rhecus of Samos, Laban the Argiue faith he wrote 200, verfes of Aftrolopy.(k) Afrologe 
call] Exdemus faith hee prefaged the eclipfes. Hi/?. Aftroleg. Amoneft the Grecks( faith Ping 
lib,2.) Thales inthe fourth yeare of the.48. Olynipiade , was the firft that found their 
courfe of eclipfes , and prognofticated , thac which fell outin King Hal/:attes time ,in the 

C LXX, yeare. after the building of Rome. So faith Exujebins and Cicero de dininat. ib. t, +. - 
Where for Haliattes,he writeth Affiages.But they liued boch at one time, and had warresoné ~ 
yoith anocher.(/} Water |As Homere calls the fea,father of all:Plutarch(in Placit.Philof: andos 
thers giue Thades his reafon , becaufe thé feede of all creatures animate ismoift : and {ois all 
nutriment : Nay they held that the feas moifture nourifheth and increafech the ftars,(#) Nor — 
did beet Velleins in Tully,affirmeth that Theses thought all things to bee made of water,and 
that the effence that vas the caufe of all their production,is God : and Laertins faith that-hee 
held all thingsfull of Demones:and beeing asked whether the gods knew not a mars .euill 
deeds: Yes(faid he Jand thoughts tov:But this proues Gods knowledge onely, andnothisopes , 
ration to be auouched by him. (#) Anaximander | A Milefian alfo,but not hee that wrote the Anasimang 
Hiftories. He held an inhnite element was the fubftance of the production of all things - but ~~" 
neuer fhewed whether it was fiery,ayry,earthly or watry : Hee held befides that the partes of 

this infinite ching were fucceffiuely changed, but that the Whole was ithrautable. Ariffot: Plas 
‘Latr.Enfcb. (0) Nor did be] Herein Pistarch reprehendeth him for finding the matter, dnd 

groc the efficient caufe. For that infinite element is the matter , but without fome efficient 
caufeitcandoenothing: =" | 
But 


woe ve = | ; | ‘ 
300 | ~ SAINT AVGVSTINE. | C nar.3 


But Tad/y faith that hee affirmed that there were naturall gods fatre diftante Eaft and Weft, 
and chat thefe were their inumerable worlds; De mat.deortsb.1. So that thefe contraries, 
their originall and there efficient are all one, namely that eternall cold and heate: as Exfeb.de 
prepar. Exang.taith,and eArifforle intymateth Phyf.lib. 1. (p) Auaximenes| Sonne to Enry- 

Anszime- /fratus,a M. lefian alfo : borne, Olympiad.64. He died in the yeare of Crefws his ouerthrow , as 
nes, Apotlodorns counteth, (7) Infinite ayre] infinite (faith Eafebses)in kinde,but not in qualities: 
of whofe condenfation , and rarefaction all things haue their generation. Hee held the ayre 

god, generated, infinite and eternally mouing: The ftars,the Sunne and the Moone were crea- 

ted(hee he!d)of the earth. (icero.(r) ed naxagoras| Borne at Clazomene,a towne in Ionia,he 

died, Olymp. 88. beeing 62. yearesof age. His worke(faith Platarch and Laertins ) beganne 

Anaxage- thus: There was one uniner{all maffe: an effence came , and diftoyned st and difpofed st:|For hee 
nate held a matter or maffe including infinite formes of creation and parcells of contraries ando- 
chers.all confufed rogerher,which the diuine effence did compofe, and feperate : and fo made 

fleth,of many parcells ot ficth,of bones , bone, and fo of the reft : yet are thefe other parcels 

formally extanc in the whole,as in their bones there is parcells of fiefh,and fire , and finewes, 

_ &c. For fhould bread or meate giue encreafe to a bone, or the bloud vnleffe there were feedes 

or little parcells ofbone and bloud in the bread chough from their fmalleneffe they be inuifi- 


ble? Arif?. Platarch,Laertins.({) Valike| Orlike : either is tight. For as Ariftotlefaith , Ae - 


naxagoras held infinite partes in cuery body, both contrary,and padha perineal es hee cale 
led Homogenia , or sueouspic: fimilaria , like : Sywsilarities Gaza cranflateth it. For in bodies 
they are partes that are fimilare, asin fire water , ficth, bone &c. and here the name of each 
part ische name of the whole ; each drop of water is water , and each bit of fleth is fleth,and 
fo of the reft: then are there alfo partes diffimsilar, as in a man,an horfe and fo forth: wherein 
are parts feuerally called,as bones,nerues,sloud, skin, and fuch : likewife in artificial things: 
as a table,a booke,or fo ; euery leafe is not a booke,nor cuery part ofthe table arable. Thefe 
parts are called Hererogenea, or, Of diners kindes:multigene, Agricola calles them. The Symsi- 
dar partes Anaxagoras held te bee in all things infinite , either different, as of wood,bloud, 
ayre,fire,bone and fuch : or congruent as of water, infinice parcells all of one nature,and fo of 
fire.Bcc for though bodies bee generate by this feparation, yet cannot thefe parts bee fo dif 
tinguifhed but infinite will {till :emaine ; that euermore is beft meanes for one thing to bee 
progencrate of another,and nourifhed, fo that this communication continueth eucriaftingly, 
of nacure,place,and nutriment. But of the Heterogeneal/ parts hee did not put infinite in na- 
ture, for hee didnot hold that there were infinite men in the fire , nor infinite bones ina man. 


\ 
Diogenes, (t.) Diogenes| There were many of this name one of Synope called the Cynike: ane of Sicy-" 


on,an Hiftoriographer : one a ftoike, fellow Embaffador to Rome which Carneades borne at 

Seleucia , but called the Babilonian , or Tharfian - one that writ of poetical! queftions , and 

Diogenes Laértius from whem wee haue this our Philofophy , elder then them all : one alfo 

called a4polloniata, mentioned here by Auguffine. Our commentator like a good plaiflerer 

daubed the Cynike ard this, into ane, as hee made one Thomas ,of Thomas Valoss and Thee 

mas Aquinas in hisCommentaries vpdn Boethsus.(#) Ayre} Cic. de nat.de, What is that ayre 

| that Diogenes Apolloniata calles God ¢ He affirmed allo inumerable worlds,in infinite {paces, 
Archelsns and that the ayre thickning it felfe into a globous body , produaeth a world, (x) Archelans 
the Naturas Some fay,of Myletus,fome of Athens.He firit brought Phyfiologie from Joniato Athens: an 

ut, therefore was called Phy/icus , alfo becaufe his fcholler Socrates brought in the Morality. (7) 

He alfo| Flatarch faith he put the infinite ayre for the worlds generall principle , and that ihe 

rarity and denfity thereof made fire and water. (z) Confonance | Eternity fay the manufcripts, 

(4) Socrates | This is hee that none can fufficiently commend : the wifeft Pagan that euer wase 

_ An Athenian begot by Sophrom:fews a ftone-cutter, and Phanareta , a mid-wife : A man,tem~ 

pesace,chafte,iu(t,modeft,pacient,fcorning wealth,pleafure and glory:for he neuer wrote any 


_ thing : he was the firft that when others faid he knew all,affirmed himfelfe hee knew nothing. 


a Of the Socraticall défespline. Cuar 3. 7 

Ocrates therefore was (4) the firft that reduced Philofophy to tlie reformation 

~ of manres for al before him aymed at naturall {peculation rather then a 
| : ° 


Ct mE RSS ET RIE | | ie 
‘Lin. OF THECITIEOF GOD. | 301 

morality:I cannot furely tel whether the tedioufnefle (6) of thefe obfcurities mo. | 

ved Socrates to apply his minde vnto fome more fet and certaine inuention, for an 
affiftance vnto beatitude:which was the {cope of all the other Phylofophers in- 
tents,and labours:or(as fome doe fauorably furmife ) hee (¢) was vnw iting that 

mens mindes being fuppreffed with corrupt and earthly affects , {hould offer to 

crowd voto the height of thefe Phyficall caufes whofe corall, and whofe originall 

relyed foly (ashe held) vpon the will of God omnipotent, only and true: where- 

fore he held that (d)no mind buta purified one,could comprehend them:and ther: 

fore firft vrged a reformed courfe of life, which effected, the mind vnladen of ter- 
reftriall diftraGtions might cowre vp to eternity ,8 with the owne intele@tuall pu- 

rity fticke firme in contemplation of the nature of chat incorporeal,8& vnchanged — 

and incomprehenfible light,which (¢)conteyneth the caufes ofall creation. Yet 

{ure it is that in his morall difputations,(/)he did wich moft elegant and acute vr- 

banity taxeand detect the ignorance of thefe ouer-weening fellowes chat build 
Caftles on cheir owne knowledge,eyther in this , confeffling his owne ignorance, 

or diffembling his vnderftanding. (¢) wher-vpon enuy taking hold,he was wrackt 

by a4) callumnious accufation , and {fo put to death( 2) Yet did Athens that con- 
demned him, afterward publikely lament for him,and the wrath of the commonty 
. fell fo fore vpé his two accufers that one of them was troden to death by the mul. 
titude,and another forced to auoid the like by a voluntary banifhment.This Scers- 
ges ( {o famous in his lifeand death) left many of his {chollers behind him, whofe | 
(4) ftudy and emulation was about moralyty euer , and that fwsmum benum that The fast 
greateft good which no man wanting can attain beatitude.(m) VVhich being not seed. 
euident in Socrates hiscontrouerfiall queftions,each man followed his own opinid, arta 
and made that the finall good: ( » )The finall good is chat which attained, maketh vers opie 
man happy. But Sceraées his fchollers were {o diuided , ( ftrange, hauing all one. 4" 
maifter)that fome(c) Arifinpss) made pleafure this finall good:others (p) .anti/t- 
henes) vertue. So (g) each of the reft had his choice:too long to particularize. 


WV 4 the (4) fixft) Cicero. Acad, Queft. Vthinke (and fo.do all) thag Socrates firft called Socrateld 
Phylofophy out of the mifts of naturall {peculations , wherein all the Phylofophets be- 

fore had beene bufied,and apllyed it to the inftitution of life and manners , making it § meane 

to inquire out vertue and vice,good and euill:holding things celeftiall, too abftrufe for natural 

powers to inveftigate , & far feperate from things natural:which if they could be known,were 

not v{cfull in the reformation of life.(6)Tedsos{neffe ] Xenophon. Comment.rer. Socratic, ¥. wri~ 

tech that Socrates was wont to wonder,that thefe dayly and nightly inueftigaters,could neuer 

finde that their labour was {til rewarded with vncertainties : aad this he explaneth at large.(c) 

Was unwiling \Lattantins his wordes in his fir booke,are thefe. J desy not but that Socrates 

hath more witte then the reft that thought they could tonuprebend all natures courfes , wherein I 

shinke them not onely unwife,but inspious al[o,to dare to adstance thesr turions eyes to view the alti 

sade of the dixine prouidence. And is Much guiltier ave they that lay their impions difputation 

upon gueft of the worlds fecrets,prophani. the celefial temple therby then either they that enter the 

7 emples of Ceres ,BonaDea, Vetta. (4) No minde| Socrates difputeth this at large in Plato's 

Phadon, at his death:Shewing that none can bee a true Phylofopher that is not abftraGed in 

{pirit from all the affects of the body:which then is affeéted when in this life the foule is loo. 

feed from all perturbations , and fo truly contemplated the true good , that is the true Gods 

And therefore Phylofophy is defined a meditation of death, thatis , there is a feperation 

or diuorce betweene foule and body : the foule auoyding the bodies impurities, and fo be-wne ss 

comming pure of it felfe : For it is fin for any impure thought to be prefent at the {peculation Phylofs- 

ofthat moft pute effence : and therefore (hee sore) men attoned unto God haue far mose phen, ~ 


knowledge 


302 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cur,.; 


knowledge then the impure that know him not, In Plato's Cratylus , hee faith good men are 
onely wife : and that none can be skilfullin matters celeftiall , wichour Gods affiftance. Jz 
Epinomede, There may be other beginnings found , eytcher knowne to God orhis friendes, 
faith eApuleius out of Plato. ( ¢ ) Which conteyneth \ This is Plate’s opinion related by Angus. 


¢ Lo- tize nor his owne. [ This 1 adde becaufe our truth-hunter fets it as _Augu/fines, and then 


uanitts 
Jeaue 


| this.] 


comes in with jis realityes and formalities , fuch as Augustine neuer dreaned of .| For Plato 
faith God is the mixdes light,Like as the funne wee fee is the light of the body, whereby we fee, So 
is God the caufe of oxr underftanding , whofe facred light infufeth things , and the non ledge of 
truth intovs. De Rep. 6. The funne ts the light of the world vifible, and God of the innifible. Na- 
zanz.(f) He did with moSt | Plato , Xenopbon, Aefchines , Xenocrates and other reduced Socra- 
tes his wordes into Dialogyes , wherein hee moft elegantly reprehendeth their ignorance 
that perfwaded both chem-felues and the multitude that they knew all things: Such were 
Protogoras,Gorgias,Euthydemus,Dionyfodorus,and others.(g)t¥ber-vpon | His difputation (faith 
Plato)ouerthrew him, Three( faith Laertixs)accufed him, Anytus, Melitus 8 Lycon, an Orator 
in Anyrus his defence of the trades-mens tumultuous crew and the other Cittizens, whome 
Socrates had often derided, Afelitus defended the Poets,;whom Secrates would haue expelled 
the Citty, Of thefe thinges read Plato and Xenophon in their Apologies for Socrates: But the 


 playneft of all is Laertins in his life of Socartes.. He was condemned by two hundred eighty 


Socrates 
huis atue, 


dy and emulation | This onely queftion made all the feéts. ( m ) which being not |For his difpu- | 


one fentences. (4 )Callumnious | Afy accufers ( faith Scerates ) nor my crymes, can kill me: 
bat enuy onely which both hath deffroyed and will deftroy the worthyeft ener.( 4) Yet did Athens } 
They tid fo greeue for his death, thatthey fhut vp all che {chooles : and made a fad vacation 
all over the Citty , put AZelitusto death , banifhed Asstas and ere&ted Socratesa brazen fta- 
tue of Ly/ippus his workemanthip, (k ) Many | All the feéts almoft , deriued from Socrates; 
the Platonifts, Academikes,Cyrenaikes,Cynikes,Peripatetiques, Megarians and Stoikes. (t ) Stue 


tations rather were confutations of others, then doctrines of his owne. For profeffing him- 


final good | To which all things haue reference. Cic. de finib. For this ( faith hee lib. 3, 


felfe to know nothing , hee thought it vnfit to affirme any thing, Plato's’ Theatetus, : ) Tbe 


beein 
the vimoff ( you knowe Ivinterprete the grecke zinos, (0) Wee may call # the laft , orthe en 
for which all thinges are defired, and it felfe onely for it felfe : as Plato, Arifforle and the rett 


pen affirme. (o)eAriffippus } A Cyrenian , the firlt Socrarif# that taught for money , as hee would 


haue alfo paid for bis learning :( But Secrates neucr tooke pay , {zying his Genius forbad him) 
Hee fuffered alfo Dionysius of Syracufa the younger , to deride him, and flattered him for 
payne. Hee made bodily pleafure the greatelt good. Diog, Laert. Of them the Cyrenaikes 
Phylofophers had their originall. An end of this with a briefe note out of Hierome vppom 
Ecclefiaftes, {peaking of pleafure. Let this (quoth he) Be affirmed Ly fome Epicurus , or Ariftip« 
pus,or the patel fuch Phylofophicall cattellsitmuftbee the Cyrenaikes , for what had te 


Antifthes Cynikes to doe with bodily pleafurcs? (p) Antifthenes ] The author of the Cynikes , or Dog- 


of | The diverfity of opinions herein , you may read in Cicero bis 2.de finibus. And wee haue 
touch them briefely in the preface to his worke de legibus, | 


{e&: maifter to eee Synope the Cynike :hee held verrue the preatelt good. (4) Each 


: ofPlato the cheefe of Socrates his fchollers , whe 
ae 7 es dinided Phylofophy into three kindes. 


ke Cap. g. 


BY of all Socrates-his {chollers , there was one whofe glory worthily ob- 
*" feured all the reft : Plato: (a) Hee was an Athenian, borne ofhoneft pa- 
rentage , and endowed with perfection of vnderftanding farre more thenall 
his-fellawes. Sotiee thinking that his inuention and (4) Socrates his inftru@i- 


_ons wereall too fhort of the true ayme of Phylofophy , and therefore would 
needes - trauell to any place where Fame tolde him he might drinke 


of the fount of noble fapience. So went hee into (¢) Zgipe , and there 


carne 


Lis. OF THECITIEOFGOD. 303 


Jearnt all chathee held worth learning ,and from thenceinto( 4) /ialy ; where 
the Pyshagoreans were famous , and there didde he drayne from the moftéminent _ 
teachers.all the Phylofophy of Jra/y. And becaufe heedearely affe@ted his maifter 
Socrates , hee maketh him in all his Dialogues to temperate that which (4 ) either 
he had Jearned of ozhers , or inuented of him-felfe,with his delicate vrbanity and 
morality. So whereas the ftudy of ( f) wifedome is eyther concerning aétidn patna 
or contemplation,and thence afiumeth two feuerall names, aGtiue and contemp- and what ie 
latiue,the aGiue confifting in the pra&tife of morality in ones life , and the con: toncernes, 
templatiue in penetrating into the abftrufe caufes of nature, andthe nature 
of Diuinity. ( ¢ ) Secrates is faidto excell in the active: Pythagoras inthe contem- 
platiue. But Piste conioyned them into one perfect kinde , which (4 ) hee fubdi- 
uided into three forts: The Morell: confifting chiefly in a@ion: The Natérail in 
contemplation : The Rational! , in(#) diftin@ion of true and falfe:(&£) which 
though it bee vfefull in both the other, yetie pertaineth more particularly to 
contemplation. And therefore this Trichotomy or triple diuifion doth not con- 
tradict the other Déchotomsy that includeth all in a@ion and contemplation. But 
as for P/ato’s opinion herein,what fhould be the end of all ations, the caufe ofall 
natures,and the light ofall reafons , is both tedious to follow,and may not bee 
rafhly afirmed. For (/) delighting in his maifter Socrates his diflembling ofhis 
_ knov. ledge(whome hee maketh difputant in all his dialogues ) and affeting thar, 
he left his owne opinions inthefe great queftions as ambiguous/very neare Jas his 
maifters ? yet do we intend out of his owne difcourfes,and his relations (9) from 
others,to repeat fome of his pofitions, eyther fuch as dofquare with truth of hae 
religion which our faith profeffeth and defendeth,or fuch as oppofeie : as farreas 
- fhall concerne the fingularity or multititude of goddes, whome the Catholike 
religion fayth we mutt salt a for theobtayning of eternall felicity in thelife to 
come. For it may be that fuch as knew P/ato to excell althe other Phlofophers of . - 
al nations,and vnderftood him far bettter then others, do think that in God is the 
caufe of natures, light of reafon and therule of life:which haue reference to the 
three Phylofophies Naturall , Rationalland Morall. (2) For ifaman were created, - 
_ by his excelling pare to afpire to that which excelleth all , that is ,the One, 
Foe ahnighty God, without whome nothing hath being , no reafon inftruteth 
and no vie zfliftech:(o)then let him be fearched out,in whom we haneall fecuriry: 
Jet him be bebeld,in whom is al our certainty , let him bee beloued , in whome is 
all our morality. | 


L. VIVES. 


Late (a )|Hisparents were eArifto and Perittiene s Hee came from Codris by che father, plase, 

the laft King of Athens: bythe mother from Selon , one of the feauen fages; the famous: 
Law-giuer of Athens, Both his pedigrees claime from Neptune. He was born at Athens:Olyms~ 
piad. 88. His life and ations are recorded by many;who extoll him for wifedom and conuer- 
fation aboue al earthly men, But indeed their louc is fo far from doing him more then right, ¥ 
but that J know them ftand dearely affected vnto him, | fhould fufpect they did fomwhat enuy 
his praife-for he erreth in my iudgement that holdeth not Pate to haue bin fome-what mere 
then man, at leaft of that fame rare,and fingular race and Ramp of men. (6 )Socrates brs |A diuers 
rcading.(c -Lgipt \Laertins(faith Exrspides)8& he went thether together, after his return from 
Ttaly.(d) Italy | Into Magna grecia,where Pythageras had left many of his fectiof whom Are 
chitas the elder read vnto Plaro at Tarentum,and Enritus,Timans at Locris , Phylolaus at (rote: 
Tally in his (ato Adaior , faith he came thether in the Confulfhips of L. e£msilius, and Appius 

€landinschovgh Liny at that time(that was twenty foure yeares after the Candsnefoyle J puta. 
ccth Furins Gappillas in Appexs his place.Plato rt alfoto Alegarato Exclidethe ALathena- 
2 : 7 tisian 


304. SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuarg. 

titian ,, and to Theedorus another of Cyrene:and but for the warres ment to haue vifited che 
Perfian Alagies. (e) Either he bad | Al chis learning he faid was Socrates his ( Epift ad Dyon:f_) 
Afcribing ali his Phylofaphy both mogall & natural to him. (f )W1[edome is | ! lato & Ariftaiie 
recken fome difciplines chat are neither actiue nor contemplatiue,but effeQual,as Arcl i:c@ture 
Effeing and al mechanike trades.So that fome they fay are fpeculatiue,as Theology:feme act.ve wher- 
dsicipines, in no effect remaines after the aét,as mufique and all rhetorike :fome affecting materially as al 
¥laio, the trades, building ,cobling caruing ,&c. but chis laft is impertinent in this place.(¢ )Socrates sz 
_ faid| Altine,chat is im morality and vertuous rule of the actions,wherein he is {aid to be wholy 

_ amploiediyet did hee fpeculate much in this kind: for Adymantus faith to him ( Pl.to De re- 
pub. hb, 2.) Tho baft {pent thy tinse in nothing but (peculation : And what paines he'tooke inthe — 
inueftigation of the meanes to attain the fsmmum bonum,him-{clfe fheweth in his Apology in - 
Flaro:but he dire€ted all to a€tion:but Pythagoras his aymes being at matters only pertayning 
to them-felues , had their full limitation in them-felues. (4) He fub-dinided} This diuifion 
(faith Exfebius de prep, Evang.) hee had from the Hebrewes,alledging eAtticus the Phylofo- 
phers opinion, who defcribeth them plainly , and that hee conioyned the parts of Phylofophy 
that was in pecces before , as thetorne members of Peathexs : for Thales and his followers 
 wereall Phyficall : The other fages all Morall : Zezo and the Eleans , all Logicall, Allthefe 
Plato combined and diuulged,publifhing his Phylofophy perfect, not by peece-meale as Ari{~ 
totle confirmes(Phy/f. hb, 7.) Phylofophy at firfl( faich Laertius in his Plato ) medled but with 
“nature:then came Socrates and made it Morall.then Plato with his rationall made it abfolute,& 
had the laft hand vpon it, Apuleins fpeaking of hitn faith rat be filled al his bookes with the moft 
admirable and extratied things that Leno and Parmenides had tanght.fo conioyning the tripartite 
Vhylofophy,and fo reconcyhing each,that he aneyded all diffonance of parts, and made tach ackrow= 
ledge a dependance vpen other,( Dogmat, Platon)Some of his Dialogues all Logical, as his Gor- 
gias and his Exthydemus:fome privately Morall , as his ALemnon,Entipbyro,Phylebus and (rites 
Jome publikely Morall, as his Lawes,and his Refpublica : Some Natarall,as his Timaus : Some - 
Supernaturall,as his Parmenides,and his Sophifta : yet all chefe are Logically compofed. (é) dif- 
tinttion of true \terminat or difterminat,all is butto diftinguith,fo doth Lucane vie diferminat, 
ab anfoniis diferminat arua Colonis divides the fieldes. And Afela victh it {0 alfo,Bo/phorss dif 
TT terminat Europam ab Afia , Bofphorus divides &c. (k) Which though st be | It isa great quefti- 
[This onin ourSchooles whether Logicke be {peculatiue or praCtike:A fond queftion truly I thinke, 
and fellow with moft ofour Phylofophycall theames of thefe times, where the dreames of 
lef pra¢tife and {peculation do nought bur dull young apprehenfions. And now at laft the caufe 
haue lett goes on the Practikes fides, becaufe it teacheth to difpute : as though wee argue not more in 
~ our contemplation of nature,then in our morality. But thefe Schoole-men neither know how 
ee to fpeculate in nature,nor action,nor how the lifes actions are to be ordered: Not that I thinke 
thefe muft belong onely to fpeculation , but eSugu/fine faith here , That st is meceffary to thems 
both:but efpecially it is wmployed about feeking truth, falfbeod , and probability. | ( |) Delighting in 
Phite his maifter \Plato( as | faid) confeffed that Socrates was author of ail his workes,and in all his 
7 oe , the wordes that Pato giueth him, are by his author onely to be held his opinions, 
[And this though hee fpeake his owne opinion by the mouth of Tsmsens,and the Arthemian ftranger, and 
aifo for 267 the Elean, (ms) From others |Or from him: For Secoates and hee were ftillofone opi- 
nion,though others were fo alfo. () For ifa man | [ What need fuch a turmoyle whether this 
Comp APY: be the intelle@,or will, fince eA riftotle to omit others, fatth that the minde is mans moft excel- 
ling part, in that ic is both intellect , will and memory : But they are fo hard, that beeing 
not vnderftood by thefe fellowes , they admire them: mary thefe beeing playne, and almott 
_palpable,chey neglect ] (¢) The» fet ] Aliuding tothe diuifion of Phylofophy into three parts: 
he old bookes for fecurity , read certaixty, and for certainty , truth, 7 


That the cheefe Contronerfie with the Platoné ts is about 
Theology ,and that all the Philofophers opinions 
hereof are inferior unto theirs. 
[F Pfeto then affirme that a wife man is an immitator, aknower anda belouer 
ofthis GOD: VVhbofe participation makes a man blefled , what neede wee 
_ 3 meddle 


A 


L 18.8, OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 


_ meddle with the reft , whereof none come fo neare vs.as hee ? Away therefore 
with this fame fabulous theology , pleafing reprobate affections with the crimes 
of the goddes: Away withthe ciuill, wherein the diuels working vpon the wil- 
lingneffe of the ignorant to impure actes , caufe them to celebrate mortall errors 
for diuine honours: In the beholding of which, they (4 ) make their feruants the 
_vfhers of cheir vayne villanies, both by the example of thefe difhoneft {ports allu- 
_ting others to their worfhippe, and making them-felues alfo better {port with 
the guile of the fpetators of thefe impurities. Wherein alfo, ifthere be any ho- 
~ nefty lefe in the Temples,it is polluted by attration of turpitude from the Sta- 
_ ges and ifany filth bee prefented on the Stages, it is graced with the coherence 
it hath with that of the Temples. The pertinents wherof Varro interpreting by 
references to heauen,nature and caufes of production, fayled wholy of his purpofe 
becaufe the thinges them-felues fignified no fuch matters as he interpreted them 
by. Andthough they did, the reafonable foules which are parts in i order of 
nature,arenot to bee held for goddes: Nor ought it to be fubieé& co thofe things 
ouer which God hath giuenic {uperiority : Away with thofe thingesalfo which 
Numa buryed , beeing pertinent co thefe religious ordinances:and beeing after- 
wards turned vp by a plough,were by the Senate buryed. And thofe alfo(to fanor 
our fufpition of Numa.) Which Alexander the great wrote(b)to his Mother,thae 
hee hadde learned of Leow an e£¢iptian Prieft : Where not onely Pécus,Fasnus 
e£neas Romulus, Hercules, Ac {culapius Bacchus,Caftor and Pollwx,and other mortal 
men,whome they hadde for their goddes,but euen the (¢) gods of the greater fa- 
— milies,;whom Ta//y(not naming them though)feemes to touch at in his Ta/culene 
Que fizons:Iupiter,luno,Saturne,N ulcan , Vefta,and many other which Varro would 
make nothing bite Elements and parts of the world , there are they all fhewne to 
haue beene but men. For the Prieft fearing the revealing of thefe mifteries, war- 
ned Walexander thatas foone as his Mother hadde read them, hee fhould burne 


them. So not all this fabulous and ciuill Theology fhall giue placeto the Plato- - 
nifts,(who held aseue God the author ofall thinges , the clearer ofall doubtes, 


and the giver ofall goodnes )but euen the other Phylofophers alfo, whofe groffe 


305 


bodily inuentions held the worlds beginning to be es | :letal thefe giuc place Allthe 
h s 


to thofe good god-conceiuing men:let Thales depart wit 


is Water , Anaximenes phe a 


with the ayresthe Stoskes with their ( 4 ) fire,Epscurus with his Atomes,his indiuifi- thor of 


ble and infenfible bodies,and all other (chat now are not for vs to.recount ) who 4" 


. placed natures originall,in bodies eyther fimple,compound , quicke or dead, for 
there were (¢) fome,and the Epscureans were they , that held a poffibility of produ- 
cing the quicke out of the dead :( f ) others would produce ont of the quick,fome 


things quick and fome dead:yet all bodily,as of a body produced. But the Stoskes +4 seo. 
held (¢} the fire one of this vifible worldes foure elements,to bee wife,liuing the ikes fre. 


Creator of the world whole and part,yea euen God him-felfe. Now thefe & their 
fellowes,followed euen the bare furmifes of heir owne flefhly opinions, in thefe 
affertions. For(4) they hadde that in them which they faw not,and thought thae 


to bee in them which they faw externally:nay which they faw not,but imagined . 


onely:now this in the ‘fight of fuch a thoughr, is no body , but a bodies likeneffe. 
But that where-with our minde feeth feeth this bodyes likenefle, is neither body 
nor likenefle,and that which difcernech the other, iudging of the deformity or 
beauty of it,is more beautious then that which it iudgeth of: This is the nature of 
mans minde and reafonable foule , which is no bodysnor is the bodies likeneffe, 
revolued in the minde a body either. So — _ neyther fire, ayre, water nor 

| 3 car 


€ COPPO. 


real wosld 


' 


The gods 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. | Curr. 


earth, of which foure bodies which wee call Elements , this vifible World is 
compofed. Now if our foule beeno body ; how can God that made it bee a bo- 
dy ?Se then let thefe giue place to the Pletonifts and (2) thofealfo that fhamed 


to fay God was a body , and yet would make him of the fame effence that our . 


foules ar:being not moued by the foules mutability, which it were vile to afcribe 
vnto God. 1 but/fay they) (&)the body itis yalters the foule:ofit felf it is immu- 
table. So might they fay that it isa body that woundeth the body : for of it felfe it 
is invulnerable. That which is immutable,nothing externall can change: But that 
that any body alters isnot vnchangeable : becanfe it isexternally alcerable. 


L. VIVES. . | 
T Hey(a)make] A difference of reading , but not worthy the noting. (6)/rote this) Cyprian, 
affirming al ¥ Pagan gods were men, faith: that this x fo, Alexander writeth in a famous vo- 
Lume to hrs mother,that the feare of his power maac {uch fecrets of the gods to bee revealed vuto him 
by that Prieft,that they were(he faw now ) nothing elfe but ancient kinges whofe memories ufed to 


| be kept at firft,and afterwards grew to facrifices, Del doll, Vanitate. (c) Gods of the } Tarquinius 


Prifcus,fift King of Komeadded 100, Senators to the ancient Senate, and thefe were called 
the fathers of the leffer families sthe former of the greater , which phraze Tsd/y vfeth meta- 

horically,for the ancient confirmed gods. If we fhould feeke the truth of Greeke authors, 
(faith Tsily ) encn thefe goddes of the greater families would be found tobane gone fromvs hereon 


ot thehipheearth , vp iato beanen, Thus tarre he: Tx/c. Queft.1. Teaching the foules immortallity, 


er houle, 


Stoikes: 
Epicurus, 


which beeing loofed from the body, fhall be {uch as they who are adored for gods. Such were 
Romulus Hercules ,Bacchus,oc. And thus is heauen filled almoft ful with men. Txl/y alfo elfe- 
where calleth fuch gods of the greater families,as haue alwaics bene held celeftiall, J Legib. 
Thole that merit heauen he calleth Gods afcript. (d) Fire | Cic. de nat: deor, The Stoskes hold al 
actiue power, fire:following (it feemes) Heraclitus. And Zeno their chiefe defineth the nature 
that he held for god,to be a fire artificiall,generatiue,and moouing. (¢) Some.| The Epscureans 
held all men and each thing elfe to come out of Atomes,flying about at randome and — 
together by chance, ( f') Others ]Sothe old Manu{cripts do read it. (¢) Held the fire] Cic.. 

nat, deor, (b) They bad that | They could not conceiue the foule to be incorporeall,but corpo- 
rall oncly nor vniuerfally that,but fenfible onely, And it is triuiall in the Shooles. Nothing is 
in the underftanding that was not fir/t in the fence. That is,our minde conceieth but what is cir- 
cumfcribed with a body fenfible,or an obicét of our fence. So we conceit incorporeall things, 
corporally,and corporall things neuer feene , byimagination and ‘copitation of fuch or fuch 
formes as we haue icene : As one that neuer faw Rome , but thinkes of it, he imagineth. it hath 
walls , churches, buildings, or fuch-like,as he hath feene at Paris, Louvaine, Valencia, or elfe- 
where, Further, Angu/fine ceacheth that the thoughts are incorporeall,and that the mindes in- 
ternall fences which produce thoughts , are both before thoughts , and thinges them-felues: 


which fences internal,God being the Creator of, muft needs be no body, but a power more ex- ° 


o 


cellent then al other bodies or foules.(i) Thofe alfo|Cic. de nat.deor.\, 1. for Pythagoras that held 
God to be afoule continuate & diffufed through al nacure,neuer marked the perturbations our 


Pythagorass tes are fubieG&t to,by which(were God fuch Jhe fhould be diftra¢ted,and difturbed,8 when 


che foules were wretched(as many are )fo fhould god be alfo:which is impoffible:but P/ato de- 
riued our foules fr the fubftance of the ftars,& if they died yong,he afhrmed their returne the- 
ther again,each to the ftar whence it came: and that as the {tars were compofed of the 4. Ele- 
ments, fo were the foules, but in a far different manner then that compofition of the bodies.(k ) 
The body|Virgil( Georg.4. & cEneid,6. )reciteth Pythagoras his opinion finging of God, thatis 
the worlds foule, whence each one drawesa life at his originall, and returnes it at his death. 
But becaufe it may be doubted how all foules haue ene originall fence , one vnderftandeth 
better chen another , and vieth reafon more perfectly : this difference he held did proceed from 
the body and not from the foules, For thefe are his wordes, | 

Principio Calum at Terras Campof@, liquentes, 

Lucentemg, Globum terra, Vitansiag, astra: 

Spiritus intus alit totam, infufa per artes, = 

Mens agitat molem ye magno fe corpore mifcet. Gb. 

zs Heauen 


ra 


é 


= be 


L128, OF THE CITIE OF GOD. | | B09 


Heauen,Earth,and Sea each in his proper bound, » 
. The Moones bright globe,and all the {pangled round, 

A fpirit within doth feed,doth moouc,and atte _ 
Through eucry parcell of this {patiousmafle. oe 


om, 


f. 


ot MS ON oy 


e 
ed 


How the platonilts conceived of the naturall part of Phylofophy — 
a. C wap. 6. 7 


V7 V/ Herefore’thefe Phylofophers whom fame(we fee)hath worthily preferred 
before § reft,did wel perceine that God was(4)no bodily thing : & therfore 

paft further then al bodies in this inueftigatid:they {aw thatno (6) mutable thing 
was God.and therfore went further then al mutable fpirits,and foules to feck for 
him. Again they faw that (¢ )al formes of mutable thiags,whereby they are what 
they are(of whar nature focuer they be)haue originall from none but him, that is 
truéand vnchangeable. Confequently , neither the body of this vniuerfe,the fi- 
ures, qualities motions and Elements,nor the bodies in themall,from heanen to 
eatth,either vegeratiue , as trees , or fenfitiue alfo as beafts or reafonablealfo,as- 
men: nor thofe that need no nutriment but fubfift by them-felues as the Angels, God onely 


can haue being,but from him who hath only.fimple being.For in him(d)co be,and es Ca 
co line, differ not:as ifhe might haue being without life :neither to liue , and to the reft des 
vnderftand:as ifhe could haue life wichout intelle& : nor to vnderftand and to bee pend vppon 
bleffed,as if he could hayethe one and not the other. Buchislife, vnderftan- ss 
_ding and beatitude are all but his being. From this invariable and fimple‘effence 

of his , they gathered him to bee the vncreated Creator ofall exiftence. For th 
confideredthatall thinges are eyther body, or life:that the (e ) life excelleth the 

body :that fenfibility is but a /pectes of the body ; but vnderftanding of the life: _ 

and therefore they preferred intellect before fence : Senfible things are thofe Things 
that are to be {een er touched. Intelligible can only be vnderftood by the minde. fenfble and 
For thereisno bodily fweetnefle , be it in the body ,as beauty , or in mosion,as iutelligible, 
a niuficall fong , butthe minde doth iudge therof : which it could not doe if this 
forme werenot in it more excellent , then eyther in that quantity of body ,or 

that noyfe of voyces and keeping of tones and times. Yet ifttwere not mutable 

and couldnot iudge better then another of thefe fenfible /peeies nor one be witti- 

ér, cunninger, or more exercifed then another , buchethat began aftet thould 
profitas much as he that learned before: and he chat profited after {hould bee vn- 
altered from his ignorance before: bucchat which admitceth masority ot mipori» 

t7;is changeable doubrleffe. And therfore thefe learned men did well obferue mutable 
chat the firft forme of things could not have exiftence in a fubie& mutable. And what, , 
therefore beholding degrees of diirerfiry in the formes of fonles and bodies , and 

thar the feperation of al forme from thé dire@ly deftroied thé’; this infered ane- 

ceffity of fome vnchangeable and confequently an. all-excelling forme: this they | 

held the beginning ofall thinges , vncreated, all creating , exceeding right. This . 
what they knew ot God he did manifeft ynto them by teaching them the gradu- as. 
ate contemplation of his parts invifible by his workes vifible: as alfo his eternity 

and diuiriity , who created all things both vifible and temporary. Thussmnch of 

their Phyfiology,or naturallPhylofophy, © ecto 


Da. OLIVES. 


308 | 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. | Cuap7 


God is no 
body, 


_ ned vnderno kinde what-focuer : not definable, nor 


Dionyfius 


. 


L. VIVES. 


O D (a) was no body \ This eAlcinoxs in Plato's doGtrine argueth thus. /f Ged were a bo- 
nak dy hee fhould hane “xbftance and forme : for fo haue all bodies , being like the \dea’s whereto 
they bane a fecret refemblance, But to fy God hath fubftance and forme is ab{urd : for he fhould 
neither be the beginning ,nor uncomponnaed : Therefore hee hath no body. Befides, enery body is of 
fome fubftance : What then fohalG OD bee of fire or ayre? earth or water ? Nor of thefe are be- 
ginnings : but rather haue alater being then the fubftance whereof they confit. But thefe are blaf- 
phemies , the truthis , GOD is incorporeall. If be were abody,hee were generated,and therefore 
corruptible. But farre are thofe thinges from GO D. Thus fatre eAlcinous. (6) No mutable\Pla- 
.to (in Timaus ) calls God ivér xgrmm&c, one , the fame , and alwaies like him-felfe , as 
Tully tranflates it. Alcizons faith hee muft needes bee an intelligible fubftance. Of which kind 
the foule is better,chen what is not the foule,buc the power that is perpetually actual,excelleth 
that which is potentiall,fuch therefore is God. (c) All formes |In Greek eidcs, fo Tully & others 
interprete it,(4) To bee and to line | Alcinous faith that God is fupreme , eternall , ineffable, 
felfe-perfect,needing nothing,eternally abfolute , Deity , caufe of all beeing , truth , harmony, 
good, and all thefe,in one,and one, For I countthem not as dif-ioyned, but coeffentiall. Aa: a 
little after he faith that God is incomprehenfible, a) apparant to the thought : but contey- 
pecificall , nor fubie& to any accidents 
to ay hee is euill were wickedneffe , andto fay hee is good is iniufficient , Or then hee 
fhou 


‘did Dionsfius the Diuine follow , denying wifedome , life, or vnderftanding to bein god, For 


¢ Diuine, ehefe are the names of particular perfections which are not in God:This feemes to bee groun- 


ded on Plato's wordes in Phedon that all good is fuch by participation of good : but there hee 
excepteth true good , that is doubrlefle God the /dea and effence of all beautifull goodneffe. 
(e) Life excelleth \He cals the foule life , as e4riffotle doth artriyia, perfection or aMatzle, an 
thing eternally actuall:both may bee faid of the foule. But Plato {peaking of foules peat 
(it feemes)onely the rational. | 


The excellensy of the Platonifts aboue the reft 8B logic kee 


HAP, Je 


Ow as concerning the other part of their (¢) doétrine , called logicke, farre 
beeit from vs to ioyne them in comparifon with thofe fellowes that fetch- 
ed the iudgement of truth from the bodily fences, and held ali things to 
bee fwayed by their falfeand friuolous pofitions ,as (6) Epicurus held , yeaand 
even the Stoskes. (¢ ) Thefe men ftanding onely affected to the art of difputation 
called Logike , nar it was to be deriued from the fences : affirming that from 


them the minde doth receiue definable notions (d ) irrizsand thence the whole 


methode of learning and teaching hath the propagation. Now (¢) heere doe 
wonder how thefe men( / ) affirming a wife-man onely to bee beautifull , hadde 
any notion of this beauty from their fence : and how their carnall eyes could be- 
hold the faire forme of wifdome. (zg) But thofe whome wee doe worthyly pre- 
ferre hauc diftinguifhed the conce1es of the minde concciued from the formes 
receiued by the fence: Giuing them no more then their due ,nor taking ought 
of their due from them. But ( 4 ) the light of the mind giuing power to conceiue 
all,this chey hold is God , that created all. 


L. VIVES. 


i Gee (4) Dottrine | Plato diuided {peach into fiue parts. 1. ciuill , vfed in politike affaires, 
A counfels and fuch like. 2. rethoricall , which is demonftratiue , or iudiciall, contayning 
ptaif or difpraife , accufation or defence. 3, ordinary difcourfe of one man with another. 4. 

: . 4 worke-mens 


\ 


d yell ba of goodneffe , but hee hath neyther difference nor accident. This opinion 


L138. | OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 
worke-mens conference in matters mechanical : 5: Logicall, confitting 
tions and anfwers. This latt is by fome afcribed to bee Plzto’s inuention;as Phauorixus:otners. 


‘giueit to Alexamenes Teius , Ariftotle : Some alfo to Zeno the Bleanscertaine it is that Plagow- -- 
gaue thuch ornament ynto difcourfe, Feplcouining with all parts of learning , prauiry aid * 
éenot exprefly taught , ycethey arelaid ©. 


elegance : Wherein though the Lopicall formes 
downe inpractife, and cheir wfefully exprefled : And particularly demonftration is pract- 
fed in his Timens Sophifmes ,in Exthydemus , whence Ariftotie bad many ofhis fallacians: 
But Secrates his induction is of moft power of all, and feemes to fake the originall from him: 
For Socrates vfed 1t more nimbly then any man jiuing. Ard from him Quintiliza biddes his 
Orator fetch it. (5) Epscurus | Hee held the Sunne to bee no bigger then it fecinéd: And 
chat if the feace once miftake,, one fhotild neuer truftic after. Cicero , (Clatarc, Placit, lib. 4.) 
The Stoikes held the fences true , buttheir obiects now true, and now falfe, But Epicx- 
rus held fence an obiect all true , mary -opinion hee {aid erred fometimes ; and Cicero faitin 


of dialogifines , que | 


, 
- a a 


of Zeno , That. vnto the fosmes receined by our fences hee adioyned the affent of the minde, _ 


which hee will haue fixed , and voluntary in cuery. one of vs. Hee didde not affirmhe all thae 
wee faw..was true ¢ But onely fuch’as brouphe with them eertaine peculiar declarations 
fot that which they pretended, (¢ ) Thefe men | The Stotkes ; for the Eptcures reiccted Logike, 
_asvaine and ynprofitable. The Stokes vied it exceedingly. And Chri/ippus , Cleanthes and 
Zeno ,Maitters of that fe& , wroce much in that kinde: but all concerning the laser parts 


ludgement the firft , Inuention they commonly meddle not with as Cicero faith in his To~ - 
pkes. (a) arias] The firft apprehenfions °, wraarifes, or vnderflanding of thinges. Tacfe . 


nature hath giuen man , whence the knowledge of many great feueralties atife , which 'mo- 
tions arife from vifible and palpable obicéts , producing eyther knowledge, ignorance 
or opinion ; the meane betweehe bork, Cicero calleth them begunne conceits , and faith 
Epicuras firft named the opoaess , a3 if one fhould faye premeditate apprehenfion of a thing 
in the mind,without which we cari neither ynderftand, inquire nor difpute, Mary the Srotkes 
Ifeehaue ¥fed this word alfo , which*Tudly tranflaceth axticipationes : And Chry/ppus 
defincth itto bee a naturalbeynderftanding-of uniner{alities, Laert.(¢ ) Heere‘do F } Hee pro- 
ueth that the affirmers of thefe pofitions rather trufted vnderftanding then fence. (f) afirming 
a wife man }A Stoicall Petadoxe.( ¢ ) But thofe whome } Plato fo dealt that hee debarred the 
fences from power to iudec the truth, allowing that only to the mind,prouing the authority of 
chat moft fitte to bee trufted, becaufe ir beholdeth alone the fimple truth, vniforme and 
ynfaioned ; in that manner as it iso(4) The light } This funne they held was the light 
ofthe eye; and that the prince of the World was the light of the foule to wnderftanding; 


knowledge wifedome , andiudgement ; and therefore hee is the father ofall light : For from Cicer. Ae 
that light inuifible,thejlight vifible hath his originall , as I fhewed before out ofP/ato, The oe Queft, 


fame Alcinoes teacheth./% Dottrina Platonis. 


_ That the Platonifts — be preferred in Morality alfos 
Be de ce HAP. 8 . . | 

T Here remayneth the Morall yin Greeke isis which inquireth after the gréa- 
tefl good whereto al] our actions haue reference: and which is defired for ic 
felfe only, for no other end, butto make vs bleffed in attaining it only:and therfore 
wecallittheend: as referring all the reft vnto ic. But defiring it only for ic 
felfe x This bleffe-affording good fome.would derive from the (4) bodie, 
fome from the (5) minde , fome (¢,) from both: For feeing that a.man con- 
fifteth bue of foule and bedy , they beleeued that his cheefe good ‘mutt 


haue origitiall from one of thetwo ,anid therein fubfifts as che finall end ftandin a. 


as the‘fhor-marke ofall their ations , which being once attayned , theirlabours 
were crowned with perfection. So that they (d) that added a third kinde of good 
tothefetwo namely , confifting ofhonour, ritches and fuch goods of Fortune : 
otherwife called extrinfécal:didnot propofe it as a finall good,that is,to bedefi... 
redin refpect of it felfe , but referred it to another: beeing ofit {elfe good to.the ; 


geod gail bade to te}. So’ Wiis good then» chat fame dcrined ean ch 


body 


‘db, I, 


310 SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuap.8. 
_ body,andfome from the foule ,and fome from both , all deriued from the mans 
ecikba ine felfe. But they chat tooke the bodies part had the worfe fide , the foule had the 
temrion —_ Better:mary they that tooke both, —- this good from the whole man. Se 
abourthe, then, pare or whole, itis fromman , howfoeuer. Thefe three differences made 
wk aboue three feuerall fe&ts of Phylofophers:each man conftruing diverfly both 
‘of the bodies good , and the foules good, and both their goods. But lerte all 
thofe ftand by and make them place that fay that he is not happy that inioyes 
abody ,nor hee that inioyes a minde , but hee that inioyesGod : Not asthe _ 
foule inioyes the body , or it felfe, nor as one friend inioyes another , but( ¢ Jas 
the eye intoyes the light. Ifthe reft can fay any “ri for the other fimilies , or 
againft chis laft , what it is, God willing wee fhallin duefeafon difcouer. — 


Ls V I VE S, ° 
Rom the (a) body |So did Epicurus , eArifisppus , and all their followers. (b) The minde |The 
Stoikes.(¢) From both | As Calipho , Polemon and Diodorus. (d) That added | This triple di- 
uifion of goods,into the bodies,the mindes,and fortunes Auge/fine often vieth. Itis Arsftatles 
re ie and the Peripatetiques:taken from diuers places of Plato,as 1 will fhew in the next booke. ( e) 
els the eye | Plato faith that the knowledge of the truth is the greateft good , which being hardly te 
be attained in this life gines us caufe to think that {carcely any one lining ts truly bappy: mary there 
is great hope of partaking it in the life tocome , when wee are freed from the bodies bounds , the 
fole tmpe tof the foules perfection. But when we die ( fo we die pure )then in the fight of thatév 
that truly exiftent truth , God, we fhall inioy the height of our defres,that is, truth and uninerfall 
knowledge, Wherefore as the eye wanting the light is ufelef[e,and fetteth the owner fadly affetted in 
darkenes,and perpetually forrowfull:but when the Sun the light comes,it rifeth with vigor to the fun- 
tion , and oftth the ofice with cheerefulveff[e and alacrity : fo our intelleét beeing ungined frons the 
body , sf it want the light of Gods truth, st muft needes lament and languifh,but sf st it $t exttte 
sh oi soyfully ofeth that light which prefents the formes of allthe creation. Whence it comemeth 
that in our pleafures and felicities wherein we fulfill our affections , and as it were inioy our felues, 


we do not reape that delettable comfort that we draw ftom the internall comtemplavion of that eter- 
wall good,and from that attayning the pure light of foperfett awifedome, So that the foule that is 
abfolutely bleffed,inioyeth not God in his beauty,and lane which concerne pleafure,an alt of the will: 
but in his truth hick. is an att of the intellett: though then followeth his beauty, and his lone jntirely 
delettable,sor can thefe be feperated. For none knowes God,but admireth him : none admireth hin, 
but toiues loue to bis admiration and delighteth in them all, Thus much out of Plato in diuers 
places of his Re/pub. leges Phadon andPhilebus,who {till preferreth the inquiry and contempla- 
tion of truth,and that to men of pure life, exhorting and exciting all there-vnto. 4nd this all 
the Academicks and Peripatetiques profeffe after him,as Tw/ly teacheth De fisib, lib. 5. 


Of that Phylofophy aarti neareft to Chriftianity. 
HAP. 9. 

Eric fuffice now to remember that Plato ( 2) did determine that the end of al 
good was the attayning avertuous life , which none could but hee that knew 
Pixoes and followed God :norisany manhappy by any othermeanes. And therefore 
sie alee heaffirmeth,that to bea Philofopher is to loue God, whofe nature is incorporeal: 
efGod. And confequently that wifedomes ftudent , the rae ate are , isthen bleffed 
when hee tnioyerh God. For though the inioying of each thing a man loucth 
doth not forth-with make him happy : ( for many by placing theirloue on hate- 
ful obie&s are wretched,and more wretched in inioying them)yet is no man hap- 
py that inioyeth not that he loueth. For (6)euen thofe that loue what they thould 
not,thinke not them-felues happy in louing, but in inioying. But he that inioyes 
what he loues,and loues the true and greateft good. Who (buta wretch ) will 
| deny 


Ling, ©, OFTHE CITIE OF GOD. | gat 


deny him to bee happy ? This true and greateft good , is GO D faith Plato, and. 
therefore hee will hauea Phylofopher a louer of G OD , thar becaufe Phylofos 
phy aimes at beatitude, the louer of God might bee bleffed by inioying GO Di 
Wherfore what euer Phylofophers they were that held this of the high and true 
God, that he was the worlds Creator,the light of vnderftanding, and the good of 
all ation:that he is the beginning ofnature,the truth of doctrine,and the happi- 
neffe of life:whether they be called P/stons/ts (as fitteft Jor by any other fect : (c) 
wthether the Joméan teacher held as this Plato did ,and vnderftood him well; Oz 
thar the Italians held itfrom Pythagoras & his followers,or any other of the fame 
doétrine , of what nation fo euer they were, and were counted Phylofophers (d ) 
Atlantes, Lybians, (e)Egiptians, ( f)ludians, (gz) Perfians, (hb ) Chaldees ,( 4) Scythi- 
ans,(k ) Galles, (1) Spaniards , or others that obferued and taught this doétrine, 
them wee preferre before all others, and confeffe their propinquity with our 
beleefe. Fer though a Chriftian , vfed onely to the Scriptures , neuer heard of 
the Platon:/?s ,nor knoweth whether Greece held two fe@s of Phylofophers,the 
Ionike and the Iralian ,yet ishee not fo ignorant in humanity , but hee knowes 
that the Phylofophers profeffe either the ftudy of wifedome or wifedome 
itfelfe. But lette him beware of thofe that difpute ( ) ofthe Elements of this 
world onely , and reach not vp to God that made them Elements. The Apoftle 
giues vs good warning of this: Beware ( faith hee) leaft any deceine you by Philofophy eer 
and usine d-cespt according to the worlds Elements. But leaft you fhould thinke °°" *" 
that hee held. all Phylofophers co bee fuch, hee faith elfe-where:(#) For that 
which which is kxowne of God , és — in them, for God hath fbewed it unto 


them.(o) For his invifible powers from the beginning of the world are manife/ted by oe 


his workes,and fo ts his (p) eternall vertue. And hauing {poken a great matter con- 
cerning Gad vnto the Athenians which few of them viriderftood(q )in him we line, Wann 
cr sone, and hane onr beeing : he added as fome alfo'of your writers hawe [aid: Hee — 
knco how to beware of their errors. For hee faid that GOD hadby his workes, | 
Jaid open his invifible power to their vnderftanding,there alfo hee faid that they 
did not worfhip him aright , but gaue the diuine honours W were his pecuriarly, 
vnto other thinges thé was lawful:becaufe that when they knew God,they glorified him Rom.1,218 
not as God,neither were thankefull: but became vaine in their owne imaginations : Q 23-23- 
their faoldb heart was full of darkentfe\ For profeffing them-felues wife they prooned 
fooles, And turned the glory of the incorruptible God, into the fimilstude of the Image of 
a corruptible man,and of birds, and beats and ferpents.(r Jin this place the Romaitis, 
Grecians,Egiptians,and al] that gloryed in their wifedome,are iuftly taxed. Buc 
they -nd we willargue this hereafter:as for thofe things wherin we and they con- - 
fent,as of one God the Creator of this vniuerfe , who is not only incorporeall,. 
aboue all bodies, but alfo incorruptible aboue all {pirits , our beginning,our lighe 
and our goodneffe,in thefe we preferre them before ail others. : 
a a L. VIVES. | 
Lato did determine | That venerable , and holy-teaching P/ato, furmounting all Ph los vy a 
fophers in almoft all other matters , in defining mans greateft good , si fags hse ofche 
euen him-felfe, in his firft booke De Legib. Hee deuides good , into diuine and humaine: preset 
The laft is quite feperate from vertue , the firft contoyned therewith. Socrates in Plato's Gor- goods 
jas affirmes that beatitude confifteth in learning and vertue , calling onely the good,happy, 
‘the euill wretched, And in Afencxenus, in fixe hundred places , (and fo all Plato through J 
good isonely honeftand beauteous. As for other goddes , without vertue. they are the de. 
{truction of him that pofleffech them. But thefe are but Pletos common fayings : in thefe 
hee goeth with his fellowes : But when he lift , he rifeth in {pirie , and Jeaues all toother’ 
{chooles of wifedome beneathhimn, His Philebus is adialoguc of the greateft: good , bd ds” 
ome 


312 


/ 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. | Caro. 


fome intitle ic , +69) 7% stonis , of pleafure. Therein hee maketh fixe rankes of goods, inthe 
fecond ftandes the thinges proportienate , faire, perfe& fufficient, and fuch like. In the third 
vaderftanding , and fapience. In the fourth , the goods of the foule , {ciences , artes and good 
Opinions. But in che firft , he pueteth meafure , moderation and oportunity. All which (as 
hee writeth to Dionyfine ) import that GO D is the proportion , caufe , meafure , author and 
moderator of all gooaneffe. And in his 2. de Repub. hee calleth GOD , the greateft good 
and the Jdea of good, And therefore e‘palesus defineth GOD to bee the profeffor and 
bettower of BeaticudesDogm: : Plat. And Spensfippus defineth him to be , ef lining cmmortall 
and {upernaturall effence , fufficing to beatitude , and canfe of nature and all goodneff2. 

Tine contemplation of this good didde Platefay , made aman happy. Forin his Banquet; 
Diotima ,a mot wife woman Tiddeth Socrates to marke her {peach well. end then falling 
sto @ difcourfe that our loue concerned beanty, at lait free drew to a deeper theame,affrmung 
a@beanty that was eternal , immutable and undiminished, nor increafed , nor fayre in one part 
ard not in another , nor beoing {ubiet to any viciffitude , or alteration of times : Nor beauty~ 
full in one refbett and not ix all : Whofe bon 45 neyther altered by place , nor opinion, 
mor 13 a8 4 part ,or an accident of that effence wherein it is. But it is ener existent 
in one and the fame forme , and from thence Pagid all the Worldes beauty: yet [0 , as neyther. 
the original: of any thing decreafeth st ,nor the decay angmenteth st , or gineth any effett , or 
change toit, This holy andvenerable beauty when a man beginneth te behold tridy , that is beeo 
ing dsflinked from we lone of other beauties , then is not hee farre from the toppe of bie 
perfection. For that is the way to thinges truly worth defiring : Thus musk wee bee truly ledde 
vate st, when 4 man afcendeth by degrees from thefe inferior beanties unto that fupreme one, 
tranfporting him-felfe from one fayre obiectt unte twe , and fo unto all the rest of all beauty- 


full defres, where-uppon the like difciplines must needes follow , of which the onely checfe 


and cheefly ta bee followed , 1s the contemplation of that fipreme beauty , and from 
thence ie this i » thus muft a a jeune, dsrett bis lfe. "oe 
but this once cleare , you would fcorne ritches , honours and exterior formes. Tellme now( faith 
Shee ) how great a  anthahe fiould hee gine thee that foould flew thee this fincere shis pureff 

beauty , not circum{cript with a forme of mortalsty , nor with coullors nor mettals , or fuch like 
trajh , but ix it felfe meerely dimne , and one and the fame to all eternity? I pray thee wouldit 
thes not aamire his iife that flould haue his wifves fo full as to behold and tnioy this gloryons 
bea y? Ogloryous pertaker of unchanged folid vertue \ Friend of the all powerfull God , and 
aboue all other Diuine and smmortall, Thefe are the wordes of wife Diotyma wnto Socrates 
to which hee replyeth that hee beleened her, and that hee laboureth to perfwade man-kinde thas 
there is no {uch meane to attaine the poffeffion of this pulchritude , a3 the lous of it:and that ne man 


| Should thinke st 7 to difpute of st in wordes,or to Contemplate there-vppen with an unpar- 


ged heart, which things is hard,nay neere impo(fible faith Platos yet teacheth hee that beatitude 
18 attained by imitation of GO D ( De /eg. 4. ) where {peaking of GODS friendes and ene- - 
mies .hee faith , That it muff bee a wife mans continuall meditation bow to follgw God, and make 


bin the rule of bss conrfes before all mortall men , to whofe likeneffebis cheefe Study muff bee 


te mold him-felfe. what it isto be like GOD hee fheweth inhis Thaatetus , st 15t0 bee tuft, 
wifeandboly, Andinhis Epiftle to Hermeas andhis fellowes , hee faith, That ifany man bce 
4 Phylofopher hee aymeth at the knowledge of God , and his father , as farre as bappy men can at~ 
sayne it. And in his Epixonsis , {peaking of GOD, hee faith : He doth each man efp ecially 
admire and confequently is inflamed with the power of humaine witte to labour for this beae 
titude in this life prefent , and expelling a place after death with thofe that baue fer- 
sed vertue. This faith Plato, who placed the greatcft beaticude in the life to come. 
For hee fayth in the fame beoke , That mone ( or very few ) can attayn bappyneffa ix this 
Lfe , bur great hope there is after this life to insoy the happynef[e for which wee haue beene fo care- 
fell to keep and continne our courfes in goodnelfe and honefiy, And towards the end hee faith: Je es 
wickelies to neglect God,the reafon of all beeing fo fully alrendy difcouered. Hee that can make vfe 
of sll thss, I count him truly wife,and firmely avow that when hee dyeth pe fhall not be any longer ix 
the common fajhion of this life, but bane a certayne peculiar excellence alloted him, to bee bot moft 
wile and moft bappie: And line a man fo,where he will in Iland or continent , bee fhallpertake shis 
felecsty: and fo fball he chat ufeth thefe direEtions where[ocuer, in gonernment of others,or ix primate 
aitatereferring allto God. ‘But as wee aya before, fo fay wee itil , very few attaiue this por- 


fection 


\ | i es a fe 
E13.8. | OFTHE CITIE OF GOD. 313 


fettion in this hfe : this life: this is moft true, and no way rafbly fpoken, Thus much oitt of his _ 
Epinomis. In the end of his De Repub. thus. Behold now the rewards, ftable and glorions which 
a good man fhallreceiuc both of god and man,befides the particular benefits that bis iuftice doth res 
terne him. But all thefe are i neither in number nor guantity in refpett of thofe after death. . 


~ And in his Phedon : wherefore ( faith Socrates while wee line here on earth, let vs hane as little 


commerce with the body as may be , for fo wee fhall get to fome knowledce,and keeping a good watch 
oner st untill that God fet vs free from it wee fhall paffe away pure from contagson,to conuer{e wit 
Jach as our felues , and by our felues haue full underftanding of that fincere and pure truth , which 
being fo, one that is azoing my way, hath agreat bope to bee there crowned with the fruition of 
that for which in his life he fuffered fo many afflittions, And after : [f he be a true Philofopher,that 
opsnson of Gods muft needs beare a great flroke with him, namely that he cannét attaine the pure 
s1f[dome untill after this rhe Thus much out of P/ato , in divers places , partly the words , and 
partly the fence : which being affumed (to fhew his opinion Jout of his owne workes,maketh Vill; 
it fuperfluous co ad any quotations out of other Platoni/ts.(b)Enen thofe that lone.) Y wounder , tes 
thar Valls in his logike faith thac their is no loue but delight : the world controules him. I Delph, 
loue mine abfent friend, yct my delight departed with him.But this is not the leaft nor the laft Toenioy. 
abfurdiry in that booke. To enioy,is to take delight of in any thing:as 4ugu/tine writeth in his 
80. gue/fions : Wee enioy that wee take pleafure in : of the vfe and the fruic, hereafter in the 
leauenth booke,(c) whether the Ionian.| Though Plato had much from Pythagoras , yet was 
hee a /onian Philofopher for hee followed Socrates more then either rchitas or Timens. (a) 
eA tlantikes.] eAfricans, bordring on the Ocean: eftlas was the firlt King , brother to Sz Adantikes< 
turne,and fonne to Celus: Agreat Aftronomer. Hee taught his Sonne He/perus and many-Atlas. © 
more the Art ; for hee had feauen daughters all married tothe Heroés , that had Sonnes Fstpuans. 
no leffe glorious then the Parents. Hee taughe divers of the vulgar alfo , whence the 
art {pred into Libia where Hercules learnt it and difputed of it.’e)Egiptians.| Their Philofo- 
phy is ancient,but moft part from Cha/dea, chiefely from 4érabam : though they (as Diodo- 
rus writes ) afcribe itto Z/s and Ofiris, Uslean, Mercury,and Hercules. How euer, fure itis | 
much of their Philofophy was diuine, and much falfe and filthy.( f ) indians, | There Philofo- Brachmans. 
hers were called Brachmans :of whomeread Philoftratus his Uita Apollon.T byan.and Stra- : sare 
bo ,fuch as wrot of Alexander the Macedonian his conquefts. (g). Perfians.| They had the ccihians, 
Magies, that Zoroafter taught. (4) (ladees.| The chiefe ta sat and ‘diuinators of the 
world - of thefe read Diodorus .lib.3. (¢ )Scytbians. | Their Philofophers whilem , contended 
with the Eg iptians for antiquity :a nation valiant, plaine, iuft, harmeleffe, doing more by na- 
turall wit, then Greece with all her laborious difcipline. (k)Galles. Jor Frenchmen, They had 
their Druides : Cefar Comment Gallic, Bell. and Poets alfo which were both Philofophers and Dtuides. 
diuins,called Saronide,Dio.l.6.they had alfo the wifards that pore came vnto for trifles.No 
facrifice aniongft them might be offered without a Philofopher, that was, a Naturalift diuine 
and humane : and thefe ruled all,in all places, Their Drusdes)as Strabo [asth lib.4.) were both. ! 
niaturalifts and Moralifts.(/) Spantards.}In Spaine,before filuer and pold wercfound,there was 
no waires,many Philofophers, and the people liued wounderfull religioufly:euery fociety had Spain. 
a magiftrate by the yeare, chofen out of the moft learned and iudicious ranke of men, equity 
was the executor of iuftice then , without lawes clangor : (yet the Turdetani now called the 
eAndeluzians had certaine wounderfull old lawes' written ) few orno controuerfies were 
euer mooued : and thofe chat were did either concerne vertuous emulation , the reafons of. 
nature, of the gods, of good manners, or of foine fuch theames, which the learned difputed of 
at (ec titmes, and called the womento bee auditors, Afterwards ; cerraine mouncaines that 
were full of mettall within brake out and burned, and the melted gauld and filuer , left ads 
miration of fuch fine fluffes, in mens mindes , fo fhewing thistothe Phznicians , who were 
then the gencrall marchants of the world , they bartered of their mettalls away to them for 
chinges of no value,’ The Phenicians {pying this gaine , acquainted diuers of the A/ians and 
Greekes therewith, and fo came often thether with a multitudeof men, fometimes with — 
great nautes, and otherwhiles with but ewo or three Marchants fhippes : Now many either 
Jiking the ayre and the foyle, orelfe louing gold better then their gods, tet vp their refts in 
Spaine : and by one tricke of other found meanes to contra¢t alliance with others : and then 
began they to fend Colonyes into Spaine out df all e4fa, and the Iles adiacent , and 
thefe fpread their villenies amongft the filly ignorant foules. Then began the Spaniards to 
adinire their owne wealth : to fight,to prey ~ vpon aother, firlt privately , and foone after 
| e in 


: ws TOR FOE Re eee aE PS ae ee far ee ; 
' 3%4 SAINT AVGVSTINE. | -Caiar.to. 


Rg these enero eeseey Renee gr ge ES 
in whole armies : afterward to flat nations warre,waged ynder alien leaders:the Phenicians at . 
firft,the authors both of their prefent and future misfortunes : Then good manners got them 
gone,equity was fent packing away , and lawes came vp,together with digging of metralls, 
and other traffiques , fo chat farewell Philofophy, and all artes grew almoft to veter ruine : for 
they were not written but oncly paffed by tradition from mouth to eare, But that which ree 
mained of thé was renewed by fome wel-wifhing wits, in the time of the Romaine peace:but - 
firft the Gothes , and afterward the Saracins rooted them veterly from amongft the vulgar, 
There is an old memorial extant of the ancient times,written in greck and Latine:I hope by ix 
to illuftrate the original of any natiue coiitry. (#)Of the elements) That is,fuch as conceiue no 
further thé the elements:fuch as think them the orignalls of al,& neuer leaue GOD any thing 
to doe, whofe will difpofeth all things. (#) For that which is knowne] yori bad gernpw ise , 
Yevtes fath the grecke. ( o) Hiss nnifible | a yap aiegra te Yor RTigioee mous This wenpast wEscpra KETO TH 
Bisa fd G cove dura jure x; Osse7ne, faith the Grecke xties is both Creation, and the thing created. Valls 
thinketh that this inuifibility is meant of che forme and fabrik of heauen and earth, according 
to that of the Pfalme. The beanens declare the glory of God,and the firmament foeweth she workes 
Phal, 3901+ of his bands. And we find _Ariftotle and many more to gather by the world externall fhape of 
the world,that there is a God, chat hatha prouidence and care of the world : and the fame 
they gather by the courfe and motion of times , by the order of our life,and of the whole vni« 
werfe,wherein fuch things could not be done,but by that moft wife and glorious gouernor of 
the faid vniuerfe. Augu/tine tranflateth «tise, confstutions , to make it imply that men may _ 
conceiue the fecrets of GOD, by his workes , euen from the worlds firft conftitution , to pere 
{wade vs that this knowledge had exiftence before Chri? his comming, or AZoy{es lawe,euen 
from the firft creation of the world . And this me thinkes is nearef{t ynto Pasis minde,who in 
this place difputech-againft the Philofophers , telling them that when or where euer they liue, 
they may finde a god the gouernor and father of all vniuerfity : and that(for fo followes the 
f{equele)and that,by the workes which he hath made, may his inuifbility bee certainly gathe=. 
red, (p) Erernall vertne |Not onely his fecret wifdote, and iuftice,but his illuftrious deity and 
power-vnleffe you take away [And fo] and let the reft depend vpon the former:for the greeke 
{7*] fignifying coniundtion, was the caufe that [gaog,].was thruftintothe Latine interpre- 
tation. (4) Jn him we le] The ancients called GOD thelife ¥ is diffufed throughout the vni- 
werfe: and the aire alfo: fo chat this is true howfocuer : that inhim wee liue ; wee moue and 
haue our becing. Aratus alfo faid,that al waies, courts,hauens,and all places and things were 
-full of Jove : which his interpretor ateributeth to the ayre. (7) which place] The Romaines 
and Greekes worfhipped mens ftatues for gods,the Egiptians beafts, 


What the excellence of arveligious Chriftian is in thefe Philofophicall artes. 
| HAP. 0. 
No if achriftian for want of reading , cannot vfe fuch of their words as fits 
difputations , becaufe hee never heard them: or cannot call that pare chat 
treates of nature, either naturall in Latine,or phyficall in Greeke: nor that that 
inquires the truth, rationall or Logicall: nor that which concernes rectifying of 
manners, and goodnefle of ends Morall ; or Ethicall: yetthence it followes noe 
that he knowes not,that from the true God is both Nature, whereby hee made 
vs like his Image,Reafon,wherby we know him, and Grace wherby we areblef- 
fed in beeing vnited tohim. This chen isthe caufe why wee prefer thefe before 
the other : the other fpent their wittes in feeking out of the caufes of chings,the 
meanes of learning, and order of life : thefe knowing GOD , found that 
their was both the caufe of the whole creation, thelight of all true learning, 
andthe founc of all felicity. Sothat what P/ston#/#s or others foeuer held thus 
of GOD, they held as we doe. But wee choofe rather to deale with the(4) Pis- 
tonifis then others , becaufe their workes are moft famous; for both the 
Greekes ( whofe language is very greatly efteemed of the nations ) doe 
preferue and extoll them, and the Latines , mooued by their excellence 
and glory learning them more willingly chemfclues , and by — 
cm 


~ ~ 


Lind. ° OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 315 


chem in their tongues alfo, left them the more illuftrious dnd plaine to vs,and 
£0 all pofterity. , | ee | oF 


—— 


a an 
ees ee a 2 ee) 


- . VIVES. 


A | {This is 
V Vie the (4) Platonifts| From ‘Plate and Ariftotles time, vnto Aphrodifews,that liued yn- aeheine 


der Seneras and his fonne , eriftotle was rather named aihongft the learned then ci- inthe Le- 

ther read,or vnderftood : e4predifexs firlt aduentured co explaine him,and did fet many onto yanifts om 
fearch farther into the author,by thatlight bee gaues yer did Plats keepe abouchim fiill,vn= pinion 
till che erection of publike fchooles in France and Italy,that is, as long as the Greeke and La- aa it is 
tine congues were in account: [ but when learning grew Mercenary , and Mimicall , all theit left our 

aime was gaine,and contention, and verbofity , and fond {ubtility , with vile fained wordes as dif ' 
of arte,and frivolous quillets , then was’ Arifforles logike and phy(ikes held fit for their put- rafefull 
pofe, and many better bookes of his throwne afide. Butasfor Plato becaufe they vnder= tothe 
ftood him not, (nay and Ariffetle much leffe , yet) becaufe hee teacherh ‘no trickes , oh neuer (-b.oolea 
name him ¢ | fpeake not this to imply Arifotles learning more infufficient then Prato’s, but pe 

itis a fhame that P/ato,a holy Philofopher fhould bee thruft by , and _4riftet/es beft part alfo; : 


and the reft fo read,that he muft fpeake their pleafures,beeing fuch fooleries,as not e4Sr:fetle, — 
- f0,not any mad man of his time would haue held or divulged } | | the dire 
————_$- _— truths) 


whencePlato might bane that knowledge that brought him fe neare the 
Chriftias dottrine. Cuar.tle 


N Ow fome of our Chriflians admireat thefe affertions of Plato comming fo- 
neereto our beleefe of God: So that fome chinke that at his going to Egipr, 

hee heardtheProphet (4) Hieremye, ot got to read fome of the prophets bookes | 
in his trauel!s thefe opinions I haue (6) elfe-where related . But by all crue chro- Plata peed 
nicles f{upputation,P/sso was borne an 100. yeares after Jeremy prophecied, Plato Dot ute- 
liued 81.yeares, and from his death tothe time that Ptolomy King of Egiptde- oe 
manded the Hebrew prophccies, and had them tranflated by the 7o. lewesthat 
vnderftood the greeke alfo ,is reckned almoft 60. yeares. So that P/efoin his. 
trauell,could neither fee Hseremy, becing dead , nor readthe feriptures becing: 
not as yer tranflaced into the greeke,which he saderfiood/sjenlefie(is he was of 
an infatigable ftudie)be had had them read by an interpretor,yet fo as hee might 
not ee them,or coppy them ( which Pfo/omy as a friend might intreate, or 
as aKing,command) but onely carry away whathe couldinhismemory.Some ___ 
reafon there is for this,becaufe Genefis beginneth thus. Jsthe beginnixe GO D Gen. 2.1.3 
created heanen and earth and the carth was without forme and voide , and darkeneffe ».. 
was upon the deepe,cr the Spirit of GOD mooued upon the waters. And Plasto in his(a) srowndes 
Times faith that GOD firft (e) ioyned the earth andthe fire. Now itis certaine oof diub 
that (f) hee meaneth heaven by fire: fothat hereis a correfpondence with the ” 
other : Js the beginning GOD created beauen andcarth . Againchec faith thatthe 
two (g) meanes conioyning thefe extremities,are water and ayre,this fome may 
thinke hehad from the other, The /pirst of GOD mooued upon the waters: not tind - 
ing in what fence the fcripture vieth the word Spsrit , and becaufe (6) ayreis a 
fpirit, therefore it may bec hee gat hered that hee colle@ed 4. elements from this 

lace. And whereas hee faitha Philofopher is alover of God , there i$ nothing. 
Cael {quareth with theholy {criptures: but that efpecially(which maketh mee | 
almoft confeffe that P/sto wanted not thefe bookes)thac whereas the Angel thae 
brought Gods word to Afoy/es, being as — what his name was chat bad him foe | 
' c2 | ree 


! 


316 -., SAINT AVGVSTINE. wens 


freethe Ifraelites ous.of Egipt,anfwered his name was (#) am that Sam: And 

Exod 3.14 thus fhale thou fay to the children of Ifraell, sams hath [ent me to you: as if thatin 

comparifon of that which truely is, being immutable, the things that areimmu: 

table,are not. Plato ftuck hard vponthis,and commended it highly : And Lmake 

a doubt whether the like be to be found in any one that euer wrote before Pisto, 

except in that booke when it was firft written , fo, / 4 that Jam and thou (hale 

tell them chat Lam fent me to zon. But wherefoeuer he had it,out of others bookes 

before him, or as the Apoftle faith : Becan/e that which is knowne of God , is mani- 

__ Seflunte them: for God hath {bewed it them . For the inuilible things of him that is, 

ROM1:39s hes cternall power and god-head,are fecne by the creation of the world, being confiderca - 

7 in his workes.This maketh mee chofe to deale with the Plton:/?3,in our intended 

queftion of vacurall Theology,namely,whether the feruice of one GOD, or ma- 

ny , fuffice for the felicity of the life to come. For as touching the feruice of 

or many for the helpes of this temporall life, Ithinke I haue faid already 
fuficient | 7 


fi _ | ; L; V IV E S. 
Hicsemy, Pre (4) Hieremy | Hee went with the two Tribes Bensansin and Inde into E ipt, and 
a was there {toned at Tanis : there theinhabitants honour him , for che prefent i his 
"* sombe giues thé againft the Ringing of ferpents,(5) Elfe-where | De Dottr. xpian. 2. Exfebius 
faith Hieremy began to ptophecy the 36. Ofpmpiade:and Plato was botne the 88. of the Sep= 
twagines hereafter. (¢) Uniefe (as he was | /uftin Martyr, in Paracl.ad gent. Enfeb, de prep. 
Theodor. de Grac. affect, all affirme that Plato had much doAtrine from the Hebrew bookes, 
Piso an Herevpon Numenins the Philofopher faid vies erdraripsveieeauater ? what is Plato but Mof- 
vftrike =. fer made Athenian ? And e4riffobulus the lewe writting to Philomeror,{aith,as Enfebsas cite 
Moyles, eth it: Lato did follow onr law in many things. for his diners allegations hae prooned bins an. ob: 
Serner of it in particular things,and thatin many. For the Pentateuch was tranflated before A- 
lexanderstime, yea before the Perfian Monarchy,whence hee and Pythagoras had both very 
much. (4) Témans] So becaule Tiwens the Locrian is induced as difputing of the wor'd,him 
"had Plete heard in Italy,and he wrote of the world in the dorike tonguc , out of which booke 
‘Plato hath much of his doctrine, (¢) Joyned the earth} The words are tranflated by Tully thus: 
( orporeum Gr afpettabilems stemg, trallabilem effe, neceffarium eff : nibil porre sgnt vacunm vide~ 
rs,ant teupigesd Caveat felido . Solidum autem nibil, quod terra fit expers: quamobrem msds 
| efficere moliens dens ,terrams primam , ignemd, iangebat . The fame is Tymens his opinion in his 
Wecoheld work De Mundo c& anima f)He meaneth\Plato {aid heauen was of fire,the Rars of the foure 
¢- elements,becaufe they feemcd more folid. But he held not heauen of the nature of our fire,for 
he held fires of diuers nature.(g) Tivo meanes |Water and fire muft needs hauc ameane of cohe= 
rence. But folid bodies are hardly reconciled by one meane but muft haue two , which may of 
thefelues & their accidents , compofe a conuenient third, fuch is water & ayre, between fire 8 
earth:for water to earth,& ayre to fire,beare the fame proportion , and {o doth water and ayre 
betweene themfelues whi 4 cothbination rules fo in the elements , that in the afcending and 
defcending innumerable and imperceptible variations of nature all feemes but one body, eci« 
ther rarified vnto fire, or condenfate ynto earth. (b) Ayre isa Spirit} But not of God: of this 
hereafter. (4) Jams} o° wy, this 4, is a perticiple:as on e fhould fay, 4m be that is. For wee can 
not tranftate it by one word, as Seneca affirmeth Ep;f?.lib.8, But weemay call it Ens, of ften(as 
(4far did,)being,of,to bee,as pacent,of poffiem So did Sergius, Quintsl, GOD medneih, that 
hee hath beeing - whereas as nothing elfe hath properly any beeing : but are as Tfayas faiths 
nothing : and [ob hath it often,G O D onely hath teeing the re(t haue not their exiftence 
(ich Seneca ) becaufe they are eternall themfelucs , but becaufe their maker guardeth the 
and fhould hee difift, they would all vanith into nothing. Plaze alfo fayth that a oril 
things neuer haue truc beeing, but fpirituall haue. J» Tirzeo & Sophiffa. And there, and in 
his Parmsenides hee faith that G O Dis one , and Ens, of whom all things depend : that naturé 
hath nos: a ficte expreffiue mame for his Excellence , nor can hee bee defined » NOF 
atcribed , nor knowne, nor comprehended , that hee begotte all thefe-leffer gods 
Ge a whom 


Cae ee rescence nL TTT AIL TCT ana eeean as 
Lin8- OF THE CITIE OF GOD. Sty 
on = 

whom in his Ty»rexs he faith are immortall only by their fathers wil,not by their own power 
Himhee calleth +33. which is : as he faith ofa true Philofopher in his Phedor,ipiy seus 37@ he 
concciueth him which is: andalitele afters & rvfadsp@ w ivrG@ percaker of them which is, | 
and in his Timaus asinpardss pinow dt vxizer the ercrnall beeing , vnbegotten. And all the Ple- 
toniffs agree that the title of his Parmen:des,De ente (> uno rerum principio,and of his Sophifta 

#9: zhr@ are both ment of GOD, which is the true being,and the beginning of all things:and 

ay being a perticile is of the prefentence, f gnifying that GOD hath no time paft,nor to come, 

but with him all is prefent,and fo his beeing is . That he faith in his Tymexs, Time hath partes, 

paft , prefent and to come: and chefe times of our diuiding are by our error falfely afcribed to 

the diuine effence , and vnmeetely. For wee vie to fay,hee was,is,and wilbe : but indeed he 

onely is, properly and truely ; was and wilbe belong to things that arife and proceede accore 

Ging to the times and with them. Forthey are two motions: but the onely Lord of etermty 

hath no motion, nor is elder, nor hath beene younger , nor hath net beene hitherto, for fhall 

not bee hereafter,nor feeleth any affect of a corporall bodie,but thofe partes,paft and to come One God. 
are belonging to ume that followeth cternity , and are /pecies of that which meoueth it felfe 
according to number and fpace. Thus much out of 7émeus : hee that will readethe author, 

lec him Jooke till hee finde thefe words, wése Jt wars pip G- xpi’ &cc. there this fentence bee — 

ginneth. Gregory vfed part of it in his Sermon of the birth of Chrift , and handled it largely 

in that place.(s O D was alwaies , and is,and fhalbe (faith he) nay rather God is alwaies:was, 

and fhalbe are parts of our time,and defects in nature. But hee is eternally beeing : and fo he 

told CMoyfes.when hee asked him his name. és pa duis 4 ist xitsasnadoy ddicnds & Cc. Then hee 
beginresco mount, and with diuine eloquence to fpread the luftre of GOD S eternity and 
inmutability : but this worthy man is faine to yeeld vnder fo huge a burden, and fhut his 
eyes , dazcled with fo fiery a fplendor. Plutarch tells that on one pofte of the Temples dore 

at Delphos was written 5 ra6s csaure 20M felfe, and on the other, ,thox art : the firft hauirg 
reference to our preparation in matters of diuinity,and the later ynto GODS nature,which is 
alwaies fixt and firme,whereas ours is fluxe and mutable. Wherefore,it may well bee faid of 
him whofe nature is not fubie& to any alteration of time,but al» aies fixedand vnalterable, _ 
thox art. Thou art ; may alfo bee referred vnto the ynmoueable eternity , without any refpe& 

of the cime,as ‘7 ato faith in his ‘Parmensdes , who will not haue the time prefent made an ate 
tribute of GOD, becaufeitis atime, nor will haue him called aneffence,but ratherfomea = 
what inexplicable aboue all effence ,to know what it is not,is eafie,but what it is,impoffible, 
Some thinke that Parmenides himfelte in his Philofophicall poeme, meaneth of GOD there 
where hee faith,ad/ things are but one: and{o thought Symplicéus : for it is vnlike that fo fharpe 

a wit as Parmenides ,found nor the difference and multitude of things which hee fetteth 

ainely downe in his poemes. For hauing {pcken largely of that onely Ens , hee concludeth 

thus : 7 hus much of the erne high things now concerning the confufed and mortall thing: in which 

és mucherror, eArifiotle through defire toreprehend erronioufly eraduceth his opinion in 

his Phyfikes,which T hemiftins coucheth at : Parmenides ({aith he)did not thinke an accident, 

that hath exiftence but from another , to bee the Es hee meant of , but hee fpoke of the Ens 
which is properly , efpecially and truely {o,which is inceed no other but P/ato his very Ens, 
Nay. what fay you to Arifforle, that faith himfelfe that Parmenides ment of that one Ens 
which was the originall of all: The other Platonsf?s opinions l haue already related : Now as 

for chat fentence({o common againft them)that the things intelligible onely not the feufible, 
haue exiftence : e4/cymas in his worke to eA mynthas declareth that Plato had both it, and Epichare — 
ehat of the /dea’s,out of Epicharmus his bookes,and alledgeth the words of Epicharmus hime MS 
felfe,who was a Philofopher of Coos, a Phythagorean,who held that learning made a manas 
fasre more excellent then others,as the funne excells the ftarres and all other light, and the fea 

the rivers. Plato him/elfe in his Sophiffa-aucreeth the antiquity of thac opinion that affirmed 

the effence of intell:gibilities oncly , and that therevpon arofe a great contention with thoi 
‘that held the world to confift of onely bodies , Tymsaus alfo the Loctian in his booke de mse 
do,wrote of thefe fdes's. But Plato re 4 nedall thele things , and brought ina more polite,ele- 
gant forme, adding befides altitude and diuinity of doctrine,admirable and excellent. I make 

no queftion that Pythagoras did learne thofe mifteries out cf the Scriptures in Egipe . And it 

js more likely chat he talked with Hieremy there,thenthatPlatedid. 

gM ee eee. SRR Z | Thar 


’ a . | | | . : , 
318. SAINT AVGYVSTINE. 7 CHAP.13 
aA | a 


That the Platonifts for alltheir good opinion of the trueG QD, yet nenerthtn 
thele(feheld that wor{bip was tobee ginento many. Cwar.12. 
Herefore haueI chofen thefe before the reft,becaufe their good opinion of 


the true & only GOD, made them more illuftrious then the reft,& {o far pre- 


ferred by pofterity,chat wherea: (4) 4riftetle Plato's {chollet,an excellent witted 
man,(6) Plato’s inferior indeed, but farre aboue the reft; who infticuted the Peri- 
patetique feat,that taught walking, and had many famous {chollers of his (c) fe& 
inhis (a) maifters life rime,and atter Pleto’s death(c)Spea/sppas his fifters fon and 
Xenccrateshis beloued {choller fucceeded inhis {choole, called the( f) cedemy, 
and their followers (g)therevpon , Academsskes : yet the later Philofophers thae 
liked to follow Pisto would not bee called Peripatettques , nor —4cademskes, but 
Plavonifts. Pistons fs: Of which fore there were thefe famous Gretians (4) Plotine,(i) Jamsbe 
| Ayehus, (k) and Porphiry: and Apuleiwsan African was famous both for his write 
tings in che Greeke and Latine tongues. Butal{chefe,and their followers, yeae 
nen (4) Plato bimfelfe,held it fit ta adoremany gods. v4 


tas L.VIVES. 20... 

Ariftorle; V VY Hereas() Ariftotle] Borne at Stagyra , fonne to Nitemachusand Pheftis both defe 
: cended from e£/culapius : borne the 99. Olympiade . He came to ‘Plato at 15.yeares 

old,and heard him till he was 3 5.when as ‘Plate died : and then beganne he to teach himfelfe, 

walking in the Lycium,whence his followers were called Peripatertques of #cgsratty,to walke, 

He was an admirable, fingular witted man, inferior to none: Plato's better in variety ofknowe 
ledge,and all the worlds better in difputation of all artes . ia thefe preat guifts ofhis to 

be cuill taken, or maligned : we muft confefle indeed that hee was an affectator of glory , and 

too curious a condemner of others,but withall,modeft and abftinent : nor in doctrine of artes 

Plaeand hadhe euer his fellow. I with he had dele more vprightly in his confutations of others. Md 

Ariftode ~ Pigto’s pone oie Sars betweene Plato and 4rifforle is odious, becaufe of their diuerfit 

compared. of Audies, Doubtleffe they were both admirable examples for all to imitate. The greekes cal 
Plato, dives dinsne, and Aryftorle deipar,which is afmuch: Plato's eloquence was fuch that i 

was acommon faying, if Jowe would fpeake precke,he would {peake Piato's grecke : But Aris 

7 frotles knowledge in Rhetorick(Ihad almott faid excelled Plato's : mary in vic hce was farre 
fhortofhim. For Ariftotle affeQed a fuccin& phrafe : leaft beeing tedious,and drawing each 

thing at length the difcourfe might become to profufe, and the rules of arte too long to beare 

away . So his endfiour was not to admit an id!e word,which made him attaine vnto a great 
perfection in the proper vfe of the grecke language and figures. (c) Sett] dipsoss in Greeke,a’ 

word of indifference, but ordinaryly taken in the worft fence, for all opinions priuate,or o« 

_ ther,without the Church, wee call Herefies. (d) His Maifters life| eAriftotle (faith Platein 
Speutippus. Laértius) hath kiekt againft vs,as foles doe at their dammes , Yet fome fay hee did not teacke 
whileft Pate liued. (¢) Spem/ippws| Exrymedons fonne, Plato's fucceflor,he taught 8.yeares,and. 

Kenoceaes tke pay,for which Diony fins mockt him : he went alto as far as. Macedon to fing the Epithae 
. bamion a Caffanders marriage,for mony : which Philoffratas faith he had written in bald and 

'  gugged verfe.Growing difeafed Xenocrates of Chaledon succeeded him at his owne requeft, 
one that Platoloued deerely well,and trauelled with bim into Sycily : he was bur dull of wit, 

bur of a feuere and facred carriage. Plato faith Arifforle lackt the bit and he the fpurres ; but loe 

ued him fo well that when men {wore he {poke ill of him,he would not credite them,thinke it 
vnpoffible that one whom hee loved fo well , fhould not Joue him againe,In controuerfies of 

Jawgthe Judges neuer put him to his oth: thinking ic fin not to truft fo iuft e man though hee 

{wore not.(f) Academy \A fare was indeed nere Achens,al woods & fennes, & therefore vne 
whatand healchful & had bin faith Laértivs)the habitation of Academas,one of the Heroés:Enpolisthe 
whence, Cémedian calleth him a god:but Péstarch in hislife of Thefexs,fhews what he was.It'was hey 
told (after & Pollux ¥ Thefens after his rape of Hellen, kept her fecretly at Aphidna: 8 there- 

fore was euer a‘rer refpected both by them & al the other Lacedemonians:for in‘altheit roades 
madeinco 7 Achenié cerritories,they newer meddied with Acadensia-but Dicaarchns faith he 


ni a! ia ee 
pie Bos! ids 


=—_ -—_— = _—— —~ —_ —__ a= = — — 


Se " , anne aeeenennenatieeenes a = , : : 
L138. - OFTHE GITIE OF GOD. 319 


firft was called Ecedemia of one Ecedemsus , afoldiour vnder (ajtor and Pollux: and {0 aftet, 
came to be called Academia : This Laertinstoucheth ac. Apsleins faith that Plato left all his 
patrimonic, in alittle garden ‘neare this Academie,cwo feruants,acup for facrificing in,and 
as much gold as would make an eare-ring, Ja vita Platon. Laertius faith hee was honorably 
buried in the Academy,and that CMithridates king of. Pontus, hauing taken Athens ,ere&ed 
Plato a ftacue,dedicating it tothe Mufes.In Athens(this we may not paffz) were thefe {chooles: 
Firft the Academy fecondly Liceum, thirdly Prytaneam, fourttily Cte. fifily Stoa, fixtly The (ch: les 
Tempe,feuenthly (ynofarges. (g) Therevpon } Thisis the old Academy, taught to _Archefilas, athens, 
by Colemon Senocrates his {choller, and hee endeuoured to reduce all to Socrates his forme of | 
difputation,to affirme nothing, but confute all, and this was called the new Acamede , which 
Tully in Uarro's perfon affirmeth was like the old one? Buchence-forth thofe that had pofi- 
tiue grounds for any thing,and helda truth to be in things, as Plate did; were not called Aca- 
demicks but Platonsits,1 thinke becaufe the name of Academicks was io proper to Archefilas - 
{chooles. (4) Plotine | Borne ( faith Swidas ) ar Lycopolis in Egipe : hee wrote foure and fittie plosing, 
bookes,obicure ones,cokeepe the cuftome of his feet. Hecliued in th Emper: r Galiexus time, 
vatill Probus encted,he of whofe defteny Firmsiens doth fo lie and prate.Porphyry,Plormes na —: 
ler wrote his life at large. (1) Lambtichas | Of Calchis , Porphyries {choller,a Pyrhagorif? tathet Tamblichus 
then a Péatons/t as Hier ons ceftificth t yet ini all diuine matters , the Platoniffs are Pythagorians. 
His witte and manners wete better then bis maifters. ( &) Porphyry | A Tyrian, one neither Porphyry, 
found in body nor minde, of wauering iudgement, vnmanly inucterate malice and crue!ty-.a 
profeffed Plotinsff : Susdas faith he was Amelins {choller alfo. Porphiry (faith he}was properly 
called Baflens,a Tyrian philofopher,e£melins his {choiler whom Plotine taught, Hee liued in 
SArelians time and continued vntill Déecletians. Thus fatte Suidas. Why he was called Bafileus 
he fheweth in his maifter Plotines life. Ansefsus (quoth he) dedicated this booke to me, and inthe 
sitle called me Bahieus, for that was my name : in the language of my country, was called after my 
father Malcus : which tranflated is keng-Thus he of himfelfe, (/) Plato himfelfe} In his Timfens he 
calles Saturne,Ops,and [uno gods, and all the reft brethten and kinsfolkes amongft them-felues, ‘ 
and elfe-where,hee commands facrifices vrto their gods, Demsones & Heroes: faying itis thefe 
to whom the Cities good eftate is to be commended, De legib.c de repub. in diuer{e places, 


Of Plato’s 4ffirmation,that the gods were all geod,and louers of vertue. 
Cuap. 13. - 
Nj Herefore though in other points they aad wee doe differ,yet to ouer-paflé 
them in this great controuerfie now in hand, aske them what gods we muft 
_ worfhip ? the good, the bad,or both? nay herein we muft take Plite’s(4Jaffertion, 
that holds all the good to be good, no bad ones of them : Why then this worfhip 
is the gods, or then it is the gods,and if they be bad their god-head is gone. This 
being true,(and what elfe fhould we beleeue: chen downe g eth the (4) opinion 
that affirmes aneceffity of appeafing the bad gods by facrifices, and inuoking the 
good.For there are no bad gods : & the good onely/if there were)muft haue the 
worthip,without any other pectakers. What are they then chat loue ftage-plaies, 
andto fee their owne crimes, thruft into their honors and religion? their power: 
proones them fome-thing, but their affe&s conuince them wicked , Péato’s opini-. 
on of playes was fhewen in his iudgement of the expulfion of Poets, as pernici- 
ous and baleful! to an honeft ftace. What gods are cheynaw that oppofe Plato in 
defence of thofe playes ? hee cannot endure that the gods fhould bee flandered, 
they cannot endure vnlefie they be openly defaced. Nay they added malicious. 
cruelty to their beftiall defires,depriuing T.Latinus of his fonne, & ftrikibg him 
with a difeafe,mary when they had doneas they pleafed, then they freed: him fr. 
his maladie.But Plato very wifely forbad all feare of the euill po rers,8& confirm- 
ing himfelfe in his opinicn feared not to avow the expulfionof al thefe politique 
abfurdities,from a firme ftate,all thofe filthinefles -¥ rhofe gods delighted in.And 
this Plato doth Labeo make a Semsy-god:euen that(c)l.4beo that holds that fad, black Labeo, 
and bloudy facrifices do fit the euill gods ,& mirthfull orgies the good: why then 
| Ec4 dares 


8 


Sn 


320 SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuaray 


dares Plato , but a femigod , boldly debarre the gods themfelues , the very good 
ones, from thofe delights which hee held obfcznce and valawfull? Thefe gods 
neuerctheleffe confute Lebeo,for they (howed them-felues cruell and barbarousa- 
gainft Letinas,not mirthfull nor game-fome. Let the P/etonsfs , that holdall che 


gods to be good and invertue the fellowes of the wife,and affirme ita facriledge - 


to beleeue other of them, let them expound vs this miftery , wee will, fay they: 
marke vs well we do fo. | - + 7 


& 9 extern 


| : L. VIVES. 


| penne )eAffertion.| Deleg.1c.he faith the gods are good, full of vertne, prowidence and inf- 
SB tiweshbut yet that they hane all this from bim ii bath the true being, the Prince of nature, as 
from the fountaine of all goodxeffe. his argument Socrates (in their banquet ) vfeth to proue 

Lone no god : all the gods are good, and bleffed : fois not Lene : ergo. Porphyry de facrifie. 

2.GOD is neither hurtfull, uer needefull of any thing. So held the Stokes as Tull 

. faith, Offic.2 but wee are all for Plate now 3 whereof pe Se fpeakes :if wee fhould recite al, 

whac end fhould wee make.( 6 ) The opinion. | Apuleius faith forme of the Damones lone day 
offerings fome the nights forme mirthfull rites, fome fed and melancholy. De deo focrat Porpherio 
Whythe ypon Horace his Carmen feculare faith it ; was a common opinion that fome geds were wor/l spped 
soulless leaft they fLonld kurt , and o.beys from protetlion, Plutarch {ath that kings and princes déd offer 
hipped, Sacrifices to thefe great Damones,to auert their wrath which was alwaies moft perilloxs. Porphery 
faith thar ftates neede fome-times offer to the dinells to appeafe them fram hurting their corne,cate 

tellor horfes,for fure st is( quoth he)that if they bee negletted.they will become angry,and doe men 
much mifchiefe : but lawfull worfhsp they hane none , and this the dinines not the vulgar onely ) de 
‘The foper- bold , allowing facrifices to bee offered them, but that they muft net bee tafted of. De abftinent.a- 
mi ntmat.lib .2.(¢) Labeo. | Porphery inthe faid booke, allowesno liuing creature, but fruites 
ave nd flowers hony and meale to be offered to the gods aboue : So vfed the ancients, and fo fhould 
Iming offe- 1 be faith Theophraftus, and Pibagoras would neuer fuffer creature to beekil'ed for facrifice, 
redtothem But blood and flaughter are expiations for the deuills. And Porphery elfewhere faith that the 
lower the gods are the fadder facrifies they require:the earth-gods,aud bell-gods lone blacke cattell: 
the ferft upon alltars,the latter in granes and pits. 


‘Cn. 9 


Of fuch as held.3.Kinds of reafonable fowles:in the gods ,in airy [pirits, 


andinmen HAP.14. 


A LL reafonable( 4) creatures ( fay they ) are threefold: gods , men, deuills 
The denlls = > the gods the heigheft , then the diuells, laftly, men : the firft hauing place in 
community heauen, the fecond intheayre, che third onthe earth : each with his change of 
rub gods place , hath difference in nature : the gods are of more power then the {pirits, or 
ms men: and menace vnder the {pirits and gods, both by place of nature and worth 
of merit,(4)the {pirits, in the middeft,ate vnder the gods and fo their inferiours: 

aboue men in place ,and therefore in power withthe gods , they are immorrtall: 

with men paffionare,and cherefore louers ofloofe {ports , and poetical} figments 

and are {ubied toall humaine affe&ts , which the gods by nomeanes can bee: So 

Plato's prohibi: ion of Poetry did not depriue the gods of their delights,but only 


the ayry {pirits. Well,of this queftion diuers,but 4patesus a Platonift of Madau- 


ra,chiefly in one whole u orke, difputeth, calling it De deo Socrasis , of Socrates his 
goa:wher he difputeth what kind of god(c)this power that Socrates had attendant 
vpon him was:[¢ was as his friend,& forbad him to proceed in any ation which 
itknew would not end profperoufly. Now there he plainly atirmeth,thacthis was 
no god, but onely an ayry {pirit,handling Pete's doGrine rarely , = 

| | eignt 


a 


L128. OF THE CITIE OF GoD. 32x. 


height of che gods,rans meanneffe, and the diuells ridle interpofition. Bur thig 
_ beingchus , how durft Pleto deprine (not thie gods, for them hee acquitted from 
all touch of humaine affects ) butthen the ayry fj pirits of cheir ftage pleafures, 
by expelling of Poets 2 vnlefie by this a@ hee meant ti warne inars foule how 
cuer here encheyned in corruption, yet to deteft the vinpure, and impious foule- 
nefie of thefe deuills,euen for hoferties fakepfor if Plete’s prohibition,and proofe 
be iuft,then is their demand and defire moft damnable. So either Cpaleins mit. 
tooke the kind of Socrates his Geiius or Plato contradiGs himf elfe, now (4) hario- 
ring thofe {pirits and ftreigth after abridging chem their pleafures,ard expelling 
their delights from an honett ftate; or elfe Socrates his fj pirit was not worth the ' 
approuing,wherein Apwlcius offehded in being not afhamed to ftilehis booke(e) 
De deo Socratis, of his god, and yet proties by his owne diftin@ion of Di & damo- 
wes, that hee fhould haue called it De dessone Socratis, ofhis diuell. But this hee 
had racher profeffe in the body of his difcourfe then in his ticle, for thename of 
a Demon was by good dodérine brovght into fuch hate, that ( f) whofoener bad 


read Demen in the titlesere he had read the Demons commendations inthebooke, — 


would haue thought Apuleius (¢ Jmaddee And what found he praife-worthy in 


them , buc their fubtile,durabi¢ bodiés,and eleuationof place;when hee came to 
their conditions in generall , heé found no goad, but fj pake much euill of them: 
fo that hee that readeth that booke, will neuer maruell at their defiring plaies; 
and that fuch gods as they fhould be delighted with crimes, beaftly (howes, bar- 
_ barous cruelty, and what ever el{e is horrible or ridiculous , thatall this (heuld 
{quare with their affeéts,is no wonder. os 


Spare. 


FR Fafonable.(c ) (reatures.\ Plato reckoneth three forts of godsithe Deityes,the Damon 5,8 


the Heroes : but thefe laft hauereference to men;whence they arife. De leg.4:Epinom. Plue T 


sarch highly commends thofe that placed the fpints betwixt gods andmen: wereic Orphens, 
fome Phirgian or pe » for both their factifices profeffeth ic. De sy hes oracul. for they 
ford the meanes (faith he)wherein gods and men conturre. Homer(fatth be)uferh the names at 
vazden:now calling them gods,and now demones : Hefiad;fire made reafonable nature quadripar= 
‘tite into gods, {pirits, Heroes,and mortalles:who liuing well arife both to Heroes and Dames 
wes.(b) The fpsrits.| Socrates in Plates (onwiniums, mentionetha difputation with Diaryuse, 
‘whrere hee'affirmeth the {pirits nature to bee meane betweene gods ard mans.(c ) This pewer.} 
Socrates (they fay ) had a fpirit that forbad him all acts « hofe cuents it knew fhould not bee 
fucceffefull : but neuer incited hin to any thing whatfoeuer, (d) Honoriag.] Teaching it alfo 
Epinom.‘¢)De deo. | All chat handled this before Apuleius ; called this {pirit a Demon not a dei< 


‘ 


ty : him-felfe in aboue [ix hundreth places in P/ato,in Plato Zenuphon alfo,(icero and Plutarch, 


(Maximus of Tyre who wrot a double demonftration hereof : So did many other cailic, bork 
Platanift's and Philofophers of other nations,recitall were tedious. ( Ff )Whofoener:] Whofoeuer. 
seads the title beforethe Booke ere he read the booke.( g ) cAMadde.] For the gentiles as then 
called the Demenyaksand fuch as were poffeffed with the deuill,mad men: Pag Be ae 


That neither the ayry {pirits bodies nor height of place, make then excell a 
“ | Citar. ee ee ee 
YY HerforeGod forbad that a foule that feares God hould thinke thofe fpirits 
| +” toexcellitbecaufe they haue more (4) perfea& bodies: Sothould beafts 
excel vs alfo,many of which goe beyond vs in quicknes of fence,nimblenes sfwift- 
nefic,ftrength and long life what man fees like the Eagle,or Vultur#{mellslike to 
the dog? is {wifter then ftags, hares,and birds?ftrongas a lyonor an elephant, or 
Fines with the ferpent(b)ehar with his thin put of his cares &heeomes yong agains 
| | : 


™ 


” 


; : = ’ os: 


322 | SAINT AVGVSTINE. C uap.ry 


Bucas we excell thefe in vnderftanding, fo do wee the ayrie fpirits in inft liuing ; 
or fhould do at leaft. For therefore hath the high prouidence giuen them bodies 
in fome fort excelling ours,that we might haue the greater careto preferue, and 
augment that wherein we excell them,rather then our bodies:and learne to con- 
temne that bodily perfe@ion which wee know they haue, inreipe& of the good- 

nefie of life, whereby we are before them,and fall obtaine immortalitie of bod 
alfo,not for the erernitic of plagues to affli& , but which purity of foule thall ef- 
fe&. And for the (¢) higher place,they hauing the ayre,and we the earth, it were 
aridiculous confequence to make them our betters inthat: for fo fhould birds 
be by the fame reafon. (a) I but birds being tyred, or lacking meate come downe 
cocarthtoreft or to feede, fo doe not the fpirits: Wellthen , will you preferre 
them before vs,and the fpirits before them ? if this bee a mad pofition , as mada 
confequence it is to make them excell vs by place,;whom we can,nay muft excell 
by pyety. For asthe birds of the ayre are not preferred before vs , but fubiea&ted 
to vs for the equitie of our. reafon: fo though the deuills being higher then wee, 
are not our betters becaufe ayre is abone earth : but we are their betters, becaufe 
orig our faith farre furmounteth their defpaire. For Plato's reafon dividing the ele- 
deulsdes ments into foure,and parting mooucable fire and immooueable earth by inter- 
fpaire. —_ pofition of ayre and water , giuing each an equall place aboue the other , this 
 prooues that the worth of creatures dependeth not vpon the placing of the ele- 
ments. And dpsieins making a man an casthly creature, yet preferreth him be- 

fore the water-creatures, whereas P/eto puts the water aboue the earth , to fhew 
that che worth of creatures is to be difcerned by another methode then the po- 
fture of naturall bodies: the meaner body may include the better foule, and the 
perfectertheworfe. acoso 


‘ © Cee 


. ge. 8 


LIES. _ 
The deuills M Ore (4) perfect] Apuleius makes them ofa meane temperature betweene earthly and xthe- 


ymore pure and tran{parent then a clowde,coagulate of the moft fubtile parts of ayre, 

and voide of all folidity,inuifible vnleffe they pleafe.to forme themfelues a groferfhape. (6) 

Thefer. _ Pat with bis skinne | Cafting his skinne,he begins at his cies,chat one ignorant thereof would 
peatsreno: thinke him blind. Then gettes he his head bare,and in 24.houres putteth it of bis whole body. 
uation, Looke Ariftot.de gen anim lib.8.(c) Higher place} Which Apuleixs gathers thus - No elemene 
Lib is voyde of creatures. Earth hath men and beats: the water, fifhes: fire fome liuing things 
An 4g fo, wienefle eAriftorte : Ergo the ayre muft have fome alfo: but vnleffe thofe fpirits bee they, 
Dee Socrae Hone can tell what they be, So that the {pirits are vnder the gods,and aboue vs: cheir inferiors 
tis, our betters. (4) [but bsrds | Apuleius his anfwer : thus: Some giue the ayre to the birdsto 
Olympuse dwell in: falfly : For they neuer go higher then Ofympme cop : which being the higheft mount 
of the world, yet perpendicularly meafured is not two furlongs high. whereas he ayre rea- 

cheth vp to the concaue of the Moones fpheare,and there the skies Becin, What is chen inall 

that ayrie {pace betweene the Moone and O/yaspus top ? hath it no creatures? is it 2 dead vie~ 

leffe part of nature? And againe, birds (if one confider them well ) are rather creatures earth- 

ly chen a¢reall : on earth they feed, reft,breed, and flye as neare it as may bee: and. when they 

are weary , earth is their port of retirement This from an imperfect coppy of Apuleius: yet 
Auguftines reafon of the place muft ftand : for though the fpirits bee aboue the birds , yet the 

birds are flill aboue vs : but 1 meane.not heare to play the difputant. ee 


. ~ 


what Apuleius the Platonift beld _——- the qualities of thofe ayrie ivitsa 

| os 4 HAP. 16. | - es [ = 
— fame Pleseniit {peaking of theis qualities (faith , thet shey are ( amen ) 
2 7 , fubiecé 


Liz.8.° OF THE CITIE ‘OF GOD. 323 


- fubieEl to pafsionsof anger delight, glory, unconftaniie in therr ceremonies, and furte 
upon neglect. Belides,to them belong dininations,dreames,auguries prophesies, and all 
magicians miraculous workes. Briefly he defineth them, things created, 91 /(iue, reafo- 
nable,atreall eternal: Inthe three firft they perticipate with vs + inthe fourth 5 a. 
with none, in the fift with the gods: and two of the firft the gods fhare with them us, ~ 
alfo.For the'(a) gods ( faith hee ) are creatures: and giuing each element to his 
proper inhabicants, hee giues earth to men,and the other creatures ; water to the 
fifhes,&c.aireto thefe {pirits,and e£¢her to the gods.Now in that the (pirits are 
creacures,they cominunicate both wich men and beafts,in reafon with gods and 
men,in eternity with gods onely; in paffion With men onely, in ayrie effence wich 
none.So that they are creatures is nothing; for fo are beafts: in that they arerea- 
fonable,fo are we,equally: in that they are eternall what is that without felicity: 
(6) Temporall happineffe excells eternall miferie . In that they are paffiue, whae 
get they by that? fo are we, and were we not wretched wee fhould not bee for in 
that their.bodies are ayrie , what of that , fecing a foule of any nature is prefér- 
red before a body of what perfe@tion fo euer > And therefore the honor giuen by 
the foule,is not due to the foules inferiour. But if chat amongft thefe {pirits qua- 
lities hee had reckoned wifdome,vertue and felicitie, and haue made them comm 
municate thefe with the gods, thenhad he fj = {ome-what, worth noting, yet 

-ought we not to worfhip them as God, for thefe ends, but rather we fhould know 
him of whom they had thefe good gifts. But as they arehow farre are they from 
worth of worfhip,being reafonable to be wretched, paffiue to be wretched, eter- 
nallro be euer wretched? wherefore toleaue all and infift on this onely which I 
faid thofe fpirits fhared with vs, that is paffion , ifeuery element haue his crea- 
tures, fire and ayre immortalls , earth and water mortalls, why are thefe {pirits 
f{ubie& to perturbations ? ( to that which the Greekes call (¢ ) ra80s. whence our 
word paflion deriueth : word (d) of word, wes, and paffion, being (¢) a motion of 
the minde againft reafon), WWhy are thefe in thefe {pirits that are not in beafts 2. 
for th’apparance of fuch in beafts, is (no perturbation, becaufe it is not againtt 
reafon, which the beaft wanteth. And that it isa perturbation in men, (¢ ) their 
foolithnelfe,or their (4) wretchedneffe is. caufe. For we cannot haue that perfec- 
tion of wifdom in this life that is promifed vs after our acquittance from morta- 
licy. Now the gods they fay cannét fuffer thofe perturbations , becaufe that theie 
eternicie is conidyned with felicity: and this they affirme the reafonable foule 
thac is abfolutely pure,enioyeth alfo. Sg then if the gods be free from paflion,be- 
caufe they are (#) creatures bleffed , and not wretched : and the beafts , becaufé 
they are creatures, neither capable of bleffedneffe nor wretchednefie : it remais 
neth that thefe {pirits be perturbed like men ,onely bécaufe they are creatures not 
bleffed but wretched. ) | | 


a wero aye ore 


L.VIVES. | _ 
[0 a)Geds | Plato alfo in his Tincens faith,that they are inuifible creatures. Apuleius de dee 
Socr.makes fome vncorporall Dessones,viz.Lone & Sleep.(b)Temporal\ltis faid that ve 
Satarnes fonne refuled immortality, & that Viyfes chofe rather to liue and die at home with his 
father and friends, then to live immortal amoneft the goddefles. Plato faith it is better to liue a 
very little while, then to be eternally poffett of all bodily pleafures without iuftice & the other Immortalle - 
vertues.d? legtb: the Philofophers haue a fayin git us better to be then not to be: of that hereafter. a oe 
(c) wafes |\So Tull. Tef.gx.tranflateth it: & Owintil 6 termeth it affects,8 holds $ moft proper. ania ; 
Péiny only of their ancients, vfeth paffion for it : bur I make doubr that the copy 1s faulty 4.20. ; 
the words are Jt — the paffions of the belly being anneinted therupo.(d Word of word} as wabot 
of mie ,8¢ paffio of pasior,co fuffer:(e).A motion] Tully hath it from Zeno, (f) No perturbation] 
, | T why 


324 SAINT AVGVSTINE. C wap.17. 


Tully Tufc.queft. The affections of the body may be inculpable,but not the mindes : all which 
arife out of the neglect of reafon,and therefore are exiftent onely in men : for that which wee 
fee by accident in beatts , isno perturbation. (g) Their fool:/bneffe | For wee are ouer-borne 
with falfe opinions : and our felues rather worke our affects then receiue them 46 extra,and as 
Seneca faith,we are euer worfe afraide then hurt. The Stoikes held all perturbations to haue 
their fource from deprauation of opinion. For defire is an opinion of afuture good : and feare 
an opinion of future ‘euill,forrow,of prefent euill,ioy of prefent good, all which we meafuring 
by the fondneffe of our thoughts,and not by the nature of things , thence it comes that wee 
are rapt with fo many violent thoughts, (4) Their wretchedneffe | This is mans miferie , thae 
the very wifeft is fubie ro forrow, ioy,and other affeéts,doe he what he can. (1) Creatures} 
Socrates durft not confeffe that thefe {pirits were bad, or wretched : but hee boldly affirmes - 
they are neither'good nor happy. Plate. (onninie. | 


whether it becomes a man to worlbip thofe [pirits from whofe guilt he 
fhould be pure. Car. 17. 


WV Hat fondneffe then,nay what madneffe fubie&s vs vnto that religion of de- 
uills, when as by the truth of religion we fhould be faued from participati- 
on of their vices ? for they are mooued with wrath (as —puleius for all his ado- 
ring and {paring them a hae : but true religion biddeth vs not to yeeld to 
wrath, but rather (4) refift it.(6) They are wonne with guifts, wee are forbidden 
to take bribes of any. They loue honors, we are (¢) prohibited all honors affecta- 
tion, They are haters of fome,& louers of fome,as their affects tranfpore them: 
| truth teacheth vs to loue all,euen (d ) our very enemies. Briefly all che inrempe- 
Mzt, 5.44. rance of minde, (¢) paffions and perturbations , which the truth affirmes of 
them, it forbiddeth vs. What caufe is then, but thine owne lamentable error for 
thee to humble thy felfe to chem in worfhip , whom thau feekeft to oppofe in 
vprightneffe of conuerfation ? and to adore thofe thou hateft to imitate, when 
as all religion teacheth vs to imitate thofe we adore ? 


roe 


L. VIVES. 


Abbot A- | Osea & )refst | Chrift in Mathewes Gofpelsvtterly forbids anger. Abbot Agathe faid 
guho, that an angry man could neuer pleafeG OD, though hee fhould raife the dead to life: 
(b) They | They take willingly,and begge impudently, Apollos oracle did alwayes bid his cli- 
ents remember him with a guift to make them-felues more fortunate by : yet the craftie deuill 
defires not their mency (he needed not) but their mindes that was his ayme. (¢ ) Prohibited | 
Christ forbids his Apoftles to affume the name of Maifters, to fit high at table, er loue falutes 
in the ftreetes : and commands that the chiefe fhould bee but as a minifter, For honor arofe 
with Heathenifme,and fhould fall there-with,and not furuiue in the Church : nor is it magna- 
nimous to affect but to contemne it. (4) Onr very exemies | Mat.5.44. Lone your enemyes, 
bleffe thems that cxr(e you,erc, lt fufficeth not,to beare them no hate,we muft loue them: which 
is not impoffible. For firft Chrift did it, and chen Steen. Hierom. (¢) Paffiens and perturbati- 
ons | or paffionate perturbations. » 


Of that religson that teacheth, that thofe [pirits muff bee mens aduocates 
to the good gods. Cuar. 18. | : 


[XN vaine therefore did — 4padeius and all of his opinion, honor them fo asto place 
chem inthe ayre,and becaufe God and man ( as Plato (4) faith) haueno imme- 
diate commerce, thefe are the carriers of mens prayers to the gods, and their an- 
{wers to men.For thofe men thought it vnfit to ioyne the gods with men:but held 
the fpirits.fit meanes for both fides co (6) to take the prayers hence, and bring 

anfwers 


Ling | | ~OF THE CITIE OF GOD. gag 


-anfwers thence: that a chafte man, and one pure from Magicall fuperftition, _ 
might vie thenras his patrons ,by whome hee might fend to the gods that loue 
fuch things as if hee forbeare to vfe ir,maketh him farre more fite to bee heard of 
good deities : for they loue ftage-filche 5 which chaftitie lotheth: they loue all the 
villanies of witch-crafts which innocence abhorreth. Thus chaftity and inno- 
cence if they would any thing wich God , muft make their enemies their inter-_ 
ceffors,or elfe go empty away. He may faue his breath in defence of ftage-plaies:. 
Plato his highly-admired maifter giueth them too fore a blow : if any man i fo. 
fhameleffe , as to delight in obfcxnity him-felfe , and thinke it accepted alfo of 
the gods. | o , 


| L. VIVES. 
Pz (a) faith \In Socrates perfon in his (onsininm. Diotyma hauing put loue as meane 
berwixt mortalltie and immorrtalitie : Socrates asked her, What that loue was ? Azimoy yey Ht, 
quoth fhe,the great Demon: (Socrates) for allthofe Demones are betwixt gods and men. So# 
crates pot yet conceiuing her,asked che nature of this Dewson. He carieth (faith fhe) meflages 
betweene the gods and men : theirs to vs, ours to them : our prayers, their bounties. Such as 
this haue the middle place of che vniuerfe : chether defcend prophecies, thether aimes all ces. 
remoniall artes of the Priefts,charmes,7e/ete,and all the parts of Magicke. And thee addeth3 
Osos Se’ a'vecaw s uiprvras, God hath no coniunttion with man, but vfeth thefe Dzmones in all his 
commerce with men, fleeping er waking. (b) Take thene| Apuleius calls them Saluti-geruli, 
health-bearers ; and admini/fri,minifters : the firft in our refpect, the fecond in the gods, Ca- 
pella calls them Angeli,meffengers,that cell the gods what we doe, and Praftires, becaule their 
hand is chiefe in all actions. . 7 


Lead 


Of the wickedne(fe of arte Magicke, depending on thefe wicked 
Spsrsts miniflery. Cua P. Ie - ‘ 


N Ow will I out of the publike (6) light of all the.world,bring ouer-throwes 
| totheartes Magicke, whereof fome wicked and fome wretched doe make 
boafte inthe deuills name : why if they bee the workes of the god: , are they fo 
feuerely punifhed by the lawes ? or haue Chriftians divulged thefe lawes againft 
chem with any other intent then to fupprefle athing fo generally pernitious vn- 
to all man-kinde? what faiththat worthyPcet?> “= ° an 
Teftor chara deos,& tegermana,tuumg, - _ -_ Ancid.fe 
Dulce iy a Magieas inuitam accingier artes. , 
(6) Silter,by heauen,and thee that hear{t my vowes, 
I would not vfearte Magick,could I choofe. 
And that which hee faith elfe-where. 7 _ _ 7 | 
(c) Atg, fatas alio vidi traducere meffes. Ving dege 
I faw the witch tranfport whole fields of corne, log 8. 
- -_Inthat thefe diabolical artes were reported of. power to rethooue whole har- 
| uefts of corne and fruits whether they pleafed: was noe this (as Tully faith )recor- 
ded in the xii. tables of Romes ancient lawes,and a punifhment proclaimed for all 
fuch as vied ic? Nay (4). was not _4puleius him-felfe brought before Chriftian Apuleius 
ludges for fuch practiles ? !f hee had knowne them to be diuine,hee fhould haue acculedof 
auouched them at his accufation,as congruent with the diuine powers, and haue “ei 
-<conninced the oppofite awes of abfurde impietie , in condemning fo admirable 
effets of the deities. For fo might hee either haue made the Iudges of his minde, _ 
or if they had beene refractarie , and: following their vniuft lawes put him to - 
death,then the {pirits would have done his foule as good a turneas hee-had de- | 
ferued in dying fearelefly,for the due auonching of. their powerfull operations, 


of 
y 


326 SAINT AVGVSTINE. C wap.1g 


Our martyrs when Chriftianisy was laide totheir charge, knowing it was the 
tract of eternall glory,denied it not to auoide a temporail torment, but auerred 
# conftantly,bore all tortures vndantedly,and dying fecurely, ftruck fhame vpon 
the lawes fore-heads that condemned it as vniawfull. But this Platenii# wrotea 
large and eloquent oration (¢ ) now extant wherein heé purgeth himfelfe of all 
touch of vfing thefe artes,and fees no meanes to prooue his owne innocence but 
by denying that which indeed no innocent can commit. But (/)for all thefe ma- 

ick miracles,hee rightly condemneth them, as done by the workes and operati- 
ons of the deuills : wherefore let him looke how hee can iuftly giue them diuine 
honors,as mediators betweene the gods and vs,when he fhewes their workes to 
be wicked: and {uch indeed as wee muft auoyde if'wee will haue our prayers 
come neare to the true God. And then whatare the prayers that hee affirmeth 
they doebeare vatothe gods ? Magicall or lawfull ? If magicall,the gods will re- 
ceiuenofuch prayers: if lawfull,then vfe they no fuch minifters. But if a finner 
(chiefly one that hath finned in Magicke repent and pray 5 will they carry vp his 
prayers,or obtaine his pardon chat were the caufers of his guile , and whom hee 
doth accufe? Or doe thefe deuills(to obtaine his pardon) ficft repent chem-felues 
for deceiuing him,and receiuea pardon them-felues alfo afterward. Nay, none 
will fay fos for they chat hope to get pardon by repentance , are farre from be- 
ing worthy of diuine honors: for if they were defirous of them, and yet peni- 
tents alfo,their pride wereto be detefted in the firft, chough their humility were 
to bee pittied in the Jatter.' - 


Ight,(4) of the |Some read law. (6) Sifter) Dido ynto hic fifter Anna, when e4neas 
“was departed : This Virgil grounds vpon the Romaines lawes, who for all their {uperfti- 
Magike fore ONsYct condemned Magick, Serwins.(d) Atg, fatas |Uirg. Pharmacente. Plin.l.i8.Duod.Tab. 
ie Hee that Enchants the corue, Gc. and fo in diuerfe places. ae faith that Vectins Marcellus, 
| Nero's Harbinger had an Oliue-yeard in the (Marucine fields, that remooued oe ouer 
the high-way,and that the whole farmes went out of their places and feated them-{clues elie- 
where. Magick (faith Apuleius) was forbidden of old by the twelue tables becaufe of the in- 
credible bewitching of che corne: (4) Was not |So were many, by the Romaine lawcs: Apolle- 
nins Tyancns by Domitian,and Apuleius by Claud, Maximus PrafeQ of Africa :not the Chrie 
ftian. (¢) Now extant |His two Apologies concerning Magicke > wherein hee) leaueth all his 
luxurious phrafe,and his fuftian tearmes,and goeth to it like a plaine lawyer = yet not fo well 
but he flies out here andthere arid muft bee -4paleias fill. (f) For al thefe |] How could men 
know ( faith Ex/ebins ) how to call and compell the Deuils, but by the deuills owne teaching 
chem ? This Porphyry confeffeth,and alledgeth Hecates prefcription how thee fhould bee cals 

led out. De Orac. : | 


whether it be credible that good Gods had rather conuer(e with thofe 
- Spirits then with men, Cuar. 20. : 

But there isa neceflitie bindeth thefe fpirits in this place between the gods 

and men,to carry & recarry meffages & anfwers from the one to the other. 
Well,and what neceflity? why becaufeno god hath commerce immediatly with 
man. Very good! Oh( 4) that is a glorious holyneffe of GO D furely, that 
pone not with a penitent, humble man, and yet will conuetfe with a 
proud fpirit ! Hee hath no commerce with a man that flieth from fuccour to his 
death, but with a fpirit chat counterfeits. his deity, hee hath: hee medleth not 
with him that asketh pard6, but with the fpirit that imagineth mifchiefehe doth: 
he dealeth not with aPhilofopher } expelleth tage playes,out ofan honeft wah 
| 38 | ut 


L138. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 337 


he dealeth witha deuill chat forceth ftage-playes fromthe priefts and Senators, 
as part ofthe religion of acitty,he liketh not the mens company that forbid flan- 
ders of the gods, but the deuils that delight in them,theirs he liketh of. Hee con- 
‘uerfech not withthe man that executeth iuft lawes vpon Magitians,but with the. 
deuills chat teach Magicke, and giue it effe@ thofe hee con uerfeth with : not 
is ioyned with a man that flieth the example of the deuill,yet ioynes with the de- 
uill chat hunteth for the wrack of man: This is likely fure. 


L. VIVES. 


O (a) that ts a glorions | The Bruges copie hath alittle alteration,tran{ferring [ penitent ]into 
a following fentence ; but the fence is all one : it were curiofity to ftand ypon fuch 
{mall trifles. 


whether the gods ufe the Denills as their Meffengers, and be willing that 
they {bould deceiuethem,or ignorant that they do tt. 


C wap. 21. 


BY there is a great neceffity of this fo vile an inconuenience, becaufe the £- 
thereall gods,(but that thefe fpirits being vpward)other-wife could not know 
the affaires of earth : heauen (yee know) being farre from earth , and ayre adioy- 
ning to both.O rare wifdome! This is their opinion, that their good gods hauea 
care of humane bufineffes,elfe were they not worth worfhip,and yet the diftance 
of place debarres them from notice how things paffe , but that the fpiries helpe 
them: fo there are they neceflary : and confequently worfhip-worthy, as the 
meanes that the gods haue to know mens cafes, and to fend chem helpe in time: 
If chis then be fo,the deuills contiguous body is better knowne to the gods then 
a mans good minde.O lamentable — ! nay rediculous deteftable vanitie, 
to keepe vanity from diuinitie. Ifthe gods by their freedom from the bodies ob- 
ftacles,can behold our mindes,what need they any {pirits helpe ? And if the gods 
haue corporall meanes ,as fight, fpeach, motion, or fo, in bodies, by which they 
" receiue the fpirits meffages, then may the fpirits lye, and deceiue them alfo. So 
that if the deyties be not ignorant of the deuills deceits ,no morearethey bard 
the knowledge of our actions. But I would they would tell mee whether the {pi- 
rits told the gods that P/ato difliked the flanders that the Poets laide vpon them, 
and yet concealed that they did like well of them, or concealed all , chat the gods 
neuer knew ic: or revealed all, P/sto’s religious zeale, and their owne vile aftei- 
on ? ordid they fupprefle Plato's opinion that would haue fuch impious liberty 
abrogated as by Poctique fables did iniure the gods ,and yet fhamed not to lay 
open their. owne wickedneffe in affeGing fuch playes as conteined the gods dif- 
graces: Choofe of thefe foure which they will , and marke the fequell. How 
vilely they thoughtof thefe good gods. If they choofe the firft,then it is granted 
thatthe gods mighcnot conuerfe with good Pésgto that reftrained their fhames, 
and yet conuerfed with thofe euill {pirits that reioyced at thefe iniuries of the 
gods, who could not know a good man being a farre but by thefe deuills,becaufe 
they could not know thefe deuills that were fo neare them. If they take the 
fecond , and fay che {pirits concealed both , that the gods fhould neither know 
Plato's religious lawe, and the deuills facriligious praGife , what vfe can the 
gods haue of thefe meflengers for any knowledge, feeing they could.nothaue 
knowledge of the good lawes that honeft men a in their honor — 
| 2 4 


a a cp ns 
328 | SAINT AVGVSTINE. C HAp.22 


a en Ce Le eee ee 
the luft of chofe vile fpirits! If they choofe the third and make thefe fpirits both 
to celebrate Plato's prohibition of the gods iniuries ,and their owne affe@ation — 
of their continuance’ why were not this rather to ouer-crow them, then to in- 
terpreteto them ? Ard fo fhould the gods heare and iudge of both thefe relati- 
ons,thac they neither thould cafheere thefe fpirits of their feruice, that oppoled 
Plato his good zeale, nor forbeare to fend Plato rewards by them, for his honeft 
intent. For fo are they placed in the chaine of nacures(4) elemients,that they may 
haue the company of thofe that iniurie them,but not of thofe that defend them: 
both they may know, but the ftates of (6) ayreand earth they catinot alter, nor 
tranfmute.Now if they choofg the fourth, itis worfe then all. For who canen- 
dure the deuills fhould cell the gods how they are abufed By players and Poets, 
and of the height of pleafure themfelues take in thefe thewes, and yet bee filenc 
of Plato's graue decree that abrogatedall fuch obfcenities > that fo the good gods 
might haue intelligence of the wickednefle of the worft : their owne meffens 
gets sand yet none of the Philofophers goodneffes,that aymed all at their honor 
whereas the other profeffed their extreame difgrace. 


L. VIVES. 


Thecle-— T He (a) chine of \for the elements are cheined together as i¢ were : the lower tothe high- 

waa er,to coherent, that the parts contiguous feeme both of one nature & foit isin the {pherés 
that are all contained one within another. (6) Ayre and earth That we can neither afcend(not 
jnthought)vnto them, for they defcend to vs,to heare and helpe vs without interpretours, 


The renouncing of tie worfbip of thofe [pirits againit Apufeius, 
| HAP, 22. 


TO auoyde therefore all euill thoughts concerning the gods all che fouréare 
to be auoyded: nor muft we at all beleeuc what Apulesws wold haue vs, and 
others with him, chat the Demones are fo placed berweene the gods and men,that 
they beare vp mens prayers,and bring downe the gods helpes : bur that they aré 
fpirits moft thirftie of mifchiefe, wholy vniuft, proud , envious, treacherous, 
(4) inhabiting the ayre in deed, as thrutt out of the glorious heaven for their vn- 
The devils Pardonable guiir,and condemned eternally ro that prifon. Nor are they aboue 
habitation, man in merite becaufe ayre is aboue earth, for men doe eafily excell them,notin 
quality of body , but in the faith and fauour of the true God. Indeed they rule 
ouer many that are not worthy of the perticipation of gods truth: fuch are their 
fubie&s , wonhne to them by falfe myracles, and by illufions perfwading them 
that they are gods . But others that looked more narrowly intochem and their 
qualities, would not beleeue this that they were gods, onely they gott this place 
in their opinion,to be held the gods meffengers,and bringers of mens good fore 
tunes. Yet chofe that held chem not gods, would not giue them che honor of gods 
 becaufe chey faw chem euill,and held all gods to be good : yet durft chey nor de- 
nie them all diuinéhonors , for feare of offending the people, whofe inueterate 
{uperftition preferued them in fo many temple:,alrars,and facrifices. 


© eet 


so V iV E S. 
[reins (2) the ayre, | The olde writers placed all their fable -f hell in the ayre: and 
there was Ssmmanus , Proferpina , the (Manes , and the Furies. Capella, Chalcidius 
faich, the ayre was iuftiy called dedw:, darke : Peter alfo and Jude affirme that the deuillsare 
bound in dashneffe inthe ayre,& fone in che lovelt part of the earth, Empedeciesin Placer 


faich, 


~w YQ OS we 


— = 


ee 


faith that Heauen reieéted them, earth expels them, the fea cannot abide them , thus are they 


torrured by being toffed from place to place. 


Hermes Trifmegiftus hes opinion of Idolatrie,and how he might come to know 
that the Egiptian fuperftitions were to be abrogated. Cuar.23. 


“Or Hermes (a) the Egiptian, called T7s/megifius,wrote contrary to thefe. C4 
* puleius indeed holds them no gods: but middle agents betweene gods and 
men,that being fo neceflary he conioynes their adoration with the diuine wor- 
fhip.But Trifmegsflus faith, that the high God made fome. gods, and men other 


fome.Thefe words as I write them, may bee vnderftood of Iinages , becaufe they 


are the workes of men. But he calleth vifible and palpable bodies , the bodyes of 
the gods : wherein are {pirits (inuited in rhereco ) that haue power to hurt or 


pleafure fuch as. giue them diuine honors. So then, to combine fucha fpirit inui- — 


fible by arts vnto a vifible image of fome certaine fubftance, which it mutt vfeas 
the foule doth the body, this is , to makea god, faith hee, and this wonderfull 
power of making gods,is in the hands of man.His(6)words are thefe: And where- 
as our difcourfe (faith he) concernes the affinitie betweene gods and menymarke(A{cle- 


pius)thss power of man: Our God the Lord and Father, is the creator of the celeftiall gods, 


fois man of the terreftriall, which are inthe temples. And alittle after : So doth huma- 
nity remember the original, and ener flrineth to imitate the deity: making gods like 
the owne Image, as God the father hath done like his. Do you meane ftatues replied 
i ftatues,quoth he : doe you yee them animate full of [pirits and fence, 
(d) (trust your eyes doing {uch wonders ? fee you not flatues that prefage future euents 
( farre perhaps (e) beyond all propheticall in(piration to fore-tell) that cure difeafes and 
canfe them, eiuing men mirth or fadneffe,as they deferue? Know you not ( Afclepius) 
shat Egipt ts heawens Image, or rather the place whereinto allthe celeftiall graces def- 


'eend,the very temple of the whole world. Awd fince wifdome (bould fore know all, I 
would not haue you ignorant herein.The teme {ballcome that all the zeale of Egivt {bal 


be abrogated, and all the religions obferwations hetd idle and vaine. Then goeth hee 
forward,prophecying (by all likelyhood) of chriftianity, whofe true Findtitie is 
the verer {ubuerfion of all fiGiions and fuperftitions:that the Sauiours true grace 
might free vs from thofe humaine gods, thofe handy-workes of man, and place 
vs in gods feruice,mans maker. But Hermes prefageth thefe things as the deuills 
confederate, fupprefling the evidence of the Chriftian name,and yet fore-telling 
with a forrowfull intimation,cthat from it fhould proceed the wracke of all their 
Idolatrous fuperftitions : for Hermes was one of thofe,who (as the Apoftle faith) 


Knowing G OD, glorified him not as GOD, nor were thankfull, but becanie vaine in Ro 


‘Lr.8. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. Ty 


mi 1.21 


their imaginations, and their fool{b heart was fullof darkeneffe : when they profeffed **43- 


them-{elues wife they became fooles. For they turned the glory of the incorruptible God 
into the fymilttude of the Image of a corruptible man ,and byrdes, and foore-footed 
beafts,and Serpents (For this, Hermes faith much of God according ro truth; 
But how blindneffe of heare drawes him to affirme this, I know not, that thefe 
gods fhould bee alwayes fubie& , whome man hath made: and yet to bewaile 
their abrogations to come. As if man could bee more miferable any way, then 
in liuing flaue to his owne handy-worke :( g )it being eafier for him to put off 
all humanitie in adoring thefe peeces hee hath made , then for them to put on 
deity by being made by him. For it comes oftener to paffe that a man being fet 
in hanor,be not vnderftood to bee like to the beafts, then that his handy-worke 
| | FE 3 | fhould 


33° 


T.uc.r. 
Luac.r 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. | Cuan 


fhould bee preferred before the worke that God made like his owne Image, to 
wit,mans felfe. Worthily then doth hee fall from his grace that made him, that 
maketh that his Lord which he hath made himfelfe. Thofe vaine,deceitfull, per- 
nicious facriledges, Hermes forelecing fhould perifh deploreth,but as impudenc- 
ly as hee had knowne it foolithly . For the fpirit of GOD had not fpokento him 
as it did to the Prophets , that fpokethis with gladnefle. sf amen make gods,be- 
hold they are no gods :and in another place: U4t that day ( faith the LORD) Iwill 
take the names of their Idols from the earth, and there {balbe no remembrance thereof. 
And tothe purpofe , of Egiptheare J/asas. The Idols of Egipt (balbe mooned at hss 


Ma16.:6 prefence ,and the heart of Egspt [ball melt in the midft of her, and {o forward. Such 
Mzt.8.29 were they alfo chat reioyced for the por (4) of that which they knew fhould 


come topafle :as Simeon , Anna and Elszabeth, the firft knowing Chritt at his 
birth,the fecond at his conception: and (¢) Peter , that by Gods in{piration fayd 
Thou art that Chrift the Sonne of the living GO D . But Hermes hadhis knowledge 
from thofe deuills, chat trembling in the fleth fayd to Chrsft : why art thou come te 
wndoe vs before the time: Either (k) becaufe that came fuddenly vpon them 
which they expected not vntill afterwards , or that they calledic their vndoing 
to bee knowne,and 10 defpifed : and this was before the time, that is, the iudge- 
ment wherein they , and all men their feCtaries are to bee caft into eternall cor- 
ments: as that (/) cruth faith , that neither deceiugth nor is deceiued ; not as hee 
faith thar following the puffes of Philofophy flies here and there , mixing truth 
and falfhood,greeuing atthe ouerthrow of that religion which afterwards hee 
affirmes is all error. 


7 L. VIVES. 

He (4) } Of him by and by. (6) Hés words] We haue feene of his bookes, greeke and lae 
tine This is out of his fclepias , tranflated by eApaleins. (c) So deth bumanity| So hu- 
manity adapting it felfe to che nature and originall(faich Hermes his booke) (4)Tr«/?|So hath 
Hermes it: Bruges copy hath.Miftru! not your felfe. (¢) Beyond |eAputeius and the (oleine co-_ 
haue it both in chis maner,onely Mirth, the ( o/eyni/?s haue more then he. (f) For Hermes} 
t wauid haue cited fome of his places, but his bookes are commion,and {o it is needeleffe. ( ¢) 
Ut being eafer) A diuerfity of reading, but ofno moment , nor alteration of fence. (4) OF ye 
which |Reioycing that Chri? is come , whom the law and Prophets had promifed, So Joh» bad 
his difciples aske,art then be that fbosld come or {hall wee looke for an other? (¢) Peter] This cone 
feffion is the Churches corner ftone, neuer decaying , to beleeue and afirme THAT IESVS 
IS CHRIST THE SONNE OF THE LIVING GOD. This is no Philofo- 
phicall revelation,no inuention, no quirke, no worldly wifdome,butreucaled by GOD the. 
father of all to fuch as hee doth Icue, and vouchfafe ic. (k.) Beeaxfe} Hee fhewcth why the de- 
uills choughe that Chrifl vndid them before the time. (2) Trath] Mat. 2 5-41. Depart from mee 

yeecurfed into enerlafting fire which is prepared for the denill and bis angels. 


a 
Pape oes 


How Hermes openly confe(fed his progenitors error, and yet bewayled the 
deffruction of it. CHAP.e 246 


| a afrermuch difcourfe, hee comes againeto {peake of the gods men made: 
bur of thefe fufficient(faith hee); let vs returne againe to man,& to reafon,by 
which diuine guift man hath the name of reafonable . For we haue yet fpokenne 
wonderfull ching of man : the (4) wonder of all wonders is that man could fnde 
out che divine nature , and giue ic effe. Wherefore our fathers erring excee- 
dinly in increduliry (6) concerning the deities, andneuer penetrating into che 
depth of diuine religio, they inuéced an arc,to make gods, whervnto they ioyned 

. a vercug 


TL I A CT CI TTI : . 
avertue out of fome part of the worlds nature, like to the other } and conioyning 
thefetwo, becaufe they could make no foules , they framed certaine Images 


whereinto they called either Angells, or deuills, and fo by thefe myfteries gaue spices and 
thefe Idols power to hurt or helpethem. I know not whether the deuills being deuills cal- 


admired would fay afmuch aschis man faith. Our fathers exceedingly erring 

(faith he)in inctedulity concerning the deities,8¢ not penetrating into the depth 

of diuine religion, inuentedan arte tomake gods. Was hee content to fay me 
bucerred,in this inuention ? no, he addeth.£xceedéng/y,thus this exceeding error 
andincredulity ofthofe that looked nocinto matters diuine , gauclife to this in- 
vention of making gods. And yer though it were fo,though this was but anin- 
uention of error,incredulity,and irreligion{nes,yet this wife man lamenteth thae 
fucure tines fhouldabolith i.Marke now whether Gods power compell him to 
confefle his progenitors error, & the diuills to bee made the future wrack of the 
faid error. Ifit were their exceeding error, incredulity & negligence in matters 
diuine that giue firft life to this god-making inuention,what wonder if this arte 
bee deteftable , and all that ie did againit the crutch caft out from the truth, 

this truth correcting that errour, this faith chat incredulity, this conuerfion that 
negle& ? fhe conceale the caufe,and yet confefle that rite to be their inuention, 
we/(if we haue any wit)cannot but gather that had they bin in the right way,they- 
would never haue fallen to that folly:had they either thought worthily,or medi- 
tated ferioufly of religion yet fhould wee a firme thar their great , incredulous, 
contemptuous error inthe caufe of diuinity was the caufe of this inuention, wee 
fhould neuertheleffe ftand inneed to prepare our felues to endure the impudence 
of the truths obftinate opponéts . But fince he thae admires § power cf this art a- 
boueall ocher things in man , and grecues that the time fhould come whereinal 
thofe illufions fhould clafpe with ruine ,throughthe power of legall authority: 
fince he confefferh the caufes that gaue this art firft original,namely the exceed- 
ing error,incredulity 8 negligéce of his anceftor in matters diuine: what fhould. 
wee doe but thinke GOD hath ouerthrowne thefe inftitutions by their iuft con- 

trary caufes ? chat which errors multitude ordained, hath truths tra abolithed: 

faith hach fubuerred the worke of incredulity , and conuerfion vnto Gods truth 

hath fuppreffed the effects of true Gods negleG:not in Egipt only (where onely 

the diabolicall {pirit bewaileth ) but in all che world, which hearetha new fong 


ledind Be 
mages, 


fung vnco the Lord,as the holy fcripture faith. Sing wato the Lord anew fone:Sing Plal. 96.43 


untothe Lord, all the earth:for the (c) title of chis Pfalme is , when the houfe was 
builc after the captiuity:the City of God,the Lords houfe is buile,chat is the ho- 
ly Church all the earch oue?: after captiuiry where'n thedeuills held chofe men 
aues,who after by their faith in God became principall ftones in the buildings 
for mans making of thefe gods , did not acquit him from beeing flaue tothele 
works of his,but by his willing worfhip he was drawn into their fociety:a fociety 
of furtle diuills,not offtupid Idols : for what are Idols but as the Scripture faith, 
haue eyes and fee nor,& all the other properties that may be faid of a dead fences _ 
leffe Image,how well foever carued.But the vncleane {pirits, therein by that tru- 
Jy black art,botid their foules that adored thé,in their fociety,& moft horrid cap- 
_ tiuity:thereforefaith the Apoftle: We know that an Idol is nothing in'the world : But 


the Gentiles offer to deuslis cr not unto God:I wil not haue them to haue fociety with the Cont, 8.46 


denils.So then after this captiuity chat bound men flaue to the deuils,Gods houfe 
began to be buile throngh the carrh : thence had the Pfalme the beginning . sing 
unto the:Lord anew fong : fing unto the Lord,alithe earth. Sing unto the Lord and 

: . Ff 4 praife 


i) ss 


332° SAINT AVGVSTINE. C war.24 


frat{e his mame (a) declare hisfaluation (e) from day to day. Declare his glorie 
amonzft all nations , and his wonders amoncft all people. Forthe Lord is great and 
- > much tobe pratfed: heeis tobe feared aboue all gods. For all the gods of the people are I- 
dols Lut the Lerdmade the heauens. Heethen that bewailed the abolithment of 
thefc Idois inthe tine to come , and of the flauery wherein the deuills held men 
captiie,did it out ofan euill {pirits infpiration, and from that did defirethe con- 
tinnance of that captivity which beeing diffanulled, the Pfalmift fung that gods 
. hosfe was buile vp through the earth. Hermes prefaged it with teares 5 the 
Prophet with ioy , and becaufe that {pirit that the Prophet fpake by is euer vic- 
tor: Hermes himfelfe that bewailed their future ruine, and wifhe their eternity 
is by a Rrange power compelled to confeffe their original from error, incredult- 
ty and contempt of GOD, not from prudence, faith,and deuotion. Andthough 
he call chem gods, that in faying yet men did make them (and fuch men as wee 
fhould not imitate} what doth he(defpite his heart)but teach vs chat they are not 
to be worfhiped of fuch men,as are not like ché that made them : namely of thofe 
that be wife, faichful,and religious: fhew ing alfo that thofe men that made them, 
bound themfelues to adore fuch gods as wereno gods atal.Sotrucis that of the 
Prophec : Jf 4 man make gods , behold , they are no gods . Now Hermes in calli 
thofe gods that are made by fuch meanes , thatis, deuills bound in Idols , by an 
Howman arte,or rather, by their owne eleGions, and affirming them the handy-workes of 
doth make men , gineththem not fomuch as T4paleius the Platonift doth (but wee haue 
aaa fhewne already how grofely and abfurdly)who maketh them the meflengers be- 
tweene the gods , that God made , and themen that hee made alfo: tocarry vp 
praiers and bring downe benefites: for it were fondneffe to thinke that a god of 
mans: making could doe more with the gods of Gods making then a man 
whom he made alfo could. For becaufe.a deuill bound ina ftatue by this damned 
arte,is made a godsnot to each man,but to his binder (¢)f{uch as he is. Is not this 
a'fweete god now, whome none but an erroneous, incredulous , irreligious man 
would goe about to make ? furthermore if the Temple-deuills,beeing bound by 
arte (forfooth) in thofe Idols by them that made them gcds at fuch time as they 
themfelues were wanderers, vnbelecuers,and contemners of gods true religion, - 
are no meffengers, betweene the gods and chemsand it by reafonof their damna- 
ble conditions,thofe men that do fo wander, beleeuc fo little,and defpife religion 
fo much,be neuertheleffe their betters,as they muft needs bee, beeing their god- 
heads makers : then remaineth but this, that which they doe,they doe as deuills 
The deuills Onely either doing good, for the more mifchiefe,as moft deceitfull , or doing o- 
beneftes. pen mifchi: fe: yet neither of thefecan they doe without the high infcrutable 
furiall,  prouidence of God: nothing is in their power as they are the gods friends ,and 
meffenger to and from men : for fuch they are not : for the good diuine powers, 
whom wee call the holy angells, and the reafonable creature inhabiting heauen, 
whether they be Thrones,Dominations ,Principalitses,or Powers,can hold no frind- 
fhip at all with thefe {pirits : from whom they differ as much in atfetion as ver- 
tue differeth from vice,or (4) malice from goodnelfle. 


L. VIVES. 


TF E wonder (a) | There alfo hee calleth man a great miracle, a venerable , honorable creas 
ture. (6) Concerning the| Or,againft the deities. (¢) The tstle] The greeke faith : 4 presi 
feng of Dauid , that, the houfe was buile afterthe captiuity. Hicromestranflation Ms : che 
| e . ; kaeDrew 


. : * ia = 


Lin8. | OFTHE CITIE OF GOD. $33 


Hebrew hath no title , and therefore the Greekes call it ¢nviyree@, Vntitled. (4) Declare | -_ 
dinyporieseSsand afterwards ¢rypArert, Annunciate,declare,tell. (e) From day] A Greeke phraife na pai 
iyaipar off insdoay, ( f) An arte] Porphyry faith the goes doenotonly afford men their familiar comn- ph,Orac. 
pany but fhew them what allurech them , what bindeth chem, what they loue,which daies to 7 
auoide, which to obferue,and what formes to make them,as Hecate fhewes in the Oracle, fay- 

ing, thee cannot neglecta fratue of braffe,pold or filuer : and fhewes further,the-vfe of worm- 

wood,a Moufes bloud, Mirrh, Frankincenle, and ftirax. (g ) Such ashe} An euill man, for fuch - 
anone Hermes defcribes, (b) CMatice’ Malice is here vied for all euill- as the Greekes vie Malice, 
xgxia,but Tilly faith he had rather interprete ssx,by vice, then by malice : for malice isa Spee 

ties of vice,oppofite to honeft fimplicity,and mother co all fraude a.nd deceite, 


‘3 
~~ oe enn 


Of [ach things a3 may be commen to'_Angells and Men, Cuar.2$. 
7 Herefore the deuills are no means for man toreceiue the gods benefits by, 
or rather pood Angels: but itis our good wills,imitacing theirs, making vg 
Huein one community with them and inhonor of that one God thar they honor 
(though we fee not them with our earchly eyes) chat is the meanes totheir focie- 
ty : and whereas our miferable frailty of will, and infirmicy of {pirie doch effet 4 
difference becweene them and vs, therein wee are farre fhort of chem,in merit of 
life not in habite of body. Ict.is not our earthly , bodily habitation, but our vn- 
cleane carnall affeGion, chat caufeth feparation between them and vs. But when 
we are purified,we become as they! drawing neare them neuerthelefi¢ before, by 
our faith, if we béleeue that(by their good fauours al{o)he that blefled them, will 
make vs alfo bleffed. 


That all Paganifme was fully containedin deadmen. Cuav. 26. 

Ve marke what Hermes inhis bewayling of the expulfion of thofe Idols one 
of Egipt,which had fuch an erroneous incredulity & irreligious inftieutors, 
“faich among ft the reft , then (faith he) that holy feate of temples [hall become « fepul- 
cher of dead bodies. Asif men fhould not die vnleffe thefe things were démolithed, 
or being dead, fhould be buried any where faue in the earth? Truly the moretime 
that paffeth, the more carcaffes thal ftil be buried & more graues made. But this 
(it feemes)is his griefe , thac the memories of our Marcires fhould haueplacein vives E+ 
their Temples: that the mif-vnderftarding reader hereof might imagine chat mery face . 
the Pagans worfhiped gods in the Temples, and wee,dead men in their tombes. cals 
For mens blindaeffe doth fo carry them head-long againft (4) Mountaines letting 
them not fee till they bee ftruck, that they doe not confider that in all paganifme, - 
there caanot bee a god found but hath bin a man: but on will they,and (6) honor 
them as eternally pure from all humanity. Let Varro paffe,thacfaid,al/ that died 
were held gods infernall, (c) proouing it by the facrifices done at all burials, (d) 
there alfohe reckneth the (¢) tunerall plaies,as the greateft token cf their diuini- 
ty, plaies beeing never prefented but tothe gods .. Hermes him-felfe (now mens 
tioned)in his deploratiue prefage,faying = Thew that holy feate of Temples {hall be- 
come 4 fcpulcher of dead bodies, doth plainly auerre,that the Egrpt:an gods were all 
dead men : for having faid thac his fachers in their exceeding errour,incredulity 
and negledt of religion, had found a meane to make godssherevnto(taith he)they 
added a vertue out of fome part of the worlds nature,and conioyning thefe two, 
becaufe they could make no foules , they framed, certaine Images jinto which 
they called either Angells or deuills,and foby thefe mifteries gaue thofe Idols 
power to hurt or helpe them. - 

CY 


334 SAINT AVGVSTINE. | | C nap.26. 


SRS 
Then hee proceedesto examples. Thy(e)randfather (Afclepins) faith he the firf 
| snuentor of Phificke, hath « temple (fon mount Lybia, neare the ( g) Cracodile 


fbore : there lyeth his worldly man,his body,but his refidue or his whole (sf man be whole 


Mercuries “SC ) # gone up to heauer, helping all ficke perfons now by his deity as hee did before by 


tombe, 


The Necii 


plaics. 


his Phificke . Lo heare hee confeffeth a dead man worrfhipped for a god, there 
where his graue was : erring , and making others erre, in faying , that hee was af- 


ceded to heauen , and helpeth all ficke perfons by his deity. Nay hee proceeds to an- 


other, Afy grandfather(h)Hermes( faith hee)/ying in the towne of (2 his Sur-name, 
doth hee mot afcift and preferue all that implore his helpe, This was Hermes the elder 
Mercury, buried ( they fay ) in Hermopolés , the towne of hisfurname. Behold 
now, here are two men gods already 4/culepins and Mercury(k)for the firft,the 
opinion both of Greekes and Latines confirme it. But the(/)fecond many thinke 
was neuer mortall: yet hee faith here,that hee was his grandfather, for (#s)this is 
one and that another though both haue onename. But this I ftandnot vpon : he 
and —4e/calepius were both made gods of men, by this great teftimony of his ne- 
phew (2) Tri/meiefius,who proceedes,and fayth(o)//is,the wife of Ofirts doth much 
good(wee fee )bezng pleafed, and being offended , much euill. And thento fhew that 
thefe are of hat kind of gods that men make by this art, hee giueth vs to vnder- 
ftand,that he thinkes thofe diuells to be foules of dead men, which he faith thofe 


- erring,incredulous irreligious fellowes called by art into ftatues : becaufe thefe 


could make no foules:& when he hath fpoken that of //is,besng offended ynuch hurt, 
he addeth:for earthly and worldly gods are foone offended, and moued to anger 
by reafon they confift (p)of men in boch their natures: Both their natures,(faith 
he)teking the deuill for che foule and the image for the body wherevpon it came 
to pafie( faith hee) that fuch and {uch creatures became holy in Egipt, and their 
foules were(g)adored in al the cicties that confecrated them in their l'ves, fo far 
that they haue part of their worthip affigned them,and are called by their names, 
Whereis now that fad complaint that Egipt the feat of temples fhould become 
a graue forcarcafles ? fee, the falfe {pirit chat made Hermes {peake it ,made him 
alfo confeffe chatit was already filled with their carcaffes whome they held as 
gods. But inhis complaint hee was but the vent of the deuills woe, becaufe 
their eternal] plagues were in preparing by the martyres holy memories , forin 
fuch places are they often tormented,and forced to confeffe themfelues, and to 
auoyde the bodies pofiefied. : 


Rr ER 


L. VIVES. 


Gainft.(a)Moxntaines. And fuch things as all men elfe could fee and fhunne. (6) Honor 
them. | A diuerfity of reading : the old bookes haue the fentence fhorter, but the fence is 
not altred at alll.{c’) Prowing st.) The Necia (faith Tully) or funerall ports , foould not bee called 
feafts as well as the other gods holy daies are , but that men wonldhaue their dead anceftors ac- 
counted as gods, De leg.sb,2.(d) Funerall.| Wherein were commediesacted. Terresces Adel- 
us was acted at Paulus eF milins his funeralls.P.( orn.Scipio,and Q. Fabins(two of his fons ) 
ing Ediles, They had alfo {word-plaies : brought in by 4/.and D.Jwnins Bratus,his fonnes 
at their fathers funeralls. App.Claud. (audax,and M. Fuluius being Confulls. They fought in 
the beaft market. Liw.4b.11.Ualertib-2 Anfon.in Gryph. 
Tres primas Thracum pugnas,tribus ordine fellis 
Inniada Patri inferias mifere sande 
Three chaires three fights,wherein che Thracians ftraue, 
~ — Arcended Juxins Bratus to his grauc. 


They 


=_— ~s = eS Se DB TT SH 


- : ' . ee Sa ee to 
ay : 4 . 

: 3 
a a a a eam ee a ee ee heel : amedineaae 


L13.8. OF THECITIEOF GOD  —_—._ 3 


_ They had alfo abanquetanda dole. (e) Grandfather( Afclepius). ]a4felepius in greeke fs 
E[culapias:to this eAfelepins, Anguftine makes the Phifition Aefculapins grand-facher , which 
‘ot Tally bis 3. cdefculapés this was,I know not-one of them/(they fay wie thunderftrucke, ant 
buried at (ynofara in eAchasa, Another neare the riuer Lujfins in ef rcadia , the third was the 
Second Mercuries brother,fonne to Valens and Pheéronis,and himthe Arcadians haue in much 
honor. Tacitus faith Ofris was called Ae{culapius:it may be chis. It is liker that Hermes {pea= The Cro 
‘eth of him,then any other.(f) fount Libia. ] Ie runnes along from the lowelt part of Egypt cole, 
nee (ixope'is, Peatomy takes st for many mountaines,& calles it che Libian coalt.(\(rotad:le} 
‘A ferpencthat laies eges , foure-footed, growing to feauenteene cubites lenght, or more : hee 
moueth his vpper chappe,and fo doth no creature liuing befides him:deuoureth man and beaft, 
and lives part in the water and part on the dry-land, Herodor. Ar if?,& vgn Senec, {ath that ie 
feareth one coursgious,and infulceth ouer one that feares it, The Crocodile citty is in the heart 
‘of Egipt neare ta the Libian Mountaine not farre from Prolemais,in the end of the fixt Paralel 
‘of the third climat, The Egiptians faith hich woifhipped a Crocodile,becauie he was con= 
fecrated to the Sunne as the Ram, the Buzzard,and che blacke ne ee rece 
Aneth fiue of chem,two the Egyprians wotrfhipped : the firlt Wiles his fonne,whome it was fa- 
criledge'to nairie fecond hee that killed e4rgas , was Egypts king , aught them letters and 
lawes, him they call Tent, after their firft moneth.Ex/eb.46.1.faith that the Phanician theolo- 


Three Act. 
culapi}, 


TheMete 
cury. 


| gians held Trifwegsfus to be Satnrnes fecretary, Celxshis fonnes , and that hee vfed his helpe 


in defending his mother, giuing him at his going into the South, all Egypt. Dionifixs faith 
he was. counfellor to J/s and Ofrris : and Ofrs going forth to warre, left him at home to di- 
rect his wife Jfs : that hee was of fingular prudence , and taught the world much knowledge 
in artes and fciences. This ( I thinke Yeas graund-father tothis Hermes that wrot thus : and 
‘that hee was called Thent, the Demon (as Plato faith in his Pbhed.) that inuented Mathemati- 
qués, letters, and dice, and taught them to Thanrxs King of Egypt afrerward called Hammon, 
(f )Towne of bis furmane.| Hermopolis,a great city in 7 t, Amarke( faith Ptolemy ) to thofe 
that trauell from the Weft of Nile vnto our fea: beyon o : 

dell che therd climate.(k )For the firft.) For hee is but held a femigod, diefled for his merits, as 
Hercules, Bacchus, and Romulus, were , Teeodoretus faith that in Homers time he was held no 
‘God : for hee maketh Peon cure Mars,not e{culapins, And {peaking of A¢achaon , he calles 


him the Sonne of 4e/culapins an abfolure Phifitian,(/ )Second,many. \ He is one of the perpe- 


tuall Gods counfellours (1) , This is one. | The famous Mercury was fonne to Jone and Ma- 
$a,/4tlas his Grand-child,for there were two other as 1 faid,Egyptians,and two more, one the 


- Sonne of (eles and Dies, the other, of Valens and Pboronis :the fitht they picture with Erec+ 


aed priuities for hauing beheld Proferpina : the later , the Lebadsans worfhippe ina caue , and 


_ cal him Trophonins.(n)Trifmegiftus,\ As the French fay trefpuiffant,and we,thrice mighty. But 


the latter wrot notT rifmegsfins,but his grand-father didsyet both were.called Hermes Trifmme= Trifmegit 
gifts. The firt, Thewt,was a great king,a great Prieft &,a Philofopher. Thus it pleafeth fome to tus, 
defcribe his greatneffe.‘o) L/is.)//is & Ojsris do much good (faith Hermes his booke.)(p )/n both 


their natures. Hermes had it without naturezextra naturam.(q)Adored.\The Egyptians had in- 
_ numerable things to their gods. Garlike and Onions,by which they fwore as ‘Pliny faith : and 


many creatures,after whome they named cheir citties,Crocodslopolis,Lycopolit,Leontopolis, and 
Latopelis. vpon the crocodyle,the walfe , the lion end the place-fith : So Apis firftinfticuting 


_ the adoration of the Oxe , was adored himfelfe in an oxes fhape i Mercury iniadogs , [fsina 


cowes , Diodorus write:h that their leaders wore fuch crefts on their helmets , Anupica dog, 


‘Alexander the preata wolfe.8&c.whence the reuerence of thefe creatures firft arofe,and theres 


ypon thofe Princes being dead, they ordained them diuine worfhips in thofe fhapes,, This is 
that which AZercary faith , their foules were adored that in their liues had otdayned honor to 
thofe creatures , as indeed the Princes wearing them on their hefmes and fheelds , made therts 
venerable, and refpeéted : and the fimple people thought that much of their victories came 
from them, and fo fet them vp as deities; a 


Of the Honor that Chriftians gine to the Martives. | Cc HAR. 276 . . me ; 
Et we erect no temples altersnox facrifices to the martirs,becanfenot they ; 
te : e o_ ; o . 7. I . } pian 3 
y 7 buttheir god is our God, wee honor their memories ’,as Gods Saints -ftin. 
. . ; ; : et ~ + eee. = : ding 


_ -8 
+ : 
9 


° 
s 
, 
e 
» 


\ 


rocadslopolis. inthe feauchth Para- mere : 


336 


s 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. ——— Cuaraay 
ding cilldearh for the truth, that the true religion might be propagated , and all 


_ Idolatry demolithed : whereas if any others had beleeued right before them, 


~ husband and Hermes her counfellour: and fo they wil 


Cyprusa. 


yet feare forbad them confeffe it. And who hath ‘cuer heard the Prieft at the al- 
tar , that was builr vp in gods honor , and che martires memories , fay ouer the 
body,I offer vnto thee Peter or vnto thee Paul, or (1) Cyprian ? hee offers to God, 


in the places of their memorialls , whome God had made men, and martirs, and 


aduanced them into the fociery of his Angells in heauen, that wee at that fol. 
lemnity may both giue thanks to God for their victories ,and bee incouraged to 
endeuor the attainement of fuch crownes and glories as they haue already at- 
tained : till inuqgating him at their memorialls : wherefore all the religious 
performances done there , at the martires follemnicies , are ornaments 
of their memories, butno facrifices to the dead, as vnto gods , and(é Jthofe that 
bring banquets thether,which notwithftanding the better Chriftians do not,nor 
is this cuftome obferued in moft places,yet , fuch as do fo, ferting them downe, 
praying ouerthem , and fotaking them away tocate, or beftow on thofe thag 
neede: all this they doonely with a defire that thefe meates might be fanGified, 
by the martirs , in the god of martirs name. But hee that knoweth the onely fa- 
crifices that the Chriftians offer to God,(¢) knoweth alfo that thefe are no facri- 
fices to the Martires: wherefore we neither worfhippe our Martires with Gods 
honors nor mens crimes, neither offer them facrifices nor turne their (d ) 
difgraces into any religion of theirs 3 As for d/és Ofirés his wife,and the Agyptian 
goddeffe and her parents,that haue beene recorded to haue beene all mortall,to 
whome fhe facrificing (¢) found three graines of — , and fhewed it vnto her. 

| baue her tobe Ceres alfo, 
what groffe abfurdities are hereof recorded, not by Potes,but their own Priefts 
(as Leow (hewed to Alexander andhe tohis mother Olimpéa)let them read that lift, 
and remember that haue read : and then but confider , vnto what dead perfones 
and dead perfons workes their diuineft honors were exhibited. God forbid they 
fhould in the leaft refpe& compare them with our Martirs, whome neuerthe- 
leffe wee account no gods wee make no priefts to facrifice vnto them, it is vn- 
lawfull , vndecent, and Gods proper due : neither do wee pleafe them with 
their owne crimes , or obf{cene {pectacles : whereas they celebrate both che 
guile thac there gods incurred who were men, and the fayned pleafures of fuch of 
them as were flat deuills. If Socrates had hada god, he fhould not haue bin of this 
fort : But fuch perhapsasloued to excell in this damnable art of making gods, — 
thruft fuch an one vpon him being an inocent honeft man , and vaskilfu'l in this 
their pernicious practife.. What need weemore ? none that hath his. wits about 
him will now holdthat thefe fpirits are to be adored for the attainement of eter- 
nall bliffe inthe lifeto come. Perhaps they will fay that all the gods are good, 
buc, of thefe fpirits fome are good and fome badde : and that by thofe that are 
good wee may come toeternity ,and therefore ought to adore them : well, 
to rip vp this queftion,the next booke fhallferuetheturne. =. © 


L. VIVES. 
R. (4 \Opprian.) Bithoppe of Carthage; moft learned , as wittneffe his holy works. Hee 


receiued the crowne of Martirdome vader Valerian , {o Pontius his Deacon writeth. (6) 


TheMsr- Thofe.| A great.cuftome in Afrike. Ang confeflib,6. where he faith that his mother at Millaine 
ures teatts, did bring potage,aiid bread and wineto.the Martirs fhrines,and gaue them to the porter - But 
= | ! of; € 


= Se eA 
> -. 


v. 


L1s.8. - OF THE CITIE OF GOD. ) 337° 


Ambrofe forbad her , bosh for that it might bee an occafion of gluttony, and for the refeme 
blance it had with paganifme. (c) Kzeweth alfo,| Many Chriftians offend in not diftinguifhing 
betweene their worthip of God and ehe Saints : nor doth their opinion of the Saints wane 
much of that the Pagans beleeued of their gods, yet impious was Usgélantins to bar the Mar-, | 
tirs all honor , and fond was Exnomsins to forbeare the Churches leaft hee fhould bee com- 
pelled to adore the dead, The Martyres are to be reuerenced,but not adored, as god is. Hieron 
contra vigilant. (d) Difgraces| (But now , euen atthe celebration of Chrifts paflion and our acca te 
redemption,it is a cuftome to. prefent plaies almoft as vile as the old ftage-games : fhould Ibe .4,.. 
filent the very abfurdity of fuch fhewes in fo reuerend amatter,would condemne it fufficient- ] 
ly. There /udzs plaicth the moft ridiculous AZimike,even then when he betraies Chrifl. There. 

the Apoffles run away, and the foldiors follaw , aod all refounds with laughter . Then comes Plaies of | 
Peter,and cuttes off (Malehus care, and shen all rings with applaufe , as if (rifts betraying the paflion 
were now reuenged. And by and by this great fighter comes and for feare ofa girle, denies ; 
his Maifter,all the people laughing at her queftion , and hiffing at his deniall : and in all chefe seas 
reuells and ridiculous ftirres Chrift onely is ferious and feuere : but feeking to mooue paffion 
and forro'w in the audience,hee is fo farre.from that,that hee is cold euen in the divineft mat- 74. y ous 
ters: to the great puilt, fhame, and finne both of the priefts that prefene this , and the people nifts wane 
that behold it. Bur wee may perhaps finde a fitter place for this theme} (¢) Found the graine af this. 
barley} And wheate alfo faith Diodor.dib, 1.and therevpon fome Cicties prefene thembothin [ . 
her ceremonies. Buc Offris her husband firft obferuedtheir profit, and taught the world it, 2&8, Ceres, 
chiefly barley that maketh ale in fuch countries as want wine :andisnowviedin the North = 
parts, But they made meatc ofit in old time, P/in.b, 18, out of an Athenian ceremony that Wheate 
Menander reporteth ; prouing it of elder inuention then wheate. For had wt! found wheate put barley 
fooner(faith P/ixyjbarly would haue bin out of requeft for bread, as it was prefently vpon the ds, 
finding of wheate,thence-forth becomming meate for beafts. i o%, 


— Binishb.8, 


Cee 


THE CONTENTS OF. THE 


ninth booke of 


t. The fe the afovepaffed difpatation, 
and a hob pit of. 0 I. 
- %. Whether amongst the {pirits of the ayre 
that are under the gods there bee any good ones 
that. can further a man in the attainement of 
true blefeduefe, =. | 
| 3.What qualities Apuleius aferibeth unto 


aie the dinells,te whons he geneth reafan but never- 


: ove, 


| 4 The opinions of the Stoikes asd Peripa- 


- etiques concerning perturbaties of the minde. 


.. §o That the (briftians paffions are canfes of 
the prattsfe of vertue, not Inducers unto vice. 

_ 6. What paffion the fpirits shat Apuleius 
weaketh Mediators berweene the Gods & Men 
ere fubsett unto,by bis ewne confelfion. 

7- That the Platonitts doe but feeke conten- 
tions in faying the Poets defame the gods where- 
as their isputations pertaine to the diuells and 
not the gods. | 

8. Apuleius bis definition of the gods of hea 
wen {pirsts of ayre,and men of earth, 

9. Whether ayery [pirits tan procure aman 

¢ Gods friend/hips, 
t0. Plotines opision that men are leffe 
wretched ix their mertality, then the dinills are 
én their eternity, 
_ 13. Of the Plaronilts ehat held mens foules 
te become Demones after death, 


the City of God. 


Mens, , | 
12, How the deuslts if they be neither bleffed 
with the Gods, nor wretched with (Men,maybe 
in the meane betwixt both without participatio 
on of either. | 

14. Whether mortall men may attaine tree 
bappineffe. | 

1. Of the mediator of God and Man,the ! 
Man Chrift lefus. | | 

16. Whether it bee probable that the Plato | 
nifts (ay,that the gods anoiding eli conta | 
Sion hane no commerce with men , but by the : | 
meanes of the ayry {pirits. 

17. That unto that beatitude that conffietha 

participation of the chiefeft good wee muff bane 


| onely {uch a Mediator ‘as Chrift , xe facha. a“ 


the denill, \ 
18. That the diuslls under collour of them — 
interceffion feeke but to draw us fromGed. 
19. That she word Dzmon is not vfed a 
now of any Idolater in a good fence. 
20. Of the qualsty of the dinils knowledge, — 
whereof they. are fo proud. ' 
2t, Inwhat manner the Lerd wenld make 
himfelfe knowne tothe dinills, 
22. Thedsference of the holy Angells know- 
ledge,and the diuills. 
23. That the Pagan Idols are falfely called 
gods yet the feripture allowes it to Sasmts and 


1 3. Of the three contraries whereby the — | Angells. 


conilts difingui{h che dintlls natures from 


FINIS.— 


THE 


Liag. | ae - 33> | 


- THE NINTH BOOKE~ 
OF THE CITTIE OF GOD: 


Written by Saint _tuguftine Bilhop of Hippo, 


¢ 


vnto Warcellinus. 


+. osteme 
CTPA 


_ The feape of the afore-paffed difputation and what is remaynine 


totreatof. Cart. 


he AM did the gods that honor to hold thé all good. But thofe(s) 
Say & chat held che firft,held the ayery fpirits to be gods alfo,and - 
YA 4 called chem gods,as they called the gods, {pirits,but not fo 

Pee ordinarily. Indeed they confeffe that /oxe the Prince of all 
(HA the reft was by Homer (>) called a Demon. But fuchas af- 
> firmedall the gods were good ones , and farre better then - 

_ the beft men, are iuftly mooued by theartes oftheayry _ ‘ 
fpirits,to hold firmely that the gods could doe no fuch matters, and thereforeof | 
forde there mutt bee a differenceberweene them and thefe {pirits : and thac what 
cuer difpleafant affe,or bad a& they fee caufed , wherein thefe {pirits doe fhew 
cheir fecret power,that they hold is the diuills worke, and not the gods . But yee 
becaufe they place thefe {pirits as: mediators betweene their gods and:men(as if 
God and Man had no other meanes of commerce)to carry and recarry praiets 8¢ 
‘benefits from the one to the other, this beeing the opinion ofthe moft excellent 
Philofoptiers the P/stoxsts, with whom I choofé co difcuffé this queftion, whe- 
‘ther the adoration of many gods be helpfull to eternall felicity? In the laft booke 
we difputed how the deuils(delighting in that which all wife and honeft menab- 
horre , as in the foule, enormous, irreligious fictions of the gods crimes ( not 
imens)and inthe damnable praCtife of Magike Jcan be fo muchnearer to the gods, 
that men muft make them the meanes to attaine their fauors: and wee found it 
veterly impoffible.So now this booke/as Ipromifed in the end of che other muft 
‘not concerne the difference of the gods betwixe themfelues( ifthey make any 
{uch Jnor the difference of the gods and fpirits (the one beeing farre diftant from 
* men(as they fay) andthe other in the midft betweene the gods and men.) but of ae 
the difference of thefe fpiritsamongft themfelues . This is the prefent queftion, © 


a eee 


"Hele (a) that beld\ Plato held all the gods to bee good , but the Demanes, to bee neither pressing . 
fd euill,but neuters . But Hermes hath his good angels and his bad. And Porphery iain 
hath his helpfull Deszones,and his hurcfull : as fome of the Platoniffs hold alfo. (4) Homer cal- Demones: 

ated} Plutarch (de defett . Oracul, ) faith that Homer confounded the deities and Demones tegen 
“sher,ufing both names promi{cually : Hee calls Jone « Demon :which word as one interpreteth 
it,is fometimes vied for good,and fometimes bad. And Ji/ad.1, hee faith Joue with the orber da- 
sezones calling all the gods by that name - vpon which place hisinterpretor faith ; Hee calleth 
them Damenes cither for their experience, wifdome, or gouernmenc of man. So faith /udins 

“Pollax: Homer called the Gads , Demones, and Plate. calleth the worlds Archie the great. 
| | Gg. 2. | | Demen: 


34. 


muft expe and enioy bearicude. 


“COncemning motions of the minde which the Greckes call xt.,and fome of 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. = Cusar.z.and3. 


Demon:for Deity & Demon ace both taken in one fence: This Demsox Plato mentioneth.De re- 
pxbLBut itis a queftion whether he meane the Prince of al che world,or the deuills Prince:for 
they haue cheir Hierarchy alfo.Euery fpirit(faith Proc/as De anime et damone)inxefpect of that 
which is next vinder it is called a Demon : and fo doth %upiter( in Orpheus ) call his father Sa- 
turne, And Platohim(clfe calls thofe gods that gouerne propagation,and proreé a man with- 
out mediation, Demsones. To declare (faith he in Tsmsans)the generation and nature of the other 
Demones,were more then man can comprehend: for each power that protetteth aman without ance 
shers mediation,is a demon,be it a God,or leffe then a God. Thus farre Proclus, : ~~ 


Whether among ff the [pirits of the ayre that are under the gods,there be any good ones, 
_ that pan aman in the attainement of true bleffedneffe. Cwar. 2. 


Fo many vfeto fay thereare fome good deuills and fome badde: but whether 
this opinion bee P/ato’s or whofe foeuer,itisnotto bee omitted, becaufeno 
man fhalbe deluded in honoring thofe fpirits as if they were good, or fuchas 
whileft hee thinketh fhould by their place bee a meane of reconciliation betwixt 
them and the gods,and defireth their furtherance,to bee with them after death, 
doeinacigle him and drawe him in with deceipt , quite from the true God, with 
whom onely and in whom onely,and from whom onely, every reafonable foule, 


| Whas qualities Apuleius afertbeth to rhe deutlls;to whoms he gincth 
a + veafon but novertne.. -Cuar. 3.- ; 
Ho is this difference of good and euil then extant,when as _4puleins the Ple- 

? toms/i,dilputing fo much hereof,and attributing fo mych to thofeayry pow 
ers., yet heuer fpeaketh a word of their vercues , Which hee would haue done if 
they hadhad any ? Hee fhewes not the caufe why they arc happy, burthe fignes 
oftheir mifery he openeth at full: confeffing chat though they hauereafon, they 
want vertue,that doe not giue way to vnreafonable paffions, but(as fooles vfeto 
be) chey are often percurbed with tempeftuops and vaquiet motions.. His words 
are thefe. Of the/e Damones, the Poets (not much amiffe)doe faigne fayse to be haters, 
and fome loucrs of fome perticular men : preferring fome,and deiecting others’; So that 
pitty,anger,foy, and all paren are eafily accidents unto thems :and fo is their 
minde expofed to the dominion of all perturbation; ,whichthe gods (whofe mindes are 
quiet end retired)are mot. ere you heare plainely that the deuills foules as wel as 
mortalls are fubie& to all difturbance of paffion , and thereby not to bee compa- 
red vnto wife men, who can curbeand fuppreffe thofe exorbitant affeats, how- 
euer accident vnto them by reafon of theit humanity 3 giuing then no predomi- 
nance to worke any vnreafonable effe& , oppofice to iuftice : But they are more 
like(not to fay worfe)vnto fooles,& wicked perfons,not in bodies,but qualities, 
elder they are indeed, and incurably tortured, ftill foting in the fea of percurba- 
tion, hauing no hold acall of verity, or vertue, which are the meanes to repreffe 
all outragious affections. =. ee | | 


‘ 


Theo inians ofthe Stoikes and Peripatetiques concerning pertare 
| ’ bations oftheminde, Cuae.4r ‘ 


VS, 


; ” mater . acme | 
Lisg. OFTHE CITIE OF GOD. | 34% 


vs,(with Tully) Perturbations others Affects, or affeGtions ; and fome morc ex- 
preffly from the Greeke, Paftons , there bee two @pinions of the Philofophers: 
Some fay that they may ‘befalla wife man , yet fo as they are, ftill awed by rea- 
fon, and by the rule of the minde, obliged to what conditions difcretion impof- 
eth. The holders of this are Platoné/ts or —4riffotelians, for 4riftctle the firft © 
Peripatetiq, was Plato his {choller. But others/as the Stozkes exempt a wife man 
from any touch of thofe paffions . And (4) thofe , T#/ly in his bookes De finsbus; 
proueth to bee rather materially then formally oppofite vnto the P/aton/fts or 
Peripatetiques: becaufe the Stoskes (6) willnot admic the external] helpes ofthe 
body,or eitate,to the name of goods , referuing that onely for vertue , as the are 
of liuing,fixedin the minde. But the (¢) others , following the common fafhion, 
callthem goods , mary of {malfvaluein refpe& of vertue: So then howfoeuer 
they differ in their name, they concurre in their efteeme, nor do the Stoskes thew 
any thing in this controuerfie but nouelty of phrafe:So that I hold dize@ly , that 
in this queftion, (4) whether a wife-man may haue paffions of minde or no, their 
controuerfie is rather verball , then reall: for lam perfwaded they are iuft of the 
Platoxt/tsand Peripatetiques minde hercin, though their words pretend a diffe- 
rence. This proofe,I wi!l thew faire to avoide the tedioufneffe of alonger dif- 
courie. (¢} A Gellias,in (f) eloquent and excellent fcholler , writteth in his No- 
ctes Attice shat hee was at feain the company ofa famous Stoéke . This Philofo- 
pher(as Ge/liws tells at large, bue I in briefe ) feeing the fhippe ini great peril by 
reafon of a dangerous and dreadfull tempeft,was pale for very fease: which fome — 
that were by(beeing even in the chaps of death fo curioufly obferueth whether 4 hiftary 
the Philofopher were preturbed or no Jdid percieuethe ftorme ending,and feare that 
Jetting mens tongues hoofe ,a ritch glutton (¢) of Afiafella {coffing the Stoske wasin a 
for becing fo terribly afraide of that brunt which himfelfe had paffedwithout a-forme at 
ny paffion at all: buthee (+) replied as ———o the Socratift did ,vponthelike 
gale, that the other baning byt the foule of a bafe kMue , needed not care for st , but hee 

was care fall for the foule of Ariftippus. This anfwere packt away the ritch chuffe, 

and then Gellsus asked the Philofopher(no: defiring to offend , but to learne) 

what was the caufe of his feare. WVho defiring to fatiffie a man fo defirousto 

know, hee pulleth out of his {crippe the booke of () Epscfetus, a Stoike , contay- 

ning the C¢xiomes of Zeno and Chryfippus , Stoicifmes founders: wherein Gellsus 
| (faith hee) fhewed him this pofition , That the (k) mindes apprehenfions(they call 

them fantafies) arifing from fearefull and terrifying obiects , can neither bee hindred 
from befalling a wife man,nor from moouing his minde when they doe befall : that hee 

fall feareor bee fadde a isttle by thefe pafsions too hafty intrulion upon his reafon: Yet 

(\) not fo farre that they leaue an opinion or confent, of the minde unto their effect be- 

hinde them : for this they kcepe free, as the difference between: the foole and the wife: 

the foo'e cinfentcthto his paftons: thz wife man though hee fuffer themycs keepes 

his eleétson , and his reprobation of them all, firme and free. Thus much from. 
Gellius,no berter, but briefer then his owne relation of that with himfelfereade 

in Epictetus, fcom the pofitive dofrine of the Stoskes. Which beeing true, 
leaues finall difference betweene them and other Philofophers in this point of 
affects. For both doe quit mans reafon fréin beeing ouer-ruled by paffion. 

And perhaps therefore the Stoskes denie a wife man to feale them , becaufe they 

alcer him not,nor hurthis wifdome, But they (7) befall him (not moouing his 
wifdome) in the refpects of the commodities or difcommodities of this life 

which notwithftanding hee will not = goods, or guills. For if the. anaes 

“8 3 : 


343 SAINT AVGVSTINE. | Cuara, 


a 
had not efteemed that which hee doubred to loofe bY that fhip-wracke, namely 


Geods of 
3 forts. 


Sroizall Pa 


radoxes, 


Gellias. 


EpiGetus . 


his life and bodylie fafety ,hee would neuer haue beene pale for the matter: 
Yet might his minde ftand fe for all that externall pallor and hee fill hold firme 
that life and bodily fafety, which their hee feared to loofe , were not of thofe 
goods that make their poffeffors good,as vertue doth. But in that they fay they 
arenot to bee called goods at all,but onely commodities, in this their minde is 
more vpon the word then the matter. For what care is there of their name,when 
as their loffe leaues both Stoske and Peripstetique alike affeCted ? prouing thereb 
their equallefteeme of them , call them what they lift? Ifthe daunger of thefe 
oods or commodities fhould draw either ofthemro mifchiefes , or els to bee 
oft: they both ioyne in this; rather to abiure the vfe of bodily benefits then to 
tranfgreffe the rules of iuftice. Thus isthe minde ftill fixed, holding ftedfaftly 
that no paffion(though it infule vpon the foules meaner parts) can domineere o- 


-nerreafon: but reafon ouer them,excercifing vertues foueraignty ouer them by 


eppofition,nor by confent. For fuchan one doth Virgil fay Eneas was. 
: Mens immota manct, Lachryme voluuntur inanes. 
His minde ftood fixt,yet fruitlefle teares muft out — 


L. VIVES. 


[ee (4) Tully] De fisib. lib.3. Cato ALinor is forthe Stoikes,in the queftion of the higheft 
good-all whofe arguments 7 #ily himfelfe(/ib.4)refuteth,proouing their controuerfie with 
the ‘Plotoni/ts and Perspatetiqnues to bee onely verball : whofe priricipall founder Zeno was.(6) 
Willnot\ (sc. de fixib. calls themeffeemables: and Acad queft fib.1. faith thus. Zeno placed all 
the neceffaries of beatitude,in vertne onely: nor reckned ought good, but what was honeft , thae 
being the fimple and onely good. The reft(though not bad, yet) {ome are naturall,fome againft 
nature,fome meane betweene both. The natural he holds are to bee held in fome efteeme,and 
contrary of the contrariety , The meane, hee leaves as acuters,not to be held at, any efteeme: 
make degrees of efteeme‘in the naturall alfo: the more efteemable hee called rpoxy ves prefer- 
red, the lefle dsoxporyysra,teieted,and thefe words Tully vith de finib.lib. 3. (6) Others] Plato 
de leg.lib.4.maketh goods triplet - corporall,mentall, externall : the fiift and laft,being feclu- 
ded from vertue : he maketh vieleffe , hurtfull and dangerous,the midlemoft, are diuine , and 
happy adiun@s of the wife man onely,making man happy of themfelues alone : the other pro- 
perly are not goods,but refpeCtiuely:nor ynto all,but the iuft onely : to whom that which the 
vulgar calleth euill,is a cruer geod , then thefe are to the wicked, feruing them onely as inftru- 
ments of more mifchiefe. This is common in P/ato,who gaue originall to aloft al the Stoikes 
“gare and admired paradoxes:as,that honeft things are only good:only awife man is ritch & freethe 
good man is happy the bad miferable : to beare a wrong is more felicity then to offer one. Yet did 
Plato call thofe corporall and external benefits,soods:becaule(as Apuleiss faith Dog. Pls.) 
their vfe is neceffary in common life : yet fo are they goods, as vertue muft better them,and a- 
dapt them to the fit profecution ofhappineffe. So, good they are({aith Plato) when they are ver- 


rues infiruments,and ferne in her miniftery:when otherwife, they are diretl plaghes & deftruttions. - 
And this 4riffotle alfo held.(d) whether a wife] Of affects sad difcourfeth at lage (Tu{c.queft. — 
e 


4) which, & what they are that a wife man muft not be expofed vnto, in Stoscifme,But the Pla- 
tonifis,and their moft generall followers the Perpatetiques fay that they are naturally ingraf- 
ted in man, irremoouable and onely to bee repreffed.(e) A.Gellins|He liued in Adrians time 
and then wrote his Nottes 4ttice , Hee was very familiar with Phasorinus and Tasrus, both 
Philofophers,and with eApollinaris and Probus , Grammarians : of his learning and wit , take 
Augaftines iudgement,whom the moft,nay rather all the Grammarians doe ont perhaps 
becaufe that hee was of their profeffion ( fufficeth it to fay thus) though by Amgu/tines leauel 
thinke him far otherwife.But of this elfe-whete.The place here quoted is.:6.19. cap.1.( f) E- 
boguent | Or of quick inuention.(g)Of A/a] Which word addeth to his luxury, for fom Afiait 
firft arofe. (4) Replied as Ariftippus.] Who had the like chance in fayling to Corinth. Laérti#s. 
(#) Epitterus} A Phrygian,borne at Hicropolis , feruant to Epaphroastus , Nero's ee 
, <n 


- _ —e. 7 
eee eae <.4 Ws a ae Ls 


OK, «, * | Parag * 


Liz.9.. - OFTHE CITIE OF GOD. : 1343 
TIT TIT CIELO OO TT TCE ID. 
and liued ynco the Antonines,of him was made this dilticke, : | 
AvosErintures &c. | 
--. Borne was I flaue,and Epsttete my ames 
| Belou'd of God as /rus poore; andlame. —; ei ee 

For laine he was indeed.Sufine & abjtine, was much in his mouth, which Gellins faith often: 
hee wrote not much: nothing of his wasextant in Swidas times : His AZannell was his {chol- 
lers Arrianus othis. The booke that this Philofopher puld out of his {crip was the fift of his 
difputations.(k )Adinds | Phantafies of perriZeto imagine.7 ally tranflates ita thing feene,it iS phantafies 
the model that the mind frames it felfe after any obie¢t, arifing of the external impulfi6,which 
is feconded by confent or refiftance , fo begetting opinion, But the opinions condemned by 
the Stoikes,feeme rather to bee the affections that wee doe procure our felues from out owne 
depraued iudgements and opinion : forrow they calléd an opinion of 4 great éuil prefent :ioy Opinion. 
of a great good - defire an opinion of a great future good : feare,of an euill. Thence doe they 
afffirme that opinion troublerh vs more then reall caufes : and we are oftener feared then hurt. 
But this is toucht already. They held furtherthat an yngrounded opinion , or weake affene 
without due confideration doth not befall a wife man. (2) Not fo farre]| Arrianus in his Ex- 
| chiridion biddes a wife man as foone as any tetrible obiect prefents it felfe vato him,to cone 
fider that itis as but aphantafme,and not fuch asit appeareth. (ms) Befall | Plate faith that af- 
fects areina manas like nerwes, or little ftrings whereby nature drawes vs forwarde,into AffeGs 
contraries,as themfelues are contraries : but hee that hath given his reafon once dominion o- how ina 
wer them fhall finde their force of no efte& worth efteeming. | | pass 


Ho 


‘I hat the Chriftians paffions ave caufes of the the practife of vertue, nok 
tnducers unto vise. Cuap.5. . S avr 
HE isno need to ftand vp6a large difcouery what the chriftians {criptures | | 
teachin this point of affects : It doth fubied& the whole minde to Gods go- | 

uernance,and affutance, and all the paffions vnto it, in that manner that they are 

al made to feeme the increafe of iuftice, finally our dorine inquires not fo much 

whether one beangry,buc wherefore? Why he is fad,not whether he be fad,and 

fo of feare? For anger with an cffender to reforme him : pitty vpon one affliated 

to fuccor him:feare for one in daunger to deliver him,thefe no man,not mad,can 
reprehend. The Stoskes (4) indeed vfe to reprehend pitty. But that Stozke might - 

more honeflly haue pittied another mans daunger then haue feared his owne. Pyry vidas; 
But with farre more humanity and piety fayd Tully (6) in Cefars praife- Of all thy. | 
werbues is none mere admired , nor applauded then thy mercy : What is mercy but a 
compafiion,in our ownie heart of anothers miffortuneés , vrging vs ds farréas our 
power ftretcheth to releoue him?This affe& ferues reafon, hen our pitty offend. 
eth not iuftice, either in releeuing the poore or forgiuing the penitent. This (¢) 
‘that eloquent Cicero ftuck not to ¢all a vertue, which the Stoékes recken with the 
vices: yet doth Epicfetus out of the do@rines of Zeno and Chry/ippus, the firft pa- 
trons of this {ect , allow thefe paflions vntod man, whom nachelefls they muft 
needes keepe from all vice, and confequently thefe paffions that befalla wife 
mian,fo as they doe not offer any preiudice to his reafon or vertue , are no vices, 
and the Stokes, Platoni/ts and Peripatetiques doe all agree in one. Bur(as (d) Tul- 
ly faith the Grecians(of old)affect verbofity of contention rather then truth:But now it 
is a further queftion whether it bee'coherent vnto § infirmity ofthis prefent life 
to fuffer thefe affections in all good offices how ever , whereas the holy Angells, 
though they punifh fuchas gods eternall prouidence appointeth with anger, 
ie they helpe thofe that they loue out of danger,without any feare,and fuc- 
cor the wretched without feeling any compdffion , are notwithftanding faid(af- 4 vets 
ter our phrafe of fpeaking) to be pertakers ofthofe paffions,becaufe of the fimili-.why called 
tude of their workes,not any way becaufe of their infirmity of affections ¢ And {o'fterthe afe 
God in the feripture is fayd to bee angry ; yet farre is hee from feeling affe@,the lg F 
effe& ofhis reuenge did procure this — the turbulence ofhis paffion, _cesreleue, 

S84 es L. Vi 


the dh 


oo $$$ $$ 
344 SAINT AVGVSTINE. : Cuap.6. 


L. VIVES. 


G Toikes (4) indeed) (ic. pro Muren, A many come to you in diftreffe and mifery ; you fh:il 
bea villainein taking any compaffion vpon them. This in difgrace of Stoicifme hath Tally. 
(6) T: ully | Pro Q.Ligario. (¢\ This now | intimating that he had more words then wifdome,as 
Saluffe tayd of (atsline: wifdome indeed being peculiar to thofe that ferne the true Ged, the K ing 
of the whole uniner{e,and his wifdome,bis fonne, (4) Tully faith\ Craffss his words of the Greckes 
_ Opinion of an oratour. De oratore lib.1. : | 

Se 

_ What pafGon the (pirits that Apuleius maketh mediators betweene the gods and 

| men are fubiect unto,by his owne confeRion. Cuar 6. | 


Verto deferre the queftion of the holy Angels awhile, let vs fee how the P/sto- 
nifts teach of their mediating {pirits,in this matter of paffion.Ifthofe Demones 
ouer-ruled all their affects with freedome and reafon , then would not —4puleing 
haue fayd thac they are toffed in the fame tempeftuous cogitations that mens 
hearts doe fleete in.So their minde then, their reafonable part, chat if it had any 
vertue feated in it fhould be the dominator over thefe turbulent affects of the 
_ inferior parts: this very minde floteth (fay the P/atoniffs) in this fea of pertur- 
ee bation, Well ,then the deuills mindes lye opento the paffions of luft , feare, 
minds (ab. 2th, and the reft. What patt then haue they free,wife,and vnaffected,whereby 
ie: to pat tO pleafe che gods,and conuerfe with good men,when as their whole minde is fo 
fons, fubiugated vnto affects, & their vices that their whole reafon is ecernally emploi- 

ed vpon deceipt & illufion,as their defire to endamage all creatures is eternall? 
hs 

That thePlatonifts doe but fecke contentions in faying the Poets defame 
the gods whereas their imputations pertaine to the desills, 
| and not tothe gods. Cuar7. 


TE any fay the Poets tolerable fictions that fome gods were Jouers or haters of 
fome men, were not {poken vniuerfally but reftrictiuely, refpecting the euill 
{pirits, whom Apulesus faith, doe flote in a [ea of turbulent tuoughts: how can this 
and,when in his placing of them in the midft betweene the gods and vs, hee 
faith not, fome, for the ewill,but (4) all,becaufe all haue ayrie bodies ? for this he faith 
is a fiGion of the Poets that make gods of thofe fpirits.and call them fo,making 
them friends to fuch or fuch men,as their owne loofe affeats do put in their heads 
to poetize : whereas indeed the geds are farre from thefe in place, blefledneffe 
and qualitie. This is the fiction then, to call them gods that arenot fo: and to fer 
them at oddes, or at amity with fuch or fuch perticular men , vnder the titles of 
deities. But this fiction ( faith he ) was not much: for though the fpirits bee cal- 
~ led gods as they are not, yet they are defcribed as they are. And thence (faizh he) . 
is (6) Homers tale of Minerua;that ftaide Achilles from ftriking in the middeft of 
the Greeke hoaft. That this was Adsnerua, hee holds it faife , becaufe fhee (in his 
opinion) was (c) a goddefle highly placed amongft the greateft deities, farre from 
conuerfation with mortalls . Now if it were fome fpizit thae fauoured the 
Greekes againft Troy,as Troy had diuerfe _—— them,one of whom hce calls (4) 
Penus,and another Mars, who indeed are higher gods then to meddle with fuch 
trifles,and if thofe fpirits contended each for his owne fide, then this fiGion is 
~~ not farre wide, faith he. For it was fpoken of them whome he himfelfe hath tefti- 
_ 2 | fied fubie& to affedts,as mortall men are : fo thatthey might vfe their lones and 
uy, Baseanot according to inftice bur enen( ¢)as the people dog in huntings and 
page oe Oe | —— courfes, 


a 


Ling. OF THE’ CITIE OF GOD. 7. a 
_ courfes,each one doe the beft for his owne partie : for the Philofophers care it 
Acemes was this, to preuent the imputation of fichaéts vpon the gods (whofe 
names the Poets vfed )and co lay therh vpon the fj pirits co whom of right they 


belonged.” 


~L. VIVES. nen: 
[Qt (a) all \all are meane betweene gods: and men , not in fubftance , but nature and place, 
(6) Homers | Hiad, 1 She ftaid Achilles from ftriking Agamemnon. , vponill words patt be- 
_tweene them. (+) 4 goddeff2|One of the wwelue countellor-gods that Exmixs hath in his di- 
ftich : high,good,powrefulland pane Venus They thinke) faith Plutarch De defett, 
erac. that none of thefe calamities which the gods are blamed for , were their doings, but the 
-workes of certaine wicked fpirits. (¢) As the people | Inthe greater circuite, they had horfe- 
rafes and huntings- and the riders were.attired either in white,blew, greencorredde:andfo-_.... 
many partics were there. Martiall mentigns two of their colours, Pri/ine,& Venetian, that is, The Circis 
, greene and blew. Some hold thofe foyre.colours dedicated to the foure feafons of th ycare, an colours. 
' Domitian ({aith Suetonius) added two. more, golden and purple: The blew was facredto-the 
- ftormy wiiter:greene to the verdant fprings white to the Autumne froits, and red to the fun. 
mets fires. Piinze writeth thus hereof: / wonder ta (ee (0 many thonfands of people gaxin gatafere 
of fellowes riding about like boyes; if they did either ve[vetl the horfes fpeed or the horfmans skill, it 
were allwell, but their nimgeis all upon thecolbur , and sf they change colours in the miaf? of their 
-courfe the {petlators fanoge changethalfo: and thofe whome they knew byt enen now afarre of, and 
called love ypon their naspes, prefently, they hane done with they : Such faner,fuch credit followerh 
,apatiry coate : Not tn oe s indgement onely ( which és not worth atatter )but enen in the 
msindes of the graner fort bate this foolery gotten refidence.Epilt.lib.8. 3 


Apuleius his definition of the gods of heanen,fpirits of ayre and 
 . mnen ofearth, Crude, 8. ~~ | 
N/ Hat of his definition of fpirits? it is vniuerfall and therefore worth infpec. 
tion. They are({aith he)creatures,pafliue,reafonable,aeriall & ecernali:In all 
which fiue there is no cOmunity,thae ane ee haue' with goodinen; but they 
haue it with bad alfosFor making alarge defcription of man,in their place, being 
the laft, asthe godsare the firft, to paffe from commemoration of boththeir ; 
extreames,ynto that which was the meanebetweenethem,viz.thefe deuiils chas pipe : 
he faith. AZen, toying (4) in reafon, perfect in (peath , mortal in body , smimportall i tion ofmus 
foulepafionate andvunconftant in minde, brat[pand fraile én body, of difcrepant con 
dstions,and conformed errors, of tmpudent bohinefe , of bold hope, of indurate labour, 
-and vacertaine fortune , perticularly mortal, gewrerally cternall; propagating owe Ano~ 
ther Jhort of life, lowe of wifdome,fudden of deathand difcontented in life, thefe dwell 
on carth. Inthefe generals(common to many he added one, that he knew as falle 
in few: (6) flewe of wifdome : which had he omitted,hee ‘had negleed toperfed 
his defcription. For in his defcripcion ofthe gods, hee faith, that that beatirude. 
which men doe feeke by. wifdome, excelleth in them, (6 hadheethoughrof any 
‘good deuills, their definition fhould hauc mentioved it’, either by fhewing them’ 
to perticipate fome of the gods beatitude, or of ihans wifdome. But hee hath-no’ 
feperation hetweene them and wretches: though hee bee fauourable in difcoue~ 
ring their maleuolent-natures, not-fo much for feare of thent, as. theirferuants 


‘that fhould read his pofitions: Fo the wife hee leaues his opinion open inough, ° 
and what -theirs fhould bee : both in his feperation’ of the’ gods from’all tem. 
pett of affect , and rherein fromthe spirits itr all ‘birt eternitie ; and in his 
‘intimation that cheit*mindes (eve Tike anrefis; tot the’ ods’; nay‘ahd-thathae 
in wifedome, which .men may pertake with the gods, but in being prone to 
a 7 paffions: 


6 


e SS, | ets : e : 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuarg 


paflions, which rule both in the wicked and the witleffe: but is ouerruled by the 
wife man,yet fo as heehad (¢ ) rather want it, chen conquer it,for if hee feeke to 
make the diuells tocommunicate with the gods in eternity of mind onely , not 
ot body,then fhould hee not exclude man , whofe foule hee held eternall,as well 


_asthereft: and therefore hee {aich that max és acreature mortall iz body,and im- 
— mortallin foule. : | 


L. VIVES. ~ 
[Ores in reafor] Or contending by reafon, (Ywentes, of Clxo,to ftriue .(6)S/ow. | Happy is 
hee that getts to true knowledge in his age.Plato.(c) Rather want.| A wife man hath rather 
haue no paffions of mind : but feeing that cannot be,he taketh the next courfe, to keepe them 
vader, and haue them ftill in his power. | | | | 
. Whether the ayry {pirits can procure aman the gods friend{bips. 


HAPe Ge 


“WY Herfore,if men by reafon of their mortal bodies haue notthat participation 


ofeternity with the gods, that thefe fpirits by reafon of their immortal] bo- 


_ dies haue:whbat mediators can their be between the gods &men that in their beft 
pare,ctheir foule,are worfe then men, and better , in the worft part ofa creature, 


che body ? for ,allcreatures confifting of body and foule, have the (a) foule for 
the better part, bee it neuet fo weake and vicious, andthebody neuer fo firme 
and perfect ; becaufe it is of a more excelling nature, nor éan the corruption of 
vice deie€ it tothe bafeneffe of the body : but like bafe gold ; that is dearer then 
the beft filuer , fo farre doth it exceed the bedies worth. Thus then thofe iolly 
mediators, or pofts from heauen to earth, haue eternity of body with the gods 
and corruption of foule with the mortalls,as though that religion that muft make 
od and man to meete, were rather corporall chen {pirituall ! Bue what guileor. 
f nteuce hath hung vp thofe iugling intercedents by the heeles , and the head 
ioe , thac their lower partes their bodies participate with the higher 
powers:and their higher , their foules with the lower , holding correfpondence. 
with the Gods in their feruile part, and with mortalls in. their principal] 2 for 


the body (as Seluf faith ) is the foules flaue : at leaft fhould beein the true vie: 


: * aud hee proceeds : the one wee haue common with beafts , the other with gods: 


- ' "” fpeaking of man whofe body is as mortall as a beafts. Now thofe whome the 


Philofophers haue put betweenethe gods and vs, may fay thus alfo: wee bene 
body and foule,in community with gcdsand men : but then( as I {aid ) they are bound 
with their heeles vpward hauing their flauifh body common with the gods , and 
their predominant foule common with wretched men: their worft part aloft and 
their beft vnderfoore, wherefore if any one thinke them eternall with the gods, 
becaufe they neuer diethe death with creatures, let vs not vnderftand their be- 
dies to bee the eternall pallace wherein they are bleffed , but (6) the eternall pri- 
fon wherein they are damned : and fo he thinkech ashe fhould. 


ae 7 L. VIVES. Oo 
Te foule(a) for.\For things inherent neuer change their effentiall perfection,and I' do won- 
der that once the aban ied {choole of Paris would make any fpecificall difference of 


— foules.(6)Dammed.JNot in the future tence : for they are damned euverfince their fall. 


Plotines opinion shat men are lefe wretched in their mortality them the 
diuells are in their cternity.C Hap. to. : 
[ is faid that Plotine , that lived bur («) lately, vnderftood Pisto the belt of _ 


Ling. | SETHE CITIE OF GOD. | 347 


Hee {peaking of piens foules, faith thus: (6) The father one of hismercy bound shes 
bat for a feafor,So that in that mens bonds, (cheir bodies Jare mortal ; he impu- The deuille 
trulerable 
teth it to God the fathers mercy , thereby freeing vs from the etetnall tediouf- immortae 
neffe of this life. Now thedeuills wickedneffe is held vnworthy of this fauour ly. 
whofe paffiue foulés haue eternall prifons , not remporall as mens are, for they 
were happier then men,had they mortall bodies with vs, and bleffed foules with 
the Gods. And mens equalls were they if they had bur mortall bodies.to their 
wretched foules : andthen could. worke them-felues reft after death by faith and 
piety. Butas they arethey are notonly more vnhappy then man in the wretched- 
nefle of foules , but far more in eternity of bondagein their bodies; (c)hee would 
not haue men,to vnderftand thar they could ener come to bee gods, by any grace 
or wifdome,feeing that he callech thein eternal] diuells. 
L. VIVES. =F | 
BY: (4) Lately.| In Probus his time , not 2 0 0. yeares ere Honarins his raigne, In Plotine otine 
Anguftine faith,him thoughe Plato's academy reuiued, Indeed hee was the plaineft and pu- : 
reft Platonsffs that euer was. Plato and S lotinns, Princes of the Philofophers AZacrob. Porpis 
bis {choller wrot his life,and prefixed it vnto Plotines wor kes.( 6) The father. Plate {aid this of 
the leffer pods is Titmeo:but Plorine faith it was the mercy of ¥ father,to free ma from this liues 
tedioufneffe, his words ate thefe, Lone the father pitying our foules labors prefixed an expiration 
so the bonds wherein wee labour and granted certaine times for vs to remaine without bodies there 
where the worlds foule ruleth eternally out of all this tronble.De dub.aisime.(c)For hee.)eApuleius, 
ehae writeth chat which followeth. . 


nn LD 
Of the Platonifts that held mens foules to become Dze-nones after death. 
| Cap. 1. OS 
TYEE faith (2 )alfo chat mens foules are Demones,and become(b) Lares if cheir 
merits be good : ifeuill, (c) Lemures , goblins ; ifdifferent,(d ) Adexes. But 
how pernitious this opinion is to all goodnelle,who fees not;for be men neuer [6 
soifcheeuous , hoping to become Lemures,or Manes, the more defirous they are: 
of hurr,the worfe they curne into; and are per{waded that fome facrifices wil] calf: 
them to do mifchiefe when they are dead , and become fuch : for thefe Larud 
(faith hee) are euill Demones that haué beene men on earth. But here is another 
een : levit paffe : hee faith further , the Greekes call fuichas they hold blef=_ 
ed .itajueras , good Demones ; herein confirming his pofition that mens foules Bademes , 
become Demones after death. he 
L. VIVES. oe 
HE faith(a) |Hauing often named Genius, and Lar,gius me leaue (good reader) to handle 
them here alittle. 4pudeius his words are thefe. Jn hea fencethe feule of man while is is wn 
the body may be called a Demon. a | 
_ Dit ne bune ardorem mentibus addunt, 

Exriale,an fuacurque deus fit diva Cupido, — - 

Caufen the gods ( Exrialus)chefe fires, 

Or beene thofe gods which men call loofe defires, a 
 Sothen good defire is a good god in the minde. Some therefore thinke they are called tetatiante, Gents, 
whote Demensthat sabe oule is pureft perfect. I know not if I may tranflate ie the Genius 
becaufe that god which is each mans foule though hee bee immortal , yet hath originall after: 

a certaine manner with each man = and thether tend the praiets we offer to our gemiss at care: 

nail coniunétions. Some affigne the body and foule feyered ¢ whofe coniundétion produceth: | 
man ) fo that the fecond fort of Denones is mens foyles acquit from-the bonds of body atid: 1 res: 
mortality - thefe the ancient Latine call Lemsures : and uch of thefe as have a care of their pro 
geny,and ftaies quietly about the houfe,are called Lares. 


Bus 


( 


ELS TS TE a aT SS SE SAT NO IEE, 


348 SAINT AVGVSTINE. — Cuarat 


eS 
Lae But fuch as for their bad liues, are bound to wander, and vfe to amaze good men with idle ape 


The golden 


- beene mortall men divided. Thus farre out o 


paritions,but to hurt the euill men call Larve.But when their merits are indifferent betweene 
the Lar,and the Larua,then they are called A4anes,and for honors fake are furnamed gods.For 


_ {uch as liued orderly and honeftly,of thofe perfons,were firft graced with diuine titles by their 


fucceflors , and fo got admittance into the temples , as Amphiarss in Baotia,AZopfies in Africk, 
Ofirss in Egypt, others elfewhere, and spc laae Big euery where. And thus are | oem that haue 

eApuileins from a moft vnperfect copy though 
printed by one of good credit : Plate alfo calles our foules leaft part, a Demon : ix (ratil, His 


words : you know whom He/iod calls Dansones , euen thofe men of the golden age : for of 
them hee faith. 


fertot a, o-en=-( Mens an damon. : 


Demon. 


Mt genus hoc poftquam fatalis condidst hora. 
Demones hi purs terreftres tunc vocitantur, 
Cuftodes hominum falices qui mala pellunt. 

- ----A Demon or aminde, 

But when fet fate calld hence this glorious kinde, 
Then hight they Earthly Desmones and pure. 
Mans happy guides from i!l,and guards moft fure. 


_ -Ithinke they were called golden (not that they were worth gold ) becaufe they were 
juft and vertuous,and in that refpect are we called Jron, Bur any good man of thofe daies fhall 
ftand in the ranke of Hefiodes golden men alfo, And whois good,but the wifc ? I hold there- 
fore that hee called them Demons for their wifdome & experience,as the word imports:where. 
fore well wrot hee and whofoeuer wrot it .4 good man dying is aduanced and madea Dze 
mon,§2 bis wifdome.So fay | that a wife man dying and lining fo,becometh a good Demon,as Her- 
mogenes allo afirmeth, Thus far Plato, in his 7imeus, whence J doubt not but Origen had his 
error,that mens foules become Demones,and fo contrariwfe. Plutarch.Orig.Porphsry alfo faith 
that a proper part of the foule, viz , the vnderftanding isa Demon, which hee that hath wife, 
i$ ahappy iedziuoy :'and hee that hath not , is vnhappy :that euill foules become wicked 
fpirits and liers and deceiuers like them: But Proclus ciftinguifheth of a Demon and makes all 
plaine. It is true (faith hee ) that Plato faith there is a Demon in the reafonable foule : bur thar 
is compatatiuely true,not fimply,for their is a Demon eflentiall a Demon in refpect, and aDe- 
mox in habit.Euery ching in refpect of the inferiour as aDazon , is called a Demon : {0 Impiter 
calls his fachcr Satsrve in Orpbexs, And [lato calls them gods that haue the immediate difpo- 
fition of generation Demones : to declare the nature and generaiion of the other Demones, 
Were more then mancan compreltend (faith hee: ) for each power that affordeth a man im- 
Medi te protection, be it a god leffe or more is called a De#zon.Now the habitual Demoz is the 
foule that hath practifed it felfe wholly in ations rather diuine then humane and fo hath had 
{peciall dependance therevpon : and in this fence Socrates calles the foules that lied well,and 
are preferred to better place and dignity, Demons. But the eflentiall Deron hath not his name 
from habite, or refpeét , but from the propriety of his owne nature: and is diftin& from the 
reftin effence, proprieties, and actions, But indcedin Tymexs each reafonable foule is called 
2 Demon. Thus far Proc/xs who liketh not that a foule fhould be called a Demex fimply : for 


_ that hereftraines only to that effence that is ameane between the gods &ys,nor wil haue an 


thing but our foule called a Denson comparatiue : not that which worketh the chiete in it, be 
it reafon or affeét , inmirds found or perturbed wherein e4puleins and hee agree not]: for 
that which Usrgill faith ( it is indeed aridle , or a probleme ) is like this of Flato: law tothe 
geod man is his god, luff te the ewsll. Sernins expounds Virgillchus. Plotine and other Philofo- 


phers make aqueition , whether our minde mone of st felfe unto affects or connfells, or bee led 


by fome other power ? firft they faid , it is moned it felfe , yer found they afterwards that our fa~ 
miliar genius was our inftigator to all goodnef[e, and this wee hane ginen vs at our birth : but for 
affections exill and exorbitant , in thofe wee are our owne guides; for it is impoffible that the 
good gods fionld ixnite vs unto exill. Thus much Seruixs. But furely che affects that do 


- mooue vs, Plato callethalfo Demones, And it isa wounder to fee the controuerfies of 


men of one fe in the queftion of- gods and Demsones ; eApuieins hee contradiéted Plato, 
- oe, es Platine 


t 


Ling. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 349 


Plotine him,Porphyry all of them,nor can lamblichas and he agree,nor Procles and Lamblichus, 

the diuels them-felues ferting difference anongft them as they pleafe ro teach them, (4)Lares | Lares. 
All one with the Geos faith Apsleins:and (enforinas fheweth it in an old opinion, De die. zat. 
(icerotranflates Demones by Lares:mary witha condition , If] may fay fo.Capella calls them 
Preftites,and Angeli ,and Sernins (in eLneid.6.) Maneszit is {aid each man hath his good Gens- 
wsand his bad:véz-reafon that effeéteth good , and luft euill, This is the Larva the euill 
Genins : that the Lar , the good one. If the Lar#a ouer-rule aman in this life , then is hee 
damned by it in the life to come, and punifhed for his folly : ifthe Lar conquer , hee is puri- 

fied , and carryed vpppe to bliffe , by the fayd Lar. Plato alfo is of the fame opinion, faying _ | 
the foules goto indgement. De rep Vitimo. (c) Lemures | Thepeaceable dead foules are Lares, Gemures,’ “ 
the burtfull Lerue or Lemures:and thofe they trouble or pofleffe, Larvats,Althe ayre faith Cap- 
pela, ( Nuptiar. lib, 2, ) from the Moone isin Plato's power , otherwife called Summanus, 

quafs manuam fummus : the Prince of diuels : and the Moonéthat is next the ayre is therfore 
called Proferpina, vnder whome the Manes of all conception are fubiect , who delight after 
death in thofe bodies,and if they liued honeftly in their firit life , they become Lares of hou- 

fes and citties: ifnot they are made Larze ,and walking Ghoftes: fo that heere are the good 

and euill AZanes which the Greekes call «Ses and nants sasyors, Heere alfo are their Go- 
vernors Mana and Maturna , and the Godscalled eAqnils, fura alfo,, Furina , and mother 
Mania and other eAgents of the goddes doe liue heere, Thus much Capella, There ( fayth 
Porphyry ) are the Lemures , Ghofts that affright and hurt men,ptefaging their death: called 
Lemures quaft Remures of Remus ; for expiation of whofe murther Romulus offered and in- 
ftituted the Lemuraliato bee kept the third day of May, at fuch time as February was vn-ad 

ded to the yeare, Ther-vpon it is finneto marry in May. ( Jn borat, Epift. lib, 2.) This hee 

hath from Quid, Faffor. 5. (d) Manes] As if they were good. Fef?. For they vied Alana Manes, 
For bona , alfo mother ALatuta , and Poma Matura ripe apples. Thefe were adored for 
feare of death , and called the AZanes 3 as it were good , whereasthey wererather /mma- 

wes andmonftrouseuill, =~ | 


Of the three contraries whereby the Platonifts diftingwilb 
| the diuells natures from the mens. 


Cap. I2. ° 


Ve nowto thofe creatures whomie he placeth properly betweene the goddes 

and men, being reafonable, paffiue, zreall and immortall. Hauing placed the 
goddes the higheft and the men the loweft , here (faith he)aretwo ofyourcseas  . 
tures : the gods andmen much differing in height of place , immortallity and 
perfection , the habitations being inameaineatl /diftant ,and the life there eter- 
nall , and perfection heere, fraileand («) falering : their wittes aduanced to 
- beatitude, ours deie&ed vnto mifery. Heere now are three contraries betweene 
natures two vttermoft parts, the higheft & the loweft:for the three praifes of the 
gods eftate, hee compareth with the contraries ofmans. Theirs are height of 
place, eternity of life , perfection of nature. All thefe are thus oppofed by him 
from humanity:the firft height of place ynmeafurably diftane from vs:the fecond 
eternity of life , poized with our fraile and falering ftate : the third perfection of 
mature and witte , counterpoized by our witte and nature, thatare deie&ed 
vnto mifery. Thus the goddes three , height, eternity , beatitude : are con- 
traryed in our three. Bafencffe, mortality and mifery ; now the diuels beeing 
in the mid-way betwéenethem and vs , their place is knowne, for that muft needs 
bee the midde-diftance betweene the higheft and the loweft. But the other two 
muft bee better looked into, whether the.diuels are eyther quite excluded from 
them, or participate as much of them as their middle pofture require : excluded 
from them they cannot bee: for (5) wee _— fay that they arereyther happy 
a 2 | H nor 


2 : 


Pe ee 


350 | | SAINT AVGVSTINE. ~Cuar.r3, 


norwretched (as wee may fay that the mid-place is neither the higheftnor the 
loweft ) beafts and vnreafonable creatures neither are fo. But fuch as haue reafon 
muft be the one:Nor can we fay they are neither mortall nor cternall: for al things 
aline are the t’one. But he hath faid they are eternall. It remaineth then thae they 
haue one part from the higheft,and another from the loweft,fo being the meane 
them-felues. For if they take both from eyther,their mediocrity is ouerth rown, 
ard they rely wholy vppon the lower part or the higher. Seeing therefore the 

cannot'want thefe two qualities aboue-faid, their mediation arifeth from their 
pertaking one with either. Now eternity from the loweft they cannot haue : for 
there it is not : fo from the higheft they muft have that: So then is there nothi 
to participate for their megicty fake betweenhe them and mortalls,but mifery, 


| LVIVES. | 
| A nd (4) faltring | Subcifiwa with eApsdeius , ot Succidua , with fome Copyes of Auguftine, 


the later is more proper and fignificane, (6) We cannot |Contradiories in oppolites ad- 
mit no meane : as one muft perforce either run or not run. Other oppofites do , as blacke and 
white,contraries end other conllors the meanes betweene them. Some admit it not in partie 
culars : As living and dead in creatures : Seeing and blinde , at natures ficte times. e-triff, 
Categor. — 


How the diuells if they be neyther blefed with the gods nor wreta . 
ched with men may be in the meane betwixt both 
without participation of eyther. 


Cuapr. 13. 


€ Othenaccording to the Platoniffs ,the goddes are in eternall bleffedneffe , or 

bleffed eternity , and men are in mortall mifery or miferable mortality : And 

the fpirits of the ayre betweene both, in miferable eternity, or eternall mifery. 

For in his fiue attributes giuen them in their definition , is none that fheweth 

(ashe promifed ) their mediety : this community with vs including their rea- 

fon , their becing creatures , and their beeing paffiue, and holding communi- 

ty withthe goddes onely in eternity: Hauing their ayry nature, common with 
neither. How arethey meanes then , hauing but one from the higher,and three 

from the lower? Who fees not how they are thruft from the meaneto the lower 

fide? But thus they may be found to be in che midft: they haue one thing proper 

to them-{elues onely , their ayry bodies,as the gods haue their celeftiall and man 

his terreftciall:and cwo things they haue commonto both: their being creatures 

and their gift of reafon : For hee fpeaking of the goddes and men, Coed Heere 

haue you two creatures : Nor do they affrme but that the eoddes hauereafon. 

Two then remaines: their paffiueneffe , and their eternity , onecommon with 

the lowerand the other with the higher , fo beeing proportioned inthemeane 

place that they decline to neither fide. Thus then are they eternally mifera- 

ble or miferably eternall. For incalling them paffiue hee would haue called 

| them miferable , buc for offending them that ferued them. Befides ,. becanfe 
an pase the world is not ruled by rafh chance but by (4) Gods prouidence: thefe fpirits 
nally mie fhould never haue bin eternally miferable,buc that they are extremely malicious: 
feablee = wherfore if the Evdemones be blefled,thé is it not they that ar in this mediety be- 
tween Gods & men: where is their place then,admitting their miniftery between 

| ee | — goddes 


Lis.g. - OF THE CITIE OF GOD. : 351 

gods and men. If they be good and eternall , then are they blefled. If blefled, then 
not in the midft,but nearer to the gods and further from men: fruftrate then is all 
their labour that feeketo proue the mediety of thofe {pirits being good, immor- 
call,and blefled ,betweene the gods immortall andbleffed, and men mortail and _ 
wretched. For hauing beatitude and immortality, both attributes of the gods,and 

_ neycther proper vnto man,they muft need hold nearer correfpondence with gods 
then men. For if ic were ocherwife , their two attributes fhould communicace 
with one vpon either fide,not with two vpon one fide:as a man isin the mid:t be- 
tweene a beaft and an Angel: a beaft beeing vnreafonableand morcall,an Angell 
_reafonable and immortal] ,a man mortalland reafonable, ho:ding the firft witha 
beaft , the fecond with an Angell, and fo ftands meane synder Angels aboue 
beaftes. Euen fo in feeking a mediety betweene immortality blefled , and 
mortality wretched , wee muft eyther finde mortality bleffed , or immorta- 
lity wretched. , 7 3 


e is V IVE S. : 
B T (a) Gods prosidence |.So Plato afhrmezh often :that the great father both created and 
gouerned a!l the world: Now hee fhould doe vniuftice in afflicting an innocent with erer= 
nall.mifery : for temporail affliQion vppon a good man is to agood end , that his reward may 
bee the greater and nee more happy by fuffering fo much for eternal! happyneffe, 3 


ee 


Ge anew é -- oS ON LD - CTT eet, 


we ee wom wee & ane. ccommete... o> 


Whether mortall ween may attaine true happpne/fe. 
| Crap. 14. | 

TZ isa great queftion whether a man may be both mortall and happy: fome (4) 

confidering their eftare with humility, affirmed that in this jife mancoul!d not. 
be happy, others extolled them-felues and auouched that a wife man was hippy: 
which ifit bee fo , why are not they made the meanes,betweene the immortally 
happy,and the mortally wretched?Hold their beatitude of the ficit,and their mor- 
talicy of the lacer ? Truly if they be blefled chey enuy no man For(4) what is mare 
wretched then enuy ? And thereiore they fhall do their beft in giuing wretched 
mortals good councell to beatitude,that they may become immorta!] after death 
and bee ioyned in fellowfhip with the ecernali blefled Angels. — ceo 


‘ Z L.VIVES. _—— ; : | . 
Si (4)confidering \Solon of Athens held, none could be happy til death.P/ato excepted a - 


few : But Solon grounded vpon the vncertaine face of man: For who could fay Pryam was 
happy before the warre, being to fufterthe mifery of a tenne yeares fiege? Or Crefusinall — 
his wealth, being to be brought by Cyrus tobee burncata ftake ? Now Plato refpected the 
difficulty of atrayning that diuine knowledge in this life, which makes vs blefled. (6) /Vhat ¢ 
#s | Thatis all the good that enuy hath, that it afficteth thofe extreamely that vfe it moft,as - 
the Greeke author faith. 


Of the Mediator of god and maz, the man Chriftlefus. — 

C HAP. Ij. | 

BY: if that bee true ( which is farre more probable) thatall men of neceffity 
muft bee (4) miferab‘e whileft chey are mortall, then mufta meane be found 
whichis Godas wellas man , who by the mediation of his bleffed mortality may 
helpe vs out of this morrall mifery vnto that immortall happynefie: And 
this meane muft bee borne mortall , bucnotcontinue fo. He became morrall 
| | Hhz © : hoe 


om 


353 


_ Phil,2. 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. Crar.ts. 
not by any weakening ofhis Deity , but by taking on him this our fraile fleth: he 


remained not mortall , becaufe hee raized him-felfe vp from death: for the fruit of 
his mediation is,to free chofe whom heis mediator for,from the eternall death of 


_ the fieth:Sothen it was neceflary for the mediator betweene God and vs,to haue 


atemporall mortality,andan eternall beatitude , to haue correfpondence wich 
mortals by the firft , andto transferre them by eternity to the fecond. Where- 
fore the good Angels cannot haue this place, beeing immortall and bleffed. The 
euill may , ashauing their immortality , and our mifery : And to thefeis the 
geod mediator oppofed,bee ing mortall for a while ,and bleffed for cuer, againgft 
their immorcall mifery. And fo thefe proud immortals , and hurtfull wretches, 
leaft by the boaft of their immortality they fhould draw mento mifery , hath hee 
by his humble death and bountifull beaitude expelled from fwaying ofall {uch 
hearts as he hath pleafed to cleanfe and illuminate by faith in him:what mean thé 
fhal a wretched mortall,far feperate fromthe bleffed immortals,choofe to attain 
cheir focieties? The diuels immortality is miferable: But Chrifts mortality hath 
nothing vndele@table. There we had need beware ofeternall wretchedif€ffe:heere 


~‘wenecd not feare the death(which cannot be eternal)and we cannot but love the 


happines which is eternal:forche me anthatis immortally wretched aimesalat — 
keeping vs fro immortal beatitude, by perfifting inthecontrary mifery: but the 
mean that is mortal & bleffed,intends after our mortality to make vs immortal(as 
he fhewewed in his refurrection ) and of wretches to make vs bleffed, he neuer 
wanted. So that ther is an euill meane that feperateth friends, and a good that re- 
conciles them:& of the firft fore (6 )is many,becaufe the bleffednes that the other 
multitude attaineth,comes al frd participating of one God:wherof the miferable 
multitude of euil Angels being (c)depriued, W rather are oppofite to hinder,then 
interpofedto further,doth al that in it lieth to withdraw vs from that only one 
way that leadethto this bleffed good,namely the word of God, not made, but the 
maker of al:yet is he no mediator as he is the word:for {0 is hee moft dleffed , and 
immortal,farre from vs miferable men. But as he is man: therein making it plaine 
that to theattainment of this bleffed,and blefling good,we muft vieno other me- 
diators wherby to work:God him-felfe , bleffed and bleffing al,hauing graced our 
humanity with participation ofhis deity:for when hee freeth vs from mifery and 
mortality,he doth not make vs happy by participacion of blefled Angels but of 
} trinity, in whofe participation the Angels them{clues ar bleffed:and therfore(d) 
when he was below che Angels in forme of a feruant,then wealfo aboue them in 
forme of a god:being the fame way of life below, and life it felfe aboue. 


L. VIVES. 


B: (4) miferable | Homer ‘cals men 404 , and «baie , that is miferable , and fo do the La- 
tines.(5)/s many|Vertuc is fimple,and fingular,nor is there many waies to it. Vice is con- 
fufed,and infinite paths there are vito it. riff. Ethic. So the divels haue many wayes to draw 
a man from God , but the Angels but oneto draw him vnto him by Chrift the Mediator. 
(¢ ) Depriued | As darkencffe is the priuation of light , fois mifery ofbeatitude. Bur not 
contrarywife. (4) When he was |Plin, 2. Who being in the formeGOD, des Sap it no robbery 
to be equall with GO D , but made him-felfe of no reputation , and took on him the forme of a fer 
want, Thefe are‘Pasls wordes proouing thar though CHRIST were molt like to his fa- 


her , yet neuer profefied him-felfe his equall here vppon earth , unto vs that refpected 


but his manhood : Though hee might lawfully haue done it : Butthe LORD of all 
putte on him the forme ofaferuant, andthe highGO D debafed him-felfe into one degree 


“with vs,that by his likenes to ours,he might bring vs to the knowledgc ofhis power & effénce, 


and fo eftate vs in eternity before his father : and chat his humanity might fo inuite vs , that his 
| Diuinity 


Lig | = OFTHECITIEOFGOD. | , 353 


Diuinity did not terrifie vs,but take hold of our acceptance of this inuitation , and fo tranflace 
vs into ioy perpetuall. But hee could neither haue bin inuited nor allured to this, but onely by 
one like our felues: nor yet could wee bee made happy , butonely by God the fountaine of 
happyneffe. Sothen there is but one way , Chrifts humanity by which all acceffe lyeth ro his 
Deity , that is life ecernall and beatitude. 


whether st be probable thet the Platonifts fay, That the gods 
auoyding earthly contagion , haue no commerce with 
| men,but by the meanes of the ayry {pirits. 
Cuap, 16. 
Fo it isfalfe thatthis P/etoni(t faith Plato faid: God hath no commerce with man: 
and maketh this abfolute feperation , the moft perfe& note of their glory and 
height. So then the Diuels are left to deale,and to bec infected by mans conuer- 
fation,and therefore cannot mundifie thofe that infe& them,fothat bothbecome — 
-vnclean,the diuels by conuerfing with men,and chen men by adoration ofthe di- 
uels. Or if the diuels can conuerfe with men,and not bee infested ythenare they 
better then the gods:for they cannot auoid this inconuenience: for that he makes 
_ the gods peculiar,to bee farre aboue the reach of mans corruption. But (4) God 
the Creator(whome we call the true God) he maketh furch an one(out of P/sts) as 
words cannot defcribe at any hand , may and that the wifeft men in their greateft 
height ofabftractiue {peculation,can haue but now and then a fodaine and/b) mo- 
mentary glimpfe of the (¢) vnderftanding of this God. Well then if this hi 
God (d ) afford his ineffable prefence vnto wife men , fometimes in their Ka 
ftractiue {peculation:(though after a fodaine fafhion)and yet is not contaminate God noe 
thereby: why then ate the gods placed fo farre off, for feare of this contaminati- P°;"4: 
on?As though the fight of thofe ethereal bodies thatlight the earth were not fuf- prefent mn 
ficient. And ifour fight of the ftarres ( whome hee maketh vifible gods ) doe not °™® 
contaminate them ,thenno more doth itthe fpirits, though feenenearerhand.” 
- Or is mans f{peech more infeGtious then his fight , and therefore the goddes (ro 
keepe them-felues pure ) receive all their requefts acche delivery of the diuells? 
What fhall I fay of the other fences?Their fmelling would not infe@ them if they 
were below,or when they are below as diuells,the {mel of a quicke man is not in- 
fectious at all,ifthe fteame of fo many dead carcafles in {acrifices infe& not. Their 
tafte isnot fo crauing of them as they fhould bee driuen to come and aske their 
meate of men : and for theirtouch, it is intheir owne choyce. For though (¢) 
handling bee peculiar to that fence indeed , yet may they handle their bufinefle 
_ with men,to fee them and heare them without any neceffity of touching: for men 
would dare to defire no further then to fee and heare them : and ifthey fhould, 
what man can touch aGod or a Spirit againft their wils:when we fee onecannot 
touch a fparrow.voleffe he haue firft taken her? So then in fight, hearing & {peech 
the goddes might haue corporeal commerce with man. Now if the diuels haue 
thus much without infeCtion,and the gods cannot, why then the goddes are fub- 
je& to contamination: and not the diuels? But if they bee infeed alfo,then whae 
-good can they doe aman vnto eternity ,whome( beeing them-felues infected) 
they cannot make cleane , nor fit to bee adioyned with the gods , between whom 
and men they are mediators ? And ifthey cannot doethis, what vfe hath manof 
their mediation?Voleffe that after death they liue both together corrupted, and 
neuer come nearer the goddess nor inioy any beatitude, either ofthem. Vnleffe 
fome will make the {pirics like to fpunges , fetching all the filth from others , and 
Hh 3  _ retayning 


354 


God incée 
prehenfible 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuap.16° 


retayning it in them-felues: which if it bee fo,the gods conuerfe with fpirits rhae 
are more vncleanethen the man whofe conuerfation they.auoyd for vncleane- 
neffe fake.Or can the gods mundifie the diuels from their infeGtion , vn-infea@ed 
and cannot do fo with men?VVho beleeues this that beléeeueth not the divels j]- 
lufions? Againe,if the lookes of man infeét,then thofe vifible gods,the (f) worlds 
brighteyes , and the other ftars , arelyable cothisinfe@ion, and the diuels thar 
are not feene but when they lift,in better ftate then they. Bur ifthe fight ofman 
(not his )infe&,chen let them deny that they do fee man, we fecing their beames 
ftretchttothe very earth. Their beames looke vn-infected through all infe@ion, 
and them-feluescannot conuerfe purely with men onely,though man ftand in ne- 
uer fo mugh neceffity of their helpe, wee fee the Sunnes and Moones .beames 
toreflcct vppon the earth without contamination of the light. But I wonder 
that fo many learned men, preferring things intelligible euer-more before fen- 
fible,would mention any corporall matter in the dodtrine of beatitude..VVhere 
is that faying of (¢) Plotine: Lette vs flie to our bright country, there is the father, and 
there is all? VWVhat flight is that ? (4) to become like to GOD. If, then the 
liker a man is to GOD the nearer hee is alfo , why then the more vnlike, 
the farther off : And mans foulethe more it lookes after chinges mutable and 
temporall , the more vnlike is it to chat effence that is immutable and eternall. 


OD (4) the Creator | eApul. de deo Socrat, & Dog. Platon. G O D is celeftiall » inef- 


fable, and vn-name-able , whofe nature is hard ro finde ,. and harder to declare. 
words The of Plato are thefe a*sor ef: ivpeirs fadior prirascdi edvrate To finde Godishard, but to 
comprehend -bim impoffible. Thus farte Apalesus, Plate in his Tmmens, that to finde ont the fa- 
ther of this uninerfe 1s a hard matter, but to expreffe his full nature to another utterly impoffitle. 


~ And in his Parmenides,dijputing of that Oxe , Hee faith scan neyther bee named , defined , wor 


Godisto 
be partly 


comprehended , feene nor imagirced: (6) Momentary. Signifieth thar the dime light fodain- 
ly withedraweth it fel{e,leauing a {lender /peczes.or light impreffion thereof cnly,in the mindes 
of fuch as haue feene ityct fuch an one as giucth ample tcftimony,of the immenfity and luftre 
thereof. (c) Vnderftanding \In the world there are fone markes whereby the worldes Maker 
may-be knowne,but that a farre off, asalight in the moft thicke and fpatious darke : and not 


knovne of by all,but only by the fharpeft wits chat giue them-felues wholly co fpeculation thereof. ( 4) 


his creae 
tures. 


TO auoyd this inconuenience , fecing that mortall impurity cannot atrayne 


Afford his | Nor doth the knowledge of God leaue the wife minde, but is euer prefent when it 
is purely fought , and holyly. (¢) Handling | Contretlation, of ‘Tratto tohandle. ( f.) tvorldes 
bright } Apulei.de deo Socrat, For as their maiefty required, he dedicated. heauen to the immor- 
tall goddes, whome partly wee fee,and call them celeftiall: as, you the worlds bri ght eye that 

uides the times:/’es O Clari{fima mundi Lumina, faith Virgell of the Sanne and Moone. Georg. 
3. (g) Plotine | Plato faith hee , Coleyne copy. (4) To become | The fentence is Plato's: 
wee rehear{ed it in the laftbook. Hee calls heauen our countrey E bécaufe hence we are exi- 
led : Our bright countrey,becaufe all chinges there are pure,certaine and illuftrate, here foule, 
fickle and obfcure: There is the father of this vniuerfe , and all thinges about him as the 
King ofall, as Plato writesto Dyonifins, How fhall wee gerge thether,being fofarre,, andthe way 
ae fe On by our bodtes? Onely one dirett and ready way there is to it,to follow God with all our 
indeanor of. imitation, Thats onely elenateth vs thether, aaa - 
a en LL 
hat unto that beatitude that confifeth in participation of the greate/t good, wee 

| uf haue onely fach a mediator as Chrilt wo fuch as the dinell, 
| : Cuwap.17. | 


to 


Lis. 9. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. | 355 


co the height of the celeftiall purity , wee muft haue a Mediator , not one body- 
ly mortall as the goddesare, and mentally miferable as men are, for fuchan 

one will rather maligne then further our cure; but one adapted vnro our body 

by nature,and of an immortal righteoufnefle of fpiric, whereby ( not for diftance 

of place but excellence of fimilitude ) hee remayned aboue, fuch an one muft . 
giue vs his truly dtuinehelpein our cure from corruption and captiuity. Farre 

bee it from this incorruptible GO D to feare the corruption of (4) that man 

which hee putte on , or of thofe men with whome as man hee conuerfed. 

For thefe two Documents of his incarnation are of no {mall value , thar ney- 

ther true divinity could bee contaminatreby the flefh , nor that the diuels are 
our bettets in hauing no flefh; This as the Scripture proclaymeth , is the 

Mediator betweene GO D and man , theman CHRIST JESVS,of whofe 

Diuinity , equall with the father , and his humanity, like vnto ours:this is now no 

fitte place to difpute. - 


L.VIVES. 


CF (¢) that man] Yhe Phraze of Hierome , eAuguftime and all the Latine Fathers : The 6 4 47 
Greekes vfe drtpunt> in C H R I$ T that isman, nor haue they any other Phraze Ea 

co vfe for the Sonne of G OD his affumption of man:The later Diuines (as if they only were 

Ditines and hadde found out all CHRIST g Deity andhumanity ) fay that it was not All this 

man , but manhood that lee tooke vpon him: And this ( fay they )is the beft ground againft ay ene: 

herefies. Asif Angaffine and Hierome were nobedy. J but they meant manhoed ( fay thefe ) Lovanifts 

though they faid man. Weill then , fpeake you as they didde, and thinke fotoo, But you are doleaue 

the neate Polifhers of the rude antient Latine and Greeke. Mary the beftieft is,you, will quite out. 

haue none tocontradi& the fathers , and giue them the firft oppofition your felues, and in 

this you thinke you fhew rare acuteneffe :But if an other do but leaue your fripples, and fticke 

to the fathers; you prefently proclayme him an Heretique. For if any of yourlearners of 

Diuinity ; ‘defiring to feeme morereligious , and almoft attayning it , fhould fay that 

CHRIST affuredman , hee is prefently thruft fromthe LeQure for an heretike. O but 

( fay they: ) man is but the name of the fubiect, but manhood declares the nature. Good God 

what Heretique will not thinke you would deride him if hee vfe it thus: And would not de- 


ridevsif wee fhould vic it fo. 


That the dinels under coullor of their snterce/fion, 
Secke but to draw vs from God. 


Cuap. 18. 


BY thofe falfeand deceiptfull mediators the diuells, wretched in vncleaneffe - 
4 of fpirit 5 yet working ftrange effets by their aéreall bodyes , feeke to 
drawvs from profit of foule , fhewing vsno way to GOD, but {weating 
to conceale that wholy from vs: For in the corporall way, which ismo 
falfe and erroneous ; a way that righteoufnefle walkes not ( for our afcentro 
GOD muttbe by this fpiricuall likeneffe , not by corporal! eleuation ) but ( as 
I fayd ) in this corporall way that the diuels feruants dreame doth ly through the 
Elements , the diuels are placed in the midft betweene the celeftiall Goddes © 
andthe earthly men , andthe gods haue this preheminence that the diftance of 
place keepeth them from contagion ofman: fo that rather they beleeue thae 
the diuels are infected by man,then he sap by them, for fo would he infe& 
eS | Hh, the 


356 : | SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cap.ry, 


che gods(think they)but for the far diftance that keeps them cleane. Now who is 
he fo wretched as to thinke any way to Pee oi par the men do infe@, 
the {pirits are infe&ed,and the gods fubie& to infection? And wil not rather feleg 
that way where the polluted {pirits are abandoned, and men are purged from in- | 
fection by that vnchangeable God, and fo made fi perfons for the fellowfhip of - 
the Angels euer vnpolluted. | 
That the word Demon és not ufed as now of any Idolater in 2 good fence 
| Cap. 19. oe | 
BY to auoyd controuerfie concerning wordes, becaufe fome of thefe Demon- 
feruers,and Labeo for one,fay,that (4) whome they call :Demones, others call 
Angels:now muft I fay fome-what of the good Angels,whome indeed they deny 
not , but hadde rather call them Demons then Angels. But we (as {cripture 
Demonv- and confequently Chriftianity inftru@s vs ) acknowledge dngels bath good 
eye and euill,but no good Demons. But wher-foeuer in our {cripture Demon or Damo- 
ture on the #éwm is read , it fignifieth an euill and vncleane {pirit:and is now fo vniuerfally 
worktparte ved in that fence,that euenthe (¢) Pagans them-felues that hold multitude of 
godsand Demons tobe adored , yet bee theyneuer fuch fchollers,dare not fay to. 
their flaueas in his praife : thou haf? 4 Demon : who-foeuer doth fay fo, knoweth 
* — thathe isheld rather to curfle then commend. Seeing therefore thatall eares do. 
fo diflike this wordsthat almoft none but taketh it in ill pare ,why fhould we bee - 
compelled to expres our aflertion further , fecing that the vfeofthe word Angell 
will quite abolith the offence that the vfe of the word Demon caufeth. _ 


LL. VIVES. 


3 \7 Home (a) they | Ay» 2000 is ameffenger: and thence in the Greekes we read often ypuars 
th : is, be Sacco pe: face. Euripid.Iphgen. So the Demones being held the goddes 
meffengers and interpretors,are called Angels,and fo is Mercury for his office: Trifmegifius and 
Capella both call him fo,and auerre the duenefle of his name as declaring our fecret thought te 
the higher powers, (4) Wee (as Scripture | The Ghofpell {fpeakes much of good Angels, and 
~ Chriff nameth the diuels Angels. (c) Pagans | I faid before,that after Chrift was borne, the 
name of a Demon grew into fufpect,and fo into hatred , as the epithite of an evill effence , as 
well to the vulgar as the Phylolophers, : | 


Of she quality of the dinels knowledge whereof. they are {0 proud. 
Cuap, 20, 


enone Y= the originall of this name ( if we looke into diuinity ) affordes fome-what 

why focale © worth obferuation, for they were called in Greeke, (4; aeiveres for their know- 

eee 2, ledge. Now the apoftle {peaking in the holy {pirit, faith: tease ¥ puffeth vppe, 

Whythe ° but charsty edifieth : that 1s knowledge is then good when it linketh with charity: 

diuels are otherwife it puffeth vp,that is filleth one with vaine glory. Sothen: In the divels 

fo proud, is this knowledge without charity,and thence they are puffed fo op. {o proud, 

that the religious honours which they well know to be Gods due, they haue ever 

arrogated to them-felues, and as far as they can doe fo ftill. Now what power the 

~~ humility of Chrift,that came in forme ofa feruant , hath againft this diuels pride 

(as men deferued)dominered in their hearts, mens wretched minds beeing diue- 

lefhly as yet puffed vppe ,can by no meanes(becaufe of their proud tumor)com- 
prehend or concetue. | . 2 


Ling. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 357 
L, VIVES. | 


(3 Recke (4) Aeipores | Aaize in the old grecke was inisaues, x >treoxe, toknow. Thence 
came ota quafi 4ziny faith the author of the great Etymology , All knowing. And 
Platoisof the fame minde , for their knowledge : Jn Cratylo. Capella followeth him , and fo 


doc others , Lattantins alfo (ib, 2.) giues them this name for their ynderftanding » And {oDamott 


_ doth (balcidius ypon Plato his Timeus. 


= see woerenr ohne OO eHow ame ote =e - ae th ew 


In what manner the Lord would make hits-[efe 
| knowne to the Dinells. 
| Cap. 21- % 
fo the diuels hadde this knowledge ,’ they could fay to the Lord in the flefh: 
what haue we to do withthee , O lefus of Nazareth? Art thou come to deftray us Masks tt9s 

before our time ? Here is a plaine knowledge without charity:they feare to be pla- 
gued by him , but loued not the iuftice inhim. Their knowledge was bounded 
with his will,and his will with conuenience:But they knew hiin notas the Angels 
knew him,that participate of his Deity in all eternity,but vnto their terror,out o 
whofe clutches,he quit thofe y he had predeftinated to his Kingdom of true eter- 
nall glory,and eternall glorious truth. The diuels thercfore knew him notas hee | 
was the life eternall, the vnchangeable light , illuminating all the godly who re- 
- eeiue that lightro the purification of their hearts by faich , but they knew him by 
fometemporall effeas of his prefence,and fecret fignes ofhis vertue,which the di- 
uels(2) angelicall fences might eafilier obferue then mans naturall infirmity: 

which fignes when he fupprefied , the Prince of diuels made queftion of his Dei- 
ty, andtempted himfor the( 4 ) tryall of his Deity ,trying how farre hee would 
{uffer him-felfe to bee tempted , in ( ¢ Jadapting his humanity vnto our imitati- 
on. Bur( dZ)after his temptation when the good and glorious Angels ( whome 
the diuels extremely feared ) came and miniftred vnto him;then the diuels gorte 
more and more knowledge of him,and-not one of them durft refift his command, 


though hee feemed infirme and (e) contemptible in the fleth, — 


Math, 4. 


L.VIVES. 


Ane (4) fences} Chriffs miracles were more admired of the Angells and Di- 

uels then ofmen, becaufe they knowing the caufes of thinges , faw natures power con- Chrifts ‘mie 

uered and tranfcended. Now men though they faw them ftrange , yet wanted there not racles, 
ome to fay hee caft out diuels by Beelzebub,cheir Prince : not fo much beleeuing this indeed, 

as defiring that the fimple multitude fhould beleeue it. And others of later time haue falfe- 

ly charged him with art Magicke , again whome (by GOD S$ helpe ) I will deale at large 

in my bookes De fapientia Chriftiana. (b) For tryall| The Diucll generally tempts man to 

finne , but here he aymed not fo much at finne ( for he knew his fanétity at leaft neare inex- 
pugnable ) but his fetch was to fee whether the Deity were in this humaine forme, (¢ ) A- 

dapting | Becaufe he would not {ecme exempted (by paffing vntempted ) from humaine con- 

dition : Nor fhould his feruants after him , thinke much to be tempted, feeing that old male- | 
solent enemy of man didde not fpare CHRIST him-felfe. (4) efter temptation | This Temp. 

is exemplary alfo : For as none fhall paffe vntempted , fo if none yeeldto the temptation, tation. 
they fhall all inioy the folace and miniftery of Angels, as Hierome faith, (e ) Contemptible |} 

Poore , needy , ofmeane birth and place , farre from oftentation, and hauing his focie- 

ry of fuch like as hee was, _ "a 


The 


358 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cnsese: 


The difference of the holy Angels know-. 
_. Ledge andthe Diuels. — 


Cuap, 2 y Py 


YNe the good Angels , the knowledg ¢ of all remporall things(that puffes vp 

the Diuels ) is vileznot that they wantit , but in that they wholy refpea 
the loue of that God that fan@ifiech them, in comparifon of which ineffable and 
vachangeable glory with the(4)loue of W they are inflamed,they contemne al that 
is vnder it,that is/>)ngg it,yea and even them. felues,that al their good may be im- 
ployed in inioying that onely good: And fo came they toa more fure knowledge 


The diuels of the world,viewinggn God the principall caufes of the worlds creation , which 


ledge 


cautes do confirmethis, fruftrate that,and difpofe of all:now the (c) diuelsare far 
from beholding thofe eternali and fundamental] caufes in the wifedome of God, 
only they can extract a notion from certaine fecret fignes which man is ignorant 


The ducls in,haue more experience,and therefore may oftener prefage euents. But they are 


efien de- 
cqued, 


Loueof 


. faire ob. 


ic&s. 


often deceiued, mary the Angels neuer. For itis on: thing to prefage changes & 
events from changeab‘eand cafuall grounds,and to confound them by as change- 
able a will(as the diuels are permitted to do )& another thing to fore-fee the chan- 
ges of times,and the wil of Ged in his eternall vnalterable decrees mot (4) certain 
& (moft powerful) by the participatié of his diuine f{pirit,as the Angels ar vouch- 
fafed by due gradation todo.So are they eternal and bleffed He is their God that 
made them, for his participation andcontemplation,they do(e) conrinually inioy, 


L. VIVES. | | : 
fey (4) lone | Loue alwayes worketh on beauteous obiects, Socrates in Plato's Phedo faith 
that if corporall eyes could behold the face of honefty and wifedome,they would hold it moff deer 
and amiable, What then if we could fee Gods face,whofe fayreneffe((iaith the booke of wife- 
dom )appeares enen in this,that onr fayreft ob:etts are of his making. Diotina in Plato's Conui. (as 


_ wee faid aboue ) holds but one pulchritude worthy the loue of an honeft man that defires bea- 


titude. (5) /s xor Jall that is not God , being vile in refpect of Gad,the Argels contemne beth 
all and them-felues in refpeQ ofhim , which cogitation faftneth them fo firme in Vnion 
with God.that his beaticude fufficeth withour all other appendances to make them eternally 
blefled.(¢ ) The diszels |For they cannot behold the pole or foundation where-vpon all caufes 
are grounded and turned, nor the fount whence they arife : but only ( by their pregnancy and 
wit,furmounting ours, as alfo by experence , more then ours ( becing immortall ) they haue a 
quicke conceipt of things prefent,and a furer prefage in things to come then we haue. Where- 
by conie@turing euents uot from the proper caufe, but their owne conieCtures, they are often= 
times deceiued,& by,when they think they {peak moft true,boafting that they know al things, 
Nor do the vnpure diuels faile herein onely,but cuen the gods themn-felues, faith Porphyry. (a) 
CMof? certaine ]Gods willhath this certainty , iceffecteth whacit pleafeth , elfe were it not 
certaine , as no: being in his power, but all effects beeing in his hand, it is moft certaine. That 


_ is, nothing can fall out, but he willeth it,becaufe he willeth nothirg but muft fall fo out. And 


The cer- 
tainty of 
Gods wil, 


therefore they that obferue his will,obferue the fure caufe of all cffectes,becaufe all effects haue 
production trom his will,fo that rightly doth eLugustine call his will moft certaine , and moft 

owerfull , his power being the caufe of his wils certainty, This will the Angels and Saints 
Choline , know as muchas the proportion of their beatitude permitteth., For al of them haue 
no: the fame knowledge,but gradually,as they haue beatitude , as hee faith. (e} Coutinually | 
Continual is their fpeculation of God, leaft the leaft incermiffion fhould make them wretched: 
yet doth not the feare of that, caufe chem continue the other, but that béacicude doth wholly 
tranfport them from the cogitation and defire of all other thinges,they inioying all goodneffe 
in him that is the fountaine of them all. 


That 


fu" =F” oF er. «9 


Ling, - OF THE CITIE OF GOD. | 359 


That the Pagan Idols are falfely called goddes,yct the [crip 
ture allowes tt to Saints and Angels. | 


Cuap. 2 36 


N?2’ ifthe Platoni/ts had rather cal thefe gods,thé Demones,and reckon them | 
amongft thofe whome the father created (as their Maifter P/sto writech ) lee 
thé do fo:we wil haue no verbal! controuerfie with them: If they call chem im- 
mortall,and yet Gods creatures,made immortall by adherence withhim , 8¢not 
by themfelues,they hold with vs,call them what they will. And the beft Platon:/ts 
(ifnot all)haue left records that thus they beleeued:for whereas they call fuch an _ | 
immortall creaturea god, wee (4 ) contend not with them,our fcriptures faying: fo ue 
The God of gods euen the Lord hath fpoken:againe:Prat(e yea the God of Gods : Againe: Pv. Ae 
A great King aboue all gods:And in that it is written : He is.tobe feared aboue al gods; Ff 96.4 $. 
The fequell explaines it: For a// the gods of the people are Idols:but the Lord made the 
beanens. Hecalleth him oucer al gods, to wit the peoples , thofe that the Nations Mart 24. 
called their gods being Idols, therfore is heto be fearedaboue them all , and in 
this feare they cryed: Art thou come to deftroy vs before our tzme ? But whereas it is 
written. The God of goas,this is not to be vnderftood,the God of Idols , or diuels: 
and God forbid we fhould fay, 4 great King aboue all Gods,in reference tohis king- 
dome ouer diuels:but the {cripture calleth the men of Gods familie, gods, Jhaue. 
fasdyouare gods,and al children of the moit High:of thefe mutt the God of gods be vn- ra ak 
derftood,and ouer thefe gods,is King , The ereat King aboue algods. But now oneled Gods; 
ueftion:If men being of Gods family,whom he fpeaketh vnto by men or Angels, WY 
be called gods,how much more are they to be fo called that areimmortall,& inioy 
that beatizude which men by Gods feruice do aime at? We an{wer that the {crip- 
ture rather calleth men by the name of gods, thenthofe immortall bleffed crea- 
tures whofe likeneffe was promifed after death, becaufe our vnfaithfull infirmity 
fhould not be feduced by reafon of their fupereminence to make vs gods of them: 
which inconuenience in man is foon auoyded.And ¥ men of Gods family are the 
rather called gods,to affure them that he is their God that is the God of gods: for 
though the bleffed Angels bee called goddes:yet they are not called the Gods of | 
. Gods,} is of thofe feruants of Godof whom it is faid, Yen are gods,c> al children of Cort. 8 
the moft High. ere-vpon the Apoftle faith:though ther be that are called gods whether "75" 
in heanen or in carth,as there be many gods,and many Lords:yet untovs there is but one 
God which is the father : of whomeare allthings andwein him: and one Lord \efus 
Chritft by whome are al things and we by him. No matter for the name thé,the mat- 
ter being thus paft all {cruple. But whereas we fay from thofe immortall quires, 
Angels are fent with Gods command vnto men,this they diflike,as beleeuing that 
this bufineffe belongs notto thofe blefled creatures whom they cal goddes, but 
vnto the Demones ,whome they dare not affirme bleffed but only immortall:or fo 
immortal] and bleffed as good Demores are,but not as thofe high gods whom the 
place fo high and fo farre from mans infection. But (though this feeme a verba 
controuerfie che name of a Demon is fo deteftable,that we may by no meanes at- 
‘tribute it vnto our blefled Angels. Thus then let vs endthis book. Know al that 
thofe bleffed immortals(how euer called)§ are creatures,are no meanes to bring 
miferable man to beatitude , being fromthem (¢ ) doubly different. Second- 
ly thofe that pertake immortality with them, and miferable (for reward of their 
mallice with vs,can rather envy vs this happines , then obtaineit vs:therfore the 
: | fautors 


360 


— “See 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. - Cuaraz. 


ihe a hia faucors of thofe Demenes can bring no proofe why wee fhould honour themas 


now to 
yvarthip. 


ped, 


God,but rather that we muft auoyd them as deceiuers. As for thofe whome they 


fay are good , immmortall and bleffed, calling them goddes and allotcing them — 


facrifices for the attainment of beatitude eternall, In the next booke(by Gods 
helpe) wee will proue tha their defire wasto giue this honour notto them, but 
vntothat one God , through whofe power they were created , and in whofe 
participation they are bleffed. | 


L VIVES. 


nd (4) recken | Plate faith that that great God the father created all the reft. Jn Ti- 

mao, (6) V Ve contend net No man denieth (faith Cypryan ) that there aremany gods by 

‘leaden Boethixs calles euery happy man a god, but one onely fo by nature, all che reft 

y patticipation. Andto ys hath Chrift giuen power to be made the fons of God. (¢) Dosbriy] 

By, from our mifery and mortality : which two wordes, fome copies adde vnto the text, The 
fence is all one,implied in the one and expreffed in the other. 


4 Finis, lib. 9. 


THE 


# a 22 ee: i 


(368 


tenth booke'of 


: That the Placonifts themfelues held that 


~ One onely God was the giner of all beatitude 


~ 


uxto Men ayd Angels; but the contronerfie ity 
whether they that they : 7 
for this end , would hane facrifices offered r0 
shers-felues,or refigne all unto God 
2. The opinian of Plotine rhe Placonift roe. 
cerning the fispernaturall Allumeinatson. sat 
3. Of the true worfbip of God, wherein the 
Placonilis failed in wonfhipping good or: enill 
Angcls,though they knew she worlds Creator. 
"4. That facrifice is due onely to the trne God, 
5. Of the facrifices which God reqnireth 
not and what he requreth in their fignification. 
6. Of the true andperfett facrifice, 
7, That the good Angels doe {a lowe vs, that 
they defire wee foould werfbip. God onely, and 


them, eee 
a Of the miracles whereby God hath con- 


oe 
s 


firmed his promifesin the mindes of the-faith= 


Fully the miniftry of bis boly Angels, = 
‘“ 9. “of mie Arts else the Deu:ls 


| wor/hip, whereof Porphery approoneth fome and- 
P] ee 


difaloweth others. a 
lo. Of Theurgy that falfely promiferh: to 
ssundifie the minde, by the innocation of. denills. 
11. Of Porpheries epiffle to Anebuns: of 
ce cipt,defiring hins of infiruttion in rhe fene~ 
rall kindes of Demones. ° 7 
12. Of the miracles that God worketh by 


bis Angels miniftry. 


- 2. How the innifibleGod bath often made 


bimfelfe uifible , not as bee is really , but arwee 
couldbe able tocomprebendhis fight. _,.. 
14. How but one God is to be worfhipped for 
all things temporall and eternal, all being in the 
power ofbispromidence, _ ae 
15. Of the hely Angels that minifter to 
Gods prosidence, 


16. Whether in this queflion of Beatitnde we | 


wait truff thafe Angels that refufe the dinize,. 
worfbip and aferibe tt all to owe God , or thefe 
that require ittathemfelucs: 


' 
: i 


| 


. | veaite 
a) ar - Le by 
ye E Pee 2 ae 
: . . i a 28 one . . «@ —« 
- el Peed 
. a te ‘. » “pee Sse ey ‘ oa ‘ 
ae Want, ea ee” a PAE 
(] . a , ? ¢ 
’ : ° 
| - . - : INIS, 7 | | : 
“ - ° .) ae } - Siar = 
ee ee CSS ae Ss 9 
‘ ’ J 
eee | ' 
: fog : ' a. a  * . P a ‘ « : 
1 6 ; 1 . to Worn eo. . $ are t’! s : a. 
& 
: oa a a “. ry 
oe li ~ eft 


the City of God. * 


17. Of the Atke of the Teftament, and the 
miracles wrought te confirme the lawe and the 
promife. 


18, Agaendt fuch a6 deny to beleené the Soripe 
tures,concerning thofe miracles fhewen te God¢ 
peoples ag oe 
the true religion commands vs to offer to one 
God. Ce 

20. Of the onely and.srae facrifice which the 
mediator betweene God. and Man became. 
21. Of the pewer ginen to the denils , to the 
greater glorifying of te Saints that bane (uffe- 
red martyrdome,and sonqnered the ayrie fpsrits, 


not by apptafing themiput by adhering to God, 


22.. From whenve the Saints hae thtir power 


against the dinels , and their pure par gation of 


A beart. :. 


23. Of the Platonifts;principles in thesr pif 
Gation of thefowle. a. 
24. Of the true — beginning thar purgeth 
and reneweth mans whole nature, - =>: - 
25. That all the Saints in the old law, axa 
other ages before it mere inftified onely by the 


«59. Théreafon of that vifible facrifice that 7 


26..0f Porphery his wanering betweene Cone 


feffion of the true God, and adoration of the 
Denils. © ae Un he eee 


miflery and faith of Chrift. 


27. 
23, what perfiafions blinded Porphery from 
knowing Chrift the tree wifdome. 
29. Of she. intarnation of our Lord Tefus 
Chrift, which, the impious Platonifts fhamse te 
acknowledge, | 


tedandvorrefied,  (°' - 2 
«ot. Against the Plaronifts holding the foule 
cocternallwithGod.) .° 0 


2 


32 OF she eninerall oy of she foules frees 


dome, which Porphery foxght amiffe,and.theres 
| fore fernd wot: That onely Chrift hath declaa 


: ? 
Be PE me 


7+.™ 


Q ° * - 


Of Potphery his exteeding Apuleius ia 


30. What opinions of Plato, Pophery ce fi - 


"363 


THE TENTH BOOKE 
OF THE CITTIE OF GOD: 
cman emmy” ae 


_. That thePlaronifts themfelues held, that One onely God was the giner of all 
, :. beatitude unto men and Angels; bus the contronerfie is whether they 
shat they hold are to be wor[bipped for this end,would hane facri- 
| fees offered to es refigne all veto God. . | 


HAP. I. 


‘3 ‘ saab 


weer Tis perfpicuous to the knowledge of all fuch ‘as’ hane 

BAIS Rage vie of reafon,that man defireth to be happy : But the great 

- A ob a ‘ controuerfies arife vppon the inquifition whence or how 
§ mortall infirmity fhould attaine beatitude : in which-the 
\ p Phylofophers haue beftowed all their time & ftudy which 
Mm to relate were here too tedious ., and as fruitleffe. He thae 

\ hath read our 8. booke , wherein'we fele&ed with what | 
Phylofophers to handle this queftion of beatitude , whe- 
oe | ther, it were to be attained by feruing one God , the maker 
of the reft, or the others alfo need not looke for any repititions here , having 
there to repaire his memory :ifit faylehim, we choofe the Platoné/ts,as worthily 

held che moft worthy Philolophers, becaufe as they cou!d conceiue that the rea- 

fonabic irnmortall foule of man could never be bleffed,buc in participation of the 

— jight of God the worlds creator : fo could they affirme that beatitude / theayme 

of all humanitie) was vn-atcainable without a firme adherence in pure loue , vn- 

to thie vnchangeable Owe :that is G O D. Bur becaufe they alfo gaue way to Pagan 

Rom.J- 33 errors (becomming vaine (as Pas/ faith ) in their o xne imaginations ) and belee- 
ued ( or would be thought to beleeue)that man «as boundto honor many gods, 

and fome of them extending this honor euen to deuills,/whom wee haue indiffe- 

rently confuted:)it refteth now to examine (by gods grace)how thefe immortal} 

and bleffed creatures in heauen (be they inthrones, (4) dominaticns , principae 

lities,or powers) whom they call gods , and fome of them good Demones,or An- 
gelsaswe doe,are to bebeleeted to defire aur preferuation of truth in religion 

and piety : thatis (to be more plaine) whether their wills be,thac we fhould offer. 

prayer and facrifice,or confecrate ours or our felues vnro ghem,oronely to god, 

who is both their God & ours : the peculiar worfhip of the diuinity or(to fpeake 

more expreflie ) the deitie, becanfe [ baueno-one fit Latine word to expreffe its 

when I'need, I will vfethe Greeke (b) Latréa;which our brethren (inall cranflati- 

on of Scripture) doc tranflate, Serusce. But that feruice wherein we ferve men, 
intimated by the Apoftle in thefe words , Seruants, bee obedient to yout mai- 

Bphel.s. fers, thatis, exprefledby another Greeke word . But Latris, as our Euange- 
lifts doe vfeit either wholy or moft frequently, fignifieth the honour due vn- 
toGOD. Ifwee therefore eranflate it‘Ca/tys of Colo,to worthippe or to ill, 

wee communicate it with more then God, for wee (¢) worfhip pene Jall 

men of honorable memory. or prefence : befides Co/o in generall vfe, is pro- 

per to (.4) things vnder vs , as well as thofe whome wee reuerence or adore. 


oo” 


Leen aac 


Lis.10. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. | 363 


for hence comes the word Colonus , for a husbandman, or an inhabitant. Andthe 
gods are called Calicole , of Ce!am,Heauen: and Colo,to inhabite, nor to adore, or 
worthip, nor yet (¢) as husband-men,that haue their name from the village of the 
foyle they poffeffe,but as that rare Latiniflt faith, rbs antigua fuit, f)Tyry tennére 
coloni.Coloni being here the inhabitants not rhe husbandmen. And herevpon the 
rownes that haue beens planted and peopled by other greater cities (as one hiue 
‘of bees produceth diuerfe ) are called colonies . So then we cannot vfe Cole with 
referenceto God withouta reftraint of the fignification , feeing it is communi- 
cate vnto fo many fences : therefore no one Latine word that I know is fufficiene 
to expreffe the worfhip due vnto God . For though Religion fignifie nothing fo. 
- diftinGly as the worfhip of GOD, and there-vpon fo wee trapflate the Greeke 
(2) Yexextre, yer becaufe in the vfe of itin Latine, both by learned and ignorant, 
(4) icis referred vnto linages , affinities , and all kindreds , therefore it willnot 
feruc to auoyde ambiguitie in this theame : nor can wee truly fay, religion isno- 
- thing elfe but Gods worthip : the word feeming co be taken originally, from hu- 
maine duty and obferuance. So Piety alfo is taken properly for the worfhip of 
God, where the Greekes vie ivetiie : yetis it attributed alfo vnto theduty towards 
our parents : and ordinarily vfed for (¢ )the workes of mercy ,I thinke becaufe 
God commands it fo ftridly, putting it in his prefence ( £) for, and (/) before 
{acrifices. Whence came acuftome to call God, Pésous. Yet the Greekes never 
call him (7) wane , though they vie wate for mercy,or piety often. But in fome 
places( for more diftinGtion } they choofe rather to fay qwotue, Gods worthip, 
then @eéus , plainely, worfhip, or good worfhip . Buc wee haue no one fit worde 
for to cypreffe either of thefe. The Greeke, rare we tranflate , ferusce, but with 
a reftraint of ic onely to God : their tesa, we turne it , Religion , but ftill with a 
"peculiar reference to God : their Seti, wee haue no one word for, but wee may 
call it G ods worthip: which wee fay is due onely to him that is che true God,and 
maketh bis feruants gods. Wherefore if there be any bleffed immortals in hear g.4, tors 
uen,that neither love vs,nor would haue vs bleffed,them wee muft notferue: but une 
if they both louevs, and with vs happineffe, then truly they with it vs fromthe 
fount whence they haue it. Or thall cheizs come from one ftocke, and ours from 
another. | | : 


a 3 L. VIVES.: : 


TT rrones (4) dominations | Iamblichus divides the fupernall powers into eAngels, Archane 

“™ gels, Damones,Heroés, Princtpalsties and Powers, and thofe hee faith doe appeare in diuerfe 
manners and fathions, Jn Myer. Alithe other P/atonsfts make them but geds and Demexes, 

(6) Latria | rerpivw is “terore, to ferne : but it grew tobe vied for cituus ,teworfbip. Suidas. But Latrias 
Asgnftine will haue the feruice of men called seria, NOt respsia, for the place hee quoteth is: 

si tian, Seruants ce. Ephef.6.5. Hence arifeth the dictin&tion of adsratio, Latria, Dulia and 
Hyperdulia. Vala makes latria and Dulia both one, for feruice or bondage , and fheweth it 

by chefe words of Suidts : nxetplias urea etras.tnipueda. Sernice or bondage xs mercenary. For an 
husband faith in Xenophon: 1 would redeemeé this woman from flanery er bondage( SeuianatpCoa) 

with my life,O Cyrus. Cyripad d:b.2. thety the wife replied : Let bins redeeme bimfelfe from bone 

dage (s¢s wideniver) With bis owne life. Ibid. The {criptures alfo vie ratpoe , for tobee feruile, 
“or toferuc,in Leuiticus, Tou fhall doe no fernuile worke ( ratpure,) And againe, Thon foalt.make 
gone of thy feede to bee flane to thy Prince,( same, ) And in Job, a begper is called reps, 
Dulia and Latria haue the latt fyllable bue one, lon’. (¢): Wee werfoip | And {o doth holy ,.,. 
writte vie, Adoration. (d) Things-under us| Rightly : for (olo is to’ handle or exercife : ¢ 

wee doe Coleré all that wee vfe or practife; learning , armes, fports, the earth, &c: It is alfo to 

| lis inhabite,: 


364 -- SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuana, 


inhabit,(¢) Hasbandmen. Such as till hired grounds are called colons, as they are called Jnqui- 
dini,that dwell in hired houfesin citties , i husbandmen that ill their owne ground , afwell 
tat as fuch as are fene forth to inhabit any where, are called colons, Therevpon grew the name of 
ony the Roman colonies, to omit the Gteekes and Afians, The townes that fend out the colonies 
are called the Metropolicane cities thereof.( f )7yréé.] The Tyrians buile Carthage, and came 
thither with Dido Eés/a,that fled from Pigmsalion,after che death of Sickens her husband. This 
hiftory isas common asa foole :( g ) ¢pxeae, | All one with Latria(faith Susdas)and Gavenet and 
duciCei are allone , belonging tothe gods. For Orpheus , they fay , firft raught the mifteries of 
religion , and becaufe hee wasa Thracian hee called this duty, Sessa: or elfe of Threfco( an 
old-word )to fee.( 4) Jt ss referred.} Being taken for piety : which is referred to our country, 
parents and kinred.($ ) The werkes.| The vulgar call the mercifull godly,mercy godlineffe : So 
do the Spaniards , and French , that fpeake Latine the worft.( k )Fore and.) Thefe two words - 
fome copies omit.) Before. ] Wherevpon itis faid. will hane mercy and no facrifice.Ofee.6.6. 

fester, } None of the learned vic it in that fence indeed. . 


The opinion of Plotine the Platonift concerning the fupernall 
suminstion, CHAP, 2. 


B Veweeandthofe great rhs 2 haue no confti@ about this queftion: 
for chey well faw, and many of them plainely wrot that both their beatitude, 
and ours bad originall from the perticipation of an intelleQual light, which they 

counted God, and different from themfelues:this gauethem all their light,and by 

the fruition of this,they were perfe& &bleffed:(4)in.many places doth Plotine ex. 

plaine P/eto thus:that that which we call che foule of this vniuerfe,hath the beati- 

tude from one fount with vs,namely alight which it is not, but which made it:8 

from whofe inteletual illuftration it hath al the intelligible {plendor.This he ar- 

gueth in afimily drawen from the vifible celeftiall bodies compared with thefe 

— two inuifible things putting the Ss:7xe for(d Jone,and the Afoone for another, for 

the light of the Afcone is held to proceed from the refleionof the Suzne.So(faith 

this great Pletonift Jthe reafonale or tntelledtuall foule,of whofe nature all the 

bleffed immorrtalls are,that are contained in Heauen,hath no effence aboue it, but 

onely gods that created borh it , and all che world;nor haue thofe fupernall crea- 

tures their beatitude or vnderftanding of the truch from any other originall 
then ours hath : herein truly agreeing with the fcripture , where itis writtten, 
felts 8.6.7: (-) There was 4 man [ent from God whofe name was lohn, the fame came for a witne fre 
to beare witne(fe of the light , that amen (a) through bins might beleene, (e) He was 

not the light but cane to beare witnelfe of the light. That was the true light(f) whieh 

lightneth encry mang ) that cometh into the world,which difference fhewech,thag 

that reafonable foule which was in Jeh2 could not bee the owne light,but fhone 

by perticipation of another , the true light. This /oh» him-felfe confefled in his 
teftimony where he faid Of bis Fulwe (fe bane all we recesued. a 8 


5, __L VIVES. ea Je 
N(d)many places. From the contemplation of that good father axifeth all beatitude. Plotix de 

| pak caes Aree elfewhere he faicti ¥ our foules after their temporal labours thal enioy one & 
. . ¥fame beatitude without difference, with § foule of the vniuerfe.(6)For one.) Forthe Prince of 
“- "the world whence the beatitude arifeth,&the A/oene for the worlds foule.(¢)7 ker was.|A man 
fentileakt fome fhould thinke eucry meffenger from heauen(&con{equently ve 


STOO ES 


Lrs10. ‘OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 


oo ee 


God,becaufe he could bring no fuch newes from any but God, (d) Through him } not in him 


365 


quoth Bada; (for curfed is the man that trufieth in man) but in the Ji ght,by his teftimonie,yee Hier, 17 


the Greeke, 4:@# cannot be diftinguifhed to either fide, (e) Hee was ot | ix li incivos raeds s 


In the article + , Theophilatt will haue a mifterie. The Saints are lights. You are the light of the Mat. 5.14 


world fast Chrift. for they are deriued ftom hislight. Thence followeth that: That was the true 
~. Bight : Why, true ( faith Auguftine? ) becaufe that which is li chtened ab externo is ji che alfo, 
‘but that is the true light that enlightneth.Or the article 79, may haue relation to the prece- 
dence, and the fence bee, John was not that light of which I fpake. (fF, Which lightueth} not that 
allmen are enlightned,but becaufe none are enlightned but by this light, or as Chryfoftome 
faith it lightneth each man as farre as,belongs to him tobe lightned . if any doe fhutre their 
hearts againft the beames,the nature of the light doth noc caufe the darkeneffe in them , bur 
their owne malicious depriuing them-felues of fucha good , other-wife fo generally {pred 


ouerall che word. (g )That commezh tw ray x6: wsv. Origen allegcrizeth vpon it: itlightneth — 


{uch as come into the world of vertues nos of vices, 


——_— 
Of the true wer{hip of God,wherein the Placonilts fatled in worfbipping good or 
| eullangels though they knew the worlds creator. 
| | HAP, 3. 


TJ His being thus, what Platon## , or otherPhilofopher foeuer had held fo, and 

knowne God,and glorified him as God, and beene thankfull and not become 

vaine in his conceits,nor haue been an author of the peoples error,nor winked at 

them for feare: they would hate confeffed, that both the blefled immorralls and 

we wretched morralls are bound to che adoration of one onely G O Dof gods, 
both their God and ours. 


nny, 
That facrifice is due onely tothe trueGod. Cua. 4. 
T° him we owe that Greeke Latria,or /ernice, both in our felues and facrifices, 


for we are all his temple,and each one his temples,he vouchfafing to inhabit 
vs all (4)in f{umme,and each in particuler,being no more in all,then in one: for he 


_isneither multiplied nor diminifhed(4)our hearts eleuated to himare his altarss - 


. his (6Jonely fonne is the prieft by whom we pleafe him: we offer him bloudy {a- 
crifices when wee fhed our bloud for his truth : cnd incence when wee burnein 
zeale to him,(c) the gifts he giueth vs,we doe in vowes returne him : his benefits 
weconfecrate vr.to him in fet folemnities , leaft the body of time thould bring 
_ them into vngratefull obliuion : we offer him the facrifices of humility 8 praifes 
_ onthealear of our heart in fire of feruent loue:for by the fight of him(as we ma 
fee him)and to be ioyned with him, are we purged from our guiley & filthy affe@s 
and confecrated in his name: he is our bleffed founder ,& our defires accomplifh- 
ment.Him we elect,or rather re-ele&, for by our negle& we loft him: him there- 
fore we(d) re-elec&t(whenee religion is derived Jand to him we do haften with the 
_ ‘wings of loue,to attaine reft in him : being to be bleffed by attainment of that fi- 
nall perfection: for our good ( whofe end the Philofophers iangled about ) is no- 
thing but toadhere vnto him,and by his intelle@ual! and incorporeall embrace, 


our foule growes great with all vercue (¢) and true perfedtion . This good are we. 


taughr to love with all our heart, with all our foule, and all our ftrength. To this 
good we ought to be lead by thofe that loue vs, and to lead thofe wee loue. Sois 
therwo commandcments fulfilled , wherein confifteth all the lawe and the Pro- 
phets.(f) Thow {halt lowe (g) thy (h) Lord thy (4) God (k) with all thine heart , with 
all thy foule,and with allthy mrinde : and(L Thoulbalt loue thy neighbour as thy felfe. 
For to teach a man how to loue him-felfe, was this end appointed, where-vnto 


Mai 3 


Ti 3 to 


366 _ SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuan, 


to referre all his workes for beautitude for he thatloues himfelfe, defireth burro 
bee bleffed.And the end of this is,coherence with god. So then the command of 

_ louing his neighbour, being giuen to him that knowes how to loue himfelfe,() 
what doth it but command and commend the loue of God vnto him ? This Gods 
true worfhippe,true piety,true religion,and due fernice to God onely, wherefore 
what immortall power foeuer ( vertuous or otherwife) that loueth vs as it felfe, 
it defires wee fhould but bee his feruants for beatitude , of whence it hath beau- 
titude by feruing him. If it-worfhippe not God, itis wretched, as wanting God: 
ifit do,then will not it bee worthipped for God. It rather holds,andloues to bold 
as the holy {cripture writcth. Hee that facrsficeth to any gods but the ene god {ball bee 
rooted cut,tor to be filent in other points of religion there is none dare fay a facri-” 
fice is due, but vnto god alone. But much is taken from diuine worfhip and thruft 
into humane honors , either by exceffiue humility or peftilenc flattery : yee ftill 
with a referued norice thacthey are men, held worthy indeed of reuerence and 
honor,or at moft (7) ofadoration. But who euer facrificed but to him whom hee 
knew,or thought,or faigned to be aGod: And how ancient a part of Gods wor- 
fhip a facrifice is Caine and Abel do fhew full proofe,God almighty reie@ing the 
elder brothers facrifice,and accepting the yongers. | 


L.VIVES. 


AZ L(a)in fumme.The Chruch.(6 )Owr hearts. Therevpon are we commanded in diuine fere 
uice to lift vp our hearts , at the preparation to communion. Herein being admonifhed © 
to put off all worldly thought , and meditate wholly vpon gcd , lifting all the powers of our 
foule to fpeculate of his loue,for fo 1s the mind quit from guilts and lets, and made a fit temple 
for God.(b) His onély fonne.|Some read, we and the prieft pleafe him with his onely fonne, read 
which you like.(c) The guifts,|What we giuc to God,is his owne, ngt ours , nor cari we pleafe 
him better , then referre what hee hath giuen vs vato him againe , asthe fount whence they 
Pfa.tr6.13 flowed.what fhall I render oner to the Lord faith the Pfalmift ) for all his benefites towards mee? 
a2. Iwill take the cup of {aluation,and call upon the name of the Lord. Tuis is theonely relation of 
Religien. grace,if chou haft grace. (d) Re-elect. | Tully deriues religion of re.egendo,reading againe, and 
calles it the knowledge of GOD, as 7 rifmegifius doth. Lattanrinis had rather derine it 
of religando , binding, beecaufe the religious are bound to God in bonds of Piety : sagu/tine 
. of religendo, re-electing. I thinke becaute it was ficceft for his prefent ailafion. (¢) Trne per~ . 
vs Jones of feftion.| Plato faith that a happy man by {peculation of the diuine pulchritude thal bring forth — 
ene oD crue vertues,not any formes onely,/» conninio.( f). Thou fhalt lone.}O what a few lawes might 
ferue mans life! how {mall a thing might ferue to rule ( nota true Chriftian, but) a true man! 
(indeed hee is no true man that knoweth not and worfhippeth noe Chrift, ) What needeth 
all chefe Dige/ts,(odes,gloffes, connfelles, and caxteles ? In how few words doth our great Mai- 
fter fhew eucry man his dne courfe. Loue thee that which is aboue afwellas thou canft, 
and that which is next thee like thy felfe, which doing thou keepeft all che laws,and haft thern 
perfit, which others attaine with fuch toyle ee) keepe with fo many iuitations and rer= 
rors, Thou fhale then bee greater then Plato or Pythagoras with all their trauells and num- 
bers: then 4riffotle with all his quirkes and fillogifines: what can bee fweeter then loue ? thou 
are taught neicher to feare,fly,nor fhrinke,( g)7 47. |God to many,yet the moft properly to his 
feruants > and yet euer common.(b Lord. JAnd therefore to be reuerenced.(é )God. |And onely 
God.‘h Withal thine heart. \LoueGod with all thine heart(faith Asguftine de dott ré ikea | 
that is,referre all thy thoughts : with all thy foule,chat is,referre all thy life : with all chy mind 
that is,referre all thine vnderftanding,vato him of whome thou had(t them all. He leaues no 
part of vs to be piven to another,but wil haue the fruition ofall himfelfe. Origen oe soir the 


hart, viz the chought , worke, and memory : the foule, to bee ready to lofe ix for Gods 
c 


tae ane . : . ‘ 


Ls s:10: OF THE CITIE OF GOD. «367 


The miinde,to profeffe,or fpeake nothing but Godly things. (/) Thon fhalt] Auguftine de Doét. 
xpian. faith that all men are neighbours one to another. And fo faith ¢ 4ré/ in the firft pre- | 
cept: for as (by(offome faith, Adan ts Gods Image : fo that he that loues man, feemes to loue Neighbors 
God . This precept is fo congruent to mans nature , that the Philofophcrs approoued it. For who bee 
Nature(fay they )hath ioyned all men in Icague and likeneffe togither. And it is the firlt in they. 

the lawes of frienathip , to loue our friend as our felfe : for wee hold him our fecond felfe.(m) Our friend 
What doth it|Mans defite beeing all vpon tappirieffc,if he loue his friend as himfelfe,he ought poder 
to.defire to lead him the fame way hee goeth himfeife. (#) Of adoration. |For euen men in the {elfe. 
{criptures haue 4 kinde of reuerend adoration allowed them. | | 


/ 


Of the facrifices which God requiveth not,and what he requireth in their 
fignification. CHAP. §. 


| BY who is fofondto thinke that Godneedeth any thing that is offered in fa- 
crifice ? The {criprure condemnes them that thinke fo diuerfly,one place of 
the P/alm:f? ( to make fhorc) for all :1fasd unto the Lord , thou art my God (a) be- Piles 
caufe thou needeft none of my goods. Beleeueit therefore God had no neede of si 
mans cattell,aor any earthly pood of his,no not his iuftice : but all the worfhi 
that hee giueth God, is for his owne profit, not Gods. One cannot fay hee doth - 
the fountainc good by drinking of it,or the light,by feeing by it. Nor had the pa- 
triarches ancient faerifices (which now Gods people (6) reade of but vie not Jae 
ny other intent,but to fignifie what fhould bee done of vs in adherencecto God; 
and charity to our neighbour for the fame end ¢ So theri an exterriall offting is 
a vifible facrament of an inuifible facrifice ; that is,an holy figne. And therevp= 
on the penitent man in the Prophet (or rather che penitent Prophet ) defiring 
Godto pardon his finnes : Thou delireft no facrifice thonghJ would gine it({aith he:) 
but thou delzghtcft not sn burnt offering : The facrifices of God are acontrite [pirit: a Plag3; 16; 
broken and humbled heart (O GO D)thou(c) wilt not defpife. Behold here he faith, 17+: - 
~ God will haue facrificés , and God will haue no facrifices. Hee will haueno 
flaughtered beaft, but hee will have a contrite heart. Soin that which hee de- 
hied,was implied that which hee defired. The Prophet then faying hee will noe 
hauefuch,why doe fooles thinke he will,as delighting in them ? Ifhee would nor 
haue had {uch facrifices as he defired(wheteof acontrite heart is one)to hauebin 
~ fignified in thofe other(wherein they thought he oe would not baue 
giuén any command concerning them in Lewiticns: but there are fet times ap- 
pointed for their changes, leaft men fhould thinkehe tooke pleafure in them,or 
- accepted them of vs otherwife,thenas fignes of the other : Therefore(faith ano- 
ther Plalme:) 167 bee hungry I will not tell thee for allthe world is mine, and all that phil.eo.tg 
therinis:wil Leate the fl Ib of Buls or drinke the blond of Goates,as who fhould fay, ifT 5,, “ae 
would I would not beg them of thee hauing them in my power. But then addeth 
he their fignification:Offer praife to God,and pay thy vowes tothe moft high; And call Vee.14,15 
vpon mee in the day of trouble,and I willdeliner thee , and thou {halt (d) glory fie Mlle 
And in (e) another Prophet: # here-with {ball 1come before the Lord and bow my Mich 6,6; 
felfe before the lngh GOD? Shall 1come before himi with burnt offerings and with ™* 
Calues of a yeare old? will the Lord bee pleafed with thoufands of Ramemes ,or with ten 
thoufandriners of Oyle? Shall 1giue my firft borne for the tran{gre{von,euen the fraite 
of my bodie for the finne of my (ouie? Hee hath {beued thee O man what is good and 
what the Lord requireth of thee: furely to dee Inuftice and te lone mercy,atd to humble 
thy felfeyand to walhe with thy God. | 


\ 


li4 tn 


r 


368 | SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuar.6, 


_ Inthefe words are both the facrifices plainely diftin®, and it is thewed that 
God refpeGeth not the firft,chat fignifie thofe he refpecteth.as the Epiftle (f) in- 
Heb.13.16 cituled tothe Hebrewes faith : To doe good and to diffribute forget not : for with fach 
: Jucrifices (g) God és pleafed.Andas itis elfe-where :/will bane Mercy and not (acré- 
sia free :this fheweth thacthe externall facrifice is but atipe of the better ,and chat 
which men calla facrifice is the figne of the true one. And mercy is a true facri- 
fice, wherevpon it is fayd,1s before : with /uch facrifices God és pleafed.Wheretore 
all che precepts coacerning facrifices, inthe Tabernacle andthe Temple haueall 
reference to the love of God and our neighbour. For in thefe two/as is fayd (4) 

is contained all the law and the Prophets. 


L. VIVES. 


BE (4) thon | He is his true Lord thae needeth not his goods, when the ether needs his, 
(6) Read}So is che beft copies. ‘¢) Thon welt} The Septuagints reade it sissvdou, in the third 
perfon,and fo doth Aucaffines text , but not the valgar[ nor our tranflation. ](d) Some fay 
magnifie : fome honor :#a;ces, faith the Greeke , and {o Héerome tranflateth it. The difference 
is nothing. (¢) Another Prophet] Micah. 6. carefullto walke with thy God , faith Hiereme 
from the hebrew : Theodotion hath it, take diligent heede, asguritx, ffand firme ,towalke with 
thy God. (f)) Intstuled | Intimating the vncertainty concerning the authour thereof. (¢) God és 

_ pleafed| The old copies fay, let God bee pleafed - better then our vulgar God is déferued , pre- 
meretar. The greeke is roxptset res : propiciatur, or placatur, is appeaied. (4) Is conteyned| For 
this is che end and {cope of all the law,and Prophets precepts. 


Of the trueand perfect facrifice. Cuar. 6. 


BYcy worke therefore tending toeffed our beatitude bya finfull inherence 
with God, isatrue facrifice. Compaffion fhewn vpona man, and not for 

Gods fake, is no facrifice.For a facrifice(though o‘ired by a man)is a diuine thing 

and fo the ancient Latinifts tearme it: wherevpon aman, confecrated « holy to 

Gods name, toliueto him, and die to the world, isa facrifice. For this is mercy 
Becl. 30.33 fhewn vpon himfelfe. And fois it written: Péty thine owne (cule, and pleafe GOD, 
And when we chaftice our bodyly abftinence,if we doe icas we fhould, not mak- 
ing our members inftruments of iniquity , but of Gods iuftice, itis a facrifice, 
wherevnto the Apoftle exhorteth vs, faying: /befeech you therefore brethrenby 
the mercies of GO D that you gine up your bodtes, 4 ituing facrifice holy and acceptable 
unto GOD,which is your reasonable feruing of GO D. lf therefore the body beeing 
but feruanc and inftrument vnto the foule, being rightly vfed in Gods feruice,bee 
a facrifice,how much more is the foule one,when it relieth vpon God, and being - 
inflamed with his loue loofeth all forme of temporall concupifcence,as is framed 
according to his moft excellent figure, pleafing him by perticipating of his beau- 
ty ? This the Apoftle adioynes in thele words: Aud fa{hion not your felues like this 
world but bee ye changedin newnelfe of heart, that yee may prooue what is the good-will 
of God,and what is good, acceptable and perfect, Wherefore {ceing the workes of 
meoee mercy being referred vnto God, (bee they done to our felues or our neighbors) 

are true facrifices: and thae cheir end is nothing but to free vs from mifery and 

make vs happy,by that God (and none other)of whom itis faid: Jt és good for mee 
Pfim.73» to adhere (a) unto the Lord: Truely it followeth thatall the whole and holy foci- 
ag chrife ety of the redeemed and fanGiified Citry,bee offered vnto God by that (4) great 
es Prieit who gaue vp his life for vsto become members of fo great an head in O 


Rom,t3, I 


Ww: See . Dk Bees et : Se, a c af ad : 


Lrz.10. OF THE CITIE OF GOD, 369 . 


fo sieane a forme:this forme he offered, 8 herein was he offered, in this is he our 
prieft or mediator and our facrifice,all in this.Now therfore the Apoftle hauing 
exhorted vs to giuevp our bodies a living facrificé, pure & acceptable to God, 
namely our reafonable feruing of God, and not to fafhion our felues like this 
world, but bee changed in newnefle of heasr,that (2) wee might prooué what is 
the will of God,and what is good,acceptable and perfea, all which facrifice wee 
are: For Lfay(quoth hee) shrosigh the grace that is ginen to mee , to eaery one among 
you that no man prefume to(e) under fland more then is mecte to underfland: but 
that hee underftand according to fobrietie, 4s GOD hath dealt to eucry man the 
“meafure of faith : for as wee bane many members in one body,and all members hine not 
“one office. So wee beeing Many, are ont body in Chrift, aud euery one,one anothers mem- 
‘bers haning diners gifes according tothe grace that is giuen us crc. This is the chrif= - 
tians ra : wee are one body with Chrift,asthechurch celebrareth in the {a- The faeras 
crament of the altar , fo well knowne tothe faithfull , wherein is fhewed that in a ‘ 
that oblation, the church is offered. ° : 


“~ 


L. VIVES: 
A ‘Dhere (a4\} leis the — pood: (b) Great prieft\ Clrift, of \Melchifedechs order,not ef 
fd Aarons : Hee went but once to facrifice , & that with onely (to wit his crucified body) 
bought our peace of God. (¢) So meane] Chrifts man-hood is the churches head : his Gode © 
head,the life & foule.(d) we might prone|So Augufime victh this place wholy Epift.86, which 
Era[mus wonders at: the greeke refering good,and acceptable, and perfeé, all to the will of 
God.But Auguftine referreth them either to the facrifice,or vfeth thé fimply without refpect. 
Andin thé later fence Ansbrofe alfo vfeth it. (e) Under ftand] Or thinke of himfelfe, his bree 
thren, or other matters. (f) Sobrsety) ts ¢oeporery, A mediocrity of the whole life is Sobriety 
faith Tully Offic.1. out of Plate. Some-time ewopslen( faith Tully elfe-where)is tranflated tem= 
perance,moderation,and fometimes modefty : but hee doubes whether he may cail it frugas 

lity. Tue. 3.0 ho yo 4 | 


a 


That the good Angells doe folome vs,shat they defire we [bould worfbip 
hea  Godonely,andnotthem. Cuar.7 
7 Orthily are thofe blefled immortals placed in thofeceleftial habitations, ré- 
-" joyeing in the perticipation of their Creator,being firme, certaine and ho- 
ly by bis eternity,truth & bounty:becaufe they louevs mortall wretches with 
azealous,pity,and defireto haue vs immortally bleffed alfo,and will not hauevs 
facrifice to them,buc to him to whom they know bothvsandthemfeluestobee ...__. 
facrifices. For we bothare inhabitants of that inthe pfalme : Glorious things avé Pfal,07.2 
Spoken of tfee,t how City of GOD: part whereof is pilgrime yet with vs,and part af- 
fifteth vs with them From that eternall citty where Gods vnchanging will is all 
aheir-law:and from that (4) fupernal. court (for their are wee cared for )by the 
miniftery of the‘holy Angelis was ¢l-at holy {cripture brought downevnto vs, 
that fayth. Hee shat (agrificeth to any but God alone, fbalbe rooted ont. This (cripture, 
this precept is confirmed vnto vs by fo many miracles, that it is plaine inough,to 
‘whom the bleffed immortalls , fo louing vs , and wifhing as themfelues , would 
hauevs to offer facrifice. as : | 


Rs say fe. ere ee ee ee’ 


Te Jicpernall (4) Corrt| Whence the Angels defcénd and minifter vs fafery & protection, 


37° 


_ SO ye 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuar.B 


Of the Miracles whereby God hath confirmed his promifes tn the mindes of the 
faithfull by the msiniftery of hes holy Angells. Cuar. 8. 


Should feeme tedious in reuoluing the Miracles oftoo abftrufe antiquity: with 


Gen.37,18 I hat miraculous tokens God affuredhis promifes to Abraham shat ix his feed 


Gen.28 


Bzod.15 


&zod.23 


rotted when one gathere 


fo it was no nouelcy to him. 


Should all the earth be bleffedymade paany thoufand years agorIs it not miraculous 


for Abrahams barren wife to beare a fon, fhe being of age both paft child-birth 
8¢ conception?that (4)in the fame Abrahams facrifices, thefire came down from 
heauen betweene them as they lay divided? thaethe Angells fore-told him their 
deftruGion of Sodome,whom he entertained in mens fhapes, & from them had 
Gods promife fora fonne? and by the fame Angells was certefied of the mira- 
culous deliuery of his brother Zot ,hard before the burning of Sodome? whofe 
wife being turned intoa ftatue of fale for looking backe, is a great miftery ,chae 
none becing in his way of freedome fhould caft his eyes behinde him 2 And what 
ftupendious miracles did Moy/es effe& in Egiptby Gods power forthe free- 
dome of Gods people ? Where Pharaos Magicians (the Kings of Egipt that 
held Gods people in thrall) were fuffered eo worke fome wonder , to haue 
the more admired foile: for they wrought by charmes and enchanements ( the 
delights of the deui!ls:) but Afoy/es had che power of the God of heaven & earth, 
(to whom the'good Angells doe ferue, ) and therefore muft needes bee vitour: 
And the Magicians fayling in the third plague, ftrangely & miftieally did AZoyfes 
effe& the other 7. following:and then che hard. hearted Egiptians, & Phereo yeel- 
ded Geds people their paflage. And by and by os , and perfuing them, 
the people of God paffed through the waters/ftanding for them,as rampires)and 
the Egiptians left al their liues in their depth, being then re-ioyned. Why fhould 


T reherfe the ordinary miracles chat God fhewed them in the defert: the {weet- 


ning of che bitter waters 7 cafting woed therein, the 142#2 from heauen, that 
more then a fet meafure : yet gathering two meafures 
the day before the Saboath(on which they might gather none) it neuer putrified 
at all: how their defire to eate fiefh was fatisfied with fowles that fell inthe 
tents fufficiéc(O miracle)for al the people,cuen til they loath thé/how the hold- 
ing vp of Moy/es hands in forme. ofacroffe,and his praier,caufed that not an Hee 
brew fell in the fight: & how the pea a, Pa them-felues from the {ocie- 
ordained by God , were by the earth {wallowed vp quicke,to inuifible paines, 
for avifible example. How the rocke burft forth into ftreames being ftrucke 
with Afoyfes todde, and the ferpents deadly bytings being fent amongft them for 
a iuft plague,were cured by beholding a brazen ferpentfetvp vpona pole,here- 
in beeing both 2 prefent helpe for the hurt , anda type ofthe future deftru@ion 
of death by death in the paffion of Chriff crucified ! The brazen ferpent,beeing 
for this memory referued ,and afterward by the feduced people adored as anI- 
dol, Ezechéas a religious King,to his great praife,brake in peeces. 


L. VIVES. 


]” (a) the fame| This Anguftine(Retratt,Jib.2.) recaneeth, In the tenth booke(faith he fpeak- 
ing of this worke)the falling of the fire from heauen berweene Abrahams diuided facrifices, 
is to bee held no miracie. For it was reuealed him in‘a vifion . Thus farre he. Indeed it was no 
miracle becaufe Abraham wondered not at it, because he knew it would come {0 to pafie,and 


Of 


Lisro. | OFTHE CITIE OF GOD: 


| (Of: wnlewfall sees Concer Bing the denils wer{bip,whereof Po rphyry 4pproe— 
: seth fomezand difalloweth ethers. Cwat.! 9. — 


"[Hefe,and multitudes niore,were done to-commend the worthip ofone God. =: » 


vnto vs,andto prohibite all other. And they were done by pure faith and 
confident piety,not by charmes and coniuration trickes of damned curiofity,by 
Magike,or (which is in name worfe by (4) Goetia o1( to tallic more honorably) 
(5) Theurgie , which who fo feekes to diftinguifh(which fioné can) they fay that 
thedamnable practifes of all {uch as wee call witcheés,belong to the Goetie,mary 
theeffedts of rheurcy they hold lawdable. But indeede they are both damnable, 
_ and boundto the obferuations of falfe filthy deuills,in ftead of Angells. Porphy- 
ry indeed promifeth a certaine purging of the foulero be done by Thearey,buthe 
(4)faltersand is afhamed of his text: hee denies veterly that one may have dny 
recourfeto God by this arte : thus floteth he becweene thefurges of facrilegious 
_ curiofity and honeft Philofophy : For,now, he condemneth it as doubtfuil, peti: 
‘ lous, prohibited, and giues vs warning of ic and by and by, giuing way to the 
praifers of it , hee faich ic is vfefull in purging the foule : not inthe intelleQualt 
part that apprehendeth the truth of intelligibilities abftraGted from all bodily | 
formes : but the (¢) {pirituall,that apprehendeth all from corporall obie&s. This 


hee faith may be prepared by certaine Theurgike confecrations called (f) Telete, The Teles 


coreceinea fpirit or Angell , by which itmay feethe gods. Yet confeffeth hee ** 
that thefe Theurgike Telete profit not the intelleCuall part a iot,to fee the owne 
God and receiue apprehenfions of truth. Confeqiently,we fee what fweete ap. 
paritions of the gods thefe Te/ete can caufe,when there can bee notruth difcers 
ned inthefe vifions.. Finally hefaith the reafonable foule(or,as he liketh better 
to fay, the intelleCtuall ) may mount aloft, though the {piricuall part haueno 
7 beurgske preparation :and ifthe {pirituall doe atraine fuch preparation , yetit 
is thereby madecapable of eternity. For though he diftinguifh Angellsand De- 
monessplacing thefe in the ayre, and thofeinthe (¢) skie, and glue vs counfelf ta 
etthe amity of a Demon whereby co mount from the earch after death, profef- 
fins no other meanes for one to atraine the fociery of the Angells, yet doth hee 


(in manner, openly) profefle that a Dezons company is dangerous : faying that | 


the foule beeing plagued for ic after death, abhorres to adorethe Demrones that 
deceiuedit. Nor can he deny thatthis TAewrgy (which hee: makethas the league 
betweene the Gods and Angells)dealerh with thofe deuillith powers, which ei- 
ther enuy the foules purgation,or elsare feruite to chem that enuy it: A Chaldz- 
an(faish hea good man,complained that all his endeuour to purge his foulewas 
- fruftrate,by reafona great Artyft enuying him this goodnefle,adiuredthe pow- 

ers (hee was to deale with)by holy inuocations ,and bound them from grantitig’ 
himany of his requefts. So hee bound them, (faith hée)and this other could nor 

loofe them.Here now is a plaine proofe that Thesrese is an arte effeGing euill as 
well as gcod both with the gods and mien: and that the gods aré wrought vpon 
__ by the fame paffions and perturbations that Apaleas laies vpon the deuills , and 
men,alike : who norwithftanding (following P/sto in that) acquits the gods from 
all fach matters by their hight of place,being celeftiall. _ 7 | 


7 Sy. VIVES. 


B’ (« }Goetia] Ie is. enchantment ,-a kinde of witch-craft. Guetia, Magiasand Pharinecie Corti; 
| a (faith 


| 


1373 | SAINT AY.GVSTINE. Cuarg 


Macike. (haich Swidas)are divers kindes : inuented all ‘in Perfia. Magike, is the inuocation of deuills, 
agmte but thofe cogoodendes,as eApollonius Tyaxens v{edin his prefages. Goetie worketh vpon 
Pharmacy, ‘hc dead by-inuotation , forcalled of the noyfe that the practifers hereof make abour graues. 
‘Pharmacia,worketh all by charmed potions thereby procuring death: Magike, and Aftrolo- 
r BY Adagufts they fay indented:And the Perfian AZeges had that name from their countrimen, 
beurgy, and {oi au'they the name of CALagufti. Thus farre Swidas. (6) Thewrgy] It calleth out che fu~ 
rio¢ yous wherein when wee erre ( faith Jamblichns) then doe not the good gods appeare, 
be badde ones in their places. Sothata moft diligent care mutt bec liad in this op¢ration,to 
obferue the-priefts old tradition to ahaires bredth. (c) witches] Many hold that witches,and 
charmcs ncuer can hurt a man, burit is his owne conceite that doth it : Bodies may hurt bo» 
dies naturally (faith Plato de deg Jeb. 11.) and thofe that goe aboutany fuch mifchicfe with 
magicall enchantments , or bondes , asthey call chem, thinke they can hurt others, and that 
others by art Goetique, may hurt them. Buthow this may bee in nature , is neither-eafe te 
know,not make others know.: though men hauea great opinion of the powerof Imagess? 
and thercfore let this ftand for alawe . If any one dot hurt another by empoyfoning , though --~ 
not deadly, nor any of his houfe or family, buc his cattell,or his bees, if hee hutt then how= 
: {ocuer,becing a Phifition, and conuict of the guilt $ lec him die the death :ifhte did it igno- 
Plato’slavy, rantly, Ice che ludges fine or punifh him at their pleafures. Ifany one bee conuicted of do~ 
ing {uch hure by charmes, or incantations , if hee bee a prieft, or a footh-faier,let him die the 
death: bur ifany one doc it thatis ignorant of thefe artes , let himbee punifhable as the law 
_ pleafethin equity. Thus farre ‘Plate, de legib.lib.1 i. Porphyry faith thae the cuill Demones 
are euermore the efte€tors of witch-crafts : and that they are chiefly to bee adored that o- 
uerthrow them, Thefe deuills haue all fhapesto take, that they pleafe , and are moft cunning , 
22:7. and coyzening in their prodigious fhewes , thefe alfo worke in thefe ginrpe, thofe vnfortu- 
-” fate loues: all incemperancy,couetice and ambition,dee thefe fuppliemen with , and efpeci« 
ally with deceipt: fortheir propriety moft efpeciallis lying . De animel. abft, nb. 2. (d) Fale 
ters) As feeing the deuills crickes in chefe-workes, felling themfclues to vs by thofe illufiue o9 
perations. But Jamblichus becing initiate and (as hee thought ) more religious , held, that 
the arte was not wholy reproueable’, ( beeing of that induftrie and antiquity ) becaufe that 
fome-times it gulles the artilte - che pricfts muft therefore diuide the fpirits into (leffes , and | 
remember that no good fpirit will bragge of his canning. (¢) Spirituall| Wherein are the | 
abftradts of externall obiedts , all referued , and fent ro the common fence, the phantafie,the 
eftimation,and the memory : thefe,beafts haue afwell as wee, beeing’common receipts of the 
fenfible obiests in both : bur then wee haue the minde , and the ponderatiue iudgement of 
teafon,confifling cf thee wo intelleéts the Recipient ,and the agent : lalt of allis the will. (g) 
Shie} rFisaicobesinee with the King in this canke) faith thae the firft kind of gods hane in= 
uifible bodies: the fecond {pred through heauen , and vifible : che third the Demons bodies, 
two-fold : the firft ethereall,more pure chen the other in fubftance-the fecond ayry,and more 
groffersbut neither of the intirely vifible t thete are alfo the Semi-gods with watty bodies, 
feene,and vnfecne when they Iift,and when wee {ce them their tranfparent light formes make 
vs wonders. /s Epinom, Pfelius. (Our of one Marke a skilfull Dawson) relaceth fixe kindes 
Pfellus his Of Demones, Firlt the fiery, called in Barbarian Batlelisreon, and thefe wander in the toppe of 
Demones, the ayry region(for hee keepes all the Demsones as profaine creatures(out ofa temple ) vnder 
| the moone), 2. the ayry,ncarer ynto vs. 3. the earthly,dwelling ypon the earth., periffous foes 
vnto mankinde. 4. watry, dwelling in rivets, lakes and {prings , drowning men often,tayfing 
ftormes at fea, and finking thippes ¢, the fubcerrene, chat live in caues,and kill wellediggers, 
and miners for mettalls,cavfing earthequakes, and eruptions of flames, and peftilent winds. 6 
night-walkets, the darke and moft infirutable kinde, ftriking all things they meet with cold 
paffions. And all thofe deuills ( faith hee) hate both gods and men but fome worfe then 
others. Then hee procecdes to defcribe how they hurt men, too tedioufly for mé to.dilate, 
nd reckneth gods that are either heauenly, ethereal , ayry, watry, sa or infernall, 
Porphyries 300d allignes cuery one their proper factifice. The earthly muft haue blacke beafts vpon altars: 
: fo muft the infernall , but in craues - the watry gods will haue black-birds throwne into the 
fea,the ayry, white birds, killed, The celeftiall and etheriall white facrifices alfo that muft not 
bee diminifhed,and much more of this madneffe hath the in his booke called Refp.ex orac. A= 
.:..1. poll. Nogare they new inucntions, bue drawne all from Orphens and ALercury, Mercury Ani 
ae (fait 


Plaeos 
gods, 


Lizso. | OFTHE CITIE OF GOD. 873 


faith Jamblichus,) an hundred bookes of the Emspyreall:an hundred of the Ethereall: anda 
thoufand of the, celeftiall . Prociws diuides the deuills into fiue regimentes rather 
then fiue kinds deftinguifhing them by their functions. But of this,inough , edugujtin out 
of Porphyry calls their firy gods Emspyreal,whom both Plate and Porphyry feeme not to diftin- 
guifh from the celeftiall, whom they make of flery nature. , 


7 


Of Theurgy that failly promifeth to mundifie the minide by the inuo- 


cation of denills, CouaAP.10. 


Ehold now this other(and they fay morelearned) Platoni/? Porphyry , with his 

owne Theargy makesall the gods fubie& to paffion and perturbation . For 
they may by his dodtrine , bee fo terrifying from purging foules by thofe that 
enuy their purgation , that hee that meaneth euill may chaine them for euer 
from benefiting him that defires this good , and that by this are Thewreique : that 
the other can nevet free them from fis feare and attaine their helpes , though 
hee vfethe fame Art never fo: Who feeth not that this is the deuills meere 
‘coufinage but hee that is their meere flaue ,and quite bard from the grace of the 
Redeemer? Ifthe good gods had any hand herein, furely the good defire of 
Man that would purge his foule (hould vanquifh him that would hinder 
it. Or ifthe gods were iuftand would not allowe him it, for fome guile of his, 
yet it fhould bee their owne 'choyfe, not their beeing terrified by that enuious 
party, nor(as hee fayth ) the feare of greater powers that fhould caufe this de- 
nyall. And it is ftrange that that good Chaldean that fought to bee thus pur- 

ed by Theurgy could not finde fomehigher GOD, that could either terri- 

ze the other worle, and fo force themto further him , or take away their ter- 
rour, and fet them free from the others bond to benefite him * andyetfo 
fhould this good Theurgske {till haue lackt the rites wherewith to purge thefe 
gods from feare firft ere they came to purge his foule: For why fhouldhee 
calla greater GOD to terrifiethem , and not to purge them ? Oris therea 
G OD that heareth the malicious , and fo frights the leffer gods from doing 
good, andnone to heare the well-minded , and to fet them at libertie to doe 
good againe ? O goodly Theargy! O rare purgation of theminde/whereim-_. 
pure enuy doth more then pure devotion ! No, no, auoide thefe damna- oe 
ble trap-falls of the deuill, flie to the healthfull and firme truth: For whereas ons, 
the workers of thefe facrilegious expiations doe behold (ashee faith ) fome, oy. 
admired fhapes, of Angells, or Gods, as if their f{pirits were purged: why 1,7” 
ifthey doe; aske the Apoftles reafon: For (a) Satan tranformeth hinsfeife into 
an'Angellof light. es 

Thefe are his Apparitions , feeking to chaine mens poore deluded foules in 
fallacies, and lying ceremonies, wrefting them from the true,and onely purging. 
and perfecting dotrine of GOD: andas it is fayd of (b) Protews,hee turnes him- 
felfe toall fhapes; perfuing vs as an enemy, fawning on vsasa friend , and fub- 
uerting vs in both fhapes. 


aoe. ~_ _ -——— ~s —iese «= om ae 


= z= _ an ~— a a a 


os. re ae ee ge ~ ee eee __— 77 oe 


. L. VIVES. | - 
FF” (2) Satan | Confeft by Potphyry and Lamblichs both , The deuills moft efpeciall pro- 


perty is lying , and ftill chey affame the faces of other Gods, faith the firft. De facrifice 
— Kk , Lib.2. 


374 SAINT AVGVSTINE. | Cuapar 


Proceus, 
Like. 


bb.2, Their euill fpirits often affume the fhapes of good,comming with brags and arrogance to 
men fayth the fecond. IncMyfter. (b) Protens | Sonne (faith Hefiod)to Oceanus , and The- 
tis ta great prophet, and as Vergilt faith skildin all things paft,prefent and to come . Homer 
faigneth thathee was compeld to prefage the truth ofthe Troian warreto e<gamemnon, 
and Virgil faith thac Arsffews ferued him fo alfo. Valerius Probus, faith hee was an Egiptian, | 
and called Bufpris for his tyranny :Virgsl calls him Pallemius , of atowne in Macedonia,and 
there was hee borne (faith Seruins) mary reigned ( as Virgil faith ) in (arpathum , Herodo- 
tus faith hee was of (Memphis , and King there when Paris and Hellen came into Egiprt, 
and for their adultery hee would let them ftay there but three daieS, /# Euterpe. Diodorus 
faich thac the Egiptians called him (etews whom the Greekes called Protexs , that hee was 
a good Aftronomer , and had skill in many artes, and reigned in Egipt in the time of the 
Troyan warre. The Egiptian Kings vfed alwaies to giue the halfe Lyon, or the Bull, _ 
or Dragon for their armes , and thence theGreekeshad this fiction, J thinke hee changed 
his efcntcheon often. | | 


ee ee 


Of Porphyryes Epz/fle to Anebuns of Egipt and defyring him 
of saftruction in the (enerall kindes of Demones. 
Cuap, It. 


ib bere Porphyry fhewed more witte in his Epiftleto (2) 4nebuns of Egipe, 
where betweene learning and inftruQing hee both opens and fubuertes 
all thefe facriledges. Therein hee a. all the Daemones that becaufe of 
their foolifhneffe doe draw (as hee fayth ) the (6) humid vapours vppe , vrto 


~ them: and therefore are not in the skie but in the ayre , vnder tle Moone, and 


inthe Moonesbodie. Yetdares hee not afcribe al] the vanities toall the de- 
uills , chat ftucke in his minde : For fome of them hee (as others doe ) calls 

ood: whereas before hee had called them all fooles. And much is his won- 
der why the gods fhould loue facrifices , and bee tompelled to grant mens 


_ futes. Andifthe gods and Demowes bee diftinguifhed by corporall , and vncor- 
porall , why fhouldthe Sunne , Moone, and other Starres vifible in Heaven 


(whom hee auoutcheth to bee bodies ) bee called gods? and if they bee gods, 
how can fome bee good ,and fome euill? Or beeing bodies , how canthey bee 
ioyned with the gods that haue no bodies ? Furthermore , hee maketh doubes 
whether the foule ofa diuiner, ora worker of ftrange things, or an externall 
{pirit,caufe the effet. 8 _ 

But hee conieG&tureth on the fpirites fide the rather of the rwo, becaufe 
that they may bee bound, or loofed,by (c) hearbes and ftones , in this or that 
ftrange operation. And fome therefore , hee faith , doe (d) holda kindeof 


_ fpirits,chat properly hearevs , ofa fuctlenature, and a changeable forme, coun- 


siete, gods , Demones ,and dead foules.,and thofe are agents in all 
good or badde effe@s : But they never further man in good a@ion, as not 
knowing them, but they doe entangle and hinder the progrefle of vertue, by all 


meanes; they are rafh and proud, louers of fumigations , taken eafily by flattery, 


and {fo forth of thofe fpirits that come externally into the foule,and delude 
mans fences fleeping and waking : yet allthis hee doth not affirme, but coniec- 
tures, or doubts, or ith that others affirme , for it was hard for fo greata Philo- 
fopher to: know all the deuills vileneffe fully ,and to accufe it freely , which 
knowledge. no Chriftian Idiot euer feeketh , but fully detefteth . Per- 
haps hee was afraide to offend  ebuns to whome hec wrote , asa great 
Prieft of fuch Sacrifices , and the other (¢) admirers of thofe things as 
| a | appurtenances 


~ Lresto. OF THE CITIE OF.GOD. gag, 


appurcenances of the diuine honors. Yet maketh hee as it were an inquificiue 
proceeding in thofe things which beeing well pondered will prooue attributes 
to none bur malignant {pirits. Hee asketh/f) why the beft gods beeing inuo- 
ked,are commanded as the’ worft ,to fullfill mens pleafures : and why they will: 
not heare ones praiers that is ftayned wich venery , when as they haue fuch in- 
ceftuous contracts amongft themfelues , as examples to others ? Whythey | 
- forbidde their priefts the vfe of liuing creatures leait they fhould bee polluted 
by their fmells, when as they are inuoked , and inuited with continuall fuffu- | 
migations ,.and finells of facrifices? And the footh-fayer (¢) is forbiddento 
touch the carcafle , whetras their religion lies wholy vpon carcaffes . Why the 
charmer threatneth not the gods ,or Demones , or dead mens foules but (4) the 
Sanne or the Moone, or fuch celeftiall bodies, fecching the truch out by this fo 
falfeaterour ? They will threaten to knocke downe the skie ; and fuch impoffi- 
bilities , that the gods beeing (like foolifh babes ) afraide of this ridiculous ter« 
rour , may dos as they are charged. Hee fayth farther that one Cheremon, eienee 
one of the facred( or rather facrilegious ) priefts,hath written, that that fame E- 
giptian report of (z) Zs , or her husband O/7rés, is moft powerfull in compelling 

of the god; to doe mens pleafures,when the inuoker threatens to reucale them, 

or to cafta broad the members of Ofyris, if hee doe not difpatch it quickly. | 

That thefe idle fond threates of man, yeavntothegods and heauenly bodies 

the Suane, the Moone &o. fhould haue that violent effe@ to force them to per- 
forme «hat men defire, Porphyry doth iuftly wonder at , hay rather vnder co- 

jour of one adniring and inquiring , hee fheweth thefe to bee the actions of 
’ thofe fpirits whome hee defcribed vnder fhadowe of relating others opinions, 

to bee fuch deccitfull counterfeiters of the other gods , mary they are deuills 
themfelues without diembling : As forthe Herbes,Stones,Creatures,Sounds, 
Wordes,Charactcrs,and (£) conftellations,vfed in drawing the powers of thofe 

effects , allthefe hee afcribes tothe deuills delight in deluding and abufing the 

foules that ferue and obferuethem. >. | | | 

Sothat Porphyry eitherin a true doubt, defcribech fuch of thofe actes , as can 

haueno reference to thofe powers by which wee muftaymeat eternity, but _ 
conuince them-felues the falfe deuills peculiars : or els hee defireth by his hu- 

mility in inquiring, not by his contentions oppofing , to drawe this Cdmebuns 

(that wasa great Prieft in thofe ceremonies,and thought hee knewe much) vn- — 

toa due fpeculation of chefe things , andro detect their deteftable abfurdity vn- 
‘tohim. Finally in the end of his Epiftle hee defirech to bee informed what dog. 

trine of béatitude the Egiptians held. Bue yet hee affirmes that fuch as-con- 

“uerfe with the gods and trouble the deity about fetching againe of cheeues,buy- 

ing of landes,marriages, bargaines or fuch like , feemeall ina wrong way to wif- 

dome. And the gods they vfe herein, though they tell them true, yet teaching 

them nothing concerning beatitude are neither gods nor good Demones , but 

either the falfe ones , or all is but a figment of man . But becaufe thefe artes ef- 

fe& many things beyond all humaine capacity , what remaineth, but firmely to 
“beleene,and credibly to affirme that {uch wonders(in worde or deedes ) as haue 

no reference to the confirmation of their worfhip of that one God,(to whom to _ 

adhere (as the P/atonsfsaffirme ) isthe onely beatitude)are onely feducements 

of the deceiptfull fiendes , co hinder mans progrefleto vertue , and foly to bee a- 


L. VI- 


. ‘ 


uoided and difcouered by true zealé and ig? ae 


SAINT AVGV STINE. C wapirr 


. 
‘ 


| L. VIVES. 
O (4) Anebuns)Or Anekon. (b) Humid vapors| Hee faith they ioue fumes , and fmells of 


. * fiefh,which fatten their {pirituall bodies,which liue ypon vapors, and fumigations , and is 


diuerfly Mrengthed by their diuerfity 3 Jawsblichus(the truer Demeniff ) fecing him put this 


_,asan expreffion of the deuills nature,denies it all. For Porphyry dire€tly affirmed that all fuch 


epinion ir fpirits as delighted in flaughtered offrings,wete euill Damzones, and liers : and oe fo 


‘thaove 
{acrifices, 


Ofjtiss 


were all his gods to whom he diuideth facrifices in his Refponfa , mentioned in our Comment 
vpon the ninth chapter of this booke.. Thus was he coft betweene truth, and inueterate error, 
daring neither affirme them al good,nor al euill,fdr feare of his {chollers,his difciplines autho. 
rity,and the deuill himfelfe.(c) Herbes] Porphyry maruells that men haue the gods fo ob{equi- 
ous,as to giue prefages in alittle meale. This admiration, and queftion Lamblichus(as hee y{- 
eth)anfwers with a goodly front of words, which any one may reade, but neither the Egipti- 
ans,nor he himfelfe can probably declare what they meane. The gods(faith he)exceeding in 
power and goodneffe,and the caufes conrayning all,are wretched if they be drawne down by 
meale:fond were their goodneffe , if they had no other meanes to fhew it;and abiect their na- 
ture, if ic were bound from contemning of meale - which if they can doe why come they net 
into a good minde, fooner then into good meale?(d) Dee bold} Porphyry faith thofe cuill Dee 
mones decciue both the vulgar, and the wife Philofophers , and they by their eloquence,haue 
giuen propagation to the error.Forthe deuils are violent, falfe,counterfeits,diffemblers & feek 
to imbezell gods worfhip. There is no harme but they louc it,and put on their fhapes of gods 
to lead vs into deuillifh errors.Such alfo are the foules of thofe that die wicked . For their pere 


- turbations of Ire,concupifcence and malice leaue them not,bue are vfed by thefe foules being 


now become deuills,to che hurt of mankind. They change their fhapes alfo,now appearing to 
vs,and by and by vanifhing : thus illuding both our eyes and thoughts ; and both thefe forts 
poffeffe the world with couetice,ambition pride , and luft, whence all warres and conflicts ae 
rife: and which is worltof all, they feeke to make the rude vulgar thinke that thefe things - 
are acceptable to the gods. And poefie with the fweetneffe of phrafe hath helped them prit- 
tily forwardes. Thus farre Porphyry de Ab/tin. anim, lib.2.not in doubrfull or inquiring mane 
ner,as hee doth in his writing to the prieft, but pofitiuely, in a wo: ke,wherein he fheweth his ' 
owne doctrine. (¢) admsivers| The Philofophers whom hee faith erred themfelues concerning 
the gods natures ,fome in fauour of the gods, and fome in following of the multitude. (f) 
Why the bef \ Thushee beginnes, api ri bacrr,&ce Of thofe that are called gods but are indeede 


_ wicked Demones. ( ¢) The foeth{aier] Epoptes, the proper word for him that lookes on their 


Sacrifice, (b) The Sunne} So faith Lucan his Theffalian witch,that fhee can force the gods to 
what the lift. Lacans.(s) [fs or] Thefe are the Sunne and Moone , Their fecret ceremonies be- 
ing moftbeaftly and obfcene , the deuills feare to haue them reuealed (as (eres did ) of 
elie delude their worthippe by counterfeite feare,and fo make vfe of their fonde errour . This 
of fis and O(yris belongsto the infernalls alfo ; for Porphyry. faith the greateft deuill is called 
Serapis and that is Ofpris, in Egipt, and Plasto in Greece , ihis charaCter is a three headed dog, 
fignifying the deuills of the earth, ayre and water . His J/s, is Hecate or Proferpina : {oit is 
plaine that this is meant of the fecrettes of hell , which haue mighty power in magicall prace 
tifes. Thefe doth Eriéthoin Lucan threatento the Moone, the infernalls , and (eres factifi- 
ees, The Poet expreffeth it thus. : 3 


- CMiratur Erichtho, 

Has fatis licuiffe moras jratag ,merti 
Verberat immotum vine (erpente cadaner, 

j Perg, Canas terra quas egit carmine rimag 
CManibas sllatrat,regnig, filentia rsemnpit. 
Tyfiphone,vecs(g, mea fecnra Megzra, 
Non agitis fenis Erchi per twane flageliis 
5 seve ? Lams ves egenomine vere, 
Eliciam fiigialg, canes in luce fuperna 

Deftismaw : per bafta fequar: per funera cufies 
Expellam tamuhe abigamn vos omnibus vrais. 


4 


Teg, 


Lis 10. : OFTHE CITIE OF GOD. 377 
— Teque deis,ad quos alio procedere vulty, 
Fitta foles Hecate , pallenti tabida forma — 
Oftendam.faciemque Erebi mutarevetabo, 
Eloquar immenfo terra {ub pondere,gua te 
(ontineant Ennaa dapes,quo fadere mafium, 
Kegem nottis ames,qua te contagia paffam, * 
Noluerit renocare ( eres 3 tibi peffime mundi, 
. arbiter immittam ruptis T itanacauernis, 
| Ex fubico feritredie. ee 
» pmeeeeErichtho wondersmuch,  _ a 
| At fates de-ay,and with aliuing fnake. © 

_ She'lafht the flaughtred corps,making death quake, 

- Een-through tlie'ritts of earch,rent by her charmes, 
She barkes in hells broad eare thefe blacke alarmes,. 
Stone- deaf Afegera and Ty/iphone, 

‘Why {courge yea not that wretched foule to me 
From hells huge depthsfor will you haue me call yee, 
_ By your true names,and leaue yee?(foule befall yee) 
You ftigian dogs, Ile leaue you in the lighe, 

And fee the graues and you diffeuerd quite. 

And Hecate,thou that are neuer knowne 

But in falfe fhapes, lle fhew thee in thine ownes: 
‘Whole heauen(perforce) fhall fee thy putred hew, 
And from earths gutts will I rip forth to vew 

The feafts,and meanes that make thee P/sto's whore, 
And why thy mother fet thee thence no more, 

And thou(the worlds worft King )al-be thou dead 

In darkeneffe,I will breake chrough all, and fend 

Strange light amid thy caves. 


And Perphiry (in Refponf- brings in Hecate compelled to anfwer the magician. 


wodsnn- TH95 SE BEC. | - 
| vee=--Why doft thou blind vs fo | 
| | _ Theodamas, what wonldft thou bane vs do. 
apollo alfo confeffeth that he is compelled to tell truth againft his wills 
ie Kav 94 wav, & ce. , 
‘ L anfwer now petfore,as bound by Fate, —- 7 


And by and by calleth to bee loofed :---—---avert,&e. loofe the left ring. Porphiry alfo faide (as 
Lamblicus writeth i CUifter ) that the Priefts were wont to vie violent threats again the 

Gods,as thus :if you doe not this,or if you doe that, will breake downe Heauen.1 will reveale 

Ffis her fecrets, and diuulge the miftery hid in the depth: I willftay the Baris (a facred fhipe 

in Epipt)and caft Ofirrs niembers to Typhon, Now Lamblichus faith thofe threates tend not to 

the gods,but there is akind of {pirits in the world,confufed,vndifcreet, and inconfiderat, that 
heareth from others , but no way of it felfe and can neither difcerne truthes nor poffibilities 
from thecontraries, On thefe do thofe threatnings worke , and force them to all duties. Pers = 
haps this is them that Porphiry giueth a foolith wil vnto:Zamblichus proceedeth to the threatss 

read them in him.( 4) Conftellations. } Prophiry writeth out of (beremon, that that aftrology 

is of than incomprehenfible : but all chefe conftellated workes,and prophecies, are tought him 

by the deuills, But Jambi:chns oppofeth him in this,and in the whole dogtrine of deuills. The 

man is all for this prodigious fuperftition , and laboureth to anfwere Prephyry for eAnebuns, 


. Of the miracles that God worketh by his Angels miniftery. 
; | ; Cuan... are cae 
Ve all miracles (done by angells or what ever diuine power ) confirming 
the true adoration of onc God vnto vs, (inwhomeonly we ace bleffed ) we 
oO | Kk3 | belccue 


f aw b, a ; ; z 


378 | .- SAINT AVGYSTINE. C wap.12, 


Mana 
great mita~ 
cle, 


. 


beleeuc truely are done by Gods power working in chem inimortalls that loue vs 
in true piety. Heare not thofe that deny that the inuifible God worketh vifible 
miracles ; is not the world a miracle? Yet vifible,and of his making . Nay,all the 
miracles done in this world are leffe then the world it felfe , the heauen and earth 
andall therein, yet God made them all, and after amanner that man cannot 
conceiue nor comprehend .:For though chefe vifible miracles of nature , bee 
now no moreadmired, yet ponder them wifely ,and they are more admirabie 
then the ftrangeft : for man is (4) a greater miracle theriall that hee can worke. 


_ Wherefore God that made heauen and earth (both miracles)fcorneth not as yet 


of the ritches wifdome,and knowledge of God! 


to worke miracles in heauenand earth, todraw mens foules that yet affea vifibi- 
lities,vn'o the worfhip of his inuifible effence . Bue where and when he will dee 
this,his vnchangeable will onely.can declare: (6) at whofe difpofing all time paft 
hach beene,and tocome,is.He mooueth all things in time,but time adoreth not 
him, nor mooueth hee future effets otherwife then prefent. Nor hearech our 
praiers otherwife then he fore-feeth them ere we pray-for when his Angellshere — 
them, he heareth in them,as in his true temples(not made with hands)& fo doth 
he hold al things effe@ted temporally in his Saints, by his eternall difpofition, 


| ~ L.VIVES. _ 
Mi a (4) ereater| The faying is moft common in Trifinegifius : Man is a great miracle, 

(5) At whofe difpofing) Paul faith all things lie open and bare vnto Gods knowledge, for 
all time is neither paft nor to come,but prefent to him . So doth hee determine, and difpofe of 
all chings as prefent,nor doth yefterday,or this day,paffe or come. with him,as it doth with vs. 
His power and effence admitreth no fuch conditions,nor reftraintes: All eternity is prefent to 
him,much more our little percell of time s yet he that made our foules, adapted them times fit 
for their apprehenfions - and though hee fee how wee fee and know, yet hee neither feeth nor 
knoweth like vs.Shall wee run on in a Philofophicall difcourfe hereof, wanting rather wordes 
then matter,or is it better co burft out with Pani into admiration , aad e¢y-out. O the altitude 


@-w 


How the inuilible God ath often made bimfelfe vifible,ubt,as he is really but 
as we could be able tocomprehend his fight. Ciiny.13. 


Or harteth it his inuifibility co haue appeared (2)vifible oftentimes vnto the 

’N fachers.For as the impreffion of a found of a fentence in the intelled, is not 
the fame that the found was: fo the fhape wherein they conceiued Gods inuifi- 
ble nature, was not rhe fame chat he is :yet was he feene in that fhape, as the fen- 


_ tence was conceiued in that found, for they knew. that no bodily forme could(é). 


containe God.He ralked with Afoy/es, yet Mfoyfes intreated him(a)/fT base found 


fauonr in thy fight, oew mee thy face that 1 may (d) know thee. And feeing it behou- 


Bred. 33 
336 


edthe law of God to bee giuen from the mouthes of Angells with terror,notto 
afew of che wifelt, burte a « hole nation, great things were done inthe mount 
before the fayd people , the lawe beeing giuen by one, and all che reft beholding 
the admirable and ftrange things that were done «For the Ifraelites had not that 
confidence in Afoy/es that the Lacedemonians had in (d).Lresrgus , to beleeue 
that hee had his lawes from Jowe or Apollo. For whenthat lawe was: giuenthe 
people,thar enioynes the worfhippe of one God, in the view of the fame people 
were ftrange proofes fhewne/as many as Gods prouidence thought fit)to proue 


that that was the Creator whom they his creatures oughtto ferue in thas 


lawe.'  - - — . Pees 
a ee oe « LVE 


. oP 


Linso.: OFTHE CITIB OF GOD. ~—_. 379 


—< 


A Ppeard(a) vifsble | Iobnin his Gofpell faith,thut 10 man harh ever feene God : and Pant con» Whether 
~ Afirmeth it, yet Jacob faith, Hee faw the Lord face to face. And Exod.23. itis faid Moyles the Farhers 
fpake with God face to face, as one friend with another - which many places of Scripture te~ “4 S04 | 
ftifie, But it is fo fure thacman cannot behold Gods inuiftble nature , that fome haue faid chat "7 
neither the Angels nor Archangels doe fee him, Chryfo/?, and Gregor. Fhe fathcrs therefore 
faw Angels in fach Maieftic'of forme as they thought was diuine : for that the Angels {fpoake - 
with the fathers,and gaue them che lawe, Paul affirmeth tothe Hebrewes in thefe words. /f Heb 2.2, 
the words poken by Angels was fledfast coc. The fame faith Stenen. eA fles.7. Now this was no 
fhape of God, (for none bee hath ) faith Chrzfoftome, that Christ faich the Tewes neuer fawe, To | 
but this was that vifible fhape that the Angels ( by Gods appointment ) take vpon them, fo aon 
farre ‘exceeding ordinary fhapes, charft feemes dinine, and is a decree tothe view of the 
deity ; this ( faith he) Chri faith they had tiot feenc,though they thought they had Exo.19. 
(6) Containe | A diuerfe reading inthe Latine. (¢ ) /f £ haae | It is plaine faith Cregorie that 
during this life,man may fee fome images of God, but never him-felfe in his proper nature s as 
the foule infpired with the {pirit,feemeth fome figures of God, but can neuer reach the view 
of his effence. Hence it is that /acoé feeing-but an Angell, thought hee had fcene Ged: And 
‘Moyles for all he was faid to fpcake with him face to face, yet faid : Shew mee thy face that I 
wiay [ee thee : whence it is apparane that hee defired to. behold that cleare vncircumfcribed 
nature, which lic had but yet beheld in fhadowes and figures. Moral.tn Tob (36.1 7.But the An+ | 
geil, (Gods deputy ) anfwered Moyfes thus : Thon caxft not fee my face , for there fhak no man Exo. 39.20 
fee mee and lene, Buca little after: Thon [halt fee my back parts: but my face thon foalt not fee, vede az. 
So the prints of the deity left in his creatures we may fee,and fo afpire cowards hisinuifibility: *  ” 
cach get more knowledge thereof as God giues more grace. But his true effence is more am- 
ple,then our weake fence and intelle&t can comprehend jor then can be fo farre debafed. But 
of {peach with God 1t isnot fo,nor doc I thinke it imptous or abiurd to hold that God fpake 
to many of the Fathers, and after Chrift to many of the Saints : God , cuen that God of hea« 
uen and earth ; it is not againft his Maieftie, but congruentto his infinite goodneffe. His face 
might be feene as eAugu/finedeclares. (d) Know thee | Or fee thee knowingly. (¢) Lycurgne] Lycurgus; 
Sonne to Exnomis King of Sparta,and Dionaf/a,brother to king Polsbites, or ( Plutarch) oli : 
aeétes, after whofe death,he reigned yntill his brothers wife prooued with child: for then hee 
refigned to the childe vnborne, if it were a {onne,and proouing fo,hce was protector. He gaue 
the Lacedemonians {harpe lawes,and therefore feyned to.haue them-from e4pollo of Delphose 
fome fay from Jone, becaufe hee went into Crete, (to auoide the maleuolence of fome of his 
country-men} and there they fay, learned hee his lawes of Jone, that was borne there ; Jusffsne 
faith hee dyed in Creete : Butthe Hifioriographers doe neither agree of his birth , lawes, nor 
"death, (faith Plutarch ) nor of his time, nor whether there were diuerfe fo called. Ténmsens 
reckoneth two,and both Lacedemonians : but faith that both their deedes were referred tothe 
Jacer, that the elder liued in Homers time , or not long after. Of Lycurgas lawes , 1 omitte to 
fpcake here,feeing they are fo rife in Plutarch and Zenophon,commonauthorsboth. 


How but one God 2s to be worlbipped for allthings temporal and eternal: alk’ 7 
7 being in the power of bis prouidence. Cwar.tge wae 
VT the true religion of all mankinde (referred to the people of God )as well 
~as one,hath had increafe,and receiued mote and mote perfe&ion, by the fuc- 
ceffion andconiinuance of time , drawing from temporalitiés toeternity , and 
from thinges vifible to the intele@uall : fo chat euen then when the promife of 
vifible rewards was giuen,the worfhipof one onely God was taught, leaft man- 
kind fhouldbe drawne to any falfe worfhip for thofe temporal refpects: for he is 
mad that denyeth chatall chac menor Angels:can;doe vnto man, is in the hand of 
One almi ehty:Plotine the Platourst (a)difputes of prouidénee,promin g it to be de- 


Siued from the high, ineffable & beautious God, /(b)vnto slie méaneft creature on 
ce 3 Kkqg °° | earth, 


RS 


380 


SAINT AYGVSTINE. Cuarp.14 


earth, (¢) by the beautie of the flowers, and leaues : all which fo tranfitory, mo- 
Mentary things , could not haue their peculiar , feuerally-forted beauties, but 
_ from that intelleQuall and immutable beauty forming them all.This our Sauiour — 
Mat. 6.98. fhewed, faying: Learne how the Lillies of the field doe growe : they labour not, nesthey 
29.30. fpinne,yet fay 1 unto you that enen(d ) Salomon én all his glory was mot avayde like 
one of thefe: Wherefore sf God fo cloathe the graffe of the field which ts to day , and to 

morrow is cast into the Owen , {ball not hee doe much more unto yous O yon of lsttle 

faith? Wherefore though the minde of man bee weake,and clogged with earth- 

. lie affe&s,and defires of thofe things that are fo fraile and contempuble in re- 

{pect of the bleffings celettiall (though neceffaries for this prefent life ) yet 

doth it well to defire them at the hands of one onely GOD, andnotto depart 

from his feruice to obteine them elfe-where, whenthey may fooneft attaine his 


loue by negle& of {uch trifles , and with that loue all neceffaries both for this 
lite,and the other. : - | 


——— See 


ETD 


iL. VIVES. 


Latoni§t (a) difputeth | In foure bookes,fhewing that the leaft part of this inferior world is 
- refpected by the Prince of nature, and that by the intelligible world , whichis with God, 
_ Gods pro- this world of ours was made - many that the depreffion hath altered it , that the other fimple 


widénce. 


world produced this multiplyed , and difperfed. (6) Vato the meanest | For fome held that 


Gods prouidence defcended no lower then heauen. This fame opinion fome fay was Ariffetles, 
of which elfe-where.: Others held that the Gods medled onely with the greateft affaires on 


earth, and (as Kings ) medled not with petty matters : where-vpon Lwcave maketh (<far 
{peake thus to his mutinous foldiours : . | | 


Nunquam fe cura decorum — 
Sic premit,ut veftra vita, vefired, faluti 
Fata vacent : procerum motus hac cuntla fequantur. 
Human: pancis vinit genus. ~—— Oe. 
The gods doe not refpe& 
Your good fo much, as to permit the fates 
To tend on that : they manage greater tates, 
Mankinde may liue with fmall. — 


Le &e. 
(¢ ) By the beauty | Euery flower hath fuch an apte forme, growth, bud, feede,and {pring,that 
hee that obferues it,muft needs fay, the workman of this, is none but God. Gods pronidence © 
(faith Proc/us ) defcends from aboue vnito each parcell of the creation , omitting none. But 
feeing Platois for vs , what neede wee cite his followers? Hee affirmes Gods prouidence to 
difpofe of cuery little thing,and euery great. J” Epniom.hauing difputed of it, De fegib.Jib,10. 
The fumme whereof is this: Seeing there are gods, they muSt not Le thought idle: therefore they 
looke to bumsaine affaires : and knowing all, ie know both little and great : being farre from floth 
e 


and fluggifbneffe : nor ss thetr power a whit le 


in the least bufineffes,nor dee they thinke tt unwor- 


shy theér maiefty to refpett them, for they are degrees tothe highest. Therefore they regard all things, 
great and (mal. & ) Salomon | What purple, filke, or dye (faith Hserome vpon this place ) 
t 


. ss comparable to 


e flowers? what is fowbite as the Lily? what purple exceeds the Vivlet ? Let the 


‘ o7es bee rather indges in this, then the tongue. Thus {arrehee. And truly Arte can neuer attaine 
_-\tonatures perfeCtion, imitate how it can : though our efteeme preferre it,and feeing it gettea 
little by emulation, attribute much more to it. 7 


Of the holy Angels that min ifter to Gods pronidence. CHar. 15. 


| pleafed the divine prouidence therefore fo to difpofe of the times ,that as I 
faid,and wee read in the actes, the lawe fhould bee giuen (4) Y the Angells 


mouths , concerning the worfhip of the true God, wherein Gods perfon (not 


in 


7 


' Lisso. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 8x 


in his proper fubftance , which corruptibleeyes can neuet fee, but by certaine 
{uppofitions of a creature for the creator ) would appeare j'and {peake fyllabi-’ 
cally in a mans voyce,vntovs: euen hee that in his owne nature fpeakethnor 
corporally bute {piricually, not fenfiblie but intelligibly, riot temporally, but (as 
I may fay)zternall, neither beginning {peach ,nor ending: whome his blefled | 
and immortal] meffengers and minifters heard not with eares , but more finceres 
ly with intelle@&s: and hearing his commands after an ineffable manner, they ins 
{tantly and eafily frame to bee deliuered vs in-a vifible and fenfible manner. 
This law was giuen (asI fay ) ina diuifion of rime, firk hauing.all earthly pro.’ 
wifes that were types of the goods eternall, which many celebrated in vifible | 
facraments , but few. vnderftood . Bur there the true religious worthip of one 
onely God, is directly and plainely taught and teftified , not by one of the peo- 
ple,but by him that made heanen and earth, and euery foule and fj pirit that is noe 
im-felfé: for hee maketh them that are made , and haue neede of his helpethae . 
made them, in all their exiftence. - | : | 


~L. VIVES. | | | 
B’ (a) the Angels mouthes} Or by their difpofing, as Gods minifters in thofe myracles.Of 


this here-after. 


Whether in this queflion of Geatitude we must truft thofe Angels that — 
vefufe the dinine wor{bip,and afcribe st all to one God, Gy 

| or thofe that veduive ét tothem-felues; 
oo Chap, 866 - : 


WV Hat Angells thall wee truft then in this bufineffe of eternall bliffe. Thofe 
that require mortall men tb offer them factifice and honours, or thofe 
that fay iris all die vnto GO D the Creator, and will.vs moft pioufly,to giue 
him abouc it all , as one, in the onely fpeculation of whome wee may attaine 
this happineffe . For the fight of GOD, isa fight of that beauty , and worthy 
fuch loue, that P/sto( 4) didnot doubt tocall him thac wanted this , vnhappy, 
had heencuer fuch {tore of goods befides. Seeing then that fome Angels re... 
figneall this religious worfhip to him, and fome would haue it them-feluess °°!" 
the firft refufing all part of it, and the fecond not daring to forbid him of part | 
of it: let the Platonsits, Theurgigues, (or rather (5) Persurgzkes , for fo may all Periorgikes 
thofe artes bee fitlye termed) or any other Philofophers anfwere which wee 
fhould follow. Nay let allmen anfwer that haue any vfe of naturall| reafon, 
fay, whether wee fhall facrifice to thefe Gods or Angels that exad it OF to 
him onely to whome they bid vs , that forbid ie both to them-felues and the 
others. If neither of them did any miracles , but the one fide demanded facri- 
fice,and the others faydno,GO D mutt haue all , then ought piety ca difcerne 
sberweene the pride of the one and the vertue of the other. Nay, | will fay 
more, if thefe that doe claime facrifice fhould worke vpon mens hearts with 
wonders, and thofe that forbid it ,and ftand all for GOD, fhould not haue 
power atall to worke the like, yet their part fhould gaine more by reafon, 
then the others by fence: But feeing that GO D , to confirme his truth, hach 
by their minifteric , that debafe them-felues: for his honour , wrought nrore 


great 


382. | _ SAINT AVGVSTINE. | Cuaps6 


great, cleare ,and certaine miracles, then the others , leaft they fhould drawe 

weake hearts vnto their falfe devotion by inueigling their fences with amaze- 

True mira~ ments : who is fo grofely fond , as will not choofe to follow the truth , feeing it 
ie La confirmed with more miraculous prooues ? for the recorded.miracles of the Pa- 
gan gods (I {peake not of fuchas time and natures fecret caufes by. Gods pro- 
uidence, hane produced beyond cuftome, as monftrous byrths, fights in the 
ayre-andearth, tearefull,or hurtfull alfo, (¢ ) all which the deuills fubtiley per- 
{waded the world,they both procured and cured ) I meanéof {uch as were their 
euident ates, as the(d) remoouall of the gods ( that e4neas brought. from 
Troy.) from place to place by them-felues: (¢) Turguins cutting of a-‘Whet- 
ftone (.f) the Epidanrian {erpents (¢) accompanying E/culepixs in his tran{porta- 

tion to Reme : the (4) drawing on of the fhippe that brought B-recyathia’s fta- 

tue from Phrygia ( being other-wife not to bee mooued by fo huge ftrength of 

men and beatts ) by one woman with her girdle, inteftimony of her chattitie: 

and the ( #) carrying of water from Tyber ina fiue by a (& ) veftall, thereby ac- 
quitting her felfe from an accufation of adultery. Thefe, nor fuch as thefe , are 
comparableto thofe, done in preience of the people of GO D, eyther for rarity 

or greatneffe. How much leffe then the ftrange effets of thofe artes which the 
Pagans them-felues did legally prohibite , namely of cMigicke and Theargie, 

(/) many whereof are meere Deceptsones vifus, and flatte falfehoods indeed, as 

the (m) fetching downe of the Moone, till ¢ faith Lucan ) thee {pume vpon 

fuch hearbes as they defire. Now though fome in their arte feeme to come 

neere others of the Saints wonderous deeds, -yet their end that difcerneth the 

latter ones farre to excell the firft, theirs. For their mulcitude, the more facrifi- 

fices they defire, the fewer they deferue . But ours doe-but prooue vnto vs 

one, that needeth no fuch, as hee hath fhewed both by his holy writte, and 

_ whole abolifhment of them ceremonies afterwards. If therefore thefe Angels 
require facrifice, then are thefe their betters that require none, but referre all to 

_ God:fer herein they fhew their true louetovs, that they defire not our fub- 
ie@ionto them,by facrifice, but vnto him in contemplation of whomeis their 
felicitie,and defire to fee vs ioyned to him fram whome they neuer are feperate. 
But fuppofe the other Angells that feeke facrifices for many , and not for one 
The angels Onely,would not have them for them -felucs, but for the gods they are ynder; 
ofone god, yer for all this are the other to bee preferred before them , as beeing vnder but 
one GOD,to whome onely they referre all religion, and to none other: and 
“27> the other no waye daring to fozbid this‘-GO D all worfhippe, to whome the 
former afcribeall. Butif they bee neyther good Angels nor GODS, (as 
their proud falfenefle prooueth ) but wicked deuills , defiring to (hare diuine 
honours with that one glorious GO D, what greater ayde can wee haue a- 
gainft chem then to ferue chat GO D,to whome thofe good —— ferue, that 
chargevs to facrifice not to them but vntohim, to whome our felues ought to 

bee a facritice? aa _ 3 | 


L. VIVES. 


Dato (a did\ Tt is his in many places : all chings with-out vertue , and the knowledge of 
> che true Gas, is vile and abiect. (6) Per-inrgskes | Ot Per-wro, toburne, men eae 
¢ 


ad 


~ er -—~ 


A 
e 
1 


Lixo. | - OFTHE CITIE OF GOD. 383 


(c) Al which | By facrifice (faith Ualerias ) are the prefages of vifions and thunders procu- 
red. The Hetrurians vfed the arte, and Nama brought it to Rome, It ismuch mentioned in | 
Cicero,Seneca, Linie, and other Latine authors. Procwrare isin this place to facrifice to fuch a Procurart, 
pod (as firteth the time)to make the euent profperous. (d} Remoonall | Val.lib.1. They were 

rought to Lasininm,and placed there by e£meas, and being borne toe4lba by Afcanins, 
they returned to their othcr feateagaine: and becaufe they might bee perhaps fecretly re- 
mooued, they were brought to _4/ba againe,and they departed the fecondtime. (¢) Targuins] 
Hee defiring to increafe the ntmber of histrained fouldtors , Actins Neninvs the Augur for- 4éins New 


_ bad him till hee had beheld the Auguries, Tarquin, to {coffe his arte: Prefage by thine arte *s,Augut 


( faith hee ) whether my thoughts fhatl.come to paffe- It fhall( quoth ACius, out of his arte: ) 

Then cut this whetftone (quoth Tarquin ) with this razoxr. Hee did it in that full prefence, 

and whileft he liued euer after was honourably tefpected, and had a ftatue ereétedhiminthae | 

very place where it was done ( namely the Confiftorie ) with a Wherftone anda razor, as te- 

flimonies of the fact. Liu.lib.1, Cicero de disinat.lib.1. but they fay Attias cut it , not Tarquin. 

(f) The Epidaurian | This is that e£/culapins that was brought from his Temple (fiue miles 

from Epidaurus) to Rome,in forme of a Serpent. The great deuillic was furely ( faith Lattan- The Bpi= 
tius) without diffembling : for the Scriptures call him a Serpent , and Pherecides the Syrian, “#1748 let. 
faith they’all haue ferpentine feete. (g ) Accompanying | Nay the ferpent it felfe wase#J-P* a 
enlapins, ynleffe they held him inuifible, and this ferpent hts companion vifible. eA /culapins 

was painted with a Serpent wound about a rodde, and called Ophinchus, that is , the Snakes 


bearer. It was a ftatute alfo that Phifitians fhould vfe Snakes. Higin. Hiffor. Calest. Plinie 


thinkes the Snake was facred to him, becaufe it is fo medicinable : but AZacrobins faith, be- 
caufe it is fo quick-fighted. Horace, oo 

; Cur in amicorum vitinm tam cernis acuium, 

nam ant aquila,aut ferpens Epidaurins ? 
+4 wie dooft into thy friends ill carriage prye, 
With a quick Eagles,or.a Serpents eye? | ., 

(4) Drawing '} The thip that came from Peffinuns with the Mother of the gods, fticking im- 
mooueably in Tyber, on ground, Q. Clandig a Veftall ; ( flandered for incontinencie becaufe Claudia a 


_ fhee loued to goe handfome) tooke hir girdle , and knitting it to the fhippe , praide Berecyn. Veltalt, 


thea if fhee knew her chafte to follow her, and fo fhee did’, where-vpon Clandia hada ftatue 

fet vp before the goddeffes temple,that ftood fafe when the Temple was twife burned, Li#./. 2. 

Onid. Fast. Ualer.\ Maximus, (i) (arrving of water|.A dwerfe reading : but of no mo- 

ment. (k) A Veffall | Turria, Valer. b.8..(1) Many | Mens thoughts often make them 

thinke they fee that which they fee not indeede, and this is often done by a Phantafme, or ap- 
parition, And hence is moft of our reportes of {pirites walking, arifen. Yeathe fpirits them- 

felues doe decciue our fences: which is no wonder, feeing that our iug!ers can doe the like . 
by Jeiger du mayn, which if another fhould doe, you fhould haue fome make a miracle-of ; Iuglerte — 


. And their dooings truely are admirable, and.their manner very harde to conceiue, Some 


thinke they are not done but by the deuils meancs: not fo: they are but the quick conuey-. 
ances of arte and exercife, their fwift motion pteuenting our cye-fights: So doth hee that 
cheweth bread and blowes forth meale - and hee that drinkes , and letrs f¢ out at his chroate, 
© how people will martell to fee them eate daggers, {pue heapes of needles, laces, and ° 
counters! er a ee en A ee, | : 
I omitte to fpeake of the trickes of naturall Magicke , making men looke headleffe, and 
headed like Affes,atid {preading a Vine all oucr theroome . Many know the reafons hereof: 
they are written of and eafily:done by. men , much more by the deuils , that are fuch cuaning 
naturalifts. That the Pagans fufpe&ed their gods myracles to bee but illufions ,or faigned 
imaginations, Valerius fheweth plainely,/d.1. 1 know (faith hee ) the doubrfull opinion of 
the ancients,concerning the gods {peach and apparitions, obiected to mens eares and eyes, but 
Becaufe they are old traditions, let vs beleeue their authors, and not detract from the aythos 


riti¢ of revierend and antique dogtrine. And Liwie faith in diuerfe places that the dangerous lafbted 


times made mens thoughts fo {crupulous; that they. beleeued anid reported farre more myra- 
cles then were true. (a) Ferchieg downe | Of che Magicians power: Laces writeth thus. | 
ib.6. i a hae ee ee ee Coe 


ee ee ee ee | . "= « aoe 


384 SAINT AVGVSTINE. . C HaP.l6é 


rere ES 


 omelilles et Sydera Primum, | 
Pracipsti dedutta polo Phabeque ferena, 
Non aliter diris verborum obfeffa venenis, 
— ~Pallust et nigris,terreni{que ignibus ar fit. 
| Quam fi fraterna prohiberet imagine tells, 
Infereretque fuas flammsis caleftsb’ umbras, 
| -Et patitur tantes catn deprefja labores, 
_ Donec fuppofitas propior de(pumet in herbas. 
—-T hey firft difroab’d the fpheres, 

. Of their cleare greatnes,and Phebe in her ftation, 
Wich blacke enchantments and damn’d Inuocation, 
They (trike as red,or pale,and make her fade, 

As if the Sunne cafting earths fable fhade 

Vpon her front,this alteration made, f 4 
So plague they her with harmes,till fhe come nyer, 
And fpume vpon {uch herbes as they defire. 


So in Virgil, a witch faith fhee can turne the courfe of the ftarres. ef enid.4.And Apwleins his 
witch could weaken the gods,and put ous the ftarres. And Onid faith of Medea. 
; Illa reluétaté curfis deducere luna 
Nititur,c@ tenebras addere folis equis. 


She workes to fetch fwift Phebe from her chaire, 
And wrap the Sunnes bright fteeds in darkned ayrte. 


For they beleeued that charmes would fetch the Moone downe from heauen. Uirg. Pharmac. 


Carmina nel -alopoffunt deducereluna: 
Charmes force the filuer Moone downe from her {pheare: 


And Phedras nurfe in Seneca’s Hippolitus,worthipeth the ALgong in thefe termes. 


Sic te pein enaey Said 

Et nube rupta,cornib? puris eas: 

Sic te gerenté frena notturni atheris, 

ie iis nunquam Theffali cantus queant. 


So be thy face vnfhrouded, 
And thy pure hornes vaclouded! 
So be thy filuer chaite farre from the reach | 
= 9h Ofall che charmes that the Theffalians teach. : es 
- And inthefe troubles they held that making of noyfe helped the moone, and kept her from 
hearing the inchaunters words:whervpon they founded cymballs,and bet vpon.drummes and 
bafens : forthis,they thought a fingular helpe.‘Properr. | 
. (Cantus ete curr# lunam deducere tetqnt, 
Et facerent,ft no ara repal[a fonent. 
Charmes feeke to draw downe Phebe from her feating, 
| And would,but forthe noyfe ofbafensbeating, - 
And Jusenall peaking of a woman that was an euerlafting prater,faith: 
_ | Vua laborantipoterit fuccsrrerre lune. , ss 
_ Heronely voyce would kecpe the moone from charmes. : 


_ They vied it alfo in Eclipfes,not knowing their pe | {peaking of the firft declarers here- 
the 


of faith : great men , and learned that difcouered much in the law of nature ,. more then others yet 
feared the death of fore ftarres or fome mifchicfe to beefall them in their eclipfes. Pindarus and 
Stefichorus ( both great {chollers) were fubie& to this feare , the fayling of the Sunne and 


_ Moones light-arguing(faid they)che power of witchcraft vpon them, and therefore men beat 


” it from them with loud and cenfufed founds. Nor is it any wonder thofe learned men fhould 


beleetie that the Moone was fet from heauen, when as there was a fort ofmen(fince wee could 

remember) that beleeued that an affe had drunke vp che moone, becaufe drinking in the riuer 

where it fhonne, acloud came on the fudden, and couered it ; fo the afle was amp, 
 % : ; 7 an 


Lix.40. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 385 


and hauing hada very lawfull , and orderly tryall , was ripped vppe , to haue the Moone 
let forth of his belly , to fhine in the world againe. (# ) She {pum d | This they held was the 
flauer of Cerberus dogge vnto the Moone , Hecate,or Proferpixa, and the Enchantreffes, 
vfed it much in their witch-crafts. 7 


Of the Arke of the teftament andthe miracles wrought to confirme 
this law and promife. Cuap. 17. | 
| THe lawe ofGod , giuen by the Angels , commaunding the worfhip of one 
God, and forbidding all other , was put vppe in, an Arke called the Arke ofthe © 

—Teftament : VVhereby is meant that GOD (to whofe honour all this was 

done ) was not included in that place or any other , becaufe hee gaue them 
certaine anfwers from the place of the Arke, and fhewed miracles alfo from 
‘thence : but that the Teftament of his will was there : Thelaw ( that .was 
written vppon tables of ftone and putte inthe Arke ) beeing there : WVhich 
beeing in their trauell , carryed ina Tabernacle , gaue it alfo the name of 
the Tabernacle of the Teftament, which the Prieftes with due reverence did 
beare. And thcir figne wasa pillar of a clowd in the day,which fhone in the night Exod,13; 
Jike fire:and when it remoued,the tents remoued,and where ic ftayed,they refted. 
Befides,the Jaw had many more great teftimonies giu€ for it,befides what [haue 
faid,and befides thofe that approached out of the place where the Arke ftood: for 
when they and the Arke were to paffe Iordan,into the land of promife, The waters | 
elett,and left them adry way:Befides hauing borne it 7. times about the firft Citty jot4: 
that was their foe,and(as the land was then) flaueto Paganifme, the wals fell flattetol6. 
downe without ruine or battery. And when they had gogtenthe land of Promife,8z * "8" 5¢ 
thatthe Arke(for their fins )was taken fromthem,and placed by the viGor Idofa- 
ter in their cheefe gods temple, and locke faft in ,comming againe the next day, 
they found their Idoll throwne downe and broken all to peeces:and being terriff- 
ed by thefe prodigies(befides a more fhamefull fcourge ) they reftored the Arke 
to thofe they rooke it from. And how? They fet ic vpona carriage yoking kine in 
it (or Heifers ) whofecalues they tooke from them,and fo(in tryal of the diuine 
power)turn’d them loofeto go whether they would : They without guide came 
ftraight to the Hebrwes, neuer turning again for the bleating of their Calues, bute 
fo brcught home this great miftery to thofe chathonoured it: Thefe and-fuch like 
are nothing toGod,but much to the terror and inftruction of man. For if the Phi- 
lofophers ( cheefely the P/aton:/s ) that held the prouidence of God to extend 
to every thing great and {mall , by the proofe drawne from the feueral formes 
and beauties of herbs and flowers as wel as liuing creatures,were held to be more 
. wifely perfwaded then the reft: How much more do thefe things teftifie the Dei 
comming to paffe at the houre when this religion was taught,that commaundet 
the adoration of one God, the onely louing and beloued God, bleffing all , limi- 
ving thefe facrifices in a certainetime , and then changing them into better b 
a better Prieft:and teftifiing hereby that hee defireth not thefe, but their fienift 
cations,not to haue any honour from them neither, but that we by the fire of 
his loue might be inflamed to adore him,and adhere ynto him, which is al for our 
owne good , and addeth nothing to his. | 


Ageing fucis as deny to beleeue the [criptures , concerning thofe 
miracles {bewne to Gods people. Cuar.18. 
VV! any one fay there wasno fuch aah ess allislyes ? Hee that faythfo 
J and 


386 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. | Car. 18. 


‘The duels and takes away the authority offcripture herein , may as well fay that the Gods 


wonders 
for their 
wor{hip. 


PL,7 2 


re{pect not men. For they had no meane but miracles,toattayne their worthip, 
wherein their Pagan ftories {t.ew how far they had power to proue them-felues 
alwayes rather wonderfull then vfefull. But in thisour worke( whereof this is 
the tenth book)we deale not againft Atheifts, nor fuchas exclude the geds from 
dealing in mans affaires,but with fuch as preferre their gods,before our God , the 
founder of this glorious Citty: knowing that he is the Creator inuifible & immu- 
table of this vifible and changeable world,and the piuer of beatitude, from none 
ofhis creatures, but from him-felfe intyrely. For his true Prophet faythslt 7s good 
for meto adhere unto the Lord. The Phylofophers contend about the finall good 
(4) to which all the paines mantakes hath relation. But hee fayd nor, it is good 
for mee to bee wealthy , honourable or inuefted a King :Or( as fomeofthe 
Phylofephers fhamed not to fay) It és good for mee to hane fulnefve of bodily plea- 
fure : Or (asthe better fort fayd )/t és good for mee to haue vertue of minde :But hee 
fayd: It ss good for me to adhere unto God, This had heetaught him, vnto whome 
-onely both the Angels ,and the (b)teftimony of the law doeteachall facrifice to 
bee due: So that the Prophet became a facrifice vnto him, beeing inflamed with 


his intelle€tuall fire,and holding a fruition of his ineffable goodneffe in aholy de- 
- fireto bee vnited to him. Now if thefe men ofmany goddes in the difcourfe of 


Offices, 


their miracles , a credence to their hiftoryes and magicall ; Or (to {peaketo 
pleafe them) Theurgicall bookes , why fhouldnot the fcripture bee beleeued in 
thefe other , who areas farre beyond the reftas hee is aboue the others,to whom 


: onely thefe our bookes teach all religious honour to bee peculiar? 


. as 


Renee segnpnes coe _ 


. | LIVES. 


| YET ey 
T O(awhich al|Tully(Roically )diuided mans offices or duties into two parts,abfolute,refer- 
"Ered to the abfolute vertues,wifdome,&c, and foto good ends , and this the Greekes call 
xarbpbcur, the Latines reftum, athing well done, conteyning all vertuous acts:the other is 
referred to the rules of comm life,and hath alwaiesa probable reafon why it hath this effect 
rather then that, This is called sedixm,a meane or community,poflible to be drawne to a wife 
or to a foolifh event. Such actions concerne common weales, honours,titches, &c, (6 ) Tefti- 
mony of \Miracles, {faith one copy,and another otherwifc,all comes to one purpofe, 


~? 2. 


The reafon of that vifible facrifice that the true religion 


commands vs to offer uxtoone God. CHAP. 196 


B ut as for thofe that thinke vifible facrifices pertaine to others,and inuifibleto 


him,as onely inuifible,as greater to the greater,and berrer to the better, ( viz: 
the duries ofa pure heart , and an holy will) verely thefe men conceiue not that 
the other are Symbols of thefe,as the found of words,are fignifications of things. 
Wherefore as in our prayfes and prayers to him , wee — vocall wordes, but 
offer the contents of our hearts,euen fo we in our facrifice , know that wee muft 


gels retufe held that the Angels were eyther to haue adoration, or (that which wee owe 


nours, 


Apoc.3g9e 


8 lawfully giuen him. And thofe Angels the Saints did follow(¢) Paw! 8 Barnabas 


P being 


Liz. to, OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 387 

beeing in Lycaonia, the people ( for amiraculous cure )held them goddes,, and 4&4. - 
would haue facrificed vnto them, bur they humbly and godlyly denyed it , and 
preached that. God vynto them in whome they beleeued. But the wicked fpirits 
do affe& it onely becaufe they know it to be gods onely due. For( as Porphyry and 
others thinke)it is che diuine honours,not the fmels of the offerings that they de- 
ight in. For thofe fmels they have plenty,and may procure them-felues more i 
‘they lift. Sothen thefe arrogant {pirits affect not the {moake afcending froma 
body, but the honours given them from the foule, which they may deceiue and 
domineere ouer,{topping mans way to God , and keeping him from becomming 


f 


Gods facrifice , by offering vnto other then God. : 


hoo et LW AWES, 
Riz (4) with } The Angelssreioyce at mans righteoufnes. Lac. 15.(¢) Scriptures | Tob 
would haue worfhipped the Angel that was fent him,but he forbad him, willing him rather 


' to worfhippe God, whome he (as his fellow feruant ) ferued. e4poc, 19. (¢) Paul | Being in 


Lyaconia(a part of Afia ) preachirig Gods word , and curing alame man by Gods power , the 
_ people faid Se were ooasiesitin g Barnabas Tone, & Pani{ that preached) A4cranry,the preten« 
- ded God of fpeach, So they prepared them facrifices,but the Apo/tfes were angry , and forbad 
it,fearing to rake to them-felues,the due of God, ie By | 


| : o>. Of the onely and true facrificeswhich the Mediator be tweene : 
 . + § Godandman became. Cuar 200 mae 
MV VHerefore the true Mediator,being in the forme of a feruant, made Media- 
« « ° tor betweene God and man,the man Chrift Je/us , taking facrifices with his 
father’,as God,yet in in the feruile forme choofe rather to bee one then to take 


~_* 


pe 


any,teaft fome hereby fhould gather that one might facrifice vnto creatures , By 

this is hee the Prieft , offering, and offerer. The true Sacrament whereof is the | 
Chirches daily facrifice : which being the body of him the head, 4 ) learneth C0 gp, isch 
offer.it felfe by him. ‘The ancient f scrilices of the Saints were all diuers types of afaerifice, 
this alfo , this beeing figured in many and divers ,as one thing istoldin many Howe: 
words, that it might be commended (6 ) without tedioufneffe. And to this great 

and true facrifice , all falfe ones gaue place. 


s ribo oalied Or faith the offereth by him,fo the Coleyne & Bruges copies haueit: butthe 
yorher isgood alfo, (b) Without tediou{neffé | For variety eafeth that , and in difcourfe he 
that repeatethione thing twife of one fafhion , procureth loathing, but vary it a thoufand. 
wayes -, and it will til paffepleafing, This is taught in Rhetorike. Andit is like that whiets 
Q. Flaminins in Linie faith of the diuers fauces: Therfore the types of the old law that fignified 
onothing,were diuers,that men might apprehend the future faluation with leffe furfet andthe 
perions,amonig ft fo many might find one wherby to conceiue what was tocome. — | 


. bd 


i) 


Of thepower ginen tothe dinels,to the greater gloryfying of the Saints — 
phat haue fuffered martyrdome and conquered the ayry {pirits, 

not by appeafing them,but adhering to God. Cuar, 21. | 
T He Diuells hadde a certayne temporary power allowed them , whereby 
AL eo excite: fiich as they. poffeffed , againft GODS Citty , and both to 
accept facsifices of the willing offerers , and to require them of the vnwil- 
ling, yea cuen to extort them by violent — was this at all preiudi 

ie | a 


4 
- 


ne 


tm 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. °° | Cuarat, 


but very commodious for the Church , thatthe number of Martirs might bee 
fulfilled: whom the Citty of God holds fo much the dearer, becaufe they fpent 
their blood for it againft the power of impiety: thefe now/if the-church admitted 
the words vfe ) we might worthily call our ( 4) Heroes, For this name came from 
ye , Juno, and therefore one of her fonnes ( [know not which) was called Heros, 
the miftery beeing , that aso was Queene of the ayre,where the Heroes( the well 


TheMar- deferuing fovles ; dwell with the Demones. But ours (if wee — vfe the word) 
i 


Bide the dis fhould be called fo,foracontrary reafon, namely not for dwel 
Lt 


quccers, 


ng-with the De- 
mones in the ayre,but for conquering thofe Demones thofe aercall powers. and in 
them, all that is calied sono: whome it was not for nothing, that thePoets made 
fo enuious,and {uch an oppofite to (¢) good men beeing deified for their vertue, 
But vnhappily was Vérgzl/ ouer-feene in making her firft to fay ,e£neas conquers 
men , and then to bring in He/enus warning A.neas , as his ghoftly father in thefe 
wordes. | : 8 


Tunoni cane vota libens,dominamg potentem, 
Supplicibus fupera AON; Sa~—emn | 
Purchaf'd great Junos (4) wrath with willing prayers. 
_ and (e)conquer‘d her with humble gifts~—~ - 


And therfore Porphyry (though not ofhim-felfe ) holds thata good God or Ge. 
"wins neuer commeth toa man till chebad be appeafed: as if it wereofmore power 
 thenthe other , feeing that the bad.can hinder the good for working,and muft be 
intreated to giue them place, wheras the good can do no good vnleffe the others 
lift ,and the others can do mif cheefe maugre their beards .This is no traQ of true 
-seligion:our Martirs do not conquer Jazo,cthat is the ayry powers. , that mailice 
their vertues , on this fathion : Our Heraes (If I may fay fo ) conquer’ noe 


Hera by humble gifts but by divine vertues. Surely (f) Sespia deferued the name 


_ Of African rather for conquering Africa , then for begging or buying his 


honour of his foes. 


L. VIVES, 


. nr ( a ) Herees | Plato in his ordet of the gods : makes fome leffe then a Damones, and 
sonal x then men,calling them.demi-gods : now certainly thefe bee the eue: for fo are 


To wit,thofe ¥. Plato. meanethifor thefe ar more ancient & venerable then they chat failed with 


they called that are begotten of a godand a mortall,as Hercules Diony fins, Enea , wv feulan 
ins, Romulus and fuchzone of whofe. parents being a.god, they would not callshem bare men, 
ut fomewhat more,yet leffe then the Demones. And fo holds lamblicns. Flierocles the Stoike 
(relating Pythagoras his verfes,or.as fome fay Philolaus his faith that Angedsatd. Heroes(as Pie 
to faith Jare both included in the ranke of Demsones:the celeftiall are Angels,the earthly Heroes, 
the meane Demones.But Pythagoras held(quoth he)that the goddes fonnts were called Heroes 
Damones : And{o they are, in that fence that Hefied cals the men of the golden age, Terreftrial’ 
Desones:for hee putteth a fourth fort of men,worfe then the golden ones but better then the 
third fort,for the Heroes, But chefe and the other alfo he calle men;and Sexi-godssaying 


drepetniptorde | A bleffed kinde of Heroes they were. 
— f Surnamed Semi-gods-----. . 


igs 602 weno 


od 


Zafer in che facal thip,& fought in the war of Troy. For Hefied cals thé warlike, and thence (as 
ddenander faith were they held wrathful,& violentiifany one went by their cemples(called trea) 


4 


mae - se ww —_ —= 


_ Hierocles a\lowes the derijuation from Joue , 


ad 


Linso. § | OF THE CITIE OF GOD. —3By 


he mufi paffe in reuerend filence, leaft hee fhould anger the Heroes , and fet altogether by tht Heroum, — 
eares, And many fuch temples were ere&ted in Greece, Paxfanias mentioneth divers to Vii | | 

fes,Tantalus,and Acrifius, The Latines hadde them alfo : Pin. lib.19, mentioneth of one, Phe- 
to deriues Heros,of iewt@ Lone:becaufe the loue betweenea god or goddeffe and a mortall,pro- 
duced the Heroes. Some draw it from. ise, to Speake » becaufe chey were eloquent {tates-men:; 

uc not in refpect of the birth, but their fingular 

loue of the gods, inciting vs to the like. For Jamblichas {aies i bea ouer men, giving ys life, 
reafon,guarding and freeing our foules at pleafure.(But we haue fhowne thefe to be the powers 
of the foule,and each one is his owne Demon) Some deriue it from is ,earth,they being earthly 
Demones, For fo Hefiod calleth the good foules departed; and Pythagoras alfo,bidding vs wor- 
fhip the earthly Demsones, Homers interpretor liketh this derivation. sex ( faith he) in one lane 
guage, is carth:and of earth was mankind made. Capella ( Apr. lib. 2, )fayth that all between 
vs and the Moone,is the Kingdome of the M/anes and father Dss, Bucin the higheft part are 
the Heroes,and the A4anes below them:and thofe Heroes,or femi-gods , haue foules and holy 
mindes in mens formes,and are borne to the worlds great good: So was Hercules, Deony/. Ma 


- tolemus crc. and therefore the name comes of tex, Juno becaufe thee rules the ayre , whither 


the good foules afcend , as Hierocles witneffeth in thele verfes of Pythagoras or Philolaus , ve» 
Jating their opinion herein. ae | 
Fed Servet far cos ical parndudisortAntae . 
Lue em aharat G 5. Q- aubeseG@ un itebyer Oe 
’ + If quitfrom earthly drofle to heau’nthou foare 
Then fhale chou be a God, and dye no more. 


But Plate thinketh themto become Sea-goddes : ]-beleeue becaufe hee holdes them grof- 
fer bodyed then the Demsones whome he calleth purely aéreall : and fo thought fitte to giue 
them hzbitation in the moft appropinquate part of nature, the water. Hera alfo the Latines vie 
for a Lady or a Queene :Virg. en. 3. and-fo Heroes, if it deriue from Hera,may bee taken for 
L ords pr Kinges, (6) One of her fonnes | Ithinke Ihaue read of this in the Greeke commenta- 
ries,but, ].cannot remember. which:thefe things (as | {aid before are rather pertinent to chance 
then {chollerfhip. (¢ ) Good mens ] As to Hercules , aes and e£ineas. (d) Great |The tran~ 
flation of Hera, For Proferpina whom Charon ( eEneids 6.) calls Lady,is che infernal /xo,And 
Juno the celeftiall is called the great , and the infernall alfo (faith Serséns.) For father Dis,is 
called Znpiter infernall. So Clandian fings in the filent ring ef the f{pirits,at the wedding of Or- 
éus and Proferpina, : : ’ 


Noftra parens luno,tug, ogermane tonantrs | : Rape, Pro- 
Et gener,unanimis con(ortia ducste fomni | sf ferp, lib, 2. 
AM, uthag, alcernss innectite collalacertss, 

 Iuno our mother,and thou Jowes great fonne 

And brother, fweetly may you take your reft, . 

Linckt in each others armes,and breaft to breaft. | 


And Pretefilans in Lucian, calls Plato, lupiter. (e) Conquer | Shewing ( faith Donate ) that the 


greateft enemies are ooner conquered by obeyfance then oppofition. (f) Scipio | The firkt ge- Scipio A= 
nerall that ever got {ur name from his prouincial conquefts , was P. Cornelins Scipio, Publing trcan, 
his fonne, Hee fubdued Africa,and fubuerted Haniball , and was inftiled African. 1 fpeake of 
Generals and prouinciall conquefts : Coriolanus had that name from the conqueft of a towne, 
and Sergins Fidenas , was fo furnamed for fubduing the Fidenates. | 


). From whence the Saints hane their power againft 
it hh dinels and their pure purgation of heart. 
| Crap. 2 2.’ 


| G Odly men doe i the aéreall powers oppofing them, from their pofleft | 


oh by ( 4) exorcifmes,not by pacification : and breake their Temprations 
by prayer ,not vntothem but vnto God , againft them. Fortheyconquernor . 
chayne no man but by the fellowfhip of finne. So that his name ¥ took on him 
- : | , 13 | humanity 


390 "SAINT AVGVSTINE. . Cuar.23. 


en humanity , and lived without finne , confoundes them veterly. Hee is the Prieft 
fom God, and facrifice of the remiflion of finnes : Hee the Mediator betweene G O D and 
man,euen the man Chri/t Je/us by whome wee are purged of finne , and reconci- 
led vnto God:for nothing feuers man from God but finne,which not our merits, 
but Gods mercy wipeth off vs: it is his pardon, not our power, for all che power 
chat is called ours, is ours by his bountyous goodneffe ; for wee fhould thinke too 
well of our fiefh,vnleffe wee liued (6 ) vnder a pardon all the while weeare in the 
fleth. Therefore haue we our grace by a Mediator , that beeing pollutedby the 
fiefh,we might be purged by the like flefh. This grace of God wherein his great 
mercy is fhewne vs,doth rule vs by faith in this life,and after this life is ended, will 
tranfport vs by that vnchangeable truth unto moft abfolute perfection. 
L. VIVES. 
Exorcifme, B (4 )exorcifme |. itog ype , isto admire : eAuguftine tranflatesit fo,and Exercifta, an admie 
rersand Exorci(mus, admiration. The Exercif? expelleth the diuell from the Chatecnemes 
niftere he be baptifed. dugu/t.Synbol. 1c is the third of the leffer orders of the churhethey are in 
all feauen, Of this and of Exorcifme before Baptifmse read Petrus Lumbardus-Sentent lib,4.dsf. 
8.24. (5 ) Vnder a pardon \Vnder the law of finne and infirmity , Jeaft any one fhould extoll 
him-felfe. All che good wee doe , comes from God, by whofe pardon wee are.vnhusked of 
the old man, finne : and by him we liue in iuftice. é . 


Of the Platonitts principle in their purgation of the Joule 
“=. Cuap. 23. ee 


Por” faith that the Oracles fayd thatneyther the Sunnes nor Moones 7e- 

- kete could purge vs,and confequently,the Te/et2 of no goddes can. For ifthe 

Sunnes and Moones (the cheefe gods )cannot, whofe is more powerfull But the 

Oracles anfwered ( quoth hee) that the beginnings may: leaft one fhould thinke 

that vppon the denyall of this power tothe Sunne and Moone,fome other God 

Porphyry ofthe multicude might doe it. But what beginnings hee hath as a Platonif? , wee 

his opinion know. For hee {fpeakes (2 ) of God the father,the Son called in. greeke the Fathers 

nag Tete intellect : but of the {pirit snot a word: at leaftnot a playneone : though what he 

a meaneth, by a meane betweene the two ,I cannortell:for if he follow (¢ ) Plotine 

in his difcourfe of the three priuic effences,and would haue this third , the foules 

nature:hee (hould not haue put itas the meane betweene the father and the fon. 

For Plotine puts it after che fathers intellect, but Porphyry in calling it che meane, 

_interpofeth it betweene them. And this hee fayth as well as hee could , or would: 

but we cal itneicher the fathers fpirit alone,nor the fonnes , but both. The Philo- 

fophers {peake freely , neuer fearing to offend religious eares in thofe incompre- 

henfible mifteries : but wee muft lay our wordes to a(d) line, that wee produce 

Heed mut no impious error,by our freedome of fpeech concerning thefe matters. .Wher- 

Liven fore when we f{peake of God , we neither talke of two principles,nor three,as we 

the Trinity. may not fay there were two goddes orthree , though when wee {peake of the fa- 

ther,the fonne or the holy ghoft,we fay that each of thefe is God. Nor fay we 

The Sebel with the Sabellian heretikes,that he that is the father is the fonne, and hee thatis - 

lien Hee. the holy ghoftis the father and the fonne,butthe father is the fons father , and the 

tikes, fonnethe fathers fonne, and che holy fpiric both the fathers and the fonnes,but 

neyther father nor fonne. Truc then itis that man is purged by none but the be- 
ginning but this begianing is by them too variably taken. a 

a 7 ts | LAVIVES: — 


. 


Lia.to. OF THECITIEOF GOD. =~ 39: 


: | -yL VIVES, © - » oh x — 

'@}s (4) God the | Itisa queftion that hath troubled many , Whither the Phylofophers Whether 

had any notion of the Trinity? Firft , we our felues , to whome the miftery of redempri-'"* Vhyloe 
on is reuealed,haue but afmall glance(God knowes)of that radiantlight.. But what the Phy-oPhers, 
Jofophers of old wrotc hereof is eafily apparant that they {poke it,rather then knew what they Tunny, 
Spoke , itis fo obfcure. Thefe fecrets belonged not to their difcouery. It fufficed them to ats 
taine the ynity of God: And if ( by Gods infpiration)they fpoke oughtt concerning the Trini 
ty, it was rather to ferue as a teftimany of the future truth againft their maifters opinions,then 
to expres any vnderftanding they had therof them-felu es. Aristotle writes(de calo et mundo),2 ) 
y the Pytbagorsfts placed perfcétion in three,the Leginning ,midfi,and end : and this number they 
vied in religion, Thence fome hold that Theocritws his witch faid, se ay 

T 0 three I offer,three I holy call: But Vergillmore plaines 


Terna tsbi bac primum triplici dinerfacolore 
Lycia circundo,terg, hec altaria circum -— -.. 
Effigiems duco:numere ens iuparegandet = 
Firft wrap I thefe three thornes(to frame my fpel) 
Three times about the fhapesthe altars then © | - 
We compaffe thricesGod loues od numberswell, oe Sf 


And Zeno calleth Loges,fate , neceflity , God , and Jones foule. But Piata feémes Sarre 
more plain:for(Socrates in his de Re p1.6. hauing difputed fufficiently of the nature. of gocd, 
and affirmed that he held it too great a theame for any mans difcourfe to containe , faith thuss . 
But O you happy men,let us leane to fay what is good untill another time: For I hold it utter! y inCOM= 
prebenfible of mans minde. But my defire at this time is to expreffe what the fon of this reads owbich 
4s moft like to good it felfe:If youwil I wil proceed, sf not let it alone. Ther Glancus replied thdt hee 
fhould goon with the fon and leauc the father till another time. So he proceeds to difcourfe of 
the birth , and fonne of dod ', and after fome queftions, faith : that Loud, is as the fiorand the 
Son is as the light we bane from the fan. Andin his Epiftle to Hermsias he {peaketh of iugyas were 
fworne to fit ftudies;and(the Mufes sya dl God;the guide & father of al things paft, 
and to come, And in his Epiyomis hee faith that by that moft diuine Word , was the svorld and 
al therin created, This word, did fo rauifh the wife man with divine loite,that he conceiued.the 
meanes of beatitude. For many fay that éy, is meant of the ord,not of the world , and fo wee 
haue vfed itin the eighth book, {peaking of Plato's opinion of beatitude. So that Plato menti- 
ons the father and the fort exptefly,mary the third he thought was indecldreable. Thonph. hee 
hold tharip the degr&s of Diuinity,the foule of the world, the third proceedeth fromthe be- 
ginning,and the begininnings fonne, AZens. which foule(if one would ftand for PLete) might 
eafily be defended to be that Spirit that mooued upon the waters, which they feeme todiffule 
through the whole inaffe , andto impart life and being to euery particular. And this is the 
Trine in diuinity of which he writeth to Diony/iws anigmatically,as him-felfe faith. Alzhinges 
are about the King of al,and by him haue exiftence:the {econds about the fecond, and § thirds 
about the third. { omis to write what Trifmege/Fus faith,&¢ Jamblichus from him: we are all for 
the Flatonift:but I cannot omitte Serapés his anfwer to Thules(the King of Egipt in the Trojan 
wars)who inquyring of him who was moft bleffed,had thisanfwer. _ 


ac we NN ia, 14 
reste Bier, Firft God and then the fonne,and next the Spirit, eas, 
acute radiarciz.ée, | Ail coéternall,one in a&,amd merit. i Ally ‘his 
b)T he fon\P orphyry (explaning Plato's opinion,as Cyril faith againht [#/an)puts three effence 

th ese od almighty. A the (3 eae 3, the feale of the world : nor.is = deity eel 

any furcher, Péete & he both,cal the Creator sazgids'vis, the fathers intelleit,W the Poets(though 
obfcurely touch at,calling Ainernasi@-rév, borne without amother,the wifedom Sa 

forth out of the fathers brain.(e) Plorine} he wrote a book of the three perfons or fubftances: §. 

firft hee maketh abfoluce , and father to the fecond , that is alfo eternall and perfect. plotige, 
Hee calleth the father ;AZens alfo in another place , as Plato doth :. but the: word. ‘arpfe 


~ from him: For hee fayth (De pronid. lib,2.)in the begining all this whole vninet{e was created 


by the CAfens (the father ) and his ¥orde. (d ). A line | religion tyeth vs to hane.a,care 
Ll, | "Show 


392 , SAINT. .AVGNVSTINE. | Cwar.24. 
Sabellians, how wee fpeake herein. (¢) Sabellians | They faid chat the perfon of the father ,and of the Son 
lo, 44° = wasall one,becaufe the {cripture faith : and the Father am one 7 ee, 


Of the true onely beginning that purgeth andrenucth 
_ _ manswholenatwre. Cwarn2g. 2 
BY Porphyry beeing flaue to the malicious powers (of whome hee was afha- 
*med,yet durft notaccufethem ) would not conceiue that Chréft was the be- 
Pride bare génning,by whofe incarnation wee are purged , but contemned him in that flefh 
rethone which he aflumedto bea facrifice for our purgation,not apprehending the great 
trom lish facrament ,becaufe of his diuell-infpired pride, which Chré the good Mediator 
tery ofre- by hisowne humility fubuerted,fhewing him-felfero mortals in that mortal ftate 
— danpuon. which the falfe Mediators wanted , and therefore infulted the more ouer mens 
wretcheds foules : falfely promifing them fuccors from their immortality. But 
our good and true Mediator made te apparant , that it was not the fethly fub- 
ftance,but finne that is euil : the flefh and foule of man may be both affumed,kepr, 
and putte off without guile , and bee bettered at therefurre&tion. Nor is death, 
though it be the punifhment of finne(yer payd by Chréf for our finnes ) to bee a 
noyded ‘by finae , but rather, ifoccafion ferue, tobecindured for iuftice. For 
chrifts dying , and that not for his owne finne,was of forceto procure the pardon 
ofall other finnes. That hee was the beginning, this Pleton:/t did not vndeérftand, 
elfe would hee haue confefled his power ip purgation. For neither the fleth 
nor the foule wasthe beginning , butthe word al creating. Nor can the fleth 
purge xs.by ic felfe,but by thac word that aflumed it, when the word became  flelb,ce 
| dweleinas. For hee {peaking of the myfticall eating of his fleth (and fome that vn- 
Jori4e derftood not becing offended at it, anddeparting , faying : This és « bard faying, 
106.60. whocanbeare it?) Anfweredto thofe that ftaid with him: Jt #s the /piris that quick- 
neththe fle[b profiteth nothing. Therforethe beginning , hauing read flefh and 
foule, mundifieth both inthe beleeuer. And fo when thé Iewes asked him whe 
hee was. hee anfwered them, that hee was the ( 4) beginning , which our flefh and 
bloud beeing incumbted with finfull corruption ,can neuer conceiue,vnleffehe 
by whome wee were,and were not, doe purifie vs. Wee were men, but iuft 
wee were not. But in his incarnation our nature was, arid chat iuft, not finfull: 
This ts the mediation thathelpeth vp thofe that are falne , and downe: This is 
the feed thax the Angels fowed, by dictating the law wherein the true worthip 


» , 
oe 


10, 8.25, 


ofone God was taught and this our Mediator truly promifed. 


e ae 
Sack tt aN ew mw. om 


~ 


a ~ LVIVES. : 
° : He ( yj ) beginning | Hy apxNre eAugnstine will haue the Sonne to beea be innin at but no 
ia A othérwife then che:father ,asno otherwifeGOD, And this heé takes : tne fot, Valla 


and Erafwous fay thac xirdpxiv can be yno nowne here , but an aduerbe,as,sn the beginning. I wil 

fpeake my minde hereof briefly though the phraze be obfcure and perhaps an Hebras/me , as 
many in the new Teftamene are:Chrif? feemeth orto fay hee is the beginning: but beein 

asked-who hee was,he hauing no one word to expreffe his full nature co all their ca acities lef 

it td cach ones mindets thinke in his minde what he was , not by his fight but by his wordess 

and to ponder how orte in that bodily habite,could fpeake fuch thinges, Ic was the Deity that 

fpake in the flefh,wherice all thofe admirable ates proceeded. Therefore he faid , Jams bee in 

. the begiuning,and I fpeake to you vfing 4 meortall ee as an infirument, gining yetbno more precepts 

(\ by angels bat by my felfe. This anfwer was not vnlike that,giuen to Afoy (es; ans that Lam: but 

| be coticerned Gods fimple effence and maicfly, this was more later,and declared God in the 

femeofman. ==. ss = 7 | | 


Cnap. 


L413. 10, OF THE GITIE OF GOD 393 


That all the faints in the old law, and other ages be(ore 
& , were iustified only by the miftery, 
| and faith of Chrift. 
| es “Cuar25. | 
By fayth ofthis miftery might the ariciene Saints of God al fo bee iuttif- 
ed(together with godly life)not only before the law was giuen the hebrewes, 
(for they wanted not Gods inftructions nor the Angels ) butalfo in the very 
times of the law,though they feemed to have carnall promifes in the types of fpy- 
ritual thinges,it being therefore calledthe old Teftament. For there were Pro- 
hets then that taught the promife as wel as the Angels,and one of them was he 
whofe facred opinionof mans good,I related béfore:I¢ ss good for me to adhere v2-0L73. 38 
teGod. In which Pfalme thetwo Teftaments are diftinguifhed. For firft ,hee 7 
( feeing thofe earthly promifes abound fo tothe vngodly ) faith his (b) feete flip. 
ped,and that he was almoft downe,as ifhee had ferued God in vayne, feeing thae 
felicity that hee hoped of God was beftowed vppon the impious:and that hee la- 
boured fore to know the reafon of this,and was much troubled vntill hee entred 
into the fanQuary of God, and there beheld their endes whome hee,(in errour) 
thoughthappy. But then (¢)as hee faith , hee faw them eaft downe in their ex- 
altation, and deftroyed for their iniquity , and thacall their pompe of temporal 
felicity was become as adreame , leauing arhan when hee is awake, fruftrace of 
the.fayned ioyes hee dicamed off.. And becaufe they fhewed great here vpon 
earth,Lord (faith hee )Jn thy Cstty thou halt make their Image bee held as nothing. 
Buchow: geod it was for him to feek rhoferemporalties at none but Gods hands 
hee fheweth faying , Zwas as 4 beaft béfore thee,yet wes 1 alwaies with thee asa bea 
not dnderftanding. For 1 fhould hane'defired fuch goodes as the wicked could noe 
fhare with mee:but {eeing them abotind with goods , I thought [had ferued thee 
tono erid,when as they that hared thee inioyed fuch felicity. Yet was 1 alwaies with 
thee.1 fought no other goddesto begge thefethinges vppon. And then ic follow- 
eth, Thou haf holden me by my right hgnd,thou haft guided me by thy will and hast af- 
fanied me into glory. As ifall thac which he faw the: wicked inioy were belonging 
tothelefthand , though fceing it,hehadalmoft falne. What haue Lin heauen bat 
_ thee-(faythy he?) 4nd would 1 haue upon carth but thee’ Then hee doth checke him- 
felfe inftly, for haning fo great agoodin Heauen (as afterwards hee vnderftdod J 
and yet begging fo tranfitory,frayle and ¢arthen a thing of God here below: (4) 
Mine heart faileth,and my flelb,bus God is the God of mine heart. A. good fayling , to 
leaue the lower and eleé thie loftyer.. Sothac in another Pfalme he faych:c fy /owle PL83; 
longeth and fainteth for the Courtes of the Lord. And in another: My heart fainteth 
for thy fauing health. But hauing fayd both hearc and fleth fainteth:heereioyned ie ficthia. 
not, The God of mine'heart and fle(b, bat the God of my heart: for it is by the heart that ee a 
ehe flefh is cleainfed,( asthe Lord fayth) Clean(e that which is within,and theh that | 
which is without {halt be cleane : Thet he calleth God his portion,not any thing of 
goddes sbut him-felfe. God ss the God af my heart , and my portion for ener. Becaule 
amongft mens manifold-choyces , he chofehim only. For(e)behold(faith he) they 
that withdraw theri-felues from them, Jballperifb: ( f ) thou deftroyeft al themthat go 
awhoring fromthee,that is that make them-felues proftitute unto many god3:andthen — 
followes that which is the caufe! haue fpoken al this ofthe Pfalme: 4s for me,it 
is good for see to adhere unto GOD , not, to withdraw my felfe,nor to goe a 
_— ' ‘whoring 


on a 


a ei . 
394 SAINT AVGVSTINE. © Cwar.25. 


whoring. And then is our adherence to God perfect , when all is freed that 
fhould bee freed. But as wee are now , the hold is, /put my t7uff ix the Lord God, 
RomuB.34 for hope that is feene, is no hope,bow can aman hope for that which he feeth,fayththe 
Apoftle. But when we fee not our hope,then we expe with patience: wherein 
lette vs do that which followeth,each one aecording to his talent becomming an 
Angell , ameffenger of God, todeclare his will, and praife his gratious glory. 
That I may declare all thy workes (faith hee) ix the gates of the daughter of Sion: This 
is that ploryous Citty of God, knowing and honouring him alone : This the An- 
gells declared, inuiting vs to inhabite it,and become their fellow Citizens init, 
They like not that wee fhould worfhip them as our ele&ted Gods , but with them 
him that is God to vs both: Nor to facrifice to them : but with rhem,be a facri- 
fice to him. Doubrleffe then, (if malice giue men leane to feethe doubt cleared)al 
the bleffed immortalls that enuy vs not/and if they did ,they were not bleffed )bue 
_ rather louevs , to haue vs partners in their happinefle , are farre more fauourable 
and beneficiall tovs , when wee ioyne with them in facrificing our felues to the 
adoration of the Father , the Sonne and the holy Spérst. os 


| He sO“, VIVES. 


NV Hich (4) Pfal. 73. diuinely foluing of this queftion of the. Phylofophers : Why(one 
. God tuling all)haue the good fo often hurt , and the bad fo much good?Or Epseuras his 
Dilemma si there bea God , whence is euill?If none, whence is good? Angaftine recites fome 
verfes,and we wilbreefely interpofe here and there a word. (6) Feete flipped \or moued by the 
vnworthy cuent ,to take another way, it feeming to him to haue done {0 little goed in this, 
(¢ )Then | All things(faith the wife man ) are fecret vatil the end,bat then the goed life helps, 
and the bad , hurts:the one rewarded and the other plagued : for then all appeareth in eruth, 
(4) My beart,) A fanétified man in all his troubles and faintings of ftrength and counfell, ftill 


keepes heart-hold of God,making him his portion for euer : loofe he all thinges,, God he will 
neuer loofe, Auguftine (me thinks) applyeth this to he defect of {pirit,through the vehemene 
defire of celeftiall comfortes. For the foule will languith into much loue,and lofe all the felfe in 
entyre {peculation of that it affecteth. Or he may meane, that although all bodily meanes of 
firength or fiate,do faile a good man, yet his minde will ftil fticke firmely vnto God,and enter= 
taine 4 contempt ofall worldly wealth,and all guifts of wit,ot fortune,in refpe& of this God, 
this onely ritches,and heritage. (¢) Behold | Therefore is it good to adhere to him from whom 
who-foeuer departeth,perifheth. ( f) Thon deftroyef?.| Wee ought to keepe our foule chafte,as 
the fpoufe of God:which ifit go a whoring, after the defires and lufts of the world,negleQing 
God » hee cafteth it off asa man doth his difhoneft wife , and diuorceth it from him, And 

this is the death of che foule,to leaue the true life thereof. | Oo 


Of Porphyry his wanering betweene confeffing of 
| the his God and pin Fe of the phe ' F a 

| : | ' Crap. 26. ‘28 4, eae 

Ms thinkes Porphyry( 1 know not how) is afhamed of his Thevrgicall acquain- 

a bance. Hee had fome knowledge of good , but he durft not defend the wor- 

fhippe of one God, againft the adoration of many. Hee fayd there were fome 

Angels,that came downe and taught Theurgke praGifers thinges to come: and 

. others that declared the will of the a earth,and his alticudeand ime 

menfity. Now whether would hee haue vs fubie& to thofe Angels that declare 

chewill of he Father vyon earth , or vnto him whofe wil they declare. T’is plain, 

hee biddeth vs rather imitate them then inuocate them : why chen wee need not 

feare to giue no facrifices to thefe bleffed immortals, but referre it all freely. vnro 

: God 


. 
NN 


en eR Rn ae 


Lia.so. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 7 
God. For queftionleffe that which they know to bee due to that Godonely in 


395 


whofe participation they are bleffed,they will neuer afcribe to them-felues either | 


by figures or fignifications. This ts arrogance proper to the proud and mifera- 


ble diuels, from which thezeale of Gods fubiects and fuch as are blefledby cohe- — 


rence with him,ought to be farre feperate. To which bleffed coherence it beho- 
ueth the Angels to fauour our attaynement , not arrogating our fubieétion ro 
them, but declaring God the meane of both our coherences vntovs. Why fea- 
reft thou now(Philofopher)tocenfure thefe aduerfe powers,enemies both-to the 


trve God and true vertue ? Thou faidit but( ) now that the true Angels thatre-. 


veale Gods will,do differ from them that defcend vnto men that vfe Thexxgécall 


cortiurations. VVhy doft thou honour them fo muchas to fay they teach diuine 


thinges?How can thac be,teaching not the will ofthe Father 2(2)Thofe now are 
they whom the malicious Theurgske bound from purging the fouleofthe good 
one: VVhome hee could not loofe,for all that they defiredto be lette loofe , and 
todo him fomie good. Doubteft thou yet that thofe are wicked diuels ? Or doft 
but diffemble for feare of offending the Thesrgikes , whofe curiofity inucigled 
thee fo,that they made theee beleeue. they did theea great pleafure in teaching 
thee thisdamnable cunning? Dareft thou extoll that maliciousplague(no pow- 
er that is a flaue,and no regent ouer the enuious,aboue the ayre , into Heauen, 
and doethe ftarry goddes , or the ftarres them-felues fuch,foule difgrace as to 


place it amongft them. 


L. VIVES. > 


. . 
‘ » 


| | S aydf (a) but now } The old copiés read Diffsnxifti for Dsxifti : but the fencé is not alte- 
Ire 


dinatittle. (4) Thofe xow | Hee had fayd before that the eusll Demon hinders the 
good , that the firft muft departere the latter could come to worke effect. And of the Chal: 
dean whome another malicious fellow hindered from being purged in foule, i 


of Porphyry his exceeding Ap vleius sn mspiety. 
Crap, 27. . 

Heo w much more tollerable was the error of palezus thy fellow fetary who 
*confeffed ( {pite ofhis teeth ,forall his honouring of them ) that the diuels 
vnder the Moone onely were {ubiect to perturbation! quitting the Gods sethere- 
a#,both vifible as the Sus, Afoone,crc. And inuifible alfo from thefe affects , by all 
the arguments hee could deuife. P/ato taught thee not this chine impiety, but thy 
Chaldee maitters,to thruft vp mortall vices amongft the ether¢ad powers, that the 
gods might inftruat your Theurgéke in diuinity : which notwithftanding thou in 
thine intelleétual life makeft thy felfe excel: putting art Theurgske as not necefla- 
ry for thee, but for others thar will be no phylofophers,yet } teacheft it,to repay 


- thy maifters, in feducing thofe to it that affect not Ph aie ke holding it of 


no vfe fora Phylofopher as thou thy felfeart: So thatall that fancy not Phylo- 
Sophation , (which being hard to attayne is affected by few might by thine autho- 
rity , inquire out Thesrgskes,and of them attaine (no intelleQuall bur )a fpirituall 


purification. And becaufe the multitude ofthofe , do farre exceed the Phylofo- 


phers,thereforemore are drawne to thy vnlawfull Magicall maifters , then to 
lato’s {chooles , for this the vneleane Diuell ( thofe counterfeyt athereall 
goddes whofe meffenger thou art become ) promifed thee, that fuchas.were 


purged 


rt SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cnar.27._- 


at ee 


at er Se 
. Phi purged by Theurgy fhould neuer returne tothe father ,.but inhabite aboue the 
wWhule min, ayre amongft the ethereall goddes. But thofe whome Chrift came to free from 


thofe diuelith powers , indure not this doétrine. For in him haue they mo 
mereyfull purification ot body,foule and fpiric. For theéefore put heeon whole ~ 
man wichout finne,to cleanfe whole man from finne: I with thou hadft known but 
him,and laid che cure of thy felfe vppon him rather then vpon thine owne fraile, 
weake vertue,or thy pernicious curiofity. For hee which your owne (4)Oracles 
(as thou writeft acknowledged for holy and immortall , would neuer haue decei- 
vedthee. Of whome alfo that famous Poer faich (Poetically indeed)as vndera 
another perfon,but witha true reference to him, aaa 


(b)Te duce fi qua manent {celeris veftigia noftré | 
. | _ Irrita perpetua foluent formidine terras. 


Thy conduét all finnes markes from man fhall cleare, 
And quit the world of their eternall feare, : 


Speaking of thofe fteppes of finne(if not finnes) which by reafon of our infirmi 
may hauerefidence in the great proficients ofrighteou({nefle , and are cured by 
none but Chrift,of whome the verfe fpeaketh. For Virgil (c ) {poke it not of hime 
felfe,as he fheweth about the fourth verfe ofhis Eglogwe , where hee faith 


Virgil. Bd. Vitima Cuma el fam carminis atas: 
on | Time,and Sybilla's verfe are now new met. 


Playnly fLewing hee had it from Sybille Cumea. But thofe Theurgikes (orrather 
fiendes in the fhapes of goddes ) doe rather putrific thepurifie mens hearts ‘by 
their falfe aparitions , and deceiptfull illufion in change of formes, For how 
fhouid they cleanfe another, becing vacleane them-felues? Otherwife could they 
not be bound by the charmes of the enuious,eyther to feare to infea , or to enuy 
The Theur. to beftow the good they feemingly were aboutto dee. But ic fufficeth that chou 
a confefleft that neyther the foules intelleétuall part is made pure,nor che fpicitual, 
occleante (that is vnder the other partJeternall by art theargéke. But Chrift promifeththis. 
humiine eternity , and therfore (tothy owne great admiration , and deepe greefe ) the — 
tpt World flocketh to him (d). VVhat of that that thou canft not ceny thatthe The- 
urgikes doe often erre and draw others into the fame blindeneffe,and that it is 
a moft playne error to become fupplyant co thofe Angelicall powers? And then 
(as though thou hadft not loft thy labour in.the former affertion) thou fendeft 
fuch as liue not intellectually to the Theurgites to bee purged in the mindes 
{piricuallpart. 3 : | 


me. 2 eee eee e+ ow ee 


3 | L. VIVES. 


Our (4 ) Oracles |Ofthis in the 20. booke. (b ) Te duce | Sersius refers all this eglogue 

to the ciuill wars in e4/finins Pollte’s Confulfhip,that in his time they fhould end, and all 

the feare bee extinct. But they out-lafted him. Hee was Conful with Domsitins eEnobarbus, 

the fourth yeare of his Triymvirfhip.(c) Spoke ét nor|The whole egloguc is nothing but ie 

verfes,which being Enygmatically {fpoken of Chrift,and the time touched in certaine mifticall 

tokens , Virgill obferuing it to bee neere hand, thought they meant fome ofthe Romaine 

Princes, and fo attributes them to Saloninus Pollio's{on.(d ) What of | Or , which becaufe 

thou canft not deny,thou doft fo falter in thy do¢trine, and contrary thy felfe , chat firft chou 
teacheft that the Téturgikes Gre. And this is the better reading of the two. 


what 


[7 -~ et 


Lixo. | OFTHE CITIE OF GOD. o 397 


what per{wafions blinded Por phiry from knowing Chrift the true 
| wifdome, Cuar.28. 


Hus draweft thou men into moft certaine error, arid (4) art not afhamed 

of it being a profeffor of vertue and wifdome,which if thon truely refpeed, 
thou woldeft haue knowne Chrift the vertue, and wifdome, of god the father, 
and not(é)haue left his fauing humility for the pride of vaine knowledg.Yet thou 
confeffeft that che vertue of (¢) continence oncly, without Theerzy,and with 
thofe Tedete ( thy frucleffe ftudies is {ufficient to purge the-foule fpiritwally. And 
once thou faidft that the Te/ete eleuate not the {cule after dcath as they donow, 
nor benefit the {piricuall part of the foule after this life : and chis (4) thou toffeft, 
and tumbleft , onely (1 thinke ) to fhew thy felfe skilfull in chofe matters , and to 
pleafe curious eares , or to make others curious. But thou dof wellto fay this 
art is dangerous both(e) for the lawes againftic, and for che( f)) performance 
of it. Iwouldto God that wretched men would heare thee in this,and leaue the 

ulfe,or neuer come neare it,for feare of being fwallowed vp therein. Ignorance 

(thou faift) and many vices annexed therevnto, are not purged away by any Te-_ 
fese but only by the fathers intelle@ his Asews, chat knoweth his will. But that this 
is Chrift thou beleeueft not: concemning him for affuming flefth ofa woman; for 
being crucified like a fellon, becaufe thou chinkeft ic was fit that che eternall wil 
edome fhould contemnethofe bafe things , andbe imbodied ina moft eleuated 
fubftance.I but he fulfills that of the prophet,/ will deftroy the wifedome ofthe wife, t.Cor, 
and cast away theunderftanding of the prudext. Kee doth not deftroy his wifdome Elay.3 35 
in fuch as bee hath given it vnco, but, thac which others afcribe to themfelues, : 
who hauenone of his,and therefore the Apoftle followes the propheticall refti- 
mony,thus, where is the wife? Where és the Scrtbe >? where is the ( g ) difputer of the +. 
world?hath not God made the wifedome of this world fools[bwe(fe?tor fecing the world deans cide 
by wifdome knew not God in the wifdome of God, it pleafed God by the foo- word feo. 
lifhneffe of preaching to {aue them that beleecue. Seeing alfo thatthe Iewes re- Es 
quire'a figne ,and the Grecians feeke after wifdome. But we preach Chrift cru- 
cified,a ftumbling blocke vntothe ewes, and foolifhneffe vnto the Grecians. But 
unto them that(h)are called both lewes and Grecians we preach Chrift the power, and 
wifdome of God: for the (2) foolt{bneffe of God ss wifer then men, and the weaknefe 
of Godis flronger then men. This now the wife and {trong in their owne conceit 
do account as foolith , and weake.But this is the grace that cures the weake , and 
fuch as boaft not proudly of their falfe happinefle, bur humbly confeffe their 


truemifery. - | 


—~ 


ed ees 


~ 


L. VIVES. 


Rt not-(a)afoamed. An old phrafe in the latine,malum non te pudet.(b) Hane left. \For he 

was fir{t of our religion, and afterwards fell from it, and railed ac it like a mad man. (¢) 
Continence.\ De abft.animal.Continence and frugality eleuate the foule and adioyne it ynto 
God, But Pétto is farre more learned ahd elegant vpon this poynt in his Charmides : thewing 
that temperance purgeththe mind , andis the onely cure of an infected confcience , thatno 
other enchantments can cleanfe the foule from corruption. (4) Toffe/t.| Porphyry is moft ab- 
furd in his Tastologies, as wee may fee in that common booke of his de predicabilibus. (e) Fer 
the Lawes. | Plato torbad it,and the ciutll lawes do {0 alfo, fb | tains f) Performance. | Being 


dangerous ifie be failed in:for the Deuils will be angry,and doe the vnpertect magitian muc 
| Mm . -mifchiefe 


\ 
aE CCT 


38 —~Cté«‘ SAINT AVGVSTINE Cees 


mifchiefe,as many horrible examples haue teftified : for they loue perfect impiety, from which 
there is no regreffe vnto sang Tieeestes they terrifie men therevnto.(¢)Ds/puter |\Philofopher, 
and naturali{t, eSsni74s, andis referred to the Philofophers immoderate ianglings. (4) (alled] 
To godlineffe and piety , and made Cittizens of God, (4) Foolifhnef[e | Uulgarius calles the 
croffe foolith ,becaufe it feemed fo : yet is it wifer then men; for the Philofopherskept a ftirre 
about trifles and fuperfluities , whileft the croffe produced the worlds redemption . And the 
deity feemed weake in beeing nailed to the croffe : yet is it farre more ftrong then mén: 
not onely becaufe the more wee fecke to fuppreffe it, the more it mountcth and {preadeth, 


ut alfo becaufe the ftrongeft deuill was bound and crufhed downe by CHRIST in chat 
weake forme. | . 


Of the Incarnation of ourLord lefus C hritt,which the imptous 
Platonifts hame to acknowledge. 


| — Cuap.29. 


Kine teacheft the Father and his Sonne, calling him his intelle@ , and their 

'& meane( by which wee thinke thou meaneftthe holy /pirit ) calling them af- 
ter your manner, three Gods. Wherein though your words bee extrauagant, 
yet you haue a little glympfe of thar we muft all relye vpon. But the incarnation 
of the vnchangeable Sonne ,that faueth vs all, and bringeth vs a'lco that other 

_ which we belecue and relie vpon,that you fhame to confefle. You fee your true 
country (though along,long way off ) and yet you will not fee which way to get 
thether. Thou confeffeft that the grace to vnderftand the deity, is giuen toavery 

.. few. Thou faieft not, few like it,or few defire its but, is given toa few: fully con- 

-__ feffing the euift of it to lye in Gods bountie , and not in mans fufficiencie . Now | 
thou playett the true (4 ) P/stonif? and {peakeft plainer, faying, That no man én this 
life can come to perfection of Wifdome : yet that Gods grace and prouidence doth 
fulfill all chac the vnderftanding lacketh;in the life to come.O hadft chou knowne | 
‘Gods grace refident in Jefus Chrit our Lord! O that thou couldft haue difcer- | 
ned his affuming of body and foule to bee the greateft example of grace that 
euer was ! But what? in vaine doel fpeaketo the dead: Butas for thofe that 
efteeme thee for that wifdome or curiofitie in artes,vnlaw full for thee to learne: 
perhaps this fhall not be in vaine. Gods grace could neuer bee more gracefully ; 
extolled,then when the eternall fonne of God, came to put on man , and made 
man the meane to deriue his loue to all men: whereby all men might come to 
him , who was fo farre aboue all men, beeing compared to them, immorrall to | 
mortall , vnchangeable to changeable , iuft to vniuft, and bleffed to wretched. 
And becaufe hee hath giuen vs a naturall defireto bee eternally bleffed , hee re 
maining bleffed and putting on our nature, to giue vs what wee defired, taught ! 
vs by fuffering to contemne what wee feared. But humility , humilitie a bur- 
then vnacquainted with your ftiffe neckes , muft bee the meane to bring you 
to credence of this truth. For what , can it feeme incredible to you ( that 
knowe fuch things, and ought to inioyne your felues to beleeucic) can it 
feeme incredible to you , that G O D fhould affume mans nature and bo- 
dye 2? you giue fo much to the intelleCtuall part of the foule ( beeing but 
humaine ) that you make ie confubftantiall with the Fathers inrelle@, 
which you confeffe is his Sonse . How then is it incredible for that Sonne 
to affume one intelleQuall foule to faue a many of the reft by ? Now nature 
teacheth vs the cehzrence of the body and the foule tothe making of a ‘full 


3 bE tke F4 


Lixo. OFTHE CITIE OF GOD. 399 


man. Which if it were not ordinary were more incredible then the other, For 
weemay the mort eafily beleeue that a {pirit may cohcre with a fpirit ( beeing 
both incor poreall,chough the one humaine, and the ether divine ) then acorpo- | 
rall body with an incorporeall {pirit. But are you offended at the ftrange child- 
birth of a Virgin ? This ought not to procure offence , but rather pious admira- 
tion,that he was fo wonderfully borne. Or diflike you that hee changed his body 
after death and refurrection into a better ,and fo carried it vp into heauen being 
made incorruptible , and immortall ? This perphappes you will nor beleeue, 
becaufe Porphyry faith fo often in his worke De regre/fu anime, ( whence I 
haue cited much) ¢hat the feule muft leane the body intirely, ere it can bee ioyned 
with God. But that opinion of his ought to be retracted, feeing that both hee and 
you doe hold fuch incredible things of the worlds foule animating the huge 
maffe of the bodily vniuerfe. For Péato() teacheth you to call the worldacrea- 
ture ,a bleffed one, and you would baueit an eterna'l one. Well then haw 
fhall ic be eternally happy,and yet neuer put off the body.if your former rule be 
truc ? Befides,the Sunne, Moone, and Starres, you all fay , are creatures , which 
all men both fee, and fay alfo. But your skill (you thinke ) goeth farther : calleth 
. them bleffed creatures,and eternally with their bodies. Why doe you then for- 
pet or diffemble this, when you are inuited to Chriftianity , which you other- 
wife teach and profeffe fo openly ? why will you not leaue your contradi@ory 
opinions (fubuerting them-felues ) for chriftianitie , but becaufe Chrii# came 
humbly,and you areall pride? Of what qualitie the Saints bodyes fhall be after 
refurre€tion,may well bee a queftion amongft our greateft chriftian doors , but 
weeall hold they fhall be eternall, (¢) and fuch as cb itt (hewed in his refurre@ti- 
on. But how-fo-euer feeirg they are taught to bee incorruptible , immortall, and 
no impediment to the foules contemplation of God,and you your felues fay that — 
they are celeftiall bodies immorrally bleffed with their foules; why fhould you | 
thinke that wee cannot bee happy without leauing of our bodies , (to pretenda 
reafon for auoyding chriftianitie ) but onely as I faid ,becaufe Chrift was hum- 
ble,and you are proud ? Are youafhamed tobee corrected in your faults 2a true 
charactcr of a proud man. You that were Plato's (d) learned {chollers, fhame to 
become Chrifis, who by his {pirit caugtr a fither wifdome to fay,/n the beginnin 
was the worde,and the word was with God,and G OD was the word. The fame was inthe — 
beginning with God: all things were made by tt and without it was made nothing (e) 
shat was made. init was life, and the life was the light of men, Aad the light fbincth 
inthe darkene/fe,and the darkne/fe comprehended it not. (f) Which beginning of 
Saint Johns Gofpell ,a certaine Plten:/t ( as olde holy (g ) Sémplicianus after- 
wards Bifhop of AdiMaine tolde mee ) fayd was fitte to bee written in letters of 
golde ,and fet vp to bee read in the higheft places of all Churches. But thofe 
proud fellowes, {corne to haue G G D their Maifter, becaufe the word became 
flefh, and dwelt invs. Sucha thing of nothing it is for the wretched to be ficke 
and wea‘e,but they muft axale them-felues in their fickeft weaknefle, and fhame 
to take the onely medicine that muft cure them : nor doe they this to rife,but to 
take amore wretched fall. | | 


L. VIVES. 


T Rue(a)? latonift |\Plato in Phad, cy Epinen,hereof already,booke the 8.(6) Teacherh]in his 
a | Mm 2 Timeans. 


é 


a A 


400 | SAINT AVGVSTINE. _ Cuar.3o 


—_——-_ — 


Timans.(c\ And fuch.\Sound,incorruptible,immortall, pertaking with the {oule in happineffe. 
diay 3.We looke for the fanionr , enen the Lord Iefus (brift who fall ehange eur vile bedy that it 
may be falbioned like unto his glorious body (xc.ver.21.(d) Learned. | What an infolent thing isit 
to boaft of wifdome? As if Plato were afhamed of his Maifter Socrates that faid, bee knew xo= 
shing?and did not glory in all his life that he was {choller to that ftone cutters fonne, and chat 
all his wifdome wharfoeuer was his Maifters ? And as if Socrates him-felfe (in Plato and Xeno- 
phon chiefe founders of that difcipline}did not referre, much of his knowledge to e4/pafia and 
Diotima his two women infiructers, ( ¢ ) That was made. } Vhe pointis fo in the greeke as we 
haue Icft it: as if che world fhould become nothing but for the care of the creator, as the Phi- 
lofophersheld. The (oleyn copy alfo poinceth it fo , buc wee muff let this alone , as now. ( f J 
Which beginnsng.| Anguftine (onfeff.lib.8. faith that hee had read the beginning of Saixt Jobus 
Gofpell. Ln the beginning was the word, In Piato,but not in the fame words.eAmelius the Pla- 
tonift faith. And this was that word,by which all things were made,that were made,yet being eter- 
nall(as Heraclitus faith ) and difpoied in their order and dignity with god (asthe other Bare 
barian held) that word was God, andwith God, and by it was all things made , andit was the life 
ana being of al! things that were made,thus faire Amelixs,calling Saint John a barbarian.But we 
teach it out of P/ato,that by the word of God were althings made, and out of Plorine thas the 
Sonne ofGod is the creator : Numerias will not have the a God to be the creator , bur the 
fecond.(g) Simplicianns.)Bifhop of Millaine,a friend of Axgufties betweene whon.e many let~ 
ters were written. He being but as yet a Prieft, exhorted,_Augu/fine,to vie his wit in the ftudy 
of holy writ. Gennad.(arolog viror slluftr. | 


what opinions of Plato,Prophiry confuted,and corretted. 
Cc HAPe3 Oo 


IF it be vnfit to corre&t ought after Peto, why doth Porphiry corteé fuch, and 
fo many of his doGrines?(«)Sure it is that P/sto held a tranimigration of mens 
foules into beatts:yet though( 6) P/eto the learned held thus, Porphsry his fcholler 
iuftly refuted him,holding that mens foules returned no more to the bodies they 
once left,but into other humane bodies. Hee was afhamed to beleeué the other, 
leaft che mother, liuing ina mule, fhould cary her fonne;but never thamed to be- 
leeue the later, though the mother liuing in fome other maid might beeccme 
her fonnes wife. But how farre better were it to beleeue the fan@ified and true 
Angels, the holy infpired prophets; him that taught the comming of Chrift, 
and the blefled Apoftles,that {pread the gofpell through the world > how farre 
more honeftly might we beleeue that the foules returne but once into their own 
bodies:rather then fo often into others?But as I faid, Porphéry reclaimed this opi- 
nion much in fubuerting thofe beftial rranfmigrations,and reftraining them only 
to humaine bodies, He faith alfo that God gaue the world a foule , that it lear- 
ning the badneffe of the corporal fubftance by inhabiting ic, might returne 
tothe father,and defireno more to be ioyned to fuch contagion. Wherin though 
heerre fomething ( for the foule is rather giuen to the body to do good by ,nor 
fhould it learne any euill but that ic doth euil,)yet herein he exceeds,correas all 
the pyr Aa houlding that the foule being once purified and placed with the 
father thal neuer more fuffer worldly inconuenience.Wherhe ouerthrowes one 
great Plstoni/me:viz.that the dead are continually made of the liuing & theliuing 
ofthe dead:prouing that(c)P/etonical pofition of Virgsil falfe , wher bee faith that 
the foules being purified. &fent vntoth’ E4/ian fields( vnder which fabulous name 


they 


_ --s ee mee _ 


~~ 


ce A re a 


Linto, OF THE CITIE OF GOD. hor. . 


they figured the ioyes of the bleffed) were brought to drinke of the riuer Lethe... 
that is to forget things pat. | : ia ea 


Scilicet immemores fupera vt conuexarenifent — 
Rur{us & incipiant in Corpera velle résertt. | 
The chought of heauen is quite out ofthe brayhe: 
Now gin the with to line onearthagaine, =’ 


Porphiry iuftly difliked this,becaufe it were foolifh to beleeue. thatsmien being in 

that life which the onely affurance of eternity maketh moft happy, fhould defire 
to fee the corrupton of mortality,as if the end of purification were ftill to returne 
to new pollution , for if their perfe@ purification requirea forgerfulneffe of all 
euills:and chat forgetfulneffe produce a defire in them to be imbodied againe,and 
confequently to bee againe corrupted, Truely the height of happyineffe, hall be 
the caufe of the greareft vnhappynefle : the perfeion of wifdome the caule of 
foolifhnefle,and the fullneffe of putity, mother Vnco impurity. Nor can the foule 
ever be blefled,being ftill deceiuedin che bleffzdaeffe : to be bleffed it muft be f{e- 
cure : to be fecure it muft beleeve it fhalbe euer bleffed,and that falfely, becaufe ie 
muft fometimes be wretched: wherefore if this ioy muft needs rife of a falfe caufe, 
how can it be truely ioyfull 2 This Prophiry faw well, and therefore held thatthe 
foules once fully purified returned immediatly to the Father, leaft ie fhould bee 
any more polluted withthe contagion ofearthly and corruptible affe@s. 


L, VIVES. 
S Vre (a) it se. Plato, Pythagorizing , held that the foules after death paffed into other bo 
dies [n his Tameus, ani his lat de Repub. and in his Phedrns alfo, in which laft hee pros 
pounds the neceflity of the e4draj/tian law , commanding euery foule, that hath had any true 
{peculation of God to paffe ftraight to the fuperior circle without impediment: and if it per- 
fever there , then is it to become bleffed eternally , continuing the former courfe., but ifie 
change that, and fall vnder the touch of punifhment, then muftit returne to a body. And ifit 
haue come to thofe aforefaid degrees, then the knowledge maketh it a Philofopher, the next 
degree vider it,a King, Emperour , or valiant nan :the third , a magiftrate , or the father of a 
family : the fourth , a Phifitian or chirurgian :che filt , aPrieft or a Prophet ; the fixth,apoet, — 
the feauenth atradefman,or an husband man : the eight, a Sophifter,or guilder,the ninth a ty- 
rant. Thus do foules paffe vnto life and pafling that well,are exalted, if not depreffed, for it is 
10000, yeares erethe foule returne to his firit {tate t ho foule recouereth his broken wings 
before chat tme, but hee chae hath beene a true Philofopher;for he that paffech three courfes 
fo , fhall bee reinftalled at 3.006. yeares end.-for the reft,fome of them fhall bee bound ynder 
the earth in paines, and others inuefted with bliffe in heauen, at the prefixed time of iudg- 
ment, but all {hill rerurne to life after a 0 0 ©. yeares , and each one fhall haue his choice, a | 
that fome that were men before,become beafts,and forne that were beafts before,men,iffo bee | 
chat they were ever men before : for that foule that newer looked vpon truth, fhall neuer haue | 
mans forme. This is Pltoni{me. Now Plato {peaking of thefe choices, in his laft de repub, faith 
that their election ftill followeth the fafhions of their former liues. So shat Orpheus his foule 
chofe a {wan to liue in,nor would become a woman for his hate of them. Thamsiris foule went ° 
into a hightingale , and a fwans foule went into a man : ef fax into alion , Agamemnon into | 
-an eagle,and 7 herjites into ani ape. ( 6) Plato. \ Some read, Plotine. Prophyry writes that in the 
tenth yeare of Gallients his raigne hee came into Italy, Plorsne being then fifty yeares of age, 
and that hee heard him fiue yeares. And Plotine was a dire&t Platom/? in this theame of tranf{- 
migration of foules. So chat both theirznames may well berecited in the text. (¢) Platonicall.] 
Plato de Rep.li.19.faith,that the ate go into the lethean field,wherein groweth nothing and there 
they all ly downe and drinke of the riner eAmelita, and thofe that drinke largly, forget al things. 
oo Mm 3 ( Amelita, 


402 


Amelita, 


x 


-?. SAINT AVGVSTINE:. C uar.3t 


(Amelita indeed is obliuion,or negleét of things paft,) this done they fall a fleepe,and about 
mid-night, a great thunder awaketh chem, and fo they returneto life. Anchifes in Uirgill 
{peakcth of thefe in this manner. 7 : 
Has omnes ubi mille rotam voluereper annos, 
Letheum ad flauivm Deus enocat agmine magne, - 
Scilicet immemores,OC.. - | 
And when the thoufand yeares are come and gone, _ 
God calls them all to Letbe,euery one, 


So they forget what is paft;and refpeétnot what isto come: and this they doe not willingly 
but ofnecefity, : aaa se 


—"' UAgainft rhe Platonifts holding the foule cotter all with God. 
‘PVealtogether erronious was that opinion of fome Pistoniffs importing the 
*continuall ands) neceflary renolution of foules from this or that, and to it 
againe: which if ic were tru¢, what would ic profit vs to know it? ynleffe the 
Pletonifts will preferre them-felues before vs, becaufe we know noc that they are 
to be. made moft wife in the next life,and bleffed by their falfe beleefe> If it bee 
ab{urd.and foolith toaffirme this,then is Porghyry to be preferred before all thofe 


tranfporters of foules from mifery to bliffe,and back againe: which if ic be true, 


then here is a Platons/refufeth Péto forthe better : and feeth that which he faw 
not,not refufing correion after fo great a maifter, but preferring truth before 
man,and mans affection. Why then doe we not beleeue diuinity in things aboue 
our capacitie,which teacheth vs that the foule is not cocternall with God, bur 
created by God ? The Platoni/ts refufe , vpon this ( feeming futficient ) reafon, 
that that which hath not beene for ever , cannot be for euer. 1 but P/sto faith 
dire&ly that both the world, and the gods , made by that great GOD in 
the world, had a beginning, but fhall hane no end, but by the will of the crea- 
tor endure for ever But they haue a (5) meaning for this, they fay this beginning 
concerned not time, but fubfticution: for (¢ )euenas the foote( fay they ) if ic 
had ftood eternally in the duft,the foore-ftep fhould haue beeneeternallalfo, yer 
no man but can fay,fome foote made this.ftep ; nor fhouldthe one be beforethe 
other,though one were made by the other: So the world ,and the God there-in 
haue beene euer coeternall with the creators erernitie , though by him crea- 
ted. Well then, put cafe the foule bee and hath beene eternall; hath the foules 
mifery beene fo alforTruly if there be fome-thing in the foule that had a tempo. 
rall beginning, why might not the foule it felfe haue a beginning alfo? And then 
the beatitude,being firmer by rriall of euill, and to endure for ever, queftionleffe 
had a beginning,though it fhall neuer have erd.So then the poficion that nothing 
can be endleffe that had a temporall beginning , is quite ouer-throwne. For the 
bleffedneffe of the foule hatha beginning buc ir fhall never haue end. Let our 
weakneffe therefors yeeld vnto the dinine authoritie,and vs truft thofe holy im- 
morrtalls in matter of religion, who defire no worfhip to them-felues,as knowing 
all is peculiar to their and our God: nor command vsto facrifice but vnto him 


" to whom (as I faid often ) and muft fo ftill) they and wee both area facrificeta 


be offered, by that prieft chattooke our manhood.and in that this priefthood vp- 
on him, and facrificed himfelfe euen to the death forvs. _ a 


LVIVES. 


L. VIVES. 


; Nd (a) meceffary] Plato fubieéts the foule both in the bod y, and without the body ynto 
the power of the fates,that after the reuolution of life,death muft come:and after the pu- 


‘rification ofthe foule,life againe:making our timein the body,vncertaine,but freeing vs from 


‘the body a 1000.years. This reuolution they held neceffary becaufe God creating but a fetnii- 
ber of foules in che beginning the world fhould otherwife want men to inhabite it, it being 
‘fo eternal,and we fo morcall. This, Vsrgi/l more exprefly calls a wheele, which bein © once tur- 
ned about, reftores the life that it abridgedsand another turning, taking it away againe,both 
bring things to one courfe . This from death to death, that, from life to life - but that worketh 
by deathjand this by life. (6). A meaning] It is well knowne that Plato held that God created 
the world, But the queltion is,whether it began temporally,fome yeares ago,or had no tem- 
porall beginning. ‘Plutarch , Atticus, and Senérus held that Plato's werld had a beginning 
remporall,but was neuer to haue end : But (rantor,Plotine,Porphyry,lamblichus, Proculus and 
Macrobins (all Platoniffs)choughe that it neuer beganne, nor neuer fhould haue end. So doth 
: Cenforinus,adioyning this aad Pythagoras his opinion in one, for Plato, Py:hagorized in all na 
-turall queftions . This Citeré, Iuffine Martir aud Boetins doe fubicribe vnto alfo , Plato 
(faith Apuleins de deo. Socrat.)held all thefe godsto bee true , incorporeall liuing and eternal: 
hauing neither beginning nor end. Yet Apsleius in his Dogma Platonis, athrmes that Pla- 
te taught vncertainely concerning the worlds beginning , faying one while, it had an origi- 
‘nall , and another while , it had none. (¢) Ewen as | Our Philofophers difputing of an 
“effet that is coequallin time and beeing with the cdufe , compare thein to the Sunne and the 
‘Suones light. =. 


Of the uninerfall way of the foules freedome; which Porphyty foaght 
amiffe,and therefore found not:that onely Chrift hath de- 
- os claredit. Cuarp. 32, | 


for no where els is it found buc herein. This is the(z)Kings high way that leads 
tothe ecternall dangerlefle Kingdome, tono temporal! or tranfitory one. And 
whereas Porphyry faith in the end of his firft booke, De regre/fs anime , that there 
isno one fect yet, either truely Philofophicall,(b) Indian or Chaldzan that teach- 
‘eth this vniuerfall way : and that hee hath not had fo much as any hiftoricall rea- 
ding of it,yet hee confeffeth that fuch an one there is,but whatic is hee knoweth 
not./So infufficiene was all chat hee bad learnt, to direct him to the foules true 
freedome and all that himfelfe held , or others thought him hold: for he obfer- 
ued the want of an authority fic for him to follow ) But whereas hee faith that 
nofe&ofthetrue Philofophy euer had notice of the vniuerfall way of the foules 


THis is the religion that containes the yniuerfall way of the foules freedome: 


_freedome,he fhewes plaine that either his owne Phylofophy was nor true, or els 


that ic wanted the knowledge of this way,and then, ftill,how could itbe true? for 
what vniuerfall way of freeing the foules is there but that which freeth all foules, 
and confequently without which noneis freed? But whereas he addeth Indian 
or Chaldzan, he giues a cleare teftimony,that neither of their doctrines contai- 
ned this way of the foules freedome-yet could not he conceale,but is til a telling 
‘vs that from the Chaldxzans hadheethe diuine oracles. What vniuerfall way 
then doth hee meane, that-is neither receiued in Philofophy nor into thofe Pa- 
gan difciplines that had fucha ftroke with him in matters of diuinity, (becaufe 
indeed with them did the curious fond fuperftition; inuocation of all Angells) 
and whichheneuerhadfomuchasreadof? 4 a 
| SO Mm 4 Whar 


Toca. OF THECITIEOF GOD.  —>4o3_— 


Plato’s opi= 
Tron ot the 
Worlds cree 
ation. 


‘ 


The Kings 


high way, , 


—————<—<—<—_—_$ 
404, | SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cwar.32 


What is that vniuerfall way , not peculiar to every perticuler nation but com- 
* mon to(c) all the world and giuen to it by the power of God 2 Yet this witty Phi-. 
lofopher knew that fome fireh way thers was. For hee belecues not that Gods 
prouidence would leaue man-kinde without a meane of the foules freedome.He 
faith nor,there is no fuch, but that fo great and good an helpe is not yet knowne 
to vs,nor vnto him: no meruell : for Prophyry was yet all (d) for the world, when 
chat vniuerfall way of the foules freedome, chriftianity, was fuffered to be oppo- 
fed,by the deuills and their feruants earthly powers,to make vp the holy number 
of Martires (¢) chat is,witneffes of the truth , who might fhew that all corporal 
tortures were to be endured for aduancement of che truth of piety. This Porphyry 
faw,and thinking perfecution would foone extinguith this way, therefore held 
not this the vniuerfall not conceiuing that that which he ftucke at, and feared to 
endure in his choice , belonged to his — commendation and confirmation, 
This therefore is chat vniue.fal way of the foules freedome,that is granted vnto 
all nations out of Gods mercy,the knowledge whercof commeth,and is to come 
vnto all men: wee may not,nor any hereafter, fay, why (f) commeth it, fo foone, 
or , why fo late, forhis wifdome that doth fend it, is vnfearcheable vnto man. 
Which he well perceived when he fayd,it was not yet receiued,or knowne vnto 
him : he denied not the truth thereof, becaufe heas yet,haditnot. This] fayis 
_ the way chat will free all beleeuers, wherein 4braham trufting, received that di-- 
Gene&22 wine promife, in thy fede fballall the nations bee blefed. Abraham was a Chaldz- 
an,but for to receive this promife,that the feede which was difpofed by the An- 
gells inthe mediators power, to giue this vniuerfall way of the foules freedome 
vnto all nations,he was commanded to leaue his owne land and kinred,and his fa- 
thershoufe. And then was hee firft freed from the Chaldzan fuperfticions,and 
ferued thetrue God,to whofe promife he firmely trufted.This is the way recor- 
ded in the Prophet. God bee mercifull unto us and bleffe vs :andlbew us the light of 
Pialm.60 5s countenance and bee mercifull unto vs.That thy way may be knowne upon carth:thy 
fauing health among all nations.Andlong aftcr.brahams {eede beeing incarnate, 
Iohn 14 Chrift {ayth of himfelfe , 147 the way, the truth andthe I:fe. This is the vniuerfall ® 
Esy2 = way,mentioned fo long before by the Prophets. Js fhalbe in the laf? dates that the 
(g) mountaine of the houfe of the Lord {balbe prepared inthe toppe of the mountaines, 
and {balbe exalted aboue the hills and all nations fbaliflie unto st. And many people 
flall goe and fay , come let vs goe uppe to the mountaine of the Lordso the houfe of the 
God of lacob,and hee will teach us his way, andwee will watke therein. For the lawe 
fball goe forth of Syon,and the word of the LOK D from lerufalem . This way there- 
fore isnot peculiar to fome one,nation but commontoall. Nor did the law, 
and word of God ftay in Ierufalem ,or Syon, but come from thenceto ouer- 
{pread all the world. Therevpon the mediator being rifen from death fayd vnto 
his amazed and amated difciples. A/ things muff be fulfilled which are written of mee 
én the law,the Prophets and the Pfalmes. Then opened hee their vnderftanding,thae 
they mighe vnderftand the {criptures, faying, thus 1 behooued CHRIST to fuffer 
and torife againe from the dead the therd day: and that repentance and remi(Gon of 
finnes flould be preached in h:s name among fl all nations beginning at lerufalem. This 
then is the vniuerfall way ofthe foules freedome , which the Saints and Prophets 
(becing at firft buta fewe as God gaue grace, and thdfe all Hebrewes,for that e-. 
ftate was in a (4) manner confecrated ) did boch adumbrate in their temple, facri- 
fice and Prieft-hood , and fore.told alfo in their prophecy , oftenmiftically , and 
fome-times plainely . And the Medsator himfelte and his Apoffies , reuealing the 
| ; : prace 


Luk.24 


i” @ 


23 28 f= 


iow 


Lix.10. | OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 
grace of the new teftament , made plaine all thofe fignifications, that fuecefle of 
precedent times had retained,as it pleafed God, the miracls which I {poke of be- 
fore cuermore giuing confirmationto them. For they had not onely angelicall 
vifions ,and faw the minifters of heauen ,but cuen thefefimple men relying 
wholy vpon Gods word, caft out deuills,cured difeafes ,() commanded wild- 
bealts, waters, birds,trees,elements,and {tarres,raifed the dead.I except the mi- 
racles,peculiar co our Sauiour, chiefly in his birth , and refurrection, fhewing in 
the firlt , che miftery of (&) maternall virginity ,and in the other the example of 
our renouation. This way cleanferh every {-:ule,and prepareth a mortall man in e- 
uery pare of his ,for immortality. For leaft that which Prophyry calls the intellea& 
fhould haue one purgation,the {pirital another arid the body another;therefore 
did our tru¢and powerfull Sauiour take all vpon him. Befides this way , (which 
hath never failed man-kinde, either (/) in prophecies,or in their (7) performan- 
ces)no man hath ever had freedome,or ever hath or ever fhall haune. And wher- 
as Porphyry faith he neuer had any hiftoricall notice of this way, what hiftory can 
be more famous thea this that lookes from fucha towring authority, downe,vp- 


- onall che wor!d? or mote faitlifull,fince it fo relateth things paft,as ic prophecy- 


eth things to come: a great part whereof wee feealready performed, which giue 
éthvs affured hope of the fulfilling ofthe reft. Porphyrynor euet a Platonéft in 
the world can contemne the prediGions of this way , (albee they concerne but 
temporall affaires)as they doe all other prophecies and diuinations of what fore 
foeuer : for them, they fay they ncitherare fpoken by worthy men ,nor to any 
worthy purpofe: true, for they are either drawne from inferiour caufes , as phi- 
fikecan prefage much (#). concerning health, vpon fuch or fuch fignes :or els 
the vncleane fpirits fore-tell che artes that they haue already difpofed of, (0) cone 
firming the mindes of the guilry and wicked, with deedes fitting their words, 
or words fitting their deedes,to get themfelues a domination in mans infirmity. 
But the holy men of this vniue:fall way of ours neuer réfpe@ the prophecyin 

of thofe things, holding them iuftly , trifles: yet doe they both know them and 


‘often fore-tell chem to confirme the faich in things beyond fence,and hard to pre- 


fent vntoplainnefle. Buc they were other, and greater matters which they , (as 
God infpired them ) did prophecy : namely the incarnation of Chrift ;and all 
things thereto belonging, and fulfilled in hisname , repentance and conuerfion 
of the will vnto God, remiffion of finnes, the grace of iuftice, faith ,and increafe 
of belecuers throughout all the wor'd, deftin@ion of Idolatry , temptation for . 
triall,mundifying of the proficients, freedom from euill , the day of iudgement, 
ref{urrection damnaticn of the wicked , and glorification of the City of GO Din 
an eternall Kingdome. Thefe are the prophécies of them of this way : many are 
fullfilled , and the reft affuredly are to come. Thar this ftre'ght way,leadingto 
the knowledge and coherence of G O D, lieth plaine in the holy fcriptures,vpon 
whofe truth it is grounded: they chat beleeue not(and thereforeknow not ) may 
oppofe this but can neuer overthrow it: And therefore in thefe ten bookes I 
haue fpoken( by the good affiftince of GOD ) fufficient in found iudgements, 
(though fome expected more) againftthe impious contradiGors, that preferre 


. their gods before the founder of the holy citty whereof weearetodifpure.The . | 
firft fiue of theten, oppofed them thar adored their gods fot temporall refpects: ({recsimas 
the fiue later, againtt thofe thar adored them for the lifeto come. It remaines the fermet 
how according as wee promifed in the firft booke,to proccede in our difcourtg 2 bookes 


ofthe ewocitties that are confufed together in this world and diftin& in oer 
| other, 


eo TRA 


\ 


5 


406 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. + Cuapga 


Catholike 
faith, 


oe ‘ » 
other, of whofe original! , progreffe and confummation, now enter to difpute,e- 
Uermore inuoking the affiftance of thealmighty. 


L.VIVES. 


Kee (4) high} or road: the Kinges , the Pretors , and the Soldiors way the lawes held 
holy, (5 ) Lndian ] The Gymnofophifts and the Brachnsans ,much recorded for admirable 
deeds and do@trine.(c ) All the world Therfore is our fayth called (atholike,becaufe it was not 
taught to any peculiar natian,as the Iewes was,but to all mankind excluding none: all may be 
foued byit,and none can without itsnor hath euery nation herein(as they haue in Pagani{me) 
@icuerail region. But for the other,the Romaines had thofe gods and this worfhip, andthe 
Grecians others : the French others from theirs, Spaine, Scythia, India,Perfia,all feuerall . Bue 
all that profeffle CHR IS T haue oneG O D,and one facrifice (4) All for the world ] Liuing 
vnder Diocletian , afore perfecutor of Chriftianity. (¢) Witneffes] wepre, ,is a witneffe.(f) 
Why commeth] Why came it not ere now Por fo, (¢) Afountaine | Some bookes , leaue out,of 
the houfe, the 70, read it r0ig:¢ xupix,&c. the monut of the Lord and houfe of onr God. (b) 
In a manner \ Ic was the beginning or feminary of Gods Church. (¢) Commanded | Some adde, 
the deuills to depart : but itis needleffc. (k.) ALaternall |The miftery is chat nothing that our 
Sauiour touched,jis (tained, or corrupted. (/) Lx prophectes] In Moyes lawe. (me) Performances] 
In our law,by Apoftles,and other holy Preachers.(%) Concerning health |Or,to befal che health, 
better.(0) ( onfirmsing | or,the rule of which they challenge to themfelues,insficting wicked afs 
fections with correfpondent effects. For they can vfe their powers of nature farre mcre know- 


ingly then we,in procuring health or fickneffe. 


Finis lib 10. 


TRE 


\ 


Sen oer 


407° 


THE CONTENTS OF THE 


eleuenth booke of the City of God. 


1. Of that part of the worké wherein the de- 
monftration of the begunings and ends of the 
swo (itties , the Heanenly and Earthly are de- 
¢ lared b . 

2. Of the knowledce of God which none can 
attaine, but throuch the Mediator betweene 
God and Man,tke Man Chriftlefus. 

3. Of the authority of the canonicall fcrip- 

tures made by the {pirit of God. 
. §. That the flate of the world is neither e- 
ternall , nor erdained’by any new thought of 
Gods, as sf be meant that after, which he meant 
net before, 

5. That we ought not to feeke to comprebend 
the infintre [paces of time or! place ere the world 
was made. | 

6. That the World and Time had both one 
beginning nor was the one before the other. 

7. Of the firft fixe dates that had merning, 
and enening ere the Sunne was made, 


8.1hat we muft thinke of Gods refting the 


Seanenth day ofter lis fix daies worke. 


9.What is to bee thought of the qualities of 
Angells according to ferjpture. 

10. Of the uncompounded unchangeable 
Trynity, the Father , theSonneand the Holy 
Spirit , one God in fubfance and quality ener 
one and the fame. . | 

11. Whether the Spirits that fell did ener 


' pertake with the Angells in their bliffe at their 


beginning. | 

12. The happineffe of the ixft , that ‘as yet 
haue not the reward of the dinine premifecom- 
pared with the firft men of Paradife, before fins 
original. - | 

13. Whether the Angells were created in 
fuch a ftate of happineffe that neither thofe that 
fellknew they fhould fall,nor thofe that perfene- 
ted,fore-krew they [bould perfener. 

14. How thrs is meant t thedexill. Hee a- 
bode not inthe truth , becaufe there isno 
truth in him. 


15. The meaning of this place. The diuell 


_finneth from the beginning. 


16. Of the different degrees of creatives, 
wherein profitable ufe and reafons order do dif~ 


cr. 
17. That the vice of malice is not natural 


| Sat againft nature , following the will not the 


| 
| 
| 


: 
| 
| 


| 


Creator in inne. 


18. Of the Leanty of this unineré, augmene 


ted by Gods ordinance,out of contraries. 
49. The meaning of that. God feperated the 
light from the darkent fle. 
20. Of that place of {cripture , [poken after 


the [eperation of the light and darkeneffe. And 


God faw the light,thae it was good. 
21. Of Gods eternall unchanging willand 
knowledge, wherin he pleafed to create al things 


in forme,as they were created, | 


22, Concerning thofe that difliked fome of 


the good Creators creatures,and thought fome 
things naturally exill. 

23. Of the error that Origen incarreth, 

24. Of the dinine Trinity ; notifying ie felfe 
(én fome part )in all the ape fy thereof. 

25. Of the tripartite dinifion of all philofa~ 
phicall difcspline. 

26. Of the Image of the Trinity, which is tn 
Some fort in enery mans nature,enen before his 
Llorification. - — 

27. Of Effence, knowledge of Effence, and 
lone of both, 

28. Whether we draw néarér to the Image of 
the holy Trinity in lowing of that lone, hy which 
we loueto bé,and to know our being. 

2g. Of the Angells knowledge of the Trinis 
ty #2 the Deity,andconfequently , of the canfes 
of things.inthe Archetype , ere they come tobe 
effetted i workes. 


“30. The perfettion of the wumber of fixe,the 


firft is compleate in all the parts. 


31. Ofthe feauenth day, the day of reftand | 


compleate perfettion. 

32. Of their optnion that held Angellt tobe 
created before theworld, = 

33. Ofthe two different fecieties of Angells, 
not unfitly tearmed light,and darkeneffe, 

34. Of the opinion that fome held , that rhe 
eAngells were ment by the fenered waters , and 
of orbers that held waters uncreated, 


408 | | Capt 


THE ELEVENTH BOOKE 
~ OF THE CITTIE OF GOD: 
Di cca degree = 2 Sarg acc 


| Of that part of the worke wherein the demonftration of the beginings andends of 
the two Citties,the heauenly and the earthly, are declared.- 


Cuap.t. 


E giue the name of the Citty of GOD vnto that fociety 
wherof that fcripture beareth wittnefle,which hath gotten 
the moft-excellent authority & preheminence of all other 
workes whatfoeuer , by the difpofing of the diuine proui- 
Is dence,not the affectation of mens iudgements. For there 
itis fayd : Glurions things are [poken of thee,thou Citty of God: 
Wy |{ andinan other place, Great és the LOR Dyand greatly to bee 
=ad pratfed,in the Citty of ourGodeuen upon his holy mountaine, 
increaling the toy of all she earth. Andby and by in the fame Pfalme: 4s wee haue 
heard [o hane wee feene in the Citty of the Lord of Hoaftes, in the Cstty of our God: God 
hath eftablilbed st for ener-and in another. The riners fireames {ball make glad theCi- 
tie of God, the moft high hath fanctified his tabernacle, God is inthe middeft of it, un- 
mooned., Thefe teftimonies ,and thoufands more,teach vs that there is a Citty of 
God, whereof his in{pired loue maketh vs defireto bee members. The earthly 
cittizens prefer their Gods before this heauenly Citties holy founder , knowing 
not that he is the God of gods, not of chofe falfe,wicked,and proud ones,(which 
wanting his light fo vniuerfall and vnchangeable,and beeing thereby caft into an 
extreame needy power, cach one followeth his owne ftate , as it were,and begs 
peculiar honors of his feruants)but of the Godly,and holy ones who fele& thetr 
owne fubmiffion ro him, rather then the worlds co them,and loue rather to wor- 
fhip him,their God, then to be worfhipped for gods themfelues. The focs of this 
holy Citty,our former ten bookes(by the helpe of our Lord & King)I hopehaue 
fully affronted. Andnow , knowing what is next expected of mee , as my pro- 
mife,véz. to difpute (as my poore talent ftretcheth)oftheoriginall, progreffe, 4 
and confummarion of the two Citties that inthis world ly confufedly together: 
_ by the affiftance of the fame God, and King of ours, I fer. pen to papersintending 
firft to thew the beginning of thefe two, arifing from the difference betweene 
the Angelical powers. | ee | 


Pfal,46 


Of the knowledge of God, which none can attaine but through the mediator bts — | 
tweene God and man, the Man Chriftlefus. Crap. 2.— 


[t isa great, and admirable thing for one to tranfcend al] creatures corpo- 
B ral or incorporail,fraile and mutable,by fpeculation;and to attaine to the Dei- 
ty it felfe, andlearne ofthat,that it made all things that are not of the diuine ef- 
fence.For fo doth God teach a man, {peaking not by any corporall creature vnto | 


_ z . him, 


= i! 


Lrytr. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. | 409” 


him,nor reuerberating the ayre betweene the eare , and the {peaker: nor by any 4 ga, 
fpiricuall creature, or apparition,as in dreames, or otherwife . For fo hee doth fpeakech 
{peake as vnto bodily eares,and as by 2 body, and by breach of ayre and diftance, "to man. 
For vifions are very like bodies. But he fpeaketh by the truth, ifthe eares of the 

minde bee ready ,and not the body . For hee {peaketh vnro the beft part of the 

whole man, and that wherein God onely doth excell him, and vnderftand a man 

in the beft fafhion,you cannot then but fay,he is made after Gods Image,beeing ~ 
neerer to Godoncly by chat pare wherein hee excelleth his others , which hee 

hath fhared with him by beafts. Bur yet the minde (a) it felfe(wherein reafon and 
vnderitanding are naturall inherents)is weakned, and darkened by the mitt of in- 
ueterate error,and diff-enabled to inioy by inherence(é) nay enen to endure thar 
immutable light, vntill it bee gradually purified , cured, and made fit for fuch an 
happineffe, therefore it muft firft bee purged , and inftru@ed by faith,co fet ic the 
furer;wherein,truth it felfe ,Gods Sonne, and God , taking on our man without 

wafting of god-head ordained that faith ,to bee a paffe (¢) for man to God, by | 

his meane that was both God and man. (4) for by hisman-hood, is he mediator, No God- 
and by man,is hee our way . For if the way lie becweene him that goeth,and the gornes waie 
place to which he goeth, there is hope to attaine it. Buc iffe) one haue no way,nor fed in tus 
know which way to goe,what booteth it to know whether to goe ? And theone- spc gas 
ly fure,plaine, infallible high way is this mediator,God and Man: God, our iour- 

nies end,and Man our way vntroit. | | 


ee or wenqernnrere~ em 
ae waeene one 0 wwe eee 


L.VIVES.. 


il a (Minde (a) it felfe| We call the minde mans pureft and moft excellent part , by which 

- wee doe vnderftand , argue, colleét, difcourfet, apprehending enn fimply,or comparing 
them : producing all artes and difciplines, managing the whole courfe of life , and inventing 
all rarities,all by the minde, (6) Nay exen to endure] So is the belt reading |‘c) For by bis]This 
isnot A«guftine,but all added by fome other,vnto the chapters end. ; - * 


Of the authority of the canonicall Scriptures made by tne fpirit 
. of God. Car, 3. 


“THis God, hauing fpoken what he held conuenienr, firft by his Prophets, then 

by himfe.fe,and afterwards by his Apoftle , made that fcripture alfo , which - 

we callcanonicall , of moft eminent authority, on which wec relie in things that Faith cons 
befall our vnderftanding,and yet cannot bee attained by our felues . For if things thincs ine : 
(4) fenfible either to our exterior or interior fence( wee call them things prefent) uis 
may bee knowne in our owne iudgements (6) wee fee them before our eyes,and 

haue them as infallible obiects ofour fence : then truely in things that fall not in 
compalfe of fence,becaufe our owne iudgements doe faile vs,we muft feeke out 

other authorities, co whom {uch things ( wee thinke)haue beene more apparant, 

and then weare totru{ft. Wherefore, as in things vifible,hauing not feene them 

— our felues,we truft thofethae haue « (and fo inall other obieéts of the fences: ) e ., 

ven fo in things mentall,and intelligible, which procurea notice or fence,in man, 
(whereof comes the word, fentence: ) that is (c) in things inuifible to our exceri- 

or fenfe, wee muft needs truft them, (4) who haue learned then of that incorpo- 

reall light,or (¢) behold them continually before him: ae 
a | | Noa | L. VI- 


410 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. — Cwang 


Senfe, : 


. To fee. 


. L. VIVES. , 2 , , 
aes (a) fenfible | That power in manor other creature whacfoeuer chat difcernesh any 
thing,is called fence.Fiue exterior fences there are, and one within,the minde,or foule,fee- 
ling fence of forrow, or of ought that the exteriors prefent,ioy, praife,glory,vertuc,vicc,hope, 


feare: of the exteriors , as thus : wee fay,what doe you thinke of this wine? this muficke ? this - 


vefture ? & of fuch amans iudgement or wifdore,Philofophy,diuinity,or policy? Thus much 
becaufe our Philofophers will not endure the minde fhould bee called fence, dueSy again 
Ang nffine. But what hath a Philofopher of our time to do with the knowledge of {peach, that 
is(as they interpret it ) with grammar ? (6) Wee fee them] So it muft be,pre fenfibus, before our 


fences, not prafentibus (¢) In things inuifble | Vitible commeth. of Videre to fee , that thatis: 


common to all the fences. Saw you ‘not what a vile fpeech hee made ? faw you euer worfe 
wine? and fo the Greekes v{e tiv. So doth Auguftine vie inuifible here, for that which is no 
obicét co any exterior fence. (d) Who bane learned | The Saints , of God their Maifter. (¢) Be- 


held) The holy Angells. a | | 
 - That the frate of the world ss netther eternall,wor ordained by any new thought 


of gods,as if he meant that after, which he meant not before. Cuar.4. 


‘@): things vifible the world is the greateft,of inuifible, God. Buc che firft wee 


fee,the fecond wee but beleeue. That God made the world, whom {hall wee 


~ beleeue with more fafety them himfelfe 2 Where haue we heard him ? neuer bet- 
ter then in the holy {criptures,where the Prophet faith. Zn the beginning God crea- 
ted beauen and earth NV as the Prophet there when he made it : no.But Gods wif 


dome, whereby hee made it, was there, and that doth infufe it felfe into holy 
foules, making Prophets and Saints , declaring his workes vnto them inwardly, 
without any noite. And the holy Angells that eternally beho!d the face of the Fa- 
ther, they come downe when they are appointed, and declare his will vnto them, 
of whom he was one that wrote,Js the beginning God created heauen and earth,and 


. who Was fo fic a witneffe to beleeue God by, that by the fame {pirit chat reaealed 


this vnto him , did hee prophecy che comming of our faith. But(«) what made. 
God create heauen and earth , then , not fooner:(b) they that fay this ro import 
an eternity of the world, being not by God created, are damnably,and impioufly 
decejued and infected .For(to exceptall prophecy) the very (c) order,difpofitt. 
on, beauty and change of the worlde ardall therein proclaimerh is felfe ro haue 
beene made(and not poflible to haue beene made, but)by God, that ineffable, in- 
uifible great one,ineffably & inuifible beanteous.But they that fay God made the. 
world,and yet allow itno temporal] but onely a formall originall, being made af- 
ter amanner almoft incomprehenfible, they feeme to fay fome-what in Gods de- 
fence from that chancefull rafhnefle , to takea thing into his head that was not 
therein before,vsz.to make the world,and to be fubie& to change of will,he be- 
ing wholy vnchangeable and fcr euer.But I fee not how their reafon can ftand in 
other refpects chiefly (d) inthat of the foule, which if they doe coeternize with 


_ God,they canneuer fhewtiow that mifery befalleth ic anew,chat was neuer acci- 


dent to it before.(e)Ifthey fay that the happineffe & mifery haue bin coeternale- 
uer,then muft they be fo ftill,8 then followes this abfurdity,chat the foule being 
called happy,fhall not be happy in this, that it forefeeth the mifery co come.If it 
doe neither forefee their bliffe nor their bale,thé is it happily a falfe vnderftand- 
ing: and that were a moft fond affertion .But if they hold that the mifery and the 
bliffe haue fucceeded each other fr6 al eternity, but that afterwards the foule be- 
ing once bleffed,returns no more to mifery,yet doth nor this faue thé from being 
céuicted that § foule was neuer truly happy beforesbuc then beginéth to enioy a 


-new,& vacertaine happines: & fo they cofeffe that this fo ftrang & vnexpedted a 


thing befals the foule then, that neuer befel it before-which new changes caufeif 
they deny y God eternally foreknew’, they deny him alfo to be the author of thas 
) happinefle 


= A 


ous . os . ona : : , EEE e “ 


Lieatt. - OF THE CITIE OF GOD. | att 


happinefle : ( which were wicked to doe.) And then if they fhould fay that hee 
hadnewly refolued that the foule fhould nor become eternally bleffed,how farre 
are they ‘from quitting him from that mutability which they difallow? But if 
shey.acknowledge , that ichad (f) atrue temporall beginning , but fhall neuer 


- hatie temporal end,& hauing once tried mifery,and gotten cleare of it,fhal neuer 


bee miferable more,this they may boldly affirme with preiudice to Gods immu- 
tabilsty of will. And fo they may beeleeue tha: che world had atemporall origi- 
nall,and yet that God did not alter his eternall refolution in creating ofit. 


a) on oe. , : — . : =a ae 


) L. VIVES. . . 
W Hat (a) made] Epicurus his queftion. (sc.de nat. deor. 1. Velleizs reafons of it. (2) T hey 
that) This is a maine doubt, mightily diuided and tofied into parts by great wittes,and 
tedious difputes. Some hold the world neuer made , nor euer ending , fo doe the Peripateti- 
gues,and many Latines (as Pliny,and Manilins ) follow them:Caro the clder faith that of the 
Egiptians fome faid it was created, but muft bee cternall,as chey(in the other booke {aid Flee 
to held. Some faid it was from eternity,but muft haue an end . Some, that God made it corrupe 
tible,yet endleffe,as preferued by the diuine effence,and thefe are Pythagorcans . Some fay it 


Whether ? 
the world 


be creatcd. 


both had a beginning and muft haue an end : the Epicareans, Anaxagoras,Empedocles andthe — 


Stoskes held this.Ot thefe Plat.de Plac.Philofo.Galen, Hisftor. Philofoph.( if that booke bee his. ) 
(lenforin.de die nat. ~Macrobins, and others doe write. Aphrod:feus ftands to -4riftotle,be- 
caufe that opinion was the moft battered at. Gales made the fences iudges of all the whole 
queftion,and becaufe wee fee the fame world, all in the fame fafhion, rherefore it was vncrea« 
ted,and muft bee eternall. For as Afanilins faith . The Father fees not one world;the Sonne ano- 
ther . Some of them that make it eternal! fay that God nade it. Some giue it no caufe of bee. 
ing , but make it caufe of it felfe, and all befides. erift. de clo mundo, (c) Order| Chance 
could not make fo fingularly an ordered worke, nor any other reafon or work-man,buc beau- 
tyit felfe could produce fo beauteous an obie¢t. All the Philofophers {chooles that {melt of 
any diuinity, held directly that nothing prooued the world to bee of Gods creating,fo much 
as the naturall beauty thereof:Plaro , the Stoskes , Cicero . Piutarch,and Arifforle were all thus 

serfwaded. (tc. de nat.de. lib. 2. (d) In that of the foule| Plato thrutts their etcrnal foules into 
bodiessas into prifons for fins comitced., (¢)/f they | They muft needs fay they were either ever 
bieffed or euer wretched, or fucceffiuely, both : whicli ifit be,the alteration of the foulcs na= 
ture mutt caufe it,pcrforce. For what viciffitude of guilt and expiation could there bee for fo 
many thoufand yeares of eternity,fo con{tant, as to make the foules now blefled and now mi- 
ferable.( f) 4 trve] Some read,a beginning as number hathsnumber begins at one,and.fo runs 
on infinitely:the great number may itil be increafed,nor can you euer come to the end of num 
ber, for it hach no end,butis iultly called infinite. | — 


That we ought not to fecke to comprehend the infinite Spaces of time or place,ere . 


the world wasmade. Crwar.s. | 


: Nd thenletvs fee what wee muft fay to thofe that make God the worlds - 


# & maker and-yet examine the time: and what they wil fay ro vs, when wee exa- 
miine them ofthe place. They aske why it was made then, and no fooner,as wee 


may aske,why was itmade in this place and in no other ? for if they imaginein- . 


finite {paces of time before the world , herein they cannot thinke thac God did 
‘nothing, fo likewife may. they fuppofe infinite {paces of place befides the world, 
wherein ifthey doe not make the Deity to reft and not operate , they muft fall to 
Epiauras (4) his dreame of innumerable worlds, onely chis difterence there wilbp, 
he makes all his. worlds of che (6) cafuall coagulation of Atomes , and fo by sheir 
parting diffolues them :but they muft make all theirs,Gods handiworkes,if a 
Bae, | : Wi 


Nn 32 


412 


@. 


SAINT AVGVSTINE Cuar.s. 


will not lethim reff in all the inter-mirable {pace beyond the world , and haue 
none of all them worlds (no more then this of ours) tobee fubie& to diffolution, 
(c) for wenow difpute with thofe that doe as weedoe,make God the incorpore- 
all Creator of all chings that are not of his owne effence. For thofe that ftand 
for many gods , they are vnworthy to bee made difputants in this queftion of re- 
ligion. The other Philofophers haue quite (d) out-ftript all the reft in fame and 
credit becaufe(chough they were farre from the truth,yer)were they nearer then 
the reft.Perhaps they will neither make Gods effence dilatable ,not limmitable, 
but(as one fhould indeed ho!d ) will affirme his incorporeall prefence in all chat 
Ipacious diftance befides the world, imploied onely in this little place (in refpe& 
ofhis immenfity ) that the world is fixt in: Idoe notthinxe they will talke fo id: 
ly. Jf they fec God on worke inthis one determinate ( though greatly dilated) 
world : that reafon thae they gaue why God fhould not worke in all thofe in- 
finite places beyond the world, let them giue the fame why God wrought noe 
in all che infinite times before the world. But as itis not confequent that God 
followed chance rather then reafon in placing of the worlds frame where it now 
ftandeth,& in no other place,though this place had no merit to deferue it before 
the infiaire others:(yet no mans reafon can comprehend why the diuine will pla- 
ced it{o: ) euen fo no moreis ic confequent , that wee fhould thinke that it was 
any chance made God create this world than, rather then at any other time, 
whereas all times before had their equall courfe ,and none was more meritori- 
ous of thecreation then another : Bucif they fay , men are fond to thinké there 
is any place befides that wherein the world is: fo are they({fay wee) to immagine 
any time for God to bee idle in, fince therewas notime beforethe eddies 
creation. 7 


. ” 


L.VIVES. 


| Sak aig (a) bis dreamse] Who held not onely many worlds, but infinite : I fhewed it elfe» 


here. (Metredorns faith it as ab(urdto imagine but ene world, in that (0 infinite a fpace,as te 
Say that but one care of corne growes i a huge field.This error Ariftorle & the Sto:kes beat quite 
downe , purting but that one for che world, which P/ato, and che wife(t Philofophers called 
ae wir, the Uninerfe. (6) (4{uall] Great adoc the Philofophers keepe about natures principles: 
Democritus makes all things of little bodies that flie about in the voide places , hauing forme 
and magnittide, ver indiuifible,and therefore called émpos, Atomses,Epicurus gauc them weight 
alfo,more then ‘Democritus did : and made thofe indiuifible diuerfly-formed things,to flie a- 
bout(of diuers quantities and weights )vp and down cafually in thé voyd and fhuffling toge- 

in diuers formes, thts produce infinite worlds, and thus infinite worlds do arife,continue 
and end, without any certaine caufe at all : and feeking of a place,without the world,we may 
not take it as we do our places , circumfcribing a body : but as a certaine continuance,before 
the world was made, wherein many things may poffibly be produced and liue.So though theit 
bee nothing without this world , yet the minde conceiueth a fpace wherein God may both 
place this,arid infinite worlds more.(c) For wee ] With the Plerensfts,he means.(d) Out ripe} 
The ancients held the P/aronsffs and Steickes in great refpect and reuerence.Cicere. 


That the world and time had both one beginning,wor was the one 
| before the other. Cuap.6. 


| if eternity and time be wel confidered,time (2) never to be extant without - 
motion, and (5) eternity to admit no change , who would not fee that time 


could not haue being before fome mouable thing werecreated;whofe motion, & 


fuccefhue 


rm 


= a 
_o— 


~~ a F 


_ p< Fe oo =s.Uh!S 
<> —~ - 
i 2 


go> *? 


a TR. SE 


es” FE 
23 a 


oe: 


ee> EE” €3- 


= Bar 
2: -s 


den 


Linsr. OF THECITIEOF GOD; —_ 


fucceffiue alceration (neceffarily following one part another)the time mi gherun 
by ? Seeing therefore that God whole eternity alters rot, created the world,and 
time,how can he bee faid co haue created the worldiatime , vnleffe you will fay 
there was fome-thing created before the world, whofe courfe time did follow? 
And ifthe holy and moft true fcriptures fay that:72 the b:-ginning God created heas 
wen and earth,to wit that there was nothing before then, becaufe this was the Be- 
ginning, which the ottier fhould haue beene if -_ had beene made before, 
thé verily che world was made with Time,& nor in Time, for that which is made 
in time,is mace both before fome Time, & after fome.Before i- is Time patt,af- 
fer ic is Timeto come :But no Time pafled before the world,becanfé nocreature 
was made by whofe courfe it might paffe. But it was made with the Time if mo- 


tion bee Times condition, as that-order of the firft fixe or feauen daies went, 


wherein were counted morning & euening vntill che Lord fulfilled all the worke 
vpon the fixth day , and commended the feauenth to vs in the miftery of fan@tifi- 
cation. OF what fafhion thofe daies were , it is cicher exceeding hard,or altoge- 

thet impofitble to thinke,tnuch moretofpeake. : 


OL VIVES. 


Bes (4) neuer) Ariftotle defined time the meafure of motion; makein g them vererly infe- Tim, 
perable. Some Philofophers define it,motion,{o doe the Stoskes.(6) Eternity) So faith Ana 
gaftene often, Boerius alfo, Nazsanzene,and others all out of Plato,thefe are his wordes. Whew’ 
the Father of this great mooneahle and cternall unimerfe,bebeld his worke,he was very well pleafed, 
refolued to make st, yet a little liker tothe Archetype. eAnd [o,enen as thss creature is immortal, 
yj hee to make the world eternali,as neare as the nature thereof would permit : but hit na- 


ture is eternall,and {quaredmot with this made worke . But hee conceined a moneable forme of eo Erernity, 


rernity , and together with ornament of the heanenly firutture , gane it this progreffine eterviall [- 
mage of eternity: which he named Time,diniding it into daits nights, monthes and lyeares:all which 
came up with heauen,and none of them were before beanen.Thus Platoia his Timens : Time(faich 
Apuleius)is the Image of eternity: but time mooneth, and eternity moneth not being naturally fixed 
and imsmoueable:towards it doth time palfe,and endeth in the perfettion therof and may be diffolued 
when the worlds creator will.Indogm.Platon, - | 


Of the firfl lixe daies that hadmorning,and enening,-re the Sanne 
ee. 4 was made. Crat.7.. | : 

‘A. S for ordinary (2) daies,wee fee they haue neither morning nor.euening bue 
AG. the Sunne rifesand fets, But the firft three daies of all,had no Sunne,for 
that was made the fourth day. And firft, God made the light ,and feuered it from 
the darkeneffe, calling itday,and darkeneffe, night : but what chatlighe was,and, 

-how it ranne a courfe to make morning and night, is out of our fence roindge; 
nor can we vnderftand it, which neuertheleffe we mutt make no queftion but be, 
leeue. (6) for the light was either a bodily thing placed in the worlds highef 
parts farre front our eye, or there where the Sunne was afterwards made:(¢).or 


els the name of “ght fignified that holy citty,:with the Angells and {pirits . . , 
‘whereof the Apofile faith: seru/alem which is dbone is our eternall mother 1 beauen; Gagné, 
Andin another place hee faith : yee are allthe children of light and the fonnes of the oe 
day:we are not fonnes of wight and darkene(fe.(d)Yet hath this daythe morneand ee =? 
uening, becaufe (¢) che knowledge of the creature, compared to.he Creators is 
but avery twilight:And day breaketh = man, when he drawech beare the — 
ge. —_ n 3 | | anc 


414 


SAINT AVGV STINE. Cuars 


and praife of the Creator.Nor is the creature euer be nighted, but when the inae 


_ ofthe Creator forfakes him. The fcripture orderly reciting thofe daies, never 


mentions the night: nor faith, sight was ,but,the enening andthe morning were the 


Knomledge 7 # day,{o of the fecond,and foon. For the creatures knowledge,of it felfe,is as ic 
 ofacea. were farre more difcoloured , then when it ioynes with the Creators, as in the 


ture, 


Godaréh 
not per{o- 
nail but 
efficient, 


arce that framedit . Therefore yeuen , is more congruently fpoken then séghe, 


yet when all is referred to the loue,& praife ofthe Creator , night becomes mor- 
ning : and whea it comes to theknowledge of it {elfe it is one tull day. When ie 
comes to the Firmament that feperateth the waters aboue and below,ic is the fe. 
cond day.When vnto the knowledge of the earth , and all things that haue roote 
thereon, ic is the third day. When vnto the knowledge of the two lights the grea- 
ter and the lefle , the fourth: when igknowes all water-creatures, foules and fi- 
fhes, it is the fifch,and when it knowes all earthly creatures , and man himfelfe it 
is the fixch day. | 


L. VIVE S. 


Rdinary (4) daies\ Coleynes coppy reades not this place fo well. () For the] The fchoole 
men Sent, 2.d:f?.24. difpute much of this. But e4nguitine calleth not the light a body 
here : but faith God made it either fome bright body , as the Sunne, or c's the contraction of 
the incorporeall light,made night,and the extenfion,day,as Bafil{aith, moouing like the Sun, 
in the egrefle making mcrning, in the i cuening. Hug.de.S Wsttore,de Sacram.lib.1.{e) 
Or els\ Aug.de genef adlit.lib. 1. (a) Yet hath} A diuers teading,both to one purpofe, (e) The 
knowledge|De genef.ad lst lib.4, Where hee calleth it morning when the Angells by contem- 
plating of the creation in themfelues( where is deepe darkeneffe ) lift vp themfelues to the 
knowledge of God : and if that in him they learne all things ( which is more certainethen all 
habjtuall knowledge) then is it day : It growes towards euening when the Angels turne from 
God to contemplate of the creatures in themfelues,burt this cuening neuer becommeth nighe 
for che Angells neuer preferre the worke before the worke man : that were moft deepe,darke 
night. Thus much out of Augufine,the firft mentioner of mornings & eienings knowledges. 


| What wee msuft thinke of Gods refting the feanenth day after his 
fixe datesworke. CouAp. 8. or 


Ve whereas God refted the feauenth day frd al his workes,& fan@tified ir,this 
isnot to be childifhly vnderftood,as if God had caken paines;he but fpake the 


‘word,and (a) by that iatelligibleand eternal one(not vocall nor temporal ) were 


all things created.But Gods reft fignifieth theirs that reft in God, as the gladgeffe 
of thehoufe fignifies thofe ¥ are glad in the houfe, though fome-thing elfe(and 
not the houfe)bee the caufe thereof. How much more then ifthe beauty of the 
houfe make the inhabitants glad, fo that wee may not onely call ir glad vfing the 
continent for the contained ; as, the whole Theater applauded, when it was the 
men :the whole medowes bellowed,for,the Oxen,butalfovfing the efficient for 
the effedt,as a merry epiftleschat is ;making the readers merry. T herfore the ferip- 
ture affirming that God refted,meaneth the reft of all chings in God,whomn he by 
himfelf maketh to reft:for this the Prophet hath promifed co all fuch as he fpeak- 
eth ynto, and for whom he wrote,that after their good workes which God doth 
in them or by chem, (ifthey firft haue apprehended him in this life by faith they 
fhalin him haue reft eternal . This was prefigured in the fanGification of the Sa- 
boath by Gods command in the old law,whercof, moreat large in due _ 


.] 
a 


. eer ES Sh 


! 


reir. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. “gts 


| L. VIVES. ae 
Bz (4) thar intelligeble | Bafl faith that this word is a moment of the will, by which wee 
““conceiue betier of things. . | oo. 


What is to be thought of the qualities of Angels, according toferiptare.C 0 ?.9 
Nov having refolued to relate this holy Cities originall,& firft of the angels 


who make a great part thereof fo much the happier in that they neuer(s) | 


were pilgrims,let vs fee what teftimonies of holy writt concerne this point. Tie 
{criptures {peaking of the worlds creation fpeake not plainly of the Angels,when 
or in what order they were created, but that they were created, the word heaner 
includeth. 4” the beginning God created heauén andearth, or ratherin the world 
Light, whereof I {peake now,are there fignified: that they were omitced,I cannot 
thinke,holy writ faying,that God refted in the feauenth day from all his workes, 
the fame booke beginning with, Js the beginning God created heauen andearth: to 
fhew that nothing was made ere then.Beginning therefore with heauen & earth, 
and earth the firft thing created , being as the {cripture plainely faizh, wich-oue 
formeand voide, light being yet vn-made,and darknefle being vpon the déepe : 


(that is vpon a certaine confufion of earth and waters.) for where light is not. 


darkneffe muft necdes be,then the creation proceeding ; and all being accompli. | 


fhed in fixe dayes,how fhould the angels bee omitted,as though they were none 


of Gods workes, from which hee refted the {éuenth day 2 This though it be not 
"omitted, yet here is it not plaine: but elfe-where it is moft evident. The three 


children fung in their himne,O al yee workes of the Lord,ble{fe yee the Lord,amongtt 
which they recken theangels. And the P/atmiff {aich: O praife God in the heanens, 
preife him in the heights: praife him allyee his angells, praife him all his hoafts ; prasfé 
him Sanne and Moone,praife lim flarres and light.Praife him yee heanens of heawens, 
and the waters that ke aboue the sane the name of the Lord , for hee jake the 
wordand they were made: he commanded G they were created : here diuinity calls the 
axgels Gods creatures moft plainly : inferting chem with the reft,& faying of all: 
He fpake the word and they were made: who dares thinke that the Azge/s were made 
after the fixe daies :Ifany one bee fo fond, hearken, this place of fcripture con- 
founds him veterly,(¢) when the ftarres were made,allmine angels praifed mee with a 
lowde voice. Therefore they were made before the ftarres,and the ftars were made 
the fourth day. what ethey were made the third day,may wee fay fo ? God forbid. 
That dayes worke is fully knowne,the earth was parted from che waters, and two 
elementstooke formes diftin@&,and earth produced all her plants. In the fecond 
day then? neither. Then was the firmament made betweene the waters aboue and 
below, and was called Heawez in which firmament the ftarres were cteated the 
fourth day./¢; Wherefore if the amge/s belong vnto Gods fixe dayes worke, they 
are that light called day;to commend whofe vnity, it was called, owe day snot thé 
firft day, nor differs the fecoud or third from this , all are but this one, doubled. 
vnto 6.0r 7.fixe of Gods woikes,the7.of his reft. For when God faid : Lee theve 
‘be light cr shere was light; if we vnderftand the angels création aright herein, they 
are made partakers of that eternall liglit, the vichangeable wifdome of God, all- 
creating namely, the onely begotten Jonne of God, With whofé light they in their 
éreation weré illuminate, and made light, & called.day in theparticipation of the 
vnchangeable light & day that #ord of God by which they 8 all things elfe were 
created.For the true light that lightneth every nfan that cometh into this world, 


this alfo ligticneth enery pure azged, = itlight, noc inic {elfe, but in God, 


Noq fem 


Tob.38.9 


416 SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuar.10 


from whom ifan Angell fall,ic becommeth impure, as all the vncleane {pirits 
are,being ne morea light in God,buc a darkneffe in it felfe, depriued of all per- 
ca fe of the eternall light: for Ewe! hath no nature; but the lofleof good, * 
that is euill. | a 


L.VIVES. 7 

| Exer were(a) pilgrims | But alwayes in their country 2 feeing altwayes the face'of the fa- 
ther.(b) When the farres} Job.38 7. So the Septuagints doe trarflate it, as itis in the text. 
(c) Wherefore if | The Greeke diuine put the creation of {pirituals, before that of things cor- 
porall, making God vfe them as minifters in the corporall worke - and fo held Fite, Hierome 
following Gregorie and his other Greeke Maifters held fo alfo , But of the Greekes, Ba/iand 
Dionyfius, ee almoft all the Latines, eAmbrofe, Bede, (affiodorns,and Anguftine in this place 
holds,that God made althings together, which agreeth with that place of Ecclefiafticus, chap. 
18.verf.t.He that lineth for ener, made althings together. 


_ Of the uncompounded unchangeable Trinity the Father the Sonne, and the Holy | 
> fpirityone God s1 fubftance and quality,euer one andthe fame. Cuav.to. 


(~).Ood therefore(which is Gog) is onely fimple,and confequently vnchange- 
* able.This good created all things , but not fimple, therefure changeable.T 

~ fay created , that is made,not begotte.For that which the fimple good begor, is 
as fimple as ic is,and is the fame that begot it. Thefe twowe call Farher and fonne 
both which with their fpirit, are one Gad: that {pirit, being the fathers and the 
fonnes, is properly called in {criptures , she holy pirst, (4 Jit is neither father nor . 
Sonne,but perfonally diftin& from both , but itis not really : for it is a fimple and 
vachangeable good with them, and coeternall. And this trinity is one God: not 
fimple becaufe.a trinity (for we call not the nature of that good, fimple, becanfe 
the fether is alone therein,or the foane,or holy chof alone, for that name of the tri- 
' witie is not alone with perfonall fubfiftance,as the (b) Sabellzans held) but ic is cals 
led fimple,becaufe it is ove in eflence & the fame one in quality ( excepting their 
perfonall relation : for therein the father hath a fonne,yet is no fonae,& the foane 
Salen isno father. (¢) But in confideration each of it felfe , the quality and 
effence is bozh one therein, as each liveth that is hath life,and is life it felfe. This 

>* ‘fs the reafonof the natures fimplicicy, wherein nothing adheareth thar can bee 
loft,nor is the continent one & the thing conteined another,as veffels & liquors, 
bodies.and colours,ayre and heate, or che foule and wifdome are: for thofe are. 

not coeffentiall with their qualities : the veffellis not the liquor, nor the body 

the colour,ner ayre heate,nor the foule wifdome : thereforé may they all loofe 
thefe adiun&s,and affume others: the veflel may be empty, the body difcoloured, 

the ayre cold, the foule foolifh. But (d) the body being one incorruptible( as the 
faints fhallhaue in the refurrection ) that incorruption it fhall neuer loofe, yet is 

not that incorruption one effence with the bodily fubftance. For itis alike in all - 

- parts of the body, all are incorruptible. Bucthe body is greater in wholethenin | 

- partand the parts are fome larger, fome leffer, yet neither enlarging or leffening 
the incorruptibility. So then(e)the body being not entire in it felfe, & incorrup. - 
tibilicy being intire in it felfe,do differ : for all parts of the body haue inequalitie 

in themfelues,but none in incorruptibility. The finger is leffe then the hand, but 
neither more nor leffe corruprible then the hand : being vnequall ro themfelues, 
their incorrupribility is equall.And therefore though incorruptibility be the bo- 

dies infeperable inherent, yet the fubftarce making the body , & the quality mak- 

ing it incarruptible,are abfolutely feuerallAnd {0 it is in the adiun@ aforefaid of 


Vnitie in 
trirutre, 


i OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 


the foule, though the foule be alwaies wife, ( as it fhall bee when ic is deliuered 
from mifery to eternity )chough it be from thence evermore wife yet it is by par- 
ticipation of thediuine wifdome,of whofe fubftance the foule is not.For though 
the ayre beeuer light, ic followeth nor chat the lizht and the ayrefhould beall 
one. (I fay not this/ f Jas though the ayre were a foule as fome tliat (¢) could hot 
concefue an vncorporal nature,did imagine.But there is a great {imilitude in this 
difparity : fo chat one may fitly fay,as the corporeal ayre is lightned by the cor- 


"7 


poreal light, {0 is the incorporeal foule by gods wifdomes incorporeall light,6< _ 


as the aire being depriued of that light,becomes darke, ( 4) corporeall darknefle 
beingnozhing but aire depriucd of light,fo doth the foule grow darkned,by wane 
of the light of wifdom) According to this then, they are called fimple things, that 
are truely and principally divine, becaufe their eflence and (7) their quality are 
indiftin@,nor do they partake of any deity, fubftance,wifdome,or beatitude, but 
are all entirely them-felues. The feripture indeed calls the Holy Ghoft, the 
manifold fpirit of wifdome, becaufe the powers of ic are many : but all one with 
the effence; and all included in one,for the wifdome theredfis not manyfold, bue 
one, and therein are infinite and vnmeafurable ( & ) treafuries of things intelligi. 
ble, wherein are all the immutable and infcrutable caufes of al things, both vifi- 
ble,and mutable,which are thereby created:for God did nothing vnwittingly,(/) 


“ie were difgrace to fay fo of any humaine artificer. Butif he made all knowing, 


then made hee but what hee knew. This now produceth a wonder, but yet a 
truth in our mindes : that the world could not be vnto vs , but that itis now exe 


ane : but it could not hauebeene at all (2s) buc chat God knew ic. 


ee ne ee ee 


see L. VIVES. 
I T is (a)Neither.] Words I thinke ad litele to religion , yet mult we haue a care tokeepe the 


old path and receiued doftrine of the Church , for diuinity being fo farre aboue our reach, Redigioia 
how can wee giue it the proper explanation ? All words , are mans inuention for humane vies, phralese 


andno man may refufe the old approued words to bringin newof his owne inuention ; fu¢ 
when as proprieties are not to be found out by mans wit,thofe are the fitteft to declare things 
by,that ancient vfe hath left vs, and they that haue recorded moft part of our religion. This I 
fay for that a fort of {matteribg rafh fellowes impioufly ptefume to caft the old formes 
of fpeach at their heeles,and co fet vp their own maifters-fhips, being proffly ignorans both ity 
the matters and chest bare formes , and will haue it lgwfull fer them, at their fond likings to 
frame or fafhion the phrafes of the fathers in matter of religion, into. what forme they liftlike 
anofe of waxe.(b )Sabehians. Of them before. The held no perlorisin the Terity, (¢) But i 


confideration. \The Bruges copy reads it without the fentence precedent in the copy that Vines = 


commented ypon, and {fo doth Paris,Lonaines.and Bafills all \(d ) The body. | Prouing aeci= 
dents both feparable and infeparable to be diftinét from the fubftance they do eins vtito.(e) 


The body being not.) The body confifts of parts: it cannot {tand without theih, combined and 


coagulate in one: the hand is not the ra his whole, nor the thagnitude : yet the iricar+ 
ruptibility of the hand is. no part of the bodies incbrriiptibilicy , forthis is not diuifible, 
though it be in the whole body; but fo indiuifible,that being all in all the body, it is alfo all.in 
euery part: and fo are all fpirituall things, 4ugels,foales;and God;their natures pofleffe ne plage 
fo that they may fay , this ison my rght hand, this on the left,or this aboue,and this below, 


but they are eee whole in every particle of their place , and yet faile not to fill the whole; 


whether this be eafilier fpoken or vnderf{tood,iudge you. 


(f) eds though.) So eAnaximenes of Mileinis , and Diogenes of Apolloniaheld, amen °° 


xagerasheldthe foule was like an ayre. . Heraclitus , produced all foules out of refpiration, 
therevpon calling it Joya, of Iixe, torcfrigerate. Plato in (ratyl. The ancients tooke our 


Eteath wee draw, for the foute. Whére-vpon the Poet faid, oworis anima Fare. My 


wiues 


Aid SAINT AVGVSTINE. - Cuar.1r 


wiues breth ftinkes. They called all ayre alfo the foule. Virgil Semina terrarums animaque mari{- 

gue fuiffent. Asthey had beene the feeds of earth,ayre,fea,&c. (¢ ) ( ould not.| Cic. Tufe.queff. 
4ib.y.They could not conceiue the foule that liues by it felte, but fought a fhape for it.(4) (or- 
porall darkeneffe. | Arift, de anima.lib.2. Darkenefle is the abfence of light from a tranfparent 
body, by which wefee. (4) Their quality. | The Greekes call it xot]siv. Tilly in his acade- 
mikes taketh this for a body. But Axguftine here calleth all adherences to the fubftance(which 
Philofophers call accidents ) qualities. Quintsl, and others , fhew the name of Quality to bee 
generall,and both in the abftract,and conceite,appliable to all accidents, k.) Trea furies. |\Store- 
houfes,or treafures themfelues. (/)/¢ were.) All were hee a bungler,and had no skill,the word 
is;any,(m) Bur that God. _] Wofe care vpholds,or elfe would it ftand but a while. Buc he can- 
not care for that hee knowes not: nor any workeman fupports a worke heis ignorant in, or 
perfometh any fuch, - | % : 


: ... Whether the {pisits that fell did ener pertake with the Angells, 
| in their bliffe at their beginning. 
Crap.il. 


WVHich being fo, the Angels wereneuer darkneffeat all , but as foone as euer 
they were madethey were made light: yet not created onely to liue, and be 

as they lifted, but liue happily and wifely in their illumination , from which fome 
of chem turning away,were fo farre from attaining that excellence of bleffed wif- 
dome which is erernall,with full fecuricy of the eternity chat they (4 )fellroa life, 
of bare foolifh reafon onely which they cannot leaue although they would:how 
they were pertakers of that wifdome,before their fall , whocan define ? How caa 
wee fay they were equally pertakers wich thofe that are really blefled by the affu- 
rance of their eternity ,whome if they had beene therein equal, they had ftill con- 
tinued in the fame eternity , by the fame affurance? for life indeed muft haue’an 
end, laftit neuer folong ; but this cannot bee faid of eternity, for itis life, be- 
caufé of lyuing ; but it is eternity of neuer ending: wherefore though all cternity, 

~ be not bleffed(for hel fire is eternal ye: if the true beaticude be noc without eter- 
“nity chéir beaticude was no fuch as hauing end,and therefore being not eternall, 
whether they knew it, or knew it not: feare keeping their knowledge, and error 
theiz ignorance from being blefled. But if their ignorance built not firmely vpon 
vnceriainety , but on cither fide , wauering becweene theend, or the eternity of 
theit bearitudesthis protraGtion proues them not pertakers of the blefled agells 
happineffe,(b). We ty not this word, beatitude, vnto fuch ftriGneffe, as to holdit 
Goa onely peculiar : yet is hee fo blefled as none can bee more: In comparifon 
God truce of which (be the Angells as bleffed of chemfelues asthey can) what is all the bea- 


ly bleffed. titude of any thing,or what can it be? 


teas. eu, 2h - L. VIVES. re ae 

A aces l(a) to a.ife.| The Deuills. haue quicke,.and futtle witts,yet are not wife , knowing 

.* norchem-felues northeir Father as they ought, but being blinded with pride and enuy, 
runac mo ft. fondly inte all mifchiefe. If they were wife,they fhould be good,for none is hen 
ed in whome ignorance rules not, as Plato and Arifforle after him , teacheth, (6) We tie not] 
‘The -ateients defined beatitude. eA xumerically perfect ftate in allgood,peculiar to God,in whole 

Diuells (at perticipation the Angells and Saints are bleffed.: | Se eae 

oo - The bappine(fe of the sn[t that as yet hae not the reward of the diuine promife,com- 
‘-'<« " pared with the firft man of parads(e,before finnes oréginall.C ti ap.12. 


oe WW Either do we onely call(«)them bleffed,refpecting all reafonable intelle@tual} 
as oe | _ €reatures, 


vs eet 
* 


— 


WA TH RENT 


rs ae a | 


‘Lisrt. | - OF THE CITIE OF GOD. tg - 


—, — 


creatures,for whd dares deny that the firft man in Paradife was bleffed beforchis. 
finrie ? though he knew not whether he fhould be fo ftill or not. Hee had beene fo 
erernally had henot finned : for we call them bappy (6) whom we fee live well in 
this life,in Lope of the immortalitie rocome, without (¢ ) terror of confcience, 
and with true attainmene of pardon for the crimes of our naturall imperfeGion. 
Thefe,though they be affured of reward for their perfeuerance’, yet they arenot 


fare to perfeuet: For what man kroweth that he fhall continue ro the end in a@i- 


on and encreafe of iuftice,vnielfe hee haue it by reticlation ftom him , that by his 

fecret providence inftrudech few yer fa‘léth none) herein ? But as for prefent 
delight, our firft father in Paradife ‘was more bleffed then any iuft man of the 
world : butas for his hope,etiery mari in the miferies of his body,is more bleffed: 

as one to whom truth (not opinion) hath faid that he fhaltbee rid of all moletta- 
tion,and pertake with che Angels in'that great God , whereas the man that liued 

in Paradife,in all that felicity was vncertatine of his fall or continuance therein; 


es (4) them bleffed ] Thisreading is beft approoued. Angsuftine meanes thar the Angels. 
though they were vncertaine of their fall or continuance, yet were(in a fort)blefied onely 
by their high glorious nature: as Adam was in thofe great gifts of God before his fall. (6) 


Whom wee fee | Chriff calls them bleffed. Mat.8. (¢) Terror of con{cience | The greateft bliffe _ i 


on earth is apure confcience : as Horace faith,to.bLufh for guilt of nothing, and the greateft tor. 
ture is the guilty confcience’. This was that the Poets called che furies. Cie, contra Psfonens 
& Pro Rofcio. ar | 


ore, 


whether the An gels were createdin {uch a flate of ha ine(fe, that neither 
_ thofe that fell,knew they fbould fall,aor thofe that perfenered; 
fore-knevw they foouldperfener. C war. 13. 


VV Herefore now itis plaine, that beatitude requires both conioynéd: fuch 
_” . beatitude I meane, as the inrelle@uall nature doth fitly defire: thatis , to 
enioy God,the vnchangeable good, without any moleftation , to remaine in him 
for euer with-out delay of doubt,or deceit of error. This wee faithfully beleeue 
the holy angels haue : buc confequently thae the .4mege/s that offended, and 
thereby loft chat light,had nor, before their fall: fome ener they had, bue | 
not fore- knowing: this wee may thinke , if they (4) were created any while bé- 
fore they finned. But if ic feeme hard to beleeue fome Aage/s to bee created 
without fore-knowledge of their perfeuerance or fall, and qther-fome to haue 
true prefcience of their beatitude,but rather thac all had knowledge alike in their 
creation,and continued fo, vneill chefe that now are euill, left that light of good- 
neffe , then verily it is harder to thinke that che holy zgels now aré in them- 
felues vncertaine of chat beatitude, whereof the {criptures affoord them fo 
much certeinty , and vs alfo that read them. What Catho/tcke Chriftian buc 
knowes that no W4mgell thac now is; fhall ener becomea deuill: nor any deuill 


an Angell, from hence-forth ? The truth of the Gofpell tells the faithful, thar 


they fhall bee like the Angels, and that they fhall goe to life erernall. Bur if 
wee bee fure neuer to fall from bliffe, and they bee not fure, wee are aboud 
them , not like them.: but the truth affirming ( and neuer erring ) that wee 
fhall bec their like; and cqualls , chen are they fare of their blefled eretnitie: 
, whereof 


 -chees, 


420 SAINT AVGVSTINE  — C war.14.& 15. 


whereof thofe other being vncertaine ( for it had beene erernall had they beene 

_ Certaine of it )it remaines that they were not the others equalls, or if they were, 

thefe that ftood firme,had not this certaintie of knowledge, vntill afterwards. Vn- 

Soh 8.44, i¢fle we will fay that which Chrsi faith of the Deuill: Hee hath beene a mureherer 
from the beginning , and abode. not in the truth, is not onely to be vnderftood from 

the beginning of markinde,that is fince man was made, whom hee might kill by 
deceiuing ; but euen from the beginning of his owne creation: and therefore be- 

caufe of e auerfion from his creator, and (4).proud oppofition (herein both er- 

ring and feducing ) was debard . uen from his creation,from happinefle,becaufe 

he could not delude the power of the Almighty. And he that would not in piety 

idhy.;., HOld with the truth, in his pride counterfeits the truth, that the A poftle sobns fay- 
ing, The deutll finneth from the beginning. may be fo vnderf{tood alfo : that is, euer 

fince his creation,he reieGted rightcouineffe:which none can haue,but a will fub- 

ie& vnto God. W hofoeuer holds thus, is not of the heretikes opinion, called the 

(¢) Manichees, nor any fuch damnations as they , that hold that the Deuill hada 

Wicked nature given him in the beginning : they do fo doate that they conceiue 

not what Chriff {aid,He aboade not sx the truth,but thinke he faid, He was made exes 

mite to the truth : But Christ did intimate his fall from the truth, wherein if he had 

| remained,hee had perticipated it with the holy Asgeds, and beene eternally blef- 


fed withebem, oo: —_ 
oo es ee 3 ~ L.VIVES. 

The Mani’ pr) Fre ‘a) created \ The time betweene their creation and rebellion, was fo little ,thatie fee- 
...med none,(b) Proud oppofition|,So the approoued a bbe do read. (¢) Manichees|Hearing 
that the Deuill finned fromthe beginning , they thought him created finfull and vicious by 
nature rather then will : for that is naturall and inuoluntary in one, which the creator inueft- 
eth him with in his creation. 

Tohn.8.44 ‘How this is meant of the Deu:l,He abode not in the truth, becau fe 


there isnotruthinhim. Cuar.14, 
V T Chrift fet downe the reafon , as if wee had asked why hee ftaid not in the 
truch ? becaufe,sthere ts no truth in him. Had he flood in it, truth had beene in 
him. The phrafeis improper: it faith, He aboade not in the truth, because there is no 
pariave sruth in him,whereas it fhould renuerfe it,& fay there ss 20 truth in hin becaufe he 
“ey re" aboade not therein. But the P/almis vfeth it fo alfo. 7 bane cryed , becaule thos haft 
heard me 6 God: whereas properly itis: Thon haft heard me 6 God becaufe! bane cried. 
But he,hauing faid, /hawe cryed : as if he had beene asked the reafon, adioyned the 
cgufe of his crie in the effe& of gods hearing : as if he faid. / fbew that Icryed,pe- 
caufe thou haft heard mee ,0 God. | = = 


The meaning of this place, The Deuill finneth from the beginning. C 1a. Ig. 

A Ndthat that Joba faith of che Deuill, The (4 )deuill (isneth from the beginning, 
ifthey() make ic naturall to him,ic can be no finne . But how then will they 

anfwer the Prophets, as E/syes prefiguring the Prince of Babilon faith: How art 

ta.14:12 shou fallen from heawen,O Lucifer,fonne of the morning? and Ezechiel: Thou haft bin 
‘tze,28.13 és Eden in Gods garden, ewery precions flowe was in thy raiment? This prooues him 
verfers, once fin-lefle: and fo doth that which followes more plainly : Thou waft perfect in 
. hey wayes from the day thon waftcreated crc. Which places if they haue none other 
fitter meaning,do prooue that he was in the truth,but abode not therein: & that 

fobus place,He abode not in the truth,prooues him once in the truth,but not pesfe- 
uering,and that allo; He Gameth from the beginning meancth the beginning ~ 
a a ariling 


Y= ws 


cad ee - oom nt ~~? > "A iPS -- FF ‘a 


“W Herefore in refpect of the deuills nature, not his will , wee doe vnderflaid 


ian OF THE CITIE OF Gop. 


arifing from his pride,but not from his creation, Now muft the place of Zob,con- 


421 


cerning the deuill,( He(c )is the beginning of Gods werks,to be deluded by the Angels: ob.30, 
or that of the Plalme,thés dragon whom thou hajt made to fcorne him:) areto bee ta- Pakt04 


ken as if God had made the deuil at firft,fir for the Angells to deride, but } that 
was ordained for his punifhment after his fin. Hee is the beginzing of Gods workes, 
for there is no nature in the {malleft beaft , which God made nor,from him is all 


forme,fubfiftence and order: wherefore much more muft the creature that is an- 


gelicall,by the natural dignity haue their preheminenceofal Gods othet works, 


He (a) deuill; Wee may not drawe | nay wreft)the gof,:ell to thofe grammaticifmes.h mo- 

ment or two breakes no {quare in this phrafe from the beginning. So we fay, Exuy in bre~ 
thers was from the beginning : alittle time doth nor prooue this falfc. ( b) They] The CUanj- 
cbies,eAguinas, and thole that fay the Angells could not fin inthe moment of their creati- 
on,prooue it, becaufe otherwife the author of their worke fhould beare the blame rather then 
(they the worke,And fo Origen feemes to hold faying. The ferpent oppofed not the truth,nor was 
bound to go upon his belly ever from the point of bis creation But as Adam and Ene were, awhile 
finleffe, fo was the ferpent no ferpenc, ene while of his beeing in the Paradice of delight , for 
God made not malice ./z Ezechiel. So Auguftine thought,that the firft parents offended not 


as foone as they were created.(c) He is] Iob. 44.the words, to bee deluded by the eAingells,are 
from the Septuagints. 3 | 


Of the different degrees of creatures, wherein profitable vfe andreafons 
order doe differ. Cuar. 16. 

Fo in all things that God made,and are not of his efferice, the liuing is before 
the dead : the produ@iue before thefe that want generation,& in their living. 
the fenfitiue before the fencelefle,as beafts &c.before trees,& in things fenfitiue, 
the reafonablebefore thé vnreafonable » as Man before beafts : & in things rea- 
fonable, immorrtalls before morralls,as Angels before men, but this is by natures 
order.Now thegefteeme of thefe,is peculiar and different, as the diuers vies are: 
whereby fome fenceleffe things are preferred before fome {enfitiue,fo farre;that 
if we had power,we would roote the later out of nature, or(whether weknow or 
know not what place therein they haue ) put chem all after our profit. For who 
had not rather haue his pantry ful of meate thé mice, or poffeffe pence then fleas, 
No maruell : for mans efteeme( whofe nature is fo worthy)will giue more often- 
times fora horfe then for a feruant , fora ring then a maide. So that in choice, 
the reafon of him that refpe4s the worth often controlls him that refpe&s his 
owne necde or pleafure ,nature pondering euery thing {imply in it felfe, and 
vfe euery thing refpectiuely for another: theone valuing them by the light of 


the minde,the ocher by the pleafure,or vfe of the fenfe: And indeedeacertaine 
will, andloue, hath gotten fuch predominance in reafonable natures, thatal- bene ho 
though generally , all Angells excell men in natures Order, yet by the lawe of bad Ane 
rightcoufnefle good men haue gotten place of preferment before the euill & 


Angells. 


That the vice of malice is.sot natural , but againft nature , following the 
| will,not the creation infinne. C iar, 17. 


7 
, 


@ 


this place aright, He was the beginning of Gods workes. For.where thewvice of Tob.40 | 


imalicécame in, the nature was not cortu pted before: (a) vice is focontraryto 
-nature that it cannot but hurc it.(b) therefore were it ho vice,for thatnature that 
‘Jeaueth God,to doe fo, but that it is more nacurall to:it to defire adherence with 


Oo God 


poe emma er: | a ae Si aes ae 
422 SAINT AVGVSTINE C Hari8 
qe ee I ee 


God (c) The euill wil then is a great proofe that the nature was good. But as God 
is the beft Creator of good natures, fo is hee the inft difpofer of euill wills:thae 
when they vfe good natures euil!,hee may vfe the euill wills, well. Therevpon hee 
caufed that the deuills good nature,and euill will ,fhould bee caft downe, and de- 
rided by his Angells’, thacisthathis temptations might confirme his Saints, 
whom the other,fought to iniure. And becaufe God in the creating of him, fore- 
{aw both his euill will,and what good, God meant to effe& therebystherefore the 
Pfalmift faith : this Dragon whom thou haft made for a {corne:that,in that very 
creation that it were good by Gods goodnefle, yet had God foreknowledge how 
to make vie of it in the bad ftate. | : 


re eS Se 


L.VIVES. 


1 He (a )viee| Socrates and the Stoickes held vertue, naturall, vice vnnaturall For, follow the 
condué of the true purity of our nature, feperated fr6 depraued opinion, & we fhall neuer 
Enill yell, £19-(6) Therefore {Fit did the nature,that offendeth,more real good to offend, then forbeare,it 
” were no offence,nor error,but rather 2 wife election,and a iuft performance. (¢) The exill will] 
Thence arife all finnes,and becaufe they oppofe nature,nature refifteth them: whereby offend- 

_ ing pleafes their will but hurts the nature, the will being voluntarily cuill,cheir nature forced 

to it : which were it left free, would follow the beft ( for that it loucs and goe the direét way 

to the maker,whofe fight at length ic would attaine. 


« 


Of the beauty of this uniuerfe,angmented,by Gods ordinance,out 
of contraries. Car. 18. 


Or God would neuer haue fore-knowne vice in any worke of his,Angell,or 
Man, but that! hee knew in like manner,what good vfe to put it vnto, fo make- 
ing the worldes courfe, likea faire poeme,more gratious by Angele g figures, 
Antitheta (4) called in Latine , oppofites,are the moft decent figites ot all elocu- 
tion: fome , more exprefly call them Contra-pofites. But wee haueno vie of this 
word, though for the figure,the latine,and all the tongues of the world vfe ir.(5) 
 Cor.1,6,7, 5-Paul vfeth it rarely vpon that place to the Coryathes where he faith. By the armor 
8,910 of righteoufnelfe on the right hand, and the left : by honor and defbonor, by eusllreport 
gnd good,as decesuers,and yet true,as unknowne and yet knowne,as dying and beholdwe 
line,ss chaftned,and yet not killedasforrowing and yet ener glad,as poore,and yet make 
Contraries 9409 ritch,as haning nothing , yet peeling althings. Thus as thefe contraries op- 
gracethe pofed doe giue the faying an excellent grace, fois the worlds beauty compofed 
vnverles of contrarieti¢s, not in figure,but in nature. This is plainein Eccle/ia(ficus, in this 
Ecel33,83 verfe> Agsinft cutll,js good,and again death zs life,fo ss the Godly agasnft the finer: 
8a booke for in all the workes of the higheft two and two,one againft one. 


L. VIVES. 


Antitheta. A Neitheta (a) are} Contrapoftes, in word,and fentence. Cic. ad Herex lib. 4, calleth it (on- 
| tenti,Contrapofition(faith Ourstilian)contention,or Antitheton,is diucrfly vfed,Firftin op- 
pofition.of one to one :as, feare yeelded to boldneffe, fhame to luft: it is not out witte but 
Lou- your helpe.Secondly of fentence to fentence:as,He may rule in ovations but muft yeeld in indge- 
vaine coe ments.lib.g. There alfo is more to this purpofe, fo as I fee no reafon why Anguftine fhould fay 
pie defec- the word is out of yfe with vs. (5) S.Panl| Anguftine makes Paul a Rhetorician. | Wellitis toe 
ciue.] _‘lerable, Augeftine faith it:Had one of vs faid fo , our eares fhould ring of herefie prefently,he- 
| rcfies axe fo ready at fome mens tongue ends, becaufe indeed they are fo:full of itthemfelues.] 


The. 


_ 


Lisat. | OF THE CITIE OF GOD. | 423 
The meaning of that place , God feperated the light from darkeneffe. 


| HAP. 19. - . : 
V Vierefore though the hardneffe of the Scriptures be ofgood vic in produ. 
_ cing many truths to the light of knowledge,one taking it thus and another 

thus: (yet fo asthat which is obfcure in one place bee explaned by fome other 
playner,or by manifeft proofes : Whether it be that in their multitude of opini- 
- ons, onelight onthe authos meaning , or that it bee too obfcureto bee at- 
tayned and yet other truths, vpon this occafion, be admitted )yet verily I thinke 
itno abfurdity‘in Gods workesto belecue the creaticn of the nels , and the f{e- 
peration ofthe cleane ones from the vncleane, then, when the firft light ( Lax ) 
was made : Vppon this ground : 4d God feparated the light from the darkenefee: = 
And God called the light day, and the darkenkefse he called night. For heeonely was S¢™ "+5 
~ able to difcerne them , whocould fore-now their fall ere they fell, cheir de- 
priuation of light , and their eternall bondage in darkenefle of pride. As for the 
dayes that wee fee,véz: this our naturall light and darkeneffe, hee miade the two 
knowne lights,the Sune and the Afooneto feperate them, Let there be lights(faith 
he) in the firmament of the Heauen , to feperate the day from the night. And by and 
by: Then God made two great lights, the (4) greater light torule the diy, andthe 
leffer to rule the night : Hee made both them and the ftarres : And God fette 
them in the firmament of heauen(é) to (hine vppon the earth , and to rule inthe 
day and night,and to feperate the light from darkenefle , but betweene chat light 
_ which is the holy fociety of Angells , fhining in the luftre of intelligibletruth, — 

and their oppofice darkeneffe: the wicked 4mge/s,peruerfly falne from that light 
ofiuftice:hee onely could make feperation , who fore-knoweth , and cannot an 
fore-know all the future euils of their wils, not their natures. 


L. VIVES. 


The(4 )greater|The greater light to rule or to begin ¥ day.[ x8 »’p~a’s]So the Septaagints tran 
late it. spyn'is both rule & beginnings & principinms yfed fomtimes for rule,as in P/.1 T9.¥<3, 
(6)Tofbine or,thatthey might thine os ¢airery: Some of the Latines haue vied the infinitive 
alone,& forbore the coniunction, Pe/tis acerba boums,pecorumaque afpergere virus faith Virgil. 
Of that place of fcripture fpoken after the feperation of the light and darke- 
nes,And God faw the light that it was good. C nap, 20. 
: N Or may we ouerflip ¥ thefe words of God; Let there be light,c> there waslight, 
were immediatly feconded by thefe:.dad God faw the light that it was good:not 
after he had feperated the light and darknes, and named them day and niglit, leaft 
he fhould have feemed to haue fhewne his liking of the darknes as wel as § lighe: 
For wheras the darknes,which the confpicuous lights of heauen diuide fromthe 
light is inculpable:therfore ic was faid after it was,8 not before,And God [aw that - 
it was good. And God ( faith he) Set them in the firmament of heauen to {hine upon the 
earth,andto rule in the day and night, and to feperate the light from the darknes 3 and 
God faw that it was good:Both thofe he liked, for both were fin-les: but hauing fayd 
Let there be leght, and there was fo,hee adioines immediatly, dud God aw the light 
that it was good, And then followeth:God /eperated the light from the darknes , and 
God called the light day,and the darkneffe,night:but heere he addeth not,And God 
Saw that st was gocd: leaft heedhould feeme to allow well ofboth , the one beeing 
(not naturally but)voluntary euill. Therfore the light onely pleafed the Creator: 
3 Ooz | the 


TST 


424. 


| Dasknes. 


— Gent. 


Pino. 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. ° _—_Cuar.az. 


the Angelicall darkneffes, though they were to bee ordained, were not to bee 

approued. — ae 7 

SDSS, 
) L. VIVES. | 


oe 4) feconded | The Scripture {peaking of the fpirituall light,the Angels, before¥ 
part of this light,that is part of the Angels became d ark,God approned the light , that is all the 
Angels whom he had made good,& light:bur {peaking of our vitble light, made the fourth day: 
God approueth both Jight and darknes:for ¥ darknes Cod created, and it was not cuil as § Ane 


gels that became dark were,& thertore were not approued,as the fourth daies darknefle-was. 


Of Gods eternal unchanging will and knowledge wherein he pleafed tocre- 
ate al things in forme as they were created, Car. 21. 


Hat meanes that faying that goeth through all 4nd God faw that it was good, 

bur the approbation of the worke made according to the work-mansart, 

Gods wifedome?God doth not fee itis good , beeing made, as if he fawitnor fo 
ere it was made:But in feeing that it is good being made , which could not have 
beene made fo but that hee fore-faw it, hee teacheth ( but learneth not) that it is 
good. Plato( 4 )durft go further: and fay That God had great toy inthe beauty of 
theVninerfe. He was not fo fond to thinke the newnefle ofthe worke increafed 
Gods ioy :but hee fhewed that that pleafed him beeing effected which had pleafed 
his wifedometo fore-know fhould be fo effected, not that Gods knowledge vary- 
eth,or apprehends diuerfly of thinges paft,prefent and future. He doth not fore- 
fee thinges to come as we do,nor beholds things prefenc, or remembers thinges 
aftas wee doe : But ina maner farre different from our imagination. Hee feeth 
them not by change in thought, but immutably , bee they paft or not paft , to 
comeor not to come , allthefe hath he eternall prefent , nor thus inhis eye and 
thus in his minde(he confifteth not of body and foule) nor thus now, and other- 
wife hereafter,or herctofore:his knowledge is not as our is , admitting alterati- 


onby circumftance of time,but (5) exempted from all change, andall variation of. 


moments: For his intention runnes not from thought to thought; all thinges hee 
knowesare in his vnbodily prefence. Hee hath no temporall notions of thetime, 
nor moued he the time by-any temporal] motions in him-felfe. Therfore hee faw 
that which hee had made was good, becaufe he fore-faw that he fhould make it 
good. Nor doubred his knowledge in feeing it made,or auginented it,as ifit had 
beene leffe ere he made it: he could nor do his works in {uch abfolute perfection, 
but out of his moft perfe& knowledge. VVherfore if one vrgevs with, who made 
this light 2 It fufficeth to anfwer, God: if wee be asked, by what meanes;fufficeth 
this,God faid let there be light and there was light:God making it by his very word. 
But becaufe there are three neceflary queftions of euery creature , who madeit 
how hee made it,and wherefore hee made it?God /ayd (quoth Moyfes ) let there bee 
light,and there was light,and God faw the light that #t was good. Who made it? God. 
How?God fayd but /et st be,and st was: wherfore ? /¢ was good. Nobetter author can 
there bee then God ,no better art then his #erd , no better caufe why,then thata 
good God fhould make agood creature. Andthis( ¢) Plato prayfedas the iufteft 
caufe of the worlds creation: whether he had read it, or heard it,or got it by fpe- 
culation ofthe creatures,or learned it of chofe that had this fj peculation, = 


L. VIVE S- 


——— a ee 


Lin ai, =“ OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 425 


: |  LVIVES. . * 

pu (4) durfénot \Inhis Timens. The father of the vniuerfe,feeing the beauty of it, and 

the formes of the eternall goddes,approued it,and reieyced. (6) Expelled from all | Iames, 
1.17. in whom is no varidb!enes,noz fhadowing by turning. Heerome (contra louin )ceades it,in 
whomne is no difference og (Hadowing by moment. e4ugu/tine vfech moment alfo whether re- 
ferring it to time, or quality, know not. For neyther retyres at all from his light to a {hadow, 
nor is any the leaft fhadow inctermixe with his light. AZomen:um is alfo aturning,a conuerfion 
ora changeable motion,comming of mouco to move :; itis alfo an inclination,as in balances. , 
This place may meane that God entertaines no viciffisude or pafle from contrary tocentrary,as The iuft 
wedoe. (¢ ) Plato | Let us fee (faithhee ) What made the Worldes Creator go about fo buge a caule of the 
worke: Truly hee excelled in hanefty,and honefty enuyeth not any man ,, and therefore hee made all Ae as 


things like him-felfe, beeing the sufteft canfe of their original, 


eee Ue wr ew eo °c amen ee: (en. eno ae 


Concerning thofe that difltked fome of the good Creators 
creatures, and thought fome things naturaly eutl — 
Crap.22. : 
Ye this good caufe of thecreation,Gods goodreffcithis iuft, fit caufe , which 
being well confidered would giue end co all further inueftigation in this kind, 
fomeheretikes could not difcerne , becaufe many thinges,by not agreeing with 
this poore frayle mortal flefh(beeing now our iuft punifhment ) doe offend , and 


hurt it,as fire,cold , wilde beaftes , &c. Thefe do net obferue in wha place of na- 


ture they liue,and are placed , nor how much they grace the vniuerfe(like a fayre 
ftate)with their ftations , nor what commodity redounds to vs frdthem,ifwe can 
know how to vfe them:in fo much chat poyfon(a thing one way pernicious)being 
conueniently miniftred,procureth heatch:and contrary wife,our meat,drinke,nay 
the very light , immoderately vied , is hurtfull. Hence doth Gods providence ad- 
uize vs not to difpraife any thing rafhly, butto feeke out the vie of ic warily, and 
where our wittte and weakenelic tailes there to beleeue the reft that is hidden,as 
wee doe in other thinges paft our reach: forthe obfcurity of the vie, ey: her ex- 
cercifech the humility,or beaces downe the pride,nothing (a)at all in nature being 
cuill,(euill being buea priuation of good) but every thing from earth to heauen 
afcending in a degree of goodneffe,and fo from the viftble vito the inuifible,vnto 
which all are vnequall, And inthe greateftis Gad che great workeman,yet( 6 ) no 
Jeffer in the leffe:which little thinges are not to be mealured to their owne great. 
neffe beeing neare to nothing, but by their makers wifedome:as ina mans thape, 
thaue his eye-brow, a very nothing to the body , yet how much doth it deforme 
Inm, his beauty confifting mo re of proportion and parilyty of parts ,then mag- 
nitude. Nor is it a wonder that (¢) thofe that bold fome nature bad, and produced 
com abad beginning,do not receiue GO DS goodnefle for the caufe of the cre- 
ation,but rather chinke that hee was compelled by this rebellious euill of meere 
neceffity to falla creating,and mixing of his owne good nature with euillin the 
fuppreffion and reforming thereof,by which it was fo foyled,and fo toyled , that 
he had much adoe toreécreate and mundifie it:nor can yet cleanfe ic all, but chae— 
which hee could cleanfe,ferues as the furure prifon of the captiued enemy. This 
was not the Maniches foolifhnes,but their madnefle:which they fhould abandon, 
would they like Chriftians be'eeue that Gods nature is vnchangeable,incorropt- | 
ible,impaffible and that the foule (which may be changed by the will,vntoworfe, =. ° 
and by the corruption of finne be depriued of that vnchangeable light) isno part 
of Godnor Gods nature;,but by him created of afarreinferiourmould. .  ~ 


O03 | L.VIVE S- 


a, 
426 SAINT AVGYSTINE. ° C war.23 


Nothing Nae (4) at all) This eAnguftine repeats often,and herein do al writers of our religion, 
eer igs LN (befiaes Plato, Ariftotle, Tally,and many other Philofophers ) agree with him. Lato in his 


Timeus holds it wicked to imagine any thing that Ged made euill, hee beeing fo good a God 
him-felfe:for his honefty enuied nothing , but made al like him-felfe. And in his 2. de, Rep. hee 
faith: The good was author of no enill,but onty of things good: blaming Heftod and Homer for ma- 
king Jone the author of mitchiefe;confeffing God to be the Creator of this vniuerfe,and there. 
by fhewing nothing to be euil in nature,1 wil fay breefly what 1 think:That is good (as Arif- 
totle faith in his Rhetorike )which wee dcfire either for it felfe,or for another vfe. And the iuft 
contrary is euill:wherfore in the world,fome things are vfeful and good: fome auoidable and 
bad, Some neuters and indifferent,and to fome men one thing is good, and to others, bad:yea 
vnto one man, at feucral times, feucral,good,bad,or neuter,vppon feucrall caufes, This opinion 
the weakeneffe of our iudgements and re{peéts of profit doe produce, But only y is the diuine 
judgement which fo difpofeth all thinges that each one is of vfe in the worlds gouernment, 
Andhe knowceth al without error, that feeth all thinges to bee good, and vfefullin their due 
feafons,which the wife man intimates, when hee fayth That God made all thinges good , each im 
the duetime, Therefore cid hee bleffe all with increafe and multiplication. Itany thing were 
alwaycs ynprofitable , it fhould bee rooted out of the creation. ( 6 ) No leffe | Nature is in the 
leaft creatures,pifmires,gnats,bees & {piders,as potent, as in horfes,oxen,whales,or elephants, 
and as admirable. Pliny, lib. 11.( ¢) Taofe |This herefie of the Alanichees, Anguftine decla~ 
r(0h.De beref. ad Quod vult deum. Contra Fanft. Manich, De Genef. ad liter, . | 


~See, 


Of the ervor that Ori genincurreth. 
C HAP, 2 30 


ut the great wonder is that fome hold one beginning with vs , of all thinges, 

| Bind that God created all thinges that arenot ot his eflence , otherwife th 
could never haue had being: And yet will not hold that playne and good beleets 
ofthe Worldes fimple and good courfe of creation, that the good God made 
all thinges good. They hold that all that isnor GOD, isafterhim, and yet 
that all is not good which none but God could make. But the (4) foules they fay 
(not parts,but creatures of God) finned in falling from the maker:and beeing caft 
according to their deferts,into diuers degrees dovne from heauen, got certayne 
bodies, for their prifons. And ther-vpon the world was made ( {ay they ) not for 
increafe of good , but reftraine of bad,and this is the VVorld. Herein is Origen 
juftly culpable, for in his Peréarchion, or booke of beginnings, he affirmes this; 
wherin I haue much maruaile , that a man fo read in diuine {criptures,fhould not 
obferue, firft how contrary this was to the teftimony of Scripture , that confir- 
meth all Gods workes with this, 4a God faw that ét was good: Andat the conclu- 
fion, God faw all that he had made,and lot was very good : Auerring no caufe tor 
this creation, but onely that the good God thould produce good things : where 
ifno man had finned,the world fhould haue bene adorned and filled (4) only with 
good natures. But fin being committed, it didnot follow that all fhould be filled 
with badnes , the farre greater part remayning ftill good, keeping the courfe of 
their nature in heanen:nor could the euil willers,in breaking the lawes of nature, 
auoid the iuft lawes of the al-difpofing God. For as a piGture fheweth wel though 
it haue blacke coulors in diverfe places, fo the Vniuerfeis moft fayre,for al thefe 
ftaines of finnes , which notwithftanding beeing waighed by them-felues do dif- 
race the luftreof it. Befides, Orégex fhould haue feene( and all wife men with 
Bim ) chacif che world were made onely fora penall prifon for che tranfgreffing 
powers 


e oes Re TR bs TR 


Lis. zy, OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 427 


powers to bee imbodyed in, each oneaccording to the guile, the leffe offenders 

the higher and lighter,and the greater ones the bafer and heauier: that then the 
Diuels( the worft prevaricators ) fhould rather haue beene thrutt into the bafett, 

that is earthly bodies,then the worft men. Butthat we might know that the fpirits 
merits are not repaid by the bodies qualities :the worft divell bath an (c)ayry bo- 
dy,and man(though hee be bad,) yet of farreleffe malice,and guilthath an earch. 

ly body,yea and had ere his fall. And what can be more fond,then to thinke chat 

the Su#ne was rather made for a foule to bee punifhed in as aprifon , rather then 

by the pronidence of God , to bee one,in one worldasa light to tle beauty,anda 
comfort to the creatures ? Ocherwife ,two,tenne or an hundred foules finning all 
alike,the world fhould hauefo many Sa#anes:To auoyd which wee muft rather 
beleeue that chere was but orie foule finned in that kinde , deferuing {uch abody 

rather then thatthe Makers miraculous prouidence did fo difpofe of the suaae, 

for the light andcomfore of thinges created : It is not the foules whereof 
{peake they knowe not what , buc it is their owne foules that are fo 

farre from truth that they muft needes bee attaynted and reftrayned. There- 

fore thefe three I commended before , as fitte queltions of every creature, Queftions 
viz:Who made it, how, and why, the anfwer to whichis ,G O D 69 his word, be- sea 
caufe hee is good: whether the holy Trinéty ,the Father , the Sonne and Holy of nacute, 
Ghoft doe intimate this vnto vs from their mifticall body , or there bee fome place 

of Scripture that doth prohibite vs to anfwere thus , isagreat queftion , and 

not firteco bee opened in one volume. 


‘ ‘ % : oe , es , : a 
| - LWIVES. 
“ Fle ( 4) foules | Origen in his firft booke Periarchion, holdes thatGOD fir created 


al chinges incorporeal,and that they were called by the names of heauen and earth,which 
afterward were giuen ynto bodies. Amongft which fpiricuals, or foules (ce Mextes were crea- 
red, who declining(to vfe Refixus his tranflation ) from the ftate and dignity , became foules 
astheirname yy» declareth,by waxing cold in their higher ftate of being mentes. The mind 
fayling of the diuine heate,takes the name and {tate of a foule, which if it arife and afcend vn-- 
to againe , it gaynes the former ftate , of a minde. Which were it true , I fheuld thinke’® : 
that che mindes ofmen,vnequally froin God,fome more and fome leffe,forne fhould rather be ‘ 
foules then other fome : fome reteyning much of their mentall vigor , and fome little or none. 
But thefe foules(fayth he )beeing for their foule fals to be put into greffer bodies , the world 
wasmade , asa place large ynough to exercife them all in,as was appoynted:And from the dis 
uerfity,and in-equalicy of their fal from him, did God collect the diuerfity of things here crea- 
ted. Thisis Origens opinion . Hierome reciteth itad auitum.(b) which good | Wee fhould 
haue beene Gods freely without any trouble. (¢) eAny ayry body | Of this hereafter. 


Of the dinine Trinity notifying tt felfe ( in fome 
part) in alttheworkes thereof | 


a CHar.24. = ; : 
VVE beleeue(s)hold,& faithfully affirme,that God the Father begot the world, 


~~ his wifedome by which all was made, his only Soz,one with one,coeternall, 
moft good,and moft equall: And that the Holy Spirit is both ofthe Father and the 
Son,con{ubftantiall, and coeternally with them both:& this is botha Trsnéty in reé- 
{pe& of the perfons , and but one God in the infeperable diuinity and orie omni- 


O04 ' potent 


oe. ewan 


£28 | SAINT AVGVSTINE. © Craver 


: : nae ,porent in the vnfeperable power,yet fo , as euery one of the three be held to bee 
fcdovia Godomnipotentiand yet altogether are not threeGods omnipotents , but one God 
‘ancy, omnipotent: fuch is the infeperable unity ofthree perfons , and fo muftic bee 
taughc off, But whether the {pirit,beeing the good Fathers ,.and the g00d Sonnes 
— may bee fayd to be both their goodueffes,(c) heere dare not rafhly determine:I 
durft rather call it the fan@ticy of them both:not as their quality , burtheir fub. 
{tance and the third perfon in Tréity. For to that , thisprobabilicy leadeth mee, 
that the Father is holy,and the Son holy , and yet the Sperit is properly called ho- 
ly,as beeing the fubftantiall,and confubftantiall holyneffe of chem both. But ifthe 
diuine goodnefie be nothing elfe but holyneffe,then is it but diligent reafon , and 
no bold prefumption to thinke ( for exercife ofour intentions fake) that in thefe 
three queftions of each worke of God,who made it , how, and why the holy Tri. 
nity is fecretly intimated vuto vs :for it was the Father of the word that fayd, Let # 
be made 5 and that which was made when hee fpake, doubrleffe was made bythe - 
word:and in that, where it is fayd, 4d God [aw that it was good , it is playne that 
neyther necefficy nor vfe,but onely his meere will moued Ged to make what was 
made, that is, Becas/e st w2s good: which was fayd after it was done , to fhew the 
corre(pondence of the good creature to the Creator, by reafonof whofe good- 
nefle it was made.If this goodnes be now the holy fpirit, then isal the whole Tré- 
arty intimate to vs in eulery creature : & hence is the originall,forme,and perfei. 
on ofthat holy Citty wherofthe Axgells are inhabirants. Aske whence it is 3; God 
made itshow hath it wifedome.God enlightned it. How is it happy? God whom 
it enioyes hath framed the exiftence, and illuftrated the contemplation , and 
{weetned the inherencethereofin him-felfe, that is, it feeth , loueth, reioyceth 
in Gods eternity , fhines in his truch,and ioyeth in his goodnefle. 


L. VIVES. 


VV: (a') belcewe | Lette vs beleeue thefi and bee filent, hold, andnot inquire,preach 
{ Louaine faithfully and not difpute contentioufly, (4) Begotre | What can Ido heere but fall 
copy dee to adoration?What can I fay but recite that ying of Paul , in admiration : O the deepneffe of 
fettiue)} theritches both of the wifedome and knowled ge of God\(c)Heere I dare not\{ Nor I though many 
diuines call the ipirit the Farbers goodnefle , and the Sonne his wifedome. Who dare affirme 
ought directly,in thote deepe mifteries. | (d) Becanfe st] or , becaufe it was equally good. 


of the tripartite dénsfion of All Phylofophicall difcipline. 
Cuap, 25. 


Ence was it (as far as we conceiue)that Phylofophy got three parts: or rather 
that the Phylofophers obferued the three parts. They did not inuent them,bue 
they obferued the natucall , rationall and morrall , from hence. Thefeare the Zs- 
tine names , ordinarily vfed,as wee fhewed in our eighth booke: not chat it fol- 
Joweth that herein they conceived a whit of the Tré#éty : though Plato were the 
firft chat is fayd to finde out and record this diuifion : and that vnto him none but 
God {eemed the author of all nature, or the giner of reafon, orthe infpirer of ho- 
nefty. But whereas in thefe poynts of nature , inquifition of truth, and the finall 
good, there are many diuers opinions, yet al their controuerfie lieth in thofe three 
great,and generall queftions:euery one maketh a difcrepant opinion from anos 
ther inal] thiee,and yet all doe hold , that nature hath fome caufe , knowledge, 
i eee tT ~ 


Lisasr. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. © 7 429 
fome forme,and life fome dire€tion and fumme.For three things are fought out in The parts 
cuery artift , nacure, skill and practife, his nature to bee iudged off by wite, oa" 
his skill by knowledge , and his practife (4) by the vfe.(4)i know well chae | 
fruite belongs to fruition properly ,and vfe to the vfer:( And that they fcemeto 
be differently vfed , fruition of a thing which beeing defired for it felfe onely,de- 
lighteth vs:and vfe of that which we feeke for another refpe@: in which fence we 
muft rather vfe, then inioy temporalityes , to deferne the fruition of eternity: 
_not asthe wicked inioyes moncy., and viethG OD , {pending not money for 
him , But honouring him for money ) Yet in common phraze of fpeech wee 
both vfe fruition, and inioy vfe. For fruites properly are the fieldes increafe, 
where-vppon weeliue: Sothenthus1 take vfe in three obferuaticns of an ar- 
tift, his nature, skillandvfe. Fromwhichthe Phylofophers invented the feue- 
_ralldifciplines ,tending allto beatitude: The natural! tor nature, the rationall 
for doétrine, the morall for vfe. So that if our nature were of it felfe , wee fhould 
now our owne wifedome , and neuer go about to know it by learning , 4b exter- 
wo. and ifour loue had originall of it felfe, and returned vppon it felfe; it would 
fuffice ys vnto beatitude , exempting vs from need of any other good. But feein 
our nature hath beeing from GOD our author , doubrlefle wee muft ae 
hauc him to teach vs true wifedome, and to infpire vs with the meanes to bee 


truly bleffed , by his high {weetneffe. - 


LVIVES. 


Pet aby the vfe \[vfus,1 tranflate,praQife, fructus vfe:otherwife JHere feemés to bee an 

A. abufe of the word vfe,for whereas he fayth , workmanfhips ftands on three grounds , na-vee, 
ture;skil,and vfe,vfe is here practife. But he wrefted it to his meaning,natnely the pradtife of e-Fiue,” 
uery-att is referred to vfe or profit,& therby-iudged. (4)/ irs ioe Wate fruition of ¥ wee de-Fruiuote 
fire for another end:therfore faith Aug. We only inioy God,and vie al things elfe. Of this read 
him:De dottr, Chrif?: In 80, quef?, De trintt:where he ties fruition, to eternal felicity, vfe tothe 
world.[Fré him had Peter Lumbard inough; S¢utJ.1. & the {choolmé,euen more then inough. 


. . Ofthe Image of the Trinity which és i fome fort in euery mans 
| " pature,enen before his glorification. Cuar. 26. | 

A nd we haue in our felues an image of that holy Trénsty which thal be perfece 
- * ted by reformation,and made very like it:though it be far vnequall,and farre 
‘diftant from it,briefly neither coeternall with God , nor of his fubftance, yet is it 
‘the neareft it of any creature,for we both hauea being, know it,and loue both our 
heing and knowledge. And in thefe three no falfe apparance ever can deceiue vs. 
Fordoe not difcerne them as thinges vifible, by fenceas wee fee colours , heare 
founds, fcent {mels,tafte fauors,and touch things hard and foft:the/s) abfta@s of 
which fenfibles we conceiue,remember & defire in incorporeal formes moftlike 
tothefe other:in thofe three itis not fo;1 know(6)without al phantaftical imagi- 

_ nation that Iam my felfe,thac this I know and loue. I fearenot the/ ¢ ) Academike 
arguments in thefetruths,y fay, what sf you er?(d) if | er] am. For he that hathno 
being cannot er:and therfore mine error proues my bceing : which being fo,how 
_can] er inholding my being?for though] be one that may er,yet doubrlesin that 
Iknow my being, er not:& confequently,if I know that I know my being : & lo. 
uing thefe two, Ladioyne this loue asa third of equall efteeme with the two. 
For I doe not erre inthatl loue , knowing the two thingesI love, without 
error:ifthey were falfe , ic were true that] loued falfethinges, For how could 


\ 


ave al A ge 


sd 


N 


430 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. | ~ Cuar.az. 


I bee iuftly checked for louing of falfe thinges if it were falfe that I loued them? 


S enfes CZe 
terior. 


Acade~ 


mikes. 


But feeing the thinges loued, are true, and fure, how can the loue of them bee 
but true and fure ? And there isno man that defireth not to bee,as there is none 
defires not to be happy-for how can he haue happinefle,and haueno becing? 


L. VIVES. . 


A et (a) abftratts |For fhutte our eyes,and taft,our thought tells vs what a thing whiteneffe 
and {weetnefle is, wher-vpon our dreames are fraught with fuch thinges , and we are able to 
iudge of them without their prefence.But thefe are in our exterior fences,our imagination,our 
common fence,and our memory, all which beafts haue as well as wee, and in thefe many things 
are rafhly obferued , which if wee affent vnto, wee erre: for the fences are their weake, dull 
and vnfure teachers,teaching thofe other to apprehend things often falfe,for true. Buc the rea- 
fonable mind,being proper only to man,that ponders al,and vfeth all dilligence to auoyd falfe- 
hoods for truth,warning vs to obferue well ere we iudge. (6) Phantafticall] Of fancy, already. 
(c) eAcademickes | Thefe took away the truft of the fences,and held that nothing was known, . . 
It you faid,/ know this ffone to moue,becafe I fee it,or toxch it: they replyed : What if you erre? 
Did you neuer thinke you faw fome-what moue,that ftood ftill,(as in fayling,or riding ?) Did 
you neuer thinke fome-what moued that moued not, vnder your touch ? There you were de- 
ceiued , fomay you bee now. Reftrayne your affent , nothing offends wifedome more then 
confent before full knowledge. (d J /f Ierre | Therefore our Phylofophers vppon e4friftesles 


_ Pofferiera,fay,that this propofition is of the greateft euidence. 


anal | 


Of effence, knowledge of effence , and lowe o€ both. 
C nap.27. | | 


O(a) naturally doth this delight, that very wretches , for nothing elfe but 

this would rather leauetheir mifery , then the World, knowing them-felues 
wretches tho , yet would they not dye. And the moft wretched ofall,eyther 
in wife iudgements ( for(b ) their foolifhneffe; )orin theirs that hold them- 
felues bleffed ( for their defect hereof :) Tf one fhould profer them an immortali- 
ty of mifery,and tell them if they refufed it,they fhould become iuft nothing, and 
loofe all beeing, verily they would reioyce and choofe an eternall mifery beforea 
millity ofbeeing. This our common fence teftifieth. For why doe they feareto 
end their mifery by death rather then continue it, but that nature ftill wifheth to 
hold abeeingeAnd therefore feeing they know they mutt dye,they domake fuch 
‘great accoumpt ofalong life in their mifery , ere they dye: Wherein doubtiefle 
they fhew how thankefull they will bee for immortality,though it had not end of 
their mifery. And what of brute beafts that vnderftand not this,from the Dragon 


-_ 


tothe worme? Do they not thew their loue of being, by auoydiug death al waies 


poffible?T he trees and plants that haue no fence of death nor meanes to auoyd it, 
do theynot put forth one fprig into the aire, & another(c) deeper into the earth, 
whereby to attraé nucriment and preferue their beeing ? Nay,the very bodyes 
that haue neycher fence nor vegetation,by their very motion vpwardes, downe- 
wardes,or middle fufpenfion,moue to the conferuation of their effence and na- 
ture. Now then may bee gathered how much mans nature is beloued , andloth 
to bee deceiued , from hence,that man had rather (4) lament ina found minde, 
then reioice in folly. Which power is inno mortal creature but manzothers haue 
fharper fights then wee , yet not any can beholdthe incorporeall light, which in 
fomefort lightneth our mi ndes,producing a true iudgement ofall thefe thinges, 
oe | (e jas 


a: a se 


Lint. . OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 


(e) as farre as wee are capable of it. But though the vnreafonable creatures fen- 
ces conteine no knowledge, yet fome fimilicude of knowledge there is in thent 
But all other corporal creatures,hauing no fence inthemfelues , are but the ob- 
iets of others fences, therefore called fenfible: and the growth and power 
whereby the trees drawe nutriment , this is like their fence. But thefe and all 
other corporall bodies caufes,are hid in nature, marry their formes in the diuer- 
fitie (the parts of the worlds ftructure) are apparant to vs, { ecmingly profefling a 
defireto be knowne fince they could notknow themfelues: but our bodily fen- 
ces iudge not of them though they apprehend them. That is lefe vnto 4 farre 
more excellent interior fence, difcerning iuft and vniutt, (f) iuft, by the intelli- 
gible forme, vniuft,by the priuation thereof. Theoffice of this fence,neicher the 
eye, the eare, the fmell, the tafte, nor the touche can perferme. By this I know 
my beeing, and I know this knowledge; and I loue them both,and know that I 
loue them both. 3 | 8 7 


-_ L. VIVES. 
O (a) natwrally | A Stoica and Academicall eae handied by Tully, (Offic. 1.& de 
fo2.3. eae and (De fin.s.) eAcademically. (6) For their \ Fool:fhueffe is the greateft 

mifery,and wifdome the good. So held the Stoskes.(c} Deeper | A diucrfe reading : therext 

fuppliech both. (dj Antiffhenes the firtt (ynickes choife. His reafon was becaufe to reioyce in 
an-vnfound minde, was bale, and caft downe the minde from che true ftate: Secrates in 

Plato rells eAlcibiades, that poffeffions with-ont wifdome , are not onely fruitleffe , but hurtfull. 

(¢) As farre) It is not then our witte or toyle, bur GODS bountie thas-inftrudts ys in 

the great courfe of nature,and fharpens the iudgement:which bounty the good maa attainin 

aboue the bad,muft needs bee wiler, though Icfle learned, or popularly acute. Therefore fait 

Wifdome : Into an exill foule, wifdome well not come. T he fame hae Socrates aid, Onely good mex 

drewife. (f) Inft,by} By a forme, left in my minde by fecing iuftice done, and tht ‘dite con» 

pruence fitting thereto : which,be it abfent, I conceiue what iniuftice is, by fecirlg the faire 
and congruent harmony fubuerted ; I build not vpon hurts, violence, injuries , or reproches, 
which are no priuations, but may be iuftly done vpon due command of the magiftrate,or with 

a good intent: but vpon this, I {ee the vertues decorum broken. Forme is neither to bee taken 

for the fhapes or abftracts of things,referued in the foule,and called motions, fay forme : Well, 

Ithinke they either want witte or knowledge - And becaufe they cannot make them-feluies 
admired by things really extant: they mutt fetch their audiences eares vp to them by purfuling 


Chymera’s,G non entia : this is our {choole-mens beft trade now a dayes.] | 
: Bien hea 


_. + Whether wedraw nearer to the image of the holy trinity ,in loving of thas loue - 
© = by which we \oue to be,andto know onr being, CuAaR28. os 


Ve wee haue fpoken as much as needeth here, of theeffenceand knowledge, 
low much we ought to refpea them in our {ehies , andin. other creatures vn- 
der vs,though we finde a different fimilitude in them. But whether chelouethat — 
we loue them in,be loued,that is to declare, Ic is loued: wee prooue it, becaufe it 
is loued in all chings that areiuftly loued. For hee is not worthily calleda good 
gnan, that kaowes good, but hee thatloues it. Why then may-weenat lone that 


¢: lowe in our felacs,whereby wee lous that which isto bee loised. They.may’ both 


"bec.in one-man <and it is good for'a man thac his goodnefie .increafing , his 
euillfhould decreafe, euen to the perfection of his cure, 4nd full change into 
-goodneffe : for if wee were beaftsi, wee fhauld Joue.a camall fenfiaue lifes. 
and'this good would fuffice our nature (‘5 ): without any. futther trouble: if 
‘wee were trees, wee fhould not indéede lout any thing by motion-af:fences 
viti ee ee | _ yct 


(Rr a 


432 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. | C Harp.29 


yet fhould we feeme toaffed fruitfulneffe and growth, if wee were ftones,water, 


winde,fire,or fo,we fhould want fence,andlife, yet fhould we hauea natural] ap- 
petite vnto our due (c) places, for the (4) motions of weights are like the bodies 
oues: gothey vpward or downwards ; for weight is tothe body,as loue is tothe 
foule.But becaufe we are men, made after our creators — , whofe eternity is 
true,truth eternall: charity, true and eternall; neither confounded nor feuered, 
werunne through all things vnder vs, (which could not be created, formed, nor 
ordered without the band of the moft effentiall, wife,and good God)& fo through 
all the workes of the creation : gathering from this (¢ ). more playne , and ‘from 
that leffe apparant markes of his effence : and beholding his image in our felues 
‘ f ) like the prodigall childe, wee recall our thoughts home , and returne to him 
from whom we fell. There our being fhall haue no end, our knowledge noerror, 
our loue no offence.But as now,though wee fec thefe three fure, trufting not to 
others,but obferuing it our felues , with our certaine interior fight , yet becaufe 
of our felues we cannot know how long they fhall laft, when they fhall end , whi- 
ther they thall goe,doing well or euill, therefore here we take other witnefles of 
theinfallibicy of whofe credit wee will nor difpute here , but hereafter. In this 
booke of the Cétty of God, that was neuer pilgrim,but alwayes immortall in hea- 
uen, being compounded of the — eternally coherent with God, and never 
ceafing this coherence: betweene whom and their darknefle namely thofe rhat 


_ forfooke him,a feperation was made as we faid at firft by God, now will wee ( by 


his grace ) proceede in our difcourfe already begun. 


. Eee 


| | L. VIVES. 
F2 that (a) s¢ love | There is a will in vs arifing from the corruption of the body , whieh 
_reafon ruleth,not as it doth the better will bu it haleth ic and traileth it to good : it flyes 
all good properly,and feeketh euills, bodily delights and pleafures : Thefe two Papd calleth 
the law of the fle[h,the law of the {pirit, fome-times flefo and fpirit. The firft, brutith, foule, hated 
of good men,who when they can cannot expel ic, they compell and force it vnto Gods obe- 
dience : otherwife ic produceth aloue of things vnmeete. (4) Without | Either in this life, or 
vnto our bodies. (c) Places | Or orders, and formes of one nature: the preferuation of which 


each thing defires for it felfe, helping it felfe again{t externall violence, if it bee not hindered. 


(d) Motions } of this before :the Latine word is,»omenta. (¢) More plaine |Our reafon pla- 
ceth an Image rather chen a marke of Ged in vs. Man hath the fight of heauen and the know- 
ledge of God beftowed vpon him, whereas all other creatures are chained to the earth. Where 
fore the {pirit ouer-looking the creation, left his image in our erected nature, in the reft, 
whome hee did as it were put wnder foote, hee left onely his markes, Take this now asa figue 
ratiue fpeech. (f.) Prodigal | Luc.15. | ¢ 


Of the Angels knowledge of the Trinity inthe Deity,and confequently,of the 
caufes of things in the Archetype,ere they come tobe effected in workes. 
| ; C nap. 29. | 


i cae hol nes, Pala not of God by founds , but by being prefent with 
that wachangesble truth,bis onely begotten word,himfelfe, and his holy pirit that 4 
wndiuided trinity ,of (ubjtantiallperfons: yet hold they not three Geds, but one, and. 
this they (4) know plainer then weknow our felues. (6) The creatures alfo doe 
they know better in che wifdome of God, the worke-mans draught, then inthe 
things produced : and confequently them-felues in that , better then in them- 
Pref ied hauing their knowledge in both : for they were made,& are not of 


s. 
ote | on 


» EX ER OFT 


— Vass 


é 


—. eee. te: Se = we _ we. SS - 


Limer OF THE CITIE OF GoD, 


his {ubftance chat made them. Therefore iri him their knowledge is day, in 
themefelues,(as we fayd) twy-light.But the knowledges of a thing, by the means 


itis made,and the ching it felfe made,are farre different. (¢) The vnderftandin 


ot aline or a figuredoth produce a perfe@er know ledge of it then the draughe 


of icin (d) duit: and iuftice is one in the changeleffe truth, and another in the 


iuft mans foule. And fo of the reft, as the firmament becweene the waters aboue 


and below , called heauen, the gathering of the waters , the appgranceof land, 


rowth of plants, creation of foules and fithes,of the water, and foure foored 

eafts of the carth and laft,of man the moft excellirig creature of all. All thefe the 
Angels difcerned in the Word of God , where they had their caufes of their pros 
duction immoucable and fixed, otherwife , then tri them felues: clearer in him, 
but clowdier in them-felues:yet referring all thofe workes to the Creators praife, 
it fhines like morning in the mindes of :hefe contemplators. | 
L.VIVES. : 


Hey knew (a) plainer | They haue both harper wittes then we,and thelight whereby they 
know the ‘rinity is farre brighter then thac by which wee know our felues. (6 ) The creas 
txres | Knowing the effect better in the caufe,then in it felfe, (¢) The under flanding | Mathes 
maticall principles gine better knowledge of times and figures, then draugnts, which can nee 
ucr be fo exact as to prefent the thing to the eye,truly, as it iss and bereer conceiue wee by 
Exclide,that a ftraight line is the fhoreeft draught from point to point,and chatall lines drawae 
from the center t> the cyrcle are equall,by the precepts of Geometry, rather then by all the 


- 


draughts (of duft ? nay ) of Parrhajfius or Apelles. (d) Duft ]The old Mathematioans drew 


their proportions in duit, with a compaffe, the better to put out or in what they would, This 


eA rchimedes wasa dooirg when Syracufa was taken. Lin, Ty calleth it,learned daff-De nat. 
deor.2,~---Et fetto ix puluere metas; faith Perfiis, Lines in dinided adnst.Satyr.t. 


The perfection of the mansber of fixe,the firf ss complete in all the parts. 
‘ Z HAP. -- 30. eo ae we”. | ae a? 
A Nd thefe were performed in fixe dayes becaufe of the perfe@ion of the(«) . 
£ *number of fix,one being fix times repeated: not that Ged was tied vnzo time, - 
ard could not haue created all at once’, and afterwards haue bound the motions. 
totimes congruence ; but becaufe thag number fignified the perfeion of the 
worke: for fix is (6) che fir ft number that is filled by coniun@ion of the parts,the 
fixt the third and che halfe: whichis one; two, and three; all which conioyned 
are fixe. Parts in numbers are thofe that may be deferibed of how (¢) many they 
are,as an halfe,a third,a fourth,and fo forth.Burfoute being in nine. yer ra are 4 


e-. 


pare of it: oneis the ninth part,and thr¢s the chird part. But thefe two parts, one 


andthree,are fafre from making nine the whole. So foure isa parr of t en, b aon 
iuft part: one is the tenth part,two the fift,& flue the fecandzyet chefe three parts 
one,two,& 5, make not vp full cen,but eight onely, As for chenumber of twelfe, 
the parts exceed it.For there is one the rwelfe part y Ae econ four the ching 
three the fourth,and two the fi xt.Butone,two,th rec, foureandiixe, make aboue 
twelue, namely fixteene. This bv‘the way now to. prooue the perfeaion of the 
number of fixe,the ficft, / as I {aid } thar is made of the coniunétion of the parts: 
and in this did God make perfect all his-workes: Wherefore this numbet is ndt to 
be defpifed,but hath the efteems apparantly confirmed by many places of fcrip- 
ture - Nor was it faid int vaine of Gods workes , Thon madcit all things in number, 
weight and mesfure. | = Se ic a ae aes ae, er ee oe hee eee “4 


‘ 


\ 


oN. eae SNe py Bo. a ee My eg ee Le oft “ I -cig S: 
- . 
P L.VIVES: 


433 


434 


. SAINT AV.GV STINE. Cuar.3e 


mew etapa TP Oe OC SD 


The num~ 
ber of fixe, 


Pro.24-16, 


L. VIVES. 


T Be ) numsber | Pythagoras and Plato after him,held all things to be difpofed by numbers, 
© teaching them {fo myfterioufly , that it feemed they fought to conceale them from the ex- 
prefie profeffors, not onely the prophane vulgar. Our diuines both Greeke & Latine put many 
ftiyfteries in numbers.But Hicrome the moft ofall, lay that the Exange/ift omitted Jome 
of Chrifts progeriie,to make the reft fall ina firnumber. (5) For fx |The perfection of a num- 
ber is to confift of all che parts: fach are fcarce in Arithmetique, and fuch is fixe onely with in 
ten,and twenty feauen within a hundred :for this lateer confifts of 1.2.4.7. and 14. The my- 
fterie of the creation is conteined in the number of fixe Hier. in Ezech. (c1) Of how many} 
as an halfe,a fourth, a fift,fixth,&c. foure in nine, is neither halfe, three nor foure , and fo vp to 
the ninth, as farre as nine goeth. For the leaft quantitatiue part, nameth the number , asthe 
ewelfch of twelve: the ewentith in twentie, and that is alwayes an vnite. This kinde of pare 
wecall an aliquote. Exctide calleth an alsquote onely,a part,the reft parts. For his two definiti- 
ons, (his third and his fourth)are thefe. ef part s 4 leffe number diniding a greater. Parts, are 
they that dinide not.And fo the old writers vied thefe words. 


Of the Jeanenth day the i of rest andcomplete perfection. 


HAP. 31 


Vein the feauenth day,that is,che(«){euench repetition of the firft day(which 

sumber hath perfeGion alfo in another kinde ) God refted , and gaue the firft 
rule of fanétification therein. The day that had no euen, God would not fan@i- 
fie in his workes butinreft. For there is none of his workes, but being confide- 
red firft in God,and then in it felfe, will produce a day knowledge, and an cuens. 
Of the perfe@ion of {eauen,1 eould fay much, but this volume groweth bigge, 
andI fearel fhall be held rather to take occafion to fhew my {mall skill , chen to 
réfpe& others edification. Therefore we muft haue a care of grauitie and mode- 
ration, leaft running all vpon number, ( 6) wec bee thought neglecters of weight . 
and meafure: (¢) Let this bee a fufficient. admonition, (4) that three is the rft 
number,wholy,odde,and foure wholy euen,and thefe two make feauen,which is 
therefore often-times pu for (¢) all: ashere 3 The suft {hall fall/eanen times a day, 
and arife againe, thatis, bow _ foener hee fall, bee {ball rife againe. (This is not 
meant of iniquitie, but of tribulation, drawing him to humility.) Againe, Seamer 
tines 's day will Ipraife thee : the fame hee had fayd before: His prasfe {ball bee al- 
wayes inmy mouth, Many fach places as thefe the Scripture hath ,to prooue the 


- number of feavenito bee often vied for all , vniverfally. Therefore is the holy 


{pitit called oftén-times ( fy by chis number, of whom Chri faid, Hee fball teach 
sail truth: Thete is Gods ret, wherein wee reft in God: In this whole, in this per- 
féion is reft, in the part of it was labour: Therefore wee labour , becaufe wee 
know 4s yet but'in pate , but when perfeidnis come, that which is in part fhall 
be abolithed. This makes vs fearth the fctiptures fo labourioufly . But the holy 
Angels, (vato whofe glorious congregation our toylefome pilgrimage caftsa 
long looke ) as they haue erernall permarience, fo hauc they cafic knowledge,and 
happy reftin Godibelping vs without trouble , becaufe their {piticuall , pureand 
freeinotionsaréwithoutlabour. | 


erty, A Ji 


“\ 


He (4) feanenth\ Signifying all things created at once. () ee be shougbt} alluding to the 
DP precedent Laying, God made althings i number weight & mtafwre ; that if he fhould fay too - 


much 


Lis.rr. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 435 


wife-mans, ( ¢ ) Let this | The Jewes in the religious keeping of their Sabboth , thew that 7. 
wasa number of much miftery. Hierome in Efay. Gellius. lib, 3. and his emulator (Macro. 
bius (in Somn, Scip.lib. 1.) record the power ofitin Heauen,the Sea, andin Men, The Pytha- 
gorifts , as ( balcidius writeth, included all perfection , nature & fufficiency herein. And wee 
Chriftians hold it {acred in many of our religious mifteries. (4) That 3. 1s | Aneuen number 
(fayth Exclid ) is that which is diuifible by two : the odde is the contrary. Three , is not di- 
uifible into two , nor any: for one is ne number : Foure is diuided into two, and by vnites: and 
this foure was the firft number chat gotte to halfes , as AZacrobius fayth, who therefore com~ 
mendeth 7, by the fame reafon that e/ug. vieth here.(¢) For all] eAug. in Epift, ad Galat. 
(f) By this number | Serm. de verb, dom. in monte. This appellation arifeth from. the giftes, 
fhewne in Efzy,Chap, 32. | 


Of their opinion that held Angels to be created before the world- 
| Cap. 32. | | 
Ve if fome oppofe, and fay chat that place, Let there be light and there was 
light , wasnot meant of the Angels creation, but of fome (4) other corporall 
light,and teach that the Axge/s wer made not only beforethe firmament diuidin 
the waters,and called heauen,but euen before thefe words were {poken: J» the be- 
ginning God made heauen and earth ; Taking not this place as if nothing had bene 


much of number, hee fhould feeme both to negle& his owne grauity and meafure ,andthe Thenum~ 


ber of {Lae 
uén, 


4 


made before, but becaufe God made all by his +s/edome and worde, whome the 


Scripture alfo calleth 2 (4) begivning,as an{wered alfo tothe Jewes when they in- 
quired what he was : I will not contend ,becaufe I delight foin the intimation 


of the Tréity inthe firft chapter of Geae/is. For hauing faids/x the beginning GodPhi043 


made heauen and earth:that is the Father created it in the Sow,as the P/a/me faich:O 
Lord how manyfold are thy workes! inthy wifedome made# thou them all: prefently 
after he mentioneth the Holy Spirit. For hauing fhewed the fafhion of earth, and 
what a huge maffe of the future creation God called heauen and earth : The earth 
was without forme Cr void , and darkne(fe was upon the deepe:to perfe his mention 
of the Trinity he added , (c) 4d the /pirit ofthe Lord moned upon the waters. Let 
each one take it as he liketh: itis {o profound that learning may produce diuers 
opinions herein , all faithful! and true ones: fo that none doubt that che Arsgels 
are placed in the high heavens , not as coeternals with God,but as fure of eter- 
nall felicity:To whofe foctety Chrift did not onely teach that his lictle ones be- 
longed, faying : They fballbe equal vvith the Angels of God: but fhewes further,the 


- very contemplationof the Angels , faying: Se that you de[pife not one of thefe little 


ones for Lfay unto yousthat in heanen,their Angels alway bebola the face of my Father 
uvbich isin Heauen. a 


L VIVES. | 


Mat,18.10, 


Ome ( 4 ) other corporeall\ Pdhering to fome body. (6) Beginming | I reproue not the di~ 4 penn 
.aatn in calling Chrif? a beginning. For he is the meane of the worlds creation , and cheefe.ning, 


ofall thatthe Father begotte. But [holdit nofit collection from his anfwere co the Iewes. 
Te were better to fay fo becaufe it was true,then becaufe John wrote fo , who thought not fo, 
The heretikes make vs fuch arguments , to {corne vs with , at all occafion offered, But what 
that wifely and freely religious Father Hierome,held of the firft verfe of Gene/fis,I will now re- 
late, Many( as Lafon in Papifc, Tertull. contra Praxeam , and Hillar. in Pfalm.) Hold that the 
Hebrew text hath,J» the Sonne God made Heauen and earth, which is dire@ly falfe, For the 70, 


. Symachus,and Theodotion tranflate it,/n the beginning : The Hebrew is Berefith , which Aquila 


tranflates in Capitulo, not Ba-ben , in the Son. So then the fence, rather then the tranflation 


giueth it vnto Chri? , who is called the Creator of Heanen and earth , aswell inthe frontof. 


Pp 2 Genefis 


436 | 
perenne 
John,33- Genefis (the head of all bookes ) as in S. Johns Ghofpell. So the ‘Pfalmift faith in his perfone 


PL 104.30 


Eph.s.8 


«8 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cnar.33. 


Inthe head of the booke it is written of me,viz. of Cenefis,and of John: Al things were made byit,cy 
without it was made nothing, oc. But we muft kuow that this bock ss called Berefith, the Hebrewes 
ufing to put their books names in their beginnings Thus much word for word out of Hierome. (c) 


And the fpirit|That which wee tranflate Ferebatur,moued ({ayth Hierome ) the Hebrewes read — 


Marahefet , forwhich we may fitly interprete,incubabat,brooded,or cherifhed as the hen doth 
_ heregges wich heate. Therfore wasit not the fpirit of the world,as fomethinke , but the oly 
{pirite that is called the quickner of all things from the beginning : lf the Quicker then the mae 
ker,if the faker then the God - [f thou fend forth thy word faith he) they are created. 


Of the two different focieties of Angels,not uns: ly 
searmedlight and darkenefle. 


Cuar, 33% 


at fome Angels offended,and therfore were thruft into prifons in the worlds 
™ Joweft parts vntill che day of their laft indiciall damnation, S. Peter teftifieth 
playnely faying That God [pared mot the Angels that had finned, but cait them downe 
:anto hell and delznered them into (4) chaynes of darkeneffe to be kept unto damnation. 
Now whether Gods prefcience feperated thefe from the other , who doubteth? 
that he called the other ght, worthily, who denyeth?Are not we heare onearth, 
’ by faith,and hope of equality with them, already ere wee haue it, calledlight by 
‘the Apoftle?Te were once darkene(fe,({aith he)but are now light in the Lord. And well 
‘doe thefe perceiue the other Aps/Paticall powers are called derkene/fe, who confi- 
‘der them rightly , or belecue them to bee worfe then the worft vnbeleeuer. 
‘Wherefore though that /é¢ht,whichG O D fayd fhould bee, andit was , bee one 
‘thing and the darkene fe ftom which GO D {eperated the /ight bee another: yet 
the obfcurity of this opinion of thele two focieties , the one inioying GOD, 
the other {welling in (6) pride :the one to whome it fayd: PraifeGOD al yee 
Bis Angels,the other whofe Prince faid: All the/e will/ gine thee sf thon wilt fall 
downe and wor{hip mee: the one inflamed withG ODS loue, the other , blowne 
bigge with felfe-loue ( whereas it isfayd ) God re/ifteth the proud and giucth grace 


 dames.4, tothe lowly: ) the one in the higheft heauens , the other inthe obfcureft ayre: 
the one, pionfly quier,the other madly turbulent :the one punifhing or releeuing 


according to Gods (¢ )iuftice and mercy: the other raging with the ouer vn- 
reafonable defire to hurt and fubdue :the one allowed GOD S Minifter co all 
good ; the other reftrayned by GOD from doing (d) the defired hurt : the 
one {corning the other for doing good againft their wills by temptations : the 
other enuying this ,the recollection of the faichfull pilgrims : che obfcurity(I 
fay ) ofthe opinion of thefe two fo contrary focieties (the one good in nature 
and wil, the other good in nature al fo, but bad by wil) finceit is not explaned by 


other places of fcripture , that this place in Gemeftis ofthe light and darknes, may 


bee applyed as Denorsinatine vnto them both ( though the author hadde no 
fuch intent ) yet hath not beene vnprofitably handled : becaufe though wee 
could not knowe the authors will, yet wee kept the rule of faith, which ma- 
ny other places make manifeft. For though Gods corporall workes beeheere 
recited , yet have fome fimilitude with che fpiritual , as the Apoftle fayth: 
youare all the children of the light , and the children of the day: wee are. no fannes 
of the night. nor darknes. But tt this were the authors mind , the other difputa- 
tion hath attained perfection:thar fo ws/e« man of God , way the [pirit in him, 

a | in 


ee se ee 


>be 
re J 


oe ea ne 


Lin gy, OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 


in reciting the wotkes of God, all perfected in fixe dayes , might by no meanes 
bee held to leaue out the aage/s, eyther inthe beginning ,thatis becaufehee had 
made them firft, or (as wee may better vnderitand ,’ /n the beginning ) becaufe 
hee made them in his onely begotten word, in which beginning God made hea- 


- wenandearth: Which two names eyther include ali thecreation {pirituall and 


temporal] , which is more credible : Or the two great partes onely as continents 
of the leffer , beeing firft propofed in whole , and then the parts performed. 
orderly according to the miftery of the fixe dayes. oe 


: L. VIVES. 


Nto (a) cheynes|Thisis playne in Saint Perers fecond Eniftle and Saine Indes.alfo. The 
eAngels ( fayth the later ) which kept nor their firft eftate , but left their owne ‘habitation 
hath hee referued in euerlafting cheynes , vnder Darkeneffe,vnto the iudgemenc of the greac 
day. eAugnftine vfeth prifons , for places whence they canno: pafle, as the horfes wete jn- 
clofed: and could not paffe out of the-circuit vntill chey hadruc. (6 ) Pride | Typhus,tu¢os, ts 


‘Pride , and the Greeks vfe Typhon ( of 1v'6:ux ,’to bee proud and tveruai to Surne ) for the 


fiery diuell :So fayth Plutarch of Typhon , Ofyris his brother , that he was a diuell chat tronba 
ledall the world with atts of malice ,and torment, Asgu/ixe rather victh it then the Latine, 


for it, is of more force , ‘and was of much vfe in thofe dayes: Philip the Prieft vfeth it inhis - 
Commentaries vppon /o8,, (¢) Isftice ] For God doth iuftly reuenge,by his good Minifters. He ~ 


maketh the fpjrits his meffengers,& flainiaz fire his Minifters. Pf. 103. (d) The defired| There 


_isno power onthe earth like che diueis, Job. 40, Which fy they practife as they defire,they 
wouldburtie,drowne,wafte,poyfon,torzure and vtterly deftroy man dnd beaft:And though we 


know riot the diuells power dire@tly, where it is lintited;and how farr extended: yet are wee 
fare thty‘can dé vs more hurt then we can cuer repaire. Of the power of Angels tead Anguft- 
tine de Trinit Tib.3. a re + 
oc eee ae c46 sae Pewee a oS vy 
- Of the opinion that fume heldthat the Angels wece meant bythefe- 
>. weralwaters and of others that heldthewaters uncreated, 


— 
o- . r 


as 
See ea ee ee oe 7 _ CHAR. 34, are | : = oe 


Et fome there (4). were that thougherhat che (4) company of Angels were 


meant by che waters:and that thefe wordessLet there be a firmament sn the midfi oj. 


of the waters and tet it feperate the waters from the waters, meant by thevpperwas 


ters thesdzgels,and-by the lower,eyther the nations,orthe divels. But ifthisbee © 


{o,thereis no mention of the Ayge/s creation , but onely of their feperation. (¢ ) 
Though fome moft vainely,and impionfly deny , char God made the waters , bex 
caufe hée neuer {aid Let there be waters: Sothey may fay of earth:for he never faid 
Let there be earth. V but fay they :itis written God created both heaven and earth, 
Did he fo? Then is water included therein.alfo,for one name ferues both:for the 
Pfatia day th: The fea is his,and he made it ord bis hands prepared the dry lana&zbut tre 


gels, becaufe {o"'an element cannot remayne aboue the heavens. No more 
wonld thefe'men,if they could make a man after their principles, put fleame, be- 
ing (¢ ) in {tead’ of water. in mans body, in the head: (fJbut there is che feate of 
fleame,moft fitly appointed by God:but fo. abfurdly in-chefe mens conceits,chag 
if weeknow not (though this booke told.ys playne ) thac God had placedthis 


fitidcold anid confequently heauy hamor in the vppermoft part of. mansbody; _ 


Pp 3 _ thefe 


(d) elementary weights do move thefe mén‘to take the waters aboue,for the An- Pog 


oe ke rel 


$3 


8 SAINT AVGVSTINE, | 


Cwarg4 


| hata a orld-weighers would neuer belecue it. And if they were fubieé tothe 


W 2ters 26 
boue hea, 
yen, 


Acriptures authority they would yet haue fome meaning to thift by. But {eeing 
that the confideration of all thinges that the Booke of God contcineth concerning 


the creation,would draw vs farre from our refolued purpofe , lette vs now (to- 
gether with the conclufion of this booke ) giue end to this difputation of 


the two contrary focietyes of Angels, wherein are alfo fome groundes of the 
two focieties of mankinde , vnto whomme We intend now to proceed, ina fitting 


difcourfe, 


eee 


L.VIVES., 


‘© Ome (a) there were Jas Origen for one , who held that the waters aboue the heauens were 

no waters but Axgelicall powers , and the watcrs vnder the heauens,thcir contraries, die 
ucls. Epiph. ad loan. Hterofol. Epsfe.(b) C ompanies | Apocal. The people ave Like many waters,and 
here-vpon,fome thought the Plalme pel You waters that bee aboue the heanens.praife 
the name of the Lord:for that belongs only to reafonable creatures to do.(c) Though fome | Ana 
gefi:ne reckoneth this for an herefie tohold the waters coeternall with God : bur names no 
author. I beleene Hefiods Chaos and Homers all producing waters were his originals. (d) Ele~ 
mentary ] {ee all this growes into queftion, whether there be waters aboue the heauens, and 
whether they be eleinentary as ours are. Of the firft there is leffe doubr. For if(as fome hold) 
‘the firmament be che ayre,then the feperation of waters from waters was bur the parting of the 
_sloudes trom the fea, But the holy men, that affirme the waters of Genefes to be aboue £ ftar- 
ty firmament,preuaile, I gcffe now in this great queftion,thac a thicke clowd, commix: with 
sayre was placed betwixt heauen and earth,to darken the fpace betweene heaven end vs : And 
thar part of ic, beeing thickned into that fea we fee,was drawne by.the Creator , from the face 
‘of the earth,to the place where it is, & thac other part was borne vp by an vpknowne power,to 
the vrtermoft parts of the world. Andhence it came that the vppet ftill including ‘e lower, 
heaven the fire, fire the ayre , ayre the watér, this water includeth not the earth » becaufe the 
whole element thereof is not vnderthe Afoene,as fire and ayreis. Now forthe nature of thofe 
Waters, Origen , (to begin with the eldeft Jholds.them refolued into moft pure ayrc: which S, 
‘Thomas diflikes, fcr fach bodies could neuer penetrate the fire,nor the heavens. P ut he is too 
eAAriftorelique, thinking to binde incomprchenfible cffcétes to the lawes of nature > as if 
tnis were a worke of nature Rridlly takein, and not at the liberty of GODS omnipotent 
power , crthatthey had forced through fire and heauen by their condenfed violence: 
Some difliked the placing of an elementaboue heauen, and therefore held the Chriftal. 


- line heauens compofed of waters , of the: fame fhew ;- but of a farre other nature’ then 


Flemence- 
hsv com- 
Tixkiures, 


‘tloubrfull (as hee is generally ) yet holdes the ingreffe of 


the Elementary. Both of them are tranfparent ,-both: colds, but that is light. and ours 
heauy. Bafiid fayth thofe waters doe coole the heate. of the-heaucnis. Our Aftronomicall 
dinines., tay. that Saturnes frigidity proceedeth from thofe waters: ridiculous as though 


ai! the ffarres of the eighth {pere cre noc cooler then Satsrne ! Thefe waters ( fayth 
ede’) are lower then the {pirituall heauens , but higher then all corporeal creatures: :ept (as 
Jime fay )tothreaten a fecond deluge’: But (as others hold better_) to coole’ the heate 
Otthe flares, De at. rer, But this is a weake conieéture. Let vs conclude as Auguffine doth, 
whon Genefis:s How , or what they are we know net:there they are we are fure,for the Feri tHres ane 
thority weigheth downe mans witte. (¢) In flead of | Another queftion roffed like the firlt : How 
the elements are in our bodies, In parcels-and Atomes peculiar to each of the foure, faith 
Anaxtzoras, Democritus, Empedaales,Flata,(, icero,and moft of the Peripatetignes , Arabians 
Auerroes., and Axnicen : parcels enter not the bodies compofition, fayth another,but na- 
turesouly. This is the {choole opinion , with the leaders , Scores and Occam, Ariftole is 
| _clements into compoundes, 
O; the .tomists ,fome confound all, making bodies of coherent remaynders , Others 
deftroy ‘all fub{tances. Howfocuer .it is ,wee feele the Elementary powers , heate and 
drought in our gall , or choller of the fire : heate and moyfture ,.aysy , in the blood: 
a re cold 


Lis. ry, OF THE CITIE OF GOD. ‘439 


colde and moyft, watery in the fleame : Colde and dry , earthly , in the melanchol- 
_ly : and in our bones folydity is earth , in our brayne and marrow water, in our 
blood, -ayre : in our fpirits cheefely of the heart , fire, And though wee haue lIeffe of 
one then another , yet haue fome ofeach. (f) Bat there ] And theace is all our trou- The fest of 
blefome fleame deriued : Fitly it is feated in the brayne , whether all the heare™ brayne, 
afpyreth. For were it belowe , whither. heate defcendeth not fo , it would quickly 
“ growe dull , and congeale ; Whereas now the heate keepes it in continual ade. wi. 


gor and vegetation, 


: Finis. lib, 11. 


\ 


uw , 


“440 


THE CONTENTS OF THE | 
twelfth booke of the Citty of God. 


‘ 1. Of the nature of good andenil Angels, | 


: I 5. Whether (to preferue Gods eternal] dye. 
2. That no effence ss contrary to God,thongh | mination )we must fuppofe that he hath alwaies 
al the worlds frailty feeme to bee oppofiteunto «| badcreaturestornle oner , and how it maaay bee 
this immutable eternity. held alwases created which 1s not cocternall 
3. Of gods enemses not by nature , but will, | withGod, , 
which hurting them, burteth their good nature, 16. How wee must uncerftand that God 
becanfe there is no vice but hurteth nature. promifed Man dife eternall before all eternity, 
4. Of vfeleffe and reafon-leffe natures, whofe 
order differeth not frem the Decorum held ts 
the whole unimerfe. 
5. That the Creator hath deferued praife ,in 
enery forme and kind of Nature. | 
6. The caufe of the good Angels blife , aud 19. Of the worlds without ender Ages of 
the euills mifery. | L Ages, , 
7. That wee ought not to feeke ont the canfe | 20, Of that twspions affertion,that foules trae 


| 
17. The defence of Gods unchanging wil, 

againft thofe that fetch Gods works abou fro | 

eternity sn circles from flate to flate. | 
18. Against {uch as [ay thinges infirsite are 

abone Gods knowledge, ‘dill: 


of the vicious will, by blefedfhall hane diner srenolutions isto mic 
8. Of the perner{e lone,wherby the fonlegoeth | [ery againe, 
fromthe unchangeable to the changeable good, 21. Of the flate of the Sirf! Man and Mane 
9. Whether be that made the Angels natures, | kinde ix him, 
made their wils good alfo , by the infufion of his 22. That God fore-knew that the for ff Men 
lone into them,through his ee Spirit. | fhould fin,and how many people be was to tranfe 
_10, Of the falfenes of that Hiftory,that faith | late out of bis kind into the Angels Society. 
the world bath continued many thoufand years, 23. Of the nature of Mans foule, being crte 
11. Of thofe that holdnot the Eternity of | ated oe to the Image of God. 
the world,but esther a diffolution and generati- 24. Whether the Angels may bee called 
on of innumerable worlds , or of this one at the 5 Creatots,efany the leaff creature. 
expiration of certaineyeares. eats 25. That no nature or forme of any shing lie 
12. Of fuch as hela Mans Creation too lates | wing bath any other Creator but God, 
ly effected. | 26, The Platonifts opinion , that held the 
13. Of the revolution of Tymes at whofeex- | An gels Gods creatures,c> Man the Angels. 
piration fome Phylofophers held that theVni- 27. That the fulueffe of Man-kind was erte 
uerfe /hould returne,to the fate it was in at firf? + atedin the firft Man, inwhome God fore-[aw, 
14. Of Mass temporall eftate,madeby God | bothwho fhonuld bee faned , and who {hould bes 
out of no newnelf[e,or change of will, damned, 7 


FINIS, - 
rae | 


441 


THE TVVELETHBOOKE 
OF THE CITTIE OF GOD 


Written by Saint tuguftine Bifhop of Hippe, 
vnto CMarcelénus. 


Of the nature of good andewil! Angels, 
Cc H Ap. I. . 


=—eery Efore I {peake of the creation of man,wherein(in refpe& of mor- 
OR} }e-B} tall reafonable creatures)the two Citties had their originall , as 
‘ we fhewed in the aft booke of the Angels:(to fhew as well as wee 
Zz can) the congruity and conuenience of the fociety of fen with | 
ny PE Angels :and chat there are not foure ,but rather two focieties of 
ng 7. Menand Angels qualicied alike,and combined in eyther, the one 
eS Confitting both of good Angels and Men , and the other of cuill: 
that the contrariety of defires betweene the Angels good and euill arofe from. 
their divers natures and beginnings , wee may atno hand belecue : God having 
beene alike good in both their creations ,and in all things befide them. But this 
diuerfity arifeth from their wils : fome of them perfifting in God,their common 
good,andin his truth, loue and eternity:and other fome delighting more in their 
owne power,as though it were from them-felues , fell from that common al-blef 
fing good to dote vppon their owne: and taking pride for —— , vaynede- 
ceit for firme truth,and faGtious envy for perfect loue, became proud 5 deceiptfull 
and enuious. The caufe of their beatitude was their adherence with GODs_ 
chen mufttheir miferies caufe bee the direct conttary , namely , their nocadhe- 
rence with G O D. Wherefore if when wee are asked why they are blefved . and 
wee anfwerewell, becanfe they fiucke faft unto GOD ,and beeing asked why 
they are wretched , wee anfwerewell , becaufe they fiucke not unto GO D: Then 
is there no beatitude forany reafonable or vnderftanding creature to attaine, 
butin God. Sothen though all creatures cannot beebleffed , for beaftes , trees, 
ftones, &c. are incapable hereof yet thofe that are, are not foof them-felues, 
beeing created of nothing , but they haue it from the Creator. Attayninghim — 
they are happy , loofing him ,vnhappy : But hee him-felfe is good onely o fim- | 
felfe,and therefore cannot loofe his good , becaufe hee carinot loofe him-felfe. = ioe 
Therefore the one , true blefled God,wee fay is theonely immutable good :and mateble | 
thofe thinges hee made, are good alfo,becaufe they arefrom him , but they are £004 
~ mutable becaufe they weremade of nothing. Wherefore though they bee not 
the cheefe goods , God beeing aboue them, yet are they great, inbeeing able 
to adhere vntothe cheefe good, and fobeehappy , without which adherence, | 
they cannot but bewrteched Nor are other parcels of the creation better, in that 
they cannot bee wretched: For wee cannot fay cur other members are better 
thé our eies inthat they cannot be blind: but euen as fenfitine nature in the worft 
plight, 1s better then the infenfible ftone: fois the reafonable( albeit miferable) 
aboue the brutifh that cannottherefore bee miferable. This being fo , chen this 
nature created in fuch excellence, that though it bee mutable yet by inherence 
with God that vnchangeable good,itmay become bleffed: Norfatisfieth the own 
neede without bleffedneffe , nor hath any meanesto attayne this bleflenefle 
| | bat 


f 


442 


To adhere 
¥n.o Gou, 


Fxcd,3. 


Evlence 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. Crap.2. 


but God,truly committeth a great error andenormity in notadhering vnto him. 
Andall finne is againft nature and hurtfull there-vnto. Wherefore thar nature 
differeth nor in Nature , from that which adhereth vnto God, but ince: And 
yet inchacV7ce is the Nature it felfe laudable ftill. For the Vsce beeing iuftly dif- 
commended , commendeth the Natare: The true difpraife of sce being , that st 
difzraceth an honeft nature: So therefore euen as when wee call blindneffe a faule 
ot che eyes , wee fhew that fight belongeth to the eye: And in calling the faule 
of the eares deafenefle , that hearing belongesto the eare : So likewife when wee 
fay it was the Angels fault not tuadhere vato God, we fhew that that adherence 
belongedto their natures. And how greaca praife itis tocontinue inthis adhe- 
rence , fruition & liuing in fo greata good without death, error or trouble, who 
can fufficiently declare or imagine ? Wherefore fince ic was the euill aagells 
faulcnot to adhere vnto GOD (all vice beeing againft nature: ) It is manifeft 
thar GO D created their na:ures good: fince it is hurt only by their departure 
from him. 


occa 


That no effence is contrarytaG OD , thouch all the worlds frailty 
feeme tobe oppofite to his immutable eternity. 
HAP, 2. 


“¥™ His I haue faid leaft fome fhould thinke that the-Apostaticall (a) powers 
whereof wee {peak@, had a different nature from the reit,as hauing another 
beginning; and( 6) notGOD co theirauthor. VVhich one fhall the foo- 

ner auoyd by confidering what GOD faydvnto Moy/es by his angels , when 

hee fent him tothe cluldren of Jfaell: 1 4m that 1am. For God beeing the higheft 
effence ,that is erernalland vnchangeable : gaue effence tohis creatures,but not 
fuch as his owne: (2) to {ome more and to fome leffe : ordering natures exiftence _ 
by degreessfor as wifedome is deriued from being wife,fo1s cflence absp/o effe of 
hauing being:the word is new not vfed of the old Latinifts , but caken of laie into 
the tongue, to ferue for toexplayne the Greeke jai” which it expreffe:h word for 
word, Wherefore vntothat efpeciall high effence,thatcreatedailthe reit, there's 
no nature contrary,but that « hich hath no effence: ( f) For that which hath be- 


_ eing is not contrary vnto that which hath alfo beeing. Therefore no effence ac 


Apoftata, 


al! is contrary to GOD the cheefe effence, and caufe of effence in all. 


Aon ee 8. cee == 8 


LVIVES. / 


Poftaticall (4) powers | ‘awosrarns, A forfaker , of aténvi; The diuels are fuch that 

fall from GOD, Theodoret writing of Goddes and eAngells, fayth che Hebrew word is 
Satan, the Grecke ‘axcea’ lo, Hierome incerpreteth it an aduerfary , or tranfgreffor, ( 6) 
Not G OD | Leattfome fhould thinke GOD created not their nacure.(¢ ) / an } Of this 
already in the eight bocke. ( d) To fome | eArift de murdo. The neareft vnto GOD (¢ fayth 
Apuleius ) doe gayne from his power the moft celefti: ll bodies , andeuery thing the nea- 
rerhim , the moreDiuine , andthe farther , the Ieffer. ThusisGODS goodneffe , de- 
riued gradually from Heauen vnte vs, And our beleefe of this extenfion of GODS 
ower , wee mu(t thinke that the nearer , or farder off thathee is , the more , orleffe 
Becichee nature feeleth. Which the Phylofopher gaue him to wnderftand when hee fayd 
That Gods effence is communicated to fome more,and to fome leffe. For in his predicaments, he di- 
rectly affirmeth that effence admicteth neither intention nor remiffion , more nor leffe, 4 ffone 
hath effence as well as an Angell, Tnis therefore is referred to the excellence and qualityes 
adherent or infufed into the effence,which admitte augmentation,and diminution.(e)7e word 
is 


“ 


Lrerz. _ OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 443 


is.) Not fo new but that Flanius Sergins vfedit before Quintilian, but indeed it was not in 


generall vie till of lace, when Philofophy grew into the latine ronpue. (f) For that. ] Noxhing 
(faith eAréifotle ) is contrary to fubftance: taking contrary , for two.oppofites of one kinde : 
as blacke and white,both colours,for he reckneth not priuations,nor contradiCories, for cone 
traries,as he fheweth in his diuifion of oppofites into foure fpecies. 


; Gf Gods cnemies.not by natiere,but will,which burting them,harteth their good = 
nature : becaufe their ts no vice but hurteth nature. 

ss He (cripture callech them Gods encmies,becaufe they oppofe his foucraign- 
* cy noc by nature bit wil,hauing nopower to hurt him, but chem felues. Their 

wilto refift,noc their power to hurt,maketh them his foes, for he is vachangeable 

afd wholly incorruptible: wherefore the vice that makcth them oppofe God, is 

their owne hurt, and no way Gods ; onely , becavfe it corrupreth their good na- 

cure. Their nature itis not,bur there vice that contrariech God : euill onely be. 


ingcéntrary to good. And who denies that God is the beft good? fothen vice is 


contrary vnto God,as euill is vnto good. The nature alfo which it corrupteth is 
Goed , and therefore oppofed by it : bucit ftands againft God as cuill oriely a- 

ainft good ; but againft this nature, as cuill and hurt alfo , for euill cannot hurt 
GOD, butincoruptible natures onely ,which are good by the reftimony of 
the hurcthat,euill doch them, for if chey werénot pood, vice could not hurt 
them , for what doth it in hurting them bura bolith their integrity , luftre , ver- 
cue, fafety,and what euer vice can diminith or roote out ef a good nature ? which 
if ic bee not therein 4 vice taketh it not away , and therefore hurcech not : for 
ic cannot be both a vice,and hurtlefle, whence wee gather chat chough vice,can- 
not hurt that vnchangeable good, yer it can burt nothing but good : becanfe itis 
not,but where it hurtéth. And fo we may fay chat vice cannot bee in the higheft 
good, nor cannot bee but in fome good. Good therefore may be alone, but fo 
cannot euill : becaufe the natures that aneuill will hath corrupted, though as 
they be poljured they are euill, yet as chey are natures,they are good. And when 
this vicious natureis punifhed,there is this good befides thé nacuré, that ic is not 


Fite 

i, 
Gods Chee 
mes, 


vnpunifhed,for this is iuft,and what js iuftis quéftionleffe good, andno(4)man | 


is punifhed for the fales of his nature, but of his will, for that vice that hath got- 


ten from a cuftome into an habit , and {eemeth naturall , had the originall from 
corruption of will: fornow wee {peake of the vices of that nature whereinisa 


foule capable of the intelle@uall light, whereby wee difcerne betweene iuft 
and vniuft. . | : 


ed 


. 


a oe 6 ee new eee een 


L. VIVES:. / 


JO (4 ) max.) Vice ora faltigtnerally ,: is adeclining from the tigtie. So that thereare of Vice sad 


“them natarall, as if wee have gotten any cuftome of any aét againitthe Decornm of that 
hkiride, or haue ir by nature : as to hatie more, or fewer members then we fhould : ftammerin 
of fpeach’, blindneffe, deafneHle ; ot any ching againft perfection :beeit in men , beafts,trees, 
ftdtres or'whatfever. Then ‘there is falte of manners , and fault of arc, when the worke-man 
hath erred from his {cience. ¢b) Nasurall,.}So that is dominereth , and playeth the tyrantin a 
fndn, feeking ro compell him to do thus!whé¢revpon many fay in excufeof finnes,that they can- 
not cdo withalk, whereas their owne will nonfles it vp in-them, and they may oppofe it ifthey 

oD 


Feife you cxpell it,you fhall not be acquit of the guile. 


BWTHough tbe not fo eafily expelled as admitted, yet the expulfion is not impoifible,and w= 


falcingtic, 


of 


444 >. SAINT AV GVSTINE, — Cuang 


Of lineleffeand reafonleffe natures, whofe order differerh wot frome 
the decorums held inthe whole Vainerfe. Cuar. 4. 


BY: it were afottifhneffe to chinke that the fales cf beafts,trees , and other yn- 

ceafonable,fencelefle, or liueleffe creatures,whereby their corruptible nature 

is damnified,are damnable: for the creators will hath difpofed of thofe, thus,to 

perfe&tthe inferior beaucy of chis vniuerfe by this (4) fuccefliue alteration of 

them. For earthly things are not comparabletro heauenly : yet might not the 

world wa it thofe,becaufe the other are more glorious. Wherefore,in the fuc- 

cc ffion of thofe chings one toanother in their due places , and in the (6) change 

of che meaner inco qualities of che better ,the order of things tranfitory confit 

eth. Which orders glorie wee delight not in, becaufe wee are annexed to it, as 

partes of mortality , weecannor difcerne the whole Vniuerte, though weeob. 

ferue how conueniently thofe parcells wee fee , are combined: wherevpon in 

things out of our contemplations reach, we muft beleeue the prouidence of the 

Creator,rather then be forafh asto condemneany part of the worlds Fabrigue, 

of any imperfeQion. Though ifwee marke well, by the fame reafon,thofe vn- 

voluntary , and vnpunifhable falts to thofe creatures ,commend their natures 

vnto vs : none of whomehath any other maker but GOD: becaufe wee our 

felues diflike chat that nature of theirs which wee like fhould bee defaced by thae 

falc : vnleffe men will diflike the natures of things that hurt them , not confider 

Exodg their narures, but their owne profitas(¢) of rhofe creatures that plagued the 

prideofEgipt. Butfothey might difpraife the Sunne , for fome offenders,or 

vniuft deteiners of others right ,are by the Iudges condemned (d} to bee fer in 

the hot Sunne. Whereforeit is not the confideration of nature in refped of 

our profit,bue in it felfe chat glorifieth the Creator. The nature of the eternall 

fire is affuredly laudable, though the wicked fhalbe therein ewerlafting|ly tor- 

mented. For what is more faire then the bright, pure and flaming fire ? what 

more vfefull co heate,cure,or boile withall ? chough not fo hurefull in burning. | 

Nocares Thus that (e) being penally applied,is pernicious, which being orderly vfed, is, 

ablelure conuenieni:(f) for who can explane the thoufand vfes of ic in the world ? Heare | 

excellence them not (g) that praife the fires light and difprai(e the heate : refpe4ting not the 

chings chac Nature Of it but their own profite and difprofice: they would fee but they would 

punifh = not burne . But they confider not thac this light they like fo,beeing immoderate- 

ma ly vied hurteth a tender eye : and that in this heate which they diflike fo,many 
(6) creatures do very conueniently keepe,and liue. : 


L. VIVES. 
Fe (a) fucceffine | One decaying,and another fucceedin g.(5).Change of the} He toucheth 


> che perpetual alteration of elements and elementary bodies,where fome are tran{mutedin- 

Pumith- to the more powerfull egent,and fometimes the agent puts on the nature of the paffixe. Ayre 
alee continually taketh from water , and water from ayre: So doth fire fromayre and ayre from 
fire, but in diuers places. (c) Of rhofe| The frogs,and enats, (d) To bee fet | Akinde of punifh- 
_memt,efpecially infamous, yet, not without paine. The bawdes in Spaine are thus punifhed: 
fet in the ftockes,and anointed al with hony,which drawes all the Bees, Flies and Wafpes ina 
Country,vnto them. (e) Beeing penally | So wee reade it forthe beft. (f) For whe| Thenccis 


_ the common prouerbe ofa thing of common vie ee hane as mach ufe of s,s of fire or water: 


_=_ 


-_= De i rn, 


Nae ee eee ee TL TT NOE a OTT 
Lizt2. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. ; 445 
as Tully faith of friendfhip. Led’ And to forbid one fire and water , (mans two chiefe necef 
faries) is as tc were to expel! him of all humaine focietie . Uitrienius faith that the comming 
together ynto the fire brought men firft to talke together, and fo produced commerce, focie- 
ties and citics /b,2. Lattantis prooucth man .a diuine creature, becaufe hee onely ofall creae 
tures vfeth the fire. (g¢.) That praife| Taught by Plararchs Satyre that laued Promethenzhis The ecu 
new found fire, fo that hee fell.akiffing of 1t, and burning his lirpes threw irdowne ,and ran nelle offire. 
away. Sucha cale cells 4Z¢/2 of. the fea-bordering Affricans ,to whome Exdaxus caried fire. 
(b*; Creatures \1n Cyprus in the braffe furnaces, where they burneredd Vitiioll m any dayes 
cogecher,are produced winged creacures,alitele bigger then the greateft flyes ; and thofe liue 
inthe fire, Ariit. Aft animal.lib.s; The Salamander they fay not onely lives int the fire ynbure 1 
ned, but alfo purteth it out, with his very touch, cae a a ° 


edpraife inenery fo 
Cuar. 5. 


WV Hereforeall natures are good, becaufe they haue their forme, kinde, and 4 
q@ertaine ceft withall in them.felues.And when they are in their true pofture 
of nature, they preferue the effence in the full manner as they receiued it: and 
thar,whofe effence is not eternall, followeth the lawes of the creator that fwav- 
ech it,ind changeth into better,or worfe ‘tending ( by Gods difpofition ) ftill to 
that end which the order of the vaiuerfe requireth: fo that that corruption 
which bringeth all natures mortall vnto diffolution , cannot fo diffolue chat 
which was,but it may become thar afterwards which it was beforé,or that which 
_ itfhould be : which being fo, then God, the highekt being , who made all things 
that are not him-felte, (no creature being fitte for that equalitic, being made of 
nothing) and confequently being not able tohaue beene, but by him ) is nor td 
‘bedifcommended through the.caking offence at fome faults, but to bee honored 
- vpon the due confidération of the perfeGion of all natures. -_ 


‘That the Creator hath defers rme and kinde of nature. 


A (a) certaine } Euery thing keeping harmonious agreement both with it felfe and others; - - 
£ *without corrupting difcorde : which made fome ancient writers affirme , that the world 


e ee 


: éonjifed all Upen lone. 


CHAP. b< 


The caufe of the good Anegells bliffeand the ewills wifery, 

rPHE true caufe therefore of the good Angells bliffe , is their adherence to 

_& that moft high effence: and the iuft caufe of the bad Angels mifery, is their 
departure from that high effence ; to refide vpon them-felues, that were not _ sais 
fuch : which vice what is it elfe but (4) pride? For pride ds the roote of all fisne. aaa 
Thefe would not therefore ftick vnto him, their ftrength, and having power to 

bee more( 4 ) perfect by adherence to this higheft good , thev preferred them- 

felues that were his inferionrs,before him. This was the firft fall,mifery and vice 

of this nature,which all were ic not created to haue the higheft being, yet might 

it haue beaticude by fruition of the higheft being : bur falling from him,norbee 

made nothing , but yet leffe then it was ,and confequently miferable. Seekethe 

caufe of this euill will,and you fhall finde iuft none . For what can caufe the wills 

euill the will being fole caufe of all euill ? The euill will therefore caufeth euill 

° ; Qq | | workes 


EE A LL 


446 


SAINT AV GVSTINE. Cuan 


workes,but nothing caufeth the eas/ will .Ufthere be,then either ithath a wel)or 
none. If it haue, it is either a good one ora bad: if good , what foole will fay, a 


good will is caufe of an enti will? It fhould ific caufed finne: but this were ex- 

~ treame abfurditie co affirme.But if that it hauean eusl/ well, chen I acke what cau- 
fed this exii willin it? and to limite my queftions, I aske the caufe of the firft cuill 

* gill. For not that which an other ewM will hath caufed,is the firft exé/ wil, but that 


which none hath caufed : for ftill that which caufeth is before the other caufed, 
If 1 bee anfwered,that nothing caufed it, but ic wasfrom the begsnning , 1 aske 


then whether it were in any nature : If ic wete in none, it had no being : ifit were 


in any,it corrupted it,hurt it,and deprived it of all good : and therefore this Vice 
couldnot be in an euill nature, but ina good , where it might.doe hurt : for if it 
could not hurt, it was no vice,and therefore no bed will: and if it did hurt, it was 
by priuation of good,or diminithing of it. Therfore a bad will could be from eter. 
nity in that wherein a good nature had beene before, which the euill will deftroi- 
ed by hure. Well if it were.not eternall,who made ic ? It muft be anfwered,fome- 
thing that bad no ews wil/: what was this inferior, fuperior, or eqnall vne it? 
If ic were the {uperior, it was becter , and why then had it nota we/l, nay, 4 bet. 
ter will? — = | | 

This may alfo bee faid of the equall: for two gocd wil/s neuer make the one 
the other bads Je remaines then that fome inferior thing that had xo wii! was 
caufe of that vicious wi/lin the Azgels. 1 but all things below them,euen to the 
Joweft earth, being naturall, is alfo good , and hath the goodneffe of forme and 
kinde inall order : how then cana good thing produce an evil will? how can 
goedbe caufe of eé//? for the will turning from the fuperior to the inferior , be- 
comes bad,nor becaufe the thing where-vnto it tusneth is bad, but becaufe the 
diuifion is bad,and peruerfe. No inferior thing then doth depraue the will, but 
the wei/depraues it felfe by following inferior things inordinately. For if two of 
like affe@t in body and mindefhould beholde one ferent perfonage , and the 


_ oneof them be ftirred with aluftfull defirecowards it , and the others thoughts 


ftand chafte, what fhall wee thinke was caufe of the ews! will inthe one and sot 
in the other ? Not the feene beaury : for it tranfformeéd not the wéd in both, and 
yet both faw it alike: nor the flefh of thebeholders face, why not both? nor the 
minde we prefuppofed them both alike before,in body and minde. Shall we fay 
the deuill fecretly fuggefted it into one of them, as though hee confented not to 
it in his owne proper will? 


, 


This confent therefore, the caufe of this affent of the will co vicious de - 


fire is chat wee feeke. For, to take away one let more in the queftion , if 
both were tempted, and the one yeelded, and the other did not , why was 
this, but becaufe the one would continue chafte, and the other would not? 
whence then wasthis fecret fall but from the proper will,where there was fuch 
parity in body and minde, alike fight, and a like temptation ? So then hee that 
defires toknow the caufe of the vstious will in the one of them, if hee markeit 
well fhall finde nothing. For if wee fay that hee caufed it, what was hee ere his 
vicious will,butacreature of 4 good nature, the worke of G O D, that vnchange- 
able good? Wherefore hee that faith that hee that confented to this luftfull 
defire which the other with. ftood, (both beeing before alike affeted , and be- 
holding the beautifull obie& alike ) was caufeof his owne esi will , whereas he 
was good before this viceof will; Oo - 


- a Se. 


« 


Let him aske why he caufed chis ? whether from his nature, or for that hee was 
made of nothing; and he fhall finde that his ew ws// arofe not froma his nature, 
buc‘from his nothing : for if wee {hall make his ature the effeér of his vscions 
will, what fhall wee doe but affirme that geod is the efficient caufe of ew? But 
how can it bee that stare (though it bee mutable ) before it haue a victons will, 
fhould doe vicieufly namely in making the wéll,vitzous? ~~ 


L. VIVES. 


Vt (a) pride | Scotus holds that the dge/s offence was not pride, I thinke onely becaufé 
hee will oppofe Saint Thomas, who held (with the Fathers) the contrary, (6) Perfeé#) ini 
effence and exellence. | 


Se 


That we ought not to fecke out the caufe of the vicious will. 
| Cuap. 7. | 


Et noné therefore feeke the efficient caufe of a casi] will: for it is noteffeiens 

but deficéent , nor is there effec? but defedF: namely falling from that higheft 
effence,vnto alower,this is to haue 4x ewil/ will. The caufes whereof ( beeing not 
efficient but deficient) if one endeuour to feeke, it ig as if hee fhould feeke to fee 
the darkneffe,or to heare filence.: weeknow them both, this by («) the eare, and 
that by the eye : but not by any formes of theirs , but priuation of formes. Leet - 
none then feeke to know that of mee which I know not my felfe : vnleffe hee will 
learne not to know what hee muft know that hee cannot know : for the things 
chac we know by priuation and not by forme,are rather ( if you can conceit mee) 
knowne by not knowing: and in knowing them, are {till vaknowne. For the bo- 
dyes eye courfing ouer bodyly obieds, fees no darkeneffe , but when it ceafeth 
_ tofee. And fo it belongs to the eare , and tono other fence to know filence, 
which notwithftanding is not knowne but by not hearing.So our intelle& doth 
fpeculate the intelligible formes, but where they faile it learneth by not Jearning: 
for who can vnderftand his faults ? This I know, that Gods nature can neuer faile Phil. to: 
in time,nor in part : but all things that are made of nothing may decay: which The dinne 
doe not-with-ftanding more good, as they are more effentiall : for then doe they “ence 20; 
fome-thing when they haue efficient caufes : but inthac they faile,and fall off fale. 
and doe euill; they haue deficient caufes : and what doe they then but vanity 2 __ 

| L. VIVES. 7 | 
Br the (A) eave |Contraries are knowne both by one methode,fay the Philofophers., and the 
primatine is knowne onely by feperation of the knowledge of the Po/itine, 


- Of the peruerfe loue, whereby the foule goeth from the unchangeable 
| tothe changeable good, Crap. 8. 


‘Know befides that wherein the vicious will is refident, therein is that done, 
which if the wid! would not, fhould not bee done: and therefore. the punifh- 
ment falls iuftly vpon thofe acts which are wil/s and not zecef’#ties. It is not the 
(a) thing to which wee fall , but our fall chat is euill: chat is: wee fall tono euill 
_3 Qgq 2 natures 


an: 


448 | SAINT AVGVSTINE C maAP.ge 
| natures, but againft natures order,from the higheft to the lower : and therefore 
The inoe euill. Couetife is no vice in the gold , but in him that peruerfly leaueth iufticeto 
mee Loue gold,whereas iuftice ought alwayes to bee preferred before ritches. Nor is 

bad noe the luft the faule of fweete bautious bodies, but the foules thac runnes peruertly to 
things | -bodily delights , negle@ting temperance, which {cornes all company with thofe, 
"_ & prepares vs vnto far more excellent and fpirituall pleafures. Vaine-glory is not 

a vice proper to humaine praife, but thefoules , chat peruerfely affe&eth praife 

of men, not refpeGing the confciences teftimonie. Noris pride his vice that gi- 

ueth the power, bur a foules,peruerfly louing that power , contemning the iu- 

ftice of the moft mighty.By this then,he that ectnaly affeGted a good of nature, 

though he attaine it, is euill himfel fe in this good;and wretched , being depriued 


ofa better. 
L. VIVES. 
fee E (a) thing \ It isnot the ation , but the quality and manner thereof that is vicious, 
faid Plato. 


whether he that meade the Angels natures yoade their wills good alfo,by the 
infusion of bss lene into thems through bis holy pirtt. Cuar.g. 


GEcing therefore there is n6 naturall nor (4) effentiall caufe , effeting the euill 
of will, but thar euill of mutability of {pitic, which depraueth the good of na- 
cure, arifeth from it felfe : being effeed no way but by falling from God, which 
falling alfo hath nocaufe : If we fay alfo chat good wills haue no efficient caufe . 
we muft beware leaft they bee not held vacreated and coeternall with God. Bur 
feeing thatthe Angels them-felues were created , how can their wills but bee fo 
alfo ? Befides being created , whether were they created with them , or without 
them firft ? if wich them, then doubtleffe hee that made one,made both: and (4) 
as foone as they were created,they were ioyned to him in that loue wherein they 
were created. And therein were they feuered from the other, becaufe they kept 
theirgood-wills ftill ,and the other were changed by falling in cheir euill will, 
from that which was good,whence they needed not hau fallen vnleffe they had 
lifted. But if the good Angels were at firft with-out good wills , and made thofe 
wills in them-felues without Gods working, were they therefore made better of 
them-felues then by his creation? God forbid. For what were they without 
good wills, but euill. Or, if they were not cuill’ becaufe they had no euill wills 
neither,nor fell from that which they had not, how-fo-euer they were not as yet 
fo good, as when they bad gotten good wills. But now if they could not make | 
them-felues better then God ( the Een workeman ofthe world ) had made them: | 
then verily could they never haue had good wills but by the operation of the cre- 
ator in chem.And thefe good wills, effeGing their conuerfion(not co them-felues 
who were inferiours,but) to the fupreme God,to adhere vnto him,and bee blef- 
fed by fruition of him, what doethey elfe but fhew,that che beft will fhould haue 
remained poore,in defire onely,but that he wlio made a good natureof nothing 
capable of himfelfe, (¢ made icbetter by perfecting it of himfelfe, firft hauing 
made it more defirous of perfe@ion? for this muft bee examined: whether the 
good Angels created good willin them-felues , by a good will or a badde, or 
none: if by none, then none they created. If by a badde,, how can a badde 
will producea good ? if by a pes shen had they good wills already. hea 


things)it prophecied fhould beleeue ic. 


1 


Lrs.12. OF THE CITIE.OF GOD. 449 


And who gaue them thofe, birt he thar created themby a good will, that is in that: phe fall 
chaft loueof their adherencé to him; -both forming them nature , and giuing. from good 


them grace?Beleeue it therefore the Angeles were neuer without good will, that is 


Gods lowe: But thofe that were created good, and yet became ews by their proper 
will, which no good naturécan do but in'a voluntary defe@ from good, that, and 
not the good being the canfe of east) either (d) receiued lefle grace from the di- 
uine loue, then they that petftited therein , or if thehad equall good at their crea: 
tion, the one fell by the evz@ wills , andthe other hauing further helpe attained 
that bliffe, from whith they were fure never to fal,as we {hewed in our laft booke. 
Therefore, to gods duc praife wee muft confeffe that the diffufion of Gods fone is 
beftowed as well vpon the Angells , as the Saints,by his holy fpirit beftowed vpon 
them : and chacthac Sqripeure : Jt és good for me to adhere unto God, was peculiar 
at firft tothe holy axgells, before man was made. This good they all participate 
with him to whome they adhere,and aré « bo/y cétty,a liuing f{acrifice,and a liuing 
temple vntothat God. Part whereof, nainely that which the Angel/s fhall gather 
and take vp from this earthly pilgrimage vnto that fociety , being now inthe 
fle(h , vpon edrth,or dead,and refting fn the (e) fecret receptacles of foules, how 
it had firft original, muft I now explairic,as I didbefore of the Angels.For of Gods 
worke, The firff man,came all man kind, as the {cripture faith, whofe authority is 
iuftly admired throughout the earth and thofe natures , whome ( amongft other 


L. VIVES. 


(4) Effentiall, As hauin g effence. (6).As foone.} Hee plainely confeffeth that the eAngells 
were all created in grace.De corrept,et grat. Before they fell they had grace.Hierome alfo 


the caufe 
euill. 


The crenie 
onofthe © - 


vpon Ofea affirmes that the Dexills were created with great fuleeffe of the holy {prrit . But eA Angells 


gxftine De genef.ad lit {eemes of another mind,faying the angelicall nature was firft created vn- 
formall, The Diuines herevpon are divided : fome following Lombard Sent.2.dift.4.eAles,and 
Bonauenture deny thatthe Ansgells were created in grace. Saint Themas holds the contrary. 
L dare not,nor haue not where withal to decide a matter fo mightily difputed and of fuch mo- 
saaranegar Seabee in moft plaine words,and many places,houlds that they were created in grace 
as that of Exechiel {eemes alfo to import : Thon fealeft up the funne,and art full of wifdome, and 
perfect in beanty.(c) Made st. | Shewing that God gaue them more grace when they fhewed 
their obedience ( of this I fee no queftion made : ) in fuch meafure,as hee affured them of eters 
nity of bliffe.(d)Receined leffe.}If all the Angells had grace ginen them, it then fhould haue bia 
diffribueed with refpect of perfons , to {ome more , and to fome of the fame order leffe. But 
it was giuen ener’ to the orders not to each particular e4xge//: where-vpon fome of the 
fame order fell , and fome ftood , though both had grace giuen them alike. (¢) Secret. | Hee 


’ 


Eze,28,32 


doubts not of the glory , but of the glories place before the iudgement;for they may be blef=. = 


edany where, Ged , in whofe fruition they are bleffed being eucry where, 


Of the falfenc{fe of that Hiftory that (aith the world hath continue 

_ | ed many thoufand yeares.C waP.1o. 

| Bs the conie@tures therefore of thofe men that fableof mans andthe worlds 
4 originall they knowe not what paffe for vs : for fome thinke that men 


haue beenealwaies,as of the world;as 4padeis writeth of men:Seuerally mortal but 


oa | Q4q 3 that 


450° SAINT AV GVSTINE. C Har.1o 


_, that,who brought vp artesdand learning, and who firft inhabjted this or that re- 
- gion? they anfwered vs: the world. hath at certaine times beene fo wafted by 
fica deluges,that the men were brought to a very few:whofe progenie mul- 
tiplied againe and fo feemed this as mans firft originall , whereas indeed it was | 
but a reparation of thofe whome the fires and flouds. had deftroyed: but that 
man cannot have produdtion but from man. They {peake now what they thinke, 
but not what they know.: being deceiued by afore of moft falfe writings , thae 
fay the world hath continued 4 many thoufand yeares, where as the holy {criptures 
juethvs not accompt of (c) full fixe thoufand yeares fince man was made. To 
Frew the falfeneffe of thefe writings briefly, and that their auchority is not worth 
_ aruthberein, (a) that Epiftle of Great Alexander to his mother , conteininga 
‘narration of things by an e£gsptian Prieft vato him, made out of their religious 
my fteries; conteineth alfo the Monarchies , that the Greeke hiftories recorde 
alio: Inthis Epittle (e) the Affyrian monarchie lafteth fiue thoufand yeares and 
aboue. But in the Greeke hiftorie, from Belws the fir2 King,ie contiaueth but one 
thoufand three hundred yeares. And with Belus doth the Egiptian ftorie begin 
alfo. The Perfian Monarchie (faith that Epiftle) vneill Alexanders conqueft ( to 
whom this Prieft fpake thus ) lafted aboue eight thouafand yeares: whereas the 
Macedonians vntill Acexanders death lafted but foure hundred foure fcore and 
fiue yeares,and the Perfians vntill his victory two hundred thirty & three yeares, 
_ bythe Greeke ftory. So farre are thefe computations fhort of the Egiptians,be- 
ipa ae ing not equall withthem though they were trebled. For (f) the Egiptians are 
ee faid once tohaue had their (¢ )yeares but foure moneths long: fo that one full 
Ey -ahiged yeare of the Greekes or ours, isiuftthreeof their old ones. Buc all this will not 
truerthen make the Greeke and Egiptian computations meete: and therefore wee mutt ra- 
the Egipti- ther truft che Greeke, as not exceeding our holy fcriptures accompt. But if this 
compurti« Epittle of —dlexander being fo famous, differ fo farre from the molt probable ac. 
en ofthe compt,how much leffe faith then ought we to giue to thofe their fabulous anti- 
* guities,fraughe with leafings, againft our diuine bookes ,that fore-told thatthe 
whole world fhould beleeve them,and the whole world hath done fo: and which 
prooue that they wrote truth in things paft,by the true occurrences.of things to 
come,by them prefaged. | | 


_ 8 ? L.VIVES. | : 

GEnerally (4) mortall | eApuleius Florid, [.2. cunttim, genetally, or vniuerfally of cuntus,all, 

(b) And when'|  Macrobius handleth this argument at large. De fom, (cip. and thinkes he 

- . pits it off with thac chat Augaffine here reciteth. Plato feemes the auchor of this fhift in his 
— Thmene, where Critias relating the conference of the Egiptian Prieft and Solon, faith, that wee 
know not what men bane done of many yeares before: becaufe they change their countrie, or are 
expelled it by flouds,fires,or fo, and the reft hereby deftroyed. Which anfweris eafily confu- 
ted,fore-feeing that all the world can neither bee burned nor drowned (Ars/?. Meteor.) the re~ 
mainders of one ancient fort of men might be preferued by another, and fo deriued downe to 
_vs,which Arifforle {eeing (as one witty,and mindfull of what he faith) affirmeth that we haue 

the reliques of the moft ancient Philofophy leftvs. (Metaphyf.t2. Why then is there no me- 
mory of things three thoufand yeares before thy memory.(c) Full fix thou{and] Enfebins whofe 
Theliberty 2¢count Anguftine followeth,reckoneth from the creation nto the fack of Rome by the Gothes 
chat the ald $61 t.yeares : following the Septuagsars. For Bede out of the Hebrew referueth vnto the time 
weriters vied of Honoris aud Theodofus the yonger ( when the Gothes tooke Rome ) but 4377.0f this dif 
in compus fetene computation hcre-after. (d) That Epiftle }Of this before,booke cight.(e) The Affyrian] 
rationof Héreofin the 1&.booke more fitly.Much liberty do the old chroniclers iE in their accompt of 
cms tise Pii7 196.1 1,0 of Exdoxns, faith that Zoroaffer Hiued 6000. yeares b¢fore Plato's death. 
an. Ss . | Los 4 So 


L 12.12. ° 


Tv 


Sofaith Ariforle. Herimippas faith he was 5000.ycares before the TrojanWwarre.. Tally writes 
thacahe Chaidees had accounts of 470000. yearesinthcir chronicles. De dixinat. 1; Diodoa 
rasvaith alié that they reckned from their firft.aftronomer vntill great Alexander 430003) 
yeares. (f) The Egiptians| Extsedmeé liers in their yeares. Plato writes that the Citty Sais in: 
Epipt had chronicles of the countries deedes for 8000. yeares fpace . And Athens was buile 
rooo. yeares before Sais, Laertius writes chat Valean was the fonne of Niles, and reckneth” 
48863. yearcs begweene himiand Great Alexander: : in which time there fell 343, ecclipfes 
of the Sunnc,and § 32.0f the Moone. (Mela lieth alictle lower: fayino thatthe Egiptians ret= 
kon ¢40.Kings before Area/is,and aboue 13006. yeares. But the lie wanted this fubfequent, 
had Bnosthey were Egiptians, Heayen hath had fouire changes of reuolutions , and the Sunne 
hath {ectwife whereit tifech now. (Déodorgs. alfo writteth that {tom Offris vnto Alexander 
that bujlc Alexandria, fome recken 10000. and fome 1 3000. yeares: and fome fable that che. 
Gods had the Kingdome of Ifis: and then that men reigned afterward very neare 1 5000, 
yearcs, entill the 185, Olympiad , when Profomy beganne to reigne. Incredible was this ab- 
fardvithity of the Esiptians who to make thernfelues che firft of the creation, lied fo many 
taduland ycares . Which was the caufe chat many were deceiued, and deceiued others alfo as 
concerning the Worlds originall , 7#/ly followes Plato and maketh Egipt infinitly old,-and fo 
doth 'rifterte. Rolis.7. (g) Yeares but | Pliny lib,7. faith the Nations divided their yeares fome 
by the Sommer, fomie by the Winter,fome by the quarters 4s the Archadians whofe yeare was 
three monethes , fome by the age ofthe Moone , asthe Egiptians . So that fome of them 
hauclived athoufand of their ycares, Cenforinus faith that ihe Egiptians moft ancient yeares 
was two moneths. Then King Pio made it foure, at lait cameto thirteene moneths and 
fiue daies . Diodoras faith that it being reported that fome of the ancient Kings had feigned 
¥ 200. yeares, beeing to much to beleeue,they found for certaine that the courfe of the Sunne 
besing not yet knowne, they counted their yeares by the Moohes . $6. then the wonder of 
oli fables ceaferh, fome diuiding our yeare into foure as diuérs of the Greekes did. Diedon 
rus faith alfo that the Chaldees had mortethes to their yeares. But to thew what my con- 
icCtute is of thefe numbers of yeares amongft the nations, I hold that men beeing fo much 
giuen to the ftarres,counted the courfe of euery flarre fora yeare. So thatin 30.yeares of the 
Surihe;are one of Suturne,fiue of Jupiter, fixe of Afars,moré then jo. of UVenms and Mereary, 


and almoft 400,0f the AZoone.So they arein all neare s00, 


Of thofe that hold not the eternity of the World, but ether a dtfolution ana - 
+. generation of shumerable Worlds, or of this one ai the expiration of 
7 certaine yeares, Cap rie / 


BY others there are, thatdd¢ nor thinke the Werld eternall , and yeteither 
1 imagine it,not to beone (4) world but many : or (b) one onely, diflolued and 
regenerate at the date of certaine yeares. Nowthefe muft needs confeffe,thae 
therewere firft men of them{elues, ere any mien were begotten.(c) For they can- 
not thinke that the whole world perifhing , any man could temiainé,as they may 
doc.in thofe burnings,& invndations which left ftill fome men to repaire man- 
kinde: but as they hold the world to bee re-edified out of the owne ruines, fo 
mutt they beleeué that man-kinde firft was produced out of the elements; and 
from thefe firft, as mans following propagation, as other creatures, by generati- 
on of their like. — a ate = | 
: | | L. VIVES. “ag Mae * 3 
N2: to bee one (a) world | Which Democritus and Epicurns held. (6) One oxely| Heraclytus, 
Hippafus and the Stoickes held that the world Should be confumed by fire; and then be re- 
ya (c) Fot they cannot)Platoand Ariftotte hold chat there canhot be an yniuerfall deluge, 
(OF uUmiIng: . a Fit the et a ge etn Bea a Sa oo eee ys ah 


cy 


FTHECITIEOF GOD  —§ 451 


Themonth: 


by years, 


\ 


eee. -_ = 


= - =-— ecm ein 
we 


eas. Paes 


- 


. ae ee Tae --- aan . 
ee EEE Te yt 


— 


i 


legorx Zeta i ena eS re 


feo es es ee 


a 


SAINT AV GVSTINE. Cuan 


But the Steickes'(as Tully faith) beleeued that the World at length fhould become all on fire, 
and the moifture fo dried,as neither the earth could nourifh.the plants,nor che ayre be drawn 


in bredth,nor produced,all che water being confumed . So that Plato and _4réftorte ftillrefer- 


ued fome.men for propagation : thefe,none, bur deftroied 4t,tore-edifie AH... 


- Offuch asheld Mans Creation too lately effected. Crav.t2z, 


NM Herefore our anfwere to thefe that held the world to haue beeng 4b eterae, 
againft Plates exprefie confeffion , though fome fay hee fpake potas hee 
thoughr, the fame fhalbe our anfwere ftill to thofe chat thinke fans Creation too 
lately effe@ed, having letten thofe innumerable {paces of time paffe , and by the 
{criptures authority beene made but fo late,as within this fixe thoufand yeares, 
Ifthe breuity of time be offenfiue,and that the yeares fince Man was made feeme 
fo few, let them confider that(s)nothing that hath an extreame,ts continuall;and 
thacall the definite {paces of the World being compared to the interminate 
Trinity, are as (a very little : Nay as ) iuft nothing . And therefore though wee 


-fhould recken fiue or fixe,or fixty, or fix hundred thoufand yeares,and multiply 
them fo often till the number wanted a name,and fay then G O D made man, yet _ 


may we aske why he made him no fooner? For GODS panfe before Maas Cree- 
tion beeing fromall eternity was fo great , that compare a definite number with 
ic,of neuer fo vnfpeakeable a quantity, and it is not fo much,as one halfe dropof 
water being counterpoifed with the whole Océan: for in thefe , chough the one 
be faexceeding fmall,and theother fo incomparably great,yet (6) both aredef- 
nite. But that cime which hathany originall,runne it onto neuer fo huge a quar- 
tity being compared vnto that which hath no beginning , I know not whetherto 
callic fmall,ornothing. For, with-draw but moments from the end of the firlt, 
and be the number neuer fo great,jc will(as ifone fhould diminifh thenumberof 


_ amans daies from the time he liues in, to his birth day Jdecreafe,vntill we come 


to the very beginning . But from the later abftra@ (not moments, nor daies,nor 
monethes nor years,but as much time as the other whole number contained, (lie 
it out of the cempaffe ofall computation) and that as often as you pleale, 
preuaile you when youcan neuer attaine the Beginning, it hauing none atall? 
Wherefore that which we aske now after fiue thoufand yeares and the onerp/us 
our pofterity may as well aske after fixe hundreth thoafand years , if our mortal- 
lity fhould fucceede, andour infirmity endure fo long. And our forefathers, 
nem! vpon the firft mans time might haue calledsthis in queftion. Nay the 

rftman himfelfe, chat very day that he was made,or the nexc might haue asked 
why he was made no fooner ? But whenfoeuer hee had beene made, this contro- 
= of his originall and the worlds (hould haweno better foundation then tt 
nath now. | ee it OR pg 


LE, VIVES. _ 


N othe (a) that} (ie.de fene&.When the extreame comes,thenthat which is paft,is gone 


(6) Both are.| Therefore is there fome propertion betweene them , whereas berweene 
definite,and indefinitethere isnone. .. | 


Of the reucla tion of Times at whofe expiration fome Philofophers held that the ¥- ; 


|... atuerfe [hould returne to the flate it wasn at fir, Cuar. 13. | 


N° thefe Philofophers belecued that this world had no other diffolution, | 


Lrs12. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 453 


uta renewing of it continually at cértaine( 2) revolutions of time,wherein the 


nature of things wasrepaired : and fo paffed on a continual (5) rotation of ages 


- paft and comming : whether this fell out in the continuance of one world,or the 


world arifing , and falling gaue this fueceffion , and date of things by the owne re- 
nonation, from which ridiculous mocking they cannot free the immortal nor the | 

wileft foule,but ic mutt ftil be toffed ynto falfe bliffe, & bearen backe into true mi- 

fery.For how is that bliffe true, whofe eternity is euer vncertaine,the foule either 

being ignorac of the returne vnto mifery,or fearing it inthe midft of felicity?Bue 

ifit go from miferyto happineffe never to returne , then is fome thing begun in 

time which time thall neuer giue end vnto, and why not then the world>and why 

net man made therein;(co avoide al the fal fe tra¢ts that deceived wittes haue de« 

uifed to diftract men from the truth) : for(¢}fome wil haue that place of. Ecclefiaf Ect.t.9,16 
tes> what is it that hath beewe that( which fhalbe : what is it that bath beene made? 

shat which {ballbe made.( d ).And there is no new thing under the funne : nov any thing 

whereof one may fayybehold this is new: it hath beene already in the time that was before 

vs.) to be vnderftood of thefereciprocall revolutions , whereas he meant either 

of che things hee fpoke of before,véz,the fuccefliue generations ; the funnes mo- 
tions,the corrents fallssor elfe generally ofall tranfitory creaturessfor there were 

men before vs ,thereare with vs, andthere {halbe after vs, fo it is of trees ; and 

beafts. Nay even monfters, though they be vnufuall,and diuers, and fome have 

fallen out but once, yetas they are generally wonders , and miracles , they are 

both paft and to come:nor is it newes to fee a monfter vnder thé Sunne. T hough 

{ome will haue the wife man to fpeake of Gods predeftination thit fore-framed 

all , and therefore that now there is nothing new vnder the Sunne. Bir farre be 

our faith from beleeuing that thefe words of Salomon fhould meane thofereuolu- 

tions that they do difpofe the worlds courfe and renouation by : as P/eto the A- 

thenian Philofopher taught in the Academy that in a certeyne vnbounded 

{pace, yet definir, P/to himfelfe, his {chollers, che wo and {choole fhould after 

infinite ages meeteall in that placeagaine and beeasthey werewhenheetaught _ 
this. God forbid I fay thac wee fhould beleeue this. For Chrift once died far. onr Rom6, _ 
finnesand rifing againe ,dieth no more , nor hath death any future dominion oner him, P Atle raps 
and wee after our refurrection Jbalbe alwaies with the Lord, to whome now we fay - 
with the Pfalne : Thou wilt keepe-vs O Lord and preferne vs from this generation for 

exer. The following place! thinke fittes them beft: The wicked walke ina circuit: 

not becaufetheir lite(as they chinke)is to rtin circularly but becaufe their falfe do- 

rine runs round in acircular maze. 


eee Ce OE OE 8 ees 8 Om O668. awe: ee erent ome ne wow + ro ewer one eee roma. 


L. VIVES. 


R Eeclations (4) Of. } Platonifme holding acontinuall progreffion'and-facceflion of¢aufes = 
and effcéts,and when heauen hath reuolued it felfe fully,and come to the point whence ic Reuolatien 
inoued firft,then is the great yeate perfect , and all hall be as they were at firft. (4) Rotation, |. tmes. 
Columeen,a fix word of Uolno to roule.(¢) Some. |Origen,Periarch lib.2. Iwillfollow Hierome | 
rather then Raffnas in citying Orsgens Dogmaticall doétrines ; and that for good reafons: we 
hold (faith Origen hat there was a world ere this , 8 fhalbe another after it:wil you heare our , 
reafon for the later? Here E/ay fayingl will create new heauens,and a new earth;to remaine in 
my a forthe firlt Ecclefiaffes : What ts it that bath bin? that which flialbe.cfor al things 
haue bin, as they are inthe old ages before vs. Thus Origen ; yethee doubts whether chefe 
words fhalbe alike , or fomewhat different. (a) eAnd there is no.|] Simmachus hath cranflated 
this better then Hicrome , referring it ynto Geds prefcience , that al things of this world ih 
| rft 


f.65.37: 


ee 


454 


God etere 
aall, 


Pfal,x I, 


SAINT AVGVSTINE = Cnarg3.8015. 


firft in the Creators knowledge,though e4ugwftine alittle before, take it as ment of the gene. 
rality of things,and toucheth Hieromes expofition. | 


Of Mans temporelle ftate ynade by God,out of no newne(fe or change 
ofwillh Cuar 14... 
BY: what wonder if chefe men runne in their circular error ,and findeno way 
forth,feeing they neither know mankindes originall nor his end ? beeing not 
able to pearce into Gods depths : who being eternall, and without beginning yer 
gauetime a 6, ) and made Man in time whom hee had not made before, 
yetnot now maketh he him by any fuddaine motion,butas hee had eternally de- 


creed.VWho can penetrate this (4) infcrutable depth, wherein GOD gaue Mana’ 


tenporall beginning andhad none before : and this out of his eternall,vnchange- 
able will; multiplying all mankinde from one? for when thePfal mift had fayd, 
Thon {bale oe vsOL ORD, «and preferne vs from this generation for exer, then hee 
reprehendeth thofe whofe fond and falfe do@trine referue no eternity forthe 
foules bleffed freedome, in adioyning , The wicked walke in 4 Cyrenite : as Who 
fhould fay what dof thou thinke or beleewe? Should wefay that God{ uddainely de- 
termined to make Man,whom he had not madein all eternity before,and yet that 
God is cuer immutable,and cannot change his will,leaft this fhould draw vsinto 
doubt,he anfwereth God prefently,faying:/2 thy deepe ws(dome didf? thon multiply 
the — of men. Let men thinke,talke or difpute,as they will({aith he)and argue 
as they thinke , Js thy deepe wifdome, which none can difcouer , did/t thew multsph 
mankinde. For it is moft deepe, that GO D fhould bee from eternity , and yet 
decree - Man fhould bee made at this time , and not before,wichout alterati- 
on of will. | 


- L. VIVES. 


His inferutable| The text is inne ftigabilem,put for the iuft contrary mininze inueftigabilem 
vnfearchable,as indelere and sswocare in latine is ved both for affirmative and negatiue. 


Whether(topreferue Gods eternal domination) wee muft fuppofe that he hath al- 
- waies hadcreaturesto rule ouer ,and how that may be held alwaies created, 
which is not cocternall withGod. Cuar. 15. 


BY: I,as I dare not deny Gods domination («) eternall from ever,fo may I n0t 
doubt but chat Man hada temporall beginning before which he was not. But ' 


Rem.11.14 when I thiake, what God fhould bee Lord ouer from enternity , here doe I feare 


to affirme any thing , becaufe] looke into my felfe, and know that it is fayd,#7he 
can know the Lords connfells? or who can thinke what Godintendeth? Our a oa 
ons are fearefull ,and our fore-cafts are vncertaine. The corruptible body fup- 
preffeth the foule,and the earthly manfion keepeth down the minde thatis much 
occupied. Therefore of thefewhichI reuolue in this earthly manfion,they ate 
many, becaufe out of them all I cannot finde that one of them or befides them 
which perhaps I thinkenot vpon, and yet is true. IfI fay there hath beene crea 
tures euer for God to bee Lord off who hath beene euer,and euer Lord : but = 
they were now thofe, andthen others by fuccefle of time(leaft wee fhould : za 


\ 


cee ee a ef 


a ae: 


AM WR TR. OWS 


oS as 


we ~A 


gells that haue beene alwaies , fhould yet bee vncreated 


List, = | OF THE CITIE OF GoD,’ - 


forne of chenrcoerernall with the Creat or , which faith and reafon reprooueth) 


455. ; 


Then mutt wee looke that ir bee not abfurd for 2 mortall creature to haue beene | 


fuccefliuely from the beginningand the immortal creatureto haue had a tem. 
porall original in this our time, andnot before! wherein the Angells were crea- 
ted, (whether they bee ment by the name of light, or, heauen;of whom ic is fayd, 
in the beginning God created heauen and earth: and that they were not fromthe be- 
ginning,vacill che time that they were created: for otherwife they fhould be co- 
ecernall with God. IfI fay they were not created in time. bur before it, char God 
might bee thei: Lord, who hath beenea Lord for ever . Then am I demaunded, 
whether they were before all rimé,ar how could they that were created be from 
eternity ? And here] might perhaps anfwere how that which hath beene for the 
fpace ofall time, may not bee vnfitly fayd zo haue beene alwaies, and they haue 
bin fo far inall time,thacthey were before all time,if Time began with héauens 
motion, and they were before heauén. But iftime begannenot {fo , buc were be- 
fore heauen not in houres,daies,moneths or yéars(for fure it is thatthefe dimén. 
fions , properly called times,beganne from the ftarres tourfes,as God faidwhen 
fhe made them : Let them be for fines and feafons and daies.and yeares)but in fome 

other wondrous morion.whole former part did paffe by,and whofe later, fuccee- 

ded , itbee:ng impoffible for them to goe both together: Ifthere were fucha 
heauen in the Angells morions,and that as foone as they were made,they began 
to mooue thus, even inthis refpect haue they beene from the beginning of all 
Time: Time,and they hauing originall both at once. And who will nor fay that 
what hath beenefor all Time, hath beene alwaies? But if] anfwere thus; fome 
will fay to me,why are they not then coeternall withthe Creator ifboth he and 
they haue beene alwaies 2? What thall I fay to chis ? That they haue bin alwaies, 
feeing that time & they had originall both together,and yet they were'created? 

for we deny not thar timé was created,though it hath beene for all times conti- 
nuancesotherwife, there fhould have beene atime that had beene no time, bue 

what foole will fay fo ? wee may fay,there was atime when Rome was not: when 


¢ va ‘ 


Ierufalem was not: Utbraham yor Man himfelfe,or fo, when they all werenot. 
Nay the world it felfe being not made at times: beginning but afterwardes, wee 
may fay there was atime when the world was not. But to fay there wasa time when 
time was not , isas improper , asto fay there was aMan when there was no 


Man , or a worlde’, when the world was not. Ifweemeane cf divers perti- 


‘culars,wee may fay,this Man was when that was not: and{fo this Time was when 
that was nor; true. Butto fay Time was, when no Time was Who is fo fortitha 


So thenas we fay Time was created , and yet hath beene alwaies > becaufe it | 


hath beene whileft Time hath beene, fo is it no confe uent then thar the Aj- 
> | eGing they hatie beene 
alwaies, onely in that they haue beene fince Time hath beene :and that becaufe. 
Timecould not hauebeene without them, For where no creature is whofe mo-. 
tion may proportion Time forth, there can bee no Time: and therefore though 


they haue beene.alwaics they are created , and not coeternall with the Creator: 


(b)For hec hath beenne vnchangeable from all eternity,but they wete createdjand 
yet are fayd tohaue beene alwaies, becaufe they have beeneall-Time, tharcould 
not bec without them. Bur Time,beeing tranfitory,and thutable,cannot be co- 


eternall wich vnchanging eternity? And therefore though Angells haue no bedi- 
Ay traiifmutation , nor is this part paftin them andthe. other tocome, yettheir «.: -’-. 
motion 3 meafuring Time;admitceth the differences of paftandtocome: And ©. * 


ae | thetefore 


eo nmmnastiimananeniesemetenssetine een menanmmneaaaaal 


sar. 
456 | _ SAINT AV GVSTINE. C wari 


therefore they can neuer be cocternal with their Creator, whofe motion admit- 
tech neither paft,prefenc,nor furure. Wherefore G O D hauing beene alwaiesa | 
Lord, hath alwaies had acreature to be Lord ouer,not begotten by him, bur crea- 
ted out of nothing by him, and not coeternall with him , for hee was — 
though in notime before it: nor foregoing it in any {pace, but in perpetuity. Bur 
if 1 anfwere this to thofe that aske me,how the Creator fhould be alwaies Lord, 
and yethaue no creature to be Lord ouer: or how hath hee acreature that isnot 
coeternall with him,ific hath beenealwaies : I feare to bee thought rather to af- 
firme what I know not,then teach what I know?So that I returneto the Creators 
reuealed will ; what hee allowes to wiler knowledges, in this life,or referueth for 
all vnto the next, I profeffe my felfe vnableto attaineto.. But this I thought to 
handle without affirming,that my readers , may fee what queftions toforbeare 
as dangerous : and not to hold them fit for farther inquirie: rather following the 
nomtz Apoftles wholefome counfell, faying : 1/ay through the grace that ts gine me,unte 
- euery one among it you, prefame sotto under ftand more then is meete to underfiand, 
but underftand according to fobricty , as God bath dealt unto euery man(c) the mes- 
fare of faith , for (d) ifan infant bee nourished according to his ftrength, hee will 
grow vp,but ifhe bee ftrained abouc his nature , he will rather fade then increafe 
ingrowthand{trength. -. 


L.VIVES. 


Do (4) eternall| He had no feruants to rule,in refpe& of whom he inight be called 
a Lord : for Lord isa relatiue : and it ficted nor the Sonne and the Holy Ghoft to call him 
Lord, (6) Hee hath beene} His continuance, is,but wee abufe the words : and fay hee was,and 
fhalbe :not becing able in ourcircumf{cribed thoughts to comprehend the eternity. (c) 7 he 
mecafure] wtrgor views. The Greekes vic the eAcenfatine often of our ablarine , or rather for the 
feauenth cafe Past meaneth the proportionating of wifdome to the meafure of faith. (4) Jf 
an infant | Quintilian hath fuch another fimily : poure water eafily into a narrow mouthed 
_glaffe,and it wilbe filled : bue powre to faft,and it will runne by,and sot go in./s/ftntlib.x. 


How wee muft under fland that God promifed Man life erernall,before 
 alleternity. Crar. 16. 


V Viiatreuolution paffed ere mans creation,I confeffe I know not : but fire I 
| am,no creature is coeternall with the Creator. The Apoftle fpeaketh of e- 
ternall times norco ¢ome,bur(which is more wondrous )patt. For thus he faich, 
Tiarz,, Vader the hope of eternal! lsfe which God that cannot lie, hsth promifed before all eter- 
| wity(a) of time: but his word he hath manifefted in time. Behold heetalketh of 
Times eternity paft,yet maketh it not coeternall with G O D. Forhe was not on- 
ly himfelfe before all eternity , but promifed eternall life before it,which hema- 
nifefted in his due Time: chat was, és word: for thatis eternal/ fe. But how 
did he promife it vato men that were not before eternity but that in his eternity 
and coeternall world,he had predeftinated what was in Time to be manifefted. 


| L. VIVES. 
Theeters | 


arabe B Bfore (a) all evernity.| Tit, 1.2. ‘Hierome expoundes itthus. Wee may wot onsit tediclive 
are, my DD bee G O'D that cannot lie, promifed life , before esernity . Ewen finge the world (as itisin 
| = 3" ae Garth) 


Li3.13. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. ° 457 


o_o + ——_— 


Genefis was made, and time ordeined to paffe in daies,months cy years,in this.courfe the times paffe 
and come,peing paft or future.Whervpon fome Philofophers held no time prefent,but all either _ 
paft or to come : becaufe all chat we doc, fpeake,or thinke,, either paffeth as it isa doing, or is 
to come ific bee not done. We muft therefore beleeue an eternity of continuance, before thefe 
worldly times: in which,the Father was, with the Sonne and the Holy Ghoft,and if I may fay 
fo,all eternity is onc Time of Gods : nay innumerable Times, for he being infinite was before 
Time, and fhall exceede all Time : our world is not yet 6000. yearcs old: what eternities 
what huge Times and originalls of ages may we imagine was beforeit, wherein the Angells, 
} Thrones,Dominations and other hoafts ferued God , and fubfifted by Gods command,with- 
a outmeafure or courfes of Times ? Sothen,before all thefe Times , which acither the tongue 
fk can declare, the minde coimprize , or the fecret thought once touch at,did GOD the Father of ; 
wifdome promife his Word and Wifdome, and Life ta fuch as would beleeue ypon this pro- 
‘ -mife: Thus far Hierome. Peter Lumbard obiecting this againft him-felfe , maketh Héerome 
cs fpeake it as confuting others ,notafhrming himfelfe. Senttib.2.So doth he with Anugufine 
i alfo in many places : an eafie matter , when great authors oppofe ought chat wee approoue, 
Ms Auguftene againit the Prifcilians/ts faith that them times were called crernall,before which there 
was ne time,as if one fhould fay , from the creation,our common reading is : before the world 
Mt began,the greeke is xpd 8p xp oray dioptey. 


ee oes. 


The defence of Gods unchanging will againft thofe that fetch Gods 
workes about from eternity,sn circles,from ftate 
ws ee tofiate. Cuar.i7, 


No: doeI doubt that there was no man before the firft mans creation: but 
: deny the(I cannoc tell what ) reuolution of the fame man] know not how 
: often,or of others like him in nature , nor can the Philofophers driue mee from 
i this, by obieing(acutely they chinke)chat sui/um (a) énfinitum ef (erbile,infinice Pee 
. things are beyond reach of knowledge. And therefore God({ay they Jhath defi- span the 
nice formesin himfelfe of all the definite creatures thathee made : nor mutt his creation of 
goodnefie be ever heldidle , nor his workes temporall,as if he had had fuch an e- ee 
: __ ternity ofleafure before,and then repented him of it and fo fell co worke: there- 
fore, fay they, is this reuolution neceffary : the world either remayning in 
change(which though tt hath beene alwaies yet was created)or elfe being diffol- 
ved,and re-edified in this circular courfe : otherwife giuing Gods workes atem-_ 
orall beginnmg wee feeme to make him difallow and condemne that leafure 
thathe refted in from all eternity beforeas floathfull, and vfeleffe . But if hee did 
| create from eternity snow this and then that,and came to make man in time,thae 
| was not made before,then fhall hee feeme not to haue made him by knowledge 
| (which they fay containes nothing infinite )but at the préfenttime, by chance 
as it came into his minde . Bue admit thofe revolutions ( fay ney ) either with 
the worlds continuance in change, or circular revolution , and then wee acquit 
GOD both of this (fo long and idle feeming ) ceflation, and fromall opera- 
tion in rafhneffe and chance. For ifthe fame things bee not renewed , theva- 
Semi of things infinite are too incomprehenfible for his know!edge or pre- 
cience. | 
Thefe batteries the vagodly doe plant againft our faith, to winne vsinto 
their cirele: but ifreafon will nor refute them , faith muft deridethem. Butby 
Gods grace reafon will lay thofe circularities fat inongh. For here is thefe 
mens error: running rather ina maze then ftcpping inte therighe way ,thac 
they proportionate the divine vnchangeable power , vnto they humaine fraile _ 
oO oo 7 and 


6 
458 SAINT AVGVSTINE Cuap.r7. & 18. 


and weake fpirie, in mutability and apprehenfion. Butas the Apoftle faith 1 (4) 
Comparing themf{elues tothemfelnes they know not themfelues . For becaufetheir 
actions that are fuddainely done, proceede all from new intents , their mindes 
beeing mutable , they doe imagine (notG OD, for him they cannot compre- 
hend , but) themfelues for G O D , and compare noz him to himfelfe, but them. 
felues (in his ftead) vnto themfelues. But weé may notthinke that GOD S reft 
Gods —_ affects him one way , ahd his worke another, hee is neuer affected , nor doth his 
bit: nature admit any thing that hath not beene euer inhime That which is afe@- 
ng, : saga 
ed ,fuffereth, andthat which fuffers,is mutable. For his vacation is not idle, 
floathfull nor fluggifh, nor is his worke painefull , bufie, or induftrious. Hee 
can reft working , and wcrke refting. Hee can apply an eternall willtoa new 
worke, and begins not to worke now becaufe he repenteth that hee wrought not 
before. Butifhee refted firft and wrought after ( which I feenot how mancan 
conceiue ) this firft and afcer were in things that firfthadno beeing, and after- 
wards had. Bucthere was neither precedence nor fubfequence in him , to alter 
or abolith his will, but all chat euer hee created , was in his vnchanged fixed will 
eternally one and the fame: firft willing that they fhould not be , and afterwards 
wiliinz that they fhould be, and fo they were not, during his pleafure, and began 
to be,at his pleafure. Wonderoufly fhewing to fuch as can conceiue it, Re 
needed none of thefe creatures,(but created them of his pure gdodneffe) hauing 
continued no leffe bleffed without them, from alll vn-begunne eternity. 


a.Cor, 10, 
13, 


L. VIVES. 


Infinitum, NY’ lum infinitum (a)} -Ariff. metaphyf-2. and in his firft of his pofferior eAnalitikes, he faith 
* “that then know we a thing perfettly when we know the end;and that fingularities are infinite but 
uniner{alities moft fimple.So as things are infinite they cannot bee knowne, but as they are definite, 

they may. And Plato hauing diuided athing ynto fingularities , forbiddes further progrefle 


for they ave infinite and incomprehenfible. (6) Comparing \ Cor.2. 10. This place, Erafmmus faith, 
Auguftsne vieth often in this fence. | : 


Again fuch as fay that things infinite are aboue Gods 
| knowledge. -Cuap. 18. 
Namber. FQ Ve fuch as fay that thirigs infinite are paft Gods knowledge, may euen afwelk 
panaies leape head-long into this pit of impiety , and fay that God knoweth not all 
numbers. [hae numbers are infinite, it is fure,for take what number you can,and 
thinke to end with it let it bee neuer fo great and immenfé 11 will ad vnto it,not 
one,nor two, but by the law of number , multiply it vnto ten times the fummeit 
was. And fo is euery number compofed,that one (a)cannot be equall to another, 
but all are different , euery perticular being definite, and all in general, infinite. 
(6) Doth not GOD then know thefe numbers becaufe they are infinite, and can 
his knowledge attaine one fum of numbers, & not the reft ? what madman would 
fay fornay they dare not exclude numbers from Gods knowledge, P/eto hauing fo 
commended God for vfing them in the worlds creation: and our Scripture faith 
Witt1,t7 Of God. Thos haft ordered al things in meéfure number and weight:and the Prophet 
” faith. He sumbreth the world :and the Gofpell faith : Wal the hezres of your heads are 
Mat.10,30 zambred. | | . | 
God forbid thé that we fhould think ¥ he knoweth not number: whofe — 
aD 


“et Sm 


\ 


Lassa. - OF THE CITIE OF-GOD. 459 


and vnderftanding is in numerably infinite as Dawid faith: for the infinirenefle of 
number though ic bee beyond number is nor vnknowne to him whofe know: 

ledge is infinite. Therefore it whatfoeuer bee knowne be comptehended inthe 

bound of that knowledge, then is all infiniceneffe bounded inthe knowledge of 
GO D, becaufe his knowledge is infinite, and becaufeicis not vncomprehenf- 

ble vnco his knowledge. Wherefore ifnumbers infinitenefle,bee no: infinite vn- 

to Gods knowledge,nor cannot bee, what are wee meane wretches that dare pre- 

{ume tolimmic his knowledge ,or fay that if this reuolution beenot admittedia 

the worlds renewing, God cannot either fore-know althings ere hee made them, 
or know them when hee made them ? whereas his wifdome beeing fimply and 
vniformely manifold, can comprehend , all incoiprehenfibility,by his incom. 

prehenfible compreheafion,fo that whatfoeuer thing thacis new and vnlike co all 

other hee fhould pleafe to make , it could not bee new,nor ftrange vnto him,nor 

fhould he fore-fee ita little before, but containe it in his eternall prefcience. 


ce aa 


L.VIVES. 


OG cannot |} Two men,two horles or whatfoeuer, make both one number . Linquire not 
~“ here whether the number and the thing numbred bee one or no : the {chooles ring of that 
loud inough,(6) Doth xor| The beft reading. 


Of the worlds without endyor ages of. Ages. 
| Crap.ly. 


Hat he doth fo,and that there is a continual connexion of choferimes which Sectla fos. 
are called Secula monde a es ofages,or worlds without end: running — 
on ina predeftinate difference: onely the foules that are freed from mifery,re- 
mayning eternally bleffed ,or that thefe words , Seculs/eculorum doe importthe 
worlds /dea remayning firme in Gods wifdome and beeing the efficient caufeof 
this tranfitory world,I dare not affirme . The fingular may bee an explication of 
the plura'l,as if wee fhould fay, Heaven of heauen , for the Heauens of heauens. 
For GOD calls the firmament aboue which the waters are , Heauen > inthe fin- 
gular number, and yet the Pfalme faith , amd yom waters that bee abouethe HeauenS, 
praife the name of the LOR D. Which of thofe ewo it be,or whether Secula feculo- orepe 
yum haue another meaning , is a deepe queftion. We may let it paffe,ie belongs cs 
not to our propofed theame: but whether wee could define , or but obferue 
more by the difcourfe, let vs not aduenture toaffirme ought tathly in fo obf- 
cure a controuerfie . Now are wee in hand with the circulary perions thae 
turneal things round about till they become repaired. But which of thefe opini- 
ons foeuer be true concerning thele Secula feculorum,it is nothing to thefe reuo- 
lutions becaufe whether the worlds of worlds bee not the famere volued, buto- 
thers fucceffiuely depending on the former ( the freed foules remayning ftill 
in their endleffe bliffle) or whether the Worldes of worldes , bee the formes 
of thefe tranfitorie ages , and ruling them as their fubies : yet che circlari- 
tics haue no place heere how-foeuer : Fhe Saints (4) eternall life ouerthroweth 
them vtterlie, Sei eae Aas _ 7 


Rr3 L.VI- 


at ea ee 

460 SAINT AV GV STINE. C HAP.29 

TTT TSE TO a ED 
L. VIVES.. | 


Secula fe« S Ecula(a) |The {criptures often vfe thefe two words beth together, Hiereme(in epe.ad Gal. 

culocum, ' expounds them thus,we muf? (ee;(faich he)the difference berweene Seculum,Seculum Secue 
li,and fecula feculorum. Seculsm is fome-times a {pace of time : fome-times eternity,the he- 
brew is ot. and when it is written with the letter vax before it , it is eternity when other- 
wife,it is 50. yeares or, a Iubily, And therefore the Hebrew feruant that loued his Maifter for 

Exod,32+ his wife and children,had his eare bored , and was commanded to ferue an age, Seculam, so, 
yeares.And the Afoabites and Amonites enter not into the Church of God vntilt the 15. gene 
ration, and nor ynrill an age: for the yeare of Jubs/y quit all hard conditions.Some fay that Se- 
culam feculorem hath the fame rcfpect that Santt# San{lorwm,& (alum (elornm the Heavens 
of heauens had,or as the Works of workes,or Song of fongs, That difference that the heavens 
had to thofe whofe heauens they were,aind fo the reft, the holy aboue all holy,the fong excel- 
ling all fongs &c.So was fecula feculorum the ages excelling all ages, So they fay that this ptte 
fent age includeth allfrom the worlds beginning ynto the iudgement : And then they poe 
further,and begin to graduate the ages paft, before and to come after it, whether they were or 
fhalbe good or ill, falling into fuch a forreft of queftions, as whole volumes haue. beene writ- 
ten, onely of this kinde, (6) Eterna/l | Returning no more to mifery :ner were that happy 
without certeyaty of eternity : nor eternallif death fhould end it. 


Of that impious affertion that foules truely bleffed , {ball hane 
| diners renolutions into mifery againe. 


Fo what (4) Godly eares can endure to heare,that after the paffage of this life 
in fuch mifery,(it I may call ica life, (4) being rather fo offenfiue a death,and 
et (c) we loue it rather then that death that frees vs from it) after fo many intol- | 
erable mifchieucs,ended all at length by truezeale and piety, wee fhould be ad- 
mitted to the fight of God , and bee placed in the fruition and perticipation of 
that incorporeall light and vnchangeable immortall effence with loue of which 
we burne,all vpon this condition,to leaue it againe at length, and bee re-infolded 
in mortall mifery amoneft the hellith immortalls , where G OD is loft , where 
— truth is fought by hate,where ble/fedne//e is fought by vncleanefle, and bee caft 
~ fromall enioying of eternity,truth, or felicity: and this not once but often,being 
eternally reuolued by the courfe of the times from the firftto the later : and all 
this ,becaufe by meanes of thefe circularities , transforming vs and our falfe bea- 
titudes in true miferies , ( fucceffiuely , but yet eternally )GOD might come to 
know his owne workes. Whereas other wife hee fhould neither bee able co reft 
from working, nor know ought that is infinite 2 Who can heare or endure this? 
Which were it true, there were not onely more witin concealing it, but alfo 
(to fpeake my mindeas I can)more learning in not knowing it:(4) for ifweéfhale 
bee bleffedin not remembring them there , (¢-) why doe wee agrauate our mi- 
fery inknowing them here? But if wee muft needs know them there, yet let vs 
keepeour feluesignorantof them here ,to hauethe happier expe@ation , then 
the good is that wee fhall ateaine : here expecting bleffed eternity , and there — 
atrayning onely bliffz, bue with affurance that itis buttranfitory. Buc ifthey “ 
fay that no mancan actaine this bliffe vnleffe hee know the tranfitory reuoluct- 
ons theseof erehee leaue this tife,how then doe they confeffe that the more one 
loues GOD, theeafilicr fhall hee attaineblifle, and yet teach the way how to 
dl: tists fouing aff: 22 BO | _ 


Liy32. ~ ‘OF THE -CITLE OF GOD. 46r 


——ae sme wee on + 
- —————— —- 


- For who will not buc-loue him. lightly whpme hee knowes hee muft leaue,and 
holdagainft bis truch and wifdeme,and thaewhen by the perfe@tion of his bliffe; - A 
hee comes to the full knowledge: of him? (f,9n¢ can never loue his friend faith. | 
fully ,ifhee know thathee {hall become: bis enemy:. But Ged forbid that this 
threarning of theirs that our mifery fhouldnener,bee ended, but onely interrup- 
ted now and then by falfe happineffe , fhoyld beetrue. For what is falfer then 
that bliffe , wherein wee fhalbe either wholy ignorantjn fuch light or otherwife 
continually afraide of che lofic‘ef it, beemg.on the toppe of felicity? If wee 
know not that wee fhall become wretched , our milery-horeis wifer then hap- 

yineffe there. But if wee (hall know ity(¢): shen ,:rhe wretched foule bad better 
Fine in miferable ftate and goe from then¢eto etarniyeznhes.ina blefled to fall 
from thenceto mifery . And fo (4)ourhape of happingfeisvnhappie,andof — + 
mifery,happie: and confequently, we fuffring mileri¢s lpre,and expecting them 
there,are rather wretched then bleffed in cruch, Buc pieb¢ cricth out, and truth yo. gti. 
- conuinceth this to be falfe. The felicitie promifed ys istrué, erernall,and wholy cuy, 
yn-intersupted by any revolution to worfe. a. oe = 

—Letys follow Chrift,our right way,& leawte this circudar maze of the impious, 

For if Porphyry the P/atoniff retu fed his Maifters opiniomin this sircumrotation 

of foules , beeing mooued heereto either by the vanity ofthe thing, or by feare — 

of the Chriftians arguments ; and had rather affirme ( as I faidin the tenth 
booke ) that che foule was fent into the world to know euill , chat beeing pur- 
gedfrom it , it mightreturne to the Father, andneuer more firffer any fuch 
pollution : how much more then ought. wee.to detelt chis impiety’, this enemy 

of true faith and chriftianity 2 Thefe circles now beeirig broken ; there is no- 
thing vrgeth vs to thinke that tnan had no beginning , becaufe (‘I know not 
what) revolutions haue kept ‘alchingsin fuch a cgntinuall courfe of vppe and 
downe, that nothing can bee new in the world. For if the foule bee freed, 

and fhall no more returneto miferie , it beeing neuer freed before , there is ari 

act and thata great one ,new begunne , namely the foules poffeffion of eternalk 

bliffe. | . § on a a 

And if this fall out in an immortall nature without any circumvolution , why 

isitnot as poffiblein mortall things 2]f they fay that blifle isno new thing to 
the foule, becanfe it returneth but vnto that which it enioyed alwaies before: 
yet is the freedoine new then , for it was never freed before , becing neuer mif¢- 

table , and the mifery isnew vnto it, that was neuer miferable before. Now 
ifchis newneffe happen . not in the order that Gods prouidence allotted , but by 
chance, where are our revolutions that admit nothing‘new:, but keepe allin 
onecourfe? Butif this nouelty bee within the compafie of Gods ‘prouidencd, 
bee the foule (s) giuen from heauen, or fallen from. thence , there inay bee new 
accidents that were not before,and yet in the order of nature. Andif the foule 
by follié procure it felfe new: mifery ( which the diuine prouidence fore, * 
{aw and included in the order of things. freeing in from thence alfo bythis 
prouident power. ):how dare fiefhand bloud then bee'fo rafh astodeniethat...- 
- thediuinicy may produce thingsnewvatothe world (thoughnat to himdfelfe) — F 
which though hée forefaw, yet were fieuer made before? If they fay icjs. no 
neweé that the freed foules recurne no more to miferie,becatife there are (ine | 
dailié and daily freed from thence, why then they confeffe that there is fill 
new foules created, to bee new freed from new miferies . For if they fay they 
are nor new foules, but haue beene from eternity , whichare daily put into 
a a Rr3z new 


\ 


462 SAINT AVGVSTINE 


C map.20 


_ new bodies, and liuing wifely , ate freed , neuer to returne: then they makethe 
foules of eternity , infinite: fof imagine a number of foules neuer fo large, 
they could not fuffice for all the tien of thefé infinite ages paft , if each fouleas 
foone as it was quit, ewe vppe,andreturnedno more. Nor can they fhew 
how there may beean infinite (4) fort of foules inthe world, and yet debarre 
G OD from knowing of things infinite. Wherefore feeing their revolutions 
of bliffe and mifery are cafheered , what remaines butcoaverre that GO Dcan 
when his good pleafure is créate what new thing heewill , and yet becaufe of 
his eternall fore-knowledge neuer change his will? And whether the number 
of thofe freed, andnot returning foules may bee increafed ,looke they tothar, 
who will keepe infiniteneffe out of the world : wee fhut vppe our difputation 
onboth fides. Ifit may bee increafed , why deniethey that that may bee made 
now,that had no beeing before, if thatnumber of freed foules that was before, 
bee not onely increafed now,but fhalbe for euer ? But if there bee buta certaine 
number of foules co bee freed, and never to returne, and that number bee not in- 
ereafed, whofocuer it fhalbee, itis not the fame yet that ic muft bee, nor can it 
increafe ,to the con‘umation but froma beginning , which beeing not before 
man,that man was made to beginne,before whom was rio other. 


- L. VIVES. 
VVie (4) Godly | The Platonifis haue a ea ftirre amongft themielues whether the 


foule {hall recurne to her ftarre whence fhe was taken, or follow rhe reuolutions, from 
| podyto body. Plato in his Phedras , and his Refp: maketh it eternally happy . Thence doe 
Porphyry and /amblichus deny the returne of it after purgation. Prec/ws and Plotine,take Ple- 
to's eternity buc fora se {pace of time,and fubmit the pureft foule to the period of reuoluti- 
on. (6) Beeing | Cic. De repub. lib. 6. faith (after Plato ) that our life beeing inuolued in fuch 
| killing mifery,is rather to bee called a death. (¢) wee /oxe it} This is a chiefe one itthis bodies 
Ourlifé jnconueniences , it blindes our reafon fo farre thatit allures vs all to louc it, and maketh ¥s 
a eer hate and abhorre all chat oppofe it, whereas were our reafon and iudgement found , andnoe 
ouersborne by the bodie,they would defire to leaue this liuing death,and fighing , fay with 
Romy: the Apoftle,retched man that L am,who foall deliner mee from the bodie of this death. (a) For 
Wee fhallall drinke of Lethe they fay. (e) Why doe \Feare of euill is a great torture , and 
one had better die fecure theriliue in feare, (f) One can] Scipio in Tullies Lelins , defies chat 
there can bee a faying {o preiudiciall to amitie , as to fay that / lowe bint now but I foal bate 
bins: nor willhee beleeue that Bées ener faid fucha word (as it was faid ) beeing one of the 
feauen fages. But fome ambitious vnhoneft fellow that defired to’ haue all in his owne 
power might fay fo. For how cam hee bee friend to him whom hee thinkes hee ean bee foe 
to ? This rule who foeuer gaue it tends to the abolifhment of friendfhippe : but in deed wee 
had more neede obferue this in our friendfhippes , not to beginne to lone him whome wee 
éould euer hate. Thus Cicere.(¢) Then the wretched) For happineffe is farre better after 
mifery then mifery after happineffe. For the feeling of mifery is leffened by ee of mah - 
neffe , and happinefie is aftauch leffened by feare of mifety. (My mother Blanche , ax oft 
mother me 74879 (or piety deteihe's mee jhad wont to tell me when Iwas a thilde shat the Sjrens [ung (weet= 
toL, Vines. 4 4 tempeft,and lamented in faire wether : hoping the later in the firft , and fearing the firft i 
the later.(h) Our hope | Not of so uae but ynhappy, of the happinefle to come. (8) 
Ginem from | Hee toucheth the Platonifs controuerfic :fome holding the foules giuen of 
GOD, and others that they were caft downe for their guilt, and forthcir punnifhment, 
imprifoned in bodies, () Sortes of fewles ] A dinerfity of reading but let vs make good 
one fences | 3 | 
eo of 


s.~ CZ re oo aw -< 


Linra: - OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 


Of the fiate of the firft man,and man-kinde tz him. 
a — Cuhke.2n a. é - ae | 
T His hard queftion df Gods power to create new things without charge of 
will, becaufe of his eternitie, being ¢ I hope ) fufficiently handled ; wee miay 
plainly fee chathe did farre better in producing man-kinde ftom one man onely, 
then ifhe had made mary: for whereas he created fome creatures that loueto be 


463 


The good. 


hee might be tranfported to the Axgels fociety: but if hce became ‘te a iN nefle oF 


: L. VIVES. | 
Pyivdes (a) Damile itithe diminutiue, becaufe it isa timorous creature , neither wilde, nor 
tame. , ~ 7 


That God fore-knew thet the bef Man fhould finne, and how many pevple hee 
wastotranflate, out of his kinde into the Ancelsfociety: | 
Cwar.i22. rs 
G? D was not ignorant that Hee would finne , and fo incurre mortallitye 
both for him-felfe and his progenie: nor that mortalls fhould ranne on in 


that height of iniquitie that brute( 4) beafts fhould liue at more attonement — 


and peace betweene them+felues ; whofe originall was out of water and earth, 
then men whofe kinde came all out of one sin honor of concord: for Lyons ne- 
tier watre among them: félues, nor Dragons,as men haue done. But God fore-faw 
With-all, that his grace fhould adopt the godly , iuftifie them by the holy {pirie, 
pardon their finnes,and ranke them in eternall peace with the Cdngels , the laft 


and moft dangerous death being deftroyed: and thofe fhould make yfe of Gods: 


producing all man-kinde from one,in learning how well God refpected vnity in 
man-kinde. | : 


L. VIVES. 


P,Ruite (4) beafts | Any place will holde biuite-beafts withoite donttention , fooner ehén 


t bee caft obedience, — 


men. For manis Woolfeto man as the Greeke Prouerbe faith. Péiw. 46.7. and all other Difcorde 


creatures agree among them-{elues, and oppofe ftrahgers. The fterne Lion fights.not.with 
the Lion: nor doth the Serpent fting the Serpent : the beatts and fifhes of the fea a- 
gree ftill with their owne kinde . Bue man doth man the moft mifchiefe. Dicearchus 

Rr 4 (faith 


among 
men yror it” 


| : | 


464 SAINT AVGVSTINE / Cuara3 


(faith Tully )wrotea booke of the death of men: ( He is a free and copious Peripatetique) and 
herein hauing reckned vp inondations , plagues , burning , exceeding aboundance of beafts 
and other externall caufes, he compares then with the warres and feditions wherewith man 
hath deftroyed man : and finds the later farre exceeding the former, This warre amongft 
men did Chrift defire to haue abolifhed,and for the fury of wrath to ‘hauce grafted the heate of 
zeale and charity. This (hould bee preached, and taught, that Chriftians ought not to bee at 
wars,but at Icue one with another, and to beare one with another:mens minds are already to 


forward so fhed bloud,and do wickedly : they neede not be fet on. 


_ Of the nature of mans foule being created according to the image of Gad. = 
ae | | Cuar.23. | 


Gen.2, T Herefore God made man according to his (4) image and likenefle , giuing 
3 him afoule whereby in reafon and vnderftanding hee excelled all the other 
creatures , thathadno fuch foule. And when hee had made man thus of earth, 
Breathing and cicher (0b ) breathed the foule which he had made, into him, or rather made 
inkusface. tha: breath one which he breathed into him( for to breath, is but to makea breth). 
then (¢) out of his fide did hee take a bone , whereof he made him a wife, and an 
helpe,as he was God, for we arenot to conceiugthis carnally ,as wee fee an arti- 
ficer worke vp any thing into the fhape ofa man,by art : Gods hand is-his power 
working vifible things inuifibly. Such as meafure Gods vertue and power that 
can make feedes of feeds by thofe daily and vfuall workes , hold this rather fora 
fable then atruth:Burt they know rot this creation, and therefore thinke vnfaith- 
fully thereofas thc ugh the workes of ordinary conception , and production , are 
not {trange to thofe that know them not,though they affigne chem rather to nz 

turall caufes chen account them the deities workes. 7 


| ‘L. VIVES. | 
HH“ a)Image.\Origen thinkes that man is Chrifts image and therfore the fcripture calls man 


odsimage , for the Sonne is the fathers image, fome thinke the Holy Ghoft is mentia — 


2,Cor.11, the fimyly. Bue trucly the fimyly confifts in nothing but man,and the likenefle of God.A man 
(faith Pang is Gods image. It may be referred to his nature and in that he is Gods likeneffe, 
may be referred to his guifts,immortallity,and fuch,wherein he is like God.(6)Breathed, \Itis 
a doubt whether the foule were made before, &infufed after,or created with che body. Ang de 
Eenfad 4t.4i.7 faith that ¥ foule was made with the other fpiritual fubftances,& infuted atrer- 
wards,and fo interpreteth this place, Hee breathed into his face the breath of life. Orhers take 
1t as though the foule were but then made , and fo doth e4ugu/tine here.(c )Oxt of his.] Why 
fe woman was made after the man, why of hisribbe when he was a fleepe, and how of his rib, 
read Afag iffer fentent.ib.2.Dift.18. ee 


Whether the Angels may be called creators of any,the leaft creature. 
Cuap. 24. 


RY here wee haue nothing to doe with( 4 ) them that hold the divine effence 
not to medle with thofe things at all . But (6 ) thofe that follow Pésto.inaffir- 
ming that all mortall creatures , of which man is the chiefe,were made by the lef- 
fer created Gods , through the permiffon or command of the creator, and not 


: | | by 


Lie12. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 465° 
by him-felfe that framed the world, let-them but abiureshe {uperftition wherein ~ 

thy feeke to gine thofe inferiors iuft honors, and facrifices, and they fhall quick- 

ly avoid the error of this opinion , for itis not lawfull co hold any creature , be ie 

neuer fo finall, to haue any other Creator then God, even before it could be vn- Ancells the 
derftood. Butthe Angells ( whome they had rather call Gods )though(¢ ) at sicuoieak 
hiscommand they worke in things of the world, yet weeno more call them crea- nothing. 
tors of liuing things, then. we call husband-men the creaiors of fruites and trees. 


—_— ge TS TE Ro I A ee 


L. VIVES. 


V 7 Ith(a) thems. With the Epicuriffs, that held althings from chance, or from meere natiire 
without GO D(althings I meane in this fublunary world: )which opinion fome fay was 

Ariftctles;or with the heretikes,fome of wheme held the diuills crc ators of al things corporal. 

(6) Thofe that. | Plato inhis Tsmeus brings in God the Father commanding the leffer Gods 

to make the lefferliuing creatures : for they are creatures alfo: and fo they tooke the immor- 

tall beginning of a creature, the foule,from the ftarres:imitating the Father , and Creator - and 

borrowing parcells of earth, water andayre from the world, knit them together in one: 

not as they were knic,but yet in ap infenfible connexion , becaufe of the combination - {Tah 

{mall parts, whereof the whole body was framed. One Afenander a Scholler of Symou Alagus, 

faid the Angclls made the world : Saturninus {aid that 7.Angells made it beyond the Fathers 

knowledge. (¢)7 hoxch.| The Angells as Paudfaith, are Gods minifters , and deputies, end do , 

many things ypon earth at his command sforas Auguftine faith , exery vifble thizg on earth © An gels 

3s under an eAncelicall power yand Gregory faith that nothing in the viftble world bxi us ordered Gedsdevas 

by aviftble creature. Ywillexcept Miracles, if any one contend. But Plato, ashe followeth ties and 

CMofesin the worids creation , hadthis place alfo of the creation of liuing things from the miniiters, 

Scriptures, for hcuing read that God this great architect of fo new a workc, faid:Let vs make 

man after our owe Image , thought he had fpoken to the Angells , to whofe ininiftery he fup- Genz: 

pofed mans creation commiticd : But it feemed ynworthy to him that God fhould vie them in 

making of man the nob-eft crcature and make all the reft, with his own hands:and therfore he 

thought the Ange!ls madeall , whofe words if one confider the in Ties tranflation (which I 

vie)he fhal find that Pézto held none made the foule but God, and that of the {tars, which Tally 

de legib.1.corfirmes cut ct Plato, faying that the foule is created by God within the elementary 

body which be made alfo : and the leffer Gods did nothing but as minifters, conioine thofe which bee 

bad firft created : and forme it into the effence of a lining creature. Seneca cxplanes Platoamore 

plainely faying. That when God had laid the firft foundation of tats rare and excellent frame of na- 

ture,and begun it,be ordayred that each peculiar fhould haue a peculiar gouernor, and though hime 

felfe had modelled, and dilated the whole uuinerfe , yet created be the leffer gods,to be his ninifters, 

or vice-gerents in this his kingdome, 


mw og a One ee ene — ae th: | owt ewer 


‘That no nature or forme of any thing lining hath any other 
| Creator but God. Cwar.25. ; 


VV Hereas there is one forme giuen externally to all corporall fubftances ac« 
cording to the which Potters, Carpenters and other fhape antiques, and 
figures of creatures:and another that containeth theefficient caufes hereof in the 
fecret power of the vniting and vnderftanding nature;which maketh not onely 
the natural formes, but even the liuing foules,when they are notextant.The firft; 
each artificer hath in his brayne,but the later belongs to none but God,who for- 
med the world andthe Angells without either world or Angells , for from that 
(a) all diuiding, and all effective diuine powey,which cannot be made,but makes, 
and which in a beginning gaue rotundity both to the Heauens & Sunne, from 


the 


466 


SAINT AV GVSTINE. C uar.zs 


the fame, had the eye the apple, and all other round figures that wee fee in nature 
their rorundity not from any externall effeQiue,but trom the depih of that crea- 
tors power that faid./ fl heanen and earth :and whofe wifdome reacheth from 
endto end, ordering allinadelicate Decorum : wherefore what vfe he madeof 
the Angels in the creacion,making all himfelfe,1 know not.I dare neither afcribe 


them more then their power,nor detra@ any thing from that. But with their fa- 


uours, I attribute the eftate of althings as they are natures vnto God, onely of 
whome they thankefully aknowledge their being : we do not then call hufband- 
men the creators of trees or plants,or any thing elfe:fot we read, Neither ts he that 


BES 7 planteth any thing , ncither he that watereth,but Godthat gineth the increafe.No,nor 
,Cor.t§38 the earth neither,chough it feemes the fruitful mother ofal things that grow: for 


Hier. y. 


Pl inlib,8, 


wee read alfo. God gemeth bodies unto what hee will,enento enery feed his owne body, 
Nor call wee a womanthe creatrixe of her child, but him chat faid to a feruane 
of his, Before Iformed thee in the wombe I knew thee: & although the womans foule 
being thus or thus affected may put fome quality vpon her burthen(é)as we read 
chat Jacob coloured his fheepe diuerfly by {potted itickes : yet fhee canno more 
make the nature that is produced,then {hee could make her felfe : what feminall 
caufes then foeuer that Angells, or mendo vfe in producing of things liuing or 
dead,or (¢ ) proceed from the copulation of malcand female, ( 4) or what affec- 
tions foeuer of the mother difpofe thus or thus of the coullour or feature ofher 
conception, thenatures, thus or thus affeGed in each of their kindes are the 
workes of none but Ged : whofe fecret power paffeth through all, giuing all be- 
ing toall what foeuer,in thatit bath being:( ¢) becaufe without that hee made ir, 
it fhouldnotbee thus , northus , but haueno being at all, wherefore ifin thofe 
formes externall,impofed vpon things corporall,we fay that(not workemen,but) 
Kings, Romulus was the builder ofRome, and Alexander of ( f) Alexandria, bee 
caufe by their direction thefe citties were built : how much the rather ought we 
to call God the builder ofnature ,;who neither makes any thing of any fubftance 
but what hee had made before, nor by any other minifters but thofe hee had 
made before:andif hee withdraw his (¢ ) efficient power from things, they (hall 
haue no more being then they had ere they were created: Ere they were,I meane 
in eternity , not in time ; for who created time, but he that made them creatures, 
whofe motions time followeth. 


ORE, QFE TT Oe 1FD- HO 


L. VIVES. 


Hatla al-dixiding.\ All diuiding may be fome addition, the fence is good without it.(5) 

Aswe.| Pliny Jaith that looke in the Rammes mouth, and the collour of the veines vader 
his tongue, fhalbe the colour of the lambe he getteth - if diuers, diuers:and change of waters 
varieth it. Their fhepehards then may haue fheep of what collour they will:which Jacob knew 
wellinough, for he liking the particolours caft white ftraked rods into the watring places, 
at Ramming time, that the fight of them might forme the Images of fuch collours in the con- 
ception,and fo it did.Gex.30.(c) Proceed. | The fame Pliny.lib 7. faith that the mind hatha re- 
collection of fimilicudes in it , whercin a chance of fight,hearing or remembrance is of much 
effecét,the images taken into the conceit at the time of conception are held to be powerfull in 
framing the thing conceiued : and fo is the cogitation of eithcr party , how fwift loeucr it bez 
wherevpon is more difference inman then in any other creature, but the {wiftnes of thoughr, 


- and variety of conceites formeth vs fo diuerfly : che thoughts of other creatures being immo-~ 


ucable and like themfelues in all kinds. Thus much Péxy. The Philofophers (tand wholly vp- 
on immaginationin conception. At Hertzogenbe/h in Brabant on acertaine day of the yee 
‘where- 


FR Le 


a a 


Lis.r2 OF THE GITIE OF GOD. 487 


whercon they fay there chiefe Church was dedicated ) they haue publike playes vntethe 

honor of the Saints as they haue in otlicr places alfo of that country,fome act Saints aud fome A eas 

dewils.one of thefe diuels fpying a pretty wench, prew hot,&in al halt,danceth home,& cafting : 

his wife ypon a bed, teld her he would beget a yong diuel vpon her,&& fo Jay with her,the we- 

aati conceiued,& the child was no fooner borne,but it beean to dance.& was iuft of the fhape 

that we payne our deuillsin. This ALergucret of Aultria Vaxinil.avs Daughter,( barées the 

fifts aunt, told Jobn Lamnza, King Ferdimauds graue ambaffador ; snd now (harles his liet- eee 
ee a : : ees ehn Lae 

t¢nanc in Aragon , aman as able to difcharge the place of a Prince as of a Licutenant (d) What i, 

7 iaaaadge Child-bearing womcn do often long for many euiil things , as coales , and afhes. I Womens 

faw one long for abit of ayoung mans necke, and had loft her birth but chat fhee bitte of longing 

his nccke vntsll he was almoft dead, fhee tooke fuch hold. The Philicians write much hereof, “hatare 

and the Philofophers fomewhat. eAriff.ce animall, They all aferibe it to the viclous humors ™ d, 

in the ftomake, which if they happen in men, procure the like diftemper. (¢} Becanfe. So read 

the old bookes.(f) Alexandria. |Aha,Sogdia,Troas,Cilicia,India,and Fgipt hate al cities called 

Alexandriaouilt by Alexander the great, this that e7ucu/tine meeres of, is that of Egipt,the 4 exandrid 


moft famous ofall : fycuwate vpon the Mediterrane fea,neare Bicchicri,the mouth of Nile:called 


now Scanderia,ot Scandaroun.(g) Efficient. |Fabricatixam:pertayning to compofition and diui- 
fion of matter: in things created by it felfe, for thefe are mot the workes cf creation, Angells 


mcn,beaits,and liueleffe things,can effect them: : 


— 


ne oe eee 


Perr en mr a 8 ne Oe 


The Platonilts opinion that held the Angells Gods crestares, 
| and man theAngells. 

| | C nkr.26. | 
A Nad Plato would haue the leffer Gods(made by tlie higheft)to create allother ' 
£ dthings, by taking their immortall pare from him, and framing the morrall 
themfelues : herein making them not the creators cf our felues but our bodies 
onely. And therefore Perphiry in holding that the body muft be avoyded ere the 
foule be purged,and thinking with ®/ero, and his feat, that the foules of bad livers. 
were for punifhment thruft into bodies (into beafts alfo faith P/sto but into mans 
onely faith Porphery) affirmeth dire@ly that thefe gods whom they wil haue vs to 
worthip ascur parents & creators, are but the forgers of our prifons,and not our 
formers, but only our iaylors,locking vsin thofe dolorous grates,and wretched 
fetters.wherfore the Platoxze/ts muft either giue vs no punifiimét in our bodies:or 
elfe make not thofe gods our creators,whofe worke they exhort vs by all meanes 
to avoid & ta efcape: though both thefe pofitions be moft falfe,for the foules are | 
neither put into bodies to be thereby punifhed ; nor hath any ching in heauen or 
earth any creator but the maker of heauen and earch. For if there be nocaufe of 
our life,but ont punifhment, how (a) is it thac Plato faith the world could neuer 
haue beene made moft beautifull, but that ie was filled with all kind of creatures? 
But if our creation ( albeit mortal! ) teche worke of God; how is it punifhment 
then to enter into Gods benefites,that is our bodies ? (4 and if God/as Plato faith 
often) hadall the creatures of the world in his prefcience, why then did not hee 
make them all ? wouldhe not make fome, and yet in his vnbounded knowledge, 
knew how to makeall ? wherefore our true religion rightly affirmes him the 
maker both of the world , andall creatures therein, bodies, and foules,of which, 
in earth man, the chiefe Piece was madealone, after his Image, for the reafon 
fhewed before, ifnot for a greater:yet was he not left alone, for there is nothing 
in the world fo fociable by nature,and fo farring by vice, as manis;nor can mans 
nature {peake better cither to the keeping of difcord whilft it is out,or expelling 

: / it 


pe 


468 SAINT AVGVSTINE ——~ Curav.2e.&:7. 


AC whenit is entred; then in recording our firft Father, whom God created fingle, 

(from him to propagate all the reft ) to giue vs a true admonition to preferuean 

Vnion ouer greateft multitudes. Andin thacthe woman was made ot his ribbe, 

was a plaine intimation of the concord that fhould bee betweene manand wife, 

. Thefe were the ftrange workes of God for they were the firft. Hee that beleeues 

them not , muft veterly deny all wonders : for if they had followed the vfuall 

courfe of nature, they had beene no wonders. But what is there in all this whole 

worke of the dinine prouidence,that is not of vfe, though wee know it not? The 

Pial.46.8 holy Pfalme {aith : Come and behold the workes of the Lord, what wonders hee hath 
wrought upon the earth. Wherefore, why the “oman was made of A¢ans ribbe, 


and what this firft {eeming wonder prefigured , if Ged vouchfafe I will thew in 
another place. , | 


L. VIVES. | 
In Timzo, He (a) #s it that Plato ] His words are thefe. GOD {peaketh to the lefler Gods. -*Marke 


what I fay untoyou : we hane three kindes remaining : all mortall: which sf wee omit, the crea 

tion will not bee perfect : for wee {ball not jy baie AH kindes of creatures init ,which wee muit 

needs doc to hane it fully abfolute. (6 ) And ifG OD ) There alfohec faith, that Ged hath the 

Ideas of all creatures,mortall and immortall in him-felfe, which he looked vpon: rhe immor- 

Mariage tall ones when hee made the things that fhould neuer perifh ; the mortall, in the reft. I aske 

commea- not here whether that God be thofe /dee, or whether they bee fome-thing elfe sche Platensfts 

| ee know not them-felues. (c) The concord that fhould | Becaufe the woman was not made of 

| any externall parts, but of mans felfe , as his daughter , chat there might bee a fatherly loueof 

his wife in him,and a filiall duty towards him in the wife : fhee was taken out of his fide, as his 
fellow: not out of his head as his Lady,nor out of his feete as his feruant. 


That the fulneffe of man-kinde was treated im the firff man és whom God 
fore-faw both who bould be faned,and who fbould be damned. 
| _ Cuar, 27. 


Ve now becaufe we muftend this bookeslet this bee our pofition : thac inthe. 


 firlt man,the fore-faid two focieties or cities,had originall; yet not cuident- 

lie, but vnto Gods prefcéence: for from him were the reft of men to come : (ometo 

be made fellow cittizens with the Arzgels in ioy : and fome with the Dewé/s intor- 

| ment, by the fecret,but iuft iudgment of God. For feeing that it is written: A// the 

PLa.25, 10 wayes of the Lord bee mercy and truth, his orace can neither bee vniult , nor his 
iuftice cruell. 


Finis, lib.12. 


———— 


* Saints. 


i pg «sige nated Jane poe 7 


 premarication, .. 


e ’ » ge e e - - - 
; : re 3 mus 


THE CONTENTS OF THE 
thirteenth booke of the City of God. 


1. Of the firft Mans fall,and ithe procureinent \ fooke him; and that ithe Joules firf death was tbe 


of mortality. : | | departure from God. . | 
2, Of the death that may befall the iemér- | — 16. Of the Philofophers that held corpora 
tall foxle.and of the bodies death; | ° —S= |: death not to bee penalt. whereas Platobrings m 
"3. Whether death propagated unte all meg | the Creatg:, promifing the lefer Geds shat they 
from the Sirf , bee punifhment of finne to the | food neuer leanethe bodies. 
ee ee a 17. Apaenj? the opinion , that carthly bodies 
| 4. Why the firlt death is not with=beld frame \ cannot becarraptiblenarercrnall, 
te regenerate from banebygrace. -—«-—s':: |. 18. Of sha terreng bodies , which the Philé- 


469 


5. As the wicked vfe the good law ens, fe | Sobers bold caunot bee in heanen, but menst fall 


to earth by their naturall weight. 


the ood v[c death which is enill,well. _ . 
19. Against thofe that held thzt Man froula 


6. The generall enill of that death, that fene- |. 


roth foule and body. 1 mot haue beene sramortall, if hee bad not finned. 
Of the death that fuch is are net regene-| 20, That the bodies Z ee Saints ne refting 
rate doe fuffer for Chrilt. tn hope. fhall become better then our firkt {a0 


for the truth are quit from the {econd. _ | a1lOf the Paradice when our firft parents 
9. Whether 4 man at the bonre of bis death, | were placed,and that it.peay be taken [piritnall 
way be (aid to be among the dead, or the dying. | alfoywith-ons any wrong to the truth of the hie 
10. tberber this nertall life be rather tobce \ frorse as tonchin g-thereal{place,, 
soe of. a, That the Saints. bodies after refurrettia 


8, That the Saints in fuffering the firft death | thers was. 


Calleddeaththentife. 9 2 a 
« Ux. Whether one muy bee. lining and dead; on {hall bee fpivitnall and yet not changed inig 
both together, ee 3 | fperites —:. 7 


._ 12, Of the death that God-shreatned to po |. 23. Of bodies animndte and fpiritnall , theft 
Chiti-. =) 

24 Hew Gods breathing a life inte Adam, 

and Chrilts breathing. upon bis Apoftles when 


33: Wat prsi/loment wag firft 


o MIAN : 


- 34, dn what fate God maile Man, andivte 


underfioed, 


- 


what flate be fellby bis voluntary choyce. —~ | her {aid Receiue the holy {pirit, are to-be6 - 


15. That Adam forfeske God ere God for- 


a 


dying in’ Adam, azd thofe being quickxed in 


‘ : SS : ‘ ‘ . : } 
uw . gi Be Te vy ar a ' , + el + yo eS d 
. % \ sofa oe. © os See ines : Lae Ne . ot an ar 
F , e ke 
- ts > e e 6 e . 
. . ‘ a ee. e? . ° ae: - ° a ao - She 7 e = 7 ; 
ft ze a ee ae ee ee Tk se Sve sie oA 
key ‘ ne “ Oe “sf id ‘ ° ; ! . 
° ‘" Nes ‘ “ os - ; ’ -! 
4 . ‘ ! aero th. a ion / i . 7 y a ° 
7. t 2 7 . . ? tA 
~ : L ; . 2 , ' ra . 3 6 _¢* oe) . : : oY Bis ; eal 
f “ ow an fi. ® « a¢@ _! . eee . es : : * " - 
. v 3 . eC ee ,, J t ?. : 
? a ry : e a? e . » 2 oe . 
o . * ° Ce ‘ , ° tere eo ! a d . oe eos . . 
+ - ied ees: 7 a ie roe -@ ash i 6 : : ss ‘ i oe : Bree 
“% 2 : 
e; “ \ . . : S id 4 a4 conte : a , 
an se ae Ce eee a ie 2, ys Sie ae ie to, re Se 
® Pee: . ¢ . ~ . : - ; . 
i @ ef? t ya <f a a. ot a 
ba) ’ = - 
? ! w a H ae cs . es ie es, | ae {: e x or a 
\ is . ° . a 
a 7 an -~ ft ae Yas 
ef - \ \ fy \- ro . ~ se a. 
2s oe Me ete Greely Ge et oe ale $s aden aa. rea 
4)y* JOR a ope Sa SP el Crete se § 
é . s opt t . -3 
of “ ri Nas oF ST tin eas 
e 


4 
=e eee Pl Ue 


47° 


| THE _.. & 
THIRTEENTH BOOKE: 
OF THE CITTIE OF GOD 


Written by Seint Asgaffine Bifhop of Hippo, 
” vnto cMarcelinus. 7 


| Oftthe first Mans fall,and the procurement of mortalitie.. . 
OS - Oram tr ee 

al Auing gotten through the intricate queftions of che worlds ori- 
| ginall , and man-kindes ; our methode now calleth vs to dif- 
| courfe of the firft mans fall,nay the firft fall of both in tbat kind, 
| and confequently of the originall and propagation of our mor- 
tality ; for Ged made not mras.as he did Angels ,chac though they 

pale incclt ‘finned yet could not dye: but fo,as hauing (2) performed their 
courfe in obedience, death could not preuent them from partaking for euer of 

bleffed and Angelicall immortality: but hauing left this courfe,death fhould take 

_ them into iuft damnation,as we {aid in the laft Boke. “ie 


‘ 


~ L.VIVES. 


LL Aang (4) performed) Every man fhould haue lived a fet time'vpon earth,and then being 
(The. rey ie by rafting of the eree of life , haue beene immortally tranflated ie 
wavnifts Heaven. Here are many a made : firft by Augu/tine, and then by Lombard lift.2.What 
we deafe mans eftate fhould haue beene,had he not finned: but thefe are modeft and timerous inqui- 
onthis  *¢t epee they cannot finde what they fecke [ But our later coments vpon Lumbard, flie 
fide. bue “itéttly to affirmative pofitions, Ts coniectures ,.or grounds of nature. ] heare them 

otblind, *e2fon,but fee them grauelled and in darknefle : where yet they will not feelc before them 
es ? ert they goe,but rufh on defpight of all break-neck play.. Whatman hath now, wee all know 


a So to our coft : what he fhould haue had, itis 2 queftion whethee Adass kocw , and what fhalt 
icae cue 1S then feeke ? why fhould we vfe coniedtures in:a things fo rran{cendene, therit feemes mi- 


ractlous to the heatens ? as if chis-maft follow natures lawes, which would haue amazed nas, 


* 4 ture,had ic had exiftente then.] Whatlight Asgafinrgiues,] will eake, and as my power and 


) duty ts,éxplaine : the reft I will baa ler aegis -_ 


a eee 


“ HAD, 2. 

BY I feel muft open this kinde of death a little plainer.For mans foule(though 
it be immortall ) dyetha kinde of death. (4) It is called immortall , becaufe ie 
cad neuer leaue to bee liuing , and fenfitiue : and the body is mortall , becaufe it 

may be deftieute of life,and {eft quite dead in 1 felfe.But che death of the foule is, 

when God leaucth it : & the death of the body is when the foule leaueth it : fo that 

The forfk- the death of both, is when the foule being left of God,leaueth the body. And this 
co death is feconded by that which the Scripture calles the ( 6) fecond death. This 
ofthe foule our Sautour fignified, when hee faid, feare hime which ss able to defiroy both body and 
Mat.10.38 foule in hell: which comming not to paffe before the body is ioyned to the foule, 
neuer to be feperated, it is firange that the body can be fayd to die by that a 

| Wale 


Of the death that may befall the immeortall foxle and of the bodyes death, 


wees en -- o> 


Listy. == «= OF THE CITIE OF GOD. | at 


which feuereth not the foule from it,but torments them both together. For that 
eternall paine (of which wee will {peake here-after )is fitly called the foules 
death, becaufe it liueth not with God : but how is it the bodies which liueth with 
thefoule ? for ocherwife it could not feele the corporall paines that expe it 
after the refurreCtion: is it becaufe all life how-fo-cuer is good , and all paine . 
euill that the body is faidto dye , wherein the foule is caufe of forrow tather 
then life 2 Therefore the fouleliveth by God, when it liveth well: ( for it canot 
liue without God, working goodin it: ) and the body liveth by the foule , when 
the foule liveth in the body, whether it liue by God or no. Forthe wicked have 
life of body, but none of foule : their foules being dead (that is, forfaken of Ged) 
haning power aslongas their immortall proper life failes nor , to afforde chem 
this. Burin the Jaft damnation,though man bee not infenfitiue, yet this fence of 
his being nejther pleafing nor peacefull , but fore and painfull , is iuftly termed. 
rather death then jife : and therefore is it called the fecond death‘, becaufe it fol- 
loweth the firft bceach ot nature, either betweene God and the foule, or this and 
 thebody : of the firft death therefore wee may fay ,that it is good to the good, 
and bad to the bad.Bur the fecond is bad in all badneffe, vnto all,& good to none. 


L.VIVES: | : 
T (a) is called | Brages copy differs not much: all is one in fubftance. (4 ) Second death] 
eApoc,2.11.and 21 8, oe Oo 


, Whether death propacated unto allen from the firft, be punifbment 
of finne te the Saints. Cuar. 3. | 

Ve here’s a queftion not to be omitted: whether the firft death bee good to 

the good ?If it be fo,how can it be the punifhment of finne? for had not our 
fir{t parents finned, they had neuer tafted ic: how then can it bee good to the vp- _ 
_ tight tbat cannot happen but vnto offenders ? and if ic happen but vnto offenders yeah by 

it fhould not be good, for ic fhould not be at all vnto the vpright:for why fhould’ finn. © 
they haue punifhment that haueno guilt 2 Wee muff confeffe then,that had not 
our firft parents finned,they had not dyed: but finning; the punifhment of death 
was infli@ed vpon them and all cheirspofteritie: for they fhould not produce 
any thing buc what themt-felues were,and the greatneffe of their crime depraued 
their nature; fo hat that which was penall in che firft mans offending, was made 
naturall in the birth ofall the reft : for they came not of m2,as mancame of the 
duft. The duft was mans materiall : but 42 is mans parent. That which is earth 
isnot flefh,though fleth be made of earth : buc that which san the father is, man 
the fonne is alfo.For all man-kinde was in the firlt #an,to bee deriued from him by 
the woman,when this couple receiued their fentence of condemnation. And that ,;, : 
which 42 was made,not in his creation , but in his fall and condemnation, that ete os 
he begot,in refpe&/I meane} of finne,and death.For his finne(4)was not caufe of we-ker 
mans veakitelle in infancie,or whitenefle of body,as we fee in infants: thofe God | sot 
would haue as the originall of cheyonglings, whofe parents he had caft downe to any other 
beaftiall morcalicy,as itis written: Mans was in honor andunderftood not but became Te 
bshe to the beafts that peri{b, vnleffe that infants bee weaker in tnotion and appetite 
_ thenall other creatures,to fhew mans mounting excellence aboue themall,com- 
arable to a fhaft that flieth the ftronger when it is drawne farcheft back in the 

hao. hetefore mans prefumption and iuft fentence, adiudged him not co thofe 
imbecilities of nature: but his nature was depraved vnto the admiffion of con- 


+ 
ee Hg, 


~~. SV Ge GSE OE SS SE. EM 


cupifceritiall in-obedience in his members againft his will:8¢ thereby was bound 
_ Sfa co 


472 SAINT AV GVSTINE. C war.g.des. 
to death by neceffiry,andto produce his progeny vnder the fameconditions that 
his crime deferued.from which band offin , if infants by the mediators grace be 
freed ; they fhall onely bee to fuffer the firft death,of body,bur trom the erernall, 
penall fecond death, their freedome from finne thalf quit them ab{olutely. 


L. VIVES. 


He finne(a)was mot.| Here is another queftion,in what ftate men fhould haue beene borne, 

had they not finned : e@ugufine propounds itin his booke. De baptif: parus/. fome 
thinke they fhou'd haue beene borne little , aad prefently become perfe& men. Ochers,borne 
little, but in perfect Hrength onely not growethsand that they fhould prefencly haue followed 
the mother as we {ce chickens, and lambes, The former giue them immediate vfc of fence,and 
reafon: the later,not fo,but to come by degrees,as ours do. Axgu/tine leaues the doubt as hee 
findes it : feeming to fuppofe no other kinde of birth, but what we now haue. 


hy the firft death i xot withheld from the regenerat from  finne 
by grace. C naP.4. 


Why death | F any thinke they fhould not fuffer this , — che punifhment of guile , and 
ieee ati thete guilt cleared by grace,he may be refolued ia our booke called De bapts/- 
time, © moparuulorum. There we fay that the feperation of foule and body remaineth to 
fucceed (‘hough after finne) becaufe if the facrament of regeneration {hould be 
immediacely feconded by immortality ofbody, our faith were difanulled, being 
. an expectation of a thing vnfeene. Buc by the ftrength and vigor of faith was 
this feare of deachto be formerly conquered,as the Afartsres did:whofe confli€s 
had had no viory ,norno glory, nay had bin no conflidts if they hadbeenedei- 
fied and freed from corporall death immediatly vpon their regeneration:for if it 
were fo who would not run vnto Chriftco haue his child baptifed, leaft hee 
fhould die? fhould his taich be approved by this vifible reward ? no, it fhould be 
no faith, becaufe he receiued his reward immediatly. But now the wounderfull 
grace of our Sauiour ha:h turned the punifhmencof finne , vnto the greater good 
of righteoufnefle. Then it was faid to man,thow (bale die éf thou finne now itis {aid 
Gens, tothe Martir,dse,to auotd fin. Then,éfyou breake my lawes,you (ball dy wow ,éf you ree 
Suse to dic,you breake my lawes. That which we feared then if we offended,we muft 
now choofe,nor cto offend. Thus by Gods ineffable mercy the punifhment of fin 
is become the inftrument of vertue,and the paine due to the finners guilr, is the 
iuft mans merit. Then did finnepurchafe deach,and now death purchafeth righ- 
teou{nes:I meane,in the Martires whome their perfecutors bad either renounce — 
their faith or their life, and chofe iuft men chofe rather to fuffer that for belee- 
uing which the firft fiers fuffred for not beleeuing : for vnleffe they had finned 
they had not dyed , and Martires had finned if they had not died. They dyed for 
finne,the/fe finne not becaufe they die. The others crime made death good,which 
before was euill,but God hath giuen fuch graceto faith that death Which is lifes 
contrary,is here made the ladder whereby to afcend to life. 


As the wicked ufe the good law.euill.fothe good ufe death, 
which ss eusllwell. C war. 5. 


FrOr the apoffe defiring to thew $ hurtof fin being vnpreuented by grace, doub- 
ted not to fay that chelaw which forbids finne,is the Arength of ftane. The fing 
) | , f 


or + a ar a 


Lrs33. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. «473 


of death (faith he) % finme,and the flrength of finne is the lawe. Moft true: for (4)for- |... 

bidding of vnlawfull defires, increafe chem in him , where rightecufneffe is not “56. , 
of power to fuppreffe all fuch affects to finne. Andrighteoufneffe can neuer bee 
loued without gods grace procure this loue. But yet to thew that the law is noe 
cuill, though hre calls it the ftrength of finne,hee faith in another place, inthe 
fame queftion : The law is holy, and the commandement holy and inkt and good. Was 
that then which is good ( faith he ) made death to me ? GO D forbid: but finne 
that ic might appeare fione,wrought death in mee, by that which is good,(b)that 
finne are be out of meafure fintull by the commandement. Out ef meafure, 
faith hee béecaufe preuarication is. added, (¢ ) the lawe beeing alfo contemned. 
through the luft of finne. Why doe wee recite this ? Becaufe as the law is not 
euill when it exciceth concupifcence in the bad,fo earth is not good when it ir. 
creafed the glory of the good: neither the law when it is forfaken by finners and 


Rort.7, 


‘maketh them Prewaricators : nor death when itis vnder-taken for truth , and gna- 


keth them Martyrs. Confequently,the law forbidding finne is good, and death 
being the rewarde of finne,euill.But as che wicked vfe all things, good and euill, 


badly, fo the iuft vfe all things, euill and good well. Therefore the wicked vie the: 
law,that is good,badly,and the vfe death that is bad,well. | 


; ~ LL, VIVES. 


FF Orbidding (a’ id ] Icis naturall ynto exorbitant mindes,the more a thing is forbidden them | 

© the more to affectit: as women ( whofe mindes are moft vnftayed ) defire that onely that wees 
they are prohibited. So chat whereas then knew not what it was to goc to the ftewes , nor bi Hegre 
thoughit not vpon it, in comes the law, and faith, Thow fbale mot goe , and fo taught them all 
what it was to goe, fetting their depraued natures vpon purfuice of thofe vnlawfull actes. I 
knew not ( faith Pax/) what concupifcence was,vntill the law told me, Thos /hals not comet: 
Tully faith, that Solon {et downe no lawe againft parricide : which being vaknowne, hee was’ 
more afraide to declare then punifh. Pro Rofc. Amerin, (6) That finne | The old bookes read, 
thatthe finner. Augufline ad Simplician. lib. 1. quotes it thus: that the finner might bee out. 
of meafure a finner,&c. but his quotations are both falfe : For thus it fhould be read indeed : 
That the funer might bee out of meafure finfull,oc. Sinner, being referred to finne. auegrones § 
dpapne, faith the Greeke: vnleffe you will make finful'; anowne, and no participle, as Salat 
victh eAppetens,and Terente,Fugitans. (c) The law | all the terrors of the law being contems 
ned by fuch as haue turned their cuftome of finne into their nature. 


The general enill of that death that fenereth foule and body. 

Ben ona ao May Cuarp. 6. or 
VW Herefore, as for the death that diuides fouleand body , when they fuffer te 

whome wee fay are a dying, it is good vnto none. For ic hatha fharpe(.) 

vnnaturall fence,by which nature is wrung this way and that in the compofition 

of the lining creature,vntill it bee dead,and vntill all che fence be gone wherein 
the foule and body was-combined. Which great trouble,one ftroake of the bo- 
die,or one rapture of the foule often-times preuenteth , and out-runneth fence, 
in (wiftneffe. But what-fo-euer it isin death , that takes away (4) our fence with 
fo grieuous'afence , being faithfully indured ,it augmenteth the merite df‘ paci- 
ence,but taketh not away the name of paine. It is fure the death of the firft man, 
duly propagate, though if it be endured tor faith and iuftice, it bee the glory of 

the regenerate. Thus death being the rewarde of finne,fome-time quitreth finne 


from allrewarde. - «: | a — 


>. ¥ “a 
a eq i °, oe oe . 


474 SAINT AVGVSTINE Cuapy. 
ef 


| | | L. VIVES. 
: VY Nuatarall (4) fenee,] Sence, for paffion. (5) Our fence with fo greenous afence, ] The fick 


active, the fecond paffiue,the preat paffion,taketh away our power of fence, 


Of the death that fuch as are not regenerate do (uffer for Chrift. 
| Cap. 7. | : 

; Or whofaeuer hee is that being not yet regenerate, dyeth for confefin of 
ean + Christ, itfreeth him of his finne,as well as ithe had Soca the ecsen of 
parece Baptifme. For he that faid, Vmle/e a man bee borne againe of water , and of the holy 
biptime, [pivit,bee [ball not enter into the kingdome of God , excepteth thefe elf e-where.in as 
Joh.3.  -generall a faying : Whofoeuer confe(feth mee before men, him will confeffe before my 
tg Eker which ts in keauen: And againe.Hee that loofeth bis foule for mee, fall finde it, 

Pial,s16. ; Hérevpon it is that,Precious in the light of the Lord se the death of the Sxints. For 
| ‘ what is more deare,then thatdeath wherein all a mans badneffe ig abolithed, and 
his good augmented? Thofe that dye baptized, becaufe they could lite no Jone 

er, are not of that merite that thofe that dye willingly , where-as they mighe 
auc liued longer,becaufe thefe had rather dye in conteffing of Chriit, then denie 
him,and fo come to baptifine:(a) Which if they had done,this facrament would 
haue forgiuen it,becaufe they denied him for feare of death. For in it cuen their 
()villanie was forgiven that murdered Chr:i¥.(c)But how could they louc Chri 


| fo dearely , as to conremne life for him, but by abounding in thegrace of that 


 fpirir, that infpirech where it pleafeth 2 Pretious therefore is the death of thofe 
~ Saints,who tooke fuch gracious hold of the death of Chrift >that they ftuck noe 
to engage their owne foules in the queft of him, and whofe death fhewed thae 


they made vfe of that which before was the punithmentof finne to the produ. — 


cing of a greater harueft of glory. But dea:h ought nor to feeme good, becaufe 
it is gods helpe, and not the owne power that hach made it of fuch gaod vie, 
that being once propounded asa penaltie laide vpon finne, it is now eleGed.as 


a deliuerance from finne, and an expiation of finne , to. the crowning of inflice 


with glorious viGozie. 


L. VIVES. | 


jy Het (4) sf] Intimating that no guilt is fo great but Baptifme willl purgeie. (6) Thesb ot- 

lanie | {cis like he meanes of fome that had holpen to crucifie Chriit,and were afterwards 
conuerted, (¢) But bow | It could not bee but our of great aboundance of grace that they 
thoutd loue Chrsit,as well as thofe that were baptized alteadyinhim, 


That the Saints in faffering the firft death for the trathsare quit from 
thefecond. Cuan 8 ... . = 


| Port wee marke well, in dying well and lawdably for the truth, isa (worfe) 
~ death auoyded, and therefore wee take part of it, leaft the whole fhould fall 
Vpon vs, anda fecond , that fhould neuer haue end. Wee vnder-take the {epe- 
ration of the body from the foule, leaft wee fhould come to have the faule fe- 
uered from God, and then from the bod ys and fo mans firft death being pat 
fo P t € 


@& 


regener TEED LL EOL ITI _— . bees . | 
L1r3.13. - OF THE CITIE OF GOD. as 


the fecond , that endleffe ‘one,fhould fall prefently vpon him. Wherefore the 

death as I fay chat wee fuffer (4) when wee die ,and caufeth vs die’, is good vntd pean, 
no man, but icis well golerated, for attayning of good. But when men once are in good to the 
death,and called,dead,then we may fay that it is good to the good, and bad to the ogee 
bad. For the good foules, being feuered from their body, areinreft,andthee- bad, 
ail!,in torment,vntill the bodies of the firft rife to life erernall,and the later vnto 


the eternall,or fecond death. 
| ~L. VIVES. 
Se ,) When) The dead, and the dying are faid both to be in death: death being both in 
their departure and after, in the firft as a paffion } inthe fecond as a priuation, Both are of 

vfe inthe authors. Vorg, | | 

Priamus quanquane media tans morte tenetnr, ae 

Priam lies now in midft of death, —————— that is a dying : and the 

(Morte Neoptolemi tegnorum reddita ceffit..———————_ pars Helene. = A 

By Pyrbus death got Helénns,that part that now he holds, --—- that is,after his death. 


whether a man at the houre of bis death may be fayd to be tong the: 
wead.or thedying. Cuar. 9. 


BY now for the time of the foules feperation from the body (bec it good or 
bad)whether we fay it is in death, or after it? ifit be after death, it is not death 

then being paftand gone,but rather the prefent life of the foule,good or bad. For 

the death was euill cochem whileft ic was death, thacis;whilelt they,dying, fuffe- 

redic, becaufe it wasa greéuous paffion ( though the good vfé this euill well): 

Flow theri can death being paft ,bee either good or bad? Againe if wee marke 
well,we fhall finde that that greeuous — in man is not death. Fot (4) 4s long 

as we feele,we line: andas long as weliue,we are before death,and notiniec: for 

when death comes , it taketh away allfence, yea cnen that which is greeued by 

deaths approach. And therefore how we may call thofe that arenot dead, but in 

the pangus of deadly affli€tion,dying3is hard to explaine, though they may bee 

called ordinarily fo: for when death ts come , they areno more in dying,bue in 
death,or,death: Therefore is none dying bucthe hiding: becaufe when one is in Whe ms 
the preateft extreamity;or (b) paffage,as wee fay,if his foule bee not gone,hee is be Gid to 
yetaliuethen. Thus is hee both liuing and dying: going to death and from life, be dying, ; 
yet lining as Jong as the foule isin the body: andnor yet in death, becaufe the 

foule is vndeparted. And when it is departed,thenis hee not in death, but rather 

after death : who then can fay who is in death? no man dying is,ifno man can be 

both liuiag and dying at once : for as long as the foule is in the body wee cannot 

deny that he lives. (c) But if it be fayd that he is dying who is drawing towardes 

death, and yet that the dying and the liuing cannot bee both in one at once, then 

know not I who is liuing. 7 


L. VIVES: 


AS (4) lene } But death isa temporally effected {eperation of foule and body, and as foone 
asones members beginne to grow cold,hee beginnes to die , the departure of the foule Fe ints: 

is the admittance of death,the one is no fooner gone but the.other is there.(4)Paffage|ALart. 

Sidtfit grod apas , Attale azas animam. ageio doe , agere animam,to dic : becaufe the agcient 

‘held tar the foille was but a breath : and fo beeing breathed out,death followed, 

ar. ss S{4 (6) Bae 


a 
Pad 


/ 


Se COTES ECCT IT SN 


476 SAINT AVGVSTINE | - CHAP.1G6 
eee a ee a eae ree ee ea ee ae Cle SS ee ee 
(c) But sf | If hee bee faid to die chat drawes towards death, then all. our life is death : for as 
Cone as euer wee are borne the bodie beginnes to fecke how to thruft out the foule , and the 
life,and by litele doe expell it, Which made fome Philofophers fay that wee died in our birth, 
and chat that was che end of death which we call che end of life,either becaufe then wee bee 
ganne toliue,or becaufe death was then ended,and had done his worft. 


Whether this mortall life be rather to be called death 
then life. Cwar. ro, 


Oras foone aseuer man enters this mortall bodie,hee beginnes a perpetuall 
journey vnto death. For that this changeable life enioynes him to, if I may 
call rhe courfe vnto death, a life. Forthere is non¢é but is rn arer death at the 
yeares end then hee was at the beginning : to morrow, then today : today then 
Tretime yelterday,by & by then iuft naw, & now then a little before;(4)each part of time 
oflifeis that wee paffe,cuts off fo much from our life: and the remainder ftill decreafeth: 
aedeake” £0 that our whole life is nothing but a courfevnto death, wherein one can neither 
ftay nor flacke his pace: but all runne in one manner, and with one fpeed. For 
the fhort liver, ranne his courfe no fafter then the long : both hada like paflage 
of time, but the firft had nor fo farre to runne as the later , both making {peedea- 
like Ie is one thing toliue longer ,and another to runne fafter . Hee that lives 
longer,runneth farther but not amoment fafter . And ifeach one beginne to bee | 
in death as foone as his life beginnes to fhorten, ( becaufe when itis endedhee | 
is not then in death but after it)-then is euery man in death as fooneas euer hecis 
conceiued . For what elfe doe all his daies, houres and minutes declare , but that 
they beeing done , the death wherein hee liued , is come to an end: and that his 
time is now no more in death (hee being dead, ) but after death 2 Therefore if 
mian.cannot be in lifeand death both at once , hee is neuer in lifeas long as hee is 
in that dying rather then liuing bodic. Or is he in bothria life thas is ftill dimini- 
fhed,and in death becaufe hee dies, whofe life diminifheth ? for ifhee bee not in 
life, what is ic that is diminithed, vntillitc bee ended , and ifhee bee not in death, 
whar is it that diminifheth the life ? for life being taken from the body vntill ic be 
ended,cold notbe fayd now to be after death , but that death ended ic and thatit 
was death whileft it diminifhed. And if man be not in death, but after it, when his 
life is ended, where is he but in death whileft ic is a diminifhing? 


oo L VIVES. . 
a (a) part} All our life lowes off by vnfpied courfes ,and dicth euery moment of this 


ng times Onintilian Time {till cuts part of vs off : a common prauerbe.Poeis & Philo- 
fophers'all fay this, and Seneca efpccially , from whome .Augufime hath much of that hee re- 
laceth heere. ne te, ‘ 


whether one may be lining and dead,both togither. 
Cuap. ff. 


1. pe if it be abfurd ¢9 fav a man isindeath before he caine at it(for what is it chat 
© isco fe rannes vato, ifhee bee their already ? ) chiefly becaufe ic is (4)too 
Feoay oie de,0ne is body living and dying, fitch wee cannot fay one is both 
—_— - ° ~~ | fleeping 


= &- WS Ge 


ae . . : : Berd APES ae ee 


Linz. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 477 


fleeping and waking, wee muft finde when a man is dying. Dying before death 
come, hee is not, then is heeliuing: dying when death is come ; is heenot;for 
then is hee dead. This is after death, and that is before ic. (6) When is hee in 
death then ? for then is hee dying , to proportionate three things , /iuing,dying; 
and dead, vntothree times , before death ,indeath , and after. Therefore wher 
hee is in death, that is neither liuing , or beforedeath , nor dead , or after 
death,ishard to beedefined. For whiled the foule is in the body (efpecially 
with fence ) man liues affured, as yet beeing foule and bodie,and therefore is be- 
foré death,and not in it. But when the foule and fence is gone, then is hee dead, 
and after death. Thefe two then cake away his meanes of being in death,or dy-: 
ing , for if hee liue hee is before death, and if he ceafe tu liue,hee is after death. 
Therefore hee is neuer dying nor in death.. For this is foughtas prefent in the 
change of the times, and is found the one paffing into the other without the leaft 
interpofed fpace. Doe we nat fee then that by this reafon the death of the bodie 
is nothing ? Ifit bee, how is it any ching beeing innothin, and whereing nothing 
can be? for if weliue, it is not any thing yet,becaufe wee are before it,not in ie:if. 
Weliue not, it isnothing ftill ,for now wee are after it and not in it. But now, if 
death bee'nothing before nor after,what fence is there in faying, before,or after 
death 21 would to God wee had liued well inParadife that death might hauebin 
nothing indeede. But now, there is nor onely fuchathing,bucit is fo greeuous 
vito vs,as neither tongue cantell nor réafon avoide. Let vs therefore {peake 
according to (c) cuftome: for fo wee (Hiould , and call che time ere death come, 


a 


‘ 


before death: as it is written (d) Iadge mone bleffed before his death. Letvs call the Ecdl,£13 | 
time when it is already come , after death: this or that was after hisdeath: and 2% 


Jet vs {peake of the prefent time, as wee can: hee dying, gave fuch alegacy,hee 
dying Jefe thtis much,or thus much,though no man could do this but the liuing; 
and rather before his death , then at, or in his death. And let vs fpeakeas the ho- 
ly fcripture fpeaketh of the dead , faying they were not after death but in death 
For in death there is no remembrance of thee: for vntill they rife againe they are 
iuftly faid to bee in death as one is in fleepe vntill hee awake. Though fuch as are 
in fleepe wee fay are fleeping , then may wee not fay that {uch as are dead, are dy- 
ing.For they that are once feperace wholy fr6 theis bodies, are paft dying the bo- 
dily death,(whereof we {peake)any more.But this that I fay,one cannot declare, 
how che dying man may be fayd to live, or how the dead man canbe faydto bee 
in death : for how can he bee after death, if hee bee in death, fince wee cannot call 
him,dying,as we may dochee that is in fleepe,fleeping,or hee that is in languor, 
languifhing , or hee that is in forrow;forrowing,or in life, liuing ? Butthe dead 
votill they arife are faidto bee in death, yet wee cannot fay they aredying. And 
therefore J thinke it was not for no caufe ¢ perhaps God decreed it) that ssertor, 
the latiné word for todie,could not by any méanes bee brought by (e) grammar 


Pfal,6.§ 


rians vnto the forme of other verbes. (f) Orior, toarife,hath ortus in the preter- _ 


perfe&tenfe,and fo haue other verbes that are declined by the participle of the 


 preterrenfe ; But Aorior muft haue mortews for the preterperfe& tence, 


doubling the Jecter V. for Mortuns. endes like fatuus ,'arduus con{picuus 5: and 


_ fich like that aré no preterperfe& tenfes , buenownes , declined without tenfes, 


or times :and this as ific were a nowne declinable,that cannot be declined, is put. 


for the participle of the prefent tenfe. Sothat it is conuenient,that as it canndt | 


effe& the fignification by a&,no more fhould the name be to bee (¢) declined by. 
arte. Yet by the grace of Our Redeemer,we may decline(that is,avoide )the fecond 
death .Forthis is the fore onc, andthe wortt ofcuills , becing no feparation 


dee 


ey 


waine coe 


“ 


q78 SAINT AV GVSTINE. C warerr.& 12, 


Thefe. DPUtrather acombination of body and foule vnto erernall torrure .. Therein thall 

conddeath, none beea fore death nor after death , but eternally in death: neuer Jiuing,neuer 
dead,bur euer dying . For man can neuer be in worfe death, then when the death. 
he is in,is endieffe. , 


° Sea 


L.VIVES. 


[ Lou- To (4) ftrange } Infolens for infolitum,vn-accuftomed, Saluffs worde (that antiquary) and 
Gellius,his ape. (6) when ishe| (Oh Saint Anguftine,by your fauor, your witts edge is too 
pie de. blunt ! here you noc our rare {choole diuines ? the firft is ,the firft isnot , the left is, che Jaftis 
fectiuc,as not: deathis not in this inftant for now it is done: conceiue you not ? Why thus - It was 
I dée but now, and now itis not: not yet? then thus ----- but you muftinto the fchogles , and 
thinke ic learne of the boies: for thofe bables are fitter for chem then for men, But you and I will 
may very hauea great deale of good talke of this, in fome other place.] (¢) Cuftome | The miftreffe of 
lawfully fpeach, whom all artes ought to obferuc, (d) Ludge none] Like Solons faying. No man cap bee 
inthis:} called bleffed,and he be dead : becaufe hee knowes noc what may befall him. (¢) Grammari- 
ans | Youare too icle inthis chapter, Saint uguftine: Firlt in commanding vs to apply our 
{peech to the common fence: and fecondly , in naming granarians ina matters of .diuini- 
ty : how much more in drawing any argument pertayning to this queftion from them . If a- 
riy fmatterer of our diuines had done it,Ree fhould haue beenchiffed out of our {chooles:but 
you follow the old difcipline, and keepe the artes combined - mixing each others ornament 
Compari- and no way diftoyning them. (f) Orior ] That comparifon holdes in grammar ic is a great 
fonjoras —queftion,and much toffed, Ariffarchus,a great grammarian defended ic, and Crates building 
falogy. vpon (brs/ippus his Persanomalia,did oppote it. Varro’s fragments herevpon , lay downe both 
. their reafons: and Ovintilian difputes of it. (Cains ba wrote alfo to Cicero concerning 
Analogie. Doubtleffe it muft be allowed in many things but not in all : otherwife,that art can- 
not ftand , nor hardly worldly difcourfe. (¢) Declined | Alluding to the ambiguity of the 
— , declinars : i cannot bee declined, that is avoided , nor declined , that is varied by 

cales. ; 
SS 


Of the death that God shreatned topromife the firft man withall if 
| hetranfereffed. Cwar. 12. | 


[F therefore it bee asked what death G O D threatned man with all vpon his 
“trangreffion and breach of obedience, whether it were bodily or fpirituall , or 
that fecond death : we anfwere,it was,all : the firft confifteth oftwo , and the fe- 
cond entirely of all: for as the whole earth confifts of many lands, and the whole 
Church of many Churches ,fodoth the vniverfalt death confift of all the firft 
confifting of two,the bodies,and the foules , beeing the death wherein the foule 
becing forefaken of G O.D, forfaketh the bodie , and endureth paines for the 
time , the fecond beeing that wherein the foule being forfaken of GOD en- 
dureth paines for euer. Therefore when G OD fayd tothe firft man that hee 
placed in Paradife as concerning the forbidden fruite. “henfcemer thon cate 
thereof thou {balt die the death, he comprehends therein,not onely the firft part of 
the firft death,wherefoeuer the foule loofeth God, nor the Jater onely , wherein 
the foule leaneth the body, and is puni(hed after that feperation but alfochat laft 
part,or the fecond which is thelaft of deaths, eternall , and following after alls 
all chis is comprehended in that commination. | wiles 


. Cornpied () us all]A dinetfry of reading. Augu/fines meaning is that we being Ah portn 
| i 


OF THE CITIE OF GOD: «499 


Lis.¥3- 


| What punilbment was frit ge on mans prewsrication. 
HAPe 236 et 2 


/ 


Or after mankinde had broken the précept, hee was firft, forfaken of Gods 

grace and confounded with his ownenakedneffe : and fo with the figge leaues Genel}: 
(the ficft perhaps that came td hand, ) they couered their nakednefle and fhame: 
their members were before as they were then, but they were not (4) fhamefull 
before,whereas now they feltanew motion of their difobedient fleth, as the re- 
ciprocal (b)punifl:ment of their difobedience,for the foule being now delighted 
with peruerfe liberty and {corning to ferue GOD, could not have the body at the | 
former command: & hauing a bt ent OD the fuperior , it could noe 
have the inferior fo feruiceable as it defired , nor had the fleth fubie& as it might - 
haue had alwaies, had it felfe remained Gods fubie®. For then the flefh beganne 
to covet, and contend againft the {pirit ,and(¢) with this contentionare weeall 
borne, (d) drawing death from our originall,and bearing natures corruption,and Roms, ~ - 


‘ contention,or victory in dur memberss 


) L. VIVES. 
[A [08 (4) framefull | Not vey nor procuring fhame, they had not beene offenfiue,had wee | 


not finned , but had had the fame vfe that or feete , our hands now, but having offended, 
there was an obfczne pleaftire put in them,which maketh them to bee athamied of, and coue= 
red. (6,) Reciprocali] Which difobedience refleCted vpon them: as they obéied not GOD, to 


- whom nature fubie&ted them,fo fhould they finde arebell., one of the members’, againft the 


sule of reafon. (d) #2th this] Some bookes ads fome-thing here, but it is needleffe. (4) Draws 
ing death | That is,vpon the firft finne, arofe this contention beeweene the minde and their af= 
fecis which is perpetually in vs ; wherein the minde is fome-times victor, and fome-times 
not : forne read without ripad aa dep do the affe&tions cannot be fo fuppreffed, but then 
they will [till rebell againft reafon,and difturbe it: This is the more fubtile fence, and feemieth 


beft co mee, | 


in what flate GOD medt Man and into what fiate hee fellby his volun- 

tary choices Guar. 14. 
Or GOD (the Creator of nature,and not of vice Jmademan vpright : who be- 
= ing willingly depraued and iuftly condemned, begot all his prageny vnder the 


’ Jame deprauation and condemnation : for in him were we all,whenas,hebecing 


feduced by the woman, corrupted (4) vsall: by her that before finne was made 
of him(elfe. Weehad not our perticular formes yet, but there was the feede of - . 


“our naturall propagation, which beeing corrupted by finne.muft needs produce 


man of that fame nature,the flaue to death,& the obie& of iuft condénation:and 
therefore this came from the bad vfing of(4)free will,thencearofe all this teame_ 
of calamity ,drawing al men on into mifery(excepting Gods Saints)fr6 their cor- 


rupted originall,euen to the beginning of the fécond death which hath no end. 


L.VIVES. ° 


y 


\ 


wer pee 
ee 


"480 _ $AINT AVGVSTINE _ - Cuap.ts, 


tially in hm,and hee beeing corrupted by finne,therefore wee , arifing all from him as our firft 
fountaine,draw the corruption a long with vs alfo. (6) Free will) Per our firlt parents abufed 
the freedome of it, hauing power a{well to keepe Gods hefts cternally,as to breake them. 


Thet Adam forfoske GOD ere GOD forfocke hiss and that the fontes firft 
death was the departarefromGOD. Cuar.15. 


V VHereforein that it was fayd ron fhall die the death, becaufe it was not fayd, 
the deaths, if we vinderftand that death, wherein the foule leaueth the life, 
that is GO D(for it was not forfaken ereit forfooke him but congrary, the owne 
will being their firft leader to euill, but the Creators will being the firft leader to 
good,both in the crearion of it, before it had being, and the reftoring of ie when 
ithad falne: ) wherefore if we doe vnderftand chat God meant but of this death, 
Genef2, Where hee faith when/oener thou cate ff thereof thou {bale dse the death: as ifhee had 
1% ~~ fayd: whienfoeuer you forlake mee in difobedience , I will forfake you in iuftice: 
yet verily doeall the other deaths follow the denunciation of this death. For in 
thatthe foule felt adifobedient motion of the fiefh,and therevpon couered the 
bodies fecret partes, in this was the firft death fele , that is the departure ofthe 
foule from God. Which was fignified in that , that when the man in mad feare 
had'gone and hid himtelfe , Ged faid to him, Adam where art thon? not ignorant. 
ly feeking him , but watchtully warning him to looke well where hee was, feeing 
God was not with him.But when the foule forfaketh the body decaied with age, 
then isthe other death felt, whereof God faid in impofing mans future punifh- 
ment , carth then waft , and to earth thou {bale returne : Thatb thefe two, the firft 
death which is of whole man, might beacc6plifhed, which the fecond fhould fe- 
cond, if Gods grace procure not mans freedome from it; for the body which is 
earth , returnes not to earth but: by theowne death , that is the departure of the 
foule from it . Whereforeall chriftians (4) holding the Catholike faith, belecue, 
thac che bodily death lieth vpon mankind by no lawe of nature , asif GOD had 
sade man for to die, but as a (¢) due punifhment for fin : becaufe God in fcourg- 

_ ing this finne,fayd vnto man,of whom weall are defcended, Earth thou waft and to 

earth thon (halt returne. : 

Arth (a) thon waft] vii ro'us rv pv croawen, fay the Septuagints , by the later article,rls 
implying the element of earth,che graue of althings dying.(b Holding the | Auguftineof= 

cen auerreth dire&tly,that man had not died,had he not finned: nor had had a body {ubie& to 

death or diftafe: che tree of life fhould haue made him immortall.Aad S. Thomas Aguinas,the 

beft {choole diuine holds fo alfo.But Seotws,either for faction, or will,deniesital, making men 

Btenan had in his firft {tate fubic& to difeafes,yet thathe fhould'be caken vp to heauen ere he died : but if 


ra rea he were left on earth,he fhould die at length : for that the tree of life could not eternize him 
ea. but onely prolong his life. (c) A due } deferued by his guile, a 


- Of the Philofephers that held corporall death not to be penall, whereas Plato 
brings in the Creator promifing the le(fer gods that they fbould ne- 
ae uer leaue their bodies. Couar. 16. 


. B the Philofophers againft whofe callumnies we deféd this Csty of God,that 
DS a ne se 


a < ee a ce oo 


Tevfsys Qe ew NWA GE 


Lietz. OF THE CITIE’OF GOD: 438i 


is his church,thinke they giue vsa witty {coffe for faying that the foules fepera- 
tion from the body isto be held as part of the punifhment,when as they afirme 


that then (2) is the foule perfectly bleffed whenit leaueth the body,and goeth vp - 


pure and naked vnto God.IfI fhould finde no battery againft this opinion out of 
their owne bookes I {houldhaue a great adoeto prooue not the body , but the 
corruptibility of the body to bethe foules burden : wherevpon is that which we 


cited in ourlatt booke ,.4 corruprible body is heanyunte the foule. Inadding,cor- Wit 5.34 


ruptible, he fheweth that this being infli@ed as finnes punifhment,vpcn the bo- 
dy,and not the body it felfe,is heauy to the foule: and if hee had nocadded it,yet 
mouft we haue vnderftood it fo. Bur Plato affirming plainely that the gods chat the 
Creator made, haue incorruptible bodies, & bringing in their maker,promifin 
them(as a great benefir)to remaine therein eternally , and neuer to bee feperate 
from them,why then do thofe never (4)diffemble their owne knowledge,to pro- 
cure chriftianity trouble and conctradi& themfelues in feeking to oppofe againft 
vs 2 Plato's words (¢) Ta//y tranflateth thus: bringing in the great GOD, fpeaking 
thus tothe gods hee had made: (d) You that are of the gods original whom I hane 
Created attend :(¢) thefe your bodies,by my will, are indt(foluble:although emery com- 
pound may bee diffolued. But (£) it ss enill,to defire to diffolue a thing(g)componnded by 
reafon but feeing that you are created, you are neither immortall, nor indiffoluble : yét 
fballyon neuer be diffolued,nor die : thefe {ball not preusile , againft my will, which is 4 
greater 4{furance of your eternity, then all your formes, and compefitions are. Behold, 
Plato faith that their gods , by their creatiori and combination of body and foule 
are mortall, and yet immortall , by the decree and will of him that made them . If 
therfordit be paine to the foule,to be bound in anybody, why fhoukd God feeme 
to take away their feare of death , by promifing them eternall immortality ? not 
becaufe of their nature,which is compounded , & not fimple, but becaufe of his 
holy wil, which ¢an eternize creaturesand preferue compounds immortally,fro 
diflolution: whether P/ete hold this true of the ftars,is another queftion. For(h) 
we may not confequently grant him that thofe globous illuminate bodies , fhi- 
ning night & day vpon earth,haue each onea peculiar foule whereby it liues,be- 
ing bleffedand intelleQuall , as he afirmeth direCtly of the world alfo.But this,as 
J {aid,is no queftion for this place. This [held fit to recite againft thofe that af- 
feGtingthe name of Platoni(ts,are proudly afhamed of the name of chriftians, 
leait the communication of this name with the vulgar., fhould debafe thé 
proud(becaufe {mall number of the (2) Palliace. Thefe feeking holes in the coate- 


_ of chriftianity barke at the eternity of che body,as if the defire of the foules eter-’ 


nity,and che continuance of it in theftaile body , were contraries , whereas their 


Maifter Plato holds itas a gift giuen by the greatG OD tothe leffer, thatthey 


4 ah ‘ 


fhouldnot die,that is,be feucred from the bodieshe gauethem. =~ 


qe (a)is|Philolans the Pythagorean held thar man having left his body becorsian im- 


mortall God, and P/ato fayth our body depreffeth our-thoughts,and calls it away from fue. 


périor contemplations: that therefore we muft leauc it, that in this life alfo as well as we can, 
¢ in another life where we fhalbe free,we may fee the truth & Joue the g00d.Herevpon Por- 
phyry faith aman cannot bee happy without he leaue the boty, and be‘ioyned vrito snd 
Diffemble | An imitation of Terence,tw fi fapis qhod (cis, wefcias.{a) Tully tranfateth) Tuthies 


booke de. uwserfo,is a peece of Plato's Tz ee See worke is very fadty-in T wé/y,He that 
i : wi} 


df 


Palliat, 


SAINT AV GVSTINE. C uap.t7, 


will read Plato himfelfe,the words begin thus : @s0; sar &c. Plate had it out of Tamens of Lo~ 
cris his booke,after whom he named his dialogue : for thus faith Témeus : God defyring to doe 
an excellent worke,created.or begot this God ,who fballnener die , unleffe st pleafe that God that 
made bies,to dsffolue bins.But st 1s enill to defire the diffolution of forare a werke (d) Yow that are 
of | Devrums fats orti, (¢) Thefe your | Tuly hath this fentence :adepraued fence by reafon of 
the want ofa negatiue. (f) /e és exilf | Or,an euill mans part. (g) Compounded \Or , combined, 
(h) te may not] eAuguftine durft neuer decide this queftion . Origen ic feemes followed Pla 


) to,and gota many of the learred vnto his fide. (s) Padliate | The Romanes Toga, or gowne, 


was the Greekes Pad/ium: and they that would feeme abfoluce Grecians,went in thefe / adlia, 
or clokes : and fuch were obferued much for their Grecs/me in life and learning . For as we 


teach all our arts in latine, now,fo did they in greeke then . They were but few,and therefore 


more admired. 


Againft the opinion,that earthly bodies cannot be corruptible,mor 
| eternall. Cray. 17. is 

Hey ftand in this alfo, that earthly bodies cannot bee eternall , and yet hold 

‘the whole earth which they hold but as a part of their great God (though 
not of their higheft)the worldro beerernall. Seeng then their greareft GOD, 
made another God, greater then all thereft beneath him , that is, the world and 
feeing they hold chis isa creature hauing an intelleQuall foule included in it by | 
which it liues,hauing the parts confifting of 4. elements , whofe connexion that 
great GOD (leaft his other fhould ever perith) made indiffluble,and eternall: 
why fhould the earth then, being but a meane member of a greater creature,bee 
eternall, and yecthe bodies ofearthly creatures ( God willing the oneafwell 2s 
the other) may norbee eternall ? I but fay they, earth («) muft bee returned vnto 
earth, whence the bodies of earthly creatures are fhapen, & therefore(fay they) 
thefe mutt of force be diffolued, and die,to be reftored to the eternal! earth from 
whiéce chey were taken. Wel if one fhould affirme the fame of the fire,& fay that 
al the bodies taken thenee, fhould be reftored vnt9 it againe,as the heauenly bo- 
dies , thereof confifting , were not that promife of immortality , that Pl2to fayd 
God made vnto thofe gods , veterly broken by this pofition 2? Or can it not be fo, 
becaufe it ‘pleafeth not God , whofe will as Flato faythis beyond all otheraffu- 
rance?why may sot God then haue fo refolued of the terrene bodies, that being 
broughtforth,they fhould perifhno more; once compofed,they fhould bee dif- 
folued no more , nor that which is once taken from the elements fhould ever bee 
reftored ? and that the foules being once placed,the bodies fhould neuer forfake 
them, but inioy eternal! happineffe in this. combination ? why doth not Pleo 
confeffe chat God can do this? why cannot he preferue earthly things from cor- 


a 


oor ruption? Is his power as the Platon/fts,or:ratber as the chriftians auouch. A like- 
the Philo. y matcer-/ the Philofophers know: Gods counfells , bur not the Prophets! nay 
fophers,, rather it was thus, their {piric of truth reuerled what God permitted vnto the 


Prophets:but the weaxeneffle of conieGure in thefe queftions ,wholy deluded the 
Philofophers. But they fhould nor haue bin fo far befotted in obftinate igno- 
rance as to contradiG& themfelues ia publike-afferticns,faying firft chat the foule 
cannot be bleffed without it abadonal bedy ,whatfoeuer, & by & by after(6)thac 


_ the gods haue bleffed foules, & yet are continually tied vato celeftiall & fiery bo 


dies: 8 as for /upsters(the worlds foule,that is ecercally inheréc in the 4.elements 
compofing this vniuerfe. For Plete holds it to bee diffufed,frd the midft of earth, 
geometrically called che(c)center,vnto the extreametft parts of heaué through al 
th¢ parts of che world by(d)mifticall numbers:making the world,ableffed crea- 
tuse, whofe foule enioyech ful happines. of wifdom & yet leaueth noc the — 
a3 a Oo a whofe 


“Ae 


~*~ 


Vt 


ad 
} 


e a AN, a bein, 


List3. | | OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 483 


whofe bodie liucteh eternally by ic, and as though it confit of fo many different 


_ parts, yet can neither dull ie nor hinder it. Seeing then that they giue their con: 


1eCtures this {cope , why will they ndt beleene that God hath power to etérnize 
mortall bodies, wherein the foules without being patcéd from them by death,or 


‘being burdened by chem at all in life may liue moft in blefféd eternity,as they 


fay their gods doe m firy bodies, and theit Zspiter in all the foure elements 2 If 
the foules cannot be bleffed-without the bodies bet quite forfaken,why then lee 


their gods get them ourofthe ftartes let Jupiter pack outofthe elements: if they - 
cannot goe, then are they: wretched. Bur they will allow neither of thefe : they 
dare nocanerre that the Gods tay leane their bodies, leaft they fhould feemeto 
worthip mortalls: neicher dare they barre them of bliffe, leaft they thoula con: 
feffe them wretches. Wherefore all bodies are not impediments to beatitude,but 
onely the corruptible , tranfitory and mortal! ones : not fuchas God made mati 
ac firft,buefach ashisfinne procured hitafterwards. - 


¢ 


AL WIVES, 


Ji Arth (4) sea) This is (cripture , chat the body is earth’, and mutt become earth. Homer Giiil,3, 

Sha it rv bl : fiche calls Hettors carcaffe, earth, Phecylides, an ancient whiter 

hathitthus, 7 

_ = Loya yap ix. &e, ms | 

“Our body is of earth,arid dying muft, 

+-  - Returne to earth: for Man is made of diift: | . 

__ Exvipides hath alfo the like,recited by Tiwly;T1 w]e .gu.t. whereinehe words that Mugu 

citech,are extant, , 7 | 

(Mars eft finitas omuibns qua g encri bumano angerem, 

Nec quicquam afferunt : re da eff terra terra, 

Ofall che paines wherein Mans foule foiournes; 

. a _Deathis the end : all earth to earth .returnes. re 

- (6) That the gods }Some bookes read,tertene gods : falfly , uguftine hath nothing to doe The Cease’ 

with cerrene gods in this place.' (c) Ceater} A center is that point in the mid of a fphzricall tes, | 

body fromm whence all lines drawne ro the clrcumference are equall . It is an indiuifible oint, 

for it ic had parts, neither fhould it bee all in the midft,nor the lines drawne from it tothe cit- 15 Timea; | 

stmference equall, as not beeing all drawne from one part. “Plate placeth the worldes 

foulein the center, and fo diftends it circularly throughout the whole voiuerfe : and then 

conuerting his pofition , makesthe diuine power aboue ; diftufe it felfe downe-ward, euen 

tothe center. ( d) Mafexdt numbers \Hereof lee Macrobins,(balcidias,and Mearfilius Ficinns; 

in his breuiat of Plate's Téwsens,which he cither tranflated , or reformed from the hand of an- 

other.Thefe numbers for their ob{curi ty ate growne into a prouerbe. | . 


Of the terreiie bedies which the Philo ophers hold, cannot be in heasen, 
| but wnf? fall to carth by their naiurall weight. 
- 3 | ; Cuar. 18. a | 
O# but ( fay they ) ‘an earthly body is either kept on earth ; or catied to 
earth by thenaturall weight,and therefore carinot bee in leauen. The firft 
imen indeede were in a wooddie,and fruitful land, which was called Paradife But 
becaufe we muft refolue this doubt, feeing that both Chrifts body isalready af- 


_ eended , and hat che Safats at the pefurredion thal ners 


Tea 


/ 


I a ac a ennes —_om acme as — 


484. 


- SAINT. AV-GYV STINE. Crarer8. 


thefe earchly weights a litcle. If mans arte,ofa mettall chat being put into the wa- 
ter, finketh,can yet frame a veffell, chat thall fwim, how muchtnere credible is it 
for Gods fecret power , whofe omnipotent will , as P/sto faith s-can both keepe 
things produced, from perifhing,and parts combined from difloiuing, (whereas 
the combination of corporall and yncorporeall is a ftranger anid harder operati- 
on then that of corporalls with corporalls ) ro take. (4) all weight from earthly 
things, whereby they are carried downe-wards , and to. qualifie the bodies afthe 
bicfied foules fo,asthough they bee terreste,yet they may bee incorruptible,and 
apt to afcend,defcend, or vfe what motion.they will. with all celerity. Or, ¢4) 
if the Angells can tranfport bodily weights whetherthey pleafe , mult we thinke 
they doe it with toile,and feeling of the burden? VV hy then may wenor beleeue 
thac.the perfect {pirits of the blefled cancagry theit: bodics whither they pleafe, 
and place them where they. pleale 2 for whereas in our, bodily carriage of earth- 
ly things, we feele, that che.(¢) more bigge it is,che-heauier it is, and che heauier, 
the more toile-fometo beare: it isnot fo with the foule : the foule carrieth the 
bedily members better when they are big,and ftrong , then when they are {naall, 
and meigre, and whereas a big found manis beauier co others fhoulders,thena 
Icane ficke man,yet will he mooue his healchfull heauineffe with farre more agi- 


_ dicy chen the other can doe his crafie¢ rela then he can hirhfelfert famine 


wConts 


or fickneffe naue fhaken off his fefh. This power hath good temperature more 
then great weight in our mortal, earthly & corruptible bodies. And who can def- 
cribe che infinite difference betweene aur prefenc health,and our future immor- 
tality ? Lec nor the Philofophers therefore oppofe vs with any corporall weight 
or earthly ponderofity -1 will mor aske. them why an:earthly body maynorbee 
in heauen as well as (a) che whole earth may hang alone without any: firpporta- 


tions for perhaps they will retire their difputatioa to the center of the world vn- 


to which all heauy things doe tend. But thisI fay,that if the lefler Gods(whofe 
worke P/ato maketh Man & all other liuing chings with him)could take away the 
quality of burning from the fire, andieaue it the light,(e) which the eye rranffu- 


~ feth: thall wee then doube thae that GOD,vnto whofe will hee afcribes their im- 


mortality , the eternal] coherence and indiffolubility ofthofe ftrange and diuers 
combinations of corporealls and incorporealls , can giue mana nature thar chall 
make him live incorruptible,and imniortal,keeping the forme of him,and auoy- 
ding the weight > Bucof the faith of the refurre€tion,and the quality of thc im- 
mortall bodies, more exactly (God willing)in the end of the worke. 


. 77 


, L. VIVES. 
AZ L (4) weight|Thefe are Gods admirable workes,and it is the merit of our faith that we 
owe vnto God to beleeue them. I wonder the fchoolemen will inquire of chefe things,& 


define them by the rules of nature. (b)/f the Angels} To onsit the {chooles , and natural] rea- 


fons, herein is che power of an Angell {cene,that in one night God finote 1 80000.men of the 
Affyrians campe by the hand of an;Angel 4.Kings 19.Now let Man go brag of his weaknefle. 
(c) The world 61g. Here is no need of predicamentall diftinGtions : hee vfeth big , for the mafly 


-weight,not for the quantity. (4) The whole earth) Ithangs not in nothing for it hangs in the 


ayre: yer would ayre giue it way, but.char it hath gotten the middlemoft meg of the world, 
and keepes there in the owne nature,immoueable, The Philofophets maruelled that the earth 
fell not, feeing it hung in the ayre : but that which they thought 4 fall, fhould then bee no fall 
bue an a for which-way foeuer earth fhould goe,it fhould gog towards the heduén: 
and és itis no marvel! chat our Hemifphere afcendeth not, nto more is it of any elfe,for the mo- 
tion fhould be all onc, aboute and beneath beeing sll alike in aglobe’, Butieathing co bee 


ar | 34 admired 


o 


oe ea 


, . 7 "1 


Lis.173. . OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 


faith. 7 3 

| Terra pile fimilis nullo fuleimine nixa, 

elere fufpenfo,tam graue pexdet onus. 

Earths maffy globe in figure ofa ball, | 

Hangsin the ayre; vpheld by noughratall. | . = 
(e) With the eye| Plato in hits Timeus, {peaking of mans fabrick faith,chatthe eyes were endow- 
ed with part of that light that fhines &biirnes norsmeaning the funs:for the Godscommanded 
this pure fire brother to that of heauen ;) to flow from forth the apple of the eye.:and there- 
fore when that,and the daies light do meete,the coniuhction of thofe two fo well acquainted 
natures, produccth fight ; And leaft that che fight fhould fceme effected by any other. thing 
then fire in the fame worke,hee defincth collours to bee noshing but fulgores e corperibus ma- 


admired and adored , that the earth fhould hang fo in the ayre,beeing fo huge a maffe,as Owid 


435 


nantes : fulgors,flowing out of the bodies wherein they are . The queftion whether one feeth feth, 


by emiffion, or reception , chat is whether the eye fend any beame to the obieét,or receiue a= 
ny fromit,is notheereto bee argued . late holds the firft. Ariftotle confuteth him in his 
booke De fexforiis,and yet feemcs to anproue him,in his Problemes, The Stoickes held the firft 
alfo,whom Auguffsne( De Trizstate) and many of the Perspatetiques,follow . Aphrodifeus acld 
‘that the eye fends forth fpirits : P&ny faith ic’ receiuech them. Ha/ythe Arabian maketh the 


Species to goc fromthecye and recurne fuddainely , allin a moments the later Peripatetiques 


following Oceam, and Darandas, admit no Species on either fide. But of this in another place. 
Plato doth would haue the eye fend fome-thing forth, and receiue fomething in. , 


ES EE es A = OS 


Againft thofe thit hold that man{bould not haue beene immortal 
if he hadnot finned. Car. 19. 


B Venow let vs proceed with the bodies of the firft men , who if they had nor 
finned, had neuer talted of that death which we fay is good only ro the good: 
being,as all men know,a feperation of foule and body, , wherein the body of the 
creature that had euident life,hath euident end. For alchough we may not doubt, 
thacche foules of the faithfull that are dead, arein reft- yet (4) it were fo much 
bercer for them to liue with their bodies in good ftate,that they that hold it moft 
blefled to wanta bodie, may fee themfelues conuinced herein dire@ly . For 
no nian dare compare thofe wife men,chat haue either left their bodies,or areto 
Jeaue chem,vnto the s#mortall gods to whom the great GO D promifed perpe- 
tuity of bliffe, and inherence in their bodies. And P/sto thought it the greateft. 
bleffing man could haue,to bee taken out of the body (after a courfe vertuoufly 
ea )and placed in the bofomes of thofe gods., that are neuer to leaue their 
dies. : 7 
| Stilicet immemores (spravt tonwexa reus[ant, 
Rur[us C incipiant in corpora velle renerts. 


The thought of Heauen is quite out of their braine, 
Now gan they with to live on earth againe. = 
Which Virgél is commended for, {peaking after Plato. So that hee holds, thae 

the foules of men can neither bee alwaiesin their bodies , but mutt of force bee 
Joofed from them: nor canthey bee alwaies without their bodies , but muft bee. 
forced {ucceffiuely,now to live, and now to die, putting (4) this difference that 
wife men when they die arecaried vp to the ftars,and every one ftaies a while in 
a ftarre fit for him,thence to returne againe to mifery , intime:and to follow the. 
defire of being imbodied againe,&cfo co line againe in earthly calamity,but your 


- fooles, are beftowed after their deaths in other bodies , of men or beafts,aécor- 
ding to their merits . In this hard and wretched cafe placeth hee the wifett 
_ a Te3. foules, . 


| Virg Aened 
ad,6. 


486 


-$AINT AVGVSTINE. CHap20 


foules,who haue nd other bodies giuen them , to bee happy in; but {uch as they 
can neither bee eternally within, nor eternally abandon. Of this Pletomi/me,Por= 
phyry(as laid elfe-where)was afhamed becaufe of the chriftian times,excludin 

thefoules not onely from the bodies of beafts, and from that revolution , bur af- 
firming them ( ifthey liued wifely )tobee fet free from their bodies, fo as they 
fhould neuer more bee incorporate , but liue in eternall bliffe with the Father. 


_ Wherefore leaft he fheuld ieeme in this point to be exceeded by the Chriftans 


that promifed the Saints eternall life, che fame doth hee giue to the purified 


| foules : and yet , to contradi& Chrift,hee denies che refurreGion of their bodies — 


in incorruptibility; and placeth the foule in bliffe without any body at all. Yet 


2,.Cor. 15 | 


did hee neuér teach that thefe foules fhould bee fubic& vnté the incorporated 
gods in matter of religion. Why fo ? becaufe he did not thinke them better then 
the Gods,though they had no bodies. Wherfore if they dare not(as I think they 
darenot ) preferre humaine foules before their moft bleffed chough corporeal 
gods , why doe they thinke ic abfurd for chriftianicy to teach that our ett pd- 
rents.had they not fianed, had beene immortal , this beeing the reward of their 
true obedience ? and that thé Saints acthe refurre@ion fhall haue the fame be- 
dies that they !aboured in here , but fo , chat they fhalbe light,and incorruptible 
as their biiffe fhalbe perfe& and vnchangeable. | _ 


L.VIVES. 


Y Et (a) were it | If che following opinion of Plato concerning them were true. (6) This dif 
A. farence |Plaro faith that fome creatures follow God well , are like him, and are reuolued 
with the {phere of heauen vntill they corne belowe and then they fall : Some get vp againe : 
fome are oucr-whelmed : thefe are the foolifh, and thofe the wife: the meane , haue a middle 
place. So the wife foule is cleuated to heauen, ana fits there , vneill che reuolution bring it 
downe againe , from feeing of truth , others voluntarily breake their wings and fall ere the 
time bee expired . The Philofophers foules at the end of 3000. yeares , rerarne to the ftarre 
whence they cathe : the reft mutt {tay 10000.yeares efe they afcend. 


That the bodies of the Saints now refling in hepe,(bal become better 
then our firft Fathers was. Cuare2ce - 


‘He death that feuereth the foules’of the Saines from their bodies is not 
troublefome vnto them,becaufe their bodies doe reft in hope,and the: eford 
they feemed fenceleffe of all reproach here vpon earth. For they do not(as Plate 
will haue men to do ) defie to forget their bodies but racher,cemembring what 
thetruch that deceiueth none, aid vntothem (4) that they [bould wt loofe an baire 


of their head , they defire and waite for the refurreGtion of their bodies wherein 


they fuffced {uch paines and aré never to fuffer more. (6) For if they hated not 
their fleth when they were faine co bind it from rebelling by che law of the {pirir, 
how much fhall they loue it, becomming wholy {pirituall ? for ifwee may iuftly 
call che fpirit feruing che fleth , carnall, then fo may we call the fleth feruing the 
{pirit, {piricuall, (¢) not becaufe it fhalbe turned intg the fpiric ( as fome thinke, 
becaufe it is written: Jt és fowme a natural! bodie but tt arifcths Spiritual bodie): 
but becaufe it thall ferue the fpirit in all wonderfull , and reacy obeifance, 
t6 the fulfilling of moft fecure will of indiffollub!e immortality , all fence 
of trouble , heavynefic; and corruptibilicy beeing quike taken from it. i 


Omar tite ae oF 


ero. 


SE Se 


Lr.13. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. © ~ oe 


Chall not bec fo bad, asitis now in our beft health : nor as ic was in our firft pa- wre to. 
rents before finne 3fer they (though trey had not dyed but that. they finned) das our | 
were.faine to eate corporal méate as men do now:hauing earthly , and noc {piri- “ir apa 
eual bodies:and though they {hould never haue growne old and fo haue died(the “~ 


‘cree of life that ftood in the midft of Paradife , vnlawfull for chem to taft of , affor- 


ding them this cftate by GODS wonderfull grace ) yet they eate of more 


‘trees then that one ':.( which was forbidden them, becaufe it was bad but 
-for their inftru@ion in pure and fimple obedience , which is agréat vertuein a 


‘reafonable creature placed vnder God the creator, for though aman touched no 
cuill, yet in touchinig that which was forbidden him , the very aé was the finne 
Trdiibbedenen, shies liued therefore of ocker fruices , andeaze,|eaft their carnal 


bodies fiould haue beene troubled by hunger ,or thirft :buc the caft of the tree.- 


of life was giuenthem , to confiriné them againft death , and wéakenefle by age, 
the reft feruing them for nutriment, and this one for a facrament : thé tree of life 
in the earthly paradife, being as the wifdome of God is in the heauenly swheréof,. 
itis written :/# 43 a bree of lif tothems that imbrate it. Pro.3.18; 


L:VIVES. 


V Nto thens.(a)That\Luc.21.7.(6)For if.] Epbef-5.2 xo main entr yeb bated his owne fete (2) 
Not becanfe Saint Origen faith chat all our corporal! nature fhall become fpirituall ;and 

our fubftance thai become a body purer and clearer thei the light,and fuch an one as mah ¢in- 
not imagine :God fhall be all,in all,fo that cuery creatitre fhall be tranf nuced into thac which 
3s better then all,namely into the diuine fubftance,for that is thie belt. Periarch. | 


Of whe Pa ridife wherein our fre parents were placed and that st may be 
taken {piritually alfo without any wrong to the truth of the 


hiftery as teuthing the reall place. 
c HAP. 21. 


XV Herevpon fome referred that Cs ) Paradife wherein the firft man was pla- 
ced aSthe {cripture recordeth,al viico alpiricual meaning taking the trees,to 
be vertués, as if there were (b )nofuch vifible things, but onely thatthey were 
writ to fignifie things intelligible. Asif there were not areall Paradife,becaufe 
we may vnderftand a {piritual one: as if chere werenot two fuch women as Agar 
and Sara,and two fonnes of Abraham by them, the one being a bond- woman and 
the other free, becaufe the Apoftle faich that they fignified the rwo Teftaments: 


_ ot asifthe Rocke guffied tiot forth in Water, When Afoy/es {mori , becanfethae 


rotk may prefigure Chrift,ehe fame Apolile faying the rocke was Chrift! Noman 
denies that the Paradife may be vndet{tood, the bliffe of the Saints the (¢)foure 
flouds, foure vertues 3 prudence, fortitude,remperance and iuftice : the trees, all 

ood difciplines : the tree of life, wifdome the mother of the roft > the treeofthe 
Enowieles of good and cuill , the criall oftranfgreffion , for God decreed a pu- 
nifhment for finne,iuftly , and well, ifman could haue made vie of it to his owne 


‘good. Thefe things may alfo be vnderftood of the Church , and that inabetteg 


manner,ds prophetique tokens of things to come , Paradif¢ may betaken for the 
_ i = Fteg Church 


ste cont ; a ST A ee — ; | a 
488 SAINT AVGVSTINE. — Cuapaa 


Chorch, as wee (d) read in the canticles thereof. The foure flouds are the foure 
Ghofpels: the frurefull trees,the Saints: their fruits,their workes:the tree of life, 
the holy of holies,Chrift : the tree of the knowledge of good and euill, free elec- 
tion of will, for ifman once forfake Gods will, he cannot vie him-felfe,but co his 
owne deftrudtion : and therefore hee learneth either to adhere vnto the good of 
all goods,or to affe@ his owne onely, for louing himfelfe,he is giuen to himfelfe, 
that being in troubies , forrowes sand feares ( and feeling them withall ) hee may 
Pal, 42.6. fing with the P/s/asi/t, My foule is caft downe within me.and being reformed ? J wil 
Pll $9.9» waite upon thee O God, my defence. Thefe and fuch like may be lawfully vnderftood 
by Paradife,taken in a fpirituall fence,fo that che hiftory of the true and locall one 

be as tirmely belceued. : 


ene 


a 


L. VIVES. 


; Aradife.(a)\eAuguftine fuper Genef.ad.lit.ib.8.recites three opinions of Paradice : x.Spiri- 
Peon Pei — : natty ooety bie ry eae and locall fethentel ds he approues for the like- 
lieft. Buc where Paradife was,is a maine doubt in authors. Jofepbws placeth it in the eaft , and 
fo doth Bede , adding withall that it is a region, feuered by feas from all the wor'd , and lying 
fo high that ic roucheth che moone, Fiato in his Phedo placeth it aboue the cloudes , which o« 
thers ciffalow as vnlikely. Albertus Grotus herein followeth Axscen, and the elder writers al- 
fo as Polsbins,and Eratofthenes,imagining a delicate and moft cemperate region vnder the equi- 
noctiali,painft the old Pofition, thar the climate ynder the beeen wasinhabitable. The 
equinoiiall diuides the ‘torrid Zone in two parts,touching the Zodiacke in two points, Aries, 
and Libra. Theredid hee thinke the moft temperate clime hauing ewelue howers day , and 
_ twelue night, all the yeare long , and there placed hee his Paradife, So did Scetws : nor doth 
this coutroull them that place it in the eaft, for there is caft and weft vnder the equine étiall 
line, Some fay that the fword of fire fignifieth that burning c'ymate, wherein as ef rrianat 
faith, thereis fuch lightning and fo many fiery apparitions , where Paradife was , Hiierome 
Gden thinketh that the Scriptures doth fhew,and though the Septuagintes tranflate in Eden,from the 
* — eaft : Oriens is alarge fignification. Hierome faith chus for Faradife there is Orrus : Gan. Eden 
"js alfo Delscie,pleatures,for which Symmachus tranflateth Paradifus florens.Vhat alfo which fole | 
lowethY ontra Orientem,in § Hebrew Mckkedem. Aquila tranflaceth ave <eyi's:we may read it, 
from the beginning Symmachns hath in xgv7m 5 and Theodotion , a xeéns both which fignifie 
beginning, and not the eaft,whereby it is plaine that God had made Paradife before he made 
heauen and earth, as we read alfo in the Hebrew. God had planted the Paradife Eden froms the 
beginning. This out of Hierome,(6)No fuch.)No man denieth that Paradife may be {piritually 
vnderftood , excepting Ambrofe in his booke De Paradife. But all the Fathers profeffe that 
Paradife was a reall pleafant place, full of trees , (as Damafcene faith ) and like tothe Poets 
imaginary El:zsume, Away with their foolery(faith Hierome vpon Danief)that feeke for figures | 
in truthes,and would ouerthrow the reall exiltence of trees , and riuers in Paradife , by draw- 
ing all intoan Allegory. This did Origen, making a {pirituall meaning of the whole hiftory, : 
and placing the true Paradice in the third heauen, whither the Apoftle Pax/ was rapt.(c)Fowre | 
The riners riners.] Nile of Egipt.Euphrates and Tigris of Syria;and Ganges of India, There heads are vn- 
of Paradile. knowne, and they run vnder the Ocean into our fea : and therefore the Egiptian priefts called | 
Nive,the Ocean.Heradot.( d) Readinthe.|(ant,4.12. 1.7 fifter,my {poufe ts as a garden inclofed 
as a {pring fut up, and a fountaine fealed up, their plants are as an orchard of pomegranates with 
freete fruites.coc. , | | 


That the Saints bodies after refurrection [halbe [pivttuall,and yet not 
changed into [pirits. CHAP.22. ‘ 


“Te bodies ofthe Saints in the refurreétion fhall néed none of che tree of life 


* co preferuc them in life, healchor Rrength , nor any meate to ee away 
| , | . unger 


os . oe 


L- 2613. | 


OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 489 


ee eed 


: huiger and chirft : They thalt hauefuch an ct Aca abfolute immortality, thae. 


they thall newer need to eate : power they hall haue co doe irif they will, but no 
neceffity. For fo the «_4nge/s did appearing vifi bly and fenfibly,rot of neceflity, Genef 18. 
‘but of power and will to affoord their minifterie vnto man in more congruence. 
For we may not thinke thac when ( 2) they lodged in mens houfes ,they did but 


-eate (b) feetriingly : chough they feemed to eae v ith the fame appetite that the 


«men did,who knew them not to be Axgeds:And therefore the Angifaithin Tobie 
“sou fav mee cate, but you [aw it bat 12 viffon :thatis;you thought I had eaten as Tob.12. 
‘you did,to refreth my body. Bucif the other {ide thay bee probably held of the 


+ 
, 


‘Angels yer vetily wee doubt it not to bee ttue (¢) af Chrift, that hee in his 
fpirirvall fléth after his refurredtion ( yet was it his true flefh ) eate and dranke 
with his difciplés : The neede onely, not the power, is taken fronicliole glorified Lac. 23. 
Dodies which are fpirituall, not becaufe they ceafe to bec bodyes , but Becaule | 
they {ubfift by the quickning of the fpirie. | : -_ 

- oe 


a L. VIVES. ge ee 

TT Frey (a) lodged \Inthe houfes of Abrabams,Let,and Tobias. ( 6) Eate feemingly | They did. 

. & not e2tcas we doe, paffing the meate frem the mouth to the ftomack through the thtoate; 
and fo deco& it,anid difperte the iuice through the veiries, for nutriment,nor yet did they de~ © 
Judeatiens eyes by feeming to mooue that which they had for theirchaps , and yet moouing 
them not, or fecming to chaw bread, er fleth, and yet leauing it whole. They did eate really; 
but were not nourifhed by cating. (¢) Of Christ] Luke the 23. The earth ( faith Beve vpon 
‘this place ) crinketh vp water one way,and the funne another: the earth for necde : the funne 
by his power. And fo our Sauiour did eate, but not as weeate: that glotious body of his tooke 
the tneate,bur turned it noc into nutriment,as Outs doc, — a 


Of bodies animate and {pivituall, thefe dying in Adam, and shofe beeing 
| guickned ik Chriff. Crwiar. 23. an , 
Fo asthe bodyes that hane a liding foulé ( though as yet vnquickned by the 

- fpirie )are called animate,yet are out foules but bodyes: fo are the other cal- 
led ‘piricuall : yet God forbid we fhould beleeue them co bee fpirit, or other then 
fubftaritiall fleth!y bodies, yec vncorruptible, and without weight, by the qnick- 
ning of the {pirit.For man hall nor then be earthly but celeftiall,nor thathe fhall 
feauie his earthly body.but becaufe he (hall be fo endowed from heauen, that he 
stay irhabire it with loff: of bis nature, onely by attaining a celeftiall quality. 
The firft man was made earth of earth, inco («a liuing creature, but not into (4) 
a quickning {pirit : 4s liee (hould haue beene, had hee perfeucred in obedienee. 
Doubrlefle therefore , his body needing meate and drinke again{t hunger and 
thirft,and being norkepr in youth, & from death by indiffoluble itucaoealiey hen | 
onely by the Tree of Isfe,was not {pirituall,but onely animace : yec fhould ic not 
hane died but that it incurred Gods heauy fentence by offending, And though he 
might cake of otliet meates out of Paradice,yet had he bin (¢) forbidden to touch 
the tree of life,hé fhould haue bin lidble to time & corruption, in that life onelys 
which had he continued in {pirituall obedience , chough it were But meerely ant- 
mate, might haue beene eternall in Paradife. Wherefore though by thefe words 
of God, (d) when foewer you cate thereof yon [hall dye the deaths wee vnderftand by 
death, the feperation of fouleand body, yet ought it not feeme abfurd, in thac 
they dyed not the very day that they tooke this deadly meate, for that very 
day their nature was oe at , and by eheir tuft exclufton from the Tree _ 
of life , the necefltie of death entred vppon them , wherein wee = are 

ait | roughe 


ower TF Te 


490 | SAINT AV GVSTINE. | Cuar.23. 


A TD 
brought forch. And therefore the —qpoft/e faith not : The body thall dye for 
Rem.8.10 finne ,buc The body ss dead becaufe of linne,and the (pirit ts life for inflice fake. 
 Andthenheaddeth : But ifthe [pert of him that raifed up \elus from the dead dwek 

in you,he that raifed vp Chrift from the dead, {ball alfo quicken your mortall bodyes by 

his [pirit dwelling in you. Therefore then as the Apoftle faich hall be in quickning 
of he {piric, which is now in the life of foule, and yet dead, becaule it muft ne- 
ceffarily dye. But in the firft man, ic was in life of foule , and not in ee 
Ipirit, yet could ic not be called dead,becaufe had not he broken the precept,hee 
had not beene bound to death.But whereas God fignified the death of the foule in 
leauing of him,faying Adame where art thow? and in faying, Earth thon art , azd to 
earth thou {balt gor, fignified the death of the body in leauing of the foule , there- 
fore wee muft Finkehe fpoake not of the fecond death, referuing that fecret be. 
caufe of his new teftament, where it is plainly difcouered : that che firft which is 

. common toall,might bee fhewento proceed from that finne, which one mans 
_ a@e made common to all: but thar the fecond death is not common tv all , be- 
- caufe of thofe holy onely whom hee hath fore-knowne and predeftinated (as the 
Apoftle faith) to bee made ithe the image of his {onne,that he might be the fir it borne 
of many brethren,whom the grace of God by this medsator had faned from the fecond 

death. © | : 

Therefore the firft mans body was but animate ,as the Apoftle witneffeth, 
| who defiring our animate bodies now , from thofe fpiritnall ones, chat they fhall — 
nCet.15- become in the refurreion: /t is fowne im corruption ( faith he) bat {bell rife againe- 
| sncorruptible : st is fowne in reproche, but it ss ratfed in glory: it is fowen sn weake- 
4» — we fe,but raifed in powre: it's fowne an animated body,but {ball arife  {pirstuall body. 
44 And then to prooue this,hee proceedes: for sf there be a maturall( or aninsated ) bo- 

die there is alfe a {pirituall body. And to thew what anaturall body is,hee faith ; 

45 The frft man Adam was made a living foule. Thus then fhewed he what a natural! 

body is,though the {cripture doe not fay of the firft man dam , when Ged brea- 

thed in his face,the breath of life, that man becamea living body , bur man be- 

cate a living foule. The firft man was made aliuing foule,faich the Apoftle,mea- 

ning a natural! body. But how the fpirituall body is to be taken, hee fheweth alo, 
adding, but thte laft man, a quickning {pirit : meaning Chri afluredly , who rofe 

from death to dye nomore. Then hee proceedeth faying : That wes not frit made 

which ss [pirituall but that which is naturall, and that a bs [ptrituall after-wards. 

Here hee fheweth moft plainly that He did meane by the liuing foule , the natu- 

rall body,and the fpiricuall , by the quickhing fpiric. For the natuzall body that 
Adamhad,was fitft,/chough ic had not dyed but for that he finned)and fuch have 

, Wee now , onenature drawing corruption and necefficy of death , from hiny and 

from his finne : fuch alfo did Chréf# take vpon him forvs: not needfully, but in 

his power: but the fpirituall body is afterwards + and fuch had Christ our head 

in his tefurre&ion,fuch alfo fhall wee his members haue in ours. Then doth the 
Apoftle defcribe the difference of thefetwo, thus. The first man ts of the earth 

earthly ; the fecond is of heaucn, heaucnly 54s the earthly one was fo are all the earthly: 

and asthe heauenty one is, fuch fballall the heawenly ones bee. As wee haue borne the 

dmage of the carthly, fo [ball wee beare the image of the beanenly. This the Apoftle 

inferres vpon the facrament of regeneration,as hee faith elfe-where : Alyce that 

are baptized into Chrift hane put ox Chrift : which fhall then be really performed, 
| when that which is naturall in our birth, thall become fpirituall in our refurredti- 
Rem.8. 2490, that I may vichis owncewordes: for wee are faued by hope. WV ce put on the 
| a image 


Rom. 8, 39 


Liner3. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 49t 


image of the earthly man, by the propagation of finneand corruption , adhe-Ctrf the 
rent vnto Our firft birth ; buc wee put on that of Heauenly man by grace; aunt 
pardon and promife of life eternall ;, which regeneration affureth vs by the mer- 

cy onely of the mediator betweene God andman, the man Chrift Iefus ; whome 
the Angell calles che Heauenly man becaufe hee came from Heauen to take 
vpon him the thape of earthly mortality, and to fhape it into heauenly im- 
mortality. Hee calleth the reft, heauenly alfo, becaufe they are made mem- 
bers of Chrift by gracethey and Chrift beingone, asthe: members and the 
head is own body. This he auerreth plainly in the chapter aforefaid,by2 man came 
death and by 2 man came the refurrection from the dead: for asin Adam all die, euen 
feinChrift ball all bee made alse : and that into a quickning fpirit , chat is a fpiris 
tuall body : nor that all that die in ~dam fhall become members of Chriit , for 
many more of them (hall fall into the eternall fecond death : but ic is faid, all,and 
all, becaufe as none dy naturall, but in Adam, fonone fhall reuive fpiricuall bue 
in Chrift , wee may not thenthinke that our bodies atthe rufurreGtion fhallbe | 
fuch as Adams was at the creation, nor thacthis place, As the earthly one was, fe 
are ail the earthly,is meant of that which was effected by the tranfgreffion:for we 
may not thinke that dam had a fpiritual body ere he feil,and in his fall wgs made 
anaturall one : he that conceiucth it fo, giues but little regard to that great tea- 
cher,chat faith.2fther be 2 natural body,then is there alfo a {psy étualas itis alfo writ- 
ten,the fir man Adam ws mad: 4 tining fowle,was this done after finne,being the 
firtt eftace of man, from whence the bleffed Apoftic tooke this teftimony of the 
Jawe,to fhew what anaturail body was. 


21Caxt 5.23 


. <omentatins ‘ as 


L. VIVES. 


‘Lising(a).(Os with a living foule,but the firft is more vfual in holy writ.(6).4 quickning] 

“\ Blefied and ioyned with God : be which coniunétion it impattech integrity and mmmore 
tality vntothe body.(c) Forbidden. | Out of much diuerfity of reading ! hold this the beft : for, 
it is the foule that liuech and the quickning fpirit that giucth life.(d Jwhen foeucr.| Symmachus 
(faith Hicrome )expounds this place better , 40m /halt be mortal, But indeed we die as foone 
as we are borne as ALanilins faith. | 

Najfcentes morimur fini{(que, ab origine pendet, 
Being borne we die : our ends hangs at our birth: 


t 


How Gods breathing life into Adam , andChrifts breathing upon bis. 1 
Apoftles whew be faid, receive the holy fpirit, are to be | 

_ _ underftood. Cuar.’ 24. 7 | 

om therefore do vnaduiledly thinke that God, when he breathed in bis face the 
breath cf Isfe and man became a lining forle,did ( 4) not then giue him a foole buc 

by the holy {pirit onely quiekned a foule thac was in him before. They ground 

ypon Chrifts breathing vpon his Apoftles after his refurrection and faying, 

veceeue the Holy’ fpirit: thinking that chis‘was fuch another breathing , fothac 
the Euangslift might haue fayd, they. became lining foxles, which if hee. had 
done it would haue caufed..vs to imagine. all reafonable foules dead that.are 
not quickned by Gods fpitit, though their badies. feeme:to.bee aliue: But it 

was not fo when man was made, as the Scripture fheweth plaine,in thefe words: 

¢ 6.) tod GOD. formed wan being duit of the Earth: which fome thinking'to ' 
explane , tranflate. (¢ ) 4nd GOD framed man of the Lome of a 
| ecaula 


‘: 


492 SAINT AV GVSTINE. | Carag. 


becaufe it was {aid before, amift went vp from the earth and Watred all the 
earth:that lome fhould feeme to be produced by this mixture of earth and water 

for immediatly followeth. 4d God framed man being duft of theearth, asthe 
Grecke tranflations (4) whence our Jatine is, do read it:but whether the Greeke.- 

Manfor. *h27*s be formed , or framed, it maketh no matter: (¢) framed, is the more pro- 
med. per Word, bute they that vfed formed a they avoyded ambiguity , becaufe 
that fingo, in the latineis vfed (/) commonly for to feygne , by lying or illuding. 

This man therefore being framed of duft , or lome, ( for lome is moy{tned duft ) 

that this duft of the earth ( to {peake with the fcripture more expreflly ) when it 
receiued a foule was made an animate body,the Apoftle affirmeth faying,the man 

was made 4 lining fonle :thatis, this duft being formed was made a liuing foule. 

I ( fay they ) but hee had a foule , now, already , other-wife hee could not have 

beene man being neither foule only, nor body only, but confifting of both. T'is 

true, the foule is not whole man, bur the better part onely , nor the body whole 

man but the worfe part only,and both conioyned make man, yet when we {peake 

of them difioyned_, they loofe not thatname ; for who may not follow cuftome, 

and fay, fuch a man is dead ? fuch a man is now 1nioy , or in paine,and {peake but 

of the foule onely ? or fuch a man is in his graue, and meanebut the body onely? 

will they fay che {cripture vfeth no fuch phrafe ? yes , it both calles thebody and 

foule conioyned by the name of man and alfo dividing them , calles the foule the 

inward man , and the body the outward, as if they were two men , and not both 

compofingone. | 

And marke in what refpe& man is called Gods image,and man of earth, retur- 

ning to earch,che firft is in refpeQ@ of the reafonable foule which God breathed,or 
infpired into man,that is, into mans body : and chelateris in refpe@ of the body 

which God made of the duft,and gaue it a foule,whereby it became aliuing body, 

that is,man becamea liuing foule : and therefore whereas Chrift breathing vpon 

his Apoftles, faid,recewe the holy [psrit : this was to thew that the fpirit was his, 

afwell as the Fathers, for the fpiric is the Fathers,and the Sonnes, making vp the 
 Manhow | tinity of Father,Sonne,and Holy Spirit, being no creature,but a creator? Thag 
created, breath which was carnally breathed , was not the fubftantiall nature of the Holy 
Spirit , but rather a fignification (as I {aid) of the Sonnes communication of the 
{piric with his Facher, it being not particular co either , but common to both. 
The fcriptures in Greeke calleth it alwaies swye, asthe Lord called ithere, 
when by fignifting it with his breath, hee gaue it to his difciples: andI neuet 
read it otherwife called in any place of Gods booke. Buthere,whereas it is fayd 
that God formed man being duft of the earth , and breathed in his face the fpirie 
(or breath ) of life. the Greeke is (g ) not pa, but’ #8: which word is tread 
oftener forthe creature chen the creator : and therefore fome latinifts ( for dif. 
ference fake ) do not interpret this word zv0i,fpirit, but breath, for fo it isin Efay, 
where God faith (h)/ haue made all breath:meaning doubtleffe,cuery foule. There- 
fore that which the Greekes call si, wee do fometimes call breath, fome-time 
{pirit,fome-time infpiration, and afpiration , and fome-times (3 ) foule : but syne 
nenverbut {piric,cither of man, as the Apoftle faith , whet man knoweth the things 
LCor,2,11 of 4 sas but the {pirit of « man which is inhim : or ofa beaftas wee readin the 
gy gig, Preacher : whe knoweth whether the /ptrit of man afcendeth vpwardes , and the {psrét 
Me of the besft downewards tothe earth 2 or that bodily (pirit which wee sell wind , as the 
Pfalme faith, fre, heyle, (wow, Ice ,ed the [psrit of tempefts ; or of no createre,but 


38.57.16. 


L114: OF THE CITI£ OF GOD. 


the creator ‘himfelfe :'whereof oar Sewiour {aid in the Gofpell: Recesue the holy | 
first’: fignifying icin his bodily breath rand there alfo where hee faith , Goe, and 
baptife al mations tx the name of the father,the fonne,and the holy /pirit, plainly and 
excellently intimatingthe full T7énsty unto ve : and there alfo where wee read ; 
God #s 4 fpirst andin many other places:of-{oripture. Inall thofe places of Scrip- 
eurejthe. Greeke wee fee hath #xiand-not evi, andthe Latine, flatu, atid not 
pivites. And therefore if m that place; Hee brekshed snto his face the breath of tife; 
the Greeke had not 774 (as it hath )- but #itue, -yer-were ic no confequent that 
wee fhould take it forthe boty'frrit the third petfon in Trinity, becaule shun is 
vied for a creature, as wellas ‘the creator,and as ordinarily.O but({ay they)hee 


_ would not haue added wstz,of life, but chathee meanc-that {pirit:.ard whereas 


hee faid; Afan became a fonkejheowouldnot haue added 4ang,but that he meant 
the foules life , which is given from abowe by the /pirit of God: for the foule ha- 
uing a proper life by ie felfe, why thould hee adde Uiuéng , but to intimate the 
life giuen by the holy /psrit? Bat whavis this but folly to refpe& conie@ure, and 
wholy to neglect {cripture ? for what need we goe further then a chapeer,and bes 
hold: fet the earth bring forth the lining foule : {peaking of the creation of all 
¢arihly creatures - and befides for fue ov fixe Chapters onely after, why might 


they not obferue this: Fuerything in whofe. pofhriils bb rit of life did breath, Genelg. 
c 


whatfoencr they were tn the drye land, dyed; relating the deftruction of euery liuing ** 
thing vpon earch, by the deluge? If chen wee findéa liuing foule , anda {pirit of 
life in beafts,as the Scriprure faith plainly, ving 74 and not anvye, in this ve 
ry laft place: why may wee not as well fay, why added hee sing there, feeing 
thar afoule cannot bee valeffe it lize? and why-added hee, 0f/:/c, here, having 


named /périt ?But wee vnderftand the Scriptures ordinary vfage of the liuin 


foule, and the {pirit of life, for animated bodyes, laturall,and fenfitiue : and yee 
forget this vfuall phrafe of Scripture, when tt commeth to bee vied concernin 


the ftace of man: Whereas it implieth chat man receiueda reafonable foule of 


God, created by his breath, ( & ) not as the other were, produced out of water and 
earth,and yet fo, rhat it was made in chat body to liue therein,and make it anani- 
mate body , andaliuing foule , as the other creatures were, whereof the Scrip. 
ture fayd: Lee the earth bring 4 forth lining foule : andthat in whofe mostrills was 
the [psrit of ife,which the Greek text callech not #«#«, but #0, meaning not the 
holy fpirie, but their life. But wee (fay they ) doe conceiue Gods breath to come 
from the mouth of Gods now if that beea foule, ( /) wee muft holde it equall, 
and confubftantiall with that wifdome, or Worde of GO D, which faith Z ans come 


ont of the mouth of the moff high Well:.it faith not ; that it was breathed. from ® 34's. 


his mouth,but came out of it And as wee men (not out of our owne nature,but). 
of the ayre about vs, can make a contraction into our felues, and giue tc out. 
againe in a breath, fo Amighty G O D (not onely out of his owne nature, or of 
any inferiour creature,but Jeuen of nothing can make a breath , which hee ma 
bee moft fitly faid to breath or infpire into man,it being as hee is,incorporeall, 
but not as hee is, immutable, becaufe it is created,as heis not. —_ 
~ But to let thofe men fee that will calke of Scriptures, and yet matke not what 
they doe intend,that fome-thing may. bee fayd to come forthof GO D S mouth 
befides that which is equall eet confubftantiall wich him,let chem read or heare 
Godsownewords: Becas/e thou art like Warme and neither colde nor hoste , # will 


. bometopaife that I {ball (pew thee out of my mouth. Therefore wee haueto contra: 


di& the —4poff/es plainenefle in a the naturall body wherein wee 
vv now 


494. | SAINT AVGVSTINE. . C mar.24, 


how are , from the {pfrituall wherein wee fhall bee: where hé faith’; 2 is fowens 
natural body, bat arifeth a fpirisuallbody v-asitis alfowritten : The frit man Adam 
was made 4 lining foute and the last Adam »4guickning [psrit.T i oh was of earth, 
earthly, the fecond of heauen , heanenly : 45 $8 B panes futl ave all the earthly, and 
asthe heavenly is, (ach ave the heanenty. And a3 wee haste arne the Image of the earth. 
by fofballwee bearethe Image of the heaneniy. Of all which words , wee {pake be. 


fore. Therefore the naturall body wherein man was firft-made, was not made . 


immortall : but yet was made fo that ie fhould not haue dyed , vnleffe man had 
offended . But the body that hall bee {piricuall and immortal, thall neuer have 
power to dye, as the {oule is created immortal! ; who though ic doe in a ma 
ner lofe the life,by loofing the fpirit of -God, which {hould aduance it vnto beati- 
tude, yet it referueth the proper life,thatis,icliueth inmifery for euer,for it ca» 
The! Apof- not dyewholy . The spofaticall Ancets ; after afort, aredcad by finning: be- 
taiell = caufehey forfooke God , the founraine of life , whereat they might haue drunke 
Angels. crernall felicity : yetcould they rot dye fo,thac cheit propet life and fence fhould 
Thediaet !caue them, becaufe they were made immortal; and at the laft iudgement they 
acthe nds. thal be thrown headlong into the fecond death, yet {o as they fhal live therin for 
agg ee cuer, in perpetuall fence ofrorture. But the Sezats (the Angels fellow-cittizens) 
the fecond belonging to the grace of God, fhall be fo inuefted in {piritual bodies, that from 
deh, = thence-forth they fhall neither finne nor die: becomining fo immortall (asthe 
Angelsare that finne can never fubuert theit eternity , the nature of fleth thal 
fill be theirs , but quite excraCted fram all corruption , vnweeldyneffe and pon- 
derofity. Now followeth another queftion, which ( by the true Gods helpe) 
we mearie to decide ; and chat is this 3 If che motion ‘of concupifcence arole 
in the rebelling members of. our firft patents , immediately vppon their 
tranfgreffion , where-vppon they faw-, that is, they did more curioufly ob- 
feruc their owne. nakedneffle., and becaufe the vncleane motion refitted their 
wils ,couered their priuie partes ; how fhould they haue begotten children 
had they remayned_ as they were created , without preuaricaticn > But this 


booke beiug fit for an end , and this queftion not fit for a too fuccing difcuffion, 


it is better toleaueit co the nexc volume. | 


L. VIVE S. | L. 
Td not (4) then| This the Manichees held. -Aug. de Genel ad lit. \ib. 2. (29.8 


e (8) AndGO D formed | They doe tranflate it ,e4#d God framed man of. earth the 

ken froms the earth: \thinke Augsffine wantetha word , fakes or taking : Laurinus his co» 

y readeth ic as the Septuagints.do. Yer the (haldee Thargum , ot paraphraze steading 
it as Angaftime hath it; and fo itis in the Bible chat Cardinall Xsmsenes , my patron, rors 

his predeceffor, publithedin foure languages becing affifted by many learned men,but for 

John Vere the greekeefpecially by Jobs Vergara ,a nr vprightly iudicious ,.and ynvulgar Scholle. 
gra. Their Pentateuch, Lewis (erenclls lent me forbearing al the while that I was in hand with this 
Lert?" worke,for the common good. (¢) And God framed | Hieromestranflation. (d) Whence on | 
Shewing chat in his time, the Church vfed the Latine cranflation, from the feauentic,and not 
Fieroms | worider therefore that men fhould be excluded ftom fober vfing of diuerfet * 

tions. (¢) Framed is) xnaz'Jar; the Greeke is, we vie it of thofe that forme any thing out - 

elaye : that is[ fingere ] and great authors vie it concerning men. He made them[ gy 

die and gluttonous. Sadsf. He made thee [ fixxit ] wife, temperate , &c. by nature. 

Mur {peaking of (ate Maier, To forme I thinke is nothing but to giuc forme Ee 5 al 


10. fre 


A -—— 


= 


=~ 
rm, 


a co 


—— 


Limr3. OF THE CITIE OF GOD... 


495 


(f) Commonly \{ 1fa moderne diuine had plaide the Gramarian thus, hee fhould haue heard The Lo- 
of it. But Axgu/tine may : but if he and Pas/ liued now adayes,hce fhould be held a Pedant, [ meee 
or apetty oracor, and Paw/ 2 madde man,or an heretique.| Not rveys2.] The Chaldees read, a aaaiee ve 

[peaking fpirit. Here Auguftine fhewes plainly how neceflarie the true knowledge of the mea-. oe 
nings of words is in art and ciftipline (4) J bane made | May.57.16. the 70. allo read it aveny nee 
sara, allbreath. Many of the Latitilts animus,and asima,for ayre,and breath; srg. 

Semina terrarnmdg, animeque marifque fuiffent. : 
They had beene feeds of earth,of gyre and fea: | 

And 7#iy in his Academikes vieth it for breath : Si vas & fimsplex, utrum fit ignis ,an anima, 
an fangnis: Ufit be fimply onc, whether is it fire, breach, or bloud. Terenc. Compreffi animam: 


[held my Breath. Plant. Feret anima uxoris tue. Your wiues breath ftinkes, and Pliny Anime 


Leonis virus grane : A Lions breathis deadly poifon. () Sox/e\J like this reading better then 
Bruges copies : it Squares better with the following Scriptures. (k ) Not aé the] lf we fay that 


eAuguftine held mans foule created without the body, and then infuled , as e4ri/otle feemes 


to auerre,De generat.animal.,S.Thomas, and amany more moderne authors goe downe the 
winde, But if wee fay itis not created as themortall ones are , that are produced out of the 


- difpofition of the fubftances wherein they are : but that it is created from aboue,within man, 


without all power of che material] parts,to worke any fuch effe&t, this were the moft common 
opinion,and Ariffotle fhould be thus vnderftood : which feemes not to agree with this affer- 

tion, thatit commeth 4b externo: nor with his opinion that holdeth it immortall ; andin- 

borne, if J vnderftand his minde aright , whereof I {ee his interpretors are very yncertaine, 

(1) We muff hold | There were not onely a ae Pagans (as wee haue fhewen) but fome Chri- 

Rians alfo that held the foule to be of Gods fubftance : nor were thefe leretiques onely , as 

the Prifillianniffs, and fome others , but euen that good Chriftian Laftastins :not thatl,or pan@ansic 
any one wifer then J, will approoue him in this,but in that hee feemeth co ttand zealoufly us, : 
affected vnto Christ, His words are thefe : Haning made the body he breathed into tt a fonle, ont 

of the lining fountaine of his owne fpirit,which is eternall.Jnftirut diuin.lib.2, wherein hee feemes 

to hold that mans foule was infuted into him from the fpirit of Gad. 7 | 


F inis, lib.t3. 


496 


- the flefh. | 


THE CONTENTS’ OF THE 
foureteenth booke of the City of God. 


. 1. That the inebedience of the firft man bad | .16. Of the exill of laft, bow the mame is gexes 
drawne all mankind into the perpetuity of. 69 ~| rallte many vices, but proper unto vexcreall 
cond death , but that Gods grace bath freea a- : 

many from st. | 


concupifcence, | | 
| | 17. Of the nakgdneffe that our firft parents 

2. Of the carnall life apparant in the fonles | difcouered in themfelues after thesr finne. 
vicion{nefe,as wellas the bodses. 18. Of the fame that accompanieth copnla- 

3. 7 hat finne came from the feule,and not the | tien,as well in Common,as in mariage. | 
fica , and that the corruption which finne bath § 19. That the motiens of wrath and laff are fe 
preckred ss not finne but the punifbment of finne, | violent , that they doe ncceffarily require to bee 

4What it iste line according torsan, andte} fuppreffed by wifdeme , and that they were not ix 
hue according to Ged. , onr Nature,before our fall depraued st. 

5. That the Platonifts teach the naturesof | _ 20.Of the vaine ob{canity of the (ynikes. 
foule and bodie, better then the Maniches , yet 21. Of the blefing of multiplication before 
they erre 1s afcribing inne , untothe nature of \ finne,which the tran{ereffiox did not abolifh,but 
| = onely linkedto lust, = | 

6.-Of the quality of mans willunto which al 22. That Ged firft inftituted and bleffed the 
affettions,Good and Bad,arefubiett. - - | band of marriage, —. 

7-That Amor and Dilectio are of indifferent | — 23.Wwhether sf man had net finned , hee foould 


_ ufe in the Scriptures both for Good and Euill. hane begotten children in paradsce,and whether 


8. Of the three paffions that the Stoykes al- | there fhonld there haue bins any contention , be- 


low a wifeman,excluding (adnes as foe toa vere | tweene chaftity and lnft. 

tons mind. 24. That our firft parents had they limed 
9.Of the perturbations of mind,which the inft | without finne, foould bane had their members ef 

dee moderate,and rule aright. Seneration as {ubiett unto their wills as anyef 
10.Whether Man had thofe perturbations in | the reff. 

Paradife,before hrs fall. 25. Of the true beatitude , unattayneable in 

| 1x, The fall of the firff Man , wherein Na- | this life. — 

26.That onr firft parents in Paradife might 


pub was made good, and cannot bee repair d bat ; ra 

y the Maker. _. - Gane produced mankind withom amefull 

12.Of the quality of Mans firft offence. | wee oe 
15.That ix Adams offence, bis Ens willwas 27. That the fnners, Angels,and men, cata 

before his enill weorke. | not with their pernerfeneffe deffurbe Geds pre- 
14.Of the pride of the tranfgreffio,which was \ uidence. 

wor[e then the tran(greffion it felfe. . 1 28. The flate of the two Cisties the Heanexly 
15. Of the inst reward that onr firft parents \ and the Earely, 

receined for fixe, ae 


FINIS. 


497 


= re | 
FOVRTEENTH BOOKE: 
OF THE CITTIE OF GOD 

8 ; bi ritten by — hep 2h ea of Hippo, 


That the inobedience of the firft man had drawne allmantinde into the perpetuity 
of the fecond death but that Gods grace hath freed a many fromit. 


HAP. I. 


E faid in our precedent bookes that it was Gods pleafure 
to propagate all men from one, both for the keeping of hu- 
maine naturein one fociable fimilitude , and alfo for to 
make their vniry of originallbe the meanes of their con- 
cord in heart. Nor fhould any of this kinde haue dyed but 
ae the firft wo (the one whereof was made of the other,and Death pros 
\\ fis } | the other of nothing ) had incurred this punifhment presteby — 
Ea Raat es by their difobedience : in committing fo great a finne, 


_ that cheir whole nature being hereby depraued , was fo tranffufed through all 


their off: {pring in the fame degree of corruption, and neceffity of death; whofe 
kingdome here-vpon became fo great in man, thatall fhould haue beene cat 
headlong in the fecond death, that bath no end, by this due punifhment, but the 
vidue (a) grace of Gad acquitted fome from it: whereby it comes to paflethae 
whereas man-kinde is diuided into fo many nations, difting in language, difei- 
pline,habire, and fafhion: ye: is there but two forts of men that doe ptoperly 
make the two citties wee {peake of: the one is, of men that liue according to the 
fleth, and the other of thofe that liue according to che fpirit,either in his kinde: 


_ and when they haue atcained their defire,cither doe live in their peculiar peace. 


L. VIVES. 


VV Nie (4) crace] For God owes no man any thing,ahd therefore itis called grace;becaufe 
~ it comes gratis, freely,and becaufe it maketh the receiuer ¢ratums,thankfull, #0 hath gi- Gace, 
wen unto bins fir/t and hee foal be recompenfed ? Rom.i 1.35. 1f ic were due, he fhould not then 
giue,but reftore it. Not by the workes of righteexfnelfe which wee hane done, but according to bis 
mercy hee faued us. Tit.3.§. 


. Of the carnall life Apparent in the fou.es victon|: nelfe as wellas the bodies. 
ay 7 Cap. 2. | 


E mutt firft then fee what it is to liue according to the flefli, and what, ac- 
cording ro the fpirir. The raw and inconfiderate confiderer hereof, not at- 


- tending well to the fcriprures,may thinke chac che Epscureams were thofe that li- 


ued according to the feth , becaufe :héy made bodily pleafure that /ummum bo- 
num,and all fuchas any way held corporall delight to be mans chiéfeft good : as 
‘the vulgat alfo,which not out ot Philofophy, but out of their owne pronen fle 
-taduft,can delight in no pleafures, bur {uch : are bodily and fenfible: oe 
a the 


‘ eps 4) 


r come ss . @ - ae -s 
earnest 
Lee 


498 SAINT AVGVSTINE Cuara, 


ove 
ee ee a ee. 


_- 
— 


the Stoictes that placed this fu bonum inthe minde, live according to the 
{pirit: (for what is mans minde but his fpiric ? ) But the Scriptures procue them 
. both to follow the courfes of the ficth, calling the Aéfi not ofély anearthly ani- 
1.Cor ty, Mate body, as it doth faying. AU flefb is not the famsé flelb 3 for there is one flefb of 
men, and another ficth of beasts 5 and another of Sifbes, andanothery of birdes: but ie 
vfeth the worde in farre other fignifications , amongft which dne is, chat it cal- 
leth whole man, that is, his intire nature, flefh, vfing the part for the whole: as 
Rom 3. 20 By the workes of the lawe [ballno fib be instified. What meanes hee by no fleth, 
Galag x1 Dut no man? hee explaineth him-felte immediatly : 4 mas ts iuffified by faith with- 
out the workes of the lawe. And inanother place: No man ts infizfed by the lawe. 
ohn. 1413 The word was made fley. Whatis that but man? Some mifconceiuing this place, 
Yohz0, 13 heldthat Chriit had no humaine foule. For as the partis taken forthe whole 
inthefe words of tury Magdilene. They have taken atoay my Lord, and 1 know 
not where they hane laide him: Meaning onely the eth of Chrift ywhich thee 
thought they had caken out of the Sepulchre: fo is the part taken for the whole, 
when wee fay fib, for Afan,as in the —— before. Seeing therefore that 
the Scripture vieth fiefh in fo many fignifications (too tedious heere to re 
‘collea. ) | - 3 : | 
To finds what it is toline according to the flefh (the courfe being enill 
_.._. whenthe fleth is not euill, ) let vs looke a litcle diligently into chat place of che 
ee Apottle Pasi to the Galethians,where hee faith, The workes of the fle{b are mantfeft, 
The works whch are adaltery, forwication vacleanne(fe, wantonne/ve, Idolatry; itch-craft , hae 
ofthe Acth pred debate, emulation,(b ) wrath , contentions, fedstions , herelies ,enxit , drunken- 
neffe; glattonie , and [ech like , whereof I tell you now , as 1 told you before, that they 
which do thofe things ball not inher tt the Kingdome of God. The due confideration 
of this place of the Apoftle, will prefently giue vs fufficient demonftration (as 
farre ds here needeth ) what it is ro hue according to the flefh , for in the workes 
of the Aefh which hee faith are manifeft, rechearfing and condemning them, we 
finde not onely fuch as appertaine to bodily and luxurious delight , as fornica- 
tions, vncleannefle,luxurie,and drunkenneffe, but fuch alfo as difcouer the vici- 
oufneffe of the minde, truly diftin@ from flefhly pleafures. For who conceiueth 
Themen. not chat Idolatry ;Witch-craft,emnity, contention , emulation, wrath, enuy, fe- 
allvices dition, and herefie, are rather mentall vices then corporall ? A man may for ve- 
thefchh, ty reverence, of {ome Idolatrous or hereticall error , abftaine from the lufts of 
the body, and yet though lee doe fo, by the Apoftles wordes , bee lines accord. 
ne tothe flelb: and in peda the workes thereof, committeth moft damnae 
ble workes thereof. Whohath not enmitie in his heart ? or who faith ro his 
enemy,or him that hee thinkes his enemie, you haue an euill fleth againft mee 2 
none ; you haue an euill minde againft mee. Laftly, as all men that fhould heare 
thofe catiall vices recited, would affirme they were meant of the fieth, fo none 
thar heatéth thofé mencall crimes , but reterreth them all to the minde ? why 
then doch this true and faithfull ceacher of the Gentiles, call them The workes of 
the fe(b, but in that hee taketh flefh for man,as the part for the whole ? 


39 
Ficth vied 
for man, 


L.VIVES. 


SOme( a) mifconceining| Thole were the Apollinarifis ding in Toan.Serm.in Arrii, 33. Ouéit. 
© The Gerdenians altos the pie held fo. de beread quod vals Dei, (bt rast ove, Hicrom 
| baie 


i iS i”. ae 


List4.  QFTHECITIE OF GOD © 499 


Tok. [aw laft yeare how wrath/i ully j quan- ~ 


. 


qeades it,ere, but aninens is vied alfo for-wrath.Sy Luft, 
eis animis} Lucullus oppofed L.-Onintigs hereof comes.the word antmsolitas,th at Ang uffine. vi- 
eth for wrath .. Virgs! calls them aft wihdes Animofwrathfull. AZacrobins in Som. Scip.2. 
vfeth it fo too, That anger thatthe greekes call 3 per, is momentari¢ and of no continuance. iol es 
Tully calls it excande{centia,afuty now beginpires,and prefently ceafing , thete is inthis text | 

of Panlstixz,feeldings or abtercations tpittial which Anguftineaddethnot, 0 
4 ee, ee oe Sree, ee OP. Pe 2 


he of 4 fe , ( 
4 


imofitye 


oben 


es 
. ; 
o Moscn:: 


: 


That finne came from the fealeyind not the firfb: and.shat the corruption - 
3 - yphich inne arb procured ys not fim but the pimifbrvent of flanc: 
es eget. Otrar. Ze 5 ee ee Oba 


i 
ba . 1 


2 an , upg Th ee ee | OA es | te eh tee, g Og. et ae psaig ay 
F any man fay chat the loth is daufe of the vicioufheffe of the foule,he is igno- 
Brant in mans nature, forthe cotraprible body. doth but burden the foule:there- 
fore the Apoftle {peaking of this ¢ottuptible body whereofhee had fayd before, 
although ouk outward man be corrupretd..we kaow(quoth he).thas ifour carthiy 2 
hou/e of habitatson bee acfroved , wee haue 4 building given of Godyan houfenct made , St s 
with hands, but an eternall one in heauen , therefore wee figh,de[yring to bee cloathed oud 
with that habstation which we haue in heauen: notwithitanding sf we bee cloathed wee 
foall nct bee found naked . For wee that dre sn this habitacle,figh,snd are burdened,be- 
cause we would not be vncloathed, bat cleathed vpon,that mortalsty wat ht be fwatlow- 
ed upof life. WWeeare therefore burdened wich: this dorruptible body yandyee 
‘knowing that itis not the bodies nature, but corruption, thaccaufethehisbur- 
defi, wee would not bee defpoiled of ic, but bee cloathed vponit , with the ims 
‘mortality thereof. Ic hail chen bee 4 body ftill,but burdenfometovs homore; | 


, e 


- becanfe itis become fucorruptible : fo then,as yet the corr uptible bodie is heauy W&s.15 


entothe foule and the earthly manfion keepeth down the comprehenfiue minde, 


-Burvet luch as thinke chat the euills of che minde arife from the body, dacerre. 


For though that Vergill doe feeme to exprefie a plaine (4) Platoni(me in thefe 
verfes. i eS ee 
Jgnens eff ollis vigor & celeftis origs, _ 
Seminibus,guamtum non nexia corpora tardast, 
Terrenig, bebetant artus moribundag, membra: . 


Thofe feedeshaue firy vigor,heauenly {pring, 
So farte as bodies hinder not with fullnefle, 
Or earthly dying members clog with dullneffe,, _ 


#7. 


Seeming to deri ¢ the foure kaowne paffions of che minde, (6) Defite,Feare ie 


~ Yoy and Sorrow,asthe originalls of all guilt,wholy from che bodie,by chefe ver- 


{es following. os <6 % 
ne ,)) Eame metuunt,tupinet G delent,gandentg,, ne ANYAS. wt oe 
Sufcspinnt claufe tencbris & carcerecaco, 7 : Sete no 
Heare-hence they feare,defire,difpteafd,content, ; 
| | Nor looke to heauen,in darke-blinde prifon pent, a 
~~ Yetour faith teacheth vs otherwife. Farthis corruption tliat is fo burden- 
fome to the foule,is the punifhmient of the firft fin,nor the cauferche corruptible 
flefh made not the foule to fin , but the finning fonle made the flefh corruptible: 
£13 which corruption although there doarife fome incitements vnro fin ;& {ome 
vicious defires, yet arenotall the fins of ari euill life to bee laid vpon she 8¢fh,o- 
‘ therwife,we thal make the diuil,charhath no flefh, fin-leflerfor though we cannot 
‘(ecal him a fornicator,a drunkard,or by any one of chofe caxnally-vicious names, 
a V4 ~~ (hough 


500 


SAINT AVGYSTINE. — Cuarg, 


The deal, (though he bee a fecret prouoker of man vntoall ehofe )yetishe truely ftiled 
hueno moft proude and enuious, which vices have poffefled him fo farre , as therefore 


fi:th yee 
have they 


fiefhily 
workes, 


— Tagee 


Ront 3.7 


. hadtheir beginning. 
ee Be e8 


is hee deftinate vnto eternall torment in the prifons of this ob{cure ayre. Now 
thofevices that domineere io himthe Apoftle ca!leth the workes of the fleth, 
though fure it is that hee hathno flefh. For hee faith that emnity, contention,e- 
mulation,wrath,and ennie are the workes of the flefh : to all which, pride giueth 
being,yet rules pride in the fleth-leffe deuill. For who hates the Saints more 
thenhee ? who is more enuious , contentious , emulatisig , and wrathfull againft 
them then hee? Doing all this without the: fleth , how. are thefe the workes of 
the ficth, but becaufe they are the workes.of man , whom as I fayd before, the A- 
poftle meaneth by flefh 2 for man became like the deuill not in beeing in the Aleth 
(for fo'was not the devill) but inlining acebrding tohis:owne loff.that is accor- 
ding to the flefhly man: for fo chofe the deuill po doe ; when hee left the 
truch,to become ali¢r, not through G O'D, but through himfelfé, who is both 
a lier; and che father oflying. For heelied firtt,and from him,fianing and lying 


A ag "Nive 


CSR Ea 


oe | ee ° “L WIVES. 
| Rare (4) Platoni{me} No.more then Pythagers{me,both alike: but of thisin the 8.booke. 

_(b) Defire | There are foure chiefe.affects ot the.m:nde,two, delightfull,and two forrow- 
full. Of the firft , the one belongs to things prefene : fey,and is,an opinion of a prefent good: 
the ocher,defire,yvnto future : and is,an opinion ofa Future good Of the two fad unes, forrow, 


... san opinion of a prefent euill,and feate,of a fucure,and of thefe affects, come all the reft, Ea- 
py Emulation, Detraction Pitty, Vexation, Mourning , Sadneffe , L amentation,Care,Deubr, 


Troublefomneffe, Affi tion, Dziperation : all chefe come of {orzow.s and Sloath, Shame ,Error, 
Timosrosineffe, Amazement,Difturbance,and Aaxiery,from fearc, And then, Exulration, Dee 
light and Roafting of loy, with Wragh,Fury,Hatred,Emnity,Difcorde,Need,and Affe€tation, 
all of Defire.Cic.T(c.queft.lib.4. (¢) Cannot call hins|O< this hereafter. . 


What it is to line according to Atau,avd fo line according 
toGed. ‘Cuarp.4. |. 


TJ Herefore a man liuing according to man , and not according to God, is like 
_&: thé deuill : becaufe an Angellindeed (Lould not live according toan Angel, 
bat according to God: to remaine in the truth, and {peaketruth from him, and 
not lies from himnfelfe. For the Apoftte fpeakes thus of man. Ifthe trath of GOD 
hath abounded through my lying t calling lying his,& the cruch of God. Therefore 
he that liues according tothe truth , liues according vato God,not according to 
himfelf.For God {aid.J am the trath:But he ¥ liueth not fo, but according to him- 
felf,liueth according to lying:nor that man(whom God that neuer cteatedlie,did 
create)is the auchos of lying , bur becaufe man was creased vprigtit , to live ace 
cording to his creator and not: himfelfe, that is , to doe his will rather then his 
owne. Butnot toliue, as heewasmade to liue, this isalie. For hce (4) would 
bee bleffed, and yetwill noc tine in a courfe poffible to atraine it: (6) What can 
there bee more lying then {uch a will? And. thereforeic is not vafttly fayd euery 
firine,isa lie. For wee never finne but witha will to doc our felues good, or nat 
to doe our felues hurt. as, gee ee eg _ 

SR) Therefore 


i 


= 
= 


ass SRR FT ae ee eo 


=> pa ° 


1 en Sen Se 


on a ee ne Sn 


— Er — _ ye Fe 7 Ses i nn 


_-wherche faith, 


, 7 : eee 


so eee ee eee. + 


Therefore is ita lie when as that we thinke fhall doe ¥s good turnes vnto our 
hurt : or that which wethinke to better our felues by, makes vs worfe, whence is 
this,but becaufe that inan can haue his good but onely from God , whome hee 
forfakethin finning: and none from himfelfe in lining according to whom,hee 
fianeth ? Whereas therefore wee fayd that the contrariety of the twocitties a- 
rofe herevpon, becaufe fome liued according tothe flefh , and others accordin 
to the {pirit we may likewife fay it is becaufe foe liue according vnto Man,and 


ee, OF THE CITIE GF GOD. gor 


other fomevnto God. For Pas! faith plainely to rhe Corinthians, Seeing there is 1.Cor.3,3 


evtrulstion,and contention amongit you, are you not carnall,and walke ascord ng to man. 
* Towalke therefore according to man,is carnal! , man beeing vnderftz0d in his, 


anferior part,fleth. For thofe which hee calles carnall here he callech naturall bee 


fore,faying : (¢) what man knoweth the things of aman but the {pirit of aman,wohich ¥ Cor-2s 


4s in him? euen [oso man knoweth the things of God but theSpivit of God.Now we hane 
not received the fpivit of the Word, but the Spirit which 3s of God, that wee might know 
the things that God bath giuen vs, which things al[o we fpeake, not in the words which 
mans wifdome teacheth, but (d) being taught by the {pirit comparing /pirituall things 
with {pirituall things. But the natarall man pereeineth sot the things of the fpirst of 
Goa:(c) for they are fool:[breffe unto him .Vuto thofe naturall men hee fpake this a 
little afterwards: /could not fpcake unto you brethren as unto [pirituall men,butas 
unto carnall.Andhereis that figure in fpeech that vfeth the pate for the wholero 


‘bee vnderftood : forthe whole mari may either bee ment by the foule,or by the 


flefh: both which are his parts : and fo 4naturall man anda carnall man, arenot 


feverall,but all one;namely onc that liueth accotding to man:according as thofe 


places afore-cited doc intend. By the workes of the lave(E) [ball no fichh bee inftified: 


33,33, 8 35 
34 


Rom.3. t6 


and that where it is faid shat (g) Senenty fise foulés v vent dovune vvithlacob in- Gen,46, 
to Egipt,in the former by fleth, is ment,man, and in the later , by 75. foules, are 37 


‘Meant 75.perfons. Andin this,not in the words which mans wifdortie teacheth, 
he might haue fayd: which carnall wifdome reacheth : as‘al fo; according to the 


* fiefh, for according vnto man, ifhee had pleafed . And it was moreapparant itt 


the fubfequence: for when one faith , Ja Pauls, and another,/ am poll's, ar€ +. Cons: 4 


you nok men ? That which he had called natural! and carnal before, he now more 
exprefsly,calleth man : meaning, you liue according to Man , and not according 
to God,whom if you followed in your lives , you fhould bee made gods of men. 


L.VIVES. 


EE (a) would )No man liueth fo wickedly ,but hee defireth beatitude : though his courfe 
& Flead him quite anether way , directly vnro mifery. (b) What can) There is nothing more 
deceiptfull then the wicked. For it deludeth him extreamely in whomic ruleth,(c) What man} 
This place is cited othetwife,& more exprefly in the latine text of the firft booke. ( a) Taught’ 
2 the fpirit| er JN Aixlers &c. But fome reade, by the Dottrine of the Spirit (e) For are] 
fpiricuall things of GOD feeme fooleries vnto carnall and wnfettled:- men : as the Pagans 
wifdome and vertues were feorned of the ritch gnoffes that held fhades for fubftances , and 
vertues formeere vanities. Thence hath P/ato his caue whetein men were vied to fhapes 
and appearing fhadowes that they.thought their had beene no other bodies. Derep.hb,7. (f) 
Sha oo Some read it in the prefent tenfe , but erroncoufly : the greekeis Sixgeoducords 
inftificabitur,(g) Senenty fise foules\ Soule, for man, is an Hebraicall wie : for life, a greeke 
phrale : vied alfo bythe latine. Nonins ‘Aarcelins faith Usrgit vieth it for bodies ; there 


Intered 


nee ' 


_ . 7 a 


eal 


SAINT AV GVSTINE. — Cuars, 


| Unterea focios, inhumataque corpora terra, 
** (Mandemus,qui folus honos evicheronte {nb imo eft: 
Ite ait egregias animas qua fangnine nobis, 
Hanc patriam ste {u0.—— 
‘Meane while th’ vnburied bodies of our mates, 
Giue we to Graue, fole honor after Fates, 
Goe honor thofe braue foules with their laft dues. 
Who with their blood purchaf’d this land for vs. 


Whether it be fo orno ; let him looke to it: $+7,' indeed in the Greeke is fometimes vied for 
the whole creature. ; | | ue 


That the Platonifts teach the natures of foule and body better then the 
Manichees, yet they erre in afcribing finne unto the nature 


of the flefh. Cu ars. 


/ E fhould not therfore iniure our creator in imputing our vices to our flefh: 

the fle(h is good, but to leaue the creator and liue according to this created 
good, is the mifchiefe:whether a man do choofe to liue according to the bodyor 
the foule or both which make full man, who therfore may be called by either of 
them? For he that maketh the foules nature,cthe greateft good, and the bodies the 
greateft cuill, doch boch carnaily affe& the foule , and carnally auoid the fleth: 
conceiving ot both as humaine vanity , not as diuine verity teachech:him indeed 


_. the (4)Plotoniffs are not fo mad as the Afanichees, that hate the carnal body,as the 


naturall caufe ofall mifchiefe, and. yet make God the creator of all che elements, 
parts and qualities that this vifible world is compofed of. Yet the Platoni/?s hold 
that thefe our mortall members, do produce the affects of feare, defire, ioy, and 
forrow in our bodies : from which foure perturbations ( as Tudy calles them ) or 
paffions ( asother tranflators giue them ) the whole inundation of mans enor, 
mities haue their fource and fpring. Ifthis be fo,why doth e4& meas in Vergil hea- 


_ ging by his father that the foules were to returne backe into bodies , wunder at. 


this apinion,and cry out. 
oO O pater anne aliquas ad calum binc ire putandum eft, 
Sublimes animas,iterumque ad tarda reuerti 
(orpora?que lucis miferis tam dira cupido? 
What father do you thinke the foules are taine z 
To heaven, and thence,to chis dull flefh returne. . 
What dire affect fhould vrge them to their paine. 


Is this fame dire affe& as yet remayning in the foule , being now quit from the 
carnall burden in fuch a commended purity ! doth hee not fay they are purged 
from all bodily infe@ion , whenas they defire to returne into. the body againe, 
ific.were fo then (as it is moft vaineto hold fo)that chere were an eternall reuo- 
lution ofthe pollution,and the purgation, then can it not bee truely faid thatall 
vicious affects are the effects of the flefh : for as this ( 6) noble fpeaker faith , thet 


dire affect which doth compell the ss purged from all carthly (¢ ) contagion to 
defire the boay againe , isnot ofthe body. And therefore they confeffe that all the 


" 
s 


~ foules ill affe&s arife not from the fiefh: as defire , feare, ioy , and (4) forrow; 
but icmay haue thofe paffions of it felfe. | | 


L. VIVES 


> 


cece ee a a ES acres, otis —m eH 


Linry=)0S”sC«O EF THE CITIE OF GOD. 


ee ‘ 4 a 


- L. VIVES. 9 sn. 


' , Csi: ee. ae | bined, ta ee a ae ee ee 
TH (a) Maniches ] They held all flefh the worke of the deuill,not of GOD, and there- 
fore they forbad their hearers to kill any creatures , Jeaft they fhould offend the Princes of 
darkeneffe bot whom they fayd al] fleth had originall : and if they vied their Wiues, yet mult 
they aulolde generation, lealt the diuine fubftance which goeth into chem by theit nourifh- 
sdetit Chould bebound in the fleflily bonds of the child begotten, Adgied Oded valtdenm.The 
Prytiiianifts held chus alfo. (b) Noble fpeaker|So he called Tully before, and Virgilnow. (6) 
Coutagion | Orx,habitacle. (d) Sorrow) Twllee calls ic egrithdeTufe.3. 0 0 


Ff 


‘ 
3 
¢ 


é : 
. 3 Pa 
’ i 
a + av 
1 


e i“ ae . 


Of the quality of mans will, unta with all affections, good, andbad, 
oe a "| prefubie@, Cuan. 6 |, roe 

BY the qualicy of mans will,is of fome moment, for if it be bad, fo are all thofé 
4 motions , if good, they are both blameleffe,and praife- worthy : for there is 
4a will in them all: nay they are all'dire@ wills: what is defire , and ioy, bur a 
will (6) confenting to that which wee affz@t : and what isfeare , and forrow,but a 
will;contrary.vrito what we like 3 But when we confent to the defire of any thing, 
that is defire; and when wee confent in enioying any thing , this is delight : So, 
when wee diflike athiag,and would not haue it come to paffe, this will, 1§ feare: 
when we diflike it being come to paffe,this is griefe or fotrow. And this accor- 
ding to the variety of the things defired ‘and avoided , as the will cohfents, or 


-diftikes fo are our diuerfity of paffions . Whereof a Man that miaketh GOD and 


not Man the ftzeref-man ofhislife , ought to loue Rood :and confequertly,to 
hare enill: and becaufe none is euill by nature, but dli by vice shee chat liuech af- 
vice,nor to loue thie vice for the mah, but hate the vjce and loue the man : for the 
vice being cured, hee {hall finde no obie& of his hate,but all for his louye.. 


ter Gods loug,oweth his (¢) full hate vrito the Euill : not to hate the man for his sng 


| 7 L. VIVES.’ 

(a) A Will ) The Stoickes told chat onély to bet Cunnsos (which Tuty tranflates wall) when d 
with reafon which is in a wife nan only : bac that which is againft reafon,is called a luft,or an 
inogdinate defire beeing refident in all fooles. The Peripateriqnes call both thefe.wills,the one 
good and the ather badde - the controuerfie (as I faid elfe-where ) is but verball, For the 
Stoickes call = ew wills alfo,nor skilleth ic whether Will, follow Nature or Reafoh : for it is e- 
uer-more Will,chough that be ptoperly called Will,wherein is that freedonieé of election, and 
is harbour to Vice,or Vettue. (5) ( onfenting | To beleetie a thing to bee, or not to bee, isno 
confent,or diffent,bue Knowledge,Faith,or Opinion,( Arist in Analyt. Pofterior.) but to will, 
or not to will in any thing that belongs to the will, which perteineth ro the minde , and as it 

were,appoints and decrees what is to be done or not done. (¢) Full bate) Explayning that of 
the Pfalme 13.9.22.1 hate them with a perfett hatred. 


Thet amor,end dilediio,eve of. Indifferent ufe in the feriptares both 
forgoodazdcuill, Cuar. 7. 


po hee tliat i refolited:-to' loue GOD yand his neighbor a¢cording vate 
~ : GOD 


:Athing is firmely arid conftantly defired, therefore it is defined , a defire of any thing W 


5°3 | 


o 


7 ‘ 
, 
iil; 
‘ 
. 


504 SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuarz, 


Godand not Man: for this loue, is called a Man of a good wil! , and this is called 
more commonly, charéty, in the {criptures , though fome-times it bee called loue 
therein alfo. Forthe Apoftle will haue his magiftrate to bee 4 loner of good. And 
- our LORD asking Peter thus: Symon the fonne of lonah,/encft thou me (a) more 
thenthefe,hee anfwered,Lord,(b) thou knowelt that //one thee : hee asked him {g 
againe, and hee anfwered fo againe , then they asked him the third time, by eae, 
amo whereas he had vied «yerea,4slégo ,in the other two,onely.to thew,that di. 
gere,and amare wereboth one, to loué,as Peter had vfed the one, inall the thre¢ 
queftions. This I thought, worth recital, but fome fay (¢) délectéo, charity , is one 
thing,and amor,loue,avosher: and that the firft is (d)vfed inthe good ,and the la- 
‘ter in the badde : But fure it is that the profane authors never vfedthem fo. 
But let the Philofophers looke totheir diftindions . Fortheit bookes vfe emor 
loue,in good fenfes ,andin reference to GO D,moft frequently. But wee were 
to (e) fhew chat our feriptures whome wee place farre aboue their authorities, 
doe not vfe amor and dilectio with any fuch diftin& difference : for wee have 
fhewne that they vie amor ina good fence: Ifany one thinke, it is vfed both in - 

200d tefpect and bad, and délec#zo, onely in the good, let him looke in that of rhe 
Plait = =Pfalme: Hee that loueth[ diligic] snequsty hateth his owne fonle : here is déligovp- 
tlo2 onabadde{ubie&. Andhere the Apoftle John: Ifany man loue [ Dilexeric ] the 
vvorldthe loue[ dele&io }of Father és not in him. Behold here déleéfio in one place, 
in both the refpects. But ifany one feeketo know whether «mor bee vied in euill 
2.Tim.3.3 (wee haue fhewne it in good, )lethim reade this: Aten fbalbe loners of them- 
, Jelues,érc. Louers of pleafures more chen lowers of GO D. For, anvprighe 
willis good loue,and a peruerfe willis baddeloue. Loue then defyring too en- 
ioy tharir loucth is defire: and enioying it, is ioy : flying what ithateth it is feare, 

. _ feeling it,it is forrow. rar. 7 a 

_ ' Thefe are euillsif the loue bee euill: and good if it bee good . What wee fay 
Phx letvsprcouebyfcriprure. The Apoftle aefires to bee diffolued, and tobee vvith 
Pias1y,20 Chrift: And, My heart breaketh for the continual cefire I hane unto thy indgements. 
Wil 6.20 (f) Or ifthis beebetter : Aty Soule hath coneted to defire thy indgements? Andgdefire 
of wtf{dome leadeth to the Kingdome : yet cuftome hath made ica law, that where 
P31 — comcupi{centia,or cupiditas is vied without addition of the obie@, itis cuer taken 
Ping ima badde fence. But Ioy, or Gladneffe the Pfalme vfech well: Bee glad én the 
LORD, andreioyce yourightcons , andthon hift ginen gladneffe to mine heart , and, 
Pial,18,13 Jn thy prefense is the fulne(fe of oye . Feare, is alfo vied by the Apoftle ina goad 
Rom rz. Lence:orke ont your faluation uvith feare,end trembleng: and,Be not high minded, 
20 but feare:and, But I feare leaft as the ferpent beguiled Eve gas hes futtlety f° 
that your mindes [howld be corrupted from. the chaftity that isin Chrift. Butas for 
chat forrow ( which Tay had rather call( ¢) egritude) and Virgsll, dolour; where 
hee {aith,dolent 4, gaudentg., yet (b) 1 hadrather call it ¢ré/titéa, fadnefle, becaufe 
egritude,and delonrareoftner vied for bodily affects: the queftion whether ic be 


vied in a good fence or no, is fit to bee more curioufly examined. — 


_LVIVES. 


Ore (a) then thefe| Then thefe doe : to auoide ambiguity. (6) Then kpoweft] 


ayer ev,is here cranflated dibge,and ginteyaiwe, both totoue. (¢) Sona] Orig. _ ins 


“Fee 


Fe OE ED 
wv a 


3 be Ft OBR 


\. 
r 


N 


505 


Lret4. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 


YE Ae Cee - ee = a 8 


(antic. The {cripwure(J thinke being carefull ‘faith he Jto keepe the readers in the rrat of true 
vnderftanding it,for the capacity of the weaker , called that Charity,or Dileio , which they 
thinke wife men ca:led loue.(d) Js ufed.] The Latinifts vfe thefe two words farre other- wife? 
vicing Diligetor alight!oue, and amo for aferuent one. Dol obellam antea diligebam , nunc 


amo,iaith 7 #d/y,and clfewher,n:ore plainely (Vodéus Tribu.Pleb.valde me diligit.feu vt iuzatine Amoand 
ztpoy addam , valde me amat. | grant that amor is the meancr word , and oftener vied ip cbe Dit a.dife 


feenity then délectio. The fame difference that the latines put bttweene ame and d:ligo,the fame 
do the Greekes put between piata & dyed (e )To fLew.| Fhe places here cited prooue nothin g 
vnieffe that ease ¢yaree be both vied in a good oran euilfence:for 4 Jatine tranflation is the 
minde of the interpretor not of the author : Buc perhaps ke cefired to thew it, becaufe he dele 


ferent, 


againit a Grecian namely, Origer.( f } Ov, if. |For fo the 70.tranflated it Here begins he to thew 
that none of the foure affects are bad of them-felues. ( g \ Egritude.| Tufe queft.3.and4.(b) 0° 


had rathev.}T wlly( a) Tu{c.qu.2.)calleth bodily vexation,dolor,and(1 n{c.4.)detendeth egritudo, 
to bein the mitid , as egroratio is in the body: and affirmeth (46.3. ) that ic hath nowany dif- 
tinct name from forrow. : , | ti. | 


| Of the three pafsions that the Stoickes alow a wifemanexcluding 
| fadne(fe,as ‘foe toavertuons minde. 


Crap, &, 


T Hofe whichthe Greekes eal] (2) irabeery and Tally , Constantiethe Stoickes 
make to bethree,according tothe three perturbations ina wifemans mind, 


taking will for defire ,( 6) ioy for exultation,and warinefle for feare :but infteed 


of that egritude or dolour which wee to avoyd amphibology call fadnefle , they 
deny that a wife mind can intertaine any thing-for the will , ( fay they ) affectech 
good: which a wifcman effecteih: ioy , concerneth the good hee hath atrayned, 
and warinefle avoideth that heeistoauoyd : but feeing fadnefle arifeth from 
an euill caufe, already fallen out, (and no euill happineth toa wifeman ) there- 
fore wifdome admits nothing in place thereot. Therefore ( fay they ) none but 
wifemen can will, reioyce,and beware, andnonc but fooles can couet » exult, 
feare and bee fad. The firft are the three conftancies (faith Tay, ) and the lacer 
the foure perturbations. The Greekes,as I faidcall the three, ‘v7radea! , and thefe 


foure, =24". In (c) feeking the correfpondency of this, with the phrafe of holy - 


writ, I foundthis ofthe prophet. There ts no(c) ioy ( faith the Lord) unto the 
wicked , as ifthe wicked might rather ex:1it,"hen haue ioy,in their mifchiefes, for 
ioy is properly peculiar to che good atid Godly : That alfo in the golpell : # bat 
foener yee wouldthat men|{kould ace unto you exenfodoyce tothem: this feemes to 
intimate that a man cannot will any euill ching but cove: it: by reafonof which 
cuftome of interpretation , {ome trarflarorsadded good, what good foeuer.crc.for 
they thought it fit for man to defire that men fhould do them nd dithonefty , and 


E fay. 57.13 


Mat, 7.33 


therfore putin this, leaft forse fhould thinke that in their lus urious banqtiets(ro. 


be filent in more obfcene matters chev fhold fulfil chis precepr,in doing to others 
as others did vnto them. But(e)good,is not in the originall the greeke,bur only, 
as we read before: #hat foruer yee would.¢re.for in faying yee v ould,he meaneth 

ood. Hee fayd not, whatloeuer you covet, yee mult wee not alway tye our 

hrafes to this ftri@tneffe , but take Icatie at needfuli occafions, and when wee 
reade thofe that wee may not refift, wee muft conceine them fo,as the true fence 
haueno other paflage , as for example fake,in — d places of the Prophet and 


506 SAINT AVGVSTINE. |. Cuar.8. 


the Apoftle who knoweth not that the wicked exule in‘ pleafure 2 and yet there 

is no ioye( faith the LOR D Jrothe wicked. Why ? becaufe loye is properlie 

_ and ftrickly vfedin this place. Somay fome fay that precept; what/eouer ox 

— vvould eye. is not well delivered : they may pollute one another with ynclean- 

nefle,or fo : Notwithftanding , the commaunde is well giuen: and is a moft true 

and healthfull one. Why 2 becaufe will , which properly cannot bee vfed in 

euill, isputin the moft proper fignification in this place. Bucas for ordinary 

vfage of fpeech , wee would not fay , Hane #0 vvill to tellany Le: but that 

there isa badde will alfo , diftin& from thar which the Angells praifed fay- 

ing: (f) Pease inearthto menof good vvill. Good were heere fuperfluous, if 

P6204 thar there were no will but good, and howe coldlie had the Apoftle prailed 

charity ,in faying that st retoyceth not in sriquitic, but that enuy reioyceth therein: 

a *3> For the Pagan authors doe vie thefe differences. (¢) Idefire( faith Tally ) Fe- 

thers confcript ,Idefire to bee mercifull. Heere hee vieth Cxpioina good fence, 

_and who is {0 peruerfe to fay hee fhould haue vfed Yo/e rather? And Terence 

his lafciuious youth : (+) I would hauenone but Philumenafaithhee. That 

this will was luft , his (¢ )ancient feruantes anfweare declareih, faying to his 

Andsa@s Maifter : How much better were it for you, to caft this lowe out of your heartrather then 

— feeke to inflame tt more therein ? That they vied ioy in an euill fence , Virgills verfe 
of the foure perturbations doth record. | | 


Hine metuant cupiuntd, dolent,gandentd. ' 
Heere-hence they feare,difire,difpleat d,content. 


And the fameauthor in another place faith: 


(Mala mentis gandia. 
The mindes badde ioyes, 


Sothen both good and euill doe will , beware , and take ioye,and to reherfe 
them in other tearmes,the good and badde,doe defire,feare,and reioyce: mary, 
thofe. doe it well, and chef badly according as their willsare. And thac{ad- 
neffe, fot which the Stoickes can affordea wife man iutt nothing, is apparenc 

Sadneffe 19 good men, efpeciall of our profeffion. For the Apoftle praifeth the Co- 
according. rinthians for that they were Godly forrowfull. I but ( may fome fay ) the 
sa Apoftle congratulateth their forrowe in repentance , and that is proper to none 
| but finners: for his words run this. 

Tperceine well that the fame Epiftle made you forrie though it vvere but for a fea- 
Son,put Inow' reioyte not, that you were forrié but that you forrowed unto repentance: 
for you forrovved Godlie, fothat in nothing you vvere hurt by vs. Fer Godlie for- 
revucaufeth (k:) repentance unto faluation, not to bee repented of : but the vvorldly 
forrovy canfeth death : for bebold this Godlie forrovw , vvhat great care it hath 
vourought in you. Verelie the Stoickes may an{were for themf{elues, that this 


2Cor,7,8 
PT O,I1 


forrowe feemed vfefull vnto their repentance , but it cannot bee ina wife 


man becaufe hee cannot doe an aé finne-full or worthie of repentance , nor 

can admit any thing that fhould procure fadnefle in him.For they fay that() a 

Pe esbiades(if1 haué not forgecten the mans name) thinking himfelfe happie,and 
his ad. () Socrates dilputing againft it and proouing him miferable,becaufe he was nor 
nefe. wile, fell a weeping. = was his want of wifdome caufe of this good oe 
| : whereby 


\ a“ 


ape eo i 


. on ee 


oh: ee . | . , — nse a ; . : 
Lis.34. | OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 507, 


whereby. hee greeued that hee was as hee fhould not bee,but a wife man( fay the 


Stoickes)can neuer haue chis forrow. 


L. VIVES. 


|S ardeans (4) and \ Tnfe.lib.4. wralire, isa good affect, and may be vnderftood two waies__. ...,,.. 
Aeicher arifing of pleafure , whofe contrary is forrow: or it may deriue from that purified Exapathid, 
‘will which the Stoickes held: for Haid before chat the Steickes held that wills were onely : 
good,as Tx/y plainely relateth. (4) Joy for exxltation| It is need to ioye,but not to exult,wae 
rinefle alfo is asudicious avoidance of euill:feare , anamazed and reafon-lefle deicétion. (¢) 
Secking the} I {ee not vnto what fo long a difcourfe of words oncly out of the tranilation can 
tend : ifhee produced them out of their originall there were fome reafon for it.(d) Toy Peace, 


‘faith che vulgar, but the 70, loy.(¢) Good is not |wdrre& &c. It were too idle to vfe man 
“wordes in perf wading all en in what doubts foeuer,to haue recourfe to the {criptures : This 


‘Hierome veyeth , and e4uguftine heere warneth , confirming it by his example. Wee haue 
oppofers that fay it is farre more fure in the latine then in the originiall:but I will neuer trou. — 
ble my felfe to anfwere them ,they are few,and thofe are fooles and tithe will either ftop theig 
mouthes { {eeing their breth is vainely {pene ) or the confent of the learned , will filence their 
harth.clamours, (f) Peace in earth |The greekeis , and good will ynto men, <:8peavssswtoxir, 
hut all is to one purpofe, | | 

(g) ldefire| in Ctdi 1. and Tully vieth Cxpio fixe hundred times in this fence: And this 
Argument of e4uguffines out of the latine writers is fitter to his purpofe then all chofe out of 
the (criptures - and thar not fo much againft the Greekes Seoickes , as Tully the Latinift. (2) Philumens, 
i would | (bdrinus his wordes in Terentés Andria,.Philumena, quafs beloucd of praw fhe was 


. fuppofed the daughter of Chremes. [ My commentator hath held his peace a great many ‘he Loz | 


bookes through , but here hee hath got his congue againe. Phs/smena ( faithhee ) wasa *" 
Whore. Troth, this is nohoneft mans part, to make a chafte Virgin , an Whore: oh but hee UNE coe 
chinketh as many of our times doe alfo,that there is no man fpeakes in the Poets,but Theeues Pics de 
and Pandars : nor any woman but Whores and Bawdes . And Philumenai beeing found in a ‘S*4S- 
bawdie-houfe, what could this doue-eyd innocent Preaching Friar do leffe then take her for 

a Whore? }(s) Ancient |Or , mifer ? For ( barinus was not wife inough in hisloue. This was 

his man Birrhia. (k.) Repentance unto | So wee reade commonly , The olde copies,and Bruges 

bookes rcade, vnto the smpenitent,for faluation :falfly , the (oleyne readeth it the beft [ as wee 

haue tranflated it ) Forthe greeke is wevavisaytic&c (1) eAlcsbyades] Kinfmanto Pericles . 
Prince of Athens, to whofe tuition hee waslefc. Hee was the moft beautifull-perfonage of Alcibiadsa, 
the world,of wondrous witte, and moft induftrious in art military,hee was the Athenians ge- 
nerallintheir warres againft Lacedzmon and Sicylie. No man had euera more flexible wit 

to the rwo ereateft diuerfitiesshight of vertue, and hight of vice : of his life, Plstarch,Emstias 
Probus,and [xjtine,(knowne authors) doe write: () Socrates |Who taught him , and made 

fhéwe of louc to him,to keepe him from the vnchaft lone of others . Plate mentions him of= 

ten . Socrates would fome-times cherifh him , when hee obeied him, and fome-times , chide 

him tharpely,when he brake out into exorbitances ; As yee may reade in Plato's, Alcsbiades 

of the nature of man. Socrates (faith Tully jhauing perf{waded him that hce had nothing thae 

.was man in him, and that high borne Alcsbfades diffred nothing from a common porter , hee 

grew into great griefe,and befeeched Socrates to teach him vertue , and abolith this his bafee 


| nefle. Tx{c.q. 
Of the perturbations of minde which the inft doe mode- 
: vate ,andrale aright. 
Cuap. 9. 


BV« concerning thefe queftions of perturbations, che Philofophers aré already 
| Xx 2 anfwered 


Caen a aEsEnEnnNEEnE_2anEInIInIRIRRERRRREnnERRnnRnnREERSOE DA RnRRREInReEe 
508 7 ~*SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuary, 


anfwered inthe 9.booke,in which we thew that theircontention is rather verbal 
th: nreall. But according to our religion and fcriptures,the cittizens of GOD, 
as long as they are pilgrimes ,.and inthe way of GO D,doe feare,defire,reioyce 
nom. 3.27 2ndiorrow. But their loue beeing right, ftreighteth all thofe affe@s. They feare 
333 ee ) 
eternall paine, and defire eternallioy ; They forrow for the prefent , becaufeas 
yer they fizh in themfelues, wayting for their adoption,euen the redemption of 
their bodice s:they reioyce in hope,becaufe that thal be fulfilled whichis writtea: 
— BCONTSs Degsh is fvsllow-d uppe into victory. They feare co offend,and defireto perfeuer: 
" they forrow for fisne, and reioyce in doing good , they feare to finne , becaule; 
Mae.°4,12 for that sniquity \ba.be increafed the loue of many fbalbee cold. they defireto perle- 
Bast 10,2? uer, becaule: He that endureth to the end athe faucd: they forrow for fin ,becanfe 
2, Cor.957 if we faythat we hane no fin,we deceine our Selues and there is no truthinvs: they re- 
| ioyce in-good workes, for GO D loueth 4 cheerefull giwer. And as they are ftrong 
or Weake,to doe they defire, or feare to bee tempted: reioycing, or forrowing 
Galé. in temprations: they feare to bee tempted , for /f amy man fall into a falt by any 
Pialsg,2 occasion, yee which are {piritusll, reftore [uch an one with the fpirit of meekene/fe, com 
fadering thy felfe alfo,leaft thou bee tempted: they defire to bee tempted, for, 
Prooue meeO LORD and trie mec , examine my reines and mine heart faid Danid: 
They forrow in temptations, for they heare how Peter wept : they reloyce in 
them ,for Brethren, count it exceeding toye when yeefall into diners temptations, 
faith Jenmes. 
And they doe not feele affedts for chemfelues onely but for others alfo,whom 
they defire (t.ouldbee treed, and feareleaft they perith , forrowing at their fall 
and reioycing at their deliverance: for if wee that are come from («) Paganif-. 
. - me to Chriftianity may give an efpeciall inftance in that worthy and dautit- 
leffe man that boafted of his infirmities , that teacher of fayth and trothto the 
nations , that toyler aboue all his fellow Apoftles ,that cdifier of Gods people 
by fermons , beeing prefent , and by more Epiftles then they all , beeing ab- 
fent , thacbleffed Man Pas meane’C H RIS TS Champion, (6) taught by hin, 
(¢) anointed from him, (d) crucified with him(¢) glorifiedin him , (f) inthe 
Theater of this World where hee was made a fpectacle ,to GO D, Angells and 
». Men, fightinga(g)lawfull, and (4) great fight, and fullowing hard towardes the 
Phi'ip.3, oe ° : | 
14 (i) marke for the (k) prize of the high calling : How gladlie doe wee with theeyes 
Rom.t2, of fayth behold him, weepe with them that weepe,and retoyce with them that ree | 
eS Ceriis joyce ,{ 1) fightings without, and tetrours within , dcfyring to bee diffolued and 
-fobevvith CHRIS T,deflyting to fez the Romaines , and to receiue fruite from 
them as wellas the others , beeing iealous ouer the Corinthians, and fearing 
leaft their mindes fhould be corrupted; from the chaftsty uvith is in CHRIST, hit | 
wing great fadneffe , and continuall forrow of heart for Jrselcthac becing ige 
noranctin GOD Siuftice , would ere@ oneoftheirowne ,andnorbeefubie® — | 
vnto gods : and denouncing his lamentation for divers that had not repented | 
Corrs, them.of theic fornication and vncleaneffe. If thefe affeéts, arifing from the 
a3 loue of good, bee vicious , thenlet true vices bee called vertues: But feeing 
their vfe is leuelled by therule of reafon , who dare call them fraileor im- 
perfect paffions of the minde ? Our LOR D himfelfe , lyuing in the forme of 
a fervant(yet wichour finne) vfed chem when hee thought it requifite : for wee 


may not thinke that hauing mans effentiall bodie,and foule , hee had but feeming 
affedtes. | " i 


<= 
a 


7S 2 BY ta TR FL. 


Lint4. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 5 Dy 


And therefore his forrow for lerifalewss hardne(fe of heart , his ioy for the be- pa 
deeners ,histeares for Laxarons , his defire to eate the Paffeoner with his difci- obs iE 
ples,and his deadly heauinefle of foule vpon the approach ofhis paffion , thefe Luk 22 
are no fained narrations. a | Mat.s6 

But thefe affects of mar hee felt when it pleafed him as hee was made man 
when it pleafedhim. Wherefore wee confeffe that thofe affects \ in their beft 
kinde hee, pertinent to this prefent life , not vnto that which wee hope for 
heereafter: and that wee are often ouer-preffed by them:a laudable defire or 
charity may mooue vs: () yet fhall wee weepe whether v eewillorno. For 
wee haue them by our humaine infirmity, but fo had not CHRIS T (2) for hee 
had his very infirmity it felfe, from his owne power. But as long as wee liue 
in this infirmity , wee (hall liue worfe if wee want thofe affects. For the Apof- 
tle difpraifeth and detefts (0) {uch as want niaturall affee& . And fo doth the 
Pialme, faying , //ook. d for fowse to pitty mee, and there was none. For to want the Rom, i,30 
{ence of forrowinthis mortall life (asa(p) grear fcholler held ) neuer be-falls, Plabey,20 
aman without great fupidity cf bodie , and barbarifme of minde. (q) There- 
fore the grecke ar.tue, or impafhibility becing meant of the minde, and not 
the bodie, if it bee vnderftood as a want of thofe perturbations onely which 
difturbecthe minde , and refift reafon, itis tobee defended, and deficed. For 
the Godly wife and holy men ( not ordinary ranglers ) fay all dire@ly , sf wee 
farthat wee haue no finne, wee deceiue our-[elues , and there 1s no truth in-vs. But 
if aman had chis fame e'xaee, (meantas before) hee had mo finnc indeed in him. 

But itis well it wee can liue heere without (7) crime: but hee that chinkes hee 

lines v. ichout finne doth not avoide finne but rather excludes all pardon. Bue 

now if dxd%ua,bee an veter abandoningof all mentall affects whatfoeuer , who 

‘will not fay fuch a ftupidity is not worfe chen fiane? Wee may fitly fay indeedé 

thar true happineffe thalbe veterly voide of feare and fotrow: bute whocan 

fay it fhalbe voideof loue, and ioy , buchee that profeffeth to oppofe the truths 

but if this cectns, bee a freedome from feare, and forrow, wee muft not ayme 

at icin this life, if wee meane to liue after the laweof GOD. But inthe other 
promifed life of eternity (/) all feare fhalbee excludedfrom vs. For thatfeare | 
whereofthe Apoftle Johs faith. There és no feare in loue , but perfect lone cafteth Lloh4,18 
out feare , and hee that feareth is not perfect in lowe, is not thatxinde of feare 
whereof the Apoftle Pzul feared the fall of the Corinthians , for lovie hath - 

this feare in it , and nothing hach ic but loue : but che other feare is noe in 

Joue, whereof the fame Apottle Pani faith, for yee haue mot receiued the {pirit of Pial 9,9 
bondage to feare agtine. But that chafte feare , remayning world without ende, 

ifit bee inthe world to come (and howe elfe'can it remaine worlde without 

ende? ) fhal bee no feare terrifying vs from euill ,bucafeare keeping Vs in ari 
infeperable good. For where the good attained is vnchangeably loued , there 

is the feare to loofe it infeperably cheined . Fcr by this chafte feare ismeant 

the will that wee muft necflarily haue, toavoide finne: not with an vnerounded | 
carefulneffe leaft wee fhould finne, but beeing founded in the peace of loue, to 
beware of finne . Buc if that firmeand eternall fecurity be acquit ofall feare , and 
conceiue onely the fulneffe of ioy,then che feare of Lorde is pure , and indureth 

for euer,is meant as that other place is : The p.ciente of the afflicted [ball not perifo 
for ener. | | : Pal.g.r8 

Their patience fhall not be eternall,fuch needeth onely where miferies are to 

=o Kx 3 


- 


RS A I TT IS 7 : pie -_ EEE DEES Ee EERIE IE NEE TESTES, 


579 


SAINT AVGVSTINE.. | Cuapg, 


be eterually endured. Butthat which their pacience fhall accaine, thall be eter- 
na!.So it may be that this pure feare is faid to remaine for ever, becaufe the fcope 
whereat it aymes is everlafting: w hich beeing fo,anda good courfe onely lead- 


ing to beatitude, then hath a badde life badde affe&s , and a good life good ones, 


And the eternal] beatitude fhall haue both ioye and loue, net onely right , but 
firme, and vnmoouing: but fhalbee vererly quit of feare, and forrow. Hence 
is it apparant what courfes GODS Citties onght to runne, in this earthly pil- 
grimage,making the {pirit,not the fle(fh ,GOD, andnot humanity the lanterne 
to their pathes: and here alfo wee fee their eftate in their immorcall future in- 
flalz:ment. Butthe Cittie of the impious tha faile after the compaffe of car- 
nalitie , and inthcir moft diuine matters, reie@ the truth of GO LD , and relie 
vpon the (r) inftructions of men, is fhaken with thefe affects , as with earth- 
quakes, and infected wich them as with peftilent contagions. And if any of 
the cittizens feeme to curbe themfelues from thefe courfes, (#) they growe 


.... foimpioufly proude and vaine-glorious , that theleffe their trouble is by thefe 


paffions the bigger their tumour. And if any of them bee fo rarely vaine , and 
barbarous,as toembrace a dire& ftupidity , beecomming infenfible ofall affe@, 
they doe racher abiure true man-hood then atraine true peace.Roughneffe doth 
not prooue a thing right, nor (x) can dulneffe produce folid foundnefle. - 


_ L.VIVES. 


Fe” 'a) Paganifme] So did not Pavé, for hee was an Iraelitie of the tribe of Pexsemin, 
and therefore fore bookes doe fafly read, He that came from paginifme ce.(b) Taughe] 
There were maifters of fence that taughc thefe champions. Aug,alludeth to them, \¢, Axoyn- 
ted from _) Some reade,bound vnto in,as Paw/himlelfe faith : and this is more proper : though 
hisallufion run through the anoynting, cxercife and fafhions of the champions. ‘d) Craesfied] 
For they had certaine bounds that they might not pafle in any exercife.’e)Glorsfied | Victori- 


ous. (f) Ls the Theater Betore a fulland honorable viewe.(g) Lawfuil | The Sy se had 


their lawes,each might not play chat would. (4; Great fight They had their lefler fights and 
their ¢ reater,as had the runners,and the wraftlers.(¢) / be marke| That becing perfeét and ha- 
u:ng paft daily more and more contentions, hee mighc at length become Maifter of the fiue 
exercifes , and haue his full degree, Pas/s wordes are in the Epiftle to the Philippians, 3. 


13.1 

% 1} Fighting s Hee reckneth Pasls affects beeing all good. (mz) Yet fhall wee weepe] Eithet 
fuddainely,or forcibly, for ioye,or forrow.(#) Fer be| He was God and Man, and therefore had 
his affeéts in his power to extend or repreffe at_pleafure : ours are violent, and whirle vs with 
themthroughall obftacles , by reafon of our owne impotent infirn.ity : and therefore wee 
fay our minde is impotent in yeelding herevnto. (0) Sach as want | :’cu-y01,fuch as are fences 
leffe of mifery , or happineffe in themfelues or friends: and thofe, ftupidicies much like the 
Greekes a7 ¢deat, of whom reade Pliny lib.7. Socrates they fay was neuer feene to change his 
countenancesthis continuall fixation of minde fome-times turneth into a rigid fowreneffe of 
nature,abolifhing all affects from the foule,and fuch men the Greekes call senies. (p) ef great 
{choller \ Crantors opinion the Academike in Tully, Tx{c, queft. 3. (q) Therefore the | Sem, 


 Epift.lib, 1. Explaine @edive, with one worde , and call it impacience wee cannot, without 


ambiguity. For fo wee may come to haue our meaning to bee thought iuft contrary to what 
itis . Wee meane one that is fenceleffe of all euill , and wee may bee thought to meane one 
that istoo fenfible of the leaft , chinke then whether wee may better fay invulnerable,or im= 
patient. This isthat difference betweene vs and the Epicureans . Our wife-man feeles pafs 
fions but fubdues chem all; theirs are acquit from feeling them . Thus Seneca. 

(7) Crime] 


—- - a. eee “i a_i 


fe BE 


Fa SIRT aa : , a: 


Lisr4. — OF THE CITIE OF GOD. -- - 


(r) (rime. The difference betweene crime,and finne he declareth. Tralt.41 fap Joan,thusa_- _. 


crime ( faith hee ) és an att worthy of acce(ationand comdemnation. Arid theretore the Apoftle 
iuing order for the eledction of Puefts, Deacons, os other Chyrch-men , faith nor, if any of you 
i. without finne , for fohe fhould exclude all‘ Man-kivd from: beeing eletted ; but if any bee 
witheut crime : as man flaughterywloredome,fome kind af enny adultery,theft.frand facriledge,and 
Such tike.Thus to explanc this place.({) ell feare.} Or,this «reve is to be expected, (t) In- 
Srrutitons,\ Some arts the deuills tanght men, as Magike, Aftrology, ang.all:diuination excep- 
ting Prophecy. Plato faith that a diuell cailed Thent inuénted Arithmctil Geometry, Atro~ 
nomy and Dicyng, and taugfit thie to Tharus King of Egypr. [doubt noc but that Logike 
was the deuills indention alfo,it teacheth the wruchs oppéficion , and cbftinacy in falfenieffe,fo 
cunningly , delighting to put-verity to the worfe , by deceipte. (4) They grow fo.) Pride was. 
the common vice almoft of all the Philofophers.(x) Stupidity; or dulneffe.| The Phifitians when 


they cannot cure an hurt member,do apply,thejr apes to avoyd the ience of paine onely but. 


af 


Theuty 


ftate . 
out fat 


| L. VIVES. 


T (a) were,| The defire is a finne.afwell as the a&t not onely by the Scriptures, but by the 

more exact difcipline of humanity alfo.(ic.Philippic.a. Though there be no law againitit,for 
the lawe faith nae,if this man defire thus much land, let him be fined, as (ase the elder pleaded 
for the Rhodians. . - - ; ee 7 


; : 


Xx4 The“ 


512- SAINT AV GVSTINE. Cuapll, 


The fall of the firft man,wherein nature was made good,and cannot 
: be repaired but by the maker. 


C wap. Ife 


BY God, foreknowing althings,could not but know that man would fall:there- 


fore wee muft ground our City vpon his prefcience and ordinance, notvpoa ‘ 


that which we know not, and God hath vnreuealed For mans finne,could not dif- 
turbe Gods decree , nor force him to change his refolue : God fore-knew and 
preuented both, that is, how bad man ( whome hee had made ) fhould become 
and what good hee meant to derive from him, for all his badneffe. For though 
God bee faid tochange his refolution ( as the feriptures («) tropically fay that 
hee repented,&c.) Yet this is in refpe& of mans hope, or natures order, notac- 
cording to his own prefcience.So thenGod made man,vpright,and confequentl 

well-willed : otherwife he could not haue beene vpright. Sothat this good will, 
was Gods worke,man being there-with created. Bur the euill will , which was in 


man before his euill worke , was rather a fayling from che worke of God ta the | 


owne workes , ‘then any worke at all. And therefore were the workes euill, 
bccaufe they were according to them-felues , and not to God, this euill will be- 
ing as a tree bearing fuch bad fruite , or man himfelfe, in refpe@ of his euill will. 
Now this euill will , chough it do nor follow,but oppofe nature,being a fale: yet 
is icof the fame nature that viceis , which cannot but bee in fome nature: butit 
muft bee in that nature which God made of nothing, not in that which he begot 


Gen.2. of himfelfe, as his word is, whereby althings were made: for a God . 


- made man of duft , yet hee made duft ofnothing , and hee made the foule of no- 
thing, whichhe ioyned wich the body, making full man. Buteuills are fo farre 
vnder that which is good,chat though they be permitted to bee for to fhew what 
good vfe Gods prouident iuftice can make of them , yet may that which is good, 
confi without them,as that true and glorious God him. felfe, and all the vifible 
re{plendent heauens do,aboue this darkned & mifty aire of ours:but euills cannot 
confift but inthat which is good, forall the natures wherein they abide being 
confidered as meere natures , are good. And euill is drawne from nature, not 
by ab{ciflion of any nature contrary to this or any part of this, but by purifiying 
of that onely , which was thus depraved. Then (4 ) therefore is che will truely 
free,when it ferueth neither vice ner fin.Such God gaue vs, fuch we loft,and can- 

Toh.8. not recouer but by him chae gaue itzas the eruth faith: /f the fonne free you,you [oalbe 
truly freed ,it is all oneas ifheé fhould fay : /f the fonne faue you,you fbalbe truely fa- 
wed,(c) for hee is the freer , that isthe Sauiour. Wherefore ( d ) in Paradife both 
locall,and {pirituall man made God his rule co liue by , for te wasnot a Paradile 
locall, for the bodies good, andnot {piricuall for the {pirits : nor was ita fpiritu- 
allfor the fpirits goud, and no fecal one for the bodies : Noe, it was both for 
both. But after thar(e)that proud,and therefore eauious Angell, falling through 
that pride from God vnto him-felfe , and choofing ina ciranicall vain glory ra- 

\ ther to rulethen to be ruled , fell from the {pirituall paradife, (of whofe fall, and 
his fellowes , that cherevpon of good Angelis became his, I difputed in my ninth 
booke as God gaue grace and meanes ) hee defiring to creepe{into mans minde 
by his ill-perfwading futtlely , and enuying mans conftancy in his owne 


‘chofe the ferpent , one of the creatures that as then liued hurtleffe with the pr 
| : an 


a — a a a — os Am ne, ee 


-Mm “ft TN 


aN 


we “SA we NON Cen 


; 


List4q. OF THE CITI£E OF GOD. ; 553 
. and woman in the earthly paradife, abeaft flippery and moueable, wreatchd 
_in knots, and fic (f°) for his worke,this hee chofe to fpgake through : abufing ir, 
as ( £ fubieé vnto the greater excellency of his angelicall nature,and making it 
the inftrument of his {pirituall wickdneffe,through it he began to {peake deceit- 
fully vnto the woman : beginning at che meaner part of man-kind , to inuade the 
whole by degrees: thinking the man was not focredulous, nor fo foone deluded 
as he would be,feing another fo ferued before him,for as Aaron confented not by 
perfwafion, but yeelded by compulfion vnto the Hebrewes idolatry, to make Exod 32. 
them an Idol , nor Saéoqen(as it is credible )yeelded worthip to idols ofhisowne —""** 
‘erronéous beleefe , but was brought vniothar facriledge by his wiues perfwa- 
fions : Sois itro bee thought, thar the ficft man did not yee'd to his wife inthis _ 
tranfgrefiion of Gods precept, as ifhee thought thee faid two;butonely being 
compelled to ir by this fociall loue to her , being burt one with one, and both of © | 
one nature and kind, for itis notin vaine thattne Apoftle faich : Adam mes nog LTL. 34: 
not deceiued : bur the woman was deceived : but it (héweth that the woman did % 
thinke the ferpents words true , but 44am onely would not breake company 
with his fellow , were it in finne,and fo finned wittingly : wherefore the Apoftle g 
faith not, He finned not : but, He was not feduced , for hee theweth that hee finned og it 
faying : by ome man finne entredinto the worlds and a littleaftct more plainely: after 
the manner of the tran{ere(icn ef Adam. Aud thofe he meane: are feduced , chaé 
thinke the firft co be ne finn,which he knewro beea finne, other wife why thould 
hee fay , Adam was “ot f¢duced? But he that is not acquainted with che diuine fe- 
uerity might therein be deceiued td conceiueé chat his {inne was but veniall. And 
therfore in that the woman was feduced he was not,but this w as ic that(/)decei- 
ued him, that hee wasto bee iudged , forall that he had this excufe. The woman 
that thou gaueft me to ke with me,fbe gane me of the tree, andi did eate,what need we Gen.3.18. 
any more then? chougb they were noc both feduced, they were both taken in fin ~ 
and made the divells captives. 


L. VIVES. 


BG Becarey (a) Say. \Figuratiuely. A trope(faich QOnsetslian, is the tranflation of one word 
A into che fit fign:fication of another, from the owne : that God repented , is a Metaphor, 
which is a figure that who fo knowes not and yet would learne,for the vaderftanding of {ripe 
tures,muft not go vrto 73 ully,or Quintilian,but ynto our great declamers,who know ing not 
difference becweene Gramar and Rhetorike,call it all by the name of grammer.(6)Thén theres 
ore. | Not thar it is ocherwife not free ¢ for {uppofe it had not finned : but becaufe then it is 
Jeofed from the burden ef all crimes , from all cuill cuftomes , at.dis no thore molefted by the 
tiranicall invafions of vice.(c} He és the. ]They are both onely from God.(d}/# Parads{e,) Par= Pasaidife; 
radife is pleafure and delight. Man being placed in earthly Paradife had preat ioy corporally, 
but farre greater fpiritually :for without this , the bodies were painefull rather then pleafings 
Themind is rhe bantaire of delight , which being fad , what ioy hath man in any Hag: (e 
Proud and. | Enuy immediately fuccedeth pride,by nature, for a proud man fo loueth himfelfe 
that he greetes chat any one fhould excell hith,nay equalize him,which when he cannot auoid 
ther he enuiesthem : whence it comes that enuy facts chiefely amorpft the higheft honors, 
wheri as thepeoples fauor dock not alwaies prace the Princé aloné.Swetonins faith that Cafi- 
sla enuied euen the meaneft,fome for that the people fauored them, others for their forme ot 
inh. So did the diuell enuy maus holding of fo high a place, and this enuy brought death 
into the world, (f') Fit for. | He faith faper genef. ad. Lr. that the deuill was not permitted to 
tempt in any other creature but this:that the woman might learne that from a poifonous creas 
ture can come nothing but poyfon, Pherecides the Syrian faith the diuells were caft from hea~ 
ten by Jone,and that their chiete was Ophsoniens,chat is,Serpentine, _ : 
—_ (g)Sabie 


a Trope, 


514 SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuani2.8c13, 


(g ) Subieft | The diuell tooke the ferpents body , and therfore was the ferpent held the meft 

uttle creature of all , as re kale faith vpon Genefis. ( b) Seciall lone | Neceffitude , is oftner 
taken for loue and kinred then for need or necefPty, (s ) Deceined bins | Adam was deceiued 
in this,that he thought hee had a good excufe to appeafe Gods wrath withal, in faying thathe 
did it co gratifie his fellow,and fuch an one as God God had ordayned to dwell with him, 


Of the quality of mans fir it offence. 
Cuap. 12. 


B Vt if the difference of motion to finne , that others haue from the firft man, 
~ 4&7 dotrouble any one , and thatother finnes doe not alter mans nature, as that 

firft rranfgreffion did:making him lyable to that death,torture of affe@t,and cor- 
Irwasnee Fuption which weall feele now,and he fele nor at al, nor fhould haue felt, bat chat 
the fat __ he finned:1f this(I lay moue any one,hee muft not thinke therefore,that it wasa 
dieace thi light falc chac hee cominitted in eating of thac fruite which was not (4 ) hurtful 
Ouerdtrww ac all bur onely as it was forbidden. For God would not haue planted any hurt- 


full ar in thar délicate Paradife. But vppon this precept was grounded obedi- | 
) the mother and guardian ofal the other vertues of the foule:to which 


_ ence ,( 
itis goodto be fubie@, & pernicious to leaue/leauing with it the Creators wil) 
and to follow ones own. This command-hen of forbearing one fruic when there 
were fo many befides it, beeing foeafy to obferue ; and {> fhort to remember 
(cheefely when the affe& oppofed not the wil) which followed vppon thetranf- 
gteflion ) was the more vniultly broken,by how much it was the eafier to keepe, 


| LVIVES. a ; 
N& (a) burtfull | OF it felfe.(6) The mother ] GOD layesnathing vppon his cres 


tures , men orangels , asifhice needed their helpe in any: thing , but onely defireth 
to haue them in obedience to him. Thence is the rule : Obedience sis better then facrie 
___ fice. Hierome vpon the eleuenth Chaper of na ide 3. Curfed ss the man that heareth 


sees wot the wordes of this contract : Not for the priniledge of the nation (fayth hee) ser the wrong of 


of allvere “irewmesfion,»or the leafure of the Sabeth, but for ae It is that God is Ifraels God , and 


cue, they bis people. Likewile in J/as. Chap. 44. Anguffine wrote a work calied De obedientiae bu 
seilstate, What he hath faid here he repeateth often. (oxtra aduerfleg.cr Proph.Liie de bens 
coningals. : | | 


T hat in Adams offence bis cuill will wes before his euill worke. — 
| 2 a? ¢ C nap. 3° | 
BY: euil began within them ore) at firft,to drawthem into open difobedi- 


Pride. - ence afterwardes. For there had beene no ewsll worke , but there was an ew 


Redaros will before it:and what could begin this ex#/ will but pride,that is the beginning — 


ofall finne? And whats pride buta peruerfe defire of height, in forfaking him 
ro whome the foule ought foly toadhere, as the beginning therof , to make the 
{elfe feeme the owne beginning. This is when it likes it felfe too well, or when 
it affectes it felfe fo , as it will abandon that vnchangeable good which ought to 
bee more delightfull co ir then it felfe.. This defeét now is voluntary: For ifthe 
will remained firm2 in the loue of that fuperior firmeft good which gaue it light 
to fee it,and zeale to louc itsit would not haue curned from that,to take delight in 

oS | oo a | 


Lipa. OF THECITIEOF GOD. 53 


it felfe and therevpon haue bee come fo (4) blinde of figtit , and fo( 4 ) could of 
zealethatcither (c) fhec fhould haue beleeued the ferpcnts words as true, or 
that (d)hee fhould haue dared to prefer his wiues will before Gods commana, 
andtothinke thache offended but (¢) venially , ifhee bare the fcliow of his life __ 
z, : ae ape Euill . 

company, in her cffence. The euill therefore, that is, this tranfgréflion, was noc workes 
done but by fuch as were euil before;fuch eate the fordidden fruit:the:e couldbe deneby. 
no éuill fruir,but from an cuill cree , rhe tree was miade enil againft nature, for ic Pont OM 
had not become euil but by the vnnatural vicioufneffé of the wil:& no naturecan ieaee 
be depraued by vice, but fuch as is created ofnothing. And therefore in that it is 
nature it hath ic from God:but it falleth from God in that it Was made of nothing. 
Yetman was not made nothing vpon his fall,but he was leflened in excellence by 
inclining to himfelfe,being moft excelling,in his adherence to God: whome hee 
Jeauing,to adhere to,and delight in himfelfe,hee grew(not to bee nothing , bur) 
towards nothing. Therefore the fcripture called proud men, otherwile,(f) 
pleaferes of them-felues. Itis good to haue the heart aloft , but not vnio ones 
{elf : that is pride : but vnto God, that is obedience, inherent oncly in the pamiliy, 
humble. | 

In humility therfore there is this to be admired,that it eleuates the heart:and in 

ride this,that it deieCteth it. This feemes ftrangly contrary, that cleuation fhold 
be below, and deie€tion aloft.ButGodly humility fubie@s oné to his fuperior:and 
Godis aboue all; therefore humility exalteth one, in making him Gods fubjea. 
But pride the vice, refufing this fubiection, falles from him that is aboue all;and 
fo becomes more bafe by farre ( then thofe that ftand ) fulfilling this placeofthe pal.73. 
Pfalme:Thow hajt caft them downe tn their exaltation, He faith not when they wete 
exalted, they were deicCted afterwards: but, in their very exaltation were they 
caft downe,their eleuation was their ruine. And therefore in that humility is fo 
approved in,and commended to the Cétty of God that is yet pilgrime vpon earth, 
and fo highly extolled by (¢) Chrift , the King thereof3 and pride ; the iuft con. 
trary, fhewen by holy writ, to be fo predominant in his aduerfaies the deuill and 
his Angels:in this very thing the great difference of the two citties the Godly and 
the vngodly , with both their Angells accordingly , lieth moft apparant : Gods 
loue {wayingin the one, and felfe-loue in the other. So thatthe deuill hadnoe 
feduced mankindeto fuch a palpable tranfgreffion of Gods expreffe charge, but 


thae ( euill willand ) {elfe-loue had gotten place in them before, for hee deligh- Gen.3.§. 


ted in that which was fayd (/ ) you fhellbe as Gods: which they might foonerhaue 
beene by obedience aud coherence with their creatorthen by proud opinion 
that they were their owne beginners,for the created God:,are not Gods of them 
felués but by. participation ofthe God that made them, but man defiring more 
becatneleffe, and chofe to bee fufficient in him felfe, fell from rhacall-fuffici- 
ent God. | | 

This then is the mifchiefe , man liking him-felfe as if hee were his owne 
light turned away frorh the truelight, which if heehad pleafed him-felfe with 
all, hee might haue beenelike : this mifchiefe( fay I ) was firft in his foule, and 
thence was drawne onto the following mifchieuous ac, for the fcripture is 
truethatfaych, Pride gocth before diftruction , andan hich minde before the fall: the 
fal which was in fecret, fore runneth the fall which was in publike, the firft being 
eakén forno fallat all, for who taketh exalcation to beé ruine,though the defe@ 
proucdintheplaceofheight. © 


Pro.s6.18. 


erie Fs, ~*~ 2 | But 


516 SAINT AV GVSTINE. -Cuap. 13.8 14. 

But who feeth not that ruine lyeth in the expreffe breach of Gods precepts? 

For therefore did GOD forbid it , that beeing done , (# ) allexcufeand auoy- 

dance of iuftice might bee excluded. And therefore I dare fay. it is good that 

the proud fhould fall into fome broad ard difgracefull finne thereby to take 

adiflike of them-felues , who fell by to much liking them-felues : for Peters for- 

rowfull diflike of him felfe , when he wept , was more healcthfull to his foule 

then his vnfound pleafure that he tooke in him. felfe when hee prefumed. There- 

pea3. fore faith the P/alme: fill their faces with lbame , that they may feekc thy name O 

Lord: that is that they may delight in thee ard fecke thy name, who before, de- 
lighted in them-felues , and fought theirowne. . | 


0 et ee aoe. 


L. VIVES. | 


: S O (4) blinde | 1 ofing their light. (6) (old | Lofing their heate. (c) She fhondd Here fhee 
tJ lacke her light,was blinde and faw nat. (a) “e /Lould \Here he warted his heate, and was 
cold,in negleétirg Gods command for his wiues pleafure. But indeed , they both want both: 
the woman had no zea!e,preferring an apple before Goe:the man had no light, in cafting hime 
felfe and vs headlong he kuew not whether, (ec) Uensally }1 doe not meane to difpute heere 
whether oe 4dams finne were veniall or no:As Bonaxenture and Scotus doe. Iknow his inne 
was cappitail, and Tamtheredy wretched. (f) Pleafures of | Pet. 2. 2.10, (The Greekes call 
them eraveia burit isnot foin Peter : Tonely namcittrom the latine.) #if 6. This vice 
therefore is cailcd onare! or fel’e-loue 3 Socrates calls ic the roote of all enormity : Jt is the 
head of all pride,and the bafe of all ignorance, ( g ) Chrif? | Who was made obedient to his fa- 
ther euen vnto death,to which he was led like a fheepe to the flaughter,and like a lamb when 
it is clipped,he was filent,neithtr threatning thefz that {mote him, nor reproching thofe that 
reproched him: »4// hayle thou example of obed:ence , gentleneffe , man (uetude and medesl Ly ,im~ 
pofed by thy father unto osr barbarous, brutifo , irgratefull ,impioxs mankinde. (b) You hall bee} 

_ Fulfill thy minde ( proud woman ) aduance thy felfe to the height: What is the vetermoft 
Excufesin {cope of all ambitious defire? To bee a God : wiy eate, and thou fhalt be one, O chou fon- 
set a deit of thy fexe,hopeft thou to be deified by an’apple ?( 1) Allexcufe |No pretence,no fhew, 
ther, * no imaginary reafon of iuftice would ferue the turne. For the cye of Gods iuftice cannot 
| bee blinded, but che more cou!lor thac one layes vppon guilt before him,the fouler hee makes 

his owne foule and the more iaexcufable. | y 


Of the pride of the tran{greffion, which was worfe 
then the tranf{greffun st felfe. Curr. 14. 

BY pride that makes man fecke to coullor his guilt,is farre more damnable 

then the guile ic felfe is,as it was in the firft of mankind.She could fay the fer- 
pent begnilde me,and1did cate. He could fay: The woman thou giuzit mefhe cane 
me of the tree, and I did eat: Here is nofound of asking mercy, no breath of de- 
firing helpe; for thoughthey doe notdeny their guile, as.Casme did , yer their 
pride feekes to lay their owne euill vpon another , the mans vpon the woman, 
and hers vppon the Serpent. Bur this indeed doth rather accufe them of worfe 
then acquit them of this, fo plaine and palpable a tran{gr: flion of Gods com- 
maund. For the womans per{wading of the man , and thie ferpents feducing of 
the woman to this,doth no way acquit them of the guilt: as if there (2) were any 
thing to be beleeued,or obeyed before God,or rather then the higheft. 


ee ee ene, 


L. VIVES. 


| AS if there (4) were | There is nothing to be belecued rather then God, or to be seve 
cfore 


Lrsr4. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. $17 


before God:but the woman beleciied the Serpent rather then God,and the man preferred his 
wife before God. — | 


Of the inff reward that our firft paventsreceined for their finnes 


Crap. i5. 


T Herefore becaufe God, (that had made man,according to his image,placed 


him in Paradife, aboue all creatures , giuen him plenty of althings , and layd 
no hard nor long lawes vpon him, but onely that one breefe command ot obe- 
dience, to thew that himfelfe was Lord of that creature whome free (4 Jferuice 
beft befitted was thus contemned :therevpon followed that iuft condemnation 
being fuch ,that man , who might haue kept the command , and beene fpiricuall 
in body’, became now carnall in mind: and becaufe , hee had before delighted 
in his owne pride, now hee cafted of Gods iuftice :( 6) becomming not as hede-' 
fired, folly in hisowne power , but falling euen from him-felfe , became his flaue 
thac taught him finne , changing his {weete liberty into wrerched bondage , be- 


ing willingly dead in {pirit and vawilling todie in the ficth, forfaking eternal 


life, and condemned to eternall death,but that Gods good grace delitered him, 
He that holds this fentencetoo feuere, cannot proportionate, the guilt incurring 


it,and (¢) the ea(ineffe of auoyding its for as Abrahams obedience is highly extol- 4, 4. 
- Jed becaufe the killing of his fonne( ah hard matter ) was commaunded him, {0 obedience 


was their difobedience in Paradife , fo much the more extreame as the precept 
wasealy toperforme. Andas the obedierice of the fecond was the more rarely 
excellent, in that he kept it vnto the death : fo was that difobedience of the firft Theva. 
man,the more truely deteftable,becaufe he brakehis obedience to incurre deaths nifmene 
For where the puni(hment of the breatch of obedisnce is fo great, and the pré- of difobes 
cept foeati'y kept , who can at full relate the guilt of that finne that breakethic, 
ftanding neither in aW of the commanders maielty , dor in feare of the terrible 
aff.iction following the breatchi | 

| Andto fpeake ina word, whatreward , whac punifhment is layd vpon difo. 
bediency , buidifobedience ? Whacis mans mifery , other then his owne difo~ 0, ead 
bedience to hinifelfe:that feeing( ¢ Jhe would not what he might,now hecannor — 
what he would? for alchough that in Paradice, all was not in his power during: 

his obediencé;yet then he defired nothing but what was iri his power , and {6 di 
whathee would. 7 | a eee 

~ But now,as the Scripture faith , and wee fee by experience , man is like to vanity; 

for who can recoutit his innumerable defires of impoffibilites, the feth , andthe 
(f) mind,that is himfelfe, difobeying the will,that is hitnfelfe alfo, for his mindé 
is troubled, his ficth payned, age and death apptocheth, and athoufand other 
affedts feaze on vs again{t our wills , which they could not do, ifour nature were 
wholly obedient vato our wiil, And che fleth fuffereth( ¢ )fome- thing, thar hin- 
ders the feruice of thefoule, whacskilleth ic wHence, as longas it is Gods al- 
mighty iufticé.to whome we would not bee fubieé,that our fleth fhould not be 
fubie& tothe foule , but troublé ic whereas it was fubie& wholy vnto it before, 


~ though wein riot feruing God, do trouble our felues and not him? tor hee nee- 


deth not our erpice, as.wce neede ourbodies :and therefore it is our paife to 

haue abody, notany hurt to him in that wee have made ic-fuch a body. Be 

fides, thofe that weecall fiethly paines , arethe foules paines’; in, and -_ the 
OO Yy | lefti 


a a ee, ee Boece 


518 SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuar.rs.& 16. 


Paincsof Atth, for whaccan che Ath either feele, or défiré without the foule? But when 
the fieth,& wee fay the ficfh doch eycher , wee meanc either the man (asI fayd before ) or 
welaules {ome part of the foule that the fle(hly paffion affeCteth;either by fharpneffe, pro- 
curing paineand griefe, or by fweetnes producing pleafure. But ficthly paine 
is onely an offencegiuen to the foule by the flefh, anda (4) diflike of that paffion 
thatthe ficth produceth: as that which wecall fadneffe, is a diftaft of things be- 
falling vsagainft our wills: But feace commonly forerunneth fadneffe, & that is 
wholly in ths foule, and not in che flefh : But whereas the paine of the fleth is not 
fore-run by any flefhly feare,fele in che fleth before y paine - (2) pleafure indeed is 
viher'd in by certaine appetites fele in the fleth,as che defires therof: {uch is hun- 
ey gc ger & chirft and the venereall affe& vfually called luft:whereas (é)luft isa general 
oe itviie Hamecoallafeds that are defirous: for(/) wrath is nothing buta luft of rouenge, 
eas eficGs. as § ancient writers definedit:alchougha ma fomtimes without fence ofreuenge 
: will be angry at fenceleifc things, as to gag his pen in anger when it writes badly, 
or fo: But even this is acertaine defire of reuenge, though it be reafonleffe, it is 
a certaine fhadow of returning euill to them that doe euill. So then wrathis a 
luft of reuenge, auarice a luft of hauing money, obftinacy a luftof getting vi@o- 
ry, boafting aluft of vaine glory; and many fuch lufts thereare: fome peculiarly 
named, and fome nameleffe: for who can giue a fit name to the luft of foveraign- 
ty,which notwithftanding the tyrants fhew by their inteftine watres, that they 

ftand wellaffeXedynto? = ° « | , 


’ ; 
! 
< ~a0 


L.VIVES. 


eee a (4) fersice |For to be Gods feruant is to be free, nay to be aKing. (6) Becemmix 
Nicholas A wot |The belt reading. (c) the eafineffe} my trend Nicholas Valdanra told me that heha 
Waldawra. read in an author (1 know not whome ) that the fruit chat «diem eate was hurtfull to the bos 
dy; but chis was rather an agerauation of efdams finne; then any likelyhood of truth.(d) Se 
cond man | Chriit called by Paule,the fecond man, of heauen, heauenly, as e-4dams the firft was 
of earth, earthly.(e,) He would not | Terences {aying in. Andria : fince Phi cannot haue that you 
defite, defire that which you may haue, (f) Adizd | There is in the foule(AZens Jbclonging to 
the reafonable part ,and animus, belonging to the fenfuall, wherein alt this tempeft of affeds 
doth rage, (¢) Something | Wearineffe and flowneffe of motion, whereby it cannot go cheers 
fully to wortke, nor continue long in action, (4) ef difléke | Or a diflike of the euill procured 
: bythe paffion. (4) Pleafure} Herevpon faith, Epicuras, Defire cenfureth pleafure, pleafures 
are belt being: but feldome vied; faich Jauenall; voluptates commendat rarior ufas, (hk) Luft is 
a gencrall | We fhewed this out of Tally, it comes of bet, that extended it felfe ynto all de- 
fires chat are not bounded by reafon. (/) Wrath \Tufc. queft. 4. Wreath isa defire to punith 
thofe by whome one thinketh he is wronged. It isa greeuing appetite of {ceming reueng, 
faith Ariffotle. Rhet. ib 3. Oo | | 


\ 


Ofthe ewill of luft : bow the name is general! to many vices, but proper 
| atte venercallconcapifcence, —— _ 

Cdr. 36. ke | os ae 

Lehough therefore there be many lufts, yet when we read che word wi, 

alone without mention of the obicé, we eSmonly take it for the yncleane 


ow a 


_ FE SS FP OS ee” 


= 


RE fe FF ES wt TF 


ome poe 


at 


= bse 


> es aad 
t-3  < 


nS Wek GE 


r 


Let4. | OF THE CITIE OF GOD. | 519 


moticn of the géneratiue parts. For this doth fway in the whole body , mouin 

the whole man , without, and within, with fuch a commixtian of mentall af 

‘feet, andcarnall appetite , that hence is the higheft bodily pleafure ofall pro- 

‘duced : So that in the very (4) moment of the confymmation , it ouer-whel- 

meth alimoft all the light , and power of cogitation. And what wife and godly | 

man is there , who beeing marryed,and knowing (as the Apoftle fayth) bow 

topoffefe his veffell in holneffe and honour , and net in the luff of concupifcence , a8 « Theta: 
the gentises doe which knay sot God’, had not rather (ifhee could) begette his ae a 
children without this luft : chat his members might obey his minde in this a@e 

of propagation , as well asin the luft , and beruled by his will, not compelled 

by concupifcence? But the louers of thefe carnall delightes them-felues can- 

not haue this effect ac their wills , eycher in nuptiall coniundions , or v ic- 


-ked impurities : The motion wilbe fometimes importunate , agaynft che will; 


ahd fome-times tmmoueable when it is defired : And beeing feruent in the 


-minde , yet wilbefrozen in thebodye : Thuswondroufly doth this luft fayle 


man ,both in honeft defire of generation , and in lafciuious concupifeence: 
Some-times refifting the reftrayne of the whole minde, and fome-time 


‘oppofingicfelfe , which beeing wholly inthe minde , and no way in the bo- 


dy at che fame time. 


L. VIVES. 


[Hever (2)moment| Therfore Hippocrates fayd that carnal copulation was alittle Epilep/y; carnal cas 
or falling ficknes. 4rchitas the Tarentine to fhew the plague of pleafure , bad one to ima- pul.tiogi, 
gine fome man in the greaceft i of pleafure that might be: and auerred that none would 

doubt him to bee voyd of all che functions of foule, and reafon as long as delight lafted, 


Of the nakedneffe that our fir it parents difcouered in them- 
felues after their finne: Crap. 17. 


qety is man athamed of this luft; ahd iuftly are thofe members ( which luft 
moues or fuppreffes againft our wils, as it lufteth ) called fhamefull : befere 
‘tan finned they were not fo, For itis written,shey were both naked and were not Gen,2, 04; 
afhamed , noc that they faw not the nakedneffe , but becaufe their nakednefié was 


* not yet fhamefull: for luft did not as yet moue thefe partes againft their wils: 


nor was the difobedience of the flefh as yet made a teftimony of the difobedi- 
‘enceofman. They were not made blind as (4) the rude vulgar thinke, for the 
man faw the creatures whom he named, the woeman faw,that the tree wasgoed 
for meate and pleafing tothe eyes. Their eyes therefore were open , but they were Gen, 3.6 
hot yet opened , thatis, o¢cupyed , inbeholding what good the garment of 

race beftowedvpon them ,in keeping the knowledge of the members rebel. - 

ion againft the will from them : which grace beeing gone, that difobedience. 
‘might bee punifhed by difobedience , there entred anew {hame vppor thofe 
bodily motions that made their nakedneffe feemevndecent: This they obfer- 
ved , and this they were afhamed off. Thence itis , that after that they had 
broken the commaund , it was written of them, Thea the eyes of them both «§ . 
were opened , and they knew that they were naked , and. they fowed fig-tree O37: 
Ieanes together and made them-felues breeches. Their eyes were opened , not 


¥yz to 


wv 


520 SAINT AV GVSTINE. Cute 


What was t0 {ee,for they faw before: but to difcerne betweene the good that they had loft 

mentby andthe euill chacthey had incurred. And therefore the tree was called the tree 

i poe ot of the knowledge of good and ewik,becaute if it were tafted of againft the precept by 

ledgeof them, it (houldlec them fee this difference, for the paine of the difeafe being 

ate and knowne, the pleafure of health is the {weeter. So, they knew that they werena- 
ked : naked of that grace that made their bodily nakedneffe innacent , and vnref- 
ting the wil of their minds. This knowledge they got,happy they if they had kept 
Gods preceprs,and beleeued him,and never come to know the hurt of faithleffe 
difobedience. But then being afhamed of this flefhly difobedience that vpbray- 
ded theirs vnto God, they fowed fig-tree-leaues together, and made them bree- 

Campefira cches , or couers for their priuities. The latine word is (b) Campeftria, taken 
from the veftures wherewith the youthes that wraftled , or exerced themfelues 
naked in the field ( é campo) did couer their genitories withall , being therefore 
called by the vulgar , campe/frati. Thus their fhamefaftneffe wifely couered chat 
which luft difobediently incited as a memory of their difobedient wills iuftl 
herein punifhed ; And from hence, all mankind, atifing from one originall, 
haue it naturally in them to keepe their priuities coucred;that euen fomeof the 
(¢) Barbarians willnot bath with them bare, but wafh them in their couertures. 
And whereas there are fome philofophers called Gymmnofophists becaufe the live 
naked in the( d ) clofe deferts of India; yet dothey couer their gen italls,whereas 
all the reft of their bodies, are bare. 


L.VIVES. 


He (4) rude uulgar.| Becaufe it is write en He did eate : and then the eyes of them borh wer" 
Bh opened.Gen.3.(b)Campeffria. | So learned writes call breetches, Horace.sn Epi/t. 


Penula folftitio,campeftre ninalibus auris. 
A cloke for heat,and bretches for the cold, 


eAcron vpon this place faith ie couereth nothing but the priuities, (aro fac intudgement 
(faith one ) without a coate , onely hauing ona payre of bretches vnder his gowne, becanfe 
it was fommer : and fo went hee downe into the court , and pleaded. eA {cons Orat. pro MH. 
Scaur. Some take (apiftrum for campeffre , being nothing neare it. Nor can I fee why Petras 
de natalibas inhis Hifforia Scholafica: fhould fay that bretches were not inuented in Noes 


time. ( c) Barbarian, ) It was a foute fhame for a Lydian or any other Barbarian to bee feene- 


naked by his fellowes. Herodot , i#'Clie. The Romaines neuer wafhed the father with the 

fonne in law nor the father with his owne fonne if hee were not aboue fifteene yeares of age, 

This was an old cuftome (tc.Offt.li.t.(d).Clofe deferts.|C lofe and deferts,both,to comend their 

_ fhamefaftnes , for nothing neede bee afhamed of the fonnes fight, much leffe of a darke and 

| fhady defert, But how come thefe Gymofophifts in India. “Phitoftratus placing them in Erhi- 
The Gym. opia,neare to Nilus. ( Jn vita Appollonii Elianei. ) And Hierome alfo followes him faying. Re 
nofophitts, tarning to Alexandria , be went inté Ethyopia ,to fee the Gymnofophifts , and that famons table of 
the funne sn the fande, But Pliny, Solinus,Strabo, Apuleins,Prephiry and others,place the Gywsne- 

Sephifts in India neare vnto the riuer Jedus , in the.region called [ydoftythica , yer Philoftratué 
isnot deceiued, for heir originall is. from India, wherein Strabo faith there were two forts of 

Philofophers. | , Oo. ee a | 

The ciuill , or fuch as vfed the cities , called Beachnsans , (and thofe wore linnen, and beafts 

skins: they bathed with Apelenins , as PhylojPrarue faith, and one of thent tooke a letter 

out ofhis cappe and gaue it to a woman whole fonae was troubled with an cuill fpirit : = 


a ain. aa? W 


SS  ..  ) a 


\ 


L 13.3 4. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 521 


other were fuch as liued in the woods, naked,or fometimes clothed with leaues,and barkes of 
trees:they called them Hermsans,or Gymsnofophifts and from thofe came they of Ethiopia, For 
the inhabirants vpon /ndws are reported to haue come vpon Ethiopia with an huge power, & 
there to haue taken vp dwellings vpon Nilas bankes :and this they named Indiaalfo , and 
brought their Hermans or Gymnofophifts thether : fo that che name grew common to both © 
parcs. Diodorus lib. 4, relating the Ethiopians cuftomes,fayth that fome went all naked , fome 
couered their priuities with Foxe tayles, and fome had breeches made of hayre : And Strabo 
rehearfeth a ftory of eight flaues that the Ambaffadors of thofe countries gaue vnto Cefar, all 
naked but for their priuities,which they couered with breeches. 


Of the [ame that accompanyeth copulation , as well 
58 COMPNOB AS 18 MATTYALZC. 

C Hap. 18. | i be ake @ etl. ath 
utthe a& ofluft , not onely in punifhableadulteries, but euen in the vfe of 
harlors which the (4) earthly citty alloweth , is afhamed of the publike 

view, although the deed be lyable vnto no payne of Jaw: andthe ftewes them- 
felnes haue their fecret prouifions for it ,euen becaufe of naturall fhame : Thus 
was it eafier for vnchaftnefle to obrayne permiffion , then for impudencetogiue 
it publike praGife. Yet fuchas filehy them-felues, will call this filchyneffe , and — 
though they !oue it, yet (2) dar¢not profeffe it. But now for copulation in mar- 
riage, which according to the lawes of matrimony, muft bee vied for propaga- 
tion fake: doth itnot feekeacorner for performance,though it bee honeft, and 
Jawfull ? Doth not the Bridegroomecurne all the feaft-maifters , the artendanrs, 
the mufique , and all other out of his chamber, before hebeginto meddlewith 
his wife. And as (c) that great author of Romaine eloquence fayd, whereas all 7% Ub,35 
honeft deeds defire the light , thatis loue to bee knowne : This onely 
defireth foto bee knowne , that it fhameth to bee feene. For who know- 
eth not what the man muft do to the woman tv hauea child begotten,{ceing the 
wife is follemnly married for this end? But when this is done,the children them- 
{elues , if they have any before , hall not knowe. For this ace doth defire 
the (d) fight ofthe minde , yet foas it flyeth the view of the eye : why , but 
oncly becaufe that this lawfull 2& of nature , is( from our fir/t parents ) ac- 
companied with ourpenallfhame> : 


Re. A EE a ee Ont 9 0D ae 


. LVIVES. 


“He earthly ( a) Citty | Por it was lawfull to haue an whote,or a concubine, De Concub. 
Digeft. lib. 25. Anguftine fheweth plainly that Romes old ciuill law allowed much that 
Gods law prohibited, This they gain-fay that fecke to adapt Heatheifme to Chriftianity, and 
wil do it fo l8ng,that corrupting Both , and difliking eyther,they wil proue neyther good Pe- 
gans nor good Chriftians. (6) Dare not profeffe | This is Ciceroes proofe,that pleafures are not 
good,for all good loues to be publifhed , and he thae hath ie may glory init :butnone dare 
glory in bodily pleafures, (c) That great author | { Our Paffawantins hath fayd nothing along [The Loa 
time ; here he fpeaks : who this was ( fayth he )mine expofitor fettes not downesnot can I tel. anife 
Sweare fir,or I'le not beleeue ye:yet, faith , who can be fo hard hearted as not to beleeue him dete Giue 
without {wearing when hee confeffeth plainely hee knowes nor, cheefely in that which wee lieve 7 
would verily beleeue hee knew not indeed,though he fhould fweare neuer {fo faft char hee «Paflauant 
he did?In troth mine honeft Pafanant , thou mightft do better ro haue followed thy , names in french 
councell , and haue made no ftand at all here. | But Lucan lib. 7, cals Tu/ly thus , and the is g0 one 
words quoted by Auguffine are his, Tu/c.q. 1. 3. (a) Sight | That the mindes but not the cies forward, 
might behold and iudge of the effect, 
; Yy3j That 


523 


. SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuar.19.82 20. 


Diovi 


That the motions of wrath and luft are fo violent that they do neceffarily 
vequire te be fupprefjed by wifedome: and that they were not ix 
our mature, before our fall deprawed it. 

: | _ Cuar 1g. ae 8 
FEctevppon the moft accute and iudicious Philofo phers held wrath , and 

luft co be ewovicious partes ofthe minde: becaufe they moued mah with- 
outallorder and meafure to a@es vncdndemned by wifedome, and therefore 
needed to be ouer-fwayed by iudgement and reafon : which (4 ) third part of the 
foule, they placed as ina tower , to bee foueraigne ouer the reft , that this com- 
maunding , and they obeying , the harmony of iuftice might bee fully keptin 
man. Thefe partes which they confefle tobee vicious in the moft wife, and 
temperate man , fothat the minde had needeftill to tye chem from exorbitance 
to order : & allowe them thatliberty only which wifedome prefcribeth , as 
(6) wrath in a iuftrepulfe of wrong, and luft in ropagation of ones offpring: 
thefe I fay were not vicious atallin man whileft ie lined finleffe in Paradife. 
For they neuer aymed at any thing befides reGtirude , reafon dire@ing them 
witheut raynes. But now when-focuer they moue the iuft and temperate man 
they muft bee hamperd downe by reftraynt, which fome do eafily, and others 
with great difficulry : They arenowno partes of a found, but paynes ofa ficke 
nature. And whereas fhamefaftneffe couereth not wrath , nor other affects, 
in their immoderate aces, as it doth lufts :whatisthe reafon but tharit isnot 
the affe& bur the affuming will that moues the other members , performing 
thofe affeGionate adtes , becaufe it rulethas cheefe in their vfe? Eor hee thac 
beeing angry, rayles ,or {trikes , could not doe ic but thar the tongue and 
the hand are appointed todoe fo by the will , which méues them alfo when an- 
ger is abfent; but in the members of generation , luft is fo peculiarly enfeoffed, « 
that they cannot mouc, if it be away , nor ftirre vnleffe it ( beeing eyther volun- 
tary ,or forcibly excited) doe mooue them. This is the caufe of fhame and 
auoydance of beholders in this a&te : and the reafon why a man beeing in vnlaw- 
full anger with his neighbour , had rather hauea thoufand looke vppon him, 
then one when hee is in carnall copulation with his wife. 


+ (eee? 


L. VIVES. 


VV Heh a)third part}Platoin his Timeus following Times the Locria,€& other Pythage- 
rifts diuides the foule into three parts:and in his De Rep. He places anger in the heart, 
concupifcence in the liuer and fpleene , and reafon the Lady and gouerneffe of the worke = 
(landian fayth ) in the brayne, (6) Wrath in a inft It was called the whetftone of valor,& t 
rayfer of iult and vehement affects againft the foe,or a wicked Cittizen. Cicero.Seneca de Ira, 


Of the vaine obfcanity of theCynikes. Cu AP.20. 


“pHs the dogged Phylofophers, thatis, the Cynikes obferued not , ae 
that truly dogged:, vnpure and impudent fentence againft mans fhamefatt- 
neffe , thac the matrimoniall a@e becing lawfull , is not fhame , but ought, 
if one luft , to bee done in the ftreete. Euen very naturall fhame fubuerted 


_ this foule error. For though Diogenes is fayd to doe thus once , glorying 


chat his impudence would make his fe&e the more famous : Yet afcer- 
wards the Cywéker left it 5 and thame prenailed more with chem,as they were 


ree ib Re 


L134. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. Ty 


See 
men,then thatabfurd error to become like doggess And therefore! thinke that i 


hee, orthole chat did fo, did rather fhewe the motions of ‘gabe in copulati- vine 


onvnto the beholders that faw not what was done vnder the cloake, then that 
they performed the venereall atin their viewe indééd. For the Philofophers 
were not afhamed to make fhew of copulation there, where luft was aftiamed to 
prouoake them. Wreefecthereare Cynzikes to this daic, (6) weareing cloakes, 
and bearing clubbes,yet none of them dare doe this: if they fhould , they would 
haucallehe ftreete vpon their backes: either with ftonés ,:or fpittle. Quefti- | 
onleffe therefore mans nature is iuftlie afhamed of this a@: for that difobedi- 
ence, whereby the genitall members are taken from the, wills rule and giuen 
to lufts, isa plaine demonftration of the reward that our firft Father had for his 
finne: and that ought to bee moft apparant in. thofe partes, becaufe thence is 
our nature deriued which wasfo depraned by that his firft offence : from which 
bandnone is freed,vnleffe that which was committed for the ruine of vs all (wee 
becing thenall in one) and is now punifhedby Gods itftite s beeing expiacedig 


‘enery one by the fame Gods grace, 


7 : 
: L.VIVES. — - 


He (a) Cynikes | Of xluto-,a Dogge. Antifthenes , Socrates his {choller was their author. ca 6: 
A Their fathions were to reuile , and barke atall men, to bee obfcene in publike , without’ 
bluthing, andto beget all the children they could ; finally,what euer we are afhiamed to doe 
euen infecret, that would they doe openly : yet were they gfeat {corners of pleafures,and of 
worldly matters,yea cuen of life.Of this fe&t were(as I faid) Aptifthenes,the author, Diogenes 
of Synope,( rates of Thebes,and Adenippus of Phenice. Tw#iy faith their manners were impu- = 
dent, vnciuill and abhominable. J offic.) wearing éleakes | The cloake was the Greekes vp- Thedoske, 
per garment, ds the gowne was the Romanes. The (yikes wore old tattered cloakes , and ca~ 
ried ftanes in theit hands: Anguftine calls them clubbes. Herein they boft that they: ate like. 
Hercules,their tattered robe being like his Lyons-skin, their ftaffe like his club,and their ene- | 
mies,pleafures,as his were monfters. Lucian, Cay xgaoe, here arc Epiftles vnder Diogenes 
his name,that fay thefe garments are ynto him in the fame ftead thataKings aretohimshis =... 
cloake is his mantle,and his (taffe,his fcepter. The Donatifts, and the Circamecelliones { beeing Thedonas- 
indeed both of ofie Rampe jin Aauguftimes tithe went fo cloaked , and bare clubbes,to deftroy tizns and 
the true Chriftians withall. oo on a ee | : aera 


of the ble(fing of multiplication before finne,whith thet anferepion didnot 


| aboli{h but encly linckedto luff, Cuar2t. . - 
GOP fobie chen that we (hould beleeue,that our parents in Paradife thould 


bodie , perceined it,blufhed at it, and couered it. But that bleffing of esis, Luft groind 


« 


-_— Bes « 


524 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuaraa! 


(others though they receiue the {crip tures, yet hold thae this bleffing, Jwcrea/e 
4nd multiply ,is meant of a fpirituall ,and not acorporall fecundity : becaufe the 


Pil.zg8,3 Pfalme faith, show flats multiply vertue in my fonle, and interprete the followin 


The Ada- 


mutes, 


The diftinc- 


tion of 


words of Genefis , 4nd fillthe earth andrule oner ét , thus : eatth,that is the fle 

which the foule filleth with the prefence,and ruleth ouer it , when it is maltipli- 
ed in vertue : but that che carnall propagation cannot bee performed without 
that luft which arofe in man , was difcouered by him, fhamed him,and made him 
couer it,atter finne: and rhat his progeny were-.not to liue in Paradife,but with- 
out it,as they did : for they begot nochildren vntill chey were put forthcf Para- 
dife,and then they did firft conioyne,and beget them. 7 


Ove (a) reiefling| The (Uanichees , that reie&ted all the olde Teftament,as } fayd elfe« 
where. (4) Others though | The Adamites that held that if Adem hadnoc finned there 
fhould haue beene no marying.(¢) Thon fhalt nsultiply] The old bookes reade,T hen frale mul 
tiply mee in fonle,by thy vertue. And this later is the truer reading, I chinke, for exe. followed 
the 7o.and they tranflate it fo.  ., #2, 7 | 


© ot ee Swe Owe, oe. 


That God firft inftstuted and bleffed the band of 
Mariage. Cx AB. 226 


6 
Ve wee doubt not at all, that this increafe, multiplying and filling of the earth, 
was by Gods goodnefle beftowed vpon the marriage which hee ordeined in 
the beginning, ere man finned, hen hee made them male and female; fexes eui- 
dent in the flefh. This worke was no fooner done , but it was bleffed: for the 
fcripture hauing faid. He created them male,and female addeth prefently: Awd God 
fea them,faying , Increafe and raultiply crc.(4) All which though they may not 


fexes in the ynfitly be applied {piritually , yet male and female can in no wife be appropriate 


Cieation, 


Mat, 1 994. 


to any {pirituall ching in man : not vntg that which ruleth, and that which is rul- 
ed: butas it is euident in the reall diftin@ion of fexe, they were made male and 
female,to bring forth fruite by generation, to multiply and to fill the earth. This 
plainerruth none but fooles will oppofe. It cannot bee ment of the fpirit ruling, 
and the flefh obeying, of the reafon gouerning and the affect working:of the con- 
templatiuve part excelling, and the aGtiue feraing, nor of the mindes vnderftand- 


ing and the bodjes fence: but dire@ly of the band of marriage, combining both - 
_ the fexes in one:Clirift being asked , whether one might put gway his wife fora- 


ny caufe,becaule Afofes by reafon of the hardnefle of their hearts fuffred them ta 
giueher a bill of diuorce , anfwered faying , Hane you not read,that he hich made 
them at the beginning , made them male and female? and fayd for this cau[efhall a- 


 mantleaue father and mother and cleaue unto his wife, and they tuvaine {balbe one 


flefb ? So that now they areno moretwo but one. Letno man therefore funder 
what God hath coupled together. Sure it ts therefore that male and female were 


ordained at the beginng ifthe {ame forme, and difference that mankinde is now 


in. And they are called one, e:ther becaufe of their coniunction,or the womans 
originall , who came of the fide , of man : for the Apoftle warnes all maried men 


L. VI- 


by tiis example,to louetheir wines, . 


| 


~~ ~ aa 
Pn Tas “tr a” we, ro Pa = =. te ees 


LiBiq. - OF THE CITIE OF GOD. - 


L. VIVES. . 
A\ LL (a) which| There is nothing in the feripture but may bee (piritually applied ver mun 


e keepe the true,andreal fence otherwife we fhould make a great confufion in religions 
for the Heretiques,as they pleafe,wreft all vnto their pofitions. But if God, in faying Increz/e, 
cee had no corporall meaning , but onely {piritual],; what remaines but that we allow this {pi- 


rituall increafe ynto beafts,vpon whom alfo this bleffing was laide? 


_ whether if mas had not finned,he [bould haue begotten children in Paradite, 
ana uvhether there bould there hane beene any contention be- + - 
; ruveene chaftity andiaff. Cuar, 23. ; 
BY he that faith that there fhould haue beenencither copulation nor propa- 
gation but for finne, what doth he els,but make finne the original of the ho- 
0 number of Saints? for if they two fhould haue liued alone,not finning,feeing 


nite/asthefe fay) was their onely meane of generation , then veryly was finne 


-neceflary,to make thenumber of Saints more then two « But if it bee abfurd to 


hold this , itis fic to holdthat, that the number of Gods citizens fhould haue 


beeneas grcat jthen,ifno man had finned,as now fhalbe gathered by Gods grace 
out of the multitude of finners , as long (4) as this worldly multiplication of the 
fonries of the world(men fhal endure,And therefore that marriage thatwas held 
fit to bee in Paradice,fhould haue had increafe, but no luft , had not finne beene. 
How this might be,hereis no fit placeto difcuffe: but itneede not feeme incre- 
’ diblechat one member might feruethe will without luft then, {6 many feruing 
it now. (6) Do wee now mooue our hands and feete fo lafily wheti wee will vuto 
their offices, without refiftance,as wee fee in our feluienand others, chiefely hane 


ERS 


dicraftefmen,where induftry hath made dull nature nimble; and may wee not be-_ 


leenethat thofe members might haue ferued our firft father vnto procreation, if 
they had notbeene feazed with luft , the reward of his difobedience as wellas 
all his other ferued him to other aéts 2 doth not Te//y,difputing of the difference 


of gouerments(in his bookes ofthe Common-weale and drawing a ftmyly from’ | 
mans nature, fay,that they (¢) command our bodily members as fonnes, they are 


fo obedient ,and that wee muft keepean harder forme of rule ouer our mindés 
vicious partes,as our flaties > In order of nature the foule is aboue the body, yet 


The foules 


is it harder to rule thén the body. But this luft whereof we {peake is the more neko” 


fhamefull in this, thatthe fouledoth neither rule it felfe therein ; fo that irmay 
"pot luft; nor the body neither , fothatthe will rather then luft might mooue 
thefe parts , which if it were fo werenot to bee afhamed of .But now, it fhameth 
not inothér rebellious affe@ts ,becaufe when itis Conquered of it felfe , it con- 
quereth it felfe, (although it bee inordinately and vitioufly ) for alchough thefe 
parts be reafonleffe,that conquere it,yet are their parts of it felfe, and fo as] fay, 
it is conquered of iz felfe. For when it se, re it felfe orderly, and brings al 
the parts vnder reafon, this is a laudable and vertuous conqueft,, if the foole bes 
Gods fubie&. But itis leffe afhamed when ic obeyeth not the vicious parts of 
it felfe,then when the body cbeyeth not it,becaufe ic is vnder it, dependeth of it, 
and ‘cannot live withoutit ; Butthe other members beeing all vider ‘the will, 
without which members nothing can bee performed againft the will,the chafti- 
ty is kept vnviolated: but the delight in fin 1s not permitted.(a) Thig contention, 


ght, 


ae 


| oon 


536 SAINT AV GVSTINE. Cuan. 23.24. 


fight, and aleercation of luft and will, this neede of luft to the fufficiency-of the 
will, had not beene layd vpon the wed-locke in Paradi‘e, but that difobedience 
fhould bee the plagueto the finne of difobedicrce : otherwife thefe members 
had obeied cheir wills afwell as the reft. (¢) the feede of generation fhould haue 
beene fowne in the veffell,as corne is now in thefielde. What I would fay more 
in this kinde,modafty bids me forbeare alittle , and firft aske (f) pardon of chafte 
eares: Ineedenot doe it,but might proceed in any difcourfe pertinent to this 
theame, freely, and wichout any feare to bee obfc ene,or imputation of oo 
tothe words, being as honeftly {poken of thefe as others are of any other bodily 
menmbers . Therefore he that readeth this with vnchatte Ph 5 nae him ac- 
cufe his owne guile, not thenatureof the queftion: and obferue hee the effe@ 
of turpitude in him-felfe,not that of neceffity in vs:which the chafte and religious 
reader will eafily allow vs , to vfe in confuting of our experienced (not our cre- 
dulous)aduerfary,who drawes his arguments from proofe not from beleefe.For © 
hee that abhorreth not the Apoftles reprehenfion ef the horrible beaftlineffe of 
women,who peruerted the naturall vfe, and did againft nature , will reade this 
without offence, efpecially feeing wee neither rehearfe nor reprehend that dam- 

Rom, 1,26. nable beftiality chat hee condemnes,but arevpon difcouery of the affe&s of hu- 
—_ en , yet with avoydance of obfcene tearmes , as well as hee doth a- 
voide them. . 


L. VIVES. 


AS long (4) as ] In this world,the fonnes thereof beget, and the fonnes thereof are bepot- 
ten : but by Chrifts mercy they become the fonnes of the Kingdome , they are generate, 
by finne,and regenerate by grace.(6)Do wee not] This is the common opinion of the {chooles, 
Sent tib.2-di?.20, Buc fome of the Greekes doe hold, that generation fhould haue beene boch 
without finne and copulation ¢ which is not likely. For to what end then was the difference of 
fexe,and the members of generation giuen. (¢,) Command] For wee doe farre more eafily rule 
our body then the rebellious affects of the foule, which warre perpetually with reafon,fo that 
the foule rules the body with more eafe then it doth the inferior part of it felfe. (d) This cone 
tention | eAquinas doth not depriue the marriage in Paradife offal pleafure, but alloweth it 
Folal ser that which is pure,and chafte, and farre vnlike to our obfcene and filthy delight in copulation. 
om” (x) Veffell jor generatiue field: put for the place of conception 3 as Vsrgit doth, 
: | Hoc facinnt pimio ne lien obtufior ufus, 
Sit genitals érue. 

(f) Parden| So we doe being to fpeake of obfcene matters ; with fuch words as theft; fae 
wing yourreuerence, or, fauing your prefenfe . Sodoth Pliny in his preface, beeing to iafert 

words of barbarifine,rufticity, and bluntneffe,into his worke, 3 


That our firft Parents,bad they lined without finne hould hane had their members 
of generation 4s [abiec? unto their wills, as any of there, Cuwar.24. 


M An therefore fhould have fowne the feede,and woman haue receiued it,as 
neede required, without all luft , and as their wills defired: for asnow wee 
are,our articulate members doe not onely obey our will , our hands , or-feete, or 
fo but even thofealfo that we mooue,but by {mall finewes,and Tendones,we con- 
trast and curne them as wee lift: asyou fee in the voluntary motions of the 
mouth and face. Aadthe (¢) lungs, the foftelt of all che intrailes but for the 

_ — — Murrow, 


ere OFTHE CITIZ OF GOD. 537 


marrow,and therefore-placed in the arches of the breaft far more fafely to také 

in and giue out the breath, and to proportionate the voice,doe ferue a mans will 
entirely, like a paire of Smiths, or Organs bellowes : to breath,tu fpeake, to cry, 

orto fing. Iomic thar ic is naturall in fome creatures if they feele any thing bice fetrsordi- 
them, to moouethe skin there where it bites , and tio where elfe : (haking Off not naties pos, 
onely flies, but even dartes or thaftes by this motion of the skinne . Man cannot “ers of. 
doe this : what then 2? could not God giue it vato what creatures hee lifted? E- (aac pees | 
uen fo might man hauehad the obedienceof hi. lower parts,which his owne dif- ons, © 
obedience debatred. For G O D could cafily haue made him withall his mem- 

bers fubiedted to his will,euen that which now is nor mooued but by luft : for we 

fee forn¢ ‘mens natures farre different from other fome : acting thofe things 
ftrangely in their bodies,which others can rieither do nor hardly will beleene.(c) 

There are that can mooue their cares, one or both, as they pleafe: there are that 

can mooucall their haire towards their fore-head , and back againe , and. never 
mooue their heads. Thereare that can {wallow yee twenty things whole,and 
contracting but cheir guts alittle,giue you every thing vp as whole as ifthey had - 

but put it intoa bagge. (d) Thereare that can counterfeite the voices of birds 

& other men,fo cunningly, that vnleffe you fee them you cannot difcerne them 

for your hearts. (e) There are thatcan breake winde back-ward fo artificially that 

you would thinke they fung. (f) Ehaue feene one {weat when hee lifted, and it is 

fure that (g) fome can weepe when they lift ; and fhedteares, plentifully. But ie 

is wonderfull tha: diyers of the brethren (4) tried of late ina Prieft called refti- Refitutus 
tutus, ofthe (i) village of (&) Calamon,who when he pleafed/and they requefted hisexe © 
him to fhew them this rare experinient)(/) at the fayning ofa lamentable fourid *%& 
drew himfelfe into fuch an extafie, thathee lay as dead, fencles ofall punithing; 
pritking nay euen ofburnitg, but that he felc it fore after his awaking. And this 
rapture was found to be true , and (#) not counterfeite in hiini,in that he lay {till 
without any breathing : yet hee faid afterward, that if one fpake aloude , hee 
thonghr he heard him, as if hee were a farré off. Secing therefore that in this 

fraile ftaré of ours, the body ferueth the will in fuch extraordinary affeéts § why 

fhould we not beleeue that before his difobedience,the firft man might haue had 

his meanes and members of generation without luft ?But hee taking delightin 
himfe!fe,was left by God vnto himfelfe, and therefore could not obey himfelfe, 
becaufe hee wouldnot obey GO D. Andthis prooues his mifery the plainer,in - 

that he cannot liueas he would: forifhe would doe fo,he might thinke himfelfe 


é A ’ 


happy : (#) yet liuing,in ob{cenity,he fhould notbe fo indeed. 


ee: ae ar 
oO LVIVES, | fo 

He (a) lugs) The marrowe is not vfually taken for any part of the incrailes.Ic is obferued 

that Tuily,and the moftlearned Latinifts , vfe Pssdme continually in the plural! number :! he fan : 
thinke itis eer it is~parted into two fillets or lappets: but (el/ws,Pér/ins and Latlanims The lungs, 
vie it in the fingular./b) To take in | For there: octh a pipe from the lungs into the mouth,cal+ | 
led Afpera arteria by (elfus, and Gwrgulio by Lattantins [the weafand-pipe] and through this 
the breath goeth in and out: for that is the proper funtion théréof. Arif. Hiffor.animall LB 
1.(¢) There are] Arifforle faith that man only of all creatures cannot moue his earesythatis,ie 
cannot moue thévoluntarily,as horfes,&c. do.(d) There are that Plutarch talks of one Parme= 
no that could imixate the voicks of all creaturesrarely,whéce the proucrb,.Nrhilad Parmenonis 


. ww : . se: 


court,and his fon Phillips chat would hauc rchearfed any verfe whatfacucr with his taile. (f) 


I bane fiend} - os 


od 


4 


te aes aaa, . % 


528 


. Called Parect. But Parochia,is ano 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. | C uar.25.8¢ 26: 


meme — ee ee 


And when I was ficke of a Tertian,at Bruges,as often as the Phifitian told me that it was good 
to {weare, ! would buc hold my breath alittle and couex my felfe ouer head in the bedde,and 
I fweat prefently . They that faw it,wondred at my ftrange conftitution,but they would haue 
wondred more had they feene Auguffines {weater, that {weat as eafily as I can fpit. ‘g) Some] 
The hired mourners in Italy , and almoft all women-kinde. (b) Tried of late | Such like hath 
Pliny of one Hermotimus of Clazomene, whofe foule would leaue his bodie and goe into farre 


semd,ofCla- countries,and then come backe and tell what hee had feene. (#) Uitlage ] eapetnes; is a neigh. 
zomene, 


bor-hood,a dwelling togither. They that dwell in diuers hemifpheres ynder one paralell , are 

thet matter,and Vfed now for a parifh. Anguftine mean of 
the other. /) Calemax] Calam-fus, was a towne in Italy : Calamo was in Phenicia,and that I 
thinke Auga/fine meant of : vnleffe there were fome village in Africa called fo : as being buile 
by the Phenicians,who once poffeffed almoft al Aftica.(2)4e the feigned Some fei gned moure 
ning, whcrevpon his phantafie tooke the conceite,and produced the rapture,or he fained fuch 
a found himfelfe,and fo put of his externall fences thereby, (a) Not counterfeite] Hee did not 
oppofe himfelte ittinaly tothofe punifhings and burnings , but was fenfelefle of theming 
deed, (») Yet lising | Felicity is notin opinion,but really folid: not in fhade,or irnapinatier, 
but in effe,and truth. Nor was that noble Argiue happy, whoas Herace faith, thought he had 
feenc fiue tragedies acted. 7 Se 

| In-vacno folus feffor,plauforg,,Theatre, 

Aplauding loud when none were on the ftage, 


Of the true beatitude : unattainable in this lifer 

) | Cuap, 25. 
Ve if wee obferue aright : none lines as hee lift , but hee is happy,andnoneis 
"happy,but he is iuft,yec theiuft,Jiuerh not as he lift, vntil he atcaine , that fure, 
erernall hurtleffe , vndecciuing ftate. That he naturally defirethnot can hee bee 
perfect vntil! he haue his defire . But what man herevpon earth can fay hee lines 
as he lift,when his lifeis not in his owne hand 2 he would liué faine, and hee muft 
die. Howthen liveth he as he lift , thaclineth noc as long as he liit ? But ifhe lift 
to die,how can be liue as he lift that will not hue at all 2 and ifnedefire to dienot 
forgoc alllife , but to change ic fora better , then liueth hee noryerc as he lift,bue 
atraineth that by dying . But admit this, he liueth as he lift,becaufe hee hath for~ 
ced himfelfe, and brought himfelfe to this , to defire nothing but what is in his 
power, as Terence faith : (4) Since youcannot haue what you would bane, defire that 


which yous may hene : Yecis he not bleffed,becaufe hee is a pat:ent wretch, For be- 


atitude is not attained vnleffe itbeaffeed. Andif it be both attained and affec- 
ted, then mutt this affe& needes {urmount all other , becaufe all other things are 


affected for this. And ifthis be loued as it oughe co be(for he that loues not be- 


aticude as it ought to bee loued cannot bee happy)then cannot it choofe but bee 


defired to be eternall, So thar the bleffed life mutt needs be ioyned with eternity. 


| LVIVES 
Gl you) This was an old faying.Plato,de rep, =r 


That onr fir ff parents in Paradtift might bane produced man-kinde, c 
— _ withont any fbamefull appetite. Cwar.26 9° | 
Fie man lined in Paradifeashee defied, whilett he defired bur _ 
aa ! i Go 


~<a 


Lint4e OF THE CITIE‘OF GOD. «539 
Godcommanded,hee inioyed God, from whence was his good : hee liued with- 74. 4 
out need,and had life eternall inhis power , hee had meat for hunger, drinke for mans felicis 
thirft,che cree of life to keepe off age,hee was free of all bodily corryption and © erehee 
fenfible moleftation : hee feared neither difeafe- within nor. violence without: 

Hight ot health was in his flefh,and fulneffe of peace in his foule,and as Paradife 

was neither firy nor frofty , no more was the inhabitants good will offended ei- 

ther with defise,or feare:there was no true forrow, norvaineioye,theirioycon- . 
tinued by Gods mercy, whom they loued with apure good confcienceandan -- ~ 
vnfained faith:their wedlock loue was holy and honeft, their ce culfto- °°" 
dy of the precept wichoutall toile or trouble. They were neither weary of lea- 
fure, nor vawillingly fleepy . And can wee not in all this happineffe {uppofethae 
they might beget their children without luft ,and mooue thofemembers with. 
our concupifcentiall affec&,, the man (4) beeing laid in his wiues lap (6). without 
corruption of integrity ? God forbid. Want of experience need not drive vs 
from beleeuing thac their generatiue parts might be mooued by will onely with. 
out exorbitance of hotter affet:& that the {perme of the man might be conueid 
into the place of conception without corruption of the inftrumen. receiuing,as 
wellas a virgine now doth giue forth her (¢) menftruous fluxe wvithouc breach. 
of virginity . That might be caft inas this is caft forth . For_as their childbirth. 
fhould not haue beene fore-run by paine, but by (4) maturity which thould open 
away for the childe without torment : fo fhould theit. copulation hanebeene 
performed without luft full appeite,ouely by volu::tary vfe.. This cheame is im, 
modeft,and therefore , let vs conie&ure as wee can , how the firft Pareiits of mag 
were, ere they were afhamed : needes mutt our difcourfe herevpon, rather yeeld 
to thamefaftneffe then cruft co eloquence : the one reftraines vs much, ee a O- 
ther helpes vs little. For fecing they that might have tried,did not trie this that I 
haue fayd , deferuing by finneto bee expelled Parradife , ere they had vfed 
their meanes of propagating man. how can man now conceiue it fhould be done, 
bur by the meanes of that head-long luft, nor by any quiet y ill? Thisischar 
which ftops my mouth , though I behold the reafon in mine heart . But howfo< 
ever; Almighty God, the Creacor of all nature, the helper and rewarder of all 
goad wills, the iuft condemner of the badde , and the ordainer of both,wanted « 
not a prefcience how to fulfill che number of thofewhom he had deftinateto.bee |: ee 
ofhis cittie,cuén out of the condemned progeny of man , diltinguifhing them ~.:.5. -: 
not by their merrits,( for the whole fruite was condemnéd ‘in the corrupted = 
ftock)but by his owne'grace, freeing them both from themfelues, and the flauith ~ 
world , and fhowing them what hee beftowed on them: for each one now ac, 
koowledgeth-that it is norhtis owne deferts, but Gods goodnefle that hath freed 

him from euill , and from their fociety with whom hee fhould haue fhared aiuft 
condemnation. Why then might not God create fuch as he knew would Gnne, 

thereby to fhew in them/and their progeny both what finne deferued,and what _ 

his mercy beftowed ? and that the peruerfe inordinate offence of them, vndeg 


oe 
~~ 


him,could not peruert the right order which he hadrefolued? | 
— LVIVES 5 
BF (a) laid \So faith Vargil of Unlean and Venus fEncid 8. 


Zz — Optanie 


, a sc 13 nent : . - 
$39 7 SAINT AVGVSTINE. C wap.27.8 28 


Optatos dedit amplexus,placidufg, petinit, 

Coniugis effufus gremio per miabre foporens. 

Embracing me, foft flumber on him crept, | 
ne And inher lap he laid himdowneandflept. 

(6) withont corruption} Therefore fhould the place of conception bee opened, faith The- | 
weas,and Bonasentare, for that muft needes haue beene opened in child-birth :for bodies doe , 
not penetrate one another.And this were no breach of integrity no more then opening of the f 

| 
| 


The mouth . For the integrity depends vpon the minde. Some hold that the matrix fhould 


Gowers. in Dae Opened at birth but keepe fhut at copulation as it doth in the effufion of che menftruall 
vromen, bloud = and thefe hold wich Aaguftine, te) CMenftruons | Ic beginnes in them when their 
‘breafts begin to grow bigge : about’ the twelfth yeare of theirage, itis like the bloud of a 

beaft new killed, and happenech orice a month, more or leffe,in fome much, and in fome {mall. 
Arift.Hift animal. lib.7. (a) Maturity |Which as yet, at child-birth,extendeth and openeth 

' the bones of the lower part of the belly, which at any other time can hardly bee cleft open 

_with an hatchet : but chen it fhould haue beene opened without paine, where as now the 

‘_paine is extreame. 


That the Sinners, Angells and Menannot vvith their perue/- ) 
| nelle difturbe Gods prouidence, Cunar.27- | | 


Nd therefore the offending Angells and Men no way hindred the great 

£3 workes of God, who is abfolute in all thar hee willethshis omnipotency dif- 
tributeth all vnto all, and knoweth how to make vfe both of good and bad: and 
therefore why might not God vfing the euill angell ( whom hee had deferuedly 
condemned for his euill will,and caft from all good )vnto a good end,permichim 

to ox the firft man in whom hee had placed an vpright will ? and who was fo 

eftated, chat ifhe would build vpon Gods helpe,a good man fhould conquer an e- 

uill angell; but if he fell proudly from God, to delight in himfelfe,hee fhould be 
conquered , hauing a reward laid vp for his vprightneffe of will affifted by God, 

aod apunifhment for his peruerfneffe of willin forfaking of God. Truftvpon 

Gods helpe he couldnot valeffe God helped him : yet followeth ic not,that hee 

ad no power of himfelfe , to leaue this diuine helpe in relying wholy vpon him- 

felfe : for all wee cannot liuc in the fiefh without nourifhment, yet may wee leave 
Manhah the ffefh when we lift :as they doc that kill chemfelues : euen fo,man being in Pa- 
ofkemiclfe Ladife could not liue well without Gcds helpe: but yet it was inhis power co live 
to avoide badly,and to fele® a falfe beatitude,and a fure mifery. Why then might not God 
| thatknew this before hand, permit him to bee tempted by the malicious wicked 
fpirit? Not being ignorant that hee would fall , butknowing withall, how doubly 
the deuill fhould beé ouerthrowne by thofe that his grace fhould fele& out of 
mans pofterity. Thus God neither was ignorant of the future euent,neither com- 
pelled he any one to offend : but fhewed by fucceeding experience both to Men 
and Angells , what difference there was betweene prefuming of ones felfe,and 
trufting vnto him. For who dare fay,or think that God could not haue kept both 
Men and Angells from falling 2 Buc he would not take it out of their powers,but 
fhewed thereby the badnefle of their pride and the goodnes of his owne grace. 


— ee es 


The flate of the Two Cittres, the Heauenly and the 
Earthly, Cuar. 28. 


Te toues therefore, have giuen original tothefe tuwe Cisties : felfe lovein 
Me : oe contempt 


‘inall, 


Lietz =  OFTHECITIEOF GOD. — 53 


contempt ofGod voro the earthly, loue of God in coittempe of ones felfe to the 


heavenly, the firft feeketh the glory of men, and the lacer defireth God onely as 
the ceftimony of theconfcience 5 the greatelt glory . That glories in it felfe,and 
this in God. That exalteth it felfin the own glory : this faith to God:Aty glory and 
thelifter up of myhead . That boafteth of the ambitious conquerours, led by the 
lnft of fouereinty : inthis every one fertieth other in charity, both the (2) rulers 
incounfelling and che fubieds in obeying. That loueth worldly vertue in the po- 
tentates : this faith vnto God, /wil/ lowe thee,O LOR Dymy firength. Andthe 


pial. 3-3 


wife men of thar, follow either the goods of the body,or minde, or both : lining Pfalr8.4 


according to the flefh:and fuch as mighr know God, honored him not as GOD, 
nor were thankfullbue became vaine in their owne imaginations and their foo- 
lifh heart was darkened : for holding themfelues wife, that is extolling ihein- 
{eles proudly in their wifdome, they became fooles ; changing the glory of thé 
incorruptible God to the Ifkeneffe of the image of a corruptible Man , and of 
birds and foure:footed beafts and ferpents:for/b)they were the peoples guides, 
orfollowers vnto all thofe Idolatries, and {erued the creature rather. then the 
Creator who is bleffed for ever. But in this other this heawenly Crttéc, (c) chereis 
nowifdome of matt, but only the piety that ferueth the true God and expecteth 
areward in the fociety of the holy Angells ,and Men, that God may become all 
26 a, i : ee 


2 LWIVESS | : 
[He (4) rulers) Yato how excelleht a breuiat hath he drawne the great difcourles of a good 7 
commonweale, namely that theruler thereof doe not compell,nor command,bur ftanding 


aloft like centinells,onely giue warnings,and counfells,(chence were Romes old Magifttates 
called Confulls: ) and thac the fubieéts doe not repine nor refift, but obey withalacrity; (6) 


They were |Some of the Pocts and Philofophers drew the people into great errors :and fome:: 
followed them with the people, (¢) There is x0] No Philofophy,Rethorike,or other arte: the 
= art here is to know and worfhip God, the other ae left to the wotld,ce be admired iy | 
Worldings, io | on -_ eee ee 


Finis, lib.rgi | 


: 2 : 7 . . ae fs 
. . a Se Cee 


S| a | 


> HE CONTENTS OF THE 


fifteenth booke of the City of God. 


1. Of the ewe contrary courfes taken by | they begor children. . 
) y 9 25 Of the Lawes of marriage, which the firft 


wsans progeny froms the beginning. 
de kg of the fel and the fonnes 
ofpromife, | 
3. Of Saras barrenneffe ,which Ged turned 
into frastfullneffe. | 


4. Of the coflstts c peace of the earthly city, 


- ROF that murtherer of his brother,that was 
the frff founder of the earthly (sty ,whofe aft 
thebxilder of Rome paralell d in murdering bis 

—brotheralfan..  . 


. eo 


6. Of the langnors that Gods cittizens en- 


dure on earth as the punsfbments of finne du- 


ving their pilgremage-, and of the grace of God 


curing thems. 


7. Of the can{e ofinae of Caines wick! 


edneffe which was not reprefjed by Gods ewne 


ray, Posey 4 3 

wp <i paaackinds that eucr built a cay a ia j 
9) Of the length of fe and bignelfe of body 
shat: lirot rx a Sic doings - od f cE 4 
. Lez Of the’ difference that feemes to bee be~ 
twoewe rhe Hébrens comput ation and ours, 
11. Of Mathufalems yeares,who feemeth te 

bane lined 1 4.yeares after the Deluge. 

12. Of fuch as beleene not that men of olde 
Time lined fo long as és recorded. , 
13. Whether wee ought te follow the Hebrew 
computation,or the Septuagsnts. | 
14. Of the po) sf be , meafured by the 

fame fpaces,of oldand of late. — | 
15. Whether the men of old abftained from 
wemen,untill that time that the {oriptures {ay 


F I 


“:B: The reafon why ‘Cayne was the firff of | Prange wimeh whereby a 


- 
- 
. 


a weight bane defcrent from the fuccetq 
Ss 


| 17.Of the twe heads und Princes of the twe 


Cuties borne both of one Father. 7 
18. That the fgnifications of Abel , Seth, 
and ¥Enos,are all pertinent unto Chrsft,and bis 
Body the Church. 
19. What the trakflation of Enoch fignified, 
:20. Concerning Caines fucceffion,being bat - 
eight from Adam,whereas Noah ts the tenth, 
21. Why the gencratio® of Caine is contin~ 
newed downe along, from the naming of bis fon 
Enoch,whereas the {cripture baxing named E~ 
“thos , Seths fonne goeth backagaine,tobeginne 
Seths generation at Adam. , | 
22. Of the fal of thé fonnes of God by lonin 
‘but eight perifted. 


- 


23.4 herbert bee credible that the Angells 


being of dn incerporeall nature fhonld lift after 


the women of carthand marrying thems ; beget 
| Qeigiiee 
“: 24, How the wordes that God {pake of thofe 
| that were to perifh in the deluge. And their 
daies fhalbe an hundred and twenty yeares, 
aretobeunderfiood, 
2g. Of Gods vnpaffionate and unalter ing 
06. That Noah bis Arke , fgnifierb , Cori 
4. 26, oah bis Arke , fgnifieto, { ori 
yaad bis Church is all things. 
27. Of the Arke ps ed Deluge , that the 
meaning thereof ss neither meerly biftericall, 
b nor mecrely allegorical. 


NLS. 


s+ 2 @ 


5133 


FIFTEENTH BOOKE: * 
OF THE CITTIE.OF GOD _. 
— Wristen by Saint —— Bifhop of Hsppe, 

t a _. -Ynto STOCMLAUS. a oe 


Of: the two contrary courfes taken by WANS progeny from 
the beginning. .Cuar. i. | 


F the place, and felicity of the locall Paradife rogicher with 

VA mans life and fall therein , thereare many opinions,many affer- 

x tions and many bookes , 4s.feuerallmen, thought , fpake, and 

|}, wrote. What we held hereof, or could gather out of holy ferip- 

i) tures,correfpondent vato their truth and authority,we related 
‘Pixy in fome of our precedent bookes : If they be farther looked in- 

| | to,they will giue birth to more queftions , and longer difpu- 

tations then this place can permit vs to proceed in: our timeis not fo large as to 

permit vsto ft cke fcrupuloufly vpon enery queftion that may bee asked by bu- 

fic heads that are more curious of inquiry then capable of vnderftanding. I think 

wehaue fufficiently difcuffed the doubts concerning the beginning of the world, 

the foule,and man-kinde: which laft is diuided into two forts: fuch as liteaccors — 

ding to Man, and fuch as liue according to God. Thefe,we miftically call,two ci#- mre 

ties or focieties ,the one predeftinate to reigne eternally with GOD: the other ¢ Dg 

condemned to perpetuall torment with the deuill. This is theirend:of which =. - 

hereafter. Now feeing we haue fayd fufficient concerning their originall, both 

in the Angells whofe number wee know not, and in the two firft Parents of man- 

kinde: I thinke it fit to paffe on to their progreffion,from mans firft offpring vn- 

till hee ceafe to beget any more . Betweene which two points all the time in- 

cluded, wherein the liuers ever fucceed the diers, is the progreflion of thefe two 

Cities. Caine therefore was the firft begotten of thofe two that were man-kinds 

Parents : and hes belongs co the City of man: —4be was the later,and hee be- 

longs tothe Citty of GOD. For as we fee that in thatone man(as the Apoftle 

| faith )that which is fpirituall was noe firft ,bucthat whichis naturall firft,and 

then the {piritual,’wherevpon all that commeth of Adams corruptednature muft 

heeds be euilland carnall ar ficit, and then ifhe be regenerate by Chrift,becom- 

meth good and fpiricuall afterward : )fo in the firft propagation of man,and pro- 

greflion of the two Citrzes of which we difpute,the carnall cittizen was borne Fcf 

and the Pilgrim on earth, or heavenly cittizen afterwards , being by grace pre- 

deftinate , and by grace elected, by grace a pilgrim vpon earth,and by grace a 

eittizen in heave: . For as for his birth , ic was out of the fame corrupted mafle 

that was condemned from the beginning : but God likea potter (forthisfimyly 

the Apoftle himtelfe vfeth ) out of the fame lumpe, made,one ve(fell to honor and pome.ox. 

another to reproach. The veflellt of reproach was made firft ,and the veffell of honor 

afterwards. For in thatcne man, as EF fayd ; firft was reprobation , whence wee 

muft needs begin (and wherein we need not remaine)and afterwards, goodneffe, 

to which we come by profiting and comming thether,therin making our abode. 

eee Lz 3 a Where- 


SAINT AV GVSTINE. 
Wherevpon it followes that none can bee good that hath not firft beene euill, 
though all chat be euill, became not good:but the fooner a man betters himfelfe, 
the quitker doth this ‘name. followshim, aboljfhing the memory ofthe other, 
Therefore itis recorded of Caine that he builea Citty ,but e/l wasa pilgrim, 
and built none « For the City of the Saints is:abouc , though it have citrizens 
here vpon ‘earth , whetein ie fateh as apilgrim vntill chetimeoftheKirigdome 
come , and then it gatherech all the cictizens together in the refurrection 
of the body and giveth them: a Kingdome to reigne in with their King , for 
ever and cuer. - | — ae) 


| C war.2, 


3 


Of the Sonnes of the flefband the Sones of promife. 
es Pace: oe > Car. 2. | 

7 fhadow,and propheticall image of this Citty ( notprefenting ic but fig 

At nifying it) ferued here vpon earch ,at the time when it was to bee difcoue- 

red,and was called. the holy Citty,of the fignificant image , buc not of the expreffe 

truth, wherein it was afterwards to bee {tated . Of this image feruing , and of the 

Ga.4.21 free Citty herein prefigured the Apoftle {peaketh thus vnto the Galatians: Te 

ae ‘245 se 70 that wilbe underthe law hake yee not (a) heard the law? for itis written that 

_ ve Abraham bed two Sonnesjone by & bontl-womanandthe other by « free : Bui the fonne 

of the-bond-woman was borné of the ficth , and the fonne of the free-womai by 

promife. This is (6) allégoricall: for thefe are the two Teftaments,the one piuen 

(c¢) from Mount Syna, begetting.man.in feruitude , which is Agar:for (4) Syna is 

a mountaine in Arabia, ioyned to the Ierufalem on earch, for ic feruech with her 

. . children. But our mother’, the celeftiall Ierufalem, is free. For ic is written, 

Hay 54.1 Reioyce thou barren that beare(t not: breake forth into toye , andcrie out,thou that 

traucleft -nct without Child,for the defolate hath more Children then the married wife, 

but wee,brethren, are the fonnes of promife according to aac. But as then he thar 

was borrie of the fleth, (¢) perfecuted him that was borne after the fpiric, euen fo 

itis now. But what faith the feriprure . Cat out the boxd-woman and her fonne; 

fer tthe(£) bond-womans fonne {ball not bee heire with the free womans . Then brethe- 

rew are not we the children of the bond-womd but of the free.Thus the Apoftle autho- 

rizeth vs to conceive of the olde and new Teftament. For a part of the earth- 

lie Cittie was madean image of the heauenly , nor fignifying ic felfe , burano-~ 

ther,and therefore feruing: for it was not ordeined to fignify it felfe , but 

another, and it felfe was fionified by anocher precedent fignification: for & 

gar,Saras {ecuant,andhir fonnewereacype hereof. And becanfe when the lighe 

comes, the fthadowes muft avaide , Sara the free-woman, fignifying the free 

Cittie ( which that fhadowe fignified in anocher manner ) fayd , cast oud the 

ty boxd-woman and her fonne: forthe bond-womans fonne {hall not bee heire with my 

Ciny in fonne Ifaac : whomthe Apoftle calls the free womans fonne. Thus then wee 

twotormes, finde this earthlie Cittie in two formes:the one prefenting ic felfe, andthe other 

 -prefiguring the Cicty celeftiall, and feruing it. Our nature,corrupted by fin pro- 

duceth citcizens of earth : and grace freeing vs from the finne of nature, ma- 

keth vs celeftiall inhabitants: the firft are. called the veffells of wrath : rhe 

lait, of mercie. And this was fignified in the two fonnes of Utbraham: the © 

one of which beeing borne of the bond-woman was called //mael, beeing the 

fonne of che fliefh: the other, the free-womans , //at, the fonncof prommife. 

7 > > oo Both 


bvbel§ ew. ia =: 


both were Abrahams fonnes.: but naturall cuftome begot. the firft, and pratious ~~ 


promife the later. In the firft was a demonftyation of mans vie, in the fecond was 
acommendation of Gods goodnefle. —_ | | 
seve Dende ete er. be ae ee a eee ee Ups 69 Seg ! ° : 

eas a - ee iA : i i i VIVES; ': Spat —< i sar : 2 

WN 08 '(4) beard jNor read Hithithe Gtecke better, atid {4 doth Hizrome tranflate it. b) Ae 
2 legoricul jAa alleg drie( faith’ Qawitilian’ ) fheweth‘one ‘thing in: worde and andt ‘er. irk An allego= 
fence sfome-tispes the dizbctoondary: kdarpase'faich, ebar thar which Pad callethallegoritalf ric. 
here,he calleghspiritnall lfeawherts (on Livers mayat So, doe Ambrofe and Hierome real it: Sina the 
(4) Sypasaht ha itis chat bigh Mri calles Caffinsin. Arabia. For Plinytalkes of amoung mouata 
Cafiasin Syria, Lat of Arabia is tamarys fox that Zapiterhad a temple there,but more far Paws 

peyes vombe,Sommie thinke thrat Sina is called Agar in the Arabian tongue, (e,) Perfecured In 

Genefis is oncly méntiott of the thildrehs fay Re ethics, but of no perfecurion, as 


) if #, Dur. ution, as Hierome 
noteth 3 for.the two brethéren J/wael nid [Jede;phy ing topether at the feat of Vaacs wean 
ning, Sere could nor enduré.it,:but intreated her husbarrd to-caft oarthe bond-woman & hee _ 
fonne, It is thought fhe would nat haue:done th is,burthat L/areel being the elder offered the 
yonger wrong. Hierome {aithythat for our. word 96 bi aan »making of Tdols;or 
viurping the firft place in iealt. The {criptures vie it for fighting,as Ksx.2.Come, let the.childrert 
arife, and play betore ys :, whether it be meant of imaginary fight,or military exercife, or ofa. 
true fiehcin dced.( - ) Bond-wonsans Sonne] Genefis readeth, with my. fonne Lfaac, and..fo doe 
the 70. but eFuguftine citéth itfromt Pawh Galat.4.25. | fete te 


re, ae, 
; \- nd a - CS Re 8 4 ae a ao 
ie * of Saraes birrennefe,w hich G . od turned into fr Bi itfulne (fe. : ar oe : : : oe, - 
; p2ti- ve ; * H AP, e | - . : ‘oe i oe ‘o 


Fo Sara was barren and defpaired of hauing any child :.and. defiring to haue. 
- achilde, though ic were from her flaue , gaucher to brabam to bring him: 
children ,feeing fheé could bring him none her felfe. Thus exaGed fhe her(4/due. 
of her hu band although it were by the wombe of another : fo was J/mael borne 


- being begotten by the vfuall comtmixcion of both fexes inthe law of faturedand 


there-vpon {aid to bebome.after the fleth : not that fuch births are sat Gods be: witds.5, 

nefits or workes,(for his working wifdome as the {cripture faith , reacheth from 

end toend mightily,and difpofeth all things in comely order ; ) butin that ; thac 

for the fignification of chat free grace that God'meant to gine vngo man, {fucha | 

fonne fhou'd be borrie,as the lawés and order of nacureatt not require: for na-.. 

ture denieth children vnto all {uch copulations as Abrahams and Saras were, (b), 

age and barrenneffe both {waying in her then :‘whereas fhe could have no childe. 

in her yonger dates when her age feetiied not to want fruitfulneffe,chough fruie, 

fulnefie wanted in that youthfull age. Therefore in that Her nature being thus af- 

feéted could not exact the birth of a fonne, is fignified this, that mans nature be-. 

ing corruptedand corifequently condemned for fiane ; had no claime afterward 

vato any part of felicity, But i/asc beeing borne by promife, is. a true sype.ofithé 

fonnes of grace,of thofe free cittizens,of thofe dwellers in eternall peace, where: 

no private or felfe-loue shall be | gover. bur all fhallioy in thar vniyerfal& 
ood,and (c) many hearts {hall meete in one, compofinga perfect modell o£ 

charity and obedience. — 3 7 re 2 oe 


 . Hn. aed eee ele: FIVE ee a ee eee 

Ir (a'idue | by law of mariage. (b) wf ge and] For (he was both;aged, and naturallybara | - 
aa fome both men and women as Ariffotle faith,are borne Jo. (c,) Many hearts | that, i daa 
isthe true concord of the Apoftles,of whom it is {aid.: The multitude of the beleeners were of" 
wid bearteAbsdgie EE I 


Lz 4 


tame Le 


$365 “SAINT AV GVSTINE. C uarg.80.5. 


/ 5 ofthe confliftsand peace of the earthly Citty. 


a mex  Cuap. 4. - 


BY che temporall, earthly citey (temporal, for when it is condemned to per- 
petuall paines it fhall be no more a citty ) hath all che good, here vpon earth, 
and therein taketh that ioy that fuch an obie& can affoord. But becaufe it is nog 
_.. ,, @good that acquits the poffeffors of all troubles, cherefore this citty is diuided 
x itt it felfe, into warres,aleercations, and appetites of bloudy and deadly victories. . 
_,.-, For any part of ie that warreth againft another, defiresto bee the worlds con- 
_.- Queror,whereas indeed it is vices flaue.And if it “ig ny extolls it felfe and fo 
becomes the owne deftruétion : but if wee confider the condition of worldly af- 
faires , and greeue at mans openneffe to aduerfity , rather then delight in the 
cuents of profperitie , thus is the victory deadly : for it-cannot keepe a foue- 
raigntie for euer where it got a victory for once. Nor can wee call the obiedcts of 
this citties defires,good,it being in the owne humaine nature, farre furmounting 
them.it defires an earthly peace, for moft bafe re{pe&s,and feeketh ie by warre, 
where if it fabdue all refittance, ic attaineth peace : which notwithftanding che 
aduerfe part, that fought fo vnfortunately for thofe refpeds,do want. This peace 
Banhly they fecke by laborious warre, and obteine ( they thinke) by aglorious viGory. 
See tog /bnd when they conquer that had che right caufe, who will not gratulate their 
obtened Vidtory,and be glad of their peace ? Doubrleffe chofe are good , and Gods good 
byware. guifts. But if the thing's appectaining to that celeftiall and fupernall citzie where 
| the viGtory thall be euerlafting,be negle&ed for thofe goods , and thofe goods 
defired'as che onely goods, or louedas if they were better chen the other,mifery 

muft needs follow and:increafe that which is inherent before. 


of that murderer of his brother, that was th ¢ fir fonder of the earthly citie, 
whofe att the builder of Rome parall:ld,in murdering his brother asfo. 
| | : Cuap. 5. - 


Herefore this earthly Cicties foundation was laide by a murderer of his 
# ownebrother,whom he flew chrough enuie, being a .pilgria.vpon earth, of 
the heauenly cittie. Wherevpon it is no wonder if the founder of thar Cittie 
which was to becomethe worlds chiefe,and the Queene of the nation, followed 
this his firft example or (4) archetype in the fame tafhion. One of their Poets re- 

cords the fac&t in thefe words : | 

Fraterno primi madnerunt fanguine muri, 
7 The firft walle teamed oa broshers bloud. 

Such was Romes foundation,and fuch was Romulus his murder of his brother Re- 
m4sas theichift wiesrelare: onely chis difference there is,thefe bretheren were 
both cittizens of theearchly cittieand propagators of the glory of Rome, for 
whofe infticution they contended.Burt they both could not haue that glory,thae 
if they had beene but one,they might hae had. For he that glories in dominion, 
mut needs fee his glory diminithed when hee hath a fellow to (hare with him, 
Tnerefore the oneco haue all, killed his fellow, and by villanie grew vnto bad 
preatnefle , whereas innocencie would haucinftalled him in honeft meanneffe. 
But tote two brethren,Caise and Abel, ftood not both alike affe@ed to earthly 
matters : nor did this procure ¢nuie in them,thacif they both fhould reigne,hee 
: | | that 


R, 


Limits. - OF THE CITIBOF GOD © $37 


that couldkill che other, (hiould arife to a greater pitch of glory;for C4be/ fought 

no domiriion in thaccitty which his brother buile, but that divell enuy did:all the 
mifchiefe , which the bad beare vnto the good; onely becaufe they are good: 

for the poffeffiori of goodneffe is not lefined by beirig fhared: nay it i$ increafed. 

when it Hath many poffeffing ic in one Linke and league of charity. Nor fhall hee: 

ener haue it; thae will not haue ie common : and héthatlouesa fellow inicsfhall 

haue it the more aboundant. The ftrife therfore of Romahes & Remus ;(heweth the 

divifion of the earthly city in it felfe:and that of Caéwe & abel Thew the oppofiti- | 
on of the city of then &the city of God: The wicked opofe the good. But the good Te good 
they be petfect,cannot contend amongft them-felues : but whilft they are vnper- coneend -. 
fect they may contend one againft another in that mafner that each contends a- gainft an 
ainft him-felfe,for in every man the Hefti isagainft the {pfrie Sethe {pirit againft ober 

#8 fieth. So then the fpirituall defire in one may fight againift the carnall in ano- 
ther, or contrary wife:che carnall againft che {pirituall,as the euill do apainit the 
good, or the two carnal defires of two good mei that are inperfe& may contend 

as the bad doagainft the bad, vntil their difeafes be cured,& themfelues brought 

to euerlafting health ofvitory, = 7 


L.VIVES. | | 
A Rebpee 4) It isthe firft pattent,or copy of any workejthe booke written by the authors | 
whe hand,is calledthe Archetype./suenall, —- co a arches 
s. . 7 . 7 . 7 ; type. Ss 


Et inbet archetypos iterum feruare Cleanthas. . .. 
| And bids him keepe ( Iranthes,archetypes. 7 ee 
(5) Fraterno.|Lwcas lib.8, The hiltorie is knowne.(¢) His brother built JDid (Caine build a citty 
then , or meanes hee the earthly citty which vice and {eperation from God buile? the latter I 
thinke./d) The wirked,| This is that ‘ay vice neither agrees with vertue,nor ic felfe : for amity 
is only amongft the good, the bad can ncithér bee friehds with the good,nor with themfelues. 


Of the langours of Gods Citizens endure incarth as the puniflments of oe 
e Pevthtng hed pilgrimage, andof the graceofGok © 
| baringthem. Cuae, 6 


B Vithe langowt or difobedience ( fpoken of in the laft booke ) is the firft pu- 

J nifhment of difobedience,and therefore it is no nature buta corruption : for 

which it is faid vnto thofe earthly prilgrimes and God proficients : Beare (a ) yee mor 
one anothers burdens, aad fo yee ball fulfllthe Law of Chriff:and againe:edmoni{b the 5.1h. 4 
unruly comfort the feble, be patient towards allouer-coure ewill with govdne/fe , fee that Galt. - 
xone do burt for burt :and againe,/f 4 man be fallen by occaftom into any fisne,you that nee ss, 
are fpivituallreftore [uch at one with the foirit of meekeneffe confidering thy feife least 

thou alfo be tempted: and befides , let wot the funne go downe vpon yout wrath ; and 

in the Gofpell : if thy brother trefpalfe againft thee , take. hint amd tell bir his falt be~ 
sweenmethee andhimalone. ee or ee | ree 

'And conceining the feandalous offenders,the Apoftle faith: T:hein that fin,rebuké 

openly that the ret may feare-and in this refpe& many ehings are taught concerning - 
pardoning. Anda great charge is laid vpon vs tokeepthat peace there,wherethat 

yerror is of the(«){cruants,being commanded to pay the ten thoufand talents hee 

— | oe ought: 


SAINT AV GVSTINE. | C unr. 6.5¢ 7. 


ought, becaufe hee forcibly exa&ted his fellowes debt of an hundred pence.Vnto 
which fimily the Lord Jefus addeth this cloze.So {hall mine heanenly father doe unto 
you, except you forgive cach one hss brothers tvefpaffes from your hearts. Thusare 
Gods citizens vpon earth cured of their difeafes, whileft they are longing for 
Met.18.35 1» celeftiall habiration: But the Holy pert worketh within to make the falue 
worke that is outwardly applied, otherwife though God fhould {peake to man- 

kinde out of any creature,cither {enfibly or in dreames, and not difpofe of our 

hearts with his inward grace,the preaching of che truth wouldnor further mans 
conuerfion a whitte. But this doth God in. his fecret and iuft prouidence,diui- 

ding the veffells of wrath and mercy. And it is his admirable and fecret worke, 

that fine (e) being in vs rather the punifhment of finne as the Apoftle faith,and 

_ dwelling in our members,when it doth not reigne in our mortall body, obeying 

the defires of ic, and when wee doe not giue vp our members as inftrumnents 
of iniquity to ferue it, it is conuerted into aminde confenting not vnto it in any 


- euill,by Gods gouernment,and man thac hach ic fome-what quietly here, fhall 
- haucit afterwards moft perfeatly ferled,finleffe, and in eternall peace. 


538! 


. ee 


LIVES. a 


Eare(a) yee | The Greeke is cartaay ralacn Casatize. (b ) The fpirit of meckeneffe | Becaule 
of that which followeth : (onfidering thy felfe leaff thou alfo bee tempted, itis fitte thacont 
that corrects finne,fhould confider that hee might finne him-felfe: leaft if hee growe proud 
becaufe hee 1s more perfe& chen his brother, reuenge bee at hand, and make him fall worfe. 
¢) The fernants | Our Sanionr treating of brotherly remiffion, reciteth this Parable. Math. 
18. (d) Not difpofing | Ecclefiaffes the 7.15. Eebold the worke of God : whocan make frreight 
that which hee hath made crooked: And hence it is that a few rules ferue to guide fome in ho- 
neftie,and none, other-fome. If the minde bee not inwardly mooued to good, the outward 
words doe but little good. (e) Being im vs | for the proneneffe to badneffe that is in vs all, is 
the punifhmeng of the fir(t mans finne,by which without great refiftance, wee are harried into 
all enormity. Befides there is no finne but vexeth him in whome it is. The firft reuenge ( faith 
Tuuenall ) is, that no guilty man.is quitte by his.owne confcience. But this place is diuerfly 
read. But the true fence is, If chat original! protnife to finne:which wee haue all from eta 
dams bee not predominant ouer the whole man,-nor reigne not (as the Apoftle faith ) in our 
members, but bee fubie&ted to the minde, and the minde ynto Ged the gouernour ; not con= 
fenting to that wicked procliuitie, buc rather peaceably reftraining it, and comming vnto the 
curing of GO D that good Phifitian, then that crazed affect becommeth found perfection, 
and with the whole man attaineth immortality. For this aptneffe or inclination to firme, 
which che {choole-diuines call fomes, is finne in vs. 


Of the caufe and obftixacie of Cains wickedne(fe, which was not repreffed 
7 "hy Gods omne words. —§ Cuar,7. 7 a 

a BY: that fame fpeaking, of God vnto Caéze in the forme of fome.of his crea- 
cures (as wee haue fhewed that hee vfedto doe with the firft men ) what 
ood did ic doe him ? did hee not fulfill his wicked intent co murther his 
wrother , after GO D had warned him? who hauing diftinguifhed both their 
facrifices reieGing the one and receiuing the other (no (6 ) doubt by fome vifi- 

ble figne)and that becaufe the one wrou ght euill and the other good,Cainz grew 
exceeding wrotb and his looke was deie@ted.And God faid vnto him : Why és thy 

booke detectea?(c) If thon offer welland diuideft not well,(d)ha/t thou not finzed:be qui- 

et (e) unto thee [hall his defire-be fubsect and thon {halt rule oner him 1 this admoni- 
tion of God vato Caine, becaufe tne firft words, if thon offer well and diusde ft not 
| . gee a : | vel 


~ 


| 


be or to haueto doe in humanity : for there are that are farre worfeand beleeue 
notthis. Sothen Caéwe knowing that God refpected his brothers facrificé and 
not his,ought to have changed him-felfe and fallen to imitation df his good bro- 
ther ; not to haue {wollen vp in enuy againfthim. But becaule hee was fad, — 
his lookes caft downe , this greefe at anothers good, chiefely his brothers ,Go 

doth finde great fale with , for there-vpon hee asked hith faying : why art thou fad 
and why ts qa countenance caft dowee ? His enuy to his brother, God faw, and re- 


_ sprebended. Man, that knoweth nor the hearc, mighe well haue doubted whe. | 


ther hee was fad forhis owne badnefle that difpleated God, or for his brothers 
Mapai sfor which God accepted his facrifice. But God giuing a reafon why 

ee would not accept his, chachee might hdaue iufter caufe to diflike him-felfe 
thenhis brother, hauing not diuided,that is , not livéd well; and being not wor- 


thy to haue his facrifice accepted, doth fhew that hee was farre more vniuft, _ 


inthis , that hehated his iuft brother for no cauféryet hee fendeth hitn nor away 


Without a good and holy command : Bee quiet quoth hee : for unto thee [ball his 


defire bee fubiect and thou {balt rule oner him. “What ouer his brother 3 God for: 
bid; no, but over finne : for hee had faid before, hast thou not finned ?. and now 
heeaddeth , ace quiet for unto thee.crc. Some may take it thus , that finne fhall 
bee tiirned vpon man, fo that hee that finneth, thal! have none to blame for it 
but him-felfe: for this is the wholefome medicine of repentance, and thefic plea 
fot pardon,that thefe words of God be vnfterftood as a percept,and not as 4 pro: 
phecy : for then (hall euery nian rule ouér fin, when he doth not fupport itby 
defence, but fubdue it by repentance : otherwife hee that becomes the protec- 
tot ofit , fhall fure become prifoner to it. But if wee vnderftand this finneto 
bee that carnall concupifcenfe whereof the Apoftle faith : The flelb coweteth a- 


gsinit the fpirit, amongft whofe workes , enuy isréeckened for one, whichin= — 


cited Cayne to his brothers murder , then wee may well take thefe words 
this : Ze Sbalbce turned unto thee, and thow fale rule ower it } for the carnal 


paré 


= 


« 
* 


540 _ SAINT AVGVSTINE. or Cuary 


- part being moued (which the Apoftle éalls finne, faying , Sdo mot thes but the 

" fiane which dwelleth in mze: ) which parc the Philofophers call che vicious part of 

the foule, that ought not to rule but to feruc the minde, and bee thereby curbed 
Rom,6.43. from vnreafonable acts : when this moueth vs to any mifchiefe, if wee follow che 
Apoftles counfel,faying,giwe mot your members 2s weapons of unrighteon{neffe unte 

fine, then is this part conquered and brought vnder the minde and reafon. This 


rule God gaue him that maliced his brother, and defired to kill him whome hee. | 
ought to follow:be quiet quoth he, is,keepe thine hands our of mifchiefe, let not - 


finne get predominance in thy body, to effe@& what it deficeth , nor giue thou thy 
members vp as weapons of vnrighteoufnefle there-vnto , for vnto thee fhall the 


defires thereof become fubie2, if thou reftraine it by fupreflion andincreafe _ 


it not by giuing it fcope.. And chou fhale rule ouer it : Permit it not to performe 
any external] act, and thy goodneffe of will fhall exclude it from all internall mo- 
tion. Such a fayingthere is alfo of the woman , when God had examined and 
condemned our firft parents after their finne, the deuillin the ferpent, andmaa 
and woman in them-felues : J will greatly increafe thy forrowes and thy conceptions 
(faith he ): én forrow fb:lt thou bring forth children : and then he addeth , asd thy 
defire {halbe fubiect to thine hufband and hee [ball rule oner thee: thus what was to 
Caine concerning fine or concupifence, the fame was faid here to the offending 
woman: where wee muft learne , chat che man muft gouerne the woman, as the 
foule fhould gouerne the body. Where-vponthe Apoftle faid, bee that loucth his 
Bphe.s. wife loueth him/elfe , for no man ener hated his owne fico. Thefe wee mutt cure ,as 
our owne, not caft away, as ftrangers. But Cséne , conceived of Gods eommand 
like a maleuolent reprobate ; and yee'ding to his height of enuy, lay in waite for 
his brother and flew him. This was the founder of the flefhly City. Howhee 
furthér-more was a Type of the Iewes , that killed Chrift che crue fhepherd pre: 
figured in the fhepherd Wabe/I {pare to relate, becaufe it is a propheticall Alle- 
gory ,andI remember that I fayd fome-what hereof in my worke againft Fawfas 
theManichee, % a y 


‘L. VIVES. 


HW E (4) ufed.\Sup.Gen.ad lrt.lib.8, He inquireth how God fpake to adam, {piritually,or 
A corporally 2 and hee anfwereth that hee fpake to him ashe didto Abraham, Moyfes.&c. 
in acorporall fhape,thus they heacd him walking in Paradife in the fhade.(q)No dexbr,| How 
could Caine know (fayth Hierome ) that God accepted his brothers facrifice and refused his, 
bur that it is rrue that Theodotion toch fay : the Lord fet Abels facrifice on fire, but Caines he did 
not sthat fire had wont to come downe from heanen vpon the facrifice , Salomons offring at the de- 
dication of the temple,and Euas bis upon mount. armel do teftifie. Thus far Hieron, e)[f rhew.] 
So do the feauenty read ic: our common tranflation is : [f thon do well {hale thon not be abe 
ted,and if thon do not well, fiane lieth at the doore. Hierome rehearfeth the tranflation of the 
feauenty and faich thus:the Hebrew and the Sepruagintes do differ much ia this place. But the 
Hebrew read it as our vulgar tranflations haue it: and the feauenty haue ir as Auga/tine res 
deth it.(d, Be qviet.)Runne not headlong on , neither be defperate of pardon;finnes origina 
is adherent vnco allmen, bu:, itis in mans chojce to yeeldto itorno.(e ) Varo zbee fal 
evrieeoh, fay th: feauenty. Agsila hath Societas, and Symmachus Appetitus,or impetus, 
meaning may be either that fin fhalbe our fellow , or chat finnes violence fhalbe in our powet 
co fuppreffe,as the fequel declareth,aad this later is the likelier to‘be the crue meaning.( f )G& 
wing God.] God retpecs not the guift but the giuer,and therefore the facrifices of the one 


e 


Luss. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 


‘are vaine,and neither acceptable to God nor good men,as ‘Pleto faith. (g) Such I meane.|For 

there be fome Atheills:but fuch wicked as beleeue a God,thinke that they can meane God by 

guitts to returne them the fame againe, cen-fould, be it gold or filuer. As Syie and (raffiss of~ 
ered Hercales the tenth part of their good;that they might be hereby enritched, 


The reafon why Caine was the fir fh of mankind that cher built acity: 
Cc HA P, 8. | | | r 
B Vc now muft I defend the authority of the diuine hiftory that faich;that this 


oneman builcaciey , when there were but three or foure men vpon earth; 
afrer hechad killed his brother,chere were but Adam, the firft father, Cazne him- 
felfe and his fonne Exoch, whofe name was giuen to the cicty.But they that fticke 
at this,confider not thar the Scriptures/ 4 )neede not name all che men thac were 
-vpon earth at that time : but onely thofe that were pertinent to the purpofe, 
The purpofe of the Holy Ghoft in Afoy/es was to drawa pedigree , and genealo- 
gy from Adem,cthrough certaine men, vnto Abraham, and fo by his feed vnto the 
people of God : which being diftin& from all other rations , might containeall 
the tipes and prefigurations of the eternall City of Heawen and Chrift the king and 
founder : all which were fpirituall and to come : yet fo, as the men of the Earthly 


itty , bad mention made of them alfo ; as farre as was neceflary to fhew 


the aduerfaries of the faid glorious cétty of God. Therefore when the Scrip. 
tures reckon vp a mans time , and conclude, hee liued thus long,and had fonnes 
or daughters,muft we imagine that becaufe hee names not thofe fons and daugh. 
ters,there might bee in fo many yeares as one manliued in thofe times, as many 
children gotten and borne , as would ferue to people diuers cities # But it be- 
longed. to God , who infpired the {piric by which. the fcriptures were penned, 
to ditinguith thefe ewo ftares, by feuerall generations jas firft , that the feuerall 
genealogies of the carnall Cittizens,and of the fpirituall vnto the deluge, mighie 
bee colleed by them-felues where they areboth recited ::their diftin@ion, in 


that the one is recited downe from the. »surderer Cayne, and the. other from 


the righteous Seth,whom Adam had giuen for(b)him whom Cesse had murthered; 
and tai coniunétion , inthat all men grew frombad to worfe, fothattheyde-._. 
ferued to bec ail ouer-whelmed with the floud, excepting one iuft man called _ 
Noe ,his wife , his three fonnes and their wiues ; onely thefe eight perfons did 
God voutchfafe ro deliuer in the Arke , ofall the whole generation of mankind, 
whereas therefore it is written. .4#d Caine knew his wife which conceiued aud bare 
Henoch (c) and hee bucit acitty andcalled it by his fonnes name , Henoch : this pro- 
ueth not chat hee was his (4) firft fonne, for wee may not thinke that becaufe 
itis faid-here,that he kuew.bis wife , that he had notknowne her before, for this is 
fayd of Adam alfo,not onely when Caine was begotten,who was bis firft fonne, 
but when seth, his younger fonne was borne afo. . Adam knew his wife and thee 
conceiued and barea fon and calledhisname SethPlaine it is then chat the Scrip- 
ture vfeth this phrafe in all copulations , and not onely in thofe wherein the firkt 
bepotienareborne. Nor is itneceflary. that Hemoch fhould be Caines firft fonne, 
becaufe the citty bore his name j cheremightbee fome: other. reafon why his fa- 
ther loiied him aboue the reft-( ¢ );For Judes , of whomethe name of: Jade, ind 
Tewes cams ;-was not Litaels firft borne’: butadmit Hesoch,-was this builders 


| firft fonme 5 8is nd cOnfequeme chas his facher-named the citty after himas foone 


Aaa as 


542. - SAINT AVGVSTINE. Car.8.& 9 


Whit a Shee was borne , for thet could nor he haue founded a city , which is nothing 
City is elfe but-a multitude of men combined in one band of fociety. Therefore when 
this mans children & family grew populous,then he might fore them into a city, 
and call it after his firft fone, tor the men liued fo long in thofe dayes , that of all 
that are recorded together with their yeares, he that liued the leaft time( fJliued 
75 3-yeares. And fome exceeded goo. yet all were fhort of a 1000. ( gJ Who 
maketh any doubt now that in one mans time, man-kinde might increafe toa 
number ableto replenifh many cities more then one? It is a good proofe hereof, 
that of Abrahams {cede onely the Hebrew people in leffe then 5 0 0. yeares grew 
tofuch anumber that their-went 600 0 00. perfons of them , out of Egypt,and 
thofe all warlike youthes : to omit the progeny of the Jdumeans that E/as begor, 
and:the ( b ) nations that came of Abrahams other fonne, not by Sara : for thefe 


belong not to //rael. 


bey CLA VIVES. 


Tonicus. | Eeded(a)not.|Nae they fay,had a fonne called Jonicus,a great aftronomer: A4oy/és nameth 
_  ¢ chim not. (6 )For Aim.]|. Therevpon was he called Seth.Gen,4.25.(c).And he built. The hu- 
imanifts cannot agree about the firlt city-founder. Some'( with 7liny ) fay (ecrops,who buile 

that which was firft called Arx Cecropix,and afterwards Acropolis : Stabofayth Phoronens 

a= frtt built efrcos(which Homer calls Pele(gicon:) firlt. The Egyptians clayme all them-felues,and 
y mike thet Diofpolis,ot Thebes the eldeft citty ofall: But this Henarhia as Iofephnoteth which 
Henochia, £79 buile is the eldeft of all , (aywebeing plagued with terror of con{cience for the death of 
bis bropher: built it,and.walled it abouc, It was axipe of this world, and the fociety of deuills, 
Hieroz.ad Marcellam(d)F irft fon, Vofephus faith he was,but he takech the fcriptures at the firft 

Indes fight.(¢)Har Judas. He was Jacobs fourth foone by Lea. Juda was firlt called Canaax of Chanis 
metas fonne,and afterwards /uda of TudasTacobs fonneLofephus.Sé {aith Luftine.lib.3 6.who reckneth 
burt'cén'fertnes of Ifracl , but hee erresin this ,as he doth there where he faith chat, the whole 
nation wete-called lewes by J/rae/himfelfe after fis fonne-Judas,who died after the diuifion, 
butbefore his fatlier.” Lxctamsivs faith that they.tooke this name in acertaine defert of Syria 
whare they refted, becaide Adis had bin the captaine of that company, & the land where they 
had dwels; bad bin-called Judes./46,4.But 1 chinke that both the nation got the name, and the 
tribe of Jxdab the Kingdome.,, for that in pafling of the read fea, all the cribes topping, Judah 
thadg fie way out after Moyfes,which the Hebrewes fay is ment by that of Jacob vnto Judas, 
Thow hal? come vp from captinity my fonne,for fo dothey read it,( f)Lined 7 5 3. } Ithinke this 
was ‘Lamech,Noes father,who as the Hebrew faith liued 7 5 7. yeares, and the Septuagints 
9-5 3.104 \Ppho maketh. yin my fathers time their was a cowne in Spaine,euery dweller where~ 
bt vad défcended from the children of. one man who was then aliue : yet were there an hun- 
dred houfes in the towne, fo that the youngelt knew not by what name of kinred to call the 
old man,for our langyage hath names io higher then the great grandfather.(b ) The nations, } 
From L{mael Abrabams.fonne by Agar. ie. wee -_ ~ , 


e fe ‘ See 


Gen, 49.9, 


- wae - : Pee egy “ 


ak. Of the length of life,and bigne(fe of body that menhadbefore 
apse See eaten! Cue 8 the deluge, Cwwrgs | oo, = fee se 


e ., } 
y who roe 


Means 


ae ome, Me te Se Re ee ee rae ae ee ee ee re 

“f'Herefore no wife-man neede doubt that Caine might build a Ciety , and 

-® that a large. one, men living fo long:.in thofe daies : vnles fome. faith- 
leffe will: take occafoniof incredulity. from the ‘numbes of years:which. ou. 
authours recite men to haue lined, ahd -fay it is impofible..: And fo alfo they 
mizy deny che bigne(is of mens bodies: in thofe daics. eohauc far baat sau ai 
ae oe wnoer 


toa ED 


te A ee 


Lint. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. $43. 


whereof their famous Poet (4) Virgil giues a teftimonie of a bounder ftone,that 


avaliant man caught vp in fight,and running vpon his foe, threw this at him. 


Vix illud lelti bis fex cernicetuliffent, 
Qualia nunc hominum producit corpora tellus. 

It paft che power of twelue flrong men to raife, 
That ftone from ground :as men go now adayes, 


(6) Intimating that men of elder times were of farre larger bodyes : How much 
more then before that famous deluge in the worlds infancie? This difference of 
rowth is conuinced out of old Sepulchres which either ruines , or ruiners, or 
Cue chance haue opened,and wherein haue beene found bones of an incredible 
bigneffe. Vpon the fhore of ¥##ca, 1 my felfe and many with mee, faw amians (¢) 
axle-tooth of that bigneffe, chat if ichad beene cut into peeces ; would haue 
made an hundred of ours. But I thinke it was fome Giants tooth: for thoughi 
the ancients bodies exceeds urs, the Giants exceeded all chem : and our times 
haue feene fome( though very few ) that haue ouer-growne the ordinary fta- 
ture exceediugly. (a) Pény the fecond , that great {choller , affirmes that the 
longer the world lafteth, the leffer bodies fhall nature produce: as Homer ( hee 
faith ) doth often complaine : not deriding it as a fiGion, but recording itasa 
writer of the rbyracles of nature. But as I fayd, the bones of the entombed 
ancients have left great proofes of this vnto pofteritie: butas for the continu- 
ance of their times, that cannot bee proowed by any of thofe teftimonies: yet 
may wee not derogate from the credite of — criptures,nor bee fo impudent 
in being incredulous of what they relate , fecing wee fee thofe things haue 
fuch certaise events, that they fore-tell. Plssy(e) faich chat there is as yet a 
countrie wherein men liuetwo hundred yeares. If then wee belecue that this 
length of life which wee haue not knowne, is yetextant in fome va-knowne 
countries , why may wee not beleeue thar ic hath beene general in ancient 
times ? Is it poffible chat chat which is not here may be in another place; and isit 
impoffible that that which is not now, might liaue come at fome other time ? 


a. 


. - L.VIVES. 


V v8! (4) gines | Encid.t 2. of Tarnns. Alluding eo that fight of Diomedes and nen 
in Homer , where Diomedes takes vp a ftone which foureteene fuch men as the world 
hath now ( faith hee ) could not lift, and threw it at Exess , who being ftriken downe with 
ir, his mother couered him with amifté and {0 fauied hint, /wenall coucheth them both, at 
that of Vsrgiland Homer. Sat,15. | 7 


Saxa inchnatus per bumuin quafite lacertis 
Incipiunt torquere domeftica feditione a 
Ttlasnéc bunc lapidem quali fe Turnus & eAiax, 
Et quo Tydides percuffit ponderecoxam = 

 @AEnea, fed quam valeant emittere dextra 

Illes diffisasiles, & noftre tenspore nata, 

- Nam genus hee vino jams decre{eebat Homero. 

Terra malis bomines nunc educat atque pufilles, 
Ergo dens quicungne appexit,ridet & edit,cre. 


t for ftones to caft,and kept a coyle 


Wit ee US eae BA, 
| Aaaa 


544. 


Hierome 


Burgarimo, 


Pliny the 
fecond, 


_and flue yeares ere his eranflation. 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. roe 


Not fuch as Twrnus threw,nor Aiax call, 
whe Nor that e4eas haunch was hurt wichall, 
_ But {uch as our weake armes to weald were able : 
Farre fhort of thofe: thofe worthies memorable _ 
Began to faile ere Homer fail'd his pen : 
And earth brings nothing forth but Pygmee-men, 
The Gods behold our growth with ieafting fcorne,&c. 


(5) Intimating | And in his Georgikes, lib.1. 


Grandiaque effoffis mirabitur offe fepulchris. | 
And gaze onthofe huge bones within the tombe, - 


((¢) eA xle-teoth] Vpon Saint Chrffopbers day wee went to vifite the chiefe Church of our 
citty, and there was a tooth fhewen vs as bigge as my fift, which they fay was Saint (hriffo- 
phers, There was with mee Hicrom Burgarixo,aman of a moft modeft and fober carriage . and 
an infatigable ftudent : which he hath both from nature and alfo from the example o his fae 
ther:whothough hee were old, aiid had a great charge of family , yet gaue him-felfe to his 
booke that his children might fee him and imitate him. (4 ) Pémie JHis naturall hiftory wee 
hate. J. need neither ftand to commend this worke, nor the authors learned diligence, This 
which eugn/tine citeth is in his feauenth boeke: where alfo hee faith, chat in (yete there 
was amountaine rent by anearth uake , and in it ,a body of fortie fixe cubites long was 
Found. Some fayd it was Orxs his Beiyand fome Orions. Oreftes his body was digged vpb 

‘otdcle,and found to be feauen cubites long. Now Homer complained of the decreafe o ae. 
ture, Very neare a tHoufand yeares agoe. Thus farre Pliny : Cyprian writes hereof alfo to 


‘Demetrianas, and Vriell Gods Angell {pake it alfo vnto Efdras, Befides Gelléns (4s6.3.) faith, 


thar the ordinary ftature of man was neuer aboue feauen foote, which I had rather beleeue. 
then Herodotus that fabulous Hittoriographer,who faith that Ore/fes his body was found to 
to be feayen cubites , which is bares ait and 3. vnleffe as Homer thinke,the bodies of the 
ancients were larger then thofe of Jater times, who decline with the worlds declinin g age: 


. But Plato, eAriffotle,and their followers, that held the world to bee eterhall, affirme that ir 


neithér diminifheth not declineth. (¢) Saith] Lib.7.chap.48. Hellanicus faith,chat there is a 
race of che Epirotes in Erolia that liue two hundred yeares, and Damajfes holdeth fo alfo; na- 
ming one Priftoreus a chiefe man amongft ther in ftretigth, who liued threc hundred yeares, 


Of the difference that feemes to bee betweene the Hebrewes 
computation andours. ° CMAP.10. 


eee 


ge | aes ON ie Seine are at 
‘The eight generation hath fome difference ,.but-of lefle moment, and not 
4 a | | like 


: 2A 
&. Pe ee 


i 


od 


Lis35- OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 545 


like to this. For Atethufalem hauing begotten Encch, before hee had his next 
fonne whome the Scriptures name;is faid by the Hebrewes.to hauc liued twena 
tie yeares longer then wee fay hecliued : but inshe account ‘of his yeares after 
this fonne,wee added the twenty,and both doe iumpe in one iuft fumme. Onely 
inthe ninth generation,that is mthe yeares of :Lewech the fonne of Matbnfalers 
and the father of Nosh, wee differ in the whole fumme, byt it is but foure and 
twenty yeares,and that they have more then We::for hisage, étehe begot Nosh, 
inthe Hebrew is fix yeares leffe then:in ours : andcheir furnme of his yeares after- 
wards is thirty more then ours : which fixe taken from thirty ; leaues foure and 
twenty,as I {aid before. see east 2 


L. VIVES, 


OC” (a) beokgs | Meaning the Latine tranflations hat the Church vfed theri, out of the-74, 
cre Hieroms was either publifhed or receiued. And by the Hebrew bookes he meanes the 
originall {criptures, and the Hebrew authors thereto agresing, e4dam ( faith Hierome) liued 
230. yeares,and begot a fonne like him-felfe and calle bjpname Seth. Where wee age to con= 
ceiue that from Adams to the floud;where wee read twodhundred yeares and the ouerplus the 
Hebrews read onely one hundred arid the oser-p/us. And the dayes of Adam after he had be- 
gotten Seth,were feauen hundred yeares, becaufe the tranflacors had etred an hundred before, 
here he puts but feauen hundred,where the Hebrew hath eight hundred. Thus farre Hierome, 
who excepts not at all at this manner of computation. Asgu/fine omittes Jareds begetting of 
Henech in the fixt generation, but this indeed goeth not boat two hundred yeares. 


Of Mathufalems yeares, who {eemeth to hawe liued foureteene = 
- + -geeres after the deluge. Car, tt: is 


BY here is a(4) notable queftion arifing vpon this difference betweene vs 
and the Hebrewes , where Aetha/alem is reckoned to hate liued foureteeneé 
year es after the deluge: whereas the Scripture accompteth but eight perfons 
that were faued therein of all man-kinde, whereof Afatha/alem was none. For iri 
our bookes, A4ethufalem liued ere hee begot Lemech one Hundred fixty feauen 
yeares,and Lamech vntill he begot Woah,one hundred foure {core & eight yeares, 
which ioyned,make three hundred fifty and fine yeates, vnto which adde Neshs 
fixe rae yeares (for then begun the deluge ).and fo the time betweene Afs- 
thufalems birth and the delugeis nine hundred fiftie and fiue yeares. Now Ale 
thufalems dayes are reckoned to bee nine hundred fixty and nine yeares : for 
being onc hundred fixtie and feauen yeares of :age ere hee begot Lamech , hee 
lined eight hundred and two yeares after,which make in all'nine hundred fixtie 
and nine,from whence take nine hundred fiftie flue (the time from his birthto 
the deluge ) and there remaines fourteene, which hee is thought to liue after the 
deluge. Where-vpon fome thinke: that hee liued this time (not vpon earth, 
for there was not a foule of thofe efcaped, but) in the place to which his fonne 
was tranflated, with him vniill the deluge were come and gone: becaufe th 
will not call the authoritie of thefe ttuthes into queftion,, feemg the Chor 
hath allowed them, nor beleeue that the Ilewes haue the truth rather then we: 
nor allow that this fhould rather bee an error in.vs,chen is thofe out of whome 
wee have it by the Grecke . But fay they, it is incredible thac the fedenty 
interpreters, who tranilated all at one time ; and ‘in: onefence could este, or 
. 4 Aaa 3 would 


546 SAINT AVGVSTINE. | C nap.32; 


Would falfifie in'2 thing impertinent vnto chem: but thatthe lewes enuying our 
tranflations of their lawe and their: Prophets, altered diuerfe things in their 
bookes,to fubuere the authoritie of ours. This opinionatiue fufpicion, euery one 
may take'as hee pleafe « but this is once fure, Alathufalem lived not afcerthe dé: 
luge, but dyed in the fame yeare, if the Hebre es accoumpt be true.C oncerning 
the Septuagints tranflation, I will fpeake my minde here-after,when: I come (by 
Gods helpe ) ro the cintes them-felues, as che methode of the worke thall exa@; 
Sufficeth ic for this prefent queftion to haue {hewen by both bookes , thae che 
Fathers of old lived fo long,thac one man might fee a number of his owne pro- 
pagation fufficient to build a cittie. ) a eee 


L. VIVES. 


Orable ( 4) queftion | Hicrome faich ie was famous in all the Churches. Hierens.affirmes . 
that the 70. erred in their accompt, as ae did in many things elfe: and gathers out of 
the Tewes and Samaritanes bookes, that (Afathufalem dyed iu that yeare wherein the deluge 
began.’ Wherevpon efagisftine do iuftiy deride thofe thie will rather truft the tranflation 
then the original. | eee ee eee | 


. 


ae | Of, [uch 43 beleene not that men of ol time lined fo long as is recorded. 
| eee 2. ; ce © Crap. 12. $B agt re 


Or is any eare to bee giuen vnto thofe that thinke that one of our ordinary 
yeares would make tenne of the yeares of thefetimes, they were fo fhort: 
And therefore fay they ,nine hundred yeares of theirs,that is to fay ,ninetie of 
ours : their ten is our one, and their hundred, ourtenne. Thus thinke they that 
«Adams was but twenty and three yeares olde when hee begot Seth : and Seth 
but rwentie and an halfe when hee begatte Ewos, which the Scripturescalles two 
hundred and five yeares. For as thefe men hold, the Scripture diuided onc yeare 
into ten parts, calling each part a yeare: and each(¢) part hach a fxc-folde qua- 
drate.becaufe that in fixe dayes God made the world to reft vpon the feauenth, 
(whereof I have already difputed in the eleuenth booke. ) Now fixetimes fixe, 
(for fixe maketh che fixe-fold quadrate ) is thirty fixe: and ten times thirtie fixe 
is three hundred and fixtie , that is twelue moneths of the Moone. The fiue 
dayes remaining and that quarter of a day, which ( 6 ) foure times doubled is ad- 
ded tothe leare yeare, thofe were added by the ancients afterwards to make vp 
ghe number of other yeares ,and the Romaines called them Dées z#tercalares : 
dayes enterpofed. So Ewes was nineteene yeares of age when hee begot Cey- 
wan, the Scriptures faying hee was one hundred foure-{core and ten yeares. 
And fo downe through all generations tothe deluge , there is not one in all our 
bookes that begot any fonne at an hundred, or an hundred andtwenty yesres,or 
there-abouts,but he thae was the yongeft fathee was one hundred andthree fcore 
yeares of age: becaufe( fay they) none can beget a childe at ten yeares of ace, 
which that number of an hundred maketh: but ac fixteene yeares they are of 
ability to generate, and that is as the Scriptures fay,when they are one hundred 
' andthree-fcore yeereold. And to prooue this diuerfitie of yeares likely , they 
fetch the Egiptian yeares of foure monethis, the Acarnaris of {txe moneths,and 
the Larines of thirteene moneths.(c).P4sy having recorded that fome] “a ve 
ae - eae | undr 


Liwss. ‘OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 


hundred and fifty yeares, fome ten more, forthe two hundred yeares .fome three 
hundred, fome fiue hundred ,fome fix hundred, nay fore eight hundred, held chat 
all this grew vpon ignorance in computation.For fome(faith he made twe years 
of fammer and winter:fome made foure years of the foure quarters,as the Arcaé 


$47 


dians did with their yearé of three monthes. And che E giptians( faith he)befides 


there little years of 4. nionths( as we faid before)made thécourfe ofthe Mooné 
to conclude a yeare,euery ménth . Thus cn them(‘aith hé)are fome recor. 
ded to hane liued a thoufand yeakes. Thefe probabilities'haue fome brought,noe 
to fubuert the authoriry of holy writ, but to ptooue it credible that the Partiar- 
ches might liue folong,and perfwaded thethfelues(ehinking it no folly neitherto 


perfwade others fv in like manner) that their yéars in thofe daiés were fo litle, | 


that cen of them made but one of qurs,éa hundred of theirs,ten of ours. But 

wil lay oper the eminent falfereffe of this,smmediately.Y et éreI do it,T muft firft 
touch at a more credible fufpicion. Wee might overthrow this aflertion out of 
she Hebrew bookes,who fay that Adam was not two hundred & thirty bur ahun- 
dred and thirty yeares old when hee begot his third fon, which if they makebut 
thirteen years,then he begot his firft fon,at the eleauenth,or rwelfth yeare of hig 
age. And who can ininatures ordinary courfe now, beget a child fo yong? Bur lec 
vs except 4dam,perhaps he might haue begorten one as foone as he was created: 
for we may not thinke that he was cteated little bné,as our children are borne. 


-But now his fon Seth,was not two hundred yeares old/as wee read)butahundred — 


and fifty, when hée bepot Enos, and by their account but eleauen yeares of age. 


What thall I fay of Cezaan who begot Malalehelat feauenty, not at ahundred 


and feauenty yearesof age, fay the Hebrewes ?If thofe were but feauen yeates, 
What mancan beget a child then? re ag. | , 


L.VIVES: 


4 


pf (a) part hath a} A number qttadtate is char which is fortned by multiplication ofit feif oe 
as three titties three, foure times foure,and fix times fixe. The yeare hath 3 65.daics and fixe Aquadeaee. 


houres t thofe cornputators did exclude the flue daies and fixe houres, and diuiding the three 
hundred & fixty into ten partes , the quotient was , thirty fixe, (6) Foure times} Of this readé 
Sucton.in Cafar.(enforin. Macrob.and Beda.Before Cafars time the yeare had three hundred 
fifty fiue daies. And obferuing that the true yeare required ten daies and fix houres more, iz 
was pur to the priefts,at the end of February to interpofe two ‘and rwenty daies,and Kecaufe 
thar thefe fix houres euery fourth yeare became a day,then it was added, and this month was 


called nothing but the s#tercalatory month. In the intercalary month faith eA {conins, Tolly 


in aumbed, 


: o 


pleaded for AGile. Now this confuted interpofition, (</ar beeing dictator tooke away,com onef daies. 


manding them to kcepe a yeare of three hundred fixty fiue daies,and eucry fourth yeare inter- 
pofed aday into the Calends of March, which was called Biffextile , becaufe the fixth of the 
Calends of March was twife fet downe in {uch yeares : for the better adapting of thefe to the 
time,he made a yeare of fifteene menthes iatetpofing two monthes betweene Nouember and 
December, with the intercalary month for that yeare : and this was to bring the month and 
dajes to the courfe of the Sun :for the accounts made by winter and fommef, they called the 


yeare of confufioni,for it contained 44 3.daies.(¢.) Pliny] Lib.7 cap.g8. . 


merece « 


| | whether we ought to follow the Hebyew computitionor the = 
BVT if fay thus, of thus, prefently I muft bee anfwered, it is one of the 
ae OR Baa ge PUT tees 


' 


548 


i) 


SAINT AVGVSTINE.’ = Ginarat 


Jeweslies :of which before : for it is incredible that fuch (4) laudable‘and hono- 
rable fathers as the Septuagints were,would record an vntruth . Now ifI fhould 
aske them whether it be likely that a nation fo large,and fo farre difperfed as the 
Tewes fhould all laytheir heads together to forge this lie,and through their ma- 
lice others credites ,fubuert their owne truthes, or that the feauenty beeing 
Tewes alfo , and all fhut vp in one place (for Ptolomy had gotten them together 
for chat purpofe)fhould enuy that the gentiles fhould enioy their {eriptures, and 
putin chofe errors by acommon confent,who feeth not which is eafieér to effe@> 
But (6) God forbid that any wife man fhould thinke that the Iewes (how fro- 
ward focuer) could haue fuch power,or fo many and fo farre difperfed bookes, 
or that the feauenty hadany {uch common intent to conceale their hiftories 
truth from the Gentiles. One might eafier beleeue that the error was commit- 
ted inthe tranfcription of the copy from Prolomies library, and fo that it hada 
fuccefline. propagation through all the copies difperfed.” This may welbe fuf- 
pected indeed in Adathufalems life, andin that other , where there is foure and 
twenty yeares difference inthe whole-f um. Butinthofe where the fale is con- 
kaha that anhundered yeares in the one are ftill owerp/us before the genera- 
tions,and wanting after it, and in the other , ftill wanting before, and onérplus af- 
ter, ftill agreeing in the maine: and this continued through the firft,fecond, 


third,fourth,Gfth, and feauenth generation : this profeffeth aconftancy in error; 
and intimateth rather induftrious endeuour to make it fo, then any negligento- - 


miffion to let it paffe fo. So that this difparicy in the greekeand latine,from the 
hebrew where thefe yeares are firft wanting, and then added, to procure the con- 
{ent of both, is neither to be faid the lewes malice not the Septuagints diligence, 
but vpon the tranfcribers error that copied it firft from Prolomies library : for 
vatothis véry daie, numbers, where they areeither hard-obee vinder{tood, or 
feeme to denotea thing not very needfull , they are negligently tranfcribed,and 
more negligently corre&ed:for thiaketh he that he need learne how many chou- 
{and there was in euery Tribe of Ifraell? itis held vfeleffe : how few is chere that 


as =” €an difcetne what vfe to make hereof? But here, where in all chefe generations, 


here wants an hundred yeares,and heere is an hundred too many: wanting, aftet- 


_ ward when they exceeded before the birth of fuch or fuch a fonne,and exceed- 


ing afterwards when they wanted before: he that did this, defiring to perfwade 
vs,that the fathers were to liue fo long becaufe the yeares were fo {hore : and de- 
fyring to thew that by their maturity, when they were fit to generate : and here- 


. bythinking to perfwade the incredulous,that a hundred of chofe yeares were 
+ butten of ours this made him where he found an age which his account would 


difable for generation, to adde an hundred yeares , and after the generation was 
paft, to take it from the maine fumme of his daies of life .For thus defired hee to 
proue thefe ages conuenient for generation(by his account Jand yet not to dimt- 
nifh from thetrue computation of their whole yeares . Which becaufe hee: 
not in the fixth generation, thisisthatthat perfwades vs the rather to thinke 
that he did ie where it needed, becaufe where it needeth not , bee addeth not not 
altereth any thing. For therein thé hebrew he found that Jared liued ahundred 
fixty and two yeares before hee begot'Hesoch , which time comesto fixteen¢ 
yeares,two monthes,and fome od daies by his account, and that age is fic for ge 
neration,and therefore hee would not adde an hundred here, to make them VP 
twenty fix ofour yeares by hisreckning : nor would hee detract any thing from 
the time of lered after Henochs bitch. This was that made the fummes “ 8 
haere ; 


Lip 15. 


bookes agree. Another perfwafion is (c) becaufe in the cight.generation before 
thae Afathe/alem had begot Lamech, the Hebrews reading one hundred eightie 
two,out bookes haue twenty yeares lefle , where-as ordinarily wee vfe to finde 
a hundred more: and after Zamgch his birth they are added againg to make vp 
’ the furnme,which is one in both the bookes. For if he would take a hundred and 
feuentie yeares to be feauenteene, becaufe of, the abilitie to gette children : hee 
fhould neither haue added nor fubtraced any thing from thence: for hee found 
a time full inough here,for want of which hee.was fainetodddea hundred yeares 
elfe-where. Wherefore wee fhould verily thinke that this error of the twenty 
yeares wére occafioned by fome faule in tran{cription,but rhacthe fummeof 10, 


is added to the grand-fimme againe, tomake both bookes agree., Shall wee — 


thinke it was fubtletie in him? to couer his addition and {ubrraGion of thofe 
yeares when need was , by prattifing it alfo( nat with hundreds , bue with leffe 
fummes.) where he needed not ? whecher we thinke it was.thus or no, or that the 
right is this or chat, I make no queftion, the righteft courfe of alf‘inall thofe 
controuerfies concerning computations, if the two bookes differ (.feeing both 
cannot beetrue ) yet (4) belecue the original] sather then the tranflgtion, For 
fome of the Greeke copies, befides a Latine one, and a Syrian one , affirme thas 
Mathufalem died fixe yeares before the deluge, . _ a ge Peas 


et, a 


t 
“ty 


i 


[| Andable (a)and}A diuerfitie of reading: but.ofne moment. (6) God forbid] Thus may 


YF THE CITIE OF GOD. $49 


we anfwere thofe that fay the Iewes haue corrupted the old Teftament , and the Greekeg 


not his meaning here : Hierom and the featientie , read both that Mathufalem was ahundred 
eightie and-feauen when hee begot Lamech : vnlefle Augaffine had read it otherwife in fome 
other: (4) Beleene |This Hierom admirdth and reafon‘inuiteth vs to? no man of wit will gaine-! 
fay it: but in vaine doe good iudgements defend this; for blockifhneffe lyes againft iclikea 
tock, not that they onely are ignorant in thofe tongues, for Anguffine had no Hebrew, and, 


the new, leaft we fhould go to drinke at truths {pring-head. (c) Becane in. the.] I conceiue 


Ps Py) ? 4 oe 


very little Greeke, but they wane his modefty : hee would cucr learne and they would neuer, 


learne,but would teach that wherein they are as skilfull as afort of Cumane Affes. 


iar xt ie oe ic tine, ve 


io . rie ey ne a oe eee Ht 4 
Of the parity of yeares, meafured by the fame [paces,of oldjand of late... : 


: ‘a ity 


- Carp. rae: 

ag en vs fee how plaine wee can thew’ that tenof their yeares is not one 
of ours, but one of their yeares as long as one of ours: both finithed by 

the courfe of the fuithe, and all their. anceftors long liiiés laide out by'that rec-, 
koning.. Te is Written that the floud happen¢d the three {core yeare of Noahs’. 
age. Bur why dos he Scriptures fay 1m the fixe hundreth yeare of Noahs life yie 
Ri ferond maneth andshe twenzie feauenth.day.of the mencsh , if tha yeare were; 


but thirtie fixe dayes? for fo littlea yeare minft-eyther-haueino moreths, or it: 


muft haue but three dayes in a moneth,to make twelue moneths ina yeare.How 
then can it be faid,the fixe huudreth yeare.the fecond moneth, cy the twenty feauenth 


vib 
Vea ot ae 
BeICOIN Tee 


Wt 


day of the swoneth, vnlefle their yeares atid mondths ‘were'as ours: is?\How can - 
it bee other-wife fayd that -che‘delupe happened: the.twenty feauen of the 


moneth 7 Againe ac che end of the deluge ic is written. t0 she feanenth, menest 


y tte 


SAINT AV GYSTINE. Cmarergdc 15 


and the twenty (eauenth of the month, the trke refted upon the Mountaine Avarath 
and the waters decreafed vntill the eleauenth month : & in the eleauenth month, 
the firft day,were the toppes of the mountaines feene. Sothen if they had fuch 
monthes ; their yeares were likeours : fora three daied, month cannot haue 27. 
daies: or if they diminifh all proporticnably , and make the thirteenth part of 
three daies,ftand for one day, why chen that great deluge that continued increa- 
fing forty daies,and forty nights , lafted not full 4. of our daies. Who can endure 
this abfurdity ? Caft by this error then that feekes co procure the {criptures cre- 
dic in one thing, by falfifying ic in many. The day without al queftion was as great 
then as it is now , begun and ended in the compaffle of foure and twenty houres: 
_ the month as it is now, concluded in one performance of the Moones courfe:and 
the ycare as it is now,confumate in twelue lunary revolutions; Eaft-ward , (4) 
fiue daies anda quarter more, being added for the proportionating of it to the 
courfe of ghe Sunne: fixe hundred of fuch yeares had Nosh liued, two fuch 
monthes and feauenand twenty fuch daies when the floud beganne,wherein the 
raine fell forty daies continually , not daies of two houres anda peece, but of 
foure and cwenty houres with the night , and therefore thofe fathers liued fome 
ef them nine hundred {uch yeares, as 4braham liued but one hundred and eighty 
of;and his fonne J/azc neare a hundred and fifty , and {uch as Adoy/es pafled ouer to 
the number of a hundred and twenty, and fuch as our ordinary men now a daies 
do liue feauenty,or eighty of,or fome few more, of which ic is faid their onerplas 
Plal 90. 20 is but Labour and forrow. For the difcrepance ofaccount betweene vs and the He- 
brewes concernes not the lenght of the Patriarches lives , and where there isa 
difference betweene them both,that truth cannot reconcile, wee muft truft to the 
tongue whence weehaue our tranflation. Which euery man hauing power to 
doe, yet (6) itis not for naught no man dares nor aduenture to corre& that 
which the Seuenty haue made different in their tranflation from the Hebrew: 
for this diuerfity is no error , let no man thinke fo: I doe not: but ifthere bee no 
falt of the tranfcriber , itisto bee thought that the Holy Spirit meant to alter 
fome-things concerning the truth of the fence , and that by them,not according 
to the cuftome of interpreters , but the liberty of Prophets: and therefore, the 
Apoftles are found not onely to follow the Hebrewes, but them alfo , in cityng 
of holy Teftimonies.But hereof(if GOD will)hereafterznow to our purpofe.We 
may not therefore doubt, that thefirft child of Adam living fo long might haue 
iffue enough co people acitry( an earthly one I meane not that of Gods) which is 
the principall ground wherevpon this whole worke intreateth. 


7 L. VIVES. | 
FE“ (4) daies and |The Moones month may bee taken two waies: either for the moones 
A departure, and returne to one and the fame point , which is done in feauen and twen 
the moone, daies : or for her following of the funne vntill thee ioyne with him in the Zodiake : whi 
is done in nine and twent Sales , twelue houres, and foure and forty minutes : for fhee neuer 
. . - ftdeth the fuane where the left him, for hee is gone on of his iourney,and therefore the hath 
two-daies aad an halfe to ouertake him; the Jewes allow hir thirty daies : and:call this the 
full month, (6) Jt is] Not without a caufe. ee x Ms : 


, 3350 


The. 
moath of 


a 


| whether the mew of 6 ld abftained from pimus untill that the feriptures | 
5 | Say they beget children. Cuap.t5. r Gee 
BY will fome fay ,is it credible that aman fhould Hine cighty , or ninty nay 


more 


. . 7 ied - as | ¥ * , 


Liss5. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. | "551 


‘more then a 100. yeares without a woman, and withouit purpofe of continency, - 
and then fall a begerting children as che Hebgewes record of them ¢or ifthey lit- 
ted, could they not get children before ? this queftion hath two anfweres, for ¢i- 
ther they litied longer (¢Jimmature then we do,accordirig to the length of time 
exceeding ouirs,or elfe( whichis morelikely ) their firftborne are nor reckened, 
butonely fuch as are requifite for the drawing of a pedegree downe from Adams 
-vnto Noah;from whom we feea deriuation to’ Abraham : and fo vneill a cercaine 
period,asfarre as thofe pedegrees were held fitito prefigure the courfe of Gods 
gloricus Pilgtim-citry , vntillic afcend to etetnity. It cannot bee denied that. 
Caine was the ffrft thac cuer was borne of manand woman. For Adsm would Gen.4.1 
not haue fayd, J bane (1) gotten a man by the Lord, at his birth but that hee was the 
firft man borne before the other two. Himj_se//was next whomthe firftor | 
elder killed,and herein.was prefigured what perfecutions God g/orions City {hould 
endure at the hands of the wicked members of the terreftriall {ociety,thofefons <=: -' 
_of earth,I may call them. But how old dam wasac the begetting of thefecwo,ie 
isnot evident: from thence is a paflage made to the generations of Caine,andto 
his whom God gaue Adam in murdred —#els feede,called Seth : of whom it is 
written,Gad beth appointed me another feed for Abell whom Caine few. Seeing ther- 
fore thar thefe two generations , Caines, and Seths,do perfeGly infinuate the two 
citties : the one celeftiall , and laboring vpon earth: che other earthly and fol- 
lowing our terreftriall affects: there is not one of all Caénes progeny, from Adam 
to the cighth generation, whofe age is fer downe when hee begot his next fonnes 
yet:is his whole generation reherfed : forthe Spirit of Gad would not record; 
the cimes of the wicked before the deluge , but of the righteous ond, asonelie 
wosthy.. But when Seth was borne his fathers yeares were not . forgotten 
though he had begotten others beforgas Casveand —dbe/; and who dare fay whet 
ther he had mote befides them,? for it isno confequent that they wereallthe fons 
hehgd,becaufethey wereonely named for the ft diftin@tion:oftherwagenera _ 
tions.‘ far, wee read that hee had fonnes,and daughters , all which ate vnnamed} ., ae 
who dare, afficme how many they were, without incurfiod of rafhnefle? adam :t *: 
might by.GodsinftinG fay at Seths birth, God bath rated mse up another feed for A- 
bell int t.Seth was to fulfill sbe//s {an@ity 3noc chat he:was borneafrer him by 
courfe of tinge. And where asit is written, Seth Jiued 105.01, 205.yeares,8:begot 
Enos, whobut onebrainelefle would gather. fram hence chat Bwsos was Seths firft 
fon,.o gipte vs caufe of admiration that Seth could lide fo:long continent withour 
pyrposeof.continency,or withour vfe of she mariage bed vnto generacionefor it 
is writt€ of him.He bagat fons apd daughters ana the dares of Seth were gi2.yeares, 
ang he.died.Andthus,the reft alfo that are named,are al recorded to haumhad fons Gens.8. 
&ccaughters.Bur hege is no proofs chat hethanis named to be fonto any dé them, 
fhopld-be.their firft,fpn: ner is ic.credible thac their fathers linedal this while eis 
' gher immgcure,or.vamarried, of ynchilded nos chat they were their fathers firft 
born , But the fcripryire intendigg to.defcend by 4 genealogicall {cale from. 
daz vato.Noak tothe deluge , recounted nocthe firlt: borne-ef euery father, but 
only fach.as fell wichin the compafie of thefe_swo generations. Take chisexam+ 
-ple,coicleare-allfumther or furyre dgubt :Saine A4athewche Euvangelift inten: 
ding ta ,r¢cord, the, generation ‘ef-the, Mga 5G. RIS FF, -beginning at zbra- 
pamsand defcendiag dawne to Dawid, Abrabeas (faithihee, ). beg ot //ast: why noc 
Imaelzhewashis Arfk fonne? iam begot Jacohz why not Eau? hee was his fice | 


Des ee iL, 


ae : Ve : ads seped § : ae . “ a? 
fonne rp0..., oe Oe RE ae he ae: tle PID) ge aattie eS : 
a oe : Thi 


™ oa 
w . 


“ 


552 | SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuars6, 


The reafon is; he could not defcend by them vnto Daséd . It followeth: sacob be- 
_ gat Jedasand his brethren. Why ? was ndas his firft borne ? Jvdas begat Phares 
and Zera. Why neither of thefe were Judas his firft fonnes,he had three betore 
eicher ofthem . So the Euangelift kept onely the genealogy that tra@ed dire@- 
ly downe to Dawid, and foto his purpofe. Hence may wee therefore fee plaine 
thae the mens firft borne before the deluge, were not refpected in this account, 
buc thofe onely through whofe loines the propagation paffed from —-ddem to 
Nosh the Patriarche ; And thus the fruitleffe and obfcure queftion of their lace 
‘Maturity, is opened as farre as atedeth : we will not tire our felues therein. 


L. VIVES. oo 


| | Los (4) insmature | Maturity in man,isthe time when he isfit to beget children 3 when 
— Maturity. as haire groweth vpon the immodeft parts of nature in man or woman.(b) Getten] Or pof- 
fefle ixrnz plu, fay cy Se Caine faith Hiereme is xréess,pofleffion. 


ee 


Of the lewes of marria ewhich the firft women might have different 
| fromthe fucceeding. Cuar 16. - 


T Herefore whereas mankinde (after the forming ofthe firftman out of clay, 
. & and the firft woman out of his fide,) needed coniunétion cf male and female, 
for propagation fake, it beeing impoffible for+nan to bee increafed but by fuch 
meanes':, the brethren maried the filters , : this was lawfull then , through the 
compulfion of neceffity: but now it is as damnable,through the prohibirionof it 
in religion: for there was («) aiuft care had of charity, that them to whom con- 
cord was moft vfefull , might be combined rogither in diuers bonds of kinred and 
Affe atinity: chat one fhould’haue many in one ; but chat every peculiar fhould bee 
sie oa beftowed abroade , and fo many, byas many, fhould bee conglutinate in honeft 
gorof §=coniugalliociety. As, father, and father inlaw,aretwo names of kinred: So if 
charity. one haue both of them , there isa larger extent of charity . Adavsis compelled to 
be borh,vnto his fonnes,and his danghters, who were matched cogecher beeing 
brothets and fifters. So was Evah both mother and ftep-mother to them both. 
But if there had bin two women for-thefe cwo names, the loue of charity hadéx- 
tended further : The fifter alfo here , that was ‘made a wife , comprized ewo alli- 
ances in her felfe,which had they beene diuided and the fifter to onc asd-wife to 
another the combination had taken in more petfons then as now it could , bee- 
-.¢"C tng mo-mankinde vpon earth , but brothers and fifters , che progeny of the §rft 
created. But it was fit to be done as foone as it could , and thae chen wives and-fif- 
ters fhould be no more one: it being no meede, but great abhomination to prac- 
tife it any: more. For ifthe firft mensnephewes ,that maried their coufin-ger- 
maines, had married their fifters , there had beene three alliances (not two }in- 
cludedin one: which three ought for the exteiition of toue and charity to haue 
beene communicated vnto three feuerall perfons : for one man fhouldbe father, 
ftepfather,and vncle vato his owne children , brother and frfter, fhould they rwo 
mary together ; and his wife fhould be mother, ftepmothet and aunte vnto them 
and they chemfelues fhould bee-not onely brother and fifter, but (6) brother and 
fifters childrenalfo. Now thofe alliances char combine ‘three men vntoone, 
fhouldconioyne nine perfons together in kinred 8 amity if they were feuered: 
ee one 


. eo t_. —a a 


\ yf. 


. ; : = 
RA EE LE LE TI ETT TEE EI LA RS EE EE TSDC SESE ES AE IE SILENT ETE DERE EE TEES TOL ; ‘ oe 
A 


Lint. | OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 553 


one itiay haue one his fifter,dniother his wife,another his cOufin, another his fa: 

ther, another his vncle,anothér his ftep. fithet nother his mother, another his 
aunte,and another his ftep-mother : thus were the fociall amity dilated, and not 
contracted all intg twoorthree. And this vpon the worlds increafe wee may 
obferue even in Paynimis and Infidels, tha although (¢) fome of their beftiall 

lawes allowed the bretheren to marry their fifter ; yet better cuftome abhorred 

this badde liberty : and for all thatin the worldes beginning ic Was lawfull yet 

they auoide it {o-now asif ithad neuer beene lawfull: for cuitome is a gieat 
matter tomake a man hate or affectany thing: and cuftoiné herein fupprefling 

the imitioderaté itrimodefty of ccupifcence,hath iuftly fer a brand of ignominy 
vpon it,as an irreligious and vnhumaineade:: for ifit bea vice to plow beyond 

your boundet , for greeditieffe of more ground : how farre doth this excted it, 

for luft of carnality co tranfgreffeall bound,nay fubuerc all ground of goodman. — 
nets ? And wee haue obferued chat the tharriage of coufin-getmaities , becaufe 

of the degree it holdeth next vrito brother dnd fifter , to haue beene wonder- 

full feldomein thefe later times of ours : and this now becaufe of good cuftomé 
otherwife, though the lawes allowed ic, for the lawe of G O D hath not forbid- 

den it ,(d) ndk as yethad the lawe of man. Buc this ,alchough it were lawfull) 

is avoided;becaute it is {6 neare to that which is vnlawfull :and thae which one 

doth with his coufin, hee almoft thinketh that Hée doth with his fifter : for thefe 
becaufeof théir heare confanguinicy, (e) dre called brothets and fiftets, and are 
indeed very neare it. Butthe ancient fathers had areligious careto keepe the 
kindred with fuch limmites, leaft ic fhould {ptead vnto nothing : binding of it 
backe againe into it felfe, when it was. little diffuled,and calling itftillcoariew 2 | =. 
combination init felfe. And herevpon when the earth was well replenithed with 
men , they defired no thore to marry brother nto fitter ; yet notwithftanding 
each one. defired a wife it his owne kindred. But without all queftion thepro- 
hibition of coufin.germainés wnarriages is very Horielt : partly tor the afore-faid 
teafons,becaufe one perfon therein (hall haué two alliaaces,which two ought ra- 
ther to haue, forthe increafe of affinity: and partly becaufe there is a certaine 
laudable naturdll infting , in a mans (himefaftneffe ,to abfteine from ving that 
luft (though ie tend vnto ptopagation ) ypon fuch as propinquity Kath bound 
him chaftly to refped, fecing that inculpable wed-locke is affiaméd of this very 
aé. Intefpedt of tiankinde therefore ; the coupling of man and wotnan,is the 
fetinary ofa cittysarid the Earthly City heédéth only this, marty the Heauenly: 
City néedeth a further friateer, called regenétation,to avoidd the corruption of 
the firft generation. But whecthet there were any figne, or at leaft any corporal 
or vifible figne of regeneration before the deluge’, of vntill circumcifion was 
commended vnto Csbrahani , the —— doth tiot manifeft . That thefe firtt 
men facrificed vito GOD, holy writ declaéth, asin the cwo firft brethren,and _ 
in Noah, after the deluge, whén hé¢ came out of the Arke he is faid'to offer vnto 


. 


God . But of this wee haue fpoakén altéady,to fhew that the deuills dcfire to bee. 
accounted Gods,and offred vnto, onély for this end, becaufethey know that trig 
facrifice is dueto none bist the trie GOD. as a: | 


- ~LVIVES. a oe 
[Here (4) wes} Thats Niance might be augmented by matches abroadeé,and riot kepetontie 
nually within che walls of one parentage , but ae with blonds, and linages sthus 


- 


' 
ee  Y 


SAINT AV GVSTINE. Cuabaz 


is ynion dilated,and loue fowne through mankinde. Csc. de finsbh.tib.5.(b) Brother | The fons 
The latines of cwo brethren ate called Patrueles : of abrother anda filter , eAmitini : of two fifters,(on- 
| ase isd fobrini.[ generally, coufin germaines they are all,| A¢arcellus de propriet. fermen. (¢) Some of 
pss ex. their] The Gods vfed it, Satwrne married his fifter Ops, and Jupster,/uxo. The Egyptians alfo, 
mancs, andthe Athenians allowed it.Bue the Rormans,neuer. (d) Nor as yet} There was a law againft 
marying ofkindred(faith FJwtarch)vntil at length it was permitted that father or vnclemight 
mary his brothers or fifters, daughter : which arofe herevpon : A good poore man whom the 
people loucd very wel,married his brothers daughter: and beeing accufed,and brought be- 
fore the ludge,he pleaded for himfelfe fo well,thac he was abfolued, and this !aw decreed by an 
vniuerfall confent.(e) Are called] So Abraham called Sarah.And Tully calleth Luctus (icere, 
his vncles fonne, brother. De fisib.isb.5. Yer Anguftine faith not,they are brothers &c,but 


very neare it. | 


334 


re 


~—_«- = 


Of the two heads and Princes of the Two citties,borne both of 
: one father, CHAP. 17. : 


A Dam therefore beeing the Father of both the progenies, belonging to the - 
Earthly and Heauenly City and .¢be//becing flaine,and in his death a won- 
derfull (2) miftery commended vuto vs 3 Ceéne and Seth became the heads of che 
two parties: in whofe fonnes fuch as are named , the Two Cicries began to thew 
~ themfelues vpon earth, in mankinde: for Caine begot Enoch , and built an Earthl 
- Cittie after his name, no fuch City as fhould bea pilgrim in this earthly op 
bucanenioyer of theterreftriall peace . Caéne,is interpreted ,Pofleflion,wherevp- 
Cainespol= on either his father or his mother at his birth faid,/baue gotten 4 man by God. He- 


feffion Hee ad te ° ‘ ° : s ; 
noc dedicas Hoch is’ interpreted , Dedication: for the earthly Citty is dedicated here below 


stele where itis built: for here is the fcope.and end that it affects and aymes at. Now 
—vedeon. (6) Seth is called,Refurreation , and Exes his fonis called, Man,not as Adem wast 


Enos,man, (for Adam is man, but inthe Hebrew it is commonto male aad femall : for ic is 
written: Adale and femall made he them, and calleth their name Adam :{o that Ewah 
doubrleff: was nor fo properly called Euah but thac.4dem was a name indifferent 

to them both. But (¢) Evos is { properly a man, that it excludes all womankinde 

(as the Hebrew linguifts affirme)as importing che fonne of the refurrectiion 
where they fhall not marry , nor take. no wife » For regeneration fhall 

sean 419 exclude generation from thence. Therefore I hold this noidle note,that in the 
“whole generation drawne from Seth there is not one woman named as begotten 
inthis generation. For thus wee reade it, Afathufael/ begot Lansech, and Lamech 
tooke vnto him twowiues: Adah, and Zillah, and Adah bare Jabell , the father of 

fiich as liued_ intents and werekeepers of cattell; and his brothers name was Jw- 

ball, who wasthe father of Mufitians...And Z#lh alfo bare(d) Tobel, who 
wrought in braffe and iron : and the filter of Tobe was Naamah. Thus far is Caines 

Se oe recited beeing eight from Adams , wich Adam feauen to Lamech that 

ad thefe two wiues , and the eight in his.fonnes , whole fifters are alfo reckned. 

This is an elegant note,that the Earthly Citty fhall haue carnall generations 

vntill jz.¢nde: fuch I meane as, proceede from copulation of male and female. 
And therefore the wiues of him thag:is; the laft Father , heere , are named 

by their proper names , and fo isnone befides them beforethe deluge, but 

Eush. But euenas Caéne is interpreted Poffeffion , of the Earthly Citties foun- 
der,and Hexochhis fon, interpreted;Dedication, who gaue the City his name,do 

fhew that it isto haue bothan earthly beginning,& ending,in which there is no 

hope but of things of this world:folikewile Seth is interpreted the Refurre@ion, 

ve Pe ae aren eS : ae 


oy aes 


Liss5. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. sss 


who being the father of the other geaerations, wee mutt ee what holy writ deli~ 
uereth concerning his fonne. | : 


L.VIVES. | 
wonderfull (a). miftery } Firft of the death of Chrift , and then of the martires,whom the 
worldly brother perfecuteth. (6) Seth és ] Hierome putteth it, pofition : Pofuit. Thetable 
| at the end of the Bible conecyning the interpretation of the Hebrew names,faith that Seth,is 
put,or fet.(c) Exes] As eAdam: is (faith Héeromse) fo is Enos,aman.(d) Tobel } eAnguffine fol- 
loweth the feauenty, who read GeCsa : whereas the Hebrewes read it, 7#balcain': who was the 
fonne of Zidlah as lofepbas recordeth alfo. | 


owe ne ae 
ee 


That the fignification of Abel,Seth andEnos,are all vertinent unte 
Chrift esd his body,the Church. Crap. 18. 


A Nd Seth{faith the fcripture) had a fonne,and hecalled his name Enos. This Genel; 
man hoped to call vpon the name of the Lord, for thefon of the refurre@ion 36, 
liueth in hope, faith thetruth, itis true: all the while that hee continueth in bis 
pilgrimage here below, together with the Cétty of God, which arifeth out of 
the faith of Chrifts refurreCtion : for by thefe two men , Abe}, interpreted Sor- 
row, and Seth,Refurrection, is the death and rifing againe of Chrift perfigured,of 
which faith #4¢ Cétty of God hath originall, namely in thefe men that (4) hoped to 
call vpon the Lord God. For wee are faued by hope faith the Apoftle.. Bat hope __ 
which és feene is no hope:for hopeth he for that he feeth?but éf we hope for that which we Rom,t,24 
See not then do we with patience abide #t:who can fay that this doth riot concerne the 2 
depth of this miftery? Did not Abe/ hope to call vpon thename of the Lord God 
when his facrifice was fo acceptable vnto him? And did not Setd fo alfo, of 
whomiie is faid, God hath appointed me another feed for Abell? Why then is this 
| ape bound vnto Seths time in which is vnderftood the time of all the God- 

sbur that it behooued that in him who is firft recorded to haue beere borne,to 
cleuate his fpirit from his father that begot him , vnto a better father , the King 
of the celeftiall country, Man , that is,that fociety of man , who liue in the hope 
of bleffed eternity,not according to man,but GOD be prefigured? Ic isnot faid, 
He hoped 2 God:nox he called vpon God:but be hoped to call upon God. WWhy hoped to 
call ? but that it is a prophecy that from him fhouldarife a people who by the e- 
ledtion of grace fhould cail vpon the name of the Lord GOD. This is that which 
the Apoftle hath from another prophet, & fheweth it to pertaineé vnto the grace. , 
of God, faying,hofeeuer (ball call upom the name of the Lord ,{balbe faned. This is Rom.te. 
that which is faid, He called bis name Enos (which is,man)and then is added, This '>° 
mats hoped to call upon the name of the Lord: wherein is plainely fhewnethacman _ 
ought notto put histruftin himfelfe. For curfed ssthe wan that A sie in man, 
as wee reade elfe-where, aad confequently in hinifelfe : which if hee doe nor; 
he may become a cittizen of chat Citty which is founded aboue in the eternity of 
bliffe ,not of that which Caine built and named after his fonne, beeing of this 
world wauering,and tranfitory: - 


‘THe (4) hoped }Somie reade it , Then men aa : call upon the name of the LL ORD: 
.. 3 


referring : 


"$56 


SAINT AVGVSTINE.  Cuap.zy.820 


referring to the time,and not to Seths perfon.It is aa ordinary phrafe in authors. The Chaldee 
approeucth it,and fo feémes Hierome to do. The Hebrewes thinke thar,then they beganne to 
fet vp Idolsin thename ofthe LORD. Hierome. But Angaftine followeth the feauenty 
Srocanwiovixengntselat this man hoped to call upon Gc. ° 


Cad 


| What the tranflafion of Enoch fighified. 
— — Cuar.tg. — | 
Fo Seths progeny hath that name of dedication alfo for one of the fonnes ,the 
{eauenth from —4dam , who was called (4) Hensch, and was the feauenth of 
that generation : but hee was tranflated ,or taken vp becaufe hee pleafed God, 
and liued in that famous number of the generation wherevpon the Sabboth was — 
fan@ified, namely the feauenth , from dam: and from the firft diftinQions of 
the generations in Caéwe and Seth the fixth: ia which number man was made, 
and all Gods workes perfited. Thetranflation of this Eaoch is the prefigurati- 
onofour dedication which is already performed in Chrift,who rofe from death 
to die nomore,and was aflumed alfo . The other dedication of the whole houfe 
remaineth yet whereof Chrift is the foundation , and this is deferred vntill the . 


_end,and finall refurrection ofall flefh to die nomore. WVee may callit the hoyfe 


of Ged, the Church of God, or the Citty of God: the phrafe wil be borne. irgéicalls 


Rome(6) Cafaracushis houfe , becaufe the Romanes defcended from Troy and 


the Troyans from A/eratus : and he calls it e£seas his houfe,becaufe heeled the 
Troians in to Italy,and they built Rome:Thus the Poet immitated the fcriptures, 


that calleth the populous nations of the Hebrewes,the bow/e of lacob. 


- Two He. 


L.VIVES. 


Coie (a) Hetoch} There were two Henochs,(aine begot one,/ared another,of the ftock 
“of Seth,of this he meaneth hereX6 ) Affaracus | Hee was fonrie to Capys and father to An- 
chifes,from whom Eneas and the Romanes are deriued,(¢) Hee led) Salut. oninr.( atilin, 


Concerning Caines fucce/fion,beingbut eight from Adam ;vhereas 

peat, Noah ssthetenth, Car, 20. | 

| But (fay fome ) if che feripture meant onely to defcend downe from Adams to 
Nosh in the deluge , and from him to <brabam , where Adathew the Euangelift 

begunne the generation of the King of the Heasenly Cétty, Chrift , what meant it 

to medle with Casses fucceflion? I anfwere ic meant to defcend downe tothe 

deluge by Caénes progeny , and chen was the Earthly Cétty veterly confumed, 

thoughitwere afterwards repaired by Noahs fonnes . For che fociety of thefe 

worldlings fhall neuer beea wanting vntill che worldes end : of whom the ferip- 


Lue.20.34 ture faith . The children of this world marry and are married. But it is rege- 


neration that takerh the Cz/ty of G O D from the pilgrimage of this world,and pla- 
ceth it in the other, where the fons neither may nor aremaried. Thus then ge- 
neration is cominon to both the Citties hereon earth: though the Cstrie of God 
haue many thoufands that abftaine from generation , & the other hath fome citi- 
zens,thag do imitate thefe fc yet go aftray:for vato this City do the iss 7 al 

erefies 


| 


Lipts. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. $55 


herefies belong , as liuers according to the world , not aftér Gods ptefcription. 
The (4) Gymnofopbifts of India, living naked in the deferts , are of this fociery alfo: 
and yer abfteine from generation. For this abftinence is nor good,vnlefie ic be 
inthe faich of God,that great good. Yet wee doe not finde any that profeffed it 
before the deluge , Exoch himielfe the feauienth from Adam whom G OI) tooke’ 
vp,and fuffered nor todie , had fonnes and daughters, of whom. Afathu/alem was 
the man through whom the generation pafled downe-wards. But why then aré 
fo few of Catns progeny named, ifthey wereto bee counted downe to the floud, 
and their lenght of yeares hindered nog their maturity , which continued a hun- 
deted or more yeares widhout children ? forif the author intended not to draw 
downethis progeny vnto one man as hee doth to Noah in Seths ,and foto pro- 
ceed , why omitted he the firft borne'to come vrito‘Lamech ,in whole timetheré 
coniun@ion was made , in the eight generation from Adam; and the feauenth 
from Cazaeas ifthere were fome-what more to be added, for the defcent downe, 
_ either vncothelfraelites (whofe cerreftriall Cicty lerufalem was a type of the 
Citty of God, Jor downe vnto Chriftes’ birth in the fleth , (who is that étérnall 
GOD and bleffed founder and ruler ) when as. all Caines pofterity were abo- 
lifhed 4 Whereby wee may fee that the firft borne were reckned in this recitall 
of the progeny: why are they fo few then? So fewthere could not bee, vnleffe 
the Jenoth ofthere fathers ages ftaied them from maturity an hundered yedres 
atthe leaft. Forcto admicthat they begunne all alike to beget children at thir- 
ty yeares of age: eight times thirtie (for there are eight generations from.A- 
dam to Lameches children incluftuely ) istwo hundred and forty: didtheybeget __ 
no children then ,all the tefidue of the time before the deluge ? what was the 
caufe then that this author reciteth not the reft:for our bookes account from ' 
dam tothe deluge(b) two thoufand two hundred fixty two yeares ;and the He- | 
brewes,one thoufad fix hundred fifty fix.To allow the leffer nfiber forthe truer, 
take cwo hundred and forty, from one thoufand fix hundred fifty fix,and there re-_ 
maines one thoufad foure hundreth and fixteen years. Is it likely that Caines pro- 
geny had no children al this time?Buz let him whom this troubleth obferue what 
I fayd before, when the queftion was put, how it were credible that the firftimen . 
could forbeare generation fo long: It was anfwered two waies:.either becaufe 
of their late maturity , proportioned to their length of life : or becaufe that they | 
which were reckned inthe defcents were not neceffarily the firft borne, but _ 
fuch onely.as conueied the generation of Set#through themfelues downe vn-— 
to Noah. | a CO oo 
Andtherefore in Caines pofterity if fuch an one wants as fhould bee the {cope | 
wherevnto the generation(omitting the firft borite , and including onely ftich as 
were needefull, might defcend ) wee muft impute icto the latelineffe of matu- 
"rity , whereby they were nor enabled to generation vntill they were aboue one 
hundred yeares olde ,that fo the generation might ftill pafle through the firft 
borne, and {o defcending through thefe multitudes of yeares , meete withthe 
floud: Icannot tell ,there may bee fome more(¢ ) fecret courfe why the Earth. _ 
dy Citties generation fhould bee-(d).reieted vntill Lamsech and bis fonnes and 
then the reft vnto the deluge wholy fuppreffed by che author]. And (to . 
auoide this late maturity ) che réafon why the-pedegree defcendeth not by: 
the firft borne may bee for that Casse might reigne !ong inhis Cittie of He- - 
xoch : and. begette many Kings who might edch beget a fonne to reigne in 
his owne-ftead. Of thefe Caine '; I fay rig bee the firft : He#och his fonne 
~ : bg the 


EE aan naa anata ena eee 


558 


SAINT AV GVSTINE. CHA P.206 


the next: (for whom the, Citry was buile that he might reigne , there: ) Geidad 


the fonne of Henoch the third: (¢) Manichel the fonne of Gaidad the fourth, (f) 
Mathufaelthe fonne of AManichel the fit: Lamech che fonne of Mathufael the fixt, 
and this man is the feauenth from dam by Caine. Now it followeth not thac 
each of thefe fhould bee their fathers firft begotten,their merits , vertue,policy, 
chancé,, or indeed their fathers loue might eafily enthrone them. And the 
deluge might befall in Lemechs reigne , and drowne both him andall.on carth 


_ but for thofe in the Arke: forthe diuerfity of their ages might make itno won. | 


der,that there fhould bee but feauen generations from Adam by Casxe to thede- 
luge, andten,, by Seth: Lamechas I {aid beeing the feauenth from Adam, and 
Noahthe tenth , and therefore , Lamech is not faid to have one fonne,but many, 
becaufe it is vncértaine who fhouldhaue fucceeded him , had hee died before, 
thedeluge.. But howfoeuer Caines progeny bee recorded , by Kings,or by eld- 
eft fonnes ,this I may not omit, that Lemeck, the feauenth from Adam, hadas 
many childreras made vppe eleauen, the number of preuarication. For hee 
had-three fonnes and one daughter ( His wiues haue a reference to another 
thing nor here to bee ftood vpon. For heere wee {peake of defcents : but 
theirs is vnknowne.) Wherefore feeing that the lawe lieth in the number of 
ten, as the tenne commandements teftifie , eleauen ouer-going ten in one,figni- 


Exod.26,7 fieth the tranfereffion of the law, or finne. Hence ic is that there were cleaner 


Pfal, 52,4 


hatre-cloath vailes made for the Tabernacle , or mooucable Temple of GO D during 
the Ifraelites trauells. For(g)in haire-cloath is the remembrance of finne in- 
cluded ,becaufe of the (4) goates that thalbe feton the left hand: for in repen- 
tarice wee proftrate our felues in hayre-cloath faying as it is in the Pfalme, sty 
frane is ener in thy light. Sothen the progeny of —Adem by wicked Caine,end-, 
eth-in thé éleauenth , the number of finne:and the laft that confumateth the © 
number, is a woman , in whome that finne beganne, for which wee are all deaths 
flaues: and which was committed, that difobedience vnto the fpirit , and car-. 
nall affe&s might take place in vs. For (*) Naamah Lamechs daughter, is in-. 
terpreted beastifull pleasures But front Adam to Noshby Seth ,tenne , the num- 
ber of the lawe, is conftimate : vnto which Noahs three fonnes are addedtwo 
their father bleffed ,and the third fell off: thatthe reprobate beeing reiccted;. 
andthe eleét added to the whole, (4) twelue. the number of the Patriarches 
and Apoftles might herein bee intimate : which is glorious becaufe of the mul-. 
tiplication of the partes of (/) feauen producing it: for foure timesthree,or . 
threetimesfoure istwelue. This beeing fo, icremainethto difcufle how thefe 
two progenies diftintly intimating the two two Csttzes,of the reprobate and the 
régenerate,came to be fo commixt and confufed, that all mankinde but for eight 
perfons,deferued to perith in the deluge. - | 


| L. VIVES. 

fies (4) Gymenofophifts| Strab. lib.1 5. (b) 2262.) Exfebins and Bede haue it ftom the Septuas_ 
gints‘buc 2 242. irmay bee eAugaftsne faw the lat number. L XII. in thefe characters, 

and they had it chus XL IJ, with the X. before. The tranftriber might eafilie commit fuch: 

an error, (c) Secret caufe | Ithinke ic was becaufe they onely of Camés generation fhould 

bee named that were to. bee plagued for his brothers murder : for Lofepbrss writcth hereof in 

thefe words:(aine offing, ynto God , and praying him to bee appéafed, got his great guilt of 


= homicide 


aes ree: 


a EO CT IT I TC 


Lrmay. OF THE CITIE-OF GOD, gg. 


homicide fome-what lightned : and remained curfed,and his off-fpring #nto the feauenth ges 
neration,lyable vnto punifhment for his defert. Befides Caine liued fo long himfelfe, and the 

author would not continue his generation farther then his death. (@) Recided} Not commen- 

ded,as fome bookes read. (¢) (Manichel \Some read CManiah. Enfebins hath Maniel: the 
7orpzncrein (ff) Mathsifael | Exfebins, Mathnfalem, the feayenti¢, pabscsnc. ( ¢) Inhayre 

cloth | The Prophets wore haire-cloth to ftirre the people to repentance. Hier. fap Zachar. Haire. 
The Penitents.alfo wore it. ( b:) Goares} Christ faith, Het will gather the f:éepe,that is the iuft eae 
and fimple men togethor,in the worlds end,and fer chem on his right hand: and the Goates, 

the luxurious perfons., and the wicked , on his Icft. This hayre-cloch was made of Goates 

hayre, and called (slicium, becaufe (as Varro faith ) the making of st was firft inuented in 7 
(ilicia. (1) Naamah | Ir is both pleafure and delicate comlineffe: Hierome. ( k.) Twelue| Naamahs 
Ofthis read Hierome vpon Exechiel.lib.10. (¢-) Seawen | A number full of myfterious reli- 

pion, as I faid before. . , 


why the generation of Caine és continued downe along from the naming of | 
his fonne Enoch,whereas the Screpture hauing samed Enos, 
Seths /onne, goeth back againe to begin 
Seths gexeration at Adam. 
Car. 203 
Vt firft we muft fee the reafon why Casas gencration is drawnie out along to 
the deluge, from the naming of his fonne Easch, who was named beforeall 
his othet pofterity,and yet when Seths fonne Exos is borne , the author doth not 
proceede downward to the floud, but goeth back to Adem inthis manner : This is | 
the beoke of the generatcon of Adam, in the day that God created Adam, in the like» Getus,t0s 
nelfe of God made he him,male and female created he them,and blefedthem,and called 
their name Adam that day that they were created. This I hold is iriterpoféd,to goe 
back to Adam,from him to reckon thetimes: which the author would nor doe 
ia his defcription of the Earthly Citie: as alfo God remémbred that without 
refpe@ting the accoriipt. But why returnés heeto this recapitulation after heé — 
hath named the (4 ) righteous fonne of Seth, who hoped to call vpon the name 
of the Lord: but that hee will lay downe the two Céttécs iri this manner : one by © 
“an homicide vntill hee come to4n homicide ( for Lamech confeffeth vnto his two. 
wives that hec had beencan homicide ) and the other by him that hoped to call 
vpon the name of the Lord. For thé principall bufinefle chat Gods Céttie hath in 
this pilgrimage vpon earth, is that which was commended in that one man,who 
Was appointed a feede for him that was flaine. For in him onely, Was the vnity 
Of the faperinall Cittie , notreally complete; myftically comprizéd : whereforé 
| the fonne of Caine, the fonne of oo what fhali hee have but the name of 
the Earth/y Cittée on earth, which was built in bis name ? Hereof fings the Pfal- -; -.-: 
mift: (b) They bane called thetr lands by their names : wherevpon that followeth Phal.49, ae 
which hee faith elfe-where: Lord thow {halt defperfe their image to nothing in thy P&L73320 
cittie. But let the fonne of the refurrection,Seths fonne, hope to call vpon the 
Lords name, for hee is atype-of that fociéty that faich : 7 fall bee Like a fraitfull — 
Oliue in the honfe of God, for I truftedin his mercy. Andlet him not {eeke vaine- Plal.gs.§ 
glorievpon earth, for Ble/fed is the man that maketh the Lord his trust: and re- Plalao,4 
gardeth not vanity ahd falfe fondneffe. "OR week Bees 
Thus the two Cities are defcribed to befeated: the one in worldly poffeffion, 
the other in heauenly hope,borl comming ourat the common gate of mortality, 
: bb 4 which 


a. SAY SE od A ee 


le ee — 


oo, 


, 
t 
ry 
. . 
. 


540. 


SAINT AV GVSTINE. Cuar.22, 


which was opened in Adam, out of whofe condemned progenie , as out of a pu- 
trified lumpe,God cleéted fome veffels of mercy and fome of wrath: giuing due 
paines voro the one,and vindue grace vnto the other , that the citrizens ot God 
vpon earth may take this leffon hes thofe veffels of wrath, neuer co (d) relie on 
their owne election. but hope to call vpon the name of the Lord : becaufe thé 


_\ naturall will which God made ( but yet heere the changeleffe made it uot chang- 
~— Jeffey may both decline from him that is good,and from all good , to do euill,and 


thar by freedom ot will; and from euill alfo to doe good, but that not with-out 


— Gods affiftance. © 


Ce nated 
/ 


L.VIVES. 


Hat (a) righteous | Enes, Seths fonne, interpreted, man. (6) They bane } This isthe truck - 


" reading and neareft to the Hebrew : thouch both the feauenty, and Hieron read it-othc-- 
wife. (¢) Ginseng ]To thew Gods iuft punifhment of the wicked, and his free fauing of the 
chofen. (d) Kelye on thesr | As Pelag:ms would haue meu to doe, 


Of the fall of the fonnes of God by lourng ftrange women, 
whereby all ( but eigtt ) pert{bed. 
“Crap 22.55 


“THis freedome of will increafing and pertaking with iniquity , produced 2 
confufed comixtion of both Cicties : and thi: mifchiefe.arofe from woman 


» alfo: bucnotas the firft did For che women now'did not feduce men to finne,bue 
the daughters that had beene of the Earthly Cistie trom the beginning , and of 


euill conditions,were beloued of the cittizensof God fortheir bodily beauty : 


which is indeed a gift of God, but-giuen to the euill alfo, leatt the good fhould | 


imagine it of any fuch preat worth. [hus was che greateft good onely percey- 
ning to the good left and a declination made vnto the leaft good , that 1s com. 
mon to the bad alfo,and chus the fonnes of God were taken with the loue of the 
daughters of men, and for their fakes, fell into fociety of the earthly, leauing the 


piety chat the holy fociery practifed. And thus was carnall beaury (a gift of 


good indeed, bur yet atemporall , bafe and tranfitory one) finne-fully eleGed 
and loued before God, that eternall, internall,and fempiternall good: iuft as 
the couetous man forfaketh iuftice . and Joueth goide , che golde beeing not in 
faule but the man: enen fois it in all other creacures. They are all good; and 


may bee loued well, or badly : we'll, when our loue is moderate,badly when itis ~ 


inordinate : as ( 6 one wrote ta praift of the Creator : 


Hac tuaTunt, bona funt,quia tu bonus iffa creafti, 

Nil noftrum est in ets nif quod peccamus amantes, 

Ordine negletto pro te quod condstur abs te. | 

Fhofe are thy goods, for thou (chiefe good) didft make them, _ 
Not ours, yet feeke we them in fieed of thee: 

Peruerfe affect in forcing vs miftake them. - 


But we fouethe Creator truly,that is,ifhe be beloued for him-felfe,and nothing 
that is not of his effence beloued,for of him we cdanot loue any thing amifle.For 


that very loue,where-by weloue that is tobe loued, is it felfe to be moderately 
| «ee | | loucd 


pen LLL LEE La ELIOT Y 
L133 5- QF THE CITIE OF GOD. | 561 
a hi Se ee ase se ea ae 
louedin our felues; as beeing a vertue direGing vs in honeft, courfes. And 
thereforeI thinke that the beft and briefeft definition of vertue be this , It is (¢) 

an order of loue: for which Chrefts {poufe the Citty of God faith in the holy can- . 
ticles: Hee hath ordered his lowe inmer. This order of loue didthe fonnes of God Cast..4 
breake,negle@ting him, and running after the daughters of men: in which two 

names both the Cictties are fully diftinguifhed : for they werethe fonnes of men 

by nature ; but grace had giuen thema new ftile. For in the fame Scripture, 

where it is fayd that, The fonnes of God loued the daughters of men , they are alfo + 
called che Wazgels of GOD, Where-vpon fome thought them to bee Angels 

and not men chat did thus. | . 4 | _ 3 


. 
a a ee ee Re 


. VIVES. 
Hich (4) ss indeed |Homer. Iliad.3. (6) One wrote | Some read : as I wrote once in praife 
of ataper. know not which to approoue, (¢) ex order | That nothing bee loued bur 

that which ought to be Joued, as it ought, and as much as it ought. So doth Plete graduace 

the reafonable and mental! loue. (4) Hee hath ordered \ This faith Origen is that which our 

Saniasr {aith, Thon fale lorie thy Lord with all thine heart, with all thy foule , with all thy mode, 
and with ailthy ffrength: eAnd thon fhale lone thy neighbor as thy felfe: but not with all thire 
heare sand loue thine enemies ; (he faith not, as thy felfe,nor withall thine heast , bur holdsiz 
fufficienc to loue them at all.) fn (antic. > 


Whether it be credible shat the Angels being of an tncorporeall nature, 
Should lust xfter the women of earth, and marrying 
them,beget Gyants of them, | 
Crap. 23. 

His queftion wee touched at in ourthird booke, but left it vnd#tuffed, whe- 
© ther the Angels,being fpirits could hane carnall knowledge of women : for 
it is written, He maketh his Angels (pirits : that (a) is, thofe that are {pirits, hee Pfal.so 
maketh bis Angels, by fending them on meflages as hee pleafe : for the Greeke . 
(6) word ayo, which the Latines call (¢) Angelus, is interpreted « me/fenger. 
But whether he meant of their bodyes,when he addeth: And his miniflers-a fla- 
ming frre,or that he intimate chat Gods'‘minifters fhould burne with fiery zeale 
and charicie, itis doubtfull; yet doe the {criptures plainly auerre that the An- 
gels haue appeared both in vifible and palpable figures. (6) And feeing itis fo 
generall areport, andfo many auerre it eyther from their owne triall or from 
others, that are of indubitable honeftie and credite , that che Syluanes and 
Fawnes,commonly called (¢): sncube,haue often inured women,defiring and ad& 
ting carnally wich them: and that certaine deuills whomethe Frenchmen éall 
Dafes, doe continually pradife this vncleanneffe,and tempt others to it,which 
is afhrmed by fuch perfons, and with {uch confidence that it were impudence 
to denie it. I dare not venter to determine any thing heere : whether the 
Deuills beeing imbodyed in‘ ayre (for this ayre beeimg violeitly mooued is 
to bee felt) can {uffer this luft, or mooue it fo as the women with whome 
they comixe,many feele it/ /) yet do I firmely beleene that Gods Angels could 
neuer fall fo at chat time: nor thac the Apoftle Peter did meane.of theta whien 


eer ee 


562 SAINT AVGVSTINE. Caar23 


hefayd: If God /pared not the Angels that had finned , but caft them downe into hell, 
and delinered thems into chaines of darkene(fe to be kept unto damnation : but rather 
of chofe that turned apoftata’s with the diuell their prince at firft,in him Imeane 
 thatdeceiued man-kinde inthe ferpent. That men were alfocalled the Angels 
of God the fcripture teftifieth alfo , faying of John : Behold , = mine Angel be- 
| fore thy face which ball prepare the way before thee. And Mataciie the prophec by a 
ote peculiar grace giuen him, was called an Angell. Bur fome fticke at this , that in 
Ma"3* ‘this commixtion of them that were called Gods Angels with the women ofearth 
there were Gyants begotten and borne: as though that we haue no fuch extra- 
ordinary huge ftacured creatures even in thefe our times. Was there not a wo- 
_manof late at Rome, with her father and mother, a little before it was facked 
by the Gothes, that was of a giantlike height in re{pe of all other >It was won- 
derfull to fee the concourfe of thofe that came to fee her, and fhee was the more 
admired, in that her parents exceeded not our talleft ordinary ftature. There- 
fore there might bee giants borne before chat the fonnes of God (called alfo his 
Angells ) had any carnall confederacy with the daughters of men, fuch I meane, 
as lined in the flefhly courfe:that is ere the fonnes of Seth medled with the daugh- 
ters of Caéne,for the Scripture in Genefis faith thus, So when men were multiplied 
Gene. vpomearth., and there were daughters borne unto them, the fonnes of God faw the 
daughters of men that they were faire , and they tooke thems wines of all that they Liked. 
Therefore the Lord faid my /prrit fball not alway ftrine with man : becaufe he is but 
flelh, and his daies fbalbe 12 0. yeares. There were Gyants in the earth in thofe 
daies , yea and after thac the fonnes of God came vnto the daughters of men,and 
they had borne them children , thefe were Gyants , and in old time were men 
of renowne. Thefe words of holy writ fhew plainely that there were Gyants vp- 
on earth when the fonnes of God tooke the fayre daughters of men to bee their 
wiues,( ¢ )for the fcripture vfeth to call that which is faire good. Butthere were 
Gyants , borne after this : for it faith. There were Gyants upon earth in thofe daies 
and after that the /onnes of God came unto the daughters of men :{o that there were 
Gyants both then and before-and whereas it faith. They begot unto them/elues,this 
_ flaewech that they had begotten children vnto God before , and not vnto them- 
~ felues,thac isnot for luft, but for their duty of propagation , nor to make them- 
felues vp, any flaunting family, but to increafe the Csttizens of God, whome they 
(like Gods angels )iuftructed fo ground their hope onhim, asthe fonne of the 
refurrection , Seths fonne did, who hoped to call vpon the name of the Lord: in 
which hope, heandall his fons might be fons and heires of life euerlafting. But we 
may not take them to bee fuch Angels as were no men: men they were without 
doubr,and fo faith the Scripture: which hauing firft fayd, the C4ncels of God faw 
foanes P 18 y As 
ot Seth cal- the daughters of men that they were good , and they tooke them wines of all whcme they 
ai st leked : addeth prefently : Awd the Lord {aid , my {pirit [ball not alway rine with man: 
my because hee is but flefb. For his {pirit made them his Angels, and fonnes, but they 
ined downewards , and therefore hee calleth them men, by nature , not by 
grace : and fiefh,being the forfaken forfakers of the {pirie. The 7o. call them the 
Angelsand fonnes of God :fome bookes call them onely the fonnes of God, 
leauing out Angels : But (4) Aguila whome the Lewes prefer beforeall, calls 
them neither,but the fonnes of Gods:both 1s true, for they were both the fonnes 
of God, andby-his patronage, the bretheren of their fathers : and they were the 
fonnes of the Gods :as borne ofthe Gods , and their equalls , according to pe 
| , of 


= ore FE 
eR LOLA 


—s a 
int | 


Lis. ts. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. : 563. 


ofthe Pfalme: / bane faid yee are Gods and yee are al fonnes of the most high.for wee PGl.82.6. 


do worthily beleeue that the 7 o. had the {pirit of prophecy,and thac what foeuer 
they alcered is fer downe according to the truth of diuinity , not after the plea- 
fure of tranflators,yet the Hebrew they fay , is doubtfull and may be interpreted 


- either the /osnes of God, or of Gods. Therefore let vs omit the {cripcures that are 
‘called (é) 4pocripha, becaufe the old fathers of whome wee had the {criptures, 


knew notthe authors of thofe workes , wherein though there bee fome truths; 
yet their multitude of falfhhoods maketh them of no canonicall authority, 
Some Scriptures queftionlefle were written by Enoch the feauenth from 
Alam. As the canonicall ( &) Epiftie of Jade recordeth : but it is not for 
nothing that they were left out of the Hebrew Canon which the Priefts kept in 


_ thecemple. The reafon was, their antiquity procured a fufpicion that they 


were not truly diuine, and anvncertainety whether Henoch were the author or 
no: feeing that fuch as fhould haue giuen them their credit vnto pofterity never 
named them. And therefore thofe bookes that go in his name and conrainethofe 
tories of the giants that ther fathers were no men,are by good iudgements held 
to be none of his : but counterfeite,as the heretiques have done many,vnder the 
names of the() Apoftles and (#2) Prophets,which were all afterward examined, 
and thruft from canonicall authority. But according tothe Hebrew canonicall 
{criprures , chere isno doubt but that there were Gyants vpon theearth before 
thedeluge , and that they were the fonnes of che men of earth , and Cittizens of 
the carnal] Cicty,vn:o which the fonnes of God, being’Seths in the fleth,forfake 
ing iuftice adioyned them-felues. Nor is ic ftrange if they begor Gyants, They 
were not all Giants , buc there were farre more before the deluge, then haue 
beene fince: whome it pleafed the creator to make, that wee might learne that 2 
wife-man fhould neither refpe& hugeneffe of body nor faireneffe of face: but 
make vp his beaticude out of the vndecaying , {pirituall and eternall goods that 
are peculiar tothe good, and not that he fhareth with the bad : which another 


commendeth to vs, faying: There were the Gyants famous from the beginning that » veuck : 


were of fo end ftature and he expert in war. Thefe did not the Lord choofe neither - 


gauehe the way of knowledge vnto them : but they were deftroyed becaufe they 
had no wifdome,and perifhed through there owne foolifhaeffe. 


N & 


L. VIVES. 


T Hat ( 4) «s thofe|That Aucuftine held that the Angells and Deuills had bodies, he that 


readeth this worke,and his bookes de natura demon, de genefi ad literam;fhall {ee plaing 
ly that hee held ic himfelfe, and fpake it not as an other mans opinion, as Peter Lumbard faith 


' , fome do thinke : It was bis owne, nor followed hee any meane authors herein, hauing the 


Platonifts , andthen Origen , Lattantius, Bafil and almoftall the writers.of that time on his. 
fide, It is neede( faith Michael Pfellus,de demonib, )that the {pirits that are made meflengers, 
fhould hatte bodies tuo ( as Saint Panl{ayth ) whereby to mooue, to ftay,and to dppeare vie 
fibly. And whereas the Scripture may in fome place call them incorporeall , ] anfwer , that is 
inrefpect of our groffer ,-and more folid bodies , in comparifon of which ; the tranfparent ine 
fenfible bodies are ordinarly called incorporeall. Augu/fine giuesthe Angels moft fubtiliate 
bodies, invifible, actiue, and not paffueand firch the Deuills had ere they fell: but then, 
thejr bodies were condenfate and paffiue , as Pfellus holds alfo :( 6) a*yx? & | It is Nuncins 
in Latine : a meffenger : 4) ,009, 1s ALitto to fe 
noname of nathre , fe 


« 


FHomey 


“a 


nd, and therefore the Angell , faith Higram,is An 


gels 


ut of miniffery. And hereof comes Enangelinus , callcd the good meflage, what & is, 


$64 


SAINT AV GVSTINE. C nar.23-& 24. 


Homer and Tully vnto eAtticus vie it often. (¢) e4ngels | Turning » intox: and @ into as. 
And feting| Pell affirmeth out of one CWarke a great Demoni/t, that the deuills caft 


orth {pertne; producing diuerfe little creatures , and that they haue penne (. oe like 
uch,but onely che watry 


o 


mens ) from whence the excrement paffeth: bur all deyills haue not 


Sucubus and and the earthly,who are alfo nourifhed like fpunges with attraction of humor. (¢) Jv¢ub:] OF 
Succnins. incubsto lyevpon: They are divels that commix with women : thofe that put them-felues 


dquila,a 
¢ranflator 


9 


The Apo- 
aypha 


wnder men,as women, are called farcxbi. There are a people at this day thateglory thac their 
defcent is from the deuills , who accompanied with women in mens fhapes , and with men in ° 
womens : ( This in my conceite is viler,then to draw a mans pedearce from Pyrates, theeues, 
or famous hackfters, as many doe..) The Egiptians fay that the Diuells can onely accompanie 
carnally with women,and not with men, Yet the Greekes talke of many men that the Gods 
haue loued,as Hiacinithus, Phorbas,and Hippolitus of Sicione by Apollo, and (ypariffus by Syl- 
wanus. (f) Yet doe I firmely] Lattantins lib.2.cap.1 5. faith, that the Angels, whome God had | 
appointed to preferue and garde man-kinde,being commanded by God to beware of loofing 

their celeftiall and fub{tantiall digniry by earthly pollution , not-with-ftanding were allured 
by cheir dayly conuerfation with the women,to haue carnall action with them, and fo finning, 

Wete kept out of heauen and caft downe to earth: and thofe the denill tooke yp to bee his 
agents and officers. But thofe whom they begot , being neither pure Angels nor pure men, 

but in a meane betweene both, were not caft downe to hell, as their parents were not taken 

vp into heauen : and thus became there ewo kindes of deuills 1 oneiceleftiall and another 

earthly. And thefe are the authors of all mifchiefe , whofe chiefetaine the grear Dragonis. 

Thus faith Exfebins alfo dib.5. And Plstarch confirmeth it faying, That the fables of the Gods, 
Signified fome-things that the denills bad done i the old times : and that the fables of the Giants 

and Titans, were all aéts of the deuills. Thismaketh mee fome-times to doubt whether thefe 

wetethofe chat were done before che deluge, of which the {cripture faith : And when the An- 
gels of God faw the daughters of men cre. For fome may fufpe& that thofe Giants ,& their {pi- 

rits ate they whorhe ancient Paganifme tooke for their Gods, and that their warres were the 

fubieét'of thofe fables of the Gods. ( g’) For the feriptures ] Becaufe xeacs is both good and 

faire: Térencé, Phorms.Enunuch. (b)eAquile \In Adrians time hee turned the Scriptures out of 
Hebrew into Greeke, Hierom calles him a curious and diligent tranflator ¢ and he was the firft 

after the feauentie that cate out in Greeke. Exfebsus liketh him not sbut to our purpofe : hee 

readeth it, the fonnes of the Gods : meaning the holy Gods or Angels, for God ftanding in the 

congregation of the people, and he will iudge the Gods in the midft of it, And Symachus tol- 

lowing this fence,faid : Ana when the fonues of the mighties beheld the daughters of men, &c. 

(6) Apéclryvha | Secreta i of xp6a']w, to bide; They were fuch bookes as the Church vfed not 
openly ; buc had therttin pritiate coread + paca ‘4s the Reuelation of the Apoltle Peters 

che booke of liis Actes, ¢. (&_) Epiffte || Hierons vpon the firft Chapter of Pan/to Titws,faich 

that Jude citeth an Apoctyphall booke of Henochs, Judes words are thefe. But Michael she 

efrchangell when bee ftrone againft the denill, and difputed about the bedy of Moyfes , durSt not 

blame him with curfed peaking but [aid onely : The Lord rebuke thee, Which Enoch fayd thefe 
words,is yncertaine,for they doe not feeme to bee his that was the feuenth from 24dam. For 

he was long before A4o/es, vnlefie hee {pake prophetically of things to come. And therefore 

Hierome intimateth that the booke onely whence this was,was entitled;Exoch. () Prephets | 
As the Nazarites counterfeited a worke vader Hicremies name. Aug.in Matt.4p.27. (12) Ae 
poftles\ As Thomsas his Gofpel, Peters reuelation,and Barnabas his Gofpell.which was broughe 
wate Alexasdria,figned with his owne hard: in the time of the Emperor Zeno, 7 


How the words that God | (pake of thofe that were to peri{h in the deluge 2 
and their dayes hall be an hundred and cwenty yeares, 
are tobeevunderfiood. Cure 24. 7 


Ve whereas God aid: Their dayes {ball be a hundred and twenty yeares,wee mutt 

7 not take itas though thar it were a forewarning,thac(4)none after that fhould 
line abous that time,tor many after the deluge lined flue hundred yeares. Buric 
is 


v \ 


Lis.s5. QF THE -CITIE OF GOD. - §65 


isto bee vnderftood that God fpake this about the end cf Noahs fiue hundred 
yeares , that is when he was foure hundred and foure feore yearés old,which the 
Scripture ordinarily calieth fine hugdred taking the greareft part for the whole: 
for in the fixe hundred yeare of Neah, and the fecond month, the load be- 

an,and fo the hundred and twenty yeares ‘vere paffed , at the end of which nran- 
kind wasto bee vnuerfally déftroyed by the delugé. Nor is, it fruteleffeto be- 
leeue thar the deluge camethus, when there were ncne left on earth, that Were 
not worthy of fuchadeath : not that a goodman dying fuch a dcath thou-d be 
aior the worle for it after itis paft. Bur ofall tholé of scehs proceny whoinethe 
Scripturenameth , there was not one'thar died by thedzluge. This floud the _ ; 
Scripture faith grew vpon this :-The Lord fe that th: wickedue([é of man was great pine 
' jntheearth, avd all the imaginations of his heart were onely andcontinaally enill: anddeuge. — 
bel b) renolued ix his heart bp he had made man in ‘the earti,and fayd : 1 will aeftroy Ge.6.5.6.7 
from the face of the earth the man uhome I haue made from man to beaft,and, from the 

creeping things tothe fowles of the ayre,for Lam angry that I hake inade them. 


a ooo.) OL VEVESoc. os. 

Hat (a) none. \This Lattantins heldisb.2.His words are thefe. The earth being dried , the 
Lord hating the iniquity of the fornser world , leaft thesr length of life fhould bee the mid-wife 
. tomore wsifchiefe , bee fhortned the daies of man by degrees. untill they came to a hundred and 

swenty yeares and there he fixt his bound : nos to be onerpafed. But Hierome gocth with Argn/- 

tine , aying they (ball yet bane «hundred and twenty yeares torepent sz , not , tha: the life ot no 
man hereafter (hall not exceed a hundred and twenty yeares,.as many crroneoufly voderitand 
it,for we find that Abraham, after the deluge,liued a hundred three-fcore and fifteene yeares 
and diuers two hundred :nay fome aboue three hundred yeares . ofephus di fers fome-what 
from Lattantins but not much : for hee fayth that atter thie flotid mens dayes prew fewer, va 
till (Moy/es time, and after him the bound of mans life was fec vp at ahundred and twenty 
yeares,by Gods decree, and accerding to che number alfo chat Moy/es liued. ( 6) Resolued,] 
We read,repented, but the feauenry haue treSupnge recegstanit : ie rcuolued in his thought. 


oa Of Gods unpafronate and vmaltering anger. 


G OD S anger ( 2) is no difturbance of mind in him ; but his iudgement af 
figning finne the deferued punifhment : and bis rtuoluing of thoughe isan Godpre- 
entethnot of any thing SA sie. 


vnchanged ordering of changeable things: for God re 
he doth,as man doth:but his knowledge of a thing ere it be done,and his though firme and 
of it when itis dene are both alike firme and fised. Buc the Scripture without a 
thefe pkrafes cannot inftil into our vnderftandings the meanirig of Gods workes 
nor terrifiethe proud, nor ftire vp the idle ,nor exercife the inquirérs , nor de- 
light che vnderftaders. This ic cannot do without declining to our low.capa- 
cities. And whereas it relateth the future deftruétion of beafts, and birds , It 
fheweth vs the greatneffe of the diffolution, but doth not therearen it vnto thé 


vnreafonable creatures as if they had finned. 


epee er ce ee 


| VIVES, 
> O DS (4 ranger. \Laftanting wrote a booke of Gods Anger, we (with Hieréme.)sefer the 
Ooi ee he defiretoknow further, 7 ‘ — kas 
PaS* ah \Gce This 


‘566 SAINT AV-GVSTINE. _Cnar.26 


: ° Lhat Noah his Arke fignifieth Chrift and his Church in all things. 

_ =o .% Cuap. 26. _ = 
Now whéreas Woah being (as the ruth faith ) a iuft man in his time, and per- 
4 fe& (yet notas the Cittizens of God fhallbee perfed in that immorcaliry 
wherein they fhall equalize the Angells, but perfe& as a mortall pilgrime of 
‘God may bee vpon earth ) was commanded by God to build an Arke, wherein 
he,bis family , and the creatures Which God commanded to come into the Arke 
' ‘ynto him , might bee faued from the waters: this verily isa figure of Gods Citty 
sat. herevponearth, thatis ,his Church which is faued by wood , that is , by that 
*" ‘where-vpon Chrift che mediator betweene God and man was ctuicified : For 
the dimenfions of the {ength, deapth and bredsh of the Arkeé,, ‘do fignifie mans 
body , in which the Sauiour was prophecyed to come, and did fo : for (a ) the 
length of mans body from head to foote , is fixe times his bredth from fide to 
fide : and tetine times his thitkenelle meafuring prependicularly from backe 
_ tobelly : lay amanalong and meafure him , and you thall finde his length from 
head to footeto see, bredth from fide co fide fixe times , and his height 
from the earch whereon helyeth, tenne times , where-vpon the Arke was made 
three hundred cubites long , fifty broad, and thirty deepe. And the dorein 
the fide wasthe wound that the foldiers fpeare made in our Sauiour, for by 
this doall men go in vnto him : for thence came che facramentsof the beleeuers: 
andthe Arke being made all of fquare wood, fignifieth the vamoued conftancy 

ofthe Saints:for caft a cube,or {quared body which way you wil, it wil ever fta 
firme. Soall the reft that concerned the building of this Arke, (5) were tipes 
of Ecclefiafticall matters. But here it is too long to ftand vpon them : wee 
havedoneicalready, again{t Fawstes the Manichee, who denied chat the ould 
teftament hadany propheticall ching concerning Chritt. Icmay bee one may 
take this one way , and another another way : ihe all bee referred to the 
Hely Citty where-vpon wee difcourfe , which asI fay often laboured here in - 
chis terreftriall pilgrimage ; other-wife hee fhall goe farre from his meaning 
that wrocit. As forexample, if any one will not expound this place : make 
it with the (¢ )loweft, fecond, and third roomes:as I do in that worke againft 
Faaitas namely that becaufe the Church is gathered out of al nations,it had two 
roomes, forthe two forts ofmen circumciféd and vncircumcifed whome the 
Apoftle other-wife calleth (4) Iewes and Greekeés : and it had three roomes, 
becaufe all the world had propagation from Noah his three fonnes, aiterthe 
— Aloud : if any one like not this expofition , lechim follow his owne plea- 
fure, fo hee controll not the true rule of faith in it: forthe Ackehad roomes 
below and roomes aboue,, and therefore was called double roomed : and it had 
roomes aboue thofe vpper roomes , and fo was called triple-roomed , being 
three ftories high. In thefe may bee ment the three things that the Apoftles 
prayfeth fo : Faith, Hope and Charity : or (ard that farre more fittly)che three 
re giag CUangelicall increafes : thirty fold, fixcy fold and an hundred fould ; chaft 
marriage dwelling in the firft 5 chaft widowhood inthe fecond : and chaft vir- 
ginicy in che higheft ofall: chus, or otherwife’may this bee vnderftood , ever 
re{pecting the reference it hach to this Holy Cstty. And {o I might fay of the 
other things here tobe expounded: which alchough they haue more thenone 
expofition;yet all they haue muft be lyable to one rule of concord in the Catho- 


like faich. 
| L. VIVES. 


Lists. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 567 


© ne ee aes a CES anova 


L.VIVES. . 


Tre (4) length [ The fame alfohee hath againft Fasfus ib. 12. Ambrefe alfo compares sti; 
Noahs Arke,to matis body, but in another manner, Lib.de Noe et Arca. (6) Were types] The Arkea 

The Apoftle Peter taketh the Arke for a figure of the Church. 2.Pet 3.56. Where Hicrome type of the 

prooueth the Arke to be che Church, (ontra [onin. & contra Luciferianos Cyprian doth the shitch. 

like alfo, De fpiritn fantlo, (if that worke bee his, } Origen alfo and many others fay muchof 

this Allegorie. (¢) Lowest fecond ; The Arke was thus built ( faith Origen.) It was diuidedin- ° 

to two lower roomes,and ouer thefe were thgee other roomes , each one immediatly aboue 

other. The loweft was the finke or common Jakes sand that next it was the graner, or place 

where meate was kept for all the creatures: then in the firft of the other chree,were the wilde 

beafts kept,in the fecond the tamerjand in the third were the men themfelues, /afephus writes 

bur of toure roomes;whereas all elfe make fiue, But hee might perchance omitt the lakes, as 

Petrus de Natalibns faith. (d) Jewes and} He diftinguifheth them by their tongues: for Pand 

conuericd with none but they fpoake either Hebrew or Greeke : fot at. Rome they fpoake 

Grecke as commonly then as we doe Latine at this day. i 


Of the Arke,and the deluge, that the meaning thereof is nesther meerely 
Hiftorscall,por meecrely allegorical. 


C wap. 27. 


) Ve let nonethinke thac thefe things were written onely to relate an hyftori- 
4 call truth without any typicall reference to any thing elfe: or contrarywife, - 
_ that there were no fuch things really aGted, but thac itis all allegorical: or thae 
ihat-foeuer it is,ic is of no vfe, nor include:h any prophericall meaning cohcer= 
‘hing the Church: for whobut an Acheift will fay , that thefe bookes are of no 
vfev ho have beene fo religioufly kept, and fo carefully deliuered from one age 
to another. fo many thoufand yeares te.gether ? or that they are onely hiftoricall; 
when as (to let all the reft paffe ) the bringing in of the vncleane creatures by 
paires,and che cleane by feauens,muft needes hauefome other meaning, for they 
might have beene preferued had they beene but paires , as well as the other. 
Couldnot God , that taught this meanes of re-inftautationrepaire them as hee 
_ had created them? Aad now for thofe that fay chat all chis was but myfticall one- 
ly , firft chey imagine ic impoffible that any floud fhould become fo huge as to, 
exceedethe height of any mountaine fifteene cubires, becaufe of the (4) top of 
Mount O/mpns which they fay reacheth aboue the cloudes ,and is as high as 
(6) heauen, fo that the pai ayre that engendreth windes and raine cannot 
mount fo high: neuer obferuing in the. meanefpace,that the groflelt element of 
all, the éarth can lye fo high: or will they fay the top of this mountaine is not 
earth ? rio, why then doe thofe bad proportionacors allow the earth to lyefo 
high,and yet deny the water to mount higher , auerring not-with-ftanding thac 
the water is highér andof a more ability to afcend then the earth? what reafoni 
can they thew why earth fhould holde fo higha place in ayre, for thus many 
thoufand yeares,and yet that water may not arife to the farhe. height fora licele 
_ fpace? They fay alfo,thatthe Arke was too little ro holde fuch anumber of crea- 
tures , feauen of euery cleane on¢, and two of every vticleane one. It feemes 
they make accoumpt onely of three hundred cubites in length, fiftie in breadth, 
and thirtie in depth , neuer marking that euery roome therein was of this fize, 
Ccés inaking 


- é , hoe aS 


568 SAINT AV GVSTINE. C nar.27. 


making the whole Arke to be nine hundred cubites in length, one hundred and 
fiftie in breadth,and ninetie in deapth or height. And if thacbe true that Origen 
‘doth elegantly prooue,that Aoy/es (being learned (as it is written ) in all che wif- 
dome of the E fiptians ,who were great Geometricians ) meant of a Geometri- 
call cubicte in this cafe,one of which make fixe of ours, who feeth not what an 
- huge deale of roomies lyeth within this meafure ? for whereas they fay that an 
Atkeof fuch greatneffe could no way bee built, they talke idely , for huger cir- 
‘ thes then this Arke have beene built : and they neuer confider the hundred 
yeares that ic was a building in,through-out : vnleffe they will fay that one ftone 
may bee bound faftvnto another by lime onely, and walles on this manner bee 
carryed out (d ) fo many miles in compaffe, and yet timber cannot bee faftened 
vneotimber by (e) mortayfes ,( f) epirt snayles and pitch, whereby an Arke 
might bee made, not with embowed ribbes, but ina ftreight lineall torme,noc 
to a lanched into the fea by the ig of mén, but lifted from earth by 
the ingruent force of the waters them-felues,hauing G O D S prouidencc, ra- 
ther then mans: pra@tife, both for fteres-man and pilot. And for their {crupue 
lous queftion concerning the Vermine, Mice, (g ) Stellions, Locufts , Hornets, 
Flyes and Fleas, whether there were any more of them in the. Atke then there 
fhould bee by GO DS command? they that mooue this queftion ought firft 
to confider this :thac fuch things as might line in the waters ,needed not bee 
brought into thé Arke: fo might both the fifhes that {wamme in the water, and 
(4) divers birds alfo that fwamme aboucic. | 
_ And whereas it is {aid , They [hall bee male and female that concerneth the 
reparation of kinde : and therefore fuch creatures as doe not generate, but are 
produced them felues out of meeré putrifaGion, needed not bee there: if they 
were, it was as they are now in our honfes, with-ovt any knowne number , if: 
the greatnefle of this holy myftery included in this crue and reall a@e,could 
not bee perfited with-out there were the fame order of number kept in alf 
thofe creatures , which nature would not permit to live with-in the waters; 
that care belonged not vnto man, but vnto GOD. For Nosh did nor take 
the creatures and turne them into the Arke, buc GO D fent them in all, hee 
onely fuffered them to enter: for fo faith the booke : Two of enery forte {ball 
rome unto thee : not by his fetching, but by GOD S bidding: yet may wee 
well holdethac noné of the creatures that wante féxe,were there : for it is pre- 
cifely fayd, They {hall bee male and female. There are creatures that atifing out 
of corruption, do¢(#) afterwardes engender , as flyes : (k) and fome alfo with- - 
. out, fexe, as Bees : fome alfo that haue fexe and yet engender not,as Hee- mules 
and Shee-mules : it is like that-they were not in che Arke, but that their pa- 
rents, the horfe and the Affe ferued to produce them after-wards : and fo 
like-wife of all other creatures (/ ) gotten betweene diuerfe kindes . Buc 
4 os concerned. the myfterie , chere they were : for they were male and 
emale. | : | 
Somealfo fticke at the diuerfitic of meates that they had, and what they. 
cate , that could eate nothing but flefh : and whether there were any more 
. creatures there then was in che command , that the reft might feede vpon 
them: or ( m ) rather ( whichis more likely } chac there were fome other 
meates befides flefh, that contented: them. For ( ) wee fee many creatures 
_ thas eate ficlh, cate fruites alfo, and Apples , chicflye Figges and saa 
. : What 


Lisrs. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 569 


what wonder then if God had taught this iuft man to prepare a meate for euery 
creatures eating ,and yet not flefh? what will not hunger niake one eare? And 
what cannot God make wholefome , and delightfome to the tafte, who might 
make them(ifhe pleafed )to line without any meate atalzbut thac ic was befitting 

to the perfection of this miftery that they fhould bee fedde? And thusall men, 

but thofe that are obftinate,are boundto beleeue that each of thefe manyfold 
circumftances , had a figuration concerning the Cburch:: for the Gentiles haue 

now fo filled the Church with cleane and vncleane, and fhall do fo vntill theend 

and now are al fo inclofed in thofe ribbes,that ic is vnlawful to make ftop atthofe —_ 
inferior ( although obfcurer ) ceremonies, which being fo , ifno man may either 
thinke thefe things as written to no end: nor as bareand infignificant relations, = 
nor as fole vnacted allegories,nor as difcourfes impertinent tothe Churchsbut 
each ought rather to beleeuechat they are written in wifdonie, and are both true 
hiftories , and mifticall allegories , all concerning the prefiguration of thé 
Church s then this booke is brought vnto an tnd:and from hence wee are to pro- 

ceed with the progrefle of both our citties,the one celeftiall,and that is Gods, 
andthe cother terreftriall,and that is mans,touching both which, wee muft now 


obferue what fell out after the deluge. | 


L.VIVES. | 


He toppe ( 2) of. ) The Geographers hatie diuers Ofymspi # but this here, isin Theffaly ten a 
Tee ‘ gh T Plutarch faith in the life of pp sain ‘Paulus. The toppe is a ee ae Oa 
middle repion of the aire as fome hold,and proue it becaufe the afhes of the Sacrifice would ly 
ynmoyftned,and Vnmoued al the yeare long. Solin. This is a fable faith Francss Philelphus,who 
went vp the hill Him-felfe,to fee the triall. -And it is ftrange that the toppe of O/unpus,or Athos 
in Macedon,or of any other mountaine {Hould be fo high abote the citcle of the earths globe, 
that it fhould exceed the halfe part of the ayre , and lying aboue all moyfture , haue fuch cons: 
tinuall fountaines and riuets dowing roe it :for chey are the mothers of windes and rayne. 

(6) As Heanen. | Intimating the vfe of the Poets, who call Heauen Olympus becaufe o this 
_ height. Hom.[hiad.11. (¢) They fay alfo.|Origen Homsil.2,in Genef hath thefe words. ‘és far 
as Tcangather by defcriptions ,the Arke was built up in foure Angles, avifing all from ar equall 
bafe,and finifhed on the toppe in the bredth of one cubit, for itis {aid that it was built thirty cubites 
long fifty broad , and thirty bigh , but yet was it fo gradually contracted that the bredth and 
length met all in one cubic : and afterwards, But the fitceft forme for to keepe of the rayne 
and weather , was to bee ridsed downe a proportioned defcent from the toppe downeward, 
fo to fhoot off the wet , and to haue a broad arid {patious bafe in a fquare proportion, leaft the 
motion of the creatures within fhould either make it leane atone fide or finke it downe right. 
But for all this cunning fabrike , fome quettions there are made , and thofe chiefly by Apelles, hot ocs 
afcholler of Afarcions but an inuentor of another herefie : how ss it poffible ( fayth hee ) to put Apelie ane 
but foxre Elephants in the roome that the Seriprure allowes for thé Arte? Which to anfwer , out aaa a 
fathers faid chat AZoy/es who ( according to the Scriptures) was skilled in all the arts of Feit 
did meane Geometrical cubytes in this place (and Geometry is the Egyptians chiefe ftudy, ) 
And in Geometry , both in the meafuring of folides and fquares ; one cubit1s generally taken 
for fixe of our common cubits, or for three hundred minutary cubits. Which ificbee fo,heare, 
the Arke had roome at large to containe al the creatures that were requifit for the reftauration 
of the world. Thus far Origen. (d) So many miles. | As Babilons , Romes , and Memphis. Bue 
there is a citty in Thrace,the Greekes called it paxpoy reixos , The long wall, for there was an 
incredible long wall began there, which reached vnto the Melican Bay, excluding Cherone+ 
fus from the reft of Thrace, (WViltiades the Athenian captaine built it. There was fuch ane 
other from the lake Lensanus ynco mount Jura , diuiding Burgogne from Switzerland , buile 
by Cefar,ninteene miles long;and fixteene foote ee did the like in England,to aa 8 
| 2CC3 the 


, 


Gaerne eee 


570 


- 


- SAINT AVGVSTINE. Caxtaz: 


ortayles, the Scots and Pi&ts from inuading the Brittaines. (¢) CMortay/es } Let your pofts (faith V2- 


fub(cudines, *its be as thick as the maine body of your piller vnder the wreath whence the arch arifeth, 


Stellions, 


and ler them be mortaifed together , fo that the hole of euery ioynt bee two fingers wide. 
Cf) Epiri ] Either itis falfely written, or elfe wee may goe feeke whatit is. (g¢) Stellions JA 
Kinde of Lizard that benummeth where he biteth. A kinde of Spider alfo Pix. 8.6 9. Ariffo. 
(4) Diserfe birds) Ducks,Swans,Cormorants,Sea-guls, Water-{wallowes,Puffins,8cc. (4) Af- 
terwards engender | Flyes are not generate, and yet doe engender. For the male and female 
commixe,and produce a worme,which in time becommetha flie. eAriffer. Hi/?, ansmal. lib.5. 


Bees, «(4 etd foe alfo |How Bees are produced ( faith e4riftorle, Hift.animal. lib.s. cis vncer- 
* taine : fome thinke they doe not ingender,but fetch their iffue elfe-where, but whence none 
knowethj: fome fay from the Palme-flowre, others from the recdes, others from the Oliues. 
Vsrgsl in his Georgikes held chat they did not engender : his words are thefe : 
a Sa. ee Tilsen adeo placuiffe apibus mirabere morem, 


. Quodnec concubstuindulgent,nec corpora fegnes 
dn venerem foluunt,aut foens nixibas adunt : 
“Verum ipfa ¢ folirs natos,c fuanibas berbis 
Ore legunt,chc. 


Would you not wonder at the golden Bees 
They ve no venery,nor mixe no thighes: 

_ Nor grone in bringing forth : but taking wing, 
Flie to the flowres,and thence their yong they bring 
Within their pretty mouths,bred there,&zc, 


Some there bee that fay the Bees bee all females, and the Drones males, and fo doe engender : 


_. and that one miay haue them produced of the fleth ofa Calfe. (1) Gotten betweene diner{e | as 


. ereatures begotten berweene Wolues and yet att Beares and Bitches, &c, Piny faith thar 


fuch beafts are neuer like either parent, but of a third kinde, and that they neuer engender 
either with.any kinde,or with their owne : and therefore Mules neuer haue yons ones.But by 
Plixies Yemuc,it is recorded that Mules haue brought forth young,and haue beene often-times 
bigge bellyed - and this is common in ( «ppadocie faith Theophraffus, and in Syria faith Aré- 
frotle, Indeed thefe are of another kinde then ours bee. (#) Or rather] Origen uae? | did 
eate fichh. (%) Wee {ee many creatures | Dogges, Crowes, and Foxes , when they want flefh 
will eate fruites,Figges and Cheft-nuts efpecially , and liue as well with them as with all the 
Gieth inthe world. | — | 


Finis lib. 15. 


THB 


a TO a A aed 
THE CONTENTS OF THE, 
_ - fixteenth bookeof che-City of God...» © - 

r.whether there be any faneilres of Gods citis | would make his feed as the ftarres of heauen and 
eens named betweene Noah and Abraham.” ‘ | thathe was inffified by fatth,before bis circum- 

2. What prophetigne muffertes were in the | fifon, | oo | 
foanes of Noah. - a |, tg.Of the fignification of the facrifice which 

3. Of the generations of the three fannes of | Abraham was commanded to offer when hede= - 

Noah. | | fired to be confirmed in the things he beleened. | 

4.Of the confusion of tongues , and the buil- | _ 25.Of Agar,Saras boxdwoman , whome jie 

ding of Babilon. St game as concubme unto Abraham. — | 
5. Of Gods comming downe to confound the 26. Of Gods promife vxto Abraham, that 
language of thofe Tower-builders... —-— | Sara( though fhe were ola\firould haue a fon that 

6. The manner bow GOD fpeaketh-tovois \ foonld be the father of the nation, and how this 
Angels. ae Pe ee ee promife was (ealed in the miftery of circum/if:on 

q.Whetber the remote Iles were fipplied with | 27. Of the nean-child that if it were vot cira 
the beafts of al forts that were [assed in the Arke, | cum/ifed the exght day , it perifhed for breaking 

8. whether Adams or Noaths fonnes begot | of Godsconewant. =. » 29 
any monftrous kindes of men. - |” a8. Of the changing of Abrahams andSaras 

_ Whether their bee any inbabitants of the | names,who being the one to barren,and bothtoo — 
earth called the Antipodes. - | old to hane children , yet by Gods bounty , were 

10. .Of the generation of Sem , ts which the | both made fruitful. LO. ge os 
City of God dyeth,downe unto Abraham, | | 29.Ofthethree menor _Angells wherin ad 

11.7 hat the Hebrew tangue((o called after- appeared to Abraham zm the plaine of mambra. 
wards of Heber )was the firft language upon \ 30. Lots delinerance, Sedomes difirutfion: 
earth, andremayned in hss family when that Abinidleches /a/t,and Sarahs chajfity. _ 
great confufon wat, x | ' 34.O0f aac borne the time prefixedand nam 

12. Of that point of time wherein the Citty med fo becaufe of bis parents laughter. 
of GOD began & new order of fucceffion in | ;2.Abrahams faith and obedience proned in 
Abraham. - . ch ky | bis intent to offer bis fonme :Sarahs death, 

- 13.Wby there is no mention of Nachor,Tha- |. 3 3.0fRebecca,Nachors seece whom Ifaac 
ras {on in his departure from Caldea into Me- | marvied. | | 
fpotamia, ae 34, Abrahams marrying Ketyrah after San 

14. Of the age of Thara,whe lined in Charra \ tahs déath,and thé meaning thereof. : 
until his dyingeday, ~ ° | oe 35. The appointment of G A concerning the 

te. Ofthe time wherein Abraham receined | two twins in Rebeca’s woombe. — a. 
the promsfe from God > departed froms Charra | 36. Of a promife and bleffing received by 

16. The order and quality of Gods promifes Ifaac, in the manner that Abraham had reeei- 
made unto Abraham. i wed hit. .% 3 Ae ; 

17. Of the three moft eminent kingdomes of | . 37-Of Efau and lacob,and the mifteries ine - 
the world; the-cheefe of which in Abrahanis cluded ih them both, ee rr 
time was méft excellent of all. ane oe 38. Of lacobs sourny into Avefapotamsia for. 

1 8.Of Gods fecond promife to Abraham that | 4 wife his vifion in the ngght at he went:bis rea: 
he & his feed fhould poffeffe the land of Canaan, | turne with foure women , whereas hee went but. 

19. How God preferned Saraschaffityin E. \ forom. nae a, 2 
fipt, when Abraham, would not be knowne that | 39. Jacob enfiiled Ifrael, The reafon of this 
foe was his wife but hisfiffers ~ change.. , 

20. Of the feperation of Lot and Abraham, | © 40.Iacobs departure into Egipt with fenen-. 
without breach of charsty or lone betweene | ty fipe foules 5 how to bee taken feeing fome of 
Shige. ge ES. Se GE ae EN themwere borne afterwards. v1 
- a1. OF Géds third. remye of the Land of Gu-:}* ‘4 t-Jacobs — bis fonnehidab: 
naan te Abrabam.and hii fede forzwers -:: .: |» G2. Of lacobs vhanging of bis hands, from as 


22. How Abtaham oxertprew the enemies of. j 
the Sodamitssfreed Lot from captinity, and yas |. 4, Of Moyles his times.Joluas #9 ludgess 
bleffed by AMclchifedech the Prieft. . xf t e.Kings : Saulethe fir 3s Daud heehee 

. 23. Of Geds promife ta ‘Abraham ,' that bee A both ix merrit,andin mifticall reference, 
Paice : BINIS. 7 


4 toe 


of the heads of lofephs fows; when he blefedshens:. 


s7t 


572 


Se 
X 


SIXTEENTH BOOKE 
OF THE CITTIE OF GOD: 


Written by Ssint tugaftine Bifhop of Hippo, 
vnto (Marcelénas. 


whether there be any families of Gods cittizens mamed,betweene 
=e Noahasd Abraham. Cuap..1. 


=a O finde in the evidences of holy writ whether the Glori- 
A ficbesyg ous Citty of GOD continued on in a good courfe after 
BA iy N74 the deluged,or through the fecond inundation of impiety 
EAE i] was fo interrupted,as Gods religion Jay wholy vnrefpe@- 
mate Wate ed is avery difficule matter :becaufe that in all the cano- 
Rey: nicall fcriptures,after chat Noah and his three fonnes with 
ON hee: py |! his and their wiues were fauedby the Arke from their de- 
eee Se} luge, we cannot finde any one perfon vntill brabams time, 
euidently commended for his piety: only Noshs propheticall blefling ofhis two 
fennes Sem and Japhet,wee doe fee,and know that he knew what was to follow a- 
long timeafter. Wherevpon he curfed his micdlemoft fonne , (who had offen- 
ded him)not in himfelfe, hee laydnotl fay the curfe vpon himfelfe,but vpon his 
rand-child faying ,Curfed be Canaan, « feruant of fernants {hall bee be unto his bre- 

Gen. 9.35. g : } : 
thren . This Canaan was Chams fonne, his that did hot couer , but rather difcouer 
his fathers nakednefle. (4) And then did he fecond this , with a blefling vpon his 
eldeft fonnes,faying : bleffed be the Lord God of Sem, and iet Canaan be his [eruant. 
Gen.9.36. The Lord make laphet resoyce(b) that he may dwellin the tents of Sem: all which,to- 
gether with Noahs planting a vine-yeard, beeing drunken with the wine,and vao- 
couered in his f{leepe , all thofe circumftances haue their propheticall interpre- 

tations and myfticall references. | 


L. VIVES. . 
| A” (a) then] A diuerfity of reading : the beft lies before you.(b) That he may dwel] Hie- 


rome faith itis meant of the Chriltians who expelling the lewes doe dwell and inioye 
the lightof the holy {criptures. . | 


What prophetique mifteries were inthe fonnes of 
Noah Cnap.2. | 


BY their ‘true event hath now cleared their former obfcurity : for what dili- 
gent obferuer fees chem not all in Chrift ? Sem,of whofe feed Chrifts huma- 
Cane 3, +, Bity came,is interpreted, Named. And whois morenamed then Chrift , whofe 
*" "name is now fo fragrant that the propheticall Canticle compareth it to an cyst- 
ment powred out : in whofe houfes,thac is, in whofe churches, the diffufed nations 
fhallinhabice. For Japhet is,aiffufed. But Cham, who is interpreted hette,Noabs 

, , mi 


oan) 


t. 
TC OTT TE, 


Lint. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. $73 


middie fonne beeing as diftinét from both, and remayning betwééne both,bee- 
ing neither of the firit fruites of Ifraell, nor of the fullneffe of the nations’, v hat 
is hee but a type of our hotce hcretiques, not horte in the fpirit of wifdome , but 
of (s) turne-coate futrletie 5 that burneth in their, hearts to the difturbance 
of the Sainrs quiet ? But this is vfefull to the good proficients in the church. 
asthe Apoftle faith. 7 keremuft bee Herelies amongst you that they which are ap- _ 
proowed mixlt bee knowne. WWherevponalfoicis writen. The learned {onze wit- 
bee wife, and vfe the fooles ks his minsfler. For thtereare many things pertey- 
ning to the. Catholike faith which the Heretiques turbulen:ly roffing andtur- 
ning,caufe them thac are to defend them againft them both to obferue chem the 
more fully,vnderftand them the moreclearely , and avow thesh the more confi- 
dently. Thus the enemies queftion addeth the perfection of vnderftanding. Al- 
though not oncly the protefled Infidels , buteuen the cloaked Heretikesalfo 
Jurke vnder the name of chriftians,and yet liue wickedly,may bee iuftly compri- 
fedin Noahs middle fonne : for in worde they declare ,and in deede they difho- 
nour the paffion of CHRIST prefiguredin Nosbs nakedneffe. Ofthete itis ; 
faide,tee [ball know them by their fruites :and therefore was Cham curfedin his Bae.7 3° 
fonne,as in his fruice, that is his worke: where-vpon Chandan,is fitly interprered, 
their motion and what is that. but their werke. But Shem and Japhet prefizuring 
circumcifion, and vocercumcifion,, oras the Apoftle faith, the Iewes and the 
Greekes , ( thofe I meane that are called and iuftified ) hearing of their fathers 
nakedneffe( the Redeemers typical paffion ) tooke a.garment and putting it 
vpon their fhoulders , went back-ward,and fo couered their fathers nakedneffe, 
not feeingewhat they couered . In like manner, wee, in Chrifts Paffion doe reue- 
rence that which was done for vs,yet abhorre weethe Iewes villany herein. The 

arment, is the facrament : their backs the remembrance of things paft, becaufe 
a church now celebrateth the paffionof CHRIST Japhes dwelling in the tents 
of Sem,and Cham betweenethem both: it looketh now no more for a paffion ta 
come , but the euill brother is (6) feruant to his good brethren in his fohne,that 
is,his worke : becaufe the good can make vfe of the enill to their increafe of wil. 
dome: for there be fome(faith the Apoftle)shat preach not Chrift purely, but how- Phil.1,16 
foewer Chrift be preache fincerely or colourably,1 ao joy,and wil toy therein;For he had 28. 
planted the vin-yard whereof the Prophet faith, Tine vine-yeard of the Lord of heits Usis., 
isthe houfe of Ifraelt cc.and he drinketh of the wine thereof:whether it be of that 
cup wherofit is faid. Are yee able to drinke of the cup that [bal driake of? And,O.my lpia 
Father, if it bee pofitble let this cuppe paffe from me: wherein donbrleffe hee meant Pare 
his paflion. Or whether it were fignified ( feeing that wine.is the fruite of the 
vine-yeard ) that hee tooke our flefh and blond out of the vine-yard , that is, 
the. houfe of Ifrael , and was drunke, and vncovered, that is: {uffered thé 
pafton . For theré was‘ his nakednefle difeoheted : that. is his infirmitie,. 
whereof the Apoftle faith. Hee was crucified concerning his ‘iafirmitie : where- Ome 
of alfo hee faith elfe-where. The weakeneffe of GOD is flronger then men, 1 Cotats 
and the fools{bneffe of GOD , is wifer then mes. But the Scripture hauing 35 
fayd. Hee was uncouered , and ss in the middeft of his owne honfe , makes 
vs an excellent demonftration that hee was to {uffer death by the hands of 
his owne country mea , fellowes and kinfmen in the flefh . This paffionof — 
CHRIST, the reprobate preach verbaliie onely : forthey know not what 
they preach . But the elect lay vppe this great “miftery within , and. there, 
they honour it in their hedrts beeing GOD S infirmity , and foolifhneffe , buc 

| | a farye 


1.Cor, If5 
19 


574 


SAINT AV GVSTINE. Cuar.a.8 3. 


farre ftronger and wifer then man in his beft ftrength and wifdome. Thetype 
of this,is le going out and telling of his brethren whache had feene of his fa- 
ther, and Semsand Japhets going in , that is,difpofing themfelues inwardly,for 
to couer and reuerence thac which hee had {eene and told them of. Thus as 
weecan wee fearch the fence of f{cripture, finding it more congruent to fome 


- applications then to others, yet doubting nor, but that euery part ofitbatha 


farther meaning then meerely hiftoricall, and that , to bee referred to none 
bute CHRIST andhis church the Citty of GO D : which was preached from 
mans firit creation, as wee fee the euentes doe confirme . Sothen fromthefe 
two bleffed fonnes of Nosh, and that curfed one betwixt them,downevnto the 
daies of Abraham, isno mention made of any righteo}:s man , which time conti- 
nued more then onethoufand yeares. I doe not thinke but there were iuft men 
in this time,bue hac it would haue beene too tedious to haue rehearfed them all, 
and rather ro haue conceraed the diligence ofan hiftory, then the fubftance ofa 
prophecy. The writer of thefe diuine bookes ( or rather the fpiritof G O D in 
him ) goeth onely about fuch things as both declare the things paft and prefi- 
pure the thingsto come, pertinent onely cothe Cittieof GO D: for whatfo- 
cuer is heerein fpoaken concerning her oppofites , itis all co make her glorie 
the more illuftrious by entring comparifon with their iniquity , or to pro- 
cure her augmentation by teaching her toobferue cheirruine, and bee warned 
thereby. Nor areall cthe*hiftoricall relations of thefe bookes , myfticall ; bur 
fuch as are not , are added for the moreilluftration of fuch as are. Itis the 
plow-fhare onely that turneth vppe the earth: yet may not the plough lacke the 
(c) other inftruments. The ftrings onely doe caufe the found in harpes and 6- 
ther fuch inftruments : yet muft that haue pinnes , andthe other , frets, tomake 
vppe the muficke and the (4) organs haue other deuifes lincked to the keyes, 
which the organift toucheth not, but onely their keyes,tomake the found pro- 
portionate, and harmonious. Euen fo in thofe prophetique ftories,fome things 
arebut bare relations , yetare they adherent vnto thole thatare fignificant, and 
in a manner linked to them, — 


L. VIVES. 


Urne-coaté (a) futtlety | Some reade, impatience,and for wifdome, before , pacience : and 
* for their heares,their firft beginning :bucchis is not fo praper. (6) Seruant | The Latinet 
vfe Puer,either for a childor a | aes , and fo the Greekes doe auk,as the Septuagints for ex- 
ample in this place. ass éexi rus &c. 4% hoxfoold fernant fhall hee bee to bis bretheren: ( brifippus is 
idle in his diftintion of 3: siras and sae: as if che firft were a feruing man,and the later a flaue 
ar bondman: Ammonins is of another minde,but this is nothing to our | poles G:xeris isan 
ordinary feruant in the houfe.(c) Other inftruments ] The cutter, and opulcer wédges,the 
teame,the handles or hailes the beame, the plough-{taffe,the mole-boord &c. ‘d) Organs, |He 


meaneth of all che gins in inftrumnents, it is too tedious to ftand reckning of chem here. 


Of the generations of the three founes of Noah. 


Crap. 3. 


N Ov muft wee fee what Wee can-finde concerning the generations of thefe 
#. ¥ formes,andlay chat downein che progreffe , to fhew the proceeding of gee 


“Seoss La > -me me a 


Lise. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 


the Citties in their courfes, heauenlyand earthly . The generation of lapher,the | 
yongeft,is the firft that'is recorded, who had eight fonnes,two of which had fea- 


uen fonnes further, three the one, andfoure the other: fo that Z4ph:# , had inall, 
fifteene fons.Now Cham,the middle brother had foure fonnes,one of which had 
fiue more,and one of thefe had two, which in all make eleauen. Thefe being réck. 
ned , the feripture returneth as to the head,faying : 4nd Chuth begat Nimrod, 
who was 4 Gyant wpcn the earth: hee was a mighty hunter againft the Lord, where- 
fore itis faid , as Nemrod the migh!y hunter againft the Lord. (4) Andthebegin- 
ning of his Kinedorhe was Babilon,and (4) Oreg, and (c) Archad,and Chalame 
inthe Land of Seimar.Outof thar Land canie Cur and (@) builded Niniuy,and 


the citty (¢) Robooth, ad Chaleth,and: Dafem, betweene Chaleth and Nioiuy: . 


this is a great city. Now chis Chas,the pyant Nembrods father ,is the fickt of Cham 
generation that is named, fiue of whofe fons, and two of his grand-children were 
reckned before: But he either begot this giant afterall chein,or elfe(anid that I ra- 
_ ther hold) the {criprure nameth him for his eminence fake,bécaufe his Kingddm 
is natned alfo, (whereof Babilon was the head itty ) and fo ate the other citties, 
and regionsthat hee pofleffed. Bact whereas itis faid that Afr came‘our of the 
Land of Semar , which belonged vnto Nimrod and builded Nintvie and the o- 
ther three citcies,chis was long after, but named heere , becaufe of the greatneffe 
of the Affyrian Kingdome;which (f) Nénus,Belas bis fonne, enlarged wonderfol- 
ly,he that was the founder of the great citty Niniuie, which was called after his 
name: Ninivieof Ninas. But A/ur, the father of the Affyrians , was none of 
Chams fonnes , but of the progeny of Sem’, Neahs eldeft fonne. So tharit is éui- 
dentthat fome of Ses fonnes afterward attained the Kingdome of this great 
Giant , and went further then it, and builded ocher citties , the firft of which 
was called Niniuie of Ns#as : from this,the feripcure recurneth to another fonne 
of Chams , Mixrdim ,and his generation is reckned-vppe : not by perticulak 
meu, but. by feauen nations  ouref the fixt whereof, as froma fixch fonne’ 
came the Philyftiym which make vppe eight. Thence it returneth backea- 
gaine to Chanacn in whom Cham was curfed , and his generation is comprized 
in eleauen: and all their extents related , cogether with fome citries. Thys caf- 
ting all into one fumme, of Chams progeny are one and thirty defcended. 
Now it remaineth to recount the ffockéof Sem, Noahs eldeftfonne: for the 

enerations , beganne to bee counted fromthe youngeft , and fo vpwards pra- 
Sally vnto him. Buc it is fome-what hard to finde where his race heginnes to 


bee recounted: yet muft we explaine ic fome way :for itis chiefly pertayningto — 


ourpurpofe. | | ee ee ee eee 
Thus weread it. (¢g) vnto Sem alfo the father ofall che fonnes of Heber and el- 
der brother of sephet were children borne: the order of the Wordes is this : ed 
Heber was borme visto Sem, and all his children; enen unto Sém who was laphets el- 
der Gromer, Thus it maketh Sew the Patriarch vnt6‘all that weré borne; 
of his ftocke whether they were his fonnes , dk his grand-fonnes , or theit 
fonnes , or their grand fonnes ; and {0 of the reft : for Sem. begot not He- 
der, Heber is the fir from him in lineall defcent. For Sem Cbefides others) be- 
app das shee Cancan, Canaan Sale,and Sale was Hebers father . Ic isnoe. 
or nothing then that Heber is named the firlt of Sems progeny, and before 
all Semss fonries , beeing but grand-chiilde to his gearid-childe; valeffé it bée that 
the (+) Hebrewes had their name from him , qua/s Heberewes :as i¢ may bee 
held that they were called Hebrewts guwa/i Cabrabewes 5 of a 
—_ uc 


‘@ 
a 7 
Lene es 24 
ger Ad 
ote 
ae Fs 


ee 


576 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuan; 


But trueict is, they were called Hebrewes of Heber sand Ifrael onely attained 


that language,and was the people wherein Gods Citty was both prefigured,and 
madea ih . Sothen Sem firft hath his fixe fonnes reckned , and foure other 


fonnes,by one of chem : and chen another of Ses fonnes begor afonne,and this 


fonne of chis latt (on was father vnto Heber. And Heber had two fons, one called 
Phadec,that is,dsuifion : che {cripture addeth this reafon of his name: for 4m his time 
the earth was ainided:which thalbe manifefted hereafter. Hebers other fonne had 
twelue fonnes ,.a‘d forthe tinage of Seth were inall feauenandtwenty . Thus 
thei the grand fumme of all the generations of Noahs three fonnes, is three 
{core andthirteene. Filteene from J/sphet,thirty.and one from Chans , and feauea 
and twenty from Shem. Then the {cripcure ptoceedeth , faying : Thefe are the 
fonnesof Sem according sotheir families and their tongues , inthesr conntries and 
Nations. Andchen of them all: Thefe are the families of the fonwes of Noah efter 
their gencratrons smongit their people: and out of thefe were the Nations of the 
earth diwided after the floud . Whence wee gather,chac they were three {core 
and ithirteene or rather (as wee will fhewe hereafter) three {core andtwelue 

ations 5 not feauenty two fingle perfons: for when the fonnes of Japhet were 
reckned , it concluded thus: (1) Of the/e were the iflands of the gentiles diusded 
in their hands each one according to.bis tongue and families tx their nations. And 
the fonnes. of Cham are plainely made the tounders and ftorers of nations,as I 
fhewed. before. Alizrzim begot all thofe shat were called the Ludicim , and fo 
of the other fixe . And hauing reckned Chams tonnes ,it concludeth in like 
manner: Thefeare the fonnes of Cham according to their tongues and families 
in their countries and their. nations .. Wherefore the Scripture could not 
recken many of their fonnes:, becaufe they grew vppe, and went to dwell ino- 
ther countries: and yet couldnot people whole lands themfelues : for why are 
buc two /aphets eight fonnes. progenies nained:; three of Chams foure :and two 
of Sems. fixe ? Had the other no children? Oh wee may not imagine that ; but 
they did nos growe yppe into Nations warthy recording , butas they were ioy- 


_nedthemfelues withasher peopld..  - 


The plaine 
of Semar. 


Ninine, 


oy. LA VIVES. S, 
AX ) the] Whar thofe places ‘were in Greeke ; Eufebins Pamphilus, and Tofepbus relates 


*whom Hierome.alfo agrceth with: what we necde,wee will cake thence sthe Reader may 
finde the reftin themfelues , for they are common bookes. The field of Sewar was in Chal- 
dea,in it was builc the tower of Babel, (6) Oreg] The Hebrew is eS rach-but thus the feapen- 
ty haue it: (¢) eArchad | The Hebrew is eAccad , which they fay is Niftbis in Mefoporamia. 
Péeny calleth it Antioche, (d) Nesinse] That of Afiyria, for there-was another lewith one ine 
corner of Arabia,corruptly called N. neve afterwards . That of Affyiia Piz calles Ninns,be- 
ing whilom a goodly ching fanging vpon Tyerisand lying towards the weft : fo fatth Pred- 
my alfo,Diodoras calls it Nina,and faith that Nines, Seles his fonne built it,and that there was 
neuer City fince fo large within the walls, Their bight was one hundred focte : they bredth 
three chariots might haue gone fide by fide vpon., eafily : their compaffe was foure hundred 
and eighty furlougs,and their pofture,in a quadrangle, there were on the walls one thoufan& 
fiue hundred towers cachone a hundred foore high.(e' Robooth Hieromes trarflation hath, the 
ftreetes.of the Citry,for Robooth bur the feanenty Read onely Hee baste Ninine,and Chalach in 
the midf which was a great (itty, Valefle the copy bee faulty, The hebrew hath Abobooth for 
that which ‘vee read {treetes. (f) Niwns | Sancheniate following the Phznician Theology 
maketh Nims a toageof Saterne and callech. him Jupiter Belus.. Now there was 8 

) | ’ 


Lret6. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. , 577 


Belus,{onne to Epaphus kinge of Egypt whome Jove begot : vnto this Belws, J/iswasmother. _, 
Though Exufebsus make him the fonne of T% elegonus who maried J/s after e7pis was dead: Belus. 
(ecropsxe g ing asthenin Athens. But Pets chat was father co Nizus , wasa quiet King of 
Affiria, and contented with alittle Empire , yet had hee this warlike fonne, whereby he was ~ 
reucrenced as a God, and called the Babilonian /wpiter. This was their Belus fay the Egyptians 
father to Egsptus , whome thcy call he fonne of Neptune and Lybra,and.granchild to Epaphus, 

r Lybsas father. Hee p!aced colonies in Babilon and feating him-felfe vpcn the bankes of Eu- 

: phrates,iuftituted his Prie{ts here after the Egyptian order. That Belss whom they werfhip- 
ped fo deuoucly in Affiria, and who had a temple at Babilon in Pixies time,was (as he faith) 

. theinuencor of Allronomy , and the Affirians dedicated aiewell yntohim and calledit Belws 
hiseye. ‘ g ) Usto Sem alfa. |The feauenty lay it downe moft playnely.( 4) Hebrewes. ] Panl, The Hes 
Bifhoppe of Borgos , a great Hebraician fayth they were called Hebrewes , qua/i tramellers, brevees. 

. for fo che wor: intends, trauellers they were indeed,both in Egypt and in the land of Canaan. 
(i) Of thefe were. ] As Mands are diuided from the continent by the fea,fo were they amoneft 
them felues by riuers, mountaines, woods,fands : deferts;and marifhes, 


Of the confufien of tongues and the building of Babiloi. 
, : —  Cuap, & 4. 


VV Hereas therefore the Scriptures reckneth thofenations each according 
to his proper tongue, yet it recurneth backe tothe time when they had 
all but one congue, and then fheweth the caufe of the diuerfity. Then the whole 
earth (faith it ) was of one language and one pie And as they went fro the Eaft, 
they found a plaine tn the lind of Semar , andthere they aboade : and they Jayd one to 
another, ccme let vs make bricke and burne st in the fire fo they had bricke for fone, 
and(a pitch for lime : They fayd allo, come let vs build us a citty and(b)a tower whofe 
toppe may reach tothe h:aucn,that we(c) may get vs 4 name Jealt we bce fcattred upon 
the whole earth. And the Lord came downeto fee the citty and tower which the 
fonnes of men builded. And the Lord fayd : behold the people is allone, and hane all 
one language , and this they begun to do , neither can they now be ftopped from 
_  Whattoeuer they haue imagined to effe& : come on let vs downe and confound Babilons 
their language therethat each one of them vnderftand not his fellowes fpeach. confusion. 
So the Lord fcattered them from thence ouer the whole éarth and they (d) left 
of to bui'd thecitty andthe cower. Therefore the name of it was called confy- 
fon, becavfe there the Lerd confounded the language of thé whole earth: 
and from thence cid the Lord fcatter them vpen all the eatth. This Cirty 
now which was called confujiom isthat Babilon, whofe wounderfull buildin 
is admired even in prophane hiftories : for Babilon is intérpreted confulon, 
‘whence we gather, thac Nessbrod the Giant was ( as we faid before )the builder 
ofit : the {criptuie laying : the beginning of his kingdome was Babilon, that is, this 
was the metropolitane cicy of the realme, the kings chamber , and the chiefe 
of all the reft : chough it were never brought to that ftrange perfection that the 
wicked and the proud would haue it to be, for it was built toheigh ; which 
is fayd wasup to beauen , whether this were che fault of fome one Tower which 
they wrought more vpon thenall the reft , ox of them all vnder one, as wee will 
fay , the foldiour , or enemy , when we meane of many thoufatids , and as thé 
multitude of Frogges and Locutfts that plagued Egypt were called onely in the 
fmgular number , the Frogge and Locuft.: But what intended mans vainé 
| Ddd prefumtion’ 


- sR 
Esteem — a ee oe 


——--—— -—-~ 
Pere See at | go 


—— ee 


(a RRR AIT GET ETL ET I Ln ND 
578 ; SAINT AV GVSTINE. C war.4.& 5. 


Se PET TDS 
The power prefumption herein ? admic,they could haue exceeded all che mountaines with 
ofhumili- their buildings height, could they euer haue gotten aboue the clement of avre? | 
Y: aud what hurt can elleuation either of body or {pirit do vnto God ? Humility 
is che true traé vnto heaven, 'lifting vppe the {pirit vynrco G O D,but not againft 
G OD,asthat gyant was faid to be an hunter againft the Lord: which fome not vn- 
derftanding , were deceiued by the ambiguity of the greeke and tranflated,de- 
fore the Lord, (f) iwusiy beeing both before, and againft : for the Pfalme vfeth ir 
fo : and knecle before the Lord our maker. Anditis alfo in lob: He hath firetched 
out hishand againft God. Thus then (g) is that hunter againft the Lordco bee vn- 
derftood. But whatis the worde, Hater, but an entrapper , perfecutor and 
murderer of earthly creatures ? So rofethis hunter and his people, and raifed 
this tower againft G O D, which was a typeof the impiety of pride: and an euill 
intent,though never effected deferueth to bee punifhed. But how was it puni- 
fhed ? Becaufethat (4) all foueraignty lieth in commauad, and all commaund 
in the congue, thus pride was plagued , that the commaunder of men fhould nor 
be vnderftood,becaufe he would not vnderftand the Lord, his commander. Thus 
was this con{piracy diffolued, each one departing from him whom hee vnder- 
ftood not,nor could he adapt himfelfeco any but thofe that hee vnderftood,and 
thus thefe languages diuided,qpem into Nationsand difperfed them ouer the 
whole earth,as God who wrought thofe ftrange effe@ts,had refolued. 


| —— | L. VIVES. | ; 
Nad (a) pitch) Bitumen,whercof there was great ftore in thofe places,(6) A tower} The like 
to this do the prophane writers talke of the Gyants wars againit the Gods, laying moun- 
taine vpon mountaine, to get foote-hold againfi heauen the nearer it, 

Ter funt conxati inponere Pelion Offe, 

Ter pater exctruttos diftecit fulmine montes. 

Pelion on Offa three times they had throwne, 
| _ And thrice Jo#es thunder {truck the bul-warke downe. 

Saith Virgil. The ftory is common : ic might be wrefted out of this ofthe confufion,as di- 
uers other things are drawne from holy writ into heathenifme, (¢) #e may get| Let this beea 
monument of vs all. (d) Left off] And the builders of the cittic ceafed , fay the feauenty. (e) 
Wonderfuil\\n Pliny,Solsnus, Mela,Strabo, Ferodotus , all the geographers,and many of the 

Nimrod, Poets, of this elfe-where. (f) éravzsv.] Soitis in latin alfo.’g) Zs that hunter] Tofephus writ- 

eth that Nénerod firft taught mankinde to iniure GOD, and to grow proud againft him ; for 

being wondrous valiant,he perfwaded them that they might thanke themfelues,and not God, 

for any good that befell them. And fo ordeined he himfelfe a fouerainty,and to prouide that 

God fhould not fubuert it, fell a building of this tower,to refift afecond deluge if God fhould 

be offended. And the multitude held it aleffe matter to ferue man then God: and fo obeying 

Nimrod willingly began to build this huge tower, which might {tand all waters yncouered, 

Of this tower, Sybille writeth faying. When al men were of one language fome fell to build an high 

tower as though they wonld paffe through st unto heauen . But God fent a winde,and ouerthrew it, 

and confounded their language with diners, fo that each one had a fenerall tongue : and therefore 

that citty was called Babilon.(4) 41 foxeraignty | The Princes words are great attatiues of 

the fubiets hearts : which if they bee not vnderftood , make all his people avoide him. And 

therefore Aithridates euen when hee was veterly ouerthrowne, had friends ready to fuccour 
him,becaufe he could {peake to any nation in their owne language. 


Of Gods comming downe to confound the language of thofe 
towre-builders, CHAP. 5. | 
Genii, Or whereas it is written: The Lord came downe to [ee the citty and tower which the 
Sous of mee builded , that ig not the fons of God,but chat earthly minded ane 
! whic 


Lin 16. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. $79 
which we call che Terreftriall citty : we muft thinke that God remooued from NO God moa- 
place, for hee is alwaies all in all, but he is fayd to come dow ne,when he doth any eth ie 
thing in earth beyond the order of nature,wherein his omni potency Is as it were si ee 
prefented.Nor gettethihe temporary knowledge by feeing,who can never beig- 

norant in any thing: but he is faid to fee and know that which he laies open tothe 
fence,and knowledge of others.So then he did not fee that city,as he made it bee 
feene,when he fhewed how farre he was difpleafed with 1c. Vee may fay GOD 

came downe to it , becaufe his angells came downe,wherein hee dwelleth,as chat 

alfo which followeth. The Lord {aid, Beho/d,the people ts ove,and they haue all one 
language crcand then, Come on, lat vs goe downe,and there confonnd their language: 

This is arecapitulation , fhewing how the LOR D came downe : for ifhe were 

come downe already , why fhouldhe fay Let vs go downe oc. he f poke to thean- 
gellsin whom hee cane downe. And he faith not,come,and goe you downe.and 

there confound their language » but come, let vs LOC. thewing that they are his 
minifters, and yet hee co-operateth with them and they withhimasthe Apoftle _. . 
faith, For we labour together with Goa. | 1.Cor.3 


_ee 


The manner how GOD [peaketh tohis An gels. 
HAP, 6, a a 


T Hat alfo where God faith, Zet vs (4) make man in our Image,may be meant vn- 
to theangells , becaufe hee faith not, ws// make but adding, sn our Image,itis 
_ wicked to thinke that God made manin the angells Image, or chat Gods and 
theirs areallone.This therefore is an intimation of the Triwzty: which Trinity be- 
ing neuerthelefle,but one God, when hee had {aid /et vs make,he adioyneth,thas 
God created the man in his Image,hee doth not fay the Gods created,nor inthe image 
of the Gods : and {o here may the Trinzty bee vnderftood,as if che Father had fayd 
to the Sonand the Holy Spiric, come on, ket vs goe downe and there confoand there 
language : this now, if there bee any reafon excluding the Angells in this point: 
as thofe whom ic rather befittedto come vnto God 9in holy nations and Godly © 
cogitations , hauing recourfe vnto the vnchangeable truth , the eternall 
law of that vpper court: for they themfelues are not the truth but pertakers of 
the truth,that created chem,and draw to that,as the fountairie of their life‘ take- 
ing out ofthat, what wanteth in themfelues , and this motion of theirs js firrtie, 
drawing to that whence they neuer depart. Nor doth GOD {peake tohis Goa weak. 
angells as wee doe one to another, of vnto G ODsor his angellsto vs Of Wee to eth three. 
them , or God by them to vs : but in an ineffable manner »{hewne to vs after our seeps 
manner : and his high {peach to them before the effec, is the vnaltered order of 
the effec : not admitting found, ‘or verberation of ayre,but an é¢ternall power in 
it felfe, working vpon a temporall obie@&s Thus doth God fj peake to his angells, 
ut vnto vs, being farre of him,in a farreother manner: and when we conceiuea- 
ny thing by the firft maner, wee comeneare the angells : but I amnot here to dif- 
courfe of Gods waies opening his will to others: the vnchangeable truth doth 
cither fpeake ineffably from himfelfe, vnto reafonable creatutes , or by reafona- 
ble creatures, mutable,or piricuall , eicher vnto our imagination and {pirit,orto 
our bodily fenfe : and whereas it is fayd : Aud {ball they not faine many things they 
go about ? this is noconfirmation , but rather a queftion,as we ¥fé in threatning; 
asin this verfe Vsrgz/] declareth. | | 


. 
Gan 
»: 


Dddi (b) Nig 


Aenid,3, 


SAINT AV GVSTINE. C wap.7.8£ 8, 


(5) Non arma ot apes a g.ex urbe fequentar 
| And hall not allmy powers take armes,and run? 

We muft therefore take itas a queftion.Ocherwife it fheweth not as a chreat- 
ning:we muft needs therefore adde che interrogatiue point . Thus then the pro- 
genies of Noahs three fonnes were feauenty three or rather (as wee haue {aid) 
three {core and twelue Nations, who filled the earth and the Iflands thereof (e) 
and the number of nations was farre aboue the nnmber of languages: for now 


in Africa wee_haue many Barbarous countries that {peake all one languager 


and who doubteth that mankinde increafing , diuers tooke fhippes and went to 
inhabite the Iflands abroad? | | | ) 


L. VIVES. 


Et (a )us make | Uierome and Auguftine doe both take this as an intimation of the Trinity 
(6) Non arma\Dido's words in Virgil. Enead.3.(c) And the number \But | thinke ir is hare 
der co fhew any one language,then any one nation , but | doe not contend , but onely fpeake 


_ My minde, 


Whether the remote Iles were fupplied with the beafts of all forts that were 
| _ fanedin the Arke. Cwar.7: 


BY: nhow-there is a queftion concerning thofe beafts, which man refpeéts not, 

 & yet are not produced by putrifaction, as frogs are,but only by copulation 
of maie and female(as wolues &c.)how they after the deluge, wherein al perifhed 
but thofe in the Arke,could come into thofe Iflands,vnleffe they were propagate 
from them that were preferued in the Arke,we may thinke thac they might fome 
to theneareftelles; but there are {ome far inche maine , to which no beaft could 
{wim. If men defiredto catch them and tranfport them thether, queftionleffe 
they mighs doe it (¢) by hunting ; though we cannot deny but thar the angells by 


_. Gods command might cary them thether : but ifthey were produced fron the 


earth,asat firft becaute God faid, let the earth bring forth the lining foxte : then is it 


moftapparant that the diverfity of beafts were preferued ia the Arke rather for 


afigureofthe diuers Nations, then for reftauration , ifthe earth brought them 
forth in thofe Iles to whichthey could not otherwife come. 


oe a VIVES. 


Ya bunting \Yn che Canaries and other new found Iles,there were none of many creatures 
"chat wé haue in abundance in the continent : but were faine to be tranfporced thethersand 
the like we vfe in cranfportation of plants, and feeds, from natien to nation, 


Whether Adams,or Noahs fonnes begot any moxftrous 
7 kinds of men. CuapP, 8. Oo a 
pts further demanded whether Noahs fons,or rather Adams ( of whomall man 


kinde came)begot any of thole (4) monftrous men, that are mentioned in pro- 


—— ae el -_=ae 


Liné.; °° OF THECITIE OF GOD. 58x 


phaine hiftories : as {ome that haue (6) but one'eye in their mid fore-head:fome 
vith their heeles where their toes fhould bé;fome, with both fexesin one, & their 
right pap a mans, & the left a womans,&c both begecting and bearing children in 
one body: fome without mouths, liuing only by ayre and fmellings fome but acu-. - 
bite high, called (c) pigmies,of the grecke word : fome,whereé the women beare 
children at the fift yeare of their age : fome that haue but one leg ,and bendit , 
not,and yet are of wonderfull fwiftneffe,béeing called (4) Sciopode , becaufe they 
-fleepe vnder the fhace ofthis their foote: fome neck-lefle, withthe face ofa mart 
-intheir breafts :and fuch other as are wrotight itt (e) checker-worke in the Sea- 
ftreete at Carthage , beeing aken out of their moft curious and exact hiftories, __ 
What fhallI fpeake of the (f) Cynocepbals , that had dogs heads,and barked like 
dogs? Indeed we need not beleeue all the moniftrous reports,that runne concer- 
ning this point. But what foeuer hee bee; that is Man , that 1s,amortall reafona- 
ble creature,bee his forme, voice , or what ever , neuer fo differentfrom an ordi- 
nary mans, no faithfull perfon ought to doubt chat hee is of Adams progeny : yet 
isthe power of nature fhew're , and ftrangely fhewne in fuch : but the fame rea- 
fons that wee can giue for this or that vnordinary fhaped-birth amongft vs,thé 
fame may be giuen for thofe monftrous nations : for G O Dimadeall, and when 
or how hee would forme this dr chat, heeknowes beft, hauing the, perfir skill © 
how to beautifie this vniuerfe by oppofition and dinerfity of parts. But heechat 
eannotcontemplate the beauty of their whole, {tumbles ac the deformity of the © 
art:not knowing the congruence that it hath wich the whole.We fee many that 
nal aboue fiue fingers , or toes :and this farther frem that, then the other is in 
proportion : yet God forbid that any one fhould bee fo beforted as to thinke the 
maker erred in this mans fabrike, though weekniow not why hee made him thus.’ 
Be the diverfity neuer fo great, he knowes what hee doth: and none muft repree 
hend him.(g) At Hippos we had one borne with feet like halfe moones,and hands 
likewife ; wich two fingers onely,and two toes . Ifthere were a nation fuch now; 
(b) curious hiftory would ring off it.as of a wonder. But muft wee therefore 
fay that this creature came not from Adam? an age can feldome Be without an(s) 
Hermphradite,thoughthey benot ordinary,perfons I meane thac are fo perfic in 
both fexes that we know not what to terme them,man,or woman : though cuf- 
tome hath giuen the preheminence to the (k) chiefe, andcall them ftill, men; 
For none bom of them in the female fenfe. In our tiie (fome few yeares 
agoe ) wasone borne, that was two from the middle vp-wardes , and burone _ 
_downe-ward . This was inthe (/) Eaft : hee had two heads ,two breafts, 
- ” foure hands,one belly and two feete : and lined fo longe chat‘a multitude of men 
were cie witneffe of this fhape ofhis. — : oe) re ee ee 
Buc who ean recken all the birthes —— 2 Wherefore as wee may 
not fay but thofe are really defcended from the firft man, fo what Nations 
foeuer haue (hapes different from that whichis in moft men,and feeme(s) to be 
exorbitant fromthe common forme, ifthey bee (#) defineable to bee reafona- 
blecreatures , and mortall , they muft bee acknowledged for Adams iflue : ( if it 
bee truethat their bee fuch diuerfity of fhapes in whole Nations , varying fo 
farre from ours.)Eor if we knew not that Apes (0) Monkeyes,and (p) Babiounes, — 
were net men but beafts,chofe brave and curious hiftoriographers wou!d belie 
them confidently to bee nations and generations of men. But if they bee men - 
of whome they write thofe wonders , — : GODS pleafure was tofhewvs — 
| 3 in 


i 


; 82 


Sciopodes 
a pcople. 


Checker- 
vrorkes, 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuars 


in the creating of whole nations of fuch monfters , thar his wifdome did not like 
an vnperfit caruer,faile in the framing of {uch fhapes,but purpofely formed them 
in this fafhion ? It is no abfurdity therefore to beleeue that there may bee 


fuch nations of monftrous men, aswell as wee fee our tithes are often wit-. 


nefles of monftrous births here amongft our felues. Wherefore to clofe 
this queftion vppe with a furelocke: either che {tories of fuch monfters are 
plaine lies,or if there be {uch , they are either no men,or if they be men,they are 
the progeny of Adem : 7 : 


bnted 


L.VIVES. | 
M Onftrens(a) men | Pliny b.7, (6) One 9] Such they fay are in India, (c) Pygmees | 1do 
V.Anot beleeue that the:Pigmces were but iti one place , or-that the writers concerning 
them, differ fo as they feeme. P/iny( Gb 4. )faith they were in Thrace’, neare the towne Gerras 
nia, and called (atizé,and that the Cranes beate themaway. For there art great-ttore of 
Cranes there, wherevpon they are called the Ssrimonian , of Strymon, ariuer in Thrace, And 
Gerrania is drawne from the greeke : for yipar®: is,a Crane. The fame author reherfeth their 
opinion that faid Pygmees dwele by Endon,a riper in Caria, Lib.5. And (/i6.6.)hee follow= 
eth others, and placeth them in India , amongft the Prafian hilles: as Philoffratus doth alfo. 
Somie there bee ( as Pline faith there) that fay they are aboue the marifhes of Nils: one of 
thofe is efrifterle , who faith they liue ih Ethioptaamongft the Trog/odytes , in caues, and 
therefore are.called Troglodyte: and that theit Racure,.and crane-bactells are fables . Of thefe 
Homer {ung , placing them inthe South, where the Cranes live in winter, as theydpe in 
Thrace in fummer, going and comming with thefcafons. (e/a puts the Pygmees into the 
in-moft Arabia , little wretches they are faith hee , and fight for their: corne againft the 
Cranes. Omen hewn Se ok Pe ee, | = . 
Somie hold their are rio fuch creatures. e4ri/?. Pliny. yor in eteeke,is a cubite , and thence, 
faith Enfturhins,( Homers wnterpretor)they had cheir name. This cubite is halfe afoote, thar 
isfour¢dnd twenty fingers by their meafure , For'a fodte,is twelue infhes’, that is , fixteene 
fingéersand foure hand-breadcths. But an hand-bredch is diners : there is the lefler ( of which 
wee. dag méane)beeing three infhes, the quarter of the foate:: and there isthe greater,beeing 
twelue fingers , called a fpanne : beeing thre¢ partes of the foate , that is facace . There 
are (faith P&xy lib. 7. ) vpon thofe, mountaines , the Span-men , as they fay , or the Pigmees, 
beethg not aboue three sone (that is two fogre 3) high. So faith Gellins alfo thac their 
highett ftacure is buttwo foote 3. ib. 9.’ Pliny and Gellius doe both meane, fixe and thirtie 
fingets:, Invenkiltomake them the more cificiilous.taids they were not aboue a foore high. 
(d) | Ssiopode| Or,foore-fhadowed : nis is a fhadow. wis’a foote. (e) Checker-worke | An- 
futons ophs. ., Spartian wieth it and Pliny , It is:(faith Hermalaus Barbarus vpon Puntes 
fixth booke, and Repssffa Egnatius vpon Spartiax ) wrought with {tones of diuers col- 
Jours , which beeing rightly laied together , are the portraytures of images : as is ordinary 
to bee feenein the pauementes at Rome and_¢lfe-where in old workes, for of late it is neg 
leGted : Our in-laide workes in our chaires,and tables in Spaine haue fome refemblance there- 
of; Perottes, faith it ts ie called (Au {aicum,but the true word is Mufeacum, of Mn- 
fewm,and alledgeth chis place of Pliny : Barbarus feemes to bec of his mindealfo , The vul- 
gpar called it ssn/aicums , becaufe it feemed co bee aworke of prear wit andinduftry. (f) (7 
— } Worde for worde, Dogges-heads. ' So/izes.mekethithem 2 kindeof Apes , and 
eflible to bee turned from euer beeing wilde againe..., Drodorms, accguintes - them. wilde 
eaftes. (¢) At Hippos ] Some had added in the Margen ',. Déayitum ; and Zarityng, Ie 
fhould bee Diarrhytum . (Mela, Strabo , Plizy and Ptolemy {peake of two Hippons 
in Africa, ( haning their names from Knights, ér horfe-mien , for fois the. Grecke ixteis in- 
terpreted:: che one called Higpox Diarrhyrus, neare'Carthace,a little on this fide , and heere 
was Augaffine Bilhoppe : the othér called Hippos Regins ; becing-farther Raft, and the Kings 


are ancicnt 


_* eh in 


ta ee 


@ 


Lis16. | OF THE CITIE OF GOD. _ 533 


ancient feate,as Sitins faiths | ee 
Tum vag CH antignss dilethus regibus Hippor. 
| Vaca and Hippon, that old feate of Kings. | er ae ee 
Touching at them both. (4) Curious hiftory | Which he fpake on before. ( ) Hermaphrody- aa 
tes} Verbally from the Greeke is the word Androgyuas,avépds, aman, yaw, a wornan; But they 


are called Liermaphrotes, becaufe the fonne of Hermes and Aphrodite , chat is, Mercury and 
Venus, was held to bee the firft halfe-inale. ( &) The chiefe | The, mafculine = fo faith the La- 
tine, Semi-mas. When thofe were borne, they were counted prodigics in olde times. Ligy. 
Lucane,exc, (1) The East. } In the Eatt part of Affrick, lying towards Nilus and Cyrene,for . 
Nile parts Affricke on the Eaft from Afia, (x) Exorbitant } out of orbsta, the right path-of oa 
nature. (1 ) Definable | It is knowne that the Philofophers defined man to bee a reafonable | 
creature,and added mortall ; becaufe they held the moft of their Gods, andthe Demonestobe . _ . 


reafonable creatures, and yet immortal. (0) ~Moxkeyes | (ercopitheri, tayled Apes, xipxos,  Munkeyes, 


tayle, siBumos an Ape. (Martial. a oe 
ie (allidus admi(fzs eludere Simins haffas, | . “a * —- 

| Si mihi candaforet,Cercopithecms eram. ts ee 
|  Imocke their darted ftaues withouten faile, : "ie, See 
_ Jultlike a Monkey had Ihada taile. : a Wie ga 


Ariffotle calles thofe tailed Apes, xiter; De animal. lib-2. But fore bealts hes are. with 
Lyons faces, and Panthers bodies, as bigge as an Hinde, which hee. calleth Cepi. b.10.There . 


arealf> a people neare the Fennes of Meotis called (eps. (p ) Babiouns | Sphynga, a creature Sphinxes. 


not much ynilike an Ape, bur bigger, with a face like a woman, and two dugges dangling be~ 
fore. Solinus faith'they liue in Exhiope, and are eafily taught and tamed, The Poets giue the 


Sphinx a Virgins face,a Lyons pawes,and aGriffons wings. be tine cs 
es Te af atg teen Site eee Re : gg ae - tate aCe 


whether there bee any inhabjtants of the earth, 0 
_. galled the Antipodes. © 5 2 er 
i CHan ge Sg he ee 

Ve whereas they fable of a (4) people that inhabite that land where the 
WU funne rifeth , when ic ferteth with vs ,and goe with (4) their feete cowards 
ours, it is incredible. They haue no authority for it,but onely (¢) coniecture that 
fuch a thing may bee, becaufe the earth hangeth within the orbes of heauen, 
-andeach(¢) part of the world is aboue anc below alike ,and thence they ga- 
ther chat rhe ocher hemy{phere cannot want inhabitants. Now they confider 
not that alchough thac it bee globous as outs'is, yet it may bee all couered with 
Sea: and if ic bee bare ,yet it followeth nor, that it is inhabited, feeing that 


the Scripture (chat proouerh all that ic faith to be true, by ithe true guents thae’ - 


it prefageth ) neuer. maketh mention of any fuch ching. And ic:w erexoo-abfurd 
tofay, that men might fayle ouer that hugé Ocean , and goe ‘inhabite ‘there: 
thar the progenie of the firft man might people that parrdlfo.. But let vs goe 
and feeke among thofe.:feauentie:two nations and their languages , whethér 
Wee can finde hat Gitty of G O-D. which remained:.a continuall. pilprjm’ on 
earth yntill che deluge; and is fhewed to perfeuere. amongft the fonnes of 
Nosh after their bleffing, chiefly in Sem, Noshs eldeft fonne; for Lephets bleffirig: 
was co. dwellin che cénts of his brother. ..:..; tools es ae te ee gtd eee | 


. e ee. & er ee ee er ae m, . 
: eM fp valores ad hid h sas. . 


“""pddg sz VIVES 


"584 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. — Cuar.to 


L. VIVES. 


‘The Antic [)Eople( a \that.JAll Cofmographers diuide the heauen,and confequently the earth into fiue 


podes, — 


Dereplli.6, 


Zones,the vemoft whereof lying vnder the Poles , and farre from the Heauens motion.and 
the Sunnes heate are infirfferably cold-the iriplaaculhinn Jes the moft violent motionofHea- . 
uen, and heate of the Sunne , is intolerably hot : the two being interpofed betweene both ex- 
treames,are habitable:one temperate Zone lying towards the North and the other towards the 
South : the inhabitants ofboth, are called Awtichthones, Now Cleomedes bids vs divide thofe 
two Zones into foure equall parts : thofe chat dwell in the parts chat lye in the fame Zone, are 
called Perici, circumferential inhabitants , thofe that dwell in divers, or in an yneqnall dif 
tance from the Poles, and equall from the equino€tiall, are called Avtoeci , or oppofites : they 
that dwell in equall diftances from both , are called -Antipodes. The Periecé, differ in their 
day and night,but not in feafons of the yeare;the Anteecé iult contrary: the Antipedes in both, 
It was an old opinion which Tully, Mela, and other chiefe men followed , that neuer 
man had any knowledge ofthe South. Tully putsthe great ocean betweene it and vs, which 
no man euer pafled: (Maerobins difcourfeth atlarge herevpon. Ido but glance at this for 
feare of cogging my reader. This was a great per{wafion to Angu/tine tofollow Lattantins, 
and deny the Axtipodes , for the learned men faw well , that grant men no paflage ouer thae 
reat fea vnto the temperate Southerne Clymate , ( as Twily and other great authors veterly 
enied them)and then they that dwell there could not poffibly be of Adams ftocke: fo that he 
had rather deny them habitation there,then contend in argument againft fo many learned op- 


pofits - Buritis moftfure once, that se a there are , and that we haue found away yato 
- -them, not se in old times, buc even by late fea maifters : for of old , diuers flying inte 
e 


euery where a like aboue it. 


the Perfian gulfe for feare of Augaftus , fayled by the coaft of iat ae and the Aclantike fea 
ynto‘ Hercules pillers. And in the prime of Carthages height, fome fayled from thence 
through Hercules his ftraytes , into the red fea of Arabia,and then were not the Bayes of Per~ 
fia, India, the Eafterne fea, Taproban , and the Iles thereabouts all found out by the power of 
Alexanders nauy ? and thofe you. fhall find. Antipodesto.vs , if you marke the pofture of the 
Globe diligently , for they haue the fame eleuation of their South pole , and bee in the fame 
diftance from the occidentall point,that fome of the countries in our climat haue,ofour North 
poynt.( b ) Thesr feete. }As Tully faith in Scipios dreame.(c¢ )Conietture. |For the temperature of 
the Southerne Zone is iuft like to ours. ( d) Each part.) The worldis round , and Heauen ig 


Pe . 


Of the generation of Semin which the Citty of God 
| byeth dowxe unto Abraham. = 


be of Cwarp. Io. 


‘Eg MS eneration it isthen that wee mutt follow to'find the cstty of God after 
“the deulge , as Seth deriued it along before. Therefore the Scripture hauing 


~ fhewen the Earthly Cittyto bee in Babilon 9 that is , ¥% ¢onfufion ,returnes to the 


Patriarch Sem , and carieth his generation downe vntill Abraham, counting e- 
very mans yeares , when he had his fonne , and how long hee lined: where by 


_ the way [thinke of my promife, ofexplayning , why one of Hebers fonns was 


called Pbalech , becaufein his dayes the earth was divided: how was it divided? 
by the confufion of tongues. | - aes . | 


So then the fonnes of Sem that conceme not this purpof ¢, being letten paffe, 
the Scripture reciteth thofe that conucy his feed downe vnto Abrahanw:as it did 


wich 


Lin 16. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. $85 


with thofe that conueyed Seths feede before the deluge, downe vnto Noah. Ie 
beginneth therefore thus. 7he/e are the generations of Sem: Sem was an hundred 
yeares old and begat ( 4) Arphaxad, two yeares after the floud. And Sem lined after 
: hee begat Acphaxad five hundred yeares,and begat fonnes and dau chters, and dyed: 
Andthus of the reft,fhewing when ecuery one begot his fonne, that belonged to 
this generation that defcendeth to Abraham,arid how long euery one lived after 
hee had begotten his fonne; and begot more fonnes and daughters, to fhew vs 
what a great multicude might come of oné, leaft wee fhould make any childith 
doubt at the few thar it nameth: Sems feede beeing fufficient to rep'enith fo 
many hingdomes, chiefly for the Aflyrian Monarchie, where Winus the fabduer 
of all che Eaft raigned in maiefty; and left a mighty Empire to bee poffeffed 
matiy yeares after by his pofterity ¢ But let vstiot ftand vpon trifles longer therk 
needs muft: wee will not teckon the number of eucry mians yeares till he dyed; 
but onely vnrill hee begat the fonne who is enranked in chis penealogicall rolles 
And gathering thefe from the deluge to Abraham, we will briefly touch at other 
-accidente as occafion fhall neceffarily impore. In the fecond yearé therefore 
after the deluge, Sem being two hundred yeares old begat Arphaxat: Arphaxat 
beinga hundred thirty fiue yeares old begat Canaan: hee beeing a hundred and 
thirty yeares oid begat Sala, and fo old was Sale when hee begot Heber: Heber 
was ahundred thirty and foure yeares old when he begat Phalec : Phalec ahund- 
dred and thitty and begat Ragaw: hee one hundred thirty and two,and begat Se- 
ruch,Seruch one hundred and thirty and begot Nachor : Nachor feauenty and niné 
and begot Thara :( 6) Tharaleiuenty ,and begot Abram whom God afterward 
called Abraham. Sothen from the deluge to Abraham are one thoufand feauenty 
and two yeares,according to the vulgar tranflation,that is the Sepruagints . But 
iri the Hebrew the yeares are farre fewer; whereof wee can heare little orna- 
reafon fhewen. | oe ee eee 
Now therefore in this queft of the Citty of Ged, wee cannot fay in this time 
wherein thofe men were not all of one language, ( thofe feasenty and two na: 
tions I meane wherein wee feeke it) thar all man-kinde was fallen from GODS 
true feruice : but that it remained onely in Sems generation , defcending to 
Abraham by Arphaxad. But the earthly Citty was vifible enough iti thae pre- 
fumption of building the tower vp to heaven (the true type of dewillith exal: 
tation): therein Was it apparanc, and euer after thar. But whether this other 
were not befcre, or lay bid, or rather both remained in Nozhs fonnes, the godly . 
in the two bleffed ones ,and the wicked in that one accurfed , from whoin that 
great giant-hunter againft the Lord defcetided, it is hatd to difcerne , for it may 
be(and that moft likely) that before the building of Babilon, GO D might haue 
feruants of fone of Chams children,and the deutil, of fome of Sems anid Japhets. 
For wee may not beleeue that the earch wanted of éyther fort. For that, faying : 
They are ak gone out of the way , they are all corrupt there is not one ‘athena G00 , 90 Playh.3 4° 
not one, euenin both the Pfalmes that haue this faying, this followeth; Doe mot Plas 3. 
all that worke iniquity know that they eate up my people as it -uvere bread? {6 chit 7 
God had his people then: And therefore that fame No aot ove jis meant réftrie- 
tiuely of the fonnes of men, and not the fonnes of GOD; for hee fayd before, 
The Lord looked downe from beaten vpon the fonnes of men, to fee if there were any 
that would vnderfland and fecke GOD? and thén the addition that followerl; 
fheweth that it was chofe, that lined after the lawé of the fleth ; and not of thé 
Spirit,whome hee {peaketh of. | == eee 


586 : SAINT AV GVSTINE. C wap. 


L.VIVES. 


A Rphaxad (a)\From him (faith Hierome,) the Chaldzans defcended, (6) Thara ] The 7. 
call him O2ppd :the Hebrew, Terabh. | : | : 


Tha the Hebrew tongue ( fo called afterward of Heber) wes the firft language 
upon the earth and remained i2 his family when that erest 
: confufionwas. CRAP. II. 


V Herefore euenas finne wanted not fonnes when they had all but one 
language, (for fo ic was before the deluge,and yer all deferuedto perifh 

therein but Noah and his family) fo when mans prefumption was punifhed with 

his languages confufion,whence the C itty Babilon , their proud worke, had the 

name, Hebers (4) houfe failed not but kepe the old language ftill, Where-vpon 

as I faid, Heber was reckoned the firft of all the fonnes of Sem, who begot each 

of them an whole nation: yet was hee the fife from Seth in deicent, So then be- 

caufe this language remained in his houfe, that was confounded in all the ret, 

pheHe- being credioly held the onely language vpon earth before this ) hence it had 
the name of the Hebrew tongue, for chen it was tobee nominally diftin@ from 

the other tongues,as other tongues had their proper names.But when it was the 
tongue of all,ic had no name, but che tongue or language of man-kinde, wherein 
all men {pake. Some may fay : if that the earch was diuided by the languages in 
Phalechs time, Hebers fonne,it fhould rather .haue beene called his name then 
Hebers :O but wee muft vnderftand that ( 6 ) Heber did therefore gine his fonne 
Phalec {ach a name, that is , asuifon, becaufe hee was borne vnto him iuft atthe 
time when the earth was diuided,fo meanes the Scripture when ic faith , 2s bis 
dayes the earth was deuided. Fox if Heber were not liuing when the confufion be- 
fell, the tongue that was to remainein his family fhould not haue had the name 
from him; and there wee muft chinke that it was firft vniuer({al] ,becaufe the con- 
fufion of tongues was a punifhment , which Gods people were nor to catt off: 
Nor was it for nothing that Wsbraham could not communicate this his language 
vnco all his generation,but onely to thofethat were propagate by /scob , and a- 
rifiag into an evident people of God, were to receive his Teftament, and the 
Sauiour in the flefh. Nor did Hebers whole progenie beare away this language, 
but onely that from whence C4braham defcended, Wherefore though there be 
no godly men euidently named, that liued at the time when the wicked buile 
Babylox : yet this concealement ought not co dull, but rather to incite one to ~ 
inquire further. For whereas we read that at firft, men had all onelanguage,and 
that Heber is firft reckoned of all the fonnes of Sem, beeing but the fife of his 
houfe downeward, and that language which the Patriarches and Prophets vfed - 
— inall cheir words and writings was che Hebrew: Verily when wee feeke where 
' that congue was preferued in the confufion (being to bee kept amongft them to 
whom the confufion could be no punifhment ) what can wee fay but that ie was 
preferued vnto this mans family of whome it had the name? and that this is a 
great figne of righteoufneffe in him, that where as the reft were affli@ed with 
theconfufion of their tongues, hee onely and is family was acquit of that af- 
fli@ion. But yet there is another doubt: How could Heber and his fonne Phalee . 
become two feuerall nations,hauing both but one language ? Andtruly the He- 
brew tongue defcended to Abraham from Heber , and {0 downe from him vntill 


congue, 


Cd 


Hee ene ee Enn I RRaREIRRR REA RRAn aR ae er ae ee a ee a 


Pate OF THE CITIE OF GOD: 


A ER On ee 
=~ 


I{racl! became a great pecple, How then‘could every fonne of Noz2hs fonnes pro- 
genies become a particular nation when asHeber and Phalec had both but one Jan- 
guage? The greatcft probability is, that (¢) Nembroth became a nation alfo,and 
yet was reckned, for the eminence of his dignity and corporall ftrength,tokeepe 
the, number of feauenty two nations inuiolare :, but 24a/ec was nornamed for 
growing intoa nation, but thac that {trange accident of the earchs-diuifion fel out 
in his da:es:for of the nation and language of Heber, was Philec allo. Weneed not 
Ricke at this, how Wembrorh might line inft wich that time when Babilon was 
builc,and the confufion of tongues befell, for chere'is no reafon , becaufe Heber 
was the fixt from Noah, and hee but the fourth buc chat they might both line vn- 
to'one rime & in one time,for this fel our fo beforce,where they that had the leaft 
progeny lined thelongeft, that they that hadthe more, died fooner :-orthey 
that had few fonnes had them later then thofe that had many, tor wee mutt con: 
ceine this, chat when the earth was builded, Neabs fonnes had nor onely all 
their iffue (who were called the fathers of thofe nations) but that thefe alfo 
had great and numerous families, worthy the name of nations. Nor may wee 
thinke then that hey were borneasthey arereckened . Otherwife, how could 
loéfans twelue fonnes (another fonne of Hebers ) become of thofe nations, if hee 
were borne after Phalec , as hee is reckned ? for in Phalecs daics was the earth 
divided. <> oer ee | 

— Wee muff rake ic thus then, Phalec is firtt named, but was borne long 
after his brother /okten,whofe twelue fonnes had all their families fo great that 
each mighcbe fufficient to fhare one ie the confufion,for fo might he chat 
was laft borne , be firft reckned , as Noahs youngeft fonne is fifft named ,name- 
ly Japhet : Cham the fecond thenext, and Shem, the eldeft , the'laft. Now fome of 
thefenations names continued,fo that we may know to this day whence they are 
deriued , as , the Affirians of .4//ar the Hebrewes of Heber, ( d ) and fome con- 
tinuance of time hath abolifhed, in fo much that the mioft Idarned men can 
{carcely finde any memory of them in antiquity. For fome fay that the Egypri- 
ans were they that came of Af¢szracm (e) Chams{onne : here is no fimilitude 
ofnames at all : nor in the Aethlopians which they fay came of Chas, another 
fonne of Chams. Andifweeconfider all , wee fhall finde farré more names loft 
then remayning. 


L. VIVES. 
WW Ebers( 2 Sbou{e.] Some thinke they confented not vnto the building of the Tower and 


_therefore had the firft language left onelyto them. Herodoras writeth that P/ameti- 
con, an Eoyptian king, caufed two children to. be brought vp in the woods , wichout hearing 


‘word of any mans mouth, thinking thatthat language which they would fpeake of themfelues 


onely, would bee, that which man f{pake at firft : after three yeares, they were brought ynte 
him,and they faid nothing but Bec , divers times. Now Bec is bread in Phrygian ,whereypon 


_ hee thought the Phrygian tongue to bec the firft : buc ic was no maruaile if they cryed 


Bec , being continually brought vp amongpft the goates , that could cry nothing elfe, 
(6) Heber did.’ Prophecying of what was to come, faith Hierom. (c ) Nembroth became,] 
what nation , it is vncertaine: where hee raigned is playne, Gen.2.J2 Batilon,and Arach that 
is(faith Eterom ) Edeffa, and eAfccad, that is.now. called Nifids, and in Chalah, that 
Was afrer-ward calléd Seleucia of Selewcws, or elfe that which is now called Cre[iphon, 

| | . Perhaps 


ree 
588 | SAINT AV GV-STINE. C wap.i2 


Reypt, 


Acthiopia. 


P erhaps hee was the father ( but doubtleffe the great increafer ) of thofe nations, (4) end 
fome }So faith Hierome of all Joftans fonnes. And no maruell,fince that all the mountaines, 


-hilles,and riuers of Icaly, France and Spaine,changed their names quite into barbarous ones 


within the compaffe of two hundred yeares. (¢ ) Chams fonne | Nay Egipt (faith Hierome ) 
bare Chams owne name: for the feauenty put the letter X. for the Hebrew He, continually,to 
teach vs the afpiration dew tothe word , and here they tranflate Cham, for that which in the 
Hebrew is Ham,by which name Egipt in the countries proper language is called vnto this 
day, Thus farre Hierome. But it might bee chat Egipt was called (AMizrains of him thar firtt 
peopled it,as Hierome faith the Hebrews call it continually. Egipt was alfo called afterwards 
eAeria, becaufe as Stephanus faith , the ayre was chicke therein: it was called further-more 
Neptapolis of the feauen citties t“erein. And laftly Egypt of Egyptus Belus his fonne. Homer 
calles the riuer Nuus, Egipt. (f°) Erhioptans | The Hebrews call Ethiopia, Chas. Hieron, It 
was called eAtlantia of Arlas, and Erhiopia afterwards of Ethiops, Unleans fonne, as fome 
fay. But I thinke rather of che burnt hew of the inhabitants : for acdiey in Greeke, is black: 
Homer that old Poet faith,there are two Ethiopas. Odyft. 


Se ye Suoeeucrs Uwipbores,&XC. 


This lyes vpon the Eaft,that on the Weft. 
There is alfo a part of the Ile Eubza called e£tbiopon. 


Of that point of time wherein the citty of God began 4 new order 
of fucce/ien in Abraham. Cuapr.12. 


Ow let vs fee how the Cs#tyofGod proceeded from that minute wherein ic 
- “\ began to bee more eminent and euident in promifes vnto —4braham(which 
now wee fee fulfilled in Chri/?.) Thus the holy Scripture teacheth vs then, thae 
Abraham was borne in a parc of Chaldza , which belonged (4) vnto the Empire 
of the Affyrians. And now had fuperftition got great head in Chaldza, as it had 
all ouer elfe- fo there was but onely the houfeof Thara, Abrahams father , thae 
ferued God truly, and (by all likelyhood ) kept the Hebrew tongue pure,though 
that (as Jofuah celleth che Hebrewes) as they were Gods euident people in Egipt, 
{fo in Mefopotamia they fell to Idolatry, all Hebers other fonnes becommin 
other nations,or beeing commixt with others. Theretore even as inthedeluge 
of waters Noahs houfe remained alone to repaire man-kinde, fo in this deluge of 
finne and fuperftition, Thares houfe onely remained as the place whereinGO DS 
Cittse was planted and kept. And euen as before the deluge , the generations of 
all from Adams,the number of yeares , and the reafon of the deluge being all rec- 
koned vp, before God began to {peake of building the Arke,the Scripture faith 
of Nosh: Thefe are the generations of Noah: even fo here ,hauing reckoned all 
from Sem,the tonne of Noah, downevnto Abraham, hee putteth this to the con- 
clufion,as a point of much moment, Thefe are the generations of Thara. Tharabe- 
got UAbrahum,Nachor,and Aram: And —4vam dyed before ( 6 ) his father Thera 
in the land wherein hee was borne,being a pare of Chaldza. And _4brahbam and 
Nashor tooke them wiues : the name of Abrahams wife was Sarah,and the name 
of Nashors wife was Melca ,the daughter ot ~4vam : who was father both to 
Melcaand fefca,whome fome holdalfo tube Sara, abrams wife, 


Z 7  “ LAYVIVES. | 
WV det (4) belonged | For ALela, Pliny , Strabo and others, place Chaldza in Affyria: And 
: - thas 


LIBI6. - OF THE CITIE OF GOD:  ’ §8%9 
that it is not onely a part of that Affyria which the ancient writers called by the name of S 57° 
‘ria,that great countrie,but of that Affyria alfo which Strabo calles the. Babilonian Alfyria. 
Kenoplion maketh a difference betweene Syria and Affyria, (yroped.y. (b ) Before | In his fa- 
thers prefence. So all interpretours take it; 4uga/tine might perhaps vnderftand it , before his 
father came to‘Charra, which is part of Chaldza. Charrah was a citty in Mefopotamia , where Chara, 


Affytia. 


the Parthians killed (7af/ss the Romaine generall. 


Why there is no mention of Nachor, Tharas/oune,in his departure from 
| Chaldeato Mefopotamia. Car. 13. 
Hen the Scripture ptoceedeth, and declareth how Thare and his family lefe 

4 Chaldza,and came (4) into Mefopotamia, and dwele in Charra. Bur of his 
fonne Nachor there is no mention,as ifhe had not gone withhim.Thus faith the __ 
Scripture. Thus Tharatooke Abraham his fonne , and Lot his grand-child, Abra- Gen.1%< 
hams forne,and Sara his daughter in law,his fonne Abrahams wife; and hee tedthens 
out of the conntrey of Chaldaa, into the land of Canatn and hee came to Chakra and | 
dwelt there. Here is no word of Nachor, nor his wife Meltha. But afterward, 
~ when Abraham ferithis feruant to feeke a wife for his fonne //asc, wee finde ic, 
written thus: So the feruant tooke tem of hit maifters Canicls and of his Maifters GenB4i 
goods with him, and departed and went into Mefoporamia into the citty of Nachor. 
This place,and others befide, doe prooue, that Nachor went out of Chaldzaal- 
fo,and ferléd him-felfe in Mefopotamia where Abraham andhis father had dwele. 
Why did not the Scriptures then remember him 5 when Thate went thénceto 
dwell elle-where,when it maketh mention both of Abraham and Lot, that was 
buthis grand-childe,and Sera hig daughter in lawe, in this tran{migrdtion ? what 
fhouid we thinke but that hee had forfaken his father and brothers religion, and 
receiued the Chaldees fuperftition, and afterward, cizher repenting for his fac, 
ar being perfecuted by the countrie,(ufpecing him to bee hollow-hattéd,depar- 
ted thencé him-felfe alfo ? for Holophernes Mraels enemy in the booke of Judith; 
inquiring whac nation they were, and whethér hee ought to fight againft chem, 
was thus anfwered by Achsor captaine of the Ammonites : Let my Lord heare the 
word of the month of his feruant, and Iwill [o-w thee the iruth concerning this people 
that inhabite thefe mountaines, and there {ball no lye come out of thy feruants mouth, 
This peopte come out of the ftock of the Chaldzans, and they dwelt before in 
Mefopotamia , becaufe they would not follow the Gods of their fathers, that 
were glorious in the land of Chaldza : but théy letc che way of their anceftors && 
worfhipped the Ged of heauen,whom they knew: fo that they caft them out from 
. the face of their gods ; andthey fled into Mefopotamia ,and dwelt there many 

dayes. Then their God commanded them to depart fromthe place where they 
dwelt,and to goe into the land of Chanaan where they dwele, and fo forth 3 as 
Achior the Ammonite relateth.Hence itis plaine that Therahis family were per: 
fecuted by the Chaldzans for their religion , bécaufe théy worfhipped the true 
and onely Ged. | 2 


| L.VIVES. ; 7 a. * : ae a ee ae 
No (4) Mefeporamia| Melopotamia quafi yures saresr betweené two feas,for i lay all be= MeoPOS 
eweene Tigris and Euphrates. 


— Bee oF 


$90 SAINT AVGVSTINE. .  Cuarrg.t15 


Of the age of Thara, who hued in Charra vatill his dying day. 

Cuape I40 “=, = 
Hara dyed in Mefopotamia, where it is faid hee liued two hundred and five 
yeares,and after his death the promifes that God madeto Abraham began to 
be manifefted : Of Thara,it is thus recorded: The dayes of Thara were two husdred 
and fine yeares, and bee dyed in Charra.Hee lived not there all this time, you muft 
thinke,bue becaufe he ended his time (which amounted vnto two hundred and 
fiue ycares ) in that place,it is faid fo. Ocherwife wee could noc tell how many 
yeares he liued,becaufe we haue not the time recorded when he carve to Char- 
ra: and ic were fondneffe to imagine that in that Casalogue where all their ages 
are recorded,his onely fhould bee left out: for whereas the Scripture names 
fome,and yet names not their yeares, itis to bee vnderftood ,that they belong 
not to that generation that is folineally drawnedowne from man toman. For 
the ftem that is deriued from dam vnto Noah , and from him vnto _4braham, 
.. Mamesno man without recording the number of his yeares alfa, 


Of the tithe vvbherein Abrahams receined the promife from God,and 
| departed fromCharra. Car. 15. 


Vet whereas wee read,that after Thera’s death the Lord {aid vnto Wsbraham, 
Gette thee out of thy conntrey,and from thy kindred and from thy fathers boufe,cre. 
Wee muft not chinke that this followed immediately in the times,though it fol- 
low immediately in the fcriptures , for fo wee fhall fall into an( 6) inextricable 
doubt: for after chefe words vnto Abraham, the Scripture followeth thus: So 
Abraham departed, as the Lord (pake unto him,and Lot vuvent vvith him: asd A- 
brabam vves Sag ipl a yeares ola vuben hee vvent out of Charra. How can this 
be crue now,if —braham went not out of:Charra vntill after the death of his 
father ? fur Thara begot him ,as wee {aid before, at the feauentith yeare of his 
age : voto which adde feauentie fiue yeares, (the age of ~4rahamat this his de- 
parture from Charra ) and it maketh a hundred forty fiue yeares. So old there- 
fore was Thera when Abraham departed from Charra, that citty of Mefopota- 
mia: for Abraham wasthen but feauentie two yeares of age, and his father be- 
| getting him when he was feauentie yeares old , muft needs bee a hundred fortie 
uc yeares old (and no more) at his departure. Therefore hee went not after his 
fathers death,who liued two hundred and flue yeares, but before,at the feauenty 
two yeares of his owncage , and confequently the hundred forty fiue of his fa- 
thers. And thus the Scripture/in an vfuall courfe ) returneth tothe time which 
the former relation had gone beyond: as it did before faying, That the fonnes of 
Gea, 11,2, Noahs /onnes were dinided nto nations and languages,crc. and yet afterwards ad- 
joyneth : Then the vuhole earth vvas of one language,cre. as though this had re- 
ally followed. | oS | 
_ How then had euery man his nation and his tongue, but that the Scriptures re- 
turne back againe vnco thetimes ouer-pafled. Euen fo here,whereas it is faid she 
dates of Thara were tio hundred G fine yeares andhe died in Charra:8cthen theferi 
__ , tures returning to that which ouer-paffed to finith the difcourfe of Thara Girfts | 
then the Lord laid vate Abraha: get thee ont of thy country Sc after which is added, 
: aS Se 


Livr6. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. © 591 


so Abraham, departed as the Lord fpake unto him,and Lot went with him gad Ribta- 
ham was feauenty yeares old when he went from Charra. This therefore was, when his 
father was a hundred forty and fiue yeares ot age ; for thenwas Abraham Jeahen- 
ty fine. This doubt is alfo otherwife diffolued bycounting Abral:ams feauenty 
eares when he went to Charra , €-om the time when he was freed from the fire 
of the Chaldazns and not from his birth , as ifhe had rather:becne barne then. 
But Saint Stephen in the Aétes difcourfing hereof, faith thus : 7 he God of glory ap- AG7.2.3.. 
peared to our “ther Abraham is Me/opotansia , before he dweit in Charra, and {ard 
unto him, get thee out of thy country from thy kindred and came into the land which 
Iwill gine thee. According tothefe words of Stephen it was norattcr Tharas death 
that God {pake to Abrabam(for Thara died in Charra)but it was before he dwele 
in Charra, yet was in Mefopotamia. Buche was gone out of Chaldza firft.And 
whereas Stephen faith, 7 hen came hee ont of the land of the Chaldeans anddweltin —*. 
Charra this is relation of a thing: doneafter thofe words ot God : for hee went 
ourof Chaldzaafter God had {poken to him ( for hee faith , God /pake to hin in 
. Mefopotamia)but chat word, Then,comprifeth all che time from Abrahams depat- 
ture vntill the Lord {paketo him.And that v-hich follow eth.4/ter that bis father 
was dead God. placed him in this landwheresn he now awelleth. The meaning ofthe 
lace is.And God brought him from rbence,wher his father dyed afterwards,and placed 
him here Sothen we iuf vnderftand,that God {pake vnto Abraham being in Me- 
{opotamia, yet not as yet dwelling in Charra:but that he camein to Charra with 
his father , holding Gods commandement faft, and in the {eaventy flue yeare of 
his age departed chence:which was in his fathers a hundred forty flue yere-Now 
hee faith chat he wasplaced in Chanaan (not he came out of Charra ) after his 
fathers death , for when hee was dead, he began to buy landthere, and became 
sich in poffeffions, But whereas God fpake thusto himafter hee came from 
Caldzaand was in Mefopotamia, Get thee out of thy country, from thy kindred 
and from thy fathers houfe : this concerned not his bodily remouall/for thathee 
had done before ) but the feperation of his foule from them, for his mind was 
noi departed from them if he ever hadany hope toreiurne., or defired it: this 
hope and defire by Gods command was to bee cut of. |; is not incredible 
that afterwards when as Nachor followed his father Abraham then fulfilled the 
commandot God, and tooke Sara his wife and Zot his brothers fonne , and {o 


went out of Charra. 


L. VIVES. , | 


bt. J So Hicrome calles it and diffolueth it fome-what 


A N (4) inextricable don 
A diueifly from eAnguftine , although hee vie three coniectures. (6 ) Orher-wife diffol- 
ued. | Thus Hiereme diffolueth ict out of an Hebrew hiftory : forthat which we read the 


country of Chaldza , the Hebrew hath owe 1 Ur Shadim , thatis, the fire of the Caldz- 

ans : herewpon the Hebrewes haue the ftory : eAbrabam was taken by the Chaldzans, and it 

becaufe he would not worthippe their Idols,namely their fire,he was put into itsfrom whence The Chale 

Ged deliuered him by miracle , and the hike ftory they hauie of Thara alfo his father,that hee, worthippe’ 

becaule he would not adore their images was fo ferued, and fo efeaped a!fo: as whereas itis the free 

read that ram dyed before his father in the land where hee was borne in the cotmtry of 

the Chaldzans, they fay itis, in his fathers.prefence inthe fire of the Chaldzans,wherein bes | 

éaufe He would not worthip it,he was burned to death.And likewife in other places of § text. 

. Hacrom wherhe comes to this point, faith stbe Hebrew tradition us true, t hatfait h that Thara 

o& bis foes cate ont of the fire of the Chaldees , & that Abraham being. hedsed roundabout in 

Babilonwith che fire which he would not worfhippe, was by Gods power deliuered, & from 
: Ecce s thence 


dezans 


2 592 


SAINT AVGVSTINE.  — Cutar.ré.c17. 


thence are the number of his yeares aceounted, becaufe then hee firft confefled the Lord God, 
and concemned the Chaldee Idols : Thus farce Hierome, without whofe relation this place of 


Angaftine is not to bee ynderftood. Jofephus writeth that Théra hating Chaldea, departed 


thence for the greefe of his fonne rams death, and came to dwellin Charra sand that ¢/- 


rams tombe was to bee feene in Vr of the Chaldees. 


«+ The order and quality of Gods promifes made-unte Abraham. ; 


CHap. 16; 


, 


No muaft we examine the promifes made vnto Abrebam: for in them began 


Gen,12, 


the oracles prefaging our Lord fe/us Chris the true God,to appeareswho was 
to come of that godly people,that the prophefies promifed. The firft of them is 
this: The Lord [aid veto Abraham: get thee out of thy countrey,and from thy kinred, 
and frons thy fathers honfe unto the land that 1 will \bew thee. And 1 willmake of thees 


great nation,and will bleffe thee,cr make thy name great,and thon {belt be ble(fed,1 will 


alfobleffe them that bleffe thee, and curfe them that curfe thee, avd in them {hall allthe 
families of the earth bee bleffed. Here wee mutt obferuea double promife made 


' ynto ‘Abraham: the firft that his feede fhould poffleffe the land of Canaan, in 


A&s.7,3. 


thefe words; Goe vato the land that I will {ew thee , and I will make shee a gress 
wdtion :the fecond of farre more worth and ‘moment , concerning his fpirituall 
feede,whereby hee is notonely the father of Iftael , but of allthe nations that 
follow his faith: and that is in thefe words : 4d in thee [hallall the families of the 
earth bee ble(Jed. This promife was made in Abrahams feauentie fiue yeare , as Exe 
febsus (a) thinketh :as-if that Abrabam did prefently there-vpon depart oat of 
Charra,becaufe the Scripture may not be controuled,that giueth him this many 
yeares at the timeof hisdeparture. But if ic were made then, then was Abraham 
with his father in Charra: for hee could not depart from rhence,vnleffe hee had 
firft inhabited there.Doth not thisthen contradict Steuens faying ; That God ap- 
peared unto him in Mefopotamia, before he dwelt inCharra? But we mutt conceive 
that chis was in one yeare, Gods promife to Abraham firtt ; Abrahams dwelling in 


* Charranext, and laftly his departure: not oncly becaufe Exfebsus his computa 


tion is thus, accounting foure hundred thirty yeares from this yeare vnto the 


Gala. 3.17 Lfraelites freedomgout of Egipt, but alfo becaufe the Apoftle (6) Pax/ mentio- 


Aas 


“ % 


neth it like-wife. 


cee ye een eens ~ io DD — Qala ante 


L. VIVES. _ 


| U febius (a) thinkerh | Thefe are his words : Aris the fourth raigning in Affyria, and The- _ 


laffion in Sycionia, Abraham being feuentie fiue yeares old, was {poken ynto by God , and 
receiued the promife. (6) Pas! }Galat.3.17. The law which was giuen foure hundred and 
thirty yeares after the promife made ynto Abrabam, a 


er eee ee eee? ee 


oe ee 


Of the three moft eminent kingdomes of the world, the chiefe of which ie 
: Abrahams time was moft excellent of all Crar.17. 


A! this time there were diuer's famous kingdoms vpon earth, that is,fociety of 


—“ “men iiuing carnally,& inthe feruice of the apoftaticall powers, three of which 


were moft illuftrious,the/s)Sycionians,the (6)Egiptians & the A ffyrians,which 
was the orcateft of all. For Nuns the fonne of Be/ws conquered al Afia excepting 
India only.I do not meane by Afia(¢)which is now but one prouince of the grea 
‘ter Afia,but that which contained ‘it all, which fome make the third pare of the 
world, diuiding the whole earth into 4/ie,Ewrope 8¢ Africs,& {ome(d)make ; — 


- 
| i it a a a ee a, 


bites OF THECITIE OF GOD. 593 


. 
F emad 


halfe,diuiding the whole into two onely. Others diuide all into three () equall 
parts. Afiain the Eaft , from the North to the South: Europe (/) from the, 
North to the Weft, and( ¢ ) Africa from the Weft vntothe South: fo that Eu- 
rope and Africkeare but the halfe of the world, and Afia the other halfe : but the 
two firft were made two parts, becaufe (4) all che water that commeth from the 
Ocean,runs in betwixt them two, making (¢ Jour great fea. So that diuide but 

the world into two,and Afia fhall be one halfe,and Europe and Africk the other. 

Therefore Sicyonia,one of the three eminent kingdomes, was not vnder the Af 

fyrian monarchie,for it lay in Europe. But (&) Egipt muft needs be inferior vato: 
Affyria,feeing that the Affyrians were Lordsof all Afia , excepting India. So 

then the citty of the wicked kept the chiefe courtin A flyria: whofe chiefe citty 

was Babylon, moft fitly called fo. that is , confufion: and there Ninus fucceeded 

his father Be/us ,who had held that fouerainty three {core and fue yeares : and 

his fonne Nénus liued fiftie two yeares , and had reigned fortie and flue yeares 

when Abraham was borne, which was about a thoufand two hundred yeares be- 

fore Rome was buile,that other Babylon of the Wet. : 


: LVIVES. ie ae 
He (a) Sicyonians)Sicyon is an ancient citty on the left hand as you come intn Pelopone- 
fus, Egiateus(as Panfanias and Exfebins fay)was the firft King thereof-Sicyonia is a litthe 
country in Achaia,but the kings of it ruled Achaia , and Sycion was their place of abode :' It 
was called Achaia,and -£gialia of the Kings thereof in old time. Pliny. And all Peloponefus 
was called there-after. Exfeb. Afterwards it was called Apfa of king Apis the fourth, and 
then , Poloponelus of Peleps,quafs xinems vic @, Pelups Ile, foritisan halfe Hand. Pasfanias Pelope- 
faith that all Peloponefus was not called Aegialia, but onely that part towards the fea, gua/i menins, 
ésysaad, marstimall,or {ea-coafting : and afterwards Sicyonia of King Sicyon : of him hereafter. 
(b)Egyptians \The Thebzanstuled here in thofe daies,a country in Delta,named fo by the rich 
and mighry citty of Thebes. (¢ ) That which] Of Alia minor, hereafter. ( d ) Some make #} 
Some (faith Sal/) diuided the world but into two parts, Afia and Europe, making Africaa 
part of Europe. /z Bello [ugurth. There-vpon Sylins {faith of Lybia, thac it was either a great 
part of Afia, or the third part of the world: Thofe that diuide not Africa from Europé doe 
ground vpen the temperature of the windes,and vpon the heauens : as Lucane {aith,46.9. 


Sicyon, 


Tertia pars rerum Lybie ficredere fdme, — 

Cuntia velts : at fiventos,calumg fequaris 

‘Pars erit Exrope: nec enim plus littora Niki’: 
Quam Scythicus Tanais primus & Gadibus abfint. 
Lybia’s the worlds third part,or authors 7 : 
But if you ground vpon the windes and skte, 
"Tis part of Europe: Tanais fhores and Niles, 
Liea like diftant from the Gades Iles, | 


And {fo forward vpon this.queftion. (¢) Eguail] Some read vnequall : better. For Afticke is 
greater then Europe,and Afia greater then both : which lieth in a larger quantity to the Eaft, 
then Europe, Africa,and the fea becweene them both conteineth, as Ae/a faith : but hee fol. 
lowed the olde tradition : for wee haue now difcouered a great part of Africa towards the. 
fouth,vnknowne before. ( f).Esrope frem the North} On the North fide, Europe is bounded pr, 2: 
with the frozen fea, and the Brittifh Ocean. On the Weft with the Atlantike Ocean : on the | 
South with the Mediterrane fea, and on the Eaft wich Hellefpont, the two Bofphori , the 
‘fennes of Meotis , and the river of Tanais. (g ) africa } eAfrica is bounded on the Eaft 
with Nilus, on the Weft with the Atlanticke fea, on the North with our fea,and on the fouth 
with the Ethiopian Ocean. But thus the old writers vopetfectly limited it , the Portugalles 


haue difcoucred it farre more fully. Ey 
| Eee zs (hb) Ail 


pee Se 
594 SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuap.18.8¢19 


(b) All the water\ The Bruges coppy readeth,becaufe our fea comes from the Ocean betweene 
them both, The fea that the Greekes and Latines call the Medicerrane {ea, is ours,for no other 
"fea comes neare them. It ftretcheth (according to Adela ) from Hercules his pillers to the Bay 
of Ifus on the Eaft,to Meotis and Tanais on the North, lying betweene Europe and Africa in 
‘one place,and betweene Europe and Afia in another. (4 ) Ourgreat fea | That which oweth 
from the Ocean,vpon the coafts of Europe and Africa, and is broadeft berweene the bayes of 
___ Liiguréa and Hippon, where Auga/fine dwelt: who therefore calleth it, great, (k.) Egipt menft} 
Egipt =» Eoipt was notall Afia,but a part of it, lying from Nilus to the Eaft: yet did it not obey the 
Affyrians,but was a mighty kingdome of it felfe, and made great warres ypon Affyria, and 
oucr-ran much of it,if we may giue credence to their bookes. - 


_ Of Gods fecond promife to Abraham, that hee and his feede 
| flould poffeffe the land of Canaan. 


Cuap. 18. 


S° Abraham at the feuentie fiue yeare of his owné age: and the hundred 

forty fiue of his fathers, left Charra, and tooke Zot his brothers fonne with 
him,and Sera his wife,and came into the land of Canaan, euenvnto (4) Sichem, 

Genel, where he receiued this fecond promife: The Lord appeared unto Abraham and fatd 
‘unto thy [eede will 1 gine this land. This promife concerned not that {eed of his, 
whereby hee was to become the father of all the nations, but the progenie of his 
body onely, by J/aac and J/raed « for cheir feed poffeffed this land. 


— LVIVES. 


scheme. Nto (4)Sichem] This lay in the tribe of Ephraims part,and Abimelech afterwards deftroied 
? it.udg.9.45. Ie was called Sicima in Greeke and Latine, and there remained forne memo- 
rie of icin Heeromes time,in the fuburbes of Neapolis neare vnto /ofephs Sepulcher: there was 

another Sichem alfo vpon mount Ephraim, a citty of the fugitiues. Hier.de loc. Hebrec, 


How God preferued Saras chaftity in Egipt,vvben Abraham wvonld not be 
knowne that fre vvas his vvife but his fifter. 
Cap, Ig. : 


T Here Abraham built an altar , and then. departed and dwele in a wilderneffe, 
and from thence was driuen by famine,to goe into Egipt,where he called his 
wife his fifter,and yet (4) lyed not. For fhe was his coufin germaine, and Lot be- 
ing his brothers fonne,was called his brother.So that he did onely concea!e,and 
not deny that fhe was his wife: commending the cuftody of hir chaftitie vnto 
God,and auoyding mans deceits,as man : for if hee fhould not haue endeuoured 
to ef{chew danger as much as in him laye, hee fhould rather haue become a (4) 
tempter of GO D, then atrufter in him, whereof wee haue difputed againft Few- 
feusthe Manichee his callumnyes. And as Abrabam trufted vpon God , fo cameit 
to pafle: for Pharao the King of Egipt , feeking to haue her to wife , was fore af- 
. flicted,and forced to reftore her to her husband. Where (c) God forbid that wee 
fhould thinke her defiled by him any.way: his great plagues that hee fuffered 
would no way permit him to eommit any fuch out-rage. 


L. VIVES. 


—" 
ae 


2. FS 3-H 


Tt 82 my 


7 ye TB Oa. be 


Liz36. OF THE CiTIE OF GOD. 595 


L. VIVES. — 
Ye (a) lied not\ For coufin-germaines are called brethren and fifters,as wee fhewed 6ygof . 
Tully.(b).A temple \God would be trufted vnto firmely,but no way tempted. 7 hon foals nor sar will 
sempt thy Lerd thy God faith CMoyfes in Detteronomy,which faying our Sauiour Chrift made tempced, 
holy vie of Afar. 4. (c) God forbid | Hierome fheweth by the examplé Hefer,that the women 
were kepra full yeare,to be prepared fit for the Kingsbed,ére hee touched them : fo that Pha- 
rao might be plaptcd,and forced to returne Sara to herhusbandinihe meanetime,. ©. 


rt re | f °3 : . , @ , 4 . “oye 
« wd ° . toe ‘ a! ose : : : +d 


Of the [eperation of Lot and Abraham without breech fo 
char sty or loue betweene Shem. = 
COHAP. 200 ois : : . a 


. Bs a eee oe ee oc oe © ts ea ae | eek oe 
S° Abraham departing out of Egipt to the place whence hee came, Lot(with- 

out any breach of loue betweene them)depaited to dwell in Sodome.For be- 
ing both very ritch , their fheppards and heard-men could not agree, and fo to a- 
voide that inconuenience’, they parted. For amongft fuch(as all men arevnper- 
feét)chere might no doubt bee foie contentions now and then arifin eS which e- ‘ 
uill co avoide, Abraham laid thus vnca Lot : Let there be no firife 1 pray thee,between > Se 
thee and me, nor betweene my heard{men and thine for we be brethren . 15 (a) not the if 
whole lind before thee ? Ipray thee depart fromme: if thou welt take the left hand ff 
will coe to the right,or tf thou vvilt goe tothe right hand , thes! vvilltake the left. 
and hence (6) it may be the world got vppe an honeft quiet cuftome,that the ¢l- 
der fhould evler-more diuide the land, and the yonger fhould choofe. 


. 7 am, 
. 


L.VIVES. | 
1S (a) not] Abraham puttes him to his choice co take where hee would,and hee would take 
Ache other. (6) Hexce it may bee |This was acuftome of old , as the declamers lawes con- 
firme, whercof this was one.Sen.dsb.declam.6: | 


. om, 


Seedfor ewer Cusp. 21. 


B Ve when Abrahams and Lor were parted, 8 dwelt feuerall, (for neceffities fake 

and not for difcord ) Abraham in Canaan, Lot in Sodome, God {pake the 
third time to Abraham, faying: Lift up thine eyes now,and looke from the place where Gen.s3: 
thou art ; North.ward and South-ward ,andEaft-ward, audto(a)thefea, for allthe 
land thou feeft will! giue to thee andihy feed for eacr : and I willmake thy feed as the 
Sands of the carth :fo that if aman may number the fands of the earth , then fball thy 


Of Gods third promi{e,of the landof Canaan to Abraham and hit 


feed be numbred alfo: arife walke through the landin the length and bredth thereoffor ! 


Ivuill gine it unto thee. Whether thefe. promife concerne his beeing the fa- 
ther ofall the nations, itis not eufdently-apparant. Thefle words,/ vyé/l make 
thy feede as the fands of the fea , may pale ie. refercnce tothat: beeing atropi- « 
call phrafe of {peech which the greekes call (6) Hyperbole. But how (<) the 
{cripturé vfech this and the reft : not that hath reade them, but vaderftandeth, 
Ete 4 This 


os 
oe . 
: : 
’ : 2 at ’ . ; 


a Ae 


596 | SAINT AVGVSTINE. — Crap.a1.822 


eee a Oe 


This trope now , is when the wordes doe farre exceede the meaning. For who 
feech not that the numberof the fands is morethenall Adams feedecan make, 
from the beginning to the. end of the world? howmuch more then Abrahams, 
_ though it include both the Ifraelites, and the beleenes ofall other nations ? com- 
pare this later wich the number of the wicked,/d)and it is but an handful:tchough 
(e) this handfull bee fucha multitude as holy writ thought to fignifie hyperbo- 
lically, by the fands ofthe earth. And indeedthe feed promifed Abraham is in- 
numerable vnto men, but not vnto GOD, (f) nor the fands neither : andtherfore 
becaufenot onely the [fraelites, but all <brahams {eede befides , which hee fhall 
propagate inthe {pirit,are ficly compared with the fands; therefore this promife 
includeth both. But this, wee fay isnot apparant,becaufe his bodily progeny a- 
Jone, in time amounted to fuch anumber that it filled almoft all che world , and 
fo mighr(by an hyperbole)bee comparable to the fands of the earch, becaufe this 
multitude is onely innumerable vnto man. But that the land hee fpokeof,was 
onely Canaan, no man maketh queftion. But fome may fticke vpon this, /wéll 
gine it fo thee and thy feed for ewer: whether hee meane,eternally,hereorno. But 
if we vnderftand this, Eser,to be meant vntill the worlds end, as wee doe firmely 
beleeue itis then the doubtis cleared. For though the Ifraelites bee chafed 
out of Terufalem , yet doe they poffeffe other citties in Canaan, and fhall doe 
vntill theend , and were all the land inhabited with chriftians , there were Abre- 
 bamsfeed,inthem. | | 


ie Sais, 


L VIVES. 
le, O the (a) fea] Of Syria,wherein eA brabam was , our ais vpon the Weft,fo that hauing 
a a in 


named the three quarters of the world before, hee muft needs meane chat for the wefterne 

Rhetonke, fea which Péiny calls the Phznician fea.( b) Hyperbole | When our words exceed our meaning, 
Qaintil. ib. 9.(c) The {criptures | Asin Hieremy che twentith,an Hyperbole of many verfes, 

faith Hierome alfo, Dan.g.and Ecclefaftes,10. The foules of the heauen {ball carry thy voice. O- 

rigen faith that that placeRom.1.8. your faith ts publifoed throngh all the world ;isan hy- 

perbole. This figure is ordinary in the Ghofpell alfo , and vfed moft , to mooue the hearers. 
Ang.contra Intianlib.s.({I wonder of fome,that had rather haue the {criptures {peake ruftical- 

[Th aVc- ly then learnedly }(d) Je is but) Narrow ss the way that leadeth unto hfe: and many are called 
saints but few are chofen.<Mat.7.14. (e) This handfull] So Iobn faith that ke faw aruultitude which xo 
defec- 4” could number. Apoc.7.9. (f) Nor the fands] This the oraculous deuill of Delpho’s (a- 
ciue.] moneft other perticulars of God ) afcribed to himfelfe : for the Lydians,whom Crafas {ent 

chether comming into the temple,the Pyrhia {pake thus to them from polls. 


Nowi ego arenarum numerum,[pacinmaG, profunds, 
My power can count the fards,and found the fea. 


How Abraham ouerthrew the enemies of the Sodomstes , freed Lot 


from captiusty and was bleffed by Melchifedech the 
Priel. Cap, 22, 


A Braham hauing receiued this promife , departed and remained in another 
place,by the wood of Mambra,which was in Chebron. And then Sodome 
being {poiled,and Zot taken prifoner by fue Kings that came againft them, Abre- 
ham went to fetch him backe with three hundred and cightcene of thofe that 

| were 


y 


Sf Sw 1 ise 


oe 


-2- 
~) 
= - 


RAE rr, 


Liss 6: OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 597 


were borne and bred in his houfe,and ouer-threw thofe Kings, and fer Lot at li- 
berty,and yet.would cake nobing of the fpoile though the (2) King fer whome _,. - 
be warred proffered it him. But then was hee blefled of Mekhifedech , who was pry 51, 
prieft of the high God, of whome there is written in the Epiftle to the Hebrev:s 
(which (6)the moft afirmeto bet Pauls though fome deny it) many arid geeae 

things. For there the facrifice that che whole church offereth now vnto GO D, 
was firft apparant, and that was prefigured which was long after. fulfilled in 
Christof whom the Prophet faid, before he came inthe feth: Thos art 4. Prices Genel, 14. 
tor ener after the order of Melchifedech : not after the order of Aaron , for that was 
to be remooued,when the true things came to effe&, wherof thofe were figures 


L. VIVES. — 
[He a)King \Bafa King of Sodomie,whofe quarrell Abrabam reuenged,Gen. 14.( b \wbick 


the mof?\ Hierome,Origen, and Augu/fine do doubt of this E piftle, and fo doe others, The { This the 
Latine Church before Héerome held it not canonicall. Erafmus difpureth largely and learned- Louanifts 


ly in the cnd of his notes vpon it. This bread and wine , was type of the body and bloud of haue left 


Christ that are now offered in thofe formes. | out as ¢r- 


of Gods promife to Abraham that hee would meke his feede asthe ftarres of hu 
and that he was inflified ty faith, before his circusmesfion, | 
Cuan. 23. 
T Hen the word of the Lord came vnto Abraham ina vifion,who hauing many 
-* great —s es made,and yet doubting of pofteritie,hee faid that F/sezer his 
Steward fhould be his heyre: but prefently hee had an heyre promifed him, not 


 Ekezer,butoneof his owne body and befide that his feede thould bee inmume- Geel i 5, 


rablejnot-as the fands of earth now, but as the ftatres of heaueti: wherein the 
celeftiall glory of his pofteritie feemes to bee plainely intimated. Buras for their 
number,who feeth not that the fands doe farre exceede the ftarres ? herein you 
may fay they are comparable, in that they are both innumerable. For wee can- 
nét thinke that one can fee all che ftarres, but the earnefter he beholds them, the 
more lice feeth : fo chat we may well fuppofe that there (¢)-are {ome that deceiue 


the fharpeft eye , befides thofe chat arife in other (6) horizons out of our, fight. 


Laftly,fuch as hold and recorde one cettdine and definite number of the ftarres; 

as (¢) Aratus, or (d ) Endoxus, or others, this booke ouer-throweth them wholy, | 
And here is that recorded that the Apoftle recitéth in commendation of Gods 
grace: Abraham beleeued the Lord , and that was counted vnto him for righte- 
oufneffe,leaft circumcifion fhould exalte it felfe,and deny the vncircumc{fedna- __ 
tions accefle vnto Chr : for Abraham was vncircumcifed as yet;when he belee- | 
wed thusjand it was imputed vnto him for righteoufneffe. Sas 


LVIVES. | 


Hers are | le ) fome ] In the white circle ‘of heanen, called the milkenway, there areantany Scorresias 
fats that ne eye can diftinguith, .4rz?.and others. (0) Other borizovs} There onan a ; 


4 


ronious, J _ 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. — Cuab.2g 


Rudexus. 


Genet ¢ 


ir boaftchus at (Yeopatra’s table. 


that neuer appeare vnto vs,as thofe aboue the Soutti-pole , Proc/us and others. Nor doe the 
Antipodes euer fee our Charles waine, nor our. pole {tarre, nor the lefic beare,8c (¢} Aratus] 
Two famous men there were of this name: one a captaine , who freed his country Sycione 
from the tyrrany of Nicocées , the other a Poet of Pompciopolis acitty of Cilicia , nere vnto 
which is this rates his tombe, ypon which if you throw a ftone,it willleape oft. The reafon 
is ynknowne.He liued in the time of ed ntigonus, King of Macedon,and wrote diuérs poemes 
which Swidas reckneth,& amongft others,his Phenomena, which Tally when he was a youth, 
tranflated into latine verfes,a fragment of which is yet extant. Judius Cefar({aith Firmsicus,but 
the common opinion, and the more true, is , Germanicus)put all Aratus his workes into a po- 
eme;but perhaps Firmicus calleth Germanicus Iulins. eAnienns,Ruffus io Hierones time made 
a latine Paraphrafe of it. Ic is ftrange that Til faich he was no Altronomer in the world,and 
yet wrote exccllent well of che ftarres , his eloquence was fo powerfull. De Oratoretb.1. 
(4; Exdoxus | ACarian,borne at Gnidus , an exellent philofopher, aud deepely {eene in phy- 
fick and the Mathematiques,he wrote verfes of Aftrology, Swsdas. Plutarch faith that ake 
tas and he were the firft pratical Geometricians, Laértins faith he firft deuifed crooked lines. 
Hee went (faith Strabo) with Plato into Egipt , and chere learnt Aftronomie , and taught ina 
Rocke that bare his name afterwards.Lucane fignifiech that he wrote calenders,makine (far 


Nee mens Eudoxi vincetur faftibus Perry 
~ Nor can Exdoxus counts excell miy yeare. 
Becaufe he had brought the yeare to a reformed courfe, 


Of the fignéfication of the facrifice which Abraham vvas commanded to offer 
vuhen he defiredto be confirmed in the things he belecued. 


Cuar. 240 | 


o 


#°% Od fayd alfo vnto him in the fame. vifion : Lam the Lord that brought thee 
—~ out of the country of the Chaldeans ,to giue thee this landte inherite st. Then 
{aid Abraham , Lord, how {hall 1know that J {ball inherite it 2 and God faid vnto 
him, Take me an heifer of three yeares olde,a {hee Geate of rhree yeares old, a Ramme 
f three yeares old,a T urtle-done and a Pidgeon. So hec did, and diuided them in 
the middeft,and laid one peece againft another, but the birds hee didmoc diuide. 
Then came foules,as the booke faith, and fell on the carcaffes , and fare therevp- 
on, and Abraham (4) face by them: and abount funne-fet there fell an heauy 
fleepe vpon Abrabam,andloea very fearefull darkenefle fel vpon him:8& God {aid 
vnto Abraham,Know this affuredly that thy feed [balbe 4 ftranger ina land that is not 
theirs foure hundred yeares and they {ball ferue there, and {ha Ibe euillintreated. But 
the nation whos they {ball ferae will Liudge , and afterwards they (ball come out with 
greatfubfiance. But thoulbalt go unto thy fathers in peace,and {bale die ina good age: 
andinthe fourth generation A fballcome hether againe, for the wickedneffe of the 
Ammorstes is not yet at full: and when the Sunne went downe therewas adarkene(fe, 
and behold a {moking furnace, and a fire-brand went betweene thofe peeces. In 
that fame day the LORD made a conenant with Abraham faying , unto thy feed 
haue I giuen this lande {rom the riner of Egipt unto the great riner of Euphrates, 
she Chenites, andthe Chenezstes , and the Cadmonites , the Hittites , the Perezites, 
the Kephaimss,the Amorites,the Chanaanites , the Gergefites and the lebufites : all this 
did Abraham heare and {ce inhis vifion:to ttand vpon each perticular were te- 


 dious, and from our purpole.. Sufficeth ic, that wee muft know that whereas 


Abraham belccucd before: and that was counted vato him for righteoufnefle, 
| : | he 


Lim ité. - OFTHECITIEOF GOD  _ 599 


he fell not from his faith‘now , in faying, LO RD; how haz know that i {ball inhe- 
rite ft : namely that land which GOD had promifed him hee faith noc, from 
whence fhalll know ? but how , or where by, thalll know, bv what fimilitude 
fhall I bec further inftruéted in my beleefe ? Nor. did the Virgin Afary.diftruft, | 
faying : How {hall this bee, feeing 1 know no man ? Shee knew it would bee,but thee Luc.s. 34. 
inquired of the manner ,.and was anfwered thus , The Holy Ghoft [hall defcend - 
upon thee,arid the power of the moft high {hallonerfbadewthee. © » «5 | 

~ Andin this manner had Abraham his fimyliein his three beafts , his Heifer, 
his Goate ,and Ramme; and the two birdes, the Turtle-doue and the Pidgeon: 
to leaue that that was to cometo pafle thus , which hee was firmely perfwaded 
fhould come to -paffe fome way. Wherefore either the heifer fignified the 
peoples yoake vnder the law ,the(d) goate their offending , and the (¢) Ramme 
their dominion ( which three creatures were all three yeares olde, becaufe 
the three {paces of time beeirig fo famous which lay from ‘Adam to Nosh from 
Noah to Abrabam, and from Abrahamto Dawid , who was the fir dected 
King of Ifraell ( Sawle beeing 4 reprobate ) of thefe three , this third , from 
Abrabamto David conteined Ifraells full growth to glorie)- or elfe they may 
fignify fome other thing more conueniently , but without all doubt , the 
Turtle-doue and the Pidgeon are types of his fpiritwall feede ,and therefore 
it is fayd , them hee dinided not : for the camall are diuided betweene them- 
felues, but the fpirituall neuer : whether chey retirethemfelues from conuerfin 
with the bufineffes of man,like tlie (4) Turtle-dowe,or live amongft them (e) like 
the Pidgeon. Te eee eee eee ee 

_Boththefe birdsare fimple , and hurtleffe, fignifyirig thac euen in Iftaell who 
fhould poffefle that land, there fhould bee individuall fonnes of promife:, and 
heirés of the Kingdome of eteritity: (f) The birds that fell vpon the facrifice 
fignified nothing but the ayry powets ;that feede vpon the contentions and di- 
uifions of catnall men. But whereas dbraham fate by them, that fignified 
that there fhould bee of the faithfull amongft thefe contentions , euen ynto 
the end of the world : andthe (¢) heauinelfe .chat fell. vpori Abraham to- 
-wardes Sunne-fetting :and that fearefull darkeneffe, fignifieth the fore trouble 
that the faithful! fhall endure towardes the end of this world , whereof 
CHRIST fayd in the Ghofpell.: Thes fhalbe a great trebulation, fuch as 
was not from the beginning oc. And whereas it was fayd to Abrahans,kwow a{[t-Mat.o4.a% 
redly that thy feede Ihelbee 4 ftranger crc. This was a plaine prophecy offfra-Genas 
ells feruitude in Egipt. Not chat they were to ferue foure hundered yeares 

in this flauifh affidtion ; buc that within foure hundered yeares this. was: 

to befall chem. For as there where it is written of Thara the father of 
Abrabam , that hee lined in Charra , two handered and fiue yeares: Wee mult. 

note that hice lived hot there all this whilé, bur that there hee ended thefe 

his daies , foisitheete fayd, They {halbee firancers it 4 Lana that is mot theirs, 

foure hundered yeares , not that theit bondage lafted all this time , but. ° 
that ic was ended at this time: and it is fayd fouré hundered yeares for the 
fulncfle of the number, although there.were fome more yeares in the account, 
whether you recken from. Abrahams firft receiuing of the prorhife , or fromthe 

birth of his fon i/sec, the firft of che feed vntowhom this was promifedsforfrom __ 
Abrahams feauenth yeare, wherein as I fayd before he firft receiued the promife, _ 

vnto the departore of Ifrael out of Egipt,foure hiidred & thirty. y ane re 


. Lf 


emer en : 


600 SAINT AVGVSTINE. © Cuar.24.825, 


Apoftle mentioneth in thefe words. This Lfay,that the law which vvas foure hun- 


Galat,3.17 deredand thirty years after,cannet difanul the conenant vvhich vas confirmed of God 


Genté, 


before,or make the promife of none effect. Now thefe foure hundred and thirty years 
haue beene called foure hundred becaufe, they are‘not much more: efpe- 
cially fome of them being paft when —4braham had this vifton,or when J/aag was 
borne vnto his father being then one hundred years old: It being fiue and twenty 
years after the promife,fo that there remained foure hundred & fiueyears of the 
foure hundred and thirty that were to come, and thofe it pleafed God to eall 
foure hundred. Solikewife in the other words of God,there is no man doubteth 


~ burchat chey belong vnto the people of Ifraell . But that which followeth : when 


the Sunne went downe there was a darkene(fe,and behold,a {moking furnace and afire- - 
brand went betrweene the peeces : this fignifiech, that in the end,the carnall areto be 
iudged by the fire: foras the great and exceeding affliGion of the Crtsy of God, 
Was fignified by the heauineffe that fell vpon .467aham towards Sunne-fer,that is 
towards this worlds end: even fo, at Sun-fet,that is , at the worlds end,doth this 
fire fignyfie that fire, that fhall purge the righteous and dedoure the wicked:and 
then the promife made vnto Aoraham , is a plaine mention of the Land of Cana- 
an naming the cleauen nations thereof from the river of Egipt vnto the great 
riuer Euphrates. Not from Nile,the great riuer of Egipt,but trom that little one 
— diuideth Egipt and Paleltina, on whofe banke the citty (4) Rhinocorura 

andeth.. | ' > 


oe - LVIVES. | 
PBratarn( 4) fate by them) The vulgar readeth,and Abrabgm drous them away and fo hath 
* “the Hebrew : Hier. Buc the Seauenty read it ¢vsepfiew, (ate by them. (b) The goate their] 
This creature is in aperpetuall feuer. Ariff.ex eAlmeone.(c) The ramme}| This is the leader of 
the flock or rather that Kingly ram. Dan. 8. (d)The Turtle-done| Thofe({aith Pliny)doe hide 
themfelues when they caft their fethers, Neither the Turtle nor the Pigeon( faith delian)will - 
haueto doe with aay but their owne cocke. (¢) The Pigeon] That liucth tamely with vs. (f) 
The fowles} This isacype faith Lofepbus ofhis cuill neighbours of Ezypt.(¢) Heawineffe|Some 


" Kead it fleepe,fome an extafie and fo the feauenty doe. (4) Rhinocorura}] This word(faith Hie. 


reme)is not in the Hebrew, but added by the Seauenty ro make knowne the place. Pliny (4b. 
s-)callech ic Rhinocolura,and placeth it in Idumza,Strabo,in Phenicia.But without al quetti- 
on the Iewes and the Egyptians claimed it to themfelues,and peepled it with the Ethiopians 
whom they conquered and cut off their nofes . Afifanes the King of Ethiopia(faith Diedorns 
Steulss. b.2.)hauing conquered all Egipt partly by force,and part by condition, fet ypanew 
lawe for theeues , neither acquitting them,nor punifhing them with death, but getring them 
altogether hee punifhed them thus : fir he cut off their nofes,and then forced themio goe in- 
to the fartheft parts ot the deferts, and there he built acitry for them called Rhinocorura of 
there want of nofes :and this ftandeth in the confines of Egipt and Arabia,voide of all chings 
fit for the life of man , for all the water of the country is fale:and there is but one fountaine 


' weibin the walls,and that is moft bitter, and ynprofitable. Thus farre Diodorus. 


Of Agar, Sata her bond-vvoman,v vbom fhe ga ue as concubine : 
_° uatoAbraham. Cwap. 25. | 


, | Ow follow the times of Abrahams fonnes,one of Agar the bond-woman,the 
other of Sare the free-woman , of whom we fpake alfo in che laft booke: bux 

now for this a& , Abrabam offended not in viing of this woman Agar as a 
: : concubjos. 


\ 


a ee a mean cee ae ee ee ee ee 


Lieel6. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 601 
a e 
concubine : for hee did it for progeny fake , and not for luft, nor as infulting but 
obeying his wife : who held thag it would beea comfort vnto her barrenneffe if 
the got children from her bond-woman by will , feeing thee could get none of 
her felfe by nature: vfing that law that the Apoftle {peaketh of: The husband 
hath not power of his owne bodie bus the wife . The woman may procure her felfe 
children from the wombe of another if fhee cannot beare none her felfe. There 
is neither luxury nor vncleanneffein fuch an a@ . The maide was therefore — 

giuen by the wife to the hushand for Iffues fake,and for that end hee tooke her: 

neither of chem defire the effects of luft , but the fruites of nature: and when as 

the bond-woman being now with child beganne co defpife her barren miftreffe, 

and Sara {ufpe&ed her husband for bearing. with her in her pride, sbrahans 

fhewed, that he was nota captiued louer, but a free father inthis,and that it was 

not his pleafure,but her will that hee had fulfilled , and that by her owne feeking: 

thar he medled with gar , but yet was no way entangled in affe@ vato her :and 

fowed the feed of future fruite in her, but yet without yeeldingte anyexerbi- 
tant affeGtion to her : for he told his wife: Thy maide ts tn thine hand : ufe her as tt Gen,16.6. 
pleafeth theeOh worthy man that could vfe his wife with temperanceand his fer- 

uant with obedience, and both withoutall touch of vncleanneffe! | 


1.Cor.7. 4 


Of Gods promife unto Abraham, thet Sara (though {be were old )fbonla 
ane a fonne that [bould be the father of the nation,and how | 
thes promife was fealed in the miftery of tircumcifion. 
Cuap. 26. 


Af this J/mael was borne of Ager in whome it might bee thoughe chat 
GODS promifeto Abraham was fulfilled , whowhen hee talkedofmake- _ 
ing his Steward his heire, GOD fayd, Nay, but thou{balt hane an hesre of thine Gens7 
owne bodie .But leaft hee fhould build vpon this,in the foure {core and nineteene 
yeare of hisage GO D appeared vnto him faying: Jay the all-fufficient GOD, 
walke before mee , and bee thouvupright : endl wilt make my couenant betweene mee, 
and thee , and will multiply thee exceedingly. Then Abraham fell on.his face 


-andG OD talked with him faying : Bebold J make my couenant with thee thon 


foals bee a father of many nations. Nor {ball thy same bee,called Abram any more, 
byt Abraham : fora father of many Nations haue I made thee. I-vill make thee 
exceeding {ruitfull, and many Nations, yea even Kings {hall proceed of thee: AndI 
willeftabh{hmy couenant , betweene mee andthee, and thy feed after thee in their 
generations; for an enerlafting couenanttobe GOD to thee and thy feed after thee. 
And I will giue thee and thy feede after thee a Land wherein thou art 4 ftranger , cue 
all the Land of Canaan for an euerlasting poffefion , anal wilbee their GOD: and, 
GOD faid further vnto Abraham: thom {halt keepe my couenant thou andthy feed 
after thee in their generations,this is my couenant which thou {bale keepe betweene thee 
and me, and thy (eed after thee let euery man-child of you bee circumcifed : that és, 
you {ball circumcife the fore-skinne of your flelb , and it {balbe a ficne of the co- 
senant betweene meeand you. Euery man child of eight daies old agponcit you{halbe 
cireumei[ed in your generation afwell » hee that borne in thine houfe,or he that ts 
bought of any frranger which is not of thy feed: both muff bee circumcifed,fo my coue- 
nant {halbe eternally 2 you. But the uncircumcifed man-child,and he in whofe fle{b the. 
fore-skinne is not circnmscifed, [balbe cus aff from his people becanfe he hath broken my 

" Fif concnante 


602 SAINT AV GVSTINE. Cuap26 


couenant. And God fayd morevnzo Abraham. Sarai thy wife {hall bee no more cal- 
led Sarai , but Sarah, and Iwill ble(fe her, and willgine thee a fonne of her,and I will 
bleffe her and {be [balbe the mother of nations, yea ewen of Kings. Then braham fell 
vpon his face and laughed in his heart , faying : Shall he that s an hundered yeares 
oldhsue « child? and {ball Sarah that is ninety yeares old, bearez and Abrahun {aid 
_ vnto God, Oh Jet Mmael hue én thy fight :andGOD {aid vnto Abraham: Sarah 
thy wife {ball beare a fonne indeed , and thou {hall call his name Uaac,/ will eftablifh my 
couenant with him as an euerlafting ccucnant snd 1 (a) wilbe his GOD and the GOD of 
his feed after him : as concerning \{mael J hane heard thee : for Lhane bleffedhim,and 
willnsultiply and increafe him exceedingly : twelue Princes {hall hee beget , and I will 
make him a great Nation. But my couenant will leftablé{b with Uaac , whom Sarah 
foal beare unto the next yeare by this time .Here now is the calling of the Nations 
plainly promifed in J/aac, that is in the fon of promife fignifying grace, and not 
nature, for a fonne is promifed vnto an old man,by a barren old. woman , andal- 
though God worketh according to the courfeof nature, yet wherethat nature 
is withered and wafted, there fuchan effe& as this is Gods eaident worke,de- 
nouncing grace the more apparantly:and becaufe this was not to come by gene- 
Circumci.. Tation , burregeneration afterwards, therefore was circumcifion commanded 
fonatype now,When this fonne was promifed vnto Sarah: and whereas all children, fer- 
or ets uants vnborne, &c{trangers,are commanded to be circumcifed,this fheweth thar 
"grace belongeth vnto all the world: for what doth circumcifion fignifie bue 
the putting off corruption, and the renouation of nature? and what doth the 
eight day fignifie but Chrift chat rofe againe in the end of the weeke,the fabboth 
being fulfilled? (6) The very names of thefe parents beeing changed, all fignifiech 
that newneffe,which is fhadowed in the types of the old Teftament,in which the 
New one lieth prefigured : for why is it called the Old Teftament,but for that ic 
fhadoweth the New? and what is the New Teftament but the opening ofthe 
Old one ? Now Abraham is fayd to laugh , but this was the extreamity of his ioy, 
not any figne of his deriding this promife ypon diftruft : and his thoughts beeing 
thefe: Shall he that ts an hundred yeares ola crc. Are not doubts of the euents,but 
admirations caufed by fo ftrange an euént. Now if fome ftop at that where God 
faith, be will give him all the Land of Canaan for an eternall pofje(ion , how this may 
be fulfilled, feeing thatno mans progeny can inherite the earth eucrlattinglyshe 
muft know, that eternall is here taken as the Greekes take evats:y, which is deriued 
Of (c) iar,that is fecu/um, anage: but the latine tranflation durfinotfay /cculare, 
here,leaft it fhould haue beene taken in an other fence :for /eculare and tranfito- 
vium are both alike vfed for things that laft but for alittle {pace: but eseoy,is that 
which is either endleffe ac all , or endeth notvntill the worlds end: and in this la- 
ter fence is,etersall,v{ed here. 7 


L. VIVES. 


Wilbe (a) his God] Or,to be his G OD, sires evra’ Bees, a grecifme , hardly expreffed ia your 

latine. (6) The vgy] The gentiles had alfo their eight day wherevpon the diftinguifhed the 
childs name from the fathers. 2 4a] It is Seculum,etas,annum, CS eternitas in latine. Tully and o~ 
ther great authors tranflate it all thofe waies from the grecke, 


/ Of 


L131 6. | OF THE CITIE OF GOD. . 603 


| Of the man child, that if it were not tircumecifed the eight day, 
| st pert[bed for breaking of Gods touenant. 
C tap. 27, | 


Some alfo may fticke vpon the vnderftanding of thefe words. 7 he man child in 
"whofe flefh the fore-skinne ts not circumcifed,that petfon {balbe cut off frem his pee- 
ple because he had breaken my conenant. Here is no fault of the childes who's here~ 
expofedto deftrudtion : he brake no couenant of Gods but his parents, that look- 
ed nat co his circumcifion, valefle you fay that the yongeft child hath broken 
Gods command and covenant as wellas the reft, in che firft man, in whom all 
man-kinde finned. For there are (4) many Teftaments or Couenants of God, be- 
fides the old and new, thofetwo fo greatones , that euery one may read and 
know. The firft couenant was this, vnto Adam: Whenfoewer thou cateft thereof Pee 
thoufbalt die the death : wherevponiit is writtenin Ecclefafticns Allflelo waxeth Rech tesa 
oldas a garment and itis 4 couenant from the beginning that all finners {ball die the 
death,for whereasthe law was afterwards giuen,andthatbroughtthemorelight —_ 
to mansiudgement in finne: as the Apoftle faith, where no law 2s there £5 no tran/- Roma. 18 
gre{sion :how is that rue thacthe Plalmift faid: 7acconmted all the finners of the °""** 
earth tranfereffors ,(b) but that euery man is guilty in his owne confcience of 
fome-what that hee hath done againft fome law ? and thetefore feeing that little 
 children(as the true faith teacheth)be guilty of original finne, though not of ac- 
tuall , wherevpon wee confeffe chattheymuft neceffarily haue the graee of the 
remiffion of their finnes; then verily in this , they are breakers of Gods coue- . 
nant, made with Adsm in paradife: fo that both the Pfalmifts faying ,and che: 
Apoftles is true: and confequently, feeing that circumcifion was atype ofre- 
generation, iuftly fhall che childs originall finne (breaking th firft conenantthat 
euer was made betweene God and man) cuthim off from his people, vniefle 
that regeneration engraffe him into the body of the truereligion. This then 
we mutt conceiue that GO D {pake: Hee shat is not regenerate , {ball peri{b fron 
among {t his people,becaufe he hath broke mycowenant , in odending me in Adam. For 
ifhe had fayd,he hath broke this my cowenant , it could hauebeene meant of no- 
thing but the circumcifion onely: but fceing hee faich not what couenant the 
child breaketh,we muft needes vnder{tand him to méane ofa covenant liable vn- 
to the tranfgreffion of the child. But ifany one will tie it vnto circumcifion, and 
fay chat that is the couenant which the vncircumcifed child hath broxen,let hint 
beware of abfurdicy in faying that hee breaketh their couenant which is not bro- 
ken by him but in him onely. But howfdeuer we fhall finde the childs condem- 
nation to come onely from his originall finné, and not from any negligenceof . 
his owne iucurring this breach of the couenant. 7 


L.VIVES. 


‘| Fee (4) are many) Hierome hath noted that wherefoeuer the Greekes read tefament;. 

the Hebrewes read conenant : Berith is the Hebrew word. ) But that\Thereisnoman — 
fo barbarous, but nature hath giuen him fome formes of goodneffe in his heart whereby to 
liue ap honeft life if he follow them, and ifhe refufe them,to curne wicked. 


Fifs © of. 


a SAINT AVGVSTINE. —— Caara8, 


Gen.17.6, 
7. 


Of the changing of Abram and Sara's names, who being the one too bar- 
ren,and both to old to hane children,yet oy Gods bounty were 
both made fruitfall, C nar. 28, 
Siw this great and evident promife beeing made vnto —braham in thefe 
words : A father of many nations haue I made thee,and 1 will make thee exceeding 
fruitful: and nations , yea cuen Kings {ball — of thee :( which promife wee {ee 
moft euidently. fulfilled in Chrift ) from that time the man and wife are called no 
more Abram and Sarai , butas wee called them before , and all the world calleth 
them: Abraham, and Sarah. Butwhy was Abrahams name changed ? the reafon 
followeth immediately , vpon the change, for, 4 father of many nations haue Imade 
thee. Thisis fignified by Abrahams :now <Abran ( hisformer (4) name)is inter- 


| preted,an high father . But (6) for the change of Sara’s name ,thereis no reafon 
 giuen: but as they fay that have interpreted thofe Hebrew names, Sarazis m 


Princeffe : and Sarah, ftrength : wherevpon it is written in the Epiftle to the He- 
brewes, By faith Sarah recezwed ftrength to conceiue feed orc. Now they were both 


--- oldas the fcripture faith, but (c) thee was barren alfo,and paft the age (d) where- 


inthe menftruall bloud floweth in women , which wanting fhe could neuer haue 
conceiued although fhe had not beene barren. And ifawomanbe well in years, 


_ and yet have that menftruall humour remayning,fhe may conceiue with a yong- 


' man, but neuer by an old:as the oldman may beget children , but it muft bee 


Sarat. 
Sarah. 


Caufes of 
bartene 


ypona young woman ,as Abraham afecr Sarabs death did vpon Keturah becaufe 
fhee was ofa youthfull age as yet. Pee a lg : | 

_ ‘This therefore is that which the Apoftle fo highly admireth , and herevpon 
he faith chat Abrahams body was dead , becaufe hee was not ableto beget a child 


-vponany woman tKat was not wholy’ paft her age of child-bearing : but onely 


of thofe that were in the prime and flowre thereot. For his bodie was not fimp- 
ly dead , but refpectively; otherwife it fhould haue beene a carcaffe fir fora 
grauc,not an ancient father vpon earth. Befides the guift of begetting children 
that G OD gauchim, lafted after Sarahs death,and he begot diuers vpon Keturah, 
and this cleareth the doubt that his body was not fimply dead; I meane vnto ge- 
neration. ButI likethe other anfwere better becaufeaman in thofedaies was 
not in his weakeft age atan hundred yeares , although the men of our times bee 
fo,and cannot beget a child ofany woman : they might , for they lived far lons 
ger,and had abler bodies then we haue. | 


_L.VIVES. 


HH former (a) name] Some Hebrewes fay that God put aletter of his name m= into 
Abrahams name,to wit, the letter ,. Hierome.(b) For the change | Hierome aut of moft 


. of the Hebrewes, interpreteth Sarai , my Princeffe or Ladie : and Sarah aPrinceffe or Ladie, 


for fhe was firft Abrahams Lady, and then the Lady of the nations:and Virtus,or {trength is 
often taken by diuinés for dominion, or principality. Hrero.in Gene/. Augu/tine v{eth the word 
in another fence. (¢)Shewas barren | The phifitianshold womens barrenneffe to proceede 
of the defects of the matrix,as if it be too hard, or brawny,or too loofe and fpungeous,or too 
fat, or ficthly: Plutarch. De phifopb. decret. lib.'5. 1 ommit rhe fimples that: beeing taken 
inwardly procure barrenneffe , as the berries of blacke uy, (etarach , or hearts tongue as 
Pliny faith &c. z | 

| The 


Lret6. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. — G0¥ 
The Stoickes fay that it is often effected by the contrariety of qualities in the agent & patient 
at copulation: which being coupled with others of more concordance,do eafily become fruit- 
full, which we may not vnfitly imagine in Abraham and Sarah,becatfe afterwards hee becot 
children vpon Ket#rah , vnleffe you winde vp all thefe matters with a nore diuine interpreta- 
tion.For Paul calleth Abraham, vervpausvor,a dead body,exhauft,and fruitleffe.(d) wherein the 
menfiruall| Of the menftrues Pliny faith thus : Some women neuer haue them : and thofe are 
_ barren. For they are the fubftance wherein the {permes congeale and ripen : and thereot if 
they flow frow women that are with child , the child borne wilbe cicher weake andfickly, or 
els ic will not liue long, as Nigidiws faith. Thus much out of Pliny. hb, 7. Arftorle faith 
that all chac want thefe menttruall fluxes are not barren: for they may retaine as much 


in their places of conception as they doe that h..ue thefe purgatiue courfes fo ofen, Hiffor. 
animal.ib.7, . 


mee ee ae rr ee oe ee 


Of the three men,or angells wherein G O D appeared to Abraham in 
the plaine of Mambra. Cuar.29. 


G°? Dappeared vnto Abraham in the plaine of Mambra in three men,who 

doubrleffe were angells , though fome thinke that one of them was Chrift, 
and thathe was vilible before his incarnation. Itis indeed in the power of the 
vnchangeable,vncorporall,and inuifible deity to appeare vnto man vifible when- 
foeuer it pleafeth, without any alteration of it felfe : not in the owne but in fome — 
creature fubie& vnto it; as what is it chat it ruleth not ouer ? But ifthey ground | 
that one of thefe three was Chrift,vpon this, that Abraham when hee faw three 
men, falutedthe Lord peculiarly , bowingto the ground at the dore of his Ta- 
bernacle,and faying,Z OR D if Ihaue found fauour tn thy fight dc. Why doe they 
not obferue that when two came to deftroy Sodome, Utbraham {pake yetbut 
vnto one of them that remained(calling him Lord, and intreating him not to de- 
ftroy the righteous with the wicked )and thofe two were intertained by Lot, 
who notwithftanding called either of them by the name of Lord ? For {peaking 
tothem both, My Lords (faith hee) /pray you turne in unto your feruants honfe Gc. Geng 
and yet afterwards we reade:and the angells tooke him and his wife,and his two 
daughters by the hands , the Lord beeing mercifull vnto him-and they brought — 
him forth,and{ec him without the citty, and when they hadfo done,the angells =. 
faid,E/cape for thy felfe ,looke not behind thee, neither tarry in all the plaines,but ef- 
cape to the mountaines leat thou bee deftroied, and he {ayd, not fol pray thee my Lord 
ore and afterward, the Lord being in thefe two angells , an{wered him as in one, 
faying: Behold,1 hane (4) recetued thyrequeft évc.andthercfore it is far more likely 
that Abraham knew the Lord to bee in them all three, and Lot in the two,vnto 
_ whom , they continually {poke in the fingular number, euen chen when they 
thought them to bee men, thenotherwife. For they intertained them at firft 
only to giue them meate and lodging in charity,as vnto poore men:but yet there 
was fome excellent marke in them whereby their hoafts might bee affured,that 
the Lord was in them,as he vfed to be in the Prophets: and therefore they fome- 
times called them Lords in the plurall number , as {peaking to themfelues ,and 
formetimes Lord , in the fingular,as fpeaking to God in them. But the feriptures 
themfelues ceftifie that chey were angells , not onely in this place of Geriefis, but 
inthe Epiftle to the Hebrewes where the Apoftle commending hofpitality:() 
therby forse({aith he)haue receiued angels into their houfesunwares:thefethreemen' | 
therefore confirmed the promife of J/aac the fecond time, and faid'vnto bra, He. 133 
ham: He {balbea great and mighty nation , and in him (hall the nations of the world be ee 
bled. Here isa plaine prophecy both of the bodily nation of the Ifraclites,and 75"7* 
the {pirituall nations of the righteous. | : 

| | FEF 3 | LvI- 


. 


606 SAINT AVGVSTINE.  ——Cnrargo.831 


a _ LVIVES. 
] Haxe (a) receined|So readeth the vulgar,but not the feauenty. (6) Thereby fome] I wonder 
how Placserunt came into the latine vulgar editions] chink the tranflators made it Latuerunt 
rather, from the grecke ixefor, but efuguftine hath tranflated it the beft ofall, putting vna- 
wares for itéaafep, as the Greekes doe often vfeto fpeake fo. : | 

3 . é . 
Lots delinerance : Sodomes defiruction: Abimelechs /vf, 
Sarahs chaffity. Cuap. 30. 


| A Feer this promife was Lot deliuered out of Sodome,and the whole territo 
of that wicked citty confumed by afhower («) offire from heauen: and al 

thofe parts where mafculine beftiality was as allowable by cuftome as any other 
actis by other lawes . Befides,this punifhment of theirs was a type of the day of 
iudgement : and what doth the angells forbidding chem to looke backe, fignifie, 
bucchatthe regenerate muft neuer returne to his old courfes,if hee meane to ef- 

Lots wife, cape the terror of the laft iudgment ? Lots wife, whére fhe looked back,there was 
fhe fixed,and beeing turned into (4) a piller of fale, ferueth co feafonthe hearts of 
the faithful,to take heed by fuch example. After this, Abraham did with his wife 

Gen,2o | Sarah at Geraris, in King Abimelechs couit , as hee had done before in Egiprt,and 
her chaftity was in like maner preferued,& fhe returned to her husband. Where 
Abraham when the King chideth him for concealing that (hee was his wife;ope- 
ned his feare,and withal,cold him, faying, fhe és my (ifer indeed for {he is my fathers 
daughter but not my mothers, and {he is my wife : and fo (hice was indeed both thefe, 
and withall offuch beauty,that fhe was amiable even at thofe years. 


L. VIVES: 


A Shower (a) of firé | Of this combuftion many prophane authors make mention. Strabe 
| faith that cities were confumed by that fire as the inhabitats thercabout report:the poole 
that remaineth where Sodome ftood(the chiefe city )is fixty furlongs about, Many of thé alfo 
meation the lake A/phalts where the bitumen growcth,(b).A psller | Lofephus faith he did fee it. 


Of lfaac, borne at the time prefixed,and ramed{o, becaule of bis 
parents laughter. CaP, 31. | 


Af this braham according to Gods promife, hada fon by Serah, and cal- 

led him J/aac,chat is, Laughter: for his father laughed for ioy and admiration 

when he was firft promifed : and his mother when the three men confirmed this 

promife againe laughed alfo,betweene ioye,and doubr: che Angell fhewing her 

chat her laughter was not faithful], thougbic were ioyfull.. Hence had the child 

his name: for this laughter belonged not to the recording of reproach, but to 

the celebration of gladneffe,as Sarah fhewed when //aac was borne and called by 

this name: for fhe aid Goa heth made me to laugh , and all that heare me will reioyce 

Genal. 6», ish me: and fooneafter the bond-woman and her fon is caft out of the houfe in 

‘fignification of the old Teftament,as Sarah was ofthe new (as the Apoftle faith) 
and of that glorious Céty of God,the Heauenly Ierufalem. 

| | | Abrahams 


(a 


_ bee called: and addeth: Of the bond-womans fonne wall I make z great nation alfo, 


Lini6. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 


Abrahams faith and obedience prooued its his intent to offer his Sonne: 


Sarahs death, Cwar.32. 


She omit many accidents for breuities fake, Abraham (for atriall ) was com- 
manded to goe and facrifice his deareft fonne #/aar , that his true obedience 
might fhew it felfe to all the world in that fhape,which G O D knew already that | 
itbare. This now was an inculpable tem ptation (and fome fuch there bee ) and 
was to bee taken thankfully, as ane of Gods triallsaf man. And generally mans 
minde can never know it felfe well, but putting forth ic‘felfe vpon trialls and ex- 
perimental hazards,and by their events it learneth the owne ftate,wherein if it 
acknowledge Gods enabling it, it is godly, and confirmed in folidity of grace; 
againft all the bladder-like humors of vaine-glory. braham would neuer be. 
leeuc that God could take delight in facrifices of mans flefh s though Gods thun- 
dring commands are to bee obeyed, not queftioned vpon, yet is sbraham 
commended for hauing a firme faith and beleefe,that his fonne Jase fhould rife 
againe after hee were facrificed.For when he would not obey his wife in caftin 
out the bond-woman and hir fonne, God {aid vnto him : zs Ifaae floall thy feede Rom,9, 
becaufe hee ts thy feede : How then is I/aac onely called Abrahams feede, when God 
calleth //macl fo likewife ? The Apoftle expoundeth it in thefe words : that Is, 
they whech are the children of the flelb, ave mot the children of God, but the children of 


the promife are accounted for the feede. And thus are the fonnes of promife called 


tobe —tbrahams feede in I/aac, that is gathered into the Church by Chréft his 
free grace and mercy. This promife the father holding faft , feeing chat it mult 
bee fulfilled in him whom God commanded tokill, doubted not but thatthat God 
could reftore him after facrificing , who had giuen himac firft beyond all hope._ | 
So the Scripture taketh his beleefe to haue beene,and deliuereth it. By faith (a) Hebe-tt. 
Abraham offered up aac when hee was tryed: and hee that had receiued the pro- 
mifes offered his onely fonne :to whom it was faid, én Ifaac (hal! thy feede bee called : 
for hee confidered that God was able'to raife him fromthe dead; and then fol- 
loweth, for when hee receiued him alfoin afort :in what fort but as hee receiued 
his fonne,of whom it is {aids who /pared not his owne fonne, but gaue him to dye for Rom.$, 
vs all: And {o did J/aac carry the wood of facrifice to the place ,euen as Christ 
carried the crofle : Laftly seeing J/aac was not to be flainé indeed , and his father 
commanded to hold his hand, who was that Ram that was Offered asa full (and 
typicall ) facrifice? Namely that which braham firft of all efpied. entangled 
(b) in the buthes by the hornes. What was this buta type of Je/us Chrif, crow- 
ned with thornes ere hee was crucified ? But marke the Angels words, Abraham 
(faith the Scriptures) lift up his hand and tooke the knife to kill his fonne : Butthe 
Angell of the Zerdcalled vnto him from heauen faying, Abraham ? and he anfwe- 
red,Here Lord: thenhe faid: Lay not thy hand _— thy [onne,nor doe any thing un. 
to him, for now I know.thon feareft God, feeing tha for my fake thou hait not pared 
thine onely fonne. Now I know, that is now I haué made knowne: for God knew. 
it crenow. And then Abraham hauing offered the Ram for his fonne //a4c, called 
the place (¢ ) the Lord hath feene : as it is {aid vnto this day : éathe mount hath the 
Lord appeared,& the Angels of the Lord called vnto Abraham againe out of hea- 
uen,faying:By my felfe hane L/worne({. aith the Lord )becaufe thoi haf? done this thing 
& haft not pared thine onely fonme for we: furely I wilt bleffe thee G multiply thy feed 

4s 


608 SAINT AV GVSTINE. C uar.3 3.8 34 


God will 
fee inthe 
Mouatzan | 
Hebrew 
prouerbe, 


asthe ftarres of heauen or the fands of the fea,andthy feed {hal poffeffe the gate of his e- 
nemies:and in thy feed [hallall the nations of the earth be bleffed,becaufe thou haft(d)o- 
bayedmy voyce. This is that promife {worne vnto by God concerning the callin 
of the Gentiles after the offering of the Ram , the type of Chrift.God had often 
promifed before,but neucr {worne. And what is Gods oth but aconfirmation of 
his promife and areprehenfion of the faithleffe ? after this died Sara being a- 
hundred twenty feauen yeares old, in the hundred thirty feauen yeare of her huf- 
bands age, for hee was ten yeares elder then fhe : as he fhewed when J/aac was 
firft promifed,faying fbad J that am 4 hundred yeares old haue a childvand {hall Sarah 
that is foure {core and tenne yearesold, beare ? andthen did W4braham buy a 
peece of ground and buried his wife in it : and then ( as Stephens {ayth ) was hee 
feated in that land : for then began hee to be a poffeffor , namely after che death 
of his father who was dead fome two yeares before. 


L.VIVES. | 


RB; a) faith, ) A diuerfity of reading in the text of Scripture [ therefore haue wee followed 
the vulgar.] ( 6 ) iss the bufbes.) This is after the feauenty , and Theodotion , whofe trarfla- 
tion Hierome approues before that of Aquila , and Symachus. (¢ ) The Lord hath feene. | The 
Hebrew ( faith Hierome )is /ball fee. And it was a prouerbe vied by the Hebrewes in all their 
extremities, wifhing Gods helpe to fay , Jw the mount , the Lord fhall fee : that is , as hee pitied 
| Abrabam , fo willhee pitty vs. And in figne ofthat Ramme that God fent him, they vfe vnto 
this day toblow an horne , thus much Hierome. In Spaine this Prouerbe remaineth ftill, bur 
notas euguffine taketh it ; The Lord wilbe altogither feene , but in a manner, that is, 
3 = thall bee feene. (4 ) Obeyed. | Ob-andifti, and fo the old writersvied to fay in fteed 
Ol ebeasfts. | 


- = 


Of Rebecca Nachors weece whome lfaac maried. 
Crap. 33. 


“T Hen Jfaac being forty yeares old maried Rebecca ,neece tohis vacle Nachor 

three yeares after his mothers death , his father being a hundred and forty 
yeares old. And when Abraham fent his feruant into Mefopotamia to fecchher, 
and faid vnto him, Put thine hand under my thigh and I wiilfweare thee by the Lord 
God of heanen and the Lord of earth that thou {haltnot take my fonne \{aac a wife of the 
daughters of Canaan:what is meant by this,but the Lord God of Heauen and the 
Lord of Earth chat was to proceed of thofeloynes ? are thefe meane prophefies 
and prefages of that which wee fee now fulfilled in Chrift. : 


of Abraham marrying Kethurah efter Sarahs death , and the 
meaning therefore. HAP. 34. a 


Ve what is ment by Abrahams marrying Kethurahafter Sarabs death> Godde- _ 


fend vs from fufpeé of incontinency in him , being fo old, and foholy and 
faithfull: cefired he more fonnes,God hauing promifed to make the feed of aac as 
the flars of Heauen and the fandes of the Earth? Butif Agar and Hifmaell did fi “ 


Lis.36. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. | 609 


the mortalls ro the Old-teftament(as the Apoftle reacheth) why may not Kethurah 
and her fonnes,fignifie the mortalls belonging to the New. teftament. They both 
werecalled Abrabams wiues,&his concubines But Sarah was neuer called his con- 
cubine,but his wife only for it is thus written of Serahs giuing .4gar vnto Abraha 
Then Sarah, Abrahams wife tooke Agar the Egiptian her maid , after Abraham had 
dwelled teune yeares in the land of Canaan , and gane her to her hufboand Abraham for 
his wife. And of Kethurab wee read thus of his taking her after Sarahs deaths Now 
Abraham had taken him ancther wife called Kethurah : Here now you heare ° 
them both called his wiues : but the Scripture caileth them both his concubines 
alfo, faying afterwards, Abraham gane all his goods unto Lfaac , but vnto the fonnes . 
of his concubines he gaue guiftes,and fent them away from //zac his fonne(while ae 
heyerliued ) Eaftward, into che Eaft country. Thus the concubines fonnes haue 

- fome guifts but none of them attayne the promifed kingdome, neither the car- 

nall ewes, nor the heretiques,for none are heyres.but //aac : nor are the fonnes 

of the Aefhthe Sonnes of God, but thofe of the promife;of whome ic is faid : J 

Ifaac fhalbe calledthy feede : fot I cannot fee how Kerhurah whome hee married 

after Sarahs death fhould bee called his concubine but in this refpect. Buthee 

that will not vnderftand thefe things thus, let him not flander Abraham: for what _ 

if his were appointed by God, to fhew («) thofe future heretiques that deny 
fegond mariage in this great father of fo many nations, that it is no finne to ma- 

rry afeer the firft wife be dead: now _ Abraham died,being a hundred feauenty fiue 
yeares old, and //aac (whome hee begat when hee was ahundred : ) was {ea- 


uenty fiue yeares of age at his death- 


| L. VIVES: |  & ye 
| Hofe (a) future. ]The Cataphrygians that held fecond mariage to bee fornication. Aug The lo- 
ad quod unlt { Hierome againft [owinian,doth not onely abhorre fecond matiage but cuen yaine co- 
difliketh of the firit : for he was a fingle man,and bare marriage no good will, | | py defes | 


tue. | 


ae ath 


The appointment of Goa concerning the two twins inRebeccas womb... 


Cuap. 33: 
Ow let vs feethe proceedings of the Citty of God after Abrahams death. So 
then from J/zacs birth to the fixtith yere of his age(wherin he had children) 
there is this one thing to be noted, that when as he had prayed for her frutefulnes 
(who was barren )and that God had heatd him,and openedher wombe,andfheg : 
conceiued, the rwo twins ( 4 ) played in her wombe : where-with fhe being trou, go ep 
bled, asked the Lords pleafure , and was anfwered thus : Two wattons.are in | - 
thy womsbe, and two manner of people [balbe dinided out of thy bowells , and the one Genzye'" 
fall bee mightier then the other, and the elder {hall ferue the younger. \Wherirt 
Peter the Apoftle vnderftandeth the great miltery of grace :‘in that ere. they 
were borne , andeither done euill or good, the one was elected and the’ o- 
ther reiected ; and doubtleffe as concerning originall fin, both were alike , and 
guilty , and as concerning a@uall , both alike and cleare. But myne intent in re 
| ! : WOLKe 


610 


SAINT AVGVSTINE.  Caar.36° 


worke,curbeth mee fram further difcourfe of this point: wee haue handled it in 
other volumes. But that faying ; The elder {ball ferme the youger : all men inter- 
pret of the lewes feruing the Chriftians , and though it feeme fulfilled in (6) 


_ Idumea,which came of the elder ,E/as or Edoms, (for hee had two names) becaule 


Jdumz2 


Gen,26 Ue : 


it was atterward fubdued by the I fraelites chat came of the yonger, yet not-with- 
ftanding that prophecy muft needs haue a greater intent then fo: and what is 
that but to be fulfilled in the lewes and the Chriftians ? 


L.VIVES. 


Tie two twinnes (4) played \So fay the {eauentie, iexipswrt or kicked. Hierowse faith meoened ; 

monebantur. Aquila faith, were crufbed : confringebantur. And Symmachus compareth their 
motion to an emptic fhip at fea : feixatoy. (b) Idumea | Stephanus deriueth their nation from 
Ldumeaas, Semiramis her fonne,as /udea from Jndas,another of her fonnes : but he is deceiued. 


Of promife and blefing receined by \faac,in the manner that Abraham 
| hadreceiwed his.. Cuar. 36. 


Now Jfaac ceceiued fuch an inftruGion from Ged, as his father had done di- 
verfe times before. It is recorded thus: There was a famine in the land befides 
the firft famine that was in Abrahams time: and aac went to Abymelech, kine of 
the Philiftines in Gerara. .4nd the Lord appeared unte him and faid: Goe not downe 
into Lg ypt,but absde in the land which I fball(bew thee: dwell in this land, and 1 will 
bee with thee and bleffe thee : for to thee andtothy feed wsil I giue this land, and I will 
eftable[b mine oath which I fare to Abraham thy father : ana will multiply thy fede 


as theflarres of heanen, and gine all this land unto thy feede: and in thy feede {hall all 


Abrabam 
and I/aac 
compare 


Faithfull 
wedlock 
ter 


faahiefle 


Einglenefle. 


the nations of the earth bee bleffed, becaufe thy father Abraham obeyed my voyce , and 
kept my ordinances my commandements, my flatutes, and my lawcs : Now this Patri- 
arch had no wife nor concubine more then his firft, bugrefted content with che 
twofonnes that God fent himat one birth. And hee alfo feared his wiues beau- 


‘tie,amongft thofe ftrangers,and did as his father had done betore him,with her, 


calling her fifter onely,and not wife. She was indeed his kinfiwoman both by fa- 
ther and mother : but when the ftrangers knew that fhe was his wife,they let her 
quietly alone with him, Wee not preferre him before his father tho, in that hee 
had but one wife : with-out all doubr his fathers obedience wasof the greater - 
merite, fo that for his fake God faith that hee will doe J/ase that good that he did 
him. Js thy (eede {hall all the nations of the world bee bleed, faith he , becaufe thy fa- 
sher Abraham obeyed my voyce crc. Againe: ( faith he ) she God of thy father Abra 
ham, feare not: for Lam with theeand hane bleffed thee, and will multiply thy feede, 
for Abraham thy Fathers fake. To thew all tchofe carnally minded men that thinke 
it was luft chat made Abraham doe as it is recorded,that hee did ic withno luft ar 
all, buea chafte intent: teaching vs befides that wee ought not compare mens 
worths by fingularitie,buc to take them with all their qualities together. For‘a 
man may excell another in this or that vertue, who excelleth him as farrein an- 
other as good. Andal-be-it it be crue that continence is better then marriage: 
yet the faichfull married man is better then the cqntinent Infidell : for fuch an 
one (4) is not onely not to be praifed for his continencie fince he beleeueth nor, 
byc rather highly to bee difpraifed for not beleeuing, fecing hee is ore 
_ ut 


Basie OF THE CITIE OF GOD. — bit 
Buttogrant them both good sa married man of great faith and obedience in Ie-- 

fus Chraft is better then a continent man with leffe: buc if they be equall, who 
maketh any queftion chat the continent man is the more exellent. . _ 


me a 


L.VIVES.: 
Uch an (a )Oneis not.| Herein is appararit how fruitleffe externall workes are without the 
dew of grace do ripen them in the heart. the Bruges copy readeth not this place fo well 
in‘my iudgement. | | 


of E fait and lacob 4nd the mifteries included in thers both. 
Cuiar. 27. 


So Jfaacs two fonnes,E/aw and Jacob,were brought vp together:now the yonger 

got the birth-right of the elder by a bargaine, made for(«)lentiles and potage 
“which /acob had prepared, & Efas longed for exceedingly, & fo fold him his birth- 
right for fome of them, and confirmed the bargaine withan oth, Herenow may 
we learne that it is/b not the kind cf meate, but the gluttonous affea that hurts. 
To proceed ? J/aac growes old, and hisfight fayled him, he would willingly bieffe 
his elder fonneé , and not knowing, he bleffed the yonger;who had counterfeited 
his brothers roughneffe of body by putting goats skins vpon his necke and hands 
and fo let his father feele him. Now leaft fome fhould thinke that this were (c) 
fraudulent deceipt in Jacobsthe Scripture faith before:Efau was a cunning hunter, 
and lined in the fieles,butlacob wzs 4 fimple playne man,and kept at home.(d), éxrasos, 
deceiptleffe, one without counterfeyting : what was the deceipt then of this 
plaine dealing man in getting of this bleffing? what can the guile of aguiltleffe, 
true-hearred foule be inthis cafe ; but adeepe miftery of the truth 2 what was the 
bleffing ? Behold (faith he )the {melt of my fonne is as the {melll of a field which the Lord 
hath bleffed 3 God gine thee therefore of the dew of heauen andthe fatne(fe of earth Theblek: 
andplenty of wheate and wine : let the nations bee thy feruants, and Princes bow downe Makes 
untothee,bee Lord ouer thy bretheren,and let thy mothers children honor thee : curfed\acob, 
be he that curfeth thee,and ble(fed be he that bleffeth thee. Thus this blefling of Jacob, 
is the preaching of Chrift vntoall the nations. This is the whole{cope, in J/aae . 
is the law and the prophets, and by the mouths of the Tewes is Chrift blefled,vn- 
knowen to,them hecaufe heeknoweth not them. The odour of his name fills 
the world like a field, the dew of heauen, is his divine do@trine, the fertile 
earthis the faithfull Church, the plenty of wheat and wine is the multitude 
ingraffed in Chriit by the facraments of his body and blood. Him do nati- 
ons ferue and Princesadore. He: is Lordouer his brother , for his people rple 
ouerthelewes. The fonnes of his father thatis Abrahams fonnes inthe faich, 
doe honour him. For hee is 4brahams fonne in the fleth,carfed bee'hee that curfeth 
him, snd bleed be he that bleffeth him: Chrift | meane,our Sauiour,blefled. Thatis 
truely-taughe by che Prophersof the woundring Iewes :and is ‘till bleffed by o- — 
thers of them that as yet erroneoufly expect hiscomming. And now.comes 
the elder for che bleifing promifed: then is (aac afraid, and knowes. hee. hed. 

| rian eset a ) Ble 


en 
612 SAINT AV GVSTINE. | C uar.38 


Lentich'a, 
what itis, 


bleffed the one for the other. Hee wonder s,and asketh who he was, yet complai- 
neth hee not of the deceit, but hauing the myfterie thereof opened inhis heart, 
hec forbeares fretning and confirmeth the bleffing. #740 was bee then ( {aith he) 
that hunted andtooke venifon for me,aud I haue eaten of it allbefore thon camcft,and I 
haue ble(fed him , and bee {ball bee bleed? Who would not hauehere expecteda 
curfe rather,but that his mindewas altered by a diuine infpiration ? O true done 


- deedes,but yet all propheticall : on earth but all by heauen! by men, bur all for 


God! whole volumes would not ‘hold all the myfteries that they conceiue: but 
wee mutt reftraine our felues. The proceffe of the worke callech vs on vnto 
other matters. : | 


L. VIVES. 


Fo (a) lentilés| There is lenticula,a vellell of oyle,and lenticula of lexs, alittle fitchie kinde 
of peafe: the other comes of /entitas , becaufe the oyle cannot ruane bur gently ( dente ) 
out of the mouth, it is fo ftraite. But the fcripeures fay, that el were onely read potage that 
Efaw {olde his birch-right for: and therefore hee was called Edom,redde. (6) Not the kinde of } 
This is a true precept of the Euangelicall lawe, Heere I might infcribe much, not allow the 
commons any licentioufneffe,but to teach the rulers diuerfe things which I muft let alone f 

once. (¢) Fraudulent deceipt | For deceipt may be either good or bad, , 


eee 


Of lacobs iourney into Mefopotamia for a wife, his vifion inthe night, as hee 
went: hisreturne with foure women, whereas he went but for ome. 
Cuapr. 38. 


[ «2 parents fent him into Mefopotamia, there to get a wife. His father dif- 
miffed him with thefe words. Thos {halt take thee no wife of the daughters of Ca- 
saan: rife get thee te Mefopotamia to the houfe of Bathuel, thy mothers father, and 


thence take thee a wife of the danghters of Laban thy mothers brother. My G OD 


ble(fe thee,and increafe thee, and multiply thee, that thou maift bee a multitude of peo- 
ple: and gine the biefiing of Abraham to thee and to thy feede after thee , that thon 
maie(t inherite the land ( wherein thou art a firanger ) which God gave Abraham. 
Heere wee fee Jacob , the onc halfe of //aacs feede , feuered from E/ew the other 
halfe. For when it was faid : in J/aac fhall thy feed bee called, that is, the feed per- 
taining to Gods holy Cittie , then was Abrahams other feede , (the bond-womans 
fonne) feuered from this other, as Ketharahs was alfo to bee done with after- 
wards. But now there was this doubt rifen about J/sacs wo fonnes, whether the 
bleffing belong but vnto one, or vnto both: if vnto one onely , vnto which of 
them? This was refolued when J/aac faid; That thou wai ft bee 2 multitude of people, 
and God gine the ble(ing of Abraham unto thee: namely to Jacob. Forward : Jasob 
going into Mefopotamia,had a vifion in a dreame,recorded thus: 4nd lacob de- 
parted from Beer\beba,and came to Charra: andhe came to a certasne place andtarried 
there all the night,becaufe the funne was downe,and he tooke of the ftones of the place, 
and leide under his head,and flept. And he dreamed,and behold ladder, and the top of 
st reached up to heauen,and loe the Angels of God went up and downe by tt, and the 
Lord /tood aboue it and {aid : 1 am the Lord God of Abrabam thy father,and of aac, 
frare not : the land on which thou fleepest, willl gine thee and thy feede , and thy fede 
(ball be as the dujt of the carsh , and thou {halt [pread(b ) omer the fea, the AS the 
| North, 


Lis.16. OF THECITIE OF GOD. | 613 


North and the South. And lo 1am with thee and will keepe thee wherefoener thon goeft, 
and willbring thee agasne into this land , for Iwill not forfake thee, untill that I haue 
performed that 1 promsfed unto thee. And Jacob arofe from his fleepe, and faid: 
Surely the Lord 1s i” this place andl was not a ware,and he was afraid and faid. O bow 
tirrible is this place | furely this is none other but the houfe of God and the gate of hea- 
gen. And he arofe up and tooke the ftone thathe had layd under hishead and fet st up 

bke a(e) Title and powred oyle vpon the tope of it, and called the name of that 
place (4) theheufe of Ged. This now was prophericall : he did not Idolatrize in 
powring oyle on the ftone ,nor made it aGod,nor adored it,nor facrificed vnto 
it , but becaufe the (¢ ) name of Chrift was tocome of Chri/ma , that is vn@ion, 
of chac was this a very fignificant miftery. Now for the ladder ,our Sauiour him- 
{elfe mentioneth it in the gofpell,for hauing fayd of Nathanael, behold atrue Ifra- 
lite,wherein there is no guile(becaufe If tae], that is, Zecob {aw this fight)he addeth, 
Verrily ,verely Lfay unto you hereafter you [hall fee beauen open and the Angels of God 101.5%: 
afcending and defcending upon the fonne of man,But forw ard. Jacob went into Me- 
fopotamia to feekea wate s where hehappened to haue foure women giuen him, 
of whome he begat ewelue fonnes and one daughter, without affectir.g any of 
them luftfully as che {cripture fheweth, for he came but for one, and being decei- 
ued by one for another,he would not turn her away whom he(/7had vnwittingly 
knowne,leaft he fhould feeme to make her a mocking ftocke , and fo becaufe the 
lawat that time did not prohibite plurality of wiues for increafe {ake , bee tooke 
the other alfo whome he had promifed to marry before: who being barren, gaue 
him her maid to beget her children vpon , as her fitter had done , who was not 
baren and yet did fo to haue the more children. But Iacob neuer defired but one: 
nor vied any but to the augmentation of his pofterity and that by law of mariage 
nor would he haue done this,but that his wiues vrged it vpon him, who had law- 


full power of his body becaufe he was their husband. 


L. VIVES. 
Erfheba, (a) and.) The feaventy read it the well of the [wearing : the Hebrew interpreted it, well ofthe 
othe er of 


the well of fulneffe and Aquila and Symmachus do both follow the laft: Hierome. But the 
well of fulneffe that Jfaacs {cruants digged is not the fame with the well of {wearing that. Abra~ faranity. 
hams digged,and nained the well of the othe , or couenant which he made with Abymilech, gi- 
wing him feauen lambes: for Sheba is either an oth or feauen : yet both thefe wells were in one 
citty.(6)Oxer the fea.| This isno fignification of power ower the fea by nauy or fo : but it fig. 
nifiech the Wett ( as I faid before )-or Syrian fea,next ynto ours,to fhew the foure parts of the 
world.(¢) Aitle. |The feauenty read , ei, apiller, and that is better then a title.( d ) The 
bonfe of God. | The next village was called Bethel, being before called Lux, now the houfe 
of God, before a natte, It was in the portion of Beniamsine,betweene Bethau, and Gai.(¢) The 
name of (brift. | ¢is0s in Greeke is vnttns in Latine :{ anoynted in Englith ] and agizes is, 
wnttion.( f )One for an otber.\Lea the eldeft daughtet for Rachel the yonger. Gen.29. 


oe i ss oe 


wrens - 


lacob enfirled\{racll. The reafon of this changes 


| Cap. 39. | eae 

O E thefefoure women Jacob begottwelue fonnes and one daughter. And 
then came the entrance into Egypt by his fonne /ofep,whome his brethters 
enuied, and fold chether, who was aaah there vnto great dignity . lacob was 
| | Ggg alfa 


a 
614 SAINT AVGVSTINE. C wap.4o’ 


Pe 


alfo called J/rzel (as I faid before) which name his progenie bore after him. This 
name, the Angell chae wraftled with him as hee returned from Mefoporamia, 

aue him,being an evident type of Christ. For whereas Jacod preuailed againft 

im, by (2) his owne confent ,to forme this myfteric , is fignified the paffion of 
Christ, wherein the Lewes feemed to preuaile againft him. And yet /1cob gottea 
bleffing from him whom he had ouer-come : and the changing of his name was 
that blefling : for (6) J/rael is as muchas, /eesng God,which thall come to paffe in 
the end of the world.Now the Angell touched him(preuailing )vpon the breadth 
of his thigh,and fo he became lame: So the bleffed and the lame wasall bur one 


Jacob blefe Jacob: bleffed in his faithfull progenie,and lame inthe vnfaithfull. For the brediht 
fed &lame, of his thighis the multitude of his iflue: of which the greatest part (asthe Pro- 


Iftael, 


phet faith ) hane halted in their wayes. 


a atin + 2. «, Ee 


| L. VIVES. 
Y his (4) owne confent | For otherwife,the Angel could not onely haue conquered him, but 
euen haue killed him. (5 ) //rael is as much \ Hierome \iketh not this interpretation, nor 
tocall him the Prince of God, northe dire& of God,but rather the moft iuft man of God, Iofe- 
pus taketh ic to be vnderftood of his preuailing againft the Angel. De Antiguit.Indarc. 


AEE. 6-0 ene 


~ acobs departure into Fgipt with (eanentic fine foules, how to be taken, fecing 
fome of them were borne afterwards, Cap. 40. 


iY . 
: os 


[! is faid there went with Jacob into Egipt feauentie fue foules, counting him- 


felfe and his fonnes,his daughter and his neece.But if you marke well,ycu hall 
finde that hee had not fo numerous a progenie at his entrance into Egipt. For in 
this number are /o/ephs grand-children reckoned, who could not then bee with 
him. For Jacob was then a hundred and forty yeares old, and /ofeph thirty nine, 
who marrying (as it is recorded) but at chirty yeares old, how could his fonnes 
innine yeares have any fonnes to increafe this gumber by ? Seeing then chat 
Ephraim and Mana{fes, Icfephs fonnes, had no children, being but nine yeares of 
age at this remooue of Jacobs {tock, how can their fonnes fonnes, or their fonnes 
be accompted amongft the feauentie fiue that went in this company vnto Egip:? 


© for therg is Afachir reckoned, Masa/fes his fonne, and Galaad, Machirsfonne,and 


there is Vtalaam,Ephraims fonne reckoned ,& BarethYtalaams {onne : Now thefe 


_ couldnot be there, /ecob finding at his comming that Jofephs children, the fathers 


and grand-fathers of thofe foure laft named,were but children of nine yeares old 
at that time.But this departure of Zacob thether with feauentie fiue foules,contei- 
néth not one day,nora yeare, but all the time that Jo/eph lined afterwards, b 
whofe meanes they were placed there: of whome the Scripture faith; Iofeph 
dwelt in Egipt and his brethren with him a hundred yeares,and Yofeph faw Ephraims. 
children eucs unto the third generation: shat was vntill hee was borne who was 


 Ephtaims grand-child: vnto him was he great grand-father. The fcripture then 
| proceedeth: Machirs fonnes(the fonne of Afanaffes ) were brought vp on ta 


knees. This was Galaad, Manaffes his grand-child: but the fcripture {peaketh in 
the plurall,as ic doth of Jecobs one daughter, calling her daughters,as the (« ) La- 
tines vfe to calla mans onely child.if hee haueno more, /sberi,' children. Now 
Jofephs felicitie being fo great as.to fee the fourth from him in difcent,wee may 
net imaginethac they were all borne when hee was but thirty nine yeares old, ar 
which time his father came into Egipt: 8 this is that that decéiued the ignorant 

7 er ar yo ss beeaufe 


‘az oh . 


oat 


Lrmi6. OFTHECITIEOFGOD § — 65 


becaufe it is written; The/e ave the names of the children of I{rael which came into 
Egipt with lacob their father. For this is faid becaufe the feauentie fiuearerecko- _—ia. 
ned with him,nor that they all entred Egipt wich him.But inthis tran{migration ) 
and fetling in Egipt,is included all the time of Jofephslife, who was the meanes 

of his placing here. eee 


* He (4°) Latinos | Sempronius eA fellta called Sempronins Gracchns his onely fonne, liberi: petiged 
A and it was an v{uall phrafe of old. Gell. &Herenn. Digefib.s0. | ae | 


er. 


-Tacobs blefting unto his fonne Ludah. 
~Cuarp.4i. 


S° then if wee feeke the flethly defcent of Chrif from Cdbraham firtt( for the 
good of the Citty of God, that is ftilla pilgrim vpon earth ) //aac is the next: 
and from J/¢ac, Jacob or Jfrae/,Efau or Edom being reieted : from J/rael, Indah (all 
thereft being debarred ) for of his tribe came Chriff. And therefore //rae/ athis 
death bleffing his fonnes in Egipt, gaue Judah this propheticall blefling : Judah 
| (a) thy bretheren [ball praife thee: thine hand {ball bee onthe ntck of thine encmies: 
thy fathers fonnes {ball adore thee. As & Lyons whelpe (ludah) {halt thou come up (b) 
from the {potle my fonne.Hee {ball lye downe and fleepe as 4 Lyon,or 4 Lyons whelpe, who 
fall roufe hin ? The {cepter hall not depart from \udah,nor a law-g/ner from betweene 
his feeteyuntill Shiloe come,and the people bee gathered unto him. Hee {ball binde his 
Affe fole unto the Vine,and his Affes colt (¢) with a rope of hayre: he {hall walh his ole 
in wine and his garment in the bloud of the grape,bis eyes {ball be redde with wine, and 

his teeth white with milke. ThefeI haue explained againft Fau/tus the Manichee, 

as farre, Ithinke , as the Prophecie requireth. Where Chrifts death is poe 

in the worde /leepe.as not of neceflitie,but of his power to dye, as the Lion had 

to lye downe and {leepe: which power him-felfe auoweth in the Gofpell; / have teh.t0.1 7. 
power te lay downe my life,and power to take it againe: no man taketh it from mee but *®: 

Lay it downe of my felfe,cxc. So the Lion raged, fo fulfilled what was {poken : for 

thacfame, Who fhall roufe him? belongeth tothe refurrection: fornone could 

raife him againe, but he himfelfe that faid of his body : De/froy this temple and inXob.2.19. 
three.dayes I will raife it up againe.Now his manner of death vpon the a croffle, 

is intamatedin this : {halt tho come vp: and thefe words, Hee {hall lye downe and lob. 19.30 
fleepesare'euen thefe i Hee bowed downe his head and gaue up the ghoff. Or it may 

meane the graue wherein hee flept,and from whence none could'raifehimvp,as 
the Prophets and he him-felfe had saifed others,but him-felferaifed him-felfe as na 
froma fleepe. Now his ftole which. hee watheth in wine, that is, cleanfeth from | 
finnein-his bloud ¢ iatimating the facrament of baptifme , as.that addition, And 

his garncent in the bloud ef the grape,exprefieth) what is it but the Church? and 

eyes being tedde with wie: are his fptrituall fonnes that are drunke with her cup, 

asthe Pialmift faith: Adyeup runneth oner; and histeeth whiter then the milke, 

are his nourifhing wordes where-with hee feedeth his little weaklings as with 

milke, Thisis he in whomethe promifes to Judah were laide vp, which vntill they. 

came, there neuer wanted kings of Ifraell of the ftock of. Judah. And vnto him 

thall the people bee gathered : this is plainer to the fight to conceiue , then the 


tonguctGVitér, 82 hh a a eS ee ee 
) | Ggeg2 L.VIVES. 


Gen.49. 


616 


SAINT AV GVSTINE. C nar.42.8.43- 


Iudah, 
Pfal.6.5. 


Hix, 


, L.VIVES. | 

Vda (a) thy brethren\Iudab is praife or confeffion.(b) From the {poile| From captiuity faith the 
| ora 7 thisis oa of Pbodts Aor: * people captiue,his high and facred afcen- 
tion, and the taking of captiuitie captiue.Hierome. (c) With a me of bayre| With a rope onely 
fay fome : and his affes cole ynto the beft wine, faith Hierome from the Hebrew.And for this 
Affes colte (faith he) may be read the (sty of God,(whereof we now {peake)the feuentie read 
it tums sto the vine branch, di€ is the twilt of the Vine as Theephraftus faith : and thence haue 
che two kindes of luy their names. Diefor. Plix. fo might cilicinm come into the Latine text 


that Anguftine Vfed,if the Grecke were tranflaced Helicinns,otherwife I cannot tell how. 


Of lacobs changing of his haxds from the heads of lofephs fonnes, 
when he bleffed them. . Cuar. 42s 


BY as Efaand Iaceb,J/aecs two fonnes, prefigured the two peoples of Iewes 
and Chriftians ( although that in the flefh the Idumzans, and not the Iewes 


_ came of Efas,nor the Chriftians of Jacob, but rather the Iewes, for thus muft the 


Gen.3 5. 


. 


Exod 3. 


Exod, 8. Se 


10.72 


words, The elder {ball ferue the yonger,be vnderftood)euen fo was it in Jofephs two 
fonnes, the elder prefiguring the ewes, and the yonger the Chriftians. Which 
two,/acob in bleffing laide his right hand vpon the yonger , who was on his left 
fide,and his left vpon the elder, who was on his right fide. This difpleafed their 
father,who told his father of it, to gechim to reforme the {uppofed miftaking, 
and fhewed him which was the elder. But Jacob would not change his hands, but 
faid,J know fonne,! know very well: hee ball bees great people alfo: but his yonger 
brother {hall be greater then hee,and his feede {ball full the nations. Here is two pro- 
mifes now, a people tothe one, and a fulnefle of nations to the other. What grea- 
ter proofe need wee then this,to confirme,that the Ifraelites,and all the world be- 
— contained in Carabams feed: the firft in the flefh, and the later in the 
pirit. - 


me © oe ee 


Of Moyfes his times, lofuah, the ludges, the Kings, Saul the f/f, 
Dauid the chiefe,both in merite and in myfticall reference. 
CHAP. 43. | 


| Fie and Jofeph being dead , the Ifraelites in the other hundred fortie foure 

yeares ( attheend of which they left Egypt ) increafed wonderfully , though : 
the Egyptians oppreffed them fore, and once killed all their male children for 
feare of their wonderfull multiplication. But Afofes was faued from thofe bur- 
chers, and brought vp inthecourt by Pheraohs daughter (the (4) nameof the 
Egiptian Kings )God intending great things by him,and he grew vpto that worth 
that he was held fit co lead the nation out of this extreame flauery, or rather God 
did ic by him, according to his promifeto Abrsham. Firft, hee fled into Madian, 
for killing an E giptian in defence of an Ifraelite: and afterwards returning full of 
Gods {pirit, hee foyledthe enchanters (6) of Pharao inall their oppofition: and 
laide che tert fore plagues vpon the Egiptians , becaufe they would not let Ifrael 
depart, namely the changing of the water into bloud., Frogges, (¢) Lyce, - 
(4) Gnattes, morren of Cattell, botches and fores, Haile, Grafhoppers , darke- 
neffe,and death of all the firft borne: and lafly the Ifraelites being permitted - 
after allthe plagues chat Egypt had groned vnder , to depart, and yet beeing 
purfued afterwards by them againc, pafled ouexr the redde Sea dry-foote, 
, ‘ = sad 


é 


L13.16. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 
and left all the hoaft of Egipt drowned in the middeft : the fea opened before the 


Ifraclices,and fhut after them, returning vpon the purfuers and over-whelming 
them. And then forty yeares after was Ifraell in the deferts with Adoy/es, a 
there had they the tabernacle of the teftimonie , where God was ferued with fa- 
crifices,that were all figures of future cuents : the law being now given with ter- 
ror vpon mount Syna: for the terrible voyces and thunders were full proofés 
that God was there: And this was prefently after their departure from E gipr in 
the wildernefle,and there they celebrated their Ps//é-ouer fiftie dayes after , by 


617 


offring of a Lambe, the true type of Chrifts pafling vnto his father by his paffion 2=4.13. 
in this world. For Pa/cha in Hebrew, is a paffing ouer: and fo thefiftith day after - 
the opening of the new Teftament, and the offring of Chrz/? our Paffe-ower, the Luc.rt, 


holy {pirit defcended downe from heauen (he whom the {criptures call the fing- 
er of God ) to renewthe memory of the firft miraculous prefiguration in our 
hearts,becaufe the law in the tables is faidto be written by the finger of GOD. 


Moyfes being dead, o/uah ruled the people,and lead them into the land of pro- geod 3». 
mife, diuiding itamongft them, And by thefe two glorious captaines , werelolr. — 


ftrange battels wonne,and they were ended with happy lucceffe : God himfelfe a- 
vouching that the lofers finnes,and not the winners merits were caufes of thofe 
-conquefts. After thefe two,the land of promife was ruled by Judges , that Abre- 
hams {eede might fee the firft promife fulfilled, concerning the land of Canaan, 
though not as yet concerning the nations of all the earth : for that was to be ful. 
filled by the comming of Chrif in the flefh,and the faith of the Gofpell, not the 
precepts of the law, which was infinuated in this ,that it was not Afoy/es that re- 
ceiued the law, but Jofuab (h) (whofe name God alfo changed)that lead the people 
into the promifed land. But in the Jedges times , as the people offended or obey- 
ed God; fo varied their fortunes in warre. On vnto the Kéxes. Saul was the firft 


King of Ifrael, who being a reprobate, and dead in the field , and all his race re- 


3.Samite: 


iected from ability of fucceflion,Da#éd was enthroned ( #) whofe fonne our Se- wahi7, 
siour is efpecially called: In him is as it were a point, from whence the people of God Mz.15. 
doe flowe, whofe originall ( as then being in the youthfull time thereof) is drawne berg 


from Abraham vntothis Dasid. For it is not out of negle& that A¢athew the 
~ Euangelift reckoneth the defcents fo , that hee putteth foureteene generations 
bectweene 4braham and Dasid. For aman may be able to beget in his youth, and 
therefore he begins his genealogies from Abraham , who vpon the changing of 
his name,was made the father of many nations. So thatbefore him,tche Church 
of God was in the infancie,as it were : from Nosh I meane, vnto him, andthere- 
fore the firft language, the Hebrew as then was invented for to fpeake by. For 
from the terme of ones infancie, hee begins to {peake , beeing called an infane, 
() Anon fando, of not {peaking, which age of himfelfe,euery man forgetteth as 
fully as the world was deftroyed by the deluge. For who can remember his in- 
fancie ? Wherefore in this progreffe of the Cittie of God,as the laft booke con- 
teined the firft age thereof , fo let this containe the fecond and the third , when 
the yoake of the law was laide on their necks the aboundance of finne appeared, 
and the earthly kingdome had beginning, &c. intimated by the Heifer, the Goate, 
andthe Ramnse of three yeares old: in which there wanted not fome faithfull per- 
fons, 4s the turtle-doue and the Pidgeon portended, - : 


L.VIVES. 


T He (4) name of | To auoyde the fuppofition that Phares that reigned in Tacob and Lofephs vrasss: 


{ 


Ggg 3 fie, 


cme chmmeansaincameinc mcm EEA A IT a aa a EE 


AL 


618 


Cyniphes, 


Toluah and 


@ 
4 


Infanes ' 


[Thelo- 


‘ 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuar43. 


time, was all one Pharao with this here named: Pharao wasa name of kingly dignity in Egipt, 
Hieron, in Exechiel, lib.g. Sowas Ptelomy after Alexander, Cafar and Auguftus after the two 
braue Romaines, and e4bimelech in Paleftina. Herodotus {peaketh of one Pharao that was 
blinde. They were called Pharao of Pharos, an lle ouer-againtt Alexandrid,ealled Carpathos 
of old : Proteus reigned in it.The daughter of this Pharao,lofephus calleth Thermush, (6) Of 
Pharao |) Which Pharao this was,it is doubrfull. e4mafis ( faith Apion Polyhiffer, as Exfebius 
citeth him ) reigned in Egipt whea the ewes went thence.But this cannot be,for Amsaj/ss was 
long after, viz. in Fythagoras his time,vnto whom he was commended by Polycrates king of 
Samos. But Jofephus faith out of ALanethon, that this was Techmofis , and yet fheweth him to 
vary from him-felfe , and to put Amenophis in another place alfo. Enfebius faith chat it was 
Pharao Cenchres, In Chron, and that the Magicians names were Jazmes and. lambres. Prep. 
exangel, ex Numenio, (c) Lyce |So doth lofephus fay, if. Refizns haue well tranflated him: 
that this third placue was the difeafe called Phrbiriafs, or the loufie cuill naming no gnattes, 
Peter de natalibus and eAlbertus Grotus faith, that the (ynipbes are a kinde of flye. So iaith 
Origen. Albertws faith that they had the body of a worme, the wings and head of aflyc,with 
a fting in their mouth where-wicth they prick and draw bloud,and are commonly bred in fens 
and marifhes,troubling all crearures,but man efpecially. Origen calleth them Snipes. They do 
flic (faith he ) but are fo {mall that hee that difcerneth them as they flie muft haue a fharpe 
eye; buc when they alight vpon the body, they will foone make them-felues knowne to his 
feeling though his fight difcerne them not. Super Exod. By this creature Origen vnderftands 
logick which enters the mind with fuch ftings of vndifcerned fubtlety,that the party deceiued 
neuer perceiueth till he be fetched ouet. But the Latines, nor che Greekes euer vied either Cj- 
wipes ox Snipes, not isit in the feauentie eyther, but omixss, Guat-like creatures, (faith Ssidas) 
and fuch as eate holes in wood. Pfal.ro4. The Hebrew, and Chaldee Paraphrafe read lice, for 
this word, as Jofephus doth alfo. (d) Horfe-flyes | Or Dogge-flies, the vulgar readeth fiyes, 
onely,, (¢) Gra(boppers| The fields siecaetaie cree that part of Africa that bordereth 
vpon Egipt. Pliny faith they are held notes ef fad wrath,where they exceed thus. (f) Groned 
under \Perfrattiperfrattus,is, throughly tamed,prefrattus,obftinate. (g )Paffe-omer |Phafe isa 

affing ouer : becaufe the Angel of death paffed ouer the Ifraelites houfes,& {mote them not: 

ence arofe the pafchall feaft, Hieron. in (Mich lib.2. not of wde,er, to faffer,as if it had beene 


from the paffion, Js Adatth. (b ) Whofe name |In Hebrew Jofuah and Jefus feemes all one: 


both are /aleation,and Fefus the fonne of Jofedech in Efdras is called lofuah. (8) Whefe foxne} 
(Mat.t, and in all the courfe of the Gofpell ; Christ is efpecially called the fonne of two, 
Abrahans or Dania : for to them was hee chiefly promifed. (k) anon faxdo ] And therefore 
great fellowes that cannot fpeake,are fome-timnes called infants : and fuch alfo as ftammer in. 
their language : [ and fuch like-wife as being expreffe dolts and fortes in matter of learning, 


uaine cO- will challenge the names of great Artifts,Philofophers and Diuines. } 
2 | | 


defe 
Give) 7 


Finis lib. 16. 


THE 


a 


THE CONTENTS OF THE 


feauenteenth booke of the City of God. 


1. Of the times of the Prophets. 

2.0 what time Gods promife concerning 
the Land of Canaan was fulfilled , and Ifraell 
receined it to dwell in and poffeffe. -_ 

3. The Prophets three meanings : of earthly 
Ternfalem,of beanenly Terufalers,and of both. 

4. The change of the kingdome of Ifrael.An- 
na, Samuels mother a propheteffe : and a tipe 
of the Church iwhat foe prophecied. 

5. The Prophets words unto Heli the prieff, 
feniying the raking away of Aarons prieft- 

ook. 


6. The promife of the prieft-bood of the 
lewes , and their kingdome to fiand eternally, 
not fulfilled in that fort , that other promifes of 
that vibounded nature are, 

7. The kingdome of /{raelirent :prefiguring 
the perpetnall dinifion betweene the fpirituall. 
andcarnallIfrael. a 

8. Promifes made to Dauid concerning his 
fonne : not fulfilled in Salomon ; but én Chrift, | 

9. A prophecy of Chrift in the 83, pfalme, 
like unto this of Nathan, in the booke of King. 

10. Of diners attions done sm the earthly [e- 
rufalem,and the kingdome,differing from Gods 
promifes,to fbew that the truth of his word con- 
cerned the glory of an other kingdome, and an- 
other king. 

11. The fubfiance of the people 
were in Chrift inthe flefh: who only 
redeeme the foule of man from hell, — 

12. Another verfe of the former plalme,and 
the perfons 10 whoin st belongeth. 


- God ; who 
1A 


d power ta 


PENIS, | 


i. 


| 


13. whether the truth of the promifed peace 
may be afcribed unto Saloons time. 


| _ 34. Of Dauids exdeauors in compofing of 


RR EY Sse cerenenonneonE 
(eee EG 


se 


the plalmes. 
15. Whether all things concerning (hrif & 
his church in the pfalmes be to bee rehearfed + 
this work?, 
16. Of the forty fine pfalme , the tropes and 
truths. there , concerning Chrift and the. 
church, | Oo 
17. Of the references of the bundreth and: 
tenth pfalme unto ( hrifts prieft-bood , and the 
two and twentith unto bis paffion. = 
18.Chrifts death and refurrettion prophecia 
ed in pfalme.3.et 40.15.€t 67. | 
19. The obffimate infidelsty of the Iewes de. 
clared in the 69.p{alme. OT 
20. Dauids ksngdome , his merrit : bis fonne - 
Salomon, his prophecies of Chrift in Salomens 
bookes : and in bas that are annexed ynte 
them. aie 
21. Of the Kings of I{rael and Indah after 
Salomon. 7 | 
22. How Hieroboam ifetted his fubseéts 
with [dolatry,yet did God nener failed thems in 


. Prophets, nor in keeping many frows that infec- 


- [10m 


| 


43. The flate of Ifrael and Ludah unto beth 
their captinities ( which befell at different 
times) diuerfly altered: Indah united to Lf~ 
racll: and lafth both unte Rome. Sa 

24, Of the laft Prophets of the Iewes,abont 
the time that (briff wasborne, 6° 30k 


, eo F he 


620 


| THE | 
SEVENTEEN TH BOOKE 
OF THE CITTIE OF GOD: 
| | Written by = ao of Hippo, 


Of the times of the Prophets. 


HAP. I. - ; 


Re ee Hus have weattained che vnderftanding of Gods promi- 
ROA SH bic a)ene'a (es made vnto Abraham, and duc vnto J/rae/ his {eed in the 
1 Rh Aefh,andto all the Nations of earth as his {ced in the {pi- 
S & (iii ric: how they were fulfilled the progreffle of the Crtzie of 
sees! Godin thofe times, did manifeft. Now becaufe our laft 
‘TABS a! booke ended at the reigne of Dawid , let vs in this booke, 
Fe nner iyi A proceed with the fame reigne, as farreas is requifire. All 
pete I the rime therefore betweene Samaels firft prophecy , and 
the returmig of J/rae/ irom feauenty yeares captivity in Babilon , to repaire the 
Hier.25° ‘Temple (as Hieremy had prophecied ) all this is called thetime of the Prophets. 
Genz, For alchough that the Patriarch Woah in whofe timethe vniuerfall deluge be- 
Genro _‘fel,and diuers others lining before there were Kings in Ifrael , for fome holy and 
Dent.4 heauenly predidti ns of theirs,smay not vndeferuedly be called (4) Prophets: e- 
{pecially fleeing wee fee Abralam and Mofes chiefly called by thofe names ,and 
1Sim10 more exprefsly then the reft : yet the daies wherein Samuel beganne to prophe- 
eae cy,were called peculiarly the Prophets times. Samuclanoynted Saa/ firft,and after- 
wards(he beeing reiected Jhee anoynted Dauéd for King , by Gods expreffe com- 
mand, and from Daséds loines was all the bloud royall to. defcend, during thar 
Kingdomes continuance. But ifI fhould rehearfe all that the Prophets(each in 
his time) fuccefliuely prefaged of Chrift during all this time that the Cittie of 
God continued in thofetimes,and members of his ,I fhould neuer make an end, 
Firft , becaufethe fcriptures ( though they feeme buta bare relation of the fuc- 
ceffiue deeds of each King in his time, yet) being confidered, with the affiftance: 
of Gods {pirit , will prooue either more , or as fully , prophecies of things to 
come,as hiltories of things paft. And how laborious it were to ftand vpon cach 
peculiar hereof, and how huge a worke it would amount vnto , whoknoweth nor 
that hath any iofight herein : Secondly , becaufe the prophecies concernin 
Chrift and his Kingdome(the CittieefGod)are fo many in multitude,that che dif 
putations arifing hereof would not be contained ina farre bigger volume then is 
neceflary for mine intent . So that as I will reftraine my penne as neare as 
I canfrom all fuperfluous relations in this worke,fo will I not ommit any thing 
that fhall be really pertinent vnto our purpofe. | 


L. VIVES. 


Cie (4) Prophets | The Hebrewes called them Seers , becaufe they faw the Lord(in his 
iGtions or prefigurations of any thing :) with the eyes ofthe {pirit, chough not of 


Lr3.17. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. pa 


the dull fiefh,hence it is that {criptures call a prophecy,a vifion, and Nathan is called the Seer. ‘ 
1.Kings. The Greekes fome-times vfe the name of Prophet for their priefts,poets,or teachers. 
eAdam was the firft man and the firft Prophet, who faw the miftery of Chrift and his church 

in his fleepe. Then followeth,Exoch,Noab , Abrabam,l{aac, Iacob and his children, Moyfes. 

dc. Yet are not thefe reckned amongft the’ prophets, for ndne of them left any bookes of 

the vifions but Afsy/es, whofe bookes concerned ceremonies, facrifices and ciuill ordersalfo. 

Bur thefe were all figures of future things,nor were thofe the prophtticall times,as thofe from 
Samuel were,wherein there neuer were prophets wanting, whereas befort God fpake but fel- 
dome,and his vifions were not fo manifeft as they were from the firft King vnto the captiui~ 

ty : wherein were foure great bookes of prophecies written,and twelue of the {mall. | 


e- 


At what time Gods promife concerning the Land of Canaanwas ful- 
filed and Ifracl received isto dwellin and poffeffe. 
| C HAP. Ze o 
V ( ZEE {aid in the laft booke that God promifed two things vnto brah am, 
one was the poffeflion of the Land of Canaan, for his feed: in thefe 
words: Goe into the Land that 1 will {bew thee and 1 will make thee 4 great nation ere. 
The other of farre more excellence,not concerning the catnall, but the f{piricuall 
feed : nor Ifraell onely,but all the beleeuing nations of the world: in thefe words 
In thee {halt all nations of the earth be bleffed crc. This we confirmed by many tefti- 63> 
monies. Now therefore was Abrabams carnall feed (that is,the Ifraelites)in the 
land of promife: now had they townes, citties, yea and Kings therein,and Gods 
promifes were performed vnto them in great meafure: not onely thofe that hee 
made by fignes, or by word of mouth onto Abraham , Ifaac and Jacob: but even 
thofe alfo that Aéoy/es who brought them out ofthe Egyptian bondage, or any | 
other after him vnto this inftant had promifed them from God. Bnethe pro- 
mife concerning the land of Canaan, that l/rael fhould reigne ouer it from the 
riuer of Egipt vnto the great Euphrates,was neither fulfilled by Io/wah that wor- 
thy leader of them into the Land of promife, and hee that diuided the whole a- 
mongft the twelue tribes, nor by any other of the Iudges in all the time after 
him: nor was there any more prophecies that it was tocome, but at this inftant 
it was expected. And by(«)Dauéd,and his fon Salomon, it was fulfilled indeed,and 
their Kingdome enlarged as farre as was promifed : for thefe two, made all 
thofe Nations their oan and tributaries. Thus they was Abrahams feed 
in the ftefh fo fettled in this land of Canaan by thefe Kings , that now no part of 
the earthly promife was left vnfulfilled : buc that the Hebrewes , obeying Gods 
prteone f aa , might. continue their dominion therein, without all diftur- 
bance,and in all fecurity and happineffe of eftare. But God knowing they would 
not doe it, vied fome temporall afflictions to excercife the few faithfull therein 
thar he had left , and by them to giue warning to allhis feruants that the nations 
were afterwards tocontaine, who were to bee warned by thofe, as inwhom hee 
was to fullfill his other promife, by opening the New Teftamentin the deathof 
Chrift. "% 


L. VIVES. | 
Y (a)Dauid) Hierome(epift.ad Dardan. fheweth that the Iewes potfeted not alll the lands 
that was promifed thé:for in the booke of Nuwibers,it is Sayd to be bounded on the ~— 


= , 


. 


y 


622 


SAINT AV GVSTINE.. Cnar.3. 


by the falt feaand the wilderneffe of finne, vato that riuer of Egypt that ranne into the fea by 
Rhinocorura : on the wett,by the fea of Paleftina , Phenicia , Coele, Syria, and Cylicia,on the 
North,by Mount Taurus,and Zephyrius , as farre as Emath,or Epiphania in Syria ; on the Eaft 
by Antioch and the Lake Genefareth, called now, Tabarie, and by lordan, that runneth into 
the falt fea,called now,7he dead fea.Beyond Jordan halfe of the land of the tribes of Ruben & 
Gad,lay and halfe of the tribe of AZanaffes. Thus much Hierome . But Dawid pofleficd not all 
thefe but onely that within the bounds of Rhinocorura and Euphrates,wherein the Lraelites 
ftill kept chemfelues. 


. The Prophets three meanings: of earthly Ierufalem,of heauenly | 

cere Sa lerufalem,and of both, CHar. 3. | 
Hévetoreas thofe prophecies fpoken to Abraham, Yfaac,lacob,or any other in | 
the times before the Kings, fo likewife all chat the Prophets {poke after- 

wards,had their double referéce:partly to brahams {eed in the fleth ,& partly to 


* chat whereinal the nations of the earth are blefled in him, being made Co-heires 


with Chrift in the glory and kingdome of heauen , by this New Teftament. So 
then shey: concerne partly the bond-woman,bringing forth vnto bondage, that 
isthe earthly Ierufalem, which ferueth wich her fonnes , and partly tothe free 


_ Citty of Ged , thetrue Leryfalem , eternall and heauenly , whofe children are pil- 


“+ grims vpon earth in the way of Gods word.And there are fome that belong vnto 


2,Sam.372 


both, properly,co the bond-woman , and figuratiuely vnto the free woman: for 
the Prophets hauea triple meaning in their prophecies : fome concerning the 
earthly Ierufalem,fome the heauenly,andfome,both: as forexample. The Pro- 
phet (4) Nathan was fent to tell Dawid of his finne ,andro fortell him the euills 
that fhould enfue thereof. Now who doubteth that thefe words concerned the 
temporall City , whether they were fpoken publikely for the peoples generall 
good,or priuately for fome mans knowledge, for fome cemporall vfe in the life 
prefent ? But now whereas wee read. Bebold the dies come( faith theLORD)that f 
willmake anew couenant with the honfe of Ifracll, andthe houje of Indah : not accor- 
ding tothe couenant that I made with their fathers when] tovke them by the hand to 
bring them out of the Land of Ezipt which couenant they brake,although I ws an hus- 
band unte them, faith the Lord: but this is the couenant that Iwill make with the houfe 
of Ifraelafter thofe daies([aith the LORD )I will put wey law in their mindes,and write 
isin their hearts,and I wilbe their GOD , and they lbalbe my people. This without all 
doubt,is a prophecy of the celeftiall lerufalem, to whom God himfelfe ftands as 
a reward, and vnto which the enioying of him is the perfetion of good. Yer 
belongeth it ynto them both in that the earthly lerufalem was called Gods Cittie, 
and his houfe promifed to bee therein, which feemed tobe fulfilledin Salomons 
building of that magnificent temple. Thefe things were both relations of 
things acted on earth, and figures of things concerning heauen,which kinde of 
prophecy compounded ofboth, is of great efficacy in the canonicall fcriptures of 
the Old Teftament,:and. doth exercife the readers of {cripture very laudably in 
feeking how the things that are fpokenof Abrahams carnall feed are allegorical- 
ly fulfilled in his feed by faith: In (4) fo muchthat fome held thar there was no- 
hie in the fcriptures fore-told and effected, or effected without being fore-told, 
that intimated not fome-thing belonging vnto the Céttée of God, aad to bee refer- 
red vnto the holy pilgrims thereofvpon earth. Butifthis be fo,we hall tiethe 
Prophets words vnto two meanings onely, and excludethe third: and not onely 


poe 


OF THE CITIE OF GOD. i 643° 


Lisr7. 


the Prophets but ever all the Old Teftament. For therein muft be nothing pe- 
culiar to the earthly Ierufalem, ifall that be fpoken or fulfilled of chat,haue a far- 
ther reference to the heauenly Ierufalem : fo that the Prophets muft needes 
fpeake bur in two forts, either in ref{pect of the heauenly lerufalem,or els of both. 
Butas I thinke it a great error in fome,to hold no relation of things done, in the 
fcriptures more then meére hiftoricall :fo doel hold ita (c) great boldneffe in 
them that binde all the relations of Scripture vnto allegoricall reference, and 
therefore I auouch the meanings in the Scriptures,to be triple,and not two-fold 
orely. This I hold, yet blame [not thofe that can picke a good fpirituall fenfe 
out ofany thing they reade, fo they doe not contradi& the truth of the hiftory. 
But what faichfull man will not fay that thofe are vaine {ayings that can belong 
neitheir to diuinity nor humanity ? and, who willnot avow that thefe of which 
we did fpeake,are to hauea {piritual interpretation aliojor leave them vnto thofe 
thatcan interprete them in that manner? : 


‘ . ‘ 


He Prophet (a) Nathan] After Dasid had fent Vriah to be flaine in the front of the batrell, 

and married his widow Berfabe. (6) Jn fo »uch] Herevpon they fay that fomuch 1s left out 
concerning the a&ts of the Iewifh Kings, becaufe they feemed nat to concerne the Citty of 
God : bur that whatfoeuer the Old Teftament conteineth or the New either, hath all afure Origen. 
reference vnto Chrift and his Chirch;at which they are both leuelted. c) Great boldneffe|}(As [The Lo~ 
Origen did with great rarity of fpirit,yet keepeth he the gruth of the hiftory vnuiolate ; for o- Uaine e- 
therwifeall chefe relations were vanities : and each one would {crue an allegory out of the dition 
{ctiprisres to live and belecue as he lift,and fo our faith and difcipline fhould bee veterly con- defectiue 
founded, Wherein I wonder at their mad folly that will fetch all our forme of life and religion in al this} 
out of allegories, entangling them in ceremonious vanity , 4nd proclayming all that contra- 
di& them-heretiques ] : . 


The change of the Kingdome and prieft-hood of Yraell. Anna,Samuels mother 
a propheteffe : and a type of the Church: what fle prophecied. 


CHAP. 4. 


? or He progteffe therefore of the City of Ged ini the Kings time, when Sas/ was re- 
“© prooued , and Dawzd chofen in his place to poflefle the Kingdome of Ierufa- - 
Jem for him and his pofterity fucceffiuely, fignifieth and prefigureth,that which 
wee may not omit, namely the future chaage: concerning the two Teftaments, 
the Old and the New, where the Old Kingdome and prieft-hood was changed by 
that New and eternal! King and Prieft , Chrift Iefus ; for He being reieGted,se- q 
sexe) was made both the prieft and the Iudge of God: and Sas/being reie@ted;Da- * anes 
uid was chofen for the King,and thefe two being thus feated, fignified the change 
that I fpake of. ‘And Samsels mother , Anna, being firft barren,and afterwards by 
Gods goodnes made fruitfull,feemeth to prophecy nothing but this in her fong 
of reioycing,when hauing brought vp her fon fhe dedicated him vnto God as the 
had vowed , faying : My heart reioyceth inthe LORD ,my hornets exalted in the. 
LORD: my mouth és enlarged on mine enemies , becanfe I retoyced in thy faluation, ae 
There is sone holy as the Lord« there is no God like our, Godynor any holie befides thee, Pree 
foeake no more prefumptiowfly, let wo arregancie come out of your mouth,for the Lord es 
4G OD of knowledge , and by him are enterprifes efablifbed : the bowe of the mich. 
sie men hath bee broken, and guirded the weake with frength,they that were fall are. 
| | 7 hired 


ae a ee 


hired forth for hunger: and the hangry baue paffed the land : for the barren hath borne 
feanen,and (a) fbee that had many children is enfeobled , the Lord killeth nd quick- 
neth: bringeth downe to the graneandrasfeth upthe Lord smpoutribeth,andenritch- 
eth: humbleth andexalteth ,heralfeth the poore out of the duft,and lifteth the beeger 
from the dunghil,to fet them amongit Princes,cr make thens inherite the feat of glory, 
he giueth vowes , unto thofe that vow unto him ,and bleffeth the yeares of the uf : for 
in his owne might {ball noman Lee flrorge: the Lord, the holy Lord {ball weaken bis ad. 
Hie.g  strfaries,let not the wife boaft of his wifdome, northe ritch in his ritches wor the migh- 
ty in his might , but let their glory bee to know the Lord, and-toexecute his tud zement 
andtuftice upon the earth : the Lordfrom heauen hath thundered : be {hall sudge the 
ends of the world and {hall gine the power unto our Kings , and {hall exalt the horne of 
his annointed. Arethefe the words ofa woman giving thankes for her fonne? 
are mens mindes fo benighted , that they cannor difcernea greater {pirit herein 
then meerely humane ? and if asy one bee mooued at the events that now began 
to fallout in this earthly proceffe,doth he not difcerne, and acknowledge the ve. 
ry true religion and Cztty of God whofe Kingand founder is Je/as Chréf , in the 
Anna, wordsofhis 4#n2,who is fitiy interpreted, Hes grace ? and that it was the {pirit of 
grace(from which the proud decline,and fall , and therewith che humble adhere 
and are aduanced as this hymne faith ) which fpake thofe propheticall words? 
Ifany one will fay chat the woman did not prophecy,but onely commended and 
extolled Gods goodneffe for giuing her praiersafonne, why then whatis the 
meaning of this ? The bow of the mighty hath hee brokes,and guirded the weake with 
frength? they that were full arehired forth for hunger and the hungry haue paffed o- 
wer the Land? for the barren hath borne feauen, and {bez that had many children,isen- 
feebled? Had thee (being barren ) borne feauen ? {he had borne but one when the 
fayd thus,(4 nox had thee feauenafterward, or fixe cither(for Samsue/ to make vp 
feauen) but only three formes and twodaughters. Againe,there being no King 
in fracl at that time, to whatend did the conclude thus : Heefb.dl iue the power 
unto our Kings, andexalt the horne of his anoynted ? did fhee not prophecy in this? 
Let the church of God therfore, that fruitful Mocher,that gracious City of thar 
great King,bee bold co fay that which this propheticall mother {poxe in her per- 
fon fo long before: Aty heart resoyceth in the Lord (¢) aud my horness exalted inthe 
Lord. Trueioy , and as tru¢ exaltation, both beeing in the Lord, and not ia her 
- felfe / my mouth is enlarged over mine enemies, becaufe Gods word is not pent 
vppe in ftraites‘, (d) nor in preachers thataretaught whatcofpeake. /hauere- 
teyced (faith fhe)é thy faluation. Thac was, in Chrzft\Je/us whom old Siocon (in 
iue2, — the Gofpell Jhad in his armes, and knew his greatnefle in his infancy, faying, zord 
sow letteft then thy feraant depart in peace : for mine eyes hane feene thy faluation. Let 
the church then fay. Jame reioyced in thy [aluation : there is none holy,as the Lord 
és: noGod like to ourG O D, for hee és holy, and maketh holy :iuft himfelfe,and iuftify- 
ing others: none is holy befides thee.for none is holy but from thee. Finally it follow-. 
eth :{peake no more prefumptuoufly, let not arragance come out of your 
mouth,for the Lord is aGodof knowledge, and by him are all enterprifes efta- 
blifhed: (¢) none knoweth what he knoweth : for hechat thinketh himfelfe to be 
fome-thing , feduceth himfelfe, andis nothing atall. This now is againft the 
prefurnptuous Babilonian enemies vnto Gods Cittée , glorying in themfelues and 
Rom, 10,3 OF in God,as alfo againft the carnall Ifcaelites, who( as the Apoftle faith )beezng 
ignorant of the rightcou/nefse of Goa,(that is, that which hebeing onely righteous, 
and iuftifying , giueth man ) axd going about to eft abls{h their owne rigitcon{neffe, 
: | | (that 


o- 


Lre17, OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 625 


(that is as if they had gotten fuch themfelues , and had ‘none of his beftowing) 
Submitted not themfelues unto therighteou{neffe of God:but thinking prondlysto pleafe 
God bya inftice of their owne,and none of hss,(who is the Godof knowledge,and the — 
Arbiter of conf{ciences , and the difcerner ofall mans thoughts , which besing 
vainte , deriue not from bim ) So they fell into reprobation. And by him faith the 
faid Hymne ) are all exterprsfes efiablié[bed,and what are they but the {uppreffion of 
the proud, and the aduancement of the humble? Thefe are Gods intents,as it fol- 
loweth : the bow of the mighty hath he broken , and guirded the weake with firength: 
their bow,that is,their proud opinions that then could fanCifiethemielues with- 
our his infpirations: andthey are guirded with Qrength that {ay in their hearts, 
Hane mercy on mee, O Lord, for 1 am weake. They that were fullare (f) hired _ 
: hunger , that is, they are made leffer then they were,for in their very bread,chaec 
ds the diuine words, which Ifrael as then had alone from all the world, that fa- 
uour nothing but the caft of earth. But the bungry nations, chat hadnot the 
Jaw,comming to thofe holy words by the New Teltament, they. pafled ouer the 
earth,and found, becaufe they relifhedan heauenly taft in thofe holy dorines 
and not, a favour of earth. And this followethas the reafon : for the barren hath 
brought forth feauen, and {be that had many children is enfeebled. Here is the whole 
prophecy opened to fuch as knowe the number of the leu es what it is,to wit, 
the number of the churches perfection , and therefore Johz che Apoftle writeth 
-wntothe feauen churches, implying inthat, the fulnefle ofoneonely:andfoic _.. . 
is figuratiuely fpokenin Salomon . wsfdome hath built her an honfe and hewen out ®.9;1 
her feauen pillers : For the Citty of Godwas barren in all the nations , vntill thee 
obtained that fruitce whereby now we fee her a fruicfull mother : and the earthl; 
Jerufalem that had fo many fonnes,wee now behold to bee weake and enfeebled, 
Becaufe all che free-womans fonnes were her vertues : but now feeing fhee hath 
the letter onely without the {piric, thee hath loft her vertue and is become 
weake. The Lord killeth,and the Lord qutckneth , hee killeth her that had fo many 
fonnes , hee quickrieth her wombe was dead before, and hath made her bring 
forth feauen, although properly his quickning be to beimplied vpon thofe whom 
he hath killed , for fhe doth as it were repeate it faying: hee bringeth dowze to the 
graue,and raifeth up ,for they,vnto whom the Apoftle faich : if yee bee dead with 
Chrift feeke the things that are abone, where Chrift fitteth at the right band of Goa: 
are killed unto faluation bythe LORD, vito which purpofehe addeth. Set your 
affections upon things aboue , aud not om things that areon the earth . For you 
are dead (quoth hee) behold here how healthfull the Lord kslleth: and then follow- 
eth: Aud your life is hid with Chrift in God. Behold here how God quickneth. I 
_ but dothhe bring them to the graue and backe againe? \ es without doubr , all 
we that are faichfull fee that fulfilled in our head , with whom our life is hidde in 
God. Forhe that fpared not his owne fonne but gaue him for vs alljhee killed » 
~ him in this manner, and in rayfing him from death , hee quickned him againe. 
And becaufe we heare him fay inthe pfalme, thow {halt not leane my foule in the 
grase,therefore he brought him vnto the graue,and backe againe . By his pouerty. 
are we enritched: for the Lord maketh poore,and enritcheth, that is nothing elfe 
bur,the Lord humbleth, ard exalteth, humbling the proud and exalting the 
humble. For that fame place : God refiffeth the proud and giuc!h grace vato the 
humble ,is the text wherevpon all this prophetefles words baue dependance. 
Now that which followeth. Heraifeththe poore out of the du/t and lifteth the beg- 
ger from the dunghill , isthe fittlieft ynderftood of him who became poore for vs, 


Collof.3,1 


626 — 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. | Cary, 


whereas he was ritch,by his pouerty (as I faid) to enritch vs. Forhe raifed him 
from the earth fo foone that his flefh faw no corruption : nor is this fequence, 
And lifteth the begger from the dunchill,meant of any but him, (g) for the begger 
andthe poorcisallone ,the dunghill whence hee was lifted,is the perfecuting 
route of [ewes , amongft whom the Apoftle had beene one, but afterwards;as he 
faith , that which was aduantage unto mee Iheldloffe for Chrifts fake: say not onelie 
loffe , but Liudge them all dunge , that I might winne Chrift. Thus then was this 
poore man raifed aboue all the ritch men of the earth, and this begger was lifted 
vp fromthe dunghill to fic with the Princes of the people , co whom hee faith, 
Youlball fit on twelue thrones, Grc.andto make them inherite the feat of glory: for 
thofe mighty ones had faid , Behold we hawe left all , and followed thee : this vowe 
had thofe mighties vowed. But whence had they this vow but from him that 
giueth vowes vnto thofe that vowsotherwife, they fhould bee of thofe mighties, 
whofe bow he hath broken. That giveth vowes(faich fhe)vnco them that vow. 
For none can vow any fet thing vnto God but hee muft haue it from God : it fol- 
loweth,azd bleffeth the yeares of the tuft, that is that they fhalbe with him ecernal- 
ly;vnto whom it is written , thy yeares {ball seuer faile : for that they are fixed: but 
herethey either paffe or perith : for they are gone ere they come, bringing fill 
their end with them. But of thefetwo, hee giueth vowes to thofe that vow 
and bleffeth the yeares of the cuff :the one wee performe , and the other wee re- 
ceivesbur this , alwaies by Gods giuing wee receiue, nor can wee doe the ather 
without Gods helpe , becaufe in his owne might fhall no man be ftronge: The 
Lord fhall weaken his aduerfaries, namely fuch as refift and enuy his feruants in 
fulfilling their vowes. (4) The grecke may alfo fignifie,his owne aduerfaries : for 
hee chat is our aduerfary when we are Gods children is his aduerfarie alfo ,and 
is overcome by vs, but not by our ftrength: for in his owne might fhallno man 
bee ftronge. The LORD, the holy LORD fhall weaken his aduerfaries,and 
make them be conquered by thofe whom Hee the moft Holy hath made holy al- 
{0;(¢) and therefore let not the wife glory in his wifdome , the mighty in his 
might,nor the ritch in his ritches , but let their glory beto know God,and to ex- 
ecute his iudgements and iuftice vpon earth. Heeis a good proficient in the 
knowledgeof God, that knoweth that God muft giue him the meanes to know 
God. For what haff thou (faith the Apoftle ) which thou haft not recetued? thatis, 
what haft thou of thine owne to boaft of. Now hee chat doth right, executesh 
iudgement and iuftice :.and hee that liueth in Gods obedience andthe end of the 


1,Tim.1.§ command, namely in a pure loue,a good confcience,and an vafained faith. Bue 


this loue(as the Apoftle Joha faith) és of God. Then,to do iudgement and iuftice,is 
of God,but what is on the earch;might it not haue beene left out, and it haue on- 
ly bin faid,to do zudgement and inflice 2 the precept would bee more common both 
to men of land and fea: but leaft any fhould thinke that after this life there werea 
time elfewhere to doe iuftice and iudgement in,and foto auoide the great iudge- 
ment for not doing them in the flefh, therefore, in the earth is added , to confine 
thofe acts within this life : for each man beareth his earth about with him in this 
world,and when hee dieth,bequeaths it tothe great earth,that muft returne him 
itat the refurre@ion . In this earth therefore, inthis flefhly body muft we doe 
juftice and iudgement, to doe our felues good hereafter by when euery one fhall 
receiue according to his works done in the body,good or bad : in the body ,thae 
is , in the time that the body lived: for if aman blafpheme in heart though he 
do no hurt with any bodily méber yet fhal not he be vnguilty ,becaufe though he 
a ee eee ee eee ey, 


4 : 
we -¢ : we 
. a dé é 


Lisn37. | OF THE CITIE OF GOD. —— 647 


And fo many we vnderitand that ofthePfalme, The Lord, our King hath wrought ere 
faluation in the midlet of the earth before the beginning of the world : that is the Lord al 
‘lefus our God before the beginning ( for he made the beginning ) hath wrought 
faluation in the midft of the earth namely then,when the word became flefh,and 

dwelt corporally amongft vs. But on. Aznah havin fhewen how each man 

ought to glory, véz. notin himfelfe but in God , for che reward that followeth 

the great iudgement, proceedeth thus(/)The Lord went up unto heaucn,and-hath 
thunared: he {ball inde the ends of the worlds,and {ball géue t he — unto our Kings, 1,5. 

and exalt the borne of bis annoynted. This is che plaine faith of a Chriftian, Hee 

afcended into heanen, and thence hee foall come to iudge the quicke and dead , for who Mat-10, 

_ isafcended faith the Apoftle , but he who firft defcended into the inferiour parts 
of the earth? Hee thundred in the clouds , which hee filled with his holy fpiritin 

his afcention , from which clouds he threatned Hierufalem,that vngratefull vine 

to fendno rayne vponit. Now itis faid, Hee foall iudge the ends of the world , that 

is the ends of men: for he fhall iudge no reall part of earch,but onely allthe men 
thereofjnor iudgeth hee them that are changed into good or bad, in the meane 

time, but( 7 Jas cuery man endeth, fo {hall he beiudged:wherevpon the {cripture 

faith , He that commeth vnto the end {hall be fafe , hee therefore that doth iuftcein 

the midft of the earth thall not be condemned, when theends of the earth are 

judged. And {hall gine power vito omr Kings, that is , innot condemning them by 


judgement , hee giveth them power becau | 


fethey rule over the flefh like Kings 
and conquer the world in him.who fhed bis blood for them. 42d [ballexalt - 
herne of his anoynted. How thall 


Chrift the annoynted exalt the horne of his an- 
noynted ?Itis of Chrift that chofe fayings, The Lord went up to heauen,eoc.are all 
ment,and fo is this fame laft,of exalcing the horne of his rer pm Chrift sheres 
fore all exalt the horne of his annoynted, that is,of euery faithful feruanc of his,as 
fhe {aid at firft: my horne is exalted in the Lord , for all chat haue receiued the vne- 
tion of his grace,may wel be called his annoynted,al which, with their head,make 
but oneannoynted. This sxe prophified, holy Samuels mother, in whome the 
change of ancient priefthood was p refigured and now fulfilled , when ds the wo- 
man with many fonnes was enfeebled, that the barren which brougt forth feuen; 


might receiue the new prieithood in C hrift, 


ee L. VIVES.  * 
Ss that («4 )bad.\ Multa in filie.(6) Nor bai te firft booke of Samuel agreeth with 

» Anguftine but Tofephws(vuleffe the booke be falty ) faith fhe had fixe,chree fonsaridthree 
daughters after Samuel; but the Hebrewes recken Samuels two forines for Annahs alfo, being Hie,in Reg: 
but her grandchildren,and Phamuabs feauen children died feuterally,as Annabs , and her fonne lib,t. 
Samuels were borne.(c ) And my horne.| Some read,mine heart, but falfely,the greeke is‘ xspar, 

(d)No in preachers there are.) Or, not in fuch as are bound by calling to bee his preachérs;the 

Bruges copy fc adeth, but ix his called prechers.’e) Noman knoweth Both in his foreknowledge, 

and his knowlege of the fecrets of mans heart. (f ) Are bired ont. | Thefeauentyteadit,are 
- diminifbed (g)F or the begger, lit {cemes to be a word of more indi gence,then poore : the Jatine The begget 
word here is inops orihelpeleffe , hauing no reference in many places to want of mony., but of See. 
helpe Uir.Georg.t Terent. Adelpe. Alt.2fcena.1 Pauper » faith Uarro, is gual panlus lar, thre, POOR 
inops ,quaf opis egens. ( h ) The Greeke. | dvr is both bis and bis owne :the Greekes do not diftins 

ouith thefe two, as we doe.{s) Let not the.\This is not the vulgar tranflation of the Kings , bue 
"in Hieremy cha.g9.the 70.putit inthem borh,but with forhe alreration.1c is an veter fubuerfion 

of pride. God refpedts not wit,power,or wealth,thofe are the fuell of mans vaine glory,but let 

bine waz gleryerh ( 2s Pawle faith) glory in the eeiae Tt vy @ miodeft and equal thought of be 

7? ~ e. 


Fa a A aA aca 
628 _ SAINT AVGVSTINE._ Cua, 


— 


‘felfe continually.For fo fhall he neuer be pride-fwollensfor the knowledge of God that chari- 
ty feafonech,neuer puffeth ¥p,if we confider his mercies, and his iudgements,his loue, and his 
wrath,togither wich his maiefty.(k) edd to dee indgement | The feauenty read this one way 
in the booke of Samwel,and another way in Hieremy, attributing in the firtt vato the man that 
gloriech,and in the later vnto God.(/) The Lerd went 7] This is not in the vulgar, vntill you 
come vato this,and be hall indge : Auguftixe followed the LXX and fo did all chat age almoft 
in all che churches.(ms) As exery man] As I finde thee,fo will I sedge thee. 


The Prophets words unto Heli the prieft figntfying the taking away of 
| Aarons prieft-bood, Cuar.s. | 


Vethis was more plainely fpoken vnto Helsthe prieft by aman of God, («) 
whofe name we read not,but his miniftery proued hima Prophec: Thus itis 
written: There came 4 man of GOD vato Heli , and [aid unto him : Thus faith the 
Lord,did net Iplainely appeare unto the houfe of thy fasher when they were in Egivt in 
Pharaos honfe , aud 1 chofe him out of all the tribes of i{racl to bee my prieft , to offer 
at mine Altar to burne incenfe,sndto weare (b) an Ephed,and I gaue thy fathers honfe 
al the burnt offrings of the houle of I{rael,for to cateby then hane you looked in fcorne 
on my facrifices,and offrings,ana(c) honored thy children aboue me,to(G) ble(fe the 
fir ft of all the offrings of Ufracll sm my fight ? wherefore thus faith the LORD GO Dof 
es : Laid thy boufe and thy fathers houfe ball walke before mee for ewer: nay not 
Se now: for them that honour me ( fasth the Lord) will honour ,and thems that defpife 
me, willl defpife. Bebold the dases come that I well cait ont thy feed, and thy father 
feed , that ea fball nos bee az(c) old manin thénetoufe. [will deftroy eneryene 
of thine from mine Altar that thine eyes may faile and thine beart faist,and all the re 
mainder of thy boufe {ball fall by the — » andthis {halbe a figne umta thee, that 
float! befall thy two fonnes, Ophi,end Phinees, in one day [hall they both dte._And 1 iil 
sake my felfe uppe a faithfull PriefE that {hall doe accordsng to mine heart : 1 will build 
him a fare howe and hee {ball walke before mine Annointed,for ener. And the (§)re- 
meaines of thy houfe fall come and bow drwne to bins for an halfe-penny of filuer , {ay- 
y : 7 nee L pray the informe office about the priefi-hood , that Imay cate a mor(ell 
Of brea 
Wrecannot fay that this prophecy , plainely denouncing the change of their 
old prieft-hood, was fulfilled in Samuel (¢) for though Samuel were ot that tribe 
that ferued the Altar,yee was he notof the fons of Aaron, to whofe progeny God 
tied the prieft-hood:(and therefore in this , was that change fhadowed that 
Chrift was to perfome, and belonged to the Old Teftament, properly , but figu- 
ratiuely, vnco the New : beeing now fulfilled both in the event of the prophecy, 
and the hiftorie , that recordeth thefe words of the Prophet vnto Hels.) For af- 


‘terwardes there were Priefts of Aarons race,as Abiathar and Zador in Dastds 


reigne,and many more, for the time came wherein the change was to bec effected 
by Chrift. But who feeth not now(ifhee obferue it with the eye of faith)charall 


_ isfulfitled,che Iewes haue no Tabernacle, no Temple,no Altar, nor any Prieft 


of Aarons pedegree, as GOD commandedthem tohaue. Iuftasthis Prophet 


. faid. Thou and thy fathers bonfe fhall walke before mee for ener. Nay not fo 


now; for them that honour mee, will 1 honour crc. By bis fathers houfe hee meaneth 
not £/f his Jatt fathers , but Aarons, from whom they all defcended , as thefe 
words: Did J not appeare to thy — houfe in Egipt Gc. Doe plainely prooue. 
Who was his Father in the Egiptian bondage , and was chofen prieft after 
their freedome , but Aéren ? ot his ftocke chen ic was here {aid there fhould bee 
no morc pricits as wee f¢¢ now come topalle. Let faith bec bur vigilant , and 
mais ic 


Lin17. OF THECITIEOF GOD. pe 


it (hall difcerne and apprehend truth,euen whether it willor no .Behold (faith he) 
the dates doe come , that Iwillcaft out thy feederc. Tistrue: the daies arecome. 
Aarons feede hath now no Prieft : and his whole off-{pting behold the facrifice . 
of the chriftians gorioufly offered all the world through, with fayling eyesand 
fainting hearts : but that which followeth 5  4/ the remaznder of thine houfe 
foali fall by the fword crc. belongs properly to the houfe of He. And thedeath 
of his fonnes , was afigne of the change of the Prieft-hood of Carons houle: 
and fignified the death of the Prieft-hood , rather then the men. Butthenext 
place to the prieft that Semnel , Heli his fucceffor , prefigured , | meane Chrift 
the Prieft of the New Testament. [ will take mee vp a faith-full Prieft , that {hall 
do all according to mine heart: Iwill build bimafure houfe erc.( Thishoufe is the 
heavenly Ierufalem ) aad he {ball walke before mine annoynted for ewer: that ishee 
fhall conuerfe with them , as hee faid betore of the houfe of —4zron,] fayd,thow 
and thine houfe {ball watke before mee for ener . Bebold mine annointed, that is 
mine annointed flefh, not mine annointed Prieft,for that is Chrift himfelfe , the 
Sauiour . So that his houfe and flocke it is that hall walke before him, 
it may bee meant al{6 of the paffage of the faithfull from death vnto life at the 
end of their mortality, and che laft iudgement. But whereas it is faid: He fhall doe 
all according to mine heart , wee may not thinke that GO D hath any heart,bee- 
ing the hearts maker , but it is figuratiuely {poaken of him, as the {criprure doth 
m other members, the handofthe LORD, the finger of GOD, cc. And leaft 
wee fhould thinkethat in this refpe@ ; man beareth the Imageof GOD,the - | 
{cripture gineth him wings , which man doth want : Hide mee under the Ihadow of lz. 
thy wings :to teach men indeed , that thofe things are fpoken with notrue,but a 
tropicall reference vnto that ineffable eflence. On now : and the remaines of 
thine houfe {ball come and bow downe unto him, cre. This is not meant of the. 
houfe of Heli, but of Aaroxs,of which fome were remayning vntill the comming 
of CHRIST, yea andare vnto this day. Forthat abouc,the remaynder of thy 
houfe {ball fall by the ford was meant by Helshis linage. How then can both 
thefe places bee true that fome fhould cometobow downe, and yetthe {word 
fhould deuoure all, vulefie they bee meant of ewo, the firft of Aarons linage,and 
the fecondof Helies 2 1f then they bee of thofe predeftinate remainders whereof Inyo. 
the Prophet faith: The remnant fhalbe faued: and the Apoftle,at this prefent time is Romar. § 
there a remnant through she election of grace : which may well bee vnder-ftood 7 
of chat remnane thatthe man of G OD fpeakes off heere then doubrléffe they 
beleeued in Chrift,as many of their nations(lewes)did in the Apaftles time,and 
fome (though very few) do now, fulfilling that of the Prophet,which followeth: eae 
and bow downe to him, for aw halfe penny of filuer : to whom but vnto the great Pial,136 
Prieft , who is God eternall? For in thetime of arozs Prieft-hood, the people 
came not to the remple to adore or bow downe tothe prieft. But whatis that, 
for an halfe pennie of filer? Onely the breuity ofthe Word of faith, as the A- 
poftle faith, The Lord wll make a {hort accompt in the earth, that filuer is put for of renee 
the word, the P/a/mi/t proueth, faying ,The words of the Lord are pure words, as Ln 
wer, tried inthe fire: what is his words now, that boweth tothis Gods prie##, and 
this God and Prie/t: place me in fome of fice about the Prieit-hood,that I may.eate 4 mor 
fell of bread? 1 will not haue my fathers honours, they are nothing, but place me any 
where ix thy Prie/t-hood. I would faine be adore. keeper, or any thing in thy feruice and. 
among fi thy people for Prieft-hood is put heere for the is a whom Chrif the 
mediator is the high Prieft. which people the Se rap called; an holy nation and pe. 5 
| alee , 


> 


aro 


630 SAINT AV GVSTINE. © C uar.s.& 6, 


1 Cor, 10, 
17 
Rom,12f, 


a royall Prieft-hood. Someread (k) Sacrifice in the former p'ace for Prieft-hood, 
allis one;both fignifie the chriftian flocke. Whereof S.Paa/ faith: Being many,we 
ave all one bread,and one bedy,and again. (1) Giae up your bodtes a lining facrifice.So 
then the addition , th:t / may eate a morfel of bread ,isadirect expreflion of the fa- 
crifice, whereof the Prieft himfelfe faith the bread which I will zine ,is my ficlo.cre. 
This is the facsifice not after the order of arom but of Melchifedech :hee that 
readeth,let him vnderftand. Sothen thefe words, Place me in fome office about thy 
prieft-hood that I may cate a morfell of bread, area direct and fuccina confeffion of 
the faith: this is che haife penny of filuer,becaufe it is briefe,and it is Gods word, 
thar dwellech in the houfe of the belecuer: for hauing faid before that hee had 
given Aarons houfe meate of tlie offring of the houfe of Zvae/, which were the fa- 
crifices of the Iewes in the Oid Teftament , therefore addeth hee the cating of 
breadin this conclufion,which is the facrifice of the New Teftamenc. | 


L. VIVES. 


H* (4) name] It was Phinees , "fay the Tewes: or Helias Hierome. (b ) An Ephod’ Of this 
read Hierome. AdtMarcellam , (Contra Ioninian, Ad Fabiolam .Vhe Greckes called ie, 


TheEphed. tmoysts. Tofeph.de Antsg.1ud.lb.3.S0 do the LXX. Reffinws tranflateth it, Superbumerale and it 


[This is 
too bitter 
the Lo. 
uainifts 
like ie not 
but leaue 
it out] 


{Louuay- 
nifts vn- 
leffe 

you had 
felt your 
Selues 
toucht 
with this, 


you 


neuer 
haue raz- 
edit our} 


was open at the fides from the arme-pits downe-wards . The high Prieft onely wore {ach an 
one,andic was embrothered with gold and filke of divers collours. The Leasts had a garment 
like it,but that was of linnen. Such an onedid Ana make for Samuel: and fuch an one did 
Dawid dance in, before the Arke.{ And herevpon I thinke our Rabbines,or moft Doctor-like 
fort of t riers,haue got the tricke of wearing fuch aveiture hanging loofe from the fhoulderss 
as a badge of their {uper-erminent knowledg :and then your Ciuilian,and Poifician in emu!ati- 
on of them,got vp the hike.] Butthe Seaucney call itezi9. (¢) Hoxorc/? |! So was it in the time 
when the lewes priefts grew wealthy , and fo is it now with vs :for who feeketh into the 
prieft-hood for Godlineffe rather then gaine,as the world goeth now? and what fonne is per- 
{waded by the father vnro an ecclefiafticall habite , but onely in hope of ritches ? what Prieft 
thinketh he doth not well,to fit and {pend the churches goods(as they call them)frankly, with 
his fonnes if he haue them(and haue them hee will, vn'effe he vee an Eunuch his brethren,his 
fifters and his coufins , let the pcore goe fhift where they can ? Thus,thus will it bee, whileft 
ritches rule in the hearts of mien.] (a) 7 0 bleffe ] The vulgar is not fo : read it,each onc hath the 
bookes,I muft proceed.(e) An old man] axes: 4oree an high prie/P, faith Hiereme, ( f) Remaines] 
A divertity of reading but thil ad rem.(g, Though Samuel | His father was a leuite,Chron.1.6. 
his mother of the tribe of Judah, This place Auguffine recalleth,thus :whereas I faid,hee was 
not of the fons of Aazon,! fLould haue faid, hee was none of the prtefts fonnes.And they moft tome 
monly fucceeded their fathers in the Prieft-hood, but Samuels father was of Aarons feede,but 
he was no Prieft,nor of his feed otherwife then all the lewes were the {eed of Jacob.Retraita~ 
tian.Isb.1, (b) Prophecy and hiffery| And though thefe words feemed to anothcr purpofe,yer 
aimed they at Chiift.(s) We /houla thiake| So thought by the Authropomorphites. (k) Sacrifi e} 
lipariswy is both, bucrather, Prieft-hood. (/) Gs#e vp} This is not in fome copies,yet is it be- 
fitting this place. 


The promife of the Prieft-hoodof the Iewes,and their kingdome,to ftand eternally 
not fulfilled is that fort that other promifes of that unbounded 


nature,sre. CHAP. 6e 


A biter gh thefe things were thé as deeply propheci ed, as they noware plain- 
ly fulfilled, yet fome may put this doubt: how fhall we expc& all the euent 
therein prefaged,when as this that the Lord {aid; thine honfe,and thy fathers boufe 


fball waske before me. for ener, can bec no way now effeaed, the prieft hood being 


now 


deen ecrsimmppresenen eae enensecomammeeeuneneinanesineacmnentttae taataaheimatiatanreensent nea Aaa a ee | 


ype 


Diniz OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 


> eernnmene -_ ~~ 
<a 


631 


now quiie abolithed , nor any way expected, becaufe that exemity is promifed 


to the prieft-hood that fucceded it? hee that objedteththis ;conceiuc: not thar 
Aarons priefihced was Fut atype & fhadow of the others future pricfihcod-and 
therfore thar the eternity promifed to the fhaddow, was due but vnto ihe fub= 
ftance onely : and that the change was prophecyed , to auoyde this fuppofition 
of thefhadowes eternity , for fo the kingdome of Sixt, thereprobaze,was fha- 


dow of the kingdome of ‘eternity to come, the oyle wuerc-withhe was annoyns 


ted, was a great and reverend miftery - which Dasid fo honored, that whenhee 
was hid inthe darke catieinto which Saw/e came to eafe himielfe of tlie burden 
ofnature, he was affraid, and onely cut off a pcece of his skirt , cohaneatoken 
whereby to fhew him how caufelefle he fupected him , and perfecured him : hee 
‘feared’, [fay for doing thus much: leaft he had wronged the miltery of Sails be- 
ingannoynted: Hee was teuchedin heart (faith thé Scripture ) ‘for cuttenc off the 
(4) skirt of his rayment (6) Hismen thar were with him perf aded himto take 
his time,Sau/was now in his hands, ftrikefure. 7 be Lord kepe nie (faith he) from. 
doing fo'unto my maifter the Lords annoynted : to lay mine hands on him , for he is the . 
annoynted of the Lord, Thus houoredhee this figure, not for ic felfe but tor the , 
thing ic fhaddowed. And therefore thefe words of Samuel vnto Saule, The Lord 
had prepared the: a kingdome for ener in Ifractbut now tt [bainot remaine unto thee,be- 
caufe thon halt not obayed his voyce : therefore willhe fecke himaman accordin gto hus 
heart.crc.are not to be taken as if Sa#/himfelfe {hold haue reygned for evermore, 
and chen that his finne made God breake his promife afterwards ( for hee knew 
that he weuld-finne , when hee did prepare hiimthis hingdcime ) but this hee pre- 
pared for a figure of thac kingdome thar fhall remaine for euer-more :1nd there: 
fore he added st [ball not remaine unte thee : it remainech and ever fhall inthe fig- 


nification,but not vato him,tor neicher he nor his progeny were to raigne there, 


cuerlaftingly. a a. | ee 
The Lord will seekc him aman, Saithhee, meaning either Dawid, or the 
medzator , prefigured in the vnétion of Dausdand his pofterity. Hee doth nat fay 
he will fe. ke ,asif heeknew not where to finde , but hee fpeaketh as one that fee- 
keth our vader ftanding, for wee were all knowen both to God the father, and his 
fonne, the feeker of the loft fheepe, and elected in him alfo,before the beginning 
of the world (¢) He will feeke , that is he will fhew che worid that which hee him- 
fe:fe knoweth already. And fo haue we acquiro in the latine, » ith a prepoficion, 
to attaine ; and tiiay vie quero, inthat fence alfo $ as quefiws, the {ubftantiues 
for gaine. . | 7 eS a 


L. VIVES. 


TH (4 ) skirt. .Or hemme,or edge,any thing that he could come neareft ro‘cut , the Jewes 
vied edged garments much : according to that command in the booke of Numbers, The 
Greek word, is r]+p6 psor Srnd.tos the wing of bis doubler.Raffines tran{laceth it,Sammitatem,.b) 
His men.jWhich were three hundred, faith Jofephus.lsb.6, (c) He will feeke.} A diuerfity of rea 
ding, I thinke the words,from., And fo haue we acqwiro , to the end o! the chapter , bee fome: 
addition of others. ar or ae see ot Sl ae 


aE Bis oe, 4 


= ee ee eee , => : ns 
ji 4 ae \ ° , : 7 ooge 
: Hhh4 : . ok 4. 4 + Se tae The 
‘ 
1 


.5am. 226 


Sam. 3 


632 SAINT AV GVSTINE. C uar.z° 


¥.Sam, 150 


Pfa, 81002. 


Gods te. 
pentanee, 


The Kingdome of Ifraell, rent: prefiguring the perpetuall dini- 
fron betweene the ptrituall and carnall Ifracl. 
Cuwar.7. | 


S“/ fellagaine by () difobedience , and Samae//told him againe from God, 
Y Thou haft caft off the Lord and the Lord hath caft off thee,that thon {halt no more bee 
King of Ifraell. Now Seni confeffing this finne , and praying for pardon, and that 
Samuel! would go with him to intreat the Lord. Not /( faith Samuell ) thou haft 
caft off the Lord, Ge. And Samuel! turned him-felfe to depart and Ses/held him 
by the lappe of his coate, andit rent. Then, quoth Samwell , the Lord hath rent 
the Kingdome of I{raell from thee this day , and hath gine n it untothy neighbor which 
és better then thee : and Ifrael {hall bee parted into two, and{ball no more bee united, 
nor hee is not aman that hee {bould repent , orc. Now hee vnto whome thefe words 
were faid, ruled Ifraell fourty yeares, euen as long as Dauéd, and yet was told 
this in the beginning of his Kingdome ; to fhew vs that none of his race fhonld 
reigne after him , and to turne our eyes vppon the line of Daséd, whence Chritt 
our mediator tooke his humanity. Nowthe originall read not this placeas the 
Latines doe: The Lord {hall rend the Kingdome of Ifracll from thee this day, but , the 
Lord hath rent , cre. from thee, that is trom Ifraell, fo that this man was a type of 
Ifraell , thacwas to loofethe Kingdome as foone as Chrift came with the New 
Teftament , to rule fpiritually ,not carnally. Of whome thefe wordes, and hath 
ginen it unto thy neighbour (heweth the confanguinity with I{raell in the flefh,and 
fo with Ses/: and that following , whos betterthen thee , implyeth not any good 
in Saul, or Ifraell , but that which the Pfalme faith:vmtsil 1 make thine enemtes thy 
foot ftoole whereof Ifraell the perfecutor(whence Chrift rene the Kingdome) was 
one. Although there were Ifraell the wheat amongft Ifraell the chaffealfo : for 
the  Aposties were thence, and — with a many Martyrs befides, and from 
their feed grew up fo many Churches as Saint Pas/reckoneth,all gloryfiing God 
in his conuerfion. And that which followeth , /rael{(ball bee parted into to,con- 
cerning this point afluredly namely,into [fraell Chri/ts friend, and Ifraell chrifts 
foe: into Ifraell the free woman and Ifraell the flaue. Forthefetwo were firft 
vnited, Abrahags accompanying with his maid vntill his wiues barrennefle being 
fruicfull,the cryed out,Caf owt the bondwomas cy her fonne.Indeed becaufe of Selo~ 
mans fin, we know that in his fonne Roboams time Ifraell diuided it felfe into two 
parts,and either had a King, vntill the Chaldeans came & fubdued and ren-verfed 
all. Bue what was this vnto Saw/ ? Such an euen was rather to be threatned vnto 
Dauid,Salomons father: And now in thefe times,the Hebrews are not diuided,bue 
difperfed all ouer the world , continuing on ftill intheir errour. But that diui- 
fion that God threatned vnto Sas/ , ‘who was a figure of this people ,was a pre- 
monftration of the eternall irreuocable feparation , beeaufe prefently it follows 
eth: And {hall no more bee united, nor repent of it.for it is no man, that it {bould re- 
pent:Mans threatnings are tranfitory : but what God once refolucth is irremoue- 
able. For where wee read that God repented , it portends an alteration of things 
out ofhis eternall prefcience. And likewife where hee did met, it portends a fixing 
of chings as they are. So here wee fee the diuifion of Ifraell , perpetual! and irre. 
uocable , grounded vppon this prophecy. For they that comefrom thenceto 
Chrift,or contrary , were to doe fo by Gods providence , though humaine conce:t 
cannot apprehend it: and their feparation is in the fpirit alfo, notin the fleth. 


Arid chofe Ifraelices chat ftand in Chrift vnto theend , {hall never pertake 
| ae with 


Lissr7. OF THE CITIE OF.GOD. 633 


with thofe that ftayed with his enemies vnto the end, dat be (as it is here faid) 
eterwally feperate. For the Old Teftament of Sina, begetting in: bondage, fhall doe Gel4.: 
them no good, nor agy other, further then confirmeth the Wew. Otherwife, as "> 
long as AMofes is read, (4) the vaile is drawne ouer their hearts: and when they 

core to Chri ,then is remooued. For the thoughts of thofe that paffe from 

them to him,are changed,and bettered in their paffe: and thence , their felicitie 

they feeke is {pirituall,no more carnall. Wherefore the great Prophet Samuel 
before hee had annointed Saw/, when hee eryedtothe Lord for Ifracl; and hee 

heard him : and when hee offered the burnt offering, (the Philiftins ‘comming 
againtt Ifraell ,and the Lord thundred vpon them and fcatrered them; fathac 
they fell before Ifraell ) : tooke (¢)a ftone, and placedit betweene the (f) two 'Sam7. 
Majpha's,the Old and the New, and named the place Eben Ezer, that is, the flone of 

helpe: faying,Hethertothe Lord bath helped vs : that ftone,is the inediation of our 
Sanioar,by which wee come from the Ol4 A44/pha tothe New,from the thought 

of acarnall kingdome inall felicitie, vaso the expectation of acrowne of {piri 

tuall glory, (as the New Teflament teacheth vs,) and fceing that thar is the fum 

and {cope of all, exen thitherte hash God helpehvs. 


L.VIVES. 


Bre \ difobedience }For being commanded by Sensuel from Ged,to kill all the Amalechites 

maa and beaft, hee tooke gag the King alive, and drouc away a multitude.of Cattle, 4... 
(b) The Lappe of bis coate |‘Diplom is any double garment. (¢) The Lord bath rent |Shalltend,  *""™ 
faith Jofephns : But, bath rents, ¢i'ppige , it is ia the LXX, (4) Thevaile | The vaile that Afe 

fes coucred his face,was a tipe of chat where-with the-Jewes couer their hearts,vneill they bee 
conuerted. 1.((orinth.3. (¢) A ffene | ofepbus faith,that hee placed it, at Charron, and called yoga: 
ic Forticude:lib.6,.( f') The two Mafpba's | Mafpha che Old ftaod betweene the tnbes of Gad | 
and Leni Hier,de loc. Hebraic,,There is another in the tribe of Ivde, as you goe North-ward 

ynto e£lia,in the confines of Eleutheropolis. Ata/pha is, contemplation, or pecalation, The 
Greckes write it, cacupad. 


| Promifes made unto Dauid;concerni ; i Sonne : mot 
‘i fulfilled iw Salomon : bat és Chrift. - 


Cuap, 8. 


- TOw muftI relate Gods promifes vnto Dawid, Sauls fuceeffor ( which change 
N prefigured the friricdall 8 great one, which all che Scripeures haue relation 
ynto ) becaufe it concerneth our purpofe.Daasd hauing had continual good for- 
tune, intended to build GOD anhoufe ,ndmely that famous and memorable 
temple that Salonen built after him. While this was in his thought,Nathes came. 
co him from God,to tell him what was his pleafuré, ; wherein,when as. GO D.had, 
fait, That Dauid fhould not build bir an houfe,and thes be hed not commanded Y/reet 
sm allthis tine to build bim any honfe of Cedar: then hee proceedeth thus: Tedmy, ..- 
ferment Dauid shat thus {aith the Lord: 1 tooke thee from the — wake thee i.9.10, Be 
avislex ouer my people Ifraell: and | was with shee where-fo-euer thon walked, andh ane se 
deftroyed all thine enimies out of thy fight and ginen thee the glory of a sed men 
upon earth. 1 will apposnt a place for mY peop [rack and will plawt it, it [oil doe 
by it felfe and wsoone 10 more, nor ja" witked people trouble them any more 5 a 


shey bane done, fimce 1 (4) appotmted Indges oner raclle 


- 


634 SAINT AVGVSTINE. = =| — Cusar. 


And | will gine thee ref? from allthine enemies,and the Lord telleth thee alfo that thou 


Seal make him an boufe. It [hall be when thy dayes bee fulfilled, and thou fleepe(t with 


shy fatbers,then will fet up thy [eede after thec,ewen hee that [ball proceed from thy 
body and willprepare his kingdome. He foall build an houfe for my name , and I will di- 
vect his throne for ener . Iwillbe his father and hee {ball be my fonne: sf bee inne 1will 
chasten him with the rod of men,ana with the plagues of the children of men. But my 


- wsercy will I not remooue from bim,as lremooucd st from Saul , whom ! haue reseed. 


His honfe {ball be faithfull,end his kingdome cternall before mee: his throne {hall bee 
eftablifbed for exer. Hee that holdeth this mighty promife fulfilled in Salomon, is 
far-wide. For marke how it lyeth. He [ball baild me an houfe , Salomon did fo: and 


this he marketh: but, és hon(efball bee faithfull and his kingdome cternall before - 


Salomon, 


P&al.73,9 


sce: WW hat is this 2 this hee marketh not. Well let him goe to Salomons houfe, 
and fee the flocks of ftrange Idolatrous women, drawing this fo wife a King into 
the fame depth of damnation with them:dothhe fee it ? thé let him neither think 
Gods promifes falfe,nor his prefcience ignorant of Salomons future peruerfion by 
Idolatry.. We neede neuer doubt here, nor runne with the giddy brained Iewes 
to feeke had I wift, and to finde onein whom thef¢ may bee fulfilled , wee thould 
never haue feene them fulfilled, burin our Chrift , the fonne of Dassdin the 
flefh. For they know well inough; that this fonne of whom thefe promifes 
{pake, was not Sa/omen : but (oh wondrous blindneffe of heart! ) ftand ftill expec- 
ting of another to come, who is already come, in moft broad and manifeft appa- 
rance. There was fome fhadow of the thing to come in Safomon, 'tis true , in his 
érection of the temple,and that laudable peace which he had in the beginning of 
his reigne,and in his name,(for Salomon iss peace-maker): but he was (‘b ) onely in 
his perfon 2 fhadow,burno prefentation of Chréffour Sasiour, & therfore fome 
things are written of him that concerne our Safes ; the {cripture including the 
prophecie of the one, inthe hiftorieof cheother. Forbefides the bookes of the 
Kings & Chronicles} {peake of his reigne,the 72.Pfalme is entitled with his name. 
Wherein there are fo many things impoffible to bee.true in him, and mioft appa- 
rant in Chréf,chatit is euident that he was but the figure ,not the truth it felfe. 
The bounds of Salmons kingdome were knowne, yet ( to omtit the teft ) chac 
Pfalme faith ; hee [ball reiene from [ea to fea and from the riner to the lands end. This 
is moft true of Chrift. For hee began his reigne at che riuer , when Joba baptized 


and declared him ,and his difciples acknowledged him, calling him Lord and 


Maifier . Nor did Salomon begin his reigne in his fathers time (as no other of 
their Kings did) but onely to fhew that hee was not the ayme of the prophecie, 
that faid, st fall bee when thy dayes are fulfilled,and that thou fleepeft with thy fathers, 
then will 1 fet up thy feede after thee ana prepare his kingdome. Why then fhall wee 
lay all this vpon Salomox,becaufe it is fayd, Hee fball busld mee an hoxfeand not the 
rather vnderftand, that it isthe other peace-maker that is fpoaken of who is not 


_ promifed tobe fet vp before Dauids death ( as S./omon was) but after,according 


3.Cer,9, 
&7 


to the precedent text? And though Chri were neuer fo long ere hee.came , yet 


, Comming after Dauéds death, allis one : heecame at length as he was promifed, 


and built God the Father an houfe,not of timber and ftones, but. of liu ng fonles, 
wherein wee all rcioyce. For to this houfe of God, that is, his faithful! people, 
Saint Past faith, The temple of Gad is boly,which you are. : 


\ ; 


: — LVIVES 
| Appointed (a) Indges} Ucacll bad thisteene Judges in three hundred and {eauentie ps 


= —_—— — . : : . : : _ 
Listy | OF THE CITIE OF GOD, 7 E35 
: Fan Orhoniel to Samuel who annointed Sax/ - and during that time, they had vatiable for- 


tune in their warres. (2 ) Oxely in | Hee wasa figure of Chriff , in his peaceable reigne, and 
building ofthe cemple: buehee was not (oristhim-felfe, © , = 


8 : A Prophecie of Chrikt iz thé eighty eight Pfalme, likeunto 
: this of Nathan in the Booke of Kings. 
4. + Sy — ; ; Crap, 9. 


: T He eighty eight Pfalme alfo,intitled,.4x (4) i/truction to Ethan the J/raelite, 
. seckoneth vp the promifes of God vnto Daued, and there is fome like thofe of 
. Nathan,as this: I haue fworme to Dauid my feruant, thy feede will Leftabl:[h for ener: 
and this ' Then /pakest thou (b ) sn 2 vifion unto thy fonnes and [aidyI haue laidhelpe’ 
ie upon the mighty one: Ihaue exalted one chofen out of my people.J hae found Dauid 
my (eruant,with my holy oyle hawe [ annoynted him. For mine hand {ball helpe bimyand ; 
mine armne (hall firencthen him.The enemy {ball not gperefie him, xor {hall the wicked Plalm3g. 
: hurt him. But will deftroy his foe before his faceand plague them that hate. him. My 
= truth and mercy {ball bee with him and in my name {ball hishorue bee exelted. J will 
: pat his hand inthe fea, and his right hand in the flouds, hee {ball call upon mee, thon 
| art my fatber,mny G OD,and the vocke of my faluation. 1 will make him my firft borne, 
a higher then the Kings of the earth «My mercy will 1 keepe unto him for ewer,and my 
conenant {ball land fat with hivs. His feede {hall endure for eucr,and his throne as the 
dayes of heanenx. (c) Ail thisis meant of Chrsit vnder the type of Danid,be- - 
caufe that: froma Virgin of ‘his feede CHRIST tooke man vpon him: — 
_ Then followeth it of Daséds. fonnes ,as it doth in Wathass words, meant pro- 
: perly of Salomon; hee fayd there: if they finne 1 will(d ) chaftenthem with the 
¢ roddeés of men, and with the(e) plagues of the fonnes of mn: (that is 5 correctine * 
* afflictions ) but my mercy will I not remooue from bim, \Where-vpon it is fayd. 
i Touch not, mine annointed, bart themnot: And now heere in this Pfalme ( {peak- | 
¥ ing of the myfticall Dewzd) hee faith the like .: sf hes children forfake my lawe,PGLt1°5- 
ft and walke not in my righteoufne/fe,erc. I will vsfite their tran{grefsion with rodds 
iy and their iniquities with flroakes: yet my mercy will I not take from him. Hee 
i faith: not from them, though hee {peake of his fonnes, but from him, which be 
f ing well marked, isas much: For theré could no finnes bee found in Chréf, 
vo the Churches head; worthy to bee corrected of GO D: with, or without re- 
: feruation of mercy, but in his members; thar is his people: Whereforg in che | 
Kings it is called his fonne, and in this Pfalme, his childrens , that wee might 
fee that all things fpoken of his body, hath fome reference vnto him-felfe; 
if and in that when Sau/ perfecuted his. members , his faithfull, hee fayd from 
| heauen; Sawl, Saal, why perfecute/t thon mee ? Le followeth in the fayd Pfalme: 
My conenant will I not breake, nor alter the thing I haue fpoaken, 1 hane fworne 
a ‘onely by my holynefve: that( f) if 1 fatle Dauid: that is, I will not faile Dasid: 
. Itis the Scriptures vfyall phrafe,, that he will notfaile in, he addeth, faying: 
Hs feede foal vremaine for euer, and his throne fball bee “as thee funne befor ¢ MCC: 
perfect 2s the Moone and asa faithfull witneffe 1m hedwen, . 


Sam 7. 


Pfalm,3 9. 


f° 


— Lvives. | 


636 | SAINT AVGVSTINE.  — Cuarro.gerr. 


L.VIVES. 


ja inffrattion (a) to Ethan the [/raelite | The Ezraite\faith the Hebrew. Hierome. This 
Pfalme is fpoken by many mouthes from the father.to the fonne,and the fonne to the fa- 

ther , and the church,the Prophet him-felfe, orthe Apoftles. (6) Jn 4 vifion | er iesou- (c) All 

this | A diuerfity of reading all to one end. 5 ) Chaften them) thinke it is meant of the warres 

that often plague the nations. (e) Plagses | all the difcommodiues , that befall man. ( f) ff J 


faile \ A negatiue phrafe often vied in the {eriptures.As Pfal.g5 verf.11. 


omnes Gamma 


Of diner/e actions done inthe carthly Hierufalem,and the kingdome, differing from 
Gods prom:fes, to fhew that the truth of hss words concerned the | 
glory of another kingdome and another King. 
| HAP. 10. 
Now after the confirmation of all thefe promifes ,leaft ic fhould bee thoughe 
- N chac they were tobe fulfilled in Salomon (as they werenot ) the Pfalme ad- 
deth : Thou hast cast him off,and bronght hins to nothing. So did he indeed with Se- 
lomons kingdome in his pofterity ,euen (4) vneo the deftruction of the earthly Hie- 
rufalem,the feat of that royalty, & vnto the burning of thatcemple that Salomon 
buile,But yet leaft God (hould be thougnt to faile in his promife, he addeth: ‘Thos 
haft deferred thine annointed :this was not Salomon,nor Dasid,if the Lords annoin- 
ted were deferred, for though all the Kings that were confecrared with that my- 
The Kings fticall Chryfme, were called annointed, from Sew/ cheir firft King : (for fo Daséd 
ctreeof’” Calleth him) yet was there but one true annointed whomall chefe did prefigure, 
Chnf,  who/(asthey thought that looked for him in Dawid, or Salomon) was deferred 
long, but: yet was prepared to come in the time that God had appointed. What 
becameof the earthly Hierufalem in the meane time where hee was expected 
to reigne,the Pfalme theweth, faying: Thou haft oner-throwne thy feruants cone- 
nant, prophaned his crowne,andcaft tt on the ground. Thou hast pulled downe bis walles, 
and laid his fortre(fes inrusne. All paffengers doe fpoile him , hee is the {corne of his 
neighbours: thou haft fet up the right hand of bis foes,and made hisenemsies glad. T how 
hat turned the edge of bis (wordand ginen him no helpe 1s vattaile. Thow haft ds{per- 
Sed his dignity, and cast his throne tothe ground. Thou haft [bortned the dayes (b)of his 
reigneand coucred him with {bame. All this befell Hierufalem the bond-woman, 
wherein neverthelefle fome fonnes of the free-woman reigned in the time ap- 
— shoping for the heauenly Hierufalem in a true faith , beeing the true 
fonnes thereof in Chri. But how thofe things befell that kingdome,the hiftorie 


fheweth vnto thofe that will read ic. 


L.VIVES. - | 
| VNeu the (a) deftruttion ] 2.Kings 25. (6) Of bis reigne | The vulgar,and the Greeke, fay, of 


bis time : x0 ore dua. . 


The fubftance of the people of God who were in Chrift in the flefb: who onely had 
power toredeeme the foule of man fromhell, Cuap. 11. 


A Frer this,the Prophet beginneth to pray: yet is this prayer a prophecie alfo: 
Pfal.8 9; 


Lord how long wilt thon turne away? (thy face ) for ener? asis {aid elfe-where: _ 


| How 
; 


=a Ps Mee 


Lis.17. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. | 637 


How long wilt thon turne thy face from mee : Some bookes read it in the 
(4) paffiue , but it may bee vnderftood of GODS mercy alfo, in the 
active: For ever, that is, vnto the end: which end, is the aft times, when 
that nation fhall beleeue in CHRIST, before which time it is to fuffer 
all thofe myferies that hee bewaileth. Wherefore it followeth : Shall thy 
wrath burne like fire? O remember of what 1 am; my [ubfiance. Heere isno- 
thing fitcer to bee vriderftood, then 1 E SVS, the fubftance of this people: 
for hence hee had his fleth. | | - - 

Didf thou create the children of men in vaine ? Vnleffe there were one 
fonne of man, of the fubftance of [frael , by whome a multitude fhould bee 
faued,they were all created in vaine indeede: For now all the feede of man 
is fallen by the firft man from truth to vanitie: Man & liketo vanitie(faith = 
the Plalme) és dayes vanslh like 4 fbadowe. Yet did not GOD create all Pielusag 
men io vaine, for hee freeth many from vanitie by CHRIST the media. | 
tour his Some, and fuch as hee knoweth will not bee freed , hee maketh 
vfe of , to the good of the free , and the greater eminence of the two 
Citties : Thus is there good reafon for the creation of all reafonable 
creatures, | tae, = 

It followeth. what san lineth that [ball nor fee death? or {ball free his foule 
from the hand of hell? Why none bot CHRIST LESVS the fubltance 
of Ifraell ,and the fonne of Dasid : of whome the Apoftle faith ; #4» bee- 
ing rayfed from death, dyeth no more: death bath xo more dominion oner him. 
For hee liueth and fhall not fee death , Bur freed his foate from the hand of 
hell , becaufe hee defcended into the lower parts to loofe fome (6) 
from the bonds of finne : by that power that the Euangelift recordeth — 
of his : 1 hawe power to laye downe my foule, and I bane power to take st uppe tdhia 3 
againe. : Lee . 7 


Rom,6.9, 


LVIVES. 


TN (2) the paffive |So readeth noc the vulgar: but inthe actiue: The Greekes indeede 

read it daocqion, Wilt thon bee turned away. (4) From the bonds | The bonds of hell, fay 
feme bookes , making this earth an hell vnto (brif, beeing defcended from heauen : but 
the other reading is better. | | | 


Sauces yer{e of the former Pfalme, and the 
——— perfons to whome st belongeth. nf 
Cwar, 12. | 


B Bie refidue of this Pfalme , in thefe wordes: Lord where are thy olde. Pid.99.45 

* merties which thou fworest unto Dauid in. thy truth ? Lord remember the $21 

rebuke of thy feruants,(by many nations that bane {corned them ,) becanfe they 

hane reproached the foote-fteps of thine axnointed: whether, it haue reference 

to the Ifraclites chat expected this promife made vnto Daséd,or to the {piri- 

tuall Ifraelites the Chriftians , it is.a —— deciding. This was 
ii 7 


written 


633 


SAINT AVGVSTINE.. Cuapr. 


written or fpoaken in the time of Ethax, whofe name the title of the Pfalme 


beareth : which was alfo in Dauéds reigne, fo that thefe words : Lord where 
are thine old mercies which thou fwareft vato Dauid tx thy truth , could not then 
bee {poaken,but chat the Prophet bare a type of fome-what long after to en- 


‘fue,to wit at fuch time as the time of Dawid wherein thofe mercies were pro- 
_ mifedmight feeme ancient. It may further bee vnderftood, ( 6 ) becaufe that 
- Many nations, thar perfecuted the Chriftians , caftchem in the teeth with the 


paffion of Chrif#,which hee calleth his change,to witte beeing made immortall 
by death. } | | | 

Chrifts change alfo in this refpe@& may bee a reproach vnto the Ifzae- 
lites, becaufe they expeéted him, and the nations onely receiued him, and this 
the beleeuers of the New Teffament reproche them for, who continée in the 


Olde : fo that the Prophet may fay , Lord remember the reproache of thy fer- 


wants, becaufe heere-after (GOD not forgetting to: picry them ) they fhall 
belecuc alfo. But I like the former meaning better: for. the words , LORD 
remember the reproach of thy ferwants,crc. cannot bee fayd of the enemies of 
CHRIST, to whome it. is a: reproche, that CHRIST left them and 
came to thenations: ( Such Iewes are no feruants of GOD) bue of them 
onely, who hauing endured great perfecutions: for the name of CHRIST, 
can:remember thar high kingdome premifed wnto Dasids feede, and fay in 


“6 defire thereof, - knocking ,. fecking, and asking, Where are thine olde mercies 


Lord which thew fwaredf vate thy fernant Dauid? Lord remember, cc. becaufe 


~ thine tnemies haucheld thy change aideftru@ion, and vpbraided icin thine 


annointed S Bowe . . ar ee a ae : 
-.: And what ts 5 Lord remember. but:iiord haue mercy, and for my paci- 


42 Ge; gite mee that height ‘which thou fwareft vnto Dawid in thy truth? If 
wee make the Lewes {peake this, it muft bee thofe feruants of G OD, that fuf- 


fered the captiuity in Babilon, before CHR1JSTS comming, and knew what 
the change of C HR/ST was, and that there was no earthly nor tranfitory fe- 
licitie to bee expected by it, {uch as Se/empx had for a few yeares , but that 
eternall and fpirituall kingdome, which the Infidell nations not apprehend- 


ing as then, ca& the change of the annoinied in.their difhes , but vnknowing- 


lie,and vnto thofe chatknew:it. And therefore that laft verfe of the Pfalme, 
( Blefed bee the Loxd for ener-more_Amen, omen: )agreeth fitly inough with 
the people of the celeftiall Hierufalem: place them as: you pleafe, hidden in 
the Old Teffament , before the reuelation of the New, or manifefted in the 
New ,when it was fully reuealed. For GOD S bleffling vpon the feede of 


 Dautd is notto bee expeged.onely fora while , as Saéomom had it , but for 


euver,and therefore followeth 
is doubled. | 
_ This Dauéd vnderftanding in the fecondof the Kings, (whence wee digref- 
fed in this Pfalme ) faich: Thow haf ve of thy feruants houfe for a gret 


Amen, Amen, The hdpe confirmed, the worde 


< 
a 


“ phie-And then a little after: Wow therefore begin & bie(fethe houfe of thy feruant 


for ener,crc. becaule then hee was to beget a fonne,, bywhome hid progenie 
fliould-defcend vnto Chriit, in whome his houfe andthe houfe'of God fhould 
bee-oiie; and-thar eternall. It is Denids houfe, becaufe of Dasids feede, and 
thie (fate is Gods houfe, becaufe-of his Temple, buiilt’of foules and not of 
fies wherein Gods people nizy dwell for ever, in, & with him,arid he for ever 
ee 8 on in, 


a 


L547. OF THE CITIE OF GOD, | 639 


in,and with them , he filling them, and they being full of him: God beingall id 
all their reward in peace and their fortitude in warre: And whereas Nethanhad 
faid before : thus fasth the Lord,{bals thou bexild me an houfenow Daaid{aithvpon — - 
that: how O Lord of hoffes, the God of I{rael , haft reuealed unto thy feruant faying; 
Iwill build thee an houfe. This houfe do wee build, by liuing welt, and the Lord 
by gining vs power to liue well , for , valeffe the Lord build thehoufe, their labour 
is but loft that bu:ld st. Andatthe laft dedication of this houfe, fhall the word of 
the Lord bee fulfilled, that Nathan {poke faying : / well appoynt a place for my people 
irecl,and will plant stand it [ball dwell by st felfe , andbe no more mowed , nor {ballthe 
wicked people trouble st any more , as st hath done fince the time that L appoynted Inudges 
oncr my people Firael. ° 


L. VIVES. 

"He time of (a) Ethan.) Etkan,and A{aph were players vpon the brazen Cymballs before Zshen, 
A the Arke , in Dasids time t.(bronieles.15.the Greeke and the Latine call Ethan an Iftae= 
lite, bue I chinke he was rather an Jezraelite,of the towne of Tezrael in the tribe of Judeb and 
the borders of //acher betweene Scythopolis, and the Legion, or an Ezraste , of Exran in 
the tribe of Ajur.Howfocuer he was, Hrerome out of the Hebrew, calleth him an Ezrast. But 
noe queftion he was not called an Ifraelite , for no man hath any fuch peculiar name from his 
aegis nation. (6 ) Becaufe that many.| There isa diuerfity of reading in fome other bookes, 

ut not fo good as this we follow. _ 


{ 

' 

+) 1 
\ 

z 
Pu 
rye. 
El 


Whether the trath of the premifed peace may be af- 
cribed unte Salomons time. 
Cap. 13. 


—— 
—_) 


H E that looketh for this great good in this world, is far wrong.Can any one 
bind the fulfilling of ic vnto Salomons time ? No, no, the {criptures com- 
mend it exellently , as the figure of afucure good. But this one place , the wicked 
fosll not trouble it any more , Fiqfoluech this {ufpicion fully :adding this further, — 
as sthath done fince the time that Iappoynted Indges ouer my people Ifrael , forthe 
ludges began to rule Ifrael before the Kings, as foone as euer they had attayned 
theland a promife:and the wicked , that is the enemy;troubled them fore ,and 
divers was the chance of warre , yet had they longef peace in thofe times chen 
cuer they had in Salemons , who raigned but fourty yearés , for vnder Iudge od, 
they had eighty yeares peace. Sa/omons time therefore cannot bee held the fulfil- 
ling of thofe promifes : and much leffe any Kings befides his , for no King had 
that peace that hee had : nor any nation euer had kingdome wholly acquit from 
feare of foe , becaufe the mutability of humane eftate can neuer grant any 
realme an abfolute fecurity from all incurfions of hoftility. The place therefore 
where this promifed peace isto haue refidence, is eternall : ic is chat heauenly 
Hierufalem , that free-woman where the true Ifrael fhall haue their blefled a-. 
boad: as thename importech; Hierufalem, (4 ) that is , Beholding God: the defire 
of which reward muftbeare vs out in Godlyneffe ; through all this forrowfull 
pilgrimage. es | : 


= 


Se Pee ee 


r= a oe | | ie 


lita «OL VIVES: 


640° 


Fiierafalem 


\ 


SAINT AV GVSTINE. 


C wapilg 


ae LA WIVES. 


H Terufalems, ( 4) that is.) Heerome faith it was firft called Zebme : then,Satews : thirdly Hye 
rufalene, and laftly eZlia. Salem, is peace :as the Apoftle faith vnto the Hebrewes : Hise 
rufalens the vifion of peace. This was that Salem wherein Melchifedech raigned. Iofeph and- 
Hegefip.It was called e£ ia,of eE line Adrian che emperor that repayred it after the deftrudti- 
on by Tétss,in emulation of his aunceftors glory. The Gentiles called it both So/yme, Solymt, 
and Hierufalem. Some draw that Solymi , from the Pifidians in Lycia , called of old , cea-pors 
fome from the Solymsi, a peopie of Pontus in Afia , who perifhed ( as Eratbftbenes writeth } 
with the Peleges and Bebricians,Espotensus (as Eufebine faith) derived the nasne Sa/jmi., from 
Salomon,guaft spor corepevos Salomons temple,and fome thinke Homer called it fo : bur lofephas 
(46.7.)faith it was called Solyma in Abrabams time, And when Dawid had builca tower in ic 
( the Iebuzites hauing taken it before ) and fortified it , ic was named Heerofolyma , tor the 
Hebrewes calla fortiffcacion Hieron , but it was rather called Jebus after it was called Salem, 
then before, for itis held chat CMelchifedech built it, and he called it Salem. And the Canaa- 
nites , whofe King he was, dwelt therein: and he was otherwife called the iuft King ( fath 
Fegefippus : )fot fo was he named after his father,yet Hserome( De loc.Hebrasc,e ad Damaf.) 
faith that Satems was not Hiersjalem , but another Citty in the country of Sychem ( 2 part of 
(Chanaan) where the ruines of Adelchifedechs palace are yet to be feene,as the memories of a 
moft ancient and magnificent ftructure. I omicto relate whence Strabo aeriueth the originall 
of Hierufalem, out of Afoyfes : for Strabo was neuer in Chanaan. J omit chofe allo that fay 
that Hierufalem was Laz, and Bethel , Bethel,beinga village long after it,as Ifaidbefore. | 


5 Ce 


Of Dauids exdesonrs in compofing of the Pfalmes. 
Cuar. 14, 

G Ods citty hauing this progreffe, Dawid raigned firft in the tipe therof,the ter- 
4 reftrial Hierufalem:now Daséd had great skil in fongs,and loued mofike,noc 
outof his priuat pleafure, but in his zealous faith : whereby, in the feruice of 
his(and the true)God in diuerfity of harmonious and proportionat founds , hee 
miftically defcribeth the coneord and vnity of the celeftiall Cztty of God ,compo- 
fed of divers particulars.Al his prophecies(almoft)are in his Pfalmes.A hundred 
and fifty whereof, thac which wee call the bookeof Pfalmes, orthe Pfalcer, © 
contayneth. Of which, ( 6 ) {ome will have them onely to be Dawids , that beard 
his name ouer their title. Some thinke that onely they that are inticled, each 
peculiatly 4 Palme of Dauid, are his: the reft, that are inticléd to Dawsd , were 
made by others, and fitted vnto his perfon. Bucthis our Sauiour confuteth , his 
owne felfe : faying that Dawid éaled Christ in the (pirit his Lord : cycing the 
hundreth and tenth Pfalme chat beginneth thus : The Lord fayd ato my Lord, /it 
thouon my right hand untill 1make thine enemies thy foott-ftooleNow this Pfalme 
is‘not entituled , of Dewéd,but to Daaid as many more are. But | like their opi- 


 nion beft that fay hee made all the 150. entitling them fometimes with other 


names, and thofe pertinent vnto fome prefigutation or other , and leauing 
fome others vntituled atall, as God pleafed to infpire thefe darke mifteries . 
and hidden varieties ( all vfefull how-fo-cuer ) into his minde. Nor is it 
any thing againft this thac wee read the Pfalmes of fome great Prophets ~_ 

gainit iucd 


\ 


- 


+ 
= e 
é -- = ‘, ~ . 
. i $ ’ 2 


& 


Liwr7. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. bax 


liuedafter him, vpon fome cfhis Pfalmes, as if they were made by them, for , «1.5 
the {pirit of prophecy might afwel foretel him their names,as other maters that mae 
apertained to their perfons , as the Reigne of King Jofias was reuealed vntoa 
Propher,who fore-told ofhis doings ,andhis very name about three hundred of 


yeares before it came to pafle. 


L. VIVES. 


D ner fity of (a4) Harmomious and.) The fcucrall, nftruments vied in this harmony are 

| reherfed.1.Chron.15. eAugufine,(in Proem Quinguag.) faith of the inftrument cal'ed the ©. 
Pfaltery, thatic is fic tor celeftiall harmony, and to be vied-in matters diuine, kecau‘e the cen- |. : 
cords of it in the tuning do all afcend vpwards (b) Some will. | lames Perez,my countryman pp, a. 
who wrote the laft ( not fo eloquent as learned ) large commentaries vpon the Pfalmes , In ¥ 
the beginning of them difputeth a while about the authors of the Pfalmes,and affirmeth that 


the Iewes ncuer made queftion of it before Origens time : but all both wrot and beleeued 


that Dasid wrot themall. But when Origen began withrare learning and delicate wit td 
draw all the propheticall fayings of the Old-teftament vnto Chrift already borne , hee made 
the Jewes runne into opinions farre contrarying the pofitions of their old maifters,and fall to 
deprauing of the {cripruresin ali they could, yet were there fome Hebrewes afterwards thae 
held as the ancents did,that Dasid was the oncly author of all the Pialmes : Some againe held 
that he made but nine : and that other Prophets wrot the reft,viz.fome of the fonnes of Corab 
Ethan Afaph or Idythim. Thofe that haue no titles they do not know whofe they are, onely 
they are the workes of holy men they fay. Marry Rabby Salomon,(that impudent Kabbine ma- 
ketli tenne authors of the Pfalmes : Melchifedech , Abraham , Moyfes, the tonnes of (hora, 
Daxid,Salomon, Afaph,leduthim,and Erhan:but Origen,eAmbrofe, Hillary, Auguftine and Caf~ 
fiodorus make Danid the author of them all ; vnto whome James ‘Perez agrecth , confirming ie 
for the crueth by many arguments - read them in him-felfe , for tne bookes are common, I 
omit Hieremes words to Sopbronius, and ( yprians concerning this poyint,let this fuffice at this 
prefent(¢) To Dauid. So isthe Greeke indeed : bu | haue heard diuers good Hebrascsans 
fay that the Hebtewes vie the datiue cafe for the genitiue. ( d) As the rasgne.] 1. Kings.11. 


Rabbi. . 
Salomon, 


whether all things concerning Chrift and his Church in the P{almes; 
| be to be vehearfed in this worke. 


Seemy reader expectethi now,that I fhould deliver all the prophecies coricer« 
ning Chrift and his Church contayned in the Pfalmes. But the abundance 
therof, rather then the want, hindreth me from explaning all the reft as I haue 
done one ,andas the caufe feemes to require. I fhould be too tedious,in reciting 
all , and feare to choofe any part, leaft fome fhould thinke I had omitted any thae 
were more-neceflary. Againe, another reafon is, becaufe the teftimony wee 
brought is to be confirmed by the whole body of the Pfalter , fo that though all 
do not affirme it yet nothing may contrary it : leaft wee fhould otherwife feéme 
to {natch out verfes for our purpofe,like (4) parcells of fome(b ) retrograde poo 
eme, whofe intent concerneth a theame far different, Now to fhew this teftimo-- 
ny of one in euery Pfalme of the booke, wee muft expound the Pfalme': 
which to do, how great a worke it is , both others and our volumes wherein weé 
haue doncit, do exprefily declare, let him that can and lift; read thofe, and there | 
hee fhall fee how abundant the aa of Dawid concetning Chrift }and of 
i13 his 


642 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. Carte 


_ his Church were namely concerning thar celeftiall King , and the Citty which 


Cent ones 


Setadicall 
veries, 


hee builded. 


L.VIVES. 


L“* (¢)parcells | (entones are peeces of cloath of diuerfe colours ; vfed any way, on the 

back, or on the bedde. (ic. Cato Maior. Sifenna, (. (efar. Metaphorically it is apoeme 
patched out of other poems by.ends of verfes,as Homero-centon,and Usrgilio-centon,diuerfe, 
made by Proba,and by Aufonins, (6 ) Retrograde poeme | Sotadicall verfes: that is verfes 
backward and forwards, as Adufa mshicanfas memora, quo numine lela: &, Lafo numine-quo 
memoracau{as mtbi Mufa. Sotadicall verfes may bee turned backwards inco others alfo: as 


x. this Jambick : Pio precare thure caleftum numina : turne it, Numina cele/tum thure precare pios 


_+ itis a Pentameter. They are akinde of wanton verfe (as Qsinrilian faith ) inuented , faith 


Pfalm, 4 Se 


Strabo, or rather vfed ( faith Diomedes ) by Sotades,whome Marteall calleth Guidus :fome 
of eAugu/tines copies read it, a great poeme,iand it isthe fitter , as if one fhould pick verfes 
out of {ome greater workes concerning another purpofe , and apply them vito his owne, as 
fome (entonifts did, turning Usrgils and Homers words of the Greekes and Troyan wartes, 
ynto Christ and diuine matters: And As/onins turneth them vnto an Epithalamion. 


Of the fortie fiue P(alme’: the tropesand truths therein, 
concerning Chrift avd the Church. 


| . Curae. 16. 


Fo although there be fome manifeft prophecies, yet arethey mixed with fi- 
gures ; putting the learned vnto a great deale of labour, in making the igno~. 
tant vnderftand them , yet fomefhew Chriff and his Charvch at firft ight (though 
wemuftat leifureexpound the difficulties that we finde therein:}as tor example. 
Pfal.45. Mine heart hath giuen out 4 good word: I dedicate my workes to the King. 
My tongue is the pen of 4 ready writer : Thou fairer then the children of men, grace 
is powred in thy lippes, for GOD hath wi iy thee for ener. Girde thy fworde upon thy 
thigh ,thow mot mighty: Procecde in thy beauty and glory: and reigne pale ba 
~~ of thy truth, thy inftice and thy gentlenee: thy right hand {ball guide thee 
wondroufly: Thine arrowes are [barpe ( most mighty ) againit the hearts of the Kings 
enemies : the people {hall fall under thee. Thy throneO GOD is ener-lafting , andt 


— feepter of thy kingdome,s {cepter of direction : Thow louest iuftice, and hateft iniqui- 


bd 


tie : therefore GOD euen thy GOD hath annoynted thee with oyle of gladneffe 
abone thy fellowes. All thy garments {mell of Myrrhe, Alloes, and Cafe, from the 
Iuory palaces , wherein the Kings daughters had made thee glad, in their honour. 
Whe is fo dull that he difcerneth not Chré/f our God, in whome we beleeue,by 
this place? hearing him called GO D, whofe throne is for euer , and annoyn- 
ted by GOD, not with vifible but with fpirituall Chrifme: who is fo barba- 
roufly ignorant in this immortall and vniuerfall religion, that hee heareth not 
that Chré/?s name commeth of Chri/maynétion ? Heere wee know CHRIST, 
let vs fee chen vnto the types : How is hee father then vnto the fonnes of men? 
in.a beauty ‘farre more amiable then that of the body. What is his fword, 
his fhaftes, &c. all thefe are tropical] charaGers of his power: and how they 
areall fo ,let him that is the fubie& to this true ,{iuft’, and gentle King , looke 
to at his leafure. And then behold his Church, that {pirituall {poufe of his, 
ai ae . | wal 


Lins. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 643 


“and that diuine wed-locke of theirs: herefit is : The Queene food on thy right hand, 
her clothing was of gold embrodered with druers colloars. Heare Oh daughter , dnd 
marke, attend, and forget thy people andthy fathers houfe. For the King taketh plea 
fore sn thy beauty: and hee ts the Lord thy God. The fonnes of Tyre foall adore him 
with guifts,the ritch men of the people [ball wooe bine with prefents . The Kings daugh- 
ter is all glorious within,her cloathing is of wrought gold. The Virgins fhalbe brought 
after her unto the King, and her kinsfolkes andcompantons {bal follow her,with toy and 
gladne(fe foal they be brought,and fbatl enter into the Kings chamber.Infead of fathers 
thou {halt haue children.ts make them Princes through out the earth. They {hal remens- 
us ber thy name O Lord from(a)gencration to generattonstherefore {hall thesy people gine 
A: thanks unto thee worldwithout end.I doe not think any one {o befotted at to thinke 
this cobe meant of aay perfonal woman:no,no,fhe is his fpoufe to wh6 it is faid: 
“- Thy throne,O God,és euerlafting and the {cepter of thy Kingdome a {cepter of direction, 
thou haft loued iuftice and hated iniquity , therefore the Lord thy God hath annointed 
thee with the cyle of slednefe before thy fellowes :Namely Chrift before the chrifti- 
ans. For they arehis fellowes of whofe concord out of all nations , commeth 
this Queene,as an other pfalme faith : the Cétty of the great King,meaning the {pi- 
rituall Syon: Syonis {peculacion: for fo'it fpeculateth the future good that ifis 
“ —_ toreceiue,and thither SireGerh itall che intentions. This is the {piricuall Ieru- 
falem,whereofwee haueall this while {poken, this is che foe of thar deuillith Ba. 
bilon hight confufion,and that the foe ofthis. Yetis this City,by regeneration, 
freed from the Babilonian bondage, and paffech ouer the worft King for the beft 
that euer was, turning from the deuill and comming home to Chrift :for which 
itis fayd, forget thy people, and thy fathers houfe, oc. The I{raelites, Werea pattof 
this Ceety in the fieth, but nor in that faith : but became foes both to this great. 
‘t+  Kingand Queene: Chrift was killed by them , and came from them,to (6) thofe- 
“s that he neuer faw in the flefh. And therefore our King faith by the mouthofthe 
ct pfalmiftin another place: thou haf delsuered me from the contentions of the pevple, 3 
i and made me the head of the heathen: a people whom 1 haue not -knowne hath ferned Pl18.48 
 Mmesand — as they heard me , obeyedme. This was the Gentiles whoneuer *™ 
faw Chrift in the fleth nor hee them: yet hearing him preached they beleeued 
fo ftedfaftly,chath¢é might well fay : as /oone as they heard mse, they obeyed mee :for 
2 faitheowes.by hearing. This people , conioyned with the true Ifraell , both 
 inflethand fpiric,is that Cétty of God, which when it was onely in Iftagll, broughe 


wad eter 


pe, - 2 


eather ene sta 


TE ee ae a ae 


ee = 


| ee A eee ae iat tne Smee = 2 


SS Se 
eek Seat a 


«forth Chriftin the flefh: for thence was the Virgin A4a7y , from whom Chrift : 
ss tooke. dur man-hood vpon him. Of this cittie, thus faith another pfalme. (¢) f 
is Men{balleall it,eur Mother Sion : he became man therein, the moft high hath founied ,.. P i 
st ber: who was this moff bigh,but God ? So did Chrift found her in his Patriarchs da E 
‘#@ and prophets, before he tooke fleth in her, from the Virgia Adary.Seing therefore f 
thatthe Prophet fo long agoe faid that of this Citcy which now we behold come f 
3 tocthed: In fleed of fathers thon foal hane children,to make them Princes ouer ail the 

i ——earth(for fo hath thee when whole nations and their rulers , come freely to con- i 
i fefle 8 proffeffe Ghrift his truth for etier and euer)them without all doubt, there: _ fy 
“. Wnotropé herein, how ever vnderftood ; but hath dire@ reference vatothefé 
2 Manifeftations. : f 
oo en wi BAD Sees eRe ec Reece ae = fo ee 

¢ L.VIVES. — i, ae ; 
Rt (4) generation |So read the 7o, whomn Adgaffiice ener follower; by wala Saud iy yerieg f 


liig and ok 


a 


as 


Gen. 33 


Pfal.33 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. | Casarn 


and this reduplication is very emphaticall in the Hebrew. (6) To thofe that hee neuer | Chrift 
while hee was on the earth neuer came,nor preached ia any nation but Ifraell, Nor matters it 
that fome few Gentiles came vnto him, wee fpeake here of whole nations.(c) ALen fall call it} 
The feauenty read it thus indeed but erroncoufly as Hierome noteth In Pfalm 89.for they had 
written 1t, fia adr, what is Sion? which reading, fome conceyuing not,reieéted, and added He 
reading it, uérep e1e7, an other Séox, and that the rather becaufe it followeth,bee was made man 
therein. But the vulgar followeth the Hebrew, and reads it with an interropation. 


Of the references of the 110. Pfalme unto Chrifts Prieft-hood: 
and the 22. unto his pafion 


| Cap. I7e 


Or in that pfalme that (as this calleth Chrift a King ) enftileth him a prieft,be- 

ginning: The Lord {aid unto my Lord,/it thou at my right hand untill 1 make thine 
enemies thy foote-ftoole : we beleeue that Chrift fitteth at Gods right hand, but we 
fec it not: nor that his enemies are all vnder his feece( which /s) muk appeare in 
theend, and is now beleeued,as it thal! hereafter bee beheld): but chen the reft: 
the Bord \ball fend the rod of thy power out of Siow, be thou ruler amidjt thine enemies, 
This is fo plaine that nought but impudence it felfe can contradi@ it. The ene- 
mies themfelues confeffe that the law of Chrift came out of Sion, that which we 
call che Ghofpell , andauouch to be the rod ofhis power. And that heruleth in 
the midft of his enemies , themfelues , his flaues ; with grudging , and fruitleffe 
gnafhing of tecth,doe really acknowledge. Furthermore : she Lord ware end will 
not repent,(which proues the fequence eternally eftablithed thou art 4 Prieft for e- 
wer after the order of Melchifedech. Thereafon is, .4arons prieft-hood and [acri- 
fice is abolifhed, and now in all the world vnder Chriftthe prieft , wee offer that 
which Adelchifedech brought forth when hee blefled brabews: who doubteth 
now of whom this is fpoken? and vnto this manifettation are the other Tropes 
of the pfalme referred ,as wee haue declared them peculiarly in our Sermons, 
and inthat pfalme alfo whereinC HR IS T prophecieth of his paffion by Dassds 
mouth, faying they perced my hands and my fete: they counted all my bonesyand ftood 
gazing upon me. Thefe words area plaine defcription of his pofture on the 
croffe his nayling of his hands and feete,his whole body ftretched at length,and 
made a rufull gazing ftock to the beholders. Nay more : they parted my garments 
among them,shey caft lots upon my vefture. How this was fulfilledlet the Ghof pell 
tellyou. And fo in this,there arediuers obfcurities, which notwithftanding are 
all congruent with the maine,and fcope of the pfalme , manifefted in the affion, 
chiefly fecing that thofe things which the pfalme prefaged folong before,are 


but now effeGed ( as it fore-told)and euen now are opened vnto the eyes of the 


whole world. For it faithalittle after: althe ends of the world fhallrememsber 
shemfelues and turnevnto the Lord : ail the kindreds of the earth {ball worlbip before 


hie for the kingdome is the Lords andhe ruleth among the nations, 


# 


TEE) 


L. VIVES. 
V Hich (4) maft apeare | Jn the end, butnow is onely beleeued . Saint Pes/ writeth 
_¥ much ofit vato the Corynthians,and Hebrewes, * ’ | 


Chritts 


Liui7, ° OF THE CITIE OF GOD; a 645 


. Chrifts death and refurrection prophetied in pfalme.3.& 40. 
es 7 G.867.- CHaprB. 2 Zz 
N Either were the pfalmes filene of his refurrectié: for what is chat of the third 
plalme : tard me downe,and flept and rofe avainefor the Lord fufteined me2wil_- : 
any one fay that the prophet would recordit for fuch a great thing, to fleepe,and eae 
ro rife: buc chac he meaneth by fleepe , death,and by rifing againe,the refurreGi- 
on? things thar-were fic to bée prophecied of Chrift? this , in the 41: pfalme is 
moft plaine: for Dawid in the perfon of the mediator, difcourfinp(as hee victh)of. . 
things to come as if they were already paft, ( becaufe they are already paftin 
Gods predeftination(s)and prefcience){aith thus. Adine enemies freake eust! of ine 
saying, when {bail he die and his name peré{b? and tf he come to fee,he [peaketh lies and 
bis heart heapeth vp iniquity wsthin him: and hee goeth forthand telleth tt mine ene- 
mates whifper together again ft me,and imagine howto hurt me.They hane fpoken anna 
suft thing upon me,fball not he that fleepeth,ari[e againezthis is cuem as much as ifbe 
had fatd,fballnct he that is deadreuine againe ?the précedence doth fhew how they 
confpired his death,and how he that came in totee him, went for to bewray him 
tothem. Andwhy is nor chis that traitor Judas , his difciple ? Now becaufe hee 
knew they would effe& their wicked purpofe; to kill him , hee to thew the fond- 
nefle of their malice in murdering him that fhould rife againe, faich thefe words: 
{ball not he shat fleepeth , arifeagaine,as if hee faid,you fooles, your wickednef{e procn- 
reth but my fleepe.But leatt they fhould do fucha villany vnpunifhed,hee meant to 
repay them at full: faying, Uy friend and familiar, whom Itrufted,and who eate of 
my bread,euen he hath(bJkicked at me:But thou Lord haue mercy upon me,raife me up 
and 1 {ball reguite them. Who is hee now chat belioldeth the lewes beaten out of 
their land, and made vagabonids all the ‘Wworld-ouer, fince the paffion of Chrift, 
that conceiueth not the aes ofthis prophecy? for he rofe againe after they had 
killed him , and repayed chem with temporall plagues,befides thofe that hée ré- 
ferueth for the reft , vorill the great iudgement : tor Chrift himfelfe fhewing his 
betraier to the Apoftles by reaching him a peece of bread;temembred this verfe 
of the pfalm,& fhewed it fulfilted in himfelt,he that did cate of my bread,eué he hath 
kicked at me ,the words , in whom I truffed , agree not with the head but with the . 
soembers properly-for our Sauiour knew him well, before hand, when he fayd(¢) Euc+33-2t,. 
One of you is 4 dinell: but Chrift vfed to transferre the proprieties of his members 
vnto himfelfe,as being their head, body andhead being all one Chrift. And ther- 
fore chat of che Gholpell, was banery,aied you gaue me to cate,neée expoundeth af- Mah,25; 
tecwatd thus : Js thst (d) you did it'to one of the/e,you azd zt unto mée.He faith there- 35 _ 
fore that he trufiedin hin’, as the Apoftles trufted-in Judas 5 when hee was a 
made an Apoftle. Now the Iewes hope that their Chrift chat chey hope for beleeue a 
fhall neuer die ; and theréfore they hold chat the law and the Prophets prefign. Chnftre 
red noc ours , but one that fhalbe free from all touch of death ; whom they doe Pats . 
looke for (and may doe’, long’ indugh). And this miferable blindnefle makéth die stall, 
them take that fleepe and rifing againe ( of which wee now {peake ) in the lite- 
rall fence, not for death,andrefurrection, | | 
Butthe 1 6. pfalme confoundeth thein, chas:c44 heart is Glad,atid my tongue re- 
sovceth , my fielb alfo refeth in hope y for thou wilt not teane my foule in hell ,nei- 
ther wilt thou fuffer thine Holy one to fee corruption. WWivt man could fay 
that his ficth refted in that hope that his foule fhould not bee left in hell, buc 
yéturr.¢ prefently to the fleth co fauc it from che corruption of a carcafle, 
| - | excepting 


Pil, 4t | 


646 


SAINT AV GVSTINE. *  Ceancem 


excepting him onely that rofe againe the third day ? It cannot be faid of Dassd. 


Pial.68.20 The fixtie eight Plalme faith alfo: Owr God és the God that (e) faneth vs,and the éf- 


Luc.t 


Math.27. 
Pial.69. 


ues of death are the Lords. WVhat can bee more plaine 2 seus Chrsif is che God that 

faueth vs: for Je/us is « Sauiowr, as the reafon of his name was giuen in the 
Gofpell , faying: Hee ball faue his people from their finnes: And fecing chat his 
bloud was thed for the remiffion of finnes , the enemies of death ought to be- 
long voto none but vnto him, nor could hee haue paflage out of this life , but by 
death. And therefore it is faid, Vto him belong the (f) ifjues of death ; to thew 
that hee by death fhould redeeme the world. And this laftis {poken in an ad- 
miration,as if the Prophet fhould haue fayd, Such is the life of maz , that the Lord 
him-felfe leaneth it mot put by death ! a | 


L. VIVES. 


Nd (a) prefcience | Some copies adde heere, guia certa erant, but it feemeeth to haue but 

creptin, out of fome fcbolton. (6) Kicked at me | Supplantanit me : taken vp mine heeles, 
as wraltlers doe one with another. Allegorically itis dwaldy, to deceine. (c) One of you} The 
Bruges copie hath : One of you foall betraye mee : and one of you 1 adexnill, both : they are two 
feuerall places in the Gofpell. Jobz.1 3.and John.6. Indas is called a Deuill, becaufe of his de- 
ceitfull villanie. (4) Ju that you did it\Or,in as much as i¢’ See, (¢) That faucth us\3 02s 1% opdeur. 
A proper phrafe to the Greeke tongue, but vnordinary in the Latine , valeffe the nowne bee 
vfed,to fay the God of faluation. ( f) fies } #ttorto. _ 


The obftinate enfidelitie of the lewes,declared in the fixtie nine 

. — Pfalme. Cuar. 19. 

Veall thofe teftimonies and prefigurations beeing fo miraculoufly come to 
effect,could not mooue the lewes: wherefore that of the fixty nine P/aime 
was fulfilled in them: which {peaking in the perfon of Chrift, of the accidents in 
his paffion, faith this alfoamong chereft: They gaue mee galltocate,and when [was 
thirfty they gane mee vinegar to drinke. And this banquet which they affoorded 

him,hee thanketh them thus for. Let sheér table bee (4) afnare for them, and their 


 profperitie their ruine; let their eyes bee blinded that they [ee not,and bend their backs 


for ener,crc. which are not withes, but prophecies of the plagues that fhould be- 


- fall them. What wonder then if they whofe eyes are blinded, difcerne not this, 


and whofe backes are eternally bended, to fticke their aimes faft vpon earth: for 
thefe words being drawne from the literall fence and the body , import the vices 
ofthe minde. And thus much of che P/aimes of Deuid ,to keepe our intended 


- meane. Thofe that read thefe and know them all already, muft needes pardon 


‘mec for beeing fo copious, and if they know thar! haue omitted that is 
more concerning mine obie&, I pray themto forbeare complaints of me for it, 


- L VIVES. 
Age aAuguftine callech icheere x Mafcipnle, a Moule-trappe. The Grecke is 
| Dauids 


Linty. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 


647 


EET yg ere eg tee AES y pe STS ogee S mee Sa mE ea a ee 


Dauids Kingdeme : bis merit , his fonne Salomon, Prophesies of Chrift in 
Salomons bookes :and in bookes that are annexed unto them. 
— Crap, 20. | 


Auid,the fonnie of the celeftiall lerufalem,reig «+d in the earthly one,& was 
auch commended in the {criptures, his piety and true humility fo conque- 
red his imperfections, that he was one of whom wemight fay,with him:Ble//ed are 


thofe whofe iniquity is forzinen and whofe finnes are covered. After him, his fonne Sa- P/!.3¢ 


loon reigned in all his Kingdome, beginning to reigne(as we faid in his fathers 
time.(4) He beganne well but he ended badly:profperity,che moath of wifdome, 
did him more burt , then his famousard memorable wifdome it felfe , profited 
him . He wasa prophet,as his workes , (6) namely the Prouerbs,the Canticles, 
and Ecciefiaftes,doe proue : all which are canonicall . But Ecclefiafticus and the 
booke of wifdome, were onely called his , for fome fimilicude betweene his file, 
and theirs . Butall the learned affirnte them none ofhis, yet the churches of the 
Weftholds them of great authoritie., and hath done long: and in the booke of 
(6) Wifdome is a plaine prophecie of Chrifts paffion ; for his wicked murderers 
are brought in,faying,Let vs cercunouent the suftfor he dsfj 
ry unto our doings, checking vs for offending thee law , and{baming vs for our breach 
of difcipline. Hee boafteth himfelfe of the knowledge of GOD, andcalleth himfelfe 
the Sonne of the LO RD: Hee is made to reproone our thoughts st greeucth vs to looke 
upon him, for his life isnot like other mens: his waies are of another falbion. He 
cqunteth vs triflers,and avoideth our waies, as uncleasne([e: he commendcth the ends 
of the sufi , and boafteth that GOD is hes father. Let vs fee then if he {ay true: let 
vs prooue what end he {ball haue : If this iuft man, beG O DS Sonne,he will helpe him, 
and deliner him from the hands of his enemies : let vs examine him with rebukes 
andtorments,toknow his meekene/fe ,andto prooue his pactence. Let us comdemne 
him unto a {hamefull death , for be faith he thalbe preferued. Thus they imagine, 
all aftray,for cheir malice hath blinded them. In (d) Ecclefiafticus al{o is the fu. 
LORD GODof all, andfendthy feare among ft the Nations : lift uppe thine hand 
upon the Nations that they may: fee thy power : and as thou art fanitified in vs be- 
fare them fo be thou magnified in them before vs : that they may know thee as wee know 
thee that there is no God but onely thou.O LORD. This propheticall praier we fee 
fulfilled in Iefus Chrift . But the {criptures that are not inthe lewes Canon,are 
no good proofes againft our aduerfaries. But ic would bea tedious difpute, and 
carry vsfarre beyond our ayme,ifI fhould heere ftand to referre all the prophe- 
cies of Salomons three true bookes that are in the Hebrew Canon,vnto the truth 
of Chrift and his church. Although that that of the Prouerbs, inthe perfons 


ure faith of the Gentiles prophecied , inthefe words. Hane mercy uponus ,O Bede. 36 


of the wicked : Let us lay waite for the iuft without acaufe and [wallow.them uppe Prey 


altue,as they that goe downe into the pit, let vs raze his memory from earth and take 


away his vitch pojfefion , this may eafily and in few wordes bee rediiced vnto 
CHRIST ,andhis church : for fuch a faying haue the wicked husbandmen 


(eh eth us and ts contra- ifs, Ya 


in his euangelicall Parable : Théststhe heire come let vs kill him); andtakehis.- : 3 


saberitance. In the fame booke likewife , that. which wee couchedat before 
(fpeaking of che barren that brought forth feayen ) cannot bee meant but of 
the church of CHRIST, and himfelfe'} 4s: thofe ‘doe eafilie apprehend 
chat know CHRIS Ttobeecalledehe ts/dore of his father :the a 

y¥i/doiie 


Mat.a£.38 


as tt | oe 


‘me seereie Lk i ED A AN 


NN 


wee nen + | ee err ee we + ee - Pres 
. ——— 


seh a a ian tS 
648 oo SAINT AVGVSTINE. - Crapo, 


eee | eee es eee — 


Wifdome hath built her an houfe,and hath hewen out her feanenpillers : [be hath killed 
ae 93133 her vidtualls, drawne her owne wine,and prepared her table. Shee hath fent forth hey 
: maidens to crie from the higths, laying . He that is {imple , come hether to me,and to 
the weake witted,{be faith,Come andeate of my bread and drink of the wine that thane 
‘drawne. Here wee fee that Gods wifdome, the coerernall Word built himan 
houfe of humanity in a Virgins wombe , and vncothis head hath annexed the 
church as the members ; hth killed the véctmailes chat is facrificed the Martires, 
and prepared the table with bread and wine, (there is the facrificeof Mekhi/edech:) 
hath called the fimple andthe weake witted, for GO D (faith che Apoftle hath chofex 
the weakeneffe of the worla , to confound the firength by. To whom notwithttand- 
ing is faid as tolloweth: forfake your fooli{fbne([e, that yee may line and feeke wif 
dome, that yee mayhaue Isfe. The participation of that table, is the beginning of 
life: tor in Eccelafiaftes,where hee fayth : It 2s good (e) for man to eate and drinke, 
wecannoc vnderftand it better chen of the perticipation of that table whichour 
Melchifedechian Prieft inftituced for vs the New [eftament. For that facrifice 
fucceeded all the Oid I eftament facrifices that were but fhadowes of the future 
PGl.40,6 good: as we heare our Sauiour {peake propherically in the fortierh pfalme, fay- 
ing: Sacrifice and offring thon dift not defire,but a body haft thou perfited forme: 
for his bedy is «flered ard facrificed now infteed of all other offrings aad. 
facrifices. For Eccicfiaftes meaneth not of carnall eating and drinking in thofe 
wordes that he repeatech fo often, as that one place (heweth fufficienty, faying: 
Eccl.7,4 Jt és better to goe into the boufe of mourning then of feafting : and by and by after, 
the heart of the wife ts ix the houfe of mourning:but the heart of fooles ts in the houfe of 
feafting. Bucthere is one place inthis booke,of chiefe nore, concerning the rwe 
Citties,and their two Kings, Chriftandche deuill: “oe tothe land whofe Kingise 
. childyand whofe Princes eate inthe morning .Bleffed art thou, Oland when thy King 
isthe fonne of Nobles,and thy Princes cate tn due time for ftrength and not for drum 
kenneffe. Here he calleth the deuill a child, for his foolithneffe , pride,rathneffe, 
petulance, and other vices incident to the age of boyifh yourhes. Bur Chrift 
he calleth the fonne of the Nobles,to wit,of the Patriarches of that holy and free 
Citty : for from them came his humanity . The Princes of the former eate in the 
’ morning:before their houre,expeGing not the true time of felicity but wil hurry 
vnto the worlds delights , head-long: but they of the Cétty of Chrift expe their 
future beatitude, with pacience. This is for ftrengch: for cheir hopes neuer faile 
Roms them,Hope(faith Saint Paul)fbameth no man, All A hope in thee({aith the pfalme) 
fall not be afhamed . Now for the Canticles it is a certaine fpiricuall and holy de- 
light in the mariage of the King and Queene of this citty , that is, Chriftand che 
church. But this isall in myfticall figures , to inflame vs the more to fearch the 
truth and to delightthe more in finding the appearance of that bridegrometo 
whom it is fayd there :trath heth loued thee, and of that bride, thac receiueth 
this word ; lowe és in thy delights. 1 ommit many things with filence, to drawthe 
_ worke towards an end. | | | 


3.Cor.T,27 


Ecel,'7 


L. VIVES. 


HE (a) beganne well] Anguftine imitateth Saleft.In Bello Caril.(b) Workes namely] Iofephus 

affirmeth that he wrote many more, ¥#z.fiue thoufand bookes of fongs,and harmonies : & 
three thoufand of Pronerbs and Parables : for hee made a parable of cuery plant fromthe 
Hope to the Cedar: and fo did he of the beafts, birds and fifhes : he knew the depth of saa 


L13.37. | OF THE.CITIB OF GOD. - 2 649 


and difcourfed of ie all,God taught him bands,exterminations and Amulets againtt the deuill, 

for the good of man,and cures for thofe chat were bewitched. Thus faith Jofephaus(e )sjdome’] Chilostiie . 
Some fay that ‘Phalo Judens,who liued in the Apoftles time,made this booke : He was the A-/ev. 
poftles friend., and fo eloquent in the Greeke,that it was a prouerbe. [hilo esther Platonized 

er Plato Philonized. (d) Ecclefafticus | Written by Jefus the fonne of Syrach, in the time of 
Prolomy Energetes King of Egipt , and of Syasomthe high prieft. (¢) For man to ete] The Sea- 

uenty and vulgar differ a little here, but itis of no morhent. . : 


Of the Kings of I[rael and Indah , after Salomon. 


HAR. 21. 


VVE finde few ee pasar of any of che Hebrew Kings after Salomon, perti- 
"YY nent vnto Chrift or the church either of Iudah or Iftael* For fo were 
the two parts termed into which the kingdome after Salomons dezth was diui- 
ded, for his finnes,and in his fonne Roboams time: theten Tribés that /eroboam, Sa- 
lomons feruant attained , beeing vnder Samaria, was called properly s/raef(al- 
though the wholenation went vnder that name)& the two other. Judah and Ben- 
samin , which remained vnder Ierufalem, leat Daxids ftocke fhould haue veterly 
failed were called Judah :of which tribe Dasid was. But Fen‘amin {tuck vnto it,be- 
caufe Sas/,(who was of that tribe Jhad reigned there the next before Dawid: thefe 
two(as I fay)were called /adah,and fo diftinguifhed from Iftaell,vnder which the 
other ten tribes remained fubie&: for the tribe of Less, beeing the Seminary of 
Gods Priefts,was freed from both, and madethe thirteenth tribe. /ofephs tribe, 
being diuided into Ephrasmand Manajfes,into two tribes , whereas all the other 
tribes make but fiagle onesapeece. But yetthe tribe of Less was moft properly 
vnder Jerufalem becaufe of the temple wherein they ferued. Vpon chis diuifi- 
on,Rebean King of Tudah, Salomons fonne , reigned in Ierufalem , and Héeroboams, 
King of Ifrael , whilom feruantto Salomon, inSamaria. And whereas Roboam 
would haue made warres vpon them for falling from him; the Prophet forbad 
him from the Lord , faying 3 That st was the Lords deed. So then that it wasno — 
finne either in the King or people of Ifrael but the Lords wil, that was herein ful-_ 
filled: which beeing knowne,both partes tooke vppe them{elues,and refted : fot > 
they wereonely divided in rule,not in religion. 


How Hieroboam infected his fubiedts with Idolatry : yet did God nener faile 
them in Prophets por in keeping many from that infection. 7 


Cuar. 22. 


Ve Hieroboam the King of I {raell fell peruerfly from God(who had truely en- 
throned him as he had promifed)and fearing that the huge refore of all Ifrael 

to Hierufalem(for they came to worfhip & facrifice in the Temple,according to 
the law)might be amean towith.draw thé from him vnto the line of Dawsd(their 
old King Jbeganto fet vp Idols in his own Realme,andto feduce Gods people by 
this damnable and impious furtlety, yet God neuer ceafedto reproue him forie 
by his Prophets ,and the people alfo that obeied him and his fucceffors in it for 
that cime were the two great men of God, Helias and his difciple Helifeus. And 
when Helis aid vatoGOD: LORD " ; oo laine tity Prophets, dod digged 
| | me 


om. 


650° SAINT AVGVSTINE. = = Cuara3.824. 


: dewne thine Altarsand I cnely ans left and now they fecke my life: hee was anf wered 
1 Kings 19 that God had yet feanen thonfand sn Ifracl thst bad not bowed towne the knee to Bazl. 


The fate of tfvacl and Iadel unto beth their Captinities which befell 
at different tiemes)dinerfy altered. Indah united 
- $0 sfrael : and lafty,both unto Rome. 


C wap. 23. 


No warited there Prophets in Iudalf (that lay vnder Ierufalem) in all thefe 
fueceffions: Gods pleafure was ftill co haue them ready , to fend out either 
for prediction of euents,or reformation of maners, For the Kings of Iuda did of- 
fend Ged alfo ( though in farre lefle meafure then Ifrael ) and deferued punith- 
ment , both they and cheir people. All their good Kings haue their due commen- 
dations. But Ifrael had not one good King from thence, but all were wicked, 
moreorleffe. So chat both thefe kingdomes,( as it pleafed God) had their reuo- 
lutions of fortune ,now profperous , now aduerfe, through forraine and ciuill 
warres, as Gods wrath, ormercy was mooued: vntill dt length, their finnes 
prouoking him,he gaue them all into the hands of the Chaldzans, who led moft 
part of them captives into Affyria , firft the tenne Tribes of I{rael,andthen Jw- 
deh alfo,deftroying Terufalem, and that goodly Temple : and that bondagelafted 
70. years . And then being freed,they gepaired the rnined Temple ,and then (al- 
though many of them liued in other nations) yet was the land no more diuided, 
but one Prince onely reigned in lerufalem, and thether cameall the whole 
land to offer andro celebrate their feafts ac the time appointed. Bue they were 
not yet fecure from all the nations , for then (4) came the Romanes,and vnder 
their fubieCtion muft Chrift comeand finde his Ifracl. | 


LAV IVES. 


Hen (4) came | Pomspey the great quelled them firft , and made them tributaries to Rome. 

Cicero and Axstony being confulls. And from that time they were ruled by the Romane 
Prefidents of Syria,and Preuofts of ludza. That they paied tribute to the Romanes, both pro- 
ae iftories and that queftion in the Ghofpell { Is st Lamjtull ro gine tribute unto Cx far? doe 
witefie. | | | 


Of she left Prophets of the Lewes about the time that Chrift was borne. 
au 4 C nap. 2he 


A Fret their returne from Babilon,/ at which time they had the abi sinc Ag- 

és * gee, Zacharie, and Malaché',and Efdras ) they had no more Prophets vnull 
‘our Sauiours birth but one other Zacharie , and Elizabeth his wife : and hard be- 

‘fore his birth old Symon 8 Anxa,a widow,and Jobe the laft of all, who was about 
Chrifts yeares, and did not prophecy his comming , but protefted his prefence 

(a) being before vnknowne. Therefore faithC HRIST , The prophets and the 

aw prophecied unto lohn. The prophecies of thefe five laft, wee finde inthe 
Ghofpell, where the Virgin, Owr Lerds Mother prophecied alfo before Jobs. 

| Bur 


| é : | 7 2 7 : ’ ae 


Lin17. | «OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 639 


But:thefe prophecies the wicked Jewes reiedt,yet an intumerable company of 
them did beleeve , and receiuedthem. For then was Ifrael truely diuided,as 
was prophecied of old by Samae/ ynto Sau/: and avouched neuer to beealeered. 
But the reprobate Iewes alfo haue Atalachie , Agee , Zacharieand Efdrasin their 
Canon,and they are the laft bookes thereof : for theis bookes areas the others, 
full of great prophecies: otherwife they were but few thac wrote worthy of 
cannonicail authority . Of hefe aforefaid I fee I mut make fonve abftracts to in- 
{ere into this worke, as farreas thall'concerne Chrift and fiis chiach: But that I 


may doe better in the next booke. - | 


L.VIVES. 


B Eing.(a) before unknowne ]Hee knew hee was come,but hee knew not his perfon yet,vntill | 
the Holy Ghoft defcended like a doue , and God the Father fpake from heauen , then hee 


kaew him,and profeffed his knowledge. 
Sa 
llr FUR Fut Sb eer FR SO ta Pally 
THE CONTENTS OF THE 
eighteenth booke of the City of God. 


I. A recapitulation of the 17. boakes paft 12. The fal{e Gods adored by hoje Greeks 
| 


concerning the two Citties, continuing unto | Princes which lined betweene Ifraells free~ 
the time of Chrifts berth, the Sauiour of the \ dome,and lofuahs death. . 
world, | Be 
2. Of the Kings and times of the Earthly 
Citty,corre/pondent unto thofe of Abraham. 
3.What Kings reigned nm Affiria and Sicy- 
onia in the bundreth yeare of Abrahams age, 
when \faac was borne,according to the promife: 
or at the birth of tacobandEfau, 
, 4. Of the times of lacob and his fonne lo- 
h. >: o Sa 
‘ 5. Of Apis the Argine King , called Sera- 
pis i Egspt :and there adored asa deity. | 
6. The Kings of eArges and eA firsa, at the 


13, What filtions got footing im the nations, 
| when the Indges began firft tornle I{raell. 
14. Of the theological! poets. . eee 
15. The rnine of the Argine Kingdome: Pi- 
cus, Saturnes fonne fucceeding bim in Lan» 
rentum,  .. : Bg 
_ 16. How Diomedes was deified “ier the de~ 
Struttion of Troy,and his fellowes faid to be tur= 
medintobirds,§ =| . — 
| .. 17. Of the incredible changes of men that 
Varro beleened, | 
| 18. Of the diuills power in transforming 


time of lacobs death, — | — mans foape: what « chriftian may beleene here= 
7. In what Kings time lofeph died in E- \ én. a —: eet 
ipe. . 19. That e£neas came into Ltaly whens 


Labdon was Ludge of Ifraell. . 


8. what Kings lined when Moyles was 
borne,and what Gods the Pagans.bad as then. 
9. The time when Athens was built,and the 
reafon that Varro gineth forthe name. 

10. Varroes relation of the originall of the 
word Areopage : and of Deucalions — 

11. About whofe times Moyfes brought I- . 
raell out of Egipt : of lofuah,in whofe time hee 
died. 


20. Of the fic ceffion of the Kingdome in f= 
racilaftertheludges., = 
_ 21, Of the Latian Kings: £ncas(the firft) 
and Auentinus(the twe/frb)are made Gods. , , 

22. Rome,founded ut the time of the Affirian 
CMonarchies fall, Ezechias beeing King of 
23. Of the enident prophecy of Sybilla, 
lii2 == Phen 


652. 


lem was taken and the Temple deftroied.. 


40. The Egiptians abhominakle hers to 
claime their wi{dome the age of 1 oco00.jeares, 
41. The diffention of Phslofophers , and the 
concord of canontcall fcriptures, 
42.Of the tranflations of the Old Teftament 
out of Hebrew inte Greeke, by the ordinance f 
God, for the benefit of the zations. 
43. That the tranflation of the feanenty is 
moft authenticall, next unto the Hebrew. 
44. Of the deftruttion of Nininy, which the 
Hebrew prefixerh forty daies unto,and the Sep 
tuagints but three. 
5. The Lewes wanted Prophets ener after 
wing of the Affirrian Monarchy,and the Ro~ | the repairing of the Temple,and were affistted, 


sa i concerning Chrift. E: 
manes eretling. exen from thence untill Chrift came , to frew 
| 


24. The feanen Sages in Romulus his time: 
Vraell led into captintty: ‘Romulus dieth and is 
desfied. 

a5.Philofophers lining i in Tarquinius Prif- 
cus his time,and Zedechias hrs,when Terufa~ 


26. The Romsaines were freed from thew 
Kings , andl fraell from captinity , both at one - 
time, 

27. Of the times of the Prophets , whofe 
bookes wee haue , how they prophecied ( fome of 
shem )of the calling of the nation, in the decly- 


28. Prophecies concerning the Ghofpell ,in | that the Prophets fpake of the building of rheo- 
Ofee and Amos. ther Temple. 

29. Efay his prophecies concerning Chrift, 46. Of the words. Becommin g Flefh : onr 

30. Sis ponds of Micheas, Jonas and Toe], | Sasusours Birth and the difperfion of the Lewes, 
corre{pondent unto the New Teftament. 47.Whether any but Ifraelites before Chrifts 

31. Prophecies of Abdi, Nahum and Aba- 
cuc,concerning the worlds faluation in ( brift. 

32.-The prophecy contained in the fong and 
praser of Abacuc. 

33. Prophecies of Hieremy and Zepbany 

concerning the former theames. 

34. Daniels and Ezechiells prophecies,con- 


tinse belonged to the City of God. 
48. Aggcis prophecy , of the glory of Geds 
honfe, fulfilled sn the church,not in theTemple. 
49. The churches increafe uncertaine bee 
| canfe of the comuuxtion of Eleét and reprobate 
in thes world. 


50. The Peedi bie preached , and glorionflse 


ecrning Chrift and his church. ey ay ry the bloud of the preachers. 
35-Of the three prophecies of Ag ge,Lacha- 51. That the chur.h is confirmed euen by 
ry and Malachi, the fehifmes of herefies, 
36. Of the bookes of E{dras and the Ma- 5 2. Whether the opinion offome be credible, 
ehabees, that their /balbe no more perfecutions after the 
37. The Prophets mere ancient then any of ten pafiont the eleanenth which is that of Arq 
the Gentile phslofophers, techrs 


53. Of the unkwowne time of the laff perfea 
cHtion. 


54. The Pagans foolifhneffe in affirming 
shat chrifteanity fhould ahbe three hander 


fixty fine yeares. 


38. Of fome fcriptures too ancient for the 
church to allow , becanfe that might procure a 
Sulpett thatthe M4 are rather counterfit then true, 

39. That the Hebrew letters bane bin ener 
cae én that language, 


FINIS. 


THE 


EIGHTEENTH BOOKE 
OF THE CITTIE OF GOD: 
eer ys hala 


bo 


Arecapitulation of the [eauenteene bookes paft, concerning the two 
Citties,contsnning unto the time of Chrifts bi: th,the 
| Sauiour of te world. a 


Cuarpl.: - 


CR Vy mites of the two Citties,Gods,and the Worlds, as far as fhould 
mife, one part originalls of the citties , haue I declaredin 


luge,in the fifteenth booke : and fo from thence vnto Abraham | followed downe 
allthe times as they lay. But whereas from Abrahams fathers time , vaeill the 
Kingdome of the Ifraclites , (where I ended the fixteenth booke)and from thence 
ynto our Sauiours birch(where I ended the feauenteenth)I hauc onely caried the 
Citty of God along with my pen, whereas both the Citties ran on together, in 
the generations of mankinde: this was my reafon; ldefired firft to manifeft the 
defcent of thofe great and manitold promifes of God,from the beginning vatill 
Hee, in whom they al! were bounded ,andto be fulfilled, were come to be borne 
ofthe Virgin, without any interpofition of ought done in the Worldly citty 
during the meane {pace : to make the Cirty of God more apparent, although 
that all this while, vntill the reuelation of the New. Teftament, it did but lie in- 
uolued in figures Now therefore moft I beginne where I left , and briag along 
the Earthly Citry, from sbrabams time , vnto this point where 1 muft now leaue 
the heauenly -that hauing brought both their times to one quantity, their com- 
parifon may fhew them both with greater euidence. | - 


Unease oo* SE oererenat Aes eee! RE SEEPS 


Vines his Preface voto his commentaries vpon 
| the eighteenth booke of Saint Auguftine bis C#ttyofGod. Rk 


' : 
~~. t i ue 
ry . 


val 


N this eighteenth booke wee were to paffe many darke:waies,and oftén-times ‘to feele for. 
our paffaze, daring not fixe one fore vntill wee firft groped whereto place it,'as ‘one mutt 
doe in darke and dangerous places . Here wee cannot tarry all day at Romic,but mutt abyoade: 
into the worlds fartheft cormer; inte linages long fince loft,and countrids:worne quite.eys of 
= | — Kkk 3 niemory 


sf re continue my difcourfe through the originall,progreffe, & lime , 


653 


&54 


ee oe 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. C HAP.2. 


memory : pedegrees long agoe laid inthe depth of oblivion muft wee fetch out into the light 
(like Cerberns ) and {pread them openly . Wee muft into Affyria that old Monarchy, {carcely 
once named by the Greekes : And Sy cionia,which the very Princes therof fought to fupprefle 
from memory themfelues, debarring their very fathers from hauing their names fet on their 
tombes,as Paufanias relateth ,and thence to e4rgos,which being held the moft antique ftate 
of Greece, is all enfolded in fables : then Athens, whofe nimble wits ayming all at their coun- 
tries honour , haue ‘left truth ficke atthe heart, they haue fo cloied it with eloquence : and 
wrapped it vp in cloudes. Nor is Auga/fine content with this, but here and there caftethin 
hard walnuts, and almonds for vs.to crack, which puts vs to fhrewd trouble ere wee can get 
out the kernell of truth: their fhells are fo thicke. And then commeth the latine gefts , all 
hacke im peeces by the difcord af authors. And thence to the Romanes :nor are the Greeke 
wife-men omitted , Icis fruitlefle to complaine , leaft fome fhould thinke I doe it caufeleffe. 
And here and there,the Hebrew runneth, like veines in the body,to fhew the full courfe of the 
Two Citties, the Heauenly andthe Earthly, If any one trauelling through thofe countries, 
and learning his way of the cunningeft, fhould for all chat miffe his way fome tines, is not he 
pardonable] pray you tho,and will any one thinke him the leffe diligent in his trauell ? none, 
Ichinke. What then ifchance, or ignorance lead me aftray, out of the fight of diuers meane 
villages that I fhould haue gone by, my way lying through deferts,and vntraGted woods, and 
feldome or neuer finding any to aske the right way of ?amI not to bee borne with? I 
hope yes, Uarros Antiquities are all loft; And the life ofRome . None but Ex/ebius helped 
mee in Affyria , bug. that Diodorus Siculus and fome others , fetmee in once or twife. Ihad 
abooke by mee, called Berefesby the Booke-fellers , and fome-what I had of Joanses An- 
sins , goodly matters truely , able to fright away the Reader at firft fight. But Ilet them ly 
{till ; Jioue not to fucke the dreg ges, or fetch fables out of friuolous pamphlets , the v 
rackets wherewith Greece bandieth ignorant heads about. Had this worke beere 2 
childe of Berofies I had vfed it willingly : but is looketh like a baftard ofa Greeke fire, as Xe- 
nophons e/Aquinoca are ,and many other that beare their names that neuer were their au- 


| thors. | 


Ifany man like fuch ftuffe , much good doe it him: ile bee none of his riuall . Through Si- 
cyonia Pasfanias and Exfebses,went with mee , Feat: themfelues onely with the bare 
names,and fome other little matters: the Reader fhal pertake of them freely. For /udex, I {ee 
no guides but the {criptures : fome-times wee haue put in the mindes of the Gentiles here- 
of, onely in thofe things that the Prophets touched notin the reft:where the fcriptures con- 
curre,wee neede goeno further. That maketh mee not to trouble (ornelins Alexander Mia 
defus Polyhiftor,for allegations concerning the Jewes : for hee goes all by the L X X. inter- 

retours in his computations both in the Hebrew ftories, and others. Concerning Athens, 

ome,Argos,Latium,and the other fabulous fubieéts, the Reader hath heard whatfoeuer my 
diuerfity of reading affordeth ,and much from the moft curious ftudents therein that] could 
bee acquainted withall. Hee that liketh not this thing , may finde another by and by thae 
will pleafe his palate better , vnleffe hee bee fo proudly teftie tharhee would hauethefe my 
paines for the publ ike good,of power to fatisfie him onely. The reft,the Commentaries them- 
felues will cell you. ) : . 


Of the Kings and times of the Earthly Citty,corre/por- 
a dent unto thofe of Abraham. 


C HAP. 26 


Liss8. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 


perith then ferue,for nature cryeth with one voice(alnioft alt the world through) 


Is is better to ferue the conqueronr,then to be deftroyed by warre Honee it is that fome 


are Kings & fome are fubse&ts(not without Gods prouidéce for Prince & fubie& goa, pias 
are vnto him, alike,& both in his power)but in al thofe earthly domimions;wher- uidencethe 


in diuided man-kinde followed each his temporall profit and refpe@: we find arbiter 
two moreeminent then all the other, firft Affiria,and then Rome :feuerallborh — 


in times and places : the one in theEaft., long before the other , that was inthe 
Weft, finally theend of the firft was the beginning of the later. The other king- 
domes were but as appendents vnto thefe two, In Affiria, Wssus ruled, the a 
cond King thereofafter his father Be/us the firft, in whofe time( 6 )--sbrabam was 
borne. | 1 i. ae. a. eee 

Then was Sycionia but a {mall thing, whence that great fcholler Varro 
begins his difcourfe, writing of theRomaine nation : and comming from the 
the Sicyonians to the Athenians , from them tothe latines, and {o ro theRo- 
manes. Burtbofe were triflés in refpe& of the Affirians before Rome was built: 
Though the Romaine Salu/t fay that (¢) Athens was very famous in Greece: 
I thinke indeed it was more famous, then farne-worthy, for hee {peaking of 
them, faiththus : The Athenians exployts Lthinke were worthy indeed : but {hort 
of their report : as being enhaunced by sheir eloquence in relations, and fo came the 
world to ring of Athens , andthe Athenians vertues held as oe in their acts: 


wows 


of 
gdomes 


656 


Abraham, 


india 


jee 


———— 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuap.2 


a am A aR RRR A aa 
-he.was dead, they adoredhim as 2 God, with facrifices, and playes , whereof 


it ts faid they were the firft inuentors. 


- 


L. VIVES. 


called in Greeke Chaldzopolis , chat hee inuented Aftrology there , and was fo iuft , wife and 
welbetoued of God, tuat hee {cne himinto Phanicia, andthere hee taught Aftronomy and 
other good Arts, and got inco great tauour with the King - Nicholas Damafcenss fath that 
Abraham reigned at Damatcus , cc mming thether out of Cha:dza with an army - and went 
thenceinto Cnanaaa (afterwards callcd Juda Jleauing great monuments of his being at Da- 
mafcus, by which was avillage called Aérabams houfe. But Chanaan being plagued with 
farniné , hee went into Egypt, and conforting him-felfe with the Prietts there , helped their 
knowledye,their piety and their policy very much:Hi/for.l:b.4. eAlexanaer faith hee liueda 
whileat Heliopolis , not profeffing the inuention of Aftronomy , but teaching it as Exoch had 
taughthim it, whohad ic from his fore-fathers, .4rtapanus faichthat they were called He- 
brewes of eLbrabam,that hee was twenty'yeares in Egypt and caughe King Pharetates Af- 
tronomy , and went from then¢e into Syrig. AZe/gin his booke againft the lewes, troubleth 
the truch of this hiftory very much , for he maketh but three generations from the deluge vne 
to Abraham : giuing him two wiues, an Egyptian, and a Chaldzan , of which Egyptian hee 
begor tweiue children,all Princes of Arabia,and that of the Chaldzan he had but //aac onely, 
who had twelue children alfo,whereof Afoy/es was the eldnit and Jofeph the youngeft. But in 
this cafethe Scriptutes are melt true, as they are moft dive. (¢) Athens was. | Their eftate 


“Was greater in time, then power , for intheir gieateft eatyce! they ruled onely the fea 


colt ( by reafon of their nauy ) from the inmoft Bofphorus , avout by the {eas of Aegeum and 
Pamphylia , and chat they held not aboue feauenty yeares, as Ly/iasfignifieth in his Epitaph, 
(4) All Afia.) Dionifins Alexandrinus {ayth that the Alfirian Monarchy ruled but a very {mall 
portion of Afia.(¢) Onely the Indians. | India is bounded on the Eaft wich the Eaft fea, AZar. 
del Zur: on the South with the Indian fea, Golfo ds Bengala:on the Weft with the riuer Indus, 
(the greateft of the world , faith Diodorss , excepting Nilus ) and on the North, with mount 
Emodus that confineth vpon Scythia, There are fome people called Indofcythians - Profomsy 
diuideth India into two, the India without Ganges , andthe India within. Of India many 
haue written, Herodotus, Diodorus,Strabo. Mela, Srephanus, Pliny Solinus, Ptolomy,ad others 
that wrot the Acts of Alexander the great,who led an army ouer moft of them parts,difcoucs _ 
ring more then cuertraueller did befide. But our mariners of late yeares haue made a more 

certaine difcouery of it all. Diodorus ,and Strabo write much of the happy fertility ofit in all 
chings;both of them borrowing of Eratofthenes and Megafthenes who foicurned with Sadre- 
cotus King of India , and recorded thefe things. (f) Semsiramss warred,| She had two battells 
againtt them, one'atthe riuer Indus, and wanne the field, the other farther in. ana loft it, and 
was beaten home: Diodor 6.3; Megaftenes ( in Strabo ) faith che Indians neuer fent army forth 
of their country , nor any cuer gat into theirs, but thofe of Hercules and Bacchus. Neither 
Sefoftris the Egyptian, nor Tharcon the Ethiopian , though they cameto Hercules his pillers 
through Europe, nor Nerbogodrofor (whome the Chaldeans in fome fort prefcr before Her- 
ésles , and who came alto tochefe pillers ) euer came into India. /dantyrfus alfo got into 
Eeypt, but neuer into India, Semiramis indeed came into it a little, but perifhied ere fhee gor 
out.Cyrns conquered the Maffageres onely , but medled not with India. (¢)But becaufe wee 
ksow,| In the Kings of Sicyonia, wee follow Exfebius, and Pasfanias, both Greekes : for the 
bookes of Varro and all the Latines concerning them , are-now lott, Nor do thefe tuo goe 
any Further chen the names of thofe Kings: becaufeindeed the Sycianians sa any 
oe ew itaphs, 


2 Lear. - OF THE CITIE OF GOD. _ 


ns Epitaphs , but onely the names of the dead, vpon their tombes , as Paw{anias declareth : Vy 
Kopertsexoss. Norcan any Latine author further vs in the affaires of Affiria : they medlenot 
with them. The Greckes take aleape almoft from Ninus to Sardanapalus,from the firft Aflirj- 
an Monarch'to the laft. Some name a few betweene them: but they do buename them: for 
this old monarchy they ehruft into the fabulous times, as Diovs/iws doth in his firft booke, 
Indeed it brought no fanious matter to pafle,for Nin#s hauing founded it,and Semiramis ha- 
uing confirmed it, all their fucceffors fell co floth and eafefuil delights , liuir.g cfofe sn their 
huge palaces, and taking theirpleafures without any controll ; that made (te/ias , that old 
writer , both to record all their names and the yeares of their recignes But of the other Kings, 
‘2 Greekes ‘and Latines wee fhall haue better ftore to choofe in. (4) Esrope..] The Sycionians . 
“ (faith Paxfansas ) bordering vpon Coryrithe , fay,that e£.gialews was their firft King , chathe” ene 
. -came out of that part of Peloponetus that iscalled Aegialos after him , and dwelt firft in the 
3 ‘Citty Aegializ , where the rower ftood then , where the temple of AZineruais now. This is 
te ‘Acgialia in Sicyqnia on the fea coaft : thereis Aegialiain Paphlagonia alfo ; and elfe-where. 
Some fay that Peloponefus was firft called e4egialia of this King, and then Apia of Ape, 
then Argos of that famous citty , andlaftly Peloponefus of fe/ops. But their opinion that 
make Acgialia to be a fea-coafting citty is better. This king they fay bepot Exrops,he Telchin 
father to Apis, who grew fo rich and mighty that before Pevops cameto Olympia, all the 
country within I{thmus was called Apias, afterhim, Heebegot Telexion , and he Egyrus, 
Egyrus,Thurimachus , and hee Lencippus, who had no fonne , but a daughter called Calchinia 
ypon whome Neptune begot Peratos, whome Lewcippus brought vp , and leftas King. He be- 
got Plemnens , and all Plemnens his children as foone as cuer they were bornc, and cryed, 
died pretently,vntill Ceres helped this mif-fortune , for fhee , comming into Acgialia , was ine 
tertayned by Plemnans , and brought vp achild ofhis called Orthopolis who atterwards had a 
daughter called Charyforthe,who had (ornus by Apollo ( as itis fayd ) and he nad two fonnes, 
Corax and Laomedon, ( orax dying lfulefle Epopexs came out of Theffaly iuft at that time,and 
got his kingdome,and in his time they fay warres were firft {ec on foote,peace hauing {wayed 
all the time before. Thus farre Pas{ansas. Europs raigned fourty yeares,arid in the twenty two 
yeare of hisreigne , was eibraham borne.(s )eZgzalens. | Thefonne of Jnzachus,the riuer of ; 
ner Melia, Oceanus his daughter, Thus fay fame Greekes. (k) After bis mother Se= cemricamis 
miramis. oe 
Diodorus faith mach of her 46. 3, She was the daughter ( faith hee ) of nymph 
Derceto by an ynknowne man,hir mother drowned her-felfe in the lake Afcaion,becaufe fhee 
had loft her mayden-head and left Semiramis her child among{t the rockes where the wild 
~ bealts fed her with their milke :and that her mother was counted a goddeffe witha womans 
head anda fifhes body, nor would the Sirians touch the fifh of that lake , but held them facred 
vnto goddefle Derceto. Now Symmas the Kings fheppard found Semirames and brought her 
vp,and being very Seautifull, Aemnon a noble man maried her,and then fhe came acquainted 
with King Ninxs,and taughthim how to fubdue the Bactrians,and how to take the citty Bac- 
tras which then he befeged:fo Minus admiring her wit and beauty, maried her, and dying left 
her Empreffe of Afia, vntill her yong fonne Meas came at age , fo fhee vndertoke the gouer- 
nmcnt, and kept it fourty two yeares. This now fome fay,but the Athenians(and Dion after 
them ) affirme that thee begged the fway of the power imperiall of her husband for fiue daies 
onely , which hee granting , fhe caufed him to be killed » of as othets fay , to bee perpetually 
imprifoned. er _ seine, See 
(1) They fay he flew. She was held woundcrous luftfull after men, and that fhe ftill mur-_ 
dered him whome fhe medled with : that fhee tempted her fonne, who therefore flew her, 
either for feare to fare as the others had, or elle in abhomination of fo beaftly an aét. The 
Chaldees fay fhee died not,but went quickevptoheauen, oe 
(w) Built Babilon} Babilon is botha country in Aflyria, and a Citie theretn, built by Semss- 
ramss,as Diodorus, Strabo, Inftine, and all the ancient Greekes and Latines held. But fo/e- 
phus, Exfebius, Marcellinus, and others both Chriftians and Tewes fay , that it was buile by: 
the progenic of Noah,and onely répaired and fortified by. Semiramis , who walled it about 
with fuch walles as ate the worlds wonders, This Oxéd fignifieth faying. way eee tp 
| | : Ae aS ee ee - Lokksdibus 


ae . a ee . a a: 3 
G2 8 a ee : ; . ram) 


646 | 


SAINT AV GVSTINE. | Canes. 


Coftitibus muris cinxiffe Semiramis urbem. 
Semiramis guirt it with walles of Brick. 


And this verfe Hicrome citeth to confirme this, In Of, Some hold that Be/ws her father in 

law built it. Some, that hee laide che foundations onely. So holdes Dioaorxs,out of the Egip- 
tian monuments. eAlexander faith that the firft Beles , whome the Greekes call xedves, 
reigned in Babilon,and that Be/us the fecond , and Chanaans were his two fonnes. But hee 


- followeth Expolemss in allotting the building of Babilon to thofe that remained after che 


Telexion. 


deluge. Ewf: de pr. Enan . isb.8° Chaldza was all ouer with water (faith eAbydenus in Exfe- 
biums de prep.Enang.li.10, ) And Belus dreined it drye, and built Babilon : the walles whereof 
being ruined by flouds, Nabocodronofer repaired, and thofe remained ynto the time of the 
Macedonian Monarchie; and then hee reckoneth the ftate of this King, impertinent vnto this 
place. Augu/fize maketh Nemrod the builder of Babilon , as you read before, Heare what 
Plinie faith :4ib,6. Babilon the chiefe (itty of (1 baldea,and long famous in the world,and a great 


ae of the country of Affyria was called Babilonia,after i,the walles were two hundred foote high, 


and fifty foote brode : enery foote being three fingers larger then ours,Euphrates ranne throuch the 
midst of it, Gc. There was another Babilon in Egipt built by thofe whome Sefofris broughe 
from Babilon in Affyria,into Egipt,to worke ypon thofe madde workes ofhis,the Piramides, 
(n) This fonne }His mother brought him vp tenderly among{t her Ladyes, and fo hee liued a 
quiet Prince,and came feldome abroade,wherevpon the other Kings his fucceflors , pct vp an 
vfe totalke with few in perfon, but by an interpretour , and ro rule all by deputies. Diodor. 
Iuftin. (0) Ninus} Some call him Zameis, fonne to Nixus, (as lofephus and Enfebins and - 
fome Ninins, (p ) Telexton | In thetranflated Exfebius itis Selchis,whome hee faith reigned 
twenty yeares. In fome of Axguftines olde copies it is Telxton , and in fome,7 halafion,but it 


muft be Telexion, for fo itis in Pasfantas, 


What Kings reigned in Alrie , and Sicyonia, in the hundreth yeare of 
Abrahams «¢ge,when l{aac ws borne according to the 
promife: or at the birth of Tacoband Bfau. 


Cuar. 3. 


N his time alfo did Sera being old, barren ,and paft hope of children, bring 

forth //4ac vnto Ss to the promife of God. And then reigned 
(4) Aralius the fifeKing of Affyria. And //aac being three {core yeares of age, 
had (6) Efas and Jacob,both at one birth of Rebecca, Abraham his father being yee 
liuing,and of the age of one hundred and fixtie yeares who liued fifteene yeares 
longer and then dyed, (¢) Xerxes the older , called alfo Bs/ens, reigning the fea- 
uenth King of Affyria, (4) and Thuréachus (called by fome Thurimachus ) the 
feauenth of Sicyon. Now the kingdome of the Argiues began with the time of 
thefe fonnes of J/aecjand Inachus was the firft King there. But this wee may noc 
forget out of Varro, that the Sycionians vfed to offer facrifices at the tombe of 


the feauenth King Tharimachas. But (¢) Armuamitres being the eight King of Af- 


fyria,and Leucippus of Sycionia,and ( f ) sachue the firlt King of Argos,God pro- 
mifed the land of Chanaan vnto J/aac for his feede, as hee had done vnto 4éra- 
hams before,and the vniuerfall bleffing of the nations therein alfo : and this pro- 
mife was thirdly made vnto /acob,afterwards called J/rael, Abrahams grand-child, 
in the time of Belocus the ninth Affyrian monarch , and Phoromeus ,Inachus his 
fonne, the fecond King of the Argiues,Lewcippus reigning as yet in Sycione. In 
this Phoroneus his time, Greece grew famous for diuerfe good lawes and ordi- 
nances : but yet his brother Phegous, after his death built a temple ouer his 
tombe,and made him to be worfhippedas a God , & caufed oxen to be facrificed 


vnto 


" morie and fame of their nation, 


Lrs.r 8. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 


658 


vnro him , holding him worthy of this honour, I thinke,, becaufe in that car 


the kingdome which he held (for their father diuided the whole betweene them) 
hee fet vp otatories to worfhip the gods in ; and rdught the true courfe and ob- 
feruation of moneths and yeares : which the rude ‘people admiring in him; 
thoughre tharat his death hee was become 4 God, or elfe would hate it tobee 
thought fo. Fot {6 they fay (f) that Js was thie daughter of znachus {hee chat af 
terwards was called ( ¢ ) 74s,and honored fora great goddefle in Egipt: though 
fome write that (4) fhee came out of Ethiopia to peercacnt of Epipr , and 


becaufe thee was mighty and gratious in her reigne , and taughe her fubie@s 


« 


‘many good Artes, they gane her this honour after her death, and thar with — 


fuch diligent refpe&, chat it was death to fay fhee had euer beene mortalft ose 


—_ 


“LVIVES. Bae: 


A Rats (4) ]In the old copies. Avgins sin Exfebine, Analins, fonne to Arrixs the laft King 
before him, hee reigned fortie yeares. The fonne in Affyria euer more fucceeded the fa- 
ther, Celleins. (6) Efan and lacob | Of Lacob, Theedetus, a gentile , hath writeen an clepant 
poemand of the Hebrew actes. And eArtapanns , and one ‘Philo, not the lew, but anor 


ther, Alexander Polybifter alfo , who followeth the Scriptures , all thofe wrote of Jacob | 
(c ) Xerxes the elder | Aralins his fonne: hee reigned forty yeares, There were two more Xe 


Xerxes, but thofe were Perfian Kings: the ficft Darias Hidappis his fonnc,and the fecond fues 
ceflor to eArtaxerxes Long-band, reigning brit a few moneths. The firft of thofe fent the 
huge arniies into Greece. Xerxes in the Perfian tongue, is.a wattiour,and Artaxerxes a great 
warriour, Herodot. is Erato, The booke that beareth Berofashis name , faith that the eight 
King of Babilon was called Xeres,furnamed Ba/exs,and reigned thirty yeares,that they cal. 
led him Xerxes, Victor, for that hee wone twife as many nations to his Empire, as Aralins 
ruled, for hee was a ftoute and fortunate fouldiour, and enlarged his kingdome almoft ynto 
India. Thus faith that author,what euer hee is.En/2bists for Balens readeth Balanens: Caraviiog 


xes, 


in Greeke, is Balzearins, belonging to the bathe. (d) Thuriachus ] Enfebsus hach ir, Tire Therita: 


machus,and fo hath the Brages old. coppy : but erronioufly ,as ic hath much more, Egyr: 
(faith Pasfanias ) was Thelexions fonne, and Thurimachus his.fonne, in the feauenth yeare 
of whofe reigne //aacs fonnes were borne. (¢) eSrmamsitres| He reigned thirty eight yeares, 
and Lexcippxs,the fonne of Thariachns forty fiue,our counterfeit Berofss calleth him Arma- 
trites. | at | a 

poli) reaching from Syila’s promontory vnto Cape Malea, and the Myrtoan fea (now called 
‘Mar de Mandria) conteining the Citties Argolis, Argos,and Mycenas,the riuers of Inachus, 
and Erafinus,and ae of Lycaonia, Here did /zachms reigne at firft, and gaue his name tothe 
riuer that fprings from mount Lyrczus. Some thinke that both hee and Phorenens reigned at 


Argos in Theffaly,buethe likeneffe of the name decciueth them. For there is Argos indeed 
in fheffaly,called Pelafgis by Homer, and there is Pelafgis in Poloponefus, and Achzi, and 
Achini in both countries. Strabo faith that Pefops came into Apia with the Phthiots thae 
are now in Theflaly ; and gaye Peloponefus his name afterwards: gnd thar there.were fome 
Pelafgi, that were the firft inhabitants of Traly about the mouth of Po, and fome Theffalians 


chus, » 


Cf) Inachas \ Peloponefus there is the Argolican gulfe( now called Golfo di Naa Tnachis, 


thatinhabired Vmbtia. But Pela(gws was the fonne of Niobe, Phorenexs his daughter and Pelafgus 


Tome sand from him came the Achiues and the Pelopennefians that firlt peopled Aemonia 
( afterwards called Theffaly ) in great multitudes. Diony[: Halicarn. Achens , Phthins and 
Pela(eus were the fonnes of Neptune and Lariffa,came into Aemon ia,chafed out the Barbari- 
ans, and diuided it into three parts, each one leauing his name vnto his fhare , J thipke be- 
caufe they would continue the memory ef their old countrey, hauing left Achaia, Pelafpis, 
Phehia,and Lariffa the Argitie tower,at Argos, ‘here they wotild renew the namiés for the me- 


Fiue 


2 ‘ pa amet Seip ali agi es 


660 SAINT AVGVSTINE. . Ceanaa 


Fiue ages afrer did the Locrians and e£tolians (then cafled the Leleges and Curetés ) by che 
leading of Dexcalion, Prometheus bis fonne,chafe thefe Pelafgiues into the Iles of thee gean 
{ea,and the fhores neare adiacent.Thofe that light in Epyrus,paffed foone after intoJtaly Ho- 
mer inhis caralogue of che Greekes thips {heweth plaine that thefe names were confcunded, 
Bur we are'too Jong in this point. ‘Dsony/ins maketh the Argiue fate che eldeft of all Greece, 
_ Ip Chron, Axion and others (the moft) follow him , making e£gialeus King of Sycion to bee 
Tnachus in Phoroveus his time,& the firlt founder of that tate then, Now Jnachws they fay was 
Ho man but a ricer onely, begotten by Oceanus, and father to Phoroxeus , and fome fay, ynto 
t£gialeus allo. Phoronens being ‘made Iudge betweene Juno and Nepinne concerning their 
controucrfie ab ~ut lands,together with Cephifus, Inachus,and Affecioniudged on Inno’s fide, 
and there-vpon fhe was called the Argiue J#no,as louing Argos deerely,and hauing her moft 
~ ancienPremple betweene Argos and Mycenas, Phoronens did make lawes to decide ccntro- 
Phoroncus, Uttfies among't his people,and therefore is called a Iudge. Some thinke that forwns, the name 
” of the pleading place,came from his name: how truly, looke they to that. He drew the wan- 
dring people into a Citic ( faith Panfanias ) and called it Phoronicum . The Theleifians 
and Carfathians made warre vpon him , whome hee ouer-threw, and droue them to feckea 

new habitation by the fea, At length they came to Rhodes, called then Ophinfa , where th 
lo feated them-felues a hundred and feauenty yeares before the buil ding of Rome.Oref. (f) Jo} 
con Tone ( they fay } rauifhed her,and leaft Iwo fhould know it,turned her into a Cowe,and gaue 
her to Sano, who put ber to the keeping of the hundred eyed Argus and this Cowe was Tfise 
Herodetus, out of the Perfian Monuments relateth , that tHe Phenicians that traffiqued vnto 
_ Argos,ftole her thence and brought her into Ezipt, which was the firft iniurious rape, before 
_» Hellens, Diodorus faith thar Inachns fentanoble Capraine called (yrans to fecke her,charging 
him neuer co returne without her. ‘Panfanias maketh her the daughter of Jafius the fixt Are 
gine King,and not of Jxachas, Phoroneus hee faith begot 2Arges, who fiucceeded his grand- 
acher, and gaue the Citty the name of e4rgos ( being before called Phoroxicum ) and this 
Argos begot Phorbas, hee Triopas, and Triopas , Jafius and eAgenor. Ualer, Flaccus calleth Ie, 
Jnachis,and the Iafian vergin,the firft becaufe of the nobility of Jxachus, the kingdoms foun- 
der,the later,becaufe Ja/ius was her father, eArgorant.4. Aud this reconcileth the times beft. 
For if fhee were Jnachus his daughter,how could fhee live with Kin & Triopas,as Enfebius faith 
fhee did? In Chron. cy} De prep. Evang. !.10. for hee liued foure hundred yeares after Jwa. 
«bus, being the feauenth King of Argos. Though Exfebiasmake one Jun in Inachus his time, . 
" " to faile to Egipr by fea (1 Chron.) but not to {wim ouer the fea. Fer they had a feaft in Egipe - 
"' “forthe honour of //s her thip.Lattant,lib.1.And therefore the was held the faylers goddeffe, 
guiding them in the fe. Goe(faith Lane to Mercwry in Lucian ) guide lun through the fea vate 
Egipt,ee call her fis, o let them account of her asa deity : let her cary Nilus as fhe lift,ch guide all 
the voyages by fea.cre. My worfhip ( faith Lfs ofher fealt,in Apuleius) [hall bee eterzall, asthe 
oe dy folewerb the night becanfe t calme the temspef}s,and guide the [Lips through the Stormy feas,the 
 ficfh fruites of whole voyages my pricfts offer mee, (g ) [fis \In Egipe they pi@ured her with 
hornes. Herodot-Diod. Sycul, Some faid fhee was the daughter of Saturne and Rhea,who was 
marryed to Her brother O/yris,that is,/«no to Lowe. Others called her Ceres,(deurspain Greeke). 
becaufe the inuented husband: y and fowing of corne, and thofe called Ofpris,; Diony fis, Some 
called her the Moone, and Ofpris the Sunne : for Dsodorus will not haue Jo to bee Lnachus his 
daughter, Sernins faith [fis is the genius of Egipt, fignifying the ouer-flowing of Nilus, by 
g the horne he beareth in her right hand,and by the bucket thee hath in her left, the plenty of 
all humaine neceffaries. Indeed in the Egiptian tongue, /fis is earth, and fo they will haue //'s 
tobe.ln Aeneid.8. (4) She came out of Ethiopia | Whence Egipt had all her learnin ¢, lawes, 

, policies,religion,and often-times colonies {:nt from thence. 4 


Of the times of lacob and hisfonnelofeph, Cuar. 4. 


B Aleus being the tenth King of A llyria,and Ade/Jappas (4)(otherwife (b Jcalled 
Cephifws, but yet both thefe names were by feueral authors vfed for one man) 
being che ninth of Sycjonia, and (c) pis the third of Argos,d/aec dyed : being 
ee 3 undred 


_ 


L118. | OF THE CITIE OF GOD. ~ 66n 


hundred and eighty yeares old, leauing hisfonnes at the ages of a hundred and 
twenty yeares : the yonger Jacob, belonging to Gods Cérty, and the elder to the 
worlds. The yonger had twelue fonnes, one whereof called Jo/eph , his brothers 
folde vnto Marchants going into Egipr, in their grand-father Fede tine. Jofeph 
liued (by his humility ) in great fauour and aduancement with Pharao,being now 
thirty yeares old. For he interpreted the Kings dreames , fore-telling the feauen 
plentious yeares, and the feauen deare ones, which would confume the pienty 
of the other : and for this the King fet him at liberty (being before imprifoned 
for his true chaftity,in not confenting to his luftfull my treffe jbut fled and left his 
raiment with her,who here-vpon falily complained toher husband of him) and 
afterwards hee made him Vice-roye of all Egypt. And in the fecond yeareof 
{carcity, Jacob came into Egipt with his fonnes , being one hundred and thirty. 

eares old,ashe told the King. Jo/eph being thirty nine when the King adiianced 
him thus,cthe 7. plentifull yeares, and the two deare ones being added to his age. 


L.VIVES. 

Mi Elarpems (a) | Pasfasias nameth no fuch : faying Lencyppus had no fonne, but Chalciniz, Mefappus, 
| one daughter,who had Perattus by tide » whom his grand-father Leacippys brou ghe 
vp,and lef inthroned in his kingdome.Ea/ebins faith AZefappas reigned forty feauen yeares If 
it were AZefappus,then doubtleffe it was Cadcénias husband,of whom mount Mefappuis in Bre 
otia and Mefapia( otherwife called Calabria )in Italy ,had theirnames. Virgil maketh him 
Neptunes fonne,a tamer of horfes,and invulnerable. £neid.7. (b) (ephifus) A riuer in Boe- Cephitas, 
otia, in whofe banke ftandeth the temple of 7bemss , the Oracle that taught Denca/ion and 
Pyrrha tow to reftore mankinde. It runnes from Pernaflus chorow the countries of Beeotia, 
and the Athenian cérritory., And (WMefappus either had his names from this nuer and that 
mount, or they had theirs from him,or rather (moft likely) the mount had his name, and hee 
had the rivers , becaufe ic ranne through his natiue foile. (c) e4pis] Hee is nor in Pas/anige Apis, 
among ft the Argiue kings: but amongft the Sycionians , and was there {0 ritch, that all the 
countrey within Ifthmus, bare his riame , before Pelops came. But Exfebsus ( out of the moft. 
Greeke» ) feateth him in Argos. | 


Of Apis the —Argine King,called Serapis in Egipt.and there adored > 
: asadeity, CHar. 5. - oe 

_ This time did pis king of Argos faile into Egipt , and dying there, was 
called Serapis the greateft God of Egipt. The reafon of the changing his 
name, faith Varvo,is this : a dead mans coffin ( whichall do now call (5) capnopdyoy) 
is voit alfo in Greeke: fo at firft chey worfhipped at his coffin and tombe, ere his 
temple. were builc, calling him ar firft Sorofapis, or Sorapis: and afterwards (by 
change of a letter,as is ordinary) Serapis. And they made a lawe,that who-foeuer: 
fhould fay hee had beenea man, fhould dye the death. And becaufe that in all 
the (c ) temples of Js and Serapis, there was an Image with the finger laid vpon 
the mouth ,as commanding filence, this was (faith Varro ) to fhew them that 
they muft not fay that chofe two were euer mortall. And (d) the axe which 
Egypt (being wonderoufly and vainly feduced) (¢ ) nourifhed in all pleafures 
and fatneffe vnto the honor of Serapis ; becaufe they did not worthip him in a 

coffin,was not called Serapés but _40is : which Oxe being dead, and they feeking . 
him, and finding another, flecked of colour hee was: heré they thigh 


a re re 
662 SAINT AVGVSTINE. | Cuar.s. 


they had gotten a great God by thg foore. It was notfuch an hard matter in- 
deed for the deuills , to imprinte the imagination of {uch a fhapein any Cowes 
phantafie, at her time of conception , to hauea meane to fubuert the foules of 
men , and the Cowes imagination wonld furely model the conception into fuch 
a forme, as(¢ ) Jacobs ewes did and his (hee goates , by feeing the party-colored 
ftickes, for that which man can doe with true collours,the Diuell can do with ap- 
paritions,and fo very eafily frame fuch fhapes. 


LVIVES. 


Offris: A T (4) this time.|Diodorus.ib,x.reciteth many names of Ofjris as Diony/ius,Serapis, Ioue 

Ammon, Pan,& Pluto.T acstus arguing Serapis his original, faith that fome thought him to 

be e£/culapius , the Phifitian-god : and others, tooke him for O/yris,Egypts ancientcft deity. 

lib, 20. Mucrobins taketh him forthe funne, and Jfs forthe earth. Te Serapim Nilus ( faith 

Marlanus to the funne) A¢emphis veneratur Ofyrim: Nilus adoreth thee as ferapts,and Mem- 

phis,as Offris. Some held Serapis the genius of Egypt, making it fertile and abundant, His 

ftatues(faith Sidas’) Theophilus Archbifhop of Alexandria tooke downe, in the time of The- 

odofius the great, This pod fome called Joue,fome Nilus,( becaufe of the meature that he had 

in his hand, and the cubite , defigning the meafures of the water. ) and fome,/ofeph, Some fay 

thete was one e4pis , arich King of Memphis, who in a great famine ‘elecued all Alexandria 

at his proper coft and charges , where-ypon they erected a Temple co him when hee was dead, 

and kept an Oxe therein, (for atype of his husbandry ) hauing certaine {pots on his backe, 

and this Oxe was called by hisname , Apis. His tombe wherein he was buried , was remoucd 

to Alexandria, and fo. him-felfe of copes , and Apis , was called Sorapis, andafterwards, Sera- 

pis. Alexander built him a goodly temple.Thus much out of S#edas and the like is in Ruffinss, 
Ecelef. Hift.lib.t 1. The Argiues King (faith Euv/ebins Prep.ib.1 0 out of eS rsfippus his hiftor 

of Arcadia /ib, 2.) called Apis,built Memphis in Eyypt: whome ees Argiue calleth 

Sarapis : and this man ( we know ) is worfhipped in Egyptas a god. But Nimphodorus, Am- 

phipolitanus de legib. Apatic. Ib.3. faith that the Oxeé called Apis , dying, was put into a coffin 

«(called copes in Greeke) and fo called firft Scrapis, andthen Serapis.. Theman Apis, was 

the third King after Jnachus. Thus farre Enfebixs,( 6 ) sapxezayw, ] Thatis, the deuciner of 

flefh. Therefore Paufanias,Porphyry, Suidas, and other Greekes, call him not Sorapis , but Sa- 

vapis , apes isa cheft,an Arke,or acoffin. (¢ ) Temples of. | I/is and Ofyris were buried at Nifa as 

fome thinke ( fayth Diodorus lib, 1 )A citty in Arabia, where two pillers were erc&ted for 

monuments one for her and another for him,and epitaphs vpon them contayned their aéts and 

inuentions. Bnet chat which was in the Priefts hands might neuer come tolight for feare of 

revealing the truth : and dearely mufthee pay for it that publifhed it. This God that laid his 

finger on his lipsin figne of filence, hight Harpocrates,varro de ling lat.lib. 3. where he affir- 

Marpocta@es mech chat //s and Serapis were the two great Gods, Earth and heauen, This Harpocrates 

eAAufonsns calleth Sigalion , of etna», to be. filent.Pliny,and (atulles mencion him often when 

they note a filenc fellow , and his name is prouerbiall,P/wtarch.(lib.de 1f:& OfprMfaich hee was 

their fonne gotten by Ofjris vpon Ls after his death : and becaufe the child died as foone as 

it was borne, therefore they picture it with the finger on the mouth , becaufe it neuer {pake. 

Ilike not this interpretation , it is too harfh and idle. The ftatue fignifted that fome-what 

Angerona, was to bec kept fecret , as the goddefle Angerona { inthe like fhape ) did at Rome. A¢acrob. 

Onid. Metam.9. | : 


Santtague Bubaftis,variisque coloribus Apis. 
Quique premst vocem,digitoqne filentia fuadet. 


Saint J/s and that party colour'd Oxe, 
‘And he whofe lips his hand in filence lockes. 


To this it may be Perfins alluded faying digito compefce labelli Jay your finger on your mouth. 
_ | | = (d)The 


Lini8. © OF THE CITIE OF GOD. ee. 


a 


(d) The Oxe | Apis the Oxe. Noman I thinke Greeke or Latine, eucr wrote of the Egyptian — 
aftaires,but he bad vp this Oxe: but efpecially Herodo.Diodo.Stra. Plutar.Eufeb.Suidas,Jarro, Apis. 
Mela, Pliny Solinus, and Marcellinus, Hee was all black,but for a fquare fpotte of whitein his 
fore-head, (faith Herodotus) on his right fide (faith Pény) : hishornes bowed like aCref- 
cent : for he was facred vnto the Moone, Aarcellinus, Hee had the.fhape of an Eagle vpon 
his back,and alumpe vpon his congue, like a black-beerle , and his taile was all growne with 
forked haites. When hce was dead, they fought another with great forrow, neuer ceafing yn- 
till they had found a new Apa like him in all refpects, Him did Egipt adore as the chiefe god, 
and(as (Macrobins {aith ) with aftonifhed veneration , nor might hec liue longer then a fet 
time, if hee did, the priefts drowned him = (¢) Nowrifhed | At Memphis ¢ faith Strabo) was a 
temple dedicated vnto _4pis ,and thercby a goodly parke or enclofure , before which was an 
Half,and this enclofure wasthe dams of _4pis, whereinto hee was now and then letten in, to 
foort him-felfe,and for ftrangers to fee him. His place where hee laie,was called the myfticall 
bed, and when he went abroade, amultitude of vfhers were cuer about him : all adored this 
Oxe-god, the boyes followed him in a fhole, and hee himfelfe now and then bellowed forth 
his prophecies. No man that was a ftranger might come into this temple at Meinphis, bur 

_ oncly atburials, ( £) They did not worf!-sp \ Some did draw this worfhip of the Ore from the 
inftitution of J/s and Ofjris, for the vfe that they found ef this beaft in tillage. Some againe 
fay Ofyris himfelfe was an Oxe,& J/s a Cow, either becaufe of Jo,or vpon fome other ground, 
Some fay befides (as Diodorus telleth vs ) that Ofyris his foule went into an Oxe, and remai- 
neth continually.in the Oxe Apés, and at the drowning of this,goeth into the next. Some af> 
firme that //s hauing found Ofyris his members, difperfed by Zyphon;put them into a wodden 
Oxe coucred with an Oxes hide : fo that the people feeing this , beleeued that Ofyris was be- 
come an Oxe,and fo began toadore that, as if it had beene him-felfe. This was therefore the 
liuing Ofyrss, but the body that lyeth coffined in the temple , is called Serapés , and worfhip- 
ped asthe dead Ofyris. (4) Iacobs Eewes| Gen.30. Of this I difcourfed elfe-where. The LXX, 
doe tranflate this place confufedly. Hserome vpon Genefis explaineth it. 


The Kings of Argos and A(fyria,at the time of lacobs death. 
Cuap. 6, 


Pis the King of Argos (not of Egipt ) dyed in Egipt, (a) Arens his fonne 
fucceeded him in his kingdome, and from him camethe name of the Ar- 
giues. Forneitherthe Citty nor the countrey bare any fuch name before his 
tine. He reigning in Argos,and (6 ) Eratus in Sicyonia, Ba/ews ruling as yet in 
Affyria, /e0b dyed in Egypr, being one hundred forty {eauen yeares inage, ha- 
uing bleffed his fonnes and Nephewes at his death , and prophecied apparantly 
of CHRIST, faying in the blefling of Judah; The Scepter {hall not depart from Gen.49, 
ludah, zor the law-giner from betweene his feete, untill(¢ ) that come which is pre~ 
mifed him» And(d }heefball bee the nations expectation. Now in (e) Argas his 
time Greece began to know husbandry and tillage , fetching feedes from 
others. For ‘Argus atter his death was counted a God, and honoured with teme 
ples and facrifices. Which honor a priuate man one Homogyrus, who was {laine 
by thunder, had before him, becaufe hee was the firft that euer yoaked Oxen 
tothe plough. | 2. & - cae. a 


® 
ELS LTE ET 


RS COPED TS WUE ge ete ee ES Seer REE. -eE -S ETE” Or paUinenSE copren 
Ps 5 ° : 


L VIVES. _ 


Reus ( a) his fonne | by Niobe, Phoroneus daughter: fome call him “pis. 7 t might bee Argus 
Apis that begot him of Niobe, and was reckoned for a King of Argos, becaute Ke ruled 
. Lil 2 for 


664 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. C wap.7.& 8. 


for his fonne vntill hee came to age: and then departed into Egypr, leauing his fonneto his 


_ owne. Exfebins faith hee left the kingdome to his brother eZgsalus , hauing reigned feauen- 


tic yeares. There was another Argus, Areffors fonne, who kept Jo, Jenoes Cowe,in Egipt : and 
another alfo, furnamed Amphion,whilom Prince of Pylis & Orcbomene in Arcadia.(b) Eratus} 
Peratus, faith Paufanias, and fonne to Neptune and Chaleinia, Leucippus his daughter. Exfe~ 
bins callech him Heratus , hee reigned forty feauen yeares. (¢) Untill that which 1s pramifed } 
So read the Septuagints : but Herome readeth; Untill bee come that 1s to. bee fent. The Hebrew, 
Shiloh. (a) Hee {hall bee \Some copies leaue out frail bee, and fo doth the text of the |XX. 
(¢) In Argus his time |For Ceres came thether in Phenneus his reigne, a little after Peratus 
and fhee they fay was the firft chat euer taught the Athenians husbandry. 


in what Kings time lofeph dyed in Egype. 
Cuar. 7. 


| N Mamitas (a) his time, the twelfth Affyrian King, and (b) Phenneus his, the 


eleuenth King of Sicyonia(—4rgus being aliue in Argos as yet ) Jofeph dyed 
in Egypt: being a hundred & ten yeares old: after the death of him,Gods people 
remaining in Egypt,increafed wonderfully for a hundred forty fiue yeares toge- 
ther,vntill all chac knew Jofeph were dead. And then becaufe their great augmen- 
tation, was fo enuied, and their freedome {ufpected , a great and heauy bondage 
was laide vpon them, in the which neuertheleffe they grew vp ftill , for all chac 
they werefo perfecuted, and kept vnder,and at this time the famePrinces ruled 
in ‘Affyriaand Greece,whom we named before. | 


L. VIVES. 


MY Amitas (4) bis }So doth Exfebise call him,but faith that hee was but the eleuenth King 
of that Monarchie. Hee reigned thirty yeares. (6) Plemsnens | So doth Paufansas write 
this Kings name s hee ruled,as Exfebius faith, forty cight ycarcs. 


What Kings lined when Moy {es was borne: and what 
Goddes the Pagans had as then. 


Crap. 8. 


| [NC a )Saphrus his time,the fourteenth Affyrian King, (6) Orthopolus being then 


the twelfth of Sicyon, and (¢) Cria(us the fiftof Argos (d) Adeyfes was borne in 
Egypt,who led the people of God out of their flauery ,wherein God had excer- 
cifed their paciences during his pleafure.In the afore-faid Kings times (¢) Prome- 
theus (as {ome hold) liued,who was fayd to make men of earth , becaufe he (f) 
taught them wifdome fo excellently well (g) yet are there no wife men recor- 
ded to liue in his time. (4) His brother At/as indeed is faid to haue beene a great | 

Aftronomer, whence the fable arofe of his fupporting heauen vpon his fhoul- 

ders; Yet there is an huge mounraine of that name,whofe height may feeme to 

an ignorant eye to hold vp the heauens. Arid now began Grecce to fill the ftories 
with fables, but from the firft vnto ( #) Ceerops his time (the king of Athens) in 
whofe reigne Athens got that name,and A4o/es lead Ifracl out of Egipt: fome of 
| a | a | the 


0 eee Qe. Cup eed ag. 


Liser8. OF THE CETIE OF GOD. 665 


—- 


iin cedhithie i aii 


the dead Kings were recorded for Gods , by the vanity and cuftomary fuperfti- 
tion of the Greekes. As Atelantonice, Crias his wife ( & ) Phorbas therefonne,the 
fixt king of Argos, and the fonneof (/) Triopas the feauenth King , ( #) Ja/us, 
and ( 2)Sthelezas or Sthelenus,or Sthenclus(for hee is diuerfely written)the ninth: 
And( o)in thefe times alfoliued Adercury, Altas his grandchild,borne of Afaéa his 
daughter : the ftory is common. Hee wasa perfect Artift in many good inuenti- 
ons ,and thercfore was beleeued (at leaft men defired he fhould be beleeued) 
co bee a deity.(p ) Hercules liued after this, yet was he about thofe times of the 
Argiues : fome thinke heeliued before Afcrewry, but I thinke they are deceiued. 
But how-fo-euer, the graueft hiftories that haue written of them (gq) auouch 
.them both tobe men, and(r )that for the good that they did man-kinde in mat- 
ter of ciuillity or other neceflaries to humane eftare, were rewarded with thofe 
divine honors. (/) But CMinerus was long before this , for thee ( they fay ) ap- 
preaed in Ogigins histime, (¢) atthelake Triton, inavirgins thape , where- 
vpon fhe was called Trytonsa : awoman indeed of many good inuentions , and 
the likelyerto be held a goddeffe, becaufe her originall was vnknowne, for (#) 
~ that of Jones brayne ts ablolucely poetique, and no way depending vpon hiftory. 
There was in deed ( x )a great deluge in Ogégéns his time, not {0 greatas that 
wherein all perifhed faue thofeinthe Arke( for that, neither Greeke author 
(7 )nor Latine do mention )but greater then that which befell in Ducalons daies. 
But cf this Ogégsus his time, the writers haue nocertainty:, for where Varrobe- 
gins his booke, I {hewed before : and indeed he fetcheth the Romaines origi- 
nall no further then the deluge chat befell in Ogég/us histime. But our ( z ) chro- Ogigias, 
niclers,Ex/ebsus firft,and then Héerome , following other more ancient authors 
herein,record Oggias his Delugeto haue fallen in thetime of Phoronews the fe- 

cond King of Argos , three hundred yeares after the time before faid. But how- 
foeuer,this is once fure,that in( 4 )Cecrops his time(who was either the builder or 
reftorer of Athens ) Msmerua was there adored with diuine honors. | 


L. VIVES. 


S Aphrus. (4) | Machanell ( faith Exfebins) reigned iuft as long ashis father ACanitus, saphrus, 
«J fourty yeares; and Ipherens fucceeded him and raigned twenty yeares and in the eigh- _ 
teenth yeare of his raigne was AZoyfes borne in Egypt. ( 6 ) Orthopolus. | Orthopolss faith Ex-Orthopolis, 
febius, and Paxfanias , making him the fonne of Plemnexs whome (eres brought vp. The 
ftory of which you had before, | | | | — 
(¢)Cryafus \Pyrafus faith Panfanias he rayned fifty foureyeates.(d) Moyfes was borne] The WIi-Meyles, 
ters apre not about Moy/es birth. Porphiry faith (from Saxchoniata)that he liued in Semiramis 
time : No, but in facta: his time, faith eAppion( out of Prolomy Mendefius the Prieft) Amofis 
being then King of Egypt.Polemon ( Hif?.Gre, ) maketh him of latter times : Making che peo- 
ple he led,to depart out of Egypr,andto fettlein Syria,in the time of 4pis,Phoroneus his fonne. 
Tacianus eA ffrius brings amany feuerall opinions of men concerning this poynt,fome ma- 
king Afoyfes elder then the Troyan watre, and fome equall with ic. Buc the arguments which 
he him-felfe brings proueth himto haue beenc before it. His words you may read in Exfeb, 
de prep.enang.lib.10. Numenins the Philofopher calleth Afofes Mufans , and Artapanus faith 
that the Greekes called him fo, and that AZeris , the daughter of (hexephris King ot Egypt, has 
uing no child herfelfe,adopted him for her fon,and fo he came to ereathonorinEgipt,becaufe 
of his diuine knowledge &inuentions in matter of learning and gcivernment.( e )Promethens] prometheus 
So faith Exfeb.from others, Affricanns I thinke , who maketh Promethess to line ninety foure 

3 EN” | | yeares 


ao 


666 


Alats, 


SAINT AV GVSTINE. | Cuard 


yeares after Ogigins. Porpbiry putteth Arias and himin Jxachns his time. But Prometheus 
was fonne to Japellis, and Afia. Hefied calls his mother (lymene. His failing out with lone 
(faith Higin.bift.Celeft.and many other do touch at this)grew vpon this caufe:being to imal in 
facrifices to offer preat offrings,& tlie poore being not able to offord them, Promethens{uttely 
agreed with /owe that halfe of their facrifice onely fhould bee burnt;the reft fhold be referued 
for the vfe of men:/owe confented. Then offers Promethens two Bulls ynto Jowe and put:cth ail 
their bones , vnder one of the skins , and all thei: lel vnderthe other, and then bad Sone to 
choofe his part. Jove, a good plaine dealing God, looking for no coufnage , tooke chat was 
next to hand, & light on the bones:thereat being angry,he touke away the fire fr6 mankind, 
thar they could facrifice no more. But Prometheus vfing his ordinary trickes , tole a cane fuil 
of the fre celeftiall , and gaue it vnco man, where-vpon hee was bound to (asca/xs , and an 
Eagle fet to feed continually vpon his liuer euer growing asaine. Some fay that Premethens 
made chofe creatures who haue fetche Jone downe fo i , women. Prometheus his come 
plaine(in Lacian ) is thus anfwered by Vulcan and Mercury: Thou confonedft louc in fharing, 
thon froleft the fire , thou madeft men, and efpectally wemen, For fo itis faid , that he made inen 
of clay , and then putlife into them by the fire which hee had ftolne from owe , where-vpon 
({ath Horace ) commeth man-kinds difeafes and feuers. Sermins faith that AZierna woun- 
dred at this man, this worke of Promserhens , and promifed to perfit it in ail it lacke : and that 
Promethexs affirming that hee knew not what was belt for it,fhe tooke him vp to heauen, and - 
fetting him by the fonns Chariot,gaue hima cane full of the fire , and fent his downe to man 
with it. Hefod in one place toucheth at that ftory of Higinus, faying that/ene tooke away the 
fire from man, and Prometheus got itagaine: to reuenge which iniury Vis/can by Joxes com- 
mand made Pandora ( awoman endowed with all heauenly guifts and therefore called Pane 
dora ) and fent her downe into che earth by Merenry, to be giuen asa guift vaco Epimerbens, 
Prometheus his brother - and being receaued into his houfe,fhe opened a cunne of all che mif- 
chiefes that were diffufed throughout all mankinde,only hope remayning ia the bottom:and 
Prometheus (as Ae{chslus faith ) was bound vpon Cancafus fc thirty thoufand yeares, neare 
tothe Cafpian ftreights, as Lucian faith in his (ancafis. Philoftratus faiuh chat that mount 
hath cwo toppes of a furlong diftance one of the other, and that the inhabicants fay that vnro 
thefe were Prometheus hishands bound. Jn vita Apollon. So faith Lucian. This Eagle, fome 
fay was begotten betweene Typhon and Echydua, ( Higin.) fore fay betweene Terra and 
Tartarsus: but the moft fay that Uslcan made her, and Hercudes killed her witha fhaft, fo fhe 
was fet vpinthe skie betweene the tropike of Cancer and the Equinodtiall line. Buc after 
that Premethens had prophecyed vnto Jone; being to lye with Thetés ) chac the fonne he be- 
gat fhould bee greater then the father: He was loofed , prouided he muft cuer weare an iron 
ring vpon his fluger , inmemery of his bondage : and hence came the vie of rings they fay: 
Latiantius faith he firt made Idols of Clay : He ftole fire ( faith Pliny. 46.7. ) that is be taught 
the way how to ftrike it out of the flints, and how to keepe itin acane, Icisfure (faith Dion 
dorusdsb.5,)that hee did finde out the fewell of fire, at fittt. The Pelafgiues ( as Paufanias cef- 
tifieth ) afcribe the finding of fire vnto their Phoronexs, notvnto Prometheus. Theophralius 
faith this is tropicall and ment of the inuentions of wifdome. | 
(f) He taught, J Old Lazhers fonne : the worlds full wifelt man doth Hefied call him:vnto 
Epimethens his younger brother they fay hee did willingly refigne the kingdome of Theffaly 
giuing him-itelfe wholly vnto celeitiall contemplation , and fos that end afcending the high 
mount Caucafus co behold the circumuolution of the ftarres their poftures.8c. And then def- 
ceriding downe came & taught the Caldees Aftronomy and pollicy,tothe which Ithinke the 
fable a the Eagle feeding vpon his liuer hath reference, and to nis doubrfull cares arifing 
{till one from another. The interpreter of Apollonius Khodins, faith there is ariuer called Aqui- 
Ja,that falling from Caucafus runnes through the heart of the country Promethea , lying clofe 
cothat mount. Herodotus writeth that Prometheus the King of Scythia knowing not which 
way to bring the riuer Aquila to runne by his kingdome, was much troubled votiil Heresles 
came and did ic forhim, Thus of theriuer thefe two agree. Diodorss faith that Promerhens 
was the King of Eoypt, and when Nilus had ouer flowed the country and drowned many of 
the inhabitants , he was about to kill him-felfe , but Hercules by his wifdome founda meane 
toreduce the riuetito his proper chanell - and herevpon Nilus for his fwiftnefle of courfe was 
called Aquila.(¢ ) Yet are.) Yes, eAtlas was wife, and fo was Epinsetbens, but to late, for Pre. 
miethens is one of a forewit,& Epimethens an after witted man, for he being warned b y his bro- 
ther Promethens to take no gift of Jene,negle&ed this warning, and tooke Pandora,and after 
7 a | wards 


L118. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. | 68 


wards(as lef efod faith)he knew he had recexaéd his burt. And therefore eAncuftines reafon is 
ftrong and acute: How was he fuch’a great do&or, when wee can finde no wife men that hee 
left behind him?who can iudge of his. wifdome;{eeing therewas no wife men of his titne? for 
wildome onely iudgecth of wifdome. (b) His brother Atlas ] There were thfee of this name, 
faith Serhins,in eencid 4.8. A Moore; the chiefe.An Italian, father to Efettra,and an Arcadian, 
father to AZasathe motherof Afercury , Thefe three,the writers doe confound as their vfeis, - 
For Diodorus lb 4.maketh Atlas the Moore,fonne to (élus , and brother to Saturne,fatherto 
the Hefperides,and grand-father to A¢ercury,a great aftronomer,& one who by often afcend- 
ing the mountaine of his name, fro whence he might better behold the courfe of the heavens, 
gaue occafion of the fable of his fuftayning heauen vpon his fhoulders. Pliny lib.7 faith that 
Aslas the fon of Lybia(this Moore affuredly) was the inuentor of Aftrology:& 4#h.2.inuented 
the {phere. Alex Polyhiffor thinketh that he was Henech,the inuentor of chat ftareskil that 4- 
brabats taught the Phanicians and Egiptians afterwards, when hee trauelled thele countries, 
This knowledge in Aftronomy might well giue life to that fable of Heauen-bearing., Some. 

" thinke it arofe from the inacceffible hight of, mount Atdas , that feemeth to the eye to vader. 
fhore the skies(faith Heredotus)and reacheth aboue the cloudes,ner can the top be eafily dif- 
cerned , the cloudes beeing continually about it :this was a great furtherance to the fidtion, 


The Icalian At/as,was that ancient king of Fefulz,as it is reported. (3) Cecrops bis || Paufanias 


faith that .4éfeus was the firft King of Attica, and (ecreps , an Egiptian ( his ftep-fon)inheri- Ceeropm 
ted his kingdome after him : and hee(they fay) was a man from his vpper parts , and a beaf in 

his neither : becaufc hee by good lawes reduced the people from barbrifme vnto humanity:or 

his necher parts were feminine fay fome , becaufe hee inftituted marriage , in that country,and 

-was as it were the firft author in thofe parts of Father and mother : for before,cthey begot chil- 

dren at randon,and no man knew his owne father. e4ffricanus faith that Ogyges was the firft 

King of Athens, & that from the deluge in his daies, the land was yntilled and lay delert 200, 

yeares after,vuntill (ecrops his time : But for Aé.e«s and others named as Kin gs thereof before 
Crefushey are but bare names: Annal,lib.4.(k )Phorbas} Brother to Perafu: faith Panfanias, Phorbug, 
fon to e4rgus,and father to 73 riopas. The Rhodians(faith ‘Diodorns,)beeing fore vexed by fer- 

pents, went to the Oracle, and by the appoinementthereof,called Phorbas into their Ifland,gi- 

uing him part thereof,to him & hisheires,and fo they were freed from that plague, for Which 

they decreed that he fhould after his death be honored asa God: but this(as eae by Die- 

dors) was not Pherbas the Argiue,nor thefe of Perafus,or Argus, buta Theffalian,the fonne of 
Lapithus.() Triopas} Sonne to Phorbas. Pau{. Diodorxs mentions one Ti riopas,the fonne of vn- Triopas. 
known parents: fomne fay of Nepeane and (anace,fome of eApollo.The people hated him(faith ° 

he )for impouerifhing the Temples,arid for killing his brother . Hizinins faith thacfome tooke 

him to bee that celeftiall conftellation in heauen called Ophinchus, who is wound about witha 
_dragon:for Triepas hauing taken off the roofe of Ceres temple to couer his own palace withal, 

fhe reuenged her felfe vpon him wieh a bitter hunger : and laftly in his end,a dragon appeared 

vnto him & afflicted him fore : at laft he died,and being placed in heauen he was fipured as ifa 
ferpent guirt him about.(m )/afss | Father to Jo,of whom Argos was called /a/ium,and the Ar- 
giues,lafans(n) Sthenelas| After Lafus(faith Pas. A ei ay ge fon reigned, & hee be- 

got Sthenelas (0) Mercwry| Tuhy(as I faid before)reckneth 4. AZercuries. This is the third:(on Mercury, 
to Jone and Mata,taught by his grand-father, & inuenting many excellent things of himfelfe: 

hee was a Magician, as Prudentins writes,& therefore feigned to be the carier and recarier of 

foules to and from hell.(p) Hercules} There were 6. of this name,as Tully faith. The 1.and moft - es 
ancient,fon to the eldeft Jone and Li/estus,8 he contended with Apolle for the Trspos.2: an E- 
giptian,fon to Nilws,reputed the author of the Phrygian letters.3.one deified amongft the I- 
dzans,vnto whom thcy offer facrifices infernal.4.Son ynto Aftery Latona’s fifter,honored by 

the Tysians,and Carthage they fay was his daughter 5.An Indian called Be/as.6.The third J4= 

piters fon by Alemena. Siculus hath butthree of his name. 1. an Egiptian,the worthieft,made 
generall ofthe army by Ofpris , for ftrength and valour , hee trauclled moft part of the world, 

and ereéted a piller in Libya she liued before Hercules Alcmenas fon,aboue Joo00 yeares : that 


Hercules emulated him,and therefore he was called A/c. ws, Ar helper. The third,was Hercules 
of Crete,a famous foldior,and the ordainer of the Olympian games. Pasf-calleth him Hercules 
TdansHiasenis, Seruins ceckneth foure Herexles, the Tyrinthian, the Argiue, the Theban,and 
the Lybian, Js e£%,8 But indeed the number is vncertaine. Varro reckneth 44.The Lybians 
fay theits is the moft ancient, and thar as gee did all take their names from oy | 
ott 4 | out 


668 


Mineru2, 


Pallas, 


Lake Tri- 
ton, 


SAINT AV GV STINE. C wap.8., 


But the Author of Xenophons eA quinoca , faith that the moft ancient Kings of Noble families 
were ftill called Saturnes: their eldeft fonnes,/spiters,and their hardieft grand-children, Her- 
cules. Auguffine heere meanes of that Hercales that wasfonne to Jexe and Alcmena , who 
failed with the Argonautes,and was one generation before the Trojan warre : and to him doe 
the ambitious Greekes afcribe all the glory of the reft. So that he brought a greater fame vato 
pofterity then either Jose or any other god : as Seneca the Tragezdian writeth. 


Fortius ipfe genitore tuo,fulmina mittes, 


Wich more ftrength,then thy fire,thou fhale flath thunders fire. 


He liued after (Mercury.For Mercury(as the report goeth) waited vpon Jowe when he was 
begotten. Buc the fonne of Li/citus was long before Azercury the Arcadian, and liued in the 
time of Mercury the Egiptian, beeing an Egiptian himfelfe. (q) Both wen | Homer maketh U- 
liffes meete Hercules amongft other dead men. Odyff 9. and yct hee faith that his Idol onely 
was in hell,for himéelfe feafted with the gods : bur we know what he meanes by that Idol. (7) 
For their good| Mercury found out many good artes,and adorned the fpeach with eloquence. 


Hercules clenfed the world of tyrants and monfters : and was therefore called anefigx®, (/) 


Minerna\ Tully De nat.deor. Lb, 5.maketh fiue Aizeruas. 1, mother vnto eApollo , begotten 
by Vwlcan 2.daughter of Neus , and a goddefle of the Saitz in Egipt,thrid daughterto Jupi- 
ter (elims,fourth begotten by Jone on ( oriphe,Oceanus his daughter,;whom the Arcadians cal- 
led (oria,and affirme,that fhee inuented Chariors.s the daughter of Pad/as who killed her fa- 
ther being about to rausfh her :and fhee is pictured with wings. This Pailas they fay was a 
cruell fellow,and fhe for killing of him was furnamed Pallas. But the Arcadians tell atale how 
(Minerna being yet alittle one was fent by Jone to Pailas,Lycaons fonne,to be brought vp in 
his houfe,where fhe liued with his daughter whom fhe afterwards tooke vppe to Heauen and 
called her Usétoria, and her felfe Padlas in memory of her fofter-father. Now their are other 
derivations of Pallas, as dm? ranruv,of [baking a fpeare, ox om me avanz lites &C, of mooning her 
felfe in loues head:or 4:87) rarrdousslw &c, of bringing Déoynfiws his heart panting ynto Jone, 
namely whé the 7ytans had torne him in peeces.(¢)Tritox)Between the two Syrtes in Affri- 
ca there is a riuer,and a fen alfo, both at: called Triton , & thence the inhabicants/as Afele 
faith)fuppofe the fur-name of A4imerua to be deriucd,who they fay was borne there, & } day 
that they thinke was her birth daythey follemnize with games & {ports amongft the Virgins, 


, Herodotus faith there is an Me in that fenne orlake , wherevnto la/ox failed with his Argonau- 


Ogygese 


tes. The writers greeke and latine, confentin this,chac CMinerua was called Tritonia from 
this lake, Sidinsimplieth that there fhe firft found out oyle. So/inws faith fhe beheld her felfe 
therein : it may bee then,when feeing her cheekes bigge with blowing her pipe,fhee caftit a 
way. ThisthePoers fay fhe did by A@cander,ariuer of Ionia. But which ot the (Minermas 
was this? I thinke the fife: for hard by,there isa lake they call Pallas, and Calimachus who 
was borne not farre thence, viz, in Cyrene, calleth the lake Triton it {elfe Pallentia , and fo 
doth Feftus. But the Lybians call ic Nepranes , and Tritonis lake : it may bee Neptune is Pal- 
las, Some now (and this I muft not ommic) fay that CMinerua was borne in Boeotia,in Triton 
there. For thereare diuers Tritons , one in Boeotia yone in Theffaly, and one in Lybia,and 
there was AZineruaborne. Interpr. Appollon.Rhod,(#) That of loucs | Some thinke Afimerua 
was called Tritonia becaufe in the Boeotian tongue zgnr4 is an head. Buc this was onely a ficti- 
on,becaufe fhe is called the goddeffe of wifdome,and the higheft part of the ayre. (x) .4 great 
deluge) Eufebixs,(whence Aug.hath moft of this) referreth all thefe things vnto the reigne of 
Phoroneus the Argiue . Ogygins reigned(faith hee in Attica Eleufina,of old,called A&ta,and o- 
uer many other Citties , the time when the Virgin whom the Greekes call A4inerua,appeared 

at the lake Tritonis. | 
 Inthis Kings time there wasa greatinvndation , betweene which and that of Dexcasons 
time are reckned one hundered and feauenty yeares , within a few. Bue Solinus faith not fo, 
There was‘ faith hee)fixe hundered yeares betweene Ogyges and Dencalion, and Ogrges reig- 
ned in A¢ta, and Boeotia, which-was called as Strabo faith , Ogygia, before Cecrops tline,who 
(as fome fay)built the Boeotian Thebes , and therefore the Theban wittes were called Ogygs= 
an,and hee was generally held to haue beene borne in Eleufis in Attica : ior other original] of 
his is vaknowne ; and from his time vato the firft Olympiade, HeManicus Philochorus, (after, 
— and 


1 
a _ 


Lrwi8. _ OF THE CITIE OF GOD. | 669 
and Thalus, (chat wrote the aéts of the Sirians ) doe reckon aboue.a thoufand yeares : and foe 
doth Diodorus and almoft all the Greekes : ynto whome Orofivs agrecth', making Ogygis , his 
deluge to befall a thoufand foure. hundred yeares before Rome, was buile. TPorphiry in his 
~ fourch book againft Chriftianity, fayth that Ogyges liued in Inachus his time, and Africanus 
following him, maketh AZofes and him both of one time, whereas Afof2s was. long after him, 
(7) Nor latin }Not fo in the opinion of Jofephus nor.Enfebsus, Iofephrs {ayth , that Berofus the 
Chaldzan made mention of this generall deluge, as alfo Afnafeas of Damafcus,and Hie 
rome of Egipt, quoting all their fay:ngs. And eAlexander Polyhiffor, Melan, Eupolemus,and 
Abvidonus doe mention it alfo, as Exfebins faith. Plinie alfo and Afelz affirme, that Joppe in 
Egipt was.built before rhe Inundation of the earth,which cannot be ment of the delage of O- 
gyces or Dewcalion for thofe did neuer come fo farre as Egipt. Nor is it any wonder if chat Ci- 
ty were builtthen: for fo were amany more befides : yea that deluge which the poets make 
Jupiter to thréaten, is no other but this. Buethey write hereof lo obfcurcly , as they {carcely 
knew what chey wrote chem-felues, Indeed that.which Berofes, Afnafeas, and Enpolemus do 
deliuer, belongs vino the Bacbarian hiftories, and neither co the. Greeke nor latine, whereof 
Auguftine {peaketh. (=) Our chroniclers} Chriftian hiftorigraphers : as Exfebius Bifhop of 
Cefarea in Paleftina (who by reafon of his familiarity wich the martyr Pamphilus,was called 
Pamphilas alfo,) who as Hierome fayth wrote an infinite number of volumes, and among ft 
the reft, one generall hiftory out of all the chroniclers, as an abftrat or epitome of them all, 
and that [ thinke be this which we haue of his yet extant, although the proper names, and 
frame of the whole worke bee much depraued by the ignorance of the tranfcribers , from 
whofe heads the vnderftanding of thofe computations was farre to feeke: nor can thofe er- 
rors bee reformed, but by the mott perfe& antiquaries, and therefore the fimple are herein ea- 
fily feduced, But how neceffary this booke is fora ftudent , Hierome himf{c!fe fhewed by 
tranflating ic out of the Grecke, and putting that holy admiration of {renens vnto the tran- 
fcriber, in the front of it. It was continued by Ex/ebims vatill the fecond yeire of Conflantine 
the great,and Hierome made an appendix of the reft of thetime vnto Gratian, (4) Attica) Te Attica. 
isacountrey in Greece betweene Megara and Beorsa , lying vpon the fea wich the Hauen 
Pyreus, and the Cape Sunius : a fertile foyle bath of good fruites , good lawes , and good 
wittes, faith Tully. The waues beating vpon the fhores hereof ( faith / apelle \ doe produce a 

true harmonious mufick - metaphorically fpoaken (I thinke) of their delighcfull ftudies. The 
countrey-men call them-felues dw7ySeres, s2-bred, rior deriuing from any other nation, Of 

their Kings Panfanias faith thus : Alfeus( itis faid ) reigned firtt in Attica, then Cecrops his 
fonne in Jaw : who begot Erifa, Aglaurus,and Pandrofus, daughiters,and Erifichthon a forine, 

who dyed before his father. (ecrops (faith Strabo ) brought the difperfed people irito twelue 
Citties : Cecropia, Tetrapolis,Epacria, Decelea, Eleufis, ne Ae ( or Aphydnz) Dorichus, 
Brabron, Cytheros, Sphetus, Cyphefia and Phalerus: and afterwards hee brought them all 
twelue into that one now called Thebes, | 


Eulebius, 


Seg rere eee oe 6 eee eo werk 
.. ‘ t .° ple cad 


The vime when Athens was built, and the reafon that Varro 
giueth for the name. Car. 9. 


Or the name of Athens(4) (comming of «§l,which is Minerua)Varro giueth 
this reafon.An Oliue tree grew fodenly vp in one place,& a fountaine burft 
as fodenly out in another. Thele prodigies draue the King to Delphos, to know 
the oracles minde, which anfwered him,that the Oliue tree fignified Adinerua, & . 
the fountaine Neptune,and that the citty might after which of thefe they pleafed 
to name their citty.Here-vpon Cecrops gathered all the people of both fexesto- 
gether ( for (¢) thenit was a cuftome in that place to call the women vnto ~ 
coufultations alfo ) to giue their voyces in this eléGion, the men becing for 
Neptune, and thewomen for Méinerua :and the women beeing more, wone the 
day for Ménerus, Here-at Neptune beeing angrie , ouer-flowed all thé Athe- 
nians lands , ( for the Deuills may drawe the. watérs which way they Hi) 
_* | an 


670 


Athens. 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. | —— Cuary. 


and to appeafe him,the Athenian women had atriple penalty fet on their heads, 
Firft they muft never hereafter haue voice in councel.Second neuer hereafter be 
called (¢) Achenians : third nor euer leaue their name vnto their children. Thus 
this ancient and goodly citty, the onely mother of artes and learned inventi- 
ons, the glory and luftre of Greece , by a fcoffe of the deuiils ,in a contention of 
their gods a male and female,and (f) by a feminine vi@tory obteined by women, 
wasenftiled Athens , after the females name that was victor, Msersa: and yer 
being plagued by him that was conquered, was compelled to punnifh the means 
ofthe victors victorie ;and fhewed that ic feared Neptunes waters , worfe then 
Minernasarmes. For AMéinerua her felfe was punithed in thofe her women cham- 
pions : nor did fhe affift thefe that aduanced her , fo much asto the bare referua- 
tion of her name vnto themfelues, befides the loffe of their voices in eleGtions, 
and the leauing of their names vnto their fonnes: Thus they loft the nameof 
this goddefle , whom they had made viGorious ouer amale god: whereof you 
fee what I might fay , but that mine intent carieth my penne on ynto another 


purpofe. 


: L. VIVES. 


Thens (4) comming| Whence this name defcendedit is doubrfull , the common opinion 
fetches it- from Minerna , called 2nxd, The Greekes haue this, ofthe name both of the 


" country and Citty, Cranaus({aith Pas/anias) a worthy Athenian, fucceeded Cecreps : andhe 


amoneft his other children,had a daughter called 4tthis,of whomthe country was called At- 
tica,being called Actza before . Some(faith Serabe )call it Attica of Afton : Some call ic Ac- 
this,and Attica of Atthis (ranaus his daughter of whom the inhabitants were called Cranai, 
Some call it Mopfopia,of Mop/fopms, Ionia of Jon fontie to Xurhus , Pofidonia,of Pofdon,and 
Achena of Athena,or Minerua,of CMinerna,if you like it in Iatine,/u/tine(out of Trogus faithi¢ 


was not called Achens vntill the fourth King of Attica, (ranaus his fucceffor, whom hee cal- 


leth Amphionides, but there isa fale, Ithinke,the greeke is -Amphylibyon : and indeed Athens 
ig not named in the number of Citties that ¢ ecrops founded. That which was called Cecropia 
and was after-wards called Athens and built by Thc/ews,was but the tower of the citty . For 
this the Greckes fay ordinaryly,the tower of Athens was called Cecropia at firft : Jnterp. A- 


~ pollon. But note this there were three townes called Athens ( Varro de analog. Jrtie Athenians 


inhabited one , the Athenzans another, andthe Athcneopolitanes a third. The firft was A- 


© thensin Attica, The fecond Athens in the Ifland Eubza, (otherwife called Chace, buile by 
_ King Cecrops fonne to Erichtheus, andthe cittizens hereof were called Athena.zus , bucthae 


was oncly by the Latines, for the Greekes call the Attick Athenians @tuzicsIthe chird was 

a pcople of Gallia Narbonenfis inhabiting Atheneopolis in the countrie of Mahia. Tnercis 

another Athensin the Lacedemonian territory. (6) Of both fexes | Ouid faicsh that this cons 

tention of Neptune and Minerua was before twelue gods,and Jose him felfe fac arbicer. Nep- 

tune {mote the earth with his mafe and brought forth an horfe : and Minera thee brow ghe 

forth an oliue tree, this was the figne of peace , and that of warre. So all the gods tixed the 
figne of peace beft,and gaue Afsnerua the preheminence, ALetamorph.6 Some refer this to the 
contention becweenc fea and land, whether the Athenians could fetch in more cornmodity or 

glory, by warre or peace,from fea orland, Neptunes horfe was called by fome Syroz, by fome 

Arion , and by fome Scythins, Sernint. Georgic. Virg. Valerius Probus reckons more cf hig 

horfes then one : for he gaue eAdraffus,eArion,and Panthus and (yllares vito Inno,and fhee 

beftowed them on Caffor and Pollux , But which of the fiue Adizeruas was this. The {econ d, 

Nilus his daughter,the e£giptian,Satetes goddefle,as Plato held J 7 irae Sais is a ercat cit- 

ty in Egipt,in the prouince of Delta , where e4mafis was borne, built by the fame Afinerus, 

who is called euth in Egypt, and Athene in Attica . The Athenians haue amoneth, begine 
ning at the firft new Moone in December, which they call zvewtey; in memory of that 
contention 


7 


‘ al : f . - 
4, 


Lint8. OF THE CITIE OF GOD: o7t 


ee 


contention of Neptune and Pallas. (c) Then it was] Both there and elfe-where : and Plato re- 
quired itin his Repab.(d) Athenians | Wherevpon they were neuer called but Attica as Ne- 
saclides faith:the men indeed were called s8erdsos,but not the women, the reafon was(faith he) 
becaufe their wiucs in their falutations fhould not fhame the Virgins, for the woman taketh 
her husbands name and they being called Athenians if the Virgins fhould bee called Atheni- 
_ans,they fhould be held to be married. But Pherecrates,  hslemon,Diphilus,Pindarus,and die 
uers other old poets callthe women of Athens sile'zias which word Phrynichus the Bithini, 
an fophilter holdeth to bee no good Athenian Grecke, and therefore wondereth that Pherec-: 
rates aman wholy Atticizing , would vfe itin thar fence. (f) By a feminine | A diuerfity of 
reading,but of no moment. 


. Jee 


Vartos relation of the oviginall of the word Areopage ad of : 
| Deucalions de/uge. CHar.to: 


BY Varro Will beleeué no fablesthat make againft their gods, leaft hee fhould 
difparage their maiefty : and therefore he will not deriue that (4) Areopagon, 
(the place (6) where Saint Pas? difputed with the Athenians, and whence the 
Ludges ot the ciety had their names) from that,that (¢) Adars(in grecke wen; ) bee- 
ing accufed of homicide,was tried by twelue gods in that court,and quit by fixe 
voices: fo abfolued (for the number beeing equall on both fides the abfolution 
is to ouer-poyfe the condemnation).But this though it be the common Opinion 
he rreieéts,& endeauoreth to lay down another caufe of this name,that che Athe- 
nians thould not offer to dere Areopagus from (4) dpxs and Pagus:for this were to 
iniure the gods by imputing broiles and contentions vnto them ,and therefore 
he affirmeth this, and the goddeffes contention about the golden apple, both a- 
like, falfe : though the ftages prefent them to the gods as true,and the gods take 
pleafure inthem,bee they true or falfe’. This Varro willnotbeleeue ,forfeareof ~*". 
difgracing the gods in -it sand yet hee tellsa tale concerning the name of A- 
thens; of the contention betweene Neptune and Minera, (as friuolous as this) 
and maketh that the likelieft origiaall of the cicties namé: ds ifthey two con- 
tending by prodigies , Apollo durft not bee iudge betweene them, but as Paris was 
called to decide the ftrife betweene the three goddefles, fo he was made an vm- 
pier in thiswrangling of chefe two swhere Afinerua conquered by her fautdrs, 
and was conquered in her fautours, and getting the name of Athens to her felfe, 
could nor leauethenameof Athenians vntothem. Inthefetimes,as Varro faith, 
(e) Cranaus,Cecropshis fucceflor reigned at Athens,or Cecrops himfelfe as our Ew- 
febins, and Hierome doc affirme : and then befell that great inundation called the 
floud of Deucalion. becaufe it was moft extreame m his Kingdome. But /f)it 


came not nere Epipt nor the confines thereof: 


L.VIVES. 


A reepagen 1 In fome,e4reon Pagon.in others Arion Pagon: in grecke"A poy wwyer,Stephanns ; 
E Ade Vrbibus faith it was a promontory by Athens where all matters of life & death were The Areos 
heard.For there were two counfels at Athens(as Libanins the Sophifter writeth one continu-P*8 — 
all,iudging of capirall matters , alwaies in the Areopage : the other changing euery yeare and | 
perceyning to the ftacescalled the counfell of the 00, of the firtt,our Badens hath writ large- 

lie out of both languages. + /unot.in Pandéft.(b) where Saint Paul] A&.17. (c) Mars called] 

The ¢ommon opinion is’ fo sand’ Je#enall therevpon calleth the Areopage Mars his Court. 


672 . SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuar.10.8 11 


(ee ee a ee 


Paufanias{aith ic had that name becaufe (Mars was firft iudged there for killing Afirrho- 
thien, Neptunes fonne , becaufe hee had rauifhed tk a Mars his daughter by -Aglanra the 
daughter of Cecrops. And afterwards Oreffes was iudged there for killing of his mother,and 
being quit,he built a Temple vato Afinerna Area,or (Martial. ( A) apus and Pagus|I doe not 
Pagus is a thinke Arcopagus is deriued hence, as if it were fome village without the towne, or ftreete in 
village, or the Citty: but Pagus is fome-timestaken fora high place or ftone, or promontory as Ste- 
ftrecte, = phanws calleth it, tor Suidas faith it was called Ariopagus , becaufe the Court was in a place 
aloft,vpon an high rock : and Arins,becaufe of the flaughter which it decided, being all vader 
Mars. Thus Swidas,who toucheth alfo at the iudgement of Afars for killing of Alirbothien: 
out of Hellanicus b.1. As we did out of Paxfanias : and this we may not ommic : there were 
filuer ftones in that Court, wherein the plaintifs and the defendants both ftood,the plaintifs 
was called che ftone ot Impudence_ and the defendants,of Iniury. And hard Sy was a Tem- 
_ &xanaus ple of the furies, (¢) Cranans | Or Amphyttion,as ayd: but Exfebins faith (ecraps himfelfe, 
But this computation | like not , nor that which hee referreth to the fame. viz, That (ecrops 
who failed into Exbsea( whom the Greekes call the fonne of Erichthexs ) ruled Athens long 
after the firit (7 ecrops , and of him were the Athenians called Cranai ,as e4riffophanes called 
them, Strabo writeth that they were called Cranai ‘alfo : but to the deluge , and Deucalion. 
Deucalion. Hee was the fonne of Prometheus and Oceana , as Diony/fias faith, and hce married Pirrba the 
daughter of his vncle Epimetheus and Pandora , and chafing the Pelafpiues out of Theffaly, 
got that Kingdome: leading the borderers of Parnaflus , the Leleges , and the Curetes alon 
in his warres with him. And in his daies(as rsftor/e faith) fell an huge deale of raine in Thee 
faly, which drowned it and almoft all Greece. Dencalion and Pyrrbafauirg themfelues vpon 
Parnaffus went to the Oracle of Theme, and learning there what to doe, reftored man-kinde 
(asthey fable) by cafting ftones ouer their fhoulders back-ward; the fiones that the man 
threw prouing men, and Pyrrbas throwes bringing forth women. Indeed they brought the 
ftony and brutith people from the mountaines into the plaines,after the deluge and that gaue 
life to the fable. 
In Dencalsons time(faith Lucian in his Mifantkropus )was fuch a fhip-wrack in one inftane, 
that all che veffells were funke excepting one poore skiffe or cock-boate that was driuento 
Lycotea. JLycorea. Lycoreaisa village by Delphos named after King Licorens. Now Parnaflus (as 
Stephanas writeth was firft called Larnaflus,of Dencalsons »«;vat,0r couered boate,which he 
Parnaflos. madc him by the counfell of his father Promethexs, and which was driven ynto this moun- 
.  taine. Strabo faith that Dencalon dwelt in Cynos,a Citty in Locris neare ynto Sunpius Opun- 
tius,where Pirrbas {epulchre is yet to bee feene, Deacalson being buried at Athens.Pass{anstas 
faith there was a Temple at Athens of Deucalions building and that hee had dwelt there. Yer 
Dion faith that the combe is in the Temple of Jupiter Olympins,which he founded. (f) It came 
not | So faith Plato In Timeo.and DiodorSicul lib.1. | | 


About whofe times Moy fes brought I/rael ont of Egipt . Of lofuah:in 
whofe tsmes he died. Cuar, t0- 


N thelater end of Cecrops raigne at Athens, came A4ofes with Jfraell out of E- 
gypt:Afcarades,(4) Macathus and Triopas beings Kings of Afiria,Sicyonand Ar- 
gos. To Synadid Mofesleadthem,and therereceiued the law from aboue called 
the old Teftamenr, containing all cerreftriall promifes : the new one, containin 
the fpiritual, being to come with Chrift our fauiour: for this order was Gitte 
(as itis in euery man as S.Peudfayth that the naturall fhouldbe firft, and the fpi- 
Gunde ritvall afterwards, becaufe (ashe faidtruely ) the first man ts of earth, carthly, and 
"the fecond man is of heanen, heauenly, Forty yeares did Mofes rule this people in 
the defert, dying a hundred and twenty yeares old: hauing prophecied Chrift by 
innumerable figures in the carnal obferuations about the Tabernacle, the Prieft- 
hood, the facrifices, and other mifticall commands . Vito Afofes was Jofuah the 
fucceflour, and he led the people into the land of promife, and by Gods sae 
. expell 


Lisa. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 693 


expelldallehe Pagansthat {warmed init, andhauing ruled feauen and twenty - 
yeares, hedyedinthetime that Amintas {acas eyghteenthKinz of Aflirias Corex 
the fixteenth of Sicyonia(b) Danas the tenth of drgos, and Eriththonins thé 
fourth of Athens. : : | | | 


L.VIVES: 


[vye47aha} Peratus,faith Panfanias, But Ex/cbins calls him Marathus,hee reigned twen- Marathat, 
ty yeares. There was one Adarathus , Apollo's fonne , who built a citty in Phocis not farre 

from Anticizza, Tiere was another that ferued vnder (affor and Pollux,and of him did CM4- 

; thon in Achaiatake the name.Ic may be this was AZarathus Apollos {on , for Suidas affirm= 

eth that the country in Attica , fo called had the name from that Aferathws.(b) Danaus] An. 

Egiptian, Belws his fonne,he broughe tlic firft {hip out of Fgipt into Greece. Pliny, for before, Danaur, 

they kepc their thipping all in the red fea,among the Iles of ing Erishras. And this Danans 

was the firft that dioged welles in Argos. Dépfms that is the droupht., The Egiptians bani- 

thed him, and elected £ giptus for King , of whom the country ( before called e£ria)wasnow 

called Egipt. Exfeb.He came to Argos in the time of Gelanor the fonne of Sthexelas,whom he 

depriued of his eftate cogether with all e4genors progeny. Their contention was ended thus. 

Danaus beeing come out of Egipt , fell to contend with Gelapor about the Kinedome , the 

people becing vmpier,much was faid on both fides , Dakans feemed to fpeake as good reafon 

asthe other, foircouldniot bee decided vntillthe nexc day : the next morhing,a wolfe come 

meth hurling intothe pafture , and beginnes a fight with the chiefe bull of he Kings heard. 

This made the people liken Danaas,to the wolfe ,-and. Gelanor to the bull: for as the 

wolfe is a ftranger to man , fo was Danaus voto them. But by and by, the wolfe kills che 

bull,and fo vpon this iudgement was giuen on Danaus his is cherie Danans thinking 

that Apotla had fent this wolfe , hee dedicated a temple vnto Apollo Lycius , that is , Woluifh, 

This Dasans dwelc in the Argiue cower, and all the Pelafgiues were called Dazaiafterhim, — 

His were the fifty daughters whom poets haue fo ecerilzed: Dissarns faith he buile che Argiue 


Argos,the oldet citty(one of them)in all Greece.Others fay he built but the cower .He was 4 


more famous King then Greece had euet had before him. 


oe 


The falfe godi,adored by thofe Grecke Princes which lined be- 
tweene I/raells freedome, and Lofuahs deaths 


Cuar; 12: 


Etwixe the departure of Ifraell out of Egipe , and che death of /o/aeh, who 
fedthem into the land of promife, the Grecke Princes ordained many forts 
of facrifices to their falfe gods, as folemne memorials of chedeluge,and thedre¢- 
domeof mankinde fromit,andche miferabletime that they had 1n it,and vpon ig 
now being driuen vp to the hill, and foone after comming downe againe into the 
plainess for this they fay the (4) Lapercalls ruining vppe and downe (6) the holy 
fireete,doth defcipher, namely how the men rannevp tothe mountaines in that 
great invndatidn, and when it ceafed , came all. downe againe into the secs . 
Andat this time they fay that (c) Diong/ius(otherwile called(d J father Leber, and | 
made a god after his deceafe ) did (e) firft thew che planting of the vine. in Attica: 
and then were there muficall (/) plaies dedicated to Apo of Delp hos,toappeafe 
him whé they thought had afflicted al Greece with barrenneffe,becaufe they des 
fended not his temple which Devaas in his inuafion burned: & the oracle ic felfe 
_- Min an charged 


* £4727. Gama 2 | 2 eS 


The Lupere 


SAINT AV GVSTINE. C war.12, 


charged them to ordaine thofe plaies. Eréchthonius was the firft that prefented 
them in Arctica, both vnto him and Adimeras, where hee that conquered,had a re- 
wardof oyle , (z¢) which A@izerua they fay inuented , as Liber had found out the 
wine : and in thefe times did (4) Xanthus King of Crete force(z) away Evropa,and 
begot (t) Rhadamanthus (1) Sarpedow, (m) and Asnos,who are reported to bee the 
fonnes of Jove and Ewropa . But the pagans yeeld tothe truth of hiftory in this 
matter of the King of Crete: and this that hangs at euery poets penne,and at e- 
uery plaiers lyps ,they doe accompt asa fable,to proue their deities wholy de- 
lighted in beaftly vntruthes: and now (#) was Hercwlestamous at Tyre: not hee 
that wee fpake of before: (for the more fecret hiftories fay there were many He7- 
cules& many father Lsbers) And this Hercules they make famous for twelue-{un- 
dry rare exploits(not counting the death of the African (0) Antens amongtt the, 
for that belongs to the other Herewles) and this fame Hercu/es doe they make to 
~ burnehimfelfe vpon mount (p) Oeta,his vertue whereby he bad fubdued fo mra- 
ny montfters, failing bim now in the patient toleration of his (q) owne paines: and 
at this time (r) Bu/yris ( the fonne of Neptune and Lzbia daughter to Epaphus) and 
King or rather Tyrant of Egipr, vfed to murder ftrangers & offer théto his gods: 
O butlecvs not thinke Neptune a whore-maifter or father to fuch a-damned 
fonne , let the poets haue this {cope to fill the ftage and pleafe the gods withall! 
Ic is faid that Vulcan and Minerus were parents to this (f/) Eréchthonius,in the 
endof whofe reigne Jofuah died. (¢) But becaufe they hold Afineruaa Virgin, 
therefore (fay they )in their ftriuing together, /w/can proiected his {perme vpon 
the passe thence came this king as his name fheweth: for igi; is ffréfe , 8 xSe7, 
is earth: which ioyned doe make Erichthenins. But indeed che beft learned of 
them reie& this beaftlinefle from their gods , and fay that the fable arofe heere- 
vpon,(#) that inthe Temple of Valcanand Mincrua , which were bothone at At- 
thens , there wasa (x) little shild found with a dragon wound about him, which 
‘was afigne that hee fhould prooue afamous man, and becaufe of this Temples 
knowing no other parents that hee had, they called him the fonne of Yalcan and 
Minerua :But howfoeuer,that fable doth manifeft his name better then this hif- 
tory. But what isthattovs when as this is written intrue bookes, to inftru@ 
religious men, and that is prefented on publike ftages to delight the vncleane de- 
uills, whom notwicthftanding their trueft writers honour as gods,with thofe reli- 
gious men? and let them deny this of their gods yet can they not acquit them 
ofall crime, ’in affecting the prefenting of thofe filthinefles, and in taking plea- 
fure to.behold thofe things beftially a&ed, which wifdome feemeth to fay might 
better be denied : for fuppofe the fables belie them, yet if they do.delight to here 
thofelies of chem-felues,this maketh their guilt moft true. | 7 


a a ee eee mee Sra 


---L, VIVES. 


LEG ) Lupercalls | The Lapereall was'a place on mount Palatine in Rome , faered ynto 
& “Pan lycins,or,the Wolsifo: whom they fay the Arcadians that came with Exander into Ita- 
ly,dedicaced,by the aduice of Carmentis , the propheteffe: in the fame hely forme that they 
worthipped him in their country, and /upsser Lycius vpon mount Lyceum, In the fame place 
where Rensulus and Remsas fuckt,the fhe Wolfe, and there was a flacue reprefenting the fame. 
Therefore was the place called Lupereall,faith Sernius,but the ftatue of Pan Lyceus had Emane 
der confecrated long before Romsulws wasborne, Onid Feft, | : 


“es 


Lint8 = © OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 675 


Quidverat Arcadica diftos «monte lupercost 
Faunus in Arcadia templa Lycans habet. 
Luperci may th Arcadian hills name beare, 
‘Since wolfe-like Faunus hath his temple there. 
And Vargilin his (£neads1ib.8. | : 
--——~- Gelida monftrat fish rupe Iupercal 
Parrhafia ditium panos de mente bycai. 


'Lupercall vnderneath the rock fo chill, 
So ¢all’d of wolfe-like Pans Parrhafian hill. 


Romslas himfelfe was one of the Lupercalls,and was celebrating of chat feaft when Nonebs 

tors fhepheards tooke him, Now they vfed to facrifice ynto Pak all naked favie their priui- 
.ties which were couered (as Déony/. faith) with the skins of the facrifices , and fo they ranne 

all about the ftreete , They were called Lupercalls({aith Varro de ling.Lat.5.) becaufe they fa- 
crificed inthe Lapercadl: the ordcrer of the facrifice when hee proclaimed the monthly feafts, 

to be kept vpon the nones of February , calleth this feaft day, day februate , that is a day of 
purgati¢n, &c. Feffus feemeth to afcride the Lupercall feafts to the honour of Jwne,for on 

this day Lee faith the women were purged with Janos mantle , that is,with a goates skinne, 
. forthe womcn,beleeued thatic would make them fruitfull,to bee beaten with a skione of one 

of the facrifices at the Lwpercall feafts. And therefore as the. Lapercalls ranne by,they would 
-hold our their hands for tuem to (trike. They offered a dogge alfo at this fealt ,as Plutarch 

faith : whecher chat were a kinde of purgation , or that it was in token of tne dogges emnity 

with the wolues, beeing facred ynto Pan Lyecss.(b) The holy ftrecte’ Via facra. \treached not 

(as the vulgar thiuke ) onely fromthe pallace to tne houfe of the Maifter of the Ceremonies ry poy 
but from that houfe to the chappell of goddeffe Strenna, and from the pallace,to the Capitol, ttreete an 
Varro de ling lat. faith this : lt Strenuas chappel,bard by the (arina begsnneth, holy ftreete and Rome, 
st reachethto the Capitol for that way doe facrifices goe tothe Capitol every month: and that way 

come alleAugursto take their anguries. But the vulgar know onely chat part of it, which 
reacheth from che court to the fore-moft defcent:It was called boly—freete,for there did Rome 

das and Tatius the Sabine King make their ynion, Here Owsdtaith they vied to fell apples. » 

Tc wasa fteep vneuen way, which is the reafon of Angu/fines mention of it here.(c) Déony/jus | 
Tall.de nat.deor.3. Wee hase many Dionyfii : onc fonne to Jone and Proferpina, another Nilus Dyonifim, 
his fonne,the murderer of Nyfa:a third Caprixs his fonne, and King of Afia,whence the Scy= 
thians had there difcipline: a fourth fonne to Jouve and Luna to whom Orphews his cohfecratie 

ons are dedicate, afift, fonne to Nifus and Thyone , who icftituted the Trieterides, (or three 
yeares facrifices}vnto Bacchus.Ofthe Theban Diany/ias the Indian and the Affirian,read Phis 
loftratus, Vita A;ollonii lib, 2,Some held but one Diony/ins the finder out of wine,& the con- 
querour of many naticns:and fome againe held that there were three, beeing in three feuerall 
times.1, a0 Indian,who found out wine. 2. fonne of Joue & (erés,the inucnter of the plough. 

3. fonne to Jove and Semele,an effeminate fellow,leading whores about with him in his army, 

(d) Father Liber | Becaufe(faith ALacrobrus, from Newins he ss the {unne,and gocth freely(Lé- 
bere) throughout the skies . P/atarch (1m Quaft.) giucs other reafons becaufe hee freeth the 
tonsue of drinkers - or, becaufe hee fought for the freedome of Bzotia : or becaufe hee freeth 

one fromecares,and fecureth themin hardeft actes.Sexeca faith his name;L:ber,commeth nota 
Libera lingua,froma free tongue,but.qusa liberat feruitio curarnm animum, becaule hee freeth |. 
the foule from the bondage of care,and giueth it vigor in enterprifes : for it chrufts out care,“ 
and turneth the minde vp from the bottome,and therefore itis good to drinke now and then, 

De trang.anime)F eff fhew) Therefore was he called Dsonyfins,gquafis.cs sivev.gining wine.Pla~ 

to in Cratyl. Now Valerius Probus relateth this ftory thus, |. Georg.Staphylus a fhepheard of 
etolia,and keeper of King Ocexexs goates,obferued one of them that ftraied alwaies from the 
reft,and was morc lufty,and came later to the foldthen any other,herevpon he watched him, 

and finding him in a fecret place, eating of a fruice that was vnknowne vnto him, hte plucked 
fome of it , and brought it vnto King Oeneus , who delighting in the iuice wrung fromit,as 
foone as it grew ripe,fet it before father Lsder,who was then his gueft.Liber teaching him the 

way how to husband it, for aperpetuall memory of the inuentors , named the iuice élves of 

. : Mmm 7 Onuns, 


676 


SAINT AV GVSTINE. — Crapi2. 


Apolles 
plaies. 


Xanthus. 


Oeneus,and the grape sapian,of Staphylus.Eufebius meaneth one Déonyfins the fonne of Denea- 
dion,more ancient then that fonne of Semse/e,and he({aith Exfebies)came into Actica,and there — 
found out the vine: thar hee lodged with oue Semacus vnto whefe daughter he gaue a Roe- 
bucks skia : but chis was in Cecrops time , But Exbolus faith it was before Cecrops time that 
wine was found, and that before that, they vfed water in their facrifices in lead of wine. (f J 
Plaies dedicated te Apollo) Eufebéns faith that Erichthon,( ecreps fonne built chat Temple vn- 
to Apollo Delius : Apollo had many plaies facred vnto him, buc ‘there were two forts of the 
chiete : the A@tian,in Acarnania, facred vnto Apello A&ius , wherein the Lacedemonians had 
the preheminence:and chefe were famous all Greece ouer : and the Delphike,in Phocis,called 
the Pythian games,kept euery eight yearc. (enforin. Pistarch(in Queftion. faith that the Del- 
phians celebrated three kindes of plaics euery ninth yeare : the Srephateria, the Heroides, and 
their Chorile. . 

But who ordeined thefe games at fir(t, is vncertaine . One of Pixdarss his interpetours, 
faith that their Pythian games were of two forts(as Strabo alfo teltifieth.)che moft ancient, in- 
uented by eApolle himfelfe vpon the killing of the dragon Python : and in thefe , diuers He- 
roés,as ( a/for,Pollux,Peleus, Hercules and T elamon were viCtors,and al crowned with laurells 
the later,ordeined by eAmphycthions counfell, after the Grecians by the helpe of Earslochus 
the Theffalian , had conquered their curfed aduerfaries the Cirrhzans : this was in So/ens 


time. Aefchyles maketh mention of this warre. (Contra Crefiphont. (¢) With Mincrua] Shee 


rather found out the tree then the fruite. Virg.<Minerua, finder of the Oliue tree; For Pkany 
lib.7. afcribes the inuention of oyle,and oyle-prefics , vato Ariffexs of Athens,hee that found 
hony out firft:nay and wine alfo, faith .4ri/fetle , making him a learned man, and much be 
holding to the Mufes. Yet Diodorus deriues the drawing of oyle from one of Afimerma’s 
inuentions. But that the oliue tree is confecrated to AAixerna, all writers doe affirme , as is the 
Jaurell to Apolle,the oke to Jone, the myrtle to Venus,and the poplare to Hercules. Virg.Pliny 
faith that the oliue that Adinerua produced at Athens wasto bec feene. in his time.4i6.16, 
And the conquerors at Athens are crowned with an oliue Ghirland. Andthis yf the Ro- 
manes had in their leffer criumphs , vfing crownes of oliue and myrtle , and the troupes of 
fouldiours in the Calends of luly were crowned with oliue branches , as the victors in the 
Olympick exercifes were with garlands of the Oliue:and the tree whence Hercules had 
his crowne ,remained ynto Plinies time , as himfelfe writeth. (4) Xanthus,} Ichinke this 
is that fucceffor of Dencalion whom Diodorus calleth Afferius.lib. 5. Dencalion had Hellenus: 
hee, Dorus; Dorus, Tettanus , who failed into Crete, and bare Jupiter threcfons, Khadaman~ 
thus, Minos, and Sarpedon :allwhich Afferins marying their mother , having no chitde b 
her,adopted for his fonnes. Eufebins faith hee begot themall vpon her, Buc Strabo faith 
that Hellenus, Dencalions fon,had two fons Dorus,and Xuthus , who marrying Creu{2,Erich~ 
theus his daughter, brought collonies into Tetrapolis in Attica , founding Oenoa , Marathon, 
Probalinthus,and Tricorythus: Joannes Grammeaticus (miei diante]oy ) is of his opinion alfoy 
adding one Acolus,athird fonne of Hellenus, of whom the Acolike diale& came, as the De- 
trike did of Dorus , andthisis more likely. For there are but foure fcore yeares betweene 
Dewcalions floud , and the rape of Ewropa,namely from the thirtith yeare of (ecreps ynto the 
fortith of Erichthonins. | 

Some Greeke authors will not haue Doras and Xathus to bee Jonnes wnto Hellenus,but yn- 
to Acolus,who married Crenfa. Of Jon,fonne to this Panthxs,was the countries name chang- 


ed from Aegialia,into Ionia: for he planted Colonies in twelue citties of Afia,as the oracle of 


Delphos dire&ted him according to Uetruuius, who emploieth both Xanthus and his fon , Jon 
in this bufineffe, yet did the country beare the fonnes name. The Athenians had a feaft called 
Bontpomis or,(peedy heipe : becaufe they beeing ina dangerous warte with Eumolpus, Neptunes 
fonne, Xasthus came to their aide with wonderfull celerity : for which Erichthexs made him 
his fonne in lawe. | | , 

Now this Xanthus they thinkeis e4ferins alfo : for Xanthus, and Xuthws are vfed both for 
one : and hence came the claime that Amdrogens,fon to Mines,& grand-child to Xenthss, had 
againit Acgeas,Thefens his father,vnto the kingdome of Athens : and he being made away by 
the treafons of Aegens , Afinos inuaded Attica ,and brought them to chat freight , clrat they 
were faine to pay hima yearely tribute of feauen boies and feauen virgin girles . — 

| | Ramet 


a { is Pe 
~ - = e 7 we 


Lx3.18. OF THE CITIE OF GOR. © 677 


Itt a i” 


a 


nameth one ef /erins,who went in the Argonautcs voi2ge: hut that was the brother of 4m-_— 
phson,not this Affersus. (8) Enropa | Agenors daughter, folne by Pyrates from Sydcn in Phe- BOP: 
nicia,and broughs into Crete ina fhippe calicd the White-Bul! :and from her had this third 

part of our world, the name : if reports bee true. Herodotus faith the Cretans did ftcale her to 
anenge the rape of fo,whom the Phznicians had borne away before... Tuen Paris to reuenge 

the Afians went arid ftole Hefew,and fo beganne the mifchiefe. Palephatus Paruys declareth it 

thus, There was one Tasrws , aGnoffian , who making warre vpon Tyria, tooke a many Vir- 

gins from them,and Ewropa for one sand hence came the fable. The Greekes to make {ome- 

what of the coniundction of Joe and Ewrepa,fay that hee begot Cernixs on her,whom e4polle 
loued,and therefore in Lacedomon they tad the feafts of Apolo Carnius..Praxil (k) Roada- ... 
manthus| The Cretan law-giuer,for his iuftice feigned to be iudve of hel. Homer calicth §40@- Rhada- 
that is yellow, or faire Rhadamanthus,and | thinke hee teucheth at his father herein : although manne 
hee call other faire perfonages Eay$e: alfo. Plato faith he was fonneto Afopus by ef gina,on Sarpedoti, 
whom Jene begot eAdacus, and gaue her name vnto an Mein Greece./# Gorg. (1) Sarpedon vF 
Homer wiil not haue him the fon of Jame by Exropa, but by Laodsmeza,Bellerephons daughter, — 

He reigned in Cilicia, where there is apromontory of his name in the vcmoft part of his King- 

dome. Me/a, the common teport is he was King of Lycia,and fo holds Straba.46,1 2, writing 

that Sarpedon brought two Colonies from Cretethether:where he dwelt,and where the fon of - 
Pasdion Lycus reigned afterwards, leauing his name to it, which was called se da before,and 

Solymi af.erwards,though Homer make two {cuerall peoples of them, Sarpedon was flaine by 
Menelaus before Troy ,to the creat griefe of Joxe ; who could not sd sees the deftenies 

herein. (3) Adixos} King of Crete , and their law-giuer alfo: This fome fay was CAdizos the — -- 
yonger,and fon to /uptter.Diodor.. 5, (#) Hercules in Tyria | Or in Sytia.But indeed Tyre is in Mines 
Syria,and all Phanicia alfo. For Syria is an huge thing Sixe Hercules doth Txily(as I faid rece cules: 
ken vp.Eufebins makes Hercules {urnamed Delphinas who was fo famous in Phznicia,to line 8 

in thefe times: but if ie were the Heresles that burnt himfelfe on Octa,it was the Argiue,and - 

we muft read Tyrinthia in Augu/fine,and neither Tyria,nor Syria:Tyrinchia being a citty neare 

vnto Argos wherein Hercs/es the Argiue was brought vp,& cherevpon called the Tyrinthiang 

heit was whom che Authors fay did come into !talie and killed all tne monfters, Buc hee thae 

came vnto the Gades,was Hercules of Ezipt,as Philoftrates faith./.2.(0) Antens} Son vatoTer= 

rahe dwelt in Tingen in Mauritania,which was thervpon called Tingitanas lying ouer again 
Spaine.His fheeld(faith AZe/a )is there to be feene,being cut out of the back of an Elephant & . 
of fuch hugeneffe,as rio man of earth is able to weeld it -and this che inhabitants affirme with 
reuerence,that hee bore alwaies in fight. Fhere is aHo a little hill chere,in forme of a man lyin 

with his face vpward,thar, fay they, is his combe,which when any part of itis dimithed,it be- 

gins to raine,and neuer ceafech wntill it be made vp againe.Exjebins driucth the oueithrow of 
Antans by Hercules, vnto the former-times, of the firft Heren/es , who conquered hiin(as hee 
fa'th‘in wraft!ing.Nor doth Virgil mention the conqueft of Antexs amongit the Argiue Her- 

cules labours:but Oxid,Clandian and others,lay all the exploits of the reft vpon him only,thae 

was fon to Jowe & Alemena.(p)Octa]A mountaine in Macedonia, Afe/4, The Otzan groue was «,.': 
the [aft ground that Argiue Hercules euer touched, all the greeke and lacine bookes are filled 

with the ftory of his death : there is nothin more famous.(7} His owne paines Proceeding ofa 
melancholy breaking into vicers, Arift.(in proé/. mentions his difcafe, as Politian hath obfere 

ued in his Centuries. Feffas {ich he wasa great Aftronomer,and burned himfelfe in the time of 

a great eclipfe,to confirme their opinion of his diuinity:for etl the Moore had taught him 
Aftronomy,and he fhewing the Greekes the {phere that he had giuen hin, gaue them occafi« 

on to feigne that Hercsdes bore vp heauen while Atlas relted his fhoulders.:7) Bupris King of Bufyrig; 
Egipt he buile Bufysis and Nomos in an inhofpirable and darren foile, and thence came the fa« 

ble of his killing his gueftes:for the heard{-men of thofe parts would rob & {poile the paffene 

pers, if they were to weake for chem. Another reafon of this table was(faith Diod.4.2.)for chat 
Typhox who flew his brother Ofyris,being red-headed, for pacification of Offris foule,an order 

was fet downe,that they fhou'd facrifice nothing but redde oxen and red-headed men,at his 
tombe,fo that Egipt hauing few of thofe red heads , and other courtries many , thence came. 

there areport that Bufyris maflacred firangers, whereas it was Ofyris tombe that was caufeof. .__ 
_ this cruelty. Bufyris indeed(as Exfeb.faith)was a theeuifh King:dut Heresles killing him, {eral Erichtho= 
the land at reft. This affuredly was Hercules the Egipcian.({) Evichthonixs] Son to Viulean and nits 


Mmm 3 the 


678 


‘SAINT AVGVSTINE. rorretes 


Vv'cans 


~ arole 
~ ft) ve 


the earth,He confpired againft Amph:ltion , and depofedhim, Panfan, (t) But becanfe they 
hold | Ione hauing the paines of trauell in bis head , praied Uwlcax to take an axe and cleauc it: 
he did fo,and out {tart AZinerna,armed,leaping and dancing, Her did Usicas aske to wife, in 
regard of the mid-wifty that hee had afforded Jupiter in his neede , as alfo for making Jeues 
thunder-boles, and fire-workes vied againft the Gyants : Jone put it vnto the Virgins choifes 
and fhe denies to mary with any man.So ’#/can affring to force her,(by foxes conicnct)in ftri- 
uing he caft out his {perme vpon the ground,which A4smerna {haming at, couered with earth: 
and hence was Erichthonixns borne, hauing che lower parts of a {nake,and therefore he inuen- 
ted Chariots,wherein he might ride,and his deformity be vafeene. Varg.Georg.3. 


Primus Exichthonius currus et quatnor anfas, 
Iungere equos,rapidi(que rotis infiftere victor. 

Firlt Erichthonsus durft the Chariot frame, -_ 

Foure horfes ioyne,on {wift wheeles rnnne for fame. 


Sersins ypon thistells the tale as wee doe. Higinins faith ( Hit. cele/?.lib.2.)that Tone admia 
ring Erichthonixs his new inuentioa,teoke him vppe to heauen , naming him #40x@-, chat is 
Fi’aggoner : appointing himto be the driuer of the 7. {tars by the tropike of Cancer, Buc E« 
richthonins (faith hee ) inuented waggons, and ordained facrifices to (Afinerxa, building her 
firft Temple ae Athens.(«) That in the Temple of | Aboue (eramicus and Stoa(called Bafilenm) 
is aTemple of Vulcan wherein isa ftatue of Afsnerna: and this gaue originall to che fable of 
Erichthonsus. Paufan.in eAttic. There was one Minerna that by Unlcan had Apollo , him 
whom Athens calleth Patron.(x) A little child| Hence was he feigned to be footed like a fers 
pent.Ovid tells a tale how AZinerna gaue a boxe vnto (ecrops daughters to keepe(in which E- 
richthonius was ) and warned them notto looke in it, which fec them more on fire to know 
what it was,and {fo opening it,they faw a child in it, and a dragon lying with him. AZetams.2. 
Pandrofas one of the fifters would not confent to open it,but the other two did,and therefore 
beeing, ftriken with madneffe , they brake their necks downe from the higheft part of the 


tower, Panfanias, 


eee. 


what fictions got footing in the nations, when the Iudges beganne 
frftiorule Ifracl, Cuar. 13. ss 


§ Ofwah being dead, Ifraell came to be ruled by Iudges: and in thofe times, they 
+ prof{pered, or fuffered,according to the goodnes of Gods merciesor the defeart 
of their fins. And (4) now the fiction of Trptolemus was on foote,who by Ceres a- 
poyntment flewall ouer the world with a yoakeof Dragons, and taught the vfe of 
corne: another fiction alfo (6) of the Adsnotanre, hut in (c) the labirynth,a place 
which none that entred, could ener get out of. Of the (4) Centaures alfo,halfe men 
and halfe horfes : of (¢) Cerberus, the three-headed dogge of hell. Ot (f) Phrixus 
and Helle who flew away on the back ofa Ramme. Of (¢) the Gorgon whofe haires 
were {nakes, and who turned all that beheld her into ftones. Of (4) Bellerophon, 
and his winged horfe Pegafus : () of mphion ,and his ftone-moouing mufick 
onthe harpe. Of (k) Ocdépws,and his anfweretothemonfter Sphrnxes riddle, ma- 
king her breake her ownenecke from her ftand. Of Asteus , earthes-fonne killed 
by Hercules (in the ayre) for that he neuer {mote himto the ground buthe a- 
rofe vp as ftrong againe as he was when he fell: andothers more that I perhaps 


 haue omitted. Thofe fables, vnto the Troian warre, where Varre ende:h his fe- 


cond booke De Gente Rom.were by mens inuentions fo drawn(/) from the truth of 

biftory that their gods werene way by them difgraced. Butas for thofe that fay- 

nedthat Jupéter (7) ftole Ganymede, that goodly boy for his luftfull vfe (a villany 

doneby Tastalss andafcribed vnto Jone, ) or thathe came downe to lie with (s) 

Danae ina fhower of gold( the woman being tempted by gold vnto difhonefty J: 
: | an 


i RR oe : 
Lis18. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 679: 
ith eames eed eee | 
gidall this being eyther done or deuifed in thote times, or-done by others, and 
favned to be Jones: itcanct be fatd how mifchieuous the prefumption of thofe 
fable-forgers was, vpon the hearts of all maokind, that they would beare with 
fuch vngodly flaunders of their'gods: which they did norwithftanding, and gaue 
them gratious acceptance, Ww hereas had they truely honored Japiterthey fhon!d 
feuerely naue pnnithed hisflanderers. But now they are fo farre from checking 
them,that they feare their gods anger, ifthey doe not nourifh them, and prefent 
their fictions vnto 4 populous audience. About this time Latona bore Apolo,not 
chat oraculous God before-faid: but he that keprthe heards of King (0)_ame- 
hee afrerwards held a God ,and coanted oneand the 


tace of buriallalfo: and yet were thofe damned factiligious facrifices called 
the Bacchanalls appointed by the vneleane deuills vnto him ,as vntoaGod. But 
the Senate of Rome at length ( after long vfe of ther ) faw the'barbarous filchi- 
nefie of thefe facrifices,and expelled them the citty. And inthis time (7) Perfe- 
us and his wife _Aadromeda bemg dead,were verily beleeuedio bee aflumed in- 
to heauen, and chere-vpon the world was neither afhamed (/) nor affraide to. 
giue their names vnto two goodly conftellations, and to foxne their Images 
therein. ‘(ws oe Hes. 
. row She. 2 _ ee ee a oy 


L.VIVES. - 
His ori gi nall is vncertainc,ignoble,faich Onid his mother was Triproles 


TH e fittion of (4 ) Triptolemsus| 
childe : and (res lodging in his mothers houfe, beftowed mus, 


2 poore woman,and he a fickly 
his health of him, Latfantixs making him fonne to Elenfas (King of Eleufis) and Hone, that 


eres beftowed immorrality vpon him, for lodging ee inhis fathers houfezon the day'fhe | 
fedde him in heauen with her milke , and on the night fhe hidde him in fire. (elens was hig 
father, faith Serums: But Eufebius maketh him a Rranger to (eleus,aad landeth him at Eleufis, 
Celeus his citty out of along fhip.Bur the Athenians generally beld him the fonne of Celeus,fo 
did not the Argiues,but of Trochilus Hiercpanta who falling out with Agexor, & flying from 
Argos,camie to Eleufis there martied, and there had Triptole:.sus, and Exboles, Some hold him 
(and fo Mufaus did,fome fay) the fonne of Oceanus and Terra: that Enbolis and Triptolemus’ 
weie Dyfanlss fonnes,faith Orphens, Charilus of Athens derives him irom Rharas, and one of 
Amphytlions daughters. Diodorus ,from Hercules and: Thejprote King Philews his daughter, 
Now Ceres (they fay ) gaue him corne, and fent him with a chariot ( with two wheeles onely 
for {wiftnefle fake, faich Hegin. ) drawne by a teame of Dragons through the ayre, to goe and 
teach the (owing of corte to the world : that he firft fowed the field Rhazius by Eleufis , and 
reaped an harueft of it:wherfore they gathered the Mufhtomes vied in the facred banquets, fré. 
that ficld:Tréptolemus had his altar alfo,and his threfhing place there, ‘dhe pretended truth of: 
this hiflory agreeth with Exfebias s for it faith that Triptolemus was fonneto Ekufus King of. 
Elufis , who ina great dearth fuftairied the peoples liues out of his, owne: granary, which 
Triptolemsus vpon the like occafion beeing not adle to doe,fearing the peoples furieshee-tooke 
along fhip called the Dragon, and fayling thence, within a while retu ned againe with aboun-" 
dance of come,and expelling Celeus who had vit urped invhis abicence,releened the people with 
corne,and taught them tillage. Hence was ke termed Ceres his pupitl. Sctne place Lyncus for 
Celeus He(faith Oxid)was King of Scythia, & becaufe he would nave Aanye Triptolemus,Ceres | 
turned him into the beaft Ly#x,which we call an Once. (6) The Afi-otaure| Minos of Crete The Mino= 
maried Pa/phaé the Suns daughter, & he being abfencin a war again{t._Atri¢a about his claime taure, : 
so the kingdom, & she killing ofhis fon Axidrogens; fhefellintoa beaftly defire of copulation. 

_—— Mmm ¢ with 


680 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. ~ Cuarrg, 


The Labi« 
tinth. 


With a Ball: and Dedalus the Carpenter framed a (ow of wood, wherein the beeing enclofed, 
had her Luft fatiffied, and brought forth the Minotaure,a monfter that eate mans fiefh. This 
Versus was caute of. Seru. For the Sune bewraying the adultery of Mars and Venus , Unl- 
64x cameand tooke them both in a Wyre nette, and fo fhamefully prefented them vnto the 
view of all the gods, Here-vpon Vensas tooke a deadly malice againft all the Sunes proge- 
nie sand thus came this Minoraure borne: but Sersiss faith he was no monfter, but that there 
was aman either Secretary to AZinos, or fome gouernour of the Souldiours vnder him called 
Taurus,and that in Dedalus his houfe,Pa(iphae and he made AZines Cuckold, and fhee bring- 
ing forth two fonnes,one gotten by (Minos, and the other by Tarsus, was faid to bring forth 
the Minotaure: as Vrgill calleth it; 
Milamane genus prolema, biformens. 
A mungrell breed,and double formed-birth. a. 

Euripides held him halfe man and halfe bull : Péatarch faith he was Generall of A4in0s forces, 
and cither in a fea-fight or fingle combate, flaine by Thefems, to Minos his good liking : for 
hee wasacrucll fellow, and the world reported him too inward with Pafiphaé : and therefore 
after that Adios re(tored all the tribute-children wnto Athens, and freed them from that im- 
pofition for euer. Palephratus riteth that Taurus was a goodly youth,and fellow to Afines, 
that Pa/iphae fell in Joue with him, and hee begot a child vpon her : which A4snos afterwards 
vaderftood,yet would not kill it when it was bor.e, becaufe it was brother to his fonne:. Tie 
boy grew vp, and the King hearing that hee iniured the Sheapheards, fent to apprehend him: 
but he digged him a place in the ground, and therein defended himfelfe, Then the King fene 
certaine condemzed Malctactors to fetch him out: but he hauing the aduantage of the place, 
flew them all, and {> euer after that the King wfcd to fend condemned wretches thether , and 
hee would quickly make them fure, So cMinos fent Thefexs thether vnarmed (hauing taken © 
him ia the warres ): but Ariadne watched as he entred the caue,and gaue him a iword where- 
with he flew this Minotaure. (¢) The Labyrinth | A building fo entangled in windings and 
cyrcles,that ic deceiueth all that come in it. Foure fuch there were in the world - but in Egipe 
at Heracleopolis,neare to the Lake Maris, Heredorus faith that he {awe it: no maruell, for it 
was remaining in Plinyes and Diod. his time. Thefe two,and Strabo and Mela do deic ibe ir, 
Mela saith Pfameticus made it, Pény reciteth many opinions of it, that it was the worke of 
Petefucus, or elfe of Tithois,or elfe the palace of -ALorherudes, or a dedication wnto the Sanne, 
and that is the common beleete. Dedalas made one in Crete like this ; Diod. Flin, but it was 
not like Ecypts by an hundred parts: and yet moft intricate. Onid.8 Metamorph.Ph:lother ss 
in Plutarch,thinketh that ic was but a prifon ,out of which the enclofed theeucs might not 
efcape,and fo thinketh Palephatus. The third was in Lemnos, made by Zmlus , Rholas, and 
Theodorus builders, The ruines of it flood after thofe of Crete and Italy were veterly decayed 
and gone. Plyn, The fourth was in Italy , by Clu/iems: made for Porfenna King of Hetruria, 
Varro. (d) The ( entanres | [xton,fonne to Phlegias the fonne of (Mars, louirg /sno,and thee 
telling Jove of it, hee made a cloud like her, on which cloud /xéon begot the Centaures. Sure 
it is,he was King of Theffaly, where horfes were firft backt. Pésn/ib.7. Bridle <nd faddle did 
Peletronius inuent : and the Theffalians that dwele by mount Pediow, were the firfi chat foughe 


‘on Horle-back : Virgd goeth not farre from this,faying. Georg.3. 


Frena Pelethronsi Lapsthe girofque dedere, 
Impofiti dorfo,atque equstem docuere {ub armis, 
Infultare folo,cr at Zlomerare {uperbos, 
Fir(t Pelethronian Lapiths gaue the bit, 
And hotted ee taught arm’d horfmen fit s 
And bound,and proudly coruet as was fit. 
The fame hath Lacan in his Pharfalia,b.6. 
7 Primus ab aquorea percuffis cuppide faxis, 
7 keffal-eus fonspes hells feralibus omen . 
Extlust premus Chalybem freno{que memordit, 
Spamanit que nonis Lapitha domsrorts batenis. 
Since Neptune with fea- trident ttroke the rockes; 
Fit che T heffalian horfe with deadly fhockss 
oi A difmall 


| ee } : : 
TLint8. | OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 681 


—— ea. owe wee we eee 


A difmall figne,came forch, he firlt bit bruzed, 

| And fom'de;at Lapith riders reines vnufed. __ | ee 
Sernins explaining this place of Usrgill: faich thus. The Oxen of a certaine King of Theffaly 
gadding madly about the fields, hee fent his men to fetch them in : but they being not fwsft enough 
for them, got upon-horfes, and fo riding fwiftly afier the Oxen, pricked and whipped them home to 
their fiabies, Now fome feeing them in their Swift courfe,or when they let their horfes drinke 
at the river Peneus, began this fab’e of the Centaures : giuing them that name, er? nurs res 
ravers, of pricking the Oxen, Some fay this fable was inuented to fhew how {wiftly mans life 
paffeth on,( becaule of the {wiftneffe of an horfe.) Thus farre Seruins, Palephatus hath it thus, 
when the wilde Buls troubled all Larifia and T heffaly, Yxion proclaimed agreat rewarde to thefe 
that could drine them thence. Sothe youths of Nephele got upon the horfes they bad broken , (for 
they had waggons in ufe before’ and fo drove them away very eafily : and hauing receined their re- 
ward,they grew proua,iniursng beth \xion him-felfe and the Lariffeans ( then called Lapithes ) for 
being ixuited to Pirrnas his marviage,they fell torausfhing of the virgins. Thus began the fable of 
the Centaures, and their horfedlike bodyes,and of their birth from a clowd : for Wephele( their 
cities name) is, 4 ¢lond, Thefe Centaures alfo were Lapsthes, for Nephele was inthe Lapithes | 
countric,and they are diftin& as the Remaincs and the Latines were. (e) Cerberus} begotten Cerberns, 
by 7yphon, he made an hideous noife when he barked, hauing fifty necks. Heftod, in Theegon, 
Thus Seveca defcribeth him in his Hercules furens, | 


Poff hec auariDitis apparet domus, 
Sanus bic umbras territat Stygius canis, 
Quiterna vafto capita coneutiens fono 
Regnum tnetar fordidum tabocaput 

, unt colubri,viperis horrent inbé, 
Longufq torta {ibilat tauda draco, 

Par tra forme, fenfit bt motns pedum, 

| Attollit hirtas angue uibratecomas, 
Miffumd, captar aure fubietta fonum, 
Sentire oy vibra folitus.—-— 


ThecC ene 
taures, 


The haule of greedy hell comes next to fight: 
Here the fierce Stygian Dog doth foules affright,- 
Who fhaking his three heads with hideous Bick 
Doth guarde the itate ; his mattring head around 
Snakes lick : his mane with vipers horrid is : 

- Athis wreathd taile a Dragon large doth hiffe, 
Furie,and forme,like : when our feete he heard, 
Darting a fnake,his briftled haires he reard, 

: And liftned at the noife with lolled eare, 
As he is wont eu’n fhady foules to heare, 


Boceace and others compare him to a conctous man: (and Boecace wrote nothing fo vainely, 

as the reft of that age did,) Porphyry faith, that the badge of Serapss and fs, (that is Dis and 
Proferpina)was athree-headed dogge: viz. that oe of deuill char haunts the ayre,the 
earth,and the water. De interpr,dinin.He was called three-headed(faith he) becaufe the funne 
hath three noted pofiures,the point of his rifing,height,and fetting, This Cerberus, Herewles 
(they fay ) did traile from hell vp to earth: and that isnowa prouerbe in all hard attempts. 
Some fay he drew him out ynder mount 7 exarus(Strab Senec.)& this is the common beleefe. 
Por there(fay they) lieth rhe readieft and Jargeft way dowrie vnto hell. It is thought that Hers 
exles killed fome venemous ferpent there,& that thence che fable had originall.Of thofe parts 
weread this in Afels.The Mariandines dwell there in a city that by report,was giuen them by. 
the Argiue Hercules, it is called Heraclea : the proofe of this is , becaufe hard by it is the hole 
called Achereufia,whence Hercules is thought to haue haled Cerberus. Péiny followeth Adela. 
1.27,Thé Herbe Aconitan grew(fay they)from the froth that fell from Cerberns his lips when Aconitam 
he was traled along by Hereules:& therfore it groweth about Heraclea,whence the hole is at 
which he came vp.Ovid affigneth no fet place for the growth, but only Pontus at largé where 
Cerberms was futt feene , to calthis froth vpon the cliffes: for it i called Acomitwns of ant, 

| : a acragge: 

é \ 


6383 


Phryxas 
 ~& Helle. 


——~ vy ~eor 


SAINT AV GVSTINE. Cuar.13: 


a craggeor flint : and heis called Cerberus, quaft rpsaruy Cocos, a deuonrer of flefh. efidexs the 
Mollofian King had a dogge of this name,for he being called ¢iovevs , that is: Orcas , named 
his wife Ceres,his daughter Proferpina,aud his dogge (erborus.Some fay he {tole his wife and 
called her Proferpina : but on with Platarchs tale. Thefens and Pirithous comming to freale bis 
daughter hee tooke thens,and cast Pirithous unte his dogge Cerberus,and kept Thefeus in ftraight 
prifon, Here-vpon came the fable of their going into Hell co bring away Proferpina, For the 
countrey of Moloffis in Epyrus, lying Welt from Attica and Theflaly , was alwayes fignified 
by the name of Hell. Homer. Palaphatws tells chis tale in this manner. Hercules baning 
conquered Gcrior in Tricarenia, a city of Pontus, and drining away all hes heards , there wasa 
very fierce Maftiffe that followed the Oxen : they called him Cerberus: fo when they came inte 
Peloponne{us,Molcflus, a rich Nobleman of Mycene begged the dogge: but Euriftheus denying 

him,hee agreed wsth the fhepheard to fhut bins into the cane of mount Tanarus , with a fort of bit- 
ches that ae had put in there. Se Euriftheus fet Hercules to feeke the dogge, and hee found him in 

Tesarus, and brought him away, and this is the ground of the fable. (f) Phryxns and Helle } 
Brother and fitter, the children of Athansas fonne to Acolss, aman of Nephele: who becont- 
wing mad,and running into the defers, Athansas maried Jno Cadmus his daughter: who hating 
Phrycusand Helle,smade meanes by the matrons to fpoile all che fruites of che citty the caufe 

whereof they fhould go and inquire of the Oracle,and returne this falfe anfwer,that the chile 
dren of Nephele mutt be facrificed. Bue Jo pittying them,fent them a golden fleeced Ram,to 

ridc ouer the fea vpon. Helle being a young virgin,and not able to guide her felfe,fell into the 
fea,that runs betweene Afia & Europe,therevpon named Hellefpont(her did Neptune lie with, 
and fle bare him Peon.) Phryxus paffed ouer Bofphorus, Propontis, &c. and at [aft landed at 

Colchos,where he facrificed the Ram ynto Jowe,and the fleece vnto AZars,building hima tem- 

ple. Apollonius faith hee built AZars no temple , but onely one vnto Jupiter fugins, che flight- 

guider,(yet fome Greeke authors fay that Dencalion ereCted the ftatue of this deity,prefently 


" ypon the deluge.) The Ram was bred at Orchomenon in Beeotia,fome fay in Theflaly : he was 


taken to heaven, made the firft figne in the Zodiak.Now that is obfcure(faith Eratoffbenes ) 
for when he was to afcend,he put off his golden ficece himfelfe,& gaue it vnto Phryxus. There 
was an Oracle(faith Diod./s.5.)told e£eras King of Pontus,that the Ram fhould dye as foone 
as a ftrange fhip came to take away this fleece of the Ram: wherevpon he cruel!y maflacred all 
ftrangers,to make them feare to come thicher,and walled the temple about with a triple wall, 
keeping a continual! guard of Taurians about it, of whom the Greekes tcldan hundred lyes: 
that they were Buls that breathed fire , and that a great dragon watched the ficece, &&c. Bue 
rae were called Bulls,of their countrie name Tavvica . and becaufe they were {o cruell, were 
faid to breath firaAnd the keepers name of the remple being Drace, hence ferched the Poets 
all their fixions.So feigned they alfo of Phryxus , who indeed failed away ina fhip called the 
Golden Ram,and Helle being {ea-fick,and leaning ouer the poope,fell into the fea, Others f; ay> 
that Gambrus the King of Scythia landed at (olchos the time that Phryxxs and his maifter was 
taken and that the King liking the youth well,- et. gaue him to him, & he brought him vp 
as the heire ef his kingdome, and left him it at his death: but for his maifter Aries, (for that 
was his name)he was {acrificed to the gods, and his skin hung vp in the cemple,as the cuftome 
was. And then the oracle telling e4 eras that he fhou'd dye when ftrangers came to demand 
the Rams skin, he to make the keepers more carefull ouer it, guilded ic ouer sthus far Sscsds 
Some referre thisto che riuer of Colchos, in whofe channels there is gold found , which they 


_purge from the fand through flues, and receiue it into skins which they lay vnder their fues. 


Some refer it to the great aboundance of gold and filuer in that country,as Pliny doth in thefe 
words, Now bad Salauces and Efubopes reigned in Colchos, who finding the laud in the original 
purity,digged out much gold and [yluer in the Santan territories : This as Strabo faith, firft made 
Phryxus, and then Jafon , to vnder-take an expedition again(t ic: both which , left fome me- 
mories of their being there : Za/on, the Cittie Iafonia; and Phryxas, Phryxiuin ; and both of 
them matched with e£eras daughters, Jafon with Aledea , and -Phryxas with Chalciope : by 
whome he had Cytifforss, Afelana,Phontss and Argus,of whome (faith Pherecides. ) their fhip 
was called Arge.But Exfeb.will hauc Phryxus, Abas the Argiue,and Evichthess of Athens, all 
of onetime. Some writers affirme ( faith hee ) that Phryxss at this time fled with his fifter 
Hele from his ftep-mothers treacher:es,and-was feene go ouer the fea vpon a golden Ram:the 
Ghip wherein hee failed bearing a guilt Ram vpon her ftemme. Pelephatas delivers . thus. 

| ‘ Athamaas, 


Lin.18.. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 683 


Athamas,Acolus his fonne raigning in Phrygia , had a fteward called Aries whome he much truf- 

ted. This Aries told Phryxus how his death was plotted :(o Phryxus hus fier Helle and this Aries, 
Lota great maffe of riches together and away they went Helle died at feasand fo they cast her body: . : 
oner-boord, which gane the name of Helle{pont unto the feasthe reff got to (olches. Phryxus mas Hlellefpons. 
ried Kg Acetas daughter , and gaue him an Image of 4 Ramme , all of pure gold : which hee 
made of the riches that he brought with him. ( g) The Gorgon. | There were faidto bee three G 3 
Gorgons,Steno,Euriale and ALedufa, daughters to Phorcus , and feamontfters. Hefiod faith that al i 
of thefe three Afedufa oncly was mortall,/2» Theog.Onid hath but two in all. 14et.4. and both | 
thefe had but one eye betweenethem, which they vied by courfe. Quer againgt the Weft 
of Ethiopia, are Hands that (e/a calleth Gorgones , making them the habitation of thefe 
monfters, And Lucan agreeth with him Pharf-g, Ouer again{t Hefperoceras a promontory +6 
of Egipt their are lands({aith Pészy) which the Gorgon whilom inhabited;fome two daies faile” ** 
from the maine: Hanno of Carthage came co them,& tooke two of the women,al rough & hai- 
ry:the men were too {wilt for them,but thefe he gor: their skins hung vp fora monument in 
‘ Janos temple , along time after, at Carthage. Some tooke thefe Gorgons for the Hefperides, 

but the Hefperides les, fayth Statins Sebofus ly forty daies fayle farther thenthe Gorgons, 
Diedorns faith that the Gorgons were a warlike nation of women in Lybia, whome Perfeus 
ouerthrew, with their leader Afeduf2.lib.4. , | , ie 
Thi’ Adedufa the fables fay that Neptune lay withallin Adizerna’s Temple, wheteat Minerwa MeduG, 
being angry turned het hayres into inakes , and made themall that beheld her,become ftones: 
Perfens being armed with Adinersa’s fhield encounered her,and fhe beholding herfelfe in che 

bright fheeld as in a glaffe grew into an heauy fleepe, and became a {tone , but Perfeus pre- 

fently cut of her head, and the droppes of blood that fell from it filled Lybia full of ferpents 

euer fince : and thofe that fell vpon the twigges of fhrubs , turned them into corall : and from 

thence ( faich Oxidand Hefiod) came Pegafus that winged horfe : but others fay, from the 
copulation of Neprane and Aledufa. Higsnus fayth that Perfens ouercame the Gorgons thuss 
Hauing but one eye betweene them, hee watched the time that the one tooke it out to 

giue the other, and then hee fuddenly came and fnatched it away , and threw it into the lake 

Triten , and fo hauing blinded them he eafily foyld them both. /spiter being to fight againft 

the Giants was told that he mutt weare the Gorgons head if he would be victor:wherypon be ~ 
couered it with a goats skine, and fo-bare it to the field: Pallas afterwards gatitofhim. Exbeo 

merus faith that Pallas flew the Gorgon. In facr. Hsf?. Tis commonly heldthatthis AZedufa 

yeas wounderfull faire, and amazed all that beheld her beauty,and thence was it faid fhe made | 

them ftones. The Gorgons came to the field armed in the skins of mighty ferpents. Diod,per- 

haps they will put fome of this fixion vpon the Catoblepz2 , for they liuc ouer againft the Mes 
_Gorgones, in that part of the mayne. A¢e/a. Pliny. They are no great beafts , but chey arethe 

diuill for dangerous; flow of body , with great heads hanging alwaies downctothe ground: _ 

and hurt not with any member but their eyes. No imore doth the bafiliske again{t which Bafiiske, 
men go armed with gloaffes in their fhields and breft-plates,that the ferpent may fee him-felfe.. 

Palaphatus tells along tale of thefe things and this it is. Phorcys was ax Ethiopian of Cyrene, — 

which is an Iland witbout the ftrayght of Uercules.,, and the shabitants till the ground of Lybia 

as farre as the riner —Amona neareto Carthage , and are very rich in gold, So Phorcis eretted a. 

flatue unto Minerua, of three cubites height : but died ere he conld dedicate st. (‘1 his goddeffe now 

they call Gorgon. ) So he left three daughters behind him Stheno , Euriale , and Medufa: whe 

would none of them marry , but fhared their fathers eftate equally : each one had ber Iland , bat for 

that Batue , they neither confecrated it nor divided it but kept tt in the treafury , and poffeffed st 

zach one by courfe, Now Phorcyshad one fithfull friend about Lim whome hee vfed as-¢f it bad 

beene his eye. Now Perfeus being fled from eArgos , and turned pyrat , bearing that thofe Ilands 
‘were fullof gold and empty of men, lurked fecretly betweene Sardinia and [ orfica , and watching 

this faithfull meffenger whome the fisters ufed ftill to [end from one to another , tooke lime in a. mef- 
fage,and learnt of him that there was nothing for bins to take, bet Mincruas flatue, So the Vir- 

gins woundring what was become of their feruant,their eye, Perfeus landed , and fhewedthems that, 

he had him , and wonld not refore him,nay further , would kill them , unleffe they fhewed bins the. 

Gorgons fatue, Medufa would not , and fo was flaine, the ether two did, and had their eyes againes 

So Perfeus fet Medufas hezd upon the prow of his Gally , naming her the Gorgon,and then robe 

bing on ; fpoyled all the Ilanders of their wealth , killing, and plaging thofe that wontd ging bins mde. 

ins 


rhing’ 


684 


SAINT AVGVSTINE.  Cuart3° 


Bellerephd 


Chymara, 


Pegafus, 


thing and demanding mony of the Striphians,they forfeoke the city which be entring found nothing 
but 4 many fione Ratues in the Market place, See ( quoth Perfius) bew my Gorgon turnes men ina 
te fones, [ would fhe did net fo with our felues. Thus farre Palaphatas : who is farre miftaken in 
the places. Ichinke chofe Ilands the Syrtes , for they doe accord better with Cyrene, Sardinia 
and Corfica. But there may bee fome' error in his copies. (6 ) Bellerophon. Sonne to 
Glaucus : Sifiphas bis fonne : king of Ephyra (afterwards Corinth ) vntill Prasus the Argiue 
King depriued him and made him ferue him. Now Antia , Pratus his wife,tempted himtolie 
with her, which refufing , fhee flandered him ynto her husband of actepmting it. Se he fene 
himto efricbatus, Antias father with a letter aduifing him to protect his daughters chafticy 
by killing Bellerophon, Ariobatns , fent him againft the ( bymera which hee with the helpe of 
the winged horfe ‘Pegafus oucr-came (i ) Now this (hymara (faith Hefod)was a Lyon in his 
fore-parts,a Dragon in the midft,and aGoate behind ; which hinder parts gaue name co the 
whole montter, Homer makethic the midle part a goat. Typhen they {aid begoc it vpon Echide 
na,it breathed fire:Uirg.e£n.6 vponwhich place Sersins {aith that indeed 1t was a mountaine 
in Lycia whofe top: caft forth flames:and thac about the height of ic there were Lyons : that 
the middle parts were good pafture grounds,and that the foote of it (warmed with ferpents:8 
this ‘Bellerophon made habitasle. Pegafus the horfe,had as Owsd faith, Celurm pro terra pre pede 
penna heauen for earth , and wings for hoofes. eApaleins faith that it was his feare made him 


famous, leaping about the Chymsara for feare of hurt,as if he had lowne.4fins.:b.8.From this 


Amphion, 


horfe,the two chiefe fountaines of the Mufes in Greece had their names. Thus writeth Sodas 
of them. By Thebes is the wood Helicon, the grouc (yrheron,the riuer /fmenins , and foun- 
taynes, sFrethufa,Ocdspodia, Piammate , Derce , and chiefly Agamippe and Hippecreene , both 
which (admus, the fir{t inuentor of letters, finding as he rode abroade gaue the Poets occafion 
to faigne that they both fprung from the dints of the winged horfes heeles , and both being 
drunke of , infpired che wit with vigor and learning. Thushe, Now Bellerophex siding vp to- 
wards heauen , and looking downe, grew brain-ficke, and downe he fell, but Pegafus , kept 
on his courfe , and was ftabled amongft the ftarres. Palephatus faith Bellerophon was a Vhrygi- 
an,ofthe bloud of Corynth,and was a rouer in the ftraytes of A(ia and Europe , hauing along 
thippe called Pega/xs, In Phrygia is Mount Telmifus, and Chymara adioyning to it : neare 
that was a caue that vented fyre: and vpon Mount Chymara , were dragons , Lyons. &&c, thae 
did the husbandmen much hurt. The whole mountaine did Bellerophon fet on fixe , and fo the 
wild-beafts were all burnt. (k_) Of Amphion.) Brother to Zetus and (alass , Jones fonnesby 
Antiope : for which Lyncexs her husband, King of Thebes, refufedher. The children being 
come to age reuenged their mothers difgrace, flew Lynceus, and Dyrce his wife , and chafin 
out old Cadmss , pofleffed Thebes them-felues. eAmpbion they fay drew the ftones after his 
mofike and fo built che walls of Thebes,the {tones dauncing thermfelues into order. Herac.de, 
vf rte poet > 


Diktwes et Amphion Thebane conditor arcisy 
Saxa monere fono teftudinis,et prece blandas 
a-—o-Ducere quo uellet. 


Amphion builder of the Theban city, 
With found of harpe and fweetentifing ditty; 
To moue the ftones is fayd,and where he weuld them lead. 


Pliny faith hee inuented Muficke. lib.7. Some fay the Harpe alfo : and fome fay that 
gaue him the Harpe.He was author of the Lydiantones. Valerius probus vpon Usrgills Alexa 
és,faith that Exvspides,and Pacusius fay that Zeties 8 Amsphion could gather their Hockes to- 
gether with their pipes. Witnefle Thebes which they walled about as Apollonius writeth. Je 
Argonast, But Zetus bare the ftones to their places , Ampbion onely piped , or harped them 
together. Exfebins maketh them both che inuentors of Mufike.Emang prep.Panyajis,and Alex- 
ander fay that (Mercury gaue eA mpbiow the Harpe for freeing of (yxara. Thus farre Prebas, 
eA mpbiox built Thebes, (faith So/inws.)not that his Harpe fetched ie ftones thether, for char 
is not likely , but hee brought che mountayners, and hyland-men ynto ciuility , and to helpe 
in that worke, Thisis that which Horace faych : Dstins cs Amphion Thebaxa conditer pe 
7 | Axa 


Lava. OF THE ‘CITIE OF GOD. | 685 


—_— + a gc SuSE NSS ORE 
— 


-—— — 


faxa monere,&c. Ir may bee that his fong or his eloquence obteined ftones for the worke, oF 


™: hisneighbours. Palepbatus faith hee paide them for the ftones with his Muficke, hauingno - |< 
it money. But Exfebins maketh him and Zetss to liue both together in two {cuerall ages, vnieffe 

te his tranicriber haue falfified him. For firft they liued vader Lincews his reigne , and then in 

= Abas his time afterwards. Niobe ( about whofe children the writers hold that famous contro- 

i uerfie ) was eAmpbions wife. > sete BOG white <1 ce | x ok: 

i. (k) Dedalus | An Attike (faith Diod.46.5.) fonne to Expalamus,who was grand-child-to pzdalus, 
Erichthens . hee was a rare ftatuarie, andan excellent Architedt , framing ftatues that feemed 


a to breath, and to goe, his witte was fo admirable , Hee taught it to Ta/as his nephew., who 
being but young,inuented the Wimble andSawe,which Daedalus greeuing at ,thatthe plory 

ofhis Arte fhould bee fhared by another, flew the youth, and being therefore condemned heé 
fled vnto Adinos in Crecte , who interteined him kindly : and there hee built the Labyriath, 

oy Thus Siculus. Now Serniis eAinead. 6, faith,that hee and his fonne /earus being fhutte.in the 

=:  Jabyrinth,hee deceiued his keepers by perfwading them hee would make an excellent worke 

ne for the King, and fo made him and his fonne wings , and flew away both. But /carus flying 

too high , the funne melted his waxen ioyntes , and fo hee fell into the fea that beareth his 

name , Daedalus lighted at Sardinia, and from thence (as Saéef faith) he flew to Cume , and 

there built atemple to Apo#o. Thus Seruins. Diod. and others fay, hee neuer came in Sardi- 

. nia, but into Sicilia, whether Mines purfued him, Cocades reigning then in Camarina, who 

‘3 ynder colour of a long difcourfe with him in his bathe, held him there vntill heehad choaked | 

a him. Aréffotle faith, that (roralus-his daughters killed him: but hee interpreteth a fhip and In Polit. 

* Oares to bed his wings, whofe {peed feemed as if hee flew away. Diodorus reckoneth many - 

of his workes in Sicilia, (ecalus intertaining him with all courtefie, becaute of his excellent. 
inuentions, and that it was a Prouerbe to call any delicate building, a Dedalean werke. 

Home.Ody/.1. a 

| Kanade du dancer, &e. ne ee os be 

. Vnder his feete a foote.ftoole was, whith in Dedalean worke :did paffe. 

“. And Virgil calleth the honey combes,Dadalean houfes, Geo.g, and Circe hee calleth Deda- 

ie lea, Avéftorle (in Pott.) faith that the ftatues hee made would goe by them-feluies, landrunne 

_9 away (faith Plato in ALemnone ) Vulefle they were bound, Hee that had them loofe had fu- — 

. gitiue feruants of them. Hee made a {tatue of Vexns that mooued through quick-filuer that 

7 was in it, Arif, 1.de Anima, Palepbatus rcferres all this to the diftinction of the feete, all ft» 

‘ tuaries before him making them alike, Hee learnt his skill in Egipt, but hee foone was his 

maifters better; For hee alone made more ftatues in Greece then were in all Egypt: At Mem- | 

phis was V’«/cans porche, fo memorable a worke of his, that hee had a ftacue mounted on it, 

and diuine honors giuen him, forthe Memphians long after that ,had the temple of Dedalus 

in great honour : which ftood in an Ile neere Memphis. But] wonder which Cumz the wri- 

ters meane,when they fay hee flew to Cumz : whether the Icalidh or the Ionian , whence the 

the Icalian defcended. Moft holde of the Italian, For thence hee flew into Sicilia, and of this 

doe Vsrgill and Iusenall meane. Inverall where hee faith how Visbritins went to Cuma, and 

Virgil where ¢neas conferreth with Sybille of Cumz. But the doubt is ; becaufe the Icarian 

fea, ( being his drowned fonnes name ) is not betweene Crete and Italy, but betweene Crete 

and Ionia, neere ynto Icarus, one of the Sporades Ilands, of which the fea (faith Varro ) is 

called Jcarian,and the Ile beareth Jcarss his name, who was drowned there ina fhip-wrack, | 

and fo left his name tothe place, Oxid defcribeth how they flew in their courfe in thefe - 

words: . i a | 

| , _——- Et iam Innonia lena 

Parte Samos fuerat,Delofqne parofque relitta: 

os Dextra Lebynthes erat, facundag, melle (alydna. 


Now Paros,Delos,Samos,lunoes land, | 
On the left hand were left: on the right hand 
Lebynth,and hony-full Calydna ftand. 


" Paegil faith hee flew an ynknowne way to the North. But the Ionian Cums, and not the Ita« 
, _ talian are North from Crete, But Sersins faith, that if you obferue the worde’, hee flew to- 
wardstbe North: but if you marke the bifforie, 2 flew by the North, So chat the fable 


686 


Ocdipus, 


Atidle. 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. | Cuar.s3 


hath added fome-what befides the truth : vniefle it were fome other Icarus, or fome other 
caufeiof this feas ndme , who can affirme certainly in aching of fuch antiquity. ( 2) Ocdipns.} 
Laius,Grand-childto eAgenor and fonne to Labdacus , King of Thebes in Boetia, married 
Tocafta-(veens daughter : who feeming barren, and Layas being very defirous of children, 
-wentto theoracle which told him hee neede not bee fo forward for children, for his owne 
fonne fhould killhim. Soone after Jocaffa conceived , andhad a fonne : the father made holes 
to bee bored through the feete and fo caft it out inthe woods : but they that had the charge, 
‘gaue it to. a poore woman called Pelybia,and fhe brought it vp in Tenea, a towne in the Co- 
sinthian teritory.. Ic grew vp to theitate and ftrength of aman, and being hardy and high 
minded hie went to the Oracle to know who wasshis father , for hee knew hee was an out-caft 
child. Layss by chance came then from the Oracle, and thefe rwo meeting neare Phoris , nei- 
ther would giue the way : fo they fell to words and thence to blowes , where Eains was flaine 
or as fome {ay , it wasin atumulte in Phocis,Ocdspus and hee taking feuerall parts. Jocafte 
was now widdow, and ynto her came the Sphynx with a riddle for all her wooers to diffolue: 
hee that could , fhould haue /oca/fa and the Kingdome;he that cou!d not, mult dye the death, 
Her riddle was - what creature is chat goeth in the morning on foure feete , at noone on two” 
and at night on three? This coft many a life,at laft came Ocdspus and declared it : fo maried his 
mother, and became King of Thebes, The Sphynx brake her necke froma cliffe, Oedipus 
hauing children by his mother, at aft knew whome hee had maried,and whome he had flaine: 


__-where-vpon hee pulled out his owne eyes : and his fonnes went to gether by the eares for the 


Sphynx, 


Ganimede 


Panag 


Kingdome. Thus much out of Diod. Strabo , Sophocles and Sexeca: for it is written in trage- 
dyes. Hee was called. Ocdspus quaft , atior xa , (wollen fete. The Sphynx( faith Hefied ) 
was begot berwne Typhon and the Chymsara. Aufonsus ( In Gryphiis. ) makes her of atriple 
fhape, woman-faced, griffia-winged,and Lyon-footed. His words be thefe, | 


‘Wa etiam thalamos per trina enigmeata querens, 
Qui bipes,ot quadrapes foret et tripes omnza folss, 
Terruit Aoniam volucrisleo,virgo triformis, 
Sphinx volncris pennis pedsbus fera, frente pulla. 


A mariage the feeking by ridles three, 

‘What one might two,three,and foure-footedbe, , 
Three-fhaped bird,beaft,made,fhe Greece daftreft,, 
Sphinx maid-fac’d,fetherd-foule,foure-footed beaft. 


But indeed this Sphynx was a bloudy minded woman. All this now fell out(faith Ex/ebrus) 

In Pandions time ,the Argiues , and in the Argonautes time. Palephatus faith that ( adeeus 

hauing put away his wife Harmonia, fhee tooke the mountaine Sphynx in Bocotia, and trom 

thatrouft did the Bocotians much mifchiefe./ Now the Boeotians called treacheries e£xig- 

mata , riddles.) Oedipus.of Corynth oucr-camie her, and flew her, ( ¢ ) From the truth of.} For 

‘of nothing is nothing inuenced, faith Lattaut and Palephatus.( m ) Ganymed. | Tantalus Role 
him and gaue him to Jowe, he was a goodly youth: and fonne to Tros King of Troy. /oxe 


made him his cup-bearer, and turned him into the figne Aguary. Tros warred vpon Tantalus 


for this, as Phanocles the Poet writeth.Eafeb.and Orof. fay that hee was ftollen from Herpagi- 
xm,which tooke the name from that fact:ic was a place neare the citty Parium in Phrygia.Ste- 
phan.() Danae.| Ofher elfewhere. She was Acrifins his daughter : who fhut her and his 
fonne Prefexsin acheft , and caft them into the fea , they droue to Apulia, where Danae was 
married ynto Primus , and barehim Dasnus , of whome Apulia was called Daunia, (0 J 
Admetus. | The Hell-gods complayning to Joxe that a gs diminifhed their kingdome 
in reuiuing dead men , hee killed him with athunder-bolc , dt which his father 4po//o being 
mad , fhot all the Cyclops ( Jones thunder-makers( to death, which Jowe greatly ftomaching 
would haue thruft Apollo out of Heauen: but at Latonas intreaty , hee oncly bound hima 
yeare prentife vnto a mortal]. So hee came into Thefflaly and there was heard{man vnto King 
Admetus,and therefore was he called Nonins , ot Paftorall.Orph. Flace.in Argonaut. Died.lib, 
5. Higinds faith he killed notjall the Cyclops but ontly Steropes. Admetus fayled with the Ar- 
ee ee eee nn 


7 


- es . i : ; r 


Lini8. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 687 


This may bee thar epollo that gaue the Arcadians their lawes , who called him Nominus. 
Who knoweth the contrarie? (p) Father Liber | AsDrodorns,Strabo, Fliny, Philoftratus, 
and all Poets almoft doe recorde. Dredor. and Philoft. giue this reafon of that fable of his 
beeing borne in Joxes thigh. His armie was fore infected with maladies in India, and he Icad 
them vppe to an higher and more wholefome ayre , where hee recouered them all , and this 
place the Indians called Femsxr (a thigh: ) and fo grew the fable. ( 9.) Was conquered |Some 
(faith Enfebiss )in thefc times (to witte when Pandionw remooued the feate of the Argive 
kingdome to Mycenas ) recorde the deedes of Liber Pater, the Indians , eAffeox and 
Pentheus , and that Perfexs ouer-came Liber, and flew him as Dinarchus.the Poet wri- 
teth. Hee chat wiil not beleeue him, let him view the tombe of Liber at Delphos ,neere 
the gulded ftatue of Apollo. Hee is painted in an ¢ffiminate fhape , for hee lead women to 
the warres as well as men, as Philocerss faith, liber.2, Thus farre Exfebins, Clemens ( Contra 
Gent. ) faith that the Tycans pulled him in peeces , and began to roafte and boyle his 
‘members, but Pallas gotte them away, and Apolle by Jones command buryed them on 
Pernafflus. , 7 6 a 

(r ) Perfens and | Sonne to one and Danaé : of him had Perfia the name, for hee warred_ 
there with admirable good fortune. Orof. fo holde the Greekes as Xenophon Atticus for 


Perfeus. 


one, e4ndromeda was daughter to Cephus,Phenix his fonne, and ( affiopeia. Shee was bound Ardremec 


vnto arocke,by the command of -pol/o's Oracle, for a Sea-monftcr to deuoure , and her pa- 
sents (tanding and weeping ouer her - Perfens egies oes the Gorgons warres , hearing 
how a!! things ftood , bargained with chem that hee 

ee monftet by prefenting the Gorgons head vnto it, All of them were afterwards placed in 
heauen : (ephexs hath nineteene ftarres at the backeof Vrfa Afinor , andthe circle Aytike. 
diuideth him in the breft, no part of his conftellation ever fetteth , but his fhoulders : Ca/fio- 


peia ficteth in a chaire , and hath thitteene ftarres, and the milken circle diuides her it: the 


middeft : the heauens motions turnes her heeles vpwards ( faith Higinus ) becaufe thee boae. 
fted that fhee was fairer then the Nereides. Andromeda was deified by A‘ixerna, for prefer- 
ring her husband before her countrey and friend: fhee is next (affiopeia , and hath twentie 
flarres in her conftellation : her head is ynder Pega/us his belly , and the Tropike of Cancer 
runnes ouct her breft and her left arme . Perfexs hath feauentcene ftarres : his right hand. 


ould marry the Virgin, andfo flew _ 


toucheth the circle Arétike,and his fcote ftands vpon Aréturus his head. Of thefe, read Jelins — 


Higinus and Atatus Solenfis loppain Syria({aith Afela. db 1.) was built before the deluge, 
where the inhabicants fay Cepvens reigned, where they doe keepe diuerfe old alears of his. 
and hir brother Phinens with great reverence, as alto the huge bones of the fea monfter 
that Perfens flew, Hierom. Marcus Scanrus ( faith Pliny lib. 9) in his Edilefhip amongit 


other ftrange fights , fhewed the bones of the mionfter that fhould haue deuoured Andree | 


meda: beeing fcrtie foote more in length, then the longeft Elephants ribbe of India, and Laitvence : 


halfe a foote thicker in the back bone, This hee brought from Ioppe, a towne in Judza. 
Indeed all writers fay that Toppe is in Judza, and therefore I wonder that Lawrence Valle 
liketh not of this opinion: for hee taxeth Jerome of Ignorance for placing of it in India: 
whereas Hicrome had Pliny and Mela on his fide, of better credite in Geagraphie then Onsd. 
But indeed thole yerfes are not much to the purpofe : for the firftof the fwartie browne, 


may bee meant of e£thiopia or Egypt : and in the later , Vaila himfelfe miftaketh the foe. 


sie. For Perfexs came out of Mauiitania to Judza and e£gypt , along the coaft of Africa. 
There marryed hee Andromeda, and from thence hee went to Euphrates , and to that coune. 
trey that the Greekes call Perfia after him,from thence into India, and then home to Argos 


with his wife. ( (-) Nor affraide ] Fearing not to blalt heauen with fuch impieus and fabu- 


lous imputations, — 


‘ 


| of the Theologicall Poets. 
Cuap.!I 4. 


Nino 7 


A Bout that time liued Poers, who were called Theologians ; verlifying of 
( Stheir men-made gods ; or of the worlds elements ( the true GODS: 
handy-workes ) or the principalities and powers,(whome GODS will and 

"Boe 


Vailsin an 


@ 


688 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. | Gunrax 


not their merite, had fo aduanced ) of thefe as of Gods did they make their 
poemes: If their fables contained any thing that concerned the true God it was 
fo layd in hugger-mugger with the reft, that hee was neither to bee difcer- 
néd from theit falfe gods therby,nor could they take that direftion to give him 
the whole, his onely due , but muft needs worfhippe the creatures as Gods, 
with God the creator, and yet could not abftaine from difgracing the fame 
their gods with ob{fcoene fables. Such was Orpheus (4) Mufeus ,and Lynus. 
But thofe were onely the gods feruants, notmade gods them-felues. Though 
Orpheus , Tknow not by what meanes, hath gottenrhe (6) ruling of the infer- 
nall facrifices, or rather facriledges in the citty of the Deuill. The(¢ ) wife of 
Athamas alfo , Ino, caft her felfe headlong into the fea with herchild Afeézcer- 
tes, and yet werereputed gods: as others of thofe times were alfo,as( d)Caitor 
and Pollux. Ino, was called by the Greekes Lemcothea, and by thelatines ALstute, 
and hekta goddefle by both parts, 


LVIVES. 


Orpheus, O Rphens (4) Mnfens,and Linas, }They liued all together alittle before the warres of 


Linas, 


I 


they beate her. Plat. Prob. Ine and: Melicerta being drowned, had their names changed , Ino 


Troy. Orphews was a Thracian and fonne to Ocager , or as fome fay , to eSpolle and ( al- 
Siope, but that was afition , deriued from his delicate vaine. Artapanus fayth he learnt AZey- 
fes law of amaifterin Egypt, Died, fayth hee brought the bacchanalia from Egipt into 
Greece , and taught the Thebanes them , becaufe they vied him curteoufly. Beafts and ftones 


_ did follow his muficke , by report, amd his harmony perfwaded the very deftenies to returne 


hitn his Enridice ; Thus the Poets fable. The Becche flew him : wherefore, no man kno- 
weth : fome fay becaufe hee had feene the facrifices of Liber : others becaufe in his praifes of 
the gods , being in hell, hee left Liberout. Others, becaufe hee iudgedthat (-alléope fhould 
ae with Adonis one halfe yeare , and Genus another ; and sudged not all for Venus: there- 
ore the women fell vpon him and killed him. Hee was terne in peeces ( faith Higis.Gb.2. J 
and his harpe placed in Heauen, with the belly towards the circle Arcticke. Ar:ffotle faith 
there wasnofuch man, Ochers fay he was of Crotone, and liued in Py//fratns his time, the 
Tyran of Athens. eAuthor Argonantic. Larus was founeto Mercury and Vrania: Hermedor. 
Apollosforne, faith Virgil. Hee firlt inuented mufikein Greece. Diod. Heetaught Hercules 
onthe Harpe : who being dulleand there-vypon often chiden , and fome-times fhiken by 


| Linus, onetime vp with his harpe and knockt out his maifters braynes, Some {ay hee was 


flayne with one of Apolloes fhaftes. Suidas reckneth three A4ufes,One borne at Eleufs : fonne 
to Antiphemus and {choller to Orphexs , hee wrot ethike verfes vnto Esmolpxs. Another 2 
Theban , fonneto Thamyras, Hee wrot himnes, and odcs, before the warresof Troy. A 
third farre latter , An Ephefian, inthe time of Ewmenesand Attalus, Kings: hée wrot the af- 
faires of the Troyans. Jt is commonly held that hee that was Orpheus {choller was fonne to 

polpus Lacrtins fayth he wrot the genealogyes of che Athenian gods : inuented the fphere, 
and held one otiginall of all thiags , vnto which they all returned. Hee dyed at Phalerain’ 
Attica, as his epitaph mentioneth , they fay hee was Maifter of the Eleufine ceremonies when 
Hercules was adimitced to them, Some(as | faid before ) held that the Greekes called Afey/es, 
Maufans : volefle Exfebins bee herein corrupted ( 6 ) Ruling of the infernall..| Becaufe held to 
goc into hell and returne fafe : and to mollifie the deftenies and make the furies weepe. Oxad. 
CMet.10, This prooued him powerfull in Hell. (¢ ) Thewife. ] Shee feeing her husband 
loue an Actolian maid fhee had, called 4mtiphera, fell in loueher-felfe with her fonne Me- 


_ beertes. And therefore no feruant may come inher temple. The crier of the facrifices vfed to 


cry: way feruants,and Actolians yuan and woman, _ 
_ At Rome the Matrons led one maid feruant onely into CHatatas Temple, and there 


to 


r ere np A A Ae eg | = : 
L138. _ OF THE CITIE-OF GOD. 689 


to Leucothea in Greeke and Matuta in Latine: Mclicertes to Palamon in Greeke , and Fore 
tumnus in Latine : quai Dens portusm, the God of havens, His temple was on the wharfe of 
Tiber,and his feafts called PortamsaliaVarre. In honour of him the Corinthians ordained the 
Ifthmian games, Paufan. (d) (after and Pollux} lupiter in the fhape of aSwan,commanding 
Venus to purfue him in the fhape of an Eagle,flew into Ledas lappe, who tooke him, and kept _ 
him. But fee being a fleepe,he got her with egge,of which came (4/for,;Pollux, and Helena, Caftor and 
fome fay fhe laid two egges : ( Hor. Art.Poet.) and that Hellen and Ciytemneffra came of the Pokux, 
tother egge, 7 | | 
Others fay thae Helen onely and Pollux were the immoftall births of the egee : but 

that Caffor was mortall, and begotten by Tyxdaras. fecrates faith that Hellen was thought 
to bee of the Swannes begetting , becaufe fhee hada long and a white neck, Thy were all 
called Tyndarides and Tyndaride , becaufe they were fuppofed the children of Tyndarus, 
Ladas husband, and fonne yvnto Ocbalus, and not of Jone, Yet is a Swanne placed in heauen : 
as a monument of this holy acte ( forfooth) and Caffor and Pollux are the figne Gemini which “°"** 
doe fhine. by courfe : becaufe ( faith Homer ) Caftorand Pollex endeuouring to take away 

the birdes of Liscus and Idas, Idae after along fight killed Caffor, and would haue killed — 
Pollux alfo , but that Jxpiter {ent him fudden helpe , and made him invulnerable . So Pollux 

begd of Joe, that his brother might haue halfe of his immorctality,and Jose granted it. (after 

was a good horfe-man, and Po/lax awraftler, They were called Déofcurs, #ros xSeor, that is, Diefeure 
Inpiters fonnes, Homer faith they were buried in Lacedemon , they were held tobee good for 

the Sailers , and they appeared like two ftarres, becaufe they peing inthe Argonautes yoy- 

age,a tempeft arofe, where-vpon all were terribly afraide, fauing Orphens who cheered them 

vp, and hauing prayde to the Samothracian gods , the tempelt immediately began to calme, 

two ftarres appearing vpon the heads of (- spor and Poksx, which miracle gladded them all, 

and made them thinke that the gods had freed them : and fo it grew to a cuftome toimplore 

the helpe of thofe two , who when both appeated, were a good figne , but neuer when they 

came fingle : But the: Romanes called their temple moft commonly (afors temple: wherein 

they were eyther ir-religious , or (4/for vngratefull , who beeing made immortall by his 
brothers meanes, would take all the glory and honour ynto him-felfe , who had beene for- 
gotten and left in obfcurity but for the other. But Pollux was caule of this , forhee obtey- 

ning that one fhould fhine one day,and another another day,was caufe that they could neuer _ 
haue one anothers company. 


: ? 
Portumnus. 


Tyndaride, 


The ruine of the Argiue kingdome : Picus Saturnes fonse 
fucceeding him in Lanrentum. 


Cuap, 15. 


Hen was the Argiue kingdome tranflated (4) to Mycznz, where (6) A- 
amemnon ruled: and then (¢ ) arofe the kingdome of the Laurentines, 
which (d) Pécws Saturnes fonne was the firft fucceflor in, (¢) Delborah a wo- 
man beeing Iudgeffe of the Iewes : GODS {pirit indeed iudged in her , for 
{hee was a Propheteffe : ( her(f) prophecie is too obfcure to drawe vnto 
CHRIST with-oura long difcourfe. ) And now had the Laurentines hada 
kingdome in Italy, ¢ g) from whence, (after their difcent from Greece ) the Ro- 
maines pedegree is drawne. Still the Affyrian Monarchy kept vp: Lampares 
the twentich King ruling there now, when Pscss began his kingdome in Lau- 
rentum. His father Saturse ( the Pagans fay ) was no man : let the Pagans looke _ 
to that: fome of them haue written that bes was, and that hee was(4)King | 
heere before his fonne Péews. Aske thefe verfes of Yirg#ll; and they will cel 


you. -£n¢14.8. 
| Nao 3 — disgenns 


{ 


EE eae 
690 | SAINT AVGVSTINE. | CHar.lg 
excrete apap nance na gE EA EC a eC A nn 

Aeneid,8. | Is genus indocile ae di{perfim montibus altis 


Compofuit , lege(que dedit Jatinmane vecari 
Matus : his quonian latuiffer tutne in oris. 
Anredgue vt perbibent sito fub rege fuére.-—-Secula. 


Th’vndocill fort on Mountaines high difperft 

He did compofe,and gaue them lawes,and firft _ 
Would call it Latinas , when he latent lay, 

In whofe raigne was the golden age men fay. 


| Tuth, butthefe they fay are fictions ( /) Sterces was Saturnes father , hee that 
Scerems, inuiented (7) manuring of the ground with dung , which of him was called 
" $tercus : Some fay they called him Stercutivs : Well howfoeuer hee gotte the 


name of Satarne , hee was the fame Sterces or Stercutins whome they deified - 


forhis husbandry. And Pyrss his fonne was deified after him alfo; ( #) a cun- 
ning footh-fayer, and () a great foldier as they report himtobec. Hee be- 
gotte (p) Faunus , the fecond — of Laurentum, and hee was madea Syl- 
uane god. All chefe men were deified before the Troyan warre. 


6 Mies (4) unto Mycene | Paujanias his wordes here-vppon, All know the villa- 
The Ar- 


a Kings = Danaus in the Kingdome : who dying , Abas his fonnes diuided the Kingdome amongft 

mer them. ecrifius had Argoes Pretus , Erzum , Mydza and Tyrinthus , andall thatlayto 
the fea: In Tyrinthus are monuments yet of Pretus his dwelling there. Afterward Acrifixs 
hearing how his grand-childe Perfews was aliue , and of great renowne, hee retyred to 
Lariffa -neare the riuer Peneus : Now Perfeas was wonderfull defirous to fee him, and 
fought all the meanes to honour him that might bee , and comming to Lariffa to him, they 


mettc , and Perfens after a while began to practife the cafting of the queyte (his owne inuen- 


tion ) to fhew his ftrength : now Acrifixs by chance came vnder the fall of the quoyte , and. 


fo was brayned according to the Oracle concerning his death. Perfexs returning to Argos, 

and beeing afhamed of his grandfiers death, changed Kingdomes with Aicgapenthes the 

Myce, fonne of Pretus: and then built Mycenas , calling it fo , becaufe his fwordes uins, fcab= 
berd fell off there: which heetookefora figne to fettlethere. Yet fome fay it was named 

fo of Mycena daughter to Inachus the fecond , and wife to Areffor. Homer doth name fuch 

Acamem- 2 oman. ( b) Agamemnon | Pelops begotte Atrexs and Thyeftes on Hippodame ,and Atrens 
oak begotte Agamemnon and Menelaus of eLrope,as Homer holdeth. But Hefted faith they 
were the fonnes of Plifthenes , Thyeftes fonne , vnlefle wee read Thyeffes for Pisfthenes, which 

ismore likely. This e4.gamensnon ledde all the Heroes againft Troy : Though fome fay that 

hee was putte once from the Empire and Palamedes crowned, a beeing flayne by the 

craft of Usfes , the empire returned to e4gamemmnon.(c) Lanrentum | Theeldeft Citty of 

| mis Latium: the feate of the Aborigines where the Kingdome was founded by Saturne : called 
Picus, _ Lawrentsm of the laurell wood , that grewneareit.(d) Pscus | Saturnesfonne by Fauna, 
Virg. ib. 7.Onid. Meta 14,Hemarryed Cyrce,who perceiuing that he loued Ponsona,turned 

him into a bird called a Pye:wherfore the Latines held that for Afars his bird, and it was ora- 

culous. Dyonif. eAlex, Onid faith hee was thus tranfformed for refufing the loue of Cree, 

Deborah, but fhe was not his wife. So holds Sersins alfo. (1) Delborah | Hierome readeth it Deborah, 
that is ( fayth hee ) a Bee : or a Pratler The Tribe of Nephthalim vnderher dire&tions 

and Baruchs conduc ouerthrew the mighty armie of Ssfara , Iudg. 4. lofeph. de antiqni, 

lib. 5. Shee ruled the people fourty yeares » and hadde peace all the while jn Ifraell, 

: : ee ie ee eee be (f) Hes 


ny of Dazaus.daughters vpon their coufine Germaines , and how Lyacexs fucceeded 


L318. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. | 69x 


(f) Her prophecy) Iud.s.(¢) From whence \1n a continuall fucceffion from the Laurentes vnto 
Laninia Anaas his wite,to Syluins Pofthumus their fonne,and fo to the Kings of Alba,downe 
ynto Numitor,.Amulius lean Romulus,and Remus. (h) King there| Wherevpon it was called 
Saturnia : though the ancient poet Exjebixs thinke otherswile. Read his words in Dion./ib.1, 
(i) Virgil] Esanders words, eAEneid.3.(k, ) Golden age |Of this before. Ie was fuch as Plato 
required in his refpnblica : and that was {uch as edam liued in before his fall:fo that Ex/ebius 
faith that Plate had that place from (Moyfes law. (1) Sterces | This they fay was Saturne srercutins 
that caught manuring , call him what they will. CMacrob. Saturnal. But Pliny faith chat Se 
Stercutins who. was deified for dung-finding , was Saturnes fonne. But there was a Saturne saturnes 
long before this, three hundred yeares before the Troyan warre,as Theophilus writeth out many. 

of Talus: living inthe time of Betws the Babilonian , Alex. Polyhifter called Belus him- 

felfe, Saturne : which were it fo, either out times are falfe accounted, or he was eight hinde- 

red yeares before thar warre. Itmay bee( as heethat wrote the eZquinoca faith) that the 

chiefe of euery noblefamily were called Saturnes ,andtheir fonnes /oves.(m) Manuring] 

Taught by Pliny lb..16, Varro, and other writers of husbandry. Cato in Tully,wonders that 

Heficd ommiteth it, Homer hauing mentioned it before him,(#) A canning footh-{aier} There- 

fore was hee faid to be turned into apie;becaufe hee 46 one alwaies for Augury : and theres 


fore Virgil faith he was painted with the Augurs ftaffe by him. «Axcid. 
pe Quirinali litwoparudj.fedebat, Vin 
Saccinitus trabea, . | ——— Acnid, Tie 
Heina fory paule did fit, 
naugurs crofier ioyn’d with it. 


_ (0) Warviour] Ouid. Met,14.and Virgil calleth him the Horfe-breaker, which in Greeke is 

as much as Warrier : wherefore they feigne himchanged into a hardy bird ; who pearceth an 

oke with her bill: and is holy vnto AZars. The Romans honour it much , and affirme that ic | 
defended Romulus and Remus from hurt when they were caft out in their infancy. (p) Fannus ]Fasoas, 
Who was alfo called Fatuus, and his fitter Fawna,and Fatua. Of thefe we haue fpoken before, 

Diony/. faith that fome held Mars to bee his great grand-father , and that the Romans wor- 
fhipped himas their countries Genins , with fongs and facrifices . So ifaith Trogus. They fay 
he feated Ewander and his few Arcadians vpon mount Palatine 5 and his wife Farwa(faith Tro- 
gus)was eucry day filled with the {pirit of prophecy : fo that ic grew a prouerbe to fay of pro- 
phets,that they were infatuate, Faunus killing her, fhe was deified and nained Bona dea and her heueDes. 
chaftity is {aid to be fuch,as no man lyuing euer faw her , but her owne husband. Varro, from : 
this Fanzns come all the fawnes,Syluanes,and Satires. 


How Diomedes was deified after she deftruition of Ti roy: and bis fellowes Said 
| to bee turnedintobirdes. Cur. 16. 


“PR (whofe deftruGion the excellent wits of elder times haue lefe recorded 
vnro all memory, as well asthe greatneffe of it felfe)beeing now deftroied in 
the reigne of (4) Latinus , fonne to Fasnsus ,(b)( and from him came the Latine 
namie, )the Laurentine cealing ): The Grecianvictors returning each oneto his 
home,(c) were fore affliGed onall fides,and deftroied in great numbers:yet fome 
of them gorto bee gods. For (d) Diomedes was made one ; who neuer returned 
home ,and his fellowes they fay (¢) became birdes: this now they haue hif- 
tory for, not poetry onelie, yet neither could his new god-head, nor his in- 
treaty of iéve preuaile fo much as toturne his fellowes vnto men againe. Ie 
is faid alfo that hee hath a Temple (f) in the Ile Diomedea,not farre from 
Mount Gargarus in Apulia , where thefe birdes continually fie abour 
the Temple ; and dwell there with fuch wonderfull obedience ; that they, 

—_ Non 4 : will 


692 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuarte. 


Latinas, — 


Latiuts, 


Diomedes, 


Diomedes 
fellowes 
become 
birde, 


will wath the Temple with water which they bring in their beakes , and when 
any Grecian comes thether , or any of a Greeke race, they are quiet , and will 
bee gentle with them, but ifany one elfe come they will fly at his face with great 
fury , and hure fome even to death , for their beakes are very bigge fharpeand 
ftrong , as it is faid. | 


LVIVES. 


L_ Atinus ( 4) Sonne, | Sonne to Fannus and Marica. Uirg. Some fay this was Circe, and 

fome held her ( faith peariat to bee Venus : Hefiod makes him the Sonne of Cirees 
and Viifes, and Usrgill coucheth at that alfo, But the times allow it not , therefore wee 
muft affirme with Higoms, that there were many Latini, Dienytinus faith that Heres 
les being in Italy begor Pallas of Lasinia, Euanders daughter , and Lafws of Hyper- 
boride his hoftage ; who at his departure to Greece hee maried to Faswus Kino of 
the Aborigines, /u/fine fayth he was baftard to Hercsles and Faseus daughter. The Greeks 
called him Telephus, thavis illaftrions.(6\ And from bins. \ The common report is they were 
firft called Aborigines, and afterwards Latines. Dion and others. But Phile/phus brings in 
Orphens againft this calling them Latines ere Latiaws was borne. Butlet him looke which 
Orphexs it was that wrot both the Argonautica and the Hymmes : not the Thracian Orpheus, 
hold all the learned:but for the Hymmes , the Pythegors/#s hold them the workes of acertaine 
cobler. Ariffot/e faith there neuer was fuch a Poet as Orpheus was. But if it be called Letsuss of 
Saturnes lying hid there, then are they called the Latines of Latiwm, But Verro deriueth it 
from Latinus. (¢ ) Sore afftted. JULifes his wandrings are well knowne, Menelaus was driven 
into Egrpt.Oylens Atax into Lybia. The whole nauy was drawne vpen the rockes of Capha- 
reus,neare Eubcea by a falfe light Nanplins father to Palamedes hung out.Virgill.lib.2.Sernine 
diriues all this mifchiefe from Mineruas wrath , either for (affandras rape , or for their con- 
tempt fhewen in not facryficing vntoher. (d ) Déomedes.| Sonneto Tydeus and Deiphile: 
A foldior before Troy and almoft equalized with Achslles by Homer, Hee maketh him foyle 
Mars,He was King of Aetolia , but would not returne thither, becaufe of his wife Egiale that 
playde the whore with (ylleborus, Sthenelus his fonhe , fo went he into Apulia,where he buils 
Adria, Argyripa, Sipunte and Salapia, and there are Diomsedes fieldes which hee fhared with 
Danaus his ftep-father. There was an clder Diomedes , abloudy King of Thrace that fed his 
horfes with mans-fleth , and Hercules fed them with him-felfe. His fifter Abdera buile that 
citty in Thrace where Democritus was borne : Neare ynto which was Diomedes tower , the 
Greckes fay thofe horfes were his filthy daughters , whome hee made ftrangers to lye withall, 
andthen killed them, Palephacus referreth it ynto the wafting of his patrimony vpon horfes, 


_as eAtteon did his vpon dogs.(¢ ) Became birdes, | Becaufe Agmon Diomedes his fellow had 


rayled on % enns.On.Met.4.or,becaufe Diomedes had hurt both Uexns and AJars,before Troy, 
the later the likclier, Homer Jii.5. Pliny faith thefe birds are called Cataracte ( by Juba ) and 
that their ceeth and eyes are of the collour of fire : their bodies are white , one euer leadeth 
the fhole , and another followes it: and they are onely feene in the Ile Diomedea, where his 
tombe and his Temple is,ouer againft Apulia. Ifany ftranger come there, they fet vp amonf 
trouscty ; Butif aGreekecome ,they will play with him, that you would wounderto fee 
how they feeme to acknowledge their country-men. Origen faith their wafhing of his temple 
is but afable, They were aniroried (fayth Sernins ) through their impatient forrow after 
the loffe of their leader , and that they will fly in flocks to the Greekes thips ftill, as knowing 
their old kindred, but do the Barbarians all the Greefe they can, for that Diomedes was killed 
by the Illyrians. /# Geor,2. yet Ariffotle faith ~neas flew him, J Pfyl. Seruius faith che 
Greekes called them pastas, which Gaza tranflateth , Hearons. Susdas faith they were like 
ftorkes, or ftorkes them-felues. They may be like {torkes or hearons , or fwans as Onid faith, 
but they are neither {torkes, hearons , nor fwans. ( f)) Js the /le..] Some ( as Anguftine here , 
Suidas fefius.cc. ) willhaue but one Ile thus called :but there are two, in oneof which Dio. 
medes lies buried. Some will haue fiue or fixe ofthem. But Pémy and Strabo do name onely 
¢wo,ouer againgt the promontory Garganus whichlycs three hundred furlongs into the - 

| c 


t 


Lrnt8 | OF THE CiTIE OF GoD. 6h 


— 


the one of themis inhabited ; but not the other, in which they fay Diomteds was loftand newer _ 
feene more: fo the Venetians both there and in there owne feate,gaue hin diuine honours. 


Of the incredible change’ of men that Varro beleened. 
| Cuap. 17. 


Arro,to get credite vnto this, reports a many ftrangetales of that famous (4) 

witch Cerce,whoturned Vii/es his fellowes into beafts : and (6) of the Arca 
diatis ,who {wimming over a certaine lake became wolites , and liued with the 
wolues of the woods: arid if they eateno mans fle(h, at nine years end fwimmin 
ouer the faid lake they became mé againe. Nay he names one Demonctus,who tal- 
ting of the facrifices , which the Arcadians (killing of a child) offered to their 5 
god Lycéus,was turned into a wolfe and becomming a maa againeat ten yeares” 
end,hee gtueto bee a(¢) champion;and was vi@or in the lympike games. Nor 
doth he thinke that Pan (d)and Jupéter were called Lyces in the Arcadian hiftory 
for any other reafonthen for their transforming of men into wolues: for this 
they held impoffible to any buta diuine power : a wolfeis called»«@- in greeke,. 
and thencecametheir name Lyceus : ahd the Romane Lyupercé/{aith hee)had oré- 
ginall from their mifteries. | | 


L.VIVES. 


Hat (a) famous witch Cyrce] Daughter t6 the Swn,Aunte ynto Afedea, Her motheris vn- a 
knowne,fome fay fhe was Afferia,Latona’s fifter, Homer faith ¥ Per {a,Oceanns his daugh. Circe. 
ter was her mother. But Died. tells this tale. Perfens and Acetas,were fonnes to Phabns: Pér- 
feus begot Hecate,a cruell huncreffe, who vied to ftrike mert in ftead of beafts ; wich dartes. 
dipped in Aconytum,(che vfe whereof thee firft found):And fhe had AZedea, Cyrce and a fonne 
called e£gias,by her vncle etas. (yrce became an excellent Herbarift,and could make Phil- 
ters(Lone-drinks fhe matried Scytha King of Sarmatia,and poyfoned him when the had done. 
Wherevpon fhee was chafed into a little defert Ie inthe Ocean,or as fome fay, vato the pros 
montory that bedres her narne.. Sotne thinke it is an Ile, but indeed it is bura promontor 
like a Peninfula.Strabo, It was once an Ile, but time hath knit it vnto the continent, as ie ck 
done many more. Sersivs. In the bigger Ile of the two Pharmacufle , is (srees tombe to bee 
feene. Thisis fhee that turned fis his conforts into beaftss Homer hath much of her. $5 
hath Theocritus, Virgilland many other poets and Hiftorians, (b) Of she Areadians | Enantes 
(faith Pliny lib, 8.) a credible Greeke author writeth that the Arcadians vied to choofe one 
out of the family of one Axtens,and to bring him to a certaine lake , where he(putting off his. 
cloathes and hanging them on an oke ) fwam over , and became prefently a wolfe, running, 
Rreipht ro the defert, and lyuing nine yeares among ft the wolues , where ifhee cate no mans 
flefh arthat {pace hee returned to the fake and fwimming ouer againe , became manas hee 
was,onely nine yeates elder: Fabias {faith hee had the fame cloathes againe alfo. So faich Mee 
4 of the Neurt , a peoplé in Scythia , that they haue fet tintes wherein they may turne wolnes 
if they will, and wherein they may turne men againe if they will. (¢) A chanepion| Properlya 
fighter with whirlebats : for that, wtaftling, running, leaping,and quoiting were the Greekes o,..1 . 
exercifes: and the praétifets of them all were called in grecke awladaet, in laine Osingners 
enes.(d) Pan and \Vpon mount Lyczus in Arcadia wére three gods honored,b the name of tveei: 
Lycai:Tone,Bacchus,and hornned Pan, thinke the place, (but fome others hold their driving 
away of the wolues) gauie them their names . Some fay they ruted in this metamorphizing of 
then into swoluesanil helped them ro cheir native fhapes'againe, . | | = 


° 


694. 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. © —s Cuara8. 


Of the denills power in transforming mans [bape : what a Chriftian 
7 may beleeue berets. Cuar. 18. 


Ome perhaps will looke for our opinion heere , touching this deceipt of the 
deuills, (4) { what achriftian,fhould do, vpon this report of miracles among 
the infidells. ] What fhall wee fay, bat get you ont of the midft of Babslon ? this 
propheticall command wills vs,to ply our faiths feete as faft as we can,and quit 
our feluesof this Worldly Citty compaé of a confufed crue of finners and euill 
Angells , and hie vs vnto the liuing God. For the greater power wee behold ia 
the deceiuver,the firmer hold muft we lay vpon our mediator,by whom wee leaue 
the dregs and afcend vnto hight of purity. Sothen if we fhould fay, all thofe rales 
are lies,yer arethere fome that wil avow they haue either hard them for truth,of 
erfons of éredite , or haue feene them tried themfelues. For when I was in Ica- 
y , [heard fuchareportcthere , howcertaine womenof one placethere,would 
but give onea little drug in cheefe,and prefently hee became anaffe ,andfo | 
‘they made him carry their neceffaries whether they would, and hauing done, 
they reformed his figure againe :yet hadhehis humane reafon ftill,(6).as Aps- 
lens had in his affe-fhip,as himfelfe writeth in his booke of the golden affe; bee it 
a lie or a truth that hee writeth. Well (c¢) either chefe things are falfe,or incredi- 
ble, becaufe vnufuall, Bur we muft firmely hold Gods power to beeomniporent 
in all things: but the deuills can doe nothing beyond the power of their nature 
(which is angelicall ,albhough malcuo:ent) vnleffe hee whofe indgements are e- 
uer fecret, but neuer vniuft, perimic them. (d) Nor can the deuills create any 
thing(what ever fhewes of theirs produce thefe doubts)but onely caft a changed 
fhape ouer that which God hath made, altering onely in fhew. Nor doe I thinke 


- thedeuillcan forme any foulg or body into beitiall or brutifh members , and ef- 


Preftanti- 


fences:but they hauean vn{peakable way of tranfporting mans fantafiein zbodily 
{hape,vnto other fenfes(this running ordinarylie in our dreams through a thou- 
fand feucrall things, and though ic be not corporall , yet feemes to cary it felfe in 
corporal! formes through all thefe things ) while the bodies of the men thus af-. 
fected lie in another place,being aliue,buc yet in an excafie farre more deepe then 
any fleepe. Now(e) this phantafie may appeare vnto others fences ina bodily 
fhape,anda man may feeme to himfelfe to bec fuch an one as hee often thinketh: 
himfelfe to be in his dreame,and to beare burdens, which if they be true burdens 
indeed,the deuills beare them ,todelude mens eyes with the apparance of true 
burdens,and falfe thapes. For one Pre ffantins told me that his father tooke that 
drug in cheefe at his owne houfe , wherevpon he lay in fucha fleepe that no man 
could awake him: and after a few daies hee awaked of himfelfeand told all hee 
had fuffered in his dreames in the meane while,how hee had beene turned into ani 
horfe and carried the fouldiours victualls about ina (f) budget. Which was true 
as hetold,yet feemed it buca dreame vnzohim : another told how one night be- 
fore he flept,an old acquaintance ofhisa philofopher came tohim and exponn- 


pled certaine Platens/mes vnto him,which hee would not exoound him before. So 


afterwards he asked him why he did it there which he would not doe in his own, 


- - houfe when he was intreated ?1 didit not quoth the other,indeed I dreamed that 


Ididit. And{o that which the one dreamed , the other ina santafticall appea- 
rance beheld : Thefe now wererelated by {uch as I thinke would notlie , for had 
any one told them,they bad not beeng tobe belecued. Sothen thofe Arcadians, 


roe - Fs Be ATE. Ow 
> 


es <a a ESSERE RSet ee 
Li 8. OF THECITIE OF GOD, ~ és. 


a rt ee ee ee ee oe 


whom the god (nay the deuills rather) turnedinto wolues and thofe fellowes of 
Viiges(g) beeing charmedby Cérce into Beftiall thapes , had onely their fantafie, ..--.; 
‘occupied in fuch formes, ifthere were any {ich matter, But for Déomedes bitds, 
feeing there is.a generation of them] hold chemmnot to be rransformed men,buc 
thac the menwere taken away, and they broughiin their places,as the (4) hinde 
was,in /phigenias roome, Agamemnons daughter. the deuill can play {uch iugling 
trikes with eafe ,by Gods permiffion , bur the Virgin beeing found alive after- 
wards, this was a plaine deceipt of theirs to takeaway herjand fer the hinde there. 
But Diomedes, fellowes, becaufe they were neuer feene,( the euill angells deftroy- 
ing them ) were belceued. to bee turned into (2) chofe birds thar were brought 
out of their vaknowne habitations into their places . Now for their wafhing of. 
his temple',their loue to the. Greekesand cheir furie again{t ochers , they may 
haue all this by the deuiils inftin@ : becaufe it (4) was his endeuorto perfwade y 
Diomedes was become a god, thereby to make them iniure the true God, by ador- 
ing fained ones , and dead perfons (with temples , altars priefts and facrifices) 
who when they liued,(/) had no life: all which honours beeing rightly beftowed, _ 
are peculiar to that onetrueandonely God. 7 | 


L. VIVES: 


V V Hat (4) a Chriftian} Some copies haue not this, (6) 4s Apuleius] Hee was a magitian, 
_ , , doubrleffe: but neuer turned into an affe. Augu/f:me {aw how incredible that was,but ie 
hauing notred many Greekes,he could not know whence he had his plot ofthe golden affe:for 
Apulens names none that he followes, as hee doth in his cofinography.But Luciaz before him 
wrote how hee becing in Theffaly to learne fomie magike was turned inco an affe in {tead ofa 
birdinot that this wag true: but thac Lweian delighted neither in truths,nor truths likelihoods. 
This worke cid Apuleius make whole in Jatine ; adding divers things to garnith it with more 
delight to fuch as; loue Melefian ales, and heere and there fprinckling it with his antiquaries 
phrafes,and his sew compofitions,with great liberty, yet foine-what fupprefling the ablardicy 
of chetheame. But wee loue now to read him becaufe hee hath faid fome things there in. that 
new dexterity , which others feeking to imitate, haue committed groffe errors: for I thinke 
that grace of his in that worke,is inimitable, But 4palesns was no affe,only he delights mens 
eares with fuch a ftory,as mans affection is wholy tranfported with a Rrange ftory. (¢) Esther 
the fe] Pliny t.8. held them all falfe,nor may we beleeue all the fables afhtmed : but the Greeks 
were fuch cruell liers, chat they would noc want a witneffe forthe moft impudent fiGion they 
had.(d@) Nor can|To create, is to make fomething of nothing :this God onely can dosas all the 
diuines affirme :j but then they difpute whether hee can communicate this power vnto 4 crea~ | 
ture. Saint Thomas hath much concerning this, and Scotss feekes to weaken his arguments to Tocreate 
confirmehis owne: and Occams is againtt both, and Petrus deeA liaco againft him , thus each whats, 
one {creweth the celeftiall power into what forme he pleafe.How can manners,bee amended, [Lou- 
how cantruth bee auahonew can contentions bee appcafed, as long as there is this confufed uaine co~ 
obftinate ianzling , and this haling roo and froe in matter of dininity , according as pie-de+ © 
each man ftands affected ?[ (¢) This Phantafie] All the world prooues this opinion of Agu fectiue. 
fisne crue. (f) ef budget) Reticélum : the trauellers caried their vidtualls in it , bread, cheefe; 
apples, &c. Hor.lib.1.Sern, - 7 oo ; 
Reticulum paxis venales inter onuftos, 
_ Forte vehas humeropihiloplus acespias quam 
) Qui nihtl porbAarit ——————- | 
As ifyou,on your backe well burdened, bore a 
—. + Awaller offale-bread,youfhouldnomore; 
“ =2 Receiue for food then he:that were from burthen free. Pi 
C 


ie eee 


696 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. | Cuarty 


Iphigenia, 
Calehas, 


It was a nerte (fayth Acros ) wherein bread was borne to the flaues that were tobee fold. 
Thus I conieéturg (fayth hee) (¢) (harmed | Virg. Pharmacentr. (4) The Hinde } Iphige- 
nia was daughter to Agamemnon and ( litemneftra. The Army being at Aulis in Bocotia, 
Agamemnon killed a Stag of Diangs , for which deed the nauy wasfore beaten with ftormes, 
and infected with peftilence : to the Augury they went : (4/chas anfwered, Diana muft be ap- 
peafed with Agamemmnons bloud. So Usiffes was {ent to Mycenz for Jphigenia , vndcr coulor 
of a marriage , and being brought to the Altar , and ready to bleed, fhee was fent away , anda 
Hinde fette in her place,fhee beeing carryed into Taurica Cherfonnefus,to King Thoas, where 
{hee was made Prieft vnto ‘Diana Tanrica,who had men facrificed ynto her. So Oreffes hir 


' brother comming thether, they two ry ae together and flewe the King , andthen fayled 


Aenead,$. 


Aeneas, 


away to Aricia in Italy( 4) Thofe birds | A diuerfity of reading. (k) Jt was bis indeavor| Many 
a fond nore was there , onthis worke here-tofore, An affe, that is,a creature fo called shee 
fpoke , that is , hee fayd;I was filenc, that is, I faid nothing: and fuch an one was crept into 
the cext heere but wee haue left ic out, (2 ) Had 20 true Isfe |For the foules true life is Ged: 
whome the foule leauing ,dyeth, This the Pagan Phylofophers en as well as wee Chrift- 
ians that all things che farther chey were from GO D, the leffelife had they , and fo of the 
contrary. This is common in Plate and fometimes in Arsffotle, The Stoskes fayd chat a 
wife man onely liued,and was a man;the reft were nothing but plaine apes. So fayd Socrates. 


eee) 


That e£ncas came into Italy when Labdon was lndge of I/raell. 
; Cc HAP. 19. a | . 
Tr beeing now taken and razed , (4) e£meas with tenne thippes filled with 


the remaynes of Troy came into Italy , Latinus being King there, (4) Mnef- 


bens at Athens, Po/iphides in Syrion,(d) Tawtawes in Affyria,and(e) Labdon iude- 


ing Ifracll. Latiaus dying, e£neas raigned three yeares inthe fametime of the 
fame Kinges, excepting that ( f) Pela/gus was King of Sycion, and (Z) Sampfon 
ludge of the Hebrewes , who was counted Hercules for his admired ftrenoth. 
e£ne4s (4) beeing not to bee found after his death (+) was canonized fora od 
by the Latines. So was Sangus or Sanctus by the Sabines. And at this time Co- 
drus the King of Athens , went intdifguife to bee flaine of the Peloponefians the 
Athenians enemies ; and fo he was : hereby delivering his countrey from ruine. 
For the Peloponefians had an Oracle told them that they fhould conquer if they 
killed not the Athenian King. Sohee dectiued chem by his‘difguife , and giuing 
them euill wordes,prouoked them tokill him ,whereof Vergillfayth : Ant surgse 
Codri. And (k) him the Athenians facrificed vnto as a Godi Nowin the raigne 
of Sy/wéus the fourth Latine King(/eneas,his fonne by Lewéna,not byCres/a, nor 
brotherto Afcanins ) Oneus the nine and twentith of Affyria(/) Adclanthus che 
fixteenth of Athens, and Heli the Prieft iudging Ifraell,the Sicyonian Kingdome 
fell to ruine, which indured (as it is recorded) 9 5 9 yeares. 


———K—_—— a tt ace tenses ar nanaassgets 


L. VIVES. 


Ames 4 ) | How hee efcaped out of Troy , itisdiuerfly related. Dionyf. ib. 1. For 
fome fay that hee keeping a Tower , and fetting all the Grecians on fire againft chat 
place , meane time packt away all the vnneceffaries , old men , womenand children ine 
to the fhippes, and then —- through the foes , increafed his powers and rooke 
the ftrengths of Ida , which they held almoft ayeare: but the Greekes commin apainft 
them,they madea peace , vpon condition to depart out of Phrygia without difturbance of 
any man whatfocuer , vntill chey were fetled fome-where. Thus faith Hélanicus , a famous, 
but a fabulous author. Mencerates Xauthins faith Lncas betrayed Troy , and therefore the 
Greckes freed him : the reafon of this treafon was, for that Paris fcomed him and made 
him a mocking ftocke to the Troyan Lords:fome fay he wasin the hauen when Troy was ta- 
Kenzochers , that he was admiral of Priems nauy ; che Latines fay that Axtenor an ou were 
| — alana preferued 


Lrp8. OF THECITIE OF GOD.- 697. 


preferued becaufe they had alwaies perfwaded the reftoring of Hellen , and were of old ac- 
quaintance in Greece. How hee came into Italie Virgsil fings at full, mixing. falfe notes with 
true,as poets commonly vfe,] wil quote no more from others,fer this is the moft liké@ co truth. 
He came-firft into Thrace, ftaid there all winter,and had many fled vnto him out of Afias there 
he built a Citty and called it Acnea(Diony/.)or Aenon:(Mela and Plin, And there faith Virgd 
was Polsdorus buried.e£n.3, 


~ Feror hac et littore curuo 

(Menta prima loco, fatis ingref[us iniquis: 
eneade(que meos nomen de nomine finge. 

Thether driu’n,by croffe-fates in I came, oe 
And on crook’e ie firft walls did found and frame, 
And nam‘d them ¢£neads by myne owne name. 


This Citty S./e/? calleth Acnon , though Homer faith that e4enen fent armes acaintt 
Troy. Sern.in en. 3. Exphorion and Callimachus fay that Viiffes his companion was buried 
there,going forth to forage,and dying : and thence it had the name. It ftood vatill the Mace- 
donian monarchy,and then King Caffander razed it, and remooued the townefmen to Thefla- 
lonica which hee then built. From Thrace e£eas went to Delos, then to Cythera,then to his 
kinfmen in Arcadia,thence to Zacynthus,fo to Leucadia,and thence to Ambracia where there 
was a Citty on the riuer Achelons banke, called Aenea,but it was left vn-peopled afterwards. 
Thence went Anchifes to Butrotum in Epyrus , and Aeneas to Dodona to the oracle,with all 
{pecd,and thence Fa to his father,they came to Drepanum in Sicily, where Anchifes die 
ed.(Yet Strabo faith eAnchifés came into Italy:and died (faith Diony/.)a yeare before Aeneas) _ 
_ Then came Aeneas into Italy , into the quarters of Laurentum , in the fiue and thirty yeare of 

Latinus his reigne,two yeates after his departure from Afia.Nor came his whole Nauy hether. 
For fore landed in Apulia,and fome in other places of Italy,of whofe arriuall there are monu- 
ments ynto this day . Some of them leauing Aeneas in Italy, returned to Phrygia againe. The . 
firft place that sdeneasheldin Latium, they named Troy. It was foure furlongs from the fea, 
(6) Maneftheus | Sonne to Ornins, Erichthexs his fonne ; hee ftirred the people againit Thefens 
in-his abfence, faying that hee had brought the free people of Attica into one citty,asintoa 
Jayle : Now The/eas was held in moft ftraite prifon by Orchys the Moloflian King : and he had 
left che rauifhed He//ex at Aphydna, which Caffor and Pollwx tooke , freed their filter and 
made Mnefthens King of Athens,for that hee left chem fouldiours. So 7 hefews being freed by 
Hercules ,and making meanes for the recouery ofhis Kingdome , went into Scyros , where 
King Lyconides flew him. So ruled AMnefthens quietly ac Athens ; for Thefexs his children 
_ were but young, and in the hands of Elpenor in Eubcea, Maeftbeus refpeGted them not . They 
being come to yeares went with E/penor to that voiuerfall warre of Troy, and Afnefthens 
went alfo with his forces, and returning died in Melos , and Demophon Thefeus fonne {uccec- 
ded him. Plat. Panf-Exfeb.So that Mnefthens was dead alittle before Aeneas came into Italy, 
Apion Polyhiftor {aith that Demophon reigned at Achens whenas Troy was deftroicd, (c) Po in oe 
lpphides} So faith Enjeb.but Panfanias relaceth itthus. Syctow had a daughter , called Echtho= 
nophyle,onhir did Mercury (they fay) beget Polybus , Phlias , Diony fies his fonne mattried her 
afterwards,and had begot Androdangs on her. Po/ybss matried his daughter Ly/ianaffa to Ta- 
lens fonne to Bias King of Argos. Acthis time Adraffus fledfrom Argos to Polybus in Sicy-_ 
one,and Po/ybas dying, was King there.He returning to Argos, /ani/cus one of Ciytins Laome- 
doxs pofterity came from Attica thether & gor their Kingdome,and dying,left it to Phaftns,a 
fonne of Hercules . Hee beeing called by Oracle into Crete, Emvippas fonne to Apollo and 
nymph S7lss, reigned,and hee being dead, Agamsensnon made warre vpon Sycionia, and Hippo- 
sus fonne to Rhopalus the fonne of Pheftas , fearing his power , became his tributary , vpon, 
compofition . This Héppolstus , had iffue Lace/tades and Phalces. Now Tamphalees {onne to 
Temenus came with his Dorikes in the night and tooke the citty,yet did no harme,as beeing 
defcended from Hercules alfo,onely hee was ioyned fellow in this Kingdome with him, From 
thence the Sycionians were called Dorians,and made apart of the Argiue Empire. (d) Tasta= 
nes\He rcigned in the time of the Troian wars.Ex/-Diod.faith that Prsams(who held his crown 
fom him as fromhis foucraigac ) in the ns of the fiege fent to intreate aan of. 
ae * bed im 


» 


aoe cence ene EET A CEO A ES LTS EDD AA 


658 SAINT AVGVSTINE. Buiss 


him : who fent him 10000. Ethiopians ; 10000. Sufians, and twenty chariots or armed Wag. 
gons,vnder the conduct of ALemnon ,fonne to Duke Tythox his deareft aflociate . Homer 
mentian$this Afemnon, for he was flaine in this warre.He was a youth of an hardy and heroi- 
Labds. que {pirit,as his valourous performances did witneffe in abundance. (e) Labdon) So doth Ex- 
_ feb.callhim, The Bsble hath it. Abdon. Ind.1 2.1 3.Sonne he was to Hylo the Ephraite, who had 
| forty fons,and they had fifty fons al good horfmen & he left them al liuing at his death./of-i.5 
Hieromine, (f ) Pelafgus | The old bookes , read Pelagus. My friend Hieronimo Buffelde (an vnwearied 
Buffsido,  Qudent,a crue friend,and an honeft man) faith that in one copy hee had read it Pelzgus, Pan- 
 fansas puttech other names inthis place quite different: he giues vsno light here. (g') Samp- 
fon\ Ind,1 3. His decds excelled all thofe of Hercules, Hettor,or Milo.They are knowne :1 will 
not ftand to rehearfe them. (4) Being not to be} Mezentinus King ot Hetruria warred againtt 
the Latines,and e4~eas(their King) ioyning batcell with him neere Lauinium,they had a fere 
diwada fought field : and being parted by night , next morning e&xeas was not to bee found : fome 
fied, faid he was indenized,fome,that he was drowned in Numicus,the riuer. The Latines buile him 
a Temple,& dedicated it: TO OVR HOLY FATHER AND TERRESTRIALL GOD,GO. 
VERNOR OF THE WATERS OF NVMICVS, Diony{’ Some fay be built ic himlelfe,Feftus 
faith, Afcanins his{onne did, He died three yeares afcer his {tep-father Latinus , ( folong was 
he King jand feauen years after the diffolution of Troy.He hath toumbes in many nations,but 
thole are but for his honour,xsvorséigia,empty monuments, his truc one is by the river Numicus, 
Lin. They call him /upster mndiges,fo Afcanins named him whé he deifted him:/ndiges,is a mor- 
Andiges, tall made a Deity . Some {ay it is onely {paken of thofe, whomit is facriledge to name, 
WhattriS a5 the patron-gods of citties,and fuch like.But J chinke /ndiges bee as much as in-borne or ine 
Jiuing ; that is, meaning them that dwele or were borne in the foile,where they are deified, 

Such did Lacane meane when he faid, 


Indugites fleniffe deos urbifg, laborem, 
Teftatos fadore lares 


The towne-geds weprt,the houfe-hold-gods with fwear 
Witnet},the Citties labour fhould be great. | 


Mexzent us, 


And therefore he was both Jupiter indiges , and Inpiter Latials . But this ] may not balke: 

Swinging e£neashad his {winging placesin_ Italy , as Erigoxe Jcarushis daughter had in Greeec : for 
g1mes, thus faith Feffas Pompeins. Thefe {winging-games had originall from hence, becaufe e£neas, 
being loft(no man knew how in his warres againft A@ezentins King of the Cerites)was held 
deified,and called Joze Latiall, So Afcanixs {entoutall his fubieéts bond and free fixe daies 
to feeke him in earth and ayre : and fo ordeined {winging to fhew the forme cf mans life, 
how he might mount to heauen, or fall from thence to earth, and the perpetuail revolution of 
fortune, Thus Fe/fas.(#) By the Latines | And the Sicilians alfo in Elyma,a itty that hee - 
buile.O%.AZet.14. (kh) Sangas)} Or Xanthus,or Sazttus,or Sancus,but Sangus is the truth. Por- 
cius Cato (faith Dionyf-) wrote that the Sabines had their name from Sab:mas fonneto Sangus 
the god of the Sabines, otherwife ca'led Piftiws. Him (faith Laltantins doe the Sabines adore, 
Cedrus, asthe Romanes doe QOvirsnus,and the Achenians Adinersa. Hereof hee thar lift may read Ane 
nins. Sequefter Uibins,in his defcription of Rome,mentions this Geains Sangus.(1: (odrus|Son 

to Melanthus the Meffenian ; in whofe time the Kings of Pcloponnefus(defcended ftom Her-. 

cules) warred vpon Athens , becaufe they feared the aboundance of exiles th¢re, and Codras 

_ reiging at Athens ,they feared both the Ccrinthians, becaufe of their bordeting vpon them. 

(for lithmus wherein Corynth ftood, ioyneth on Megara) and the Meffenians a'fo,becaufe of 
Melanthus,Codrus his father, beeing King there, So the bloud royall of Pelaponnefus fent to. 

the oracle , and were anfwered thatthe viCtory and the Kings death fhould fall both on 

one fide: herevpon they conceiled the Oracle, and withall, gaueaftndt charge that none 
fhould touch (odrus. But the Athenians hearing of this Oracle , and (odrus beeing dee. 

firous of glorie , and the good of his countrie, difuifed himfelfe , went into the Laconian: 

campe , and falling to brable with che fouldiours , was flaine, So they loft the fielde ,.and 

all their Kingdome befides , excepting onely Megara. (ms) en” Oracle | Eyther that 

the Laconians fhould conquer if they killed not (odrus:(.Treg. ) or that the Athenians. 

fhould conquer if Codras were killed. Txfc. queft. Lb. 3, Serutus deliuereth it , as wee 

did but now. (*) Hin the Athensans | If chefe bee gods (faith Tuy Demat. Deer. 3, }. 
chil ae ete ol mae sade Ser a 


Sangus 


Lr218. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 699 


com oo 


- 


then is Evichtheus one,whofe prieft and temple we {ee at Athens: ifhee bea god,why thenis | 
not ( vdrus,and all thofe that fought and died for their countries glory,Gods alfo ? which if it Ervichtheus, 
be not probable,then the ground whence it is drawne,is falfe . Thefe words of Tii/z feeme to 

auerre that (odrus was held no god at Athens rather then otherwile.(o) Cre} Daughter to : 
Priam and Hecuba,wife to e£ncas, mother to Afcanins. Bute#neas in Italy nad Sy/sins by Cresfa, 
Lasinia,and hee was named lofthxmus becaufe his father was dead ere hee were borne.Son.e 
think that Lasinia, after eve his death fwaied the ftare rill Sylums carve to yeares,and then 
refigned to him, Some fay Afcanins had itthough hechad no claimeto it from Lawiniaby 
whom it came : but becaufe that fhe had as yet no fonne, and withall,was of too weake a {ex 
to manage that dangerous war again{t ALexex tists & hisfon Lasfus (leaders ofthe Hetrurians) 
therefore fhe retired into the country, and built her an houfe in the woods where fhe brought 
vppe her fonne, calling hitn therevpon Sy/ai#s. Now 4feauzius hauing ended the warre fetched 
them out of the woods, and vfed them very kindly,but dying hee left his Kingdome to his fon 
Iulins, betweene whom and his vnele Syluins there aroje a conrention abour che Kingdome, 
which the people decided, piuing Sy/uins the Kingdome,becaufe he was of more yeares,& dif 
cretion,and withall, che true heire by Lasinia : and making Ju/ns chiefe ruler of the reli gion,a 
power next to the foucraignes.Of this ( ¢/r fpeaketh, both in Lecane, and in Ssctoxius, And 
this power remained to the Judsan family yntill Déony/- his time. I remember I wrotc before, 
that becaufe of Neptunes prophecy in Homer, fome thought that e4neas returned into Phry- 
gia hauing feated his fellowes in Italy , and that hee reigned ouer the Troians there,at their 
home:(perhaps ftealing from that battaile with ALezentins,and fo fhipping away therher.)But 
if chat Homer meane the Phrygian Troy,then he hkewile fpeaketh of A/canius , whom many 
hold did seigne there againe, Diony/ius faith that Helens brought Heciors children back to le 
lium,and 4/canius came with them and chafed out Axtenors fonnes whom Agamemnon had 
made viceroies there at his departure. There is alfo a Phrygian Opry called Antandron, where 
Afcanins(they fay reigned buying his liberty of che Pelafgiues,for that towne,whezevpon it 
had the name. So thatitis a queftion whecher e£~eas left him in Phrygia,or that his father 
being dead in Italy,and his ftep-mother ruling all,he returned home againe. Hefychens names 
Afcania,a citty in Phrygia of his building StepbJt may bee this was fome other fon of Aeneas 
his , then that who wasin Italie. For J beleeue Aenews had more fonnes of that name 
then one: Je was rather a fur-name amongft them then otherwife; for that 4/cansns thatis uclaarbiK 
faid to rule in Jealy,properly hight Ewryleon, (p) Aelanthus, | ( odrus his fathcr. How hee got ae 
this Kingdome,is told by many : but {pecially by Susdas in his Apatarza. This feaft({aich hee) 

was held at Athens in great follemnity , three daies together : and Séralcus his fonne (the 

King of Thrace)was made free of the Citty. The firft day they call Dorpeiz,rne fuipping day, 

for that daie their fea(t was at fupper: the fecond Anarrhy/is, the riot , then was the excefhiue 

facrifices offered vnto Jupiter Sodalis,and Mineruasthe third,( #reotss,for their boies and wen- 

fhes plaied all in companies thatdaie. The feafts originall wasthus. The Athenians hauing 

warrcs with the Bxatians about the Celenians, that bordered them both; Xasrhus the Bee~ 

otian challenged Téhimetus the King of Athens: hee refufing , Welanthes the Meffenian 

fonne to Periclymenus the fonne of Ne/eas , beeing buta ftranger there , accepted the combat 

and was made King. Beeing in fight Afe/anthasghought hee faw one ftand behind Xanthas 

in a black goates skin, wherevpon he cried out on Xanthus that he brought hetpe with him to 

the field. Xanthus looking back , Melanthus thruft him through. Herevpon was the feaft 

ofthe deceiuer( d@zeripss ) ordained, and a Temple buile to Dyonsius Melanaiges , that Apaturia. 
is black-skind. Some fay that the name of thefe feafts came of their tathers gathering to- 

gether to infcribe their fonnes into the rolls of their men,and giue them their toga virilis,their 

gowne of mans eftate. Thus farre Susdus. 


Afcania,a 


EY | SEeemaiee 


Of the fuccefiton of the Kingdome in Ifraell after the Isdges. 


Cnap.20. : 


yee after (in thofe Kings times ) the Iudges ceafed,and Sas/ was anoynted 
farftKing of Ifrael , in Semswel the prophets time :and now began the Latine 
: Ooo02z kings 


in a a a Sanh a ee 
790 —_ SAINT AVGVSTINE. CuHap20.& 21 


kings to be called sy/ay of Syluins e&neas his fonne: all after him,had their proper 
names feuerall and this fur-name in generall, as the Emperors that (2) fucceeded - 
Cefar were called Cefars long after. But Sau/and his progeny being reiected,(b) 
and he dead, Dawid was crowned , (c) forty yeares after Sa#/beganne his reigne, 
(4) Then had the Athenians no more kings after Codrus, but begannean Arifto- 
cracy.(e) David reigned = yeares, and S2/omon his fonne fucceeded him, hee 
that buile chat goodly Temple of Godat Ierufalem. In his time the Latines buile 
Alba. = Alba, & their kings were thence-forth:called Alban kings, though ruling in Lati- 
um.(f) Roboam {ucceeded Salomon,& in his time Ifrael was diuided into two king- 
domes,and either had aking by it felfe. 


The S lyuss e 


L. VIVES. 


ae (4) fucceeded Cxfar |Not Lulins , but Auguftus ( and fo haue fome copies ) for it was 
The Cefars & from him that Auguftus,and Cefar became Imperial furnames.He was firft called C.Oa- 
whence. uinsbut Cefar left him heire of his goods,and name. (6) Hee dead,| Samuelhad anointed him 
long before,but he began not to reigne vntill Sass death , at which time God fenc him into 
Hebron.2.S$am,2.(c) Forty yeares| So long ruled Sas/,according to the fcriptures,and Lofephas. 
But Espolemus that wrote the Hebrew gefts, faith, but 22. (d) Then had the] They {era rule of 
apyovres, princes , magiftrates , or what you will. The Latines call them Archons, viing the 
pital Greeke.Cic.1 de fato. Spartian. in Adriano, Vell. Paterc.cc, They had nine magiftrates at Ae 
Magiltrate , thens( faith Pollax.lib. 8,) fit the Archon, clected euery yeare new. Then the prefident,then 
the generall for war: then the chiefe luftice,and fiue other Counfellors or Lawiers with him. 
Thefe laft heard and decided matters in the Court. The e4rchon, he was to looke to the or- 
dering of Bacchus his facrifices, and Appollo’s games in the fpring : commanding all then - hee 
was chiefe alfo of the Court where caufes of violence, flander , defraudations of wards,ele@i- 
ons of guardians, letting out of the fatherleffe childrens houfes,8¢c. were difpatched, all thefe 
mutt paffe his feale. Thus Pollsx, Before So/ons lawes , they might not giue iudgement but 
each ina feucrall place. The prefident, hee fat at the Buco/exm , not farre fromthe Councell- 
houfe. The Generall in the Lyceum , the Counfellours in the Thefmetivm .The Archon atthe 
brazen ftatues,called Exonimi,where the lawes were fixed ere they were approued.(e) Danid] 
There was neuer fuch a paire of men in the world , princes or priuate men as were thefe two, 
David and Salomon , the father and the fonnc , the firft for humility , honefty , and prophecy: 
the fecond for wifdome. Ofhimand of the Temple hee buile, Expolemus and Timochares, 
(prophane Authors) doc make mention. Laét, Inft. din.lib. 4, faith that hee reigned one hun- 
_ dered and forty yeares before the Troyan warre : whereas it was iuft fo long after it ere hee 
Roboamw, beganne to reigne. Either the auchor,or the tranfcriber are farre miftaken. (f) Roboam. In 
him, was the prouerbe fulfilled , a good father hath often- times a badde fonne : for hee like a 
foole, fallen quite from his fathers wifdome would needeshold the people in more awe then 
his father had done before him, and {0 loft tenne tribes of his twelue; and they chofe thema 
King,calling him King of Ifrael , leauing the name of the King of Iuda to him and his pofteri- 
ty,that reigned but ouer that, and the tribe of Bewéamin : for Leni,belonging tothe temple of 

God, at Jerufalem,was free. 


Danid ° 


. Of the latian Kings : Encas(the fir /t)and Aucn- 
tinus (the twelfth)are made gods. | 


CHAP. 21 


Las after Aeneas their firft deified king had eleauen more ,and none of 
chem deified. But Anentinus che welfth , becing flaine in warre,and buried 
| on 


7 s 


Lin18. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. ot 
on thac hill that beares his name , he-was put into the calender of their mengods. . 
Some fay he was noc killed but vanifhed away,and that mount Auentine (a) had 
not the namefrom him but frdm another : after him was ‘no more gods madein. 
Latium but Romalas the builder of Rome; betwixe whom and Asentine weretwo- 
Kings : one,Vtrgs/ nameth faying. a : : 
_ -Proximus tlle Procas Trotane gloria gentis. | . 
In whofe time becaufe Rome was now vpon hatching, the gredt monarchy of 
Aflyria tooke end. For now after one thoufand three hundred & fiue years(coil- 
ting Be/us his reigne alfo in that little Kingdome at firft ) it was remoouedtothe 
Medes. Procas reigned before _4mulius.Now Amulins had made Rhca,(or Ila)his - 
brother Nwmitors daughter,a vettall Virgin,and Afars they fay lay with het (thus . 
they honour her whore-dome) and begot two twins on her,who/for a proofeof =. 
their fore: faid excufe for her ) they fay were caft out, and yeta fhe-wolfe,the °” 
beafi of Afars came and fedde them with her dugges: as acknowledging thé 
fonnes of her Lord and Maifter. Now fome doe fay that there was an whore 
found them whenthey were firft caft out , and thee fuckedthem vp: (Now they 
called whores,Lupe,fhee wolues, andthe ftewes vnto this daie arecalled Lupe... 
narta,) Afcerwardes Faflulus a {hep-heard had themi( fay they) and his wife Welaifh - 
Accabrought them vppe. Well,whatifGO D, totaxethe bloudy minde of the oe 
King that commanded to drowne them, preferued them from the water and fent 
this beaft_to give chem nourifhment? is this any wonder ? Numitor,Romulus,his 
— fire fucceeded his brother Amswlius in the Kingdomeof Latium,and inthe 
rft yeareot his reigne was Rome buile,fo that from thence forward, hee and Ro- 
malasccigned together inItaly. —- - a 4 


L: VIVES. 


Aventine (a) hdd not} Yt hath many deriuations(faich Varro, )Nenins deriueth ic 2b ansbus Auentine,’ 
* “from the birds that flew thence to Tyber. Others, of e4uentsmusthe Alban King ,there _ 
buried.Ochers, ab aduentu hominum,of the refort of men, for there ftood Dianas remple,com. 

mon to all Latium. But Ithinke ie comes rather 2b aduetin, of. carrying to its for it was whi« 

Jom feuered from all the cittie , by fennes; and theréfore they were faine to bee rowed to itin 
fhippes. And feeing wee doe comment fome-what largely in this perticular booke, for cus 

rious heads, take this with yee too: Auentine was quite without the precingt of Rome, either 

becaufe that the people encamped there in theit mutiny,or bécaufe that there came no fortu= 

nate birds ynto it in Remus his Auguty. 


Rome, founded at the time of the Affyrian Monarchies fallExéchias 
being King of luda. Crwar.22. 


: B Riefly Rome (4) the fecondBabilon, daughter of the firft(by which it pleafed 
God to quell the whole world , and fetch it all vnder one foueraignty)was, 
now founded. The world was now full ofhardy men, painfull and well praGtifed 
in warre . They were ftubborne , and not tobee fubdued but with infinite labour. - 
and danger. Inthe conquefts ofthe Affyrians ouer all Afia,the warres were of 
farre lighter accompt ,the people were to feékein their defenfés , nor was the 
world fo populous. For it was not abouea thoufand yeares after that vniuérfall 
deluge wherein all died but Ness and his family ; thas Winds coriqueredall Afia 
Ooo gz excepting’ 


Ee A NE 
4O2 SAINT AV GVSTINE. Cuar.23, 


excepting India. BuctheRomanes came not totheirmonarchy with that eafe 

- thachee did : they {pred by little and lictle.,and found fturdy lets in all their pro- 
ceedings. Rome then was buile when Ifraell haddwele in theland of promife 
718. yeares.27.vnder lofuah, ; 2 9.vader the ludges , and 3 6 3.vnder the Kings 
vntill 4chaz,now King of Iudah, or as others count,vnio his fucceflor Ezechiasy 
that goodand Godly king, who reigned (afluredly) in Romsulws his time: Ofee in 
the meane time being king of Ifraell. | 


| L.VIVES. 
Rome calc R” the (a) fecond Babilon | Saint Peter calleth Rome Babilon as Hierome faith (in Us- 
led Babilé. Lata ALarci. ) who alfo chinketh that Johs in the Apocalips meaneth no other Babilon but 
[Ah (fay Rome.e4d Marcellam{ But now it hath put off the name of Babilon:no confufion now- you 
the Lo- cannot buy any thing now in matter of religion without a very faire pretext of holy 
uaynifts ) law for the felling of it, yet may you buy or fell(alinoft)any kinde of caufe, holy , or hellifh, 


thisbites, for money.] 


leaue it 
out,and. peo | | 
fothey-" Of the emidemt prophecy of Sybilla Erithraa con- 
doc. } oa cerning Chrift. 

es - | 7 Cuar. 23. 


[X thofe daies Sybsils Erythrea(fome fay |prophecied: there were many (4)Sybéils 
(faith Varro ) more then one. But this (4) Sybille of Erithrea wrote ome appa- 
rant prophecies of Chrift, which wee haueread in rough latine verfes,not cor- 
ref{pondent to the grecke,the interpretor' wellearned afterward, being none of 
the beft poets. For Flaccéasws, alearnedand eloquent man(onethat had beene 
Confulls deputie) beeing ina conference with vs concerning Chrift,fhewed vsa 
greeke booke,faying they were this Sybs//s verfes, wherein in one place, he fhew- 
ed vsa fort of verfes fo compofed, that (c) the firft letter of euery verfe beeing 
taken,they all made thefe words juss yper@-tt sq, cur. Jefus Chriftus,Dei Filsas, 


* saluator, IESVS CHRIST,SON OF GOD. THE SAVIOVR. Now (4) - 


thefe verfes,as fome haue tranflated intolatine ,are thus. The Englifh of chem 
you fhall haue in the Comment following , in an acroftike out of che 


Greeke. 


(¢) Indicis figno tellus fudore madefcer. 

| Ecelorex adneniet per feclafuturus: 
(F) Scilicet tn carne prefens ut indicet orbem, 
Unde Denm cernent incredulus atq, fidelis 
Celfiems cum fanttis,eni iam termino in ipfe. 
(3) Sic ansme cum carne aderunt,quas indicet ipfe. 
Cum iacet incultus denfis in vepribus orbis. 
Reiicient fimulachra viri,cuntiam queque Gaxam. 
(h) Excuret terras ignis pontumaue polumque 
Inqusrens ,tetriportas effringet -Anerni, | 
Ci) Santlorum fed enim cuntte lux Libera carni 
Tradetnr, fontes aternum flammacremabit, 
(k) Occnltes atts retegens,tunc quifque loqnerer 


aaa aaa ' 


7 : . ' . s 


L518. OF THE CITIE OF GOD.. 703 


_— 


Secreta,atque Dens referabit pettora Inci. 
Tune erit er lnttns, flridebunt dentibns omnes: 
Eripitur Jolis Inbar et chorus interit aftris. 
Solnetur celam bunaris [plendor obibst. 

Deiicret colles,valles exctollet ab imo, | 
Non erit in rebus hominum fublime , vel altum. 
lam equantér campis montes,et cerula pots. 
Omnia cefabunt,tellns confratta peribst. 

Sic paritér fontes torrentur fluiminaque ign. 

Sed tubatunc fonitum triftem dimitret ab alto 
Orbe,gemens facinns mifernm,vaviofque labores: 
Tartarenmque Chaos monftrabit terra debifcens, 
Et coram hic domino reges fiftentur ad unum, 


Decider ¢ calis igni(que et fulphuris amnis, 


Now this tranflator could not make his verfes énds meete inthe fame fence that 
the Greeke meete in : as for example,the Greeke letter v, isin theheadofone 
yerfe,but the Latines haue no word beginning with v , that could fitte the fence. 
And this is in three verfes, the fifth , the eighteenth and thenineteenth. ine 
weedoe not take thefe letters from the verfes heads in their iuftnumber,but ex- 
prefie them 5. wordes, Jefus Chrifius, Dei Filias ; faluator. The verfesare in 
all,27. which makea trine,fully (#) Ltt folid. For 3 times 3.is 9..and 
3. times 9.i$ 97. Now take the 5. firft letters from the 5. firft wordes of the 
Greeke fentencé included in the verfes heads,and they make ifs 2 fb, amifti- 
callname of Chr/t, who could bein this mortal! world,as inadeepe Sea , with- 
outall finne. Now this Ssbille Erythrea, or (as fome rather thinke ) Camsana, 
hath not one word in all her verfes¢ whereofthefe area parcell) tending to Ido- 
latry,, but all againft the falfe gods and their worfhippers, fo that fhe feemes to 
me to haue beenea cittizen of the Cstty of God. ( f) Lactantins alfo hath prophe- — 
cies of Chrift out of fome Ssbille but he faith not from which. But that which he | 
dilaceth in parcels,do I thinke good to lay together,and make one large prophe-; 
cy ofhis manylittle ones. This it is. Afterwards he [ball be taken by the ungodly, 
and they (ball ftrike God with wicked hands , and {pitte vbeir venemous Sperits in his 
face. Hee {hall yeela his hely backe to thecr Rrokes, and take their blowes with filence, 
leaft they {bould know that he is the word, or whence he came to fpeake to mortals. Ti cts 
| foall crowne him with thorae,they gaue hint gallin fiead of vineger to cate , this table 
‘of hofpitallity they {hall afford him. Thou fool nation that knews not thy God, 
but crowned him with thorne , andfeafted him with bitterne(fe. The vayle of the. 
Temple ball rend in two, and zt {hall bee darke three houres at noone day. Then {ball he 
dy and fleepe three dayes , and then {ball hee avife againe from death ana {bewe the frft 
fruites of the refurrettion to them that are called: All this hath Lectantins vfed in. 
feuerall places as hee needed,from the the Sybs//: We hauc laid it together , dif- 
tinguifhing it onely by the heads of the chapters , ifthe tranfcriber haue thecare 
to obferue and follow vs. Some fay Sybille Erythrea \iued iq the Troyan 
warre long before Romulus, 7 


| OL VIVES. a. 
Mz (4) Sybils] Prophetefles. Diod. lib. 5. Sers. in 4: eEncid. Lattant. Dis. inft, The Sys 
| fay that Sybille commeth of 7¢® God,(in the Acolike Dialect ) and Ger's comnfel, Swidas bils. 
aythithatitisa Romane word and fignifiech a P ropheteffe. How many of the Sibils ther were 
, | 0004 he “gad 


e 


704 


SAINT AV GVSTINE. C uar.23. 


and when they liued, is vncertaine : wee will heare the beft authors hereof, (Martianus faich 
there were but two Sybills, one called Erophila , daughter to Afarma{us the Troyan (and this 
hee faith was that of Phrygia and Cume} the other Symsmachia, daughter to an Hipponelian, 
borne at Erythra,and prophecying at (‘ema alfo, There were three ftatues of three Sybils, ia 
the pleading court at Rome, Piix. the firft ere&ted by Pacunsns Tanrus Aedile, and the reft by 
M. Meffala. Thefe (faith Solinus ) were the Cumane, the Delphike , and the Erithrz- 
an Eriphila. “Elian (iff, vari.) names foure ; Erythrza, Samia, Egyptia , Sardiana, O- 
thers adde two more Iudza, and Cumza. Varromakes them vp ten, De re dinsx, ad Caf. The 
Greekes thought to doe with chem as they did with the ewes and Hercules , making a many 
allinto one, and writ much of one Sybille: fome make her daughter to eApollo and Lamia: 
fonneto Ariffocrates and Hydole : {ome to Crimagoras,or to Theodorus, Some make her 
borne at Erythra, fome in Sicily, fome in Sardinia,Gergethia,Rhodes, Lybia, or Leucania, and 
all thefe concerne the Erythrean Ssbylf, who liued before the, fack of Troy ,faythey. But 
now to Varro’s ten Sybills,as Lattantius reckens them, adding the fitte affertions of Greckes, 
or Latines by the way. The firft was a Perfian, mentioned by Nicander , the Chronicler of 
Alexanders ates. This fome fay was a Chaldean, and fome a Iew, her name being Sansbetha, 
-borric in Noe, acitty neare the read fea, of one Beroffws and his wife Tymanthe , who had 
foure‘and twenty children betweene them. Shee prophecyed aboundantly of Chrif , and his 
comitihg,with whome che other Sydii/s doe fully accorde. The fecond was a Lybian. Exrip. 
Prolog. in Lamiam, The third aDelphian, ( Chry/p.de Dinivat. ) borne at Delphos, called 
T hems, living before the fiege of Troy. Homer inferted many of her verfes into his Rapfodie. 
This faith Diodorus was Daphne, Tyrefias daughter , whom the Argiues conquering Thebes, 
fent to Delphos, where growing cunning in eporlo's myfteries, fhee sounded the Oracles, 
to them that fought to them, and therefore was called Siby//a. There was another Daphne, 
daughter to L dom the Arcadian, e4pollo loued her, and thee is fei ened to bee turned intoa 
Lawrell in flying from him. The fourth aCumran in Italy, Nex. de bello Punic. Pifo ix An- 
nal. Some fay fhee was borne in Cymerium a towne in Italy neere Cumz. The fifth an Ery- 
thraan : e4pollederus faith hee and fhee were borne both in atowne. Shee prophecied to the 
Greekes,going to Troye, that they fhould conquer, and that Homer fhould write lyes. But 
the common opinion is, fhee liued before the fiege of Troy: yet Exfebinus drawes him to Re- 
mulus his time. Indeede Strabo maketh more then one frythream Jsby4): faying there was 
one ancient one, and another later called eA thenais, liuing in eAlexanders time. Laltantins 


— faith Stbylle Erythrea was borne at Babilon, and chofe to bee called Erythraa. The fixe was 


Tarquinius 
Prifcuse 


aSamian, Eratofth. faith hee found mention of her in the Samian Annales: fhee was called 
Phito the feauenth, a Cumane, called Amalthea, and by other Herophile, or Demophile. Sni- 
das calleth her Hserophile, and faith fhee brought nine bookes to King Targquinine Prifcus,and 

asked him three hundred angels for them, which hee denying and laughing at her, fhee burne 

three of them béfore his face,and asked him the whole fumme for the reft, Hee thinking thee 
was madde or drunke indeed, fcoffed at her againe : fhee burned other three , and asked fill 
the whole fumme for the three remaining : then the King was mooued in minde, and gaue it 

her. This is recorded by Péiny, ‘Dionyf. Solin, Gellins, and Sersins, concerning Tarquin the 
proud,not the other. P/sxy faith fhee had but three bookes burning two,and fauing the third. 
Swidas faith fhe had mine bookes of priuate oracles , and burnt but two of them: her tombe 
(faith Sofinns ) ae be feene yet in Sicilia.Buc he calleth her not Eriphile, for that hee giues to 
the Erythraan Sybill,who was more ancient then the Cumane. Exfebins thinks that Hierophile 
was neither the Erythrean,nor Cumane,but the Samian, that fhe liued in Nwma’s time, Leo- 
crates being Archon of Athens, The wife of Amsphiaraus was called Eri hile alfo. The eight 
was of Hellefpont,borne at Marmiffum neare Troy, liuing in the time of Se/ox and Cyrus. He- 
racl.Pontic.The ninth was aPhrygian,and prophecied at Aucyra.Thetenth a Tyburtine,called 
Albumea,wor hipped atTybur,as a goddeffe on thebanke of the riuer Anienes,in whofe chan- 
nell her Image was found, with a booke in the hand of it. Thefe are Varro's Sybills. There are 
others named alfo , as Lampufia , (alchas his daughter, of (olophon , whofe prophecies were 
whilom extant inverfe: and Sybilla Elyffas alfo with them. Caffandra alfo, Priams daughter, 
who praphecied her countries ruine,was counted fora Sy4ill: chere was alfo Sy/sll of Epirus, 

and Manto Tyrefias daughter : ‘and laftly Carmentis Exanders mother, and Fatua , Faxnus his 

wife,all cailed Syste. Dedius Grammaticns isin doubt whether Sapho were a Syéill or no, 

ea Sen 


Peas: OF THE CITIE. OF GOD. 


Sen. de ftud. liberal. Yet fome in this place read Publica for Syéilla, But which S7éil st was 
that wrote the verfes conteyning the Romanes fate , Varro him-felfe they fay could not tell. 
Some fayd it was Sybilla Cumana ,as Virgil doth , calling her Deiphobe daughter to Glancus, 
who wasa Prophet,and taught Apollo the art : vnlefle you had rather read it Deiphile, for the 
(as fome fay ) brought the bookes to Tarquin Prifcus who hid them in the Capitol : She li- 
ued in Rome (fayth Solinus)ia the fifteench Olympiad.! fthat be fo, it was TarguinPrifcus,8¢ 
notthe Proud , that bought her bookes: For Prifews dyed , and Seruins Tx/lss began his 
raigne the fourth yeare of the fifteenth Olympiade , Epitelides of Lacxdemon beeing victor 
inthe Games , and Archeftratides beeing Archon of Athens, That cherefore is likelier that 
Varro and Suidas afirme of Prifcxs, then that which others fayd of Superbus , if Solinus his 
Account bee true, Her Chappell was to bec feene atCumz , but Varro thinketh it vilikely 
that the SySilf chac Aeneas talked with , fhould liue vnto the fife King of Romestime:and 
therefore hee thinketh it-was Erythrea that {ung the Romaines deftinies. Yet Déony/- fayth 
it was to her that Aeneas went. Gb. 4. Varro hath this further ground,that when Apolloes Tema 
ple at Erythrza was burnt , thofe very verfes were found there. Euen this is fhee whome 
Vergill callech Cumea,for fhee prophecyed at Cumz in Italy , fayth Capella, and fo thinke]; 
There is Cumz in Jonia,by Erychrea,but e4rifforle fayth diretly , there is a Caue in Cume a°' 
Citty of Italy,in which Sybilla dwelt. Shee whome others called Erythrea , the Cumzans for 
glory of their country call Cumea : Otherwife they meane fomeother. For it was not 
Virgils Sybill that Cumane Sybilla , that fold Tarquin the bookes, Nor fayth Usrgill , nor 
thinke wee that there were no verfes in thofe bookes, but of One Sybils, This Tacitus fhew- 
eth faying of Axgujtns,that , whereas there were many fables {pred vnder the Sy:/s names, 
hee fent into Samos,Erythrea, Ilium, Afticke, and to all the Italian Colonyes,to bee at Rome 
with their verfes at aday appoynted , where a iudgement was paft by the Quindecimuers, 
and a cenfure yppon all that fhould haue of thefe verfes in priuate : Antiquity hauing deereed 
againftit before. And the Capitoll beeing repayred ( fayth Lattantins out of Varro) they 
came thether from all places (and cheefly from Erythrea ) with Spbills verfes,. This glfo Feae/- 
tella(adilligent Author )recordeth,an that P. Gabinigs, 14. Ottacilins, and Luc. Valerins 
went to Erythraa purpofely about it,and brought about a thoufand verfes to Rome , which 
priuate men had copyed forth. Thus farre Lattantias. Stilico Honorins his ftep-father , de- 
firing to mooue the people againtt his fonhein law , made away all the Sybills bookes : Of 
which fa&,Clandian writeth thus: 
Nec tantum Geticis graffatus proditor armis 

' Ante Sybillina fata cremanit opis. 


Nor onely rag’d the Traytor in Gothes armes, 
But burnt the fates of Syi/s helpe from harmes. 


And thus much of the Sydills. (6 ) Sybil of Erythrea | Laflantius citeth fome of thofe verfes 
from another Sybil: itis no matter indeed which Sybslls they are. One Sybils they are {ure to © 
be,and becaufe fhee was the moft famous,to her they affigne them, (¢ ) The firft letter | That 
the Sybils put mifteries in their verfes heads, wily can teftifie. Their Poems ( fayth he ) proo- 
ueth them not mad, for there is more cunning then turbulency in them - becing all couneyed 
snto Actofticks,as Exnins alfo had done in fome, Shewing a minde rather attentive then fu- 
rious, De disinat. lib. 2, Virgillalfo Fg. 4. 

Ultima Cumei venit iam carminis atas: 

The Syhils prophecies drawtoanend, oe. eas 
Namely thetime that thee included in her propheticall Acrofticks. (4 ) T! hefe verfes\ The 
Grecke verfesin Ex/ebins are thefe. , | 


sd poices 4S x8ey, xedosac onpeion Or’ tem, 

Slee J’ vegroder Casirtic aiaesy 6 uinar 

olexge weipesd xpsney WATTAP, XDY ROT MLOY oh TUN Teh. 

Shovtay 4 Veo uiepmss MIF AKI TETOE 

TL gery" TF alpicon seri THs XpevoIs 

aupnogiesr, -Luxacd” abdparar Bars Cupege ss xpires. 
ipoogan’ avmerixoouG croc xgek angrier pivaretty 

Hleci @ eideda Cpmtety xxi oredr ord aarre, = 

yh op 


. 
‘ 


SAINT AVGVSTINE, | Cuaray 


invArcay pices ra Aas eipx tas aidteo, ae 
eal tive doen rexparr ds srsv Signor ox OY Het, 
POUS aL ibs,z rE TETD Up aicoosp IN ySete 
s@a@coun Tie opatag thadny, Tore mes Tes Aahaeete 
sndsa rap Copeerse Side pastossy anolkete 
Spur@ Jem warrerisa x26 Lpvyuet oforray 
caret er cihag athis a spar Ta yopeity, 

Yegror eireres panrnce 34 TH GiY7 08 rei wees, 
UL0604 4 pal opofacsdrerd Vs gre Borves Ve. 
U'fecd'w'ximr Auzpdr cy as dpeemoie! GL ti Tell 
ious 7" Opn enadloic teas, noj wacom Oadacre 
Exes @AKY bEes,4" 9D Gpuxteion xEenuIG, 
uw mBnyaye Wo rao i ARK Aa Corte dei e ob, 
orehtns, F J‘ wesisdce gurap woAUGpuror agaed, 
¥pUsors nviode Hi morsngtt OU UATE KOgLE, 
Taprupicy 4 ya Gy mre Seiler pala yart ort, 

aE sor Stas Cause Ss8 Racsdate awarres, ; 
sdures ds” og rey aro reysos wupite HES 70 Beste 


I 2 figne of Doomes-day, the whole earth {hall fweate: 
E ner to reigne, 4 King in heaw aly feate, 
S hallcome to tudge allfle(h. The faithfulland 
V nfasthfull too, before this God [ball ftand, 
S ccesng him hich with Saints yn Times laft end. 


C orporeall {hall hee fit ; and,thence,extend 

H1 ts doome onfoules. The earth {hall quite lie wast, 

R w:n'd,ore-growne with thornes,and men {hall cat 

I dolls away.and treafure. Searching fire 

S hall burne the ground, and thence it {hallinquire, 

T brough feas,and skie,and breake Hells blacke/t gates: 


S ofball free light falute the bleffed ftates 

O f Saints; the guilty lafting flames {ball burne. 
N 0 act fo hid,but then to light {hall turnes 

N or brest (0 c'ofe,but G O D {hall open wide. 

E ach where {ball cries be heard,and noyfe befide 


O f gnalbing teeth. The Sunne {hall from the skie 


F Lite forth; and ftarres no more mooue orderly. 


G reat Heauen {hall be diffolu'd,the Moone depriu d 
O fallher lights places at height arriud 
D epreft sand valleys raifed to their feate 


T bere fhall be nought to mortalls,high or great. 

H #lls (hall lye lenell with the plaines; the fea 

E ndure no burthens and the earth,as they, 

S hall peril cleft with lightning: euery pring 

A ndriuer burne.The fatall Trumpe {ball ring 

V nto the world, from heauen,a difmall blaft 

I wcluding plagues to come for ill deedes paft. 
O M4Chaos, through the cleft maffefball bee feene, 
V ato this Barre jhalt all earths Kinzs conueene : 
R iwers of frre and Brimftone flowing from heau'n. 


(¢)Indicis figno} eAd.1.41, This /efus who is taken vp to heauen , fhall fo come as you haue 
feene him goe vp into heauen, (f) Scélicet ] This verfe is not inthe Greeke sNor is it added 
here, for chere mutt be cwenty feauen, (g ) Sic anime) The Greeke is,then (hall all fleth come 
into free heauen, and the fire fhall take away the holy and the wicked for euer , but becaufe 
the fence is harfh , I had rather read it te eyier, and fo make it agree with the Latine inter 

pretation, 


Lisad. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 707 


2 ae ee ee - 


pretation. (4) Exuret.] Thebookes of contciences fhall bee opened , as it is in the Reue- 

lation: Of thofe here-atter. (¢) Santteram | Ifzy.40.4. Euery valley fhall bee exalted, 

and cuery mouncaine and hill {hall bee layde lowe : the crooked fhall bee ftrcight, and the 

rourh places plaine. : . 7. a | 

(k) Occultos | High and lowe fhall then bee all one, and neither offenfiue ; pompe, 

height and glorye fhall no shore domincere in particular : but as the epoftle faith. 

Then fhall all principalities aid powers bee annihilated , thas GOD may bee all 

in all, For there is no greater plague then to bee vndcr him that is blowne bigge with 

the falle conceite of greatnefle: hee groweth rich and confequently proud: hee thinkes 

hee may domineere, his father was , I marry was hee: his pedigree is alway in his mouth, 

and ( very likely ) a theefe, a Butcher or a Swin-heard in the front of this his noble 

defcent. a 2” 
Another Tarre-lubber bragges that hee is a fouldiour, an ayde vnto the ftate in affaires 

military, therefore will hee reare and teare, downe goe whole Citties before him ( if an 

leaue their owne f{eates and come into his way , or to take che wall of him , not elfe ); 4 quadrate 

(4) No word | For the Greeke ¢ , beginning a word, is alwayes afpirate : now if we bring silane d 

it into Latine, afpirate wee muft put A, before it, and this deceiues the ignorant. (#) Oua- ec 

drate and folid] A plaine quadrate is a number mulciplyed once by it felfe, as three times 

three, chen multiply the produét by the firft, and you haue a folid: as three times three is paftant Jide 

nine. Heere is your quadrate plaine, three times nine is twenty feauen , that is the quadrate 4 cap.18, 

folide, (2) Lactantius\ Lattantius following: his Maifter-«rnobsus , hath written feauen 

moft excellent and acute volumes againit the Pagans, nor haue wee any Chriftian that is @ 

better Ciceronian then hee. 


ols aréuut yelese yal dxicay Ussegy nFet, 
Saevar 4 Sid pacieygra yep7ly dpayrile, 

Rat Chusol Miaeyios =e @luoperEgapysxcerTe, 
Scoees 4 ast yssstyas se@nat a yr0y ToTEVAOT07, 


To th’faithleffe yniuft hands then fhall hee come, 
Whofe impure hands thall giue him blowes,and fome. 
Shall from their foule mouthes poy foned fpittle fend, 
Hee to their whips his holy back fhall bend. 


sa) xe.agi Guar GY orybod, pre btsy10 
- ae Ap Gr snerober malar ives psreresc ABANCH, 
xaj siparer gopices tor daarSaror, 


7 Thus beate hee thall ftand mute, that none may ken ~ 
: Who was, OF whence,the worde, to ff peakk comens 
‘ Andhee fhall beare athotnie crowne=—' 


| e395, 70 Psussorsne ee Siler Eee iauar, 
| wie dqudekceine yan deigues apemar, | 
, They gaue him for drinke Vineger, and Gall for meate, 


This table of in-hofpitalitie they fer. 


. 
* A ‘ : 
eet ey ee : . . * 2 
Poe or ‘S _ - \ - 
é This 


/ 


Ba a a er 
708 SAINT AVGVSTINE. —Cuar.24 


ce ED AR ae CC 


This is likewife in another verfe of Sybills : the Greeke is: 


auw ySicu appar tov voy Deore'x crotees, 

guiloree crv arciss rouse, a Ma nanadlals 

ise Larrspare,po€apur ze xodnr cabepocts, | 

Thy God ( thy good ) chou brainleffe fenceleffe didft not know, 
Who paft sad) plaid in mortall words and works below : 

A crownc of thornes, and fearfull gall thou didft beftow. 


Chap.1 . In the next Chapter following : the words are thefe, 


vas JoxseSiccry al racug,xx| inet picop 
wucicn oxoTossoes WEA EL G” co Tpseiy copans. 

_ The Temples veile fhall rend in twaine,and at mid-day 
Predigious darkned night for threc full houres fhall ttay. 


In the fame Chapter. 
re a a a 
RPS asa SATS aheToicap ray Vmod ets ag, 
Death fhall thut vp his date with fleeping for three daies 
Then rifing from the dead,he turnes to the Sunne raycs 
The refurreCtions firft-fruites to th’elect difplayes, 


(2) Of the refurrettsn| Making away for the chofen, by his refurreCtion, fo the Greeke im- 
plyeth, Chriff as the Apoftle faith, being the firft borne of many brethren , and the first fruites 
of thofe that fleepe, \ 


The feauen Sages in Romulus his time : Ifrael lead into captinity : 
, Romulus dysth and ts deified, | 


Cuap. 24. 


]N Romulus his time liued Thales, one of thofe who ( after the Theologicall 
Poets in which Orphens was chiefe ) were called the Wife-men, or Sages. 
And (2) now did the Chaldzans fubdue the ten Tribes of Ifraell, (fallen before 
from Js#da)and lead them all into Chaldza captiue , leauing onely the tribes of 
Jnda and Beniamin free, who had their Kings feate at Hierufalem . Rozwlus dy- 
ing, and beeing not tobee found, was here-vpon deified, which vfe was now 
almoft giuen ouer, fo that (6 ) in the Cefars times they did it rather vpon flat-_ 
tery then error, and Tuy commends Rowwlus highly in that hee could deferue 
thofe in fo wife and learned an age, though Philofophy were not yet in her 
height of fubtile and acute pofitions and difputations. But although in the 
lacer dayes they made no new Gods of men, yet kept they their old ones ftill, 
and gaue not ouer to worthip them : increafing fuperftition by their fwarmes of 
Images , whereof antiquity had none: and the deuills working fo powerfully 
with chem,that they got them to make publike prefentations of the gods fhames, 
fuch as if they had bin vn-dreamed of before,they would haue thamed to inuente 
asthen. After Romulus reigned Num ,who ftuffed all che Citty with falfe reli- 
gion, yet could hee not fhapea God-head for him-felfe out of all this Chaos of 


——= wh, SSN = —~ we = 
wr 


Lini8. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 999 


his confectations . Ic feemes hee ftowed heauen fo full of gods that hee left 


noroome for him-felfe. He raigning at Rome,and AZana/fes ouer the Hebrewes 


(that (¢ ) wicked King that killed the Prophet Ifaias) Sybilla( ad) Samra lined; 


as itis reported. 


L. VIVES. 


Ne a ) did | By the condué ef Senxacharib, or Salmanazar , King of Chaldza, in Ofees 
time, They were tranfported into the Mourtaines of Media,after they had bene ruled by 
Kings 250. weares, Senacherib {ent colonies out of Affyriainto Judza to poffefle and keepe 
it,and they followed the Iew ifh law,and were ca'led Samaritanes,that is,keepe rs. (6 ) Inthe Samarie. 
Caiass time | Tully in his Phillippikes rattles vp Cefars deity , Seneca derides that of Clandsas, tance, 


and Lacan the diuine honours giuen to all the (efars.(¢ ) That wicked King that killed ) So 
‘he did and fet vp an Idoll with : 


uc faces. Efaias was aProphet of the bloud royall. Hee pro- 
phecycd vnder Masaffes who made him be fawen in two. He was buryed wnder the oke Ro- an 
gell,neare to the {pring that Ezechias damined vppe. Hierome. ( d) Samia | Called Herophs- . 


dasand living in Samos. Enfeb. 


Phylofophers lining in Varquinius Prifcus his t2me,and Sedechias, 
when Hitrafalem was taken,and the Temple destroyed. 
C wap. 25. 

oe ruling ouer the Hebrewes,and Terguinins Prifews (fucceflor to Ancus 

Martius ouer the Romanes,the lewes were carried captive to Babilon , Hie- 
rufalem was deftroyed’ , and Sa/cmonstemple razed.(6 ) The Prophets had told 
them long before that their wickednes wovld be the caufe of this,chielly Hicremy 
(c)who told them the very time that it would hold : ( d) about this time liued (¢) 
Psttacus of Mitylene , another of thefages. And the other fiuealfo( which with 
Thales and this P:ttatws make feauen ) hued all (as Exfebéns faich) (f) within the 
time of the Ifraclites captivity in Babilon. Their names were’ ¢) Solo of Athens. 
(b)Chiloot Lacedzmon(é) Pertander of Corinth()Cleobulas of Lindum , (/) and 
Bias ot Prienazum. Thefewere all after the Theolgicall Poets,and weremore fa- 
‘mous for their (m better difcipline of life,then others obferued, & for that they 
gaue fundry(#) good inftru@ions,touchw g the reformatié of manners. But they 
left(o)nc records of their learning to pofterity but onely Solow that lefc the Ache- 
nians fom lawes of his making. T#a/es vasa Naturalift , & left books of his opini- 
nons:& in this time alfoliued Avaxtmander, Anaximenes 8 Xenophanes,al natural, 


Philofophers,& Pythagoras al{o fr6 whome Philofophy feemed to take begining. 


_ L VIVES. 


. « 


~ Bae - 


Of him and his prophecy thus writeth sd/ex. Polyhift. In loachims time, be was fent.by God Pi ies | 


en, ee ee ee 


‘710 SAINT AV GVSTINE. Cars 


? 


Prophecy , and finding the Iewes adoring of their Idol Baal, hee there-~vppon proghecyed thei 
Citties raine and their captenity , sg tia i Joachim commanded to burne him. But hee told 
then: that with the fame peeces of wood fhould they ( beeing captine ) digge and delue betweene 
Tigris and Euphrate:.This Nabuchodroxor heard off and gathering his power,came and {poyled alll 
The capti- J ndea,THierufalen , and the Temple, taking the Arke and all away with him.(c) Who told ] Sea- 
uty of Iu- yenty yeares hee fayd it would indure , and fo it did. (4) Pittacas | Exfeb, fayth that there 
da. were feauen wife men of Greece in Cyrus his time, Euang, Prep. 4b. 10, But indeed their 
Thales gimes cannot bee brought vntoone, fome were before other fome. Thales afluredly {pake 
with / yrus , fo did Solom and Psttacus with Crafus who warred with ilesk Buc (pres his 
time began but a little before his ended. For (yrus liued from the fortith to the fifteeth 
Olympiade. Some fay co the fifty one, fifty wo, fifty three, yea and fome to the fifty eighth. 
Eufebius {ayth 7 bales lived in the beginning of Romwlus histime. But eyther the author or 
“the tranfcriber is in a foule faule , yet Angajfine followeth them. For howcould Thales 
come to (yras his time then ? From the eighth Olympiad vnto the fiue and fifteeth , very 
necre two hundred yeares ? Thales by the longeft accompt liued but ninety:So counts 
Sofcrates , but ordinarily hee hath but feauenty allowed him, Laert. AndEsfebius maketh 
‘the {cauen {ages to Jiue but in Serséns his firft beginning of his reigne : and Thales in the fisft 
of eAncus Afartius; that is Olymp. thirty fue,whome he fayd liued vnto Olymp. fifty eight: 
then muft henccbe referredto Romulus his time. And the Greekes haue exceeding adoe- 
| about their {ages , euery one being vayne-gloryous for his owne fide, for they hadde wont 
bercith in old time to call all their Artifts ,Sages, as wee call them knowing men. The Poets alfo 
Grit a gene- were called fo: as Hefiod and Homer. And then Thales , Bias , Pittacns , and Solon gotte all 
rallnameto this name. For thefe fayth Dicearchus , were afluredly fuch, Bue whome to adde to thefe 
Artnftand now therelyesthedoubr. Icisthe greateft and moft noble queftion that is handled in pro- 
Poets, phane matters. The three that e4aguffsse nameth , are coitimonly added. Laert . Plata , re- 
iectes Periander , and putteth one CMifonin his place , whofe countrey is vnknowne. Ix pre- 
tag, Plato maketh him a Cheuean , a may-hater as hie » and eApemanthus was. Lean- 
drins for him and (Teobulus,putts Leophantus of Ephe us, and Epimenedes of Crete. Epborus 
putes Axacharfis the Sythian in Pertanders place. Others ad -Ariffodemus Pawsphilus , and 
Strabras thé Argiue , Hermippus reckons feauenteeene wife men: Solon , Thales, Pittacus, 
Bias, Cleobulus , Chilo , Periander , Anacharfis, Acafilaus , Epimenides, Cleophantus , Phe- 
recides , Ariftodemus , Pythagoras , Latins ,Hermion and Anaxagoras. (e) Pittacus | Sonne 
to Hircadixs the Thracian as it is reported : borne at Mytelene in Lefbos : a loucr of his coun~ 
tryes freedome , for which hee flewthe Tyrant Adelanchrus : he was very valiant (for hee 
fought hand to hand with Phrymon of eAthens who had beene victor in the Olympicks, and 
flew him ) and moft iuft, for beeing made a iudge betweene Athens and Mitylene in acon- 
trouerfie concerning lands , hee iudged onthe Athenians fide : and therefore the Mityleni- 
ans made him Prefident of theit ftate , which hee held vntill hee had fetled it and then gaue 
it ouer . Hee dyed , Olymp. fifty one, in the feauentith yeare of his age; renne yeares after hee 
had reformed the ftate. (f) W%thin the time | Exfeb. Prep, Enang. and in Chronic. ( whome 
eAAuguftine followeth much in this work)In (yrss his time were the Ifraclites freed,and inthe 
Solon, beginning of his reigne the feauen fages flourifhed.(¢) Solon) born in Salaminia,vnder the do- 
minion of Athens, & fon of Exe/fides one defcended trom the bloud-royall of Codrus:he mol- 
lified Draco his bloudy lawes,& gaue the Athenians better : for Draco wrote his with bloud 
& not with inke, as Demades {aid:al crimes great and {mal,yea euen idlenes it felfe was guilty 
of death, Solon hated his coufin Pifftrates his affectation of a Kingdom,who attaining 1t,So/en 
got him into e£gipt,& from thence to Crefs,King of Lydia:then to Cilicia where Fee buile 
Solos(afterwards called Pomspesopolss) becaufe there Pompey ouercame the pirates , thence to 
Cyprus and there he died,being 70. yeares old. He was Archon of Athens, Olymp. 46.in the 
third yeare therof, For they elected now euery yeare, not eucry tenth yeare as they had done 
before, The Athenians offered him their Kingdom which he {toutly refufed,& exhorted them 
earneftly to ftand in their liberty. Laertsws and Péstarch recite fome of hislawes , which the 
; Romans put into their twelue tables. (4) Chilo | His fathers name was Damacetes; he was one 
"of the Ephori(Magiftrates much like the Romaine Tribunes )for he firft ordained the ioyning 
The of the Ephori with the Kings : he was a man of few words, and briefe in phraze as the Laconi- 
ri, Mage 208 were naturally. Hee dyed at Pifa , imbracing his fonne comming viGor from the 
Aracy:; = Olympicks. He-had an epigram ynder his ftatue , that called him the wifelt of che feauen (#)_ 
- ; =o Snes Set Re ise, ay ees eS — - P 5 ] 


ae yrs 


Pittazus. 


~ 
erg guenndan ae 


Lisasd. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. a1 
(4) Periander, ) Mee no reafon he fhould haue this honor, for hee was a tyrant, moft furious, eee 


vicious ,couctous , and abhominably inceftuous. Thefe are no parts of wifdome, therefore 

many do puthim out of this sumber.But Sorioz and Heracl:t-rs fay that the wife Peri.utder was 

not hee of Corynth, but an Ambracian borne. Ariffor, faich hee was borne atCorinth rand _ 
cofin-ogcrmaine tothe Tyrant.‘ P/ro faith n0.Ck )Cleobalus.' Borne at Lindus in Rhoces 107N€ Clechaless 
fay , ia Carts. Dutis.. His fatherwas called Exagoras , the moft béautious and velorous perion 

of his time. Hee learnt his know'edge in Egypt, his daughter (Veobeli.a was a famous pro- 
pheteiir,&c, (2 )Bit. ) Hig fathers name was Teatanws, Prienniais in tonia, Tohim they _ 

fay the golden 7r/pos was brought, andhce tentic vnto Hercules of Thebes, Hee freed his Bias, 
country iro.nihe great warre of (refus the Lydian, his was thac phrale , Omnia mes ne- 

cum porto : Myne owne, and all mine owne , |beare about me. (7c. Parztox. | wonder the 

Greckes maize no mention of this imhis life. They speake not of Priexes taking in all his 

whole life: 77y I belecue was deceiued in this, nor is this his onely crrour, Sexeca feemes 

to give iz more crucly to Srilpoof Megara, for Demetrizs as then tocke Mecaia. Bras diced 

fweetly w.th his headin the lap of his grandchild by his daughter. The Prienmans built a cha- 

pell to him, ‘.ztyras preferreth him before all the other Sages.(m) Better difcipline.) They were 

not learned, nor Philofophers (faith Dicearchus ) butthey werc hardy men and good politi- 

ans. And fo faith T#%y.De Amicit.(n ) soodinftruttions, | We haue Greeke fentences vader 

there names: /tuforrs bath made fome of them,into verfe. Thales his motto was,Nofte te 

know thy felie, Péttecss his, Nofce occaffonem : take time while timeis.Solons, Nihil nimis : the 

meane is the beft./ bi/ons.Sponfions non deeft ia€tera: Bargaines ad lores are infepzrable, or he 

that wil aduenture mult loofe.Perianders,Stizgandus Imperator dediturus ron eff armus fed bene- | 
uolentia, loué and not armes guard him that would rule.(leolulus,cane tnimicorum infitias, a- The mows. 
micorum inuidias , beware of your focs emnity and your friends enuy. Bias,Plures mali, The of the:euen 
worfe are the mere. So agree Anguftine and Exfebius who faith that their inuentions were 928°: 
nothing but fhort fentences,tending to the infticuting of honeft difciplines into mens hearts, 
Prep.Euang.liber.10.( 0) Norecords.| Yet Solon and Bias they fay lef fome verfes, 


3 


Dh, 


ae el eee 


The Romaines were freed from their Kings,and I{rael from 
captinity both at one time. | 


Cuap.26. 


T the fame time(s)Cyrus King of Perfta,Caldza,and A flyria,gaue the lewes 
+ & a kinde of releale, tor hee fent s0000.0f them to re-edifie the Temple,and 
thefe onely buils the Alear, and layd the foundations : for their foes troubled 
them with fo often incurfions that the building was lefe of vntill Daréus his time. - 
(6 ) Thc ftory of Zadith, fel out alfo in the fame times : which they fay the lewes 
receiue not into thcircannon. The feauenty yeares therefore being expired in 
Darius his reigne, (the time that Hreremy(¢ had prefixed) The lewes had 
their full freedome: Tarquin the proud being the feauenth King ofRome: whom 
the Romaines expelled, and neuer would be fubie@ to any more Kings. Vntill 
this rime, had Ifraell prophets, in great numbers, but indeed we haue but few. 
of their Prophecies cannonicaly recorded, Of thefe I faid in ending my laf 
booke, that would make fome mention in this , and here it is ficteft. 


Crm (2 ) King.) Sonneto Mac lases, Affiageshis daughter the. Median King, and Cynus, 
 (ambyfes oneof. obfcure birth : hee was called (yras, afcethe riuer Cyrus in Perfia 
—_ Ppp2 peare » 


wis SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuar. 26.827 


nere to which he was brought vp. Hee foyled his grandfather in watre , and tooke the Mo. 
narchy from the Medes, placing it in perfta. He conquered Chaldza alfo. For the Medians 
hauiny gotten the Monarchy to them-felues after Sardanapalus his death , had their Kings 
all crowned at Babilon , and Nabuchodrofor was their moft royall ruler ; his exploytes they 
extoll aboue the Chaldean Hercades actes: faying that hee had a conquering armye, 
as farre as the Gades. Strabo ex (Megafthene. Megafthenes, ( fayth eAlphens ) athirmes thar 
Nabuchodrofor was a ftouter foldier then Hercules , and that hee conquered all Libya and 
Afia as farre as eArmenia , and returning to his home , he cryed eut in manner of prophecy- 
ing’: O Babilonians , I prefage that a great miffortune fhall befall you , which neither Belus , nor 
any of the gods can refift : The Mule of Perfia (hall come to make flawes of you all! Hauing thus 
‘fayd ,prcfently hce vanifhed away,¢ Milena Rudocus his fonne fucceeded him , and was flaine 
by /géfares who reigned in his place , and left the crowne to his fonne Babafo eArafcxs,who 
was flaine by treafon, Vabinidocus was made King. Himdid (yrus, taking Babilon , make 
Prince of Carmania, Thus farre eAiphens . Alexander ‘Polyhiftor diftereth fomewhat from 
this but not much. Jofephus fayth there were two Nabuchodrofors: and that it was the fonne 
that Aegafthenes preterres béfore Hercules , and the father that tooke Babilon. The fonne 
dying left his crowne to Amilmadapak_,or Abimatadok,and he freed Iechonsas and made him 
one of his Courticrs. Amilmadapak dyed hauing reigned eighteene yeares , and left his fon 
Agreffarins to ee , who reigned fourty yeares , and his fonne Labofordak fucceeded 
him , who dyed at the end of nine monthes , and Balthazar otherwife called Noboar had his 
crowne , and him did Cyrus chafe out ofhis Kingdome when hee had reigned feauenteene 
eares. Now if this account bee true , there are more then an hundred yeares betweene the 
e becinnie g of the lewes captiuitie and (yrusthe Perfian, Butfure anetror thereis, eytherin 
ta PY the author or in the tranfcriber. Now Cyrms being moucd by the Prophecy of Efay,who had 
nie gure fore-told the originalofhis Empire twenty yeares ere it came to pafie,ferte the lewes free and 
beforeCy- fent them to build the Temple , reftoring all the veffels that Nabachodrofor had ce 
rus = away. This was now fourty yeares after the beginning of their captiuity, Ewfeb. So they 
.“ ent and built,but cheir enemies troubled them fo chat they were fayne to let it alone yn- 
till che fecond yeare of Dearins his reigne, the fonne of Hifta/pis , who expelled the AZegé, 
and was King alone, Forhee in fauour of Zorebabell , {ent all the Iewes home , and forbad 
any of his fubieats to moleft them, Soin the feauentith yeare after their captiuation they 
returned home, Thisis after Enjebias his account , vnto whome (/ement agreeth , faying, 
The Je wes captiuity indured feauenty yeares vnto the fecond Shas of Darins King of Per- 
fia Zeypt and Affyria, in whofe time, Aggee , Zachary andone of the 12. called Angelus, 
prophecyed;and Lefxs the fon of Jofedech was high Prieft. That Darius his fecond yeare, and 
The autho. the feauentith of the captiuity, were both in one , Zachary teftifieth Chap, x. 1, 12. Buc /ofe- 
rity of the phys maketh fcauenty yeares of the Captiuity to be runne in Cyrashis time.( 4) The frory of 
bookeof “Judith | This booke ( fayth Hicreme) hath no authority in matter of Controuerfie : Buc yet 
ladith, the f ynode of Nice hath made it canonicall, Bede fayth that (amby/is fonne to the elder 
Cyrus was called by the Iewes the fecond Nabuchodrofor , and that the fa& of Indith was 
doneinhistime. (¢ ) Hadprofixed | Chap, 25.11. 


Computati: 
on of years. 


Of the times of the Prophets whofe bookes wee hawe : How they 
prophecyed ( fome of them ) of the calling of the nation , in 
the declyning of the A(fjrian Monarchy, 
and the Romaines erecting. 


C HAP. 27e 


Te know the times wel,let vs go backea little. The prophecy of Ozee, the firkt 
of the twelue beginneth thus. The word of the Lord that came to Ozee , én the 
dayes of Ozias,foatha,Achaz,E zechias, Ksngs of Juda(b) Amos writeth alfo that $ 

rophecy in Ozéas his daies,(¢ Jadding that Hreroboam lived in thofe times alfo,as 
he didindecd, E/aias Ulfo che fon of Amos ( cither the Prophet or fome cn | 


Linti $= = OFTHECITIEOF GOD... _ og: 


and. this Jateris more generally held) sameth the foure in the b innieg of is - 
‘prophecy,tharOfee named. Sodoth (d) Afichrsjalfo. All hele tacts prophe 
cies proue to haue lived in one time : together with (¢) fows; atid (filet, the 
‘firft vader Oesas ,and the later vader his fonne Josthan. But wee finde not the 
times of the two later , intheir bookes, but in thé Chronitlés: Now (¢) thefe 
times reach from Proces or Aventinus his predeceflor, K ing of the Latines’; vn- 
to Romslusnow King of Rome, nay euén vatoNama Pompilius , his fucceffor: 
For fo long reigned Excebiasin Juda. And therefore in the fall ofthe Affyrian 
Empire and the rifing ofthe Romane , did thefe fountaines Of prophecy breake 
forth : that euen as 4b7eham had received the promife of all the worldes beein 

bleffed in his feed, ac the firft original of the Affyrian eftate ; So likewife might 
the teftimonies of the perfon in whonie the former was to bee fulfilled, be as fre- 
quent both in word and writing in the originall of the wefterne Babilon. Foz - 
thofe prophets that were continually in Ifraell, from the firft of cheirKings, 
wereall for their peculiar good ,andno way-pertaining to the nations. { 4) But 
for the more manifeft prophecies , which rended alfoto the nations good, ic 
was fitte they thould begin , when ehac Citty began that was the Lady of the 


nations. 


L.VIVES. . 


YN che ( 4 ) dayes of Ozias | The fureR teftimony of the Prophets times , are in their works Otis, 
if they haue not omitted to record when they prophecied , fo that it were fuperflaous to 

make addition of any other confitmations , then thofe of their owne. Ofee pro ee too, 

vnder thofe three Kings of the two tribes,the father, the fonne, and che fonnes fonne , inthe 

laft of whofe dayes,Safmanazar ledde the Iftaelites away captiue, So that Ofee ( as Hierome 

fayth \did both prefage it ere it came,and deplore it when it came. Oxses liued in that memos 

rable raine of the Affyrian Empire,by the rebellion of the Mcdes. Some call thisKing dag . 


vias.($ ) Awol | Amos (fayth Hrerome ) the next Prophet after /eel/, and the third of the Amed 


twelue was not hee that was the Prophee Efays father. For his name is written rq, 
eAleph and Tfade beeing the firft and laft letters ot his name,which is oS > rong and 
velant :but this Prophets name is written owy swith es and Samech , and is tranlated 
a difperfed people. Mem and Vax , both of them haue alike. To vs now that haue nq differeace 
| of vowels,nor of the letter S, which the Hebrewes haue triple , thefe wordes {cemme all ones. 
bat they can difcerne chem , by the propriety of the vowels and accents. This Prophet Ames 
was bome in Thecue,fixe miles South from holy Betheleem where owr Sauiour was borne:and 
beyend that is seyther village nor cottage : fuch an huge defeit lyes betweene that and the 
redde fea, reaching euen tothe confines of Perfia , e£€thiopia ; and India. But becayfe the 
ound is barren and will beare nocorne, therefore alt is full of fheapheards , to countervaile 
the fruitlefneffe of the land , with the dbcundance of ¢attell. One of thefe fheapheards was 
Amos, rude in language but not in knowledge. Fort the {pitit chat fpake in them all, {poke al. 
fo inhim . Thus far Hierome. Wherefore 1 wonder that the Prologue vnto Amsos fayth di- 
re€tly rhat hee was father to E/ay ; perhaps it was ttom fome Hebrew tradition , who fay that 
all the Prophets fathers , or gtand-fathers , thac are natnedin any part of their workes titles; 
were Prophecs alfo. Hier, in Sophon. (¢ ) Adding that Hicrobown } Not hee that drewe the 
tenne tribes from Roboam , for hee was a hundredand fixty yeares before this other , who 


was Laas his es (Micheas | Hee. prophecyed ( fayth Hierome) in the time of Jaathon, Mi chaad, 


eauenty make him third Prophet of che twelue , and the Hebrewes the 


nos of Oxias. The | | 
Gsth. (¢ ) Zonas So fayth Exufebins of che times of Axarias , or Oxias. So fayth Hicrame al- 
fo in his commentaryes yppon Oxee t and in his prologue vppon Jowas he receyteth the,opini- 
oa of fomechat helde efmsethi the father of Jonas , to bee the widow of Serephta’s fonne, 
whome Edis retlored to life , where-vppon thee fayd : Now] kwow that thew arta man of 
Gad, and shat shemord sof Gad. in sip mah isa so chealons hee cide was fo patie. 
Se a | a PP 3 i | £ 


- 4 - : | : 
A! on SAINT. AV GVSTINE. , _  Cunae, 28 


For: Assithi , in our language is truth. (f ) feel | In our tongue Beginning . Hicrome, Hee 
Toe, i, Dom in the tithes of che other prophets, (¢ ) Thefe times | eAnentinus raigned thir- 
ty fcauen yeares , and in the two and thirtith ofhis reigne began Azarias or Oxias to reigne 
in Juda, Exfeb. Extropins differs not much from this, fo thatby both accounts Exeché 
his time fell to the beginning of Numa his reigne. (b ) Bat for the } For thefe prophets pro- 


phecyed of the calling of the Heathens,as he will thew afterwards, 


7 Prophecies concerning the Ghofpell,in Ofeciend Amos. 


Le 6 a, Cran 28. | 
O« isa Prophet as diuine as deepe. Let vs performe our promife , and fee 
what hee fayth : J the place where st was fayd unto them, you are not my people, 
it ballbee fayd , ye are fonnes of the lining God, This teftimony the ( «) Apoftles 
them-felues interpreted.of the calling of the Gentiles: who becaufe they are 
the {pirieuall fonnés of Abrabam, and therfore(é) rightly called Ifraell : it fol- 
lowethof them thus: Then the children of Iudah and the cheldren of Ifractt {halt bee 
athered together and appoint them-felues one head , andthey{ball come up out of the 
Lind . If wee feeke for farther expofition of this, wee hall cloy the {weete cafte 
of the Prophets eloquence. Remember but the corner ftone, andthe two wals, 
the Iewes and the Gentiles , eyther of them vnder thofe feuerall names , beeing 
__, founded vppon that one head , and acknowledged to mount vppe from the tand. 
”” And that thofe carnall Ifraelices that beleeue not now fhalt once beleeue ( being 
as fonnes to the other, fucceeding them in their places ) the {ame Prophet auouat- 
Hole, 3.4, cheth, faying : The children of tfraell {ball fit neany dayes without a King , without 
Prince,without xn offcring , withont an Altar,without aPrie{theod , and wethont (c) 
 manifeflattons , who fees not thatthefearethe lewes ? Now markethe fequele. 
Afterwards {ball the children of Ifracll conuert , and feeke the Lord their God,and Da- 
uid their King,and fhall feare the Lord and his goodneffe in thefe later dayes. Nothing 
can be playner {poken,here is Chiff meant by Dawid,as he was the fon of Dasidin 

the flefh ( fayth the Apoftle ) Nay this Prophet fore-told the third day ofhis re- _ 

_ furredionalfo: Heare him elfe : After two dayes willbe reniueus , and inthe third 
oe day he will rayfevs vp. Luft in this key fpake Saint Paw/ faying: f ye bee rifen with 
Amon4.t3 Chriff,/eeke the thinges which are aboue. Such a prophecy hath tees allo : Prepare 

to meete thy God O Ifraclt.for lo, forme the thunder, and the windes,and declare mime 
annoynted in men : and in another place : (4) In that day will Iraifevup the taberna- 
cle of Dauid that és falne downe and clofe vp the breaches thereof , aud will rasfe upp 

his ruinesana build it as inthe daies of old:that the refidue of mankind,and al ihe bee 
then,may feck me,becanfe my name ts called upon them , faith the Lord that doth this. 


Hofe, 1,10, 


L. VIVES. - 


| sa scald Pet, 1.2. 10.(b) Rightly called [fraell \For all that follow truth and righte- 

oufnefle are of Abrahams {pirituall feed. Wherfore {uch as defcend from him in the fleth, 

the {criptures call Indab, becanle that tribe ftucke to the old Priefthood,temple and facrificess 

and fuch as are not Abrabams children by birth,but by faith , are called //raefl, For the renne 

Madi, tribes chat fell from [ndabs King , the Iewes named //raedl, and they differed nor much from 
— Pagans :for chey left their fathers'religion,and became Idolaters : Wherfore the ewes hated 
shes as muc h as they did the heathen, who hadno clayme at'all of defcent fren tbrahens. 

aa — {¢) Manifefis. 


ae Cee. = ~~ x. we . 


Lin iS. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 


ats. 


(¢) Manifefiqrions \So doe the feauenty. réadie.. The hebrew hath is Ephod. The feauenty 
ayme at that intimation of the loffe of their prophecy do@trine and wifdore:the greareft lofte 
shat could befalla citty. The hebrew,at the abolition af their pri¢ft-hood,dienity,and orna- 
ment,(d) In the day| This place Saint James in the Acts teftifieth to be meant of the calling of 
the Nations Act: 15.13.16. The Apoftles there avowing it,who dares gaine-fay it? |. 


fa: 


E fay his prophecies concerming Chrift 
| Citarz 29. 


FE Saiai(a) is none of the twelue prophets . They are called she {mall eal 7 
4 becaule their prophecies are briefe,in comparifon of others that wrote large 
“volumes,of whom E/az was one;whom Tadde here,betaufe he liued.in' the amés 
of che wo afore-named. In his precepts apainft fin,and for gdodneffe,& his pro- 
-phecies of tribulation for offending, hee forgetreth nétalfd ro proclaine Chrift 
-and‘his' Church more amply then ang other,in fommuch that (5) fome call himan 
Euangelift rather then aProphet.One ofhis prophecies hearein briefebecaufel | 
‘cannot ftand vpon many. In the perfon.of God the Father, thus hee faith; (¢) Be- lay 52,13 
hold, my fon Shal underftand:he fbalbe exalted and be very high:as mtuny were aftonied ** 
at thee( thy forme was fo de[pifed by men, ana thy beauty by the fons of men ){egpall ma- 
ny nations admere himyey the kings {balbe put to filesce at his fight : for that which they tr $3912 
hasie not heard of him, {ball they fee, and that which hath not. beenctoldthemghey {bell &c. 
under ftand.Lord who will beleewe our report 2 to whos ts the Lords arme renealed? wee 
will declare him, as an infant end as aroote out of a dry ground: he hath neither forme 
nor beauty, when wee {ball fee him hee fhall hane neither goodline/fe mor glory: but his 
looke {halbe defpifed and resected before all men. He ts 4 man full of forrowes,azd hath 
experience of infirmities. For his face is turned away : he was defpifed and we efteens-. 
ed him not . Hee hath borne our finnes avd forroweth for us: yet did we tudge hime ws 
plagued of Godand {mitten and humbled. But hee was wounded for our Lie cag | 
and broken for ony iniquities: our peace we learned by him and with his Stripes wee are 
healed. We haue all ftraicd like fbeepe: man had loft his way,and upon bim hath GOD 
laid ail our gnilt . He was affrcied,yet nener opened he his inouth : he was ledas 4 fheope 
tothe flaughter.cy ds a Lambe before the fhearer, is dumbe.fo was he & opened not his 
mouth : hee was out from prifonunto iudgement : O who {ball declare his generatson? 
For he fhalbetaken out of life. For the tran[gre([ton of my people was he plagued: ana 
Iwill gine the wicked for bis graue , and the ritch for his death : becanle hee hath 
done no wickedneffe , nor was there any (d) deceite found in his mouth! The LORD 
will purge him frem his affliction’: (¢) Ifyou gine your foule for finne ,youfball fee the - 
feed continue lonz, andthe LORD fhalltake his (oule from forrow : to [bew him light 

to confirme his under |tanding,to iuftifie the righteous, feruine many, for he bare their — 
imiqnities. Therefore I will giue him a portion’ with the great: bee {ball diusde the 
Spoyles of the firong , becaufe hee hath powred out his foule unto death : Hee was recko- 
nea with the tranfereffors , and hath borne the finnesof many, and was betrateqd 
for their trefpaffes. Thusmuch of HRI S T,now what faith he of his church? yp 64 4,9 
Resoyce O barren that beareft not: breake forth andcrse out for toy, thou that bringelt ac 
not forth: forthe defolate hath more children then the maried wife. Enlarge the 

lace of thy tents ,and falten tix (£) curtaines of thy Tabernacles :/pare not ffretch out 

thy cordes and make faft thy flakes :[pread it yct further to theright hand andthy 
hefirandthy feed flal poffeffe the Gentsles,and dwell in the defolate Cstties:feare not pe- 
aoe Ppp 4 | Caule 


716 


SAINT:AV GVSTINE. | Cuar.3zo 


canfethow art foemed be net afraid becanfe thou art vp:brayded , for thou fball for- 


Mi 
Mat,2, 


get thine encrlaiting foume , and {bike not romenber the reproch of thy widdow-bhoed 
any nore. for thé Lord that madethee is called the Lord of Hoftes andthe redeemer the 
daly one of Ifracl foalbe called the God ofall the world.crc. Here is enough , needing 
_bucalittle explanation, for the places are fo os that our enemies themfelnes 
are forced ( defpite their hearts)to acknowledge the truth. Théfe then fuffice. 
LVIVES. 
E Saias ( 4) ¢.)A noble man worthily eloquent,more like an Euangelift then a Prophet,he 
prophecied in Hierufalem and lury. Hier.ad Euffoch. & Paxlam, a King of Indah 
mad¢ ‘him be fawen atwo, with a wooden faw , of him ts that ment in the Hebrewes. chp. 1. 
verfe,37. They were fawen aftinder. The caufes of his death Hierome relateth , conceit E fa. 


Lib.1,(6 ) Some.\ Hurome ad Paul & Exftech . forhe ipeaketh not in mifticall manner of 
things as if they were to come,but moft plainely , as if they were prefent, of patt which és nor 


ordinary in the other prophets. (¢ ) Bebold. | All this quotation out of thes 2. 53- and s4. 


‘chapters of J/ay, the Sepruagints(whome Saint eAuguftinefolloweth ) dofome-times differ 
from the Hebrew truth : Bur the fcope aymes all at one end, namely the paffion of Chrift : wee 


» - -will not ftand to decide petticulars , Augustine him-felfe faith allis playne inough , and omits 


- > £0 ftand vpon then , coavoyd tedioufnelle. (d) Deceipe found, The feauenty,lcaue out found 


Le If yougine your foute,] The feauenty read it,ifyou Sine( him) for finne your foule fall fee your 
feede of long penueaniy Ff ) The enrtaines.) The vulgar,and the feauenty read, the skins. 


|” Prophecies of Michzas,lonas,and loell corre/pondent unto 
- | the New-Tefhament. 


= m3 a _ Crap. 30. 


He Prophet A¢icheas prefiguring Chrift by agreat mountaine, faith chus 
(4) Inthe laft daics flalthe mountaine of the Lerdbe prepared upon the toppes of 
the bills , and fhalbe exalted aboue the hills:and the nations fball haft thems to st fay- 
éng:Come let us gee up into the mountaine of the Lord, intothe houfe of the God of \a- 
et 4nd he wil teach vs his waies and we wil walke in his paths,for the law {hal go forth 
of Sion and the word of the Lord from Hierufalem, Hee (ball indge among ft many ople 


_ and rebuke mighty aations a farre of. The fame prophet foretells Chritt eRe fe 


alfo faying (6) td thou Bethleem(c) of Ephrata,art little to bee among lt the thou- 
Sands of Indah : yet out of thee {hall s( d) captaine come forth unto mee that fbslbe the 
Prince of Ifrael, (¢) whofe ps haue beeneencrlaiting. Therefore ( f) will 
be gine them vp vatill she time that the child-bearing woman dotrauell , and ihe ) 
remnant of her brethren {hall returne unto the children of Iraell. And he (4) 
frand and looke , and feed his flocke in the ftrength of the Lord : in the honnor of Geds 
name {ball they continue:for now {ball he be magnified unto tie worlds end. Now £)lo~ 
was prophecied Chrift rather in fuffering,then in {peaking,&that mioft mani eftly 
confidering the paflion &refurreGion.For why was he 3.daies in the whals bell 
and then let our , but to fignifie Chrifts refurreétion from che depth of hell, vpon 
the third day?Indeed Zoels prophecies of Chrift & the Church , require great ex: 
planation,yet one of his,(and that was remembred by the(k)Apofiles , at the def 
cending of the Holy 84 vpon the faithfull,as Chrift had promifed)I will net o- 
mit. Afterwards ( faichhee) Lwill power out my /pirit uponall fielb : your fonnes 


res ai oe ae fin J 


ee > See oe ee a 


‘the fenfe, ( ¢) whofe goings ont.] This excludeth all mortall men 


Dae. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 


and daughters ball Prophecypndyour oldmen foal dreame dreames, and your yong then 
See vifions : ewe upon the feruants and the maids in thofe dates will Ipoure wsy {pirs?. 


LW IVES. | 


| N (4) The Laff daies.}] The fame is in E/ay.2.2.(b ) And thon Bethelens.] eAnguftine,and the 
feauenty do differ here from the Hebrew, $, A¢athew readeth it thus. And thou Bethleem 
in the land of Indah art not the leaft among the Princes of Indah , for out of thee ball come the 
goncrnor that [hall feed my people Ifrael. S.Hierome vpon Micheas (lib.2.) faith that this quo- 
tation of ALathew accordeth neither with the Hebrew nor the feauenty. This queftion put- 
ting the holy father to his plunges , hee is fayneto fay that either the Apoftle cited it not ha- 
uing the booke before him, but out of his memory ,.which fome-time doth etre : of elfe 
that hee cited it as the priefts had giuen icin anfwerto Hered: hercin fhewing their negli-~ 
gence , the firit hee affirmeth as the opinion of others. It isan hard thing te make the Apoftle 
{peake iuft contrary to the prophet:Neither Prophyry not (elfus would beleeue this in a matter 
at concerned northemfelues. But the fcope of both being one , maketh this conie@ture in« 
decde the more tollerable : But it is aweake holdto fay the Pricft fpake icthus, it were 
extremly abfurd in their praégtife of the fcriptures to alcer 2 Prophecy , intending efpeciall 
to fhew the full ayme of it. But before the Apoftle (nay the fpirit of God) fhalbe taxed oak 
fuch an error, let che later conieture ftand good , or a weaker thenit,aslong as we can finde 
no fironger, But if we may lawfully put inva guefle , after Hierome(thac worthy ) in the cx- 
trication of thofe holy labyrinths , to grant that the Hebrew and the feauenty read this place 
affirmatiuely and the Euangelift negatiuely : read the place with an interrogation, and they 
are both reconciled : Imeane with an nape ping in the Prophet, as is common in their 
workes, and befitting the ardor of their affections : butin the Euangelift the bare fence is 


onely fit to be layd downe without figure ot affe&tion. (¢ ) Of Ephrata. |] The country where perhleensi 


Bethleem ftood , which the Priefts omitted , as fpeaking to Herod a ftranger that knew Iuda 
becter, The Euangelift gaue an intimation of Chrift whence he was to come , by putting in 
Judah for Ephrata s there was another Beth!eem in Galilee, as it isin lofuah.. Hiereme ypon 
Mathew noteth it as the tran{cribers fale to put Judea for Tuda, for all che Bethlems that are, 
are in Judea Galelee , where the otheris, being a part thereof, And the like fale it may be isin 
that which followeth; Bue when hee heard that Archelaus raigned in ludza, for luda, but 
indeed Iudza after the returne from Captiuity , kept not the old bounds, but was contraéted 
to the country about Hierufalem,the metropolitane citty thereof.( d) et capraine. | The Bru- 
es copy leaueth out, a captaine,and fo do the feauenty. But the panne of itin, alters not 
rom being meant of in this 
Prophecy : inculding onely that eternall Sauiour , whofe effence hath beene from all eternity. 
Gj vill be gine them. | The gentiles fhallrule, yntill che body of their ftates do bring fort 
fh has ynto the Lord (¢ ) T he remnant, | The bretheren of the people Ifrael , and the {piri- 
tuall feede of eAbraham, & c, they fhall beleeue on that Chrift that was promifed to the true 
Ifrael.( 6 ) He fhall fland.\Here thalbereft , and fecurity,the Lord looking vntoallhisfheepe, 
and feeding them with his powerfull grace. (2 ) Jonas. | Being caft ouer-bord by the — Tonar, 
ina {torme, he was caught P PY a Whale, and atthe third daies end was cafta fhore by him ; 
thus washe the Image of Chrift him-fefe vnto the tempting Iewes. AZat.12.39.40.( k)By 


the Apoftles.}eAtt.2.37.18. 


_ Prophecies of Abdi, Naum and Abacuc,comcerning the worlds 

i [aluation in Chrift. Cuar, 31. , : 

Herefore the {mall prophets (4) Abaé, (6) Naum, and (¢) abacuc 

DL never mention the times : nor doth Ewu/ebins or Hierome {upply, that 
defe&. They place ( d ) Abdi and Wisheas both together 5, but not 
there where they record che time.of ccheas his prophecying ( ¢ ) _— 
hia | the 


ow oe 


718 SAINT AVGVSTLNE. Cuaegr 


- ~~ = = 


the negligence of the tranferibers I thinke was the onely caufe of. Thetwo o- 
ther,we cannot once finde named in out copies: yet fince they are cannonicall, 
we may not omit them. 4d; in his writing is the briefeft of them all , he {peakes 
againtt Jdumea,the reprobate progeny of F/axz,the elder fonne of J/aac,and grand- 
child of Abrabam. Now ifwe take Idumza ; by a Synechdoche partis, (g) for allthe 
nations,we may take this prophecy of his tobe meant of Chrift : pon Mount Sy- 
on fhalbe faluation,and it {halbe holy, andby and by after. They that (hb) {hall be faucd, 
Shall come out of Sion (that is the beleeuer in Chrift , the Apoftles,thall come out 
of Iudah) to defend mount Efau, How to defendit, but by preaching the Gof- 
pell,to fauethe belecuers , and tranflate them into the kingdomeofG O D out 
_ of the power of darkenefle asthe fequell fheweth? 4nd the Kingdome thalbe the 
Lords. For Mount Syon fignifieth Iuda,the ftore-houfe of faluation,and the ho- 
ly mother of Chrift in the flefh : and (i) Mount E/an ) 18 Idumeza,prefiguring'the 
churcli of the Gentiles, whom they that were faued came out of Syon to de end, 
that the kingdome might bee the Lords. This was vnknowneere it were done, 
but beeing cometo pafle,who did not difcerne it 7Now the Prophet Nanm(nay 
Nam Godin him) fayth. 1 wid abols{h the granen and molten Image ,andimake them thy 
(k) graue. Behold upon the feete of him that declareth and pubisbeth peste .Oludah 
keepe thy foltcmns feafts,performe thy vowes,for the witked {hall no more palfe through 
thee, he is utterly cut off. He that breatheth in thy fare, and freeth thee from tribulan 
tion,afcendeth .VWho ts this that doth thus ?remember the Holy Ghoft,remem- 
ber the Gofpell . For this belongethtothe New Teftament whofe feafts are re- 
newed,neuer moretoceafe. The Gofpell we fee hath abolithedall thofe grauen 
and molten Images,thofe falfe Idols,& hath Jaydthem in obliuion, asina prauc. 
Herein we fee this prophecy fulfilled. Now for sbacwh,of what doth he Meane 
but of the comming of Chrift, whenke faith? The Lord anfwered faying , write the 
vifton,and make it plaine on tables that he may runne that readeth it. For the viftonis 
erent yet for an appointed time , but at the laft it {ball [peake and not le , though it tarry: 
awatte, for tt [ball come furely,and {ball not ftay. | a . 7 


, $$$ eee 
L.VIVES. 


Abdi. ‘Bai (2) | The Hebrewes (faith Hierome ) fay this was he that in the perfecution vnder_4- 
chab and Iezabel,fedde one hundered prophets in caues,that neuer bowed the knee ynto 
Baal,and thofe were part of the feauen thoufand whom Elias knew not.His {epulchree is next 
vnto Helifexs the prophets, and John Bapti/?s,in Scbafta,otherwife called Samaria. This man 
got the fpirit of prophecy becaufe he fed thofe prophets in the wilderneffe,and of a warriour, 

became a tcacher, Hier.in Abdi He was in Jofaphats time,before any of the other, Tiber bein 
Naum, King of the Latines,(6) Nazm] He liued in /oathans time,the king of Juda, lofeph.lib.9.(c) A- 
Abacuc, bacuc] Of him is mention made in Daniel.c.14.that hee brought Daxielhis dinner from Juda 
[Louaine to Babilon, (But Azguftine vfeth not this place to proue his times,becaufe,that hiftory of Bel, 
copie de and allthis fourteenth chapter together with the hiftory of Sw/anna are Apocryphall, neither 
fectiue,] written in Hebrew nortranflated by the feauenty.]e4bacuc prophecied(faith Hzerome)when 
Nabucodrofar led Indah and Beniamin into captiuity, and his prophecy is all againft Babilon, 
(4) Abdi and |) Enfebius placeth Addi and Micheas both vnder Jofaphat. \tistrue that Abd; 
liued then, but for A@icheas, his owne words(cited before by Axguffine)ioe difprooue it.For 
his vifions befell him in the times of Joathan , eAchaz and Exechias, long after Jofuphat. 
Idumxa, (¢)¥ ich the necligence|Y affure you there is crrourin E “febius very dangerous beth to the ig. 
norane and the learned-(f) Idsmea] It adioyneth to Paleftina,and is the next countrie beyond 
Atrabia, Pliny Lofeph, Hieron. The Greeke and Latine authors call:them Wabathei snhabicing 
a : the 


Lin iS OF THE CITIE OF GOD, 


-_o 


Oy a ye en 


the Cicty Petra. The land hath the name of Efau,who was otherwife called Edom, for xi- 

uers cauies (¢) For all she nations | Idumza is ‘no part of Mrael , but yet they defcended both 
from Jfaac. Yet was ita foe vnto Juda, and the Jewes called the Romanes , Idurnzans, Idu- 
mea fignifieth fleth , which fighteth againft the fpirit, (b) Shalbe faued| The hebrew is , frall 
faue. (1) Mount Efau | The Mountaines in Idumza are called Scir. Jofeph. Iofnah. chap:24. Seit the 
becaufe they are rugged and rough,as E/as was. (k ) Thy.grane] The hebrew addeth, For thon mountaines 
art ‘vile.Saint Paul had not his quotation. Roy. 10; 1 s+ from hence, but from the fifteerieth °f¢umza, 
of Efay. noe as ie : i, Pa tes | 


S. ead oA fe ee a A 
The prophecy conteined in the Songand praier of Abacuc. ae va 


a CHap.32._ 


| A*? in his praier and forig,who doth he {peake vnto but Chritt faying.O Lord 
I heard thy voice and was afraid, Lord J confidered thy workes and was terrified, 
Whatis this but an ineffable admitation of that fuddaine and vnknowne falna- 
tion ofman ?/n the midft of two,{balt thon bee knowne , what are thofetwo ? the 
two Teftamentssthe two theeues,or thetwo prophets Afey/es and Elsas.in the ap- 
proch of yeares [belt thou be knowne : this-is plaine,it needs no expofition . Bur that 
which followeth: My foule being troubled there-with, in thy wrath remember mercy: 
is meant of the lewes,of whofenation hee was : who being madde in their wrath. 
and crucifying Chrift , he remembring his mercy, faid, Father forgiue them, they 
know not what they dee. God {hall come from Thensan andthe holy one from the 
thick and darke mountaine : from (4) Theman (fay fome ) that is from the (6) 
South: fignifyeth the heate of charity , and the light of cruth. The thicke darké 
mountaine , may bee taken diuerfly , but I rather choofe tohold it meant ofthe 
depth of the holy fcriptures prophecying Chrift : for chetein are many depths 
for the induftrious to excercife themfelues in: and which they finde out when — 
they find him whom they concetne: His glory couereth the heauensand the earth is 
full of his praife:that is iuftas the pfalme faith . Exalt thy {elfeO GOD aboue the 
heauens and let thy glorie bee aboue all the earth: His brightneffe was as the lights 
His glorie fhall enlighten the nations: Hee had hornes comming out of his hands: 
that was his extenfion on the crofle: there was the heding of his power ; this 
isplaine. Before him went the word, and followed hime into the field : that is,hee 
was prophecied ere hee came, and preathed after his departure: hee food, and 
the earth mooued,hee {tood to faue, and earth was mooued with beleeuimg in him: 
He beheld the nations and they were diffolued : that is Hee pitied arid they repented: 
Hee brake the mountaines with violence , that is, his miracles amazed the proude: 
the eternall his did bow : the people weretemporally humbled ,to bee eternally 
glorified: For my paines,1 (aw his goings inithat is,I had the reward of eternity fot 
my labours in charity : the tents of Ethiope trembled: and fo dsd they of Madtan: 
that is euen thofe nations that were newer vader Rome, by the terror of thy namé 
and power preached, fhall become fubie@ to Chrift. was the Lord angry acaingt 
the riwers or was thine anger againff the fea?chis implieth that he came norto iudge 
the world, but to faue it: thon rodeft upon harfes , and thy Chariot brought faluati- 
on : The Euangelifts are his horfes, for hee ruleth them, and the Gofpell his 
Chariot , faluation to all beleevers: thon {halt bend thy bowe sboue [tep- 
ters , thy indgement Shall reftraine euen the Kingé of the earth , thos {halt iteaue 
the.earth with riners, that is , thine abundant dogtrine.thall dpen the hearts 


of 


720 


SAINT AV GV'STINE. | Cuar. 32 


of mento beleeue them : vnto fuch it is fayd. Rend your hearts andnot your gar- 
ments. The people thall fee thee, and tremble 5 thou fhall fpreadthe waters as 


thou goeft, thy preachers (hall power out the ftreames of thy doGrine on all 
_ fides. The deepe made anoife: che depth of mans heart exprefied what it faw: she 


hight of his phantafie, thacis the deepe gaue out the voice, ex refling (as I fayd,) 
what it aw. This phantafie was avifion, which hee conceiled nor,but proclaim- 
edat full. The Sunne was extolled , and the Moone kept her place. Chrift was 
affumed into heauen,and by him isthe church ruled:théne arrowes flew in the light. 
Thy word was openly taught, and by the brightnefle of thy fhining armes, 


a thine arrowes flew: For Chrift himfelfe had faid , what J tell yousn darkene/fe, 


. @ é 
Ste 
en 


that {peake in the light. Thou fhalt tread downe the land in anger,thou (hale hum- 
ble high {pirits by affliGtingthem . Thow {halt threlb the heathen in di{pleafure, 
thatis, thou thale quellthe ambitious by thy iudgements : thes wente/t forth to 
faue thy people and thine annointed , thou laideft death vpon the heads of the wicked: 
all this is plaine sthow haf? cut them off with amazement: thou haft cut downe bad, 
and fet vppe good ,in wonderfull manner: the mighty {ball crowne their heads ; 
which maruell at this : they {hall gape after thee as 4 poore man eating fecretly. For 
fo diuers great men of the Iewes beeing hungry after the bread of life ,cameto 
eate fecretly, fearing the lewes ,as the Cofpell fheweth: thou putteft thine horfes 
into the fea,who troubled the waters; that is,the people; for vnieffe all were troub- 
led,fome thould not become fearefull conuertes, and others furious perfecutors. 
I marked it and my body trembled , at the [ound of my lippes : feare came into my bones, 
and Iwas altogether sroubled in my felfe. See, the hight of his praier and his pre- 
{cience of thofe great cuents amazed cuen himfelfe , and hee is troubled with 
thofe {eas , to fee the imminent perfecutions of the church whereothee laftly 
avoucheth himfelfs a member, faying , 7 weil reff in the daie of trouble ,as if hee 
were one of the hopefull fufferers, and patient rcioycers : that J may goe uppe to 
the people of my pilarimage: \eauing his carnall kinred that wander after nothing 
but worldly matters , neuer caring for their fupernall countrie : for the fig- 
tree [ball not fructifie nor hall fraite bee in the vines : the oliue jball fasle and t 
foelds halbe fruitleffe .Thefbeepe hawe left their meate ,and the oxen are not in their 
ftalles. Here hee feeth the nation that crucified C HRIS T , deprived of all 
{pirituall goods, prefigured in thofe corporall fertilities ,and becaufe the coun- 
tries ignorance of God had caufed thefe plagues, forfaking Gods righteoufneffe 
through their owne pride,hee addeth this : J wéll resoyce in the Lord and toy in God 
my Sauiour : the Lord my God is my flrength, he will eftablif my feete : bee will fer mee 
= high places ;that I may bee vittorious in his fong. What fong? even fuchas 
epfalmift fpeaketh of :hee hath fet my feete upon the rocke :and ordered my go- 


_ ings: and bath put into my month a new fong of praifeunteoGOD. In fucha fong 


(and not in one ofhis owne praife) doth Ahscwc conquer,glorying in the Lord his 
God. Some bookes read this place better. (¢) weil oy :ismy LORD IESVS. 
Bur the tranflacors had not the name it felfe in Latine other-wife wee like the 
worda great deale better. 


L. VIVES. 


E Ron (4). Theman | Aquila, Synsmachus,and the fifth ‘edition (faith Hierome) put the very 
A. word fo. Gnely Theode jon expreficth it , from the South , Ge. Theman is: vader Edom, in 
| : | ~ the 


Lisr8. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 721 


the land of Gebal named fo by Theman fonne to Elyphaz the fonne of Efas, and it holderh 

the name vnro this day: lying fiue miles from Petra where the Romaine garrifon lyeth and 

where Eiplaz King of the Thebans was borne, One alfo of the fonnes of //aacs,was called 

‘7 beman, \ndecd the Hebrews call euery Southerne Prouince, Theman. Hieron. loc. Hebraic. 

(6) Soath | Such is that place alfo in the Canticles. (¢) The thick darke mountaine] So fay the 

LXX, but the Hebrewes,from mount Paran,which is a towne on the farre fide of Arabia, joy- 

ning to the Sarazens.The Ifraelites went by it when they lett Sina. The LXX. rather expreffed 

the ad-aceies then the place it felfe. (d) Meuer under Rome } (ndia, Perfia, andthe new found 

lands. (¢) J wall soy| So doth the Hebrew read it : indeed. lcfi#s,rar'o arid Sawiour,are all one. 

In Ta.tyes time they had not the Latine word Saluator.e4it.2, a Verr. but Lattantins.eAu- Salnarn 
fonias,andinany gocd Latinifts doc vicit fince, Read Hierome of this verfe if you would are 


know further, : 


OE OnE O 4 


Prophecies of Hieromie,and Lephany concerning the former themes. 
HAP, 33. 


I Jeremy (a) is one of the greater Prophets: fois J/ayzs, not of the fmall ; of 
- 4 {ome of v. hom I now fpake. He prophecied vnder /o/fa King of luda, Ascos 
Martius being King of Rome,hard before liraels captivity, vnto the fifth month 
of which hee prophecied, as his owne booke prooueth. Zephany (6) a{mall pro- 
pher,\vas alfo in his time,and prophecied in /o/izs time alfo (as himfelfe faith) bur 
how long he faith noc. Héeremies time lafted all C4ncus Martins his, and part of 
Tarquinius Prifcushis reigne, the fift Romaine King. For in the beginning of his 
reigne,the Jewes were captiued. This prophecie of Chréi# wee read in Hieremmy. 
The breath of our mouth, the annoynted our Lord was taken in our finnes. Heerehee 
fheweth brieflie both Chréff his deity and his fufferance for vs. Againe. This # 
my God,nor és there any befideshim: he hath found all the wayes of wifdome,c> taught 
thems to his fernantlacob, and.to ifrael his beloued: Afterwards was hee feene upon 

_ carth and hee conuerfed with men. This, fome fay, is not Hieremyes but (d) Baruchs 
his cran{cribers. Butthe moft hold it Héeremies. Hee faith further. Behold , rhe Hier.23 5. 
dayes doe come (faith the Lord) that J witra:(e unto Dauid 4 2uff branch , whtch {hall 
reigne as Kiag,and be wife: and {ballexetute uftice and indgement upon the earth, 
In his dayes (hall ladah be fauzd,and Ifraes ball dwell fafely and this is the name that 
suey {ball call him : The Lord our righteou{neffe. Of the calling of the Gentiles 
(which we feenow fullfilled )he faith thus. O Lord my God and refuge tn the day of 
ewillunto thee [bill the Gzatiles come fron the ends of the world, ana {hall fay : Our fa- 
thers haus adored falfe Images wherein there w.ts no profit. Axd becaufle the Iewes 
would nora-knowledge Chrsi#,but thould killhim: the Prophet faith. (¢) The 
heart ts heany in all things,he is aman and wo {ball know him? clis was the teftimo. 
ny alfo of the New Teftament and Chrift the mediatour , which I recited in my 
renth Booke: for hee faith. Behold, the dayes com: that I will make a new couenant 
with the houfe of Ifracl oc. Now Zephany,that was of this time alfo, hath this of est 
Chrift.Wayte upon me ( faith the Lord ) #2 the day of my refarrection , wherern my" ™* 
iudg:ment {ball gather the nations: and azaine : The Lord will bee terrible unto 
thems: hee will confumse all the gods of tne earth: euery man {ball adore him from his 
place :euen all the Hes of the Heathen :anda little after : Then willl tarne tothe peo- 
plea pure language, that they may al cali vpon the Lord ,and ferue him with one con- 
Sent and from beyond the risers of Ethiopia fiali they bring mee offerings. dnthat day 
floslt thon not bee afhsmed for all thy wernes wherezn thon baft offended mee , for then. 
will I cleanfe thee of the wicked that hawe wronged thee: and thou [balt no more bee 

| Qqq © proud 


Jak 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuarzq 


Zephany, 


Barcuhs, 


Darm7 53 


Ezcch.34 


Ezech 37 


Daniel, 


proud of mine holie mountaine , and Iwill leaue amecke and lowly people in the mindes 

of thee, and the remnant of Ifraell {ballrenerence the name of the Lord . This isthe 
remnant that is prophecied of elfe-where, and chat the Apoftle mentioneth fay- 
ing: there ts aremnant at this prefent time through the election of grace. For arem- 
nant of that nation beleeued in Chrift. 


LVIVES. 


He” (4)] Ofhim , already. (6) Zephany\Hee was aprophet,and father to prophets,and 

had prophets to his grand-father and great grand-father , fay the Hebrewes.Chu/i was his 
father, who was fonne to Godoli.ts,the fonne of Amarias the fon of Ezechia_all prophetssfor al 
the prophets progeny named in their titles,were prophets, fay the Hebrewdodtors.(c ) The an- 
nointed There are many anointed,& many Lords:but that breath of our mouth,this annoynted 
is none but CHRIST our SAVIOVR the SON of GOD : by whom we breath, we mouc,and 
haue our being:who if he leaue vs,leaucth vs leffe lite,chen if we lackt our foules.(4) Baruchs] 
Hee was Hieremies {eruant (as Hieremies prophecy fheweth)and wrore a lictle prophecy, al- 
lowed by the Caurch,becaute it much concerned Chrift , and thofe later times, “e) The heart} 
This is the Septuagints interpretation. Hzerome hath it otherwife from the hebrew. 


ED te en ne 
“ 


Daniels,zzdEzechiels prophecies concerning Chrift and 
hisCharch, Cwar. 34. 


. | Ow in the captiuity it felfe (4) Daniel and (6) Ezechiel two of the preater 

- ‘ prophets prophecied firft . Danie‘ fore-told the very number of yeares vatill 
the comming of Chrift, and his paffion . It is too tedious to perticularize ando- 
thers haue doneit before vs. Butofhis power and glories this he fayd: 1bchela 
a vifton by nigit and behold, the fonne of mancame in the cloudes of heanen,and Ap 
proached unto the ancient of dates, and they brought bim before himand lec cauchim 
dominion and honor and 4 Kingdome,that all people nations and languaces {houls ferue 
himshis dominios is an enerlafting dommion , and{ball neuer bee tane avay: bis Kiag- 
dome {ball acuer be deftroied: Ezechicl alfo prefiguring Chrift by Daud (asthe. 
prophets vfe)becaufe Chrift tooke his fleth , and the forme of a feruant from Da- 
wtds {eed : in the perfon of GOD the Father doth thus prophecy of him. / w7// fet 
uppe a fheapheard ouer my lbeepeyand hee {hall feed them,euen my feruant Dauid , hee 
fh Ui feed them'and be thetr heapheara. 1the Lord wilbe their God, and my fernant 
Dauid fhacbe Prince among} them: Ithe LORD hane Spoakes:t. Andagaine: One 
King {balbe Kingto them all: they {balbe no more two peoples , nor bee deurded from 
thence-forih into two Kingdomes: nor {hall they bee any more polluted ix their Idols, 
nor with thee abhominations , sor with all their tran{greffions : but Iwill [aue thems 
out of alltncir dwelling places , wherein they haue finned, andwillcleanfe them :they 


fhalbe my people and 1 wilbe their GOD : and Dauid my feruant {balbe King ouer them, 
and they all{hall haue one fheapheara. , be 


L. VIVES. 


Aniel (a) }Hee was one of the captined fonnes of Judah ,and'fo Dasiel, was named 
Baltazar , by the Kings Eunuch that had charge ofthe children. His wifdome 


made 
him 


[TR KW ek ee Se 


a 


Me 


_ 


PELL STALL DID DLL LE CC ETT INTIS OED, 


Linr8. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 723 


him highly efteemed of Ba/thazar the laft King of Babilon,and after that ,of Darius the Mo- 
narch of Media,as Daniel himtelte and Jofephus kb.10. doe teftifie Methodius, Apollinaris,and 
Enfebius Pamphilus defended this prophet againit che calluninies of Porphiry,(b) Exechzel A 
pricft,and one of the captiuity with Dawiell,as his writings doe record. 


Of the three prophecies of Aggee,Zachary andMalachy. 
| Cars 39: ne nee 
T Hre of the {mall prophets, (4) Agece, (b) Zachary,and(c) Milachy,all prophe-. 
cyingin the end of this captivity, remaine ftill. Aggee prophecyeth of 
Chrift and his church, thus,diuerfly and plainely : Yet « tle while and 1 wil {bake 
the beanens , and the earth andthe fea and the dry land: and I willmooue all nations, 
and she defire of all nations fhall come ,fatth the Lord of hoftes . This prophecie is 
partly come to effedt,ana partly to bee effeted at the confumarion of all. The 
Angells,and the ftarres are witnefle,of heavens moouing at Chrifts birth . The 
miiacle of a Virgins child-birth , moouedthe earth, the preaching of Chrift in 
the Iles and che continent,mooued both fea and drieland: The nations we fee are 
mooued_to the faith. Now the comming of the defire of all nations,that we doe 
expect,at this day of iudgement: for firft hec muft be loued of the beleeuers and 
then be defired of the expecters. Nowto Zachary. Reioyce greatly O daughter of 
Syon (saith hee of Chrift and his church) fboute for soy O daughter of Lerufalem ibe- 
hold thy King commseth to thee , hee ts tuft , and thy Sawiour : poore,and rtatng u;on an 
affe,and upon(d )acolt,the fole of an affe:his dominion is from [ea to feacy fremtheré- 
wer to the lands end. Of Chrifts riding in this manner,the Gofpell {peaketh: where | 
this prophecy (as much as needeth J is recited: In another place, {peaking pro- 
pheticaliy of che remiffion of finnes by Chrift , he faich thus tohim.. Thom ca the 
bloud of thy teftament haft loofed thy prifoners out of the lake wheresn is no water. This 
lake may bee diuerfly interpreted withour iniuring our faith. Buc I chinke hee 
meaneth that barren , bondleffe depth of hu:naine myferies,, wherein there is no 
fircame of righteoufneffe,but all is full of the mudde of iniquitie : for of this 
is that of the pfalme meant: Hee hath brought mee out of the lake of mifery, and Plalsed; 
out of the myry clsy. — on 
. Now Malachi prophecying of the church ( which wee fee fo happily pro- 
pagateby our Saviour Chritt) hath thefe plaine words to the Iewes in the per- 
fon.of God: /haue no pleafure in you,neither will 1 accept an offring at your hand: for 
fromthe vifing of the Sunne unto the fetting my mame is ercat amongst the Gentiles, 
and in emry place {balbe (ec) incence offered unto mee, and a pure offering unto my 
mame: for my sme is great among the heathen , faith the LO R D. This wee fee of- 
fered in cuery placeby Chrifts prieft-hood after the order of Afe/chifedech : but 
the facrifice of the lewes,wherein God ronke no pleafure but refufed,that'they 
cannot deny is ceafed. Why do they expe an other Chrift,and yet fee that this 
prophecy is fulfilledalready , which could not bee but by the true Chrift? forhe - 
faith by & by after in the perfo of God: My comenant was with him of lufe and peace:I 
cane hin feare, and he feared me,ana was afraid before my name. The law of truth was 
in his moutl:he walked with me in peace and egurty, endturned many away from ini« 
quity:for the priefts lips {bould preferue kno ne ,and they{bould fecke’ the Lac ar/his 
month: for he 1s the meffenger of the Lord of hoftes. No wonder tt Chrift be Ealled 
fo,for ashe is a feruant becaufe of the feruants forme he tooke,whten he came to 
| Qad2 men: 


be---- ne 4 


(724 


—_ 


SAINT AVGVSTINE.. Pasins: 


men: fo is hee a meffenger, becaufe of the glad tydings which hee brought vnto 
men: For Evangelium in grecke, is in our tongue, vad tydings,and he faith againe 
ofhim. Behold I will fend my mefrenger and hee fhallprepare the way before mee : the 
Lord whom you feeke , {hall come fuddeoly into his T ‘6 od , 42d the meffenger of the ca- 
senant whom you defire : beheld he {ball come , faith the Lord of hoftes : but whontay a- 
bide the daic of his comming? who {bell endure when he sppeareth 2 This place isa 
dire& prophecy of both the commings of Chrift: of the firft : He fhall come fud- 
denly into bis temple his flefh , as hee fayd himfelfe : Deftroy this temple and in three 
daies Lwillraife it againe.Of the fecond: Behold,hee {ball come , faith the L O R Dof 
hostes , but who may abide the day of his comming? cre. Butthofe words the Lord 
- whom you feeke and the meffenger of the conenant whom yo defire, imply that che 
Tewes ,inthat manner that they conceine the fcriptures, defire and-feeke rhe 
gomming of CHRIS T. But many of themacknowledged him not,being come, 
‘for whofe comming they fo. longed ;their euill defertes hauing blinded their 
-‘The couenant, named both heere, and there where heefayd, (447 conenant 
was with him, is to bee vnderftood of the New Teftament whofe promifes are 
erernall, not of the Old, full of temporal! promifes : fuch as weake men eftee- 
ming too highly , doe ferue. GOD wholy for , and ftumble:when they fee the 
finne-full to. enioy thems. Wherefore the Prophet.,,to put acleare difference 
-Retweene the bliffe of the New Teftament , peculiar to the good , and the abun- 
danceof the Old Teftament, fhared wich the badde alfo, adioyneth this , For 
seords haue beene flout againft me ({aiththe Lord Jand yet you (aid, wherein haue we 
Spokes again? thee? you hauefayd it is in vaine toferue GO D; and what profit hane 
we i keeping his commandements, and in walking humbly before the LORD GOD 
Of hoftes? and vow wee haue bleffed others; they that worke wickedueffe are fet uppe, 
Audthey that oppofe God,they are deliuered, Thus {pake they that feared the Lord: 
each to his neighbour , the Lord hearkaed , and heard it ,and wrote a booke of 
remembrance in his fight , for fuch as feare the Lord , and renerence his nanie. 
That booke infinuateth the New. Teftameat. Heare the fequele: They fbalbe 
tomee faith the Lord of hoftes, inthat day wherein 1 doe this, for aflocke : and Iwill 
[pare them as aman f{pareth his owne fonne that ferueth him. Then {hallyox returne, 


“and difierne berweene the righteous and the wicked and betweeme him that feructh 


GOD, and him that feructh him not. For behold the day commeth that {hall barne 
asanoven: and all the proud and the wicked [bathe as fiubble, and the day that come 
meth {hall burne them uppe fatth the LORD of Hoftes , and {hall leaue. shems neither 
roote nor branch. But-untoyou. that feare my name {ball. the fonne of righteon{meffe 
arife ,and health flalbe under hw wings, and you{ball goe forth and growe uppe at 
fatte Calues . Tow fball tread downe the wicked , they fhube 46 duft under the folesof 
your feete inthe day that I{baildoe this fasth the LOR D of Hoffes. Thisis that day 
that is calledthe day of iudgement , whereof if it pleafe God , wee meane to fay 


fome-what,in place conuentent. 


7 L. VIVES. 


AcE (4) Zachary) Efdras sameth them. chap.6.1. where he calleth Zachary the fonne of 
& Addo ,whors' Zachary himfelfe faith was his grand-father,and Barachiah, his father. This 
{faith Higreme ) was doubdedic that e-ddo chat was fent to Hieroboams the fone of Nabath, 
gr aaate ae sa aa oe | iis | in 


+ °? 


b:318. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. | 925 


in whofe time the Altar cleft , and his hand withered , and was reftored by this Addos prayers. 
Kosngs.1.12. & (hro.2.1 2. But hee is not called Addo ineither of thefe places:the Kingsomit 
his name , the Chronicles callhim Semeias. But a prophet of thactime muft bce gtcat great 
grand-father at leaftto afonne'of the captiuity. This Zachary was not the fonne of Joiada 
whome /oafd the King of Iuda killed. (r.2.34.21.be whome Chrift faid was killed berweene 

_ the Temple and the Altar. A4at.23.35.( 6 ) Malachi.| His name interpreted is , His eAngell, M 
and fo the feauenry called him, where-vpon Origen vpon this prophet faith that hee thinketh 

ic was an Angell that prophecyed this prophecy , if we may beleeue Hievomes teftimony here- 
in. Others callhim Adalachi, for indeed , names are not to be altered in any tranflation. No Testis 
man calleth Péato,Broade : Ot e4riffotle good perfection’, or ofsab, the Sauiour , or Athens, ouch iy 
Minerua. Namesare to be fet downe in the proper drome, other- wife , the names:of famous change n0 
men, being tranflaced into feuerall tongues , fhould ob{cure their perfons fame , by being the nmes, 
more difperfed , which makes me wondet at thofe that will wring the Greeke names.&c.vnto 

their feucrall Idiomes , wherein their owne conccit doth them groffe wrong , ( e/ar was wile, 

to deale plainely in giuing the french & Gerthaine,each his contries names,only makin g them 
declinable by the Latine. But to Malachi.Some by concordance of their ftiles,fay that he was 

Efdras : and prophecied vnder Darixs thé fonne of Hifta(ps.Of Efdras in the next chapter(c) 

Keioyce greatly, } This whole quotation , and the reft differ much from our vulgar tranflation. 

(4 j Upon a colt. | The Euangelift S. Mathew readethit : vponacolc, and the fole of an affe 

vfed co the yoke. cha.2t.ver.5. The Iewes that were yoaked vnder fo many ceremonies were 
prefigured herein, But the free and yong cole (as the feauenty do tranflate it ) was the type, 

‘ of the Gentiles , take which you wi'l : God fitteth vpon both, to cure both from corruption 

and to bring both faluation.(e ) Shalbe incenfe offred.| The feauenty , read its offred : becaule 

the Prophets often {peake of things to come, asif they were Ea yea and fome-times 

as if they were paft, The tranflation of the feauenty is fome-what altred in the following 


quotation, : j 


- 


alachi. 


Of the bookes of Efdras send the Machabees. 


CHAp. 36. 


A Frer Ages, Zachary & Malachy , the three laft Prophets, in thetime of the {aid 
* >captiuity , (4) E/dres wrote, but heis rather heldan Hiftoriographer then 
a Prophet : As the booke of ( 6 ) Heffer is alfo,contayning accidents about thofe 
times; alltendingto the glory of God. It may bee faid that E/dras_prophecied 
ia this , chat when the queftion arofe amongft the young men whar thing was 
moft powerfull , one anfwering Kings , the nexe , wine,and the third women, for 
they often command Kings, (¢) yet did the third adde more, and faid that truth 
conquered althings. Now Chrift in the Gofpell is foundto bee thetruth. From 
this time , after the temple was re-edificd the lewes had no more kings but prin- 
ces vnto (d) Ariftobulns his time. ‘Ihe account of which times wee haue not in 
the canonicall fcriptures, but in the others, (¢) amongft which the bookes of 
the Afachabees are alfo, which the church indeed holdeth for ‘canonicall (/) be- 
— caufe of the vehementand wonderfull fuffrings of fome Martires for the law of 
Godbefore the comming of Chrift.. Such there were that endured intollerable 


torments,yet thefe bookes are-but Apocryphall co the Lewes. 


OR OR 


Kew 4)|A moft skilfull {cribe of the law he was,8 Hierons faith he was that Jofedech whofe Brdrag, 
on Jefus was pnieft He,they fay,reftored the law,which § Chaldzes had burnt,(not without | 
diuine ‘ance  guchanged c hebrew letters to diftinouifh ché fr the Samaritanes,Gentiles, 

oo a | Qqg 3 which 


726 SAINT AVGVSTINE. __ Cuar.37 


which then filled Indea.Ea/feb. The lewes afterwards vied his lecters,only their accents differed 
Mufeer. = fromthe Samaricans, which were the old ones that CMoyfes gaue them. (6) Heffer.) This hif- 
pole tory fell out ( faith Jofepbus Jin the time of Artaxerxes , other-wife called (yras:for Xerxes 
"6 was the fonne of Darixs Hiftafpss,and Artaxerxes furnamed Long-hand, was fonne to him, in 
whofe time the ewes wete in fuch danger by meanes of Hama, becaufe of Mardockee, 
Hefters vncle,as chere booke fheweth. This Nicepherns holdeth alfo. But Exfebsss faith this 
could not bec, that the Iewes fhould bee in fo memozable a perill , and yet Efdras who wrot 
their fortunes ynder eArtaxerxes neuer once mention it. Sothat bee maketh this accident 
to fall out long after, in the time of Artaxerxes Muemon,baftard fonne to Darins,and him the 
Hebrewes called Ajfuerns,(faith hee) Indeed, Bede is of this mindealfo. But I feare Ex/ebius 
his accompt is not {o fure as Jofepbus,but in this wee recite opinions onely,leauing the iudge- 
_ tment. (¢) Yet didthe third. ] This was Zarobabel that faid truth was about all. Efd.33.Jof. 
el. Ant Jib. 1x. butthe third and fourth booke of Efaras are Apocryphall, Hierome reieéteth 
Anitobwus em as dreamcs. (d] Ariftobulue, | Sonne to Joxathas, both King and Prieft,he wore the firft 

diademe in ludza, foure hundred eighty and foure yeares after the captivity vnder Mabuca- 
donofor.( e) Machabees.| Hierome {aw the firft of thofe bookes in Hebrew , the latter hee 
knew to bee penned firft in Greeke by the ftile : Jofephus wrot the hiftory of the ALachabees 
as Hierome faith (ontra Pellagian, Ucannog tell whether hee meane the bookesthat we haue 
for {cripture , or another Greeke booke that is fet forth feuerall and called Jofephiad Macha- 
Leos, There is a third booke of the Machabees,as yet vntranflated into Latine that I know of: 
that I chinke the Church hath not receiued for canonicall. ( f) Becanfe of. | Forthere were’ 
feuen brethren who rather then they weold breake the law , endured together with their mos 
ther to be flayed quicke,rather then to obey that foule command of Antiochus , again{t God. 


The Prophets more ancient thenany of the Gentile Philofophers. 
| | CHAP. 37. 
I N our (4) Prophets time ( whofe workes arenow fo farre diuulged ) there 
were no Philofophers ftirring as yet, for the firft of them arofe from (6 ) 
Pithagoras of Samos, who began to bee famous at che end of thecaptiuity. So 
that all other Philofophers muft needes bee much later (¢)for Socrates of Athens, 
the chiefe Moralift of his time , linedafter E/dras , as the Chronicles record. 
And foone after was P/eto borne, the moft excellent of all his {cholers.To whom 
if we ad alfo the former feauen , who were called {ages , not Philofophers, and 
the Naturalifts chat followed Thales his ftudy,to wit Anaximander, Anaximenes, 
Anaxagoras,and others before Pythagoras profefled Philofophy , not onecfthefe 
was before the Prophets , for Thales the moft ancient of themall, liued in Ro- 
msulus his time , when this Propheticall do&rine flowed from the fountaine of If 
raell, to bederiued vnto all the world. Onely therefore the Theologicall Poets, 
Orpheus Linus , Mufeus andthe others ( ifthere were anymore ) were before our 
canonicall prophets. But they were not more ancient then our true diuine 
Adoyfes, who taught them one ttue God , and whofe bookes are in the front of 
our Canon, and therfore though the learning of Greece warmeth the world 
at this day , yet acedethey not boatt of their wifdome, being neither fo ancient 
nor fo excellent as our diuine religion , and the true wifdome : we confeffe , not 
that Greece, but that the Barbarians , as Egypt for example , had their peculier 
do&trines before Aoyfes time, which they called their wifdome : Otherwife our 
feripture would not haue faid that A4ey/es was learned in al the wifdome of the E- 
ptians : for there was hee borne, adopted, and brought vp worthily ( ¢) by the 
ghter of Pharao. But their wifdome could not bee before our prophets , for 
Abraham him-felfe was a prophet. And what wifdome could there be in Egypr, 
before Js their fuppofed goddeffe taught them letters ? This 4/s was daughter 
to dwachus King of Argos, who raigned in the times of 4brahams aaa . 


Zoro 


ee ee eT I LST TE 


L337 8. OF THE GITIE OF GOD. 737 


+ & 


: 


: - ree : _ Goa ip Sti , Sora ie eS 
Sebi. Poet |S : ao San f , ge ce ee | 
ry ’ . . : ‘ ae 3 y : e ae os : 7 a ee “a 
Le es Sa gek Sah Re BeV I BS oe a erg es ae ee 


NN enr (2) prophets | Here Angaftine prooues the Old Teftanent ancienter then all the phila- 

fophy of the greekes. This queltion /ofephus handleth worthily againft 4ptox,fo doth Exfeb. 
prep exang. and Inffin. Martys Ad Gentes.The cafe is plaine inouph by ont allegations ypon 
other chapters of this booke. (4) Pythagerus.| Tully faitty he liued in his progenitor Serains 
Tullus his time,and fo faith Liny Hi, 1. True in his later yeares,and in the whole time of (yras Pythagoe 
the Perfian : for, hee flousifhed Olynipiade, (ixcy, whergia Targash. cheproud begange bis ™* 
teig hé. He died ( according to Egfebins )Olymp.. Jo. after the Iewes-wete freed from captiuity 
and liued quietly at leritfalem:(c) Socrates] He liued Olymp,77- faith po{lederms,almoftforcy 
yeares'after Dartiesferit the Te we tothe etiesphe se fon plige ( a shape re) In the 
sighty tight Olympiad, Apotlod.(e)By the danghter | Mana the daughter of ( henephres Ki ' 
ba 8 so:children adopted a fewift child called in hebrew Mote precks ie Moyles, 
fens.This Exfebins ib.o.prep.citeth out of sfrrapanis: 65 5 ee eS eeee 


Ces. @- 
es at ae ‘ ‘ “ a Dae 


me 


: =. oo et aS 
a. %& ‘ & 


Of forme fcriptures too ancient for the Church to allow,pecanfe that might 
-- ptecure fulpect that they ave-rather counterfeit thentrue. yt 
N ‘Ow if I fhould goe any higher , there is clé Patriarch Nosh , before the 

V great dehige: we may very well cal hima prophet,for his very Arke,and his 
efcape in that floud,were propheticall references vnto thefe our times.: What > * 
was Enoch, the feauenth from ~4dam? Doth not the Canonicall Epiftle of iude 
fay chat hee prophecied ? The reafon' thac wee haue not their writings’, nor.che 
Jewes neither, is their to great antiquity: which may procure a {ufped, that 
they are rather feigned tobee theits,then theirs indeed. For many that beleeve 
as they like, and {peake as they lift, defend themfelues with quotations from 
bookes.But the cannon neither permicteth that fuch holy mens authority fhould 
be reie@éd,nor chat it fhould be abufed by connterfeit pamphlets . Nor is ir any 
marnell thae fuch antiquity is to be {ufpected when as We read in the hiftories of 
_ the Kings ofIudaand I frael ( which we holdcanonicall ) of many things touch: 
ed at there which are not there explaned , butare faid (4) to bee found in other 
bookes of the prophets,who are fometimes named, & yet thofe workes wee haue 
not in our Canon , aos the Lewes in theirs ? I know not the reafon of this,only I 
thinke that thofe prophets whom it pleafed the holy {pirrit to infpire , wrote 
fome-things ‘hiftorically a5 men, dnd other things prophetically as from the 
mouth of God , and that thele workes were really diftin@:fome being held their 
own,as they were men,and fome. the Lords,as {peaking out of their bofotnes : fo 
that the firft might belong to the bettering of knowledge and the later to the con- 
firming of religion, to which the Canon onely hath refpe&, béfides which if 
there be any Workes going vnder prophets names , they are not of authority to 
betrer the knowledge, becaufe itis a dotibe whether they are the workes of thofe 
prophets or no: therefore wee miay not truft chem, efpecially whenthéy make 
againft the canonical truth,wheein they proue themfelues direétly falfe bitches, 


T © bee forni in (4) other. Fos we teat Concerning the deédes of Dati,  é. they #2 
A | Qq9d¢ | wititted 


“SAINT AVGVSTINE. — Cuarzo. 


written in the booke of Samemel the Scer , and in the booke of Mathax the prophet,and of Gad 


&c.Chron.1.29.29.8 {0 likewile of Salensons Chron.29.29.And of Jofaphats.Chronsc. 2.20.34. 


Thar the Hebrew lesters bane beene euer continued in thas. 
Sint. lamgwage. “Cuar. 39. “ 


VVEB thay nor therefore ‘thinkeasfome doe , thatthe hebrew tongue onely 


1 pwasderiued from Heberto Abraham, & that(4)Moyfes firft gaue the hebrew 
lettevs wich the law: no,chat tongue was deriued from man toman fucceffiuely * 
by Tectet's afwell'as language. For Afoyfes appointed men to teachthem , before 


... the law was giuen. Thefethe {criptures.call (6) Grammaton Ifegozos that is intro- 


dudtorsof letters, becaufe chey did as it. were bring them into the hearts of men, 
or rather their hearts into them. So then no nation can ouer-poife our Prophets 
and Patriarches in antiquity of wifdome, for they had diuine in{pirations, & che 
Egyptians themfelues that vfe co giue our fuch extreame and palpable lies of 
their learnings are prooued fhort of time in comparifon with our Pacriarches, 
For none of them dare fay that they had any excellence of vnderftanding before 
they had lecters, that is, before Js cameand taught them. And what was their 


_ goodly wifdome thinke you Truely nothing bur(¢) Aftronomy,and fuch other | 


fcientes as rather feemied to exercife the wit ,thento eleuate the knowledge. 
For as for morality, it ftirred not in Egypt.vntill Tré/megi/tus his time , who was 


Philofophy indeed long before (d) che ages and Philofophers of Greece,but after Abrahams, 


Moyle <° 


I fade, Latob,lofeph,vea & Moyfes alfo-for atthe time when Afoy/es was borne, was 
Atlas, Prometheus his brother, a great Aftronomer lyving,and hee was gr.nd-fa- 
ther by the mother-fide to the elder Afercary, who begot the father of this 
Trifmegifius, 9° _ a et 


- —. LVIVES. 


Moe“ )frft gane | It is the common opinion both of the Jewes & Chriflians that Aforfes 

"did giue the firft letters to that language.Espelensns, Artapanus,& many other prophane 
authors, affirme it alfo : and chat the Phanicians had their letters thence, Artapanus thinketh 
thac Mayfes gaue letters to the Egyptians alfo :and that he was that Afercary,whom all af- 
firme did tirft make the Egyptian languageliterate. Ifany ane aske chenimwhat letter that 
wifdome of Egipt,that AZoy/es learned was contained, hee fhalbe anfwered,it went partly by 
tradition , and partly was recorded by Hieroglyphicks: Philothe lew faith, Abraham inuen- 
ted the Hebrew letters But chat they were long before eAbraham it feemes by Lofephus, who 
faich chat the fonaes of Seth, ereGted two pillers, one of ftone,and another of brick , whereon 
the arces that they had inuented were ingrauen - and that the ftone _piller was to bee feene in 


Pillers e- Syriainhistime. Antiq. lib. 1. Thele Auguffine feemeth here to.take for the Hebrew letters, 
re ape by (b)Grammates ifagogus \Hierome tranflateth it, Dottors,and AZayfters & Scribes. They taughe 
the 


Scribe-. 


onely the letter of the {criptures , and declined not from it an jnch:: but the greater profeffors 
were the Pharifes,of Phares diuifion,for they feuered themfelues from others,as all others bet- 
cers. Both forts taught thelaw out of i Afoyfes chaire , the fcribes the litterall fence , and the 
Pharifees the mifteries.(¢) Affronomy| Geometry, Arithmetick and Aftronomy,were the anci- 
ent Egyptians onely ftudies. Neceffity made them Geometers,for News his in-undations e- 


Pharafes. uery yeare tooke away the boundes of their lands , fo that each one was faine to know his 


ewne quantity, and how it lay and in what forme, and thus they drewe the principles of that 
art, Now apmnefic made thé Afronomers,for their nights were cleare, & neuet Cloud came on 
i | asa | cheir 


a ee 


Lint 8. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 729.4 
their fand,fo as they might eafily difcetne all the notions, tations, tiling and falkof enery ftarz: 
a ftudy both wondrous delectable, and exceeding profitable, and befgeming the.excellence of: 
man : now thefe two arts,could not confift without number, and fo Atithmetick goete vp fos. 
thethitd, (d) Beforé the (ages) A diuerfity of reading rather Worth nothing then noting. |” 

be eta! ae ee ee ee a ee er, 


te a as. 7 ow ¢ = eo age : gp te eres ass @ bd " 7 ram ¢ Piast a ne a po 
T is therefore a monftrous abfurdity co fay:, § fom dos that itis ahoue 
; ae: Cie a he : een oe § oor a ES pee fae ee oe rey Coe fee ke ae re f 
100000.’yeares fince Afttonomie began in Egipé. What recordes haye they 


eA s ft 
. The diffenfon lage Sasi the concord of the Canonical Scriptures, >’. 
+4 | YS HAP. ATs eee Vee = So 
| RY to leauchiftory,and come to the Philofophers whom wee lett long agoe =. 
their ftudies feemed wholy to aymeat the attainment of beatitude. VWhy di 
the fchollers thei contradi@ their maifters , but chac both were whirled away 
with humaine affects : wherein (2) although there might be fome fpice of vaine- 
glory; each thinking him-felfe wifer and quicker conceited then other , and af-~ 
feCtirig to bee an Arch-dogmatift him-felfe, and not a follower of others: not. 
withftanding to grant that it was the loue of truth, that carried fome(or the moft 
of them) from their teachers opinions ,to contend for truth, were it truth or 
were it hone? what courfe, what a& can mortall mifery performe t6 the obrai- 
ning of rue bleffedneffe,with-out it hauea diuine inftru&tion ? as for our Cano- 
nicall auchors,God forbid that they fhould differ, Nothey donot: arid therefore 
worthily did fo many nations beleeue that God fpoake éither in then or by them: 
this the multitude in other places,learned and vnlearned doe auow, though your 
perry company of ianglers in the fchooles denieit. Our Prophets were but few, 
ea{t being more, their efteeme fhould haue beene leffe, which religion ought 
highly to reuerence,yet are they not fo few but that theie concord is iuftly to be 
admired. Let one looke amongft all che multitude of philofophers writings and 
if he findetwo that tell both one tale in all refpeds,it may be regiftred for a rari- 
ty.It were two much for me to ftand ranking out their diuerfities in this worke. 
But what Dogmatift in ail this Hierarohy of Hell hath any fuch priviledge chat 
hee may not bee controuled:, arid oppofed by others, with gracious alow- 
 ance*to both partes: were not the Epscarifts in great accoumpt'at ‘Athehs, 
holding thar GO D had naught to doe with: man? And were not’ de Stokes? 
theit opponents, that held the Gods to bee the diredtots of all things » ewelw 
| as 


- 


73000 
as prations as they ? Wherfore I'maruell chat (6) ~taxagoras, wasacculed for 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. | Gaara. 


faying the funnie was a fiery ftone,denying the god-head thereof: Epéewrusbeing: 
allowed and gracedin that Cicty , who diuided ‘both deities offunne, ftarres, 
yea of Joue him-felfe(¢ ) andall the reft,in all refpe&t of the world ,and mans fup- 
plications vnto chem: was not Aréfippus there with his bodily /asmums bonum, 
and Antifthenes with his mentall ? Both famous Socratéf's , and yet both fo farre 
contrary each to other intheir fubie€ts ot beatitude. The one bad a wife man 
flye rule,the other bad him take it,and both had full and frequent audience. Did 
not enezyone defend his opinion in.publike , inthe towne ( 2) gullery,in (e¢/ 
{chooles ,in (f) gardens’, and likewife in all private places? One(g ) held one 
worid: another a thoufand : fome hold that onecreated : fome , not created: 
fome hold itérernall,fome not eternall : fome fay it ruled by the power of Ged, 
others by chance.Some fay the foules are immortall:others mortall:fome tranf- 
fufe them into beatts: others deny it: fome of thofe that make thém mortall , fay 
they dye prefenrly after the body: others fay they liuelonger , yet not for ever: 
fome place the cheefeft good in the body , fume inthe foule , fome in both: 
fome draw the externall goods tothe fouleand the body : fome fay the fences go 
atwaie true , fome fay Bit fome-times , fome fay never. Thefe and millions 
more of diflentions do the Phylofophers bandy,and what people, ftate, kingdom 
or citty of alt che diabolicall focyety hath euer brought chemto the teft , or re- 
ie&ted thefe and receiued the ocher ? But hath given nourifhment co all confufi- 
on in their very bofomes, and vpheld the rable of curious ianglers , not about 
Jands,or cefes in lawe,but vppon mayne poynts of mifery and bhiffe ? Wherein if 
they fpoke true,they hadas good leaue to {peake falfe , fo fully and fo ficly forred 
their fociety to the name of Babilon , which (as we fayd) fignifieth confajion. 
Nor careththeir King che diuell how much they iangle,it procureth him the lar- 


- ger harueft of variable impiety. But the people, ftate, nation and Citty of Ifra- 


ellto whome Gods holy lawes were left, they vied not that licentious confufion 
of the falfe Prophets with the the true,but all in one confent held andacknowled- 
gcd the later for the crue authors, recording Gods teftimonies. Thefe were their 

ages,their Poets,their Prophets,their teachers of truth and piety. Hee that 
liued after their rules,followed not man,but God; who {pake in them- The facri- 
ledge forb'dden there,God forbiddeth : the commandement of honour thy father 
and mother ,Godcommandeth. Thoufbat: not commit adultery, nor murder , mor 
floate feale : Gods wifdome pronounceth this not the witteof man. For (4) what 
truth foeuer the Philofophers attayned and difputed offamidft their falfhood as 
namely,that God framed the world,and gouerned it moft excellently, of the honefty of 
vertue,the lowe of our countrey, the fatth of friendlbip guft dealing, and all the appen- 
dances belonging to good manners: they knew not to whatend the whole was 
to bee referred: [he Prophetstaught that from the mouth of God in the per- 
fons of men, not with inundations of arguments, but with apprehenfion of fear 
and reverence of the Lord in all that underftood them. | 


L.VIVES. : 


Aue (4) there be}Vaineglory led almoft all the ancient authors wrong, {tuffing artes 
.-& with infamous errors,groffe and pernicious: each one feeking to be che proclamer of his 
own — then the preferrer of anothers . Blind men ! they faw not how laudable ir 
igen obey Geod.conncell, & co agree ynto crush. | knew a man once(not fo learned as arrogant) 

wl di ‘ : . “a more es ca 


. 


' % 

a et, 
Lvvr8. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 731 
peta gi 
who profeiled thac hee would write mich, and yet avoyd what cchers had faid before him 
as nce would fly afe:pentora Bafiliske - for that hee had rather wittir cly ¢fhimealic, then 
ailent vnto the opinion, (5 ) e4maxigorts, | A ftone fell ence cur ot the ayre into Acpos, a- 
riuer ia Thracia, and dzaxigoras (who had alfo prcfaced ity affirmed that hezuen was made | 
all of {tones and chat the fonne was a hry {tone : where-vpen £m piics hig tcholler calleth ita Anaxacoras 
goldenturfle. Lz Phaetonte:tor this aflertion Sotron accufed him or smpsety, and Pericles his : 
{choller pleaded for him, yer was he fined at fue talents , and parpetuai! ben:firent. Others 
fay otherwile. But the moft fay that Pericles who was gicat in rhe Citry, faued his life being 
condemned:where-vpon the Poets faigned that Jove was Angry at izaacgoras and threw a 
thundcr-bole at him,but Pericles ftept betweenie, and fo it flow another way. ¢) _Andallihe 

_ refi.) Epicurus held Gods, but excluded them frem medling in humane aflayres, and hearing é picuras 

_ vss indeed his vnder ayme was Atheiime, burthe Arcop.ige awed hii trom profeffing it:for 7 

farewell {uch Gods as wee haue no necce on faith (otta a Txlly (d ) Towne gallery.) There 
taught the ftoikes.( ¢ ) Scheoles.| As the Peripaterigees in the Lycwum. ( f) Gardens. ] As the 
Epucureans did ( g )Some held. | Of thefe we {pake at large vpon the cight bocke. (4 ) 3 hat: 
truth focuer, \Eufe.de prep.Enang prooueth by many arguments that Pdz10 had all his excellene 
pofition out of the {criptures, 


aes ene 


o 


, 


© ene 6 eee eee 


4 
Of the tranflations of the Old-Teftament out of Hebrew into Greeke, by 
the ordinance of God for the benefit of the nations 


| | ~Cuap.42. oe, 7 SD 
T Hefe fcriptures one (4) Prolomya king of Egypt defired to vnderftand, for 
after the ftrange & admirable conquett of 4/exander of Macedon, furnamed 
the great , wherein he brought all Afia and almoft all the world vnder his fubiecs 
tion, partly by faire meanes and partly by force, (who came alfo into Iudza) 
his noblesatter his death making a turbulent diui{ion or rather a dilaceration of 
his monarchy , Egypt came toberuled by Ptofomyes. The firft of which was the 
foone of Lagus, who brought many lewes captiue into Egypt:the next was Phés- 
ladelhas ywho freedall thofe captiues, fent guifts to the temple, and defired 
Eleazar the Prieft to fend him thé Old-tettament whereof he had hard great com- 
mendations , and therefore hee inentto put icinco his famous library : Eleazar 
fencictin Hebrew , and then hee defired interpretours of him, and he fent him 
feauenty two; fixeof every tribeall moft perfect inthe Greeke and Hebrew. 
Their tranflaion doe wee now vfually call the Septuagints.” 4) Lhe report of 
their diuine concord therein is admirable : for Profomy hauing(to try their faith) 
made each one tranflate by him-felfe, there was not one word difference be- 
tween them,cither in fence or order, butal was one,as ifonly one had donethem 
all : becaufe indeede there was but one fpirit in them all. And God gaue them 
that admirable guift,to giue a diuine commemdationto fo dinin a worke,wherin | 
the nations might fee tha: prefaged , which wee all fee now effected. | 


eS 5 twee ee oe ee ee een ee -o Oa we 


Ee eel 


L VIVES. - 


Ne(.1)Ptolomy.]The Kings of Ecypt were all.called Pharaos vntill (amby/es added that Ptolomies. 
O kingdome ynto the Monarchy of Perfia, Buratter lexander , trom Prolomy ionof Las 


gus they were al called Ptolomies,vntil Anzuftus made Egipt a prouince. Alexander was abroad Alexinder 
‘with an arny 21.yeares;in which time he fubdued al Afia,buc hele it buca while,for in the3 2. the greats 
\ yeare$ of his ave , he died, and then his nobles ranne all to fhare his empire as it had bin a bro~ 
ken chett filled with gold ; euery one got what he could , and the leaft had a Kingdome to his 
fhare. Antigonus got Afia;Selencus Chaldza,(affander Macedonia,cach one fomewhat,& Pto~ 
lomy Egypt,Phenicia and Ciprus; hee was hut ofmeane defcent. Lagashis father was one of, 
. | , | Alexanders 


732, 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuarig2.43. 


eAllexcanders guard , and hee ftom a common foldior, got highly into the fauour of his Prince 


Philadel- for his valor, difcretion, and experience, Being old, and addicted to peace, he left his crowne 


phus. 
t 


to his fonne Philadelphus , who had that name cither for louing his filter -4r/izee or for hatin 
her afterwards , a contrario, H¢ freed all the Iewes whome hus father had made captiues and 
fet luda free from a great tribute :and being now growen old, and difeafed ( by the per- 
{walion of Demetrius Phalerens , whome enuy had chafed from Athens thether ) hee berooke 
him-felfc to ttudy , gathered good writers together, buylt that goodly librarie of Alexan- 
dria , wherein he placed the Oid-Teftament, for hee fent to E/eazar for tranflators for the 


The Septu Jaw and Prophets , who being mindfull of the good hee had done to Iudza,fenz him the fea~ 


agints, 


uenty two interpretours whome from breuivy fake we call the f cauenty , asthe Romaines ca!. 
led che huncred and fiue officers, the (entumenirs. In Iofephus are the Epiftles of Prolomy to 


_ Eleazar,and his vnto him.lib.t2, There is a booke of the feauenty interpreters thatgoeth yne 


derhis name, but I takcietobea falfe birch, (4) The report of. |] Ltolomy honozed thofe ing 
terpreters, highly. Totry the truth by their Agreement (faith laine Nee built {cauenty 
two chambers, placing a tranflator in euery one, to wrice therein, and when they had done, 
conferred them all and their was noc a letter difference. Apologet. ad Gent. The ruines 
of thefe /#/Psne {aith he faw in Pharos, the tower of Alexandria. CMenedemis the Pliilofopher 


[ The Lo- admired the congruence in the tranflation, Tertull. eAduer[.gentes [ Hierome fome-times ex- 
uaine CO- roils their tranflation as done by the howy fpirit , and fome-times condemnecth 1t for euill , and 
py faileth ignorant :as hee was vehement in all oppofition | that tory of their chambers, ke fcoffeth at 


here. | 


Hiecrome a 


Prieft, 


for this he faith : 1 know not what hee was whofe lyes buile the chambers for the feauenty at 
Alcxandria,where they might write feuerall, when as Aristeas one of Prolomies gard , faith 
that they all wrote in one great pallace : not as Prophets : for a prophet is one thing, anda 
tranflatour another , the one f>eaketh out of infpiration , and the other tranflateth out of yne 


: derftanding.Prolog.in Pentatench. 


etna 


or esas 


That the tranflation of the Seuenty is moft anthenticall, 
, next untothe Hebrew. 


Crar.43. 


-_ — om - 


J 


Linz. OF THECITIEOF GOD... 933 


Some held it good co corre& the feauenty , by the Hebréw , yet durit chey not 
put out what was in them and not in the Hebrew, but onely added what was in 
that and notin them . (6) marking the places with (¢) Aftersiskes at the heads 
of the ver{es, and noting what was in the feauenty, and not inthe Hebrew , with 
lines , as We marke ( 2) ounces of weight withall: And many Greeke and Latine 
copies are difperfed with thefe markes. Butas for the alterations, whether the 
difference be great or {mall, they are not tobe difcerned but by conferring of the: 
bookes, If therefore we go all to the {pirit of God and nothing elfe , as is fiereft, 
whatfocuer is in the feauenty ; and not in the Hebrew , it pleafed God to fpeake 
it by thofelaccer prophets , and not by chefe firft. And focontrary.wife of that 
which is in the Hebrew and not in the feauenty, herein fhewing thetn bothto be 
Prophets , for fo did he fpeak this by Efay , chat by Heerensy ; and other things by 
othes as his pleafure was. But what wee finde in both, thatthe fpiric fpake by 
both : bythe firftas Prophets, by the lacer as propheticall tranflations. : for as 
there was onefpirit of peacein the firft who fpake fo many feuverall things with 
— rdance, fo was there in thefe who tranflated fo agreeably without con 
erence. : | | 


- ¢. 8-4 


. OL VIVES. 
A Lrbengh( a ) the lemes.J No min now adaies fheweth an error, and leaueth it, Man 


ind is not fo wife. Againe , time gayneth credit ynto many :and nothing bit time vn- 
to fome. Bit it is admirable to fee bow gently hee fpeaketh here of Hierome: whofe opinion 


he fo’lowed not in this high controuerfie. O that wee cottld immiitate him! ( 6) Marking.) | 
of this Hieromse fpeaketh Proleg. in Paralip. Origen was the firft that tooke the paines to cori- Hiasemns, 
ferre che tranflation , andl he conferred the feauenty with Theedorion ; Hier. tp:ad Auguft. 

where he inucigheth at whit hee had erft commended : faying that the booke is tot corrected 

but rather corrupted by thofe afteriskes , and fpits, [But this he faid becaufe ugu/tsme woutd 

hot meddle with his tranflation,but held that of the fcauenty fo facred, this power oftentimes (phe Lo. 
hath affection ia the holieft men; | (¢ ) Afferiskes. ] Little flars ( d) Ounces. | It feemes the yaine cod 
ounce in old times was marked with afpits character, Lfdoré faith ic wasmarked with che py defece 
Greeke Gamma , and our a; thus 50, and the halfe {cruple with aline thus ------ they noted tine Ps ae 
thofe places with a fpit,thus me to fignifie that the words fo noréd,were thruft thtoughias ad- 
ditions , falfefiing therext. It was Arsftarcbss his inuention vfed by the Grammarians in their 
cenfure of bookes and verfes. Qsinsi.sb.1.Which the old Grammarsians vfed with fuch feuerity 
that they did not onely taxe falfe places , or bookes hereby, but alfo chruft their authors cithet 
out of their ranke or wholy from the name of Grammarians, Thus Osintibian. Seneca did ele< 
gantly call therafing dut of baftard veries, Arsfarches his notes, 


&. Ze: cy . + fp 


Of the deftruction of Nibiny, which ihe Hebrew perfixeth fourty _ 
dates vnto,and the Septuagints but three; 


Crar.4ge 


] But will fome fay, how fhall [know whethet /onas faid , jet forty deiés id NB 
niny [balbe deftroved,or yet three dates? who feeth not that the Prophet prefaging 
their deftruGion could not fay both: ifat three daies endthey weteto Bee def- 


troyed chen not at fourty : if at fourty then not at three. 


734 SAINT AVGVSTINE. | Cuargs, 


If I bee asked the qneftion, I anfwer for the Hebrew. For the LXX. being long 
after,might fay otherwife,and yet not againft the fence, but as pertinent ro the 
matter as the other,though in another fignification: aduifing the reader notto 
Jeaue the fignification of che hiftorie for the circumftance of a word,nor to con: 
Nin'nie,g temme cither of the authorities : for thofe things were truly done ()at Niniuie, 
figureof and yet had a reference farther then Niniuie:as ic was true thatthe Prophet 
che Church was three dayes in the Whales belly and yet intimated the being of the Lord of 
allthe Prophets thres dayes in the wombe of the graue . Wherefore if the 
Church of the Gentiles were prophetically figured by Niniuie,as being deftroy- 
__ ed in repentance, to become quite different from what it was : Chrzff doing this 
in the faid Church, it is hee chat is fignified both by the forty dayes ,and by che 
three: by forty, becaufe hee was fo long with his difciples after his refurreCtion, 
and then afcended into heaueh : by three, for on the third day hee arofe againe: 
as if the Septuagints intended to ftir the reader to looke further into the mat- 
ter then the meere hiftory, and that the prophet had intended to intimate the 
depth of the myfterie: as ifhee had faid : Secke him in forty dayes whom thon {bak 
4 finde in three: this in his refurreion, and <he other in his afcenfion. Wherefore 
both numbers haue their ficte fignification , both are {poken: by one fpirit, the 
firit in Jom.zs, the lacter in thetranflacors. Were it not for tedicufneffe I could 
reconcile the LXX. and the Hebrew in many places wherein they are held to 
. differ. ButI ftudy breuity, and according to my talent haue followed the Apa- 
ftles,who aflumed what made for their purpofes out of both the copies, knowing 

& — theholy fpirit co be one in both. But forward with our purpofe. 


FY a . 


co. 8 _L. VIVES. 


y Et (a') forty dayés | Hierome wonders that the fcauenty would tranflate three, for forty, 
- di the Hebrew hauing no fuch fimilitude in figure or accent. In thefe ftraitesis the excel- 
» Tent witte of Saint eAugu/fine now entangled, norcan hee well acquit him-felfe of them. 
. (6) At Nininie | Acitty in Affyria, built by Niaws. Wee haue fpoaken of it already. 


7 oe 


s)he lewes wanted Prophets euer after the repayring of the Temple, 
. : — andwere affistted euen from thence untill Chrift 
Came stofbew the Prophets fpakeofthe = — 
: building of the other Temp'e. 
oe “Crd gs. - 
Feer the Iewes were left deftitute of Prophets , they grew dayly worfe 
and worfe: namely fromthe end of their captiuity , when they hoped to 
growe into better ftate vpon the repaying of the Temple. For fo that carnal] 
_ mation vnderftood 4ees Prophecie, faying ; The glory of this lat houfe {ball 
a greater then the firft: which hee fheweth that hee meant of the ew Tefts- 
| ment io the words before,where hee promifeth C HR/ST exprefiely, faying: 
EF will mooue all nitions , and the defire of a nations {ball come . Where the 
LX X. vfed a fence rather applyable to the members chen the head, fay- 
ing: dd they that are GODS elect flosil come ont of all Netions,to witte,the 
m¢ce 


~ 


Lis.28.. - OF THE CITIE OF GOD. | 735 


EAE Re 


nien of whom Chriit faid in the Gofpell. Many are called ,l-ut fewe are chofen, 
For thofe chofen, is the houfe of GOD built by the New Teftament, of living — 
{tones, farre more glorious then that which was built by Salomon, and repaired 
after the captiuity. Therefore fromthence had this nation no more Prophets, 
but were fore afflidted by aliens, euen by the Romaines them-felues , to teach 
themthat —4gge meant not of that houfe whichthey had repayred. For (b) ones 
alexander came fooneafter that, and {ubdued them: who although lee made facrificeth 
no maffacre of them (for they durft doe no other but yeeld at his firft becke)*° wah oe 
os ne ae not as hee 
yet there was the glory of thar Temple prooued inferiour to what ithad beene thould 
in their owne free Kings times. For inthe Temple did alexander facrifice, 
not in any true worfhip vnto GO D, but giuing hima place in the adoration 
of his falfe deities. (¢ ) Then came the tore-named Ptolomey {cnne to Lagus, 
afer «Alexavders death,and hee lead many of them captive into Egipt , yee 
his fonne Phéladelphus did courteouflie free them afterwards , and had the 
feanentie to tranflate the Old Teffament for him , as I fayde before: from 
whence it came to ourhands. | a | 
~ Afterall this, the warres mentioned in the Machabees, lay vpon them. And 
in( 4) proceffe of time, Prolomy King of Alexandria fudbued them, (hee that 
was called Epiphanes ) andthen were they extreamly plagued, forced to offer to 
Idols,and their Temple filled with facriligious pollution by C4stiochus King of 
Syria,whofe powers not-with-ftanding Judas Machabeus vtterly fubuerted, and 
reftored the Temple ro the ancient dignity . | 
Within a while after . did 4/himus (aman borne out of the Priefs bloud ) 
by ambition afpire to the Prieft-hood:and then about fifty yeares after,all which 
were pafled vader the variable chance of warre, did riffobulus aflume a dia- 
deme,and became both King and Prieft.. For allche time before , euer fince the 
captiuitic, they had no Kings, but Captaines and Generalls, or Princes (though 
a King may bee called a Prince, becaufe of his preheminence, but all that are 
Captaines and Princes, /( f)are not Kings, as Ariftobulus was). To him (¢)did 
Alexander {ucceed both inthe kingdome and the Priefthood,and is recorded for 
atyrant ouer his people. Hee left the regality to his wife Alexandra, and from Alexandre, 
thence began the Iewes extremities of affliction. For(4)her two fonnes 47:- 
frobulusand Hircanus contending for the Principalitie, called the Romaine for- 
ces to come againtt Ifraell, by the meanes of Hercanus demanding their ayde 
againft his brother. Then had the Romaines conquered all Affrick and Greece, 
and hauing commanded ouer a multicude of other nations, (2) the ftate fee- 
med too heauie for it felfe,and brake it felfe downe with the owne burden. For 
now had {edition gotten ftrong hold amongft them, breaking out into confede- 
racies,and ciuill warres,where-with it was fo maimed, that now all declined vn- , 
to aMonarchike forme of gouernment. But Pompey the great gencrall of Romes pyps,yoro: 
forces, brought his powers into ludza , tooke Hierufalem , opened the Temple me og 
doores (not to goe in to pray vnto God,but to prey vpon Godrather ) and noras mele. 
a worthipper, but as a prophaner,entr ed the(k)/andfum fancforum,a place onely 
Jawfull for che high Prieft to bee feenein. (/) And hauing feated Hircanus inthe 
prieft-hood,and made Axtipater prouott of the prouince, hee departed carrying 
Ariftobulus away with him,prifoner. Here began the Lewes co bee the Romaines cafius 
cribucaries.Ascerwatds came Ca/(zs and f{poiled the Temple. (7) And withina poles the 


few yeares after, Herod an Alien was made their gouernour , and in his time was ‘“" 


our Sesiopr CHR1ST borne. 


Ree 2 | For 


736 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. C wards 


For now was the fulnefle of time come which the Patriarch prophetically im- 


Gen.49+10 plyed, faying , The Scepter {ball nor depart from Juda, mor the law-giuer from be- 


Alexander. 


Ptolomy, 


Epiphancs, 


tweene his feetevntill Shilo come, and hee {hall gather the nations unto bins.For the 
Iewes had neuer beene with-out a Prince of their bloud, vntill Herods time,who 
was their firft Alien King. Now then was the time of Sh#/ob come, now was 
the New Te/tament to bee promulgate,and the nations to bee reconciled to the 
truth. For ic were vnpoffible that che nations fhould defire him to come in his 


glorious power to iudge, (as wee fee they. doe ) vniefle they had firft beene 


vnited in their true belecfe vppon him, when hee came in his humility to 
fuffer. | 


L. VIVES. 


Hey that (a) are Gods elett | 7 txasi]a’. (b) eAlexander came | \n the time of Darins, 
# fonne to Arfamus, Olymp.s12. whichis a little more then two hundred yeares after. For 
Alexander befieging Tyre-and fending for helpe to Zaddus the Prieft,commanding him 4s ifhe 
were Lord of Ata teans he had now chafed Darias thence,the Prieft anfwered,that he oughe 
him no feruice as long as Darius liued,with whome hee was in league. A wife anfwer,and bee 
fitting an Ifraclites faith : it enflamed the yalarous young King,who hauing taken Tyre,made 
ftraightto Galilee through Paleftina,tooke Gaza, and fet forward to Hicrufalem , where the 
Prie{ts mette him in all their ceremonial robes,and faluted him : fo hee was pacified and ado- 
red the Prieft,faying that hee was the Pricft of the God.of Nature, who had appcared vnto 
him in his fleepe at Macedon , andtolde him hee fhould attaine this Empire. So tooke hee 
Tudza into his protection. Jofeph. lib. 1, Antig. (¢) Ptolomy fonne to Lagus \Vnder colour 
of defiring to facrifice in the Temple vpon a Sabboth, hee tookethe towne. Jofeph. (2) Epi 
phanes | Thatis, [Wlx/friozs, Hee fucceeded his Father Philopater, and warred with Antiochus 


_ Epiphanes , vntill they both were wearied , and then hee marryed (Jeopatra , Antiochus 


his daughter,and had Iudza for his dowrie,&c, (¢) -Axteochus |Ofhim read the Machabees 
2.7,and 8. and lofeph.lib.13. (f ) Are not Kings \Vor King isa greater name then Prince, or 
Captaine, bringing larger licence to the ruler ,and ftricter bondage to the fubie@, (g) -A- 
lexander | Ariftobulss kept his brothers. prifoners during his life, but beeing dead, his wife 
Saloni ( whome the Greekes call Alexandra ) fer them at liberty, and made dlexander (one 
of them) King, whome Ptolomy, Demetrius , and Antiochus foyled in many fights. At 
length beeing fickly by often {urfetting’, hee dyed. Hee was' a forward {pirited and a 
valorous tyrant, but ever. ynfortunate , and ynwife. Hee left the kingdome tos Alexan- 


dra his wife, who held it nine yeates, letting the Pharifees rule allas beficted a woman, 
to doe. 


Ariftobolus.«” h ) Her two fonnes | Their warre was worfe then ciuill, and befell ( faith Jofeph) in the 
& Hireanus Confulthip of Q, Hortenfins, and Q. Metellus Creticus, Olymp. a hundred ‘eighty three, 


Antipater. 


Pompeye 


Alexander and his wife had left Astipas (afterwards called Astspater the ich ) an Idu- 
mzan prefect of Idumza, who was factious and ftirring , and fauoured Hirtanus aboue 
e-triffobulus , and fet Aretes King of Arabia againft Ariftoboles,and for Hircanus . Hee 


- foone affented, and befieged -Ariffobulus in Hierufalem, Then warred Pompey the great in 


Affrica, and his Legate emul. Scanrus lead part of his forces into Syria ,and him did Ars 
frobolus implore in his ayde : Scaures rayfed the fiege , and afterward che bretheren conten- 
ding for the kingdome before Pompey at Damafcus, were both difmifled, Afterwards, Arie 
ftobolxs offending him, hee marched into Iudza , tooke him prifoner, and turned Iudza into 
a Prouince of Rome, Txily and (. Antonins being Confuls. Jofeph.lib.1'5. (1) The fate feemed 


The (antty 00 heante | So fayd Lime of it indeed. (k ) The fanttum fanttorum |The Romaincs defired 
farnttorum, earneftly to fee what God the Hebrewes worfhipped, thinking they had fome ftatue of him 


in the Tcmple.So Pompey ,and afew with him,entred euen to this place(which the Iewes held 
| : = oe afi 


Lint8 ~ OF THE CITIE OF GOD. am 
ee 

afacriledge for any man but the prielt'to doe, ) where he found nothin g but a golden table,a 

many tafters, a great deale of {pices , and 2000.talents in the holy treafury: of this enuy of his 
Tacitus {peaketh, Annal, 21. and faith that vpon this it was given out that the Iewes had no 
Images of their gods but worfhipped in voide roomes and, empty fan&tuaries, (1) Andha= 
wing feated | By the fending of Aulus Gabinins, who divided alfo all the land into flue parts, Hircanué. 
and fet rulers ouer them all. Jofephus faith that in (e/ars warre againit Prolomy , Hircanus 

and 4ntipater fent himayde , wherevpon hauing ended the warre hee made Hircanus high 
prieft,and .Amtipater ( according to his choice) prouoft of the whole land. De bello Iud.ib.y. 
& in Antiq. lib. (m) Andwithin a few| Antipater dying made his fonne Hircanus, (a dulland Hered, 
floathfull youth ) gouernor of Ierufalem , and Herode (beeing as then {carcely fifteene yeare 
old)ruler of Galilee,who by his vertues, furmounting his age,quickly got the hearts of all the 
Syrians,and fo by abrive(paide by them)got the gouernment of Syria from Sextus (4/ar,who 

as then heldit:and afterwardes helping Odfausus and Avtony oreatly , in che warre of Brutus 

and Caffins, got the ftile of King of Judza,giuen him by the Senate , hee beeing an Idumzan 

borne. So was Lacobs prophecy at his death, fulfilled , which alone might bee of power fuffi- 


‘cient to fhew the Mefftas to the lewes,but that their eyes by Gods fecret indgements are J6 
wholy éealed vp,and enclowded. 


Of the words becomming flethjour Sauiours birth : 
and the difperfion of lewe’s. | 


Crap. 46. 


Hered reigning in ludza, Romes gouernment being changed, and (4) _-4ugai/- 
tus Cefar being Emperor , the world beeing all at peace,Chrift(according to 

the precedent prophecy)was borne in Bethelem of Iudah, beeing openly man of 
his Virgin-mother,and fecretly God, of God his father : for fo the Prophet had 
faid: (6) Behold,e Virgin {ball conceive sand beare a fonne : and {be {ball call his name, 
Emanuel, thet #5,God with vs Now he thewed his deity by many miracles, which 
as farreas concerneth his glory and our faluation, are recorded in: the Gofpell. 
The firftis his miraculous birth , the laft his as miraculous afcenfion. But the 
Tewes who reie@ed him, and flew him ( according to the needfulneffe of his 
death, andrefurreGion after that were miferably {poiled by the Romanes,cha- 
fed all into the flauery of ftrangers, and difperfed ouer the face of the whole 
_ earth. Fortheyareinall places with their Teftament,to fhew that we have not 
|" forged thofe prophecies of Chrift ; which many of them confidering, both be- 

fore his paffion and after his refurreCtion,belecued in him,and they are the rem- 
nant that are faved through grace. Bur the reft were blinde,as the pfalme faith, 
Let their table be made a fnare before them, and their profperity their ruine : let their 
eyes be blinded that they fee sot, and make their loines alway to tremble. For inrefu- bd 
fing to beleeue our fcriptures; their owne( which they read with blindneffe) ae 69 
are fulfilled vpon them. | | 4 re 
l(c) Some may fay that the Syé//s prophecies which concerne the Iewes,are but 
fictions of the chriftians: but chat fufficeth vs that wee haue from the bookes 
of our enemies , which wee acknowledge in that they preferue it fot vs againft 
their wills , themfelues and their bookes beeing difperfed as farreas GODS 
Church is extended and {pread 5 in euery corner ofthe world ; as that prophecy. 
of the pfalme which they themfelues doe read, fore-telleth them. Aty merciful = 
GOD will present mee ,GOD willlet mefee my defirevpon mine enemies : flay them PGl.s9,t0 
not ieef my people forget it, but {catter them abroade with thy power,here did GOD *™* 
fhew his mercy to his church enen a lewes his enemies, becaufe (as thé 

AEE 3 


ae aeann nnennnnennnnnSDnnInIINSR Damen renee 


738 


SAINT AV GVSTINE. ._ Cua?.46.847 


Apoftle faith J through their fall commeth faluation to the Gentiles. And there- 
fore hee flew them nor, that is hee left them their name of Iewes ftill, a:chough 
they bee theRomaines flaues,leaft their veter diffolucion fhould make vs forget 
the law of GOD concerning this teftimony of theirs. So it were.nothing to 
fay ,Slaye them not, but that he addeth, Scatter them abroade:For if they were not 
difperfed through-out the whole werld with their Scriptures, the Church 
fhould want their teftimonies concerning thofe prophecies fulfilled in our 
Mefitas. SO - 


L.VIVES. 


A Usguftus (a ) Cefar \In the forty and two yeare of his reigne , and of the world fiue 
thoufand one hundred ninety and nine,was Christ borne.Him-felfe,and AZ. Plautins be- 
ing Contulls. Eafeb. (afiodorus referreth it to the yeare before, Cx. Lentulus, and Af. Meffale 
being Confuls. (6) Bebold a Virgin | Shall take a fonne mto ber wombe , fay the feauentie, 
(c) Some may fay | But not truly: for Lattantins and Exfebins cited them when the bookes 
were common in all mens hands, Where if they had quoted what thofe bookes conteined 
not, ic would boch haue beene impudence on their parts,and difgrace to the caufe of Chris, 
Befides Owid aud Virgil vfe many of che Syb:lls verfes,which can concerne none but ( drift, 
as Uirgills whole fourth e£ slogue is and his digreffion yponthe death of Ce/ar. Georg.1, 
And likewifein Osid wee read thefe. 


Effe quog, in fatis reminifcitur affore terris 
Quo mare,que tellus correptaque regia Cali, 
Ardeat et mundi moles operofa laborer. 


There is a time when heauen ( men fay) fhall burne, — ere 
When ayre,and fea,and carch,and the whole frame, — 
Of this huge maffe fhall all to afhes curne. eo ees 


And likewife this. | - Ree: 
Et Deus humana luftrat [ub imagine terras. 
‘God takes a view of earth in humaine fhape, 


And fuchalfo hath Lucane in his Pharfalian warre. “ber 13. Now if they fay that all the af 
fertions of ours (recorded by great Authors ) bee fictions , let mee heare the moft dire 
truth that they can affirme,and I will finde one Academike or other amongft chem that fhall 
make a doubt of it. : 7 


. | 


whether any but Ifraelites.before Chritts time,pelonged to the 
: CittyofGod,  Cuapr.g7. 


PY Herefore any ftranger be he no Ifraelite borne, nor his workes allowed for 
canonicall by them, if hee haue prophecied of Chri/#,that wee can knowor 
rehearfe,muy bee added vnto thenumber of our teftimonies : not that wee need 
his words, but becaufe it is no error to beleeue that there were fome of the Gen- 
tiesto whom this myftery was reuealed,and who were infpired by the {pirit of 
prophecie to deciare it: werethey elect or reprobate, & taught by the euill fpi- 
rits, whom we know confefled Chrzit being come, though the Iewes denied him. 
| - a Nor 


TLE TE LITE IACI A TT TET TET TO TT TEA 


Lin 8. - OF THE CiITIE OF GOD. 739 


Nor do I thinke the Iewes dare auerre’, that ( 4) no man was faued after the pro- 
pagation of Ifrael, but [fralites : Indeedthere was noorher people properly cal- 
led the people of God. Buc they cannot deny that fome particular men liued in 
this world and in other nations that were belonging tothe Heauenly hierarchy. ~ 
If chey deny this ,the ftory of (8) huly 7ob co: vinceth them , who was neither a 
natiue Ifralice , nor (¢ Ja profelite, adopted by their law,but borne and buried 

in Idumza : and yet (a) is hee fo highly commended in the fcriptures, that 
there was none of his time/it feemes Jchat equalled him in righceoufnefle, whofe 
time thovehthe Chronicles exprefle not, yer out of whe canonicall authoriry of 

his owne booke wee gather himro haue liuedin (¢) the third generation atrer 
I{rael. Gods prouidence (no doubt) intended to giue vs an inftance in him,thae 
there might ke ochers in the nations that Jiued after the law of God , and in his 
{cruice thereby attaining a place in the celeftiall Hicrufalem : which we muft 
thinke none did but fuch as fore-knew the comming of the Afe//7as,mediator be- 

~ yweene God and man, who was prophecied vnto the Saints ot old that he (hould 
come iuft as we haue feene him to haue come in the fleth:thus did one fatch vnite 

all the predeflinare into one citty one houfe,andone Temple for the living God. 

But whatother Pi ophecie: foeuer there paffe abrod concerning Chrift the vici= 

ous inay fuppole hac w ehaue forged, therefore there is no way fo fur, to batter 
downe all contentions in this kinde, asby citing of the prophecies couteyned 

in the lew es Eockes : by whofe difperfionfrom their proper habitations all over 

- the world, the Church of Chriftis hapily increafed. , ~ * 


, L.VIVES. 

TO Hat (4) No man.” Nature being vnpolluted with vicious opinion micht pefhibly guide 

one to God as well as the law of AZoyfes , for whatthefe get by the law , thofe might get 
withcutit, and come to the fame perfection that the Iewes caine , fecking the fame end : nor eo 
was their d:fference other then if ouc traueller fhould cary an Itinerary of his way with him, (The Lo- 
and the other tiuft onely his memory, | So may healfo now a dayes . thac Hueth in the faith- uaine cos 
leffe Iles of the Ocean, anducuer heard of C uit, artaine the gory ofa Chriftian by keeping py defec- 
the two abitraéts of ali the iaw ard the Propliets. per fcét foue of Ged and his neighbour:fuch tiue in all 
aconfcience is glaw toman,and according tothe Plalmift, Fe remenibreth the name of the thise] 
Lord inthe night , and keepech his lave, This hath hee that feeth the Lurds righteoufnefle : fo 
great able fing is it to bce yood, although yer have not one totreach you goednefle. And 
what wanteth herc but water ? for here isthe holy fpirit as wellas inthe Apoftles ; as Peser 
witneffeth of fome who receiucd that, before euer the water gouched them. So the nae 
tions that have no law but natures, arealaw to them-felues , the tight of their liuing wellis 
the guift of God comming from his fonne,of whome it 18 faid. Flee us the light which hebteth 
enery man that comn:eth into the world, |(6 ) Holy Tob. | His holy hiltory , faith hee was of th¢ 
Land of Huz. Hierome faith Haz buylt Demaicus,and Traconitide and ruled betweene Palef= 
- tina and Calofiria : thisthe fcauenty intimate in theirtranflacion, Haz was of the fonne of 
eA ram ,the brother of *braham. There was an osher Vz defended froth Efan but Hieront 
excludeth him from /obs kindred admitting that fonne of eA ram, for that ; faith hec ) it is 
in the end of the booke where Ice ts faid co be che forth from E fan is becaufe the booke was 
tranflared out of Syrian, for it was not written in the Hebrew. Phill p the Pricht, the next 
cornimentator vpon Job after Ercrom \aith thus: (4x and Bez were the fons of Nachor, Abra~ 
hams brother begot of Adelcha, filler to Sarah, Itis credible that this holy man ( ob idwele lob, 
in the Land that bore his fathers name : andthat hee wasrather of the fteckeof Wachor 
then of E/aa; thou eh fome fufpect the controry , bue the thtte Kinys(to wit Eliphaz;Bildad, 
and Zophane ) were of tic generation of Efav, Thus faith Philip. Sothat Lob was. fonne 
to Nachor, by Melcham. Origen followeth tne vulgar, and faith thathee was an Vzzite, 


Rirg bors 


740 


Aprofelyte, 


Ephef, 1,4 


SAINT AV GVSTINE.  Cuar.g8.849° 


borne & bred,and there liued. Now they, & the Minzites , and Euchzites & the Themanites, 
areall of the race of Efax,or Edom,I{aacs fonne: and all Idumza was as then called Edom:but 
now they are all called Arabians,both the Idumzans’, Ammonites and Moabites. This ts the 
opinion of Origex,and the vulgar, and like-wife of fome of the Gentiles , as of Ariffeus Hift. 
Indaic.c.(¢) A profelite |\Comming from heathenifme to thc law of apéewpyopzs to come to 
(4) So highly commended] In the booke of [ob,and Exech. 14.(e) In the third generation ]Some 
thinke that Gerefis mentioneth him vnder the name of a/xb, but there is no certenty of it. 
Fierome faith that Eiipbaz,Efan's fonne by Adsh , is the fame that is mentioned in the booke 
of Job:which ifit be fo,/ob liued in the next generation after Lacob. 


| Ageces prophecy of the glory of Gods houfe, fulfilled inthe Church, 
not inthe Temple. Crap. 48. 


T His is thac Houfe of God more glorious then the former forall the precious 
compacture : for C4¢gees prophecy wasnot fulfilled inthe repayring of the 
Temple, which never had that glory after the reftoring that it had in Sa/omsons 
time: but rather loft it all,che Prophets ceafing,and deftruGion enfuing , which 
was performed by the Romanes asI erft related.But the houfe of the New Tefta- 
ment is ofanother luftre, the workemanfhip being more glorious, and the ftones 
being more precious. But itwas figured in the repaire of the old Temple,becaufe 
the whole New Teftament was figured in the old one. Gods prophecy therefore 
that faich,J that place will] gine peace , is to be meant of the place fignified not of 
the place fignificant: that is , as the reftoring that houfe prefigured thechurch 
which Chrift was to build , fo GOD, faid éx this place, ( that is inthe place that 
this prefigureth ) wsll/ gine peace , forall things fignifying , feemeto fupport the 
perfons of the things fignified,as Saint Peter faid : the Rock was Chrif : for it fig- 
nifyed Chrift. So then, farre is the glory ofthe houfe of the New Teftament a- 
boue the glory of the Old, as fhall appeare in the finall dedication. Then thall 
the defire of all nations appeare (as it is inthe hebrew): for his firft comming 
was not defired of all the nations, for fome knew not whom to defire,nor in 
whom to beleeue. And then alfo thall they that are Gods ele& out ofall nations 
come (as the LXX. readit) for none fhall come truely at that day but the eleét,of 
who theApoftle faith 4s he hath elected us in him,before the beginning of the werld: 
forthe Archite@ himfelf,that fayd,Atany are called but few are chofem:he {poke not 
of thofe that were called to the feaft and then caft out: but meant to fhew chat 
hee had builean houfe of his ele&, which times worft {pight could neuer ruine. 
But being alcogither in the churchas yet,to bee hereafter fificed,the corne from 
the chaffe;the glory of this houfe cannot be fo great now,as it fhalbechen where 
man fhalbe alwaies there where heis once. | 


The Churches sncreafe uncertaine sbecaufe of the commixtion of elect and re- 
probate inthisworld. CHuar.4g9. 


Herefore in thefe mifchieuous daies, wherein the church worketh for his fu 
.* ture glory in prefent humility, in feares,in forrowes, in labours and in temp- 
tations , ioying onely inhope when (hee ioyeth asthe fhould , many rebrobate 
liue amongft the ele@&: both come into the Gofpells Net,and both {wim ar 
randon in the fea of mortalicy,vntill che fifhers draw them to fhore,and then Na 


A 


Lrsa8. . OF THE CITIE OF-GOD. 41 


are thtowne from 'the good, i; whomas in his Temple,Godis allinall. We ac- 
knowledge therefore bis words inthe pfalme. ,/ wowld declare and [peake of them, re 
but they are more then 1 am able toexpreffe,to be traly fulfilled. This multi plication vad 
began at that inftane when firft ob his Meflenger , and then himfelfe in perfon 
began to fay, Amend your lines for the Kingdome of Gods at band, He chofe him dif. 
ciples,and named the A poftles : poore,ignoble,vnlearned men, that what great 
worke foewer was done hec might bee (eené to doe it inthem. He had one,whoa- 
bufed his goodneffe, yet vied hee this wicked man to a good end,to the fulfilling 
of his paffion and prefenting his church an example of patience in tribulation, 
And hauing fowne fufficiently the feed of faluation,he fuffered , was buried and 
rofeagaine;(hewing by his fuffering what wee oughe to endure for the truth,and 
by his refurrection what we ought for to hope of eternity, (2) befides the ineffa- 
ble Sacrament of his bloud,fhed for the remiflion of finnes . Hee was forty daies 
onearth with his difciples afterwardes , andin their fight afcended co. heauen, 
ten daies after fending downe his promifed {piric vpon them : which inthe com- 
ming , gauc that manifeft and neceflary figne of the knowledge in languages of 
all nations , to fignifie that iz was but one Cactholikechurch, that in all thofe nati- 
ons fhould vieall chofe tongues. — : 


L. VIVES. 


Efides (2) the ineffable} For Chrifts fuffrance , and hislife hath not onely leaft vs the era 
of the Sacraments, but of his example alfo,whereby to dircét ourfelues in all good courfes 


The Gofpell predchedand glovidully compirmed by the bloud of the preachers ‘ 


HAP. 50. 


ANd then, asit is written , The law {hall goe forth of Zion , and the word of 

L d the Lord from Terufalem, and as Chrift had fore-told, when as (his difciplies 
being aftonifhed at his refurreCtion) he opened their vnderftandings in the {crip- 
tures, and told them chat it was written thus : Jt behowed Chriff to fuffer,and to 1) ee ee 
againe the third day and that repentance,and remi([ion of finnes fhould bee preached in Tukr4,46 
bis name amongft all nations beginning at lerufalens:and where they asked hin of *7 
his fecond comming,and he anfwered, /t #s nat for you to know the times andfeafons 
which the father. hath put in his owne power : but you {ball receiue power of the Holte 
Ghoft when hee {hall come upon you and you [balbe witneffes of mee in lernfalem,and in 
all lury and in Samaria ,and unto the vimoft partof the earth : Fir the churchf pred 
it felfe from Ierufalem , and then through Iudza ,and Samaria,and chofe lights 
of the world bare the Gofpell vnto other.nations : for Chrift had armed them, 
faying. Feare not them that killthe body but are not able to izil the foule : they had “#1925 
the heate of loue thatkept out the cold of feare: finally bytheirperfonswho 
had feene him aliue , and dead, and aliue againe: and by the horrible perfecuti- 
ons endured by their fucceflors after their death,and by che ever conquered/to 
others vnconquerable ) tortures of the Martires , the Golpell was diffufed: 
throngh all che habitable world: GOD going with it in Miracles,in verrues,and 
in guifts of the Holy Ghoft: in fo much that the nations beleeuing inhim who 
fuffcred for their Redemption, in chriftian loue did hold the bloud of thofe 

| : Martires 


_~- 


Martiresin reuerence, which before they had thed in barbaroufneffe , and the 
Kings whofe edicts affli&ed the church came humbly to be warriours vnder that 
banner which they cruelly before had fought veterly to abolith : beginning now 
to perfecute the falfegods , for whom before they had perfecuted the feruants 
of thetrueGOD. 7 


That the Church ts confirmed ewen by the {chifmes of Herefies. 


Cuap. 51. 


N Ow the deuill feeing his Temples empty & al running vnto this Redeemer, 
fet heretiques on foote to fubere Chrift, in a chriftia vizar, as if there were y 
allowance for them in the heauenly Ierufalem which their was for contrariety of 
Philofophers in che deuills Babilé. Such therfore as in the church of God do dif- 

taft any thing, and/2)being checked & aduifed to beware, do obftinately oppofe 
themfelues againft good inftructions , and rather defend their abhominations 

then difcard them , thofe become Heretikes,and going forth of Gods Houfe,are 
tobeheldas our moft eager enemies : yet they doe the members of rhe Catho- 

like Church this good ,that their fall maketh chem take better hold vpon God, 

who vfeth euill to a good end, and worketh all for che goodof thofe that loue 

him. Sothenthe churches enemies whatfoeuer , ifthey haue the power to im- 

pofe corporall affliaid, they exercife her patience.if they baite her with with op- 

pofition onely verbal, they practife her in her fapience: and fhee in louing thefe 

enemies excercifeth his beneuolence,and bounty, whether fhee goe about them 

with gentle perfwafion or feuere correction: and therefore though the deuill 

her chiefe opponent, mooue all his veffells againft her vertues, cannot iniure her 

aninch . Comfore fhe hath in profperity, to bee confirmed , and conftant in ad- 

verfity : and excercifed is fhee in this,to bee kept from corrupting in that: Gods 
providence managing the whole: andfo tempering the one with the other that 

the pfalmift fayd fitly . 2 the multitude of the cares of mine heart thy comforts hane 

Piil.g4,1g toyed my foule. And the Apoftle alfo: Resoycéng in hope and patient in tributation, 
Rom.12, For the fame Apottles words faying, Al that will Lue Godly in Chrsft {ball fuffer per- 
5 Tim, 3 » fecution mutt be held to be in continuall a@tion:for though 4b externo, abroad,all 
feeme quiet,no guft of trouble appearing, & that is a great comfort,to the weake 
efpecially : yet at home,ad satus,there doe wee never waat thofe that offend and | 

moleft the Godly pilgrim by their deuillifh demeanour, blafpheming Chrift and 
the Catholike name, which how much dearer the Godly efteeme,fo much more 

griefe they feele to heare, if lefle refpected by their pernictous brethren then 

they defire it fhould bee :and the Heretiques themfelues, beeing held to haue 
Chrift,and the Sacraments amongft them, greeue the hearts of the righteous ex- 
treamely , becaufe many that hauea good defire tochriftianity, ftumble at their 
diffentions , and againe many that eppofe ic, cake occafion hereby to burden it 

with greater calamities : the Heretiques bearing the name of chriftiansalfo, 

Thefe perfecutions befall Gods true feruants by the vanity of others errours, al- 

though they be quiet in their bodily eftate : this perfecution touchezh the heart, 

and notthe body: as the pfalme faith, ss the multstude of the cares of mine heart: 

not of my body. But then againe , when wee revolue the immutability of Gods 
promifes, who as the Apoftle faith, ksoweth who be his , whom hee hath predefti- 

nate to (b) be made like the Image of his Sonne, their fhall not one of thefe bee 

peediceceea ~ aes meg eadnta ange ) bi 


Lint 8. OF THE CITIE OF GOD, 743° 
loft: therefore the pfalme addeth. Thy comforts haue ioved my [onle. Now the for- 

row that the Godly feeleth for the peruer{neffe of euill, or falfe chriftians,is 

good for their owne fouls, if it proceed of charity , not defyring their deftruc= 
tion nor the hindrance of their faluation: and the reformation of {uch yeeld- cee 
eth gceatcomfortto the deuout foule , redoubling the ioy now , for the griefe ow eee 

thac it felt before for their errors. Sothen in thefe malignant daies, not onely Godly. 

from Chriftand his Apoftles time,but euen from holy C4eZwhom his wick- 

ed brother flew, fo along ynto the worlds end , doththe church trauell oh hit 
pilgrimage , now fuffering worldly perfecutions , and now receiuing dinine 

. confolations. a , oe 


L. VIVES. | 
Bes (a)checked | Heretiques are firft to be quietly inftrnéted by the church, & letten now 


that their.pofitions are vnchriftian : which if they obftinately auer,then their contumacy is 
as pernicious to their foules as their dogtrine.(b ) To be made] Made,is not in Saint Pasis text. 


Whether the opinion of fome, be credible phat there fhalbe no more 
perfecutions after the ten,paft but the eleauenth, 
ae which is that of Antichrifts, | 


Cuap, 52. 


BY I thinke thar that is not to be rafhily affirmed , which fomedoe thinke vie, 
&/that the church fhall fuffer no more perfecutions vatill Antichrifts ’ 
time,then the ten already paft,that his fhalbe the eleauenth and laft. The/a) firft 
was vnder Wero,the (b)fecond by Dométian, the third by Traian, the (c) fourth by 
Antoninas, the(d)fift by Senerus thee fixe by Aaximinus,the(f) feauenth by De. 
cinsthe(g)cight by Valeriaz,the(h) ninth by Aurelian,the/s) tenth by Diccletian, 
& Maximian.For fomehold(k/the plauges of Egipt being ten innumber before 
Ifraels freedome,to haue reference vnro thefe, Antichrifts eleauenth perfecutié 
being like the Egyptians purfuite of Ifrael in che read {ea,in which they were all 
drowned. But Itakenot chofe euents in Egipt to bee any way pertinent vnto 
thefe, esther as prophecies, or figures , although they that hold other-wife haue 
madeavery ingenious adaptation of the one to thcother , but not by the fj pirie 
of prophecy , but onely by humaine conieture , which fome-times may erre,as 
well as not :for what will they that hold this affirme of the perfecution wheres 
in Chrift was killed? What ranke fhall chat haue amongft the reft? If they except 
_ this,andhold that {uch onely are tobe reckned as belong tothe bo¢y andnotto. 
the head , what fay they to thacafter the afcenfion, where Stewen was ftoned,and 
James the brother of Johx beheaded , and Peser fhut vp for the laughter but that 
the Angell freed him ? where the brethren were chafed fiom Ierufalem, and 
- Saul,(atterwards madean Apoftle and called Paul) plaied the purftuant amongft 
them, haling them out to deftrudtion ? and where he himfelfealfobeing conuer- 
ted,and preach ing the faith which hehad perfecuted, {uffered fuchaffliionsas 
_ aforetimes hee had! laid vpon others, wherefoeuer hee préached,vnto lewesot 
Gentilesewhy dothey begin at Wero,when the church was néuer without perfe- 
eations ofall the time before, wherofit is too tedious to recount the perticulars, 


If 


744 SAINT AV GVSTINE. . - Suanga. 
. ) \ 


If chey will not beginne but at perfecutions by a King , why(/) Herod was aKing, 
who did the church extreame iniury after Chrifts afcention? Againe (m) why 
arenot Julians villanies reckned amnongft the ten? waspot heea perfecutor that 
(#) forbad to teach the chriftians the ltberall artes? Was not(o) Valentinian the 
elder (who was the third Emperor after him ) depriued ofhis generallthip , for 
conféffing of Chrift? to (p) leaueall che maffacres begun at Aatioche , by chis 
wicked Apoftata,vntill one faithfull and conftant young man yng in tortures an 
whole day,continually finging pfalmes , and prayfing of G O D, did with his pa- 
tience fo terrific the aye Atheift that hee was both afraid and afhamed 
toproceed. Now laltly (q) Valews,and Arrian,brother to the aboue-naimed 
Valentinian shath not hee affliGed the eafterne church with all extreamity,e- 
uen now before our eyes ? What alame confideration is irto colle& the per- 
fecutions endured by an yniuerfall church vnder one Prince , and in one nation, 
and not in another ? cannota church fo farre diffufed , fuffer aff@i@ion inone 
perticalar nation but it mutt fuffer in all? perhaps they will not haue the chrif- 
tians perfecution in Gothland, (r) by: their owne King for one , who martired 
arhany true Catholikes,'as wee heard of divers brethren who had feene, it living 
inthofe parts whenthey were children : and (/) what fay chey to Perfia 2 Hath 
riot the perfecution there, chafed diuers euen vneo the rownes of the Romanes? 
Ic may be now quiet, but itis morethen weecantell. Now ail chefe confidera- 
tions laid together , and fuch like as thefe are,maketh methinke that che number 
of the churches perfecutions is not to bee defiried : bur to affirme that there may 
bee many infli@ed by other Kings before chat great and affured one of Anti- 
chrift ; were as rath an affertion as the other: let vs therefore leaue it in the 
midft, neither affirming nor contradi@ing , but onely controwling the rathneffe 
of both in others. | 


- 2 L. VIVES. 

Suctovius He firft (a) was} Of thefe writeth Eufeb.Hift. Eccl. of this firlt Sweronsas and Tacitus make 
and Teci. ~~ mention , Suetonixs calling the chriftians men of new and pernicious fuperfistion. in Nerone, 
tus again And Tacitas calleththem , Hated for their wickedneffe, guilsy,and worthy of vutmoft puns{bment, 
pa chtiftie 756. 5- Oh fenceleffe men, Taciens and Suetonius» Can your beftiall and luxurious Jone {ceme 2 
God vnto you , and Chrift {eeme none? call you an vnion in innocency , execrable fuperftiti- 
on,and hold you them worthy of punifhment.whofe chiefe lawes is, to doe no man hurt,and 
all men good ? If you haue not read our lawes why condemne you vs? If you haue, why re- 
prooue you vs , fecing wee embrace thofe vertues which your beft writers fo highly admire. 
(b) The fecond | Nero's three ended ynder Ue(pafian,who fuffred the chriftians to liue in qui- 
et,and fo did his fonne Tétxs after him. But Domitianns Calnus Nero, co prouc himfelfe right 
Nero , begunne the perfecution againe , banifhing Saint Jobs into Pathmos : This , and the 
third of Traian , is all one: for Domitian begunne it and it lafted ynto Traian, fucceffor vnto 
Neraa,who {ucceeded Domstias , and held the Empire little more then ayeare. There isan 
Epiftle extant vnto Traian from Pliny the younger,Regent of Afia, askiag how he woul haue 

*. himico vie the chriflians, feeing ee ie no hurt in them,reckning vp their hureleffe mectings, 
praiers, hymnes,communions,&¢. and affirming that the name {pred fo farre that the altars of 

the gods cooled, and the priefts were almolt farued. Traian biddeth him not feeke them out, 

bur if they bee accufed ynto him punifh them , vnleffe they will recant &c. [ O would wee 

.. cthriftians could vfethis moderation vneto others. ]In this perfecution was Sinton Cleopbas 

ve aren: fecond Bifhoppe of Ierufalem,marcired, (¢) The fourth |For Adrian was a fecret fauourite of 
‘Chrift,and would haue deified him amongft his other gods,bue that fome told him,all che reft 

would goc downe if Chrift once came vp , Astoninus Pins alfo did lighten their affliGion by 

ut | | Fo 


Domitian. 


/ 


: ‘ cesieapegescia . See | = ee ee renee ‘ | ) ; ‘ : 
L318. OF THECITIE OF GOD. . 7A5 


enedidt. But this Axtonine that caufed the forthperfecution was the Philofopher who rue¢ Policarpe 
led with Antonius verus - In this perfecution were Policarpe and ‘Pionins martyred. in Afi: Pionmus 
and many in France, whofe fufferings are left recorded./a/fime martir alfo fuffred at this time martires. 
Exfeb.lib.4.Hift.Eccl.(d) The fift by Seuens.}He had good fortune to become Emperor,for hee Juttine. 
was an African,a fierce and bloudy fellow.He forbad Chriftianity vpon a deadly penalty.(e£/, SeasrUs, 
Spartian.) and plagued the Chriftians all Egypt ouer ; chietely in Thebais Eujeh.Eccl. Aift.Lb. ye 
5. Alexander Bifhop ot Hierufalem was martyred at this time, (¢ ) The fixe, | Maximinus was a pooximinis 
Thracian borne , his father aGoth , his mother a Scythian : barbarois in actcent , body and 

mind. His ftrength preferd him from acommon foldiorto acommanuer. And e4lexander 
Mammeaher founc being killed, the foldiours made him Empcror.. He was moft proud and 

crucll, He perfecuted the priefts, as the efpeciall caufers of chriftianiry Ex/e. (f) By Decins.} Decias, 
Borne in Bubalia, a part of the lower Pannonia. He foyled Philip the Emperor ina ciuill frght, 
~ and he then fucceded in his place : hating the Chriftians fo much more becaufe Phillip fauo- 

red them , and putting them to exquifite torments : S.Lawrence, he broyled.£sutrop. Yet ruled | 
he but one yeare , what would he haue done hadhe continued ? Fabraz alfo the Bifhop of 5 Laurcnce 
Rome was martyred vnder him.( g )By Valerian, |Who was crownedthree yeares after Decins tye B, - 
He was moft vnfortunate: for Sapor King of Perfia tooke.him in fight, and made him his v. ae 
blocké to mount his horfe by. Gadiex and he were ioynt Emperors , vnder whometne Empire — 

fell greatly to decay - no maruell , being both deiected , fluggifh lvmpes. In this perfectition 
was S.(jyprian Bifhop of Carthage martired. (4) By Anrelian, \Third Emperor after Galen, A Cyprian, 
Dane; very fortunat in wasre , but bloudy and Barbarous , fit for an Empire, and for nothin g Aurelian, 
elfe: hated, ( and fo flayne ) by his owne friends, who killed him as he went from Byzance to __ 
Herculea. ( i) Diocletian. |Sonne to Salon , a dalmatian,he afpired to the Empire by the con- Diocletian, 
tentions of others, and ioyned Maximianus Herculeus with him, the better to withftand the "8 
ingruent warre. Hee was futtle, and cruell, and could eafily lay his butcheries on anothers 

necke, Afaximian was Batbarous,andbrutifh euenin Afpectt,and ferued for Diocletians hang. 

man , who grew to fuch pride that he commanded him-felfe to be adored asa God , and that. 

his foote fhould be kiffed , whereas before, they vfed but to kiffe their hands ; he prefecuted 

the Church and on Eafter-weeke,the ninteenth yeare of his raigne,commanded all che Chur- 

ches to be pulled downe, and the Chriftians to bee killed. Decins his perfecution was the 

greateft, but this was the bloudieft.(& ) ThePlagues of Egipt. } This is Orofixe his opinion. 


e+ - ene. 


; 1) Herod.| His fonne vnder whome Chrift was borne. ( ) Iulian.|The Apoftata,firt ration the 
4 Chriftian , and after-wards an Atheift. He fhed no Chriltian bloud , but vfed wounderfull Apoftata, 
deceites to draw men from Chrift : a bitter kind of perfecution , raking more hearts from God | 
_ by thatone meanes,, then allthe violence before had done.(# ) Forbad to teach the liberall 
artes. )His edi&t was torne in peeces by S. ohn, There was one Proberefius a Sophitter of 
Czfarea,who comming to Athens was receiued with great applaufe of the people , to whome 
he made an extemporal] oration in a frequent audience. Julian allowed leaue onely vnto him 
to teach the Chriftians : but che learned man hating that Barbarous edict , forfooke the rowne - 
and fcholers ; tothe Lae greefe of the ftudents. (0 ) Valentinian.) An Hungarian, captaine Valentinian 
of che targatyers,and faluted Emperor by-the foldiours Being a Chriftian vnder Jw/ian,he was the clder., 
_ commanded either to facrifice vnto the Idols orto refigne bis place , which hee refigned wil- 
hngly , and foone after Ju/ian being flaine,and Jowinian dead, he reigned Emperor, receiuing 
that for his captaine-fhip chat he had loft for Chrifts fake.Ewtrop, His fonne, Ualentinian the 
ounger ruled firft with Gratéax and then with Theodofins the great.(p ) dt Antioche.|{ulian 
Yad fe Chtiftians remoue the tombe of the martire Babylas to fome other place,fothey went —* 
about it finging the Pfalme when IJrael went out of re. Which Intian hearing was vexed, & Pfa,at4. 
caufed divers of them tobe put to torments. Salu/tiws was he that had the charge,who tookea 
young-man called Theodorus , and put him to moft intollerable torments, yet he neuer mo- 
ued , but with a ioyfull countenance continually fung the .Pfalme that the Church fungthe - 
day before, which Saluf? feeing , hee returned himto prifon , and went to Julian, telling. 
him that ifhee tortured any more of them, it would redownd to their glory and his fhame; 
where-vpon hee ceafed. Exfebins faith that him-felfe talked with this Theodorss at Antioch 
and asked him if hee felt no payne ; who ee no : forthere ftood a young-man behind 
me 


Valens, 


2.Theff,s 
8, 


- SAINT AV GVSTINE. ; | C uar.53 


me in a white raiment,who oftentimes fprinckled cold water vpon me,and wiped my {weat 2- 
way with a towelhas white as {now, fo that it was rather paine to mee to bee taken from the 


_ racke. (7). Valens) An Arrian : when e-‘ugnffixe was a youth,this Emperour made a law that 


Monkes fhould goe to the warres, and thofe that would not, hee fent his fouldiors to beate 

them to death with clubbes, An huge company of thofe Monkes liued in the deferts of E- 

gipt. Exfeb.Emtrop. Orof. (r) By their owne) Immediatly after Ualens his death : Arianifme as 

then raging in the church. ({) J» Perfia]) Vader King Gororanes , a depillith perfecutor who 

raged becaufe ebdias an holy bifhop had burnt downe all the Temples ofthe Perfians great 

Bod: their fire. Caffiod. Hsft.sripsb. 10, Sapor alfo perfecuted fore in Conftantines time, a little 
efore this of Gororanes. 


Of the unknowne time of the laft per/ccution. 
C uap. 530 


T He laft perfecution vnder Antichrift , Chrifts. erfonall prefence fhall ex- 
tinguith. For, He {hall confume him with the breath of his mouth and abol:{h hin 
with the brightneffe of bis wifdome,faicth the Apoftle . And here is an vfuall quetti- 
on: when fhall this bee? itis a faucy one. Ifthe knowledge of it would haue. 
done vs good, who would haue reuealed it fooner then Chrift vnto his difci- 
ples? for they were not bird-mouthed vnto him , but asked him, faying: Lord 
wilt thou at this time (a) reftore the Kingdome to Ifrael. But what {aid he ? /t % not 

or yeuto knowe the (b) times or feafons which the Father hath put in his owne power. 

hey asked him not of the day or houre, but ofthe time , when hee anfwered 
them thus. Invaine therefore doe wee ftand reckning the remainder of the 
worlds yeares , wee heare theplainetruthtell vs , st befits us not to know them. 
Some talke how it (hall laft 400. fome fiue hyndered, fome a thoufand yeares af- 
ter the Afcenfion , euery one hath his vie , it were in vaine to ftand oe 


- vpon what grounds; In a word, their conictures are all humane, grounde 
- vpon no éertenty of {cripture . For hee thar faid, Jt 2s wot for you to know the 


A damna- 
ble fiona 
acct , 
Peter of 


forcery. 


times crc. ftoppes all your accounts:.and biddes you leaue your calcula- 
tions. 

But (c) this beeing an Euangelicall fentence , I wonder notthat it was not 
of power to refpreffe the audacious fictions of fome infidels touching the con- 
tinvance of chriftian religion, For thofe ,.obferuing chat thefe greareft per- 
fecutionsdid rather increafe then fuppreffe the faith of CHRIST, intiented 
‘a fort of greeke verfes (like as if they had besne Oracle ) conteyning how 
CHRIST was cleare of this facreledge.Sut that Peter had by magike foun- 
ded the worfhip of thename of CHRIS T for three hundered three fcore and 
fiue yeares,and at that date, it fhould veterly ceafe.Oh learned heads ! Ohrare 
inuentions ! fitto beleeue thofe things of CHRIST fince you will not be- 
leeuc in CHRIST: towit ,that Peter learned magikeof CHRIST: yet was 
he innocent :and thathis difciple was a witch , and yet had rather haue his Mai- 
ftersname honoredthenhis owne , working to that end with his magike , with 
toile,with perills,and laftly with the effufion of his bloud ! If Peters witch-crafe 
made the world lone CHRIST fo well ,whathad CHRIST S innocence 
done that Peter Chould loue him fo well ? Let chem anfwere , and (if they can) 
conceive thatit wasthat fupernall grace that fixed CHRIST in the hearts 
of the nations for the attainment of eternall blifle: which grace alfo made — 

: . Peter 


IE A eg LT IIS SILL II AG I 


L118. _ OF THECITIE OF GOD. ~ 947 


= ee eee + 


_ Peter willing to endure a temporall death for CHRIST , by him to bee 
receiued into the fayd eternity... And what goodly gods‘are thefe that can 
prefage thefe things and yet not pretent them ? but are forced by one 
witch and (as they affirme) by one (c) child-flaughtring facrifice ,to fuffer a fe@ 
fo iniurions to them to preuaile ‘againft them folong time , and to beare downe 
all perfecutions by bearing them with patience , and to deftroy their Temples, 
Images , and facrifices > which of their gods is it ( notieofours ic is ) that is 
compelled to worke thefe effe&s by fuch a damned oblation ? for the ver- 
fes fay that Peter dealt not with a deuill , but wich a god , in his magicall - 
operation. Such a god haue they , that haue nor CHRIST for their 


GOD. | 


L. VIVES. 


AT ithistioe (a) reffore) So it mit bee read,not reprefent, (b) Le not for you) He forbid~ Againt_ 
*déth all curiofity, referuing the knowledge of things to come onely to himfelfe, Now let ca'eulators, 

my figure-flingers,and mine old wiues ’, that hold Ladiesand fcarlet potentates by the cares, 

with tales of thus and thus it fhalbe; let them all goe packe . Nuy fir he doth iby Chrifts 

command: why very good, you fee what Chrifts command is. Yet haue wee no fuch de- 

light as in lies of this nature,and that maketh them the bolder in their fictions , thinking thac — 

wee hold their meere defire to tell true , a great matter in fo ftranpea cafe. (c) Exangelicall) 

Spoken by Chrift, and written by an Euangelift. Indeed Chrifts afcenfion belongeth tothe 

Gofpelland that Chap. of the Actes had been added.to the end of Lwkes Gofpell but thathig* 
tae would haue made a feperation. (@ ) (bsld-flanghtering | The Payans vied to vp- Killing of 

paid the Chriftians much with killing of Children. Tertwll eApologet.tc was a filthy lie, In~ children 

deed the (ataphrygians and the Pepuzséans, two damned feéts of herefie,vfed to prick a yong hee Pier 

-childes body all ouer with needles , and fo to wring out the bloud,wherewith they tempered eech, 

their paft for che Eucharifticall bread. Aug.ad Onodvnitd.So vied the Enchite and the Groffici, Cataphty- 

for to driue away deuills with. Pfe//. But this was euer held rather villanies of magike then giante 

rites of chriftianicy. pO | 


The Pagans foolsfoneffe in affirming that Chriftianity fbonld 
: iff 04t 26) .yehres. 


Citar. 54. 
| Could gather many fuch as this, ifthe yeare were not paft chat thofeliés pre- 
fixed and thofe fooles expe@ed. But feeing itis now aboue three hundered 
fixty fiue yeares, fince Chrifts comming in che fle(h,and the A poftles preaching 
his naine , what needech any plainer confutation. For to ommit Chtifts infancy 
and child-hood wherein he had no dilciples syet after his baprifme in lordan,by 
John , as foone as he called fomedifciples to him, his name affiredly began to bee 
diuulged,of whom the Prophet had {aid, hee [ball rule from fea to fea,and from the 
 yiner to the lands end. Butbecaufe the faith was not definitiuely decreed vntill 
afeer his paffton, to wit , in his re(urrectionsfor fo faith Saint Paw/td the Athe- 
nians: Now hee admoni{beth all men enery where,to repent , betaufe hee hath Appotn= > 
tedadaie in which hee wilhindge the world in vightcoufneffe . by that man in whom AG&,17, 30 
heehath appointed s fasth unto all men, inthat bee hath railed him from the acad: 
Wee thall doe better for the folution of this queftion, t© beginne atthat time, 
S{f 2 | chiefely 


— ees - a 7 


748 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. | Cuarsa 


chiefly becaufe then the Holy Spirit defcended vpon that fociety wherein the 


fecond law the New Teftament was to bee profefled , according as Chrift had 
romifed. For the firft law ,the Old Teftament was giuen in Sine by cMay/es, 
Buc the later which Chrift was to giue was prophecied in thefewords: The 
law {hall gee forth of Zion , and the word of the LORD from lerufalem,. There- 
forehee faid himfelfe that it was fit that repentance fhould bee preached in 
his name throughoyt all nations , yet beginning ac Terufalem. There then be- 
anne the beleefe in CHRIST crucified and rifen againe. There did this 
faith heatethe heartes of divers thoufands already, who fold their goods to giue 
to the poore and came cheerefully co CHRIST and tovoluntary pouerty, 
withftanding theaffalts of che bloud-thirfty lewes with a pacience ftronger thea 
an armed power. | 
If this now were not done by Magike, why might not the reft, inall che 
world bee as cleare? But if Peters magike had made thofe men honour Chrift, 
who both crucified him and derided him beeing crucified , then] aske them 
when their three hundered three {corce and fiue yeares muft haue an end? 
CHRST died inthe(¢ ) two Gemin?s confulfhippe ,the eight of the Calends 


_ of Aprillsand rofe againe che third daie, as the Apoftles {aw with their eyes, 


a es 
Z e 


and fele wich their hands: fortie daies after afcended hee into Heaueén , and 
tenne daies after ( that is fiftie after the refurreCtion )came the Holy Ghoft, 
and then three thoufand men belceuedinthe Apoftles preaching of him , So 
that then his name beganne to [pread , as wee beleeue, aad it was truely proo- 
ued,by the operation of the Holy Ghoft : butas the Infidels feigne , by Peters 
magike. And foone after fiue thoufand more belecued through the preach- 
ing of Pas/, and Peters miraculous curing of one that had beene borne lame and 
day begging atthe porch of the Temple: Peter with one word. Zsthe name of 


var LORD IESVS CHRIST , fet him found vpon his feete. Thus the 


_ church gotte vppe by degrees. Now reckon the yeares by the Confulls from 


tians be- 
leeue not 
an Peter 


the defcenfion of the Holie Spirie that was ia the Ides of Maie, vnto the 
confulthippe of () Honorius, and Extychian,and you fhall finde full chree hunde- 
red three {coreand flue yeares, expired. Now inthenexc yeare, inthe conful- 
fhip of (¢) Theodorus Manlins when chriftianity fhoald haue beene veterly gone 
( according tothat Oracle of deuills , or fiction of fooles : ) what is done in other 
places , wee neede not inquire, but for that famous cittie of Carthage wee 
know that Jossus and Gaadentins ,two of. Homorius his Earles ,camethether on 
the renthofthe Calends of Aprill, and brake downe all the Idols , and pulled 
downetheir Temples. tt rere é | 
_Itjsnow thirty yeares agoe fince , ( almoft).and what increafe chriftianity 
hath had fince , is apparant inowgh : and partly, by 4 many whom the expeda- 


The chef. 10 OF the fulfilling of that Oracle kept from beeiag reconciled to the truth, 


who fince are come into the bofome of, che church , difcouering the ridicu- 
loufneffe of chat former expeGation. But. wee that are chriftians re ¢ ere, 
in deed and name,doe not beleeuein Peter, but in (f) him that Peter belecued in. 


CHRIST, Weeare edifyed by Peters fermons of Chrift,but not bewitched by his charmes 


nor deceiued by his magike, but furthered by his religion. CH RIT, thae 
taught Peter the doctrine of eternitie., teacheth. vs: alfo . But now it is 


time to fet an end to this booke , wherein as farre.ds neede was wee haue 


runne along with the courfes of the. Two Citties in their confufed 
| a | “ove Sse . progrefie 


ri . 
a 
ia Fi - 


ane eee eater aan eee 
Lis7 8. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 749 
progreffe: che one of which , the Babilon of the earth, hath made her falfe gods 

of mortall men, feruing them and facrificing to them as (hee thought good, but 

the other,the heauenly lerufalem fhee hatch ttucke to the onely andtrueG OD, 

and is his true and pure facrifice her felte. But both of thele doe feele onetouch 

of good and euill forrune,but not with one faith, nor one hope,nor one law : and 
‘at length, ac the Jaft iudgement they fhall bee feucred for ever, and cither thall 
receine the endleffe reward of their workes. O. thefe tw oendes wee are now 

to difcourfe. , | . 


a 2 ee 0 9 0 re rn EE Pe ONE Be TO Rt IED, G* SD 


| L.VIVES.. 
1% the (a) two] Firft,fure iris , Chrift fuffered vnder Tyberius the Emperor.Lake the Euange-The time. 
lift maketh his baptitme co fallin the fifteenth yeare of Tyberins hisreigne, Sothen his paf- of Chu.fts 
fion mult be in the ei ;hteenth or ninteenth,for three yeares hee preached faluation. Hier. So de 
faith Exfebins,alledginy heathen teftimonies of that memorable eclips of che Sunne,as name- 
ly ouc of Phlegon ,a writer ofthe Olympiads: who faith that inthe fourth yeare of che two 
hundered and two Olympiade (the eighteenth of Tyberins his reigne ) the greateft eclips be~ 
fell thac euer was. It was midnight-darke at noone-day , the Rarres were all vifible , and an 
earth-quake fhooke downe many houfes is Nice a city of Bythinia, But the ewo Cemini,Rw- 
bellius,and Fufins , were Confulls in the fifteenth yeare of Tyberins , as is cafily prooued out of 
Tacitus Lb. 5.and out of Lattantins ib, 4. cap.) o, where hee faith chat in that yeare did Chrift 
futfer,and himdoth Axguffine follow here. But Sergins Galba ( afterwards Emperor)and L, 
Sylla were Confulls in thee: ghreenth yeare.(b) Honersus and | nthe confuithip of theie two, 
Stilicon draue the Gothes and Vandals into Italy . Hoxorins the Emperor beeing Confull che 
fourth time, Profper faith this was not vatill the. next ycare, Stslicom and eAurelian beeing 
Conf. (¢}) Theodorss } Clandian made an exellent Panegyrike, for his confulfhip,« herein hee 
fheweth that hee had beene Contul before . Profper avaketh hum Corsfull before Honorius his 
fourch Confulfhip, but J thinke chisis an error in the time,as well as inthe copie. For it mult 
bee read, Beeing the fecond time Con{ul.Entrepins the Eunuch was made Confull with hin,bue 
- foone after hee was put to death. Wherevpon it may bee that Extropéms his name was blotted 
out af the regiftcrs,and Theodorus Mankus ( hauing no fellow’ was taken for cwo,7 beodorus 
and Manlius as Caffiodorus taketh him,but miftakes himafelfe. Yet about that.time,they began 
to haue but one Confull. (4) Now 30.yeares| Vito the third yeare of Theodo/ins Innior,where~ 
in eAnguffine wrote this. (¢) Jz hims that Peter] For who és Pauland who és Apollo ? the mini 


frers by whom you beleene, 


Finis libs 18: 


} S{f 3 


730 


. after rhe paling of this worlds affisttions. 


—andenill, which the Philofophers held to bee 


_ THE CONTENTS OF THE 
nineteenth bookeof the City of God. 


That Varro obferued 288. fettes of the Phi- 14. Of tbe law of Heanen and Earth,which 
lophers , in their queftion of the perfection of \ fwayeth humaine fociety by councell , and unte 
goodneffe. which councell humaine fociety obeyeth, 

‘ 2. Warro his reduttion of the finall goodout | — 15.Natnres frecdome cy bondage,caufed by 
of al thefe differences unto three heads,G& three \ _finne;in which man is a flaue to his own af feels, 
definitions,one onely of which is the true one. thouch he be not bend-man to any one befides. 

3. Varro his choife among ft the three fore- 16.Of the inft law of fonerainty. 
name fetts folowing therin the opinion of An« | 17. The grounds of the concord and difcord 
tiochus,anthor of the old Academicall fet. betwixt the (ities of Heaven and Earth,. 

4.The Chriftians opsnton of the checfeft good 18. That tke fufpended dottrine of the new 
Academy oppofeth the conftancy of Chriftiansty 

19.Of the habit and manners belonging toa 

riftian, — 

20.Hope,the bliffe of the heanenly { stizens, 
during this life. 


within themfelues. * 
5. Of lining fociabiy with onr neighbours: 
how fit it is,and yet how {ubietl to croffes. | 
6.The error cf humaine indgements in cafes | 
where truth is not knowne. ' ' 28, Whether the (itty of Rome bad ener a 
7.Difference of language animpediment tobu- | true common-wealth according to Scipio's deo 
maine foceety. The miferies of the iunfteftwars. finition of a common-wealth,in Tully. 
8. That true friendhip cannot be fecnre, a- | 22. Whether Chrif? the Chriftians God be he 
mong? the inceffant perrills of thts prefent life. | unto whome oncly fucrifice is to be offered, 
9.The friendfbip of boly eAngells with mex;'' 23. Porphery His relation of the Oracles 
undifcernable in this life, by reafow of thé ds- | touching (hrift. | 
wells,whom al the Infidells tooke te be good pow- 24, defizition of a people, by which , beth 
ers and gane them dinine honors. — the ‘Remans and other kingdomes may Chal- 
10.The rewards that the Saints are toreceme | lenge them/felues common-weales. 
 25.That there can bono true vertue , where 
trne religion wanteth, 

26, The peace of i” enemies , vfefull te 
| 12, That the blondicft wars cheefe ayme ta \ the piety of his friends, as long astheir Earthly 
peace : the defire which is naturalin man. pilgrimage lafteth, | 

1 3.Of that uniner {al peace which no pertur- | 27.7 he peace of Gods feruants ; the fullneffe 


1i.The beatitude of eternall peace,and that 
trie pérfettion wherein the Saints are enftalled 


bances can feclude from the law of natures | wherof it is impoffible in this lifeto comprehend 
Gods inf? indgements difpofing of enery one ace 2.5.The end of the wicked. 
cording to his proper defert. . 


FINIS. 


751 


~—ie- 


NINETEENTH BOOKE. 
OF THE CITTIE OF GOD: 


Written by Saint Cduguftine Bifhop of Hippo; 
vnto Marcelinus. 


eS 


That Varro obferued 288 Setts of the Philofophers in their 
gueftion of the perfection of goodneffé. | 
CC 


HAP. Ia 


|| fore firft lay downetheir arguments (as farre as the quan- 
Mah} city befeeming this volume may permit ) who intend to 
mnake thein-felues vp a beatitude extant ¢uen in the conti- 
nuall misfortunes of manstemporall morcality: wherein 
my purpofe is to paralell their vaine pofitions withour af 
{ured hope which GO D hazh giuenvs, and with the obiect of that affurance, 
namely the true blefledneffe which he will giue vs ; that fo,confirming our affer- 
tions both with holy fcriptures,and with fuch reafons as are fitt to be produced 
apainft Infidels,the difference of their grounds and ours,may bee the more fully 
apparant. About that queftionof the finall good ,the Philofophers haue kept a 
wonderfuil coyle amongft thent-felues: feeking in euery cranke and cauerné 
thereof,for the true beatitude: for that is the finall good, being onely defired for 
it felfe ali other goods hauing in their attainments a reference vnto that alone. 
We do not call tiiat the finall goodwhich endeth guodneffe, chat is, which mak- 
eth it nothing : butthat which profiteth ic,which giueth it fulnefle of perfection; 
nor do wee call chat the end of afl euill, whereby it ceafeth to bee euill but that 
_ point which mifchiefe arifeth vnro, ftill referuing the mifchieuous nature, that 
we callthe end of mifchiefe.So then the great good and the createft euil, are the 

ends of all good and euill: the finali goodneffe, and the finall badneffe: About 
whichtwo there hath beene wonderfull inquifition, to auoide the finall euill and, 
attaine the finall good: this was the daily endeuour of our worldly Philofophers: | 
who though they were guilry of much exorbitance of error,yettheboundsofna- 
ture were fuch limits to their Aphori/mes that they fought no further then either 
the body,the mind,or both,wherein to place this /umum bonum of theirs. From 
this rripartite foundation hath A“, /arro in his booke De P4é/ofophza, moft wittily 
and diligently obferued 288. fe@s to have originall not in ¢//e,but in po//z,fo ma- 
ny feuerall pofitions may bee drawne from thofe threc fountaines : of which to 

make.a briefe demon ftration,I muft begin with that which hee relicarfeth in the | 
‘booke aforenamed. viz. That there are foure things which euery one defireth things defi- 
by nature, without helpe of maitter or induftry ; or chat habire of life which is ted by man 
called (.2) vertue, and is learned by degrees : namely ,eyther fenfible pleafure, *™™*" 
or fenfible reft,or both, (6 ) (which Epscurus calleth by one name of pleafureJor 
(¢ )the vniuerfall firft pofitions of nature, wherein chefé and the reft are inclu- 
ded, as in the body, health and ftrength , and in A minde, {harprieffe of witte, 


4 and 


SAINT AV GVSTINE. —  Cuap.t 


and foundneffe of iudgement : thefe foure therefgre , pleafure, reft, both, 

and natures firft pofitiues , are in the fabricke of man vnder thefe refpeas, 

thac either verrue (theeffect of dodtrine ) is to be defired for them, or for it felfe, 
or they for vertue or for themfelues. And here are foundations for twelue fects, 
for by this meanes they are all tripled : I will (how it in one, and that will make ic 
apparanc in all che reft. Bodily pleafure , being either fet ynder vertue, aboue 
it , or equall w sth it,giveth Ife to chree diuers opinions. It is vnder vertue when 
vertueruieth it and vieth ic, for it is a vertueco liue for our countries good, and 
for the fame end co beget our children: neither of which can be excluded from 
corporall delight, for wichout that wee neither eate , to liue, nor vfe the meanes 
of carnall generation. But when this pleafure is preferred before vertuc, then 
is it affe&ted in meere re(peG of ic felfe and vertues ataynementis wholly refere 


red vnto thar, thar isall vertuesa&ts muft tend to the produdtion of corporall 


pleafure, or elfe tothe preferuation of it : which is a deformed kind of life, be- 
caufetherein, vertusis flaue to the commands of voluptuoufnes - ( though in- 
deed , that cannot properly bee called vertue that is fo.) Bur yer this deformity 
could not want patronage and that by many Philofopers.Now pleafureand ver- 
tuc are ioyned in equalliry when they are both fought for them-felues ,no way 
refpecting others. Wherefore, as the fubic&tion, prehi minence, o- equality 
of vertuevnto voluptuoufneffe , maketh three feds, fodothreft, de‘ight and 
reft , and the flirft pofitiues of nature make three more inthis kinde, forthey 
haue their three places vnder , aboue, or equallto vertue, as well as che other: 
thus doth the number arife (4) vntotwelue. Now adde bur one difference to 
wit, fociety of life, ar d the « hole number is doubled : becaufe whofoeuer follo- 
weth any one of thefe cwelue fects , either dorh follow it as refpeing him-felfe 
or his feilow , to whome he ought to with afwell as himfelfe : So there may bee 
twelue men that hold chofe twelue pofitions each one for their owne refpeétjand 
other twelue that hold them in refpe& of others, whofe good they defire as much 
as their owne: Now bring inbut your (¢ ) new Academikes , aud thefetwenty 
foure fe&s become fourty eight , for euery onc of thefe pofitions may bee either 
maintained Scoically to bee certaine ( as thac ot vertuc , that it is the fole 
good ) or Accademically as vncertaine , and noc fo affuredly true, as likely 
tobecirue. Thus are there twenty foure affirming the certainetruth of thole 
pofitions , and twenty foure ftanding wholly for their vncertainry . Againe 
each of thefe poficions may be defended either in the habite of any other Philo- 
pher or (f) cf a Cynike,and this of fourty eight maketh the whole ninety fixes 

Againe thefe may either be difpuced of by {uch as profeffe meere Philofophy no 
Way entermedling with affaires of {tate , or by fuch as loue argumentation , and 
yetneuerthelcfle keepe a place in politique dire@tions and employmenis of the 
weale publike,, or by fuch as profefle both , and by a certaine viciffitude ,donow 
play the meere Pailofophers, and nowthe meere polititians: and thus is the 
number trebled, amounting to two hundred eighty andeight. Thusmuch, as 
briefely as 1 could out ot Varro, laying downe his doétrine in mine owne formes, 
Butto fhew how he confeffeth all the reft but one, ( ¢ ) and choofeth thac, as 

peculiar to the old Academukes of Péatos inftitution , ( continuing to defend 

certaine Aphor!(mes from him to (4) Polemon the forch that fucceded him) who 

are quite different from the new nought-affirming Academikes, inftitured by 

(4) CArchefilas , Polemons {ucccfle : to thew Varros opinion in this , that the old 

Academikes were free both of vncertenty and crrour. It is too tcedious to make 

- | | a ful 


See Se a | 
L319. OF THE CITIE:OF GOD. 


—_—-—— — — oe ee 
28 


ee 


_afull relation of it, yermay we lawfully ( nay and muft neceffarily)takea view o 
it in (ome cart:firft therfore he remoueth al the differences procuring this multi- 
tude of feéts his reafon is,they aynie noe at the perfection of goodnefle. For hee 
holdeth not chat worthy the name of afe& in Philotophy, (é )which différeth 
not from all others in the maine ends of good and euill: the end of all Philofophy 
being onely beatitude; which is the maine end and perfection of all goodneffe. 
This then isthe aime ofall Philofophers : and fiich as do not leuell at this are va= 
worthy that name. Wherefore in that queftion of fociety in life , whethera wife 
man (hould refpe& the perfection of goodneffe in his friend as muchas in him- 
felfe,or do all that he doth for his owne beaticudes fake : this now doth no way 
concerne the good it felfe,but the affuming or not affuming of a companion into 
the participation of it , not for ones owne fake, but for his fake that is admitted, 
whofe good the other affeéteth as hee doth his owne. And likewife in thefe new 
Acacemici{mes,whether all thefe affertions be to be heldas vncertaine , or with 
that affurance that other Philofophers defended them: the queftioa medleth not 
with the nature of chat which we are to attaine,as the end of all good , but itaf= 
keth whether there be fuch a thing or no,auerring a doubt hereof rather then an 
affirmation :that is (to be more plaine) the controuerfie is, whether the follower 


of this perfection may affirme his finall good to be certaine, or onely that it fee- 


meth fo,but may be tncertaine, atid yer both thefe intend one good And likewile 
againe,for the Cynical habice,the reality of the good is not called in queftion, 
but whether it be to be followed in fuch a fafhion of life and conuerfation or no. 
Finally there haue beene Philofophers chat haue affirmed diuerfly of the finall 
good,{ome placing it in vertue, and fome in eons and yet haue all obferued 
one Cynicall habite and forme of cariage: fothat the caufe of their being enfti- 


f 


| 753 


led fo, had nomanner of reference to the perfection that they ftudied to attaine. — 


For if it had,then fhould that end bee peculiar to that habite , and not bee com- 
municated with any other. a 


LVIVES. 


Nad (a) is learned |The old Philofophers haue a great adoe about vertues in man:whether 
E3st be by laborious acquifition,or naturall infufion. Some hold the later,and fome the firft: 
Plato is variable, Affuredly vertue is not perfited in any one with-out both,nature & exercife. 
Three things ¢octs a%@. nei doxness nature,teafon and practife,are as neceflary in the attaining 
of artes and all good habites,as a fatte foyle,a Rood feed,and a painful! husband-man,are vato 
the obteining of a fruicfull harueft. Plutarch hatha little worke, proowng vertue to bee ex 
andsfiria, (b) Which Epscwrns | Hee called both fenfible delight, and reft. full quiet by one 
onely name, Pleafure.For fo doth Tully make Torquatus an Epicure auouch, in his.firft booke 
De finibus. (¢) The vniner{ah] Thefe are moft frequent and pecuharly vicd by the Stoikes. 
Cicero vieth them in many places. (4) Unte twelve | Omit but vertue in fome of thofe refe. 
rences, and the number will arife to a farre greater fm / comparing pieafure with ret, & then 
with natures firtt pofitiues,arid then compare reft with'them, but indeed chere was neuer Phi 
lofopher fo impident,as to exclude vertue from the feate of felicisic, though he gaue.the pre- 
hetninence vuto pleafure. (¢) Vew Academicks | Herein he obferueth the vulgar opinion. For 
Varroa Tally faith, that he thinketh that Socrates inflituted that Academy of Archefilas, that 
jt was the elder,and that Plate confirmed it,& recorded the pofitions. Exe bins adgeth a third 
Academy of (arneades his infticution called the middle Academy. Prep. exang.:b.14. But 
Laertins maketh Plato the founder of the old one, Archefilas of the middle one, and Lacydas 
(bis fchollet ) of the new one. (f) Of a Cynic ke | aAntifthenes, Scholler to Socrates an 


earnefthater of pleafure , fourided this fect ; Such wert moft of the Cynikes after him, yet - 


fe, 


fome:were gtcat voluptuatics ; whete-¥pon Origen donmpartth the dogge-Aye-vrito theit 


\ 


Pl f wee 


ad a 


754 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. —— Caapa, 


fe&,who to draw others vnto the fame damnation with them,auouch luft and carnall delight 
to be the true beatitude. Je Exod, Now it were ftrange that this fhould bee meant of all, the 
old Cynikes hauing this pro serbe continually in their mouthes, J bad rather rune madde 
then eniey delight : 1: ray bee that Aéerome foiloweth Origen ,in calling Arsffippws and the 
Cynikes,the proclamers of voluptuoufneffe. In Ecclefaft. But wee haue put Cyrenaikes for 
Cynikes,for that makes the better fence. Note that Laertins faith the Cynickes are a true and 
juft {e& of Philofophers not molifyed nor deniable ypon any refpe&, (¢ ).And choofeth that} 
Which Tully alfo approoueth aboue all,as almoft pure Ariftotelias. De fis.lib.5. For Arifterle 


_ had moft of his morality that was worth ought, from his maifter Plato. (b) Polemen] Speu- 


Sippus, filters fonne to P/ate,was made Plztos fucceffor in the fchoole, but hee growing difta- 

ed,refigned the place to Yenocrates,who by one oration conuerted this Polenson from a lewd 
and luxurious youth,to becorhe an honeft and earneft obferuer of pacience: and after XYexo- 
crates death , he taught in his place. Ualer. Maximes citeth him, as an cxample of fudden 
change of manners, There was another Poleme furnamed Hellanicus,an Hiftoriographer, wee 
haue vied his authorities elfe-where. A third alfo of this name there was , a fophifter in Lae- 
dicta, (i) eArchefilu | Borne in Picane in e£olia, a Secratif, in matter aod forme : Icauing 
no more recordes of his do&ttine himfelfe, then Socrates did. (k ) Which differeth not |Hee 


that amongft the old Philofophers differed from any other in the fissnssan bonum , was forthe | 


with reputed of a contrary fect,though he agreed with them in all pofitions befides. 


Varro his reduction of she finall good ont of all thefe differences unto three 
heads and three dcfnstions, one onely of whch is the true one. 
Cap. 2. +d, 


T Herefore in thefe three forts of life, the contemplatiue, che a@iue, and the 
. mixt,if our queftion be,which of thefe we fhould obferue,we doe not med- 
dle with the finall good, bue with the eafie or hardattainement of that good, 
which accompanieth thofe three feuerall courfes: for besing attained, the finall 
good doth immediatly make the attainer bleffed.But it is neither contemplation, 
nor action,nor thefe two proportioned together, that maketh a man bleffed, for 
one may liue in any of thefe three fafhions, and yet bee farre wide from the true 
courfe to beatitude.So then,the queftions touching the end of goodnefle,which 
diftinguith all thofe fects,are farre different from thofe of fociety of life, Acade- 
micall vncertainty cynical! cariage, and that of the three courfes of conuerfati- 
on,Philofophicall, politique,and neuter. For none of all thefe doe once meddle 
with the natures of good andeuill. Wherefore Varro hauing recited the laft 
foure,whereby the whole fumme of opinions amounteth to cwo hundred eigh- 
ty eight, becaufe they are not worthy the name of fects , in that they («) make 
no mention of the good that is chiefly to be defired, he leaueth them all, and re- 
turneth to their firft rwelue, whofe controuerfic is about the maine point, Atanas 
chiefe good : out of thefe will he gather one dire truth , and thewall the reft ro 


be falfe. For firft he remooues the three forts of life, and they carry two parts of 
the number with them: fo there remaines but ninety fixe.Then go the Cynikes, 


and they carry forty eight with them: fo there remaineth bur forty eight ,then 
fend away the new Academikes with their parts , fo there remaines bnt thirty 
fixe. And then the fociall conuerfation, wich the multitude that it broughr, fo 
there remaines onely twelue,whichno man can deny to be twelue {euerall fe@s. 
For their onely difference is the higheft parts of good and euill. For the ends of 
Wt a euills lye dire@ly oppofite.So thefe twelue fedts are pro- 

uced by the triplication of thefe foure,Pleafure,reft,both, and (4) natures pri- 
mitiue affe@s and habites, which Varrocalleth Prémogenis, For they all are made 

| | | cither 


, 


a_i WE We OE Se 2 


- 
r . bs 


Lin tg. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 755 


eyther vertues inferiours,and defired onely in refpe& of her , or her fuperiours, 
and (hee defired onely for their fake: or equalls, and both are affeCtéd for their 
owne fakes : thus doe they accrew vnto twelue feuerall pofitions. Now of thefe 
foure heads Varro taketh away three : pleafure,reft,andboth vnited: not that he 
difprooues them , but that they are already idcluded in the fourth : namely the 
firft pofitiues of nature , as wellas many things more are, and therefore what 
neede they keepe a number in thistanke? So then of the three remaining deduc- 
ted from the fourth head, his difcourfe muft wholy be framed, to know which of 
them is the truth:there can bee but one true one by reafon, bee it in thefe three, 
orin fome other thing ,as wee will fee afterwards. Meane time let vs briefly 
fee Varro's choife of the three: which are thefe; whether Natures firit pofs- 
tine affects , bee to bee défired for vertues fake, or vertue for theirs, or both for 
them-felues. | : : 


“ 


L. VIVES. 
T#9¢ 4) make ie || For though their true vfe feemeto hinder, or further the chiefeft good, 
yet haue they no effentiall reference there-vnto, ( 6 ) Natures primitive | As health, 
ftrength, perfection of the fences, freedome from forrow, vigor, beauty,and fuch like: like vn= 
to which are the firft feedes of vertue in our mindes, which if depraued opinions would fuffer 
to come to niaturity,they alone were fufficient to guide vs to beatitude. 


Varro his choife among it the three fore-mamed fects, following therein the 
opinion of Antiochus, author of the old Academical fect. 
ee : Crap. 3. : 
T Hus hee beginneth to thew in which of them the truth is conteined. Firft, What maf 
becaufe the queftion concerneth not the beatitude of Gods, or beafts , or * 

trees, but of man,he holds fic to examine what man is. Two things he findeth in 
- his nature,body and foule,whereof the foule hee affirmes to bee the farre more 
excellent part. But whether the foule be onely man,and that the body be vnto ie,. 
as the horfe is to the horfe-man , that hee maketh another controuerfie of : (for 
(4) the horfe-man,is the man alone,not the horfe and man both together: yetis 
it che mans reference to the horfe , that giueth him that namie.) Or whether the | 
body onely bee the man, hauing that refpe& vnto the foule thatthe cup hath to 
the drinke, (for it is not the cup and the drinke both that are called (5) pocu/uae in 
Latine,but the cup onely : yet onely in refpect that ic conteineth the drinke: ) or 
whether it bee both body and foule conioyned , and not fenerall, that is called 
man , and thefe two are but his parts , as two Oxen are called a yoake, ( which 
though ic confift of one on this fide,aind another on that, yer call wee neitherof 
them f{eperately a yoake,but both combined together). Now of thofe three po- 
fitions he choofeth the laft,calling the effence compofed of body and foule,man, 
ands denying the appellation vnto either of them, beeing feuerally confidered. 
Andtherefore (faith be) mans beatitade miift Be included in the goods that be- 
long ioyntly both to body and foule; fo that the pritie gifts of nature are to bee 
defired for them-felues, & that vertiie which doQrine doth gradually ingraffe in 

a good minde, is the moft excellent good of all, Which vertue or methadeo 
lie, hauing receiued thofe firft uit of nature ( which tiot-with-ftanding hac 


being; 


es ts ae * 


796 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. Caan. 


being, before that they had vertue) it now defireth all things for it felfe, and the 
owhe felfealfo : vfing all things together with it felfe, vntothe owne pleafure 
and delightfull fruition, (4) more or leffe,making a liking vfe of all,and yet ifne- 
ceflity require,rather refufing the fmaller goods, for the attainment or preferua- 
tion of the greater,then otherwife. (¢) But euer-more holding it felfe in higher 


refpec then any other good what-fo-euer , mencall or corporall: For it know- 


eth both the vie of it felfe and ofall other goods that maketh a man happy. Burt 
where it wanteth, bee there never fo many goods , they are none of his that hath 
them , becaufe hee cannot giue them their true natures by good application of 
them.T bat man therefore alone is truly bleffed,that can vfe vertue,and the other 
bodyly and mentall goods which vertue cannot be with-out all vnto their true 
end. If hee can make good vic of thofe things alfo that vertue may eafily want, 
heis the happier in that. But if hee can make that vfe of all things what-fo-euer, 
toturne them either to goods of the body or of the minde, then is hee the hap- 

ieft man on earth: for Fife and vertue are not all one. The wifermans life onely ic 
is that deferues that name: for fome kinde of life may bee wholy voyde of ver- 
tue,butno vertue canbe wich-out life. And fo likewife of memory, reafon, and 
other qualities in man: all thefe are before learning , it cannot bee with-out 
them,no more then vertue,which it doth teach. But {wiftneffe of foote , beauty 
of face, ftrength of body,and fuch, may bee all with-out vertue,and all of them 
are goods of them-felues , with-out vertue , yet is vertue defired for it felfe ne- 
uertheleffe,and vfeth thefe goods as befiteech. Now (f) this bleffed eftate of life 
they holdto bee fociable alfo , defiring the neighbours good as much as their 
owne,and wifhing them in their owne refpects,as well as it felfe : whether it be 
the wiues and children,or fellow cittizen, or mortall man what-fo-euer, nay fup- 
pofeit extend euen to the Gods whome they hold the friends of wife-men, and 
whome weecall by a more familiar name, Angels. But of the ends of the good 
and euill chey make no queftion , wherein onely (they fay ) they differ from the 
new Academikes: nor caré they what habite, Cynicall , or what-fo-euera man 
beare,fo he auerre their ends . Now of the three lines, contemiplatitic, aGiue, 
and mixt, they choofe the laft. Thus (faith Varro) the old Academikes taught: 
(g) Antiochus maifter to him and Twy , beeing author hereof , though Tudy 
make him rather a Stoike then an old Academike in moft of his pofitions. Buc 


_ What is that tovs? weeare rather to looke how to iitdge of the matter, then 


how others iudge of che men. 


L: VIVES. 


T™ (4) horfran’| But éques hath beene of old time vied for equss. Gell. Marcell. Macrob, 
and Servins, all which doe prooue it out of Ennins, Annal, ib.7. and Virgil ~Lnead.3. 
And it was the old cuftometo fay , that the horfe rode , wheh the man ‘was on his Back’; as 
well as the man him-felfe, AZacréb. Saturnal.6, (b) Pocuium] Pocaluas is a\fo the thing chat 
is in the veffell, to bee drunke, efpecially in the Poets, Uirg. Georg.1. (¢ ) Vertue or me- 
thode | Which ripening out of the feedes infufed by nature, groweth vp to perfection, and 
chen joynes with the firft pofitiues of nature, in the purfuice of true beatitude; thus held 
the Academikes , hee that will regd more of it, let him Jooke in Ariftotles Morality, and 
Tullyes de finib, ib. 5. Volefle hee will fetch it from Piatd, the labour is more , but the 


liquor ispurer. | (d) a 


-_ =—_-wa TR wR RP HT Ul 


© 


Lis.tg. ‘OF THE CITIE OF ‘GOD. 


(4) More or leffe\Bodily goods leffe then meneall,and of the firft, healeh nbore ther fteengeh, :. 
quickneffe of fence’ more then {wiftneffe of foore, (¢) But ener-more |Nor ivit-arrogance 
in vereue ro haue this knowlesge of her-felfe, and ro difterne her onely excellence fi in antl : 
ting all.. (f.) This bleffed | Th Staikes placed it in a politique manner of fife, but heir, mea. 
ning Seneca explaineth ( De vita beata ) making ‘two kinde of common-wealths, the one a 
large and comely publike one, conteining GOD and Aan , and this is’ the whole world: 
the other, aleffer, where-ynto our birth hath boundvs’, as che Athenian ftate or the Cartha-' 


ginians : Now fome follow'the pteater common-weale’, huling wholy in‘contemplation, and 
others the leffer,attending the ftate and action fof that, and fome- apply. chem-felues to: both. ne 


‘Befides,a wife man often-times abandoneth ro'gouerne , becatife either the {tare respecteth | 
him nor,or the maners thereof are vnreformable, The latter made P/ato liue in priyate., the. 


firft,Zeno,Chry/ippus,and diuetfe other. (g ) Astiochus) An Afcalonite: he taught Uarre,La— 


cnllus, Tully, and many other nobles of Rome, allin forme of the ancient Academy, together 
with fome inclination to Zeno, yer calling the men of his profeffion rather reformed Acade- 
mikes then renewed Stoikes,arid therefore Brutus who was an auditor of his brother Arifigs, 
and many other Stoikes,did greaely commend his opinion of beatitude , Indeed it was very: 
neere Stoicifme (as wee fayd.clfe-where ) and their difference was rather verball then mate* 
rial. Some few things oncly were changed, which eAntiochns called his reformations of the 
old difcipline. . 7 Se ak ww" ow 


The Chrifti ‘ ns opinion of she chiefert good, and ewill, which 
the Philofophers held to be within themJelnes. 


a a C wap. 4. 


TE you aske vs now what the Cssty of God faith, firft to this pofition of thie per-" 
fection of good, and cuill, ic will anfwere you prefently,eternall Jife is the per. 
fection of good and eternall death the confummation of cuill’, and that the 
aymeof all our life muft bee co auoyde this, and attaine that other. Therefore 
is ic written, The 2u/t [ball Lue by fatth. For wee {ee not our greateft good , and 
therefore are tobeleeue and hope for it, nor haue wee power to live accor- 
dingly, vnleffe our beleefe.and prayer obreyne helpe of him who hath giuen 
vs that beleefe and hope that hee will helpe vs. But fuch as found che perfe@i- 
onof felicity, vpon this life, placing it eicher inthe body ,or.in the minde , or 
in both 2 or (‘to fpeake more apparantly ) eyther in pleafure of in vertue, or in 
pleafure, and reft cogether,or in vertue,or in both,or in natures firtt affeas , on 


- in vertue, or in both : fondlye and vainely are thefe mén per{waded to finde true 


happynefle heere.. The Prophet {coffes.chem , faying.: The Lord knoweth, the 
thoughts of mem.,or (as Saint Peal hatnit, of the wile, ) that they are vaine, For 
who can difcourfe exa@ly of the miferies, of rhis life? Tally (a) vppon his 
daughters death,did what hee could: Buc what could hee doe? m what: perfon 
can the firlt affects of namure.bee found with-out alteration? what hath:not 
forsow and difquier full power to difturbe the pleafure and quiet of the wifeh's 
So-firength, beauty, health, vigour and aGivicy., are all fubuerted by. their 
contraries , by loffe of limmes, deformitie , ficknelle , faintnefle, and vaweeldi- 
neffe, And what if a member fall into fome tumor or other affect 2 what if 
weakenefle of the back bend a man downe to the ground, making bim neete. to 
a foure-footed beaft 2 is nog all he grace of his pofture quite gone? and then the 
firft puifts of nature, whereof fence and reafon are the two firlt ,becaufeof thé 
apprchenfion of truth, how eafily are they mr ? how quité doth — °F 
niece. ; Tee. nak: 


— ‘es. Bi ge 


757° 


mre £ d 


758 


SAINT AV GVSTINE. | Cuar.g 


blindnetfe take away hearing and fight > and then for the reafon , how foone, 


is it febuerted by a phreneticall paffion, a Lethargy or fo 2Oh itisable to wring 
teares from our eies to fee the ations of phrenetique perfans fo wholy different, 
nay fo dire@ly contrary vnto reafons direction ! what need I {peake of the De- 
moniakes whole vaderftand ing the diuel wholy dulleth,and vfeth all their powers 


of fouleand body at his owne pleafure ? and whae wife mancan fully fecure him- 


felfe from thefe incurfions ? Againe, how weake isour apprehenfion of truth 


Witdom.g, in this life, when as we reade in the true booke of wifedome,, the corrsptible 


~ 


body is heauy vato the foute , and the earthly manfion keepeth downe the minde that is 
falofcares? | | | | 7 
- And that fame()épas,that violent motion vnto action,(¢)which they recken 
for one of natures firft pofitiues in goodmen ¢ is itnot that that effe&eth thofe 
ftrange and horrible a&sof madnetfe when thereafon 8 fence are bothbefotted 
and obnubilate ? Befides , vertue, which is not from nature but commeth after 
wards: from induftry , when ic hath gotten the higheft ftand in humanity, whae 
other workehath it, but a continuall fight againft the in-bred vices that aré fnhe- 
rent in our owne bofomes not in others?chiefely that(d) seepesom chat temperance 
which fuppreffeth the lufts of the flefh, and curbeth them from carying the 
mind away into mifchiefe ? forthat fame is avice when (asthe Apoftle faith) 
the flelb rhe fb she (périt , and thac contrary isa vertue, when the {pirit laf: 


eeth after the flelb, for they (faith hee ).are contrary , fo that you cannot do 
what you would. And what would wee ? what is our defire inthis perfe@ion 
ofGod,but that the fiefh fhould not luft againft the {piric, and chat there were 
no vice in vs againft which the fpirie fhould luft 2 which fince we cannot attaine 
in this life, would wee neuer fo faine, let vs by God grace endevour this, that 
we do not fubie& our fpirit ynto che concupifcence of our feth, attdfo feale _ 


_ vito the bond of finne witha free confent. | 


So that farre bee it from vs euer to thinke that wee haue attayned the true 
happineffe whilft wee line here. Who is fo wife , but hath ndw and theh di- 
vers fights againft his owne luftes >what is the office of prudence ? is it not to dif- 
cerne betweene things to be chofen,&things to be refufed,to the end that no er- 
ror be incurred in either ? This teftifieth thac there is euil in vs and that we are in 
ouil. Ic teacheth vs that ic is euill to affent vntofinne, and good, toavoyd it. But 
yet neither can prudence nor temperance ridour lives of thar euill whieh they 
fore-warhe vs of andarme vs againft. And what (¢) of Iuftice, that giuieth ewes 


_ fy onehisdue ? and theiuft order of nature is thatthe foule bee vnder Géd; 


the flefh vnder the foule , and both together vnder God. Is ie noe plaine chat 
this is rather continually laboured then truely attained in this life > for theleffe 
that the foule doth meditate of God, the leffe it ferueth him , and the more 
that the fleth lufteth againft the foule, the leffe command hath the foule o- 
wer it, wherefore as long as wee are obiected vnto this languour and corrupti 
on , how dare we fay we are fafe,or ( ifnotfafe, much mors) bleffed by the per- 
feGtion of attayned bleffe ? Now there is alfo Fortitude, another authenticall te 
timony of humaine miferies endured with Patience. 3 

I wonder with what face the Stoikes deny thefe to bee euills, of whicti 
(f) they confefle chat if awife man cannot, or oughr not to éndure thent, hee 
may lawfully (nay he mutt needs)kill him-felfe, and auoyd this life. To this hight 
is their proud ftupidity growne ( building all there beaticude vpon this life) ehae 
if their wife man ( ¢) were blind, deafe, lame, and made the very hofpitall of all 


Se 


Lr3ig. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 


eee Ge ee. ——— eee - 
~ : 


agonies and anguifh,which fhould ly fo fore on him that they fhould force himbe 
his owne death, yet thislife chat is enuironed with all thofe plagues,are not they 
afhamed to call bleffed. O fu cete and blefled life, which it is requifite that death 
do conclude! for ifit be bleffed why then keepe it ftill : bur if thole eulls make ie 
avoydable, what is become of the bliffe? or what are thefe but euills, that haue 
fuch power to fubuert the good of fortitude ? making ic not onely guilty 
of deiection,but of dotage, in affirming that ane and the fame life is bleffed, and 
yetmuft be auoyded : who is fo blind that feeth not that if it be che one, it cannot 
poflibly be the other 20 but (fay they ) the auoydance is caufed by the effeat 
of rhe ouerpreffing infirmity: why may they not afwell bid adue to obftinacy,and 
confeffe chat it is wretched ? was it patience that made Cao kill him-felfe? no he 
would not haue done ic but that he tooke Ce/arsviGory fo vnpatiently: where was 
his fortitude now ? gone, it yeelded, and was fo troden downe that it fled both 
light and life,as blefied as it was, Was not his life then bleffed? why then it was 
wretched. Why then are not they true euills that can make oneslife fo wretched 
and foto be auoyded # And thereforethe Peripatetiques and old Academikes 
(whofe {c& Varro ftands wholy forjdid better in calling thefe accidents, plainely 
euill. But they haue one foule errourto hold his life that endureth thefe euills, 
bleffed, ifhee ridhim-felfe from them by his owne voluntary deftruGtion, The 
paines and torments of the body are euill, fay they , and the greater the worfe, 
which to avoyde, you muft willingly betake your felfe to death, and leaue this 
life: what life? this, that is fo encombred with euills. VWWhat is it then bleffed 
amongft fo many euills that muft bee avoyded, orcall you it bleffed , becaufe 
you may abandon thefe euills when you lift , by death ? what if fome power di- 
uine fhould hold you from dying , and keepe youcontinually in thofe euills; 
then you would fay this were a wretched life indeed ? well, the foone leaving 
of it maketh noc againft the mifery of it : becaufe if ic were eternall , 
your felfe wouldiudge it miferable. Iris not quit of mifery therefore becaufe it 


is (hort, nor.(much leffe ) is it happyneffein thatthe mifery ts fhort. Ic muft 


needes be a forcible euill , chat hath power to make a mani( nay anda wife man) 
to be his owne executioner, it being trucly faid by them-felues , that ic is as ig 
were natures firft and moft forcible precept, thata man fhould haue adéare 
refpe& of him-felfe, and therefore avoyde the hand of death, by very naturall 
inftinct: ard {o bee-friend him-felfe, that hee fhould ftill defire ro bee a living 
creature, and enioy the coniundtion of his foule and body. Mighty are the 
euills chat fubdue this natural inftin@,which isin al men to defire to aviod death, 
and fubduing it fo farre, that what was before abhorred, fhould now be defired, 
and( ratherthen wanted ) effe&ted by a mans owne hand. Mighty is the mif- 
chiefe that maketh fortitude an homicide, if'that bee to bee called fortitude 
which yeeldeth fo to thefe euills, that it is faine to force him ‘tolkull him-felfe 


* toauoyde thefe inconueniences whome it hath vndertaken to defend againft 


all inconueniences. — — 

Indede a wife man is to endure death with patience, burt that muft come 
ab externo, from another mans hand and not from his owne. But thefe men 
teaching thathee may procure it to him-felfe , muft needs eonfeffe that thee- 
uills are intollerable which ought to force aman to fuchan ex:reame inconue- 
nience. The life thereforechat is liable to fuch a multitude of miferies can-no 


way bee called happy, ifthat mento auoyd this infelicity bee faine to giueic 


Teta place 


759 


Serer RiP pra, 


760 SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuap.g. 
olace by killing of them-felues, and being conuinced by the certainty {of reafon 
are faine in this their queft of beatitude, to give place to che.truth, and to dif- 
cerne, that the perfection of beatitude is not refident in this mortall life, when 
in mans greate(t guifts, the greater helpe they affoord him againft anguifh, 
dangers and dolours , the furer teftimonies are they of humaine miferies. For 
if truevertue can bee in none in whome there is no true piety,then doe they not 
promife any many in whom they are, any affurance from fuftering of temporal] 
forrowes. For true vertue may not diffemble , in profeffing what it cannot per- 
forme: but it aimeth at this onely, that mans life which being inthis world, is 
~ turmoyled with all thefe extreames of forrowes, fhould in the life to come bee 
made pertaker both of fafery and felicitie. For how can that man haue felicitie 
that wanteth fafety 2 Ic is not therefore of the vnwife, intemperate, impacient 
or vniuft chat Saint Paul fpeaketh,faying, “ee are faned by h:pe , but of the fonne 
- of crue piety, and obferuers of the reall vertues: Hope that is feence, is not hope, 
Rom.8.25 for how can aman hope for that which hee feeth ? But if wee hope for that wee fee not, 
wee doe with patience abide for it. Wherefore as wee are faued, foare wee bicf- 
fed by hope, and as wee haue no ‘holde of our fafety ,no more haue wee of our 
felicity, but by hope, paciently expecting its and beeing as yetin adefert of thor- 
nie dangers, all which wee muft conftantly endure vntill wee come to the para- 
dife of all ineffable delights , hauing then paffed all che perills of encombrance. 
This fecurity in the life to come, is the beatitude wee {peake of , which the Phi- 
lofophers not belolding will not beleeue , but forge them-felues an imaginarie 
bliffe here, wherein the more their vertue affumes to it felfe,the falfer it prooues 

tothe iudgementof all others. | 


L.VIVES. 


BBs (4) vpon | Hee had two children, arke a fonne , and Tullia a daughter , marryed 
firtt to Pifo-frugus Craffipes, and afterwards to (ornel. Delabella , and dyedin child-bed, 
Tully cooke her death with extreame oriefe, Pompey, ( far, Suipitins, and many other wor- 
thy men fought to comfort him, both by letters and vifitation, but all being in vaine, hee fet 
vp his reft to bee his owne comforter , and wrote his booke called Corfelatso , vpon this fub- 
ie€t swhich is not now extant, yet itis cited often, both by him and others, There-in hee 
aie hee bewailed the life of man in generall, and comforted him-felfe in particular. Ts/é. 
weft. 1. , 

45) beni] sgude, is, to.goe to any acte with vehemencie and vigor ; to goe roundly to 
worke. ¢u4, is the violence of paflion that carieth every creature head-long to affe& or to 
auoyde : and are conuerfant onely about things naturally to bec affected , or anoyded ,as the 
Stoikes fay, and (ato for one, in Tally. (¢) Which they | The inftin& where-by wee affect 
our owne preferuation is of as high efteeme as eyther the witte or memorie: for turne it 
away, and the creature cannot liue long after. (4) seopecem JOF this before. (¢) Of Jnftice] 
It comprehendeth both that diftributiue change of eftate, and alfovnto the line of reafon 
andteligion. (f) They confeffe | (ie. de fin. lib.3, & Talc. quaft..4. (g) Were blinde | Itisa 
wife mans duty (faith Cato the Stoike in Tally ) fome-times to renounce the happieft eftate. 
So faith Seneca often. (4) Oner-paffing infirmitie | A diuerfity of reading in the texts of 
Bruges Ve Bafil s but it is not to bee Rood vpon. (4) Natures firkt} (ic. off-1.and De 
frw.3.and 5. 


of 


L119. | OF THE CITIE OF GOD. — 76E 


Of lining foctably with our neighbour : how fitt tt w, and yet how | 
— fubiect tocroffes.  Cuar.§. | 


E doeworthily approoue their enioyning a wife man to liue in mutuall fo. 

ciety: for how fhould our Celefeall Citty (che nineteene booke whereof wee 
now haue in hand ) haue ever come to originall , to prolation or to perfection, 
bur thae the Saints liue all in fociable vnion ? But yet what is he that can recount 
‘lf che miferies incident vnto the focieties of mortalls 2 Here what the Comedi- 
anfaith,with a generall applaufe. (4) 1 married ¢ wife(b) O what mifery wanted I 
then! I begot children: fo , there's one care more. And thofe inconueniences that 
Terence pins on the back of louc,as (¢) iniuries,enmities ,warre,& peace againe, 
do not all thefe lackey our mortality continually 2 do not thefe foote fome-times 
into the friendlieft affetions ? and doth not all the world , keepe thefe examples 
in continual! renovation as warre, I meane iniuries & enmities. And our peace 
is as vncertaine, as we areignorant of their affeats with whome wee hold it, and 
though we nigh know to day what they would do;to morrow we fhall not. Whe 
fhould be greater friends then thofe of one family ? yet what a many fecret plots 
of malice lye euen amongft fuch , to expell fecurity 2 cheir firmer peace becom- 
ming touler malice : and being reputed moft loyall , whereas it was onely moft 
craftily faigned : the far foread contagion of this made Tw let this faying runne 
out with his teares: Tres/on is neuer fo clofe carried, as wher it lurketh onder the . 
name of duty, or affinity. An open foe. ealily watched : but this your fecret ferpent 
both breedes and ftrikes eve ener you can ai|coner it. Wherefore that which the holy 
fcripture faith, ( d) A mans enemies are the men of bis houfe this wee heare with 
great greefe: for though a man haue fortitudeto endure it , or prevention to 
auoyde it, yet if hee bee a good man , hee muft needes take great griefe at the 
badneffe of rhofe fo neare him: bee it that they haue beene vfed vnto this vi- 
perous diffimulation of old,or have learnt it but of late. So then if a mans awne 
private houfe affoord him no fhelrer from thefe incurfions, what fhall the citty. 
doe,which as it is larger,fo is it fuller of brables,and futes,and quarrels, and ac- 
cufations, to grant the abfence of feditions and ciuill contentions, which are 
too often prefent : and whereof the Citties are in continuall danger, when they 
are in their fafeft eftate? | - 


L.VIVES. 


] (4) bane maried | Ter. Adelph. AE.3 fc.4.Demea's words. ( b) O what] Some bookes haue 
it not as Terence hath it,but they haue beene falfly copied. (¢) Jninries | Parméene his words 
wnto Phedria, (d) A mans enemies| Mich,7. and Matth.10. 


The errour of humaine indgments,in cafes where truth is hot knowne. | 
Cc H A P. 6. | 


Nd how lamientable and miferable are thofe mens iudgements whom the 
Cicties mutt perforce vfe , as Magiftrates , euen in their moft fetled peace; 
concerning other men? they iudge them whofe con{ciencés they cannot fee, and 
Tet 3 therefore 


162 


SAINT AV GVSTINE. | Cuan. 


therefore are often driuen to wring forth che truth by ( 2 ) tormenting of inno- 
‘cent witnefles. And what fay you when a man istortured in his owne cafe, and 
tormented,cuen when it isa queftion whether hee be guilty or no? and though 
hee bee (6 ) innocent, yet fuffereth affured paines when they are not affured hee 
is faulty. In moft of thefe cafes theIudges ignorance turnes to the prifoners 
miferie .Nay which is more lamentable , and deferuetiza fea of ceares to wathe 
it away; the Iudge in torturing the accufed, leaft hee fhould put him to death. 
being innocent,often-times through his wretched tgnorance killeth that party 
being innocent, with torture, whome hee had tortured to auoyde the killing of an 
innocent . For if (according vnto their do@rine ) hee had rather leaue this life 
then endure thofe miferies, then hee faith prefently that hee did the thing 
whereof hee is cleare indeed. And beeing there-vpon condemned , and execu- 
ted, ftill the Judge cannct tell whether hee were guilty or no. Hee tortured him 
leaft hee fhould execute him guiltleffe ,and by that meanes killed him ere hee 
knew that hee was guilty. Now in thefe mifts of mortall focietie, whether fhall 
the Judge fitte or no? Yes hee muft ficte : hee is bound to it by his place, 
which hee holdeth wickedneffe not to difcharge, and by the ftates command, 
which hee muft obey. But hee neuer holds it wickedneffe co torture guiltleffe 
witneffes in other mens caufes, and when the tortures haue ore-come the pati- 
ence of the innocent, and made them their owne accufers to. put them to death 
as guilty, whome they cortured but totrie, being guildleffe :nor co let many of 
them dye-euen vpon the very racke it felfe,or by that meanes, if they doe efcape 
_thehang-man. Againe;what fay you co this, that fome bringing a iuft accufati- 
on againft this man or thiat , for. the gdod of the ftate, the accufed endureth all 
the tortures without confeffion, and fo the innocent plaintiffes beeing not able 
to prooue their plea, are by the Iudges ignorance caft and (¢ ) condemned ¢ 
Thefe now, anda many more then thefe, the ludge holdeth no finnes, becanfe 
his will is not affenting vnto them , but his feruice to the ftate compells him, 
and his ignorance of hurt 1t is that maketh him doe ir, nor any will to hurt. 
This now is mifery in a man: ifit bee not malice in a wife man, is it che trou- 
bles of his place and ot ignorance that caufe thofe effects , and doth not hee 
thinke hee is not well enougti in beeing free from accufation, but hee muft 
needes fitce in beatitude? (4) how much more wifdome and difcretion fhou!d 
hee thew in acknowledging his mortality in thofe troubles, and in detefting this 
mifery in him-felfe , crying out vnto G OD (if hee bee wife) with the Pfalmift: 
Lord take mee ont of all my troubles. 


L.VIVES. 


Ormenting (a) of |For in the caufe pertaining them, the feruant Rill is called in queftion, 
and fo is the guiltleffe commonly brought to the torment. This kinde of Trial] is oft men- 
tioned in Twiy. Ic was once forbidden, Cie: pro deiorar. & Tacit. 12, (b) Yet Sufficient} Te 
Was atru¢ tyrant, ( were it Tarqain the proud , ot whofocuer ) that inucnted torments to 
trye the truch; for neither hee chat can endure them will tell the truth, nor hee chat cannot 
endure them, Paine ( faith one ) will make the innocent a lyer.*(¢ ) Condemned | By that 
lawe, that faith, Let the accufer (xffer the paines due to the accufed, if hee cannot prooue his 
accufation, (d) How much more | Ancedeleffe difference there is here in fome copyes ¢ but 
Imay well omitte it). | | 
| | Dif- 


. 
te 
. 5 


“ s 
ae x . 
‘ ~ 
° a ® 


° 


Pana: OFTHE CITIEOF GOD, 763 


Difference of langnageyan impediment fo humane [cci- 
| ety. The miferies of she infleft warres, 


C HAP. 7, 


Frer the citty,followeth the whole world,wherein the third kind of humane 
~ 4 fociety is refident, the firft beeing in the houfe , and the fecond inthe citty. 
Now the world is asa floud df waters, the greater,the more dangerous: and firft 
ofall, difference of language (4) divides man from man ] For if two meete,whé 
perchance light vpon {ome accident crauing their abiding together. and confe- 
rence, if neither of them can vnderftand the other , you may fooner make two 
bruite beafts,oftwo feuerall kindes foctable to qne another. then thefe two men. 
For when they wou'd common together. their tongues deny to. accord , which 
being fo,a!l the other helpes of nature,are nothing : fo chat aman had rather bee 
with his owne dogge,then with another man of a ftrange language. But the great 
(b) wefterne Babilon endeauoureth to communicate her language to all the 
lands fhe hath fubdued,to procurea fuller fociety , and a greater aboundance of 
interpretours on both fides. Itistrue, but how many lives hach this coft ? and 
{uppofe that done, the worft is nat paft : for alchough fhe neuer wanted ftranger 
nations againft whom to lead her forces, yet this large extention of her Empire 
procured greater warres then thdfe , named ciuilland confederate warres ,and _ 
thefe were they that troubled the foules of man-kinde both in their heate ; with 
defireto fee them extin@ ,and in their pacification, with feare, to fee them ree | 
newed. It would ftand to recite the maffacres, andthe extreame effe&shere-. > 
of, as I might ( though I cannot doe it as I fhould )-the difcourfe would bee inf 
nite. (/¢) yea but 4 wife man (fay they ) will wagenone but iuft warre. Hee will. 
not ! As if the very remembrance that himfelfe is man, ought notto procure 
his greater forrow in that heehath caufe of inft warre, and muft needes wage 
them ,whichif they were not iuft, were not for him todeale in, fo thata wife 
man fhould never haue warre: For ic isthe ocher mens, wickedneffe that workes 
his caufe iuft chat hee ought.to deplore, whether ever it produce Warres or nos 
Wherefore hee that doth but confider affetionately ofall thafe dalorous and 
bloudy extreaines ,muft needes fay thatthis is amyfery,but hee that endureth 
them, without a forrowfull affe@, or thought thereof, is farre more wretch 
edto imagine hee hath the blifle of a God ;when hee hath loft the fence of 
aman. , : or er : : 


. . & os fe e 
ae Yala oe fr) t -f ’ . ‘ 7 : er ae -> : 


L.VIVES. 


DM“ (a) of language| Plin. lib.7.(b) Wefterne imperious Babilon | Rome : called impe- 
A rious for her foueraignty that was fo large, aiid .becaufe her commands were fo peremp- 
tory,he alludes to che furname of Tit#s Manlins, who was called imperious,for executing his 
fonne.The Romanes endeauoured, to haue much latine fpoken in their Prouinces,in fo muck 
that Spaine and France did wholy forgec their owne. languages ,and {pake all latine. Nor 
might any Embaffage bee preferred to the Senate'bue in latine.. Their endeauour wasmo} 
lorious,and vfefull herein, whatfoeuer their end was. (c) Yea, but] Here hee difputeth againk y 
the Gentiles ,out of their owne pofitions, | 


Teg Tha 


eT Tn EEEEEEEEEnaanenenene aaa ae 
764 SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuap.8. 


That true friendlbip cannot bee fecure,among ft the 
saceffant 7 rill of this present life. 


Cuap. 8 


4 


B Veadmit that a man.bee not fo groffely deceiued (as many in this wretched 

* life are) as to take his foe for his friend ,nor contrariwife , his friend for his 

foe: what comfort haue wee then remayning in this vale of mortall miferies,bue 

the vnfained faith and affe@ionof {ure friends ? whom the («) more they are,or 

the further of vs,the more we feare , leaft chey bee endamaged by fome of thefe 

infinite cafualties attending on all mens fortunes. We ftand not onely in feare to 

fee them affliGed by famine, warre, fickneffe,imprifonment , or fo , butour farre 

greater feare is,leaft they (hould fal away through treachery malice,or depraua- 

tion. And when this commeth to paffe,and wee heare of it, (as they more friends 

wec haue, and the farther off withal,the likeJier are fuch newes to be brought vs) 

then who'can decypher our forrowes but he that hath felt the like? we had rather 

heare of cheir death,though that wee could not heare of neither, but vnto our 

- griefe. For feeing wee enioyed the comfort of their friendfhips in their life, 

how can wee but bee touched with forrowes affects at their death? hee that for- 

biddeth vs that,may as well forbid all conference of friend and friend, all fociall 

curtefie, nay euen all humane affe@, and thruft them all out of mans conuerfati- 

on: or elfe prefcribe their vfes no pleafurable ends . But asthat is impoffible, 

fo is it likewife for vs not to bewaile him dead whom wee loued being aliue . For 

the (6) forrow thereof is as a wound,or vicer in our heart, vnto which bewayle- 

ments doe ferue in the ftead of fomentations, and plaifters. Forthough that _ 

the founder ones vnderftanding be, the fooner this cure 1s etteed,yet it proues 

not but that there is amalady that requireth one 4pplication or other. There- 

fore in al our bewayling more or lefle, of the deaths of our deareft fri€ds or com- 

panions, wee doe yet referue this loueto them, that wee had rather have them 

dead in body ,then in foule, and had rather haue them fall in eflence, then in man- 

ners, for the laft,is the moft dangerous infe€tion vpon earth, and therfore it was 

written, Js not mans lsfe a (b ) temptation vpon earth ? WWherevpon our Sautour 

Iob.7,t laid: Woe bee to the world becaufe of offences , andagaine: Becaufe iniquity [balbe in- 

MatS —creafed , the loue of many {bilbe cold. This makethvs giue thankes for the death 

of our good friends,and though it make vs fad a while, yet it giueth vs more affi- 

rance of comfort ever after,becaufe they haue now efcaped al! chofe mifchieues 

which oftentimes feize vponthe beft, either opprefling, or peruerting them,en- 
dangering them how-foeuer. | 


Mat, 34 


L.VIVES. 


TFA) mere they are | Ariffotles argument againft the multirude of friends.(b) Temsptation] 
The vulgar readeth it,/s there not ax appointed time to man upo carth?Hicrom hath it a ware- 
fave,for we are in continual! warre witha futtle foxe , whom wee muft fet a continuall watch 
againft,leaft he inuade vs vnprouided, : 


The 


Liwig9.- OF THE CITIE OF GOD. | 6a 


The friend hip of. holy Angells with CN: undificrnable in this life, b 
-reafon of the deuills, whom all the Infidells tooke to be good 
powers,and gaue them dinine howeurs, Car. & 


No the fociety of Angells withmen (thofe whom the Philofophers calle . 
the gods guardians , Lars, and a number more names) they fet inthe fourth 
place,comming as it were from earth to the whole vniuerfe , and here including 
heauen . Now forthofe friends‘the Angels )we need not feare to be affected with 
forrow for any death, or deprauation of theirs, they are impaffible. Butthis 
friendfhip betweene themand vs, is not vifibly apparant as that of mans is: 
(which addes vnto our terreftriall mifery) andagaine , the deuill ( as wee reade) 
often transformes himfelfe into an Angell of lightto cempt men, forte for their 
inftru€tion,and fome for their ruine:and hereis need ofthe great mercy of God, 
leaft when wee thinke wee haue the loue and fellowfhip of good Angels, they 
prooue at length pernicious deuills , fained friends, and furtle foes, as greatin 
ower as in deceipt. And where needeth this great mercy.of GO D,but in this 
worldly mifery,which is fo enveloped in ignorance,and fubiect to be deluded.As 
for the Philofophers of the reprobate citey , who fayd they had gods to their 
friends ,moft {ure it was they had deuills indeed whom they tooke for deities; 
allthe whole ftate wherein they liued , isthe deuills monarchy , and fhall haue 
the like reward with his, vnto all eternity. For their facrifices , or rather facri. 
ledges,where-with they were honored,and the ob{czne plaies which they them- 
{elucs exacted were manifeft ceftimonies of their diabolicall natures. | 
: 


_ Thereward that the Saints are to receive after thepaffing of 
| this worlds afflictions. 
CHar. 10. 


Y* the holy and faithfull feruants of the true GO D are in danger of the de- 
uills manifold ambuthes: for as longas they live in this fraile,and foule-brow- 
ed world,they muft be fo, andit is for their good, making them more attentiue ia 
the queft of chac fecurity where their peace is without end , and without want. 
There {hall che Creator beftowe all the guifts of nature vpon them, and giue 
them not onely as goods, but as eternall goods , not onely tothe foule, by retor- 
ming ic with wifdome, butalfo to the body by reftoring itin the refurreGion. 
Therethe vertues fhall riot haue any more conflia&s with the vices , but fhall reft 
with the viGory of eternall peace,which none, fhalleuer difturbe. For itis the 
finial beatitude, haning now attaineda confummation to all cternity. Wee are 
faydto bee happy here on earth when wee haue chat little peace that gdodneffe 
can afford vs: but compare this happineffe with that other,and this fhall be held 
but plaine mifery. Therefore if weeliue well vpon earth,our vertue vfeth the be- 
nefits of the tranfitory peace,vato good ends, if we haue it:ifnot.yet ftill our ver- 
tue vfech the euills that the want thereof produceth , vntoa good endalfo. Bue 
then is our vertue in full power.and perfedion , when it referreth it felfe,and all 
the good éffects that itcan giue being vnto either vpon good of euill caufes,vn- 
to that onely end, wherein our peace fhal] haue no end,nor any thing {uperior 
vato it in goodnefié or perfection, 4s 


\ 


enn A A A LC 
766 SAINT AVGYSTINE. Cuarp.il.& 12 


The beatitud: of eternall peace, and that true perfection wherein the — 
—« Saintsareinflalled. Cuar.¥t. 


YVEE may therefore fay that peace is our finall good,as we fayd of life eter- 

nall: becaufe the pfalme faith vnto that citty whereof we write this labo- 

tious worke: Prayfe thy LORD Olernfalem , praife thy LORD OZion: for hee 

hath made faft the barres of thy gates , andble(fedthy children within thee; hee hath 

made peace thy borders. “When the barres of the gates are faft, as nonecan 

comé in,fo none can goe out . And therefore this peace which wee cal] finall,is 

the borders and bounds of this citty : for the mifticall name hereof, Ierufalem, 
fignifieth , 4 vio of peace ,but becaufe the name of peace is ordinary in this 

world where eternity is not refident , therefore wee choofe rather to call the 

bound wherein the chiefe good of this citty lieth, fe eterwal/, rather then peace. 

Rom,6. 22, Of which end the Apoftle faith. Now beeing freed from finne , and made feruants to 
— GOD,you hane your fruite in holyne(fe, andthe end , eucrlafting life. Butontheo- 
ther-fide becaufe fuchas areignorant inthe {criptures,may take this exer/a/teng 
life, inan ill fence , for the life of the wicked which is eternally euill , either as 
fome Philofophers held , becaufethe foule cannot die, or as our faith teacheth, 
becaufe torments cannot ceafe ( yet fhould not the wicked feele them eternally 
but that they haue alfo their eternall life): therefore the maine end of this citties 
ayme , is either to be called eternity in peace, or peace in eternity , and thus it is 
plaine to all . For (a) the good of peace is generally the greateft with of the 
world, and the moft welcome when it comes. WhereofI thinke wee may take 
_leaue of our reader,to haue a word or two more, both becaufe of the citties end, 
whereof we now {peake,and of the {weetneffe of peace, which all men doe loue. 


L. VIVES. 


~ He (a) good of peace | Nothing is either more pleafant or more profitable : more wilhed, 
or more welcome. Peace is the chiefe good,and warre the chiefe euill.Xenoph, tv ra spre, 


And the peace of minde is that which Demacritus called the great falicity. The Stoikes make 
concord one of beatitudes chiefeft goods, | 


That the bloudieft warres chiefe ayme és peace: they defive which 
is saturailin mas. Cmar. 12. | 


VViiich heethat marketh but mans affaires , and the («) generall forme of 
nature , will confeffe with me. For ioy and peace are defired a like of all 
men? The warrior would but conquer : warres aymeis nothing but glorious 
peace : what is viCtory but a {uppreffion of refiftants , which beeing done,peace 
followeth? Sothat peace is warres purpofe, the {cope ofall military difcipline, 
and the limmite at which all iuft contentions leuell. All men feeke peace by war, 
but none feekes warre by peace. For they that perturbe the peace they liue in,do 
it not for hate of it , but to fhew their power in alteration of ic. They would not 
difanull ic, but they would haue it as they like; and though they breake into 
{editions from thereft , yet muft they hold a peace-full force with their fellowes 


chat 


‘ : - . , ~~. + = — | - | SS, 0 tavlt oe . ; aoe 
Lin 79. _ OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 


thar are engaged wich them,or els they Thalf never effea what they intend.Euen 
the theeues themfelues chat moleft all the world befides them, are at peace a-. 
mongft themfelugs.Admit one be fe frong,or furtle that he will haue no fellow; 
but plaiech all his parts of roguery along , yet {uch as hee can neither cutoff,nor 
liftto make knowne his fats vnto;with thofe he muftneeds hold akinde of peace. 
And athome, with his wife and family , there muft he needs obferue quietneffe, 
and queéftionleffe delighteth in their obedience vnto him, which if they faile in; 
he chafes, and chides and ftrikes ; fetting allin order by force if need bee,or by 
_ cruelly: which hé feeth he catnot doe, vnleffe all the reft be fubi¢@ed vnder one 
head,which is himfelfe . And might hee hane the {way ofa citty, or prouinee it 
fuch fort as he hath that ofhis houfé ; hé would put off his theeuifh forme, an 
putona Kings,albeichis couetoufneffe and a remained vnchanged. Thus 
then you fee that all mendefire to haue peace with fuch as they would haue 
live according to their liking. For thofe againft whom they wage warre,they 
would make theic owne if they could , and if they conquere them the giue them 
fuch lawesas they like.(>) But let vs imagine fome fuch infociable fellow as the 
poets fable recordeth , calling him (¢) Haife-man , for his inhumaine barba- 
rifme. 6 tae ein Saye 
. Now he although his Kingdomelay in a lightleffe tape,and his villanies {0 rare 
that they gaue him that great nameof (d) Casas, which is, Euill-though his wife 
neuer had good word of him, hee neuer plaied with his children,not ruled them 
in their manlier age ,neuer {paxe with friend ,not fo muchas with (ec) his fa 
ther 7ulten( then whom he was farre more happy inthat hebegot no fuch mon- 
fter,as Valcaz had,in begetting him ) wig. heénevér gaue to any, , but robbed 


thiefe for his living. Bue there was no fuch man, or ifthere were ; hée was no 
fuch as the ee Faigne him. For vnleffe they liad mightily belied C4eus,they. 
fhould not fifficiently haue (4) commended Hercales. Butjast fayd,icis like 
that there was f10 ich mah ;nomiore then is truch in many othe oftheirfiGis ~~ 
Gris i forthe very wild bealts, (part of whofe brutifhneffe they place in him)doe__ 
prefetue a peace each with ig Jit theirkinde,begettirig,bréeding and liuing == 
together amongft thémfelues , beeing otherwife the infociable birthis of the de- 
ferts:l fpeake not hete of Sheepe , Deere, Pigeons , Stares or Bees, byt of Lions, 
Foxes, Bagles and Owles.For what Tyger is there that doth not noufle hér yong 
dnes,& fawh vpon therh in their tendernefle>what Kite is there though he fly fo- 
firarily about for his prey , but wil ttéad his. female , build his néft,fit his égges, 
feed his young , and affift his fellow in her motherly duety ; allthat in himlieth? 


r] 


Fare ionget ae the cha bid man no foe and pet with ati 


_~ 


768 SAINT AVGVSTINE.. - Caueaa 


_ are peaceable : rhe worft: meni ofall doe fight for their fellowes quictneffe , and 

would (if ic lay in their power)redtice all into adiftin& forme of ftate,drawneby 
themfelues, whereof they would'bethe heads,which could neuer bee, but by aco- 
berence either through feare orloue . Forherein is peruerfe pride:an Imitat, 
or ofthe goodnefle of G OD, hauing equality of others with it felfe vnder him, 
and laying a yoake of obedience vpon the fellowes, vnder it {elfe, in ftead of him: 
thus hateth it the iuft péace of God,and buildeth an vniuft one for it felf. Yet can 
itnot burloue peace , for novice how euer vnnaturall,can pull nature vp by che 
rootes. But hethat can difcetne bétweene good and bad, and betweene order 
and confufion , may foone diftinguifh the Godlie peace from the wicked. Now 
that peruerfe confufion muft bee reformed by the better a eye the thing 
wherein it is, ific bceatall, as for example: hang a man vp with his head downe- 
wards,al his’ pofture is confotided,that which fhould be loweft,haning the high- 
eft place,and fo contrary this confufion difturbes the flefh,and ts tronblefome to 
it.But it is the foules peace with the bodie that caufeth the feeling of char diftur- 
bance . Now ifthe foule leaue the body by the meanes of thofetroubles, yet as 
long asthe bodies forme remaineth ic hath a certaine peace with ice felfe, 
andin the very manner of hanging , fhewes that it defireth to bee placed in 
the peace of nature, the very weight, feeming to demand a place for reft , arid. 
though life be gone; yet very nature fwayeth ic vntothac order wherein fhee 
placefit . For if the dead body bee preferued by putrefaGtion,by vuguents, and 
embalmings, yet (#) the peace of nature is kept ,for the bodies weight is appli- 
edtherby to an earthly fimpathizing fice,8¢ conuenient place for it co reft in. Bue 
if it bee rot (0) embalmed , butleft co natures diffoluing , itis fo long altered by 
(p)illrafting vapours, vntill each part bee wholy reduced to the perticular na- 
tures of the elements, yet is not a tittle of che Creators al-difpofing Jaw control- 
led : for ifthere grow outof this carcafle, amany more living creatures , each 
body of thefe, ferueth the quantity oflife that is in it,according to the fame law 
Ofcreation. And if that it be devoured vppe,by other rauenous beafts er birds, 
it fhall follow the ordinance of the fame law,difpofing al things congruently,in- 
to what forme of nature foeuer it be changed. 


L. VIVES. 


Eneralt(a ) forme}Or community of nature.[ Our fcholians fay that wee muft netict ref- 

| pe& words in matter of diuinity or Philofophy : this they auouch , hand-{mooth,and yet . 

one of their great men at Paris , broughre thefe words of e4ngr/time,(in a queftion of Philofe- 

[Louw _ phy )to confirme the communities of nature,which Occams had written againtt.. So likewife, 
uaine ¢o6« many of chem will haue Tw#ily ,Seneca,Hierome, e-/ugufine,P liny and others, ff eaking of com- 
Py de- mon fenfe, co meane chat which Ariffotle maketh the iudge ouer all the nes corporal], 
cftiue.] whereas they,and all latine authors take common fence , for athing that is vnitierfally inhe- 
rent,as for a mother to loue her child. And natures community is thofe generall inclinations 

that are inal!men. This miffinterpretation of words hath made -foule worke in artes, firft 

cankring and then diredtly killing them] (6) Jmagine fome [uch] This was Virgils Cacus. 

e£neid, 8.Hee was ouercome ( faith Dioxyfins ) by Hercules, hee dweltinan impregnable 

place, from whence hee plagued all that dwelt neere him : and hearing chat Hercales was en- 

camped nere him, hee {tele out and droue away a great prey: but the greekes iniured him in 

his {treagth. He dwelt(faith Sofas) at Saline, where port Trigemina ftands now. Beeing put 

faith Geiss.) into prifon by Tarchon the Tyrthene Prince , whileft hee was embaffader for 
aa ca a ln let 


, 


a ee 


Live 


& 


OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 


= ew oe ee 


gil Vulcurnum & Campania,he prefumed to encroch vpon the Arcadians whom Hercules pro- 


rected, who therevpon flew him, Thus out of thefe. Sersins faith : the fable reported him 
the fonne of Vulcan,thac he breathed fire,and deftroyed all that hee came neare,but the truth 
of all is,he was a thecuith and villenous feruant of Exanders, his hifter (aca betrayed hire,and 


- therefore had a chappell erected vnto her, wherein the veftalls offered facrifice. Lattant.(c) 


_—- 


who doe not breed birds 0 


Halfe-man] Virgil, and Seruins call him fo. (d) Cacas| Diodorus faith his proper name was 
Lacunins,if his copy bee true.isb.5. (e) His father Vulcan) Virg. O+ id.Faf?, end others call him 
fo becaufe hee burnt vp the corne, and wafted their fields, with fire. (£) The perfons } Whofe 
heads he {et vppe at the mouth of his caue. Virg. and Oxid (g} Breatheing of | Fire-breathing 
Cacus, did Virgil call him. (4) C omm ended Hercules | One ot whofe labours the death of Ca- 
cus was for Cacus {tole part of his Spanifh kine , and drew them into his caue by their tailes, 
leaft they fhould tract them by their fteps.Buc Hercules difcoucring them by their bellowing, 
prake into the Caue,& killed him, Livy, Diony{Virg.Oxid,and a many more,the {tory is com- 
mon.(é) In their kinde| By that law which the lawyers call natura‘l, U/pian lib. Pandet, (k) 
Tyger) A fierce beaft, Virg. and Onid vfe it asthe embleme of blondineffe.(/' Noujfle her yong] 
She loueth her young dearely.P/in..8, (ms) Kste] A rauenous and meaper foule.It is not feene 
in winter,and at the Se/sfficées,it hath che gout in the feete. Plis./.10.Arifforle hath one ftrang 


- note of the Eagles breed, that fome of them goe out of their kind, €& are hatched Ofpreyes:the 


Ofprey hatcheth not Aa he but che foules called géras,Beane-breakers,and they hatch kites, 

their owne kinde,but others, which die and neuer bring forth a- 
ny other.(#) The peace of | Empedocles held all things to confit by concord, and to diffolue by 
difcord,putting them two as the firft qualities of the foure elements. (0) Emsbalmed ]As they 


 yfe to preferue bodies the longer from putrefaction , drying vp the Vifcous humidity, fo that 


thereby the carcafes become dry , and at length turne to plaine pouder of duft. ( p) /AraFing] 
For asa good fent delighteth tne fenfe , fo doth a ranke one offend it : nature holding a cor- 
ré{pondent affection ynto things that delight , and an inherent diftafte of things offenfiue 
toit. | oo . | 


Of that uniner{all peace which wo perturbances can feclude from the | 
law of nature,Gads inft indgements difpofing of emery onc Ac- 
‘ cording to his proper defert. 
Cuwap.13. 


T He bodies (4) peace therefore is an orderly difpofe of the parts thereof: the 
vnreafonable {oules , a good temperature of the appetites thereof: the rea- 
fonable foules,a true harmony betweene the knowledge , and the performance. 
The bodies, and foules both,a temperate and vndifeafed habice of nature in the 


- wholecreature. The peace of mortall man with immortal G O D,is an orderly 


obedience vnto his erernall law , performed in faith. Peace of man and man , isa 
mutuall concord : peace of a family , an orderly rule and fubicGion amongft the 
parts thereof: peace of a citty ,an orderly command, and obedience amongft 
the citizens : peace of Gods Citty a moft orderly coherence in God, and frui- 


- tionof GOD: peace of althings, is a well difpofed order.For order,is a good dif- 


poficion of difcrepant parts , each in the ficceft place,and therfore the miferable; 
(as they are miferable) areout of order , wanting that peace-able and vnpex-_ 


curbed ftace which order exa@eth. But becaufetheir owne merices haue incur- 


red this mifery , therefore cuen herein they areimpofed in a certaine {et order 
howfoeuer. Being not con-ioyned with the bleffed , but feuered from them 
by the law of order ,and beeing expofed to miferies ; yetare adapted vnto the 
places wherein they are refident, and fo are digefted into. fome kinde of me- 
thodicall forme,and confequently into fome peacefull order . But this is theic 

Ps Vvv¥ snifery 


77° 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuar.13° 


mifery , thacalthough that fome little fecurity wherein chey liue, exempt them 
from prefent forrowes, yet arethey not in that ftate which fecludeth forrow for 
euer, and affordeth eternall fecarity. And their mifery is farre greater if they 
want the peace of nature :and whenthey are offended , the part chat grieueth 
is the firft difturber of their peace : for that which is neither offended , nor dif- 
folued , preferues the peace of nature ftill. So then as one may poflibly liue 
without griefe, but cannot poffibly grieue vnileffe hee liue: fo may there bee 
peace without any warre or contention : but contention , cannot bee without 
fome peace, (not as it is contention , but ) becaufethe contenders doe fuffer and 
performe diuers things herein according to natures prefcript, which things 
could not confift, had they not fome peacefull order amongft them. So that 
there may bee a nature( you fee ) wherein no euill may have inherence , but 
to findea nature veterly voide of goodneffe , is veterly impoffible. For the very 
nature of the deu Ils ( confider itas nature ) is moft excellent , but their owne 


‘voluntary peruerfnefle depraued ic. The deuill abode not in the truth, 


yet fcaped hee not the fentence of the truth: for hee tranfgrefled the 
peacefull lawe of order, yet could not avoide the powerfull hand of the er- 
derer. : . 

' The good which G OD had beftowed on his nature, cleared him not-from 
GODS heany iudgement which allotted him to punifhment. Yet dothnot 
GOD heerein punith the good which himfelfe created , but the euill which 
the deuill committed : nor did hee take away his wholenature from him, but 
left him part, whereby to bewaile the loffe of the reft: which lamentation, 
teftifyech both what hee had and what hee hath: for had hee not fome good 
left shee could not lament for what hee had loft. For his guilt is the greater 
that hauing loft allhis vprightnefle , fhouldreioyce at the loffe thereof. And 
hee thatis ficke, if ir benefit him nothing yet greeueth at the loffe of his health. 
For vprightnefle and health beeing both goods, it behooueth the loofers of 
them to mourne, and not to reioyce, vnleffe chis loffe bee repaired with bet- 
ter recompence, as vprightnefle of minde is better then health of bodie: 
but farre more reafon hath the finner co lament in his fuffering then to re- 
ioyce in his tranfgreffion. Therefore euen as to reioyceat the loffe of good- 
neffe in fining, argueth a depraved will: fo likewife lament for the fame loffe, in 
fuffering , prooueth a good nature. For he that bewaileth the loffe of his nacu- 
rall peace , hath his light from the remainders of that peace , which are left in 
him, keeping his nature and him in concord. | 

And inthe laft iudgement, it is bute reafon thatthe wicked fhould deplore 
the Joffe of their naturall goods, and feele GODS hand iuftly heauy in de- 
ptiuing them of them, whome they fcornefully refpe&ed not inthe beftow- 
ing themvponthem. Wherefore the high G O D, natures wifeft creator, and 
moft iuft difpofer, the parentofthe worlds faireft wonder ( mankinde)beftow- 


ed diuers goods vpon him, which ferue for this life onely , as the world! 


and temporall peace , kept by honeft cohzrence and fociety :together wit 
all che adiacents of this peace , asthe vifible light , the {pirable ayre, the 
a water ; and all che other necéffaries of meate drinke and cloathing: 
ut with this condition , that hee that fhall vfe:them in their due manner, 
and reference vnto (6) humaine peace , fhall bee rewarded with guiftes of farre 
greater moment , namely with a paace of immortalicy , and with roe 


Ling. 


OF THE CITIE OF Gop. wi 
glorie; and full fruition of G O Di and his brother;in the fanie G OD:(¢) biic he ep 
thac wfeth chem amiffe;(hall neither pertake ofthe formet Hor the larer. 


L, VIVES: 


6 tess (a) bolies peace | Saint atugnfine in this chapter prooiteth althin ps to confit by peace 
_= and concord : fo that confequently, difcord muft needes bee the fuell to all ruine and con- 
fulion , Wherefore I wonder at the peruerfe nature of men that loue diffentions and quar- 
rells,as their owne very foules hating peace , as ie were’a molt pernitious euill } Surels they 
had but there due, iftheir bofornes within , and their ftates without , were wholy raughe 
with this their fo deerely affected darling , warre, (5) Humane peace | But men doe turne all 
thefe goods now adaies into contentious vies ; as if, they were ordeined for rio other endsne- 
uet thinking that thete is a place of eternall difcord prepared fot them to dwell jn hereafter, 
where they may enioy their damned defireé for ener. The whole goodnefle of peace, and 
of that efpecially which CH RST leftvs as his full inheritance, is gone,all but forthe name 
and an imaginary fhade thereof, all che reft wee haue loft: nay wee haueimade a wi'ling exe 
trufion of it;and expelled it wittingly,and of {et purpofe, imagining our whole felicity to con- 
fift itt the cumules of warres and flaughters: And oh fo wee braue it, that wee haue flaine 
thus many men, burnt thus many townes , facked thus many citties! Founding our principal 

lories vpon the deftru€tion of our fellowes. But I may beginne a plaint of this heere, 
oa I thall neuer end it, (¢) Bat bee]A diuerfity of reading in the topies,rather worth no- 
thing then noting. | | | 


-Y 
' 
. 


4 


Of the law of Heauvit and Earth,which fioaieth humane 
Sotiety by counfell, and unto which connfell ha-~ 
| mane fociety obeyeth. 
Ciarig 


A LL temporal] chings are referred ¢nto the benefit of thie a which is re. 
A fidentin the Terrefriall Cittie , by the members thereof: and vnto the vfe 
of the eterhall peace, by the Cittizens of the Heavenly fociety. Wherefore if 
wee wanted reafon , wee fhould defire but an orderly ftate of body, and a 
good temperature of affects : nothing but flefhly eafe, and fulneffé of pleafure. 
For the peace of the bouly augmenteth the quiet of the foule: and ifitbee a 
Wanting,it procureth a difturbarice nen in brute beafts, betaufe the affeds haue 
‘not their true temperature, | | | a 
_ Now both thefe combined, adde vnto the peace of foule and bodie both > that 
is , vmto the healthfull order of life. For asall creatures fhew how they de- 
fire their bodies peace, in avoyding the caufes of chéir hurt -and their foules, 
in following their appetites when neede requireth : fo in flying of deaths they 
make it as apparant how much they fet by their peice of foule and body. Bue 
man hauing a reafortable foule , fubiecteth all his communities with beafts ,Vn- 
to the peace of that, to worke fo both in his contemplation and aGtion , that 
thére may bee atrue confonance betweene them both , and this weecall the 
peace of the reafonable foule . To this end hee is to avoide peer 
griefe , difturbance by defiré , and diffolucion by death sand to aymeatpro - 
table knowledge ) Wherevnto his ations may bee conformable. But leaft- 
bis owne infirmity , throughthe much defire to: know, (hould étaw hith in-” 
toany peftilent inconuenience of — > hee muft haue a dhuite a 
oe vv s _ t 


0 seer 


r om 


72 «= SAINT AVGVSTINE. + — Cuanrg.8r5 


co whofe direGions and affiftance , hee is to affent wich firme’ and free obedi- 
ence... And becaufe char during this life, Hee ss abfemt fromthe LOR D , hee-walk- 
eth by faith , and not by fight, and therefore hee referrethall his peace of bodie, 
of foule and of both, vnto that peace which mortal man hath wich immor- 
tall GOD: to liue in an orderlie obedience vnder his eternall lawe , by 
faith. | Ss 
Now G OD, our good Maifter , teaching vs in the two'chiefeft precepts the 
loue of him , and che loue ofour neighbour, toloue three things, GOD , our 
neighbour,and our felues,and feeing he that loueth G OD, offendeth not in fo-_ 
uing himfelfe: ic followeth, thathee ought to counfell his neighbour to loue 
GOD, and to prouide tor him in the love of G OD, fure hee is commanded to 
loue him,as his owne felfe. So muft hee doe for his wife, children , family, and 
all men befides: and with likewive that his neighbour would doe as much for 
him, inhis need : thus fhall hee bee fettled in peace and orderly concord with all 
the world. The order whereof is, firft (4) todoeno man hurt, and fecondly,to 
helpe all that hee can. So that his owne, hauvethe firft place in his care, and 
| thofe , his place and order in humane fociety affordeth him more conuenicncy 
___ tobenefit, Wherevpon Saint Paul faith, Hee thet prowideth wot for his owne, 
TTI $.8 and namely for them that bee of his hou{hold ,denieth the faith, andss worfe shen an 
Infidel. For this is the foundation of domefticall peace, which is , an orderly 
rule,and {ubieGtion inthe partes of the familie , wherein the prouifors are the 
Commaunders,as the husband ouer his wifes parents ouer their children, and 
maifters over their feruants : aid they-that are provided for, obey, as the 
wiues doe their husbands , children their, parents , and feruants their maifters, 
But inthe family of rhe faithfull man, the heavenly pilgrim , there the Com- 
maunders are indeed the feruants of thofe they fecme to commaund: ruling not 
in ambition, but beeing bound by carefull duety : not in proud foueraignry, but 
in nourifhing pitty. | | 


2.Cor, 5.7 


L. VIVES. 
FF“ (4) to doe xo| Man can mote eafily doe hurt , or forbeare hutt,theh doe good . All men 


may iniure others,or abftaine from it . But to doe good, is all and fome.. Whercfore holy 
writ bids vs firft,abftaine from iniary,all we can: and chen, to benefic our chriftian bretheren, 
whenweecan, | 


Natures freedome and bondage,caufed by finne: in which man: . 
03 4 flane to bis owne affects,though he be sot 
bondman to any onebefides. 


Cuap. 15. 


Hus hath natures order prefcribed , and man by GO D was thus creared, 

a Let themrule ( faith hee) oner the files ofthe fea and the fcwles of theayre, 
Gens. 26 end ower enery thing that creepeth upon the earth. Hee made him, reafonable, 
and LORD, onely ouer the vnreafonable, not ouer man, but ouer beaftes, 
Wherevpon the firft holy men were rather fhep-heards chen Kings 1c OD 
= ewing 


Liergs OF THE CITIE OF GOD. ae 


fhewing herein what both the order of the creation defired , and what the 
merit of fiane exacted. For iuftly was the burden of feruitude layd vpon the 
backe of tranfgreffion. And therefore in all the fcriptures wee neuer reade 
the word, Seruant, vntill fuchtime as that iuft man Nosh (2) layd itas acurfe vp- 
on his offending fonne. Sothat it was pul, and not nature that gaue origi- 
nall vnto that name. (6) The latine word Seruus, had the firft derivation from - 
hence: thofe that were taken in the warres , beeing in the hands of the conque- 
rours to maffacre or to preferue, ifthey fauedthem , then were they called Ser— 
wi, of Serus; to faue . Nor was this effeGted beyond the defert of finne. For 
in the iufteft warre., the finnevpon one fide caufeth it; and if the vi€ory fall 
to the wicked (as fome-times it may )(¢} it is GODS decree tohumble 
the conquered , either reforming their finnes heerein , or punifhing them, 
Witneffe , that holy manofG OD , Daxie/, who beeing in captiuity , confeffed 
vnto his Creator , that his finnes ,andche finnes of the people were the reall 
caufestof that captiuity. = ee | | 
Sinne therefore is the mother of feruitude ,and firlt caufe of mans fubiec- 
tion to man: which notwithftanding commeth not to paffe.but by the diree- 
tion of the higheft , in whome is no iniuftice, and who alone knoweth beft how 
to proportionate his punnifhment vnto mans offences:and hee himielfefaich: — . 
Whofeener committeth (inne is the feruant of finne ,and therefore many religious 108.34. 
Chriftians are feruants vnto wicked maifters ,(d@) yet not vnto free-men, for 
that which a man is addiGed vnto ,the fame is heeflauevnto. And it isa hap. 
pier feruitude to ferue man then lu: for luft (to ommic all che other affects) 
practifeth extreame tirany vpon the hearts of thofe that feruc it, bee it luft af- 
ter foueraignty ,or-fiefhly luft. Burin the peacefull orders of ftates,wherein 
one man is vider an other, as humility doth benefit the feruant , fo doth pride 
endamage the fuperior. But take aman as GOD created him atfirft , and fo 
hee is neither flaue to man nor to finne. But penall feruitude had the infticu- 
tion from that law which commaundeth the conferuation , and fotbiddeth the 
diftarbance of natures order : for if thaclaw had not firft beenetranfgreffed, 
penall feruitude had neuer beene enioyned. - ae 
Therefore the Apoftle warneth feruants to obey their Maifters and to phe. 
ferue them with cheerefulnefle , and good will:to the end that if they cannoe 
bee miade free by their Maifters , they make their feruitude a free-dometo 
~ themfelues ;by oe in deceiptfull feare , but in faithful! loue, vn- 
till iniquity be ouerpaffed , and all mianis power and principality difanulled, and 
GO Donely beall in all. | 


L. VIVES. 

Now (4) layd it Gen. 9. (6) The latine |So faith Florextinns the. Ciuilian , Jnftitueib.4. 

Andthey are called Aancipia ( quoth hee ) of masse captisto take with the hand, or, 

by force, This you may reade in Juftintans Pandects éb.1. The Lacedemonians obferued, 

itfirft. Plinls.7,(c) It is Gods decree) Whole prouidence often produceth warres againtt 

the wills of either party. (4) Yet not unto free] Their Maifters being flaues to their owne pafft- 
ons,which are worfe maiftersthenmencanbe. = | a : 


. ’ 2 5 ’ . 3 . . | ‘ a 
hah at EE Se 


‘ 
? 


Of the iuft law of foweraignty. 

. CaP. 16. 
V 7 Herefore es our righteous foré-fathers had fernants in their fami- 
lies ,and according to their temporall eftates , made a diftinGion be- 
twixctheir feruants and their children , yet in matter of religion ( the fountaine 
whence all eternall good floweth, ) they prouided for all their houfhold with 
an equall refpe@ vnto each member thereof. This, natures order prefcribed, 
and hence came the name of, The Father of the family a name which euenthe 
worft Maifters loueto bee called by. But fuch as merit that name truely , doe 
carethat all their families fhould continue in the feruice of GOD, as ifthey 
wereall their owne children , defyring that they fhould all bee placed in the 
houfhold of heauen , where commaund is wholy vnneceffary , becaufe then 
they are paft their charge , hauing attained immortality , which votill they 
bee inftalled in ,the Maifters are (2) to endure more labour in their gouern- 
ment , then the feruants in their feruices If any bee difobedient , and offend 
this iuft peace,hee is forth-with to bee corrected , with ftrokes , or fome other 
conuenient punifhment, whereby hee may beere-ingraffed into the peace-full 
ftocke from - whence his difobedience hath torne him. For as it is no good 
eurneto helpe a man vatoa fmaller good by the loffe of agreater : no more 
is it the part of innocence by pardoning a. {mill offence , to let it grow vnro 
a fouler. It is the duetie of an innocent to hurt no man, but withall ,to curbe 
finne inall hee can , and to corre& finne in whome' hee:can, that the finners 
correGion. may hee profitable-to himfe}fe., and his example a terrour vnto o- 
thers . Euery family then beeing part -of.the cittte , euery beginning hauing 
relation vnto fomeend , and euery part yténding tothe integrity of the whole, 
it followeth apparantly , that the families; peace adhereth vnto the citties, 
thas is the orderly command, and obedience in the familie ,hath reall refe- 
rence to the orderly rule and fubieGion. in the cittie. So that the Father of — 
the familie may fetch his inftru&ions from the citties government , whereby 
‘may proportionate the peace of his priuate eftate , by that of the 
ommon. : a | 


-L.VIVES. 


i b= Maifters (a) ave to' endure \Icis moft difficult and laborious to rule well,and it is as 
crouble-fome to rule ouer vnruly perfons. . 7 


i++, The graunds of the concord, and difcord betweenctheCitties of Heauen 


BY they that liue not according to faith, angle for all their peace 
J in the Sea of temporal] profittes : Whereas the righteous live in full 
expeGation of the glories to come , vfing the occurences of this 
Worlde , but as pilgrimes , not to abandon their courfe towardes GO 


Lrety.-. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 775 


SRS (SE NP LE - 


for mortall refpets, but therebyxo affift che infirmity of the corruptible flefh, 
and make ic more ‘able to encounter with toyle.and trouble. Whereforé the ne- 
ceffaries of thislife arecemmon, both to the. faicthfull.and rhe Infidel, -andta 
both cheir families : butthe endes of: their two vfageés thereof are farre diffe- 
rent. ; 

The faythlefle, worldly cétty, aymeth at earthly peace, and fettleth the 
felfe therein, onely tohaue an yAiformity of the Cictizens wills in matters 
onely pertayning till mortality. And the Heavenly citty, or rather chat pare 
thereof, which is as yet a pilgrimeon earth and liveth by faich , vfeth this 
peace alfo : as befitceth vnto, itleaue this mortall life wherein fuch a peace is 
requifite and therefore liveth(while itis hereon earth )as if it were in capti- 
‘uity, and-hauing receiued thé promife of redemption, and divers {piricu- 
all guifts, as feales thereof, it willingly obeyeth firch lawes of the temsporall citty 
as order the things pertayning to the fuftenance of this mortall life, to the 
end that both the Citties might obferue a peace in fuch things as are per- 
tinent here-vnto. But becaufe that the Esrth/y. Cisty hath fome, members, 
whome the holy fcriptures veterly difallow, and who ftanding either to well 
affe&ted to the diuells ; or being. iJluded by them, beleeued that each thing 
had a peculiar deity. ouer it, and belonged to the charge of a fenerall God: 
as the body.to one, the foule to another, and in the body it felfe the head to 
one, thenecke to another , and fo of euery member : as likewife of the foule, 
ene had the witt, another the learning , a chird the wrath, a forth the defire: 
as alfo in other neceflaries or accidents belonging to mans life , the cartel], 
the corne, thewine , the oyle, the woods, the monies, the nauigation, the 
warres, the mariages, the generations: each being a fcuerall charge vntoa 
particular power, whereas the cittizens of the Heauenly ftate acknowledged 
but one onely God,to whom that worfhippe, which is called aarptie was peculi- 
arly and folly due : hence came it that the two héerachies , could not bee com- 
bined in one religion, but muft needs diffent herein, forbat the good pare was 
faine to beare the pride and perfecution of the bad, burt that their owne 
multitude fome-times , and the providence of G O D continually ftood for 
their protection. | | er oe ee eee | 

This cele/tiall foctety while it is here on earth, increafeth it felfe out of all 
languages , neuer refpecting the temporall lawes that are made againft fo 
good and religious a practife : yet not breaking , but obferuing their diuerfi- 
ty indiuers nations, all which do tend vnto the preferuation of earthly peace, 
if chey appofe not the adoration of one onely GOD. So that you fee, the 
Heauenly citty obferueth and refpe&eth this temporall peace here on Earth, 
and the coherence of mens wills in honeft morality, as farreas ic may-with 
a fafe confcience,yeaand fo farre defireth it, making vfe of it for the atraynement 
of the peace eternall : which is fo trdely worthy of that name, as that the order- 
fy dnd vhiforme combination of mien in the -fruition of GOD, and of ovean-. 
other in G O D, is to be acconipred the reafonable creatures onely peace, 
which being once attained, mortality is banifhed, andlife.then is the (4) true 
life indeed, nor is the carnall body-any more an encombrance to the foule,, by 
corruptibility, but iShow become fpirituall, perfeded, and entirely fubie& vnto 
the fouerainety ofthewill, 7 Fe ie . 
This peace is hae vnto which the pilgcime in faith referreth the other which he 


796 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuarer8.8¢ 196 


(RSE 
hath here in his pilgrimage, and then liueth hee according to faith , when all chat 


hee doth forthe obteining hereof is by him-felfe referred vnto God, and his 


_ neighbour with-all, becaufe being a cittizen, hee muft not bee all for him-felfe, 


but fociable, in his life and a@tions. 


L. VIVES. 
TH (4) true life] Ennins vied the Latine phrale Vite vitalis, to which Auguffine alludeth. 
Cicero. 


That the fufpended dottrine of the new Academy oppofeth the conftancie 
of Chriftiantty. Crap. 18. 


As for the new Academians, whome Varro auoutcheth to hold no certeinty 
but this, That i things are uucertaine. the Church of God detefteth thefe 
doubts,as madneffes, hauing amoft certaine knowledge of thethings it appre- 
hendeth,alchough but in fmall quantity , becaufeof che corruptible Body which 
is a burdento the foule, and becaufeas the —Apoftle faith, wee know (but ) in part. 
Befides, it beleeueth the ferice in obie&s,of which the minde iudgeth by the fen- 
fitiue organs, becaufe hee isina pies error that taketh all truft from them: Ie 
beleeueth alfo the holy canonicall fcriptures,both old and new, from which the 
iuft man hath his faith, by which hee liueth, and wherein (4 ) wee all walke 
with-out doubt , as long as wee are in our mien, , and perfonally abfene 
from God: and this faith being kept firme, wee may lawfully doubt of all fuch 


"other things as are not manifefted vnto vs eyther by fence,reafon, {cripture, nor 


teftimony of grounded authoritie. 


L.VIVES. 


WE allwalke (4) without donb | We haue no knowledge of it , but beleeue it as firmely 
_- as what wee fee with our eyes. 


Of the hebite,and manners belonging to 4 Chriftian. 
: Cuap. 19. 


3 isnothing to the Cétty of God what attyre the cittizens weare,or whacrules 
they obferue, as long as they contradi@ not Gods holy precepts, but each one 
keepe the faith,the true path co faluation : and therefore when a Philofopher be- 
commeth a Chriftian , they neuer make him alter his habice, nor his manners, 
which are no hindrance to his religion, but his falfe opinions. They refpe@ not 
Varro’s diftin@ion of the Cynikes, as long as they forbeare vncleane and intem- 
perate aGtions. But as concerning the three kindes of life , a€tiue , contempla- 
tiue,and the meanes betweene both, although one may keepe the faith in any of 
thofe courfes, yetthere isa difference betweene the love of the truth , and the 
duties of charitie. One may not bee fo giuen to contemplation , that hee negle& 
the good of his neighbour: nor fo farrein loue with a&ion that hee forget di- 
uine fpeculation.In contemplation onemay not feeke foridleneffle,but for cruth: 

to 


a 


a. lU©we in ooo 


on TE OE cp OT EPA AS I PaO STE A ES SET EA 
Lipig. OF THE CITIE-OF GOD. 797 

to benefite him-felfe by the knowledge thereof, and not to grudge to impart it 

vnto others. In action one may nor aymeat highnefle or honor , becaufe a//va- 

der thefanne a meere vanitie: butto performerbe worke of a fuperiour vnto the 

true end, that is, vnto the benefire and faluation of the fubiett,aswee faydbe- 
fore. And this made the Apoftle fay. : If any man defere the office pf 4 re hee 1.Tim,3.%0 
defireth 4 good worke : what this office was, hee explaineth noc sit is an offict of 
Jabour, and nor of honour. (4) The Gretke word fignifieth chat-hee thar is 

heerein inftalled, is to watch ouer his people that are vnder him: Epé(copusa 

Bifhop,commeth of ®), which is, ower,and cms,which is ,4 watching, or andte 

tendance :{o that wee may very well tranflate tricone, 4 fuperintendent, to thew 

that hee is no true Bifhop, who defireth rather to be Lordly him-felfe , then pro- 

fitable vnto others. No man therefore is forbidden to proceed in a lawdable 

forme of contemplatiom But to affe& foueraignty, though the people muft bee 

gouerned,& though the place be well difcharged, yet notwithitanding is (5) tax- 

able of indecencie. Wherefore the lone of truth requireth a holy retirednefle: 

and the neceffity of charity,aiuft employment, which if ic bee-not <i vp- 

on vs, wee ought not to feeke it, but be-cake our felues wholy to the holy inqueft 
of truth : but if wee bee called forth vntoa place , the law and need of charity 

bindeth vs to vnder-take it. (¢) Yet may wee not for all this , giue ouer our firft 

refolution, leaft wee loofe the {weetnefle of that ,and bee furcharged wich the 

weight of the other. | : 


L.VIVES. 


[T% (4) Grecke word | of this before. (ib. 1. cap.ge iwioxer@ comes either of izisxeme, to 

confider, or of ixexe7Jouas, which is, to vifit. The Scripture, where the feauenty tranflated _ 
ixicxnow@-, doc read it, 4 watch-man, as in Exechiel, o& Ofee, chap.s.[ where the Lord com- {The Lo= 
ape that they bad beene a {sare in their watching, anda net vpox monnt Thabor, As if hee uaine co" 


ad fpoken of che Bifhops of thefe times,who fet {nares fot benefices, and {pread large netts pie de- 


for moncy , but not too wide wafted , Jeaft the cayne fhould {catter forth. (6) Taxable of feAtiue 


indecencie \O but fome fine braines haue now brought it fo about , that bifhoprickes may 


not onely bee fued for, but euen bought and fold with-out any preiudice at all vnto ‘this 


Jawe.] (c) Yet may wee not | Hee fheweth thata Bifhop fhould conuerfe with the holy ferip- thus fat.) 
tures often, and drawe him-felfe home ynto God now and then, from all his bufineffes, liuing 

(if he did well) as a pilgrim of Gods in this life , and one that had a charge of Gods , and his 

owne foules in hand, not any temporall trafh ,and yet onghthe not to forfake his miniftery, 

to which he fhould be preferred by an heauenly calling,and not by an heaty purffe, 


Ho pe,the bliffe of the heanenly Cittizens daring this life. 

a Cuar. 40. : 
"Tien therefore is the good of the Hely [ociety perfea : when cheir peace is 
B eftablifhed in eternity: not running any more in fucceffions as mortall men 
doe in life and death , one to another : but confirmed vnto thenr together with 


their immortalitie for euer , with-out touch of the leaftimperfeion. What is 
bee that would not. accompt fuch an eftate moft happy , or compating ie 


778 


SAINT AY GVSTINE. Cuar.at 


with that which man hath heere vpon earth, would not auouch this later to bee 
moft miferable,were it neuer fo well fraught with temporall conueniences ? yet 
hee chat hath the latter in poffeffion , and :applyeth it all vnto the vfe of his 
hopes firme and faithfull obie& : theformer, may not vnfitly bee called happy 
already, but that is rather in his expeation of the firft , then in his fruition of 
thelater. For this poffeffton with-out the other hope, isa falfe beatitude, anda 
moft true mifery. For herein is no vfe of the mindes trueft goods, becaufe there 
wanceth the true wifdome, which in the prudent: difcretion,refolute perfor- 
mance,temperate reftraine, and iuft diftribution of chefe things , fhould referre 
his intent in all chefe,vnto that end,where God thall bee all in all,where eternity 
fhall be firme,and peace moft perfe&andabfolute. - 


Whether the Citty of Rome had ener atrue tommon-wealth, according 
to Scipio's definstion of 4 common-wealth in Tully. 
- C HAP. 31. 


Nov itis time to performe a promife whichI pafledin the fecond booke 


of this worke : and that was,tofhew that Rome neuer had a true common- 
wealth, as Scipio defineth one in Twlyes booke De Repub. his Definition was, A 
common-wealth is the eftate of the people. ke/pub. e8 res populi. If this be true, 
Rome never had any,for it neuer had an eftate of the people , which hee defines 
the common-wealth by: For,he defineth the people to bee a multitude, vnited in 
one confent of lawe and profite : what hee meaneth by acanfent of Jawe, hice 
fheweth him-felfe : and fheweth chere-by thata ftate cannot ftand with-out iu- 
fice : fo chac where true iuftice wanteth, there can bee no law. For what lawe 


doth;iuftice doth, and what is done vniuftly, is done vnlawfully . For wee may 


not imagine mens vniuft decrees to bee lawes : all men defining law to ( « Jarife 


. outof thefountaine of iuftice and chat that fame vniuft affertion of fome, is 


oe viterly falfe: ( b) That is Lew which is proptable unto the greateft. So chen, where 


iuftice is not, there can bee no focietie vnited in one confent of lawe , therefore 
no 04 , according to Seipses definitions in Ts//y. If no people, then no eftate 
of the people,but rather of a confufed multitude, vnworthy ofa peoples name. 


 Ifthen che common-wealth be an eftate of the people,and that they bee no peo- 


le that arenot vnited in one confent of lawe: nor that no law, which ground- 
eth not vpon iuftice : then followeth it needes , that where no iuftice is , thereno 
commion-wealth is. Now then 4d propo/tusn : Luftice is a vertue diftributing vnto 
every onc his due. What iuftice is chat chen,that takéth man from the true God, 
and giueth him vnto the damned fiends ? is this diftribution of due? is hee that 
taketh away thy poffefftons,and giueth them to onethat hath no claime to them 
guilty of in-iuftice, and is not hee fo likewile, that taketh him-felfe away frem 
his Lord God, and giueth him-felfe tothe feruice of the deuill 2 There are witty 
and powerfull difputations in thofe bookes De repub. for iuftice againft in-iu- 
ftice. Wherein, it hauing firft béeene argued for in-iuftice, againft iuftice, and 
auerred that a {tate could not ftand with-out in-iuftice ; 8 this broughtasa 
principall confirmation hereof , that it is in-iuftice for man torule ouer-man, 
and yet if the Citty whofe dominion is fo large, fhould not obferue this forme 
of in-iuftice , thee could neuer keepe the prouinces vnder. Vnto this it was 
an{fwered on the behalfe of iuftice,that this was a iuft courfe,, it being — 
| . or 


Lixig. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 
for fuch to ferue,and for.their good,to witte, when the power to do hurt iscaken 
from the wicked,they wilcarry themfelues better being curbed, becaufe they ca- 
ried the mfelues fo badly before they were curbed. To confirme this anfwer this 
notable example was alledged,as being fetched from nature it felfe://st were vit 
juft to rule,why doth God rule oner man,the foule oner the body,reafon oner luft,and al the 
mindes other vicious affects > This example teacheth plaine that it is good for fome 
to ferue in perticular , and itis good for all to ferue, God in generall. And the 
mind feruing God, is lawfull Lord ouer the body:{o is reafon being fubieét vn- 
to God, ouer the lufts and other vices. Wherefore if man feruenot God, what 
iuftice can bee thought to bee in him ? feeing that if hee ferue not him the 
foule hath neicher lawfull fouerainty ouer the body , nor the reafon ouer the af- 
fects : now if this iuftice cannot befound in owne man , no mote can ic then ina 
whole multitude of fuch likemen. Therefore amongft fuch there is not that con- 
fent of law which maketh a multitude a people, whofe eftate maketh a common- 
wealth ; What neede I {peake of the profic, that is named inthe definition of a 
people? for although that none liue preficably that liue wickedly , that ferue not 
God,but the Diuells ( who are fo much the more wicked in that they being moft 
filthy creatures,dare exact facrifices as if zhey were gods:) yet I chinke that what 
Thauefaid of the confentof law may ferue to fhew that they were-no people 
whofe eftate might make a weale-publike , having no iuftice amongft them. If 
they fay they did not ferue Diuells, but holy gods , \ hat neede wee rehcarfe 
that here which we faid fo often before?who is he hat hath read ouer this worke 
vnto this chapter,and yet doubreth whether they were diuells that the Romaines 
worthipped or noevnlefie he be either fenflefily blocki(h,or f.ameleffely conten- 
tious ? But to leaue the powers that they offered vnto , take this place of holy 
writ for all: He that (acrificeth unto gods,{balbe rooted owt but untoone God alone. He 
that taught this in fuch threatning manner will haue no gods facrificed vnto, be 
they good or be they bad. | | 


L, VIVES. 


L~ te (a) arife.), (s0,daleg lib.x. Te was not the peoples command ( faith he ) nor Princes 

decrees , nor iudges fentences , but the very rule of nature chat gaue originall ynto law. 
Andagaine, 6,2. 1 fee that the wifeft men held that law came neither from mans innentions nor. 
popular decrees, but isan eternall thing, ruling all the world by the knowledge of commandin g and 
forbidding : and fo they anoutched the bigh law of allto be the intellett of that great God who fway- 


eth all by compulfion and prohibition. Thus Tully , out of Plato, ard thus the Scoikes held 


aganft Epicwrus who held that nature accounted nothing iuft, but feare did. Sene. Epsit.16. 
This holy law that lyeth recorded in euery-mans confcience,the ciuilians call right and reafon 
eguum (5 bonum. | - atta . | 

_So that Ulpian defineth law to be ars equi & boni ,an arte of right and reafon, making him 
oucly a Lawyer chat can skill of this right and reaton, and fuch that as Tully faydof Sulpitine, 
seferre all ynto equity, and had rather end controuerfies then procure them, that peace 
might be generally kept armongft men, and eachbee at peace with him-felfe , which is the 
chiefe ioy of nature, | eT ) 7 " 

Surely the lawyers of ancient times were appointed for this end, to decide and finith cons 
tentions, as when I was licle better then.a child, I remember J hard mine vacle He 
Marke read in his admired le&tures vpon Iuftinians Inftitutions, Francefco Crane 


cemmyocttewnelpnenanesescenectnsnnr eeepc 


780 


SAINT AVGVSTINE.. = Curarva2.&23- 


and Ihad much talke hereof, of late, who is a famous and profouud ciuilian , and in truth hee 
made a preat complaint in my hearing of the quirkes, and coufonages that thelawyers of this 
age do hatch and bring forth. Truly he is aman of a rare conceipt, and of that harmeleffe 
cariage withall, that conuerfe with him feauen yeares, and pi you fhall neuer heare offenfiue 
tearme come out of his mouth. Marke Lasrino, Deane of S. Donatians in Bruges was with 
vs now and then: if learning had many fuch friends as he , ic would beare an higher fayle then 
ie doth. John Fennins alo, of the fame houfe, was with vs fometimes , 2 youth naturally or- 
dayned to learning , and fo be applieth him- felfe.(b ) That is Law. | So did Thrafibulus define 
law. Plato de Rep.lib.1. where Socrates confuteth him , but truely thelawtlrat isin ordinary 
practife,is moft of this nature. | 


eee 6 


whether Chrift, the Chriftzans God be he untowhome onely 
Sacrifice is to be offered. 


CuHap. 22. 


B Vethey may reply:who is that God? or how proue you him to be worthy of 
all the Romaines facrifices , and none befides him to haue any pare ? oh itisa 
figne of great blindneffe,to be yet to learne who that God is! Ie is he whofe pro- 

hets fore-cold what our owne eyes faw effeGed: itis hethat tolde orzhans, In 
thy feed {hall ell the nations be bleffed, which the remainders of the haters of Chrif- 


tianity do know , whether they will orno, to hauebeene fulfilled in Chrift , de- 


{cended from —4braham inthe fieth. Itis thar God whofe fpirie fpake in them 
whofe prophecies the whole Church beholdeth fulfilled : the whole Church, 
{pred ouer the face of the whole earth, beholds them, and in that were they ful- 
filled,which I related in my former bookes. Ic is that God whome Varro calleth 
the Romaines Joe, though he know not what he faith, yetthis Iadde becaufe 
that fo greata fcholler thought him to beeneitherno Godatall, nor one of the . 
meanett, for hee thought that this was the great God ofall. Briefly, itis euen 
thac God whome that learned Philofopher Prophiry (albeit he was a deadly foe 
to Chriftianity ) acknowledged to bee the higheft God, euen by the Oracles of 
thofe whom hee called the inferiour gods. | 


Porphiry his relation of the Oracles touching chrift. 
| Cuar.23. 


F Orhe in his bookes whichhe entitleth Ssercyie grrccovias , The dininity of Phile- 
Sopey wherein he ferteth downe the Oracles anfweres in things belonging to 
Philofophy , hath fomething to this purpofe, and thus it is, from the Greeke: 
One went (faith he ) vato the Oracle, and afked unto what God he fhould facrzfice for to 
obtaine his wives conserfion from Christianity: Apollo anfwered him thus: Thos 
masfi fooner write legible letters upon the water , or get thee wings to fly through ayre 
like a bird, then reuoke thy wife frons hir polluted opinion. Let her runne after her 
wad opinions , a6 long as {be lift : let her honour that dead God with her falfe lamenta- 
tions whomse the wife and well adusfedindges condemned, and whome a{bamefull death 
upon the croffe di/patched. Thus farre the Oracle , the Greeke is in verfe but our 
language will not beare it. After thefe verfes,Prophiry addeth this : Behold how re- 
msedyleffe their erroncons beleefe is : becaufe as Apollo faid ( quoth he ) the ewes de 
recciue 


a ira ae a ey 


Lintyg. ‘OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 


981 , 


receiue God with meanes greater then others. Heare youthis? hee difgraceth and 
ob{cureth Chrsi#,and yet faith, the Jewes receine God, for fo he interpreteth theo- 
racles verfes,where they fay that Chri? was condemned by-well aduifed judges, 
as though. hee had beene lawfully condemned and iuftly executed. This lying 
Priefts ‘oracle let him looke-vato , and beleeue if hee like it : butic may very 
well bee thatthe Oracle gaue no fuch anfwer , but that this is a meere fiction of 
his. How hee reconciles the oracles, and agrees with him-felfe, wee thall fee by 
ahd by. But by the way, heere hee faith , that the lewes, as the receiuers of God, 
indged aright in dooing Chri to. fo ignominious and cruel! a death. Sothento 
the lewes God fayd well infaying , Hee that facrificeth unto many Gods [bill bee 
roctedcut, but unto owe God onely. But come on, let vs goe to more manifeft mat- 
ter, and_heere what hee maketh of the lewes Ged: Hee asked —4pollo which was 
better, th: word,or the Liw: And hee an{wered thus ( faith hee ) and then: hee ad- 
deth the anf. er,I will relate as muchof it as needeth ): Vpow God the Creator, 
and upon the King before allthings, who maketh heawen and earth, the fea , and hell, 
yeaand ali the Gods to tremble: the lawe ss their father, whome the holy Hebrewes 
doe adore. This glory doth Porphyry giue the Hebrew God,from his God Apollo, 
that the very deities doe tremble betore him. So then this God hauing fayd, Hee 
that facrificeth unto many Gods fhall bee rooted ont, 1 wonder that Porphyry was not - 
atraide to bee rooted out for offering to fo many Gods. Nay this fellow {peak- 
eth well of Chrés# afterwards, as forgetting the reproche hee offered him be- 
fore: as if in their dreames, his Gods had {corned CHRIST, and beeing a 
wake, commended him, and acknowledged his goodnefle. Finally ,as if hee . 
meant to fpeakefome maruellous matter: /# may exceede all beleefe (faith hee ) 
which I am now to deliner : the Gods affirmed C URIS T to bee aman moft godly, and 

- immortalized for his goodnelfe, esuing him great commendations : but for the Chri- 
| flians , they auouche them to bee perfons ftained with all corruption and errour: and 
gine thern all the foule words that may bee. Thervhee relateth the Oracles which 
bla{pheme the Chriftian religion,and afterwards, Hecate ( {arth hee being asked 
if Chriff were GOD, replyed thus: His foule beeing feucred from his body became 
Sminortall; but it wandereth about voyde of all w1[dome : it was the foule of & most 
worthy man, whome now thofe that forfake the trath, doe wor{bip. And then hee ad- 
deth his owne fayings vpon this oracle, in this manner. The godde(fe therefore 
called him a most godly man, and that the detuded Chriftians doe worlbip his fonle, bee- 
ing made immortal after death , as other godly foules are. Now beeing asked why 
hee was condemned then? fhee anfwered: His body was condemned to torments, 
bat his foule fittct h abaue in heauen,and gincth allthofe foules vntoerrour by defleny, 
who cannot attaine the guifts of the Goas, or come to the knowledge of smmortall 
loue. 40d therefore are they hated of the Gods, becaufe they-netther acknowledge 
them,nor receiue their gifts, but are deftin'd vato errour by him: now hee him -felfe 
was godly, and went up toheau: nas godly men doe. Therefore blafpheame not him, 


but pitty the poore foules whome hee hath bound in errour. — 
What man is there (6 fond’ chat cannot obfetue that thefe oraclesareeither 
diredily faizned by this craftie foe’ of Chriftianicy ,or elfe the Deuills owne 
trickes to this end, hati. prayfing’ of Christ, they. might f{eeine truely to repre- 
hend the Chriftian profeffion ? and fo'if they could, to ftop mans entrance into 
Chriftianity;the fole way vnto faluation? for they’ chinke it no preiudiceto their - 
many-formed deceipt.to be beleevéd'in-praifi die as long as they be be- 
leeued alfo in difprayfidg’ the Chriftian, Othathectlac belecuech shem,mutt bea 


732 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. | C uar.23. 


commender of Chrif, and yet a contemner of his religion. And thus alchough 
hee honour Chré/f,yet fhall not Chrsf free him from the clutches of the Deuill, 
becaufe they giue Chrift fuch akinde of praife ,as who fo beleeueth to bee true, 


. fhall be farre from true Chriftianicy,and rather then other-wife, of (6 ) Photénas 


— buteventoreuerence thofe depraued Demonzes . 


his herefie,who held Chrift to be but onely man,and no Ged at all: fo that fucha 
beleeuer fhould neuer bee faued by Chréf# ,nor cleared of the deuils fowling 


nettes.: — 


But we willneither beieeue Apollo in his deprauation,nor Hecete in her commen- 
dation of Chrift. He will haue Chrift a wicked man, and iuftly condemned, the will 
haue liim.a moft godly man,and yet but onely man. But both agree in this , they 
wouldhane no chriftians,becaufe all bur chriftians are in their clutches. But let 
this Philofopher,or they that give credence to thofe oracles againft chriftianity, 
if chey can reconcile Apollo and Hetsteyand make them both tell one tale,either in 
deceitfull deuills bothin theic good words and in their bad.But feeing this God & 
this goddefle cannot agree about Chrift, truly men haue no reafon to beleeue or 
obey. them in forbidding chriftianity. Truly either Porphyry or Hecate in thefe 
commendations of Chri/t, affirming that he deftinied the chriftians to error, yet 


: rs or difpraife. Which if they could do,yet would we auoide them, as 
cfu 


, = about to fhew the caufes of this error; which before I relate, I willaske 


im this.one queftion: If Chrift did predeftinate all chriftians vnto error, whe- 
ther did hee this witringly,or-againft his will 21f hee did ic wictingly, how then 
can hee bee iuft? if ic were againft his will ,how can hee then bee happy ? But 
now to the caufes of rhis errour. There are fome fpirits of the earth, ( faith hee) 
which are vnder the. rule of the euill Demores. Thefe, the Hebrewes wife men, 
(whereof LE SVS was one, as the diuine Oracle,declared before,doth teftifie) 
forbad the religious perfons to meddle with-all ,aduifing them to attend the 
celeftiall powers, andefpecially God the Father, with all the reuerence theypoffi- 
bly could. And this (faith hee ) the Gods alfo doe command vs, as wee haueal- 
ready fhewen, how they admonifh vs to reuerence GOD inall places. But 
the ignorant and wicked ,hauing no diuine guift ,nor any knowledge of thae 
great and immortall Jowe, nor following the — of the gods or good 
men , haue caft all the deities attheir heeles, choofing not onely to refped, 
ad where-as they profeffe 
the feruice of G OD, they doe nothing belonging to his fervice. For GOD 
is the father of all things, and ftands not in neede of any thing : and it is well 
for vs toexhibite him his worfhip in chaltitie, iuftice , and the other vertues, 
making our whole life a continuall prayer vato him, by our fearch and imitation 
of him. (¢ ) For our fearch of him ( quoth hee) purifieth vs, and our imitation 
of him, deifieth-the effets in our felues. Thus well hah hee taught God the Fa- 
ther yuto vs ,and vs how co offer.our feruice vnto him. The Hebrew Prophets 
are full of fuch holy precepts, concerning both the commendation and refor- 
mation of the Saints lives, But as concerning Chriftianity , there hee erreth, 
and flandereth, as farre as his deuills pleafure is , whome hee holdeth dei- 

ties: as though it were fo hardamatter, out of the ob{cenities praGifed and 

ublifhed in their Temples ,and the true worfhip and, dodtrine prefented be 
ia GOD in our Churches, to difcerne where manners were reformed and 
where they were ruined. Who but the denill him-felfe could infpire him with 
fo fhameleffe a falfification , as to fay , thas the Chriftians doe rather honour 
then detelt the Deuills who{¢asoration was forbidden by the Hebrewes ? No, 


eee 
Lrsrye- OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 783 


that God whome the Hebrewes adored, will not allow any facrifice vito his ho- 
lieft Angels,(/whome wee that are pilgrims on earth,doe not-with- ftanding loue 
and reuerenceas mott fanified members of the Cetty of heauen) but forbiddeth 
it directly inthis thundring threate: Hee that facrificeth unto Gods, {ball be rooted 
out,and leaft it fhould be thought hee meant onely of the earthly {pirits, whome 
this fellow calles the lefler powers, (4) and whome the {cripture aifo calleth 
gods, (not of the Hebrews bur the Heathens ).as is euident in that one place, P/al. 
9 6.verfe 5. For allthe Geds of the Heathen,are Dinel:: leaft any fhould imagine that 
the fore-faid prohibition extended no further then thefe deuills, or that it con- 
cerned not the offring to the celeftiall fpirits, he addeth: bus unto the Lord alone, 
bat unto.one God onely : Some may take the words, #2/ domino foll,to bee unto the 
Lord,the funne : and fo vnderftand the place to bee meant of 4polb , but [the ori- 
pall and'\ the (e) Greeke tranflations doe fubuert all fuch mifprifion. So then 
the Heb:ew God,fo highly commended by this Philofopher,gaucthe Hebrewes 
alawein their owne language, not obfcure: or vncertaine , but already difper- 
fed through-outall the world , wherein this claufe was literally conteined. Hee 
that facripceth unto Gods {hall bee rooted out, but unto the Lord alone. What neede 
wee make any furcher fearch into the law and the Prophets concerning this? 
nay what need wee fearch at all ,chey are fo plaine and{o manifold, that what 
neede ftand aggrauating my difputation with any multitudes of thofe places, 
that exclude all powers of heauen and earth from perticipating of the honors 
due vnto God alone ? Behold this one place, fpoaken in briefe, but in powerfull 
manner by the mouth of that GOD whome the wifeft Ethnicks doe fo highly 
extoll;let vs marke it, feareit and obferue it, leaft our eradication enfue. Hee 
that facrificeth usto more gods then that truc asd onely LORD, fhall bee rooted out: 
yet God him-felfe is farre from needing any of our feruices, but ( /) all chat wee 
doc herein is for the good of our owne foules. Here-vpon the Hebrewes fay in 
their holy Pfalmes: J haue fayd unto the Lord , thou art my GOD, my well-dooing aalees 
tendeth not unto thee : No, wee our felues are the beft and moft excellent facri- ~" *" 
fice that hee can haue offeredhim. It is his cstty whofe myftery wee celebrate 
in {uch oblations as the faithfull doe full well vnderftand, as I fayd once already.. 
For the ceafing of all che typicall offrings that were exhibited by the Iewes, 
and the ordeyning of one facrifice , to bee offered through the whole world | 
from Eaft to Weft ( as now weefee itis ) was prophecied long before, from 
GOD, by the mouthes of holy Hebrewes : whome wee haue cited , as much as 
needed,inconuenient placesof thisourworke. = 

‘Therefore ,to conclude, where there is not this iuftice that GO D ruleth 
all alone ouer the fociety that obeyeth him. by grace, and yeeldethto his pro- 
hibition of facrifice vnto all but him-felfe, and where in euery member belong- 
ing to this heauenly fociety,the fouleis lord ouer the body , and all the bad af- 
fects thereof, in the obedience of GO D, and an orderly forme, {o thatall the 
iuft (as well as one ) liue according to faith (¢) which worketh by loue, in 
which a man loueth GOD as hee fhould , and his neighbour as him-felfe: 
whiere this iuftice is not, iso focietie of men combined in one vniformity of 
laweand profite: confequently, no true ftate popular, ( if that definition holde , 
touch )and finally no common-wealth ; for where the peopie haue no certaine 
ftate,the generall hath no exact forme. | 


Xxx2 L.VIVES. 


784 SAINT AVGVSTINE. |  $Cuwap.23.8 24: 


peepee meet macatiac NET LC I LEE LL A DI CT AA a 


L.VIVES. 


Beoreyie grrsvorias. | That is of Oracnlons Phifofephy , in which worke hee recites eApolles Or- 
racles ,and others , part whereof wee haue cited betore. ( 5 ) Photinns. | Hee was condemned 
by the counfell of Syrmium, being confured by Sabinus Bifhoppe of Ancyra. ( 4ffiod, Hift trs- 
part. He followed the pofitions of Samefatenss, fo that many accompted of both thefe here- 
fies all as one. (¢ ) For onr fearch. | Search is here a mentall inquifition , whereby the mind is 
illuftrate,and purged from darke ignorance, and after it hath found God, ftudieth how to grow - 
pure , and diuine,like him, (d ) eAnd wheme the {cripture.}The name of God,is principally his, 
of whome, by whome , and in whome, al things haue their exiftence : fhewing (in pare ) the 
nature and yertue of chat incomprehenfible Trine. Secondly and (as one may fay ) abufiue- 
ly , the Scripture calleth them, gods, ynto whome the word is giuen , as our Sauiour ceftifiech 
in the Gofpell : and fo are the Heauenly powers alfo called , as feemeth by that place of the 
Pfalme: God ftandeth in the affembly of the gods, Ge. Thirdly and (not abufiucly but ) falfely, 

the Deuills are called gods alfo. Ai the gods of the beathen, are Denills. Origen, sm Cantic. 
This lat queftion eAuguftine taketh fromthe feauenty, for Hierome tranflaceth ic from the 
Hebrew, Idols , and not Diuells. P/z.96.5.(e) The Greeke. ] Where wee read & #6 70 aple uéra 
nor is this fuperfluoufly added of eAugu/fsne, for many Philofophers , and many nations both 
held and honored the Sunne onely for God,aud referred the power of all the reft ynto it alone, 
CMacrob. (f ) Allthat we do. | Our well doing benefiteth not God, nor betters him , fo thae 
there is nothing due vntovs for being good : but wee our felues owe God for all,by whofe 
grace it is that wee are good. ( g¢ ) Which worketh by.) It is dead,and lacketh all the power,and 
vigour,when it proceedeth notin the workesof charity, = - 


IRs « 


i oA definition of 2 people,by which both the Romaines and other kingdomes. 
: may challenge themfelues common-weales. 


Cuarp.24. 


Ve omit the former difinition of a people,and take this : A people is 27ultitude 
of reafonable creatures conioyned in a general communication of thofe things it ref- 
ecteth : and then to difcerne the ftate of the people , you mutt firft confider what 
thofe things are. But what ever they bee, where thereis a multitude of men, 
conioyned ina common fruition of what they refpe&, there,may fitly bee fayd 
to beea people : the better that their refpes are,the better are they them-felues, 
and other-wife, the worfe. By this definition , Romehad a people , and confe- 
quently 2 common-weale : what they embraced at the firft, and what after- 
wards, what goodneffe they changed into bloudinefle, what concord they for- 
fooke for {editions , confederacies and ciuill warres , Hiftory can teftifie, and 
wee(in part) hauealready related 2 Yet this doth not barre them the name of 
apeople , nor their ftate of the ftile of a common-wealth, as long as they beare 
this our laft definition vnin-fringéed. And what I haue fayd of them, I may fay 
of the Athenians, the Greekes in generall, the Egyptians, and the Affian 
- Babilonians, were there dominions great or little , and fo of all nations in 
_ the world. For in the Cstty of the wicked, where GOD doth not gouerneand 
men obey, facrificing vnto him alone, and confequently where the foule doth 
not rule the body , nor reafcnthe paffions, there generally wanreth the vertue 
of truciuftice. 


That 


Ling. ‘OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 


i... That therecan be no truevertuewhere triuerclizgion wanteth. 
eae Bere 7 Cuap.25. fg wey Oe at 


>. 
! 
° ' 
. 
« 
~ 
- 


oy oe 


# ferye not God,as he bach taughe.them how co ferue hin, chey can neuer have 

true, dobainion over atte body,nor over the paffions: for how can that foule have 

lany truemeane of this decorum,that knoweth not God,nor ferueth his greathefle, 
but runnetha whoring with the vncleane and filthy deuills ? No , thofe things 
which fhee feemes to account vertues ,and thereby to {way het affects, if they 
bee not all referred vnto God, are indeed rather vices then vertues. For al- 
though fome hold them to bee reall Vertes, (4) when they are affected onely 

for their owne refpec, and nothing elfe3, yet ¢uen fo they incurre vaine-glory, 

.and {a Joofe their true goodnefke -For as it is not of the flefh,but aboue the fleth, 

athat animates thebody. So it isnot of man, but aboue san , which deifies the 
minde of man, yea,and of allthe powers of thehéauens. 


- * 


wee 


— L. VIVES. 


WV He (4) they | The Stoikes held vertue to bee her owne price, content with it felfe, and 
.. tobee affected onely for it felfe. This is frequent in Seneca , and in Tullies Stoicyfmes, 


VASE VSR Ee ee “e eee! ios oh & a bes 7 ae 5 : iy Ht = — 
Fo though there bea feeming of thefe things, yet ifthe foule , and the reafon 


78% 


‘and Plate {eemesto cenfirme it. Tully fetts downe two things that are tobe affected meere- 


ly for them-felues : perfection of internall goodneffe, and that good which is abfolurély ex- 
cernall,as parents,children, friends,8c, Thefe are truly deare vnto vs,in them-felues, but no- 
‘thing fo as the others are, De fiwsb. Lib.5. It is a queftion in diuinity, whether the vertues are 
to bee deffred meerely for them-felués. eAmsbrofe affirmeth it. Jn Epist. ad Galat. etuguftine 
deniethiit." De Trinit. ib.1 3. Peter Lumbard holdes them both to bee worthy of loue in 
them-felues, and alfoto haue a neceflary reference vnto etetnall bearitude. But indeed, they 
are fo bound vnto Gods precepts, that hee that pucteth not Gods loue in the firft place, cannog 
loue thegij)-at all. Nor can hee fo loue them for them-felues , that lice preferre them before 
God their author, and their founder, or equall the loue of them, with the love of hitn : their 
natire is to lift the eyes of, him that admureth them, vnto G O D, fo that hee that feeketh for 
them-felues , is by them euen ledde and dire&ted ynto him, the consummation vito which 
they all doe tend. But Saint e4aguffine in this place,fpeaketh of the Gentiles, whofe vertues 
'défiring external rewardes , were held bafe and ignominious : but if they kept them-felues 
content with their owne fole fruition, shen were they approoued . but this was the firft fteppe 
to arrogance , by reafon that heeteby they that Had them; thought noné fo gdod as them- 
Selues. - , } 3 7 7 


The peace of G ods enemies, vfe-full to the piety of bis friends 
as long as theiy earthly pilgrimage /afteth. 
Cc H Kr. 26 A . 


VV Herefore, as the foule is the flefhes life’,fo is God the beatitude of man, 
as the Hebrewes holy writte affirmeth (4) Ble(fedés the people whofe God ts 

the Lord: wretched then ate they that dre ftrdngers to. chat GOD, and yee 
hane thofe 2 kinde of allowable peace, but that they (hall not haue for euet, 
becaufe they vfed ic nor well when they had it. But that they fhould haue:it 
in this life is for our good alfo :: becaufe thac during out commixtiorn -with 
- XZ£xK 3 | Babiloti 


Pla.1442%5 


f 


786 «SAINT AV GVSTINE. rere 


Babilon,wee our felues make vfe of her peace, and faith doth freethe peopleof . 

God at length outc.of het, yet fo,as in the meane time wee live‘as pilgrims in her. 

And therefore the Apoftle admonifhed the Church , to pray for the Kings and 

t.Tim 2,2 Potentates of that earthly Citty,adding this reafon 3 That wee may lead 4 quiet life 
"én all godline(fe and(.b> charity. And the Prophet. Héeremy , fore-telling the capti- 
uiticof Geds ancient people commanding then (.from the Lord ) to goe peace- 

ably and paciently to Babilon,aditifed them alfo to pray; faying, For inher peste, 

fla!l be your peace,meaning that temporall peace which is common botlrto good 


¢ 


~ andbad. “. 


Bie4 (4) is ]Pfal.144.15. Where the Prophet haning reckoned ¢p all the goods of for. 
tune, children, wealth, peace, ptofperitie; and all in aboundance, at length hee concludeth 

thus: [they haue fayd | Bleffed are the peuple that bee fo : yea, [ but |bieffed are the people whofe 

God is the Lord, (6) Charity| Inthe Apofile, itis boneffy, expronm, : a 4 


The peace of Gods feruants,the fulne(fe whereof, it is tmpo/fible 
| inthis life,tocomprehend. Curr. 27. 

RY: as for our proper peace,we haue it double with Ged: heere below by faith, 

and here-after aboue (4) by fight. But all the peace we haue here, bee it pub- 

like,or peculiar,is rather a folace co our mifery,then any aflurance of out felicity. 

And for our righteoufneffe, although it be truly fuc, bécaufe the endis the true 

good where-vnto it is referred, yet as long as weliue here,it confifterh (6) tather 

offinnes remiffion, then of vertues perfeGtion, witnefle that prayer which all 

Gods pilgrims v{e, and euery member of his holy Citty , crying dayly vaco him 

Forgine us our tre[paffes,as wee forgine them that tre{pa(fe againi vs.( ¢') Nor doth 

this prayer beneftre them whofe taith,wanting workes; is dead, but chem whofé 

faith worketh by loue : for, becaufe our reafon though it be fubie& vnto God, yet 

as long as it is inthe corruptible body, which burdeneth the foule, cannot haué 

che affects vnder perfect shadiencetitecfors the iufteft man ftands in neede of 

this prayer. For though that reafon haue the conqueft, it is not without combat. 

And ftillone couch of infirmity or other, creepeth vpon the beft conquerour, 

even when he hopes that he holds all vicioufneffe vnder, making him fall either 

by fome vaine word, or fome inordinate thought, if it bring him not vntoaduall 

errour. And therefore as long as we ouer-rule finne, our peace is imperfet: be- 

caufe both the affe@s not as yet conquered, are fubdued by a dangerous confli, 

and they that are vnder already,doe deny vsall feeuriti¢,and keepe vs dooing in 

a continuall and carefull command. Soe then, inall chefe temptations ( whereof 

God {aid in a word : (d) fs not the life of man atemptation upon earth? )who dare 

fay hee liveth fo,as hee need not fay to God, Forgsue vs our tre/pajfes? none buta 

proud foule. Nor ishe mighty, bur madly vain-glorious, that in his owne righte- 

~~ oufneffewill refift him,who —= grace to the humble , where-vpon ic is writ- 

ten, Ged refifteth the proud, and gtucth grace tothe humble « Mans iuftice therefore 

teed  t< chis : co hatie God his Lord,and him-felfe his fubiedt, his foule maifter ouer his 

body , and bis reafon ouer finne, eyther by fubduing it or refifting ic: and toin- 

treate God both for his grace for merice,and his pardon for finne,and laftly to be 

oe | ak gratefull 


Lintg. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 785 
gratefull for all his beftowed graces, But in thatfinal peace vnto which all mans — 
peace and k cememcrey on earth hath referencé , immortality and incerrupti- - 


on doe fo refine‘nature (rom yicigulbefie j chat) ofeMes thalfhaye no need of 
reafon to rule ouer finne, for. there fhall bee no {inne at all chere,but G O D shall 

rule man, and the foule haBddy: obadi¢hte Tall ef tUde as plea fant and eafie, 
as the ftate of them that liue fhalbe glorious, and happy . And this fhall all haue 
vnto all eternity; and (hajbe:. fire tehapcit fo; ad therefore theblefledneffe of 
this peace,orthe peage of ehts blefledneffe; that beehe fulnefe ant perfeaibvof 
allgoodneffes® <2 tasers? So, ae ete ae: 


Ju ON, Bek oan by Oo ae re v\ ee a pe NE 
fy phe oa a \ cle z «? vox Z .? \ was a oy yooh aa} ake 44 Seats ees 
: ° a ne a aa 
*y ‘. 
e 


yn te as SR SANGIN 84 TEENS OG a er 
i“ i - is 
: : ; ath. I I ’ | eres Cae ere ia A, (°° Ge, Be 
ar | ait a) %.¢ rr s . 2 ate 28 J ANS 7 ¢ : V! V ES: E dt MY #3, “ \ ve 5 aa 3 ; cKggn + . % ie ae: 
. 2 A r ta . a ; 
son MO] ao ee CAS 


- - - i“ y “ : | 3 | ok 4. ° ae { AES os : rs . Poul itipsw a: osama Ve sgh - ; 
Bro a) fight) Béing theti facé to Face With G OD.(6) Rather of ‘linsie s}Eor he aieatet bart 
 Dof our goodneffe is not our well doing, bug Gods kemiffioa of 


‘at reft whileft others take paines,are ténder :turtlés, and Buy their quiet with difgrace. > 
P a - go ON 7 bo ee ‘ ns 5 . see ae _ P i . 


. woe een \ : 
a LS we . re oe : TD eee OP ae eT , a mart 7 a aS . ae wv 
te gt) 1Sbe endof thewickede 606 a 
_ 3 a! (Cap. 8h ee a eee 
oa : : i 


digest ee a a Hs = x. ae mere 4 Sai ated : Ot 
BY on the orher fide,they that are not of this fociéty,are defteined tocternall 
1 mifery,called the fecond death, becdufe there,euen the foule,béin depriced 
of GOD, feemeth nor to liue , much leffe the body, bound in aierlathiagror- 
ments; And therefore, this fecond death fhalbé fo much the more cruell,in that 
icfhall neuer haueend. Butfeeing warreisthe contrary-of peace ,as mifery is 
vnto bliffe , anddeath to life,ic is aqueftion what kinde of warre (hall reigneds 
then amongft the wicked , to anfweré dnd oppofe the peace of the Godly.. :But 
marke only the hurt of war,& itis plainly apparant to bé nothing bat theaduerfe 
difpofe,and contentious conflia of things betweene themfelues. Whar then can 
be worfe then that,wherethe willis fuch a foe to the paffion, & the paffion 16 thé 
Will ,thac they are‘ for ever in-fyppréffible, and ir-reconcileable 3 and where.nae 
ture,and paine fhall hold ari etérnall confli@ , and yet the one ‘neuer maifter the 
éther ? In our conflidts here on earth , either the painéis viGor, ang fo death 
éxpelleth fence of it,or nature conquers, and expells the paine. But there,paine 
fhall affliG@ eternally,and nature hall! fuffer eternally, both enduring to the con- 
tinuance of the inflifted punifhment . Bur feeing that the good, and the badde; 
arein that great iudyement to paffe vnto thofe ends , the one to bee fought for, 
and the other tobee fled from :by Gods permiffion and affiftance I will inthe, 
next booxe following , hauea litrle difdourfe df chat laft day , and that terrible 
iudgement. . 


ebm, Ayal ses 
7 , 
one 


Finis lib, te FHE 


r 


788 oe ae 
EPS ENS re ee WIC gS & br ae a 
RENE, Hg : eee 
THE CONTENTS OF oPHE. 
‘vewentich booke of ¢ che Ciryiof Ged. 


' . sek rare 
ore Gea sada continasihynfetted his 
| ap indgement the propor fubiett af. this booke |. 
follewing. 
2. Thechange of humaine eftates,ordered by 
Gods unfearcheable sudgements. 
3. Salomons a gerne in Eclefialtes,con- 
cerning thofe gee 


uniuft doe {hare in. 


4. The Authors refolution, in this dicen feof 


. the ‘ied gement, t ta produce the teftimenies of the , 
| New Teftament firft,and then of the Old. 
. Places of Scripture’ prooning that phere” 
foalbe ada iy of indgment at the worlds end. 
& hat the ff refurreltion js 1 ,and what. 
the fico | 

7. Of the two Réflerrettions' ; what may ‘bee. 
thanght of the thonfand-yeares, mentioned 
Saint Tohns rexelation, ° 
--B.Ofthe binding and loofng of the denill. 

' g.What 0 meant by Chriffs rai igning a 
thonfand yeare with the Saints , eae ie | 
rence betweene that,andbis eternal reigne. 

10.4 anfwere to the obiettion of. fine 
ming that refurretlion es proper to the body only 
and not te the Soule. 

11,Of Gog and Magog , whom the dessill - 
(at the worlds end ) foal. bavre Up | againft the 
church of God. 

27 Whether the fire falling from heanen,and 
denouring them, aa) the laf torments ts of the 
wicked. 

43. whether st bee a jbeifaed yeares untill 
the perfecution onder Antechrift. . 

14. Sathan and his followers condemned : a 
recapitulation of the Refierrettion, and the lafe 

shdgement, 


7 ts Ka the dead, whens the er death, 


sre td 


which beth the inft , and 


reo | aie 
ils hair te sissies - 
16. Of she nee Heanen ind the new Earth, 

17. Of the glorification of the church, after 
death for exer. 

. 18. Saint Peters doltrine of the refurretti- 
on of the dead. 

19. Saint Pauls words te the Theffalonians: 
| Of the mavifeftation of Antechrift , whefe 
yd [ial immediatly fore-run the day of the 
LORD... 

I! 20. Saint Pauls doftrine of the refiervetlion 
. Of the dead... 

2. Efaias bis dattrine concerning the indg- 
mentand. refurrettsen, _ 

a2. How the’ Saints foall orth to fee the 
- paines ofthe wicked anf . 
"23, Daniels prophecy of eAntichrist;of the 
1 inAgment,and of the kingdome of the Saints. 

24, Dauids prophecies of the worlds end, 

the laft indgment. 

25.Malachies prophecy of the indgement, 

. and of fuch as are tobe purged by fire. 

26, Of the Saints offrings , which God foak 
accept of, As is.the old tame , and the years be- 
fore, 

27. Of the {eparation of the ood from the 
bad, . vboend Lip laft hs — 

| a&. Moyfes Law to be fpiritualy under fteod, 
for feare of. dAngerous error. 

29. Helias bes comming toconnert the Iewes 

before the. inilgmment. 

30. That it és mot exident i inthe Old Tefta- 
ment , in fuch places as fay , God fhall iudge: 
that st foalbe in the-perfon of Chrift , but one 
by fo fome ‘the teftimsonies where the LO RI 

' G 0 D peakerh. 


NIS. 


9 


TVVENTITH BOOKE 
OF THE CITTIE OF GOD: . — 
Written by ee — of Hippo, 


as 


Gods indgements continually effeéted: His laft indgement the 
proper [ubiect of this booke following. | 


7 Crap. I. 


=A Eing now to difcourle ofthe day of G ODSIah itdgement; 


eks}| againft che faichleffe,and che wicked, wee muft lay downe hol 
PN (criptures firft, for the foundation of our following ftruc- 


seS}H| and fridolous arguments, wrefting them cither quite, vnto an- 
7 / otal other purpoie,or veterly denying them to containe any thin 
SES divine. For I doe not thinke chat man liuveth,whovnd arftand. 

ing them as they are fpoken,and beleening that G O D infpired them into Jan@i- 
fied men, will not give his full affent vnto what they auerre,but hee muft needes 
rofefle as much, bee he neuer fo afhamedor afraid toauouch it, or neuer fo ob- 
Rinate chat he would conceale it ,and ftudy to defend mere and knowne falfhood 
againftit. Wherefore, the whole church beleeueth and profefleth,chat Chrift 
isto come from heauen to sudge both the quicke and the dead, ana.this wee call the 
day of GOD S iudgement “thelatt time of all : for how many daies this iudge- 
ment willhold , wee know not bur the fcripture vfeth Daie for Time, verie 
often, as none that vfeth to reade it but. welldifcernethic. And wee, when 
we fpeake of this daic doeadde laft, the Left date , becaufe that G O D doth iudge 
at chis prefent and hath done euer fince hee fer man forth of paradice, and cha- 
fed our firft parents from the tree of life for their offences , nay from the 
time chat hee caft out the tranf; erefling Angells , whofe enuious Prince doth all 
that heécanne now to tuing the foules of men. Ic is his tudgemenc that both 
men and denills doe liue in fuch miferies arid perturbations in ayre and earth, 
fraughcwith nothing buteuillsandertors. Soe. | 
"And ifno man had offended, it had beenc his good iudgement that man and 
all reafonable creatures had lived in perfe@ beatitude andeternall coherence 
withthe LORDtheir GOD. So that he iuidgeth not onely men ,and deuills: 
viito mifery , in generall, but hee cenfureth cuery perticular foule for thé 
workes it hath performed out of freedome of will. For the deuills. pray 
that they may not bee tormented 5 neither doth GO D vniuttly either 
in {paring them or punnifhing them. And man , fome-times. in publike, 
but continually in fecret, fecleth the hand of Almightie GO D , punnifh- 
ing him for his trefpaffes and mifdeedes , either in this life , or in the nexts 
though no man _caone doe well, without thé helpe of GOD , ~ any 


ture: Which fome beleeue not , but oppofe them with fond | 


79° 


‘ 


<tc pn TA AE Ca iS SST ES TSE 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. | Cuar.1.&2, 


cs 


diuill can doe hurt, without his iuft permiffion. For asthe Apoftle fayth : is 


Rom.9.14: ghere vsrighteou[neffe is GOD? GOD forbid: and in another place. Vnfcarche- 


Rom.1I, 
33°, 


able are his indgements , and his waies paft finding owt. Lintendnot thereforein | 
this booke to meddle with Gods ordinary-daylie indgements , or with thofe at 
firft,but with that great and laft Iudgement ofhis ,( by his gratious ‘permiffion) 
when CHRIST fhall come from heauen, To sudge both the quicke , and the 
dead for thatis properly called the Iudgement-day : becaufe (a) there fhalbee 
no place for ignorant complaint, vpon the happineffe of the bad and the mife- 
ry ofthe good. The trucandperfe@ felicity in that day fhalbe affured onely to 
the good, and eternall tormentfhall then fhew ir felfeas an euerlafting inheri- 
tance onely for the euill. ee | 


L. VIVES. 


‘Here (4) fhalbe no place for | Inthis life, many men ftumble at the good fortunes and 
‘™ profperity of the badde, and the fad miffortunes of the good; They that know not that 
fortunes goods are no goods atall,(as the wicked doe beleeue they are ) doe wonder at this, 
But indeede , the wicked neuer enioy true good, nor doth true euill euerbefall the good, 
For the names of goods and euills, that are giuen to thofe things that thefe men admire, are 
in farre other refpect then they are aware of , and that makes their fond iudgements con. 
dernne the ordering of things. Bur atthe laft ludgement of CHRIS T,where the truth of 
good and bad fhall appeare,then fhall good fall onely to the ri ghteous , and bad to the wick 
ed : and this fhalbe there, vniuerfally acknowledged. --- a | 


Cm. . 


The change of humane eftates,ordered by Gods un- 
| Searcheable indgements. | 


} 


Cap, -2. 


BY here on earth, the euills , endured by the good men inftru@ vs toendure 
4 them with pacience , and the goods enioyed by ‘the wicked , aduife vs. 
not to. affect them with immoderation .. Thus in the things where GODS 
iudgements are not to bee difcouered , his counfell is not to bee negle&ed, 
Wee know not why GOD maketh this bad man ritch , and that good man 
poore: that hee fhould haue ioy whofe deferts wee hold.worthier of paines, 
and hee paynes , whofe good life wee imagine to merite content : that the 


Iudges corruption or teftimonies falfeneffe fhould fend the innocent away 


condemned , much more vn-cleared ; and the iniurious foe. fhould depart, 
renenged , much more vnpunifhed: that the wicked. man fhould liue found, 
and the Godly lie bedde-ridde : that lufty youthes fhould turne theeues , and 
thofe that neuer did hurt in worde’, bee plagued with extremity of fickneffe: 
That filly infances , of good vfe in the world , fhould bee cut off by vntime- 


~ lie death, whilethey that feeme vnworthie euer to haue beene borne ) attaine 


long and happie life : thar the uilty fhould be honoured , and the Godlie’ 
oppreffed , and fuch like as thefe; Oh who can ftand to colle& or recount 
them / | : | 


Thel now, albeit they kept this feemingly abfurdorder continually, “> 


Lingo. OF THE CITIEOF GOD 791° 


oe eee 


this whole life (wherein as the Prophet faithin the Pfalme , Vanes Like to 
vanity, ind his daies like a [hadow that vanibeth )the wicked alone fhould pof- 
fefle thofe temporall goods and the good onelie fuffer euills , yet might this 
beereferredto GODS iuft iudgements ,- yeacuen to his mercies: that fuch. 
as fought not for eternall felicitie, might either for their malice, bee inftly 
deluded by this tranfirory happinefle ; or by GODS mercie bee a comfore 
vato the good , and that they beeing not to loofe the biiffe crernall,mighe 
fora while bee excércifed by croffes temporall , either for the correction of 
finnes,or (4) augmentation of their vertues. | | 4. ater 
But.now , feeing that not onely the good are afflicted , and the badde ex- 

‘alted ( which feemes iniuftice ) but the good alfo often enioy good , and the 
wicked, euill ; this prooues GODS iudgements more infcrutable , ard his 
waies more vnfearcheable . Although then wee fee no caufe why GOD 
fhould doe thus or thus ; hee in whome is all wifdome, and iuftice , and no 
‘weakenefle, nor rafhneffe, nor iniuftice : yet heere wee learnethat wee may 
not efteeme much of thofe goods ; or misfortunes , which wee fee the badde 
fhare with the righteous. Butto feeke the good , peculiar totheone,andtoa- . 
voide the éuill referued for the other. eo 

Andwhen we come.o that great iudgement,properly called the day of doome, 
Or, the cosfurmmuation of time there we fhall not onely fee all chings apparant,but 
acknowledge allthe iudgements of GOD from the firft to the laft,to bee firme- 
Ty grounded-vpon iuftice. And there wee fhall learne, and know this alfo , why 
S& ODS iudgementsare generally incomprehenfible vnto vs,and how iuft his 
iudgements arein that point alfo :alehiough already indeedeic is manifeft vnto 
the faithfull, chat wee areiuftly ,as yet, ignorant in them all; or ac leaft inthe — 
moft of them. = . 


Plal 144-4 


. ad 


Re. re ewe ene. 


_ | | L. VIVES. 


R (a) augmentation) That vertue might haue' rheanes to exercife her powers , for fhee 
Joues ation , and leaning that,fhee languifheth,nay euen perifhech , as fire doth, which 
‘wanting fuel! to worke vpon,dieth , But practife her vpon obiedts of aduerfe fortune, and fhe 
_ worketh otit her owne perfe tion, | : : 


"y vgs Ae oo. 


Salomons difputa tion in Ecclefiaftes concerning thofe goods which 
, goth the inf andshevuninft doe [bare in: , 
_ ‘Cuar. 3. _ 


S Aomonsthe wifeft King that ever reigned ouer air his booke cal sara | 
led (4) Ecclefiaftes, (whichthe Iewes themfelues hold. for Canonicall jin this 

manner : (6) Vanity of Vanities , allis vanity. ‘What remaineth vato manof all 

his trauells which hee: fuffereth vnder the Sunne? Vnto which , hee annex- 

eth the rormentes and tribulations of this eng a worlde, and the fhore 

and fwift courfes of time , wherem nothing is firme , nothing ¢onftanc. 

In this vanitie of althings,vnder the Sunne , hee bewayleth this alfo- 

for one, that feeing' fc) There ss more profitte im. wifdome then in follie, 

as the light is more excellent then datkene{fe's and: fecing the wife-mans oes, 
ca. ; 


799 | SAINT AV GVSTINE. — Suar.g.d4. 


are in his bead when the foole wallketh in darkene fe, yet that one condition , one 
eftate, fhould befa'l them both as touching this vaineand tranfitory life : mea- 
ning hereby , that they were both alike expofed tothofe euills that good men 
and bad do fome-times both a like endure. Hee faith further, chat the 
good fhall fuffer as the bad do : and the bad fhall enioy goods, as the good 
Eede,8.24 do sin thefe words : There  « vanity which is done upon the carth, that there bee 
righteous men to whome it commeth according to the worke of the wicked, and there bee 
wicked mento whome it commseth according to the worke of the sufts [thought alfo that 
. this is vanity.In difcouery of this vanity,the wife man wrote al this whole worke, 
-forno other cau‘e but that wee might difcerne that life which is not vanity vn- 
der the {unne, buttruth , vnderhim that made thefunne. Butas (d) touching 
this worldly vanity, is it not Gods iuft iudgement that man being made likeir, 
fhould vanith a!fo like it ? yet in thefe his daies of vanity, there is much betweene 
the obeying , and the oppofing of truth : and betweene partaking and neglecting 
of Godlinefle and goodnefle? but this is not in refpec of attay ning or anoying 
any terreftriall goods or euills, but of the great future iudgment, which fhall dif- 
tribute goods,to tbe good, and euils to the euil to remaine with them for euer.F+- 
nally che {aid wife King concludeth his booke thus:feare God and keepe bis commuan- 
dements,for this s the whole(duty)of man, for G O D will bring euery worke unto indg- 
ment ( ¢ of euery di[pt(edmsan, be st good or be st eusll,how can wee haue an inftruc- 
_ tion more briefe, more true, or more wholefome ? feare God ( faith he ) and keepe 
his commandements for this is the whole ( duty ) of man , for he that doth this, is full 
_ man, and he that dothict not, is in accompt, nothing , becaufe he isnot reformed 
according tothe Imageof truth, but fticketh ftill in the thape of vanity : for God 
will bring ewery worke , that is cuery a& of man in this life, vnto iudgement, beit 
good or euill, yeathe workes of euery difpifed man,of every contemptible per- 
fon that feemeth not to benoted at all,God feeth him,and defpilech him aot,nei- 


ther ouer-paffeth him in his indgement. | 


Ecc 13.33 


\ 


aa. 


| | L.VIVES. 


Pileecfaftes (4).] Or the Preacher, Many of the Hebrewes fay that Salomon wrot this in the 
time of his repentance for the wicked courfe that he had runne. Others fay that he fore-favw 
the diuifion of his kingdome vnder his fonne Reboboam , and therefore wrote it , in contempt 
of the worlds vnftable vanity (6 ) Uanity of. } So the feauenty read it , but other read it <]uo¢ 
a lutov , frnoke of fumes, Hierome (¢ ) There is more.| Wifdome and folly are as much oppofed 
as light and darkeneffe. (4 ) Touching this.] But thatG O D inftru&eth our vnderftanding in 
this vanity, it would vanifh away , and come to nought, conceyuing falfhood for truth ; and 
lying all confumed with putrifiing finne, at length like a fume ic would exhale a way vnto 
che fecond death. (¢) Of eueryde/p:fed man. | Our tranflations read it ; with enery fecret thing 
Fherome bath it, Pro ommnierrato, 7 = bss 


~ 


The authors refolution in this difcourfe of the indgement , to produce the he fimonies of 
| the New.Teftament firft and shen of the oid. oe 

| Cc HAP. he , 
“I Heteftimonies of holy Scriptures by which I meane to proue this laft sudge- 
* ment of God, mult bee firft of all taken out of the New-Teftament, and then 
= | — | 7 out 


Lib20. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 793 
outofthe Old. Forthough the later bee the more ancient , yet the former are 
more worthie ; as. beeing the true contents of the later. The former then thall 

roceed firft,and they fhalbe backt by the later. Thefe, that is, the old ones,the 

aw and the prophets affordvs ,the former ,( the new ones ) the Gofpells; and 
the writings of the Apoftles. Now the Apoftle faith; By the law commeth the pom, 3,10 
knowledge of finne. Bat now ss the rightcoufne(fe of GO D made manifeft without 1,22 
the law hauing witne(fe of the law and the Prophets, to wit, the righteou/ne(fe of GOD, 
by she fatth of LESVS CHRIST vntoall andvpon althat betecue. This righte-. 
oufnefle of GOD belongeth vuto the New Teftament , andhath confirmati- 
on from the Old, namely thelawand the prophets. Wee muft therefore firft 
ofall propound the caufe ,and then produce the confirmations,for CHRIST: 
himfelfe fo ordered it , faying: Esery fersbe which is taught unto the kingdome. 


of heauen és like vato an houlbolder which bringeth ont of his sreafury things both new Ma: 3,52 
and old.He faith not,both aad sew but if hee had not refpeGed the order ot digni- 
ty more then of antiquity,he would haue done fo,and notashedid. =. 


Ae eet Te ne - ee | 


Places of Scripture prouin that there [haloe a daie of 


Iudgement at the worlds end. 
Cuap. 5. | 


Vr Satiour therefore,condeming the citties,whom his great miracles did 
not induce vnto faith,and preferring aliens before them ; telleth them this,’ . 
I fay unto you , st [balbe eafier for Tyrus (a) and Sydon at the day of indgcment then for mx.sy,23 
you, And by and by after , vnto another cittie : J/ey unto you, that st [halbe eafier 
for them of the Land of Sodome inthe daie of indgement then for thee. Hereisalbid2, , 
plaine prediG@ion of fuch a day. Againe : Tbe men of Nininie ( faith hee) N*'?4" 
fall arsfe in indgement with this generation, and condemnei? ,orc.The Queene 
of the fouth {hall ssfe in Indgement with this generation and {ball condzmne st , ore. 
- Heere-wee learne twothings 1. that there fhalbea iudgement 2. that it fhal- 
be when the dead doe arife againe. For Our Sauiour {peaking of the Niniuites, 
and of the Queene of the South, fpeaketh of them that weré dead long before. 
Now (6) hee fayd not, {hall condemne, as if they were to bee the iudges, but | 
that their comparifon with the afore-faid generation half iuftly procure the 
judges condemning ‘fentence. Againe, {peaking of the prefenr commixtion 
of the good andbad , and their future feperation, mtheday of Iudgement , hee 
vfetha fimily of the fowne wheate’, and the tares , fowne afterwards amoneft 
-it, which hee expoundeth vnto his difciples. Hee that_foweth the good feed ss . 
the Sonne of Man : the fields the world : the good feed . they are the children of the wases3,37 
Kingdome : the tares ave the children of the wicked’, the enemy that foweth that is 35034249 
the denill : the harucft is the end of thé world and the reapers bee the Angels, 4g 404>45 
shen the tares are gsthered and burned in the fire, fofball st bee in the ende of this 
worlde: the Sonne of Man Shall fend forth his Angells and they {hall gather out of 
his Kingdome all things that offend and they fan doe rniquity , arid {ball caf them. 
into a furnace of fire : there [balbe weeping and’ gualbing of teeth. Then {ball 
the inf men (bine as the Swine in the Kingdome of their Father. Hee that hath cares 
sohesre,let himbeare: © | Be 
7 Yyy He 


9 4 SAINT AV GVSTINE. — Cuars 


Heenameth not the Iudgement day heere: but hee expreffeth it farre more 
plainely by the effets, and promifeth it to befall at theend ofthe world. Fur- 
thermore, hee faith to his difciples; Verely 1/ay unto you, that when the Sonne of 
Man {hall fis sn the Throne of his Maiefty,then yce which followed mice in their regene- 
vation , {ball fit alfo upc twelue thrones and indge the twelue tribes of ifracll. Here 
wee fee that Chrift {hall bee iudge , together with his Apoftles. Wherevpon 
hee fayd vnto the Iewes in another place: Jf 1 through Beelzebub caff owt deuslls, 
by whos doe your children caft thems out ? therefore they {balbe your indges. But 

 now,in chat he fpeaketh of twelue chrones , we may not imagine that he,and one 
twelue more with him fhalbe the worlds Iudges . The number of twelue,includ- 
ech the whole number of the Iudges,by reafon of the two parts of feauen,which 
number fignifieth the rotall, and the vniuerfe : which twoparts,foure and three 
multiplied cicher by other , make vp twelue , three times foure , or foure times 
three,is twelue.( befides others reafons why twelue is vfed in chefe words of 
our Sauviour,). Orherwife, Afathzas having Judas his place,Saint Pss/fhould haue 
no place Jefe him to fit as ludge in , though hee tooke more paines chenthem 
all: but thachee belongeth voto the number of the ludges , his owne wordes | 
1 Cor, ¢,3 d0e proue : Kuow yce wot that we {ball iudge the Angelis? The reafon of their iudge- 
ments alfo is included inthe number of twelue. For Chrift in faying, To sudge 
the twelue trsbes of Ifrael,excludeth neither the tribe of Less, which was the thir- 
teenth, nor all the other Nations befides Iftaell, from vnder-going this iudge- 
ment. | 
Now whereas hee faith, 4s the regener ation heereby affuredlichee meanes the 
refurrection of the dead. For our flefh {halbe regenerate by incorruption, 
as our foule is by faith. I omit many things that might concerne this great 
daie , becaufe inquiry may rather make them feemeambiguous , or belonging 
-yntoother purpofe then this: as either vnco CHRISTS dayly comming vn- 
tohis church inhis members , vnto each in perticular, or vnto the deftrui- 
on of the earthly Ierufalem,becaufe Our Sauiour {peaking of chat, vfeth the 
fame phrafe that hee vfeth concerning the end of the world, and the laft iudge- 
ment , fo that wee can fcarcely diftinguifh them but by conferring the three 
Euangelifts, AZethew, Marke, and Luke , together , in their places touching this 
point. For one hath it fome-what difficult , and another , more apparant, 
the one explayning the intent ofthe other. And thofe Lew haue I conferred 
together in one of mine Epiftles vnto He/pchins , ( of bleffed memory ) Bi- 
fhoppe of Salon , the Bpiftle is inticuled, De fine fecwli , of the worldes ende, 
So thar|I will in this place , relate onely that place of Saint Adethew, where 
‘CHRIST ( the laft iudge , beeing then prefent ) fhall feperate the good 


fromthebadde. Icischus. . hs 7 

Mst.25,3, Whenthe Sonne of Adan commeth in his glory, and all the holy Angell: with him. 
33953 &¢. shew {bal he fit upon the throne of his glorie and before him [balbe gathered all nations, 
and be foallfeperate them one from another aba fheepheard/eperateth the fbeepe from 

‘the goates ,and hee {hall fet the {heepe on. his right hand, andthe goates on his Left, 

‘Then fhall the King fay to them on his right hand: come yee bliffed of my father 
inherite yee the Kingdome prepared for you from the foundations of the worlde, 

For I was an hungered 5 and you gaue mee méste; I thirficd , and you gane mea 
drinke , 1 was 4 firanger , and.you lodged mee: 1 was naked , and yee cloathed 

wece , Iwas fiske and yee vifited mee , 1 was in prifos and yee came unto mee. 

r i ‘ay Them 


Lmao. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 795 


. Then fhallthe righteous anfwere him faying ;|Z O 8 D when faw wee thee ats hun- 
gred and fedde thee , or a thsrft and gaue theedrinke , oc. Andthe King fhall an- 
{were ,and fay vnto them ,Verely [fay unto youin afmuch as yee haue done it un- 
soone of the leaft of thefe my bretheren , yee haue done tt unto mee . Then fhall 
hee fay vnto them on the left hand; Depart from mee yee surfed inte enerlafting 

frewhich is prepared for the deuill and his Angells: for I was an hunzercd and yee 

gane mee no meate: I thirfteds and yee gaue mee no drinke,ec. Then fhall 
they alfo anfwere him faying : LORD when fawe weethee huncery ,or thir ft, 
or 4 firanger; or naked, or ix prifon, or fickey and did not minifter unto thee? 
Then fhall hee anfwere them, and {aie , Verelie 7 [aie unto you in afmuch 
asyee did it not unto one of the leaft of thefe,vee did it not untomee . And thefe 
floall coe into euerlafting fire , and the righteous into lefe crernall. 

Now Joba the Euangelift fhewetb plainely thas CHRIST fore-told this 10.5,22, 
iudgement to bee at the refurre@ion . For hauing fayd , The Father stidgcth 23: 24 
to man , but hath committed all iudgement unto the Sonne ; Becaufe all men {bowld 
honour the Sonne as they honour the Fa:her , hee that honoureth net the Sonne ,the 

fame honoureth not the Father that fent him: Hee addeth forth-with. Verelse, 
verelie I fay unto you, hee that heareth my worde and beleencth in him that [ent 
mee , hath euerlafting life » and|ball not come into (c) indgement , but {hall palfe 
from death to life. Behold, heere hee auoutcheth direétly that the faithtull 
fhallnot bee iudged. How then fhall they by his iudgement bee feuered from 
the faithlefle, vnlefle iudgement bee vfed heere for condemnation? For that 
is the iudgement into which , they that hearehis word and beleeuein him that 
fent him, {hall never enter. : 


| L. VIVES. 


Trus (4) and Sydon| Two Citties on the Coat of Phatnicia, [ called now, Swrs, and Said, 
Poftell Niger. (. b) Hee fayd not ] The accufers of the guilty perfons are faydto condemne 
him,a{well as the ludges. (¢) Judgement but fhall paffe | Our tranflation readeth it , condense 
saison but bath paffed,Hierome readeth it,tranfer. ' 


‘What the firftrefurrettiow isand 
what the fetond. 


Caras. é. 


4 Bs n hee proceedéth , in thefé words : Verely, verelie I fay unto you, the bouretoig.25; 
Shall come , and now is, when the dead {ball heare the voyce of the Sonne of GOD, 36 

and they that heare tt (Wall line. For asthe father hath life in him/felfe fo likewife hath 

hee ginen unto the Sonne to haue life in himfelfe. 
Hee dothmnot fpeake as yet of the fecond refurre@ion ; of that of the bodies, 

which isto come, but of the firft refurre@ion , which is now. For to difting- 

uith chefe two hee fayth, the houre fhallcome, and now is: Now this is the foules 

refurreGion , not the bodies; for the foules haue their deaths in {inne , as 

the bodies haue in nature; and therein were they dead,of whome Our Saviour 


Yyy3 fayd, 


1Cor, 5 
34,15 


SAINT AV GVSTINE. Cuan. 


fayd ,let the dead bury the dead , to witte let the dead in ‘foule , bury the dead in 
bodie. So thenthefe wordes, The houre [ball come and now ts , when the dead {ball 
heare the voice of the Sonne of GOD, and:they that heare st {ball line . They 
that heare ic, that is, they that obey it, beleeue it, and remaine inic. Hee 
maketh no diftin@ion heere , berweene good and euill, none atall. For it is 
good forallto heare his voice , and thereby to paffe out of the death of finne 
and impiety , vnto life and eternity. Ofthis death in finnethe Apoftle fpeak- 
eth , in thefe wordes : Jf ome bee dead for all, then were all dead, and hee died for all, 
that they which liue , fbould not hence-forth line unto them/elues , but unto hin which 
died for them androfe againt. 

Thus then, all were dead,in finne , none excepted , either in originall finne, 
or inactuall: either by being ignorant of good , or by knowing good and not 
performing it:and for all thefe dead foules,one liuing Son came,and died; liuing, 
that is, one without all finne, chat fuch as get life by having cheir finnes remit- 
ted, fhould no more liue vato themfelues , but vnto him that fuffered for all 
our finnes , and rofe againe for all our iuftifications, that wee which beleeu 
vponthe iuflifier of the wicked, beeing iuftified out of wickedneffe , and a 
fed (as it were) from death to life, nay bee affuredto belong vnto the firft re- 
furretion , that now is. For none but fuchas are heires of eternall bliffe , haue 
any partin this firft refurreGion: but the fecond, is common both (6 the blef- 
fed and the wretched. The firft is mercies refurrection : the fecond, indge- 
ments. And therefore the Pfalme faith : 7 will fine mercie and indzement unto 


Pil. rer,1 thee O LORD ! Withthis iudgement the Euangelift proceedeth , thus : And 
10.5537 bath ginen him power alfo to execute Iudgemcnt, in thar hee isthe Sonne of (Mate 


{o.5, 38 


Loe heere now , inthat flefh, wherein hee was iudged, {hall hee cometo bee 
the whole worldes iudge. For thefé wordes , Jn that hee isthe Sonne of Man, 
haue a dire& ayme at this. And then hee addeth this : Aaruell not at this, 
for the houre {ball come in the which , all that are in the granes [ball heare 
hisvvoice 5 and they {ball come forth , which hane done good, unto the refur- 
rection of life; but they that haue done eusll unto the refurrection of indge- 
ment. 

This is thae iudgement which hee put before, for. condemnation, when hee 
fayd , Hee that heareth my Worde, ee.foall not come into mndgement ,but {ball paffe 
from death to life, that is , hee belongs to the firft refurre&ion, and that be- 
longeth to life , fo that hee fhall not come into condemnation , which hee 
vnderftandeth by the worde Judgement in this laft place, unto the refurrecti- 
on of Indgement . Oh Rife then in the firft refurreQion all you that will noe 

erifh jin the the fecond. For the houre will come , and now is, when the dead 
all heave the voice of the Sonne of GO D, and they that heave it {hall line : that is, 
they fhall not come into condemnation , which is called the fecond death: 


~ynto which they fhallall bee caft head-long after the fecond refurreGion, 


that arife not in the firft . For the howre will come: ( hee faith not that 
houre is now , becaufe it fhalbe in the worldes end ) in the which all chae 


'arein the graues fhall heare His voice , and fhall come forth : but hee {faith 


not heare as hee fayd before , and they shat heare it , {ball live: ( for they — 
fhall not liue all in bliffe , which is onely to bee called life, becaufe ie is 
the crue life. : — 

| Yee 


Lisnz0. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. | 797 


Yet muftthey haue fome life, otherwife they could neither heare nor arife in - 

their quickned flefh.): And why they fhall not all liue? hee giueth this fubfe- 

quentreafon, 7. tee ek ee 
They that haue done good {bal come forth unto the refurrection of life:andthefe ons 


"y 


ere, 


atid other-fomé into the life rhat-defpifeth and excludeth all death what- 


; Se 
‘4 
; 


ee ae aa Pan 
ee } ious poe bow: = ee j 3 ae 
Of the two refurrections : what may bee thought of the thoufand years 
“mentioned in Saint Tohns Reuelation: _ 


Senger ee ene A em. . ee = ; 
. . . . . . _ oe ve Py 
: . . Cui. 7 
“yoeee +e .@ ~% s om 
a ee Ltu as oe Le 


© Aint Jobs. the Euangelift in his Reuelation fpeaketh of thele two refurre@i- 
sons in fuch darke manner , as fome of our diuines exceeding their owne ig- 
norance in the firft doe wreft it vito divers tidiculous interpretations . His 
words are thele. 4nd 1 fawe an Angell tome downe from Heauen haning ‘the Apedsi, 
keye of the bottomle/fe piste , 4nd a great chaine in his hand, And hee tooke that Dra-® 
gon,that old Serpent wl ich $s the deuilland Sathan , and boisndhim 4 thonfand ycares, 
ana hee caft him into the bottomleffe pytte »4nd{but him uppe, and fealed the dores vy 

on him , that hee oould deceine the people no more, till the thonfand yeares were fal Ei 
fed. For after hee must bee boofed for alittle feafon. And Lfaw feates, and they fet 
apon them, and indgement was ginen Unto them , and Lfaw the foules of themwhich 
were flaine forthe teftimonse of IESV'S, andfor the worde of GOD,and worlbipped 
yot the. beaft. nor his Image , neither had taken his marke upon thpirfore-beads or. | 
on their handes,: and they linedand reigned with CHRIST 4 tHoufand veares.. But 
thereft of thedead men Shall not liwe againe untill the thoufand yeares be fuifbed: this 
gs the firf refurreciion . Ble fied and Holy is hee that hath his part ix the firft refirvege 
tion , for on {uch the fecond death hath no power , but they {ball be the Prieftsof GOD 
— andofC HRIST,and reigne with hiniathoufandyeares. = 8 
- .The.chiefeft reafon that mooued many to thinke that this place implied 
a corporall refnriection, was drawne from (4) the thoufand yeares, asif the 

aints fhould baue a continuall Sabboth endiiring fo long towit , a thot 
ae ‘yacation after the fixe thoufand of trouble , beginning at mans 
creationand. expulfion oue of Paradife into the forrowes of mortalitié ,. thas 
fice it is written, One daie is with the LORD asathoufand yeares and 4 thot 
fand yeares as one daie, therefore fixe thoufand yeares beeing finifhed , (asthé 
fixe daies ) the feauenth fhauld follow , for the timeof Sabbath, and laft a thou- 
fand  yeares aljo’, all the Saints rifing corporalli¢ from the dead to ecle- 


rate it. | | ee 
a Yyy3 This 


a an enee en az 

798 SAINT AVGVSTINE. | Cuapz, 

Ee eee Te Ee EE eee Se eee a ene ee 

This opinion were tolerable , ifit propofed onely fpirituall deights vnto 

the Saints during this {pace < wee were. once of thefame opinion our felues)s 

but feeing the auouchers heereof affirme that the Saints after this refurrection 

fhall due nothing but reuell in flefhly banquetres, where (6) the cheere fhall 

exceed both modefty and meafure this is grofle, and fitte for none but car- 

nail men to beleeue. But they that are really and truely fpirituall ,doe call 

thofe Opinionifts , (¢) Chiliaffs sthe worde is greeke, and many bee interpre- 

— ted, Adélenaryesjor Thoufand-yere-ifts. -- 
Toconfute them, heere is no place, letvs racher cake the texts true fence 
Mark,3,27 20ng withvs. Ow, LORD IESVS CHRIST faith : No man can enter 
"ston frrong mans honfe, andtake aay his goods, unle(fe hee frit binde the firong 
man, andthen {poyle his houfe.:. meaning by this ftrong man ,the deuill, becaute 

hee alone was able to hold man-kinde in captiuicy:and meaning by the goods 

hee wou'd take away , his future faichfall, whome the deuill held as his owne 

in divers finnes and impieties. That this Stong-man therefore might bee 

bound , the Apoftle fawe the Angell comming downe from heauen, hauing 

the keye of the botcomleffe pitte ,.and.2 great chainé in his hand: dad hee 

pooke, (faythhee ) the Dragon that olde ferpent which is, the deucltand Sathan 

and bound him « thoufand yeares, that is , reftrayned him from feducing or 
with-holding them that were to bee fet-ffee. The thoufand yeares , I thinke 

may bee taken two waies, either for that this fhail fall out in the laft thoufand, 

thatis, (4 )on the fixth daie of the workes continuance, andthen the Sab- 

both ofthe Saints. fhould follow, which (hall have no night and bring them 

bleffedneffe which hath no ‘end : So that thus che Apoftle may call the laft 

___. pate’ of the current thoufand (which make the fixth aie) a thoufand yeares, 

“"" vfing the part for the whole: or elfe‘a thouland yeatres is‘ put for eternity, 

noting the plenitude of time , bya ‘niinber moft: perfed , For’ a thoufand, 

+ isthe folid quadrate of renneé tenrie times tehné, is one hundered, and this 

is a quadrate , butitisbuta plaine one. Butto produce the folide, mukiply 
_ten,by a hundered,and there arifeth dne thoufand. | 7% | 

___, Now if anhundered bee fome-times vfed for perfe&ion , asweelee ic is 

in CHRISTS wordes concérning him that fhould leaue all and follow 

ax.19,.9 him, laying: Hee [ball receive a hundered-fold more ; (which the Apoftle feem- 

2Cor.6,10 efi to expound , faying , 4s hawing nothing and yet pol fangs althings , for 

hee had fayd befare , vato a faithfull man the whole wor 


4 
, deis his vitches) why 
thei may not one thoufand, bee put for confummation, the rather , in that 
it is the moft folide {quare chat can bee drawne from tenne? And therefore 
Pf,r05,8 ; Wee interprete that place of the Plalme , Hee bath alway remembered his ¢o- 
aenant and promife that bee made to a thoufand generations, by taking athou- 
fand , fot allin generall.On. Aisd bee caf? hime into the eae § piste, hee 
caftthe deuills into that pitte that is, the multicude cf the wicked , whofe ma- 
lice vnto GODS Church is Bottomleffe , and their hearts 4 depth of enuie 
againft it : hee caft him into this pitte’, not that hee was not there before, 
but becaufe the deuill beeing fhue from amongft the Godly-, holds fafter 
pofieflion of the wicked’: for hee is a moft fure hold of the déuills , that is 
not onelie caft out from G OD S fervants, but purfuesthem alfo' with a caufe- 
lefle Hate: forward. And [but himuppe ,and fealed the dore vpon hin, that hee 
thould deceiue the people no mote till the thoufand yeares were expired 


_ eh) wa bP 


Lre20. | OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 799 
he fealed, thatis, his. will was to-keepe ic vnknowne, who belonged to the diuell; 

and who did not. Bor this is vaknowne vnto-this world, for we know not whether 

he chat ftaadeth (hall fall,or he thatlieth along fhall rife againe But how-fo-euer 

this bond reftrainerh him from tempting the nations that are Gods felected,as he 

did before.For God chofe them before the foundations of the world meaning to 

take them out of the power of darkeneffe, and fet them in the kingdonie of his. 
fonnes glory,as the Apoftle faith. For who. knoweth not the deuils dayly fedu- 

cing and drawing of others vnto eternall carment , though they bee none of the 
predeftinate? Nor isit wonder it the diuellfubuert fome of thofe whoareeuen- 
regeneratein Chriit,and walke inhis wayes. For God knoweth thofe that bee his, 

and the deuill cannot draw a foule of them vhto damnation. For this Ged know- 
eth,as knowing all things to come. not as one man feeth another,in prefence,and 
cannot tell what fhall be-come either of him hee feeth,or of him-felfehere-after. 

The diuell was therefore bound aiid locked vp, thathee fhouldno more feduce 
the nations ( the Churches, members ) whom hie had held in crrour and impiety; _ 
before they werevnited vnto the Church. It is trot faid, shat hee fbould decetue no 

snan any more,but,.chet.hefboald deceine thé people no more , whereby queftionleffe 

hee meaneth the Church. Proceed: vatsif the thonfand yeares bee fulfsled, that is, 
zither the remainder of the fixth day, (che laft choufand ) or tlic whole time that 

the world was to ‘continue. Nor may wee vnderftand the deuill fo to bee barred 
from {educing,that at this time expired, hee fhould feduce thofe nations againe; 
whereof. the Chureh,confiftech,and from which hee was forbidden before. But 

this place is like vnto.that of the Pfalme, Oat eyes taste upon the Lord untill hee 

bane werey upon vs; (for the feruants of God take not theit eyes from beholding, pres3,4 
as foone'as he hath mercy vpon them Jor elfe the order of the words is this, Hee | 


. 


float him vp and [ealed the deore pon him untill 4 thoufand yeares were falfiled , all 
that commech berweene,namely, that he fhould not deceiue the people, hauing. 
no neceffary connexion here-vnto, but beeirig r0 bee feuerally vnderftood,as if 
it were added after wards,and fo the fence runne thus: sd he [but him vp snd [ean 
ted the dore upon him untill a thoufand yeares were fulfiled,that hee {bould not feduce 
the people,that is therefore hee {hutte him vp fo long,that he fhould feduce them 


RO MOre. 


, . | L. VIVES. , | 

| Spe th (4) tRoie{ani } lobns mention of a thoufand yeares in this place,and (4rif's words, - 

1 wiil-tot drinks hence-Forth of the fruste.of the ushe yopill that day that I drinke it new with Mat 26,29 

you in my Fathers kingdeme., together with many Prophecies touching Cbriffs kingdome in 
Hierufalem,made fome imagine that Chrji# would returne into the world, raife the Saints in 

their bodyés,and liue a thoufand pcaeshente omearth in allioy; peace, and profpetitie, farre 
exceeding the galden age’of che Poets,or that of Sybian Efe ‘The Fit Author of this 

opinion was Papiaé Bithop of Hierufalem ; who huedia the Apotiles times . Hee was fecons 

ded by frenans, Apollinarins,Tertulisan ( Lb. de fideliumpV iktorinas:Pittauienfis,cér Lattantins. 

(Dinin Infiit 6.7: And although Hiroe derigaatadcoffe at this opinion i many places, 

yet in his fourth booke.of his Commentaries vpon ieretyys hee faith thacheedarenotcon- + 
demne jt, becaufe many holy martyrs. and religious Chriftiang heldit, fo great an authority 
the perfon fome-times giueth to the pofition, that we mutt v e preat modeity in our diffenti- 

oni with them, and giue great reuérence c6 their godly éffe and grauity. ] cannot beleeue thae 

the Saints held this ‘opinion in that-manner that Cerssb? the heretique did, of whome_ 

wee read this in Exfebins . Cerinthus held that Chrift would base tn earthly kingdome in 
Hoarnfalens ; after the refurrettion, where the Saints (bould line in all foasetie of verry 


Yyy 4 


800 SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cu ar.7.&8. 


lufts and concapifcences. Befides , againft all ruth of {cripture , hee held that for a choufand 
yeares {pace this fhould hold, with reuells and mariage , and other works of corruption, oncly 
to deeciue the carnall minded perfon, Dionifius difputing of S. Jobes reuelation, and recitin 
fome ancient traditions of the Church,hath thus much concetning this man. (eri#thas(quoth 
he )the author of the Cerinthian herefie, delighted much in getting his {eft authority by wrefting of 
feripture. His herefie was , that Chrifts Kingdome fhould bee terreftriall and being ginen vp unte: 
luft and gluttony him{elfe,he affirmed nothing but {uch ap. gs thofe two affects taught hins.T hat 
ali[bould abound with bangaets and belly-chere and ( for the more grace to his affertions ) that 
the feafts of the Law foould be renewed , and the offring of carnal facrifices restored. Irenans pub- 
lifbeth the fecrefie of this herefie in his fir? booke : they that would know tt may finde it there. Thus 
farre Exfebsas, Hift. Eccl.b. 3. wherefore this was not Papias his opinion, whofe originall 
¢  Mierome would otherwife hauc afcribed vn-0 Cerinthas,who was more ancient then Papias, 2 
little , though both lived in one age : nor would /ranexs haue writtes againft Cersnthus , for 
he allowed of Papias his opinion, neither did all the {ets agree in one as touching this chou 
fand yeares : but each one taught that which feemed likelieft vnto hirti-felfe, andno wonder, 
in fo yaine a fiction. Dionijsus of Alexandria(as Hiereme affirmeth,Jx Eas. 6b.18.)wrot an ele- 
‘gant worke in derifion of thefe Chiliafts,and there Golden Hierufalem, their reparation of the 
temple,their bloud of facrifices, there Sabbath, there circumfitions,there bisth,chere mariaces, 
there banquets, chere foueraigneies , their wartes, and eryumphs, &c.( 6 ) The cheare 
Shall exceed. | So faith Lattantins : The earth fhall yeeld ker greateft facundsty , and zeeld 
her plenty varilled. The rockie mowntaines{ball fweate a , the riuers {hall ruane wine , and the 
fountaines milke. (To omit Cersnthus his relations which are farre more odious, ( ¢ } ( biliaf.} 
xinses., is athoufand. (4 ) On the fixt day. | There is areport that in the bookes of Elias the 
Prophet it was recorded that the world fhould laft 6ooo. yeares, 2000.vnder vanity , wnto de 
brabaxs,2000.vnder the law vnto Chrift.and 2000,vnder Chrift,vnto the iudgement. This by 
the Hebrewes account : forthe L XX. haue aboue 3000. yeares from .e4dem to Abrabant, 
And in Axgsftines time the world lacke not 400 yeares of the full 6000. So thet now , our 
Vulgar accoumpt is aboue.6700.yeares Namely,from Our Saviour, 15 22. Whom Exjebins and 
fuch as follow the LX X. affirme to haue beene borne in the yeare of the world 5100. and 
T fomewhat more. Therefore Angu/tixe faith that the later end of the 6000.ycares, pafled along 
in his time. And Laftantins, who liued before -ugujfine, vnder Conffantine, faich chat in his 
time there was but 200.0f the 6000.yeares to runne, _ et? 


Of the binding and loofing of the Dinelle 
Cuap., 8. 


A Fter that ( [aith S:lobe ) he wsuft be loofed for a feafon. Well , alchough the Di- 
uell be bound and locke vpthat-he fhould:not feduce the Church , thal hee 
therefore be looofed to feduce it? God forbid. That Church which God pre 
deftinated ,and fetled before the worlds foundation , whereof it is written , God 
knoweth thofe that be his that the Dewill [ballnener feduce : and yet it fhalbe on earth 
ceuen at the cime of his loofing , as ic hath continued in fucceffiue eftate euer 
fince it was firft erected , for by and by after, hee faith that, the Diusll {hell bring 
bu feduced mations in armes again it , whofe muncber (balbe as the fee fands : And 
Rew,20,9, sheywent vp (faithhes ) vato the plaine of thecarth , and compaffed the tents of the 
— Saints about,and the beloned citty , but fire came dowse from God out of Heanen, and 
devoured them. And the Densllthat deceined them was caft intoa lake of fire and brim- 
frewe , where the beaft and she falfe Prophets {halbe tormented ence day and night 

Ser enermore. . 7 oe | 
| But 


-_—_ Uh ~- =. = > =— =—_ 


nr A SC ET EDI A A TE TES TP TS EE LT ELECT ERGEA, 


Lin20. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. - Soi 


Buc this nowbelongeth to thelaft judgment, which I thought good to recite, 
leaft fome fhould fuppofe that the Diuell being let loofe againe for a feafon 
fhould eithes findeno Churchatall, or by his violence and feducements fould 
fubuert all he findeth. Wherefore the Diuells imprifonment during the whole 
time included in this booke (hac is from Chrifts firft comming to his laft )is | 
not any particular reftraint from feducing the Church,becanfe hee could not in- 


+ jure the Church were hee neuer fo free: other-wife if his bondage were afet- 


prohibiton from feduction what were his freedome but a full permiffian to fe- 
duce ? which God forbid fhould euer be ! No his binding is an inhibition of his 
full power of temptation, which is the meanes of mans being feduced ; either 
by his violenceor his fraudulence. Which if kee were fuffered to pra@ife in 
that long time of infirmity , hee would peruert and deftroy the faith of many 
fuch foules as Gods goodneffe will not fuffer to bee caftdowne. Toauayd 
this inconuenience, bound heeis ; And in the laft and {malleft remainder of 
time {hall hee bee loofed: for wee read that hee fhall rage inhis greateft ma- 
lice onely three yeares and fixe monethes , and hee fhall hold warres with fuch 
foes as all his emnity fhall neuer bee able either to conquere or iniure. But if 
hee werenot let loofearall, his maleuolence fhould.bee the leffe confpicuous, 
and the faithfulls pacience the leffe glorious 3; briefly it would bee leffeappa- 


. rant vnto how bleffledan end GOD had made vfe of his curfedneffe, in noe 


debarring him abfolutely from tempting the Saints ( though hee bee veteérly 


caft ouc trom their inward man ) that they might reape a benefit from his bad~ 


neffe : andin binding him firmely inthe harts of fuch as vow them-felues his 
feGtators , leaft if his wicked envy had the full {cope , hee fhould enter ina- 

mongft the weaker members ofthe Church, and by violence and fubtilty toge- 

ther, deter and difwade chem from their faith , their onely meane of faluation. 

Now in the end, hee fhalbe loofed , chat the Cs#ty of GO D may fee what a 

porenc aduerfary fhe hath conquered by thegrace of her Sausour and redeemer, 

vnco his eternall glory. 33 

O whatare wee, and compare vsvnto the Saints that fhall liue to fee this! 

when fuch an enemy fhall be let loofe vnto them as we can {carcely refift al- 
though hee bee bound! (although no doubt but Chrift hath had fome foldiors 

in thefe ourtimes , whoif they had liued in thetimes to come, would haue a; 

voyded all the Deuills trapps by their true difcrete prudence ) or haue with- 

ftood them. with vndanted pacience. ) This binding of the Diuell began when 

the Church began to f{pread from Iudea into other regions , and lafteth yer, 

and fhall do vntill his time bee expired : for men euen in thefe times do refufe. 
the chaine whercin hee held them, infidelity, and turne vato GOD, and 
fhall dono doubt vnto the worlds end. And then is he bound in refpect of eue- 
ry private man, when the foule that was his vaflall , cleareth her felfe of him, nor. 
ceafeth his fhutting vpon, when they dye wherein hee was fhut: for the world 
fhali hae a contiouall fucceffion of the haters of Chriftianity, whileft the 
earth endureth, and in their hearts the diuell fhall euer bee fhutvp. But ie 


may bee a doubt whether any one fhall turnevnto GOD, during the fpaceMat,12,29 


of his three yeares and an halfes raigne , for how can this ftand good, How can a 
wan enter into a ftrong mans houfe & [poyle his goods,exept he firft bend the frongman, 
c& then [poile his pee 4 ifhe may do it when the {trong man is loofe?This feemeth 
to proue dire&ly that during that {pace,none fhalbe conuerted,buc that the diuek 


fhall 


pn 
302 | SAINT AV GVSTINE, — Cuar.8.89. 


fhall have acontinuall fight with thofe that are in the faith already, of whome he 
may perhaps conquer fome certaine number, but none of Gods predeftinate, 
not one. For it is not idle that Johsthe Author of this Reuelation, faich in one 
of his Epiftles, concerning fome Apoftatas, They went out from vs, but they were 
sJoh.s.19 78 of us: for if they had beene of us they would haue continued with vs. But what 
then fhall become of the children ? for it is incredible , that the Chriftians 
fhould haue no children during this fpace: or that if they hadthem,they would - 
not fee them baptized by one meanes or other . How then fhall thefe bee taken 
from the deuill,the fpoyle of whofe houfe no man can attaine before he binde 
him 2 So that it is more credible to auouche , that the church in that tine fhall 
neither want decreafe nor augmentation , and that the parents in ftanding ftifly 
for their childrens baptifme, (together with others that fhall but even then be- 
come beleevers ) fhall beate the diuell back in his greateft liberty : chatis , they 
fhall both wittily obferue and warily auoyde his neweft ftratagems, and moft fe- 
cret vnderminings,and by that meanes keepethem-felues cleare of his mercy- 
Jefe clutches. Not-with-ftanding,that place of Scripture, How ¢a# aman exter 
into a ftrong mans howfe, Grc.is true, for all that : and according there-vnto , the 
order was,that the ftrong fhould firft bee bound, and his goods taken from him 
out of all nations, to multiply the church in fuch fort,thac by the true and faith- 
full vnderftanding of the Prophecies that were to bec fulfilled ,they might take - 
away his goods from him when hee was in his greateft freedome: for as wee 
Mat,4.12 mutt confeffe, that becaufe iniquity increafeth, the loue of many {hall bee colae, and 
that many of them that are not written in the booke of life fhall fall before the 
force of the raging newly loofed deuill: So muft wee confider what faithfull 
fhall as then bee found en the earth, and how diuerfe fhall euen then flie to the 
bofome of the C hurche, by Gods grace,and the Scriptures plainnefle: wherein 
amoneft other things,that very end which they fee approching is prefaged: and 
that they fhall be both more firme in beleefe of what they reiected before , and 
alfo more {trong to with-ftand che greareft affauleand foreft batteries. If this be 
fo, his former binding left his good to all future {poile, bee hee boundor loofe, 
vnto which end, thefe words, Howcan 4 man enter into a firong mans honfe, Cre 
doe principally tend. : | 


what ts meant by Chrifts reiguing 4 thoufand yeares with the Saints, 
ana the diffcrence betweene that and his eternallreigne. 


E Cuar. oe 


Ow doubtleffe whilft the diuel is thus bound,chré# reigneth with his Saints 

the fame thoufand yeares,vnderftood both after one manner, that is, all the 

time from his firft comming, not including that kingdome whereof hee faith, 

Mst,24.34 Come you ble(fed of my Father snberite you the kingdome prepared for you: for if there 
were not another reigning of Chri@ with the Saints in another place, whereof 

him-felfe faith 5 1 a with you alway unto the end of the world: the Church now 
vpon earth fhould not bee called his kingdome, or the kingdome of heauen: for 
the Scribe that was taught vnto the kingdome of God, liued in this thoufand 
Mec.12.¢9)oare= And the Reapers {bal take the tares out of the Church , which grew ( vntill 
03°57 harueft) together with the good corne: which Parable he expoundeth,faying, The 
Mat-7 3.39 harne/t isthe end of the world,and the reapers are the Angels, as then the tares ave 
ao,Se, : gathered 


Mat,28.20 


J 


OF THECITIE OF GOD. —_ 803 


athered and burned in the fre : fo fballit be inthe end of the aa pa of mar 
Doel [fend forth his Angels,and they{ball gather out of his kingdome ‘all shines shat of- 
fead.WWhar‘doth hee {peake heare of that kingdome where there is no offence ? 
No,burof the,Church, thar is heerebelow. Hee faith further, : #ho-(c- ener fhall 
breake one of thefe least commandements and teach men fo, hee fbalttee calledthe leat 
in the kingdome of heauen: but who-fo-ener ball obferne and teach them,the fame hall 
bee called great inthe kingdome of heanen, Thus both thefe are déne in the king- 
dome of heauen, both the breach of the commandements , and the keeping of 
them. | | ' ae | 
Then Hee proceedeth : Except your righteou[nejfe exceed the righteou/neffe of 
the Scribes and Pharifees (that is of fuch as breake whac they teach, andas Chrjf 
faith clfe-where of them, Say well but doe nothing )vnle(ffe you exceed thefe , that is, 
’ both teach and obferue, you fbal/ not enter into the kingdome of heauen. Now the 
kingdome where the keeper of the commandements , and the contemner were 
both faidto be,is one,and the kingdome into which, he that faith and doth net,fhal 
not enter, is another. So then whereboth forts are,the church is,that now is:but 
where the better fort is only,the church is,as jt {hal be here-after,vererly. exempt — 
from euill. So that the church now on earth is both the kingdom of Chrif,and the 
kingdome of heauen.The Saints reigne with him aow, but not as they fhall doe 
here-after: yet the tares reigne hot with them a they grow inthe Church 
amongft the good feed. They reigne with him who doasthe Apoftle faith : if yee Cole83,%. 
then be rifen with Chriit, feeke the things which are aboue, where Chrift fitteth at the 
right hand of God: Set your affections on things which ave aboue,and not on things 
| which are on earth ,of whomealfo hee faith, that their comuerfation ts in heauen. 
Laftly they reigne with Chris# whoare with all his kingdom where he reigneth. 
But how dg they reigne with him acall,who continuing below, vntill the worlds 
end,vatill his kingdome be purged of all the ares; do neuer-the-leffe fegke theit 
owae pleafures, and poe their redcemers 2 This booke théreforé of Saint lobas 
fpeaketh of this kingdome of malice, wherein there'are daily conflicts with the | 
enemy,fome-times with victory, and fome-times-with foyle, varill the time of 
that moft peaceable kingdome approach, where no enemy fhall cuer fhewhis © 
face ; this,and the firft refurrection aré the fubie@ of the Apoftles Reuelation. 
For hauing fayd that the deuill was. bound fora thoufand = ,and then was 


tobee lodfed for awhile, hee recapitulateth thegifts of the Church during 


Lino. 


them. This may not bee ynderftood of the laft iudgement: bur bythe fcakts are 


2 a et 


them which were flaine for the witne/fe of Iefus aqKonsatt 

thovfand yeares. Thefe were the martires foules,hauing not their bodies as yer,for 

the foules of the Godly are not excluded from the Church , which as itis now is 

thekingdomie of God.Otherwife fhe fhold not mention them,noccelebratetheir  ~ 

Memories atour communions of she body and blond of Chrift:nor were it neceflary 

for vs in our perills,to run voto his Baptifme,or to be afraid to dy without itsnog¢ 
3 | | td 


$04 - SAINT AV GVSTINE. Cuang 


to feeke reconciliation to his church, if a man haue incurred any thing that ex- 
aGtech repentance,or burdeneth his confcience. Why doe we thofe things; bur 
that euen fuch as are dead in the faich,are members of Gods Church? Yet are they 
not with cheir bodies, andget neuer-the-leffe,their foules reigne with Chri/t,the 
whole {pace of this thoufand yeares. And therefore wee reade elfe-where in the 
fame booke. Ble//ed are the dead which dye in the Lord : Buen fo faith the {pirie, for 
they rest from their labours; and thes workes follow them. Thus then the Church 
raigneth with Chréf,firlt 2m the = and the dead: for Chrift(as the Apoftle faich) 
that hee might thence forth rule both ower the quick and the dead. Bucthe Apoftle 
heere nameth the foules of the martyrs onely , becaufe their kingdome is mof 
Rom.14  plorious-afrer death,as hauing fought for che truth vneill death. Buc this is bur 
a taking of the part for the whole, for wee take this place-to include all the dead 
that belong to Chrfts rp whichis, the Church : But che fequell , 40d 
which did not worlbep the beaft neither hrs Image, neither bad taken bis marke upon 
their fare-heads,or on their hands: this is meant both of the gusck and dead. Now 
alshough wee muft inake a more exact inquiry what chis beaft was , yet is ic not 
againft Chriftianity to interpret it,she foczety of the wickedoppofed against the com 
pany of Gods fernants, and against his holy Citty. Now his image, that is, his difl- 
mulation,in fuch as profeffe religion,and praGife infidelity. They faigne to bee 
what they are not,and their fhew (not their truth ) procureth them che name of 
Chriftians. For this Beaft confifteth not onely of the profefled enemies of Chrift 
ard his glorious Hierarchy,but of the cares alfo,that in the worlds end are to be 


Apo, 14.13 


gathered out of the very fields of his owne Church. And who aré they that 


2.Cor.6, adore not the beaft, but thofe of whome Saine Pauls aduife taketh effet, Bee not 
14. [waequally | yoaked with the Infidels ? Thefe giue him no adoration; no confent, 
no obed:ence,nor take his marke , chatis ,the brand of their owne finne, vpon 

their fore-heads, by proteffing it,or on their hands ,by working according to ic. 

They that are cleare of this, be they liuing, or be they dead, they reigne with 

Chrzft all chis whole time,from the vnion vnto him, to the end of the time im- 

Ioh. 5, 25. plyed in the thoufand yeares. The reft (faith Saint John) [ball not line, for now is the 
houre when the dead Iball heave the voyce of the fonne of God.and thzy that he are it ball 

line, the rest all not line: butthe addition; untill the thoufand ycares be finifbeds 
impliech,that they fhall want life all the time that they fhould haucic, in attay- 
ning ic, by pafling through faith from death tolife. And therefor¢ on the day of 

the general! refurrection,they thall rife alfo,not vato life , but vnto iadgement, 

that ig,vnto condemnation, which istruly called the fecond death, for hee that 
liueththot before the thoufand yeares be expired, that is, he chat heareth not che 
Sauiours voyce,and paffech not from death tolife, duringthe time of the firft re. 
furreétion,affuredly fhall be throwne both body and foule into the fecond death, 

at the day of the fecond refurre&tion. For Saést lehn proceedeth plainly : This 

( fatth hee ) is the firft refurvection. Ble(fed and holyis.hee that hath part in the frft 
vefurrectron, and part of it is his, who doth not onély arife from death in finne, 

>but continueth firme in his refurreion. On fuch (faith he ) the hier death heth 

no power : But ic hath power ouer the reft of whome hee fayd before , The reff 

fball not line untill the thoufand yeares bee finsfbed: becaufe that in all that whole 

time meant by the thoufand yeares , although that each of them had a bodily 
life ¢ at one time or other ) yet they {pent it ,and ended it with-out arifing out 
of the death of iniquitie, wherein the deuill held them: which pehinrettion 

| ae fhould 


me ee = —_ = 


~” 


Lis20, 0 OF THE CITIE OF GOD. S05 


fhould haue beene their onely meane to. haue purchafed thenva part in the firft | 
re{urrection,ouer which the fecond death hazh no power...‘ eae? Oe 


me Z 


An anfwer to tha obiection of fomse,affirmsing that refurrcttion is 
| _ proper to the bedy onely,andnot tothe foules 1. 0% 
a HAP.IO. -! ee tee | 


© Ome obie& this,that refurrection pertaineth onely to the hody,and therefore 
J the firft refurreaion is abodily one; for that which falleth.(fay they ) thac 
_ may rife againe : but the body falleth by death, (for fo isthe word Cadauér, acar- 
cafle,deriued of Cado,to fall: ) Ergo,rifing againe belongeth foly to the body,and 

no: ynto the foule. Well, but what will you anfwer the Apoftle, that in'as plaine 

terms as may be,he calleth the foules bettring arefurreQion:they were hot reui- 
ued ip the ourward man,but in the inward,vnto whom he {aid, Jf yee thew be rion 

with Chrift,feeke the things which are eboue: which he explaineth elfe-where, fay- Rom,6:4: 
‘ing; Like as Chrift was raifed up from the dead by the glory of the father, fowceaifa 
fhould walke in newneffe of life. Hence alfois that place: Awake thow that fcepest, Ephel.s.14 
“and ftand vp from the dead,and Christ {ball gsne thee light. Now whereasthey fay, 

none canrife but thofe that fall,ergo, the body onely can arife, why can they not 

Aheare that thrill found of the {pirit. Depart mot from hins leaft you fall, and againe, tofash 423 
Hee flandeth or falleth to his owne master: and further , Let him that thinketh hee Rom. 14.4 
frandeth take heed least hee fall: 1 thinke thefe places meane not of bodily falls,bue ESS Sa 
* cof the foules. If chen refurre€tion concerne them that fall,-and thatthefoule ° 

may alfo fall; it muftneeds follow , that the foule may rife againe. Now:Saint 

John hauing {aid,On {uch the fecond death (hall haue no power, proceedeth thus: Bat 
they ballbce the Priefts of God and of Chrift ,and {ball reigne. with him athoufand 
yeares : Now. this 1s not meant onely of chofe whome the Church peculiarly 
callech Bithops and Priefts , but as wee are all called Chriftians , becaufe ‘of our 
amyfticall Chré/me, ous vn@ion, fo are wee all Priefts in being. the members of 

one Prieft. Where-vpon Saint Peter calleth vs, 4 toyall Prieft-hood, an holy sati-, pers 9: 
en. And marke how briefly Sain Joba infinuateth the deity (4) of Chrifinthefe © *’ ’ 
.words,of God, and of Chris, that is of the Father and of the Sonne, yet as hée 

was made the fonne of man, becaufe of his feruants fhape, fo in the fame refpeg 

was he madea Prief for euer according to the order of «Melchifedech , whereof 

wee hauc fpoken diuerfe times in this worke. : 


Pane : Aa 28 OYE: | 2 : \ . 
L.VIVES, © nes tone, 

. ; et — al vers oo Viva ate 
DY (a) of Christ |For it were a damnable and blafphemous injury’ to God to fufferany 
+ oneto haue Priefts , bur him alone: the very Gentiles would: by no meanes allowe it. 
Cicere Philippie,z. ee ae, OS es ean Pa ee) ee | 


a ae 


of Gog and Magog.vhom the Denil (at the worlds end) flall flirreap 


againft the Churchof God. Car. 11. 
: A when the thonfandyeares (faith hee ) are expired, Sathan {ball be loofed Ont Reunody,8 
Lzz Of ; 


806 SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cwaril 


of his prifon ated [ball got out to deceine the people which are in the foure quarters of the 
earth , enenGog and Magog , to gather them together into Battell whofe number ts as 
the fand of the fea. So then the ayme of his decept fhalbethis warre, for he vfed 
diuers waies to feduce before, andall tended to euill. He hall leaue the dennes 
of his hate , and burft out into open perfecution ; This fhalbe the laft perfecuti- 
on, hard before the laft iudgement,and che Church thall fuffer ic, all che earth 
see the whole citry of the Diuel fhall affli@ che Cstty of God at thefetimes in 
places. | | | 
This Gog and this cMagog are not to bee taken for { 4 ) any particu- 
lar Barbarous nations, nor tor the Geres and Meflagetes, becaufe of their 
litterall affinicy, nor for any other Countryes beyord che Romaines iurif- 
difion : hee meaneth all the earth when hee faith , The people which are 
' én the foure quarters of the Earth, and then addeth that they are Gog and Me. 
5! b) Gog, is, anhoufe : and Afegog, of an houfe : as if hee had fayd, the 
“honfe and hee that commeth of the boufe. So that they are the nations wherein 
the Deuill was bound before and now that he is loofed , cometh from thence, 
they being as the houfe, and hee as comming out of the houfe. Buz wee re- 
ferre both thefe names vnto the nations, and neither ynto him, they are both 
the houfe, becaufe the old enemy is hid and houfed in them: and they are of 
the houfe , when out of fecret hate they burft into open violence. Now where 
as hee fayth : They went up imto the plaine of the Earth , and comps(fed the tents 
of the Saints about , and the beloued City, wee muft not thinke they came to any 
one fet place, as if the Saints tents were in any one certaine nation , or the 
beloned Citty either : no, this Citty is nothing bue Gods Church, difperfed 
throughout the whole éarth, and being refident in all places, and amongft 
allnations , as them words, the plaine of the Earth, do infinuate : there fhall 
the tents of the Saints ftand, there fhall the beloved Ctty Sand : There fhall 
the fury of the prefecuting enemy guirt them in with multitudes of all nations 
Ynited in one rage of perfecution : there (hall the Church bee hedged in with tri- 
bulations,and (hut vp on euery fidetyet fhall fhe not forfake her warfare, which is 
fignified by the word, Tents. 3 p 4 


L.VIVES 


A Ny (4 ) particular Barbarons. | The lewes ( faith Hierome) and {ome of our Chriftians 
+ 3 alfo following them herein , thinke that Gog is meant of the Huge nation of the Scythi- 
ans, beyond Caacafus and the fens of AZeoris, reaching as farre as India and the Cafpian 
Sea , and chat thefe (after the Kingdome hath lafted a thoufand yeares at Hierufalem ) fhals 
be {tiered vp by the Deuill to war again(ft Ifraell and the Saints, bringing an innumerable 
multitude withthem , firftout of Moffoch, which /ofephas calls Cappadocia , and then out of 
Thubal , which the Hebrewes affirme to be Italy ,.and be holdeth to bee Spaine . They thall 
bring alfocthe Perfians, Ethiopians and Lybians, with them of Gomer and Theogorma, 
to wit , the Galatians and Phrigians , Saba alfo and Dedan,the Carthaginians, and Tharfians. 
Thus farre Hiereme: Jn ExehJib.11. (6) Gog isan bexfe.| So faith Hierome. So that thefe 
two wogds imply all proud and fa'fe knowledge that exalteth ic felfe againft the truth, 


Whether 


QS FS fe ‘we OS 


rt 063 


Liz2o. OF THE CiTIE OF GOD, 807 


Whether the fire falling from heauen, and dewonring them, 
smply the last torments of the wicked, 


= oe HAPS Y 2s Be, es A A bean 

RY: his following words, fire came downe from GOD out of heanen,and denourea 

them,arenotto bee vnderftood of that punifhment,which thefe words imply: 
Depart from me yee curfed into euerlafting fire : for then fhall they bee caftinto the 
fire;and not fire be caft downe vpon them. But the firft fire infinuateth the firm- 
neffe of the Saints,cthac will not yeeld vnto the wills of the wicked : fot heauen is 
the firmament, whofe firmueffe fhall burne them vp for very zeale and yexati-- 
on,that they cannot draw the feruants of God vnto the fide of Antichrift. This 
is the fire from God that fhall bure them vp in that God hath fo confirmed his 
Saints,that they become plagues vnto their oppofites.Now whereas I faidzease, 
know that zeale is taken in good part or in euill: in good,asheres The zeale of pag. 
thine honfe hath eaten mee vp : in euill as here’: Zeale hath poffeffed the ignorant . 
people. And now the fire {hall eate vp thefe oppofers, but not that fire of the 
faft iudgement. Befides if the Apoftle by this fire from heauen doe imply the 
plague that fhall fall vpon {uch of Antichrifts rege as Chri? at his com- 


ming fhall finde left on earth,yetnot-with-ftanding this fhall not be the wickeds 
Jaft plague, for chat fhall come vpon them afterwards, when they are rifen 
againe in their bodiesy: 3, oe 


Whether it be 4 thoufand yeares untill the perfecution under 
AntichrsfP. Cuap. 13. 7 
vy His laft perfecution vnder Antichrift (as wee faid before, and the Prophet 
Daniell prooueth ) fhall laft three yeares and an halfe :a little {pace ! but whe- 
ther it belong to che thonfand yeares of the deuills bondage, and che Saints 
reigne with Chri/?; or bea {pace of time more then the other fully accompted,is 
a great queftion. If we hold the firft part,chen wee muft fay that the Saints with 
Chri#t reigned longer then the deuill was bound. Indeed the Saints fhall reigne 
with him in the very heate of this perfecution , and ftand out againft the deuill, 
when heeis in greateft power to moleft them. But why then doth the Scripture 
confine both their reigne and the deuils bondagé to the iuft fumme ofa thoufand 
yeares,fecing the diuellscaptiuitie is outthree yeates and fixe moneths fooner 
then their kingdome with Chréff? well,if wee hold the later part,that thefe threé. 
yeares anda halfe, are beyond the inft thoufand:, to. vnderftand Saint John that 
the reigne of the Saints with Chrift and the deuils in. Srifonment ended both 
at once; (according tothe thoufand yeares whicti hee giueth alike vnto both ) fo 
that the faid time of perfecution Belongeth neither to the time of the one, nor 
the other : then we muft confeffe,that during this perfecution, the Saints reigné 
not with Chri. But whatis he dare affirme,that his members do not reigne with 
him, when they do moft firmlieft of all, keepe their coherence with him? at fuch — 
vime-as when the warresdoe ragé, the more apparent is their conftancie , and 
the more frequent is the-afcent-from martyrdome to glory ? If wee fay they 
reigne not becaufe of the affli@ion that they endure, wee may then inferre; 
that inthe times already paft,if thé Sairits were orice afflicted , their kingdome 
with their Sassowr ceafed : and fo they whofe foules this Euangelift. beheld, 
namely of thofe who were flaine for‘the teftimonié of 1E SVS, and for the 
“2 = Lizz word 


\ 


808 


SAINT AV GVSTINE. : Cuar.tg 


word of God, reigned not with Chréft in their perfecutions , nor were they the 
kingdoms of Chrift, who were Chrifts moft-excellent poffeffions.Oh this is ab- 
{urd and abhominable / No, the vi€torious foules of the glorious martyrs, fub- 
duing all'earchly toyles and cortures,went vp to reigne with Chrzft (as they had 
reigned with him before) vntill the expiration of the thoufand yeares , and then 
fhall cake their bodies againe, and fo reigne body and foule with him for euer- 
more. And therefore, in this fore perfecution of three yearesand an halfe, both 
the foules of thofe chat fuffered for Chri ft before,and thofe that are then to fuffer, 
fhall reigne with him vntill the worlds date bee our, and the kingdome begin 
thar fhail neuer haue end. Wherefore affuredly the Saints reigne with Chrsf, 
fhall continue longer then Sathans bondage, for they fhall reigne with God the 
fonne their King, three yeares and an halfe after Sathan bee:loofed. It remai- 
neththen,that when we heare that, The Priefts of God and of Chrift , thall reigne 
with him a thoufand yeares,and that after a thoufand yeares the deuill (hall bee 
loofed,we muft vnderftand chat either the thoufand years are decretiuely meane 
of the deuills bondage onely,and notof the Sainrs kingdonte ior that the yeares 
of the Saints kingdome are longer, and they of the dcuils bondage fhorter , or 
that feeing three yeares and an halfe is but a hetle fpace, therefore it was not 


~ counted,either becaufe the Saints reignehad more then it conceived , or the 


deuills bondage lefle ; as wee faid of tne foure hundred yeares in the fixceene 
booke. The time was more, yet that fumme onely was fet downe, and this ( ifone 
obferuc it) is very frequent in the Scriptures. 


Satan and his followers condemned: A recapitulation of the refurreion, 
and thelaftiudgment, Car. 14. 


AFee this rehearfall of the laft perfecution; he proceeds with the fuccefle of 
Rom,2o18 , 


31 


0Co8,7, 


the deuill and his congregation ac the laft iudgment.4d the denzll( faith be) 
that deceiued thems,was caft into a lake of fire Cr brimftone, where the beaff andthe falfe 
Prophet {ball be tormented cuen day and night for encr-more, The beatt (as I faid be- 
fore) is the.eéty of the wicked : his fal//e Prophet is either Antichrift,or his image, 
the figméc that I fpake of before.After all this, commeth the /ef sadgment, inthe 
fecond refurrection,to wit,the bodies,and this he relatech by way of recapitula- 
tion,as it was reuealed vnto him,/ few (fatth he) a great white throne, and one that 
fate on it, from whofe face flew away both the carth and heanen, and their place was no 
more found. He faith not.and beauenand earth flew away from hisface.{as impor- . 
ting their prefent flighté*for that befell not vntill after the sudgeasent , but , frons 
whofe face flew away both beauen and earth , namely afterwards, when the swdgment 
fhall be finiflied,then this heaven and this.earth fhall ceafe,and anew world fhallf 
begin.But the old one fhall not be veterly confumed, it fhall onely pafle through 
an vniuerfall change; and therefore the Apoftle faith. The fafbior of this world 
goeth away, and 1 would hane you wsth-ont care.: The fa{tiion goeth away , notthe 
nature. Well, let vs follow Saént Jobn , who after the, fight of this throne, &ice 
proce:deth thus, 4sd I fawe the dead both great and (mall fland before God, and 
the bookes were opened, and another booke was epened which ss the booké ( a ) of life, 
andthe dead were indzed of thofe things which were written tn the bookes, according 
to thesr workes. Se Oe Aedes | 
Bshold, the opening of bookes, and of one booke ! This what ic _ ghee 
. "ef 3 _ | thewerh: 


=~ 


Linco. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. - — B05. 


fheweth : which is the booke of life. The other are the holy ones of the Old and 
New-Teftamene,that therein might be fhewed what God had commanded : but 
inthe booke (4) of life were the commiffions and omiffions of euery man on 
earth, particularly recorded. If we fhould imagine this to be an earthly booke, 
fach as ours are, whois he that could imagine how huge a volume it were, ot 
how long the contents of it all, would beareading ? Shall there be as many An- 
gells as men, and each one recite his deeds that were commited tohis guard? 
then (hall chere not bee one booke forall, but-each one fhall haue one. I bur the 
Scripture here mentions but one inthis kind: Ic is cherefore fome diuine power 
infufed intothe confciences of each peculiar, calling all their. workes ( won- 
derfully & ftrangely)vnto memory ,and fo making each mans knowledge accufe 
or excufe his owne confcience : thefe are all, and fingular , judged in themfelues, 
This power diuine is called abooke, and ficly , for therein is read all the fa@s that 
the doer hath commitced , by the working of this hee remembreth all : But the 
Apoftle to explaine the iudgement of thedead mere fully , and to thew how ie 
comprifeth greate and fmall, he makes at ie were a returné to what he had omit, 
ted( or rather deferred) faying , smd the feagane up her dead which were within 
her pnd death and Hebi delinered up the dead which were in them. This was before thar 
they were iudged & yet was the iudgment mentioned before, fo thatas I faid, he 
returnes,to his intermiffion,&hauing faid thusmuch.The [ea gane up her dead.crc. | 
As afore,he now proceedeth in the true order; faying, 4nd they were tudged euery 
wan according to his workes. This hee repeateth againe here, to fhew theorder | 
which was to‘manage the -iudgment whereof hee had {poken before in thefe. 
words, And the dead were indged of thofe things which were written in the bookes, ae 
sordingtotheir workes. 88 == ss a a 


ee ee earl oe : 


L. VIVES. | 
? ) life }Soreadeth Hicréme,and fo readeth the vulger, wee finde not any that readeth 
“it, Of the life of ewery one, as it is in fome copies of Auguffine, The Grecke is iuftas wee 
read, tuns, of life, without addition. te ee 5 ee 


Of the dead,whons the Sea, aid deathand. 
hell ball gine vp to Ludgement. 


eu . . CuaP i5. ae a? od, 8 
BY what dead aré they thar the See fhall gitie vp ? for all chac die in the fea are 

LD not kept from hell,neithet are their bodyes kept in the fea: Shall we fay thae 
the fea keepeth the death that were good, and bell thofe that were euill; horriblé 
abfurdity/ Who is fo fotti(h as to belecue this ? no the fea here.is fiely vnder- 
ftoodto imply the whele woild. Chrsi# therefore intendihg to thew: that thofe 
whowiehe found on earth at the time appointed, fhould be iudged with thofe thag 
were to rife againe,callech chem dead men,and yet good then,vnto whom it was: 
faid, Tom are dead,and your life is hiddcn with Chriff ip God. Biitrhem he calleth euill 
of whome hee fayd, Let the dead bury their dead. Befides, they may beé. called 
dead, in that their bodies-ase deaths obie&s : wherefore the Apoftle.{aich : The ; 
body is dead,becanfe of fine ,bnt the [pirst is life. foryighteoufacff Jake s fhew that gon. 6.44 


| ro 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. . Cuarets.8006, 
ina moreall man, there is both a dead body and a liuing fpicic’; yer faidhee noe, | 
the body is mortall , but dead, alchongh according to his tnanner of {peach, 
hee had called bodies , mortall, but alictle before. .Thus then the fea: gaue 
vppe her dead; the world waue vppe all mankindethat as yet had not approached 


 the-graue. And death avd hell ( quoth hee) gawe up the dead which were in them. 


The fea gaue vp his; for as they were then fo werethey found : but death and hell 
had theirs firft called to the life which they had,lefe &then gaue them vp.Perhaps 
je were not fufficient to fay death onely , or hell onely , but hee faith borh,death 
and hell,death for {uch as might onely die, and not enter hell, and -hell for fuch as 
did both , for.if ic bee not abfurd to beleeue that che ancient fathers ‘beleeuing in 
Chriftto‘come, wereall atreft (4) ina place farre from all torments, ( and yet 
within bell) vneill Chrifts paffion,and-defcenfion thether fet them at liberey:then 
furely the faithfull chat are already redeemed by that paffion , neuer know what. 
hell meaneth, from their death vntill they arife andreceiue their rewards. sd 
they indged ewery one according-to their deedes : abriefe declaration of the iudge- 
ment. And death and hell ( fareh be) were caft into the lake of fire : this isthe fecond 


_ death, Death and Hefare but the diuell and his angells,the onely authors of death 


and hells torments. : This hee did buc recite before , when hefaid, And the Diuell 
that deociued thems was caft tatealake of fre-and brinstone:But his miftical addition, 
Where.the beaft and the falfe Prophet fballbe tormented,cre. That he thew eth plain. 
ly here: Whofoener was not fowmdwritten inthe booke of life was caft into the leke of 


fire. Nowas for the-booke of life, it is mot meant to. put God in remembrance 


of any ching’ leaf hee fhould forges, bur it fhewech who are predeftinate vnto 


, faluation , tor Godis net igndrant ofcheis: number , neicher readeth hee this 


' Matas, 


ssa: the world being fa. fisbftantially renewed, may bec fitely adapted. viitg the mea 


booke to finde it: his prefcience is rather the booke it felfe wherein all are writ- 
ten,that is fore-knowen. | 


| | L. VIVES. 
Fe a( 4) place.| They call this place e<brahams bofome : wherein wete no paines felt as 
Chryft.(heweth plaitiely of Lazarissec.16.and-that this place was farre from the dungeon 
of the wicked : but where it is,or what is.ment hereby, S. Auguffine confeflieth chat he cannot 
define, Sap. Genef.46.8. Thefe arefecrets all vnneedfull to be: knowne, and all wee ynworthy 
to know them. : 


Of the new Heauen,aud the pew Earth 
—  “Cuaprg. 
He iudgement of the wicked being paft 4s he fore-told,the iudgement of the 
good muft follow, for heehath already explained what Chrift faid in briefe 
They fall go isto cherJafting patneinow he tuft exproffe the fequell: Andthe righ- 
teows into lufe eternal, And 1 faw( [aith he) anéw heanez andanewearth. The ‘ rft 
heaueh and earth were gone, and fo was thefea, for fuch was the order defcribed 
beforé by him when hetaw the ¢reée white throne,& one fitting vpon it,fré whofe 
face tliéy fled. So thén they thgt were riot in the booke of life being iudged, and 
eaft into eternall fire;what,or where it is, Uhold is vnknowne to (4 )all but thofe 
vato whome it pleafé the fpirit ‘to reueale ic then fhall this world loofe the 
figure by worldly fire ,.as it was erft deftroyéd by earthly water. Then(as I faid) 
fhalt all the worlds corruptible qualities be burn away , all chofe that held-cor- 
refpondence with “our corruption’, fhall be agreeable with immorality , thae 


whofe 


Lrx20.° OF THE CITIE OF GOD. | | Sixx 


berks 


~,/- 3e 4 a B: . et ere ae 


whe fubftances ‘are. tenewed al. But ‘for thar which followeth;, Thére 
‘was Mo more fes , whether tt imply that the fea fhould bee dried vp by: that vni- 
uerfall conflagration ,-or bee transformed into a:better ‘eflence, I ‘cannot 
eafily determyne. Heauen arid Earth ,: were read, fhalbe résewed “but. as 
concerning the fea, L hate rioc read any fuch matter,that'l can remember ¢ vn- 

leffe that other place in this‘booke., of that which Hee calteth asie Were’ fea 

of glaffe, like “nto chtiftall «, import any fuch alteration. But in that ‘place | 
hee {peakerth nec of the worlds‘end ‘, neither: doth hee fay direétly afeay bud, ise 
asafca. Notwithftanding iris che Prophets guife to {peake of truthis in mifti- | 
call manner, andto mixe truths and types together sand-fohe might fay , there. 2 «= ' 
was'no more fea, inthe fame fence that hee fayd, rhe (es {hall génevp ber dead,inten: 

ding tharthere fhouldbeno moré turbulent times in the world, which he'infinua- 
techvndertheword;Sea, 


ak ne cote a Rrra ee eats 


eke ag ns eee? 
7: a yf wes 
$ | ae { 2 7 i¢ oo" 


toe 2. 2 7 a ee ee ee: , 
‘*rthnowne (a)to all | { Toalb? nay ( Saint Auguftine ‘it feemes you were neuer at the oe Lae 
bare ian There is cf a ) at ialtne graduate ; biitcan celt No word 
tharitis the elementany fire-which is betweene the {phere of the moone, and the ayre} re in 
chat Chall come downe , and purge the earth of droffe , together with the ayre and water. faine 
IF you like not this , another will tell you , that the. beames of the Sonne kindle afire copy.] 
in the midft of the ayre,as m a burning glafic,and fo worke wonders. ° peat e 
"But I doe not blame you : fire was not of chat vfe in your time that.it is now of, when e- 
ucry Philofopher(to omit che diuines) can carry his mouth, bis hands and his feete full of fire 
both ih the midft ot Decembers cold,and Lulies heate. Of Philofophers they become diuines, 
ahd'yct keepe their old fiery formes of dogtrine ftill,fo that they Mauefarte better iudgement: 
ian hot cafe then you or yourpredeceffors euer had. } tg © “lear 9 


Paar . ‘ ‘ ry 
- + .f - - dice 


2 oe She f Se ee ee 
Of the glorification of the Church , after death , for ener. 
 - Crap. 27. ae 


4 


signi nie ee of GQD hau, had.theitinoreafeby.the fame-gracespiuen 
y the (piri, from heaved , in she faune of regeneration. “Butac the taf Jwdgen 2 iy 


of immortality For: it. were too-groffe impudence ro chinke ;thac thiy-was: 


meant of the thouland: yeares afoxs-faydsa- wherein-the: Chusch is aydh toi 
~ | Lzz4 ae yeigne 


$2 |. SAINT AYGVSTINE.- Cuaraz8c 1 


reigne with Chrift: becaufehe faith direAly ,G OD {hall wipe ewaie alfteares from 

pheir cies sand there fhatbe wo more death, neither forrowes , neither crying , neither 

fhall there bee any more paine. Who is fo obftinately abfurd , or fo abfurdly 
obitinate as to averre , that any one Saint ( much leffe the whole fociety of 
themhall paffe chis tranfitory life without teares or forrowes, or ever hath 
-pafled ic;cleare of them ? feeing that the more holy his defiresare,and the 

more zealous his holineffe , the more teases fhall bedew his Orifons . Isit 

Pfai.42,3 not the Heauenly lerofalem( that fayth,) My teares hane beene my meate daie 
Pial.6,6 ‘and wight ?. And againe: 2 canfe. my bedde euerie night to fwimme, aud water my 
Rom,8, 23 6#ch with teares and befides: Ady ferrow ss renewed ? Are not they his Sonnes that 
bewayle that which they willnor forfake ? But bee cloathed in it .thae their 
mortality: may bee re-inuefted with eternity ?and hauing the firft fruites of the 
[pirst doe figh in themflueswayting for the adoption, that is] the redemsption of their 

bodies 2 Was not Saint Pas/one of the Heauenlie Cittie nay and that the rather 

"in that hee tooke fo great care for the earthly Ifraelices > And when (a) fhall 

death haue to doe in that Cirtie', but when they may fay: Ob death , where is 

rConss thy fting ? Ob hell , where is thy (b) vidtorie ? The Ling of death is finne. This 
45“ couldnotbee fayd there where death had no fting: bytas for this world, Saine 
"vei. dohe himfelfe faith : sf wee fay wee hame no linne , wee deccine our felues ,anathere is 
THOR E o sruthiv vs. Andin this his Reuelation , thereare many things written for 
i" “the exoercifing of the readers vaderftanding , and-there are but few things, 
whofe vnderftanding may bee an induction vnto the reft : for hee repeteth the 

faine thing , fo many waies , thar it feemes wholy pertinent vnto.another pur- 

pole: and indeed it may often.beetfound as fpoken in ‘another kinde . But 

here where hee fayth.: GO Dfhall wipe awase all teares from their eyes ee : this is 
direGly meant of the worldjto come, and the immortalicie of the Saints , for 

there fhalbe no forrow , no teares , nor caufe of forrowe or teares ; if any 

one thinke this place obfcure let bim looke for no plaineneffe inthe Scriptures. 


L. VIVES. 


a aE (a) ujitory ? | Some read , coutextion : butghe original is, Usfery,-and fo doe Hieron 
—* and Ambrofe readeit, often, Saint Pas/ hath the place out of Ofee.chap.1.3 ver.t4.and v{- 

eth it, 1.Cer.16.ver.5 5. (b) When {hall death ] The Cittie of G O D hall fee death, vntill the 

words that were fayd of Chriff after his refurreCtion;Ob hell,where is thy victory ? may bee faid 

of all our bodies, that is,at che refurreCion,;when they fhalbe like his glorified bodie. > 

a ne Dos ‘ na rs en. “ > See ea ; 2 ar = :: ‘ : 


. Saint Peters doctrine of the refurrettion of the dead. 


HAP. 18, | 


oR age i ue AEN ee ote a ee | a ex 7 ie 7 
N Ow let vs heave what Saint Peter faych. of this ludgement.. There fballcome 
. ‘(faith hee )in the laf? dates, mockers , which will walkeafter theér lufts ,and fay, 
7 : eae’ where'ss the prormife of his comming? For fince the fathers died’; all things cou- 

rinuealike fe aE se of the creation. For this , they(willingly know 
not,that the heauens were of old , and ‘the earth that was of ‘the water, and 
by.che water by the word of GO D,wherefore the world;that chen was, perifhed, 
ovet-fowed wich the water. -Buttheheauens and earch chat now are are kept 


a heas 


by che fame-word in flore and réferued vaco fire againit the day of indgemenr 
Foon SS ee aad 


e 


] 


Lino. OF THECITIE OF GOD 813). 


and ofthe deftruaion of vngodly men. Dearely beloued bee not ignorant of this, 


shat one date. with the LORD is asathonfand years ands thonfandyeares.as one. | 


date. The LOR Dts not flack concerning bis promife,(as [ome tren caunt flackeneffe) 
but is pacient towards and would haue no man toperi{h but would haue allmen to 
come to repentance. But the date of the LORD will come as athiefein the night jn 
the whith the heanens {hall paffe awaie with @ noyfe and the elements {hall.melt with 


heate , and the earth with the workes that are therein {halhe burst uppe . Sccive there- 
fore all thefe muff bee diffolued, what manner of perfoas ought youto bee in holy con- - 


nerfation and Godltne(fe , longing for , and hafting unto the commirg of the daie of 
GO D,by the which,the heauens beeing on fire {balbe diffolucd and the elements hall 
melt uvithheate . But vve-looke fora neu heauen, ands. nevu earth accerdin z 
to his promife vuberein duvelleth righteou{neffe. Thus farre.. Now hereis no 
mention of the refurreétion of the dead: but enough concerning the deftrugi- 


_ onof the world,where his mention of che worlds deftruction already paft, giu- 


eth vs fufficient warning to beleeue the diffolutionto come . For the world 
that was then perifhed ( faith hee ) at that time: (not a the earth, bue 
that part of the ayréalfo which the watter (4)poflefled,or got aboue,and fo con 
fequently almoft all thofe ayry regions, which hee callech the heauen, or ra- 
ther (in the plurall) the heauens ) buenot the fpheres wheeein the Sunne andthe 
Starres haue their places,they were not touched : the reft was altered by humi- 
dity,and fothe earth perifhed , and loft the firft forme by the deluge... Bucthe 
heauens and earth ( faith hee ) that now are)are kept by the fame word in ftore, 
and referued vnto fire againft the daie of iudgement , and ofthe deftruaion 
ofvngodly men. Therefore the fame heauen and earth thac remained after the 
deluge ,.are they that are referued vnto the fire afore-faid, vnto the daie of 
judgement and perdition of the wicked. For beeaufe of this great change hee 
ftickech not to fay,there fhalbea deftrudtion of men alfo , whereas indeed their 
effences fhall neuer bee annihilate , alehough they liue in torment. Yea but 
(may fome fay) if this old heauen and earth fhall atthe worlds end bee burnéd 
beforethe new ones be made,where thal the Saints be in the time of this confla- 
gration,fince they haue bodies and therefore muft be in fome bodily place? We 
may an{wcre,in the vpper parts , whither the fire.as then fhallnomore afcend, 
then the water didin the deluge. For at this daietbe Saints bodies fhalbe moo- 
uveable whither theit wills doe pleafe : nor need they feare thefire ; beeing now 
both immorrall and incorruptible: (6) for the three children though their bo- 
dies were corruptible,were notwithftanding preferued from loofing an haire by 
the fire,and might not the Saints bodies be preferued by che fame power? 


| L. VIVES. 
He (a) water pofz{ed | For the two vpper regions of the ayre doe come iuft fo low that, 
+ they are bounded with a circle drawne round about the earthlie , higheft mountaines 
tops. Now the water in the deluge beeing fifteene cubites higher then the higheft moune 
taine,it both drowned that part of the ayre whetein wee liue , as alfo chat pare of the middle 
region wherein the birds do vfually flie : both which in Holy writ, and in Poetry alfo are cal- 
led Heauens. (b) The three} Sidrach, Mifach,and Abdenago, at Babilon, who were ¢aft into a 
fiirnace for {corning of Nabuchadnexzars golden ftatue. Daw.3. - : 7 


a ana Sgt Me a Ssint 


5 
Wo - a 


- 


814 | SAINT AV GVSTINE. — Cap. ig 


Saint Pauls words to the T. heffalonians : Of the manifefiations of An- 
tichri(t whofe times [hall inemedsasely fore-runne the day 
of the Lord. Cwar.3g. : 


SeeI muft ouer-paffe many worthy fayings of the Saints , concerning this 
day ; leaft my worke thould grow to too greata volume: but yet Saint Pauls 
2.Thef.2. Lohay by no meanes omit. Thus faythhe. Now /befeech you bretheren by the com- 
1k. sing of our LORD 1ESVS CHRIST and by our affembling unto him , that you 
bee not (uddenly mooued from your minde, nor troubled neither by {pirit , nor by word, 
nor by letter,as éf st were from vus,as though the day of CHRIS T were at hand, Let no 
man deceinue you by any meanes, for that day {ball not come except there come (a) 4 fag jl. 
tine firft,and that that man of finne bee difclofed, euen the foxne of perdition : which is 
an aduerfary, andexalteth him/elfe againft all'is called god , or that is wor{bipped : fo 
that he fitteth as God in the Temple of God,fbewing bimfelfe that he is God . Remember 
yee not that when Iwas yet with you , [told you thefe things? And now yee know what 
withholdeth that he might be renceledin his due time . For the miftery of iniquity doth 
already worke : onely he which now withholdeth , {ball let till he be taken ont of the way: 
and the wicked man {halberenucaled ,whom the Lord {hall conf{ume with the [pirst of bis 
mouth and {ball abol:{b with the brightne(fe of his comming : eucn him whofe comming 
ts by the working of Sathan,with all power,and fignes , and lying wonders and in all de- 
ceiuableneffe of vnrighteou{ne(fe amongst them that pertlh , becaufe they receined not 
the loue of the trath that they might be faued.And therefore God (ball fend thems ftrong 
delufion,that they {bould beleeue lyes that allthey might bee damned whichbeleene not 
3 the truth but had pleafure in unrichteou{reffe. Thisis doubrlefle meant of Anti- 
chrift and the day of iudgemenc. For this day hee faith fhall not come,vntill thar 
Antichrift be come before it,he that is called here a fugitiue from the face of the 
Lord: for if all the vngodly deferuethis name, why nothee moft ofall? But in 
whattemple of Godhe is to fitas God, itis doubrfull : whether it be the ruined 
Temple of Sa/omon,or in the church. For it cannot bee anytheathen temple. Saint 
Paul would neuer call any fuch the Tempte of God . Some therefore doe by 
Antichritt vnderftand the deuill and all his domination; together with the 
whole multitude of his followers: and imagine that ic were better: to fay hee 
{hall fic <5) in Teseplum dei,as the Temple of God, that is,as though hee werethe 
church :as we fay (c) Sedet in amicum hee fitteth as a friend, and fo forth.: Bue 
whereas hee faith , 4d now yee know what with-holdeth , that is , what ftaieth him 
from being revealed ;this implieth that they knew it before, and therefore hee 
doth not relate it here « Wherefcreweethat know not whatthey knew , doe 
{trive to get vnderftanding of his knowledge of the Apoftle,but wee cannot ; be- 
caufe his addiction maketh it the more myfticall . For what is this: The my/Fery of - 
iniquity doth already worke,onely hee that withboldeth {hal let sill hee bee taken ovt of 
the way ? Truely I confeffe, that I am veeerly ignorant of his meaning : but what 
others conie@ures are hereof I will not bee filencin. Some fay Saint Pesé{poke 
(4) of the ftate of Rome, and would not bee plainer , leaft hee fhould incurrea 
flander that hee wifhed Romes Empire euill fortune, whereas it was hoped that 
(¢) it (hould continue for euer. By the miftery of iniquity they fay he meant Nere, 
whofe deeds were great refemblances of Antichrifts, fo thar fome thinke that he 
fhall rife againe and bethetrue Antichrift. Others thinke be (/) neuer died,but 
_ Vanifbed,and that he liueth ( in (g) thatage and vigor wherein hee was fuppofed 
a to 


( 


Liz20. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. | 816 


to be flaine ) vntill the time come that hee fhalbe revealed , and feftored co his 
Kioodome,. << * 226 2 2G ey oe ee, og ees ae 
But this is too prefumprious an Spinion . Onely:thefe wordes + Hee thes 
withholdeth pall let till hée'be tkken out of the wate. May not vufitly bee yndet- 
ftood ofRome,as ifhehad fayd’: He that sow reigneth foal reigne ontillhee bee'ta- 
ken away, And then the wicked man fhalbe revealed. This is Antichrift, no man 
doubts it. Now fome vnderftand thefe words , Now yee know what withholdeth, 
and, the miftery of sniquity doth already worke std be meant onely of the falfe chrif- 
tians in the church,who thall increafe vnto a number which fhal make Antichrift 
apreat people: this, fay they, isthe miftery of iniquity, for itis yet voreuealed: 
and therefore doth the A poftle animate the faithfull co prefeuere,faying,Jet him 
shat boldeth, hold ( for thu’ they take this place) wHtill hee ber taken out of the way, 
thatis, vneill Antichrift and his troupes, ( this ynreuealed: miftery of iniquity) 
depart out of the midft of the church. And vntathis doe they hold Saint. 
Johns words to belong: Babes it & the laft time And as yee baie beard that dath- sy 
chrift [ball come , euen now there are many Antichrifis, whereby wee ksowshat 8 18,1 . 
isthe lait time. They went ontt from vs. but they were not of us 3 for sf they bad beene 
of us, they would haue continued vvith us. Thiis ( fay «they ) cuen as before 
the end.in this time which Saint Joba calls the Left of aif , many heretiques 
(whom he calleth many Antichrifts)went out of the church, fo likewife hereaf 
ter all chofe chat belong not vnto C HRIS T but vnto the laftiAntichrift fhall 
depart outof the middeft of CHRISTS flocke, and then ball the max of finne 
bee xeuealed. Thus onetaketh the Apoftles wordes one way,,and another. ano~ 
ther way , but this hee meaneth affuredly , chat CHRIST will not cometo 
iudge the world vntill Antichriftbee here before him to feduce the worlde: 
(although it bee GODS fecret iudgement that hee fhould thus feduce it) 
for his comming fLalbe (as itis fayd ) by the working of Sathan vith all power, 
andfighes , and lying ,vvonders , andin all decetutableneffe of unrighteon{nefve an 
mongit them that perifh . For then {ball Sathan bee let loofe , and vvorke by this An- 
tichrift Unto all mens admiration and yet all in fallbood. Now here is adoubr, 
whither they bee called lying wonders becaufe hee doth but deludethe eyes — 
inthefe miracles , anddoth not what hee feemes to doe; or becaufe thatal- 
though they may bee reall aétions , yet the end of themall isto drawe igno- 
rant man-kinde into this falfe conceite that fuch things could not bee done 
but by a diuine power , becaufe they know noe that the deuill fhall have 
more power giuen him then, chem euer he had had before? For the fire that fel] 
from Heauen , and burnt the houfe and goods of Holie Job, and the whirle- 
wind that {mote the building and flew his children , were neither‘ of theny 
falfe apparitions ; yet were they the deuills effects , by the power thatGOD 
hadgiuenhim. == 7 aS a ee 
Therefore ; in what refpe@ thefe are called lying wonders, thalbe chéa 
more apparant’. Howfoeuer , they thall feduce {uch as -deferue to bee fe- 
duced, becaufe they received not the loue of truth that chey might bee faued: 
wherevpon the Apoftle addeth this. Therefore foall GOD fend them from 
delufion that they fhowld belcene lies: GOD ‘hall fend ic : becaufe his iu 
judgement permittes it , though the deuills maleuolene defire perfotres 
ie . That! al) they. might bee damned which beleeve ‘notin thé truth , but 
pleaftire in varighteoufneffe. — Tr. a a 
2 : 4% ee ee ee aera Thug 


S16 SAINT AVGVSTINE.. | Canes: 


Thus being condemned,they are feduced, and becing feduced,condenmed. But 
their feducement is by the fecret indgement of God, iuftly fecret, and fecretly 
ivft ; euen his that hath iudged. continually, cuer fince the world beganne. 
Bur their condemnation fhalbe by thelaftand magifeft iudgementof I ES VS 
CHRIST, he that iudgeth moft iuftly and was moft vniuftly iudged himfelfe. 


. _. LVIVES. 


A (a) Fugitine| The grecke is dances ie,a departing,and fo the vulgar reads it.(b) [ue temo 
L S plums de: | Sodoth the greeke read it. (¢) Sedet in amicum) The common phrafe of {crips 
cure.Effo mihs in denm : be thou my God, &c. (d) Of the frate of Rome] Lattant. lib.7. tt was a 
generall opinion, that towards the end of the world , there fhould tenne Kings fhare the Ro- 
mane Empire amongft them,and that Ancichrift fhould be the cleauenth and ouercome them 
all. Hier..in Danéel. But thefe are idle -conieCtures; (¢) It fhonld comtinne for ener, | As the old 
_ ., Romanes dreamed.So faith Jupiter in Usrgsl, _ : 
-.\, dis ege nec metas rerum,pec temspora pone, 
OT aioe fine fine deds, andi 


I bound thefe fortunes by no time, or place, 
Their Rate thall ever ftand, 


(f°) Neuer died }His death in deed was fecret ; for vpon Galba’s approach hee fled in the 
night with foure onely in his company ( and his head couered ) vnto his country houfe be- 
tweene va Salaria and Momentana , and there ftabd himfelfe , and was buried by his nurfes 
and.concubine, in the Sepulchre of the Domssis neare to the field. Sueton. (g ) In that.age] Beto 
ing two andrthirty yearescld, sts : 


. + Saint Pauls doctrise of the refurreétion of the dead. 
a rr Cap. 20. | 
B Ve the Apoftlefaich nothing of the refurreGion of the dead in this place: ma- 
“x Thef4,:4/ ry.in anocher place hee faith thus, /wonld nos hane you ignorant ( bretheren) 
13 234,0iCe 7 thofe which fleepe , that yee forrow not euen as thofe which hane no hope: 
for if weebeleene that LESV'S ts deadandisrifen againe , cuen {o,thems which fleepe 
sBLE SVS, will GOD bring with him. For this wee fay vatoyouby the word of the 
LORD that weewhish line andare vemayning at the comming of the LORD, fall 
not prauent thofe that fleepe. For the LORD himfelfe [halt de/cend from heanen with 
Afbonte,with the vatee of the Arch angell, and with the trumpet of GO D, and the dead 
INC HRIST fb: larife-frft: then fall we which line and »cmaine.besaught vp with 
them alfo inthe cloudes to mecte the LOR Din the ayre , and fo {ball wee ener bee with 
the LOR 2, Herethe Apoftle maketh plaine demonftration of the future refur- 
reGtion, when CHRIST thallceme to fitin indgement muer both quick and 
dead . But it is an ordinary queftion whether.thofe whom C HR1S T hall finde 
aliue at his comming/whom the Apoftle admitteth him felfe and thofe with him 
to be) fhall euer die ac all ,or goe immediately in a moment vp with the reft t0 
meete C HRIST, and fobe forth with immortalized. It isnot impofiible for 
them both to die and Jiue againe in their very afcention through the ayre. For 
thefe words ; And fo fball wee enen bee with the. LORD, are nottobeetakenas if 
wee Were to continue in theayre with him,for hee fhall not flay in the ayre,but 


_ doe firft dye,ifthefe words of the Apoftle bee true? If w 


_ of the moft aged bodye , fhall in. Qpe moment concurre to reraine thofe 


fosl all fleepe. d vs we ane ay” ae a eee . 
. Sothen, death going alway befoterdfurrection and fleepé in this placeimply- 


Linad. "OF THE'GITIE'O# ‘Gop. 


go ahd come through i. Wemecte him tomimidg but uot laying sbue io tha i 


we cucr bremith him,chat is,in immortal! bodies; where ever our fiay bee. And in 

this fence tke Apoftle feemes- to vegetht vnderftanding of this queftion to bee 

this,thac thofe-:whom Chrz/ thall finde alive’, thall neuer-the-lefle both dyeand: 

reuiuc, where he faith. Jn Christ [ballallbee wade ulide:and vpon this, by and by 1-Cor. rye 

after; That which thon fowe ff, 2¢ mat yvickned cxbCps st dye. How then fhall thofe: 

whom Chr:ff fhall fiade aline bee quickned in him by immortality, vnlefle they 
rt ee fay thac the fowing 

is meant oncly of thofe bodyes that are returned to theearth, according to the : 

judgement laide vpon our tranfgréffing fare-fathers : Thos art duff, and toduf Gen, 3.19 

flalt thou retarne : then wee mutt confeffe, that neither that place of Saint Paul 

nof this of Gexefis concernes their bodies whome Chrift ar his ‘comming thal 

finde in the body : for ctiofe are nor: fowhe,becabife they neither goetotheearth, 

nor returne from it,how-fo-euer they haue alitele flay in the ayrejor other-wife 

taite not of any death at all. But now the Apoftle bath another. place of the re. 1,Cor, 15. 

{urection. (4) Wee floall all rife agatte,faith hee,or (as itis in fome copies) wee 22:36 


a 


ing nothing but death, how {hall alt rife againe, or fleepe,, if fo many -as Chrift 
fhall finde Huing vpon earth , thal neither fleepe hor rife againe> Now there- 
fore, if wee doe bur auiouch that the Saints whome Chri/ thall finde inthe Aicth, 
and who thall meete him in the ayre , doein this rapcure leane their bodies for 
a while ,and chen take them on againe; the doubt is cleared both in the Apo- 
tes firtt words; That which thon fowef? ts not guickned, except it dye: asalfo in 
his later, wee {ball aif rife agasne or wee.fhall aif feepe : for they thall not bee 
quickned vnto immortalicie, valeffe they firft tafte-of death: and confequent- 
lie haue a thare in the refurrection by meanes of this their little fleqpe. And | 
why is it incredible chat thofe bodios{héuld bee fowen, and reuiued immor- 
tally in the ayre, when as wee beleewié the A oltle, where hee faith plainely: 


thar rbe refurrc@ion thall bee in the ‘twinckling of an eye yand that the-dufk 


members, that chence-forth. fhall never perifh : Nor let vs thinke that chat: 


° . 


place of Genefis , Thow art duit, ore. concerneth. not the Saints’, for all thag’ 
their dead bodyes returne not to cthe-earth , bue are both dead and reniued 


Whileft theyareinthe ayre:.- 0 - ~~ 2 mo 
| To dait {halt thon returue,that is; thou fhale by loffe of life ,become chat 
which thou waft ere thoy *hadfp life, It was earth in whofe'facethe LORD 
breathed. the breatli of dife., when man: became a living foule ; So -that it 
might bee fayd. Thox:art liuing duit 5 whith thes waft not, and thors [halt bee’ 
buclefe dufi asi thon waft::: Such are ail dead bodyes cuen before putrefagi- 
on , and {uch fhall they «bee ( if chey dye ) where-fo-cuer they dye , beeing’ 
voyde of life , which not-with-ftanding they fhall immediatly returne vntoy 
So then thall:they returne.ynto earth ; in beconfting earth , of living men ; 


asthat returnes to afhés which is ‘made of afhes; that vnco putrifa@ion which 


is putrified , that into a parte which of earth is tnadé a potte anda thoufand 
other fuch like inftances. Buc how: this thalt beée,wee doe but conie€ure now, 
nor {hall know-till wee feeig; ob ee cn oe a 
+ That ¢d) there fhall bee'arefiirrédtion of the Aeth at the conatiting of Christ 
a Adaa te 


S18 


SAINT AVGVSTINE.- Cuar20.& 21 


toiudge che quicke and the dead, allithacare chriftians muft confidently be- 
leeue :nor is our faith inthis pointany way frivolous, although wee. know not 
how this (halbeeffected . Bart, asI faidbefore, fo meane I ftill , to proceed in 
laying downe fuch places of the Old Teftament now,as concerne this laft iudge- 


_ Mment,asfarreas neede fhalbe ;which it fhall not bee altogether fo neceflary 


is paffed before. 


re 


to ftand much vpon, if the readeg do but ayde his vnderftanding wich that which 


. L.VIVES. - 


We {hall (a) allrife againe| The greeke copies reade this place diuerfly ( Hier. ep.cd Nw- 

merisms : tor fome read it, We Ball not all fleepe,but wee {bail all bee changed, Era{. Annet, 
Nou.Tefiam ,et in Apolog, Hence 1 thinke , arofe the queftion whether all fhould die, or 
thofe that liued at the iudgement daie bee made immortall without death. Petrus Lumbara 


dus Sent.3.dift.4o, fhewing the difference herevpon betweerte Ambrofe and Hierome , dares 


not determine, becaule Augafine leaneth to Ambrofe ; and moft of all the preeke fathers to 
Hierome,reading it,wee fhall net all fleepe. And for Ambrofe , Erafisas fheweth how he ftag- 
reth in this affertion. Meane while wee:doe follow him whom wee explane. (6) There foalbe 
are{arrettion.| This we mutt Rick to, it isa pact of our faith. How it mutt bee,lct vs Ieauc to 
G OD, and yoake our felues in that fweet obedience vnto Chrift . Jt fufficeth for a chriltian 
to beleeue this was,or that fhalbe,let the meanes alone to him who concealeth the planet 


 work:<sof nature fromourapprehenfions, 


Wf.26.19 


. cw 
° , 
a — - -- - € 


 Elaias his dadtrine concerning the iudge- 
ment andthe neflrrecsen. —_ 


ad ic fe tae 


5° a tin Ewartar. 
r) { “tg 


Te dead (faith the prophet E/aias) hall arife againe ; and they [hall ars{e againe 
AY, that were inthe granes; aud all they[palbe glad that are inthe earth : for the 
Dew that is frovs thee , ts health’ to them, and the Land (or earth) of the wicked 
foal fall. All chis be'ongs to thetefurre€tion. And whereas he faith the lend of the 


wicked [ball fail,thatis to bee. vnderftood by their bodies which fhalbe ruined 


by damnation. Butnow if wee looke well into the refurre@ion of the Saints, 
thefe wordes , The dead {hall arife againe belong to the firft refirreion , and 
thefe-; they flall arife againe that were in.the granes', vate the fecond. And 
as for thofe holie onts whom CHRIST {hall meece in cheit fief, this is 
fittely pertinent vnto them, : 4 they fhatbe.glad that ave in the carth : for the 
dewe that is from thee, #3 bealthvunto them : By health in this place, is meane 
immortality , for that is che beft health ,andneedes no daicly refeQion to pree 


-f{erue it: 


_. The fame prophet alfo fpeaketh of the iudgement, both to the comfort of the 
Godly,and the terror of the wicked. Thus faeth the Lord: Behold, will incline unte 
thers as a floud of peacesand the glory of the Gentiles lske «flowing ftreame: Then {hal yee 
Suckyee [halbe bornc upon her fooulders and be soyfull upon her knees.4s one whows his 
smother comsforteth fo will 1 comfort you, andyee {balbe comforted its lernfalem. Amd 
whes-yce fee this yeur hearts fall retoyce and your bones {bal flowré{h as an herbe : and 


nee ETO © ewe. © ~~ pene 


bys6: OF THE CITIE OF GOD. Brg 


the band of the Lord {halbe knowne unto his feruants , and his indignation againft his 
enemies. For behold the Lord will come with fre, and his chariots like awhirle-winde, 
that hee may recompence his anger with wrath, and his indignationwith a flame of 
fire, forthe LORD williudge with fyre, and with his fward all ficlb,and the flaine 
of the L O R D{balbe many.T hus you heare, as touching his promifes tothe good, 
hee inclineth to them /vke 4 floud of peace : thatisinall peacefull abundance; 
"and fuch fhall our foules bee watred withall ac the weorldes end: ( but of this 
in the laft booke before ) This hee extendeth vnto them to whom hee promif- 
eth fuch bliffe that wee may conceiue that this floud of beatitude doth fuff- 
cently bedewe all the whole region of Heauen, where we are to dwell. But 
_becaufe he beftoweth the peace of incorruption vpon corruptible bodies, there- 
fore hee faith he will incline,as if. hee came downe-wards from aboue , to make 
man-kinde equall with the Angells. a 
By ferufalem wee vnderftand not her that ferueth with her children, 
but our free mother ( as the Apoftle faith ) which 1s eternall , and aboue; 
whereafter the fhockes of all our forrowes bee paffed , wee fhall bee confor- 
ted , and reft like infants in her glorious armes , and on her knees. Then 
fhall our rude ignorance bee inuefted in that vn-accuftomed blefledneffe; 
then fhall weeefee this , and our heart fhall reioyce : what hall wee fee > ic 
isnot fee downe. But what is it bur GOD, that fo the Gofpell might bee 
fulfilled : Bleffed are the pure in heart for they {ball fee GOD. And all thar,,;, 
bliffe which wee now beleeue but , like fraile-men , in farre leffe meafure it 
then it is , wee fhall-then behold and fee : Here wee hope, there wee thal 
enioye. But leaft wee fhould imagine that thofe caufes of ioye concerned, 
onelie the {pirit ; hee addeth , 4d your bones {ball flourish as an herbe. Here 
is a plaine touch at the refurrection, relating as ic were , what hee had o- 
mitted. | 
Thefe things: {hall not bee done euen then when wee doe fee them ; but 
when they are already come to paffe then fhall wee fee them. For hee had 
{poken before of the new heauen and earth in his relations of the promifes 
thar were in the end to bee performed to the Saints , faying , 7 will create 
new Heawens , and a new Earth , and the former {hall not hee remembered nor 
come into minde + but bee you glad and reioyce therein ; for behold 1 will create 
Terufalem as a reioycing ,andher people as a toye , andl well retoyce zm lerufalem, 
and ioye in my people', and the voice of weeping {halbe heard no more inher , nor 
the voice of crying , Gc. This now fome applic to’ the proofe of Chilsa/me: 
becatife that the Prophets manner is to mingle tropes with cruthes , to 
excercife the Reader in a fitte inqueft of their {pirituall meanings , but car- 
nall floath contents ic’ felfe with the litterall fence onely , and neuer feekes 
further . Thus farre of the Prophets wordes before that hee wrote what 
wee haue in hand : now for-ward agairie. 4nd your bones {ball floursb like 
an herbe-s that hee meaneth onelie the refurre@ion of the Saintes in this, : 
his addition prooues : 4nd the hand of the LORD {balbee knowne among 
his feruantes . What is this , but his hand, diftinguifhing his feruants from. 
fuchas {corne him ? of thofe it followeth. zd hts smdignation againft his e- 
nemies : or (as another interprets it) (4) againft the unfaithfull. This is no. 
threatning,but the effec ofall his threatnings .. For behold ( (aith hee ) the LORD 
will come with fire, and his chariots re a whirle-winde that hee may ae 
| Azaaz is 


‘820 SAINT AV GVSTINE. | _C uap.at. 


his anger with wrath , and bis indignation with aflame of fre. For the LOR Dwill 
sudce with fire, and with his fword, all flefb, aud the flaize of the LOR D fhalbee ms- 
zy,whither they perifh by fire or {word, or whirle-winde, all denounce but 
the paine ofthe Iudgement,for hee faith thatGOD {ball come as 4 whirle-winde, 
that is , vnto-f{uch as his comming fhalbe penall vnto. Againe his chari- 
ots , beeing fpoke in the plurall , imploy his ‘miniftring Angells. But where- 
asheefaith chat a// fP{b {balbee indged by this fyre and {word , wee doe except 
the Saints, and imply it onelie to thofe which minde carthlie things,and {uch 
minding is deadlie-and fuch as thofeof whome GOD faich , Aty/pirét {hall 
not alvaie firine with man , becaufe hee is but fiesb. But thefe words. The 

[laine ( or wounded) of the LORD fbatbee many; this implicth the fecond 

death, 

The fire,the {word , and the ftroke , may all bee vnderftood in a good fence: 
forGOD hath fayd bee would fend fyre into the world: Andthe Holje Ghoft 
defcendedin the fhape of fiery tongues. Againe ,/ same not ({aithC HRI ST) 
tofend peace , but the fworde. And the {cripture calls GODS Worde two 
edged {worde ; becaule of the wo Teftaments. Befides , the church in the 

~ Canticles , faith that {bee ts wounded with loue , even as fhotte, with the force of 
loue.. Sothat this is plaine,and fo is this that weeread shat the LO RDfball come 
as a Reuengzer,cre. : | | 
So then the Prophet proceedes with the deftru@ion of the wicked , vnder the 
typesoffuchas inthe oldelaw forbarenot the forbidden meates,rehearfing the 
gratioufneffe of the New Teftamentfrom CHRISTS firft comming, euen 
vnco this Iudgement we haue now in hand. For firft, hetells how GO D faith 
_ that hee comm:th to gather the nations ,and how they (ball come to Jee bis glorée. For 
all haue finned (faith the Apoftle ) end are deprined of the glorie of GOD. 
' Hee fayth alfo that bee will leaue fignes amongft them to induce them to be- 
leeue in him, and that hee will fend his ele& intomany nations, and farrelf- 
Jands thacneuer heard of his name, to preach his glory tothe Gentiles, and 
to bring their bretheren,that is the bretheren of the clect Ifraell (of whome hee 
fpake ) in:o his prefence: to bring them for an offering vnto GO D in cha- 
‘Yiots , and vpon horles 3 chat is by the minifterie of men or angells, vnto ho- 
lie Ierufalem, that is now fpread through-out the earth in her faithfull Cir. 
tizens. For thefe when GOD affifteth them, beleeue; and when they be- 
leeue , they come vnro him. NowGOD in a fimily compares them tothe 
children of Ifrael that offered vnto him his facrifices wich pfalmes inthe Tem. 
ple: as the church doth now in all places: and hee promifethto take of them for 
priefts and for leuites,which now wee fee hee doth. For hee hath not obferued 
fiefhly kindred in his choife now , as hee did in the time of Asrons prieft-hood: 
but according to the New Teftament where CHRIST is prieft afier the or- 
der of Melch:fedech , hee felecteth each of his priefts according to the merit 
which GODS grace hath ftored his foule with : as wee now behold : and 
thefe (4) Priefts are not to bee reckned of for their places (for thofe the vn- 
worthie doe often hold ) but for their fanétities, which are not common bothto 
good and bad. , | 
Now the prophet hauing thus opened Gods mercies to the church,addeth the 
1.66.22, feueral ends chat fhall befall both the good and bad in the laft iudgement,in thefe 


23% words 3.45 the mew beauens ana the new earth which F{ball make {hall rensaine before 
| : Mie, 


Be 
av 


( 
4 . * 
2 wy geen eewes : Z cs : 


Lin2o. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. Sar 


meee , faith the LOR D:euen fo {hall.your feede end your name. And from ‘month 
tomoneth , and from Sabbath to Sabbath fhallall flelb come to wor{hippe before mee, 
{sith the LORD: Andthey [hall goe forth and looke vponthe members ofthe mes 
that hae tranfgreffedagainst mee ; for their women fball not die, neither {ball their 
fire bee quen{bed, and they {balbe aw abborring vnro all fleh. Thus endeth the 
Prophet his booke , with the end of the world. Some in this place for mem- 
bers, read (¢ ) carkaffe. » hereby. intimating the bodies euident punifhment, 
though indeed a carkafle is properly nothing-but dead -fleth : but thofe bodies 
fhalbe lyuing, otherwife,how fhould they bee fenfible of paine ? vnlefle wee fay, - 
they are dead bodies, thatis,theit foules are fallen into the fecond death,and 
fo wee may ficly call them carkaffes.. And thus is the Prophets former words 
alfo to bee taken, The lend of the wicked bali fall : Cadauer,acarkafle ,all knowes, 
commeth of Cado to fall : Now the trarflators by faying the carkaflesof the 
men, doenot exclude women from this damnation , but they {peakeas by the 


Better fexe , beeing thac woman was taken out of man. Butnote efpecially, 
that where the Prophet {peaking of the bleifed, fayth , «ff flefh flail come to 
wor{bippe ; Hee meaneth not all men( for. the greater number (ha‘be in tor- 
ments ) but fomethall come out of all nations ,to adore him inthe Heauenly _ 
Terufalem. But as I wasa faying, fince here is mention ofthe good by fleth; 
and of the bad, by carkaffes 5 Verelieafter the refurre@ion of the feth » Our 
faith whereof, thefe words doe confirmie,that which foall compme both the good and 


, 


y “a 


bad ysto theit laft limits (halbe the ludgement to come. *- 


Ay 


~ 


a ¢- 


- L.VIVES. | 
| A Gainft (a) the onfaithful!| Hierome, out of the hebrew,and the feauenty readeth it, As 


gainft bis enemies (b) Priefts are not to be | Ic isnot prieft-hood , nor orders that maketh 
aman any whit refpected of G OD; for thefe dignities both the Godly ‘and vngodly doe 
fhare in : but it is purity of confcience,good life, and honeft cariage, which haue refemblance 
of chat immenfe , that incorruptible nature of GO D, thofe winne vsfauour with him. () 
\Carkaffes | So. doth Hierome reade it. Butmarke Saint eugu/fines vprightneffe , rather 
to sah fauorable expofition of a tranflation to which hee ftood not affected , then any way. 
to cauill at ic, ' | 


-  Howthe Saints {hall goe forth to fee the paines of the wicked. 
| HAP. 22. | 
BY how fhall the good goe forth to fee the bad plagued ? Shall they leaue 
their bleffed habitations, and goe corporally to hell,to fee thém face to face? 
God forbid: no, they thall goe in knowledge . For this implieth that the damned 
fhalbe without,and for this caufe the Lord calleth their place , vtcer darkeneffe, 
oppofite vnto that ingrefle allowed the good feruat in thefe words,Enter into thy 
Maifters ioye : and leaft the wicked fhould be thought to goe in to beefeene , ra- 
ther then the good fhould goe out by knowledge to fee them, being to know that 
which is without : for the tormented fhall neuer know what is done in theLords | 
Joye: but they that afe in that Ioye,thall know whiatis done inthe veter darke- 
neffe: Therefore faith the Prophet, they {ball goe forth; in that they fhallknow 
‘what is without, for ifthe Prophets throughthac {mall patt of dinine infj piration | 
ne ee : .  — Goule 


 Baat3 


$22 


Dan? 


-paines of the wicked , that etern 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. | | Caar.23 


could know thefe things before they came to paffe: how then fLallnoc thefe im. 
mortalls know them being paffed,feeing that in chem the Lord is at in all ? Thus 
fhall the Saints bee bleffed both in feed,and name.In feed,as Saint Joba faith, And 
his feed remaineth in him .1n name,as J/asas faith, So foal your name continue ; frons 
moneth to moneth , and from Sabbath to Sabbath {ball they haue ref opon reff : pafling 
thus from old and temporall 2 i to new and euerlafting truthes. Buc the 

worme, and that neuer dying fire,is diverfly 
expounded , either in reference to the bodie oneli¢, or to the foule onely, or 
the fire to belong to the bodie reallic,and the worme to the foule figuratiuely, 
and this laft is the likelieft of the three. But heere is no place to difcuffe 
peculiars. Wee muft-end this volume, as wee promifed , with the iudge- 
ment,the feperation of good from badde, and the rewards and punifhments ac- 


cordingly diftribuced. 


Daniels prophecy of Amtichrift of the tudgement, 
| ana af she King dome of the Saints. 
. ~ Cuap, 23. 7 


OF this ludgement Daniel prophecieth, faying, thet Antichrift hall fore-vun 
wt: and fo hee’ proceédeth to the eternall Kingdome of the Saints. : for, ha- 


ving in avifion beheld the foure beafts, types of the foure Monarchies , andthe 
fourth ouer-throwne by a King whick al confefle to bee Antichrift sand then 


 {eeing the eternall Empire of the Sonne of man (CHRIS T)to follow:] Dans- 


eli (faith hee ) was troubled in {pirit in the middeft of my body , andthe vifions of 
minehead made mee affraide. Therefore 1came to one of them that ftecd by and 
asked hins the truth of all thts : fo hee told mee and {hewed mee the mterpretation of 
thefethings. Thefe foure great beafis are foure Kings, which {ball arife ont of the 
earth, and they fball take away the Kingdome of the moft high , end poffe(fe tt for e~ 
ner, cuen for ener and ener, After this, I wouldknow the truth of the foarth 
beaft which was fovuntike the other ,veriec fearefull, whofe teeth were of lron, and his 
wayles of Braffe , which denouved , brake in peeces and flamped the ref? under his 
feete. Alfoto knowe of the tenue hornes that were on bis head, and of the other that 
came uppe , before whom three fell, and of the horne that badeyes, and of the month 
that {pake pre/umptuous things , whofe looke was more ftoute then his fellowes: 1 
beheld, and the fame horne made battaile againft the Saints , yea and prensiled a- 
gainft them, vatill the Ancient of daies came , and indgement was giacnto the 
Saints of the moft high : and the time approached that the Saints poffeffed the 
Kingdome. | : 

, Ai this Dentel inquired ,and then hee proceedeth : Then hee fayd, the fourth 
beaft balbe the fourth Kingdeme on the carth which [balbe unlike to all the Kingdomes 
and {ball denoure the whole earth , and {ball tread it downe end {ball breake it in 
peeces. .And:the tenne bornes are tenne Kings that (ball rife; and ancther {hall 
vife after them , and hee {halbe unlike to the foft 3 and hee fball fubdue three 
Kings , and{ball [peake wordes ageinft the moft high ,and (ball con/ume the Saints, 
of the moft high, and thinke that hee may change tinses and lewes; and they {bal- 
bce giuen into his hand untill atime,and helfe a time. a. | 

But the sndgement (ball fit and they {hall take away his dominion ,to confuse and 
defirey it onto the end : ad the kingdeme and dominion ,and the greatne (fe of the 
| | kingdeme 


een +; kN A ~~ = 7° 


oid mee eS = _—m wie 


Lin200.-° OF THE CETIE-OF GOD. $23 
Kingdome under the whole Heauen fhalbe ginen unto the boly eople of the moft Wiz. 
whofe Kingdome is an euerlafling Kingdome , and ah powors thal forse and obey him. 
Euen this is the end of the matter. I Datiell. bad msny.cogitations which troubled me, 
and my countenance changed in me but Ikept theanatter. 1m wine heart.. Thelefoure 
Kingdomes, fome holdco bee (4) thofe ofthe Afftrians , Perfians , Macedoni- 

ans, and Romaines. = ee 7 

How fittly, read Héeromses commentaries vpon Danzel, and there you may 
haue fullinftru@ion. Butthac Antichrifts Kingdome thalbe mioft cruell againft 
the Church(although it aft but 4 while) ¢ntill the Saints receiue the Soueraign- 
ty, none that reads this place, canmake queftion of. The time, times and halfe 
atime is three yeares and a halfe: 2 yéare, rwo yeares and halfe a yeare ,-and this 
is declared by a number of daies afterwards, and: by the numbers of monethes 

_ in-other places of the Scriptures: Times in this place feemeth indefinite § but 
the(4) duall number is here vfedby the LX X. which the Latines haué hoe: 
but-both the Gréekés and (¢) Hebrewes haue.’ Times thén ftandeth but ‘for 
twotimeés. Now I an afraid(imdeede J that wee deceiuée our felues iri the teri 
Kings whome Antichrift fhall find, as tennemen, by our account, butthere _ 
are not fo many Kings in theRomaine Monarchy , fo that Antichrift may come 
vpon vs ere wee bed aware, WVhatif this number itnply the fullneffe oftegalicy, 
which fhalbe expiredere hee come; as the numbers ofa thoufand, a hundred, 
feauien ,and diuers more do oftentimes 5 the whole of a thing ?I leauc it 
toiudgement. On with Daniel ; ‘There halbe a time of tremble (fasth bee chap.12) 

Sitch as neuer was fince there began to bee anation unto that fame time, and at thet 
time thy people {balbe deliuered , enery ont that {balbe found written in the booke. tnd 
many that fleepe in the duft of the Earth {hall awake : fome to ewerlafting ife , ana fome 
to [hame and perpetuall contenipt. And they shat be wife [ball {bine as the brightneffe 
of tbe firmament , and they that taurne to rishi nef fball fine as the flarres, for 
euer and ever, How like is this place vnto that of the Ghofpell concerning the 
refureCtiofirrhat faith: They that are in the graues: This , they that are in the daft 
of the Earth that faith , fall come forth:this fbal awake, that they that hane done good, 
unto cternall life , and they that hane done enill unto enerlasting damnation : this, 

Some tocnerlafting life , and fome to perpetiall [bame anid contempt. ‘Nor thinke they 
différ in that thé Gofpell faith, a that are iz se Sgr the Prophet faith but 

_ Many: for the Setipture fometimesvf{eth many for all. So was it{aid vnto Abra- 
bam , thor [halt bee a father of many nations, and yetin another placé , ix thy, 

feed {ball all nations be blefed. Of this refurrection , ic was faid thus to Daniell 

‘him-felfe a little after 3 Go thon thy way till the endbe : for thou {bilt refi and frandup 


rm GB + ta eh 


1 eee ar 8 


a 


in thy lot at the end of the daies. 


ee t 4 


eer ree Yl ite haa 


wy 


L. VIVES: 


Ti of the( a) Affirians.JEor the firft beaft was like a Lyoneffe,bloudy and luftful and like 
an Eagle,proud,and long litted:and fuch was the Affirian Empire: The fecond like'a Beage, 
rough and fierry , fuck was (yrs founder of the Perfian Monatchy. The third fike a winged 
Leopard , head-long , bloudy , and rufhing vpon death : fuich wasthe Macedon, who feemed 
tacher co fly to fouerainety then goe on foote : for how foone did hee bring all Afia vn- 
der ? cheforth, the flrangeft, ftrongeft , bloudieft. & c, Of all: fuch was the Romaine 


4% 
: 4 
a ed 


Aaaaq - “"EBnspire,; 


$24 


Pfal. rete 
35.26, 


SAINT AV.GVSTINE. . Cuariag 


- Ennpire,that exceeded Barbarifme in cruelty , filling all the world with the ruft of hir owne 


breeding, with are of her maffacring, with ruines of her ee (4) The Dual | The an- 
‘Gent Greekes had but fingular and plurall:che duall was added afterwards,which the Latines 
would not imitate. (Diony{- Granbmat.) yet theGreeke Poets doe often vie the plural) for 
the duall,as yee may obferue:in ‘Hemer,ge, (6) Hobrewes haxe | So faith Hierome vpon 
Dansel. gE a | 


Dauids Prophecies of the worlds. endand the Lait sudgment. 
ee L , Cap. 24, | ee 


“] Ouching this laft iudgment,we finde much fpoken of it in the Pfalmes, byt 
{ omit the moft of it, yet the plaineft thereof, I cannot but rehearfe. Thos 
afore time layd the foundation of the carth andthe heauensare the workes of thy hands. 
They [hall pers{h but thou fbalt endure : they [ball all waxe old as dotha garment; a4 
vefture {batt thon change them , and they {ball bee changed: but thou art the fame and 
thy yeares {ball not fasle. What reafon now hath Porphyry to praife the Hebrewes 
for their adoration of the greateft Ged, and yet biame the Chriftians for auout- 
ching that the world fhall have an end, feeing chat thefe boukes of the Hebrews, 
whofe Goa hee confefleth to bee terrible toall thereft, dce direAly auerce it? 
They [ball pere{b: what ? the heauens : the greatett , the fafeft, the higheft pare of 
the world thall perith, and fhall not the leffer, and low ér doe fo too ?, If foe doe 
not like this , whofe orgcle (as Porphyry {aith--hath condemned the Chriftians 
credulity, why doth hee not condemne the Hehrewes aifo, for leauing this doc- 
trine efpecially recorded in their holyeft writings: But if this lewith wifdome 


which he doth fo commend, affirme that the heauens fhall perifh , how vainea 


_ thing is it, to deceft the Chriftian faith , for auouching that the world thall pe-_ 


rifh,which if it perifh nor,then cannot the heauens perifh.Now our owne {crip- 
tures, with which:the ewes haue nothing to doe, our Ghofpels and Apoftolike 


_ writings,do al) affirme this. The fafbion of this world goeth away «The world paffeth 


Aeneid 3, 


away. Heaven and carth {ball palfe away. But Lthinke that paffet® away, doth not im- 
ply fo much as peri{beth. But in Saint Peters Epiftle, where hee faith, how the 
world perifhed being ouer-flowed with water, 1s plainly fee downe both whar 
he meant by the world, how farre it perifhed, and what was referued for fire, and 


the perdition of the wicked.And by and by after, The dey of the Lord will come as 4 


bhiefe in the night,in the which the Heauens[bsll paffe away with 4 noy[e, the elements 
foal melt uvith heate, and the earth vvith the sockes that ere therein {ball bee burnt 
vp sand fo concludeth , thar feeing all thefe perifh , what manner perfons oughe 
yee tobe? Now we may vnderftand that thofe heauens hall perith which he Bid 
were referued for fire,and thofe elements fhall mele which are here below in this 
mole of difcordant natures; wherein alfo he faich thofeheauens are referued,not 
meaning the vpper {pheres that are the feats of the Rars:for whereas it is wriceen 
that the fra fel from heausn, it isa good proofe thatthe heauens thall: re- 
maine vntouched; (if thefe words bee not figurati.i¢ , but that the ftarres fhall 
indeed , or fome {uch wonderous apparitions fiil this lower ayre, as Virgil 
@ 3 Stella (a) facem ducens multa cam luce cuerrit, : 
A tailed Scarre flew on,with gliftringlight. 5‘ 


And fo bidit felfe in the woods of Ida.) But this place of the Pfalme feemes to 


=r 


Liz20. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 825 


oe or 


Sa 
exempt none of all the heauens from perifhing. The heanens are the workes of pes ror. 
i thine hands : they (hall perith : thus as hee made all, fo allthall bee deftroyed. | 
The Pagans fcorne (Lam {ure ) to call Saint Peter to defend that Hebrew doc- 
trine which their gods doe fo approoue ; by alledging the figurative fpeaking 
hereof pars pro tto: all (hall perrifh, meaning onely all the lower parts : asthe 
Apoftle faith there,chac the world perifhed in thé deluge, when it was onely the 
earth,and fome parc of the ayre. This fhift they will nor make,leaft they fhould ) 
eyther yeeldto Saint Peter,or allow this poficion Phat the fire at che laft iudge- : 
ment may doeas much as wee {fay the deluge did before: their affertion,that all ) 
man-kinde can neuer peri(h,will allow chem neither of thefe euafions. Then they 
muft needes fay chat when their gods commended the Hebrews wifdom, they | 
had notreadthis Pfalme: but there is another Pfalme as plaine as this : Our | 
God {ball come, and {ball not keepe filence:a fire {ball deuoure before him,and a migh- | 
sre tempest [ball bee mooned round about him: Hee [ball call the heauen aboue, andthe 
earth to indge bors people. Gather my Saints together unto mee,thofe that make 4 co- 
uenant with mee with facrifice. This is fpokenof Chrift , whome wee beleene 
fhall come from heauen to iudge both the quick and the dead. Hee thall come 
ovenly , to iudge all moft iuftly , who when hee came in fecret was iudged him: 
felfe moft vniultly. Hee [ball come and {ball not bee filent , his voyce now thal] 
confound the iudge before whome hee was filent , when hee was lead like 4 
fheepeto theflaughter, and 4s 4 lembe before thefbearer is dumbe,asthe Prophee 
faith of him, and as it was fulfilled in the Ghofpell. Of this fire and tempett 
wee {pake before, in our difcourfe of J/aias prophecie touching this point. 
But his calling the heauens aboue ( that is the Saints ) this is thac which Saint 
Paul faith : Then [ball wee bee caught up alfoin the clouds, to meete the Lordin the 
ayre. For if it meant not this ,.how could the Heauens bee called aboue, as 
though they could bee any where but aboue? The words following; 4rd thé 
earth , if you adde not, dbose heerealfo, may bee taken for thofe thac are co bee 
iudged,and the heauens for thofe that fhall iudge with Chri?. And then the 
calling of the heauens, aboue implyeth the placing of the Saints in feates of 
iudgments,nor their raptures into the ayre. VVee may further vnderftand ic to 
bee his calling of the Angels from their high places ,to difcend with him to 
iudgement,and by the earth, thofe that are to bee iudged. But if wee doe vn-: 
derftand <boue at both claufes, it incimateth the Saints raptures direCly : put- 
ting the heavens for their foules,and the earth for their bodyes: to sadge ( or dif- . 
cerne )his people that is,to feperate the fheepe from the goates,the good from the 
bad. Then fpeaketh he ro his Angels, Gather my Saints together unto mee: this is 
done by the Angels miniftery. And whome gather they ? Thofe that make a cone- 
want with mee with facrifice : and this is the duty of alliuft men to doe. For either 
they muft offer their workes of mercy(which is aboue facrifice,as the Zord{aith, 
Twill hane mercy and not facrifice ) or elfe their workes of mercy is the facrificeic Ofee.5, 
felfe that appeafeth Gods wrath, as I prooued in the ninth booke of this prefent 
volume. In {uch workes doe the iuft make couenants with God, in that they pér- | 
forme them for the promifes made them inthe New Teffament. So then Chriff Mat3se. 
hauing gotten his righteous on his right hand, will giue them this well-come. 
Come yee bleffed of my Father , aherste yee the kingdome prepared for you from the 
foundations of the world: for I was an bungred and you gane me to cate: and fo forth ~ 
of the good workes,and their évernall rewards which fhall be returned for chem 
in the laft indgment. eee 
alae L. VIVES, 


8.6 SAINT AVGVSTINE. Curves 


L. VIVES. : 
G stele (4) facem ducens | Virg.eAneid. 2. eAnchifes beeing vnwilling to leaue Troy, and 

£neas being defperate , and refoluing to dye , Jupiter {ent them a token for their flight, 
namely this tailed ftarre : all of which nature ({aith 4ri/fotle ) are produced by vapours enfla- 
med in the ayres mid region.|f their formes be only lineall,they call them “aas:,that is,Zempes, 
ortorches. Such an one faith Plysie glided amongft the people at noone day, when Germani- 
cus Cefar prefented his Sword-players prize: others of them are called Bolide , and fuch an 
one was feenc at Zutina. The on of thefe flye burning onely at one end, che latter bur- 
neth allouer. Thus Pliny /ib.2. 


Malachies Prophecy of the sudgement,and of fuch as are to be 
a purged by fire.  Cuare 25. 

He Prophet (4) Walachielor Malachi other-wife called the Axge/,and held 
#4 by fome as Heerome faith,arid namely by che Hebrews, (5) to bee E/dras the 

Prieft that wrote fome other parts in the Canon ) prophecied of the laft iu 
Mal.3, 12, ment in thefe words. Behold hee {hall come, faith the Lord of Hoaftes: but who may 
abide the day of his comming ? andwhofballendure when hee appeareth? for hee is like 
aparging fire, and like Fullers Sope : and hee {ball fit downe to tryeand fine the frlucr, 
hee {ball euen fine the fonnes of Leui, and purifie them us golde and filuer, that they 
may bring offrings to the Lord in righteoufneffe. Then {ball the offeriigs of ludab, 
and Hierufalens bee acceptable unte the Lord as in old time , and inthe yeares afore. 
And I will come neere unto you to iudgement , and Iwill bee a [wift witne(fe agcinft 
the Sooth-fayers , andagainit the adulterers, and againit falfefwearers, and againft 
thofe that wrong fully keepe back the hirelings wages and vexe tke vuiddow and the 
fatherleffe, and feare not mee, faith the Lordof Hoaffes: for I am the Lord, 1 change 
not. Thefewords doe feeme euidently to imply a purification of fome, in the 
. - — Jaftiudgement. For what other thing can bee meant by this, Hee és lske a purzing 
Ila 4.4. firre,and like Fullers fope, and hee {bell fitte downe to trye and fine the filuer . hee hal 
fuse the fonnes of Leui,.sad purifie them as golde or finer? So fai Ffayzs: : he 
Lord {hall wafh the filthine(fe of the daughters of Zion,and purge the bloudcf Hicra- 
fatem ont of the middeft thereof, by the {pirit-of tudgement, and by tie [pirit cf burn. 
ing.Perhaps this bsuraing may bee vnderftood of that feperazion of the pollu- 
ted from the pure in that pznall iudgement, the good beeing to liue euer after, 
wicth-out any commerce wich the bad. Butthefe words ; Hee {hall eacn fine the 
Sonnes of Leui,and purifie them as gold and filuer , that they may bring offrings to she 
Lord in righteou/se(fe, doe intimate a purgation even of the good,who fhall now 
be cleanfed from chat in-iuftice wherein they difpleafed the Lord,& being clean- 
{ed,and in their perfection of righteou{nefle,they fhall bee pure offerings them- 
felues vnto him their Lord. For what better or more acceptable oblation for 
him,then them felues 2 But let vs leaue this theame of pznall purgation vnto a 
more fitt oportunity . By the fonnes of Lewé, Judah and Hierufalen:, is meant the 
Charch of God,both of Hebrews and others: but not in chat {tate that it ftandeth 
now in: (for as we are now, sf wee fay wee hawe no finne,wee adeceiue our felues anc the 
truth is not in-vs:) butas it (hall be chen, like a thre(hing-flore cleanfed by the fan 
of the laft iudgement,all being penally purged,that needed fuch a purification, fo 
that now there fhall needno more facrifice for finne, for all that offer fuch,are in 
finne,for the ren§fion of which they offer to bee freed from it by Gods gracious 

acceptance of their offting, 

~ L. VIVES. 


Linad, OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 


» LVIVES. = _ 

 Alachiel ar( P \Adalac hi neutr read that Malachi was euer called Malachiel Malachi, 

is in Hebrew, his eAngel: and therefore he was called <Malachi,for ifie-were Malachiel, 

it fhould be interpreted.the eAngell of the Lordz thinke therefore it fhould be read here, Afa= 
lachi.() To beEfdras.JOfthishib.«8, °° _* as 
Of the Saints offerings,whichGod foall accept of yas in the old time 4nd the 


i a) peares afore. Cuar.26. bee a hk a od 
| "T Ofbew that the City of God. fhould baue no more, fuch cuftome, it is faid 

SF chaethefonnes of Lew: [hall bring offrings tothe Lord ip righteoufn [fe : there- 
fore ngt in finne, and confequently not for fione , wee may therefore gather b 
the words following, viz. Then fballshe offrings of ludah and Jerufalem be acceptab 


untothe Lord, asinold time and in the yeares afore 3 that the lew es are d-ceiuedin 
belceuing the re{taurations of their old legall ceremonies : for all the facrifices 
of theold Inftrument were offered in finne, and for finne , the priefthim {elfe 
(who wee mutt chiake was tlie holieft ) was exprefly commanded by the Lord 
to offer fir(t for his owne finnes , and then for the people: wee muft therefore 
- fhew how thefe words, UG tn old time and in the yeares afore , are tobee taken. 
They. may perhaps imply the time of our firft parents being in paradice, for 
they werethen pute, and offred them-felues as vnfported oblations to che Lord. 
Bue théy tranfgreffing , ind being therefore th ruft out, and all mankind being 
‘depraued and condemned in them, fince their fall no () man but the wor/ds re- 
d-emer , and little baptized infants were euer pure from finne :no not the in- 
fant of onedaies agen Sa ee ee 7 
If it be anfwered that they are worthily faid to offer inrighteouifneffe that offer in 
faith , inthar the iuft Lencth by faith though if he fay bee hath no finne hee deceiues 
’ him-felfe , and therefore hee faith it not, bee | 

is any one fo farre ‘deceiued as to pararell thefe times of faith with thofe 


fe heliueth by faith: [fay againe; 


of the laft iudgment, wherein thofe that are to offer thofe oblations in riphee- _ 


oufneffe are to bee purged and refined: Nay , feeing chat after chat purgation, 
there fhalbeno place for the leaft imperfection of fin: affuredly the time where- 
in there fhalbe no finneis not to bee compared with any , fauing with the time 
before ‘our firft parents fall in Paradife, wherein chey liued in ipo tle felicity.So 
that this itis which is-ment-by the old tinie, and the yeares afore, for fuch an-. 
other paflage is there in E/sias: After the promife of anew Heauen andanew 
Earth,amongft the other allegoricall promiles of beatitudes to the Saints(which 
ftudy of brevity enforced vsto let pafic vnexpounded ) this is one. .4s the dstes of 
the of tree life,fball the dayes of my people be. This tree, who is it that bath réad the 
Scriptures andknowes not ¥ God planted it,and where,and how our firft parents 
By finne were debarred from eating of the fruit thereof, and aterrible guard fet 
vpon it for ever after ? fome may fay the Prophet by that, meant the daies of 
Chrif his Church that now isgaid chac C hrift is that ereé,¢ according to that of 
Salonion concetning wildome She t a tree of life to them that lay hold on her ) and a- 
gaine,that our firft parents liued bat a fmal whilein Paradifé feeing cha; they had 


oo Pia ; 


no children during thac fj pace,and therefore When we fpeake'of the time hat they 
were there,we can not {peake ofany yeares , 2s this place doth , in old time and in: 
the yeares bofore: well this queftion is too intricate to difcuffe at thistime; and 


SV ELCy ee DOr Pee, . teers 
sherefore let it patfe. 


There. 


If 35.23, 


tee “why 


828 ss SAINT ANV°GVSTINE.: C nav.a68& 37. 


Thereis another meaning of thefe words alfo , ( befides this } which doth alfo, 
exclude the interpretation of this.placeby the legall and carnall facrifices as 
though the reftoring of them were fuch a benefit , for thofe offrings of the 
old law being made all of vnpolluted beafts , ‘and purely exhibited, did fign- 
ifie fpotleffe and holy men, fuch as. Chrift him-felfe onely was and no other. 
Seeing therefore that in the iudgement all being clenfed that neede clen- 
fing , there fhall noc bee any finne fefe in the Saints , but each fhall offer him- 
felfe in righteoufnes vnto God , as: ah immaculate and pure oblation:chus thall ie 
bechen asin che yeares afore, when thae was‘réprefented typically which at this 
day thalbe fulfilled truely , for then fiiall chat purity be reall in the Saints, which 
erft was prefigured in che facrifices.-And thus of chat. Now a3 for thofe tliat are 
not worthyof being elenfed, but condemned, thus faith the Prophet: syed come 
toyouinindgement , dud it wilbe a fwift witnelfe aguinft the Sonth-fayers , and agcinft 
the adulterers,cre. for 1 am the Lord,znd change not:asif he farl your fault hach now 
made you worfe , and my. grace crice made you betrer : bit Sehange ror. He will 
be witnefle him-felfe , becaufe he (hall in chaciidgement neede no othes:. Swift, 
becaufe he will come'on a fuldders? (looked for ; ‘and whenhe is thought to bee 
fartheft of: and againé becaufe hed will conuinge the guilty confcience without 
Wild.t,9, making any words. Inqusfition fhalbe made in th: thoughts of the -vagodly , faith the 
wife man. Their conf{cience alfo bearing witnes (faith the Apottle Jandshelr thoughts 
accufing one another or éxcufing , at the day when God {hall:indge the fecrets of men 
by lefus Chrift according to my Ghofpell. Thus then: ffiall God: be 2 fns/t witae(fe in 
calling thai prefenily vito the thoughts which fhall forthwith condemne them. 


. at. - 


- ave 
_ ' . Py 
7. ‘ : ‘ : . 
rio se . we “6 ’ 7 
e e 7 3 — .* <@ De x * 
. e ' i 
. e ’ a “ . e. ty x . 
« . oe’. ~ e 


| O(« ):manexcept.)| [The queftion of che Virgin ALary was hot yet. foote : bug prew af= 
= N terward aia two orders offen beck here » and led with pudqunted een » the 
Louaine Dominicans by Thomas of 14 quin,andthe Francifcangs by [obs Dyns Scotas. Now the coun: 
copy cell of Bafil decred char fhe was wholly pre from allrouch of finne,: But the Dominicans ob- 
: ie&ted that this was no Jawfull coun{ell ; and the Minorites of the other fide avowed char 

ic was true and holy, and called the Dominicans heretiques for flandering’ the power of 

the Church 3 fo that the matter had come to a fhrewd paffe , but'that Pope Sixtus forbad 

this theame to be any more difputed of. Thus do thefe men efteeme vouncells or canons , bee 

they againe their pleafuresy juft as an old wiues: talein a Flaxe-{hope:or at an Ale-houfe 


Goffrping.] : ; ‘ eee rar 


: ecoye 
° eo 
OOnteesessseim, 6 


: ” Of the feperattos of. rhe good from the badinshe 


end ofthe lif indgemicot, 
T Hat alfo which I alledged (;to another pi pole ) in the eighteenth booke, 
out of this Propherdelongeri tothe lal udgement : They fhalbe to me , faith 

Malschy.3 the Lord of Hoft:s,in that day that I (ball do this» 43 aflocke , for Twill [pare thems 4s 4 
mats {pareth his ownesSonne that feructh him: shen [ball you rethrne and difcerne be- 
sweene the righteous sud ibe wicked, betwocese him. that ferueth God and hime that fer- 

seth him not, for beboid the dar comsmesh phat (hall bey ne 46 an Ouen,and all the prond, 
yea and all that do wickedly \balbe fiuble and she day that commeth [ball burne pi up 


t 
os 
, 

2 


a a | 
Lin2z0. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. | _ 829-. 
faith the Lord of Hoftes, and fballleane them neither roote nor branch. But unto yO 
shat feare my name {hall the fuane of vighteou[nes avife, and health fbalbe under his __- 

. pinges, and yee fhall go forth and grow up 26 fat Calucs, And yee fballtreaddowne 
the wicked , for they fbalbe duft vader the fouls of your feete inthe day that 1 floall do 
this,fasth the Lord of Hoftes. This diftance of rewards,and punifhments,feuering 
the iuft from the vniutt,js not {cene by the tranfitory light of this worldly funne, 
bue when it appeareth before that funne of righteoufneffe , in the manifef. 
ation of the life ro comie, then fhall there bee {uch a iudgement as neuer was 
before. . ' a _ | 
SS Lea a SSS nnaSeS GED 


te. Moyfes Law, to be [piritually understood for feare of dangerous errour. 
| oo Cuan 28 - 


: B Vet whereas the Prophet procedeth,, faying : Remersber the law of Moyfes my Malachi 
— MY feruant which Icomme ded unto him in Horeb for all ifraell with the Statutes and 
sudgements , this 1s fittly added, both to follow the precedent diftin@ion be- 
tweene the followers of the law andthe contemners ofit , as alfo ro imply that 
| - the faidlaw muft bee {piritually interpreted, that Chrift , the diftinguither of the 
good and bad, may therein be difcouered ; who fpoke not idly him-felfe,whenhe =. 
told the Iewes faying : Had yee beleewed Moyles , yee would haue belecucd me , for'u$.46., 
be wrote of me ,for thefe men conceyuing the Scriptures in a carnall fence and not 
apprehending thofe earthly promifes as types of theeternall ones,fell into thofe - | 
damnable murmurings that they durft bee bold to fay , (4 ) 18 sin vaine to ferne mal, 3.040 
God , and what profit is it that wee hane kept hiscommaundement , and that wee walked 
humbly before the Lord of Hoftes ? Therefore ( b J wee count the prowd bleffed,euen they 
that worke wickednejfe are fet up.ce. Thete their words feeme euen to compel 
- the prophet co foretell -the laft iudgement , where the wicked fhall be fo farre 
from all fhadow of happineffe, that they fhalbe apparantly wretched, andthe 
good, foacquite from all lafting mifery, that they hall not be touched with any 
the moft tranfitory,but fully and freely be enthroned in eternal blefledneffe.For 
their words before feeme to fay thus a//shat do enill,are good in Gods eye , and pleafe 
him. Thefe grumblings againft God proceeded meerely of the carnall vnderftan- 
ding of Moy/eslaw. Where-vpon the Pia mift faith that he had like to haue fallen 
him-felfe , and that his feete flipped,through his fi etting at the foolifh , fecing the prof- 
perity of the wicked , info much that he faith : How doth God know it., or is there 
knowledge in the moft high? and by and by after : Haue I clenfed mine heart in-vaine, 
and walbed mine hands tm innocency ? but to cleare this difficulty , how it fhould 
come to paffe that the wicked (hould bee happy , and the iuft miferable, he ad. 
— deth this : Then thought I toknow this, but st w.0s too painefull for me,vuntill 1 went 
into the Santtuary of Godandthen underftood [their end. At the day of the Lord 
| it fhall not be fo , but che mifery of the wicked, and the happineffe of the God- 
ly fhall appeare at full ; in far a he order then the prefent world can difcouer. 


oe 

LVIVES. | 

; | 5 is(a) in vaine.| A wicked , fond and abfurd complaint,of fach as onely(tike brute beatts), 

é conceiue &refpe& nothing but what is Pee but into the confcience of the wicked, 
. | . © bb and 


=. -~- 


7 
/ 


“~~ * ~- 


SAINT AV GVSTINE. C wine: 


and you fhali finde their hearts corne in peeces : looke but vpon the time to come, and you 
fhall feea hole of plagues prepared for them,which you may thinke are flowe , but heauen 
affureth you, they are fare: p b ) wee conut-the wicked | Your account cannot make them fer- 
tunate. | 


f 


Helias his comming to combert the lewes before theindgment. | 
Crap. 29.- | 


Notte Prophet hauing aduifed them to remember the law of Morfes, be- 
caufe he fore-faw tlrat would here-after miff interprete much thereof, hee 


~ addeth: Behold 7 will fend you (4) Heliah the — before the comming of the great 


and fearefull day of the Lord: and hee {ball turne the heart of the fathers tothe children 
and of the childrento the fathers, leaft 1 come and {mite the carth with curfing. That 
this great and.mighty Prophet E/zes hall conuert (6) the Iewes vnto Cars ft be- 
fore the iudgment, by expounding them the lawe , is moft commonly belecued 
atid taught of vs Chriftians,and is held as a point of infallible cruth.For we may 
well hope for the comming of him before the iudgment of Chr##, whome we do 
truly beleeve to liue in the body at this prefent houre, with-out hauing euer ta- 
fted of death. Hee was taken vp by a fiery chariot body and foule from this mor- 
tall world,as the {criptures plainly auouch. Therefore when he commeth to giue 
the lawa fpirituall expofition, which the lewes doe now vnderftand wholy ina 
carnall fence, Then fball hee turne the bearts of the fathers unto the children, (or the - 
heart of the father unto the child: for the LXX. doe often vie the fingular number 


' for the plurall.) chat is,the Iewes fhall chen vnderftandthe law as their holy fore- 


fathers had done beforethem, Moy/es,the Prophets, and the reft. For the vnder- 
ftanding of the fathers being brought to the vnderftanding of the childrén, is 
the turning of the fathers heart vneo the children , and the childrens confent yn- 
tothe vndetftanding of the fachers,is the turning of their heart vnto the fathers. 


| And whereas the LXX. fay : (¢) tnd the heart of aman-unto his kinfrean : fachets 


and children are the neareft of kindred and confequently are meant of in this 
lace. There may be a farther and more choice interpretation of this place,name- 
f that Heléas fhould curne the heare of che father vnto the childe;notby making _ 
the father to loue the child, but by teaching thatthe father loueth him, that the 
Tewes who had hated him betore,may hence-forth loue him alfo. For they hold 
‘that God hateth him now , becaufe they hold him to be neither God nor the Sonne 


., of God : but then fhall his heart (in theiciudsemets ) be turned vnto him , when 


they are fo farre curned them-feluesas to vnde: ftand how he loueth him. The fe- 
quel And the heart of man unto his ktafmans meaneth, the hearcof man vato 
themian Chr#?, for hee being one Gad in the forme of God, taking the forme of a 
feruant, and becomming man , vouchfafed to become our kinfman. This then 
fhall Heliah performe. Leait J come and {mite the earth with curfing. Theeéarth, that 
is thofecarnall thoughred Iewes, that now are, andthar now murmure at the 
Deity faying, that he delightec inthe wicked,and that it is in vaine to feruc him. 


| L. VIVES. 
Eliab(a )the ‘Of himread the King.1.2, Thelewes out of this place of Afalachibeleeue 
that hee fhall come apaine betore the Meffiah,as the Apoftles doe fhew in their queftion 
concerning bis commii.g,A4att.17.t0 which our Sasiowr in anfwering that he ss come alre 


doth not reprouc the Scribes opinion, but fheweth another coming of Heliah before himelfe, 
.. tet : ; | . which 


: : - , . Z ‘ 7 s 
L 13,20. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 831, 


which the Scribes did not vnderftand. Orsgex,for firft he had faid that Heli.cs msuf? firft conse and 
reftore all things. 7 . oe | | 

But it being generally held chat Helias fhould come before Chrift,and it being vaknowne 
before which comming of Chrift, our Sauiour to cleare the doubt that might arife ofhis deity 
‘in that the people did not fee that Helias was come faid, Helis is come already meaning John,of 
whome hee him-felfe had fayd , /fyce willreceine it, this is Helias ; As ithe had {faid; bee not 
moued in that you thinke you {aw not elias before me, whome you doube whether I be the 
Meffias or no. Noman can be deceiued in the beleeuing that ohn , who came before me was _ 
that Helias who was to come:not that his foule was in /ohn , or that Helias himnfelfe in perfon 
were come, bucin that John came in the {pirit and power of Helias toturne the hearts of the fa- 
thers unto the children, tomake the vnbelecuers righteous, and to prepare me a perfect peo- 
ple, asthe Angel promifed of him Luc.1.17, This great miftery the Lord being willing 
to poynt at, and yet not laying it fully open , hee elevates the hearts of the audience with his 
vfual! phrafe vpon fuch occafions, Hee thar hath eares toheare let himheare  » , 

And truely /chns life came very nesre Heéfas his, Both liued in the wilderneffe , both wore 
girdles of skins, both reproued vicious Princes and were perfecuted by them,both prea- 
ched the comming of Chrift: fittly therefore might /obx bee called another Helias to fore- 
runne Chrifts firft comming, as Helias him-felfe fhall do the fecond..&c. (6 ) Coxuert 
the Iewes,| Therefore faid Chrift,Helias muft firft come.cre. to correct (faith Chrifoftome ) their 
infidelity andtoturne the hearts of the fathers unto the children,that is voto the Apoftles, And 
then hee maketh a queftion ; If Helias his comming fhall do fo much good, why did not our 
Sauiour fend him before his firft comming ? An{w.becaufe as then, they held our Saviour him 
felte to be Helias,and yet would not beleeue him ,wheras when at the worlds end Hedias fhall 
come,after all their tedious expe€tation,and fhew them who was the true CWeffias , then will 
they all aa him. (¢) eAnd the heart of man. | Hierome( and our Englith vulgar ) read it 
other-wile. " 


+ were 


That it és wot enident in the Old-Teftament in (uch places as fay,God {bell indge, 
shat it [balbe in the perfon of Christ,but onely by fome of | 
she teHimonies where the Lord God {peakes. 
Cuap.3o. 


TO gather the whole number of fuch places of Scripture as prophecy this 
iudgement , were tootedrous. Sufficeth we haue proued it out ofboth the - 
Teftaments, But the places of the Old-Teftament are not fo euident for the com- 
ming of Chrift (4) in perfon as them of the New be; for whereas we read in the 
Old ,that the Lord God {hall come , it isno confequent thacit is meant of Chrift: 
for the Father,the Sonne.and the holy Ghoft are all both Lord and God: which 
we may not omitroobferue. Wee muft therefore firft of ai] make a demonttra- 
tion of thofe places in the prophets as doexpreflely name the Lord God, and 
yet herein are evidently meant of Iefus Chrift, as alfo of thofe wherein this. 
euidence isnot fo plaine , and yet may bee conueniently vnderftood of him ne- 
uertheleffe. There is one place in J/aias, thathathit as plaineas may be. Here 
me O lacob and Ifrael ( faith the {aid Prophet ) my called,lam, 1am the firft, andl 
am the laft : furely my hand hath laid the foundation of the carth, and my right 
hand hath {panned the Heauens:when Icallthem , they fland together. All you affem- 
ble your felues, and heare : which among ft them hath declared thefe things? The Lord — 
hath loned him : hee willdo his willin Bable, and his arme {balbe againft the Chaldeans. 
denen Thane fpoken st and Ihaue called him: I hawe brought him and his waies {ball 
rofper. | 
/ / si neare unto me,heare yee this:1 hawe not {poke st in fecret froms the beginning, 
Bhbba {rom 


Ifa 48.12, 
13. 


$32 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuar,3 0+ 


Zach 2 


Mat,15 


Toh.7 


Pfal. 18 


Mat 4 
Luc§ 


Zach.12 


from the time that the thing was,I was there, and nowthe LORD GO D and his {pirit 

hath fent me. This was he that fpoke here asthe LORD GOD: and yet ithad 
not beene euident that hee was Chrift , but that hee addeth the laft claufe, the 
LORD GOD and his fperit hath fent me. For this hee {poke of chat which was to 
come. in the forme of a feruant vfing the preterperfe& cenfe for the furure,as the 
Prophet doth elfe-where faying , he was led 45 4 {beepeto the flanghter,he doth not 
fay He fbalbe led,but pucceth the time paft for the time to come, according to the 
viuall phrafe of propheticall fpeeches. 

There is alfo another place in Zacharie,as euident as this ; where the Abnigh- 
tie fent the Almightie: and what was that , bucthat the Fazher fent the Sonne? 
the words are thefe: Thus /aith the Lord of Hoaftes : After this glory hath hee 

Sent mee unto the nations, which fpoyled you, for hee that toucheth you,toucheth the 
Apple of his eye. Behold, I wil left my hand upon thew; and they {hall bee a fpoyle to 
thofe that ferued them ,and yee {hall know that the Lordof Hoaftes hath fext mee. 
Behold here, the LORD of hoaftes faich ; thac the LORD of hoaftes hath 
fenchim. Who dare fay that thefe words proceed from any but from Chré/t, 
{peaking to his loft fheepe of Ifraell? forhee faith fo him-felfe : 7 ams wot fent 
but-untothe loft {beepe of Ifraell : thofe hee compareth heere vnto the Apple of 
his eye, in his moft feruent loue vnto them , and of thofe loft ones, the Apo- 
ftles werea part themfelues; but after this refurrection, (before which the 
Holy Ghoft(faith John )wasnot yet ginen,becaufe that JESV'S was not yet glori- 
feedynce was alfo fent vnio the gentilesin his Apoftles , and fo was that of the 
pfalme fulfilled 5 Thow haft deliuered mee from the contentions of the pecple : thos 
hajt made mee the head of the heathen : that thofethat had fpoiled the lfraclices 
and made them flaues , fhould fpoile them no more but become their flaues. 
This promifed hee to his Apoftles faying, /:// make you fibers of men,and againe, 
vnto one ofthem alone, from hence-forth thon {halt catch men. Thus thal the nations 
become {poiles , bucvnto a good end, asveffell tane froma {trong man that is 
bound bya ftronger. te. 

The faid Prophet alfo in another place faith (orrather the LOR Dby him - 


‘faith ) Is that dase willl fecke to deftroy alithe nations ' that come againft lerufalem, 


and 1 will pewre upon the houfe of Dauid and upon the inhabitants of lerufalem the 
Spirit of grace and of compaffion , and they {hall laoke upon mee whome they haue pear- 


“ced and they {ball lament for him as one mourneth for his oncly fonneand bee forry 


‘for hiws as one %s fory for his firft borne. VWWhoisit but GOD that fhall ridde Ie- 
rufalem of the foes chat come againtt her, chat is , chat oppofe her faith,or (as 
fome interprete it ) that feeke to make her captiue? who but hee can powre the 
{pirit of grace and compaffion vpon the houfe of Dasid and vpon the inhabitants 
of lerufalem? This is Gods peculiar,and fpoken by God himfelfe in the propher: 
and yet that this G O D, who fhall doe all the wonderfull workes isC HR1S T, 
the fequele fheweth. plainely : they ball looke upon mee whom they hane pearced, 
and bee forry é¢. For thofe lewes who fhall receiue the fpirit of grace and come 

affion.,in the time to come , fhall repent that euer they had infulted ouer 
CHRIST in his paffion , when they fhall {ee him comming in his Maiefty, 
and know thar this is hee whofe bafe-neffe of parentage they had whilom 
flowted at. And their fore-fathers:{tall fee him too , vpon whom they 
had exercifed fuch impiety , euen him ‘hall they behold, but not vnto 
their correction’, but vnto their confufion . Thefe words there , 7 will 
| | | | ae powre 


s , : : 


bopae. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 833 


powre upon the honfe of Dauid , and upon the inhabitants of Hierufalem, the fpirit of — 
grace and compa/ion, cc. doe no way concerne them, but their progenie one- 
lye, whome the preaching of Helsas fhall bring to the true faith. But as 
.wee fay tothe lewes, You killed Chrift, though it were their predeceffors, fo thall 
the progeny of thofe ‘murcherers bewayle the death of Chriff them-felues, — 
though their predeceffors, (and notchey ) were they that did the deed. So then 
though they receiuethe fpiritof grace and compaffion , and fo efcape the dam- 
nation of their fore-fathers,yet {hall they grieve, as if they had beene pertakers 
of their predeceffors villanie, yet fhall it not be guile,bue zeale tha: thal] inforce 
this griefe inchem. The LXX. doe read this place thus, They ball behold mee, oner 
whome they hsue infalted, but the Hebrews read it, whom they haue pearced’, which 
giveth a fuller intimation of the crucifying of Chrs?. But thac infultationin the — 
LX X.was continued euen through the whole paffion of Chrs/f; Their taking him, 
binding him, iudging him, apparelling him with for-like habices, crewning him | 
wich chorue, ftriking him on the head with reedes, mocking him with fained re- 
ucrence,entorcing himto beare his owne croffe,and crucify ing him, euen to his 
vey laft gafpe , was nothing but a continuate infuleation. So chat laying both 
the interpretations together (as wee doe ) wee exprefic at full, that this place 
imply eth c br7# and none other. oO , 

Therefore, when-fo-euer wee read in the Prophets that Gad {ball iudge the 
world, hough there bee ho other diftin@ion, thac that very word, Judge, doth 
exoreffe the Sonne of man, for by his comming it is, that Gods iudgement fhall be 
executed. Godtl e Farber in his perfonall prefence will iudge no man burt hath 
given alliodgement vito his Sonse, who thall thew him-felfe as man, to iudge 
the would euen as hee fhewed him-felfe as man to bee iudged of the world. Who 
isic of Whome Ged {peakech in Efasas vider the name of Iscob and d/rael, but 
this fonne of man that cooke fleth of Jacobs progeny ? acob my feruant, 1 will flay\'a.42. 
upon him. I{rael mine elect in whome my fonle delightcth, 1 hane put my {pirit upon 
bim;hee [ball bring forth ludgement unto the Gentiles. Hee fball not crye nor lift up, 
nor cane his vorce to bee heard in the ftreetes. Ad braifed Reede {hall hee not breake, 
and the {moaking Flexe {hall hee not quench: hee {ball bring forth indgement in 
truth. Hee {ball not faile nor bee difcouraged untill hee bane fetled iudgement ix the 
 earthyana the Ie {hall hope in his name. 7 a ee 
_ Inthe Hebrewrhere isno (6) mention of Jasob, nor of J/rae/ , but the LX X. 
being difirous to thew what hee meance by his feruant,namely that fame forme 
' of a fezuant wherein the higheft was humbled , added the name of the man, 
from whofe {tock hee was to deriue chat feruile forme. The /pirit of God came 
upon him in forme of a Dowe,asthe Ghofpellreftifieth. Hee brought forth sudges 
ment to the G-atiles , in fore telling them of future things which they neuer 
knew of before. Hee dvd not crie out ,yet ceafed hee not to preach: Nor was his 
voyce heard with oat (or in the ftreete) for fuch as are cut off from his fold neuer 
heare his voyce. Hee neither broske downe nor extinguifhed thofe Iewes his 
perfecutors, whofe loft integrity, and abandoned light, made them like brufed 
Recdes,and ( ¢) fmoaking flaxe; ee sco thems, foras yet hee was not come to 
iudge them, but to bee tudged by them. Hee brought forth indgment in truth, 
by fhewing them their fucure plagues, if they perfifted in their malice. His face 
fbone on the mount his tame in che whole world, hee seither failed nor fainted, 
in that both hee and his Church ftood firme againft all perfecutions. Therefore 

. | Bbbb 3 his 


334 | 


SAINT AV GVSTINE.. Cuar.z0 


his foes neuer had, nor eer fhall haue caufe to thinke that fulfilled which they 


Palgr 


withed inthe Pfalme,faying; “hex {ball hee dye and his namse perish? vntill hee 
haue fetled judgement in the earth : Loe, here is that wee feeke. The laft iudge- 
ment, is that which hce (hail fetcle vpon earth; conaming to effe& it out of hea. 
wen. As for'the Jaft wordes, the sles {hall hope in his name ,wee fecic fulfilled 
already. | 
| Thusthien by this which is fo vn-deniable, is that prooued credible, which 
impudence dares yet deny. For who would éwer haue hoped for that which 
the vnbeleeuers them-felues doe now behold,as well as wee,to their verer heart- 
breaking and confufion 2 (4) Who dideuer looke that the Gentiles fhould em- 
brace Chriftianicy, that had feene the Author thereof bound, beaten, mocked, 
and crucified 2 That which one cheefe durft but hope for vpon the croffe,in that 
now doethe nations farre and wide ‘be their vemoft confidence , and leaft 
chey fhould incurre eternall death , are figned with that igure where-vpon hee 
fuffered his temporall death. Letnone therefore make any doubr that chrift 
fhall bring forch fuch a iudgment as the Scriptures doe promife, except hee be- 
leeue not the Scripcures,and ftand in his owne malicious blindneffe againft that 
which hath enlightned all che world. | 
And this iudgment fhall confift of chefe circumftances, partly precedent and 
parcly adiacent: Hedsas (hall come,the Iewes hall beleeue, Antichrift fhall per- 
fecute,Chrés# (hall iudge,the dead hall arife , the good and bad thall feuer, the 


- world fhall burne,and bee renewed. All this wee muft beleeue fhall bee, but in 


what order, our full experience then fhall exceed our imperfed intelligence as 
et. Yet verily I doe thinke chey (halifalf uc in order as I haue rehearfed chem. 

Now remaineth there two bookes more of this theame , to the perfec perfor. 
mance of our promife : the firft of which hall create of the paines due vnto thé 
wicked, and the fecond of the glories beftowed vpon the righteous ; wherein 
if it pleafe G O D, wee will fubuert the arguments which foolifh mortalls; and 
miférable wretches make for them-felues againft GO D S holy and diuine pro- 
mifes,and againft the facred nucriment giuen to the foule,by an vn{potted faith, 
thinking them-felues the oncly wife-men in thefe their vngratious cauills , and 
deriding all religious inftru@ions as contemptible and ridiculous . As for 
thofe that are wife in GOD, in all that feemeth moft incredible ynto man, 
if it bee auouched by the holy Scriptures ( whofe truth wee haue alr 
fufficiently prooued ) they laye hold vpon the true and omnipotent deity , as 
the ftrongelt argument againft all oppofition , for hee ( they know ) cannot 
poffiblye fpeake falfe in’ thofe Scriptures , and with-all , can by his diuine 
power effect that which may feeme more then moft impoffible to the vn- 


beleeuers. : ; 


L. VIVES, 


Git 4 )in perfox | According to this iudgement of Christ ,did the Poets faigne the 
udges of hell : for holding Jeme to be the King of Heauen, they auoutched his ai to 
be iudge of hell : yet none of his fonnes that were wholy immorcall at firtt, as Bacchus, A» 
pelo or Merexrie was,but aGod that had beene alfoa mortal] man , anda iuft man withall: 
fuch as Axes, Lacns,0r Rhadamanthas was, This out of Lefastins Lb.7. (6) No mention] 

| | : Eitcrems, 


j 


ie Cra: OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 835 
ee ee re NT are a : — 
hier Hierom.in 42, E fai, (c) Smoking flaxe\Iewas a cuftome ofold (faith Platarc hin Quaft sonsb,) 
bel neuer to.put out the fnuffe.of the lampe,but to lecit dic of it felfe, and chat for diuers reafonsy 
ane firtbecaufe ‘this fire was “fome-what likein nature to that inextipgujble innmorrall fire of 
a0 heauenfecondly the held this fire to be'a Jiuing creature,and therefore not to bee killed bue 
Nes when it did mifchie fe.( That the fire was, alising afature, the wang that ic hath of nutrim- 
pas ent,and the proper motion, befides the'grone it feemeth togiue when it is quenthed,induced 

‘hem to affirine). hirdly,becaufe it is Vnfit to deftroy any thing that belongeth to.mans con- 
de tinuall vie,as fire,or water 6c. But wee ougin f° leause them to others when our owng turnes 
tury greferued. Thus far Plutarch.The fist reafon terideth to religion,the fecondto maniuctude, 
a the third to humanity, (4) bo did ener looke ] Chrift was not ignorant of the time to come, 
ie por of the eternity of bis doftrine,as his leauing it to the publifhing of onely twelue weake 
jist nen, againft the malicious oppofition of all Judea , and his commanding them to preachit 
Be throughout the whole world, doth fufficient! prooue,befides his prophecying to the Apof- 
ti festhrat they fhould all abandon him and hee bee led to death that night, and yer sgaine hee 
vc —_promifeth chem to be withthem,to the end of the world, | eee 
(ica : | | : eo. a 

oe | = 

tt 

503 

wae | | e & - 4 | 

xe | Finis lib, 20. 

rey DY oe _ | Se wt 

rt e: | 7 a 

et a : Tag . 

; -  ° Bhbh4 THE 

a ; ; ‘ ee : : ‘ 

ie | | | 

Ig y 

Wid e 

is" 

1s - 

rm 

J aa 

i 7 

' a | 
4 cd 
tf , + i e > 
J 
| 


835 


THE CONTENTS OF THE ONE | 
and ewentith bookeof the City of God. 


ff. 


at the punifbment of the dansned ss bere 


 difpuredb of before the bappineffe of the Saints. 


2. Whether ax earthly body may poffibly bee 
incorruptible by fire. | 
3. Whether a flefoly body may polfibly endure 


erernall paine. 


gh Natures teftimenies that bodies may res 


maine undiminifbed in the fire. | 
5-Of fuch’things as cannot bee affuredlie 
knowne to be fuch,and yet are not to be doubted 


of. | 
‘, All firange effetts are not natures, fome 
are mans denifes fome the denils. 
7. Gods omnipotency the: ground of all bee 
licfe in things admired. 
 - 8. That the alteration of the knowne zature 
of any creature,untoa nature unknowne,ts not 
oppofite,unto the lawes of nature. : 
9.Of Hell, and the quality of the eternal 
paines therein. i 

lo. Whether the fire of hell sf it be corporal, 
oan take effect upon the mncorporeal denills. 

11 Whether it be not infiice that the time of 
the pasnes [oould bee proportioned to the time of 
the finnes and crimes. phe Co 

12. The greatneffe of Adams fix, inflifting 
eternall damnation upon all that are ont of the 
frate of grace. | 

13. Againft (uch asholdthat the torments 
after the Indgement , foalbe but the meanes 


. _ whereby the foules foalbe purified. 


14. The temporall paines of shis Bfe afflic- 
ting al man-kinde, 


| 
| 


E 


| 


16. The Lawes 
vate ave blefjed ix. | 

17. Of fome chriftians that held rhat bells 
paines foonld net becternal. | 

18. Of thofe that bold thas the Interceffion 
of the Saints foal fane al men from damnati- 


of Grace shat all the’ regene- 


or. | , 

19. Of uch as hold that beretiques fialbe 
faned,in that they hanepertaken of the body of 
20. Of fuch as allow thie delinerance enely. 
to wicked and renolted Cathol:kes 

21, Of {ach as afftrme that al that abide is 
the ( atholike faith {halbe faued for that faith, 

22.Of {uch as affirme that the finnes com- 
mitted amongst the workes of mercy,shalnot be 
called into Indgenzent, 7 
23. Againft thofe that exclude both men cy 
demels froms paines eternal, 

24, Againft thofe that would prone al dams-~ 
nation fruftrate ky the praiers of the Saiuts. 

25. Whether that fuch as beeing baptized-by 
heretiques , become wicked in life or amongft 
| Catholiques,and then fal away inte berefies & 
fchifmes., or contyuning among it Catkoliques 
be of vicions conuer{ation,can oe any bcp: of 
efcaping damnation , by the priuiledge of rhe 
Sacraments. 

26, What it is te bane (hrift for the fennda- 
tion: where they are that fealbe faued ( as 
were )by fire. | 

27. Againft thefe that thinke thofa fixnes 
[hall not be lasd to their charge,wherewith they 


15. That the {cope of Gods redeeming vs, | mixed fome workes of mercy. 


wholy pertinent to the world to come. 


_ FINIS. 


ONE AND TVVENTITH 
~BOOKE OF THE CITTIEOF GOD: 
Weg i 


why the punifbment of the damned is here difputed of before 
the happine(fe of the Saints. 


Cuakp. i 


EEing that by the affiftance of Our LORD and SAV IOVR 
) IESVS CHRIST, the Indee of the quick apd the deadwehaue 
brought both the Citties(the one whereof isG O D S and the 
other the deuil!s, )vnco their intended confummation,wee are 
‘now to proceed ( by the helpe of GO D ) in this booke, with 
the declaration of the punifhment due vnto the deuilf and all 
his confederacy. And this I choofe to doe before I handle the 
glories of the blefled becaufe both thefe & the wicked are to vndergo their fen- 
tences in body and foule,and it may feeme more incredible for an earthly body to 
endure vndiffolued in eternal! paines, then without all paine, in euerlafting hap- 
pineffe. So that when I haue fhewne the poffibility of the firft, ‘itmay beca 
great motiuevnto the confirmation of the later, Nor doth this Methode want 
a prefident from the Scriptures themfelues , which fome-times relate the bea- 
titude of the Saints fore-moft, as here, They that haue done good unto the refarrec-' 


‘tion of life,but they that hawe done euill , unto the refurrection of condemnation ,and 


fome times afterward,as here, The: Sonne of man {ball fend forth bis (Aagellsyana 
they {ball gather out of his Kingdome al things that offend, and them which doe inigui- 
tie,and {ball caf? them into furnace of ire there {balbe wayling and gnalbing of teeth: 
Then {ball the iuft {bine like the Sanne in the Kingaome of the Father ,anda aine, 
And thefe ball goe inte enerlafting paine, and the righteous into life eternall. Be- 
fides hee that will looke intothe Prophets (hall finde this order often obferued: 
it weretoo much for metorecite all: my reafon why I obferue it heere, I haug 


{et downe already. | | 
. Whether an earthly bodie may pofibly be incorruptible by fire: 


WV Hat then thall I fay vnto the vn-beleeuers,to proonethatabody carnall 
and liuing , may endure vndiffolued both againft death and the force of 
eternall fire. They will not allowe vs to afcribe this vnto the power of God, bue 
vrge Vs to prooue ic to them by fome example. If wee fhall anfwere them that 
there are fome creatures that are indeed corruptible, becaufe mortall & yetdoe 
“AG , poner “a 


a 
ee 4s - 


$38. SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuarezs 83 


liue vntouchedin the middeft of the fire : and likewife,that there area kinde («) 


of Wormes that liue without being hurt in the feruent fprings ofthe hot bathes, 
wnofe heare fome-times is fuch as none can endure; and yet thofewormes doe 
fo loue toliue init ,that they cannot line without it; this , either they will not 


beleeue voleffe they fee it ; or if they doe fee it, or heare it affirmed by fufficient _ 


-auchoricy,cthen they cauill atit asan infufficient proofe for the propofed quefti- 

on ; for chat tchefe creatures are not eternall howfoeuer , and liuing thus in this 
heate, nacure hath made ie the meane of their growth, and nutriment , not of 
their torment. As though it were not more incredible that fire fhould nourifh 
any thing racher then nor confame it. It is ftrange for any thing to be tormented 
by che fire,and yet to liue - but it is ftranger to liue in the fire and notto bec tor- 
mented. If then this later be credible,why is not the firft fo alfo? 


L. VIVES. 


KR Kinde (a) of wormes) There are fome fprings that are hot in their eruptions by reafon of 
their paffages by vaines of fulphurous macter vnder ground . Ewspedocles holds chat the 
fire which is included in divers places of the earth , giueth them this heate Semec. One/?. nate 
4b. 3. Their waters are good for many difeafes. Many of thofe naturall bathes there are in Ita- 
ly and likewife in Germany, whereof thofe of Aquifgrane are the beft. Of thefe bathes read 
Pliny lsb,1,c& 32.In thefe waters doe the wormes liue that he fpeaketh of. 


a raed 


Whether a flefbly body may poffibly endure eternal pasne. 
HAP. 3 e 


b Ges but(fay they (4) thereisno body that can fuffer eternally but it muft per- 
ith at length. How can we tell that ? Who can tell whether the (6) deuills doe 
* fuffer in their bodies when as the confefle they are extreamely tormented? If 
they anfwere that thereis nocarthly foule, and vifible body, or (to {peakeallin 
one)no flefh,that can fuffer alwaies and neuer die , what is this burto ground an 
aflertion vpon meere fence, and apparance? for thefe men hnow no flefh but 
mortall, and what they haue not knowne and feene, that they hold impofftble. 
And what an argument it this , to make paine the proofe of death , when it is ra- 
ther the teftimony of life? for though our queftion bee , whether any thing 
liuing may endure eternall paine and yet liue ftill,yet are wee {ure it cannot feele 
any paineat all vnleffe it liue,paine beeing infeverably adherent vnto life, ifit be 
in any thing at all. Needs then muft that liuechatis pained , yet is there no ne- 


ceffity that chis or that paime fhould killit: for all paine dorh not kill all the bo- - 


diesthat perifh. Some paine indeed muft, by reafon that the fouleand the body 
are fo conioyned that they cannot part without great torment, which the foule 
- giueth place vnto, and the mortall frame of man becing fo weake chat it cannot 
withftand this (c) violence , thereupon are they feuered. But afterwards, th 

fhall be fo reioynedagaine , that neither time nor torment hall bee able to pro- 
cure their feperation. Wherefore though our fiefhas now bee {uch that it can- 
not fuffer mt pore without dying ; yet chen fhall ic become of another nature, 
as death alfo then fhalbe of another nature. For rhe death then {halbe eternall, 
and the foulethat fuffereth it fhall neither bee able to liue , hauing loft her God 
and onely life,nor yet to avoide torment , hauing loft all meanes of death. The 


SF .:°5- e- rs Tt 6lU TF Pie 4 


‘part of the bodie. 


Linear. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. | 839 
| firft death forceth her from the body againft her, will, and the fecondho'ds 


herinthebody againft hee will. Yet both are one in this, that they enforce the 


‘foule to fuffer in the body againft her will . Our opponent will allow this, 


tharno fiefh as now.can fuffer the greateft paine ,and yernoc perith : buethey 


obferue not that there is a thing aboue the body, called a foule, that rules 
and guides it, and this may fuffer all corment and yet remaine for ever. Be- 


hold now , hereisa thing , fenfible of forrow , and yet eternal! : this power then 
that is now in the foules of all, fhalbe as then in the bodies of the damned. 
And if wee weigh it well, the paines of the bodie are rather referred tothe 
foule. The foule itis, and not thebody that feeles the hurt inflicted vpon any 


Sothatas wee callchem living ;and fenfitiue bodies ) though all thelife and 


fenfeisfromthe foule ; folikewife doe wee fay they are greaucd bodies,though 


the gricfe bee yr in the foule. So then , when the bodie is hurt, the foule 
gricueth with the bodice. When the minde is offended by fome inward vexa- 
tion ; then che foule greeueth alone, though it bee in the bodie; and further, 
it may greeue when ic is without the bodie, as the fouleof the ritch glutton 


— didinhell, when heefayd, am tormented in this fame. But thebodic w ant- 


ing afoule grieueth not, nor hauing a faule, doth it grieve without the foule. 
If thefefore it were meete to draw an argument of death , from the feelin 
of paine,asifwee fhould fay, hee may feele paihe: ergs,he may die, this fhould 
rather inferre that the foule inay di¢,becaufeit is chat which is thé feeler of the 
paine. | | | 

. Rut feeing that this is abfurd & falfe,how then can it follow that thofe bodiés 
which fhalbe in paine , fhall therefore bee fubie&t vnto death ? Some (d) Ple- 
sonifis hold thac thofe parts of the foule wherein feare , ioye , and gtiefe 
were refident,were mortall ,and perilted : wherevpon Vergslifayd , Hine inets- 
wat cupruntqae , dolent ,gaudent , hence ( that is >. (i reafonot thofe mortall parts 
of the foule ) did feare, hope, ioye,and gricfe pofféffe them, Burtouching this | 
wee prooued in our foureteenth booke , that after that their foules were 


purged to the vecermoft, yet remained there a defire in them , to returne | 
—-vnto their bodies: aud wheredelfire is, there griefe may bee. Forhope bees 


ing fruftateand miffing the ayme , turneth into griefe and dnguifh. Wheres 
foreif the foule which doth principally , or onely fuffer paine, bee norwith- 


- ftanding ( (¢) after a fort) immortall; chen doth ie nde follow that a body fhould 


perithbecaufcitisin paine. Laftly, ifthe bodie may breed the foulés ‘greefe, 
and yet cannot kill ir, this isa plainé confequent chat paine doth not neceflari- 
ly inferre death. Why then is it noc as credible thac the fire fhould grieue 


_ thofebodiesand yet not kill them ,as thatthe bedy fhould procure the foules 
_ aiguith and yer not thie death?Painé therefore is no fufficient argument to proué 


thac death muft needs follow ic. 


l. V IVE S. 
Lie is ( P ) We body) A common propofition of Ariffotle, Plato,Epicurus,Zeno,(1 sero, Semen 
¢,8 all the ancient Philcfophers.(b)bether the denills\The Platonifts difpute among thé= - 
felues whether the bodies of the Demenes hate fecling . Some fay thus, the feeling lieth 
ohely in the Nerues and finewes. ca 


$40 


SAINT AV GVSTINE. Cuara. 


The Demones haue now finewes : ergo. Others (asthe old Atheifts fay that the feeling is not 
in the finewes but in the fpirit chat engirteth them, which if it leaue the finew,it becommeth 
ftupid,and dead : therefore may the bodies of thefe Demsones both feele and be felt,and confe- 
quently bee hurt, and cut in peeces by a more folid body , and yet notwithftanding they doe 
prefently reioyne,and fo feele the leffe paine,though they feele fome , the more concrete and 
soadetilace that their bodies are, themore fubiect are they to fuffer paine, and therefore they 
doe fome of them feare (words, and threatnings of cafting them downe headlong. Afich. Pfeil, 
and Marc. Cherronef, Hence its ‘perphaps) that Vergil maketh Sibylla bid eEncas draw his 
{word,when they went downe to hell. eZneid,6.(¢) Violence} Paine(faith Tully Txfe.quef. 
2.) isa Violent motion in the body, offending the fences, which if it exceede, opprefleth the 
vitalls and bringeth death: whether it arife of the fuper-abundance of fome quality of the 
bodie , ofheate , moylture, the {pirics, the excrements, or of the defe& of any of them, or 4b 
externo, which three are genei ally the caufes of paine. (4) Some Platonifts| eArsfforle affirmes 
asmuch De anima ib, (e) After a fort \For it was not trom before the beginning, and yet 
fhalbe euerlafting :it fhall neuer be made nothing though it fhall fuffer the fecond death,and 
endure,eternally dying. . | | | 

ee eae ee eae a ee eee ee 

Natures teftimonies that bodies may remaine undiminilbed 
’ in the fite. Cap. 4. , 


F therefore the (2) Salamander liue in the fire(as the moft exa@ naturalifts re- 
cord and if there bee certaine famous hills in (4) Sicily that haué beene on fire 
continually, fram beyond the memory of man,and yet remaine whole & vncon- 
fumed , then are thefe fufficient proofes to fhew that all doth not confume that 
burneth,as the foule prooueth chat all char feeleth paine , doch not perifh. Why 
then thould we ftand vpon any more examples to prooue the perpetuity of mans 


~ foule and body , without death, or diffolution in euerlafting fire and torment? 


That GOD thatendowed nature with fo many feuerall and (c) admirable qua- 
lities fhall as then give the flefha quality whereby it {hall endure paineand bar- 
ning for cuer . Who was it but hee, chat hath made the ficth ot a(d) dead Pea- 
cock to remaine alwaies {weete , and without all putrefaction ?I thought this vn- 
soffible at firft,and by chance being at meate in Carchage,a boyledPeacock was 
Seaued in,and I totry the conclufion,tooke of fome of the Lyre of the breaft and 
vaufed itto belayd vp. After acertaine fpace (fufficient forthe putrefaGtion of 
any ordinary flefh) 1 called for it,and {melling co it,found no ill cafte init ac all. 


 Laydit vp againe,and thirty daies after, I looke againe, it was the fame leftic. 


The like Idid an whole yeare after , and found no change, onely it was fome- 
what more drie and folide? Who gaue fuch cold vnto the chaffe, that ic will 
keepe fnow vnmelted in it , and withall, fuch heate, thac icwillripen greene 
apples 2? who gaue the fire that wonderfull power to make alchings that irburn- 
eth blacke, it felfe beeing fo bright, andto wrne afhining brand into ablack 
coale? Neither doth it alwaies thus. For ic will burne {tones vntill they bee’ 
white, andthough it bee redde,and they whitith , yet doth this their (¢) white 
agree with the light as well as blacke doth with darkenefle . Thus the fire 
burning the wood , to bake the ftone,worketh contrary effe@s vpon obiegs 
which are (f) not contrary. For ftone and wood are different but not oppo- 
fite ,whereas white and blackeare , theone of which collours the fire effeat- 
eth vpon the ftone, and the other vpon the wood , enlighting the firft, and 


darkening the later , though it could not perfect the farft but by the helpeof 


the later. . 
And 


Lexar ' OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 841 


_ And what ftrange things there are in a cole ? it is fo brittle, thae alittle 
blow curnes it to powder, and yet fodurable chat no moyfture corrupteth it; 
no time'wafteth it, fo that they are wont ta(z) lay coalesvnder bounders, 
and marke-ftones for lands , to conuince ‘any one thar. fhould come hereaf- 
terand fay this is no bound-ftone, What is 1¢ that maketh them endure fo 
longin the earth, where wood would eafily roc , but thac fame fire that cor- 
rupreth althings ? And then for lyme , befides that ic is whitened by the fire; 
ic carieth fire init felfe, astaken fromthe fire, andkeepeth it fo fecrer, thar it 
is not difcouerable in it by any of cur fences ,nor knowne to bee init but by | 
our experience . And therefore wee call it quick lyme, the inuifible fire bee- 
ing as the foule ofthat vifible body. But the wonder is that whenic is killed 
it is quickned . For ,to fetch oiit the fire from it, wee calt water yponit, and 
beeing could before, that enflameth it, that cooleth all other things beeing ne- 
ver fuhot. Sorhat the lumpe — as it were, giueth vppe the fire that was 

init , and afterward remaineth cold if you water it neuer fo: and then for 
quicke-lyin¢ wee call ic quenfhed lyme. What thing can bee more ftrange? - 
yes. If you power oyle vpon it in ftead of water , tuiough oyle bee rather the 
teeder of fire , yet will it neuer alcer but remaine cold ftill. If wee fhould 
haue heard thus much of fome Indian ftone, that wee had nor, nor couid not get 
to proue it, weefhould furely imagine it either to beea ftarkelie ora ftrange 
wonder. 

But things occurrent vnto dailieexperience, are debafed by their frequency, 
infomuch that wee haue left to wonder at fome-things that onely India(the 
fartheftcontinent of the world ) hath prefented'to our viewe. The diamond is 
common amongft vs, chiefly our Jewellers and Lapidaries : and this is (4) fo 
hard that neither fire , ftone, nor fteele can once dint it, but onely the bloud of 
a goate . But doe youthinke this hardneffe fo much admired now as it was by 
himn thar firft of all defcried it? Such as know itnot ,may peraduenture not be- 

_ Jeeueit,or beleeuing it, one feeing it , may admire it asa rare worke of nature: 
but dayly triall euer taketh off the edge ofadmiration. VWeeknow that (/&) the 
Joade-ftone draweth Iron ftrangely : and furely when I obferued it at the firft, 
jt made mee much agaft. For I beheld the ftone draw vppe an Iron ringe and 
then as if ic had giuen the owne power to the ring, the ring drew vppe an other 
and made it hang faft by ic , as ic hung by the ftone. So did a third bythar, 
and a fourthby the third , and fo vneill there was hung asic were achaine of 
rings onelie by touch of one another, without any inter-linking. Who would 

, -notadmire the power in this ftone , not onely inherentin it, but alfo extend- 

/ ingicfelfe through fomany circles , and {uch a diftance ? Yet ftranger was thae 

experiment of this ftone which my brother and fellow Bilhoppe Seserus, Bi- ° 
fhoppe of Mileuita fhewed me. | | : 

Hec told meethat hee had feene Bathanarinus (fome-times a Count of Affrica) 
when hee feafted him once at his owne houfe, take the fayd ftone and hold it 

vnder a filuer plate vpon which hee layd a peece of Iron :and ftill as hee mooued 
the ftone vnder the plate, fo did the Iron mooue abouc , the plate not moouing 

~ atall,and iuft inche fame motion that his hand mooued the ftone, did the ftone 

moouc the Iron. ThisI faw, and this did I heare him report , whom I will be- 
leeueas wellas if I had feene tt my felfe. I haue read further-more of this ftone, 

, _ that(2 lay buea diamond neare it , and a willnot draw Iron at all, but putteth — 

: | cee | it 


842 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. = Gurarugecy' 


Bernard 
Valdaura. 


it from it as foone as euer the diamond comes to touch it. Thefe ftones 
are to bee found in India. Buc if the ftrangeneffe of them bee now no more 
adinired of vs show much leffe doe they admire them where they areas com- 
mon as our lyme, whofe ftrange burning in water ( which vfeth to quenth the 
fire,)and not in oyle (which feedeth it) we doe now ceafeto wonder at becaufe ic 
is fo frequent. | 


L. VIVES. 


He (a) Salamsander | Of this creature you may readin eArsffotle and Pliny. Thaue wrirten 
of it elfe-where. It quenfheth fire with the touch , and is in fhape like a Lizart. (6) Jn Sie 
cily| As Aetna,and Kiera, commonly called Volcania, as alfo in Theon Ochema in Acthiope, 
Vefuuius in Campania , Chimzra in Lycia , and in certaine places about Hercules pil- 
lers,befides Hecla in Ifland, &c, (¢) Admirable qualities | Truely admirable, for they are ea- 
fie to bce wondered at, but moft intricate to bee fearched out. (d)ef dead peacock] Many of 
thefe examples here are beyond reafon,and atthe moft but explanable by weake coniec- 
tures,which wee will omit, lea{l wee fhould feeme ratherto oppofe Saint e4ugu/tine then 
expound him.(¢) # bite agree | It isa light collour, and offends the eye as much as the lights 
black is the darkcft , and {trengthens the power vifuall, like the darkeneffe. (f) Not contrary] 
Contraries are two oppofites of one kinde,as blacke and white, both collours:moift and drie, 
both qualities,éc,.but Subftances haue no contraries inthemfelues, (g)To Lzy coales]As.Ctea 
fiphon did vnder the foundations of Diana's temple in Ephefus.P/inJ:b.36.1 thinke it fhould be 
Cherfphron,and not Clefiphon. For {o fay all the Greekes, and Strabo lib. 14. (b) Onick | me} 
Sen. Nat.queffli.3. (4) So hard that neither| Pkn.lib.vlt.cap.4. Notwithftanding Fernard Val- 
daura fhewed me diamonds the laft yeare that his father broake with ahammer. But I thinke 
they were not Indian nor Arabian diamonds, but Cyprians ,or Syderites , for there are many 
forts. (kh) The Load-ftone.| Hereof reade Pliny. lib. 3 6.cap. 16.Sotacus maketh fiue forts of its 
the Acthiopian,the Macedonian , the Bxotian , the Alexandrian , and the Androlitian . This 
laft is much like filuer, and doth not draw Iron. There is a ftone(faith Piny )called the Thee 
amedes,iuft oppofite in nature to the loade-ftone expelling all Iron from it. (2) Lay but a diae 
mond | Plin, lib. ult. (ms) In India] Andin other places:alfo, Butin India they iy there are 
Rocks of them that draw the fhips to them if they hate any Iron in them,fo that fuch as faile 


that way,are faine to ioyne their fhips together with pinnes of wood, : 


Of (uch things as cannot bee affuredly knowne to bee fuch, ~- 
and yet are not to be doubted of. 


Cuap. 5. 


BY the Infidels hearing of miracles , and fuch things as wee cannot makeap- 
parant to their fence, fall to aske vs the reafon ofthem, which becaufe it fure 
affeth our humane powers to giue,they deride them,as falfe and ridiculoussbut 
let chem but giue vs reafon for all che wondrous sing 4 that wee haue feene, or 
may cafily fee hereafter , which if they cannet doe, then let them not fay thac 
there is not, nor can bee any ching without a reafon why it fhould bee; thus fee- 
ing that they are conuinced by their owneeye fight, I will not therefore runne 
through all relations of authors, but try their cunning in things which are ex- 
tant for any to fee,chac will take the paines, (4) The fale of Agrigentum in Sici- 
ly beeing put in fire melcech into water , and in water, it crackicth like . : 
! ¢ 


TTI SL OLS LL A LT CCL TTT TTT OT DIS TCC CTO, 
‘Lin2t. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 843 
(b) The -Garamances haue & fountairfe fo ‘cold in the ‘day that it‘can-' - 
not bee drunke oft: fo hor in the night that ie cannocbeetonchr.(¢){n Epyrus ' 
is another, wherein if you quenfhatoarch, you may Jight it againe thereat. 
The Arcadian (6). Asbeft beeing once enflamed , will neuer bee quenfhed. 
There is akinde of fig-tree in Egypt whofe wood (e) finketh,and being through- 
ly fteeped , (andthe heauier , onic would thinke ) ic rifeth againe tothe toppe of 
the water. : ae we eee eo 
~The apples of thie country of (f) Sodome, are faire to the eye bupbecing 
touched, fall to duft and afhes. The Perfian(g) Pyrites prefled hard in the hand, 
_ burneth it, wherevpon it hath the name. (4) The Selenites is another ftone 
wherein the waxing and waning of the Moone is ever vifible. The (s) Mares 
in Cappadocia conceive with the winde , but their foales liue but three yeares, 
The trees ot (4) Tilon,an ble in India , newer caft their leaues. All shefe, and 
thoutands more, are no pafled things , but vifible at this daie , each in their 
places 51t wece too long for mee to recite all , my purpofe is otherwife. And 
now le: thdfe Infidels giue mee the reafon of thefe things , thofethat will nor 
be'eeuc the fcriptures, but hold themto bee fictions, in that they feemeto 
relate incredible things, fuchasI haue now reckned ! Reafon/( fay they ) {or- 
biddeth vs to thinke that a body fhould burne, andyet not bee confumed, 
thar it fhould feele paine, and yet-liue euerlaftingly. O rare difpurers! You 
thatcaa give reafon for all miraculous things, giue mee the reafons of thofe 
 f{trange etfeas of nature before named , of thofe fewe onely ; which if you 
knew not to bee now vifible, andnot future, but prefent to the vieweof tho. 
that will make triall , you would bee (/) more incredulous in them, then in 
this which wee fay fhall cometo pafle hereafter. Forwhich of you + ould be- 
leeue vs if wee fhould fay (as wee fay that mens bodies hercatter thal! burne 
arid notconfume, fo likewife) that there is afale that melteth in fire ,and crack- 
lech in the water? of a fountaine intollerably hot inthe night, and intolicrab-— 
ly cold in the day ? or aftone that burneth him that holdeth it hard, or ano- 
‘her , that beeing once fired , neuer quenfheth ; and fo of the reft > If wee 
had favd , thefe things fhalbe in the world to come, and the infidells had 
biddenvs givethereafon why , wee could freely confeffe wee could not , the 
power of GOD in his workes furpafling the weakenefle of humane reafon: 
and yet that wee knew that GOD did not without reafon in putting 
mor:all man by thefe, paft his reafon : Wee know hot his will in man 
things , yet know wee that what hee willeth is no way impoffible , ashee 
hath told vs,to whome wee muft neither impute falfeneffe nor imperfection. 
Buc wharfay our great Reafonifts vnto thofe ordinary things which are fo com- 
mon, atid yet exceed all reafon , and feeme to oppofe the lawes of nature? If 
wee fhould fay they were to come,thenthe Infidells would forth-with ashe rea- 
fon for them, as they doe for that which wee fay is tocome. And therefore fee- 
ing that in chofe workesof GO D , mans reafon isto feeke, as thefe things aré 
fuch now,and yet why,noman can tell, fo (hall che ocher bee alfo hereafter , bé-. 
yond humane capacity and apprehenfion. 


L. VIVES. - 
Cece 3 fountaine 


344 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. = Cuan 


fountaine is Hammens well, of which you may read more im Diodorus, Lucret..Mela,Onid, 
Silius , Solinus ce. (c) In Epirus | Pomp, Mela lib.2.and Plin. hb. 2. It is called che founraine 
of Inpiter Dodonans.(d) Asbeft| A ftone of an Iron collour. Pls, 38, (e) Sinketh:] PlinLb, 
13,¢4p.7- (f)Sedome | Fiue citties perifhed in the burning of Sodome. Sodome,Gomortha, 
Adama, Seborin and Segor, wheteof this laft was a lirtle one but all the reft were Very large. 
Pasl,Orofherof you may read in Solinss his Polyhiftor,as alfo of thefeapples. Tacitus feemeth 
to giue the infection of the earth and the ayre from the lake , for the reafon of this ftrange ef- 
fect vpon the fruites. Lib. ultimo, Vide Hegefip. eb. 4. Ambrof. interprete.(g) ae) So faith 
Pliny Jsb.vlt.Pur,in greeke,is fre. Some call the Corall pyrites,as Péiny wittnefleth. 46.36. but 
there is another Pyrites befides,of the collour of brafle. (b) The Selenites| Plin.sb.vlt.out of 
Diofcorides, affirmeth this to bee true. (4) AZars ] So faith Solixus in his defcription of Cappa- 
docia.And it is commonly held that the Mares of Andaluzia doe conceive by the fouth-weft - 
winde,as Homere,Uarre, Colamella, Pliny, and Solinus ,Plintes Ape doe all affirme. (k.)Tilen] 
Plixy. and T heopbrajtus affirme that it liech inthe read fea. Priny faith that a fhip buile of the 
wood of this Ifland, will laft two hundered yeares./1b.16,(/) More iscredulons | For fome will 
belecue onely what they can conceiuc , and hold althings elfe, fictions , nay fome are fo mad, 
that they thinke it the onely wifedome to beleeue iuft nothing but what they fee , defpifing 
and deriding the fecrets of GO D and nature, which are wifely cherefore concealed from the 
vulgar,and the witleffe care. | | 


Ml firange effects ave not matures : forme are mass 
deusfes : fome the deusHs. 
|  Cmar6. 
PEthes they will anfwete ,Oh, thefe arelies , wee beleeue them not,they are 
- falfe relations, if thefe be credible,then beleeue you alfo if youlift , ( for one 
man hath related both this and thofe ) chat there was atemple of Venss wherein 


_ there burheda lampe which no winde nor water could ever quenth , fo thacie 


‘was called the sinextinguible lampe. This they may obie&, to pucvs to our 
plunges, for if wee fay it isfalfe, wee detraG from the truth of our former ex- 
amples , and sf wee fay itis true wee fhall feeme to avoucha Pagan deity. Bue 
as Ifaydinthe eighteenth booke, weneed not beleeue all that Paganifie hath 
hiftorically publithed , their hiftories(as Varro witneffeth )feemeing to confpire 
in voluntary contention one againft an other : but wee may, if we will, beleeue 
fuch of their relationsas doe not contradi& thofe bookes which wee are bound 
tobeleeue. Experience ,and fufficient teftimony thall afford vs wonders enow 
ofnature,to conuince the pofibility of what we intend, againft thofe Infidells.As 
for that lampe of ¥emms it rather giueth our argument more feope then any way 


fuppreffethic. For vnto that, wee can addea thoufand ftrange things effe&ed 


boch by humane inuention and Magicall operation . Which ifwee would deny, 
we fhould contradi& thofe very bookes wherein wee beleeue. Wherefore that 
lampecither burned by the artifteiall placing (4) of fome Asbeft in it,or it was 
effected by (6) art magike , to procurea religious wonder , or elfe fome deuill 


-hauing honour there vnder the name of Venus, continued in this apparition for 


the preferuation of mens misbeleefe . For the (¢) deuills are alluredto inhabire 
fome certaine bodies , bythe very creatures of (d) Godand not their deligh- 
ting in them , not as other creatures doe in meates , but as fpirits doe in charae- 
ters and fignes ad-apted to their natures, either by ftones sherbes, plants, lining 
creatures,charmes and ceremonies. 


And 


re See OT ve ~~ 


fee alfo, as hee faith bieniolie, 0) Ryne 


found , wherein there buried a 


Lry.21. OF THE CITLE OF GOD. 


Andthis allurement they doe futly entice man to procure them , either Sy in- 
{piring hiny withthe fecrets thereof, or teaching him the order ina fal'e and 
flattering apparition , making fome few , hollers to them‘, andtcacherstoa 


many more. For mancould never know what, they love , and What they loathe 


butby their owne inftructions which Were the firft foundations of arre Ma- 
gike. And thendoe they getthe fafteft hold ofmens hearts ( which isall they 
{eckeand glory in) when they appeare like Angells of light. How euer,their 


workes are ftrangeyand the more admired; :themiore tobe avoided,which their 1.Co 


owne natures doe perfwade vs to doe; for if thefe foule deuills can worke fuch 
wonders, what cannot the glorious'anpells doe then? Nay what cannot that 
G OD doe, who hath ginen {uch power to the moft hated creatures ? Sothen, 


if humane arce can effedt {uch rare ‘cond fdas) chat fiehtas know them née 


would thinke them diuiine effedss‘(as there Wasim Tron livage hung (e) in acer- 
rainetemple, fo ftrangely that the ignorant: weald haueverely beleeued they 
had feene a worke of GO D S imaiediate powers it hung fo. iat beeweene two 
Joade- ftones, (wheréof one was placed in the reofe of the temple and-theother 
in che Aoore) without touching éfany thing aeall, and as-there might be fuch a 


 tricke of mans are, iff that inexciniguib!e lampe of Venms if Magicians, (which the 


{criptures call forcéfet's and enchanters ) can doe fuch are <xploytes bythe de- 
uills meanes as Vérgs that faméuis’ Poer reluceth Of ta Enchanrrefie ; in 
thefe words. GT Me ee ae ae caine he 

Po ee Be ee a ee, IG 


ae ee Tg hg oe a re. Uepttcsctghe 2. Wage Me 

eee (fF) Her fe carmisibuspromitist falneré mentes >... ae. aoe 
Cag Qua velit aft ahas dur as ivrontt(re Cur Abs Se ay yee Gee 
; oe ‘\ \ ' : . 

2 1 Sifterqaquams flanpisc: vergere [YAerp retro, oa, 
Sojcas' ,., WMpgturnelg,ciet manes, mugireuidebis 
vn" "Sub pedibus terram & defcenderé.montibys Ornoss 
fo Pe gt GAS | i oe er ke ic Sages aes 


: ) Pra tag, OR By ost oe we ae eg SBE ae 


‘ 


ey : 


r r) is e 


es cca She faid her chafmescoild ebfe‘dbed heart dfpaine, °F Ct 
si hl 4. . 3. Buen when the ityanid thake himipreeusagaines 0 POG 
Gi vue... °° Seopiflouds,bring back theftarssand withherbteath, 9. :-- 
“She Oar Roufe the black ficnds,vazil) cheearsi beneath, (, 
_ . | Groan'd,and che.tyces came maps Hing from the hills Be, 


foe 7 
4 N ry 2? « 


tos ais . on a are PF tee | MpoSd ree be eee 08 ee a | 4 7 - - 
ya pc oa = pee be ta eg Perth wa fF ig. ue 4 

‘Ifalt chis bee,poffible ro thofe, how much mere then can the power of GOD 
exceed. them in, working fuch things as are incredible to waidelity »butealie to 
his omnipatency ., who. hath giugn. vercues vngo | ones; Witte vnto man; 
and fuclt large powet.unto Angells ? his wonderfull power exceedeth all 
wonders, his. wifdome permittechand effeGeth all andeuety perticular-of them, 
ae 1\. ahd pee 34 4 te ye eee ‘) oa laa ‘ AS 8 gts ues , 
and cannot hee make,che mol} wonderfull vfeofall che patts of chat world that 


hee onglyt ath.creared 3. | tr ae Let ee ee ee 
in FOS Aine 8s Mg Naat VO RONG : Ae. eee a ee a _ 
ol aS ee ere eo Gy Slee 3 ee ae 
seibeh oow los EV WIVES G20). alana 
ie, “er ap re ak ae POON ge Ae ee, ee ee F . a : 
ry inde of axe:that will newer bee confumed, for fuch 


Ppi«rs (a) of forse “Asbeft | Orof'a } 
‘there is. Flin. hb: 29, 'Patedre Garfia and kSaw mang lampes of jc at Paris, where yee faw 
alfo anapkity of it throwae into the middeft of 2’ fire; and taken out againe after a while 
more whice-and cleans thes all she {ope in Europe would haue madeit. Such did Phny 

. i) Jn my fathers time there wasa tombe. 
ampe which bythe infcription of the tombe, had beene 
Ccec 3 — Tighted 


845 


rail 


846 / . SAINT AVGVSTINE. Caap.7. 


lighted therein,the {pace of one thou(and fiue hundered yeares and more . Beeing touched, it 
fell all co duft. (¢) Denills are allwred JOf this reade more in the eight andtenth bookes of 

this prefent worke, and in Pfell, de Dem. (d) And not theirs} The Manichees held the deuills 
tobeeth= creators of many things, which this denieth. (¢) J 4 certaine temple) In the tem- 
ple of Serapis of Alexandria. Raffin. Hij?.Ecclsb.21. ( f) Hae fe | e#neid.s. | 


Gods emsmipotenty the ground of all belecfe in things admired 
Swan. 


V Hy then cannot (¢) GOD make the bodies of the dead to rife againe, 
¥ Y andche damned to fuffer torment and yet not to confume, feeing hee 
hath filled heauen, earth, ayre and water fo fullof inumerable miracles , and che 
-world,which hee made, beeing a greater miracle then any it containeth? But our 
 aduerfaries , beleewing a God chat madethe world and the other gods, by whom 
he gouerneth the world , doe not deny, but ayoutch that there are powers that 
effe& wonders in the world , either voluntarily, or ceremonially aad magically, 
but. when wee giuethem an inftance wrought neither by.man nor by fpiric,:hey 
anfwereys,ic is nature, nature hath given it this quality « Sothen it was naiure 
that made the Agrigentine fale melt in the fire, and crackle in the water’. Was it 
fo ? this feemes rather contrary tothe nature of fale, which naturally diffolueth 
in water , and crakleth in the fire. . I but nacuire (fay they ) made this perticular 
~ fale of a quality iuft oppofite: Good: this then is. the: reafon alfo of theheate 
and cold cf che Garamantine fotintaine, and: of the other that puts out the torch 
and lightech ic againe , as alfo of the Asbefte , and chofe orher,all which to re- 
herfe were too tedious : There is no other reafon belike to bee giuen for them, 
but, fuch is their.nacure. A good briefe reafon verely , and (6)a fufficient. 
But GOD beeing-the Auchour-of all-nature, why then doe they exa@ a ftron- 
ger reafon of vs , whenas wee.in proouing that whichy:they hold for an impo- 
flibilicy , affirme that ic isthus by che will of Almighey.G:0 D, whois there- 
forecalled Almighty becaufe hee can ‘doe all chat hee will, hauing created fo 
many things which were they not .to bee feeng , and confirmed by fufficient 
seftimony, would feeme as impoffible as the reft , whereas now wee know them, 
partly all, and partly fome ofvs. As for other things that are but reported with- 
out teftimony, and concerne not religion , ‘nor ate‘ not taught in fcripture, 
they may bee falfe, andaman may lawfully refufe to-beleeue them. J doe not 
belecuc all thac I have fet downe , fo firmely that f doe make no doubt of 
fome of them , but for that which have tried ‘as the burning Of lyme in water 
and cooling in oyle ; the loade-ftcnes drawing of Iroh and not moouing a 
ftraw ;the incorruptibility of the Peacoks fleth,whereas Platoes fieth did putri- 
fie; the keeping of {now and the ripening of apples in chaffe ; the bright 
- fire makeing the flones of his awne coligur , and woodof the iuft contra 
rie, thefe I haue feene and beleeue without any doubt at all: Such alfo are 
chefe , that cleare oyle fhould make blacke {popes sand white filuer drawne 
a black line : that coales fhould turne black from white weed brittle of hard 
ones,and incorruptible of corruptible peeces: togithes: with many other which 
ecdioufneffe forbiddeth me heere to infert. For the others, excepting that foun- 
taine that quenfhech and kindleth againe, & die dufty apples of Sodome,I could 


noc 


C 


Last. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. - 847 


not get any fufficient proofes to confirme chem. Nor mett I any chat had beheld 
thar fountaine of Epyrus, but I found diuerfe that had feene the like,neere vn- 
to Grenoble in France. And for the Apples’ of Sodome , there are both eraue 
authors,and eye-witnefles enow aliue,that'cah affirme it,fo that I make no.doube 
thereof. The reft I leaue indifferent,co affirme,or deny ; yet I did fetthemdowne 
-  becaufe they are recorded in.our aduerfaries owne hiftories , to fhew them how 
many things they beleeue in their owne bookes,with-our all reafon,that will not _ 
giue credence to vs,when wee fay that God Almighty will doe any thing that ex- 
ccedeth their capacity to conceiue-What berter or ftronger reafon can be giuen 
for any thing then to fay, God Almighty will doe this, which hee hath promifed in 
thofe ae wherein ie meaiee as ftrange things as this,which he hath per- 
A formed.He will do it,becaufe he hath faid hee will: euen hee, chat hath made the 
incredulous Heathens belecuc things which they held meere impofiibilities. 


wns. 2. F- 1 CE Z 


_. ELVIVBS. .. .. - aah, 

; WV Fy thew ( 4 ) cannot God Seeing the fcope of this place is dinine, and furpaifeth the 

; bounds of nature,as concerning the refurreCtion, indgment,faluation,and damnation, I (Noword 
wonder that e4gminas, Scotus, Occam, Henrscus de Gandaue, Durandus and Petrus de Palade of this in 
dare define of them according to Arifetles pofitions , drawing themt-felues into fuch laby- the Lo- 
rinths of naturall queftions, fa ou would rather fay a were Athenian Sophifters , chen waine co= 
Chriftian diuines.] (6) S#fficient] Mans conceipt being fo flender and thallow in thefe caufes pie. ] 
of chings, in f6 much that Virgsl {aid well,Felix,qns potmst rerum cogno[cere can(as: (6 Gre- 


; woble | lc was built by Gratian, and called hr fe + V alexs being Empesour of the 
Gendeth in Danlphive and reteineth part oftheoldname. | . 


~"  Thas the alteration of the knovvne nature of any creature,unte & nature 
e. vkwowne,ss mot oppofite unto the Lawes ofnature. 

]F they reply that they will not beleeue that mans body can endure perpetual! 

* burning, becaufe they know it is of no fuch nature,fo that it cannot bee faid of 
it, thacnature hath giuen it fuch a quality,we may anfwer chem out of the {crip- 
tures, thae mans body before his all was of fucha nature that it could noc fuffer 
death: and yet in his fall was aleered ynto that mortall mifery wherein now al 
man-kinde liueth,to dye at length : and thereforgat therefurreQion it may vn- 
dergoc fuch another altetation,vnknowne to vs as yet. But they beleeuenor the 
Scriptures that relate manseftate in Paradife,if they did, we thould not needero 
ftand long swith them vpen this cheame of the paines of the damned : whereas 
now wee suk make demonftration out of their owneauthors,how it is.poflible 
thar there may: bec a full ajcoration of nature. in any one obiedt, from the kinde 
ofbeing char i bad before,and yer che lawes of nature be kepp.ynviolated. Thus 
wee read in Yarro’s, booke. De Gente Pap. Rom. Caftor ( faith, bec ) relatech , thar 
in xhat bright: ftarte of Pesus.(4). which Plestus calles Hefperugo and Howser 
she glerions{ b-) Hefperus, befell a moft monftrous.change nae ue , Mag- 
nitude, figure and motion: the like neuer,was before nor fince: and this Gaith 
Adv afins Cyzésenus,and Dion Nespolites (two famous Aftronomers.) befell in the 
reigne of Ogyges, .A monfirous 'y faith Varro, and why, but that ie feemed 
contrary to pature: flich we fay,all porcents to be,but wee are decciued:for how, 
Fae CCC 4 can 


Qe ow ewe ew 


SAINT. AVGVSTINE. | Cuand. 


can that be againft nature which is effe@ted by the will of God the Lord and ma- 


ker of all nacure 2 A porcent ‘therefore is.noc againft nature, but againft rhe 
moft common order of natute. But whois hee that can relate all the portents 
recorded by the Gentiles ? Let vs feeke our purpofe in this one. What more de- 
cretall law hath God laide vpon nature in any part of the creation , then hee hath 
in the motions of the heauens? what more legall and fixed order doth any part 
of nature keepe ?and yet you fee,thac when it was the pleafure of Natures high- 
eft foueraigne,the brighett ftarre in all che firmamenct,changed the coulour,mag- 
nitude and figure,and which is moft admirable,the very courfe and motion. This 
made a. foule difturbance in the.rules of the Aftrologians.( if there were any 
then) when they obferuing their fixed de{criptions of the eternall courfe ofishe 
ftarres,durft affirrne that there never was,nor neuer would bee any fuch change 
as this of Venus was. Indeed weeread inthe Scripturé thatthe Sunne ftood fiall 
at che prayer of Jofuah,vntill the battle was done , and went back to fhew Heze- 
chias that the Lord had added fifteene yeares vnto his life. As for che miracles 
done by the vertues of the Saints, thefe Infidels know them well , and therefore 


__ auerre them to bedome by Magicke: where-vpon Virgie faith as Ixglated before 
|, Othe wicch, thatthe could." ae 7 
Virg, Enid se es 
4: ae 


rae ge ibs a™ Seek ce eS Sie eee ham 
ola ot Siheraaquam fluwiis cy vertere [ydera retro: ‘cae “al 
ae "Stop floods, bring hack the flarres,&c.0 ET det 
A ee Ny fay OS + SEIS Re OS < ORE OO ogeeEeE og 


‘peod, 


weit, Bee ase ye : ts eae ie Bete WG a, Ae a gud 2 2) 
Forthe:riuer Lordan parted., when Jo/fmehlead the people ouer it, and when He- 


liah-pafled it astikewife when-his follower He'sfews deuided it tuith Hetiah his 
cloake,and the funneas wee faid before went batk iti the time of Aesbchsah. Bat 
Varro doth not fay that any onedefired this change of Vewus.. Let not the faith- 
leffe therefore hood-winck them-felues in the knowJedge of nature, as though 
Gods power coutd nor alter the nature of any thing ftdtn' what ic was before vnto 
mans knowledge, although that thekhoWnenatdreofany thing bee fully as ad- 
mirable,buc that men admire nothing bre rariecies. For what reafonable man 
doth not feee,that in that greateft likeneffe and moft numerous multitude of one 
worke of nature; the face of man, thereis fueh an admirable qualiry. ; chat were 
they norall of ne forme, they fhould noe diftinguifi man fronfbeatt , and yet 
were tliey all of oli forme, ore: man fhould nor-bee kno whe from anacher? Thus 
likerrefle and difftrence are both in one obied&. Bue the differenceisinon adriii~ 
rable,nature it'felfe feeming to’exaét an vniformity- in’ the proportion thereof, 
and yet becaufe if i$’ rarieties Which wee admiré, weedoe woridor- frre more 
whieh wed fee twat) fo like tharone may bec eafily aids oftentimes deceived 
intaking the one for the other. Buc it may ‘bee they belecuermot the- relation of 
Partothough het bee one of cheirmoft ledrned Hiftdtiedy, ordos net refpectic, 
becaufechis ftatre did not remaine long in this: new forthe, buc(Sone refumed 
the former fhzpe and courfe againe. Letvs therefore gine them agtother exam- 
ple; Which togethictwich this of his, Fthinke nay fithiée to-cdriuiaces thae God is 
not to bee bound to any conditions in the aHorrthg-oP-particuler-betng ‘to any 
thing,as thongh fiecould not make an abfolure alteration thereof. zaco ay vA 
knowne quality of fence. Thé country of Sodome was whilom ‘otherwife ttret 
it is now: it'was once like the reftof che land, as'fereilé-atid usifakke if nor mdre 
then the reft,info much‘that che Scriptnre‘comparethit' to Paradies’ Bue belts 
{mitren from heapien (as the Payhim ftories themftuestrecord ard all trauellers 


confirine)it now iss a field'df fodte and Mhes,and the apples‘vfthe foylebeing 
Sas Sica o oS te 


® 


— 


— 


| 849 
faire without are naughe bur duft within. , Behold, .it was nor fuch , and yet fuch 


Liman. OF THE CITIE.OF GOD. 


jtisatchisday. Behold aterible change of nature wrought by natures Creator? 
and that it remaineth in that foule eftate now , which it was along timé ere it fell 
into- So then, as God can create whathee will, fo can hee change shenature of 
whathe hath created, at his good pleafure; And hence.is thé multitudeof mon- 
fters;vifions, portents, and prodigies, for the particular relation whereof,here is 
no place. They are called d)montters,of Aon /tro,to fhew,becaufe they betoken 
fomewhar ; And portents and prodiges of ‘portendo,, and porro dicq,to prefage and 
fore-tell fome-what to enfhew. But whether they, or the deuills , whofe care itis 
to inveigle and intan gle the minds of the vnperfed, and fi\ch as deferue it, do de- 
Jude the world either by true prediCtions,or by {tumbling onthe troth by chance, 
Jet their ob{cruers &interpreters looke to chac.But we “— to gather this from 
all chofe monflers & prodigies that happen or are faid ro happen againft nature 
(asthe Apoftle implied when he fpake of the (¢ ) engraffing of the wild Olive 
sntothe Garden Oliue, whereby the wild one was made partaker of the roote and fat- 


“neffe of the other ,) that they all do tell vs this , that God willdo wich the bodies 


of the dead , according to his promife, no difficu}ty,no law ofnature can or fhall 
probibit him. And what hee hath promifed, the laft booke declared outofboth 
the Leftaments , not in very great meafure, but fufficient ( I thinke ) for the pur- 
pofeand volume. | | 


. ee ig 


L.VIVES. | 
po e Zt a. ok eS ee or... at Se : “se 

Enss (a ) with.] Hereof already. Séme call this ftarre Venus fome Inno. etrift.De nsanda, 

." Some Lucifier , fome Hefperus. HiginJib.2. Ie feemeth the biggeft ftarre in the firmament, 
Some fay it was the daughter of Cepha/ws and “Proeris , who was {o faire that fhe contended 
with Venus, and theretore was called Venus Eratafthen. It got the name of Lacsfer and Hef 
perus from rifing and ferting before and after the Sunne. Higénus placethit abouc the Susne 


_ the Moone and CMeremry , following Plato, Ariffotle the Epiptians ,and all che Old Aftrono- 


shers. (6 \ Hefperms.)So doth CynnainhisSmima, ,.. . 

Te matutinis flentem confpexit Eous,; . 

Ei flentem paulo viast po Hejperus idem. 2 

The day-f{tarre , faw thy checkes with teares bewet, 

| So did it in the euening when it fer, ° ae 

_ That this was both the day-ftarre and the Euening-ftarre,Pythagoras,or fas fome fay ) Para 
menides was the firft that obicrued.Plsw.4b.2.Susdas. (¢) Two fo iike.| Suchtwo twins had Ser- 
wilins.Cic. Acad. Quaft 4.Such were the Menechmi in Pleatus fuppofed to be, whome their ves 
ry mother could not diftinguith, fuch alfo were the Twins that Qaintilian declameth of. And 
at Mechlin at this day Petrus eApoftolins,a Burguet of the cowne,mine hoft,hath two toward, 
and gtatious children, fo like,that not onely ftrangers , but euer their owne mother hath mif- 
tooke them , and fo doth the father like-wife to this day , callin & Peter by his brethet obns 
naine, and John by Peters. (d ) Monffers.| Thus doth Tully expound thefe words; De dininat. 
(6) Engraffing. } The wild oliue is but atbaftard frute and worfe then the other: but ic is noe 
the vfe ro engraffe bad flips in abetter ftocke, to marre the whole , but good onesin abad 
ftocke to berter the fruit, So thatthe Apoftles words feeme to imply a deed againft nature. 


$ 


“4 


Of Hell andthe qualities of. she crernallpaines sherein. 

| Cuap, Por 
A SGoutherfore byhis Prophet fpake ofthe paines of the danined, fiich alt 
| they 


: ' 


850 


SAINT AV GVSTINE. Cuarg, 
they be: Their worme [ball not die either {ball sheir fire be quenfbed Our Sauiour to 


19.66 «24. cSmend this vnto vs, putting the parts that {candalize a m4, for mans right mem- 


Mar, 9.47. 


¥.Cor.I fe 
29, 


Eccl. 70 


bers,and bidding him cut them of, addeth this : better st is for thee to enter into life 
maimed, then hauing tu'o hands to go inte Hell into the fire that neuer {balbe quen{bed, 
where their worme dicth not,andtheir fire neusr goeth ont,and likewife of the foote: 
Better for thee ro goe halting into life, then hauing two frete to bee caft into Hell.cyc. 
And fo faich he of the eye alfo., adding the Prophets words three feuerall times. 
O whom would not this thunder from the mouth of God ftrikea chill terror in- 
to founding fo often?Now as for this worme and this fire , they that make them 
only mental paines,do fay that the fire implieth the burning of the foule in griefe 
and anguifh,that now repentech to late for being feuered from the fight of God: 
afcer the maner that the Apoftle faith : who tw offended and I burne not? And this 
anguith may be meantal{o by the worme,fay they, as it is written , 45 the moth is 
tothe garment, and the worme to the wood , So doth forrow eate the heart of 4 man. 
Now fuch as hold them both mentall and reall, fay chat the fireis a bodily plague 
tothe body ,and the wormea plague of confcience in the foule. This feemeth 
more likely io that itis abfurd to fay , chat either the foule or body fhalbecleare 
of paine; yet had 1 rather take pare with them thar fay they are both bodily then 
withthofe that fay that neither of them is fo; and theretorethat forrow in the 
Scriptures though it be not exprefled fo, yetit is vnderftood to bee a fruicleffe 
repentance conioyned with a corporall torment,for the {cripture faith : the ver- 
geance of the (fle(bof the) wickedss frreand the worme: hee might haue faid more 
brietely , the vengance of the wicked, why did hee Bier ad of the flefb, but to fhew 
that both thofe plagues’, the fire and the morme , {halbe corporall ? If hee added 
it becaufe that man fhalbe thus plagued for lining according to the feth, — 
( for it is therefore that hee incurreth the fecond death , which the A- 
poftle meaneth of when hee faith , If yee line after the flcfb yee die: ) but euery 
man beleeue as hee like 5 either giving the fire truely to che body, and the 
worme figuratively to the foule , or both properly to the body:for we haue fully . 
proued already thac a creature may burne and yet not coniume, may liue in 
paine and yet not dye : which he that denyeth, knoweth not him that isthe au- 
thor of all natures wonders , that God whohath made ail the miracles chat J 
erft recounted,and thoufand thoufands more,and more admirable,thutting them 
all in the world the moft admirable worke of ail. Let euery man therefore choofe 
what co thinke of this, whether both the.fire and the worme plague the body, 
or whether the worme haue ametaphoricall reference to the foule. Thetruth 
of this queftion fhall then appeare plaine, when the knowledge of the Saints 
fhall bee fuchas fhall require no triall of ic, but onely fhalbe fully fatiffied and 
refolued by the perfedtion and plenitude of rhe divine fapience. We know but 
now in part , vneill chat which is perfe@ become, buc yet may wee not beleeue 
thofe bodies ro be fuch, that the fire can worke them no anguifh nor torment. 


L.VIVES. 
[er ( a )worme. | Jf-66.24. this is the worme of confcience, Hierome vpcn this place. 
Nor is there any villany ( faith Seneca ) how ever fortunate, that efcapeth ynpunifhed, 


but is plague to it felfe by wringing the confcience with feare and diftruft. And this is Epi- 
curus his reafonto proue that man was treated to avoyd finnt, becaufe hauing cominitted ir, 


Was: OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 


it fcourgeth the confcience, and maketh it feare’, eden without all caufe of feare, This ovit of 
Seneca, Ep:ft.Jib.1 6. Aud fo fingeth Jasenailin.chefe words : . 
Exeniple quodcungue malo committitur spf 

Dijj:licet auttors : prema eft becvltia,quodfe = = - 


Indice nemo nocens abfoluitur mm GC. 


Each deed of mifchiefe firkt of all diflikes 
The authour : with this whip Reuenge firft ftrikes, 
That no ftain'd thought can cleare it felfe,—--&c. 


. And by and by aes 3 


, Cur tamenhosin, 

Euajiffe pates,quos dsricon{ciafatii 

Mens habet  ttonitos,e furdo verbere cadity 
Occultum quatiente animo tortore flagellum. 

Pena astem vehemens,& multo fanior illis, 
QOnuas & Cedirins granis innenit,cr Rhadamanthns 
Notte dieque funm geftare in pettore teftem. 


But why fhould you fuppofe 
Them free, whofe foule blackt ore with ougly deeds 
Affrights and ceares the confcience ftill, and feeds 
Reuenge, by noufling terrour, feare and warre, 
Euen in it felfe.O plagues farre lighter farre, 

To beare guilts blifters in a breft ynfound, 

Then Khadamant,or fterne Cedstise found. 


Nay the confcience confoundeth more then a thoufand witneffes, Tully holdes chereareno | 


other hell furies then thofe ftings of confcience, and that the Poets had that inuention from 
hence. /n L. Ps. & Pro Rofc. Amerin.Hereof you may read more in Onintilians Orations, 


whether the fyre of hell sf tt be 74, Solon take effect 


_ upon the incorporéall deuills. 


C wap. fo. 


BY here now is another queftion: whether this fire, if it plague not fpiritual- 
LJ ly,but onely by a bodily touch,can infli@ any torment vpon the deuill and his 
Angels ? they areto remaine in one fire with the damned, according torwr Sané- 
eurs owne words: Depart from mee you curfed into enerlafting fire , which is prepared 
for the dewill and his Angels, But the deuills according as fome learned men {up- 
pofe,hauebodies of condenfate ayre,fuch as wee feele in a winde ; and this ayre 
is paffible , and may {uffer burning’, the heating of bathes prooueth, where the 
ayre is fet on fire to heace che water,and doth that which firit ic fufferech. Ifany 
will oppofe,and fay the deuills have no bodies atall,the matter is not great, nor 
much to be ftood vpon. For why may not vnbodyed {pirits feele the force of bo- 
dily firejas well as mans incorporeall foule isnow included in a carnall thape,and 
fhall at chat day be bound into abody forecuer. Thefe {piricuall deuils therefore 
or thofe deuillith {pirits , though ftrangely , yecfhall they bee truly boundia 
this corporall fire , which (hall tormenc them for all chat they are incorpo- 
geall . Nor fhall they bee fo bound in it, that they: fhall giue it a. foule, 
| : : as 


‘351 


852 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. Capt, 


as it were,and fo become both oneliuing creature,but as I fayd,by a wonderfull 
power (hall they be fo bound that in fteed of giuing it life,they thal fro ic receiue 
intollerable torment,although the coherence of {pirits and bodies,whereby both 
become one creature,bee as admirable,and exceedeall humaine capacitie. And 
furely I fhould thinke the deuills thalliburne them,as the riche glutton did,when 
hee cryed,faying,J ans tormented sn this flame, but that I fhould be anfwered that 
that fire was fuch as his congue was , to coole which , hee feeing Lazarus a farre 
of,intreated him to helpe him wich a little water on the tippe of his finger. Hee 
was not ther, in the body but in foule onely ; fuch likewife( that is incorporeall ) 
was the fire hee burned in,and the water hee wifhed for, as the dreames of thofe 
that fleepe and the vifion of men in extafies are,which prefent the formes of bo- 
dies,and yet are not bodies indeed. Andthough man {ce thefe things onely in 
{pirit,yet thinketh he him-felfe fo like to his body,that hee cannot difcerne whe- 
ther hee haue it on orno. But that hell, that lake of fire and brimftone, thall bee 
reall,and the fire corporall , burning both menand deuills,the onein fethand 
the ocher in ayre: the one inthe body adhzrent to the fpirit ,and the other in 
Spirit onely adherent to the fire , and yet not infufing life, Bue feeling rorment 
for one fire fhall torment both men and Deuills,chrs/ hath {poken ir. 


whether st bee not suftice that the time of the paines {hould be proportioned 
to the time of the finnes.and crimes, 
Cuarnit, .- 


BY: fome of the aduerfaries of Gods cétty, hold it iniuftice for him that hath 
offended but temporally,to be bound to firffer paine eternally this(chey fay )is 
viterly vniuft. As chough they knew any law that adapted the time of the punith- 
ment to the time in which the crime was committed. Eight kinde of punith- 
ments doth Twily affirme the lawes to infli&: Damages, imprifonment , whip- 
ping, like for like,publicke difgrace , banifhment, death,and bondage , which of 


_ thefe can be performed in fo little time as the offence is,excepting(«) the fourth, : 


which yeelds euery man the fame meafure that hee meateth vnto others,accord- 
ing to that of the law, 42 eye for an eye,end a tooth for 4 tooth? Indeed one may loofe 
his eye by this law, inas fmalla time as hee put out another mans by violence. 
But ifa man kiffe another mans wife,and bee therefore adiudged to bee whipt,is 
not tbat which hee did ina era Sr for by agood deale longer fufferance? 
is not his fhort pleafure repaide witha longer paine? And what for imprifon- 
ment ?Is every one iudged to lye there no longer then hee wasa doing his villa 
nie? Nay, that feruanc that hath but violently touched his maifter,is by a iuft law 
doomed vnto many yearesimprifonment. And as for damages, difgraces, and 
banifhments,are not many of them dateleffe,and lafting.2 mans whole Jife,wher- 
in they bearea proportion with the paines eternall. Fully ecernall they cannot 
bee, becaufe the life which they affliG is but temporall , andyet the finnes they 
puni(h are all committed in an inftant, nor would any man aduife that the conti- 
nuance of the penalty fhould be meafured by the time of the faé, for thar, be ie 
murther,adulrery,facriledge,or what villany fo-euer, is TT difpatched, and 
confequently is not to be weighed by the length ef time, but by the fouleneffe of 
thecrime. Andas for himthat deferues death by an offence, doth the law hold 
the time that hee is adying , to bec the fatisfaction for his guilt, or his beeing 
| | taken 


853 


Lis.2t OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 

taken away from the fellowfhip of men,whether ? That then which che terreftri- 
all cs#ty can do by the firft death,the celeftiall can effect by the fecond,in clearing 
her felfe of male‘a@ors.For as the lawes of the firft, cannot calla.dead man back 
againe into their (ociery,nomore do the lawes of the fecond call him back to fal- 
uation that is once entred into the fecond death, How then is. our, Sastours words 2. 
(fay they ) With what mesfare yee mete, with the fame [ballmen mete te you azaines 
if cemporall finnes be rewarded with cternall paines? O but ydu marke not thae 
thofe words hauea reference to the returning of euill for euillin our natu re,and 

not in one proportion of time: that is,hee that doth euill, fall fuffer euill, with- 

out limitation of any time :alchough this place be more properly vnderftood of 

the judgments and condemnations whereof the Lord did there {peake.So that he 

that iudgeth vniuftly, if he beiudged vniuftly,is paid in che fame meah ure chat hee 
meated withall,though nat what he did : for he did wrong in.iudgment;and {uch 

ike he fuffrech :but he did it vniuftly mary he is repaid according to iuftice. 


| | _... LVIVES |... |... 
Xcepting the (a) fourth | This was one of the Romanes lawes in the eweltie tables,and here- 
of doth Phanorinss difpute with Sep. Cacilins,in Gellins.tib.r0.  - 


The greatneffe of Adams hinne jnflstting eternall damnation dpon ' 
Ba a that are ons of the flate of Grace. | a 
: ) oe? C rap. I2. , 
BY therefore doth man imagine, that this infli@ion of erernall rorméntis vis 
“Aiuftice, becaufe his fraile imperfe&tion cannot difcerne the horribleneffe of 
that offence chat was che firft procurer thereof. For the fuller fruition ‘man had 
of God,the greater impiety was it for himto renounce him, and therein was hee 
worthy of cuet-lafting euill,in that he deftroyed his owne good, that orherwife 
had beene eueriatting. Hence came damnation ypon all the ftock of man,parent 
afd progenie vnder-going one curfe, from which none can be ever freed, but by 
tlte free and gracious mercy of God,which maketh a feperatior of mankinde, to 
fhew in one of the remainders the power of grace, and in the other the reienge. 
ofiuftice. Both which couldnot bee expreffed vpon all man-kinde, for if all a4 
talted of the punifhments of iuftice, the grace and mercy of the redeemer ha 
had no placein any: and againe, if all had beene redeemed from death,therehad 
beene no obieét left for the manifeftation of Gods iuftice: Bur now there is more 
Jefe, then taken to mercy, that fo it might appeare what was due vntoa l; with- 
oat any impeachment ot Gods iuftice, who not-withftanding hauing deljuered fo 
many hath herein bound vs for ever to praifehis gracious commiferation. 
Agasnit [uch as hold,that the torments after the indgement fhallbeebut 
— the meanes whereby the Toutes at bee juried - oe 
a : HAP.I3. 0 = * toi 

Some Platonsfs there are who though they afbgrie.a punifhment to every 

finne, yet hold they that all fuch inflictions, be they humaine or diuine,in this 
life or inthe next ,tend onely to the purgation of the foule from enormicics. | 
Where-~vpon Virgd hauing {aid of the foules; . . . ee 

| Dddd ‘Hine 


854 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cmar.r38& 14, 


Hse metunt cupinntque,crc. 
Hence feate, defire,&¢, | 


And immediatly : 
Qnin vt fupreme cum lamine'vita veliquit, 
Non tamen omne malum miferis,wec fundiths enmmes 
Corporee excedupt peftes, penitusque neceffecst, 
Multa dite concreta modis inolefcere mirit, 
Ergoexercentur penis, veterumg, malorum 
Supplicia expendunt,alie panduntur inanes 
Sa/penfe ad ventos,aliis Ne Lxrgite vate | 
Infett ame cluitur fcelus, aut exsvitur igni, — 
For when the foules do leaue the bodies dead, 
Their miferies are not yet finiched : 
Nor all their times of torment yet leate 
Many {mall crimes muft needes make one thats preat. 
Paine therefore purgeth them, and makes them faire 
From their old ftaines sfome hang in duskie ayre, 
Some in the deepe do pay thedebroffinne, 
And fire is chofen to cleanfe others in. | . 


- They that hold this, affirme that no paines at all are to be fuffered after death,but 


onely fuch as purge the foules,and thofe fhall be ¢leared of all their earthly con. 
tagion by fome Z the three vpper elements, the fire, the ayre, or the water. The 


ayre,in that he faith, S#/pen/2 ad ventos: the water,by the words Sab gurgite vafte; 


the fireis exprefly named, aut exuritur igni. Now indeed wee doc confeffe that 
there are certaine paines during this life, which do not properly affliG fuch as are 


_ not bettred but made worfe by them, but belong onely to the reforming of fach 


A 


as take them for corrections. All other paines,temporall and eternal! arelaid vp- 
on eucry one as Ged pleafeth, by his ek ae good or bad, either for fome finne 
paft,or wherein the party afflicted now liueth ,or elfe to excercife and declare 
the vertue of his feruants . For if one man hurt another (« ) willingly, or by 
chance, it is an offence inhimto doe any man harme, by will orthrough i 
rance,but God whofe fecret iudgement affigned it to be fo,offeadeth nor at all. As 
for temporall paine, fome endure it heere , and fome here-after , and fome both 
here and there, yet all is paft before the laft iudgement. But all fhall not come in- 
to thefe eternall paines, (which se laaidiinat {hall bee eternall after the lat 
ludgment,vnto them that endurethem temporally after death.)For fome fhal be 
sapdeial in the world to come that are not pardoned in this , and acquitted 
there and not here from entring into paines eternall,as I {aidbefore. 


| as L. VIVES. 
V 7 [ling ly (2) or by | Willingly, that is, of fet purpofe,or through a wrong perfwafton that 
| he doth him good when he hirteth him, as the toraurers «nd murtherers of the martyrs 
beleeued. Thefe were all guilty, nor was their ignorance excufeable : which in what cafes it 
may be held pardonable, 4ngu/fine difputeth in Ouefi-ver 6 Non.Teftam. 


‘The temporall paines of this life afflicting all man-kinde. 
| | _ Cuap. 14. 
Bvt fewe there bee that endure none of thefe paines wneill after rane 
' ome 


bose. 


Livate: OF THE CITIE OF GOD. | 855 


~_ + _ 


Some indeed | haneknown & heard of that never had houres fickenes vntil their 
dying day , and lined very long , though norwithftanding mans whole life beea 
' paine 27 that st ts atemptation and awarre-fare upon earth as Holy Job faith, for ig- 
norance is a great punifhmentc, and therefore you fee thar little children are for- 
ced to a auoyde it by ftripes and forrowes,that alfo which they learne being fuch 
apainetothem, that fome-times they had rather endure the puniff.ments that 
enforce them learne ic , then to learne that which would avoyde them(a).Who | 
~wouldnot tremb!e and rather choofe to die then to be an infant againe,if he were 
put to fuch achoyce ? We begin it with teares , and therein prefage our future 
miferies, Onely (6 ) Zorcastres {miled ( they fay ) when kee was borne: but his 
prodigyous mirth boded him no good: for hee was, by report, the firft inuen- | 
tor of Magike,which notwithftanding ftood him not in a pins flead in his miffor, 
tunes,for Ns#us King of Affiriaouer came him in battel and tooke his Kingdome 
of Badtriafrcemhim. Sothacit isfochan impoffibility that thofe words of the 
Scripture, Great tranell created for allmen and an heany yoke upon the fonnes of 
Adam from the day that they go out cf their mothers wombe untill the day that they re- 
turne untothe mother of allthings ,fhouldnot be fulfilled,chat the very infants, 
being Baptifed,and therein quitte from all their guilt, which then1s anely origi-~ 
nall,are norwithflanding much and often affli@ed,yea euen fometimes by the in- 
curfion of Deuills , which notwithftanding cannot hurt them if they die at that 
cenderneffe of age. 


L.VIVES. | 
W Ho(«) would, ] Some would thinke chem-felues much beholding to God if they igh 


begin their daies againe,, but wife (atoin Tully was of another minde. (4) Zoroaftres 
fmiled, | He was king of Badtria , the founder of Magique. Hee liued before the Troian warre 
sooo. yeares faith Hermodotus Platonicus, eAgnaces taughthim. Hee wrot 00000. verfes, 
Idem. Exdoxus maketh him liue ;090. yeares before /’/ato his death , and fo doth eAriffotle, 
Zanthus Lydias is as fhort as chet are ouer in their account , giuing but 600, betweene Ze- 
roaftres, and Xerxes paflage into Greece. Pliny doubts whether there w ere many of this name, 
But this liued in Nénws his time ; hee fmiled at his birth , and his braine beate fo chat it would 
lift vp the hand; a prefage of his future knowledge, P/iz. He liued twenty yeates ina defert 
vpon cheefe,which hec had fo mixed, that it neuer grew mouldy nor decayed. 


wa 


ASP ames 6 wee wy eee oe or . 2 ee OO ED. en oan 


That the foope of Gods redeeming vs is wholly pertinent to the worldto come. 


; Cuap. I 5° 
Veyet notwithftanding in this heauy yokethat lieth vpon adams children 
from ther birth co their burial], we haue this one meanes left vs,to Sine fober, 
andcto weigh that our firft parents fin hath made this life but a painetovs , and 
that ail the promifes of the New-Teftament belonge onely to the Heritage 
layd vo for vs in the world ro come:pledges wee haue here, but the performance 
~ duechereto we fhall not haue till chen. Let vs now therefore walke in hope and 
profiting day by day let vs mortifie che deeds of the flefh , by che {piric, for God 
kno weth all chat are his, and as many as are led by the {piric of God, are the fons, 
~ of God, but by grace, not by nature, for Gods onely fonne by nature, was made. 
tlic forine of man for vs, that we being the fons of men by nature might become 


Ddddz the 


356 


SAINT AV GVSTINE. C uap.t5.&16 


the fonnes of God in him by grace, for hee remayning changeleffe , cooke our 
nature vpon him , and keeping ftill his owne diuinity , that wee being changed, 
might leaue our frailety andapneffe to finne, through the participation of his 
righteoufneffe and immortalliry and keepe that which hee had made good 
in vs , by the perfection of that good which is in him: for as wee all fell into this 
mifery by one mans finne, fo fhall wee afcend vnto that glory by one ( deified ) 
mans righteoufnefle. Nor may any imagine that hee hath had this paffe, vntil! 
hee bee there where there is no temptation but all full of that peace which wee 
feeke by thefe conflicts of the fpirit againft che fleth, and the flefh againft che {pi- 
rit. This warre had neuer beene, had man kept his will in that right way wherein 
ic was firft placed. But refufing that, now hee fighteth m himfelfe, and yet this 
inconuenience is not fo bad as the former , for happier farre is hee that ftriueth 
againft finne then hee that alloweth it foueraygnty ouer him. Better is warre 
with hope of eternall peace, then thraldome without any thought of freedome. 
We with the want of this warrethough , and God infpireth vs toayme at thar 
orderly peace wherein the inferiour obeyeththe fuperior in althings : but if 


- . there were hope of it in this life (as God forbid wee fhould imagine)by yeelding 


to finne, (4) yet oughe we rather to ftand out againft it, in all our miferies , then 
to giuc ouer our freedomes co finne, by yeelding to it. 


L.VIVES. 


be (4 ) ought we. | So {aid the Philofophers , euen thofe that held the foules to be mortall: 
that vertue was more worth then all the glories of a vicious eftate, anda greater reward 
to it felfe : nay that the vertuous are more happy euen in this life, then the vicious, and there- 
fore Chrift animates his feruants with promifes of rewards both in the world to come, and in 
this that is prefent © . | 


The lawes of grace that allthe regenerate are bleed in. 
CHap. 16. . | 

BVt Gods mercy is fo great in the veffells whome hee hath prepared for glory, 

thac eucn the firft age of man,which is his infancy,where the flefh ruleth with- 
out controll,and the fecond; his child-heod , where his reafon is fo weake that it 
giueth way to all encicements , and the mind is alcogether incapable of religious 
precepts ; if notwithitanding they bee wafhed in the fountaine of regeneration, 
and he dyeat this or that age , he is tranflated from the powers of darknes to the 
glories of Chrift, and freed from all paynes, eternal] and purificatory. His rege- 
neration onely is fufficient cleare, that after death which his carnall generation 
had contracted with death. But when he cometh to yeares of difcretion , and is 
capable of good counfel,then muft he begin a fierce confli@ with vicesleaft it al- 


Jurehim to damnation, Indeede the frefh-water foldiour is the more eafily put 


to flight,but practife will make him valourous, and to perfue viGtory with all his 


endeuour,which he muft cuermore aflay by a weap6 called the(a)lone of true righ- 


a this is keptin the faich of Chrift,for ifthe command be prefent,and 
the affifting {pirie abfenc,the very forbidding ofthe crime enflameth the peruerfe 
fieth co run the fooner into it,fometimes producing open enormities , and fome- 
times (5) fecret ones, farre-worfe then the other, in A pride, and ruinous felfe 
conceit perfwades men that they argvertucss 


Then 


~~ GE ~SER. “~~ a 8 OU ~~ Te 7 


Lis.s1. OF THE CITIE.OF GOD. 


Then therfore fia is quetled,when.it is beaten downe by they loueofGod,which 
_ none butt he and that hedoth only,by Iefus Chrift the mediator of God andman, 
who made him-felfe mortall, chat we might bee made eternall : few are fo happy 
to pafle their youth without taynt of fome damnable finne or other ,: either in 
deed,opinion,or fo; but let chem aboucall, fteke to fuppreffe by the fullnefle of 
fpirit all fuch euill motions as fhallbe incited by the loofeneffe of the flefh. Ma- 
ny , hauing betaken them-felues to the law, becomming preuaricators thereof 
through finne, are afterwards faineto fly vnto the law of grace affiftant , which 
making them both truer penitents , and ftouter opponents , fubieGeth their {pi- 
rits toGod , and {fo they get the conqueft of the flefh. Heetherefore that will 
efcape hell fire, muft he both Baptized and iuftified in Chrift, and this is his only 
way to paffe from the Deuill vnto him. And let him affuredly beleeue that there 
isno purgatory paines but before that great and terrible indgement. Indeede 
it is true chat the fire of Hell fhalbe(¢) more forcible againft {ome then apainft 
others,according tothe diuerfity of their deferts,whether ic be adapted in nature 
tO = quality of their merits, or remaine one firevnto all, andyet bee not fele 
alike of all. _ * * 


Lae 


‘ 


L. VIVES. 
He (4) loue of.| This made Plato aduife mento vie their children onely to vertuous dee 
_ At lights, and co induce a hate of bad things into their mindes , which were it obferued, our 
loue would then be as much vnte vertue as Now itis vnto carnal! pleafures, for cuftame is an- 
othernaturc: and a good man liketh vertue better then the voluptuary doth fenfuality. ( b ) 
Secret ones far wore, | Plato hauing feafted certaine Gentlemen , {pread the Roome with mats 
and dreffed his bauqueting beds handfomely, In comes Diogenes the Cynicke , and falls pre- 
fently a trampling of the hangings with his durty feete. P/zto comming in, why how pee! 
Drogenes quoth he ? Nothing faid the othcr, but that I tread downe Platoes Pride. Thou do 
indecd (faith Plato ) but with apride farre greater, for indeed this was a greater vaine-glory 
and arrogance in Déogenes that was poore , then in Plato thar was rich , and had but prepared 
thefe things for his friends, So thall you haue a many proud bevgersthinke them-felues ho» 
lyer then honeft rich men, onely for their name take, as ifGod refpe&ted the goods , and 
not there mindes, They willnot be ritch , becaufe they thinke their pouerty maketh them 
mote admired. Diogenes had wont to doe horrible things to make the people obferue him,and . 
one day in the midft of winter hee fell a wafhing him{clfe in a cold {pting , whither by and by 
there gathred a great multitude, who feeing him, pittiedhim, and praied him to for-beare; 
Ono,faith P/atoaloud,if you will pitty him,get yee all gone : for he faw it was nat vertue,but .. 1. 
vaine-glory that made him do thus.(¢ ) More forcsb/e.| According to the words of Chrift, Je Matsti 
poalbe erfier for Tyre aud Sydon.re. -* | , 


0 cae 


Of forme Chriftians that held thes Hells paines {bould not be eternall. 


Cuap.i70: = 
| New muft 1 hanea gentle difputation with certaine tender hearts of our own 
_£ N religion, who thinke that God , who hath iuftly doomed the damned vnto 
hel fire,wil after a certaine {pace, which his goodneffe thal chinke fic for the merit 
of each mans guilt,deliuer the from that torment. And of this opinion was («) 
Origen,in farce more pitiful manner, for he held chat che diuells themf{elués after. 
a BEdee ha a ‘alee 


—_— 


858 SAINT AVGVSTINE. —— Cmar.3 7.8 18 


a fer time expired, fhould bee loofed from their torments, and become bright 
Angels in heauen,as they were before. But this,and other of his opinions, chief- 
ly thac rotation and circu:n-volution of mifery and bliffle which hee held tharall 
man-kinde (hould runne in,gaue the church caufe to pronounce him Asatheme: 

feeing he had loft this feeming pitty by affigning a true mifery,after a while, and 
afalfe bliffe, vnto the Saints in heauen,where they (if chey were true)could neuer 
be fecured to remaine. But farre other-wife is their tenderneffe of heart, which 
hold that this freedome out ot hel! fhall onely be extended vnto the foules of the 
damned after acertaine time appointed for euery one , fo that all at lengch thall 
come to bee Saints in heaven. But if this opinion bee good and true, becanfe it is 
mercifull,why then the farther it extendeth,the better it is : fo that it may as well 

(6) includethe freedomé of the deuills alfo, afrer a longer continuance of time, 
Why then endeth it with man kinde onely and excludech them ? nay but it dares 

ee no farther, they dare not extend their pitty vnto che deuill. But if any one 

i fo, hee goes beyond them, and yet finneth in erring more defornedly, and 
more peruerifly againft the exprefle word of GO D, though hee thinke to (hew 


the more pitty herein. 


a eer anasoost” ~ 


| L. VIVES. 
Oren (4) in| Periarch lib, Of this already. ( b) Include the freedeme ] So did Origen, 
and likew'fe made good Angels become deuills in proceffe of time, according to his ima- 
ginaty circum-uolutions. 


Pa 


yo Of thofe tht hold that the interceicow of the Saints 
(bal fawe all men from damnation. 7 
Cap. 18. 


\ 


Haue talked with fore that feeme to reverence the Scriptures,and yet are no 

good liuers,who would make God farremore mercifull thenthe other. For as 

for the wicked , they confeffe, that they deferue to bee plagued, but mercy fhall 
haue the vpper hand when. it comes to iudgement : for God fhall giue them all 
vnto the prayers and interceffion of the Saints, who if they prayed for them 
when they infulted oner them as enemies, will doe it much morenow w henthey 
feethem proftrare at their feete like flaues. For it is incredible ( fay they ) thae 

the Saints fhould furget mercy whenthey are moft holy and perfeé&t,who prayed 

for theyr foes, when they were not with-out finne them-{elues: Surely then they 

will pray for them being now become their fuppliants , when as they haue no 
finneat all lefcin them. And will not God heare them , when cheir prayers haue 
fuch perfection? Then bring they forth the teftimcny of the Pfalme which the 
other, that held the fauing of all che damned af.er atime , doe alledge alfo , bue 
Plalm, 76, thefe affirme that it maketh more for chem : the words arethefe : Hath God for- 
gotten tobe mercifull,or will be fbut up-bis mercies 1x difpleafwre? His difpleafure(fay 
they) condemnethall that are vaworthy.of ecernall life,to cternall torment. But 
sf this condemnation continue, little or long, how can it be then that the Pfalme 
fhould fay right,w3l/ bee fbat up his mercy in difpleafwre? Icfaith not, Wid bee fbuts 
shem up hag. bus implieth thathee will not fhytte them vp at all. Thus doe they 
prooue that the indgment of GO D is not falfe, although hee condemne none, 
i ry . no 


Lisar. OFTHECITIE OF GOR. §~—850 


no more then his threatning to deftroy Niniuy was falfe,xhough ic was not effec- 
ted(fay they )netwithftanding that he promifed it'wichourex¢tption. Hee fayd 
not,/will deftroy st unlk (fe st repeat ,butplainély without addition , Neazay{ha.be 
deftroyed. This threatning doe they hold true, becaufé G.O.D fore-told plaine- 

ly what they had deferued, though he fpake not chat which he meant to due. For 
though hee fpared them , yet knew hee that they would repent : and yet did hee 
abfolurely promife their deftruétion. This therefore (fay they ) wastrue in the 
truth of his feuerity , which they had deferued , but noc in refpect of his mercy, 
which he did not fhut vp in difpleafure;becaufe he would thew mércy vnco their 
praiers , whofe pride hee hadthreatnedco punifh. If therefore he (hewed mer- 

cy then (fay they ) when he knew hee fhould thereby grieue his holy prophet, 

how much more will hee fhow it now when all bis Saints fhall inereace for it? 
Now this furmife of theirs they thinke the feriptures doe not mention , becaufe 

men fhould bee reclaimed fiom vice by feare of tedious or eternall torment, 

and becaufe fome fhould pray for chofe chat will not amend: and yet the fcrip- 

tures ( fay they) doe noc vetetly conceale it : for what doth that of the Pfalme in- 
tend, How great is thy goodne(fé whith thon laff layd uppe for them shat feare thee! ae 
Thou keepeft them fecret in thy sabernsclt from the ftrife of tongucs . That is, fay , eae 
they,this great {weetnefle of GODS mercy it kept fecret from vs, to keepe 

vs inthe moreawe, and thereforeth¢ Apoftle fayth GOD hath [but vppe all in 
unbeleefe,that hee might haue mercy on all ,to fhewchac hee will condemne none, R& 84332 | 
Yet thefe. Opinioniits will not extend this generall faluatios vnto thedeuills, 
buc make miankinde the onely obieét of their pitty , promifing impunity tocheir 
owne bad lines wichall,by pretending a cenerall mercy of GO D vatothe whole 
- generation of than :and in this, they that exiend Gods mercy vnto the deuill aird 
his ange:|s,doe quite exceed thefe later. a ae 


«Of fuch as bold that heretiques falbe [aned,in thet they hane 
pertakens of the bodyof CHRIST. — 
Cuap. 196 


OC) There thereare , that cleare not hell ofall , bat onely of fuch as arebap tized 

and pertakers of Chrifts body, and thele/they fay)are faued, bee their liuesor 
doctrines whatfocuer, wherevpon CHR1S 1 himfelfe fayd , This.is the bread toy 6 
. which commseth downe fromheanen that he which cateth of tt [oowld not die. tam the — 
lining breadwhich came downe from heanen. Therefore(fay thefe men)muf all {uch 

be faued of neceflity and glorified by euerlafting life: : 


and renoltedCatholskes, 
C HAP. 205. 


Of fuch as allow this deliuerance onely to picked 


| A Nother fort reftraine the former pofition ‘onely ‘to Catholikes , tite 
t Athey neuer fo vilely,becaufe they haue receiued CHR UST eruly andbin - 
ingtaffedin his body sof which the Apoftle faith; ve shat abe many, are onc bread, 1 C#1O 
and one body, becaufe wee-all sxe pertakers of one bread. So that fall they ino” 

: Dddd4 neuer 


te 


\ 


860 


SAINT AVGVSTINE.  —— Curar.a.g23 


neuer fo badherefies afterwards,yea euen into Paganife, yet becaufe they re. | 
ceiued the Baptifme of Cbrif in his Church, they thall not perith for euer , but 


. thall receive eternall life, nor hall their guile make their torments euer-laftin 


Mat,34, 


1.C@, 3 


_baue 


buc onely temporall , though they may laft.a long time , and bee extreamly 
painefull. 7 


Of, ‘Such as affirmse that all that abide in the Catholique faith, {ball be faned 
for that faith onely be their lines neuer [0 worthy of damnation. 


Cuap. 2]. 


Kine are fome,who becaufeit is written,Hee that endureth to the end, hee {ball 
bee faued, doe affirme that onely they that continue Catholiques ( how-fo- 
ever they liue) fhall be faued by the merite of that foundation , whereof the A- 
poftle faith. Other foundation can no man try,then that which is lade, which ts Chrift 
Jefus. And if any man build on this foundation, gold, filuer, precious ftones,tim- 
ber,haye or ftubble ; euery mans worke fhall bee made manifeft, for the day [ of 
the Lord ] (hall declare it , becaufe it fhall bee reuealed by the fire, and the fire 
fhall ¢ry-euery mans worke , of what fort it is. If any mans worke that hee hath 
Built vpon,abide, hee (hall receiue wages. If any mans workeburne,he thall lofe, 
but hee thall bee fafe him-felfe, yet as ic were by fire. So that all Chriftian Ca- 
tholiques ( fay they ) hauing Chréf for their foundation( which no heretiques 

jad cutt off from his body ) bee thejr liues good or bad, (as thofe that 
build timber,haye,or ftubble vpon this fqundation ) thall neuer-the-leffe be fa- 
ued by fire, that is,thall bee delivered after they haue endured che paines of the 
fire which punitheth the wicked in thelaftiudgment. _ 


Of uch as affirme that the finnes committed among ft the workes of mersy, 
| fall not bee called into indgement. 
C HAP, 22. 


ANd fomel haue mette with,that hold that none thall bee damned eternally, 


but fuch as negleted to fatisfic for their finnes by almes-deedes ; alledging 


Tsmes.as3 that of James : There [hall bee iudgment mercilefe-unto him that {beweth so mercy. 


Mést.60%4, 


Wherefore he thatdoth ( fay they) chough hee amend not his life , but liue fin- 
fully euen in thefe mercifull workes, (hall neuer-the-leffe haue fo mercifull a iudg- 


_ment, that hee fhall either not bee punifhed atall, or at leaft bee freed from his 
paine after his fufferance of them for fome certaine {pace, more or leffe . And 


therefcre the iudge of quicke and dead would mention no other thing in his 
words to thofe on both fides of him, for the faluation of the one part, and the 
damnation of the other,but onely the almes-deedes which they had either done 
or negle&ed. To which alfo (fay they ) doth that part of the Lords prayer per- 
taine. Forgsue us our tre(pa([es,as wee forgiue them that tre/palfe againft vs. For he 
that forgiueth an offence done to him, doth a worke (2) of mercy : which Chri# 
fo approued,that hee fayd: Uf yee doe forgine men thetr tre(paffes , your beamenly fa- 
ther will alfo forgine you, but if yee doe not forgine men thesr tre[palfes, no more will 
your heauenly father forgine you your repel. So that here-vnto belongeth aHo 
the aforefaid place of Saint lamesy There {ball bee sudgement mercileffe,d-c. The 


2 


y 


a 


eae a | SS ee 
Liz.2 OF THE CITIE OF GOD. S61 . 


LORD fayd not, Your (mall trefpa(fes ( fay they ) nor your vreat , but, general- 
ly , your tre/paffes and therefore they bold that thofe that liue never {0 Vici- 


oufly vntill cheir dying day , have notwithftanding their finnes abfolutely par-— 


doned euery day by this praier vied cuery day , if withall they doe remember, 
freely to forgiue all fuch as haue offended them , when they intreate for pardon, 


’ 


when all thote errors are confuted , I will G O D willing make an end of this pre- 
fent booke. | _ 


~ 


L.VIVES. 


A (a) Worke of mercy } For énennoromn, is the properly,mercy of ined, to haue mercie, as 


urspecerk,come of ‘*teeuri,and in diuers more examples. - of 


Fcc stan seacitenseennnsnnnsinentieinatmmngeeenenimanesios 


Againft thofe that exclude both men and deuslls 
from paines eternal. | 
 CHap. 23.0 - 

Pi then wee muft thew why’ the church hath condemned them that affirme 

that even the very deuills afteratime of torment, fhalbe taken to mercy. 
The reafon is this , thofe holy men, fo many and fo learned in both the lawes of 
G OD, the Oldand the New, did not enuy the mundification and beatitude 
of thofe fpirits after their long , and great extremity of torture, but they faw 
wel] , that the words of Our Sauiour could not bee vntrue ; which hee promifed 
to pronounce in the laft iudgement , faying: Depart from mee yee curfeainto ener- 


lating fire , which is prepared for the deuill and his —Angells. Hereby thewing Mat.25 


that they fhould burne in cuerlafting fire : likewife in the Reuelation; The dens// 
thar deceiued them was caftinto a lake of fire and brimftone , where the beaft amd 


the falfe prophet [balbe tormented euen day and night for ewermore . There hee faith, , eee a 


éuerlafting ,and here for euermore , in both places excluding alltermination 
andend of the time , Wherefore there is no reafon either ftronger or plainer 


to aflure our beleefe that the deuill and his angells fhall neuer morereturneto 
_ the glory and righteoufheffe of their Saints, then becaufe the fcriptures,that de- 


ceiue no man, tell vs direétly and plainely , #ha# GOD hath not [pared them, bat 
caft them downe into helland deliuered' them unto chaines of darkene/fe , there to bee 


kept unto the damnation in the tuft judgement then to bee caft into cternall fire’, and , Pens 


there to burne for euermore . lf this bee true, how can either all ,or any men bee 
deliuered out ofthis eternity of paines, ifour faith whereby we beleeuethede- 
uillto bee euerlaftingly tormented,be not hereby infringed ? for if thofe ( either 


all or fome part ) to whome it fhalbe fayd, Depart from mee yee curfedintoener= 


lating fire which is prepared for the deuill and his angells {hall not continue for e- 


"er inthe fire, what. reafon haue weeto thinke that che deuill and his angells 


(hall? Shall the word of GOD {poken alike both to men anddeu ills,be prooued 


‘true vpon the deuills and not vpon the men ? So indeed fhould mans furmifes 


beof more certainety then Gods promifes. Bur feeing that cannot bee, they 
that defire to efcape this paine eternall , muft ceafe to argue againft GOD, and 


take his yoake vponthiem while they hauc tithe. 
| Hs Fog 


- 


$63 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cusarag. 


For what a fondneffe were it to value.che paines eternall by a fire only of along 
continuance,but yet to belecue affuredly that life erernall hath no endatall,fee- 
ing thacthe LOR D in the fame place including both thefe parts in one fen- 
tence,fayd plainely ,The/e [ball goc into enerlafing paines andthe righteous into lsfe 
eternall.Thus doth he make them parallells : here is euerlafting paines,and there 
is eternall life. Now to fay this life fhall never end, but chat paine (hall, were 
grofsly abfurd. Wherefore feeing that the eternall life of the Saints thall bee 
without end, fotherefore is it a confequent that the euerlafting paine of the 
damned fhalbe as endleffe as the others beatitude. 


ee 


Againft thofe that would — all demusttion fruftrate 
by she prasers of the Saints. C WAP. 24. 


His is alfo againft chofe who vnder collour of more pitty, oppofe theex- 

prefle word of GOD :and fay that GO DS promifes are true in that nea 
are worthy of the plagues he threatens,not that they fhalbelayd vpon them.For 
he will giue them (fay they) ynto the intrea:ies of his Saints , who wilbe the rea- 
dier to pray for them then, in that they are more purely holy , and their praiers 
wilbe the more powerfull,in thac they are veterly exempt from all touchof finne 
and corruption . Well,and why then inthis their pure holinefle , and pow reful- 
nefle of praier will they not intreate for the Angells that are to be caft into euer- 
lafting fe , that it would pleafe GOD tomicigate his fentence, and fer them 


free from that intollerable fire? Some perhaps will pretend that the holy An- 


gells will ioyne with the Saints (as then their followes ) in ‘He both the An- 
gells and men alfo that are guilty of damnation, that God in his mercy would be 
pleafedto pardon their wicked merit. But there is no found chriftian that e- 


~ uer held his, or ever will holdit: for otherwile , there wereno reafon why the 


3,1 im.3. 


Church fhou!d not pray for the deuill and his Angells, feeing thather LORD 
GOD hath willed her to pray for her enemics. But the fame caufe thar ftayeth 
the Church for praying for che damned {pirics(her knowne enemies)at this day, 


-the fame fhail hinder her for praying forthe reprobate foules , at this day of 


iudgement, notw ithftanding her fulneffe of perfeQion. As now, thee prayeth 
for her enemies in mankinde,becaufe this is the time of wholefome repentance, 
and therefore her chiefe petition for them, is, that G O D would grant them peni- 
tence and efcape from the [nares of the deuill, who are taken of him at bis will ,as the 
Ar oftle faith. But ifthe church had this light that fhee could know any of chofe 
who(though they liueyet vpon the earth, yet )are predeftinated togoe with the 
deuill into chat euerlafting fire ; (hee would offer as few praiers for them,as fhee 
doth tor him. But feeing that thee hath not this know ledge, therefore praieth 
fhee for all her foes in the flefh and yetis not heard for them all, but onely for 
thofe who are predeftinated tobecome her fonnes, though they bee as yet her 
aduerfaries . Ifany fhall die her impenitent foes ,and not returne into her bo- 
fome atall, doth thee pray for them ?° No, becaufe they that before death are 
not ingraffed into CHRIST, are afterward reputed as affociates of the deuill: 
And therefore the fame caufe that forbids her to pray for the reprobate foules 
as then, ftoppeth her for praying for the Apoftaticall Angells as now : and the 
{amereafon there is why wee pray for all men liuing , and yet will not pray for 
the wicked,nor Infidells, being dead . For the praicr either of the Church, or of 
. fome 


at leaftlet them fo vnderftand it,chat the difoleafure of GOD remayning in chem 


fome Goaly perfons is heard (4) forfome departed this life: but for them which 
being regenerat in Chrift,haue not fpent their life fo wickedly that they may be 
indged vnworthy of fuch mercy : orelfe {6 deuoutly,that they. may bee found to 
hauenoneede of fuch mercy. Euenas alfo. after the refurcetion there thalbe 
fome of the dead, which fhall obtaine. mercy. after the punifhments,which the 
fpirits of the dead do fuffer,thae they be not caft into.eucrlafting fire. For-other- 
wife that fhould nor be truly {poken coricerning fome. That they {hall net be fores- 


nen neither inthss world , nor in the worldto. come: vnlefic there-were fome,whoal- sath. 
thoughthey haueno remiffionin this, yet might have it inthe wotld co come. 3? 


$63 | 


e 
a 
. 
~~ 
33, 


But when it fhalbe faid of rhe ludge of the quick, and the dead. Come yee bleed of rah 2 ; 


my father poffe(fe the Ksngdome prepared for you from the beginning of the world:and 34,41 


to others on the contrary, Depart from me, yee cur(fed into enerlaiting frewhich és 
prepared for the deatll, and his angells: it weretoo much prefumption to fay , that 


any of them fhould efcape euerlafting punifhment , whomehe Lord hath con- 


demned co eterhall torments, 8¢{6 goc about by the perfwafion of this prefunp- 


tion, either alfo co def{paire,or doubt of eternall life. Letno man therefore fovn- . 


derftand the Pfalmift,when he faith, ill God forget to hawe mersy,or will he fout op 


his louing kindneffe in di{plesfure : chat hee fuppofe that the fentence of GOD ig 277: 


true concerning the good , falfe concerning the wicked,or that it is true concer- 
ning good men, and cuill angells - bur concerning euill men to be falfe? For that 
which is recorded in the Pfalnie , belongeth to the veflells of. mercy ,and tothe 
fonnes of the promife, of which the Prophet himfelfe was one,who when he had 
fayd,will God forget to bane merey.: will he [but up his louing kindne(fe in difpleafwre? 
firaigth-way addeth And I fayd,it is maine pwne infirmity , {will remember the yeayes 
of the right band of the bigheft .Verely bee hath declared what hee meant by thefe 
words. Will the LO RD {but vp his losing kinducife in dé[pleafure ? For truely this 
morrall life , isthe difpleafure of God, wherein man is made like unto vanity and 


his dates pa(fe away like a fbadow .\n which difpleafure neuerthelefle G O D will wot Pal: 14,3 
forget to bee cratcous by caufing his funn: to [bine upcn the good, and the enslt,and the Stach, €.4; 
rane to fall vpom the inf, and vninft:and fo he doth not thut vp his louing kindnes 545. 


in difpleafure , and efpecially in that, which the pfalme expreffeth here faying, 
Iwill remember the yeares of the right hand of the highe/? : becaufe in this mot mi- 
ferable life,which is the difpleafure of God,he changeth the veflells of mercy in- 
to a better ftate,, alchough as yet his difpleafure remaineth in the mifery of this 
corruption: becaufe he doth not fhut vp his mercies in his difpleafure. When 
as therefore the verity of this divine fong may be fulfilled in this mariner, it isnot 
neceflary,that it fhould bee vnderftood of that place, where they which pertaine 


not to the Citty of GO D, (halbe punifhed with euerlafting punifhmenc. Bue | 


they which pleafeco ftretch this fentence euen ta thetorments of the damned, 


whichis dueto eternall punifhment, yet neuertheleffe that God doth not fhur 


' vphislouing kindneffe in this his heauy difpleafure,and caufeth tchemnotto 


bee cormented with fuch rigor of punifhments, as they haue deferued: [ Yet not 
fo that they may (6 )efcape, ] or at any time haue an end of thofe puni(h. 


ments ,jbuc chac they fhalbe more eafic then they haue deferned . For {o both. 
the wratch of GO D fhall remaine , and hee thall not fhut vppe hislouing: 


kindneffe in his difpleafure. But I doe not confirme this thing , becaufe Idoe 
not contradi& it. Do. ? a .t i" Ly ey 
Butnot onely J; butthe facred and dinine Scripture. doth reprone, andcon-. 


a 
9 
‘ 


- 


864. | SAINT AV GVSTINE. - . Canara 


uince them moft plainely and fullie, which thinke thatto bee {fpoken rather by 

Maths the way of threatning , then truely , whenitis faid. Depart from mee yee wicked, 
Apoc,2o #0 ewerlafteng fire ,and alfa. They {bal goe snto enerlefing punnillamens : and their 
Biaa,66 Worme {ball not die, andthe fire {hall net bee extinguifbedic>c. Forthe Niniuites 
Jonaz did fowes fraitfull repentance inthis life asin the field, in which G O D would hane 
that to bee fowne with teares , whith {bould aftereward bre poy with ioye. And 

yot who will deny chat to bee fulfiled in them which the LO R D had{poken be- 
fore,vaoleffe hee cannot well perceiue, that the Lord doth not onely ouerthrow 

finners in his anger, but likewife in his mercy ? for. fmmners araconfounded by 

two manner of waies , either as the Sodomits , that men fuffer punifhments for 

their finnes , or asthe Niniuits, chat the fins of men, beedeftroied by repenting. 

For Niniuy is deftroied which was euill , and good Niniuy is built , which was 

not.For the walls,and houfes ftanding ftil,the Cicty is ouerthrownein her wick- 

ed manners: And fo though the Prophet was gricued, becaufe that came notto 

paffe , which thofe men feared to come by his propehcy : neuerthelefle that was 
brought to paffe , which was fore.coid by the fore-knowledge of God: becaufe 

he knew, which had fore-fpoken it, how it was to be fulfilledin a better manner. 

~~” But that they may know who are mercifull towards an obftinat finner , what 
that meaneth which is written. How great,oh LO R Dts the multitude of thy fwect- 
neffe,which thou haf? hidden for them that feare thee 2 \ecthem alfo read that,which 
followeth . Bat thou halt performed it to them which hope in thee .For what is,Thos 

haft hidden for them which feare thee,Thou haft performed tothem which hope in thee: 

bu that the righreoufnefle of. GO Dis not {weet vnto them becaufe they know 

it not which eftabiith their owne rightecufnefle for the feareof punifhments, 

which righteoufneffe is inthe law 2 For they haue not tafted of it. For they 
hope in themfelues , not in him, and therefore the multicude of the fweetnefle of 

GO D is hidden vnto them, for truely they feare G O D but wich that feruile 
feare,which isnot in loue, becaufe perfect loue cafteth away feare. Therefore 

__ hee performerh his fweetneffeto them which hope in him by infpiring his loue 
intothem,that when they glory with chafte feare,not in that which leue cafteth 

away ,out which remaineth for euer and cuer , they may glory in the LOR D. 

1Cors, For Chriftis the righteoufnefle of God. who unto us of GOD, (asthe Apofile 
30 faith ) #s made wifdome,andrighteou{neffe , and fanctification,and redemption . That 
as itis written. Let him which reioyceth ,reioyce sa the LO RD. They which will 

oo *% eftablith their owne righteoufneffe, know noc this righteoufneffe , which grace 
doth giue without merrits , and therefore they are not fubie& to the righteonf 

nefle of GOD whichis CHRIST. Inwhich righteoufneffe there is greata- 

Pfal.34,8 , bundance of the fweetnefle of GO D, wherefore it is fayd inthe Pfalme: Taffe 
Andee how focet the Lord is . And weetruely hauing atafte , and not our fill of ie 

in this our pilgrimage,doe rather hunger, and thirft after it,that wee may bee fa- 

tifhed with it afterward,when we feehim as he is, and that fhaibe fulfilled which 

Pala7,15 iswritten. J {balbe fatisfied when thy glory [balbe manifefted. SoC HRI S Tef- 
>”? fe@eth great abundance of his {weetnefle to thofe which hope in him. Burif 

God hidethat {weetneffe which they thinke to bee theirs for them which feare 

him , becaufe hee willnot condemne the wicked , that not knowing this thing, 

and fearing to be damned they might liue well,and fo there may bee fome which 

may pray for the wicked, how chen doth hee performeitto them which hope in 

him ? feeing,that,as they dreame, by this fweetneffe he will not condemne them 

which doe not hope in him. Therefore let vs feeke that fweetneffe of his , which 

3 he 


~s 


Lis at OF THE GITIE OF GOD. 865 


he performeth to them which hope in him, and not that which hee is thought to 
effe&vnto them which contemne and blafpheme him. (c) In vaine therefore 
man inquireth that,when he is departed olst of the body which hee.hath neglee- 
tedto obraine to himfelfe beeing in the bodies ‘That faying alfo of the Apoftle,, 


(d) For God hath [hut vp all in vibeliefe,ghat he may bane mercy on all,is noc fpoken 


to that end chat he will condemae none, but it appearech before in what {enceit 
was {poken . For when as the Apoftle fpake vnto the Gentiles,to whom now be- 
leeuing he wrote his Epiitles,concerning the lewes, who fhould afterward be, 
leeue: 4s yee, (faith hee)és time paft hawe not belecueaGOD. Tet now haue obtained 
mercy through their vabeliefe :euen fo now haue they not beleeucd by the mercy fbew- 
ed-unto yom, that they may alfo obtaine mercy. Then he addsth,whereby they flat- 


ter themfelues in their errors,and fayth, For GO-D hath {hus uppe ail in unbeliefe, Rom.11.33 


that hee may haue mercy on all. Who are they ail,but they of whom he did fpeake, 
faying, as it were Both yee and they? Therefote G OD hath fhutvp both Gen- 
tiles,and Iewes all in vnbeliefe , whom hee fore-knew, and predeftinated to bee 
made hike the Image of his Sonnes that.besing afhamed and caft downe by re- 
penting for the bitterneffe of their vnbeliefe; andconuerted by belécuing, vato 
the {weetnefle of the mercies of GO D, might proclaime that in the Pfalme. 


How great is the multstude of thy furcetne([e,Oh Lord, which thon haft laid up for Phat 


them which feare thee:but halt performed tt to thews which hope, not tn them-felues,but 


ga thee. Therefore he hath mercy o# 44 the veflells of mercy , What meaneth of 


all ? That is to fay of thofe of the Gentiles,and alfo of thole of she lewes whom 

hee hath predeftinated, called, niftified, glorified, not of all men 5 and will con- 
demne none of thofe. | | 

| ~L. VIVES. | } , 

EF Or (a) fome departed this life.\1n the ancient bookes printed at Bruges and Coline, thofe 

cenne or twelue lines which follow are not to bee found : for it is written in this manner, 

For the prayer either of the Church or of fome godly perfons is heard for fome departed this 


life,but for them whofe life hath not beene {pent fo wickedly being regenerate in Chrift,cée. 
Thofe things which follow are not extant in them, neither in the copies printed .¢t Friburge. 


‘Neuer-the-leffe the ftile is not diffonant from eAnguffines phrafe } peraduenture they are 


eyther wanting in fome bookes, or elfe are added heere out of fome other worke of Ang 
jftine,as the firft Scholion, afterward adioyned to the context of the fpeech, Yet not fo that they 


. may(b) efcape.| The particle of negation is to bee put formoft, that. wee may read it, yet 


not fo that they may vnder-goe thofe punifhments at any time. Jn vaine (¢) therefore man} 
In the Bruges copie it is read thus. In vaine cherefgredoth man inquire that after this body 
which hee hath negleéted to get in the body. (4) For GO D hath fous up ail in unbelecfe] 
Commonly wee read all things in the Greeke warras, that is to fay, all men. Paul fignifieth 
that no man hath any occafion to boaft chat hee is glorious ynto GO D by his owne merits, 
but chat it is wholy to be attributed to the goodneffe and bounty of G O D. 


whether that fuch as beeing baptized by heretiques become wicked in life,or amongit 
Catholiques ,and then fall away into herefies and |chifmes , or continarne 
among it Catholiques be of vicious conaer{atton,can haue any hope of 
efcapsng damuation,by the priviledge of the Sacraments. 
HAP. 12. - 
N Ow let vs anfwerthofe; who doe both exclude the deuills from faluation, 
Eceée | (as 


th, 30, 


i aN 


366 


toh,6 


x Cor,; 


SAINT AV GVSTINE. C uHap.le 


(asthe other before doc ) andalfo all men befides whatfoeuer , excepting fuch 
as are baptizedinC HRIST, andmaie pertakers.of his body and bloud, and 
thefe they will haue faued , bee cheir liues neuer fo {potted by finne or herefie. 
But the Apoftle doth plainely controll chem., faying , The workes of the flefh are 
mantfef which are adultery , fornication, vacleaune(e, wantonne(fe, Idolatry ,ce. 
and fach like whereof Itellyou now as I told you before that they which doe re things 
foall not inherite the Kingdome of GOD. This were falfe now , if that fuch 
men fhould become Saints , at any time whatloeuer . Bur this is crue fcripture, 
and therefore chat fhall neuer come co pafle. And if they bee neuer made 
pertakers of the ioyes of heauen ,then (hall chey bee ever -more bound in the 
paines of hell , for there is no medium, wherein hee that.is not in bliffe, mighe 
haueaplacefreefromrorment. - | Le ues “GS 

And therefore it is firte, wee: fee how our Sauiours words may bee vnder- 
ftood, where hee fayth:: This ss the bread that come downe from heauen that hee 
that cateth of it, fbould not die. Lam the lywing bread which came. downe from bea- 
nen ,éf any man cate of this bread , hee {ball hue for eucr Ge. . Thole whome wee 
muft anfwere by ard by., haue' gattenan interpretation for thefe places , fome- 
what more reftrained then thofe whome wee are to anfwere at this: prefent. 
For tho‘e other doc not promifedeliuery to all that receive the Sacraments, 
bn onely to the Catholikes ( of what manner -:of life foeuer )for they onely 
are thofe that receiue the bodieof CHRIST, not onely facramencally , buc 
truclie alfo, ( fay they) as becing the true members of his bodie , whereof 
the Apoftle faith , wee that are many are one bread and. one bodie. Hee therefore 
that is in this vnity of CHRIS TS members in one bodie, the facramenc 


whereof the faitbfull doe daylie communicate, hee is truely fayd to receiue 


the bodie , and todrinke the bloud of CHRIST. So that Heretiques and 
Schifmatiques whoare cut off from this bodie, may indeed receiue the {ame 
Sacrament , but it doth them no good ,bura great dealeof hurt, in that great 
iudgement, where it will both make their paines moreheauy,and their continu- 
anceeternall, For they are notin that vnity of pedce,which is expreffed (4) in 
this Sacrament. , a i > 

But now thefe that can obferue,that hee that is not in CHRIS T,cannoe 
receiue his body cruely,doe ouer-fhoore themfelues in promifing abfolution ( at 
onetime or other) to all the feGators of fuperftition, Idolatry , or herefie. Firft, 
becaufe they ought to obferue how abfurd , and farre from all likely-hood 
itis , that thofe( bee chey more or leffe ) that haue lefe the church and be- 
come arch-heretiques , fhould bee in better eftare then thofe whome they 


-haue feduced to bee heretiques with them, beforethat they were Catholikes, 


and inthe church , if to bee baptized , and co receiue CHRISTS bodyin 
the church, bee the caufes of thofe arch-heretiques oe Foran Apoffata, 
an oppofer of the faith hee hath once profeffed , is worfe then hee that op- 
pofeth what hee didneuer profefle . Secondly ,in that the Apoftle himfelfe 
controlleth them , concluding of the workes of the fieth , chat, They which 


doe fuch things {hall not inherite the Kingdome of GO D. 


Let notfinners therefore,and wicked men , fecurethemfelues by their conti- 
nuance inthe church,in chat ic is written . He that endureth to the end,hee {balbe fa- 
sedsnor by their iniquity renounce Chrift,their iuftice,in committing fornicati- 
on, and either allor any part of thofe flefhly workes which the Apoftlere- 

| a a counteth, 


4 
Sa EE a 
e 


Linare |... OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 867 


counteth , or fuch vncleaneffes as hee would not name: for of allfuch ghee 


faith expreflely , they {hall not snberite the Kingdome of GOD. Wherefore the 
idoers.of fuch deeds cannot but bec in eternall paines , inthat they are excluded 


_, from the euerlafting ioyes. For this kinde of perfeuerance of theirs, isno per- 


fouerance in C H R IST, becaufe it isnot a trite perfeuerance in his faith which 
the Apoftle defineth , to'bee/ach 43 worketh by loue. Andloue (ashee fayth elfe- 
where ) worketh not entli. Sochen'thefeare no true receiuersof CHRISTS 
bodie , in that they are none of his true members . For (to omit other allega- 
tions ) they cannot bee both the members of CHRIST and the members 


_ ofanharlor.And CHRIST himfelfe faying hee that eateth my ficlh and drink- os 
eth my blond,dwelleth in me cy 1 in him, theweth whatit is to receiue Chrift (not 


Ich.6, 
onely facramentally , but truely : for thisis to dwell ix Chrift andchrift in him. 

For thus hee fpoke as if heehadfayd Hee that dwelleth not in mee,nor Lin him, 
cannot fay hee eateth my fic , or drinketh my bloud . They therefore thacare 

not membersof CHRIST, are notin him ; they that make themfelues che 
members of an harlot, areno members of CHRIST, vnleffe they purgea- 

way their badneffe by repentance , and returne to his goodnefle by atrue recon- 
ciliation. : . | 


— L. VIVES. . 


Brpefed (4) in this facrament. | For all pertake of one bread, which is a great bond of ynie - 
“ty. Againe , chis myfticall bread is made of many graines of corne, loofing their roper 
formes to bee all incorporated into one maffe or body. So,many are receiued into the choce 
atid at their.entrance, they put off cheir owne proper enormities,and being linked to the sa 
in loue,and charity,feeme now no more what they were before , but are incorporate into one 
body, the church, Baptifme maketh vs both bretheren , and one alfo: and mutual} charity giu- 
eth forme, collour, tafte,and perfection to the whole body , Sothat there could not haue bin 
giuen amore hit type of the Church, then chat which CHR IST gauc in his inftitution, | 


What it isto bane CHRIST for the foundation: who they are, 
that {balbe fawed(as st were by fre. _ i. 


Cuap. 26. 


| Pe chriftian Catholiques (fay they) haue CHRIS T for their foundation; 
from whom they fell not, though they built badly vpon ic, in refemblance of 


“timber, ftraw , and ftubble. So char faich is true, which holds CHRIS T the 


foiindation,and though it beare fome loffe, in that the things which are built vp- 
on it,burne away, yet hath it power to faue him that holdeth ic, (after fome time 
of fuffrance. ) Burlee Saint James anfwere thefe men ina words Jf 2412 fay hee 
hath faith and haue noworkes , can the faith faue him?\Who then is that (fay they) * 
of whom Saint Pasl fayth: Hee fhalbe fafe himfelfe , nenertheleffe (as it were’) - 
by fre > well,wee will fee who thatis : but furely it is no fuch as thefe would haue_ 
it,for elfe, the Apoftles condradi@ one another. For if one faith, though a man 


* bane linedwickedly ,yet [ball hee bee faned by faith shraugh fire: and the other, if hee 


bane no workes,can his fayth fawe him?Then fhall we foone find who ic is that fhalbe 
faned by fire; if firftofall,wee finde — isto haue Chrift for the foundation. 
cece? To 


cae Rare eA CD ELIDA L LALA LLL LALO LITT A AO 
868 SAINT AVGVSTINE. Crise 


Torgather which, firft,from the nature ofthe fimyly,there is no worke in building 
before the foundation. Now euery onehathC HRIS T inhis heart chus farre, 
that his affect of cermporall things, (and fome-times of things volawfull ) ftill 
retendeth Chriftfor the foundation thereof. But ifhee preferre thefe things 
es CHRIST, though hee feeme to hold his faycth, yet CHRIST isno 
foundation vnto him, inthat hee preferres thofe vanities before him. And if 
hee both contemne good inftru@ions , and ptofecute badde actions , how much 
the fooner fhall hee bee conuinced to fet Chriftat nothing,cto efteeme him at no 
value in vainer refpects, by negli@ing his command and -allowance , and in pre- 
varication of ‘both, following his owne luftfull exorbitanices : wherefore, if any 
sCor6  chriftianioue an harlot , and become one body with her by coupling with her hee hath 
not Chrift for his foundation. And if aman louc his wife , according to Chrift, 
who can denie but that hee hath Chrift for his foundation? Admit his loue 
bee carnall , worldly , concupifcentiall , as the Gentiles loued , that knew not 
Chrift: all this the Apoftle doth beare with , and therefore ftill may Chrift bee 
fuch a mans foundation. For.if hee preferre not thefe carnall affe@s before 
Chrift , though hee build ftraw and ftubble vpon his foundation , yet Chrift is 
that ftill, and therefore fuch aman fhalbe faued by fire. For the fire of tribulati- 
onthall purge away thofe carnall and worldly affe@ions , which the bond of 
marriage doth acquit from beeing damnablezand vnto this fire, all the calamities 
accidenc inthiskinde, as, barrennefle, lofle of children, &c. haue reference, 
And in this cafe, heethat buildeth thus , fhallloofe , becaufe his building thall 
not laft , and thefe loffes fhall grieve him in chat. their fruition did delighe 
him. Yet fhall the worth of his’ foundation faue him, in thatif the perfecu- 
cour , fhould put it to his. choice , whether hee would haue Chrift, or thefe his 
- delights, hee would choofe Chrift, and leaue all che reft. Now fhall you heare 
Saine Pew! defcribea builder vpon this foundation with gold , filuer , and. 
Con7,32 precious ftones. The vamaried (faithhee ) careth for the things of the L OR D,: 
howhee maypleefe the LORD .And now for him that buildeth with wood , ftraw 
and ftubble . Hee that is married, careth for the things of the world, how hee may 

1Co:.3 pleafe his wife. Eucry mans worke {halbce made manife/t, for the day of the LO R D {hall 
declare it , that is the daie of tribulation , for , ic fhalbe reucaled by the 
fire. : , 8 & 

Fcbsy ._—«Whis tribulation hee calleth fire, as wee reade alfo.in another place . The fur- 
nace proucth the potters veffell,and fo doth the temptation. | of tribulation | trie mans 
thoughts. So then, the fire fhalltriceuery mans worke : and if any worke 
abyde ( as his will , that careth for the things of the LORD, and how to 
pleafe him ) hee {hall recetue wages , that is , hee fhall receiue him, of whome 
the thought ,and for whome hee cared. But if any mans worke burne bee {hall 
loofe :becaufe hee fhall not haue his delights that hee loued; yet fhall hee bee. 
fafe , in that hee held his foundation, maugre all tribulation : but as it were 
by fire , for that which hee poffefied in alluring loue , hee fhall forge with © 
afflicting forrowe. This ( thinkeI ) is the fire, that fhall enritch the one 
and endamage the other , trying both , yet condemning neither . If wee fay 
that the firefpoxen of heere is that whereof CHRIST fpaketo thofe onhis 
left hand , Depart from mee yee curfed into enerlafting fire; and that all fuch 
as buildedtymber, ftrawe, and ftubble vpon their foundation , are part of the 
fayd curfed , who notwithftanding after a time of torment , are to bee de- 


Leos. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. | 865 


dclinered by the merit oftheir foundation; then can wee noc thinke that thofe on 
the right hand, towhome hee {hall fay , Come you bleffed', exc. Areany other fa- 
uing thofe thar built gold , filuer and precious ftones vppon the {aid foundation. 
Bucthis fire of which the A poftle fpeaketh , fhall bee as a tryall both to che good 
andthe bad: both thall pafle through it,for the word faysh,Ewery mans warke {hil * Cor.g, 
bee made manifeft for the day of the Lord [ball declare tt becanfe it [bal bee rewealed by '3' 
she fyre,ana the fire {ball try enery mans worke of what fort it is. Ifthe fire trye both, 
andhethat hath an abiding worke,be rewarded,and hee whofe worke fhal burne, 
fhall bee indamaged,then cannot this be that euerlafting fire, For inco that thall 
noneenter buithe curfed , ontheleft hand , in the laft indgement, whereas the 
bleffed fhall paffe through this, wherein fome of them fhalbe fo tryed, that theie 
building fhall abide vnconfumed , and other-fome fhall haue their worke burned, 


' and yet fhalbee Gued them-felues,in that their loue vnto Chri? exceeded al their 


carnallimperfeQions. And ifthey bee faued, then fhall they ftand on Chriffes 
right hand,and fhall bee part of thofe to whome it fhall bee faid, Come you bleffed 
of my father inherite the kingdome, Gc. and not on the left hand amongft the cur- 


’ {ed,to whome it fhall bee fayd, Depart from me, crc. For none of thefe fhall be fa- 
. sted by fie¢jbuc all of them fhall be bound for ever in that place where the worme 


9 


neuer dyeth, there fhall they burne world without end. Butas for the timebe- .. -<: 


aweene the bodily death,and the latt iudgement , ifany one wf that the {piritsof | 
the dead areall chat while tryed in fuch fire as neuer moucth thofe that hauenor 
built wood,ftraw,or ftubble,affliding onely {uch as haue wroughr {uch workes, 


. dyther hete, or there,or bochsor that mans worldly affects ( beeing veniall) fhal] 


‘paffe the purging fire of tribulation onely in this world , and not ia the others if 
any bold thus,I contradi& him not,perhaps he may hold the rruth.To this tribu- 


- ation alfo may belong the death of body, drawne from our firft parents finne, 


_ and infliGed-vppon cach man fooner,or later according to his building, So may 


_dlfothe Churches perfecutions, wherein the Martyrs were crowned , an¢all che 


ech afflided: For thefe calamities (like fire ) tryed both forts ofthe rote 
tag 


. confuming borh workes and worke-men , where they found ‘not Chrife for 


foundation 3 and confuming the workes onely ( and fauing the worke-mea by 


vhis loffe) where they did finde him, and fiubble,erc. built vppon him::.but. wherg | 


they found workes remayning to eternall life, there they confiumed noghing ac 
. . all: Now in rhelaft dayes ; in che time of Antichrifte fhall be fuch a perfecuti- 


on'as never.was before: And many buildings both of gold and &tubble,being all 
founded vppon Chriffe ,fhall then bee tryed by this fire, which will recurne ioy 
d@afome , and loffe to others , and yet deftroy none of chem by reafon of theic 
arnsefoundation. But whofoeuer hee bee, that loueth (Ido nor fay his wife,with 
carnall affeGion , but euen {uch fhewes of pyety as arevtter alliens from this 


 Senfuality , with. {uch.a blinde defire that hee preferrerh them before Chréff, io 


thisman hath not Chrs/ for his foundation,and therefore {hail neither bee faued 


by fire,nor ocherwife, becaufe hee cannot beeconioyned with Chrif, who faith 


playnely of fach men,Hee that loueth father or mother more then me , is viworthy of Mat, 16; 
me. And ke that louethfonne or daughter more then me,is not worthy of mee. Buchee 
rhat loueth chem carnally ,& yet preferreth Chr#? for his foundation,and hadra- 

ther loofe them all then Chréft,if hee were driuentothe loffe ofone , fuchaman 

fhall bee faned, but as it were by fire , that is his.griefe in the loofing ofthem 
snuftneedes bee as great as his delight was in enioying them. Bat bee that lowes 
father mother, oc.according toChrsff, to bring them vnto his Kingdome,or bee 

z - Eeee 3 delighted 


ecaresereersemceeseocmcc nthe SS OSS Se SO 
$70 "SAINT AVGVSTINE. | — Cuaray 


delighted in them becaufe they are the members of Chrif , this loue fhall neuer 
burne away like wood, ftraw, ftubble,but thail ftand as a building of gold, filuer, 
and precious ftones:for how can aman loue thar, more then Chr:/?,which helo- 

ueth for Chriftes fake onely. 3 


L. VIVES. 


"THe day of ( a )the Lord | Where-vnto all fecrets are referred , to be reuealed, and there- 
fore they are worthy of reprehenfion that dare prefume to cenfure aéts that are doubrfull 
and demonttrable onely by conieCtures,feeme they neuer fo bad, | | 


’] 
- . o - age oom oe 


Mgainft thefe that thinke thofe finnes {hall not be laid to their 
- charzewhere-with they mixed fome workes of - mercy. 


ow 


Cap, 27. 


| 1 Ow a word with thofe that hold none damned but fuch as negle& to doe 
lan, 2.43. 4 ¥ workes of mercy worthy of their finnes;becaufe S. Zemes faith There fballbe 
indgement mercyleffe to bim that [beweth xo mercy:he checfore that doth thew mer- 
cy/fay they)be his life never fo burdened with fin and corruptien, fhal notwith- 
ftanding haue a mercyful iudgement, which wil cither acquit him from al paines, 
or at leaft'deliuer him after atime of fufferance.And this made Chri(t diftinguith ° 
the'ele&t from the reprobate only by their performance,and not performance of 
works of mercy ,the one wherof is rewarded with euerlafting ioy , and the other 
with eternal pain:and as for their daily fins, that they may be pardoned through 
thefe workes of 'mercy,the Lords praier ({ay they )doth fufficiently proue: for as 
there is no daie wherin a chriftian faich not this praier, fo likewife is ther no dai- 
ly fin buc is pardoned when we fay, 4nd forgine us onr trefpaffes as we forgine thens 
that trefpas againft us if we performthis later claufe accordingly:for Chréf (faie — 
they) did not fay vs ge forgine men their trefpaffes , your heanenly father will forgiue 
you your mal and daily ones,but he faid generally, hee will forgine gon yours. Bee they 
therfore neuer fo great,neuer fo ordinary,neuer fo continual, yet works of mercy 
wil wafh them al away: wel,they do wel in giuing their aduice,to perform works 
of mercy worthy of their fins:for if they fhould haue faidthat any works of mer- 
cy may obrein pardon for the greareft and moft cuftomary fins, they fhould bee 
pulty of much abfardity.for fo might the richeft man for his(4)ten pencea day, 
auea daily quittance for al his fornications, homicides, and ocher fins whatfo- 
— euer: But if it be an abfurdity beyond comparifonto affirm this,then queftionles 
x3! if we make inquiry what thofe works are that are worthy of pardon for fin , and 
wherof S. Joba Bapté(t {pake,faying, Bring forth therfore fruits worthy of amendmis 
of life,affuredly we fhal find that fuchas {tab their owne foules by continuall fio, — 
* Raue no fuch works as are meant of inthis place : firft becaufe they dotakevio- 
lently from others far more then they be{tow charitably on the poore,and yet in 
beftowing alittle, they thinke they teed Cérift()and purchafe liberty of finning 
from him:thus run they carelefly vpon their damnation,who if they thould giue 
away al their whole eftate vnto the poore members of Chrift to redeem oneon- _ 
ly finne , yet if loue that dothno euil did not reftrainethem from any more fueh 
cenormities they fhould hereby reapeno good arall: he therfore that will sa 
; 3 : is 


a —— ee. — ll Virsa 


& 


Lis.as. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 


his fins by his works , muft begin firft at him-felf:for it is vnfit to do that to our 


Sor 


Mat.23. 


neighbour which wewilnot do to our felfe,Chrift himfelfe faying thon fbalt lowe Eccl. 30, 


weighbour. as thy felfe: andagaine , Lone thzne owme foule ( éf tho wisi pleale God) 


he cherefore that doth not this worke of mercy ( that is the pleafing of God ) co Echt: 


his owne foule , how can hec bee faid to do workes of mercy {afticient to re- 
deeme his finnes ? for itis written , Hee that is wicked to him-felfe to whome will hee 


bee good? far alme/dsedes do lift up the prayers of men to God. What faith the Scrip- 


tures ? Ay fonne, h/t thou finned? dofo no more, but pray for thy fisnes paft, that they 


| may bee forgiven tee, for this caufe therefore muft wee do almefdeeds , chat 
when we pray , our prayer may bee heard, shat wee may leave our former vices, 


and obtayne refrefhment for our felues by thofe workes of mercy. Now Chrift 
faith chathee will impute the doing and omiffion of almefdeeds vnto cthofe of 
the iudgement , to fhew how powerfull they are to expiate offences paft, nor 


to proteat the continuers in finne , for thofe that willnot abiure the courfes 


of impiety, cannot bee fayd to performe any workes of mercy. And thefe 


— words of Chrift; Jn a much as you did tt not unto one of thefe, youdid tt not 
unto me, imply that they did no fuch workes as they imagined ; for if they. 


gaue bread vnio the hungred Chriftian, as if it were vnto Chrift him-felfe; 
for GOD careth not to whome yeu give, but with what intent you giue. 
Hee therefore that loueth Chrift in hi, members, giveth almes with intent to 
joytie him-felfeco Chrift, not that hee may have leaue to leaue him without 


Ecel.22. 


Mat2 $45 


being punifhed , for the more one loueth what Chrift reproucth , the farther yon 
of doth he depart from Chritt, for what profitech Baptifme vnieffe iuftifica- _ 
— tion follow it-2 doth not heethae fayd, Vuleffe 4 man bee borne againe of water 


and of the fpirit, hee {ball not enter snto the Kingdome of GOD; fay allo, valeffe 
your righteon{ne(fe exceed the raghteon{ne(fe of the Scribes and Pharifes, yee {ball 
not enter into the Kingdome of heauen?'why, do men runne to Baptifme for 


~ feare of the firft, and do not draw neare to -righteoufneffe for feare of the later? 


Therefore as hee thac checketh his brothers finne, in charity, by-telling him 
hee is.a foole, notwithftanding all this, is not guilty of Hellfire : fo, on the 
other fide, hee that loueth noc Chrift in his members, giueth no almestoa 


Chriflian ( as vntoa Chriftian) thoughhe ftretch forth his hand vnto oneof _ 


Chrifts poore members : and hee that refufethto bee iuftifiedin Chrift , doch 
notloue Chriftin any refpea. | 

But ifone call his brother foole, in reprochfull contempt, rather chen with 
intent toreforme his imperfection, all the almefdeeds this man can do, will 
neuer benefic him, vnigffe hee bee reconciledto him whome he hath iniured, 
for ic followeth in the fameplace. Jf then thou bringe/t thy guift unto the altar, 
and there remembreft that thy brother hath onght agaswft thee, leaue there thine of- 
fring, and go thy way: firft be reconcyled to thy brother and then come and offer thy 


- wif. Sothat itis nothing worth to do workes of mercy to expiate any finne, 


and yet tocontinue inthe finne till. As for the Loras prayer, it doth indeed bloc 
out our dayly finnes, it being dayly faid, nd forg ine vs our tye/paffes, 1€ withall 
the following claufe bee not onely faid , but performed alfo. As wee forgine 
them that trefpa(fe againit vs. Bur indeed , wee fay this prayer becaufe weedo 
finns , notthat wee might finne , for Our Sasiour fheweth vs in this, that liug 
weeneuer fo carefull of fhunning corruption , yetdo wee euery day fallinta_ 
fome finnes for the remiffion of which we oughtboth to pray , and to pardon 


fuch as haue offended vs , that weeimay be pardoned our {elues. . : 
Eece4 Where- 


Mat.g, 


872 SAINT AVGVSTINE. ~ Caur.29 


Wherefore Chrift faith not this, Jf yee forezne men their tre/paffes , your. heauenly 
father wil alfo forgive you yours to giughope to any man co perfeuer in daily crimes 
(whether we be borne out by authority ,or commit them by fleighr and furtlety:) 
'" butto inftrué vs , that we are not without finne , though wee may hee without 
crime, as God aduifed the priefts in the Old-Testament firft to offer for their owne 
 finnes,and then for the peoples.Let vs marke thefe words of our great Lord andmai- 
feer with attenticn and diligence. He dothnot fay , your heasezty father vsh for- 
gine you any finne whatfoeuer but,he will forgive you yours,for in this place he taught 
_ his difciples ( being already iuftified ) their daily prayer , what meaneth he then 
by this fame ( yours) but fuch finnes as the righteous themfelues cannot be with- 
out 2 wherefore whereas they that would hereby take occafion tocantinue infin, 
~ affirme that Chrift meant the greateft fins, becaufe he faid not , your femeller jinnes, 
but yours én generall: wee onthe contrary fide confidering vnto whome he {pake, 
-dovnderftand his words to concerne {mall finnes onely , inthat chey.to whome 

CU they were fpoken were now cleared of their greater. | a 
| '’ Nor aré chofe great Yinnes indéed ( which euery one ought ro reforme 
him-felfe, and avoyde ) euer fcrgiuen, vnleffe the guilty do fulfill the forefaid 
claufe , ds we forgine them that trefpa(fe againft vs , for if the leaft fianes ( where- 
“ vato the righteous chem-felues are prone’) cannot bee remitted but vpon that 
condition ,then muchleffe fhall the great and Criminous ones hauethis pardon, 
though they that vfed thém , do ceafe cher further practife , if they continue in- 
Mae. ¢xorable in forgiuing {nch as haue offended them, for the Lord faith , Jf yee do not 
| forgine men their tre[paffes , 10 more willyour. Heanenly father forgine you your trefq 
pajes. And Sacnt Iameshis words are to the fame purpofe: there fhalbe iudgment 
_mercile(fe to him that fLeweth no mercy..Remember but the feruant whome his 
 maifter pardoned ofa debt of 10000. talents,and yet made him to lie for it after- 
‘wards, becaufe he would not forgiue his fellow a debt but of an hundred pence. 
Wherefore inthe veffells of mercy; and the fonnes of promife the fame Apoftles 
words are truely effeCted, mercy reioyceth againft ( or aboue ) indeement , for thofe 
that liued fo holily that they receiued others into the euerlaiting habitations, 
who had made them their friends with the riches of iniquity ; they themfelues 
werediliuered by his mercy who iuftifieth the finner by rewarding him accor- 
ding'to grace, not according to merit. He that profefied chis , / was receiued to 
mercy ( that Insight bee one of the faithfull) was one of this inftified number. Indeed - 
fuch as are receiued by this number into che euerlafting habitations, are noc of 
that merit that they could bee faued without the interceffion of the Church tri- 
_ umphant,and therefore in them doth mercy more euidgngly eleuate it felfeaboue 
ludgement. Yet may wee not thinke that euery wigked man ( being without re- 
formation ) can bee admitted thether , though hee haue beene beneficial tothe 
Saints and afforded them helpes from his riches , which whether heehad gotten 
by finifter mearies,or otherwife, yet are no true riches(but only in the choughrs 
of iniquity ) vnto him , becaufe he knoweth not the true ricches wherewith they 
abound that helpe {ich as he is into thofe ccernall manfions. Wherefore there 
muft bee a cercaine meane inthe lines of fuch mercy that it bee neither {o bad, 
that the almef deeds done vnto thofe who being made friends to the doers,may 
| _ helpecthem to Heauen be altogether fruitleffe, nor yet fo good , chat their owne 
fancticy without the mercies and fuffrages of thofe whom they haue made there 
friends , can poffefle them of fo hie a beatirude. Now I haue often wondred 
Luke,g — thatVérgill(hould haue vp this fentence of Chrift,Adske yon friends of the ritches 


of 


Pacer OF THE CITIE OF GOD. ) 873 


- 


. of iniquity, that they way receive you into the eherlisting habitations. Where ynto 

ne ane ; a . Lue.1 6.9. 
‘ this is much like. He that recetueth a Prophet in the name of a Prophet , {ball haue 4 ya to.44. 
: Prophets reward,crt. for this Pact, th deferibing of the (c) Elyfian fields., which 

: they held the blefled foules'ro inbabite ,doth. not onely place thofetherewhofe = 

i, proper merits haue de ferued I>, bye _alfo, a deth, this 1 QMGs fi ut memores altos Pea 
= fecére merendo that is,{uch asre{peching sheiz owine future eftatc deferued-to be ae 


7 remembred by thdfe others. TuGsds.if: hee had faid,as ‘eutry:-humble Chriftian 
faith commonly in commending hit felfero-fome holy m4y-ot other. Remember 
; me,and endevoureth toprocurathis femembrante by defer. Bur what the meane 
is here,and what thofe finnes are.which hiedenaman-from heauen ,and yet are 
remitted by the interceffion-of.b¥eholy friends; ic, is both difficult to finde,and 
dangerous to determine. I hauefewght thus long my Jelfe ; and yet could neuer 
finde them out. Perhaps they are concealed to ftitre vs the rather to auoyde all 
finne. For if we knew for what finnéS we might expec the interceffion of Saints, 
our naturall idlenefle would diawe vs‘on fecurely in them, and make vs reliefo 
wholy vpon the helpe of others,thde wee fhould neuer feeke to auoyde them by 
reforming our felues,but truft oriely tg thofe our friends whom wee had proai- 
red by the vnrighteous Afammon s whereas now, although eur veniall finne con- 
tinue with vs,and in what meafyre we know nor, yet our {tudy.to profit by pray- 
er,is both more feruent,and our defire ta win vs friends of the Saiats, better per- 
formed. But boththefe deliueries, both by our felues and others, tend wholly to 
keepe ¥s outof the fre eternall,notto free vsafter we once beein it.For fuchas 


by, e@ i 


interpret that place of fcripturcs Some fell in good ground, and brought forth Puite, Mat.13, 


. fome thirty-fold, fome fixty, fome ‘ak hundreds by the Saints , according to 'the di- 
: verfiry Uf their mérige , that fome fhould deliver chirty men, fome fixty,fomea 
: hundred, never-the-Jefle doe fuppofe that this deliuery thall. bee at the iudgment, 
< ) r . : * 


and not after it. By which opinion one obferuing what occafion diuerfetooke to: 
i live in all loofeneffe and exorbicance, fuppofing that by this meanes all men 


“ might be faued,is faid to giue this witty anfwer: ce onght for this caufe rather te 
es line uprightly to increafe the number of the interceffors Jeaft otherwife there [hould be 
Y fofew,that ewery one might faue his thirty his fexty, or his hundred, and yet an infinite 
fe company might remaine vnfaued: of which,why might not he beone that noufled 
ph him-felfe in his rath hope of helpe fromanozher? And thus much againft thofe 
hes who not contemning the authority of our Scriptures , doe not-with-ftanding 
af wrelt them to euill meanings , following their owne fantafies, and not the holy 
o ghofts true intention. But fince we haue giuen them their anfwer, we muft now, 
i ~~ (as we promifed) giue an endo this prefent volume. 

L. VIVES. 


H* (a) ten pence | Behold here Saint Auguftine reckneth ten pence a day fora fmall almes : 
but how many haue we now that giue fo much ? how many potentates fee you giue foure 
pence a day to the poorc: nay they thinke much with apeny or two pence,But after the Dice, 
let Ducates goe by thoufands, their fooles and iefters fhall haue fhowers of their beneficence ~ 
pewred vpon them, ‘tis a great mans part,an embleame of Nobleffe : but aske them a peny for 
? Chrifts fake,and they are either as mute as ftones , or grieue at the fight of the guift they part: 
mM from. Refpect of vertue now is low laid. (4) They aes So you fhall haue diuerfe, take 
wt vp freely they care not where,nor of whom,nor in what fafhion;and then breake,turne coun- 
‘ terfeite banquerupts, and fatife their creditours with ten at the hundred , and thinke they 
haue made a good hand of it,and fhall redeeme all with alittle almes, O fooles that thinke thas 
Ged 


4 


674 


SAINT.AVGVSTINE. - Cuaray, 


God is taken with pence! no,it is the, minde that hee refpectech, fuch as is refident onely in ho- 


~ neft brefts. ae 


- Theeucs and villaines haue now and then money good ftore, and difperfe it bountrfully. But 


let no man truftin his wealth, or to purchafe heauen with a peece of filuer, (¢ ) Tbe Elyfian 
fields | Sernins deriuesthe name from avwis, a diffolution of the foule from the body. Where 
thefe fields are it is yncertaine. P/ate placeth them in the firmament, full of all delights that 
can bee ‘imagined. Others place ‘theth in the hollow {pheare of the: Moone (Serv.) where 
the ayre is pure, and vndifjurbed, Of this opmion Lucene feemeth to bee. Pharf.9. Pythage- 
ras alfo, and Plato were of opinion thar, this part of the. ayre was inhabited with Demones, 
Demi-geds and Heroes. Heare what Lucane faith of the fpirit of Pompey: 


— Sequitur conmexatenantis, 
Qua niger aftriferis connettitior axtbus tit, 
| Quod, pares terras-inter Jupaduemeates, | - 
Semidey 


of manes babitant ques ignes virtus 


_ Tnnocnes vita patientes.etheris imi ot 
Fecit,& aternes avimam collegit in iguese 
; , ; ar cs 


—~———— Vp to that round it hyes, | tts Taal 
Where the. rm i re doth kiffe che {pangled skies, 

For in that region twixt the Moone and ys, 
The Demi-gods, and fpirits generous 

Of thofe a vertuous ardor guided well 

(On earth) in ever-lafting glory dwell. 


Homer faith, that the Elyfian fields are in the fartheft parts of Spaine, whence the Favonian 
windes blowe. Witneffe Strabo, who faith alfo that the Riuer Limza, (pow called Liuis) was 
whilom called Lethe. So doth Sifins and Mela call ic: when Decinens Brutus lead the Ro- 
maine fouldiours that way , they were afraide to paffeir , leaft they thould haue forgotten 
their country, wiues, friends, them-felues and all, The tranflation of Strabo calleth it Effenca, 


buticisanerrour. Séws faith it runnes ate the Granii, Mela, amongtt the Celtici, In- 


deede the nfule fortunate ( afecond Elyfium ) are not farre from this part of Spaine. 


Finis ib, 21. 


THE 


| 875" 


THE CONTENTS OF THE TWO 
and cwéntith bookeof the City of God, * 


it. Of the aflate of Angel and of Men... } God. 8 in ES 
2. Of the eternal and unchangeable will of | _ 17, whether that women hall retaine their 
God | proper fexe in the refurrettion. 


3. The promife of the Saints eternail bliffe, 
and the wickeds perpetwall torment. 
' Gg. Against the wife-men of the world that 
bold tt smpoffible for mans body to bee tranfe 
ported up to the dwellings of toy in heawen. 


‘ hane had during this life , 


18, Of Chrift the perfect man, andthe * 
Church, bis body and fulnefe. _ 
19. That our bodies in the refurretlion Seal , 
hane no imperfeltivn at all, whar-fo-crer they 
but fall bee perfett 


5. Of the refurrettion of the body, beleened -\ both in quantity and quality. 


by the whole worldexcepting fome few. 


20. That exery mans body, how ewer difper- 


6, That lone made the Romaines deifie their | fed here, foatl bce reftored-bim perfett, at the 
fownacr Romulus ,and fairh nrade the Church | refurretlion, = ee he 
to loue her Lord and miasfter Chrift lefus., ° - 21. What new and fpiritwall bodies foall bee 
9. That the beleefe of Chrifts deity was fine vito the Saints, | Sc 
wrought by Gods power,not mais perfwafion, | 22, OF mans miferies drawne upon him by 
(8. Of themtracles which bane beene, and neifs parents,and taken away froos bim,one- 

are as yet wreught,to procure and confirme the. | ty by Chrifts merits and Lrations goodneffe, 
prorlds beleefesw Christ. 23. Of accidents, fenered from the common 

- 9. That all the mivactes done by the Mar- ssh of man,and pecliar onely to the mitand 
righteous. 


‘byrs in the name of Chrift, were onely confir- ae a. ee 2 
24. Of the goods that ‘God bath befawed 


‘ations of that fath , whereby the Marsjis || the 
-beleened in Chritt. 7 | | tpon thts miferable life of ours, — fin 
10. Hom much-bonour the Martyres de- |: 25, Of the obflinacie of fome few in denysag 
Sarue 1x obtaining miracles for. the ra of } the refurrettion, which the whole world belegeu 
the true God , in refpett of the Denills ,w ofe | meth,asit was foretold, Madi. 2 
workes tend all to make men thinke that they | 26. Thats Porphiries : i that the blef~ 
are Gods. — — Jed foles foauld haue no bodies, is confuted by 
11. Against the Piatonifts, that éppofe the Plato bisz-felfe, who faith that the Creator 
elenation of the body vp to Heanen by argu- | promifed the inferionr Deities that they foonld 
ments of elementary ponder ofity. re a 


| wener laofe their bodies. 
12. Againit the Infidels calumnies,caft on?- 


27. Contrarseties betweene Plato and Pore 
én {corne of the Chriffians beleefe of the rtfire phety, wherein if either fhosld yeeld unte other, 
rection, eS 


13. Whether Abortiues belong not to there- 


oth (oould finde ont the truth, cus 
28. What either Plato, Labeo er Varto aight 
~ farretlion, sf they belong te the dead. 4d bane anailed tothe true faith of the refurveiti- 
14. Whether [ nfants fhall rife againe sxthe | on,sf ihe ood had an harmony in their opinions. 
frature that they dyed in, | .. 29. Of the quality of the vifton » with which 
15. Whether all of the refurrettion fhallbea \ the Saints shall fee GOD in the world to 

of the fatureofChrift!K§ © © ~= = J come, i : 
16. What is meant by the confirmation ‘of 
the Saints unto the Image. of the Sonne of 


| : 30.. Of the ternal felicsr 
G O D, and the perpetual S 


FLINIS: 


of the Citty of 
both. - " | 


876 | 


TVVO AND TVVENTITH 
BOOKE OF THECITTIEOFGOD: 


‘Written by Saat Augustine Bifhop of Hippo, 
| -. WntoCMarcelinus, 


¢€ 
‘ 


_ 


O48 eg 


Of the eftate of Angels and of mth. - 
C nap. Ie 


: A HIS prefent volume, being the faft of this whole worke, 
Nd oa, ay gsugg {hall containea difcourfe of the eternall beatitude of the 
Tooke Beaseadl cxtty of God. Which Cittie is not called eternall, as if ic 
= aN: Si fhould continue for the fpace of fo many , or fo many 
ees choufand ages, and then haue anend, but as itis written in 


We " the Ghofpell, Of his kingdome there fhallbee none end. Nor 
ye wy _| fhall this perpetuitie preferue the forme by fucceffion , as 
ed a Baye tree feemeth tokeepe a continuall verdure , hough 
ne leafe fall of,and another {pring vp ; but every Cittizen therein fhall bee im- 
mortall ,and man fhall attaine to that which the Angells haue neuer forgone. 
This God the founder of this Cssty, will effe&: for fo hee hath promifed , who 
‘gannotlye,and who to confirme che reft hath effe&ted part of his promifes al- 
ready. | | an 
a Hee it is that made the world , with all things fenfible and intelligible 
therein , whole chiefe worke the fpirits were , to whome hee gaue an vnder- 
ftanding , making them capable of his contemplation , and combining them 
in one holy and vnited fociety, which wee call the Cétty of God , holy and hea- 
uenly wherein God is their life, their nutriment, and their beatitude. Hee gaue 
a free eletion alfo vnto thofe intellectuall nacures, that if they would forfake 
him, who was their bliffe, they fhould prefently bee enthralled in mifery. And 
fore-knowing that certaine of the Angels, proudly prefuming chat chem-felues 
were fufficient beatitudeto them-felues , would forfake him , and alt good with 
 bim, hee did not abridge them of his power,knowing it a more powerfull thing 
to make good vie of fuch aswere ¢uill, then to exclude euill for altogether. 
Nor had there beene any euill atall ,buc that thofe fpirits ( though good, yer 
mutable ) which. were formed by the omnipotent and vnchangeable Deitie, 
procured fuch euill vntothem-felues by finne: which very finne,prooued that 
their natures were good in them-felues. For if they had not beene fo(although 
infericur to the maker ) their apoftacie had noc fallen fo heauie vpon them. 
For as blindneffe beeing a defect , prooueth plainely that theeye was made 
to fee, the exccllencie of the eye beeing heereby made more apparent ( for 
other-wife blindneffe were no deffec ) fo thofe natures enioying G O D, 
prooued them-felues to bee created good, in their very fall , and that eter- 
nall mifery that fell vpon them for forfaking GOD , who hath giuen-affu- 
rance of cternall perfeuerance vnto thofe that ftood firme in him, as a fitte 
seward 


Luc,s 


om? 
en ——_ 


Lagoes. ‘OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 


reward for their conftancy. He alfo made man,vpright of a free eleGion, earch- 
ly,yet worthy of Heauen,ifhe ftuck faft tohis Creator, otherwife, to pertake of 


~ {uch mifery as forted with a nature of that kinde:and fore- knowing likewife,chae 


he would break the law that he bound him to,and forfake his Maker,yet did hee 
not take away his freedome of election, fore-feeing the good vfe that hee would 
make of this euill, by reftoring man to his grace by meanes ofa man , borne of 
the condemned feed of man-kinde , and by gathering [9 many vnto this graceas 
fhould fupply the places of the falne Angels,and fo preferuc ( and perhaps aug- 
ment ) the number of thehéauenly Inhabitants.. For eull men do much againit 
the willof God, but yet his wifedome fore-fees that all.fuch actions as feeme to 
oppofe his will,do tend to fuch ends as hec fore-knew to be good andiuft. And 
therefore,wheras God is faid Tochange bis will,chat is to turne his meekneffe in- 


\ 


to anger, againft fome petfons,the change in this cafe is in the perfons,andnot ~ 


in him:and they finde him changed in their f{ufferances , as a fore eye findeth the 
fun fharp,and being cured, findes ie comiforcable,wheras this. change was in the 
cie and not in the fun,which keeps his office as he did at firft. For Gods operati- 
on in che hearts of the obedient, is faid to be his will, wheré-vppon the Apoftle 


877 


faith,Jt is God that worketh in you both will and deed. Fur even as that righteouf- Phil,2, 


neffe wherein both God him-felfeis righteous , and whereby alfoa man thatis 
juftified of God is fuch,is termed the righteoufnes of God ; Soalfois that law 
which hee giueth vnto man, called his law, whereas itis rather pertinent voto 


man then vnto him, Forthofe were men vnto. whom Chrift {aid,is és written al: 1, 9 
fo ix your lewthough we read elfe-whére, The /aw of bss God is in his hearts and ack Phil, 37. 


cording vnto his wil, which God worketh in man, him-felfe is faid to wil it,be- 
caufe he worketh it in others who do will it,as he is faid to know that which hee 
maketh the ignorant to know. For whereas S. Peter faith , We now knowing God, 


yearather being knowne of God We thay nothereby gather that Godcame butas — 
‘then to the knowledg of thofe whé hee had predeftinate before the foundations 


ofthe world , bue God as then is faid toknow that which, he made knowne to o- 
thers.Of this phraze of {peach Lhaue {poken (I remember } heretofore. And 
according vnto this ##// , wherby we fay that God willeth that which he maketh 
others co will,who know not what is to come,hee willeth many things, and yer 
effeteth them not. | | 


The promife of she Saints eternal bliffe,and the wickeds per- 
cetuall torment. CHAP. 2. , 7 

Or the Saints doe will many things chat are infpired with his holy wel/,and yex 

are not done by him,as when they pray for any one, itis not hee that caufeth 
this their praier,thongh he do produce this wi# of praier in them,by his holy {pi- 
rit. And therfore when the Saints do w#//,and pray according te God, wee may 
well fay chat God willeth ic andyet workethitnot , as we fay hee willeth thae 
him-felf, which he maketh others to wil.But according to his efernall wil, ioined 
with his fore-knowledge,therby did he create al that he pleafed,in heauen and in 
earth, and hath wroughtal things already, as well future as paft or prefent. Buc 
whenas the time of manifeftation of any thing which God fore-knoweth to. 


. €ome,is not yet come,we fay,/¢ {hal be when God wil: & ifboth the time be vncer- 
taine, and the thing it felfe, then we fay , Jt {ball be éf God will:not that God thall © 


haue any other willas than, thenhee had before , but becaufe that fhall bee 
then effected, which his eternal , a will,had from al eternity — 
| e 


878 --2 SAINT AVGVSTINE «> ;Cwar.3.84. 


The promife of | the Saints eternall blifeand the wickeds perpetual torment. 
: | HAP. 3. eee 
ae ’ 


V Herefore(co omit many wofdes ) As wefee his promife to Abraham. In 

Genin thy feed {hall all nations be bleffed , fulfilled in Chrift , fo fhall that be fulfilled 
lay, 26, hereafter which was promifed to the faid feed by the Prophet, The dead {hal lise, 
Uay,65 even with their bodies (ball they rife.’And whereas he faith,7 wil/ create new heawens 
| anda new earth and the former [ball not be remembred,nor com: into minde, But be 

you glad,and reioice in the things Fbal create; For behold 1 willérente Hierufalem as 4 
retoycing, and her people as a toy, Crc. And by another Prophet , —4¢ that time {bell 

Dan.12, “Ay oa be delinered, enery one that [ball bee found written inthe booke of life , and 
many that fleepe in the dust of the earth {hall awake fome to encrlafting life , and fome 
to fbame and perpetuall contempt : And againe , they {ball rake the kingdome of 

the Saintes of the moit High, and poffeffe st for ener enen for ener and exer. Andby 

and by after , His Kingdome is an encrlafting kingdome.crc. Together with all 

fuch places ‘as I eyther put into the twenrch booke, orleft-vntouched; All 

thefe ‘things fhall come to pafle,and thofe haue already which the infidels would 

neuer beleeue. For the fame GOD pretnifed them both , euen hee whome the 

pagan = do tremble before , as Porphyry a worthy Phylofopher of theirs 
confeffeth.. | io : 


Againft the wife men of the world that hold it inspoffible for mens 
- bodie to be tran/perted up tothe dwellings of toy 


7 taheauen. CHAP.4.. 


¢ 


Ve the learned of the world thinke that they oppofe this all-conuerting 
power very ftrongly , as touching the refurrection , when they vie that 
place of Cicero inhis third booke de repab. Who hauing affirmed that Remy- 
lus and Hercules were both deified , yet were (4 ) not their bodies ( faith 
hee ) tranflated intoheauen , for nature will alow an earthly body no place but 
in the earth. This isthe wife mans argument , which GOD knowes how 
vaine it is: for admit that wee were all mecre fpirits , without bodies, dwel- 
ling inheauen , and beeing ignorant of all earthly creatures , andit fhouldbe 
told vs, that oneday we fhould be bound in corporal bodies, might we not then 
vie this obieGtion to more power, , and refufe to beleeue that nature would ever 
fuffer an incorporeall {ubftance to bee bound er circumfcribed by a. corpotealf. 
one? Yet is the earth full of vegetable foules,firangely combined with earthly bo- 
dies. Why then cannot God that made this creature, tran{port an earthly bod 
into heauen, as wellas he can bring a foule (a purer. eflencethen any celeftiall 
body)downe from heauen, and inclofe it ina formeof earth. Can this little peece 
of earth include fo excellent anature in it,and live by it,and cannot heauen enter- 
taine it,nor keepe it in it, feeing that it liveth by an effence more excellent then 
heauen it felfe is?Indeed this fhall norcome to paffe as yet, becaufe itis not his 
pleafure who made this that wedaily {ce and forefpe& not, ina far more admi- 
rable manner chen that thal] be which thofe wife men beleeue not : for why 
is it not more ftrange that a moft pure and incorpareall foule fhould be chai- 
ned toan earthly bodice, then that an earthly bodie fhauld bee lifted vppeto 
heauen , which is but a body it felfe ? Onely becaufe the firft wee, fee daily 


in 


6 


Li3.22. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 


in our felues,& the fecond wehaue yetneuer feen. But reafon wil tel one that it 
_ is amore divine work to ioyne bodies and foules, then to ioine bodies to bodies 
chough neuer fo different in natures, as if ¥ one be heauenly & the other ofearth. 


| LVIVES. | Se ve | 7 
Y= were not(a)their bodies | But Rexsulus his body was not to bee found,and rhetefore the 
_™ vulgar beleeued that it was gone vp to heauen. And the Greekes fay thate/cu/apins re- 

ftored Hercules his body to the former foundneffe,and fo it was taken vp into the skies, 


Of the refurrection of the body. beleeued by the whole 

| world excepting fomefer. Crar.5.” ' | 
His was once incredible. But now wee iee the whole world beleeues that 
* Chrifis body istaken vp to heauen. The refurredction of the body , and the af- 
cention vato bliffe is beleeued now by all the eatth , learned and vniearned im- 
brace it,only fome few reie@ it : If it be credible , what fooles are they not to be- 
leeue it: if it be not,how incredible a thing is it, that it fhould be fo generally be- 
leeued ! Thefe two incredible things , to wit the refurreGion,and the worldes 


- $79 


. 
. 


beleefe thereof, Our Lord Jefus Chrift (4) promifed fhouldcometo paffe , before Mat. 97. 


that be had effeGed either of them. Now one of them (the worldes beleefe of 
the refurreGion) we {ee is come to paffe already 3 why then fhould wee difpaire 
of the other, that this incredible thing which the worldbeleeueth , fhould come 
to paffe as well as that other? Efpecially feeiag, that they are both promifed in 
thofe {criprures , whereby the world beleeucd. The maner of which beleefe is 
moreincredible then the reft; That men ignorant in allarts, without Rhetorike, 
Logike or Grammar , plaine Fifhers fhould be fent by Chrift into the feaof this 
world ,onely with thenets of faith , and draw fuch an inumerable multitudeof 


fifhes of al forts,fo much che ftranger, in that they took many rare Phylofophers. 


So that this may well bee accoynted the third incredib!e thing,and yet all three 
are come to paffe. Icis incredible that Chrift fhould rife againe in the flefh, and 
carry itvp to heauen with hims: [tis incredible that the world fhould beleeue 
this: and itis incredible chat this beleefe fhould bee effected by a fmall fore of 
 poore,fimple,vnlearned men. The firft of chefe our aduerfaries beleeue not : the 
fecond they behold,and cannortell how itis wroughe , ifit bee not done by the 
third. Chrifts refurreCtion and afcenfion is taught and belecued all the world 
ouer-ific be incredible, why doth all the world beleeue ic?Ifmany noble, learned 
. and mighty perfons,or men of great {way had faid they had feene it and fhould 
haue divulgedit abroad, it had bin no maruaile if the world had beleeued them, 
and vnbeleeuers fhoufd haue bin thought hardly off. But {ceing that the world 
beleeueth it from the months ofa few,meane,ob{cure and igsiorant men, why do 
not our obftinat aduerfaries belieue the whole world which beleeued thofe fim- 
ple,mean , and vnlearned witnefles , becaufe that the deity it felfe in thefe poore 
fhapes did workthe more effeGtually and far more admirably :for their proofs & 


perfwafions lay not in words , but wonders: and fuchas had not feene Chrift ri- 


{en againe , and afcending,beleeued their affirmations thereof, becaufe they con- 
firmed them with miracles:for whereas they fpake, but one language , or (at the 
moft)but two, before, now ofa fodaine, they {poke all the tongues ofall nations. 
They cured aman that had bin forty yerres lame, euer from his mothers brefts, 
only by the very name of Je/ws Chrif. Their handkerchiefs helped difeafés ; the 
ficke perfons got them-felues laid inthe way where they (hould paffe , that they 
i ! a. ee ee 


880 


‘SAINT AVGVSTINE. —Cuar.6 


might hauc helpe from their very fhadowes,and amongft all thefe miracles done- 
by thename of Chrsf , they raized fome from the dead. If thefe things be true as 

ey are written,then may al thefe be added to the three former incredibles:chus 
do we bring a multitude of incredible effe&s to per{wade our aduerfaries but vn- 
to the beleefe of one,namely the refurrection , and yet their horrible obftinacy 
will not let hem fee the light:Ifchey believe noc that che Apoftles wrought any 
fuch things for confirmation of the refurreftion of Chrift,{ufficeth then that the 
whole world beleeued them without miracles , which is amiracle as greatas any 
of the reft, 


L.VIVES. — 


Hrift (4) promifed ]In the houfe of Simen the leaper, and when hefent out his Apoftles 
to preach, AZat. 27. and promifed that his Ghofpell fhould paffe throughout the world, 
and that he would rife againe the third day. ; : 


-<eow © 0 etme - eee. 


That Loue made the Romanes dcify their founder Romulus , and Faith 
lord atid maifter Chrift Iefus. 


made the Church te loue bir 
Cuarp.6.- . 


| vs heare what Tady faith of the fabulous deity of Romulus: it is more admi- 


rable in Romalus({aith he)that the reft of the deified men liued in the times of 
ignorance , where there was more fcope for fiction , and where the rude vulgar 
were far more credulous. But Romulus we {er liued, within ( 4) this 600. yeares, 
fince which time(and before alfo Jlearnirg hath bin(6)more common, and the ig- 


~ norance ofelder times veterly abolifhed. Thus faith Twdy: and by and by after, 


Hereby it is euident,that Howser was long before Romulus,{o ¥ in the later times, 
men grew learned,and fiions were wel nearg wholy excluded, wheras antiqui- 
ty hath given credence to fome very vnlikely fables:but our moderne ages being 
more polifhed, deride andreieG al things that feeme impoflible. Thus faith the 
moft learned and eloquent man, that Remalus his diuinicy was the more admira- 
ble,becaufe his times were witty,and kept noplace for fabulous affertions. But 
who beleeued this deity,but Rome,as then 4 litle thing(god knowes)and a yong? 
pofterity indeed muft needs preferue the traditions of antiquity,euery one fucke 
fuperftition from his nurfe , whileft , thecitry grew to fuch power , that fee- 


- ming in foueraingty to ftand aboue the nations vnder ie, {hee powred the beliefe 


of this deity ofhis , throughout hir conquered Prouinces , that they fhould a& 
firme Ronsulus to be a god(how-foeuer they thought)leaft they fhould fcandalize 


_ the founder of their Lady and miftreffe, in faying other wife ofhimthenerror of 


loue(not loue of error)had induced hir to beleeue. Now Chriflikewife though 
he foundedthe Celeftiallcitty , yet doth not fhethinke him a God for founding of 
her,but the is rather founded for thinking him ‘to be a God. Rome beeing already 


built and finifhed, adored her founder ina temple: butthe Heauealy Hiern{alenms 


laceth Chriff hir founder in the foundation of hir faith , that hereby fhee may 

ebuile and perfited. Louemade Rome beleeue that Romulus wasa god: & the 

beleefe that CHRIST isGOD , madc his Cstty to loue him, So that 

euen as Rome hadde an obie& for hir loue , which {hee was ready to honour 

with a falfe belecfe : So the Citie of GO D hath an obie& for her faych 
~ . Wwnic 


a Me ee ee 7_—_— ae ee. 


“eh wn. De GR “Sr -SR- 2. oe- 12 SAO UES CU 


“Aa Sh 


Linea. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 


which fheeis euer ready to honour withatrue and rightly grounded -loue. ‘For 
-as touching Chrift,befides thofe many miracles., the holy Prophets alfo did 
teach him to be God, long before his comming :-which as the fathers beleeued 
{hould come to paffe,fo that we do now fee that they ate come to paffe. But as 
touching Romulus,wee read that hee built Rome, and raigned in ic,not that this 
was prophecyed before: but as for his deifying , their bookes affirme thar ic 
was beleeued, but they fhew not how it was effeted , for there wereno miracles 
toproue jt. The fhee Wolfe that fedde the two brethren with her milke,which 
as held fo miraculous,what doth this prooue as concerning his deicy?Ifthis fhee 


_. Wolfe -werenota ftrumpet,but a bruce beaft, yetthe. accident concerning both 


- the bresherenalike,why wasnot( 4.) Remus deified for company? And who is 
there that if hee bee forbidden vppon paine of death, tofay that Hercules , Romu- 
‘dasor-fuch,are deities,had rather loofe his life, ther leaue to affirme it 2. Whae 
“nation would worfhip Romulus asa God, if it were not for feare of Rome?But 
on the other fide ,who.is hee that can number thofe that haue fuffered death 
; willingly in what forme of cruelty focuer, rather then deny the deity of Chrift? 
A light and little feare of the Romaine power, compelled diuers inferior citties 
to honour Romulus asa god:but neither feare of power , torment , nor death 
could hinder an infinite mulcitude of Martyrs,all the world thrdugh, both to be- 
leeue and profeffe that Chrift was God. Nor did his Citty,tchough fhee were as 
then a pilgrime vppon earth,and had huge multitudes within her,euer go about 
to (¢) defend her temporall eftaceagainft her perfecutors, by force , but neglec- 
aed that,toaine her place in ererhity. Het people were bound’, imprifoned, 


‘ebeaten;racke, burnt, torne, bucche¥ed; and yet multiplyed. Their fight for life, 


swals the contenipt of life for theirGdufour. T#Hyin his 3. De rep. (Or 1am de 
‘ai ued)argnerh thata tuft Citty“meuer fhould takearmes, but either for her 


-fafety ot faith. What he meanes by fafety, hefheweth eHe-where. From thofe 
“paines (faith hee) which thefondeit may feele ,4s pouercy, banifhment,ftripes, — 


“imprifonment or fo,do priuate men efcape,by the ready difpatch of death. But 
-this death which feemethto free’ priuate men from paines , is paine it felfe vnto 
‘acitty Porthe aime ofacitties continuance, fhould beeeternity. Death ther- 
‘fore is not fo naturalltoa common wealth as'toa private man, hee may often 
‘times bee driuen to wifh for it: but when a citty is ‘deftroyed , the'whole 
“worldfeemes(in a manner ) to-péerifh with it. Thus faith Tad/ly holding the 
‘worlds eternity with the Platonz#s: So then hée would haue a citty to take 
armes for her fafety, that is, for her continuance for euer here vppon earth , al- 
though her members perifh , and renew fucceflinely , as the leaves of the Oliue 
and lawrell trees,and fuch like as they are: fordeath(faich hee)may free priuate 
menfrom mifery, but it is mifery. it felfe vnto a common-wealth. And there- 
fore it isa queftié whether the Saguntines did well,in choofing the deftruction 
of their citty , before the breach of faith with the commonwealth of Rome; 
an a@& which all the world commendeth. But 1 cannot fee how they could 
poflibly keepe this rule, chata Citty. fhould not. take armes but eyther for her 
faith or fafety . For when thefe twa are ioymly endangered , that one cannot 
-bee faued without che others lofle., one cannot determine which fhould bee 
‘Chofen:: .If the Saguntines had -chofen to. preferue their fafery , they had 


_ broken theit faith : If their faith ,then thould they lofe tteir fafety ,. as indeed 


-they'did. But the fafety ofthe CitticofG OD is fuch , that it is preferued 
iCor rather purchafed ) by faith , and faych beeing once loft , the fafetie cannot 
| OF FFE 3 poffiblic 


881 


882 


SAINT AVGVSTIN Crap.7. & 8. 


poffibly buc perifh alfo. This cogitation with a firme and patient refolution, 
crowned fo many Martyrs forchri/t,when as Romulus never had fo muchas one 
man that would die in defatecof his deity. oo ee 


ie Qe 


he g _ - ~ 
5 , 
Ce eel 


LVIVES. 


¥ A ; u 


VV Ithin this (a) 600, vyeares] Tully fpeaketh not this of his owne times but in the per= 


Y fonof Scipio Africanus the yonger,and Lelins,which Scipio liued about 602, yeares 
after the building ot Rome,which was not 6oo, yeares after the death of Romulas.(6) More 
conemon \For in thofe times lined Orpheus, Mu{eus,Linus,Philamnon, Thamyris, Ovius, Demo- 
docus, Ariftheas,Proconnefins,Pronetidas of Athens,Eucelus of Cyprus, Phenixs of Ithaca , He- 
merce. (c) Orberwife Thais in faying he was but aman,wheras the Romanes held him fora 
God.Lames Paffanant playeth the foole rarely in this place,but itis not worth relating.(d why 
was not Remus |Hee had alittle Temple yppon Auentine, but it was an obfcure one , and ra- 


ther like an Heroes temple then a gods, (¢ ) To ‘defend | She might haue repulfediniuries by 
force and awed her aduerfaries by power , bur thee deemed it fitter for fuch as profeffed the 
‘Ghofpell of Chrift 9. to fuffer, then ‘to offer , to die then to kill, to loofe their body racher 


then che foule. 


That the beleefe of Chriftes Deity was wrought byGods 
3 power wet mans perf fom. bat 
| oe en OF FN, AL aa , 
: ; ; “t-¢4 9sf eee ; sz 
B Veit isabfurd to makeany mention offhe falfe Deity of Romules,when wee 
{peake of Chri?. Bur ifthe age of Romujus; almoft 600. yeares before Scspio, 
were fo ftored with men of vnderftanding ,¢hatno impoffibility could enter thei 
beleefe : how much more wife wera they 6go. yeares after , in Tadiestime , in 
Tsherius his ,and in the daies of CHRIS F$.comming? Sochat his refurreQi- _ 
onand afcenfion would haue beene reieGed_as fidionsand impoflibilities , if 
either the power of God or the multitude of miracles had not perfwaded the 
contrary,teaching that it was now fhewne in Chri#, and hereafter to be fhewne 
in all men befides , and auerring ic ftrongly.againft all horrid perfecutions 
throughout the whole world,through which che blood of the Martyrs made it 
{pread and flourifh. They read the Prophets, obferued a concordance , anda 
concurrence ofall thofe miracles, the trath confirmed the noueltie, beeing not 
contrary to reafon , fo that atthe laft.. the World imbraced and profeffed thac 
which before it had hated and perfecuted. | | : 


Of the miracles which’hath beewe ad sre as yet wrought to procure 

- and cosfirme the worlds belecfe in Chrilt- _ 

| | . C wap. 8. a 

B Vt how commeth it (fay they)that you hase no fuch miracles now adaies,as 
you fay were done of yore? I might anfwer,that they were neceflary , before 


- theworld beleeued, to induce it to belecue:and he that feeketh to bee‘confirmed 


by wonders now , isto bee wondred at moft of al him-felfe : in refufing to be- 
leeuewhat al the world beleeueth befides him. But'thisthey obie@ , implyeth 
thar they beleeue not that there were any miracles done at ‘al? No? why thenis 
ia i a aaa 

; . | soe tae edie. “Shes ax eG 


. Las.za. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 


-nedand ciroum{pect times, beleeue fuch Incredible things, without feeing them 
confirmed by miracles?>were they credible, and cherfore beleeued? why then do 
not they them-felues beleeue shem?Our conclufion is briefe: either this incredi- 
ble thing which was not feene, was confirmed by other incrediles which were 
feen,or elfe this beeing fo credible that it need no miracleto proue it, condems 
neth their own grofleincredulity., that willnot beleeueit. This I fay w'filence 

fooles:for wé cannot deny but thatthe miraculous 4/cenfion of Chrift the fleth 


was ratified vnco ys.by the power of many other miracles. The Scriptures doe. 


both relate them, and the end whiere-vnto they tended, They were written to 
-work faith in men,& the faith they wrought hath made them far more famous. 
; They.are read to induce the people to belecue, & yet fhould not be read but thae 
they.are beleeued:and for miracies, there atefome wroughcas yet,partly by the 
-Sacraments,partly by the memorie¢s and praiers of the Saints, but they are noe 
.fo famous,nor fo glorious as theother ; for the Scriptures which were to bee di- 
-vulgestinall places,hath giuen luftre to the firft,in che knowledges ofall nations, 
- whereas the later are knowne but varo the citties where they are done , or fome 
_partsabouc them. And generally, there are few that know them there,and many 
. that de not,ifthe Cétry be grcar3& whien they relate them to others, they arenoe 


. - beleeyed fo fully, & {0 abfolutely asthe other, although they be declared by one 


-chriftian to. another. The miracle: that was done at Millayne when I was there, 
- might well become famous, both becaufe the.Cstty wasof great largeneffe , and 


-likewife for the great concourfe of people that. came to the Shrine of Pro- 
, hafiws(a)and of Gerwife , where the blinde man obteined his fight. The bodies of * ghee 


thefexwo Martyrs lay long vnknown,vntil (b) Ambrofe the Bifhop had notice of yerstighs, 
:them,by a relation ina dreame. Bat: that at Carthage,whence /anocentins , one Innocens 


7-~ SS OST COS ao =e 


—=_ SF 


thas bad bin an aduocate of theneighbor ftate,receiued his health, was vnknown dus, 


;ynto tiemoft,wheras notwithftanding I was prefent,and faw it with mine cies, 
for hewas the man that gaue intertainment vnto mee & my brother -Alspivs, not 
.being Glergy-men4s yet, but onley lay chriftiaris , and wee dwelt as then in his 
shoufeshe Jay ficke of a many fiftulaes bred in his fundament,& thofe fecret parts 
-of che body:the Cbhyurgions had lanced him; and put him to extreme and bitter 
paines, svhereas notwithftanding they had left one part vntouched which they 


“mutt perforce make incifion into ere they could poflibly cure him: burthey cu- 


red al the reft,only that, being omitted troubled them exceedingly and made all 
their applications tend to no purpofe. Jsnccentius marking their protraCtions,and 
fearing another incifion ( which a Phyfitian that dwelt in his houfe had told him 
‘they would be driuen to make, whome they would not fuffer to fee how they cut 
him, whet-vpan /svocentins had angerly barred him his houfe , & could fcarcely 
be brought to receiuc him again)at laft he burft forth, faying,wel yom cut me again? 
wel it come to his fayings, whom you wil not bawe to fee your tricks? But they mocked at 
the ignorance of the Phyfitian and bad /nnocentius be of good cheare , there was 
no fuch matter. Wel the time paffed on, but nohelpe of the malady could bee 


- Leen:che Chyurgions did ftill promife fayre,that they would cure him by falue & - 


not by ineifion. Now they had got an ‘old man ‘and a cunning Chyurgion called 


| (¢) Awemonins to ioin with them,& he viewing the fore, affirmed as much as they; 


which aflurance of his did {atisfie /enocentius that he him.felfe did now begin to 
gibe and icaft athis other Phyfitian thar faidhee muft bee cutte againe. Well 


tobe briefe, when they had {pent fome weekes more,they all left him , fhewing . 
(-to.thejr fhame Xhat hee could not poffible bee-cured but by incifion. boas 
a ge Ff | the 


ff4 


- 884 


the exceffiuc feare thereof ftrucke him ‘immediately beyond his fences,but recol- 
leGing of him-felfe he bad them begon , and neuer more come at him, being en- 
Scoot now by-neceffity,to fend for a cunning Surgeon of. Alexandria, one thar 
was held arare Artift to performe that which his anger wuold nor let the others 
do. The man comming to him , and ( like a worke-man obferuing the:worke of 
the others by the fcarrs they had left ) like a honeft man, aduifed him to let them 


finifh the cure who had tane that great paines with it, ashee had with wondér 


obferued , for true it was , that incifion was the onely meanes tocure him, bur 
that it was farre from him to deprive thofe of the honor of their induftry whofe 
paines in thecure hee faw had beene fo exceeding great.So the former Surgeons 
were fent for to performe it, and this Alexandrian muft ftand by , and fee chem 
open the pare which was other-wife held to be vneurable. The bufinefle wag put 
off vntill the next day, But the Surgeons being all departed,the houfe was fo fil- 
led with forrow for the griefe of their maifter , shat ic {hewed mote-likea prepa- 
racion for a funeral) then any thing elfe,and was very hardly fupprefled. Now he 
was dayly vifited by divers holy.men , and namely by Séturzinus ( of blefled me- 
mory ) the Bifhoppe of vzali, and Gelofus Prieft,, and Deacon of the Ghurch of 
Carthage, as alfo by Bifhop Caurelivs , who onely is yet liuing ofall thefethree: 
amanof worthy refpe, and one with whome I now and then had conferred a- 
bout the wonderful workes of God,I haue often taken occafion to {peak¢ ‘of this, 
and found that he remembred it exceeding wel. Thefe men vifiring him towards 
che evening, hee prayed them all tocome againe the next day tobe {pedarors 
of his death , rather then his paines, for his former fuffrings had fo terrifiedhim, 
thathe made no queftion but that hee fhould immediately perifh vnder the Sur- 

ions hands. They on the other fide bad him bee comforted, truft inGod , and 


¢ hiswill with patience.Then went we to gb 70 kneeling of vsdowne, 


hee threw him-felfe forcibly on his face, as if one had throft him on, and fo began 


- to pray , With firch paffion of mind,fuch flouds of teares , fuch grones and'fobbes 


(euen almoft to the ftopping of his breath ) thatit is veterly inexplicable. Whe- 
ther the reft praied,or marked him, know not ; for my felfe,could not pray a iot, 
onely I faid in my beart, Zord whofe prasers wilt thon heare , tf thou beare not hisrfor 
me thought his prayer could not but procure his fute : well we rofe , andbeing 
bleffed by the Bifhop , we departed the roome, he in the meane time intreatin 

them to come to him inthe morning , and they ftrengthening his {pirit with as 
good confolations as they could giuehim. The feared morning was now come, 
the holy men came , according to their promifes: fo didthe Surgeons , the ter- 
rible Irons were made ready , and all things fit for fuch aworke , whileft all the 
company fat filent in adeepe amazement, The chiefe and fuch as had more au- 
thority then the reft , comforted himas well as they could , his body was layd fit 
for the hand of him that was to cut him, the clothes vntyed, the placebared/, the 


_ Surgeon veweth ic with his knife inhhis hand ready to lanceit, feelino with his 


fingers where the vicerous matter fhould lye: atlength , bauing madean abfo. — 
- lute triall of all the part that was before affected , hee found the orifice firmely 


clofed,and euery place thereof as foundand as folid as it was firftcreated. Then 


ioy &prayfes vnto God/with teares of comfort were yeelded on alfidesbeyond 


the power my pen hath to defcribe them. Inthe fame towne, oneJsnocentia, 
adeuout woman , and oneof the chiefe in the citty‘had acanker on her breft,a 
kind of fore,which the Surgeons told her is vecerly(d)incurable : wherefore they 
vieeither tocut the infeed part away, or for the prolonging of thelife( as 

, } ss yposrates 


_. SAINT AVGVSTINE “Cuard- 


a sm aS A DS ITD SI OEE SSO ESE RE ED I I I TT SARIS NS SRD IS GE IE RET 


Linea, OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 


Hippocrates they fay doth aduife ro omit all atcempr of curing it. This a skilfall 


Phifictian (her familiar friend ) coldher, fothat fhee now fought helpe of none 


but the Lord, who told herin adreame, chatat(¢ ) Eafter next ( which then 


_ drew neare) thee fhould marke , onthe womans fide by the fount, what wo- 


man fhee wasthat ( being then Baptized ) fhould firft meete her , and that fhee 
fhould intreat her to figne the fore with the figne of thecrofle. She did ic, and 
wascured. The former Phifitian that had wifhed her to abftaine from all at- 
tempt of cure, feeing her afterwards whole and found whome hee knew cer- 
tainely to haue had that vncurable vicer before , earneftly defired toknow how 
{hee was cured, longing to finde the medicine that had fruftrated Héppocrates his 
Aphorifme. ; < a 4, 7 

Shee told him: Hee preféntly with a voyce (as ifhee had contemned ic, in fo 
much that fhe feared exceedingly that kee would have f{poken bla{phemy)repli- 


" 385 


ed: Why Ithought you would hane told me fome flrange thing,the {tanding al amazed, tohn ot, 


Why os it fo fi oe ( guoth hee ) for CHRIST to-heale a Canker, that could 
rayfe ene to life t 

greeued mee thatfo greatamiracle wrought vpon fo great a perfonage fhould 
a fo fupprefied , where-vpon I thought it good to giue her a checking ad- 
monition thereof, and meeting herand queftioning the matrer, fhee told mee 
fhee had not concealed it, fo that I went and enquired of her fellow matrons, 
who toldmee, they never heard of it. Behold (fayd I to her, before them ) 
haue you not-concealed it, when as your neareft familiars do not know of it? 
Where-vpon thee fell co relate the whole order of ic, vnto their greae admi- 


| ration, and the glorificationof GOD. There was alfoa Phifitian., in che fame 


towne, much troubled with the Goutes who hauing giuen vp his name to 
‘bee Baptifed, the night before hee fhauld receiue this facrament , in bis fleepe 


at hadbeene foure dayes dead > When I firft heard of this, ic 


A Phificise ’ 
ficke of the 
Gonate ; 


‘was forbidden it by a crue of curled headed Negro boyes, which he knew to Bepstfed. r 


sbee Deuills , but hee refufing roobey them, they ftamped on his feete, fo thar 
they put him to moft extreame payne ; yet hee keepiag his firme refolue, and 
being Baptifed the next day , was freed both from his paine and the canfe 
thereof, fo thachee never had the Gonte in all his daies after. But who knew 


this man ? weedid, and a few ef our neighbour brethren, other-wife it had 
_- beene veterly vnknowne. | a | 


Oneof (f) Curubis was by Baptifme freed both from the Palfte , andthe 


. exceffine tumor of the Genirories , fo that he went from the font as found a 


man.as euer was borne. Where was this knowne but in. Curypbis, aad vnto 
a few befides 2 But when heard of ie, 1 ares Atereline to fend him to 
Carthage , notwithftanding that it was firit told mee by’ men of {ufficient cre- 


dite... He/perius., one that hath beene a Captaine, and liveth at this day by Nefpetiiny 


vs, hath a litte Farme , called Zubedi, in the liberties of fuflali which hee 
hauing obferued (by the harme done tohis feruants and cattle) to bee haun- 
ted with euill {pirits hee entreated one of our Priefts , Cin mine abfence) to 
go thether and expell them. by. prayer. ‘One. went, prayed; and miniftred 
the Communion, and by-GO:DS mercy the Deuill was quit from the place 


eucr after. Now hee had.a.licde of the earth wherein the Sepulchre of 


CHRKI1 ST. ftandeth, befiowed vpon him by a friend, which hee had 


— 886 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. —— Cuar.8 


willing , for the reyerence hee bore it , to keepe it any longer in his lodging. So 
L,and my fellow Afsximns Bifhoppe of Synica, being at the next towne , hee 
praydvs to come to his houfe, wee did, heetold vs all the matter , and requef- 
ted that this Earth might bee buried fome-where , and madea place for pray- 
er ; and forthe Chriftians to celebrate Gods feruice in, and it was done ac- 
cordingly. , 

Now there was a country youth that was troubled with the Palfie, who hea- 
ring of this,defired his Parents to bring himthether : They did fo, wherehee 
prayed , and was prefently cured, Victoriana isa tawne fome thirty miles from 
‘Hippo rvegium. Thereis amemoriall of thetwo Martyres of Millayne. Gerusfe 


Hip 
Gesuale & act Protafius , andthether they carried ayoung man who “a him-felfeia 


- him thether, repli 


‘ 


{ummer , at noone day was poffeffed with a Deuill. Being brought hether , he 
lay as one dead, or very neare death : meane while the Lady of the village, (as 
cuftome is ) entred the place vnto euening prayers, with her maydes and cer- 
taine votareffes , and beganto fing Pfalmes , which found, made the man ftare 
vp as in an afright, and with a terible rauing hee catched faft hold vpon the 
Altar, whence hee durft not once moue, butheld itas if hee had beene bound 
toit. Thenthe Deuill within him began mournefully to cry for mercy, re- 
lating how and when hee entred the man , and laftly faying that hee would 
leaue him ; hee named what parts of him hee would {poyle at his departure, 
and faying thefe words, departed. But one of the mans eyes fell downe vpon 
his cheeke, and hung onely by a little {tring , all che puple of ic ( with is natu- 
rally blacke eis, Seto , which che people(/ whome his cries had cal. 
led: feeing , they fell tohelpe bim with their prayers : andthough they rejoy- 
ced atthe recouery of his wittes, yet forrowed they for the lofie of his eye, 
and aduifedhim to get a Surgeon for it. Buthis fifters husband , who brought 
a , faying ,the.GOD that delinered him from the Dinell, bath 
power to restore him his eye ; which faydhee putit into the place as wellas hee 
could, and bound itvp with his napkin : wifhing him noc to loofe ic vntill fea- 
uen daies were paft, which doing, hee found it as found as euer ie was. Ac 
this place were. many others helped , whome it were to long to rehearfe 
particularly. hae . | | 
I knew a Virgin in Hippon, who was freed from the Diuell, onely by an- 
oynting with oyle mixed with the teares of the Prieft that prayed for her. [ 
know. a Bifhoppe who by prayer difpofieffed the Diuell being in.a youth 
that he neuer faw. There'was one Florentins here of Hippo, a poore and Godly 
Oldman , who getting his lining by mending. of fhoocs , loft his vpper gar- 
ment , and being not able to buy another , heecame to the fhrine of the twenty 
Martires and praied aloud vnco them, to helpe him to rayments. A fort of 
fcoffing youthes ouer-heard him, and at his departure, followed him with 
mockes , asking him if hee had begged fifty ( ¢ } halfpence of the martirs to buy 
him acoate withall. Buthe, going quietly on, {pied agreatfifh , new caft vp 
by the fea, and yet panting, which fifth, by their permiffion that were by, 
hee tooke,, and caried it to one Carchofus acooke agood Chriftian, and fold 
it to him for 300. halfe pence, intending to beftowe chis mony vpon woll for 
his wife to fpinne, and make into a garment for him, The Cooke cutting 
vp the fifth, founds ring of gold in his. belly ; which amazing him , his con- 
fcience made him fend for the poore man , and giue him the ring, faying to him: 
behold how che twenty Martyrs haueapparelled you. ial aa hdc 
. ‘brought 


Lis.22. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 


brought Saint Stewens reliques to the Towne called W4gue Trbilitane , there 


were.a many people flocked together to honour them. Amongit whome 


there was a blinde woman, who prayed themco lead her to the Bifhuppe thar _ 


bare the holy reliques. So the bithoppe gaue her certaine flowers which hee 
hadde.in his hand , fhee tooke them, putce chem to her eyes , and prefently 


_hadde her fight reftored’, in fo much that fhee paffed {peedily on, beforeall 


the reft , as now not needing any more to bee guided. So Bifhoppe Lacslius 


_ bearing the reliques of the fayd Martyr, infhrined inthe caftle of (6) Synice, 


neare to Hippo, wasthereby abfolutely curedof a filtula wu here- wich hee hadde 
bene long vexed,and was come to that paffe that heeuery day expected when 
the Chyurgion fhould lance it : but hee was never troubled with it after that 
daic. Eucherius a Spanith Prieft , thae dwelt at Ca!ame, was cured of the ftone 
by the fame reliques , which Bifhoppe Pofidins brough thether,, ard beeing 
afcerwardes layd out for dead of anotner difeafe, by the helpe of the faid Mar- 
tyr (vnto whofe fhrine they brought him ) was reftoredvnto his former life 
andfoundnefle. __ Zz | | — - | 
_. There was one cMartialis a great man , of good years , buta grear foeto 
CHRISTE, whodweltinthisplace. This mans daughter was a Chrifti- 


an, and marryed vntoa Chriftian. The father. beeing very ficke was intreated 


by them both with praiers and teares , to becomea Chriftian , but hee veterly 
and angerly refufed. So the husband thorghe it good ty go fo Saint Stewens 
fhrine , and there to pray the. LO. R D to fendhis father in lawinto a better 
minde, andto imbratce CHRISTE JESVS wihout further delay. 
For this hee prayed with great zeale and .affe@ , with fhowers of reares,and 


ftormes of religious fighes, and then departing , hee tooke fome ofthe flow. | 


ers from offthe Altar, and in the night laid them at his fathers head, who flepe 


- wellchat night, and in the morning, called inall hafte for the Bifhappe , who 
was then at Hippo with me. They tolde him therefore fo: hee forch-wich fendes 


for the Prieftes , and when they came toldethem prefently thathee beleeued, 


ang fo was immediatly baptized, to the amazement of themall. Thisman all] 
thetime hee lived after., haddechis faying continually in his mouth. LOR D Aas7.59. 
IESVS receiue my [pirite: Thele were his laft wordes , though hee knew 
them not to bee Saine. Stenens, for hee liued notlong after. At this place alfo 


were, two healed of the Gowte , a citizen and a ftranger ; The cittizen 


knewe by example what to doe to bee ridde of his payne , but the ftranger_ 


hadde it reuealed vnto him. | | a 8 

Thereisa place called Asdurus,where S. Stewen hatha part of his body remai- 
ning alfo. Achild being in the Street , certaine Oxen thac drew acart.growing 
voruly Jeft the way,and ouer-run the child with the wheel, fo that it lay all cruthe 


__ ed,and pattal hopeof life. The mother {natched. it vppe,and ran to the {hrine 
with ie 5 where laying it downe , it recouered both lite and full ftrength a- 


ine in an inftanc , beeing abfolutely cured of all hure what-foeuer. Neare 
this place, at Cafpalia , dwele a Votarefle , who beeing ficke and paft reco- 


_uery , fent her garment to the. fhrine , but ere ie came backe , thee was 


dead , yet her parents covered hir with it , which done , the prefently reuiued 


and was as found as ever. The like happened to one Bajfus, a Syriam 


thardwele ac Hippo. Praying for his ficke daughter at Saint es and 
, ree FY Ee ek oo ae es oo uing 


987 


orx os 
cs me lg ~ lea. ok 


888 


SAINT AVGVSTINE | - Cnr 8. 


hauing her garment with him, worde came by a boy thar fhee was dead, But as 
hee was at prayer , his friendes mette the boy ,( before hee hadde beene 
with him ) and bad him not to tell him there , leaft hee went mourning through 
the fireetes. So hee comming home, and finding all in teares ,hee laydher 
garment vppon her , and fhee prefently reuiued, So like-wife /rencus his 
fonne ,a ColleGor , being dead , and readie to go out for buriall , oneadui- 
fed to anoynt him with fome of Saint — oyle. They did fo, and hee 
reuiued . Elufinus likewife a Captayne , feeing his fonne dead’, tooke him 
and laid him vppon the fhrine thac is in his farme in our Suburbes, where 
after hee had prayed a while , hee found him reuiued ?’;What fhallI doe, my 
promifes bindes mee to bee breefe , whereas doubrleffe many that fhall read 
thefethinges , will greeue that I hane omitted fo many that areknowne both 
to them and mee. . | 

But I intreat their pardon that they would confider how tedious a taske itis, 
fo that my pesmi refpe@ of breuity wil! nor allow it. For ifI fhould but 
beleeue all the miracles done by the memorials of Saint Steven , onely at Cala- 
ma and Hippo, Itfhould bee a worke of many volumes , and yet not bee per- 
fe@ neither; I could not relate all , but onely fuchasare recorded for the know- 
ledge of the people, for that we defire, when wee fee our times produce ‘won- 
ders like to chofeof yore ,'thae they fhould not be vtterly in vaine ,by being loft | 
in forgetfulneffe,and oblivion. ak : 

It isnot yet two yeares fince the fhrine was built at Hippo,and although wee 
our felues doe know many miracles done there fince , that are recorded , yet 
arethere almoft feauenty volumes written of thofe that haue beene recorded | 
fince that time to chis. But at Calama , the fhrine is more ancient, the mi- 
raclesmore often , andthe bookes farre more innumber. At Vzalialfo, neare 
Vtica haue many miracles beene wrought by the — ofthe faid Martyr, 
where Bifhoppe Exucdius erected his memoriall , long before this of ours. 
But there they didde not vfe torecordthem , though it may bee they hang 


' begunne fuch a cuftome oflate. For when wee werethere , wee aduifed Pe- 


tronia (a Noble woman who was cured ofan olde difeafe which all the Phyfiti- 
ans had giuen over ) to have the order of her miraeulous cure drawne in 
a booke ( as the Bifhoppe of thar place liked) and that ic might bee read vato 
the people : And the did accordingly . Wherin was one ftrange paflage , which 


_ Tcannot omit, a my time will hardly allow me to relate it. 


A certaine lew hadde aduifed her to take a ring, with aftone fette in icthat 
is found ( 2) inthe reines of an Oxe , and fow it in agirdle of haire which fhee 
muft weare vppon her skinne, vnder all her other rayments. This girdle thee 
hadde on , when fhee ferte forth to come tothe Martyrs fhrine , but hauing left 
Carthage before, and dwelling at a houfe ofher owne by theRiuer (# ) Bagra- 
da , as thee rofe to go on the reft of her iourney , fhee {pied the rmglyeat 
her feete : Whereat wondering , fhee felt for her girdle, and finding tt tyed, 
as fhee hadde bound it , fhee imagined that the ring was broken, and fo worne 
out : But finding ic whole , then thee tooke this as a good prefage of her 


future recouery , and loofing her girdle , caft both itand the ring into the 


River. Now they that will not beleene thas JESVYS CHRISTE 
was borne without interruption of the virginall partes , nor paffed into 
his Apoftles when the dores were fhutte, neyther will they beleeue this. 


But 


e a SS ese ESieESenmstarwems=reenene=—— : : 


Lina. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 889 


2 


en 


But when they examine it,and finde it true,then let them beleeue the other. The 


woman is of noble birth, nobly married, and dwelleth at Carthage: fo greara 


Citty,fo great a perfon in the Citty cannot lye vnknowne to any that are inqui- 


fitiue. And che Martyr by whofe prayer thee was cured beleeued in himthac | 
.was borne of an eternall virgin ,and entred to his Difciples when the doores 


were fhutte : And laftly ( where-vnto all hath reference ) who afcended into 
heauen in the fleth, wherein hee rofeagaine from death : for which faith this 
Martyr loft his life. 3 | -_ 

So that wee fee there are miracles at this day , wrought by G O D, with what 


tmeanes hee liketh beft who wrought them of yore : but they are not fo famous, 


nor faftned in the memory by often reading, that they might not bee forgotten. 


read but once, which they that are prefentdoe heare, but no one elfe : nor doe 
they that heare chem ,keepe them long in remembrance, nor will any of them 
take the paines to relate themto thofe chat hauenot heard them. Wee hadone 
miracle wrought amongftvs, fo famous, and fo worthy , that I chinke not one 
: Hippon but faw it, or knowethit, and not one that knoweth ir that can ever 
orget it. ° 
There were feauen brethren, and three filters ( borne all of one couple in 


(1) Czfarea, acitty of Cappadocia) their parents were noble; Their father : 


being newly dead, and they gtuing their mother fome caufe of anger , fhee laide 
an heauy (#s ) curfe vpon them all, which was fo feconded by GODS iudge- 


ment,that chey were all taken with an horrible trembling of all their whole bo- 


dies : which ougly fight they them-felues loathing chat their country-men 
fhould behold , became vagrant through moft parts of che Romaine Empire. 
Two of them , Paul and Palledia came to.vs, beeing notified by their miferies id 
many other places. They came fome fifteene dayes before Eafter, aid every day 
they vifited Sains Steaens fhrine, humbly befeeching GOO atlength to haue 


_ mercy vpon them, and to reftorethem their former health. Where-fo-euer 


they wenr,they drew the eyes of all men vpon them ,and fome that knew how 
they came (0 plagued, told it vnto others ythat all might know it. Now was 
Eafter day come , and many were cometo Church in the morning, amongft 


_ whome this Pas/ was one, and had gotten himto the barres that enclofed Sasa 


Steuens reliques ,and there was praying, hauing olde of the ‘barres : Prefently 


hee fell flatce downe ,and Jaye as if heehad flepe , bur trembled not as hee had 


vied to doe before, cuer inhisfleepe. _ : ae . 4 

The people were all amazed, fome feared, fome pittied him, fome would 
haue raifed him, and other fome fay nay, rather expe the event: prefently hee 
ftarted vp, and rofeas found aman as euer hee was borne. With char, allthe 
Church refounded againe, with lowde acclamations and praifes to GOD, 
euery one telling mee this ftrange and miraculous eueht . I reioyced , an 
thanked GO D within my felfe: Prefently enters the young man,and falleth 
downe at my knees, I tooke him vp, and kiffed him , fo foorth wee went vnto 
the people, who filled the Church, and did nothing but crye,GOD bee thank- 


_ And then they came flocking to mee, who was about to come forthto — 


€4,GOD bee prayfed. Every mouth veeered this: I faluted them , and thenthe . 
‘eryeredoubled. | | : : 


Gee Ae 


—— 


‘For although weehaue gottena good cuftome of late, toread the relations of _ 
fuch as thefe miracles are wrought vpon, vnto the people, yet perhaps theyare | 


$90 | SAINT AVGVSTINE. Cuap.8, 
At length, filence beeing made , the Scriptures were read,and when it was Ser- 
mon time, made onely a briefe exhortation tothem , according to the time, 
and char prefent ioy. For in fo great a worke of GOD, I did leaue them to 
thinke of ic them-felues,rather then to giue eare to others. The young man di- 
ned withvs, and related the whole ftory of his mother and brethrens mifery. 
‘The next day, after my Sermon ,I told the people that to morrow they fhould 
heare the whole order of this miracle read vnto them: which I dooing , made 
the young-man and his filter ftand both vpon the fteps that go vp into the chan- 
‘cell, (wherein I hada place aloft,to fpeake from thencetothe people ) that che 
congregation might fee them both. So they all viewed them,the brother ftand- 
ing found and firme, and the fifter trembling euery ioynt of her. And they that 
faw not him, might know Gods mercy {hewen to him by feeing his fifter,and dif- 
cerne both what to giue thankes for in him, and what to pray for in her. There- 
lation being read, I willed chem to depart out of the peoples fight, and began 
to difpute of the caufe of this, whenas fuddenly there arofe another acclama- 
tion from about the fhrine. They that hearkned vnto mee, left mee , and drow 
thether,for the maide when fhee departed from the fteps, went thether to pray, 
and affoone as fhee couched the grate,fhee was fo wrapt as he was, and fo refto- 
red co the perfe@ vie of all her limmes. So while I was asking the reafon of this 
noyfe,the people brings her vntothe Quire to mee, beeing now fully as found as 
her brother. Aind then arofe fuch anexultation , that one would haue thought 
— itfhould neuer have end. And che maide was brought thether where fhee had 
 ftoodbefore. Then the people reioyced that fhee was like her brother now, as 
had lamented that fhee was vnlike him before, feeing that the willof the Al- 
mighty had preuented their intents to pray for her. This their ioy was fo lowd- 
lic expreffed,that ic was able to ftrike the ftrongeft care with ftupor . And whae 
was in cher hearts that reioyced thus, buc the faith of CHR1ST, for which 
Saint Stewen thed hisbloud. | 


. Ques 


L. VIVES. 


| pr (4) and Gernafe } Sonnes to Vitalis , a Gentleman of Rome , and a Martyr, and 
A Valeriahis wife. Fredericke the firft ranflated their bodyes from Millaine co Brifach in 
Germany. (6 ) e4Ambrofe | That famous Father of the Church, and Bi:op of Millaine. 
(6) eAmmeoniis | Not that famous Platonsf? , Origens maifter. (d ) Uncurable } Yer Galen 
and Asmicen.tcach the cure: marry it muft not then bee at the fe lnefle of the maleuolence,for 
then it cannot bee rooted out. (ue reckons three kindes of Canckers, Firft Cacoethes,with 
a {mall rooted vicer,{welling the parts adioyning : the fecond, witb no vlcer at all: the third 
is called Zhymins, arifing from melancholy burnt by choller. (¢) At Eafer next | Ie was a 
cuftome as then,becweene Eafter and Whicfontide to Baptife perfonsof difcretion, and fuch 
as required it. There are many additions in this Chapter ( I make no queftioa ) foyfted in by 
fuch as make a practife of deprauing authors of authoritie: fome I will cut off, and other 
fome I will but touch at, (f) (urubis | A free towne in Africa, neere to Afercury his pro- 
montory,beyond Carthage. Plin.lsb.4.Ptolom. (g¢ ) Halfe-pen¢e |The Latine word is Phollis, 
which iseither a weight, conteining three hundred & twelue pound,and frxe ounces,or it isa 
kind of cribute,or(when it is vfed in the mafculine gender,as it ishere)it is the fame that Obe- 
dus is with vs,an half-peny. Alciat.Hefich de temp diss{. 1.6.Suidas, Gre. (b) Since]It may be put 
for Thiriffa,a place vihich Prolemy placeth nere Hippo Diarthytus, che lame y Plsny — 


Lis.a2 OF THE CITIE OF GOD. | Sor 


calleth Ticifa,and 7 irifa.i6.5. Or perhaps it is Sitifa, for there were fuch a people inc Maurie 
tania Cefarienfis, (i) Found in the reises |} Of this] neuer read. Pliny (lib-3.0.) faiththere isa 
little one in the head of an Oxe, which hee cafieth out when hee feareth death , and that (if 
one can get it) it is wonderfull good to further the growth of the teeth, beeing worne about _ 
ones neck. But I fee no reafon why a ftone fhould not grow in an Oxes kidney fooner then in 
amans. His heat is more, his bloud and humours farre grofer. (k) Bagrada | Vtrifcth out 
of Mapfar, amountaine of Lybia the farther,and pafling through 4,ft-ick, fallech mro our fea 

Mt Viica, Strabo, (1) Cefarea, a Citty of Cappadocia |] Cappadocia is a part of Afia minor, 
bounded on the weaft-with Galatia and Paphiagonia, on the caft with Armenia the lefle , and 
on tie north with the Fuxine fea,it hath the name from the riuer that paffcth betweene it and 
Galatia. For it was before called Leuco Syria , white Syria, in refpect of that Syria by rnc unt 
Taurus,whofe people are of fwarty and funne-burnt complexions, Strabo. They were called 
Syrians of Syrus,fonne to Apollo, and Sinope, who gaue the name alfo to Ssnope where Dioge- 
nes the Cynike was borne. Herodot. Plutarch. | cae 

‘ Now amonplt the other citties of Cappadocia,there was Diocefarea,Neoczfarea, vpon the 
tiuer Lycus,aud C2farea by mount e£geus: as witnefleth Pliny, Solinus Prolomy, and. Ammi- 
anus. This towne(faith Sextus Rufus was called Cefarea,in honor of ngu/'us (efar.But Ex- 
febias faith that Tiberins, hauing expelled Archelaus, gaue it this name, whereas it was called 
Mazaca before,as the forenamed authors do affiime.Perhaps he did fo in memory of his father 
Angufivs. This Mazaca was called the mother of the Cappadocian citties.So/:mus, Martianus 
Capella, Strabo faith it was called Eufcbia, and maketh itthe Metropolitane citry of Cappa- + 
docia, There were exccllent horfes bred in this liberty,as Clandian faith. And Ba/fil,that great — 
father, was borne in this towne. Boat | 

<' (mt) An heany curfe |Children ought euerto auoide their parenrs curfes, as ominous, and 
confirmed by many horrible examples. (#) Chancell | The text calleth it Exedra,which fignie 
fieth a place full of feates ,fuch as the ancient Philofophers difputed in. Vetrs. dibi-5. Buc l 
wonder much that Vitrwwins faith there were none in 'taly, when as Twily faith that. Crajfas 
the Orator, and Corta the Arch-flamine had fuch , belonging to their houfes. Bur thole in 
Churches, wee doe vfually call the Ouier,or Chancell,as eAugnffine vfeth the word here: and 
fuch che Monkes, ad Chanons have in their Cloyfters. Budens in Pandellar. 0 " 


er 


: aan ae _¢ 


. ——aeiweeeD 


Thatull the myracles done by the Martyrs inthe name of CHRIST,” 


wer it wereontly confirmations of that faith, wherebythe + ~~ 
Martyrs beleemedinC HRIST. a 

on ae aa 8 > ‘ ¢ a Ge: et : | . “a . i 
pie: : geciyrs A : C RAP, 9° ge 5 eet 
‘| $ ¢ . . 


a a ee , bay. 6 ye Rey 
A N D what doth all chis multicude of miracles,but confirme that faith which 
4 Sholdechthat'C HRIST rofe agdine in the flefh, and fo afcended inco hea- 
ven? For the Martyrs.were all but Martyts, that is, witneffes of thiss and for 
this,they fofferedthe malice of thecruell world, which they newer rcfifted , but 
fubdued by (ufferance. For this faith they dyed,obtaining this of him for whom | 
they dved. For this; their pacience made the way tor the power of thefe fo 
powerfull miracles to follow. For if this refurre@tion had not beene paft? in 
CHRIST,or hadnot beene to come,as CHR/S T promifed, as wellas thofe 
Prophets that promifed CHRZS T;howcommeth it that the martyrs that dy- 
ied for this beleefe fhould hane the power to-worke fuch wonders ? For whe- 
ther GO D him-felfe, ¢ who being eternall can effe& things temporall by fuch 
wondrous meanes) hath wrought thefe things of himfelfe, or by his minifters, 
or by che foules of the martyrs ,as if hee wrought by liding men, or by his An- 
gels duer whome hee hath an inuifible, vnchangeable, and meerely intellectual 
- Ggee 2 7 comman 


¥xod 8 


Plal.93. 


SAINT AV GVSTINE. Cuarp.t0.& 11. 


command, ( fo that thofe things which the Martyrs are faid to doe, bee onely 
wrought by their prayers, and not by their powers ): bee they effected by this 
meanes,or by thats they doe neuer-the-leffe in euery perticuler , tend onely to 


confirme that faith which profeffeth the refurre@ion of the flefh vnto all 


eternity. | | | | 


——— 


— 
» 


How much honor the Martyrs deferue in obtayning miracles for the worfpip “ 
of the true God 3 in refpect of the Dewills,whofe workes tend allto 
make men thinke that. they are Gods. | 
Cuap.1o.- 


Vet itmay be,here they will fay chat they Gods haue alfo wroughe wonders : 

very well they muft come now to compare their deities wich our dead men. 
Willchey fay ( thinke you )thaz they have gods that haue beene men, fuch as 
Romulus, Hercales,cve. Well, but wee make no Gods of our Martyrs,the Martyrs 
and wée have both but one God, and no more. But the miracles that the Pagans 
afcribe vnto their Edolds, are no way comparable to the wonders wrought by 
our Martyrs. But as Afoy/es over-threw the enchanters of Pharao,fo.do our mar- 


_tyrs over-throw their deuills, who wrought thofe wonders out of their owne 


pride,onely to gaine the reputation of Gods. But our Martyrs ( or rather'G OD 
him-felfe chrough their prayers ) wrought vntoanother end , onely ‘to confirme 
that faich which excludeth multitude ot Gods;and beleeveth but in one. The Pa- 
gans built Temples to thofe Deuills, ordeining Pricfts and facrifces for them, 


_ as fort: Gods. But we build our martyrs no temples , but onely eré& them monn 


ments, as in memory of men departed, whofe {pirits are at rett in Gad. Wee ered 
no altars to facrifice to them, we offer onely to him who is both their God and 
ours,at which offring thofe conquerors of the world as men.of Ged, haue each 
one his peculiar commemoration, but no inuocation at all.For the facrifice fs of- 
fred vnt6 Cod, though it be in memory of them, and hethat offrerh it, is a Prieft 
of the Zord,and not of theirs,and the offring is the body'of the Lard, which is not 
offred vnto them, becaufe they are that body them-felues. Whofe miracles fha!! 


“wee then beleeue ? Theirs that would be accompted for Gods by thofe to whom 
they thew them; or theirs whichtendallro confirme our beleefeinone GOD, 
“whichis CHRIS 7°? Thofe that would hahe their filthieft ats held facred , or 


thofe thar will not haue their very vereves held facred.in sefpeét-of their owne 
glories, but referred vnto his glory, who hath insparted fuch goodneffe vnto 
them ¢ Let vs beleeue them that doe both worke miracles , and rédch the truch:. 
forthis larrer gaue chem power to performe the formet. A chiefe point of which 
trurhis this. CHRIST rofe againe in the fleth, and fhewed the immortality 
of the refurre@ion in his owne body , which hee promifed ynto vs inthe end of 
this world, or in the beginning of thenext. - ies : 


CAgsinft the Platonitts thet oppofe the eleustion of the bédy up to heasien, by 
‘ arguments of clementaryponderofity, CwARII. © 


AGaint this promifedo many(who/e thoughts God knoweth fo be vaine) make op 
~~ pofitio out of the nature of elements: P/to(their M‘. teaching them that the 


. two 


lass OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 


two-moft contrary bodies of the world are combined by other two meanes : that 


is,by ayre,and water. Therefore (fay they) earth being lowelt,, wacernext , then 
ayre, and then the heauen, earth carindt poffibly bee contained in heauen, euery 
element hauing his peculiar poife,and tending nacurally to his proper place. See 
awithavhat vaine, weake, and weightleffe arguments mans infirmity oppofeth 
Gods omnipotency! Why thenare there fo many earthly bodies in the ayre.ayre 
being the third element from earth? Cannothe that gaue birds (that are earthly 
bodyes)fethers,of power to fuftaine them in the ayre, give the like power to 
glorified and imumortall bodies;to poffefle the heaven? Againe; if this reafonof 
theirs were true,all chat cannot flie,(houldliue vader the earth, as fifhes dce in 
the water. Why then doe noc the earthly creatures live in the watcé ; which is 
the next element vnco earch, but in the ayre, which is the third? And feeing they 
belong to the earth, why doth the next element about the eatth prefently Choake 
them,and drowne them, and the third feed and ndurifh them ? Are theelements 
out of order here now, or are their arguments out of Feafon? I will'nor ftand 
heere ro make arehearfall of what I fpake in the thirteene booke; of many ter- 
rene fubitances of great weight, as Lead, Tron, &c. which. not-with-ftandin 

may have fucha forme giuen it, thacic will {wimme, arid fupport it felfe wor 
the water. And cannot God almighty giuethebody of mian ficha forme like-wife 
that it may afcend,and fupport it felte in heauen? Ler them ftick to their method 
of elements (which is all their truft ) yet can they nor teil what to fay tomy 
former affertion. For earth is the loweft element 5 arid then water and ayre fuc- 
ceffiuely,and heaven the fourth and higheft,but the foule is a fifth effence aboue 
them all. ariftotle calleth it a fifth (4) body,and P/sto faith it is vecerly ineorpo- 
reall. If ic were the fift in order,then were it aboue che reft : but being incorpo- 
reall,ic ismuch more aboue all fub(tances corporeall. What doth it then ina 


. lumpe ofearth,ic being the mof {ubtile,and this the moft-groffe effence? It be- 
ing the moft aGtiueyand this the moft vnweeldy ! Cannot the excellencie of ie 


haue power to lift vp this? Hath che nature of the body power to draw downe 


‘afoule from heauen,and fhall not the foule haue power tocarry the body the- 


ther whenceit caine it felfe 2 And now if we fhould examine thé miracles which 
they parallell with thofe af our martyrs,wee fhould finde proofes againft them. 
{elves out of theirownerelations. ~. 2 ee ee 
~ One of their greateft ones is chat which Varro reports of a veftall votareffe, 
who being fufpeed of whoredome; filled a Siue with the water of Tiber and 
carriéd it vnto her ludges, with-out fpilling a drop. Who was it thatkepe the 


- water in the fiue, fo that not one droppe pafled through thofe thaqufand holes. 


Sotne God,or fome Diuell,they muft needs fay. Well, if hee were aGod,is hee. 
greater then hee that made che world ? if chen an inferiotir God, Angell, or Dex 
uill had chis power.to difpofe thus of an heauieclement, that the very natureof 
it feemed altered ; cannoccthenthe Almighty mater of the whole world; take awaly 
the ponderofity of earth,and giue the quickned body an hability to dwell in the 
fame place that the quickning {pirit fhallele&? And where-as they place the 
ayre becweene the fire aboue,and che water beneath, how. commicth it that wee ” 
often-times finde ic berweene water and water ,or betweene watet and earth; 
for what will they make of thofe watry clowds, betweene which and the fea, the 
ayre hath an ordinary paflage ? What order of the elements doth appoint, that 
thofé flouds of raine that fall. vpon the earth below the ayre, fhould firft han ja, 
the'clowdsabouc the ayre ? And why is ayrein Spm mid{t becweene the h al of 
can SEgE 3 a 


894 SAINT AVGYSTINE.  Cuarer18 13, 


and che earth,if it were (as chey fay) to haue che place betweene'the heavens and 

the waters,as water is beewéene it and theearth? And laftly,if'the elements bee 

fo difpofed as that the two meanes , ayre anid water,doe combine the two ex- 

treames, fire and carth,heauen being in the higheft place, arid earchin the loweft, 

as the worlds foundation,and thercfore ( {ay they ) impoffible to bee in heaven 5 

what doe wee then with fire here vpon earth ? for.if this order of theirs bee kept 
inniolate. tien, as earth canngt haucany place in fre, no more fhould fire haue 

any in earth : as that whichis loweft cahnot have refidence aloft,no mare fhould 
that which is aloft hauercfidence below. But we {ce this order renuerfed : We 
haue fire both on the earth,and in the earth : the mountaine tops giue it vp in a- 
doundance , nay more, wee fee that fire is — out of earthi, namely of 
wood, and ftones,and what are thefe but earthly bodyes ? yea bue the elementary 
fire (fay they) is pure, lartleffe,quiet,and eternall : and this of ‘ours, turbulent, 
{moakie,corrupting,and corruptible. Yet doth itnot corruptnor hurt the hills 
where-in it burneth perpetually,nor the hollowés within grourtd, where it work- 
eth moft powerfully. It is not like the other indeed, bat adapted vnto the conuc- 
nient vfe of man. But why then may we not beleeue that the nature of a corrup- 
tible body may bee made incorruptible,and fitre for heauen,as well as we fee the 
elementary fire made corruptible;and fitte for vs ? So that thefe arguments 

drawne from the fight and qualities of the elements , can no way diminith the 

power that Almighty God hath,to make mans body of a quality fitce and able to 

_ inhabite che heauens, - 3 Gua 


L, VIVES. 


A Fifib (a) ecg ] But eriffotle frees thie foule from all corporeall beeing, as you may read 
De anima, lib.t, difputing againit Democritus, Empedccles,Alcmaon,Plateand Xenccra- 
res. Butindeed, Plato teaching that the foule was con:pofed of celeftiall fire taken from the 
ftarres, and with-all,that the ftarres were compofed of the elementary bodies, made -Ari/'oele 
thinke ( elfe-where) that it was-of ao eletnentary nature as well 4s the ftarres whence it was 
taken. But in this hee miftooke him-felfe and miff-vnderftood his maifter. Butindeed Saint 
Axguftine in this place taketh the opinion of Ariftorle from. Tul ( for Ariffotles Sookes 
‘were rare, and vntranflaced as then ) who faith that hee. held their foule to bee guintam na- 
earans, Which Saint Augufline calleth quintum Corpus, a filth body’, {cucrall from the elemen- 
pot Aaen Seca But indeede it is a queftion whether 47i ‘etlehold the foule to bee corpo- 
or tie; fice is obfclire on both fides, though his followershold that itis abfolurcly incor. 
poreall,as wee hold genetally acthis day. And Zales words were cause bothof Semt Jue 
guffixes wiff-prifion, and like-wift fet almoft all the Grecians both of this age and the laf, 
ainft him-felfe, for calling the foule sstaiere, whereas they fay Ariffotle calleth it ikJeasyea, 
is, babitio perfetta,and not metio perennis, as Tullyes word implieth, But alas, why fhould 
Telly be {0 baiced for fo fmall an error? O let vs bee afhamed to vpbraide thie father of Latine 
eloquence with any mifprifion; for his errors are gencrally more learned then our labours! 


~_ 


? 


° 
e 


| Mgaiaft the infidels calumnics, caf? ont in [corneof the 
' Chriftians belecfe of the refurrettion: 


Cars 32; 


BV in helt foripulous inquiries touching thifpoint, they come againft vs 


WA to Fk ous 


we 


—_— 


with fuch {coffes as thefe : Whither thall the Ab-ortive births haue any pare in 
the refarredion? And {eeing ¢heL QR D faith , there ball hot one, haire of your 


headperifb , whether hall all men bee of one ftatureand bigiieffe or bo? If they 


bee, how {hall che Ab-ortiues (if they rifeagaitie) haue chac atthe refugrection 
which they wanted ae the firft? Or if they doe not rife apaine becaufe the} were 
neuer, borne’, but caft out , wee.may Make the fame doubr of infants , where 
fhall they haue thar bignefle of bady. whith they wanted when they dicd ? for 
they you know. are capable of regeneration j and therefore mutt bauecheir pare 


~ intherefurre@tion. And then thefe Pagauis aske vs,of what height and quanzicy 


fhall mens bodies Be'then 2 If they bee astdll as ever, was amy: man then bothlic- 


tle and many = ones fhall wane that which they wantedhere on earth , and 
t 


whence fhal! they haue ita But if ic bee tructbac Saint. #an/ faich , that wee foal Eph. 


mccte unto the meafure of the age of the fulueffe of CHRIST, and againe if that 


place , Hee predeffenated [ them ] to bee made eke. to the. Image of bis Sonne , iniply 8om-® 


that all che members of Chrifts Kingdome fhalbe like him in thapeand ftature, 
chen muft many men (fay they) forgoe part of the ftature. which they had vpon 
earth. And chen where is that great proteQion ofeuery haire,ifthere bee fuch 
2 diminution made of the ftatureand boiy. Befides ; wee make a queftion (fay 
they ) whether man fhall arife withall the haire that euérthe Barber cut from 


 hishead . Y€ hee'doe, who will not loath fuch an ougly fight > for fo likewife 
~ muttitfollow that hee have on all che parings of bis nayles. And where is then 


that comelineffe;which ought in that immortality tobee fo farre exceeding that 
of this world, white manis in corruption ? Buc if heedoe not rife with all his 
haire,then itis loft, and where is your fcriptures. chen? Thus they proceed vate 
farrieffe and leanneffe . If all beea like ( fay th then one fhall bee fatte and ane 
other Jeane. Sothat fome mutt loofe flefh,and {ome muft gaine : {ome muft haue 
what they Wanted and fone muift leaue what they had. Befides , as touching the 
putrefaction;and diffolution of méns bodies,part going into dult , part intoayre, 
part into fire , part intathe gurtes of beafts and birds; partare drownedand dif 
folued into water, thefe accidents trouble them mach , and make them thinke 
that fuch bodies , can neuer gather to flefh againe. Then paffe they to defor- 
miti¢s,as monftrous bitths,miffe-fhapen members, {carres arid {uch like; inqui- 
ring with {coffes what formes thefe fhall have in the refurredtion . For ifwee 
fay they fliall bee all caken away , then. chéy come vpon vs with ourdodrine 
that CHRIST arofewith his woundes vpon him ftill .But their moft difficule 
queftion of all ; is, whofe fefh {hall hac mians. bee iii the refurrection, which 
iseateri by another man tbrough compulfion of hunger 2 for) it.is turned into 
mn flefh chat éaréth ic, and filleth the parts thac famiie had made hollow ; and 
nc. : om ‘78 nate 4: gre % : . 
Whether therefore’; fhall hee haue it againe that ought itatfirft ,orhee 
that cate ie arid fo ought it afterwards ? Thefe doubts are put vnto our refolu- 
tions by the fcornets of oiir faith inthe refurreCtion , and they themfclues doe 
either eftate mens foules for cuer in a ftate nener certaine,but now wretched,2 id 
now bleffed ( as Plato doth ) or elfe with Porphyry they affirme that shefet. 
uolutions doe toffe the foule along tiie , but notwithftanding haue a final 
= at laft ; leduing the fpirigat reft; buc becing vicerly feparaced ns thé body 
Sor Guer. | —— Mei: ing “See ee Be es 


t ‘ 


b f 


896 SAINT AVGVSTINE.: Cuanrets.8 14, 


whether Ab-ortiues,belone wot to the refurrection,sf they 
| belong to the dead.- Cuar. 13. 


io ¥ Oall which obie@ions of theirs , I meane by G OD Shelpe to anfwere,and 
»® firft,as touching Ab-ortiues, which die after they are quick in the mothers 
‘wombe,that {uch fhall rifeagaine, I dare neither affirme nor deny. Yet, if they 
bee reckned amongft the dead, I fee noreafon to exclude them from the refur- 
reGtion. For either all the.dead fhall not‘tife againe ; and the foules that hadno 
bodies, fauing in the mothers wombe, fhall continue bodileffe for ever : or elfe 
all fowles fhall haue their bodies againe, and confequently they whofe bodies 
perifhed before the time of perfeGion: Which foever of thefetwo, be receiued 
or eruth,that which we will now(by and by) affirme concerning Infants is to be 
vnderftood of Ab-ortiues alfo,if they haueany part in che refurre@ion. 


uae. >. Whether Infants [ballrife againe inthe ftature that they died in. 
ee 4 ee oo Cusp. 54. i | 


om CE 


Now as touching infants,I fay they thall not rife againe with chat littleneffe 
* & Nofbodie in whichthey died : the fudden and ftrange power of GOD fhall 
inethemaftatureof fullgrowth. For Our Sauiours words , There [hall not one 
sive of our heads peri{p,doc onely promife them all chat chey had before, not ex- 
cluding an addition of what they hadnot before. The infant wanted the per- 
fection of his bodies quantity (as euery(4) perfect infant wanreth ) thac is, it was 
not come tothe full height and bignefie, which all are borneto have, and haue at 
their birth,potentially (noc actually) as all che members of man are potentially 
in the generative fperme , though the child may want fomeofthem (as namely 
the teeth) when it is borne .: Inwhich hability of fubftance,that which is not ap- 
parant vneill afterwards , lieth (:as one.would fay)wound vppe before, from the 
farft originall of the fayd fubftance. Andin this hability , or poffibility , thein- 
fant may bee fayd to bee tall, or low already, becaufehee fhall prooue fuch here- 
after . Which may fecure vs from all loffe of body or part of body in the refur- 
reétion : for if wee fhould be made all alike, never furall, or.giantlike, yet fuch 
as were reduced from araller ftacure vnto that,fhould loofe no part of their bo- 
die: for Chrift hath fayd shey [hould not loofe an haire.And as for the meanes of ade 
dition, how.can that wondrous worke-man of .the world want fit: {ubftance toad 
wherehe thinketh good? | 


| OL. VIVES: 

1, Uery (4) perfect infant’| Euery thing hath a fet quantity which it cannot exceed , and hatha 
owerto attaine to it,from the generative cauies whereof the thing it felfe is produced:by 
which power,ifit be not hindeted,it dilateth it felfe gradudliy in timc, till ic come to the ful- 
neffe,where it either refleth, or declineth apaine as it grew vppes This manner of augmen- 
tation proceedeth from the qualities that nature hath infufed into euery ching, and neither 

from matter nor forme, 7 | | | 
whether 


Lin22, |. OFTHECITIE OF GOD.” | 897. 


a 


whether allof the refarrection halbe of the ftature of Chrift: 
- Cap. 15. 
RY! Chrift Rimfelfe arofe inthe, fame ftature wherein hee died : nor may wee 
fay that ac the refurrection hee fhall put on any other height or quantiry, 
chen that wherein he. appeared vnto his difciples after hee was rifen againe, or 
becomeas tallas any man eucr was. Now if wee fay chat all fhall bee madee- - 
uall vnto his ftature then muft many that weretaller ; loofe part of their bo- 
ies apainft the exprefle wordes-of CHRIS T . Enery one therefore fhall a. 
rife in that ftature which hee either had ar his full mans ftate, or fhould hane 
had, ifhee had not died before. As for Saint Pauls words of the meafureof 
the fulneffe of CHRIST, they eicher imply that all his members as then bee- 
ing ioyned with him their head, fhould make vp thetimes con‘ummation, or. 
if they tend tothe refurretion , the meaning is that all fhould arife neither youn- 
ger,nor eider,butiuft of that age whereat C HRIST himfelf fuffered and rofe 


_ againe. For the learned authors ofthis world fay that about thirty yeares, man | 


is in his full ftave and from’ that time , hee declineth toan age of more graui- 
ty and decay : wherefore the Apoftle faith not , vato the meefure of the body ,nor 
wnto the meafure of the fature , but, wato the meafure of the age of the fulue fe of 


C HRIS of : 


7 


[what us meant by she conformation of the Saints 
unto the me? the Sonne of GOD. 
HAP. 16, : eo 


ng. alg. ; 
pees oo haee 7 me , es ie 


“ANd wheres he ‘faith tbat the predeftinate fhalbe made like to the Image of Rom,’ 


4 4.the Sonne of G OD, this may be ynderftood of rhe inward man; for he faith 


elic-where,fafbien not your felues like unto this world but bee yee changed by the re-Rom13 


newirg of your minde .So then,when wee are changed from being like the world, 
wee are made like vmto the Image of the Sonne of God. Befides, weemay take i¢ 
thus,that as hee was made like vs in mortality , fo wee fhould bee made like him — 
in immortality and thus it is pertinent to the refurre@ion. But if that it con. 
cerne the forme of ourryfingdgaine , then it {peaketh (asthe other place doth) 


‘onely of the age of our bodies , notof their quanticies.. Wherefore all men 


fhall arife in the ftature thatthey either were of, or fhould haue beene of in 
their fulneffe of mahs ftare : although indeed it is no matter what bodies they 
haue, of old men or. of infants, the foule:and bodie beeing both abfolure and 
without all infirmity. Sothat if any one fay that euery man fhall rife againe 
inthe fame ftaturée wherein hee died ; itis not an opinion that requireth much 


oppofition: - 


Ee = 


Whether that women [hall retaine their proper exe in therefurrection 
| - Crap. re 
T Hereare fome,who outof thefe words of Saint Pasl » Till wee all meete toges Bobs ; 
.* sher inthe unsty of faith and knowledge of the Sovne of G O D,unto a perfect man, 
ae ind 


Fr 


898 SAINT AVGVSTINE. .. — C wap.17.& 18, 
and unto the meafure of the age of the fulneffeof IESVS CHRIS T,would proue 
that no woman (hall retaine her. fexeinthe refurre@ion , bur all fhall become 
men: forGO D (fay they) made man onely of earth,and woman of man. Bur] 
am rather of their minde chat holda refurre@tion in both fexes . For chere fhall 
be none ofthat luft, which caufed mans confufion. For our firft parents before 
their fall,were both naked, and werenot afhamed . So. atthe later day, the finne 
fhalbe taken away , and yet nature ftill preferued. The fexe in woman is no cor- 
ruption,it is naturall, and as then fhalbe free both from child-birth,nor fhall che 

emale parts be any more powerfull to ftirrevp the lufts of the beholders(for all 
Juft thal] then be extinguithed ) but praife and glory fhalbe bee giuen to GOD 
for creating what was not, and for freeing that from corruption which heehad 
created. For,In the beginning when a rib was taken from 4dgm being a fleepe, 
to make Eve,this wasa plaine prophecy (4) of Chriftand the'Church. Adams 
fleepe wat CHRIST S death,from whole fide beeing opened wich a {peare as hee 
hung vpon the croffe, came bloud and water, the two Sacraments whereby the 
Boh. church is built vp. For the word of the text is not formanst, nor finxit but -£di- 
Pet fcauit eam in mulrerem hee: built her vppe into a woman. So the Apoftle cal- 
“leth che church’, the edification of the body of CHRIST. The woman thete- 
fore was GODS creature as well as man : but made of man, (6) for vnity fake. 
Andin the manner thereof was a plaine figure of Chrift.and his Church. Hee 
therefore that made both fexes will raife them both tolife. And LE S$ V S him- 
felfe, beeing queftioned by the Sadduces,that deny che refurreGtion,which of the 
Mata, {eauertbretheren fhould haue her to wife at the refurre€tion whom they had all 
had befcre, anfwered themfaying , Yre are deceined,wot knowing the Scriptures nor 
the powcr of GOD, And whereas he might haue fayd(if it hed beene fo)fee whom 
you inquire of (halbea man at that day,and nota woman, he faydno fuch matter, 
ut onelythis,/a the refurrection they neither marry wiucs nor wines,are beftowed in 
marriage,but are as the Angsilxof G O D in Heauen «That is,they are like them in 
felicity, noc in flefh: nor intheir refurrection , which the Angells need not,be- 
caufe they cannot die. Sot.atC HRI S T dothno: deny that there thalbe wo- 
men at the refurrection , but onely mariage: whereas if there fhou!d haue beene 
none of the finale fexe, hee might haueanfwered the Sadduées more eafily by 
fauing fo: but hee affirmed that there-fhould bee both fexes in thefe wordess 
They neither marry wines that is, men doe not , voriwines are beflowed in mearri» 
age,that is,;women are nor-, So that there fhalbe there both fuchas-vie to marry; 
and fuchas vfeto.be married here in this world. ePiee. ey hy 


= ate pet aoe a ae ee 
. . - e = ~~ “ye i * 
. : ‘ ‘ vo 
ver * . es . tL. i 


ps ophecy (4) of Ghrift | Ephef. 5.(B) For unity fake ] Thas their contord might bee themore; 
the one oe that hee brought forth the other,and the other that fhe came of him, So 


fhould man and wife thinke themfelues but one thing, nothing fhould diuide them, and this 
is the preferuation of peacein their family, : 


_ -— 2 = see —-- oe 


Of CHRIST she perfett man,and the Church is body, 
and fulnefe. Cuar. 18. Sok. ee 
| No touching Saint Panés words, Till wee all meete together Ct. unto aperfet 
a . ; . 9 48, 


} 


4 


- sher by euery ioynt , for the furniture thereof according to the e 


~~ . 


Lisz2. - OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 
man,were to obferue the circumftasices of che whole fpeech,which is this.. Hee 
that defcended, is enen the fame that afcended , farve aboue all heanens that hee might 
fll all things. Hee therefore gene [ome'to bee Apofiles,and fome Prophets , sud fon 
Euangels[is,and fome Paftors and teachers, for the gathering together of the Saints,and 
for the worke of their miniftery and for the edification of the boay of CHRIS T,till we 
all meete together in.the unity of fatthand knowledge of the Sonne of GOD, wntog 
perfect man and unto the meafure of the age of the falne(fe of CHRIS T :that we may 
hence-forth bee no more childeren, wancring and caried about with enery winde of doc- 
trine , by the deceipt of men, and with craftinefewhereby they lie in waite to 
deceine. | | Se , | Aiea 
But letvs follow the truth in lone ,and sn althings growe uppe into him , which 
is the head, that is ,CHRIST,by whome all the bodze ie coupled and knit toge- 
futaall power which 
4s inthe meafure of eutry part ,recesueth increafe of the body unto the edsfying of tt 
felfe inloue . Beholdheere the verfe@ man, head and bodie., confifting of all 
members; which fhalbe comp’etein duetime .But as yet the bodie increafeth 
daily in members , asthechurch enlargeth, to whichicis fayd , yee ave the bode 


8990 


Epb.4 


1 Cor 13 


of CHRIS T, and members for your part: and againe ; for his bodies fake , which i Colol.x 
the Church: and inanother place: For wee beerng many,are one bread, andone body," phcl4 


Ofthe edification whereof you heare what Saint Paw/ faith heere s for the gathe- 
ring together of the Saints , and for the worke of the miniftery,ana for the edification 


of the bodieof CHRIST. Andthen heeaddeth that which all this concerneth: _ 


Till wee all meete together Cre. unto the mesfure of the age of the fulneffe of Chrift. 
Which meafure , vato what bodie it percaineth , hee fhewech , faying , Zet vs 
snallthings growe uppe into him whith ts the headsthat is C HRIST,by whore all the 
bodse Cre. ™ — : a ue ee ~~ . 

So that both the meafure of the whole bodie, and of each part therein, is 
this mea{ure of fulneffe whereof the Apoftle fpeaketh here, and alfo elfe-where, 
faying of Chritt, Hee hath ¢iuen him to bee the head oyer all the Church which is his 
bodie,bis fulneffe, who filleth all in all. But if this belong to the forme of the refur- 
reCtion,why may wee not imagine woman tobe included by man,as in that place, 
Bleffed is the mam that feareth the LO RD, giuch the fame bleffing alfo to fuch wo- 
menasfearchim. _ : 


f 


That our bodies inthe refurrettion fall bene no imperfeition ; 
at all,whatfoener they haue had during this life,out 
flall be perfect both in quantity and quality. 


Cuap. £9: 


No what fhallI fay concerning mans haire and nayles ?vnderftand bug 
that then no partof body thall perifh,yet fo as no deformity fhall abide,and 
icineludecti, chat {uch parts as doe procure thofe deformities fhalbe zefident on- 
‘ly in che whole lumpe, not vpon any part where they may offend the cye.iAs 
for example, make a pot of claysmarre it ,and make it againe : it isnot neceflary 
thar the clay which was in thehandlebefore thould bee in the handle now a- 


gaine, andfoof the bottome and the paits : fufficeth thacit is the fame clay ix 


was before, tat 
Wherefore 


900 


Luc, 32 


See RPO rE Aa Qqegy Se nen cr eerntyn = + arm + oar 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. C warty. 
Wherefore the cut haire , and nayles,, fhall not returne to deforme their pla- 
ces, yet fhall they not perrith ( ifthey returne ) but baue cheir congruent places 
inthefame fleth from whence they had their beeing. Alchough that our Saui- 
ours words may rather bee wnderftoodof the number of our haires , then the 
length,wherevpon hee faith elfe-where, MW the hatres of your head ave numbered. 
I{ay notthisto imply that any effenciall pare of the body fhall perith,but char 
which arifeth out of deformity ,and fheweth the wretched eftate of mortality, 
thall fo returne that the fubftance fhall bee there, and the deformity gone. For 

ifaftatuary having for fome purpofe made a deformed ftatue , canmold, or | 


 cafticnew and comely , with the fame fubftance of matter , and yet withoutall 
. theformer miff-thapednefle; neither cutting away any of the exorbitant parts 


that deforined the + hole, nor vfing any other meanes but onely the new cafting 
ofhis mettall ,or molding of his matter; what fhall wee thinke ofthe Almighty 
Molder of the whole world? Cannothee then take away mens deformities of 
body ,common or extraordinary ( beeing onely notes of our prefent mifery,and 
farre excluded from our fucure bliffe)as wellas acommon ftatuary can reforme 


_ amif-thapen ftatue of {tone , wood, clay or mettall ? Wherefore the fatte , or 


the leane neede neuer feare to bee fuch hereafter, as if they could choofe,they 
would not be now, 

For all bodily beauty, (2) isa goodcongruence inthe members , ioyned with 
a pleafing collour. And where that isnot’, there is euer-morediflike , either 
by reafon of fuperfluity ,or defe&. Wherefore there fhalbe no caufe of dif- 


' like through incongruence of parts , where the deformed ones are reformed, 


Geng 


the defe@s fupplied, and the excefles fitly proportioned. And for collour, 
how glorious will ic bee! The suff {hail [bine as the Sanne in the Kingdome of 
their Father . And this luftre was rather hidden from the Apoftles eyes at 
CHRISTS refurrection , then wanting in his bodie. For mans weake 
eyes could not haue endured it, and CHRIST was rather to make them to 
know him then to fhew them his glory ,as hee manifefted by letting them touch 
his woundes , by eating, and drinking with ti:em, which hee did not for any 
neede of meate or fuftenance , but becaufe hee had power to doe it. And 
when a things is prefent thus , andnot feene, with other things chat are prefene 
and feene ( as this glory was , vnfeene,beeing with his perfon, which was feene) 
this in greeke,is called depasie,the Latines tranflate it in Genefis , cacétes , blind- 
nelle . The Sodomites were {mitten with it, when they fought Lots dore, and 
could not finde ic. But if ichad beene dire& blindneffe , chey would rather haue 
fou we for guides to lead them home , then for this dore which they could 
not finde. | | 


L.VIVES. 


BE" (a) is} Sofayth Tully Tajc.qneff.3. who maketh beauty of two forts vone, whereth 
dignity excelleth,another wherein comelinefle, e/rifietle giueth cuery part of mans lifes 
fewerall beauty. Rbetorst.t, | | 


\ o- 
- That 


vyrd 


ieae — OF THE :-CiTIE OF GOD. 


hat euery mans body, how ewer difper(edhere,{bail bee . 
reftored lim,perfect at the Refurrettion. 
peti hs “in. % OB AGs. OL So 
CV! love voto the: Martyrs is of char nacure that wee defire to behold the 
 {catrés of theit wounds (borriefor the namé of Chrift) even in their glori- 


fication; and perhaps'fo wee fhall.: For they. will not deforme , but gracéthem | 
as then,and pive oura luftre of theirvertue, net-bodily, albeit in the body. Bur 


if any of heim Joftany member forhis:Sauviout , furely hee thall nor wancthat 


in the refutrection , fer vnto fuch was: it fayd, sot an baire of your heads [ball Luck 41 


But if CHRISTS pleafure bee to make their f{carres apparant in the 
world t6 éome, then fhall thofe members alfo that werecut off haue vifible 
markes in the place whence they were cut ; and where they are reioyned, for al- 


— ‘though all their miferable hurts fhall not bee their vifible , yet their (halbe 


fome,whigh neuettheleffe thalbe no more called hurts, but honours . And farre 
becit from vs to thinke~) GODS power infufficient torecolle& and vnitee- 
ucty atome of the bodie, were it burnt, ortorneby beafts, or fallen to duft,or 


diflolued into moyfture ,or exhaled into ayre..G OD forbid that any corer 


‘of nature(though it may bee vnknowne to vs )fhould|lie hid from the eye and 
powerof the almighty. (6) Twély(their great author ) going about to define 
G OD,as wellas hee could; affirmed him to bee. Mens foluta Cr libera, fecreta 
ab omni concretione mortaliomnia fentiens Cr mouens tpfag, mote predita Sempiterne, 
A free and vnbounded incelle& , feparate from all mortall compofition, moo- 
uing and knowing althings and maouing eternally in himfelfe. This hee found 
in the great Philofophers. Now thento come vp to them,what can lie hid from 
him that knoweth all ? what can avoide his power that mooueth all? Andnow 


"+ may wee anfwere the doubt that feemeth moft difficule: chat is; whofe fic(h 


fhall that mans bee atthe refutre@ion , which another man eateth ? 2c) Anci- 
ent ftories, and lare experiencé haue lamentably enformedvs, that this hath 
often come to paflerchar one man hath eaten another: in which ¢afe none will 
fay thac all the flefh went quite. through the body, and noné was turned into 
nutriment:the meager places becomming by this onely meate, more fultand 
‘ficfhy doz prootie the contarry .. Now then my premifes fhall feruetorefolue 
this Ambiguity. Pe eg 


e 


The ficth of the famithed man chat hunger confu med,is exhaled into ayre, 


and thence (as wee fayd before) the Creator can fetch icagaine. Thisdeth — 


therefore of che mari that was eaten , fhall recurne to the firft owner , of whome 
the famifhed man doth bur as it were borrow it, and fomuft repay it againe, 


Andthat of his owne which fatnine dried vppe into ayre, fhalbe recolleéted, _ 


and reftored inro fome conuenient place of his body , which were it fo confu- 
med that no part thereof remained in'natute ; yet GOD could fetch it a- 
Gaine at an inftant, and when hee would himfelfe.- Bur feeing that theve- 
rie heires of our head are fecured vs,it were abfurd to imagine that famine (hold 
haue the power to depriuevs of fomuch of our flefh. | , 
_ _ Thefethings beeing duely confidered, this isthe fumme ofall , that inthe 
Refurrection euery man fhall arife with the rieg bodie thar héehad, or fhould 


haue 


®& 


902 


SAINT AV GVSTINE. C war.20.& 21. 


- haue had in his fulleft growth , inall comelineffe , and without deformity ofany 


Corts 


the leaft member. Topreferue with comelineffe, iffome what bee taken from 


~ any vofhapely part, and decently difpofed of among the reff ( thac it bee not 


loft,and withall,thac the congruence bee obferied ) wee may without abfurdicy 
beleeuethat there may be fome addition vntorhe ftature of the bodie;the incon- 
uenience that was vilible in one part,beeing inuifibly diftributed (and fo annihi- 
lated ) amongft the. reft. If anyone avow -precifely that every man flalla- 
rife in the proper ftature of: his growth which hée:-had. when‘hee died , wee 
dotnot oppofeit, fo that hee. grant vato.an vitce, abolithing ef ajl deformicy, 
dulneffe and corruptibility of the {ayd forme and ftature ;.as things chat bee- 
fit not that Kingdome, wherein the fonnes:dt promife-fhalbe, equalltothe An- 
gells rt G OD, ifnot in their bodies , nor-ages , yet in.abfolute perfeaion and 
beatitude. ., 3 


e 
4 
oe 


LA VIVES. 0 


Otbixke (a) Gods power) The Gouernor of a ay (ifhee bee wife and diligent) knowes 
at an inftant where to fetch any thinke in his houfe,be his rooynes neuer {olasge,and ma- 
ny ;and fhali we thinke thar G O D:cannot doe the like in che world, vnto whoie wifdome 
itis butavery casket? (b) Tully) Te [c.quaft-lib..(c) Ancient flories | Many Ciries in ftraite 
fieges haue beene driuen to this . ‘There is alfo apeople,called eAsthropophagi,or Caniballs, 
thatliue vponmansfieh, | Soe Yee Jae. . 


0 vr ere 


ee, ene ee HO Oe a Oe a ne ceed 


What new and {pivituall bodies flalbe: © ; 
_ giuen Unto the Saints. — ae 


C HAP. 2 I. 


RyYey part therefore of the bodies , peryfhing either in death, or after it, in 
the graue,or wherefocuer, fhalbe reftored, renewed , and ofa naturall ,and 
corruptible bodie, it fhall become immortall, fpirituall and incorruptible. 
Bec itall made into pouder , and duft , by chance, or cruclty , or diflolued into 
ayre , or water , fothat no part remaine vadi{perfed , yet fhall ic nor , yet can ic 
not, bee kept hidden from the ommnipotenty. of the Creator , who will not 
haue one haire of the head to perifh . Thus fhall che fpirituall flef become 
fubie@ to the fpirit, yet fhallic bee fleth ftill asthe carnal {pirit before was 
fubie& tothe fefh andyetafpiricftill  -:: 2 > _ 

’A proofe of which , wee haue in the deformity ‘of: our penall eftace. 
For they were carnall in refpect of the fpiric indeede, ( not meerely of the 
fiefh ) to whom Saint Paul fayd , Jcould not fpeake unto you as vato Jpirituall 
men, but as unto carnall . So man in this life is called /psritual/, though hee 
bee carnal ftill, and haue a lawe in his mexsbers , rebelling againft the law 
of his minde . But hee thalbe fpirituall in bodie , when hee rifeth againe, 
So that it is fowne a natural bodie , but raifed a fpirituall bedie , as the fayd Apof- 
tle fayth . But of the meafure of this {pirituall grace , what and how great 
it fhalbe in the bodie , Ifeare;to determine : for ic were rafhnefle to goe a- 
bout it. oo 

But 


Ld 


i neem ae LEO —— , a Tayo 
Liza2. OF THECITIE OF GOD. ‘aes 


But feeing wee may not conceale the ioy of our hopefor the glorifying of 
GOD, and feeing chat it was fayd from the very bowellsof diuineraprure,Oh 
LORD, Ihaue loued the habstation of thine hcnfe! wee may by GO DS helpe, Pi.26.8 
make aconiedture from the goods imparted to vs in this tranfitory life, how 
great the glories fhalbe that wee fhall receiue inthe other, which as yet wee 
neither haue tried , nor can any way truely defcribe. I omit mans eftate before 
his fall ; our firft parents happineffe in the fertyle Paradife ,which was fothort, 
that their progeny hadnotalteof ic. Who isheethat can expreffe the bound- 
leffe mercies of GO D fhewen vnto mankinde,euen in this life thac wee all trie, 
and wherein we fuffer tcemptations,or rather a continuall temptation (be wee ne- 
uer fo vigilanc)all the time that we enioy it ? | 


eee ne re 


Of mans miferies,drawne upon him by bis fir ft parents and taken 
away from him onely byC HRISTS merites, 
and gratious goodne(fe. 
| Cuap, 22. 

(/\ Oncerning mans firft originall , our prefent life( iffuch a miferable eftate 

beeto bec calleda life) doth fufficiently prooue that all his progeny was 
condemned in him. Whar elfe doth that horred gulfe of ignorance confirme, 
whenceall error hath birth, and wherein all the fonnes of “dam are fo deepe- 
ly-drenfhed, that none can bee freed without toile, feare and forrow? ms i 
elfedoth our loue of vanities affirme , whence there arifeth fucha tempeft of 
cares, forrowes , repinings , feares, madde exulrations,difcords , altercations, 
warres , treafons , furies, hates ,deceipts, flatteries, thefts, rapines., periuries, 
pride, ambition , enuy, murder, parricide, cruelty, villany, luxury, impudence, 
-ynchaftnefle,fornications, adulteries , incefts , feuerall forts of finnes againft na- 
ture,(beaftly euen to bee named) facriledge , herefie,blafphemy,oppreflion ,ca- 
- Jumnies,circumuentions,coufnages, falfe witnefles,falfe iudzements,violence, 
robberies , and fuch like, out of my rememberance to recken, but not-excluded 
fromthe life of man? Allthefe euills are belonging to man, andarife out of 
the roote of that error and peruerfe affe@ion which euery Sonne of dsm 
brings into the world with him, For who knoweth not in what a mift of 
ignorance ( as wee fee in infantes ) and with what a crue of vaine defires 
(as wee fee in boies ) all man-kinde encreth this world ? fo chat {@ might hee 
beeleft vnto his owne election , hee would fall into moft of the tore-fayd mif- 
chiues. 
_ Butthehandof GOD bearing a raine vpon our condemned foules, and pow- 
ring our his mercies vpon vs ( sot {Letting them uppe in ai/pleafure ) law, and 
inftru@ion were revealed vntothe capacity of man.,toawake vs out of thofe 
lethargies ofignorance , and to withftand thofe former incurfions , which not 
-withftanding 1s not done without great toyle and trouble. For what imply thofe 
feares whereby wee keepe little children in order ? what doe teachers,rods, fers- 
laesthongs , and fuch like , butconfirme this? And that dilcipline of the {crip- 
tures that faych that our fonnes muft bee beaten onthe fides whileft they are 
childeren , leaft they waxe ftubborne, and either paft , or very neere paft refor- 
mation 3 Whiatis the end of all thefe, but to.abolifh ignorance, and to bridle. 

Hhbh 2 | corruption © 


904 


SAINT AVGVSTINE. 7 Cap.22. 


corruption both which we come wrapped into the world withall 2 whatis our la- 


bour to remember things, our labour to learne, and our ignorance without this 
Jabour; our agility got by toyle,and our dulneffe if wee negle@ it 2 doth not all 
declare the promptneffe ofour nature (in it felfe) vaco all vicioufnefle ,and the 
care that muft bee had in reclayming it ? Sloath , dulneffe , and negligence, 
areall vices that avoide labour , and yet labour ic felfe is but a profitable 
aine. : 
: But to omit the paines that enforce childeren tolearne the ( {carcely vfefull) 
bookes that pleafe their parents, how huge a band of paines attend the firmer 
ftace of man, and bee not peculiarly infli&ed on the wicked, but generallie 
impendent ouer vsall, through ourcommon eflatein mifery ? who can recount 
them, who can conceiue them ? What feares , what calamities tdoth the loffe of 
childeren,of goods,or of credite, the falfe dealing of others, falfe fufpect, open 
violence, and all other mifchieues inflicted by others , heape vpon theheart of 
man ? beeing generally accompanied with pouerty , inprifonment , bandes,ba- 
nifhments, tortures , loffe of limmes or fences , proftitution to beaftly luft,and 
other fuch horred euents ? So are wee affli@ed on the other fide with chances 
ab externo,with cold, heate,ftormes,fhoures, deluges, lightning , thunder, earth- 
quakes, falls of houfes, furie of beafts,poifons ofayres, waters,plants,and beafts 
of a thoufand forts, ftinging of {erpents, byting of madde dogges, a ftrange acci- 
dent, wherein a beaft moft fociable and familiar with man , thall fometimes be- 


. eomemoreto bee feared then a Lion or a Dragon , infe&ting him whom hee bit- 


eth, with fuch a furious madneffe , chathee isto bee feared of his family worfe 


then any wilde beaft ? what mifery doe Nauigators now andthenendure?or | 


travellers by land 2 what man can walke any where free from fudden accidents? 
(6) One comming home from the court , ( beeing fond enough of his feete) 
fell downe, broke his legge, and died of it, who would haue thought this thar 
had feene him fitting in the court ? He/: the Prieft,feli from his chaire where hee 
fate and brake his neck. What feares are husband-men , yea all men fubie@ 
vnto,that the fruites fhould bee hurt by the heauens , or earth or caterpillers,or 
locufts or fucb other pernicious things ? yet when they haue gathered them and 
layd them vp,they arefecured: notwithftanding I haue knowne granarieé full of 
corne borne quite away with an invndation. , | 7 
‘Who can bee fecured by his owne innocency againft che innumerable in- 
curfionsof the deuills , whenas wee feethat they doe fome-times afflia little 
baptized infants ( who are as innocent as can bee ) and ( by the permiffion of 
GOD) euen vpon their harmelefle bodies , doe thew the miferiesof this life, 
and excitevs ailto labour for the bliffe of the other? Befides , mans body wee 
fee how fubie@ ic is to (¢) difeafes, more then phifick can either cure or compre- 
hend.And in moft of thefe,we fee how offenfiue the very medicines are that cure 
them,nay cuen our very meate we eate, during the time of the maladies domina- 


tion. Hathnot extremity of heate made man to drinke hisowne vrine , and o- 


thers too? Hath noc hunger enforced man to eate man,and to kill one another to 


make meate of ; yea even the mother to maflacre and deuowreher ownechild 
Nay is not our very (d )fleepe (which wee tearme reft ) fome-times fo fraught 
~ with difquiet , thac ic difturbes the foule,and all her powers at once , by 


obiedting fuch horred terroursto the phantafie, and with fuch an expreffion, 
that fhee cannot difcerne them from true terrours ? This is ordinary in fome 
difeafes : befides chat the deceiptfull fiends fome-times will; fo delude 


the 


—_ 


_— = 


L13.22. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 905 


the cyeofa found man with fuch apparitions , that although they make no far- 
ther impreffion inco him, yet they perfwadethe fence that hey aretruely fo as 
they feeme, and the deuills defire is euer to deceiue. From alt thefe miferable 
engagements , (reprefenting a kinde of direct hell ) wee arenot freed but by the 

raceof JESVS CHRIST , For thisishis name; JESYSJIS 
SAV IOV R,and heit is that will faue vs froma worfe life,or rather 2.perpetuall 
death , after thislife : for although wee bauetany and great comfotis by the 
Saints in this life ;'yet the benefits hereofare not giuen at euery ones requeft, 
leaft wee fhouldapply our faith vnro thofe eranfitory refpeéts , whereas it ra- 


/ 


. ther concerneth the purchafe of a life which fhalbe abfolucely free fromall in- 


cohuenience. And themore faithfull that one is in this life che greater con- 
firmation hath hee from grace , to endure thofe miferies without faynting; 
whére-vnto the Paynin authors referre their true Philofophy;which their Gods, 
(e) as Tully faith, revealed vnto fome few of them ( f) There was nemer(faith hee) 
nor couldthere bee « greater gutf{t cinen unto man ,thenthis. Thus our aduer- 
fartes are faineto confeffethat true Philofophy is a diuine gift: whith beeing 
(as they confeffe )the onely helpe againft our humane miferies , and comming. 
from aboue , hencethen it appeareth chat all mankinde was condemned to fuffer 
miferies . But as they confeffe thac this helpe was the preateft guift thatGO D 


_ euer gave, fodoe wee avow and beleeue, that it was giuen by no other God but 


he to whom euen the worfhippers of many gods,giue the preheminence. 


| L. VIVES. 


M Ight (a) hee bee left | There was neuer wild beaft more vntuely then man would bee, 
¥ 3 if education and difcipline did not repreffe him : hee would make all his reafon ferueto 
compafie his appetites,and become as brutith and fond as the very bruteft beaft of all (6) One | 
comming | Of {uch accidents as this read Phy /b.7,cap.4.and Ualer. Maxtib.9. (¢) Difeafas} 
Asthe poxe, (call chem French, Neapolitane, Spanifh,or what you will , thiey are indeed, In- 
dian, and came fromtlience hether , Childeren are borne with them, in the Spanith Indies.) 
or the peftilent fweate that killeth fo quickly: the ancient writers neuer méntion thefe. 
Such another ftrange difeafea Nobleman lay ficke oftat Bruges, when] was there,the Em- 
peror Charles becing as thenin the towne . Job» Martin Poblatie told mec that hee had ne~ 
uer read of the like , and yet I will auouch his theory in phificke fo exad, that cither the anci- 
ent phifitions neuer wrote of it , or if they did , their bookes are loft and perifhed. (4) fant 


-So Dido complayneth to her filter of her frightfull dreames. Usrg.eEneid, (€) As Tully faith 


But where, cannot finde,vnleffe it bee in his 5. de finibus. (f) There was neuer | The words o 
Plate in his Timens tranflated by Tully towards the end of the dialogue. T#//y hath it alfo in 
his fifth deLegib. : | 


' ey 


of sccidents,fencred from the common oflete of muh, 
and pesuliar onely to the inft and righteous, 
Cuar. 23. 


B Efides thofe calamicies that lie generally vpon all, the righteous haue a pecu- 
A liar labour,to refift vice,and be continually in combat with dangerous temp- 
tations . The fleth is fome-times furious , fome-times remiffe , but alwaies rebel- 
lious againft the {pirit , andthe {pisithath the fame forts of confli& againft the 

Hhhbh 3 eth: 


s 


(een npr eg eg gennergent a ID 
906 SAINTAVGVSTINE. = Cuar.23.8 24. 


fleth : fo chac wee cannot doe as wée would , or expellall concupifcence,but wee 
ftriue (by the helpe of GO D) tofuppreffe ic by not confenting, and to curbe it 
as well as we can,by a continuall vigilance : leaft we fhould bee deceiued by like- 
lyhoods,ox futcleties , or involued in errors,leaft wee fhould take good for euill 
and euill for good , leaft feare fhould hold vs from what wee fhould doe,and de- 
fire entice to vs do what we fhould not: leaft che funne fhould fet vpon our anger: 
leaftenmity fhould makevs returne mifchiefe for mifchiefe; leaft ingratitude 
fhould make vs forget our benefactors ; leaft cuill reports fhould moleft our 
good con{cience; leaft our rafh Pe of others fhould déceiuevs, or others 
fe fufpe& of vs, deie& vs : leaft finne {hould bring our bodies to obey it: leaft 
our members fhould bee giuen vppe as weapons to finne : leaft our eye fhould 
follow our appetite: leaft defire of reuenge fhould drawe vs to inconuenience; 
leaft our fight or our thought fhouid ftay too long vpona finfull delight - leaft we 
fhould giue willing eare to euill and vndecene talke: leaft our luft (hould become 
our law : and leaft that wee our felues in this dangerous confli@ fhould eicher 
hope. to winne the vitory by our owne ftrength, or having gotten it, fhould 
giue the glory to our felues, and not to his graceof whom Saint Paa/ faiths 
rCor.re Lasepkes bee unto GOD, who hath ginen vs uectory through our Lord Ie/us Chréft:and 
Rom, 8 37 rat hob : dn all thefe things we are more then conqueror through him that 
ouca US. ; - | 
But yet wee aretoknow this , thar {tand wee neuer fo ftrong againft finne, 
of fabdue it never fo much: yet as long as weeare mortall, weehaue caufe cue- 
ty day to fay, Forgine'vs our tréfpaffes. Buc when wee afcend intothat King- 
dome where immortality dwelleth, wee {hall neither haue warres wherein to 
fight , nor trefpaffes to pray for, nor had not had any heere below, if our 
natures had kept the guifts of their firft creation. And therefore thefecon- 
fli€ts, wherein weeare endangered,and whence we defire ( bya finall victory) 
freedome, art part of thofe miferies where-with the life of man is eoutiaually 
molefted. — ) - 3 


Of the goods that G O D hath beftowed upon this 
miferable life of eurse 


Cap. 24. | | 


\ T Ow let vs fee what goods the Great Creator hath beftowed in his mercy 
vpon this life of ours made miferable by his iuftice. The firft was that 
bleffing before our Parents fall , /acreafe and nial fh fill the earth, ec. And 
this hee reuoked not , for allthat they finned, but left the guift of fruitful- 
neffeto their condemned off-{pring : nor could their crime abolifh that pow- 
er of the ( feede-producing ) feed inherent, and as itwere wouen vppe inthe 
bodies of man and woman : vnto which neuertheleffe death was annexed,fo that 
in one and the famecurrent (as it were) of man-kinde , ranne both the euill me- 
rited by the parent ,and the good , beftowed by thecreator . In which originall 
euill,lieth finne and punifhment: and in which originall good, lieth propagati- 
on,and conformation or informacion . But of thofe euills ,the one whereof 
(finne)came from our owne audacioufnefle , and the other , ( punifhment) from 


the indgement of GO D,we hauc fayd fulcient already: em 
3 a this 


ee 


is Lrpaa, OF THE CITIE£ OF GOD. 907 


A This place is for the goods which GO D hath giuen, and doth ftill giuetothe 
a condemned {tate of man. In which condemnation of his GOD tooke not alf 
ft fromhim chat he had giuen him, (for fo hee {hould haue ceafedtohaue had any 


beeing ) nor did hee refigne his power ouer him, when hee gaue him thrall to the 
Deuill,for the Deuill him-felfe is bis thrall,he is caufe of his fubfiftence, he that 
rs is onely and abfolucely effeatiall ,and giueth all things effence vnder him, gave 
a the Deuill his being alfo. E 
; Of thefe two goods therefore which wee fayd that his Almighty goodnefle 
hadallowed our nature ( how euer depraued,and curfed ) hee gaue the firft(pro- 
d pagation)as a bleffing in the beginning of his workes from which hee refted the 
feauenth day. The fecond,(conformation ») hee giveth as yet , vnto euery worke 
which hee as yet effe@eth. For if hee fhould but with-hold his efficient power 
from the creatures of the earth, they could neither increafe toany further per- 
feGtion,nor continue in the ftate wherein hee fhould leaue them. So then GOD 
creating man,gaue him a power to propagate others , andto allow thema pow- 
er of propagation alfo,yet no neceffity, for thatGO D can depriue them of it, 
whomehcee pleafeth: but ic was his guift vnto the firft parents of man-kinde, 
and hee hauing once giuen ; hath not taken it any more away from all man- 
kinde- Por | 
But although finne did not abolith this propagation, yet it made it farre leffe | 
then it had beene if finnehad not beene. For man beeing in hononr , under ftood Plaln.g.g." 
: not,and {owas compared unto beafts, begetting [uch like as hims-felfe: yet hathhee 
: alitele {parke left him of that reafon whereby hee was like theimageofGOD, — 
: Now if this propagation wanted conformation , nature could keepe no forme 
nor fimilicude in her feueral] produ@ions . For if man and woman had nore 
had copulation, and thac G O D neuer-the-leffe would haue filled che earth 
with men, as hee made  4dam ,with-out generation of man or woman, fo could 
: hee haue made all the re{t. But man and woman coupling, cannot beget vuleffe 
: heecreate. For as Seswt Paul faith ina {piricuall fence , rouching mans confor- 
mation in righteoufnefle: Nesther is bee that planteth, any thing, wor hee that wa- ve 
tereth, but GOD that. giueth the increafe : {o may wee fay heere; Neyther is ' = 
hee chat foweth any thing ;nor fhee that coaceiveth,bue GOD thar giveth 
the forme. ae | | 7 
Ic is his dayly worke tliat the feed vnfoldeth it felfe out of a fecret clew as ie 
-were, and brings the potentiall formes into {uch a@tuall decorum. It is hee 
that maketh chat ftrange combination of a nature incorporeall (the ruler ) and 
a nature corporeall ¢ che fubie&) by which the whole becommeth a living 
creature. A worke fo admirable, that it is able to amaze the minde¢ , and force 
; praife to the Creator from it, beeing obferued not onely in man, whofe rea. 
3 fon giueth him excellence aboue all other creatures , but even in the leaft 
flye that is; one may behold this wondrous and ffupendious combination. It is 
hee that hath giuen mans fpirit an apprehenfion (which feemeth,together with 
: reafon,to lye dead in an infant,vntill yeares = ittovfe ) where-by hee hath 
a power to conceiue knowledge, difcipline, and all habites of truth and good 
! quality,and by which he may excraé the vnderftanding of all the vertués,of pru- 
dence, iuftice,forticude,and temperance,to be thereby the better arined againft 
vicioufneffe,and incited to {ubdue them by the contemplation of that highand | 
| vncliangeable goodneffe: which height, although it doe not attaine vnto, yet 
| who can {ufliciently declare how greatd good it is; and how wonderfulla worke 
| Abb of 


ove 
" 


908 


SAINT AV GVSTINE. Cuar.2g, 


SR ct a PSD aE EIS I EAE eS A A DA OS 
of the Higheft, beeing confidered in other refpe@s ?for befides thedifciplines 


of good behauiour,and the wayes to eternall happinefle ( which are called ver- 
tues ) and befides the grace of G O D whichis in IES VS CHRIS T,impar- 
ted onely tothe fonnes of the promife, mans inuention hath brought forth fo 
many and fuch rare {ciences,and artes ( partly ( « ) neceffary, and partly volunta- 


~ ry) that the excellency of his capacity maketh the rare goodneffe of his creation 


apparant,euen then when hee goeth about things that are either fuperfluous or 
pernicious , and fheweth from what an excellent guift, hee hath thofe his inuen- 
tions and praGtifes. What varieties hath man found out in Buildings, Attyres, 


- Husbandry , Navigation , Sculpture , and Imagery ? what perfe@ion hath hee 


fhewen in the fhewes of Theaters, in taming, killing,andcatching wilde beafts 


What millions of inuentions hath hee againft others , and for him-felfe in poy- 


ay 3 


fons, armes, engines, ftratagems, and fuch like ? What thoufands ot medecines, 
for the health,of meates for the weafand , of meanes and figures to perfwade, 
of eloquent phrafes to delight, of verfes to difport , of muficall inuentions and 
inftruments ? How excellent an inuention is Geography, Arithmetique, A ftro- 
logie,and the reft ? How large is the capacity of man, if wee fhould ftand v 
erticulars? Laftly, how cunningly,and with what exquifite witte, haue the Phi- 
lofophers,and the Heretiques defended their very errors: it is ftrange to ima- 
gine? forheere wee fpeake of the nature of mans foule in generall , as man is 


‘mortall, without any referenceto the tra of truth, whereby hee commeth to 


the life eternall. | 

Now therefore feeing that the true and onely G O D,thar ruleth all in hisal- 
mighty power and iuftice , was the creator of this excellenteffence him-felfe; 
doubt cffe man had never fallen into fuch mifery, (which many hall neuer bee 
freed from ,and fome fhall ) if the finne of thofe that firft incurred it, had nce 


beene extreamly malicious. Come now to thebody: though it bee mortal! as 


the beafts are,;and more weaker then many of theirs are, yet marke what pteae 
goodneffe, and prouidence is fhewenherein by GOD Almighty. Are notall the 
finews and members difpofed in fuch fitte places, and the whole body fo compo- 
fed,as if one would fay, Such an habit atzon ts firteft for a [pirtt of reafon? You {ee 
the other creatures haue a groueling pofture, atid looke towards earth , whereas 
mans vpright forme bids him continually refpe@ the things in heauen. Fhe 
himbleneffe of his tongue and hand, in [peaking, and writing ) and working in 
trades ; what doth it but declare for whofe vfe they were made fo? Yet(¢ exclu- 


_ ding refped of worke,) the very srs, Bi ) and parilicie of the parts doe fo 


concurre,that one cannot difcerne whether maris body were made more for vfe, 
or for comlifieffe. For there is no patt of vfein man, that hath not the proper 
decorum,as wee fhould better difcerne, if wee knew the numbers of the propor- 
tions wherein each part is combined to the other,which wee may perhaps come 
to learne by thofe that are apparant. As forthe reft that are not feene , as the 
courfes of the veines,finews,and arteries,and the fecrets of the fpiritualls, wee 
cannot come to know eheir numbers : for though fome butcherly Surgeons (6 ) 
(Anotamifts they call them ) haue often cut ¥p dead men, (and liue men fome- 
times) to learne the pofture of mans inward parts,and which way tomake in- 
cifions , and to effe& their cures; yet thofe members whereof I {peake , and 
whereof the(¢ ) harmony and proportion of mans whole body doth confift,no 
man could euer finde,or durft euer vndertake to enquire,which if they could bee 
knowne,we fhould finde more reafon,and pleafing contemplation in the forming 
’ 2 of 


' Lry22, OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 909 


eee nee — 
“t of che interior parts,then wee can obferue or colleé& from thofe that lye open to 
re the eye. There are fome parts of the body that concerne decoram onely, andare 


of no vfe: fuch are the pappes on the brefts of men , and the beard, whichis no 
ftrengthning,but an ornament to the face, as the naked chins of women (which 
being weaker,were other-wife to haue this ftrengehninglalfo }do plainly declare. 
Now it there be noexterior part of man that is vfe-fiill, which is not alfo come- 
ly and if there bee alfo parts in man that are comely and not vfe-full,then GOD 
in the framing of mans body, hada greater refpect of dignity then of neceffity. 
For neceffity fhall ceafe, the time {hall come when wee fhall doe nothing but. 
enioy cur(luftleffe beauties,for which we muft efpecially glorifie him,to whom 
the Pfalme faith; Thom bai put on praifé,andcom!inege. And then for the beauty - 
and vfe of other creatures,which God hath fet before the eyes of man (though as 
yet miferable,and amongit miferies) what man is able to recount chem ? the vni- 
uerfall gracefulneffe of che heauens,the carth,and the fea, the brightneffe of the 
light in the Sunne,Moone,and Starres,the {hades of the woods,the colours and 
{mells of flowres,the nunbers of birds ,and their varied hewes and fongs, the 
many formes of beafts and fifhes, whereof the leaft are Wf rareft ( for the fa- 
brike of the Bee or Pifmier is more admired then the Whales ) and the ftrange . 
‘i alceracions in the colour of the fea,( as béeing in feuerall garments ) now one 
greene,then another; now blew , and chen purple ? How pleafing a fight fome- 
: times it is to fee it rough,and how more pleafing when it is calme ? And O what 
: a hand is that,chac giueth fo many meates to aflwage hunger? fo many taftes to © 
* ghofe meates ( with-out helpe of Cooke ) and fo many medecinall powers to 
thofe taftes > How delightfull is the dayes reciprocation with the night? the tem- 
: perateneffe of the ayre ,and the workes of nature in the barkes of trees , and 
7 skinnes of beafts 2O who can draw the perticulars ? How tedious fhould I be in 
every peculiar of thefe few, that I haue heere as ic were heaped together, if I 
| fhauld ftand vpon them oneby one? Yet are all thefe but folaces of mans mife- 
ries, no way pertinent to his glories. | 
What are they then that his bliffe thall giue him, if that his mifery hane fuch . 
- pleffings as thefe? What will GOD giue them whome hee hath predeftinated 
: vnto life,hauing giuen fuch great chings evento them whome hee hath prede- 
a ftinated vnto death ? What will hee give them in his kingdome,for whome hee 
| fent his onely fonne to fuffer all iniuries, euento death, vpon earth? Where- | 
vpon Saint Paul fayth vnto them ; Hee who /pared not hes owne fonne, but gaiie him Rem. 9. 


iv tbh 


for vs all unto death, how thall hee not with Him giue vs all things alfo ?. When 
: this promife is fulfilled ,O what fhall wee bee chen ? How glorious fhall the | 
, - foule of man bee, with-ouct all ftaine and finne,that can either {ubdu®or oppofe 
4 ie,or againft which it need to contend; perfectin all vertue , and enthroned in 
{ all perfeQion of peace? | oe he cur | 
: How great,how delightfull how true, fhall our knowledge ofall things be there, 
’ with-out all error, with-out all labour, where wee fhall drinke ae {pring head 
‘ of GODS fapience, with-out all difficulty , and in all felicity 2 How perfe@ 
: | fhallour bodies bee, beeing wholy fsbie& vnto their {pirits,and there-by fuffi- 
; ciently quickned, and nourithed with-out any ather fuftenance? tor they fhall 


now bee no:more naturall, but fpirituall, they fhall haue the fabftance of flefh, 
quite exempt from all a@fhly corruption. | 


L. VIVES: 


glo 


SAINT AVGVSTINE.  Caares. 


L.VIVES. 
Artly (a) neceffary |Suchas husbandry, the Arte of Spinning , Weaving , and fuch as man 


—™ cannot liue without. (6) Anatomifs | chatis, cutters vp; of 744, a fection, incifion,or cut- 


ting. (¢ ) Harmeny ] The congruence, connexion, and concurrence of any thing may be cal- 


_ led fo: it commeth of «¢uézJa, to adapt, or compofe a thing proportionably. 


Of the obftinacte of fome few in denying the refurrection, which the 
7 whole world beleeusth,as st was fore-told. 


Cuar. 25. 


BY T as touching the goods of the minde,which the bleffed hall enioy after 
chis life, the Philofophers and wee are both of one minde. Our difference is 
concerning the refuggeGion which they deny with all the powe} they haue: but 
the increafe of the iccac hath left vs buca few oppcfers;C HRIS T, (thac 
difprooued the obftinate euen in his proper body ) gathering all vnto his faich, 
learned and vnlearned, wife and fimple. The world beleeued GO DS promife 
in this; who promifed alfo that it fhould beleeue this. It was (4) not Peters ma- 


_ gickthac wroughcit, but ic was that GO D, of whome (as I haue faid often,and 


as Porphyry confeffeth from their owne Oracles ) all their Gods doe ftand in awe 


‘ and dread. Porphyry calles him GO D the Father, and Kinz of GODS:But GOD 


forbid that wee fhould beleeue his promifes as they doe, that willnot beleeue 
what hee had promifed, that the world fhould beleeue. For why fhould wee not 
rather beleeue as the world doth, andas it was prophecied it thould , and leaue 
them totheir owne idle talke thac will not beleeue this that the world was pra- 
mifed to beleeue? for if they fay wee muft take it in another fence; becaufe they 
will not! doethat GO D whomethey haue commended , fo much intury, as to 


~ fay his Scriptures are idle things ; Yet furely they iniure him as much, or more, 


in faying they muft bee vnderftood other-wife then the world vnderftandeth 
them,which is,as GO D both promifed and performed. Why cannot GOD 
raife the flefh vnto eternall life? Is ita worke vnworthy of God ? Touching his 
omnipotencie, whereby hee worketh fomany wonders, I haue faydenoughal- ° 


“+. yeady. If they would fhew meea thing which hee cannot doe: I will tell them . 
—heecannot lye. Let vs:therefore beleeue onely what hee can doe:, and not be- 


leeue ae? ap cannot. If they doenot thenbeleene that hee can lye, let them 
belecue chat hee will doe what hee promifeth. And let them beleeue as the 
world beleeues, which (hee promifed ) fhould beleeue, and whofe beleefe hee 
both produced, and praifed. And how prooue they the worke of the refurreci- 
on any way vnworthy of GO D? There hall beno-corruption there-in, andthat 
is all the euill that can be-fall the body. Of the elementary orders, wee haue 
fpoken already: as alfo of the poffibility of the fwift motion of the incorrup- 
tible body. Of mans bodily health inthis world, and the weakenefle of ic in re- 
_ of immortality, I thinke our thirteenth booke conteineth what will fatisfie. 
Ler fuch as have not read this booke, or will not reheasfe what they haue read, 


read the paflages of this prefent volume already recorded, 


Trees. .«. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. gir 


Le VIVES. : 7 


Or (4) Peters Magick} He'toucheth at ‘Porphyryes flandering of Saint Peter with forcery 
and Magicall enchantments : as you may read in the end of the eighteenth booke, 


7 That Po rp hyryes opinion that the bleffed foules fhowla hane Bo bodiss, is cone _ 
 fuked by Plato bim/elfe,who faith that the Creator promifed the tafe- 
| your deities that they [bould neuer lof ether bodyes. 


ny Sve wry A 


Y® but'(fairh Porphyry Ja blelfed foule mutt hawe tio body :fo that thebodies 


4 incorrupribility is nothing worth , it the foulé cannot bee bleffed vnleffe it 
want a body: But hereof wee haue fufficiently argued in the thirteenth booke: 
Oncly I will rehearfe but oneonely thing. Ifthis were true,then P/zto their préat 


‘Mailter muft goe reformehis bookes , and fay thae the GOD S muftgoe and 


feaue their bodies ( for hee faith they all have celeftiall bodyes) that is, they muft 
dye,tre they can bee bleffed : how-fo-ener that hee hath made'them , promifed © 
them immortality , and‘’an eternall dwelling in their bodies, to'affure them of 

their bliffe: and this fhould come ftoti his power-full will, not from their na- 
tures. The fame P/aro in the fame pYate,ouer-throwes their reafon that fay there 
{hall be no refurreGtion,becaufe ir ts itnpoffible tor G O D the vneréaréd maker 
of theother Gods, promifing them etetnity , faith plainly that hee will doea 
thing which is impoffible: for chug quoth Plato) hee faidvnto them. Becan/é 
you are created, you cannot but hee mortall and a:(folable : yet [Lallyou neuer dye, nor be 
a:ffolued: fate {ball not controule my will which ts a greater bond for your perpetusty, 
then all thofe where-by yor are compofeda. No man that heareth this, (bee hee never 
fo doltith, fo hee bee nct deate) wilfmake any Gueftion that this was an impof- 
fibilicy which Platoes Creator promifed the deities which hee'had made. Forfay- - 
ing, You cannot beeeternall, yet by wy will you [ball bee eternal, what is it but to fay, 
my will fhall make youa or ray ? Hee therefore that (as Péeto faith did 
promife toeffe@ this impoffibility , wall alfo raife the Meth in an incorruptible, 
{pirituall and immortall quality. Why doe they now crye out that that is impof- 


‘fible which G O D hath promifed,which the wotld hath beleeved,and which ie 


was promifed it fhould beleeue, ws that plato hith-felfeis cf our minde, | 
and faiththac GOD can worke impoitbilities ? Therefore it muftpot bee the 

want of a body, but the poffeiion of one veterly incorruptible, that the foule 
fhall be bleffed in. And what fuch body fliall bee fo fitte for their ioy ,as that 
wherein ( whileft it was corruptible )they enduréd fuch woe? They hall not 
then bé plagued with that defire that Wérze/ relateth dut of P&to, faying: : 


|” Re fies & inctpinnt in corpora velle renérti: 
. Now gan they with to liue on earth againe. | 
I meane, when they haue theic bodies that they defired , they thal] no. more de: 
_ any bodyes : but fhall poffefle chofe for ever, without beeing ever foueted 
rom them fo much as one monient. . - | ae 


Contravieties 


ero ee eo = 


912° SAINTAVGVSTINE. _Cuar.27.& 28 


| Contrarieties betweene Plato endPor phyry,wherein if eyther [bold 
. yeeldvunto other both [bentd find out the truth. 


: Crap. 2%. - 


P Lato and Porphyry held diuers opinions,which if they could hauecome to re- 
concile, they might perhaps haue prooued Chriftians. Plato faid, That the 
fonle could not bee alwayes without a body: but that the foules of the wifeHt , at length 
fbould returnc into bodyesagaine .Potphyry fayd , That when the purged joule afcen- 
deth tothe father it returnes no more to the infection of this world. Now if Plato had 
eelded vnto Porphyry,that the foules returne fhould bee onely into an humaine . 
dysand Porphyry vnto Plato, that the foule fhould neuer returne; vnto the mi- 
feries of a corruptible body, if both of them ioyntly had held, both rhefe pof- 

~ tions, | thinke ir would haue followed , both that. the foules (hould returne into 
bodies,and alfo into fuch bodies as were befitting them for-ecernall felicity. For 
Plato faith, The holy fauces [ballveturne to humaine ig and Porphyry faith 5 The 
holy foules [hall not returne.to theenills of this world. Let Porphyry therefore fay with 
Plato, They {ball refurne unto bodyes: and Plata with Porphyry., they [ball not returne 
unto. exills: Andthen they fhall both fay 3.Fhey [ball retwrze vate [uch bodses as 
fhall not moleft them with any enills, namely thofe wherein GOD hath promifed that 
the ble(jed Joules bould hawe their eternall dwelengs . For this I chinke they would 
both grant ys; that if they confeffed a regurne of the foules of the iuft into ime 
mortall bodies, it fhould bee into thofe wherein they-fuffred the miferies of this 
world,and wherein they ferued GO D{o faich(ully, that they obteined an ever- 
lafting deliuery fromallfuturecalamities, | 


what either Plato,Labeo ay Varro might haue asuatled to the true 
faith of the refurvection , if there had beene an 


Harmonie in thesy opinions. | 


Ome of vs liking and louing Plato ( « ) for acertaine eloquent and excellent 
kinde of {peaking : and becaufe his opinion kath beene true in fome things, 
fay;that he thought fomething like vnto that which we doe, concerning the Re- 
furrettion of the (b) dead. Which thing Tally fo toucheth in Lib.de rep. that hee af- 
firmeth that hee rather {pake in {port,than that he had any intent to relate it,as a 
matter of truth. For(e¢ )hedeclaretha man reuiued and related fome things 
agreeable to P/atoes difputations. (d) Labeo alfo faich,that there were two which 
_ dyed both in one day, and that they met cogether in a croffe-way, and that atfer- 
ward they were commanded to returne againe to their bodies,and then that they 
decreed to liue in perpetuall loue cogether,and that it was fo vntill they dyed af- 
terward. But thefe authors haue declared , chat they had fuch a refurrection of 
body,as they haue had, whome truly wee haue knowne to hauerifen againe, and 
to haue beene reftoredto this life : but they doe not declare it in that manner, 
that they fhouldnot dye “oe Yet Marcus Varro recordeth a more ftrange, 
admirable, and wonderfull matter, in his bookes which hee wtote of a Nation 


of 


* of che people of Rome. [haue thought good to fet downe. his owne'words: - 


Liz22. OF THE CITIE OF GOD. 933 


ar ean 
ene ememieeee = ae 


Certaine Genethliaci ( wifards ) Hane written, ([asth he‘that there is a regencrati- Gencthliacz, 
’ on,or fecond birthin men to bee borne againcwhich the Greekes call ( f) mari; yarec lay 

They hauewricten , that it is brought to paffe, aud cffeed in the {pace of foure 
c hundred and fortie yeares : fo that the fame body and foule which had bene fore- 

time knit together , fhould returne againe into the fame coniunction and vnion 

they had betore. Truly this Yarro,or tnole Geneth/éacé ( Iknownot whothey are 


- For hehathrelated their opinion concealing their names) haue faid fomething, 


which although it be fale, becaufe the foules returning into the bodies , whicn 
they haue before managed , willneuer after forfake them: not-withftandingit 
ferueth to ftoppe the mouth of thofe babblers, and to overthrow the ftrong hold 
of'many arguments of thac impoffibilicy.. For they doe nor, thinke it an impofli- 
bie shi:g which haue thought thefethings,that dead bodies refi ued intoaire, 
duft, athes, humors,bodies of deuouring beaftes.,, or ofmen then “elues ,thould 
returne againe to that they haue beene. Wherefore let p/ato, ant: Porphyry or 
fuch rather,as doeaffe@ them and are now liuing , ifthey accord withvs, thae 
holy {cules (hall returne to their bodies , as P/etq faith, but not to returne to any 
eiuls as Porphyrie faith , that that fequele may follow,which our C hriftian faith 


doth declare,to wit, that they fhall receiue fuch bodies ,asthey fhallliuehappi- '- = * - 


ae 


Jy in them eternally without any euill: Let them/(I fay ) affume and take thisal- _ 
fo from Varro, that they returne to the fame badies in which they had beene 
before time,and then there fhall bee a fweete harmony berweene them, concer- 
ning the refurre@tion ofthe flefheternally. = _L.: | 


- . 
a Se OS NE? A A — aE 


L. VIVES, 


Or(a) certaine, )Three things moued not only Greece, butthe whole world to applaud 

Plato,to wit,integritie of life, fandtiry of precepts,and eloquence. The ( #) dead | Enh lb, 
¥1.thinketh that PZzto learned the alteration of che world, the refurreétion and the iudge- 
ment of the damned,out of the bookes of Moyfes : for Plato relateth that all earthly thinges 
fhall perith , a cercaine {pace of tine being expired , and that the frame of the worlde fhall bee - 
moued and fhaken with wonccriulland ftrange motions, not without a great deftruction, | 
and ouerthrow ofall liuing creatures :and thenthat a little time after , it fhall reftand bee at 


~ quiet by the affiftance of the highe(t God,who fhall receiue the gouernment of it, that it may 


not fall and perifh, endowing it with an euerlafting flourifhing eftate, and with immortalitie, 
(¢ ) For he declareth | HerusPamphilus , who dyed in batcell ( ‘Plato in fine in lib. derep) 


writeth ¥ he was reltored to life the tenth day after his death .(icero faith, macrob.iib, 1. ) May Pamphilie 


be prieued that this fable was {coffed 4t, alchough of the vnlearned , knowing it well ynougn us, 
him-felfe,ncuerthelefle auoyding the {candall of a foolifh:reprehenfion , hee had rather tell it 
that he wag raized,than that he reuiued. (d) Labeo |Plin, lib. 7. terteth downe fome examp« 
Jes of them which being carried forth to thcir graue reviued againe,and Plutarch in1.deanima  «. 
relaceth that one Exarchus returned to life againe after hee died , who faid that his foule did Bnarchus, 
depart indeed out of his bodie,but by the commandement of Péwto it was reltored to his bo- 
die againe,thofe hellifh fpirits being grieuoufly punifhed by their Prince , who commaunded 
to bring one Nicandas atanner , and a wraft'er,forgetting their errant and foulie miftaking 
the man went to Exarchus in {tead of Nicardas who dyed wachin a little whYe after, (¢) Gee 2... 

| gethliaci| They are mathematicall pettie footh-fayers , or fortune-tellers, which by the day of Nicandas, 
Natiuitie siege what fhall happen in che whole cour‘e of mans life. Gel/s hach the Chal. 
dxans and the Gexerhliact both in one place (ib, 14. Againft them (1aith he) who name 
them-felues Caldzans,or Genethliact,and profeffe to prognofticate future thinges by the mo- 
tion and pofture ofthe ftars. ( f) 7anéypertciav | Regeneration or afecond birth, Latant. alfo 


* 


| | 
914 SAINTAVGVSTINE. . Cuanaay. 


(i RA a a tl NE FEST AT EI EET IODC IODIDE OTE ODL EET DA TCO tgp a Ee ASEREE 
Lib. 7. rehearferh thefe wordes of (hry/ippusthe ftaicke out of his booke de prouidentia , by 
which he confirmeth a returne after death, 4 "#45, ssquit, xgme, Oe. And wee ( faichhee ) 
certaine revolutions of time being complet and finifhed , after our death, thall be reftored to 
the fame figure and fhape which we haue now. 7 4 


‘Of the quality of the vifion,with which the Saintes foall 
feeGOD ssthe world te come. | 

Cc HAP, 2 Je 
| Now lette vs fee what the Saintes thall doe in their immortall and fpiricuall 
| + ‘ bodies, their flefh lining now no more carnally but fpiritually :fo tar forth 
as the Lord thal vouchfafe to enable vs. And truly what maner of aGiion or(s)ra- 
ther reft and quietneffe it fhall be, if fay chetruch, I know not. ForI haue neuer 
feene it by the fences of thebodie. But ifI fhallfay I haue feenc it by the mind, 
that is by the vnderftanding, ( alafle)how great,or what is our vnderftanding in 
Phillip 4. comparifon of that exceeding excellencie? For there is, the peace or God which 
pajfeth all underftanding, as the Apoftle faith , what vnderftanding , but ours , or 
|. peraduenture of all the holy Angels? For it doth not paffe the vnderftanding 
f of God. If therefore the Saintes thall liue in che peace of G O D, without doubt 
they fhallliueia that peace ,#hich paffeth all under ftanding. Now there is no 
doubt, but that ic pafleth our vnderftanding. But ifit.alfo paffethe vnderftan- 
ding of Angels, for hee feemeth not. to except them when hee faith , 4 vn- 
der landing ; then aecording to this faying wee ought to vnderftand that we are 
notable , nor any .dngels to know that peace where-with G O D him-felfeis 
pacified, in fuch fortas GOD knowethit. But wee beeing made partakersofhis 
peace,according to the meafure of our capacity, fhall obtainea moft excellent 
- peaceinvs, and amongftvs , and with him,according to the quantity of our ex- 
cellency : In this manner the holy Cangels according co their meafure do know 
the fame : but men now doe know it ina farre lower degree , although they ex- 

cell in acuity of vnderftanding. 

Wee muft confider what a great man did fay , Wee know in part , end we prophe- 
cit inpart , untillthat come which isperfect. And wee fee now ina glaffe in a darke 
#\ | fpeaking : but then wee {hallfee him face to face. Sodoe theholy Angelsnow fee 

which are called alfo our Angels,becaufe we beeing delivered from the power of 
darkenefle , and tranflated to the kingdome of God , hauing receiued the pledge 
| of the Spirite, haue already begunne to pertaine to them, with whome wee fhall 
enioy that moft holy and pleafans Csttée of God,of which wee haue already written 

{o many books. So therefore the Angels are ours, which are the Angels of God 
| even as the Chréffe of God, isourChriffe. They are the Angels of GO D,becaufe 
afath,32. they have not forfaken God : they are ours,becaufe they haue begunne to account 
math,18. vs their Cittizens. For the Lord Jefus hath fayd, Take heed you doe not de[pife one 

aa of thefe little ones: For Lfay vate youythat their A doe alwayes beholde the face 

my father whzch is in heanen. As therefore they doe fee,fo alfo we fhall fee, but as 
yet wee doe not feefo. Wherefore the Apoftle faith that which I haue fpoken 
alitele before. we (ee now ina glaffe ins dark {peaking:but then wee {bal fee him face 
so face. Therfore that vifionis kept for vsbeeing the reward of faith , of which 
| alfo 


2 Cor, 3 3. 


Lis.32. | OF THECITIE OF GOD. 915 


‘alfothe Apoftle John {peaking faith, when hee {ball appeare, wee {hall bee like un- ohn, 

to hrm,becaufe weefball fee him asheets. | cea te. eee 
But wee mut vnderftand by the face of GOD, his manifeftation, and notte 

beeany fuch member, as wee hauc in the body , and doe call it by that name.. 

Wherefore when it is demanded of vs, what the Saints {hall doe in that {piri- 

tuall body , I doe not fay, that I feenow, but I fay, that I beleeue : accord- 


ing to chat which] read in the Pfalme. J beleeued, and therefore 1 {pake. I fay Phalm.s15 


therefore , that they fhall fee GOD in the body, but whether by the fame 


manner, as wee now fee by the body , the Sunne, Moone , Starres , Sea and 
Earth, it isno {mall queftion: , | a 

Icis a hard ching to fay, that then the Saints fhall haue fuch bodyes, that 
they cannot fhutte and open their eyes, when they will. Butit is more hardto 
fay , that who-fo-ever fhall (hutte their eyes there , fhall not fee GOD, 
For if the Prophet Hels(ews abfent in body , faw his feruant Giezs receiuing 4 King,t. 
the guifts which Nessans gaue vnto him, whome the afore-faid Prophet had _ 
cleanfed from the deformitye of his leprofie , which the wicked feruant | 
theught hee had done fecretly, his maifter not feeing him : how much more 
fhall the Saints in that fpirieuall body fee all things , not onely if they fhutre 
their eyes, but alfo from whence they are abfent in body ? For then thall 
that bee perfect of which the Apoftle {peaking , faith, #ce know in part , and 
Prophecie in part: but when that {hall come which ss. perfect, that is which in part, 
fall bee done away. | | 

Atterward that hee might declare by fome fimilitude, how much this life 
doth differ from that which fhall bee, not of all fortes of men , but alfo of | 
them which are endewed heere with an efpeciall holyneffe, hee faith. Whenz: 
was achilde, 1 underftood as achilde ,I did (peake as a child, I thought as child, Iforez.. 
but whenl became aman ,1 put away chilaslb things. Wee [ce now in aGlaffe tn 4 
darke-fpeaking, but then wee {ball fee face to fee. Now Iknow in part, but then {ball 
I knowe,euen es I am knowne . If therefore in this life, where the prophefie of 
admirable men isto bee. compared to that life, as children to a young man: 
Not-with-ftanding Heléfeus fawe his feruant receiving guifts where hee him- 
felfe was not: {hall therefore the Saints ftand in neede of corporall eyes to 
fee thofe things which are to beefeene, which Hels/exs beeing abfenc needed 
motto fee his feruant? For when chat which is perfe& is come, neither now 
the corruptible body thall any more aggrauate the foule : and no incorrupti- 
bletbingfhallhinderit> | 

For according to the LXX, interpreters , thefe are the words of the Pro-. 

het to Grezé: Did not my heart goe with thee, and I knew that the man turned 

becke from his charrtot to meete thee , and. thon bait receined money,érc. Butas 
Hierome hath interpreted it oucof the Hebrew: Was not my heart, (faith hee) 
in prefence , when the man returned from his Charriot to mecte thee? Theree 
forethe Prophet fayd, That hee fawethss thing with his heart, wonderfully ay- 
ded by the divine powre ,as no man doubteth. But how much more (hall all 
abound with that guift, when GOD fhall bee all things in all? Neuer-the- © 
leffe thofe corporall eyes alfo fhall haue their office , and fhall bee in their 


place, and the fpirit fhall vfe them by the {pirituall body. For the Prophet 


did v{e them to fee things prefent , though hee needed not them to fee his © 
abfent feruant, which prefent things er co fee by the {pirit,though 
| iti 2 hee 


+ 
= s 
. 


eee ‘SAINT AV GVSTINE. Cuar.2g, 


. heedidfhut his eyes, euenas hee faw things abfent, whete hee was not with 
them. GOD forbid therefore,that wee fhould fay chat the Saints fhall not fee 

G OD in that life, their eyes being fhut,whomethey fhall all alwayes fee by the 

fpirit. But whether they fhall alfo fee by che eyes of the body , when shey fhall 

haue them open,from hence therearifeth aqueftion. For if they fhall bee able 
todoeno more , in the {pirituall body by that meanes, as they are fpirituall 

— eyes,than thofe are able which wee hane now , with-out all doubr they fhall noe. 

bee ableto feeG O D: Thereforethey fhall bee of afarre other power, if that 
incorporate nature fhall bee feene by them, w sm is conteined in no place , but 

is whole euery where. For wee doe not fay, becaule wee fay that GO Dis both 

Hier,25. in heauen and alfo in earth. (For hee faith by the Prophet, / fil heanen and carth) 
that hee hath one pare in heauen,and another in earth , buthee is whole in hea- 

uen , and whole in earth, not at feuerall times , but hee is both together, which 

no corporall nature can bee. Therefore there fhall bee a more excellent and po- 

tent force of thofe eyes,not that they may fee more tharply then fome ferpents 

and Eagles are reported to fee: for thofe living creatures by their greacett 
fharpneffe of fecing can fee nothing but bodies , but that they may alfo fee incor- 

porat things. And it may be,thatgreat powre of feeing was granted for a time 
Iob.7- — tothe eyes of holy Job, yea in that mortall body, when hee faithto GOD. Bythe - 
hearing of the eare Idzd heare thee before,but now my eye doth fee thee, therefore I de- 

Spifed my felfe,confumed,and efteemed my felfe to bee earth and afoes. Although there 

Ephef,r; is nothing to che contrary,but that the eye of che heart may be vnderftood,con- 
cerning which eyes the Apoftle faith: To hawe the eyes of your heart enlightned But 

no Chriftian ba i, Ho GO D fhalbe feene with them, when hee fhalbe 
 ‘Math,y, {een which faithfully receiueth that which GOD the maifter faith: Bfed are the 
‘pure in heart, becaufe they {ball feeGOD. But it now is in queftion, whether 

| hee may bee feene there alfo with corporall eyes. For chat which is writ- 
Bukeg- tens And all flefh bell fee the falustion of God, without any knotte, or {cruple 
of difficulty. may fo bee vnderftood, as if it had beene fayd. Andeuery man 
fhall fee the CHRIST of GOD,who ashee hath beenefeene in bodie. thal 
likewife bee {eene in bodie , when hee fhall iudgethe quicke, and the dead. 
But that hee is the Saluationof GOD, there are alfo many other ceftimonies 

of the Scriptures. : _ = 

~ - But the wordes of that worthie and reuerent old man Simeon declare it 
more euidentlie : who , after hee had reeeiued the Infanc CHRIST into 
hishands, Now( faythhee) /etsef? thou thy fernant,O LORD, depart in peace; 

' according to thy worde: becaufe mine eyes hauc feene thy [alaation. Alfo, thar, 
which the aboue recited Job faith , as it isfoundin many coppies taken from 
lobrgi the Hebrew : And I {hall feeGO D in my flelb. Verclie hee prophecied the 
— Refurrection of the fleth without all doubt , yet hee fayd not, By msy flefh. 
For ifhee had fayd fo, GOD CHRIS Tmighthaue beene vnderftood, who 

fhalbe feene in the flefh by the fleth: now indeed it may alfo be taken, / my flefh, 

Conse,” (P) Afball feeG O Das if hee had fayd. I fbalbe in myflefb,when 1fball fee GO D. 
ess And that which the Apoftle faith, Fase to face : doch not compell vs chat 
wee beleeue that wee fhall fee GOD by this cerporall face , where there 

_ are corporall eyes , whome wee fhall fee by the fpirit without intermiffion. 
2Co.3+ For vnleffe there were a face alfo of theinwarde. man ,the fame Apoftle 
would noc fay . But wee beholdeng the glorie of the LORD with the 


face 


Luc, 


rt 


“eS Fe ee 
sors a Pr * es 


L13%.32.6 _~ OF THE CITIE OF GOD. + gz 


face vauayledare transformed inte the [ame Imsge from glory snto glory , as it were £0 
the {pirit.of the LOR D. Neither doe wee otherwife vnderftand that which is 


.- . 
e 


fung inthe Pfalme. Come unte him and bee enlightened , and your faces {ball not Pil 33.34 


bee alharned. For by faith wee come vntoG OD, which as st is eutdent belon gethtothe 

beart and not to the body (viiuerfally). But becaufe wee know not now how neare 

the fpirituall body fhall approche, for wee fpeake of a thing of which wee haye 

no experience, where fome things are, which can-not otherwife bee vnderftood, 

che anthoticy of che diuine Scriptures doth not refift, but fuccout vs : It muft 

needs bee that that happen.in vs which is read in the booke of #2/dome: Th gee 
thoughts of men are fearefull, and our fore-fights are uncertaine. For if that man- eo 
ner of arguing of the Philofophers , by which they difpute that incelligible 
things.are fo to beg feene by the afpec of the vnderftanding;and fenfible, that is 

to fay corporall chings fo to bee feene by the fence of the body that neither the 
vnder{tanding can bee able ro behold intelligible things by the body, nor corpo- 
rall things by them-felues,can bee moft certaine vnto vs, truly it fhould likewife 
be certaine,that God could notbe feene by the eyes of 2 {pirituall body But boch 
true reafon,and propheticall authority will deride this manner of difputing For _ 
who is fuch an obftinate and oppofite enemy to the cruth, that hee dare fay, chat 
God knowcth not thefe corporall things 2 Hath hee therefore a body by the eyes 
of which he may learnethofe things ? Further-more doth not that, which wee 


- fpakea little before of the Prophet Heli/eus,declare fufficiently alfo , that corpo- 


rall chings may be feeneby the fpirit, not by the body ? For when his feruantre-. 
ceived rewards , though it was corporally done, yet the Prophet faw it ,not by Kings.4.5. 
the body buc by the fpiric. As therefore it is manifeft, that bodies are feeneby 

the fpirit : what if here fhall be fuch _— powre of the fpirituall body,thac the 

{pirit may alfo befeene by the body? For Godis a {pirit. More-ouer, euery man 

knoweth his owne life, by which hee liueth now in the body, and which doth 

make thefe earthly members groweand increafe ,and maketh chem living, by 


the inward fenfe ,and not by the eyes of the body. Bur hee feeth the liues of 


other mien by the body, when as they-are inuifible . For from whence doe 
wee difcerne liuing bodyes from vn-liuing , voleffe wee {ee the bodyes and 
liues together. But wee doe not fee with corporall eyes the liues with-out 
bod CS. : . ; 3! a 
Wherefore it may bee, and ie is very credible, that then wee fhall fo fee the 
worldly bodyes of the new heaven, and new earth , as wee fee GO D prefene 
cuery where ,and alfo gouerning all corporall things, by the bodyes wee thall 
carry, and which wee fhall {ce, where-fo-ener wee fhall curnt our tyes, moft 
euidently all clowds of obfcurity beeing remooued 3 not in fuch forts as the 
inuifible things of GOD are feene now, beeing vndérftood by thofe things 
which are made,in a glaffe, darkly and in part, where faith preuailech more invs, 
by which wee beleeue,than the obie& of things which wee fee by corporal eyes. 
But cuen as,fo foone as wee behold men amongft whome wee liue, beeing 4- 
live, and performing vitall motions : wee doe not beleeue that chey liue, but 
wee fee them to liue, when wee cannot fee their life wish-out bodyes : which 
nét-with-ftanding wee clearely behold by the bodyes, all ambiguity beeing re- 
mooued: fo where-fo-euer wee fhall turne about thefe {piricuall eyes of our 
—— fhall like-wife fee incorporare G O D gouerning all chings by out 
odyes. a — sae eal 
GOD therefore {lal éyther fo bee feene by thofe eyes, becaufe they haue 
a Wiig fom¢ 


Fn TTT EAT LO ne 

918. | SAINT AVGVSTINE. | C HAarezo- 

fome-thing in thar excellencie , like vnto the vnderftanding whereby the incor- 

porall nature may be feene,which is either hard or imp offible to-declare by any 

exainples or te(timonies of diuine Scriptures : or that whichis more eafily to be 

vnderftood,God (hall be fo knowne, 8 confpicuous vnto vs, that he may be feene 

by the (pirit ofeuery one of vs,in every oneof vs,may be feene of another in an- 

other,may be feene in him-felfe, may be feene in the new heauen and in the new 

-earth,arid in euery creature,which (hall be then: may be feene alfo by the bodies 

in every body,where-fo-euer the eyes of the fpirituall body fhall be dire@ed by 

the fight comming thether. Alfo our thoughts {hall bee open , and difcouered to 

One another.For then (hall that bee fulfilled which the Apoftle intimateth: when 

heefaid. Judge not any thing before the time , vntillthe Lordcome, who willl ughtes 

— RRenke things that are hid in darkne([e,and make the counfels of the heart manifest, and then 

| fballenery msn haue praife'of GOD. | 2.7. = be 

a rae L.VIVES.. a | 

Or pather reT) For tiiere fhall be a reft from all labours,& 1 know fiot by what meanes, 

che tame of teftis'thore delightfull and {weet than of a€tion: therefore Ari/tetle nomi- 

nateth chat contemplacion,which he maketh the chiefeft bearitude, by the name of Reft. Be- 

fides che Sabbath is that, to wit, a ceafling from labour and a fempeternall reft.( 6) I {hall fee 

God } It is read in (ome ancient copies of Angaftine. 1 fall fee Goa my fanioxr. But we doe nei- 

cher read it in Hieromes tranflation, neither dothir feeme to be added of Auguffine by thofe 

words which follow. For he fpeaketh of God with-out the'man-hood, Further if he had added. 

Sasionr hee :ould haue feemed to haue fpoken of Christ. —_ | 


| Ofthe erernall felicity of the City of God,and the perpetual Sabbath. 
-.  Y | Cwap.3o0 > gi te. oad 
Ho” great (4) fhall that felicity be,where there (hall be no éuill things where 
no good thing (hall lye hidden, there wee (hall haue leafure to veter forth the 
praifes of God, which fhall bee allchings in all? For what other thing is done, 
_ where we fhall not reft with any flouthfulneffe , nor labour for any want I know 
Pilm,.83; not.I am admonifhed alfo by the holy fong,where I read,or heare.Ble/fed are they 
oh Lord,which dwell in thy houfe they {ball praife thee for ener and exer. All the mem- 
bers and bowels of the incorruptible body .which we now fee diftributed to di- 
uerfe vies of neceflity, becaufe then there fhall not bee that necefficy , but a full, 
fure,fecure, euer-lafting felicity , fhall be aduanced and go forward in the praifes 
of God. For then all the numbers (of which I haue already fpoken)of the corpo- 
rall Harmony fhall nor lye hid,which now lye hid: being difpofed inwardly and 
out-wardly thrcugh all the members of the body ,and with other things which 
fhall be feene there, being great and wonderfull;thall kindle the reafonable foules 
~ with delight of fuch a reafonable beauty to found forth the praifes of fucha great 
and excellent workman. What the motions of thofe bodies (hall be there, dare 
not raft.ly define,when I am not able to diueinro the depth of that miftery. Ne- 
vertheles both the motion & ftace,as the forme of chem, thal be comly & decent, 
whatfoeuer it fhall be, where there thall bee nothing which fhall not bee comly. 
Truly where the {pirit wil there forth-with fhall the body be: either will rhe {pi- 
rit will any thing, which may not befeeme the body,nor the fpirit. There fhiall be 
true glory where no man fhall be praifed for error or flattery. True honor,which | 
thal! be denied vnto none which is worthy, {hall bee giuen vntonone vnworthy. 
Butneither fhall any vnworthy perfon couet after it, where none is‘permittedto — 
bee, burhee which is worthy. There is true peace, whereno man fuffereth any 
thing which may moleft hii, either of him-felfe , or of any other. Hee a 
| | C 


oD . 


- S2 wh Sa “Sa Bea we % 


Lina2. OF THE.CITIE OF GOD. ' gig 


felfe fhall bee the reward of vertue,which hath giuien vertue, and hack promifed 
himfelfevato hiny,then whom nothing can be better and greater.Forwhatorher . 
thing is that,which he hath fayd by thg Prophet ; Jmlbe their GO D,and they fhal- be026 
be my people: but 1 wilbe whereby.they. fhalbe fatisfied: /wée what-foeuer is 
lawfully defired of men, life, health,food,abundance, glory,honor,peace,andall 
good things? For foalfo is, chat rightly, vnderftood, which the Apoftlefayth. 1-Con 15 
That G O D.may bee alin ally Hethalbec theend of our defires, who thalbe{eene 
without end,who fhalbe lougd withoutany faciety , and praifed without any te- 
' dioufueffe. This funstion, this affe@ion,this a@ion verily fhalbeynco all as the e- 
ternall life fhalbe common toall,. But who is fufficient tothinke, much more Degrees of 
~ tovtter what. degrees there fhall alfo. bee of the rewardes for merits,ofthe ho- rewards, 
"- nors,and glories ? But wee mutt not doubt , but that there fhalbe degrees. And 
alfo that Bleffed Cicty fhall fee that ip it felfe , chat no inferior fhall enuy his fu 
perior: euenas now the other Angells doenot‘enuie the Arch-angells : as eue- 
ry one would nor be which he hath nop receiued,although hee be combined with 
a moft peaceable bond of concord to him which hath receiued, by which the fin- 
ger will not bee the eye in the body, when asa peaceable coniunétion,and knit- 
ting together.of the whole flefh doth containe both members . Therefore one 
thi fohauea gift leffe then another hath, chat hee alfo hath this gift,chat he.will 
haueno more. Neither therefore fhall they not haue free will, becaufe finnes 
{hall not delight them. For it thalbe more free beeing freed from the delight of 
finning to an vndeclinable and fted-faft delight of not finning . For the firft free- 
will, which was given to man,when hee was created righteous, had powernot to 
_ finne,but it hadalfo powre to finne: but this laft free-will fhalbe more powerfull 
then that,becaufe ie fhall not be ableto finne .Bur this alfo by the.giteofG OD, 
not by the poffibily of his owne nature. For it is one thing to be G O D, another. 
thing to bee parcaker of GO D. GOD cannot finne by nature, but hee which is 
partaker of GO D, receiueth from him; that hee cannot finne. But there were 
degrees to be obferued of the diuine gift, that the firft free-will might be giuen, 
whereby man might be able not tofinne: the laft whereby he might notbe able 
tofinne: andthe firftdid pertaine to obtaine a meric, the later toreceiuea re-- 
’ ward. But becaufe that nature finned , when it might finne, it is freed by amore. 
bountifull grace, chat it may be brought to.that liberty;in which ie cannot finne. 
For as the tirft immoreallity , which Adam loft by finning,was to bee ablenot to. 
die. For fo the will of piety and equity fhalbe free from beeing loft, as the will of. 
felicity is free from being loft. For as by finning wee neither kept piety nor feli- 
city :neither truely haue we loft the will of felicity , felicity, beingloft. 

Truely is G O D himfelfetherefore to be denied to l:aue free-will,becaufe hee 
cannot finne ? Thérefore the free-willof that Citty fhillboth bee oneinall,and = 
alfo infeperable in cuery one, freed from all evill, and filled with all good,enioy-. 
ing an euerlafting pleafure of eternall ioyes , forgetful of faults,torgetfullof. = 
-punifhments, neither therefore fo forgetfull of her deliuerance , that {hee bee 
vngratefull to her deliuerer. For fo much as concerneth reafonable knowledge 
fheeis mindefull alfo of her euills ,which are pafts but fo much as concérneth 


the experience of ihe fenfes,altogethervnmindefull, = ce gy 
— For a moft skilfull Phificion. alfo knoweth almoft all difeafes of the. 
bodie, as they are knowne by art: bucas they arefelt inthe bodie, heeknoweth ..-'" 
not many , which he bath not fuffered.As therefore thereare twoknowledgesof two, -: 
euills : one, by which théy are not rp bala the vaderftanding. oc maceee 
ea #9 itg che 


920 7 SAINT AVGVSTINE. | CAP.3 06 


-—_ 


the other,by which they are infixed to the fenfes of him, that feeleth them(for afl 
ices areocherwife knowne by the do@trine of wifdome ,'and ocherwife by the 


ral, 83 
Pial4s 


Gen.2 


Gene.3 


goods sand departing from the true GO D,by w 


moft wicked life of a foolifh man)fo there are two forgecfulneffes of euills. For 2 
skilfulland learned man doth forget them one way, and hee that hach had expe- 
rience and fuffered them, forgetteth them another way. The former, ifbe neg- 
le& his skill , the later, ifhee want mifery. According to this forgetfulneffe, 
which I haue fet downe in the later place,the Saints fhall not be ‘mindefull of ¢- 


uils paft.For they fhall wane all euils, fo that they {hall be abolithed veterly from. 


their fenfes. Neuertheleffe that powre of knowledge , which fhalbe great in 
them, (hall not onely know their owne euils paft, but alfo cheeuerlafting mifery 
of the damned. Orherwife if chey fhall not know thatthey haue beene mifera- . 
ble,how , asthe pfalme fayth, Shell they fing the mercies of the LORD for ener? 
Then which fong nothing verily fhalbe more delightfullcto that Citty, to the 
glory of the loue of CHRIST, by whofe bloud we are deliuered. There fhalbe 
perte&ed , Bee at reft and fee, becanfe 1am GOD. Becaufethere fhalbe the moft 
great Sabbach hauing no euening . Which the LOR D commended vantovs in 
the firft workés of the world , where it isread. S9dG OD refed the feancnth day 


_ from alt his workes he wade snd fanitified it becanfe in it hee refted frons all bis workes, 


which G O D began te make . For we our felues alfo bee the feauenth day, when wee 
fhall be replen:thed,and repaired with his benedition and fanGification. There 
being freed fromtoyle wee fhall fee,becaufe hee is GO D.which wee our felues 
would hate béeene when We fell from him, hearing from the Seducer : Ye fhabbe as 

Fofe meanes we fhouldbe gods 
by participation of him,not by forfaking him. For what haue wee done without 
him,buct that we haue fayled from him and gone back in his anger ? Of whom we 
being reftored arid petfected witha greater grace fall reft for euer , feeing that 
he is G O Dywith whom we thalbe replentifhed,when hee fhalbe all in all: for our 


_ good workes alfo,alchough they are rather vnderftood to bec his then ours ,are 


Beats 


Ezech,20 


then imputed vnto vs to obtainethis Sabbath : becaufe if wee fhall atrribure 
them vnto our felues,they thalbe feruile, when itis fayd of the Sabboth. Yee foal 
wot dot any ferile worke in st .Forwhichcaufeit is {aydalfo bythe Prophet Eze- 
chiel. Aad [haut giuch my Sabbaths unto them for a figne betweene mee, aud them, 
that they micht know , that lam the LO RD which fenctifie them? Then thall wee 
know this thing perfe@ly,and wee fhall perfe@ly reft and fhall perfe@ly {ee,thac 
he is GOD. If therefore that number of ages,as of daics beeaccompted accor- 
ding to the diftin@ions of times , which feeme to bee expreffed in the facred 
Scriptures , that Sabbath day thall appeare more evidently , becaufe it is found 


«tobe the feauenth, that che firft age,as it were the firft day, bee from ~dam vnto 


Three ages 
before 


of Chrift. 


A&.s 


the the floud, then the fecond from thence vnto Ubraham,not by equality of times, 


buc by number of generations. For theyare foundto haue a tenth number. 
From hence now,as Mathew the Euangelift doth conclude , three ages doe fol- . 
low-euen vnto the comming of C HRIST, euery one of which is expreffed by 
foureteene Generations. From Abraham vnto Dauid is one, from thence evens 
vntill the Tranfmigration into Babilon, isanother, thethird from thence vato 
the incarnat Natiuiry of CHRIST. Soallofthemare made fiue: Nowthis 
age is the fixc , to bee meafuredby no number, becaufe of that which is fpoken. 
It is not for yon to know the feafons , whichthe father hath placedin his owne powre. 
After this age GOD reft asin the feauenth day, whenGOD fhall make 
that fame feaueoth day to reftin himfelfc, which wee fhalbc. arene 
Wo 


| ears 


= 


et sis FM sa 


ST Se ee 


oe ee —_ =—=_-_ NS.” 


workeby the helpeof GOD. Let them which c 


J | , = 7 ) ' 
Lis. 22, OF THE CITIE OF GOD. - 921 


would take vp along time to difcourfenow exa@ly of euety one of thofe feue- 
rallages. But this feauenth fhalbe our Sabbath,whofe end fhall not be the eue- 
ning, butthe LORDS day, asthe eight eternall day , which is fanGtified and 
made holy by che refurrection of CH RIS T, not onely prefiguring the eternal 
reft of the fpirit, but alfo of the body . There we fhall reft,and fee,wee fhall fee, 
andloue, wee fhall loue,and we fhall praife:Behold what fhalbe in the end with- 
oucend/ For what other thing is our end, butto cometo that Kingdome of 
whichthereis no end:(6) Ithinke. I haue difcharged the debt of this great 
ah I haue dene too little, 
and they which thinke I haue done too much, grant mee a fauorable pardon : But 
let them, which thinke I haue performed enough, accepting it with a kindecon- 
gratulation, giue nothankes vnto me,but vaste the LO RD with me. Amen.
