On Rebuke and Grace (Augustine of Hippo)
Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, Series 1, 1887. Public domain.
Source: Christian Classics Ethereal Library.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

======================================================================

 a treatise on rebuke and grace.

 Extract from Augustin's "Retractations,"

 Book II. Chap. 67,

 On the Following Treatise,

 "de correptione et gratia."

 ------------------------

 I Wrote again to the same persons [3235] another treatise, which I
 entitled On Rebuke and Grace, because I had been told that some one
 there had said that no man ought to be rebuked for not doing God's
 commandments, but that prayer only should be made on his behalf, that
 he may do them. This book begins on this wise, "I have read your
 letters, dearly beloved brother Valentine."

 [3235] Valentine, to wit, and the monks with him who inhabited the
 convent at Adrumetum. See above, at the beginning of the preceding
 treatise, On Grace and Free Will.

 A Treatise on rebuke and grace,

 by aurelius augustin, bishop of hippo;

 In One Book,

 addressed to valentine, and with him to the monks of adrumetum.

 a.d. 426 or 427

 ------------------------

 In the beginning the writer sets forth what is the Catholic faith
 concerning law, concerning free will, and concerning grace. He teaches
 that the grace of God by Jesus Christ is that by which alone men are
 delivered from evil, and without which they do absolutely no good; and
 this not only by the fact that it points out what is to be done, but
 that it also supplies the means of doing it with love, since God
 bestows on men the inspiration of a good will and deed. He teaches that
 the rebuke of evil men who have not received this grace is neither
 unjust--since they are evil by their own will--nor useless, although it
 must be confessed that it is only by God's agency that it can avail.
 That perseverance in good is truly a great gift of God, but that still
 the rebuke of one who has not persevered must not on that account be
 neglected; and that if a man who has not received this gift should
 relapse of his own will into sin, he is not only deserving of rebuke,
 but if he should continue in evil until his death, he is moreover
 worthy of eternal damnation. That it is inscrutable why one should
 receive this gift and another should not receive it. That of those who
 are predestinated none can perish. And that the perseverance, which all
 do not receive who are here called children of God, is constantly given
 to all those who are truly children by God's foreknowledge and
 predestination. He answers the question which suggests itself
 concerning Adam--in what way he sinned by not persevering, since he did
 not receive perseverance. He shows that such assistance was at the
 first given to him, as that without it he could not continue if he
 would, not as that with it it must result that he would. But that now
 through Christ is given us not only such help as that without it we
 cannot continue even if we will, but moreover such and so great as that
 by it we will. He proves that the number of the predestinated, to whom
 a gift of this kind is appropriated, is certain, and can neither be
 increased nor diminished. And since it is unknown who belongs to that
 number, and who does not, that medicinal rebuke must be applied to all
 who sin, lest they should either themselves perish, or be the ruin of
 others. Finally, he concludes that neither is rebuke prohibited by
 grace, nor is grace denied by rebuke.

 Chapter 1 [I.]--Introductory.

 I Have read your letter--Valentine, my dearly beloved brother, and you
 who are associated with him in the service of God--which your Love sent
 by brother Florus and those who came to us with him; and I gave God
 thanks that I have known your peace in the Lord and agreement in the
 truth and ardour in love, by your discourse delivered to us. But that
 an enemy has striven among you to the subversion of some, has, by the
 mercy of God and His marvellous goodness in turning his arts to the
 advantage [3236] of His servants, rather availed to this result, that
 while none of you were cast down for the worse, some were built up for
 the better. There is therefore no need to reconsider again and again
 all that I have already transmitted to you, sufficiently argued out in
 a lengthy treatise; [3237] for your replies indicate how you have
 received this. Nevertheless, do not in any wise suppose that, when once
 read, it can have become sufficiently well known to you. Therefore if
 you desire to have it exceedingly productive, do not count it a
 grievance by re-perusal to make it thoroughly familiar; so that you may
 most accurately [3238] know what and what kind of questions they are,
 for the solution and satisfaction of which there arises an authority
 not human but divine, from which we ought not to depart if we desire to
 attain to the point whither we are tending.

 [3236] Or according to some mss., "progress."

 [3237] Treatise on Grace and Free Will, see above.

 [3238] Or, "most clearly."

 Chapter 2.--The Catholic Faith Concerning Law, Grace, and Free Will.

 Now the Lord Himself not only shows us what evil we should shun, and
 what good we should do, which is all that the letter of the law is able
 to effect; but He moreover helps us that we may shun evil and do good,
 [3239] which none can do without the Spirit of grace; and if this be
 wanting, the law comes in merely to make us guilty and to slay us. It
 is on this account that the apostle says, "The letter killeth, but the
 Spirit giveth life." [3240] He, then, who lawfully uses the law learns
 therein evil and good, and, not trusting in his own strength, flees to
 grace, by the help of which he may shun evil and do good. But who is
 there who flees to grace except when "the steps of a man are ordered by
 the Lord, and He shall determine his way"? [3241] And thus also to
 desire the help of grace is the beginning of grace; of which, says he,
 "And I said, Now I have begun; this is the change of the right hand of
 the Most High." [3242] It is to be confessed, therefore, that we have
 free choice to do both evil and good; but in doing evil every one is
 free from righteousness and a servant of sin, while in doing good no
 one can be free, unless he have been made free by Him who said, "If the
 Son shall make you free, then you shall be free indeed." [3243] Neither
 is it thus, that when any one has been made free from the dominion of
 sin, he no longer needs the help of his Deliverer; but rather thus,
 that hearing from Him, "Without me ye can do nothing," [3244] he
 himself also says to Him, "Be thou my helper! Forsake me not." [3245] I
 rejoice that I have found in our brother Florus also this faith, which
 without doubt is the true and prophetical and apostolical and catholic
 faith; whence those are the rather to be corrected--whom indeed I now
 think to have been corrected by the favour of God--who did not
 understand him.

 [3239] Ps. xxxvii. 27.

 [3240] 2 Cor. iii. 6.

 [3241] Ps. xxxvii. 23.

 [3242] Ps. lxxvi. 10.

 [3243] John viii. 36.

 [3244] John xv. 5.

 [3245] Ps. xxvii. 9.

 Chapter 3 [II.]--What the Grace of God Through Jesus Christ is.

 For the grace of God through Jesus Christ our Lord must be
 apprehended,--as that by which alone men are delivered from evil, and
 without which they do absolutely no good thing, whether in thought, or
 will and affection, or in action; not only in order that they may know,
 by the manifestation of that grace, what should be done, but moreover
 in order that, by its enabling, they may do with love what they know.
 Certainly the apostle asked for this inspiration of good will and work
 on behalf of those to whom he said, "Now we pray to God that ye do no
 evil, not that we should appear approved, but that ye should do that
 which is good." [3246] Who can hear this and not awake and confess that
 we have it from the Lord God that we turn aside from evil and do
 good?--since the apostle indeed says not, We admonish, we teach, we
 exhort, we rebuke; but he says, "We pray to God that ye do no evil, but
 that ye should do that which is good." [3247] And yet he was also in
 the habit of speaking to them, and doing all those things which I have
 mentioned,--he admonished, he taught, he exhorted, he rebuked. But he
 knew that all these things which he was doing in the way of planting
 and watering openly [3248] were of no avail unless He who giveth the
 increase in secret should give heed to his prayer on their behalf.
 Because, as the same teacher of the Gentiles says, "Neither is he that
 planteth anything, neither he that watereth, but God that giveth the
 increase." [3249]

 [3246] 2 Cor. xiii. 7.

 [3247] 2 Cor. xiii. 7.

 [3248] In aperto.

 [3249] 1 Cor. iii. 7.

 Chapter 4--The Children of God are Led by the Spirit of God.

 Let those, therefore, not deceive themselves who ask, "Wherefore is it
 preached and prescribed to us that we should turn away from evil and do
 good, if it is not we that do this, but God who worketh in us to will
 and to do it'?" [3250] But let them rather understand that if they are
 the children of God, they are led by the Spirit of God [3251] to do
 that which should be done; and when they have done it, let them give
 thanks to Him by whom they act. For they are acted upon that they may
 act, not that they may themselves do nothing; and in addition to this,
 it is shown them what they ought to do, so that when they have done it
 as it ought to be done--that is, with the love and the delight of
 righteousness--they may rejoice in having received "the sweetness which
 the Lord has given, that their [3252] land should yield her increase."
 [3253] But when they do not act, whether by not doing at all or by not
 doing from love, let them pray that what as yet they have not, they may
 receive. For what shall they have which they shall not receive? or what
 have they which they have not received? [3254]

 [3250] Phil. ii. 13.

 [3251] Rom. viii. 14.

 [3252] Some mss. have "his land."

 [3253] Ps. lxxxv. 12.

 [3254] 1 Cor. iv. 7.

 Chapter 5 [III.]--Rebuke Must Not Be Neglected.

 "Then," say they, "let those who are over us only prescribe to us what
 we ought to do, and pray for us that we may do it; but let them not
 rebuke and censure us if we should not do it." Certainly let all be
 done, since the teachers of the churches, the apostles, were in the
 habit of doing all,--as well prescribing what things should be done, as
 rebuking if they were not done, and praying that they might be done.
 The apostle prescribes, saying, "Let all your things be done with
 love." [3255] He rebukes, saying, "Now therefore there is utterly a
 fault among you, because ye have judgments among yourselves. For why do
 ye not rather suffer wrong? Why are ye not rather defrauded? Nay, ye do
 wrong and defraud; and that, your brethren. Know ye not that the
 unrighteous shall not possess the kingdom of God?" [3256] Let us hear
 him also praying: "And the Lord," says he, "multiply you, and make you
 to abound in love one towards another and towards all men." [3257] He
 prescribes, that love should be maintained; he rebukes, because love is
 not maintained; he prays, that love may abound. O man! learn by his
 precept what you ought to have; learn by his rebuke that it is by your
 own fault that you have it not; learn by his prayer whence you may
 receive what you desire to have.

 [3255] 1 Cor. xvi. 14.

 [3256] 1 Cor. vi. 7 et seq.

 [3257] 1 Thess. iii. 12.

 Chapter 6 [IV.]--Objections to the Use of Rebuke.

 "How," says he, [3258] "is it my fault that I have not what I have not
 received from Him, when unless it is given by Him, there is no other at
 all whence such and so great a gift can be had?" Suffer me a little, my
 brethren, not as against you whose heart is right with God, but as
 against those who mind earthly things, or as against those human modes
 of thinking themselves, to contend for the truth, of the heavenly and
 divine grace. For they who say this are such as in their wicked works
 are unwilling to be rebuked by those who proclaim this grace.
 "Prescribe to me what I shall do, and if I should do it, give thanks to
 God for me who has given me to do it; but if I do it not, I must not be
 rebuked, but He must be besought to give what He has not given; that
 is, that very believing love of God and of my neighbour by which His
 precepts are [3259] observed. Pray, then, for me that I may receive
 this, and may by its means do freely and with good will that which He
 commands. But I should be justly rebuked if by my own fault I had it
 not; that is, if I myself could give it to myself, or could receive it,
 and did not do so, or if He should give it and I should be unwilling to
 receive it. But since even the will itself is prepared [3260] by the
 Lord, why dust thou rebuke me because thou seeest me unwilling to do
 His precepts, and dust not rather ask Him Himself to work in me the
 will also?"

 [3258] i.e. the objecting Pelagian.

 [3259] So the mss.; the older editors read fiant, that is, "may be
 observed."

 [3260] Prov. xvi. 1.

 Chapter 7 [V.]--The Necessity and Advantage of Rebuke.

 To this we answer: Whoever you are that do not the commandments of God
 that are already known to you, and do not wish to be rebuked, you must
 be rebuked even for that very reason that you do not wish to be
 rebuked. For you do not wish that your faults should be pointed out to
 you; you do not wish that they should be touched, and that such a
 useful pain should be caused you that you may seek the Physician; you
 do not desire to be shown to yourself, that, when you see yourself to
 be deformed, you may wish for the Reformer, and may supplicate Him that
 you may not continue in that repulsiveness. For it is your fault that
 you are evil; and it is a greater fault to be unwilling to be rebuked
 because you are evil, as if faults should either be praised, or
 regarded with indifference so as neither to be praised nor blamed, or
 as if, indeed, the dread, or the shame, or the mortification of the
 rebuked man were of no avail, or were of any other avail in healthfully
 stimulating, except to cause that He who is good may be besought, and
 so out of evil men who are rebuked may make good men who may be
 praised. For what he who will not be rebuked desires to be done for
 him, when he says, "Pray for me rather,"--he must be rebuked for that
 very reason that he may himself also do for himself; because that
 mortification with which he is dissatisfied with himself when he feels
 the sting of rebuke, stirs him up to a desire for more earnest prayer,
 [3261] that, by God's mercy, he may be aided by the increase of love,
 and cease to do things which are shameful and mortifying, and do things
 praiseworthy and gladdening. This is the benefit of rebuke that is
 wholesomely applied, sometimes with greater, sometimes with less
 severity, in accordance with the diversity of sins; and it is then
 wholesome when the supreme Physician looks. For it is of no profit
 unless when it makes a man repent of his sin. And who gives this but He
 who looked upon the Apostle Peter when he denied, [3262] and made him
 weep? Whence also the Apostle Paul, after he said that they were to be
 rebuked with moderation who thought otherwise, immediately added, "Lest
 perchance God give them repentance, to the acknowledging of the truth,
 and they recover themselves out of the snares of the devil." [3263]

 [3261] Or, "more earnest desire for prayer."

 [3262] Luke xxii. 61.

 [3263] 2 Tim. ii. 25.

 Chapter 8.--Further Replies to Those Who Object to Rebuke.

 But wherefore do they, who are unwilling be rebuked, say, "Only
 prescribe to me, and pray for me that I may do what you prescribe?" Why
 do they not rather, in accordance with their own evil inclination,
 reject these things also, and say, "I wish you neither to prescribe to
 me, nor to pray for me"? For what man is shown to have prayed for
 Peter, that God should give him the repentance wherewith he bewailed
 the denial of his Lord? What man instructed Paul in the divine precepts
 which pertain to the Christian faith? When, therefore, he was heard
 preaching the gospel, and saying, "For I certify you, brethren, that
 the gospel which was preached of me is not after man. For I neither
 received it from man, nor did I learn it, but by the revelation of
 Jesus Christ," [3264] --would it be replied to him: "Why are you
 troubling us to receive and to learn from you that which you have not
 received nor learnt from man? He who gave to you is able also to give
 to us in like manner as to you." Moreover, if they dare not say this,
 but suffer the gospel to be preached to them by man, although it cannot
 be given to man by man, let them concede also that they ought to be
 rebuked by those who are set over them, by whom Christian grace is
 preached; although it is not denied that God is able, even when no man
 rebukes, to correct whom He will, and to lead him on to the wholesome
 mortification of repentance by the most hidden and mighty power of His
 medicine. And as we are not to cease from prayer on behalf of those
 whom we desire to be corrected,--even although without any man's prayer
 on behalf of Peter, the Lord looked upon him and caused him to bewail
 his sin,--so we must not neglect rebuke, although God can make those
 whom He will to be corrected, even when not rebuked. But a man then
 profits by rebuke when He pities and aids who makes those whom He will
 to profit even without rebuke. But wherefore these are called to be
 reformed in one way, those in another way, and others in still another
 way, after different and innumerable manners, be it far from us to
 assert that it is the business of the clay to judge, but of the potter.

 [3264] Gal. i. 11.

 Chapter 9 [VI]--Why They May Justly Be Rebuked Who Do Not Obey God,
 Although They Have Not Yet Received the Grace of Obedience.

 "The apostle says," say they, "For who maketh thee to differ? And what
 hast thou that thou hast not received? Now also if thou hast received
 it, why dost thou glory as if thou hadst not received it?' [3265] Why,
 then, are we rebuked, censured, reproved, accused? What do we do, we
 who have not received?" They who say this wish to appear without blame
 in respect of their not obeying God, because assuredly obedience itself
 is His gift; and that gift must of necessity be in him in whom dwells
 love, which without doubt is of God, [3266] and the Father gives it to
 His children. "This," say they, "we have not received. Why, then, are
 we rebuked, as if we were able to give it to ourselves, and of our own
 choice would not give it?" And they do not observe that, if they are
 not yet regenerated, the first reason why, when they are reproached
 because they are disobedient to God, they ought to be dissatisfied with
 themselves is, that God made man upright from the beginning of the
 human creation, [3267] and there is no unrighteousness with God. [3268]
 And thus the first depravity, whereby God is not obeyed, is of man,
 because, falling by his own evil will from the rectitude in which God
 at first made him, he became depraved. Is, then, that depravity not to
 be rebuked in a man because it is not peculiar to him who is rebuked,
 but is common to all? Nay, let that also be rebuked in individuals,
 which is common to all. For the circumstance that none is altogether
 free from it is no reason why it should not attach to each man. Those
 original sins, indeed, are said to be the sins of others, because
 individuals derived them from their parents; but they are not
 unreasonably said to be our own also, because in that one, as the
 apostle says, all have sinned. [3269] Let, then, the damnable source be
 rebuked, that from the mortification of rebuke may spring the will of
 regeneration,--if, indeed, he who is rebuked is a child of promise,--in
 order that, by the noise of the rebuke sounding and lashing from
 without, God may by His hidden inspiration work in him from within to
 will also. If, however, being already regenerate and justified, he
 relapses of his own will into an evil life, assuredly he cannot say, "I
 have not received," because of his own free choice to evil he has lost
 the grace of God, that he had received. And if, stung with compunction
 by rebuke, he wholesomely bewails, and returns to similar good works,
 or even better, certainly here most manifestly appears the advantage of
 rebuke. But yet for rebuke by the agency of man to avail, whether it be
 of love or not, depends only upon God.

 [3265] 2 Cor. iv. 7.

 [3266] 1 John iv. 7.

 [3267] Eccles. vii. 30.

 [3268] Rom. ix. 14.

 [3269] Rom. iii. 23.

 Chapter 10--All Perseverance is God's Gift.

 Is such an one as is unwilling to be rebuked still able to say, "What
 have I done,--I who have not received?" when it appears plainly that he
 has received, and by his own fault has lost that which he has received?
 "I am able," says he, "I am altogether able,--when you reprove me for
 having of my own will relapsed from a good life into a bad one,--still
 to say, What have I done,--I who have not received? For I have received
 faith, which worketh by love, but I have not received perseverance
 therein to the end. Will any one dare to say that this perseverance is
 not the gift of God, and that so great a possession as this is ours in
 such wise that if any one have it the apostle could not say to him, For
 what hast thou which thou hast not received?' [3270] since he has this
 in such a manner as that he has not received it?" To this, indeed, we
 are not able to deny, that perseverance in good, progressing even to
 the end, is also a great gift of God; and that it exists not save it
 come from Him of whom it is written, "Every best gift and every perfect
 gift is from above, coming down from the Father of lights." [3271] But
 the rebuke of him who has not persevered must not on that account be
 neglected, "lest God perchance give unto him repentance, and he recover
 from the snares of the devil;" [3272] since to the usefulness of rebuke
 the apostle has subjoined this decision, saying, as I have above
 mentioned, "Rebuking with moderation those that think differently, lest
 at any time God give them repentance." [3273] For if we should say that
 such a perseverance, so laudable and so blessed, is man's in such wise
 as that he has it not from God, we first of all make void that which
 the Lord says to Peter: "I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail
 not." [3274] For what did He ask for him, but perseverance to the end?
 And assuredly, if a man could have this from man, it should not have
 been asked from God. Then when the apostle says, "Now we pray to God
 that ye do no evil," [3275] beyond a doubt he prays to God on their
 behalf for perseverance. For certainly he does not "do no evil" who
 forsakes good, and, not persevering in good, turns to the evil, from
 which he ought to turn aside. [3276] In that place, moreover, where he
 says, "I thank my God in every remembrance of you, always in every
 prayer of mine for you all making quest with joy for your fellowship
 [3277] in the gospel from the first day until now, being confident of
 this very thing, that He who has begun a good work in you will perform
 it until the day of Jesus Christ," [3278] --what else does he promise
 to them from the mercy of God than perseverance in good to the end? And
 again where he says, "Epaphras saluteth you, who is one of you, a
 servant of Christ Jesus, always striving for you in prayer, that you
 may stand perfect and fulfilled in all the will of God," [3279] --what
 is "that you may stand" but "that you may persevere"? Whence it was
 said of the devil, "He stood not in the truth;" [3280] because he was
 there, but he did not continue. For assuredly those were already
 standing in the faith. And when we pray that he who stands may stand,
 we do not pray for anything else than that he may persevere. Jude the
 apostle, again, when he says, "Now unto Him that is able to keep you
 without offence, and to establish you before the presence of His glory,
 immaculate in joy," [3281] does he not most manifestly show that
 perseverance in good unto the end is God's gift? For what but a good
 perseverance does He give who preserves without offence that He may
 place before the presence of His glory immaculate in joy? What is it,
 moreover, that we read in the Acts of the Apostles: "And when the
 Gentiles heard, they rejoiced and received the word of the Lord; and as
 many as were ordained to eternal life believed"? [3282] Who could be
 ordained to eternal life save by the gift of perseverance? And when we
 read, "He that shall persevere unto the end shall be saved;" [3283]
 with what salvation but eternal? And when, in the Lord's Prayer, we say
 to God the Father, "Hallowed be Thy name," [3284] what do we ask but
 that His name may be hallowed in us? And as this is already
 accomplished by means of the laver of regeneration, why is it daily
 asked by believers, except that we may persevere in that which is
 already done in us? For the blessed Cyprian also understands this in
 this manner, inasmuch as, in his exposition of the same prayer, he
 says: "We say, Hallowed be Thy name,' not that we wish for God that He
 may be hallowed by our prayers, but that we ask of God that His name
 may be hallowed in us. But by whom is God hallowed; since He Himself
 hallows? Well, because He said, Be ye holy, since I also am holy;'
 [3285] we ask and entreat that we who have been hallowed in baptism may
 persevere in that which we have begun to be." [3286] Behold the most
 glorious martyr is of this opinion, that what in these words Christ's
 faithful people are daily asking is, that they may persevere in that
 which they have begun to be. And no one need doubt, but that whosoever
 prays from the Lord that he may persevere in good, confesses thereby
 that such perseverance is His gift.

 [3270] 1 Cor. iv. 7.

 [3271] Jas. i. 17.

 [3272] 2 Tim. ii. 25.

 [3273] 2 Tim. ii. 25.

 [3274] Luke xxii. 32.

 [3275] 2 Cor. xiii. 7.

 [3276] [The editors have without reason inserted a "not" before "ought"
 in this sentence, yielding the sense: "who forsakes good, even that
 from which he ought not to turn away;" Erasmus changes the place of
 "and," reading: "who forsakes good from which he ought not to turn
 aside, and is inclined to evil." The ms. text is entirely
 satisfactory.--W.]

 [3277] Many mss. read "communication."

 [3278] Phil. i. 3, et seq.

 [3279] Col. iv. 12.

 [3280] John viii. 24.

 [3281] Jude 24.

 [3282] Acts xiii. 48.

 [3283] Matt. x. 22.

 [3284] Matt. vi. 9.

 [3285] Nearly all mss.: "even as I am holy."

 [3286] Cyprian, Treatise on the Lord's Prayer, ch. 12; see The
 Ante-Nicene Fathers, vol. v. p. 450.

 Chapter 11 [VII.]--They Who Have Not Received the Gift of Perseverance,
 and Have Relapsed into Mortal Sin and Have Died Therein, Must
 Righteously Be Condemned.

 If, then, these things be so, we still rebuke those, and reasonably
 rebuke them, who, although they were living well, have not persevered
 therein; because they have of their own will been changed from a good
 to an evil life, and on that account are worthy of rebuke; and if
 rebuke should be of no avail to them, and they should persevere in
 their ruined life until death, they are also worthy of divine
 condemnation for ever. Neither shall they excuse themselves,
 saying,--as now they say, "Wherefore are we rebuked?"--so then,
 "Wherefore are we condemned, since indeed, that we might return from
 good to evil, we did not receive that perseverance by which we should
 abide in good?" They shall by no means deliver themselves by this
 excuse from righteous condemnation. For if, according to the word of
 truth, no one is delivered from the condemnation which was incurred
 through Adam except through the faith of Jesus Christ, and yet from
 this condemnation they shall not deliver themselves who shall be able
 to say that they have not heard the gospel of Christ, on the ground
 that "faith cometh by hearing," [3287] how much less shall they deliver
 themselves who shall say, "We have not received perseverance!" For the
 excuse of those who say, "We have not received hearing," seems more
 equitable than that of those who say, "We have not received
 perseverance;" since it may be said, O man, in that which thou hadst
 heard and kept, in that thou mightest persevere if thou wouldest; but
 in no wise can it be said, That which thou hadst not heard thou
 mightest believe if thou wouldest.

 [3287] Rom. x. 17.

 Chapter 12.--They Who Have Not Received Perseverance are Not
 Distinguished from the Mass of Those that are Lost.

 And, consequently, both those who have not heard the gospel, and those
 who, having heard it and been changed by it for the better, have not
 received perseverance, and those who, having heard the gospel, have
 refused to come to Christ, that is, to believe on Him, since He Himself
 says, "No man cometh unto me, except it were given him of my Father,"
 [3288] and those who by their tender age were unable to believe, but
 might be absolved from original sin by the sole laver of regeneration,
 and yet have not received this laver, and have perished in death: are
 not made to differ from that lump which it is plain is condemned, as
 all go from one into condemnation. Some are made to differ, however,
 not by their own merits, but by the grace of the Mediator; that is to
 say, they are justified freely in the blood of the second Adam.
 Therefore, when we hear, "For who maketh thee to differ? and what hast
 thou that thou hast not received? Now, if thou hast received it, why
 dost thou glory as if thou hadst not received it?" [3289] we ought to
 understand that from that mass of perdition which originated through
 the first Adam, no one can be made to differ except he who has this
 gift, which whosoever has, has received by the grace of the Saviour.
 And this apostolical testimony is so great, that the blessed Cyprian
 writing to Quirinus put it in the place of a title, when he says, "That
 we must boast in nothing, since nothing is our own." [3290]

 [3288] John vi. 65.

 [3289] 1 Cor iv. 7.

 [3290] Cyprian, Testimonies, Book iii. ch. 4; see The Ante-Nicene
 Fathers, vol. v. pp. 528 and 533.

 Chapter 13.--Election is of Grace, Not of Merit.

 Whosoever, then, are made to differ from that original condemnation by
 such bounty of divine grace, there is no doubt but that for such it is
 provided that they should hear the gospel, and when they hear they
 believe, and in the faith which worketh by love they persevere unto the
 end; and if, perchance, they deviate from the way, when they are
 rebuked they are amended and some of them, although they may not be
 rebuked by men, return into the path which they had left; and some who
 have received grace in any age whatever are withdrawn from the perils
 of this life by swiftness of death. For He worketh all these things in
 them who made them vessels of mercy, who also elected them in His Son
 before the foundation of the world by the election of grace: "And if by
 grace, then is it no more of works, otherwise grace is no more grace."
 [3291] For they were not so called as not to be elected, in respect of
 which it is said, "For many are called but few are elected;" [3292] but
 because they were called according to the purpose, they are of a
 certainty also elected by the election, as it is said, of grace, not of
 any precedent merits of theirs, because to them grace is all merit.

 [3291] Rom. xi. 6.

 [3292] Matt. xx. 16.

 Chapter 14.--None of the Elect and Predestinated Can Perish.

 Of such says the apostle, "We know that to those that love God He
 worketh together all things for good, to them who are called according
 to His purpose; because those whom He before foreknew, He also did
 predestinate to be conformed to the image of His Son, that He might be
 the first-born among many brethren. Moreover, whom He did predestinate,
 them He also called; and whom He called, them He also justified; and
 whom He justified, them He also glorified." [3293] Of these no one
 perishes, because all are elected. And they are elected because they
 were called according to the purpose--the purpose, however, not their
 own, but God's; of which He elsewhere says, "That the purpose of God
 according to election might stand, not of works, but of Him that
 calleth, it was said unto her that the elder shall serve the younger."
 [3294] And in another place he says, "Not according to our works, but
 according to His own purpose and grace." [3295] When, therefore, we
 hear, "Moreover, whom He did predestinate, them He also called," [3296]
 we ought to acknowledge that they were called according to His purpose;
 since He thence began, saying, "He worketh together all things for good
 to those who are called according to His purpose," and then added,
 "Because those whom He before foreknew, He also did predestinate, to be
 conformed to the image of His Son, that He might be the first-born
 among many brethren." And to these promises He added, "Moreover, whom
 He did predestinate, them He also called." He wishes these, therefore,
 to be understood whom He called according to His purpose, lest any
 among them should be thought to be called and not elected, on account
 of that sentence of the Lord's: "Many the called but few are elected."
 [3297] For whoever are elected are without doubt also called; but not
 whosoever are called are as a consequence elected. Those, then, are
 elected, as has often been said, who are called according to the
 purpose, who also are predestinated and foreknown. If any one of these
 perishes, God is mistaken; but none of them perishes, because God is
 not mistaken. If any one of these perish, God is overcome by human sin;
 but none of them perishes, because God is overcome by nothing.
 Moreover, they are elected to reign with Christ, not as Judas was
 elected, to a work for which he was fitted. Because he was chosen by
 Him who well knew how to make use even of wicked men, so that even by
 his damnable deed that venerable work, for the sake of which He Himself
 had come, might be accomplished. When, therefore, we hear, "Have not I
 chosen you twelve, and one of you is a devil?" [3298] we ought to
 understand that the rest were elected by mercy, but he by judgment;
 those to obtain His kingdom, he to shed His blood!

 [3293] Rom. viii. 28 ff.

 [3294] Rom. ix. 11.

 [3295] 2 Tim. i. 9.

 [3296] Rom. viii. 29.

 [3297] Matt. xx. 16.

 [3298] John vi. 70.

 Chapter 15.--Perseverance is Given to the End.

 Rightly follows the word to the kingdom of the elect: "If God be for
 us, who can be against us? He that spared not His own Son, but
 delivered Him up for us all, how has He not also with Him given us all
 things? Who shall lay anything to the charge of God's elect? God who
 justifieth? Who condemneth? Christ who died? yea, rather who rose again
 also, who is at the right hand of God, who also soliciteth on our
 behalf?" [3299] And of how stedfast a perseverance even to the end they
 have received the gift, let them follow on to say: "Who shall separate
 us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or distress, or
 persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? As it is
 written, Because for thy sake we are killed all the day long, we are
 accounted as sheep for the slaughter. But in all these things we are
 more than conquerors, through Him that hath loved us. For I am certain,
 that neither death, nor life, nor angel, nor principality, nor things
 present, nor things to come, nor power, nor height, nor depth, nor any
 other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God which
 is in Christ Jesus our Lord." [3300]

 [3299] Rom. viii. 31 ff.

 [3300] Rom. viii. 35 ff.

 Chapter 16.--Whosoever Do Not Persevere are Not Distinguished from the
 Mass of Perdition by Predestination.

 Such as these were they who were signified to Timothy, where, when it
 had been said that Hymenæus and Philetus had subverted the faith of
 some, it is presently added, "Nevertheless the foundation of God
 standeth sure, having this seal, The Lord has known them that are His."
 [3301] The faith of these, which worketh by love, either actually does
 not fail at all, or, if there are any whose faith fails, it is restored
 before their life is ended, and the iniquity which had intervened is
 done away, and perseverance even to the end is allotted to them. But
 they who are not to persevere, and who shall so fall away from
 Christian faith and conduct that the end of this life shall find them
 in that case, beyond all doubt are not to be reckoned in the number of
 these, even in that season wherein they are living well and piously.
 For they are not made to differ from that mass of perdition by the
 foreknowledge and predestination of God, and therefore are not called
 according to God's purpose, and thus are not elected; but are called
 among those of whom it was said, "Many are called," not among those of
 whom it was said, "But few are elected." And yet who can deny that they
 are elect, since they believe and are baptized, and live according to
 God? Manifestly, they are called elect by those who are ignorant of
 what they shall be, but not by Him who knew that they would not have
 the perseverance which leads the elect forward into the blessed life,
 and knows that they so stand, as that He has foreknown that they will
 fall.

 [3301] 2 Tim. ii. 19.

 Chapter 17 [VIII.]--Why Perseverance Should Be Given to One and Not
 Another is Inscrutable.

 Here, if I am asked why God should not have given them perseverance to
 whom He gave that love by which they might live Christianly, I answer
 that I do not know. For I do not speak arrogantly, but with
 acknowledgment of my small measure, when I hear the apostle saying, "O
 man, who art thou that repliest against God?" [3302] and, "O the depth
 of the riches of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are
 His judgments, and His ways untraceable!" [3303] So far, therefore, as
 He condescends to manifest His judgments to us, let us give thanks; but
 so far as He thinks fit to conceal them, let us not murmur against His
 counsel, but believe that this also is the most wholesome for us. But
 whoever you are that are hostile to His grace, and thus ask, what do
 you yourself say? it is well that you do not deny yourself to be a
 Christian and boast of being a catholic. If, therefore, you confess
 that to persevere to the end in good is God's gift, I think that
 equally with me you are ignorant why one man should receive this gift
 and another should not receive it; and in this case we are both unable
 to penetrate the unsearchable judgments of God. Or if you say that it
 pertains to man's free will--which you defend, not in accordance with
 God's grace, but in opposition to it--that any one should persevere in
 good, or should not persevere, and it is not by the gift of God if he
 persevere, but by the performance of human will, why will you strive
 against the words of Him who says, "I have prayed for thee, Peter, that
 thy faith fail not"? [3304] Will you dare to say that even when Christ
 prayed that Peter's faith might not fail, it would still have failed if
 Peter had willed it to fail; that is, if he had been unwilling that it
 should continue even to the end? As if Peter could in any measure will
 otherwise than Christ had asked for him that he might will. For who
 does not know that Peter's faith would then have perished if that will
 by which he was faithful should fail, and that it would have continued
 if that same will should abide? But because "the will is prepared by
 the Lord," [3305] therefore Christ's petition on his behalf could not
 be a vain petition. When, then, He prayed that his faith should not
 fail, what was it that he asked for, but that in his faith he should
 have a most free, strong, invincible, persevering will! Behold to what
 an extent the freedom of the will is defended in accordance with the
 grace of God, not in opposition to it; because the human will does not
 attain grace by freedom, but rather attains freedom by grace, and a
 delightful constancy, and an insuperable fortitude that it may
 persevere.

 [3302] Rom. ix. 20.

 [3303] Rom. xi. 33.

 [3304] Luke xxii. 32.

 [3305] Prov. viii. 35.

 Chapter 18.--Some Instances of God's Amazing Judgments.

 It is, indeed, to be wondered at, and greatly to be wondered at, that
 to some of His own children--whom He has regenerated in Christ--to whom
 He has given faith, hope, and love, God does not give perseverance
 also, when to children of another He forgives such wickedness, and, by
 the bestowal of His grace, makes them His own children. Who would not
 wonder at this? Who would not be exceedingly astonished at this? But,
 moreover, it is not less marvellous, and still true, and so manifest
 that not even the enemies of God's grace can find any means of denying
 it, that some children of His friends, that is, of regenerated and good
 believers, departing this life as infants without baptism,--although He
 certainly might provide the grace of this laver if He willed, since in
 His power are all things,--He alienates from His kingdom into which He
 introduces their parents; and some children of His enemies He causes to
 come into the hands of Christians, and by means of this laver
 introduces into the kingdom, from which their parents are aliens;
 although, as well to the former infants there is no evil deserving, as
 to the latter there is no good, of their own proper will. Certainly, in
 this case the judgments of God, because they are righteous and deep,
 may neither be blamed nor penetrated. Among these also is that
 concerning perseverance, of which we are now discoursing. Of both,
 therefore, we may exclaim, "O the depth of the riches of the wisdom and
 knowledge of God! how unsearchable are His judgments!" [3306]

 [3306] Rom. xi. 33.

 Chapter 19.--God's Ways Past Finding Out.

 Nor let us wonder that we cannot trace His unsearchable ways. For, to
 say nothing of innumerable other things which are given by the Lord God
 to some men, and to others are not given, since with Him is no respect
 of persons; such things as are not conferred on the merits of will, as
 bodily swiftness, strength, good health, and beauty of body, marvellous
 intellects and mental natures capable of many arts, or such as fall to
 man's lot from without, such as are wealth, nobility, honours, and
 other things of this kind, which it is in the power of God alone that a
 man should have; not to dwell even on the baptism of infants (which
 none of those objectors can say does not pertain, as might be said of
 those other matters, to the kingdom of God), why it is given to this
 infant and not given to that, since both of them are equally in God's
 power, and without that sacrament none can enter into the kingdom of
 God;--to be silent, then, on these matters, or to leave them on one
 side, let men consider those very special cases of which we are
 treating. For we are discoursing of such as have not perseverance in
 goodness, but die in the decline of their good will from good to evil.
 Let the objectors answer, if they can, why, when these were living
 faithfully and piously, God did not then snatch them from the perils of
 this life, "lest wickedness should change their understanding, and lest
 deceit should beguile their souls"? [3307] Had He not this in His
 power, or was He ignorant of their future sinfulness? Assuredly,
 nothing of this kind is said, except most perversely and insanely. Why,
 then, did He not do this? Let them reply who mock at us when in such
 matters we exclaim, "How inscrutable are His judgments, and His ways
 past finding out!" [3308] For either God giveth this to whom He will,
 or certainly that Scripture is wrong which says concerning the immature
 death of the righteous man, "He was taken away lest wickedness should
 change his understanding, or lest deceit should beguile his soul."
 [3309] Why, then, does God give this so great benefit to some, and not
 give it to others, seeing that in Him is no unrighteousness [3310] nor
 acceptance of persons, [3311] and that it is in His power how long
 every one may remain in this life, which is called a trial upon earth?
 [3312] As, then, they are constrained to confess that it is God's gift
 for a man to end this life of his before it can be changed from good to
 evil, but they do not know why it is given to some and not given to
 others, so let them confess with us that perseverance in good is God's
 gift, according to the Scriptures, from which I have already set down
 many testimonies; and let them condescend with us to be ignorant,
 without a murmur against God, why it is given to some and not given to
 others.

 [3307] Wisd. iv. 11.

 [3308] Rom. xi. 33.

 [3309] Wisd. iv. 11.

 [3310] Rom. ix. 14.

 [3311] Rom. ii. 11.

 [3312] Job vii. 1.

 Chapter 20 [IX.]--Some are Children of God According to Grace
 Temporally Received, Some According to God's Eternal Foreknowledge.

 Nor let it disturb us that to some of His children God does not give
 this perseverance. Be this far from being so, however, if these were of
 those who are predestinated and called according to His purpose,--who
 are truly the children of the promise. For the former, while they live
 piously, are called children of God; but because they will live
 wickedly, and die in that impiety, the foreknowledge of God does not
 call them God's children. For they are children of God whom as yet we
 have not, and God has already, of whom the Evangelist John says, "that
 Jesus should die for that nation, and not for that nation only, but
 that also He should gather together in one the children of God which
 were scattered abroad;" [3313] and this certainly they were to become
 by believing, through the preaching of the gospel. And yet before this
 had happened they had already been enrolled as sons of God with
 unchangeable stedfastness in the memorial of their Father. And, again,
 there are some who are called by us children of God on account of grace
 received even in temporal things, yet are not so called by God; of whom
 the same John says, "They went out from us, but they were not of us,
 because if they had been of us they would, no doubt, have continued
 with us." [3314] He does not say, "They went out from us, but because
 they did not abide with us they are no longer now of us;" but he says,
 "They went out from us, but they were not of us,"--that is to say, even
 when they appeared among us, they were not of us. And as if it were
 said to him, Whence do you prove this? he says, "Because if they had
 been of us, they would assuredly have continued with us." [3315] It is
 the word of God's children; John is the speaker, who was ordained to a
 chief place among the children of God. When, therefore, God's children
 say of those who had not perseverance, "They went out from us, but they
 were not of us," and add, "Because if they had been of us, they would
 assuredly have continued with us," what else do they say than that they
 were not children, even when they were in the profession and name of
 children? Not because they simulated righteousness, but because they
 did not continue in it. For he does not say, "For if they had been of
 us, they would assuredly have maintained a real and not a feigned
 righteousness with us;" but he says, "If they had been of us, they
 would assuredly have continued with us." Beyond a doubt, he wished them
 to continue in goodness. Therefore they were in goodness; but because
 they did not abide in it,--that is, they did not persevere unto the
 end,--he says, They were not of us, even when they were with us,--that
 is, they were not of the number of children, even when they were in the
 faith of children; because they who are truly children are foreknown
 and predestinated as conformed to the image of His Son, and are called
 according to His purpose, so as to be elected. For the son of promise
 does not perish, but the son of perdition. [3316]

 [3313] John xi. 51, 52.

 [3314] 1 John ii. 19.

 [3315] Rom. viii. 29.

 [3316] John xvii. 12.

 Chapter 21.--Who May Be Understood as Given to Christ.

 Those, then, were of the multitude of the called, but they were not of
 the fewness of the elected. It is not, therefore, to His predestinated
 children that God has not given perseverance for they would have it if
 they were in that number of children; and what would they have which
 they had not received, according to the apostolical and true judgment?
 [3317] And thus such children would be given to Christ the Son just as
 He Himself says to the Father, "That all that Thou hast given me may
 not perish, but have eternal life." [3318] Those, therefore, are
 understood to be given to Christ who are ordained to eternal life.
 These are they who are predestinated and called according to the
 purpose, of whom not one perishes. And therefore none of them ends this
 life when he has changed from good to evil, because he is so ordained,
 and for that purpose given to Christ, that he may not perish, but may
 have eternal life. And again, those whom we call His enemies, or the
 infant children of His enemies, whomever of them He will so regenerate
 that they may end this life in that faith which worketh by love, are
 already, and before this is done, in that predestination His children,
 and are given to Christ His Son, that they may not perish, but have
 everlasting life.

 [3317] 1 Cor. iv. 7.

 [3318] Matt. xx. 16.

 Chapter 22.--True Children of God are True Disciples of Christ.

 Finally, the Saviour Himself says, "If ye continue in my word, ye are
 indeed my disciples." [3319] Is Judas, then, to be reckoned among them,
 since he did not continue in His word? Are they to be reckoned among
 them of whom the gospel speaks in such wise, where, when the Lord had
 commanded His flesh to be eaten and His blood to be drunk, the
 Evangelist says, "These things said He in the synagogue as He taught in
 Capernaum. Many, therefore, of His disciples, when they had heard this,
 said, This is a hard saying; who can hear it? But Jesus, knowing in
 Himself that His disciples were murmuring at it, said to them, Doth
 this offend you? What and if ye shall see the Son of man ascending
 where He was before? It is the Spirit that quickeneth, but the flesh
 profiteth nothing. The words that I have spoken unto you are spirit and
 life. But there are some of you who believe not. For Jesus knew from
 the beginning who were the believing ones, and who should betray Him;
 and He said, Therefore said I unto you, that no man cometh unto me
 except it were given of my Father. From this time many of His disciples
 went away back from Him, and no longer walked with Him." [3320] Are not
 these even in the words of the gospel called disciples? And yet they
 were not truly disciples, because they did not continue in His word,
 according to what He says: "If ye continue in my word, then are ye
 indeed my disciples." [3321] Because, therefore, they possessed not
 perseverance, as not being truly disciples of Christ, so they were not
 truly children of God even when they appeared to be so, and were so
 called. We, then, call men elected, and Christ's disciples, and God's
 children, because they are to be so called whom, being regenerated, we
 see to live piously; but they are then truly what they are called if
 they shall abide in that on account of which they are so called. But if
 they have not perseverance,--that is, if they continue not in that
 which they have begun to be,--they are not truly called what they are
 called and are not; for they are not this in the sight of Him to whom
 it is known what they are going to be,--that is to say, from good men,
 bad men.

 [3319] John viii. 31.

 [3320] John vi. 59 ff.

 [3321] John viii. 31.

 Chapter 23.--Those Who are Called According to the Purpose Alone are
 Predestinated.

 For this reason the apostle, when he had said, "We know that to those
 who love God He worketh all things together for good,"--knowing that
 some love God, and do not continue in that good way unto the
 end,--immediately added, "to them who are the called according to His
 purpose." [3322] For these in their love for God continue even to the
 end; and they who for a season wander from the way return, that they
 may continue unto the end what they had begun to be in good. Showing,
 however, what it is to be called according to His purpose, he presently
 added what I have already quoted above, "Because whom He did before
 foreknow, He also predestinated to be conformed to the image of His
 Son, that He might be the first-born among many brethren. Moreover,
 whom He did predestinate, them He also called," to wit, according to
 His purpose; "and whom He called, them He also justified; and whom He
 justified, them He also glorified." [3323] All those things are already
 done: He foreknew, He predestinated, He called, He justified; because
 both all are already foreknown and predestinated, and many are already
 called and justified; but that which he placed at the end, "them He
 also glorified" (if, indeed, that glory is here to be understood of
 which the same apostle says, "When Christ your life shall appear, then
 shall ye also appear with Him in glory" [3324] ), this is not yet
 accomplished. Although, also, those two things--that is, He called, and
 He justified--have not been effected in all of whom they are said,--for
 still, even until the end of the world, there remain many to be called
 and justified,--nevertheless, He used verbs of the past tense, even
 concerning things future, as if God had already arranged from eternity
 that they should come to pass. For this reason, also, the prophet
 Isaiah says concerning Him, "Who has made the things that shall be."
 [3325] Whosoever, therefore, in God's most providential ordering, are
 foreknown, predestinated, called, justified, glorified,--I say not,
 even although not yet born again, but even although not yet born at
 all, are already children of God, and absolutely cannot perish. These
 truly come to Christ, because they come in such wise as He Himself
 says, "All that the Father giveth me shall come to me, and him that
 cometh to me I will not cast out;" [3326] and a little after He says,
 "This is the will of the Father who hath sent me, that of all that He
 hath given me I shall lose nothing." [3327] From Him, therefore, is
 given also perseverance in good even to the end; for it is not given
 save to those who shall not perish, since they who do not persevere
 shall perish.

 [3322] Rom. viii. 28.

 [3323] Rom. viii. 29.

 [3324] Col. iii. 4.

 [3325] Isa. xlv. 11.

 [3326] John vi. 37.

 [3327] John vi. 39.

 Chapter 24.--Even the Sins of the Elect are Turned by God to Their
 Advantage.

 To such as love Him, God co-worketh with all things for good; so
 absolutely all things, that even if any of them go astray, and break
 out of the way, even this itself He makes to avail them for good, so
 that they return more lowly and more instructed. For they learn that in
 the right way [3328] itself they ought to rejoice with trembling; not
 with arrogation to themselves of confidence of abiding as if by their
 own strength; not with saying, in their abundance, "We shall not be
 moved for ever." [3329] For which reason it is said to them, "Serve the
 Lord in fear, and rejoice unto Him with trembling, lest at any time the
 Lord should be angry, and ye perish from the right way." [3330] For He
 does not say, "And ye come not into the right way;" but He says, "Lest
 ye perish from the right way." And what does this show, but that those
 who are already walking in the right way are reminded to serve God in
 fear; that is, "not to be high-minded, but to fear"? [3331] which
 signifies, that they should not be haughty, but humble. Whence also He
 says in another place, "not minding high things, but consenting with
 the lowly;" [3332] let them rejoice in God, but with trembling;
 glorying in none, since nothing is ours, so that he who glorieth may
 glory in the Lord, lest they perish from the right way in which they
 have already begun to walk, while they are ascribing to themselves
 their very presence in it. These words also the apostle made use of
 when he says, "Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling."
 [3333] And setting forth why with fear and trembling, he says, "For it
 is God that worketh in you, both to will and to do for His good
 pleasure." [3334] For he had not this fear and trembling who said in
 his abundance, "I shall not be moved for ever." [3335] But because he
 was a child of the promise, not of perdition, he experienced in God's
 desertion for a little while what he himself was: "Lord," said he, "in
 Thy favour Thou gavest strength to my honour; Thou turnedst away Thy
 face from me, and I became troubled." [3336] Behold how much better
 instructed, and for this reason also more humble, he held on his way,
 at length seeing and confessing that by His will God had endowed his
 honour with strength; and this he had attributed to himself and
 presumed to be from himself, in such abundance as God had afforded it,
 and not from Him who had given it, and so had said, "I shall not be
 moved for ever!" Therefore he became troubled so that he found himself,
 and being lowly minded learnt not only of eternal life, but, moreover,
 of a pious conversation and perseverance in this life, as that in which
 hope should be maintained. This might moreover be the word of the
 Apostle Peter, because he also had said in his abundance, "I will lay
 down my life for Thy sake;" [3337] attributing to himself, in his
 eagerness, what was afterwards to be bestowed on him by his Lord. But
 the Lord turned away His face from him, and he became troubled, so that
 in his fear of dying for Him he thrice denied Him. But the Lord again
 turned His face to him, and washed away his sin with his tears. For
 what else is, "He turned and looked upon him," [3338] but, He restored
 to him the face which, for a little while, He had turned away from him?
 Therefore he had become troubled; but because he learned not to be
 confident concerning himself, even this was of excellent profit to him,
 by His agency who co-works for good with all things to those who love
 Him; because he had been called according to the purpose, so that no
 one could pluck him out of the hand of Christ, to whom he had been
 given.

 [3328] Or, "life."

 [3329] Ps. xxx. 6.

 [3330] Ps. ii. 11.

 [3331] Rom. xi. 20.

 [3332] Rom. xii. 16.

 [3333] Phil. ii. 12, 13.

 [3334] Phil. ii. 13.

 [3335] Ps. xxx. 6.

 [3336] Ps. xxx. 7.

 [3337] John xiii. 37.

 [3338] Luke xxii. 61.

 Chapter 25.--Therefore Rebuke is to Be Used.

 Let no one therefore say that a man must not be rebuked when he
 deviates from the right way, but that his return and perseverance must
 only be asked for from the Lord for him. Let no considerate and
 believing man say this. For if such an one is called according to the
 purpose, beyond all doubt God is co-working for good to him even in the
 fact of his being rebuked. But since he who rebukes is ignorant whether
 he is so called, let him do with love what he knows ought to be done;
 for he knows that such an one ought to be rebuked. God will show either
 mercy or judgment; mercy, indeed, if he who is rebuked is "made to
 differ" by the bestowal of grace from the mass of perdition, and is not
 found among the vessels of wrath which are completed for destruction,
 but among the vessels of mercy which God has prepared for glory; [3339]
 but judgment, if among the former he is condemned, and is not
 predestinated among the latter.

 [3339] Rom. ix. 22, 23.

 Chapter 26 [X.]--Whether Adam Received the Gift of Perseverance.

 Here arises another question, not reasonably to be slighted, but to be
 approached and solved in the help of the Lord in whose hand are both we
 and our discourses. [3340] For I am asked, in respect of this gift of
 God which is to persevere in good to the end, what I think of the first
 man himself, who assuredly was made upright without any fault. And I do
 not say: If he had not perseverance, how was he without fault, seeing
 that he was in want of so needful a gift of God? For to this
 interrogatory the answer is easy, that he had not perseverance, because
 he did not persevere in that goodness in which he was without sin; for
 he began to have sin from the point at which he fell; and if he began,
 certainly he was without sin before he had begun. For it is one thing
 not to have sin, and it is another not to abide in that goodness in
 which there is no sin. Because in that very fact, that he is not said
 never to have been without sin, but he is said not to have continued
 without sin, beyond all doubt it is demonstrated that he was without
 sin, seeing that he is blamed for not having continued in that
 goodness. But it should rather be asked and discussed with greater
 pains in what way we can answer those who say, "If in that uprightness
 in which he was made without sin he had perseverance, beyond all doubt
 he persevered in it; and if he persevered, he certainly did not sin,
 and did not forsake that his uprightness. But that he did sin, and was
 a forsaker of goodness, the Truth declares. Therefore he had not
 perseverance in that goodness; and if he had it not, he certainly
 received it not. For how should he have both received perseverance, and
 not have persevered? Further, if he had it not because he did not
 receive it, what sin did he commit by not persevering, if he did not
 receive perseverance? For it cannot be said that he did not receive it,
 for the reason that he was not separated by the bestowal of grace from
 the mass of perdition. Because that mass of perdition did not as yet
 exist in the human race before he had sinned from whom the corrupted
 source was derived."

 [3340] Wisd. vii. 16.

 Chapter 27.--The Answer.

 Wherefore we most wholesomely confess what we most correctly believe,
 that the God and Lord of all things, who in His strength created all
 things good, and foreknew that evil things would arise out of good, and
 knew that it pertained to His most omnipotent goodness even to do good
 out of evil things rather than not to allow evil things to be at all,
 so ordained the life of angels and men that in it He might first of all
 show what their free will was capable of, and then what the kindness of
 His grace and the judgment of His righteousness was capable of.
 Finally, certain angels, of whom the chief is he who is called the
 devil, became by free will outcasts from the Lord God. Yet although
 they fled from His goodness, wherein they had been blessed, they could
 not flee from His judgment, by which they were made most wretched.
 Others, however, by the same free will stood fast in the truth, and
 merited the knowledge of that most certain truth that they should never
 fall. [3341] For if from the Holy Scriptures we have been able to
 attain the knowledge that none of the holy angels shall fall evermore,
 how much more have they themselves attained this knowledge by the truth
 more sublimely revealed to them! Because to us is promised a blessed
 life without end, and equality with the angels, [3342] from which
 promise we are certified that when after judgment we shall have come to
 that life, we shall not fall from it; but if the angels are ignorant of
 this truth concerning themselves, we shall not be their equals, but
 more blessed than they. But the Truth has promised us equality with
 them. It is certain, then, that they have known this by sight, which we
 have known by faith, to wit, that there shall be now no more any fall
 of any holy angel. But the devil and his angels, although they were
 blessed before they fell, and did not know that they should fall unto
 misery,--there was still something which might be added to their
 blessedness, if by free will they had stood in the truth, until they
 should receive that fulness of the highest blessing as the reward of
 that continuance; that is, that by the great abundance of the love of
 God, given by the Holy Spirit, they should absolutely not be able to
 fall any more, and that they should know this with complete certainty
 concerning themselves. They had not this plenitude of blessedness; but
 since they were ignorant of their future misery, they enjoyed a
 blessedness which was less, indeed, but still without any defect. For
 if they had known their future fall and eternal punishment, they
 certainly could not have been blessed; since the fear of so great an
 evil as this would compel them even then to be miserable.

 [3341] "Eamque [scil. veritatem] de suo casu nunquam futuro certissimam
 scire."

 [3342] Matt. xxii. 30.

 Chapter 28.--The First Man Himself Also Might Have Stood by His Free
 Will.

 Thus also He made man with free will; and although ignorant of his
 future fall, yet therefore happy, because he thought it was in his own
 power both not to die and not to become miserable. And if he had willed
 by his own free will to continue in this state of uprightness and
 freedom from sin, assuredly without any experience of death and of
 unhappiness he would have received by the merit of that continuance the
 fulness of blessing with which the holy angels also are blessed; that
 is, the impossibility of falling any more, and the knowledge of this
 with absolute certainty. For even he himself could not be blessed
 although in Paradise, nay, he would not be there, where it would not
 become him to be miserable, if the foreknowledge of his fall had made
 him wretched with the dread of such a disaster. But because he forsook
 God of his free will, he experienced the just judgment of God, that
 with his whole race, which being as yet all placed in him had sinned
 with him, he should be condemned. For as mary of this race as are
 delivered by God's grace are certainly delivered from the condemnation
 in which they are already held bound. Whence, even if none should be
 delivered, no one could justly blame the judgment of God. That,
 therefore, in comparison of those that perish few, but in their
 absolute number many, are delivered, is effected by grace, [3343] is
 effected freely: [3344] thanks must be given, because it is effected,
 so that no one may be lifted up as of his own deservings, but that
 every mouth may be stopped, [3345] and he that glorieth may glory in
 the Lord. [3346]

 [3343] Gratiâ--gratis.

 [3344] Gratiâ--gratis.

 [3345] Rom. iii. 19.

 [3346] Jer. ix. 24.

 Chapter 29 [XI.]--Distinction Between the Grace Given Before and After
 the Fall.

 What then? Did not Adam have the grace of God? Yes, truly, he had it
 largely, but of a different kind. He was placed in the midst of
 benefits which he had received from the goodness of his Creator; for he
 had not procured those benefits by his own deservings; in which
 benefits he suffered absolutely no evil. But saints in this life, to
 whom pertains this grace of deliverance, are in the midst of evils out
 of which they cry to God, "Deliver us from evil." [3347] He in those
 benefits needed not the death of Christ: these, the blood of that Lamb
 absolves from guilt, as well inherited as their own. He had no need of
 that assistance which they implore when they say, "I see another law in
 my members warring against the law of my mind, and making me captive in
 the law of sin which is in my members. O wretched man that I am! who
 shall deliver me from the body of this death? The grace of God through
 Jesus Christ our Lord." [3348] Because in them the flesh lusteth
 against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, and as they
 labour and are imperilled in such a contest, they ask that by the grace
 of Christ the strength to fight and to conquer may be given them. He,
 however, tempted and disturbed in no such conflict concerning himself
 against himself, in that position of blessedness enjoyed his peace with
 himself.

 [3347] Matt. vi. 13.

 [3348] Rom. vii. 23.

 Chapter 30.--The Incarnation of the Word.

 Hence, although these do not now require a grace more joyous for the
 present, they nevertheless need a more powerful grace; and what grace
 is more powerful than the only-begotten Son of God, equal to the Father
 and co-eternal, made man for them, and, without any sin of His own,
 either original or actual, crucified by men who were sinners? And
 although He rose again on the third day, never to die any more, He yet
 bore death for men and gave life to the dead, so that redeemed by His
 blood, having received so great and such a pledge, they could say, "If
 God be for us, who is against us? He who spared not His own Son, but
 delivered Him up for us all, how has He not with Him also given to us
 all things?" [3349] God therefore took upon Him our nature--that is,
 the rational soul and flesh of the man Christ--by an undertaking
 singularly marvellous, or marvellously singular; so that with no
 preceding merits of His own righteousness He might in such wise be the
 Son of God from the beginning, in which He had begun to be man, that
 He, and the Word which is without beginning, might be one person. For
 there is no one blinded by such ignorance of this matter and the Faith
 as to dare to say that, although born of the Holy Spirit and the Virgin
 Mary the Son of man, yet of His own free will by righteous living and
 by doing good works, without sin, He deserved to be the Son of God; in
 opposition to the gospel, which says, "The Word was made flesh." [3350]
 For where was this made flesh except in the Virginal womb, whence was
 the beginning of the man Christ? And, moreover, when the Virgin asked
 how that should come to pass which was told her by the angel, the angel
 answered, "The Holy Ghost shall come over on to thee and the power of
 the Highest shall overshadow thee, therefore that holy thing that shall
 be born of thee shall be called the Son of God." [3351] "Therefore," he
 said; not because of works of which certainly of a yet unborn infant
 there are none; but "therefore," because "the Holy Ghost shall come
 over on to thee, and the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee,
 that holy thing which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of
 God." That nativity, absolutely gratuitous, conjoined, in the unity of
 the person, man to God, flesh to the Word! Good works followed that
 nativity; good works did not merit it. For it was in no wise to be
 feared that the human nature taken up by God the Word in that ineffable
 manner into a unity of person, would sin by free choice of will, since
 that taking up itself was such that the nature of man so taken up by
 God would admit into itself no movement of an evil will. Through this
 Mediator God makes known that He makes those whom He redeemed by His
 blood from evil, everlastingly good; and Him He in such wise assumed
 that He never would be evil, and, not being made out of evil, would
 always be good. [3352]

 [3349] Rom viii. 31, 32.

 [3350] John i. 14.

 [3351] Luke i. 35.

 [3352] Some editions have, instead of "and not being made," etc., "lest
 being made of evil he should not always be good."

 Chapter 31.--The First Man Had Received the Grace Necessary for His
 Perseverance, But Its Exercise Was Left in His Free Choice.

 The first man had not that grace by which he should never will to be
 evil; but assuredly he had that in which if he willed to abide he would
 never be evil, and without which, moreover, he could not by free will
 be good, but which, nevertheless, by free will he could forsake. God,
 therefore, did not will even him to be without His grace, which He left
 in his free will; because free will is sufficient for evil, but is too
 little [3353] for good, unless it is aided by Omnipotent Good. And if
 that man had not forsaken that assistance of his free will, he would
 always have been good; but he forsook it, and he was forsaken. Because
 such was the nature of the aid, that he could forsake it when he would,
 and that he could continue in it if he would; but not such that it
 could be brought about that he would. This first is the grace which was
 given to the first Adam; but more powerful than this is that in the
 second Adam. For the first is that whereby it is affected that a man
 may have righteousness if he will; the second, therefore, can do more
 than this, since by it it is even effected that he will, and will so
 much, and love with such ardour, that by the will of the Spirit he
 overcomes the will of the flesh, that lusteth in opposition to it.
 [3354] Nor was that, indeed, a small grace by which was demonstrated
 even the power of free will, because man was so assisted that without
 this assistance he could not continue in good, but could forsake this
 assistance if he would. But this latter grace is by so much the
 greater, that it is too little for a man by its means to regain his
 lost freedom; it is too little, finally, not to be able without it
 either to apprehend the good or to continue in good if he will, unless
 he is also made to will.

 [3353] Some mss. read, "of no avail."

 [3354] There are other readings of this passage, but coming to the same
 substantial result.

 Chapter 32.--The Gifts of Grace Conferred on Adam in Creation.

 At that time, therefore, God had given to man a good will, [3355]
 because in that will He had made him, since He had made him upright. He
 had given help without which he could not continue therein if he would;
 but that he should will, He left in his free will. He could therefore
 continue if he would, because the help was not wanting whereby he
 could, and without which he could not, perseveringly hold fast the good
 which he would. But that he willed not to continue is absolutely the
 fault of him whose merit it would have been if he had willed to
 continue; as the holy angels did, who, while others fell by free will,
 themselves by the same free will stood, and deserved to receive the due
 reward of this continuance--to wit, such a fulness of blessing that by
 it they might have the fullest certainty of always abiding in it. If,
 however, this help had been wanting, either to angel or to man when
 they were first made, since their nature was not made such that without
 the divine help it could abide if it would, they certainly would not
 have fallen by their own fault, because the help would have been
 wanting without which they could not continue. At the present time,
 however, to those to whom such assistance is wanting, it is the penalty
 of sin; but to those to whom it is given, it is given of grace, not of
 debt; and by so much the more is given through Jesus Christ our Lord to
 those to whom it has pleased God to give it, that not only we have that
 help without which we cannot continue even if we will, but, moreover,
 we have so great and such a help as to will. Because by this grace of
 God there is caused in us, in the reception of good and in the
 persevering hold of it, not only to be able to do what we will, but
 even to will to do what we are able. But this was not the case in the
 first man; for the one of these things was in him, but the other was
 not. For he did not need grace to receive good, because he had not yet
 lost it; but he needed the aid of grace to continue in it, and without
 this aid he could not do this at all; and he had received the ability
 if he would, but he had not the will for what he could; for if he had
 possessed it, he would have persevered. For he could persevere if he
 would; but that he would not was the result of free will, which at that
 time was in such wise free that he was capable of willing well and ill.
 For what shall be more free than free will, when it shall not be able
 to serve sin? and this should be to man also as it was made to the holy
 angels, the reward of deserving. But now that good deserving has been
 lost by sin, in those who are delivered that has become the gift of
 grace which would have been the reward of deserving.

 [3355] Some mss. read, "a free will."

 Chapter 33 [XII.]--What is the Difference Between the Ability Not to
 Sin, to Die, and Forsake Good, and the Inability to Sin, to Die, and to
 Forsake Good?

 On which account we must consider with diligence and attention in what
 respect those pairs differ from one another,--to be able not to sin,
 and not to be able to sin; to be able not to die, and not to be able to
 die; to be able not to forsake good, and not to be able to forsake
 good. For the first man was able not to sin, was able not to die, was
 able not to forsake good. Are we to say that he who had such a free
 will could not sin? Or that he to whom it was said, "If thou shalt sin
 thou shalt die by death," could not die? Or that he could not forsake
 good, when he would forsake this by sinning, and so die? Therefore the
 first liberty of the will was to be able not to sin, the last will be
 much greater, not to be able to sin; the first immortality was to be
 able not to die, the last will be much greater, not to be able to die;
 the first was the power of perseverance, to be able not to forsake
 good--the last will be the felicity of perseverance, not to be able to
 forsake good. But because the last blessings will be preferable and
 better, were those first ones, therefore, either no blessings at all,
 or trifling ones?

 Chapter 34.--The Aid Without Which a Thing Does Not Come to Pass, and
 the Aid with Which a Thing Comes to Pass.

 Moreover, the aids themselves are to be distinguished. The aid without
 which a thing does not come to pass is one thing, and the aid by which
 a thing comes to pass is another. For without food we cannot live; and
 yet although food should be at hand, it would not cause a man to live
 who should will to die. Therefore the aid of food is that without which
 it does not come to pass that we live, not that by which it comes to
 pass that we live. But, indeed, when the blessedness which a man has
 not is given him, he becomes at once blessed. For the aid is not only
 that without which that does not happen, but also with which that does
 happen for the sake of which it is given. Wherefore this is an
 assistance both by which it comes to pass, and without which it does
 not come to pass; because, on the one hand, if blessedness should be
 given to a man, he becomes at once blessed; and, on the other, if it
 should never be given he will never be so. But food does not of
 necessity cause a man to live, and yet without it he cannot live.
 Therefore to the first man, who, in that good in which he had been made
 upright, had received the ability not to sin, the ability not to die,
 the ability not to forsake that good itself, was given the aid of
 perseverance,--not that by which it should be brought about that he
 should persevere, but that without which he could not of free will
 persevere. But now to the saints predestinated to the kingdom of God by
 God's grace, the aid of perseverance that is given is not such as the
 former, but such that to them perseverance itself is bestowed; not only
 so that without that gift they cannot persevere, but, moreover, so that
 by means of this gift they cannot help persevering. For not only did He
 say, "Without me ye can do nothing," [3356] but He also said, "Ye have
 not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you that ye should
 go and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should remain." [3357] By
 which words He showed that He had given them not only righteousness,
 but perseverance therein. For when Christ thus ordained them that they
 should go and bring forth fruit, and that their fruit should remain,
 who would dare to say, It shall not remain? Who would dare to say,
 Perchance it will not remain? "For the gifts and calling of God are
 without repentance;" [3358] but the calling is of those who are called
 according to the purpose. When Christ intercedes, therefore, on behalf
 of these, that their faith should not fail, doubtless it will not fail
 unto the end. And thus it shall persevere even unto the end; nor shall
 the end of this life find it anything but continuing.

 [3356] John xv. 5.

 [3357] John xv. 16.

 [3358] Rom. xi. 29.

 Chapter 35.--There is a Greater Freedom Now in the Saints Than There
 Was Before in Adam.

 Certainly a greater liberty is necessary in the face of so many and so
 great temptations, which had no existence in Paradise,--a liberty
 fortified and confirmed by the gift of perseverance, so that this
 world, with all its loves, its fears, its errors, may be overcome: the
 martyrdoms of the saints have taught this. In fine, he [Adam], not only
 with nobody to make him afraid, but, moreover, in spite of the
 authority of God's fear, using free will, did not stand in such a state
 of happiness, in such a facility [3359] of [not] sinning. But these
 [the saints], I say, not under the fear of the world, but in spite of
 the rage of the world lest they should stand, stood firm in the faith;
 while he could see the good things present which he was going to
 forsake, they could not see the good things future which they were
 going to receive. Whence is this, save by the gift of Him from whom
 they obtained mercy to be faithful; from whom they received the spirit,
 not of fear, whereby they would yield to the persecutors, but of power,
 and of love, and of continence, in which they could overcome all
 threatenings, all seductions, all torments? To him, therefore, without
 any sin, was given the free will with which he was created; and he made
 it to serve sin. But although the will of these had been the servant of
 sin, it was delivered by Him who said, "If the Son shall make you free,
 then shall ye be free indeed." [3360] And by that grace they receive so
 great a freedom, that although as long as they live here they are
 fighting against sinful lusts, and some sins creep upon them unawares,
 on account of which they daily say, "Forgive us our debts," [3361] yet
 they do not any more obey the sin which is unto death, of which the
 Apostle John says, "There is a sin unto death: I do not say that he
 shall pray for it." [3362] Concerning which sin (since it is not
 expressed) many and different notions may be entertained. I, however,
 say, that sin is to forsake even unto death the faith which worketh by
 love. This sin they no longer serve who are not in the first condition,
 as Adam, free; but are freed by the grace of God through the second
 Adam, and by that deliverance have that free will which enables them to
 serve God, not that by which they may be made captive by the devil.
 From being made free from sin they have become the servants of
 righteousness, [3363] in which they will stand till the end, by the
 gift to them of perseverance from Him who foreknew them, and
 predestinated them, and called them according to His purpose, and
 justified them, and glorified them, since He has even already formed
 those things that are to come which He promised concerning them. And
 when He promised, "Abraham believed Him, and it was counted unto him
 for righteousness." [3364] For "he gave glory to God, most fully
 believing," as it is written, "that what He has promised He is able
 also to perform." [3365]

 [3359] The original is in tanti peccandi facilitate. Of course, non
 must be inserted, but the translator ventures to conjecture facultate
 instead of facilitate.

 [3360] John viii. 36.

 [3361] Matt. vi. 12.

 [3362] 1 John v. 16.

 [3363] Rom. vi. 18.

 [3364] Rom. iv. 3, and 20, 21.

 [3365] Rom. iv. 3, and 20, 21.

 Chapter 36.--God Not Only Foreknows that Men Will Be Good, But Himself
 Makes Them So.

 It is He Himself, therefore, that makes those men good, to do good
 works. For He did not promise them to Abraham because He foreknew that
 of themselves they would be good. For if this were the case, what He
 promised was not His, but theirs. But it was not thus that Abraham
 believed, but "he was not weak in faith, giving glory to God;" and
 "most fully believing that what He has promised He is able also to
 perform." [3366] He does not say, "What He foreknew, He is able to
 promise;" nor "What He foretold, He is able to manifest;" nor "What He
 promised, He is able to foreknow:" but "What He promised, He is able
 also to do." It is He, therefore, who makes them to persevere in good,
 who makes them good. But they who fall and perish have never been in
 the number of the predestinated. Although, then, the apostle might be
 speaking of all persons regenerated and living piously when he said,
 "Who art thou that judgest another man's servant? To his own master he
 standeth or falleth;" yet he at once had regard to the predestinated,
 and said, "But he shall stand;" and that they might not arrogate this
 to themselves, he says, "For God is able to make him stand." [3367] It
 is He Himself, therefore, that gives perseverance, who is able to
 establish those who stand, so that they may stand fast with the
 greatest perseverance; or to restore those who have fallen, for "the
 Lord setteth up those who are broken down." [3368]

 [3366] Rom. iv. 19.

 [3367] Rom. xiv. 4, etc.

 [3368] Ps. cxlv. 8.

 Chapter 37.--To a Sound Will is Committed the Power of Persevering or
 of Not Persevering.

 As, therefore, the first man did not receive this gift of God,--that
 is, perseverance in good, but it was left in his choice to persevere or
 not to persevere, his will had such strength,--inasmuch as it had been
 created without any sin, and there was nothing in the way of
 concupiscence of himself that withstood it,--that the choice of
 persevering could worthily be entrusted to such goodness and to such
 facility in living well. But God at the same time foreknew what he
 would do in unrighteousness; foreknew, however, but did not compel him
 to this; but at the same time He knew what He Himself would do in
 righteousness concerning him. But now, since that great freedom has
 been lost by the desert of sin, our weakness has remained to be aided
 by still greater gifts. For it pleased God, in order most effectually
 to quench the pride of human presumption, "that no flesh should glory
 in His presence"--that is, "no man." [3369] But whence should flesh not
 glory in His presence, save concerning its merits? Which, indeed, it
 might have had, but lost; and lost by that very means whereby it might
 have had them, that is, by its free will; on account of which there
 remains nothing to those who are to be delivered, save the grace of the
 Deliverer. Thus, therefore, no flesh glories in His presence. For the
 unrighteous do not glory, since they have no ground of glory; nor the
 righteous, because they have a ground from Him, and have no glory of
 theirs, but Himself, to whom they say, "My glory, and the lifter up of
 my head." [3370] And thus it is that what is written pertains to every
 man, "that no flesh should glory in His presence." To the righteous,
 however, pertains that Scripture: "He that glorieth, let him glory in
 the Lord." [3371] For this the apostle most manifestly showed, when,
 after saying "that no flesh should glory in His presence," lest the
 saints should suppose that they had been left without any glory, he
 presently added, "But of Him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made
 unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption:
 that, according as it is written, He that glorieth, let him glory in
 the Lord." [3372] Hence it is that in this abode of miseries, where
 trial is the life of man upon the earth, "strength is made perfect in
 weakness." [3373] What strength, save "that he that glorieth should
 glory in the Lord"?

 [3369] 1 Cor. i. 29.

 [3370] Ps. iii. 3.

 [3371] 1 Cor. i. 31.

 [3372] 1 Cor. i. 30.

 [3373] 2 Cor. xii. 9.

 Chapter 38.--What is the Nature of the Gift of Perseverance that is Now
 Given to the Saints.

 And thus God willed that His saints should not--even concerning
 perseverance in goodness itself--glory in their own strength, but in
 Himself, who not only gives them aid such as He gave to the first man,
 without which they cannot persevere if they will, but causes in them
 also the will; that since they will not persevere unless they both can
 and will, both the capability and the will to persevere should be
 bestowed on them by the liberality of divine grace. Because by the Holy
 Spirit their will is so much enkindled that they therefore can, because
 they so will; and they therefore so will because God works in them to
 will. For if in so much weakness of this life (in which weakness,
 however, for the sake of checking pride, strength behoved to be
 perfected) their own will should be left to themselves, that they
 might, if they willed, continue in the help of God, without which they
 could not persevere, and God should not work in them to will, in the
 midst of so many and so great weaknesses their will itself would give
 way, and they would not be able to persevere, for the reason that
 failing from infirmity they would not will, or in the weakness of will
 they would not so will that they would be able. Therefore aid is
 brought to the infirmity of human will, so that it might be
 unchangeably and invincibly [3374] influenced by divine grace; and
 thus, although weak, it still might not fail, nor be overcome by any
 adversity. Thus it happens that man's will, weak and incapable, in good
 as yet small, may persevere by God's strength; while the will of the
 first man, strong and healthful, having the power of free choice, did
 not persevere in a greater good; because although God's help was not
 wanting, without which it could not persevere if it would, yet it was
 not such a help as that by which God would work in man to will.
 Certainly to the strongest He yielded and permitted to do what He
 willed; to those that were weak He has reserved that by His own gift
 they should most invincibly will what is good, and most invincibly
 refuse to forsake this. Therefore when Christ says, "I have prayed for
 thee that thy faith fail not," [3375] we may understand that it was
 said to him who is built upon the rock. And thus the man of God, not
 only because he has obtained mercy to be faithful, but also because
 faith itself does not fail, if he glories, must glory in the Lord.

 [3374] "Insuperabiliter," the reading of the best mss. Some editions
 read "inseparabiliter," in a dogmatic interest.

 [3375] Luke xxii. 32.

 Chapter 39 [XIII.]--The Number of the Predestinated is Certain and
 Defined.

 I speak thus of those who are predestinated to the kingdom of God,
 whose number is so certain that one can neither be added to them nor
 taken from them; not of those who, when He had announced and spoken,
 were multiplied beyond number. For they may be said to be called but
 not chosen, because they are not called according to the purpose. But
 that the number of the elect is certain, and neither to be increased
 nor diminished,--although it is signified by John the Baptist when he
 says, "Bring forth, therefore, fruits meet for repentance: and think
 not to say within yourselves, We have Abraham to our father: for God is
 able of these stones to raise up children to Abraham," [3376] to show
 that they were in such wise to be cut off if they did not produce
 fruit, that the number which was promised to Abraham would not be
 wanting,--is yet more plainly declared in the Apocalypse: "Hold fast
 that which thou hast, lest another take thy crown." [3377] For if
 another would not receive unless one should have lost, the number is
 fixed.

 [3376] Matt. iii. 8, 9.

 [3377] Rev. iii. 11.

 Chapter 40.--No One is Certain and Secure of His Own Predestination and
 Salvation.

 But, moreover, that such things as these are so spoken to saints who
 will persevere, as if it were reckoned uncertain whether they will
 persevere, is a reason that they ought not otherwise to hear these
 things, since it is well for them "not to be high-minded, but to fear."
 [3378] For who of the multitude of believers can presume, so long as he
 is living in this mortal state, that he is in the number of the
 predestinated? Because it is necessary that in this condition that
 should be kept hidden; since here we have to beware so much of pride,
 that even so great an apostle was buffetted by a messenger of Satan,
 lest he should be lifted up. [3379] Hence it was said to the apostles,
 "If ye abide in me;" [3380] and this He said who knew for a certainty
 that they would abide; and through the prophet, "If ye shall be
 willing, and will hear me," [3381] although He knew in whom He would
 work to will also. And many similar things are said. For on account of
 the usefulness of this secrecy, lest, perchance, any one should be
 lifted up, but that all, even although they are running well, should
 fear, in that it is not known who may attain,--on account of the
 usefulness of this secrecy, it must be believed that some of the
 children of perdition, who have not received the gift of perseverance
 to the end, begin to live in the faith which worketh by love, and live
 for some time faithfully and righteously, and afterwards fall away, and
 are not taken away from this life before this happens to them. If this
 had happened to none of these, men would have that very wholesome fear,
 by which the sin of presumption is kept down, only so long as until
 they should attain to the grace of Christ by which to live piously, and
 afterwards would for time to come be secure that they would never fall
 away from Him. And such presumption in this condition of trials is not
 fitting, where there is so great weakness, that security may engender
 pride. Finally, this also shall be the case; but it shall be at that
 time, in men also as it already is in the angels, when there cannot be
 any pride. Therefore the number of the saints, by God's grace
 predestinated to God's kingdom, with the gift of perseverance to the
 end bestowed on them, shall be guided thither in its completeness, and
 there shall be at length without end preserved in its fullest
 completeness, most blessed, the mercy of their Saviour still cleaving
 to them, whether in their conversion, in their conflict, or in their
 crown!

 [3378] Rom. xi. 20.

 [3379] 2 Cor. xii. 7.

 [3380] John xv. 7.

 [3381] Isa. i. 19.

 Chapter 41.--Even in Judgment God's Mercy Will Be Necessary to Us.

 For the Holy Scripture testifies that God's mercy is then also
 necessary for them, when the Saint says to his soul concerning the Lord
 its God, "Who crowneth thee in mercy and compassion." [3382] The
 Apostle James also says: "He shall have judgment without mercy who hath
 showed no mercy;" [3383] where he sets forth that even in that judgment
 in which the righteous are crowned and the unrighteous are condemned,
 some will be judged with mercy, others without mercy. On which account
 also the mother of the Maccabees says to her son, "That in that mercy I
 may receive thee with thy brethren." [3384] "For when a righteous
 king," as it is written, "shall sit on the throne, no evil thing shall
 oppose itself to him. Who will boast that he has a pure heart? or who
 will boast that he is pure from sin?" [3385] And thus God's mercy is
 even then necessary, by which he is made "blessed to whom the Lord has
 not imputed sin." [3386] But at that time even mercy itself shall be
 allotted in righteous judgment in accordance with the merits of good
 works. For when it is said, "Judgment without mercy to him that hath
 showed no mercy," it is plainly shown that in those in whom are found
 the good works of mercy, judgment shall be executed with mercy; and
 thus even that mercy itself shall be returned to the merits of good
 works. It is not so now; when not only no good works, but many bad
 works precede, His mercy anticipates a man so that he is delivered from
 evils,--as well from evils which he has done, as from those which he
 would have done if he were not controlled by the grace of God; and from
 those, too, which he would have suffered for ever if he were not
 plucked from the power of darkness, and transferred into the kingdom of
 the Son of God's love. [3387] Nevertheless, since even that life
 eternal itself, which, it is certain, is given as due to good works, is
 called by so great an apostle the grace of God, although grace is not
 rendered to works, but is given freely, it must be confessed without
 any doubt, that eternal life is called grace for the reason that it is
 rendered to those merits which grace has conferred upon man. Because
 that saying is rightly understood which in the gospel is read, "grace
 for grace," [3388] --that is, for those merits which grace has
 conferred.

 [3382] Ps. ciii. 4.

 [3383] Jas. ii. 13.

 [3384] 2 Macc. vii. 29.

 [3385] Prov. xx. 8.

 [3386] Ps. xxxii. 2.

 [3387] Col. i. 13.

 [3388] John i. 16.

 Chapter 42.--The Reprobate are to Be Punished for Merits of a Different
 Kind.

 But those who do not belong to this number of the predestinated,
 whom--whether that they have not yet any free choice of their will, or
 with a choice of will truly free, because freed by grace itself--the
 grace of God brings to His kingdom,--those, then, who do not belong to
 that most certain and blessed number, are most righteously judged
 according to their deservings. For either they lie under the sin which
 they have inherited by original generation, and depart hence with that
 inherited debt which is not put away by regeneration, or by their free
 will have added other sins besides; their will, I say, free, but not
 freed,--free from righteousness, but enslaved to sin, by which they are
 tossed about by divers mischievous lusts, some more evil, some less,
 but all evil; and they must be adjudged to diverse punishments,
 according to that very diversity. Or they receive the grace of God, but
 they are only for a season, and do not persevere; they forsake and are
 forsaken. For by their free will, as they have not received the gift of
 perseverance, they are sent away by the righteous and hidden judgment
 of God.

 Chapter 43 [XIV.]--Rebuke and Grace Do Not Set Aside One Another.

 Let men then suffer themselves to be rebuked when they sin, and not
 conclude against grace from the rebuke itself, nor from grace against
 rebuke; because both the righteous penalty of sin is due, and righteous
 rebuke belongs to it, if it is medicinally applied, even although the
 salvation of the ailing man is uncertain; so that if he who is rebuked
 belongs to the number of the predestinated, rebuke may be to him a
 wholesome medicine; and if he does not belong to that number, rebuke
 may be to him a penal infliction. Under that very uncertainty,
 therefore, it must of love be applied, although its result is unknown;
 and prayer must be made on his behalf to whom it is applied, that he
 may be healed. But when men either come or return into the way of
 righteousness by means of rebuke, who is it that worketh salvation in
 their hearts but that God who giveth the increase, whoever plants and
 waters, and whoever labours on the fields or shrubs,--that God whom no
 man's will resists when He wills to give salvation? For so to will or
 not to will is in the power of Him who willeth or willeth not, as not
 to hinder the divine will nor overcome the divine power. For even
 concerning those who do what He wills not, He Himself does what He
 will.

 Chapter 44.--In What Way God Wills All Men to Be Saved.

 And what is written, that "He wills all men to be saved," [3389] while
 yet all men are not saved, may be understood in many ways, some of
 which I have mentioned in other writings [3390] of mine; but here I
 will say one thing: "He wills all men to be saved," is so said that all
 the predestinated may be understood by it, because every kind of men is
 among them. Just as it was said to the Pharisees, "Ye tithe every
 herb;" [3391] where the expression is only to be understood of every
 herb that they had, for they did not tithe every herb which was found
 throughout the whole earth. According to the same manner of speaking,
 it was said, "Even as I also please all men in all things." [3392] For
 did he who said this please also the multitude of his persecutors? But
 he pleased every kind of men that assembled in the Church of Christ,
 whether they were already established therein, or were to be introduced
 into it.

 [3389] 1 Tim. ii. 4.

 [3390] Enchirid, c. 103; City of God, xxii. 1, 2. Against Julian, iv.
 8.

 [3391] Luke xi. 42.

 [3392] 1 Cor. x. 33.

 Chapter 45.--Scriptural Instances Wherein It is Proved that God Has
 Men's Wills More in His Power Than They Themselves Have.

 It is not, then, to be doubted that men's wills cannot, so as to
 prevent His doing what he wills, withstand the will of God, "who hath
 done all things whatsoever He pleased in heaven and in earth," [3393]
 and who also "has done those things that are to come;" [3394] since He
 does even concerning the wills themselves of men what He will, when He
 will. Unless, perchance (to mention some things among many), when God
 willed to give the kingdom to Saul, it was so in the power of the
 Israelites, as it certainly was placed in their will, either to subject
 themselves or not to the man in question, that they could even prevail
 to withstand God. God, however, did not do this, save by the will of
 the men themselves, because he beyond doubt had the most omnipotent
 power of inclining men's hearts whither it pleased Him. For thus it is
 written: "And Samuel sent the people away, and every one went away unto
 his own place. And Saul went away to his house in Gibeah: and there
 went away with Saul mighty men, whose hearts the Lord touched. And
 pestilent children said, Who shall save us? This man? And they despised
 him, and brought him no presents." [3395] Will any one say that any of
 those whose hearts the Lord touched to go with Saul would not have gone
 with him, or that any of those pestilent fellows, whose hearts He did
 not touch to do this, would have gone? Of David also, whom the Lord
 ordained to the kingdom in a more prosperous succession, we read thus:
 "And David continued to increase, and was magnified, and the Lord was
 with him." [3396] This having been premised, it is said a little
 afterwards, "And the Spirit clothed Amasai, chief of the thirty, and he
 said, We are thine, O David, and we will be with thee, O son of Jesse:
 Peace, peace be unto thee, and peace be to thy helpers; because the
 Lord has helped thee." [3397] Could he withstand the will of God, and
 not rather do the will of Him who wrought in his heart by His Spirit,
 with which he was clothed, to will, speak, and do thus? Moreover, a
 little afterwards the same Scripture says, "All these warlike men,
 setting the battle in array, came with a peaceful heart to Hebron to
 establish David over all Israel." [3398] By their own will, certainly,
 they appointed David king. Who cannot see this? Who can deny it? For
 they did not do it under constraint or without good-will, since they
 did it with a peaceful heart. And yet He wrought this in them who
 worketh what He will in the hearts of men. For which reason the
 Scripture premised, "And David continued to increase, and was
 magnified, and the Lord Omnipotent was with him." And thus the Lord
 Omnipotent, who was with him, induced these men to appoint him king.
 And how did He induce them? Did He constrain thereto by any bodily
 fetters? He wrought within; He held their hearts; He stirred their
 hearts, and drew them by their own wills, which He Himself wrought in
 them. If, then, when God wills to set up kings in the earth, He has the
 wills of men more in His power than they themselves have, who else
 causes rebuke to be wholesome and correction to result in the heart of
 him that is rebuked, that he may be established in the kingdom of
 heaven?

 [3393] Ps. cxxxv. 6.

 [3394] Isa. xlv. 11.

 [3395] 1 Sam. x. 25 ff.

 [3396] 1 Chron. xi. 9.

 [3397] 1 Chron. xii. 18.

 [3398] 1 Chron. xii. 38.

 Chapter 46 [XV.]--Rebuke Must Be Varied According to the Variety of
 Faults. There is No Punishment in the Church Greater Than
 Excommunication.

 Therefore, let brethren who are subject be rebuked by those who are set
 over them, with rebukes that spring from love, varied according to the
 diversity of faults, whether smaller or greater. Because that very
 penalty that is called condemnation, [3399] which episcopal judgment
 inflicts, than which there is no greater punishment in the Church, may,
 if God will, result and be of advantage for most wholesome rebuke. For
 we know not what may happen on the coming day; nor must any one be
 despaired of before the end of this life; nor can God be contradicted,
 that He may not look down and give repentance, and receive the
 sacrifice of a troubled spirit and a contrite heart, and absolve from
 the guilt of condemnation, however just, and so Himself not condemn the
 condemned person. Yet the necessity of the pastoral office requires, in
 order that the terrible contagion may not creep through the many, that
 the diseased sheep should be separated from the sound ones; perchance,
 by that very separation, to be healed by Him to whom nothing is
 impossible. For as we know not who belongs to the number of the
 predestinated, we ought in such wise to be influenced by the affection
 of love as to will all men to be saved. For this is the case when we
 endeavour to lead every individual to that point where they may meet
 with those agencies by which we may prevail, to the accomplishment of
 the result, that being justified by faith they may have peace with God,
 [3400] --which peace, moreover, the apostle announced when he said,
 "Therefore, we discharge an embassage for Christ, as though God were
 exhorting by us, we pray you in Christ's stead to be reconciled to
 God." [3401] For what is "to be reconciled" to Him but to have peace
 with Him? For the sake of which peace, moreover, the Lord Jesus Christ
 Himself said to His disciples, "Into whatsoever house ye enter first,
 say, Peace be to this house; and if the son of peace be there, your
 peace shall rest upon it; but if not, it shall return to you again."
 [3402] When they preach the gospel of this peace of whom it is
 predicted, "How beautiful are the feet of those that publish peace,
 that announce good things!" [3403] to us, indeed, every one then begins
 to be a son of peace who obeys and believes this gospel, and who, being
 justified by faith, has begun to have peace towards God; but, according
 to God's predestination, he was already a son of peace. For it was not
 said, Upon whomsoever your peace shall rest, he shall become a son of
 peace; but Christ says, "If the son of peace be there, your peace shall
 rest upon that house." Already, therefore, and before the announcement
 of that peace to him, the son of peace was there, as he had been known
 and foreknown, by--not the evangelist, but--God. For we need not fear
 lest we should lose it, if in our ignorance he to whom we preach is not
 a son of peace, for it will return to us again--that is, that preaching
 will profit us, and not him; but if the peace proclaimed shall rest
 upon him, it will profit both us and him.

 [3399] Query, Excommunication?

 [3400] Rom. v. 1.

 [3401] 2 Cor. v. 20.

 [3402] Luke x. 5, 6.

 [3403] Isa. lii. 7.

 Chapter 47.--Another Interpretation of the Apostolic Passage, "Who Will
 Have All Men to Be Saved."

 That, therefore, in our ignorance of who shall be saved, God commands
 us to will that all to whom we preach this peace may be saved, and
 Himself works this in us by diffusing that love in our hearts by the
 Holy Spirit who is given to us,--may also thus be understood, that God
 wills all men to be saved, because He makes us to will this; just as
 "He sent the Spirit of His Son, crying, Abba, Father;" [3404] that is,
 making us to cry, Abba, Father. Because, concerning that same Spirit,
 He says in another place, "We have received the Spirit of adoption, in
 whom we cry, Abba, Father!" [3405] We therefore cry, but He is said to
 cry who makes us to cry. If, then, Scripture rightly said that the
 Spirit was crying by whom we are made to cry, it rightly also says that
 God wills, when by Him we are made to will. And thus, because by rebuke
 we ought to do nothing save to avoid departure from that peace which is
 towards God, or to induce return to it of him who had departed, let us
 do in hope what we do. If he whom we rebuke is a son of peace, our
 peace shall rest upon him; but if not, it shall return to us again.

 [3404] Gal. iv. 6.

 [3405] Rom. viii. 15.

 Chapter 48.--The Purpose of Rebuke.

 Although, therefore, even while the faith of some is subverted, the
 foundation of God standeth sure, since the Lord knoweth them that are
 His, still, we ought not on that account to be indolent and negligent
 in rebuking those who should be rebuked. For not for nothing was it
 said, "Evil communications corrupt good manners;" [3406] and, "The weak
 brother shall perish in thy knowledge, on account of whom Christ died."
 [3407] Let us not, in opposition to these precepts, and to a wholesome
 fear, pretend to argue, saying, "Well, let evil communications corrupt
 good manners, and let the weak brother perish. What is that to us? The
 foundation of God standeth sure, and no one perishes but the son of
 perdition." [XVI.] Be it far from us to babble in this wise, and think
 that we ought to be secure in this negligence. For it is true that no
 one perishes except the son of perdition, but God says by the mouth of
 the prophet Ezekiel: [3408] "He shall surely die in his sin, but his
 blood will I require at the hand of the watchman."

 [3406] 1 Cor. xv. 33.

 [3407] 1 Cor. viii. 11.

 [3408] Ezek. iii. 18.

 Chapter 49.--Conclusion.

 Hence, as far as concerns us, who are not able to distinguish those who
 are predestinated from those who are not, we ought on this very account
 to will all men to be saved. Severe rebuke should be medicinally
 applied to all by us that they perish not themselves, or that they may
 not be the means of destroying others. It belongs to God, however, to
 make that rebuke useful to them whom He Himself has foreknown and
 predestinated to be conformed to the image of His Son. For, if at any
 time we abstain from rebuking, for fear lest by rebuke a man should
 perish, why do we not also rebuke, for fear lest a man should rather
 perish by our withholding it? For we have no greater bowels of love
 than the blessed apostle who says, "Rebuke those that are unruly;
 comfort the feeble-minded; support the weak; be patient towards all
 men. See that none render to any man evil for evil." [3409] Where it is
 to be understood that evil is then rather rendered for evil when one
 who ought to be rebuked is not rebuked, but by a wicked dissimulation
 is neglected. He says, moreover, "Them that sin rebuke before all, that
 others also may fear;" [3410] which must be received concerning those
 sins which are not concealed, lest he be thought to have spoken in
 opposition to the word of the Lord. For He says, "If thy brother shall
 sin against thee, rebuke him between thee and him." [3411]
 Notwithstanding, He Himself carries out the severity of rebuke to the
 extent of saying, "If he will not hear the Church, let him be unto thee
 as a heathen man and a publican." [3412] And who has more loved the
 weak than He who became weak for us all, and of that very weakness was
 crucified for us all? And since these things are so, grace neither
 restrains rebuke, nor does rebuke restrain grace; and on this account
 righteousness is so to be prescribed that we may ask in faithful
 prayer, that, by God's grace, what is prescribed may be done; and both
 of these things are in such wise to be done that righteous rebuke may
 not be neglected. But let all these things be done with love, since
 love both does not sin, and does cover the multitude of sins.

 [3409] 1 Thess. v. 14.

 [3410] 1 Tim. v. 20.

 [3411] Matt. xviii. 15.

 [3412] Matt. xviii. 17.

 a treatise on the predestination of the saints.

 A Treatise on the predestination of the saints,

 by aurelius augustin, bishop of hippo;

 The First Book, [3413]

 addressed to prosper and hilary. [3415]

 a.d. 428 or 429

 ------------------------

 Wherein the truth of predestination and grace is defended against the
 semi-Pelagians,--those people to wit, who by no means withdraw
 altogether from the Pelagian heresy, in that they contend that the
 beginning of salvation and of faith is of ourselves; so that in virtue,
 as it were, of this precedent merit, the other good gifts of God are
 attained. Augustin shows that not only the increase, but the very
 beginning also of faith is in God's gift. On this matter he does not
 disavow that he once thought differently, and that in some small works,
 written before his episcopate, he was in error, as in that exposition,
 which they object to him, of propositions from the epistle to the
 Romans. But he points out that he was subsequently convinced chiefly by
 this testimony, "but what hast thou that thou hast not received?" which
 he proves is to be taken as a testimony concerning faith itself also.
 He says that faith is to be counted among other works, which the
 apostle denies to anticipate God's grace when He says, "not of works."
 He declares that the hardness of the heart is taken away by grace, and
 that all come to Christ who are taught to come by the Father; but that
 those whom He teaches, He teaches in mercy, while those whom He teaches
 not, in judgment He teaches not. That the passage from his hundred and
 second epistle, Question 2, "concerning the time of the Christian
 religion" which is alleged by the semi-Pelagians, may rightly be
 explained without detriment to the doctrine of grace and
 predestination. He teaches what is the difference between grace and
 predestination. Further, he says that God in his predestination
 foreknew what he had purposed to do. He marvels greatly that the
 adversaries of predestination, who are said to be unwilling to be
 dependent on the uncertainty of God's will, prefer rather to trust
 themselves to their own weakness than to the strength of God's promise.
 He clearly points out that they abuse this authority, "If thou
 believest, thou shalt be saved." That the truth of grace and
 perseverance shines forth in the case of infants that are saved, who
 are distinguished by no merits of their own from others who perish. For
 that there is no difference between them arising from the foreknowledge
 of merits which they would have had if they had lived longer. That
 testimony is wrongfully rejected by the adversaries as being
 uncanonical, which he adduced for the purpose of this discussion, "he
 was taken away lest wickedness," etc. That the most illustrious
 instance of predestination and grace is the Saviour Himself, in whom a
 man obtained the privilege of being the Saviour and the Only-begotten
 Son of God, through being assumed into oneness of person by the Word
 co-eternal with the Father, on account of no precedent merits, either
 of works or of faith. That the predestinated are called by some certain
 calling peculiar to the elect, and that they have been elected before
 the foundation of the world; not because they were foreknown as men who
 would believe and would be holy, but in order that by means of that
 very election of grace they might be such, etc.

 Chapter 1 [I.]--Introduction.

 We know that in the Epistle to the Philippians the apostle said, "To
 write the same things to you to me indeed is not grievous but for you
 it is safe;" [3414] yet the same apostle writing to the Galatians when
 he saw that he had done enough among them of what he regarded as being
 needful for them, by the ministry of his preaching, said, "For the rest
 let no man cause me labour," [3415] or as it is read in many codices,
 "Let no one be troublesome to me." But although I confess that it
 causes me trouble that the divine word in which the grace of God is
 preached (which is absolutely no grace if it is given according to our
 merits), great and manifest as it is, is not yielded to, nevertheless
 my dearest sons, Prosper and Hilary, your zeal and brotherly
 affection--which makes you so reluctant to see any of the brethren in
 error, as to wish that, after so many books and letters of mine on this
 subject, I should write again from here--I love more than I can tell,
 although I do not dare to say that I love it as much as I ought.
 Wherefore, behold, I write to you again. And although not with you, yet
 through you I am still doing what I thought I had done sufficiently.

 [3414] Phil. iii. 1.

 [3415] Gal. vi. 17.

 Chapter 2.--To What Extent the Massilians [3416] Withdraw from the
 Pelagians.

 For on consideration of your letters, I seem to see that those brethren
 on whose behalf you exhibit a pious care that they may not hold the
 poetical opinion in which it is affirmed, "Every one is a hope for
 himself," [3417] and so fall under that condemnation which is, not
 poetically, but prophetically, declared, "Cursed is every man that hath
 hope in man," [3418] must be treated in that way wherein the apostle
 dealt with those to whom he said, "And if in anything ye be otherwise
 minded, God shall reveal even this unto you." [3419] For as yet they
 are in darkness on the question concerning the predestination of the
 saints, but they have that whence, "if in anything they are otherwise
 minded, God will reveal even this unto them," if they are walking in
 that to which they have attained. For which reason the apostle, when he
 had said, "If ye are in anything otherwise minded, God shall reveal
 even this unto you," says, "Nevertheless whereunto we have attained,
 let us walk in the same." [3420] And those brethren of ours, on whose
 behalf your pious love is solicitous, have attained with Christ's
 Church to the belief that the human race is born obnoxious to the sin
 of the first man, and that none can be delivered from that evil save by
 the righteousness of the Second Man. Moreover, they have attained to
 the confession that men's wills are anticipated by God's grace; and to
 the agreement that no one can suffice to himself either for beginning
 or for completing any good work. These things, therefore, unto which
 they have attained, being held fast, abundantly distinguish them from
 the error of the Pelagians. Further, if they walk in them, and beseech
 Him who giveth understanding, if in anything concerning predestination
 they are otherwise minded, He will reveal even this unto them. Yet let
 us also spend upon them the influence of our love, and the ministry of
 our discourse, according to His gift, whom we have asked that in these
 letters we might say what should be suitable [3421] and profitable to
 them. For whence do we know whether by this our service, wherein we are
 serving them in the free love of Christ, our God may not perchance will
 to effect that purpose?

 [3416] [The party which Augustin is here opposing had its chief centre
 in Marseilles, and hence is called "Massilians." Prosper in his letter
 called them reliquiæ Pelagianorum, i.e., "the remnants of the
 Pelagians." They are now most commonly called "Semi-Pelagians."--W.]

 [3417] Virg. Æneid, xi. 309.

 [3418] Jer. xvii. 5.

 [3419] Phil. iii. 15.

 [3420] Phil. iii. 16.

 [3421] Some mss. read aperta, scil. "plain."

 Chapter 3 [II.]--Even the Beginning of Faith is of God's Gift.

 Therefore I ought first to show that the faith by which we are
 Christians is the gift of God, if I can do that more thoroughly than I
 have already done in so many and so large volumes. But I see that I
 must now reply to those who say that the divine testimonies which I
 have adduced concerning this matter are of avail for this purpose, to
 assure us that we have faith itself of ourselves, but that its increase
 is of God; as if faith were not given to us by Him, but were only
 increased in us by Him, on the ground of the merit of its having begun
 from us. Thus there is here no departure from that opinion which
 Pelagius himself was constrained to condemn in the judgment of the
 bishops of Palestine, as is testified in the same Proceedings, "That
 the grace of God is given according to our merits," [3422] if it is not
 of God's grace that we begin to believe, but rather that on account of
 this beginning an addition is made to us of a more full and perfect
 belief; and so we first give the beginning of our faith to God, that
 His supplement may also be given to us again, and whatever else we
 faithfully ask.

 [3422] On the Proceedings of Peliagus, ch. 30.

 Chapter 4.--Continuation of the Preceding.

 But why do we not in opposition to this, rather hear the words, "Who
 hath first given to Him and it shall be recompensed to him again? since
 of Him, and through Him, and in Him, are all things." [3423] And from
 whom, then, is that very beginning of our faith if not from Him? For
 this is not excepted when other things are spoken of as of Him; but "of
 Him, and through Him, and in Him, are all things." But who can say that
 he who has already begun to believe deserves nothing from Him in whom
 he has believed? Whence it results that, to him who already deserves,
 other things are said to be added by a divine retribution, and thus
 that God's grace is given according to our merits. And this assertion
 when put before him, Pelagius himself condemned, that he might not be
 condemned. Whoever, then, wishes on every side to avoid this
 condemnable opinion, let him understand that what the apostle says is
 said with entire truthfulness, "Unto you it is given in the behalf of
 Christ not only to believe on Him, but also to suffer for His sake."
 [3424] He shows that both are the gifts of God, because he said that
 both were given. And he does not say, "to believe on Him more fully and
 perfectly," but, "to believe on Him." Neither does he say that he
 himself had obtained mercy to be more faithful, but "to be faithful,"
 [3425] because he knew that he had not first given the beginning of his
 faith to God, and had its increase given back to him again by Him; but
 that he had been made faithful by God, who also had made him an
 apostle. For the beginnings of his faith are recorded, and they are
 very well known by being read in the church on an occasion calculated
 to distinguish them: [3426] how, being turned away from the faith which
 he was destroying, and being vehemently opposed to it, he was suddenly
 by a more powerful grace converted to it, by the conversion of Him, to
 whom as One who would do this very thing it was said by the prophet,
 "Thou wilt turn and quicken us;" [3427] so that not only from one who
 refused to believe he was made a willing believer, but, moreover, from
 being a persecutor, he suffered persecution in defence of that faith
 which he persecuted. Because it was given him by Christ "not only to
 believe on Him, but also to suffer for His sake."

 [3423] Rom. xi. 35.

 [3424] Phil. i. 29.

 [3425] 1 Cor. vii. 25.

 [3426] The Acts of the Apostles were read during Easter.

 [3427] Ps. lxxxv. 6.

 Chapter 5.--To Believe is to Think with Assent.

 And, therefore, commending that grace which is not given according to
 any merits, but is the cause of all good merits, he says, "Not that we
 are sufficient to think anything as of ourselves, but our sufficiency
 is of God." [3428] Let them give attention to this, and well weigh
 these words, who think that the beginning of faith is of ourselves, and
 the supplement of faith is of God. For who cannot see that thinking is
 prior to believing? For no one believes anything unless he has first
 thought that it is to be believed. For however suddenly, however
 rapidly, some thoughts fly before the will to believe, and this
 presently follows in such wise as to attend them, as it were, in
 closest conjunction, it is yet necessary that everything which is
 believed should be believed after thought has preceded; although even
 belief itself is nothing else than to think with assent. For it is not
 every one who thinks that believes, since many think in order that they
 may not believe; but everybody who believes, thinks,--both thinks in
 believing and believes in thinking. Therefore in what pertains to
 religion and piety (of which the apostle was speaking), if we are not
 capable of thinking anything as of ourselves, but our sufficiency is of
 God, we are certainly not capable of believing anything as of
 ourselves, since we cannot do this without thinking; but our
 sufficiency, by which we begin to believe, is of God. Wherefore, as no
 one is sufficient for himself, for the beginning or the completion of
 any good work whatever,--and this those brethren of yours, as what you
 have written intimates, already agree to be true, whence, as well in
 the beginning as in the carrying out of every good work, our
 sufficiency is of God,--so no one is sufficient for himself, either to
 begin or to perfect faith; but our sufficiency is of God. Because if
 faith is not a matter of thought, it is of no account; and we are not
 sufficient to think anything as of ourselves, but our sufficiency is of
 God.

 [3428] 2 Cor. iii. 5.

 Chapter 6.--Presumption and Arrogance to Be Avoided.

 Care must be taken, brethren, beloved of God, that a man do not lift
 himself up in opposition to God, when he says that he does what God has
 promised. Was not the faith of the nations promised to Abraham, "and
 he, giving glory to God, most fully believed that what He promised He
 is able also to perform"? [3429] He therefore makes the faith of the
 nations, who is able to do what He has promised. Further, if God works
 our faith, acting in a wonderful manner in our hearts so that we
 believe, is there any reason to fear that He cannot do the whole; and
 does man on that account arrogate to himself its first elements, that
 he may merit to receive its last from God? Consider if in such a way
 any other result be gained than that the grace of God is given in some
 way or other, according to our merit, and so grace is no more grace.
 For on this principle it is rendered as debt, it is not given
 gratuitously; for it is due to the believer that his faith itself
 should be increased by the Lord, and that the increased faith should be
 the wages of the faith begun; nor is it observed when this is said,
 that this wage is assigned to believers, not of grace, but of debt. And
 I do not at all see why the whole should not be attributed to man,--as
 he who could originate for himself what he had not previously, can
 himself increase what he had originated,--except that it is impossible
 to withstand the most manifest divine testimony by which faith, whence
 piety takes its beginning, is shown also to be the gift of God: such as
 is that testimony that "God hath dealt to every man the measure of
 faith;" [3430] and that one, "Peace be to the brethren, and love with
 faith, from God the Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ," [3431] and
 other similar passages. Man, therefore, unwilling to resist such clear
 testimonies as these, and yet desiring himself to have the merit of
 believing, compounds as it were with God to claim a portion of faith
 for himself, and to leave a portion for Him; and, what is still more
 arrogant, he takes the first portion for himself and gives the
 subsequent to Him; and so in that which he says belongs to both, he
 makes himself the first, and God the second!

 [3429] Rom. iv. 20.

 [3430] Rom. xii. 3.

 [3431] Eph. vi. 23.

 Chapter 7 [III.]--Augustin Confesses that He Had Formerly Been in Error
 Concerning the Grace of God.

 It was not thus that that pious and humble teacher thought--I speak of
 the most blessed Cyprian--when he said "that we must boast in nothing,
 since nothing is our own." [3432] And in order to show this, he
 appealed to the apostle as a witness, where he said, "For what hast
 thou that thou hast not received? And if thou hast received it, why
 boastest thou as if thou hadst not received it?" [3433] And it was
 chiefly by this testimony that I myself also was convinced when I was
 in a similar error, thinking that faith whereby we believe on God is
 not God's gift, but that it is in us from ourselves, and that by it we
 obtain the gifts of God, whereby we may live temperately and
 righteously and piously in this world. For I did not think that faith
 was preceded by God's grace, so that by its means would be given to us
 what we might profitably ask, except that we could not believe if the
 proclamation of the truth did not precede; but that we should consent
 when the gospel was preached to us I thought was our own doing, and
 came to us from ourselves. And this my error is sufficiently indicated
 in some small works of mine written before my episcopate. Among these
 is that which you have mentioned in your letters [3434] wherein is an
 exposition of certain propositions from the Epistle to the Romans.
 Eventually, when I was retracting all my small works, and was
 committing that retractation to writing, of which task I had already
 completed two books before I had taken up your more lengthy
 letters,--when in the first volume I had reached the retractation of
 this book, I then spoke thus:--"Also discussing, I say, what God could
 have chosen in him who was as yet unborn, whom He said that the elder
 should serve; and what in the same elder, equally as yet unborn, He
 could have rejected; concerning whom, on this account, the prophetic
 testimony is recorded, although declared long subsequently, "Jacob have
 I loved, and Esau have I hated,"' [3435] I carried out my reasoning to
 the point of saying: God did not therefore choose the works of any one
 in foreknowledge of what He Himself would give them, but he chose the
 faith, in the foreknowledge that He would choose that very person whom
 He foreknew would believe on Him,--to whom He would give the Holy
 Spirit, so that by doing good works he might obtain eternal life also.'
 I had not yet very carefully sought, nor had I as yet found, what is
 the nature of the election of grace, of which the apostle says, A
 remnant are saved according to the election of grace.' [3436] Which
 assuredly is not grace if any merits precede it; lest what is now
 given, not according to grace, but according to debt, be rather paid to
 merits than freely given. And what I next subjoined: For the same
 apostle says, "The same God which worketh all in all;" [3437] but it
 was never said, God believeth all in all;' and then added, Therefore
 what we believe is our own, but what good thing we do is of Him who
 giveth the Holy Spirit to them that believe:' I certainly could not
 have said, had I already known that faith itself also is found among
 those gifts of God which are given by the same Spirit. Both, therefore,
 are ours on account of the choice of the will, and yet both are given
 by the spirit of faith and love. For faith is not alone but as it is
 written, Love with faith, from God the Father, and our Lord Jesus
 Christ.' [3438] And what I said a little after, For it is ours to
 believe and to will, but it is His to give to those who believe and
 will, the power of doing good works through the Holy Spirit, by whom
 love is shed abroad in our hearts,'--is true indeed; but by the same
 rule both are also God's, because God prepares the will; and both are
 ours too, because they are only brought about with our good wills. And
 thus what I subsequently said also: Because we are not able to will
 unless we are called; and when, after our calling, we would will, our
 willing is not sufficiently nor our running, unless God gives strength
 to us that run, and leads us whither He calls us;' and thereupon added:
 It is plain, therefore, that it is not of him that willeth, nor of him
 that runneth, but of God that showeth mercy, that we do good
 works'--this is absolutely most true. But I discovered little
 concerning the calling itself, which is according to God's purpose; for
 not such is the calling of all that are called, but only of the elect.
 Therefore what I said a little afterwards: For as in those whom God
 elects it is not works but faith that begins the merit so as to do good
 works by the gift of God, so in those whom He condemns, unbelief and
 impiety begin the merit of punishment, so that even by way of
 punishment itself they do evil works'--I spoke most truly. But that
 even the merit itself of faith was God's gift, I neither thought of
 inquiring into, nor did I say. And in another place I say: For whom He
 has mercy upon, He makes to do good works, and whom He hardeneth He
 leaves to do evil works; but that mercy is bestowed upon the preceding
 merit of faith, and that hardening is applied to preceding iniquity.'
 And this indeed is true; but it should further have been asked, whether
 even the merit of faith does not come from God's mercy,--that is,
 whether that mercy is manifested in man only because he is a believer,
 or whether it is also manifested that he may be a believer? For we read
 in the apostle's words: I obtained mercy to be a believer.' [3439] He
 does not say, Because I was a believer.' Therefore although it is given
 to the believer, yet it has been given also that he may be a believer.
 Therefore also, in another place in the same book I most truly said:
 Because, if it is of God's mercy, and not of works, that we are even
 called that we may believe and it is granted to us who believe to do
 good works, that mercy must not be grudged to the heathen;'--although I
 there discoursed less carefully about that calling which is given
 according to God's purpose." [3440]

 [3432] Cyprian, Testimonies to Quirinus, Book iii. ch. 4; The
 Ante-Nicene Fathers, vol. v. p. 528.

 [3433] 1 Cor. iv. 7.

 [3434] Hilary's Letter, No. 226 in the collection of Augustin's
 Letters.

 [3435] Mal. i. 2, 3. Cf. Rom. ix. 13.

 [3436] Rom. xi. 5.

 [3437] 1 Cor. xii. 6.

 [3438] Eph. vi. 23.

 [3439] 1 Cor. vii. 25.

 [3440] Retractations, Book i. ch. 23, Nos. 3, 4.

 Chapter 8 [IV.]--What Augustin Wrote to Simplicianus, the Successor of
 Ambrose, Bishop of Milan.

 You see plainly what was at that time my opinion concerning faith and
 works, although I was labouring in commending God's grace; and in this
 opinion I see that those brethren of ours now are, because they have
 not been as careful to make progress with me in my writings as they
 were in reading them. For if they had been so careful, they would have
 found that question solved in accordance with the truth of the divine
 Scriptures in the first book of the two which I wrote in the very
 beginning of my episcopate to Simplicianus, of blessed memory, Bishop
 of the Church of Milan, and successor to St. Ambrose. Unless,
 perchance, they may not have known these books; in which case, take
 care that they do know them. Of this first of those two books, I first
 spoke in the second book of the Retractations; and what I said is as
 follows: "Of the books, I say, on which, as a bishop, I have laboured,
 the first two are addressed to Simplicianus, president of the Church of
 Milan, who succeeded the most blessed Ambrose, concerning divers
 questions, two of which I gathered into the first book from the Epistle
 of Paul the Apostle to the Romans. The former of them is about what is
 written: What shall we say, then? Is the law sin? By no means;' [3441]
 as far as the passage where he says, Who shall deliver me from the body
 of this death? The grace of God through Jesus Christ our Lord.' [3442]
 And therein I have expounded those words of the apostle: The law is
 spiritual; but I am carnal,' [3443] and others in which the flesh is
 declared to be in conflict against the Spirit in such a way as if a man
 were there described as still under law, and not yet established under
 grace. For, long afterwards, I perceived that those words might even be
 (and probably were) the utterance of a spiritual man. The latter
 question in this book is gathered from that passage where the apostle
 says, And not only this, but when Rebecca also had conceived by one act
 of intercourse, even by our father Isaac,' [3444] as far as that place
 where he says, Except the Lord of Sabaoth had left us a seed, we should
 be as Sodoma, and should have been like unto Gomorrah.' [3445] In the
 solution of this question I laboured indeed on behalf of the free
 choice of the human will, but God's grace overcame, and I could only
 reach that point where the apostle is perceived to have said with the
 most evident truth, For who maketh thee to differ? and what hast thou
 that thou hast not received? Now, if thou hast received it, why dost
 thou glory as if thou receivedst it not?' [3446] And this the martyr
 Cyprian was also desirous of setting forth when he compressed the whole
 of it in that title: That we must boast in nothing, since nothing is
 our own.'" [3447] This is why I previously said that it was chiefly by
 this apostolic testimony that I myself had been convinced, when I
 thought otherwise concerning this matter; and this God revealed to me
 as I sought to solve this question when I was writing, as I said, to
 the Bishop Simplicianus. This testimony, therefore, of the apostle,
 when for the sake of repressing man's conceit he said, "For what hast
 thou which thou hast not received?" [3448] does not allow any believer
 to say, I have faith which I received not. All the arrogance of this
 answer is absolutely repressed by these apostolic words. Moreover, it
 cannot even be said, "Although I have not a perfected faith, yet I have
 its beginning, whereby I first of all believed in Christ." Because here
 also is answered: "But what hast thou that thou hast not received? Now,
 if thou hast received it, why dost thou glory as if thou receivedst it
 not?"

 [3441] Rom. vii. 7.

 [3442] Rom. vii. 24.

 [3443] Rom. vii. 14.

 [3444] Rom. ix. 10.

 [3445] Rom. ix. 29.

 [3446] 1 Cor. iv. 7.

 [3447] Cypr. Test. Book iii. ch. 4; see The Ante-Nicene Fathers, p 528.
 Augustin's Retractations, II. i. 1.

 [3448] 1 Cor. iv. 7.

 Chapter 9 [V.]--The Purpose of the Apostle in These Words.

 The notion, however, which they entertain, "that these words, What hast
 thou that thou hast not received?' cannot be said of this faith,
 because it has remained in the same nature, although corrupted, which
 at first was endowed with health and perfection," [3449] is perceived
 to have no force for the purpose that they desire if it be considered
 why the apostle said these words. For he was concerned that no one
 should glory in man, because dissensions had sprung up among the
 Corinthian Christians, so that every one was saying, "I, indeed, am of
 Paul, and another, I am of Apollos, and another, I am of Cephas;"
 [3450] and thence he went on to say: "God hath chosen the foolish
 things of the world to confound the wise; and God hath chosen the weak
 things of the world to confound the strong things; and God hath chosen
 the ignoble things of the world, and contemptible things, and those
 things which are not, to make of no account things which are; that no
 flesh should glory before God." [3451] Here the intention of the
 apostle is of a certainty sufficiently plain against the pride of man,
 that no one should glory in man; and thus, no one should glory in
 himself. Finally, when he had said "that no flesh should glory before
 God," in order to show in what man ought to glory, he immediately
 added, "But it is of Him that ye are in Christ Jesus, who is made unto
 us wisdom from God, and righteousness, and sanctification, and
 redemption: that according as it is written, He that glorieth, let him
 glory in the Lord." [3452] Thence that intention of his progressed,
 till afterwards rebuking them he says, "For ye are yet carnal; for
 whereas there are among you envying and contention, are ye not carnal,
 and walk according to man? For while one saith I am of Paul, and
 another, I am of Apollos, are ye not men? What, then, is Apollos, and
 what Paul? Ministers by whom you believed; and to every one as the Lord
 has given. I have planted, and Apollos watered; but God gave the
 increase. Therefore, neither is he that planteth anything, nor he that
 watereth, but God that giveth the increase." [3453] Do you not see that
 the sole purpose of the apostle is that man may be humbled, and God
 alone exalted? Since in all those things, indeed, which are planted and
 watered, he says that not even are the planter and the waterer
 anything, but God who giveth the increase: and the very fact, also,
 that one plants and another waters he attributes not to themselves, but
 to God, when he says, "To every one as the Lord hath given; I have
 planted, Apollos watered." Hence, therefore, persisting in the same
 intention he comes to the point of saying, "Therefore let no man glory
 in man," [3454] for he had already said, "He that glorieth, let him
 glory in the Lord." After these and some other matters which are
 associated therewith, that same intention of his is carried on in the
 words: "And these things, brethren, I have in a figure transferred to
 myself and to Apollos for your sakes, that ye might learn in us that no
 one of you should be puffed up for one against another above that which
 is written. For who maketh thee to differ? And what hast thou which
 thou hast not received? Now, if thou hast received it, why dost thou
 glory as if thou receivedst it not?" [3455]

 [3449] See Epistle of Hilary (Augustin's Epistles, 226).

 [3450] 1 Cor. i. 12.

 [3451] 1 Cor. i. 27.

 [3452] 1 Cor. i. 30.

 [3453] 1 Cor. iii. 3 ff.

 [3454] 1 Cor. iii. 21.

 [3455] 1 Cor. iv. 6.

 Chapter 10.--It is God's Grace Which Specially Distinguishes One Man
 from Another.

 In this the apostle's most evident intention, in which he speaks
 against human pride, so that none should glory in man but in God, it is
 too absurd, as I think, to suppose God's natural gifts, whether man's
 entire and perfected nature itself as it was bestowed on him in his
 first state, or the remains, whatever they may be, of his degraded
 nature. For is it by such gifts as these, which are common to all men,
 that men are distinguished from men? But here he first said, "For who
 maketh thee to differ?" and then added, "And what hast thou that thou
 hast not received?" Because a man, puffed up against another, might
 say, "My faith makes me to differ," or "My righteousness," or anything
 else of the kind. In reply to such notions, the good teacher says, "But
 what hast thou that thou hast not received?" And from whom but from Him
 who maketh thee to differ from another, on whom He bestowed not what He
 bestowed on thee? "Now if," says he, "thou hast received it, why dost
 thou glory as if thou receivedst it not?" Is he concerned, I ask, about
 anything else save that he who glorieth should glory in the Lord? But
 nothing is so opposed to this feeling as for any one to glory
 concerning his own merits in such a way as if he himself had made them
 for himself, and not the grace of God,--a grace, however, which makes
 the good to differ from the wicked, and is not common to the good and
 the wicked. Let the grace, therefore, whereby we are living and
 reasonable creatures, and are distinguished from cattle, be attributed
 to nature; let that grace also by which, among men themselves, the
 handsome are made to differ from the ill-formed, or the intelligent
 from the stupid, or anything of that kind, be ascribed to nature. But
 he whom the apostle was rebuking did not puff himself up as contrasted
 with cattle, nor as contrasted with any other man, in respect of any
 natural endowment which might be found even in the worst of men. But he
 ascribed to himself, and not to God, some good gift which pertained to
 a holy life, and was puffed up therewith when he deserved to hear the
 rebuke, "Who hath made thee to differ? and what hast thou that thou
 receivedst not?" For though the capacity to have faith is of nature, is
 it also of nature to have it? "For all men have not faith," [3456]
 although all men have the capacity to have faith. But the apostle does
 not say, "And what hast thou capacity to have, the capacity to have
 which thou receivedst not?" but he says, "And what hast thou which thou
 receivedst not?" Accordingly, the capacity to have faith, [3457] as the
 capacity to have love, belongs to men's nature; but to have faith, even
 as to have love, belongs to the grace of believers. That nature,
 therefore, in which is given to us the capacity of having faith, does
 not distinguish man from man, but faith itself makes the believer to
 differ from the unbeliever. And thus, when it is said, "For who maketh
 thee to differ? and what hast thou that thou receivedst not?" if any
 one dare to say, "I have faith of myself, I did not, therefore, receive
 it," he directly contradicts this most manifest truth,--not because it
 is not in the choice of man's will to believe or not to believe, but
 because in the elect the will is prepared by the Lord. Thus, moreover,
 the passage, "For who maketh thee to differ? and what hast thou that
 thou receivedst not?" refers to that very faith which is in the will of
 man.

 [3456] 2 Thess. iii. 2.

 [3457] Thence says Bernard, in his treatise On Grace and Free Will, ch.
 i.: "God is the author of salvation. Free will is only capable of it."
 Comp. On the Calling of the Gentiles, Book ii. ch. 2, and Fulgentius,
 On the Incarnation and Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, chs. 22, 23, and
 24.

 Chapter 11 [VI.]--That Some Men are Elected is of God's Mercy.

 "Many hear the word of truth; but some believe, while others
 contradict. Therefore, the former will to believe; the latter do not
 will." Who does not know this? Who can deny this? But since in some the
 will is prepared by the Lord, in others it is not prepared, we must
 assuredly be able to distinguish what comes from God's mercy, and what
 from His judgment. "What Israel sought for," says the apostle, "he hath
 not obtained, but the election hath obtained it; and the rest were
 blinded, as it is written, God gave to them the spirit of
 compunction,--eyes that they should not see, and ears that they should
 not hear, even to this day. And David said, Let their table be made a
 snare, a retribution, and a stumblingblock to them; let their eyes be
 darkened, that they may not see; and bow down their back always."
 [3458] Here is mercy and judgment,--mercy towards the election which
 has obtained the righteousness of God, but judgment to the rest which
 have been blinded. And yet the former, because they willed, [3459]
 believed; the latter, because they did not will believed not. Therefore
 mercy and judgment were manifested in the very wills themselves.
 Certainly such an election is of grace, not at all of merits. For he
 had before said, "So, therefore, even at this present time, the remnant
 has been saved by the election of grace. And if by grace, now it is no
 more of works; otherwise grace is no more grace." [3460] Therefore the
 election obtained what it obtained gratuitously; there preceded none of
 those things which they might first give, and it should be given to
 them again. He saved them for nothing. But to the rest who were
 blinded, as is there plainly declared, it was done in recompense. "All
 the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth." [3461] But His ways are
 unsearchable. Therefore the mercy by which He freely delivers, and the
 truth by which He righteously judges, are equally unsearchable.

 [3458] Rom. xi. 7.

 [3459] According to the Vatican mss. is read, "The former who willed,"
 and below, "The latter who willed not."

 [3460] Rom. xi. 5.

 [3461] Ps. xxv. 10.

 Chapter 12 [VII.]--Why the Apostle Said that We are Justified by Faith
 and Not by Works.

 But perhaps it may be said: "The apostle distinguishes faith from
 works; he says, indeed, that grace is not of works, but he does not say
 that it is not of faith." This, indeed, is true. But Jesus says that
 faith itself also is the work of God, and commands us to work it. For
 the Jews said to Him, "What shall we do that we may work the work of
 God? Jesus answered, and said unto them, This is the work of God, that
 ye believe on Him whom He hath sent." [3462] The apostle, therefore,
 distinguishes faith from works, just as Judah is distinguished from
 Israel in the two kingdoms of the Hebrews, although Judah is Israel
 itself. And he says that a man is justified by faith and not by works,
 because faith itself is first given, from which may be obtained other
 things which are specially characterized as works, in which a man may
 live righteously. For he himself also says, "By grace ye are saved
 through faith; and this not of yourselves; but it is the gift of God,"
 [3463] --that is to say, "And in saying through faith,' even faith
 itself is not of yourselves, but is God's gift." "Not of works," he
 says, "lest any man should be lifted up." For it is often said, "He
 deserved to believe, because he was a good man even before he
 believed." Which may be said of Cornelius [3464] since his alms were
 accepted and his prayers heard before he had believed on Christ; and
 yet without some faith he neither gave alms nor prayed. For how did he
 call on him on whom he had not believed? But if he could have been
 saved without the faith of Christ the Apostle Peter would not have been
 sent as an architect to build him up; although, "Except the Lord build
 the house, they labour in vain who build it." [3465] And we are told,
 Faith is of ourselves; other things which pertain to works of
 righteousness are of the Lord; as if faith did not belong to the
 building,--as if, I say, the foundation did not belong to the building.
 But if this primarily and especially belongs to it, he labours in vain
 who seeks to build up the faith by preaching, unless the Lord in His
 mercy builds it up from within. Whatever, therefore, of good works
 Cornelius performed, as well before he believed in Christ as when he
 believed and after he had believed, are all to be ascribed to God,
 lest, perchance any man be lifted up.

 [3462] John vi. 28.

 [3463] Eph. ii. 8.

 [3464] Acts x.

 [3465] Ps. cxxvii. 1.

 Chapter 13 [VIII.]--The Effect of Divine Grace.

 Accordingly, our only Master and Lord Himself, when He had said what I
 have above mentioned,--"This is the work of God, that ye believe on Him
 whom He hath sent,"--says a little afterwards in that same discourse of
 His, "I said unto you that ye also have seen me and have not believed.
 All that the Father giveth me shall come to me." [3466] What is the
 meaning of "shall come to me," but, "shall believe in me"? But it is
 the Father's gift that this may be the case. Moreover, a little after
 He says, "Murmur not among yourselves. No one can come to me, except
 the Father which hath sent me draw him; and I will raise him up at the
 last day. It is written in the prophets, And they shall be all
 teachable [3467] of God. Every man that hath heard of the Father, and
 hath learned, cometh unto me." [3468] What is the meaning of, "Every
 man that hath heard from the Father, and hath learned, cometh unto me,"
 except that there is none who hears from the Father, and learns, who
 cometh not to me? For if every one who has heard from the Father, and
 has learned, comes, certainly every one who does not come has not heard
 from the Father; for if he had heard and learned, he would come. For no
 one has heard and learned, and has not come; but every one, as the
 Truth declares, who has heard from the Father, and has learned, comes.
 Far removed from the senses of the flesh is this teaching in which the
 Father is heard, and teaches to come to the Son. Engaged herein is also
 the Son Himself, because He is His Word by which He thus teaches; and
 He does not do this through the ear of the flesh, but of the heart.
 Herein engaged, also, at the same time, is the Spirit of the Father and
 of the Son; and He, too, teaches, and does not teach separately, since
 we have learned that the workings of the Trinity are inseparable. And
 that is certainly the same Holy Spirit of whom the apostle says, "We,
 however, having the same Spirit of faith." [3469] But this is
 especially attributed to the Father, for the reason that of Him is
 begotten the Only Begotten, and from Him proceeds the Holy Spirit, of
 which it would be tedious to argue more elaborately; and I think that
 my work in fifteen books on the Trinity which God is, has already
 reached you. Very far removed, I say, from the senses of the flesh is
 this instruction wherein God is heard and teaches. We see that many
 come to the Son because we see that many believe on Christ, but when
 and how they have heard this from the Father, and have learned, we see
 not. It is true that that grace is exceedingly secret, but who doubts
 that it is grace? This grace, therefore, which is hiddenly bestowed in
 human hearts by the Divine gift, is rejected by no hard heart, because
 it is given for the sake of first taking away the hardness of the
 heart. When, therefore, the Father is heard within, and teaches, so
 that a man comes to the Son, He takes away the heart of stone and gives
 a heart of flesh, as in the declaration of the prophet He has promised.
 Because He thus makes them children and vessels of mercy which He has
 prepared for glory.

 [3466] John vi. 36.

 [3467] Or, "docile towards God."

 [3468] John vi. 43 ff.

 [3469] 2 Cor. iv. 13.

 Chapter 14.--Why the Father Does Not Teach All that They May Come to
 Christ.

 Why, then, does He not teach all that they may come to Christ, except
 because all whom He teaches, He teaches in mercy, while those whom He
 teaches not, in judgment He teaches not? Since, "On whom He will He has
 mercy, and whom He will He hardeneth." [3470] But He has mercy when He
 gives good things. He hardens when He recompenses what is deserved. Or
 if, as some would prefer to distinguish them, those words also are his
 to whom the apostle says, "Thou sayest then unto me," so that he may be
 regarded as having said, "Therefore hath He mercy on whom He will, and
 whom He will He hardeneth," as well as those which follow,--to wit,
 "What is it that is still complained of? for who resists His will?"
 does the apostle answer, "O man, what thou hast said is false?" No; but
 he says, "O man, who art thou that repliest against God? Doth the thing
 formed say to him that formed it, Why hast thou made me thus? Hath not
 the potter power over the clay of the same lump?" [3471] and what
 follows, which you very well know. And yet in a certain sense the
 Father teaches all men to come to His Son. For it was not in vain that
 it was written in the prophets, "And they shall all be teachable of
 God." [3472] And when He too had premised this testimony, He added,
 "Every man, therefore, who has heard of the Father, and has learned,
 cometh to me." As, therefore, we speak justly when we say concerning
 any teacher of literature who is alone in a city, He teaches literature
 here to everybody,--not that all men learn, but that there is none who
 learns literature there who does not learn from him,--so we justly say,
 God teaches all men to come to Christ, not because all come, but
 because none comes in any other way. And why He does not teach all men
 the apostle explained, as far as he judged that it was to be explained,
 because, "willing to show His wrath, and to exhibit His power, He
 endured with much patience the vessels of wrath which were perfected
 for destruction; and that He might make known the riches of His glory
 on the vessels of mercy which He has prepared for glory." [3473] Hence
 it is that the "word of the cross is foolishness to them that perish;
 but unto them that are saved it is the power of God." [3474] God
 teaches all such to come to Christ, for He wills all such to be saved,
 and to come to the knowledge of the truth. And if He had willed to
 teach even those to whom the word of the cross is foolishness to come
 to Christ, beyond all doubt these also would have come. For He neither
 deceives nor is deceived when He says, "Everyone that hath heard of the
 Father, and hath learned, cometh to me." Away, then, with the thought
 that any one cometh not, who has heard of the Father and has learned.

 [3470] Rom. ix. 18.

 [3471] Rom. ix. 18, ff.

 [3472] John vi. 45.

 [3473] Rom. ix. 22.

 [3474] 1 Cor. i. 18.

 Chapter 15.--It is Believers that are Taught of God.

 "Why," say they, "does He not teach all men?" If we should say that
 they whom He does not teach are unwilling to learn, we shall be met
 with the answer: And what becomes of what is said to Him, "O God, Thou
 wilt turn us again, and quicken us"? [3475] Or if God does not make men
 willing who were not willing, on what principle does the Church pray,
 according to the Lord's commandment, for her persecutors? For thus also
 the blessed Cyprian [3476] would have it to be understood that we say,
 "Thy will be done, as in heaven so in earth,"--that is, as in those who
 have already believed, and who are, as it were, heaven, so also in
 those who do not believe, and on this account are still the earth.
 What, then, do we pray for on behalf of those who are unwilling to
 believe, except that God would work in them to will also? Certainly the
 apostle says, "Brethren, my heart's good will, indeed, and my prayer to
 God for them, is for their salvation." [3477] He prays for those who do
 not believe,--for what, except that they may believe? For in no other
 way do they obtain salvation. If, then, the faith of the petitioners
 precede the grace of God, does the faith of them on whose behalf prayer
 is made that they may believe precede the grace of God?--since this is
 the very thing that is besought for them, that on them that believe
 not--that is, who have not faith--faith itself may be bestowed? When,
 therefore, the gospel is preached, some believe, some believe not; but
 they who believe at the voice of the preacher from without, hear of the
 Father from within, and learn; while they who do not believe, hear
 outwardly, but inwardly do not hear nor learn;--that is to say, to the
 former it is given to believe; to the latter it is not given. Because
 "no man," says He, "cometh to me, except the Father which sent me draw
 him." [3478] And this is more plainly said afterwards. For after a
 little time, when He was speaking of eating his flesh and drinking His
 blood, and some even of His disciples said, "This is a hard saying, who
 can hear it? Jesus, knowing in Himself that His disciples murmured at
 this, said unto them, Doth this offend you?" [3479] And a little after
 He said, "The words that I have spoken unto you are spirit and life;
 but there are some among you which believe not." [3480] And immediately
 the evangelist says, "For Jesus knew from the beginning who were the
 believers, and who should betray Him; and He said, Therefore said I
 unto you, that no man can come unto me except it were given him of my
 Father." Therefore, to be drawn to Christ by the Father, and to hear
 and learn of the Father in order to come to Christ, is nothing else
 than to receive from the Father the gift by which to believe in Christ.
 For it was not the hearers of the gospel that were distinguished from
 those who did not hear, but the believers from those who did not
 believe, by Him who said, "No man cometh to me except it were given him
 of my Father."

 [3475] Ps. lxxx. 7.

 [3476] Cypr. Treatise on the Lord's Prayer.

 [3477] Rom. x. 1.

 [3478] John vi. 44.

 [3479] John vi. 60 ff.

 [3480] John vi. 63 ff.

 Chapter 16.--Why the Gift of Faith is Not Given to All.

 Faith, then, as well in its beginning as in its completion, is God's
 gift; and let no one have any doubt whatever, unless he desires to
 resist the plainest sacred writings, that this gift is given to some,
 while to some it is not given. But why it is not given to all ought not
 to disturb the believer, who believes that from one all have gone into
 a condemnation, which undoubtedly is most righteous; so that even if
 none were delivered therefrom, there would be no just cause for finding
 fault with God. Whence it is plain that it is a great grace for many to
 be delivered, and to acknowledge in those that are not delivered what
 would be due to themselves; so that he that glorieth may glory not in
 his own merits, which he sees to be equalled in those that are
 condemned, but in the Lord. But why He delivers one rather than
 another,--"His judgments are unsearchable, and His ways past finding
 out." [3481] For it is better in this case for us to hear or to say, "O
 man, who art thou that repliest against God?" [3482] than to dare to
 speak as if we could know what He has chosen to be kept secret. Since,
 moreover, He could not will anything unrighteous.

 [3481] Rom. xi. 33.

 [3482] Rom. ix. 20.

 Chapter 17 [IX.]--His Argument in His Letter Against Porphyry, as to
 Why the Gospel Came So Late into the World.

 But that which you remember my saying in a certain small treatise of
 mine against Porphyry, under the title of The Time of the Christian
 Religion, I so said for the sake of escaping this more careful and
 elaborate argument about grace; although its meaning, which could be
 unfolded elsewhere or by others, was not wholly omitted, although I had
 been unwilling in that place to explain it. For, among other matters, I
 spoke thus in answer to the question proposed, why it was after so long
 a time that Christ came: "Accordingly, I say, since they do not object
 to Christ that all do not follow His teaching (for even they themselves
 feel that this could not be objected at all with any justice, either to
 the wisdom of the philosophers or even to the deity of their own gods),
 what will they reply, if--leaving out of the question that depth of
 God's wisdom and knowledge where perchance some other divine plan is
 far more secretly hidden, without prejudging also other causes, which
 cannot be traced out by the wise--we say to them only this, for the
 sake of brevity in the arguing of this question, that Christ willed to
 appear to men, and that His doctrine should be preached among them, at
 that time when He knew, and at that place where He knew, that there
 were some who would believe on Him. For at those times, and in those
 places, at which His gospel was not preached, He foreknew that all
 would be in His preaching such as, not indeed all, but many were in His
 bodily presence, who would not believe on Him, even when the dead were
 raised by Him; such as we see many now, who, although the declarations
 of the prophets concerning Him are fulfilled by such manifestations,
 are still unwilling to believe, and prefer to resist by human
 astuteness, rather than yield to divine authority so clear and
 perspicuous, and so lofty, and sublimely made known, so long as the
 human understanding is small and weak in its approach to divine truth.
 What wonder is it, then, if Christ knew the world in former ages to be
 so full of unbelievers, that He should reasonably refuse to appear, or
 to be preached to them, who, as He foreknew, would believe neither His
 words nor His miracles? For it is not incredible that all at that time
 were such as from His coming even to the present time we marvel that so
 many have been and are. And yet from the beginning of the human race,
 sometimes more hiddenly, sometimes more evidently, even as to Divine
 Providence the times seemed to be fitting, there has neither been a
 failure of prophecy, nor were there wanting those who believed on Him;
 as well from Adam to Moses, as in the people of Israel itself which by
 a certain special mystery was a prophetic people; and in other nations
 before He had come in the flesh. For as some are mentioned in the
 sacred Hebrew books, as early as the time of Abraham,--neither of his
 fleshly race nor of the people of Israel nor of the foreign society
 among the people of Israel,--who were, nevertheless, sharers in their
 sacrament, why may we not believe that there were others elsewhere
 among other people, here and there, although we do not read any mention
 of them in the same authorities? Thus the salvation of this religion,
 by which only true one true salvation is truly promised, never failed
 him who was worthy of it; and whoever it failed was not worthy of it.
 And from the very beginning of the propagation of man, even to the end,
 the gospel is preached, to some for a reward, to some for judgment; and
 thus also those to whom the faith was not announced at all were
 foreknown as those who would not believe; and those to whom it was
 announced, although they were not such as would believe, are set forth
 as an example for the former; while those to whom it is announced who
 should believe, are prepared for the kingdom of heaven, and the company
 of the holy angels." [3483]

 [3483] Augustin's Epistles, 102, chs. 14, 15.

 Chapter 18.--The Preceding Argument Applied to the Present Time.

 Do you not see that my desire was, without any prejudgment of the
 hidden counsel of God, and of other reasons, to say what might seem
 sufficient about Christ's foreknowledge, to convince the unbelief of
 the pagans who had brought forward this question? For what is more true
 than that Christ foreknew who should believe on Him, and at what times
 and places they should believe? But whether by the preaching of Christ
 to themselves by themselves they were to have faith, or whether they
 would receive it by God's gift,--that is, whether God only foreknew
 them, or also predestinated them, I did not at that time think it
 necessary to inquire or to discuss. Therefore what I said, "that Christ
 willed to appear to men at that time, and that His doctrine should be
 preached among them when He knew, and where He knew, that there were
 those who would believe on Him," may also thus be said, "That Christ
 willed to appear to men at that time, and that His gospel should be
 preached among those, whom He knew, and where He knew, that there were
 those who had been elected in Himself before the foundation of the
 world." But since, if it were so said, it would make the reader
 desirous of asking about those things which now by the warning of
 Pelagian errors must of necessity be discussed with greater copiousness
 and care, it seemed to me that what at that time was sufficient should
 be briefly said, leaving to one side, as I said, the depth of the
 wisdom and knowledge of God, and without prejudging other reasons,
 concerning which I thought that we might more fittingly argue, not
 then, but at some other time.

 Chapter 19 [X]--In What Respects Predestination and Grace Differ.

 Moreover, that which I said, "That the salvation of this religion has
 never been lacking to him who was worthy of it, and that he to whom it
 was lacking was not worthy,"--if it be discussed and it be asked whence
 any man can be worthy, there are not wanting those who say--by human
 will. But we say, by divine grace or predestination. Further, between
 grace and predestination there is only this difference, that
 predestination is the preparation for grace, while grace is the
 donation itself. When, therefore the apostle says, "Not of works, lest
 any man should boast. For we are His workmanship, created in Christ
 Jesus in good works," [3484] it is grace; but what follows--"which God
 hath prepared that we should walk in them"--is predestination, which
 cannot exist without foreknowledge, although foreknowledge may exist
 without predestination; because God foreknew by predestination those
 things which He was about to do, whence it was said, "He made those
 things that shall be." [3485] Moreover, He is able to foreknow even
 those things which He does not Himself do,--as all sins whatever.
 Because, although there are some which are in such wise sins as that
 they are also the penalties of sins, whence it is said, "God gave them
 over to a reprobate mind, to do those things which are not convenient,"
 [3486] it is not in such a case the sin that is God's, but the
 judgment. Therefore God's predestination of good is, as I have said,
 the preparation of grace; which grace is the effect of that
 predestination. Therefore when God promised to Abraham in his seed the
 faith of the nations, saying, "I have established thee a father of many
 nations," [3487] whence the apostle says, "Therefore it is of faith,
 that the promise, according to grace, might be established to all the
 seed," [3488] He promised not from the power of our will but from His
 own predestination. For He promised what He Himself would do, not what
 men would do. Because, although men do those good things which pertain
 to God's worship, He Himself makes them to do what He has commanded; it
 is not they that cause Him to do what He has promised. Otherwise the
 fulfilment of God's promises would not be in the power of God, but in
 that of men; and thus what was promised by God to Abraham would be
 given to Abraham by men themselves. Abraham, however, did not believe
 thus, but "he believed, giving glory to God, that what He promised He
 is able also to do." [3489] He does not say, "to foretell"--he does not
 say, "to foreknow;" for He can foretell and foreknow the doings of
 strangers also; but he says, "He is able also to do;" and thus he is
 speaking not of the doings of others, but of His own.

 [3484] Eph. ii. 9, 10.

 [3485] Isa. xlv. 11.

 [3486] Rom. i. 28.

 [3487] Gen. xvii. 5.

 [3488] Rom. iv. 16.

 [3489] Rom. iv. 21.

 Chapter 20.--Did God Promise the Good Works of the Nations and Not
 Their Faith, to Abraham?

 Did God, perchance, promise to Abraham in his seed the good works of
 the nations, so as to promise that which He Himself does, but did not
 promise the faith of the Gentiles, which men do for themselves; but so
 as to promise what He Himself does, did He foreknow that men would
 effect that faith? The apostle, indeed, does not speak thus, because
 God promised children to Abraham, who should follow the footsteps of
 his faith, as he very plainly says. But if He promised the works, and
 not the faith of the Gentiles certainly since they are not good works
 unless they are of faith (for "the righteous lives of faith," [3490]
 and, "Whatsoever is not of faith is sin," [3491] and, "Without faith it
 is impossible to please" [3492] ), it is nevertheless in man's power
 that God should fulfil what He has promised. For unless man should do
 what without the gift of God pertains to man, he will not cause God to
 give,--that is, unless man have faith of himself. God does not fulfil
 what He has promised, that works of righteousness should be given by
 God. And thus that God should be able to fulfil His promises is not in
 God's power, but man's. And if truth and piety do not forbid our
 believing this, let us believe with Abraham, that what He has promised
 He is able also to perform. But He promised children to Abraham; and
 this men cannot be unless they have faith, therefore He gives faith
 also.

 [3490] Hab. ii. 4.

 [3491] Rom. xiv. 23.

 [3492] Heb. xi. 6.

 Chapter 21.--It is to Be Wondered at that Men Should Rather Trust to
 Their Own Weakness Than to God's Strength.

 Certainly, when the apostle says, "Therefore it is of faith that the
 promise may be sure according to grace," [3493] I marvel that men would
 rather entrust themselves to their own weakness, than to the strength
 of God's promise. But sayest thou, God's will concerning myself is to
 me uncertain? What then? Is thine own will concerning thyself certain
 to thee? and dost thou not fear,--"Let him that thinketh he standeth
 take heed lest he fall"? [3494] Since, then, both are uncertain, why
 does not man commit his faith, hope, and love to the stronger will
 rather than to the weaker?

 [3493] Rom. iv. 16.

 [3494] 1 Cor. x. 12.

 Chapter 22.--God's Promise is Sure.

 "But," say they, "when it is said, If thou believest, thou shalt be
 saved,' one of these things is required; the other is offered. What is
 required is in man's power; what is offered is in God's." [3495] Why
 are not both in God's, as well what He commands as what He offers? For
 He is asked to give what He commands. Believers ask that their faith
 may be increased; they ask on behalf of those who do not believe, that
 faith may be given to them; therefore both in its increase and in its
 beginnings, faith is the gift of God. But it is said thus: "If thou
 believest, thou shalt be saved," in the same way that it is said, "If
 by the Spirit ye shall mortify the deeds of the flesh, ye shall live."
 [3496] For in this case also, of these two things one is required, the
 other is offered. It is said, "If by the Spirit ye shall mortify the
 deeds of the flesh, ye shall live." Therefore, that we mortify the
 deeds of the flesh is required, but that we may live is offered. Is it,
 then, fitting for us to say, that to mortify the deeds of the flesh is
 not a gift of God, and not to confess it to be a gift of God, because
 we hear it required of us, with the offer of life as a reward if we
 shall do it? Away with this being approved by the partakers and
 champions of grace! This is the condemnable error of the Pelagians,
 whose mouths the apostle immediately stopped when he added, "For as
 many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God;" [3497]
 lest we should believe that we mortify the deeds of the flesh, not by
 God's Spirit, but by our own. And of this Spirit of God, moreover, he
 was speaking in that place where he says, "But all these worketh that
 one and the self-same Spirit, dividing unto every man what is his own,
 as He will;" [3498] and among all these things, as you know, he also
 named faith. As, therefore, although it is the gift of God to mortify
 the deeds of the flesh, yet it is required of us, and life is set
 before us as a reward; so also faith is the gift of God, although when
 it is said, "If thou believest, thou shalt be saved," faith is required
 of us, and salvation is proposed to us as a reward. For these things
 are both commanded us, and are shown to be God's gifts, in order that
 we may understand both that we do them, and that God makes us to do
 them, as He most plainly says by the prophet Ezekiel. For what is
 plainer than when He says, "I will cause you to do"? [3499] Give heed
 to that passage of Scripture, and you will see that God promises that
 He will make them to do those things which He commands to be done. He
 truly is not silent as to the merits but as to the evil deeds, of those
 to whom He shows that He is returning good for evil, by the very fact
 that He causeth them thenceforth to have good works, in causing them to
 do the divine commands.

 [3495] See Hilary's Letter in Augustin's Letters, 226, ch. 2.

 [3496] Rom. viii. 13.

 [3497] Rom. viii. 14.

 [3498] 1 Cor. xii. 11.

 [3499] Ezek. xxxvi. 27.

 Chapter 23 [XII.]--Remarkable Illustrations of Grace and Predestination
 in Infants, and in Christ.

 But all this reasoning, whereby we maintain that the grace of God
 through Jesus Christ our Lord is truly grace, that is, is not given
 according to our merits, although it is most manifestly asserted by the
 witness of the divine declarations, yet, among those who think that
 they are withheld from all zeal for piety unless they can attribute to
 themselves something, which they first give that it may be recompensed
 to them again, involves somewhat of a difficulty in respect of the
 condition of grown-up people, who are already exercising the choice of
 will. But when we come to the case of infants, and to the Mediator
 between God and man Himself, the man Christ Jesus, there is wanting all
 assertion of human merits that precede the grace of God, because the
 former are not distinguished from others by any preceding good merits
 that they should belong to the Deliverer of men; any more than He
 Himself being Himself a man, was made the Deliverer of men by virtue of
 any precedent human merits.

 Chapter 24.--That No One is Judged According to What He Would Have Done
 If He Had Lived Longer.

 For who can hear that infants, baptized in the condition of mere
 infancy, are said to depart from this life by reason of their future
 merits, and that others not baptized are said to die in the same age
 because their future merits are foreknown,--but as evil; so that God
 rewards or condemns in them not their good or evil life, but no life at
 all? [3500] The apostle, indeed, fixed a limit which man's incautious
 suspicion, to speak gently, ought not to transgress, for he says, "We
 shall all stand before the judgment-seat of Christ; that every one may
 receive according to the things which he has done by means of the body,
 whether it be good or evil." [3501] "Has done," he said; and he did not
 add, "or would have done." But I know not whence this thought should
 have entered the minds of such men, that infants' future merits (which
 shall not be) should be punished or honoured. But why is it said that a
 man is to be judged according to those things which he has done by
 means of the body, when many things are done by the mind alone, and not
 by the body, nor by any member of the body; and for the most part
 things of such importance, that a most righteous punishment would be
 due to such thought, such as,--to say nothing of others,--that "The
 fool hath said in his heart there is no God"? [3502] What, then, is the
 meaning of, "According to those things that he hath done by means of
 the body," except according to those things which he has done during
 that time in which he was in the body, so that we may understand "by
 means of the body" as meaning "throughout the season of bodily life"?
 But after the body, no one will be in the body except at the last
 resurrection,--not for the purpose of establishing any claims of merit,
 but for the sake of receiving recompenses for good merits, and enduring
 punishments for evil merits. But in this intermediate period between
 the putting off and the taking again of the body, the souls are either
 tormented or they are in repose, according to those things which they
 have done during the period of the bodily life. And to this period of
 the bodily life moreover pertains, what the Pelagians deny, but
 Christ's Church confesses, original sin; and according to whether this
 is by God's grace loosed, or by God's judgment not loosed, when infants
 die, they pass, on the one hand, by the merit of regeneration from evil
 to good, or on the other, by the merit of their origin from evil to
 evil. The catholic faith acknowledges this, and even some heretics,
 without any contradiction, agree to this. But in the height of wonder
 and astonishment I am unable to discover whence men, whose intelligence
 your letters show to be by no means contemptible, could entertain the
 opinion that any one should be judged not according to the merits that
 he had as long as he was in the body, but according to the merits which
 he would have had if he had lived longer in the body; and I should not
 dare to believe that there were such men, if I could venture to
 disbelieve you. But I hope that God will interpose, so that when they
 are admonished they may at once perceive, that if those sins which, as
 is said, would have been, can rightly be punished by God's judgment in
 those who are not baptized, they may alo be rightly remitted by God's
 grace in those who are baptized. For whoever says that future sins can
 only be punished by God's judgment, but cannot be pardoned by God's
 mercy, ought to consider how great a wrong he is doing to God and His
 grace; as if future sin could be foreknown, and could not be foregone.
 [3503] And if this is absurd, it is the greater reason that help should
 be afforded to those who would be sinners if they lived longer, when
 they die in early life, by means of that laver wherein sins are washed
 away.

 [3500] See Prosper's Letter in Augustin's Letters, 225, ch. 5.

 [3501] 2 Cor. v. 10.

 [3502] Ps. xiv. 1.

 [3503] Prænosci possit, nec possit ignosci.

 Chapter 25 [XIII.]--Possibly the Baptized Infants Would Have Repented
 If They Had Lived, and the Unbaptized Not.

 But if, perchance, they say that sins are re-remitted to penitents, and
 that those who die in infancy are not baptized because they are
 foreknown as not such as would repent if they should live, while God
 has foreknown that those who are baptized and die in infancy would have
 repented if they had lived, let them observe and see that if it be so
 it is not in this case original sins which are punished in infants that
 die without baptism, but what would have been the sins of each one had
 he lived; and also in baptized infants, that it is not original sins
 that are washed away, but their own future sins if they should live,
 since they could not sin except in more mature age; but that some were
 foreseen as such as would repent, and others as such as would not
 repent, therefore some were baptized, and others departed from this
 life without baptism. If the Pelagians should dare to say this, by
 their denial of original sin they would thus be relieved of the
 necessity of seeking, on behalf of infants outside of the kingdom of
 God, for some place of I know not what happiness of their own;
 especially since they are convinced that they cannot have eternal life
 because they have not eaten the flesh nor drank the blood of Christ;
 and because in them who have no sin at all, baptism, which is given for
 the remission of sins, is falsified. For they would go on to say that
 there is no original sin, but that those who as infants are released
 are either baptized or not baptized according to their future merits if
 they should live, and that according to their future merits they either
 receive or do not receive the body and blood of Christ, without which
 they absolutely cannot have life; and are baptized for the true
 remission of sins although they derived no sins from Adam, because the
 sins are remitted unto them concerning which God foreknew that they
 would repent. Thus with the greatest ease they would plead and would
 win their cause, in which they deny that there is any original sin, and
 contend that the grace of God is only given according to our merits.
 But that the future merits of men, which merits will never come into
 existence are beyond all doubt no merits at all, it is certainly most
 easy to see: for this reason even the Pelagians were not able to say
 this; and much rather these ought not to say it. For it cannot be said
 with what pain I find that they who with us on catholic authority
 condemn the error of those heretics, have not seen this, which the
 Pelagians themselves have seen to be most false and absurd.

 Chapter 26 [XIV]--Reference to Cyprian's Treatise "On the Mortality."

 Cyprian wrote a work On the Mortality, [3504] known with approval to
 many and almost all who love ecclesiastical literature, wherein he says
 that death is not only not disadvantageous to believers, but that it is
 even found to be advantageous, because it withdraws men from the risks
 of sinning, and establishes them in a security of not sinning. But
 wherein is the advantage of this, if even future sins which have not
 been committed are punished? Yet he argues most copiously and well that
 the risks of sinning are not wanting in this life, and that they do not
 continue after this life is done; where also he adduces that testimony
 from the book of Wisdom: "He was taken away, lest wickedness should
 alter his understanding." [3505] And this was also adduced by me,
 though you said that those brethren of yours had rejected it on the
 ground of its not having been brought forward from a canonical book; as
 if, even setting aside the attestation of this book, the thing itself
 were not clear which I wished to be taught therefrom. For what
 Christian would dare to deny that the righteous man, if he should be
 prematurely laid hold of by death, will be in repose? Let who will, say
 this, and what man of sound faith will think that he can withstand it?
 Moreover, if he should say that the righteous man, if he should depart
 from his righteousness in which he has long lived, and should die in
 that impiety after having lived in it, I say not a year, but one day,
 will go hence into the punishment due to the wicked, his righteousness
 having no power in the future to avail him,--will any believer
 contradict this evident truth? Further, if we are asked whether, if he
 had died then at the time that he was righteous, he would have incurred
 punishment or repose, shall we hesitate to answer, repose? This is the
 whole reason why it is said,--whoever says it,--"He was taken away lest
 wickedness should alter his understanding." For it was said in
 reference to the risks of this life, not with reference to the
 foreknowledge of God, who foreknew that which was to be, not that which
 was not to be--that is, that He would bestow on him an untimely death
 in order that he might be withdrawn from the uncertainty of
 temptations; not that he would sin, since he was not to remain in
 temptation. Because, concerning this life, we read in the book of Job,
 "Is not the life of man upon earth a temptation?" [3506] But why it
 should be granted to some to be taken away from the perils of this life
 while they are righteous, while others who are righteous until they
 fall from righteousness are kept in the same risks in a more lengthened
 life,--who has known the mind of the Lord? And yet it is permitted to
 be understood from this, that even those righteous people who maintain
 good and pious characters, even to the maturity of old age and to the
 last day of this life, must not glory in their own merits, but in the
 Lord, since He who took away the righteous man from the shortness of
 life, lest wickedness should alter his understanding, Himself guards
 the righteous man in any length of life, that wickedness may not alter
 his understanding. But why He should have kept the righteous man here
 to fall, when He might have withdrawn him before,--His judgments,
 although absolutely righteous, are yet unsearchable.

 [3504] Cyprian, Works in The Ante-Nicene Fathers, vol. v. p. 469.

 [3505] Wisd. iv. 11.

 [3506] Job vii. 1.

 Chapter 27.--The Book of Wisdom Obtains in the Church the Authority of
 Canonical Scripture.

 And since these things are so, the judgment of the book of Wisdom ought
 not to be repudiated, since for so long a course of years that book has
 deserved to be read in the Church of Christ from the station of the
 readers of the Church of Christ, and to be heard by all Christians,
 from bishops downwards, even to the lowest lay believers, penitents,
 and catechumens, with the veneration paid to divine authority. For
 assuredly, if, from those who have been before me in commenting on the
 divine Scriptures, I should bring forward a defence of this judgment,
 which we are now called upon to defend more carefully and copiously
 than usual against the new error of the Pelagians,--that is, that God's
 grace is not given according to our merits, and that it is given freely
 to whom it is given, because it is neither of him that willeth, nor of
 him that runneth, but of God that showeth mercy; but that by righteous
 judgment it is not given to whom it is not given, because there is no
 unrighteousness with God;--if, therefore, I should put forth a defence
 of this opinion from catholic commentators on the divine oracles who
 have preceded us, assuredly these brethren for whose sake I am now
 discoursing would acquiesce, for this you have intimated in your
 letters. What need is there, then, for us to look into the writings of
 those who, before this heresy sprang up, had no necessity to be
 conversant in a question so difficult of solution as this, which beyond
 a doubt they would have done if they had been compelled to answer such
 things? Whence it arose that they touched upon what they thought of
 God's grace briefly in some passages of their writings, and cursorily;
 but on those matters which they argued against the enemies of the
 Church, and in exhortations to every virtue by which to serve the
 living and true God for the purpose of attaining eternal life and true
 happiness, they dwelt at length. But the grace of God, what it could
 do, shows itself artlessly by its frequent mention in prayers; for what
 God commands to be done would not be asked for from God, unless it
 could be given by Him that it should be done.

 Chapter 28.--Cyprian's Treatise "On the Mortality."

 But if any wish to be instructed in the opinions of those who have
 handled the subject, it behoves them to prefer to all commentators the
 book of Wisdom, where it is read, "He was taken away, that wickedness
 should not alter his understanding;" because illustrious commentators,
 even in the times nearest to the apostles, preferred it to themselves,
 seeing that when they made use of it for a testimony they believed that
 they were making use of nothing but a divine testimony; and certainly
 it appears that the most blessed Cyprian, in order to commend the
 advantage of an earlier death, contended that those who end this life,
 wherein sin is possible, are taken away from the risks of sins. In the
 same treatise, among other things, he says, "Why, when you are about to
 be with Christ, and are secure of the divine promise, do you not
 embrace being called to Christ, and rejoice that you are free from the
 devil?" [3507] And in another place he says, "Boys escape the peril of
 their unstable age." [3508] And again, in another place, he says, "Why
 do we not hasten and run, that we may see our country, that we may hail
 our relatives? A great number of those who are dear to us are expecting
 us there,--a dense and abundant crowd of parents, brethren, sons, are
 longing for us; already secure of their own safety, but still anxious
 about our salvation." [3509] By these and such like sentiments, that
 teacher sufficiently and plainly testifies, in the clearest light of
 the catholic faith, that perils of sin and trials are to be feared even
 until the putting off of this body, but that afterwards no one shall
 suffer any such things. And even if he did not testify thus, when could
 any manner of Christian be in doubt on this matter? How, then, should
 it not have been of advantage to a man who has lapsed, and who finishes
 his life wretchedly in that same state of lapse, and passes into the
 punishment due to such as he,--how, I say, should it not have been of
 the greatest and highest advantage to such an one to be snatched by
 death from this sphere of temptations before his fall?

 [3507] Cyprian, On the Mortality, as above.

 [3508] Cyprian, On the Mortality, as above.

 [3509] Cyprian, On the Mortality, as above.

 Chapter 29.--God's Dealing Does Not Depend Upon Any Contingent Merits
 of Men.

 And thus, unless we indulge in reckless disputation, the entire
 question is concluded concerning him who is taken away lest wickedness
 should alter his understanding. And the book of Wisdom, which for such
 a series of years has deserved to be read in Christ's Church, and in
 which this is read, ought not to suffer injustice because it withstands
 those who are mistaken on behalf of men's merit, so as to come in
 opposition to the most manifest grace of God: and this grace chiefly
 appears in infants, and while some of these baptized, and some not
 baptized, come to the end of this life, they sufficiently point to
 God's mercy and His judgment,--His mercy, indeed, gratuitous, His
 judgment, of debt. For if men should be judged according to the merits
 of their life, which merits they have been prevented by death from
 actually having, but would have had if they had lived, it would be of
 no advantage to him who is taken away lest wickedness should alter his
 understanding; it would be of no advantage to those who die in a state
 of lapse if they should die before. And this no Christian will venture
 to say. Wherefore our brethren, who with us on behalf of the catholic
 faith assail the pest of the Pelagian error, ought not to such an
 extent to favour the Pelagian opinion, wherein they conceive that God's
 grace is given according to our merits, as to endeavour (which they
 cannot dare) to invalidate a true sentiment, plainly and from ancient
 times Christian,--"He was taken away, lest wickedness should alter his
 understanding;" and to build up that which we should think, I do not
 say, no one would believe, but no one would dream,--to wit, that any
 deceased person would be judged according to those things which he
 would have done if he had lived for a more lengthened period. Surely
 thus what we say manifests itself clearly to be incontestable,--that
 the grace of God is not given according to our merits; so that
 ingenious men who contradict this truth are constrained to say things
 which must be rejected from the ears and from the thoughts of all men.

 Chapter 30 [XV.]--The Most Illustrious Instance of Predestination is
 Christ Jesus.

 Moreover, the most illustrious Light of predestination and grace is the
 Saviour Himself,--the Mediator Himself between God and men, the man
 Christ Jesus. And, pray, by what preceding merits of its own, whether
 of works or of faith, did the human nature which is in Him procure for
 itself that it should be this? Let this have an answer, I beg. That
 man, whence did He deserve this--to be assumed by the Word co-eternal
 with the Father into unity of person, and be the only-begotten Son of
 God? Was it because any kind of goodness in Him preceded? What did He
 do before? What did He believe? What did He ask, that He should attain
 to this unspeakable excellence? Was it not by the act and the
 assumption of the Word that that man, from the time He began to be,
 began to be the only Son of God? Did not that woman, full of grace,
 conceive the only Son of God? Was He not born the only Son of God, of
 the Holy Spirit and the Virgin Mary,--not of the lust of the flesh, but
 by God's peculiar gift? Was it to be feared that as age matured this
 man, He would sin of free will? Or was the will in Him not free on that
 account? and was it not so much the more free in proportion to the
 greater impossibility of His becoming the servant of sin? Certainly, in
 Him human nature--that is to say, our nature--specially received all
 those specially admirable gifts, and any others that may most truly be
 said to be peculiar to Him, by virtue of no preceding merits of its
 own. Let a man here answer to God if he dare, and say, Why was it not I
 also? And if he should hear, "O man, who art thou that repliest against
 God?" [3510] let him not at this point restrain himself, but increase
 his impudence and say, "How is it that I hear, Who art thou, O man?
 since I am what I hear,--that is, a man, and He of whom I speak is but
 the same? Why should not I also be what He is? For it is by grace that
 He is such and so great; why is grace different when nature is common?
 Assuredly, there is no respect of persons with God." I say, not what
 Christian man, but what madman will say this?

 [3510] Rom. ix. 10.

 Chapter 31.--Christ Predestinated to Be the Son of God.

 Therefore in Him who is our Head let there appear to be the very
 fountain of grace, whence, according to the measure of every man, He
 diffuses Himself through all His members. It is by that grace that
 every man from the beginning of his faith becomes a Christian, by which
 grace that one man from His beginning became Christ. Of the same Spirit
 also the former is born again of which the latter was born. By the same
 Spirit is effected in us the remission of sins, by which Spirit it was
 effected that He should have no sin. God certainly foreknew that He
 would do these things. This, therefore, is that same predestination of
 the saints which most especially shone forth in the Saint of saints;
 and who is there of those who rightly understand the declarations of
 the truth that can deny this predestination? For we have learned that
 the Lord of glory Himself was predestinated in so far as the man was
 made the Son of God. The teacher of the Gentiles exclaims, in the
 beginning of his epistles, "Paul, a servant of Jesus Christ, called to
 be an apostle, separated unto the gospel of God (which He had promised
 afore by His prophets in the Holy Scriptures) concerning His Son, which
 was made of the seed of David according to the flesh, who was
 predestinated the Son of God in power, according to the Spirit of
 sanctification by the resurrection of the dead." [3511] Therefore Jesus
 was predestinated, so that He who was to be the Son of David according
 to the flesh should yet be in power the Son of God, according to the
 Spirit of sanctification, because He was born of the Holy Spirit and of
 the Virgin Mary. This is that ineffably accomplished sole taking up of
 man by God the Word, so that He might truly and properly be called at
 the same time the Son of God and the Son of man,--Son of man on account
 of the man taken up, and the Son of God on account of the God
 only-begotten who took Him up, so that a Trinity and not a Quaternity
 might be believed in. Such a transporting of human nature was
 predestinated, so great, so lofty, and so sublime that there was no
 exalting it more highly,--just as on our behalf that divinity had no
 possibility of more humbly putting itself off, than by the assumption
 of man's nature with the weakness of the flesh, even to the death of
 the cross. As, therefore, that one man was predestinated to be our
 Head, so we being many are predestinated to be His members. Here let
 human merits which have perished through Adam keep silence, and let
 that grace of God reign which reigns through Jesus Christ our Lord, the
 only Son of God, the one Lord. Let whoever can find in our Head the
 merits which preceded that peculiar generation, seek in us His members
 for those merits which preceded our manifold regeneration. For that
 generation was not recompensed to Christ, but given; that He should be
 born, namely, of the Spirit and the Virgin, separate from all
 entanglement of sin. Thus also our being born again of water and the
 Spirit is not recompensed to us for any merit, but freely given; and if
 faith has brought us to the laver of regeneration, we ought not
 therefore to suppose that we have first given anything, so that the
 regeneration of salvation should be recompensed to us again; because He
 made us to believe in Christ, who made for us a Christ on whom we
 believe. He makes in men the beginning and the completion of the faith
 in Jesus who made the man Jesus the beginner and finisher of faith;
 [3512] for thus, as you know, He is called in the epistle which is
 addressed to the Hebrews.

 [3511] Rom. i. 1 ff.

 [3512] Heb. xii. 2.

 Chapter 32 [XVI.]--The Twofold Calling.

 God indeed calls many predestinated children of His, to make them
 members of His only predestinated Son,--not with that calling with
 which they were called who would not come to the marriage, since with
 that calling were called also the Jews, to whom Christ crucified is an
 offence, and the Gentiles, to whom Christ crucified is foolishness; but
 with that calling He calls the predestinated which the apostle
 distinguished when he said that he preached Christ, the wisdom of God
 and the power of God, to them that were called, Jews as well as Greeks.
 For thus he says "But unto them which are called," [3513] in order to
 show that there were some who were not called; knowing that there is a
 certain sure calling of those who are called according to God's
 purpose, whom He has foreknown and predestinated before to be conformed
 to the image of His Son. And it was this calling he meant when he said,
 "Not of works, but of Him that calleth; it was said unto her, That the
 elder shall serve the younger." [3514] Did he say, "Not of works, but
 of him that believeth"? Rather, he actually took this away from man,
 that he might give the whole to God. Therefore he said, "But of Him
 that calleth,"--not with any sort of calling whatever, but with that
 calling wherewith a man is made a believer.

 [3513] 1 Cor. i. 24.

 [3514] Rom. ix. 12.

 Chapter 33.--It is in the Power of Evil Men to Sin; But to Do This or
 That by Means of that Wickedness is in God's Power Alone.

 Moreover, it was this that he had in view when he said, "The gifts and
 calling of God are without repentance." [3515] And in that saying also
 consider for a little what was its purport. For when he had said, "For
 I would not, brethren, that ye should be ignorant of this mystery, that
 ye may not be wise in yourselves, that blindness in part is happened to
 Israel, until the fulness of the Gentiles be come in, and so all Israel
 should be saved; as it is written, There shall come out of Sion one who
 shall deliver, and turn away impiety from Jacob: and this is the
 covenant to them from me, when I shall take away their sins;" [3516] he
 immediately added, what is to be very carefully understood, "As
 concerning the gospel, indeed, they are enemies for your sakes: but as
 concerning the election, they are beloved for their fathers' sakes."
 [3517] What is the meaning of, "as concerning the gospel, indeed, they
 are enemies for your sake," but that their enmity wherewith they put
 Christ to death was, without doubt, as we see, an advantage to the
 gospel? And he shows that this came about by God's ordering, who knew
 how to make a good use even of evil things; not that the vessels of
 wrath might be of advantage to Him, but that by His own good use of
 them they might be of advantage to the vessels of mercy. For what could
 be said more plainly than what is actually said, "As concerning the
 gospel, indeed, they are enemies for your sakes"? It is, therefore, in
 the power of the wicked to sin; but that in sinning they should do this
 or that by that wickedness is not in their power, but in God's, who
 divides the darkness and regulates it; so that hence even what they do
 contrary to God's will is not fulfilled except it be God's will. We
 read in the Acts of the Apostles that when the apostles had been sent
 away by the Jews, and had come to their own friends, and shown them
 what great things the priests and elders said to them, they all with
 one consent lifted up their voices to the Lord and said, "Lord, thou
 art God, which hast made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and all things
 that are therein; who, by the mouth of our father David, thy holy
 servant, hast said, Why did the heathen rage, and the peoples imagine
 vain things? The kings of the earth stood up, and the princes were
 gathered together against the Lord, and against His Christ. For in
 truth, there have assembled together in this city against Thy holy
 child Jesus, whom Thou hast anointed, Herod and Pilate, and the people
 of Israel, to do whatever Thy hand and counsel predestinated to be
 done." [3518] See what is said: "As concerning the gospel, indeed, they
 are enemies for your sakes." Because God's hand and counsel
 predestinated such things to be done by the hostile Jews as were
 necessary for the gospel, for our sakes. But what is it that follows?
 "But as concerning the election, they are beloved for their fathers'
 sakes." For are those enemies who perished in their enmity and those of
 the same people who still perish in their opposition to Christ,--are
 those chosen and beloved? Away with the thought! Who is so utterly
 foolish as to say this? But both expressions, although contrary to one
 another--that is, "enemies" and "beloved"--are appropriate, though not
 to the same men, yet to the same Jewish people, and to the same carnal
 seed of lsrael, of whom some belonged to the falling away, and some to
 the blessing of Israel himself. For the apostle previously explained
 this meaning more clearly when he said, "That which lsrael wrought for,
 he hath not obtained; but the election hath obtained it, and the rest
 were blinded?" [3519] Yet in both cases it was the very same Israel.
 Where, therefore, we hear, "Israel hath not obtained," or, "The rest
 were blinded," there are to be understood the enemies for our sakes;
 but where we hear, "that the election hath obtained it," there are to
 be understood the beloved for their father's sakes, to which fathers
 those things were assuredly promised; because "the promises were made
 to Abraham and his seed," [3520] whence also in that olive-tree is
 grafted the wild olive-tree of the Gentiles. Now subsequently we
 certainly ought to fall in with the election, of which he says that it
 is according to grace, not according to debt, because "there was made a
 remnant by the election of grace" [3521] This election obtained it, the
 rest being blinded. As concerning this election, the Israelites were
 beloved for the sake of their fathers. For they were not called with
 that calling of which it is said, "Many are called," but with that
 whereby the chosen are called. Whence also after he had said, "But as
 concerning the election, they are beloved for the fathers' sakes," he
 went on to add those words whence this discussion arose: "For the gifts
 and calling of God are without repentance,"--that is, they are firmly
 established without change. Those who belong to this calling are all
 teachable by God; nor can any of them say, "I believed in order to
 being thus called," because the mercy of God anticipated him, because
 he was so called in order that he might believe. For all who are
 teachable of God come to the Son because they have heard and learned
 from the Father through the Son, who most clearly says, "Every one who
 has heard of the Father, and has learned, cometh unto me." [3522] But
 of such as these none perishes, because "of all that the Father hath
 given Him, He will lose none." [3523] Whoever, therefore, is of these
 does not perish at all; nor was any who perishes ever of these. For
 which reason it is said, "They went out from among us, but they were
 not of us; for if they had been of us, they would certainly have
 continued with us." [3524]

 [3515] Rom. xi. 29.

 [3516] Rom. xi. 25 ff.

 [3517] Rom. xi. 28.

 [3518] Acts iv. 24 ff.

 [3519] Rom. xi. 7.

 [3520] Gal. iii. 16.

 [3521] Rom. xi. 5.

 [3522] John vi. 45.

 [3523] John vi. 39.

 [3524] John ii. 19.

 Chapter 34 [XVII.]--The Special Calling of the Elect is Not Because
 They Have Believed, But in Order that They May Believe.

 Let us, then, understand the calling whereby they become elected,--not
 those who are elected because they have believed, but who are elected
 that they may believe. For the Lord Himself also sufficiently explains
 this calling when He says, "Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen
 you." [3525] For if they had been elected because they had believed,
 they themselves would certainly have first chosen Him by believing in
 Him, so that they should deserve to be elected. But He takes away this
 supposition altogether when He says, "Ye have not chosen me, but I have
 chosen you." And yet they themselves, beyond a doubt, chose Him when
 they believed on Him. Whence it is not for any other reason that He
 says, "Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you," than because they
 did not choose Him that He should choose them, but He chose them that
 they might choose Him; because His mercy preceded them according to
 grace, not according to debt. Therefore He chose them out of the world
 while He was wearing flesh, but as those who were already chosen in
 Himself before the foundation of the world. This is the changeless
 truth concerning predestination and grace. For what is it that the
 apostle says, "As He hath chosen us in Himself before the foundation of
 the world"? [3526] And assuredly, if this were said because God
 foreknew that they would believe, not because He Himself would make
 them believers, the Son is speaking against such a foreknowledge as
 that when He says, "Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you;" when
 God should rather have foreknown this very thing, that they themselves
 would have chosen Him, so that they might deserve to be chosen by Him.
 Therefore they were elected before the foundation of the world with
 that predestination in which God foreknew what He Himself would do; but
 they were elected out of the world with that calling whereby God
 fulfilled that which He predestinated. For whom He predestinated, them
 He also called, with that calling, to wit, which is according to the
 purpose. Not others, therefore, but those whom He predestinated, them
 He also called; nor others, but those whom He so called, them He also
 justified; nor others, but those whom He predestinated, called, and
 justified, them He also glorified; assuredly to that end which has no
 end. Therefore God elected believers; but He chose them that they might
 be so, not because they were already so. The Apostle James says: "Has
 not God chosen the poor in this world, rich in faith, and heirs of the
 kingdom which God hath promised to them that love Him?" [3527] By
 choosing them, therefore; He makes them rich in faith, as He makes them
 heirs of the kingdom; because He is rightly said to choose that in
 them, in order to make which in them He chose them. I ask, who can hear
 the Lord saying, "Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you," and
 can dare to say that men believe in order to be elected, when they are
 rather elected to believe; lest against the judgment of truth they be
 found to have first chosen Christ to whom Christ says, "Ye have not
 chosen me, but I have chosen you"? [3528]

 [3525] John xv. 16.

 [3526] Eph. i. 4.

 [3527] Jas. ii. 5.

 [3528] John xvi. 16.

 Chapter 35 [XVIII.]--Election is for the Purpose of Holiness.

 Who can hear the apostle saying, "Blessed be the God and Father of our
 Lord Jesus Christ, who hath blessed us in all spiritual blessing in the
 heavens in Christ; as He has chosen us in Him before the foundation of
 the world, that we should be holy and without spot in His sight; in
 love predestinating us to the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to
 Himself according to the good pleasure of His will, wherein He hath
 shown us favour in His beloved Son; in whom we have redemption through
 His blood, the remission of sins according to the riches of His grace,
 which hath abounded to us in all wisdom and prudence; that He might
 show to us the mystery of His will according to His good pleasure,
 which He hath purposed in Himself, in the dispensation of the fulness
 of times, to restore all things in Christ, which are in heaven, and in
 the earth, in Him: in whom also we have obtained a share, being
 predestinated according to the purpose; who worketh all things
 according to the counsel of His will, that we should be to the praise
 of his glory;" [3529] --who, I say, can hear these words with attention
 and intelligence, and can venture to have any doubt concerning a truth
 so clear as this which we are defending? God chose Christ's members in
 Him before the foundation of the world; and how should He choose those
 who as yet did not exist, except by predestinating them? Therefore He
 chose us by predestinating us. Would he choose the unholy and the
 unclean? Now if the question be proposed, whether He would choose such,
 or rather the holy and unstained, who can ask which of these he may
 answer, and not give his opinion at once in favour of the holy and
 pure?

 [3529] Eph. i. 3 ff.

 Chapter 36.--God Chose the Righteous; Not Those Whom He Foresaw as
 Being of Themselves, But Those Whom He Predestinated for the Purpose of
 Making So.

 "Therefore," says the Pelagian, "He foreknew who would be holy and
 immaculate by the choice of free will, and on that account elected them
 before the foundation of the world in that same foreknowledge of His in
 which He foreknew that they would be such. Therefore He elected them,"
 says he, "before they existed, predestinating them to be children whom
 He foreknew to be holy and immaculate. Certainly He did not make them
 so; nor did He foresee that He would make them so, but that they would
 be so." Let us, then, look into the words of the apostle and see
 whether He chose us before the foundation of the world because we were
 going to be holy and immaculate, or in order that we might be so.
 "Blessed," says he, "be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
 who hath blessed us in all spiritual blessing in the heavens in Christ;
 even as He hath chosen us in Himself before the foundation of the
 world, that we should be holy and unspotted." [3530] Not, then, because
 we were to be so, but that we might be so. Assuredly it is
 certain,--assuredly it is manifest. Certainly we were to be such for
 the reason that He has chosen us, predestinating us to be such by His
 grace. Therefore "He blessed us with spiritual blessing in the heavens
 in Christ Jesus, even as He chose us in Him before the foundation of
 the world, that we should be holy and immaculate in His sight, in order
 that we might not in so great a benefit of grace glory concerning the
 good pleasure of our will. "In which," says he, "He hath shown us
 favour in His beloved Son,"--in which, certainly, His own will, He hath
 shown us favour. Thus, it is said, He hath shown us grace by grace,
 even as it is said, He has made us righteous by righteousness. "In
 whom," he says, "we have redemption through His blood, the forgiveness
 of sins, according to the riches of His grace, which has abounded to us
 in all wisdom and prudence; that he might show to us the mystery of His
 will, according to His good pleasure." In this mystery of His will, He
 placed the riches of His grace, according to His good pleasure, not
 according to ours, which could not possibly be good unless He Himself,
 according to His own good pleasure, should aid it to become so. But
 when he had said, "According to His good pleasure," he added, "which He
 purposed in Him," that is, in His beloved Son, "in the dispensation of
 the fulness of times to restore all things in Christ, which are in
 heaven, and which are in earth, in Him: in whom also we too have
 obtained a lot, being predestinated according to His purpose who
 worketh all things according to the counsel of His will; that we should
 be to the praise of His glory."

 [3530] Eph. i. 3.

 Chapter 37.--We Were Elected and Predestinated, Not Because We Were
 Going to Be Holy, But in Order that We Might Be So.

 It would be too tedious to argue about the several points. But you see
 without doubt, you see with what evidence of apostolic declaration this
 grace is defended, in opposition to which human merits are set up, as
 if man should first give something for it to be recompensed to him
 again. Therefore God chose us in Christ before the foundation of the
 world, predestinating us to the adoption of children, not because we
 were going to be of ourselves holy and immaculate, but He chose and
 predestinated us that we might be so. Moreover, He did this according
 to the good pleasure of His will, so that nobody might glory concerning
 his own will, but about God's will towards himself. He did this
 according to the riches of His grace, according to His good-will, which
 He purposed in His beloved Son; in whom we have obtained a share, being
 predestinated according to the purpose, not ours, but His, who worketh
 all things to such an extent as that He worketh in us to will also.
 Moreover, He worketh according to the counsel of His will, that we may
 be to the praise of His glory. [3531] For this reason it is that we cry
 that no one should glory in man, and, thus, not in himself; but whoever
 glorieth let him glory in the Lord, that he may be for the praise of
 His glory. Because He Himself worketh according to His purpose that we
 may be to the praise of His glory, and, of course, holy and immaculate,
 for which purpose He called us, predestinating us before the foundation
 of the world. Out of this, His purpose, is that special calling of the
 elect for whom He co-worketh with all things for good, because they are
 called according to His purpose, and "the gifts and calling of God are
 without repentance." [3532]

 [3531] Phil. ii. 13.

 [3532] Rom. xi. 29.

 Chapter 38 [XIX.]--What is the View of the Pelagians, and What of the
 Semi-Pelagians, Concerning Predestination.

 But these brethren of ours, about whom and on whose behalf we are now
 discoursing, say, perhaps, that the Pelagians are refuted by this
 apostolical testimony in which it is said that we are chosen in Christ
 and predestinated before the foundation of the world, in order that we
 should be holy and immaculate in His sight in love. For they think that
 "having received God's commands we are of ourselves by the choice of
 our free will made holy and immaculate in His sight in love; and since
 God foresaw that this would be the case," they say, "He therefore chose
 and predestinated us in Christ before the foundation of the world."
 Although the apostle says that it was not because He foreknew that we
 should be such, but in order that we might be such by the same election
 of His grace, by which He showed us favour in His beloved Son. When,
 therefore, He predestinated us, He foreknew His own work by which He
 makes us holy and immaculate. Whence the Pelagian error is rightly
 refuted by this testimony. "But we say," say they, "that God did not
 foreknow anything as ours except that faith by which we begin to
 believe, and that He chose and predestinated us before the foundation
 of the world, in order that we might be holy and immaculate by His
 grace and by His work." But let them also hear in this testimony the
 words where he says, "We have obtained a lot, being predestinated
 according to His purpose who worketh all things." [3533] He, therefore,
 worketh the beginning of our belief who worketh all things; because
 faith itself does not precede that calling of which it is said: "For
 the gifts and calling of God are without repentance;" [3534] and of
 which it is said: "Not of works, but of Him that calleth" [3535]
 (although He might have said, "of Him that believeth"); and the
 election which the Lord signified when He said: "Ye have not chosen me,
 but I have chosen you." [3536] For He chose us, not because we
 believed, but that we might believe, lest we should be said first to
 have chosen Him, and so His word be false (which be it far from us to
 think possible), "Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you."
 Neither are we called because we believed, but that we may believe; and
 by that calling which is without repentance it is effected and carried
 through that we should believe. But all the many things which we have
 said concerning this matter need not to be repeated.

 [3533] Eph. i. 11.

 [3534] Rom. xi. 29.

 [3535] Rom. ix. 12.

 [3536] John xv. 16.

 Chapter 39--The Beginning of Faith is God's Gift.

 Finally, also, in what follows this testimony, the apostle gives thanks
 to God on behalf of those who have believed;--not, certainly, because
 the gospel has been declared to them, but because they have believed.
 For he says, "In whom also after ye had heard the word of truth, the
 gospel of your salvation; in whom also, after that ye believed, ye were
 sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise, which is the pledge of our
 inheritance, to the redemption of the purchased possession unto the
 praise of His glory. Wherefore I also, after I had heard of your faith
 in Christ Jesus and with reference to all the saints, cease not to give
 thanks for you." [3537] Their faith was new and recent on the preaching
 of the gospel to them, which faith when he hears of, the apostle gives
 thanks to God on their behalf. If he were to give thanks to man for
 that which he might either think or know that man had not given, it
 would be called a flattery or a mockery, rather than a giving of
 thanks. "Do not err, for God is not mocked;" [3538] for His gift is
 also the beginning of faith, unless the apostolic giving of thanks be
 rightly judged to be either mistaken or fallacious. What then? Does
 that not appear as the beginning of the faith of the Thessalonians, for
 which, nevertheless, the same apostle gives thanks to God when he says,
 "For this cause also we thank God without ceasing, because when ye had
 received from us the word of the hearing of God, ye received it not as
 the word of men, but as it is in truth the word of God, which
 effectually worketh in you and which ye believed"? [3539] What is that
 for which he here gives thanks to God? Assuredly it is a vain and idle
 thing if He to whom he gives thanks did not Himself do the thing. But,
 since this is not a vain and idle thing, certainly God, to whom he gave
 thanks concerning this work, Himself did it; that when they had
 received the word of the hearing of God, they received it not as the
 word of men, but as it is in truth the word of God. God, therefore,
 worketh in the hearts of men with that calling according to His
 purpose, of which we have spoken a great deal, that they should not
 hear the gospel in vain, but when they heard it, should be converted
 and believe, receiving it not as the word of men, but as it is in truth
 the word of God.

 [3537] Eph. i. 13 ff.

 [3538] Gal. vi. 7.

 [3539] 1 Thess. ii. 13.

 Chapter 40 [XX.]--Apostolic Testimony to the Beginning of Faith Being
 God's Gift.

 Moreover, we are admonished that the beginning of men's faith is God's
 gift, since the apostle signifies this when, in the Epistle to the
 Colossians, he says, "Continue in prayer, and watch in the same in
 giving of thanks. Withal praying also for us that God would open unto
 us the door of His word, to speak the mystery of Christ, for which also
 I am in bonds, that I may so make it manifest as I ought to speak."
 [3540] How is the door of His word opened, except when the sense of the
 hearer is opened so that he may believe, and, having made a beginning
 of faith, may admit those things which are declared and reasoned, for
 the purpose of building up wholesome doctrine, lest, by a heart closed
 through unbelief, he reject and repel those things which are spoken?
 Whence, also, he says to the Corinthians: "But I will tarry at Ephesus
 until Pentecost. For a great and evident door is opened unto me, and
 there are many adversaries." [3541] What else can be understood here,
 save that, when the gospel had been first of all preached there by him,
 many had believed, and there had appeared many adversaries of the same
 faith, in accordance with that saying of the Lord, "No one cometh unto
 me, unless it were given him of my Father;" [3542] and, "To you it is
 given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it is
 not given"? [3543] Therefore, there is an open door in those to whom it
 is given, but there are many adversaries among those to whom it is not
 given.

 [3540] Col. iv. 2 ff.

 [3541] 1 Cor. xvi. 8.

 [3542] John vi. 66.

 [3543] Luke viii. 10.

 Chapter 41.--Further Apostolic Testimonies.

 And again, the same apostle says to the same people, in his second
 Epistle: "When I had come to Troas for the gospel of Christ, and a door
 had been opened unto me in the Lord, I had no rest in my spirit,
 because I found not Titus, my brother: but, making my farewell to them,
 I went away into Macedonia." [3544] To whom did he bid farewell but to
 those who had believed,--to wit, in whose hearts the door was opened
 for his preaching of the gospel? But attend to what he adds, saying,
 "Now thanks be unto God, who always causes us to triumph in Christ, and
 maketh manifest the savour of His knowledge by us in every place:
 because we are unto God a sweet savour of Christ in them who are saved,
 and in them who perish: to some, indeed, we are the savour of death
 unto death, but to some the savour of life unto life." [3545] See
 concerning what this most zealous soldier and invincible defender of
 grace gives thanks. See concerning what he gives thanks,--that the
 apostles are a sweet savour of Christ unto God, both in those who are
 saved by His grace, and in those who perish by His judgment. But in
 order that those who little understand these things may be less
 enraged, he himself gives a warning when he adds the words: "And who is
 sufficient for these things?" [3546] But let us return to the opening
 of the door by which the apostle signified the beginning of faith in
 his hearers. For what is the meaning of, "Withal praying also for us
 that God would open unto us a door of the word," [3547] unless it is a
 most manifest demonstration that even the very beginning of faith is
 the gift of God? For it would not be sought for from Him in prayer,
 unless it were believed to be given by Him. This gift of heavenly grace
 had descended to that seller of purple [3548] for whom, as Scripture
 says in the Acts of the Apostles, "The Lord opened her heart, and she
 gave heed unto the things which were said by Paul;" for she was so
 called that she might believe. Because God does what He will in the
 hearts of men, either by assistance or by judgment; so that, even
 through their means, may be fulfilled what His hand and counsel have
 predestinated to be done.

 [3544] 2 Cor. ii. 12, 13.

 [3545] 2 Cor. ii. 14 ff.

 [3546] 2 Cor. ii. 16.

 [3547] Col. iv. 3.

 [3548] Acts xvi. 14.

 Chapter 42.--Old Testament Testimonies.

 Therefore also it is in vain that objectors have alleged, that what we
 have proved by Scripture testimony from the books of Kings and
 Chronicles is not pertinent to the subject of which we are discoursing:
 [3549] such, for instance, as that when God wills that to be done which
 ought only to be done by the willing men, their hearts are inclined to
 will this,--inclined, that is to say, by His power, who, in a
 marvellous and ineffable manner, worketh in us also to will. What else
 is this than to say nothing, and yet to contradict? Unless perchance,
 they have given some reason to you for the view that they have taken,
 which reason you have preferred to say nothing about in your letters.
 But what that reason can be I do not know. Whether, possibly, since we
 have shown that God has so acted on the hearts of men, and has induced
 the wills of those whom He pleased to this point, that Saul or David
 should be established as king,--do they not think that these instances
 are appropriate to this subject, because to reign in this world
 temporally is not the same thing as to reign eternally with God? And so
 do they suppose that God inclines the wills of those whom He pleases to
 the attainment of earthly kingdoms, but does not incline them to the
 attainment of a heavenly kingdom? But I think that it was in reference
 to the kingdom of heaven, and not to an earthly kingdom, that it was
 said, "Incline my heart unto Thy testimonies;" [3550] or, "The steps of
 a man are ordered by the Lord, and He will will His way;" [3551] or,
 "The will is prepared by the Lord;" [3552] or, "Let our Lord be with us
 as with our fathers; let Him not forsake us, nor turn Himself away from
 us; let Him incline our hearts unto Him, that we may walk in all His
 ways;" [3553] or, "I will give them a heart to know me, and ears that
 hear;" [3554] or, "I will give them another heart, and a new spirit
 will I give them." [3555] Let them also hear this, "I will give my
 Spirit within you, and I will cause you to walk in my righteousness;
 and ye shall observe my judgments, and do them." [3556] Let them hear,
 "Man's goings are directed by the Lord, and how can a man understand
 His ways?" [3557] Let them hear, "Every man seemeth right to himself,
 but the Lord directeth the hearts." [3558] Let them hear, "As many as
 were ordained to eternal life believed." [3559] Let them hear these
 passages, and whatever others of the kind I have not mentioned in which
 God is declared to prepare and to convert men's wills, even for the
 kingdom of heaven and for eternal life. And consider what sort of a
 thing it is to believe that God worketh men's wills for the foundation
 of earthly kingdoms, but that men work their own wills for the
 attainment of the kingdom of heaven.

 [3549] Hilary's Letter in Augustin's Letters, 226, sec. 7.

 [3550] Ps. cxix. 36.

 [3551] Ps. xxxvii. 23.

 [3552] Prov. viii. [see LXX.].

 [3553] 1 Kings viii. 57.

 [3554] Baruch ii. 31.

 [3555] Ezek. xi. 19.

 [3556] Ezek. xxxvi. 27.

 [3557] Prov. xx. 24.

 [3558] Prov. xxi. 2.

 [3559] Acts xiii. 48.

 Chapter 43 [XXI.]--Conclusion.

 I have said a great deal, and, perchance, I could long ago have
 persuaded you what I wished, and am still speaking this to such
 intelligent minds as if they were obtuse, to whom even what is too much
 is not enough. But let them pardon me, for a new question has compelled
 me to this. Because, although in my former little treatises I had
 proved by sufficiently appropriate proofs that faith also was the gift
 of God, there was found this ground of contradiction, viz., that those
 testimonies were good for this purpose, to show that the increase of
 faith was God's gift, but that the beginning of faith, whereby a man
 first of all believes in Christ, is of the man himself, and is not the
 gift of God,--but that God requires this, so that when it has preceded,
 other gifts may follow, as it were on the ground of this merit, and
 these are the gifts of God; and that none of them is given freely,
 although in them God's grace is declared, which is not grace except as
 being gratuitous. And you see how absurd all this is. Wherefore I
 determined, as far as I could, to set forth that this very beginning
 also is God's gift. And if I have done this at a greater length than
 perhaps those on whose account I did it might wish, I am prepared to be
 reproached for it by them, so long as they nevertheless confess that,
 although at greater length than they wished, although with the disgust
 and weariness of those that understand, I have done what I have done:
 that is, I have taught that even the beginning of faith, as continence,
 patience, righteousness, piety, and the rest, concerning which there is
 no dispute with them, is God's gift. Let this, therefore, be the end of
 this treatise, lest too great length in this one may give offence.

 [3413] This Treatise is the first portion of a work, of which the
 following, On the Gift of Perseverance, is the second.

 a treatise on the gift of perseverance.

 A Treatise on the gift of perseverance, [3560]

 by aurelius augustin, bishop of hippo;

 Being the Second Book,

 Of the Treatise "On the Predestination of the Saints."

 addressed to prosper and hilary.

 a.d. 428 or 429

 ------------------------

 In the first part of the book he proves that the perseverance by which
 a man perseveres in Christ to the end is God's gift; for that it is a
 mockery to ask of God that which is not believed to be given by God.
 Moreover, that in the Lord's prayer scarcely anything is asked for but
 perseverance, according to the exposition of the martyr Cyprian, by
 which exposition the enemies to this grace were convicted before they
 were born. He teaches that the grace of perseverance is not given
 according to the merits of the receivers, but to some it is given by
 God's mercy; to others it is not given, by His righteous judgment. That
 it is inscrutable why, of adults, one rather than another should be
 called; just as, moreover, of two infants it is inscrutable why the one
 should be taken, the other left. But that it is still more inscrutable
 why, of two pious persons, to one it should be given to persevere, to
 the other it should not be given; but that this is most certain, that
 the former is of the predestinated, the latter is not. He observes that
 the mystery of predestination is set forth in our Lord's words
 concerning the people of Tyre and Sidon, who would have repented if the
 same miracles had been done among them which had been done in Chorazin.
 He shows that the case of infants is of force to confirm the truth of
 predestination and grace in older people; and he answers the passage of
 his third book on free will, unsoundly alleged on this point by his
 adversaries. Subsequently, in the second part of this work, he rebuts
 what they say,--to wit, that the definition of predestination is
 opposed to the usefulness of exhortation and rebuke. He asserts, on the
 other hand, that it is advantageous to preach predestination, so that
 man may not glory in himself, but in the Lord. As to the objections,
 however, which they make against predestination, he shows that the same
 objections may be twisted in no unlike manner either against God's
 foreknowledge or against that grace which they all agree to be
 necessary for other good things (with the exception of the beginning of
 faith and the completion of perseverance). For that the predestination
 of the saints is nothing else than God's foreknowledge and preparation
 for His benefits, by which whoever are delivered are most certainly
 delivered. But he bids that predestination should be preached in a
 harmonious manner, and not in such a way as to seem to an unskilful
 multitude as if it were disproved by its very preaching. Lastly, he
 commends to us Jesus Christ, as placed before our eyes, as the most
 eminent instance of predestination.

 [3560] [In some editions and in many mss. the title is, On the Benefit
 of Perseverance, and the book is so cited by Remigius, Florus (or
 Bede), Hincmar, and others. Probably neither title is authentic.
 Prosper speaks of it to Hilary as if it simply bore the name of the
 second book of the Predestination of the Saints. "In the books," he
 writes, "of Bishop Augustin, of blessed memory, which bear the title,
 On the Predestination of the Saints."--W.]

 Chapter 1 [I.]--Of the Nature of the Perseverance Here Discoursed of.

 I Have now to consider the subject of perseverance with greater care;
 for in the former book also I said some things on this subject when I
 was discussing the beginning of faith. I assert, therefore, that the
 perseverance by which we persevere in Christ even to the end is the
 gift of God; and I call that the end by which is finished that life
 wherein alone there is peril of falling. Therefore it is uncertain
 whether any one has received this gift so long as he is still alive.
 For if he fall before he dies, he is, of course, said not to have
 persevered; and most truly is it said. How, then, should he be said to
 have received or to have had perseverance who has not persevered? For
 if any one have continence, and fall away from that virtue and become
 incontinent,--or, in like manner, if he have righteousness, if
 patience, if even faith, and fall away, he is rightly said to have had
 these virtues and to have them no longer; for he was continent, or he
 was righteous, or he was patient, or he was believing, as long as he
 was so; but when he ceased to be so, he no longer is what he was. But
 how should he who has not persevered have ever been persevering, since
 it is only by persevering that any one shows himself persevering,--and
 this he has not done? But lest any one should object to this, and say,
 If from the time at which any one became a believer he has lived--for
 the sake of argument--ten years, and in the midst of them has fallen
 from the faith, has he not persevered for five years? I am not
 contending about words. If it be thought that this also should be
 called perseverance, as it were for so long as it lasts, assuredly he
 is not to be said to have had in any degree that perseverance of which
 we are now discoursing, by which one perseveres in Christ even to the
 end. And the believer of one year, or of a period as much shorter as
 may be conceived of, if he has lived faithfully until he died, has
 rather had this perseverance than the believer of many years' standing,
 if a little time before his death he has fallen away from the
 stedfastness of his faith.

 Chapter 2 [II.]--Faith is the Beginning of a Christian Man. Martyrdom
 for Christ's Sake is His Best Ending.

 This matter being settled, let us see whether this perseverance, of
 which it was said, "He that persevereth unto the end, the same shall be
 saved," [3561] is a gift of God. And if it be not, how is that saying
 of the apostle true: "Unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not
 only to believe on Him, but also to suffer for His sake"? [3562] Of
 these things, certainly, one has respect to the beginning, the other to
 the end. Yet each is the gift of God, because both are said to be
 given; as, also, I have already said above. For what is more truly the
 beginning for a Christian than to believe in Christ? What end is better
 than to suffer for Christ? But so far as pertains to believing in
 Christ, whatever kind of contradiction has been discovered, that not
 the beginning but the increase of faith should be called God's
 gift,--to this opinion, by God's gift, I have answered enough, and more
 than enough. But what reason can be given why perseverance to the end
 should not be given in Christ to him to whom it is given to suffer for
 Christ, or, to speak more distinctly, to whom it is given to die for
 Christ? For the Apostle Peter, showing that this is the gift of God,
 says, "It is better, if the will of God be so, to suffer for well-doing
 than for evil-doing." [3563] When he says, "If the will of God be so,"
 he shows that this is divinely given, and yet not to all saints, to
 suffer for Christ's sake. For certainly those whom the will of God does
 not will to attain to the experience and the glory of suffering, do not
 fail to attain to the kingdom of God if they persevere in Christ to the
 end. But who can say that this perseverance is not given to those who
 die in Christ from any weakness of body, or by any kind of accident,
 although a far more difficult perseverance is given to those by whom
 even death itself is undergone for Christ's sake? Because perseverance
 is much more difficult when the persecutor is engaged in preventing a
 man's perseverance; and therefore he is sustained in his perseverance
 unto death. Hence it is more difficult to have the former
 perseverance,--easier to have the latter; but to Him to whom nothing is
 difficult it is easy to give both. For God has promised this, saying,
 "I will put my fear in their hearts, that they may not depart from me."
 [3564] And what else is this than, "Such and so great shall be my fear
 that I will put into their hearts that they will perseveringly cleave
 to me"?

 [3561] Matt. x. 22.

 [3562] Phil. ii. 29.

 [3563] 1 Pet. iii. 17.

 [3564] Jer. xxxii. 40.

 Chapter 3.--God is Besought for It, Because It is His Gift.

 But why is that perseverance asked for from God if it is not given by
 God? Is that, too, a mocking petition, when that is asked from Him
 which it is known that He does not give, but, though He gives it not,
 is in man's power; just as that giving of thanks is a mockery, if
 thanks are given to God for that which He did not give nor do? But what
 I have said there, [3565] I say also here again: "Be not deceived,"
 says the apostle, "God is not mocked." [3566] O man, God is a witness
 not only of your words, but also of your thoughts. If you ask anything
 in truth and faith of one who is so rich, believe that you receive from
 Him from whom you ask, what you ask. Abstain from honouring Him with
 your lips and extolling yourself over Him in your heart, by believing
 that you have from yourself what you are pretending to beseech from
 Him. Is not this perseverance, perchance, asked for from Him? He who
 says this is not to be rebuked by any arguments, but must be
 overwhelmed [3567] with the prayers of the saints. Is there any of
 these who does not ask for himself from God that he may persevere in
 Him, when in that very prayer which is called the Lord's--because the
 Lord taught it--when it is prayed by the saints, scarcely anything else
 is understood to be prayed for but perseverance?

 [3565] On the Predestination of the Saints, above, ch. 39.

 [3566] Gal. vi. 6.

 [3567] Some editions read "recalled."

 Chapter 4.--Three Leading Points of the Pelagian Doctrine.

 Read with a little more attention its exposition in the treatise of the
 blessed martyr Cyprian, which he wrote concerning this matter, the
 title of which is, On the Lord's Prayer; and see how many years ago,
 and what sort of an antidote was prepared against those poisons which
 the Pelagians were one day to use. For there are three points, as you
 know, which the catholic Church chiefly maintains against them. One of
 these is, that the grace of God is not given according to our merits;
 because even every one of the merits of the righteous is God's gift,
 and is conferred by God's grace. The second is, that no one lives in
 this corruptible body, however righteous he may be, without sins of
 some kind. The third is, that man is born obnoxious to the first man's
 sin, and bound by the chain of condemnation, unless the guilt which is
 contracted by generation be loosed by regeneration. Of these three
 points, that which I have placed last is the only one that is not
 treated of in the above-named book of the glorious martyr; but of the
 two others the discourse there is of such perspicuity, that the
 above-named heretics, modern enemies of the grace of Christ, are found
 to have been convicted long before they were born. Among these merits
 of the saints, then, which are no merits unless they are the gifts of
 God, he says that perseverance also is God's gift, in these words: "We
 say, Hallowed be Thy name;' not that we ask for God that He may be
 hallowed by our prayers, but that we beseech of Him that His name may
 be hallowed in us. But by whom is God sanctified, since He Himself
 sanctifies? Well, because He says, Be ye holy because I also am holy,
 we ask and entreat that we, who were sanctified in baptism, may
 persevere in that which we have begun to be." [3568] And a little
 after, still arguing about that self-same matter, and teaching that we
 entreat perseverance from the Lord, which we could in no wise rightly
 and truly do unless it were His gift, he says: "We pray that this
 sanctification may abide in us; and because our Lord and Judge warns
 the man that was healed and quickened by Him to sin no more, lest a
 worse thing happen unto him, we make this supplication in our constant
 prayers; we ask this, day and night, that the sanctification and
 quickening which is received from the grace of God may be preserved by
 His protection." [3569] That teacher, therefore, understands that we
 are asking from Him for perseverance in sanctification, that is, that
 we should persevere in sanctification, when we who are sanctified say,
 "Hallowed be Thy name." For what else is it to ask for what we have
 already received, than that it be given to us also not to cease from
 its possession? As, therefore, the saint, when he asks God that he may
 be holy, is certainly asking that he may continue to be holy, so
 certainly the chaste person also, when he asks that he may be chaste,
 the continent that he may be continent, the righteous that he may be
 righteous, the pious that he may be pious, and the like,--which things,
 against the Pelagians, we maintain to be God's gifts,--are asking,
 without doubt, that they may persevere in those good things which they
 have acknowledged that they have received. And if they receive this,
 assuredly they also receive perseverance itself, the great gift of God,
 whereby His other gifts are preserved.

 [3568] Cyprian, On the Lord's Prayer; see The Ante-Nicene Fathers, vol.
 v. p. 450.

 [3569] Cyprian, On the Lord's Prayer, as above.

 Chapter 5.--The Second Petition in the Lord's Prayer.

 What, when we say, "Thy kingdom come," do we ask else, but that that
 should also come to us which we do not doubt will come to all saints?
 And therefore here also, what do they who are already holy pray for,
 save that they may persevere in that holiness which has been given
 them? For no otherwise will the kingdom of God come to them; which it
 is certain will come not to others, but to those who persevere to the
 end.

 Chapter 6 [III.]--The Third Petition. How Heaven and Earth are
 Understood in the Lord's Prayer.

 The third petition is, "Thy will be done in heaven and in earth;" or,
 as it is read in many codices, and is more frequently made use of by
 petitioners, "As in heaven, so also in earth," which many people
 understand, "As the holy angels, so also may we do thy will." That
 teacher and martyr will have heaven and earth, however, to be
 understood as spirit and flesh, and says that we pray that we may do
 the will of God with the full concord of both. He saw in these words
 also another meaning, congruous to the soundest faith, of which meaning
 I have already spoken above,--to wit, that for unbelievers, who are as
 yet earth, bearing in their first birth only the earthly man, believers
 are understood to pray, who, being clothed with the heavenly man, are
 not unreasonably called by the name of heaven; where he plainly shows
 that the beginning of faith also is God's gift, since the holy Church
 prays not only for believers, that faith may be increased or may
 continue in them, but, moreover, for unbelievers, that they may begin
 to have what they have not had at all, and against which, besides, they
 were indulging hostile feelings. Now, however, I am arguing not
 concerning the beginning of faith, of which I have already spoken much
 in the former book, but of that perseverance which must be had even to
 the end,--which assuredly even the saints, who do the will of God, seek
 when they say in prayer, "Thy will be done." For, since it is already
 done in them, why do they still ask that it may be done, except that
 they may persevere in that which they have begun to be? Nevertheless,
 it may here be said that the saints do not ask that the will of God may
 be done in heaven, but that it may be done in earth as in heaven,--that
 is to say, that earth may imitate heaven, that is, that man may imitate
 the angel, or that an unbeliever may imitate a believer; and thus that
 the saints are asking that that may be which is not yet, not that that
 which is may continue. For, by whatever holiness men may be
 distinguished, they are not yet equal to the angels of God; not yet,
 therefore, is the will of God done in them as it is in heaven. And if
 this be so, in that portion indeed in which we ask that men from
 unbelievers may become believers, it is not perseverance, but
 beginning, that seems to be asked for; but in that in which we ask that
 men may be made equal to the angels of God in doing God's will,--where
 the saints pray for this, they are found to be praying for
 perseverance; since no one attains to that highest blessedness which is
 in the kingdom, unless he shall persevere unto the end in that holiness
 which he has received on earth.

 Chapter 7 [IV.]--The Fourth Petition.

 The fourth petition is, "Give us this day our daily bread," [3570]
 where the blessed Cyprian shows how here also perseverance is
 understood to be asked for. Because he says, among other things, "And
 we ask that this bread should be given to us daily, that we who are in
 Christ, and daily receive the Eucharist for the food of salvation, may
 not by the interposition of some heinous sin be separated from Christ's
 body by being withheld from communicating and prevented from partaking
 of the heavenly bread." [3571] These words of the holy man of God
 indicate that the saints ask for perseverance directly from God, when
 with this intention they say, "Give us this day our daily bread," that
 they may not be separated from Christ's body, but may continue in that
 holiness in which they allow no crime by which they may deserve to be
 separated from it.

 [3570] Matt. vi. 11.

 [3571] Cyprian, On the Lord 's Prayer, as above.

 Chapter 8 [V.]--The Fifth Petition. It is an Error of the Pelagians
 that the Righteous are Free from Sin.

 In the fifth sentence of the prayer we say, "Forgive us our debts, as
 we also forgive our debtors," [3572] in which petition alone
 perseverance is not found to be asked for. For the sins which we ask to
 be forgiven us are past, but perseverance, which saves us for eternity,
 is indeed necessary for the time of this life; but not for the time
 which is past, but for that which remains even to its end. Yet it is
 worth the labour to consider for a little, how even already in this
 petition the heretics who were to arise long after were transfixed by
 the tongue of Cyprian, as if by the most invincible dart of truth. For
 the Pelagians dare to say even this: that the righteous man in this
 life has no sin at all, and that in such men there is even at the
 present time a Church not having spot or wrinkle or any such thing,
 [3573] which is the one and only bride of Christ; as if she were not
 His bride who throughout the whole earth says what she has learnt from
 Him, "Forgive us our debts." But observe how the most glorious Cyprian
 destroys these. For when he was expounding that very clause of the
 Lord's Prayer, he says among other things: "And how necessarily, how
 providently, and salutarily are we admonished that we are sinners,
 since we are compelled to entreat for our sins; and while pardon is
 asked for from God, the soul recalls its own consciousness. Lest any
 one should flatter himself that he is innocent, and by exalting himself
 should more deeply perish, he is instructed and taught that he sins
 daily, in that he is bidden daily to entreat for his sins. Thus,
 moreover, John also in his Epistle warns [3574] us, and says, [3575] If
 we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not
 in us.'" [3576] And the rest, which it would be long to insert in this
 place.

 [3572] Matt. vi. 12.

 [3573] Eph. v. 27.

 [3574] "Potens" or "ponens" are different readings.

 [3575] 1 John i. 8.

 [3576] Cyprian, as above.

 Chapter 9.--When Perseverance is Granted to a Person, He Cannot But
 Persevere.

 Now, moreover, when the saints say, "Lead us not into temptation, but
 deliver us from evil," [3577] what do they pray for but that they may
 persevere in holiness? For, assuredly, when that gift of God is granted
 to them,--which is sufficiently plainly shown to be God's gift, since
 it is asked of Him,--that gift of God, then, being granted to them that
 they may not be led into temptation, none of the saints fails to keep
 his perseverance in holiness even to the end. For there is not any one
 who ceases to persevere in the Christian purpose unless he is first of
 all led into temptation. If, therefore, it be granted to him according
 to his prayer that he may not be led, certainly by the gift of God he
 persists in that sanctification which by the gift of God he has
 received.

 [3577] Matt. vi. 13.

 Chapter 10 [VI.]--The Gift of Perseverance Can Be Obtained by Prayer.

 But you write that "these brethren will not have this perseverance so
 preached as that it cannot be obtained by prayer or lost by obstinacy."
 [3578] In this they are little careful in considering what they say.
 For we are speaking of that perseverance whereby one perseveres unto
 the end, and if this is given, one does persevere unto the end; but if
 one does not persevere unto the end, it is not given, which I have
 already sufficiently discussed above. Let not men say, then, that
 perseverance is given to any one to the end, except when the end itself
 has come, and he to whom it has been given has been found to have
 persevered unto the end. Certainly, we say that one whom we have known
 to be chaste is chaste, whether he should continue or not in the same
 chastity; and if he should have any other divine endowment which may be
 kept and lost, we say that he has it as long as he has it; and if he
 should lose it, we say that he had it. But since no one has
 perseverance to the end except he who does persevere to the end, many
 people may have it, but none can lose it. For it is not to be feared
 that perchance when a man has persevered unto the end, some evil will
 may arise in him, so that he does not persevere unto the end. This gift
 of God, therefore, may be obtained by prayer, but when it has been
 given, it cannot be lost by contumacy. For when any one has persevered
 unto the end, he neither can lose this gift, nor others which he could
 lose before the end. How, then, can that be lost, whereby it is brought
 about that even that which could be lost is not lost?

 [3578] Hilary's Letter in Augustin's Letters, 226, ch. 3.

 Chapter 11.--Effect of Prayer for Perseverance.

 But, lest perchance it be said that perseverance even to the end is not
 indeed lost when it has once been given,--that is, when a man has
 persevered unto the end,--but that it is lost, in some sense, when a
 man by contumacy so acts that he is not able to attain to it; just as
 we say that a man who has not persevered unto the end has lost eternal
 life or the kingdom of God, not because he had already received and
 actually had it, but because he would have received and had it if he
 had persevered;--let us lay aside controversies of words, and say that
 some things even which are not possessed, but are hoped to be
 possessed, may be lost. Let any one who dares, tell me whether God
 cannot give what He has commanded to be asked from Him. Certainly he
 who affirms this, I say not is a fool, but he is mad. But God commanded
 that His saints should say to Him in prayer, "Lead us not into
 temptation." Whoever, therefore, is heard when he asks this, is not led
 into the temptation of contumacy, whereby he could or would be worthy
 to lose perseverance in holiness.

 Chapter 12.--Of His Own Will a Man Forsakes God, So that He is
 Deservedly Forsaken of Him.

 But, on the other hand, "of his own will a man forsakes God, so as to
 be deservedly forsaken by God." Who would deny this? But it is for that
 reason we ask not to be led into temptation, so that this may not
 happen. And if we are heard, certainly it does not happen, because God
 does not allow it to happen. For nothing comes to pass except what
 either He Himself does, or Himself allows to be done. Therefore He is
 powerful both to turn wills from evil to good, and to convert those
 that are inclined to fall, or to direct them into a way pleasing to
 Himself. For to Him it is not said in vain, "O God, Thou shalt turn
 again and quicken us;" [3579] it is not vainly said, "Give not my foot
 to be moved;" [3580] it is not vainly said, "Give me not over, O Lord,
 from my desire to the sinner;" [3581] finally, not to mention many
 passages, since probably more may occur to you, it is not vainly said,
 "Lead us not into temptation." [3582] For whoever is not led into
 temptation, certainly is not led into the temptation of his own evil
 will; and he who is not led into the temptation of his own evil will,
 is absolutely led into no temptation. For "every one is tempted," as it
 is written, "when he is drawn away of his own lust, and enticed;"
 [3583] "but God tempteth no man," [3584] --that is to say, with a
 hurtful temptation. For temptation is moreover beneficial by which we
 are not deceived or overwhelmed, but proved, according to that which is
 said, "Prove me, O Lord, and try me." [3585] Therefore, with that
 hurtful temptation which the apostle signifies when he says, "Lest by
 some means the tempter have tempted you, and our labour be in vain,"
 [3586] "God tempteth no man," as I have said,--that is, He brings or
 leads no one into temptation. For to be tempted and not to be led into
 temptation is not evil,--nay, it is even good; for this it is to be
 proved. When, therefore, we say to God, "Lead us not into temptation,"
 what do we say but, "Permit us not to be led"? Whence some pray in this
 manner, and it is read in many codices, and the most blessed Cyprian
 thus uses it: "Do not suffer us to be led into temptation." In the
 Greek gospel, however, I have never found it otherwise than, "Lead us
 not into temptation." We live, therefore, more securely if we give up
 the whole to God, and do not entrust ourselves partly to Him and partly
 to ourselves, as that venerable martyr saw. For when he would expound
 the same clause of the prayer, he says among other things, "But when we
 ask that we may not come into temptation, we are reminded of our
 infirmity and weakness while we thus ask, lest any should insolently
 vaunt himself,--lest any should proudly and arrogantly assume anything
 to himself,--lest any should take to himself the glory either of
 confession or suffering as his own; since the Lord Himself, teaching
 humility, said, Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation; the
 Spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak.' So that when a humble
 and submissive confession comes first and all is attributed to God,
 whatever is sought for suppliantly, with the fear of God, may be
 granted by His own loving-kindness." [3587]

 [3579] Ps. lxxxiv. 6.

 [3580] Ps. lxvi. 9.

 [3581] Ps. cxl. 8.

 [3582] Matt. vi. 13.

 [3583] Jas. i. 14.

 [3584] Jas. i. 13.

 [3585] Ps. xxvi. 2.

 [3586] 1 Thess. iii. 5.

 [3587] Cyprian, On the Lord 's Prayer, as above.

 Chapter 13 [VII.]--Temptation the Condition of Man.

 If, then, there were no other proofs, this Lord's Prayer alone would be
 sufficient for us on behalf of the grace which I am defending; because
 it leaves us nothing wherein we may, as it were, glory as in our own,
 since it shows that our not departing from God is not given except by
 God, when it shows that it must be asked for from God. For he who is
 not led into temptation does not depart from God. This is absolutely
 not in the strength of free will, such as it now is; but it had been in
 man before he fell. And yet how much this freedom of will availed in
 the excellence of that primal state appeared in the angels; who, when
 the devil and his angels fell, stood in the truth, and deserved to
 attain to that perpetual security of not falling, in which we are most
 certain that they are now established. But, after the fall of man, God
 willed it to pertain only to His grace that man should approach to Him;
 nor did He will it to pertain to aught but His grace that man should
 not depart from Him.

 Chapter 14.--It is God's Grace Both that Man Comes to Him, and that Man
 Does Not Depart from Him.

 This grace He placed "in Him in whom we have obtained a lot, being
 predestinated according to the purpose of Him who worketh all things."
 [3588] And thus as He worketh that we come to Him, so He worketh that
 we do not depart. Wherefore it was said to Him by the mouth of the
 prophet, "Let Thy hand be upon the man of Thy right hand, and upon the
 Son of man whom Thou madest strong for Thyself, and we will not depart
 from Thee." [3589] This certainly is not the first Adam, in whom we
 departed from Him, but the second Adam, upon whom His hand is placed,
 so that we do not depart from Him. For Christ altogether with His
 members is--for the Church's sake, which is His body--the fulness of
 Him. When, therefore, God's hand is upon Him, that we depart not from
 God, assuredly God's work reaches to us (for this is God's hand); by
 which work of God we are caused to be abiding in Christ with God--not,
 as in Adam, departing from God. For "in Christ we have obtained a lot,
 being predestinated according to His purpose who worketh all things."
 This, therefore, is God's hand, not ours, that we depart not from God.
 That, I say, is His hand who said, "I will put my fear in their hearts,
 that they depart not from me." [3590]

 [3588] Eph. i. 11.

 [3589] Ps. lxxx. 17, 18.

 [3590] Jer. xxxii. 40.

 Chapter 15.--Why God Willed that He Should Be Asked for that Which He
 Might Give Without Prayer.

 Wherefore, also He willed that He should be asked that we may not be
 led into temptation, because if we are not led, we by no means depart
 from Him. And this might have been given to us even without our praying
 for it, but by our prayer He willed us to be admonished from whom we
 receive these benefits. For from whom do we receive but from Him from
 whom it is right for us to ask? Truly in this matter let not the Church
 look for laborious disputations, but consider its own daily prayers. It
 prays that the unbelieving may believe; therefore God converts to the
 faith. It prays that believers may persevere; therefore God gives
 perseverance to the end. God foreknew that He would do this. This is
 the very predestination of the saints, "whom He has chosen in Christ
 before the foundation of the world, that they should be holy and
 unspotted before Him in love; predestinating them unto the adoption of
 children by Jesus Christ to Himself, according to the good pleasure of
 His will, to the praise of the glory of His grace, in which He hath
 shown them favour in His beloved Son, in whom they have redemption
 through His blood, the forgiveness of sins according to the riches of
 His grace, which has abounded towards them in all wisdom and prudence;
 that He might show them the mystery of His will according to His good
 pleasure which He hath purposed in Him, in the dispensation of the
 fulness of times to restore all things in Christ which are in heaven
 and which are in earth; in Him, in whom also we have obtained a lot,
 being predestinated according to His purpose who worketh all things."
 [3591] Against a trumpet of truth so clear as this, what man of sober
 and watchful faith can receive any human arguments?

 [3591] Eph. i. 4-11.

 Chapter 16 [VIII.]--Why is Not Grace Given According to Merit?

 But "why," says one, "is not the grace of God given according to men's
 merits?" I answer, Because God is merciful. "Why, then," it is asked,
 "is it not given to all?" And here I reply, Because God is a Judge.
 [3592] And thus grace is given by Him freely; and by His righteous
 judgment it is shown in some what grace confers on those to whom it is
 given. Let us not then be ungrateful, that according to the good
 pleasure of His will a merciful God delivers so many to the praise of
 the glory of His grace from such deserved perdition; as, if He should
 deliver no one therefrom, He would not be unrighteous. Let him,
 therefore, who is delivered love His grace. Let him who is not
 delivered acknowledge his due. If, in remitting a debt, goodness is
 perceived, in requiring it, justice--unrighteousness is never found to
 be with God.

 [3592] Rom. ix. 20.

 Chapter 17.--The Difficulty of the Distinction Made in the Choice of
 One and the Rejection of Another.

 "But why," it is said, "in one and the same case, not only of infants,
 but even of twin children, is the judgment so diverse?" Is it not a
 similar question, "Why in a different case is the judgment the same?"
 Let us recall, then, those labourers in the vineyard who worked the
 whole day, and those who toiled one hour. Certainly the case was
 different as to the labour expended, and yet there was the same
 judgment in paying the wages. Did the murmurers in this case hear
 anything from the householder except, Such is my will? Certainly such
 was his liberality towards some, that there could be no injustice
 towards others. And both these classes, indeed, are among the good.
 Nevertheless, so far as it concerns justice and grace, it may be truly
 said to the guilty who is condemned, also concerning the guilty who is
 delivered, "Take what thine is, and go thy way;" [3593] "I will give
 unto this one that which is not due;" "Is it not lawful for me to do
 what I will? is thine eye evil because I am good?" And how if he should
 say, "Why not to me also?" He will hear, and with reason, "Who art
 thou, O man, that repliest against God?" [3594] And although assuredly
 in the one case you see a most benignant benefactor, and in your own
 case a most righteous exactor, in neither case do you behold an unjust
 God. For although He would be righteous even if He were to punish both,
 he who is delivered has good ground for thankfulness, he who is
 condemned has no ground for finding fault.

 [3593] Matt. xx. 14, etc.

 [3594] Rom. ix. 20.

 Chapter 18.--But Why Should One Be Punished More Than Another?

 "But if," it is said, "it was necessary that, although all were not
 condemned, He should still show what was due to all, and so He should
 commend His grace more freely to the vessels of mercy; why in the same
 case will He punish me more than another, or deliver him more than me?"
 I say not this. If you ask wherefore; because I confess that I can find
 no answer to make. And if you further ask why is this, it is because in
 this matter, even as His anger is righteous and as His mercy is great,
 so His judgments are unsearchable.

 Chapter 19.--Why Does God Mingle Those Who Will Persevere with Those
 Who Will Not?

 Let the inquirer still go on, and say, "Why is it that to some who have
 in good faith worshipped Him He has not given to persevere to the end?"
 Why except because he does not speak falsely who says, "They went out
 from us, but they were not of us; for if they had been of us, doubtless
 they would have continued with us." [3595] Are there, then, two natures
 of men? By no means. If there were two natures there would not be any
 grace, for there would be given a gratuitous deliverance to none if it
 were paid as a debt to nature. But it seems to men that all who appear
 good believers ought to receive perseverance to the end. But God has
 judged it to be better to mingle some who would not persevere with a
 certain number of His saints, so that those for whom security from
 temptation in this life is not desirable may not be secure. For that
 which the apostle says, checks many from mischievous elation:
 "Wherefore let him who seems to stand take heed lest he fall." [3596]
 But he who falls, falls by his own will, and he who stands, stands by
 God's will. "For God is able to make him stand;" [3597] therefore he is
 not able to make himself stand, but God. Nevertheless, it is good not
 to be high-minded, but to fear. Moreover, it is in his own thought that
 every one either falls or stands. Now, as the apostle says, and as I
 have mentioned in my former treatise, "We are not sufficient to think
 anything of ourselves, but our sufficiency is of God." [3598] Following
 whom also the blessed Ambrose ventures to say, "For our heart is not in
 our own power, nor are our thoughts." And this everybody who is humbly
 and truly pious feels to be most true.

 [3595] 1 John ii. 19.

 [3596] 1 Cor. x. 12.

 [3597] Rom. xiv. 4.

 [3598] 2 Cor. iii. 5.

 Chapter 20.--Ambrose on God's Control Over Men's Thoughts.

 And when Ambrose said this, he was speaking in that treatise which he
 wrote concerning Flight from the World, wherein he taught that this
 world was to be fled not by the body, but by the heart, which he argued
 could not be done except by God's help. For he says: "We hear frequent
 discourse concerning fleeing from this world, and I would that the mind
 was as careful and solicitous as the discourse is easy; but what is
 worse, the enticement of earthly lusts constantly creeps in, and the
 pouring out of vanities takes possession of the mind; so that what you
 desire to avoid, this you think of and consider in your mind. And this
 is difficult for a man to beware of, but impossible to get rid of.
 Finally, the prophet bears witness that it is a matter of wish rather
 than of accomplishment, when he says, Incline my heart to Thy
 testimonies, and not to covetousness.' [3599] For our heart and our
 thoughts are not in our own power, and these, poured forth
 unexpectedly, confuse our mind and soul, and draw them in a different
 direction from that which you have proposed to yourself; they recall
 you to worldly things, they interpose things of time, they suggest
 voluptuous things, they inweave enticing things, and in the very moment
 when we are seeking to elevate our mind, we are for the most part
 filled with vain thoughts and cast down to earthly things." [3600]
 Therefore it is not in the power of men, but in that of God, that men
 have power to become sons of God. [3601] Because they receive it from
 Him who gives pious thoughts to the human heart, by which it has faith,
 which worketh by love; [3602] for the receiving and keeping of which
 benefit, and for carrying it on perseveringly unto the end, we are not
 sufficient to think anything as of ourselves, but our sufficiency is of
 God, [3603] in whose power is our heart and our thoughts.

 [3599] Ps. cxix. 36.

 [3600] Ambrose, On Flight from the World, ch. 1.

 [3601] John i. 12.

 [3602] Gal. v. 6.

 [3603] 2 Cor. iii. 5.

 Chapter 21 [IX.]--Instances of the Unsearchable Judgments of God.

 Therefore, of two infants, equally bound by original sin, why the one
 is taken and the other left; and of two wicked men of already mature
 years, why this one should be so called as to follow Him that calleth,
 while that one is either not called at all, or is not called in such a
 manner,--the judgments of God are unsearchable. But of two pious men,
 why to the one should be given perseverance unto the end, and to the
 other it should not be given, God's judgments are even more
 unsearchable. Yet to believers it ought to be a most certain fact that
 the former is of the predestinated, the latter is not. "For if they had
 been of us," says one of the predestinated, who had drunk this secret
 from the breast of the Lord, "certainly they would have continued with
 us." [3604] What, I ask, is the meaning of, "They were not of us; for
 if they had been of us, they would certainly have continued with us"?
 Were not both created by God--both born of Adam--both made from the
 earth, and given from Him who said, "I have created all breath," [3605]
 souls of one and the same nature? Lastly, had not both been called, and
 followed Him that called them? and had not both become, from wicked
 men, justified men, and both been renewed by the laver of regeneration?
 But if he were to hear this who beyond all doubt knew what he was
 saying, he might answer and say: These things are true. In respect of
 all these things, they were of us. Nevertheless, in respect of a
 certain other distinction, they were not of us, for if they had been of
 us, they certainly would have continued with us. What then is this
 distinction? God's books lie open, let us not turn away our view; the
 divine Scripture cries aloud, let us give it a hearing. They were not
 of them, because they had not been "called according to the purpose;"
 they had not been chosen in Christ before the foundation of the world;
 they had not gained a lot in Him; they had not been predestinated
 according to His purpose who worketh all things. For if they had been
 this, they would have been of them, and without doubt they would have
 continued with them.

 [3604] 1 John ii. 19.

 [3605] Isa. lvii. 16 [see LXX.]

 Chapter 22.--It is an Absurdity to Say that the Dead Will Be Judged for
 Sins Which They Would Have Committed If They Had Lived.

 For not to say how possible it may be for God to convert the wills of
 men averse and opposed to His faith, and to operate on their hearts so
 that they yield to no adversities, and are overcome by no temptation so
 as to depart from Him,--since He also can do what the apostle says,
 namely, not allow them to be tempted above that which they are
 able;--not, then, to say this, God foreknowing that they would fall,
 was certainly able to take them away from this life before that fall
 should occur. Are we to return to that point of still arguing how
 absurdly it is said that dead men are judged even for those sins which
 God foreknew that they would have committed if they had lived? which is
 so abhorrent to the feelings of Christians, or even of human beings,
 that one is even ashamed to rebut it. Why should it not be said that
 even the gospel itself has been preached, with so much labour and
 sufferings of the saints, in vain, or is even still preached in vain,
 if men could be judged, even without hearing the gospel, according to
 the contumacy or obedience which God foreknew that they would have had
 if they had heard it? Tyre and Sidon would not have been condemned,
 although more slightly than those cities in which, although they did
 not believe, wonderful works were done by Christ the Lord; because if
 they had been done in them, they would have repented in dust and ashes,
 as the utterances of the Truth declare, in which words of His the Lord
 Jesus shows to us the loftier mystery of predestination.

 Chapter 23.--Why for the People of Tyre and Sidon, Who Would Have
 Believed, the Miracles Were Not Done Which Were Done in Other Places
 Which Did Not Believe.

 For if we are asked why such miracles were done among those who, when
 they saw them, would not believe them, and were not done among those
 who would have believed them if they had seen them, what shall we
 answer? Shall we say what I have said in that book [3606] wherein I
 answered some six questions of the Pagans, yet without prejudice of
 other matters which the wise can inquire into? This indeed I said, as
 you know, when it was asked why Christ came after so long a time: "that
 at those times and in those places in which His gospel was not
 preached, He foreknew that all men would, in regard of His preaching,
 be such as many were in His bodily presence,--people, namely, who would
 not believe on Him, even though the dead were raised by Him." Moreover,
 a little after in the same book, and on the same question, I say, "What
 wonder, if Christ knew in former ages that the world was so filled with
 unbelievers, that He was, with reason, unwilling for His gospel to be
 preached to them whom He foreknew to be such as would not believe
 either His words or His miracles"? Certainly we cannot say this of Tyre
 and Sidon; and in their case we recognise that those divine judgments
 had reference to those causes of predestination, without prejudice to
 which hidden causes I said that I was then answering such questions as
 those. Certainly it is easy to accuse the unbelief of the Jews, arising
 as it did from their free will, since they refused to believe in such
 great wonders done among themselves. And this the Lord, reproaching
 them, declares when He says, "Woe unto thee, Chorazin and Bethsaida,
 because if the mighty works had been done in Tyre and Sidon which have
 been done in you, they would long ago have repented in dust and ashes."
 [3607] But can we say that even the Tyrians and Sidonians would have
 refused to believe such mighty works done among them, or would not have
 believed them if they had been done, when the Lord Himself bears
 witness to them that they would have repented with great humility if
 those signs of divine power had been done among them? And yet in the
 day of judgment they will be punished; although with a less punishment
 than those cities which would not believe the mighty works done in
 them. For the Lord goes on to say, "Nevertheless, I say unto you, it
 shall be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon in the day of judgment than
 for you." [3608] Therefore the former shall be punished with greater
 severity, the latter with less; but yet they shall be punished. Again,
 if the dead are judged even in respect of deeds which they would have
 done if they had lived, assuredly since these would have been believers
 if the gospel had been preached to them with so great miracles, they
 certainly ought not to be punished; but they will be punished. It is
 therefore false that the dead are judged in respect also of those
 things which they would have done if the gospel had reached them when
 they were alive. And if this is false, there is no ground for saying,
 concerning infants who perish because they die without baptism, that
 this happens in their case deservedly, because God foreknew that if
 they should live and the gospel should be preached to them, they would
 hear it with unbelief. It remains, therefore, that they are kept bound
 by original sin alone, and for this alone they go into condemnation;
 and we see that in others in the same case this is not remitted, except
 by the gratuitous grace of God in regeneration; and that, by His secret
 yet righteous judgment--because there is no unrighteousness with
 God--that some, who even after baptism will perish by evil living, are
 yet kept in this life until they perish, who would not have perished if
 bodily death had forestalled their lapse into sin, and so come to their
 help. Because no dead man is judged by the good or evil things which he
 would have done if he had not died, otherwise the Tyrians and Sidonians
 would not have suffered the penalties according to what they did; but
 rather according to those things that they would have done, if those
 evangelical mighty works had been done in them, they would have
 obtained salvation by great repentance, and by the faith of Christ.

 [3606] Epistle 102, question 2; see the first volume of this series, p.
 418.

 [3607] Luke x. 13.

 [3608] Matt. xi. 22.

 Chapter 24 [X.]--It May Be Objected that The People of Tyre and Sidon
 Might, If They Had Heard, Have Believed, and Have Subsequently Lapsed
 from Their Faith.

 A certain catholic disputant of no mean reputation so expounded this
 passage of the gospel as to say, that the Lord foreknew that the
 Tyrians and Sidonians would have afterwards departed from the faith,
 although they had believed the miracles done among them; and that in
 mercy He did not work those miracles there, because they would have
 been liable to severer punishment if they had forsaken the faith which
 they had once held, than if they had at no time held it. In which
 opinion of a learned and exceedingly acute man, why am I now concerned
 to say what is still reasonably to be asked, when even this opinion
 serves me for the purpose at which I aim? For if the Lord in His mercy
 did not do mighty works among them, since by these works they might
 possibly become believers, so that they might not be more severely
 punished when they should subsequently become unbelievers, as He
 foreknew that they would,--it is sufficiently and plainly shown that no
 dead person is judged for those sins which He foreknew that he would
 have done, if in some manner he were not helped not to do them; just as
 Christ is said to have come to the aid of the Tyrians and Sidonians, if
 that opinion be true, who He would rather should not come to the faith
 at all, than that by a much greater wickedness they should depart from
 the faith, as, if they had come to it, He foresaw they would have done.
 Although if it be said, "Why was it not provided that they should
 rather believe, and this gift should be bestowed on them, that before
 they forsook the faith they should depart from this life"? I am
 ignorant what reply can be made. For he who says that to those who
 would forsake their faith it would have been granted, as a kindness,
 that they should not begin to have what, by a more serious impiety,
 they would subsequently forsake, sufficiently indicates that a man is
 not judged by that which it is foreknown he would have done ill, if by
 any act of kindness he may be prevented from doing it. Therefore it is
 an advantage also to him who is taken away, lest wickedness should
 alter his understanding. But why this advantage should not have been
 given to the Tyrians and Sidonians, that they might believe and be
 taken away, lest wickedness should alter their understanding, he
 perhaps might answer who was pleased in such a way to solve the above
 question; but, as far as concerns what I am discussing, I see it to be
 enough that, even according to that very opinion, men are shown not to
 be judged in respect of those things which they have not done, even
 although they may have been foreseen as certain to have done them.
 However, as I have said, let us think shame even to refute this
 opinion, whereby sins are supposed to be punished in people who die or
 have died because they have been foreknown as certain to do them if
 they had lived; lest we also may seem to have thought it to be of some
 importance, although we would rather repress it by argument than pass
 it over in silence.

 Chapter 25 [XI.]--God's Ways, Both in Mercy and Judgment, Past Finding
 Out.

 Accordingly, as says the apostle, "It is not of him that willeth, nor
 of him that runneth, but of God that showeth mercy," [3609] who both
 comes to the help of such infants as He will, although they neither
 will nor run, since He chose them in Christ before the foundation of
 the world as those to whom He intended to give His grace freely,--that
 is, with no merits of theirs, either of faith or of works, preceding;
 and does not come to the help of those who are more mature, although He
 foresaw that they would believe His miracles if they should be done
 among them, because He wills not to come to their help, since in His
 predestination He, secretly indeed, but yet righteously, has otherwise
 determined concerning them. For "there is no unrighteousness with God;"
 [3610] but "His judgments are unsearchable, and His ways are past
 finding out; all the ways of the Lord are mercy and truth." [3611]
 Therefore the mercy is past finding out by which He has mercy on whom
 He will, no merits of his own preceding; and the truth is unsearchable
 by which He hardeneth whom He will, even although his merits may have
 preceded, but merits for the most part common to him with the man on
 whom He has mercy. As of two twins, of which one is taken and the other
 left, the end is unequal, while the deserts are common, yet in these
 the one is in such wise delivered by God's great goodness, that the
 other is condemned by no injustice of God's. For is there
 unrighteousness with God? Away with the thought! but His ways are past
 finding out. Therefore let us believe in His mercy in the case of those
 who are delivered, and in His truth in the case of those who are
 punished, without any hesitation; and let us not endeavour to look into
 that which is inscrutable, nor to trace that which cannot be found out.
 Because out of the mouth of babes and sucklings He perfects His praise,
 [3612] so that what we see in those whose deliverance is preceded by no
 good deservings of theirs, and in those whose condemnation is only
 preceded by original sin, common alike to both,--this we by no means
 shrink from as occurring in the case of grown-up people, that is,
 because we do not think either that grace is given to any one according
 to his own merits, or that any one is punished except for his own
 merits, whether they are alike who are delivered and who are punished,
 or have unequal degrees of evil; so that he who thinketh he standeth
 may take heed lest he fall, and he who glorieth may glory not in
 himself, but in the Lord.

 [3609] Rom. ix. 16.

 [3610] Rom. ix. 14.

 [3611] Ps. xxv. 10.

 [3612] Ps. viii. 2.

 Chapter 26.--The Manicheans Do Not Receive All the Books of the Old
 Testament, and of the New Only Those that They Choose.

 But wherefore is "the case of infants not allowed," as you write, "to
 be alleged as an example for their elders," by men who do not hesitate
 to affirm against the Pelagians that there is original sin, which
 entered by one man into the world, and that from one all have gone into
 condemnation? [3613] This, the Manicheans, too, do not receive, who not
 only reject all the Scriptures of the Old Testament as of authority,
 but even receive those which belong to the New Testament in such a
 manner as that each man, by his own prerogative as it were, or rather
 by his own sacrilege, takes what he likes, and rejects what he does not
 like,--in opposition to whom I treated in my writings on Free Will,
 whence they think that they have a ground of objection against me. I
 have been unwilling to deal plainly with the very laborious questions
 that occurred, lest my work should become too long, in a case which, as
 opposed to such perverse men, I could not have the assistance of the
 authority of the sacred Scriptures. And I was able,--as I actually did,
 whether anything of the divine testimonies might be true or not, seeing
 that I did not definitely introduce them into the
 argument,--nevertheless, by certain reasoning, to conclude that God in
 all things is to be praised, without any necessity of believing, as
 they would have us, that there are two co-eternal, confounded
 substances of good and evil.

 [3613] See the Letter of Hilary in Augustin's Letters, 226, ch. 8.

 Chapter 27.--Reference to the "Retractations."

 Finally, in the first book of the Retractations, [3614] which work of
 mine you have not yet read, when I had come to the reconsidering of
 those same books, that is, on the subject of Free Will, I thus spoke:
 "In these books," I say, "many things were so discussed that on the
 occurring of some questions which either I was not able to elucidate,
 or which required a long discussion at once, they were so deferred as
 that from either side, or from all sides, of those questions in which
 what was most in harmony with the truth did not appear, yet my
 reasoning might be conclusive for this, namely, that whichever of them
 might be true, God might be believed, or even be shown, to be worthy of
 praise. Because that discussion was undertaken for the sake of those
 who deny that the origin of evil is derived from the free choice of the
 will, and contend that God,--if He be so,--as the Creator of all
 natures, is worthy of blame; desiring in that manner, according to the
 error of their impiety (for they are Manicheans), to introduce a
 certain immutable nature of evil co-eternal with God." Also, after a
 little time, in another place I say: "Then it was said, From this
 misery, most righteously inflicted on sinners, God's grace delivers,
 because man of his own accord, that is, by free will, could fall, but
 could not also rise. To this misery of just condemnation belong the
 ignorance and the difficulty which every man suffers from the beginning
 of his birth, and no one is delivered from that evil except by the
 grace of God. And this misery the Pelagians will not have to descend
 from a just condemnation, because they deny original sin; although even
 if the ignorance and difficulty were the natural beginnings of man, God
 would not even thus deserve to be reproached, but to be praised, as I
 have argued in the same third book. [3615] Which argument must be
 regarded as against the Manicheans, who do not receive the holy
 Scriptures of the Old Testament, in which original sin is narrated; and
 whatever thence is read in the apostolic epistles, they contend was
 introduced with a detestable impudence by the corrupters of the
 Scriptures, assuming that it was not said by the apostles. But against
 the Pelagians that must be maintained which both Scriptures commend, as
 they profess to receive them." These things I said in my first book of
 Retractations, when I was reconsidering the books on Free Will. Nor,
 indeed, were these things all that were said by me there about these
 books, but there were many others also, which I thought it would be
 tedious to insert in this work for you, and not necessary; and this I
 think you also will judge when you have read all. Although, therefore,
 in the third book on Free Will I have in such wise argued concerning
 infants, that even if what the Pelagians say were true,--that ignorance
 and difficulty, without which no man is born, are elements, not
 punishments, of our nature,--still the Manicheans would be overcome,
 who will have it that the two natures, to wit, of good and evil, are
 co-eternal. Is, therefore, the faith to be called in question or
 forsaken, which the catholic Church maintains against those very
 Pelagians, asserting as she does that it is original sin, the guilt of
 which, contracted by generation, must be remitted by regeneration? And
 if they confess this with us, so that we may at once, in this matter of
 the Pelagians, destroy error, why do they think that it must be doubted
 that God can deliver even infants, to whom He gives His grace by the
 sacrament of baptism, from the power of darkness, and translate them
 into the kingdom of the Son of His love? [3616] In the fact, therefore,
 that He gives that grace to some, and does not give it to others, why
 will they not sing to the Lord His mercy and judgment? [3617] Why,
 however, is it given to these, rather than to those,--who has known the
 mind of the Lord? who is able to look into unsearchable things? who to
 trace out that which is past finding out?

 [3614] Retractations, Book i. ch. 9.

 [3615] Retractations, Book i. ch. 20.

 [3616] Col. i. 13.

 [3617] Ps. c. 1.

 Chapter 28 [XII.]--God's Goodness and Righteousness Shown in All.

 It is therefore settled that God's grace is not given according to the
 deserts of the recipients, but according to the good pleasure of His
 will, to the praise and glory of His own grace; so that he who glorieth
 may by no means glory in himself, but in the Lord, who gives to those
 men to whom He will, because He is merciful, what if, however, He does
 not give, He is righteous: and He does not give to whom He will not,
 that He may make known the riches of His glory to the vessels of mercy.
 [3618] For by giving to some what they do not deserve, He has certainly
 willed that His grace should be gratuitous, and thus genuine grace; by
 not giving to all, He has shown what all deserve. Good in His goodness
 to some, righteous in the punishment of others; both good in respect of
 all, because it is good when that which is due is rendered, and
 righteous in respect of all, since that which is not due is given
 without wrong to any one.

 [3618] Rom. ix. 23.

 Chapter 29.--God's True Grace Could Be Defended Even If There Were No
 Original Sin, as Pelagius Maintains.

 But God's grace, that is, true grace without merits, is maintained,
 even if infants, when baptized, according to the view of the Pelagians,
 are not plucked out of the power of darkness, because they are held
 guilty of no sin, as the Pelagians think, but are only transferred into
 the Lord's kingdom: for even thus, without any good merits, the kingdom
 is given to those to whom it is given; and without any evil merits it
 is not given to them to whom it is not given. And this we are in the
 habit of saying in opposition to the same Pelagians, when they object
 to us that we attribute God's grace to fate, when we say that it is
 given not in respect to our merits. For they themselves rather
 attribute God's grace to fate in the case of infants, if they say that
 when there is no merit it is fate. [3619] Certainly, even according to
 the Pelagians themselves, no merits can be found in infants to cause
 that some of them should be admitted into the kingdom, and others
 should be alienated from the kingdom. But now, just as in order to show
 that God's grace is not given according to our merits, I preferred to
 maintain this truth in accordance with both opinions,--both in
 accordance with our own, to wit, who say that infants are bound by
 original sin, and according to that of the Pelagians, who deny that
 there is original sin, and yet I cannot on that account doubt that
 infants have what He can pardon them who saves His people from their
 sins: so in the third book on Free Will, according to both views, I
 have withstood the Manicheans, whether ignorance and difficulty be
 punishments or elements of nature without which no man is born; and yet
 I hold one of these views. There, moreover, it is sufficiently
 evidently declared by me, that that is not the nature of man as he was
 ordained, but his punishment as condemned.

 [3619] See above, Against Two Letters of the Pelagians, Book ii. chs.
 11, 12.

 Chapter 30.--Augustin Claims the Right to Grow in Knowledge.

 Therefore it is in vain that it is prescribed to me from that old book
 of mine, that I may not argue the case as I ought to argue it in
 respect of infants; and that thence I may not persuade my opponents by
 the light of a manifest truth, that God's grace is not given according
 to men's merits. For if, when I began my books concerning Free Will as
 a layman, and finished them as a presbyter, I still doubted of the
 condemnation of infants not born again, and of the deliverance of
 infants that were born again, no one, as I think, would be so unfair
 and envious as to hinder my progress, and judge that I must continue in
 that uncertainty. But it can more correctly be understood that it ought
 to be believed that I did not doubt in that matter, for the reason that
 they against whom my purpose was directed seemed to me in such wise to
 be rebutted, as that whether there was a punishment of original sin in
 infants, according to the truth, or whether there was not, as some
 mistaken people think, yet in no degree should such a confusion of the
 two natures be believed in, to wit, of good and evil, as the error of
 the Manicheans introduces. Be it therefore far from us so to forsake
 the case of infants as to say to ourselves that it is uncertain
 whether, being regenerated in Christ, if they die in infancy they pass
 into eternal salvation; but that, not being regenerated, they pass into
 the second death. Because that which is written, "By one man sin
 entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all
 men," [3620] cannot be rightly understood in any other manner; nor from
 that eternal death which is most righteously repaid to sin does any
 deliver any one, small or great, save He who, for the sake of remitting
 our sins, both original and personal, died without any sin of His own,
 either original or personal. But why some rather than others? Again and
 again we say, and do not shrink from it, "O man, who art thou that
 repliest against God?" [3621] "His judgments are unsearchable, and His
 ways past finding out." [3622] And let us add this, "Seek not out the
 things that are too high for thee, and search not the things that are
 above thy strength." [3623]

 [3620] Rom. v. 12.

 [3621] Rom. ix. 20.

 [3622] Rom. xi. 33.

 [3623] Ecclus. iii. 21.

 Chapter 31.--Infants are Not Judged According to that Which They are
 Foreknown as Likely to Do If They Should Live.

 For you see, beloved, how absurd it is, and how foreign from soundness
 of faith and sincerity of truth, for us to say that infants, when they
 die, should be judged according to those things which they are
 foreknown to be going to do if they should live. For to this opinion,
 from which certainly every human feeling, on however little reason it
 may be founded, and especially every Christian feeling, revolts, they
 are compelled to advance who have chosen in such wise to be withdrawn
 from the error of the Pelagians as still to think that they must
 believe, and, moreover, must profess in argument, that the grace of
 God, through Jesus Christ our Lord, by which alone after the fall of
 the first man, in whom we all fell, help is afforded to us, is given
 according to our merits. And this belief Pelagius himself, before the
 Eastern bishops as judges, condemned in fear of his own condemnation.
 And if this be not said of the good or bad works of those who have
 died, which they would have done if they had lived,--and thus of no
 works, and works that would never exist, even in the foreknowledge of
 God,--if this, therefore, be not said, and you see under how great a
 mistake it is said, what will remain but that we confess, when the
 darkness of contention is removed, that the grace of God is not given
 according to our merits, which position the catholic Church defends
 against the Pelagian heresy; and that we see this in more evident truth
 especially in infants? For God is not compelled by fate to come to the
 help of these infants, and not to come to the help of those,--since the
 case is alike to both. Or shall we think that human affairs in the case
 of infants are not managed by Divine Providence, but by fortuitous
 chances, when rational souls are either to be condemned or delivered,
 although, indeed, not a sparrow falls to the ground without the will of
 our Father which is in heaven? [3624] Or must we so attribute it to the
 negligence of parents that infants die without baptism, as that
 heavenly judgments have nothing to do with it; as if they themselves
 who in this way die badly had of their own will chosen the negligent
 parents for themselves of whom they were born? What shall I say when an
 infant expires some time before he can possibly be advantaged by the
 ministry of baptism? For often when the parents are eager and the
 ministers prepared for giving baptism to the infants, it still is not
 given, because God does not choose; since He has not kept it in this
 life for a little while in order that baptism might be given it. What,
 moreover, when sometimes aid could be afforded by baptism to the
 children of unbelievers, that they should not go into perdition, and
 could not be afforded to the children of believers? In which case it is
 certainly shown that there is no acceptance of persons with God;
 otherwise He would rather deliver the children of His worshippers than
 the children of His enemies.

 [3624] Matt. x. 29.

 Chapter 32 [XIII.]--The Inscrutability of God's Free Purposes.

 But now, since we are now treating of the gift of perseverance, why is
 it that aid is afforded to the person about to die who is not baptized,
 while to the baptized person about to fall, aid is not afforded, so as
 to die before? Unless, perchance, we shall still listen to that
 absurdity by which it is said that it is of no advantage to any one to
 die before his fall, because he will be judged according to those
 actions which God foreknew that he would have done if he had lived. Who
 can hear with patience this perversity, so violently opposed to the
 soundness of the faith? Who can bear it? And yet they are driven to say
 this who do not confess that God's grace is not bestowed in respect of
 our deservings. They, however, who will not say that any one who has
 died is judged according to those things which God foreknew that he
 would have done if he had lived, considering with how manifest a
 falsehood and how great an absurdity this would be said, have no
 further reason to say, what the Church condemned in the Pelagians, and
 caused to be condemned by Pelagius himself,--that the grace of God,
 namely, is given according to our merits,--when they see some infants
 not regenerated taken from this life to eternal death, and others
 regenerated, to eternal life; and those themselves that are
 regenerated, some going hence, persevering even to the end, and others
 kept in this life even until they fall, who certainly would not have
 fallen if they had departed hence before their lapse; and again some
 falling, but not departing from this life until they return, who
 certainly would have perished if they had departed before their return.

 Chapter 33.--God Gives Both Initiatory and Persevering Grace According
 to His Own Will.

 From all which it is shown with sufficient clearness that the grace of
 God, which both begins a man's faith and which enables it to persevere
 unto the end, is not given according to our merits, but is given
 according to His own most secret and at the same time most righteous,
 wise, and beneficent will; since those whom He predestinated, them He
 also called, [3625] with that calling of which it is said, "The gifts
 and calling of God are without repentance." [3626] To which calling
 there is no man that can be said by men with any certainty of
 affirmation to belong, until he has departed from this world; but in
 this life of man, which is a state of trial upon the earth, [3627] he
 who seems to stand must take heed lest he fall. [3628] Since (as I have
 already said before) [3629] those who will not persevere are, by the
 most foreseeing will of God, mingled with those who will persevere, for
 the reason that we may learn not to mind high things, but to consent to
 the lowly, and may "work out our own salvation with fear and trembling;
 for it is God that worketh in us both to will and to do for His good
 pleasure." [3630] We therefore will, but God worketh in us to will
 also. We therefore work, but God worketh in us to work also for His
 good pleasure. This is profitable for us both to believe and to
 say,--this is pious, this is true, that our confession be lowly and
 submissive, and that all should be given to God. Thinking, we believe;
 thinking, we speak; thinking, we do whatever we do; [3631] but, in
 respect of what concerns the way of piety and the true worship of God,
 we are not sufficient to think anything as of ourselves, but our
 sufficiency is of God. [3632] For "our heart and our thoughts are not
 in our own power;" whence the same Ambrose who says this says also:
 "But who is so blessed as in his heart always to rise upwards? And how
 can this be done without divine help? Assuredly, by no means. Finally,"
 he says, "the same Scripture affirms above, Blessed is the man whose
 help is of Thee; O Lord, [3633] ascent is in his heart.'" [3634]
 Assuredly, Ambrose was not only enabled to say this by reading in the
 holy writings, but as of such a man is to be without doubt believed, he
 felt it also in his own heart. Therefore, as is said in the sacraments
 of believers, that we should lift up our hearts to the Lord, is God's
 gift; for which gift they to whom this is said are admonished by the
 priest after this word to give thanks to our Lord God Himself; and they
 answer that it is "meet and right so to do." [3635] For, since our
 heart is not in our own power, but is lifted up by the divine help, so
 that it ascends and takes cognizance of those things which are above,
 [3636] where Christ is sitting at the right hand of God, and, not those
 things that are upon the earth, to whom are thanks to be given for so
 great a gift as this unless to our Lord God who doeth this,--who in so
 great kindness has chosen us by delivering us from the abyss of this
 world, and has predestinated us before the foundation of the world?

 [3625] Rom viii. 30.

 [3626] Rom. xi. 29.

 [3627] Job vii. 1.

 [3628] 1 Cor. x. 12.

 [3629] Above, ch. xiv.

 [3630] Phil. ii. 12, 13.

 [3631] 2 Cor. iii. 5.

 [3632] Ambrose, On Flight from the World, ch. 1.

 [3633] Ps. lxxxiv. 5 [LXX.]

 [3634] LXX.: "In his heart he has purposed to go up."

 [3635] [An allusion to the Sursum Corda in the "Preface" of the
 Communion service. For its history see Smith and Cheetham's Dictionary
 of Christian Antiquities, p. 1693. Cyprian in his treatise on the
 Lord's Prayer already mentions it. It still has a place in the
 liturgies of the Church of England and the Protestant Episcopal Church
 in the United States.--W.]

 [3636] Col. iii. 1.

 Chapter 34 [XIV.]--The Doctrine of Predestination Not Opposed to the
 Advantage of Preaching.

 But they say that the "definition of predestination is opposed to the
 advantage of preaching," [3637] --as if, indeed, it were opposed to the
 preaching of the apostle! Did not that teacher of the heathen so often,
 in faith and truth, both commend predestination, and not cease to
 preach the word of God? Because he said, "It is God that worketh in you
 both to will and to do for His good pleasure," [3638] did he not also
 exhort that we should both will and do what is pleasing to God? or
 because he said, "He who hath begun a good work in you shall carry it
 on even unto the day of Christ Jesus," [3639] did he on that account
 cease to persuade men to begin and to persevere unto the end?
 Doubtless, our Lord Himself commanded men to believe, and said,
 "Believe in God, believe also in me:" [3640] and yet His opinion is not
 therefore false, nor is His definition idle when He says, "No man
 cometh unto me"--that is, no man believeth in me--"except it has been
 given him of my Father." [3641] Nor, again, because this definition is
 true, is the former precept vain. Why, therefore, do we think the
 definition of predestination useless to preaching, to precept, to
 exhortation, to rebuke,--all which things the divine Scripture repeats
 frequently,--seeing that the same Scripture commends this doctrine?

 [3637] In the Letters of Hilary and Prosper.

 [3638] Phil. ii. 13.

 [3639] Phil. i. 6.

 [3640] John xiv. 1.

 [3641] John vi. 66.

 Chapter 35.--What Predestination is.

 Will any man dare to say that God did not foreknow those to whom He
 would give to believe, or whom He would give to His Son, that of them
 He should lose none? [3642] And certainly, if He foreknew these things,
 He as certainly foreknew His own kindnesses, wherewith He condescends
 to deliver us. This is the predestination of the saints,--nothing else;
 to wit, the foreknowledge and the preparation of God's kindnesses,
 whereby they are most certainly delivered, whoever they are that are
 delivered. But where are the rest left by the righteous divine judgment
 except in the mass of ruin, where the Tyrians and the Sidonians were
 left? who, moreover, might have believed if they had seen Christ's
 wonderful miracles. But since it was not given to them to believe, the
 means of believing also were denied them. From which fact it appears
 that some have in their understanding itself a naturally divine gift of
 intelligence, by which they may be moved to the faith, if they either
 hear the words or behold the signs congruous to their minds; and yet
 if, in the higher judgment of God, they are not by the predestination
 of grace separated from the mass of perdition, neither those very
 divine words nor deeds are applied to them by which they might believe
 if they only heard or saw such things. Moreover, in the same mass of
 ruin the Jews were left, because they could not believe such great and
 eminent mighty works as were done in their sight. For the gospel has
 not been silent about the reason why they could not believe, since it
 says: "But though He had done such great miracles before them, yet they
 believed not on Him; that the saying of Isaiah the prophet might be
 fulfilled which he spake, [3643] Lord, who hath believed our report,
 and to whom hath the arm of the Lord been revealed? And, therefore,
 they could not believe, because that Isaiah said again, [3644] He hath
 blinded their eyes and hardened their heart, that they should not see
 with their eyes, nor understand with their heart, and be converted, and
 I should heal them." [3645] Therefore the eyes of the Tyrians and
 Sidonians were not so blinded nor was their heart so hardened, since
 they would have believed if they had seen such mighty works, as the
 Jews saw. But it did not profit them that they were able to believe,
 because they were not predestinated by Him whose judgments are
 inscrutable and His ways past finding out. Neither would inability to
 believe have been a hindrance to them, if they had been so
 predestinated as that God should illuminate those blind eyes, and
 should will to take away the stony heart from those hardened ones. But
 what the Lord said of the Tyrians and Sidonians may perchance be
 understood in another way: that no one nevertheless comes to Christ
 unless it were given him, and that it is given to those who are chosen
 in Him before the foundation of the world, he confesses beyond a doubt
 who hears the divine utterance, not with the deaf ears of the flesh,
 but with the ears of the heart; and yet this predestination, which is
 plainly enough unfolded even by the words of the gospels, did not
 prevent the Lord's saying as well in respect of the commencement, what
 I have a little before mentioned, "Believe in God; believe also in me,"
 as in respect of perseverance, "A man ought always to pray, and not to
 faint." [3646] For they hear these things and do them to whom it is
 given; but they do them not, whether they hear or do not hear, to whom
 it is not given. Because, "To you," said He, "it is given to know the
 mystery of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it is not given." [3647]
 Of these, the one refers to the mercy, the other to the judgment of Him
 to whom our soul cries, "I will sing of mercy and judgment unto Thee, O
 Lord." [3648]

 [3642] John xviii. 9.

 [3643] Isa. liii. 1.

 [3644] Isa. vi. 10.

 [3645] John xii. 37 ff.

 [3646] Luke xviii. 1.

 [3647] Matt. xiii. 11.

 [3648] Ps. ci. 1.

 Chapter 36.--The Preaching of the Gospel and the Preaching of
 Predestination the Two Parts of One Message.

 Therefore, by the preaching of predestination, the preaching of a
 persevering and progressive faith is not to be hindered; and thus they
 may hear what is necessary to whom it is given that they should obey.
 For how shall they hear without a preacher? Neither, again, is the
 preaching of a progressive faith which continues even to the end to
 hinder the preaching of predestination, so that he who is living
 faithfully and obediently may not be lifted up by that very obedience,
 as if by a benefit of his own, not received; but that he that glorieth
 may glory in the Lord. For "we must boast in nothing, since nothing is
 our own." And this, Cyprian most faithfully saw and most fearlessly
 explained, and thus he pronounced predestination to be most assured.
 [3649] For if we must boast in nothing, seeing that nothing is our own,
 certainly we must not boast of the most persevering obedience. Nor is
 it so to be called our own, as if it were not given to us from above.
 And, therefore, it is God's gift, which, by the confession of all
 Christians, God foreknew that He would give to His people, who were
 called by that calling whereof it was said, "The gifts and calling of
 God are without repentance." [3650] This, then, is the predestination
 which we faithfully and humbly preach. Nor yet did the same teacher and
 doer, who both believed on Christ and most perseveringly lived in holy
 obedience, even to suffering for Christ, cease on that account to
 preach the gospel, to exhort to faith and to pious manners, and to that
 very perseverance to the end, because he said, "We must boast in
 nothing, since nothing is our own;" and here he declared without
 ambiguity the true grace of God, that is, that which is not given in
 respect of our merits; and since God foreknew that He would give it,
 predestination was announced beyond a doubt by these words of Cyprian;
 and if this did not prevent Cyprian from preaching obedience, it
 certainly ought not to prevent us.

 [3649] Cyprian, Testimonies, iii. 4; see The Ante-Nicene Fathers, v. p.
 528.

 [3650] Rom. xi. 29.

 Chapter 37.--Ears to Hear are a Willingness to Obey.

 Although, therefore, we say that obedience is the gift of God, we still
 exhort men to it. But to those who obediently hear the exhortation of
 truth is given the gift of God itself--that is, to hear obediently;
 while to those who do not thus hear it is not given. For it was not
 some one only, but Christ who said, "No man cometh unto me, except it
 were given him of my Father;" [3651] and, "To you it is given to know
 the mystery of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it is not given."
 [3652] And concerning continence He says, "Not all receive this saying,
 but they to whom it is given." [3653] And when the apostle would exhort
 married people to conjugal chastity, he says, "I would that all men
 were even as I myself; but every man hath his proper gift of God, one
 after this manner, another after that;" [3654] where he plainly shows
 not only that continence is a gift of God, but even the chastity of
 those who are married. And although these things are true, we still
 exhort to them as much as is given to any one of us to be able to
 exhort, because this also is His gift in whose hand are both ourselves
 and our discourses. Whence also says the apostle, "According to this
 grace of God which is given unto me, as a wise architect, I have laid
 the foundation." [3655] And in another place he says, "Even as the Lord
 hath given to every man: I have planted, Apollos has watered, but God
 has given the increase. Therefore neither is he that planteth anything,
 nor he that watereth, but God that giveth the increase." [3656] And
 thus as only he preaches and exhorts rightly who has received this
 gift, so assuredly he who obediently hears him who rightly exhorts and
 preaches is he who has received this gift. Hence is what the Lord said,
 when, speaking to those who had their fleshly ears open, He
 nevertheless told them, "He that hath ears to hear let him hear;"
 [3657] which beyond a doubt he knew that not all had. And from whom
 they have, whosoever they be that have them, the Lord Himself shows
 when He says, "I will give them a heart to know me, and ears to hear."
 [3658] Therefore, having ears is itself the gift of obeying, so that
 they who had that came to Him, to whom "no one comes unless it were
 given to him of His Father." Therefore we exhort and preach, but they
 who have ears to hear obediently hear us, while in them who have them
 not, it comes to pass what is written, that hearing they do not
 hear,--hearing, to wit, with the bodily sense, they do not hear with
 the assent of the heart. But why these should have ears to hear, and
 those have them not,--that is, why to these it should be given by the
 Father to come to the Son, while to those it should not be given,--who
 has known the mind of the Lord, or who has been His counsellor? Or who
 art thou, O man, that repliest against God? Must that which is manifest
 be denied, because that which is hidden cannot be comprehended? Shall
 we, I say, declare that what we see to be so is not so, because we
 cannot find out why it is so?

 [3651] John vi. 66.

 [3652] Matt. xiii. 11.

 [3653] Matt. xix. 11.

 [3654] 1 Cor. vii. 7.

 [3655] 1 Cor. iii. 10.

 [3656] 1 Cor. iii. 5.

 [3657] Luke viii. 8.

 [3658] Baruch ii. 31.

 Chapter 38 [XV.]--Against the Preaching of Predestination the Same
 Objections May Be Alleged as Against Predestination.

 But they say, as you write: "That no one can be aroused by the
 incentives of rebuke if it be said in the assembly of the Church to the
 multitude of hearers: The definite meaning of God's will concerning
 predestination stands in such wise, that some of you will receive the
 will to obey and will come out of unbelief unto faith, or will receive
 perseverance and abide in the faith; but others who are lingering in
 the delight of sins have not yet arisen, for the reason that the aid of
 pitying grace has not yet indeed raised you up. But yet, if there are
 any whom by His grace He has predestinated to be chosen, who are not
 yet called, ye shall receive that grace by which you may will and be
 chosen; and if any obey, if ye are predestinated to be rejected, the
 strength to obey shall be withdrawn from you, so that you may cease to
 obey." Although these things may be said, they ought not so to deter us
 from confessing the true grace of God,--that is, the grace which is not
 given to us in respect of our merits,--and from confessing the
 predestination of the saints in accordance therewith, even as we are
 not deterred from confessing God's foreknowledge, although one should
 thus speak to the people concerning it, and say: "Whether you are now
 living righteously or unrighteously, you shall be such by and by as the
 Lord has foreknown that you will be,--either good, if He has foreknown
 you as good, or bad, if He has foreknown you as bad." For if on the
 hearing of this some should be turned to torpor and slothfulness, and
 from striving should go headlong to lust after their own desires, is it
 therefore to be counted that what has been said about the foreknowledge
 of God is false? If God has foreknown that they will be good, will they
 not be good, whatever be the depth of evil in which they are now
 engaged? And if He has foreknown them evil, will they not be evil,
 whatever goodness may now be discerned in them? There was a man in our
 monastery, who, when the brethren rebuked him for doing some things
 that ought not to be done, and for not doing some things that ought to
 be done, replied, "Whatever I may now be, I shall be such as God has
 foreknown that I shall be." And this man certainly both said what was
 true, and was not profited by this truth for good, but so far made way
 in evil as to desert the society of the monastery, and become a dog
 returned to his vomit; and, nevertheless, it is uncertain what he is
 yet to become. For the sake of souls of this kind, then, is the truth
 which is spoken about God's foreknowledge either to be denied or to be
 kept back,--at such times, for instance, when, if it is not spoken,
 other errors are incurred?

 Chapter 39 [XVI]--Prayer and Exhortation.

 There are some, moreover, who either do not pray at all, or pray
 coldly, because, from the Lord's words, they have learnt that God knows
 what is necessary for us before we ask it of Him. Must the truth of
 this declaration be given up, or shall we think that it should be
 erased from the gospel because of such people? Nay, since it is
 manifest that God has prepared some things to be given even to those
 who do not pray for them, such as the beginning of faith, and other
 things not to be given except to those who pray for them, such as
 perseverance even unto the end, certainly he who thinks that he has
 this latter from himself does not pray to have it. Therefore we must
 take care lest, while we are afraid of exhortation growing lukewarm,
 prayer should be stifled and arrogance stimulated.

 Chapter 40.--When the Truth Must Be Spoken, When Kept Back.

 Therefore let the truth be spoken, especially when any question impels
 us to declare it; and let them receive it who are able, lest,
 perchance, while we are silent on account of those who cannot receive
 it, they be not only defrauded of the truth but be taken captive by
 falsehood, who are able to receive the truth whereby falsehood may be
 avoided. For it is easy, nay, and it is useful, that some truth should
 be kept back because of those who are incapable of apprehending it. For
 whence is that word of our Lord: "I have yet many things to say unto
 you, but ye cannot bear them now"? [3659] And that of the apostle: "I
 could not speak unto you as unto spiritual, but as unto carnal: as if
 unto babes in Christ I have given you to drink milk, and not meat, for
 hitherto ye were not able, neither yet indeed now are ye able"? [3660]
 Although, in a certain manner of speaking, it might happen that what is
 said should be both milk to infants and meat for grown-up persons. As
 "in the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word
 was God," [3661] what Christian can keep it back? Who can receive it?
 Or what in sound doctrine can be found more comprehensive? And yet this
 is not kept back either from infants or from grown-up people, nor is it
 hidden from infants by those who are mature. But the reason of keeping
 back the truth is one, the necessity of speaking the truth is another.
 It would be a tedious business to inquire into or to put down all the
 reasons for keeping back the truth; of which, nevertheless, there is
 this one,--lest we should make those who do not understand worse, while
 wishing to make those who do understand more learned; although these
 latter do not become more learned when we withhold any such thing on
 the one hand, but also do not become worse. When, however, a truth is
 of such a nature that he who cannot receive it is made worse by our
 speaking it, and he who can receive it is made worse by our silence
 concerning it, what do we think is to be done? Must we not speak the
 truth, that he who can receive it may receive it, rather than keep
 silence, so that not only neither may receive it, but that even he who
 is more intelligent should himself be made worse? For if he should hear
 and receive it, by his means also many might learn. For in proportion
 as he is more capable of learning, he is the more fitted for teaching
 others. The enemy of grace presses on and urges in all ways to make us
 believe that grace is given according to our deservings, and thus grace
 is no more grace; and are we unwilling to say what we can say by the
 testimony of Scripture? Do we fear, forsooth, to offend by our speaking
 him who is not able to receive the truth? and are we not afraid lest by
 our silence he who can receive the truth may be involved in falsehood?

 [3659] John xvi. 12.

 [3660] 1 Cor. iii. 1.

 [3661] John i. 1.

 Chapter 41.--Predestination Defined as Only God's Disposing of Events
 in His Foreknowledge.

 For either predestination must be preached, in the way and degree in
 which the Holy Scripture plainly declares it, so that in the
 predestinated the gifts and calling of God may be without repentance;
 or it must be avowed that God's grace is given according to our
 merits,--which is the opinion of the Pelagians; although that opinion
 of theirs, as I have often said already, may be read in the Proceedings
 of the Eastern bishops to have been condemned by the lips of Pelagius
 himself. [3662] Further, those on whose account I am discoursing are
 only removed from the heretical perversity of the Pelagians, inasmuch
 as, although they will not confess that they who by God's grace are
 made obedient and so abide, are predestinated, they still confess,
 nevertheless, that this grace precedes their will to whom it is given;
 in such a way certainly as that grace may not be thought to be given
 freely, as the truth declares, but rather according to the merits of a
 preceding will, as the Pelagian error says, in contradiction to the
 truth. Therefore, also, grace precedes faith; otherwise, if faith
 precedes grace, beyond a doubt will also precedes it, because there
 cannot be faith without will. But if grace precedes faith because it
 precedes will, certainly it precedes all obedience; it also precedes
 love, by which alone God is truly and pleasantly obeyed. And all these
 things grace works in him to whom it is given, and in whom it precedes
 all these things. [XVII.] Among these benefits there remains
 perseverance unto the end, which is daily asked for in vain from the
 Lord, if the Lord by His grace does not effect it in him whose prayers
 He hears. See now how foreign it is from the truth to deny that
 perseverance even to the end of this life is the gift of God; since He
 Himself puts an end to this life when He wills, and if He puts an end
 before a fall that is threatening, He makes the man to persevere even
 unto the end. But more marvellous and more manifest to believers is the
 largess of God's goodness, that this grace is given even to infants,
 although there is no obedience at that age to which it may be given. To
 whomsoever, therefore, God gives His gifts, beyond a doubt He has
 foreknown that He will bestow them on them, and in His foreknowledge He
 has prepared them for them. Therefore, those whom He predestinated,
 them He also called with that calling which I am not reluctant often to
 make mention of, of which it is said, "The gifts and calling of God are
 without repentance." [3663] For the ordering of His future works in His
 foreknowledge, which cannot be deceived and changed, is absolute, and
 is nothing but, predestination. But, as he whom God has foreknown to be
 chaste, although he may regard it as uncertain, so acts as to be
 chaste, so he whom He has predestinated to be chaste, although he may
 regard that as uncertain, does not, therefore, fail to act so as to be
 chaste because he hears that he is to be what he will be by the gift of
 God. Nay, rather, his love rejoices, and he is not puffed up as if he
 had not received it. Not only, therefore, is he not hindered from this
 work by the preaching of predestination, but he is even assisted to it,
 so that although he glories he may glory in the Lord.

 [3662] See above, On the Proceedings of Pelagius, ch. 30.

 [3663] Rom. xi. 29.

 Chapter 42.--The Adversaries Cannot Deny Predestination to Those Gifts
 of Grace Which They Themselves Acknowledge, and Their Exhortations are
 Not Hindered by This Predestination Nevertheless.

 And what I said of chastity, can be said also of faith, of piety, of
 love, of perseverance, and, not to enumerate single virtues, it may be
 said with the utmost truthfulness of all the obedience with which God
 is obeyed. But those who place only the beginning of faith and
 perseverance to the end in such wise in our power as not to regard them
 as God's gifts, nor to think that God works on our thoughts and wills
 so as that we may have and retain them, grant, nevertheless, that He
 gives other things,--since they are obtained from Him by the faith of
 the believer. Why are they not afraid that exhortation to these other
 things, and the preaching of these other things, should be hindered by
 the definition of predestination? Or, perchance, do they say that such
 things are not predestinated? Then they are not given by God, or He has
 not known that He would give them. Because, if they are both given, and
 He foreknew that He would give them, certainly He predestinated them.
 As, therefore, they themselves also exhort to chastity, charity, piety,
 and other things which they confess to be God's gifts, and cannot deny
 that they are also foreknown by Him, and therefore predestinated; nor
 do they say that their exhortations are hindered by the preaching of
 God's predestination, that is, by the preaching of God's foreknowledge
 of those future gifts of His: so they may see that neither are their
 exhortations to faith or to perseverance hindered, even although those
 very things may be said, as is the truth, to be gifts of God, and that
 those things are foreknown, that is, predestinated to be given; but let
 them rather see that by this preaching of predestination only that most
 pernicious error is hindered and overthrown, whereby it is said that
 the grace of God is given according to our deservings, so that he who
 glories may glory not in the Lord, but in himself.

 Chapter 43.--Further Development of the Foregoing Argument.

 And in order that I may more openly unfold this for the sake of those
 who are somewhat slow of apprehension, let those who are endowed with
 an intelligence that flies in advance bear with my delay. The Apostle
 James says, "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, who giveth
 to all men liberally and upbraideth not, and it shall be given him."
 [3664] It is written also in the Proverbs of Solomon, "Because theLord
 giveth wisdom." [3665] And of continency it is read in the book of
 Wisdom, whose authority has been used by great and learned men who have
 commented upon the divine utterances long before us; there, therefore,
 it is read, "When I knew that no one can be continent unless God gives
 it, and that this was of wisdom, to know whose gift this was." [3666]
 Therefore these are God's gifts,--that is, to say nothing of others,
 wisdom and continency. Let those also acquiesce: for they are not
 Pelagians, to contend against such a manifest truth as this with hard
 and heretical perversity. "But," say they, "that these things are given
 to us of God is obtained by faith, which has its beginning from us;"
 and both to begin to have this faith, and to abide in it even to the
 end, they contend is our own doing, as if we received it not from the
 Lord. This, beyond a doubt, is in contradiction to the apostle when he
 says, "For what hast thou that thou hast not received?" [3667] It is in
 contradiction also to the saying of the martyr Cyprian, "That we must
 boast in nothing, since nothing is our own." [3668] When we have said
 this, and many other things which it is wearisome to repeat, and have
 shown that both the commencement of faith and perseverance to the end
 are gifts of God; and that it is impossible that God should not
 foreknow any of His future gifts, as well what should be given as to
 whom they should be given; and that thus those whom He delivers and
 crowns are predestinated by Him; they think it well to reply, "that the
 assertion of predestination is opposed to the advantage of preaching,
 for the reason that when this is heard no one can be stirred up by the
 incentives of rebuke." When they say this, "they are unwilling that it
 should be declared to men, that coming to the faith and abiding in the
 faith are God's gifts, lest despair rather than encouragement should
 appear to be suggested, inasmuch as they who hear think that it is
 uncertain to human ignorance on whom God bestows, or on whom He does
 not bestow, these gifts." Why, then, do they themselves also preach
 with us that wisdom and continency are God's gifts? But if, when these
 things are declared to be God's gifts, there is no hindrance of the
 exhortation with which we exhort men to be wise and continent; what is
 after all the reason for their thinking that the exhortation is
 hindered wherewith we exhort men to come to the faith, and to abide in
 it to the end, if these also are said to be God's gifts, as is proved
 by the Scriptures, which are His witnesses?

 [3664] Jas. i. 5.

 [3665] Prov. ii. 6.

 [3666] Wisd. viii. 21.

 [3667] 1 Cor. iv. 7.

 [3668] Cyprian, Testimonies, iii. 4; see The Ante-Nicene Fathers, v.
 528.

 Chapter 44.--Exhortation to Wisdom, Though Wisdom is God's Gift.

 Now, to say nothing more of continency, and to argue in this place of
 wisdom alone, certainly the Apostle James above mentioned says, "But
 the wisdom that is from above is first pure, then peaceable, modest,
 easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, inestimable,
 without simulation." [3669] Do you not see, I beseech you, how this
 wisdom descends from the Father of Lights, laden with many and great
 benefits? Because, as the same apostle says, "Every excellent gift and
 every perfect gift is from above, and comes down from the Father of
 Lights." [3670] Why, then--to set aside other matters--do we rebuke the
 impure and contentious, to whom we nevertheless preach that the gift of
 God is wisdom, pure and peaceable; and are not afraid that they should
 be influenced, by the uncertainty of the divine will, to find in this
 preaching more of despair than of exhortation; and that they should not
 be stirred up by the incentives of rebuke rather against us than
 against themselves, because we rebuke them for not having those things
 which we ourselves say are not produced by human will, but are given by
 the divine liberality? Finally, why did the preaching of this grace not
 deter the Apostle James from rebuking restless souls, and saying, "If
 ye have bitter envying, and contentions are in your hearts, glory not,
 and be not liars against the truth. This is not the wisdom that cometh
 down from above, but is earthly, animal, devilish; for where envying
 and contention are, there are inconstancy and every evil work"? [3671]
 As, therefore, the restless are to be rebuked, both by the testimony of
 the divine declarations, and by those very impulses of ours which they
 have in common with ourselves; and is it no argument against this
 rebuke that we declare the peaceful wisdom, whereby the contentions are
 corrected and healed, to be the gift of God; unbelievers are in such
 wise to be rebuked, as those who do not abide in the faith, without any
 hindrance to that rebuke from the preaching of God's grace, although
 that preaching commends that very grace and the continuance in it as
 the gifts of God. Because, although wisdom is obtained from faith, even
 as James himself, when he had said, "If any of you lack wisdom, let him
 ask of God, who giveth to all liberally and upbraideth not, and it
 shall be given," [3672] immediately added, "But let him ask in faith,
 nothing wavering:" it is not, nevertheless, because faith is given
 before it is asked for by him to whom it is given, that it must
 therefore be said not to be the gift of God, but to be of ourselves,
 because it is given to us without our asking for it! For the apostle
 very plainly says, "Peace be to the brethren, and love with faith from
 God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ." [3673] From whom, therefore,
 are peace and love, from Him also is faith; wherefore, from Him we ask
 not only that it may be increased to those that possess it, but also
 that it may be given to those that possess it not.

 [3669] Jas. iii. 17.

 [3670] Jas. iii. 17.

 [3671] Jas. iii. 14.

 [3672] Jas. i. 5.

 [3673] Eph. vi. 23.

 Chapter 45.--Exhortation to Other Gifts of God in Like Manner.

 Nor do those on whose account I am saying these things, who cry out
 that exhortation is checked by the preaching of predestination and
 grace, exhort to those gifts alone which they contend are not given by
 God, but are from ourselves, such as are the beginning of faith, and
 perseverance in it even to the end. This certainly they ought to do, in
 such a way as only to exhort unbelievers to believe, and believers to
 continue to believe. But those things which with us they do not deny to
 be God's gifts, so as that with us they demolish the error of the
 Pelagians, such as modesty, continence, patience, and other virtues
 that pertain to a holy life, and are obtained by faith from the Lord,
 they ought to show as needing to be prayed for, and to pray for only,
 either for themselves or others; but they ought not to exhort any one
 to strive after them and retain them. But when they exhort to these
 things, according to their ability, and confess that men ought to be
 exhorted,--certainly they show plainly enough that exhortations are not
 hindered by that preaching, whether they are exhortations to faith or
 to perseverance to the end, because we also preach that such things are
 God's gifts, and are not given by any man to himself, but are given by
 God.

 Chapter 46.--A Man Who Does Not Persevere Fails by His Own Fault.

 But it is said, "It is by his own fault that any one deserts the faith,
 when he yields and consents to the temptation which is the cause of his
 desertion of the faith." Who denies it? But because of this,
 perseverance in the faith is not to be said not to be a gift of God.
 For it is this that a man daily asks for when he says, "Lead us not
 into temptation;" [3674] and if he is heard, it is this that he
 receives. And thus as he daily asks for perseverance, he assuredly
 places the hope of his perseverance not in himself, but in God. I,
 however, am loth to exaggerate the case with my words, but I rather
 leave it to them to consider, and see what it is of which they have
 persuaded themselves--to wit, "that by the preaching of predestination,
 more of despair than of exhortation is impressed upon the hearers." For
 this is to say that a man then despairs of his salvation when he has
 learned to place his hope not in himself, but in God, although the
 prophet cries, "Cursed is he who has his hope in man." [3675]

 [3674] Matt. vi. 13.

 [3675] Jer. xvii. 5.

 Chapter 47.--Predestination is Sometimes Signified Under the Name of
 Foreknowledge.

 These gifts, therefore, of God, which are given to the elect who are
 called according to God's purpose, among which gifts is both the
 beginning of belief and perseverance in the faith to the termination of
 this life, as I have proved by such a concurrent testimony of reasons
 and authorities,--these gifts of God, I say, if there is no such
 predestination as I am maintaining, are not foreknown by God. But they
 are foreknown. This, therefore, is the predestination which I maintain.
 [XVIII.] Consequently sometimes the same predestination is signified
 also under the name of foreknowledge; as says the apostle, "God has not
 rejected His people whom He foreknew." [3676] Here, when he says, "He
 foreknew," the sense is not rightly understood except as "He
 predestinated," as is shown by the context of the passage itself. For
 he was speaking of the remnant of the Jews which were saved, while the
 rest perished. For above he had said that the prophet had declared to
 Israel, "All day long I have stretched forth my hands to an unbelieving
 and a gainsaying people." [3677] And as if it were answered, What,
 then, has become of the promises of God to Israel? he added in
 continuation, "I say, then, has God cast away His people? God forbid!
 for I also am an Israelite, of the seed of Abraham, of the tribe of
 Benjamin." Then he added the words which I am now treating: "God hath
 not cast away His people whom He foreknew." And in order to show that
 the remnant had been left by God's grace, not by any merits of their
 works, he went on to add, "Know ye not what the Scripture saith in
 Elias, in what way he maketh intercession with God against Israel?"
 [3678] and the rest. "But what," says he, "saith the answer of God unto
 him? I have reserved to myself seven thousand men, who have not bowed
 the knee before Baal.'" [3679] For He says not, "There are left to me,"
 or "They have reserved themselves to me," but, "I have reserved to
 myself." "Even so, then, at this present time also there is made a
 remnant by the election of grace. And if of grace, then it is no more
 by works; otherwise grace is no more grace." And connecting this with
 what I have above quoted, "What then?" [3680] and in answer to this
 inquiry, he says, "Israel hath not obtained that which he was seeking
 for, but the election hath obtained it, and the rest were blinded."
 Therefore, in the election, and in this remnant which were made so by
 the election of grace, he wished to be understood the people which God
 did not reject, because He foreknew them. This is that election by
 which He elected those, whom He willed, in Christ before the foundation
 of the world, that they should be holy and without spot in His sight,
 in love, predestinating them unto the adoption of sons. No one,
 therefore, who understands these things is permitted to doubt that,
 when the apostle says, "God hath not cast away His people whom He
 foreknew," He intended to signify predestination. For He foreknew the
 remnant which He should make so according to the election of grace.
 That is, therefore, He predestinated them; for without doubt He
 foreknew if He predestinated; but to have predestinated is to have
 foreknown that which He should do.

 [3676] Rom. xi. 2.

 [3677] Rom. x. 21 et seq.

 [3678] Rom. xi. 4 et seq.

 [3679] Rom. xi. 5.

 [3680] Rom. xi. 7.

 Chapter 48 [XIX.]--Practice of Cyprian and Ambrose.

 What, then, hinders us, when we read of God's foreknowledge in some
 commentators on God's word, and they are treating of the calling of the
 elect, from understanding the same predestination? For they would
 perchance have rather used in this matter this word which, moreover, is
 better understood, and which is not inconsistent with, nay, is in
 accordance with, the truth which is declared concerning the
 predestination of grace. This I know, that no one has been able to
 dispute, except erroneously, against that predestination which I am
 maintaining in accordance with the Holy Scriptures. Yet I think that
 they who ask for the opinions of commentators on this matter ought to
 be satisfied with men so holy and so laudably celebrated everywhere in
 the faith and Christian doctrine as Cyprian and Ambrose, of whom I have
 given such clear testimonies; and that for both doctrines--that is,
 that they should both believe absolutely and preach everywhere that the
 grace of God is gratuitous, as we must believe and declare it to be;
 and that they should not think that preaching opposed to the preaching
 whereby we exhort the indolent or rebuke the evil; because these
 celebrated men also, although they were preaching God's grace in such a
 manner as that one of them said, "That we must boast in nothing,
 because nothing is our own;" [3681] and the other, "Our heart and our
 thoughts are not in our own power;" [3682] yet ceased not to exhort and
 rebuke, in order that the divine commands might be obeyed. Neither were
 they afraid of its being said to them, "Why do you exhort us, and why
 do you rebuke us, if no good thing that we have is from us, and if our
 hearts are not in our own power?" These holy men could by no means fear
 that such things should be said to them, since they were of the mind to
 understand that it is given to very few to receive the teaching of
 salvation through God Himself, or through the angels of heaven, without
 any human preaching to them; but that it is given to many to believe in
 God through human agency. Yet, in whatever manner the word of God is
 spoken to man, beyond a doubt for man to hear it in such a way as to
 obey it, is God's gift.

 [3681] Cyprian, Testimonies, iii. 4, as above.

 [3682] Ambrose, On Flight from the World, ch. 1.

 Chapter 49.--Further References to Cyprian and Ambrose.

 Wherefore, the above-mentioned most excellent commentators on the
 divine declarations both preached the true grace of God as it ought to
 be preached,--that is, as a grace preceded by no human deservings,--and
 urgently exhorted to the doing of the divine commandments, that they
 who might have the gift of obedience should hear what commands they
 ought to obey. For if any merits of ours precede grace, certainly it is
 the merit of some deed, or word, or thought, wherein also is understood
 a good will itself. But he very briefly summed up the kinds of all
 deservings who said, "We must glory in nothing, because nothing is our
 own." And he who says, "Our heart and our thoughts are not in our own
 power," did not pass over acts and words also, for there is no act or
 word of man which does not proceed from the heart and the thought. But
 what more could that most glorious martyr and most luminous doctor
 Cyprian say concerning this matter, than when he impressed upon us that
 it behoves us to pray, in the Lord's Prayer, even for the adversaries
 of the Christian faith, showing what he thought of the beginning of the
 faith, that it also is God's gift, and pointing out that the Church of
 Christ prays daily for perseverance unto the end, because none but God
 gives that perseverance to those who have persevered? Moreover, the
 blessed Ambrose, when he was expounding the passage where the
 Evangelist Luke says, "It seemed good to me also," [3683] says, "What
 he declares to have seemed good to himself cannot have seemed good to
 him alone. For not alone by human will did it seem good, but as it
 pleased Him who speaks in me, Christ, who effects that that which is
 good may also seem good to us: for whom He has mercy on He also calls.
 And therefore he who follows Christ may answer, when he is asked why he
 wished to become a Christian, It seemed good to me also.' And when he
 says this, he does not deny that it seemed good to God; for the will of
 men is prepared by God. For it is God's grace that God should be
 honoured by the saint." [3684] Moreover, in the same work,--that is, in
 the exposition of the same Gospel, when he had come to that place where
 the Samaritans would not receive the Lord when His face was as going to
 Jerusalem,--he says, "Learn at the same time that He would not be
 received by those who were not converted in simpleness of mind. For if
 He had been willing, He would have made them devout who were undevout.
 And why they would not receive Him, the evangelist himself mentioned,
 saying, Because His face was as of one going towards Jerusalem.' [3685]
 But the disciples earnestly desired to be received into Samaria. But
 God calls those whom He makes worthy, and makes religious whom He
 will." [3686] What more evident, what more manifest do we ask from
 commentators on God's word, if we are pleased to hear from them what is
 clear in the Scriptures? But to these two, who ought to be enough, let
 us add also a third, the holy Gregory, who testifies that it is the
 gift of God both to believe in God and to confess what we believe,
 saying, "I beg of you confess the Trinity of one godhead; but if ye
 wish otherwise, say that it is of one nature, and God will be besought
 that a voice shall be given to you by the Holy Spirit;" that is, God
 will be besought to allow a voice to be given to you by which you may
 confess what you believe. "For He will give, I am certain. He who gave
 what is first, will give also what is second." [3687] He who gave
 belief, will also give confession.

 [3683] Luke i. 3.

 [3684] Ambrose On Luke, in the exposition of the prologue.

 [3685] Luke ix. 53.

 [3686] Ambrose, On Luke, Book 7, ch. 27.

 [3687] Greg. of Nazianz. Orat. 44 in Pentecosten.

 Chapter 50.--Obedience Not Discouraged by Preaching God's Gifts.

 Such doctors, and so great as these, when they say that there is
 nothing of which we may boast as if of our own which God has not given
 us, and that our very heart and our thoughts are not in our own power;
 and when they give the whole to God, and confess that from Him we
 receive that we are converted to Him in such wise as to continue,--that
 that which is good appears also to us to be good, and we wish for
 it,--that we honour God and receive Christ,--that from undevout people
 we are made devout and religious,--that we believe in the Trinity
 itself, and also confess with our voice what we believe:--certainly
 attribute all these things to God's grace, acknowledge them as God's
 gifts, and testify that they come to us from Him, and are not from
 ourselves. But will any one say that they in such wise confessed that
 grace of God as to venture to deny His foreknowledge, which not only
 learned but unlearned men also confess? Again, if they had so known
 that God gives these things that they were not ignorant that He
 foreknew that He would give them, and could not have been ignorant to
 whom He would give them: beyond a doubt they had known the
 predestination which, as preached by the apostles, we laboriously and
 diligently maintain against the modern heretics. Nor would it be with
 any manner of justice said, nevertheless, to them because they preach
 obedience, and fervently exhort, to the extent of the ability of each
 one, to its practice, "If you do not wish that the obedience to which
 you are stirring us up should grow cold in our heart, forbear to preach
 to us that grace of God by which you confess that God gives what you
 are exhorting us to do."

 Chapter 51 [XX.]--Predestination Must Be Preached.

 Wherefore, if both the apostles and the teachers of the Church who
 succeeded them and imitated them did both these things,--that is, both
 truly preached the grace of God which is not given according to our
 merits, and inculcated by wholesome precepts a pious obedience,--what
 is it which these people of our time think themselves rightly bound by
 the invincible force of truth to say, "Even if what is said of the
 predestination of God's benefits be true, yet it must not be preached
 to the people"? [3688] It must absolutely be preached, so that he who
 has ears to hear, may hear. And who has them if he has not received
 them from Him who says, "I will give them a heart to know me, and ears
 to hear?" [3689] Assuredly, he who has not received may reject; while,
 yet, he who receives may take and drink, may drink and live. For as
 piety must be preached, that, by him who has ears to hear, God may be
 rightly worshipped; modesty must be preached, that, by him who has ears
 to hear, no illicit act may be perpetrated by his fleshly nature;
 charity must be preached, that, by him who has ears to hear, God and
 his neighbours may be loved;--so also must be preached such a
 predestination of God's benefits that he who has ears to hear may
 glory, not in himself, but in the Lord.

 [3688] In the Letters of Prosper and Hilary, printed among Augustin's
 Letters, Nos. 225 and 226.

 [3689] Baruch ii. 31.

 Chapter 52.--Previous Writings Anticipatively Refuted the Pelagian
 Heresy.

 But in respect of their saying "that it was not necessary that the
 hearts of so many people of little intelligence should be disquieted by
 the uncertainty of this kind of disputation, since the catholic faith
 has been defended for so many years, with no less advantage, without
 this definition of predestination, as well against others as especially
 against the Pelagians, in so many books that have gone before, as well
 of catholics and others as our own;" [3690] --I much wonder that they
 should say this, and not observe--to say nothing of other writings in
 this place--that those very treatises of mine were both composed and
 published before the Pelagians had begun to appear; and that they do
 not see in how many passages of those treatises I was unawares cutting
 down a future Pelagian heresy, by preaching the grace by which God
 delivers us from evil errors and from our habits, without any preceding
 merits of ours,--doing this according to His gratuitous mercy. And this
 I began more fully to apprehend in that disputation which I wrote to
 Simplicianus, the bishop of the Church of Milan, of blessed memory, in
 the beginning of my episcopate, when, moreover, I both perceived and
 asserted that the beginning of faith is God's gift.

 [3690] The Epistle of Hilary in Augustin's Letters, 226, ch. 8.

 Chapter 53.--Augustin's "Confessions."

 And which of my smaller works has been able to be more generally and
 more agreeably known than the books of my Confessions? And although I
 published them before the Pelagian heresy had come into existence,
 certainly in them I said to my God, and said it frequently, "Give what
 Thou commandest, and command what Thou willest." [3691] Which words of
 mine, Pelagius at Rome, when they were mentioned in his presence by a
 certain brother and fellow bishop of mine, could not bear; and
 contradicting somewhat too excitedly, nearly came to a quarrel with him
 who had mentioned them. But what, indeed, does God primarily and
 chiefly command, but that we believe on Him? And this, therefore, He
 Himself gives, if it is well said to Him, "Give what Thou commandest."
 And, moreover, in those same books, in respect of what I have related
 concerning my conversion, when God converted me to that faith which,
 with a most miserable and raging talkativeness, I was destroying, do
 you not remember that it was so narrated how I showed that I was
 granted to the faithful and daily tears of my mother, that I should not
 perish? [3692] Where certainly I declared that God by His grace
 converted to the true faith the wills of men, which were not only
 averse to it, but even adverse to it. Further, in what manner I
 besought God concerning my growth in perseverance, you know, and you
 are able to review if you wish it. Therefore, that all the gifts of God
 which in that work I either asked for or praised, were foreknown by God
 that He would give, and that He could never be ignorant of the persons
 to whom He would give them, who can dare, I will not say to deny, but
 even to doubt? This is the manifest and assured predestination of the
 saints, which subsequently necessity compelled me more carefully and
 laboriously to defend when I was already disputing against the
 Pelagians. For I learnt that each special heresy introduced its own
 peculiar questions into the Church--against which the sacred Scripture
 might be more carefully defended than if no such necessity compelled
 their defence. And what compelled those passages of Scripture in which
 predestination is commended to be defended more abundantly and clearly
 by that labour of mine, than the fact that the Pelagians say that God's
 grace is given according to our merits; for what else is this than an
 absolute denial of grace?

 [3691] Confessions, Book x. chs. 19, 31, and 37.

 [3692] Confessions, Book iii. chs. 11 and 12, Book ix. ch. 8.

 Chapter 54 [XXI.]--Beginning and End of Faith is of God.

 Therefore that this opinion, which is unpleasing to God, and hostile to
 those gratuitous benefits of God whereby we are delivered, may be
 destroyed, I maintain that both the beginning of faith and the
 perseverance therein, even to the end, are, according to the
 Scriptures--of which I have already quoted many--God's gifts. Because
 if we say that the beginning of faith is of ourselves, so that by it we
 deserve to receive other gifts of God, the Pelagians conclude that
 God's grace is given according to our merits. And this the catholic
 faith held in such dread, that Pelagius himself, in fear of
 condemnation, condemned it. And, moreover, if we say that our
 perseverance is of ourselves, not of God, they answer that we have the
 beginning of our faith of ourselves in such wise as the end, thus
 arguing that we have that beginning of ourselves much more, if of
 ourselves we have the continuance unto the end, since to perfect is
 much greater than to begin; and thus repeatedly they conclude that the
 grace of God is given according to our merits. But if both are God's
 gifts, and God foreknew that He would give these His gifts (and who can
 deny this?), predestination must be preached,--that God's true grace,
 that is, the grace which is not given according to our merits, may be
 maintained with insuperable defence.

 Chapter 55.--Testimony of His Previous Writings and Letters.

 And, indeed, in that treatise of which the title is, Of Rebuke and
 Grace, [3693] which could not suffice for all my lovers, I think that I
 have so established that it is the gift of God also to persevere to the
 end, as I have either never before or almost never so expressly and
 evidently maintained this in writing, unless my memory deceives me. But
 I have now said this in a way in which no one before me has said it.
 Certainly the blessed Cyprian, in the Lord's Prayer, as I have already
 shown, so explained our petitions as to say that in its very first
 petition we were asking for perseverance, asserting that we pray for it
 when we say, "Hallowed be Thy name," [3694] although we have been
 already hallowed in baptism,--so that we may persevere in that which we
 have begun to be. Let those, however, to whom, in their love for me, I
 ought not to be ungrateful, who profess that they embrace, over and
 above that which comes into the argument, all my views, as you
 write,--let those, I say, see whether, in the latter portions of the
 first book of those two which I wrote in the beginning of my
 episcopate, before the appearance of the Pelagian heresy, to
 Simplicianus, the bishop of Milan, [3695] there remained anything
 whereby it might be called in question that God's grace is not given
 according to our merits; and whether I have not there sufficiently
 argued that even the beginning of faith is God's gift; and whether from
 what is there said it does not by consequence result, although it is
 not expressed, that even perseverance to the end is not given, except
 by Him who has predestinated us to His kingdom and glory. Then, did not
 I many years ago publish that letter which I had already written to the
 holy Paulinus, [3696] bishop of Nola, against the Pelagians, which they
 have lately begun to contradict? Let them also look into that letter
 which I sent to Sixtus, the presbyter of the Roman Church [3697] when
 we contended in a very sharp conflict against the Pelagians, and they
 will find it such as is that one to Paulinus. Whence they may gather
 that the same sort of things were already said and written several
 years ago against the Pelagian heresy, and that it is to be wondered at
 that these should now displease them; although I should wish that no
 one would so embrace all my views as to follow me, except in those
 things in which he should see me not to have erred. For I am now
 writing treatises in which I have undertaken to retract my smaller
 works, for the purpose of demonstrating that even I myself have not in
 all things followed myself; but I think that, with God's mercy, I have
 written progressively, and not begun from perfection; since, indeed, I
 speak more arrogantly than truly, if even now I say that I have at
 length in this age of mine arrived at perfection, without any error in
 what I write. But the difference is in the extent and the subject of an
 error, and in the facility with which any one corrects it, or the
 pertinacity with which one endeavours to defend his error. Certainly
 there is good hope of that man whom the last day of this life shall
 find so progressing that whatever was wanting to his progress may be
 added to him, and that he should be adjudged rather to need perfecting
 than punishment.

 [3693] On Rebuke and Grace, ch. 10.

 [3694] Matt. vi. 9.

 [3695] Two books to Simplicianus.

 [3696] Letter to Paulinus, 168.

 [3697] Letter to Sixtus, 194.

 Chapter 56.--God Gives Means as Well as End.

 Wherefore if I am unwilling to appear ungrateful to men who have loved
 me, because some advantage of my labour has attained to them before
 they loved me, how much rather am I unwilling to be ungrateful to God,
 whom we should not love unless He had first loved us and made us to
 love Him! since love is of Him, [3698] as they have said whom He made
 not only His great lovers, but also His great preachers. And what is
 more ungrateful than to deny the grace of God itself, by saying that it
 is given to us according to our merits? And this the catholic faith
 shuddered at in the Pelagians, and this it objected to Pelagius himself
 as a capital crime; and this Pelagius himself condemned, not indeed
 from love of God's truth, but yet for fear of his own condemnation. But
 whoever as a faithful catholic is horrified to say that the grace of
 God is given according to our merits, let him not withdraw faith itself
 from God's grace, whereby he obtained mercy that he should be faithful;
 and thus let him attribute also perseverance to the end to God's grace,
 whereby he obtains the mercy which he daily asks for, not to be led
 into temptation. But between the beginning of faith and the perfection
 of perseverance there are those means whereby we live righteously,
 which they themselves are agreed in regarding as given by God to us at
 the prayer of faith. And all these things--the beginning of faith, to
 wit, and His other gifts even to the end--God foreknew that He would
 bestow on His called. It is a matter therefore, of too excessive
 contentiousness to contradict predestination, or to doubt concerning
 predestination.

 [3698] 1 John iv. 7.

 Chapter 57 [XXII.]--How Predestination Must Be Preached So as Not to
 Give Offence.

 And yet this doctrine must not be preached to congregations in such a
 way as to seem to an unskilled multitude, or a people of slower
 understanding, to be in some measure confuted by that very preaching of
 it. Just as even the foreknowledge of God, which certainly men cannot
 deny, seems to be refuted if it be said to them, "Whether you run or
 sleep, you shall be that which He who cannot be deceived has foreknown
 you to be." And it is the part of a deceitful or an unskilled physician
 so to compound even a useful medicament, that it either does no good or
 does harm. But it must be said, "So run that you may lay hold; [3699]
 and thus by your very running you may know yourselves to be foreknown
 as those who should run lawfully:" and in whatever other manner the
 foreknowledge of God may be so preached, that the slothfulness of man
 may be repulsed.

 [3699] 1 Cor. ix. 24.

 Chapter 58.--The Doctrine to Be Applied with Discrimination.

 Now, therefore, the definite determination of God's will concerning
 predestination is of such a kind that some from unbelief receive the
 will to obey, and are converted to the faith or persevere in the faith,
 while others who abide in the delight of damnable sins, even if they
 have been predestinated, have not yet arisen, because the aid of
 pitying grace has not yet lifted them up. For if any are not yet called
 whom by His grace He has predestinated to be elected, they will receive
 that grace whereby they may will to be elected, and may be so; and if
 any obey, but have not been predestinated to His kingdom and glory,
 they are for a season, and will not abide in the same obedience to the
 end. Although, then, these things are true, yet they must not be so
 said to the multitude of hearers as that the address may be applied to
 themselves also, and those words of those people may be said to them
 which you have set down in your letter, and which I have above
 introduced: "The definite determination of God's will concerning
 predestination is of such a kind that some of you from unbelief shall
 receive the will to obey, and come to the faith." What need is there
 for saying, "Some of you"? For if we speak to God's Church, if we speak
 to believers, why do we say that "some of them" had come to the faith,
 and seem to do a wrong to the rest, when we may more fittingly say the
 definite determination of the will of God concerning predestination is
 of such a kind that from unbelief you shall receive the will to obey,
 and come to the faith, and shall receive perseverance, and abide to the
 end?

 Chapter 59.--Offence to Be Avoided.

 Neither is what follows by any means to be said,--that is, "But others
 of you who abide in the delight of sins have not yet arisen, because
 the aid of pitying grace has not yet lifted you up;" when it may be and
 ought to be well and conveniently said, "But if any of you are still
 delaying in the delightfulness of damnable sins, lay hold of the most
 wholesome discipline; and yet when you have done this be not lifted up,
 as if by your own works, nor boast as if you had not received this. For
 it is God who worketh in you both to will and to do for His good will,
 [3700] and your steps are directed by the Lord, so that you choose His
 way. [3701] But of your own good and righteous course, learn carefully
 that it is attributable to the predestination of divine grace."

 [3700] Phil. i. 13.

 [3701] Ps. xxxvii. 23.

 Chapter 60.--The Application to the Church in General.

 Moreover, what follows where it is said, "But yet if any of you are not
 yet called, whom by his grace He has predestinated to be called, you
 shall receive that grace whereby you shall will to be, and be,
 elected," is said more hardly than it could be said if we consider that
 we are speaking not to men in general, but to the Church of Christ. For
 why is it not rather said thus: "And if any of you are not yet called,
 let us pray for them that they may be called. For perchance they are so
 predestinated as to be granted to our prayers, and to receive that
 grace whereby they may will, and be made elected"? For God, who
 fulfilled all that He predestinated, has willed us also to pray for the
 enemies of the faith, that we might hence understand that He Himself
 also gives to the unbelievers the gift of faith, and makes willing men
 out of those that were unwilling.

 Chapter 61.--Use of the Third Person Rather Than the Second.

 But now I marvel if any weak brother among the Christian congregation
 can hear in any way with patience what is connected with these words,
 when it is said to them, "And if any of you obey, if you are
 predestinated to be rejected, the power of obeying will be withdrawn
 from you, that you may cease to obey." For what does saying this seem,
 except to curse, or in a certain way to predict evils? But if, however,
 it is desirable or necessary to say anything concerning those who do
 not persevere, why is it not rather at least said in such a way as was
 a little while ago said by me,--first of all, so that this should be
 said, not of them who hear in the congregation, but about others to
 them; that is, that it should not be said, "If any of you obey, if you
 are predestinated to be rejected," but, "If any obey," and the rest,
 using the third person of the verb, not the second? For it is not to be
 said to be desirable, but abominable, and it is excessively harsh and
 hateful to fly as it were into the face of an audience with abuse, when
 he who speaks to them says, "And if there are any of you who obey, and
 are predestinated to be rejected, the power of obedience shall be
 withdrawn from you, that you may cease to obey." For what is wanting to
 the doctrine if it is thus expressed: "But if any obey, and are not
 predestinated to His kingdom and glory, they are only for a season, and
 shall not continue in that obedience unto the end"? Is not the same
 thing said both more truly and more fittingly, so that we may seem not
 as it were to be desiring so much for them, as to relate of others the
 evil which they hate, and think does not belong to them, by hoping and
 praying for better things? But in that manner in which they think that
 it must be said, the same judgment may be pronounced almost in the same
 words also of God's foreknowledge, which certainly they cannot deny, so
 as to say, "And if any of you obey, if you are foreknown to be rejected
 you shall cease to obey." Doubtless this is very true, assuredly it is;
 but it is very monstrous, very inconsiderate, and very unsuitable, not
 by its false declaration, but by its declaration not wholesomely
 applied to the health of human infirmity.

 Chapter 62.--Prayer to Be Inculcated, Nevertheless.

 But I do not think that manner which I have said should be adopted in
 the preaching of predestination ought to be sufficient for him who
 speaks to the congregation, except he adds this, or something of this
 kind, saying, "You, therefore, ought also to hope for that perseverance
 in obedience from the Father of Lights, from whom cometh down every
 excellent gift and every perfect gift, [3702] and to ask for it in your
 daily prayers; and in doing this ought to trust that you are not aliens
 from the predestination of His people, because it is He Himself who
 bestows even the power of doing this. And far be it from you to despair
 of yourselves, because you are bidden to have your hope in Him, not in
 yourselves. For cursed is every one who has hope in man; [3703] and it
 is good rather to trust in the Lord than to trust in man, because
 blessed are all they that put their trust in Him. [3704] Holding this
 hope, serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice unto Him with trembling.
 [3705] Because no one can be certain of the life eternal which God who
 does not lie has promised to the children of promise before the times
 of eternity,--no one, unless that life of his, which is a state of
 trial upon the earth, is completed. [3706] But He will make us to
 persevere in Himself unto the end of that life, since we daily say to
 Him, Lead us not into temptation.'" [3707] When these things and things
 of this kind are said, whether to few Christians or to the multitude of
 the Church, why do we fear to preach the predestination of the saints
 and the true grace of God,--that is, the grace which is not given
 according to our merits,--as the Holy Scripture declares it? Or,
 indeed, must it be feared that a man should then despair of himself
 when his hope is shown to be placed in God, and should not rather
 despair of himself if he should, in his excess of pride and
 unhappiness, place it in himself?

 [3702] Jas. i. 17.

 [3703] Jas. xvii. 5.

 [3704] Ps. cxviii. 8.

 [3705] Ps. ii. 12.

 [3706] Job vii. 1.

 [3707] Matt. vi. 13.

 Chapter 63 [XXIII.]--The Testimony of the Whole Church in Her Prayers.

 And I wish that those who are slow and weak of heart, who cannot, or
 cannot as yet, understand the Scriptures or the explanations of them,
 would so hear or not hear our arguments in this question as to consider
 more carefully their prayers, which the Church has always used and will
 use, even from its beginnings until this age shall be completed. For of
 this matter, which I am now compelled not only to mention, but even to
 protect and defend against these new heretics, the Church has never
 been silent in its prayers, although in its discourses it has not
 thought that it need be put forth, as there was no adversary compelling
 it. For when was not prayer made in the Church for unbelievers and its
 opponents that they should believe? When has any believer had a friend,
 a neighbour, a wife, who did not believe, and has not asked on their
 behalf from the Lord for a mind obedient to the Christian faith? And
 who has there ever been who has not prayed for himself that he might
 abide in the Lord? And who has dared, not only with his voice, but even
 in thought, to blame the priest who invokes the Lord on behalf of
 believers, if at any time he has said, "Give to them, O Lord,
 perseverance in Thee to the end!" and has not rather responded, over
 such a benediction of his, as well with confessing lips as believing
 heart, "Amen"? Since in the Lord's Prayer itself the believers do not
 pray for anything else, especially when they say that petition, "Lead
 us not into temptation," save that they may persevere in holy
 obedience. As, therefore, the Church has both been born and grows and
 has grown in these prayers, so it has been born and grows and has grown
 in this faith, by which faith it is believed that God's grace is not
 given according to the merits of the receivers. For, certainly, the
 Church would not pray that faith should be given to unbelievers, unless
 it believed that God converts to Himself both the averse and adverse
 wills of men. Nor would the Church pray that it might persevere in the
 faith of Christ, not deceived nor overcome by the temptations of the
 world, unless it believed that the Lord has our heart in His power, in
 such wise as that the good which we do not hold save by our own will,
 we nevertheless do not hold except He worketh in us to will also. For
 if the Church indeed asks these things from Him, but thinks that the
 same things are given to itself by itself, it makes use of prayers
 which are not true, but perfunctory,--which be far from us! For who
 truly groans, desiring to receive what he prays for from the Lord, if
 he thinks that he receives it from himself, and not from the Lord?

 Chapter 64.--In What Sense the Holy Spirit Solicits for Us, Crying,
 Abba, Father.

 And this especially since "we know not what to pray for as we ought,"
 says the apostle, "but the Spirit Himself maketh intercession for us
 with groanings that cannot be uttered; and He that searcheth the hearts
 knoweth what is the mind of the Spirit, because He maketh intercession
 for the saints according to God." [3708] What is "the Spirit Himself
 maketh intercession," but, "causes to make intercession," "with
 groanings that cannot be uttered," but "truthful," since the Spirit is
 truth? For He it is of whom the apostle says in another place, "God
 hath sent the Spirit of His Son into our hearts, "crying, Abba,
 Father!" [3709] And here what is the meaning of "crying," but "making
 to cry," by that figure of speech whereby we call a day that makes
 people glad, a glad day? And this he makes plain elsewhere when he
 says, "For you have not received the Spirit of bondage again in fear,
 but you have received the Spirit of the adoption of sons, in whom we
 cry, Abba, Father." [3710] He there said, "crying," but here, "in whom
 we cry;" opening up, that is to say, the meaning with which he said
 "crying,"--that is, as I have already explained, "causing to cry," when
 we understand that this is also itself the gift of God, that with a
 true heart and spiritually we cry to God. Let them, therefore, observe
 how they are mistaken who think that our seeking, asking, knocking is
 of ourselves, and is not given to us; and say that this is the case
 because grace is preceded by our merits; that it follows them when we
 ask and receive, and seek and find, and it is opened to us when we
 knock. And they will not understand that this is also of the divine
 gift, that we pray; that is, that we ask, seek, and knock. For we have
 received the spirit of adoption of sons, in which we cry, Abba, Father.
 And this the blessed Ambrose also said. [3711] For he says, "To pray to
 God also is the work of spiritual grace, as it is written, No one says,
 Jesus is the Lord, but in the Holy Spirit."

 [3708] Rom. iii. 26.

 [3709] Gal. iv. 6.

 [3710] Rom. viii. 15.

 [3711] Ambrose, Commentary on Isaiah.

 Chapter 65.--The Church's Prayers Imply the Church's Faith.

 These things, therefore, which the Church asks from the Lord, and
 always has asked from the time she began to exist, God so foreknew that
 He would give to His called, that He has already given them in
 predestination itself; as the apostle declares without any ambiguity.
 For, writing to Timothy, he says, "Labour along with the gospel
 according to the power of God, who saves us, and calls us with His holy
 calling, not according to our works, but according to His own purpose
 and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus before the times of
 eternity, but is now made manifest by the coming of our Saviour Jesus
 Christ." [3712] Let him, therefore, say that the Church at any time has
 not had in its belief the truth of this predestination and grace, which
 is now maintained with a more careful heed against the late heretics;
 let him say this who dares to say that at any time it has not prayed,
 or not truthfully prayed, as well that unbelievers might believe, as
 that believers might persevere. And if the Church has always prayed for
 these benefits, it has always believed them to be certainly God's
 gifts; nor was it ever right for it to deny that they were foreknown by
 Him. And thus Christ's Church has never failed to hold the faith of
 this predestination, which is now being defended with new solicitude
 against these modern heretics.

 [3712] 2 Tim. i. 8, etc.

 Chapter 66 [XXIV.]--Recapitulation and Exhortation.

 But what more shall I say? I think that I have taught sufficiently, or
 rather more than sufficiently, that both the beginning of faith in the
 Lord, and continuance in the Lord unto the end, are God's gifts. And
 other good things which pertain to a good life, whereby God is rightly
 worshipped, even they themselves on whose behalf I am writing this
 treatise concede to be God's gifts. Further, they cannot deny that God
 has foreknown all His gifts, and the people on whom He was going to
 bestow them. As, therefore, other things must be preached so that he
 who preaches them may be heard with obedience, so predestination must
 be preached so that he who hears these things with obedience may glory
 not in man, and therefore not in himself, but in the Lord; for this
 also is God's precept, and to hear this precept with obedience--to wit,
 that he who glories should glory in the Lord [3713] --in like manner as
 the rest, is God's gift. And he who has not this gift,--I shrink not
 from saying it,--whatever others he has, has them in vain. That the
 Pelagians may have this we pray, and that our own brethren may have it
 more abundantly. Let us not, therefore, be prompt in arguments and
 indolent in prayers. Let us pray, dearly beloved, let us pray that the
 God of grace may give even to our enemies, and especially to our
 brethren and lovers, to understand and confess that after that great
 and unspeakable ruin wherein we have all fallen in one, no one is
 delivered save by God's grace, and that grace is not repaid according
 to the merits of the receivers as if it were due, but is given freely
 as true grace, with no merits preceding.

 [3713] 1 Cor. i. 31.

 Chapter 67.--The Most Eminent Instance of Predestination is Christ
 Jesus.

 But there is no more illustrious instance of predestination than Jesus
 Himself, concerning which also I have already argued in the former
 treatise; [3714] and in the end of this I have chosen to insist upon
 it. There is no more eminent instance, I say, of predestination than
 the Mediator Himself. If any believer wishes thoroughly to understand
 this doctrine, let him consider Him, and in Him he will find himself
 also. The believer, I say; who in Him believes and confesses the true
 human nature that is our own, however singularly elevated by assumption
 by God the Word into the only Son of God, so that He who assumed, and
 what He assumed, should be one person in Trinity. For it was not a
 Quaternity that resulted from the assumption of man, but it remained a
 Trinity, inasmuch as that assumption ineffably made the truth of one
 person in God and man. Because we say that Christ was not only God, as
 the Manichean heretics contend; nor only man, as the Photinian heretics
 assert; nor in such wise man as to have less of anything which of a
 certainty pertains to human nature,--whether a soul, or in the soul
 itself a rational mind, or flesh not taken of the woman, but made from
 the Word converted and changed into flesh,--all which three false and
 empty notions have made the three various and diverse parties of the
 Apollinarian heretics; but we say that Christ was true God, born of God
 the Father without any beginning of time; and that He was also true or
 very man, born of human mother in the certain fulness of time; and that
 His humanity, whereby He is less than the Father, does not diminish
 aught from His divinity, whereby He is equal to the Father. For both of
 them are One Christ--who, moreover, most truly said in respect of the
 God, "I and the Father are one;" [3715] and most truly said in respect
 of the man, "My Father is greater than I." [3716] He, therefore, who
 made of the seed of David this righteous man, who never should be
 unrighteous, without any merit of His preceding will, is the same who
 also makes righteous men of unrighteous, without any merit of their
 will preceding; that He might be the head, and they His members. He,
 therefore, who made that man with no precedent merits of His, neither
 to deduce from His origin nor to commit by His will any sin which
 should be remitted to Him, the same makes believers on Him with no
 preceding merits of theirs, to whom He forgives all sin. He who made
 Him such that He never had or should have an evil will, the same makes
 in His members a good will out of an evil one. Therefore He
 predestinated both Him and us, because both in Him that He might be our
 head, and in us that we should be His body, He foreknew that our merits
 would not precede, but that His doings should.

 [3714] On the Predestination of the Saints, Book i. ch. 30.

 [3715] John x. 30.

 [3716] John xiv. 28.

 Chapter 68.--Conclusion.

 Let those who read this, if they understand, give God thanks, and let
 those who do not understand, pray that they may have the inward
 Teacher, from whose presence comes knowledge and understanding. [3717]
 But let those who think that I am in error, consider again and again
 carefully what is here said, lest perchance they themselves may be
 mistaken. And when, by means of those who read my writings, I become
 not only wiser, but even more perfect, I acknowledge God's favour to
 me; and this I especially look for at the hands of the teachers of the
 Church, if what I write comes into their hands, and they condescend to
 acknowledge it.

 [3717] Prov. ii. 6.

INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


 Abel, [1]124, [2]136, [3]193, [4]414.

 "Ability," distinguished from "will," [5]106, [6]219; distinguished
 from "necessity," [7]107, [8]139.

 "Ability not," and "inability," [9]48.

 Abimelech, [10]293.

 Abraham, [11]102, [12]175, [13]291, [14]248-249, [15]405; how saved,
 [16]248.

 "Acceptance of persons," [17]397.

 "Action" in Pelagian system, [18]218.

 "Actuality" in Pelagian system, [19]219.

 Adam, [20]128; unfallen state of, [21]58 sq., [22]147, [23]482; grace
 given to, [24]483 sq.; penalty of his sin, [25]23; sin and death by,
 [26]15, [27]86, [28]174, [29]237 sq., [30]241, [31]254; saved by
 Christ, [32]128; the second Adam, [33]86, [34]476, [35]484.

 Adoption, senses of, [36]404; relation of baptism to, [37]396.

 Adrumetum, [38]436, [39]437.

 Advocate, Christ our, [40]409.

 Africa, councils in, [41]239, [42]391, [43]439; letters to, from Rome,
 [44]239, [45]393.

 "Aid by which," and "without which not," [46]485.

 Albina, [47]214, [48]217.

 "All," [49]137, [50]302, [51]489, [52]491.

 Almsgiving, [53]164, [54]172, [55]386, [56]408, [57]426.

 Alypius, [58]283, [59]377.

 Ambrose, [60]147, [61]233 sq., [62]254, [63]279, [64]304, [65]431 sq.,
 [66]532, [67]545.

 Anemartetos, [68]240.

 Anathemas, by Augustin, [69]176; by Pelagius, [70]190, [71]196,
 [72]202, [73]209, [74]218, [75]241, [76]379.

 Angels, [77]133, [78]254, [79]368-369, [80]410, [81]413.

 Animals, condition of lower, [82]190, [83]254.

 Antediluvians, longevity of, [84]246; the good, [85]405.

 Apostates, [86]168, [87]174.

 Apostle, "the" (i.e., St. Paul), [88]403.

 Apostles, sinners, [89]381.

 "Aprons," [90]304, [91]386.

 Arians, [92]298.

 Assistance, need of divine, [93]127, [94]145, [95]218, [96]227;
 ambiguously confessed by Pelagius, [97]218, [98]221, [99]226; different
 kinds of, in human things, [100]184.

 Assurance of salvation impossible, [101]488.

 Astrology, [102]396.

 Astronomy, [103]246.

 Augustin, occupations of, [104]217; not author of original sin,
 [105]292; development in doctrine, [106]536, [107]548; letter of, to
 Pelagius, [108]205; good wishes for Pelagius, [109]146, [110]204-205,
 [111]240; wishes to interpret Pelagius favourably, [112]196, [113]231,
 [114]244; books on Free Will, [115]149.

 Aurelius, [116]183, [117]237 sq.


 Bad men mingled with good, [118]172.

 Baptism, conveys pardon of sin, [119]110, [120]164, [121]172, [122]195,
 [123]253, [124]386, [125]424; regeneration in, [126]195, [127]273,
 [128]392-393, [129]396, [130]404; remission of sins in, [131]43,
 [132]63, [133]278 sq., [134]385, [135]390, [136]403; gift of Holy Ghost
 by, [137]142; leaves a sinful tendency, [138]43, [139]142, [140]385,
 [141]404; words of, [142]230, [143]237, [144]244; ritual of, [145]253;
 called salvation, [146]28; necessity of, for salvation, [147]23,
 [148]28, [149]29, [150]78, [151]319, [152]337-338, [153]348 sq.,
 [154]350, [155]394; why needed by infants, even of baptized parents,
 [156]31, [157]37, [158]62, [159]238, [160]243, [161]253, [162]273,
 [163]394; why it does not abolish death, [164]64; how dealt with by
 Pelagius, [165]23, [166]37, [167]230, [168]237, [169]243; by
 Coelestius, [170]237-238; set aside by Manicheans, [171]392; of blood,
 [172]319, [173]339.

 Baptized, "contrary flesh" even in the, [174]142.

 Believers' children, [175]61, [176]75.

 Bishops, eighteen Pelagianizing, [177]377.

 Blamelessness different from sinlessness, [178]167, [179]173.

 Body, man's, mysteries of, [180]356; effect of sin on, [181]19; effect
 of, on soul, [182]147, [183]163; the body of this death, [184]142,
 [185]144, [186]164; the resurrection body, [187]383; death of, from
 Adam's sin, [188]15 sq.

 Body, Christ's, reception of, in the sacrament, [189]390, [190]394;
 spoken of in John vi., [191]379, [192]390, [193]394; Christians His
 mystical, [194]38-39.

 Boniface, [195]374, [196]377.

 Born of God, [197]173.

 Breath, senses of, in the Scriptures, [198]322 sq.; the creative,
 [199]345; the creative, assigned by Victor to man, [200]346.

 Breathing, [201]345.


 Cæsarea Mauritania, [202]310, [203]311.

 Cain, [204]136.

 Called, the, "according to purpose," [205]401, [206]477, [207]513.

 Calling, different calls distinguished, [208]479, [209]513; grounds of
 calling "according to purpose," [210]514; to different blessings,
 [211]479.

 Campester and Campestrati, [212]304, [213]387.

 Canon, extent of, [214]34, [215]511.

 Canonical books, authority of, [216]146.

 "Capacity," and "actuality," [217]503; in Pelagius' scheme, [218]139
 sq., [219]218 sq.

 Catechising, [220]184.

 Catechumens, [221]61.

 Catholic faith, necessity of, [222]408.

 Catholics and heresy, [223]212, [224]245.

 Caution needed in reading Pelagius, [225]237.

 Ceremonial law abolished, [226]93, [227]97, [228]406.

 Charus, deacon, [229]207.

 Chastity a gift of God, [230]447.

 Cheerfulness, interruptions of, [231]164.

 Children of the world, of the devil, and of God, [232]403.

 Christ, sinlessness of, [233]83, [234]130, [235]168, [236]169,
 [237]176, [238]250, [239]385, [240]409, [241]417; in what sense called
 "sin," [242]250; our Head, [243]38, [244]176, [245]198, [246]248;
 incarnation of, due to man's sin, [247]32; reason for His coming,
 [248]30; why born an infant, [249]42; infancy of, [250]63; His baptism,
 [251]405; "the Rock," [252]234; the only source of blessings, [253]104;
 none saved except by, [254]36, [255]37, [256]40, [257]63, [258]71,
 [259]248, [260]306.

 Chrysostom quoted, [261]148.

 Church, Christ's body, [262]172; authority of, [263]202; when to be
 spotless, [264]172, [265]194, [266]424; "mother," [267]30, [268]128,
 [269]393; visible and invisible, [270]480; served by kings, [271]172.

 Circumcision, [272]88, [273]104, [274]249, [275]292; the spiritual,
 [276]88.

 Coelestius, [277]240, [278]394; relation of, to Pelagius, [279]12,
 [280]239; trial of, at Carthage, [281]12, [282]193, [283]207, [284]210,
 [285]237 sq., [286]240, [287]244; examination of, at Rome, [288]237,
 [289]241, [290]393; "Definitions" ascribed to, [291]159; quotations
 from a work of, [292]195 sq., [293]202, [294]211; other writings of,
 [295]159, [296]228, [297]237, [298]238; "profession of faith" by,
 [299]238, [300]245, [301]393; character of, [302]201, [303]230,
 [304]239, [305]241; teachings of, [306]159 sq.; exegesis of, [307]174.

 Co-equality of Divine Persons, [308]98, [309]249.

 Co-eternity of Divine Persons, [310]248.

 Coming, Christ's, delay in, [311]506; reason for, [312]30; why, as an
 infant, [313]42.

 Commandments, can they be kept? [314]151, [315]165, [316]222; why
 sometimes given when they cannot be kept, [317]54; all that is
 commanded, given, [318]401; how not grievous, [319]151, [320]166,
 [321]222.

 Communion, nature of the, [322]25; daily, [323]428; administered to
 infants, [324]25, [325]394, [326]418, [327]420.

 Concupiscence, [328]97, [329]162, [330]168, [331]170, [332]192,
 [333]263 sq., [334]383, [335]385, [336]392; origin of, [337]264,
 [338]288, [339]294, [340]304; a disease, [341]267, [342]306; relation
 to marriage, [343]37, [344]263 sq., [345]265, [346]270, [347]288,
 [348]304; gratification of, by the married, [349]270; shamefulness of,
 [350]289; when and in what sense sin, [351]274; not sin when not
 consented to, [352]45, [353]274; and the transmission of sin, [354]271,
 [355]274, [356]288; not the source of the offspring, [357]293; relation
 to propagation, [358]37; to guilt, [359]63; none in paradise, [360]307
 sq., [361]387 sq.

 Condemned, all justly, [362]123.

 Conjugal intercourse, [363]380.

 Constantius, Bishop, [364]230.

 Conversions, sudden, [365]388.

 Co-operation of God and man, [366]111, [367]227, [368]233.

 Councils, at Carthage, [369]237, [370]240, [371]394, [372]439; at
 Diospolis, [373]240 sq.; at Mileve, [374]394, [375]439; another not
 needed, [376]434.

 Creation, good, [377]162, [378]391, [379]418; is it an eternal process?
 [380]364 sq.; proof of God from, [381]91.

 Creator versus Saviour, [382]134.

 Credulity not good, [383]107.

 Creed, the, [384]184.

 Cresconius, [385]437, [386]439.

 Cross made of none effect, [387]124, [388]413.

 Cupidity, [389]225, [390]406.

 Cynics, shamelessness of, [391]274.

 Cyprian, [392]72, [393]194, [394]304, [395]319, [396]425 sq., [397]433,
 [398]439, [399]454, [400]476, [401]500, [402]505, [403]510 sq.,
 [404]527 sq., [405]540, [406]543, [407]545.


 David, [408]66; spares Saul, [409]107.

 "Dead" spiritually, [410]32, [411]109.

 Death, origin of, from Adam, [412]15 seq.; origin in sin, [413]15 seq.,
 [414]129, [415]252; some Pelagians admit its origin in the world from
 Adam, [416]417; ministered by the law, [417]96; its "reign" not removed
 by law, [418]19, [419]247; why not abolished by baptism, [420]64; its
 sting, [421]76; not terrible, [422]250; good of, [423]418; why the
 devil is said to hold the power of, [424]65; Julian's view of the
 origin of, [425]417.

 Debt in contrast to grace, [426]99, [427]198, [428]229, [429]398,
 [430]421.

 Decalogue, [431]93, [432]406; summary of, [433]162.

 Delight in duty, [434]84; a divine gift, [435]90, [436]105.

 Deluge, the, [437]249.

 Demetrias, [438]225 seq.

 Departing from sin, [439]170.

 Desire of good, God's gift, [440]399.

 Despair, [441]135, [442]166.

 Devil the author of sin, [443]301.

 Differ, who makes to, [444]398.

 Difficulty of keeping the law, [445]150; in obedience, [446]149,
 [447]150.

 Digamy, [448]408.

 Dinocrates, [449]319, [450]320, [451]366.

 Diseases, illustration from, [452]392.

 Distractions, worldly, [453]431.

 "Dominus," epistolary use of, [454]205.

 Donatists, [455]203, [456]316, [457]343, [458]344.

 Drawing of man by God, [459]389.

 Dreams, [460]364, [461]365.

 "Dung," Paul's attainments why so counted, [462]412.


 Eaglets, fable about, [463]190.

 "Easily," to obey, [464]206, [465]228.

 Eclipses, [466]246.

 Elect, the sins of, [467]481.

 Election, [468]477, [469]503; not on foreseen conduct, [470]398,
 [471]514; certainty of, [472]477; purpose of, [473]515; and holiness,
 [474]515 seq.

 Elements, the four, or more, [475]251.

 Elijah, [476]16, [477]246.

 Elisha, [478]346, [479]421.

 Elizabeth, [480]52, [481]235.

 Enoch, [482]16, [483]246.

 Esther, [484]226, [485]389.

 Eternal punishment, [486]162, [487]186; degrees in, [488]103.

 Eucharist, a sacrifice, [489]90; only for the baptized, [490]25; called
 life, [491]28, [492]90.

 Eulogius, [493]187.

 Eve, [494]287; sin of, [495]136.

 Evil spirits, [496]354.

 Examples of holiness, [497]175.

 Excess in lawful things, [498]164.

 Excommunication, [499]428.

 Exegesis, Coelestius', [500]174.

 Exhortation, [501]221.

 Exorcism, [502]253, [503]303.

 Exsufflation, [504]253, [505]303.

 Eyes, good and bad use of, [506]224.


 Faculty, certain uses of, impossible, [507]140; distinguished from the
 use of it, [508]109, [509]503.

 Faith, the law of, [510]90, [511]92, [512]96, [513]101, [514]103,
 [515]408; voluntary, [516]107; but this will itself of God's gift,
 [517]109, [518]110, [519]450; given by God, [520]105, [521]107,
 [522]455, [523]504; even the beginnings of, [524]198, [525]229,
 [526]499, [527]517, [528]547; sovereignly given, [529]506; works by
 love, [530]94, [531]103, [532]198, [533]405, [534]406; a "work,"
 [535]504; obtains justification, [536]105, [537]198, and further grace,
 [538]105, [539]108, but not the meritorious ground of either, [540]504;
 the ground of all righteousness, [541]105; the "life" of a just man,
 [542]168; dispenses with demonstration, [543]251; what true faith is,
 [544]188; under the Old Testament, [545]138; relation to good works,
 [546]451; needed by all alike, [547]104; Augustin's former error as to
 the origin of, [548]500; questions not of the, [549]246.

 Fall, its nature, [550]59; estate of man before, [551]59; denied by the
 Pelagians, [552]193, [553]207.

 Fasting, [554]164.

 Fatalism charged and refuted, [555]395.

 Fear, an inadequate motive, [556]88, [557]95, [558]105, [559]144,
 [560]227, [561]382, [562]405; produced by law, [563]96, [564]98,
 [565]105, [566]121, [567]247; use of, under the Gospel, [568]105,
 [569]132, [570]150; will cease when love is perfect, [571]167.

 Felix, [572]437, [573]439.

 Felix (another), [574]439.

 Fire, saved as by, [575]186.

 Firmus, [576]260.

 Fleece, Gideon's, [577]248.

 Flesh, sense of, [578]141, [579]143, [580]277, [581]384; resurrection
 of, [582]105, [583]253; Christ's, how dishonoured by Manicheans and
 Pelagians, [584]392; the, and the spirit, [585]143, [586]144.

 Florus, [587]472.

 "Folly" distinguished from "heresy," [588]190.

 Forgiveness, of sin, needed and prayed for by all, [589]113, [590]135,
 [591]164, [592]194, [593]409, [594]414, [595]428; of injuries,
 [596]164, [597]172.

 "Form," [598]363.

 Freedom in Adam and in the saints, [599]486.

 Free will, in Adam, [600]109, [601]378, [602]484; how injured in the
 fall, [603]378; as a faculty distinct from the use of it, [604]109; a
 "midway" power, [605]109; certainly possessed by man, [606]444 sq.;
 capable of evil [607]186, [608]378; not capable of good, [609]84,
 [610]148, [611]378, [612]395, [613]415; healed by grace, [614]89,
 [615]106, [616]415, [617]417; relation to grace, [618]106, [619]226,
 [620]235, [621]421 seq., [622]443 seq., [623]456; not made void by
 grace, [624]106, [625]110, [626]285, [627]379, [628]395, [629]437,
 [630]439, [631]443 sq.; led by God, [632]185; not the source of faith,
 [633]110; Pelagian doctrine of, [634]226, [635]379, [636]421.

 Friendship, Christian, [637]377.


 Generation, carnal, [638]50.

 Gentiles, salvation of, [639]104, [640]122; condition of, [641]101,
 [642]122, [643]124; virtues of, [644]104, [645]264.

 Gifts, diversity of, [646]197; our duties in relation to, [647]546.

 "Give what Thou commandest," [648]92, [649]508.

 Glorification of Christ, [650]172.

 Glorying in self forbidden, [651]104, [652]428.

 God, impossibilities to, [653]140; only good, [654]170.

 Good, all from God, [655]400.

 Good desires, equivalent to love, [656]225; produced by grace,
 [657]225, [658]388, [659]399.

 Good fruit, how produced, [660]225.

 Goodness, human, comparative, [661]170; among the heathen, [662]104,
 [663]264.

 Good will, from God even in its beginnings, [664]388, [665]455.

 Grace, meaning of, [666]84, [667]92, [668]97, [669]122, [670]142,
 [671]146, [672]192, [673]193, [674]220, [675]222, [676]226, [677]247,
 [678]472; Pelagian meaning of, [679]218, [680]220, [681]229, [682]231;
 Pelagius' ambiguous acknowledgment of, [683]124, [684]125, [685]131,
 [686]139, [687]141, [688]192, [689]218, [690]220, [691]225, [692]229,
 [693]231; Coelestius' understanding of, [694]228; difference from
 natural powers, [695]125, [696]141, [697]192, [698]210, [699]218,
 [700]454; relation to law and teaching, [701]96, [702]192, [703]210,
 [704]220, [705]231, [706]452, [707]453; relation to Christ's example,
 [708]218, [709]231; relation to forgiveness of sins, [710]135,
 [711]210, [712]231, [713]450, [714]454; relation to free will,
 [715]235, [716]443 sq.; does not make free will void, [717]46,
 [718]106, [719]436, [720]437, [721]443 seq.; relation to good will,
 [722]455; relation to predestination, [723]507; not given according to
 merits, [724]227 seq., [725]379, [726]422 seq., [727]437, [728]439,
 [729]448, [730]456, [731]531; grace for grace, [732]452; prevenient,
 [733]110, [734]133, [735]401, [736]421, [737]459; gratuitousness of,
 [738]122, [739]484; distinguishes men, [740]503; and the law under the
 Old Testament, [741]247; not absolutely bound to the means, [742]29;
 necessity of, [743]28, [744]122; even in a perfect nature, [745]140,
 [746]142, [747]232, [748]390, [749]446.

 Greek, appeal to the, [750]29.

 Guidance, no one should trust to his own, [751]185.


 Hagar and Sarah, [752]189, [753]403, [754]406, [755]408.

 "Hardening the heart," [756]464.

 Hasty words, [757]184, [758]190.

 Heart, a pure, what? [759]171; God's government of the, [760]463;
 inclined at God's will, [761]226; hardening the, [762]464.

 Hebrews, canonical authority of the Epistle to the, [763]34.

 Heredity, [764]335.

 Heros and Lazarus, [765]183, [766]201, [767]210.

 Hilary the commentator, [768]420.

 Hilary of Poitiers, [769]146.

 Hilary of Sicily, [770]193, [771]206, [772]241, [773]497, [774]498,
 [775]525.

 Holy Spirit, presence of, in the heart, [776]98; the "finger of God,"
 [777]95; of the Father and the Son, [778]110.

 Hope, distinct from possession, [779]253.

 Human nature assumed by the Word, [780]198.

 Humility, true and false, [781]134; attends to truth, [782]134;
 condition of divine help, [783]163; shown by the saints, [784]51,
 [785]96, [786]199.

 Hymn, an Ambrosian, [787]147.


 Idiots and simpletons, [788]27, [789]41.

 Idolatry caused by self-reliance, [790]90.

 Ignorance, human as to itself, [791]354 seq.; how far an excuse,
 [792]445; may be sinful [793]127, [794]202, [795]404; sins of, [796]44;
 and weakness, [797]44; of infants, [798]41, [799]42.

 Image of God, the, [800]103.

 "Imitation," [801]18, [802]124, [803]242, [804]301; whom sinners
 "imitate," [805]21.

 Immaculateness, [806]173.

 Imperial authority against Pelagians, [807]243.

 Impossible, the, how not exacted by God, [808]44, [809]54, [810]139,
 [811]151.

 "Inability," and "ability not," [812]485.

 Incarnation, the, [813]60, [814]122.

 Infants, ignorance and infirmity of, [815]43; why baptized, [816]23;
 not enlightened at birth, [817]29; lost unless baptized, [818]28,
 [819]29, [820]31, [821]124, [822]244, [823]319, [824]337 sq., [825]348,
 [826]463; vicarious confession of, [827]30; called "believers,"
 [828]24, [829]30, [830]69; many permitted to die unbaptized [831]396,
 [832]397; unbaptized, condemned to lightest punishment, [833]23;
 original sin of, proved from the Scriptures, [834]30 sq., [835]39,
 [836]71, [837]303, but denied by Coelestius, [838]230, and the
 Pelagians, [839]263; original sin of, enough to condemn them, [840]439;
 born in sin, [841]24, [842]240, [843]250, [844]254, [845]383, [846]390,
 [847]418, [848]431; have no actual sin, [849]23, [850]41; exemplify
 gratuitous grace, [851]463; Christ died for them, [852]28, [853]71,
 [854]306; why Christ was born an infant, [855]42.

 Inferiority of the Son, as man, to the Father, [856]249.

 Infirmity, remains of, [857]174; sins of, [858]44, [859]168, [860]386,
 [861]404; of infants, [862]43.

 Innocent I., [863]239-240, [864]243, [865]245, [866]393, [867]439.

 Inscrutableness of divine judgments, [868]26, [869]111, [870]188.

 Insidious questions of the Pelagians, [871]414.

 Intelligence, spiritual, not alike in all Christians, [872]100.

 Intercession of the Holy Ghost, [873]359.

 Intercessory prayers, [874]429.

 Isaac, [875]403.

 Israel, the spiritual, [876]99, [877]102, [878]103.


 Jacob and Esau, [879]398, [880]423.

 James, St., misinterpreted by the Pelagians, [881]126.

 James and Timasius, [882]121.

 Jerome, attack on, [883]212; quoted, [884]148.

 Jerusalem, conference at, [885]199, the earthly and heavenly, [886]189,
 [887]405, [888]408.

 Jesus, its meaning, [889]128, [890]308; no other name saving, [891]137.

 Jews, boasting of, [892]88, [893]103; dispersion of, [894]406;
 rejection of, [895]248.

 Job, [896]49, [897]146, [898]175; language of, [899]146, [900]167.

 John, the Baptist, [901]87, [902]132, [903]405, [904]407, [905]414; of
 Constantinople (Chrysostom), [906]148; of Jerusalem, [907]200,
 [908]206.

 Joseph, why called Christ's father, [909]269.

 Joshua, [910]175.

 Jovinian, [911]74, [912]288, [913]289, [914]298.

 Judgment, the future, [915]109, [916]171, [917]187, [918]426; God's,
 according to works, [919]110; not according to foreseen works,
 [920]317, [921]321, [922]509, [923]512, [924]533-537; unsearchable,
 [925]532.

 Julian, [926]258, [927]281, [928]283, [929]378, [930]386, [931]391; his
 "confession of faith," [932]386.

 Justification, through faith and grace, [933]18, [934]92, [935]105,
 [936]108, [937]220; prior to works, [938]102; by Christ alone, [939]21.


 Kingdom of heaven, not different from salvation, [940]23, [941]28;
 Pelagian view of it, [942]243, [943]390; promised in Old Testament,
 [944]189.

 "Kiss of peace," [945]427.

 Knowledge, without grace, effect of, [946]192; of God in this world,
 imperfect, [947]100, [948]433; of the law attainable by all, [949]184.


 Labourers in the vineyard, parable of, [950]397.

 Lactantius quoted, [951]146.

 Lamb of God, [952]406.

 Latin not understood by the Eastern bishops, [953]185.

 Law, under the, what, [954]145; a schoolmaster to Christ, [955]121;
 true doctrine of, [956]402; utility of, [957]221; right use of,
 [958]89, [959]97, [960]162, [961]175, [962]220, [963]246, [964]421;
 Pelagian view of, [965]248, [966]390, [967]420 sq.; and teaching,
 [968]220; cannot take away sin, [969]19; and grace, [970]421; fulfilled
 through grace, [971]89, [972]97, [973]106; the moral law good, [974]85,
 [975]89, [976]92, [977]192, [978]417, and permanent, [979]122,
 [980]124, [981]147, [982]406; written on the hearts, [983]96, [984]97.

 Law of sin, the, [985]62.

 "Letter and spirit," the, 82, [986]94, [987]97, [988]110, [989]145,
 [990]192, [991]220, [992]403, [993]406, [994]415.

 "Liberty" through grace, [995]149, [996]161, [997]164, [998]378.

 Lie, is it right to, for humility? [999]134; is every man a liar?
 [1000]169.

 Life, eternal, a gift and yet a reward, [1001]451; none outside of
 God's kingdom, [1002]28.

 "Lighteth," meaning of, [1003]29.

 Literal interpretation not always tenable, [1004]85.

 Lord's Day, the, [1005]250.

 Lord's Prayer, the, [1006]428; and Pelagianism, [1007]527 seq.

 Love, the gift of the Spirit, [1008]151; the spring of all right
 action, [1009]151, [1010]457; the root of all good, [1011]224,
 [1012]225, [1013]457; the fulfilling of the law, [1014]151, [1015]457;
 when it fulfils the law, [1016]165; how bestowed, [1017]225; infused by
 God, [1018]84, [1019]108, [1020]144, [1021]151, [1022]162, [1023]227;
 necessary for well-doing, [1024]84; duties easy to, [1025]151; greater
 than faith and hope, [1026]165; degrees of, [1027]151, [1028]163;
 perfected in the next world, [1029]112, [1030]163, [1031]165,
 [1032]222.


 Manes, [1033]163, [1034]189, [1035]421.

 Manicheans, the catholics charged with being, [1036]285, [1037]298,
 [1038]303, [1039]378, [1040]380, [1041]390, [1042]391 seq., [1043]417,
 [1044]418, [1045]433; catholics and Pelagians distinguished from,
 [1046]286, [1047]292, [1048]414; their attitude towards the canon,
 [1049]535.

 Mankind, "mass of," justly condemned, [1050]123, [1051]250, [1052]396.

 Mansions in the Father's house not outside the kingdom of God,
 [1053]349.

 Manuscripts of the Old Testament, [1054]246.

 Marcellinus, [1055]15, [1056]44, [1057]69, [1058]80, [1059]83,
 [1060]89, [1061]130, [1062]193.

 Marcion, [1063]162, [1064]189, [1065]412.

 Marriage, is it evil? [1066]250, [1067]263 seq., [1068]283, [1069]299,
 [1070]300, [1071]380, [1072]394, [1073]420; the good of, [1074]37,
 [1075]321, [1076]265, [1077]268, [1078]271; in our first parents,
 [1079]251, [1080]298; in Paradise, [1081]298; relation to
 concupiscence, [1082]252, [1083]263 sq., [1084]270, [1085]288; sins and
 virtues in, [1086]270; chastity in, the gift of God, [1087]264; but
 less than continence, [1088]264, [1089]271; and continence, [1090]268,
 [1091]271; before and after Christ's coming, [1092]269; Paul's teaching
 as to, [1093]269 seq.

 Mary the Virgin, [1094]253; perpetual virginity of, [1095]269,
 [1096]378; is she sinless? [1097]135.

 Massilians, [1098]498.

 Means given with the end, [1099]548.

 Mediator, Christ the, [1100]24, [1101]63, [1102]83, [1103]103,
 [1104]131, [1105]139, [1106]172, [1107]175, [1108]176, [1109]236,
 [1110]247, [1111]248, [1112]249, [1113]250, [1114]419.

 Medical language, [1115]175.

 Medical schools, [1116]357.

 Medicine, the law compared to, [1117]86.

 Melania, [1118]214, [1119]217.

 Melchisedech, [1120]249.

 Memory, [1121]357, [1122]358.

 Mercy, works of, [1123]44, [1124]150; need of, even in the last
 judgment, [1125]488.

 Merits, [1126]225; grace not given in reference to, [1127]196,
 [1128]201, [1129]225, [1130]227, [1131]229, [1132]379, [1133]388,
 [1134]395, [1135]399, [1136]414; are themselves God's gifts, [1137]199,
 [1138]247.

 Methuselah, [1139]246.

 Mileve, council at, [1140]394, [1141]439.

 Monastic life, [1142]207, [1143]217, [1144]437, [1145]439, [1146]443,
 [1147]471.

 "More easily," [1148]220, [1149]225, [1150]228, [1151]232, [1152]399.

 "Moriones," [1153]27, [1154]41.

 "Mortal" distinct from "subject to death" and "dead," [1155]16.

 Moses, [1156]91, [1157]390, [1158]405, [1159]407.

 Mysteriousness of God's dealings with souls, [1160]25, [1161]110,
 [1162]398, [1163]423.


 Nations, a few yet unevangelized, [1164]122.

 Nature, created by God, [1165]298; created sound, [1166]59, [1167]122,
 [1168]298, but has fallen into unsoundness, [1169]59, [1170]122;
 injured by the fall, [1171]122, [1172]127, [1173]137, [1174]141,
 [1175]142, [1176]148, [1177]150, [1178]160, [1179]161, [1180]191,
 [1181]224, [1182]249; good in itself, [1183]122, [1184]162, [1185]163,
 [1186]225, [1187]250, [1188]298, [1189]392, [1190]395, [1191]414,
 [1192]418; not sufficient to itself for holiness, [1193]122; even when
 unfallen needing God's help, [1194]140; in need of Christ as a Saviour,
 [1195]144; and will, [1196]302; and its corruption, [1197]59,
 [1198]303; restored by grace, [1199]103, [1200]137; Pelagius' idea of
 it, [1201]141, [1202]145, [1203]418; Pelagius contends it is whole,
 [1204]127, and wrongly extols it, [1205]130, [1206]134, [1207]228.

 Necessity to sin, [1208]149.

 Necessity, not incompatible with free will, [1209]139; a "happy,"
 [1210]162.

 Neophytes, [1211]184.

 Noah, [1212]175, [1213]405.

 Novatians, [1214]254.

 Numidia, [1215]394.


 Old Testament, senses of the phrase, [1216]188, [1217]406; utility of,
 [1218]35; its holy men lived by faith in Christ, [1219]139, [1220]175,
 [1221]246, [1222]250, [1223]389.

 Olive and Oleaster, a natural type of transmitted sin, [1224]272,
 [1225]307.

 Opening of eyes, [1226]266.

 Open questions, specimens of, [1227]206, [1228]247.

 Optatus, [1229]311.

 Ordination, qualifications for, [1230]173, [1231]386.

 Origenism, [1232]187.

 Original sin, [1233]122, [1234]238, [1235]242, [1236]243, [1237]245,
 [1238]250, [1239]253, [1240]382, [1241]414, [1242]415, [1243]422,
 [1244]431; universal, [1245]30; distinct from actual sin, [1246]19;
 clearly taught by Scripture, [1247]28 sq., and by the fathers, [1248]72
 seq.; Pelagius' view of, [1249]241; when alone, deserves lightest
 condemnation, [1250]23.

 Orosius, [1251]201.


 Palestine, Council of, [1252]183 sq.; catholic, [1253]194, [1254]241;
 deceived by Pelagius, [1255]191, [1256]225, [1257]240, [1258]247,
 [1259]379, [1260]388, [1261]395; condemned Pelagianism, [1262]194,
 [1263]196, [1264]202, [1265]209, [1266]212, [1267]243; official records
 of, [1268]183, [1269]206, [1270]240, summary of, [1271]209.

 Pammachius, [1272]238.

 Paradise, [1273]58 seq., [1274]246, [1275]378, [1276]383, [1277]426.

 Parents, Christian, why not have Christian offspring? [1278]61,
 [1279]75.

 Passover, the, [1280]95.

 Patience, trials of, [1281]129, [1282]168; a high virtue, [1283]428.

 Paul, St., a sinner, [1284]52; his converson, [1285]382, [1286]383,
 [1287]388; had many but not all gifts, [1288]197; rapture of,
 [1289]246; a preacher of grace, [1290]90, [1291]199.

 Pedagogues, [1292]184.

 Pelagianism, origin of, [1293]203 seq., [1294]245, novelty of,
 [1295]12, [1296]380, [1297]390, [1298]395, [1299]415, [1300]425,
 [1301]432, [1302]445; propositions of, [1303]193, [1304]207, [1305]211,
 [1306]241; three chief points in, [1307]414, [1308]527; five lesser
 questions, [1309]414, [1310]416 seq.; a true heresy, [1311]146,
 [1312]209, [1313]246-250; and Manicheanism, [1314]414, [1315]415; how
 opposed, [1316]12; condemnation of, [1317]434.

 Pelagius, his character and motives, [1318]69, [1319]121, [1320]241,
 [1321]244; a "monk," [1322]145; long residence in Rome, [1323]245;
 visits Africa, [1324]203; high reputation of, [1325]69, [1326]70,
 [1327]203; letters from bishops to, [1328]205; ability of, [1329]123;
 notes on Paul's Epistles, [1330]69, [1331]200; why he does not speak in
 his own person, [1332]71; letter to Paulinus from, [1333]230; work by,
 discussed in On Nature and Grace, [1334]116, [1335]121, [1336]192,
 [1337]196, [1338]201; "Chapters" or "Testimonies" by, [1339]185,
 [1340]206, [1341]425; his letter to Demetrias, [1342]225, [1343]228,
 [1344]231, [1345]232; his explanations made in Palestine, [1346]183
 seq., [1347]193, [1348]200; disingenuous professions by, [1349]201,
 [1350]218, [1351]221, [1352]240, [1353]395; a "paper" from, [1354]183,
 [1355]191, [1356]207; letter to a presbyter from, [1357]206, [1358]207;
 a "Defence of Free Will" by, [1359]218, [1360]224, [1361]232; letter to
 Innocent from, [1362]218, [1363]229; profession of faith by, [1364]229,
 [1365]230, [1366]244; ambiguous language of, [1367]193, [1368]197,
 [1369]204, [1370]218, [1371]229, [1372]235, [1373]243, [1374]245;
 really of one mind with Coelestius, [1375]239, [1376]241, [1377]243;
 his doubtful anathemas, [1378]218, [1379]241; his distinction between
 "possibility" and "actuality," [1380]123, [1381]218; his distinction
 between "possibility" and "will," [1382]139, [1383]218; his sincerity,
 [1384]225, [1385]237, [1386]241, [1387]244; his writings, [1388]69,
 [1389]116, [1390]218, [1391]231 sq., [1392]237, [1393]243, [1394]245,
 [1395]425.

 Penal blindness, [1396]129.

 Penance, [1397]245.

 Pentecost, [1398]95.

 Perdition, vessels of, [1399]186, [1400]424.

 Perfection, possibility of, in this life, [1401]46, [1402]111,
 [1403]235, [1404]409 seq., [1405]412; four questions distinguished,
 [1406]46; relative degrees of, [1407]52, [1408]53, [1409]112,
 [1410]411; compared with that of the future life, [1411]113, [1412]165,
 [1413]410; when to be attained, [1414]48, [1415]165, [1416]168,
 [1417]276.

 Perizomata, [1418]304, [1419]386.

 Perpetua, [1420]320, [1421]365.

 Perseverance, from God, [1422]475, [1423]477, [1424]527, [1425]547; and
 faith, [1426]526; and prayer, [1427]428, [1428]529.

 Personal union, the, in Christ, [1429]197.

 Pertinacity in error, [1430]191.

 Pharisee, prayer of, [1431]93; his sin in it, [1432]45.

 Phoenix, [1433]368.

 Physician, Christ the true, [1434]128, [1435]131, [1436]137, [1437]142,
 [1438]144, [1439]236.

 Pinianus, [1440]214, [1441]217.

 Platonist opinion of pre-existence wrong, [1442]250.

 Pnoe, [1443]323.

 Polyandry, why wicked, [1444]267.

 Polygamy in the Old Testament, why permitted, [1445]267.

 Porphyry, [1446]506.

 "Possibility" in the Pelagian scheme, [1447]123, [1448]139 sq.,
 [1449]218, [1450]224.

 Possible, the, not always realized, [1451]83, [1452]185.

 Praise, of the creature, [1453]416, [1454]418; of marriage, [1455]417,
 [1456]420; of the law, [1457]417, [1458]420; of free will, [1459]417,
 [1460]421; of the saints, [1461]417, [1462]424.

 Prayer, prompted by grace, [1463]431; a proof of grace, [1464]447; use
 of, [1465]150, [1466]164, [1467]166; and predestination, [1468]541; for
 divine aid, not to be condemned, [1469]125; for forgiveness, allowed by
 Pelagius, [1470]127, [1471]228; in what sense needed, according to
 Pelagius, [1472]233; Pelagian view of, [1473]121, [1474]145, [1475]232;
 the Lord's Prayer and Pelagianism, [1476]527 seq.

 Predestination to life, [1477]176, [1478]186, [1479]222; to punishment,
 [1480]170, [1481]361; what it is, [1482]481, [1483]539, [1484]542 seq.;
 can it fail? [1485]348, [1486]477; its number fixed, [1487]487; and
 foreknowledge, [1488]486; and grace, [1489]507, [1490]542; and prayer,
 [1491]541, [1492]550; and Jesus, [1493]512, [1494]552; shall it be
 preached? [1495]538 sq., [1496]546, [1497]549; Pelagian and
 Semi-Pelagian view of it, [1498]516.

 Pre-existence of souls, [1499]26, [1500]250.

 Prevenient mercy, [1501]133, [1502]401, [1503]423.

 Pride, its character as sin, [1504]87, [1505]133; in what sense the
 root of sin, [1506]132; its danger, [1507]412; the divine remedy for,
 [1508]55.

 Priests under the law, [1509]173, [1510]409.

 Progress in spiritual life, [1511]170, [1512]175, [1513]400.

 Prohibition, irritating effect of, [1514]85, [1515]90, [1516]94,
 [1517]163, [1518]403.

 Promises, in Old and New Testaments, [1519]97, [1520]189, [1521]405,
 [1522]407; conditional, [1523]175; surety of God's, [1524]508.

 "Propagation," or "imitation," of sin? [1525]20.

 Prophets, the, [1526]88.

 Prosper, [1527]497, [1528]498, [1529]525.

 Punishment, degrees in future, [1530]23, [1531]104; good heathen mildly
 punished, [1532]104; unbaptized infants lightly punished, [1533]23;
 both in wrath and in mercy, [1534]55; why inflicted on the forgiven,
 [1535]66; by the gift of "ability," [1536]107.

 Purity of heart, [1537]171.

 Purpose, God's, in election, [1538]401; man's, for good the result of
 grace, [1539]401.


 Rash judgments, [1540]190.

 Reason, [1541]190.

 Rebuke, and grace, [1542]468, [1543]471 seq., [1544]489; duty of,
 [1545]473; grades of, [1546]490; purpose of, [1547]491; objection to,
 [1548]473.

 Reconciliation, [1549]420.

 Redemption, necessity of, [1550]254, [1551]381; senses of, [1552]404;
 ambiguously acknowledged by Pelagius, [1553]244.

 Regeneration, senses of, [1554]47, [1555]253, [1556]404, [1557]429.

 Renatus, [1558]310, [1559]311, [1560]315, [1561]331.

 Renewal, gradual, [1562]47, [1563]99, [1564]161, [1565]173.

 Renunciations in baptism, [1566]254.

 Repentance a gift of God, [1567]234.

 Resurrection, spiritual, [1568]105; of Christ, spiritual renewal
 represented by, [1569]86, [1570]105; of the body, [1571]245, [1572]253,
 [1573]414; called regeneration, [1574]47.

 Retractations quoted, [1575]501, [1576]535.

 Riches, Pelagian view of, [1577]193, [1578]241; the spiritual,
 [1579]172.

 Righteousness, of the law, [1580]411, [1581]453; of faith, [1582]413;
 of God, [1583]88, [1584]90, [1585]96, [1586]121, [1587]403, [1588]412,
 [1589]453; produced by God, [1590]111; how men seek to establish their
 own, [1591]88, [1592]133, [1593]137, [1594]402, [1595]408, [1596]412;
 imperfect in this life, [1597]53, [1598]112, [1599]145, [1600]150,
 [1601]164, [1602]169, [1603]235, [1604]410 seq., [1605]424, [1606]429,
 [1607]432; of the apostles and prophets, [1608]408; why not propagated,
 [1609]48.

 Rogatus, [1610]343.

 Rogatians, [1611]311, [1612]316, [1613]343, [1614]344.

 Roman church, faithful, [1615]233, [1616]240; its clergy defended,
 [1617]392 seq.; members of, [1618]377; see of, most eminent, [1619]377.

 Romans, Epistle to, [1620]87 seq.

 Roots of good and evil, [1621]225.

 Rufinus, [1622]238.


 Sabbath, the literal, abolished, [1623]93, [1624]98, [1625]395;
 symbolism of, [1626]95.

 Sabellians, [1627]298.

 Sacraments, importance of, [1628]28, [1629]78; imply original sin,
 [1630]253; of catechumens, [1631]61.

 Sacrifice of body and blood, for whom offered, [1632]320, [1633]338.

 Saints under the Old Testament, not free from sin, [1634]381,
 [1635]389, [1636]424; how saved, [1637]248, [1638]404.

 Salvation, senses of, [1639]404; under the law in the Old Testament,
 [1640]247; none outside God's kingdom, [1641]28.

 Samaritan, parable of the, [1642]138, [1643]142.

 Samuel, [1644]175.

 Sanctification a divine work, [1645]173.

 Sanctify, senses of, [1646]61, [1647]102.

 Sarah, [1648]291.

 Satan, fall of, [1649]410; author of sin, [1650]132, [1651]253; power
 over man, [1652]254, [1653]388; binding of, [1654]254; some delivered
 to, [1655]132; sons of, [1656]403.

 Saviour, need of a, [1657]134, [1658]142, [1659]414; versus Creator,
 [1660]134; universal need of a, [1661]36, [1662]63, [1663]71.

 Scandals, [1664]172.

 Scripture, authority of, [1665]28, [1666]67, [1667]111, [1668]137;
 silence of, [1669]135, [1670]340; omits many things, [1671]67,
 [1672]136.

 Secular courts not resorted to, [1673]408.

 Self accusing, [1674]168.

 Self-excusing, [1675]121.

 Self-righteousness, [1676]96.

 Self-trusting, [1677]87, [1678]91.

 Semi-Pelagians, [1679]49 sq.; how differ from Pelagians, [1680]498,
 [1681]516; anticipated, [1682]388.

 Senses and sensibilities, [1683]332.

 Service, the eucharistic, referred to, [1684]90, [1685]111, [1686]135.

 Servile temper, the, [1687]107, [1688]144, [1689]223, [1690]407.

 Sextus, a Pythagorean, [1691]116, [1692]178.

 Shame, origin of, in the body, [1693]265, [1694]304, [1695]387; and
 marriage, [1696]298.

 Sicily, Pelagianism in, [1697]159, [1698]193, [1699]241.

 Sight as opposed to faith, [1700]104, [1701]110, [1702]174, [1703]410,
 [1704]412.

 Silence of Scripture, as to men's sins, [1705]135; danger of arguing
 from, [1706]328, [1707]340.

 Silver-workers, [1708]90.

 Simplicianus, Augustin's letter to, [1709]384, [1710]500, [1711]501,
 [1712]547, [1713]548.

 Simplicius, his remarkable memory, [1714]358.

 Sin, original, [1715]19, [1716]30 seq., [1717]237 seq.; clearly taught
 by the Scriptures, [1718]28 sq., and by the fathers, [1719]72 sq. (See
 under [1720]Original Sin.)

 Sin, Adam's, [1721]307; nature of, [1722]128, [1723]148, [1724]160,
 [1725]169; penal results of, [1726]197, [1727]122, [1728]129,
 [1729]150, [1730]162, [1731]163; universality of, [1732]51, [1733]122,
 [1734]123, [1735]235; unbelief specially so called, [1736]403;
 knowledge of, through the law, [1737]88, [1738]106, [1739]192,
 [1740]407; struggle against, [1741]136, [1742]168, [1743]169,
 [1744]404, [1745]429; lessening power of, [1746]168, [1747]170; as
 punishment of sin, [1748]128, [1749]129; cured by sin, [1750]131;
 actual and original, [1751]19; not a "thing," [1752]160; from will,
 [1753]160; and of nature, [1754]160; by natural descent, [1755]22; can
 it be avoided? [1756]160, [1757]164; Pelagius' definition of,
 [1758]127; Pelagius denies all subsequent effect of, [1759]127,
 [1760]128; the law of, [1761]43, [1762]277 seq., how Christ is made
 sin, [1763]250, [1764]409 seq.

 Sinful, all men born, [1765]51, [1766]298.

 Sinlessness, distinct from holiness, [1767]194; possibility of,
 [1768]46, [1769]111, [1770]124, [1771]138, [1772]146, [1773]148,
 [1774]176, [1775]235; possibility of an open question, [1776]46 sq.,
 [1777]138, [1778]146, [1779]207; open in a sense, [1780]176; not open,
 [1781]386, [1782]429; various standards of, [1783]235; four questions
 distinguished, [1784]46 sq., of the Scripture saints, [1785]35,
 [1786]381, [1787]401; of Abel, [1788]136; of the Virgin Mary,
 [1789]135; of Christ alone, complete, [1790]57; unreality of, [1791]47;
 why none in this life, [1792]55; commanded, [1793]164.

 Sins, venial, [1794]104, [1795]136, [1796]166, [1797]270, [1798]274;
 not yet committed, no sins, [1799]317, [1800]321.

 Sixtus, [1801]437, [1802]439.

 Sodom, destruction of, [1803]250.

 Song of Songs, spiritual sense of, [1804]85, [1805]198.

 Sons of God, [1806]403.

 Soul, origin and nature of, [1807]310, [1808]315 seq., [1809]415,
 [1810]427; not of substance of God, [1811]316, [1812]332, [1813]344;
 not of pre-existent material, [1814]316; out of nothing, [1815]316; not
 corporeal, [1816]317, [1817]333, [1818]361, [1819]363 seq.; not
 existent prior to birth, [1820]335, [1821]347; not good or evil prior
 to birth, [1822]317, [1823]318, [1824]335, [1825]347; given by God,
 [1826]325 seq.; are they propagated? [1827]67, [1828]76, [1829]321; are
 they created? [1830]322 seq.; creationist passages, [1831]322; and
 body, [1832]366; and spirit, [1833]331, [1834]362, [1835]369;
 Augustin's position as to origin of, [1836]329; heresies as to origin
 of, [1837]330; Manichean view of, [1838]392.

 Sovereignty of God's grace, [1839]26, [1840]57, [1841]174, [1842]456,
 [1843]463, [1844]478, [1845]489, [1846]532, [1847]538.

 Spain, [1848]191.

 Spirit, the Holy, how He intercedes for us, [1849]359, [1850]551.

 Spirit and soul, [1851]331, [1852]362, [1853]369.

 "Stainless," senses of, [1854]166, [1855]169.

 Stephen, St., his prayer, [1856]388.

 Subterfuges, Pelagius', [1857]244; chief Pelagian, [1858]416.

 Supper, Lord's, called life, [1859]28, [1860]90; service referred to,
 [1861]90, [1862]111, [1863]135; a sacrifice, [1864]90, [1865]320,
 [1866]328; partaken of by infants, [1867]25, [1868]394, [1869]418,
 [1870]420; only for the baptized, [1871]25.

 Sursum Corda quoted, [1872]90, [1873]538.


 Teaching, [1874]220; insufficient without grace, [1875]85, [1876]113,
 [1877]176.

 Temple, veil of the, [1878]95, [1879]248.

 Temptation to be prayed against, [1880]142, [1881]145, [1882]176,
 [1883]428; various forms of, [1884]429.

 Tertullian, [1885]334.

 Testament, the Old, use and teaching of, [1886]35.

 Testaments, relation of Old and New, [1887]35, [1888]92, [1889]100,
 [1890]247, [1891]405 seq.

 Texts cited by the Pelagians, [1892]165, [1893]167, [1894]169,
 [1895]170, [1896]171, [1897]172 seq., [1898]400.

 Theodicy with reference to grace, [1899]423, [1900]464; with reference
 to the heathen, [1901]104.

 Theosebeia, [1902]90.

 Thessalonica, [1903]378, [1904]391.

 Thief, dying, [1905]319; a martyr, [1906]319; perhaps baptized,
 [1907]319.

 Thorn in the flesh, Paul's, [1908]113, [1909]131, [1910]222, [1911]411.

 Thought, grace needed for good, [1912]401; sense of "about evil,"
 [1913]188; sins of, [1914]113, [1915]176; less than desire, and yet
 from God, [1916]400.

 Threatenings of the law, [1917]89, [1918]92, [1919]125.

 Three periods of the world according to Pelagius, [1920]248.

 Timasius and James, [1921]121, [1922]203 seq.

 Tongue, taming the, [1923]126.

 Transmission of sin, [1924]18, [1925]20, [1926]69, [1927]238,
 [1928]245, [1929]272, [1930]415.

 Trinity, of one Godhead, [1931]246; inseparable, [1932]110, [1933]411.

 Types, [1934]406.

 Tyre and Sidon, comparatively tolerable for, [1935]533.


 Unbaptized infants, [1936]23, [1937]25, [1938]36, [1939]273, [1940]319,
 [1941]337, [1942]348.

 Universal need of salvation, [1943]36, [1944]63, [1945]71, [1946]134,
 [1947]142, [1948]414.

 Unregenerate children of the regenerate, [1949]272.

 Unsearchable judgments of God, [1950]25, [1951]110, [1952]398,
 [1953]423, [1954]532.


 Valentinus, [1955]437, [1956]439, [1957]444, [1958]472.

 Valerius, comes, [1959]258, [1960]259, [1961]260, [1962]263, [1963]281,
 [1964]283.

 Various readings in text of Scriptures, [1965]199, [1966]219,
 [1967]246, [1968]412.

 Venial sins, [1969]104, [1970]136, [1971]166, [1972]224, [1973]270,
 [1974]274.

 "Very easily," to obey, [1975]162.

 Vincentius the Rogatian, [1976]343.

 Vincentius Victor, [1977]310, [1978]311, [1979]315, [1980]331,
 [1981]343; his errors, [1982]316 sq., [1983]352, [1984]370.

 Vindemialis, [1985]260.

 Virgin, the, Mary. (See under [1986]Mary.)

 Virginal life, the, [1987]195, [1988]408.

 Virtues, heathen, [1989]104, [1990]264.

 Vision, the beatific, [1991]110, [1992]174, [1993]410.

 "Volition" distinct from "ability," [1994]106, [1995]218.


 Wicked men, God's government of, [1996]462.

 Widow, tracts addressed to a, [1997]190, [1998]191.

 Wilderness, sins of Israel in, [1999]405.

 Will of God invincible, [2000]109.

 Will, its relation to ability, [2001]106, [2002]219; weakness of,
 [2003]45, [2004]358; needs God's help, [2005]45; in God's power,
 [2006]461; acts even in cases of reluctance, [2007]106; can assent and
 dissent when God calls, [2008]110; prepared by God, [2009]400; good,
 how bestowed, [2010]56, [2011]225, [2012]388; to believe, wrought in
 man by God's power, [2013]111, [2014]388, [2015]400; good will and
 grace, [2016]455; is good will a merit? [2017]455.

 Willing and running, [2018]174.

 Wisdom, Book of, canonicity of, [2019]511.

 Wisdom, the true, [2020]90; of words, [2021]137.

 Working of God in us, [2022]84, [2023]98, [2024]107, [2025]219,
 [2026]389.

 Works, law of, [2027]91; of the law, [2028]93, [2029]104; every one has
 some good, [2030]104.

 "World" used for men in it, [2031]224.


 Xystus quoted by mistake for Sextus, [2032]116, [2033]148.


 Young children. (See [2034]Infants.)

 Young and old alike capable of redemption, [2035]254.


 Zacharias, [2036]52, [2037]147, [2038]173, [2039]235.

 Zosimus, [2040]237, [2041]239, [2042]240, [2043]245, [2044]393,
 [2045]439; his dealings with Coelestius, [2046]239, [2047]393.

 Indexes

Index of Scripture References

 Genesis

 [2048]1:2 [2049]1:20 [2050]1:24 [2051]1:27 [2052]1:27
 [2053]1:27 [2054]1:28 [2055]1:28 [2056]1:28 [2057]1:28
 [2058]1:28 [2059]1:29 [2060]1:31 [2061]2:7 [2062]2:7
 [2063]2:7 [2064]2:7 [2065]2:7 [2066]2:17 [2067]2:17
 [2068]2:17 [2069]2:19 [2070]2:19 [2071]2:22 [2072]2:22-23
 [2073]2:23 [2074]2:23 [2075]2:23 [2076]2:23 [2077]2:23
 [2078]2:24 [2079]2:24 [2080]2:24 [2081]2:24 [2082]2:24
 [2083]2:24 [2084]2:24 [2085]2:25 [2086]2:25 [2087]2:25
 [2088]3:5 [2089]3:5 [2090]3:5-6 [2091]3:6 [2092]3:6
 [2093]3:6-7 [2094]3:7 [2095]3:7 [2096]3:7 [2097]3:7
 [2098]3:7 [2099]3:7 [2100]3:7 [2101]3:7 [2102]3:7
 [2103]3:10 [2104]3:16 [2105]3:18-19 [2106]3:19 [2107]3:19
 [2108]3:19 [2109]3:20 [2110]4:1 [2111]5:4 [2112]5:24
 [2113]7 [2114]7:8-9 [2115]7:21-22 [2116]9:1 [2117]9:21
 [2118]12:3 [2119]14:18-20 [2120]15:6 [2121]15:6 [2122]17:5
 [2123]17:5 [2124]17:10 [2125]17:14 [2126]17:14 [2127]18:18
 [2128]19 [2129]19:24 [2130]20:2 [2131]20:4 [2132]20:5
 [2133]20:8 [2134]20:14 [2135]20:17 [2136]20:18 [2137]21:1-2
 [2138]21:17-19 [2139]21:19 [2140]21:19 [2141]22:18
 [2142]22:18 [2143]24:2-3 [2144]25:17 [2145]46:26 [2146]47:29

 Exodus

 [2147]1:5 [2148]3:14 [2149]4:12 [2150]4:21 [2151]4:25
 [2152]7:3 [2153]7:3 [2154]8:32 [2155]10:1 [2156]12:3
 [2157]14:4 [2158]19:12 [2159]19:16 [2160]20:5 [2161]20:7
 [2162]20:7 [2163]20:13-14 [2164]20:17 [2165]20:17 [2166]20:17
 [2167]20:17 [2168]20:17 [2169]20:17 [2170]20:17 [2171]20:17
 [2172]20:17 [2173]20:17 [2174]20:17 [2175]20:17 [2176]20:17
 [2177]20:27 [2178]31:18 [2179]33:19 [2180]33:19

 Leviticus

 [2181]4 [2182]6:3 [2183]19:2 [2184]19:18 [2185]19:18
 [2186]19:18

 Numbers

 [2187]14:29 [2188]14:31 [2189]21:6-9 [2190]21:9 [2191]24:3
 [2192]24:15

 Deuteronomy

 [2193]6:4-5 [2194]6:5 [2195]6:5 [2196]6:5 [2197]8:17
 [2198]18:13 [2199]23:17 [2200]24 [2201]29:5 [2202]30:2
 [2203]30:9-14 [2204]30:14 [2205]30:15 [2206]30:19 [2207]31:3
 [2208]31:3

 Joshua

 [2209]7:4 [2210]7:12 [2211]11:20 [2212]12 [2213]23:6
 [2214]23:8

 Judges

 [2215]2:3 [2216]2:3 [2217]6:36-40 [2218]8:30

 1 Samuel

 [2219]10:25 [2220]15:9 [2221]24:7 [2222]26:9 [2223]28:14

 2 Samuel

 [2224]16:9-10 [2225]16:11-12 [2226]17:14

 1 Kings

 [2227]8:46 [2228]8:46 [2229]8:57 [2230]12:8-14 [2231]12:15
 [2232]19:8

 2 Kings

 [2233]2:11 [2234]4:18-37 [2235]4:29 [2236]4:34 [2237]14
 [2238]14:10

 1 Chronicles

 [2239]11:9 [2240]12:18 [2241]12:38 [2242]28:9

 2 Chronicles

 [2243]15:2 [2244]21:16-17 [2245]25:7-8 [2246]25:20 [2247]30:12

 Esther

 [2248]4 [2249]5 [2250]5:1 [2251]14:13 [2252]15:5

 Job

 [2253]1:1 [2254]1:8 [2255]1:8 [2256]1:22 [2257]6:2-3
 [2258]7:1 [2259]7:1 [2260]7:1 [2261]7:1 [2262]7:14
 [2263]7:15 [2264]8:26-14:5 [2265]9:2-3 [2266]9:17
 [2267]9:19-20 [2268]9:30 [2269]12:4 [2270]13:18 [2271]14:1-5
 [2272]14:2 [2273]14:4 [2274]14:4-5 [2275]14:4-5 [2276]14:4-5
 [2277]14:4-5 [2278]14:4-5 [2279]14:5 [2280]14:16-17
 [2281]14:16-17 [2282]16:18 [2283]17:8 [2284]19:25
 [2285]23:11-12 [2286]25:4 [2287]27:6 [2288]28:28 [2289]28:28
 [2290]29:14 [2291]30:3-4 [2292]32:7-8 [2293]39:34 [2294]40:4
 [2295]42:5-6 [2296]42:6

 Psalms

 [2297]1 [2298]1:1 [2299]1:1 [2300]1:1 [2301]1:1 [2302]1:2
 [2303]1:2 [2304]1:6 [2305]2:4 [2306]2:4 [2307]2:8
 [2308]2:11 [2309]2:11-12 [2310]2:12 [2311]2:12 [2312]3
 [2313]3:2 [2314]3:2-4 [2315]3:2-5 [2316]3:3 [2317]3:3
 [2318]3:4 [2319]3:4 [2320]3:4 [2321]3:5 [2322]3:5 [2323]3:8
 [2324]3:8 [2325]3:10 [2326]4:6 [2327]4:27 [2328]5:25
 [2329]6:2 [2330]7:20 [2331]8:2 [2332]9:18 [2333]10:4
 [2334]12:1 [2335]12:6 [2336]13:3 [2337]14:1 [2338]14:1
 [2339]14:1 [2340]14:2 [2341]14:3 [2342]14:8 [2343]15:1-2
 [2344]15:2 [2345]15:2 [2346]16:3 [2347]16:4 [2348]16:4
 [2349]16:4 [2350]16:10 [2351]16:10 [2352]16:11 [2353]16:12
 [2354]17:4 [2355]17:15 [2356]18:1 [2357]18:1 [2358]18:8
 [2359]18:23 [2360]19:1 [2361]19:4 [2362]19:5-6 [2363]19:5-6
 [2364]19:7 [2365]19:12 [2366]19:36 [2367]19:36 [2368]19:36
 [2369]19:37 [2370]19:68 [2371]19:73 [2372]19:73 [2373]19:73
 [2374]19:80 [2375]19:85 [2376]19:108 [2377]19:133
 [2378]19:133 [2379]19:133 [2380]19:133 [2381]19:175
 [2382]19:176 [2383]21 [2384]21:3 [2385]22:23 [2386]22:25
 [2387]23:6 [2388]23:6 [2389]24:3-4 [2390]24:3-4 [2391]24:7
 [2392]25:4 [2393]25:7 [2394]25:10 [2395]25:10 [2396]25:10
 [2397]25:15 [2398]25:17 [2399]25:17 [2400]25:17 [2401]25:22
 [2402]26:2 [2403]27:1 [2404]27:1 [2405]27:4 [2406]27:9
 [2407]27:9 [2408]27:9 [2409]27:9 [2410]28:9 [2411]30:2
 [2412]30:5 [2413]30:6 [2414]30:6 [2415]30:6 [2416]30:6
 [2417]30:7 [2418]30:7 [2419]30:7 [2420]30:7 [2421]30:7
 [2422]30:8 [2423]31:7 [2424]31:9 [2425]31:19 [2426]32:2
 [2427]32:2 [2428]32:2 [2429]32:2 [2430]32:5 [2431]32:6
 [2432]32:9 [2433]32:9 [2434]32:9 [2435]33:1 [2436]33:1-2
 [2437]34:2 [2438]34:2 [2439]34:13 [2440]35:6 [2441]35:6
 [2442]36:3 [2443]36:3 [2444]36:6 [2445]36:7 [2446]36:8-10
 [2447]36:9 [2448]36:9 [2449]36:9 [2450]36:10 [2451]36:10
 [2452]36:11 [2453]36:11-12 [2454]36:23 [2455]37:3 [2456]37:5
 [2457]37:6 [2458]37:23 [2459]37:23 [2460]37:23 [2461]37:23
 [2462]37:23 [2463]37:27 [2464]38:3 [2465]38:3 [2466]38:8
 [2467]39:1 [2468]39:5 [2469]39:6 [2470]39:9 [2471]39:10
 [2472]40:2-3 [2473]40:8 [2474]40:8 [2475]40:17 [2476]41:3
 [2477]41:3 [2478]41:4 [2479]41:4 [2480]41:4 [2481]41:4
 [2482]41:5 [2483]43:2 [2484]43:2 [2485]43:2 [2486]43:2
 [2487]43:2 [2488]43:2 [2489]43:2 [2490]43:2 [2491]43:2
 [2492]43:2 [2493]43:2 [2494]43:2 [2495]43:2 [2496]43:2
 [2497]43:10 [2498]44:4 [2499]44:18 [2500]44:22 [2501]45:6-7
 [2502]45:8 [2503]47:20 [2504]48:2 [2505]48:12 [2506]49:6
 [2507]49:12 [2508]49:12 [2509]49:12 [2510]49:12-13 [2511]50:6
 [2512]51:5 [2513]51:5 [2514]51:5 [2515]51:5 [2516]51:5
 [2517]51:5 [2518]51:5 [2519]51:5 [2520]51:5 [2521]51:10
 [2522]51:10 [2523]51:11 [2524]51:12 [2525]51:12 [2526]51:15
 [2527]54:6 [2528]55:8 [2529]58:11 [2530]59:10 [2531]59:10
 [2532]59:10 [2533]59:10 [2534]59:10 [2535]59:10 [2536]59:10
 [2537]59:10 [2538]62:11-12 [2539]62:12 [2540]65:2 [2541]66:9
 [2542]67:10 [2543]68:9 [2544]68:18 [2545]68:18 [2546]68:30
 [2547]69:6 [2548]70:5 [2549]71:5 [2550]73:27 [2551]73:28
 [2552]73:28 [2553]76:10 [2554]77:2 [2555]77:9-10 [2556]80:3
 [2557]80:3-4 [2558]80:7 [2559]80:7 [2560]80:17-18 [2561]81:1
 [2562]81:10 [2563]84:5 [2564]84:5 [2565]84:6 [2566]84:6
 [2567]84:11 [2568]85:4 [2569]85:4 [2570]85:4 [2571]85:6
 [2572]85:6 [2573]85:7 [2574]85:7 [2575]85:10 [2576]85:12
 [2577]85:12 [2578]86:11 [2579]94:7 [2580]94:8 [2581]94:8
 [2582]95 [2583]95:6 [2584]95:6 [2585]95:6-7 [2586]95:7-8
 [2587]95:8 [2588]99:6 [2589]99:8 [2590]119:21 [2591]119:118

 Proverbs

 [2592]1:8 [2593]1:30 [2594]2:6 [2595]2:6 [2596]2:6
 [2597]2:20 [2598]2:21 [2599]3:1 [2600]3:7 [2601]3:11
 [2602]3:11 [2603]3:12 [2604]3:16 [2605]3:16 [2606]3:16
 [2607]3:18 [2608]3:27 [2609]3:29 [2610]4:26-27 [2611]4:27
 [2612]5:2 [2613]8 [2614]8 [2615]8:35 [2616]8:35 [2617]8:35
 [2618]8:35 [2619]8:35 [2620]8:35 [2621]8:36 [2622]11:20
 [2623]16:1 [2624]16:1 [2625]18:17 [2626]18:21 [2627]19:3
 [2628]19:3 [2629]19:24 [2630]20:8 [2631]20:8 [2632]20:8-9
 [2633]20:9 [2634]20:9 [2635]20:9 [2636]20:9 [2637]20:9
 [2638]20:24 [2639]21:1 [2640]21:1 [2641]21:2 [2642]27:2
 [2643]29:19

 Ecclesiastes

 [2644]1:2-3 [2645]1:18 [2646]3:5 [2647]3:21 [2648]7:20
 [2649]7:20 [2650]7:21 [2651]7:30 [2652]7:30

 Song of Solomon

 [2653]4:8 [2654]4:8 [2655]8:5

 Isaiah

 [2656]1:2 [2657]1:18 [2658]1:19 [2659]1:19 [2660]1:19-20
 [2661]1:19-20 [2662]1:19-20 [2663]6:10 [2664]7:14 [2665]8:20
 [2666]8:20 [2667]11:2 [2668]11:2 [2669]26:10 [2670]40:5
 [2671]42:5 [2672]42:5 [2673]45:11 [2674]45:11 [2675]45:11
 [2676]45:25 [2677]52:7 [2678]53:1 [2679]53:3-12 [2680]53:6
 [2681]53:7 [2682]53:7 [2683]53:9 [2684]54:1 [2685]54:13
 [2686]56:1 [2687]56:1 [2688]57:16 [2689]57:16 [2690]57:16
 [2691]59:2 [2692]61:1

 Jeremiah

 [2693]1:5 [2694]2:29 [2695]9:23-24 [2696]9:24 [2697]10:23
 [2698]10:23 [2699]10:24 [2700]17:5 [2701]17:5 [2702]17:5
 [2703]17:5 [2704]30:1 [2705]30:33 [2706]31:31 [2707]31:31-32
 [2708]31:31-34 [2709]31:31-34 [2710]31:32 [2711]31:32
 [2712]31:32-33 [2713]31:33 [2714]31:33 [2715]31:33
 [2716]31:33 [2717]31:33-34 [2718]31:34 [2719]31:34
 [2720]31:34 [2721]31:34 [2722]31:34 [2723]31:34 [2724]32:32
 [2725]32:40 [2726]32:40 [2727]32:40-41

 Ezekiel

 [2728]3:18 [2729]11:19 [2730]11:19 [2731]11:19 [2732]11:19-20
 [2733]14:9 [2734]14:9 [2735]14:14 [2736]16:49 [2737]18
 [2738]18:1-4 [2739]18:6 [2740]18:31-32 [2741]28:3 [2742]36:22
 [2743]36:22 [2744]36:22 [2745]36:22-27 [2746]36:26
 [2747]36:26 [2748]36:26 [2749]36:26-27 [2750]36:27
 [2751]36:27 [2752]36:27 [2753]36:32

 Daniel

 [2754]7:18 [2755]7:18 [2756]7:18 [2757]9:20

 Joel

 [2758]2:32

 Jonah

 [2759]3 [2760]3:3

 Habakkuk

 [2761]2:4 [2762]2:4 [2763]2:4 [2764]2:4 [2765]2:4 [2766]2:4

 Zechariah

 [2767]1:3 [2768]1:3 [2769]3:4 [2770]8 [2771]12:1

 Malachi

 [2772]1:2 [2773]1:2-3

 Matthew

 [2774]1:16 [2775]1:16 [2776]1:20 [2777]1:21 [2778]1:21
 [2779]1:21 [2780]1:21 [2781]1:21 [2782]1:21 [2783]1:23
 [2784]3:8-9 [2785]5:6 [2786]5:6 [2787]5:6 [2788]5:6
 [2789]5:6 [2790]5:6 [2791]5:7 [2792]5:8 [2793]5:8 [2794]5:8
 [2795]5:8 [2796]5:14-15 [2797]5:17 [2798]5:17 [2799]5:17
 [2800]5:32 [2801]5:45 [2802]5:45 [2803]5:45 [2804]5:45
 [2805]5:45 [2806]5:48 [2807]5:48 [2808]6:1 [2809]6:9
 [2810]6:9 [2811]6:9 [2812]6:9 [2813]6:10 [2814]6:10
 [2815]6:10 [2816]6:10 [2817]6:11 [2818]6:12 [2819]6:12
 [2820]6:12 [2821]6:12 [2822]6:12 [2823]6:12 [2824]6:12
 [2825]6:12 [2826]6:12 [2827]6:12 [2828]6:12 [2829]6:12
 [2830]6:12 [2831]6:12 [2832]6:12 [2833]6:12 [2834]6:12
 [2835]6:12 [2836]6:12 [2837]6:12 [2838]6:12 [2839]6:12
 [2840]6:12 [2841]6:12 [2842]6:12 [2843]6:12 [2844]6:12-13
 [2845]6:12-13 [2846]6:12-13 [2847]6:13 [2848]6:13 [2849]6:13
 [2850]6:13 [2851]6:13 [2852]6:13 [2853]6:13 [2854]6:13
 [2855]6:13 [2856]6:13 [2857]6:13 [2858]6:13 [2859]6:13
 [2860]6:13 [2861]6:13 [2862]6:13 [2863]6:13 [2864]6:14
 [2865]6:14 [2866]6:19 [2867]6:30 [2868]7:2 [2869]7:7
 [2870]7:7 [2871]7:11 [2872]7:11 [2873]7:11 [2874]7:16
 [2875]7:17 [2876]7:18 [2877]7:18 [2878]7:18 [2879]7:23
 [2880]7:23 [2881]8:22 [2882]9:12 [2883]9:12 [2884]9:12
 [2885]9:12 [2886]9:12 [2887]9:12 [2888]9:12 [2889]9:12
 [2890]9:12 [2891]9:12-13 [2892]9:12-13 [2893]9:13 [2894]9:13
 [2895]9:13 [2896]10:19-20 [2897]10:20 [2898]10:20 [2899]10:20
 [2900]10:20 [2901]10:22 [2902]10:22 [2903]10:26 [2904]10:28
 [2905]10:28 [2906]10:29 [2907]10:39 [2908]10:39 [2909]11:22
 [2910]11:28 [2911]11:28-30 [2912]11:30 [2913]11:30
 [2914]12:29 [2915]12:30 [2916]12:33 [2917]12:35 [2918]13:11
 [2919]13:11 [2920]13:43 [2921]16:17 [2922]16:17 [2923]16:24
 [2924]16:27 [2925]16:27 [2926]16:27 [2927]16:27 [2928]17:20
 [2929]18:4 [2930]18:11 [2931]18:15 [2932]18:17 [2933]19:3
 [2934]19:4 [2935]19:4 [2936]19:4-6 [2937]19:5-6 [2938]19:6
 [2939]19:6 [2940]19:8 [2941]19:9 [2942]19:10 [2943]19:10-11
 [2944]19:11 [2945]19:12 [2946]19:12 [2947]19:14 [2948]19:16
 [2949]19:24 [2950]19:24 [2951]19:26 [2952]19:28 [2953]19:28
 [2954]19:28 [2955]20:1-16 [2956]20:8 [2957]20:9 [2958]20:9
 [2959]20:14 [2960]20:16 [2961]20:16 [2962]20:16 [2963]20:16
 [2964]21:9 [2965]21:21 [2966]22:11-13 [2967]22:14 [2968]22:30
 [2969]22:37 [2970]22:37 [2971]22:37 [2972]22:37 [2973]22:37
 [2974]22:39 [2975]22:39 [2976]22:40 [2977]22:40 [2978]22:40
 [2979]23:15 [2980]25:1-10 [2981]25:33 [2982]25:33 [2983]25:34
 [2984]25:35 [2985]25:35 [2986]25:46 [2987]25:46 [2988]25:46
 [2989]25:46 [2990]25:46 [2991]26 [2992]26:28 [2993]26:28
 [2994]26:28 [2995]26:28 [2996]26:41 [2997]26:41 [2998]26:53
 [2999]26:53 [3000]26:69 [3001]26:69-75 [3002]26:71
 [3003]27:51 [3004]27:51 [3005]33

 Mark

 [3006]2:17 [3007]7:9 [3008]7:19 [3009]9:49 [3010]10:8
 [3011]10:27 [3012]10:46-52 [3013]11 [3014]11:23
 [3015]12:28-31 [3016]14:38 [3017]14:38 [3018]14:66
 [3019]16:15-16 [3020]16:16 [3021]16:16 [3022]16:16
 [3023]16:16 [3024]16:16 [3025]16:18

 Luke

 [3026]1:3 [3027]1:3 [3028]1:6 [3029]1:6 [3030]1:6 [3031]1:6
 [3032]1:6 [3033]1:6-9 [3034]1:27 [3035]1:34 [3036]1:35
 [3037]1:37 [3038]1:38 [3039]1:38 [3040]2:11 [3041]2:11
 [3042]2:14 [3043]2:19 [3044]2:33 [3045]2:41 [3046]2:41
 [3047]2:48 [3048]2:49 [3049]2:50-51 [3050]3:6 [3051]3:22
 [3052]3:23 [3053]4:16-21 [3054]5:31-32 [3055]5:32 [3056]6:30
 [3057]6:37-38 [3058]6:37-38 [3059]6:38 [3060]7:41 [3061]8:8
 [3062]8:10 [3063]8:18 [3064]9:53 [3065]9:53 [3066]9:53
 [3067]9:56 [3068]9:56 [3069]9:60 [3070]10:5-6 [3071]10:12
 [3072]10:13 [3073]10:27-28 [3074]10:29 [3075]10:30
 [3076]10:34 [3077]10:34 [3078]10:41 [3079]11:4 [3080]11:4
 [3081]11:4 [3082]11:9 [3083]11:20 [3084]11:41 [3085]11:42
 [3086]12:4 [3087]12:5 [3088]12:37 [3089]12:47-48
 [3090]13:25-27 [3091]13:32 [3092]15:4 [3093]15:8
 [3094]16:19-31 [3095]16:22-23 [3096]16:23 [3097]16:23
 [3098]16:24 [3099]16:24 [3100]16:24 [3101]16:24 [3102]17:6
 [3103]18:1 [3104]18:10-14 [3105]18:11-12 [3106]18:11-12
 [3107]18:19 [3108]19:9-10 [3109]19:10 [3110]19:10 [3111]19:10
 [3112]19:10 [3113]19:10 [3114]19:20-24 [3115]19:26
 [3116]19:27 [3117]20:34 [3118]20:34 [3119]20:34 [3120]20:34
 [3121]22:32 [3122]22:32 [3123]22:32 [3124]22:32 [3125]22:32
 [3126]22:55 [3127]22:61 [3128]22:61 [3129]22:61 [3130]22:61
 [3131]23:43 [3132]23:43 [3133]24:31 [3134]24:44-47
 [3135]24:45 [3136]24:46-47

 John

 [3137]1:1 [3138]1:1 [3139]1:1 [3140]1:1 [3141]1:3 [3142]1:3
 [3143]1:5 [3144]1:5 [3145]1:8 [3146]1:9 [3147]1:9 [3148]1:9
 [3149]1:9 [3150]1:9 [3151]1:12 [3152]1:12 [3153]1:12
 [3154]1:12 [3155]1:12 [3156]1:12 [3157]1:12-13 [3158]1:14
 [3159]1:14 [3160]1:14 [3161]1:14 [3162]1:14 [3163]1:14
 [3164]1:14 [3165]1:16 [3166]1:16 [3167]1:16 [3168]1:29
 [3169]1:29 [3170]1:29 [3171]1:47 [3172]2:6 [3173]2:7-8
 [3174]2:19 [3175]3:1-21 [3176]3:3 [3177]3:3 [3178]3:3
 [3179]3:3 [3180]3:3-6 [3181]3:5 [3182]3:5 [3183]3:5
 [3184]3:5 [3185]3:5 [3186]3:5 [3187]3:5 [3188]3:5 [3189]3:5
 [3190]3:5 [3191]3:5 [3192]3:5 [3193]3:6 [3194]3:8 [3195]3:8
 [3196]3:8 [3197]3:13 [3198]3:13 [3199]3:14-15 [3200]3:15
 [3201]3:16 [3202]3:17 [3203]3:17 [3204]3:18 [3205]3:18
 [3206]3:19 [3207]3:21 [3208]3:27 [3209]3:35-36 [3210]3:36
 [3211]3:36 [3212]4:24 [3213]4:34 [3214]5:14 [3215]5:21
 [3216]5:26 [3217]5:30 [3218]5:35 [3219]5:35 [3220]6
 [3221]6:27 [3222]6:28 [3223]6:28 [3224]6:34 [3225]6:36
 [3226]6:37 [3227]6:39 [3228]6:39 [3229]6:43 [3230]6:44
 [3231]6:44 [3232]6:44 [3233]6:44 [3234]6:44 [3235]6:45
 [3236]6:45 [3237]6:45 [3238]6:45 [3239]6:51 [3240]6:51
 [3241]6:51 [3242]6:51 [3243]6:53 [3244]6:53 [3245]6:53
 [3246]6:54 [3247]6:54-66 [3248]6:59 [3249]6:60 [3250]6:62-65
 [3251]6:63 [3252]6:64 [3253]6:64 [3254]6:65 [3255]6:65
 [3256]6:65 [3257]6:65 [3258]6:66 [3259]6:66 [3260]6:66
 [3261]6:66 [3262]6:66 [3263]6:70 [3264]7:39 [3265]8
 [3266]8:24 [3267]8:31 [3268]8:31 [3269]8:36 [3270]8:36
 [3271]8:36 [3272]8:36 [3273]8:36 [3274]8:36 [3275]8:36
 [3276]8:36 [3277]8:38 [3278]8:56 [3279]9:39 [3280]10:27-28
 [3281]10:30 [3282]11:51-52 [3283]12:31 [3284]12:37
 [3285]12:46 [3286]12:46 [3287]13:10 [3288]13:34
 [3289]13:34-35 [3290]13:37 [3291]13:37 [3292]14:1 [3293]14:1
 [3294]14:2 [3295]14:2 [3296]14:6 [3297]14:6 [3298]14:6
 [3299]14:6 [3300]14:8-9 [3301]14:21 [3302]14:21 [3303]14:28
 [3304]14:30 [3305]14:30 [3306]14:30 [3307]14:30 [3308]14:30
 [3309]14:30-31 [3310]14:30-31 [3311]14:31 [3312]15:5
 [3313]15:5 [3314]15:5 [3315]15:5 [3316]15:5 [3317]15:5
 [3318]15:5 [3319]15:5 [3320]15:5 [3321]15:5 [3322]15:5
 [3323]15:5 [3324]15:5 [3325]15:5 [3326]15:5 [3327]15:7
 [3328]15:13 [3329]15:13 [3330]15:13 [3331]15:16 [3332]15:16
 [3333]15:16 [3334]15:16 [3335]15:22 [3336]15:22 [3337]15:26
 [3338]16:7 [3339]16:8 [3340]16:8-10 [3341]16:9 [3342]16:12
 [3343]16:16 [3344]17:3 [3345]17:3 [3346]17:3 [3347]17:3
 [3348]17:12 [3349]18:9 [3350]18:16 [3351]19:11 [3352]19:30
 [3353]19:30 [3354]19:34 [3355]20:2 [3356]20:22

 Acts

 [3357]2:1-47 [3358]2:2 [3359]2:2 [3360]3:14-15 [3361]4:11-12
 [3362]4:12 [3363]4:12 [3364]4:24 [3365]4:31 [3366]5:30-31
 [3367]8:30-37 [3368]9:1 [3369]9:18 [3370]10 [3371]10:43
 [3372]10:43 [3373]13:9 [3374]13:38-39 [3375]13:48 [3376]13:48
 [3377]14:8-9 [3378]15:10-11 [3379]15:10-11 [3380]16:14
 [3381]17:25 [3382]17:26 [3383]17:28 [3384]17:31 [3385]28:5

 Romans

 [3386]1:1 [3387]1:7 [3388]1:8 [3389]1:14-17 [3390]1:16
 [3391]1:16 [3392]1:16-17 [3393]1:17 [3394]1:17 [3395]1:17
 [3396]1:17 [3397]1:17 [3398]1:18-20 [3399]1:18-23 [3400]1:21
 [3401]1:21 [3402]1:21 [3403]1:21 [3404]1:21 [3405]1:21-31
 [3406]1:22 [3407]1:23 [3408]1:24 [3409]1:24 [3410]1:24
 [3411]1:24 [3412]1:24 [3413]1:25-26 [3414]1:26 [3415]1:26-27
 [3416]1:27 [3417]1:27 [3418]1:27 [3419]1:28 [3420]1:28
 [3421]1:28 [3422]1:28-31 [3423]2 [3424]2:6 [3425]2:6
 [3426]2:6 [3427]2:8-9 [3428]2:8-13 [3429]2:9 [3430]2:11
 [3431]2:11 [3432]2:11 [3433]2:11 [3434]2:12 [3435]2:12
 [3436]2:13 [3437]2:13 [3438]2:13 [3439]2:13 [3440]2:13
 [3441]2:14 [3442]2:14 [3443]2:14 [3444]2:14 [3445]2:14
 [3446]2:14 [3447]2:14-15 [3448]2:14-15 [3449]2:15
 [3450]2:15-16 [3451]2:17-29 [3452]2:26 [3453]3:6 [3454]3:6
 [3455]3:8 [3456]3:8 [3457]3:8 [3458]3:19 [3459]3:19-20
 [3460]3:19-21 [3461]3:20 [3462]3:20 [3463]3:20 [3464]3:20
 [3465]3:20 [3466]3:20 [3467]3:20 [3468]3:20 [3469]3:20
 [3470]3:20 [3471]3:20-21 [3472]3:20-26 [3473]3:21 [3474]3:21
 [3475]3:21 [3476]3:21 [3477]3:22 [3478]3:22-23 [3479]3:22-24
 [3480]3:22-24 [3481]3:22-26 [3482]3:23 [3483]3:23 [3484]3:23
 [3485]3:23 [3486]3:23-24 [3487]3:24 [3488]3:24 [3489]3:24
 [3490]3:24 [3491]3:24 [3492]3:26 [3493]3:27 [3494]3:27
 [3495]3:27 [3496]3:27 [3497]3:27 [3498]3:28 [3499]3:28
 [3500]3:29 [3501]3:30 [3502]3:30 [3503]3:31 [3504]3:31
 [3505]4:2 [3506]4:3 [3507]4:3 [3508]4:3 [3509]4:3 [3510]4:4
 [3511]4:4 [3512]4:4 [3513]4:4-8 [3514]4:5 [3515]4:5
 [3516]4:5 [3517]4:5 [3518]4:5 [3519]4:5 [3520]4:10-11
 [3521]4:11 [3522]4:13 [3523]4:14 [3524]4:14 [3525]4:15
 [3526]4:15 [3527]4:15 [3528]4:15 [3529]4:15 [3530]4:15
 [3531]4:15 [3532]4:16 [3533]4:16 [3534]4:16-17 [3535]4:19
 [3536]4:20 [3537]4:20 [3538]4:20 [3539]4:21 [3540]4:21
 [3541]4:21 [3542]4:23-25 [3543]4:25 [3544]4:25 [3545]5
 [3546]5:1 [3547]5:3-5 [3548]5:5 [3549]5:5 [3550]5:5
 [3551]5:5 [3552]5:5 [3553]5:5 [3554]5:5 [3555]5:5 [3556]5:5
 [3557]5:5 [3558]5:5 [3559]5:5 [3560]5:5 [3561]5:5 [3562]5:5
 [3563]5:5 [3564]5:5 [3565]5:5 [3566]5:5 [3567]5:5 [3568]5:5
 [3569]5:5 [3570]5:5 [3571]5:5 [3572]5:5 [3573]5:5 [3574]5:6
 [3575]5:6 [3576]5:8 [3577]5:12 [3578]5:12 [3579]5:12
 [3580]5:12 [3581]5:12 [3582]5:12 [3583]5:12 [3584]5:12
 [3585]5:12 [3586]5:12 [3587]5:12 [3588]5:12 [3589]5:12
 [3590]5:12 [3591]5:12 [3592]5:12 [3593]5:12 [3594]5:12
 [3595]5:12 [3596]5:12 [3597]5:12 [3598]5:12 [3599]5:12
 [3600]5:12 [3601]5:12 [3602]5:12 [3603]5:12 [3604]5:12
 [3605]5:12 [3606]5:12 [3607]5:12 [3608]5:12 [3609]5:12
 [3610]5:12 [3611]5:12 [3612]5:12 [3613]5:12-19 [3614]5:12-19
 [3615]5:12-21 [3616]5:13 [3617]5:13 [3618]5:13 [3619]5:13
 [3620]5:13 [3621]5:14 [3622]5:14 [3623]5:14 [3624]5:14
 [3625]5:14 [3626]5:14 [3627]5:14 [3628]5:15 [3629]5:15
 [3630]5:15 [3631]5:16 [3632]5:16 [3633]5:16 [3634]5:17
 [3635]5:17-18 [3636]5:18 [3637]5:18 [3638]5:18 [3639]5:18
 [3640]5:18 [3641]5:18 [3642]5:18 [3643]5:18 [3644]5:18
 [3645]5:18 [3646]5:19 [3647]5:19 [3648]5:19 [3649]5:20
 [3650]5:20 [3651]5:20 [3652]5:20 [3653]5:20 [3654]5:20
 [3655]5:20 [3656]5:20 [3657]5:20 [3658]5:20 [3659]5:20
 [3660]5:20 [3661]5:20-21 [3662]5:21 [3663]5:21 [3664]5:21
 [3665]5:28-31 [3666]6 [3667]6:1 [3668]6:1-2 [3669]6:2
 [3670]6:3-11 [3671]6:4 [3672]6:6 [3673]6:6 [3674]6:12
 [3675]6:12 [3676]6:12 [3677]6:12 [3678]6:12 [3679]6:12
 [3680]6:12 [3681]6:12 [3682]6:12 [3683]6:12 [3684]6:12
 [3685]6:12-13 [3686]6:13 [3687]6:13 [3688]6:13 [3689]6:14
 [3690]6:14 [3691]6:14 [3692]6:17 [3693]6:18 [3694]6:20
 [3695]6:20 [3696]6:23 [3697]6:23 [3698]6:23 [3699]7
 [3700]7:1-2 [3701]7:4 [3702]7:6 [3703]7:6 [3704]7:6
 [3705]7:6-7 [3706]7:7 [3707]7:7 [3708]7:7 [3709]7:7
 [3710]7:7 [3711]7:7 [3712]7:7 [3713]7:7 [3714]7:7 [3715]7:7
 [3716]7:7-8 [3717]7:7-8 [3718]7:7-12 [3719]7:7-13
 [3720]7:7-25 [3721]7:8 [3722]7:11 [3723]7:12 [3724]7:12-13
 [3725]7:12-13 [3726]7:13 [3727]7:13 [3728]7:14 [3729]7:14
 [3730]7:14 [3731]7:14 [3732]7:14 [3733]7:14-16 [3734]7:14-25
 [3735]7:15 [3736]7:15 [3737]7:15 [3738]7:15 [3739]7:15
 [3740]7:15 [3741]7:15 [3742]7:15 [3743]7:15-25 [3744]7:16
 [3745]7:16 [3746]7:17 [3747]7:17 [3748]7:17 [3749]7:17
 [3750]7:18 [3751]7:18 [3752]7:18 [3753]7:18 [3754]7:18
 [3755]7:18 [3756]7:18 [3757]7:18 [3758]7:18 [3759]7:18
 [3760]7:18 [3761]7:18 [3762]7:18 [3763]7:19 [3764]7:19-20
 [3765]7:19-21 [3766]7:20 [3767]7:20 [3768]7:21 [3769]7:21-22
 [3770]7:22 [3771]7:22-23 [3772]7:22-23 [3773]7:22-23
 [3774]7:23 [3775]7:23 [3776]7:23 [3777]7:23 [3778]7:23
 [3779]7:23 [3780]7:23 [3781]7:23 [3782]7:23 [3783]7:23
 [3784]7:23 [3785]7:23 [3786]7:23 [3787]7:24 [3788]7:24
 [3789]7:24 [3790]7:24 [3791]7:24 [3792]7:24 [3793]7:24
 [3794]7:24 [3795]7:24 [3796]7:24 [3797]7:24 [3798]7:24-25
 [3799]7:24-25 [3800]7:24-25 [3801]7:24-25 [3802]7:24-25
 [3803]7:24-25 [3804]7:24-25 [3805]7:24-25 [3806]7:24-25
 [3807]7:24-25 [3808]7:25 [3809]7:25 [3810]7:25 [3811]7:25
 [3812]7:25 [3813]7:25 [3814]8:1 [3815]8:1 [3816]8:1-4
 [3817]8:1-11 [3818]8:2 [3819]8:3 [3820]8:3 [3821]8:3
 [3822]8:3 [3823]8:3 [3824]8:3-4 [3825]8:3-4 [3826]8:6
 [3827]8:6 [3828]8:7 [3829]8:7-8 [3830]8:8-9 [3831]8:9
 [3832]8:10 [3833]8:10 [3834]8:10 [3835]8:10 [3836]8:10-11
 [3837]8:10-11 [3838]8:10-11 [3839]8:11 [3840]8:11
 [3841]8:12-13 [3842]8:12-13 [3843]8:12-17 [3844]8:13
 [3845]8:14 [3846]8:14 [3847]8:14 [3848]8:14 [3849]8:14
 [3850]8:14 [3851]8:14 [3852]8:15 [3853]8:15 [3854]8:15
 [3855]8:15 [3856]8:20 [3857]8:23 [3858]8:23 [3859]8:23
 [3860]8:23 [3861]8:23 [3862]8:23-25 [3863]8:24-25
 [3864]8:24-25 [3865]8:24-25 [3866]8:24-25 [3867]8:24-25
 [3868]8:26 [3869]8:26 [3870]8:26 [3871]8:26 [3872]8:26-27
 [3873]8:28 [3874]8:28 [3875]8:28 [3876]8:28 [3877]8:28
 [3878]8:28 [3879]8:28 [3880]8:28 [3881]8:29 [3882]8:29
 [3883]8:29 [3884]8:29 [3885]8:29-30 [3886]8:29-30
 [3887]8:29-30 [3888]8:29-30 [3889]8:30 [3890]8:30 [3891]8:30
 [3892]8:30 [3893]8:31 [3894]8:31-32 [3895]8:32 [3896]8:35
 [3897]8:35-39 [3898]8:37 [3899]9 [3900]9:6 [3901]9:7-12
 [3902]9:8 [3903]9:8 [3904]9:10 [3905]9:10 [3906]9:11
 [3907]9:11 [3908]9:11 [3909]9:11 [3910]9:11 [3911]9:11
 [3912]9:11 [3913]9:11 [3914]9:11 [3915]9:11-12 [3916]9:12
 [3917]9:12 [3918]9:13 [3919]9:14 [3920]9:14 [3921]9:14
 [3922]9:14 [3923]9:14 [3924]9:14 [3925]9:14 [3926]9:14
 [3927]9:14 [3928]9:15 [3929]9:16 [3930]9:16 [3931]9:16
 [3932]9:16 [3933]9:16 [3934]9:16 [3935]9:16 [3936]9:16
 [3937]9:16 [3938]9:16 [3939]9:18 [3940]9:18 [3941]9:18
 [3942]9:18 [3943]9:18 [3944]9:19 [3945]9:20 [3946]9:20
 [3947]9:20 [3948]9:20 [3949]9:20 [3950]9:20 [3951]9:20-21
 [3952]9:21 [3953]9:21 [3954]9:21 [3955]9:22 [3956]9:22
 [3957]9:22 [3958]9:22 [3959]9:22 [3960]9:22-23 [3961]9:22-23
 [3962]9:22-23 [3963]9:23 [3964]9:23 [3965]9:23 [3966]9:23
 [3967]9:26 [3968]9:28 [3969]9:29 [3970]9:30 [3971]9:31
 [3972]9:31-32 [3973]9:32 [3974]9:32 [3975]9:33 [3976]10:1
 [3977]10:2 [3978]10:2-3 [3979]10:3 [3980]10:3 [3981]10:3
 [3982]10:3 [3983]10:3 [3984]10:3 [3985]10:3 [3986]10:3
 [3987]10:3 [3988]10:3 [3989]10:3 [3990]10:3 [3991]10:3-4
 [3992]10:4 [3993]10:4 [3994]10:4 [3995]10:4 [3996]10:6
 [3997]10:6-9 [3998]10:8 [3999]10:8 [4000]10:10 [4001]10:10
 [4002]10:13 [4003]10:14 [4004]10:14 [4005]10:14 [4006]10:14
 [4007]10:17 [4008]10:17-18 [4009]10:21 [4010]11:2 [4011]11:4
 [4012]11:5 [4013]11:5 [4014]11:5 [4015]11:5 [4016]11:5
 [4017]11:5-6 [4018]11:6 [4019]11:6 [4020]11:6 [4021]11:6
 [4022]11:6 [4023]11:6 [4024]11:6 [4025]11:6 [4026]11:6
 [4027]11:7 [4028]11:7 [4029]11:7 [4030]11:20 [4031]11:20
 [4032]11:24 [4033]11:24 [4034]11:25 [4035]11:28 [4036]11:28
 [4037]11:29 [4038]11:29 [4039]11:29 [4040]11:29 [4041]11:29
 [4042]11:29 [4043]11:30-32 [4044]11:32 [4045]11:33
 [4046]11:33 [4047]11:33 [4048]11:33 [4049]11:33 [4050]11:33
 [4051]11:33 [4052]11:33 [4053]11:33-36 [4054]11:33-36
 [4055]11:35 [4056]11:36 [4057]11:36 [4058]12:1 [4059]12:1
 [4060]12:1-2 [4061]12:2 [4062]12:2 [4063]12:3 [4064]12:3
 [4065]12:3 [4066]12:3 [4067]12:3 [4068]12:3 [4069]12:3
 [4070]12:3 [4071]12:3 [4072]12:3 [4073]12:3 [4074]12:12
 [4075]12:16 [4076]12:21 [4077]12:21 [4078]13:1 [4079]13:8
 [4080]13:8 [4081]13:8-10 [4082]13:9 [4083]13:9-10 [4084]13:10
 [4085]13:10 [4086]13:10 [4087]13:10 [4088]13:10 [4089]13:10
 [4090]13:10 [4091]14:4 [4092]14:4 [4093]14:17 [4094]14:23
 [4095]14:23 [4096]14:23 [4097]14:23 [4098]14:23 [4099]14:23
 [4100]14:23 [4101]14:23

 1 Corinthians

 [4102]1:1 [4103]1:3 [4104]1:12 [4105]1:13 [4106]1:17
 [4107]1:17 [4108]1:17 [4109]1:17 [4110]1:17 [4111]1:18
 [4112]1:19 [4113]1:24 [4114]1:27 [4115]1:29 [4116]1:30
 [4117]1:30 [4118]1:30-31 [4119]1:30-31 [4120]1:31 [4121]1:31
 [4122]1:31 [4123]1:31 [4124]1:31 [4125]1:31 [4126]1:31
 [4127]1:31 [4128]1:31 [4129]1:31 [4130]2:2 [4131]2:12
 [4132]2:12 [4133]2:14 [4134]2:14 [4135]2:16 [4136]3:1
 [4137]3:2 [4138]3:3 [4139]3:5 [4140]3:6-7 [4141]3:7
 [4142]3:7 [4143]3:7 [4144]3:7 [4145]3:7 [4146]3:10
 [4147]3:12 [4148]3:12 [4149]3:15 [4150]3:15 [4151]3:15
 [4152]3:21 [4153]3:21 [4154]3:32-33 [4155]4:6 [4156]4:7
 [4157]4:7 [4158]4:7 [4159]4:7 [4160]4:7 [4161]4:7 [4162]4:7
 [4163]4:7 [4164]4:7 [4165]4:7 [4166]4:7 [4167]4:7 [4168]4:7
 [4169]4:7 [4170]4:7 [4171]4:7 [4172]4:7 [4173]4:7 [4174]4:7
 [4175]4:7 [4176]4:7 [4177]4:7 [4178]4:7 [4179]4:7 [4180]4:7
 [4181]4:7 [4182]4:16 [4183]6:7 [4184]6:15 [4185]6:17
 [4186]6:17 [4187]6:17 [4188]6:19 [4189]6:19 [4190]6:19-20
 [4191]7:1 [4192]7:2 [4193]7:3-6 [4194]7:4 [4195]7:5
 [4196]7:5 [4197]7:6 [4198]7:7 [4199]7:7 [4200]7:7 [4201]7:7
 [4202]7:7 [4203]7:7 [4204]7:9 [4205]7:14 [4206]7:14
 [4207]7:14 [4208]7:25 [4209]7:25 [4210]7:25 [4211]7:25
 [4212]7:25 [4213]7:25 [4214]7:28 [4215]7:29-31 [4216]7:36
 [4217]7:36 [4218]7:36 [4219]7:36 [4220]7:36-37 [4221]7:37
 [4222]7:38 [4223]8:1 [4224]8:1 [4225]8:1 [4226]8:11
 [4227]8:11 [4228]9:7 [4229]9:17 [4230]9:23 [4231]9:24
 [4232]9:24 [4233]9:27 [4234]9:27 [4235]10:4 [4236]10:12
 [4237]10:12 [4238]10:12 [4239]10:13 [4240]10:31 [4241]10:33
 [4242]11:1 [4243]11:1 [4244]11:3 [4245]11:3 [4246]11:12
 [4247]11:12 [4248]11:19 [4249]11:19 [4250]12:6 [4251]12:11
 [4252]12:12 [4253]12:13 [4254]12:17 [4255]12:28 [4256]12:31
 [4257]13:4 [4258]13:4 [4259]13:5 [4260]13:5 [4261]13:7
 [4262]13:8 [4263]13:8 [4264]13:10 [4265]13:10 [4266]13:10
 [4267]13:11 [4268]13:11 [4269]13:12 [4270]13:12 [4271]13:12
 [4272]13:12 [4273]13:12 [4274]13:12 [4275]13:12 [4276]13:12
 [4277]13:12 [4278]13:12 [4279]13:13 [4280]13:13 [4281]14:1
 [4282]14:14 [4283]14:18 [4284]14:20 [4285]15 [4286]15:3
 [4287]15:9 [4288]15:9 [4289]15:9 [4290]15:9 [4291]15:9
 [4292]15:9-10 [4293]15:9-10 [4294]15:10 [4295]15:10
 [4296]15:10 [4297]15:10 [4298]15:10 [4299]15:10 [4300]15:10
 [4301]15:10 [4302]15:21 [4303]15:21 [4304]15:21
 [4305]15:21-22 [4306]15:21-22 [4307]15:21-22 [4308]15:21-22
 [4309]15:21-22 [4310]15:22 [4311]15:22 [4312]15:22
 [4313]15:22 [4314]15:22 [4315]15:22 [4316]15:26 [4317]15:33
 [4318]15:34 [4319]15:34 [4320]15:35-36 [4321]15:36
 [4322]15:36 [4323]15:37 [4324]15:38 [4325]15:38 [4326]15:40
 [4327]15:41 [4328]15:44 [4329]15:44 [4330]15:46
 [4331]15:52-53 [4332]15:53 [4333]15:53 [4334]15:53
 [4335]15:53-56 [4336]15:54 [4337]15:54 [4338]15:55
 [4339]15:55 [4340]15:56 [4341]15:56 [4342]15:56 [4343]15:57
 [4344]15:57 [4345]15:57 [4346]15:57 [4347]16:8 [4348]16:14
 [4349]16:14

 2 Corinthians

 [4350]2:12-13 [4351]2:14 [4352]2:16 [4353]3:2-3 [4354]3:3
 [4355]3:3 [4356]3:3 [4357]3:3 [4358]3:3 [4359]3:3
 [4360]3:3-9 [4361]3:4 [4362]3:5 [4363]3:5 [4364]3:5
 [4365]3:5 [4366]3:5 [4367]3:5 [4368]3:5 [4369]3:5
 [4370]3:5-6 [4371]3:6 [4372]3:6 [4373]3:6 [4374]3:6
 [4375]3:6 [4376]3:6 [4377]3:6 [4378]3:6 [4379]3:6 [4380]3:6
 [4381]3:6 [4382]3:6 [4383]3:6 [4384]3:6 [4385]3:6 [4386]3:6
 [4387]3:7 [4388]3:8 [4389]3:9 [4390]3:9 [4391]3:13
 [4392]3:14 [4393]3:16 [4394]3:17 [4395]3:17 [4396]3:17
 [4397]4:1-2 [4398]4:5-6 [4399]4:6 [4400]4:7 [4401]4:7
 [4402]4:13 [4403]4:13 [4404]4:13 [4405]4:13 [4406]4:13
 [4407]4:13 [4408]4:16 [4409]4:16 [4410]4:16 [4411]4:16
 [4412]4:16 [4413]4:16 [4414]4:16 [4415]4:16 [4416]4:16
 [4417]4:16 [4418]5:1-4 [4419]5:2-4 [4420]5:4 [4421]5:5
 [4422]5:6 [4423]5:7 [4424]5:7 [4425]5:7 [4426]5:10
 [4427]5:10 [4428]5:14-21 [4429]5:17 [4430]5:17-18 [4431]5:20
 [4432]5:20-21 [4433]5:20-21 [4434]5:21 [4435]5:21 [4436]5:21
 [4437]5:21 [4438]5:21 [4439]6:1 [4440]6:1 [4441]6:1-2
 [4442]6:14 [4443]8:9 [4444]8:11 [4445]8:16 [4446]9:7
 [4447]9:7 [4448]10:17 [4449]10:17 [4450]10:17 [4451]10:17
 [4452]11:14 [4453]12:2 [4454]12:4 [4455]12:7 [4456]12:7
 [4457]12:7 [4458]12:7-8 [4459]12:7-8 [4460]12:7-9
 [4461]12:7-9 [4462]12:8-9 [4463]12:9 [4464]12:9 [4465]12:9
 [4466]13:7 [4467]13:7 [4468]13:7 [4469]13:7 [4470]13:7
 [4471]13:11

 Galatians

 [4472]1:3 [4473]1:3-4 [4474]1:11 [4475]2:14-16 [4476]2:15-16
 [4477]2:16 [4478]2:16 [4479]2:20 [4480]2:21 [4481]2:21
 [4482]2:21 [4483]2:21 [4484]2:21 [4485]2:21 [4486]2:21
 [4487]2:21 [4488]3:5 [4489]3:8 [4490]3:8 [4491]3:8
 [4492]3:11 [4493]3:11 [4494]3:12 [4495]3:13 [4496]3:15
 [4497]3:16 [4498]3:16 [4499]3:18 [4500]3:18 [4501]3:18
 [4502]3:19 [4503]3:19 [4504]3:19 [4505]3:19 [4506]3:19
 [4507]3:19-22 [4508]3:21 [4509]3:21 [4510]3:21 [4511]3:21
 [4512]3:21 [4513]3:21-22 [4514]3:21-22 [4515]3:22 [4516]3:22
 [4517]3:22 [4518]3:22 [4519]3:23 [4520]3:23 [4521]3:23
 [4522]3:24 [4523]3:24 [4524]3:24 [4525]3:24 [4526]3:24
 [4527]4:6 [4528]4:6 [4529]4:6 [4530]4:21 [4531]4:21-26
 [4532]4:24 [4533]4:24 [4534]4:24 [4535]4:25 [4536]4:25-26
 [4537]4:28 [4538]4:30 [4539]4:31 [4540]4:31 [4541]5:4
 [4542]5:4 [4543]5:5 [4544]5:6 [4545]5:6 [4546]5:6 [4547]5:6
 [4548]5:6 [4549]5:6 [4550]5:6 [4551]5:6 [4552]5:6
 [4553]5:11 [4554]5:13-14 [4555]5:17 [4556]5:17 [4557]5:17
 [4558]5:17 [4559]5:17 [4560]5:17 [4561]5:17 [4562]5:17
 [4563]5:17 [4564]5:17 [4565]5:17 [4566]5:17 [4567]5:17
 [4568]5:17 [4569]5:17 [4570]5:17-21 [4571]5:18 [4572]5:22-23
 [4573]6:3 [4574]6:6 [4575]6:7 [4576]6:17

 Ephesians

 [4577]1:3 [4578]1:3 [4579]1:3-4 [4580]1:4 [4581]1:4
 [4582]1:4-11 [4583]1:5 [4584]1:8 [4585]1:8 [4586]1:8
 [4587]1:11 [4588]1:11 [4589]1:13 [4590]1:18 [4591]1:22-23
 [4592]2:1-5 [4593]2:2 [4594]2:3 [4595]2:3 [4596]2:3
 [4597]2:3 [4598]2:3 [4599]2:3 [4600]2:3 [4601]2:3-5
 [4602]2:4-5 [4603]2:8 [4604]2:8 [4605]2:8 [4606]2:8
 [4607]2:8-9 [4608]2:8-9 [4609]2:8-10 [4610]2:8-10 [4611]2:9
 [4612]2:9-10 [4613]2:10 [4614]2:10 [4615]2:10 [4616]2:12-18
 [4617]3:19 [4618]3:20 [4619]4:8 [4620]4:8 [4621]4:8
 [4622]4:13 [4623]4:21-24 [4624]4:23 [4625]4:24 [4626]4:30
 [4627]5:8 [4628]5:8 [4629]5:14 [4630]5:23 [4631]5:25
 [4632]5:25 [4633]5:25 [4634]5:26 [4635]5:26 [4636]5:26
 [4637]5:26-27 [4638]5:27 [4639]5:27 [4640]5:27 [4641]5:27
 [4642]5:32 [4643]5:32 [4644]6:7 [4645]6:14 [4646]6:23
 [4647]6:23 [4648]6:23 [4649]6:23 [4650]6:23 [4651]6:23

 Philippians

 [4652]1:3 [4653]1:6 [4654]1:6 [4655]1:6 [4656]1:8
 [4657]1:13 [4658]1:19 [4659]1:21 [4660]1:28-29 [4661]1:29
 [4662]1:29 [4663]1:29 [4664]2:6 [4665]2:6 [4666]2:7
 [4667]2:7 [4668]2:8 [4669]2:12 [4670]2:12 [4671]2:12
 [4672]2:12-13 [4673]2:12-13 [4674]2:12-13 [4675]2:12-13
 [4676]2:13 [4677]2:13 [4678]2:13 [4679]2:13 [4680]2:13
 [4681]2:13 [4682]2:13 [4683]2:13 [4684]2:13 [4685]2:13
 [4686]2:13 [4687]2:13 [4688]2:13 [4689]2:13 [4690]2:13
 [4691]2:13 [4692]2:13 [4693]2:13 [4694]2:14-15 [4695]2:21
 [4696]2:29 [4697]3:1 [4698]3:2-3 [4699]3:4 [4700]3:6
 [4701]3:6 [4702]3:6 [4703]3:6-8 [4704]3:6-16 [4705]3:7-11
 [4706]3:8 [4707]3:8-9 [4708]3:9 [4709]3:9 [4710]3:9-10
 [4711]3:11-12 [4712]3:12 [4713]3:12 [4714]3:12 [4715]3:12
 [4716]3:12 [4717]3:12-13 [4718]3:12-14 [4719]3:12-15
 [4720]3:13 [4721]3:13 [4722]3:13 [4723]3:13-14 [4724]3:13-14
 [4725]3:15 [4726]3:15 [4727]3:15 [4728]3:15 [4729]3:15
 [4730]3:15 [4731]3:15 [4732]3:15 [4733]3:15 [4734]3:15
 [4735]3:15 [4736]3:15-16 [4737]3:16 [4738]3:16 [4739]3:16
 [4740]3:16 [4741]3:20 [4742]4:4

 Colossians

 [4743]1:12-13 [4744]1:12-14 [4745]1:13 [4746]1:13 [4747]1:13
 [4748]1:13 [4749]1:13 [4750]1:13 [4751]1:13 [4752]1:13
 [4753]1:13 [4754]1:13 [4755]1:13 [4756]1:15 [4757]1:21-22
 [4758]1:28 [4759]2:10-15 [4760]2:11 [4761]2:11 [4762]2:13
 [4763]2:14 [4764]3:1 [4765]3:3 [4766]3:4 [4767]3:4
 [4768]3:5 [4769]3:10 [4770]3:10 [4771]3:10 [4772]3:14
 [4773]3:18 [4774]3:19 [4775]3:25 [4776]4:2 [4777]4:3
 [4778]4:6 [4779]4:12

 1 Thessalonians

 [4780]2:13 [4781]3:5 [4782]3:12 [4783]3:12 [4784]4:3-5
 [4785]4:3-5 [4786]4:5 [4787]4:5 [4788]4:9 [4789]4:10
 [4790]4:13 [4791]4:17 [4792]5:14 [4793]5:14-15 [4794]5:21
 [4795]5:23 [4796]5:23 [4797]5:23

 2 Thessalonians

 [4798]1:3 [4799]1:7-8 [4800]2:10-12 [4801]3:2 [4802]3:2
 [4803]3:2 [4804]3:2

 1 Timothy

 [4805]1:5 [4806]1:5 [4807]1:5 [4808]1:5 [4809]1:8 [4810]1:8
 [4811]1:8 [4812]1:9 [4813]1:9 [4814]1:15 [4815]1:15
 [4816]1:15 [4817]1:15-16 [4818]1:15-16 [4819]1:20 [4820]2:4
 [4821]2:4 [4822]2:4 [4823]2:4 [4824]2:5 [4825]2:5 [4826]2:5
 [4827]2:5 [4828]2:5 [4829]2:5 [4830]2:5 [4831]2:5 [4832]2:5
 [4833]2:5-6 [4834]2:5-6 [4835]2:5-6 [4836]2:7 [4837]2:7
 [4838]2:9-10 [4839]3:10 [4840]3:16 [4841]4 [4842]4:1
 [4843]4:5 [4844]4:14 [4845]5:14 [4846]5:14 [4847]5:14
 [4848]5:20 [4849]5:22 [4850]6:10 [4851]6:17

 2 Timothy

 [4852]1:7 [4853]1:7 [4854]1:7 [4855]1:7 [4856]1:7 [4857]1:8
 [4858]1:8 [4859]1:8-9 [4860]1:8-10 [4861]1:9 [4862]1:12
 [4863]2:19 [4864]2:21 [4865]2:25 [4866]2:25 [4867]2:25
 [4868]2:25-26 [4869]3:7 [4870]3:12 [4871]3:13 [4872]4:6
 [4873]4:6-7 [4874]4:7 [4875]4:7 [4876]4:7 [4877]4:7 [4878]4:8

 Titus

 [4879]1:6 [4880]1:6 [4881]2:12 [4882]2:13-14 [4883]3:3
 [4884]3:3-7 [4885]3:4-7 [4886]3:5 [4887]3:5 [4888]3:5
 [4889]3:5 [4890]3:5 [4891]3:5

 Philemon

 [4892]1:13 [4893]1:14 [4894]1:14

 Hebrews

 [4895]1:1-3 [4896]2:2-3 [4897]2:14 [4898]2:14 [4899]2:14-15
 [4900]2:17 [4901]4:14-15 [4902]4:15 [4903]4:15 [4904]5:1
 [4905]7:9 [4906]7:24-27 [4907]7:26-27 [4908]9:24-28 [4909]11
 [4910]11:1 [4911]11:4-6 [4912]11:6 [4913]11:6 [4914]11:13
 [4915]11:39-40 [4916]11:40 [4917]12:2 [4918]12:6 [4919]13:4
 [4920]13:4

 James

 [4921]1:5 [4922]1:5 [4923]1:5 [4924]1:5 [4925]1:5
 [4926]1:5-6 [4927]1:5-6 [4928]1:13 [4929]1:13 [4930]1:13-15
 [4931]1:14 [4932]1:14 [4933]1:14 [4934]1:16 [4935]1:17
 [4936]1:17 [4937]1:17 [4938]1:17 [4939]1:17 [4940]1:17
 [4941]1:17 [4942]1:17 [4943]1:25 [4944]2:1 [4945]2:5
 [4946]2:8 [4947]2:10 [4948]2:12 [4949]2:13 [4950]2:13
 [4951]2:13 [4952]2:13 [4953]2:13 [4954]2:13 [4955]2:13
 [4956]2:19 [4957]3:2 [4958]3:2 [4959]3:2 [4960]3:2
 [4961]3:2 [4962]3:8 [4963]3:8 [4964]3:8 [4965]3:10
 [4966]3:13-17 [4967]3:14 [4968]3:14-17 [4969]3:15 [4970]3:17
 [4971]3:17 [4972]3:17 [4973]4:6 [4974]4:6 [4975]4:7
 [4976]4:11 [4977]4:17 [4978]17:5

 1 Peter

 [4979]1:3-5 [4980]1:5 [4981]1:7-9 [4982]1:13-16 [4983]2:9
 [4984]3:6 [4985]3:9 [4986]3:15 [4987]3:17 [4988]3:18
 [4989]3:21 [4990]3:21 [4991]4:8 [4992]5:6

 2 Peter

 [4993]1:4 [4994]1:4 [4995]2:12 [4996]2:19 [4997]2:19
 [4998]2:19 [4999]3:14-16

 1 John

 [5000]1:7 [5001]1:8 [5002]1:8 [5003]1:8 [5004]1:8 [5005]1:8
 [5006]1:8 [5007]1:8 [5008]1:8 [5009]1:8 [5010]1:8 [5011]1:8
 [5012]1:8 [5013]1:8 [5014]1:8 [5015]1:8 [5016]1:8 [5017]1:8
 [5018]1:8 [5019]1:8 [5020]1:8 [5021]1:8 [5022]1:8 [5023]1:8
 [5024]1:8 [5025]1:8 [5026]1:8 [5027]1:8 [5028]1:8 [5029]1:8
 [5030]1:8 [5031]1:8 [5032]1:10 [5033]2:1 [5034]2:10
 [5035]2:15 [5036]2:15-17 [5037]2:16 [5038]2:16 [5039]2:16
 [5040]2:16 [5041]2:16 [5042]2:19 [5043]2:19 [5044]2:19
 [5045]3:1 [5046]3:1 [5047]3:2 [5048]3:2 [5049]3:2 [5050]3:2
 [5051]3:2 [5052]3:2 [5053]3:2 [5054]3:2-3 [5055]3:5
 [5056]3:5-6 [5057]3:6 [5058]3:8 [5059]3:8 [5060]3:8
 [5061]3:9 [5062]3:9 [5063]3:9 [5064]3:9 [5065]3:9 [5066]3:9
 [5067]3:9 [5068]3:9 [5069]3:9 [5070]3:10-11 [5071]3:16
 [5072]3:21-22 [5073]3:21-22 [5074]3:23 [5075]4:1 [5076]4:7
 [5077]4:7 [5078]4:7 [5079]4:7 [5080]4:7 [5081]4:7 [5082]4:7
 [5083]4:7-8 [5084]4:10 [5085]4:10 [5086]4:16 [5087]4:18
 [5088]4:18 [5089]4:18 [5090]4:19 [5091]4:19 [5092]4:19
 [5093]4:21 [5094]5:2-3 [5095]5:3 [5096]5:3 [5097]5:3
 [5098]5:9-12 [5099]5:16 [5100]5:18 [5101]5:20

 2 John

 [5102]1:5

 Jude

 [5103]1:24

 Revelation

 [5104]2:12 [5105]3:11 [5106]5:6 [5107]5:9 [5108]6 [5109]6:9
 [5110]6:13-14 [5111]9 [5112]14:3-5 [5113]14:5 [5114]14:5
 [5115]22:12

 Tobit

 [5116]2:10 [5117]4:5-6 [5118]4:21

 Wisdom of Solomon

 [5119]1:5 [5120]1:11 [5121]1:20-21 [5122]2:24 [5123]2:24
 [5124]2:25 [5125]4:1 [5126]4:11 [5127]4:11 [5128]4:11
 [5129]4:11 [5130]4:11 [5131]4:11 [5132]4:11 [5133]4:13
 [5134]4:14 [5135]6:21 [5136]6:21 [5137]7:1 [5138]7:6-7
 [5139]7:16 [5140]8:19-20 [5141]8:21 [5142]8:21 [5143]8:21
 [5144]8:21 [5145]8:21 [5146]8:21 [5147]9:15 [5148]9:15
 [5149]9:15 [5150]10:10-11 [5151]12:10-11 [5152]12:11
 [5153]13:9 [5154]16

 Baruch

 [5155]2:31 [5156]2:31 [5157]2:31

 1 Maccabees

 [5158]2:69

 2 Maccabees

 [5159]7:22-23 [5160]7:29 [5161]12:39-45 [5162]12:43 [5163]12:43

 1 Esdras

 [5164]8:25

 Sirach

 [5165]3:21 [5166]3:21-22 [5167]7:21 [5168]10:9 [5169]10:12
 [5170]10:13 [5171]10:13 [5172]13:5-6 [5173]13:24 [5174]13:24
 [5175]15:8 [5176]15:11-17 [5177]15:14-17 [5178]15:15
 [5179]15:15 [5180]15:16 [5181]15:16-17 [5182]18:30
 [5183]18:30 [5184]18:30 [5185]18:30 [5186]18:30 [5187]18:30
 [5188]19:16 [5189]19:16 [5190]21:1 [5191]21:1 [5192]22:27
 [5193]23:4 [5194]23:5 [5195]23:6 [5196]25:24 [5197]38:10
 [5198]38:10 [5199]39:25 [5200]40:1

Index of Greek Words and Phrases

 * eleemosunen: [5201]1
 * anamartetos: [5202]1
 * ek: [5203]1
 * elpizomenon: [5204]1
 * en pathei epithumias: [5205]1
 * en te kardia sou: [5206]1
 * he: [5207]1
 * hegemonikon: [5208]1
 * e: [5209]1
 * o anthropos o alethinos oron: [5210]1
 * Ina me ha an thelete, tauta poiete: [5211]1
 * O: [5212]1
 * Apallaxeis apo pneumatos mou ten psuchen mou: [5213]1
 * Kurios...plasson pneuma anthoopou en auto: [5214]1
 * Kai enephusesen eis to proso pon autou pnoen zoes: [5215]1
 * Kai didous pnoen to lao to ep' autes: [5216]1
 * Kunikoi: [5217]1
 * Pasa pnoe ainesato ton Kurion: [5218]1
 * Pelagios: [5219]1
 * Pneuma gar par' emou exeleusetai, kai pnoen pasan ego epoisa:
 [5220]1
 * Pnoe de pantokratoros estin he didaskousa: [5221]1
 * Sunesis de cheileon mou kathara noesei. Pneuma theion to poiesan
 me, pnoe de pantokratoros estin he didaskousa: [5222]1
 * bdelussomai koiten aperitmeton: [5223]1
 * genesin: [5224]1
 * gamesai: [5225]1
 * gameisthai: [5226]1
 * dia: [5227]1
 * dikaiosunen: [5228]1
 * dunameos: [5229]1
 * theosebeia: [5230]1
 * theosebeia,: [5231]1
 * kai en tais chersi sou: [5232]1
 * lestai: [5233]1
 * moros: [5234]1
 * perizomata: [5235]1 [5236]2
 * pnoe: [5237]1 [5238]2 [5239]3 [5240]4
 * to phos: [5241]1
 * ten paratheken mou: [5242]1
 * teliskomenos: [5243]1
 * photizei panta anthropon erchomenon eis ton kosmon: [5244]1

Index of Hebrew Words and Phrases

 * byd lsvn: [5245]1
 * vkry y'tsy: [5246]1
 * kry: [5247]1
 * mpny cht'ty: [5248]1

Index of Pages of the Print Edition

 [5249]iii  [5250]v  [5251]vii  [5252]viii  [5253]ix  [5254]x  [5255]xi
 [5256]xii  [5257]xiii  [5258]xiv  [5259]xv  [5260]xvi  [5261]xvii
 [5262]xviii  [5263]xix  [5264]xx  [5265]xxi  [5266]xxii  [5267]xxiii
 [5268]xxiv  [5269]xxv  [5270]xxvi  [5271]xxvii  [5272]xxviii
 [5273]xxix  [5274]xxx  [5275]xxxi  [5276]xxxii  [5277]xxxiii
 [5278]xxxiv  [5279]xxxv  [5280]xxxvi  [5281]xxxvii  [5282]xxxviii
 [5283]xxxix  [5284]xl  [5285]xli  [5286]xlii  [5287]xliii  [5288]xliv
 [5289]xlv  [5290]xlvi  [5291]xlvii  [5292]xlviii  [5293]xlix  [5294]l
 [5295]li  [5296]lii  [5297]liii  [5298]liv  [5299]lv  [5300]lvi
 [5301]lvii  [5302]lviii  [5303]lix  [5304]lx  [5305]lxi  [5306]lxii
 [5307]lxiii  [5308]lxiv  [5309]lxv  [5310]lxvi  [5311]lxvii
 [5312]lxviii  [5313]lxix  [5314]lxx  [5315]lxxi  [5316]1  [5317]2
 [5318]3  [5319]4  [5320]5  [5321]6  [5322]7  [5323]8  [5324]9
 [5325]10  [5326]11  [5327]12  [5328]15  [5329]16  [5330]17  [5331]18
 [5332]19  [5333]20  [5334]21  [5335]22  [5336]23  [5337]24  [5338]25
 [5339]26  [5340]27  [5341]28  [5342]29  [5343]30  [5344]31  [5345]32
 [5346]33  [5347]34  [5348]35  [5349]36  [5350]37  [5351]38  [5352]39
 [5353]40  [5354]41  [5355]42  [5356]43  [5357]44  [5358]45  [5359]46
 [5360]47  [5361]48  [5362]49  [5363]50  [5364]51  [5365]52  [5366]53
 [5367]54  [5368]55  [5369]56  [5370]57  [5371]58  [5372]59  [5373]60
 [5374]61  [5375]62  [5376]63  [5377]64  [5378]65  [5379]66  [5380]67
 [5381]68  [5382]69  [5383]70  [5384]71  [5385]72  [5386]73  [5387]74
 [5388]75  [5389]76  [5390]77  [5391]78  [5392]79  [5393]80  [5394]83
 [5395]84  [5396]85  [5397]86  [5398]87  [5399]88  [5400]89  [5401]90
 [5402]91  [5403]92  [5404]93  [5405]94  [5406]95  [5407]96  [5408]97
 [5409]98  [5410]99  [5411]100  [5412]101  [5413]102  [5414]103
 [5415]104  [5416]105  [5417]106  [5418]107  [5419]108  [5420]109
 [5421]110  [5422]111  [5423]112  [5424]113  [5425]114  [5426]115
 [5427]116  [5428]117  [5429]121  [5430]122  [5431]123  [5432]124
 [5433]125  [5434]126  [5435]127  [5436]128  [5437]129  [5438]130
 [5439]131  [5440]132  [5441]133  [5442]134  [5443]135  [5444]136
 [5445]137  [5446]138  [5447]139  [5448]140  [5449]141  [5450]142
 [5451]143  [5452]144  [5453]145  [5454]146  [5455]147  [5456]148
 [5457]149  [5458]150  [5459]151  [5460]152  [5461]155  [5462]156
 [5463]159  [5464]160  [5465]161  [5466]162  [5467]163  [5468]164
 [5469]165  [5470]166  [5471]167  [5472]168  [5473]169  [5474]170
 [5475]171  [5476]172  [5477]173  [5478]174  [5479]175  [5480]176
 [5481]177  [5482]178  [5483]179  [5484]180  [5485]183  [5486]184
 [5487]185  [5488]186  [5489]187  [5490]188  [5491]189  [5492]190
 [5493]191  [5494]192  [5495]193  [5496]194  [5497]195  [5498]196
 [5499]197  [5500]198  [5501]199  [5502]200  [5503]201  [5504]202
 [5505]203  [5506]204  [5507]205  [5508]206  [5509]207  [5510]208
 [5511]209  [5512]210  [5513]211  [5514]212  [5515]213  [5516]214
 [5517]217  [5518]218  [5519]219  [5520]220  [5521]221  [5522]222
 [5523]223  [5524]224  [5525]225  [5526]226  [5527]227  [5528]228
 [5529]229  [5530]230  [5531]231  [5532]232  [5533]233  [5534]234
 [5535]235  [5536]236  [5537]237  [5538]238  [5539]239  [5540]240
 [5541]241  [5542]242  [5543]243  [5544]244  [5545]245  [5546]246
 [5547]247  [5548]248  [5549]249  [5550]250  [5551]251  [5552]252
 [5553]253  [5554]254  [5555]257  [5556]258  [5557]259  [5558]260
 [5559]263  [5560]264  [5561]265  [5562]266  [5563]267  [5564]268
 [5565]269  [5566]270  [5567]271  [5568]272  [5569]273  [5570]274
 [5571]275  [5572]276  [5573]277  [5574]278  [5575]279  [5576]280
 [5577]281  [5578]283  [5579]284  [5580]285  [5581]286  [5582]287
 [5583]288  [5584]289  [5585]290  [5586]291  [5587]292  [5588]293
 [5589]294  [5590]295  [5591]296  [5592]297  [5593]298  [5594]299
 [5595]300  [5596]301  [5597]302  [5598]303  [5599]304  [5600]305
 [5601]306  [5602]307  [5603]308  [5604]309  [5605]310  [5606]311
 [5607]315  [5608]316  [5609]317  [5610]318  [5611]319  [5612]320
 [5613]321  [5614]322  [5615]323  [5616]324  [5617]325  [5618]326
 [5619]327  [5620]328  [5621]329  [5622]330  [5623]331  [5624]332
 [5625]333  [5626]334  [5627]335  [5628]336  [5629]337  [5630]338
 [5631]339  [5632]340  [5633]341  [5634]342  [5635]343  [5636]344
 [5637]345  [5638]346  [5639]347  [5640]348  [5641]349  [5642]350
 [5643]351  [5644]352  [5645]353  [5646]354  [5647]355  [5648]356
 [5649]357  [5650]358  [5651]359  [5652]360  [5653]361  [5654]362
 [5655]363  [5656]364  [5657]365  [5658]366  [5659]367  [5660]368
 [5661]369  [5662]370  [5663]371  [5664]373  [5665]374  [5666]377
 [5667]378  [5668]379  [5669]380  [5670]381  [5671]382  [5672]383
 [5673]384  [5674]385  [5675]386  [5676]387  [5677]388  [5678]389
 [5679]390  [5680]391  [5681]392  [5682]393  [5683]394  [5684]395
 [5685]396  [5686]397  [5687]398  [5688]399  [5689]400  [5690]401
 [5691]402  [5692]403  [5693]404  [5694]405  [5695]406  [5696]407
 [5697]408  [5698]409  [5699]410  [5700]411  [5701]412  [5702]413
 [5703]414  [5704]415  [5705]416  [5706]417  [5707]418  [5708]419
 [5709]420  [5710]421  [5711]422  [5712]423  [5713]424  [5714]425
 [5715]426  [5716]427  [5717]428  [5718]429  [5719]430  [5720]431
 [5721]432  [5722]433  [5723]434  [5724]435  [5725]436  [5726]437
 [5727]438  [5728]439  [5729]440  [5730]443  [5731]444  [5732]445
 [5733]446  [5734]447  [5735]448  [5736]449  [5737]450  [5738]451
 [5739]452  [5740]453  [5741]454  [5742]455  [5743]456  [5744]457
 [5745]458  [5746]459  [5747]460  [5748]461  [5749]462  [5750]463
 [5751]464  [5752]465  [5753]467  [5754]468  [5755]471  [5756]472
 [5757]473  [5758]474  [5759]475  [5760]476  [5761]477  [5762]478
 [5763]479  [5764]480  [5765]481  [5766]482  [5767]483  [5768]484
 [5769]485  [5770]486  [5771]487  [5772]488  [5773]489  [5774]490
 [5775]491  [5776]493  [5777]497  [5778]498  [5779]499  [5780]500
 [5781]501  [5782]502  [5783]503  [5784]504  [5785]505  [5786]506
 [5787]507  [5788]508  [5789]509  [5790]510  [5791]511  [5792]512
 [5793]513  [5794]514  [5795]515  [5796]516  [5797]517  [5798]518
 [5799]519  [5800]521  [5801]525  [5802]526  [5803]527  [5804]528
 [5805]529  [5806]530  [5807]531  [5808]532  [5809]533  [5810]534
 [5811]535  [5812]536  [5813]537  [5814]538  [5815]539  [5816]540
 [5817]541  [5818]542  [5819]543  [5820]544  [5821]545  [5822]546
 [5823]547  [5824]548  [5825]549  [5826]550  [5827]551  [5828]552

 This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
 Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
 generated on demand from ThML source.

References
