The Isha Upanishad
Sri Aurobindo (trans. and commentary) (1924)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): The authorized second edition (Arya Publishing House, Calcutta, July 1924) of Sri Aurobindo's Isha Upanishad translation and commentary (first edition 1921). Public domain.

========================================================================

ISHA UPANISHAD


ISHA UPANISHAD


BY

SRI AUROBINDO GHOSE.


AUTHORISED EDITION
{Revised and Enlarged)


ARYA PUBLISHING HOUSE

College Street, Market.
Calcutta.


Published by
Sarat Chandra Guha B.A.
CoUmge Street Market, Calcutta.


SECOND EDITION

July 1924.


Printer : S. C. MajumdaR

SRI GOURANGA PRESS
7///, Mirzapur Street, Calcutta.


CONTENTS


Page.

Text and Translation ... ... ... I

ANALYSIS

Plan of the Upanishad ... ... ... 13

First Movement

The basis of Cosmic Existence ... ... 16

The Rule of Divine Life ... ... 19

The Justification of Works ... ... 20

Second Movement

Brahman ... ... ... 23

Self-Realisation ... ... ... 38

Third Movement

The Lord ... ... ... 51

Knowledge and Ignorance ... ... 66

Birth and Non-Birth ... ... 79

Fourth Movement

The Worlds—Surya ... ... 85

Action and The Divine Will ... ... 100

Conclusion and Summary ... ... 110


ISHA UPANISHAD


^ ?TT II ?

1. All this is for habitation^ by the Lord,
whatsoever is individual universe of movement
in the universal motion. By that renounced
thou shouldst enjoy; lust not after any man’s
possession.


^ TThre are three possible senses of vasyam, **to
be clothed,” “to be worn as a garment” and ”to be
inhabited.” The first is the ordinarily accepted
meaning. Shankara explains it in this significance,
that we must lose the sense of this unreal objective
universe in the sole perception of the pure Brahman.


2


ISHA UPANISHAD


spf ’?wn: i

Ti# ^ 5ns?i^??rj% 5T ^ f^n*r^ ^rt ii ^

’iro ^ ?T»?^m: i

fri^ W<?lTfw^fs?T ^ % ^T^ ’f -' i?! 'SRt: II ^

i

?T^T^S5?IT5I<^f?T f?TSgr cTf^^qt WTftTiT

^virf^ii 8

2. Doing verily^ works in this world one
should wish to live a hundred years. Thus it is

So explained the first line becomes a contradiction of
the whole thought of the Upanishad which teaches the
reconciliation, by the perception of essential Unity,
of the apparently incompatible opposites, God and
the world, Renunciation and Enjoyment, Action and
mternal Freedom, the One and the Many, Being and
its Becomings, the passive divine Impersonality and
the active divine Personality, the Knowledge and
the Ignorance, the Becoming and the Not-Becoming,
Life on earth and beyond and the supreme Immorta¬
lity. The image is of the world either as a garment
or as a dwelling-place for the informing and govern¬
ing Spirit. The latter significance agrees better with
the thought of the Upanishad.

^ Kurvanneva. The stress of the word eva gives
the force, “doing works indeed, and not refraining
from them.**


ISHA UPANISHAD


3


in thee and not otherwise than this; action
cleaves not to a man.^

3. Sunless" are those worlds and enve¬
loped in blind gloom whereto all they in their
passing hence resort who are slayers of their
souls.

4. One unmoving that is swifter than
Mind, That the Gods reach not, for It progresses
ever in front. That, standing, passes beyond

^ Shankara reads the line, “Thus in thee—it is
not otherwise than thus—action cleaves not. a man.”
He interprets Karmani in the first line in the sense of
Vedic sacrifices which are permitted to the ignorant
as a means of escaping from evil actions and their
results and attaining to heaven, but the second
Karma in exactly the opposite sense, “evil action.”
The verse, he tells us, represents a concession to the
ignorant ; the enlightened soul abandons works and
the world and goes to the forest. The whole ex¬
pression and construction in this rendering become
forced and unnatural. The rendering 1 give seems
to me the simple and straightforward sense of the
Upanishad.

2 We have two readings, Asurya, sunless, and
Asurya, Titanic or undivine. TTie third verse is, in
the thought structure of the Upanishad, the starting
point for the final movement in the last four verses.


4


ISHA UPANISHAD


WnsT 7T^ ^ II 4


others as they run. In That the Master of Life’
establishes the Waters.^


Its suggestions are there taken up and worked out.
The prayer to the Sun refers back in thought to the
sunless worlds and their blind gloom, 'which are re¬
called in the ninth and twelfth verses. TTie sun and
his rays are intimately connected in other Upanishads
also with the worlds of Light and their natural
opposite is the dark and sunless, not the Titanic
worlds.

^ Matarisoan seems to mean “he who extends
himself in the Mother or the container” whether that
be the containing mother element, Ether, or the
material energy called Earth in the Veda and spoken
of there as the Mother. It is a Vedic epithet of the
God Vayu, who, representing the divine principle in
the Life-energy, Prana, extends himself in Matter
and vivifies its forms. Here it signifies the divine
Life-power that presides in all forms of cosmic
activity.

^ A pas as it is accentuated in the version of the
White Yajurveda, can mean only “waters.’’’ If this
accentuation is disregarded, we may take it as the


ISHA UPANISHAD


5


5. That moves and that moves not; That
is far and the same is near; That is within all
this and That also is outside all this.

6. But he who sees everywhere the self in
all existences and cJl existences in the self,
shrinks not thereafter from aught.

i

rm ^ *ft^: m'. ii«

’Eww: ii c

singular Apas, work, action. Shankara however
renders it by the plural, works. The difficulty only
arises because the true Vedic sense of the word had
been forgotten and it came to be taken as referring
to the fourth of the five elemental states of Matter,
the liquid. Such a reference would be entirely ir¬
relevant to the context. But the Waters, otherwise
called the seven streams or the seven fostering Cows,
are the Vedic symbol for the seven cosmic principles
and their activities, three inferior, the physical, vital
and mental, four superior, the divine Truth, the
divine Bliss, the divine Will and consciousness, and
divine Being. On this conception also is founded
the ancient idea of the seven worlds in each of which


6


ISHA UPANISHAD


7. He in whom it is the Self-Being that
has become all existences that are Becomings/
for he has the perfect knowledge, how shall he
be deluded, whence shall he have grief who
sees everywhere oneness?

8. It is he that has gone abroad—That
which is bright, bodiless, without scar of imper¬
fection, without sinews, pure, unpierced by
evil. The Seer, the Thinker,^ the One who

the seven principles are separately active by their
various harmonies. This is, obviously, the right
significance of the word in the Upanishad.

^ The words Sarvani bhutani literally, “all things
that have become,” is opposed to Atman, self-
existent and immutable being. The phrase means
ordinarily “all creatures,” but its literal sense is
evidently insisted on in the expression bhutani abhM
“became the Becomings.” TTie idea is the acquisi¬
tion in man of the supreme consciousness by which
the one Self in him extends itself to embrace all
creatures and realises the eternal act by which that
One manifests itself in the multiple forms of the
universal motion.

^ There is a clear distinction in Vedic thought
between Kavi, the seer and manlshl, the thinker.
The former indicates the divine supra-intellectual
Knowledge which by direct vision and illumination


ISHA UPANISHAD


7


becomes everywhere, the Self-existent has
ordered objects perfectly according to their
nature from years sempiternal.

^ rw: I

rTffr ^ ^ rWt ^ ^ ?:m: II fi-

jfH ^ II ? ®

rftaf II ? ?

9. Into a blind darkness they enter who
follow after the Ignorance, they as if into a
greater darkness who devote themselves to the
Knowledge alone.

10. Other, verily,^ it is said, is that which

sees the reality, the principles and the forms of thing
in their true relations, the latter the labouring menta¬
lity which works from the divided consciousness
through the possibilities of things downward to the
actual manifestation in form and upward to their
reality in the self-existent Brahman.

^ Anyadeva ,—Eva here gives to anyad the force,
“Quite other than the result described in the pre¬
ceding verse is that to which lead the knowledge
and the ignorance.” We have the explanation of
anyad in the verse that follows. TTie ordinary


8


ISHA UPANISHAD


comes by the Knowledge, other that which
comes by the Ignorance; this is the lore we have
received from the wise who revealed That to our
understanding.

11. He who knows That as both in one.
the Knowledge and the Ignorance, by the Ignor¬
ance crosses beyond death and by the Know¬
ledge enjoys Immortality.

^ fw: i

fTffr ^ ^ ^ ii

11 ?8

?Tq # Tj^TJVSVl ^csnWTFT II n

12. Into a blind darkness they enter who
follow after the Non-Birth, they as if into a

rendering, “Knowledge has one result, Ignorance
another, “ Would be an obvious commonplace an¬
nounced with an exaggerated pompousness, adding
nothing to the thought and without any place in the
sequence of the ideas.


ISHA UPANISHAD


9


greater darkness who devote themselves to the
Birth alone.

13. Other, verily, it is said, is that which
comes by the Birth, other that which comes by
the Non-Birth; this is the lore we have received
from the wise who revealed TTiat to our
understanding.

14. He who knows That as both in one,
the Birth and the dissolution of Birth, by the
dissolution crosses beyond death and by the
Birth enjoys Immortality.

15. The face of Truth is covered with a
brilliant golden lid; that do thou remove, O
Fosterer^ for the law of the Truth, for sight.

^ In the inner sense of the Veda Surya, the Sun-
God, represents the divine Illumination of the Kavi
which exceeds mind and forms the pure self-
luminous Truth of things. His principal power is
self-revelatory knowledge, termed in the Veda Sight.
His realm is described as the Truth, the Law, the
Vast. He is the Fosterer or Increaser, for he
enlarges and opens man’s dark and limited being
into a luminous and infinite consciousness. He is
the Sole-Seer, Seer of Oneness and Knower of the
Self, and leads him to the highest Sight. He is
Yama, Controller or Ordainer, for he governs man’s
.action and manifested being by the direct Law of


10


ISHA UPANISHAD


2RT ^ ^ ^r3!ETTOfT*T fT^ q igi fa ,

^wr9[fr ii n

wT5Tfsi^r»re?mw^ HWRf jp^ai

^ tfi^ IRT 5|f^ WK, fTT ^ II ?®

16. O Fosterer, O sole Seer, O Ordainer,
O illumining Sun, O power of the Father of
creatures, marshal thy rays, draw together thy
light; the Lustre which is thy most blessed


the Truth, Satyadharma, and therefore by the right
principle of our nature, Yathatathyatah a luminous
power proceeding from the Father ol all existence,
he reveals in himself the divine Purusha of whom all
beings are the manifestations. His rays are the
thoughts that proceed luminously from the Truth,
the Vast, but become deflected and distorted,
broken up and disordered in the reflecting and
dividing principle. Mind. They form there the
golden lid which covers the face of the Truth. The
Seer prays to Surya to cast them into right order and
relation and then draw them together into the unity
of revealed truth. The result of this inner process is
the perception of the oneness of all beings m the
divine Soul of the Universe.


ISHA UPANISHAD


II


I

5^^ ^ ^ ^fw ftw II ?C

form of all, that in Thee 1 behold. The
Purusha there and there. He am I.

17. The Breath of things^ is an im¬
mortal Life, but of this body ashes are the end.
Om! O WilP, remember, that which was
done remember! O Will, remember, that
which was done remember.

18. O god Agni, knowing all things that
are manifested, lead us by the good path to the

^ Vayu, called elsewhere Matarisvan, the Life
Energy in the universe. In the light of Surya he
reveals himself as an immortal principle of existence
of which birth and death and life in the body are
only particular and external processes.

^ The Vedic terms Kratu means sometimes the
action itself, sometimes the effective power behind
action represented in mental consciousness by the
will. Agni is this power. He is divine force which
manifests first in matter as heat and light and mate¬
rial energy and then, taking different forms in the
other principles of man’s consciousness, leads him
by a progressive manifestation upwards to the Truth
and the Bliss.


12


ISHA UPANISHAD


felicity; remove from us the devious attraction
of sin.^ To thee completest speech of sub¬
mission we would dispose.^

^ Sin, in the conception of the Veda, from which
this verse is taken bodily, is that which excites and
hurries the faculties into deviation from the good
path. There is a straight road or road of naturally
increasing light and truth, riju pantha, ritasya pantha,
leading over infinite levels and towards infinite vistas.
oitani prishthani by which the law of our nature
should normally take us towards our fulfilment. Sin
compels it instead to travel with stumblings amid
uneven and limited tracts and along crooked wind¬
ings (duritdni, vrijinani),

2 The word vidhema is used of the ordering of
the sacrifice, the disposal of the offerings to the God
and, generally, of the sacrifice or worship itself.
TTie Vedic namas, internal and external obeisance,
is the symbol of submission to the divine Being in
ourselves and in the world. Here the offering is that
of completest submission and the self-surrender of
all the faculties of the lower egoistic human nature
to the divine Will-force, Agni so that, free from
internal opposition, it may lead the soul of man
through the truth towards a felicity full of the spiri¬
tual riches, Rdye, That state of beatitude is
intended self-content in the principle of pure Love
and Joy, which the Vedic initiates regarded as the
source of the divine existence in the universe and
the foundation of the divine life in the human being.
It is the deformation of this principle by egoism
which appears as desire and the lust of possession
in the lower worlds.


ANALYSIS

Prefatory

PLAN OF THE UPANISHAD

TTie Upanishads, being vehicles of illumination
and not of instruction, composed for seekers who
had already a general familiarity with the ideas of
the Vedic and Vedantic seers and even some
personal efxperience of the truths on which they were
founded, dispense in their style with expressed
transitions of thought and the development of im¬
plied or subordinate notions.

Every verse in the Isha Upanishad reposes on a
number of ideas implicit in the text but nowhere set
forth explicitly ; the reasoning also that supports its
conclusions is suggested by the words, not expressly
conveyed to the intelligence. TTie reader, or rather
the hearer, was supposed to proceed from light to
light, confirming his intuitions and verifying by his
experience, not submitting the ideas to the judgment
of the logical reason.

To the modern mind this method is invalid and
inapplicable ; it is necessary to present the ideas of
the Upanishad in their completeness, underline the
suggestions, supply the necessary transitions and
bring out the suppressed but always implicit
reasoning.


14


ISHA UPANISHAD


The central idea of the Upanishad, which is a
reconciliation and harmony of fundamental oppo¬
sites, is worked out symmetrically in four successive
movements of thought.

FIRST MOVEMENT

In the first, a basis is laid down by the idea of
the one and stable Spirit inhabiting and governing a
universe of movement and of the forms of move¬
ment. (Verse /, line /).

On this conception the rule of a divine life for
man is founded,—enjoyment of all by renunciation
of all through the exclusion of desire. (Verse I,
line 2).

There is then declared the justification of works
and of the physical life on the basis of an inalienable
freedom of the soul, one with the Lord, amidst all
the activity of the multiple movement. (Verse 2).

Finally, the result of an ignorant interference
with the right manifestation of the One in the multi¬
plicity is declared to be an involution in states of
blind obscurity after death. (Verse 3).

SECOND MOVEMENT

In the second movement the ideas of the first
verse are resumed and amplified.

The one stable Lord and the multiple movement
are identified as one Brahman of whom, however,
the unity and stability are the higher truth and who
contains all as well as inhabits all. (Verse 4, 5).


PLAN OF THE UPANISHAD


15


TTie basis and fulfilment of the rule of life cure
found in the experience of unity by which man
identifies himself with the cosmic and transcendental
Self and, is identified in the Self, but with an entire
freedom from grief and illusion, with all its becom¬
ings. {Verse 6, 7).

THIRD MOVEMENT

In the third movement there is a return to the
justification of life and works (the subject of verse 2)
and an indication of their divine fulfilment.

The degrees of the Lord’s self-manifestation in
the universe of motion and in the becomings of the
one Being are set forth and the inner law of all
existences declared to be by His conception and
determination. (Verse 8),

Vidya and Avidya, Becoming and Non-be¬
coming are reconciled by their mutual utility to the
progressive self-realisation which proceeds from the
state of mortality to the state of Immortality.
(Kerses 9 to 14).

FOURTH MOVEMENT

The fourth movement returns to the idea of the
worlds and under the figures of Surya and Agni the
relations of the Supreme Truth and Immortality
(Kerses 15, 16), the activities of this life (Verse 17),
and the state after death (Verse 18) are symbolically
indicated.


I

FIRST MOVEMENT

VERSES 1—3*


THE BASIS OF COSMIC EXISTENCE

God and the world, Spirit and formative Nature
are confronted and their relations fixed.

COSMOS

All world is a movement of the Spirit in itself
and is mutable and transient in all its formations and
appearances ; its only eternity is an eternity of re¬
currence, its only stability a semblance caused by
certain apparent fixities of relation and grouping.

Every separate object in the universe is, in truth,
itself the whole universe presenting a certain front or
outward appearance of its movement. The micro¬
cosm is one with the macrocosm.


* 1. All this is for habitation by the Lx)rd, whatsoever is
individual universe of movement in the universal motion. By
that renounced thou shouldst enjoy; lust not after any man’s
possession.

2. Doing verily works in this world one should wish to
live a hundred years. Thus it is in thee and not otherwise
than this. Action cleaves not to a man.

3. Sunless are those worlds and enveloped in blind gloom
whereto all they in their passing hence resort who are slayers
of their souls.


AVIDYA


17


Yet in their relation of principle of movement
and result of movement they are continent and con¬
tained, world in world, movement in movement.
The individual therefore partakes of the nature of
the universal, refers back to it for its source of acti¬
vity, is, as we say, subject to its laws and part of
cosmic Nature.

SPIRIT

Spirit is lord of its movement, one, immutable,
free, stable and eternal.

The Movement with all its formed objects has
been created in order to provide a habitation for the
Spirit who, being One, yet dwells multitudinously in
the multiplicity of His mansions.

It is the same Lord who dwells in the sum and
the part, in the Cosmos as a whole and in each
being, force or object in the Cosmos.

Since He is one and indivisible, the Spirit in all
is one and their multiplicity is a play of His cosmic
consciousness.

TTrerefore each human being is in his essence
one with all others, free, eternal, immutable, lord of
Nature.

TRANSITIONAL THOUGHT

A VIDYA

The object of habitation is enjoyment and
possession ; the object of the Spirit in Cosmos is,
therefore, the possession and enjoyment of the

7


18


ISHA VPANISHAD


universe. Yet, being thus in his essence one, divine
and free, man seems to be limited, divided from
others, subject to Nature and even its creation and
sport, enslaved to death, ignorance and sorrow. His
object in manifestation being possession and enjoy¬
ment of his world, he is unable to enjoy because of
his limitation. This contrary result comes about by
Avidya the Ignorance of oneness : and the knot of
the Ignorance is egoism.

EGO

TTe cause of ego is that while by Its double
^ower of Vidya and Avidya the Spirit dwells at once
in the consciousness of multiplicity and relativity
and in the consciousness of unity and identity and is
therefore not bound by the Ignorance, yet It can, in
mind, identify Itself with the object in the move¬
ment, absorbingly, to the apparent exclusion of the
Knowledge which remains behind, veiled at the back
of the mentality. The movement of Mind in nature
is thus able to conceive of the object as the reality
and the Inhabitant as limited and determined by the
appearances of the object. It conceives of the
object, not as the universe in one of its frontal
appearances, but as itself a separate existence stand¬
ing out from the Cosmos and different in being from
all the rest of it. It conceives similarly of the In¬
habitant. This is the illusion of ignorance which
falsifies all realities. The illusion is called Ahankara»


THE RULE OF THE DIVINE LIFE 19

the separative ego-sense which makes each being
conceive of itself as an independent personality.

TTie result of the separation is the inability to
enter into harmony and oneness with the universe
and a consequent inability to possess and enjoy it.
But the desire to possess and enjoy is the master im¬
pulse of the Ego which knows itself obscurely to be
the Lord, although owing to the limitations of its
relativity, it is unable to realise its true existence.
The result is discord with others and oneself, mental
and physical suffering, the sense of weakness and
inability, the sense of obscuration, the straining of
energy in passion and in desire towards self-fulfil¬
ment, the recoil of energy exhausted towards death
and disintegration.

Desire is the badge of subjection with its attend¬
ant discord and suffering. That which is free, one
and lord, does not desire, but inalienably contains,
possesses and enjoys.

THE RULE OF THE DIVINE LIFE

Enjoyment of the universe and all it contains is
the object of world-existence, but renunciation of all
in desire is the condition of the free enjoyment of all.

The renunciation demanded is not a moral con¬
straint of self-denial or a physical rejection, but an
entire liberation of the spirit from any craving after
the forms of things.

The terms of this liberation are freedom from
egoism and, consequently, freedom from personal


20


ISHA UPANISHAD


desire. Practically, this renunciation implies that
one should not regard anything in the universe as a
necessary object of possession, nor as possessed by
another and not by oneself, nor as an object of greed
in the heart or the senses.

This attitude is founded on the perception of
unity. For it has already been said that all souls
are the possessing Self, the Lord ; and although the
Lord inhabits each object as if separately, yet all
objects exist in that Self and not outside it.

Therefore by transcending Ego and realising the
one Self we possess the whole universe in the one
cosmic consciousness and do not need to possess
physically.

Having by oneness with the Lord the possibility
of an infinite free delight in all things, we do not need
tc desire.

Being one with all beings, we possess in their
enjoyment, in ours and in the cosmic Being’s delight
of universal self-expression. It is only by this
Ananda at once transcendent and universal that man
can be free in his soul and yet live in the world with
the full active Life of the Lord in His universe of
movement.

THE JUSTIFICATION OF WORKS

This freedom does not depend upon inaction,
nor is this possession limited to the enjoyment of the
inactive Soul that only witnesses without taking part
in the movement.


THE JUSTIFICATION OF WORKS 21

On the contrary the doing of works in this
material world and a full acceptance of the term of
physical life are part of its completeness.

For the active Brahman fulfils Itself in the world
by works and man also is in the body for self-fulfil¬
ment by action. He cannot do otherwise, for even
his inertia acts and produces effects in the cosmic
movement. Being in this body or any kind of body,
it is idle to think of refraining from action or escaping
the physical life. The idea that this in itself can be
a means of liberation, is part of the Ignorance Xvhich
supposes the soul to be a separate entity in the
Brahman.

Action is shunned because it is thought to be in¬
consistent with freedom. The man when he acts, is
supposed to be necessarily entangled in the desire
behind the action, in subjection to the formal energy
that drives the action and in the results of the action.
These things are true in appearance, not in reality.

Desire is only a mode of the emotional mind
which by ignorance seeks its delight in the object of
desire and not in the Brahman who expresses Him¬
self in the object. By destroying that ignorance one
can do action without entanglement in desire.

TTie Energy that drives is itself subject to the
Lord, who expresses Himself in it with perfect
freedom. By getting behind nature to the Lord of
Nature, merging the individual in the Cosmic Will,
one can act with the divine freedom. Our actions


22


ISHA UPANISHAD


are given up to the Lord and our personal responsibi¬
lity ceases in His liberty.

The chain of Karma only binds the movement
of Nature and not the soul which, by knowing itself,
ceases even to appear to be bound by the result of
its works.

Therefore the way of freedom is not inaction,
but to cease from identifying oneself with the move¬
ment and recover instead our true identity in the
Self of things who is their Lord.

THE OTHER WORLDS

By departing the physical life one does not dis¬
appear out of the Movement, but only passes into
some other general state of consciousness than the
material universe.

These states are either obscure or illuminated,
dark or sunless.

By persisting in gross forms of ignorance, by
coercing perversely the soul in its self-fulfilment or
by a wrong dissolution of its becoming in the Move¬
ment, one enters into states of blind darkness, not
into the worlds of light and of liberated and blissful
being.


II

SECOND MOVEMENT

Brahman—

ONENESS OF GOD AND THE WORLD.

Verses 4—5.*

BRAHMAN, THE UNITY^

The Lord and the world even when they seem
to be distinct, are not really differenc from each
other ; they are one Brahman.

**ONE UNMOVING ^^

God is the one stable and eternal Reality. He
is One because there is nothing else, since all exist¬
ence and non-existence are He. He is stable or
unmoving, because motion implies change in Space
and change in Time, and He, being beyond Time
and Space, is immutable. He possesses eternally in
Himself all that is, has been or ever can be, and He

* 4. One unmoving that is swifter than Mind; That the
Gods reach not, for It progresses ever in front. That, standing*
passes beyond others as they run. In That the Master of Life
establishes the Waters.

5. That moves and that moves not; That is far and the
same is near; That is within all this and that also is outside
all this.


24


ISHA UPANISHAD


therefore does not increase or diminish. He is
beyond causality and relativity and therefore there
is no change of relations in His being.

^^SWIFTER THAN MIND/*

The world is a cyclic movement (Sansara) of
the divine consciousness in Space and Time. Its
law and, in a sense, its object is progression ; it
exists by movement and would be dissolved by
cessation of movement. But the basis of this move¬
ment is not material ; it is the energy of active con¬
sciousness which, by its motion and multiplication
in different principles (different in appearance, the
same in essence) creates oppositions of unity and
multiplicity, divisions of Time and Space, relations
and groupings of circumstance and Causality. All
these things are real in consciousness, but only sym¬
bolic of the Being, somewhat as the imaginations
of a creative Mind are true representations of itself,
yet not quite real in comparison with itself, or real
with a different kind of reality.

But mental consciousness is not the Power that
creates the universe. That is something infinitely
more puissant, swift and unfettered than the mind.
It IS the pure omnipotent self-awareness of the
Absolute unbound by any law of the relativity. The
laws of the relativity, upheld by the gods, are Its
temporary creations. Their apparent eternity is only
the duration, immeasurable to us, of the world which


BRAHMAN


25


they govern. They are laws regularising motion and
change, not laws binding the Lord of the move¬
ment. The gods therefore are described as conti¬
nually running in their course. But the Lord is free
and unaffected by His own movement.

^^THAT MOVES, THAT MOVES NOT*

The motion of the world works under the govern¬
ment of a perpetual stability. Change represents
the constant shifting of apparent relations in an
eternal Immutability.

It is these truths that are expressed in the
formulae of the one Unmoving that is swifter than
Mind, That which moves and moves not, the one
stable which outstrips in the speed of its effective
consciousness the others who run.

TRANSITIONAL THOUGHT

THE MANY *

If the One is preeminently real, “the others,”
the Many are not unreal. The world is not a
figment of the Mind.


* The series of ideas under this heading seem to me to be
the indispensable metaphysical basis of the Upanishad. The
Isha Upanishad does not teach a pure and exclusive Monism;
it declares the One without denying the Many and its method
is to see the One in the Many. It asserts the simultaneous
validity of Vidya and Avidya and upholds as the object of
action and knowledge an immortality consistent with Life and
Birth in this world. It regards every object as itself the


26


ISHA UPANISHAD


Unity is the eternal truth of things, diversity a
play of the unity. The sense of unity has therefore
been termed Knowledge. Vidya, the sense of
diversity Ignorance, Avidya. But diversity is not
false except when it is divorced from the sense of
its true and eternal unity.

Brahman is one, not numerically, but in essence.
Numerical oneness would either exclude multiplicity
or would be a pluralistic and divisible oneness with
the Many as its parts. That is not the unity of
Brahman, which can neither be diminished, increased,
nor divided.

The Many in the universe are sometimes called
parts of the universal Brahman as the waves are
parts of the sea. But, in truth, these waves are each
of them that sea, their diversities being those of
frontal or superficial appearances caused by the
sea’s motion. As each object in the universe is
really the whole universe in a different frontal
appearance, so each individual soul is all Brahman
regarding Itself and world from a centre of cosmic
consciousness.

For That is identical, not single. It is identical
always and everywhere in Time and Space, as well
as identical beyond Time and Space. Numerical


universe and every soul as itself the divine Purusha. The
ensemble of these ideas is consistent ’ only with a synthetic or
comprehensive as opposed to an illusionist or exclusive Monism.


BRAHMAN


27


oneness and multiplicity are equally valid terms of
its essential unity.

These two terms, as we see them, are like all
others, representations in Chit, in the free and all-
creative self-awareness of the Absolute regarding
itself variously, infinitely, innumerably and formulat¬
ing what it regards. Chit is a power not only of
knowledge, but of expressive will, not only of
receptive vision, but of formative representation ;
the two are indeed one power. For Chit is an
action of Being, not of the Void. What it sees,
that becomes. It sees itself beyond Space and
Time ; that becomes in the conditions of Space and
Time.

Creation is not a making of something out of
nothing or of one thing out of another, but a self-
projection of Brahman into the conditions of Space
and Time, Creation it not a making, but a becom¬
ing in terms and forms of conscious existence.

In the becoming each individual is Brahman
variously represented and entering into various
relations with Itself in the play of the divine con¬
sciousness ; in being, each individual is all Brahman.

Brahman as the Absolute or the Universal has
the power of standing back from Itself in the
relativity. It conceives, by a subordinate movement
of consciousness, the individual as other than the
universal, the relative as different from the Absolute.
Without this separative movement, the individual


28


ISHA UPANISHAD


would always tend to lose itself in the universal, the
relative to disappear into the Absolute. Thus, it
supports a corresponding reaction in the individual
who regards himself as “other’* than the transcen¬
dent and universal Brhaman and “other” than the
rest of the Many. He puts identity behind him and
enforces the play of Being in the separative Ego.

The individual may regard himself as eternally
different from the One, or as eternally one with It,
yet different, or he may go back entirely in his
consciousness to the pure Identity.* But he can
never regard himself as independent of some kind
of Unity, for such a view would correspond to no
conceivable truth in the universe or beyond it.

These three attitudes correspond to three truths
of the Brahman which are simultaneously valid and
none of them entirely true without the others as its
complements. Their co-existence, difficult of con¬
ception to the logical intellect, can be experienced
by identity in consciousness with Brahman.

Even in asserting Oneness, we must remember
that Brahman is beyond our mental distinctions and
is a fact not of Thought that discriminates, but of
Being which is absolute, infinite and escapes dis¬
crimination. Our consciousness is representative and
symbolic ; it cannot conceive the thing in itself, the

* The positions, in inverse order, of the three principal
philosophical schools of Vedanta, Monism, Qualified Monism
and Dualism.


BRAHMAN


29


Absolute, except by negation, in a sort of void, by
emptying it of all that it seems in the universe to
contain. But the Absolute is not a void or negation.
It is all that is here in Time and beyond Time.

Even oneness is a representation and exists in
relation to multiplicity. Vidya and Avidya are
equally eternal powers of the supreme Chit.
Neither Vidya nor Avidya by itself are the absolute
knowledge. (See vs. 9-11).

Still, of all relations oneness is the secret base,
not multiplicity. Oneness constitutes and upholds
the multiplicity, multiplicity does not constitute and
uphold the oneness.

Therefore we have to conceive of Oneness as
our self and the essential nature of Being, multipli¬
city as a representation of Self and a becoming.
We have to conceive of the Brahman as One Self of
all and then return upon the Many as becomings
of the One Being (bhutdni,,,Atman). But both the
Self and the becomings are Brahman ; we cannot
i^egard the one as Brahman and the others as unreal
and not Brahman. Both are real, the one with a
constituent and comprehensive, tbe others with a
derivative or dependent reality.

THE RUNNING OF THE GODS

Brahman representing Itself in the universe as
the Stable, by immutable existence (Sat), is Purusha,
God, Spirit ; representing itself as the Motional, by


30


ISHA UPANISHAD


Its power of active Consciousness (Chit), is Nature,
Force or World-Principle (Prakiti, Shakti, Maya)*.
The play of these two principles is the Life of the
universe.

The Gods are Brahman representing Itself in
cosmic Personalities expressive of the one Godhead
who, in their impersonal action, appear as the
various play of the principles of Nature.

The “others” are * Sarvahhutdni ' of a later
verse, all becomings. Brahman representing itself in
the separative consciousness of the Many.

Everything in the universe, even the Gods,
seems to itself to be rnoving in the general movement
towards a goal outside itself or other than its
immediate idea of itself. Brahman is the goal ; for
it is both the beginning and the end, the cause and
the result of all movement.


* Prakrit!, executive Nature as opposed to Purusha, which
is the Soul governing, taking cognizance of and enjoying the
works of Prakriti. Shakti, the self-existent, self-cognitive, self¬
effective Power of the Lord (Ishwara, Deva or Purusha), which
expresses itself in the workings of Prakriti. Maya, signifying
.originally in the Veda comprehensive and creative knowledge,
Wisdom that is from of old; afterwards taken in its second
and derivative sense, cunning magic, Illusion. In this second
significance it can really be appropriate only to the workings
of the lower Nature, Apardi Prakriti, which has put behind it
the Divine Wisdom and is absorbed in the experiences of the
separative Ego. It is in the more ancient sense that the word
Maya is used in the Upanishads, where, indeed, it occurs but
rarely.


BRAHMAN


31


But the idea of a final goal in the movement of
Nature itself is illusory. For Brahman is Absolute
and Infinite. The Gods, labouring to reach him,
find, at every goal that they realise. Brahman still
moving forward in front to a farther realisation.
Nothing in the appearances of the universe can be
entirely That to the relative consciousness ; all is
only a symbolic representation of the Unknowable.

All things are already realised in Brahman. The
running of the Others in the course of Nature is
only a working out (Prakriti), by Causality, in Time
and Space, of something that Brhaman already
possesses.

Even in Its universal being Brahman exceeds
the Movement. Exceeding Time, It contains in
Itself past, present and future simultaneously and
has not to run to the end of conceivable Time.
Exceeding Space, It contains all formations in Itself
coincidently and has not to run to the end of con¬
ceivable Space. Ejcceeding Causality, It contains
freely in Itself all eventualities as well as all potentia¬
lities without being bound by the apparent chain of
causality by which they are linked in the universe.
Everything is already realised by it as the Lord
before it can be accomplished by the separated
Personalities in the movement.

THE PRINCIPLE OF LIFE

MATARISWAN AND THE WATERS

What then is Its intention in the movement?


32


ISHA UPANISHAD


The movement is a rhythm, a harmony which
That, as the Universal Life, works out by figures of
Itself in the terms of conscious Being. It is a
formula symbolically expressive of the Unknowable,
—so arranged that every level of consciousness
really represents something beyond itself, depth of
depth, continent of continent. It is a play* of the
divine Consciousness existing for its own satisfaction
and adding nothing to That, which is already
complete. It is a fact of conscious being, justified
by its own existence, with no purpose ulterior to
itself. The idea of purpose, of a goal is born of
the progressive self-unfolding by the world of its
own true nature to the individual Souls inhabiting
its forms ; for the Being is gradually self-revealed
within its own becomings, real Unity emerges out of
the Multiplicity and changes entirely the values of
the latter to our consciousness.

This self-unfolding is governed by conditions
determined by the complexity of consciousness in
its cosmic action.

For consciousness is not simple or homogeneous,
it is septuple. That is to say, it constitutes itself
into seven forms or grades of conscious activity
descending from pure Being to physical being.


* This is the Vaishnava image of the Lila applied usually
to the play of the Personal Deity in the world, but equally
applicable to the active impersonal Brahman.


BRAHMAN


33


Their interplay creates the worlds, determines all
activities, constitutes all becomings.

Brahman is always the continent of this play or
this working. Brahman self-extended in Space and
Time is the universe.

In this extension Brahman represents Itself as
formative Nature, the universal Mother of things,
who appears to us, first, as Matter, called Prithivi,
the Earth-Principle.

Brahman in Matter or physical being represents
Itself as the universal Life-Power, Matariswan, which
moves there as a dynamic energy. Prana, and
presides effectively over all arrangement and forma¬
tion.

Universal Life establishes, involved in Matter,
the septuple consciousness ; and the action of Prana,
the dynamic energy, on the Matrix of things evolves
out of it its different forms and serves as a basis for
all their evolutions.

TRANSITIONAL THOUGHT

THE WATERS

There are, then, seven constituents of Chit
active in the universe.

We are habitually aware of three elements in
our being. Mind, Life and Body. These constitute
for us a divided and mutable existence which is in
a condition of unstable harmony and works by a
strife of positive and negative forces between the
3


34


ISHA UPANISHAD


two poles of Birth and Death. For all life is a
constant birth or becoming (sambhavat sambhuti of
vs. 12—14). All birth entails a constant death or
dissolution of that which becomes, in order that it
may change into a new becoming. Therefore this
state of existence is called Mrityu, Death, and
described as a stage which has to be passed through
and transcended, (os. //, 14).

For this is not the whole of our being and,
therefore, not our pure being. We have, behind, a
superconscious existence which has also three con¬
stituents, Sat, Chit-Tapas and Ananda.

Sat is essence of our being, pure infinite and
undivided, as opposed to this divisible being which
founds itself on the constant changeableness of
physical substance. Sat is the divine counterpart of
physical substance.

Chit-Tapas is pure energy of Consciousness, free
in its rest or its action, sovereign in its will, as
opposed to the hampered dynamic energies of
Prana which, feeding upon physical substances, are
dependent on and limited by their sustenance.*
Tapas is the divine counterpart of this lower nervous
or vital energy.

Ananda is Beatitude, the bliss of pure conscious
existence and energy, as opposed to the life of the

* Therefore physical substance i3 called in the Upanishads
Annam, Food. In its origin, however, the word meant simply
being or substance.


BRAHMAN


35


sensations and emotions which are at the mercy of
the outward touches of Life and Matter and their
positive and negaitve reactions, joy and grief,
pleasure and pain. Ananda is the divine counter¬
part of the lower emotional and sensational being.

This higher existence, proper to the divine
Sachchidananda, is unified, self-existent, not con¬
fused by the figures of Birth and Death. It is called,
therefore, Amritam, Immortality, and offered to us
as the goal to be aimed at and the felicity to be
enjoyed when we have transcended the state of
death (vs. 12. 14. 17. 18.).

The higher divine is linked to the lower mortal
existence by the causal Idea* or supra-mental
Knowledge-will, Vijnana. It is the causal Idea
which, by supporting and secretly guiding the con¬
fused activities of the Mind, Life and Body, ensures
and compels the right arrar^gement of the universe.
It is called in Veda the Truth because it represents
by direct vision the truth of things both inclusive and
independent of their appearances ; the Right: or
Law, because, containing in itself the effective power

* Not the abstract mental idea, but the supramental Real-
Idea, the Consciousness, Force and Delight of the Being preci¬
pitated into a comprehensive and discriminative awareness of
all the truths and powers of its own existence, carrying in its
self-knowledge the will of self-manifestation, the power of all
its potentialities and the power of all its forms. It is power
that acts and effectuates, as well as knowledge master of its
own action.


36


ISHA UPANISHAD


of Chit, it works out all things according to their
nature with a perfect knowledge and prevision ; the
Vast, because it is of the nature of an infinite cosmic
Intelligence comprehensive of all particular activities.

Vijnana, as the Truth, leads the divided con¬
sciousness back to the One. It also sees the truth
of things in the multiplicity. Vijnana is the divine
counterpart of the lower divided intelligence.

These seven powers of Chit are spoken of by
the Vedic Rishis as the Waters, they are imaged as
currents flowing into or rising out of the general
sea of Consciousness in the human being.*

They are all co-existent in the universe eternally
and inseparably, but capable of being involved and
remanifested in each other. They are actually
involved in physical Nature and must necessarily
evolve out of it. They can be withdrawn into pure
infinite Being and can again be manifested out of it.

The infolding and unfolding of the One in the
Many auid the Many in the One is therefore the
law of the eternally recurrent cosmic Cycles.

THE VISION OF THE BRAHMAN

The Upanishad teaches us how to perceive
Brahman in the universe and in our self-existence.

We have to perceive Brahman comprehensively
as both the Stable and the Moving. We must see


• Hridya Samudra» Ocean of the Heart. R. V. IV. 58, 5.


BRAHMAN


37


It in eternal and immutable Spirit and in all the
changing manifestations of universe and relativity.

We have to perceive all things in Space and
Time, the far and the near, the immemorial Past,
the immediate Present, the infinite Future with all
their contents and happenings as the One Brahman.

We have to perceive Brahman as that which
exceeds, contains and supports all individual things
as well as all universe, transcendentally of Time
and Space and Causality. We have to perceive It
also as that which lives in and possesses the
universe and all it contains.

This is the transcendental, universal and indivi¬
dual Brahman Lord, Continent and Indwelling Spirit,
which is the object of all knowledge. Its realisation
is the condition of perfection and the way of
Immortality.


Ill

SECOND MOVEMENT

SELF-REALISATION
Verses 6—7*
SELF-REALISATION

Brahman is, subjectively, Atman, the Self or
immutable existence of all that is in the universe.
Everything that changes in us, mind, life, body,
character, temperament, action, is not our real and
unchanging self, but becomings of the Self in the
movement— Jagati.

In Nature, therefore, all things that exist,
animate or inanimate, are becomings of the one Self
of all. All these different creatures are one
indivisible existence. This is the truth each being
has to realise.

When this unity has been realised by the
individual in every part of his being, he becomes

* 6. But he who sees everywhere the Self in all existences
and all existences in the Self, shrinks not thereafter from
aught.

7. He in whom it is the Self-Being that has become all
existences that are Becomings, for he has the perfect know¬
ledge, how shall he be deluded, whence shall he have grief
who sees everywhere oneness?


SELF^REALISATION


39


perfect, pure, liberated from ego and the dualities,
possessed of the entire divine felicity.

ATMAN

Atman, our true self, is Brahman ; it is pure
indivisible Being, self-luminous, self-concentrated in
consciousness, self-concentrated in force, self-
delighted. Its existence is light and bliss. It is
timeless, spaceless and free.

THE THREEFOLD PURUSHA*

Atman represents itself to the consciousness of
the creature in three states, dependent on the rela¬
tions between Purusha and Prakriti, the Soul and
Nature. These three states are Akshara, unmoving
or immutable ; Kshara, moving or mutable ; and
Para or Uttama, Supreme or Highest.

Kshara Purusha is the Self reflecting the changes
and movements of Nature, participating in them,
immersed in the consciousness of the movement and
seeming in it to be born and die, increase and
diminish, progress and change. Atman, as the
Kshara, enjoys change and division and duality ;
controls secretly its' own changes but seems to be
controlled by them ; enjoys the oppositions of
pleasure and pain, good and bad, but appears to be
their victim ; possesses and upholds the action of
Nature, by which it seems to be created. For,
always and inalienably, the Self is Ishwara, the Lord.


Gita XV. 16, 17. See also XIII passim.


40


ISHA UPANISHAD


Akshara Purusha is the Self, standing back from
the changes and movements of Nature, calm, pure,
impartial, indifferent, watching them and not parti¬
cipating, above them as on a summit, not immersed
in these Waters. This calm Self is the sky that
never moves and changes looking down upon the
waters that are never at rest. The Akshara is the
hidden freedom of the Kshara.

Para Purusha or Purushottama is the Self con¬
taining and enjoying both the stillness and the move¬
ment, but conditioned and limited by neither of
them. It is the Lord, Brahman, the All, the Inde¬
finable and Unknowable.

It is this supreme Self that has to be realised in
both the unmoving and the mutable.

PURUSHA IN PRAKRIT!^

Atman, the Self, represents itself differently in
the sevenfold movement of Nature according to the
dominant principle of the consciousness in the indivi¬
dual being.

In the physical consciousness Atman becomes
the material being, Annamaya Purusha,

In the vital or nervous consciousness Atman
becomes the vital or dynamic being, Prdnamaya
Purusha.

In the mental consciousness Atman becomes the
mental being, Manomaya Purusha,


Taittiriya Upanishad II. 1—6.


SELF^REALISATION


4i


In the supra-intellectual consciousness, dominat¬
ed by the Truth or causal Idea (called in Veda
Satyam Ritam Brihat, the True, the Right, the Vast),
Atman becomes the ideal being or great Soul,
Vijnanamaya Purusha or Mahat /Ifman.*

In the consciousness proper to the universal
Beatitude, Atman becomes the all-blissful being or
all-enjoying and all-productive soul, Anandamaya
Purusha.

In the consciousness proper to the infinite divine
self-awareness which is also the infinite all-effective
Will (Chit-Tapas), Atman is the all-conscious Soul
that is source and lord of the universe, Chaitanya
Purusha.

In the consciousness proper to the state of pure
divine existence Atman is Sat Purusha, the pure
divine self.

Man, being 6ne in his true Self with the Lord
who inhabits all forms, can live in any of these states
of the Self in the world and partake of its experi¬
ences. He can be anything he wills from the
material to the all-blissful being. Through the
Anandamaya he can enter into the Chaitanya and
Sat Purusha.

SACHCHIDANANDA

Sachchidananda is the manifestation of the higher
Purusha ; its nature of infinite being, consciousness,

* The Mahat Atman or Vast Self is frequently referred
to in the Upanishads. It is also called hhiUmti, the Large.


42


ISHA UP A NISH AD


power and bliss is the higher Nature, Para Prakriti-
Mind, life and body are the lower nature, Apard
Prakriti.

The state of Sachchidananda is the higher half of
universal existence, parardha, the nature of which
is Immortality, Amritam. The state of mental exist¬
ence in Matter is the lower half, apardrdha, the
nature of which is death, Mrityu.

Mind and life in the body are in the state of
Death because by Ignorance they fail to realise
Sachchidananda. Realising perfectly Sachchida¬
nanda, they can convert themselves. Mind into the
nature of the Truth, Vijnana, Life into the nature ot
Ohaitanya, Body into the nature of Sat, that is into
the pure essence.

When this cannot be done perfectly in the body,
the soul realises its true state in other forms of exist¬
ence or worlds, the “sunlit * worlds and states of
felicity, and returns upon material existence to com¬
plete its evolution in the body.

A progressively perfect realisation in the body
is the aim of human evolution.

It is also possible for the soul to withdraw for
an indefinable period into the pure state of Sachchi¬
dananda.

The realisation of the Self as Sachchidananda is,
the aim of human existence.


SELF-REALISATION


43


THE CONDITION OF SELF-REALISATION*

Sachchidananda is always the pure state of
Atman ; it may either remain self-contained as if
apart from the universe or overlook, embrace and
possess it as the Lord.

In fact, it does both simultaneously, (v. 8)

The Lord pervades the universe as the Virat
Purusha, the Cosmic Soul (paribhu of the eighth verse,
the One who becomes everywhere) ; He enters into
each object in the movement, to the Knowledge as
Brahman supporting individual consciousness and in¬
dividual form, to the Ignorance as an individualised
and limited being. He manifests as the Jivatman
or individual self in the living creature.

From the standpoint of our lower state in the
kingdom of death and limitation Atman is Sachchida¬
nanda, supra-mental, but reflected in the mind. If
the mind is pure, bright and still, there is the right
reflection ; if it is unpurified, troubled and obscured,
the reflection is distorted and subjected to the
crooked action of the Ignorance.

According to the state of the reflecting mind we
may have either purity of self-knowledge or an

* I have collected under this and the preceding headings
the principal id2as of the Upanishads with regard to the Self,
although not expressly mentioned or alluded to in our text,
because they are indispensable to an understanding of the
complete philosophy of these Scriptures and to the relations
of the thought which is developed in the Isha.


44


ISHA UPANISHAD


obscuration and distortion of knowledge in the duali¬
ties of truth and error ; a pure activity of unegoistic
Will or an obscuration and deflection of Will in the
dualities of right and wrong action, sin and virtue ;
a pure state and unmixed play of beatitude or an
obscuration and perversion of it in the dualities of
right and wrong enjoyment, pleasure and pain, joy
and grief.

It is the mental ego-sense that creates this distor¬
tion by division and limitation of the Self. The
limitation is brought about through the Kshara
Purusha identifying itself with the changeable forma¬
tions of Nature in the separate body, the individual
life and the egoistic mind, to the exclusion of the
sense of unity with all existence and with all
existences.

TTiis exclusion is a fixed habit of the under¬
standing due to our past evolution in the movement,
not an ineffugable law of human consciousness. Its
diminution and final disappearance are the condition
of self-realisation.

The beginning of wisdom, perfection and
beatitude is the vision of the One.

THE STAGES OF SELF-REALISATION .

THE VISION OF THE ALL.

The first movement of self-realisation is the
sense of unity with other existences in the universe.
Its early or crude form is the attempt to understand or


SELF-REALISATION


45


sympathise with odiers, the tendency of a widening
love or compassion or fellow-feeling for others, the
impulsion of work for the sake of others.

The oneness so realised is a pluralistic unity,
the drawing together of similar units resulting in a
collectivity or solidarity rather than in real oneness.
The Many remain to the consciousness as the real
existences ; the One is only their result.

Real knowledge begins with the perception of
essential oneness,—one Matter, one Life, one Mind,
one Soul playing in many forms.

When this Soul of things is seen to be Sach-
chidananda, then knowledge is perfected. For we
see Matter to be only a play of Life, Life a play of
Mind energising itself in substance, Mind a play of
Truth or causal Idea representing truth of being
variously in all possible mental forms. Truth a
play of Sachchidananda, Sachchidananda the self¬
manifestation of a supreme Unknowable, Para-
Brahman or Para-Purusha.

We perceive the soul in all bodies to be this one
Self or Sachchidananda multiplying itself in indivi¬
dual consciousness. We see also all minds, lives,
bodies to be active formations of the same existence
in the extended being of the Self,

This is the vision of all existences in the Self
and of the Self in all existences which is the founda¬
tion of perfect internal liberty and perfect joy and


peace.


46


ISHA UPANISHAD


For by this vision, in proportion as it increases
in intensity and completeness, there disappears from
the individual mentality all jugupsa, that is to say,
all repulsion, shrinking, dislike, fear, hatred and
other perversions of feeling which arise from division
and personal opposition to other beings or to the
objectivities that surround us. Perfect equality* of
soul is established.

THE VISION OF THE SEIF IN ITS BECOMINGS

Vision is not sufficient ; one must become what
inwardly one sees. The whole inner life must be
changed so as to represent perfectly in all parts of
the being what is understood by the intellect and
seen by the inner perception.

In the individual soul extending itself to the All
by the vision of unity (el^ativam anupashyatah,
seeing everywhere oneness), arranging its thoughts,
emotions and sensations according to the perfect
knowledge of the right relation of things which comes
by the realisation of the Truth (vijanatah, having
the perfect knowledge), there must be repeated the


• The state described in the Gita as samatwa. Jugupsa
is the feeling of repulsion caused by the sense of a want of
harmony between one’s own limited self-formation and the
contacts of the external with a consequent recoil of grief
fear, hatred, discomfort, suffering. It is the opposite of
attraction which is the source of desire and attachment.
Repulsion and attraction removed, we have samaiwa.


SELF-REALISATION


47


<Jivine act of consciousness by which the one Being,
eternally self-existent, manifests in Itself the multi¬
plicity of the world {saro^ni bhutani atmaiva abhut,
the Self-Being became all Becomings).

That is to say, the human or egoistic view is that
of a world of innumerable separate creatures each
self-existent and different from the others, each trying
to get its utmost possible profit out of the others
and the world, but the divine view, the way in which
God sees the world, is Himself, as the sole Being,
living in innumerable existences that are Himself,
supporting all, helping all impartially, working out
to a divine fulfilment and under terms fixed from
the beginning, from years sempiternal, a great pro¬
gressive harmony of Becoming whose last term is
Sachchidananda or Immortality. This is the view¬
point of the Self as Lord inhabiting the whole move¬
ment. The individual soul has to change the human
or egoistic for the divine, supreme and universal
view and live in that realisation.

It is necessary, therefore, to have the knowledge
of the transcendent Self, the sole unity, in the
equation So* haring I am He, and in that knowledge
to extend one’s conscious existence so as to embrace
the whole Multiplicity.

This is the double or synthetic ideal of the Isha
Upanishad ; to embrace simultaneously Vidya and
Avidya, the One and the Many ; to exist in the
world, but change the terms of the Death into the


48


ISHA VPANISHAD


terms of the Immortality ; to have the freedom and
peace of the Non-Birth simultaneously with the
activity of the Birth—(vs. 9-14).

All parts of the lower being must consent to
this realisation ; to perceive with the intellect is not
enough. The heart must consent in a universal love
and delight, the sense-mind in a sensation of God
and self everywhere, the life in the comprehension
of all aims and energies in the world as part of its
own being.

THE ACTIVE BEATITUDE

This realisation is the perfect and complete
Beatitude, embracing action, but delivered fjom
sorrow and self-delusion.

There is no possibility of self-delusion (moha) ;
for the soul, having attained to the perception of
the Unknowable behind all existence, is no longer
attached to the Becoming and no longer attributes
an absolute value to any particularity in the universe,
as if that were an object in itself and desirable in
itself. All is enjoyable and has a value as the mani¬
festation of the Self and for the sake of the Self
which is manifested in it, but none for its own.***
Desire and illusion are removed ; illusion is replaced
by knowledge, desire by the active beatitude of
universal possession.

There is no possibility of sorrow ; for all is seen


Brihadftrmiyaks Upanishad.


SELF-REALISATION


49


as Sachchidananda and therefore in the terms of
the infinite conscious existence, the infinite will, the
infinite felicity. Even pain and grief are seen to be
perverse terms of Ananda, and that Ananda which
they veil here and for which they prepare the lower
existence (for all suffering in the evolution is a pre¬
paration of strength and bliss) is already seized,
known and enjoyed by the soul thus liberated and
perfected. For it possesses the eternal Reality of
which they are the appearances.

Thus it is possible, by the realisation of the unity
of God and the world (Ish and jagati) in the complete
knowledge of the Brahman, to renounce desire and
illusion through the ascent to the pure Self and the
Non-Becoming and yet to enjoy by means of all
things in the manifestation God in the universe
through a free and illuminated self-identification with
Sachchidananda in all existences.

CONCLUSION

We have, therefore, in the second movement
the explanation of the first verse of the Upanishad.
The first line, asserting that all souls are the one
Lord inhabiting every object in the universe and that
every object is universe in universe, movement in
the general movement, has been explained in the
terms of complete oneness by the Brahman, trans¬
cendental and universal even in the individual. One
in the Many, Many in the One, Stable and Motional.
4


50


ISHA UPANISHAD


exceeding and reconciling all opposites. The second
line, fixing as the rule of divine life universal renun¬
ciation in desire as the condition of universal enjoy¬
ment in the spirit, has been explained by the state
of self-realisation, the realisation of the free and
transcendent Self as one’s own true being, of that
Self as Sachchidananda and of the universe seen as
the Becoming of Sachchidananda and possessed in
the terms of the right knowledge and no longer in
the terms of the Ignorance which is the cause of
all attraction and repulsion, self-delusion and sorrow.


THIRD MOVEMENT

THE LORD
Verse 8*

In its third movement the Upanishad takes up
the justification of works already stated in general
terms in its second verse and founds it more precisely
upon the conception of Brahman or the Self as the
Lord,—Ish, Ishwara, Para Purusha, Sa (He)—who
is the cause of personality and governs by His law
of works the rhythm of the Movement and the
process of the worlds that He conceives and realises
throughout eternal Time in His own self-existence.

It is an error to conceive that the Upanishads
teach the true existence only of an impersonal and
actionless Brahman, an impersonal God without
power or qualities. They declare rather an Un¬
knowable that manifests itself to us in a double
aspect of Personality and Impersonality. When


* It is he that has gone abroad—That which is bright,
bodiless, without scar of imperfection, without sinews, pure,
unpierced by evil. The Seer, the Thinker, the One who
becomes everywhere, the Self-existent has ordered objects
perfectly according to their nature from years sempiternal.


52


ISHA UPANISHAD


they wish to speak of this Unknowable in the
most comprehensive and general way, they use
the neuter and call It Tat, That ; but this
neuter does not exclude the aspect of universal
and transcendent Personality acting and governing
the world (cf Kena Upanishad 111). Still, when they
intend to make prominent the latter idea they more
often prefer to use the masculine Sa, He, or else
they employ the term Deva, God or the Divine, or
Purusha the conscious Soul, of whom Prakriti or
Maya is the executive Puissance, the Shakti.

The Isha Upanishad, having declared the
Brahman as the sole reality manifesting itself in many
aspects and forms, having presented this Brahman
subjectively as the Self, the one Being of whom all
existences are Becomings, and as that which we have
to realise in ourselves and in all things and beyond
all things, now proceeds to assert the same Brahman
more objectively as the Lord, the Purusha who both
contains and inhabits the universe.

It is He that went abroad. This Brahman, this
Self is identical with the Lord, the Ish, with whose
name the Upanishad opens, the Inhabitant of all
forms: and, as we shall find, identical with the
universal Purusha of the 16th verse,—‘‘The Purusha
there and there. He am 1/* It is He who has
becomb all ‘things and beings,—a conscious Being,
the sole Ejdstent and Self-existent, who is Master and
enjoyer of all He becomes. And the Upanishad
proceeds to formulate the nature and manner, the


THE LORD


53


general law of that becoming of God which we call
the world. For on this conception depends the
Vedic idea of the two poles of death and immortality,
the reason for the existence of Avidya, the Ignorance,
and the justification of works in the world.

TRANSITIONAL THOUGHT .

THE DIVINE PERSON A LITY

The Vedantic idea of God, “He *. Deva or
Ishwara, must not be confused with the ordinary
notions attached to the conception of a Personal
God. Personality is generally conceived as identical
with individuality and the vulgar idea of a Personal
God is a magnified individual like man in His nature
but yet different, greater, more vast and all-over-
powering. Vedanta admits the human manifestation
of Brahman in man and to man, but does not admit
that this is the real nature of the Ishwara.

God is Sachchidananda. He manifests Himself
as infinite existence of which the essentiality is con¬
sciousness, of which again the essentiality is bliss,
is self-delight. Delight cognizing variety of itself,
seeking its own variety, as it were, becomes the
universe. But these are abstract terms ; abstract
ideas in themselves cannot produce concrete realities.
They are impersonal states ; impersonal states cannot
in themselves produce personal activities.

This becomes still clearer if we consider the
manifestation of Sachchidananda. In that manifesta¬
tion Delight translates itself into Love ; Conscious-


54


ISHA UPANISHAD


ness translates itself into double terms, conceptive
Knowledge, executive Force ; Existence translates
itself into Being, that is to say, into Person and
Substance. But love is incomplete without a Lover
and an object of Love, Knowledge without a Knower
and an object of Knowledge, Force without a
Worker and a Work, Substance without a Person
cognizing and constituting it.

This is because the original terms also are
not really impersonal abstractions. In delight of
Brahman there is an Enjoyer of delight, in conscious^
ness of Brahman a Conscient, in existence of Brahman
an Existent ; but the object of Brahman's delight and
consciousness and the term and stuff of Its existence
are Itself. In the divine Being Knowledge, the
Knower and the Known and, therefore, necessarily
also Delight, the Enjoyer and the Enjoyed are one.

This Self-Awareness and Self-Delight of Brahman
has two modes of its Force of consciousness, its
Prakriti or Maya,—^intensive in self-absorption,
diffusive in self-extension. The intensive mode is
proper to the pure and silent Brahman ; the diffusive
to the active Brahman. It is the diffusion of the
Self-existent in the term and stuff of His own
existence that we call the world, the becoming or
the perpetual movement (bhuvanam, jagat). It is
Brahman that becomes ; what He becomes is also
the Brahman. The object of Love is the self of the
Lover ; the work is the self-figuration of the Worker ;
Universe is body and action of the Lord.


THE LORD


55


When therefore, we consider the abstract and
impersonal aspect of the infinite existence, we say,
‘ That”; when we consider the Existent self-aware
and self-blissful, we say, “He”. Neither conception
is entirely complete. Brahman itself is the Unkow-
able beyond all conceptions of Personality and
Impersonality. We may call it “That” to show that
we exile from our affirmation all term and definition.
We may equally call it “He”, provided we speak
with the same intention of rigorous exclusion. “Tat”
and “Sa” are always the same. One that escapes
definition.

In the universe there is a constant relation of
Oneness and Multiplicity. This expresses itself as
the universal Personality and the many Persons, and
both between the One and the Many and among
the Many themselves there is the possibility of an
indefinite variety of relations. These relations are
determined by the play of the divnie existence, the
Lord, entering into His manifested habitations.
They exist at first as conscious relations between
individual souls ; they are then taken up by them
and used as a means of entering into conscious
relation with the One. It is this entering into
various relations with the One which is the object
and function of Religion. All religions are justified
by this essential necessity ; all express one Truth in
various ways and move by various paths to one goal.

The Divine Personality reveals Himself in
various forms and names to the individual soul.


56


ISHA UPANISHAD


These forms and names are in a sense created in
the human consciousness ; in another they are eternal
symbols revealed by the Divine who thus concretises
Himself in mind-form to the multiple consciousness
and aids it in its return to its own Unity.*

HE THAT WENT ABROAD

It is He that has extended Himself in the relative
consciousness whose totality of finite and changeable
circumstances dependent on an equal, immutable and
eternal Infinity is what we call the Universe. Sa
paryagat.

In this extension we have, therefore, two aspects,
one of pure infinite relationless immutability, another
of a totality of objects in Time and Space working
out their relations through causality. Both are
different and mutually complementary expressions
of the same unknowable **He’*.

To express the infinite Immutability the Up-
anishad uses a series of neuter adjectives. “Bright,
bodiless, without scar, without sinews, pure, un¬
pierced by evil.” To express the same Absolute as
cause, continent and governing Inhabitant of the
totality of objects and of each object in the totality
(jagatyam jagat) it uses four masculine epithets,


* It would be an error to suppose that these conceptions
are in their essence later developments of philosophical
Hinduism. The conception of the many forms and names
of the One is as old as the Rig Veda.


THE LORD


57


“The Seer, the Thinker, the One who becomes
everywhere, the Self-existent** or “the Self-
Becoming**.

The Immutable is the still and secret foundation
of the play and the movement, extended equally,
impartially in all things, Samam Brahma,* lending
its support to all without choice or active participa¬
tion. Secure and free in His eternal immutability
the Lord projects Himself into the play and the
movement, becoming there in His self-existence all
that the Seer in Him visualises and the Thinker in
Him conceives. Kavir Manishi Paribhuh Swayam-
bh^h,

THE PURE IMMUTABLE

The pure immutability of the Lord is “bright.**
It is a luminosity of pure concentrated Self-aware¬
ness, not broken by refractions, not breaking out
into colour and form. It is the pure self-knowledge
of the Purusha, the conscious Soul, with his power,
his executive Force contained and inactive.

It is “bodiless,**—without form, indivisible and
without appearance of division. It is one equal
Purusha in all things, not divided by the divisions
of Space and Time,—a pure self-conscious Absolute.

It is without scar, that is, without defect, break
or imperfection. It is untouched and unaffected by
the mutabilities. It supports their clash of relations.


Gita “The equal Brahman.


58


ISHA UPANISHAD


their play of more and less, of increase and diminu*
tion, of irruption and interpenetration. For Itself is
without action, achalah sanatanah* motionless,
sempiternal.*'

It is without sinews. The reason for Its being
without scar is that It does not put out Power, does
not dispense Force in multiple channels, does not
lose it here, increase it there, replenish its loss or
seek by love or by violence its complementary or its
food. It is without nerves of force ; It does not
pour itself out in the energies of the Pranic dyna¬
mism, of Life, of Matariswan.

It is pure, unpierced by evil. What we call
sin or evil, is merely excess and defect, wrong
placement, inharmonious action and reaction. By
its equality, by its inaction even while it supports
all action, the conscious Soul retains its eternal
freedom and eternal purity. For it is unmodified ;
It watches as the Sakshi, the witness, the modifica¬
tions effected by Prakriti, but does not partake of
them, does not get clogged with them, receives not
their impression. Na lipyate.

THE SOUL INALIENABLY FREE

What is the relation of the active Brahman and
of the human soul to this pure Inactive? They too
are That. Action does not change the nature of
the Self, but only the nature of the diverse forms.


•Gita 11.24.


THE LORD


59


The self is always pure, blissful, perfect, whether
inactive or participating in action.

The Self is all things and exceeds them. It
exceeds always that in which the mind is engrossed,
that which it takes in a particular time and space as
a figure of itself. The boundless whole is always
perfect. The totality of things is a complete
harmony without wound or flaw. The view-point
of the part taken for a wlhole, in other words the
Ignorance, is the broken reflection which creates the
consciousness of limitation, incompleteness and
discord. We shall see that this Ignorance has a use
in the play of the Brahman ; but in itself it appears
at first to be only a parent of evil.

Ignorance is a veil that separates the mind, body
and life from their source and reality, Sachchida-
nanda. Thus obscured the mind feels itself pierced
by the evil that Ignorance creates. But the Active
Brahman is always Sachchidananda using for its self¬
becoming the forms of mind, body and life. All
their experiences are therefore seen by It in the
terms of Sachchidananda. It is not pierced by the
evil. For It also is the one and sees everywhere
Oneness. It is not mastered by the Ignorance that
It uses as a minor term of its conception.

The human soul is one with the Lord ; it also
is in its completeness Sachchidananda using Ignor¬
ance as the minor term of its being. But it has
projected its conceptions into this minor term and
established there in limited mind its centre of vision,


60


ISHA UPANISHAD


its view-point. It assumes to itself the incomplete¬
ness and the resultant sense of want, discord, desire,
suffering. The Real Man behind is not affected by
all this confusion ; but the apparent or exterior Man
is affected. To recover its freedom it must recover
its completeness ; it must identify itself with the
divine Inhabitant within, its true and complete self.
It can then, like the Lord, conduct the action of
Prakriti without undergoing the false impression of
identification with the results of its action. It is this
idea on which the Upanishad bases the assertion,
“Acbon cleaveth not to a man.”

lb this end it must recover the silent Brahman
within. The Lord possesses always His double term
and conducts the action of the universe, extended
in it, but not attached to or limited by His works.
The human soul, entangled in mind, is obscured in
vision by the rushing stream of Prakriti s works and
fancies itself to be a part of that stream and swept
in its currents and in its eddies. It has to go back
in its self-existence to the silent Purusha even while
participating in its self-becoming in the movement
of Prakriti. It becomes, then, not only like the
silent Purusha, the witness and upholder, but also
the Lord and the free enjoyer of Prakriti and her
works. An absolute calm and passivity, purity and
equality within, a sovereign and inexhaustible
activity without is the nature of Brahman as we see
it manifested in the universe.

TTiere is therefore no farther objection to works.


THE LORD


61


On the contrary, works are justified by the participa¬
tion or self-identification of the soul with the Lord
in His double aspect of passivity and activity. Tran¬
quillity for the Soul, activity for the energy, is the
balance of the divine rhythm in man.

THE LAW OF THINGS,

The totality of objects (arthan) is the becoming
of the Lord in the extension of His own being. Its
principle is double. There is consciousness ; there
is Being. Consciousness dwells in energy (Tapas)
upon its self-being to produce Idea of itself (vijndna)
and form and action inevitably corresponding to the
Idea. This is the original Indian conception of
creation, self-production or projection into form
(srishti, prasava). Being uses its self-awareness to
evolve infinite forms of itself governed by the ex¬
pansion of the innate Idea in the form. This is the
original Indian conception of evolution, prominent
in certain philosophies such as the Sankhya (pari-
ndma, vikdra, vivaria). It is the same phenomenon
diversely stated.

In the idea of some thinkers the world is a
purely subjective evolution (vivaria), not real as
objective fact ; in the idea of others it is an objective
fact, a real modification (parindma), but one which
makes no difference to the essence of Being. Both
notions claim to derive from the Upanishads as their
authority, and their opposition comes in fact by


62


ISHA UPANISHAD


the separation of what in the ancient Vedanta was
viewed as one,—as we see in this passage.

Brahman is His own subject and His own object,
whether in His pure self-existence or in His varied
self-becoming. He is the object of His own self-
awareness ; He is the Knower of His own self-being.
The two aspects are inseparable, even though they
seem to disappear into each other and emerge again
from each other. All appearance of pure subjectivi¬
ty holds itself as an object implicit in its very sub¬
jectivity ; all appearance of pure objectivity holds
itself as subject implicit in its very objectivity.

All objective existence is the Self-existent, the
Self-becoming, “Swayambhu,” becoming by the
force of the Idea within it. The Idea is, self-con¬
tained, the Fact that it becomes. For Swayambhu
sees or comprehends Himself in the essence of the
Fact as “Kavi, ” thinks Himself out in the evolution
of its possibilities as “Manishi, * becomes form of
Himself in the movement in Space and Time as
“Paribhu.” These three are one operation appear¬
ing as successive in the relative, temporal and
spacious Consciousness.

It follows that every object holds in itself the
law of its own being eternally, saswattbhyah
samabhyah, from years sempiternal, in perpetual
Time. All relations in the totality of objects are
thus determined by their Inhabitant, the Self-exis-
tent, the Self-becoming, and stand contained in the
nature of things by the omnipresence of the One,


THE LORD


63


the Lord, by His self-vision which is their inherent
subjective Truth, by His self-becoming which,
against a background of boundless possibilities, is
the Law of their inevitable evolution in the objective
Fact.

Therefore all things are arranged by Him per¬
fectly, yathMathyatah, as they should be in their
nature. There is an imperative harmony in the All,
which governs the apparent discords of individualisa¬
tion. That discord would be real and operate in
eternal Chaos, if there were only a mass of individual
forms and forces, if each form and force did not
contain in itself and were not in its reality the self-
existent All, the Lord.

THE PROCESS OF THINGS

The Lord appears to us in the relative notion
of the process of things first as Kavi, the Wise, the
Seer. The Kavi sees the Truth in itself, the truth
in its becoming, in its essence, possibilities, actuality.
He contains all that in the Idea, the Vijnana, called
the Truth and Law, Satyam Ritam, He contains
it comprehensively, not piecemeal ; the Truth and
Law of things is the Brihat, the Large. Viewed by
itself, the realm of Vijnana would seem a realm of
predetermination, of concentration, of compelling
seed-state. But it is a determination not in previous
Time, but in perpetual Time ; a Fate compelled by
the Soul, not compelling it, compelling rather the
action and result, present in the expansion of the


64


ISHA UPANISHAD


movement as well as in the concentration of the
Idea. Therefore the truth of the Soul is freedom
and mastery, not subjection and bondage. Purusha
commands Prakriti, Prakriti does not compel
Purusha. Na k^rma lipyate nare.

The Manishi takes his stand in the possibilities.
He has behind him the freedom of the Infinite and
brings it in as a background for the determination
of the finite. Therefore every action in the world
seems to emerge from a balancing and clashing of
various possibilities. None of these, however, are
effective in the determination except by their secret
consonance with the Law of that which has to
become. The Kavi is in the Manishi and upholds
him in his working. But viewed by itself the realm
of the Manishi would seem to be a state of plasticity,
of free-will, of the interaction of forces ; but of a
free-will in thought which is met by a fate in things.

For the action of the Manishi is meant to even¬
tuate in the becoming of the Paribhu. The Paribhu,
called also Virat, extends Himself in the realm of
eventualities. He fulfils what is contained in the
Truth, what works out in the possibilities reflected
by the mind, what appears to us as the fact object¬
ively realised. The realm of Virat would seem, if
taken separately, to be that of a Law and Predeter¬
mination which compels all things that evolve in that
realm,—^the iron chain of Karma, the rule of
mechanical necessity, the despotism of an inexplic¬
able Law.


THE LORD


65


But the becoming of Virat is always the becom¬
ing of the self-existent Lord ,—Paribhuh Sway am-
hhuh. Therefore to realise the truth of that becom¬
ing we have to go back and re-embrace all that
stands behind ;—we have to return to the full truth
of the free and infinite Sachchidananda.

This is the truth of things as seen from above
and from the Unity. It is the divine standpoint ;
but we have to take account of the human standpoint
which starts from below, proceeds from the Ignor¬
ance, and perceives these principles successively, not
comprehensively, as separate states of consciousness.
Humanity is that which returns in experience to
Sachchidananda, and it must begin from below, in
Avidya, with the mind embodied in matter, the
Thinker imprisoned and emerging from the objective
Fact. This imprisoned Thinker is Man, the
“Manu*\

He has to start from death and division and
arrive at unity and immortality. He has to realise
the universal in the individual and the Absolute in
the relative. He is Brahman growing self-conscious
in the objective multiplicity. He is the ego in the
cosmos vindicating himself as the All and the
Transcendent.


5


V.

THIRD MOVEMENT

KNOWLEDGE AND IGNORANCE
(Verses 9—11*)

V/DVA AND AVIDYA

All manifestation proceeds by the two terms,
Vidya and Avidya, the consciousness of Unity and
the consciousness of Multiplicity. They are the two
aspects of the Maya, the formative self-conception
of the Eternal.

Unity is the eternal and fundamental fact, with¬
out which all multiplicity would be unreal and an
impossible illusion. The consciousness of Unity is
therefore called Vidya, the knowledge.

Multiplicity is the play or varied self-expansion
of the One, shifting in its terms, divisible in its view

• 9. Into a blind darkness they enter who follow after
the Ignorance, they as if into a greater darkness who devote
themselves to the Knowledge alone.

10. Other, verily, ’tis said is that which comes by the
Knowledge, other that which comes by the Ignorance; this
is the lore we have received from the wise who revealed
that to our understanding.

11. He who knows That as both in one, the Knowledge
and the Ignorance, by the Ignorance crosses beyond death
and by the Knowledge enjoys Immortality.


KNOWLEDGE AND IGNORANCE


67


of itself, by force of whidh the One occupies many
centres of consciousness, inhabits many formations
of energy in the universal Movement. Multiplicity
is implicit or explicit in unity. Without it the Unity
would be either a void of non-existence or a power¬
less, sterile limitation to the state of indiscriminate
self-absorption or of blank repose.

But the consciousness of multiplicity separated
from the true knowledge in the many of their own
essential oneness,—the view-point of the separate
ego identifying itself with the divided form and the
limited action,—is a state of error and delusion.
In man this is the form taken by the consciousness
of multiplicity. Therefore it is given the name of
Avidya, the Ignorance.

Brahman, the Lord, is one and all-blissful, but
free from limitation by His unity ; all-powerful, He
is able to conceive Himself from multiple centres
in multiple forms from which and upon which flow
multiple currents of energy, seen by us as actions
or play of forces. When He is thus multiple, He
is not bound by His multiplicity, but amid all varia¬
tions dwells eternally in His own oneness. He is
Lord of Vidya and Avidya. They are the two sides
of His self-conception (Maya), the twin powers of
His Energy (Chit-Shakti).

Brahman, exceeding as well as dwelling in the
play of His Maya, is Ish, lord of it and free. Man,
dwelling in the play, is Anish, not lord, not free,
subject to Avidya. But this subjection is itself a play


68


ISHA VPANISHAD


of the Ignorance, unreal in essential fact (para-
martha), real only in practical relation (vyavahara),
in the working out of the actions of the divine
Energy, the Chit-Shakti. To get back to the essen¬
tial fact of his freedom he must recover the sense
of Oneness, the consciousness of Brahman, of the
Lord, realise his oneness in Brahman and with the
Lord. Recovering his freedom, realising his oneness
with all existences as becomings of the One Being
who is always himself, (So’ ham asmi, He am I),
he is able to carry out divine actions in the world,
no longer subject to the Ignorance, because free in
the knowledge.

The perfection of man, therefore, is the full
manifestation of the Divine in the individual through
the supreme accord between Vidya and Avidya.
Multiplicity must become conscious of its oneness.
Oneness embrace its multiplicity.

THE EXTREME PATHS

The purpose of the Lord in the world cannot
be fulfilled by following Vidya alone or Avidya
alone.

Those who are devoted entirely to the principle
of multiplicity and division and take their orientation
away from oneness enter into a blind darkness of
Ignorance. For this tendency is one of increasing
contraction and limitation, disaggregation of the
gains of knowledge and greater and greater subjec¬
tion to the mechanical necessities of Prakriti and


KNOWLEDGE AND IGNORANCE


69


finally to her separative and self-destructive forces.
To turn away from the progression towards Oneness
is to turn away from existence and from light.

Those Who are devoted entirely to the principle
of indiscriminate Unity and seek to put away from
them the integrality of the Brahman, also put away
from them knowledge and completeness and enter
as if into a greater darkness. They enter into some
special state and accept it for the whole, mistaking
exclusion in consciousness for transcendence in cons¬
ciousness. They ignore by choice of knowledge,
as the others are ignorant by compulsion of error.
Knowing all to transcend all is the right path of
Vidya.

Although a higher state than the other, this
supreme Night is termed a greater darkness, because
the lower is one of chaos from which reconstitution
is always possible, the higher is a conception of
Void or Asat, an attachment to non-existence of
Self from which it is more difficult to return to fulfil¬
ment of Self.

THE GAINS IN EITHER PATH

Pursued with a less entire attachment the paths
of Vidya and Avidya have each their legitimate gains
for the human soul, but neither of these are the full
and perfect thing undertaken by the individual in
the manifestation.

By Vidya one may attain to the state of the
silent Brahman or the Akshara Purusha regarding


70


ISHA UPANISHAD


the universe without actively participating in it or
to His self-absorbed state of Chit in Sat from which
the universe proceeds and towards which it returns.
Both these states are conditions of serenity, pleni¬
tude, freedom from the confusions and sufferings of
the world.

But the highest goal of man is neither fulfilment
in the movement as a separate individual nor in the
Silence separated from the movement, but in the
Uttama Purusha, the Lord. He who went abroad
and upholds in Himself both the Kshara and the
Akshara as modes of His being. The self of man.
the Jivatman, is here in order to realise in the indivi¬
dual and for the universe that one highest Self of all.
The ego created by Avidya is a necessary mechanism
for affirming individuality in the universal as a start¬
ing-point for this supreme achievement.

By Avidya one may attain to a sort of fullness
of power, joy, world-knowledge, largeness of being,
which is that of the Titans or of the Gods, of Indra,
of Prajapati. This is gained in the path of self¬
enlargement by an ample acceptance of the multipli¬
city in all its possibilities and a constant enrichment
of the individual by all the materials that the universe
can pour into him. But this also is not the goal
of man ; for though it brings transcendence of the
ordinary human limits, it does not bring the divine
transcendence of the universe in the Lord of the
universe. One transcends confusion of Ignorance,
but not limitation of Knowledge,—transcends death


KNOWLEDGE AND IGNORANCE


71


of the body ,but not limitation of being,—transcends
subjection to sorrow, but not subjection to joy,—
transcends the lower Prakriti but not the higher.
To gain the real freedom and the perfect Immortality
one would have to descend again to all that had been
rejected and make the right use of death, sorrow
and ignorance.

The real knowledge is that which perceives
Brahman in His integrality and does not follow
eagerly after one consciousness rather than another,
is no more attached to Vidya than to Avidya. This
was the knowledge of the ancient sages who were
dhtra, steadfast in the gaze of their thought, not
drawn away from the completeness of knowledge
by one light or by another and whose perception of
Brahman was consequently entire and comprehen¬
sive and their teaching founded on that perception
equally entire and comprehensive (vichachal^shire).
It is the knowledge handed down from these
Ancients that is being set forth in the Upanishad.

THE COMPLETE PATH

Brahman embraces in His manifestation both
Vidya and Avidya and if they are both present in
the manifestation, it is because they are both neces¬
sary to its existence and its accomplishment. Avidya
subsists because Vidya supports and embraces it ;
Vidya depends upon Avidya for the preparation and
the advance of the soul towards the great Unity.
Neither could exist without the other ; for if either


72


ISHA VPANISHAD


were abolished, they would both pass away into
something which would be neither the one nor the
other, something inconceivable and ineffable beyond
all manifestation.

In the worst Ignorance there is some point of
the knowledge which constitutes that form of Ignor¬
ance and some support of Unity which prevents it
in its most extreme division, limitation, obscurity
from ceasing to exist by dissolving into nothingness.
The destiny of the Ignorance is not that it should be
dissolved out of existence, but that its elements
should be enlightened, united, that which they strive
to express delivered, fulfilled and in the fulfilment
transmuted and transfigured.

In the uttermost unity of which knowledge is
capable the contents of the Multiplicity are inherent
and implicit and can any moment be released, into
activity. The office of Vidya is not to destroy
Avidya as a thing that oug^t never to have been
manifested but to draw it continually towards itself,
supporting it the while and helping it to deliver itself
progressively from that character of Ignorance, of
the oblivion of its essential Oneness, which gives it
its name.

Avidya fulfilled by turning more and more to
Vidya enables the individual and tihe universal to
become what the Lord is in Himself, conscious of
His manifestation, conscious of His non-manifesta¬
tion, free in birth, free in non-birth.

Man represents the point at which the multiple


KNOWLEDGE AND IGNORANCE


/3


city in the universe becomes consciously capable of
this turning and fulfilment. His own natural fulfil¬
ment comes by following the complete path of
Avidya surrendering itself to Vidya, the Multiplicity
to the Unity, the Ego to the One in all and beyond
all, and of Vidya accepting Avidya into itself, the
Unity fulfilling the Multiplicity, the One manifesting
Himself unveiled in the individual and in the
universe.

MORTALITY AND IMMORTALITY

MORTALITY

By Avidya fulfilled man passes beyond death,
by Vidya accepting Avidya into itself he enjoys
immortality.

By death is meant the state of mortality which
is a subjectioij to the process of constant birth and
dying as a limited ego bound to the dualities of
joy and sorrow, good and evil, truth and error, love
and hatred, pleasure and suffering.

This state comes by limitation and self-division
from the One who is all and in all and beyond all
and by attachment of the idea of self to a single
formation in Time and Space of body, life and mind,
by which the Self excludes from its view all that it
verily is with the exception of a mass of experiences
iflowing out from and in upon a particular centre and
limited by the capacities of a particular mental, vital
and bodily frame. This mass of experiences it
organises around the ego-centre in the mind and
linking them together in Time by a double action of


74


ISHA VPANISHAD


memory, passive in state, active in work, says conti¬
nually, “TTiis is I.*'

The result is that the soul attributes to itself a
certain portion only of the play of Prakriti or Chit-
Shakti and consequently a certain limited capacity
of force of consciousness which has to bear all the
impact of what the soul does not regard as itself
but as a rush of alien forces ; against them it defends
its separate formation of individuality from dissolu¬
tion into Nature or mastery by Nature. It seeks to
assert in the individual form and by its means its
innate character of Ish or Lord and so to possess
and enjoy its world.

But by the very definition of the ego its capacity
is limited. It accepts as itself a form made of the
movement of Nature which cannot ^ndure in the
general flux of things. It has to form it by the
process of the movement and this is birth, it dissolves
it by the process of the movement and this is death.

It can master by the understanding only so much
of its experiences as assimilate with its own view¬
point and in a way which must always be imperfect
and subject to error because it is not the view of all
or the view-point of the All. Its knowledge is partly
error and all the rest it ignores.

It can only accept and harmonise itself with a
certain number of its experiences, precisely because
diese are the only ones it can understand sufficiently
to assimilate. This is its joy ; the rest is sorrow or
indifference.


KNOWLEDGE AND IGNORANCE 75

It is only capable of harmonising with the force
in its body, nerves and mind a certain number of
impacts of alien forces. In these it takes pleasure.
The rest it receives with insensibility or pain.

Death therefore is the constant denial by the
All of the ego’s false self-limitation in the individual
frame of mind, life and body.

Error is the constant denial by the All of the
ego’s false sufficiency in a limited knowledge.

Suffering of mind and body is the constant denial
by the All of the ego’s attempt to confine the univer¬
sal Ananda to a false and self-regarding formation
of limited and exclusive enjoyments.

It is only by accepting the oneness of the All
that the individual can escape from this constant and
necessary denial and attain beyond. Then All¬
being, All-force, All-consciousness, All-truth, All¬
delight take possession of the individual soul. It
changes mortality for immortality.

MORTALITY AND AVIDYA.

But the way of attaining to immortality is not
by the self-dissolution of the individual formation
into the flux of Prakriti, neither is it by prematurely
dissolving it into the All-soul which Prakriti expresses.
Man moves towards something which fulfils the
universe by transcending it. He has to prepare his
individual soul for the transcendence and for the
fulfilment.


76


ISHA UPANISHAD


If Avidya is the cause of mortality, it is also
the path out of mortality. The limitation has been
created precisely in order that the individual may
affirm himself against the flux of Prakriti in order
eventually to transcend, possess and transform it.

The first necessity is therefore for man
continually to enlarge himself in being, knowledge,
joy, power in the limits of the ego so that he may
arrive at the conception of something which progres¬
sively manifests itself in him in these terms and
becomes more and more powerful to deal with the
oppositions of Prakriti and to change, individually,
more and more the terms of ignorance, suffering
and weakness into the terms of knowledge, joy and
power and even death into a means of wider life.

TTiis self-enlargement has then to awaken to
the perception of something exceeding itself,
exceeding the personal manifestation. Man has so
to enlarge his conception of self as to see all in
himself and himself in all (verse 6). He has to see
that this “1” which contains all and is contained in
all, is the One, is universal and not his personal ego.
To That he has to subject his ego. That he has to
reproduce in his nature and become, That is what
he has to possess and enjoy with an equal soul in all
its forms and movements.

He has to see, that this universal One is some¬
thing entirely transcendent, the sole Being, and that
the universe and all its forms, actions, egos are only
becomings of that Being (verse 7). World is a


KNOWLEDGE AND IGNORANCE


77


becoming which seeks always to express in motion
of Time and Space, by progression in mind, life
and body what is beyond all becoming, beyond
Time and Space, beyond mind, life and body.

Thus Avidya becomes one with Vidya. By
Avidya man passes beyond that death, suffering,
ignorance, weakness which were the first terms he
had to deal with, the first assertions of the One in
the birth affirming Himself amid the limitations and
divisions of the Multiplicity. By Vidya he enjoys
even in the birth the Immortality.

IMMORTALITY

Immortality does not mean survival of the self
or the ego after dissolution of the body. The Self
always survives the dissolution of the body, because
it always preexisted before the birth of the body.
Tlie self is unborn and undying. The survival of the
ego is only the first condition by which the individual
soul is able to continue and link together its
experiences in Avidya so as to pursue with an
increasing self-possession and mastery that process
of self-enlargement which culminates in Vidya.

By immortality is meant the consciousness which
is beyond birth and death, beyond the chain of
cause and effect, beyond all bondage and limitation,
free, blissful, self-existent in concious-being, the
consciousness of the Lord, of the supreme Purusha,
of Sachchidananda.


78


ISHA UPANISHAD


JMjlORTAUTY AND BIRTH

On this realisation man can base his free activity
in the universe.

But having so far attained what further utility
has the soul for birth or for works? None for itself,
everything for God and the universe.

Immortality beyond the universe is not the
object of manifestation in the universe, for that the
Self always possessed. Man exists in order that
through him the Self may enjoy Immortality in the
birth as well as in the non-becoming.

Nor is individual salvation the end ; for that
would only be the sublime of the ego, not its self-
realisation through the Lord in all.

Having realised his own immortality, the indivi¬
dual has yet to fulfil God’s work in the universe.
He has to help the life, the mind and the body in
all beings to express progressively Immortality and
not mortality.

This he may do by the becoming in the material
body which we ordinarily call birth, or from some
status in another world or even, it is possible, from
beyond world. But birth in the body is the most
close, divine and effective form of help which the
liberated can give to those who are themselves still
bound to the progression of birth in the lowest world
of the Ignorance.


VI

THIRD MOVEMENT

BIRTH AND NON-BIRTH
Verses 12-14*

THE BIRTH AND THE NQN-BIRTH.

The Self outside Nature does not become ; it
is immutable as well as eternal. The Self in Nature
becomes, it changes its states and forms. This entry
into various states and forms in the succession of
Time is Birth in Nature.

Because of these two positions of the Self, in
Nature and out of Nature, moving in the movement
and seated above the movement, active in the
development and eating the fruits of the tree of Life
or inactive and simply regarding, there are two
possible states of conscious existence directly
opposed to each other of which the human soul is
capable, the state of Birth, the state of Non-Birth.

* 12. Into a blind darkness they enter who follow after
the Non-Birth, they as if into a greater darkness who devote
themselves to the Birth alone.

13. Other, verily, 'tis said, is that which comes by the
Birth, other that which comes by the Non-Birth; this is the
lore we have received from the wise who revealed that to
olir understanding.

14. He who knows That as both in one, the Birth and
the dissolution of Birth, by the dissolution crosses beyond
death and by the Birth enjoys Immortality.


80


ISHA VPANISHAD


Man starts from the troubled state of Birth, he
arrives at that tranquil poise of conscious existence
liberated from the movement which is the Non-Birth.
TTie knot of the Birth is the ego-sense ; the dissolution
of the ego-sense brings us to the Non-Birth. There¬
fore the Non-Birth is also called the Dissolution
(Vinasha).

Birth and Non-Birth are not essentially physical
conditions, but soul-states. A man may break the
knot of the ego-sense and yet remain in the physical
body ; but if he concentrates himself solely in the
state of dissolution of ego, then he is not born again
in the body. He is liberated from birth as soon as
the present impulse of Nature which continues the
action of the mind and body has been exhausted.
On the other hand if he attaches himself to the Birth,
the ego-principle in him seeks continually to clothe
itself in fresh mental and physical forms.

THE EVIL OF THE EXTREMES ,

Neither attachment to Non-Birth nor attachment
to Birth is the perfect way. For all attachment is
an act of ignorance and a violence committed upon
the Truth. Its end also is ignorance, a state of blind
darkness.

Exclusive attachment to Non-Birth leads to a
dissolution into indiscriminate Nature or into the
Nihil, into the Void, and both of these are states
of blii^d darkness. For the Nihil is an attempt not
to transcend the state of existence in birth, but to


BIRTH AND NON^BIRTH


81


annul it, not to pass from a limited into an illimitable
existence, but from existence into its opposite. The
opposite of existence can only be the Night of
negative consciousness, a state of ignorance and not
of release.

On the other hand, attachment to Birth in tbe
body means a constant self-limitation and an inter¬
minable round of egoistic births in the lower forms
of egoism without issue or release. This is, from a
certain point of view, a worse darkness than the
other ; for it is ignorant even of the impulse of
release. It is not an error in the grasping after truth,
but a perpetual contentment with the state of blind¬
ness. It cannot lead even eventually to any greater
good, because it does not dream of any higher
condition.


THE GOOD OF THE EXTREMES


On the other hand each of these tendencies,
pursued with a certain relativeness to the other, has
its own fruit and its own good. Non-Birth pursued
as the goal of Birth and a higher, fuller and truer
existence may lead to withdrawal into the silent
Brahman or into the pure liberty of the Non-Being.
Birth, pursued as a means of progress and self-
enlargement, leads to a greater and fuller life which
may, in its tuns* become a vestibule to the final
achievement.


82


ISHA UPANISHAD


THE PERFECT WAY

But neither of these results is perfect in itself nor
the true goal of humanity. Each of them brings its
intended portion into the perfect good of the human
soul only when it is completed by the other.

Brahman is both Vidya and Avidya, both Birth
and Non-Birth. The realisation of the Self as the
unborn and the poise of the soul beyond the dualities
of birth and death in the infinite and transcendent
existence are the conditions of a free and divine
life in the Becoming. The one is necessary to the
other. It is by participation in the pure unity of the
Immobile (Akshara) Brahman that the soul is released
from its absorption in the stream of the movement.
So released it identifies itself with the Lord to whom
becoming and non-becoming are only modes of His
existence and is able to enjoy immortality in the
manifestation without being caught in the wheel of
Nature’s delusions. The necessity of birth ceases,
its personal object having been fulfilled ; the freedom
of becoming remains. For the Divine enjoys equally
and simultaneously the freedom of His eternity and
the freedom of his becoming.

It may even be said that to have had the
conscious experience of a dissolution of the very
idea of Being into the supreme Non-being is
necessary for the fullest and freest possession of
Being itself. This would be from the synthetic
standpoint the justification of the great effort of


BIRTH AND NON^BIRTH


83


Buddhism to exceed the conception of all positive
being even in its widest or purest essentiality.

Thus by dissolution of ego and of the attach¬
ment to birth the soul crosses beyond death ; it is
liberated from all limitation in the dualities. Having
attained this liberation it accepts becoming as a
process of Nature subject to the soul and not binding
upon it and by this free and divine becoming enjoys
Immortality.

THE JUSTIFICATION OF LIFE

Thus, the third movement of the Upanishad is
a justification of life and works, which were enjoined
upon the seeker of the Truth in its second verse.
Works are the essence of Life. Life is a manifesta¬
tion of the Brahman ; in Brahman the Life Principle
arranges a harmony of the seven principles of cons¬
cious being by which that manifestation works out
its involution and evolution. In Brahman Mataris-
wan disposes the waters, the sevenfold movement
of the divine Existence.

That divine Existence is the Lord who has gone
abroad in the movement and unrolled the universe
in His three modes as All-Seer of the Truth of
things, Thinker-out of their possibilities, Realiser of
their actualities. He has determined all things
sovereignly in their own nature, development and
goal from years sempiternal.

That determination works out through His
double power of Vidya and Avidya, consciousness


64


ISHA UPANISHAD


of essential unity and consciousness of phenomenal
multiplicity.

The Multiplicity carried to its extreme limit
returns upon itself in the conscious individual who
is the Lord inhabiting the forms of the movement
and enjoying first the play of the Ignorance. After¬
wards by development in the Ignorance the soul
returns to the capacity of Knowledge and enjoys
by the Knowledge Immortality.

TTiis Immortality is gained by the dissolution of
the limited ego and its chain of births into the con¬
sciousness of the unborn and undying, the Eternal,
the Lord, the ever-free. But it is enjoyed by a free
and divine becoming in the universe and not out¬
side the universe ; for there it is always possessed,
but here in the material body it is to be worked out
and enjoyed by the divine Inhabitant under circum¬
stances that are in appearance the most opposite to
its terms, in the life of the individual and in the
multiple life of the universe.

Life has to be transcended in order that it may
be freely accepted ; the works of the universe have
to be overpassed in order that they may be divinely
fulfilled.

The soul even in apparent bondage is really free
and only plays at being bound ; but it has to go
back to the consciousness of freedom and possess
and enjoy universally not this or that but the Divine
and the All.


VII

FOURTH MOVEMENT

THE WORLDS-^URYA
Verses 15—16*

THE WORI.DS AFTER DEATH

In the third verse the Upanishad has spoken of
sunless worlds enveloped in blind gloom. In its
third movement it also speaks twice of the soul
entering into a blind gloom, but here it is a state of
consciousness that seems to be indicated and not a
world. Nevertheless, the two statements differ little
in effect ; for in the Vedantic conception a world
is only a condition of conscious being organised in
the terms of the seven constituent principles of mani¬
fested existence. According to the state of con¬
sciousness which we reach here in the body, will
be our state of consciousness and the surroundings
organised by it when the mental being passes out of

• 15. The face of Truth is covered with a brilliant golden
lid; that do thou remove, O Fosterer, for the law of the Truth,
for sight.

16. O Fosterer, O sole Seer, O Ordainer, O Illumining
Sun, O Power of the Father of creatures, marshal thy rays,
draw together thy light. The Lustre which is thy most blessed
form of all. that in thee I behold; the Purusha there and there.
He am I.


86


ISHA UPANISHAD


the body. For the individual soul out of the body
must either disappear into the general constituents
of its existence, merge itself into Brahman or persist
in an organisation of consciousness other than the
terrestrial and in relations with the universe other
than those which are appropriate to life in the body.
This state of consciousness and the relations belong¬
ing to it are the other worlds, the worlds after death.

THE THREE STATES

The Upanishad admits three states of the soul
in relation to the manifested universe,—terrestrial life
by birth in the body, the survival of the individual
soul after death in other states and the immortal
existence which being beyond birth and death,
beyond manifestation can yet enter into forms as the
Inhabitant and embrace Nature as its lord. TTie two
former conditions appertain to the Becoming ; Im¬
mortality stands in the Self, in the Non-Birth, and
enjoys the Becoming,

The Upanishad, although it does not speak
expressly of rebirth in an earthly body, yet implies
that belief in its thought and language,—especially
in the 17th verse. On the basis of this belief in
rebirth man may aim at three distinct objects beyond
death,—a better or more fortunate life or lives upon
earth, eternal enjoyment of bliss in an ultra-terrestrial
world of light and joy or a transcendence exclusive
of all universal existence merged in the Supreme as
in one's true self but having no relation with the


THE WORLDS^URYA


87


actual or possible contents of its infinite conscious¬
ness.

REBIRTH

The attainment of a better life or lives upon
earth is not the consummation offered to the soul
by the thought of the Upanishad. But it is an
important intermediate object so long as the soul
is in a state of growth and self-enlargement and has
not attained to liberation. The obligation of birth
and death is a sign that the mental being has not
yet unified itself with its true supra-mental self and
spirit, but is dwelling “in Avidya and enclosed
within it.“* To attain that union the life of man
upon earth is its appointed means. After liberation
the soul is free, but may still participate in the entire
movement and return to birth no longer for its own
sake but for the sake of others and according to the
will in it of its divine Self, the Lord of its movement.

HEAVEN AND HELL

The enjoyment of beatitude in a heaven
beyond is also not the supreme consummation. But
Vedantic thought did not envisage rebirth as an
immediate entry after death into a new body ; the
mental being in man is not so rigidly bound to the
vital and physical,—on the contrary, the latter are
ordinarily dissolved together after death, and there
must therefore be, before the soul is attracted back


Avidyay^m antare vartamanah.


88


ISHA VPANISHAD


towards terrestrial existence, an interval in which it
assimilates its terrestrial experiences in order to be
able to constitute a new vital and physical being
upon earth. During this interval it must dwell in
states or worlds beyond and these may be favourable
or unfavourable to its future development. They are
favourable in proportion as the light of the Supreme
Truth of which Surya is a symbol enters into them,
but states of intermediate ignorance or darkness arc
harmful to the soul in its progress. Those enter into
them, as has been affirmed in the third verse, who
do hurt to themselves by shutting themselves to the
light or distorting the natural course of their develop¬
ment. The Vedantic heavens are states of light and
the soul’s expansion ; darkness, self-obscuration and
self-distortion are the nature of the Hells which it
has to shun.

In relation to the soul’s individual development,
therefore, the life in worlds beyond, like the life
upon earth, is a means and not an object in itself.
After liberation the soul may possess these worlds
as it possesses the material birth, accepting in them
a 'means towards the divine manifestation in which
they form a condition of its fullness, each being one
of the parts in a series of organised states of con¬
scious being which is linked with and supports all
the rest.

TRANSCENDENCE

Transcendence is the goal of the development,
but it does not exclude the possession of that which


THE WORLDS-^URYA


89


is transcended. The soul need not and should not
push transcendence so far as to aim at its own extinc¬
tion. Nirvana is extinction of the ego-limitations,
but not of all possibility of manifestation, since it
can be possessed even in the body.

The desire of the exclusive liberation is the last
desire that the soul in its expanding knowledge has
to abandon ; the delusion that it is bound by birth
is the last delusion that it has to destroy.

SURYA AND AGNI

On the basis of this conception of the worlds
and the relation of these different soul-states to each
other the Upanishad proceeds to indicate the two
lines of knowledge and action which lead to the
supreme vision and the divine felicity. This is done
under the form of an invocation to Surya and Agni,
the Vedic godheads, representative one of the
supreme Truth and its illuminations, the other of the
divine Will raising, purifying and perfecting human
action.

THE ORDER OF THE WORLDS

To understand entirely the place and function
of Surya we must enter a little more profoundly
into the Vedic conception of the seven worlds and
the principles of consciousness they represent.

All conscious being is one and indivisible in
itself, but in manifestation it becomes a complex
rhythm, a scale of harmonies, a hierarchy of states


90


ISHA UPANISHAD


or movements. For what we call a state is only the
organisation of a complex movement. TTiis hier¬
archy is composed by a descending or involutive and
an ascending or evolutive movement of which Spirit
and Matter are the highest and lowest terms.

Spirit is Sat or pure existence, pure in self-
aXvareness (Chit), pure in self-delight (Ananda).
Therefore Spirit can be regarded as a triune basis
of all conscious being. There are three terms, but
they are really one. For all pure existence is in its
essence pure self-conscience and all pure self-con-
science is in its essence pure self-delight. At the
same time our consciousness is capable of separating
these three by the Idea and the Word and even of
creating for itself in its divided or limited movements
the sense of their apparent opposites.

An integral intuition into the nature of conscious
being shows us that it is indeed one in essence, but
also that it is capable of an infinite potential com¬
plexity and multiplicity in self-experience. TTie
working of this potential complexity and multiplicity
in die One is what we call from our point of view
manifestation or creation or world or becoming—
{bhuvana, bhava). Without it no world-existence is
possible.

The agent of this becoming is always the self¬
conscience of the Being. The power by which the
self-conscience brings out of itself its potential com¬
plexities is termed Tapas, Force or Energy, and,
being self-conscious, is obviously of the nature of


THE WORLDS—SURYA


91


Will, But not Will as we understand it, something
exterior to its object, other than its works, labouring
on material outside itself, but Will inherent in the
Being, inherent in the becoming, one with the move¬
ment of existence,—self-conscious Will that becomes
what it sees and knows in itself. Will that is ex¬
pressed as Force of its own work and formulates
itself in the result of its work. By this Will, Tapas
or Chit-Shakti, the worlds are created.

THE HIGHER WORLDS

All organisation of self-conscient being which
takes as its basis the unity of pure existence belongs
to the world of the highest creation, parardha ,—the
worlds of the Spirit.

We can conceive three principal formations.

When Tapas or energy of self-conscience dwells
upon Sat or pure existence as its basis, the result is
Satyaloka or world of true existence. The soul in
Satyaloka is one with all its manifestations by one¬
ness of essence and therefore one in self-conscience
and in energy of self-conscience and one also in
bliss.

When Tapas dwells upon active power of Chit
as its basis, the result is Tapoloka or world of energy
of self-conscience. The soul in Tapoloka is one
with all manifestations in this Energy and therefore
enjoys oneness also in the totality of their bliss and
possesses equally their unity of essence.

When Tapas dwells upon active Delight of being


92


ISHA UPANISHAD


as its basis, the result is Janaloka, world of creative
Delight. The soul in Janaloka is one in delight of
being with all manifestation and through that bliss
one also in conscious energy and in essence of being.

All these are states of consciousness in which
unity and multiplicity have not yet been separated
from eaclh other. All is in all, each in all and all
in each, inherently, by the very nature of conscious
being and without effort of conception or travail of
perception. There is no night, no obscurity. Neither
is there properly speaking any dominant action of
illuminating Surya. For the whole of consciousness
there is self-luminous and needs no light other than
itself. The distinct existence of Surya is lost in the
oneness of the Lord or Purusha ; that luminous one¬
ness is Surya’s most blessed form of all.

THE LOWER CREATION

In the lower creation also there are three prin¬
ciples, Matter, Life, and Mind. Sat or pure exist¬
ence appears there as extended substance or Matter ;
Will or Force appears as Life which is in its nature
creative or manifesting Force and that Force is in
its nature a self-conscient will involved and obscure
in the forms of its creation. It is liberated from the
involution and obscurity by delight of being strug¬
gling to become conscious of itself in desire and
sensation ; the result is the emergence of Mind. So
at least it appears to us in the ascending or evolutive
movement.


THE WORLDS^URYA


93


Wherever there is Matter, Life and Mind are
present involved or evolving. So also, Life and
Mind have some kind of material form as the condi¬
tion of their activities. These three appear not as
triune, owing to their domination by the dividing
principle of Avidya, but as triple.

In the organisation of consciousness to which
we belong, Tapas dwells upon Matter as its basis.
Our consciousness is determined by the divisibility of
extended substance in its apparent forms. This is
Bhurloka the material world, the world of formal
becoming.

But we may conceive of a world in which
dynamic Life-force with sensation emergent in it is
the basis and determines without the gross obstacle
of Matter the forms that it shall take. This organisa¬
tion of consciousness has for its field Bhuvarloka,
the worlds of free vital becoming in form.

We may conceive also of an organised state of
consciousness in which Mind liberates itself from
subjection to material sensation and becoming
dominant determines its own forms instead of being
itself determined by the forms in which it finds itself
as a result of life-evolution. This formation is
Swarloka or world of free, pure and luminous
mentality.

In these lower worlds consciousness is normally
broken up and divided. The light of Surya, tihe
Truth, is imprisoned in the night of the subconscient
or appears only reflected in limited centres or with


94


!SHA UPANISHAD


its rays received by those centres and utilised
according to their individual nature.

THE INTERMEDIATE WORLD.

Between these two creations, linking them
together, is the world or organisation of conscious¬
ness of which the infinite Truth of things is the
foundation. There dominant individualisation no
longer usurps the all-pervading soul and the founda¬
tion of consciousness is its own vast totality arranging
in itself individualised movements which never
lose the consciousness of their integrality and total
oneness with all others. Multiplicity no longer
prevails and divides, but even in the complexity of
its movements always refers back to essential unity
and its own integral totality. This world is there¬
fore called Maharloka or world of large conscious¬
ness.

The principle of Maharloka is Vijnana, the Idea.
But this Vijnana is intuitional or rather gnostic
Idea,* not intellectual conception. The difference
is that intellectual conception not only tends


* Intuition (revelation, inspiration, intuitive perception, in¬
tuitive discrimination) is vijnana working in mind under the
conditions and in the forms of mind. Gnosis or true super¬
mind is a power above mind working in its own law, out of
the direct identity of the supreme Self, his absolute self-
conscious Truth knowing herself by her own power of absolute
Light without any fteed of seeking, even the most luminous
seeking.


THE WORLDS-^URYA


95


towards form, but determines itself in the form
of the idea and once determined distinguishes
itself sharply from other conceptions. But pure
intuitional or gnostic Idea sees itself in the Being as
well as in the Becoming. It is one with the existence
which throws out the form as a symbol of itself
and it therefore carries with it always the knowledge
of the Truth behind the form. It is in its nature
self-conscience of the being and power of the One,
aware always of its totality, starting therefore from
the totality of all existence and perceiving directly its
contents. Its nature is drishti, seeing, not conceiving.
It is the vision at once of the essence and the image.
It is this intuition or gnosis which is the Vedic Truth,
the self-vision and all-vision of Surya.

THE LAW OF THE TRUTH .

The face of this Truth is covered as with a
brilliant shield, as with a golden lid ; covered, that
is to say, from the view of our human consciousness.
For we are mental beings and our highest ordinary
mental sight is composed of the concepts and
percepts of the mind, which are indeed a means of
knowledge, rays of the Truth, but not in their nature
truth of existence, only truth of form. By them we
arrange our knowledge of the appearances of things
and try to infer the truth behind. The true
knowledge is truth of existence, satyam, not mere
truth of form or appearance.

We can only arrive at the true Truth, if Surya


%


ISHA UPANISHAD


works in us to remove this brilliant formation of
concepts and percepts and replaces them by the
self-vision and all-vision.

For this it is necessary that the law and action
of the Truth should be manifested in us. We must
learn to see things as they are, see ourselves as we
are. Our present action is one in which self-
knowledge and will are divided. We start with a
fundamental falsehood, that we have a separate
existence from others and we try to know the
relations of separate beings in their separateness and
act on the knowledge so formed for an individual
utility. The law of the Truth would work in us if we
saw the totality of our existence containing all
others, its forms created by the action of the totality,
its powers working in and by the action of the
totality. Our internal and external action would
then well naturally and directly out of our self¬
existence, out of the very truth of things and not
in obedience to an intermediate principle which is
in its nature a falsifying reflection.

THE FULFILMENT OF SURYA IN MAN.

Nevertheless even in our ordinary action there
is the beginning or at least the seed of the Truth
which must liberate us. Behind every act and
perception there is an intuition, a truth which, if it
is continually falsihed in the form, yet preserves
itself in the essence and works to lead ua by
increasing Ught and largeneas to truth in the


THE WORLDSSURYA


97


manifestation. Behind all this travail of differentia¬
tion and division there is an insistent unifying
tendency which is also continually falsified in the
separate result, but yet leads persistently towards
our eventual integrality in knowledge, in being and
in will.

Surya is Pushan, fosterer or increaser. His
work must be to effect this enlargement of the
divided self-perception and action of will into the
integral will and knowledge. He is sole seer and
replacing other forms of knowledge by his unifying
vision enables us to arrive finally at oneness. That
intuitive vision of the totality, of one in All and All
in one, becomes the ordainer of the right law of
action in us, the law of the Truth. For Surya is
Yama, the Ordainer or Controller who assures the
law, the dharma. Thus we arrive at the fullness
of action of the Illuminer in us, accomplish the
entirety of the Truth-Consciousness. We are then
able to see that all that is contained in the being of
Surya, in the Vijnana which builds up the worlds
is becoming of existence in the one existence and
one Lord of all becoming, the Purusha, Sachchida-
nanda. All becoming is born in the Being who
himself exceeds all becomings and is their Lord,
Prajapati.

By the revelation of the vision of Surya the
true knowledge is formed. In this formation the
Upanishad indicates two successive actions. First,
there is an arrangement or marshalling of the rays

7


98


ISHA VPANISHAD


of Surya, that is to say, the truths concealed behind
our concepts and percepts are brought out by
separate intuitions of the image and the essence of
the image and arranged in their true relations to
each other. So we arrive at totalities of intuitive
knowledge and can finally go beyond to unity.
This is the drawing together of the light of Surya.
This double movement is necessitated by the consti¬
tution of our minds which cannot, like the original
Truth-consciousness, start at once from the totality
and perceive its contents from within. The mind
can hardly conceive unity except as an abstraction,
a sum or a void. Therefore it has to be gradually
Jed from its own manner to that which exceeds it.
It has to carry out its own dharacteristic action of
arrangement, but with the help and by the operation
of the higher faculty, no longer arbitrarily, but
following the very action of the Truth of existence
itself. Afterwards, by thus gradually correcting the
manner of its own characteristic action it can
succeed in reversing that characteristic action itself
and learn to proceed from the whole to the contents
instead of proceeding from “parts’** mistaken for
entities to an apparent whole which is still a “part’*
and still mistaken for an entity.

THE ONE EXISTENT ,

Thus by the action of Surya we arrive at that
light of the supreme super-conscient in which even

* There are really no parts, existence being indivisible.


THE WORLDS-^URYA


99


the intuitive knowledge of the truth of things based
upon the total vision passes into the self-luminous
self-vision of the one existent, one in all infinite
complexities of a self-experience which never loses
its unity or its self-luminousness. This is Surya’s
goodliest form of all. For it is the supreme Light,
the supreme Will, the supreme Delight of existence.

This is the Lord, the Purusha, the self-conscient
Being. When we have this vision, there is the inte¬
gral self-knowledge, the perfect seeing, expressed
in the great cry of the Upanishad, So*ham. The
Purusha there and tihere. He am 1. The Lord
manifests Himself in the movements and inhabits
many forms, but it is One who inhabits all. This
self-conscient being, this real ‘1’ whom the mental
being individualised in the form is aware of as his
true self—it is He. It is the All ; and it is that which
transcends the All,


VIll

FOURTH MOVEMENT

ACTION AND THE DIVINE WILL
Verses 17-18.*

THE SIDE OF ACTION

TTirough Surya then, through the growth of the
illumination in the mind which enables it eventually
to pass beyond itself, we have the first principle of
progress from mortality to immortality. It is by the
Sun as a door or gatef that the individual, the
limited consciousness attains to the full conscious¬
ness and life in the one, supreme and all-embracing
Soul.

Both consciousness and life are included in the
formula of Immortality ; Knowledge is incomplete
without action. Chit fulfils itself by Tapas, Con¬
sciousness by energy. And as Surya represents the

* 17. The Breath of things is an immortal life, but of
the body ashes are the end—OM! O Will, remember, that
which was done remember. O Will, remember, that which
was done remember.

18. O god Agni, knowing all things that are manifested,
lead us by the good path to the felicity; remove from us the
devious attraction of sin. To thee completest speech of
submission we address.

t Suryadwiiren’a.


ACTION AND THE DIVINE WILL 101


divine Light, so Agni to the ancient Rishis
represented divine Force, Power or Will-in-Conscious-
ness. The prayer to Agni completes the prayer to
Surya.

THE INDIVIDUAL WILL .

As in knowledge, so in action, unity is the true
foundation. The individual, accepting division as
his law, isolating himself in his own egoistic limits,
is necessarily mortal, obscure and ignorant in his
workings. He follows in his aims and in his

methods a knowledge that is personal, governed by
desire, habits of thought, obscure subconscious

impulses or, at best, a broken partial and shifting
light. He lives by rays and not in the full blaze of
the Sun. His knowledge is narrow in its objectivity,
narrow in its subjectivity, in neither one with the
integral knowledge and the total working and total
will in the universe. His action, therefore, is

crooked, many-branching, hesitating and fluctuating
in its impulsion and direction ; it beats about among
falsehoods to find the Truth, tosses or scraps frag¬
ments together to piece out the whole, stumbles
among errors and sins to find the right. Being

neither one-visioned nor whole-visioned, having
neither the totality of the universal Will nor the
concentrated oneness of the transcendent, the indivi¬
dual will cannot walk straight on the right or good
path towards the Truth and the Immortality.


102


ISHA UPANISHAD


Governed by desire, exposed to the shock of the
forces around it with which its egoism and ignorance
forbid it to put itself in harmony, it is subject to
the twin children of the Ignorance, suffering and
falsehood. Not having the divine Truth and Right,
it cannot have the divine Felicity.

AGNI, THE DIVINE WILL

But as there is in and behind all the falsehoods
of our material mind and reason a Light that
prepares by this twilight the full dawn of the Truth
in man, so there is in and behind all our errors,
sins and stumblings a secret Will, tending towards
Love and Harmony, which knows where it is going
and prepares and combines our crooked branchings
towards the straight path which will be the final
result of their toil and seeking. The emergence of
this Will and that Light are the conditions of
immortality.

This Will is Agni. Agni is in the Rig Veda,
from which the closing verse of the Upanisthad is
taken, the flame of the Divine Will or Force of
Consciousness working in the worlds. He is
described as the immortal in mortals, the leader of
the journey, the divine Horse that bears us on the
road, the “son of crookedness” who himself knows
and is the straightness and the Truth. Concealed
and hard to seize in the workings of this world
because they are all falsified by desire and egoism,
he uses them to transcend them and emerges as


ACTION AND THE DIVINE WILL 103


the universal in Man or universal Power, Agni Vais-
vanara, who contains in himself all the gods and all
the worlds, upholds all the universal workings and
finally fulfils the godhead, the immortality. He is
the worker of the divine Work. It is these symbols
which govern the sense of the two final verses of
the Upanishad.

THE IMMORTAL LIFE^PRINCIPLE

Life is the condition from which the Will and
the Light emerge. It is said in the Veda that Vayu
or Matarisvan, the Life-Principle, is he who brings
down Agni from Surya in the high and far-off
supreme world. Life calls down the divine Will
from the Truth-consciousness into the realm of
mind and body to prepare here, in Life, its
own manifestation. Agni, enjoying and devour¬
ing the things of Life, generates the Maruts, nervous
forces of Life that becomes forces of thought ; they,
upheld by Agni, prepare the action of Indra, the
luminous Mind, who is for our life-powers their
Rishi or finder of the Truth and Right. Indra slays
Vritra, the Coverer, dispels the darkness, causes
Surya to rise upon our being and go abroad over
its whole field with the rays of the Truth. Surya
is the Creator or manifester, Savitri, who manifests
in this mortal world the world or state of immortality,
dispels the evil dream of egoism, sin and suffering
and transforms Life into the immortality, the good,
the beatitude. The Vedic gods are a parable of


104


ISHA UPANISHAD


human life emerging, mounting, lifting itself towards
the Godhead.

Life, body, action, will, these are our first
materials. Matter supplies us with the body ; but
it is only a temporary knot of the movement, a
dwelling-place of the Purusha in which he presides
over the activities generated out of the Life-principle.
Once it is thrown aside by the Life-principle it. is
dissolved ; ashes are its end. Therefore the body
is not ourselves, but only an outer tool and instru¬
ment. For Matter is the principle of obscurity and
division, of birth and death, of formation and
dissolution. It is the assertion of death. Immortal
man must not identify himself with the body.

The Life-principle in us survives. It is the
immortal Breath* or, as the phrase really means, the
subtle force of existence which is superior to the
principle of birth and death. At first sight it may
appear that birth and death are attributes of the
Life, but it is not really so : birth and death are
processes of Matter, of the body. The Life-
principle is not formed and dissolved in the formula¬
tion and dissolution of the body ; if that were so,
there could be no continuity of the individual
existence and all would go back at death into the
formless. Life forms body, it is not formed by it.
It is the thread upon which the continuity of our
successive bodily lives is arranged, precisely because


* Anilam amritam.


ACTION AND THE DIVINE WILL 105


it is itself immortal. It associates itself with the
perishable body and carries forward the mental
being, the Purusha in the mind, upon his journey.

WILL AND MEMORY.

TTiis journey consists in a series of activities
continued from life to life in this world with intervals
of life in other states. The Life-Principle maintains
them ; it supplies their material in the formative
energy which takes shape in them. But their
presiding god is not the Life-Principle; it is the Will.
Will is Kratu, the effective power behind the act.
It is of the nature of consciousness ; it is energy of
consciousness, and although present in all forms,
conscious, subconscious or superconscious, vital,
physical or mental, yet comes into its kingdom only
when it emerges in Mind. It uses the mental faculty
of memory to link together and direct consciously
the activities towards the goal of the individual.

In man the use of consciousness by the mental
will is imperfect, because memory is limited. Our
action is both dispersed and circumscribed because
mentally we live from hour to hour in the current of
Time, holding only to that which attracts or seems
immediately useful to our egoistic mind. We live
in what we are doing, we do not control what has
been done, but are rather controlled by our past
works which we have forgotten. This is because
we dwell in the action and its fruits instead of living
in the soul and viewing the stream of action from


106


ISHA UPANISHAD


behind it. The Lord, the true Will, stands back
form the actions and therefore is their lord and not
bound by them.

The Upanishad solemnly invokes the Will to
remember the thing that has been done, so as to
contain and be conscious of tihe becoming, so as to
become a power of knowledge and self-possession
and not only a power of impulsion and self-formula¬
tion, It will thus more and more approximate itself
to the true Will and preside over the co-ordination
of the successive lives with a conscious control.
Instead of being carried from life to life in a crooked
path, as by winds, it will be able to proceed more
and more straight in an ordered series, linking life
to life with an increasing force of knowledge and
direction until it becomes the fully conscious Will
moving with illumination on the straight path towards
the immortal felicity. The mental will, Kratu,
becomes what it at present only represents, the
divine Will, Agni.

WILL AND KNOWLEDGE

The essentiality of the divine Will is that in it
Consciousness and Energy, Knowledge and Force
are one. It knows all manifestations, all things that
take birth in the worlds. It is Jatavedas, that which
has right knowledge of all births. It knows them in
the law of their being, in their relation to other births,
in their aim and method, in their process and goaU
in their unity with all and their difference from alL


ACTION AND THE DIVINE WILL 107


It is this divine Will that conducts the universe ; it
is one with all the things that it combines and its
being, its knowledge, its action are inseparable from
each other. What it is, it knows ; what it knows,
that it does and becomes.

But as soon as egoistic consciousness emerges
and interferes, there is a disturbance, a division, a
false action. Will becomes an impulsion ignorant
of its secret motive and aim, knowledge becomes
a dubious and partial ray not in possession of the
will, the act and the result, but only striving to
possess and inform them. This is because we are
not in possession of our self,* our true being, but
only of the ego. What we are, we know not ; what
we know, we cannot effect. For knowledge is real
and action in harmony with true knowledge only
when they proceed naturally out of the conscious,
illumined and self-possessing soul, in which being,
knowledge and action are one movement.

SURRENDER TO THE DIVINE WILL

TTiis is the change that happens when, the
mental will approximating more and more to the
divine, Agni burns out in us. It is that increasing
knowledge and force which carries us finally into the
straight or good path out of the crookedness. It is
the divine will, one with the divine knowledge, which
leads us towards felicity, towards the state of Immor-


* Atmavan.


108


ISHA UPANISHAD


tality. All that belongs to the deviations of the ego,
all that obscures and drives or draws us into this or
that false path with its false lures and stumblings are
put away from us by it. These things fall away from
the divinised Will and cease to find lodging in our
consciousness.

Therefore the sign of right action is the
increasing and finally the complete submission of
the individual to the divine Will which the illumina¬
tion of Surya reveals in him. Although manifested
in his consciousness, this Will is not individual. It
is the will of the Purusha who is in all things and
transcends them. It is the will of the Lord.

Knowledge of the Lord as the One in the fully
self-conscious being, submission to the Lord as the
universal and transcendent in the fully self-conscious
action, are the two keys of the divine gates, the
gates of Immortality,

And the nature of the two united is an
illuminated Devotion which accepts, aspires to and
fulfils God in the human existence.

CONCLUSION

Thus the fourth movement indicates psycho¬
logically the double process of that attainment of
Immortality which is the subject of the third move¬
ment, the state of bliss and truth within and the
worlds of Light after death culminating in the ident¬
ity of the self-luminous One. At the same time it


ACTION AND THE DIVINE WILL 109


particularises under the cover of Vedic symbols the
process of that self-knowledge and identification with
the Self and all its becomings which is the subject
of the second movement and of that liberated action
in the assertion of which the first culminates. It is
thus a fitting close and consummation to the
Upanishad.


IX

CONCLUSION AND SUMMARY

The Isha Upanishad is one of the more ancient
of the Vedantic writings in style, substance and
versification, subsequent certainly to the Chhandogya,
Brihad-Aranyaka and perhaps to the Taittiriya and
Aitareya, but certainly the most antique of the
extant metrical Upanishads. Upanishadic thought
falls naturally into two great periods ; in one, the
earlier, it still kept close to its Vedic roots, reflected
the old psychological system of the Vedic Rishis
and preserved what may be called their spiritual
pragmatism ; in the other and later, in which the
form and thought became more modern and
independent of early symbols and origins, some of
the principal elements of Vedic thought and psycho¬
logy begin to be omitted or to lose their previous
connotation and foundation and the later ascetic and
anti-pragmatic Vedanta begins to appear. The Isha
belongs to the earlier or Vedic group. It is already
face to face with the problem of reconciling human
life and activity with the Monistic standpoint and
its large solution of the difficulty is one of the most
interesting passages of Vedantic literature. It is
the sole Upanishad which offered almost insuperable
difficulties to the extreme illusionism and antipragma¬
tism of Shankaracharya and it was even, for this


CONCLUSION AND SUMMARY


111


reason, excised from the list of authoritative Upani-
shads by one of his greatest followers.

THE PRINCIPLE OF THE UPANISHAD

The principle it follows throughout is the
uncompromising reconciliation of uncompromising
extremes. Later thought took one series of terms,—
the World, Enjoyment, Action, the Many, Birth,
the Ignorance,—and gave them a more and more
secondary position, exalting the opposite series,
God, Renunciation, Quietism, the One, Cessation of
Birth, the Knowledge until this trend of thought
culminated in Illusionism and the idea of existence
in the world as a snare and a meaningless burden
imposed inexplicably on the soul by itself, which
must be cast aside as soon as possible. It ended
in a violent cutting of the knot of the great enigma.
This Upanishad tries instead to get hold of the
extreme ends of the knots, disengage and place
them alongside of each other in a release that will
be at the same time a right placing and relation.
It will not qualify or subordinate unduly any of the
extremes, although it recognises a dependence of
one on the other. Renunciation is to go to the
extreme, but also enjoyment is to be equally
integral ; Action has to be complete and ungrudging,
but also freedom of the soul from its works must
be absolute ; Unity utter and absolute is the goal
but this absoluteness has to be brought to its highest


>12


ISHA UPANISHAD


term by including in it the whole infinite multiplicity
of things.

So great is this scruple in the Upanishad that
having so expressed itself in the formula “By the
Ignorance having crossed over death by the know¬
ledge one enjoys Immortality** that Life in the world
might be interpreted as only a preliminary to an
existence beyond, it at once rights the balance by
reversing the order in the parallel formula “By
dissolution having crossed over death by birth one
enjoys Immortality,” and thus makes life itself the
field of the immortal existence which is the goal
and aspiration of all life. In this conclusion it agrees
with the early Vedic thought which believed all the
worlds and existence and non-existence and death
and life and immortality to be here in the embodied
human being, there evolvent, there realisable and
to be possessed and enjoyed, not dependent either
for acquisition or enjoyment on the renunciation of
life and bodily existence. This thought has never
entirely passed out of Indian philosophy, but has
become secondary and a side admission not strong
enough to qualify seriously the increasing assertion
of the extinction of mundane existence as the
condition of our freedom and our sole wise and
worthy aim.

THE OPPOSITES

The pairs of opposites successively taken up
by the Upanishad and resolved are, in the order of
their succession :


CONCLUSION AND SUMMARY


\\3


1. ) The Conscious Lord and phenomenal

Nature.

2. ) Renunciation and enjoyment.

3. ) Action in Nature and Freedom in the Soul.

4. ) The One stable Brahman and the multiple

Movement.

5. ) Being and Becoming.

6. ) The Active Lord and the indifferent

Akshara Brahman.

7. ) Vidya and Avidya.

8. ) Birth and Non-Birth.

9. ) Works and Knowledge.

These discords are thus successively resolved:

GOD AND NATU RE

1. ) Phenomenal Nature is a movement of the
conscious Lord. The object of the movement is to
create forms of His consciousness in motion in which
He as the one soul in many bodies can take up his
habitation and enjoy the multiplicity and the move¬
ment with all their relations.*

ENJOYMENT AND RENUNCIATION

2. ) Real integral enjoyment of all this move¬
ment and multiplicity in its truth and in its infinity
depends upon an absolute renunciation ; but the
renunciation intended is an absolute renunciation of
the principle of desire founded on the principle of


* This is also the view of the Gita and generally accepted.

8 .


114


ISHA UPANISHAD


egoism and not a renunciation of world-existence.*
This solution depends on the idea that desire is only
an egoistic and vital deformation of the divine
Ananda or delight of being from which the world is
bom ; by extirpation of ego and desire Ananda
again becomes the conscious principle of existence.
This substitution is the essence of the change from
life in death to life in immortality. The enjo 3 rment
of the infinite delight of existence free from ego,
founded on oneness of all in the Lord, is what is
meant by the enjoyment of Immortality.

ACTION AND FREEDOM ,

3.) Actions are not inconsistent with the soul’s
freedom. Man is not bound by works, but only
seems to be bound. He has to recover the con-
nciousness of his inalienable freedom by recovering
the consciousness of unity in the Lord, unity in him¬
self, unity with all existence.! This done, life and
works can and should be accepted in their fullness;
for the manifestation of the Lord in life and works is


* This again is the central standpoint of the Gita, which
however admits also the renunciation of world-existence.
The general trend of Vedantic thought would accept the
renunciation of desire and egoism as the essential but would
hold that renunciation of egoism means the renunciation of
all world-existence, for it sees desire and not Ananda as the
cause of world-existence.

t This truth would, again, be generally admitted, but not
the conclusion that is drawn from it.


CONCLUSION AND SUMMARY


115


the law of our being and the object of our world-
existence.

THE QUIESCENCE AND THE MOVEMENT.

4.) What then of the Quiescence of the
Supreme Being and how is persistence in the
Movement compatible with that Quiescence which
is generally recognised as an essential condition of
the supreme Bliss?

The Quiescence and the Movement are eqally
one Brahman and the distinction drawn between
them is only a phenomenon of our consciousness.
So it is with the idea of space and time, the far and
the near, the subjective and the objective, internal
and external, myself and others, one and many.
Brahman, the real existence, is all these things to
our consciousness, but in itself ineffably superior to
all such practical distinctions. The Movement is a
phenomenon of the Quiescence, the Quiescence itself
may be conceived as a Movement too rapid for the
gods, that is to say, for our various functions of
consciousness to follow in its real nature. But it is
no formal, material, spatial, temporal movement,
only a movement in consciousness. Knowledge
sees it all as one, Ignorance divides and creates
oppositions where there is no opposition but simply
relations of one consciousness in itself. The ego in
the body says, “I am within, all else is outside ;
and in what is outside, this is near to me in Time
and Space, that is far.’* All this is true in present


116


ISHA UPANISHAD


relation ; but in essence it is all one indivisible
movement of Brahman which is not material move¬
ment but a way of seeing things in the one con¬
sciousness.

BEING AND BECOMING,

5.) Everything depends on what we see, how
we look at existence in our soul’s view of things.
Being and Becoming, One and Many are both
true and are both the same thing: Being is one.
Becomings are many ; but this simply means that
all Becomings are one Being who places Himself
variously in the phenomenal movement of His
consciousness. We have to see the One Being, but
we have not to cease to see the many Becomings,
for they exist and are included in Brahman’s view
of Himself. Only, we must see with knowledge and
not with ignorance. We have to realise our true
self as the one unchangeable indivisible Brahman.
We have to see all becomings as developments of
the movement in our true self and this self as one
inhabiting all bodies and not our body only. We
have to be consciously, in our relations with this
world, what we really are,—this one self becoming
everything that we observe. All the movement, all
energies, all forms, all happenings we must see as
those of our one and real self in many existences,
as the play of the Will and Knowledge and Delight
of the Lord in His world-existence.

We shall then be delivered from egoism and


CONCLUSION AND SUMMARY


117


desire and the sense of separate existence and there¬
fore from all grief and delusion and shrinking ; for
all grief is born of the shrinking of the ego from the
contacts of existence, its sense of fear, weakness,
want, dislike, etc. ; and this is born from the
delusion of separate existence, the sense of being
my separate ego exposed to all these contacts of
so much that is not myself. Get rid of this, see
oneness everywhere, be the One manifesting Him¬
self in all creatures ; ego will disappear ; desire
bom of the sense of not being this, not having that,
will disappear; the free inalienable delight of the
One in His own existence will take the place of
desire and its satisfactions and dissatisfactions.*
Immortality will be yours, death born of division
will be overcome.

THE ACTIVE AND INACTIVE BRAHMAN ,

6.) The Inactive and the Active Brahman are
simply two aspects of the one Self, the one Brahman,
who is the Lord. It is He who has gone abroad in
the movement. He maintains Himself free from
all modifications in His inactive existence. The
inaction is the basis of the action and exists in the
action; it is His freedom from all He does and
becomes and in all He does and becomes. These
are the positive and negative poles of one indivisible

* In the ordinary view all this would be admitted, but the
practical possibility of maintaining this state of consciousness
and birth in the world together would be doubted.


118


!SHA UPANISHAD


consciousness. We embrace both in one quiescence
and one movement, inseparable from each other,
dependent on each other. The quiescence exists
relatively to the movement, the movement to the
quiescence. He is beyond both. This is a different
point of view from that of the identity of the
Movement and Quiescence which are one in reality ;
it expresses rather their relation in our consciousness
once tlhey are admitted as a practical necessity of
that consciousness. It is obvious that we also by
becoming one with the Lord would share in this
biune conscious existence.*

VIDYA AND AVIDYA,

7.) The knowledge of the One and the
knowledge of the Many are a result of the movement
of the one consciousness, which sees all things as
One in their truth-idea but differentiates them in
their mentality and formal becoming. If the mind
(Manishi) absorbs itself in God as the formal
becoming (Paribhu) and separates itself from God
in the true Idea (Kavi), then it loses Vidya, the
knowledge of the One, and has only the knowledge
of the Many which becomes no longer knowledge at
all but ignorance, Avidya. This is the cause of
the separate ego-sense.


• In the ordinary view the jiva cannot exist in both at
the same time; his dissolution is into the Quiescence and not
into unity with the Lord in the action and inaction.


CONCLUSION AND SUMMARY


U9


Avidya is accepted by the Lord in the Mind
(Manishi) in order to develop individual relations to
their utmost in all the possibilities of division and its
consequences and then through these individual
relations to come back individually to the knowledge
of the One in all. That knowledge has remained
all along unabrogated in the consciousness of the true
seer or Kavi. This seer in ourselves stands back
from the mental thinker ; the latter, thus separated,
has to conquer death and division by a developing
experience as the individual Inhabitant and finally to
recover by the reunited knowledge of the One and
the Many the state of Immortality. This is our
proper course and not either to devote oyrselves
exclusively to the life of Avidya or to reject it entirely
for motionless absorption in the One.

BIRTH AND NON^BIRTH

8.) The reason for this double movement of
the Thinker is that we are intended to realise im¬
mortality in the Birth. The self is uniform and
undying and in itself always possesses immortality.
It does not need to descend into Avidya and Birth to
get that immortality of Non-Birth ; for it possesses
it always. It descends in order to realise and possess
it as the individual Brahman in the play of world-
existence. It accepts Birth and Death, assumes the
'ego and then dissolving the ego by the recovery of
unity realises itself as the Lord, the One, and Birth
as only a becoming of the Lord in mental and


120


ISHA UPANISHAD


formal being ; this becoming is now governed by
the true sight of the Seer and, once this is done,
becoming is no longer inconsistent with Being, birth
becomes a means and not an obstacle to the enjoy¬
ment of immortality by the lord of this formal
habitation.* This is our proper course and not to
remain for ever in the chain of birth and death, nor
to flee from birth into a pure non-becoming. The
bondage does not consist in the physical act of
becoming, but in the persistence of the ignorant
sense of the separate ego. Tire Mind creates the
chain and not the body.

WORKS AND KNOWLEDGE .

9.) The opposition between works and know¬
ledge exists as long as works and knowledge are
only of the egoistic mental character. Mental
knowledge is not true knowledge ; true knowledge
is that which is based on the true sight, the sight of
the Seer, of Surya, of the Kavi. Mental thought is
not knowledge, it is a golden lid placed over the
face of the Truth, the Sight, the divine Ideation,
the Truth-Consciousness. When that is removed,
sight replaces mental thought, the all-embracing
truth-ideation, Mahas, Veda, Drishti, replaces the

• This is the stumbling-block to the ordinary philosophies
which are impregnated with the idea of the iliusoriness of
the world, even when they do not go the whole way with
the Mayavada. Birth, they would say, is a play of ignorance,
it cannot subsist along with entire knowledgjs.


CONCLUSION AND SUMMARY


121


fragmentary mental activity. True Buddhi (vijnana)
emerges from the dissipated action of the Buddhi
which is all that is possible on the basis of the sense-
mind, the Manas. Vijnana leads us to pure know-
ledge(Jnana), pure consciousness, (Chit). There we
realise our entire identity with the Lord in all at the
very roots of our being.

But in Chit, Will and Seeing are one. Therefore
in Vijnana or truth-ideation also which comes
luminously out of Chit, Will and Sight are combined
and no longer as in the mind separated from each
other. Therefore when we have the sight and live
in the truth-consciousness, our will becomes the
spontaneous law of the truth in us and, knowing all
its acts and their sense and objective, leads straight
to the human goal, which was always the enjoyment
of the Ananda, the Lord’s delight in self-being, the
state of Immortality, In our acts also we become
one with all beings and our life groVyrs into a re¬
presentation of oneness, truth and divine joy and
no longer proceeds on the crooked path of egoism
full of division, error and stumbling. In a word, we
attain to the object of our existence which is to
manifest in itself whether on earth in a terrestrial
body and against the resistance of Matter or in the
worWs beyond or enter beyond all world the glory
of the divine Life and the divine Being.
