The Human Cycle (Sri Aurobindo, 1919)
==========================================================
Aurobindo's Human Cycle — his philosophy of history and the spiritual evolution of human society, from his Arya period. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

GOVT.  COLLEGE,

KOTA  (Raj.)


r'a  r r


, L


'n  r

i I 1


r'  " r


THE  HUHAN  CYCLE  — THE  IDEAL  OF  HLU'^AI
W/r  Al-'D  CELF-DETEFsKiiCATlOL'


! i!


1 I


(c)  Sri  Aurobindo  Ashram  Trust  1971  . Published  By  Sri  Aurobindo  Ashram
Pondicheriy  . Reproduced  by  offset  at  the  All  India  Press,  Pondicherry,  India


PRINTED  IN  INDIA


August  15.  1872


MAKASAMADHI
December  5,  1950


CENTENARY.
August  15,


Contents


THE  HUMAN  CYCLE

I.

The  Cycle  of  Society

II.

The  Age  of  Individualism  and  Reason  .

III.

The  Coming  of  the  Subjective  Age  .

IV.

The  Discovery  of  the  Nation-Soul

V.

True  and  False  Subjectivism  . . . .

VI.

The  Objective  and  Subjective  Views  of  Life  .

VII.

The  Ideal  Law  of  Social  Development  .

VIII.

Civilisation  and  Barbarism  ....

IX.

Civilisation  and  Culture

X.

Aesthetic  and  Ethical  Culture

XI.

The  Reason  as  Governor  of  Life

XII.

The  Office  and  Limitations  of  the  Reason

XIII.

Reason  and  Religion

XIV.

The  Suprarational  Beauty  ....

XV.

The  Suprarational  Good  ....

XVI.

The  Suprarational  Ultimate  of  Life


1

11

21

29

37

48

56

66

74

84

94

105

115

127

136

145


CONTENTS


XVII.

Religion  as  the  Law  of  Life  ....

XVIIL

The  Infrarational  Age  of  the  Cycle

XIX.

The  Curve  of  the  Rational  Age  . . .

XX.

The  End  of  the  Curve  of  Reason

XXI.

The  Spiritual  Aim  and  Life  ....

XXII.

The  Necessity  of  the  Spiritual  Transformation

XXIII.

Conditions  for  the  Coming  of  a Spiritual  Age

XXIV.

The  Advent  and  Progress  of  the  Spiritual  Age


162

171

180

195

208

218  .

231

246


THE  IDEAL  OF  HUMAN  UNITY

PART  I

l.

The  Turn  towards  Unity:  its  Necessity

AND  Dangers 261

II.

The  Imperfection  of  Past  Aggregates  . . .267

m.

The  Group  and  the  Individual  ....  272

IV.

The  Inadequacy  of  the  State  Idea  . . . .278

V.

Nation  and  Empire:  Real  and  Political  Unities  285

VI.

Ancient  and  Modern  Methods  of  Empire  . . 293

VII.

The  Creation  of  the  Heterogeneous  Nation  '.  304


CONTENTS


VIII.

The  Problem  of  a Federated  Heterogeneous
Empire

IX.

The  Possibility  of  a World-Empire  .

X.

The  United  States  of  Europe  ....

XI.

The  Small  Free  Unit  and  the  Larger

Concentrated  Unity

XII.

The  Ancient  Cycle  of  Prenational  Empire-
Building  — The  Modern  Cycle  of  Nation-
Building

XIII.

The  Formation  of  the  Nation-Unit  —

The  Three  Stages

XIV.

The  Possibility  of  a First  Step  towards
International  Unity  — its  Enormous
Difhculties

XV.

Some  Lines  of  Fulfilment

XVI.

The  Problem  of  Uniformity  and  Liberty


PART  11

XVII.

Nature’s  Law  in  Our  Progress  — Unity  in
Diversity,  Law  and  Liberty

XVIII.

The  Ideal  Solution  — A Free  Grouping  of
Mankind

XIX.

The  Drive  towards  Centralisation  and

Uniformity  — Administration  and  Control
OF  Foreign  Affairs


. 311

. 318

. 324

. 334

. 342

351

361

372

382

395

405

415


CONTENTS


XX.

The  Drive  towards  Economic  Centralisation  . 423

XXL

The  Drive  towards  Legislative  and  Social

Centralisation  and  Uniformity  . . . 429

XXII.

World-Union  or  World-State  ....  440

XXIII.

Forms  of  Government  443

XXIV.

The  Need  of  Military  Unification  . . , ; . 453

XXV.

War  and  the  Need  of  Economic  Unity  . . . 463

XXVI.

The  Need  of  Administrative  Unity  . . . .471

XXVII.

The  Peril  of  THE  World-State  • 482

XXVIII.

Diversity  in  Oneness 490

XXIX.

The  Idea  of  a League  of  Nations  ....  500

XXX.

The  Principle  of  Free  Confederation  . . .510

XXXI.

The  Conditions  of  a Free  World-Union  . . . 517

XXXII.

Internationalism 525

XXXIII.

Internationalism  and  Human  Unity  . . .531

XXXIV.

The  Religion  of  Humanity 541

XXXV.

Summary  and  Conclusion 548


A Postscript  Chapter  .


. 556


CONTENTS


WAR  AND  SELF-DETERMINATION

Foreword  to  the  First  Edition  ....  575

The  Passing  of  War?  582

The  Unseen  Power 588

Self-Determination 598

A League  of  Nations 608

After  the  War 637

1919 651


¥HE  PSVCHOLOGV  OF  SOCIAI.  DEVELOPMENT  68  f


By  SO  doing  we  may  indeed  make  the  reagon  act  with
great  immediate  power  within  the  limits  of  the  idea  or  the
utility  we  have  in  view,  just  as  instinct  in  the  animal  acts
with  great  power  within  certain  limits,  for  a certain  end,
yet  finds  itself  helpless  outside  those  limits.  It  is  so  in-
deed that  the  ordinary  man  uses  his  reason,^as  the  animal
uses  his  hereditary, "transmitted  instinct,?— with  an  absorb-
ed devoUon  of^  tl)g  securing,  of  some  particular  utility

(»aoplicati’on  oTaMStomarv  and  transmitted
A-


or  with


ipplicationT  of  a'  customary
reasoning  the  necessary  practical  interests  of  his  life.
Even  the  thinking  rnan  or^in|nly  limits  his  reason  to  the
working  out  of  ccrtam^id^s;  ignorie^  or  den^asg  all  that
is  not  useful  to  thefiCor  does  no^assist  ot  justify  or  actually


cont^icts  or  seriously  modifies  them,^xcept  in  so  far  as
life^OTmpels  or  cautions  him.,to  accept^modifications  for
thetime  reason  nor.

mally  acts.  follows  most  commonly  some  interest  or  set
of  interests^ad^^ tramples  down  or  through  or  ignores  or
pushes  aside  all  truth  of  life  and  existence,  truth  of  ethics,
truth  of  bcau^^u^^  of  rea|on,  truth  of  spirit  which  conr


flicts  with^^?TOmterests  ; if  he  recognises  th  ej^^’t  IsoS^^


nominally,  nd^  in  practice,  or  else  with  a distortion,  a glo
ing  which  nullifies  their  consequences,  perverts  their  spirit
or  whittles  down  their  significance.  It  is  this  subjection


to  the  interests,  needs,  instincts,
<w.  ■'  — ■


traditional  ideaspt^^e  ordinary  min'c


syons,  prejudices,
which  constitutes


the  irrationality  of  human  existence.

But  even  the  man  who  is  capable  of  governing  his  life
by  ideas,  who  recognises,  that  is  to  say,  that  it  ought  to
express  clearly  conceived  truths  and  principles  of  his  being
or  of  all  being  and  tries  to  find  out  or  to  know  from  others
what  these  are,  is  not  often  capable  of  the  highest,  the
free  and  disinterested  use  of  his  rational  mind.  As  others
are  subject  to  the  tyranny  of  their  interests,  prejudices,
instincts  or  passions,  so  be  is  subjected  to  the  tyranny  of
ideas.  Indeed,  he  turns  thesC  ideas  into  interests,  obscures
them  with  his  prejudices  and  passions  and  is  unable  to
think  freely  about  them,  unable  to  distinguish  their  limits

6 . • A ^


A page  from  the  Arya  with  alterations  made  by  Sri  Aurobindo.  The  book.
The  Psychology  of  Social  Development,  is  now  called  The  Human  Cycle.


THE  HUMAN


CYCLE


Chapter  I


The  Cycle  of  Society


Modern  Science,  obsessed  with  the
greatness  of  its  physical  discoveries  and  the  idea  of  the  sole
existence  of  Matter,  has  long  attempted  to  base  upon  physical
data  even  its  study  of  Soul  and  Mind  and  of  those  workings  of
Nature  in  man  and  animal  in  which  a knowledge  of  psychology
is  as  important  as  any  of  the  physical  sciences.  Its  very  psychology
founded  iiseif  upon  physiology  and  ihe  scrutiny  of  the  brain
and  nervous  system.  It  is  not  surprising  therefore  that  in  history
and  sociology  attention  should  have  been  concentrated  on  the
external  data,  laws,  institutions,  rites,  Customs,  economic  factors
and  developments,  while  the  deeper  psychological  elements  so
important  in  the  activities  of  a mental,  emotional,  ideative  being
like  man  have  been  very  much  neglected.  This  kind  of  science
would  explain  everything  in  history  and  social  development  as
much  as  possible  by  economic  necessity  or  motive  — by  economy
understood  in  its  widest  sense.  There  are  even  historians  who


deny  or  put  aside  as  of  a very  subsidiary  importance  the  work-
ing of  the  idea  and  the  influence  of  the  thinker  in  the  development
of  human  institutions.-  The  French  Revolution,  it  is  thought,
would  have  happened  just  as  it  did  and  when  it  did,  by  economic
necessity,  even  if  Rousseau  and  Voltaire  had  never  written  and
the  eighteenth  century  philosophic  movement  in  the  world  of
thought  had  never  worked  out  its  bold  and  radical  speculations.

Recently,  however,  the  all-sufficiency  of  Matter  to  explain
Mind  and  Soul  has  begun  to  be  doubted  and  a movement  of
emancipation  from  the  obsession  of  physical  science  has  set  in,
although  as  yet  it  has  not  gone  beyond  a few  awkward  and  rudi-
mentary stumblings.  Still  there  is  the  beginning  of  a perception
that  behind  the  economic  motives  and  causes  of  social  and


historical  development  there  are  profound  psychological,  even
perhaps  soul  factors;  and  in  pre-war  Germany,  the  metropolis


2


The  Human  Cycle


of  rationalism  and  materialism  but  the  home  also,  for  a century
and  a half,  of  new  thought  and  original  tendencies  good  and  bad,
beneficent  and  disastrous,  a first  psychological  theory  of  history
was  conceived  and  presented  by  an  original  intelligence.  The
earliest  attempts  in  a new  field  are  seldom  entirely  successful,
and  the  German  historian,  originator  of  this  theory,  seized  on  a
luminous  idea,  but  was  not  able  to  carry  it  very  far  or  probe  very
deep.  He  was  still  haunted  by  a sense  of  the  greater  importance
of  the  economic  factor,  and  like  most  European  science  his
theory  related,  classified  and  organised  phenomena  much  more
successfully  than  it  explained  them.  Nevertheless  its  basic  idea
formulated  a suggestive  and  illuminating  truth,  and  it  is  worth-
while following  up  some  of  the  suggestions  it  opens  out  in  the
light  especially  of  Eastern  thought  and  experience.

The  theorist,  Lamprecht,  basing  himself  on  European  and
particularly  on  German  history,  supposed  that  human  society
progresses  through  certain  distinct  psychological  stages  which
he  terms  respectively  symbolic,  typal  and  conventional,  indivi-
dualist and  subjective.  This  development  forms,  then,  a sort  of
psychological  cycle  through  which  a nation  or  a civilisation  is
bound  to  proceed.  Obviously,  such  classifications  are  likely  to
err  by  rigidity  and  to  substitute  a mental  straight  line  for  the
coils  and  zigzags  of  Nature.  The  psychology  of  man  and  his
societies  is  too  complex,  too  synthetical  of  many-sided  and  inter-
mixed tendencies  to  satisfy  any  such  rigorous  and  formal  analy-
sis. Nor  does  this  theory  of  a psychological  cycle  tell  us  what  is
the  inner  meaning  of  its  successive  phases  or  the  necessity  of  their
succession  or  the  term  and  end  towards  which  they  are  driving.
But  still  to  understand  natural  laws  whether  of  Mind  or  Matter
it  is  necessary  to  analyse  their  working  into  its  discoverable
elements,  main  constituents;  dominant  forces,  though  these  may
not  actually  be  found  anywhere  in  isolation,  I will  leave  aside  the
western  thinker’s  own  dealings  with  his  idea.  The  suggestive
names  he  has  offered  us,  if  we  examine  their  intrinsic  sense  and
value,  may  yet  throw  some  light  on  the  thickly  veiled  secret  of
our  historic  evolution,  and  this  is  the  line  on  which  it  would  be
most  useful  to  investigate.

Undoubtedly,  wherever  we  can  seize  human  society  in


The  Cycle  of  Society  3

what  to  us  seems  its  primitive  beginnings  or  early  stages, —
no  matter  whether  the  race  is  comparatively  cultured  or  savage
or  economically  advanced  or  backward,  — we  do  find  a strongly
symbolic  mentahty  that  governs  or  at  least  pervades  its  thought,
customs  and  institutions.  Symbolic,  but  of  what?  We  find  that
this  social  stage  is  always  religious  and  actively  imaginative  in
its  religion;  for  symbolism  and  a widespread  imaginative  or  in-
tuitive religious  feeling  have  a natural  kinship  and  especially  in
earlier  or  primitive  formations  they  have  gone  always  together.
When  man  begins  to  be  predominantly  intellectual,  sceptical,
ratiocinative  he  is  already  preparing  for  an  individualist  society
and  the  age  of  symbols  and  the  age  of  conventions  have  passed  or
are  losing  their  virtue.  The  symbol  then  is  of  something  which
man  feels  to  be  present  behind  himself  and  his  life  and  his  acti-
vities — the  Divine,  the  Gods,  the  vast  and  deep  unnameable,  a
hidden,  living  and  mysterious  nature  of  things.  All  his  religious
and  social  institutions,  all  the  moments  and  phases  of  his  life  are
to  him  symbols  in  which  he  seeks  to  express  what  he  knows  or
guesses  of  the  mystic  influences  that  are  behind  his  life  and  shape
and  govern  or  at  the  least  intervene  in  its  movements.

If  we  look  at  the  beginnings  of  Indian  society,  the  far-off
Vedic  age  which  we  no  longer  understand,  for  we  have  lost  that
mentality,  we  see  that  everything  is  symbolic.  The  religious  insti-
tution of  sacrifice  governs  the  whole  society  and  all  its  hours  and
moments,  and  the  ritual  of  the  sacrifice  is  at  every  turn  and  in
every  detail,  as  even  a cursory  study  of  the  Brahmanas  and  Upa-
nishads  ought  to  show  us,  mystically  symbolic.  The  theory  that
there  was  nothing  in  the  sacrifice  except  a propitiation  of  Nature-
gods  for  the  gaining  of  worldly  prosperity  and  of  Paradise,  is  a
misunderstanding  by  a later  humanity  which  had  already  become
profoundly  affected  by  an  intellectual  and  practical  bent  of  mind,
practical  even  in  its  religion  and  even  in  its  own  mysticism  and
symbolism,  and  therefore  could  no  longer  enter  into  the  ancient
spirit.  Not  only  the  actual  religious  worship  but  also  the  social
institutions  of  the  time  were  penetrated  through  and  through
with  the  symbolic  spirit.  Take  the  hymn  of  the  Rig  Veda  which  is
supposed  to  be  a marriage  hymn  for  the  union  of  a human  couple
and  was  certainly  used  as  such  in  the  later  Vedic  ages.  Yet  the


4 The  Human  Cycle

whole  sense  of  the  hymn  turns  about  the  successive  marriages  of
Surya,  daughter  of  the  Sun,  with  different  gods  and  the  human
marriage  is  quite  a subordinate  matter  overshadowed  and
governed  entirely  by  the  divine  and  mystic  figure  and  is  spoken  of
in  the  terms  of  that  figure.  Mark,  however,  that  the  divine  marriage
here  is  not,  as  it  would  be  in  later  ancient  poetry,  a decorative
image  or  poetical  ornamentation  used  to  set  off  and  embellish
the  human  union;  on  the  contrary,  the  human  is  an  inferior  figure
and  image  of  the  divine.  The  distinction  marks  off  the  entire
contrast  between  that  more  ancient  mentality  and  our  modem
regard  upon  things.  This  symbolism  influenced  for  a long  time
Indian  ideas  of  marriage  and  is  even  now  conventionally  remem-
bered though  no  longer  understood  or  effective.

We  may  note  also  in  passing  that  the  Indian  ideal  of  the  rela-
tion between  man  and  woman  has  always  been  governed  by  the
symbolism  of  the  relation  between  the  Purusha  and  Prakriti  (in
the  Veda  Nr  and  Gnd),  the  male  and  female  divine  Principles
in  the  universe.  Even,  there  is  to  some  degree  a practical
correlation  between  the  position  of  the  female  sex  and  this  idea.
In  the  earlier  Vedic  times  when  the  female  principle  stood  on  a
sort  of  equality  with  the  male  in  the  symbolic  cult,  though  with  a
certain  predominance  for  the  latter,  woman  was  as  much  the  mate
as  the  adjunct  of  man;  in  later  times  when  the  Prakriti  has
become  subject  in  idea  to  the  Purusha,  the  woman  also  depends
entirely  on  the  man,  exists  only  for  him  and  has  hardly  even  a
separate  spiritual  existence.  In  the  Tantrik  Sakta  religion  which
puts  the  female  principle  highest,  there  is  an  attempt  which  could
not  get  itself  translated  into  social  practice,  — even  as  this  Tantrik
cult  could  never  entirely  shake  off  the  subjugation  of  the  Vedantic
idea,  — to  elevate  woman  and  make  her  an  object  of  profound
respect  and  even  of  worship.

Or  let  us  take,  for  this  example  will  serve  us  best,  the  Vedic
institution  of  the  fourfold  order,  caturvarna,  miscalled  the  system
of  the  four  castes,  — for  caste  is  a conventional,  varna  a symbolic
and  typal  institution.  We  are  told  that  the  institution  of  the  four
orders  of  society  was  the  result  of  an  economic  evolution  compli-
cated by  political  causes.  Very  possibly  but  the  important  point

^ It  is  at  least  doubtful.  The  Brahmin  class  at  first  seem  to  have  exercised  all  sorts  of


The  Cycle  of  Society


5


is  that  it  was  not  so  regarded  and  could  not  be  so  regarded  by  the
men  of  that  age.  For  while  we  are  satisfied  when  we  have  found
the  practical  and  material  causes  of  a social  phenomenon  and  do
not  care  to  look  farther,  they  cared  little  or  only  subordinately
for  its  material  factors  and  looked  always  first  and  foremost  for
its  symbolic,  religious  or  psychological  significance.  This  appears
in  the  Purushasukta  of  the  Veda  where  the  four  orders  are  des-
cribed as  having  sprung  from  the  body  of  the  creative  Deity,  from
his  head,  arms,  thighs  and  feet.  To  us  this  is  merely  a poetical
image  and  its  sense  is  that  the  Brahmins  were  the  men  of  know-
ledge, the  Kshatriyas  the  men  of  power,  the  Vaishyas  the  produ-
cers and  support  of  society,  the  Shudras  its  servants.  As  if  that
were  all,  as  if  the  men  of  those  days  would  have  so  profound  a
reverence  for  mere  poetical  figures  like  this  of  the  body  of  Brahma
or  that  other  of  the  marriages  of  Surya,  would  have  built  upon
them  elaborate  systems  of  ritual  and  sacred  ceremony,  enduring
institutions,  great,  demarcations  of  social  type  and  ethical  disci-
pline. We  read  always  our  own  mentality  into  that  of  these
ancient  forefathers  and  it  is  therefore  that  we  can  find  in  them
nothing  but  imaginative  barbarians.  To  us  poetry  is  a revel  of
intellect  and  fancy,  imagination  a plaything  and  caterer  for  our
amusement,  our  entertainer,  the  nautch-girl  of  the  mind.  But  to
the  men  of  old  the  poet  was  a seer,  a revealer  of  hidden  truths,
imagination  no  dancing  courtesan  but  a priestess  in  God’s  house
commissioned  not  to  spin  fictions  but  to  image  difficult  and  hid-
den truths ; even  the  metaphor  or  simile  in  the  Vedic  style  is  used
with  a serious  purpose  and  expected  to  convey  a reality,  not  to
suggest  a pleasing  artifice  of  thought.  The  image  was  to  these
seers  a revelative  symbol  of  the  unrevealed  and  it  was  used  be-
cause it  could  hint  luminously  to  the  mind  what  the  precise  intel-
lectual word,  apt  only  for  logical  or  practical  thought  or  to
express  the  physical  and  the  superficial,  could  not  at  all  hope  to
manifest.  To  them  this  symbol  of  the  Creator’s  body  was  more
than  an  image,  it  expressed  a divine  reality.  Human  society  was
for  them  an  attempt  to  express  in  life  the  cosmic  Purusha
who  has  expressed  himself  otherwise  in  the  material  and  the
supraphysical  universe.  Man  and  the  cosmos  are  both  of  them


economic  functions  and  not  to  have  confined  themselves  to  those  of  the  priesthood.


6


The  Human  Cycle


symbols  and  expressions  of  the  same  hidden  Reality.

From  this  symbolic  attitude  came  the  tendency  to  make
everything  in  society  a sacrament,  religious  and  sacrosanct,  but
as  yet  with  a large  and  vigorous  freedom  in  all  its  forms,  — a
freedom  which  we  do  not  find  in  the  rigidity  of  “savage”  com-
munities because  these  have  already  passed  out  of  the  symbolic
into  the  conventional  stage  though  on  a curve  of  degeneration
instead  of  a curve  of  growth.  The  spiritual  idea  governs  all;  the
symbolic  religious  forms  which  support  it  are  fixed  in  principle;
the  social  forms  are  lax,  free  and  capable  of  infinite  development.
One  thing,  however,  begins  to  progress  towards  a firm  fixity  and
this  is  the  psychological  type.  Thus  we  have  first  the  symbolic
idea  of  the  four  orders,  expressing  — to  employ  an  abstractly
figurative  language  which  the  Vedic  thinkers  would  not  have
used  nor  perhaps  understood,  but  which  helps  best  our  modern
understanding  — the  Divine  as  knowledge  in  man,  the  Divine
as  power,  the  Divine  as  production,  enjoyment  and  mutuality,
the  Divine  as  service,  obedience  and  work.  These  divisions
answer  to  four  cosmic  principles,  the  Wisdom  that  conceives  the
order  and  principle  of  things,  the  Power  that  sanctions,  upholds
and  enforces  it,  the  Harmony  that  creates  the  arrangement  of  its
parts,  the  Work  that  carries  out  what  the  rest  direct.  Next,  out  of
this  idea  there  developed  a firm  but  not  yet  rigid  social  order
based  primarily  upon  temperament  and  psychic  type^  with  a
corresponding  ethical  discipline  and  secondarily  upon  the  social
and  economic^  function.  But  the  function  was  determined  by  its
suitability  to  the  type  and  its  helpfulness  to  the  discipline;  it  was
not  the  primary  or  sole  factor.  The  first,  the  symbolic  stage  of
this  evolution  is  predominantly  religious  and  spiritual;  the  other
elements,  psychological,  ethical,  economic,  physical  are  there
but  subordinated  to  the  spiritual  and  religious  ideas.  The  second
stage,  which  we  may  call  the  typal,  is  predominantly  psychological
and  ethical;  all  else,  even  the  spiritual  and  religious,  is  subordi-
nate to  the  psychological  idea  and  to  the  ethical  ideal  which  ex-
presses it.  Religion  becomes  then  a mystic  sanction  for  the  ethical
motive  and  discipline,  Dharma;  that  becomes  its  chief  social
utility,  and  for  the  rest  it  takes  a more  and  more  other-worldly

^ gttna  * karma


7


The  Cycle  of  Society

turn.  The  idea  of  the  direct  expression  of  the  divine  Being  or
cosmic  Principle  in  man  ceases  to  dominate  or  to  be  the  leader  and
in  the  forefront;  it  recedes,  stands  in  the  background  and  finally
disappears  from  the  practice  and  in  the  end  even  from  the  theory
of  life.

This  typal  stage  creates  the  great  social  ideals  which  remain
impressed  upon  the  human  mind  even  when  the  stage  itself  is
passed.  The  principal  active  contribution  it  leaves  behind  when
it  is  dead  is  the  idea  of  social  honour;  the  honour  of  the  Brahmin
which  resides  in  purity,  in  piety,  in  a high  reverence  for  the  things
of  the  mind  and  spirit  and  a disinterested  possession  and  exclu-
sive pursuit  of  learning  and  knowledge;  the  honour  of  the  Ksha-
triya  which  fives  in  courage,  chivalry,  strength,  a certain  proud
self-restraint  and  self-mastery,  nobility  of  character  and  the  obli-
gations of  that  nobility;  the  honour  of  the  Vaishya  which  main-
tains itself  by  rectitude  of  dealing,  mercantile  fidelity,  sound
production,  order,  liberality  and  philanthropy;  the  honour  of  the
Shudra  which  gives  itself  in  obedience,  subordination,  faithful
service,  a disinterested  attachment.  But  these  more  and  more
cease  to  have  a living  root  in  the  clear  psychological  idea  or  to
spring  naturally  out  of  the  inner  fife  of  the  man;  they  become  a
convention,  though  the  most  noble  of  conventions.  In  the  end
they  remain  more  as  a tradition  in  the  thought  and  on  the  lips
than  a reality  of  the  fife.

For  the  typal  passes  naturally  into  the  conventional  stage.
The  conventional  stage  of  human  society  is  born  when  the  exter-
nal supports,  the  outward  expressions  of  the  spirit  or  the  ideal,
become  more  important  than  the  ideal,  the  body  or  even  the
clothes  more  important  than  the  person.  Thus  in  the  evolution
of  caste,  the  outward  supports  of  the  ethical  fourfold  order,  —
birth,  economic  function,  religious  ritual  and  sacrament,  family
custom,  — each  began  to  exaggerate  enormously  its  proportions
and  its  importance  in  the  scheme.  At  first,  birth  does  not  seem
to  have  been  of  the  first  importance  in  the  social  order,  for  faculty
and  capacity  prevailed;  but  afterwards,  as  the  type  fixed  itself,
its  maintenance  by  education  and  tradition  became  necessary
and  education  and  tradition  naturally  fixed  themselves  in  a
hereditary  groove.  Thus  the  son  of  a Brahmin  came  always  to


8 The  Human  Cycle

be  looked  upon  conventionally  as  a Brahmin;  birth  and  profes-
sion were  together  the  double  bond  of  the  hereditary  convention
at  the  time  when  it  was  most  firm  and  faithful  to  its  own  cha-
racter. This  rigidity  once  established,  the  maintenance  of  the
ethical  type  passed  from  the  first  place  to  a secondary  or  even  a
quite  tertiary  importance.  Once  the  very  basis  of  the  system,  it
came  now  to  be  a not  indispensable  crown  or  pendent  tassel,
insisted  upon  indeed  by  the  thinker  and  the  ideal  code-maker  but
not  by  the  actual  rule  of  society  or  its  practice.  Once  ceasing  to
be  indispensable,  it  came  inevitably  to  be  dispensed  with  except
as  an  ornamental  fiction.  Finally,  even  the  economic  basis  began
to  disintegrate;  birth,  family  custom  and  remnants,  deformations,
new  accretions  of  meaningless  or  fanciful  religious  sign  and  ritual,
the  very  scarecrow  and  caricature  of  the  old  profound  symbo-
lism, became  the  riveting  links  of  the  system  of  caste  in  the  iron
age  of  the  old  society.  In  the  full  economic  period  of  caste  the
priest  and  the  Pundit  masquerade  under  the  name  of  the  Brah-
min, the  aristocrat  and  feudal  baron  under  the  name  of  the
Kshatriya,  the  trader  and  money-getter  under  the  name  of  the
Vaishya,  the  half-fed  labourer  and  economic  serf  under  the  name
of  the  Shudra.  When  the  economic  basis  also  breaks  down,  then
the  unclean  and  diseased  decrepitude  of  the  old  system  has
begun;  it  has  become  a name,  a shell,  a sham  and  must  either  be
dissolved  in  the  crucible  of  an  individualist  period  of  society
or  else  fatally  affect  with  weakness  and  falsehood  the  system  of
life  that  clings  to  it.  That  in  visible  fact  is  the  last  and  present
state  of  the  caste  system  in  India.

The  tendency  of  the  conventional  age  of  society  is  to  fix,  to
arrange  firmly,  to  formalise,  to  erect  a system  of  rigid  grades
and  hierarchies,  to  stereotype  religion,  to  bind  education  and
training  to  a traditional  and  unchangeable  form,  to  subject
thought  to  infallible  authorities,  to  cast  a stamp  of  finality  on
what  seems  to  it  the  finished  life  of  man.  The  conventional  period
of  society  has  its  golden  age  when  the  spirit  and  thought  that
inspired  its  forms  are  confined  but  yet  living,  not  yet  altogether
walled  in,  not  yet  stifled  to  death  and  petrified  by  the  growing
hardness  of  the  structure  in  which  they  are  cased.  That  golden
age  is  often  very  beautiful  and  attractive  to  the  distant  view  of


9


The  Cycle  of  Society

posterity  by  its  precise  order,  symmetry,  fine  social  architecture,
the  admirable  subordination  of  its  parts  to  a general  and  noble
plan.  Thus  at  one  time  the  modern  litterateur,  artist  or  thinker
looked  back  often  with  admiration  and  with  something  like
longing  to  the  mediaeval  age  of  Europe;  he  forgot  in  its  distant
appearance  of  poetry,  nobility,  spirituality  the  much  folly,  igno-
rance, iniquity,  cruelty  and  oppression  of  those  harsh  ages,  the
suffering  and  revolt  that  simmered  below  those  fine  surfaces,
the  misery  and  squalor  that  was  hidden  behind  that  splendid
fa9ade.  So  too  the  Hindu  orthodox  idealist  looks  back  to  a per-
fectly regulated  society  devoutly  obedient  to  the  wise  yoke  of  the
Shastra,  and  that  is  his  golden  age,  — a nobler  one  than  the
European  in  which  the  apparent  gold  was  mostly  hard  burnished
copper  with  a thin  gold-leaf  covering  it,  but  still  of  an  alloyed
metal,  not  the  true  Satya  Yuga.  In  these  conventional  periods
of  society  there  is  much  indeed  that  is  really  fine  and  sound  and
helpful  to  human  progress,  but  still  they  are  its  copper  age  and
not  the  true  golden;  they  are  the  age  when  the  Truth  we  strive  to
arrive  at  is  not  realised,  not  accomplished, ^ but  the  exiguity  of  it
eked  out  or  its  full  appearance  imitated  by  an  artistic  form  and
what  we  have  of  the  reality  has  begun  to  fossilise  and  is  doomed
to  be  lost  in  a hard  mass  of  rule  and  order  and  convention.

For  always  the  form  prevails  and  the  spirit  recedes  and
diminishes.  It  attempts  indeed  to  return,  to  revive  the  form,  to
modify  it,  anyhow  to  survive  and  even  to  make  the  form  survive;
but  the  time-tendency  is  too  strong.  This  is  visible  in  the  history
of  religion;  the  efforts  of  the  saints  and  religious  reformers  be-
come progressively  more  scattered,  brief  and  superficial  in  their
actual  effects,  however  strong  and  vital  the  impulse.  We  see  this
recession  in  the  growing  darkness  and  weakness  of  India  in  her
last  millennium;  the  constant  effort  of  the  most  powerful  spiritual
personalities  kept  the  soul  of  the  people  alive  but  failed  to  re-
suscitate the  ancient  free  force  and  truth  and  vigour  or  perma-
nently revivify  a conventionalised  and  stagnating  society;  in  a
generation  or  two  the  iron  grip  of  that  conventionalism  has
always  fallen  on  the  new  movement  and  annexed  the  names  of

^ The  Indian  names  of  the  golden  age  are  Satya,  the  Age  of  the  Truth,  and  Krta,  the  Age
when  the  law  of  the  Truth  is  accomplished.


10


The  Human  Cycle


its  founders.  We  see  it  in  Europe  in  the  repeated  moral  tragedy
of  ecclesiasticism  and  Catholic  monasticism.  Then  there  arrives
a period  when  the  gulf  between  the  convention  and  the  truth
becomes  intolerable  and  the  men  of  intellectual  power  arise,  the
great  “swallowers  of  formulas”,  who,  rejecting  robustly  or
fiercely  or  with  the  calm  light  of  reason  symbol  and  type  and
convention,  strike  at  the  walls  of  the  prison-house  and  seek  by
the  individual  reason,  moral  sense  or  emotional  desire  the  Truth
that  society  has  lost  or  buried  in  its  whited  sepulchres.  It  is  then
that  the  individualistic  age  of  religion  and  thought  and  society  is
created;  the  Age  of  Protestantism  has  begun,  the  Age  of  Reason,
the  Age  of  Revolt,  Progress,  Freedom.  A partial  and  external
freedom,  still  betrayed  by  the  conventional  age  that  preceded  it
into  the  idea  that  the  Truth  can  be  found  in  outsides,  dreaming
vainly  that  perfection  can  be  determined  by  machinery,  but  still
a necessary  passage  to  the  subjective  period  of  humanity  through
which  man  has  to  circle  back  towards  the  recovery  of  his  deeper
self  and  a new  upward  line  or  a new  revolving  cycle  of  civilisation.


Chapter  II


The  Age  of  Individualism  and  Reason


A.N  individualistic  age  of  human
society  comes  as  a result  of  the  corruption  and  failure  of  the
conventional,  as  a revolt  against  the  reign  of  the  petrified  typal
figure.  Before  it  can  be  born  it  is  necessary  that  the  old  truths  shall
have  been  lost  in  the  soul  and  practice  of  the  race  and  that  even
the  conventions  which  ape  and  r&phc^  them  shaJJ  have  become
devoid  of  real  sense  and  intelligence;  stripped  of  all  practical
justification,  they  exist  only  mechanically  by  fixed  idea,  by  the
force  of  custom,  by  attachment  to  the  form.  It  is  then  that  men
in  spite  of  the  natural  conservatism  of  the  social  mind  are  com-
pelled at  last  to  perceive  that  the  Truth  is  dead  in  them  and  that
they  are  living  by  a lie.  The  individualism  of  the  new  age  is  an
attempt  to  get  back  from  the  conventionalism  of  belief  and  prac-
tice to  some  solid  bed-rock,  no  matter  what,  of  real  and  tangible
Truth.  And  it  is  necessarily  individualistic,  because  all  the  old
general  standards  have  become  bankrupt  and  can  no  longer
give  any  inner  help;  it  is  therefore  the  individual  who  has  to  be-
come a discoverer,  a pioneer,  and  to  search  out  by  his  individual
reason,  intuition,  idealism,  desire,  claim  upon  life  or  whatever
other  light  he  finds  in  himself  the  true  law  of  the  world  and  of  his
own  being.  By  that,  when  he  has  found  or  thinks  he  has  found
it,  he  will  strive  to  rebase  on  a firm  foundation  and  remould  in  a
more  vital  even  if  a poorer  form  religion,  society,  ethics,  political
institutions,  his  relations  with  his  fellows,  his  strivings  for  his
own  perfection  and  his  labour  for  mankind.

It  is  in  Europe  that  the  age  of  individualism  has  taken  birth
and  exercised  its  full  sway;  the  East  has  entered  into  it  only  by
contact  and  influence,  not  from  an  original  impulse.  And  it  is  to
its  passion  for  the  discovery  of  the  actual  truth  of  things  and  for
the  governing  of  human  life  by  whatever  law  of  the  truth  it  has
found  that  the  West  owes  its  centuries  of  strength,  vigour,  light.


12


The  Human  Cycle


progress,  irresistible  expansion.  Equally,  it  is  due  not  to  any
original  falsehood  in  the  ideals  on  which  its  life  was  founded,  but
to  the  loss  of  the  living  sense  of  the  Truth  it  once  held  and  its  long
contented  slumber  in  the  cramping  bonds  of  a mechanical  con-
ventionalism that  the  East  has  found  itself  helpless  in  the  hour  of
its  awakening,  a giant  empty  of  strength,  inert  masses  of  men
who  had  forgotten  how  to  deal  freely  with  facts  and  forces  be-
cause they  had  learned  only  how  to  live  in  a world  of  stereotyped
thought  and  customary  action.  Yet  the  truths  which  Europe  has
found  by  its  individualistic  age  covered  only  the  first  more  ob-
vious, physical  and  outward  facts  of  life  and  only  such  of  their
more  hidden  realities  and  powers  as  the  habit  of  analytical
reason  and  the  pursuit  of  practical  utility  can  give  to  man.  If
its  rationalistic  civilisation  has  swept  so  triumphantly  over  the
world,  it  is  because  it  found  no  deeper  and  more  powerful  truth
to  confront  it;  for  all  the  rest  of  mankind  was  still  in  the  inacti-
vity of  the  last  dark  hours  of  the  conventional  age.

The  individualistic  age  of  Europe  was  in  its  beginning  a
revolt  of  reason,  in  its  culmination  a triumphal  progress  of
physical  Science.  Such  an  evolution  was  historically  inevitable.
The  dawn  of  individualism  is  always  a questioning,  a denial.
The  individual  finds  a religion  imposed  upon  him  which  does  not
base  its  dogma  and  practice  upon  a living  sense  of  ever  verifiable
spiritual  Truth,  but  on  the  letter  of  an  ancient  book,  the  infallible
dictum  of  a Pope,  the  tradition  of  a Church,  the  learned  casuistry
of  schoolmen  and  Pundits,  conclaves  of  ecclesiastics,  heads  of
monastic  orders,  doctors  of  all  sorts,  all  of  them  unquestionable
tribunals  whose  sole  function  is  to  judge  and  pronounce,  but
none  of  whom  seems  to  think  it  necessary  or  even  allowable  to
search,  test,  prove,  inquire,  discover.  He  finds  that,  as  is  inevit-
able under  such  a regime,  true  science  and  knowledge  are  either
banned,  punished  and  persecuted  or  else  rendered  obsolete  by  the
habit  of  blind  reliance  on  fixed  authorities ; even  what  is  true  in
old  authorities  is  no  longer  of  any  value,  because  its  words  are
learnedly  or  ignorantly  repeated  but  its  real  sense  is  no  longer
lived  except  at  most  b;^^  a few.  In  politics  he  finds  everywhere
divine  rights,  established  privileges,  sanctified  tyrannies  which
are  evidently  armed  with  an  oppressive  power  and  justify  them-


The  Age  of  Individualism  and  Reason


13


selves  by  long  prescription,  but  seem  to  have  no  real  claim  or  title
to  exist.  In  the  social  order  he  finds  an  equally  stereotyped  reign
of  convention,  fixed  disabilities,  fixed  privileges,  the  self-regarding
arrogance  of  the  high,  the  blind  prostration  of  the  low,
while  the  old  functions  which  might  have  justified  at  one  time
such  a distribution  of  status  are  either  not  performed  at  all  or
badly  performed  without  any  sense  of  obligation  and  merely
as  a part  of  caste  pride.  He  has  to  rise  in  revolt;  on  every  claim
of  authority  he  has  to  turn  the  eye  of  a resolute  inquisition;  when
he  is  told  that  this  is  the  sacred  truth  of  things  or  the  command
of  God  or  the  immemorial  order  of  human  life,  he  has  to  reply,
“But  is  it  really  so  ? How  shall  I know  that  this  is  the  truth  of
things  and  not  superstition  and  falsehood?  When  did  God
command  it,  or  how  do  I know  that  this  was  the  sense  of  His
command  and  not  your  error  or  invention,  or  that  the  book  on
which  you  found  yourself  is  His  word  at  all,  or  that  He  has  ever
spoken  His  will  to  mankind?  This  immemorial  order  of  which
you  speak,  is  it  really  immemorial,  really  a law  of  Nature  or  an
imperfect  result  of  Time  and  at  present  a most  false  convention?
And  of  all  you  say,  still  I must  ask,  does  it  agree  with  the  facts
of  the  world,  with  my  sense  of  right,  with  my  judgment  of  truth,
with  my  experience  of  reaUty?”  And  if  it  does  not  the  revolting
individual  flings  off  the  yoke,  declares  the  truth  as  he  sees  it  and
in  doing  so  strikes  inevitably  at  the  root  of  the  religious,  the
social,  the  political,  momentarily  perhaps  even  the  moral  order
of  the  community  as  it  stands,  because  it  stands  upon  the  autho-
rity he  discredits  and  the  convention  he  destroys  and  not  upon  a
living  truth  which  can  be  successfully  opposed  to  his  own.  The
champions  of  the  old  order  may  be  right  when  they  seek  to  sup-
press him  as  a destructive  agency  perilous  to  social  security,
political  order  or  religious  tradition;  but  he  stands  there  and  can
no  other,  because  to  destroy  is  his  mission,  to  destroy  falsehood
and  lay  bare  a new  foundation  of  truth.

But  by  what  individual  faculty  or  standard  shall  the  inno-
vator find  out  his  new  foundation  or  establish  his  new  measures  ?
Evidently,  it  will  depend  upon  the  available  enlightenment  of
the  time  and  the  possible  forms  of  knowledge  to  which  he  has
access.  At  first  it  was  in  religion  a personal  illumination  support-


14


The  Human  Cycle

ed  in  the  West  by  a theological,  in  the  East  by  a philosophical
reasoning.  In  society  and  politics  it  started  with  a crude  primitive
perception  of  natural  right  and  justice  which  took  its  origin  from
the  exasperation  of  suffering  or  from  an  awakened  sense  of
general  oppression,  wrong,  injustice  and  the  indefensibility  of
the  existing  order  when  brought  to  any  other  test  than  that  of
privilege  and  established  convention.  The  religious  motive  led
at  first;  the  social  and  political,  moderating  itself  after  the  swift
suppression  of  its  first  crude  and  vehement  movements,  took
advantage  of  the  upheaval  of  religious  reformation,  followed  be-
hind it  as  a useful  ally  and  waited  its  time  to  assume  the  lead
when  the  spiritual  momentum  had  been  spent  and,  perhaps  by  the
very  force  of  the  secular  influences  it  called  to  its  aid,  had  missed
its  way.  The  movement  of  religious  freedom  in  Europe  took  its
stand  first  on  a limited,  then  on  an  absolute  right  of  the  individual
experience  and  illumined  reason  to  determine  the  true  sense  of
inspired  Scripture  and  the  true  Christian  ritual  and  order  of  the
Church.  The  vehemence  of  its  claim  was  measured  by  the  vehe-
mence of  its  revolt  from  the  usurpations,  pretensions  and  brutali-
ties of  the  ecclesiastical  power  which  claimed  to  withhold  the
Scripture  from  general  knowledge  and  impose  by  moral  authority
and  physical  violence  its  own  arbitrary  interpretation  of  Sacred
Writ,  if  not  indeed  another  and  substituted  doctrine,  on  the  recal-
citrant individual  conscience.  In  its  more  tepid  and  moderate
forms  the  revolt  engendered  such  compromises  as  the  Episco-
palian Churches,  at  a higher  degree  of  fervour  Calvinistic  Puri-
tanism, at  white  heat  a riot  of  individual  religious  judgment  and
imagination  in  such  sects  as  the  Anabaptist,  Independent,  Soci-
nian  and  countless  others.  In  the  East  such  a movement  divorced
from  all  political  or  any  strongly  iconoclastic  social  significance
would  have  produced  simply  a series  of  religious  reformers,  illu-
mined saints,  new  bodies  of  belief  with  their  appropriate -cultural
and  social  practice;  in  the  West  atheism  and  secularism  were  its
inevitable  and  predestined  goal.  At  first,  questioning  the  con-
ventional forms  of  religion,  the  mediation  of  the  priesthood
between  God  and  the  soul  and  the  substitution  of  the  Papal  autho-
rity for  the  authority  of  the  Scripture,  it  could  not  fail  to  go
forward  and  question  the  Scripture  itself  and  then  all  supernatural-


The  Age  of  Individualism  and  Reason  15

ism,  religious  belief  or  suprarational  truth  no  less  than  outward
creed  and  institute.

For,  eventually,  the  evolution  of  Europe  was  determined  less
by  the  Reformation  than  by  the  Renascence;  it  flowered  by  the
vigorous  return  of  the  ancient  Graeco-Roman  mentality  of  the
one  rather  than  by  the  Hebraic  and  religio-ethical  temperament
of  the  other.  The  Renascence  gave  back  to  Europe  on  one  hand
the  free  curiosity  of  the  Greek  mind,  its  eager  search  for  first
principles  and  rational  laws,  its  delighted  intellectual  scrutiny
of  the  facts  of  life  by  the  force  of  direct  observation  and  indi-
vidual reasoning,  on  the  other  the  Roman’s  large  practicality
and  his  sense  for  the  ordering  of  life  in  harmony  with  a robust
utility  and  the  just  principles  of  things.  But  both  these  tendencies
were  pursued  with  a passion,  a seriousness,  a moral  and  almost
religious  ardour  which,  lacking  in  the  ancient  Graeco-Roman
mentality,  Europe  owed  to  her  long  centuries  of  Judaeo-Christian
discipline.  It  was  from  these  sources  that  the  individualistic
age  of  Western  society  sought  ultimately  for  that  principle  of
order  and  control  which  all  human  society  needs  and  which  more
ancient  times  attempted  to  realise  first  by  the  materialisation  of
fixed  symbols  of  truth,  then  by  ethical  type  and  discipline,  finally
by  infallible  authority  or  stereotyped  convention.

Manifestly,  the  unrestrained  use  of  individual  illumination
or  judgment  without  either  any  outer  standard  or  any  generally
recognisable  source  of  truth  is  a perilous  experiment  for  our
imperfect  race.  It  is  likely  to  lead  rather  to  a continual  fluctuation
and  disorder  of  opinion  than  to  a progressive  unfolding  of  the
truth  of  things.  No  less,  the  pursuit  of  social  justice  through
the  stark  assertion  of  individual  rights  or  class  interests  and  de-
sires must  be  a source  of  continual  struggle  and  revolution  and
may  end  in  an  exaggerated  assertion  of  the  will  in  each  to  live  his
own  life  and  to  satisfy  his  own  ideas  and  desires  which  will
produce  a serious  malaise  or  a radical  trouble  in  the  social  body.
Therefore  on  every  individualistic  age  of  mankind  there  is  im-
perative the  search  for  two  supreme  desiderata.  It  must  find  a
general  standard  of  Truth  to  which  the  individual  judgment  of
all  will  be  inwardly  compelled  to  subscribe  without  physical
constraint  or  imposition  of  irrational  authority.  And  it  must


16


The  Human  Cycle

reach  too  some  principle  of  social  order  which  shall  be  equally
founded  on  a universally  recognisable  truth  of  things;  an  order
is  needed  that  will  put  a rein  on  desire  and  interest  by  providing
at  least  some  intellectual  and  moral  test  which  these  two  power-
ful and  dangerous  forces  must  satisfy  before  they  can  feel  justi-
fied in  asserting  their  claims  on  life.  Speculative  and  scientific
reason  for  their  means,  the  pursuit  of  a practicable  social  justice
and  sound  utility  for  their  spirit,  the  progressive  nations  of
Europe  set  out  on  their  search  for  this  light  and  this  law.

They  found  and  held  it  with  enthusiasm  in  the  discoveries  of
physical  Science.  The  triumphant  domination,  the  all-shattering
and  irresistible  victory  of  Science  in  nineteenth  century  Europe
is  explained  by  the  absolute  perfection  with  which  it  at  least
seemed  for  a time  to  satisfy  these  great  psychological  wants
of  the  western  mind.  Science  seemed  to  it  to  fulfil  impeccably  its
search  for  the  two  supreme  desiderata  of  an  individualistic  age.
Here  at  last  was  a truth  of  things  which  depended  on  no  doubtful
Scripture  or  fallible  human  authority  but  which  Mother  Nature
herself  had  written  in  her  eternal  book  for  all  to  read  who  had
patience  to  observe  and  intellectual  honesty  to  judge.  Here  were
laws,  principles,  fundamental  facts  of  the  world  and  of  our  being
which  all  could  verify  at  once  for  themselves  and  which  must
therefore  satisfy  and  guide  the  free  individual  judgment,  deli-
vering it  equally  from  alien  compulsion  and  from  erratic  self-
will.  Here  were  laws  and  truths  which  justified  and  yet  con-
trolled the  claims  and  desires  of  the  individual  human  being;
here  a science  which  provided  a standard,  a norm  of  knowledge,
a rational  basis  for  life,  a clear  outline  and  sovereign  means  for
the  progress  and  perfection  of  the  individual  and  the  race.  The
attempt  to  govern  and  organise  Human  life  by  verifiable  Science,
by  a law,  a truth  of  things,  an  order  and  principles  which  all  can
observe  and  verify  in  their  ground  and  fact  and  to  which  there-
fore all  may  freely  and  must  rationally  subscribe,  is  the  culmina-
ting movement  of  European  civilisation.  It  has  been  the  fulfil-
ment and  triumph  of  the  individualistic  age  of  human  society;
it  has  seemed  likely  also  to  be  its  end,  the  cause  of  the  death  of
individualism  and  its  putting  away  and  burial  among  the  monu-
ments of  the  past.


17


The  Age  of  Individualism  and  Reason

For  this  discovery  by  individual  free-thought  of  universal
laws  of  which  the  individual  is  almost  a by-product  and  by  which
he  must  necessarily  be  governed,  this  attempt  actually  to  govern
the  social  life  of  humanity  in  conscious  accordance  with  the
mechanism  of  these  laws  seems  to  lead  logically  to  the  sup-
pression of  that  very  individual  freedom  which  made  the  dis-
covery and  the  attempt  at  all  possible.  In  seeking  the  truth  and
law  of  his  own  being  the  individual  seems  to  have  discovered  a
truth  and  law  which  is  not  of  his  own  individual  being  at  all,
but  of  the  collectivity,  the  pack,  the  hive,  the  mass.  The  result
to  which  this  points  and  to  which  it  still  seems  irresistibly  to  be
driving  us  is  a new  ordering  of  society  by  a rigid  economic  or
governmental  Socialism  in  which  the  individual,  deprived  again
of  his  freedom  in  his  own  interest  and  that  of  humanity,  must
have  his  whole  life  and  action  determined  for  him  at  every
step  and  in  every  point  from  birth  to  old  age  by  the  well-
ordered  mechanism  of  the  State.^  We  might  then  have  a curious
new  version,  with  very  important  differences,  of  the  old  Asiatic
or  even  of  the  old  Indian  order  of  society.  In  place  of  the
religio-ethical  sanction  there  will  be  a scientific  and  rational  or
naturalistic  motive  and  rule;  instead  of  the  Brahmin  Shastrakara
the  scientific,  administrative  and  economic  expert.  In  the
place  of  the  King  himself  observing  the  law  and  compelling
with  the  aid  and  consent  of  the  society  all  to  tread  without
deviation  the  line  marked  out  for  them,  the  line  of  the  Dharma,
there  will  stand  the  collectivist  State  similarly  guided  and
empowered.  Instead  of  a hierarchical  arrangement  of  classes,
each  with  its  powers,  privileges  and  duties  there  will  be  estab-
lished an  initial  equality  of  education  and  opportunity,  ultimately
perhaps  with  a subsequent  determination  of  function  by  experts
who  shall  know  us  better  than  ourselves  and  choose  for  us  our
work  and  quality.  Marriage,  generation  and  the  education
of  the  child  may  be  fixed  by  the  scientific  State  as  of  old  by
the  Shastra.  For  each  man  there  will  be  a long  stage  of  work


^ We  already  see  a violent  though  incomplete  beginning  of  this  line  of  social  evolution
in  Fascist  Italy,  Nazi  Germany,  Communist  Russia.  The  trend  is  for  more  and  more  nations
to  accept  this  beginning  of  a new  order,  and  the  resistance  of  the  old  order  is  more  passive  than
active  — it  lacks  the  fire,  enthusiasm  and  self-confidence  which  animates  the  innovating  Idea.


18


The  Human  Cycle


for  the  State  superintended  by  collectivist  authorities  and  per-
haps in  the  end  a period  of  liberation,  not  for  action  but  for
enjoyment  of  leisure  and  personal  self-improvement,  answering
to  the  Vanaprastha  and  Sannyasa  Ashramas  of  the  old  Aryan
society.  The  rigidity  of  such  a social  state  would  greatly  surpass
that  of  its  Asiatic  jforerunner;  for  there  at  least  there  were  for
the  rebel,  the  innovator  two  important  concessions.  There  was
for  the  individual  the  freedom  of  an  early  Sannyasa,  a renun-
ciation of  the  social  for  the  free  spiritual  life,  and  there  was  for
the  group  the  liberty  to  form  a sub-society  governed  by  new
conceptions  like  the  Sikh  or  the  Vaishnava.  But  neither  of
these  violent  departures  from  the  norm  could  be  tolerated  by
a strictly  economic  and  rigorously  scientific  and  Unitarian
society.  Obviously,  too,  there  would  grow  up  a fixed  system  of
social  morality  and  custom  and  a body  of  socialistic  doctrine
which  one  could  not  be  allowed  to  question  practically,  and
perhaps  not  even  intellectually,  since  that  would  soon  shatter
or  else  undermine  the  system.  Thus  we  should  have  a new  typal
order  based  upon  purely  economic  capacity  and  function,
guriakarma,  and  rapidly  petrifying  by  the  inhibition  of  individual
liberty  into  a system  of  rationalistic  conventions.  And  quite
certainly  this  static  order  would  at  long  last  be  broken  by  a
new  individualist  age  of  revolt,  led  probably  by  the  principles
of  an  extreme  philosophical  Anarchism.

On  the  other  hand,  there  are  in  operation  forces  which
seem  likely,  to  frustrate  or  modify  this  development  before
it  can  reach  its  menaced  consummation.  In  the  first  place,
rationalistic  and  physical  Science  has  overpassed  itself  and
must  before  long  be  overtaken  by  a mounting  flood  of  psycho-
logical and  psychic  knowledge  which  cannot  fail  to  compel
quite  a new  view  of  the  human  being  and  open  a new  vista
before  mankind.  At  the  same  time  the  Age  of  Reason  is  visibly
drawing  to  an  end;  novel  ideas  are  sweeping  over  the  world
and  are  being  accepted  with  a significant  rapidity,  ideas  inevitably
subversive  of  any  premature  typal  order  of  economic  rationalism,
dynamic  ideas  such  as  Nietzsche’s  Will-to-live,  Bergson’s
exaltation  of  Intuition  above  intellect  or  the  latest  German
philosophical  tendency  to  acknowledge  a suprarational  faculty


The  Age  of  Individualism  and  Reason


19


and  a suprarational  order  of  truths.  Already  another  mental
poise  is  beginning  to  settle  and  conceptions  are  on  the  way
to  apply  themselves  in  the  field  of  practice  which  promise  to
give  the  succession  of  the  individualistic  age  of  society  not  to
a new  typal  order,  but  to  a subjective  age  which  may  well  be  a
great  and  momentous  passage  to  a very  different  goal.  It  may  be
doubted  whether  we  are  not  already  in  the  morning  twilight  of
a new  period  of  the  human  cycle.

Secondly,  the  West  in  its  triumphant  conquest  of  the  world
has  awakened  the  slumbering  East  and  has  produced  in  its  midst
an  increasing  struggle  between  an  imported  Western  individual-
ism and  the  old  conventional  principle  of  society.  The  latter  is
here  rapidly,  there  slowly  breaking  down,  but  something  quite
different  from  Western  individualism  may  very  well  take  its
place.  Some  opine,  indeed,  that  Asia  will  reproduce  Europe’s
Age  of  Reason  with  all  its  materialism  and  secularist  individual-
ism while  Europe  itself  is  pushing  onward  into  new  forms  and
ideas.;  but  this  is  in  the  last  degree  improbable.  On  the  contrary,
the  signs  are  that  the  individualistic  period  in  the  East  will  be
neither  of  long  duration  nor  predominantly  rationalistic  and
secularist  in  its  character.  If  then  the  East,  as  the  result  of  its
awakening,  follows  its  own  bent  and  evolves  a novel  social
tendency  and  culture,  that  is  bound  to  have  an  enormous  effect
on  the  direction  of  the  world’s  civilisation;  we  can  measure  its
probable  influence  by  the  profound  results  of  the  first  reflux
of  the  ideas  even  of  the  unawakened  East  upon  Europe.  What-
ever that  effect  may  be,  it  will  not  be  in  favour  of  any  re-ordering
of  society  on  the  lines  of  the  still  current  tendency  towards  a
mechanical  economism  which  has  not  ceased  to  dominate  mind
and  life  in  the  Occident.  The  influence  of  the  East  is  likely  to
be  rather  in  the  direction  of  subjectivism  and  practical  spiritual-
ity, a greater  opening  of  our  physical  existence  to  the  realisation
of  ideals  other  than  the  strong  but  limited  aims  suggested  by
the  life  and  the  body  in  their  own  gross  nature.

But,  most  important  of  all,  the  individualistic  age  of  Europe
has  in  its  discovery  of  the  individual  fixed  among  the  idea-forces
of  the  future  two  of  a master  potency  which  cannot  be  entirely
eliminated  by  any  temporary  reaction.  The  first  of  these,  now


20


The  Human  Cycle


universally  accepted,  is  the  democratic  conception  of  the  right
of  all  individuals  as  members  of  the  society  to  the  full  life  and
the  full  development  of  which  they  are  individually  capable.
It  is  no  longer  possible  that  we  should  accept  as  an  ideal  any
arrangement  by  which  certain  classes  of  society  should  arrogate
development  and  full  social  fruition  to  themselves  while  assigning
a bare  and  barren  function  of  service  alone  to  others.  It  is
now  fixed  that  social  development  and  well-being  mean  the
development  and  well-being  of  all  the  individuals  in  the  society
and  not  merely  a flourishing  of  the  community  in  the  mass  which
resolves  itself  really  into  the  splendour  and  power  of  one  or
two  classes.  This  coiiception  has  been  accepted  in  full  by  all
progressive  nations  and  is  the  basis  of  the  present  socialistic
tendency  of  the  world.  But  in  addition  there  is  this  deeper  truth
which  individualism  has  discovered,  that  the  individual  is  not
merely  a social  unit;  his  existence,  his  right  and  claim  to  live
and  grow  are  not  founded  solely  on  his  social  work  and  func-
tion. He  is  not  merely  a member  of  a human  pack,  hive  or  ant-
hill; he  is  something  in  himself,  a soul,  a being,  who  has  to
fulfil  his  own  individual  truth  and  law  as  well  as  his  natural  or
his  assigned  part  in  the  truth  and  law  of  the  collective  existence.^
He  demands  freedom,  space,  initiative  for  his  soul,  for  his
nature,  for  that  puissant  and  tremendous  thing  which  society
so  much  distrusts  and  has  laboured  in  the  past  either  to  suppress
altogether  or  to  relegate  to  the  purely  spiritual  field,  an  indi-
vidual thought,  will  and  conscience.  If  he  is  to  merge  these
eventually,  it  cannot  be  into  the  dominating  thought,  will  and
conscience  of  others,  but  into  something  beyond  into  which  he
and  all  must  be  both  allowed  and  helped  freely  to  grow.  That
is  an  idea,  a truth  which,  intellectually  recognised  and  given  its
full  exterior  and  superficial  significance  by  Europe,  agrees  at
its  root  with  the  profoundest  and  highest  spiritual  conceptions
of  Asia  and  has  a large  part  to  play  in  the  moulding  of  the
future.


‘ This  is  no  longer  recognised  by  the  new  order.  Fascist  or  Communistic,  — here  the
individual  is  reduced  to  a cell  or  atom  of  the  social  body.  “We  have  destroyed,”  proclaims  a
German  exponent,  “the  false  view  that  men  are  individual  beings;  there  is  no  liberty  of  indi-
viduals, there  is  only  liberty  of  nations  or


Chapter  III


The  Coming  of  the  Subiectiye  iA^e


The  inherent  aim  and  effort  and  justi-
fication,  the  psychological  seed-cause,  the  whole  tendency  of
development  of  an  individualistic  age  of  mankind,  all  go  back
to  the  one  dominant  need  of  rediscovering  the  substantial
truths  of  life,  thought  and  action  which  have  been  overlaid  by
the  falsehood  of  conventional  standards  no  longer  alive  to  the
truth  of  the  ideas  from  which  their  conventions  started.  It
would  seem  at  first  that  the  shortest  way  would  be  to  return
to  the  original  ideas  themselves  for  light,  to  rescue  the  kernel
of  their  truth  from  the  shell  of  convention  in  which  it  has  be-
come encrusted.  But  to  this  course  there  is  a great  practical
obstacle;  and  there  is  another  which  reaches  beyond  the  surface
of  things,  nearer  to  the  deeper  principles  of  the  development
of  the  soul  in  human  society.  The  recovery  of  the  old  original
ideas  now  travestied  by  convention  is  open  to  the  practical
disadvantage  that  it  tends  after  a time  to  restore  force  to  the
conventions  which  the  Time-Spirit  is  seeking  to  outgrow  and,
if  or  when  the  deeper  truth-seeking  tendency  slackens  in  its
impulse,  the  conventions  may  help  re-establish  their  sway.
They  revive,  modified,  no  doubt,  but  still  powerful;  a new
encrustation  sets  in,  the  truth  of  things  is  overlaid  by  a more
complex  falsity.  And  even  if  it  were  otherwise,  the  need  of  a
developing  humanity  is  not  to  return  always  to  its  old  ideas.
Its  need  is  to  progress  to  a larger  fulfilment  in  which,  if  the  old
is  at  all  taken  up,  it  must  be  transformed  and  exceeded.  For  the
underlying  truth  of  things  is  constant  and  eternal,  but  its  mental
figures,  its  life  forms,  its  physical  embodiments  call  constantly
for  growth  and  change.

It  is  this  principle  and  necessity  of  things  that  justify  an
age  of  individualism  and  rationalism  and  make  it,  however  short
it  may  be,  an  inevitable  period  in  the  cycle.  A temporary  reign


22


The  Human  Cycle

of  the  critical  reason  largely  destructive  in  its  action  is  an  impera-
tive need  for  human  progress.  In  India,  since  the  great  Buddhistic
upheaval  of  the  national  thought  and  life,  there  has  been  a series
of  recurrent  attempts  to  rediscover  the  truth  of  the  soul  and  life
and  get  behind  the  veil  of  stifling  conventions ; but  these  have
been  conducted  by  a wide  and  tolerant  spiritual  reason,  a
plastic  soul-intuition  and  deep  subjective  seeking,  insufficiently
militant  and  destructive.  Although  productive  of  great  internal
and  considerable  external  changes,  they  have  never  succeeded
in  getting  rid  of  the  predominant  conventional  order.  The
work  of  a dissolvent  and  destructive  intellectual  criticism,
though  not  entirely  absent  from  some  of  these  movements,  has
never  gone  far  enough;  the  constructive  force,  insufficiently
aided  by  the  destructive,  has  not  been  able  to  make  a wide  and
free  space  for  its  new  formation.  It  is  only  with  the  period  of
European  influence  and  impact  that  circumstances  and  tendencies
powerful  enough  to  enforce  the  beginnings  of  a new  age  of
radical  and  effective  revaluation  of  ideas  and  things  have  come
into  existence.  The  characteristic  power  of  these  influences  has
been  throughout  — or  at  any  rate  till  quite  recently  —
rationalistic,  utilitarian  and  individualistic.  It  has  compelled
the  national  mind  to  view  everything  from  a new,  searching
and  critical  standpoint,  and  even  those  who  seek  to  preserve  the
present  or  restore  the  past  are  obliged  unconsciously  or  half-
consciously  to  justify  their  endeavour  from  the  novel  point  of
view  and  by  its  appropriate  standards  of  reasoning.  Throughout
the  East,  the  subjective  Asiatic  mind  is  being  driven  to  adapt
itself  to  the  need  for  changed  values  of  life  and  thought.  It  has
been  forced  to  turn  upon  itself  both  by  the  pressure  of  western
knowledge  and  by  the  compulsion  of  a quite  changed  life-need
and  life-environment.  What  it  did  not  do  from  within,  has
come  on  it  as  a necessity  from  without  and  this  externality  has
carried  with  it  an  immense  advantage  as  well  as  great  dangers.

The  individualistic  age  is,  then,  a radical  attempt  of  mankind
to  discover  the  truth  and  law  both  of  the  individual  being  and  of
the  world  to  which  the  individual  belongs.  It  may  begin,  as  it
began  in  Europe,  with  the  endeavour  to  get  back,  more  espe-
cially in  the  sphere  of  religion,  to  the  original  truth  which  conven-


23


The  Coming  of  the  Subjective  Age

tion  has  overlaid,  defaced  or  distorted;  but  from  that  first
step  it  must  proceed  to  others  and  in  the  end  to  a general  ques-
tioning of  the  foundations  of  thought  and  practice  in  all  the
spheres  of  human  life  and  action.  A revolutionary  reconstruc-
tion of  religion,  philosophy,  science,  art  and  society  is  the  last
inevitable  outcome.  It  proceeds  at  first  by  the  light  of  the
individual  mind  and  reason,  by  its  demand  on  life  and  its
experience  of  life;  but  it  must  go  from  the  individual  to  the
universal.  For  the  effort  of  the  individual  soon  shows  him  that
he  cannot  securely  discover  the  truth  and  law  of  his  own  being
without  discovering  some  universal  law  and  truth  to  which  he
can  relate  it.  Of  the  universe  he  is  a part;  in  all  but  his  deepest
spirit  he  is  its  subject,  a small  cell  in  that  tremendous  organic
mass : his  substance  is  drawn  from  its  substance  and  by  the  law
of  its  life  the  law  of  his  life  is  determined  and  governed.  From  a
new  view  and  knowledge  of  the  world  must  proceed  his  new  view
and  knowledge  of  himself,  of  his  power  and  capacity  and  limita-
tions, of  his  claim  on  existence  and  the  high  road  and  the  distant
or  immediate  goal  of  his  individual  and  social  destiny.

In  Europe  and  in  modern  times  this  has  taken  the  form  of  a
clear  and  potent  physical  Science:  it  has  proceeded  by  the  dis-
covery of  the  laws  of  the  physical  universe  and  the  economic  and
sociological  conditions  of  human  life  as  determined  by  the
physical  being  of  man,  his  environment,  his  evolutionary  history,
his  physical  and  vital,  his  individual  and  collective  need.  But  after
a time  it  must  become  apparent  that  the  knowledge  of  the  physical
world  is  not  the  whole  of  knowledge;  it  must  appear  that  man
is  a mental  as  well  as  a physical  and  vital  being  and  even  much
more  essentially  mental  than  physical  or  vital.  Even  though  his
psychology  is  strongly  affected  and  limited  by  his  physical  being
and  environment,  it  is  not  at  its  roots  determined  by  them,  but
constantly  reacts,  subtly  determines  their  action,  effects  even  their
new-shaping  by  the  force  of  his  psychological  demand  on  life.
His  economic  state  and  social  institutions  are  themselves
governed  by  his  psychological  demand  on  the  possibilities,  circum-
stances, tendencies  created  by  the  relation  between  the  mind  and
soul  of  humanity  and  its  life  and  body.  Therefore  to  find  the
truth  of  things  and  the  law  of  his  being  in  relation  to  that  truth


24  The  Human  Cycle

he  must  go  deeper  and  fathom  the  subjective  secret  of  himself  and
things  as  well  as  their  objective  forms  and  surroundings.

This  he  may  attempt  to  do  for  a time  by  the  power  of  the  cri-
tical and  analytic  reason  which  has  already  carried  him  so  far;
but  not  for  very  long.  For  in  his  study  of  himself  and  the  world
he  cannot  but  come  face  to  face  with  the  soul  in  himself  and  the
soul  in  the  world  and  find  it  to  be  an  entity  so  profound,  so  com-
plex, so  full  of  hidden  secrets  and  powers  that  his  intellectual
reason  betrays  itself  as  an  insufficient  light  and  a fumbling  seeker:
it  is  successfully  analytical  only  of  superficialities  and  of  what  lies
just  behind  the  superficies.  The  need  of  a deeper  knowledge  must
then  turn  him  to  the  discovery  of  new  powers  and  means  within
himself.  He  finds  that  he  can  only  know  himself  entirely  by  be-
coming actively  self-conscious  and  not  merely  self-critical,  by
more  and  more  living  in  his  soul  and  acting  out  of  it  rather  than
floundering  on  surfaces,  by  putting  himself  into  conscious
harmony  with  that  which  lies  behind  his  superficial  mentality  and
psychology  and  by  enlightening  his  reason  and  making  dynamic
his  action  through  this  deeper  light  and  power  to  which  he  thus
opens.  In  this  process  the  rationalistic  ideal. begins  to  subject
itself  to  the  ideal  of  intuitional  knowledge  and  a deeper  self-
awareness;  the  utilitarian  standard  gives  way  to  the  aspiration
towards  self-consciousness  and  self-realisation;  the  rule  of  living
according  to  the  manifest  laws  of  physical  Nature  is  replaced  by
the  effort  towards  living  according  to  the  veiled  Law  and  Will
and  Power  active  in  the  life  of  the  world  and  in  the  inner  and
outer  life  of  humanity.

All  these  tendencies,  though  in  a crude,  initial  and  ill-deve-
loped form,  are  manifest  now  in  the  world  and  are  growing  from
day  to  day  with  a significant  rapidity.  And  their  emergence  and
greater  dominance  means  the  transition  from  the  rationalistic
and  utilitarian  period  of  human  development  which  individual-
ism has  created  to  a greater  subjective  age  of  society.  The  change
began  by  a rapid  turning  of  the  current  of  thought  into  large  and
profound  movements  contradictory  of , the  old  intellectual  stan-
dards, a swift  breaking  of  the  old  tables.  The  materialism  of  the
nineteenth  century  gave  place  first  to  a novel  and  profound  vital-
ism which  has  taken  various  forms  from  Nietzsche’s  theory  of  the


25


The  Coming  of  the  Subjective  Age

Will  to  be  and  Will  to  Power  as  the  root  and  law  of  life  to  the  new
pluralistic  and  pragmatic  philosophy  which  is  pluralistic  because
it  has  its  eye  fixed  bn  life  rather  than  on  the  soul  and  pragmatic
because  it  seeks  to  interpret  being  in  the  terms  of  force  and
action  rather  than  of  light  and  knowledge.  These  tendencies  of
thought,  which  had  until  yesterday  a profound  influence  on  the
life  and  thought  of  Europe  prior  to  the  outbreak  of  the  Great
War,  especially  in  France  and  Germany,  were  not  a mere  super-
ficial recoil  from  intellectualism  to  life  and  action,  — although
in  their  application  by  lesser  minds  they  often  assumed  that
aspect;  they  were  an  attempt  to  read  profoundly  and  live  by  the
Life-Soul  of  the  universe  and  tended  to  be  deeply  psychological
and  subjective  in  their  method.  From  behind  them,  arising  in  the
void  created  by  the  discrediting  of  the  old  rationalistic  intellec-
tualism, there  has  begun  to  arise  a new  Intuitionalism,  not  yet
clearly  aware  of  its  own  drive  and  nature,  which  seeks  through
the  forms  and  powers  of  Life  for  that  which  is  behind  Life  and
sometimes  even  lays  as  yet  uncertain  hands  on  the  sealed  doors
of  the  Spirit.

The  art,  music  and  literature  of  the  world,  always  a sure
index  of  the  vital  tendencies  of  the  age,  have  also  undergone  a
profound  revolution  in  the  direction  of  an  ever-deepening  subjec-
tivism»  The  great  objective  art  and  literature  of  the  past  no  long-
er commands  the  mind  of  the  new  age.  The  first  tendency  was,
as  in  thought  so  in  literature,  an  increasing  psychological  vital-
ism which  sought  to  represent  penetratingly  the  most  subtle
psychological  impulses  and  tendencies  of  man  as  they  started  to
the  surface  in  his  emotional,  aesthetic  and  vitalistic  cravings  and
activities.  Composed  with  great  skill  and  subtlety  but  without
any  real  insight  into  the  law  of  man’s  being,  these  creations  seldom
got  behind  the  reverse  side  of  our  surface  emotions,  sensations
and  actions  which  they  minutely  analysed  in  their  details  but
without  any  wide  or  profound  light  of  knowledge;  they  were
perhaps  more  immediately  interesting  but  ordinarily  inferior  as
art  to  the  old  literature  which  at  least  seized  firmly  and  with  a
large  and  powerful  mastery  on  its  province.  Often  they  described
the  malady  of  Life  rather  than  its  health  and  power,  or  the  riot
and  revolt  of  its  cravings,  vehement  and  therefore  impotent  and


26  The  Human  Cycle

unsatisfied,  rather  than  its  dynamis  of  self-expression  and  self-
possession.  But  to  this  movement  which  reached  its  highest  crea-
tive power  in  Russia,  there  succeeded  a turn  towards  a more  truly
psychological  art,  music  and  literature,  menial,  intuitional,
psychic  rather  than  vitalistic,  departing  in  fact  from  a superficial
vitalism  as  much  as  its  predecessors  departed  from  the  objective
mind  of  the  past.  This  new  movement  largely  aimed  like  the
new  philosophic  Intuitionalism  at  a real  rending  of  the  veil,  the
seizure  by  the  human  mind  of  that  which  does  not  overtly  express
itself,  the  touch  and  penetration  into  the  hidden  soul  of  things.
Much  of  it  was  still  infirm,  unsubstantial  in  its  grasp  on  what  it
pursued,  rudimentary  in  its  forms,  but  it  initiated  a decisive
departure  of  the  human  mind  from  its  old  moorings  and  pointed
the  direction  in  which  it  is  being  piloted  on  a momentous  voyage
of  discovery,  the  discovery  of  a new  world  within  which  must
eventually  bring  about  the  creation  of  a new  world  without  in
life  and  society.  Art  and  literature  seem  definitely  to  have  taken
a turn  towards  a subjective  search  into  what  may  be  called  the
hidden  inside  of  things  and  away  from  the  rational  and  objective
canon  or  nature.

Already  in  the  practical  dealing  with  life  there  are  advanced
progressive  tendencies  which  take  their  inspiration  from  this
profounder  subjectivism.  Nothing  indeed  has  yet  been  firmly
accomplished,  all  is  as  yet  tentative  initiation  and  the  first  feeling
out  towards  a material  shape  for  this  new  spirit.  The  dominant
activities  of  the  world,  the  great  recent  events  such  as  the  enor-
mous clash  of  nations  in  Europe  and  the  stirrings  and  changes
within  the  nations  which  preceded  and  followed  it,  were  rather
the  result  of  a confused  half  struggle  half  effort  at  accommoda-
tion between  the  old  intellectual  and  materialistic  and  the  new
still  superficial  subjective  and  vitalistic  impulses  in  the  West.
The  latter  unenlightened  by  a true  inner  growth  of  the  soul  were
necessarily  impelled  to  seize  upon  the  former  and  utilise  them  for
their  unbridled  demand  upon  life ; the  world  was  moving  towards
a monstrously  perfect  organisation  of  the  Will-to-live  and  the
Will-to-power  and  it  was  this  that  threw  itself  out  in  the  clash  of
War  and  has  now  found  or  is  finding  new  forms  of  life  for  itself
which  show  better  its  governing  idea  and  motive.  The  Asuric


27


The  Coming  of  the  Subjective  Age

or  even  Rakshasic  character  of  the  recent  world-collision  was
due  to  this  formidable  combination  of  a falsely  enlightened  vital-
istic  motive-power  with  a great  force  of  servile  intelligence  and
reasoning  contrivance  subjected  to  it  as  instrument  and  the
genius  of  an  accomphshed  materialistic  Science  as  its  Djinn,  its
giant  worker  of  huge,  gross  and  soulless  miracles.  The  War  was
the  bursting  of  the  explosive  force  so  created  and,  even  though
it  strewed  the  world  with  ruins,  its  after  results  may  well  have
prepared  the  collapse,  as  they  have  certainly  produced  a disinte-
grating chaos  or  at  least  poignant  disorder,  of  the  monstrous
combination  which  produced  it,  and  by  that  salutary  ruin  are
emptying  the  field  of  human  life  of  the  principal  obstacles  to  a
truer  development  towards  a higher  goal.

Behind  it  all  the  hope  of  the  race  lies  in  those  infant  and  as
yet  subordinate  tendencies  which  carry  in  them  the  seed  of  a new
subjective  and  psychic  dealing  of  man  with  his  own  being,  with
his  fellow-men  and  with  the  ordering  of  his  individual  and  social
life.  The  characteristic  note  of  these  tendencies  may  be  seen  in
the  new  ideas  about  the  education  and  upbringing  of  the  child
that  became  strongly  current  in  the  pre-war  era.  Formerly,  edu-
cation was  merely  a mechanical  forcing  of  the  child’s  nature  into
arbitrary  grooves  of  training  and  knowledge  in  which  his  indi-
vidual subjectivity  was  the  last  thing  considered,  and  his  family
upbringing  was  a constant  repression  and  compulsory  shaping
of  his  habits,  his  thoughts,  his  character  into  the  mould  fixed  for
them  by  the  conventional  ideas  or  individual  interests  and  ideals
of  the  teachers  and  parents.  The  discovery  that  education  must
be  a bringing  out  of  the  child’s  own  intellectual  and  moral
capacities  to  their  highest  possible  value  and  must  be  based  on
the  psychology  of  the  child-nature  was  a step  forward  towards  a
more  healthy  because  a more  subjective  system;  but  it  still  fell
short  because  it  still  regarded  him  as  an  object  to  be  handled  and
moulded  by  the  teacher,  to  be  educated.  But  at  least  there  was  a
glimmering  of  the  realisation  that  each  human  being  is  a self-
developing  soul  and  that  the  business  of  both  parent  and  teacher
is  to  enable  and  to  help  the  child  to  educate  himself,  to  develop
his  own  intellectual,  moral,  aesthetic  and  practical  capacities
and  to  grow  freely  as  an  organic  being,  not  to  be  kneaded  and


28


The  Human  Cycle

pressured  into  form  like  an  inert  plastic  material.  It  is  not  yet
realised  what  this  soul  is  or  that  the  true  secret,  whether  with
child  or  man,  is  to  help  him  to  find  his  deeper  self,  the  real  psychic
entity  within.  That,  if  we  ever  give  it  a chance  to  come  forward,
and  still  more  if  we  call  it  into  the  foreground  as  “the  leader  of
the  march  set  in  our  front,”  will  itself  take  up  most  of  the  busi-
ness of  education  oiit  of  our  hands  and  develop  the  capacity  of
the  psychological  being  towards  a realisation  of  its  potentialities
of  which  our  present  mechanical  view  of  life  and  man  and
external  routine  methods  of  dealing  with  them  prevent  us  from
having  any  experience  or  forming  any  conception.  These  new
educational  methods  are  on  the  straight  way  to  this  truer  dealing.
The  closer  touch  attempted  with  the  psychical  entity  behind  the
vital  and  physical  mentality  and  an  increasing  reliance  on  its
possibilities  must  lead  to  the  ultimate  discovery  that  man  is
inwardly  a soul  and  a conscious  power  of  the  Divine  and  that  the
evocation  of  this  real  man  within  is  the  right  object  of  education
and  indeed  of  all  human  life  if  it  would  find  and.  five  according
to  the  hidden  Truth  and  deepest  law  of  its  own  being.  That  was
the  knowledge  which  the  ancients  sought  to  express  through
religious  and  social  symboUsm,  and  subjectivism  is  a road  of
return  to  the  lost  knowledge.  First  deepening  man’s  inner
experience,  restoring  perhaps  on  an  unprecedented  scale  insight
and  self-knowledge  to  the  race,  it  must  end  by  revolutionising
his  social  and  collective  self-expression.

Meanwhile,  the  nascent  subjectivism  preparative  of  the  new
age  has  shown  itself  not  so  much  in  the  relations  of  individuals
or  in  the  dominant  ideas  and  tendencies  of  social  development,
which  are  still  largely  rationalistic  and  materialistic  and  only
vaguely  touched  by  the  deeper  subjective  tendency,  but  in  the  new
collective  self-consciousness  of  man  in  that  organic  mass  of  his
life  which  he  has  most  firmly  developed  in  the  past,  the  nation.  It
is  here  that  it  has  already  begun  to  produce  powerful  results
whether  as  a vitalistic  or  as  a psychical  subjectivism,  and  it  is  here
that  we  shall  see  most  clearly  what  is  its  actual  drift,  its  deficiencies,
its  dangers  as  well  as  the  true  purpose  and  conditions  of  a subjec-
tive age  of  humanity  and  the  goal  towards  which  the  social  cycle,
entering  this  phase,  is  intended  to  arrive  in  its  wide  revolution.


Chapter  IV


The  Discovery  of  the  Nation-Soul


The  primal  law  and  purpose  of  the  indivi-
dual  life  is  to  seek  its  own  self-development.  Consciously  or  half-
consciously  or  with  an  obscure  unconscious  groping  it  strives
always  and  rightly  strives  at  self-formulation,  — to  find  itself,  to
discover  within  itself  the  law  and  power  of  its  own  being  and  to
fulfil  it.  This  aim  in  it  is  fundamental,  right,  inevitable  because,
even  after  all  qualifications  have  been  made  and  caveats  entered,
the  individual  is  not  merely  the  ephemeral  physical  creature,  a
form  of  mind  and  body  that  aggregates  and  dissolves,  but  a being,
a living  power  of  the  eternal  Truth,  a self-manifesting  spirit.  In  the
same  way  the  primal  law  and  purpose  of  a society,  community
or  nation  is  to  seek  its  own  self-fulfilment;  it  strives  rightly  to
find  itself,  to  become  aware  within  itself  of  the  law  and  power
of  its  own  being  and  to  fulfil  it  as  perfectly  as  possible,  to  realise
all  its  potentialities,  to  live  its  own  self-revealing  life.  The  reason
is  the  same;  for  this  too  is  a being,  a living  power  of  the  eternal
Truth,  a self-manifestation  of  the  cosmic  Spirit,  and  it  is  there  to
express  and  fulfil  in  its  own  way  and  to  the  degree  of  its  capacities
the  special  truth  and  power  and  meaning  of  the  cosmic  Spirit
that  is  within  it.  The  nation  or  society,  like  the  individual,  has
a body,  an  organic  life,  a moral  and  aesthetic  temperament,  a
developing  mind  and  a soul  behind  all  these  signs  and  powers
for  the  sake  of  which  they  exist.  One  may  see  even  that,  like  the
individual,  it  essentially  is  a soul  rather  than  has  one;  it  is  a
group-soul  that,  once  having  attained  to  a separate  distinctness,
must  become  more  and  more  self-conscious  and  find  itself  more
and  more  fully  as  it  develops  its  corporate  action  and  mentality
and  its  organic  self-expressive  life.

The  parallel  is  just  at  every  turn  because  it  is  more  than  a
parallel;  it  is  a real  identity  of  nature.  There  is  only  this  diffe-
rence that  the  group-soul  is  much  more  complex  because  it  has  a


30


The  Human  Cycle

great  number  of  partly  self-conscious  mental  individuals  for  the
constituents  of  its  physical  being  instead  of  an  association  of
merely  vital  subconscious  cells.  At  first,  for  this  very  reason,  it
seems  more  crude,  primitive  and  artificial  in  the  forms  it  takes;
for  it  has  a more  difficult  task  before  it,  it  needs  a longer  time  to
find  itself,  it  is  more  fluid  and  less  easily  organic.  When  it  does
succeed  in  getting  out  of  the  stage  of  vaguely  conscious  self-
formation, its  first  definite  self-consciousness  is  objective  much
more  than  subjective.  And  so  far  as  it  is  subjective,  it  is  apt  to  be
superficial  or  loose  and  vague.  This  objectiveness  comes  out  very
strongly  in  the  ordinary  emotional  conception  of  the  nation  which
centres  round  its  geographical,  its  most  outward  and  material
aspect,  the  passion  for  the  land  in  which  we  dwell,  the  land  of  our
fathers,  the  land  of  our  birth,  country,  pairia,  vaterland,  janma-
bhumi.  When  we  realise  that  the  land  is  only  the  shell  of  the
body,  though  a very  living  shell  indeed  and  potent  in  its  influences
on  the  nation,  when  we  begin  to  feel  that  its  more  real  body  is  the
men  and  women  who  compose  the  nation-unit,  a body  ever
changing,  yet  always  the  same  like  that  of  the  individual  man,
we  are  on  the  way  to  a truly  subjective  communal  conscious-
ness. For  then  we  have  some  chance  of  realising  that  even  the
physical  being  of  the  society  is  a subjective  power,  not  a mere
objective  existence.  Much  more  is  it  in  its  inner  self  a great  cor-
porate soul  with  all  the  possibilities  and  dangers  of  the  soul-life.

The  objective  view  of  society  has  reigned  throu^out  the
historical  period  of  humanity  in  the  West;  it  has  been  sufficiently
strong  though  not  absolutely  engrossing  in  the  East.  Rulers,
people  and  thinkers  alike  have  understood  by  their  national
existence  a political  status,  the  extent  of  their  borders,  their
economic  well-being  and  expansion,  their  laws,  institutions  and
the  working  of  these  things.  For  this  reason  political  and  eco-
nomic motives  have  everywhere  predominated  on  the  surface
and  history  has  been  a record  of  their  operations  and  influence.
The  one  subjective  and  psychological  force  consciously  admitted
and  with  difficulty  deniable  has  been  that  of  the  individual.  This
predominance  is  so  great  that  most  modern  historians  and  some
political  thinkers  have  concluded  that  objective  necessities  are
by  law  of  Nature  the  only  really  determining  forces,  all  else  is


31


The  Discovery  of  the  Nation-Soul

result  or  superficial  accidents  of  these  forces.  Scientific  history
has  been  conceived  as  if  it  must  be  a record  and  appreciation
of  the  environmental  motives  of  political  action,  of  the  play  of
economic  forces  and  developments  and  the  course  of  institu-
tional evolution.  The  few  who  still  valued  the  psychological  ele-
ment have  kept  their  eye  fixed  on  individuals  and  are  not  far
from  conceiving  of  history  as  a mass  of  biographies.  The  truer
and  more  comprehensive  science  of  the  future  will  see  that  these
conditions  only  apply  to  the  imperfectly  self-conscious  period
of  national  development.  Even  then  there  was  always  a greater
subjective  force  working  behind  individuals,  policies,  economic
movements  and  the  change  of  institutions;  but  it  worked  for
the  most  part  subconsciously,  more  as  a subliminal  self  than  as
a conscious  mind.  It  is  when  this  subconscious  power  of  the
group-soul  comes  to  the  surface  that  nations  begin  to  enter  into
possession  of  their  subjective  selves;  they  set  about  getting,
however  vaguely  or  imperfectly,  at  their  souls.

Certainly,  there  is  always  a vague  sense  of  this  subjective
existence  at  work  even  on  the  surface  of  the  communal  mentality.
But  so  far  as  this  vague  sense  becomes  at  all  definite,  it  concerns
itself  mostly  with  details  and  unessentials,  national  idiosyncrasies,
habits,  prejudices,  marked  mental  tendencies.  It  is,  so  to  speak,
an  objective  sense  of  subjectivity.  As  man  has  been  accustomed
to  look  on  himself  as  a body  and  a life,  the  physical  animal  with
a certain  moral  or  immoral  temperament,  and  the  things  of  the
mind  have  been  regarded  as  a fine  flower  and  attainment  of  the
physical  life  rather  than  themselves  anything  essential  or  the  sign
of  something  essential,  so  and  much  more  has  the  community
regarded  that  small  part  of  its  subjective  self  of  which  it  becomes
aware.  It  clings  indeed  always  to  its  idiosyncrasies,  habits,
prejudices,  but  in  a blind  objective  fashion,  insisting  on  their
most  external  aspect  and  not  at  all  going  behind  them  to  that
for  which  they  stand,  that  which  they  try  blindly  to  express.

This  has  been  the  rule  not  only  with  the  nation,  but  with  all
communities.  A Church  is  an  organised  religious  community
and  religion,  if  anything  in  the  world,  ought  to  be  subjective;
for  its  very  reason  for  existence  — where  it  is  not  merely  an
ethical  creed  with  a supernatural  authority  — is  to  find  and


32  The  Human  Cycle

realise  the  soul.  Yet  religious  history  has  been  almost  entirely,
except  in  the  time  of  the  founders  and  their  immediate  succes-
sors, an  insistence  on  things  objective,  rites,  ceremonies,  autho-
rity, church  governments,  dogmas,  forms  of  belief.  Witness  the
whole  external  religious  history  of  Europe,  that  strange  sacrile-
gious tragi-comedy  of  discords,  sanguinary  disputations,  “reli-
gious” wars,  persecutions.  State  churches  and  all  else  that  is  the
very  negation  of  the  spiritual  life.  It  is  only  recently  that  men
have  begun  seriously  to  consider  what  Christianity,  Catholicism,
Islam  really  mean  and  are  in  their  soul,  that  is  to  say,  in  their
very  reality  and  essence.

But  now  we  have,  very  remarkably,  very  swiftly  coming  to
the  surface  this  new  psychological  tendency  of  the  communal
consciousness.  Now  first  we  hear  of  the  soul  of  a nation  and,
what  is  more  to  the  purpose,  actually  see  nations  feeling  for  their
souls,  trying  to  find  them,  seriously  endeavouring  to  act  from
the  new  sense  and  make  it  consciously  operative  in  the  common
life  and  action.  It  is  only  natural  that  this  tendency  should  have
been,  for  the  most  part,  most  powerful  in  new  nations  or  in
those  struggling  to  realise  themselves  in  spite  of  political  sub-
jection or  defeat.  For  these  need  more  to  feel  the  difference
between  themselves  and  others  so  that  they  may  assert  and  justify
their  individuality  as  against  the  powerful  superlife  which  tends
to  absorb  or  efface  it.  And  precisely  because  their  objective  life  is
feeble  and  it  is  difficult  to  affirm  it  by  its  own  strength  in  the  ad-
verse circumstances,  there  is  more  chance  of  their  seeking  for  their
individuality  and  its  force  of  self-assertion  in  that  which  is  sub-
jective and  psychological  or  at  least  in  that  which  has  a subjective
or  a psychological  significance.

Therefore  in  nations  so  circumstanced  this  tendency  of  self-
finding has  been  most  powerful  and  has  even  created  in  some  of
them  a new  type  of  national  movement,  as  in  Ireland  and  India.
This  and  no  other  was  the  root-meaning  of  Swadeshism  in  Bengal
and  of  the  Irish  movement  in  its  earlier  less  purely  political  stages.
The  emergence  of  Bengal  as  a sub-nation  in  India  was  throughout
a strongly  subjective  movement  and  in  its  later  development  it
became  very  consciously  that.  The  movement  of  1905  in  Bengal
pursued  a quite  new  conception  of  the  nation  not  merely  as  a


33


The  Discovery  of  the  Nation-Soul

country,  but  a soul,  a psychological,  almost  a spiritual  being  and,
even  when  acting  from  economical  and  political  motives,  it
sought  to  dynamise  them  by  this  subjective  conception  and  to
make  them  instruments  of  self-expression  rather  than  objects  in
themselves.  We  must  not  forget,  however,  that  in  the  first  stages
these  movements  followed  in  their  superficial  thought  the  old
motives  of  an  objective  and  mostly  political  self-consciousness.
The  East  indeed  is  always  more  subjective  than  the  West  and  we
can  see  the  subjective  tinge  even  in  its  political  movements
whether  in  Persia,  India  or  China,  and  even  in  the  very  imitative
movement  of  the  Japanese  resurgence.  But  it  is  only  recently  that
this  subjectivism  has  become  self-conscious.  We  may  therefore
conclude  that  the  conscious  and  deliberate  subjectivism  of  certain
nations  was  only  the  sign  and  precursor  of  a general  change  in
humanity  and  has  been  helped  forward  by  local  circumstances,
but  was  not  really  dependent  upon  them  or  in  any  sense  their
product.

This  general  change  is  incontestable;  it  is  one  of  the  capital
phenomena  of  the  tendencies  of  national  and  communal  life  at
the  present  hour.  The  conception  to  which  Ireland  and  India
have  been  the  first  to  give  a definite  formula,  “to  be  ourselves”,
— so  different  from  the  impulse  and  ambition  of  dependent  or
unfortunate  nations  in  the  past  which  was  rather  to  become  like
others,  — is  now  more  and  more  a generally  accepted  motive  of
national  life.  It  opens  the  way  to  great  dangers  and  errors,  but  it
is  the  essential  condition  for  that  which  has  now  become  the  de-
mand of  the  Time-Spirit  on  the  human  race,  that  it  shall  find  sub-
jectively, not  only  in  the  individual,  but  in  the  nation  and  in  the
unity  of  the  human  race  itself,  its  deeper  being,  its  inner  law,  its
real  self  and  live  according  to  that  and  no  longer  by  artificial
standards.  This  tendency  was  preparing  itself  everywhere  and
partly  coming  to  the  surface  before  the  War,  but  most  promi-
nently, as  we  have  said,  in  new  nations  like  Germany  or  in  de-
pendent nations  like  Ireland  and  India.  The  shock  of  the  war
brought  about  from  its  earliest  moments  an  immediate  — and
for  the  time  being  a militant  — emergence  of  the  same  deeper
self-consciousness  everywhere.  Crude  enough  were  most  of  its
first  manifestations,  often  of  a really  barbarous  and  reactionary


34


The  Human  Cycle


crudeness.  Especially,  it  tended  to  repeat  the  Teutonic  lapse,
preparing  not  only  “to  be  oneself”,  which  is  entirely  right,  but  to
live  solely  for  and  to  oneself,  which,  if  pushed  beyond  a certain
point,  becomes  a disastrous  error.  For  it  is  necessary,  if  the
subjective  age  of  humanity  is  to  produce  its  best  fruits,  that  the
nations  should  become  conscious  not  only  of  their  own  but  of
each  other’s  souls  and  learn  to  respect,  to  help  and  to  profit,
not  only  economically  and  intellectually  but  subjectively  and
spiritually  by  each  other.

The  great  determining  force  has  been  the  example  and  the
aggression  of  Germany;  the  example,  because  no  other  nation
has  so  self-consciously,  so  methodically,  so  intelligently,  and
from  the  external  point  of  view  so  successfully  sought  to  find,
to  dynamise,  to  live  itself  and  make  the  most  of  its  own  power  of
being;  its  aggression,  because  the  very  nature  and  declared
watchwords  of  the  attack  have  tended  to  arouse  a defensive  self-
consciousness  in  the  assailed  and  forced  them  to  perceive  what
was  the  source  of  this  tremendous  strength  and  to  perceive  too
that  they  themselves  must  seek  consciously  an  answering.strength
in  the  same  deeper  sources,  Germany  was  for  the  time  the  most
remarkable  present  instance  of  a nation  preparing  for  the  subjec-
tive stage  because  it  had,  in  the  first  place,  a certain  kind  of  vision
' — - unfortunately  intellectual  rather  than  illuminated  — and  the
courage  to  follow  it  — unfortunately  again  a vital  and  intellectual
rather  than  a spiritual  hardihood,  — and,  secondly,  being  master
of  its  destinies,  was  able  to  order  its  own  life  so  as  to  express  its
self-vision.  We  must  not  be  misled  by  appearances  into  thinking
that  the  strength  of  Germany  was  created  by  Bismarck  or  directed
by  the  Kaiser  Wilhelm  II.  Rather  the  appearance  of  Bismarck
was  in  many  respects  a misfortune  for  the  growing  nation  be-
cause his  rude  and  powerful  hand  precipitated  its  subjectivity
into  form  and  action  at  too  early  a stage ; a longer  period  of  incu-
bation might  have  produced  results  less  disastrous  to  itself,  if  less
violently  stimulative  to  humanity.  The  real  source  of  this  great
subjective  force  which  has  been  so  much  disfigured  in  its  objec-
tive action,  was  not  in  Germany’s  statesmen  and  soldiers  — for
the  most  part  poor  enough  types  of  men  — but  came  from  her
great  philosophers,  Kant,  Hegel,  Fichte,  Nietzsche,  from  her


55


The  Discovery  of  the  Nation-Soul

great  thinker  and  poet  Goethe,  from  her  great  musicians,  Beetho-
ven and  Wagner,  and  from  all  in  the  German  soul  and  tempera-
ment which  they  represented.  A nation  whose  master  achieve-
ment has  lain  almost  entirely  in  the  two  spheres  of  philosophy  and
music,  is  clearly  predestined  to  lead  in  the  turn  to  subjectivism
and  to  produce  a profound  result  for  good  or  evil  on  the  begin-
nings of  a subjective  age.

This  was  one  side  of  the  predestination  of  Germany;  the
other  is  to  be  found  in  her  scholars,  educationists,  scientists,
organisers.  It  was  the  industry,  the  conscientious  diligence,  the
fidelity  to  ideas,  the  honest  and  painstaking  spirit  of  work  for
which  the  nation  has  been  long  famous.  A people  may  be  highly
gifted  in  the  subjective  capacities,  and  yet  if  it  neglects  to  cultivate
this  lower  side  of  our  complex  nature,  it  will  fail  to  build  that
bridge  between  the  idea  and  imagination  and  the  world  of  facts,
between  the  vision  and  the  force,  which  makes  realisation  pos-
sible; its  higher  powers  may  become  a joy  and  inspiration  to  the
world,  but  it  will  never  take  possession  of  its  own  world  until  it
has  learned  the  humbler  lesson.  In  Germany  the  bridge  was
there,  though  it  ran  mostly  through  a dark  tunnel  with  a gulf
underneath;  for  there  was  no  pure  transmission  from  the  sub-
jective mind  of  the  thinkers  and  singers  to  the  objective  mind  of
the  scholars  and  organisers.  The  misapplication  by  Treitschke  of
the  teachings  of  Nietzsche  to  national  and  international  uses
which  would  have  profoundly  disgusted  the  philosopher  himself,
is  an  example  of  this  obscure  transmission.  But  still  a transmis-
sion there  was.  For  more  than  a half-century  Germany  turned
a deep  eye  of  subjective  introspection  on  herself  and  things  and
ideas  in  search  of  the  truth  of  her  own  being  and  of  the  world,
and  for  another  half-century  a patient  eye  of  scientific  research  on
the  objective  means  for  organising  what  she  had  or  thought  she
had  gained.  And  something  was  done,  something  indeed  power-
ful and  enormous,  but  also  in  certain  directions,  not  in  all,  mis-
shapen and  disconcerting.  Unfortunately,  those  directions  were
precisely  the  very  central  lines  on  which  to  go  wrong  is  to  miss  the
goal.

It  may  be  said,  indeed,  that  the  last  result  of  the  something
done — the  war,  the  collapse,  the  fierce  reaction  towards  the  rigid.


36


The  Human  Cycle


armoured,  aggressive,  formidable  Nazi  State  — is  not  only  dis-
couraging enough,  but  a clear  warning  to  abandon  that  path
and  go  back  to  the  older  and  safer  ways.  But  the  misuse  of  great
powers  is  no  argument  against  their  right  use.  To  go  back  is  im-
possible; the  attempt  is  always,  indeed,  an  illusion;  we  have  all
to  do  the  same  thing  which  Germany  has  attempted,  but  to  take
care  not  to  do  it  likewise.  Therefore  we  must  look  beyond  the  red
mist  of  blood  of  the  War  and  the  dark  fuliginous  confusion  and
chaos  which  now  oppress  the  world  to  see  why  and  where  was  the
failure.  For  her  failure  which  became  evident  by  the  turn  her
action  took  and  was  converted  for  the  time  being  into  total  col-
lapse, was  clear  even  then  to  the  dispassionate  thinker  who  seeks
only  the  truth.  That  befell  her  which  sometimes  befalls  the  seeker
on  the  path  of  Yoga,  the  art  of  conscious  self-finding,  — a path
exposed  to  far  profounder  perils  than  beset  ordinarily  the  ave-
rage man,  — when  he  follows  a false  li^t  to  his  spiritual  ruin.
She  had  mistaken  her  vital  ego  for  herself;  she  had  sought  for  her
soul  and  found  only  her  force.  For  she  had  said,  like  the  Asura,
“I  am  my  body,  my  life,  my  mind,  my  temperament,”  and  be-
come attached  with  a Titanic  force  to  these;  especially  she  had
said,  “I  am  my  life  and  body”,  and  than  that  there  can  be  no
greater  mistake  for  man  or  nation.  The  soul  of  man  or  nation  is
something  more  and  diviner  than  that;  it  is  greater  than  its  instru-
ments and  cannot  be  shut  up  in  a physical,  a vital,  a mental  or  a
temperamental  formula.  So  to  confine  it,  even  though  the  false
social  formation  be  embodied  in  the  armour-plated  social  body  of
a huge  collective  human  dinosaurus,  can  only  stifle  the  growth  of
the  inner  Reality  and  end  in  decay  or  the  extinction  that  overtakes
all  that  is  unplastic  and  unadaptable.

It  is  evident  that  there  is  a false  as  well  as  a true  subjectivism
and  the  errors  to  which  the  subjective  trend  may  be  liable  are  as
great  as  its  possibilities  and  may  well  lead  to  capital  disasters.
This  distinction  must  be  clearly  grasped  if  the  road  of  this  stage
of  social  evolution  is  to  be  made  safe  for  the  human  race.


Chapter  V


True  and  False  Subjectivism


The  subjective  stage  of  htiman  development
is  that  critical  juncture  in  which,  having  gone  forward  from  sym-
bols, types,  conventions,  having  turned  its  gaze  superficially  on
the  individual  being  to  discover  his  truth  and  right  law  of  action
and  its  relation  to  the  superficial  and  external  truth  and  law  of
the  universe,  our  race  begins  to  gaze  deeper,  to  see  and  feel  what
is  behind  the  outside  and  below  the  surface  and  therefore  to  live
from  within.  It  is  a step  towards  self-knowledge  and  towards
living  in  and  from  the  self,  away  from  knowledge  of  things  as  the
not-self  and  from  the  living  according  to  this  objective  idea  of
life  and  the  universe.  Everything  depends  on  how  that  step  is
taken,  to  what  kind  of  subjectivity  we  arrive  and  how  far  we  go
in  self-knowledge;  for  here  the  dangers  of  error  are  as  great  and
far-reaching  as  the  results  of  right  seeking.  The  symbolic,  the
typal,  the  conventional  age  avoid  these  dangers  by  building  a
wall  of  self-limitation  against  them;  and  it  is  because  this  wall
becomes  in  the  end  a prison  of  self-ignorance  that  it  has  to  be
broken  down  and  the  perilous  but  fruitful  adventure  of  subjecti-
vism undertaken.

A psychical  self-knowledge  tells  us  that  there  are  in  our  being
many  formal,  frontal,  apparent  or  representative  selves  and  only
one  that  is  entirely  secret  and  real;  to  rest  in  the  apparent  and
to  mistake  it  for  the  real  is  the  one  general  error,  root  of  all
others  and  cause  of  all  our  stumbhng  and  suffering,  to  which  man
is  exposed  by  the  nature  of  his  mentality.  We  may  apply  this
truth  to  the  attempt  of  man  to  live  by  the  law  of  his  subjective
being  whether  as  an  individual  or  as  a social  unit  one  in  its  corpo-
rate mind  and  body.

For  this  is  the  sense  of  the  characteristic  turn  which  modern
civilisation  is  taking.  Everywhere  we  are  beginning,  though  still
sparsely  and  in  a groping  tentative  fashion,  to  approach  things


38


The  Human  Cycle

from  the  subjective  standpoint.  In  education  our  object  is  to
know  the  psychology  of  the  child  as  he  grows  into  man  and  to
found  our  systems  of  teaching  and  training  upon  that  basis.  The
new  aim  is  to  help  the  child  to  develop  his  intellectual,  aesthetic,
emotional,  moral,  spiritual  being  and  his  communal  life  and  im-
pulses out  of  his  own  temperament  and  capacities,  — a very
different  object  from  that  of  the  old  education  which  was  simply
to  pack  so  much  stereotyped  knowledge  into  his  resisting  brain
and  impose  a stereotyped  rule  of  conduct  on  his  struggling  and
dominated  impulses.^  In  dealing  with  the  criminal  the  most  ad-
vanced societies  are  no  longer  altogether  satisfied  with  regarding
him  as  a law-breaker  to  be  punished,  imprisoned,  terrified,
hanged  or  else  tortured  physically  and  morally,  whether  as  a re-
venge for  his  revolt  or  as  an  example  to  others ; there  is  a growing
attempt  to  understand  him,  to  make  allowance  for  his  heredity,
environment  and  inner  deficiencies  and  to  change  him  from
within  rather  than  crush  him  from  without.  In  the  general  view  of
society  itself,  we  begin  to  regard  the  community,  the  nation  or
any  other  fixed  grouping  of  men  as  a living  organism  with  a sub-
jective being  of  its  own  and  a corresponding  growth  and  natural
development  winch  it  is  its  business  to  bring  to  perfection  and
fruition.  So  far,  good;  the  greater  knowledge,  the  truer  depth,
the  wiser  humanity  of  this  new  view  of  things  are  obvious.  But
so  also  are  the  limitations  of  our  knowledge  and  experience  on
this  new  path  and  the  possibility  of  serious  errors  and  stumb-
lings.

If  we  look  at  the  new  attempt  of  nations,  whether  subject  or
imperial,  to  fulfil  themselves  consciously  and  especially  at  the
momentous  experiment  of  the  subjective  German  nationality,
we  shall  see  the  starting-point  of  these  possible  errors.  The  first
danger  arises  from  the  historical  fact  of  the  evolution  of  the  sub-
jective age  out  of  the  individualistic;  and  the  first  enormous
stumble  has  accordingly  been  to  transform  the  error  of  indi-
vidualistic egoism  into  the  more  momentous  error  of  a great  com-
munal egoism.  The  individual  seeking  for  the  law  of  his  being

* There  has  been  a rude  set-back  to  this  development  in  totalitarian  States  whose  theory
is  that  the  individual  does  not  exist  and  only  the  life  of  the  community  matters,  but  this  new
larger  view  still  holds  its  own  in  freer  countries.


39


True  and  False  Subjectivism

can  only  find  it  safely  if  he  regards  clearly  two  great  psychological
truths  and  lives  in  that  clear  vision.  First,  the  ego  is  not  the  self;
there  is  one  self  of  all  and  the  soul  is  a portion  of  that  universal
Divinity.  The  fuMment  of  the  individual  is  not  the  utmost
development  of  his  egoistic  intellect,  vital  force,  physical  well-
being and  the  utmost  satisfaction  of  his  mental,  emotional,  phy-
sical cravings,  but  the  flowering  of  the  divine  in  him  to  its  utmost
capacity  of  wisdom,  power,  love  and  universality  and  through
this  flowering  his  utmost  realisation  of  all  the  possible  beauty
and  delight  of  existence.

The  will  to  be,  the  will  to  power,  the  will  to  know  are
perfectly  legitimate,  their  satisfaction  the  true  law  of  our  exis-
tence and  to  discourage  and  repress  them  improperly  is  to  muti-
late our  being  and  dry  up  or  diminish  the  sources  of  life  and
growth.  But  their  satisfaction  must  not  be  egoistic,  — not  for  any
other  reason  moral  or  religious,  but  simply  because  they  cannot
so  be  satisfied.  The  attempt  always  leads  to  an  eternal  struggle
with  other  egoisms,  a mutual  wounding  and  hampering,  even  a
mutual  destruction  in  which  if  we  are  conquerors  today,  we  are
the  conquered  or  the  slain  tomorrow;  for  we  exhaust  ourselves
and  corrupt  ourselves  in  the  dangerous  attempt  to  live  by  the
destruction  and  exploitation  of  others.  Only  that  which  lives  in
its  own  self-existence  can  endure.  And  generally,  to  devour
others  is  to  register  oneself  also  as  a subject  and  predestined
victim  of  Death.

No  doubt,  so  long  as  we  live  without  self-knowledge,  we
can  do  no  other;  men  and  nations  have  to  act  and  think  ego-
istically,  because  in  their  self-ignorance  that  is  the  only  life
known  to  them,  and  to  live  is  their  God-given  impulse;  therefore
they  must  live  egoistically  rather  than  not  at  all,  with  whatever
curb  of  law,  ethics  and  practical  common  sense  of  self-restraint
nature  and  experience  have  taught  them.  But  subjectivism  is
in  its  very  nature  an  attempt  at  self-knowledge  and  at  living  by  a
true  self-knowledge  and  by  an  inner  strength,  and  there  is  no
real  gain  in  it  if  we  only  repeat  the  old  error  in  new  terms.
Therefore  we  must  find  out  that  the  true  individual  is  not  the
ego,  but  the  divine  individuality  which  is  through  our  evolution
preparing  to  emerge  in  us;  its  emergence  and  satisfaction  and


40


The  Human  Cycle


not  the  satisfaction  of  the  mere  egoistic  will-to-live  for  the  sake
of  one’s  lower  members  is  the  true  object  at  v/hich  a humanity
subjectively  seeking  to  know  and  fulfil  its  own  deepest  law  and
truth  should  increasingly  aim.

The  second  psychic  truth  the  individual  has  to  grasp  is  this,
that  he  is  not  only  himself,  but  is  in  solidarity  with  all  of  his  kind,
— let  us  leave  aside  for  the  moment  that  which  seems  to  be  not
of  his  kind.  That  which  we  are  has  expressed  itself  through  the
individual,  but  also  through  the  universality,  and  though  each
has  to  fulfil  itself  in  its  own  way,  neither  can  succeed  independent-
ly of  the  other.  The  society  has  no  right  to  crush  or  efface  the
individual  for  its  own  better  development  or  self-satisfaction;
the  individual,  so  long  at  least  as  he  chooses  to  live  in  the  world,
has  no  right  to  disregard  for  the  sake  of  his  own  solitary  satis-
faction and  development  his  fellow-beings  and  to  live  at  war  with
them  or  seek  a selfishly  isolated  good.  And  when  we  say,  no
right,  it  is  from  no  social,  moral  or  religious  standpoint,  but  from
the  most  positive  and  simply  with  a view  to  the  law  of  existence
itself.  For  neither  the  society  nor  the  individual  can  so  develop
to  their  fulfilment.  Every  time  the  society  crushes  or  effaces  the
individual,  it  is  inflicting  a wound  on  itself  and  depriving  its  own
life  of  priceless  sources  of  stimulation  and  growth.  The  indi-
vidual too  cannot  flourish  by  himself ; for  the  universal,  the  unity
and  collectivity  of  his  fellow-beings,  is  his  present  source  and
stock;  it  is  the  thing  whose  possibilities  he  individually  expresses,
even  when  he  transcends  its  immediate  level,  and  of  which  in
his  phenomenal  being  he  is  one  result.  Its  depression  strikes
eventually  at  his  own  sources  of  life,  by  its  increasing  he  also
increases.  This  is  what  a true  subjectivism  teaches  us,  — first,
that  we  are  a higher  self  than  our  ego  or  our  members,  secondly,
that  we  are  in  our  life  and  being  not  only  ourselves  but  all  others;
for  there  is  a secret  solidarity  which  our  egoism  may  kick  at  and
strive  against,  but  from  which  we  cannot  escape.  It  is  the  old
Indian  discovery  that  our  real  “I”  is  a Supreme  Being  which
is  our  true  self  and  which  it  is  oiir  business  to  discover  and  con-
sciously become  and,  secondly,  that  that  Being  is  one  in  all,
expressed  in  the  individual  and  in  the  collectivity^  and  only  by

» Vyoffi  aad  SamofU


True  and  False  Subjectivism  41

admitting  and  realising  our  unity  with  others  can  we  entirely
fulfil  our  true  self-being>

Of  these  two  truths  mankind  has  had  some  vague  vision  in
the  principle  with  regard  to  the  individual,  though  it  has  made
only  a very  poor  and  fragmentary  attempt  to  regard  them  in
practice  and  in  nine-tenths  of  its  life  has  been  busy  departing
from  them  — even  where  it  outwardly  professed  something  of
the  law.  But  they  apply  not  only  to  the  individual  but  to  the
nation.  Here  was  the  first  error  of  the  German  subjectivism.
Reasoning  of  the  Absolute  and  the  individual  and  the  universal,
it  looked  into  itself  and  saw  that  in  fact,  as  a matter  of  life,  That
seemed  to  express  itself  as  the  ego  and,  reasoning  from  the  con-
clusions of  modern  Science,  it  saw  the  individual  merely  as  a cell
of  the  collective  ego.  This  collective  ego  was,  then,  the  greatest
actual  organised  expression  of  life  and  to  that  all  ought  to  be  sub-
servient, for  so  could  Nature  and  its  evolution  best  be  assisted
and  affirmed.  The  greater  human  collectivity  exists,  but  it  is  an
inchoate  and  unorganised  existence,  and  its  growth  can  best  be
developed  by  the  better  development  of  the  most  efficient  orga-
nised collective  life  already  existing;  practically,  then  by  the
growth,  perfection  and  domination  of  the  most  advanced  nations
or  possibly  of  the  one  most  advanced  nation,  the  collective  ego
which  has  best  realised  the  purpose  of  Nature  and  whose  victory
and  rule  is  therefore  the  will  of  God.  For  all  organised  lives,  all
self-conscious  egos  are  in  a state  of  war,  sometimes  overt,  some-
times covert,  sometimes  complete,  sometimes  partial,  and  by  the
survival  of  the  best  is  secured  the  highest  advance  of  the  race.
And  where  was  the  best,  which  was  the  most  advanced,  self-
reahsing,  efficient,  highest-cultured  nation,  if  not,  by  common
admission  as  well  as  in  Germany’s  own  self-vision,  Germany
itself?  To  fulfil  then  the  collective  German  ego  and  secure  its
growth  and  domination  was  at  once  the  right  law  of  reason,  the
supreme  good  of  humanity  and  the  mission  of  the  great  and  sup-
reme Teutonic  race.^


^ There  is  another  side  of  the  truth  in  which  this  interdependence  is  not  so  imperative,
but  that  is  a phenomenon  of  spiritual  evolution  which  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  present
subject.

~ The  emphasis  has  somewhat  shifted  now  and  taken  its  stand  more  upon  the  crude  vita-


42  The  Human  Cycle

From  this  egoistic  self-vision  flowed  a number  of  logical
consequences,  each  in  itself  a separate  subjective  error.  First,
since  the  individual  is  only  a cell  of  the  collectivity,  his  life  must
be  entirely  subservient  to  the  efficient  life  of  the  nation.  He  must
be  made  efficient  indeed,  — the  nation  should  see  to  his  educa-
tion, proper  living,  disciplined  life,  carefully  trained  and  sub-
ordinated activity,  — but  as  a part  of  the  machine  or  a disci-
plined instrument  of  the  national  Life.  Initiative  must  be  the
collectivity’s,  execution  the  individual’s.  But  where  was  that
vague  thing,  the  collectivity,  and  how  could  it  express  itself  not
only  as  a self-conscious,  but  an  organised  and  efficient  collective
will  and  self-directing  energy?  The  State,  there  was  the  secret.
Let  the  State  be  perfect,  dominant,  all-pervading,  all-seeing,  all-
effecting;  so  only  could  the  collective  ego  be  concentrated,  find
itself,  and  its  life  be  brought  to  the  highest  pitch  of  strength,
organisation  and  efficiency.  Thus  Germany  founded  and  estab-
lished the  growing  modern  error  of  the  cult  of  the  State  and  the
growing  subordination  driving  in  the  end  towards  the  effacement
of  the  individual.  We  can  see  what  it  gained,  an  immense  collec-
tive power  and  a certain  kind  of  perfection  and  scientific  adjust-
ment of  means  to  end  and  a high  general  level  of  economic,  in-
tellectual and  social  efficiency,  — apart  from  the  tremendous
momentary  force  which  the  luminous  fulfilment  of  a great  idea
gives  to  man  or  nation.  What  it  had  begun  to  lose  is  as  yet
only  slightly  apparent,  — all  that  deeper  life,  vision,  intuitive
power,  force  of  personality,  psychical  sweetness  and  largeness
which  the  free  individual  brings  as  his  gift  to  the  race.

Secondly,  since  the  State  is  supreme,  the  representative  of
the  Divine  or  the  highest  realised  functioning  of  human  exis-
tence, and  has  a divine  right  to  the  obedience,  the  unquestioning
service  and  the  whole  activity  of  the  individual,  the  service  of
State  and  community  is  the  only  absolute  rule  of  morality.  With-
in the  State  this  may  include  and  sanction  all  other  moral  rules
because  there  no  rebel  egoism  can  be  allowed,  for  the  individual
ego  must  be  lost  in  that  of  the  State  or  become  part  of  it  and  all
condition  of  covert  or  overt  war  must  be  abrogated  in  obedience


listic  notions  of  blood,  race,  life-room,  but  the  old  idea  is  there  giving  more  force  to  the  later
formulation.


True  and  False


43


to  the  collective  good  as  determined  by  the  collective  will.  But
in  relation  to  other  States,  to  other  collective  egos  the  general
condition,  the  effective  law  is  still  that  of  war,  of  strife  between
sharply  divided  egoisms  each  seeking  to  fulfil  itself,  each  ham-
pered and  restricted  in  its  field  by  the  others.  War  then  is  the
whole  business  of  the  State  in  its  relation  to  other  States,  a war  of
arms,  a war  of  commerce,  a war  of  ideas  and  cultures,  a war  of
collective  personalities  each  seeking  to  possess  the  world  or  at
least  to  dominate  and  be  first  in  the  world.  Here  there  can  enter
no  morality  except  that  of  success,  though  the  pretence  of  mora-
lity may  be  a useful  stratagem  of  war.  To  serve  the  State,  the
German  collectivity  which  is  his  greater  and  real  self  is  the  busi-
ness of  the  German  individual  whether  at  home  or  abroad,  and
to  that  end  everything  which  succeeds  is  justifiable.  Inefficiency,
incompetence,  failure  are  the  only  immorality.  In  war  every
method  is  justified  which  leads  to  the  military  success  of  the  State,
in  peace  every  method  which  prepares  it;  for  peace  between
nations  is  only  a covert  state  of  war.  And  as  war  is  the  means  of
physical  survival  and  domination,  so  commerce  is  the  means  of
economic  survival  and  domination;  it  is  in  fact  only  another
kind  of  war,  another  department  of  the  struggle  to  live,  one  phy-
sical, the  other  vital.  And  the  life  and  the  body  are,  so  Science
has  assured  us,  the  whole  of  existence.

Thirdly,  since  the  survival  of  the  best  is  the  hipest  good  of
mankind  and  the  survival  of  the  best  is  secured  by  the  elimination
of  the  unfit  and  the  assimilation  of  the  less  fit,  the  conquest  of  the
world  by  German  culture  is  the  straight  path  of  human  progress.
But  culture  is  not,  in  this  view,  merely  a state  of  knowledge  or  a
system  or  cast  of  ideas  and  moral  and  aesthetic  tendencies;  cul-
ture is  life  governed  by  ideas,  but  by  ideas  based  on  the  truths  of
life  and  so  organised  as  to  bring  it  to  its  highest  efficiency.
Therefore  aU  life  not  capable  of  this  culture  and  this  efficiency
must  be  eliminated  or  trodden  down,  all  life  capable  of  it  but
not  actually  reaching  to  it  must  be  taken  up  and  assimilated.
But  capacity  is  always  a matter  of  genus  and  species  and  in
humanity  a matter  of  race.  Logically,  then,  the  Teutonic^  race  is
alone  entirely  capable,  and  therefore  all  Teutonic  races  must  be

1 “Nordic”  is  now  the  established  term.


44


The  Human  Cycle


taken  into  Germany  and  become  part  of  the  German  collectivity;
races  less  capable  but  not  \vhoUy  unfit  must  be  Germanised;
others,  hopelessly  decadent  like  the  Latins  of  Europe  and
America  or  naturally  inferior  like  the  vast  majority  of  the
Africans  and  Asiatics,  must  be  replaced  where  possible,  like
the  Herreros,  or,  where  not  possible,  dominated,  exploited  and
treated  according  to  their  inferiority.  So  evolution  would  ad-
vance, so  the  human  race  grow  towards  its  perfection.^

We  need  not  suppose  that  all  Germany  thought  in  this
strenuous  fashion,  as  it  was  too  long  represented,  or  that  the
majority  thought  thus  consciously;  but  it  is  sufficient  that  an
energetic  minority  of  thinkers  and  strong  personalities  should
seize  upon  the  national  life  and  impress  certain  tendencies  upon
it  for  these  to  prevail  practically  or  at  the  least  to  give  a general
trend  subconsciously  even  where  the  thought  itself  is  not  actually
proposed  in  the  conscious  mind.  And  the  actual  events  of  the
present  hour  seem  to  show  that  it  was  this  gospel  that  partly
consciously,  partly  subconsciously  or  half  articulately  had  taken
possession  of  the  collective  German  mind.  It  is  easy  to  deride
the  rigidity  of  this  terrible  logic  or  riddle  it  with  the  ideas  and
truths  it  has  ignored,  and  it  is  still  easier  to  abhor,  fear,  hate  and
spew  at  it  while  practically  following  its  principles  in  our  own
action  with  less  openness,  thoroughness  and  courage.  But  it  is
more  profitable  to  begin  by  seeing  that  behind  it  there  was  and  is
a tremendous  sincerity  which  is  the  secret  of  its  force,  and  a sort
of  perverse  honesty  in  its  errors;  the  sincerity  which  tries  to  look
straight  at  one’s  own  conduct  and  the  facts  of  life  and  the
honesty  to  proclaim  the  real  principles  of  that  conduct  and  not
— except  as  an  occasional  diplomacy  — profess  others  with  the
lips  while  disregarding  them  in  the  practice.  And  if  this  German
ideal  is  to  be  defeated  not  merely  for  a time  in  the  battle-field
and  in  the  collective  persons  of  the  nation  or  nations  professing
it,  as  happened  abortively  in  the  War,  but  in  the  mind  of  man
and  in  the  life  of  the  human  race,  an  equal  sincerity  and  a less
perverse  honesty  has  to  be  practised  by  those  who  have  arrived  at
a better  law.

' This  was  writtea  more  than  thirty  years  ago,  but  later  developments  have  emphasised
and  brought  out  the  truth  of  the  description  which  was  indeed  much  less  apparent  then.


45


True  and  False  Subjectivism

The  German  gospel  has  evidently  two  sides,  the  internal
and  the  external,  the  cult  of  the  State,  nation  or  community  and
the  cult  of  international  egoism.  In  the  first,  Germany,  even  if
for  a time  entirely  crushed  in  the  battle-field,  seems  to  have  al-
ready secured  the  victory  in  the  moral  sense  of  the  human  race.
The  unsparing  compulsion  as  against  the  assistance  of  the  indi-
vidual by  the  Stated  — for  his  and  the  common  good,  of  course,
but  who  professes  to  compel  for  harm?  — is  almost  everywhere
either  dominant  or  else  growing  into  a strong  and  prevailing
current  of  opinion;  the  champions  of  individual  freedom  are  now
a morally  defeated  and  dwindling  army  who  can  only  fight  on  in
the  hope  of  a future  reaction  or  of  saving  something  of  their
principle  from  the  wreck.  On  the  external  side,  the  international,
the  battle  of  ideas  still  goes  on,  but  there  were  from  the  begin-
ning ominous  signs  and  now  after  the  physical  war  with  its  first
psychological  results  is  well  over,  we  are  already  able  to  see  in
which  direction  the  tide  is  likely  to  flow.  War  is  a dangerous
teacher  and  physical  victory  leads  often  to  a moral  defeat.
Germany,  defeated  in  the  war,  has  won  in  the  after  war;  the
German  gospel  re-arisen  in  a sterner  and  fiercer  avatar  threatens
to  sweep  over  all  Europe.

It  is  necessary,  if  we  are  not  to  deceive  ourselves,  to  note
that  even  in  this  field  what  Germany  has  done  is  to  systematise
certain  strong  actual  tendencies  and  principles  of  international
action  to  the  exclusion  of  all  that  either  professed  to  resist  or  did
actually  modify  them.  If  a sacred  egoism  — and  the  expression
did  not  come  from  Teutonic  lips  — is  to  govern  international
relations,  then  it  is  difficult  to  deny  the  force  of  the  German  posi-
tion. The  theory  of  inferior  and  decadent  races  was  loudly  pro-
claimed by  other  than  German  thinkers  and  has  governed,  with
whatever  assuaging  scruples,  the  general  practice  of  military
domination  and  commercial  exploitation  of  the  weak  by  the

' Not  always  in  the  form  of  Socialism,  Bolshevic  Communism  or  Fascism.  Other  forms
of  government  that  are  nominally  based  on  the  principles  of  individualistic  democracy  and
freedom  have  begun  to  follow  the  same  trend  under  the  disguise  or  the  mere  profession  of  its
opposite.

- The  League  of  Nations  was  at  no  time  a contrary  sign.  Whatever  incidental  or  tempo-
rary good  it  might  achieve,  it  could  only  be  an  instrument  for  the  domination  of  the  rest  of
the  earth  by  Europe  and  of  all  by  two  or  three  major  nations.


46


The  Human  Cycle


strong;  all  that  Germany  has  done  is  to  attempt  to  give  it  a wider
extension  and  more  rigorous  execution  and  apply  it  to  European
as  well  as  to  Asiatic  and  African  peoples.  Even  the  severity  or
brutality  of  her  military  methods  or  of  her  ways  of  colonial  or
internal  political  repression,  taken  even  at  their  worst,  for  much
once  stated  against  her  has  been  proved  and  admitted  to  be  deli-
berate lies  manufactured  by  her  enemies,  was  only  a crystallising
of  certain  recent  tendencies  towards  the  revival  of  ancient  and
mediaeval  hard-heartedness  in  the  race.  The  use  and  even  the
justification  of  massacre  and  atrocious  cruelty  in  war  on  the
ground  of  military  exigency  and  in  the  course  of  commercial  ex-
ploitation or  in  the  repression  of  revolt  and  disorder  has  been
quite  recently  witnessed  in  the  other  continents,  to  say  nothing
of  certain  outskirts  of  Europe.^  From  one  point  of  view,  it  is  well
that  terrible  examples  of  the  utmost  logic  of  these  things  should
be  prominently  forced  on  the  attention  of  mankind ; for  by  show-
ing the  evil  stripped  of  all  veils  the  choice  between  good  and  evil
instead  of  a halting  between  the  two  will  be  forced  on  the  human
conscience.  Woe  to  the  race  if  it  blinds  its  conscience  and  but-
tresses up  its  animal  egoism  with  the  old  justifications;  for  the
gods  have  shown  that  Karma  is  not  a jest.

But  the  whole  root  of  the  German  error  lies  in  its  mistaking
life  and  the  body  for  the  self.  It  has  been  said  that  this  gospel  is
simply  a reversion  to  the  ancient  barbarism  of  the  religion  of
Odin;  but  this  is  not  the  truth.  It  is  a new  and  a modern  gospel
bom  of  the  application  of  a metaphysical  logic  to  the  conclusions
of  materialistic  Science,  of  a philosophic  subjectivism  to  the  ob-
jective pragmatic  positivism  of  recent  thought.  Just  as  Germany
applied  the  individualistic  position  to  the  realisation  of  her
communal  subjective  existence,  so  she  applied  the  materialistic
and  vitalistic  thought  of  recent  times  and  equipped  it  with  a sub-
jective philosophy.  Thus  she  arrived  at  a bastard  creed,  an  objec-
tive subjectivism  which  is  miles  apart  from  the  true  goal  of  a
subjective  age.  To  show  the  error  it  is  necessary  to  see  wherein
lies  the  true  individuality  of  man  and  of  the  nation.  It  lies  not  in
its  physical,  economic,  even  its  cultural  life  which  are  only  means

> Witness  Egypt,  Ireland.  India,  and  afterwards  Abyssinia,  Spain,  China  — wherever  still
man  tries  to  dominate  by  force  over  man  or  nation  over  nation.


True  and  False  Subjectivism


47


and  adjuncts,  but  in  something  deeper  whose  roots  are  not  in
the  ego,  but  in  a Self  one  in  difference  which  relates  the  good  of
each,  on  a footing  of  equality  and  not  of  strife  and  domination,
to  the  good  of  the  rest  of  the  world.


Chapter  VI


The  Objective  and  Subjective
Views  of  Life


The  principle  of  individualism  is  the  liberty
of  the  human  being  regarded  as  a separate  existence  to  develop
himself  and  fulfil  his  life,  satisfy  his  mental  tendencies,  emotional
and  vital  needs  and  physical  being  according  to  his  own  desire
governed  by  his  reason;  it  admits  no  other  limit  to  this  right  and
this  liberty  except  the  obligation  to  respect  the  same  individual
liberty  and  right  in  others.  The  balance  of  this  liberty  and  this
obligation  is  the  principle  which  the  individualistic  age  adopted
in  its  remodelling  of  society;  it  adopted  in  effect  a harmony  of
compromises  between  rights  and  duties,  liberty  and  law,  permis-
sions and  restraints  as  the  scheme  both  of  the  personal  life  and  the
life  of  the  society.  Equally,  in  the  life  of  nations  the  individualis-
tic age  made  liberty  the  ideal  and  strove  though  with  less  success
than  in  its  own  proper  sphere  to  affirm  a mutual  respect  for  each
other’s  freedom  as  the  proper  conduct  of  nations  to  one  another.
In  this  idea  of  life,  as  with  the  individual,  so  with  the  nation,
each  has  the  inherent  right  to  manage  its  own  affairs  freely  or,  if
it  wills,  to  mismanage  them  freely  and  not  to  be  interfered  with
in  its  rights  and  liberties  so  long  as  it  does  not  interfere  with  the
rights  and  liberties  of  other  nations.  As  a.  matter  of  fact,  the
egoism  of  individual  and  nation  does  not  wish  to  abide  within
these  bounds;  therefore  the  social  law  of  the  nation  has  been
called  in  to  enforce  the  violated  principle  as  between  man  and
man  and  it  has  been  sought  to  develop  international  law  in  the
same  way  and  with  the  same  object.  The  influence  of  these  ideas
is  still  powerful.  In  the  recent  European  struggle  the  liberty  of
nations  was  set  forth  as  the  ideal  for  which  the  war  was  being
waged  — in  defiance  of  the  patent  fact  that  it  had  come  about
by  nothing  better  than  a clash  of  interests.  The  development  of
international  law  into  an  effective  force  which  will  restrain  the


49


The  Objective  and  Subjective  Views  of  Life

egoism  of  nations  as  the  social  law  restrains  the  egoism  of
individuals,  is  the  solution  which  still  attracts  and  seems  the  most
practicable  to  most  when  they  seek  to  deal  with  the  difficulties
of  the  future.^

The  growth  of  modern  Science  has  meanwhile  created  new
ideas  and  tendencies,  on  one  side  an  exaggerated  individualism
or  rather  vitalistic  egoism,  on  the  other  the  quite  opposite  ideal
of  collectivism.  Science  investigating  life  discovered  that  the
root  nature  of  all  living  is  a struggle  to  take  the  best  advantage
of  the  environment  for  self-preservation,  self-fulfilment,  self-
aggrandisement. Human  thought  seizing  in  its  usual  arbitrary
and  trenchant  fashion  upon  this  aspect  of  modern  knowledge
has  founded  on  it  theories  of  a novel  kind  which  erect  into  a
gospel  the  right  for  each  to  live  his  own  life  not  merely  by  utilising
others,  but  even  at  the  expense  of  others.  The  first  object  of  life
in  this  view  is  for  the  individual  to  survive  as  long  as  he  may,  to
become  strong,  efficient,  powerful,  to  dominate  his  environment
and  his  fellows  and  to  raise  himself  on  this  strenuous  and  ego-
istic line  to  his  full  stature  of  capacity  and  reap  his  full  measure
of  enjoyment.  Philosophies  like  Nietzsche’s,  certain  forms  of
Anarchism,  — not  the  idealistic  Anarchism  of  the  thinker  which
is  rather  the  Old  individualism  of  the  ideal  reason  carried  to  its
logical  conclusion,  — certain  forms  too  of  Imperialism  have
been  largely  influenced  and  strengthened  by  this  type  of  ideas,
though  not  actually  created  by  them.

On  the  other  hand.  Science  investigating  life  has  equally
discovered  that  not  only  is  the  individual  life  best  secured  and
made  efficient  by  association  with  others  and  subjection  to  a law
of  communal  self-development  rather  than  by  aggressive  self-
affirmation,  but  that  actually  what  Nature  seeks  to  preserve  is
not  the  individual  but  the  type  and  that  in  her  scale  of  values  the
pack,  herd,  hive  or  swarm  takes  precedence  over  the  individual
animal  or  insect  and  the  human  group  over  the  individual
human  being.  Therefore  in  the  true  law  and  nature  of  things
the  individual  should  live  for  all  and  constantly  subordinate  and

1 No  longer  perhaps  now,  except  with  a dwndling  minority  — now  that  the  League  of
Nations,  constantly  misused  or  hampered  from  its  true  functioning  by  the  egoism  and  insin-
cerity of  its  greater  members,  has  collapsed  into  impotence  and  failure.


50  The  Human  Cycle

sacrifice  himself  to  the  growth,  efficiency  and  progi'ess  of  the
race  rather  than  live  for  his  own  self-fulfilment  and  subordinate
the  race-life  to  his  own  needs.  Modern  collectivism  derives
its  victorious  strength  from  the  impression  made  upon  human
thought  by  this  opposite  aspect  of  modern  knowledge.  We  have
seen  how  the  German  mind  took  up  both  these  ideas  and  com-
bined them  on  the  basis  of  the  present  facts  of  human  life:  it
affirmed  the  entire  subordination  of  the  individual  to  the  com-
munity, nation  or  State;  it  afiirmed,  on  the  other  hand,  with
equal  force  the  egoistic  self-assertion  of  the  individual  nation  as
against  others  or  against  any  group  or  all  the  groups  of  nations
which  constitute  the  totality  of  the  human  race.

But  behind  this  conflict  between  the  idea  of  a nationalistic
and  imperialistic  egoism  and  the  old  individualistic  doctrine  of
individual  and  national  liberty  and  separateness,  there  is  striving
to  arise  a new  idea  of  human  universalism  or  collectivism  for
the  race  which,  if  it  succeeds  in  becoming  a power,  is  likely
to  overcome  the  ideal  of  national  separatism  and  liberty  as  it  has
overcome  within  the  society  itself  the  ideal  of  individual  freedom
and  separate  self-fulfilment.  This  new  idea  demands  of  the
nation  that  it  shall  subordinate,  if  not  merge  and  sacrifice,  its  free
separateness  to  the  life  of  a larger  collectivity,  whether  that  of  an
imperialistic  group  or  a continental  or  cultural  unity,  as  in  the
idea  of  a united  Europe,  or  the  total  united  life  of  the  human  race.

The  principle  of  subjectivism  entering  into  human  thought
and  action,  while  necessarily  it  must  make  a great  difference  in
the  viewpoint,  the  motive-power  and  the  character  of  our  living,
does  not  at  first  appear  to  make  any  difference  in  its  factors.
Subjectivism  and  objectivism  start  from  the  same  data,  the
individual  and  the  collectivity,  the  complex  nature  of  each  with
its  various  powers  of  the  mind,  life  and  body  and  the  search  for
the  law  of  their  self-fulfilment  and  harmony.  But  objectivism
proceeding  by  the  analytical  reason  takes  an  external  and
mechanical  view  of  the  whole  problem.  It  looks  at  the  world  as
a thing,  an  object,  a process  to  be  studied  by  an  observing  reason
which  places  itself  abstractly  outside  the  elements  and  the  sum
of  what  it  has  to  consider  and  observes  it  thus  from  outside  as
one  would  an  intricate  mechanism.  The  laws  of-this  process  are


51


The  Objective  and  Subjective  Views  of  Life

considered  as  so  many  mechanical  rules  or  settled  forces  acting
upon  the  individual  or  the  group  which,  when  they  have  been
observed  and  distinguished  by  the  reason,  have  by  one’s  will  or
by  some  will  to  be  organised  and  applied  fully  much  as  Science
applies  the  laws  it  discovers.  These  laws  or  rules  have  to  be  im-
posed on  the  individual  by  his  own  abstract  reason  and  will
isolated  as  a ruling  authority  from  his  other  parts  or  by  the  reason
and  will  of  other  individuals  or  of  the  group,  and  they  have  to  be
imposed  on  the  group  itself  either  by  its  own  collective  reason  and
will  embodied  in  some  machinery  of  control  which  the  mind
considers  as  something  apart  from  the  life  of  the  group  or  by  the
reason  and  will  of  some  other  group  external  to  it  or  of  which  it
is  in  some  way  a part.  So  the  State  is  viewed  in  modern  political
thought  as  an  entity  in  itself,  as  if  it  were  something  apart  from
the  community  and  its  individuals,  something  which  has  the
right  to  impose  itself  on  them  and  control  them  in  the  fulfilment
of  some  idea  of  right,  good  or  interest  which  is  inflicted  on  them
by  a restraining  and  fashioning  power  rather  than  developed  in
them  and  by  them  as  a thing  towards  which  their  self  and  nature
are  impelled  to  grow.  Life  is  to  be  managed,  harmonised,  per-
fected by  an  adjustment,  a manipulation,  a machinery  through
which  it  is  passed  and  by  which  it  is  shaped.  A law  outside
oneself,  — outside  even  when  it  is  discovered  or  determined  by
the  individual  reason  and  accepted  or  enforced  by  the  individual
will,  — this  is  the  governing  idea  of  objectivism;  a mechanical
process  of  management,  ordering,  perfection,  this  is  its  concep-
tion of  practice.

Subjectivism  proceeds  from  within  and  regards  everything
from  the  point  of  view  of  a containing  and  developing  self-
consciousness.  The  law  here  is  within  ourselves ; life  is  a self-
creating  process,  a growth  and  development  at  first  subconscious,
then  half-conscious  and  at  last  more  and  more  fully  conscious  of
that  which  we  are  potentially  and  hold  within  ourselves;  the
principle  of  its  progress  is  an  increasing  self-recognition,  self-
realisation  and  a resultant  self-shaping.  Reason  and  will  are
only  effective  movements  of  the  self,  reason  a process  in  self-
recognition, will  a force  for  self-affirmation  and  self-shaping.
Moreover,  reason  and  intellectual  will  are  only  a part  of  the


52


The  Human  Cycle

means  by  which  we  recognise  and  realise  ourselves.  Subjectivism
tends  to  take  a large  and  complex  view  of  our  nature  and  being
and  to  recognise  many  powers  of  knowledge,  many  forces  of
effectuation.  Even,  we  see  it  in  its  first  movement  away  from  the
external  and  objective  method  discount  and  belittle  the  impor-
tance of  the  work  of  the  reason  and  assert  the  supremacy  of  the
life-impulse  or  the  essential  Will-to-be  in  opposition  to  the
claims  of  the  intellect  or  else  affirm  some  deeper  power  of  know-
ledge, called  nowadays  the  intuition,  which  sees  things  in  the
whole,  in  their  truth,  in  their  profundities  and  harmonies  while
intellectual  reason  breaks  up,  falsifies,  affirms  superficial  appear-
ances and  harmonises  only  by  a mechanical  adjustment.  But
substantially  we  can  see  that  what  is  meant  by  this  intuition  is
the  self-consciousness,  feeling,  perceiving,  grasping  in  its  sub-
stance and  aspects  rather  than  analysing  in  its  mechanism  its  own
truth  and  nature  and  powers.  The  whole  impulse  of  subjectivism
is  to  get  at  the  self,  to  live  in  the  self,  to  see  by  the  self,  to  live  out
the  truth  of  the  self  internally  and  externally  but  always  from  an
internal  initiation  and  centre.

But  still  there  is  the  question  of  the  truth  of  the  self,  what
it  is,  where  is  its  real  abiding-place;  and  here  subjectivism  has  to
deal  with  the  same  factors  as  the  objective  view  of  life  and
existence.  We  may  concentrate  on  the  individual  life  and  con-
sciousness as  the  self  and  regard  its  power,  freedom,  increasing
light  and  satisfaction  and  joy  as  the  object  of  living  and  thus
arrive  at  a subjective  individualism.  We  may,  on  the  other  hand,
lay  stress  on  the  group  consciousness,  the  collective  self ; we  may
see  man  only  as  an  expression  of  this  group-self  necessarily
incomplete  in  his  individual  or  separate  being,  complete  only
by  that  larger  entity,  and  we  may  wish  to  subordinate  the  life  of
the  individual  man  to  the  growing  power,  efficiency,  knowledge,
happiness,  self-fulfilment  of  the  race  or  even  sacrifice  it  and  con-
sider it  as  nothing  except  in  so  far  as  it  lends  itself  to  the  life  and
growth  of  the  community  or  the  kind.  We  may  claim  to  exercise
a righteous  oppression  on  the  individual  and  teach  him  intellec-
tually and  practically  that  he  has  no  claim  to  exist,  no  right  to  ful-
fil himself  except  in  his  relations  to  the  collectivity.  These  alone
then  are  to  determine  his  thought,  action  and  existence  and  the


53


The  Objective  and  Subjective  Views  of  Life

claim  of  the  individual  to  have  a law  of  his  own  being,  a law  of
his  own  nature  which  he  has  a right  to  fulfil  and  his  demand  for
freedom  of  thought  involving  necessarily  the  freedom  to  err  and
for  freedom  of  action  involving  necessarily  the  freedom  to
stumble  and  sin  may  be  regarded  as  an  insolence  and  a chimera.
The  collective  self-consciousness  will  then  have  the  right  to
invade  at  every  point  the  life  of  the  individual,  to  refuse  to  it  all
privacy  and  apartness,  all  self-concentration  and  isolation,  all
independence  and  self-guidance  and  determine  everything  for  it
by  what  it  conceives  to  be  the  best  thought  and  highest  will  and
rightly  dominant  feeling,  tendency,  sense  of  need,  desire  for  self-
satisfaction  of  the  collectivity.

But  also  we  may  enlarge  the  idea  of  the  self  and,  as  objective
Science  sees  a universal  force  of  Nature  which  is  the  one  reality
and  of  which  everything  is  the  process,  we  may  come  subjectively
to  the  reahsation  of  a universal  Being  or  Existence  which  fulfils
itself  in  the  world  and  the  individual  and  the  group  with  an  im-
partial regard  for  all  as  equal  powers  of  its  self-manifestation.
This  is  obviously  the  self-knowledge  which  is  most  likely  to  be
right,  since  it  most  comprehensively  embraces  and  accounts  for
the  various  aspects  of  the  world-process  and  the  eternal  tenden-
cies of  humaniy.  In  this  view  neither  the  separate  growth  of  the
individual  nor  the  all-absorbing  growth  of  the  group  can  be  the
ideal,  but  an  equal,  simultaneous  and,  as  far  as  may  be,  parallel
development  of  both,  in  which  each  helps  to  fulfil  the  other.  Each
being  has  his  own  truth  of  independent  self-realisation  and  his
truth  of  self-realisation  in  the  life  of  others  and  should  feel,  de-
sire, help,  participate  more  and  more,  as  he  grows  in  largeness
and  power,  in  the  harmonious  and  natural  growth  of  all  the
individual  selves  and  all  the  collective  selves  of  the  one  universal
Being.  These  two,  when  properly  viewed,  would  not  be  separate,
opposite  or  really  conflicting  lines  of  tendency,  but  the  same  im-
pulse of  the  one  common  existence,  companion  movements
separating  only  to  return  upon  each  other  in  a richer  and  larger
unity  and  mutual  consequence.

Similarly,  the  subjective  search  for  the  self  may,  like  the
objective,  lean  preponderantly  to  identification  with  the  con-
scious physical  fife,  because  the  body  is  or  seems  to  be  the  frame


54


The  Human  Cycle

and  determinant  here  of  the  mental  and  vital  movements  and
capacities.  Or  it  may  identify  itself  with  the  vital  being,  the  life-
soul  in  us  and  its  emotions,  desires,  impulses,  seekings  for
power  and  growth  and  egoistic  fulfilment.  Or  it  may  rise  to  a
conception  of  man  as  a mental  and  moral  being,  exalt  to  the  first
place  his  inner  growth,  power  and  perfection,  individual  and
collective,  and  set  it  before  us  as  the  true  aim  of  our  existence.
A sort  of  subjective  materialism,  pragmatic  and  outwardgoing,
is  a possible  standpoint;  but  in  this  the  subjective  tendency
cannot  long  linger.  For  its  natural  impulse  is  to  go  always  inward
and  it  only  begins  to  feel  itself  and  have  satisfaction  of  itself
when  it  gets  to  the  full  conscious  life  within  and  feels  all  its
power,  joy  and  forceful  potentiality  pressing  for  fulfilment.  Man
at  this  stage  regards  himself  as  a profound,  vital  Will-to-be  which
uses  body  as  its  instrument  and  to  which  the  powers  of  mind  are
servants  and  ministers.  This  is  the  cast  of  that  vitalism  which  in
various  striking  forms  has  played  recently  so  great  a part  and  still
exercises  a considerable  influence  on  human  thought.  Beyond  it
we  get  to  a subjective  idealism  now  beginning  to  emerge  and  be-
come prominent,  which  seeks  the  fulfilment  of  man  in  the  satis-
faction of  his  inmost  religious,  aesthetic,  intuitive,  his  highest
intellectual  and  ethical,  his  deepest  sympathetic  and  emotional
nature  and,  regarding  this  as  the  fullness  of  our  being  and  the
whole  object  of  our  being,  tries  to  subject  to  it  the  physical  and
vital  existence.  These  come  to  be  considered  rather  as  a possible
symbol  and  instrument  of  the  subjective  life  flowing  out  into
forms  than  as  having  any  value  in  themselves.  A certain  tendency
to  mysticism,  occultism  and  the  search  for  a self  independent  of
the  life  and  the  body  accompanies  this  new  movement  — new  to
modern  life  after  the  reign  of  individualism  and  objective  intellec-
tualism  — and  emphasises  its  real  trend  and  character.

But  here  also  it  is  possible  for  subjectivism  to  go  beyond  and
to  discover  the  true  Self  as  something  greater  even  than  mind.
Mind,  life  and  body  then  become  merely  an  instrumentation  for
the  increasing  expression  of  this  Self  in  the  world,  — instruments
not  equal  in  their  hierarchy,  but  equal  in  their  necessity  to  the
whole,  so  that  their  complete  perfection  and  harmony  and  unity
as  elements  of  our  self-expression  become  essential  to  the  true


55


The  Objective  and  Subjective  Views  of  Life

aim  of  our  living.  And  yet  that  aim  would  not  be  to  perfect  life,
body  and  mind  in  themselves,  but  to  develop  them  so  as  to  make
a fit  basis  and  fit  instruments  for  the  revelation  in  our  inner  and
outer  life  of  the  luminous  Self,  the  secret  Godhead  who  is  one
and  yet  various  in  all  of  us,  in  every  being  and  existence,  thing
and  creature.  The  ideal  of  human  existence  personal  and  social
would  be  its  progressive  transformation  into  a conscious  out-
flowering  of  the  joy,  power,  love,  light,  beauty  of  the  transcendent
and  universal  Spirit.


Chapter  VII


The  Ideal  Law  of  Social  Development


The  true  law  of  our  development  and  the
entire  object  of  our  social  existence  can  only  become  clear  to  us
when  we  have  discovered  not  only,  like  modem  Science,  what
man  has  been  in  his  past  physical  and  vital  evolution,  but  his
future  mental  and  spiritual  destiny  and  his  place  in  the  cycles
of  Nature.  This  is  the  reason  why  the  subjective  periods  of
human  development  must  always  be  immeasurably  the  most
fruitful  and  creative.  In  the  others  he  either  seizes  on  some  face,
image,  type  of  the  inner  reality  Nature  in  him  is  labouring  to
manifest  or  else  he  follows  a mechanical  impulse  or  shapes
himself  in  the  mould  of  her  external  influences;  but  here  in
his  subjective  return  inward  he  gets  back  to  himself,  back  to
the  root  of  his  hving  and  infinite  possibilities,  and  the  potentiality
of  a new  and  perfect  self-creation  begins  to  widen  before  him.
He  discovers  his  real  place  in  Nature  and  opens  his  eyes  to  the
greatness  of  his  destiny.

Existence  is  an  infinite  and  therefore  indefinable  and  illimi-
table Reality  which  figures  itself  out  in  multiple  values  of  life.
It  begins,  at  least  in  our  field  of  existence,  with  a rnaterial  figure
of  itself,  a mould  of  firm  substance  into  which  and  upon  which  it
can  build,  — worlds,  the  earth,  the  body.  Here  it  stamps  firmly
and  fixes  the  essential  law  of  its  movement.  TThat  law  is  that  all
things  are  one  in  their  being  and  origin,  one  in  their  general  law
of  existence,  one  in  their  interdependence  and  the  universal  pat-
tern of  their  relations;  but  each  reaUses  this  unity  of  purpose  and
being  on  its  own  lines  and  has  its  own  law  of  variation  by  which
it  enriches  the  universal  existence.  In  Matter  variation  is  limited;
there  is  variation  of  type,  but,  on  the  whole,  uniformity  of  the  in-
dividuals of  the  type.  These  individuals  have  a separate  move-
ment, but  yet  the  same  movement;  subject  to  some  minute  diffe-
rences, they  adhere  to  one  particular  pattern  and  have  the  same


57


The  Ideal  Law  of  Social  Development

assemblage  of  properties.  Variety  within  the  type,  apart  from
minor  unicities  of  detail,  is  gained  by  variation  of  group  sub-
types  belonging  to  one  general  kind,  species  and  sub-species  of
the  same  genus.  In  the  development  of  Life,  before  mind  has
become  self-conscious,  the  same  law  predominates;  but,  in  pro-
portion as  life  grows  and  still  more  when  mind  emerges,  the  indi-
vidual also  arrives  at  a greater  and  more  vital  power  of  variation.
He  acquires  the  freedom  to  develop  according,  no  doubt,  to  the
general  law  of  Nature  and  the  general  law  of  his  type,  but  also
according  to  the  individual  law  of  his  being.

Man,  the  mental  being  in  Nature,  is  especially  distinguished
from  her  less  developed  creatures  by  a greater  power  of  indi-
viduality, by  the  liberation  of  the  mental  consciousness  which
enables  him  finally  to  understand  more  and  more  himself  and  his
law  of  being  and  his  development,  by  the  liberation  of  the  mental
wiU  which  enables  him  under  the  secret  control  of  the  universal
Will  to  manage  more  and  more  the  materials  and  lines  of  his  de-
velopment and  by  the  capacity  in  the  end  to  go  beyond  himself,
beyond  his  mentality  and  open  his  consciousness  into  that  from
which  mind,  life  and  body  proceed.  He  can  even,  however  im-
perfectly at  present,  get  at  his  highest  to  some  consciousness  of
the  Reality  which  is  his  true  being  and  possess  consciously  also,  as
nothing  else  in  terrestrial  Nature  can  possess,  the  Self,  the  Idea,
the  Will  which  have  constituted  him  and  can  become  by  that  the
master  of  his  own  nature  and  increasingly,  not  as  now  he  is,  a
wrestler  with  dominant  circumstance  but  the  master  of  Nature.
To  do  this,  to  arrive  through  mind  and  beyond  mind  at  the  Self,
the  Spirit  which  expresses  itself  in  all  Nature  and,  becoming  one
with  it  in  his  being,  his  force,  his  consciousness,  his  will,  his  know-
ledge, to  possess  at  once  humanly  and  divinely  — according  to
the  law  and  nature  of  human  existence,  but  of  human  existence
fulfilled  in  God  and  fulfilling  God  in  the  world  — both  himself
and  the  world  is  the  destiny  of  man  and  the  object  of  his  individual
and  social  existence.^

1 It  may  be  said  that  since  man  is  a mental  being  limited  by  the  mind,  life  and  body,  this
development  and  organisation  of  a power  beyond  mind,  a supramental  power,  would  be  the
creation  of  a new  superhuman  race  and  that  the  use  of  the  words  human  and  humanly  would
no  longer  be  in  place.  This  is  no  doubt  true,  but  the  possibility  for  the  race  still  remains,  if  not
for  all  in  the  same  degree  or  at  the  same  time,  yet  in  an  eventual  fulfilment.


58  The  Human  Cycle

This  is  done  primarily  through  the  individual  man;  for  this
end  man  has  become  an  individual  soul,  that  the  One  may  find
and  manifest  Himself  in  each  human  being.  That  end  is  not  in-
deed achieved  by  the  individual  human  being  in  his  unaided
mental  force.  He  needs  tlie  help  of  the  seciet  Divine  above  hi^
mentality  in  his  superconscient  self;  he  needs  the  help  also  of  the
secret  Divine  around  him  in  Nature  and  in  his  fellow-men.
Everything  in  Nature  is  an  occasion  for  him  to  develop  his  divine
potentiality,  an  occasion  which  he  has  a certain  relative  freedom  to
use  or  to  misuse,  although  in  the  end  both  his  use  and  misuse  of
his  materials  are  overruled  in  their  results  by  the  universal  Will
so  as  to  assist  eventually  the  development  of  his  law  of  being  and
his  destiny.  Ail  life  around  him  is  a help  towards  the  divine
purpose  in  him;  every  human  being  is  his  fellow-worker  and
assists  him  whether  by  association  and  union  or  by  strife  and
opposition.  Nor  does  he  achieve  his  destiny  as  the  individual
Man  for  the  sake  of  the  individual  soul  alone,  — a lonely  salva-
tion is  not  his  complete  ideal,  — but  for  the  world  also  or  rather
for  God  in  the  world,  for  God  in  all  as  well  as  above  all  and  not
for  God  solely  and  separately  in  one.  And  lie  achieves  it  by  the
stress,  not  really  of  his  separate  individual  Will,  but  of  the  uni-
versal Will  in  its  movement  towards  the  goal  of  its  cycles.

The  object  of  all  society  should  be,  therefore,  and  must
become,  as  man  grows  conscious  of  his  real  being,  nature  and  des-
tiny and  not  as  now  only  of  a part  of  it,  first  to  provide  the  condi-
tions of  life  and  growth  by  which  individual  Man,  — not  isolated
men  or  a class  or  a privileged  race,  but  all  individual  men  accord-
ing to  their  capacity,  — and  the  race  through  the  growth  of  its
individuals  may  travel  towards  this  divine  perfection.  It  must
be,  secondly,  as  mankind  generally  more  and  more  grows  near
to  some  figure  of  the  Divine  in  life  and  more  and  more  men  arrive
at  it,  — for  the  cycles  are  many  and  each  cycle  has  its  own  figufe
of  the  Divine  in  man,  — to  express  in  the  general  life  of  mankind,
the  light,  the  power,  the  beauty,  the  harmony,  the  joy  of  the  Self
tba.1  has  been  aUained  and  tbat,  pe-nts  itself  nnf  in  a fleet  and
nobler  humanity.  Freedom  and  harmony  express  the  two  neces-
sary principles  of  variation  and  oneness,  — freedom  of  the  indivi-
dual, the  group,  the  race,  co-ordinated  harmony  of  the  indivi-


59


The  Ideal  Law  of  Social  Development

dual’s  forces  and  of  the  efforts  of  all  individuals  in  the  group,  of
all  groups  in  the  race,  of  all  races  in  the  kind,  — and  these  are  the
two  conditions  of  healthy  progression  and  successful  arrival.
To  realise  them  and  to  combine  them  has  been  the  obscure  or
half-enlightened  effort  of  mankind  throughout  its  history,  — a
task  difficult  indeed  and  too  imperfectly  seen  and  too  clumsily
and  mechanically  pursued  by  the  reason  and  desires  to  be  satis-
factorily achieved  until  man  grows  by  self-knowledge  and  self-
mastery  to  the  possession  of  a spiritual  and  psychical  unity  with
his  fellow-men.  As  we  realise  more  and  more  the  right  conditions,
we  shall  travel  more  luminously  and  spontaneously  towards  our
goal  and,  as  we  draw  nearer  to  a clear  sight  of  our  goal,  we  shall
realise  better  and  better  the  right  conditions.  The  Self  in  man
enlarging  light  and  knowledge  and  harmonising  will  with  light
and  knowledge  so  as  to  fulfil  in  life  what  he  has  seen  in  his
increasing  vision  and  idea  of  the  Self,  this  is  man’s  source
and  law  of  progress  and  the  secret  of  his  impulse  towards
perfection.

Mankind  upon  earth  is  one  foremost  self-expression  of  the
universal  Being  in  His  cosmic  self-unfolding;  he  expresses,  under
the  conditions  of  the  terrestrial  world  he  inhabits,  the  mental
power  of  the  universal  existence.  All  mankind  is  one  in  its  nature,
physical,  vital,  emotional,  mental  and  ever  has  been  in  spite  of
all  differences  of  intellectual  development  ranging  from  the  po-
verty of  the  Bushman  and  negroid  to  the  rich  cultures  of  Asia  and
Europe,  and  the  whole  race  has,  as  the  human  totality,  one  des-
tiny which  it  seeks  and  increasingly  approaches  in  the  cycles  of
progression  and  retrogression  it  describes  through  the  countless
millenniums  of  its  history.  Nothing  which  any  individual  race  or
nation  can  triumphantly  realise,  no  victory  of  their  self-aggran-
disement,  illumination,  intellectual  achievement  or  mastery  over
the  environment  has  any  permanent  meaning  or  value  except  in
so  far  as  it  adds  something  or  recovers  something  or  preserves
something  for  this  human  march.  The  purpose  which  the  ancient
Indian  scripture  offers  to  us  as  the  true  object  of  all  human
action,  lokasamgraha,  the  holding  together  of  the  race  in  its  cyclic
evolution,  is  the  constant  sense,  whether  we  know  or  know  it
not,  of  the  sum  of  our  activities.


60


The  Human  Cycle


But  within  this  general  nature  and  general  destiny  of  man-
kind each  individual  human  being  has  to  follow  the  common
aim  on  the  lines  of  his  own  nature  and  to  arrive  at  his  possible
perfection  by  a growth  from  within.  So  only  can  the  race  itself
attain  to  anything  profound,  living  and  deep-rooted.  It  cannot
be  done  brutally,  heavily,  mechanically  in  the  mass;  the  group
self  has  no  right  to  regard  the  individual  as  if  he  were  only  a cell
of  its  body,  a stone  of  its  edifice,  a passive  instrument  of  its  col-
lective life  and  growth.  Humanity  is  not  so  constituted.  We
miss  the  divine  reality  in  man  and  the  secret  of  the  human  birth
if  we  do  not  see  that  each  individual  man  is  that  Self  and  sums
up  all  human  potentiality  in  his  own  being.  That  potentiality
he  has  to  find,  develop,  work  out  from  within.  No  State  or  legis-
lator or  reformer  can  cut  him  rigorously  into  a perfect  pattern;
no  Church  or  priest  can  give  him  a mechanical  salvation;  no
order,  no  class  life  or  ideal,  no  nation,  no  civilisation  or  creed  or
ethical,  social  or  religious  Shastra  can  be  allowed  to  say  to  him
permanently,  “In  this  way  of  mine  and  thus  far  shalt  thou  act
and  grow  and  in  no  other  way  and  no  farther  shall  thy  growth
be  permitted.”  These  things  may  help  him  temporarily  or  they
may  curb  and  he  grows  in  proportion  as  he  can  use  them  and  then
exceed  them,  train  and  teach  his  individuality  by  them,  but  assert
it  always  in  the  end  in  its  divine  freedom.  Always  he  is  the
traveller  of  the  cycles  and  his  road  is  forward.

True,  his  life  and  growth  are  for  the  sake  of  the  world,  but
he  can  help  the  world  by  his  life  and  growth  only  in  proportion
as  he  can  be  more  and  more  freely  and  widely  his  own  real  self.
True,  he  has  to  use  the  ideals,  disciplines,  systems  of  co-operation
which  he  finds  upon  his  path;  but  he  can  only  use  them  well,
in  their  right  way  and  to  their  right  purpose  if  they  are  to  his  life
means  towards  something  beyond  them  and  not  burdens  to  be
borne  by  him  for  their  own  sake  or  despotic  controls  to  be
obeyed  by  him  as  their  slave  or  subject;  for  though  laws  and  disci-
plines strive  to  be  the  tyrants  of  the  human  soul,  their  only  pur-
pose is  to  be  its  instruments  and  servants  and  when  their  use  is
over  they  have  to  be  rejected  and  broken.  True  it  is,  too,  that  he
has  to  gather  in  his  material  from  the  minds  and  lives  of  his
fellow-men  around  him  and  to  make  the  most  of  the  experience


61


The  Ideal  Law  of  Social  Development

of  humanity’s  past  ages  and  not  confine  himself  in  a narrow  men-
tality; but  this  he  can  only  do  successfully  by  making  all  this  his
own  through  assimilation  of  it  to  the  principle  of  his  own  nature
and  through  its  subservience  to  the  forward  call  of  his  enlarging
future.  The  liberty  claimed  by  the  struggling  human  mind  for
the  individual  is  no  mere  egoistic  challenge  and  revolt,  however
egoistically  or  with  one-sided  exaggeration  and  misapplication
it  may  sometimes  be  advanced;  it  is  the  divine  instinct  within
him,  the  law  of  the  Self,  its  claim  to  have  room  and  the  one  pri-
mary condition  for  its  natural  self-unfolding.

Individual  man  belongs  not  only  to  humanity  in  general,
his  nature  is  not  only  a variation  of  human  nature  in  general,
but  he  belongs  also  to  his  race-type,  his  class-type,  his  mental,
vital,  physical,  spiritual  type  in  which  he  resembles  some,  differs
from  others.  According  to  these  affinities  he  tends  to  group
himself  in  Churches,  sects,  communities,  classes,  coteries,  asso-
ciations whose  life  he  helps,  and  by  them  he  enriches  himself  and
the  life  of  the  large  economic,  social  and  political  group  or
society  to  which  he  belongs.  In  modern  times  this  society  is  the
nation.  By  his  enrichment  of  the  national  life,  though  not  in  that
way  only,  he  helps  the  total  life  of  humanity.  But  it  must  be
noted  that  he  is  not  limited  and  cannot  be  limited  by  any  of
these  groupings ; he  is  not  merely  the  noble,  merchant,  warrior,
priest,  scholar,  artist,  cultivator  or  artisan,  not  merely  the
religionist  or  the  worldling  or  the  politician.  Nor  can  he  be
limited  by  his  nationality;  he  is  not  merely  the  Englishman  or
the  Frenchman,  the  Japanese  or  the  Indian;  if  by  a part  of  him-
self he  belongs  to  the  nation,  by  another  he  exceeds  it  and  belongs
to  humanity.  And  even  there  is  a part  of  him,  the  greatest,  which
is  not  limited  by  humanity;  he  belongs  by  it  to  God  and  to  the
world  of  all  beings  and  to  the  godheads  of  the  future.  He
has  indeed  the  tendency  of  self-limitation  and  subjection  to  his
environment  and  group,  but  he  has  also  the  equally  necessary
tendency  of  expansion  and  transcendence  of  environment  and
groupings.  The  individual  animal  is  dominated  entirely  by  his
type,  subordinated  to  his  group  when  he  does  group  himself;
individual  man  has  already  begun  to  share  something  of  the
infinity,  complexity,  free  variation  of  the  Self  we  see  manifested


62


The  Human  Cycle

in  the  world.  Or  at  least  he  has  it  in  possibility  even  if  there  be
as  yet  no  sign  of  it  in  his  organised  surface  nature.  There  is  here
no  principle  of  a mere  shapeless  fluidity;  it  is  the  tendency  to
enrich  himself  with  the  largest  possible  material  constantly
brought  in,  constantly  assimilated  and  changed  by  the  law
of  his  individual  nature  into  stuff  of  his  growth  and  divine
expansion.

Thus  the  community  stands  as  a mid-term  and  intermediary
value  between  the  individual  and  humanity  and  it  exists  not
merely  for  itself,  but  for  the  one  and  the  other  and  to  help  them  to
fulfil  each  other.  The  individual  has  to  live  in  humanity  as  well
as  humanity  in  the  individual;  but  mankind  is  or  has  been  too
large  an  aggregate  to  make  this  mutually  a thing  intimate  and
powerfully  felt  in  the  ordinary  mind  of  the  race,  and  even  if
humanity  becomes  a manageable  unit  of  hfe,  intermediate  groups
and  aggregates  must  still  exist  for  the  purpose  of  mass-differen-
tiation and  the  concentration  and  combination  of  varying  ten-
dencies in  the  total  human  aggregate.  Therefore  the  community
has  to  stand  for  a time  to  the  individual  for  humanity  even  at  the
cost  of  standing  between  him  and  it  and  limiting  the  reach  of  his
universality  and  the  wideness  of  his  sympathies.  Still  the  absolute
claim  of  the  community,  the  society  or  the  nation  to  make  its
growth,  perfection,  greatness  the  sole  object  of  human  life  or  to
exist  for  itself  alone  as  against  the  individual  and  the  rest  of  hu-
manity, to  take  arbitrary  possession  of  the  one  and  make  the  hos-
tile assertion  of  itself  against  the  other,  whether  defensive  or
offensive,  the  law  of  its  action  in  the  world,  — and  not,  as  it
unfortunately  is,  a temporary  necessity, — this  attitude  of  so-
cieties, races,  religions,  communities,  nations,  empires  is  evidently
an  aberration  of  the  human  reason,  quite  as  much  as  the  claim
of  the  individual  to  live  for  himself  egoistically  is  an  aberration
and  the  deformation  of  a truth.

The  truth  deformed  into  this  error  is  the  same  with  the
community  as  with  the  individual.  The  nation  or  community
is  an  aggregate  life  that  expresses  the  Self  according  to  the
general  law  of  human  nature  and  aids  and  partially  fulfils  the
development  and  the  destiny  of  mankind  by  its  own  development
and  the  pursuit  of  its  own  destiny  according  to  the  law  of  its  being


The  Ideal  Law  of  Social  Development  63

and  the  nature  of  its  corporate  individuality.  It  has  like  the  indi-
vidual the  right  to  be  itself,  and  its  just  claim,  as  against  any
attempt  at  domination  by  other  nations  or  of  attack  upon  its  sepa-
rate development  by  any  excessive  tendency  of  human  uniformity
and  regimentation,  is  to  defend  its  existence,  to  insist  on  being
itself,  to  persist  in  developing  according  to  the  secret  Idea  within
it  or,  as  we  say,  according  to  the  law  of  its  own  nature.  This  right
it  must  assert  not  only  or  even  principally  for  its  own  sake,  but
in  the  interests  of  humanity.  For  the  only  things  that  we  can  real-
ly call  our  rights  are  those  conditions  which  are  necessary  to  our
free  and  sound  development,  and  that  again  is  our  right  because
it  is  necessary  to  the  development  of  the  world  and  the  fulfilment
of  the  destiny  of  mankind. .

Nor  does  this  right  to  be  oneself  mean  with  the  nation  or
community  any  more  than  with  the  individual  that  it  should  roll
itself  up  like  a hedgehog,  shut  itself  up  in  its  dogmas,  prejudices,
limitations,  imperfections,  in  the  form  and  mould  of  its  past  or
its  present  achievement  and  refuse  mental  or  physical  commerce
and  interchange  or  spiritual  or  actual  comminghng  with  the  rest
of  the  world.  For  so  it  cannot  grow  or  perfect  itself.  As  the
individual  lives  by  the  life  of  other  individuals,  so  does  the  nation
by  the  life  of  other  nations,  by  accepting  from  them  material
for  its  own  mental,  economic  and  physical  life ; but  it  has  to  assi-
milate this  material,  subject  it  to  the  law  of  its  own  nature,
change  it  into  stuff  of  itself,  work  upon  it  by  its  own  free  will  and
consciousness,  if  it  would  live  securely  and  grow  soundly.  To
have  the  principle  or  rule  of  another  nature  imposed  upon  it  by
force  or  a de-individualising  pressure  is  a menace  to  its  existence,
a wound  to  its  being,  a fetter  upon  its  march.  As  the  free  deve-
lopment of  individuals  from  within  is  the  best  condition  for  the
growth  and  perfection  of  the  community,  so  the  free  development
of  the  community  or  nation  from  within  is  the  best  condition
for  the  growth  and  perfection  of  mankind.

Thus  the  law  for  the  individual  is  to  perfect  his  individuality
by  free  development  from  within,  but  to  respect  and  to  aid  and
be  aided  by  the  same  free  development  in  others.  His  law  is  to
harmonise  his  life  with  the  life  of  the  social  aggregate  and  to
pour  himself  out  as  a force  for  growth  and  perfection  on  huma-


64


The  Human  Cycle


nity.  The  law  for  the  community  or  nation  is  equally  to  perfect
its  corporate  existence  by  a free  development  from  within,  aiding
and  taking  full  advantage  of  that  of  the  individual,  but  to  respect
and  to  aid  and  be  aided  by  the  same  free  development  of  other
communities  and  nations.  Its  law  is  to  harmonise,  its  life  with
that  of  the  human  aggregate  and  to  pour  itself  out  as  a force  for
growth  and  perfection  on  humanity.  The  law  for  humanity  is  to
pursue  its  upward  evolution  towards  the  finding  and  expression
of  the  Divine  in  the  type  of  mankind,  taking  full  advantage  of  the
free  development  and  gains  of  all  individuals  and  nations  and
groupings  of  men,  to  work  towards  the  day  when  mankind  may
be  really  and  not  only  ideally  one  divine  family,  but  even  then,
when  it  has  succeeded  in  unifying  itself,  to  respect,  aid  and  be
aided  by  the  free  growth  and  activity  of  its  individuals  and
constituent  aggregates.

Naturally,  this  is  an  ideal  law  which  the  imperfect  human
race  has  never  yet  really  attained  and  it  may  be  very  long  before
it  can  attain  to  it.  Man,  not  possessing,  but  only  seeking  to  find
himself,  not  knowing  consciously,  obeying  only  in  the  rough
subconsciously  or  half-consciously  the  urge  of  the  law  of  his  own
nature  with  stumblings  and  hesitations  and  deviations  and  a
series  of  violences  done  to  himself  and  others,  has  had  to  advance
by  a tangle  of  truth  and  error,  right  and  wrong,  compulsion  and
revolt  and  clumsy  adjustments,  and  he  has  as  yet  neither  the  wide-
ness of  knowledge  nor  the  flexibility  of  mind  nor  the  purity  of
temperament  which  would  enable  him  to  foUow  the  law  of  liberty
and  harmony  rather  than  the  law  of  discord  and  regimentation,
compulsion  and  adjustment  and  strife.  Still  it  is  the  very  business
of  a subjective  age  when  knowledge  is  increasing  and  diffusing
itself  with  an  unprecedented  rapidity,  when  capacity  is  genera-
lising itself,  when  men  and  nations  are  drawn  close  together  and
partially  united  though  in  an  inextricable,  confused  entanglement
of  chaotic  unity,  when  they  are  being  compelled  to  know  each
other  and  impelled  to  know  more  profoundly  themselves,  man-
kind, God  and  the  world  and  when  the  idea  of  self-realisation  for
men  and  nations  is  coming  consciously  to  the  surface,  — it  is
the  natural  work  and  should  be  the  conscious  hope  of  man  in
such  an  age  to  know  himself  truly,  to  find  the  ideal  law  of  his


The  Ideal  Law  of  Social  Development


65


being  and  his  development  and,  if  he  cannot  even  then  follow
it  ideally  owing  to  the  difficulties  of  his  egoistic  nature,  still  to
hold  it  before  him  and  find  out  gradually  the  way  by  which  it  can
become  more  and  more  the  moulding  principle  of  his  individual
and  social  existence.


Chapter  VIII


Civilisation  and  Barbarism


Once  we  have  determined  that  this  rule  of
perfect  individuality  and  perfect  reciprocity  is  the  ideal  law  for  the
individual,  the  community  and  the  race  and  that  a perfect  union
and  even  oneness  in  a free  diversity  is  its  goal,  we  have  to  try  to
see  more  clearly  what  we  mean  when  we  say  that  self-realisation
is  the  sense,  secret  or  overt,  of  individual  and  of  social  develop-
ment. As  yet  we  have  not  to  deal  with  the  race,  with  mankind  as
a unity;  the  nation  is  still  our  largest  compact  and  living  unit.
And  it  is  best  to  begin  with  the  individual,  both  because  of  his
nature  we  have  a completer  and  nearer  knowledge  and  experience
than  of  the  aggregate  soul  and  life  and  because  the  society  or
nation  is,  even  in  its  greater  complexity,  a larger,  a composite
individual,  the  collective  Man.  What  we  find  valid  of  the  former
is  therefore  likely  to  be  valid  in  its  general  principle  of  the  larger
entity.  Moreover,  the  development  of  the  free  individual  is,  we
have  said,  the  first  condition  for  the  development  of  the  perfect
society.  From  the  individual,  therefore,  we  have  to  start;  he  is
our  index  and  our  foundation.

The  Self  of  man  is  a thing  hidden  and  occult;  it  is  not  his
body,  it  is  not  his  life,  it  is  not, — even  though  he  is  in  the  scale
of  evolution  the  mental  being,  the  Manu,  — his  mind.  Therefore
neither  the  fullness  of  his  physical,  nor  of  his  vital,  nor  of  his
mental  nature  can  be  either  the  last  term  or  the  true  standard  of
his  self-realisation;  they  are  means  of  manifestation,  subordinate
indications,  foundations  of  his  self-finding,  values,  practical  cur-
rency of  his  self,  what  you  will,  but  not  the  thing  itself  which  he
secretly  is  and  is  obscurely  groping  or  trying  overtly  and  self-
consciously to  become.  Man  has  not  possessed  as  a race  this
truth  about  himself,  does  not  now  possess  it  except  in  the  vision
and  self-experience  of  the  few  in  whose  footsteps  the  race  is  un-
able to  follow,  though  it  may  adore  them  as  Avatars,  seers,  saints


Civilisation  and  Barbarism  67

or  prophets.  For  the  Oversoul  who  is  the  master  of  our  evolu-
tion, has  his  own  large  steps  of  Time,  his  own  great  eras,  tracts  of
slow  and  courses  of  rapid  expansion,  which  the  strong,  semi-divine
individual  may  overleap,  but  not  the  still  half-animal  race.  The
course  of  evolution  proceeding  from  the  vegetable  to  the  animal,
from  the  animal  to  the  man,  starts  in  the  latter  from  the  subhuman ;
he  has  to  take  up  into  him  the  anirnal  and  even  the  mineral  and
vegetable:  they  constitute  his  physical  nature,  they  dominate
his  vitality,  they  have  their  hold  upon  his  mentality.  His  prone-
ness to  many  kinds  of  inertia,  his  readiness  to  vegetate,  his
attachment  to  the  soil  and  clinging  to  his  roots,  to  safe  ancho-
rages of  all  kinds,  and  on  the  other  hand  his  nomadic  and  pre-
datory impulses,  his  blind  servility  to  custom  and  the  rule  of  the
pack,  his  mob-movements  and  openness  to  subconscious  sugges-
tions from  the  group-soul,  his  subjection  to  the  yoke  of  rage  and
fear,  his  need  of  punishment  and  reliance  on  punishment,  his
inability  to  think  and  act  for  himself,  his  incapacity  for  true  free-
dom, his  distrust  of  novelty,  his  slowness  to  seize  intelligently
and  assimilate,  his  downward  propensity  and  earthward  gaze,
his  vital  and  physical  subjection  to  his  heredity,  all  these  and
more  are  his  heritage  from  the  subhuman  origins  of  his  life  and
body  and  physical  mind.  It  is  because  of  this  heritage  that  he  finds
self-exceeding  the  most  difficult  of  lessons  and  the  most  painful
of  endeavours.  Yet  it  is  by  the  exceeding  of  the  lower  self  that
Nature  accomplishes  the  great  strides  of  her  evolutionary  process.
To  learn  by  what  he  has  been,  but  also  to  know  and  increase  to
what  he  can  be,  is  the  task  that  is  set  for  the  mental  being.

The  time  is  passing  away,  permanently  — let  us  hope  — for
this  cycle  of  civilisation,  when  the  entire  identification  of  the  self
with  the  body  and  the  physical  life  was  possible  for  the  general
consciousness  of  the  race.  That  is  the  primary  characteristic  of
complete  barbarism.  To  take  the  body  and  the  physical  life  as
the  one  thing  important,  to  judge  manhood  by  the  physical
strength,  devolopment  and  prowess,  to  be  at  the  mercy  of  the
instincts  which  rise  out  of  the  physical  inconscient,  to  despise
knowledge  as  a weakness  and  inferiority  or  look  on  it  as  a pecu-
liarity and  no  necessary  part  of  the  conception  of  manhood,  this
is  the  mentality  of  the  barbarian.  It  tends  to  reappear  in  the


68


The  Human  Cycle

human  being  in  the  atavistic  period  of  boyhood,  — when,  be  it
noted,  the  development  of  the  body  is  of  the  greatest  importance,
— but  to  the  adult  man  in  civilised  humanity  it  is  ceasing  to  be
possible.  For,  in  the  first  place,  by  the  stress  of  modem  life  even
the  vital  attitude  of  the  race  is  changing.  Man  is  ceasing  to  be  so
much  of  a physical  and  becoming  much  more  of  a vital  and  eco-
nomic animal.  Not  that  he  excludes  or  is  intended  to  exclude  the
body  and  its  development  or  the  right  maintenance  of  and  res-
pect for  the  animal  being  and  its  excellences  from  his  idea  of  life;
the  excellence  of  the  body,  its  health,  its  soundness,  its  vigour
and  harmonious  development  are  necessary  to  a perfect  manhood
and  are  occupying  attention  in  a better  and  more  intelligent  way
than  before.  But  the  first  rank  in  importance  can  no  longer  be
given  to  the  body,  much  less  that  entire  predominance  assigned
to  it  in  the  mentality  of  the  barbarian.

Moreover,  although  man  has  not  yet  really  heard  and
understood  the  message  of  the  sages,  “know  thyself”,  he  has
accepted  the  message  of  the  thinker,  “educate  thyself”,  and,  what
is  more,  he  has  understood  that  the  possession  of  education
imposes  on  him  the  duty  of  imparting  Ms  knowledge  to  others.
The  idea  of  the  necessity  of  general  education  means  the  recog-
nition by  the  race  that  the  mind  and  not  the  life  and  the  body  are
the  man  and  that  without  the  development  of  the  mind  he  does
not  possess  Ms  true  manhood.  The  idea  of  education  is  still
primarily  that  of  intelligence  and  mental  capacity  and  knowledge
of  the  world  and  things,  but  secondarily  also  of  moral  training
and,  though  as  yet  very  imperfectly,  of  the  development  of  the
aesthetic  faculties.  The  intelligent  tMnking  being,  moralised,  con-
trolling Ms  instincts  and  emotions  by  his  will  and  his  reason,
acquainted  with  all  that  he  should  know  of  the  world  and  Ms
past,  capable  of  organising  intelligently  by  that  knowledge  Ms
social  and  economic  life,  ordering  rightly  his  bodily  habits  and
physical  being,  tMs  is  the  conception  that  now  governs  civilised
humanity.  It  is,  in  essence,  a return  to  and  a larger  development
of  the  old  Hellenic  ideal,  with  a greater  stress  on  capacity  and
utility  and  a very  diminished  stress  on  beauty  and  refinement.
We  may  suppose,  however,  that  this  is  only  a passing  phase;  the
lost  elements  are  bound  to  recover  their  importance  as  soon  as


Civilisation  and  Barbarism


69


the  commercial  period  of  modern  progress  has  been  overpassed,
and  with  that  recovery,  not  yet  in  sight  but  inevitable,  we  shall
have  all  the  proper  elements  for  the  development  of  man  as  a
mental  being.

The  old  Hellenic  or  Graeco-Rpman  civilisation  perished,
among  other  reasons,  because  it  only  imperfectly  generahsed  cul-
ture in  its  own  society  and  was  surrounded  by  huge  masses  of
humanity  who  were  still  possessed  by  the  barbarian  habit  of
mind.  Civilisation  can  never  be  safe  so  long  as,  confining  the
cultured  mentality  to  a small  minority,  it  nourishes  in  its  bosom
a tremendous  mass  of  ignorance,  a multitude,  a proletariate.
Either  knowledge  must  enlarge  itself  from  above  or  be  always  in
danger  of  submergence  by  the  ignorant  night  from  below.  Still
more  must  it  be  unsafe,  if  it  allows  enormous  numbers  of  men  to
exist  outside  its  pale  uninformed  by  its  fight,  full  of  the  natural
vigour  of  the  barbarian,  who  may  at  any  moment  seize  upon  the
physical  weapons  of  the  civilised  without  undergoing  an  intellec-
tual transformation  by  their  culture.  The  Graeco-Roman  culture
perished  from  within  and  from  without,  from  without  by  the
floods  of  Teutonic  barbarism,  from  within  by  the  loss  of  its  vita-
lity. It  gave  the  proletariate  some  measure  of  comfort  and  amuse-
ment, but  did  not  raise  it  into  the  fight.  When  fight  came  to  the
masses,  it  was  from  outside  in  the  form  of  the  Christian  religion
which  arrived  as  an  enemy  of  the  old  culture.  Appealing  to  the
poor,  the  oppressed  and  the  ignorant,  it  sought  to  capture  the
soul  and  the  ethical  being,  but  cared  little  or  not  at  all  for  the
thinking  mind,  content  that  that  should  remain  in  darkness  if  the
heart  could  be  brought  to  feel  religious  truth.  When  the  barba-
rians captured  the  Western  world,  it  was  in  the  same  way  content
to  Christianise  them,  but  made  it  no  part  of  its  function  to  intel-
lectuafise.  Distrustful  even  of  the  free  play  of  intelligence,
Christian  ecclesiasticism  and  monasticism  became  anti-intellec-
tual and  it  was  left  to  the  Arabs  to  reintroduce  the  beginnings
of  scientific  and  philosophical  knowledge  into  a semi-barbarous
Christendom  and  to  the  half  pagan  spirit  of  the  Renaissance  and
a long  struggle  between  religion  and  science  to  complete  the
return  of  a free  intellectual  culture  in  the  re-emerging  mind  of
Europe.  Knowledge  must  be  aggressive,  if  it  wishes  to  survive


70


The  Human  Cycle


and  perpetuate  itself;  to  leave  an  extensive  ignorance  either
below  or  around  it,  is  to  expose  humanity  to  the  perpetual
danger  of  a barbaric  relapse.

The  modern  world  does  not  leave  room  for  a repetition  of
the  danger  in  the  old  form  or  on  the  old  scale.  Science  is  there
to  prevent  it.  It  has  equipped  culture  with  the  means  of  self-
perpetuation. It  has  armed  the  civilised  races  with  weapons  of
organisation  and  aggression  and  self-defence  which  cannot  be
successfully  utilised  by  any  barbarous  people,  unless  it  ceases  to
be  uncivilised  and  acquires  the  knowledge  which  Science  alone
can  give.  It  has  learned  too  that  ignorance  is  an  enemy  it  cannot
afford  to  despise  and  has  set  out  to  remove  it  wherever  it  is  found.
The  ideal  of  general  education,  at  least  to  the  extent  of  some
information  of  the  mind  and  the  training  of  capacity,  owes  to  it,
if  not  its  birth,  at  least  much  of  its  practical  possibility.  It  has
propagated  itself  everywhere  with  an  irresistible  force  and
driven  the  desire  for  increasing  knowledge  into  the  meiitality
of  three  continents.  It  has  made  general  education  the  indis-
pensable condition  of  national  strength  and  ejficiency  and  there-
fore imposed  the  desire  of  it  not  only  on  every  free  people,  but  on
every  nation  that  desires  to  be  free  and  to  survive,  so  that  the
universalisation  of  knowledge  and  intellectual  activity  in  the
human  race  is  now  only  a question  of  Time ; for  it  is  only  certain
political  and  economic  obstacles  that  stand  in  its  way  and  these
the  thought  and  tendencies  of  the  age  are  already  labouring  to
overcome.  And,  in  sum.  Science  has  already  enlarged  for  good
the  intellectual  horizons  of  the  race  and  raised,  sharpened  and
intensified  powerfully  the  general  intellectual  capacity  of  man-
kind.

It  is  true  that  the  firat  tendencies  of  Science  have  been
materialistic  and  its  indubitable  triumphs  have  been  confined
to  the  knowledge  of  the  physical  universe  and  the  body  and  the
physical  life.  But  this  materialism  is  a very  difierent  thing  from
the  old  identification  of  the^  self  with  the  body.  Whatever  its
apparent  tendencies,  it  has  been  really  an  assertion  of  man  the
mental  being  and  of  the  supremacy  of  intelligence.  Science  in
its  very  nature  is  knowledge,  is  intellectuality,  and  its  whole
work  has  been  that  of  the  Mind  turning  its  gaze  upon  its  vital


Civilisation  and  Barbarism


71


and  physical  frame  and  environment  to  know  and  conquer
and  dominate  Life  and  Matter.  The  scientist  is  Man  the  thinker
mastering  the  forces  of  material  Nature  by  knowing  them.  Life
and  Matter  are  after  all  our  standing-ground,  our  lower  basis
and  to  know  their  processes  and  their  own  proper  possibilities
and  the  opportunities  they  give  to  the  human  being  is  part  of
the  knowledge  necessary  for  transcending  them.  Life  and  the
body  have  to  be  exceeded,  but  they  have  also  to  be  utilised  and
perfected.  Neither  the  laws  nor  the  possibilities  of  physical
Nature  can  be  entirely  known  unless  we  know  also  the  laws  and
possibilities  of  supraphysical  Nature;  therefore  the  development
of  new  and  the  recovery  of  old  mental  and  psychic  sciences  have
to  follow  upon  the  perfection  of  our  physical  knowledge,  and
that  new  era  is  already  beginning  to  open  upon  us.  But  the  per-
fection of  the  physical  sciences  was  a prior  necessity  and  had  to
be  the  iBirst  field  for  the  training  of  the  mind  of  man  in  his  new
endeavour  to  know  Nature  and  possess  his  world.

Even  in  its  negative  work  the  materialism  of  Science  had
a task  to  perform  which  will  be  useful  in  the  end  to  the  human
mind  in  its  exceeding  of  materialism.  But  Science  in  its  heyday
of  triumphant  Materialism  despised  and  cast  aside  Philosophy;
its  predominance  discouraged  by  its  positive  and  pragmatic
turn  the  spirit  of  poetry  and  art  and  pushed  them  from  their
position  of  leadership  in  the  front  of  culture;  poetry  entered  into
an  era  of  decline  and  decadence,  adopted  the  form  and  rhythm
of  a versified  prose  and  lost  its  appeal  and  the  support  of  all  but
a very  limited  audience,  painting  followed  the  curve  of  Cubist
extravagance  and  espoused  monstrosities  of  shape  and  sugges-
tion; the  ideal  receded  and  visible  matter  of  fact  was  enthroned
in  its  place  and  encouraged  an  ugly  realism  and  utilitarianism;
in  its  war  against  religious  obscurantism  Science  almost  suc-
ceeded in  slaying  religion  and  the  religious  spirit.  But  philosophy
had  become  too  much  a thing  of  abstractions,  a seeking  for  abs-
tract truths  in  a world  of  ideas  and  words  rather  than  what  it
should  be,  a discovery  of  the  real  reality  of  things  by  which  hu-
man existence  can  learn  its  law  and  aim  and  the  principle  of  its
perfection.  Poetry  and  art  had  become  too  much  cultured
pursuits  to  be  ranked  among  the  elegances  and  ornaments  of


72


The  Human  Cycle


life,  concerned  with,  beauty  of  words  and  forms  and  imaginations,
rather  than  a concrete  seeing  and  significant  presentation  of  truth
and  beauty  and  of  the  hving  idea  and  the  secret  divinity  in  things
concealed  by  the  sensible  appearances  of  the  universe.  Religion
itself  had  become  fixed  in  dogmas  and  ceremonies,  sects  and
churches  and  had  lost  for  the  most  part,  except  for  a few  indi-
viduals, direct  contact  with  the  living  founts  of  spirituahty.  A
period  of  negation  was  necessary.  They  had  to  be  driven  back
and  in  upon  themselves,  nearer  to  their  own  eternal  sources.
Now  that  the  stress  of  negation  is  past  and  they  are  raising  their
heads,  we  see  them  seeking  for  their  own  truth,  reviving  by  virtue
of  a return  upon  themselves  and  a new  self-discovery.  They  have
learned  or  are  learning  from  the  example  of  Science  that  Truth
is  the  secret  of  life  and  power  and  that  by  finding  the  truth  proper
to  themselves  they  must  become  the  ministers  of  human  existence.

But  if  Science  has  thus  prepared  us  for  an  age  of  wider  and
deeper  culture  and  if  in  spite  of  and  even  partly  by  its  materialism
it  has  rendered  impossible  the  return  of  the  true  materialism,
that  of  the  barbarian  mentality,  it  has  encouraged  more  or  less
indirectly  both  by  its  attitude  to  life  and  its  discoveries  another
kind  of  barbarism,  — for  it  can  be  called  by  no  other  name,  —
that  of  the  industrial,  the  commercial,  the  economic  age  which
is  now  progressing  to  its  culmination  and  its  close.  This  econo-
mic barbarism  is  essentially  that  of  the  vital  man  who  mis-
takes the  vital  being  for  the  self  and  accepts  its  satisfaction  -as  the
first  aim  of  life.  The  characteristic  of  Life  is  desire  and  the
instinct  of  possession.  Just  as  the  physical  barbarian  makes  the
excellence  of  the  body  and  the  development  of  physical  force,
health  and  prowess  his  standard  and  aim,  so  the  vitalistic  or
economic  barbarian  makes  the  satisfaction  of  wants  and  desires
and  the  accumulation  of  possessions  his  standard  and  aim.  His
ideal  man  is  not  the  cultured  or  noble  or  thoughtful  or  moral
or  religious,  but  the  successful  man.  To  arrive,  to  succeed,  to
produce,  to  accumulate,  to  possess  is  his  existence.  The  accu-
mulation of  wealth  and  more  wealth,  the  adding  of  possessions  to
possessions,  opulence,  show,  pleasure,  a cumbrous  inartistic
luxury,  a plethora  of  conveniences,  life  devoid  of  beauty  and
nobility,  religion  vulgarised  or  coldly  formalised,  politics  and


Civilisation  and  Barbarism


73


government  turned  into  a trade  and  profession,  enjoyment  itself
made  a business,  this  is  commercialism.  To  the  natural  unre-
deemed economic  man  beauty  is  a thing  otiose  or  a nuisance,
art  and  poetry  a frivohty  or  an  ostentation  and  a means  of  adver-
tisement. His  idea  of  civilisation  is  comfort,  his  idea  of  morals
social  respectability,  his  idea  of  politics  the  encouragement  of
industry,  the  opening  of  markets,  exploitation  and  trade  follow-
ing the  flag,  his  idea  of  religion  at  best  a pietistic  formalism  or
the  satisfaction  of  certain  vitalistic  emotions.  He  values  educa-
tion for  its  utility  in  fitting  a man  for  success  in  a competitive  or,
it  may  be,  a socialised  industrial  existence,  science  for  the  useful
inventions  and  knowledge,  the  comforts,  conveniences,  machi-
nery of  production  with  which  it  arms  him,  its  power  for  orga-
nisation, regulation,  stimulus  to  production.  The  opulent  plu-
tocrat and  the  successful  mammoth  capitalist  and  organiser
of  industry  are  the  supermen  of  the  commercial  age  and  the  true,
if  often  occult  rulers  of  its  society.

The  essential  barbarism  of  all  this  is  its  pursuit  of  vital
success,  satisfaction,  productiveness,  accumulation,  possession,
enjoyment,  comfort,  convenience  for  their  own  sake.'  The  vital
part  of  the  being  is  an  element  in  the  integral  human  existence  as
much  as  the  physical  part;  it  has  its  place  but  must  not  exceed  its
place.  A full  and  well-appointed  life  is  desirable  for  man  living
in  society,  but  on  condition  that  it  is  also  a true  and  beautiful
hfe.  Neither  the  life  nor  the  body  exist  for  their  own  sake,  but
as  vehicle  and  instrument  of  a good  higher  than  their  own.
They  must  be  subordinated  to  the  superior  needs  of  the  mental
being,  chastened  and  purified  by  a greater  law  of  truth,  good  and
beauty  before  they  can  take  their  proper  place  in  the  integrality
of  human  perfection.  Therefore  in  a commercial  age  with  its
ideal,  vulgar  and  barbarous,  of  success,  vitalistic  satisfaction,
productiveness  and  possession  the  soul  of  man  may  linger  a while
for  certain  gains  and  experiences,  but  cannot  permanently  rest.
If  it  persisted  too  long.  Life  would  become  clogged  and  perish  of
its  own  plethora  or  burst  in  its  straining  to  a gross  expansion.
Like  the  too  massive  Titan  it  will  collapse  by  its  own  mass,  mole
ruet  sua.


Chapter  IX


Civilisation  and  Culture


N^ATURE  starts  from  Matter,  develops  out
of  it  its  hidden  Life,  releases  out  of  involution  in  life  all  the  crude
material  of  Mind  and,  when  she  is  ready,  turns  Mind  upon  itself
and  upon  Life  and  Matter  in  a great  mental  effort  to  understand
all  three  in  their  phenomena,  their  obvious  action,  their  secret
laws,  their  normal  and  abnormal  possibilities  and  powers  so  that
they  may  be  turned  to  the  richest  account,  used  in  the  best  and
most  harmonious  way,  elevated  to  their  highest  as  well  as  exten-
ded to  their  widest  potential  aims  by  the  action  of  that  faculty,
which  man  alone  of  terrestrial  creatures  clearly  possesses,  the
intelligent  will.  It  is  only  in  this  fourth  stage  of  her  progress
that  she  arrives  at  humanity.  The  atoms  and  the  elements  orga-
nise brute  Matter,  the  plant  develops  the  living  being,  the  animal
prepares  and  brings  to  a certain  kind  of  mechanical  organisation
the  crude  material  of  Mind,  but  the  last  work  of  all,  the  know-
ledge and  control  of  all  these  things  and  self-knowledge  and  self-
control,  — that  has  been  reserved  for  Man,  Nature’s  mental
being.  That  he  may  better  do  the  work  she  has  given  him,  she
compels  him  to  repeat  physically  and  to  some  extent  mentally
stages  of  her  animal  evolution  and,  even  when  he  is  in  possession
of  his  mental  being,  she  induces  him  continually  to  dwell  with  an
interest  and  even  a kind  of  absorption  upon  Matter  and  Life  and
his  own  body  and  vital  existence.  This  is  necessary  to  the  large-
ness of  her  purpose  in  him.  His  j&rst  natural  absorption  in  the
body  and  the  life  is  narrow  and  unintelligent;  as  his  intelligence
and  mental  force  increase,  he  disengages  himself  to  some  extent,
is  able  to  mount  higher,  but  is  still  tied  to  his  vital  and  material
roots  by  need  and  desire  and  has  to  return  upon  them  with  a
larger  curiosity,  a greater  power  of  utilisation,  a more  and  more
highly  mental  and,  in  the  end,  a more  and  more  spiritual  aim  in
the  return.  For  his  cycles  are  circles  of  a growing,  but  still  im-


Civilisation  and  Culture  75

perfect  harmony  and  synthesis,  and  she  brings  him  back  violently
to  her  original  principles,  sometimes  even  to  something  like
her  earlier  conditions  so  that  he  may  start  afresh  on  a larger
curve  of  progress  and  self-fulfilment.

It  would  seem  at  first  sight  that  since  man  is  pre-eminently
the  mental  being,  the  development  of  the  mental  faculties  and
the  richness  of  the  mental  life  should  be  his  highest  aim, —
his  preoccupying  aim,  even,  as  soon  as  he  has  got  rid  of  the
obsession  of  the  life  and  body  and  provided  for  the  indispensable
satisfaction  of  the  gross  needs  which  our  physical  and  animal
nature  imposes  on  us.  Knowledge,  science,  art,  thought,  ethics,
philosophy,  religion,  this  is  man’s  real  business,  these  are  his
true  affairs.  To  be  is  for  him  not  merely  to  be  born,  grow  up,
marry,  get  his  livehhood,  support  a family  and  then  die,  — the
vital  and  physical  life,  a human  edition  of  the  animal  round,  a
human  enlargement  of  the  little  animal  sector  and  arc  of  the
divine  circle;  rather  to  become  and  grow  mentally  and  live  with
knowledge  and  power  within  himself  as  well  as  from  within
outward  is  his  manhood.  But  there  is  here  a double  motive  of
Nature,  an  insistent  duality  in  her  human  purpose.  Man  is  here
to  learn  from  her  how  to  control  and  create;  but  she  evidently
means  him  not  only  to  control,  create  and  constantly  re-create  in
new  and  better  forms  himself,  his  own  inner  existence,  his  men-
taUty,  but  also  to  control  and  re-create  correspondingly  his  en-
vironment. He  has  to  turn  Mind  not  only  on  itself,  but  on  Life
and  Matter  and  the  material  existence;  that  is  very  clear  not  only
from  the  law  and  nature  of  the  terrestrial  evolution,  but  from  his
own  past  and  present  history.  And  there  comes  from  the  obser-
vation of  these  conditions  and  of  his  highest  aspirations  and  im-
pulses the  question  whether  he  is  not  intended,  not  only  to  ex-
pand inwardly  and  outwardly,  but  to  grow  upward,  wonderfully
exceeding  himself  as  he  has  wonderfully  exceeded  his  animal
beginnings,  into  something  more  than  mental,  more  than  human,
into  a being  spiritual  and  divine.  Even  if  he  cannot  do  that,  yet
he  may  have  to  open  his  mind  to  what  is  beyond  it  and  to  govern
his  life  more  and  more  by  the  light  and  power  that  he  receives
from  something  greater  than  himself.  Man’s  consciousness  of
the  divine  within  himself  and  the  world  is  the  supreme  fact  of  his


76


The  Human  Cycle


existence  and  to  grow  into  that  may  very  well  be  the  intention  of
his  nature.  In  any  case  the  fullness  of  Life  is  his  evident  object,
the  widest  life  and  the  highest  life  possible  to  him,  whether  that  be
a complete  humanity  or  a new  and  divine  race.  We  must  recog-
nise both  his  need  of  integrality  and  his  impulse  of  self-exceeding
if  we  would  fix  rightly  the  meaning  of  his  individual  existence  and
the  perfect  aim  and  norm  of  his  society.

The  pursuit  of  the  mental  life  for  its  own  sake  is  what  we
ordinarily  mean  by  culture ; but  the  word  is  still  a little  equivocal
and  capable  of  a wider  or  a narrower  sense  according  to  our  ideas
and  predilections.  For  our  mental  existence  is  a very  complex
matter  and  is  made  up  of  many  elements.  First,  we  have  its  lower
and  fundamental  stratum,  which  is  in  the  scale  of  evolution
nearest  to  the  vital.  And  we  have  in  that  stratum  two  sides,  the
mental  life  of  the  senses,  sensations  and  emotions  in  which  the
subjective  purpose  of  Nature  predominates  although  with  the
objective  as  its  occasion,  and- the  active  or  dynamic  life  of  the
mental  being  concerned  with  the  organs  of  action  and  the  field  of
conduct  in  which  her  objective  purpose  predominates  although
with  the  subjective  as  its  occasion.  We  have  next  in  the  scale,
more  sublimated,  on  one  side  the  moral  being  and  its  ethical  life,
on  the  other  the  aesthetic;  each  of  them  attempts  to  possess  and
dominate  the  fundamental  mind  stratum  and  turn  its  experiences
and  activities  to  its  own  benefit,  one  for  the  culture  and  worship
of  Right,  the  other  for  the  culture  and  worship  of  Beauty.  And
we  have,  above  all  these,  taking  advantage  of  them,  helping,
forming,  trying  often  to  govern  them  entirely,  the  intellectual
being.  Man’s  highest  accomplished  range  is  the  life  of  the  reason
or  ordered  and  harmonised  intelligence  with  its  dynamic  power
of  intelligent  will,  the  buddhi,  which  is  or  should  be  the  driver  of
man’s  chariot.

But  the  intelligence  of  man  is  not  composed  entirely  and
exclusively  of  the  rational  intellect  and  the  rational  will;  there
enters  into  it  a deeper,  more  intuitive,  more  splendid  and  power-
ful, but  much  less  clear,  much  less  developed  and  as  yet  hardly  at
all  self-possessing  light  and  force  for  which  we  have  not  even  a
name.  But,  at  any  rate,  its  character  is  to  drive  at  a kind  of  illu-
mination, — not  the  dry  fight  of  the  reason,  nor  the  moist  and


Civilisation  and  Culture


77


suffused  light  of  the  heart,  but  a lightning  and  a solar  splendour.
It  may  indeed  subordinate  itself  and  merely  help  the  reason  and
heart  with  its  flashes;  but  there  is  another  urge  in  it,  its  natural
urge,  which  exceeds  the  reason.  It  tries  to  illuminate  the  intel-
lectual being,  to  illuminate  the  ethical  and  aesthetic,  to  illuminate
the  emotional  and  the  active,  to  illuminate  even  the  senses  and  the
sensations.  It  offers  in  words  of  revelation,  it  unveils  as  if  by
lightning  flashes,  it  shows  in  a sort  of  mystic  or  psychic  glamour
or  brings  out  into  a settled  but  for  mental  man  almost  a super-
natural light,  a Truth  greater  and  truer  than  the  knowledge  given
by  Reason  and  Science,  a Right  larger  and  more  divine  than  the
moralist’s  scheme  of  virtues,  a Beauty  more  profound,  universal
and  entrancing  than  the  sensuous  or  imaginative  beauty  wor-
shipped by  the  artist,  a joy  and  divine  sensibility  which  leaves
the  ordinary  emotions  poor  and  paUid,  a Sense  beyond  the  senses
and  sensations,  the  possibility  of  a diviner  Life  and  action  which
man’s  ordinary  conduct  of  life  hides  away  from  his  impulses  and
from  his  vision.  Very  various,  very  fragmentary,  often  very
confused  and  misleading  are  its  effects  upon  all  the  lower  mem-
bers from  the  reason  downward,  but  this  in  the  end  is  what  it  is
driving  at  in  the  midst  of  a hundred  deformations.  It  is  caught
and  killed  or  at  least  diminished  and  stifled  in  formal  creeds  and
pious  observances;  it  is  unmercifully  traded  in  and  turned  into
poor  and  base  coin  by  the  vulgarity  of  conventional  religions;
but  it  is  still  the  light  of  which  the  religious  spirit  and  the  spiritual-
ity of  man  is  in  pursuit  and  some  pale  glow  of  it  lingers  even  in
their  worst  degradations.

This  very  complexity  of  his  mental  being,  with  the  absence
of  any  one  principle  which  can  safely  dominate  the  others,  the
absence  of  any  sure  and  certain  light  which  can  guide  and  fix  in
their  vacillations  the  reason  and  the  intelligent  will,  is  man’s
great  embarrassment  and  stumbling-block.  All  the  hostile  dis-
tinctions, oppositions,  antagonisms,  struggles,  conversions,
reversions,  perversions  of  his  mentality,  all  the  chaotic  war  of
ideas  and  impulses  and  tendencies  which  perplex  his  efforts,
have  arisen  from  the  natural  misunderstandings  and  conflicting
claims  of  his  many  members.  His  reason  is  a judge  who  gives
conflicting  verdicts  and  is  bribed  and  influenced  by  the  suitors;


78


The  Human  Cycle


his  intelligent  will  is  an  administrator  harassed  by  the  conflicts
of  the  different  estates  of  his  realm  and  by  the  sense  of  his  own
partiality  and  final  incompetence.  Still  in  the  midst  of  it  all  he
has  formed  certain  large  ideas  of  culture  and  the  mental  life,
and  his  conflicting  notions  about  them  follow  certain  definite
lines  determined  by  the  divisions  of  his  nature  and  shaped  into
a general  system  of  curves  by  his  many  attempts  to  arrive  either
at  an  exclusive  standard  or  an  integral  harmony.

We  have  first  the  distinction  between  civilisation  and  bar-
barism. In  its  ordinary,  popular  sense  civilisation  means  the
state  of  civil  society,  governed,  policed,  organised,  educated,
possessed  of  knowledge  and  appliances  as  opposed  to  that  which
has  not  or  is  not  supposed  to  have  these  advantages.  In  a certain
sense  the  Red  Indian,  the  Basuto,  the  Fiji  islander  had  their
civilisation;  they  possessed  a rigorously,  if  simply  organised
society,  a social  law,  some  ethical  ideas,  a religion,  a kind  of
training,  a good  many  virtues  in  some  of  which,  it  is  said,  civili-
sation is  sadly  lacking;  but  we  are  agreed  to  call  them  savages
and  barbarians,  mainly  it  seems,  because  of  their  crude  and  limi-
ted knowledge,  the  primitive  rudeness  of  their  appliances  and  the
bare  simplicity  of  their  social  organisation.  In  the  more  deve-
loped states  of  society  we  have  such  epithets  as  semi-civilised  and
semi-barbarous  which  are  applied  by  different  types  of  civilisa-
tion to  each  other,  — the  one  which  is  for  a time  dominant  and
physically  successful  has  naturally  the  loudest  and  most  self-
confident  say  in  the  matter.  Formerly  men  were  more  straight-
forward and  simple-minded  and  frankly  expressed  their  stand-
point by  stigmatising  all  peoples  different  in  general  culture
from  themselves  as  barbarians  or  Mlechchhas.  The  word  civi-
lisation so  used  comes  to  have  a merely  relative  significance  or
hardly  any  fixed  sense  at  all.  We  must  therefore  get  rid  in  it  of
all  that  is  temporary  or  accidental  and  fix  it  upon  this  distinction
that  barbarism  is  the  state  of  society  in  which  man  is  almost
entirely  preoccupied  with  his  life  and  body,  his  economic  and
physical  existence,  — at  first  with  their  sufficient  maintenance,
not  as  yet  their  greater  or  richer  well-being,  — and  has  few
means  and  little  inclination  to  develop  his  mentality,  while
civilisation  is  the  more  evolved  state  of  society  in  which  to  a


Civilisation  and  Culture  79

sufficient  social  and  economic  organisation  is  added  the  activity
of  the  mental  life  in  most  if  not  all  of  its  parts;  for  sometimes
some  of  these  parts  are  left  aside  or  discouraged  or  temporarily
atrophied  by  their  inactivity,  yet  the  society  may  be  very  obvious-
ly civilised  and  even  highly  civilised.  This  conception  will  bring
in  all  the  civilisations  historic  and  prehistoric  and  put  aside  all
the  barbarism,  whether  of  Africa  or  Europe  or  Asia,  Hun  or  Goth
or  Vandal  or  Turcoman.  It  is  obvious  that  in  a state  of  barbar-
ism the  rude  beginnings  of  civilisation  may  exist;  it  is  obvious
too  that  in  a civilised  society  a great  mass  of  barbarism  or  nume-
rous rehcs  of  it  may  exist.  In  that  sense  all  societies  are  semi-
civilised.  How  much  of  our  present-day  civilisation  will  be
looked  back  upon  with  wonder  and  disgust  by  a more  developed
humanity  as  the  superstitions  and  atrocities  of  an  imperfectly
civilised  era!  But  the  main  point  is  this  that  in  any  society  which
we  can  call  civilised  the  mentality  of  man  must  be  active,  the
mental  pursuits  developed  and  the  regulation  and  improvement
of  his  life  by  the  mental  being  a clearly  self-conscious  concept  in
his  better  mind.

But  in  a civilised  society  there  is  still  the  distinction  between
the  partially,  crudely,  conventionally  civilised  and  the  cultured.
It  would  seem  therefore  that  the  mere  participation  in  the  ordi-
nary benefits  of  civilisation  is  not  enough  to  raise  a man  into  the
mental  life  proper;  a farther  development,  a higher  elevation  is
needed.  The  last  generation  drew  emphatically  the  distinction
between  the  cultured  man  and  the  Phihstine  and  got  a fairly  clear
idea  of  what  was  meant  by  it.  Roughly,  the' Phihstine  was  for
them  the  man  who  Uves  outwardly  the  civilised  life,  possesses
all  its  paraphernalia,  has  and  mouths  the  current  stock  of  opi-
nions, prejudices,  conventions,  sentiments,  but  is  impervious  to
ideas,  exercises  no  free  intelligence,  is  innocent  of  beauty  and
art,  vulgarises  ever3hhing  that  he  touches,  refigion,  ethics,  litera-
ture, fife.  The  Philistine  is  in  fact  the  modem  civilised  barbarian;
he  is  often  the  half-civihsed  physical  and  vital  barbarian  by  his
unintelligent  attachment  to  the  life  of  the  body,  the  fife  of  the
vital  needs  and  impulses  and  the  ideal  of  the  merely  domestic  and
economic  human  animal;  but  essentially  and  commonly  he  is
the  mental  barbarian,  the  average  sensational  man.  That  is  to


80


The  Human  Cycle


say,  his  mental  life  is  that  of  the  lower  substratum  of  the  mind,
the  life  of  the  senses,  the  life  of  the  sensations,  the  life  of  the  emo-
tions, the  life  of  practical  conduct  — the  first  status  of  the  mental
being.  In  all  these  he  may  be  very  active,  very  vigorous,  but  he
does  not  govern  them  by  a higher  light  or  seek  to  uphft  them  to  a
freer  and  nobler  eminence;  rather  he  pulls  the  higher  faculties
down  to  the  level  of  his  senses,  his  sensations,  his  unenlightened
and  unchastened  emotions,  his  gross  utilitarian  practicality.  His
aesthetic  side  is  little  developed;  either  he  cares  nothing  for
beauty  or  has  the  crudest  aesthetic  tastes  which  help  to  lower
and  vulgarise  the  general  standard  of  aesthetic  creation  and  the
aesthetic  sense.  He  is  often  strong  about  morals,  far  more  parti-
cular usually  about  moral  conduct  than  the  man  of  culture,
but  his  moral  being  is  as  crude  and  undeveloped. as  the  rest  of
him;  it  is  conventional,  unchastened,  unintelligent,  a mass  of
likes  and  dislikes,  prejudices  and  current  opinions,  attachment  to
social  conventions  and  respectabilities  and  an  obscure  dislike  —
rooted  in  the  mind  of  sensations  and  not  in  the  intelligence  — of
any  open  defiance  or  departure  from  the  generally  accepted
standard  of  conduct.  His  ethical  bent  is  a habit  of  the  sense-
mind;  it  is  the  morality  of  the  average  sensational  man.  He  has
a reason  and  the  appearance  of  an  intelligent  will,  but  they  are
not  his  own,  they  are  part  of  the  group-mind,  received  from  his
environment;  or  so  far  as  they  are  his  own,  merely  a practical,
sensational,  emotional  reason  and  will,  a mechanical  repetition
of  habitual  notions  and  rules  of  conduct,  not  a play  of  real
thought  and  intelligent  determination.  His  use  of  them  no  more
makes  him  a developed  mental  being  than  the  daily  movement
to  and  from  his  place  of  business  makes  the  average  Londoner
a developed  physical  being  or  his  quotidian  contributions  to
the  economic  life  of  the  country  make  the  bank-clerk  a deve-
loped economic  man.  He  is  not  mentally  active,  but  mentally
reactive,  — a very  different  matter.

The  Philistine  is  not  dead,  — quite  the  contrary,  he  abounds,
— but  he  no  longer  reigns.  The  sons  of  Culture  have  not  exactly
conquered,  but  they  have  got  rid  of  the  old  Goliath  and  replaced
him  by  a new  giant.  This  is  the  sensational  man  who  has  got
awakened  to  the  necessity  at  least  of  some  intelligent  use  of  the


Civilisation  and  Culture


81


higher  faculties  and  is  trying  to  be  mentally  active.  He  has  been
whipped  and  censured  and  educated  into  that  activity  and  he
lives  besides  in  a maelstrom  of  new  information,  new  intellec-
tual fashions,  new  ideas  and  new  movements  to  which  he  can  no
longer  be  obstinately  impervious.  He  is  open  to  new  ideas,  he
can  catch  at  them  and  hurl  them  about  in  a rather  confused
fashion;  he  can  understand,  or  misunderstand  ideals,  organise
to  get  them  carried  out  and  even,  it  would  appear,  fight  and  die
for  them.  He  knows  he  has  to  think  about  ethical  problems,  so-
cial problems,  problems  of  science  and  religion,  to  welcome  new
political  developments,  to  look  with  as  understanding  an  eye  as
he  can  attain  to  at  all  the  new  movements  of  thought  and  inquiry
and  action  that  chase  each  other  across  the  modem  field  or  clash
upon  it.  He  is  a reader  of  poetry  as  well  as  a devourer  of  fiction
and  periodical  literature,  — you  will  find  in  him  perhaps  a
student  of  Tagore  or  an  admirer  of  Whitman;  he  has  perhaps
no  very  clear  ideas  about  beauty  and  aesthetics,  but  he  has  heard
that  Art  is  a not  altogether  unimportant  part  of  life.  The  shadow
of  this  new  colossus  is  everywhere.  He  is  the  great  reading
public;  the  newspapers  and  weekly  and  monthly  reviews  are  his;
fiction  and  poetry  and  art  are  his  mental  caterers,  the  theatre  and
the  cinema  and  the  radio  exist  for  him:  Science  hastens  to  bring
her  knowledge  and  discoveries  to  his  doors  and  equip  his  life  with
endless  machinery;  politics  are  shaped  in  his  image.  It  is  he
who  opposed  and  then  brought  about  the  enfranchisement  of
women,  who  has  been  evolving  syndicalism,  anarchism,  the  war
of  classes,  the  uprising  of  labour,  waging  what  we  are  told  are
wars  of  ideas,  or  of  cultures,  — a ferocious  type  of  conflict  made
in  the  very  image  of  this  new  barbarism,  — or  bringing  about  in
a few  days  Russian  revolutions  which  the  century-long  efforts
and  sufferings  of  the  intelligentsia  failed  to  achieve.  It  is  his
coming  which  has  been  the  precipitative  agent  for  the  reshaping
of  the  modem  world.  If  a Lenin,  a Mussolini,  a Hitler  have
achieved  their  rapid  and  almost  stupefying  success,  it  was  because
this  driving  force,  this  quick  responsive  acting  mass  was  there  to
carry  them  to  victory  — a force  lacking  to  their  less  fortunate
predecessors.

The  first  results  of  this  momentous  change  have  been


82


The  Human  Cycle

inspiriting  to  our  desire  of  movement,  but  a little  disconcerting
to  the  thinker  and  to  the  lover  of  a high  and  fine  culture;  for
if  it  has  to  some  extent  democratised  culture  or  the  semblance
of  culture,  it  does  not  seem  at  first  sight  to  have  elevated  or
strengthened  it  by  this  large  accession  of  the  half-redeemed  from
below.  Nor  does  the  world  seem  to  be  guided  any  more  directly
by  the  reason  and  intelligent  will  of  her  best  minds  than  before.
Commercialism  is  still  the  heart  of  modern  civilisation;  a sensa-
tional activism  is  still  its  driving  force.  Modern  education  has
not  in  the  mass  redeemed  the  sensational  man;  it  has  only  made
necessary  to  him  things  to  which  he  was  not  formerly  accus-
tomed, mental  activity  and  occupations,  intellectual  and  even
aesthetic  sensations,  emotions  of  idealism.  He  still  lives  in  the
vital  substratum,  but  he  wants  it  stimulated  from  above.  He
requires  an  army  of  writers  to  keep  him  mentally  occupied  and
provide  some  sort  of  intellectual  pabulum  for  him ; he  has  a thirst
for  general  information  of  all  kinds  which  he  does  not  care  or
has  not  time  to  co-ordinate  or  assimilate,  for  popularised  scienti-
fic knowledge,  for  such  new  ideas  as  he  can  catch,  provided  they
are  put  before  him  with  force  or  brilliance,  for  mental  sensations
and  excitation  of  many  kinds,  for  ideals  which  he  likes  to  think
of  as  actuating  his  conduct  and  which  do  give  it  sometimes  a
certain  colour.  It  is  still  the  activism  and  sensationalism  of  the
crude  mental  being,  but  much  more  open  and  free.  And  the
cultured,  the  intelligentsia  find  that  they  can  get  a hearing  from
him  such  as  they  never  had  from  the  pure  Philistine,  provided
they  can  first  stimulate  or  amuse  him;  their  ideas  have  now  a
chance  of  getting  executed  such  as  they  never  had  before.  The
result  has  been  to  cheapen  thought  and  art  and  literature,  to
make  talent  and  even  genius  run  in  the  grooves  of  popular  suc-
cess, to  put  the  writer  and  thinker  and  scientist  very  much  in  a
position  like  that  of  the  cultured  Greek  slave  in  a Roman  house-
hold where  he  has  to  work  for,  please,  amuse  and  instruct  his
master  while  keeping  a careful  eye  on  his  tastes  and  preferences
and  repeating  trickily  the  manner  and  the  points  that  have  caught
his  fancy.  The  higher  mental  life,  in  a word,  has  been  democra-
tised, sensationalised,  activised  with  both  good  and  bad  results.
Through  it  all  the  eye  of  faith  can  see  perhaps  that  a yet  crude


Civilisation  and  Culture


83


but  an  enormous  change  has  begun.  Thought  and  Knowledge,
if  not  yet  Beauty,  can  get  a hearing  and  even  produce  rapidly
some  large,  vague,  yet  in  the  end  effective  will  for  their  results;
the  mass  of  culture  and  of  men  who  think  and  strive  seriously
to  appreciate  and  to  know  has  enormously  increased  behind  all
this  surface  veil  of  sensationalism,  and  even  the  sensational  man
has  begun  to  undergo  a process  of  transformation.  Especially,
new  methods  of  education,  new  principles  of  society  are  begin-
ning to  come  into  the  range  of  practical  possibility  which  will
create  perhaps  one  day  that  as  yet  unknown  phenomenon,  a
race  of  men  — not  only  a class  — who  have  to  some  extent
found  and  develoned  their  mental  selves,  a cultured  humanitv.


Chapter  X


Aesthetic  and  Ethical  Culture


The  idea  of  culture  begins  to  define  itself
for  us  a little  more  clearly,  or  at  least  it  has  put  away  from  it  in
a clear  contrast  its  natural  opposites.  The  unmental,  the  purely
physical  life  is  very  obviously  its  opposite,  it  is  barbarism;  the
unintellectualised  vital,  the  crude  economic  or  the  grossly  domes-
tic life  which  looks  only  to  money-getting,  the  procreation  of  a
family  and  its  maintenance,  are  equally  its  opposites;  they  are
another  and  even  uglier  barbarism.  We  agree  to  regard  the  indi-
vidual who  is  dominated  by  them  and  has  no  thought  of  higher
things  as  an  uncultured  and  undeveloped  human  being,  a pro-
longation of  the  savage,  essentially  a barbarian  even  if  he  lives
in  a civilised  nation  and  in  a society  which  has  arrived  at  the
general  idea  and  at  some  ordered  practice  of  culture  and
refinement.  The  societies  or  nations  which  bear  this  stamp  we
agree  to  call  barbarous  or  semi-barbarous.  Even  when  a nation
or  an  age  has  developed  within  itself  knowledge  and  science  and
arts,  but  still  in  its  general  outlook,  its  habits  of  life  and  thought
is  content  to  be  governed  not  by  knowledge  and  truth  and
beauty  and  high  ideals  of  living,  but  by  the  gross  vital,  commer-
cial, economic  view  of  existence,  we  say  that  that  nation  or  age
may  be  civilised  in  a sense,  but  for  all  its  abundant  or  even  re-
dundant appliances  and  apparatus  of  civilisation  it  is  not  the  rea-
hsation  or  the  promise  of  a cultured  humanity.  Therefore  upon
even  the  European  civilisation  of  the  nineteenth  century  with
all  its  triumphant  and  teeming  production,  its  great  developments
of  science,  its  achievement  in  the  works  of  the  intellect  we  pass
a certain  condemnation,  because  it  has  turned  all  these  things  to
commercialism  and  to  gross  uses  of  vitalistic  success.  We  say  of
it  that  this  was  not  the  perfection  to  which  humanity  ought  to
aspire  and  that  this  trend  travels  away  from  and  not  towards  the
higher  curve  of  human  evolution.  It  must  be  our  definite  verdict


Aesthetic  and  Ethical  Culture


85


upon  it  that  it  was  inferior  as  an  age  of  culture  to  ancient  Athens,
to  Italy  of  the  Renascence,  to  ancient  or  classical  India.  For  great
as  might  be  the  deficiencies  of  social  organisation  in  those  eras
and  though  their  range  of  scientific  knowledge  and  material
achievement  was  immensely  inferior,  yet  they  were  more  ad-
vanced in  the  art  of  life,  knew  better  its  object  and  aimed  more
powerfully  at  some  clear  ideal  of  human  perfection.

In  the  range  of  the  mind’s  life  itself,  to  live  in  its  merely
practical  and  dynamic  activity  or  in  the  mentalised  emotional  or
sensational  current,  a life  of  conventional  conduct,  average
feelings,  customary  ideas,  opinions  and  prejudices  which  are  not
one’s  own  but  those  of  the  environment,  to  have  no  free  and
open  play  of  mind,  but  to  live  grossly  and  unthinkingly  by
the  unintelligent  rule*  of  the  many,  to  live  besides  according
to  the  senses  and  sensations  controlled  by  certain  conventions,
but  neither  purified  nor  enlightened  nor  chastened  by  any  law
of  beauty,  — all  this  too  is  contrary  to  the  ideal  of  culture.  A
man  may  so  live  with  all  the  appearance  or  all  the  pretensions
of  a civilised  existence,  enjoy  successfully  all  the  plethora  of  its
appurtenances,  but  he  is  not  in  the  real  sense  a developed  human
being.  A society  following  such  a rule  of  life  may  be  anything
else  you  will,  vigorous,  decent,  well-ordered,  successful,  religious,
moral,  but  it  is  a Philistine  society;  it  is  a prison  which  the  hu-
man soul  has  to  break.  For  so  long  as  it  dwells  there,  it  dwells
in  an  inferior,  uninspired  and  unexpanding  mental  status;  it
vegetates  infructuously  in  the  lower  stratum  and  is  governed
not  by  the  higher  faculties  of  man,  but  by  the  crudities  of  the  un-
uplifted sense-mind.  Nor  is  it  enough  for  it  to  open  windows  in
this  prison  by  which  it  may  get  draughts  of  agreeable  fresh  air,
something  of  the  free  light  of  the  intellect,  something  of  the  frag-
rance of  art  and  beauty,  something  of  the  large  breath  of  wider
interests  and  higher  ideals.  It  has  yet  to  break  out  of  its  prison
altogether  and  live  in  that  free  light,  in  that  fragrance  and  large
breath;  only  then  does  it  breathe  the  natural  atmosphere  of  the
developed  mental  being.  Not  to  live  principally  in  the  activities
of  the  sense-mind,  but  in  the  activities  of  knowledge  and  reason
and  a wide  intellectual  curiosity,  the  activities  of  the  cultivated
aesthetic  being,  the  activities  of  the  enlightened  will  which  make


86  The  Human  Cycle

for  character  and  high  ethical  ideals  and  a large  human  action,
not  to  be  governed  by  our  lower  or  our  average  mentality  but  by
truth  and  beauty  and  the  self-ruling  will  is  the  ideal  of  a true  cul-
ture and  the  beginning  of  an  accomplished  humanity.

We  get  then  by  elimination  to  a positive  idea  and  definition
of  culture.  But  still  on  this  higher  plane  of  the  mental  life  we  are
apt  to  be  pursued  by  old  exclusivenesses  and  misunderstandings.
We  see  that  in  the  past  there  seems  often  to  have  been  a quarrel
between  culture  and  conduct;  yet  according  to  our  definition
conduct  also  is  a part  of  the  cultured  life  and  the  ethical  ideality
one  of  the  master  impulses  of  the  cultured  being.  The  opposition
which  puts  on  one  side  the  pursuit  of  ideas  and  knowledge  and
beauty  and  calls  that  culture  and  on  the  other  the  pursuit  of  cha-
racter and  conduct  and  exalts  that  as  the  moral  life  must  start
evidently  from  an  imperfect  view  of  human  possibility  and
perfection.  Yet  that  opposition  has  not  only  existed,  but  is  a
naturally  strong  tendency  of  the  human  mind  and  therefore  must
answer  to  some  real  and  important  divergence  in  the  very  compo-
site elements  of  our  being.  It  is  the  opposition  which  Arnold
drew  between  Hebraism  and  Hellenism.  The  trend  of  the  Jewish
nation  which  gave  us  the  severe  ethical  religion  of  the  Old  Testa-
ment, — crude,  conventional  and  barbarous  enough  in  the
Mosaic  law,  but  rising  to  undeniable  heights  of  moral  exaltation
when  to  the  Law  were  added  the  Prophets,  and  finally  exceeding
itself  and  blossoming  into  a fine  flower  of  spirituality  in  Judaic
Christianity — was  dominated  by  the  preoccupation  of  a
terrestrial  and  ethical  righteousness  and  the  promised  rewards
of  right  worship  and  right  doing,  but  innocent  of  science  and
philosophy,  careless  of  knowledge,  indifferent  to  beauty.  The
Hellenic  mind  was  less  exclusively  but  still  largely  dominated
by  a love  of  the  play  of  reason  for  its  own  sake,  but  even  more
powerfully  by  a high  sense  of  beauty,  a clear  aesthetic  sensibility
and  a worship  of  the  beautiful  in  every  activity,  in  every  creation,
in  thought,  in  art,  in  life,  in  religion.  So  strong  was  this  sense
that  not  only  manners,  but  ethics  were  seen  by  it  to  a very  remark-

* The  epithet  is  needed,  for  European  Christianity  has  been  something  different,  even  at
its  best  of  another  temperament.  Latinised,  Graecised,  Celticised  or  else  only  a rough  Teutonic
imitation  of  the  old-world  Hebraism.


Aesthetic  and  Ethical  Culture


87


able  extent  in  the  light  of  its  master  idea  of  beauty;  the. good  was
to  its  instinct  largely  the  becoming  and  the  beautiful.  In  philo-
sophy itself  it  succeeded  in  arriving  at  the  conception  of  the
Divine  as  Beauty,  a truth  which  the  metaphysician  very  readily
misses  and  impoverishes  his  thought  by  missing  it.  But  still,  strik-
ing as  is  this  great  historical  contrast  and  powerful  as  were  its  re-
sults on  European  culture,  we  have  to  go  beyond  its  outward
manifestation  if  we  would  understand  in  its  source  this  psycho-
logical opposition.

The  conflict  arises  from  that  sort  of  triangular  disposition
of  the  higher  or  more  subtle  mentality  which  we  have  already
had  occasion  to  indicate.  There  is  in  our  mentahty  a side  of  will,
conduct,  character  which  creates  the  ethical  man;  there  is
another  side  of  sensibility  to  the  beautiful, — understanding
beauty  in  no  narrow  or  hyperartistic  sense,  — which  creates  the
artistic  and  aesthetic  man.  Therefore  there  can  be  such  a thing  as
a predominantly  or  even  exclusively  ethical  culture;  there  can  be
too,  evidently,  a predominantly  or  even  exclusively  aesthetic
culture.  There  are  at  once  created  two  conflicting  ideals  which
must  naturally  stand  opposed  and  look  askance  at  each  other
with  a mutual  distrust  or  even  reprobation.  The  aesthetic  man
tends  to  be  impatient  of  the  ethical  rule;  he  feels  it  to  be  a bar-
rier to  his  aesthetic  freedom  and  an  oppression  on  the  play  of
his  artistic  sense  and  his  artistic  faculty;  he  is  naturally  hedo-
nistic, — for  beauty  and  delight  are  inseparable  powers,  — and
the  ethical  rule  tramples  on  pleasure,  even  very  often  on  quite
innocent  pleasures,  and  tries  to  put  a strait  waistcoat  on  the
human  impulse  to  delight.  He  may  accept  the  ethical  rule  when
it  makes  itself  beautiful  or  even  seize  on  it  as  one  of  his  instru-
ments for  creating  beauty,  but  only  when  he  can  subordinate
it  to  the  aesthetic  principle  of  his  nature,  — just  as  he  is  often
drawn  to  religion  by  its  side  of  beauty,  pomp,  magnificent  ritual,
emotional  satisfaction,  repose  or  poetic  ideality  and  aspiration,
— ^we  might  almost  say,  by  the  hedonistic  aspects  of  religion.
Even  when  fully  accepted,  it  is  not  for  their  own  sake  that  he
accepts  them.  The  ethical  man  repays  this  natural  repulsion  with
interest.  He  tends  to  distrust  art  and  the  aesthetic  sense  as  some-
thing lax  and  emollient,  something  in  its  nature  undisciplined  and


88  The  Human  Cycle

by  its  attractive  appeals  to  the  passions  and  emotions  destructive
of  a high  and  strict  self-control.  He  sees  that  it  is  hedonistic  and
he  finds  that  the  hedonistic  impulse  is  non-moral  and  often
immoral.  It  is  difficult  for  him  to  see  how  the  indulgence  of  the
aesthetic  impulse  beyond  a very  narrow  and  carefully  guarded
limit  can  be  combined  with  a strict  ethical  life.  He  evolves  the
puritan  who  objects  to  pleasure  on  principle;  not  only  in  his
extremes  — and  a predominant  impulse  tends  to  become  absorb-
ing and  leads  towards  extremes  — but  in  the  core  of  his  tempera-
ment he  remains  fundamentally  the  puritan.  The  misunder-
standing between  these  two  sides  of  our  nature  is  an  inevitable
circumstance  of  our  human  growth  which  must  try  them  to  then-
fullest  separate  possibilities  and  experiment  in  extremes  in
order  that  it  may  understand  the  whole  range  of  its  capa-
cities.

Society  is  only  an  enlargement  of  the  individual;  therefore
this  contrast  and  opposition  between  individual  types  reproduces
itself  in  a like  contrast  and  opposition  between  social  and  national
types.  We  must  not  go  for  the  best  examples  to  social  formulas
which  do  not  really  illustrate  these  tendencies  but  are  deprava-
tions, deformations  or  deceptive  conformities.  We  must  not  take
as  an  instance  of  the  ethical  turn  the  middle-class  puritanism
touched  with  a narrow,  tepid  and  conventional  religiosity  which
was  so  marked  an  element  in  nineteenth-century  England;
that  was  not  an  ethical  culture,  but  simply  a local  variation  of
the  general  type  of  bourgeois  respectability  you  will  fimd  every-
where at  a certain  stage  of  civilisation,  ■ — it  was  Philistinism  pure
and  simple.  Nor  should  we  take  as  an  instance  of  the  aesthetic
any  merely  Bohemian  society  or  such  examples  as  London  of  the
Restoration  or  Paris  in  certain  brief  periods  of  its  history;  that,
whatever  some  of  its  pretensions,  had  for  its  principle,  always,
the  indulgence  of  the  average  sensational  and  sensuous  man  freed
from  the  conventions  of  morality  by  a superficial  intellectualism
and  aestheticism.  Nor  even  can  we  take  Puritan  England  as  the
ethical  type;  for  although  there  was  there  a strenuous,  an
exaggerated  culture  of  character  and  the  ethical  being,  the  deter-
mining tendency  was  religious,  and  the  religious  impulse  is  a
phenomenon  quite  apart  from  our  other  subjective  tendencies.


Aesthetic  and  Ethical  Culture


89


though  it  influences  them  all;  it  is  sui  generis  and  must  be  treated
separately.  To  get  at  real,  if  not  always  quite  pure  examples  of
the  type  we  must  go  back  a little  farther  in  time  and  contrast
early  republican  Rome  or,  in  Greece  itself,  Sparta  with  Periclean
Athens.  For  as  we  come  down  the  stream  of  Time  in  its  present
curve  of  evolution,  humanity  in  the  mass,  carrying  in  it  its  past
collective  experience,  becomes  more  and  more  complex  and  the
old  distinct  types  do  not  recur  or  recur  precariously  and  with
dfficulty.

Republican  Rome  — before  it  was  touched  and  finally  taken
captive  by  conquered  Greece  — stands  out  in  relief  as  one  of  the
most  striking  psychological  phenomena  of  human  history.  From
the  point  of  view  of  human  development  it  presents  itself  as  an
almost  unique  experiment  in  high  and  strong  character-building
divorced  as  far  as  may  be  from  the  sweetness  which  the  sense  of
beauty  and  the  light  which  the  play  of  the  reason  brings  into
character  and  uninspired  by  the  religious  temperament;  for  the
early  Roman  creed  was  a Superstition,  a superficial  religiosity
and  had  nothing  in  it  of  the  true  religious  spirit.  Rome  was  the
human  will  oppressing  and  disciplining  the  emotional  and  sensa-
tional mind  in  order  to  arrive  at  the  self-mastery  of  a definite
ethical  type;  and  it  was  this  self-mastery  which  enabled  the
Roman  republic  to  arrive  also  at  the  mastery  of  its  environing
world  and  impose  on  the  nations  its  public  order  and  law.  All
supremely  successful  imperial  nations  have  had  in  their  culture
or  in  their  nature,  in  their  formative  or  expansive  periods,
this  predominance  of  the  will,  the  character,  the  impulse  to  self-
disciphne  and  self-mastery  which  constitutes  the  very  basis  of  the
ethical  tendency.  Rome  and  Sparta  hke  other  ethical  civilisations
had  their  considerable  moral  deficiencies,  tolerated  or  deliberate-
ly encouraged  customs  and  practices  which  we  should  call  im-
moral, failed  to  develop  the  gentler  and  more  delicate  side  of
moral  character,  but  this  is  of  no  essential  importance.  The  ethi-
cal idea  in  man  changes  and  enlarges  its  scope,  but  the  kernel  of
the  true  ethical  being  remains  always  the  same,  — will,  character,
self-discipline,  self-mastery.

Its  limitations  at  once  appear,  when  we  look  back  at  its
prominent  examples.  Early  Rome  and  Sparta  were  barren  of


90


The  Human  Cycle

thought,  art,  poetry,  literature,  the  larger  mental  life,  all  the
amenity  and  pleasure  of  human  existence;  their  art  of  life  ex-
cluded or  discouraged  the  delight  of  living.  They  were  distrust-
ful, as  the  exclusively  ethical  man  is  always  distrustful,  of  free
and  flexible  thought  and  the  aesthetic  impulse.  The  earlier
spirit  of  republican  Rome  held  at  arm’s  length  as  long  as  possible
the  Greek  influences  that  invaded  her,  closed  the  schools  of  the
Greek  teachers,  banished  the  philosophers,  and  her  most  typical
minds  looked  upon  the  Greek  language  as  a peril  and  Greek
culture  as  an  abomination:  she  felt  instinctively  the  arrival  at
her  gates  of  an  enemy,  divined  a hostile  and  destructive  force
fatal  to  her  principle  of  living.  Sparta,  though  a Hellenic  city,
admitted  as  almost  the  sole  aesthetic  element  of  her  deliberate
ethical  training  and  education  a martial  music  and  poetry,  and
even  then,  when  she  wanted  a poet  of  war,  she  had  to  import  an
Athenian.  We  have  a curious  example  of  the  repercussion  of  this
instinctive  distrust  even  on  a large  and  aesthetic  Athenian  mind
in  the  utopian  speculations  of  Plato  who  felt  himself  obliged  in
his  Republic  first  to  censure  and  then  to  banish  the  poets  from
his  ideal  polity.  The  end  of  these  purely  ethical  cultures  bears
witness  to  their  insufiiciency.  Either  they  pass  away  leaving
nothing  or  little  behind  them  by  which  the  future  can  be  attracted
and  satisfied,  as  Sparta  passed,  or  they  collapse  in  a revolt  of  the
complex  nature  of  man  against  an  unnatural  restriction  and
repression,  as  the  early  Roman  type  collapsed  into  the  egoistic
and  often  orgiastic  license  of  later  republican  and  imperial
Rome.  The  human  mind  needs  to  think,  feel,  enjoy,  expand;
expansion  is  its  very  nature  and  restriction  is  only  useful  to  it  in
so  far  as  it  helps  to  steady,  guide  and  strengthen  its  expansion.
It  readily  refuses  the  name  of  culture  to  those  civilisations  or
periods,  however  noble  their  aim  or  even  however  beautiful  in
itself  their  order,  which  have  not  allowed  an  intelligent  freedom
of  development.

On  the  other  hand,  we  are  tempted  to  give  the  name  of  a
full  culture  to  all  those  periods  and  civilisations,  whatever  their
defects,  which  have  encouraged  a freely  human  development
and  like  ancient  Athens  have  concentrated  on  thought  and  beauty
and  the  delight  of  living.  But  there  were  in  the  Athenian  deve-


Aesthetic  and  Ethical  Culture


91


lopment  two  distinct  periods,  one  of  art  and  beauty,  the  Athens
of  Phidias  and  Sophocles;  and  one  of  thought,  the  Athens  of
the  philosophers.  In  the  first  period  the  sense  of  beauty  and  the
need  of  freedom  of  life  and  the  enjoyment  of  life  are  the  deter-
mining forces.  This  Athens  thought,  but  it  thought  in  the  terms
of  art  and  poetry,  in  figures  of  music  and  drama  and  architecture
and  sculpture;  it  delighted  in  intellectual  discussion,  but  not  so
much  with  any  will  to  arrive  at  truth  as  for  the  pleasure  of
thinking  and  the  beauty  of  ideas.  It  had  its  moral  order,  for  with-
out that  no  society  can  exist,  but  it  had  no  true  ethical  impulse
or  ethical  type,  only  a conventional  and  customary  morahty;
and  when  it  thought  about  ethics,  it  tended  to  express  it  in  the
terms  of  beauty,  to  kalon,  to  epieikes,  the  beautiful,  the  becoming.
Its  very  rehgion  was  a religion  of  beauty  and  an  occasion  for
pleasant  ritual  and  festivals  and  for  artistic  creation,  an  aesthetic
enjoyment  touched  with  a superficial  religious  sense.  But  without
character,  without  some  kind  of  high  or  strong  discipline  there  is
no  enduring  power  of  life.  Athens  exhausted  its  vitahty  within
one  wonderful  century  which  left  it  enervated,  will-less,  unable
to  succeed  in  the  struggle  of  life,  uncreative.  It  turned  indeed
for  a time  precisely  to  that  which  had  been  lacking  to  it,  the
serious  pursuit  of  truth  and  the  evolution  of  systems  of  ethical
self-discipUne;  but  it  could  only  think,  it  could  not  successfully
practise.  The  later  Hellenic  mind  and  Athenian  centre  of  culture
gave  to  Rome  the  great  Stoic  system  of  ethical  discipline  which
saved  her  in  the  midst  of  the  orgies  of  her  first  imperial  century,
but  could  not  itself  be  stoical  in  its  practice;  for  to  Athens  and  to
the  characteristic  temperament  of  Hellas,  this  thought  was  a
straining  to  something  it  had  not  and  could  not  have;  it  was  the
opposite  of  its  nature  and  not  its  fulfilment.

This  insufficiency  of  the  aesthetic  view  of  life  becomes  yet
more  evident  when  we  come  down  to  its  other  great  example,
Italy  of  the  Renascence.  The  Renascence  was  regarded  at  one
time  as  pre-eminently  a revival  of  learning,  but  in  its  Medi-
terranean birth-place  it  was  rather  the  effiorescence  of  art  and
poetry  and  the  beauty  of  life.  Much  more  than  was  possible  even
in  the  laxest  times  of  Hellas,  aesthetic  culture  was  divorced  from
the  ethical  impulse  and  at  times  was  even  anti-ethical  and  re-


92


The  Human  Cycle

miniscent  of  the  license  of  imperial  Rome.  It  had  learning  and
curiosity,  but  gave  very  little  of  itself  to  high  thought  and  truth
and  the  more  finished  achievements  of  the  reason,  although  it
helped  to  make  free  the  way  for  philosophy  and  science.  It  so
corrupted  religion  as  to  provoke  in  the  ethically  minded  Teutonic
nations  the  violent  revolt  of  the  Reformation,  which,  though  it
vindicated  the  freedom  of  the  religious  mind,  was  an  insurgence
not  so  much  of  the  reason,  — that  was  left  to  Science,  — but  of
the  moral  instinct  and  its  ethical  need.  The  subsequent  prostra-
tion and  loose  weakness  of  Italy  was  the  inevitable  result  of  the
great  defect  of  its  period  of  fine  culture,  and  it  needed  for  its  re-
vival the  new  impulse  of  thought  and  will  and  character  given  to
it  by  Mazzini.  If  the  ethical  impulse  is  not  sufficient  by  itself  for
the  development  of  the  human  being,  yet  are  will,  character,  self-
discipline,  self-mastery  indispensable  to  that  development.  They
are  the  backbone  of  the  mental  body.

Neither  the  ethical  being  nor  the  aesthetic  being  is  the  whole
man,  nor  can  either  be  his  sovereign  principle;  they  are  merely
two  powerful  elements.  Ethical  conduct  is  not  the  whole  of  life;
even  to  say  that  it  is  three-fourths  of  life  is  to  indulge  in  a very
doubtful  mathematics.  We  cannot  assign  to  it  its  position  in  any
such  definite  language,  but  can  at  best  say  that  its  kernel  of  will,
character  and  self-discipline  are  almost  the  first  condition  for  hu-
man self-perfection.  The  aesthetic  sense  is  equally  indispensable,
for  without  that  the  self-perfection  of  the  mental  being  cannot
arrive  at  its  object,  which  is  on  the  mental  plane  the  right  and
harmonious  possession  and  enjoyment  of  the  truth,  power,
beauty  and  delight  of  human  existence.  But  neither  can  be  the
highest  principle  of  the  human  order.  We  can  combine  them;  we
can  enlarge  the  sense  of  ethics  by  the  sense  of  beauty  and  delight
and  introduce  into  it  to  correct  its  tendency  of  hardness  and
austerity  the  element  of  gentleness,  love,  amenity,  the  hedonistic
side  of  morals ; we  can  steady,  guide  and  strengthen  the  delight  of
life  by  the  introduction  of  the  necessary  will  and  austerity  and
self-discipline  which  will  give  it  endurance  and  purity.  These
two  powers  of  our  psychological  being,  which  represent  in  us  the
essential  principle  of  energy  and  the  essential  principle  of  delight,
— the  Indian  terms  are  more  profound  and  expressive,  Tapas  and


Aesthetic  and  Ethical  Culture


93


Ananda/  — can  be  thus  helped  by  each  other,  the  one  to  a richer,
the  other  to  a greater  self-expression.  But  that  even  this  much  re-
conciliation may  come  about  they  must  be  taken  up  and  enlight-
ened by  a higher  principle  which  must  be  capable  of  understand-
ing and  comprehending  both  equally  and  of  disengaging  and
combining  disinterestedly  their  purposes  and  potentialities.  That
higher  principle  seems  to  be  provided  for  us  by  the  human  faculty
of  reason  and  intelligent  will.  Our  crowning  capacity,  it  would
seem  to  be  by  right  the  crowned  sovereign  of  our  nature.


^ Tapas  is  the  energising  conscious-power  of  cosmic  being  by  which  the  world  is  created,
maintained  and  governed;  it  includes  all  concepts  of  force,  will,  energy,  power,  everything
dynamic  and  dynamising.  Ananda  is  the  essential  nature  of  bliss  of  the  cosmic  consciousness
and,  in  activity,  its  delight  of  self-creation  and  self-experience.


Chapter  XI


The  Reason  as  Governor  of  Life


Reason  using  the  intelligent  will  for  the
ordering  of  the  inner  and  the  outer  life  is  undoubtedly  the  highest
developed  faculty  of  man  at  his  present  point  of  evolution ; it  is  the
sovereign,  because  the  governing  and  self-governing  faculty  in
the  complexities  of  our  human  existence.  Man  is  distinguished
from  other  terrestrial  creatures  by  his  capacity  for  seeking  after
a rule  of  life,  a rule  of  his  being  and  his  works,  a principle  of
order  and  self-development,  which  is  not  the  first  instinctive,
original,  mechanically  self-operative  rule  of  his  natural  existence.
The  principle  he  looks  to  is  neither  the  unchanging,  unprogressive
order  of  the  fixed  natural  type,  nor  in  its  process  of  change  the
mechanical  evolution  we  see  in  the  lower  life,  an  evolution  which
operates  in  the  mass  rather  than  in  the  individual,  imperceptibly
to  the  knowledge  of  that  which  is  being  evolved  and  without  its
conscious  co-operation.  He  seeks  for  an  intelligent  rule  of  which
he  himself  shall  be  the  governor  and  master  or  at  least  a partially
free  administrator.  He  can  conceive  a progressive  order  by  which
he  shall  be  able  to  evolve  and  develop  his  capacities  far  beyond
their  original  limits  and  workings;  he  can  initiate  an  intelligent
evolution  which  he  himself  shall  determine  or  at  least  be  in  it  a
conscious  instrument,  more,  a co-operating  and  constantly  con-
sulted party.  The  rest  of  terrestrial  existence  is  helplessly  enslaved
and  tyrannised  over  by  its  nature,  but  the  instinct  of  man  when
he  finds  his  manhood  is  to  be  master  of  his  nature  and  free.

No  doubt  all  is  work  of  Nature  and  this  too  is  Nature;  it
proceeds  from  the  principle  of  being  which  constitutes  his  hu-
manity and  by  the  processes  which  that  principle  permits  and
which  are  natural  to  it.  But  still  it  is  a second  kind  of  Nature,  a
stage  of  being  in  which  Nature  becomes  self-conscious  in  the
individual,  tries  to  know,  modify,  alter  and  develop,  utilise,
consciously  experiment  with  her  self  and  her  potentialities.  In


The  Reason  as  Governor  of  Life  95

this  change  a momentous  self-discovery  intervenes;  there  appears
something  that  is  hidden  in  matter  and  in  the  first  disposition  of
life  and  has  not  clearly  emerged  in  the  animal  in  spite  of  its  pos-
session of  a mind;  there  appears  the  presence  of  the  Soul  in  things
which  at  first  was  concealed  in  its  own  natural  and  outward
workings,  absorbed  and  on  the  surface  at  least  self-obhvious.
Afterwards  it  becomes,  as  in  the  animal,  conscious  to  a certain
degree  on  the  surface,  but  is  still  helplessly  given  up  to  the  course
of  its  natural  workings  and,  not  understanding,  cannot  govern
itself  and  its  movements.  But  finally  in  man  it  turns  its  con-
sciousness upon  itself,  seeks  to  know,  endeavours  to  govern  in  the
individual  the  workings  of  his  nature  and  through  the  individual
and  the  combined  reason  and  energy  of  many  individuals  to
govern  too  as  far  as  possible  the  workings  of  Nature  in  mankind
and  in  things.  This  turning  of  the  consciousness  upon  itself  and  on
things,  which  man  represents,  has  been  the  great  crisis,  a pro-
longed and  developing  crisis,  in  the  terrestrial  evolution  of  the
soul  in  Nature.  There  have  been  others  before  it  in  the  past  of
the  earth,  such  as  that  which  brought  about  the  appearance  of
the  conscious  life  of  the  animal;  there  must  surely  be  another  in
its  future  in  which  a higher  spiritual  and  supramental  conscious-
ness shall  emerge  and  be  turned  upon  the  works  of  the  mind.
But  at  present  it  is  this  which  is  at  work;  a self-conscious  soul  in
mind,  mental  being,  manomaya  purusa,  struggles  to  arrive  at  some
inteUigent  ordering  of  its  self  and  life  and  some  indefinite,  per-
haps infinite  development  of  the  powers  and  potentialities  of  the
human  instrument.

The  intellectual  reason  is  not  man’s  only  means  of  know-
ledge. All  action,  all  perception,  all  aesthesis  and  sensation,  all
impulse  and  will,  all  imagination  and  creation  imply  a universal,
many-sided  force  of  knowledge  at  work  and  each  form  or  power
of  this  knowledge  has  within  its  own  distinct  nature  and  law  its
own  principle  of  order  and  arrangement,  its  logic  proper  to  itself,
and  need  not  follow,  still  less  be  identical  with  the  law  of  nature,
order  and  arrangement  which  the  intellectual  reason  would
assign  to  it  or  itself  follow  if  it  had  control  of  all  these  move-
ments. But  the  intellect  has  this  advantage  over  the  others  that
it  can  disengage  itself  from  the  work,  stand  back  from  it  to


% The  Human  Cycle

study  and  understand  it  disinterestedly,  analyse  its  processes,  dis-
engage its  principles.  None  of  the  other  powers  and  faculties  of
the  living  being  can  do  this;  for  each  exists  for  its  own  action,  is
confined  by  the  work  it  is  doing,  is  unable  to  see  beyond  it,
around  it,  into  it  as  the  reason  can;  the  principle  of  knowledge
inherent  within  each  force  is  involved  and  carried  along  in  the
action  of  the  force,  helps  to  shape  it,  but  is  also  itself  limited  by
its  own  formulations.  It  exists  for  the  fulfilment  of  the  action,
not  for  knowledge,  or  for  knowledge  only  as  part  of  the  action.
Moreover,  it  is  concerned  only  with  the  particular  action  or  work-
ing of  the  moment  and  does  not  look  back  reflectively  or  forward
intelligently  or  at  other  actions  and  forces  with  a power  of  clear
co-ordination.  No  doubt,  the  other  evolved  powers  of  the  living
being,  as  for  instance  the  instinct  whether  animal  or  human,  —
the  latter  inferior  precisely  because  it  is  disturbed  by  the  question-
ings and  seekings  of  reason,  — carry  in  themselves  their  own
force  of  past  experience,  of  instinctive  self-adaptation,  all  of
which  is  really  accumulated  knowledge,  and  they  hold  sometimes
this  store  so  firmly  that  they  are  transmitted  as  a sure  inheritance
from  generation  to  generation.  But  all  this,  just  because  it  is
instinctive,  not  turned  upon  itself  reflectively,  is  of  great  use  in-
deed to  life  for  the  conduct  of  its  operations,  but  of  none  — so
long  as  it  is  not  taken  up  by  the  reason  — for  the  particular
purpose  man  has  in  view,  a new  order  of  the  dealings  of
the  soul  in  Nature,  a free,  rational,  intelligently  co-ordinating,
intelligently  self-observing,  intelligently  experimenting  mastery
of  the  workings  of  force  by  the  conscious  spirit.

Reason,  on  the  other  hand,  exists  for  the  sake  of  knowledge,
can  prevent  itself  from  being  carried  away  by  the  action,  can
stand  back  from  it,  intelligently  study,  accept,  refuse,  modify,
alter,  improve,  combine  and  recombine  the  workings  and  capa-
cities of  the  forces  in  operation,  can  repress  here,  indulge  there,
strive  towards  an  intelligent,  intelligible,  willed  and  organised
perfection.  Reason  is  science,  it  is  conscious  art,  it  is  invention.
It  is  observation  and  can  seize  and  arrange  truth  of  facts;  it  is
speculation  and  can  extricate  and  forecast  truth  of  potentiality.
It  is  the  idea  and  its  fulfilment,  the  ideal  and  its  bringing  to  frui-
tion. It  can  look  through  the  immediate  appearance  and  unveil


The  Reason  as  Governor  of  Life  97

the  hidden  truths  behind  it.  It  is  the  servant  and  yet  the  master
of  all  utilities;  and  it  can,  putting  away  all  utiUties,  seek
disinterestedly  Truth  for  its  own  sake  and  by  finding  it  reveal  a
whole  world  of  new  possible  utilities.  Therefore  it  is  a sovereign
power  by  which  man  has  become  possessed  of  himself,  student
and  master  of  his  own  forces,  the  godhead  on  which  the  other
godheads  in  him  have  leaned  for  help  in  their  ascent;  it  has  been
the  Prometheus  of  the  mythical  parable,  the  helper,  instructor,
elevating  friend,  civiliser  of  mankind.

Recently,  however,  there  has  been  a very  noticeable  revolt
of  the  human  mind  against  this  sovereignty  of  the  intellect,  a
dissatisfaction,  as  we  might  say,  of  the  reason  with  itself  and  its
own  limitations  and  an  inclination  to  give  greater  freedom  and
a larger  importance  to  other  powers  of  our  nature.  The  sove-
reignty of  the  reason  in  man  has  been  always  indeed  imperfect,
in  fact,  a troubled,  struggling,  resisted  and  often  defeated  rule;
but  still  it  has  been  recognised  by  the  best  intelligence  of  the  race
as  the  authority  and  law-giver.  Its  only  widely  acknowledged  rival
has  been  faith.  Religion  alone  has  been  strongly  successful  in
its  claim  that  reason  must  be  silent  before  it  or  at  least  that  there
are  fields  to  which  it  cannot  extend  itself  and  where  faith  alone
ought  to  be  heard ; but  for  a time  even  ReUgion  has  had  to  forego
or  abate  its  absolute  pretension  and  to  submit  to  the  sovereignty
of  the  intellect.  Life,  imagination,  emotion,  the  ethical  and  the
aesthetic  need  have  often  claimed  to  exist  for  their  own  sake  and
to  follow  their  own  bent,  practically  they  have  often  enforced
their  claim,  but  they  have  still  been  obliged  in  general  to  work
under  the  inquisition  and  partial  control  of  reason  and  to  refer
to  it  as  arbiter  and  judge.  Now,  however,  the  thinking  mind  of
the  race  has  become  more  disposed  to  question  itself  and  to  ask
whether  existence  is  not  too  large,  profound,  complex  and  mys-
terious a thing  to  be  entirely  seized  and  governed  by  the  powers
of  the  intellect.  Vaguely  it  is  felt  that  there  is  some  greater  god-
head than  the  reason.

To  some  this  godhead  is  Life  itself  or  a secret  Will  in  life;
they  claim  that  this  must  rule  and  that  the  intelligence  is  only
useful  in  so  far  as  it  serves  that  and  that  Life  must  not  be  re-
pressed, minimised  and  mechanised  by  the  arbitrary  control  of


98


The  Human  Cycle

reason.  Life  has  greater  powers  in  it  which  must  be  given  a freer
play;  for  it  is  they  alone  that  evolve  and  create.  On  the  other
hand,  it  is  felt  that  reason  is  too  analytical,  too  arbitrary,  that  it
falsifies  life  by  its  distinctions  and  set  classifications  and  the  fixed
rules  based  upon  them  and  that  there  is  some  profounder  and
larger  power  of  knowledge,  intuition  or  another,  which  is  more
deeply  in  the  secrets  of  existence.  This  larger  intimate  power  is
more  one  with  the  depths  and  sources  of  existence  and  more
able  to  give  us  the  indivisible  truths  of  life,  its  root  realities  and
to  work  them  out,  not  in  an  artificial  and  mechanical  spirit  but
with  a divination  of  the  secret  Will  in  existence  and  in  a free
harmony  with  its  large,  subtle  and  infinite  methods.  In  fact,
what  the  growing  subjectivism  of  the  human  mind  is  beginning
obscurely  to  see  is  that  the  one  sovereign  godhead  is  the  soul  itself
which  may  use  reason  for  one  of  its  ministers,  but  cannot  subject
itself  to  its  own  intellectuality  without  limiting  its  potentialities
and  artificialising  its  conduct  of  existence.

The  highest  power  of  reason,  because  its  pure  and  charac-
teristic power,  is  the  disinterested  seeking  after  true  knowledge.
When  knowledge  is  pursued  for  its  own  sake,  then  alone  are  we
likely  to  arrive  at  true  knowledge.  Afterwards  we  may  utilise
that  knowledge  for  various  ends;  but  if  from  the  beginning  we
have  only  particular  ends  in  view,  then  we  limit  our  intellectual
gain,  limit  our  view  of  things,  distort  the  truth  because  we  cast  it
into  the  mould  of  some  particular  idea  or  utility  and  ignore  or
deny  all  that  conflicts  with  that  utility  or  that  set  idea.  By  so
doing  we  may  indeed  make  the  reason  act  with  great  immediate
power  within  the  limits  of  the  idea  or  the  utility  we  have  in  view,
just  as  instinct  in  the  animal  acts  with  great  power  within  certain
limits,  for  a certain  end,  yet  finds  itself  helpless  outside  those
limits.  It  is  so  indeed  that  the  ordinary  man  uses  his  reason  —
as  the  animal  uses  his  hereditary,  transmitted  instinct  — with
an  absorbed  devotion  of  it  to  the  securing  of  some  particular
utility  or  with  a useful  but  hardly  luminous  application  of  a
customary  and  transmitted  reasoning  to  the  necessary  practical
interests  of  his  life.  Even  the  thinking  man  ordinarily  limits  his
reason  to  the  working  out  of  certain  preferred  ideas;  he  ignores
or  denies  all  that  is  not  useful  to  these  or  does  not  assist  or  justify


The  Reason  as  Governor  of  Life


99


or  actually  contradicts  or  seriously  modifies  them,  — except  in
so  far  as  life  itself  compels  or  cautions  him  to  accept  modifica-
tions for  the  time  being  or  ignore  their  necessity  at  his  peril.  It
is  in  such  limits  that  man’s  reason  normally  acts.  He  follows
most  commonly  some  interest  or  set  of  interests;  he  tramples
down  or  through  or  ignores  or  pushes  aside  all  truth  of  life  and
existence,  truth  of  ethics,  truth  of  beauty,  truth  of  reason,  truth
of  spirit  which  conflicts  with  his  chosen  opinions  and  interests;
if  he  recognises  these  foreign  elements,  it  is  nominally,  not  in
practice,  or  else  with  a distortion,  a glossing  which  nullifies  their
consequences,  perverts  their  spirit  or  whittles  down  their  signi-
ficance. It  is  this  subjection  to  the  interests,  needs,  instincts,  pas-
sions, prejudices,  traditional  ideas  and  opinions  of  the  ordinary
mind^  which  constitutes  the  irrationality  of  human  existence.

But  even  the  man  who  is  capable  of  governing  his  life  by
ideas,  who  recognises,  that  is  to  say,  that  it  ought  to  express
clearly  conceived  truths  and  principles  of  his  being  or  of  all  being
and  tries  to  find  out  or  to  know  from  others  what  these  are,  is
not  often  capable  of  the  highest,  the  free  and  disinterested  use  of
his  rational  mind.  As  others  are  subject  to  the  tyranny  of  their
interests,  prejudices,  instincts  or  passions,  so  he  is  subjected  to
the  tyranny  of  ideas.  Indeed,  he  turns  these  ideas  into  interests,
obscures  them  with  his  prejudices  and  passions  and  is  unable  to
think  freely  about  them,  unable  to  distinguish  their  limits  or  the
relation  to  them  of  other,  different  and  opposite  ideas  and  the
equal  right  of  these  also  to  existence.  Thus,  as  we  constantly
see,  individuals,  masses  of  men,  whole  generations  are  carried
away  by  certain  ethical,  religious,  aesthetic,  political  ideas  or  a
set  of  ideas,’ espouse  them  with  passion,  pursue  them  as  interests,
seek  to  make  them  a system  and  lasting  rule  of  life  and  are  swept
away  in  the  drive  of  their  action  and  do  not  really  use  the  free
and  disinterested  reason  for  the  right  knowledge  of  existence  and
for  its  right  and  sane  government.  The  ideas  are  to  a certain  ex-
tent fulfilled,  they  triumph  for  a time,  but  their  very  success
brings  disappointment  and  disillusionment.  This  happens,  first,

1 The  ordinary  mind  in  man  is  not  truly  the  thinking  mind  proper,  it  is  a life-mind,  a
vital  mind  as  we  may  call  it,  which  has  learned  to  think  and  even  to  reason  but  for  its  own
ends  and  on  its  own  lines,  hot  on  those  of  a true  mind  of  knowledge.


100


The  Human  Cycle


because  they  can  only  succeed  by  compromises  and  pacts  with
the  inferior,  irrational  life  of  man  which  diminish  their  validity
and  tarnish  their  light  and  glory.  Often  indeed  their  triumph  is
convicted  of  unreality,  and  doubt  and  disillusionment  fall  on  the
faith  and  enthusiasm  which  brought  victory  to  their  side.  But
even  were  it  not  so,  the  ideas  themselves  are  partial  and  insuffi-
cient; not  only  have  they  a very  partial  triumph,  but  if  their  suc-
cess were  complete,  it  would  still  disappoint,  because  they  are  not
the  whole  truth  of  life  and  therefore  cannot  securely  govern
and  perfect  life.  Life  escapes  from  the  formulas  and  systems  which
our  reason  labours  to  impose  on  it;  it  proclaims  itself  too
complex,  too  full  of  infinite  potentialities  to  be  tyrannised  over
by  the  arbitrary  intellect  of  man.

This  is  the  cause  why  all  human  systems  have  failed  in  the
end;  for  they  have  never  been  anything  but  a partial  and  con-
fused application  of  reason  to  life.  Moreover,  even  where
they  have  been  most  clear  and  rational,  these  systems  have
pretended  that  their  ideas  were  the  whole  truth  of  life  and  tried
so  to  apply  them.  This  they  could  not  be,  and  life  in  the  end  has
broken  or  undermined  them  and  passed  on  to  its  own  large  in-
calculable movement.  Mankind,  thus  using  its  reason  as  an  aid
and  justification  for  its  interests  and  passions,  thus  obeying  the
drive  of  a partial,  a mixed  and  imperfect  rationality  towards
action,  thus  striving  to  govern  the  complex  totalities  of  life  by
partial  truths,  has  stumbled  on  from  experiment  to  experiment,
always  believing  that  it  is  about  to  grasp  the  crown,  always
finding  that  it  has  fulfilled  as  yet  little  or  nothing  of  what  it  has  to
accomplish.  Compelled  by  nature  to  apply  reason  to  life,  yet
possessing  only  a partial  rationality  limited  in  itself  and  confused
by  the  siege  of  the  lower  members,  it  could  do  nothing  else.  For
the  limited  imperfect  human  reason  has  no  self-sufficient  light  of
its  own;  it  is  obliged  to  proceed  by  observation,  by  experiment,
by  action,  through  errors  and  stumblings  to  a larger  experience.

But  behind  all  this  continuity  of  failure  there  has  persisted
a faith  that  the  reason  of  man  would  end  in  triumphing  over  its
difficulties,  that  it  would  purify  and  enlarge  itself,  become
sufficient  to  its  work  and  at  last  subject  rebellious  life  to  its  con-
trol. For,  apart  from  the  stumbling  action  of  the  world,  there


The  Reason  as  Governor  of  Life  101

has  been  a labour  of  the  individual  thinker  in  man  and  this  has
achieved  a higher  quality  and  risen  to  a loftier  and  clearer  atmos-
phere above  the  general  human  thought-levels.  Here  there  has
been  the  work  of  a reason  that  seeks  always  after  knowledge  and
strives  patiently  to  find  out  truth  for  itself,  without  bias,  without
the  interference  of  distorting  interests,  to  study  everything,  to  ana-
lyse everything,  to  know  the  principle  and  process  of  everything.
Philosophy,  Science,  learning,  the  reasoned  arts,  all  the  agelong
labour  of  the  critical  reason  in  man  have  been  the  result  of  this
effort.  In  the  modern  era  under  the  impulsion  of  Science  this
effort  assumed  enormous  proportions  and  claimed  for  a time  to
examine  successfully  and  lay  down  finally  the  true  principle  and
the  sufficient  rule  of  process  not  only  for  all  the  activities  of
Nature,  but  for  all  the  activities  of  man.  It  has  done  great  things,
but  it  has  not  been  in  the  end  a success.  The  human  mind  is
beginning  to  perceive  that  it  has  left  the  heart  of  almost  every
problem  untouched  and  illumined  only  outsides  and  a certain
range  of  processes.  There  has  been  a great  and  ordered  classi-
fication and  mechanisation,  a great  discovery  and  practical  result
of  increasing  knowledge,  but  only  on  the  physical  surface  of
things.  Vast  abysses  of  Truth  fie  below  in  which  are  concealed
the  real  springs,  the  mysterious  powers  and  secretly  decisive
influences  of  existence.  It  is  a question  whether  the  intellectual
reason  will  ever  be  able  to  give  us  an  adequate  account  of  these
deeper  and  greater  things  or  subject  them  to  the  intelligent  will-
as  it  has  succeeded  in  explaining  and  canalising,  though  still
imperfectly,  yet  with  much  show  of  triumphant  result,  the  forces
of  physical  Nature.  But  these  other  powers  are  much  larger,
subtler,  deeper  down,  more  hidden,  elusive  and  variable  than
those  of  physical  Nature.

The  whole  difficulty  of  the  reason  in  trying  to  govern  our
existence  is  that  because  of  its  own  inherent  limitations  it  is
unable  to  deal  with  fife  in  its  complexity  or  in  its  integral  move-
ments; it  is  compelled  to  break  it  up  into  parts,  to  make  more  or
less  artificial  classifications,  to  build  systems  with  limited  data
which  are  contradicted,  upset  or  have  to  be  continually  modified
by  other  data,  to  work  out  a selection  of  regulated  potentialities
which  is  broken  down  by  the  bursting  of  a new  wave  of  yet  un-


102  The  Human  Cycle

regulated  potentialities.  It  would  almost  appear  even  that  there
are  two  worlds,  the  world  of  ideas  proper  to  the  intellect  and  the
world  of  life  which  escapes  from  the  full  control  of  the  reason,
and  that  to  bridge  adequately  the  gulf  between  these  two  domains
is  beyond  the  power  and  province  of  the  reason  and  the  intelli-
gent will.  It  would  seem  that  these  can  only  create  either  a series
of  more  or  less  empirical  compromises  or  else  a series  of  arbitrary
and  practically  inapplicable  or  only  partially  applicable  systems.
The  reason  of  man  struggling  with  life  becomes  either  an  empiric
or  a doctrinaire.

Reason  can  indeed  make  itself  a mere. servant  of  life;  it  can
limit  itself  to  the  work  the  average  normal  man  demands  from  it,
content  to  furnish  means  and  justifications  for  the  interests,  pas-
sions, prejudices  of  man  and  clothe  them  with  a misleading
garb  of  rationality  or  at  most  supply  them  with  their  own  secure
and  enlightened  order  or  with  rules  of  caution  and  self-restraint
sufficient  to  prevent  their  more  egregious  stumbles  and  most
unpleasant  consequences.  But  this  is  obviously  to  abdicate  its
throne  or  its  highest  office  and  to  betray  the  hope  with  which
man  set  forth  on  his  journey.  It  may  again  determine  to  found
itself  securely  on  the  facts  of  life,  disinterestedly  indeed,  that  is
to  say,  with  a dispassionate  critical  observation  of  its  principles
and  processes,  but  with  a prudent  resolve  not  to  venture  too
much  forward  into  the  unknown  or  elevate  itself  far  beyond  the
immediate  realities  of  our  apparent  or  phenomenal  existence.
But  here  again  it  abdicates ; either  it  becomes  a mere  critic  and
observer  or  else,  so  far  as  it  tries  to  lay  down  laws,  it  does  so
within  very  narrow  limits  of  immediate  potentiality  and  it  re-
nounces man’s  drift  towards  higher  possibilities,  his  saving  gift
of  idealism.  In  this  limited  use  of  the  reason  subjected  to  the  rule
of  an  immediate,  an  apparent  vital  and  physical  practicality  man
cannot  rest  long  satisfied.  For  his  nature  pushes  him  towards
the  heights;  it  demands  a constant  effort  of  self-transcendence
and  the  impulsion  towards  things  unachieved  and  even  imme-
diately impossible.

On  the  other  hand,  when  it  attempts  a higher  action  reason
separates  itself  from  life.  Its  very  attempt  at  a disinterested  and
dispassionate  knowledge  carries  it  to  an  elevation  where  it  loses


The  Reason  as.  Governor  of  Life  103

hold  of  that  other  knowledge  which  our  instincts  and  impulses
carry  within  themselves  and  which,  however  imperfect,  obscure
and  limited,  is  still  a hidden  action  of  the  universal  Knowledge-
Will  inherent  in  existence  that  creates  and  directs  all  things
according  to  their  nature.  True,  even  Science  and  Philosophy
are  never  entirely  dispassionate  and  disinterested.  They  fall  into
subjection  to  the  tyranny  of  their  own  ideas,  their  partial  systems,
their  hasty  generalisations  and  by  the  innate  drive  of  man  towards
practice  they  seek  to  impose  these  upon  the  life.  But  even  so  they
enter  into  a world  either  of  abstract  ideas  or  of  ideals  or  of
rigid  laws  from  which  the  complexity  of  life  escapes.  The  ideal-
ist, the  thinker,  the  philosopher,  the  poet  and  artist,  even  the
moralist,  all  those  who  live  much  in  ideas,  when  they  come  to
grapple  at  close  quarters  with  practical  life,  seem  to  find  them-
selves something  at  a loss  and  are  constantly  defeated  in  their
endeavour  to  govern  life  by  their  ideas.  They  exercise  a powerful
influence,  but  it  is  indirectly,  more  by  throwing  their  ideas  into
Life  which  does  with  them  what  the  secret  Will  in  it  chooses  than
by  a direct  and  successfully  ordered  action.  Not  that  the  pure
empiric,  the  practical  man  really  succeeds  any  better  by  his  direct
action;  for  that  too  is  taken  by  the  secret  Will  in  life  and  turned
to  quite  other  ends  than  the  practical  man  had  intended.  On  the
contrary,  ideals  and  idealists  are  necessary;  ideals  are  the  savour
and  sap  of  life,  idealists  the  most  powerful  diviners  and  assistants
of  its  purposes.  But  reduce  your  ideal  to  a system  and  it  at  once
begins  to  fail;  apply  your  general  laws  and  fixed  ideas  syste-
matically as  the  doctrinaire  would  do,  and  Life  very  soon  breaks
through  or  writhes  out  of  their  hold  or  transforms  your  system,
even  while  it  nominally  exists,  into  something  the  originator
would  not  recognise  and  would  repudiate  perhaps  as  the  very
contradiction  of  the  principles  which  he  sought  to  eternise.

The  root  of  the  difficulty  is  this  that  at  the  very  basis  of  all
oiir  life  and  existence,  internal  and  external,  there  is  something
on  which  the  intellect  can  never  lay  a controlling  hold,  the  Abso-
lute, the  Infinite.  Behind  everything  in  life  there  is  an  Absolute,
which  that  thing  is  seeking  after  in  its  own  way;  everything
finite  is  striving  to  express  an  infinite  which  it  feels  to  be  its  real
truth.  Moreover,  it  is  not  only  each  class,  each  type,  each  ten-


104


The  Human  Cycle


dency  in  Nature  that  is  thus  impelled  to  strive  after  its  own  secret
truth  in  its  own  way,  but  each  individual  brings  in  his  own
variations.  Thus  there  is  not  only  an  Absolute,  an  Infinite  in
itself  which  governs  its  own  expression  in  many  forms  and
tendencies,  but  there  is  also  a principle  of  infinite  potentiality
and  variation  quite  baffling  to  the  reasoning  intelligence;  for
the  reason  deals  successfully  only  with  the  settled  and  the  finite.
In  man  this  difficulty  reaches  its  acme.  For  not  only  is  man-
kind unlimited  in  potentiality;  not  only  is  each  of  its  powers
and  tendencies  seeking  after  its  own  absolute  in  its  own  way  and
therefore  naturally  restless  under  any  rigid  control  by  the  reason;
but  in  each  man  their  degrees,  methods,  combinations  vary,  each
man  belongs  not  only  to  the  common  humanity,  but  to  the
Infinite  in  himself  and  is  therefore  unique.  It  is  because  this  is
the  reality  of  our  existence  that  the  intellectual  reason  and  the
intelligent  will  cannot  deal  with  life  as  its  sovereign,  even  though
they  may  be  at  present  our  supreme  instruments  and  may  have
been  in  our  evolution  supremely  important  and  helpful.  The
reason  can  govern,  but  only  as  a minister,  imperfectly,  or  as  a
general  arbiter  and  giver  of  suggestions  which  are  not  really
supreme  commands,  or  as  one  channel  of  the  sovereign  autho-
rity, because  that  hidden  Power  acts  at  present  not  directly  but
through  many  agents  and  messengers.  The  real  sovereign  is
another  than  the  reasoning  intelligence.  Man’s  impulse  to  be
free,  master  of  Nature  in  himself  and  his  environment  cannot  be
really  fulfilled  until  his  self-consciousness  has  grown  beyond
the  rational  mentality,  become  aware  of  the  true  sovereign  and
either  identified  itself  with  him  or  entered  into  constant  commu-
nion with  his  supreme  will  and  knowledge.


Chapter  XII


The  Office  and  Limitations
of  the  Reason

If  the  reason  is  not  the  sovereign  master
of  our  being  nor  even  intended  to  be  more  than  an  intermediary
or  minister,  it  cannot  succeed  in  giving  a perfect  law  to  the  other
estates  of  the  realm,  although  it  may  impose  on  them  a temporary
and  imperfect  order  as  a passage  to  a higher  perfection.  The
rational  or  intellectuarman  is  not  the  last  and  highest  ideal  of
manhood,  nor  would  a rational  society  be  the  last  and  highest
expression  of  the  possibilities  of  an  aggregate  human  life,  — un-
less indeed  we  give  to  the  word,  reason,  a wider  meaning  than  it
now  possesses  and  include  in  it  the  combined  wisdom  of  all
our  powers  of  knowledge,  those  which  stand  below ‘and  above  the
understanding  and  logical  mind  as  well  as  this  strictly  rational
part  of  our  nature.  The  Spirit  that  manifests  itself  in  man  and
dominates  secretly  the  phases  of  his  development,  is  greater  and
profounder  than  his  intellect  and  drives  towards  a perfection  that
cannot  be  shut  in  by  the  arbitrary  constructions  of  the  human
reason.

Meanwhile,  the  intellect  performs  its  function;  it  leads  man
to  the  gates  of  a greater  self-consciousness  and  places  him  with
unbandaged  eyes  on  that  wide  threshold  where  a more  luminous
Angel  has  to  take  him  by  the  hand.  It  takes  first  the  lower  powers
of  his  existence,  each  absorbed  in  its  own  urge,  each  striving
with  a blind  self-sufficiency  towards  the  fulfilment  of  its  own
instincts  and  primary  impulses;  it  teaches  them  to  understand
themselves  and  to  look  through  the  reflecting  eyes  of  the  intelli-
gence on  the  laws  of  their  own  action.  It  enables  them  to  discern
intelligently  the  high  in  themselves  from  the  low,  the  pure  from
the  impure  and  out  of  a crude  confusion  to  arrive  at  more  and
more  luminous  formulas  of  their  possibilities.  It  gives  them
self-knowledge  and  is  a guide,  teacher,  purifier,  liberator.  For


106


The  Human  Cycle


it  enables  them  also  to  look  beyond  themselves  and  at  each  other
and  to  draw  upon  each  other  for  fresh  motives  and  a richer
working.  It  strengthens  and  purifies  the  hedonistic  and  the'
aesthetic  activities  and  softens  their  quarrel  with  the  ethical  mind
and  instinct;  it  gives  them  solidity  and  seriousness,  brings  them
to  the  support  of  the  practical  and  dynamic  powers  and  allies
them  more  closely  to  the  strong  actualities  of  life.  It  sweetens
the  ethical  will  by  infusing  into  it  psychic,  hedonistic  and  aesthe-
tic elements  and  ennobles  by  all  these  separately  or  together  the
practical,  dynamic  and  utilitarian  temperament  of  the  human
being.  At  the  same  time  it  plays  the  part  of  a judge  and  legislator,
seeks  to  fix  rules,  provide  systems  and  regularised  combinations
which  shall  enable  the  powers  of  the  human  soul  to  walk  by  a
settled  path  and  act  according  to  a sure  law,  an  ascertained  mea-
sure and  in  a balanced  rhythm.  Here  it  finds  after  a time  that  its
legislative  action  becomes  a force  for  limitation  and  turns  into  a
bondage  and  that  the  regularised  system  which  it  has  imposed
in  the  interests  of  order  and  conservation  becomes  a cause  of
petrifaction  and  the  sealing  up  of  the  fountains  of  fife.  It  has  to
bring  in  its  own  saving  faculty  of  doubt.  Under  the  impulse  of
the  intelligence  warned  by  the  obscure  revolt  of  the  oppressed
springs  of  life,  ethics,  aesthetics,  the  social,  political,  economic
rule  begin  to  question  themselves  and,  if  this  at  first  brings  in
again  some  confusion,  disorder  and  uncertainty,  yet  it  awakens
new  movements  of  imagination,  insight,  self-knowledge  and  self-
realisation  by  which  old  systems  and  formulas  are  transformed
or  disappear,  new  experiments  are  made  and  in  the  end  larger
potentialities  and  combinations  are  brought  into  play.  By  this
double  action  of  the  intelligence,  affirming  and  imposing  what  it
has  seen  and  again  in  due  season  questioning  what  has  been
accomplished  in  order  to  make  a new  affirmation,  fixing  a rule
and  order  and  liberating  from  rule  and  order,  the  progress  of  the
race  is  assured,  however  uncertain  may  seem  its  steps  and  stages.

But  the  action  of  the  intelligence  is  not  only  turned  down-
ward and  outward  upon  our  subjective  and  external  life  to
understand  it  and  determine  the  law  and  order  of  its  present
movement  and  its  future  potentialities.  It  has  also  an  upward  and
inward  eye  and  a more  luminous  functioning  by  which  it  accepts


107


The  Office  and  Limitations  of  the  Reason

divinations  from  the  hidden  eternities.  It  is  opened  in  this  power
of  vision  to  a Truth  above  it  from  which  it  derives,  however  im-
perfectly and  as  from  behind  a veil,  an  indirect  knowledge  of*the
universal  principles  of  our  existence  and  its  possibilities;  it  re-
ceives and  turns  what  it  can  seize  of  them  into  intellectual  forms
and  these  provide  us  with  large  governing  ideas  by  which  our
efforts  can  be  shaped  and  around  which  they  can  be  concen-
trated or  massed;  it  defines  the  ideals  which  we  seek  to  accom-
plish. It  provides  us  with  the  great  ideas  that  are  forces  {idies
forces),  ideas  which  in  their  own  strength  impose  themselves
upon  our  life  and  compel  it  into  their  moulds.  Only  the  forms
we  give  these  ideas  are  intellectual;  they  themselves  descend
from  a plane  of  truth  of  being  where  knowledge  and  force  are
one,  the  idea  and  the  power  of  self-fulfilment  in  the  idea  are
inseparable.  Unfortunately,  when  translated  into  the  forms  of
our  intelligence  which  acts  only  by  a separating  and  combining
analysis  and  synthesis  and  into  the  effort  of  our  life  which
advances  by  a sort  of  experimental  and  empirical  seeking,
these  powers  become  disparate  and  conflicting  ideals  which  we
have  all  the  difficulty  in  the  world  to  bring  into  any  kind  of
satisfactory  harmony.  Such  are  the  primary  principles  of
hberty  and  order,  good,  beauty  and  truth,  the  ideal  of  power
and  the  ideal  of  love,  individualism  and  collectivism,  self-
denial  and  self-fulfilment  and  a hundred  others.  In  each  sphere
of  human  life,  in  each  part  of  our  being  and  our  action  the
intellect  presents  us  with  the  opposition  of  a number  of  such
master  ideas  and  such  conflicting  principles.  It  finds  each  to  be
a truth  to  which  something  essential  in  our  being  responds,
— in  our  higher  nature  a law,  in  our  lower  nature  an  instinct.
It  seeks  to  fulfil  each  in  turn,  builds  a system  of  action  round
it  and  goes  from  one  to  the  other  and  back  again  to  what  it  has
left.  Or  it  tries  to  combine  them  but  is  contented  with  none  of
the  combinations  it  has  made  because  none  brings  about  their
perfect  reconciliation  or  their  satisfied  oneness.  That  indeed
belongs  to  a larger  and  higher  consciousness,  not  yet  attained
by  mankind,  where  these  opposites  are  ever  harmonised  and
even  unified  because  in  their  origin  they  are  eternally  one.  But
still  every  enlarged  attempt  of  the  intelligence  thus  dealing  with


108


The  Human  Cycle

our  inner  and  outer  life  increases  the  width  and  wealth  of  our
nature,  opens  it  to  larger  possibilities  of  self-knowledge  and
self-realisation  and  brings  us  nearer  to  our  awakening  into  that
greater  consciousness.

The  individual  and  social  progress  of  man  has  been  thus
a double  movement  of  self-illumination  and  self-harmonising
with  the  intelligence  and  the  intelligent  will  as  the  intermediaries
between  his  soul  and  its  works.  He  has  had  to  bring  out
numberless  possibilities  of  self-understanding,  self-mastery,  self-
formation out  of  his  first  crude  life  of  instincts  and  impulses ; he
has  been  constantly  impelled  to  convert  that  lower  animal  or
half-animal  existence  with  its  imperfect  self-conscience  into  the
stuff  of  intelligent  being,  instincts  into  ideas,  impulses  into
ordered  movements  of  an  intelligent  will.  But  as  he  has  to
proceed  out  of  ignorance  into  knowledge  by  a slow  labour  of
self-recognition  and  mastery  of  his  surroundings  and  his  material
and  his  intelligence  is  incapable  of  seizing  comprehensively  the
whole  of  himself  in  knowledge,  unable  to  work  out  compre-
hensively the  mass  of  his  possibilities  in  action,  he  has  had  to
proceed  piecemeal,  by  partial  experiments,  by  creation  of  differ-
ent types,  by  a constant  swinging  backward  and  forward  between
the  various  possibihties  before  him  and  the  different  elements
he  has  to  harmonise.

It  is  not  only  that  he  has  to  contrive  continually  some
new  harmony  between  the  various  elements  of  his  being,  physi-
cal, vitalistic,  practical  and  dynamic,  aesthetic,  emotional  and
hedonistic,  ethical,  intellectual,  but  each  of  them  again  has  to
arrive  at  some  order  of  its  own  disparate  materials.  In  his  ethics
he  is  divided  by  different  moral  tendencies,  justice  and  charity,
self-help  and  altruism,  self-increase  and  self-abnegation,  the
tendencies  of  strength  and  the  tendencies  of  love,  the  moral
rule  of  activism  and  the  moral  rule  of  quietism.  His  emotions
are  necessary  to  his  development  and  their  indulgence  essential
to  the  outflowering  of  his  rich  humanity;  yet  is  he  constantly
called  upon  to  coerce  and  deny  them,  nor  is  there  any  sure  rule
to  guide  him  in  the  perplexity  of  this  twofold  need.  His  hedon-
istic impulse  is  called  many  ways  by  different  fields,  objects,
ideals  of  self-satisfaction.  His  aesthetic  enjoyment,  his  aesthetic


109


The  Office  and  Limitations  of  the  Reason

creation  forms  for  itself  under  the  stress  of  the  intelligence
different  laws  and  forms;  each  seeks  to  impose  itself  as  the
best  and  the  standard,  yet  each,  if  its  claim  were  allowed,  would
by  its  unjust  victory  impoverish  and  imprison  his  faculty  and  his
felicity  in  its  exercise.  His  pohtics  and  society  are  a series  of
adventures  and  experiments  among  various  possibilities  of
autocracy,  monarchism,  military  aristocracy,  mercantile  oli-
garchy, open  or  veiled  plutocracy,  pseudo-democracy  of  various
kinds,  bourgeois  or  proletarian,  individualistic  or  collectivist
or  bureaucratic,  socialism  awaiting  him,  anarchism  looming
beyond  it:  and  all  these  correspond  to  some  truth  of  his  social
being,  some  need  of  his  complex  social  nature,  some  instinct
of  force  in  it  which  demands  that  form  for  its  effectuation.
Mankind  works  out  these  difficulties  under  the  stress  of  the
spirit  within  it  by  throwing  out  a constant  variation  of  types,
types  of  character  and  temperament,  types  of  practical  activity,
aesthetic  creation,  polity,  society,  ethical  order,  intellectual
system,  which  vary  from  the  pure  to  the  mixed,  from  the  simple
harmony  to  the  complex;  each  and  all  of  these  are  so  many
experiments  of  individual  and  collective  self-formation  in  the
light  of  a progressive  and  increasing  knowledge.  That  knowledge
is  governed  by  a number  of  conflicting  ideas  and  ideals  around
which  these  experiments  group  themselves:  each  of  them  is
gradually  pushed  as  far  as  possible  in  its  purity  and  again
mixed  and  combined  as  much  as  possible  with  others  so  that
there  may  be  a more  complex  form  and  an  enriched  action.
Each  type  has  to  be  broken  in  turn  to  yield  place  to  new  types
and  each  combination  has  to  give  way  to  the  possibility  of  a
new  combination.  Through  it  all  there  is  growing  an  accu-
mulating stock  of  self-experience  and  self-actualisation  of
which  the  ordinary  man  accepts  some  current  formulation
conventionally  as  if  it  were  an  absolute  law  and  truth,  — often
enough  he  even  thinks  it  to  be  that,  — but  which  the  more
developed  human  being  seeks  always  either  to  break  or  to
enlarge  and  make  more  profound  or  subtle  in  order  to  increase
or  make  room  for  an  increase  of  human  capacity,  perfectibility,
happiness.

This  view  of  human  life  and  of  the  process  of  our  develop-


no


The  Human  Cycle


ment,  to  which  subjectivism  readily  leads  us,  gives  us  a truer
vision  of  the  place  of  the  intellect  in  the  human  movement.
We  have  seen  that  the  intellect  has  a double  working,  dis-
passionate and  interested,  self-centred  or  subservient  to  move-
ments not  its  own.  The  one  is  a disinterested  pursuit  of  truth
for  the  sake  of  Truth  and  of  knowledge  for  the  sake  of  Know-
ledge without  any  ulterior  motive,  with  every  consideration  put
away  except  the  rule  of  keeping  the  eye  on  the  object,  on  the
fact  under  enquiry  and  finding  out  its  truth,  its  process,  its  law.
The  other  is  coloured  by  the  passion  for  practice,  the  desire
to  govern  life  by  the  truth  discovered  or  the  fascination  of  an
idea  which  we  labour  to  establish  as  the  sovereign  law  of  our  life
and  action.  We  have  seen  indeed  that  this  is  the  superiority  of
reason  over  the  other  faculties  of  man  that  it  is  not  confined  to  a
separate  absorbed  action  of  its  own,  but  plays  upon  all  the
others,  discovers  their  law  and  truth,  makes  its  discoveries  ser-
viceable to  them  and  even  in  pursuing  its  own  bent  and  end  serves
also  their  ends  and  arrives  at  a catholic  utility.  Man  in  fact  does
not  live  for  knowledge  alone;  life  in  its  widest  sense  is  his
principal  preoccupation  and  he  seeks  knowledge  for  its  utility
to  life  much  more  than  for  the  pure  pleasure  of  acquiring
knowledge.  But  it  is  precisely  in  this  putting  of  knowledge
at  the  service  of  life  that  the  human  intellect  falls  into  that
confusion  and  imperfection  which  pursues  all  human  action.
So  long  as  we  pursue  knowledge  for  its  own  sake,  there  is  nothing
to  be  said:  the  reason  is  performing  its  natural  function;  it  is
exercising  securely  its  highest  fight.  In  the  work  of  the  philo-
sopher, the  scientist,  the  savant  labouring  to  add  something  to
the  stock  of  our  ascertainable  knowledge,  there  is  as  perfect  a
purity  and  satisfaction  as  in  that  of  the  poet  and  artist  creating
forms  of  beauty  for  the  aesthetic  delight  of  the  race.  Whatever
individual  error  and  limitation  there  may  be,  does  not  matter;
for  the  collective  and  progressive  knowledge  of  the  race  has
gained  the  truth  that  has  been  discovered  and  may  be  trusted
in  time  to  get  rid  of  the  error.  It  is  when  it  tries  to  apply  ideas
to  life  that  the  human  intellect  stumbles  and  finds  itself  at
fault.

Ordinarily,  this  is  because  in  concerning  itself  with  action


Ill


The  Office  and  Limitations  of  the  Reason

the  intelligence  of  man  becomes  at  once  partial  and  passionate
and  makes  itself  the  servant  of  something  other  than  the  pure
truth.  But  even  if  the  intellect  keeps  itself  as  impartial  and  dis-
interested as  possible,  — and  altogether  impartial,  altogether
disinterested  the  human  intellect  cannot  be  unless  it  is  content
to  arrive  at  an  entire  divorce  from  practice  or  a sort  of  large
but  ineffective  tolerantism,  eclecticism  or  sceptical  curiosity,
— still  the  truths  it  discovers  or  the  ideas  it  promulgates  become,
the  moment  they  are  applied  to  life,  the  plaything  of  forces  over
which  the  reason  has  little  control.  Science  pursuing  its  cold
and  even  way  has  made  discoveries  which  have  served  on  one
side  a practical  humanitarianism,  on  the  other  supplied  mons-
trous weapons  to  egoism  and  mutual  destruction;  it  has  made
possible  a gigantic  efficiency  of  organisation  which  has  been
used  on  one  side  for  the  economic  and  social  amehoration  of  the
nations  and  on  the  other  for  turning  each  into  a colossal  battering-
ram  of  aggression,  ruin  and  slaughter.  It  has  given  rise  on  the
one  side  to  a large  rationalistic  and  altruistic  humanitarianism,
on  the  other  it  has  justified  a godless  egoism,  vitalism,  vulgar
will  to  power  and  success.  It  has  drawn  mankind  together
and  given  it  a new  hope  and  at  the  same  time  crushed  it  with  the
burden  of  a monstrous  commercialism.  Nor  is  this  due,  as
is  so  often  asserted,  to  its  divorce  from  religion  or  to  any  lack
of  idealism.  Ideahstic  philosophy  has  been  equally  at  the
service  of  the  powers  of  good  and  evil  and  provided  an  intel-
lectual conviction  both  for  reaction  and  for  progress.  Organised
religion  itself  has  often  enough  in  the  past  hounded  men  to
crime  and  massacre  and  justified  obscurantism  and  oppression.

The  truth  is  that  upon  which  we  are  now  insisting,  that
reason  is  in  its  nature  an  imperfect  light  with  a large  but  still
restricted  mission  and  that  once  it  applies  itself  to  life  and
action  it  becomes  subject  to  what  it  studies  and  the  servant  and
counsellor  of  the  forces  in  whose  obscure  and  ill-understood
struggle  it  intervenes.  It  can  in  its  nature  be  used  and  has
always  been  used  to  justify  any  idea,  theory  of  life,  system  of
society  or  government,  ideal  of  individual  or  collective  action
to  which  the  will  of  man  attaches  itself  for  the  moment  or
through  the  centuries.  In  philosophy  it  gives  equally  good


112


The  Human  Cycle


reasons  for  monism  and  pluralism  or  for  any  halting-place
between  them,  for  the  belief  in  Being  or  for  the  belief  in  Be-
coming, for  optimism  and  pessimism,  for  activism  and  quietism.
It  can  justify  the  most  mystic  religionism  and  the  most  positive
atheism,  get  rid  of  God  or  see  nothing  else.  In  aesthetics  it
supplies  the  basis  equally  for  classicism  and  romanticism,  for  an
idealistic,  religious  or  mystic  theory  of  art  or  for  the  most  earthy
realism.  It  can  with  equal  power  base  austerely  a strict  and
narrow  moralism  or  prove  triumphantly  the  thesis  of  the  anti-
nomian.  It  has  been  the  sufficient  and  convincing  prophet  of
every  kind  of  autocracy  or  oligarchy  and  of  every  species  of
democracy;  it  supplies  excellent  and  satisfying  reasons  for
competitive  individualism  and  equally  excellent  and  satisfying
reasons  for  communism  or  against  communism  and  for  State
socialism  or  for  one  variety  of  socialism  against  another.  It  can
place  itself  with  equal  effectivity  at  the  service  of  utilitarianism,
economism,  hedonism,  aestheticism,  sensualism,  ethicism,  ideal-
ism or  any  other  essential  need  or  activity  of  man  and  build
around  it  a philosophy,  a political  and  social  system,  a theory  of
conduct  and  life.  Ask  it  not  to  lean  to  one  idea  alone,  but  to
make  an  eclectic  combination  or  a synthetic  harmony  and  it  will
satisfy  you;  only,  there  being  any  number  of  possible  combi-
nations or  harmonies,  it  will  equally  well  justify  the  one  or  the
other  and  set  up  or  throw  down  any  one  of  them  according  as  the
spirit  in  man  is  attracted  to  or  withdraws  from  it.  For  it  is  really
that  which  decides  and  the  reason  is  only  a brilliant  servant  and
minister  of  this  veiled  and  secret  sovereign.

This  truth  is  hidden  from  the  rationalist  because  he  is  sup-
ported by  two  constant  articles  of  faith,  first  that  his  own  reason
is  right  and  the  reason  of  others  who  differ  from  him  is  wrong,
and  secondly  that  whatever  may  be  the  present  deficiencies  of  the
human  intellect,  the  collective  human  reason  will  eventually  ar-
rive at  purity  and  be  able  to  found  human  thought  and  life  se-
curely on  a clear  rational  basis  entirely  satisfying  to  the  intelli-
gence. His  first  article  of  faith  is  no  doubt  the  common  expres-
sion of  our  egoism  and  arrogant  fallibility,  but  it  is  also  some-
thing more;  it  expresses  this  truth  that  it  is  the  legitimate  function
of  the  reason  to  justify  to  man  his  action  and  his  hope  and  the


The  Office  and  Limitations  of  the  Reason  113

faith  that  is  in  him  and  to  give  him  that  idea  and  knowledge,
however  restricted,  and  that  dynamic  conviction,  however  nar-
row and  intolerant,  which  he  needs  in  order  that  he  may  live,
act  and  grow  in  the  highest  light  available  to  him.  The  reason
cannot  grasp  all  truth  in  its  embrace  because  truth  is  too  infinite
for  it;  but  still  it  does  grasp  the  something  of  it  which  we  imme-
diately need,  and  its  insufficiency  does  not  detract  from  the  value
of  its  work,  but  is  rather  the  measure  of  its  value.  For  man  is  not
intended  to  grasp  the  whole  truth  of  his  being  at  once,  but  to
move  towards  it  through  a succession  of  experiences  and  a cons-
tant, though  not  by  any  means  perfectly  continuous  self-enlarge-
ment. The  first  business  of  reason  then  is  to  justify  and  enlighten
to  him  his  various  experiences  and  to  give  him  faith  and  convic-
tion in  holding  on  to  his  self-enlargings.  It  justifies  to  him  now
this,  now  that,  the  experiences  of  the  moment,  the  receding  light
of  the  past,  the  half-seen  vision  of  the  future.  Its  inconstancy,  its
divisibility  against  itself,  its  power  of  sustaining  opposite  views
are  the  whole  secret  of  its  value.  It  would  not  do  indeed  for  it  to
support  too  conflicting  views  in  the  same  individual,  except  at
moments  of  awakening  and  transition,  but  in  the  collective  body
of  men  and  in  the  successions  of  Time  that  is  its  whole  business.
For  so  man  moves  towards  the  infinity  of  the  Truth  by  the  ex-
perience of  its  variety;  so  his  reason  helps  him  to  build,  change,
destroy  what  he  has  built  and  prepare  a new  construction,  in  a
word,  to  progress,  grow,  enlarge  himself  in  his  self-knowledge
and  world-knowledge  and  their  works.

The  second  article  of  faith  of  the  believer  in  reason  is  also  an
error  and  yet  contains  a truth.  The  reason  cannot  arrive  at  any
final  truth  because  it  can  neither  get  to  the  root  of  things  nor  em-
brace the  totality  of  their  secrets;  it  deals  with  the  finite,  the  se-
parate, the  limited  aggregate,  and  has  no  measure  for  the  all  and
the  infinite.  Nor  can  reason  found  a perfect  life  for  man  or  a
perfect  society.  A purely  rational  human  life  would  be  a life
baulked  and  deprived  of  its  most  powerful  dynamic  sources;  it
would  be  a substitution  of  the  minister  for  the  sovereign.  A
purely  rational  society  could  not  come  into  being  and,  if  it  could
be  born,  either  could  not  live  or  would  sterilise  and  petrify  human
existence.  The  root  powers  of  human  life,  its  intimate  causes


114


The  Human  Cycle


are  below,  irrational,  and  they  are  above,  suprarational.  But  this
is  true  that  by  constant  enlargement,  purification,  openness  the
reason  of  man  is  bound  to  arrive  at  an  intelligent  sense  even  of
that  which  is  hidden  from  it,  a power  of  passive  yet  sympathetic
reflection  of  the  Light  that  surpasses  it.  Its  liniit  is  reached,  its
function  is  finished  when  it  can  say  to  man,  “There  is  a Soul,  a
Self,  a God  in  the  world  and  in  man  who  works  concealed  and
all  is  his  self-concealing  and  gradual  self-unfolding.  His  minister
I have  been,  slowly  to  unseal  your  eyes,  remove  the  thick  integu-
ments of  your  vision  until  there  is  only  my  own  luminous  veil
between  you  and  him.  Remove  that  and  make  the  soul  of  man
one  in  fact  and  nature  with  this  Divine;  then  you  will  know
yourself,  discover  the  highest  and  widest  law  of  your  being,  be-
come the  possessors  or  at  least  the  receivers  and  instruments  of  a
higher  will  and  knowledge  than  mine  and  lay  hold  at  last  on  the
true  secret  and  the  whole  sense  of  a human  and  yet  divine  living.”


Chapter  XIII


Reason  and  Religion


It  would  seem  then  that  reason  is  an
insufficient,  often  an  inefficient,  even  a stumbling  and  at  its  best
a very  partially  enlightened  guide  for  humanity  in  that  great
endeavour  which  is  the  real  heart  of  human  progress  and  the
inner  justification  of  our  existence  as  souls,  minds  and  bodies
upon  the  earth.  For  that  endeavour  is  not  only  the  effort  to  sur-
vive and  make  a place  for  ourselves  on  the  earth  as  the  animals
do,  not  only  having  made  to  keep  it  and  develop  its  best  vital  and
egoistic  or  communal  use  for  the  efficiency  and  enjoyment  of  the
individual, . the  family  or  the  collective  ego,  substantially  as  is
done  by  the  animal  families  and  colonies,  in  beehive  or  ant-hill
for  example,  though  in  the  larger,  many-sided  way  of  reasoning
animals;  it  is  also,  and  much  more  characteristically  of  our
human  as  distinguished  from  our  animal  element,  the  endeavour
to  arrive  at  a harmonised  inner  and  outer  perfection,  and,  as  we
find  in  the  end,  at  its  highest  height,  to  culminate  in  the  discovery
of  the  divine  Reality  behind  our  existence  and  the  complete
and  ideal  Person  within  us  and  the  shaping  of  human  life  in  that
image.  But  if  that  is  the  truth,  then  neither  the  Hellenic  ideal
of  an  all-round  philosophic,  aesthetic,  moral  and  physical  culture
governed  by  the  enhghtened  reason  of  man  and  led  by  the  wisest
minds  of  a free  society,  nor  the  modern  ideal  of  an  efficient
culture  and  successful  economic  civilisation  governed  by  the  col-
lective reason  and  organised  knowledge  of  mankind  can  be
either  the  highest  or  the  widest  goal  of  social  development.

The  Hellenic  ideal  was  roughly  expressed  in  the  old  Latin
maxim,  a sound  mind  in'  a sound  body.  And  by  a sound
body  the  ancients  meant  a healthy  and  beautiful  body
well-fitted  for  the  rational  use  and  enjoyment  of  life.  And  by  a
sound  mind  they  meant  a clear  and  balanced  reason  and
an  enlightened  and  well-trained  mentality,  — trained  in  the


116


The  Human  Cycle


sense  of  ancient  not  of  modem  education.  It  was  not  to  be
packed  with  all  available  information  and  ideas,  cast  in  the
mould  of  science  and  a rational  utility  and  so  prepared  for  the
efficient  performance  of  social  and  civic  needs  and  duties,  for  a
professional  avocation  or  for  an  intellectual  pursuit;  rather  it
was  to  be  cultured  in  all  its  human  capacities  intellectual,  moral,
aesthetic,  trained  to  use  them  rightly  and  to  range  freely,  intelli-
gently and  flexibly  in  all  questions  and  in  all  practical  matters
of  philosophy,  science,  art,  politics  and  social  living.  The  ancient
Greek  mind  was  philosophic,  aesthetic  and  political;  the  modern
mind  has  been  scientific,  economic  and  utilitarian.  The  ancient
ideal  laid  stress  on  soundness  and  beauty  and  sought  to  build  up
a fine  and  rational  human  life;  the  modern  lays  very  little  or  no
stress  on  beauty,  prefers  rational  and  practical  soundness,  useful
adaptation,  just  mechanism  and  seeks  to  build  up  a well-ordered,
well-informed  and  efficient  human  life.  Both  take  it  that  man
is  partly  a mental,  partly  a physical  being  with  the  mentalised
physical  life  for  his  field  and  reason  for  his  highest  attribute  and
his  highest  possibility.  But  if  we  follow  to  the  end  the  new  vistas
opened  by  the  most  advanced  tendencies  of  a subjective  age,  we
shall  be  led  back  to  a still  more  ancient  truth  and  ideal  that  over-
tops both  the  Hellenic  and  the  modern  levels.  For  we  shall
then  seize  the  truth  that  man  is  a developing  spirit  trying  here  to
find  and  fulfil  itself  in  the  forms  of  mind,  life  and  body;  and  we
shall  perceive  luminously  growing  before  us  the  greater  ideal  of  a
deeply  conscious,  self-illumined,  self-possessing,  self-mastering
soul  in  a pure  and  perfect  mind  and  body.  The  wider  field  it  seeks
will  be,  not  the  mentalised  physical  life  with  which  man  has
started,  but  a new  spiritualised  life  inward  and  outward,  by  which
the  perfected  internal  figures  itself  in  a perfected  external  living.
Beyond  man’s  long  intelligent  effort  towards  a perfected  culture
and  a rational  society  there  opens  the  old  religious  and  spiritual
ideal,  the  hope  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  within  us  and  the  city
of  God  upon  earth.

But  if  the  soul  is  the  true  sovereign  and  if.  its  spiritual  self-
finding, its  progressive  largest  widest  integral  fulfilment  by  the
power  of  the  spirit  are  to  be  accepted  as  the  ultimate  secret  of  our
evolution,  then  since  certainly  the  instinctive  being  of  man  below


Reason  and  Religion  117

reason  is  not  the  means  of  attaining  that  high  end  and  since  we
find  that  reason  also  is  an  insufficient  light  and  power,  there  must
be  a superior  range  of  being  with  its  own  proper  powers,  — libe-
rated soul-faculties,  a spiritual  will  and  knowledge  higher  than  the
reason  and  intelligent  will,  — by  which  alone  an  entire  conscious
self-fulfilment  can  become  possible  to  the  human  being.  We
must  remember  that  our  aim  of  self-fulfilment  is  an  integral  un-
folding of  the  Divine  within  us,  a complete  evolution  of  the
hidden  divinity  in  the  individual  soul  and  the  collective  life.
Otherwise  we  may  simply  come  back  to  an  old  idea  of  individual
and  social  living  which  had  its  greatness,  but  did  not  provide  all
the  conditions  of  our  perfection.  That  was  the  idea  of  a spirit-
ualised typal  society.  It  proceeded  upon  the  supposition  that  each
man  has  his  own  peculiar  nature  which  is  born  from  and  reflects
one  element  of  the  divine  nature.  The  character  of  each  indivi-
dual, his  ethical  type,  his  training,  his  social  occupation,  his  spiri-
tual possibility  must  be  formed  or  developed  within  the  condi-
tions of  that  peculiar  element;  the  perfection  he  seeks  in  this  life
must  be  according  to  its  law.  The  theory  of  ancient  Indian  cul-
ture — its  practice,  as  is  the  way  of  human  practice,  did  not
always  correspond  to  the  theory  — worked  upon  this  supposi-
tion. It  divided  man  in  society  into  the  fourfold  order  — an  at
once  spiritual,  psychic,  ethical  and  economic  order  — of  the
Brahmin,  Kshatriya,  Vaishya  and  Shudra,  — practically,  the
spiritual  and  intellectual  man,  the  dynamic  man  of  will,  the
vital,  hedonistic  and  economic  man,  the  material  man;  the  whole
society  organised  in  these  four  constituent  classes  represented
the  complete  image  of  the  creative  and  active  Godhead.

A different  division  of  the  typal  society  is  quite  possible.
But  whatever  the  arrangement  or  division,  the  typal  principle
cannot  be  the  foundation  of  an  ideal  human  society.  Even
according  to  the  Indian  theory  it  does  not  belong  either  to  the
periods  of  man’s  highest  attainment  or  to  the  eras  of  his  lowest
possibility;  it  is  neither  the  principle  of  his  ideal  age,  his  age  of
the  perfected  Truth,  Satyayuga,  Kritayuga,  in  which  he  lives
according  to  some  high  and  profound  realisation  of  his  divine
possibility,  nor  of  his  iron  age,  the  Kaliyuga,  in  which  he  col-
lapses towards  the  life  of  the  instincts,  impulses  and  desires,  with


118  The  Human  Cycle

the  reason  degraded  into  a servant  of  this  nether  life  of  man.
This  too  precise  order  is  rather  the  appropriate  principle  of  the
intermediate  ages  of  his  cycle  in  which  he  attempts  to  maintain
some  imperfect  form  of  his  true  law,  his  dharma,  by  will-power
and  force  of  character  in  the  Treta,  by  law,  arrangement  and
fixed  convention  in  the  Dwapara.i  jiie  type  is  not  the  integral
man,  it  is  the  fixing  and  emphasising  of  the  generally  prominent
part  of  his  active  nature.  But  each  man  contains  in  himself  the
whole  divine  potentiality  and  therefore  the  Shudra  cannot  be
rigidly  confined  within  his  Shudrahood,  nor  the  Brahmin  in  his
Brahminhood,  but  each  contains  within  himself  the  potentialities
and  the  need  of  perfection  of  his  other  elements  of  a divine  man-
hood. In  the  Kali  age  these  potentialities  may  act  in  a state  of
crude  disorder,  the  anarchy  of  our  being  which  covers  our  con-
fused attempt  at  a new  order.  In  the  intermediate  ages  the
principle  of  order  may  take  refuge  in  a limited  perfection,  sup-
pressing some  elements  to  perfect  others.  But  the  law  of  the
Satya  age  is  the  large  development  of  the  whole  truth  of  our  being
in  the  realisation  of  a spontaneous  and  self-supported  spiritual
harmony.  That  can  only  be  realised  by  the  evolution,  in  the
measure  of  which  our  human  capacity  in  its  enlarging  cycles  be-
comes capable  of  it,  of  the  spiritual  ranges  of  our  being  and  the
unmasking  of  their  inherent  light  and  power,  their  knowledge
and  their  divine  capacities.

We  shall  better  understand  what  may  be  this  higher  being
and  those  higher  faculties,  if  we  look  again  at  the  dealings  of  the
reason  with  the  trend  towards  the  absolute  in  our  other  faculties,
in  the  divergent  principles  of  our  complex  existence.  Let  us  study
especially  its  dealings  with  the  suprarational  in  them  and  the
infrarational,  the  two  extremes  between  which  our  intelligence  is
some  sort  of  mediator.  The  spiritual  or  suprarational  is  always
turned  at  its  heights  towards  the  Absolute;  in  its  extension,
living  in  the  luminous  infinite,  its  special  power  is  to  reahse  the
infinite  in  the  finite,  the  eternal  unity  in  all  divisions  and  diffe-
rences. Our  spiritual , evolution  ascends  therefore  through  the
relative  to  the  absolute,  through  the  finite  to  the  infinite,  through

' Therefore  it  is  said  that  Vishnu  is  the  King  in  the  Treta,  but  in  the  Dwapara  the  arranger
and  codifier  of  the  knowledge  and  the  law.


Reason  and  Religion  119

all  divisions  to  oneness.  Man  in  his  spiritual  realisation  begins
to  find  and  seize  hold  on  the  satisfying  intensities  of  the  absolute
in  the  relative,  feels  the  large  and  serene  presence  of  the  infinite
in  the  finite,  discovers  the  reconciling  law  of  a perfect  unity  in
all  divisions  and  differences.  The  spiritual  will  in  his  outer  as
in  his  inner  life  and  formulation  must  be  to  effect  a great  reconci-
liation between  the  secret  and  eternal  reality  and  the  finite
appearances  of  a world  which  seeks  to  express  and  in  expressing
seems  to  deny  it.  Our  highest  faculties  then  will  be  those  which
make  this  possible  because  they  have  in  them  the  intimate  light
and  power  and  joy  by  which  these  things  can  be  grasped  in
direct  knowledge  and  experience,  realised  and  made  normally
and  permanently  effective  in  will,  communicated  to  our  whole
nature.  The  infrarational,  on  the  other  hand,  has  its  origin  and
basis  in  the  obscure  infinite  of  the  Inconscient;  it  wells  up  in
instincts  and  impulses,  which  are  really  the  crude  and  more  or
less  haphazard  intuitions  of  a subconscient  physical,  vital,  emo-
tional and  sensational  mind  and  will  in  us.  Its  struggle  is  towards
definition,  towards  self-creation,  towards  finding  some  finite
order  of  its  obscure  knowledge  and  tendencies.  But  it  has  also
the  instinct  and  force  of  the  infinite  from  which  it  proceeds;  it
contains  obscure,  limited  and  violent  velleities  that  move  it  to
grasp  at  the  intensities  of  the  absolute  and  pull  them  down  or
some  touch  of  them  into  its  finite  action:  but  because  it  proceeds
by  ignorance  and  not  by  knowledge,  it  cannot  truly  succeed  in
this  more  vehement  endeavour.  The  life  of  the  reason  and  intelli-
gent will  stands  between  that  upper  and  this  nether  power.  On
one  side  it  takes  up  and  enlightens  the  life  of  the  instincts  and
impulses  and  helps  it  to  find  on  a higher  plane  the  finite  order
for  which  it  gropes.  On  the  other  side  it  looks  up  towards  the
absolute,  looks  out  towards  the  infinite,  looks  in  towards  the
One,  but  without  being  able  to  grasp  and  hold  their  realities;  for
it  is  able  only  to  consider  them  with  a sort  of  derivative  and
remote  understanding,  because  it  moves  in  the  relative  and,
itself  limited  and  definite,  it  can  act  only  by  definition,  division
and  limitation.  These  three  powers  of  being,  the  suprarational,
rational  and  infrarational  are  present,  but  with  an  infinitely
varying  prominence  in  all  our  activities.


120


The  Human  Cycle


The  limitations  of  the  reason  become  very  strikingly,  very
characteristically,  very  nakedly  apparent  when  it  is  confronted
with  that  great  order  of  psychological  truths  and  experiences
which  we  have  hitherto  kept  in  the  background  — the  religious
being  of  man  and  his  religious  life.  Here  is  a realm  at  which  the
intellectual  reason  gazes  with  the  bewildered  mind  of  a foreigner
who  hears  a language  of  which  the  words  and  the  spirit  are  un-
intelligible to  him  and  sees  everywhere  forms  of  hfe  and  principles
of  thought  and  action  which  are  absolutely  strange  to  his  expe-
rience. He  may  try  to  learn  this  speech  and  understand  this
strange  and  alien  life;  but  it  is  with  pain  and  difficulty,  and  he
cannot  succeed  unless  he  has,  so  to  speak,  unlearned  himself
and  become  one  in  spirit  and  nature  with  the  natives  of  this  celes-
tial empire.  Till  then  his  efforts  to  understand  and  interpret  them
in  his  own  language  and  according  to  his  own  notions  end  at
the  worst  in  a gross  misunderstanding  and  deformation.  The
attempts  of  the  positive  critical  reason  to  dissect  the  phenomena
of  the  religious  life  sound  to  men  of  spiritual  experience  like  the
prattle  of  a child  who  is  trying  to  shape  into  the  mould  of  his  own
habitual  notions  the  life  of  adults  or  the  blunders  of  an  ignorant
mind  which  thinks  fit  to  criticise  patronisingly  or  adversely  the
labours  of  a profound  thinker  or  a great  scientist.  At  the  best
even  this  futile  labour  can  extract,  can  account  for  only  the  ex-
ternals of  the  things  it  attempts  to  explain;  the  spirit  is  missed,
the  inner  matter  is  left  out,  and  as  a result  of  that  capital  omis-
sion even  the  account  of  the  externals  is  left  without  real  truth
and  has  only  an  apparent  correctness.

The  unaided  intellectual  reason  faced  with  the  phenomena
of  the  religious  life  is  naturally  apt  to  adopt  one  of  two  attitudes,
both  of  them  shallow  in  the  extreme,  hastily  presumptuous  and
erroneous.  Either  it  views  the  whole  thing  as  a mass  of  supersti-
tion, a mystical  nonsense,  a farrago  of  ignorant  barbaric  sur-
vivals,— that  was  the  extreme  spirit  of  the  rationalist  now
happily,  though  not  dead,  yet  much  weakened  and  almost  mori-
bund, — or  it  patronises  religion,  tries  to  explain  its  origins,  to
get  rid  of  it  by  the  process  of  explaining  it  away;  or  it  labours
gently  or  forcefully  to  reject  or  correct  its  superstitions,  crudities,
absurdities,  to  purify  it  into  an  abstract  nothingness  or  persuade


121


it  to  purify  itself  in  the  light  of  the  reasoning  intelligence;  or  it
allows  it  a role,  leaves  it  perhaps  for  the  edification  of  the  ig-
norant, admits  its  value  as  a moralising  influence  or  its  utility
to  the  State  for  keeping  the  lower  classes  in  order,  even  perhaps
tries  to  invent  that  strange  chimera,  a rational  religion.

The  former  attitude  has  on  its  positive  side  played  a powerful
part  in  the  history  of  human  thought,  has  even  been  of  a consi-
derable utihty  in  its  own  way  — we  shall  have  to  note  briefly
hereafter  how  and  why  — to  human  progress  and  in  the  end  even
to  rehgion;  but  its  intolerant  negations  are  an  arrogant  falsity,
as  the  human  mind  has  now  sufficiently  begun  to  perceive.  Its
mistake  is  hke  that  of  a foreigner  who  thinks  everything  in  an
alien  country  absurd  and  inferior  because  these  things  are  not
his  own  ways  of  acting  and  thinking  and  cannot  be  cut  out  by  his
own  measures  or  suited  to  his  own  standards.  So  the  thorough-
going rationaUst  asks  the  reUgious  spirit,  if  it  is  to  stand,  to  satisfy
the  material  reason  and  even  to  give  physical  proof  of  its  truths,
while  the  very  essence  of  religion  is  the  discovery  of  the  immate-
rial Spirit  and  the  play  of  a supraphysical  consciousness.  So  too
he  tries  to  judge  rehgion  by  his  idea  of  its  externalities,  just  as  an
ignorant  and  obstreperous  foreigner  might  try  to  judge  a civiUsa-
tion  by  the  dress,  outward  colour  of  hfe  and  some  of  the  most
external  peculiarities  in  the  social  manners  of  the  inhabitants.
That  in  this  he  errs  in  company  with  certain  of  the  so-called  reli-
gious themselves,  may  be  his  excuse,  but  cannot  be  the  justifica-
tion of  his  ignorance.  The  more  moderate  attitude  of  the  ra-
tional mind  has  also  played  its  part  in  the  history  of  human
thought.  Its  attempts  to  explain  rehgion  have  resulted  in  the
compilation  of  an  immense  mass  of  amazingly  ingenious  per-
versions, such  as  certain  pseudo-scientific  attempts  to  form  a
comparative  Science  of  Rehgion.  It  has  built  up  in  the  approved
modern  style  immense  fafades  of  theory  with  stray  bricks  of  mis-
understood facts  for  their  material.  Its  mild  condonations  of
rehgion  have  led  to  superficial  phases  of  thought  which  have
passed  quickly  away  and  left  no  trace  behind  them.  Its  efforts
at  the  creation  of  a rational  religion,  perfectly  well-intentioned,
but  helpless  and  unconvincing,  have  had  no  appreciable  effect
and  have  failed  like  a dispersing  cloud,  chinnabhram  iva  naiyati.


122


The  Human  Cycle


The  deepest  heart,  the  inmost  essence  of  religion,  apart  from
its  outward  machinery  of  creed,  cult,  ceremony  and  symbol,  is  the
search  for  God  and  the  finding  of  God.  Its  aspiration  is  to  dis-
cover the  Infinite,  the  Absolute,  the  One,  the  Divine,  who  is  all
these  things  and  yet  no  abstraction  but  a Being.  Its  work  is  a
sincere  living  out  of  the  true  and  intimate  relations  between  man
and  God,  relations  of  unity,  relations  of  difference,  relations  of  an
illuminated  knowledge,  an  ecstatic  love  and  delight,  an  absolute
surrender  and  service,  a casting  of  every  part  of  our  existence  out
of  its  normal  status  into  an  uprush  of  man  towards  the  Divine
and  a descent  of  the  Divine  into  man.  All  this  has  nothing  to  do
with  the  realm  of  reason  or  its  normal  activities;  its  aim,  its
sphere,  its  process  is  suprarational.  The  knowledge  of  God  is  not
to  be  gained  by  weighing  the  feeble  arguments  of  reason  for  or
against  his  existence : it  is  to  be  gained  only  by  a self-transcending
and  absolute  consecration,  aspiration  and  experience.  Nor  does
that  experience  proceed  by  anything  like  rational  scientific  ex-
periment or  rational  philosophic  thinking.  Even  in  those  parts
of  religious  discipline  which  seem  most  to  resemble  scientific  ex-
periment, the  method  is  a verification  of  things  which  exceed  the
reason  and  its  timid  scope.  Even  in  those  parts  of  religious  know-
ledge which  seem  most  to  resemble  intellectual  operations,  the
illuminating  faculties  are  not  imagination,  logic  and  rational
judgment,  but  revelations,  inspirations,  intuitions,  intuitive  dis-
cernments that  leap  down  to  us  from  a plane  of  suprarational
fight.  The  love  of  God  is  an  infinite  and  absolute  feeling  which
does  not  admit  of  any  rational  limitations  and  does  not  use  a
language  of  rational  worship  and  adoration;  the  delight  in  God  is
that  peace  and  bliss  which  passes  all  understanding.  The  surren-
der to  God  is  the  surrender  of  the  whole  being  to  a suprarational
fight,  will,  power  and  love  and  his  service  takes  no  account  of  the
compromises  with  life  which  the  practical  reason  of  man  uses  as
the  best  part  of  its  method  in  the  ordinary  conduct  of  mundane
existence.  Wherever  religion  really  finds  itself,  wherever  it  opens
itself  to  its  own  spirit,  — there  is  plenty  of  that  sort  of  religious
practice  which  is  halting,  imperfect,  half-sincere,  only  half-sure
of  itself  and  in  which  reason  can  get  in  a word,  — its  way  is
absolute  and  its  fruits  are  ineffable.


Reason  and  Religion


123


Reason  has  indeed  a part  to  play  in  relation  to  this  highest
field  of  our  religious  being  and  experience,  but  that  part  is  quite
secondary  and  subordinate.  It  cannot  lay  down  the  law  for  the
religious  life,  it  cannot  determine  in  its  own  right  the  system
of  divine  knowledge;  it  cannot  school  and  lesson  the  divine  love
and  delight;  it  cannot  set  bounds  to  spiritual  experience  or  lay  its
yoke  upon  the  action  of  the  spiritual  man.  Its  sole  legitimate
sphere  is  to  explain  as  best  it  can,  in  its  own  language  and  to  the
rational  and  intellectual  parts  of  man,  the  truths,  the  experiences,
the  laws  of  our  suprarational  and  spiritual  existence.  That  has
been  the  work  of  spiritual  philosophy  in  the  East  and  — much
more  crudely  and  imperfectly  done  — of  theology  in  the  West,
a work  of  great  importance  at  moments  like  the  present  when
the  intellect  of  mankind  after  a long  wandering  is  again  turning
towards  the  search  for  the  Divine.  Here  there  must  inevitably
enter  a part  of  those  operations  proper  to  the  intellect,  logical
reasoning,  inferences  from  the  data  given  by  rational  experience,
analogies  drawn  from  our  knowledge  of  the  apparent  facts  of
existence,  appeals  even  to  the  physical  truths  of  science,  all  the
apparatus  of  the  intelligent  mind  in  its  ordinary  workings.  But
this  is  the  weakest  part  of  spiritual  philosophy.  It  convinces  the
rational  mind  only  where  the  intellect  is  already  predisposed  to
behef,  and  even  if  it  convinces,  it  cannot  give  the  true  knowledge.
Reason  is  safest  when  it  is  content  to  take  the  profound  truths
and  experiences  of  the  spiritual  being  and  the  spiritual  life,  just  as
they  are  given  to  it,  and  throw  them  into  such  form,  order  and
language  as  will  make  them  the  most  intelhgible  or  the  least
unintelligible  to  the  reasoning  mind.  Even  then  it  is  not  quite
safe,  for  it  is  apt  to  harden  the  order  into  an  intellectual  system
and  to  present  the  form  as  if  it  were  the  essence.  And,  at  best,
it  has  to  use  a language  which  is  not  the  very  tongue  of  the  supra-
rational truth  but  its  inadequate  translation  and,  since  it  is  not  the
ordinary  tongue  either  of  the  rational  intelligence,  it  is  open  to
non-understanding  or  misunderstanding  by  the  ordinary  reason
of  mankind.  It  is  well-known  to  the  experience  of  the  spiritual
seeker  that  even  the  highest  philosophising  cannot  give  a true
inner  knowledge,  is  not  the  spiritual  light,  does  not  open  the
gates  of  experience.  All  it  can  do  is  to  address  the  consciousness


124


The  Human  Cycle

of  man  through  his  intellect  and,  when  it  has  done,  to  say,  “I
have  tried  to  give  you  the  truth  in  a form  and  system  which  will
make  it  intelligible  and  possible  to  you;  if  you  are  intellectually
convinced  or  attracted,  you  can  now  seek  the  real  knowledge,  but
you  must  seek  it  by  other  means  which  are  beyond  my  province.”

But  there  is  another  level  of  the  religious  life  in  which  reason
might  seem  justified  in  interfering  more  independently  and
entitled  to  assume  a superior  role.  For  as  there  is  the  supra-
rational  life  in  which  rehgious  aspiration  finds  entirely  what  it
seeks,  so  too  there  is  also  the  infrarational  life  of  the  instincts,
impulses,  sensations,  crude  emotions,  vital  activities  from  which
all  human  aspiration  takes  its  beginning.  These  too  feel  the  touch
of  the  religious  sense  in  man,  share  its  needs  and  experience,
desire  its  satisfactions.  Religion  includes  this  satisfaction  also  in
its  scope,  and  in  what  is  usually  called  religion  it  seems  even  to
be  the  greater  part,  sometimes  to  an  external  view  almost  the
whole;  for  the  supreme  purity  of  spiritual  experience  does  not
appear  or  is  glimpsed  only  through  this  mixed  and  turbid  current.
Much  impurity,  ignorance,  superstition,  many  doubtful  elements
must  form  as  the  result  of  this  contact  and  union  of  our  highest
tendencies  with  our  lower  ignorant  nature.  Here  it  would  seem
that  reason  has  its  legitimate  part;  here  surely  it  can  intervene
to  enlighten,  purify,  rationalise  the  play  of  the  instincts  and
impulses.  It  would  seem  that  a religious  reformation,  a movement
to  substitute  a “pure”  and  rational  rehgion  for  one  that  is  largely
infrarational  and  impure,  would  be  a distinct  advance  in  the  reli-
gious development  of  humanity.  To  a certain  extent  this  may  be,
but,  owing  to  the  peculiar  nature  of  the  religious  being,  its
entire  urge  towards  the  suprarational,  not  without  serious
qualifications,  nor  can  the  rational  mind  do  anything  here  that
is  of  a high  positive  value.

Religious  forms  and  systems  become  effete  and  corrupt
and  have  to  be  destroyed,  or  they  lose  much  of  their  inner  sense
and  become  clouded  in  knowledge  and  injurious  in  practice,  and
in  destroying  what  is  effete  or  in  negating  aberrations  reason  has
played  an  important  part  in  religious  history.  But  in  its  endea-
vour to  get  rid  of  the  superstition  and  ignorance  which  have
attached  themselves  to  religious  forms  and  symbols,  intellectual


Reason  and  Religion


125


reason  unenlightened  by  spiritual  knowledge  tends  to  deny  and,
so  far  as  it  can,  to  destroy  the  truth  and  the  experience  which
was  contained  in  them.  Reformations  which  give  too  much  to
reason  and  are  too  negative  and  protestant,  usually  create  reli-
gions which  lack  in  wealth  of  spirituality  and  fullness  of  reUgious
emotion;  they  are  not  opulent  in  their  contents;  their  form
and  too  often  their  spirit  is  impoverished,  bare  and  cold.  Nor
are  they  really  rational;  for  they  live  not  by  their  reasoning  and
dogma  which  to  the  rational  mind  is  as  irrational  as  that  of  the
creeds  they  replace,  still  less  by  their  negations,  but  by  their  posi-
tive quantum  of  faith  and  fervour  which  is  suprarational  in  its
whole  aim  and  has  too  its  infrarational  elements.  If  these  seem
less  gross  to  the  ordinary  mind  than  those  of  less  self-questioning
creeds,  it  is  often  because  they  are  more  timid  in  venturing  into
the  realm  of  suprarational  experience.  The  life  of  the  instincts
and  impulses  on  its  religious  side  cannot  be  satisfyingly  purified
by  reason,  but  rather  by  being  sublimated,  by  being  lifted  up  into
the  illuminations  of  the  spirit.  The  natural  fine  of  religious
development  proceeds  always  by  illumination;  and  religious. re-
formation acts  best  when  either  it  reilluminates  rather  than
destroys  old  forms  or,  where  destruction  is  necessary,  replaces
them  by  richer  and  not  by  poorer  forms,  and  in  any  case  when  it
purifies  by  suprarational  illumination,  not  by  rational  enlighten-
ment. A purely  rational  reUgion  could  only  be  a cold  and  bare
Deism,  and  such  attempts  have  always  failed  to  achieve  vitality
and  permanence;  for  they  act  contrary  to  the  dharma,  the  na-
tural law  and  the  spirit  of  religion.  If  reason  is  to  play  any
decisive  part,  it  must  be  an  intuitive  rather  than  an  intellectual
reason,  touched  always  by  spiritual  intensity  and  insight.  For  it
must  be  remembered  that  the  infrarational  also  has  behind  it  a
secret  truth  which  does  not  fall  within  the  domain  of  the  reason
and  is  not  wholly  amenable  to  its  judgments.  The  heart  has  its
knowledge,  the  life  has  its  intuitive  spirit  within  it,  its  intima-
tions, divinations,  outbreaks  and  upflamings  of  a Secret  Energy,
a divine  or  at  least  semi-divine  aspiration  and  outreaching  which
the  eye  of  intuition  alone  can  fathom  and  only  intuitive  speech
or  symbol  can  shape  or  utter.  To  root  out  these  things  from
religion  or  to  purge  religion  of  any  elements  necessary  for  its


126


The  Human  Cycle


completeness  because  the  forms  are  defective  or  obscure,  with-
out having  the  power  to  illuminate  them  from  within  or  the  pa-
tience to  wait  for  their  illumination  from  above  or  without  re-
placing them  by  more  luminous  symbols,  is  not  to  purify  but  to
pauperise.

But  the  relations  of  the  spirit  and  the  reason  need  not  be,
as  they  too  often  are  in  our  practice,  hostile  or  without  any  point
of  contact.  Religion  itself  heed  not  adopt  for  its  principle  the
formula  “I  beheve  because  it  is  impossible”  or  Pascal’s  “I  believe
because  it  is  absurd”.  What  is  impossible  or  absurd  to  the
unaided  reason,  becomes  real  and  right  to  the  reason  lifted
beyond  itself  by  the  power  of  the  spirit  and  irradiated  by  its  light.
For  then  it  is  dominated  by  the  intuitive  mind  which  is  our  means
of  passage  to  a yet  higher  principle  of  knowledge.  The  widest
spirituality  does  not  exclude  or  discourage  any  essential  human
activity  or  faculty,  but  works  rather  to  lift  all  of  them  up  out  of
their  imperfection  and  groping  ignorance,  transforms  them  by
its  touch  and  makes  them  the  instruments  of  the  light,  power  and
joy  of  the  divine  being  and  the  divine  nature.


Chapter  XIV


The  Suprarational  Beauty


Religion  is  the  seeking  after  the

spiritual,  the  suprarational  and  therefore  in  this  sphere  the
intellectual  reason  may  well  be  an  insufficient  help  and  find  itself,
not  only  at  the  end  but  from  the  beginning,  out  of  its  province
and  condemned  to  tread  either  diffidently  or  else  with  a stumb-
ling presumptuousness  in  the  realm  of  a power  and  a light  higher
than  its  own.  But  in  the  other  spheres  of  human  consciousness
and  human  activity  it  may  be  thought  that  it  has  the  right  to  the
sovereign  place,  since  these  move  on  the  lower  plane  of  the
rational  and  the  finite  or  belong  to  that  border-land  where  the
rational  and  the  infrarational  meet  and  the  impulses  and  the
instincts  of  man  stand  in  need  above  all  of  the  light  and  the
control  of  the  reason.  In  its  own  sphere  of  finite  knowledge,
science,  philosophy,  the  useful  arts,  its  right,  one  would
think,  must  be  indisputable.  But  this  does  not  turn  out  in
the  end  to  be  true.  Its  province  may  be  larger,  its  powers  more
ample,  its  action  more  justly  self-confident,  but  in  the  end
everywhere  it  finds  itself  standing  between  the  two  other
powers  of  our  being  and  fulfilling  in  greater  or  less  degree  the
same  function  of  an  intermediary.  On  one  side  it  is  an  enlight-
ener — not  always  the  chief  enlightener  — and  the  corrector  of
our  life-impulses  and  first  mental  seekings,  on  the  other  it  is
only  one  minister  of  the  veiled  Spirit  and  a preparer  of  the  paths
for  the  coming  of  its  rule.

This  is  especially  evident  in  the  two  realms  which  in  the
ordinary  scale  of  our  powers  stand  nearest  to  the  reason  and  on
either  side  of  it,  the  aesthetic  and  the  ethical  being,  the  search
for  Beauty  and  the  search  for  Good.  Man’s  seeking  after  beauty
reaches  its  most  intense  and  satisfying  expression  in  the  great
creative  arts,  poetry,  painting,  sculpture,  architecture,  but  in  its
full  extension  there  is  no  activity  of  his  nature  or  his  life  from


128


The  Human  Cycle


which  it  need  or  ought  to  be  excluded,  — provided  we  under-
stand beauty  both  in  its  widest  and  its  truest  sense.  A complete
and  universal  appreciation  of  beauty  and  the  making  entirely
beautiful  our  whole  life  and  being  must  surely  be  a necessary
character  of  the  perfect  individual  and  the  perfect  society.  But
in  its  origin  this  seeking  for  beauty  is  not  rational ; it  springs  from
the  roots  of  our  life,  it  is  an  instinct  and  an  impulse,  an  instinct
of  aesthetic  satisfaction  and  an  impulse  of  aesthetic  creation  and
enjoyment.  Starting  from  the  infrarational  parts  of  our. being,
this  instinct  and  impulse  begin  with  much  imperfection  and
impurity  and  with  great  crudities  both  in  creation  and  in  appre-
ciation. It  is  here  that  the  reason  comes  in  to  distinguish,  to
enlighten,  to  correct,  to  point  out  the  deficiencies  and  the  crudi-
ties, to  lay  down  laws  of  aesthetics  and  to  purify  our  appreciation
and  our  creation  by  improved  taste  and  right  knowledge.  While
we  are  thus  striving  to  learn  and  correct  ourselves,  it  may  seem
to  be  the  true  law-giver  both  for  the  artist  and  the  admirer  and,
though  not  the  creator  of  our  aesthetic  instinct  and  impulse,  yet
the  creator  in  us  of  an  aesthetic  conscience  and  its  vigilant  judge
and  guide.  That  which  was  an  obscure  and  erratic  activity,  it
makes  self-conscious  and  rationally  discriminative  in  its  work
and  enjoyment.

But  again  this  is  true  only  in  restricted  bounds  or,  if  any-
where entirely  true,  then  only  on  a middle  plane  of  our  aesthetic
seeking  and  activity.  Where  the  greatest  and  most  powerful  crea-
tion of  beauty  is  accomplished  and  its  appreciation  arid  enjoy-
ment rise  to  the  highest  pitch,  the  rational  is  always  surpassed
and  left  behind.  The  creation  of  beauty  in  poetry  and  art  does
not  fall  within  the  sovereignty  or  even  within  the  sphere  of  the
reason.  The  intellect  is  not  the  poet,  the  artist,  the  creator  within
us;  creation  comes  by  a suprarational  influx  of  light  and  power
which  must  work  always,  if  it  is  to  do  its  best,  by  . vision  and
inspiration.  It  may  use  the  intellect  for  certain  of  its  operations,
but  in  proportion  as  it  subjects  itself  to  the  intellect  it  loses  in
power  and  force  of  vision  and  diminishes  the  splendour  and  truth
of  the  beauty  it  creates.  The  intellect  may  take  hold  of  the  influx,
moderate  and  repress  the  divine  enthusiasm  of  creation  and
force  it  to  obey  the  prudence  of  its  dictates,  but  in  doing  so  it


The  Suprarational  Beauty  129

brings  down  the  work  to  its  own  inferior  level,  and  the  lowering
is  in  proportion  to  the  intellectual  interference.  For  by  itself  the
intelligence  can  only  achieve  talent,  though  it  may  be  a high  and
even,  if  sufficiently  helped  from  above,  a surpassing  talent.
Genius,  the  true  creator,  is  always  suprarational  in  its  nature
and  its  instrumentation  even  when  it  seems  to  be  doing  the  work
of  the  reason;  it  is  most  itself,  most  exalted  in  its  work,  most
sustained  in  the  power,  depth,  height  and  beauty  of  its  achieve-
ment when  it  is  least  touched  by,  least  mixed  with  any  control
of  the  mere  intellectuality  and  least  often  drops  from  its  heights
of  vision  and  inspiration  into  reliance  upon  the  always  mecha-
nical process  of  intellectual  construction.  Art-creation  which
accepts  the  canons  of.  the  reason  and  works  within  the  limits
laid  down  by  it,  may  be  great,  beautiful  and  powerful;  for  genius
can  preserve  its  power  even  when  it  labours  in  shackles  and  re-
fuses to  put  forth  all  its  resources;  but  when  it  proceeds  by
means  of  the  intellect,  it  constructs,  but  does  not  create.  It  may
construct  well  and  with  a good  and  faultless  workmanship,
but  its  success  is  formal  and  not  of  the  spirit,  a success  of
technique  and  not  the  embodiment  of  the  imperishable  truth  of
beauty  seized  in  its  inner  reality,  its  divine  delight,  its  appeal  to
a supreme  source  of  ecstasy,  Ananda.

There  have  been  periods  of  artistic  creation,  ages  of  reason,
in  which  the  rational  and  intellectual  tendency  has  prevailed  in
poetry  and  art;  there  have  been  even  nations  which  in  their
great  formative  periods  of  art  and  literature  have  set  up  reason
and  a meticulous  taste  as  the  sovereign  powers  of  their  aesthetic
activity.  At  their  best  these  periods  have  achieved  work  of  a cer-
tain greatness,  but  predominantly  of  an  intellectual  greatness
and  perfection  of  technique  rather  than  achievements  of  a
supreme  inspired  and  revealing  beauty;  indeed  their  very  aim
has  been  not  the  discovery  of  the  deeper  truth  of  beauty,  but  truth
of  ideas  and  truth  of  reason,  a critical  rather  than  a true  creative
aim.  Their  leading  object  has  been  an  intellectual  criticism  of
life  and  nature  elevated  by  a consummate  poetical  rhythm  and
diction  rather  than  a revelation  of  God  and  man  and  life  and
nature  in  inspired  forms  of  artistic  beauty.  But  great  art  is  not
satisfied  with  representing  the  intellectual  truth  of  things,  which


130  The  Human  Cycle

is  always  their  superficial  or  exterior  truth;  it  seeks  for  a deeper
and  original  truth  which  escapes  the  eye  of  the  mere  sense  or  the
mere  reason,  the  soul  in  them,  the  unseen  reality  which  is  not
that  of  their  form  and  process  but  of  their  spirit.  This  it  seizes
and  expresses  by  form  and  idea,  but  a significant  form,  which  is
not  merely  a faithful  and  just  or  a harmonious  reproduction
of  outward  Nature,  and  a revelatory  idea,  not  the  idea  which  is
merely  correct,  elegantly  right  or  fully  satisfying  to  the  reason
and  taste.  Always  the  truth  it  seeks  is  first  and  foremost  the
truth  of  beauty,  — not,  again,  the  formal  beauty  alone  or  the
beauty  of  proportion  and  right  process  which  is  what  the  sense
and  the  reason  seek,  but  the  soul  of  beauty  which  is  hidden  from
the  ordinary  eye  and  the  ordinary  mind  and  revealed  in  its  full-
ness only  to  the  unsealedwision  of  the  poet  and  artist  in  man  who
can  seize  the  secret  significances  of  the  universal  poet  and  artist,
the  divine  creator  who  dwells  as  their  soul  and  spirit  in  the  forms
he  has  created.

The  art-creation  which  lays  a supreme  stress  on  reason  and
taste  and  on  perfection  and  purity  of  a technique  constructed  in
obedience  to  the  canons  of  reason  and  taste,  claimed  for  itself
the  name  of  classical  art;  but  the  claim,  like  the  too  trenchant
distinction  on  which  it  rests,  is  of  doubtful  validity.  The  spirit
of  the  real,  the  great  classical  art  and  poetry  is  to  bring  out
what  is  universal  and  subordinate  individual  expression  to
universal  truth  and  beauty,  just  as  the  spirit  of  romantic  art  and
poetry  is  to  bring  out  what  is  striking  and  individual,  and  this  it
often  does  so  powerfully  or  with  so  vivid  an  emphasis  as  to
throw  into  the  background  of  its  creation  the  universal,  on  which
yet  all  true  art  romantic  or  classical  builds  and  fills  in  its  forms.
In  truth,  all  great  art  has  carried  in  it  both  a classical  and  a ro-
mantic as  well  as  a realistic  element,  — understanding  realism  in
the  sense  of  the  prominent  bringing  out  of  the  external  truth  of
things,  not  the  perverse  inverted  romanticism  of  the  “real”  which
brings  into  exaggerated  prominence  the  ugly,  common  or  mor-
bid and  puts  that  forward  as  the  whole  truth  of  life.  The  type  of
art  to  which  a great  creative  work  belongs  is  determined  by  the
prominence  it  gives  to  one  element  and  the  subdual  of  the  others
into  subordination  to  its  reigning  spirit.  But  classical  art  also


131


The  Suprarational  Beauty

works  by  a large  vision  and  inspiration,  not  by  the  process  of  the
intellect.  The  lower  kind  of  classical  art  and  literature,  — if
classical  it  be  and  not  rather,  as  it  often  is,  pseudo-classical,
intellectually  imitative  of  the  external  form  and  process  of  the
classical,  — may  achieve  work,  of  considerable,  though  a much
lesser  power,  but  of  an  essentially  inferior  scope  and  nature;  for
to  that  inferiority  it  is  self-condemned  by  its  principle  of
intellectual  construction.  Almost  always  it  speedily  degenerates
into  the  formal  or  academic,  empty  of  real  beauty,  void  of  life
and  power,  imprisoned  in  its  slavery  to  form  and  imagining
that  when  a certain  form  has  been  followed,  certain  canons  of
construction  satisfied,  certain  rhetorical  rules  or  technical
principles  obeyed,  all  has  been  achieved.  It  ceases  to  be  art  and
becomes  a cold  and  mechanical  workmanship.

This  predominance  given  to  reason  and  taste  first  and  fore-
most, sometimes  even  almost  alone,  in  the  creation  and  appre-
ciation of  beauty  arises  from  a temper  of  mind  which  is  critical
rather  than  creative;  and  in  regard  to  creation  its  theory  falls  into
a capital  error.  All  artistic  work  in  order  to  be  perfect  must  in-
deed have  in  the  very  act  of  creation  the  guidance  of  an  inner
power  of  discrimination  constantly  selecting . and  rejecting  in
accordance  with  a principle  of  truth  and  beauty  which  remains
always  faithful  to  a harmony,  a proportion,  an  intimate  relation
of  the  forms  to  the  idea;  there  is  at  the  same  time  an  exact  fidelity
of  the  idea  to  the  spirit,  nature  and  inner  body  of  the  thing  of
beauty  which  has  been  revealed  to  the  soul  and  the  mind,  its
svarupa  and  svabhdva.  Therefore  this  discriminating  inner  sense
rejects  all  that  is  foreign,  superfluous,  otiose,  all  that  is  a mere
diversion  distractive  and  deformative,  excessive  or  defective,
while  it  selects  and  finds  sovereignly  all  that  can  bring  out  the  full
truth,  the  utter  beauty,  the  inmost  power.  But  this  discrimination
is  not  that  of  the  critical  intellect,  nor  is  the  harmony,  proportion,
relation  it  observes  that  which  can  be  fixed  by  any  set  law  of  the
critical  reason;  it  exists  in  the  very  nature  and  truth  of  the  thing
itself,  the  creation  itself,  in  its  secret  inner  law  of  beauty  and
harmony  which  can  be  seized  by  vision,  not  by  intellectual  ana-
lysis. The  discrimination  which  works  in  the  creator  is  therefore
not  an  intellectual  self-criticism  or  an  obedience  to  rules  im-


132


The  Human  Cycle


posed  on  liim  from  outside  by  any  intellectual  canons,  but  itself
creative,  intuitive,  a part  of  the  vision,  involved  in  and  insepa-
rable from  the  act  of  creation.  It  comes  as  part  of  that  influx  of
power  and  light  from  above  which  by  its  divine  enthusiasm  lifts
the  faculties  into  their  intense  suprarational  working.  When  it
fails,  when  it  is  betrayed  by  the  lower  executive  instruments  ra-
tional or  infrarational,  — and  this  happens  when  these  cease  to
be  passive  and  insist  on  obtruding  their  own  demands  or  vaga-
ries, — the  work  is  flawed  and  a subsequent  act  of  self-criticism
becomes  necessary.  But  in  correcting  his  work  the  artist  who
attempts  to  do  it  by  rule  and  intellectual  process,  uses  a false  or
at  any  rate  an  inferior  method  and  cannot  do  his  best.  He  ought
rather  to  call  to  his  aid  the  intuitive  critical  vision  and  embody  it
in  a fresh  act  of  inspired  creation  or  re-creation  after  bringing
himself  back  by  its  means  into  harmony  with  the  light  and  law  of
his  original  creative  initiation.  The  critical  intellect  has  no  direct
or  independent  part  in  the  means  of  the  inspired  creator  of  beauty.

In  the  appreciation  of  beauty  it  has  a part,  but  it  is  not  even
there  the  supreme  judge  or  law-giver.  The  business  of  the  intellect
is  to  analyse  the  elements,  parts,  external  processes,  apparent
principles  of  that  which  it  studies  and  explain  their  relations  and
workings ; in  doing  this  it  instructs  and  enlightens  the  lower  men-
tality which  has,  if  left  to  itself,  the  habit  of  doing  things  or  seeing
what  is  done  and  taking  all  for  granted  without  proper  observa-
tion and  fruitful  understanding.  But  as  with  truth  of  religion,  so
with  the  highest  and  deepest  truth  of  beauty,  the  intellectual
reason  cannot  seize  its  inner  sense  and  reality,  not  even  the  inner
truth  of  the  apparent  principles  and  processes,  unless  it  is  aided  by
a higher  insight  not  its  own.  As  it  cannot  give  a method,  process  or
rule  by  which  beauty  can  or  ought  to  be  created,  so  also  it  cannot
give  to  the  appreciation  of  beauty  that  deeper  insight  which  it
needs ; it  can  only  help  to  remove  the  dullness  and  vagueness  of  the
habitual  perceptions  and  conceptions  of  the  lower  mind  which
prevent  it  from  seeing  beauty  or  which  give  it  false  and  crude
aesthetic  habits : it  does  this  by  giving  to  the  mind  an  external  idea
and  rule  of  the  elements  of  the  thing  it  has  to  perceive  and  appre-
ciate. What  is  farther  needed  is  the  awakening  of  a certain  vision,
an  insight  and  an  intuitive  response  in  the  soul.  Reason  which


The  Suprarational  Beauty  133

studies  always  from  outside,  cannot  give  this  inner  and  more  inti-
mate contact;  it  has  to  aid  itself  by  a more  direct  insight  spring-
ing from  the  soul  itself  and  to  call  at  every  step  on  the  intuitive
mind  to  fill  up  the  gap  of  its  own  deficiencies.

We  see  this  in  the  history  of  the  development  of  literary  and
artistic  criticism.  In  its  earliest  stages  the  appreciation  of  beauty
is  instinctive,  natural,  inborn,  a response  of  the  aesthetic  sensi-
tiveness of  the  soul  which  does  not  attempt  to  give  any  account
of  itself  to  the  thinking  intelligence.  When  the  rational  intelli-
gence applies  itself  to  this  task,  it  is  not  satisfied  with  recording
faithfully  the  nature  of  the  response  and  the  thing  it  has  felt,  but
it  attempts  to  analyse,  to  lay  down  what  is  necessary  in  order  to
create  a just  aesthetic  gratification,  it  prepares  a grammar  of
technique,  an  artistic  law  and  canon  of  construction,  a sort  of
mechanical  rule  of  process  for  the  creation  of  beauty,  a fixed  code
or  Shastra.  This  brings  in  the  long  reign  of  academic  criticism
superficial,  technical,  artificial,  governed  by  the  false  idea  that
technique,  of  which  alone  critical  reason  can  give  an  entirely  ade-
quate account,  is  the  most  important  part  of  creation  and  that  to
every  art  there  can  correspond  an  exhaustive  science  which  will
tell  us  how  the  thing  is  done  and  give  us  the  whole  secret  and
process  of  its  doing.  A time  comes  when  the  creator  of  beauty
revolts  and  declares  the  charter  of  his  own  freedom,  generally  in
the  shape  of  a new  law  or  principle  of  creation,  and  this  freedom
once  vindicated  begins  to  widen  itself  and  to  carry  with  it  the  criti-
cal reason  out  of  all  its  familiar  bounds.  A more  developed
appreciation  emerges  which  begins  to  seek  for  new  principles  of
criticism,  to  search  for  the  soul  of  the  work  itself  and  explain  the
form  in  relation  to  the  soul  or  to  study  the  creator  himself  or  the
spirit,  nature  and  ideas  of  the  age  he  lived  in  and  so  to  arrive  at  a
right  understanding  of  his  work.  The  intellect  has  begun  to  see
that  its  highest  business  is  not  to  lay  down  laws  for  the  creator  of
beauty,  but  to  help  us  to  understand  himself  and  his  work,  not
only  its  form  and  elements  but  the  mind  from  which  it  sprang  and
the  impressions  its  effects  create  in  the  mind  that  receives.  Here
criticism  is  on  its  right  road,  but  on  a road  to  a consummation  in
which  the  rational  understanding  is  overpassed  and  a higher
faculty  opens,  suprarational  in  its  origin  and  nature.


IS4  The  Human  Cycle

For  the  conscious  appreciation  of  beauty  reaches  its  height
of  enlightenment  and  enjoyment  not  by  analysis  of  the  beauty
enjoyed  or  even  by  a right  and  intelligent  understanding  of  it,  —
these  things  are  only  a preliminary  clarifying  of  our  first  unen-
lightened sense  of  the  beautiful,  — but  by  an  exaltation  of  the
soul  in  which  it  opens  itself  entirely  to  the  light  and  power  and
joy  of  the  creation.  The  soul  of  beauty  in  us  identifies  itself  with
the  soul  of  beauty  in  the  thing  created  and  feels  in  appreciation  the
same  divine  intoxication  and  uplifting  which  the  artist  felt  in
creation.  Criticism  reaches  its  highest  point  when  it  beconies
the  record,  account,  right  description  of  this  response;  it  must
become  itself  inspired,  intuitive,  revealing.  In  other  words,  the
action  of  the  intuitive  mind  must  complete  the  action  of  the  ra-
tional intelligence  and  it  may  even  wholly  replace  it  and  do  more
powerfully  the  peculiar  and  proper  work  of  the  intellect  itself;  it
may  explain  more  intimately  to  us  the  secret  of  the  form,  the
strands  of  the  process,  the  inner  cause,  essence,  mechanism  of  the
defects  and  limitations  of  the  work  as  well  as  of  its  qualities.  For
the  intuitive  intelligence  when  it  has  been  sufficiently  trained  and
developed,  can  take  up  always  the  work  of  the  intellect  and  do  it
with  a power  and  light  and  insight  greater  and  surer  than  the
power  and  light  of  the  intellectual  judgment  in  its  widest  scope.
There  is  an  intuitive  discrimination  which  is  more  keen  and  pre-
cise in  its  sight  than  the  reasoning  intelligence.

What  has  been  said  of  great  creative  art,  that  being  the  form
in  which  normally  our  highest  and  intensest  aesthetic  satisfaction
is  achieved,  applies  to  all  beauty,  beauty  in  Nature,  beauty  in  life  as
well  as  beauty  in  art.  We  find  that  in  the  end  the  place  of  reason
and  the  limits  of  its  achievement  are  precisely  of  the  same  kind  in
regard  to  beauty  as  in  regard  to  religion.  It  helps  to  enlighten  and
purify  the  aesthetic  instincts  and  impulses,  but  it  cannot  give
them  their  highest  satisfaction  or  guide  them  to  a complete  insight.
It  shapes  and  fulfils  to  a certain  extent  the  aesthetic  intelligence,
but  it  cannot  justly  pretend  to  give  the  definitive  law  for  the
creation  of  beauty  or  for  the  appreciation  and  enjoyment  of
beauty.  It  can  only  lead  the  aesthetic  instinct,  impulse,  intelli-
gence towards  a greatest  possible  conscious  satisfaction,  but  not
to  it;  it  has  in  the  end  to  hand  them  over  to  a higher  faculty  which


The  Suprarational  Beauty  135

is  in  direct  touch  with  the  suprarational  and  in  its  nature  and
workings  exceeds  the  intellect.

And  for  the  same  reason,  because  that  which  we  are  seeking
through  beauty  is  in  the  end  that  which  we  are  seeking  through
religion,  the  Absolute,  the  Divine.  The  search  for  beauty  is  only
in  its  beginning  a satisfaction  in  the  beauty  of  form,  the  beauty
which  appeals  to  the  physical  senses  and  the  vital  impressions,
impulsions,  desires.  It  is  only  in  the  middle  a satisfaction  in  the
beauty  of  the  ideas  seized,  the  emotions  aroused,  the  perception
of  perfect  process  and  harmonious  combination.  Behind  them
the  soul  of  beauty  in  us  desires  the  contact,  the  revelation,  the
uplifting  delight  of  an  absolute  beauty^in  all  things  which  it  feels
to  be  present,  but  which  neither  the  senses  and  instincts  by  them-
selves can  give,  though  they  may  be  its  channels,  — for  it  is
suprasensuous,  — nor  the  reason  and  intelligence,  though  they
too  are  a channel,  — for  it  is  suprarational,  supra-intellectual,
— but  to  which  through  all  these  veils  the  soul  itself  seeks  to
arrive.  When  it  can  get  the  touch  of  this  universal,  absolute
beauty,  this  soul  of  beauty,  this  sense  of  its  revelation  in  any
slightest  or  greatest  thing,  the  beauty  of  a flower,  a form,  the
beauty  and  power  of  a character,  an  action,  an  event,  a human
life,  an  idea,  a stroke  of  the  brush  or  the  chisel,  or  a scintillation
of  the  mind,  the  colours  of  a sunset  or  the  grandeur  of  the  tem-
pest, it  is  then  that  the  sense  of  beauty  in  us  is  really,  powerfully,
entirely  satisfied.  It  is  in  truth  seeking,  as  in  religion,  for  the
Divine,  the  All-Beautiful  in  man,  in  nature,  in  life,  in  thought,
in  art;  for  God  is  Beauty  and  Delight  hidden  in  the  variation  of
his  masks  and  forms.  When,  fulfilled  in  our  growing  sense  and
knowledge  of  beauty  and  delight  in  beauty  and  our  power  for
beauty,  we  are  able  to  identify  ourselves  in  soul  with  this  Abso-
lute and  Divine  in  all  the  forms  and  activities  of  the  world  and
shape  an  image  of  our  inner  and  our  outer  life  in  the  highest
image  we  can  perceive  and  embody  of  the  All-Beautiful,  then
the  aesthetic  being  in  us  who  was  born  for  this  end,  has  fulfilled
himself  and  risen  to  his  divine  consummation.  To  find  highest
beauty  is  to  find  God ; to  reveal,  to  embody,  to  create,  as  we  say,
highest  beauty  is  to  bring  out  of  our  souls  the  living  image  and
power  of  God.


Chapter  XV


The  Suprarational  Good


We  begin  to  see,  through  the  principle
and  law  of  our  religious  being,  through  the  principle  and  law  of
our  aesthetic  being,  the  universality  of  a principle  and  law  which
is  that  of  all  being  and  which  we  must  therefore  hold  steadily
in  view  in  regard  to  all  human  activities.  It  rests  on  a truth  on
which  the  sages  have  always  agreed,  though  by  the  intellectual
thinker  it  may  be  constantly  disputed.  It  is  the  truth  that  all
active  being  is  a seeking  for  God,  a seeking  for  some  highest
self  and  deepest  Reality  secret  within,  behind  and,  above  our-
selves and  things,  a seeking  for  the  hidden  Divinity;  the  truth
which  we  glimpse  through  religion,  lies  concealed  behind  all
life;  it  is  the  great  secret  of  life,  that  which  it  is  in  labour  to
discover  and  to  make  real  to  its  self-knowledge.

The  seeking  for  God  is  also,  subjectively,  the  seeking  for
our  highest,  truest,  fullest,  largest  self.  It  is  the  seeking  for  a
Reality  which  the  appearances  of  life  conceal  because  they  only
partially  express  it  or  because  they  express  it  from  behind  veils
and  figures,  by  oppositions  and  contraries,  often  by  what  seem
to  be  perversions  and  opposites  of  the  Real.  It  is  the  seeking  for
something  whose  completeness  comes  only  by  a concrete  and
all-occupying  sense  of  the  Infinite  and  Absolute;  it  can  be  esta-
blished in  its  integrality  only  by  finding  a value  of  the  infinite  in
all  finite  things  and  by  the  attempt  — necessary,  inevitable,
however  impossible  or  paradoxical  it  may  seem  to  the  normal
reason  — to  raise  all  relativities  to  their  absolutes  and  to  re-
concile their  differences,  oppositions  and  contraries  by  elevation
and  sublimation  to  some  highest  term  in  which  all  these  are  uni-
fied. Some  perfect  highest  term  there  is  by  which  all  our  imper-
fect lower  terms  can  be  justified  and  their  discords  harmonised  if
once  we  can  induce  them  to  be  its  conscious  expressions,  to  exist
not  for  themselves  but  for  That,  as  contributory  values  of  that


The  Suprarational  Good  137

highest  Truth,  fractional  measures  of  that  highest  and  largest
common  measure.  A One  there  is  in  which  all  the  entangled
discords  of  this  multiplicity  of  separated,  conflicting,  intertwin-
ing, colhding  ideas,  forces,  tendencies,  instincts,  impulses,  as-
pects, appearances  which  we  call  life,  can  find  the  unity  of  their
diversity,  the  harmony  of  their  divergences,  the  justification  of
their  claims,  the  correction  of  their  perversions  and  aberrations,
the  solution  of  their  problems  and  disputes.  Knowledge  seeks
for  that  in  order  that  Life  may  know  its  own  true  meaning  and
transform  itself  into  the  highest  and  most  harmonious  possible
expression  of  a divine  Reality.  All  seeks  for  that,  each  power  feels
out  for  it  in  its  own  way:  the  infrarational  gropes  for  it  blindly
along  the  fine  of  its  instincts,  needs,  impulses;  the  rational  lays
for  it  its  trap  of  logic  and  order,  follows  out  and  gathers  together
its  diversities,  analyses  them  in  order  to  synthetise;  the  supra-
rational gets  behind  and  above  things  and  into  their  inmost  parts,
there  to  touch  and  lay  hands  on  the  Reality  itself  in  its  core  and
essence  and  enlighten  all  its  infinite  details  from  that  secret  centre.

This  truth  comes  most  easily  home  to  us  in  Rehgion  and  in
Art,  in  the  cult  of  the  spiritual  and  in  the  cult  of  the  beautiful,
because  there  we  get  away  most  thoroughly  from  the  unrestful
pressure  of  the  outward  appearances  of  life,  the  urgent  siege  of  its
necessities,  the  deafening  clamour  of  its  utihties.  There  we  are
not  compelled  at  every  turn  to  make  terms  with  some  gross
material  claim,  some  vulgar  but  inevitable  necessity  of  the  hour
and  the  moment.  We  have  leisure  and  breathing-time  to  seek  the
Real  behind  the  apparent:  we  are  allowed  to  turn  our  eyes  either
away  from  the  temporary  and  transient  or  through  the  temporal
itself  to  the  eternal;  we  can  draw  back  from  the  limitations  of  the
immediately  practical  and  re-create  our  souls  by  the  touch  of  the
ideal  and  the  universal.  We  begin  to  shake  off  our  chains,  we  get
rid  of  life  in  its  aspect  of  a prison-house  with  Necessity  for  our
jailer  and  utility  for  our  constant  taskmaster;  we  are  admitted
to  the  liberties  of  the  soul;  we  enter  God’s  infinite  kingdom  of
beauty  and  delight  or  we  lay  hands  on  the  keys  of  our  absolute
self-finding  and  open  omselves  to  the  possession  or  the  adoration
of  the  Eternal.  There  lies  the  immense  value  of  Religion,  the
inunense  value  of  Art  and  Poetry  to  the  human  spirit;  it  lies  in


138  The  Human  Cycle

tkeir  immediate  power  for  inner  truth,  for  self-enlargement,  for
liberation.

' But  in  other  spheres  of  life,  in  the  spheres  of  what  by  an  irony
of  our  ignorance  we  call  especially  practical  life,  — although,  if
the  Divine  be  our  true  object  of  search  and  realisation,  our  nor-
mal conduct  in  them  and  our  current  idea  of  them  is  the  very  op-
posite of  practical,  — we  are  less  ready  to  recognise  the  universal
truth.  We  take  a long  time  to  admit  it  even  partially  in  theory,  we
are  seldom  ready  at  all  to  follow  it  in  practice.  And  we  find  this
difiiculty  because  there  especially,  in  all  our  practical  life,  we  are
content  to  be  the  slaves  of  an  outward  Necessity  and  think  our-
selves always  excused  when  we  admit  as  the  law  of  our  thought,
will  and  action  the  yoke  of  immediate  and  temporary  utilities.
Yet  even  there  we  must  arrive  eventually  at  the  highest  truth.  We
shall  find  out  in  the  end  that  our  daily  fife  and  our  social  existence
are  not  things  apart,  are  not  another  field  of  existence  with  another
law  than  the  inner  and  ideal.  On  the  contrary,  we  shall  never
find  out  their  true  meaning  or  resolve  their  harsh  and  often
agonising  problems  until  we  learn  to  see  in  them  a means  to-
wards the  discovery  and  the  individual  and  collective  expression
of  our  highest  and,  because  our  highest,  therefore  our  truest
and  fullest  self,  our  largest  most  imperative  principle  and  power
of  existence.  All  life  is  only  a lavish  and  manifold  opportunity
given  us  to  discover,  realise,  express  the  Divine.

It  is  in  our  ethical  being  that  this  truest  truth  of  practical
life,  its  real  and  highest  practicality  becomes  most  readily  appa-
rent. It  is  true  that  the  rational  man  has  tried  to  reduce  the  ethical
life  like  all  the  rest  to  a matter  of  reason,  to  determine  its  nature,
its  law,  its  practical  action  by  some  principle  of  reason,  by  some
law  of  reason.  He  has  never  really  succeeded  and  he  never  can
really  succeed;  his  appearances  of  success  are  mere  pretences  of
the  intellect  building  elegant  and  empty  constructions  with  words
and  ideas,  mere  conventions  of  logic  and  vamped-up  syntheses,
in  sum,  pretentious  failures  which  break  down  at  the  first  stre-
nuous touch  of  reality.  Such  was  that  extraordinary  system  of
utilitarian  ethics  discovered  in  the  nineteenth  century  — the
great  century  of  science  and  reason  and  utility  — by  one  of  its
most  positive  and  systematic  minds  and  now  deservedly  discre-


The  Suprarational  Good


139


dited.  Happily  we  need  now  only  smile  at  its  shallow  pretentious
errors,  its  substitution  of  a practical,  outward  and  occasional
test  for  the  inner,  subjective  and  absolute  motive  of  ethics,  its
reduction  of  ethical  action  to  an  impossibly  scientific  and  quite
impracticable  jugglery  of  moral  mathematics,  attractive  enough
to  the  reasoning  and  logical  mind,  quite  false  and  alien  to  the
whole  instinct  and  intuition  of  the  ethical  being.  Equally  false
and  impracticable  are  other  attempts  of  the  reason  to  account
for  and  regulate  its  principle  and  phenomena,  — the  hedonistic
theory  which  refers  all  virtue  to  the  pleasure  and  satisfaction  of
the  mind  in  good  or  the  sociological  which  supposes  ethics  to  be
no  more  than  a system  of  formulas,  of  conduct  generated  from
the  social  sense  and  a ruled  direction  of  the  social  impulses  and
would  regulate  its  action  by  that  insufficient  standard.  The  ethi-
cal being  escapes  from  all  these  formulas;  it  is  a law  to  itself  and
finds  its  principle  in  its  own  eternal  nature  which  is  not  in  its
essential  character  a growth  of  evolving  mind,  even  though  it
may  seem  to  be  that  in  its  earthly  history,  but  a light  from  the
ideal,  a reflection  in  man  of  the  Divine.

Not  that  all  these  errors  have  not  each  of  them  a truth  behind
their  false  constructions;  for  all  errors  of  the  human  reason  are
false  representations,  a wrong  building,  effective  misconstructions
of  the  truth  or  of  a side  or  a part  of  the  truth.  Utility  is  a funda-
mental principle  of  existence  and  all  fundamental  principles  of
existence  are  in  the  end  one;  therefore  it  is  true  that  the  highest
good  is  also  the  highest  utility.  It  is  true  also  that,  not  any
balance  of  the  greatest  good  of  the  greatest  number,  but  simply
the  good  of  others  and  most  widely  the  good  of  all  is  the  one  ideal
aim  of  our  outgoing  ethical  practice;  it  is  that  which  the  ethical
man  would  like  to  effect,  if  he  could  only  find  the  way  and  be
always  sure  what  is  the  real  good  of  all.  But  this  does  not  help
to  regulate  our  ethical  practice,  nor  does  it  supply  us  with  its
inner  principle  whether  of  being  or  of  action,  but  only  produces
one  of  the  many  considerations  by  which  we  can  feel  our  way
along  the  road  which  is  so  difficult  to  travel.  Good,  not  utility,
must  be  the  principle  and  standard  of  good;  otherwise  we
fall  into  the  hands  of  that  dangerous  pretender  expediency,
whose  whole  method  is  alien  to  the  ethical.  Moreover,  the


140


The  Human  Cycle


standard  of  utility,  the  judgment  of  utility,  its  spirit,  its  form,
its  application  must  vary  with  the  individual  nature,  the  habit
of  mind,  the  outlook  on  the  world.  Here  there  can  be  no  reliable
general  law  to  which  all  can  subscribe,  no  set  of  large  governing
principles  such  as  it  is  sought  to  supply  to  our  conduct  by  a true
ethics.  Nor  can  ethics  at  all  or  ever  be  a matter  of  calculation.
There  is  only  one  safe  rule  for  the  ethical  man,  to  stick  to  his  prin-
ciple of  good,  his  instinct  for  good,  his  vision  of  good,  his  intui-
tion of  good  and  to  govern  by  that  his  conduct.  He  may  err,  but
he  will  be  on  his  right  road  in  spite  of  all  stumblings,  because
he  will  be  faithful  to  the  law  of  his  nature.  The  saying  of  the  Gita
is  always  true : better  is  the  law  of  one’s  own  nature  though  ill-
performed,  dangerous  is  an  alien  law  however  speciously  supe-
rior it  may  seem  to  our  reason.  But  the  law  of  nature  of  the
ethical  being  is  the  pursuit  of  good;  it  can  never  be  the  pursuit
of  utility.

Neither  is  its  law  the  pursuit  of  pleasure  high  or  base,  nor
self-satisfaction  of  any  kind,  however  subtle  or  even  spiritual.  It
is  true,  here  too,  that  the  highest  , good  is  both  in  its  nature  and
inner  effect  the  highest  bhss.  Ananda,  delight  of  being,  is  the
spring  of  all  existence  and  that  to  which  it  tends  and  for  which  it
seeks  openly  or  covertly  in  all  its  activities.  It  is  true  too  that  in
virtue  growing,  in  good  accomplished  there  is  a great  pleasure
and  that  the  seeking  for  it  may  well  be  always  there  as  a subcon-
scient  motive  to  the  pursuit  of  virtue.  But  for  practical  purposes '
this  is  a side  aspect  of  the  matter;  it  does  not  constitute  pleasure
into  a test  or  standard  of  virtue.  On  the  contrary,  virtue  comes  to
the  natural  man  by  a struggle  with  his  pleasure-seeking  nature
and  is  often  a deliberate  embracing  of  pain,  an  edification  of
strength  by  suffering.  We  do  not  embrace  that  pain  and  struggle
for  the  pleasure  of  the  pain  and  the  pleasure  of  the  struggle;
for  that  higher  strenuous  delight,  though  it  is  felt  by  the  secret
spirit  in  us,  is  not  usually  or  not  at  first  conscious  in  the  conscient
normal  part  of  our  being  which  is  the  field  of  the  struggle.  The
action  of  the  ethical  man  is  not  motived  by  even  an  inner  plea-
sure, but  by  a call  of  his  being,  the  necessity  of  an  ideal,  the
figure  of  an  absolute  standard,  a law  of  the  Divine.

In  the  outward  history  of  our  ascent  this  does  not  at  first


The  Suprarational  Good  141

appear  clearly,  does  not  appear  perhaps  at  all;  there  the  evolu-
tion of  man  in  society  may  seem  to  be  the  determining  cause  of
his  ethical  evolution.  For  ethics  only  begins  by  the  demand  upon
him  of  something  other  than  his  personal  preference,  vital  plea-
sure or  material  self-interest;  and  this  demand  seems  at  first  to
work  on  him  through  the  necessity  of  his  relations  with  others,
by  the  exigencies  of  his  social  existence.  But  that  this  is  not  the
core  of  the  matter  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  the  ethical  demand
does  not  always  square  with  the  social  demand,  nor  the  ethical
standard  always  coincide  with  the  social  standard.  On  the  con-
trary, the  ethical  man  is  often  called  upon  to  reject  and  do  battle
with  the  social  demand,  to  break,  to  move  away  from,  to  reverse
the  social  standard.  His  relations  with  others  and  his  relations
with  himself  are  both  of  them  the  occasions  of  his  ethical  growth;
but  that  which  determines  his  ethical  being  is  his  relations  with
God,  the  urge  of  the  Divine  upon  him  whether  concealed  in  his
nature  or  conscious  in  his  higher  self  or  inner  genius.  He  obeys
an  inner  ideal,  not  an  outer  standard;  he  answers  to  a divine  law
in  his  being,  not  to  a social  claim  or  a collective  necessity.  The
ethical  imperative  comes  not  from  around,  but  from  within  him
and  above  him.

It  has  been  felt  and  said  from  of  old  that  the  laws  of
right,  the  laws  of  perfect  conduct  are  the  laws  of  the  gods,
eternal  beyond,  laws  that  man  is  conscious  of  and  summoned
to  obey.  The  age  of  reason  has  scouted  this  summary
account  of  the  matter  as  a superstition  or  a poetical  imagination
which  the  nature  and  history  of  the  world  contradict.  But  still
there  is  a truth  in  this  ancient  superstition  or  imagination
which  the  rational  denial  of  it  misses  and  the  rational  confirma-
tions of  it,  whether  Kant’s  categorical  imperative  or  another,
do  not  altogether  restore.  If  man’s  conscience  is  a creation  of
his  evolving  nature,  if  his  conceptions  of  ethical  law  are  mutable
and  depend  on  his  stage  of  evolution,  yet  at  the  root  of  them
there  is  something  constant  in  all  their  mutations  which  lies  at
the  very  roots  of  his  own  nature  and  of  world-nature.  And  if
Nature  in  man  and  the  world  is  in  its  beginnings  infra-ethical
as  well  as  infrarational,  as  it  is  at  its  summit  supra-ethical  as
well  as  suprarational,  yet  in  that  infra-ethical  there  is  some-


142


The  Human  Cycle


thing  which  becomes  in  the  human  plane  of  being  the  ethical,
and  that  supra-ethical  is  itself  a consummation  of  the  ethical
and  cannot  be  reached  by  any  who  have  not  trod  the  long
ethical  road.  Below  hides  that  secret  of  good  in  all  things  which
the  human  being  approaches  and  tries  to  deliver  partially
through  ethical  instinct  and  ethical  idea;  above  is  hidden  the
eternal  Good  which  exceeds  our  partial  and  fragmentary  ethical
conceptions.

Our  ethical  impulses  and  activities  begin  like  all  the  rest
in  the  infrarational  and  take  their  rise  from  the  subconscient.
They  arise  as  an  instinct  of  right,  an  instinct  of  obedience  to
an  ununderstood  law,  an  instinct  of  self-giving  in  labour,
an  instinct  of  sacrifice  and  self-sacrifice,  an  instinct  of  love,  of
self-subordination  and  of  solidarity  with  others.  Man  obeys  the
law  at  first  without  any  inquiry  into  the  why  and  the  wherefore;
he  does  not  seek  for  it  a sanction  in  the  reason.  His  first  thought
is  that  it  is  a law  created  by  higher  powers  than  himself  and
his  race  and  he  says  with  the  ancient  poet  that  he  knows  not
whence  these  laws  sprang,  but  only  that  they  are  and  endure
and  cannot  with  impunity  be  violated.  What  the  instincts  and
impulses  seek  after,  the  reason  labours  to  make  us  understand,
so  that  the  will  may  come  to  use  the  ethical  impulses  intelligently
and  turn  the  instincts  into  ethical  ideas.  It  corrects  man’s
crude  and  often  erring  misprisions  of  the  ethical  instinct,
separates  and  purifies  his  confused  associations,  shows  as  best
it  can  the  relations  of  his  often  clashing  moral  ideals,  tries  to
arbitrate  and  compromise  between  their  conflicting  claims,
arranges  a system  and  many-sided  rule  of  ethical  action.  And
all  this  is  well,  a necessary  stage  of  our  advance;  but  in  the  end
these  ethical  ideas  and  this  intelligent  ethical  will  which  it  has
tried  to  train  to  its  control,  escape  from  its  hold  and  soar  up
beyond  its  province.  Always,  even  when  enduring  its  rein  and
curb,  they  have  that  inborn  tendency.

For  the  ethical  being  like  the  rest  is  a growth  and  a seeking
towards  the  absolute,  the  divine,  which  can  only  be  attained
securely  in  the  suprarational.  It  seeks  after  an  absolute  purity,
an  absolute  right,  an  absolute  truth,  an  absolute  strength,  an
absolute  love  and  self-giving,  and  it  is  most  satisfied  when  it  can


The  Suprarational  Good  143

get  them  in  absolute  measure,  without  limit,  curb  or  compromise,
divinely,  infinitely,  in  a sort  of  godhead  and  transfiguration
of  the  ethical  being.  The  reason  is  chiefly  concerned  with  what
it  best  understands,  the  apparent  process,  the  machinery,  the
outward  act,  its  result  and  effect,  its  circumstance,  occasion
and  motive;  by  these  it  judges  the  morality  of  the  action  and
the  morality  of  the  doer.  But  the  developed  ethical  being  knows
instinctively  that  it  is  an  inner  something  which  it  seeks  and  the
outward  act  is  only  a means  of  bringing  out  and  manifesting
within  ourselves  by  its  psychological  effects  that  inner  absolute
and  eternal  entity.  The  value  of  our  actions  lies  not  so  much
in  their  apparent  nature  and  outward  result  as  in  their  help
towards  the  growth  of  the  Divine  within  us.  It  is  difficult,  even
impossible  to  justify  upon  outward  grounds  the  absolute  justice,
absolute  right,  absolute  purity,  love  or  selflessness  of  an  action
or  course  of  action;  for  action  is  always  relative,  it  is  mixed
and  uncertain  in  its  results,  perplexed  in  its  occasions.  But  it  is
possible  to  relate  the  inner  being  to  the  eternal  and  absolute  good,
to  make  our  sense  and  will  full  of  it  so  as  to  act  out  of  its  impul-
sion or  its  intuitions  and  inspirations.  That  is  what  the  ethical
being  labours  towards  and  the  higher  ethical  man  increasingly
attains  to  in  his  inner  efforts.

In  fact  ethics  is  not  in  its  essence  a calculation  of  good  and
evil  in  the  action  or  a laboured  effort  to  be  blameless  according
to  the  standards  of  the  world,  — those  are  only  crude  appearances,
— it  is  an  attempt  to  grow  into  the  divine  nature.  Its  parts  of
purity  are  an  aspiration  towards  the  inalienable  purity  of
God’s  being;  its  parts  of  truth  and  right  are  a seeking  after
conscious  unity  with  the  law  of  the  divine  knowledge  and  will;
its  parts  of  sympathy  and  charity  are  a movement  towards  the
infinity  and  universality  of  the  divine  love;  its  parts  of  strength
and  manhood  are  an  edification  of  the  divine  strength  and
power.  That  is  the  heart  of  its  meaning.  Its  high  fulfilment  comes
when  the  being  of  the  man  undergoes  this  transfiguration;  then
it  is  not  his  actions  that  standardise  his  nature  but  his  nature
that  gives  value  to  his  actions;  then  he  is  no  longer  laboriously
virtuous,  artificially  moral,  but  naturally  divine.  Actively,
too,  he  is  fulfilled  and  consummated  when  he  is  not  led  or


144  The  Human  Cycle

moved  either  by  the  infrarational  impulses  or  the  rational  intelli-
gence and  will,  but  inspired  and  piloted  by  the  divine  knowledge
and  will  made  conscious  in  his  nature.  And  that  can  only  be
done,  first  by  communication  of  the  truth  of  these  things  through
the  intuitive  mind  as  it  purifies  itself  progressively  from  the  inva-
sion of  egoism,  self-interest,  desire,  passion  and  all  kinds  of  self-
will,  finally  through  the  suprarational  light  and  power,  no
longer  communicated  but  present  and  in  possession  of  his
being.  Such  was  the  supreme  aim  of  the  ancient  sages  who  had
the  wisdom  which  rational  man  and  rational  society  have  re-
jected because  it  was  too  high  a truth  for  the  comprehension  of
the  reason  and  for  the  powers  of  the  normal  limited  human
will  too  bold  and  immense,  too  infinite  an  effort.

Therefore  it  is  with  the  cult  of  Good,  as  with  the  cult  of
Beauty  and  the  cult  of  the  spiritual.  Even  in  its  first  instincts
it  is  already  an  obscure  seeking  after  the  divine  and  absolute;
it  aims  at  an  absolute  satisfaction,  it  finds  its  highest  light  and
means  in  something  beyond  the  reason,  it  is  fulfilled  only  when
it  finds  God,  when  it  creates  in  man  some  image  of  the  divine
Reality.  Rising  from  the  infrarational  beginnings  through  its
intermediate  dependence  on  the  reason  to  a suprarational  con-
summation, the  ethical  is  like  the  aesthetic  and  the  religious
being  of  man  a seeking  after  the  Eternal.


Chapter  XVI


The  Suprarational  Ultimate  of  Life


In  ALL  the  higher  powers  of  his  life  man
may  be  said  to  be  seeking,  blindly  enough,  for  God.  To  get  at
the  Divine  and  Eternal  in  himself  and  the  world  and  to  harmo-
nise them,  to  put  his  being  and  his  life  in  tune  with  the  Infinite
reveals  itself  in  these  parts  of  his  nature  as  his  concealed  aim  and
his  destiny.  He  sets  out  to  arrive  at  his  highest  and  largest  and
most  perfect  self,  and  the  moment  he  at  all  touches  upon  it,  this
self  in  him  appears  to  be  one  with  some  great  Soul  and  Self  of
Truth  and  Good  and  Beauty  in  the  world  to  which  we  give  the
name  of  God.  To  get  at  this  as  a spiritual  presence  is  the  aim  of
religion,  to  grow  into  harmony  with  its  eternal  nature  of  light,
love,  strength  dnd  purity  is  the  aim  of  ethics,  to  enjoy  and  mould
ourselves  into  the  harmony  of  its  eternal  beauty  and  delight  is
the  aim  and  consummation  of  our  aesthetic  need  and  nature,
to  know  and  to  be  according  to  its  eternal  principles  of  truth  is
the  end  of  science  and  philosophy  and  of  all  our  insistent  drive
towards  knowledge.

But  all  this  seems  to  be  something  above  our  normal  and
usual  being;  it  is  something  into  which  we  strive  to  grow,  but  it
does  not  seem  to  be  the  normal  stuff,  the  natural  being  or  atmos-
phere of  the  individual  and  the  society  in  their  ordinary  con-
sciousness and  their  daily  life.  That  life  is  practical  and  not  idea-
listic; it  is  concerned  not  with  good,  beauty,  spiritual  experience,
the  higher  truth,  but  with  interests,  physical  needs,  desires,  vital
necessities.  This  is  real  to  it,  all  the  rest  is  a little  shadowy;  this
belongs  to  its  ordinary  labour,  all  the  rest  to  its  leisure;  this  to
the  stuff  of  which  it  is  made,  all  the  rest  to  its  parts  of  ornament
and  dispensable  improvement.  To  all  that  rest  society  gives  a
place,  but  its  heart  is  not  there.  It  accepts  ethics  as  a bond  and
an  influence,  but  it  does  not  live  for  ethical  good;  its  real  gods
are  vital  need  and  utility  and  the  desires  of  the  body.  If  it  governs


146  The  Human  Cycle

its  life  partly  by  ethical  laws  because  otherwise  vital  need,  desire,
utility  in  seeking  their  own  satisfaction  through  many  egoistic
individuals  would  clash  among  themselves  and  destroy  their  own
aims,  it  does  not  feel  called  upon  to  make  its  life  entirely  ethical.
It  concerns  itself  still  less  with  beauty;  even  if  it  admits  things
beautiful  as  an  embellishment  and  an  amusement,  a satisfaction
and  pastime  of  the  eye  and  ear  and  mind,  nothing  moves  it  im-
peratively to  make  its  life  a thing  of  beauty.  It  allows  religion  a
fixed  place  and  portion,  on  holy  days,  in  the  church  or  temple,
at  the  end  of  life  when  age  and  the  approach  of  death  call  the
attention  forcibly  away  from  this  life  to  other  life,  at  fixed  times
in  the  week  or  the  day  when  it  thinks  it  right  for  a moment  to
pause  in  the  affairs  of  the  world  and  remember  God;  but  to  make
the  whole  of  life  a religion,  a remembering  of  God  and  a seeking
after  him,  is  a thing  that  is  not  really  done  even  in  societies  which
like  the  Indian  erect  spirituality  as  their  aim  and  principle.  It
admits  philosophy  in  a still  more  remote  fashion;  and  if  nowa-
days it  eagerly  seeks  after  science,  that  is  because  science  helps
prodigiously  the  satisfaction  of  its  vital  desires,  needs  and  inte-
rests ; but  it  does  not  turn  to  seek  after  an  entirely  scientific  life
any  more  than  after  an  entirely  ethical  life.  A more  complete
effort  in  any  one  of  these  directions  it  leaves  to  the  individual,
to  the  few,  and  to  individuals  of  a special  type,  the  saint,  the
ethical  man,  the  artist,  the  thinker,  the  man  of  religion;  it  gives
them  a place,  does  some  homage  to  them,  assigns  some  room  to
the  things  they  represent,  but  for  itself  it  is  content  to  follow
mainly  after  its  own  inherent  principle  of  vital  satisfaction,  vital
necessity  and  utility,  vital  efficiency.

The  reason  is  that  here  we  get  to  another  power  of  our  being
which  is  different  from  the  ethical,  aesthetic,  rational  and  reli-
gious, — one  which,  even  if  we  recognise  it  as  lower  in  the  scale,
still  insists  on  its  own  reality  and  has  not  only  the  right  to  exist
but  the  right  to  satisfy  itself  and  be  fulfilled.  It  is  indeed  the
primary  power,  it  is  the  base  of  our  existence  upon  earth,  it  is
that  which  the  others  take  as  their  starting-point  and  their  founda-
tion. This  is  the  life-power  in  us,  the  vitalistic,  the  dynamic
nature.  Its  whole  principle  and  aim  is  to  be,  to  assert  its  existence,
to  increase,  to  expand,  to  possess  and  to  enjoy:  its  native  terms


The  Suprarational  Ultimate  of  Life  147

are  growth  of  being,  pleasure  and  power.  Life  itself  here  is  Being
at  labour  in  Matter  to  express  itself  in  terms  of  conscious  force;
human  life  is  the  human  being  at  labour  to  impress  himself  on  the
material  world  with  the  greatest  possible  force  and  intensity  and
extension.  His  primary  insistent  aim  must  be  to  hve  and  make
for  himself  a place  in  the  world,  for  himself  and  his  species,
secondly,  having  made  it  to  possess,  produce  and  enjoy  with  an
ever-widening  scope,  and  finally  to  spread  himself  over  all  the
earth-life  and  dominate  it;  this  is  and  must  be  his  first  practical
business.  That  is  what  the  Darwinians  have  tried  to  express  by
their  notion  of  the  struggle  for  life.  But  the  struggle  is  not  merely
to  last  and  live,  but  to  increase,  enjoy  and  possess : its  method
includes  and  uses  not  only  a principle  and  instinct  of  egoism,  but
a concomitant  principle  and  instinct  of  association.  Human  life
is  moved  by  two  equally  powerful  impulses,  one  of  individualistic
self-assertion,  the  other  of  collective  self-assertion;  it  works
by  strife,  but  also  by  mutual  assistance  and  united  effort;  it  uses
two  diverse  convergent  forms  of  action,  two  motives  which
seem  to  be  contradictory  but  are  in  fact  always  coexistent,
competitive  endeavour  and  co-operative  endeavour.  It  is  from
this  character  of  the  dynamism  of  life  that  the  whole  structure
of  human  society  has  come  into  being,  and  it  is  upon  the
sustained  and  vigorous  action  of  this  dynamism  that  the  conti-
nuance, energy  and  growth  of  all  human  societies  depends.
If  this  life-force  in  them  fails  and  these  motive-powers  lose  in
vigour,  then  all  begins  to  languish,  stagnate  and  finally  move
towards  disintegration.

The  modern  European  idea  of  society  is  founded  upon  the
primary,  and  predominant  part  played  by  this  vital  dynamism
in  the  formation  and  maintenance  of  society;  for  the  European,
ever  since  the  Teutonic  mind  and  temperament  took  possession
of  western  Europe,  has  been  fundamentally  the  practical,  dyna-
mic and  kinetic  man,  vitalistic  in  the  very  marrow  of  his  thought
and  being.  All  else  has  been  the  fine  flower  of  his  life  and  cul-
ture, this  has  been  its  root  and  stalk,  and  in  modern  times  this
truth  of  his  temperament,  always  there,  has  come  aggressively
to  the  surface  and  triumphed  over  the  traditions  of  Christian
piety  and  Latinistic  culture.  This  triumphant  emergence  and


148  The  Human  Cycle

lead  of  the  vital  man  and  his  motives  has  been  the  whole  signi-
ficance of  the  great  economic  and  political  civilisation  of  the
nineteenth  century.  Life  in  society  consists,  for  the  practical
human  instincts,  in  three  activities,  the  domestic  and  social  life
of  man,  — social  in  the  sense  of  his  customary  relations  with
others  in  the  community  both  as  an  individual  and  as  a member
of  one  family  among  many,  — his  economic  activities  as  a pro-
ducer, wealth-getter  and  consumer  and  his  political  status  and
action.  Society  is  the  organisation  of  these  three  things  and,  fun-
damentally, it  is  for  the  practical  human  being  nothing  more.
Learning  and  science,  culture,  ethics,  aesthetics,  religion  are
assigned  their  place  as  aids  to  life,  for  its  guidance  and  better-
ment, for  its  embellishment,  for  the  consolation  of  its  labours,
difficulties  and  sorrows,  but  they  are  no  part  of  its  very  substance,
do  not  figure  among  its  essential  objects.  Life  itself  is  the  only
object  of  living.

The  ancients  held  a different,  indeed  a diametrically  opposite
view.  Although  they  recognised  the  immense  importance  of  the
primary  activities,  in  Asia  the  social  most,  in  Europe  the  poli-
tical, — as  every  society  must  which  at  all  means  to  live  and
flourish,  — yet  these  were  not  to  them  primary  in  the  higher
sense  of  the  word;  they  were  man’s  first  business,  but  not  his
chief  business.  The  ancients  regarded  this  life  as  an  occasion  for
the  development  of  the  rational,  the  ethical,  the  aesthetic,  the
spiritual  being.  Greece  and  Rome  laid  stress  on  the  three  first
alone,  Asia  went  farther,  made  these  also  subordinate  and  looked
upon  them  as  stepping-stones  to  a spiritual  consummation.
Greece  and  Rome  were  proudest  of  their  art,  poetry  and  philo-
sophy and  cherished  these  things  as  much  as  or  even  more  than
their  political  liberty  or  greatness.  Asia  too  exalted  these  three
powers  and  valued  inordinately  her  social  organisation,  but
valued  much  more  highly,  exalted  with  a much  greater  intensity
of  worship  her  saints,  her  religious  founders  and  thinkers,  her
spiritual  heroes.  The  modern  world  has  been  proudest  of  its  eco-
nomic organisation,  its  political  liberty,  order  and  progress,  the
mechanism,  comfort  and  ease  of  its  social  and  domestic  life,
its  science,  but  science  most  in  its  application  to  practical  life,
most  for  its  instruments  and  conveniences,  its  railways,  tele-


149


The  Suprarational  Ultimate  of  Life

graphs,  steamships  and  its  other  thousand  and  one  discoveries,
countless  inventions  and  engines  which  help  man  to  master  the
physical  world.  That  marks  the  whole  difference  in  the  attitude.

On  this  a great  deal  hangs;  for  if  the  practical  and  vitalistic
view  of  life  and  society  is  the  right  one,  if  society  merely  or  prin-
cipally exists  for  the  maintenance,  comfort,  vital  happiness  and
political  and  economic  efficiency  of  the  species,  then  our  idea
that  life  is  a seeking  for  God  and  for  the  highest  self  and  that
society  too  must  one  day  make  that  its  principle,  cannot  stand.
Modem  society,  at  any  rate  in  its  self-conscious  aim,  is  far  enough
from  any  such  endeavour;  whatever  may  be  the  splendour  of  its
achievement,  it  acknowledges  only  two  gods,  life  and  practical
reason  organised  under  the  name  of  science.  Therefore  on  this
great  primary  thing,  this  life-power  and  its  manifestations,  we
must  look  with  special  care  to  see  what  it  is  in  its  reality  as  well
as  what  it  is  in  its  appearance.  Its  appearance  is  familiar  enough;
for  of  that  is  made  the  very  stuff  and  present  form  of  our  every-
day life.  Its  main  ideals  are  the  physical  good  and  vitalistic  well-
being of  the  individual  and  the  community,  the  entire  satisfaction
of  the  desire  for  bodily  health,  long  life,  comfort,  luxury,  wealth,
amusement,  recreation,  a constant  and  tireless  expenditure  of
the  mind  and  the  dynamic  life-force  in  remunerative  work  and
production  and,  as  the  higher  flame-spires  of  this  restless  and
devouring  energy,  creations  and  conquests  of  various  kinds,  wars,
invasions,  colonisation,  discovery,  commercial  victory,  travel,
adventure,  the  full  possession  and  utilisation  of  the  earth.  All
this  life  still  takes  as  its  cadre  the  old  existing  forms,  the  family,
the  society,  the  nation;  and  it  has  two  impulses,  individuahstic
and  collective.

The  primary  impulse  of  life  is  individualistic  and  makes
family,  social  and  national  life  a means  for  the  greater  satisfac-
tion of  the  vital  individual.  In  the  family  the  individual  seeks  for
the  satisfaction  of  his  vital  instinct  of  possession,  as  well  as  for
the  joy  of  companionship,  and  for  the  fulfilment  of  his  other  vital
instinct  of  self-reproduction.  His  gains  are  the  possession  of  wife,
servants,  house,  wealth,  estates,  the  reproduction  of  much  of  him-
self in  the  body  and  mind  of  his  progeny  and  the  prolongation  of
his  activities,  gains  and  possessions  in  the  life  of  his  children;


150


The  Human  Cycle

incidentally  he  enjoys  the  vital  and  physical  pleasures  and  the
more  mental  pleasures  of  emotion  and  affection  to  which  the
domestic  life  gives  scope.  In  society  he  finds  a less  intimate  but
a larger  expansion  of  himself  and  his  instincts.  A wider  field  of
companionship,  interchange,  associated  effort  and  production,
errant  or  gregarious  pleasure,  satisfied  emotion,  stirred  sensation
and  regular  amusement  are  the  advantages  which  attach  him  to
social  existence.  In  the  nation  and  its  constituent  parts  he  finds
a means  for  the  play  of  a remoter  but  still  larger  sense  of  power
and  expansion.  If  he  has  the  force,  he  finds  there  fame,  pre-
eminence, leadership,  or  at  a lower  pitch  the  sense  of  an  effective
action  on  a small  or  a large  scale,  in  a reduced  or  a magnified
field  of  public  action;  if  he  caimot  have  this,  still  he  can  feel  a
share  of  some  kind,  a true  portion  or  fictitious  image  of  partici-
pation, in  the  pride,  power  and  splendour  of  a great  collective
activity  and  vital  expansion.  In  all  this  there  is  primarily  at  work
the  individualist  principle  of  the  vital  instinct  in  which  the  compe-
titive side  of  that  movement  of  our  nature  associates  with  the  co-
operative but  predominates  over  it.  Carried  to  an  excess  this
predominance  creates  the  ideal  of  the  arrivist,  to  whom  family,
society  and  nation  are  not  so  much  a sympathetic  field  as  a ladder
to  be  climbed,  a prey  to  be  devoured,  a thing  to  be  conquered
and  dominated.  In  extreme  cases  the  individualist  turn  isolates
itself  from  the  companion  motive,  reverts  to  a primitive  anti-
social feeling  and  creates  the  nomad,  the  adventurer,  the  ranger
of  wilds,  or  the  pure  solitary,  — solitary  not  from  any  intellectual
or  spiritual  impulse,  but  because  society,  once  an  instrument,  has
become  a prison  and  a burden,  an  oppressive  cramping  of  his  ex-
pansion, a denial  of  breathing-space  and  elbow-room.  But  these
cases  grow  rarer,  now  that  the  ubiquitous  tentacles  of  modern
society  take  hold  everywhere;  soon  there-  will  be  no  place  of
refuge  left  for  either  the  nomad  or  the  solitary,  not  even  perhaps
Saharan  deserts  or  the  secure  remoteness  of  the  Himalayas.  Even,
it  may  be,  the  refuge  of  an  inner  seclusion  may  be  taken  from  us
by  a collectivist  society  intent  to  make  its  pragmatic,  economic,
dynamic  most  of  every  individual  “cell”  of  the  organism.

For  this  growing  collectivist  or  co-operative  tendency  em-
bodies the  second  instinct  of  the  vital  or  practical  being  in  man.


151


The  Suprarational  Ultimate  of  Life

It  shows  itself  first  in  the  family  ideal  by  which  the  individual
subordinates  himself  and  finds  his  vital  satisfaction  and  practical
account,  not  in  his  own  predominant  individuality,  but  in  the  life
of  a larger  vital  ego.  This  ideal  played  a great  part  in  the  old
aristocratic  views  of  life;  it  was  there  in  the  ancient  Indian  idea  of
the  kula  and  the  kuladharma,  and  in  later  India  it  was  at  the  root
of  the  joint-family  system  which  made  the  strong  economic  base
of  mediaeval  Hinduism.  It  has  taken  its  grossest  Vaishya  form  in
the  ideal  of  the  British  domestic  Philistine,  the  idea  of  the  human
individual  born  here  to  follow  a trade  or  profession,  to  marry
and  procreate  a family,  to  earn  his  living,  to  succeed  reasonably
if  not  to  amass  an  efficient  or  ostentatious  wealth,  to  enjoy  for  a
space  and  then  die,  thus  having  done  the  whole  business  for  which
he  came  into  the  body  and  performed  all  his  essential  duty  in
life,  — for  this  apparently  was  the  end  unto  which  man  with  all
his  divine  possibilities  was  born!  But  whatever  form  it  may  take,
however  this  grossness  may  be  refined  or  toned  down,  whatever
ethical  or  religious  conceptions  may  be  superadded,  always  the
family  is  an  essentially  practical,  vitalistic  and  economic  creation.
It  is  simply  a larger  vital  ego,  a more  complex  vital  organism  that
takes  up  the  individual  and  englobes  him  in  a more  effective  com-
petitive and  co-operative  life  unit.  The  family  hke  the  individual
accepts  and  uses  society  for  its  field  and  means  of  continuance,  of
vital  satisfaction  and  well-being,  of  aggrandisement  and  enjoy-
ment. But  this  life  unit  also,  this  multiple  ego  can  be  induced  by
the  co-operative  instinct  in  life  to  subordinate  its  egoism  to  the
claims  of  the  society  and  trained  even  to  sacrifice  itself  at  need
on  the  communal  altar.  For  the  society  is  only  a still  larger  vital
competitive  and  co-operative  ego  that  takes  up  both  the  indi-
vidual and  the  family  into  a more  complex  organism  and  uses  them
for  the  collective  satisfaction  of  its  vital  needs,  claims,  interests,
aggrandisement,  well-being,  enjoyment.  The  individual  and  family
consent  to  this  exploitation  for  the  same  reason  that  induced
the  individual  to  take  on  himself  the  yoke  of  the  family,  because
they  find  their  account  in  this  wider  vital  life  and  have  the
instinct  in  it  of  their  own  larger  growth,  security  and  satisfaction.
The  society,  still  more  than  the  family,  is  essentially  economic  in
its  aims  and  in  its  very  nature.  That  accounts  for  the  predomi-


152


The  Human  Cycle

nantly  economic  and  materialistic  character  of  modern  ideas  of
Socialism;  for  these  ideas  are  the  full  rationalistic  flowering  of
this  instinct  of  collective  life.  But  since  the  society  is  one  compe-
titive unit  among  many  of  its  kind,  and  since  its  first  relations
with  the  others  are  always  potentially  hostile,  even  at  the  best
competitive  and  not  co-operative,  and  have  to  be  organised  in
that  view,  a political  character  is  necessarily  added  to  the  social
life,  even  predominates  for  a time  over  the  economic  and  we  have
the  nation  or  State.  If  we  give  their  due  value  to  these  fundamen-
tal characteristics  and  motives  of  collective  existence,  it  will  seem
natural  enough  that  the  development  of  the  collective  and  co-
operative idea  of  society  should  have  culminated  in  a huge,  often
a monstrous  overgrowth  of  the  vitalistic,  economic  and  political
ideal  of  life,  society  and  civilisation.

What  account  are  the  higher  parts  of  man’s  being,  those  finer
powers  in  him  that  more  openly  tend  to  the  growth  of  his  divine
nature,  to  make  with  this  vital  instinct  or  with  its  gigantic  modern
developments?  Obviously,  their  first  impulse  must  be  to  take
hold  of  them  and  dominate  and  transform  all  this  crude  life  into
their  own  image;  but  when  they  discover  that  here  is  a power
apart,  as  persistent  as  themselves,  that  it  seeks  a satisfaction  per
se  and  accepts  their  impress  to  a certain  extent,  but  not  altogether
and,  as  it  were,  unwillingly,  partially,  unsatisfactorily,  — what
then?  We  often  find  that  ethics  and  religion  especially,  when  they
find  themselves  in  a constant  conflict  with  the  vital  instincts,  the
dynamic  life-power  in  man,  proceed  to  an  attitude  of  almost  com-
plete hostility  and  seek  to  damn  them  in  idea  and  repress  them  in
fact.  To  the  vital  instinct  for  wealth  and  well-being  they  oppose
the  ideal  of  a chiU  and  austere  poverty;  to  the  vital  instinct  for
pleasure  the  ideal  not  only  of  self-denial,  but  of  absolute  morti-
fication; to  the  vital  instinct  for  health  and  ease  the  ascetic’s  con-
tempt, disgust  and  neglect  of  the  body;  to  the  vital  instinct  for
incessant  action  and  creation  the  ideal  of  calm  and  inaction,  pas-
sivity, contemplation;  to  the  vital  instinct  for  power,  expansion,
domination,  rule,  conquest  the  ideal  of  humility,  self-abasement,
submission,  meek  harmlessness,  docility  in  suffering;  to  the  vital
instinct  of  sex  on  which  depends  the  continuance  of  the  species,
the  ideal  of  an  unreproductive  chastity  and  celibacy;  to  the


153


The  Supraratioml  Ultimate  of  Life

social  and  family  instinct  the  anti-social  ideal  of  the  ascetic,  the
monk,  the  solitary,  the  world-shunning  saint.  Commencing  with
discipline  and  subordination  they  proceed  to  complete  mortifica-
tion, which  means  when  translated  the  putting  to  death  of  the  vital
instincts,  and  declare  that  life  itself  is  an  illusion  to  be  shed  from
the  soul  or  a kingdom  of  the  flesh,  the  world  and  the  devil,  —
accepting  thus  the  claim  of  the  unenlightened  and  undisciphned
fife  itself  that  it  is  not,  was  never  meant  to  be,  can  never  become
the  kingdom  of  God,  a high  manifestation  of  the  Spirit.

Up  to  a certain  point  this  recoil  has  its  uses  and  may  easily
even,  by  tapasyd^  by  the  law  of  energy  increasing  through  com-
pression, develop  for  a time  a new  vigour  in  the  life  of  the  society,
as  happened  in  India  in  the  early  Buddhist  centuries.  But  beyond
a certam  point  it  tends,  not  really  to  kill,  for  that  is  impossible,
but  to  discourage  along  with  the  vital  instincts  the  indispensable
life-energy  of  which  they  are  the  play  and  renders  them  in  the  end
inert,  feeble,  narrow,  unelastic,  incapable  of  energetic  reaction  to
force  and  circumstance.  That  was  the  final  result  in  India  of  the
age-long  pressure  of  Buddhism  and  its  supplanter  and  successor,
Illusionism.  No  society  wholly  or  too  persistently  and  pervadingly
dominated  by  this  denial  of  the  life  dynamism  can  flourish  and  put
forth  its  possibilities  of  growth  and  perfection.  For  from  dynamic
it  becomes  static  and  from  the  static  position  it  proceeds  to  stag-
nation and  degeneration.  Even  the  higher  being  of  man,  which
finds  its  account  in  a vigorous  life  dynamism,  both  as  a fund  of
force  to  be  transmuted  into  its  own  loftier  energies  and  as  a
potent  channel  of  connection  with  the  outer  fife,  suflers  in  the
end  by  this  failure  and  contradiction.  The  ancient  Indian  ideal
recognised  this  truth  and  divided  life  into  four  essential  and  in-
dispensable divisions,  artha,  kama,  dharma,  moksa,  vital  interests,
satisfaction  of  desires  of  all  kinds,  ethics  and  religion,  and  libera-
tion or  spirituality,  and  it  insisted  on  the  practice  and  develop-
ment of  all.  Still  it  tended  not  only  to  put  the  last  forward  as  the
goal  of  all  the  rest,  which  it  is,  but  to  put  it  at  the  end  of  life  and
its  habitat  in  another  world  of  our  being,  rather  than  here  in  life,
as  the  supreme  status  and  formative  power  on  the  physical  plane.
But  this  rules  out  the  idea  of  the  kingdom  of  God  on  earth,  the
perfectibility  of  society  and  of  man  in  society,  the  evolution  of  a


154


The  Human  Cycle

new  and  diviner  race,  and  without  one  or  other  of  these  no  uni-
versal ideal  can  be  complete.  It  provides  a temporary  and  occa-
sional, but  not  an  inherent  justification  for  life;  it  holds  out  no
illumining  fulfilment  either  for  its  individual  or  its  collective
impulse.

Let  us  then  look  at  this  vital  instinct  and  life  dynamism  in
its  own  being  and  not  merely  as  an  occasion  for  ethical  or  reli-
gious development  and  see  whether  it  is  really  rebellious  in  its
very  nature  to  the  Divine.  We  can  see  at  once  that  what  we  have
described  is  the  first  stage  of  the  vital  being,  the  infrarational,
the  instinctive;  this  is  the  crude  character  of  its  first  native
development  and  persists  even  when  it  is  trained  by  the
growing  application  to  it  of  the  enlightening  reason.  Evidently
it  is  in  this  natural  form  a thing  of  the  earth,  gross,  earthy,  full
even  of  hideous  uglinesses  and  brute  blunders  and  jarring  dis-
cords ; but  so  also  is  the  infrarational  stage  in  ethics,  in  aesthetics,
in  religion.  It  is  true  too  that  it  presents  a much  more  enormous
difficulty  than  these  others,  more  fundamentally  and  obstinately
resists  elevation,  because  it  is  the  very  province  of  the  infrara-
rational,  a first  formulation  of  consciousness  out  of  the  In-
conscient,  nearest  to  it  in  the  scale  of  being.  But  still  it  has  too,
properly  looked  at,  its  rich  elements  of  power,  beauty,  nobility,
good,  sacrifice,  worship,  divinity;  here  too  are  high-reaching
gods,  masked  but  still  resplendent.  Until  recently,  and  even  now,
reason  in  the  garb  no  longer  of  philosophy,  but  of  science,  has
increasingly  proposed  to  take  up  all  this  physical  and  vital  life
and  perfect  it  by  the  sole  power  of  rationalism,  by  a knowledge .
of  the  laws  of  Nature,  of  sociology  and  physiology  and  biology
and  health,  by  collectivism,  by  State  education,  by  a new  psy-
chological education  and  a number  of  other  kindred  means.  All
this  is  well  in  its  own  way  and  in  its  limits,  but  it  is  not  enough
and  can  never  come  to  a truly  satisfying  success.  The  ancient
attempt  of  reason  in  the  form  of  a high  idealistic,  rational,  aesthe-
tic, ethical  and  religious  culture  achieved  only  an  imperfect
discipline  of  the  vital  man  and  his  instincts,  sometimes  only  a
polishing,  a gloss,  a clothing  and  mannerising  of  the  original
uncouth  savage.  The  modem  attempt  of  reason  in  the  form  of  a
broad  and  thorough  rational,  utilitarian,  and  efficient  instruction


The  Suprarational  Ultimate  of  Life  155

and  organisation  of  man  and  his  life  is  not  succeeding  any  better
for  all  its  insistent  but  always  illusory  promise  of  more  perfect
results  in  the  future.  These  endeavours  cannot  indeed  be  truly
successful  if  our  theory  of  life  is  right  and  if  this  great  mass  of
vital  energism  contains  in  itself  the  imprisoned  suprarational,  if
it  has,  as  it  then  must  have,  the  instinctive  reaching  out  for  some-
thing divine,  absolute  and  infinite  which  is  concealed  in  its  blind
strivings.  Here  too  reason  must  be  overpassed  or  surpass  itself
and  become  a passage  to  the  Divine.

The  first  mark  of  the  suprarational,  when  it  intervenes  to
take  up  any  portion  of  our  being,  is  the  growth  of  absolute  ideals ;
and  since  life  is  Being  and  Force  and  the  divine  state  of  being  is
unity  and  the  Divine  in  force  is  God  as  Power  taking  possession,
the  absolute  vital  ideals  must  be  of  that  nature.  Nowhere  are
they  wanting.  If  we  take  the  domestic  and  social  life  of  man,  we
find  hints  of  them  there  in  several  forms ; but  we  need  only  note,
however  imperfect  and  dim  the  present  shapes,  the  strivings  of
love  at  its  own  self-finding,  its  reachings  towards  its  absolute  —
the  absolute  love  of  man  and  womans  the  absolute  maternal  or
paternal,  filial  or  fraternal  love,  the  love  of  friends,  the  love  of
comrades,  love  of  country,  love  of  humanity.  These  ideals  of
which  the  poets  have  sung  so  persistently,  are  not  a mere  glamour
and  illusion,  however  the  egoisms  and  discords  of  our  instinctive,
infrarational  way  of  living  may  seem  to  contradict  them.  Always
crossed  by  imperfection  or  opposite  vital  movements,  they  are
still  divine  possibilities  and  can  be  made  a first  means  of  our
growth  into  a spiritual  unity  of  being  with  being.  Certain  reli-
gious disciplines  have  understood  this  truth,  have  taken  up  these
relations  boldly  and  applied  them  to  our  soul’s  communion
with  God;  and  by  a converse  process  they  can,  lifted  out  of  their
present  social  and  physical  formulas,  become  for  us,  not  the  poor
earthly  things  they  are  now,  but  deep  and  beautiful  and  wonder-
ful movements  of  God  in  man  fulfilling  himself  in  life.  All  the
economic  development  of  life  itself  takes  on  at  its  end  the  appear-
ance of  an  attempt  to  get  rid  of  the  animal  squalor  and  bare-
ness which  is  what  obligatory  poverty  really  means,  and  to  give
to  man  the  divine  ease  and  leisure  of  the  gods.  It  is  pursued  in
a wrong  way,  no  doubt,  and  with  many  ugly  circumstances,  but


156


The  Human  Cycle


still  the  ideal  is  darkly  there.  Politics  itself,  that  apparent  game
of  strife  and  deceit  and  charlatanism,  can  be  a large  field  of
absolute  idealisms.  What  of  patriotism,  — never  mind  the  often
ugly  instincts  from  which  it  starts  and  which  it  still  obstinately
preserves,  — but  in  its  aspects  of  worship,  self-giving,  discipline,
self-sacrifice?  The  great  political  ideals  of  man,  monarchy,  aristo-
cracy, democracy,  apart  from  the  selfishnesses  they  serve  and  the
rational  and  practical  justifications  with  which  they  arm  them-
selves, have  had  for  their  soul  an  ideal,  some  half-seen  truth  of
the  absolute  and  have  carried  with  them  a worship,  a loyalty,  a
loss  of  self  in  the  idea  which  have  made  men  ready  to  suffer  and
die  for  them.  War  and  strife  themselves  have  been  schools  of
heroism;  they  have  preserved  the  heroic  in  man,  they  have  created
the  ksatriyab  tyaktajivitab  of  the  Sanskrit  epic  phrase,  the  men  of
power  and  courage  who  have  abandoned  their  bodily  life  for  a
cause;  for  without  heroism  man  cannot  grow  into  the  Godhead.
Courage,  energy  and  strength  are  among  the  very  first  principles
of  the  divine  nature  in  action.  All  this  great  vital,  political,  eco-
nomic life  of  man  with  its  two  powers  of  competition  and  co-
operation is  stumbling  blindly  forward  towards  some  realisation
of  power  and  unity,  — in  two  divine  directions,  therefore.  For
the  Divine  in  life  is  Power  possessed  of  self-mastery,  but  also  of
mastery  of  His  world,  and  man  and  mankind  too  move  towards
conquest  of  their  world,  their  environment.  And  again  in  the
Divine  fulfilment  there  is  and  must  be  oneness,  and  the  ideal  of
human  unity  however  dim  and  far-off  is  coming  slowly  into  sight.
The  competitive  nation-units  are  feeling,  at  times,  however  feebly
as  yet,  the  call  to  cast  themselves  into  a greater  unified  co-
operative life  of  the  human  race.

No  doubt  all  is  still  moving,  however  touched  by  dim  lights
from  above,  on  a lower  half  rational  half  infrarational  level,
clumsily,  coarsely,  in  ignorance  of  itself  and  as  yet  with  little
nobility  of  motive.  All  is  being  worked  out  very  crudely  by  the
confused  clash  of  life-forces  and  the  guidance  of  ideas  that  are
half-fights  of  the  intellect,  and  the  means  proposed  are  too  me-
chanical and  the  aims  too  material;  they  miss  the  truth  that  the
outer  fife  result  can  only  endure  if  it  is  founded  on  inner  realities.
But  so  fife  in  the  past  has  moved  always  and  must  at  first  move.


157


The  Suprarational  Ultimate  of  Life

For  life  organises  itself  at  first  round  the  ego  motive  and  the  ins-
tinct of  ego-expansion  is  the  earhest  means  by  which  men  have
come  into  contact  with  each  other;  the  struggle  for  possession
has  been  the  first  crude  means  towards  union,  the  aggressive
assertion  of  the  smaller  self  the  first  step  towards  a growth  into
the  larger  self.  All  has  been  therefore  a half-ordered  confusion  of
the  struggle  for  life  corrected  by  the  need  and  instinct  of  associa-
tion, a struggle  of  individuals,  clans,  tribes,  parties,  nations,  ideas,
civilisations,  cultures,  ideals,  religions,  each  affirming  itself,  each
compelled  into  contact,  association,  struggle  with  the  others.
For  while  Nature  imposes  the  ego  as  a veil  behind  which  she
labours  out  the  individual  manifestation  of  the  spirit,  she  also
puts  a compulsion  on  it  to  grow  in  being  until  it  can  at  last  ex-
pand or  merge  into  the  larger  self  in  which  it  meets,  harmonises
with  itself,  comprehends  in  its  own  consciousness,  becomes  one
with  the  rest  of  existence.  To  assist  in  this  growth  Life-Nature
throws  up  in  itself  ego-enlarging,  ego-exceeding,  even  ego-
destroying  instincts  and  movements  which  combat  and  correct  the
smaller  self-affirming  instincts  and  movements,  — she  enforces
on  her  human  instrument  impulses  of  love,  sympathy,  self-denial,
self-effacement,  self-sacrifice,  altruism,  the  drive  towards  uni-
versality in  mind  and  heart  and  life,  glimmerings  of  an  obscure
unanimism  that  has  not  yet  found  thoroughly  its  own  true  light
and  motive-power.  Because  of  this  obscurity  these  powers,
unable  to  affirm  their  own  absolute,  to  take  the  lead  or  domi-
nate, obliged  to  compromise  with  the  demands  of  the  ego,  even
to  become  themselves  a form  of  egoism,  are  impotent  also  to
bring  harmony  and  transformation  to  life.  Instead  of  peace  they
seem  to  bring  rather  a sword ; for  they  increase  the  number  and
tension  of  conflict  of  the  unreconciled  forces,  ideas,  impulses  of
which  the  individual  human  consciousness  and  the  life  of  the  col-
lectivity are  the  arena.  The  ideal  and  practical  reason  of  man
labours  to  find  amidst  all  this  the  right  law  of  life  and  action;  it
strives  by  a rule  of  moderation  and  accommodation  or  selection
and  rejection  or  by  the  dominance  of  some  chosen  ideas  or  powers
to  reduce  things  to  harmony,  to  do  consciously  what  Nature
through  natural  selection  and  instinct  has  achieved  in  her  animal
kinds,  an  automatically  ordered  and  settled  form  and  norm  of


158


The  Human  Cycle


their  existence.  But  the  order,  the  structure  arrived  at  by  the
reason  is  always  partial,  precarious  and  temporary.  It  is  dis-
turbed by  a pull  from  below  and  a pull  from  above.  For  these
powers  that  life  throws  up  to  help  towards  the  growth  into  a
larger  self,  a wider  being,  are  already  reflections  of  something
that  is  beyond  reason,  seeds  of  the  spiritual,  the  absolute.  There
is  the  pressure  on  human  hfe  of  an  Infinite  which  will  not  allow
it  to  rest  too  long  in  any  formulation,  — not  at  least  until  it  has
delivered  out  of  itself  that  which  shall  be  its  own  self-exceeding
and  self-fulfilment.

This  process  of  life  through  a first  obscure  and  confused
effort  of  self-finding  is  the  inevitable  result  of  its  beginnings ; for
life  began  from  an  involution  of  the  spiritual  truth  of  things  in
what  seems  to  be  its  opposite.  Spiritual  experience  tells  us  that
there  is  a Reality  which  supports  and  pervades  all  things  as  the
Cosmic  Self  and  Spirit,  can  be  discovered  by  the  individual  even
here  in  the  terrestrial  embodiment  as  his  own  self  and  spirit,  and
is,  at  its  summits  and  in  its  essence,  an  infinite  and  eternal  Being,
Consciousness  and  Bliss  of  existence.  But  what  we  seem  to  see
as  the  source  and  beginning  of  the  material  universe  is  just  the.
contrary  — it  wears  to  us  the  aspect  of  a Void,  an  infinite  of  Non-
Existence,  an  indeterminate  Inconscient,  an  insensitive  blissless
Zero  out  of  which  everything  has  yet  to  come.  When  it  begins
to  move,  evolve,  create,  it  puts  on  the  appearance  of  an  incon-
scient Energy  which  delivers  existence  out  of  the  Void  in  the
form  of  an  infinitesimal  fragmentation,  the  electron  — or  perhaps
some  still  more  impalpable  minute  unit,  a not  yet  discovered,
hardly  discoverable  infinitesimal,  then  the  atom,  the  molecule,
and  out  of  this  fragmentation  builds  up  a formed  and  concrete
universe  in  the  void  of  its  infinite.  Yet  we  see  that  this  uncon-
scious Energy  does  at  every  step  the  works  of  a vast  and  minute
Intelligence  fixing  and  combining  every  possible  device  to  pre-
pare, manage  and  work  out  the  paradox  and  miracle  of  Matter
and  the  awakening  of  a life, and  a spirit  in  Matter;  existence
grows  out  of  the  Void,  consciousness  emerges  and  increases
out  of  the  Inconscient,  an  ascending  urge  towards  pleasure,
happiness,  delight,  divine  bliss  and  ecstasy  is  inexplicably  born
out  of  an  insensitive  Nihil.  These  phenomena  already  betray


159


The  Suprarational  Ultimate  of  Life

the  truth,  which  we  discover  when  we  grow  aware  in  our  depths,
that  the  Inconscient  is  only  a mask  and  within  it  is  the  Upa-
nishad’s  “Conscient  in  unconscious  things”.  In  the  beginning,
says  the  Veda,  was  the  ocean  of  inconscience  and  out  of  it  That
One  arose  into  birth  by  his  greatness,  — by  the  might  of  his  self-
manifesting  Energy.

But  the  Inconscient,  if  a mask,  is  an  effective  mask  of  the
Spirit;  it  imposes  on  the  evolving  life  and  soul  the  law  of  a diffi-
cult emergence.  Life  and  consciousness,  no  less  than  Matter,
obey  in  their  first  appearance  the  law  of  fragmentation.  Life
organises  itself  physically  round  the  plasm,  the  cell,  psycho-
logically round  the  small  separative  fragmentary  ego.  Conscious-
ness itself  has  to  concentrate  its  smaU  beginnings  in  a poor
surface  formation  and  hide  behind  the  veil  of  this  limited  surface
existence  the  depths  and  infinities  of  its  own  being.  It  has
to  grow  slowly  in  an  external  formulation  till  it  is  ready  to  break
the  crust  between  this  petty  outer  figure  of  ourselves,  which  we
think  to  be  the  whole,  and  the  concealed  self  within  us.  Even  the
spiritual  being  seems  to  obey  this  law  of  fragmentation  and  mani-
fests as  a unit  in  the  whole  a spark  of  itself  that  evolves  into  an
.individual  psyche.  It  is  this  little  ego,  this  fragmented  conscious-
ness, this  concealed  soul-spark  on  which  is  imposed  the  task  of
meeting  and  striving  with  the  forces  of  the  universe,  entering  into
contact  with  all  that  seems  to  it  not  itself,  increasing  under  the
pressure  of  inner  and  outer  Nature  till  it  can  become  one  with
all  existence.  It  has  to  grow  into  self-knowledge  and  world-
knowledge,  to  get  within  itself  and  discover  that  it  is  a spiritual
being,  to  get  outside  of  itself  and  discover  its  larger  truth  as  the
cosmic  Individual,  to  get  beyond  itself  and  know  and  live  in
some  supreme  Being,  Consciousness  and  Bliss  of  existence.  For
this  immense  task  it  is  equipped  only  with  the  instruments  of  its
original  Ignorance.  Its  limited  being  is  the  cause  of  all  the
difficulty,  discord,  struggle,  division  that  mars  life.  The  limita-
tion of  its  consciousness,  unable  to  dominate  or  assimilate  the
contacts  of  the  universal  Energy,  is  the  cause  of  all  its  suffering,
pain  and  sorrow.  Its  limited  power  of  consciousness  formulated
in  an  ignorant  will  unable  to  grasp  or  follow  the  right  law  of  its
life  and  action  is  the  cause  of  all  its  error,  wrong-doing  and  evil.


160


The  Human  Cycle


There  is  no  other  true  cause;  for  all  apparent  causes  are  them-
selves circumstance  and  result  of  this  original  sin  of  the  being.
Only  when  it  rises  and  widens  out  of  this  limited  separative  con-
sciousness into  the  oneness  of  the  liberated  spirit,  can  it  escape
from  these  results  of  its  growth  out  of  the  Inconscience.

If  we  see  this  as  the  truth  behind  life,  we  can  understand  at
once  why  it  has  had  to  follow  its  present  curve  of  ignorant  self-
formulation.  But  also  we  see  what  through  it  all  it  is  obscurely
seeking,  trying  to  grasp  and  form,  feeling  out  for  in  its  own  higher
impulses  and  deepest  motives,  and  why  these  are  in  it  — useless,
perturbing  and  chimerical  if  it  were  only  an  animal  product  of
inconscient  Nature,  — these  urgings  towards  self-discovery,
mastery,  unity,  freedom  from  its  lower  self,  spiritual  release.
Evolving  out  of  its  first  involved  condition  in  Matter  and  in  plant
life,  effecting  a first  imperfect  organised  consciousness  in  the
animal,  it  arrives  in  man,  the  mental  being,  at  the  possibility  of  a
new,  a conscious  evolution  which  will  bring  it  to  its  goal  and  at
a certain  stage  of  his  development  it  wakes  in  him  the  over-
mastering impulse  to  pass  on  from  mental  to  spiritual  being.
Life  cannot  arrive  at  its  secret  ultimates  by  following  its  first
infrarational  motive  forces  of  instinct  and  desire : for  all  here  is
a groping  and  seeking  without  finding,  a field  of  brief  satisfac-
tions, stamped  with  the  Inconscient’s  seal  of  insufficiency  and
impermanence.  But  neither  can  human  reason  give  it  what  it
searches  after;  for  reason  can  only  establish  half  lights  and  a
provisional  order.  Therefore  with  man  as  he  is  the  upward  urge
in  life  cannot  rest  satisfied  always;  its  evolutionary  impulse  can-
not stop  short  at  this  transitional  term,  this  half  achievement.
It  has  to  aim  at  a higher  reach  of  consciousness,  deliver  out  of
life  and  mind  something  that  is  still  latent  and  inchoate.

The  ultimates  of  life  are  spiritual  and  only  in  the  full  light
of  the  liberated  self  and  spirit  can  it  achieve  them-.  That  full
light  is  not  intellect  or  reason,  but  a knowledge  by  inner  unity
and  identity  which  is  the  native  self-light  of  the  fully  developed
spiritual  consciousness  — and,  preparing  that,  on  the  way  to  it,
a knowledge  by  intimate  inner  contact  with  the  truth  of  things
and  beings  which  is  intuitive  and  born  of  a secret  oneness.  Life
seeks  for  self-knowledge;  it  is  only  by  the  light  of  the  spirit  that


The  Suprarational  Ultimate  of  Life  161

it  can  find  it.  It  seeks  for  a luminous  guidance  and  mastery  of
its  own  movements ; it  is  only  when  it  finds  within  itself  this  inner
self  and  spirit  and  by  it  or  in  obedience  to  it  governs  its  own
steps  that  it  can  have  the  illumined  will  it  needs  and  the  un-
erring leadership.  For  it  is  so  only  that  the  blind  certitudes  of
the  instincts  and  the  speculative  hypotheses  and  theories  and
the  experimental  and  inferential  certitudes  of  reason  can  be
replaced  by  the  seeing  spiritual  certitudes.  Life  seeks  the  fulfil-
ment of  its  instincts  of  love  and  sympathy,  its  yearnings  after
accord  and  union;  but  these  are  crossed  by  opposing  instincts
and  it  is  only  the  spiritual  consciousness  with  its  realised  abiding
oneness  that  can  abolish  these  oppositions.  Life  seeks  for  full
growth  of  being,  but  it  can  attain  to  it  only  when  the  limited  being
has  found  in  itself  its  own  inmost  soul  of  existence  and  around  it
its  own  wider  self  of  cosmic  consciousness  which  can  feel  the
world  and  all  being  in  itself  and  as  itself.  Life  seeks  for  power;
it  is  only  the  power  of  the  spirit  and  the  power  of  this  conscious
oneness  that  can  give  it  mastery  of  itself  and  its  world.  It  seeks
for  pleasure,  happiness,  bliss ; but  the  infrarational  forms  of  these
things  are  stricken  with  imperfection,  fragmentariness,  imperma-
nence and  the  impact  of  their  opposites.  Moreover  infrarational
life  stiU  bears  some  stamp  of  the  Inconscient  in  an  underlying
insensitiveness,  a dullness  of  fibre,  a weakness  of  vibratory  res-
ponse, — it  cannot  attain  to  true  happiness  or  bliss  and  what  it
can  obtain  of  pleasure  it  cannot  support  for  long  or  bear  or  keep
any  extreme  intensity  of  these  things.  Only  the  spirit  has  the
secret  of  an  unmixed  and  abiding  happiness  or  ecstasy,  is  capable
of  a firm  tenseness  of  vibrant  response  to  it,  can  attain  and  justify
a spiritual  pleasure  or  joy  of  life  as  one  form  of  the  infinite  and
universal  delight  of  being.  Life  seeks  a harmonious  fulfilment
of  all  its  powers,  now  divided  and  in  conflict,  all  its  possibilities,
parts,  members ; it  is  only  in  the  consciousness  of  the  one  Self
and  Spirit  that  that  is  found,  for  there  they  arrive  at  their  full
truth  and  their  perfect  agreement  in  the  light  of  the  integral
self-existence.

There  is  then  a suprarational  ultimate  of  Life  no  less  than  a
suprarational  Truth,  Good  and  Beauty.  The  endeavour  to  reach  it
is  the  spiritual  meaning  of  this  seeking  and  striving  Life-Nature.


Chapter  XVII


Religion  as  the  Law  of  Life


Since  the  infinite,  the  absolute  and  trans-
cendent, the  universal,  the  One  is  the  secret  summit  of  existence
and  to  reach  the  spiritual  consciousness  and  the  Divine  the  ulti-
mate goal  and  aim  of  our  being  and  therefore  of  the  whole
development  of  the  individual  and  the  collectivity  in  all  its  parts
and  all  its  activities,  reason  cannot  be  the  last  and  highest  guide;
culture,  as  it  is  understood  ordinarily,  cannot  be  the  directing
light  or  find  out  the  regulating  and  harmonising  principle  of  all
our  life  and  action.  For  reason  stops  short  of  the  Divine  and  only
compromises  with  the  problems  of  life,  and  culture  in  order  to
attain  the  Transcendent  and  Infinite  must  become  spiritual
culture,  something  much  more  than  an  intellectual,  aesthetic,
etliical  and  practical  training.  Where  then  are  we  to  find  the  di-
recting light  and  the  regulating  and  harmonising  principle?
The  first  answer  which  will  suggest  itself,  the  answer  constantly
given  by  the  Asiatic  mind,  is  that  we  shall  find  it  directly  and
immediately  in  religion.  And  this  seems  a reasonable  and  at  first
sight  a satisfying  solution;  for  religion  is  that  instinct,  idea,
activity,  discipline  in  man  which  aims  directly  at  the  Divine,  while
all  the  rest  seem  to  aim  at  it  only  indirectly  and  reach  it  with
difficulty  after  much  wandering  and  stumbling  in  the  pursuit
■ of  the  outward  and  imperfect  appearances  of  things.  To  make
all  life  religion  and  to  govern  all  activities  by  the  religious  idea
would  seem  to  be  the  right  way  to  the  development  of  the  ideal
individual  and  ideal  society  and  the  lifting  of  the  whole  life  of
man  into  the  Divine.

A certain  pre-eminence  of  religion,  the  overshadowing  or
at  least  the  colouring  of  life,  an  overtopping  of  all  the  other
instincts  and  fundamental  ideas  by  the  religious  instinct  and  the
religious  idea  is,  we  may  note,  not  peculiar  to  Asiatic  civilisations,
but  has  always  been  more  or  less  the  normal  state  of  the  human


163


Religion  as  the  Law  of  Life

mind  and  of  human  societies,  or  if  not  quite  that,  yet  a notable
and  prominent  part  of  their  complex  tendencies,  except  in  certain
comparatively  brief  periods  of  their  history,  in  one  of  which  we
find  ourselves  today  and  are  half  turning  indeed  to  emerge  from
it  but  have  not  yet  emerged.  We  must  suppose  then  that  in  this
leading,  this  predominant  part  assigned  to  religion  by  the  normal
human  collectivity  there  is  some  great  need  and  truth  of  our  na-
tural being  to  which  we  must  always  after  however  long  an  in-
fidelity return.  On  the  other  hand,  we  must  recognise  the  fact
that  in  a time  of  great  activity,  of  high  aspiration,  of  deep  sowing,
of  rich  fruit-bearing,  such  as  the  modern  age  with  all  its  faults
and  errors  has  been,  a time  especially  when  humanity  got  rid  of
much  that  was  cruel,  evil,  ignorant,  dark,  odious,  not  by  the
power  of  religion,  but  by  the  power  of  the  awakened  intelligence
and  of  human  idealism  and  sympathy,  this  predominance  of  reli-
gion has  been  violently  attacked  and  rejected  by  that  portion  of
humanity  which  was  for  that  time  the  standard-bearer  of  thought
and  progress,  Europe  after  the  Renascence,  modern  Europe.

This  revolt  in  its  extreme  form  tried  to  destroy  religion
altogether,  boasted  indeed  of  having  killed  the  religious  instinct
in  man,  — a vain  and  ignorant  boast,  as  we  now  see,  for  the
religious  instinct  in  man  is  most  of  all  the  one  instinct  in  him
that  cannot  be  killed,  it  only  changes  its  form.  In  its  more  mode-
rate movements  the  revolt  put  rehgion  aside  into  a corner  of  the
soul  by  itself  and  banished  its  intermiscence  in  the  intellectual,
aesthetic,  practical  life  and  even  in  the  ethical;  and  it  did  this  on
the  ground  that  the  intermiscence  of  religion  in  science,  thought,
politics,  society,  fife  in  general  had  been  and  must  be  a force
for  retardation,  superstition,  oppressive  ignorance.  The  reli-
gionist may  say  that  this  accusation  was  an  error  and  an  atheistic
perversity,  or  he  may  say  that  religious  retardation,  a pious
ignorance,  a contented  static  condition  or  even  an  orderly  stag-
nation full  of  holy  thoughts  of  the  Beyond  is  much  better  than  a
continuous  endeavour  after  greater  knowledge,  greater  mastery,
more  happiness,  joy,  light  upon  this  transient  earth.  But  the
catholic  thinker  cannot  accept  such  a plea;  he  is  obliged  to  see
that  so  long  as  man  has  not  realised  the  divine  and  the  ideal  in
his  life,  — and  it  may  well  be  even  when  he  has  realised  it,  since


164


The  Human  Cycle


the  divine  is  the  infinite,  — progress  and  not  unmoving  status  is
the  necessary  and  desirable  law  of  his  life,  — not  indeed  any
breathless  rush  after  novelties,  but  a constant  motion  towards
a greater  and  greater  truth  of  the  spirit,  the  thought  and  the  life
not  only  in  the  individual,  but  in  the  collectivity,  in  the  commu-
nal endeavour,  in  the  turn,  ideals,  temperament,  make  of  the
society,  in  its  strivings  towards  perfection.  And  he  is  obliged
too  to  see  that  the  indictment  against  religion,  not  in  its  conclu-
sion, but  in  its  premiss  had  something,  had  even  much  to  justify
it,  — not  that  religion  in  itself  must  be,  but  that  historically  and
as  a matter  of  fact  the  accredited  religions  and  their  hierarchs
and  exponents  have  too  often  been  a force  for  retardation,  have
too  often  thrown  their  weight  on  the  side  of  darkness,  oppression
and  ignorance,  and  that  it  has  needed  a denial,  a revolt  of  the
oppressed  human  mind  and  heart  to  correct  these  errors  and  set
religion  right.  And  why  should  this  have  been  if  religion  is  the
true  and  sufficient  guide  and  regulator  of  all  human  activities
and  the  whole  of  human  life?

We  need  not  follow  the  rationalistic  or  atheistic  mind
through  all  its  aggressive  indictment  of  religion.  We  need  not
for  instance  lay  a too  excessive  stress  on  the  superstitions,
aberrations,  violences,  crimes  even,  which  Churches  and  cults
and  creeds  have  favoured,  admitted,  sanctioned,  supported  or
exploited  for  their  own  benefit,  the  mere  hostile  enumeration
of  which  might  lead  one  to  echo  the  cry  of  the  atheistic  Roman
poet,  “To  such  a mass  of  ills  could  religion  persuade  mankind.”
As  well  might  one  cite  the  crimes  and  errors  which  have  been
committed  in  the  name  of  liberty  or  of  order  as  a sufficient
condemnation  of  the  ideal  of  liberty  or  the  ideal  of  social  order.
But  we  have  to  note  the  fact  that  such  a thing  was  possible  and  to
find  its  explanation.  We  cannot  ignore  for  instance  the  blood-
stained and  fiery  track  which  formal  external  Christianity
has  left  furrowed  across  the  mediaeval  history  of  Europe  almost
from  the  days  of  Constantine,  its  first  hour  of  secular,  triumph,
down  to  very  recent  times,  or  the  sanguinary  comment  which  such
an  institution  as  the  Inquisition  affords  on  the  claim  of  religion
to  be  the  directing  light  and  regulating  power  in  ethics  and
society,  or  religious  wars  and  wide-spread  State  persecutions  on


165


Religion  as  the  Law  of  Life

its  claim  to  guide  the  political  life  of  mankind.  But  we  must
observe  the  root  of  this  evil,  which  is  not  in  true  religion  itself,
but  in  its  infrarational  parts,  not  in  spiritual  faith  and  aspira-
tion, but  in  our  ignorant  human  confusion  of  rehgion  with  a par-
ticular creed,  sect,  cult,  religious  society  or  church.  So  strong  is
the  human  tendency  to  this  error  that  even  the  old  tolerant
Paganism  slew  Socrates  in  the  name  of  religion  and  morality,
feebly  persecuted  non-national  faiths  like  the  cult  of  Isis  or  the
cult  of  Mithra  and  more  vigorously  what  it  conceived  to  be  the
subversive  and  anti-social  religion  of  the  early  Christians;  and
even  in  still  more  fundamentally  tolerant  Hinduism  with  all  its
spiritual  broadness  and  enlightenment  it  led  at  one  time  to  the
milder  mutual  hatred  and  occasional  though  brief-lived  perse-
cution of  Buddhist,  Jain,  Shaiva,  Vaishnava.

The  whole  root  of  the  historic  insufficiency  of  religion  as  a
guide  and  control  of  human  society  lies  there.  Churches  and
creeds  have,  for  example,  stood  violently  in  the  way  of  philo-
sophy and  science,  burned  a Giordano  Bruno,  imprisoned  a
Galileo,  and  so  generally  misconducted  themselves  in  this  matter
that  philosophy  and  science  had  in  self-defence  to  turn  upon
Religion  and  rend  her  to  pieces  in  order  to  get  a free  field  for  their
legitimate  development;  and  this  because  men  in  the  passion
and  darkness  of  their  vital  nature  had  chosen  to  think  that
religion  was  bound  up  with  certain  fixed  intellectual  conceptions
about  God  and  the  world  which  could  not  stand  scrutiny,  and
therefore  scrutiny  had  to  be  put  down  by  fire  and  sword;  scienti-
fic and  philosophical  truth  had  to  be  denied  in  order  that  reh-
gious  error  might  survive.  We  see  too  that  a narrow  religious
spirit  often  oppresses  and  impoverishes  the  joy  and  beauty
of  life,  either  from  an  intolerant  asceticism  or,  as  the  Puritans
attempted  it,  because  they  could  not  see  that  religious  austerity
is  not  the  whole  of  religion,  though  it  may  be  an  important  side
of  it,  is  not  the  sole  ethico-religious  approach  to  God,  since  love,
charity,  gentleness,  tolerance,  kindliness  are  also  and  even
more  divine,  and  they  forgot  or  never  knew  that  God  is  love  and
beauty  as  well  as  purity.  In  politics  religion  has  often  thrown
itself  on  the  side  of  power  and  resisted  the  coming  of  larger
political  ideals,  because  it  was  itself,  in  the  form  of  a Church,


166


The  Human  Cycle


supported  by  power  and  because  it  confused  religion  with  the
Church,  or  because  it  stood  for  a false  theocracy,  forgetting  that
true  theocracy  is  the  kingdom  of  God  in  man  and  not  the  king-
dom of  a Pope,  a priesthood  or  a sacerdotal  class.  So  too  it  has
often  supported  a rigid  and  outworn  social  system,  because  it
thought  its  own  life  bound  up  with  social  forms  with  which  it
happened  to  have  been  associated  during  a long  portion  of  its
own  history  and  erroneously  concluded  that  even  a necessary
change  there  would  be  a violation  of  religion  and  a danger  to  its
existence.  As  if  so  mighty  and  inward  a power  as  the  religious
spirit  in  man  could  be  destroyed  by  anything  so  small  as  the
change  of  a social  form  or  so  outward  as  a social  readjustment!
This  error  in  its  many  shapes  has  been  the  great  weakness  of  reli-
gion as  practised  in  the  past  and  the  opportunity  and  justifica-
tion for  the  revolt  of  the  intelligence,  the  aesthetic  sense,  the  social
and  political  idealism,  even  the  ethical  spirit  of  the  human  being
against  what  should  have  been  its  own  highest  tendency  and  law.

Here  then  lies  one  secret  of  the  divergence  between  the  an-
cient and  the  modern,  the  Eastern  and  Western  ideal,  and  here
also  one  clue  to  their  reconciliation.  Both  rest  upon  a certain
strong  justification  and  their  quarrel  is  due  to  a misunderstand-
ing. It  is  true  in  a sense  that  religion  should  be  the  dominant
thing  in  life,  its  light  and  law,  but  religion  as  it  should  be  and
is  in  its  inner  nature,  its  fundamental  law  of  being,  a seeking  after
God,  the  cult  of  spirituality,  the  opening  of  the  deepest  life  of  the
soul  to  the  indwelling  Godhead,  the  eternal  Omnipresence.  On
the  other  hand,  it  is  true  that  religion  when  it  identifies  itself  only
with  a creed,  a cult,  a Church,  a system  of  ceremonial  forms,  may
well  become  a retarding  force  and  there  may  therefore  arise  a
necessity  for  the  human  spirit  to  reject  its  control  over  the  varied
activities  of  life.  There  are  two  aspects  of  religion,  true  religion
and  religionism.  True  religion  is  spiritual  religion,  that  which
seeks  to  live  in  the  spirit,  in  what  is  beyond  the  intellect,  beyond
the  aesthetic  and  ethical  and  practical  being  of  man,  and  to  in-
form and  govern  these  members  of  our  being  by  the  higher  light
and  law  of  the  spirit.  Religionism,  on  the  contrary,  entrenches
itself  in  some  narrow  pietistic  exaltation  of  the  lower  members
or  lays  exclusive  stress  on  intellectual  dogmas,  forms  and  cere-


167


Religion  as  the  Law  of  Life

monies,  on  some  fixed  and  rigid  moral  code,  on  some  religio-
political  or  religio-social  system.  Not  that  these  things  ace  alto-
gether negligible  or  that  they  must  be  unworthy  or  unnecessary
or  that  a spiritual  religion  need  disdain  the  aid  of  forms,  cere-
monies, creeds  or  systems.  On  the  contrary,  they  are  needed  by
man  because  the  lower  members  have  to  be  exalted  and  raised
before  they  can  be  fully  spiritualised,  before  they  can  directly  feel
the  spirit  and  obey  its  law.  An  intellectual  formula  is  often  need-
ed by  the  thinking  and  reasoning  mind,  a form  or  ceremony  by
the  aesthetic  temperament  or  other  parts  of  the  infrarational
being,  a set  moral  code  by  man’s  vital  nature  in  their  turn  towards
the  inner  life.  But  these  things  are  aids  and  supports,  not  the
essence;  precisely  because  they  belong  to  the  rational  and  infra-
rational parts,  they  can  be  nothing  more  and,  if  too  blindly  in-
sisted on,  may  even  hamper  the  suprarational  light.  Such  as
they  are,  they  have  to  be  offered  to  man  and  used  by  him,  but  not
to  be  imposed  on  him  as  his  sole  law  by  a forced  and  inflexible
domination.  In  the  use  of  them  toleration  and  free  permission
of  variation  is  the  first  rule  which  should  be  observed.  The  spiri-
tual essence  of  religion  is  alone  the  one  thing  supremely  needful,
the  thing  to  which  we  have  always  to  hold  and  subordinate  to  it
every  other  element  or  motive.

But  here  comes  in  an  ambiguity  which  brings  in  a deeper
source  of  divergence.  For  by  spirituahty  religion  seems  often  to
mean  something  remote  from  earthly  life,  different  from  it,  hostile
to  it.  It  seems  to  condemn  the  pursuit  of  earthly  aims  as  a trend
opposed  to  the  turn  to  a spiritual  life  and  the  hopes  of  man  on
earth  as  an  illusion  or  a vanity  incompatible  with  the  hope  of
man  in  heaven.  The  spirit  then  becomes  something  aloof  which
man  can  only  reach  by  throwing  away  the  life  of  his  lower  mem-
bers. Either  he  must  abandon  this  nether  life  after  a certain
point,  when  it  has  served  its  purpose,  or  must  persistently  dis-
courage, mortify  and  kill  it.  If  that  be  the  true  sense  of  religion,
then  obviously  religion  has  no  positive  message  for  human  society
in  the  proper  field  of  social  effort,  hope  and  aspiration  or  for  the
individual  in  any  of  the  lower  members  of  his  being.  For  each
principle  of  our  nature  seeks  naturally  for  perfection  in  its  own
sphere  and,  if  it  is  to  obey  a higher  power,  it  must  be  because


The  Human  Cycle


that  power  gives  it  a greater  perfection  and  a fuller  satisfaction
even  in  its  own  field.  But  if  perfectibility  is  denied  to  it  and
therefore  the  aspiration  to  perfection  taken  away  by  the  spiritual
urge,  then  it  must  either  lose  faith  in  itself  and  the  power  to  pur-
sue the  natural  expansion  of  its  energies  and  activities  or  it  must
reject  the  call  of  the  spirit  in  order  to  follow  its  own  bend  and
law,  dharma.  This  quarrel  between  earth  and  heaven,  between
the  spirit  and  its  members  becomes  still  more  sterilising  if  spiri-
tuality takes  the  form  of  a religion  of  sorrow  and  suffering  and
austere  mortification  and  the  gospel  of  the  vanity  of  things;  in
its  exaggeration  it  leads  to  such  nightmares  of  the  soul  as  that
terrible  gloom  and  hopelessness  of  the  Middle  Ages  in  their
worst  moment  when  the  one  hope  of  mankind  seemed  to  be  in
the  approaching  and  expected  end  of  the  world,  an  inevitable
and  desirable  Pralaya.  But  even  in  less  pronounced  and  intole-
rant forms  of  this  pessimistic  attitude  with  regard  to  the  world,  it
becomes  a force  for  the  discouragement  of  life  and  cannot,  there-
fore, be  a true  law  and  guide  for  life.  All  pessimism  is  to  that
extent  a denial  of  the  Spirit,  of  its  fullness  and  power,  an  impa-
tience with  the  ways  of  God  in  the  world,  an  insufficient  faith  in
the  divine  Wisdom  and  Will  that  created  the  world  and  for  ever
guide  it.  It  admits  a wrong  notion  about  that  supreme  Wisdom
and  Power  and  therefore  cannot  itself  be  the  supreme  wisdom
and  power  of  the  spirit  to  which  the  world  can  look  for  guidance
and  for  the  uplifting  of  its  whole  life  towards  the  Divine.

The  Western  recoil  from  religion,  that  minimising  of  its
claim  and  insistence  by  which  Europe  progressed  from  the
mediaeval  religious  attitude  through  the  Renascence  and  the
Reformation  to  the  modern  rationalistic  attitude,  that  making
of  the  ordinary  earthly  life  our  one  preoccupation,  that  labour  to
fulfil  ourselves  by  the  law  of  the  lower  members,  divorced  from  all
spiritual  seeking,  was  an  opposite  error,  the  contrary  ignorant
extreme,  the  blind  swing  of  the  pendulum  from  a wrong  affirma-
tion to  a wrong  negation.  It  is  an  error  because  perfection  can-
not be  found  in  such  a limitation  and  restriction;  for  it  denies
the  complete  law  of  human  existence,  its  deepest  urge,  its  most
secret  impulse.  Only  by  the  light  and  power  of  the  highest  can
the  lower  be  perfectly  guided,  uplifted  and  accomplished.  The


169


Religion  as  the  Law  of  Life

lower  life  of  man  is  in  form  undivine,  though  in  it  there  is  the
secret  of  the  divine,  and  it  can  only  be  divinised  by  finding  the
higher  law  and  the  spiritual  illumination.  On  the  other  hand,  the
impatience  which  condemns  or  despairs  of  life  or  discourages
its  growth  because  it  is  at  present  undivine  and  is  not  in  harmony
with  the  spiritual  life,  is  an  equal  ignorance,  andham  tamah.  The
world-shunning  monk,  the  mere  ascetic  may  indeed  well  find  by
this  turn  his  own  individual  and  peculiar  salvation,  the  spiritual
recompense  of  his  renunciation  and  Tapasya,  as  the  materialist
may  find  by  his  own  exclusive  method  the  appropriate  rewards
of  his  energy  and  concentrated  seeking;  but  neither  can  be  the
true  guide  of  mankind  and  its  law-giver.  The  monastic  attitude
implies  a fear,  an  aversion,  a distrust  of  life  and  its  aspirations,
and  one  cannot  wisely  guide  that  with  which  one  is  entirely  out  of
sympathy,  that  which  one  wishes  to  minimise  and  discourage.
The  sheer  ascetic  spirit,  if  it  directed  life  and  human  society,
could  only  prepare  it  to  be  a means  for  denying  itself  and  getting
away  from  its  own  motives.  An  ascetic  guidance  might  tolerate
the  lower  activities,  but  only  with  a view  to  persuade  them  in  the
end  to  minimise  and  finally  cease  from  their  own  action.  But  a
spirituality  which  draws  back  from  life  to  envelop  it  without
being  dominated  by  it  does  riot  labour  under  this  disability.  The
spiritual  man  who  can  guide  human  life  towards  its  perfection  is
typified  in  the  ancient  Indian  idea  of  the  Rishi,  one  who  has  lived
fully  the  life  of  man  and  found  the  word  of  the  supra-intellectual,
supramental,  spiritual  truth.  He  has  risen  above  these  lower
hmitations  and  can  view  all  things  from  above,  but  also  he  is  in
sympathy  with  their  effort  and  can  view  them  from  within;  he
has  the  complete  inner  knowledge  and  the  higher  surpassing
knowledge.  Therefore  he  can  guide  the  world  humanly  as  God
guides  it  divinely,  because  like  the  Divine  he  is  in  the  life  of  the
world  and  yet  above  it.

In  spirituality,  then,  understood  in  this  sense,  we  must  seek
for  the  directing  light  and  the  harmonising  law,  and  in  religion
only  in  proportion  as  it  identifies  itself  with  this  sjpirituality.  So
long  as  it  falls  short  of  this,  it  is  one  human  activity  and  power
among  others,  and,  even  if  it  be  considered  the  most  important
and  the  most  powerful,  it  cannot  wholly  guide  the  others.  It  it


170


The  Human  Cycle


seeks  always  to  fix  them  into  the  limits  of  a creed,  an  unchan-
geable law,  a particular  system,  it  must  be  prepared  to  see  them
revolting  from  its  control;  for  although  they  may  accept  this
impress  for  a time  and  greatly  profit  by  it,  in  the  end  they  must
move  by  the  law  of  their  being  towards  a freer  activity  and  an
untrammelled  movement.  Spirituality  respects  the  freedom  of
the  human  soul,  because  it  is  itself  fulfilled  by  freedom;  and  the
deepest  meaning  of  freedom  is  the  power  to  expand  and  grow
towards  perfection  by  the  law  of  one’s  own  nature,  dharma.  This
liberty  it  will  give  to  all  the  fundamental  parts  of  our  being.  It
will  give  that  freedom  to  philosophy  and  science  which  ancient
Indian  religion  gave,  — freedom  even  to  deny  the  spirit,  if  they
will,  — as  a result  of  which  philosophy  and  science  never  felt  in
ancient  India  any  necessity  of  divorcing  themselves  from  religion,
but  grew  rather  into  it  and  under  its  light.  It  will  give  the  same
freedom  to  man’s  seeking  for  political  and  social  perfection  and
to  all  his  other  powers  and  aspirations.  Only  it  will  be  vigilant
to  illuminate  them  so  that  they  may  grow  into  the  light  and  law
of  the  spirit,  not  by  suppression  and  restriction,  but  by  a self-
searching, self-controlled  expansion  and  a many-sided  finding
of  their  greatest,  highest  and  deepest  potentialities.  For  all
these  are  potentialities  of  the  spirit.


Chapter  XVIII


The  Infrarational  Age  of  the  Cycle


In  spirituality  then  would  lie  our
ultimate,  our  only  hope  for  the  perfection  whether  of  the  indi-
vidual or  of  the  communal  man;  not  the  spirit  which  for  its  sepa-
rate satisfaction  turns  away  from  the  earth  and  her  works,  but
that  greater  spirit  which  surpasses  and  yet  accepts  and  fulfils
them.  A spirituality  that  would  take  up  into  itself  man’s  ratio-
nalism, aestheticism,  ethicism,  vitalism,  corporeality,  his  aspira-
tion towards  knowledge,  his  attraction  towards  beauty,  his  need
of  love,  his  urge  towards  perfection,  his  demand  for  power  and
fullness  of  life  and  being,  a spirituahty  that  would  reveal  to
these  ill-accorded  forces  their  divine  sense  and  the  conditions  of
their  godhead,  reconcile  them  all  to  each  other,  illumine  to  the
vision  of  each  the  way  which  they  now  tread  in  half-lights  and
shadows,  in  blindness  or  with  a deflected  sight,  is  a power  which
even  man’s  too  self-sufficient  reason  can  accept  or  may  at  least  be
brought  one  day  to  accept  as  sovereign  and  to  see  in  it  its  own
supreme  light,  its  own  infinite  source.  For  that  reveals  itself
surely  in  the  end  as  the  logical  ultimate  process,  the  inevitable
development  and  consummation  of  all  for  which  man  is  indi-
vidually and  socially  striving.  A satisfying  evolution  of  the  nas-
cent spirituality  still  raw  and  inchoate  in  the  race  is  the  possibi-
hty  to  which  an  age  of  subjectivism  is  a first  glimmer  of  awaken-
ing or  towards  which  it  shows  a first  profound  potentiality  of
return.  A deeper,  wider,  greater,  more  spiritualised  subjective
understanding  of  the  individual  and  communal  self  and  its  life
and  a growing  reliance  on  the  spiritual  light  and  the  spiritual
means  for  the  final  solution  of  its  problems  are  the  only  way  to  a
true  social  perfection.  The  free  rule,  that  is  to  say,  the  predo-
minant lead,  control  and  influence  of  the  developed  spiritual
man  — not  the  half-spiritualised  priest,  saint  or  prophet  or  the
raw  religionist  — is  our  hope  for  a divine  guidance  of  the  race.


172  The  Human  Cycle

A spiritualised  society  can  alone  bring  about  a reign  of  individual
harmony  and  communal  happiness;  or,  in  words  which,  though
liable  to  abuse  by  the  reason  and  the  passions,  are  still  the  most
expressive  we  can  find,  a new  kind  of  theocracy,  the  kingdom  of
God  upon  earth,  a theocracy  which  shall  be  the  government  of
mankind  by  the  Divine  in  the  hearts  and  minds  of  men.

Certainly,  this  will  not  come  about  easily,  or,  as  men  have
always  vainly  hoped  from  each  great  new  turn  and  revolution  of
politics  and  society,  by  a sudden  and  at  once  entirely  satisfying
change  and  magical  transformation.  The  advance,  however  it
comes  about,  will  be  indeed  of  the  nature  of  a miracle,  as  are  all
such  profound  changes  and  immense  developments;  for  they
have  the  appearance  of  a kind  of  realised  impossibility.  But
God  works  all  his  miracles  , by  an  evolution  of  secret  possibilities
which  have  been  long  prepared,  at  least  in  their  elements,  and  in
the  end  by  a rapid  bringing  of  all  to  a head,  a throwing  together
of  the  elements  so  that  in  their  fusion  they  produce  a new  form
and  name  of  things  and  reveal  a new  spirit.  Often  the  decisive
turn  is  preceded  by  an  apparent  emphasising  and  raising  to  their
extreme  of  things  which  seem  the  very  denial,  the  most  uncom-
promising opposite  of  the  new  principle  and  the  new  creation.
Such  an  evolution  of  the  elements  of  a spiritualised  society  is  that
which  a subjective  age  makes  at  least  possible,  and  if  at  the  same
time  it  raises  to  the  last  height  of  active  power  things  which  seem
the  very  denial  of  such  a potentiality,  that  need  be  no  index  of  a
practical  impossibility  of  the  new  birth,  but  on  the  contrary  may
be  the  sign  of  its  approach  or  at  the  lowest  a strong  attempt  at
achievement.  Certainly,  the  whole  effort  of  a subjective  age  may
go  wrong;  but  this  happens  oftenest  when  by  the  insufficiency  of
its  materials,  a great  crudeness  of  its  starting-point  and  a hasty
shallowness  or  narrow  intensity  of  its  inlook  into  itself  and  things
it  is  foredoomed  to  a fundamental  error  of  self-knowledge.  It
becomes  less  likely  when  the  spirit  of  the  age  is  full  of  freedom,
variety  and  a many-sided  seeking,  a persistent  effort  after  know-
ledge and  perfection  in  all  the  domains  of  human  activity;  that
can  well  convert  itself  into  an  intense  and  yet  flexible  straining
after  the  infinite  and  the  divine  on  many  sides  and  in  many
aspects.  In  such  circumstances,  though  a full  advance  may


173


The  Infrarational  Age  of  the  Cycle

possibly  not  be  made,  a great  step  forward  can  be  predicted.

We  have  seen  that  there  are  necessarily  three  stages  of  the
social  evolution  or,  generally,  of  the  human  evolution  in  both
individual  and  society.  Our  evolution  starts  with  an  infrarational
stage  in  which  men  have  not  yet  learned  to  refer  their  life  and
action  in  its  principles  and  its  forms  to  the  judgment  of  the  clari-
fied intelligence;  for  they  still  act  principally  out  of  their  instincts,
impulses,  spontaneous  ideas,  vital  intuitions  or  else  obey  a custo-
mary response  to  desire,  need  and  circumstance,  — it  is  these
things  that  are  canalised  or  crystallised  in  their  social  institutions.
Man  proceeds  by  various  stages  out  of  these  beginnings  towards
a rational  age  in  which  his  intelligent  will  more  or  less  developed
becomes  the  judge,  arbiter  and  presiding  motive  of  his  thought,
feeling  and  action,  the  moulder,  destroyer  and  re-creator  of  his
leading  ideas,  aims  and  intuitions.  Finally,  if  our  analysis  and
forecast  are  correct,  the  human  evolution  must  move  throu^  a
subjective  towards  a suprarational  or  spiritual  age  in  which  he
will  develop  progressively  a greater  spiritual,  supra-intellectual
and  intuitive,  perhaps  in  the  end  a more  than  intuitive,  a gnostic
consciousness.  He  will  be  able  to  perceive  a higher  divine  end,  a
divine  sanction,  a divine  light  of  guidance  for  all  he  seeks  to  be,
think,  feel  and  do,  and  able,  too,  more  and  more  to  obey  and  live
in  this  larger  light  and  power.  That  will  not  be  done  by  any  rule
of  infrarational  religious  impulse  and  ecstasy,  such  as  charac-
terised or  rather  darkly  illumined  the  obscure  confusion  and  brute
violence  of  the  Middle  Ages,  but  by  a higher  spiritual  living  for
which  the  clarities  of  the  reason  are  a necessary  preparation  and
into  which  they  too  will  be  taken  up,  transformed,  brought  to
their  invisible  source.

These  stages  or  periods  are  much  more  inevitable  in  the
psychological  evolution  of  mankind  than  the  Stone  and  other
Ages  marked  out  by  Science  in  his  instrumental  culture,  for
they  depend  not  on  outward  means  or  accidents,  but  on  the  very
nature  of  his  being.  But  we  must  not  suppose  that  they  are  na-
turally exclusive  and  absolute  in  their  nature,  or  complete  in
their  tendency  or  fulfilment  when  they  come,  or  rigidly  marked
off  from  each  other  in  their  action  or  their  time.  For  they  not
only  arise  out  of  each  other,  but  may  be  partially  developed  in


174


The  Human  Cycle


each  other  and  they  may  come  to  co-exist  in  different  parts  of  the
earth  at  the  same  time.  But,  especially,  since  man  as  a whole  is
always  a complex  being,  even  man  savage  or  degenerate,  he  can-
not be  any  of  these  things  exclusively  or  absolutely,  — so  long
as  he  has  not  exceeded  himself,  has  not  developed  into  the  super-
man, has  not,  that  is  to  say,  spiritualised  and  divinised  his  whole
being.  At  his  animal  worst  he  is  still  some  kind  of  thinking  or
reflecting  animal:  even  the  infrarational  man  cannot  be  utterly
infrarational,  but  must  have  or  tend  to  have  some  kind  of  play
more  or  less  evolved  or  involved  of  the  reason  and  a more  or  less
crude  suprarational  element,  a more  or  less  disguised  working  of
the  spirit.  At  his  lucid  mental  best,  he  is  still  not  a pure  mental
being,  a pure  intelligence;  even  the  most  perfect  intellectual  is  not
and  cannot  be  wholly  or  merely  rational,  — there  are  vital  urges
that  he  cannot  exclude,  visits  or  touches  of  a light  from  above
that  are  not  less  suprarational  because  he  does  not  recognise
their  source.  No  god,  but  at  his  highest  a human  being  touched
with  a ray  of  the  divine  influence,  man’s  very  spirituality,  however
dominant,  must  have,  while  he  is  still  this  imperfectly  evolved
human,  its  rational  and  infrarational  tendencies  and  elements.
And  as  with  the  psychological  life  of  individuals,  so  must  it  be
with  the  ages  of  his  communal  existence;  these  may  be  marked
off  from  each  other  by  the  predominant  play  of  one  element,  its
force  may  overpower  the  others  or  take  them  into  itself  or  make
some  compromise,  but  an  exclusive  play  seems  to  be  neither  in-
tended nor  possible.

Thus  an  infrarational  period  of  human  and  social  develop-
ment need  not  be  without  its  elements,  its  strong  elements  of
reason  and  of  spirituality.  Even  the  savage,  whether  he  be  pri-
mitive or  degenerate  man,  has  some  coherent  idea  of  this  world
and  the  beyond,  a theory  of  h'fe  and  a religion.To  us  with  our  more
advanced  rationahty  his  theory  of  life  may  seem  incoherent,
because  we  have  lost  its  point  of  view  and  its  principle  of  mental
associations.  But  it  is  still  an  act  of  reason,  and  within  its  limits
he  is  capable  of  a sufficient  play  of  thought  both  ideative  and
practical,  as  well  as  a clear  ethical  idea  and  motive,  some  aesthe-
tic notions  and  an  understood  order  of  society  poor  and  barba-
rous to  our  view,  but  well  enough  contrived  and  put  together  to


175


The  Infrarational  Age  of  the  Cycle

serve  the  simplicity  of  its  objects.  Or  again  we  may  not  realise
the  element  of  reason  in  a primitive  theory  of  life  or  of  spirituality
in  a barbaric  religion,  because  it  appears  to  us  to  be  made  up  of
symbols  and  forms  to  which  a superstitious  value  is  attached  by
these  undeveloped  minds.  But  this  is  because  the  reason  at  this
stage  has  an  imperfect  and  limited  action  and  the  element  of
spirituality  is  crude  or  undeveloped  and  not  yet  self-conscious;
in  order  to  hold  firmly  their  workings  and  make  them  real  and
concrete  to  his  mind  and  spirit  primitive  man  has  to  give  them
shape  in  symbols  and  forms  to  which  he  clings  with  a barbaric
awe  and  reverence,  because  they  alone  can  embody  for  him  his
method  of  self-guidance  in  life.  For  the  dominant  thing  in  him
is  his  infrarational  life  of  instinct,  vital  intuition  and  impulse,
mechanical  custom  and  tradition,  and  it  is  that  to  which  the  rest
of  him  has  to  give  some  kind  of  primary  order  and  first  glimmer-
ings of  light.  The  unrefined  reason  and  unenlightened  spirit  in
him  cannot  work  for  their  own  ends;  they  are  bond-slaves  of  his
infrarational  nature.

At  a higher  stage  of  development  or  of  a return  towards  a
fuller  evolution,  — for  the  actual  savage  in  humanity  is  perhaps
not  the  original  primitive  man,  but  a relapse  and  reversion  to-
wards primitiveness,  — the  infrarational  stage  of  society  may
arrive  at  a very  lofty  order  of  civilisation.  It  may  have  great  in-
tuitions of  the  meaning  or  general  intention  of  life,  admirable
ideas  of  the  arrangement  of  life,  a harmonious,  well-adapted,
durable  and  serviceable  social  system,  an  imposing  religion  which
will  not  be  without  its  profundities,  but  in  which  symbol  and  cere-
monial will  form  the  largest  portion  and  for  the  mass  of  man  will
be  almost  the  whole  of  religion.  In  this  stage  pure  reason  and
pure  spirituality  will  not  govern  the  society  or  move  large  bodies
of  men,  but  will  be  represented,  if  at  all,  by  individuals  at  first
few,  but  growing  in  number  as  these  two  powers  increase  in  their
purity  and  vigour  and  attract  more  and  more  votaries.

This  may  well  lead  to  an  age,  if  the  development  of  reason  is
strongest,  of  great  individual  thinkers  who  seize  on  some  idea  of
life  and  its  origins  and  laws  and  erect,  that  into  a philosophy,  of
critical  minds  standing  isolated  above  the  mass  who  judge  life,
not  yet  with  a luminous  largeness,  a minute  flexibility  of  under-


176  The  Human  Cycle

standing  or  a clear  and  comprehensive  profundity,  but  still  with
power  of  intelligence,  insight,  acuteness,  perhaps  even  a pre-
eminent social  thinker  here  and  there  who,  taking  advantage  of
some  crisis  or  disturbance,  is  able  to  get  the  society  to  modify  or
reconstruct  itself  on  the  basis  of  some  clearly  rational  and  intel-
ligent principle.  Such  an  age  seems  to  be  represented  by  the
traditions  of  the  beginnings  of  Greek  civilisation,  or  rather  the
beginnings  of  its  mobile  and  progressive  period.  Or  if  spirituality
predominates,  there  will  be  great  mystics  capable  of  delving  into
the  profound  and  still  occult  psychological  possibilities  of  our
nature  who  will  divine  and  realise  the  truth  of  the  self  and  spirit
in  man  and  even  though  they  keep  these  things  secret  and  im-
parted only  to  a small  number  of  initiates,  may  yet  succeed  in
deepening  with  them  the  crude  forms  of  the  popular  life.  Even
such  a development  is  obscurely  indicated  in  the  old  traditions  of
the  mysteries.  In  prehistoric  India  we  see  it  take  a peculiar  and
unique  turn  which  determined  the  whole  future  trend  of  the
society  and  made  Indian  civilisation  a thing  apart  and  of  its  own
kind  in  the  history  of  the  human  race.  But  these  things  are  only
a first  beginning  of  light  in  the  midst  of  a humanity  which  is  still
infrarational  as  well  as  infra-spiritual  and,  even  when  it  under-
goes the  influence  of  these  precursors,  responds  only  obscurely  to
their  inspirations  and  without  any  clearly  intelligent  or  awakened
spiritual  reception  of  what  they  impart  or  impose.  It  still  turns
everything  into  infrarational  form  and  disfiguring  tradition  and
lives  spiritually  by  ill-understood  ceremonial  and  disguising  sym-
bol. It  feels  obscurely  the  higher  things,  tries  to  live  them  in  its
own  stumbling  way,  but  it  does  not  yet  understand;  it  cannot  lay
hold  either  on  the  intellectual  form  or  the  spiritual  heart  of  their
significance.

As  reason  and  spirituality  develop,  they  begin  to  become  a
larger  and  more  diffused  force,  less  intense  perhaps,  but  wider
and  more  effective  on  the  mass.  The  mystics  become  the  sowers
of  the  seed  of  an  immense  spiritual  development  in  which  whole
classes  of  society  and  even  men  from  all  classes  seek  the  light,  as
happened  in  India  in  the  age  of  the  Upanishads.  The  solitary
individual  thinkers  are  replaced  by  a great  number  of  writers,
poets,  thinkers,  rhetoricians,  sophists,  scientific  inquirers,  who


177


The  Infraratioml  Age  of  the  Cycle

pour  out  a profuse  flood  of  acute  speculation  and  inquiry  stimu-
lating the  thought-habit  and  creating  even  in  the  mass  a gene-
ralised activity  of  the  intelligence,  — as  happened  in  Greece  in  the
age  of  the  sophists.  The  spiritual  development,  arising  uncurbed
by  reason  in  an  infrarational  society,  has  often  a tendency  to  out-
run at  first  the  rational  and  intellectual  movement.  For  the  great-
est illuminating  force  of  the  infrarational  man,  as  he  develops,
is  an  inferior  intuition,  an  instinctively  intuitional  sight  arising
out  of  the  force  of  life  in  him,  and  the  transition  from  this  to  an
intensity  of  inner  life  and  the  growth  of  a deeper  spiritual  intuition
which  outleaps  the  intellect  and  seems  to  dispense  with  it,  is  an  easy
passage  in  the  individual  man.  But  for  humanity  at  large  this
movement  cannot  last;  the  mind  and  intellect  must  develop  to
their  fullness  so  that  the  spirituality  of  the  race  may  rise  securely
upward  upon  a broad  basis  of  the  developed  lower  nature  in  man,
the  intelligent  mental  being.  Therefore  we  see  that  the  reason  in
its  growth  either  does  away  with  the  distinct  spiritual  tendency  for
a time,  as  in  ancient  Greece,  or  accepts  it  but  spins  out  around  its
first  data  and  activities  a vast  web  of  the  workings  of  the  intelli-
gence, so  that,  as  in  India,  the  early  mystic  seer  is  replaced  by  the
philosopher-mystic,  the  religious  thinker  and  even  the  philoso-
pher pure  and  simple.

For  a time  the  new  growth  and  impulse  may  seem  to  take
possession  of  a whole  community  as  in  Athens  or  in  old  Aryan
India.  But  these  early  dawns  cannot  endure  in  their  purity,  so
long  as  the  race  is  not  ready.  There  is  a crystallisation,  a lessen-
ing of  the  first  impetus,  a new  growth  of  infrarational  forms  in
which  the  thought  or  the  spirituality  is  overgrown  with  inferior
accretions  or  it  is  imbedded  in  the  form  and  may  even  die  in  it,
while  the  tradition  of  the  living  knowledge,  the  loftier  life  and
activity  remains  the  property  of  the  higher  classes,  or  a highest
class.  The  multitude  remains  infrarational  in  its  habit  of  mind,
though  perhaps  it  may  still  keep  in  capacity  an  enlivened  intelli-
gence or  a profound  or  subtle  spiritual  receptiveness  as  its  gain
from  the  past.  So  long  as  the  hour  of  the  rational  age  has  not
arrived,  the  irrational  period  of  society  cannot  be  left  behind ; and
that  arrival  can  only  be  when  not  a class  or  a few,  but  the
multitude  has  learned  to  think,  to  exercise  its  intelligence


178


The  Human  Cycle

actively —it  matters  not  at  first  however  imperfectly —upon  their
life,  their  needs,  their  rights,  their  duties,  their  aspirations  as  hu-
man beings.  Until  then  we  have  as  the  highest  possible  develop-
ment a mixed  society,  infrarational  in  the  mass,  but  saved  for
civilisation  by  a liigher  class  whose  business  it  is  to  seek  after  the
reason  and  the  spirit,  to  keep  the  gains  of  mankind  in  these
fields,  to  add  to  them,  to  enlighten  and  raise  with  them  as  much
as  possible  the  life  of  the  whole.

At  this  point  we  see  that  Nature  in  her  human  mass  tends  to
move  forward  slowly  on  her  various  lines  of  active  mind  and  life
towards  a greater  application  of  reason  and  spirituality  which
shall  at  last  bring  near  the  possibility  of  a rational  and,  even-
tually, a spiritual  age  of  mankind.  Her  difficulties  proceed  from
two  sides.  First,  while  she  originally  developed  thought  and
reason  and  spirituality  by  exceptional  individuals,  now  she'  deve-
lops them  in  the  mass  by  exceptional  communities  or  nations,  —
at  least  in  the  relative  sense  of  a nation  governed,  led  and  pro-
gressively formed  and  educated  by  its  intellectually  or  spiritually
cultured  class  or  classes.  But  the  exceptional  nation  touched  on
its  higher  levels  by  a developed  reason  or  spirituality  or  both,  as
were  Greece  and  later  Rome  in  ancient  Europe,  India,  China  and
Persia  in  ancient  Asia,  is  surrounded  or  neighboured  by  enor-
mous masses  of  the  old  infrarational  humanity  and  endangered
by  this  menacing  proximity;  for  until  a developed  science  comes
in  to  redress  the  balance,  the  barbarian  has  always  a greater
physical  force  and  unexhausted  native  power  of  aggression  than
the  cultured  peoples.  At  this  stage  the  light  and  power  of  civili-
sation always  collapses  in  the  end  before  the  attack  of  the  outer
darkness.  Then  ascending  Nature  has  to  train  the  conquerors
more  or  less  slowly,  with  long  difficulty  and  much  loss  and  delay
to  develop  among  themselves  what  their  incursion  has  temporari-
ly destroyed  or  impaired.  In  the  end  humanity  gains  by  the  pro-
cess; a greater  mass  of  the  nations  is  brought  in,  a larger  and
more  living  force  of  progress  is  applied,  a starting-point  is
reached  from  which  it  can  move  to  richer  and  more  varied  gains.
But  a certain  loss  is  always  the  price  of  this  advance.

But  even  within  the  communities  themselves  reason  and  spi-
rituality at  this  stage  are  always  hampered  and  endangered  by


179


The  Infrarational  Age  of  the  Cycle

existing  in  a milieu  and  atmosphere  not  their  own.  The  elite,
the  classes  in  charge  of  these  powers  are  obliged  to  throw  them
into  forms  which  the  mass  of  human  ignorance  they  lead  and  rule  •
will  accept,  and  both  reason  and  spirituality  tend  to  be  stifled  by
these  forms,  to  get  stereotyped,  fossilised,  void  of  life,  bound
up  from  their  natural  play.  Secondly,  since  they  are  after  all
part  of  the  mass,  these  higher  enlightened  elements  are  them-
selves much  under  the  influence  of  their  infrarational  parts  and
do  not,  except  in  individuals,  arrive  at  the  entirely  free  play  of
the  reason  or  the  free  light  of  the  spirit.  Thirdly,  there  is  always
the  danger  of  these  elements  gravitating  downward  to  the  igno-
rance below  or  even  collapsing  into  it.  Nature  guards  herself  by
various  devices  for  maintaining  the  tradition  of  intellectual  and
spiritual  activity  in  the  favoured  classes ; here  she  makes  it  a point
of  honour  for  them  to  preserve  and  promote  the  national  cul-
ture, there  she  establishes  a preservative  system  of  education
and  discipline.  And  in  order  that  these  things  may  not  degene-
rate into  mere  traditionalism,  she  brings  in  a series  of  intellectual
or  spiritual  movements  which  by  their  shock  revivify  the  failing
life  and  help  to  bring  about  a broadening  and  an  enlarging  and
to  drive  the  dominant  reason  or  spirituality  deeper  down  into  the
infrarational  mass.  Each  movement  indeed  tends  to  petrify  after
a shorter  or  longer  activity,  but  a fresh  shock,  a new  wave  arrives
in  time  to  save  and  regenerate.  Finally,  she  reaches  the  point
when,  all  immediate  danger  of  relapse  overcome,  she  can  proceed
to  her  next  decisive  advance  in  the  cycle  of  social  evolution.  This
must  take  the  form  of  an  attempt  to  universalise  first  of  all  the
habit  of  reason  and  the  application  of  the  intelligence  and  intelli-
gent will  to  life.  Thus  is  instituted  the  rational  age  of  human
society,  the  great  endeavour  to  bring  the  power  of  the  reason  and
intelligence  to  bear  on  all  that  we  are  and  do  and  to  organise  in
their  light  and  by  their  guiding  force  the  entire  existence  of  the
race.


Chapter  XIX


The  Curve  of  the  Rational  Age


The  present  age  of  mankind  may  be  cha-
racterised from  this  point  of  view  of  a graded  psychological
evolution  of  the  race  as  a more  and  more  rapidly  accelerated
attempt  to  discover  and  work  out  the  right  principle  and  secure
foundations  of  a rational  system  of  society.  It  has  been  an  age
of  progress;  but  progress  is  of  two  kinds,  adaptive,  with  a secure
basis  in  an  unalterable  social  principle  and  constant  change  only
in  the  circumstances  and  machinery  of  its  application  to  suit  fresh
ideas  and  fresh  needs,  or  else  radical,  with  no  long-secure  basis,
but  instead  a constant  root  questioning  of  the  practical  founda-
tions and  even  the  central  principle  of  the  established  society.
The  modern  age  has  resolved  itself  into  a constant  series  of  radi-
cal progressions.

Tliis  series  seems  to  follow  always  a typical  course,  first  a
luminous  seed-time  and  a period  of  enthusiastic  effort  and  battle,
next  a partial  victory  and  achievement  and  a brief  era  of  posses-
sion, then  disillusionment  and  the  birth  of  a new  idea  and  endea-
vour. A principle  of  society  is  put  forward  by  the  thinker,  seizes
on  the  general  mind  and  becomes  a social  gospel ; brought  imme-
diately or  by  rapid  stages  into  practice,  it  dethrones  the  preceding
principle  and  takes  its  place  as  the  foundation  of  the  commu-
nity’s social  or  political  life.  This  victory  won,  men  live  for  a
time  in  the  enthusiasm  or,  when  the  enthusiasm  sinks,  in  the  habit
of  their  great  achievement.  After  a little  they  begin  to  feel  less
at  ease  with  the  first  results  and  are  moved  to  adapt,  to  alter
constantly,  to  develop  more  or  less  restlessly  the  new  system,  —
for  it  is  the  very  nature  of  the  reason  to  observe,  to  be  open  to
novel  ideas,  to  respond  quickly  to  new  needs  and  possibilities
and  not  to  repose  always  in  the  unquestioning  acceptance  of
every  habit  and  old  association.  Still  men  do  not  yet  think  of
questioning  their  social  principle  or  imagine  that  it  will  ever


181


The  Curve  of  the  Rational  Age

need  alteration,  but  are  intent  only  to  perfect  its  forms  and  make
its  application  more  thorough,  its  execution  more  sincere  and
effective.  A time,  however,  arrives  when  the  reason  becomes
dissatisfied  and  sees  that  it  is  only  erecting  a mass  of  new
conventions  and  that  there  has  been  no  satisfying  change;
there  has  been  a shifting  of  stresses,  but  the  society  is  not  appre-
ciably nearer  to  perfection.  The  opposition  of  the  few  thinkers
who  have  already,  perhaps  almost  from  the  first,  started  to
question  the  sufficiency  of  the  social  principle,  makes  itself  felt
and  is  accepted  by  increasing  numbers;  there  is  a movement  of
revolt  and  the  society  starts  on  the  familiar  round  to  a new  radical
progression,  a new  revolution,  the  reign  of  a more  advanced  so-
cial principle.

This  .process  has  to  continue  until  the  reason  can  find  a
principle  of  society  or  else  a combination  and  adjustment  of
several  principles  which  will  satisfy  it.  The  question  is  whether
it  will  ever  be  satisfied  or  can  ever  rest  from  questioning  the
foundation  of  established  things,  — unless  indeed  it  sinks  back
into  a sleep  of  tradition  and  convention  or  else  goes  forward  by
a great  awakening  to  the  reign  of  a higher  spirit  than  its  own
and  opens  into  a suprarational  or  spiritual  age  of  mankind.  If
we  may  judge  from  the  modern  movement,  the  progress  of  the
reason  as  a social  renovator  and  creator,  if  not  interrupted  in
its  course,  would  be  destined  to  pass  through  three  successive
stages  which  are  the  very  logic  of  its  growth,  the  first  individualis-
tic and  increasingly  democratic  with  liberty  for  its  principle,  the
second  socialistic,  in  the  end  perhaps  a governmental  communism
with  equality  and  the  State  for  its  principle,  the  third  — if  that
ever  gets  beyond  the  stage  of  theory  — anarchistic  in  the  higher
sense  of  that  much-abused  word,  either  a loose  voluntary  co-
operation or  a free  communalism  with  brotherhood  or  comrade-
ship and  not  government  for  its  principle.  It  is  in  the  transition
to  its  third  and  consummating  stage,  if  or  whenever  that  comes,
that  the  power  and  sufficiency  of  the  reason  will  be  tested;  it  will
then  be  seen  whether  the  reason  can  really  be  the  master  of  our
nature,  solve  the  problems  of  our  interrelated  and  conflicting  ego-
isms and  bring  about  within  itself  a perfect  principle  of  society
or  must  give  way  to  a higher  guide.  For  till  this  third  stage  has


J82  The  Human  Cycle

its  trial,  it  is  Force  that  in  the  last  resort  really  governs.  Reason
only  gives  to  Force  the  plan  of  its  action  and  a system  to
administer.

We  have  already  seen  that  it  is  individualism  which  opens
the  way  to  the  age  of  reason  and  that  individualism  gets  its  im-
pulse and  its  chance  of  development  because  it  follows  upon  an
age  of  dominant  conventionalism.  It  is  not  that  in  the  pre-indi-
vidualistic,  pre-rational  ages  there  were  no  thinkers  upon  society
and  the  communal  life  of  man;  but  they  did  not  think  in  the
characteristic  method  of  the  logical  reason,  critical,  all-observing,
all-questioning,  and  did  not  proceed  on  the  constructive  side  by
the  carefully  mechanising  methods  of  the  highly  rationalised
intelligence  when  it  passes  from  the  reasoned  perception  of  a
truth  to  the  endeavour  after  its  pure,  perfect  and  universal
orderly  application.  Their  thought  and  their  building  of  life  were
much  less  logical  than  spontaneously  intelligent,  organic  and
intuitive.  Always  they  looked  upon  life  as  it  was  and  sought  to
know  its  secret  by  keen  discernment,  intuition  and  insight;  sym-
bols embodying  the  actual  and  ideal  truth  of  life  and  being,  types
setting  them  in  an  arrangement  and  psychological  order,  insti-
tutions giving  them  a material  fixity  in  their  effectuation  by  life,
this  was  the  form  in  which  they  shaped  their  attempt  to  under-
stand and  mentalise  life,  to  govern  life  by  mind,  but  mind  in  its
spontaneously  intuitive  or  its  reflectively  seeing  movements
before  they  have  been  fixed  into  the  geometrical  patterns  of  the
logical  intelligence.

But  reason  seeks  to  understand  and  interpret  life  by  one  kind
of  symbol  only,  the  idea;  it  generalises  the  facts  of  life  according
to  its  own  strongly  cut  ideative  conceptions  so  that  it  may  be  able
to  master  and  arrange  them,  and  having  hold  of  an  idea  it  looks
for  its  largest  general  application.  And  in  order  that  these  ideas
may  not  be  a mere  abstraction  divorced  from  the  realised  or  rea-
lisable truth  of  things,  it  has  to  be  constantly  comparing  them
with  facts.  It  has  to  be  always  questioning  facts  so  that  it  may
find  the  ideas  by  which  they  can  be  more  and  more  adequately
explained,  ordered  and  managed,  and  it  has  always  to  be  ques-
tioning ideas  in  order,  first,  to  see  whether  they  square  with  the
actual  facts  and,  secondly,  whether  there  are  not  new  facts  to  suit


183


The  Curve  of  the  Rational  Age

which  they  must  be  modified  or  enlarged  or  which  can  be  evolved
out  of  them.  For  reason  lives  not  only  in  actual  facts,  but  in
possibilities,  not  only  in  realised  truths,  but  in  ideal  truths;  and
the  ideal  truth  once  seen,  the  impulse  of  the  ideahsing  intelligence
is  to  see  too  whether  it  cannot  be  turned  into  a fact,  cannot  be
immediately  or  rapidly  realised  in  life.  It  is  by  this  inherent
characteristic  that  the  age  of  reason  must  always  be  an  age  of
progress.

So  long  as  the  old  method  of  mentalising  life  served  its  pur-
pose, there  was  no  necessity  for  men  in  the  mass  to  think  out  their
way  of  life  by  the  aid  of  the  reason.  But  the  old  method  ceased  to
serve  its  purpose  as  soon  as  the  symbols,  types,  institutions  it
created  became  conventions  so  imprisoning  truth  that  there  was
no  longer  a force  of  insight  sufficient  to  deliver  the  hidden  reality
from  its  artificial  coatings.  Man  may  for  a time,  for  a long  time
even,  live  by  the  mere  tradition  of  things  whose  reality  he  has  lost,
but  not  permanently;  the  necessity  of  questioning  all  his  conven-
tions and  traditions  arises,  and  by  that  necessity  reason  gets  her
first  real  chance  of  an  entire  self-development.  Reason  can  accept
no  tradition  merely  for  the  sake  of  its  antiquity  or  its  past  great-
ness ; it  has  to  ask,  first,  whether  the  tradition  contains  at  all  any
still  living  truth  and,  secondly,  whether  it  contains  the  best  truth
available  to  man  for  the  government  of  his  life.  Reason  can
accept  no  convention  merely  because  men  are  agreed  upon  it;
it  has  to  ask  whether  they  are  right  in  their  agreement,  whether
it  is  not  an  inert  and  false  acquiescence.  Reason  cannot  accept
any  institution  merely  because  it  serves  some  purpose  of  life;
it  has  to  ask  whether  there  are  not  greater  and  better  purposes
which  can  be  best  served  by  new  institutions.  There  arises  the
necessity  of  a universal  questioning  and  from  that  necessity
arises  the  idea  that  society  can  only  be  perfected  by  the  universal
application  of  the  rational  intelligence  to  the  whole  of  life,  to  its
principle,  to  its  details,  to  its  machinery  and  to  the  powers  that
drive  the  machine.

This  reason  which  is  to  be  universally  applied,  cannot  be
the  reason  of  a ruling  class;  for  in  the  present  imperfection  of  the
human  race  that  always  means  in  practice  the  fettering  and  mis-
application of  reason  degraded  into  a servant  of  power  to  main-


184


The  Human  Cycle

tain  the  privileges  of  the  ruling  class  and  justify  the  existing  order.
It  cannot  be  the  reason  of  a few  pre-eminent  thinkers;  for,  if
the  mass  is  infrarational,  the  application  of  their  ideas  becomes  in
practice  disfigured,  ineffective,  incomplete,  speedily  altered  into
mere  form  and  convention.  It  must  be  the  reason  of  each  and
all  seeking  for  a basis  of  agreement.  Hence  arises  the  principle
of  individualistic  democracy,  that  the  reason  and  will  of  every
individual  in  the  society  must  be  allowed  to  count  equally  with
the  reason  and  will  of  every  other  in  determining  its  government,
in  selecting  the  essential  basis  and  in.  arranging  the  detailed
ordering  of  the  common  life.  This  must  be,  not  because  the
reason  of  one  man  is  as  good  as  the  reason  of  any  other,  but  be-
cause otherwise  we  get  back  inevitably  to  the  rule  of  a predomi-
nant class  which,  however  modified  by  being  obliged  to  consider
to  some  extent  the  opinion  of  the  ruled,  must  exhibit  always
the  irrational  vice  of  reason  subordinated  to  the  purposes  of
power  and  not  flexibly  used  for  its  own  proper  and  ideal  ends.
Secondly,  each  individual  must  be  allowed  to  govern  his  life
according  to  the  dictates  of  his  own  reason  and  will  so  far  as  that
can  be  done  without  impinging  on  the  same  right  in  others;  this
is  a necessary  corollary  of  the  primary  principle  on  which  the
age  of  reason  founds  its  initial  movement.  It  is  sufficient  for  the
first  purposes  of  the  rational  age  that  each  man  should  be  sup-
posed to  have  sufficient  intelligence  to  understand  views  which
are  presented  and  explained  to  him,  to  consider  the  opinions  of
liis  fellows  and  to  form  in  consultation  with  them  his  own
judgment.  His  individual  judgment  so  formed  and  by  one  device
or  another  made  effective  is  the  share  he  contributes  to  the  build-
ing of  the  total  common  judgment  by  which  society  must  be
ruled,  the  little  brick  in  appearance  insignificant  and  yet  indis-
pensable to  the  imposing  whole.  And  it  is  sufficient  also  for  the
first  ideal  of  the  rational  age  that  this  common  judgment  should
be  effectively  organised  only  for  the  indispensable  common  ends
of  the  society,  while  in  all  else  men  must  be  left  free  to  govern
their  own  life  according  to  their  own  reason  and  will  and  find
freely  its  best  possible  natural  adjustment  with  the  lives  of  others.
In  this  way  by  the  practice  of  the  free  use  of  reason  men  can
grow  into  rational  beings  and  learn  to  live  by  common  agreement


185


The  Curve  of  the  Rational  Age

a liberal,  a vigorous,  a natural  and  yet  rationalised  existence.

In  practice  it  is  found  that  these  ideas  will  not  hold  for  a
long  time.  For  the  ordinary  man  is  not  yet  a rational  being;
emerging  from  a long  infrarational  past,  he  is  not  naturally  able
to  form  a reasonable  judgment,  but  thinks  either  according  to
his  own  interests,  impulses  and  prejudices  or  else  according  to
the  ideas  of  others  more  active  in  intelligence  or  swift  in  action
who  are  able  by  some  means  to  establish  an  influence  over  his
mind.  Secondly,  he  does  not  yet  use  his  reason  in  order  to  come
to  an  agreement  with  his  fellows,  but  rather  to  enforce  his  own
opinions  by  struggle  and  conflict  with  the  opinions  of  others.
Exceptionally  he  may  utilise  his  reason  for  the  pursuit  of  truth,
but  normally  it  serves  for  the  justification  of  his  impulses,  pre-
judices and  interests,  and  it  is  these  that  determine  or  at  least
quite  discolour  and  disfigure  his  ideals,  even  when  he  has  learned
at  all  to  have  ideals.  Finally,  he  does  not  use  his  freedom  to  arrive
at  a rational  adjustment  of  his  life  with  the  life  of  others;  his
natural  tendency  is  to  enforce  the  aims  of  his  life  even  at  the  ex-
pense of  or,  as  it  is  euphemistically  put,  in  competition  with  the
life  of  others.  There  comes  thus  to  be  a wide  gulf  between  the
ideal  and  the  first  results  of  its  practice.  There  is  here  a disparity
between  fact  and  idea  that  must  lead  to  inevitable  disillusionment
and  failure.

The  individualistic  democratic  ideal  brings  us  at  first  in
actual  practice  to  the  more  and  more  precarious  rule  of  a domi-
nant class  in  the  name  of  democracy  over  the  ignorant,  numerous
and  less  fortunate  mass.  Secondly,  since  the  ideal  of  freedom  and
equality  is  abroad  and  cannot  any  longer  be  stifled,  it  must  lead
to  the  increasing  effort  of  the  exploited  masses  to  assert  their
down-trodden  right  and  to  turn,  if  they  can,  this  pseudo-
democratic  falsehood  into  the  real  democratic  truth;  therefore,
to  a war  of  classes.  Thirdly,  it  develops  inevitably  as  part  of  its
process  a perpetual  strife  of  parties,  at  first  few  and  simple  in
composition,  but  afterwards  as  at  the  present  time  an  impotent
and  sterilising  chaos  of  names,  labels,  programmes,  war-cries.
All  lift  the  banner  of  conflicting  ideas  or  ideals,  but  all  are
really  fighting  out  under  that  flag  a battle  of  conflicting  interests.
Finally,  individualistic  democratic  freedom  results  fatally  in  an


186


The  Human  Cycle

increasing  stress  of  competition  which  replaces  the  ordered  tyran-
nies of  the  infrarational  periods  of  humanity  by  a sort  of  ordered
conflict.  And  this  conflict  ends  in  the  survival  not  of  the  spiri-
tually, rationally  or  physically  fittest,  but  of  the  most  fortunate
and  vitally  successful.  It  is  evident  enough  that  whatever  else  it
may  be,  this  is  not  a rational  order  of  society ; it  is  not  at  all  the
perfection  which  the  individualistic  reason  of  man  had  contem-
plated as  its  ideal  or  set  out  to  accomplish.

The  natural  remedy  for  the  first  defects  of  the  individualistic
theory  in  practice  would  seem  to  be  education;  for  if  man  is  not
by  nature,  we  may  hope  at  least  that  he  can  be  made  by  education
and  training  something  like  a rational  being.  Universal  educa-
tion, therefore,  is  the  inevitable  second  step  of  the  democratic
movement  in  its  attempt  to  rationalise  human  society.  But  a
rational  education  means  necessarily  three  things,  first,  to  teach
men  how  to  observe  and  know  rightly  the  facts  on  which  they
have  to  form  a judgment;  secondly,  to  train  them  to  think  fruit-
fully and  soundly;  thirdly,  to  fit  them  to  use  their  knowledge
and  their  thought  effectively  for  their  own  and  the  common  good.
Capacity  of  observation  and  knowledge,  capacity  of  intelligence
and  judgment,  capacity  of  action  and  high  character  are  required
for  the  citizenship  of  a rational  order  of  society;  a general  defi-
ciency in  any  of  these  difficult  requisites  is  a sure  source  of  failure.
Unfortunately,  — even  if  we  suppose  that  training  made  avail-
able to  the  millions  can  ever  be  of  this  rare  character,  — the  actual
education  given  in  the  most  advanced  countries  has  not  had  the
least  relation  to  these  necessities.  And  just  as  the  first  defects
and  failures  of  democracy  have  given  occasion  to  the  enemy
to  blaspheme  and  to  vaunt  the  superiority  or  even  the  quite  ima-
ginary perfection  of  the  ideal  past,  so  also  the  first  defects  of  its
great  remedy,  education,  have  led  many  superior  minds  to  deny
the  efficacy  of  education  and  its  power  to  transform  the  human
mind  and  driven  them  to  condemn  the  democratic  ideal  as  an
exploded  fiction.

Democracy  and  its  panacea  of  education  and  freedom  have
certainly  done  something  for  the  race.  To  begin  with,  the  people
are,  for  the  first  time  in  the  historical  period  of  history,  erect,
active  and  alive,  and  where  there  is  life,  there  is  always  a hope


187


The  Curve  of  the  Rational  Age

of  better  things.  Again,  some  kind  of  knowledge  and  with  it  some
kind  of  active  intelligence  based  on  knowledge  and  strengthened
by  the  habit  of  being  called  on  to  judge  and  decide  between  con-
flicting issues  and  opinions  in  all  sorts  of  matters  have  been
much  more  generalised  than  was  formerly  possible.  Men  are
being  progressively  trained  to  use  their  minds,  to  apply  intelli-
gence to  life,  and  that  is  a great  gain.  If  they  have  not  yet  learned
to  think  for  themselves  or  to  think  soundly,  clearly  and  rightly,
they  are  at  least  more  able  now  to  choose  with  some  kind  of  initial
intelligence,  however  imperfect  as  yet  it  may  be,  the  thought
they  shall  accept  and  the  rule  they  shall  follow.  Equal  educa-
tional equipment  and  equal  opportunity  of  life  have  by  no  means
been  acquired;  but  there  is  a much  greater  equalisation  than
was  at  all  possible  in  former  states  of  society.  But  here  a new  and
enormous  defect  has  revealed  itself  which  is  proving  fatal  to  the
social  idea  which  engendered  it.  For  given  even  perfect  equahty
of  educational  and  other  opportunity,  — and  that  does  not  yet
really  exist  and  cannot  in  the  individualistic  state  of  society,
— to  what  purpose  or  in  what  manner  is  the  opportunity  likely
to  be  used?  Man,  the  half  infrarational  being,  demands  three
things  for  his  satisfaction,  power,  if  he  can  have  it,  but  at  any
rate  the  use  and  reward  of  his  faculties  and  the  enjoyment  of  his
desires.  In  the  old  societies  the  possibility  of  these  could  be
secured  by  him  to  a certain  extent  according  to  his  birth,  his
fixed  status  and  the  use  of  his  capacity  within  the  limits  of  his
hereditary  status.  That  basis  once  removed  and  no  proper  substi-
tute provided,  the  same  ends  can  only  be  secured  by  success  in
a scramble  for  the  one  power  left,  the  power  of  wealth.  Accord-
ingly, instead  of  a harmoniously  ordered  society  there  has  been
developed  a huge  organised  competitive  system,  a frantically
rapid  and  one-sided  development  of  industrialism  and,  under  the
garb  of  democracy,  an  increasing  plutocratic  tendency  that
shocks  by  its  ostentatious  grossness  and  the  magnitudes  of  its
gulfs  and  distances.  These  have  been  the  last  results  of  the  indi-
vidualistic ideal  and  its  democratic  machinery,  the  initial  bank-
ruptcies of  the  rational  age.

The  first  natural  result  has  been  the  transition  of  the  rational
mind  from  democratic  individualism  to  democratic  socialism.


188


The  Human  Cycle

Socialism,  labouring  under  the  disadvantageous  accident  of  its
birth  in  a revolt  against  capitalism,  an  uprising  against  the  rule
of  the  successful  bourgeois  and  the  plutocrat,  has  been  com-
pelled to  work  itself  out  by  a war  of  classes.  And,  worse  still,
it  has  started  from  an  industrialised  social  system  and  itself  taken
on  at  the  beginning  a purely  industrial  and  economic  appearance.
These  are  accidents  that  disfigure  its  true  nature.  Its  true  nature,
its  real  justification  is  the  attempt  of  the  human  reason  to  carry  on
the  rational  ordering  of  society  to  its  fulfilment,  its  will  to  get
rid  of  this  great  parasitical  excrescence  of  unbridled  competition,
this  giant  obstacle  to  any  decent  ideal  or  practice  of  human  living.
Socialism  sets  out  to  replace  a system  of  organised  economic
battle  by  an  organised  order  and  peace.  This  can  no  longer  be
done  on  the  old  lines,  an  artificial  or  inherited  inequality  brought
about  by  the  denial  of  equal  opportunity  and  justified  by  the  affir-
mation of  that  injustice  and  its  result  as  an  eternal  law  of  society
and  of  Nature.  That  is  a falsehood  which  the  reason  of  man  will
no  longer  permit.  Neither  can  it  be  done,  it  seems,  on  the  basis
of  individual  liberty;  for  that  has  broken  down  in  the  practice.
Socialism  therefore  must  do  away  with  the  democratic  basis
of  individual  liberty,  even  if  it  professes  to  respect  it  or  to  be
marching  towards  a more  rational  freedom.  It  shifts  at  first  the
fundamental  emphasis  to  other  ideas  and  fruits  of  the  democratic
ideal,  and  it  leads  by  this  transference  of  stress  to  a radical  change
in  the  basic  principle  of  a rational  society.  Equality,  not  a poli-
tical only,  but  a perfect  social  equality,  is  to  be  the  basis.  There
is  to  be  equality  of  opportunity  for  all,  but  also  equality  of  status
for  all,  for  without  the  last  the  first  cannot  be  secured;  even  if
it  were  established,  it  could  not  endure.  This  equality  again  is
impossible  if  personal,  or  at  least  inherited  right  in  property  is  to
exist,  and  therefore  socialism  abolishes  — except  at  best  on  a
small  scale  — the  right  of  personal  property  as  it  is  now  under-
stood and  makes  war  on  the  hereditary  principle.  Who  then  is  to
possess  the  property?  It  can  only  be  the  community  as  a whole.
And  who  is  to  administer  it?  Again,  the  community  as  a whole.
In  order  to  justify  this  idea,  the  socialistic  principle  has  practically
to  deny  the  existence  of  the  individual  or  his  right  to  exist  except
as  a member  of  the  society  and  for  its  sake.  He  belongs  entirely


189


The  Curve  of  the  Rational  Age

to  the  society,  not  only  his  property,  but  himself,  his  labour,  his
capacities,  the  education  it  gives  him  and  its  results,  his  mind,
his  knowledge,  his  individual  life,  his  family  life,  the  life  of  his
children.  Moreover,  since  his  individual  reason  cannot  be
trusted  to  work  out  naturally  a right  and  rational  adjustment  of
his  life  with  the  life  of  others,  it  is  for  the  reason  of  the  whole
community  to  arrange  that  too  for  him.  Not  the  reasoning  minds
and  wills  of  the  individuals,  but  the  collective  reasoning  mind
and  will  of  the  community  has  to  govern.  It  is  this  which  will
determine  not  only  the  principles  and  all  the  details  of  the  eco-
nomic and  political  order,  but  the  whole  life  of  the  community
and  of  the  individual  as  a working,  thinking,  feeling  cell  of  this
life,  the  development  of  his  capacities,  his  actions,  the  use  of  the
knowledge  he  has  acquired,  the  whole  ordering  of  his  vital,  his
ethical,  his  intelligent  being.  For  so  only  can  the  collective  reason
and  intelligent  will  of  the  race  overcome  the  egoism  of  individual-
istic life  and  bring  about  a perfect  principle  and  rational  order
of  society  in  a harmonious  world.

It  is  true  that  this  inevitable  character  of  socialism  is  denied
or  minimised  by  the  more  democratic  socialists;  for  the  social-
istic mind  still  bears  the  impress  of  the  old  democratic  ideas  and
cherishes  hopes  that  betray  it  often  into  strange  illogicalities.
It  assures  us  that  it  will  combine  some  kind  of  individual  freedom,
a limited  but  all  the  more  true  and  rational  freedom,  with  the
rigours  of  the  collectivist  idea.  But  it  is  evidently  these  rigours
to  which  things  must  tend  if  the  collectivist  idea  is  to  prevail  and
not  to  stop  short  and  falter  in  the  middle  of  its  course.  If  it  proves
itself  thus  wanting  in  logic  and  courage,  it  may  very  well  be  that
it  will  speedily  or  in  the  end  be  destroyed  by  the  foreign  element
it  tolerates  and  perish  without  having  sounded  its  own  possi-
bilities. It  will  pass  perhaps,  unless  guided  by  a rational  wisdom
which  the  human  mind  in  government  has  not  yet  shown,  after
exceeding  even  the  competitive  individualistic  society  in  its  cum-
brous incompetence.^  But  even  at  its  best  the  collectivist  idea

1 These  hesitations  of  social  democracy,  its  uneasy  mental  poise  between  two  opposing
principles,  socialistic  Fermentation  and  democratic  liberty  may  be  the  root  cause  of  the  failure
of  socialism  to  make  good  in  so  many  countries  even  when  it  had  every  chan^  on  its  side  an
its  replacement  by  the  more  vigorous  and  ruthlessly  logical  forces  of  Communism  and  Fascism.
On  the  other  hand,  in  the  northernmost  countries  of  Europe,  a temporising,  reformist,  prac-


igo  The  Human  Cycle

contains  several  fallacies  inconsistent  with  the  real  facts  of  human
life  and  nature.  And  just  as  the  idea  of  individualistic  democracy
found  itself  before  long  in  difficulties  on  that  account  because  of
the  disparity  between  life’s  facts  and  the  mind’s  idea,  difficulties
that  have  led  up  to  its  discredit  and  approaching  overthrow,
the  idea  of  collectivist  democracy  too  may  well  find  itself
before  long  in  difficulties  that  must  lead  to  its  discredit  and  even-
tual replacement  by  a third  stage  of  the  inevitable  progression.
Liberty  protected  by  a State  in  which  all  are  politically  equal,
was  the  idea  that  individualistic  democracy  attempted  to  ela-
borate. Equahty,  social  and  political  equality  enforced  through
a perfect  and  careful  order  by  a State  which  is  the  organised  will
of  the  whole  community,  is  the  idea  on  which  socialistic  demo-
cracy stakes  its  future.  If  that  too  fails  to  make  good,  the  rational
and  democratic  Idea  may  fall  back  upon  a third  form  of  society
founding  an  essential  rather  than  formal  liberty  and  equality  upon
fraternal  comradeship  in  a free  community,  the  ideal  of  intellec-
tual as  of  spiritual  Anarchism.^

In  fact  the  claim  to  equality  like  the  thirst  for  liberty  is  indi-
vidualistic in  its  origin,  — it  is  not  native  or  indispensable  to  the
essence  of  the  collectivist  ideal.  It  is  the  individual  who  demands
liberty  for  himself,  a free  movement  for  his  mind,  life,  will,  ac-
tion; the  collectivist  trend  and  the  State  idea  have  rather  the
opposite  tendency,  they  are  self-compelled  to  take  up  more  and
more  the  compulsory  management  and  control  of  the  mind,  life,
will,  action  of  the  community  — and  the  individual’s  as  part  of  it
— until  personal  liberty  is  pressed  out  of  existence.  But  similarly
it  is  the  individual  who  demands  for  himself  equality  with  all
others ; when  a class  demands,  it  is  still  the  individual  multiplied
claiming  for  himself  and  all  who  are  of  his  own  grade,  political  or
economic  status,  an  equal  place,  privilege  or  opportunity  with

tical  Socialism  compromising  between  the  right  regulation  of  the  communal  life  and  the  free-
dom of  the  individual  has  to  some  extent  made  good;  but  it  is  still  doubtful  whether  it  will
be  allowed  to  go  to  the  end  of  its  road.  If  it  has  that  chance,  it  is  still  to  be  seen  whether
the  drive  of  the  idea  and  the  force  it  carries  in  it  for  complete  self-effectuation  will  not  prevail
in  the  end  over  the  spirit  of  compromise.

* In  the  theory  of  communism  State  socialism  is  only  a passage;  a free  classless  Stateless
communal  life  is  the  eventual  ideal.  But  it  is  not  likely  that  the  living  State  machine  once  in
power  w ith  all  that  are  interested  in  its  maintenance  would  let  go  its  prey  or  allow  itself  to  be
abolished  without  a struggle.


191


The  Curve  of  the  Rational  Age

those  who  have  acquired  or  inherited  a superiority  of  status.
The  social  Reason  conceded  first  the  claim  to  liberty,  but  in
practice  (whatever  might  have  been'the  theory)  it  admitted  only
so  much  equality  — equality  before  the  law,  a helpful  but  not  too
effective  political  equality  of  the  vote  — as  was  necessary  to  en-
sure a reasonable  freedom  for  all.  Afterwards  when  the  injust-
ices and  irrationalities  of  an  unequalised  competitive  freedom,  the
enormity  of  the  gulfs  it  created,  became  apparent,  the  social
Reason  shifted  its  ground  and  tried  to  arrive  at  a more  complete
communal  justice  on  the  basis  of  a political,  economic,  educa-
tional and  social  equality  as  complete  as  might  be ; it  has  laboured
to  make  a plain  level  on  which  all  can  stand  together.  Liberty  in
this  change  has  had  to  undergo  the  former  fate  of  equality;  for
only  so  much  liberty  — perhaps  or  for  a time  — could  survive
as  can  be  safely  allowed  without  the  competitive  individual
getting  enough  room  for  his  self-assertive  growth  to  upset  or
endanger  the  equalitarian  basis.  But  in  the  end  the  discovery  can-
not fail  to  be  made  that  an  artificial  equality  has  also  its  irration-
alities, its  contradictions' of  the  collective  good,  its  injustices  even
and  its  costly  violations  of  the  truth  of  Nature.  Equality  like
individualistic  liberty  may  turn  out  to  be  not  a panacea  but  an
obstacle  in  the  way  of  the  best  management  and  control  of  life  by
the  collective  reason  and  will  of  the  community.

But  if  both  equality  and  liberty  disappear  from  the  human
scene,  there  is  left  only  one  member  of  the  democratic  trinity,
brotherhood  or,  as  it  is  now  called,  comradeship,  that  has
some  chance  of  survival  as  part  of  the  social  basis.  This  is  be-
cause it  seems  to  square  better  with  the  spirit  of  collectivism;  we
see  accordingly  the  idea  of  it,  if  not  the  fact,  still  insisted  on  in
the  new  social  systems,  even  those  in  which  both  liberty  and  equa-
lity are  discarded  as  noxious  democratic  chimeras.  But  comrade-
ship without  liberty  and  equality  can  be  nothing  more  than  the
like  association  of  all  — individuals,  functional  classes,  guilds,
syndicates,  soviets  or  any  other  units  — in  common  service  to  the
life  of  the  nation  under  the  absolute  control  of  the  collectivist
State.  The  only  liberty  left  at  the  end  would  be  the  freedom  to
serve  the  community  under  the  rigorous  direction  of  the  State
authority;  the  only  equality  would  be  an  association  of  all  alike


192


The  Human  Cycle

in  a Spartan  or  Roman  spirit  of  civic  service  with  perhaps  a like
status,  theoretically  equal  at  least  for  all  functions;  the  only
brotherhood  would  be  the  sense  of  comradeship  in  devoted  dedi-
cation to  the  organised  social  Self,  the  State.  In  fact  the  demo-
cratic trinity  stripped  of  its  godhead  would  fade  out  of  existence;
the  collectivist  ideal  can  very  well  do  without  them,  for  none  of
them  belong  to  its  grain  and  very  substance.

This  is  indeed  already  the  spirit,  the  social  reason,  — or
rather  the  social  gospel,  — of  the  totalitarianism  whose  swelling
tide  threatens  to  engulf  all  Europe  and  more  than  Europe.  Tota-
litarianism of  some  kind  seems  indeed  to  be  the  natural,  almost
inevitable  destiny,  at  any  rate  the  extreme  and  fullest  outcome  of
Socialism  or,  more  generally,  of  the  collectivist  idea  and  impulse.
For  the  essence  of  Socialism,  its  justifying  ideal,  is  the  governance
and  strict  organisation  of  the  total  life  of  the  society  as  a whole
and  in  detail  by  its  own  conscious  reason  and  will  for  the  best
good  and  common  interest  of  all,  eliminating  exploitation  by  in-
dividual or  class,  removing  internal  competition,  haphazard
confusion  and  waste,  enforcing  and  perfecting  co-ordination,
assuring  the  best  functioning  and  a sufficient  life  for  all.  If  a de-
mocratic polity  and  machinery  best  assure  such  a working,  as
was  thought  at  first,  it  is  this  that  will  be  chosen  and  the  result  will
be  Social  Democracy.  That  ideal  still  holds  sway  in  northern
Europe  and  it  may  there  yet  have  a chance  of  proving  that  a
successful  collectivist  rationalisation  of  society  is  quite  possible.
But  if  a non-democratic  polity  and  machinery  are  found  to  serve
the  purpose  better,  then  there  is  nothing  inherently  sacrosanct  for
the  collectivist  mind  in  the  democratic  ideal;  it  can  be  thrown  in
the  rubbish-heap  where  so  many  other  exploded  sanctities  have
gone.  Russian  Communism  so  discarded  with  contempt  demo-
cratic liberty  and  attempted  for  a time  to  substitute  for  the  demo-
cratic machine  a new  sovietic  structure,  but  it  has  preserved  the
ideal  of  a proletarian  equality  for  all  in  a classless  society.  Still
its  spirit  is  a rigorous  totalitarianism  on  the  basis  of  the  dictator-
ship of  the  proletariate,  which  amounts  in  fact  to  the  dictatorship
of  the  Communist  party  in  the  name  or  on  behalf  of  the
proletariate.  Non-proletarian  totalitarianism  goes  farther  and
discards  democratic  equality  no  less  than  democratic  liberty;  it


193


The  Curve  of  the  Rational  Age

preserves  classes,  — for  a time  only,  it  may  be,  — but  as  a means
of  social  functioning,  not  as  a scale  of  superiority  or  a hierarchic
order.  Rationalisation  is  no  longer  the  turn;  its  place  is  taken
by  a revolutionary  mysticism  which  seems  to  be  the  present
drive  of  the  Time  Spirit.

This  is  a symptom  that  can  have  a considerable  significance.
In  Russia  the  Marxist  system  of  Socialism  has  been  turned  almost
into  a gospel.  Originally  a rationalistic  system  worked  out  by  a
logical  thinker  and  discoverer  and  systematiser  of  ideas,  it  has
been  transformed  by  the  peculiar  turn  of  the  Russian  mind  into
something  like  a social  religion,  a collectivist  mystique,  an  in-
violable body  of  doctrines  with  all  denial  or  departure  treated  as
a pum’shable  heresy,  a social  cult  enforced  by  the  intolerant  piety
and  enthusiasm  of  a converted  people.  In  Fascist  countries  the
swing  away  from  Rationalism  is  marked  and  open;  a surface
vital  subjectivism  has  taken  its  place  and  it  is  in  the  name  of  the
national  soul  and  its  self-expression  and  manifestation  that  the
leaders  and  prophets  teach  and  violently  enforce  their  totalita-
rian mystique.  The  essential  features  are  the  same  in  Russia  and
in  Fascist  countries,  so  that  to  the  eye  of  the  outsider  their  deadly
quarrel  seems  to  be  a blood-feud  of  kinsmen  fighting  for  the  in-
heritance of  their  slaughtered  parents  — Democracy  and  the
Age  of  Reason.  There  is  the  seizure  of  the  life  of  the  community
by  a dominant  individual  leader,  Fuhrer,  Dux,  dictator,  head  of
a small  active  minority,  the  Nazi,  Fascist  or  Communist  party,
and  supported  by  a militarised  partisan  force;  there  is  a rapid
crystallisation  of  the  social,  economic,  political  life  of  the  people
into  a new  rigid  organisation  effectively  controlled  at  every  point;
there  is  the  compulsory  casting  of  thought,  education,  expression,
action  into  a set  iron  mould,  a fixed  system  of  ideas  and  life-
motives,  with  a fierce  and  ruthless,  often  a sanguinary  repression
of  all  that  denies  and  differs ; there  is  a total  unprecedented  com-
pression of  the  whole  communal  existence  so  as  to  compel  a
maximum  efficiency  and  a complete  unanimity  of  mind,  speech,
feeling,  life.

If  this  trend  becomes  universal,  it  is  the  end  of  the  Age  of
Reason,  the  suicide  or  the  execution,  — by  decapitation  or  lethal
pressure,  peine  forte  et  dure,  — of  the  rational  and  intellectual  ex-


194


The  Human  Cycle

pansion  of  the  human  mental  being.  Reason  cannot  do  its  work,
act  or  rule  if  the  mind  of  man  is  denied  freedom  to  think  or  free-
dom to  realise  its  thought  by  action  in  life.  But  neither  can  a sub-
jective age  be  the  outcome;  for  the  growth  of  subjectivism  also
cannot  proceed  without  plasticity,  without  movement  of  self-
search, without  room  to  move,  expand,  develop,  change.  The
result  is  likely  to  be  rather  the  creation  of  a tenebrous  No  Man’s
Land  where  obscure  mysticisms,  materialistic,  vitalistic  or  mixed,
clash  and  battle  for  the  mastery  of  human  life.  But  this  consum-
mation is  not  certain;  chaos  and  confusion  still  reign  and  all
hangs  in  the  balance.  Totalitarian  mysticism  may  not  be  able  to
carry  out  its  menace  of  occupying  the  globe,  may  not  even  en-
dure. Spaces  of  the  earth  may  be  left  where  a rational  idealism
can  still  survive.  The  terrible  compression  now  exercised  on  the
national  mind  and  life  may  lead  to  an  explosion  from  within  or,
on  the  other  hand,  having  fulfilled  its  immediate  aim  may  relax
and  give  way  in  calmer  times  to  a greater  plasticity  which  will
restore  to  the  human  mind  or  soul  a more  natural  line  of  pro-
gress, a freer  field  for  their  self-expanding  impulse.

In  that  case  the  curve  of  the  Age  of  Reason,  now  threatened
with  an  abrupt  cessation,  may  prolong  and  complete  itself;  the
subjective  turn  of  the  human  mind  and  life,  avoiding  a premature
plunge  into  any  general  external  action  before  it  has  found  itself,
may  have  time  and  freedom  to  evolve,  to  seek  out  its  own  truth,
its  own  lines  and  so  become  ready  to  take  up  the  spiral  of  the
human  social  evolution  where  the  curve  of  the  Age  of  Reason
naturally  ends  by  its  own  normal  evolution  and  make  ready  the
ways  of  a deeper  spirit.


Chapter  XX


The  End  of  the  Curve  of  Reason


The  rational  collectivist  idea  of  society  has
at  first  sight  a powerful  attraction.  There  is  behind  it  a great
truth,  that  every  society  represents  a collective  being  and  in  it  and
by  it  the  individual  lives  and  he  owes  to  it  all  that  he  can  give  it.
More,  it  is  only  by  a certain  relation  to  the  society,  a certain  har-
mony with  this  greater  collective  self  that  he  can  find  the  com-
plete use  for  his  many  developed  or  developing  powers  and
activities.  Since  it  is  a collective  being,  it  must,  one  would  na-
turally suppose,  have  a discoverable  collective  reason  and  will
which  should  find  more  and  more  its  right  expression  and  right
working  if  it  is  given  a conscious  and  effective  means  of  organised
self-expression  and  execution.  And  this  collective  will  and  intel-
ligence, since  it  is  according  to  the  original  idea  that  of  all  in  a
perfect  equality,  might  naturally  be  trusted  to  seek  out  and  work
out  its  own  good  where  the  ruling  individual  and  class  would
always  be  liable  to  misuse  their  power  for  quite  other  ends.  The
right  organisation  of  social  life  on  a basis  of  equality  and  com-
radeship ought  to  give  each  man  his  proper  place  in  society,  his
full  training  and  development  for  the  common  ends,  his  due
share  of  work,  leisure  and  reward,  the  right  value  of  his  life  in
relation  to  the  collective  being,  society.  Moreover,  it  would  be  a
place,  share,  value  regulated  by  the  individual  and  collective
good  and  not  an  exaggerated  or  a depressed  value  brought  to  him
fortuitously  by  birth  or  fortune,  purchased  by  wealth  or  won  by
a painful  and  wasteful  struggle.  And  certainly  the  external  effi-
ciency of  the  community,  the  measured,  ordered  and  economical
working  of  its  life,  its  power  for  production  and  general  well-
being must  enormously  increase,  as  even  the  quite  imperfect  de-
velopment of  collective  action  in  the  recent  past  has  shown,  in  a
well-organised  and  concentrated  State,

If  it  be  objected  that  to  bring  about  this  result  in  its  com-


196  The  Human  Cycle

pleteness  the  liberty  of  the  individual  will  have  to  be  destroyed  or
reduced  to  an  almost  vanishing  quantity,  it  might  be  answered
that  the  right  of  the  individual  to  any  kind  of  egoistic  freedom  as
against  the  State  which  represents  the  mind,  the  will,  the  good
and  interest  of  the  whole  community,  sarvam  brahma,  is  a dange-
rous fiction,  a baneful  myth.  Individual  liberty  of  life  and  action,
— even  if  liberty  of  thought  and  speech  is  for  a time  conceded,
though  this  too  can  hardly  remain  um’mpaired  when  once  the
socialistic  State  has  laid  its  grip  firmly  on  the  individual,  — may
well  mean  in  practice  an  undue  freedom  given  to  his  infrarational
parts  of  nature,  and  is  not  that  precisely  the  thing  in  him  that  has
to  be  thoroughly  controlled,  if  not  entirely  suppressed,  if  he  is  to
become  a reasonable  being  leading  a reasonable  life  ? This  con-
trol can  be  most  wisely  and  effectively  carried  out  by  the  collec-
tive reason  and  will  of  the  State  which  is  larger,  better,  more
enlightened  than  the  individual’s;  for  it  profits,  as  the  average
individual  cannot  do,  by  all  the  available  wisdom  and  aspiration
in  the  society.  Indeed,  the  enlightened  individual  may  well  come
to  regard  this  collective  reason  and  will  as  his  own  larger  mind,
will  and  conscience  and  find  in  a happy  obedience  to  it  a strong
delivery  from  his  own  smaller  and  less  rational  self  and  therefore
a more  real  freedom  than  any  now  claimed  by  his  little  separate
ego.  It  used  already  to  be  argued  that  the  disciplined  German
obeying  the  least  gesture  of  the  policeman,  the  State  official,  the
military  officer  was  really  the  freest,  happiest  and  most  moral
individual  in  all  Europe  and  therefore  in  the  whole  world.  The
same  reasoning  in  a heightened  form  might  perhaps  be  applied
to  the  drilled  felicities  of  Fascist  Italy  and  Nazi  Germany.  The
State,  educating  and  governing  the  individual,  undertakes  to  in-
tellectualisc,  etliicise,  practicalise  and  generally  perfect  him  and  to
see  to  it  that  he  remains,  whether  he  will  or  no,  always  and  in  all
things  — strictly  on  the  lines  approved  by  the  State  — intellec-
tual, ethical,  practical  and  thoroughly  perfect.

The  pity  of  it  is  that  this  excellent  theory,  quite  as  much  as
the  individualist  theory  that  ran  before  it,  is  sure  to  stumble  over
a discrepancy  between  its  set  ideas  and  the  actual  facts  of  human
nature;  for  it  ignores  the  complexity  of  man’s  being  and  all  that
that  complexity  means.  And  especially  it  ignores  the  soul  of  man


The  End  of  the  Curve  of  Reason


197


and  its  supreme  need  of  freedom,  of  the  control  also  of  his  lower
members,  no  doubt,  — for  that  is  part  of  the  total  freedom  to-
wards which  he  is  struggling,  — but  of  a growing  self-control,
not  a mechanical  regulation  by  the  mind  and  will  of  others.
Obedience  too  is  a part  of  its  perfection,  but  a free  and  natural
obedience  to  a true  guiding  power  and  not  to  a mechanised
government  and  rule.  The  collective  being  is  a fact;  all  mankind
may  be  regarded  as  a collective  being:  but  this  being  is  a soul  and
life,  not  merely  a mind  or  a body.  Each  society  develops  into  a
sort  of  sub-soul  or  group-soul  of  this  humanity  and  develops  also
a general  temperament,  character,  type  of  mind,  evolves  govern-
ing ideas  and  tendencies  that  shape  its  life  and  its  institutions.
But  the  society  has  n6  discoverable  common  reason  and  will
belonging  alike  to  all  its  members;  for  the  group-soul  rather
works  out  its  tendencies  by  a diversity  of  opinions,  a diversity  of
wills,  a diversity  of  life,  and  the  vitality  of  the  group-life  depends
largely  upon  the  working  of  this  diversity,  its  continuity,  its  rich-
ness. Since  that  is  so,  government  by  the  organised  State  must
mean  always  government  by  a number  of  individuals,  — whether
that  number  be  in  theory  the  minority  or  the  majority  makes  in
the  end  little  fundamental  dilSerence.  For  even  when  it  is  the
majority  that  nominally  governs,  in  fact  it  is  always  the  reason
and  will  of  a comparatively  few  effective  men  — and  not  really
any  common  reason  and  will  of  all  — that  rules  and  regulates
things  with  the  consent  of  the  half-hypnotised  mass.^  There  is  no
reason  to  suppose  that  the  immediate  socialisation  of  the  State
would  at  all  alter,  the  mass  of  men  not  being  yet  thoroughly
rationalised  and  developed  minds,  this  practical  necessity  o

State  government.  . ,

In  the  old  infrarational  societies,  at  least  in  their  inception,

what  governed  was  not  the  State,  but  the  group-soul  itse  ^
ing  its  life  organised  into  customary  institutions  an  se
regulations  to  which  all  had  to  conform ; for  the  rulers  were  o y


^ This  truth  has  come  cut  with  a startling  force  of  self-demonstration  in  »nb;
Russia  and  National  Socialist  Germany,  — not  to  speak  of  ot  er

reassertion  of  humanity’s  need  of  a King  crowned  or  uncrowne  , * , ’ nf  a century

or  Fiihrer  — and  a ruling  and  admuustering  oligarchy  has  been  the  las  ^ ^ of

and  a half  of  democracy  as  it  has  been  too  the  first  astonishing  result  of  the  supposed  nse

the  proletariate  to  power.


198  The  Human  Cycle

its  executors  and  instruments.  This  entailed  indeed  a great  subjec-
tion of  the  individual  to  the  society,  but  it  was  not  felt,  because
the  individualistic  idea  was  yet  unborn  and  such  diversities  as
arose  were  naturally  provided  for  in  one  way  or  another,  — in
some  cases  by  a remarkable  latitude  of  social  variation  which
government  by  the  State  tends  more  and  more  to  suppress.  As
State  government  develops,  we  have  a real  suppression  or  oppres-
sion of  the  minority  by  the  majority  or  the  majority  by  the
minority,  of  the  individual  by  the  collectivity,  finally,  of  all
by  the  relentless  mechanism  of  the  State.  Democratic  liberty
tried  to  minimise  this  suppression;  it  left  a free  play  for  the
individual  and  restricted  as  much  as  might  be  the  role  of  the
State.  Collectivism  goes  exactly  to  the  opposite  extreme; .
it  will  leave  no  sufficient  elbow-room  to  the  individual  free-
will, and  the  more  it  rationalises  the  individual  by  universal
education  of  a highly  developed  kind,  the  more  this  suppression
will  be  felt,  — unless  indeed  all  freedom  of  thought  is  negated
and  the  minds  of  all  are  forced  into  a single  standardised  way
of  thinking.

Man  needs  freedom  of  thought  and  life  and  action  in  order
that  he  may  grow,  otherwise  he  will  remain  fixed  where  he  was,
a stunted  and  static  being.  If  his  individual  mind  and  reason
are  ill-developed,  he  may  consent  to  grow,  as  does  the  infra-
rational  mind,  in  the  group-soul,  in  the  herd,  in  the  mass,  with
that  subtle  half-conscient  general  evolution  common  to  all  in
the  lower  process  of  Nature.  As  he  develops  individual  reason
and  will,  he  needs  and  society  must  give  him  room  for  an  in-
creasing play  of  individual  freedom  and  variation,  at  least  so  far
as  that  does  not  develop  itself  to  the  avoidable  harm  of  others
and  of  society  as  a whole.  Given  a full  development  and  free
play  of  the  individual  mind,  the  need  of  freedom  will  grow  with
the  immense  variation  which  this  development  must  bring  with
it,  and  if  only  a free  play  in  thought  and  reason  is  allowed,  but
the  free  play  of  the  intelligent  will  in  life  is  inhibited  by  the  exces-
sive regulation  of  the  life,  then  an  intolerable  contradiction  and
falsity  will  be  created.  Men  may  bear  it  for  a time  in  consi-
deration of  the  great  and  visible  new  benefits  of  order,  economic
development,  means  of  efficiency  and  the  scientific  satisfaction


199


The  End  of  the  Curve  of  Reason

of  the  reason  which  the  collectivist  arrangement  of  society  will
bring;  but  when  its  benefits  become  a matter  of  course  and  its
defects  become  more  and  more  realised  and  prominent,  dissatis-
faction and  revolt  are  sure  to  set  in  in  the  clearest  and  most
vigorous  minds  of  the  society  and  propagate  themselves  through-
out the  mass.  This  intellectual  and  vital  dissatisfaction  may  very
well  take  under  such  circumstances  the  form  of  anarchistic
thought,  because  that  thought  appeals  precisely  to  this  need  of
free  variation  in  the  internal  life  and  its  outward  expression
which  will  be  the  source  of  revolt,  and  anarchistic  thought  must
be  necessarily  subversive  of  the  socialistic  order.  The  State
can  only  combat  it  by  an  education  adapted  to  its  fixed  forms  of
life,  an  education  that  will  seek  to  drill  the  citizen  in  a fixed  set
of  ideas,  aptitudes,  propensities  as  was  done  in  the  old  infra-
rational  order  of  things  and  by  the  suppression  of  freedom  of
speech  and  thinking  so  as  to  train  and  compel  all  to  be  of  one
mind,  one  sentiment,  one  opinion,  one  feeling;  but  this  remedy
will  be  in  a rational  society  self-contradictory,  ineffective,  or  if
effective,  then  worse  than  the  evil  it  seeks  to  combat.  On  the
other  hand,  if  from  the  first  freedom  of  thought  is  denied,  that
means  the  end  of  the  Age  of  Reason  and  of  the  ideal  of  a rational
society.  Man  the  mental  being  disallowed  the  use  — except  in
a narrow  fixed  groove  — of  his  mind  and  mental  will,  will  stop
short  in  his  growth  and  be  even  as  the  animal  and  as  the  insect
a stationary  species.

This  is  the  central  defect  through  which  a socialistic  State
is  bound  to  be  convicted  of  insufficiency  and  condemned  to
pass  away  before  the  growth  of  a new  ideal.  Already  the  pres-
sure of  the  State  organisation  on  the  life  of  the  individual  has
reached  a point  at  which  it  is  ceasing  to  be  tolerable.  If  it  conti-
nues to  be  what  it  is  now,  a government  of  the  life  of  the  indi-
vidual by  the  comparatively  few  and  not,  as  it  pretends,  by  a
common  will  and  reason,  if,  that  is  to  say,  it  becomes  patently
undemocratic  or  remains  pseudo-democratic,  then  it  will  be  tins
falsity  through  which  anarchistic  thought  will  attack  its  exis-
tence. But  the  innermost  difficulty  would  not  disappear  even  if
the  Socialistic  State  became  really  democratic,  really  the  expres-
sion of  the  free  reasoned  will  of  the  majority  in  agreement.  Any


200  The  Human  Cycle

true  development  of  that  kind  would  be  difficult  indeed  and  has
the  appearance  of  a chimera;  for  collectivism  pretends  to
regulate  life  not  only  in  its  few  fundamental  principles  and  its
main  lines,  as  every  organised  society  must  tend  to  do,  but  in  its
details,  it  aims  at  a thoroughgoing  scientific  regulation,  and  an
agreement  of  the  free  reasoned  will  of  millions  in  all  the  lines
and  most  of  the  details  of  life  is  a contradiction  in  terms.
Whatever  the  perfection  of  the  organised  State,  the  suppression
or  oppression  of  individual  freedom  by  the  will  of  the  majority
or  of  a minority  would  still  be  there  as  a cardinal  defect  vitiating
its  very  principle.  And  there  would  be  something  infinitely
worse.  For  a thoroughgoing  scientific  regulation  of  life  can  only
be  brought  about  by  a thoroughgoing  mechanisation  of  life.
This  tendency  to  mecham'sation  is  the  inherent  defect  of  the
State  idea  and  its  practice.  Already  that  is  the  defect  upon  which
both  intellectual  anarchistic  thought  and  the  insight  of  the
spiritual  thinker  have  begun  to  lay  stress,  and  it  must  immensely
increase  as  the  State  idea  rounds  itself  into  a greater  complete-
ness in  practice.  It  is  indeed  the  inherent  defect  of  reason  when
it  turns  to  govern  life  and  labours  by  quelling  its  natural  tenden-
cies to  put  it  into  some  kind  of  rational  order.

Life  differs  from  the  mechanical  order  of  the  physical  uni-
verse with  which  the  reason  has  been  able  to  deal  victoriously
just  because  it  is  mechanical  and  runs  immutably  in  the  groove
of  fixed  cosmic  habits.  Life,  on  the  contrary,  is  a mobile,  pro-
gressive and  evolving  force,  — a force  that  is  the  increasing  ex-
pression of  an  infinite  soul  in  creatures  and,  as  it  progresses,
becomes  more  and  more  aware  of  its  own  subtle  variations,
needs,  diversities.  The  progress  of  Life  involves  the  development
and  interlocking  of  an  immense  number  of  things  that  are  in
conflict  with  each  other  and  seem  often  to  be  absolute  oppositions
and  contraries.  To  find  amid  these  oppositions  some  principle
or  standing-ground  of  unity,  some  workable  lever  of  reconcilia-
tion which  will  make  possible  a larger  and  better  development
on  a basis  of  harmony  and  not  of  conflict  and  struggle,  must  be
increasingly  the  common  aim  of  humanity  in  its  active  life-evolu-
tion, if  it  at  all  means  to  rise  out  of  life’s  more  confused,  painful
and  obscure  movement,  out  of  the  compromises  made  by  Nature


201


The  End  of  the  Curve  of  Reason

with  the  ignorance  of  the  Life-mind  and  the  nescience  of  Matter.
This  can  only  be  done  truly  and  satisfactorily  when  the  soul
discovers  itself  in  its  highest  and  completest  spiritual  reality  and
effects  a progressive  upward  transformation  of  its  life-values  into
those  of  the  spirit;  for  there  they  will  all  find  their  spiritual  truth
and  in  that  truth  their  standing-ground  of  mutual  recognition  and
reconcihation.  The  spiritual  is  the  one  truth  of  which  all  others
are  the  veiled  aspects,  the  brilliant  disguises  or  the  dark  disfigure-
ments and  in  which  they  can  find  their  own  right  form  and  true
relation  to  each  other.  This  is  a work  the  reason  cannot  do.  The
business  of  the  reason  is  intermediate:  it  is  to  observe  and
understand  this  life  by  the  intelligence  and  discover  for  it  the
direction  in  which  it  is  going  and  the  laws  of  its  self-development
on  the  way.  In  order  that  it  may  do  its  office,  it  is  obliged  to  adopt
temporarily  fixed  viewpoints  none  of  which  is  more  than  par-
tially true  and  to  create  systems  none  of  which  can  really  stand  as
the  final  expression  of  the  integral  truth  of  things.  The  integral
truth  of  things  is  truth  not  of  the  reason  but  of  the  spirit.

In  the  realm  of  thought  that  does  not  matter;  for  as  there
the  reason  does  not  drive  at  practice,  it  is  able  with  impunity  to
allow  the  most  opposite  viewpoints  and  systems  to  exist  side  by
side,  to  compare  them,  seek  for  reconciliations,  synthetise  in  the
most  various  ways,  change  constantly,  enlarge,  elevate;  it  is  free
to  act  without  thinking  at  every  point  of  immediate  practical
consequences.  But  when  the  reason  seeks  to  govern  life,  it  is
obliged  to  fix  its  viewpoint,  to  crystallise  its  system;  every
change  becomes  or  at  least  seems  a thing  doubtful,  difficult  and
perilous,  all  the  consequences  of  which  cannot  be  foreseen,  while
the  conflict  of  viewpoints,  principles,  systems  leads  to  strife  and
revolution  and  not  to  basis  of  harmonious  development.
The  reason  mechanises  in  order  to  arrive  at  fixity  of  conduct
and  practice  amid  the  fluidity  of  things ; but  while  mechanism
is  a sufficient  principle  in  dealing  with  physical  forces,  because  it
is  in  harmony  with  the  law  or  Dharma  of  physical  Nature,  it  can
never  truly  succeed  in  dealing  with  conscious  life,  because  there
it  is  contrary  to  the  law  of  life,  its  highest  Dharma.  While,  then,
the  attempt  at  a rational  ordering  of  society  is  an  advance  upon
the  comparative  immobility  and  slow  subconscient  or  half-con-


202


The  Human  Cycle

scient  evolution  of  infrarational  societies  and  the  confusedly
mixed  movement  of  semi-rational  societies,  it  can  never  arrive
at  perfection  by  its  own  methods,  because  reason  is  neither
the  first  principle  of  life,  nor  can  be  its  last,  supreme  and  sufficient
principle.

TThe  question  remains  whether  anarchistic  thought  super-
vening upon  the  collectivistic  can  any  more  successfully  find  a
satisfying  social  principle.  For  if  it  gets  rid  of  mechanism,  the
one  practical  means  of  a rationalising  organisation  of  life,  on
what  will  it  build  and  with  what  can  it  create  ? It  may  be  contended
as  against  the  anarchistic  objection  that  the  collectivist  period
is,  if  not  the  last  and  best,  at  least  a necessary  stage  in  social
progress.  For  the  vice  of  individualism  is  that  in  insisting  upon
the  free  development  and  self-expression  of  the  life  and  the  mind
or  the  life-soul  in  the  individual,  it  tends  to  exaggerate  the
egoism  of  the  mental  and  vital  being  and  prevent  the  recognition
of  unity  with  others  on  which  alone  a complete  self-development
and  a harmless  freedom  can  be  founded.  Collectivism  at  least
insists  upon  that  unity  by  entirely  subordinating  the  life  of  the
isolated  ego  to  the  life  of  the  greater  group-ego,  and  its  office
may  be  thus  to  stamp  upon  the  mentab'ty  and  life-habits  of  the
individual  the  necessity  of  unifying  his  life  with  the  life  of  others.
Afterwards,  when  again  the  individual  asserts  his  freedom,  as
some  day  he  must,  he  may  have  learned  to  do  it  on  the  basis  of
this  unity  and  not  on  the  basis  of  his  separate  egoistic  life.  This
may  well  be  the  intention  of  Nature  in  human  society  in  its  move-
ment towards  a collectivist  principle  of  social  living.  Collectivism
may  itself  in  the  end  realise  this  aim  if  it  can  modify  its  own
dominant  principle  far  enough  to  allow  for  a free  individual
development  on  the  basis  of  unity  and  a closely  harmonised  com-
mon existence.  But  to  do  that  it  must  first  spiritualise  itself  and
transform  the  very  soul  of  its  inspiring  principle:  it  cannot  do  it
on  the  basis  of  the  logical  reason  and  a mechanically  scientific
ordering  of  life.

Anarchistic  thought,  although  it  has  not  yet  found  any  sure
form,  cannot  but  develop  in  proportion  as  the  pressure  of  society
on  the  individual  increases,  since  there  is  something  in  that
pressure  which  unduly  oppresses  a necessary  element  of  human


203


The  End  of  the  Curve  of  Reason

perfection.  We  need  not  attach  much  importance  to  the  grosser
vitalistic  or  violent  anarchism  which  seeks  forcibly  to  react
against  the  social  principle  or  claims  the  right  of  man  to  “live  his
own  life”  in  the  egoistic  or  crudely  vitahstic  sense.  But  there  is
a higher,  an  intellectual  anarchistic  thought  which  in  its  aim  and
formula  recovers  and  carries  to  its  furthest  logical  conclusions  a
very  real  truth  of  nature  and  of  the  divine  in  man.  In  its  revolt
against  the  opposite  exaggeration  of  the  social  principle,  we
find  it  declaring  that  all  government  of  man  by  man  by  the
power  of  compulsion  is  an  evil,  a violation,  a suppression  or
deformation  of  a natural  principle  of  good  which  would  other-
wise grow  and  prevail  for  the  perfection  of  the  human  race.  Even
the  social  principle  in  itself  is  questioned  and  held  liable  for  a
sort  of  fall  in  man  from  a natural  to  an  unnatural  and  artificial
principle  of  Hving.

The  exaggeration  and  inherent  weakness  of  this  exclusive
idea  are  sufficiently  evident.  Man  does  not  actually  live
as  an  isolated  being,  nor  can  he  grow  by  an  isolated  freedom.
He  grows  by  his  relations  with  others  and  his  freedom  must
exercise  itself  in  a progressive  self-harmonising  with  the
freedom  of  his  fellow-beings.  The  social  principle  therefore,
apart  from  the  forms  it  has  taken,  would  be  perfectly  justified,
if  by  nothing  else,  than  by  the  need  of  society  as  a field
of  relations  which  afford  to  the  individual  his  occasion  for  grow-
ing towards  a greater  perfection.  We  have  indeed  the  old  dogma
that  man  was  originally  innocent  and  perfect;  the  conception
of  the  first  ideal  state  of  mankind  as  a harmonious  felicity  of  free
and  natural  hving  in  which  no  social  law  or  compulsion  existed
because  none  was  needed,  is  as  old  as  the  Mahabharata.  But
even  this  theory  has  to  recognise  a downward  lapse  of  man  from
his  natural  perfection.  The  fall  was  not  brought  about  by  the
introduction  of  the  social  principle  in  the  arrangement  of  his
life,  but  rather  the  social  principle  and  the  governmental  method
of  compulsion  had  to  be  introduced  as  a result  of  the  fall.  If,  on
the  contrary,  we  regard  the  evolution  of  man  not  as  a fall  from
perfection  but  a gradual  ascent,  a growth  out  of  the  infrarational
status  of  his  being,  it  is  clear  that  only  by  a social  compulsion  on
the  vital  and  physical  instincts  of  his  infrarational  egoism,  a sub-


204  The  Human  Cycle

jection  to  the  needs  and  laws  of  the  social  life,  could  this  growth
have  been  brought  about  on  a large  scale.  For  in  their  first
crudeness  the  infrarational  instincts  do  not  correct  themselves
quite  voluntarily  without  the  pressure  of  need  and  compulsion,
but  only  by  the  erection  of  a law  other  than  their  own  which
teaches  them  finally  to  erect  a yet  greater  law  within  for  their
own  correction  and  purification.  The  principle  of  social  compul-
sion may  not  have  been  always  or  perhaps  ever  used  quite  wisely,
— it  is  a law  of  man’s  imperfection,  imperfect  in  itself,  and  must
always  be  imperfect  in  its  method  and  result;  but  in  the  earlier
stages  of  his  evolution  it  was  clearly  inevitable,  and  until  man
has  grown  out  of  the  causes  of  its  necessity,  he  cannot  be  really
ready  for  the  anarchistic  principle  of  living.

But  it  is  at  the  same  time  clear  that  the  more  the  outer  law
is  replaced  by  an  inner  law,  the  nearer  man  will  draw  to  his  true
and  natural  perfection.  And  the  perfect  social  State  must  be  one
in  which  governmental  compulsion  is  abolished  and  man  is  able
to  live  with  his  fellowman  by  free  agreement  and  co-operation.
But  by  what  means  is  he  to  be  made  ready  for  this  great  and  diffi-
cult consummation?  Intellectual  anarchism  relies  on  two  powers
in  the  human  being  of  which  the  first  is  the  enlightenment  of  his
reason;  the  mind  of  man,  enlightened,  will  claim  freedom  for
itself,  but  will  equally  recognise  the  same  right  in  others.  A just
equation  will  of  itself  emerge  on  the  ground  of  a true,  self-found
and  unperverted  human  nature.  This  might  conceivably  be  suffi-
cient, although  hardly  without  a considerable  change  and  pro-
gress in  man’s  mental  powers,  if  the  life  of  the  individual  could
be  lived  in  a predominant  isolation  with  only  a small  number  of
points  of  necessary  contact  with  the  lives  of  others.  Actually,
our  existence  is  closely  knit  with  the  existences  around  us  and
there  is  a common  life,  a common  work,  a common  effort  and
aspiration  without  which  humanity  cannot  grow  to  its  full  height
and  wideness.  To  ensure  co-ordination  and  prevent  clash  and
conflict  in  tliis  constant  contact  another  power  is  needed  than  the
enlightened  intellect.  Anarchistic  thought  finds  this  power  in  a
natural  human  sympathy  which,  if  it  is  given  free  play  under  the
right  conditions  ,can  be  relied  upon  to  ensure  natural  co-operation :
the  appeal  is  to  what  the  American  poet  calls  the  love  of


205


The  End  of  the  Curve  of  Reason

comrades,  to  the  principle  of  fraternity,  the  third  and  most  neg-
lected term  of  the  famous  revolutionary  formula.  A free  equality
founded  upon  spontaneous  co-operation,  not  on  governmental
force  and  social  compulsion,  is  the  highest  anarchistic  ideal.

This  would  seem  to  lead  us  either  towards  a free  co-operative
communism,  a unified  life  where  the  labour  and  property  of  all
is  there  for  the  benefit  of  all,  or  else  to  what  may  better  be  called
communalism,  the  free  consent  of  the  individual  to  live  in  a
society  where  the  just  freedom  of  his  individuality  will  be  recog-
nised, but  the  surplus  of  his  labour  and  acquisitions  will  be  used
or  given  by  him  without  demur  for  the  common  good  under  a
natural  co-operative  impulse.  The  severest  school  of  anarchism
rejects  all  compromise  with  communism.  It  is  difficult  to  see
how  a Stateless  Communism  which  is  supposed  to  be  the  final
goal  of  the  Russian  ideal  can  operate  on  the  large  and  complex
scale  necessitated  by  modern  life.  And  indeed  it  is  not  clear  how
even  a free  communahsm  could  be  established  or  maintained  with-
out some  kind  of  governmental  force  and  social  compulsion  or
how  it  could  fail  to  fall  away  in  the  end  either  on  one  side  into  a
rigorous  collectivism  or  on  the  other  to  struggle,  anarchy  and  dis-
ruption. For  the  logical  mind  in  building  its  social  idea  takes  no
sufficient  account  of  the  infrarational  element  in  man,  the  vital
egoism  to  which  the  most  active  and  effective  part  of  his  nature
is  bound:  that  is  his  most  constant  motive  and  it  defeats  in  the
end  all  the  calculations  of  the  idealising  reason,  undoes  its  ela-
borate systems  or  accepts  only  the  Httle  that  it  can  assimilate  to
its  own  need  and  purpose.  If  that  strong  element,  that  ego-force
in  him,  is  too  much  overshadowed,  cowed  and  depressed,  too
much  rationalised,  too  much  denied  an  outlet,  then  the  life  of
man  becomes  artificial,  top-heavy,  poor  in  the  sap  of  vitality,
mechanical,  uncreative.  And  on  the  other  hand,  if  it  is  not  sup-
pressed, it  tends  in  the  end  to  assert  itself  and  derange  the  plans
of  the  rational  side  of  man,  because  it  contains  in  itself  powers
whose  right  satisfaction  or  whose  final  way  of  transformation
reason  cannot  discover.  If  reason  were  the  secret,  highest  law  of
the  universe  or  if  man  the  mental  being  were  limited  by  menta-
lity, it  might  be  possible  for  him  by  the  power  of  the  reason  to
evolve  out  of  the  dominance  of  infrarational  Nature  which  he


206  The  Human  Cycle

inherits  from  the  animal.  He  could  then  live  securely  in  his  best
human  self  as  a perfected  rational  and  sympathetic  being,
balanced  and  well-ordered  in  all  parts,  the  sattwic  man  of  Indian
philosophy;  that  would  be  his  summit  of  possibility,  his  con-
summation. But  his  nature  is  rather  transitional;  the  rational
being  is  only  a middle  term  of  Nature’s  evolution.  A rational
satisfaction  cannot  give  him  safety  from  the  pull  from  below
nor  deliver  him  from  the  attraction  from  above.  If  it  were  not  so,
the  ideal  of  intellectual  Anarchism  might  be  more  feasible  as  well
as  acceptable  as  a theory  of  what  human  life  might  be  in  its
reasonable  perfection;  but,  man  being  what  he  is,  we  are
compelled  in  the  end  to  aim  higher  and  go  farther.

A spiritual  or  spiritualised  anarchism  might  appear  to  come
nearer  to  the  real  solution  or  at  least  touch  something  of  it  from
afar.  As  it  expresses  itself  at  the  present  day,  there  is  much  in  it
that  is  exaggerated  and  imperfect.  Its  seers  seem  often  to  preach
an  impossible  self-abnegation  of  the  vital  life  and  an  asceticism
which  instead  of  purifying  and  transforming  the  vital  being,  seeks
to  suppress  and  even  kill  it;  life  itself  is  impoverished  or  dried
up  by  this  severe  austerity  in  its  very  springs.  Carried  away  by  a
high-reaching  spirit  of  revolt,  these  prophets  denounce  civilisa-
tion as  a failure  because  of  its  vitalistic  exaggerations,  but  set
up  an  opposite  exaggeration  which  might  well  cure  civilisation
of  some  of  its  crying  faults  and  uglinesses,  but  would  deprive  us
also  of  many  real  and  valuable  gains.  But  apart  from  these  ex-
cesses of  a too  logical  thought  and  a one-sided  impulsion,  apart
from  the  inability  of  any  “ism”  to  express  the  truth  of  the  spirit
which  exceeds  all  such  compartments,  we  seem  here  to  be  near
to  the  real  way  out,  to  the  discovery  of  the  saving  motive-force.
The  solution  lies  not  in  the  reason  but  in  the  soul  of  man,  in  its
spiritual  tendencies.  It  is  a spiritual,  an  inner  freedom  that  can
alone  create  a perfect  human  order.  It  is  a spiritual,  a greater
than  the  rational  enlightenment  that  can  alone  illumine  the  vital
nature  of  man  and  impose  harmony  on  its  self-seekings,  anta-
gonisms and  discords.  A deeper  brotherhood,  a yet  unfound  law
of  love  is  the  only  sure  foundation  possible  for  a perfect  social
evolution,  no  other  can  replace  it.  But  this  brotherhood  and  love
will  not  proceed  by  the  vital  instincts  or  the  reason  where  they


207


The  End  of  the  Curve  of  Reason

can  be  met,  baffled  or  deflected  by  opposite  reasonings  and  other
discordant  instincts.  Nor  will  it  found  itself  in  the  natural  heart
of  man  where  there  are  plenty  of  other  passions  to  combat  it.
It  is  in  the  soul  that  it  must  find  its  roots ; the  love  which  is  found-
ed upon  a deeper  truth  of  our  being,  the  brotherhood  or,  let  us
say,  — for  this  is  another  feeling  than  any  vital  or  mental  sense
of  brotherhood,  a calmer  more  durable  motive-force,  — the
spiritual  comradeship  which  is  the  expression  of  an  inner  realisa-
tion of  oneness.  For  so  only  can  egoism  disappear  and  the  true
individualism  of  the  unique  godhead  in  each  man  found  itself  on
the  true  communism  of  the  equal  godhead  in  the  race;  for  the
Spirit,  the  inmost  Self,  the  universal  Godhead  in  every  being  is
that  whose  very  nature  of  diverse  oneness  it  is  to  realise  the  per-
fection of  its  individual  life  and  nature  in  the  existence  of  all,  in
the  universal  life  and  nature.

This  is  a solution  to  which  it  may  be  objected  that  it  puts
off  the  consummation  of  a better  human  society  to  a far-off  date
in  the  future  evolution  of  the  race.  For  it  means  that  no  machi-
nery invented  by  the  reason  can  perfect  either  the  individual  or
the  collective  man;  an  inner  change  is  needed  in  human  nature,
a change  too  difficult  to  be  ever  effected  except  by  the  few.  This
is  not  certain;  but  in  any  case,  if  this  is  not  the  solution,  then
there  is  no  solution;  if  this  is  not  the  way,  then  there  is  no  way
for  the  human  kind.  Then  the  terrestrial  evolution  must  pass
beyond  man  as  it  has  passed  beyond  the  animal  and  a greater
race  must  come  that  will  be  capable  of  the  spiritual  change,  a
form  of  life  must  be  bora  that  is  nearer  to  the  divine.  After  all
there  is  no  logical  necessity  for  the  conclusion  that  the  change
cannot  begin  at  all  because  its  perfection  is  not  immediately
possible.  A decisive  turn  of  mankind  to  the  spiritual  ideal,  the
beginning  of  a constant  ascent  and  guidance  towards  the  heights
may  not  be  altogether  impossible,  even  if  the  summits  are  attain-
able at  first  only  by  the  pioneer  few  and  far-off  to  the  tread  of
the  race.  And  that  beginning  may  mean  the  descent  of  an  influ-
ence that  will  alter  at  once  the  whole  life  of  mankind  in  its  orien-
tation and  enlarge  for  ever,  as  did  the  development  of  his  reason
and  more  than  any  development  of  the  reason,  its  potentialities
and  all  its  structure.


Chapter  XXI


The  Spiritual  Aim  and  Life


A.  SOCIETY  founded  upon  spirituality  will
differ  in  two  essential  points  from  the  normal  human  society
which  begins  from  and  ends  with  the  lower  nature.  The  normal
human  society  starts  from  the  gregarious  instinct  modified
by  a diversity  and  possible  antagonism  of  interests,  from  an
association  and  clash  of  egos,  from  a meeting,  combination,  con-
flict of  ideas,  tendencies  and  principles;  it  tries  first  to  patch  up
an  accommodation  of  converging  interests  and  a treaty  of  peace
between  discords,  founded  on  a series  of  implied  contracts,
natural  or  necessary  adjustments  which  become  customs  of  the
aggregate  life,  and  to  these  contracts  as  they  develop  it  gives  the
name  of  social  law.  By  establishing,  as  against  the  interests
which  lead  to  conflict,  the  interests  which  call  for  association  and
mutual  assistance,  it  creates  or  stimulates  sympathies  and  habits
of  helpfulness  that  give  a psychological  support  and  sanction  to
its  mechanism  of  law,  custom  and  contract.  It  justifies  the  mass
of  social  institutions  and  habitual  ways  of  being  which  it  thus
creates  by  the  greater  satisfaction  and  efficiency  of  the  physical,
the  vital  and  the  mental  life  of  man,  in  a word,  by  the  growth  and
advantages  of  civilisation.  A good  many  losses  have  indeed  to
be  written  off  as  against  these  gains,  but  those  are  to  be  accepted
as  the  price  we  must  pay  for  civilisation.

The  normal  society  treats  man  essentially  as  a physical,
vital  and  mental  being.  For  the  life,  the  mind,  the  body  are  the
three  terms  of  existence  with  which  it  has  some  competence  to
deal.  It  develops  a system  of  mental  growth  and  efficiency,  an
intellectual,  aesthetic  and  moral  culture.  It  evolves  the  vital
side  of  human  life  and  creates  an  ever-growing  system  of  eco-
nomic efficiency  and  vital  enjoyment,  and  this  system  becomes
more  and  more  rich,  cumbrous  and  complex  as  civilisation  deve-
lops. Depressing  by  its  mental  and  vital  overgrowth  the  natural


209


The  Spiritual  Aim  and  Life

vigour  of  the  physical  and  animal  man,  it  tries  to  set  the  balance
right  by  systems  of  physical  culture,  a cumbrous  science  of
habits  and  remedies  intended  to  cure  the  ills  it  has  created  and  as
much  amelioration  as  it  can  manage  of  the  artificial  forms  of
living  that  are  necessary  to  its  social  system.  In  the  end,  how-
ever, experience  shows  that  society  tends  to  die  by  its  own  deve-
lopment, a sure  sign  that  there  is  some  radical  defect  in  its
system,  a certain  proof  that  its  idea  of  man  and  its  method  of
development  do  not  correspond  to  all  the  reality  of  the  human
being  and  to  the  aim  of  life  which  that  reality  imposes.

There  is  then  a radical  defect  somewhere  in  the  process  of
human  civilisation ; but  where  is  its  seat  and  by  what  issue  shall
we  come  out  of  the  perpetual  cycle  of  failure  ? Our  civilised  deve-
lopment of  life  ends  in  an  exhaustion  of  vitality  and  a refusal  of
Nature  to  lend  her  support  any  further  to  a continued  advance
upon  these  lines;  our  civilised  mentality,  after  disturbing  the
balance  of  the  human  system  to  its  own  greater  profit,  finally
discovers  that  it  has  exhausted  and  destroyed  that  which  fed  it
and  loses  its  power  of  healthy  action  and  productiveness.  It  is
found  that  civilisation  has  created  many  more  problems  than  it
can  solve,  has  multiplied  excessive  needs  and  desires  the  satisfac-
tion of  which  it  has  not  sufficient  vital  force  to  sustain,  has  deve-
loped a jungle  of  claims  and  artificial  instincts  in  the  midst  of
which  life  loses  its  way  and  has  no  longer  any  sight  of  its  aim.
The  more  advanced  minds  begin  to  declare  civilisation  a failure
and  society  begins  to  feel  that  they  are  right.  But  the  remedy
proposed  is  either  a halt  or  even  a retrogression,  which  means
in  the  end  more  confusion,  stagnation  and  decay,  or  a reversion
to  “Nature”  which  is  impossible  or  can  only  come  about  by  a
cataclysm  and  disintegration  of  society;  or  even  a cure  is  aimed
at  by  carrying  artificial  remedies  to  their  acme,  by  more  and  more
Science,  more  and  more  mechanical  devices,  a more  scientific
organisation  of  life,  which  means  that  the  engine  shall  replace
life,  the  arbitrary  logical  reason  substitute  itself  for  complex
Nature  and  man  be  saved  by  machinery.  As  well  say  that  to  carry
a disease  to  its  height  is  the  best  way  to  its  cure.

It  may  be  suggested  on  the  contrary  and  with  some  chance
of  knocking  at  the  right  door  that  the  radical  defect  of  all  our  sys-


210


The  Human  Cycle

terns  is  their  deficient  development  of  just  that  which  society
has  most  neglected,  the  spiritual  element,  the  soul  in  man  which
is  his  true  being.  Even  to  have  a healthy  body,  a strong  vitality
and  an  active  and  clarified  mind  and  a field  for  their  action  and
enjoyment,  carries  man  no  more  than  a certain  distance;  after-
wards he  flags  and  tries  for  want  of  a real  self-finding,  a satisfying
aim  for  his  action  and  progress.  These  three  things  do  not  make
the  sum  of  a complete  manhood;  they  are  means  to  an  ulterior
end  and  cannot  be  made  for  ever  an  aim  in  themselves.  Add  a
rich  emotional  life  governed  by  a well-ordered  ethical  standard,
and  still  there  is  the  savour  of  something  left  out,  some  supreme
good  which  these  things  mean,  but  do  not  in  themselves  arrive
at,  do  not  discover  till  they  go  beyond  themselves.  Add  a reli-
gious system  and  a wide-spread  spirit  of  belief  and  piety,  and  still
you  have  not  found  the  means  of  social  salvation.  All  these
things  human  society  has  developed,  but  none  of  them  has  saved
it  from  disillusionment,  weariness  and  decay.  The  ancient
intellectual  cultures  of  Europe  ended  in  disruptive  doubt  and
sceptical  impotence,  the  pieties  of  Asia  in  stagnation  and  decline.
Modern  society  has  discovered  a new  principle  of  survival,  pro-
gress, but  the  aim  of  that  progress  it  has  never  discovered,  — un-
less the  aim  is  always  more  knowledge,  more  equipment,  con-
venience and  comfort,  more  enjoyment,  a greater  and  still  greater
complexity  of  the  social  economy,  a more  and  more  cumbrously
opulent  life.  But  these  things  must  lead  in  the  end  where  the  old
led,  for  they  are  only  the  same  thing  on  a larger  scale;  they  lead
in  a circle,  that  is  to  say,  nowhere;  they  do  not  escape  from  the
cycle  of  birth,  growth,  decay  and  death,  they  do  not  really  find
the  secret  of  self-prolongation  by  constant  self-renewal  which  is
the  principle  of  immortality,  but  only  seem  for  a moment  to  find
it  by  the  illusion  of  a series  of  experiments  each  of  which  ends
in  disappointment.  That  so  far  has  been  the  nature  of  modem
progress.  Only  in  its  new  turn  inwards,  towards  a greater  subjec-
tivity now  only  beginning,  is  there  a better  hope;  for  by  that
turning  it  may  discover  that  the  real  truth  of  man  is  to  be  found
in  his  soul.  It  is  not  indeed  certain  that  a subjective  age  will  lead
us  there,  but  it  gives  us  the  possibility,  can  turn  in  that  direction,
if  used  rightly,  the  more  inward  movement.


211


The  Spiritual  Aim  and  Life

It  will  be  said  that  this  is  an  old  discovery  and  that  it
governed  the  old  societies  under  the  name  of  religion.  But  that
was  only  an  appearance.  The  discovery  was  there,  but
it  was  made  for  the  life  of  the  individual  only,  and  even  for  him
it  looked  beyond  the  earth  for  its  fulfilment  and  at  earth  only  as
the  place  of  his  preparation  for  a solitary  salvation  or  release
from  the  burden  of  life.  Human  society  itself  never  seized  on  the
discovery  of  the  soul  as  a means  for  the  discovery  of  the  law  of
its  own  being  or  on  a knowledge  of  the  soul’s  true  nature  and
need  and  its  fulfilment  as  the  right  way  of  terrestrial  perfection.
If  we  look  at  the  old  religions  in  their  social  as  apart  from  their
individual  aspect,  we  see  that  the  use  society  made  of  them  was
only  of  their  most  unspiritual  or  at  any  rate  of  their  less  spiritual
parts.  It  made  use  of  them  to  give  an  august,  awful  and  would-be
eternal  sanction  to  its  mass  of  customs  and  institutions;  it  made
of  them  a veil  of  mystery  against  human  questioning  and  a shield
of  darkness  against  the  innovator.  So  far  as  it  saw  in  religion  a
means  of  human  salvation  and  perfection,  it  laid  hands  upon
it  at  once  to  mechanise  , it,  to  catch  the  human  soul  and  bind  it
on  the  wheels  of  a socio-religious  machinery,  to  impose  on  it  in
the  place  of  spiritual  freedom  an  imperious  yoke  and  an  iron
prison.  It  saddled  upon  the  religious  life  of  man  a Church,  a
priesthood  and  a mass  of  ceremonies  and  set  over  it  a pack  of
watchdogs  under  the  name  of  creeds  and  dogmas,  dogmas  which
one  had  to  accept  and  obey  under  pain  of  condemnation  to  eter-
nal hell  by  an  eternal  judge  beyond,  just  as  one  had  to  accept  and
to  obey  the  laws  of  society  on  pain  of  condemnation  to  temporal
imprisonment  or  death  by  a mortal  judge  below.  This  false  socia-
Usation  of  reUgion  has  been  always  the  chief  cause  of  its  failure  to
regenerate  mankind.

For  nothing  can  be  more  fatal  to  religion  than  for  its  spiri-
tual element  to  be  crushed  or  formalised  out  of  existence  by  its
outward  aids  and  forms  and  machinery.  The  falsehood  of  the  old
social  use  of  religion  is  shown  by  its  effects.  History  has  exhibited
more  than  once  the  coincidence  of  the  greatest  religious  fervour
and  piety  with  darkest  ignorance,  with  an  obscure  squalor  and
long  vegetative  stagnancy  of  the  mass  of  human  life,  with  the
unquestioned  reign  of  cruelty,  injustice  and  oppression,  or  with


212


The  Human  Cycle

an  organisation  of  the  most  ordinary,  unaspiring  and' unraised
existence  hardly  relieved  by  some  touches  of  intellectual  or  half-
spiritual  light  on  the  surface,  the  end  of  all  this  a wide-spread  re-
volt that  turned  first  of  all  against  the  established  religion  as  the
key-stone  of  a regnant  falsehood,  evil  and  ignorance.  It  is  an-
other sign  when  the  too  scrupulously  exact  observation  of  a
socio-religious  system  and  its  rites  and  forms,  which  by  the  very
fact  of  this  misplaced  importance  begin  to  lose  their  sense  and
true  religious  value,  becomes  the  law  and  most  prominent  aim
of  religion  rather  than  any  spiritual  growth  of  the  individual  and
the  race.  And  a great  sign  too  of  this  failure  is  when  the  indi-
vidual is  obliged  to  flee  from  society  in  order  to  find  room  for
his  spiritual  growth;  when,  finding  human  life  given  over  to
the  unregenerated  mind,  life  and  body  and  the  place  of  spiritual
freedom  occupied  by  the  bonds  of  form,  by  Church  and  Shastra,
by  some  law  of  the  Ignorance,  he  is  obliged  to  break  away  from
all  these  to  seek  for  growth  into  the  spirit  in  the  monastery,  on
the  mountain-top,  in  the  cavern,  in  the  desert  and  the  forest.
When  there  is  that  division  between  life  and  the  spirit,  sentence  of
condemnation  is  passed  upon  human  life.  Either  it  is  left  to  circle
in  its  routine  or  it  is  decried  as  worthless  and  unreal,  a vanity  of
vanities,  an^  loses  that  confidence  in  itself  and  inner  faith  in  the
value  of  its  terrestrial  aims,  sraddhd,  without  which  it  cannot
come  to  anything.  For  the  spirit  of  man  must  strain  towards
the  heights;  when  it  loses  its  tension  of  endeavour,  the  race
must  become  immobile  and  stagnant  or  even  sink  towards
darkness  and  the  dust.  Even  where  life  rejects  the  spirit  or  the
spirit  rejects  life,  there  may  be  a self-affirmation  of  the  inner
being;  there  may  even  be  a glorious  crop  of  saints  and  hermits
in  a forcing-soil  of  spirituality,  but  unless  the  race,  the  society,
the  nation  is  moved  towards  the  spiritualisation  of  life  or  move
forward  led  by  the  light  of  an  ideal,  the  end  must  be  littleness,
weakness  and  stagnation.  Or  the  race  has  to  turn  to  the  intellect
for  rescue,  for  some  hope  or  new  ideal,  and  arrive  by  a circle
through  an  age  of  rationalism  at  a fresh  effort  towards  the
restatement  of  spiritual  truth  and  a new  attempt  to  spiritualise
human  fife.

The  true  and  full  spiritual  aim  in  society  will  regard  man  not


213


The  Spiritual  Aim  and  Life

as  a mind,  a life  and  a body,  but  as  a soul  incarnated  for  a divine
fulfilment  upon  earth,  not  only  in  heavens  beyond,  which  after
all  it  need  not  have  left  if  it  had  no  divine  business  here  in  the
world  of  physical,  vital  and  mental  nature.  It  will  therefore  re-
gard the  life,  mind  and  body  neither  as  ends  in  themselves,  sufii-
cient  for  their  own  satisfaction,  nor  as  mortal  members  full  of  di-
sease which  have  only  to  be  dropped  off  for  the  rescued  spirit
to  flee  away  into  its  own  pure  regions,  but  as  first  instruments  of
the  soul,  the  yet  imperfect  instruments  of  an  unseized  diviner
purpose.  It  will  believe  in  their  destiny  and  help  them  to  believe
in  themselves,  but  for  that  very  reason  in  their  highest  and  not
only  in  their  lowest  or  lower  possibilities.  Their  destiny  will  be,
in  its  view,  to  spiritualise  themselves  so  as  to  grow  into  visible
members  of  the  spirit,  lucid  means  of  its  manifestation,  them-
selves spiritual,  illumined,  more  and  more  conscious  and  perfect.
For,  accepting  the  truth  of  man’s  soul  as  a thing  entirely  divine
in  its  essence,  it  will  accept  also  the  possibility  of  his  whole  being
becoming  divine  in  spite  of  Nature’s  first  patent  contradictions
of  this  possibility,  her  darkened  denials  of  this  ultimate  certitude,
and  even  with  these  as  a necessary  earthly  starting-point.  And  as
it  will  regard  man  the  individual,  it  will  regard  too  man  the  col-
lectivity as  a soul-form  of  the  Infinite,  a collective  soul  myriadly
embodied  upon  earth  for  a divine  fulfilment  in  its  manifold
relations  and  its  multitudinous  activities.  Therefore  it  will  hold
sacred  all  the  different  parts  of  man’s  life  which  correspond  to
the  parts  of  his  being,  all  his  physical,  vital,  dynamic,  emotional,
aesthetic,  ethical,  intellectual,  psychic  evolution,  and  see  in  them
instruments  for  a growth  towards  a diviner  living.  It  will  regard
every  human  society,  nation,  people  or  other  organic  aggregate
from  the  same  standpoint,  subsouls,  as  it  were,  means  of  a com-
plex manifestation  and  self-fulfilment  of  the  Spirit,  the  divine
Reality,  the  conscious  Infinite  in  man  upon  earth.  The  possible
godhead  of  man  because  he  is  inwardly  of  one  being  with  God
will  be  its  one  solitary  creed  and  dogma.

But  it  will  not  seek  to  enforce  even  this  one  uplifting  dogma
by  an  external  compulsion  upon  the  lower  members  of  man’s
natural  being;  for  that  is  nigraha,  a repressive  contraction  of  the
nature  which  may  lead  to  an  apparent  suppression  of  the  evil.


214  The  Human  Cycle

but  not  to  a real  and  healthy  growth  of  the  good;  it  will  rather
hold  up  this  creed  and  ideal  as  a light  and  inspiration  to  all  his
members  to  grow  into  the  godhead  from  within  themselves,  to
become  freely  divine.  Neither  in  the  individual  nor  in  the  society
will  it  seek  to  imprison,  wall  in,  repress,  impoverish,  but  to  let
in  the  widest  air  and  the  highest  light.  A large  liberty  will  be  the
law  of  a spiritual  society  and  the  increase  of  freedom  a sign  of
the  growth  of  human  society  towards  the  possibility  of  true
spiritualisation.  To  spiritualise  in  this  sense  a society  of  slaves,
slaves  of  power,  slaves  of  authority,  slaves  of  custom,  slaves  of
dogma,  slaves  of  all  sorts  of  imposed  laws  which  they  live  under
rather  than  live  by  them,  slaves  internally  of  their  own  weakness,
ignorance  and  passions  from  whose  worst  effect  they  seek  or  need
to  be  protected  by  another  and  external  slavery,  can  never  be  a
successful  endeavour.  They  must  shake  off  their  fetters  first  in
order  to  be  fit  for  a higher  freedom.  Not  that  man  has  not  to
wear  many  a yoke  in  his  progress  upward;  but  only  the  yoke
which  he  accepts  because  it  represents,  the  more  perfectly  the
better,  the  highest  inner  law  of  his  nature  and  its  aspiration,  will
be  entirely  helpful  to  him.  The  rest  buy  their  good  results  at  a
heavy  cost  and  may  retard  as  much  as  or  even  more  than  they
accelerate  his  progress.

The  spiritual  aim  will  recognise  that  man  as  he  grows  in  his
being  must  have  as  much  free  space  as  possible  for  all  its- mem-
bers to  grow  in  their  own  strength,  to  find  out  themselves  and
their  potentialities.  In  their  freedom  they  will  err,  because
experience  comes  through  many  errors,  but  each  has  in  itself  a
divine  principle  and  they  will  find  it  out,  disengage  its  presence,
significance  and  law  as  their  experience  of  themselves  deepens
and  increases.  Thus  true  spirituality  will  not  lay  a yoke  upon
science  and  philosophy  or  compel  them  to  square  their  conclu-
sions with  any  statement  of  dogmatic  religious  or  even  of  assured
spiritual  truth,  as  some  of  the  old  religions  attempted,  vainly,
ignorantly,  with  an  unspiritual  obstinacy  and  arrogance.  Each
part  of  man’s  being  has  its  own  dharma  which  it  must  follow  and
will  follow  in  the  end,  put  on  it  what  fetters  you  please.  The  Dhar-
ma of  science,  thought  and  philosophy  is  to  seek  for  truth  by
the  intellect  dispassionately,  without  prepossession  and  prejudg-


215


The  Spiritual  Aim  and  Life

ment,  with  no  other  first  propositions  than  the  law  of  thought  and
observation  itself  imposes.  Science  and  philosophy  are  not
bound  to  square  their  observations  and  conclusions  with  any
current  ideas  of  religious  dogma  or  ethical  rule  or  aesthetic
prejudice.  In  the  end,  if  left  free  in  their  action,  they  will  find
the  unity  of  Truth  with  Good  and  Beauty  and  God  and  give  these
a greater  meaning  than  any  dogmatic  religion  or  any  formal
ethics  or  any  narrower  aesthetic  idea  can  give  us.  But  meanwhile
they  must  be  left  free  even  to  deny  God  and  Good  and  Beauty  if
they  will,  if  their  sincere  observation  of  things  so  points  them.
For  all  these  rejections  must  come  round  in  the  end  of  their  cir-
cling and  return  to  a larger  truth  of  the  things  they  refuse.  Often
we  find  atheism  both  in  individual  and  society  a necessary  pas-
sage to  deeper  religious  and  spiritual  truth;  one  has  sometimes
to  deny  God  in  order  to  find  him;  the  finding  is  inevitable  at  the
end  of  all  earnest  scepticism  and  denial.

The  same  law  holds  good  in  Art;  the  aesthetic  being  of  man
rises  similarly  on  its  own  curve  towards  its  diviner  possibilities.
The  highest  aim  of  the  aesthetic  being  is  to  find  the  Divine
through  beauty;  the  highest  Art  is  that  which  by  an  inspired  use
of  significant  and  interpretative  form  unseals  the  doors  of  the
spirit.  But  in  order  that  it  may  come  to  do  this  greatest  thing
largely  and  sincerely,  it  must  first  endeavour  to  see  and  depict
man  and  Nature  and  fife  for  their  own  sake,  in  their  own  cha-
racteristic truth  and  beauty;  for  behind  these  first  characters  lies
always  the  beauty  of  the  Divine  in  fife  and  man  and  Nature  and  it
is  through  their  just  transformation  that  what  was  at  first  veiled
by  them  has  to  be  revealed.  The  dogma  that  Art  must  be  reli-
gious or  not  be  at  all,  is  a false  dogma,  just  as  is  the  claim  that  it
must  be  subservient  to  ethics  or  utility  or  scientific  truth  or  philo-
sophic ideas ; Art  may  make  use  of  these  things  as  elements,  but
it  has  its  own  svadharma,  essential  law,  and  it  will  rise  to  the
widest  spirituality  by  following  out  its  own  natural  fine  with  no
other  yoke  than  the  intimate  law  of  its  own  being.

Even  with  the  lower  nature  of  man,  though  here  we  are
naturally  led  to  suppose  that  compulsion  is  the  only  remedy,  the
spiritual  aim  will  seek  for  a free  self-rule  and  development  from
within  rather  than  a repression  of  his  dynamic  and  vital  being  from


216


The  Human  Cycle

without.  All  experience  shows  that  man  must  be  given  a certain
freedom  to  stumble  in  action  as  well  as  to  err  in  knowledge  so
long  as  he  does  not  get  from  within  himself  his  freedom  from
wrong  movement  and  error;  otherwise  he  cannot  grow.  Society
for  its  own  sake  has  to  coerce  the  dynamic  and  vital  man,  but
coercion  only  chains  up  the  devil  and  alters  at  best  his  form  of
action  into  more  mitigated  and  civilised  movements;  it  does  not
and  cannot  eliminate  him.  The  real  virtue  of  the  dynamic  and
vital  being,  the  Life  Purusha,  can  only  come  by  his  finding  a
higher  law  and  spirit  for  his  activity  within  himself;  to  give  him
that,  to  illuminate  and  transform  and  not  to  destroy  his  impulse
is  the  true  spiritual  means  of  regeneration.

Thus  spirituality  will  respect  the  freedom  of  the  lower  mem-
bers, but  it  will  not  leave  them  to  themselves ; it  will  present  to
them  the  truth  of  the  spirit  in  themselves,  translated  into  their
own  fields  of  action,  presented  in  a light  which  illumines  all  their
activities  and  shows  them  the  highest  law  of  their  own  freedom.
It  will  not,  for  instance,  escape  from  scientific  materialism  by  a
barren  contempt  for  physical  life  or  a denial  of  Matter,  but  pursue
rather  the  sceptical  mind  into  its  own  affirmations  and  denials  and
show  it  there  the  Divine.  If  it  cannot  do  that,  it  is  proved  that  it
is  itself  unenlightened  or  deficient,  because  one-sided,  in  its  light.
It  will  not  try  to  slay  the  vitality  in  man  by  denying  life,  but  will
rather  reveal  to  life  the  divine  in  itself  as  the  principle  of  its  own
transformation.  If  it  cannot  do  that,  it  is  because  it  has  itself  not
yet  wholly  fathomed  the  meaning  of  the  creation  and  the  secret
of  the  Avatar.

The  spiritual  aim  will  seek  to  fulfil  itself  therefore  in  a full-
ness of  life  and  man’s  being  in  the  individual  and  the  race  which
will  be  the  base  for  the  heights  of  the  spirit,  — the  base  becoming
in  the  end  of  one  substance  with  the  peaks.  It  will  not  proceed  by
a scornful  neglect  of  the  body,  nor  by  an  ascetic  starving  of  the
vital  being  and  an  utmost  bareness  or  even  squalor  as  the  rule  of
spiritual  living,  nor  by  a puritanic  denial  of  art  and  beauty  and  the
aesthetic  joy  of  life,  nor  by  a neglect  of  science  and  philosophy  as
poor,  negligible  or  rm'sleading  intellectual  pursuits,  — though  the
temporary  utility  even  of  these  exaggerations  as  against  the  op-
posite excesses  need  not  be  denied;  it  will  be  all  things  to  all,  but


217


The  Spiritual  Aim  and  Life

in  all  it  will  be  at  once  their  highest  aim  and  meaning  and  the
most  all-embracing  expression  of  themselves  in  which  all  they  are
and  seek  for  will  be  fulfilled.  It  will  aim  at  establishing  in  society
the  true  inner  theocracy,  not  the  false  theocracy  of  a dominant
Church  or  priesthood,  but  that  of  the  inner  Priest,  Prophet  and
King.  It  will  reveal  to  man  the  divinity  in  himself  as  the  Light,
Strength,  Beauty,  Good,  Delight,  Immortality  that  dwells  within
and  build  up  in  his  outer  life  also  the  kingdom  of  God  which  is
first  discovered  within  us.  It  will  show  man  the  way  to  seek  for
the  Divine  in  every  way  of  his  being,  sarvabhavena,^  and  so  find  it
and  live  in  it,  that  however  — even  in  all  kinds  of  ways  — he
lives  and  acts,  he  shall  live  and  act  in  that,^  in  the  Divine,  in  the
Spirit,  in  the  eternal  Reality  of  his  being.


‘ Gita.  • Gita.  Sarvatha  vartamSno'pi  sa  yogi  mayi  xartatc


Chapter  XXII


The  Necessity  of  the  Spiritual
Trasnformation

Our  normal  conduct  of  life,  whether  the  in-
dividual or  the  social,  is  actually  governed  by  the  balance  between
two  complementary  powers,  — first,  an  implicit  will  central  to
the  life  and  inherent  in  the  main  power  of  its  action  and,  second-
ly, whatever  modifying  will  can  come  in  from  the  Idea  in  mind
— for  man  is  a mental  being  — and  operate  through  our  as  yet
imperfect  mental  instruments  to  give  this  Life-Force  a conscious
orientation  and  a conscious  method.  Life  normally  finds  its  own
centre  in  our  vital  and  physical  being,  in  its  cravings  and  its
needs,  in  its  demand  for  persistence,  growth,  expansion,  enjoy-
nent,  in  its  reachings  after  all  kinds  of  power  and  possession  and
activity  and  splendour  and  largeness.  The  first  self-direction  of
this  Life-Force,  its  first  orderings  of  method  are  instinctive  and
either  entirely  or  very  largely  subconscient  and  magnificently
automatic.  The  ease,  spontaneity,  fine  normality,  beauty,  self-
satisfaction,  abundant  vital  energy  and  power  of  the  subhuman
life  of  Nature  up  to  the  animal  is  due  to  its  entire  obedience  to  this
instinctive  and  automatic  urge.  It  is  a vague  sense  of  this  truth
and  of  the  very  different  and  in  this  respect  inferior  character  of
human  life  that  makes  the  thinker,  when  dissatisfied  with  our
present  conditions,  speak  of  a life  according  to  Nature  as  the
remedy  for  all  our  ills.  An  attempt  to  find  such  a rule  in  the  es-
sential nature  of  man  has  inspired  many  revolutionary  concep-
tions of  etliics  and  society  and  individual  self-development  down
to  tlie  latest  of  the  kind,  the  strangely  inspired  vitalistic  philo-
sophy of  Nietzsche.  Tlie  common  defect  of  these  conceptions  is
to  miss  the  true  character  of  man  and  the  true  law  of  his  being,
his  Dharma.

Nietzsche’s  idea  that  to  develop  the  superman  out  of  our
present  very'  unsatisfactory  manhood  is  our  real  business,  is  in


The  Necessity  of  the  Spiritual  Transformation  219

itself  an  absolutely  sound  teaching.  His  formulation  of  our  aim,
“to  become  ourselves”,  “to  exceed  ourselves”,  implying,  as  it
does,  that  man  has  not  yet  found  all  his  true  self,  his  true  nature
by  which  he  can  successfully  and  spontaneously  hve,  could  not
be  bettered.  But  then  the  question  of  questions  is  there,  what  is
our  self,  and  what  is  om  real  nature  ? What  is  that  which  is  grow-
ing in  us,  but  into  which  we  have  not  yet  grown?  It  is  something
divine,  is  the  answer,  a divinity  Olympian,  Apollonian,  Diony-
siac,  which  the  reasoning  and  consciously  willing  animal,  man,  is
labouring  more  or  less  obscurely  to  become.  Certainly,  it  is  all
that;  but  in  what  shall  we  find  the  seed  of  that  divinity  and  what
is  the  poise  in  which  the  superman,  once  self-found,  can  abide
and  be  secure  from  lapse  into  this  lower  and  imperfect  manhood  ?
Is  it  the  intellect  and  will,  the  double-aspected  buddhi  of  the  Indian
psychological  system?  But  this  is  at  present  a thing  so  perplexed,
so  divided  against  itself,  so  uncertain  of  everything  it  gains,  up  to
a certain  point  indeed  magically  creative  and  efficient  but,  when
all  has  been  said  and  done,  in  the  end  so  splendidly  futile,  so  at
war  with  and  yet  so  dependent  upon  and  subservient  to  our  lower
nature,  that  even  if  in  it  there  lies  concealed  some  seed  of  the
entire  divinity,  it  can  hardly  itself  be  the  seed  and  at  any  rate  gives
us  no  such  secure  and  divine  poise  as  we  are  seeking.  Therefore
we  say,  not  the  intellect  and  will,  but  that  supreme  thing  in  us  yet
higher  than  the  Reason,  the  spirit,  here  concealed  behind  the
coatings  of  our  lower  nature,  is  the  secret  seed  of  the  divinity  and
will  be,  when  discovered  and  delivered,  luminous  above  the  mind,
the  wide  ground  upon  which  a divine  life  of  the  human  being  can
be  with  security  founded.

When  we  speak  of  the  superman,  we  speak  evidently  of
something  abnormal  or  supernormal  to  our  present  nature,  so
much  so  that  the  very  idea  of  it  becomes  easily  alarming  and
repugnant  to  our  normal  humanity.  The  normal  human  does
not  desire  to  be  called  out  from  its  constant  mechanical  round  to
scale  what  may  seem  to  it  impossible  heights  and  it  loves  still  less
the  prospect  of  being  exceeded,  left  behind  and  dominated,  —
although  the  object  of  a true  supermanhood  is  not  exceeding  and
domination  for  its  own  sake  but  precisely  the  opening  of  our
normal  humanity  to  something  now  beyond  itself  that  is  yet  its


220


The  Human  Cycle

own  destined  perfection.  But  mark  that  this  thing  wliich  we
have  called  normal  humanity,  is  itself  something  abnormal  in
Nature,  something  the  like  and  parity  of  which  we  look  around
in  vain  to  discover;  it  is  a rapid  freak,  a sudden  miracle.  Ab-
normality in  Nature  is  no  objection,  no  necessary  sign  of  imper-
fection, but  may  well  be  an  effort  at  a much  greater  perfection.
But  this  perfection  is  not  found  until  the  abnormal  can  find  its
own  secure  normality,  the  right  organisation  of  its  life  in  its  own
kind  and  power  and  on  its  own  level.  Man  is  an  abnormal  who
has  not  found  his  own  normality,  — he  may  imagine  he  has,  he
may  appear  to  be  normal  in  his  own  kind,  but  that  normality  is
only  a sort  of  provisional  order;  therefore,  though  man  is  in-
finitely greater  than  the  plant  or  the  animal,  he  is  not  perfect  in
his  own  nature  like  the  plant  and  the  animal.  This  imperfection
is  not  a thing  to  be  at  all  deplored,  but  rather  a privilege  and  a
promise,  for  it  opens  out  to  us  an  immense  vista  of  self-develop-
ment  and  self-exceeding.  Man  at  his  highest  is  a half-god  who
has  risen  up  out  of  the  animal  Nature  and  is  splendidly  abnormal
in  it,  but  the  thing  which  he  has  started  out  to  be,  the  whole  god,
is  something  so  much  greater  than  what  he  is  that  it  seems  to  him
as  abnormal  to  himself  as  he  is  to  the  animal.  This  means  a great
and  arduous  labour  of  growth  before  him,  but  also  a splendid
crown  of  his  race  and  his  victory.  A kingdom  is  offered  to  him
beside  which  his  present  triumphs  in  the  realms  of  mind  or  over
external  Nature  will  appear  only  as  a rough  hint  and  a poor
beginning.

What  precisely  is  the  defect  from  which  all  his  imperfection
springs?  We  have  already  indicated  it,  — that  has  indeed  been
the  general  aim  of  the  preceding  chapters,  — but  it  is  necessary
to  state  it  now  more  succinctly  and  precisely.  We  see  that  at  first
sight  man  seems  to  be  a double  nature,  an  animal  nature  of  the
vital  and  physical  being  which  lives  according  to  its  instincts,
impulses,  desires,  its  automatic  orientation  and  method  and  with
that  a half-divine  nature  of  the  self-conscious  intellectual,  ethical,
aesthetic,  intelligently  emotional,  intelligently  dynamic  being
who  is  capable  of  finding  and  understanding  the  law  of  his  own
action  and  consciously  using  and  bettering  it,  a reflecting  mind
that  understands  Nature,  a will  that  uses,  elevates,  perfects


The  Necessity  of  the  Spiritual  Transformation  221

Nature,  a sense  that  intelligently  enjoys  Nature.  The  aim  of  the
animal  part  of  us  is  to  increase  vital  possession  and  enjoyment;
the  aim  of  the  semi-divine  part  of  us  is  also  to  grow,  possess  and
enjoy,  but  first  to  possess  and  enjoy  intelligently,  aesthetically,
ethically,  by  the  powers  of  the  mind  much  more  than  by  the
powers  of  the  life  and  body,  and,  secondly,  to  possess  and  enjoy,
not  so  much  the  vital  and  physical  except  in  so  far  as  that  is  neces-
sary as  a foundation  and  starting-point,  a preliminary  necessity
or  condition,  a standing-ground  and  basis,  but  things  intellectual,
ethical  and  aesthetic,  and  to  grow  not  so  much  in  the  outward
life,  except  in  so  far  as  that  is  necessary  to  the  security,  ease  and
dignity  of  our  human  existence,  but  in  the  true,  the  good  and  the
beautiful.  This  is  the  manhood  of  man,  his  unique  distinction
and  abnormality  in  the  norm  of  this  inconscient  material  Nature.

This  means  that  man  has  developed  a new  power  of  being,  —
let  us  call  it  a new  soul-power,  with  the  premiss  that  we  regard
the  life  and  the  body  also  as  a soul-power,  — and  the  being  who
has  done  that  is  under  an  inherent  obligation  not  only  to  look  at
the  world  and  revalue  all  in  it  from  this  new  elevation,  but  to
compel  his  whole  nature  to  obey  this  power  and  in  a way  reshape
itself  in  its  mould,  and  even  to  reshape,  so  far  as  he  can,  his
environmental  fife  into  some  image  of  this  greater  truth  and  law.
In  doing  this  lies  his  svadharma,  his  true  rule  and  way  of  being,  the
way  of  his  perfection  and  his  real  happiness.  Failing  in  this,  he
fails  in  the  aim  of  his  nature  and  his  being,  and  has  to  begin
again  until  he  finds  the  right  path  and  arrives  at  a successful
turning-point,  a decisive  crisis  of  transformation.  Now  this  is
precisely  what  man  has  failed  to  do.  He  has  effected  something,
he  has  passed  a certain  stage  of  his  journey.  He  has  laid  some
yoke  of  the  intellectual,  ethical,  aesthetic  rule  on  his  vital  and
physical  parts  and  made  it  impossible  for  himself  to  be  content
with  or  really  to  be  the  mere  human  animal.  But  more  he  has  not
been  able  to  do  successfully.  The  transformation  of  his  life  into
the  image  of  the  true,  the  good  and  the  beautiful  seems  as  far  off
as  ever;  if  ever  he  comes  near  to  some  imperfect  form  of  it,  — and
even  then  it  is  only  done  by  a class  or  by  a number  of  individuals
with  some  reflex  action  on  the  life  of  the  mass,  he  slides  back
from  it  in  a general  decay  of  his  life,  or  else  stumbles  on  from  it


222


The  Human  Cycle

into  some  bewildering  upheaval  out  of  which  he  comes  with  new
gains  indeed  but  also  with  serious  losses.  He  has  never  arrived
at  any  great  turning-point,  any  decisive  crisis  of  transforma-
tion.

The  main  failure,  the  root  of  the  whole  failure  indeed,  is  that
he  has  not  been  able  to  shift  upward  what  we  have  called  the
implicit  will  central  to  his  life,  the  force  and  assured  faith  in-
herent in  its  main  power  of  action.  His  central  will  of  life  is  still
situated  in  his  vital  and  physical  being,  its  drift  is  towards  vital
and  physical  enjoyment,  enlightened  indeed  and  checked  to  a
certain  extent  in  its  impulses  by  the  higher  powers,  but  enlighten-
ed only  and  very  partially,  not  transformed, — checked,  not
dominated  and  uplifted  to  a higher  plane.  The  higher  life  is  still
only  a thing  superimposed  on  the  lower,  a permanent  intruder
upon  our  normal  existence.  The  intruder  interferes  constantly
with  the  normal  life,  scolds,  encourages,  discourages,  lectures,
manipulates,  readjusts,  lifts  up  only  to  let  fall,  but  has  no  power
to  transform,  alchemise,  re-create.  Indeed  it  does  not  seem  itself
quite  to  know  where  all  this  effort  and  uneasy  struggle  is  meant
to  lead  us,  — sometimes  it  thinks,  to  a quite  tolerable  human
life  on  earth,  the  norm  of  which  it  can  never  successfully  fix,  and
sometimes  it  imagines  our  journey  is  to  another  world  whither
by  a religious  life  or  else  an  edifying  death  it  will  escape  out  of
all  this  pother  and  trouble  of  mortal  being.  Therefore  these  two
elements  live  together  in  a continual,  a mutual  perplexity,  made
perpetually  uneasy,  uncomfortable  and  ineffectual  by  each  other,
somewhat  like  an  ill-assorted  wife  and  husband,  always  at  odds
and  yet  half  in  love  with  or  at  least  necessary  to  each  other,  un-
able to  beat  out  a harmony,  yet  condemned  to  be  joined  in  an
unhappy  leash  until  death  separates  them.  All  the  uneasiness,
dissatisfaction,  disillusionment,  weariness,  melancholy,  pessi-
mism of  the  human  mind  comes  from  man’s  practical  failure  to
solve  the  riddle  and  the  difiiculty  of  his  double  nature.

We  have  said  that  this  failure  is  due  to  the  fact  that  this
higher  power  is  only  a mediator,  and  that  thoroughly  to  trans-
form the  vital  and  physical  life  in  its  image  is  perhaps  not  possible,
but  at  any  rate  not  the  intention  of  Nature  in  us.  It  may  be  urged
perhaps  that  after  all  individuals  have  succeeded  in  effecting


The  Necessity  of  the  Spiritual  Transformation  223

some  figure  of  transformation,  have  led  entirely  ethical  or  artistic
or  intellectual  lives,  even  shaped  their  life  by  some  ideal  of  the
true,  the  good  and  the  beautiful,  and  whatever  the  individual
has  done,  the  race  too  may  and  should  eventually  succeed  in
doing;  for  the  exceptional  individual  is  the  future  type,  the  fore-
runner. But  to  how  much  did  their  success  really  amount?
Either  they  impoverished  the  vital  and  physical  life  in  them  in
order  to  give  play  to  one  element  of  their  being,  lived  a one-sided
and  limited  existence,  or  else  they  arrived  at  a compromise  by
which,  while  the  higher  life  was  given  great  prominence,  the  lower
was  still  allowed  to  graze  in  its  own  field  under  the  eye  more  or
less  strict  or  the  curb  more  or  less  indulgent  of  the  higher  power
or  powers : in  itself,  in  its  own  instincts  and  demands  it  remained
unchanged.  There,  was  a dominance,  but  not  a transformation.

Life  cannot  be  entirely  rational,  cannot  conform  entirely
to  the  ethical  or  the  aesthetic  or  the  scientific  and  philosophic
mentality;  mind  is  not  the  destined  archangel  of  the  transforma-
tion. All  appearances  to  the  contrary  are  always  a trompe-VceiU
an  intellectual,  aesthetic  or  ethical  illusion.  Dominated,  repres-
sed life  may  be,  but  it  reserves  its  right;  and  though  individuals
or  a class  may  establish  this  domination  for  a time  and  impose
some  simulacrum  of  it  upon  the  society.  Life  in  the  end  circum-
vents the  intelligence;  it  gets  strong  elements  in  it  — for  always
there  are  traitor  elements  at  work  — to  come  over  to  its  side  and
re-establishes  its  instincts,  recovers  its  field;  or  if  it  fails  in  this,
it  has  its  revenge  in  its  own  decay  which  brings  about  the  decay
of  the  society,  the  disappointment  of  the  perennial  hope.  So
much  so,  that  there  are  times  when  mankind  perceives  this  fact
and,  renouncing  the  attempt  to  dominate  the  life-instinct,  deter-
mines to  use  the  intelligence  for  its  service  and  to  give  it  light
in  its  own  field  instead  of  enslaving  it  to  a higher  but  chimerical
ideal.

Such  a period  was  the  recent  materialistic  age,  when  the
intellect  of  man  seemed  decided  to  study  thoroughly  Life  and
Matter,  to  admit  only  that,  to  recognise  mind  only  as  an  instru-
ment of  Life  and  Matter,  and  to  devote  all  its  knowledge  to  a
tremendous  expansion  of  the  vital  and  physical  life,  its  practical-
ity, its  efficiency,  its  comfort  and  the  splendid  ordering  of  its


224


The  Human  Cycle


instincts  of  production,  possession  and  enjoyment.  That  was
the  character  of  the  materiahstic,  commercial,  economic  age  of
mankind,  a period  in  which  the  ethical  mind  persisted  painfully,
but  with  decreasing  self-confidence,  an  increasing  self-questioning
and  a tendency  to  yield  up  the  fortress  of  the  moral  law  to  the
life-instinct,  the  aesthetic  instinct  and  intelligence  flourished  as
a rather  glaring  exotic  ornament,  a sort  of  . rare  orchid  in  the
button-hole  of  the  vital  man,  and  reason  became  the  magnificent
servant  of  Life  and  Matter.  The  titanic  development  of  the  vital
Life  which  followed  is  ending  as  the  Titans  always  end ; it  lit  its
own  funeral  pyre  in  the  conflagration  of  a world-war,  its  natural
upshot,  a struggle  between  the  most  “efficient”  and  “civilised”
nations  for  the  possession  and  enjoyment  of  the  world,  of  its
wealth,  its  markets,  its  available  spaces,  an  inflated  and  plethoric
commercial  expansion,  largeness  of  imperial  size  and  rule.  For
that  is  what  the  Great  War  signified  and  was  in  its  real  origin,
because  that  was  the  secret  or  the  open  intention  of  all  pre-war
diplomacy  and  international  politics;  and  if  a nobler  idea  was
awakened  at  least  for  a time,  it  was  only  under  the  scourge  of
Death  and  before  the  terrifying  spectre  of  a gigantic  mutual  des-
truction. Even  so  the  awakening  was  by  no  means  complete,  nor
everywhere  quite  sincere,  but  it  was  there  and  it  was  struggling
towards  birth  even  in  Germany,  once  the  great  protagonist  of  the
vitalistic  philosophy  of  life.  In  that  awakening  lay  some  hope
of  better  things.  But  for  the  moment  at  least  the  vitalistic  aim
has  once  more  raised  its  head  in  a new  form  and  the  hope  has
dimmed  in  a darkness  and  welter  in  which  only  the  eye  of  faith
can  see  chaos  preparing  a new  cosmos.

The  first  result  of  this  imperfect  awakening  seemed  likely  to
be  a return  to  an  older  ideal,  with  a will  to  use  the  reason  and  the
ethical  mind  better  and  more  largely  in  the  ordering  of  individual,
of  national  and  of  international  life.  But  such  an  attempt,  though
well  enough  as  a first  step,  cannot  be  the  real  and  final  solution ;
if  our  effort  ends  there,  we  shall  not  arrive.  The  solution  lies,  we
have  said,  in  an  awakening  to  our  real,  because  our  highest  self
and  nature,  that  hidden  self  which  we  are  not  yet,  but  have  to
become  and  which  is  not  the  strong  and  enlightened  vital  Will
hymned  by  Nietzsche,  but  a spiritual  self  and  spiritual  nature  that


The  Necessity  of  the  Spiritual  Transformation  225

will  use  the  mental  being  which  we  already  are,  but  the  mental
being  spiritualised,  and  transform  by  a spiritual  ideality  the  aim
and  action  of  our  vital  and  physical  nature.  For  this  is  the  formula
of  man  in  his  highest  potentiality,  and  safety  hes  in  tending
towards  our  highest  and  not  in  resting  content  with  an  inferior
potentiality.  To  follow  after  the  highest  in  us  may  seem  to  be  to
live  dangerously,  to  use  again  one  of  Nietzsche’s  inspired
expressions,  but  by  that  danger  comes  victory  and  security.  To
rest  in  or  follow  after  an  inferior  potentiality  may  seem  safe,
rational,  comfortable,  easy,  but  it  ends  badly,  in  some  futihty
or  in  a mere  circhng,  down  the  abyss  or  in  a stagnant  morass.
Our  right  and  natural  road  is  towards  the  summits.

We  have  then  to  return  to  the  pursuit  of  an  ancient  secret
which  man,  as  a race,  has  seen  only  obscurely  and  followed
after  lamely,  has  indeed  understood  only  with  his  surface  mind
and  not  in  its  heart  of  meaning,  — and  yet  in  following  it  hes
his  social  no  less  than  his  individual  salvation,  — the  ideal  of  the
Kingdom  of  God,  the  secret  of  the  reign  of  the  Spirit  over  mind
and  hfe  and  body.  It  is  because  they  have  never  quite  lost  hold
of  this  secret,  never  disowned  it  in  impatience  for  a lesser  victory,
that  the  older  Asiatic  nations  have  survived  so  persistently  and
can  now,  as  if  immortal,  raise  their  faces  towards  a new  dawn;
for  they  have  fallen  asleep,  but  they  have  not  perished.  It  is  true
that  they  have  for  a time  failed  in  life,  where  the  European  na-
tions who  trusted  to  the  flesh  and  the  intellect  have  succeeded;
but  that  success,  speciously  complete  but  only  for  a time,  has
always  turned  into  a catastrophe.  Still  Asia  had  failed  in  life,
she  had  fallen  in  the  dust,  and  even  if  the  dust  in  which  she  was
lying  was  sacred,  as  the  modern  poet  of  Asia  has  declared,  —
though  the  sacredness  may  be  doubted,  — still  the  dust  is  not  the
proper  place  for  man,  nor  is  to  he  prostrate  in  it  his  right  human
attitude.  Asia  temporarily  failed  not  because  she  followed  after
things  spiritual,  as  some  console  themselves  by  saying,  — as  if
the  Spirit  could  be  at  all  a thing  of  weakness  or  a cause  of  weak-
ness, — but  because  she  did  not  follow  after  the  Spirit  sufficient-
ly, did  not  learn  how  entirely  to  make  it  the  master  of  life.  Her
mind  either  made  a gulf  and  a division  between  hfe  and  the
Spirit  or  else  rested  in  a compromise  between  them  and  accepted


226


The  Human  Cycle

as  final  socio-religious  systems  founded  upon  that  compromise.
So  to  rest  is  perilous;  for  the  call  of  the  Spirit  more  than  any
other  demands  that  we  shall  follow  it  always  to  the  end,  and  the
end  is  neither  a divorce  and  departure  nor  a compromise,  but  a
conquest  of  all  by  the  Spirit  and  that  reign  of  the  seekers  after
perfection  which,  in  the  Hindu  religious  symbol,  the  last  Avatar
comes  to  accomplish.

This  truth  it  is  important  to  note,  for  mistakes  made  on  the
path  are  often  even  more  instructive  than  the  mistakes  made
by  a turning  aside  from  the  path.  As  it  is  possible  to  superimpose
the  intellectual,  ethical  or  aesthetic  life  or  the  sum  of  their  mo-
tives upon  the  vital  and  physical  nature,  to  be  satisfied  with  a
partial  domination  or  a compromise,  so  it  is  possible  to  super-
impose the  spiritual  life  or  some  figure  of  strength  or  ascendency
of  spiritual  ideas  and  motives  on  the  mental,  vital  and  physical
nature  and  either  to  impoverish  the  latter,  to  impoverish  the  vital
and  physical  existence  and  even  to  depress  the  mental  as  well  in
order  to  give  the  spiritual  an  easier  domination,  or  else  to  make
a compromise  and  leave  the  lower  being  to  its  pasture  on  condi-
tion of  its  doing  frequent  homage  to  the  spiritual  existence,  ad-
mitting to  a certain  extent,  greater  or  less,  its  influence  and  for-
mally acknowledging  it  as  the  last  state  and  the  finality  of  the
human  being.  This  is  the  most  that  human  society  has  ever  done
in  the  past,  and  though  necessarily  that  must  be  a stage  of  the
journey,  to  rest  there  is  to  miss  the  heart  of  the  matter,  the  one
thing  needful.  Not  a humanity  leading  its  ordinary  life,  what  is
now  its  normal  round,  touched  by  spiritual  influences,  but  a
humanity  aspiring  whole-heartedly  to  a law  that  is  now  abnormal
to  it  until  its  whole  life  has  been  elevated  into  spirituality,  is  the
steep  way  that  lies  before  man  towards  his  perfection  and  the
transformation  that  it  has  to  achieve.

The  secret  of  the  transformation  lies  in  the  transference
of  our  centre  of  living  to  a higher  consciousness  and  in  a change
of  our  main  power  of  living.  This  will  be  a leap  or  an  ascent  even
more  momentous  than  that  which  Nature  must  have  at  one  time
made  from  the  vital  mind  of  the  am'mal  to  the  thinking  mind
still  imperfect  in  our  human  intelligence.  The  central  will  implicit
in  life  must  be  no  longer  the  vital  will  in  the  life  and  the  body.


The  Necessity  of  the  Spiritual  Transformation  227

but  the  spiritual  will  of  which  we  have  now  only  rare  and  dim
intimations  and  glimpses.  For  now  it  comes  to  us  hardly  dis-
closed, weakened,  disguised  in  the  mental  Idea;  but  it  is  in  its
own  nature  supramental  and  it  is  its  supramental  power  and
truth  that  we  have  somehow  to  discover.  The  main  power  of
our  living  must  be  no  longer  the  inferior  vital  urge  of  Nature
which  is  already  accomplished  in  us  and  can  only  whirl  upon  its
rounds  about  the  ego-centre,  but  that  spiritual  force  of  which
we  sometimes  hear  and  speak  but  have  not  yet  its  inmost  secret.
For  that  is  still  retired  in  our  depths  and  waits  for  our  tran-
scendence of  the  ego  and  the  discovery  of  the  true  individual
in  whose  universality  we  shall  be  united  with  all  others.  To  trans-
fer from  the  vital  being,  the  instrumental  reality  in  us,  to  the  spi-
rit, the  central  reality,  to  elevate  to  that  height  our  will  to  be  and
our  power  of  living  is  the  secret  which  our  nature  is  seeking  to
discover.  All  that  we  have  done  hitherto  is  some  half  successful
effort  to  transfer  this  will  and  power  to  the  mental  plane;  our
highest  endeavour  and  labour  has  been  to  become  the  mental
being  and  to.  live  in  the  strength  of  the  Idea.  But  the  mental  idea
in  us  is  always  intermediary  and  instrumental;  always  it  depends
on  something  other  than  it  for  its  ground  of  action  and  therefore
although  it  can  follow  for  a time  after  its  own  separate  satisfac-
tion, it  cannot  rest  for  ever  satisfied  with  that  alone.  It  must
either  gravitate  downwards  and  outwards  towards  the  vital
and  physical  life  or  it  must  elevate  itself  inwards  and  upwards
towards  the  Spirit.

And  that  must  be  why  in  thought,  in  art,  in  conduct,  in  life
we  are  always  divided  between  two  tendencies,  one  idealistic,
the  other  realistic.  The  latter  very  easily  seems  to  us  more  real,
more  solidly  founded,  more  in  touch  with  actualities  because  it
relies  upon  a reality  which  is  patent,  sensible  and  already  accom-
plished; the  idealistic  easily  seems  to  us  something  unreal,
fantastic,  unsubstantial,  nebulous,  a thing  more  of  thoughts
and  words  than  of  live  actualities,  because  it  is  trying  to  embody
a reality  not  yet  accomplished.  To  a certain  extent  we  are
perhaps  right;  for  the  ideal,  a stranger  among  the  actualities
of  our  physical  existence,  is  in  fact  a thing  unreal  until  it  has
either  in  some  way  reconciled  itself  to  the  imperfections  of  our


228


The  Human  Cycle


outer  life  or  else  has  found  the  greater  and  purer  reality  for
which  it  is  seeking  and  imposed  it  on  our  outer  activities;
till  then  it  hangs  between  two  worlds  and  has  conquered  neither
the  upper  light  nor  the  nether  darkness.  Submission  to  the
actual  by  a compromise  is  easy;  discovery  of  the  spiritual
truth  and  the  transformation  of  our  actual  way  of  living  is
difficult;  but  it  is  precisely  this  difficult  thing  that  has  to  be
done,  if  man  is  to  find  and  fulfil  his  true  nature.  Our  idealism
is  always  the  most  rightly  human  thing  in  us,  but  as  a mental
idealism  it  is  a thing  ineffective.  To  be  effective  it  has  to  con-
vert itself  into  a spiritual  realism  which  shall  lay  its  hands  on  the
higher  reality  of  the  Spirit  and  take  up  for  it  this  lower  reality
of  our  sensational,  vital  and  physical  nature.

This  upward  transference  of  our  will  to  be  and  our  power
of  life  we  have,  then,  to  make  the  very  principle  of  our  per-
fection. That  will,  that  power  must  choose  between  the  domina-
tion of  the  vital  part  in  us  and  the  domination  of  the  Spirit.
Nature  can  rest  in  the  round  of  vital  being,  can  produce  there
a sort  of  perfection,  but  that  is  the  perfection  of  an  arrested
development  satisfied  with  its  own  limits.  This  she  can  manage
in  the  plant  and  the  animal,  because  the  life  and  the  body  are
there  at  once  the  instrument  and  the  aim;  they  do  not  look
beyond  themselves.  She  cannot  do  it  in  man  because  here
she  has  shot  up  beyond  her  physical  and  vital  basis;  she  has
developed  in  him  the  mind  which  is  an  outflowering  of  the  life
towards  the  light  of  the  Spirit,  and  the  life  and  the  body  are
now  instrumental  and  no  longer  their  own  aim.  Therefore  the
perfection  of  man  cannot  consist  in  pursuing  the  unillumined
round  of  the  physical  life.  Neither  can  it  be  found  in  the  wider
rounds  of  the  mental  being;  for  that  also  is  instrumental
and  tends  towards  something  else  beyond  it,  something
whose  power  indeed  works  in  it,  but  whose  larger  truth  is
superconscient  to  its  present  intelligence,  supramental.  The

perfection  of  man  lies  in  the  unfolding  of  the  ever-perfect
Spirit.

The  lower  perfection  of  Nature  in  the  plant  and  the  animal
comes  from  an  instinctive,  an  automatic,  a subconscient
obedience  in  each  to  the  vital  truth  of  its  own' being.  The


The  Necessity  of  the  Spiritual  Transformation  229

higher  perfection  of  the  spiritual  life  will  come  by  a spontaneous
obedience  of  spiritualised  man  to  the  truth  of  his  own  realised
being,  when  he  has  become  himself,  when  he  has  found  his  own
real  nature.  For  this  spontaneity  will  not  be  instinctive  and
subconscient,  it  will  be  intuitive  and  fully,  integrally  conscious.
It  will  be  a glad  obedience  to  a spontaneous  principle  of  spiritual
light,  to  the  force  of  a unified  and  integralised  highest  truth,
largest  beauty,  good,  power,  joy,  love,  oneness.  The  object
of  this  force  acting  in  fife  will  and  must  be  as  in  all  life  growth,
possession,  enjoyment,  but  a growth  which  is  a divine  mani-
festation, a possession  and  enjoyment  spiritual  and  of  the
Spirit  in  things,  — an  enjoyment  that  will  use,  but  will  not
depend  on  the  mental,  vital  and  physical  symbols  of  our  living.
Therefore  this  will  not  be  a limited  perfection  of  arrested  develop-
ment dependent  on  the  repetition  of  the  same  forms  and  the
same  round  of  actions,  any  departure  from  which  becomes  a
peril  and  a disturbance.  It  will  be  an  illimitable  perfection
capable  of  endless  variation  in  its  forms,  — for  the  ways  of  the
Spirit  are  countless  and  endless,  — but  securely  the  same  in  all
variations,  one  but  multitudinously  infinite.

Therefore,  too,  this  perfection  cannot  come  by  the  mental
idea  dealing  with  the  Spirit  as  it  deals  with  life.  The  idea  in
mind  seizing  upon  the  central  will  in  Spirit  and  trying  to  give  this
higher  force  a conscious  orientation  and  method  in  accordance
with  the  ideas  of  the  intellect  is  too  limited,  too  darkened,  too
poor  a force  to  work  this  miracle.  Still  less  can  it  come  if  we
chain  the  Spirit  to  some  fixed  mental  idea  or  system  of  religious
cult,  intellectual  truth,  aesthetic  norm,  ethical  rule,  practical
action,  way  of  vital  and  physical  life,  to  a particular  arrange-
ment of  forms  and  actions  and  declare  all  departure  from  that
a peril  and  a disturbance  or  a deviation  from  spiritual  living.
That  was  the  mistake  made  in  Asia  and  the  cause  of  its  arrested
development  and  decline;  for  this  is  to  subject  the  higher  to
the  lower  principle  and  to  bind  down  the  self-disclosing  Spirit
to  a provisional  and  imperfect  compromise  with  mind  and  the
vital  nature.  Man’s  true  freedom  and  perfection  will  come
when  the  Spirit  within  bursts  through  the  forms  of  mind  and
life  and,  winging  above  to  its  own  gnostic  fiery  height  of  ether.


230


The  Human  Cycle

turns  upon  them  from  that  light  and  flame  to  seize  them  and
transform  into  its  own  image.

In  fact,  as  we  have  seen,  the  mind  and  the  intellect  are  not
the  key-power  of  our  existence.  For  they  can  only  trace  out  a
round  of  half-truths  and  uncertainties  and  revolve  in  that
unsatisfying  circle.  But  concealed  in  the  mind  and  life,  in  all  the
action  of  the  intellectual,  the  aesthetic,  the  ethical,  the  dynamic
and  practical,  the  emotional,  sensational,  vital  and  physical
being,  there  is  a power  that  sees  by  identity  and  intuition  and
gives  to  all  these  things  such  truth  and  such  certainty  and
stability  as  they  are  able  to  compass.  Obscurely  we  are  now
beginning  to  see  something  of  this  behind  all  our  science  and
philosophy  and  all  our  other  activities.  But  so  long  as  this
power  has  to  work  for  the  mind  and  life  and  not  for  itself,  to
work  in  their  forms  and  not  by  its  own  spontaneous  light,  we
cannot  make  any  great  use  of  this  discovery,  cannot  get  the  native
benefit  of  this  inner  Daemon.  Man’s  road  to  spiritual  super-
manhood will  be  open  when  he  declares  boldly  that  all  he  has
yet  developed,  including  the  intellect  of  which  he  is  so  rightly
and  yet  so  vainly  proud,  are  now  no  longer  sufficient  for  him,
and  that  to  uncase,  discover,  set  free  this  greater  Light  within
shall  be  henceforward  his  pervading  preoccupation.  Then  will
his  philosophy,  art,  science,  ethics,  social  existence,  vital  pur-
suits be  no  longer  an  exercise  of  mind  and  life,  done  for  them-
selves, carried  in  a circle,  but  a means  for  the  discovery  of  a
greater  Truth  behind  mind  and  life  and  for  the  bringing  of  its
power  into  our  human  existence.  We  shall  be  on  the  right
road  to  become  ourselves,  to  find  our  true  law  of  perfection,  to
live  our  true,  satisfied  existence  in  our  real  being  and  divine
nature.


Chapter  XXIII


Conditions  for  the  Coming
of  a Spiritual  Age


A CHANGE  of  this  kind,  the  change  from
the  mental  and  vital  to  the  spiritual  order  of  life,  must  neces-
sarily be  accomplished  in  the  individual  and  in  a great  number
of  individuals  before  it  can  lay  any  effective  hold  upon  the
community.  The  Spirit  in  humanity  discovers,  develops,  builds
into  form  in  the  individual  man;  it  is  through  the  progressive
and  formative  individual  that  it  offers  the  discovery  and  the
chance  of  a new  self-creation  to  the  mind  of  the  race.  For  the


communal  mind  holds  things  subconsciently  at  first  or,  if  con-
sciously, then  in  a confused  chaotic  manner:  it  is  only  through
the  individual  mind  that  the  mass  can  arrive  at  a clear  know-


ledge and  creation  of  the  thing  it  held  in  its  subconscient  self.
Thinkers,  historians,  sociologists  who  belittle  the  individual  and
would  like  to  lose  him  in  the  mass  or  think  of  him  chiefly  as  a
cell,  an  atom,  have  got  hold  only  of  the  obscurer  side  of  the  truth
of  Nature’s  workings  in  humanity.  It  is  because  man  is  not
like  the  material  formations  of  Nature  or  like  the  animal,
because  she  intends  in  him  a more  and  more  conscious  evolu-


tion, that  individuality  is  so  much  developed  in  him  and  so
absolutely  important  and  indispensable.  No  doubt  what  comes
out  in  the  individual  and  afterwards  moves  the  mass,  must  have
been  there  already  in  the  universal  Mind  and  the  individual  is
only  an  instrument  for  its  manifestation,  discovery,  develop-
ment; but  he  is  an  indispensable  instrument  and  an  instrument
not  merely  of  subconscient  Nature,  not  merely  of  an  instinctive
urge  that  moves  the  mass,  but  more  directly  of  the  Spirit  of  whom
that  Nature  is  itself  the  instrument  and  the  matrix  of  his  crea-
tions. All  great  changes  therefore  find  their  first  clear  and
effective  power  and  their  direct  shaping  force  in  the  mind  and
spirit  of  an  individual  or  of  a limited  number  of  individuals.


252


The  Human  Cycle

The  mass  follows,  but  unfortunately  in  a very  imperfect  and
confused  fashion  which  often  or  even  usually  ends  in  the  failure
or  distortion  of  the  thing  created.  If  it  were  not  so,  mankind
could  have  advanced  on  its  way  with  a victorious  rapidity
instead  of  with  the  lumbering  hesitations  and  soon  exhausted
rushes  that  seem  to  be  all  of  which  it  has  yet  been  capable.

Therefore  if  the  spiritual  change  of  which  we  have  been
speaking  is  to  be  effected,  it  must  unite  two  conditions  which
have  to  be  simultaneously  satisfied  but  are  most  difllcult  to
bring  together.  There  must  be  the  individual  and  the  individuals
who  are  able  to  see,  to  develop,  to  re-create  themselves  in  the
image  of  the  Spirit  and  to  communicate  both  their  idea  and  its
power  to  the  mass.  And  there  must  be  at  the  same  time  a mass,
a society,  a communal  mind  or  at  the  least  the  constituents  of
a group-body,  the  possibility  of  a group-soul  which  is  capable
of  receiving  and  effectively  assimilating,  ready  to  follow  and
effectively  arrive,  not  compelled  by  its  own  inherent  deficiencies,
its  defect  of  preparation  to  stop  on  the  way  or  fall  back  before
the  decisive  change  is  made.  Such  a simultaneity  has  never  yet
happened,  although  the  appearance  of  it  has  sometimes  been
created  by  the  ardour  of  a moment.  That  the  combination  must
happen  some  day  is  a certainty,  but  none  can  tell  how  many
attempts  will  have  to  be  made  and  how  many  sediments  of
spiritual  experience  will  have  to  be  accumulated  in  the  sub-
conscient  mentality  of  the  communal  human  being  before  the
soil  is  ready.  For  the  chances  of  success  are  always  less  power-
ful in  a difficult  upward  effort  affecting  the  very  .roots  of  our
nature  than  the  numerous  possibilities  of  failure.  The  initiator
hirnself  may  be  imperfect,  may  not  have  waited  to  become
entirely  the  thing  that  he  has  seen.  Even  the  few  who  have  the
apostolate  in  their  charge  may  not  have  perfectly  assimilated  and
shaped  it  in  themselves  and  may  hand  on  the  power  of  the
Spirit  still  farther  diminished  to  the  many  who  will  come  after
them.  The  society  may  be  intellectuaUy,  vitally,  ethically,
temperamentally  unready,  with  the  result  that  the  final  accep-
tance of  the  spiritual  idea  by  the  society  may  be  also  the  begin-
ning of  its  debasement  and  distortion  and  of  the  consequent
departure  or  diminution  of  the  Spirit.  Any  or  all  of  these  things


Conditions  for  the  Coming  of  a Spiritual  Age  233

may  happen,  and  the  result  will  be,  as  has  so  often  happened
in  the  past,  that  even  though  some  progress  is  made  and  an
important  change  effected,  it  will  not  be  the  decisive  change
which  can  alone  re-create  humanity  in  a diviner  image.

What  then  will  be  that  state  of  society,  what  that  readiness
of  the  common  mind  of  man  which  will  be  most  favourable
to  this  change,  so  that  even  if  it  cannot  at  once  effectuate  itself,
it  may  at  least  make  for  its  ways  a more  decisive  preparation
than  has  been  hitherto  possible?  For  that  seems  the  most
important  element,  since  it  is  that,  it  is  the  unpreparedness,  the
unfitness  of  the  society  or  of  the  common  mind  of  man  which  is
always  the  chief  stumbling-block.  It  is  the  readiness  of  this
common  mind  which  is  of  the  first  importance;  for  even  if  the
condition  of  society  and  the  principle  and  rule  that  govern
society  are  opposed  to  the  spiritual  change,  even  if  these  belong
almost  wholly  to  the  vital,  to  the  external,  the  economic,  the
mechanical  order,  as  is  certainly  the  way  at  present  with  human
masses,  yet  if  the  common  human  mind  has  begun  to  admit
the  ideas  proper  to  the  higher  order  that  is  in  the  end  to  be,
and  the  heart  of  man  has  begun  to  be  stirred  by  aspirations
born  of  these  ideas,  then  there  is  a hope  of  some  advance  in
the  not  distant  future.  And  here  the  first  essential  sign  must  be
the  growth  of  the  subjective  idea  of  life,  — the  idea  of  the  soul,
the  inner  being,  its  powers,  its  possibilities,  its  growth,  its
expression  and  the  creation  of  a true,  beautiful  and  helpful
environment  for  it  as  the  one  thing  of  first  and  last  importance.
The  signals  must  be  there  that  are  precursors  of  a subjective
age  in  humanity’s  thought  and  social  endeavour.

These  ideas  are  likely  first  to  declare  their  trend  in  philo-
sophy, in  psychological  thinking,  in  the  arts,  poetry,  painting,
sculpture,  music,  in  the  main  idea  of  ethics,  in  the  application
of  subjective  principles  by  thinkers  to  social  questions,  even
perhaps,  though  this  is  a perilous  effort,  to  politics  and  eco-
nomics, that  hard  refractory  earth  matter  which  most  resists
all  but  a gross  utihtarian  treatment.  There  will  be  new  unex-
pected departures  of  science  or  at  least  of  research,  — since  to
such  a turn  in  its  most  fruitful  seekings  the  orthodox  still  deny
the  name  of  science.  Discoveries  will  be  made  that  thin  the


234  The  Human  Cycle

walls  between  soul  and  matter;  attempts  there  will  be  to  extend
exact  knowledge  into  the  psychological  and  psychic  realms  with
a realisation  of  the  truth  that  these  have  laws  of  their  own
which  are  other  than  physical,  but  not  the  less  laws  because
they  escape  the  external  senses  and  are  infinitely  plastic  and
subtle.  There  will  be  a labour  of  religion  to  reject  its  past  heavy
weight  of  dead  matter  and  revivify  its  strength  in  the  fountains
of  the  Spirit.  These  are  sure  signs,  if  not  of  the  thing  to  be,  at
least  of  a great  possibility  of  it,  of  an  effort  that  will  surely  be
made,  another  endeavour  perhaps  with  a larger  sweep  and  a
better  equipped  intelligence  capable  not  only  of  feeling  but  of
understanding  the  Truth  that  is  demanding  to  be  heard.  Some
such  signs  we  can  see  at  the  present  time  although  they  are
only  incipient  and  sporadic  and  have  not  yet  gone  far  enough  to
warrant  a confident  certitude.  It  is  only  when  these  groping
beginnings  have  found  that  for  which  they  are  seeking,  that  it
can  be  successfully  applied  to  the  remoulding  of  the  life  of
man.  Till  then  nothing  better  is  likely  to  be  achieved  than  an
inner  preparation  and,  for  the  rest,  radical  or  revolutionary
experiments  of  a doubtful  kind  with  the  details  of  the  vast  and
cumbrous  machinery  under  which  life  now  groans  and  labours.

A subjective  age  may  stop  very  far  short  of  spirituality;
for  the  subjective  turn  is  only  a first  condition,  not  the  thing
itself,  not  the  end  of  the  matter.  The  search  for  the  Reality,
the  true  self  of  man,  may  very  easily  follow  out  the  natural
order  described  by  the  Upanishad  in  the  profound  apologue
of  the  seekings  of  Bhrigu,  son  of  Varuna.  For  first  the  seeker
found  the  ultimate  reality  to  be  Matter  and  the  physical,  the
material  being,  the  external  man  our  only  self  and  spirit.  Next
he  fixed  on  Life  as  the  Reality  and  the  vital  being  as  the  self
and  spirit;  in  the  third  essay  on  Mind  and  the  mental  being;
only  afterwards  could  he  get  beyond  the  superficial  subjective
throu^  the  supramental  Truth-Consciousness  to  the  eternal,
the  blissful,  the  ever  creative  Reality  of  which  these  are  the
sheaths.  But  humanity  may  not  be  as  persistent  or  as  plastic
Varuna,  the  search  may  stop  short  anywhere.  Only
if  It  IS  intended  that  he  shall  now  at  last  arrive  and  discover,  will
the  Spirit  break  each  insufficient  formula  as  soon  as  it  has


Conditions  for  the  Coming  of  a Spiritual  Age  235

shaped  itself  and  compel  the  thought  of  man  to  press  forward
to  a larger  discovery  and  in  the  end  to  the  largest  and  most
luminous  of  all.  Something  of  the  kind  has  been  happening  but
only  in  a very  external  way  and  on  the  surface.  After  the  material
formula  which  governed  the  greater  part  of  the  nineteenth  cen-
tury had  burdened  man  with  the  heaviest  servitude  to  the
machinery  of  the  outer  material  life  that  he  has  ever  yet  been
called  upon  to  bear,  the  first  attempt  to  break  through,  to  get
to  the  living  reahty  in  things  and  away  from  the  mechanical
idea  of  life  and  living  and  society,  landed  us  in  that  surface
vitalism  which  had  already  begun  to  govern  thought  before  the
two  formulas  inextricably  locked  together  lit  up  and  flung
themselves  on  the  lurid  pyre  of  the  World  War.  The  vital
elan  brought  us  no  deliverance,  but  only  used  the  machinery
already  created  with  a more  feverish  insistence,  a vehement
attempt  to  live  more  rapidly,  more  intensely,  an  inordinate
will  to  act  and  to  succeed,  to  enlarge  the  mere  force  of  living,
to  pile  up  a gigantic  efficiency  of  hfe.  It  could  not  have  been
otherwise  even  if  this  vitahsm  had  been  less  superficial  and
external,  more  truly  subjective.  To  live,  to  act,  to  grow,  to
increase  the  vital  force,  to  understand,  utilise  and  fulfil  the
intuitive  impulse  of  life  are  not  things  evil  in  themselves;  rather
they  are  excellent  things,  if  rightly  followed  and  rightly  used,
that  is  to  say,  if  they  are  directed  to  something  beyond  the
mere  vitalistic  impulse  and  are  governed  by  that  within  which  is
higher  than  Life.  The  Life-power  is  an  instrument,  not  an
aim;  it  is  in  the  upward  scale  the  first  great  subjective  supra-
physical  instrument  of  the  Spirit  and  the  base  of  all  action  and
endeavour.  But  a Life-power  that  sees  nothing  beyond  itself,
nothing  to  be  served  except  its  own  organised  demands  and
impulses,  will  be  very  soon  like  the  force  of  steam  driving  an
engine  without  the  driver  or  an  engine  in  which  the  locomotive
force  has  made  the  driver  its  servant  and  not  its  controller.
It  can  only  add  the  uncontrollable  impetus  of  a high-crested
or  broad-based  Titanism,  or  it  may  be  even  a nether  flaming
demonism,  to  the  Nature  forces  of  the  material  world  with  the
intellect  as  its  servant,  an  impetus  of  measureless  unresting
creation,  appropriation,  expansion  which  will  end  in  something


236


The  Human  Cycle

violent,  huge  and  “colossal”,  foredoomed  in  its  very  nature  to
excess  and  ruin,  because  light  is  not  in  it  nor  the  soul’s  truth
nor  the  sanction  of  the  gods  and  their  calm  eternal  will  and
knowledge.

But  beyond  the  subjectivism  of  the  vital  self  there  is  the
possibility  of  a mental  and  even  a psychic  subjectivism  which
would  at  first  perhaps,  leaning  upon  the  already  realised  idea
of  the  soul  as  Life  in  action  but  correcting  it,  appear  as  a hi^y
mentalised  pragmatism,  but  might  afterwards  rise  to  the  higher
idea  of  man  as  a soul  that  develops  itself  individually  and
collectively  in  the  life  and  body  through  the  play  of  an  ever-
expanding  mental  existence.  This  greater  idea  would  realise
that  the  elevation  of  the  human  existence  will  come  not  through
material  efficiency  alone  or  the  complex  play  of  his  vital  and
dynamic  powers  mastering  through  the  aid  of  the  intellect  the
energies  of  physical  Nature  for  the  satisfaction  of  the  life-
instincts,  which  can  only  be  an  intensification  of  his  present
mode  of  existence,  but  through  the  greatness  of  his  mental  and
psychic  being  and  a discovery  bringing  forward  an  organisation
of  his  vast  subliminal  nature  and  its  forces.  It  would  see  in
life  an  opportunity  for  the  joy  and  power  of  knowledge,  for  the
joy  and  power  of  beauty,  for  the  joy  and  power  of  the  human
will  mastering  not  only  physical  Nature,  but  vital  and  mental
Nature.  It  might  discover  her  secret  yet  undreamed-of  mind-
powers  and  life-powers  and  use  them  for  a freer  liberation  of
man  from  the  limitations  of  his  shackled  bodily  life.  It  might
arrive  at  new  psychic  relations,  a more  sovereign  power  of  the
idea  to  realise  itself  in  the  act,  inner  means  of  overcoming
obstacles  of  distance  and  division  which  would  cast  into  insigni-
ficance even  the  last  miraculous  achievements  of  material
Science.  A development  of  this  kind  is  far  enough  away  from  the
dreams  of  the  mass  of  men,  but  there  are  certain  pale  hints  and
presages  of  such  a possibility  and  ideas  which  lead  to  it  are
already  held  by  a great  number  who  are  perhaps  in  this  respect
the  yet  unrecognised  vanguard  of  humanity.  It  is  not  impossible
that  behind  the  confused  morning  voices  of  the  hour  a light  of
this  kind,  still  below  the  horizon,  may  be  waiting  to  ascend  with
its  splendours.


Conditions  for  the  Coming  of  a Spiritual  Age  237

Such  a turn  of  human  thought,  effort,  ideas  of  life,  if  it  took
hold  of  the  communal  mind,  would  evidently  lead  to  a profound
revolution  throughout  the  whole  range  of  human  existence.  It
would  give  it  from  the  first  a new  tone  and  atmosphere,  a loftier
spirit,  wider  horizons,  a greater  aim.  It  might  easily  develop  a
Science  which  would  bring  the  powers  of  the  physical  world  into
a real  and  not  only  a contingent  and  mechanical  subjection  and
open  perhaps  the  doors  of  other  worlds.  It  might  develop  an
achievement  of  Art  and  Beauty  which  would  make  the  greatness
of  the  past  a comparatively  little  thing  and  would  save  the  world
from  the  astonishingly  callous  reign  of  utilitarian  ugliness  that
even  now  afflicts  it.  It  would  open  up  a closer  and  freer  inter-
change between  human  minds  and,  it  may  well  be  hoped,  a
kindlier  interchange  between  human  hearts  and  lives.  Nor  need
its  achievements  stop  here,  but  might  proceed  to  greater  things
of  which  these  would  be  only  the  beginnings.  This  mental  and
psychic  subjectivism  would  have  its  dangers,  greater  dangers
even  than  those  that  attend  a vitalistic  subjectivism,  because  its
powers  of  action  also  would  be  greater,  but  it  would  have  what
vitalistic  subjectivism  has  not  and  cannot  easily  have,  the  chance
of  a detecting  discernment,  strong  safeguards  and  a powerful
liberating  light.

Moving  with  difficulty  upward  from  Matter  to  Spirit,  this  is
perhaps  a necessary  stage  of  man’s  development.  This  was  one
principal  reason  of  the  failure  of  past  attempts  to  spiritualise
mankind,  that  they  endeavoured  to  spiritualise  at  once  the
material  man  by  a sort  of  rapid  miracle,  and  though  that  can  be
done,  the  miracle  is  not  likely  to  be  of  an  enduring  character  if  it
overleaps  the  stages  of  his  ascent  and  leaves  the  intervening  levels
untrodden  and  therefore  unmastered.  The  endeavour  may  suc-
ceed with  individuals,  — Indian  thought  would  say  with  those
who  have  made  themselves  ready  in  a past  existence,  but  it
must  fail  with  the  mass.  When  it  passes  beyond  the  few,  the
forceful  miracle  of  the  Spirit  flags;  unable  to  transform  by
inner  force,  the  new  religion  tries  to  save  by  machinery,  is  en-
tangled in  the  mechanical  turning  of  its  own  instruments,  loses
the  spirit  and  perishes  quickly  or  decays  slowly.  That  is  the  fate
which  overtakes  all  attempts  of  the  vitalistic,  the  intellectual


238  The  Human  Cycle

and  mental,  the  spiritual  endeavour  to  deal  with  material  man
through  his  physical  mind  chiefly  or  alone;  the  endeavour  is
overpowered  by  the  machinery  it  creates  and  becomes  the  slave
and  victim  of  the  machine.  That  is  the  revenge  which  our
material  Nature,  herself  mechanical,  takes  upon  all  such  violent
endeavours;  she  waits  to  master  them  by  their  concessions  to
her  own  law.  If  mankind  is  to  be  spiritualised,  it  must  first  in  the
mass  cease  to  be  the  material  or  the  vital  man  and  become  the
psychic  and  the  true  mental  being.  It  may  be  questioned  whether
such  a mass  progress  or  conversion  is  possible ; but  if  it  is  not,
then  the  spiritualisation  of  mankind  as  a whole  is  a chimera.

From  this  point  of  view  it  is  an  excellent  thing,  a sign  of
great  promise,  that  the  wheel  of  civilisation  has  been  following
its  past  and  present  curve  upward  from  a solid  physical  know-
ledge through  a successive  sounding  of  higher  and  higher  powers
that  mediate  between  Matter  and  Spirit.  The  human  intellect
in  modern  times  has  been  first  drawn  to  exhaust  the  possibilities
of  materialism  by  an  immense  dealing  with  life  and  the  world
upon  the  basis  of  Matter  as  the  sole  reality.  Matter  as  the  Eternal,
Matter  as  the  Brahman,  annam  brahma.  Afterwards  it  had
begun  to  turn  towards  the  conception  of  existence  as  the  large
pulsation  of  a great  evolving  Life,  the  creator  of  Matter,  which
would  have  enabled  it  to  deal  with  our  existence  on  the  basis  of
Life  as  the  original  reality.  Life  as  the  great  Eternal,  prano
brahma.  And  already  it  has  in  germ,  in  preparation  a third  con-
^ption,  the  discovery  of  a great  self-expressing  and  self-finding
inner  Mind  other  than  our  surface  mentality  as  a master-power
of  existence,  that  should  lead  towards  a rich  attempt  to  deal  with
our  possibilities  and  our  ways  of  living  on  the  basis  of  Mind  as
the  original  reality,  the  great  Eternal,  mono  brahma.  It  will. also
be  a sign  of  promise  if  these  conceptions  succeeded  each  other
with  rapidity,  with  a large  but  swift  evocation  of  the  possibilities
of  each  level ; for  that  would  show  that  there  is  a readiness  in
our  subconscient  Nature  and  that  we  need  not  linger  in  each
stage  for  centuries.

But  still  a subjective  age  of  mankind  must  be  an  adventure
full  of  perils  and  uncertainties  as  are  all  great  adventures  of  the
race.  It  may  wander  long  before  it  finds  itself  or  may  not  find


Conditions  for  the  Coming  of  a Spiritual  Age  239

itself  at  all  and  swing  back  to  a new  repetition  of  the  cycle.

The  true  secret  can  only  be  discovered  if  in  the  third  stage,
in  an  age  of  mental  subjectivism,  the  idea  becomes  strong  of  the
Mind  itself  as  no  more  than  a secondary  power  of  the  Spirit’s
working  and  of  the  Spirit  as  the  great  Eternal,  the  original  and,
in  spite  of  the  many  terms  in  which  it  is  both  expressed  and
hidden,  the  sole  reality,  ayam  dtmd  brahma.  Then  only  will  the
real,  the  decisive  endeavour  begin  and  life  and  the  world  be
studied,  known,  dealt  with  in  all  directions  as  the  self-finding
and  self-expression  of  the  Spirit.  Then  only  will  a spiritual  age
of  mankind  be  possible.  To  attempt  any  adequate  discussion  of
what  that  would  mean,  and  in  an  inadequate  discussion  there  is
no  fruit,  would  need  another  volume  or  two  of  essays;  for  we
should  have  to  examine  a knowledge  which  is  rare  and  nowhere
more  than  initial.  It  is  enough  to  say  that  a spiritual  human
society  would  start  from  and  try  to  realise  three  essential  truths
of  existence  which  all  Nature  seems  to  be  an  attempt  to  hide
by  their  opposites  and  which  therefore  are  as  yet  for  the  mass
of  mankind  only  words  and  dreams,  God,  freedom,  unity.  Three
things  which  are  one,  for  you  cannot  realise  freedom  and  unity
unless  you  realise  God,  you  cannot  possess  freedom  and  unity
unless  you  possess  God,  possess  at  once  your  highest  self  and  the
self  of  all  creatures.  The  freedom  and  unity  which  otherwise  go
by  that  name,  are  simply  attempts  of  our  subjection  and  our
division  to  get  away  from  themselves  by  shutting  their  eyes  while
they  turn  somersaults  around  their  own  centre.  When  man  is
able  to  see  God  and  to  possess  him,  then  he  will  know  real  free-
dom and  arrive  at  real  unity,  never  otherwise.  And  God  is  only
waiting  to  be  known,  while  man  seeks  for  him  everywhere  and
creates  images  of  the  Divine,  but  all  the  while  truly  finds,  effec-
tively erects  and  worships  images  only  of  his  own  mind-ego  and
life-ego.  When  this  ego  pivot  is  abandoned  and  this  ego-hunt
ceases,  then  man  gets  his  first  real  chance  of  achieving  spirituality
in  his  inner  and  outer  life.  It  will  not  be  enough,  but  it  will  be
a commencement,  a true  gafe  and  not  a blind  entrance.

A spiritualised  society  would  live  like  its  spiritual  indi-
viduals, not  in  the  ego,  but  in  the  spirit,  not  as  the  collective  ego,
but  as  the  collective  soul.  This  freedom  from  the  egoistic  stand-


240


The  Human  Cycle


point  would  be  its  first  and  most  prominent  characteristic.  But
the  elimination  of  egoism  would  not  be  brought  about,  as  it  is
now  proposed  to  bring  it  about,  by  persuading  or  forcing  the
individual  to  immolate  his  personal  will  and  aspirations  and  his
precious  and  hard-won  individuality  to  the  collective  will,  aims
and  egoism  of  the  society,  driving  him  like  a victim  of  ancient
sacrifice  to  slay  his  soul  on  the  altar  of  that  huge  and  shapeless
idol.  For  that  would  be  only  the  sacrifice  of  the  smaller  to  the
larger  egoism,  larger  only  in  bulk,  not  necessarily  greater  in
quality  or  wider  or  nobler,  since  a collective  egoism,  result  of  the
united  egoisms  of  all,  is  as  little  a god  to  be  worshipped,  as
flawed  and  often  an  uglier  and  more  barbarous  fetish  than  the
egoism  of  the  individual.  What  the  spiritual  man  seeks  is  to  find
by  the  loss  of  the  ego  the  Self  which  is  one  in  all  and  perfect  and
complete  in  each  and  by  living  in  that  to  grow  into  the  image  of
its  perfection,  — individually,  be  it  noted,  though  with  an  all-
embracing  universality  of  his  nature  and  its  conscious  circumfer-
ence. It  is  said  in  the  old  Indian  writings  that  while  in  the  second
age,  the  age  of  Power,  Vishnu  descends  in  the  King,  and  in  the
third,  the  age  of  balance,  as  the  legislator  or  codifier,  in  the  age
of  the  Truth  he  descends  as  Yajna,  that  is  to  say,  as  the  Master
of  works  manifest  in  the  heart  of  his  creatures.  It  is  this  kingdom
of  God  within,  the  result  of  the  finding  of  God  not  in  a distant
heaven  but  within  ourselves,  of  which  the  state  of  society  in  an

age  of  the  Truth,  spiritual  age,  would  be  the  result  and  the
external  figure.

Therefore  a society  which  was  even  initially  spiritualised,
would  make  the  revealing  and  finding  of  the  divine  Self  in  man
the  whole  first  aim  of  all  its  activities,  its  education,  its  know-
ledge, its  science,  its  ethics,  its  art,  its  economical  and  political
stnicture.  As  it  was  to  some  extent  in  the  ancient  Vedic  times
\%ith  the  cultural  education  of  the  higher  classes,  so  it  would  be
then  with  all  education.  It  would  embrace  all  knowledge  in  its
scope,  but  would  make  the  whole  trend  and  aim  and  the  per-
meating spirit  not  mere  worldly  efficiency,  but  this  self-develop-
ing an  self-finding.  It  would  pursue  physical  and  psychical
science  not  in  order  merely  to  know  the  world  and  Nature  in  her
processes  and  to  use  them  for  material  human  ends,  but  to  know


241


Conditions  for  the  Coming  of  a Spiritual  Age

through  and  in  and  under  and  over  all  things  the  Divine  in  the
world  and  the  ways  of  the  Spirit  in  its  masks  and  behind  them.
It  would  make  it  the  aim  of  ethics  not  to  establish  a rule  of
action  whether  supplementary  to  the  social  law  or  partially  cor-
rective of  it,  the  social  law  that  is  after  all  only  the  rule,  often
clumsy  and  ignorant,  of  the  biped  pack,  the  human  herd,  but  to
develop  the  divine  nature  in  the  human  being.  It  would  make  it
the  aim  of  Art  not  merely  to  present  images  of  the  subjective  and
objective  world,  but  to  see  thern  with  the  significant  and  creative
vision  that  goes  behind  their  appearances  and  to  reveal  the
Truth  and  Beauty  of  which  things  visible  to  us  and  invisible  are
the  forms,  the  masks  or  the  symbols  and  significant  figures.

A spiritualised  society  would  treat  in  its  sociology  the  indi-
vidual, from  the  saint  to  the  criminal,  not.  as  units  of  a social
problem  to  be  passed  through  some  skilfully  devised  machinery
and  either  flattened  into  the  social  mould  or  crushed  out  of  it,
but  as  souls  suffering  and  entangled  in  a net  and  to  be  rescued,
souls  growing  and  to  be  encouraged  to  grow,  souls  grown  and
from  whom  help  and  power  can  be  drawn  by  the  lesser  spirits  who
are  not  yet  adult.  The  aim  of  its  economics  would  be  not  to
create  a huge  engine  of  production,  whether  of  the  competitive
or  the  co-operative  kind,  but  to  give  to  men  — not  only  to  some
but  to  all  men  each  in  his  highest  possible  measure  — the  joy  of
work  according  to  their  own  nature  and  free  leisure  to  grow
inwardly,  as  well  as  a simply  rich  and  beautiful  life  for  all.  In  its
politics  it  would  not  regard  the  nations  within  the  scope  of  their
own  internal  life  as  enormous  State  machines  regulated  and
armoured  with  man  living  for  the  sake  of  the  machine  and
worshipping  it  as  his  God  and  his  larger  self,  content  at  the  first
call  to  kill  others  upon  its  altar  and  to  bleed  there  himself  so  that
the  machine  may  remain  intact  and  powerful  and  be  made  ever
larger,  more  complex,  more  cumbrous,  more  mechanically
efficient  and  entire.  Neither  would  it  be  content  to  maintain  these
nations  or  States  in  their  mutual  relations  as  noxious  engines
meant  to  discharge  poisonous  gas  upon  each  other  in  peace  and
to  rush  in  times  of  clash  upon  each  other’s  armed  hosts  and
unarmed  millions,  full  of  belching  shot  and  men  missioned  to
murder  like  hostile  tanks  in  a modern  battlefield.  It  would  re-


242  The  Human  Cycle

gard  the  peoples  as  group-souls,  the  Divinity  concealed  and  to
be  self-discovered  in  its  human  collectivities,  group-souls  meant
like  the  individual  to  grow  according  to  their  own  nature  and  by
that  growth  to  help  each  other,  to  help  the  whole  race  in  the  one
common  work  of  humanity.  And  that  work  would  be  to  find  the
divine  Self  in  the  individual  and  the  collectivity  and  to  realise
spiritually,  mentally,  vitally,  materially  its  greatest,  largest,
richest  and  deepest  possibilities  in  the  inner  life  of  all  and  their
outer  action  and  nature.

For  it  is  into  the  Divine  within  each  man  and  each  people
that  the  man  and  the  nation  have  to  grow;  it  is  not  an  external
idea  or  rule  that  has.  to  be  imposed  on  them  from  without.
Therefore  the  law  of  a growing  inner  freedom  is  that  which  will
be  most  honoured  in  the  spiritual  age  of  mankind.  True  it  is  that
so  long  as  man  has  not  come  within  measurable  distance  of  self-
knowledge  and  has  not  set  his  face  towards  it,  he  cannot  escape
from  the  law  of  external  compulsion  and  all  his  efforts  to  do  so
must  be  vain.  He  is  and  always  must  be,  so  long  as  that  lasts,
the  slave  of  others,  the  slave  of  his  family,  his  caste,  his  clan,
his  Church,  his  society,  his  nation;  and  he  cannot  but  be  that
and  they  too  cannot  help  throwing  their  crude  and  mechanical
compulsion  on  him,  because  he  and  they  are  the  slaves  of  their
own  ego,  of  their  own  lower  nature.  We  must  feel  and  obey  the
compulsion  of  the  Spirit  if  we  would  establish  our  inner  right  to
escape  other  compulsion;  we  must  make  our  lower  nature  the
willing  slave,  the  conscious  and  illumined  instrument  or  the
ennobled  but  still  self-subjected  portion,  consort  or  partner  of  the
divine  Being  within  us,  for  it  is  that  subjection  which  is  the  condi-
tion of  our  freedom,  since  spiritual  freedom  is  not  the  egoistic
assertion  of  our  separate  mind  and  life  but  obedience  to  the
Divine  Truth  in  ourself  and  our  members  and  in  all  around  us.
But  we  have,  even  so,  to  remark  that  God  respects  the  freedom
of  the  natural  members  of  our  being  and  that  he  gives  them
room  to  grow  in  their  own  nature  so  that  by  natural  growth  and
not  by  self-extinction  they  may  find  the  Divine  in  themselves.
The  subjection  which  they  finally  accept,  complete  and  absolute,
must  be  a willing  subjection  of  recognition  and  aspiration  to
their  own  source  of  light  and  power  and  their  highest  being.


Conditions  for  the  Coming  of  a Spiritual  Age  243

Therefore  even  in  the  unregenerated  state  we  find  that  the  health-
iest, the  truest,  the  most  Uving.  growth  and  action  is  that  which
arises  in  the  largest  possible  freedom  and  that  all  excess  of  com-
pulsion is  either  the  law  of  a gradual  atrophy  or  a tyranny  varied
or  cured  by  outbreaks  of  rabid  disorder.  And  as  soon  as  man
comes  to  know  his  spiritual  self,  he  does  by  that  discovery,  often
even  by  the  very  seeking  for  it,  as  ancient  thought  and  religion
saw,  escape  from  the  outer  law  and  enter  into  the  law  of  freedom.

A spiritual  age  of  mankind  will  perceive  this  truth.  It  will
not  try  to  make  man  perfect  by  machinery  or  keep  him  straight
by  tying  up  all  his  hmbs.  It  will  not  present  to  the  member  of
the  society  his  higher  self  in  the  person  of  the  policeman,  the
oflScial  and  the  corporal,  nor,  let  us  say,  in  the  form  of  a social-
istic bureaucracy  or  a Labour  Soviet.  Its  aim  will  be  to  diminish
as  soon  and  as  far  as  possible  the  element  of  external  compul-
sion in  human  life  by  awakening  the  inner  divine  compulsion  of
the  Spirit  within  and  aU  the  preliminary  means  it  will  use  will
have  that  for  its  aim.  In  the  end  it  will  employ  chiefly  if  not
solely  the  spiritual  compulsion  which  even  the  spiritual  indi-
vidual can  exercise  on  those  around  him,  — and  how  much  more
should  a spiritual  society  be  able  to  do  it,  — that  which  awakens
within  us  in  spite  of  all  inner  resistance  and  outer  denial  the
compulsions  of  the  Light,  the  desire  and  the  power  to  grow
through  one’s  own  nature  into  the  Divine.  For  the  perfectly  spi-
ritualised society  will  be  one  in  which,  as  is  dreamed  by  the  spiri-
tual anarchist,  all  men  will  be  deeply  free,  and  it  will  be  so  because
the  prehminary  condition  will  have  been  satisfied.  In  that  state
each  man  will  be  not  a law  to  himself,  but  the  law,  the  divine  Law,
because  he  will  be  a soul  Hving  in  the  Divine  and  not  an  ego
living  mainly  if  not  entirely  for  its  own  interest  and  purpose.
His  life  will  be  led  by  the  law  of  his  own  divine  nature  liberated
from  the  ego.

Nor  will  that  mean  a breaking  up  of  all  human  society  into
the  isolated  action  of  individuals;  for  the  third  word  of  the
Spirit  is  unity.  The  spiritual  life  is  the  flower  not  of  a featureless
but  a conscious  and  diversified  oneness.  Each  man  has  to  grow
into  the  Divine  within  himself  through  his  own  individual  being,
therefore  is  a certain  growing  measure  of  freedom  a necessity  of


244


The  Human  Cycle


the  being  as  it  develops  and  perfect  freedom  the  sign  and  the
condition  of  the  perfect  life.  But  also,  the  Divine  \vhom  he  thus
sees  in  himself,  he  sees  equally  in  all  others  and  as  the  same
Spirit  in  all.  Therefore  too  is  a growing  inner  unity  with  others
a necessity  of  his  being  and  perfect  unity  the  sign  and  condition
of  the  perfect  life.  Not  only  to  see  and  find  the  Divine  in  oneself,
but  to  see  and  find  the  Divine  in  all,  not  only  to  seek  one’s  own
individual  liberation  or  perfection,  but  to  seek  the  liberation
and  perfection  of  others  is  the  complete  law  of  the  spiritual  being.
If  the  divinity  sought  were  a separate  godhead  within  oneself  and
not  the  one  Divine,  or  if  one  sought  God  for  oneself  alone,  then
indeed  the  result  might  be  a grandiose  egoism,  the  Olympian
egoism  of  a Goethe  or  the  Titanic  egoism  imagined  by  Nietzsche,
or  it  might  be  the  isolated  self-knowledge  or  asceticism  of  the
ivory  tower  or  the  Stylites  pillar.  But  he  who  sees  God  in  all,
will  serve  freely  God  in  all  with  the  service  of  love.  He  will,  that
is  to  say,  seek  not  only  his  own  freedom,  but  the  freedom  of  all,
not  only  his  own  perfection,  but  the  perfection  of  all.  He  will
not  feel  his  individuality  perfect  except  in  the  largest  universality,
nor  his  own  life  to  be  full  life  except  as  it  is  one  with  the  universal
life.  He  will  not  live  either  for  himself  or  for  the  State  and
society,  for  the  individual  ego  or  the  collective  ego,  but  for
something  much  greater,  for  God  in  himself  and  for  the  Divine
in  the  universe.

The  spiritual  age  will  be  ready  to  set  in  when  the  common
mind  of  man  begins  to  be  alive  to  these  truths  and  to  be  moved  or
desire  to  be  moved  by  this  triple  or  triune  Spirit.  That  will  mean
the  turning  of  the  cycle  of  social  development  which  we  have
been  considering  out  of  its  incomplete  repetitions  on  a new  up-
ward line  towards  its  goal.  For  having  set  out,  according  to  our
supposition,  with  a symbolic  age,  an  age  in  which  man  felt  a great
Reality  behind  all  life  which  he  sought  through  symbols,  it  will
reach  an  age  in  which  it  will  begin  to  live  in  that  Reality,  not
rough  the  symbol,  not  by  the  power  of  the  type  or  of  the
convention  or  of  the  iridividual  reason  and  intellectual  will,  but
r^tru'^  ij’ghesl  nature  which  will  be  the  nature  of  that  Reality
Mnilcd  m the  conditions  - not  necessarily  the  same  as  now-
or  terrcslnal  existence.  This  is  what  the  religions  have  seen  with


Conditions  for  the  Coming  of  a Spiritual  Age  245

a more  or  less  adequate  intuition,  but  most  often  as  in  a glass
darkly,  that  which  they  called  the  kingdom  of  God  on  earth,
— his  kingdom  within  in  men’s  spirit  and  therefore,  for  the
one  is  the  material  result  of  the  effectivity  of  the  other,  his
kingdom  without  in  the  life  of  the  peoples.


Chapter  XXIV


The  Advent  and  Progress  of
the  Spiritual  Age

If  a subjective  age,  the  last  sector  of  a social
cycle,  is  to  find  its  outlet  and  fruition  in  a spiritualised  society
and  the  emergence  of  mankind  on  a higher  evolutionary  level,  it
is  not  enough  that  certain  ideas  favourable  to  that  turn  of
human  life  should  take  hold  of  the  general  mind  of  the  race,  per-
meate the  ordinary  motives  of  its  thought,  art,  ethics,  political
ideals,  social  effort,  or  even  get  well  into  its  inner  way  of  thinking
and  feeling.  It  is  not  enough  even  that  the  idea  of  the  kingdom
of  God  on  earth,  a reign  of  spirituality,,  freedom  and  unity,  a
real  and  inner  equality  and  harmony  — and  not  merely  an
outward  and  mechanical  equalisation  and  association  — should
become  definitely  an  ideal  of  life;  it  is  not  enough  that  this  ideal
should  be  actively  held  as  possible,  desirable,  to  be  sought  and
striven  after,  it  is  not  enough  even  that  it  should  come  forward
as  a governing  preoccupation  of  the  human  mind.  That  would
evidently  be  a very  great  step  forward,  — considering  what  the
ideals  of  mankind  now  are,  an  enormous  step.  It  would  be  the
necessary  beginning,  the  indispensable  mental  environment  for
a living  renovation  of  human  society  in  a higher  type.  But  by  it-
self it  might  only  bring  about  a half-hearted  or  else  a strong  but
only  partially  and  temporarily  successful  attempt  to  bring
something  of  the  manifest  Spirit  into  human  life  and  its  institu-
tions. That  is  all  that  mankind  has  ever  attempted  on  this  line
in  the  past.  It  has  never  attempted  to  work  out  thoroughly
even  that  little,  except  in  the  limits  of  a religious  order  or  a pecu-
liar community,  and  even  there  with  such  serious  defects  and
under  such  drastic  limitations  as  to  make  the  experiment  nuga-
tory and  witliout  any  bearing  on  human  life.  If  we  do  not  get
beyond  the  mere  holding  of  the  ideal  and  its  general  influence  in
human  life,  this  little  is  all  that  mankind  will  attempt  in  the


The  Advent  and  Progress  of  the  Spiritual  Age  247

future.  More  is  needed;  a general  spiritual  awakening  and
aspiration  in  mankind  is  indeed  the  large  necessary  motive-power,
but  the  effective  power  must  be  something  greater.  There  must
be  a dynamic  re-creating  of  individual  manhood  in  the  spiritual
type.

For  the  way  that  humanity  deals  with  an  ideal  is  to  be
satisfied  with  it  as  an  aspiration  which  is  for  the  most  part  left
only  as  an  aspiration,  accepted  only  as  a partial  influence.  The
ideal  is  not  allowed  to  mould  the  whole  life,  but  only  more  or
less  to  colour  it;  it  is  often  used  even  as  a cover  and  a plea  for
things  that  are  diametrically  opposed  to  its  real  spirit.  Institu-
tions are  created  which  are  supposed,  but  too  lightly  supposed  to
embody  that  spirit  and  the  fact  that  the.  ideal  is  held,  the  fact
that  men  live  under  its  institutions  is  treated  as  sufficient.  The
holding  of  an  ideal  becomes  almost  an  excuse  for  not  living
according  to  the  ideal;  the  existence  of  its  institutions  is  sufficient
to  abrogate  the  need  of  insisting  on  the  spirit  that  made  the
institutions.  But  spirituality  is  in  its  very  nature  a thing  subjec-
tive and  not  mechanical;  it  is  nothing  if  it  is  not  lived  inwardly
and  if  the  outward  life  does  not  flow  out  of  this  inward  living.
Symbols,  types,  conventions,  ideas  are  not  sufficient.  A spiritual
symbol  is  only  a meaningless  ticket,  unless  the  thing  symbolised
is  realised  in  the  spirit.  A spiritual  convention  may  lose  or  expel
its  spirit  and  become  a falsehood.  A spiritual  type  may  be  a tem-
porary mould  into  which  spiritual  living  may  flow,  but  it  is  also
a limitation  and  may  become  a prison  in  which  it  fossilises  and
perishes.  A spiritual  idea  is  a power,  but  only  when  it  is  both
inwardly  and  outwardly  creative.  Here  we  have  to  enlarge  and
to  deepen  the  pragmatic  principle  that  truth  is  what  we  create,
and  in  this  sense  first,  that  it  is  what  we  create  within  us,  in  other
words,  what  we  become.  Undoubtedly,  spiritual  truth  exists
eternally  beyond,  independent  of  us  in  the  heavens  of  the  Spirit;
but  it  is  of  no  avail  for  humanity  here,  it  does  not  become  truth
of  earth,  truth  of  life  until  it  is  lived.  The  divine  perfection
is  always  there  above  us;  but  for  man  to  become  divine  in
consciousness  and  act  and  to  live  inwardly  and  outwardly  the
divine  life  is  what  is  meant  by  spirituality;  all  lesser  meanings
given  to  the  word  are  inadequate  fumblings  or  impostures.


248  The  Human  Cycle

This,  as  the  subjective  religions  recognise,  can  only  be
brought  about  by  an  individual  change  in  each  human  life.
The  collective  soul  is  there  only  as  a great  half-subconscient
source  of  the  individual  existence;  if  it  is  to  take  on  a definite
psychological  form  or  a new  kind  of  collective  life,  that  can  only
come  by  the  shaping  growth  of  its  individuals.  As  will  be  the
spirit  and  life  of  the  individuals  constituting  it,  so  will  be  the
realised  spirit  of  the  collectivity  and  the  true  power  of  its  life.
A society  that  lives  not  by  its  men  but  by  its  institutions  is  not  a
collective  soul,  but  a machine;  its  life  becomes  a mechanical  pro-
duct and  ceases  to  be  a living  growth.  Therefore  the  coming  of
a spiritual  age  must  be  preceded  by  the  appearance  of  an  in-
creasing number  of  individuals  who  are  no  longer  satisfied  with
the  normal  intellectual,  vital  and  physical  existence  of  man,  but
perceive  that  a greater  evolution  is  the  real  goal  of  humanity  and
attempt  to  effect  it  in  themselves,  to  lead  others  to  it  and  to  make
it  the  recognised  goal  of  the  race.  In  proportion  as  they  succeed
and  to  the  degree  to  which  they  carry  this  evolution,  the  yet
unrealised  potentiality  which  they  represent  will  become  an' actual
possibility  of  the  future.

A great  access  of  spirituality  in  the  past  has  ordinarily  had
for  its  result  the  coming  of  a new  religion  of  a special  type  and  its
endeavour  to  impose  itself  upon  mankind  as  a new  universal
order.  This,  however,  was  always  not  only  a premature  but  a
wrong  crystallisation  which  prevented  rather  than  helped  any
deep  and  serious  achievement.  The  aim  of  a spiritual  age  of
mankind  must  indeed  be  one  with  the  essential  aim  of  subjective
religions,  a new  birth,  a new  consciousness,  an  upward  evolution
of  the  human  being,  a descent  of  the  Spirit  into  our  members,  a
spiritual  reorganisation  of  our  life;  but  if  it  limits  itself  by  the  old
familiar  apparatus  and  the  imperfect  means  of  a religious  move-
ment, it  is  likely  to  register  another  failure.  A religious  move-
ment brings  usually  a wave  of  spiritual  excitement  and  aspiration
that  communicates  itself  to  a large  number  of  individuals  and
there  is  as  a result  a temporary  uplifting  and  an  effective  forma-
Uon,  parti)  spiritual,  partly  ethical,  partly  dogmatic  in  its  nature.

ut  1 1C  wave,  after  a generation  or  two  or  at  most  a few  genera-
tions, begins  to  subside;  the  formation  remains.  If  there  has


The  Advent  and  Progress  of  the  Spiritual  Age  249

been  a very  powerful  movement  with  a great  spiritual  personality
as  its  source,  it  may  leave  behind  a central  influence  and  an  inner
discipline  which  may  well  be  the  starting-point  of  fresh  waves;
but  these  will  be  constantly  less  powerful  and  enduring  in  pro-
portion as  the  movement  gets  farther  and  farther  away  from  its
source.  For  meanwhile  in  order  to  bind  together  the  faithful
and  at  the  same  time  to  mark  them  off  from  the  unregenerated
outer  world,  there  will  have  grown  up  a religious  order,  a Church,
a hierarchy,  a fixed  and  unprogressive  type  of  ethical  living,  a set
of  crystallised  dogmas,  ostentations,  ceremonials,  sanctified
superstitions,  an  elaborate  machinery  for  the  salvation  of  man-
kind. As  a result  spirituality  is  increasingly  subordinated  to
intellectual  belief,  to  outward  forms  of  conduct  and  to  external
ritual,  the  higher  to  the  lower  motives,  the  one  thing  essential  to
aids  and  instruments  and  accidents.  The  first  spontaneous  and
potent  attempt  to  convert  the  whole  life  into  spiritual  living  yields
up  its  place  to  a set  system  of  belief  and  ethics  touched  by  spiri-
tual emotion;  but  finally  even  that  saving  element  is  dominated
by  the  outward  machinery,  the  sheltering  structure  becomes
a tomb.  The  Church  takes  the  place  of  the  Spirit  and  a formal
subscription  to  its  creed,  rituals  and  order  is  the  thing  univer-
sally demanded;  spiritual  living  is  only  practised  by  the  few
within  the  limits  prescribed  by  their  fixed  creed  and  order.  The
majority  neglect  even  that  narrow  effort  and  are  contented  to
replace  by  a careful  or  negligent  piety  the  call  to  a deeper  life.
In  the  end  it  is  found  that  the  spirit  in  the  religion  has  become  a
thin  stream  choked  by  sands ; at  the  most  brief  occasional  flood-
ings of  its  dry  bed  of  conventions  still  prevent  it  from  becoming
a memory  in  the  dead  chapters  of  Time.

The  ambition  of  a particular  religious  belief  and  form  to
universalise  and  impose  itself  is  contrary  to  the  variety  of  human
nature  and  to  at  least  one  essential  character  of  the  Spirit.  For
the  nature  of  the  Spirit  is  a spacious  inner  freedom  and  a large
unity  into  which  each  man  must  be  allowed  to  grow  according  to
his  own  nature.  Again  — and  this  is  yet  another  source  of  in-
evitable failure  — the  usual  tendency  of  these  credal  religions  is
to  turn  towards  an  after-world  and  to  make  the  regeneration
of  the  earthly  life  a secondary  motive;  this  tendency  grows  in


250


The  Human  Cycle


proportion  as  the  original  hope  of  a present  universal  regenera-
tion of  mankind  becomes  more  and  more  feeble.  Therefore,
while  many  new  spiritual  waves  with  their  strong  special  motives
and  disciplines  must  necessarily  be  the  forerunners  of  a spiri-
tual age,  yet  their  claims  must  be  subordinated  in  the  general
mind  of  the  race  and  of  its  spiritual  leaders  to  the  recognition  that
all  motives  and  disciplines  are  valid  and  yet  none  entirely  valid
since  they  are  means  and  not  the  one  thing  to  be  done.  The  one
thing  essential  must  take  precedence,  the  conversion  of  the
whole  life  of  the  human  being  to  the  lead  of  the  Spirit.  The
ascent  of  man  into  heaven  is  not  the  key,  but  rather  his  ascent
here  into  the  spirit  and  the  descent  also  of  the  Spirit  into  his
normal  humanity  and  the  transformation  of  this  earthly  nature.
For  that  and  not  some  post  mortem  salvation  is  the  real  new
birth  for  which  humanity  waits  as  the  crowning  movement  of  its
long  obscure  and  painful  course.

Therefore  the  individuals  who  will  most  help  the  future  of
humanity  in  the  new  age  will  be  those  who  will  recognise  a spi-
ritual evolution  as  the  destiny  and  therefore  the  great  need  of  the
human  being.  Even  as  the  anima,!  man  has  been  largely  converted
into  a mentalised  and  at  the  top  a highly  mentalised  humanity,  so
too  now  or  in  the  future  an  evolution  or  conversion  — it  does
not  greatly  matter  which  figure  we  use  or  what  theory  we  adopt
to  support  it  — of  the  present  type  of  humanity  into  a spiritua-
lised humanity  is  the  need  of  the  race  and  surely  the  intention  of
Nature;  that  evolution  or  conversion  will  be  their  ideal  and  en-
deavour. They  will  be  comparatively  indifferent  to  particular
belief  and  form  and  leave  men  to  resort  to  the  beliefs  and  forms
to  which  they  are  naturally  drawn.  They  will  only  hold  as  essen-
tial the  faith  in  this  spiritual  conversion,  the  attempt  to  live  it  out
and  whatever  knowledge  — the  form  of  opinion  into  which  it  is
thrown  does  not  so  much  matter  — can  be  converted  into  this
living.  They  will  especially  not  make  the  mistake  of  thinking  that
this  change  can  be  effected  by  machinery  and  outward  institu-
tions, they  will  know  and  never  forget  that  it  has  to  be  lived  out
by  each  man  inwardly  or  it  can  never  be  made  a reality  for  the
kind.  They  will  adopt  in  its  heart  of  meaning  the  inward  view  of
the  East  which  bids  man  seek  the  secret  of  his  destiny  and  sal-


The  Advent  and  Progress  of  the  Spiritual  Age  251

vation  within;  but  also  they  will  accept,  though  with  a different
turn  given  to  it,  the  importance  which  the  West  rightly  attaches
to  life  and  to  the  making  the  best  we  know  and  can  attain  the
general  rule  of  all  life.  They  will  not  make  society  a shadowy
background  to  a few  luminous  spiritual  figures  or  a rigidly  fenced
and  earth-bound  root  for  the  growth  of  a comparatively  rare  and
sterile  flower  of  ascetic  spirituality.  They  will  not  accept  the
theory  that  the  many  must  necessarily  remain  for  ever  on  the
lower  ranges  of  life  and  only  a few  climb  into  the  free  air  and  the
light,  but  will  start  from  the  standpoint  of  the  great  spirits  who
have  striven  to  regenerate  the  life  of  the  earth  and  held  that  faith
in  spite  of  all  previous  failures.  Failures  must  be  originally  nu-
merous in  everything  ^reat  and  difficult,  but  the  time  comes
when  the  experience  of  past  failures  can  be  profitably  used  and
the  gate  that  so  long  resisted  opens.  In  this  as  in  all  great  human
aspirations  and  endeavours,  an  a priori  declaration  of  impossi-
bility is  a sign  of  ignorance  and  weakness,  and  the  motto  of  the
aspirant’s  endeavour  must  be  the  solvitur  ambulandd^  of  the  dis-
coverer. For  by  the  doing  the  difficulty  will  be  solved.  A true
beginning  has  to  be  made;  the  rest  is  a work  for  Time  in  its
sudden  achievements  or  its  long  patient  labour.

The  thing  to  be  done  is  as  large  as  human  life,  and  there-
fore the  individuals  who  lead  the  way  will  take  all  human  life  for
their  province.  These  pioneers  will  consider  nothing  as  alien  to
them,  nothing  as  outside  their  scope.  For  every  part  of  human
life  has  to  be  taken  up  by  the  spiritual,  — not  only  the  intellec-
tual, the  aesthetic,  the  ethical,  but  the  dynamic,  the  vital,  the
physical;  therefore  for  none  of  these  things  or  the  activities  that
spring  from  them  will  they  have  contempt  or  aversion,  however
they  may  insist  on  a change  of  the  spirit  and  a transmutation  of
the  form.  In  each  power  of  our  nature  they  will  seek  for  its  own
proper  means  of  conversion;  knowing  that  the  Divine  is  conceal-
ed in  all,  they  will  hold  that  all  can  be  made  the  Spirit’s  means  of
self-finding  and  all  can  be  converted  into  its  instruments  of  divine
living.  And  they  will  see  that  the  great  necessity  is  the  conversion
of  the  normal  into  the  spiritual  mind  and  the  opening  of  that

» The  ans\s-cr  of  Stephenson  to  those  who  argued  by  strict  sdcntific  logic  that  his
engine  on  rails  could  not  and  should  not  move,  “Your  difficulty  is  sohed  b>  its  mo\ing.


252  The  Human  Cycle

mind  again  into  its  own  higher  reaches  and  more  and  more  inte-
gral movement.  For  before  the  decisive  change  can  be  made,
the  stumbling  intellectual  reason  has  to  be  converted  into  the
precise  and  luminous  intuitive,  until  that  again  can  rise  into
higher  ranges  to  overmind  and  supermind  or  gnosis.  The  uncer-
tain and  stumbling  mental  will  has  to  rise  towards  the  sure  intui-
tive and  into  a higher  divine  and  gnostic  will,  the  psychic  sweet-
ness, fire  and  light  of  the  soul  behind  the  heart,  hrdaye  guhdyam,
has  to  alchemise  our  crude  emotions  and  the  hard  egoisms  and
clamant  desires  of  our  vital  nature.  All  our  other  members  have
to  pass  through  a similar  conversion  under  the  compelling  force
and  light  from  above.  The  leaders  of  the  spiritual  march  will
start  from  and  use  the  knowledge  and  the  means  that  past  effort
has  developed  in  this  direction,  but  they  will  not  take  them  as
they  are  without  any  deep  necessary  change  or  limit  themselves
by  what  is  now  known  or  cleave  only  to  fixed  and  stereotyped
systems  or  given  groupings  of  results,  but  will  follow  the  method
of  the  Spirit  in  Nature.  A constant  rediscovery  and  new  formula-
tion and  larger  synthesis  in  the  mind,  a mighty  remoulding  in  its
deeper  parts  because  of  a greater  enlarging  Truth  not  discovered
or  not  well  fixed  before,  is  that  Spirit’s  way  with  our  past  achieve-
ment when  he  moves  to  the  greatness  of  the  future.

This  endeavour  will  be  a supreme  and  difficult  labour  even  '
for  the  individual,  but  much  more  for  the  race:.  It  may  well  be
that,  once  started,  it  may  not  advance  rapidly  even  to  its  first
decisive  stage ; it  may  be  that  it  will  take  long  centuries  of  effort
to  come  into  some  kind  of  permanent  birth.  But  that  is  not  alto-
gether inevitable,  for  the  principle  of  such  changes  in  Nature  seems
to  be  a long  obscure  preparation  followed  by  a swift  gathering
up  and  precipitation  of  the  elements  into  the  new  birth,  a rapid
conversion,  a transformation  that  in  its  luminous  moment  figures
1 e a miracle.  Even  when  the  first  decisive  change  is  reached,
lUs  certain  that  all  humanity  will  not  be  able  to  rise  to  that  level.
There  cannot  fail  to  be  a division  into  those  who  are  able  to  live
on  the  spiritual  level  and  those  who  are  only  able  to  live  in  the
light  that  descends  from  it  into  the  mental  level.  And  below  these
too  there  might  still  be  a great  mass  influenced  from  above  but
not  yet  ready  for  the  light.  But  even  that  would  be  a transfer-


The  Advent  and  Progress  of  the  Spiritual  Age  253

mation  and  a beginning  far  beyond  anything  yet  attained.  This
hierarchy  would  not  mean  as  in  our  present  vital  living  an  egoistic
domination  of  the  undeveloped  by  the  more  developed,  but  a
guidance  of  the  younger  by  the  elder  brothers  of  the  race  and  a
constant  working  to  hft  them  up  to  greater  spiritual  level  and
wider  horizons..  And  for  the  leaders  too  this  ascent  to  the  first
spiritual  levels  would  not  be  the  end  of  the  divine  march,  a culmi-
nation that  left  nothing  more  to  be  achieved  on  earth.  For  there
would  be  still  yet  higher  levels  within  the  supramental  realm,
as  the  old  Vedic  poets  knew  when  they  spoke  of  the  spiritual  life
as  a constant  ascent,  —

brahmartas  tvd  satakrata
ud  varhsam  iva  yemire.
yat  sdnoh  sdnum  druhad
bhuri  aspasfa  kartvam,  —

“The  priests  of  the  word  climb  thee  like  a ladder,

O hundred-powered.  As  one  ascends  from  peak  to  peak,
there  is  made  clear  the  much  that  has  still  to  be  done.”

But  once  the  foundation  has  been  secured,  the  rest  develops  by
a progressive  self-unfolding  and  the  soul  is  sure  of  its  way.  As
again  it  is  phrased  by  the  ancient  Vedic  singers,  —

abhyavasthdh  pra  jdyante
pra  vavrer  vavris  ciketa.
upasthe  mdtur  vi  casfe.

“State  is  born  upon  state;  covering  after  covering  be-
comes conscious  of  knowledge;  in  the  lap  of  the  Mother  the
soul  sees.”

This  at  least  is  the  highest  hope,  the  possible  destiny  that
opens  out  before  the  human  view,  and  it  is  a possibility  which  the
progress  of  the  human  mind  seems  on  the  way  to  redevelop.  If
the  light  that  is  being  born  increases,  if  the  number  of  individuals
who  seek  to  realise  the  possibility  in  themselves  and  in  the  world


254


The  Human  Cycle


grows  large  and  they  get  nearer  the  right  way,  then  the  Spirit  who
is  here  in  man,  now  a concealed  divinity,  a developing  light  and
power,  will  descend  more  fully  as  the  Avatar  of  a yet  unseen  and
unguessed  Godhead  from  above  into  the  soul  of  mankind  and
into  the  great  individualities  in  whom  the  light  and  power  are  the
strongest.  There  will  then  be  fulfilled  the  change  that  will  pre-
pare the  transition  of  human  life  from  its  present  limits  into  those
larger  and  purer  horizons;  the  earthly  evolution  will  have  taken
its  great  impetus  upward  and  accomplished  the  revealing  step
in  a divine  progression  of  which  the  birth  of  thinking  and  aspiring
man  from  the  animal  nature  was  only  an  obscure  preparation
and  a far-off  promise.


The  End


THE  IDEAL  OF  HUMAN  UNITY


PART  ONE


Chapter  I


The  Turn  towards  Unity;

Its  Necessity  and  Dangers

The  surfaces  of  life  are  easy  to  under-
Stand;  their  laws,  characteristic  movements,  practical  utilities
are  ready  to  our  hand  and  we  can  seize  on  them  and  turn  them  to
account  with  a sufficient  facility  and  rapidity.  But  they  do  not
carry  us  very  far.  They  suffice  for  an  active  superficial  life  from
day  to  day,  but  they  do  not  solve  the  great  problems  of  exis-
tence. On  the  other  hand,  the  knowledge  of  life’s  profundities,
its  potent  secrets,  its  great,  hidden,  all-determining  laws  is  ex-
ceedingly difficult  to  us.  We  have  found  no  plummet  that  can
fathom  these  depths;  they  seem  to  us  a vague,  indeterminate
movement,  a profound  obscurity  from  which  the  mind  recoils
willingly  to  play  with  the  fret  and  foam  and  facile  radiances
of  the  surface.  Yet  it  is  these  depths  and  their  unseen  forces
that  we  ought  to  know  if  we  would  understand  existence;  on
the  surface  we  get  only  Nature’s  secondary  rules  and  practical
bye-laws  which  help  us  to  tide  over  the  difficulties  of  the  mo-
ment and  to  organise  empirically  without  understanding  them
her  continual  transitions.

Nothing  is  more  obscure  to  humanity  or  less  seized  by  its
understanding,  whether  in  the  power  that  moves  it  or  the  sense
of  the  aim  towards  which  it  moves,  than  its  own  communal  and
collective  life.  Sociology  does  not  help  us,  for  it  only  gives  us  the
general  story  of  the  past  and  the  external  conditions  under
which  communities  have  survived.  History  teaches  us  nothing;
it  is  a confused  torrent  of  events  and  personalities  or  a kaleido-
scope of  changing  institutions.  We  do  not  sei2:e  the  real  sense  of
all  this  change  and  this  continual  streaming  forward  of  human
life  in  the  channels  of  Time.  What  we  do  seize  are  current  or
recurrent  phenomena,  facile  generalisations,  partial  ideas.  We
talk  of  democracy,  aristocracy  and  autocracy,  collectivism  and


262  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

individualism,  imperialism  and  nationalism,  the  State  and  the
commune,  capitalism  and  labour;  we  advance  hasty  generalisa-
tions and  make  absolute  systems  which  are  positively  announced
today  only  to  be  abandoned  perforce  tomorrow;  we  espouse
causes  and  ardent  enthusiasms  whose  triumph  turns  to  an  early
disillusionment  and  then  forsake  them  for  others,  perhaps  for
those  that  we  have  taken  so  much  trouble  to  destroy.  For  a whole
century  mankind  thirsts  and  battles  after  liberty  and  earns  it  with
a bitter  expense  of  toil,  tears  and  blood;  the  century  that  enjoys
without  having  fought  for  it  turns  away  as  from  a puerile  illusion
and  is  ready  to  renounce  the  depreciated  gain  as  the  price  of  some
new  good.  And  all  this  happens  because  our  whole  thought  and
action  with  regard  to  our  collective  life  is  shallow  and  empirical;
it  does  not  seek  for,  it  does  not  base  itself  on  a firm,  profound  and
complete  knowledge.  The  moral  is  not  the  vanity  of  human  life,
of  its  ardours  and  enthusiasms  and  of  the  ideals  it  pursues,  but
the  necessity  of  a wiser,  larger,  more  patient  search  after  its  true
law  and  aim.

Today  the  ideal  of  human  unity  is  more  or  less  vaguely
making  its  way  to  the  front  of  our  consciousness.  The  emergence
of  an  ideal  in  human  thought  is  always  the  sign  of  an  intention
in  Nature,  but  not  always  of  an  intention  to  accomplish;  some-
times it  indicates  only  an  attempt  which  is  predestined  to  tempo-
rary failure.  For  Nature  is  slow  and  patient  in  her  methods.
She  takes  up  ideas  and  half  carries  them  out,  then  drops  them  by
the  wayside  to  resume  them  in  some  future  era  with  a better
combination.  She  tempts  humanity,  her  thinking  instrument,
and  tests  how  far  it  is  ready  for  the  harmony  she  has  imagined ;
she  allows  and  incites  man  to  attempt  and  fail,  so  that  he  may
learn  and  succeed  better  another  time.  Still  the  ideal,  having
once  made  its  way  to  the  front  of  thought,  must  certainly  be
attempted,  and  this  ideal  of  human  unity  is  likely  to  figure  largely
among  the  determining  forces  of  the  future;  for  the  intellectual
and  material  circumstances  of  the  age  have  prepared  and  almost
impose  it,  especially  the  scientific  discoveries  which  have  made
our  earth  so  small  that  its  vastest  kingdoms  seem  now  no  more
than  the  provinces  of  a single  country.

But  this  very  commodity  of  the  material  circumstances  may


263


The  Turn  Towards  Unity

bring  about  the  failure  of  the  ideal;  for  when  material  circum-
stances favour  a great  change,  but  the  heart  and  mind  of  the  race
are  not  really  ready  — especially  the  heart  — failure  may  be
predicted,  unless  indeed  men  are  wise  in  time  and  accept  the
inner  change  along  with  the  external  readjustment.  But  at
present  the  human  intellect  has  been  so  much  mechanised  by
physical  Science  that  it  is  likely  to  attempt  the  revolution  it  is  be-
ginning to  envisage  principally  or  solely  through  mechanical
means,  through  social  and  political  adjustments.  Now  it  is  not
by  social  and  poUtical  devices,  or  at  any  rate  not  by  these,  chiefly
or  only,  that  the  unity  of  the  human  race  can  be  enduringly  or
fruitfully  accomplished.

It  must  be  remembered  that  a greater  social  or  political
unity  is  not  necessarily  a boon  in  itself;  it  is  only  worth  pursuing
in  so  far  as  it  provides  a means  and  a framework  for  a better,
richer,  more  happy  and  puissant  individual  and  collective  life.
But  hitherto  the  experience  of  mankind  has  not  favoured  the
view  that  huge  aggregations,  closely  united  and  strictly  organised,
are  favourable  to  a rich  and  puissant  human  life.  It  would  seem
rather  that  collective  life  is  more  at  ease  with  itself,  more  genial,
varied,  fruitful  when  it  can  concentrate  itself  in  small  spaces  and
simpler  organisms.

If  we  consider  the  past  of  humanity  so  far  as  it  is  known  to
us,  we  find  that  the  interesting  periods  of  human  life,  the  scenes
in  which  it  has  been  most  richly  lived  and  has  left  behind  it  the
most  precious  fruits,  were  precisely  those  ages  and  countries
in  which  humanity  was  able  to  organise  itself  in  little  independent
centres  acting  intimately  upon  each  other  but  not  fused  into  a
single  unity.  Modern  Europe  owes  two-thirds  of  its  civilisation
to  three  such  supreme  moments  of  human  history,  the  religious
life  of  the  congeries  of  tribes  which  called  itself  Israel  and,  sub-
sequently, of  the  little  nation  of  the  Jews,  the  many-sided  life  of
the  small  Greek  city  states,  the  similar,  though  more  restricted,
artistic  and  intellectual  life  of  mediaeval  Italy.  Nor  was  any  age
in  Asia  so  rich  in  energy,  so  well  worth  living  in,  so  productive
of  the  best  and  most  enduring  fruits  as  that  heroic  period  of  India
when  she  was  divided  into  small  kingdoms,  many  of  them  no
larger  than  a modern  district.  Her  most  wonderful  activities,


264  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

her  most  vigorous  and  enduring  work,  that  which,  if  we  had  to
make  a choice,  we  should  keep  at  the  sacrifice  of  all  else,  belonged
to  that  period ; the  second  best  came  afterwards  in  larger,  but  still
comparatively  small,  nations  and  kingdoms  like  those  of  the
Pallavas,  Chalukyas,  Pandyas,  Cholas  and  Cheras.  In  compa-
rison she  received  little  from  the  greater  empires  that  rose  and
fell  within  her  borders,  the  Moghul,  the  Gupta  or  the  Maurya
— little  indeed  except  political  and  administrative  organisation,
some  fine  art  and  literature  and  a certain  amount  of  lasting  work
in  other  kinds,  not  always  of  the  best  quality.  Their  impulse
was  rather  towards  elaborate  organisation  than  original,  stimula-
ting and  creative.

Nevertheless,  in  this  regime  of  the  small  city  state  or  of
regional  cultures,  there  was  always  a defect  which  compelled
a tendency  towards  large  organisations.  The  defect  was  a charac-
teristic of  impermanence,  often  of  disorder,  especially  of  defence-  ■
lessness  against  the  onslaught  of  larger  organisations,  even  of  an
insufficient  capacity  for  widespread  material  well-being.  There-
fore this  earlier  form  of  collective  life  tended  to  disappear  and
give  place  to  the  organisation  of  nations,  kingdoms  and  empires.

, And  here  we  notice,  first,  that  it  is  the  groupments  of
smaller  nations  which  have  had  the  most  intense  life  and  not  the
huge  States  and  colossal  empires.  Collective  life  diffusing  itself
in  too  vast  spaces  seems  to  lose  intensity  and  productiveness.
Europe  has  lived  in  England,  France,  the  Netherlands,  Spain,
Italy,  the  small  States  of  Germany  — all  her  later  civilisation
and  progress  evolved  itself  there,  not  in  the  huge  mass  of  the
Holy  Roman  or  the  Russian  Empire.  We  see  a similar  phenome-
non in  the  social  and  political  field  when  we  compare  the  intense
life  and  activity  of  Europe  in  its  many  nations  acting  richly  upon
each  other,  rapidly  progressing  by  quick  creative  steps  and
sometimes  by  bounds,  with  the  great  masses  of  Asia,  her  long
periods  of  immobility  in  which  wars  and  revolutions  seem  to  be
small,  temporary  and  usually  unproductive  episodes,  her  centu-
ries of  religious,  philosophic  and  artistic  reveries,  her  tendency
towards  an  increasing  isolation  and  a final  stagnancy  of  the
outward  life.

Secondly,  we  note  that  in  this  organisation  of  nations  and


265


The  Turn  Towards  Unity

kingdoms  those  which  have  had  the  most  vigorous  life  have
gained  it  by  a sort  of  artificial  concentration  of  the  vitality  into
some  head,  centre  or  capital,  London,  Paris,  Rome.  By  this  de-
vice Nature,  while  acquiring  the  benefits  of  a larger  organisation
and  more  perfect  unity,  preserves  to  some  extent  that  equally
precious  power  of  fruitful  concentration  in  a small  space  and  into
a closely  packed  activity  which  she  had  possessed  in  her  more
primitive  system  of  the  city  state  or  petty  kingdom.  But  this
advantage  was  purchased  by  the  condemnation  of  the  rest  of
the  organisation,  the  district,  the  provincial  town,  the  village
to  a dull,  petty  and  somnolent  life  in  strange  contrast  with  the
vital  intensity  of.  the  urbs  or  metropolis.

The  Roman  Empire  is  the  historic  example  of  an  organisa-
tion of  unity  which  transcended  the  limits  of  the  nation,  and
its  advantages  and  disadvantages  are  there  perfectly  typified.
The  advantages  are  admirable  organisation,  peace,  wide-spread
security,  order  and  material  well-being;  the  disadvantage  is  that
the  individual,  the  city,  the  region  sacrifice  their  independent
life  and  become  mechanical  parts  of  a machine:  life  loses  its
colour,  richness,  variety,  freedom  and  victorious  impulse  towards
creation.  The  organisation  is  great  and  admirable,  but  the
individual  dwindles  and  is  overpowered  and  overshadowed;
and  eventually  by  the  smallness  and  feebleness  of  the  individual
the  huge  organism  inevitably  and  slowly  loses  even  its  great  con-
servative vitality  and  dies  of  an  increasing  stagnation.  Even  while
outwardly  whole  and  untouched,  the  structure  has  become  rotten
and  begins  to  crack  and  dissolve  at  the  first  shock  from  outside.
Such  organisations,  such  periods  are  immensely  useful  for
conservation,  even  as  the  Roman  Empire  served  to  consolidate
the  gains  of  the  rich  centuries  that  preceded  it.  But  they  arrest
life  and  growth.

We  see,  then,  what  is  likely  to  happen  if  there  were  a social,
administrative  and  political  unification  of  mankind,  such  as
some  have  begun  to  dream  of  nowadays.  A tremendous  organi-
sation would  be  needed  under  which  both  individual  and  regional
life  would  be  crushed,  dwarfed,  deprived  of  their  necessary  free-
dom like  a plant  without  rain  and  wind  and  sunlight,  and  this
would  mean  for  humanity,  after  perhaps  one  first  outburst  of


266


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity


satisfied  and  joyous  activity,  a long  period  of  mere  conserva-
tion, increasing  stagnancy  and  ultimately  decay.

Yet  the  unity  of  mankind  is  evidently  a part  of  Nature’s
eventual  scheme  and  must  come  about.  Only  it  must  be  under
other  conditions  and  with  safeguards  which  will  keep  the  race
intact  in  the  roots  of  its  vitality,  richly  diverse  in  its  oneness.


Chapter  II


The  Imperfection  of  Past  Aggregates


The  whole  process  of  Nature  depends  on
a balancing  and  a constant  tendency  to  harmony  between  the
two  poles  of  life,  the  individual  whom  the  whole  or  aggregate
nourishes  and  the  whole  or  aggregate  which  the  individual  helps
to  constitute.  Human  life  forms  no  exception  to  the  rule.  There-
fore the  perfection  of  human  life  must  involve  the  elaboration  of
an  as  yet  unaccomplished  harmony  between  these  two  poles  of
our  existence,  the  individual  and  the  social  aggregate.  The  per-
fect society  will  be  that  which  most  entirely  favours  the  perfec-
tion of  the  individual;  the  perfection  of  the  individual  will  be
incomplete  if  it  does  not  help  towards  the  perfect  state  of  the
social  aggregate  to  which  he  belongs  and  eventually  to  that  of
the  largest  possible  human  aggregate,  the  whole  of  a united
humanity.

For  the  gradual  process  of  Nature  introduces  a complica-
tion which  prevents  the  individual  from  standing  in  a pure  and
direct  relation  to  the  totality  of  mankind.  Between  himself  and
this  too  immense  whole  there  erect  themselves  partly  as  aids,
partly  as  barriers  to  the  final  unity,  the  lesser  aggregates  which  it
has  been  necessary  to  form  in  the  progressive  stages  of  human
culture.  For  the  obstacles  of  space,  the  difficulties  of  organisa-
tion and  the  limitations  of  the  human  heart  and  brain  have  neces-
sitated the  formation  first  of  small,  then  of  larger  and  yet  larger
aggregates  so  that  he  may  be  gradually  trained  by  a progressive
approach  till  he  is  ready  for  the  final  universality.  The  family,
the  commune,  the  clan  or  tribe,  the  class,  the  city  state  or
congeries  of  tribes,  the  nation,  the  empire  are  so  many  stages
in  this  progress  and  constant  enlargement.  If  the  smaller
aggregates  were  destroyed  as  soon  as  the  larger  are  successfully
formed,  this  graduation  would  result  in  no  complexity;  but
Nature  does  not  follow  this  course.  She  seldom  destroys  entirely


268  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

the  types  she  has  once  made  or  only  destroys  that  for  which
there  is  no  longer  any  utility;  the  rest  she  keeps  in  order  to
serve  her  need  or  her  passion  for  variety,  richness,  multiformity
and  only  effaces  the  dividing  lines  or  modifies  the  characteristics
and  relations  sufficiently  to  allow  of  the  larger  unity  she  is
creating.  Therefore  at  every  step  humanity  is  confronted  with
various  problems  which  arise  not  only  from  the  difficulty  of
accord  between  the  interests  of  the  individual  and  those  of  the
immediate  aggregate,  the  community,  but  between  the  need  and
interests  of  the  smaller  integralities  and  the  growth  of  that
larger  whole  which  is  to  ensphere  them  all.

History  has  preserved  for  us  scattered  instances  of  this
travail,  instances  of  failure  and  success  which  are  full  of  instruc-
tion. We  see  the  struggle  towards  the  aggregation  of  tribes
among  the  Semitic  nations,  Jew  and  Arab,  surmounted  in  the
one  after  a scission  into  two  kingdoms  which  remained  a per-
manent source  of  weakness  to  the  Jewish  nation,  overcome
only  temporarily  in  the  other  by  the  sudden  unifying  force  of
Islam.  We  see  the  failure  of  clan  life  to  combine  into  an  organised
national  existence  in  the  Celtic  races,  a failure  entire  in  Ireland
and  Scotland  and  only  surmounted  through  the  crushing  out  of
clan  life  by  a foreign  rule  and  culture,  overcome  only  at  the  last
moment  in  Wales.  We  see  the  failure  of  the  city  states  and
small  regional  peoples  to  fuse  themselves  in  the  history  of
Greece,  the  signal  success  of  a similar  struggle  of  Nature  in  the
development  of  Roman  Italy.  The  whole  past  of  India  for
the  last  two  thousand  years  and  more  has  been  the  attempt,
unavailing  in  spite  of  many  approximations  to  success,  to
overcome  the  centrifugal  tendency  of  an  extraordinary  number
and  variety  of  disparate  elements,  the  family,  the  commune,  the
clan,  the  caste,  the  small  regional  state  or  people,  the  large
linguistic  unit,  the  religious  community,  the  nation  within  the
nation.  We  may  perhaps  say  that  here  Nature  tried  an  experiment
of  unparalleled  complexity  and  potential  richness,  accumulating
all  possible  difficulties  in  order  to  arrive  at  the  most  opulent
result.  But  in  the  end  the  problem  proved  insoluble  or,  at  least,
was  not  solved  and  Nature  had  to  resort  to  her  usual  deus  ex
machina  denouement,  the  instrumentality  of  a foreign  rule.


The  Imperfection  of  Past  Aggregates  26p

But  even  when  the  nation  is  sufficiently  organised,  — the
largest  unit  yet  successfully  developed  by  Nature,  — entire  unity
is  not  always  achieved.  If  no  other  elements  of  discord  remain,
yet  the  conflict  of  classes  is  always  possible.  And  the  pheno-
menon leads  us  to  another  rule  of  this  gradual  development
of  Nature  in  human  life  which  we  shall  find  of  very  considerable
importance  when  we  come  to  the  question  of  a realisable  human
unity.  The  perfection  of  the  individual  in  a perfected  society
or  eventually  in  a perfected  humanity  — understanding  per-
fection always  in  a relative  and  progressive  sense  — is  the
inevitable  aim  of  Nature.  But  the  progress  of  all  the  individuals
in  a society  does  not  proceed  pari  passu,  with  an  equal  and
equable  march.  Some  advance,  others  remain  stationary, —
absolutely  or  relatively,  — others  fall  back.  Consequently,  the
emergence  of  a dominant  class  is  inevitable  within  the  aggregate
itself,  just  as  in  the  constant  clash  between  the  aggregates  the
emergence  of  dominant  nations  is  inevitable.  That  class  will
predommate  which  develops  most  perfectly  the  type  Nature
needs  at  the  time  for  her  progress  or,  it  may  be,  for  her  retro-
gression. If  she  demands  power  and  strength  of  character,  a
dominant  aristocracy  emerges;  if  knowledge  and  science,  a
dominant  literary  or  savant  class;  if  practical  abihty,  ingenuity,
economy  and  efficient  organisation,  a dominant  bourgeoisie  or
Vaishya  class,  usually  with  the  lawyer  at  the  head;  if  diffusion
rather  than  concentration  of  general  well-being  and  a close
organisation  of  toil,  then  even  the  domination  of  an  artisan
class  is  not  impossible.

But  this  phenomenon,  whether  of  dominant  classes  or
dominant  nations,  can  never  be  more  than  a temporary  necessity;
for  the  final  aim  of  Nature  in  human  life  cannot  be  the  exploita-
tion of  the  many  by  the  few  or  even  of  the  few  by  the  many,
can  never  be  the  perfection  of  some  at  the  cost  of  the  abject
submergence  and  ignorant  subjection  of  the  bulk  of  humanity;
these  can  only  be  transient  devices.  Therefore  we  see  that
such  dominations  bear  always  in  them  the  seed  of  their  own
destruction.  They  must  pass  either  by  the  ejection  or  destruction
of  the  exploiting  element  or  else  by  a fusion  and  equalisation.
We  see  in  Europe  and  America  that  the  dominant  Brahmin  and


270  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

the  dominant  Kshatriya  have  been  either  abolished  or  are  on
the  point  of  subsidence  into  equality  with  the  general  mass.  Two
rigidly  separate  classes  alone  remain,  the  dominant  propertied
class  and  the  labourer,  and  all  the  most  significant  movements
of  the  day  have  for  their  purpose  the  abolition  of  this  last
superiority.  In  this  persistent  tendency,  Europe  has  obeyed  one
great  law  of  Nature’s  progressive  march,  her  trend  towards  a
final  equality.  Absolute  equality  is  surely  neither  intended
nor  possible,  just  as  absolute  uniformity  is  both  impossible  and
utterly  undesirable;  but  a fundamental  equality  which  will
render  the  play  of  true  superiority  and  difference  inoffensive,
is  essential  to  any  conceivable  perfectibility  of  the  human  race.

Therefore,  the  perfect  counsel  for  a dominant  minority
is  always  to  recognise  in  good  time  the  right  hour  for  its  abdica-
tion and  for  the  imparting  of  its  ideals,  qualities,  culture,  expe-
rience to  the  rest  of  the  aggregate  or  to  as  much  of  it  as  is
prepared  for  that  progress.  Where  this  is  done,  the  social
aggregate  advances  normally  and  without  disruption  or,  serious
wound  or  malady;  otherwise  a disordered  progress  is  imposed
upon  it,  for  Nature  will  not  suffer  human  egoism  to  baffle  for
ever  her  fixed  intention  and  necessity.  Where  the  dominant
classes  successfully  avoid  her  demand  upon  them,  the  worst
of  destinies  is  likely  to  overtake  the  social  aggregate,  — as  in
India  where  the  final  refusal  of  the  Brahmin  and  other  privi-
leged classes  to  call  up  the  bulk  of  the  nation  as  far  as  possible
to  their  level,  their  fixing  of  an  unbridgeable  gulf  of  superiority
between  themselves  and  the  rest  of  society,  has  been  a main
cause  of  eventual  decline  and  degeneracy.  For  where  her  aims
are  frustrated,  Nature  inevitably  withdraws  her  force  from  the
offending  unit  till  she  has  brought  in  and  used  other  and  external
means  to  reduce  the  obstacle  to  a nullity.

But  even  if  the  unity  within  is  made  as  perfect  as  social,
administrative  and  cultural  machinery  can  make  it,  the  question
of  the  individual  still  remains.  For  these  social  units  or  aggre-
gates are  not  like  the  human  body  in  which  the  component
cells  arc  capable  of  no  separate  life  apart  from  the  aggregate.
The  human  individual  tends  to  exist  in  himself  and  to  exceed
the  limits  of  the  family,  the  clan,  the  class,  the  nation;  and


The  Imperfection  of  Past  Aggregates


271


even,  that  self-sufficiency  on  one  side,  that  universality  on  the
other  are  the  essential  elements  of  his  perfection.  Therefore,
just  as  the  systems  of  social  aggregation  which  depend  on  the
domination  of  a class  or  classes  over  others  must  change  or
dissolve,  so  the  social  aggregates  which  stand  in  the  way  of  this
perfection  of  the  individual  and  seek  to  coerce  him  within  their
limited  mould  and  into  the  rigidity  of  a narrow  culture  or  petty
class  or  national  interest,  must  find  their  term  and  their  day  of
change  or  destruction  under  the  irresistible  impulsion  of  pro-
gressing Nature.


Chapter  III


The  Group  and  the  Individual


It  is  a constant  method  of  Nature,  when
she  has  two  elements  of  a harmony  to  reconcile,  to  proceed
at  first  by  a long  continued  balancing  in  which  she  sometimes
seems  to  lean  entirely  on  one  side,  sometimes  entirely  to  the
other,  at  others  to  correct  both  excesses  by  a more  or  less
successful  temporary  adjustment  and  moderating  compromise.
The  two  elements  appear  then  as  opponents  necessary  to  each
other  who  therefore  labour  to  arrive  at  some  conclusion  of
their  strife.  But  as  each  has  its  egoism  and  that  innate  tendency
of  all  things  which  drives  them  not  only  towards  self-preservation
but  towards  self-assertion  in  proportion  to  their  available
force,  they  seek  each  to  arrive  at  a conclusion  in  which  itself
shall  have  the  maximum  part  and  dominate  utterly  if  possible
or  even  swallow  up  entirely  the  egoism  of  the  other  in  its  own
egoism.  Thus  the  progress  towards  harmony  accomplishes  itself
by  a strife  of  forces  and  seems  often  to  be  no  effort  towards
concord  or  mutual  adjustment  at  all,  but  rather  towards  a
mutual  devouring.  In  effect,  the  swallowing  up,  not  of  one  by
the  other,  but  of  each  by  the  other,  so  that  both  shall  live  entirely
in  the  other  and  as  the  other,  is  our  highest  ideal  of  oneness.
It  is  the  last  ideal  of  love  at  which  strife  tries  ignorantly  to
arrive;  for  by  strife  one  can  only  arrive  at  an  adjustment  of  the
two  opposite  demands,  not  at  a stable  harmony,  a compromise
between  two  conflicting  egoisms  and  not  the  fusing  of  them
into  each  other.  Still,  strife  does  lead  to  an  increasing  mutual
comprehension  which  eventually  makes  the  attempt  at  real
oneness  possible.

In  the  relations  between  the  individual  and  the  group,
this  constant  tendency  of  Nature  appears  as  the  strife  between
two  equally  deep-rooted  human  tendencies,  individualism  and
collectivism.  On  one  side  is  the  engrossing  authority,  per-


273


The  Group  and  the  Individual

fection  and  development  of  the  State,  on  the  other  the  distinctive
freedom,  perfection  and  development  of  the  individual  man.
The  State  idea,  the  small  or  the  vast  living  machine,  and  the
human  idea,  the  more  and  more  distinct  and  luminous  Person,
the  increasing  God,  stand  in  perpetual  opposition.  The  size  of
the  State  makes  no  difference  to  the  essence  of  the  struggle  and
need  make  none  to  its  characteristic  circumstances.  It  was  the
family,  the  tribe  or  the  city,  the  polis;  it  became  the  clan,  the  caste
and  the  class,  the  kula,  the  gens.  It  is  now  the  nation.  To-
morrow or  the  day  after  it  may  be  all  mankind.  But  even  then
the  question  will  remain  poised  between  man  and  humanity,
between  the  self-Uberating  Person  and  the  engrossing  collectivity.

If  we  consult  only  the  available  facts  of  history  and  socio-
logy,  we  must  suppose  that  our  race  began  with  the  all-engrossing
group  to  which  the  individual  was  entirely  subservient  and
that  increasing  individuality  is  a circumstance  of  human  growth,
a fruit  of  increasing  conscious  Mind.  Originally,  we  may
suppose,  man  was  altogether  gregarious,  association  his  first
necessity  for  survival;  since  survival  is  the  first  necessity  of  all
being,  the  individual  could  be  nothing  but  an  instrument  for
the  strength  and  safety  of  the  group,  and  if  we  add  to  strength
and  safety  growth,  efficiency,  self-assertion  as  well  as  self-
preservation,  this  is  still  the  dominant  idea  of  all  collectivism.
This  turn  is  a necessity  born  of  circumstance  and  environment.
Looking  more  into  fundamental  things  we  perceive  that  in
Matter  uniformity  is  the  sign  of  the  group;  free  variation  and
individual  development  progress  with  the  growth  of  Life  and
Mind.  If  then  we  suppose  man  to  be  an  evolution  of  mental
being  in  Matter  and  out  of  Matter,  we  must  assume  that  he
begins  with  uniformity  and  subservience  of  the  individual  and
proceeds  towards  variety  and  freedom  of  the  individual.  The
necessity  of  circumstance  and  environment  and  the  inevitable
law  of  his  fundamental  principles  of  being  would  then  point
to  the  same  conclusion,  the  same  process  of  his  historic  and
prehistoric  evolution.

But  there  is  also  the  ancient  tradition  of  humanity,  which
it  is  never  safe  to  ignore  or  treat  as  mere  fiction,  that  the  social
state  was  preceded  by  another,  free  and  unsocial.  According  to


214  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

modern  scientific  ideas,  if  such  a state  ever  existed,  and  that  is
far  from  certain,  it  must  have  been  not  merely  unsocial  but  anti-
social; it  must  have  been  the  condition  of  man  as  an  isolated
animal,  living  as  the  beast  of  prey,  before  he  became  in  the
process  of  his  development  an  animal  of  the  pack.  But  the
tradition  is  rather  that  of  a golden  age  in  which  he  was  freely
social  without  society.  Not  bound  by  laws  or  institutions  but
living  by  natural  instinct  or  free  knowledge,  he  held  the  right
law  of  his  living  in  himself  and  needed  neither  to  prey  on  his
fellows  nor  to  be  restrained  by  the  iron  yoke  of  the  collectivity.
We  may  say,  if  we  will,  that  here  poetic  or  idealistic  imagination
played  upon  a deep-seated  race-memory;  early  civilised  man
read  his  growing  ideal  of  a free,  unorganised,  happy  association
into  his  race-memory  of  an  unorganised,  savage  and  anti-
social existence.  But  it  is  also  possible  that  our  progress  has,
not  been  a development  in  a straight  line,  but  in  cycles,  and
that  in  those  cycles  there  have  been  periods  of  at  least  partial
realisation  in  which  men  did  become  able  to  live  according  to
the  high  dream  of  philosophic  Anarchism,  associated  by  the
inner  law  of  love  and  light  and  right  being,  right  thinking,  right
action  and  not  coerced  to  unity  by  kings  and  parliaments,  laws
and  policings  and  punishments  with  all  that  tyrant  unease,
petty  or  great  oppression  and  repression  and  ugly  train  of
selfishness  and  corruption  which  attend  the  forced  government
of  man  by  man.  It  is  even  possible  that  our  original  state  was
an  instinctive  animal  spontaneity  of  free  and  fluid  association
and  that  our  final  ideal  state  will  be  an  enlightened,  intuitive
spontaneity  of  free  and  fluid  association.  Our  destiny  may  be  the
conversion  of  an  original  animal  association  into  a community
of  the  gods.  Our  progress  may  be  a devious  round  leading  from
the  easy  and  spontaneous  uniformity  and  harmony  which
reflects  Nature  to  the  self-possessed  unity  which  reflects  the
Divine.

However  that  may  be,  history  and  sociology  tell  us  only
— outside  the  attempts  of  religious  or  other  idealisms  to  arrive
either  at  a free  solitude  or  a free  association  — of  man  as  an
individual  in  the  more  or  less  organised  group.  And  in  the
group  there  arc  always  two  types.  One  asserts  the  State  idea  at


275


The  Group  and  the  Individual

the  expense  of  the  individual,  — ancient  Sparta,  modem  Ger-
many; another  asserts  the  supremacy  of  the  State  but  seeks  at
the  same  time  to  give  as  much  freedom,  power  and  dignity  as
is  consistent  with  its  control  to  the  individuals  who  constitute
it,  — ancient  Athens,  modern  France.  But  to  these  two  has  been
added  a third  type  in  which  the  State  abdicates  as  much  as
possible  to  the  individual,  boldly  asserts  that  it  exists  for  his
growth  and  to  assure  his  freedom,  dignity,  successful  manhood,
experiments  with  a courageous  faith  whether  after  all  it  is  not
the  utmost  possible  liberty,  dignity  and  manhood  of  the  indi-
vidual which  will  best  assure  the  well-being,  strength  and
expansion  of  the  State.  Of  this  type  England  has  been  until
recently  the  great  exemplar,  — England  rendered  free,  pros-
perous, energetic,  invincible  by  nothing  else  but  the  strength  of
this  idea  within  her,  blessed  by  the  Gods  with  unexampled
expansion,  empire  and  good  fortune  because  she  has  not  feared
at  any  time  to  obey  this  great  tendency  and  take  the  risks  of  this
great  endeavour  and  even  often  to  employ  it  beyond  the  limits
of  her  own  insular  egoism.  Unfortunately,  that  egoism,  the
defects  of  the  race  and  the  exaggerated  assertion  of  a limited
idea,  which  is  the  mark  of  our  human  ignorance,  have  prevented
her  from  giving  it  the  noblest  and  richest  possible  expression  or
to  realise  by  it  other  results  which  the  more  strictly  organised
States  have  attained  or  are  attaining.  And  in  consequence
we  find  the  collective  or  State  idea  breaking  down  the  old
English  tradition  and  it  is  possible  that  before  long  the  great
experiment  will  have  come  to  an  end  in  a lamentable  admission
of  failure  by  the  adoption  of  that  Germanic  “discipline”  and
“efficient”  organisation,  towards  which  all  civilised  humanity
seems  now  to  be  tending.  One  may  well  ask  oneself  whether
it  was  really  necessary,  whether,  by  a more  courageous  faith
enlightened  by  a more  flexible  and  vigilant  intelligence,  all  the
desirable  results  might  not  have  been  attained  by  a new
and  freer  method  that  would  yet  keep  intact  the  dharma  of
the  race.

We  must,  again,  note  one  other  fact  in  connection  with
the  claim  of  the  State  to  suppress  the  individual  in  its  own
interest,  that  it  is  quite  immaterial  to  the  principle  what  form


276  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

the  State  may  assume.  The  tyranny  of  the  absolute  king  over
all  and  the  tyranny  of  the  majority  over  the  individual  — which
really  converts  itself  by  the  paradox  of  human  nature  into  a
hypnotised  oppression  and  repression  of  the  majority  by  itself
— are  forms  of  one  and  the  same  tendency.  Each,  when  it
declares  itself  to  be  the  State  with  its  absolute  “L’dtat,  c'est  moV\
is  speaking  a profound  truth  even  while  it  bases  that  truth  upon
a falsehood.  The  truth  is  that  each  really  is  the  self-expression
of  the  State  in  its  characteristic  attempt  to  subordinate  to  itself
the  free  will,  the  free  action,  the  power,  dignity  and  self-assertion
of  the  individuals  constituting  it.  The  falsehood  lies  in  the
underlying  idea  that  the  State  is  something  greater  than  the
individuals  constituting  it  and  can  with  impunity  for  itself  and
to  the  highest  hope  of  humanity  arrogate  this  oppressive
supremacy.

In  modern  times  the  State  idea  has  after  a long  interval  fully
reasserted  itself  and  is  dominating  the  thought  and  action  of  the
world.  It  supports  itself  on  two  motives;  one  appeals  to  the  ex-
ternal interest  of  the  race,  the  other  to  its  highest  moral  ten-
dencies. It  demands  that  individual  egoism  shall  immolate  itself
to  a collective  interest;  it  claims  that  man  shall  live  not  for  him-
self but  for  the  whole,  the  group,  the  community.  It  asserts  that
the  hope  of  the  good  and  progress  of  humanity  lies  in  the  effi-
ciency and  organisation  of  the  State.  Its  way  to  perfection  lies
through  the  ordering  by  the  State  of  all  the  economic  and  vital
arrangements  of  the  individual  and  the  group,  the  “mobilisa-
tion”, to  use  a specious  expression  the  War  has  set  in  vogue,  of
the  intellect,  capacity,  thought,  emotion,  life  of  the  individual,
of  all  that  he  is  and  has,  by  the  State  in  the  interest  of  all.  Pushed
to  its  ultimate  conclusion,  this  means  the  socialistic  ideal  in  full
force  and  towards  that  conclusion  humanity  seems  to  be  heading
with  a remarkable  rapidity.  The  State  idea  is  rushing  towards
possession  with  a great  motor  force  and  is  prepared  to  crush
under  its  wheels  everything  that  conflicts  with  its  force  or  asserts
the  right  of  other  human  tendencies.  And  yet  the  two  ideas  on
which  it  bases  itself  are  full  of  that  fatal  mixture  of  truth  and
falsehood  which  pursues  all  our  human  claims  and  assertions.
It  is  necessary  to  apply  to  them  the  solvent  of  a searching  and


277


The  Group  and  the  Individual

unbiassed  thought  which  refuses  to  be  cheated  by  words,  if  we
are  not  to  describe  helplessly  another  circle  of  illusion  before  we
return  to  the  deep  and  complex  truth  of  Nature  which  should
rather  be  our  light  and  guide.


Chapter  IV


The  Inadequacy  of  the  State  Idea


What,  after  all,  is  this  State  idea,  this  idea
of  the  organised  community  to  which  the  individual  has  to  be
immolated?  Theoretically,  it  is  the  subordination  of  the  indi-
vidual to  the  good  of  all  that  is  demanded;  practically,  it  is  his
subordination  to  a collective  egoism,  political,  military,  eco-
nomic, which  seeks  to  satisfy  certain  collective  aims  and  ambi-
tions shaped  and  imposed  on  the  great  mass  of  the  individuals
by  a smaller  or  larger  number  of  ruling  persons  who  are  supposed
in  some  way  to  represent  the  community.  It  is  immaterial  whe-
ther these  belong  to  a governing  class  or  emerge  as  in  modem
States  from  the  mass  partly  by  force  of  character,  but  much  more
by  force  of  circumstances;  nor  does  it  make  any  essential  diffe-
rence that  their  aims  and  ideals  are  imposed  nowadays  more  by
the  hypnotism  of  verbal  persuasion  than  by  overt  and  actual
force.  In  either  case  there  is  no  guarantee  that  this  ruling  class
or  ruling  body  represents  the  best  mind  of  the  nation  or  its
noblest  aims  or  its  highest  instincts.

Nothing  of  the  kind  can  be  asserted  of  the  modern  politician
in  any  part  of  the  world;  he  does  not  represent  the  soul  of  a
people  or  its  aspirations.  What  he  does  usually  represent  is  all
the  average  pettiness,  selfishness,  egoism,  self-deception  that  is
about  him  and  these  he  represents  well  enough  as  well  as  a great
deal  of  mental  incompetence  and  moral  conventionality,  timidity
and  pretence.  Great  issues  often  come  to  him  for  decision,  but
he  does  not  deal  with  them  greatly;  high  words  and  noble  ideas
are  on  his  lips,  but  they  become  rapidly  the  claptrap  of  a party.
The  disease  and  falsehood  of  modern  political  life  is  patent  in
every  countiy'  of  the  world  and  only  the  hypnotised  acquiescence
of  all,  even  of  the  intellectual  classes,  in  the  great  organised
sham,  cloaks  and  prolongs  the  malady,  the  acquiescence  that  men
yield  to  everything  that  is  habitual  and  makes  the  present  atmos-


279


The  Inadequacy  of  the  State  Idea

phere  of  their  lives.  Yet  it  is  by  such  minds  that  the  good  of  all
has  to  be  decided,  to  such  hands  that  it  has  to  be  entrusted,  to
such  an  agency  calling  itself  the  State  that  the  individual  is  being
more  and  more  called  upon  to  give  up  the  government  of  his
activities.  As  a matter  of  fact,  it  is  in  no  way  the  largest  good  of
all  that  is  thus  secured,  but  a great  deal  of  organised  blundering
and  evil  with  a certain  amount  of  good  which  makes  for  real
progress,  because  Nature  moves  forward  always  in  the  midst  of
all  stumblings  and  secures  her  aims  in  the  end  more  often  in  spite
of  man’s  imperfect  mentality  than  by  its  means.

But  even  if  the  governing  instrument  were  better  constituted
and  of  a higher  mental  and  moral  character,  even  if  some  way
could  be  found  to  do  what  ancient  civilisations  by  their  enforce-
ment of  certain  high  ideals  and  disciplines  tried  to  do  with  their
ruling  classes,  still  the  State  would  not  be  what  the  State  idea
pretends  that  it  is.  Theoretically,  it  is  the  collective  wisdom  and
force  of  the  community  made  available  and  organised  for  the
general  good.  Practically,  what  controls  the  engine  and  drives  the
train  is  so  much  of  the  intellect  and  power  available  in  the  com-
munity as  the  particular  machinery  of  State  organisation  will
allow  to  come  to  the  surface;  but  it  is  also  caught  in  the  machi-
nery and  hampered  by  it  and  hampered  as  well  by  the  large
amount  of  folly  and  selfish  weakness  that  comes  up  in  the  emer-
gence. Doubtless,  this  is  the  best  that  can  be  done  under  the  cir-
cumstances, and  Nature,  as  always,  utilises  it  for  the  best.  But
things  would  be  much  worse  if  there  were  not  a field  left  for  a less
trammelled  individual  effort  doing  what  the  State  cannot  do,  de-
ploying and  using  the  sincerity,  energy,  idealism  of  the  best
individuals  to  attempt  that  which  the  State  has  not  the  wisdom
or  courage  to  attempt,  getting  that  done  which  a collective  con-
servatism and  imbecility  would  either  leave  undone  or  actively
suppress  and  oppose.  It  is  this  energy  of  the  individual  which  is
the  really  effective  agent  of  collective  progress.  The  State  some-
times comes  in  to  aid  it  and  then,  if  its  aid  does  not  mean  undue
control,  it  serves  a positively  useful  end.  As  often  it  stands  in
the  way  and  then  serves  either  as  a brake  upon  progress  or  sup-
plies the  necessary  amount  of  organised  opposition  and  friction
always  needed  to  give  greater  energy  and  a more  complete  shape


280


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

to  the  new  thing  which  is  in  process  of  formation.  But  what  we
are  now  tending  towards  is  such  an  increase  of  organised  State
power  and  such  a huge  irresistible  and  complex  State  activity  as
will  either  eliminate  free  individual  effort  altogether  or  leave  it
dwarfed  and  cowed  into  helplessness.  The  necessary  corrective
to  the  defects,  limitations  and  inefficiency  of  the  State  machine
will  disappear.

The  organised  State  is  neither  the  best  mind  of  the  nation
nor  is  it  even  the  sum  of  the  communal  energies.  It  leaves  out  of
its  organised  action  and  suppresses  or  unduly  depresses  the
working  force  and  thinking  mind  of  important  minorities,  often
of  those  which  represent  that  which  is  best  in  the  present  and  that
which  is  developing  for  the  future.  It  is  a collective  egoism  much
inferior  to  the  best  of  which  the  community  is  capable.  What
that  egoism  is  in  its  relation  to  other  collective  egoisms  we  know,
and  its  ugliness  has  recently  been  forced  upon  the  vision  and
the  conscience  of  mankind.  The  individual  has  usually  something
at  least  like  a soul,  and,  at  any  rate,  he  makes  up  for  the  defi-
ciencies of  the  soul  by  a system  of  morality  and  an  ethical  sense,
and  for  the  deficiencies  of  these  again  by  the  fear  of  social  opinion
or,  failing  that,  a fear  of  the  communal  law  which  he  has  ordina-
rily cither  to  obey  or  at  least  to  circumvent;  and  even  the  difficulty
of  circumventing  is  a check  on  all  except  the  most  violent  or  the
most  skilful.  But  the  State  is  an  entity  which,  with  the  greatest
amount  of  power,  is  the  least  hampered  by  internal  scruples  or
external  checks.  It  has  no  soul  or  only  a rudimentary  one.  It  is
a militar>',  political  and  economic  force;  but  it  is  only  in  a slight
and  undeveloped  degree,  if  at  all,  an  intellectual  and  ethical  being.
And  unfortunately  the  chief  use  it  makes  of  its  undeveloped  intel-
lect is  to  blunt  by  fictions,  catchwords  and  recently  by  State  philo-
sophies, its  ill-developed  ethical  conscience.  Man  within  the
community  is  now  at  least  a half-civilised  creature,  but  his
international  existence  is  still  primitive.  Until  recently  the
orgnaised  nation  in  its  relations  with  other  nations  was  only
a huge  beast  of  prey  with  appetites  which  sometimes  slept
when  gorged  or  discouraged  by  events,  but  were  always  its
chief  reason  for  existence.  Self-protection  and  self-expansion
by  the  devouring  of  others  were  its  dharma.  At  the  present


281


The  Inadequacy  of  the  State  Idea

day  there  is  no  essential  improvement;  there  is  only  a greater
difficulty  in  devouring.  A “sacred  egoism”  is  still  the  ideal  of
nations,  and  therefore  there  is  neither  any  true  and  enlightened
consciousness  of  human  opinion  to  restrain  the  predatory  State
nor  any  effective  international  law.  There  is  only  the  fear  of  de-
feat and  the  fear,  recently,  of  a disastrous  economic  disorganisa-
tion; but  experience  after  experience  has  shown  that  these  checks
are  ineffective.

In  its  inner  life  this  huge  State  egoism  was  once  little  better
than  in  its  outer  relations.^  Brutal,  rapacious,  cunning,  opres-
sive,  intolerant  of  free  action,  free  speech  and  opinion,  even  of
freedom  of  conscience  in  religion,  it  preyed  upon  individuals  and
classes  within  as  upon  weaker  nations  outside.  Only  the  neces-
sity of  keeping  alive  and  rich  and  strong  in  a rough  sort  of  way
the  community  on  which  it  lived  made  its  action  partially  and
crudely  beneficent.  In  modern  times  there  has  been  much  im-
provement in  spite  of  deterioration  in  certain  directions.  The
State  now  feels  the  necessity  of  justifying  its  existence  by  orga-
nising the  general  economic  and  animal  well-being  of  the  com-
munity and  even  of  all  individuals.  It  is  beginning  to  see  the
necessity  of  assuring  the  intellectual  and,  indirectly,  the  moral
development  of  the  whole  community.  This  attempt  of  the  State
to  grow  into  an  intellectual  and  moral  being  is  one  of  the  most
interesting  phenomena  of  modern  civilisation.  Even  the  neces-
sity of  intellectualising  and  moralising  it  in  its  external  relations
has  been  enforced  upon  the  conscience  of  mankind  by  the
European  catastrophe.  But  the  claim  of  the  State  to  absorb  all
free  individual  activities,  a claim  which  it  increasingly  makes  as
it  grows  more  clearly  conscious  of  its  new  ideals  and  its  possi-
bilities, is,  to  say  the  least  of  it,  premature  and,  if  satisfied,  will
surely  end  in  a check  to  human  progress,  a comfortably  orga-
nised stagnancy  such  as  overtook  the  Graeco-Roman  world  after
the  establishment  of  the  Roman  Empire.

The  call  of  the  State  to  the  individual  to  immolate  himself
on  its  altar  and  to  give  up  his  free  activities  into  an  organised

> I am  speaking  of  the  intermediate  age  between  ancient  and  modem  times.  In  ancient
times  the  State  had,  in  some  countries  at  least,  ideals  and  a conscience  with  regard  to  the
community,  but  very  little  in  its  dealings  with  other  States.


282  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

collective  activity  is  therefore  something  quite  different  from  the
demand  of  our  highest  ideals.  It  amounts  to  the  giving  up  of  the
present  form  of  individual  egoism  into  another,  a collective  form,
larger  but  not  superior,  rather  in  many  ways  inferior  to  the  best
individual  egoism.  The  altruistic  ideal,  the  discipline  of  self-
sacrifice,  the  need  of  a growing  solidarity  with  our  fellows  and  a
growing  collective  soul  in  humanity  are  not  in  dispute.  But  the
loss  of  self  in  the  State  is  not  the  thing  that  these  high  ideals
mean,  nor  is  it  the  way  to  their  fulfilment.  Man  must  learn  not
to  suppress  and  mutilate,  but  to  fulfil  himself  in  the  fulfilment  of
mankind,  even  as  he  must  learn  not  to  mutilate  or  destroy,  but
to  complete  his  ego  by  expanding  it  out  of  its  limitations  and
losing  it  in  something  greater  which  it  now  tries  to  represent.
But  the  deglutition  of  the  free  individual  by  a huge  State  machine
is  quite  another  consummation.  The  State  is  a convenience,  and
a rather  clumsy  convenience,  for  our  common  development;  it
ought  never  to  be  made  an  end  in  itself.

The  second  claim  of  the  State  idea  that  this  supremacy  and
universal  activity  of  the  organised  State  machine  is  the  best  means
of  human  progress,  is  also  an  exaggeration  and  a fiction.  Man
lives  by  the  community;  he  needs  it  to  develop  himself  indi-
vidually as  well  as  collectively.  But  is  it  true  that  a State-governed
action  is  the  most  capable  of  developing  the  individual  perfectly
as  well  as  of  serving  the  common  ends  of  the  community?  It  is
not  true.  What  is  true  is  that  it  is  capable  of  providing  the  co-
operative action  of  the  individuals  in  the  community  with  all
necessary  conveniences  and  of  removing  from  it  disabilities  and
obstacles  wluch  would  otherwise  interfere  with  its  working.  Here
the  real  utility  of  the  State  ceases.  The  non-recognition  of  the
possmilities  of  human  co-operation  was  the  weakness  of  English
in  ivi  uahsm,  the  turning  of  a utility  for  co-operative  action
into  an  excuse  for  rigid  control  by  the  State  is  the  weakness  of  the
Teutonic  idea  of  collectivism.  When  the  State  attempts  to  take
up  the  control  of  the  co-operative  action  of  the  community,  it
condemns  itself  to  create  a monstrous  machinery  which  will  end

> crus  ling  out  the  freedom,  initiative  and  serious  growth  of
the  human  being.

The  State  is  bound  to  act  crudely  and  in  the  mass;  it  is


283


The  Inadequacy  of  the  State  Idea

incapable  of  that  free,  harmonious  and  intelligently  or  instinc-
tively varied  action  which  is  proper  to  organic  growth.  For  the
State  is  not  an  organism;  it  is  a machinery,  and  it  works  like  a
machine,  without  tact,  taste,  delicacy  or  intuition.  It  tries  to
manufacture,  but  what  humanity  is  here  to  do  is  to  grow  and
create.  We  see  this  flaw  in  State-governed  education.  It  is  right
and  necessary  that  education  should  be  provided  for  all  and  in
providing  for  it  the  State  is  eminently  useful;  but  when  it  con-
trols the  education,  it  turns  it  into  a routine,  a mechanical  sys-
tem in  which  individual  initiative,  individual  growth  and  true
development  as  opposed  to  a routine  instruction  become  impos-
sible. The  State  tends  always  to  uniformity,  because  uniformhy  is
easy  to  it  and  natural  variation  is  impossible  to  its  essentially
mechanical  nature;  but  uniformity  is  death,  not  life.  A national
culture,  a national  religion,  a national  education  may  still  be
useful  things  provided  they  do  not  interfere  with  the  growth  of
human  solidarity  on  the  one  side  and  individual  freedom  of
thought  and  conscience  and  development  on  the  other;  for  they
give  form  to  the  communal  soul  and  help  it  to  add  its  quota  to
the  sum  of  human  advancement;  but  a State  education,  a State
religion,  a State  culture  are  unnatural  violences.  And  the  same
rule  holds  good  in  different  ways  and  to  a different  extent  in  other
directions  of  our  communal  life  and  its  activities.

The  business  of  the  State,  so  long  as  it  continues  to  be  a
necessary  element  in  human  life  and  growth,  is  to  provide  all
possible  faciUties  for  co-operative  action,  to  remove  obstacles,
to  prevent  all  really  harmful  waste  and  friction,  — a certain
amount  of  waste  and  friction  is  necessary  and  useful  to  all  natural
action,  — and,  removing  avoidable  injustice,  to  secure  for  every
individual  a just  and  equal  chance  of  self-development  and
satisfaction  to  the  extent  of  his  powers  and  in  the  line  of  his
nature.  So  far  the  aim  in  modem  socialism  is  right  and  good.
But  all  unnecessary  interference  with  the  freedom  of  man’s
growth  is  or  can  be  harmful.  Even  co-operative  action  is  inju-
rious if,  instead  of  seeking  the  good  of  all  compatibly  with  the
necessities  of  individual  growth,  — and  without  individual
growth  there  can  be  no  real  and . permanent  good  of  all,  — it
immolates  the  individual  to  a communal  egoism  and  prevents  so


284  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

much  free  room  and  initiative  as  is  necessary  for  the  flowering  of
a more  perfectly  developed  humanity.  So  long  as  humanity  is
not  full-grown,  so  long  as  it  needs  to  grow  and  is  capable  of  a
greater  perfectibility,  there  can  be  no  static  good  of  all  inde-
pendent of  the  gro^^lh  of  the  individuals  composing  the  all.  All
collectivist  ideals  whic’:  seek  unduly  to  subordinate  the  indi-
vidual, really  envisage  a static  condition  whether  it  be  a present
status  or  one  it  soon  hopes  to  establish,  after  which  all  attempt
at  serious  change  would  be  regarded  as  an  offence  of  impatient
individualism  against  the  peace,  just  routine  and  security  of  the
happily  established  communal  order.  Always  it  is  the  individual
who  progresses  and  compels  the  rest  to  progress;  the  instinct  of
the  collectivity  is  to  stand  still  in  its  established  order.  Progress,
growth,  realisation  of  wider  being,  give  his  greatest  sense  of
happiness  to  the  individual;  status,  secure  ease,  to  the  collec-
tivity. And  so  it  must  be  as  long  as  the  latter  is  more  a physical
and  economic  entity  than  a self-conscious  collective  soul.

It  is  therefore  quite  improbable  that  in  the  present  condi-
tions of  the  race  a healthy  unity  of  mankind  can  be  brought  about
by  State  machinery,  whether  it  be  by  a grouping  of  powerful  and
organised  States  enjoying  carefully  regulated  and  legalised  rela-
tions with  each  other  or  by  the  substitution  of  a single  World-
State  for  the  present  half  chaotic  half  ordered  comity  of  nations,
— be  the  form  of  that  World-State  a single  Empire  like  the
Roman  or  a federated  unity.  Such  an  external  or  administrative
unity  may  be  intended  in  the  near  future  of  mankind  in  order  to
accustom  the  race  to  the  idea  of  a common  life,  to  its  habit,
to  its  possibility;  but  it  cannot  be  really  healthy,  durable  or
beneficial  over  all  the  true  line  of  human  destiny  unless  some-
thing be  developed,  more  profound,  internal  and  real.  Other-
wise the  experience  of  the  ancient  w^orld  will  be  repeated  on  a
larger  scale  and  in  other  circumstances.  The  experiment  will
break  dowm  and  give  place  to  a new'  reconstructive  age  of  con-
fusion and  anarchy.  Perhaps  this  experience  also  is  necessary  for
mankind ; yet  it  ought  to  be  possible  for  us  now  to  avoid  it  by
subordinating  mechanical  means  to  our  true  development
through  a moralised  and  even  a spiritualised  humanity  united  in
its  inner  soul  and  not  only  in  its  outward  life  and  body.


Chapter  V


Nation  and  Empire:  Real  and
Political  Unities


JL  HE  problem  of  the  unification  of  mankind
resolves  itself  into  two  distinct  difficulties.  There  is  the  doubt
whether  the  collective  egoisms  already  created  in  the  natural
evolution  of  humanity  can  at  this  time  be  sufficiently  modified
or  abolished  and  whether  even  an  external  unity  in  some  effec-
tive form  can  be  securely  established.  And  there  is  the  doubt
whether,  even  if  any  such  external  unity  can  be  established,  it
will  not  be  at  the  price  of  crushing  both  the  free  life  of  the  indi-
vidual and  the  free  play  of  the  various  collective  units  already
created  in  which  there  is  a real  and  active  life  and  substituting  a
State  organisation  which  will  mechanise  human  existence.  Apart
from  these  two  uncertainties  there  is  a third  doubt  whether  a really
living  unity  can  be  achieved  by  a mere  economic,  political  and
administrative  unification  and  whether  it  ought  not  to  be  pre-
ceded by  at  least  the  strong  beginnings  of  a moral  and  spiritual
oneness.  It  is  the  first  question  that  must  be  taken  first  in  the
logical  order.

At  the  present  stage  of  human  progress  the  nation  is  the
living  collective  unit  of  humanity.  Empires  exist,  but  they  are  as
yet  only  political  and  not  real  units;  they  have  no  life  from  within
and  owe  their  continuance  to  a force  imposed  on  their  constituent
elements  or  else  to  a political  convenience  felt  or  acquiesced  in
by  the  constituents  and  favoured  by  the  world  outside.  Austria
was  long  the  standing  example  of  such  an  empire;  it  was  a poli-
tical convenience  favoured  by  the  world  outside,  acquiesced  in
until  recently  by  its  constituent  elements  and  maintained  by  the
force  of  the  central  Germanic  element  incarnated  in  the  Haps-
burg  dynasty,  — of  late  with  the  active  aid  of  its  Magyar  partner.
If  the  political  convenience  of  an  empire  of  this  kind  ceases,  if
the  constituent  elements  no  longer  acquiesce  and  are  drawn  more


2B6  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

powerfully  by  a centrifugal  force,  if  at  the  same  time  the  world
outside  no  longer  favours  the  combination,  then  force  alone
remains  as  the  one  agent  of  an  artificial  unity.  There  arose  indeed
a new  political  convenience  which  the  existence  of  Austria  served
even  after  it  suffered  from  this  tendency  of  dissolution,  but  that
was  the  convenience  of  the  Germanic  idea  which  made  it  an  in-
convenience to  the  rest  of  Europe  and  deprived  it  of  the  acquies-
cence of  important  constituent  elements  which  were  drawn
towards  other  combinations  outside  the  Austrian  formula.  From
that  moment  the  existence  of  the  Austrian  Empire  was  in  jeo-
pardy and  depended,  not  on  any  inner  necessity,  but  first  on  the
power  of  the  Austro-Magyar  partnership  to  crush  down  the  Slav
nations  within  it  and,  secondly,  on  the  continued  power  and
dominance  of  Germany  and  the  Germanic  idea  in  Europe,  that
is  to  say,  on  force  alone.  And  although  in  Austria  the  weakness
of  the  imperial  form  of  unity  was  singularly  conspicuous  and  its
conditions  exaggerated,  still  those  conditions  are  the  same  for  all
empires  which  are  not  at  the  same  time  national  units.  It  was
not  so  long  ago  that  most  political  thinkers  perceived  at  least  the
strong  possibility  of  an  automatic  dissolution  of  the  British  Em-
pire by  the  self-detachment  of  the  colonies,  in  spite  of  the  close
links  of  race,  language  and  origin  that  should  have  bound  them
to  the  mother  country.  This  was  because  the  political  con-
venience of  imperial  unity,  though  enjoyed  by  the  colonies,  was
not  sufficiently  appreciated  by  them  and,  on  the  other  hand,  there
was  no  living  principle  of  national  oneness.  The  Australians  and
Canadians  were  beginning  to  regard  themselves  as  new  separate
nations  rather  than  as  limbs  of  an  extended  British  nationality.
Things  are  now  changed  in  both  respects,  a wider  formula  has
been  discovered,  and  the  British  Empire  is  for  the  moment  pro-
portionately stronger.

Nevertheless,  it  may  be  asked,  why  should  this  distinction
be  made  of  ilie  political  and  the  real  unit  when  name,  kind  and
form  are  the  same?  It  must  be  made  because  it  is  of  the  greatest
utility  to  a true  and  profound  political  science  and  involves  the
most  important  consequences.  When  an  empire  like  Austria,  a
non-national  empire,  is  broken  to  pieces,  it  perishes  for  good;
there  is  no  innate  tendency  to  recover  the  outward  unity,  because


Nation  and  Empire:  Real  and  Political  Unities  287

there  is  no  real  inner  oneness;  there  is  only  a politically  manu-
factured aggregate.  On  the  other  hand,  a real  national  unity
broken  up  by  circumstances  will  always  preserve  a tendency  to
recover  and  reassert  its  oneness.  The  Greek  Empire  has  gone  the
way  of  all  empires,  but  the  Greek  nation,  after  many  centuries
of  political  non-existence,  again  possesses  its  separate  body,
because  it  has  preserved  its  separate  ego  and  therefore  really  exis-
ted under  the  covering  rule  of  the  Turk.  So  has  it  been  with  all  the
races  under  the  Turkish  yoke,  because  that  powerful  suzerainty,
stern  as  it  was  in  many  respects,  never  attempted  to  obliterate
their  national  characteristics  or  substitute  an  Ottoman  nationa-
hty.  These  nations  have  revived  and  have  reconstituted  or  are
attempting  to  reconstitute  themselves  in  the  measure  in  which
they  have  preserved  their  real  national  sense.  The  Serbian  na-
tional idea  attempted  to  recover  and  has  recovered  all  territory
in  which  the  Serb  exists  or  predominates.  Greece  attempts  to  re-
constitute herself  in  her  mainland,  islands  and  Asiatic  colonies,
but  cannot  now  reconstitute  the  old  Greece  since  even  Thrace  is
rather  Bulgar  than  Hellenic.  Italy  has  become  an  external
unity  again  after  so  many  centuries;  because,  though  no  longer
a State,  she  never  ceased  to  be  a single  people.

This  truth  of  a real  unity  is  so  strong  that  even  nations  which
never  in  the  past  realised  an  outward  unification,  to  which  Fate
and  circumstance  and  their  own  selves  have  been  adverse,  nations
which  have  been  full  of  centrifugal  forces  and  easily  overpowered
by  foreign  intrusions,  have  yet  always  developed  a centripetal
force  as  well  and  arrived  inevitably  at  organised  oneness.  An-
cient Greece  clung  to  her  separatist  tendencies,  her  self-sufficient
city  or  regional  states,  her  little  mutually  repellent  autonomies;
but  the  centripetal  force  was  always  there  manifested  in  leagues,
associations  of  States,  suzerainties  like  the  Spartan  and  Athenian.
It  realised  itself  in  the  end,  first,  imperfectly  and  temporarily  by
the  Macedonian  overrule,  then  by  a strange  enough  development,
through  the  evolution  of  the  Eastern  Roman  world  into  a Greek
and  Byzantine  Empire,  and  it  has  again  revived  in  modem
Greece.  And  we  have  seen  in  our  own  day  Germany,  constantly
disunited  since  ancient  times,  develop  at  last  to  portentous  issues
its  innate  sense  of  oneness  formidably  embodied  in  the  Empire  of


288


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

the  Hohenzollerns  and  persistent  after  its  fall  in  a federal  Re-
public. Nor  would  it  at  all  be  surprising  to  those  who  study  the
working  of  forces  and  not  merely  the  trend  of  outward  circums-
tances, if  one  yet  far-off  result  of  the  War  were  to  be  the  fusion
of  the  one  Germanic  element  still  left  outside,  the  Austro-
German,  into  the  Germanic  whole,  although  possibly  in  some
other  embodiment  than  Prussian  hegemony  or  Hohenzollern
Empire.^  In  both  these  historic  instances,  as  in  so  many  others,
the  unification  of  Saxon  England,  medieval  France,  the  forma-
tion of  the  United  States  of  America,  it  was  a real  unity,  a psy-
chologically distinct  unit  which  tended  at  first  ignorantly  by  the
subconscious  necessity  of  its  being  and  afterwards  with  a sudden
or  gradual  awakening  to  the  sense  of  political  oneness,  towards
an  inevitable  external  unification.  It  is  a distinct  group-soul
which  is  driven  by  inward  necessity  and  uses  outward  circums-
tances to  constitute  for  itself  an  organised  body.

But  the  most  striking  example  in  history  is  the  evolution  of
India.  Nowhere  else  have  the  centrifugal  forces  been  so  strong,
numerous,  complex,  obstinate.  The  mere  time  taken  by  the  evo-
lution has  been  prodigious;  the  disastrous  vicissitudes  through
which  it  has  had  to  work  itself  out  have  been  appalling.  And  yet
through  it  all  the  inevitable  tendency  has  worked  constantly,
pertinaciously,  with  the  dull,  obscure,  indomitable,  relentless
obstinacy  of  Nature  when  she  is  opposed  in  her  instinctive  pur-
poses by  man,  and  finally,  after  a struggle  enduring  through
millenniums,  has  triumphed.  And,  as  usually  happens  when  she
is  thus  opposed  by  her  own  mental  and  human  material,  it  is  the
most  adverse  circumstances  that  the  subconscious  worker  has
turned  into  her  most  successful  instruments.  The  beginnings
of  the  centripetal  tendency  in  India  go  back  to  the  earliest  times
of  which  we  have  record  and  are  typified  in  the  ideal  of  the
Samrat  or  Chakravarti  Raja  and  the  military  and  political  use  of
the  Aswamedha  and  Rajasuya  sacrifices.  The  two  great  national
epics  might  almost  have  been  written  to  illustrate  this  theme;  for
the  one  recounts  the  establishment  of  a unifying  dhannarajya  or
imperial  reign  of  justice,  the  other  starts  with  an  idealised  des-


* Thii  rwliwd  iiself  for  n time,  but  by  means  and  under  circuni5tancci  which

irat-'r  i!  e tev^a!  of  Auwnan  n.nior.aI  sentiment  .nnd  a separalc  national  existence  inevitable.


Nation  and  Empire:  Real  and  Political  Units  289

cription  of  such  a rule  pictured  as  once  existing  in  the  ancient  and
sacred  past  of  the  country.  The  political  history  of  India  is  the
story  of  a succession  of  empires,  indigenous  and  foreign,  each  of
them  destroyed  by  centrifugal  forces,  but  each  bringing  the  cen-
tripetal tendency  nearer  to  its  triumphant  emergence.  And  it  is  a
significant  circumstance  that  the  more  foreign  the  rule,  the  greater
has  been  its  force  for  the  unification  of  the  subject  people.  This
is  always  a sure  sign  that  the  essential  nation-unit  is  already  there
and  that  there  is  an  indissoluble  national  vitality  necessitating  the
inevitable  emergence  of  the  organised  nation.  In  this  instance,  we
see  that  the  conversion  of  the  psychological  unity  on  which  na-
tionhood is  based  into  the  external  organised  unity  by  which  it  is
perfectly  realised,  has  taken  a period  of  more  than  two  thousand
years  and  is  not  yet  complete.^  And  yet,  since  the  essentiality  of
the  thing  was  there,  not  even  the  most  formidable  difficulties  and
delays,  not  even  the  most  persistent  incapacity  for  union  in  the
people,  not  even  the  most  disintegrating  shocks  from  outside
have  prevailed  against  the  obstinate  subconscious  necessity.  And
this  is  only  the  extreme  illustration  of  a general  law.

It  will  be  useful  to  dwell  a little  upon  this  aid  lent  by  foreign
rule  to  the  process  of  nation-making  and  see  how  it  works.  His-
tory abounds  with  illustrations.  But  in  some  cases  the  pheno-
menon of  foreign  domination  is  momentary  and  imperfect,  in
others  long-enduring  and  complete,  in  others  often  repeated  in
various  forms.  In  some  instances  the  foreign  element  is  rejected,
its  use  once  over,  in  others  it  is  absorbed,  in  others  accepted
with  more  or  less  assimilation  for  a longer  or  briefer  period  as  a
ruling  caste.  The  principle  is  the  same,  but  it  is  worked  variously
by  Nature  according  to  the  needs  of  the  particular  case.  There  is
none  of  the  modern  nations  in  Europe  which  has  not  had  to  pass
through  a phase  more  or  less  prolonged,  more  or  less  complete,
of  foreign  domination  in  order  to  realise  its  nationahty.  In  Rus-
sia and  England  it  was  the  domination  of  a foreign  conquering
race  which  rapidly  became  a ruling  caste  and  was  in  the  end  assi-
milated and  absorbed,  in  Spain  the  succession  of  the  Roman,
Goth  and  Moor,  in  Italy  the  overlordship  of  the  Austrian,  in  the

» But  it  must  be  remembered  that  France,  Germany,  modern  Italy  took  each  a thousand  or
two  thousand  years  and  mote  to  form  and  set  into  a firm  oneness.


290  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

Balkans'  the  long  suzerainty  of  the  Turk,  in  Germany  the  tran-
sient yoke  of  Napoleon.  But  in  all  cases  the  essential  has  been  a
shock  or  a pressure  which  would  either  waken  a loose  psycholo-
gical unity  to  the  necessity  of  organising  itself  from  within  or
would  crush  out,  dispirit  or  deprive  of  power,  vitality  and  reality
the  more  obstinate  factors  of  disunion.  In  some  cases  even  an
entire  change  of  name,  culture  and  civilisation  has  been  neces-
sary, as  well  as  a more  or  less  profound  modification  of  the  race.
Notably  has  this  happened  in  the  formation  of  French  nationa-
lity. The  ancient  Gallic  people,  in  spite  of  or  perhaps  because  of
its  Druidic  civilisation  and  early  greatness,  was  more  incapable  of
organising  a firm  political  unity  than  even  the  ancient  Greeks  or
the  old  Indian  kingdoms  and  republics.  It  needed  the  Roman
rule  and  Latin  culture,  the  superimposition  of  a Teutonic  ruling
caste  and  finally  the  shock  of  the  temporary  and  partial  English
conquest  to  found  the  unequalled  unity  of  modern  France.  Yet
though  name,  civilisation  and  all  else  seem  to  have  changed,
the  French  nation  of  today  is  still  and  has  always  remained  the
old  Gallic  nation  with  its  Basque,  Gaelic,  Armotican  and  other
ancient  elements  modified  by  the  Frank  and  Latin  admixture.

Thus  the  nation  is  a persistent  psychological  unit  which
Nature  has  been  busy  developing  throughout  the  world  in  the
most  various  forms  and  educating  into  physical  and  political
unity.  Political  unity  is  not  the  essential  factor;  it  may  not  yet
be  realised  and  yet  the  nation  persists  and  moves  inevitably  to-
wards its  realisation ; it  may  be  destroyed  and  yet  the  nation  per-
sists and  travails  and  suffers  but  refuses  to  be  annihilated.  In
former  times  the  nation  was  not  always  a real  and  vital  unit;  the
tribe,  the  clan,  the  commune,  the  regional  people  were  the  living
groups.  Those  unities  which  in  the  attempt  at  national  evolution
destroyed  these  older  living  groups  without  arriving  at  a vital
nationhood  disappeared  once  the  artificial  or  political  unit  was
broken.  But  now  the  nation  stands  as  the  one  living  group-unit
of  humanity  into  which  all  others  must  merge  or  to  which  they
must  become  subservient.  Even  old  persistent  race  unities  and
cultural  unities  arc  powerless  against  it.  The  Catalonian  in

* I Jrfc  ihcrs  was  no  sioflc  people  to  be  united  but  many  separate  peoples  which  had  each
to  rrcoscf  their  separate  indepcadtr.ee  or,  la  some  cases,  a coalition  of  kindred  peoples.


Nation  and  Empire:  Real  and  Political  Unities  291

Spain,  the  Breton  and  Provencal  and  Alsatian  in  France,  the
Welsh  in  England  may  cherish  the  signs  of  their  separate*  exis-
tence; but  the  attraction  of  the  greater  living  unity  of  the  Spanish,
the  French,  the  British  nation  has  been  too  powerful  to  be  in-
jured by  these  persistences.  The  nation  in  modem  times  is  practi-
cally indestmctible,  unless  it  dies  from  within.  Poland,  tom
asunder  and  crushed  under  the  heel  of  three  powerful  empires,
ceased  to  exist;  the  Polish!  nation  survived  and  is  once  more
reconstituted.  Alsace  after  forty  years  of  the  German  yoke  re-
mained faithful  to  her  French  nationhood  in  spite  of  her
affinities  of  race  and  language  with  the  conqueror.  All  modern
attempts  to  destroy  by  force  or  break  up  a nation  are  foolish  and
futile,  because  they  ignore  this  law  of  the  natural  evolution.  Em-
pires are  still  perishable  political  units;  the  nation  is  immortal.
And  so  it  will  remain  until  a greater  living  unit  can  be  found  into
which  the  nation  idea  can  merge  in  obedience  to  a superior
attraction.

And  then  the  question  arises  whether  the  empire  is  not  pre-
cisely that  destined  unit  in  course  of  evolution.  The  mere  fact
that  at  present  not  the  empire  but  the  nation  is  the  vital  unity
can  be  no  bar  to  a future  reversal  of  the  relations.  Obviously,  in
order  that  they  may  be  reversed  the  empire  must  cease  to  be  a
mere  political  and  become  rather  a psychological  entity.  But
there  have  been  instances  in  the  evolution  of  the  nation  in  which
the  political  unity  preceded  and  became  a basis  for  the  psycho-
logical as  in  the  union  of  Scotch,  English  and  Welsh  to  form  the
British  nation.  There  is  no  insurmountable  reason  why  a similar
evolution  should  not  take  place  on  a larger  scale  and  an  imperial
unity  be  substituted  for  a national  unity.  Nature  has  long  been
in  travail  of  the  imperial  grouping,  long  casting  about  to  give  it
a greater  force  of  permanence,  and  the  emergence  of  the  con-
scious imperial  ideal  all  over  the  earth  and  its  attempts,  though
still  crude,  violent  and  blundering,  to  substitute  itself  for  the
national,  may  not  irrationally  be  taken  as  the  precursory  sign  of
one  of  those  rapid  leaps  and  transitions  by  which  she  so  often
accomplishes  what  she  has  long  been  gradually  and  tentatively
preparing.  This  then  is  the  possibility  we  have  next  to  consider
before  we  examine  the  established  phenomenon  of  nationhood


292


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity


in  relation  to  the  ideal  of  human  unity.  Two  different  ideals  and
therefore  two  different  possibilities  were  precipitated  much
nearer  to  realisation  by  the  European  conflict,  — a federation
of  free  nations  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  distribution  of  the
earth  into  a few  great  empires  or  imperial  hegemonies.  A prac-
tical combination  of  the  two  ideas  became  the  most  tangible
possibility  of  the  not  distant  future.  It  is  necessary  to  pause  and
consider  whether,  one  element  of  this  possible  combination  being
already  a living  unit,  the  other  also  could  not  under  certain  cir-
cumstances be  converted  into  a living  unit  and  the  combination,
if  realised,  made  the  foundation  of  an  enduring  new  order  of
things.  Otherwise  it  could  be  no  more  than  a transient  device
without  any  possibility  of  a stable  permanence.


Chapter  VI


Ancient  and  Modern  Methods
of  Empire


A.  CLEAR  distinction  must  be  made  between
two  political  aggregates  wliicli  go  equally  in  current  language  by
the  name  of  empire.  For  there  is  the  homogeneous  national  and
there  is  the  beterogeacous  composite  empire.  In  a sense,  all
empires  are  composites,  at  any  rate,  if  we  go  back  to  their  ori-
gins; but  in  practice  there  is  a difference  between  the  imperial
aggregate  in  which  the  component  elements  are  not  divided  from
each  other  by  a strong  sense  of  their  separate  existence  in  the
whole  and  the  imperial  aggregate  in  which  this  psychological
basis  of  separation  is  still  in  vigour.  Japan  before  the  absorption
of  Formosa  and  Korea  was  a national  whole  and  an  empire  only
in  the  honorific  sense  of  the  word;  after  that  absorption  it  became
a real  and  a composite  empire.  Germany  again  would  have  been
a purely  national  empire  if  it  had  not  burdened  itself  with  three
minor  acquisitions,  Alsace,  Poland  and  Schleswig-Holstein  which
were  not  united  to  it  by  the  sense  of  German  nationality  but  only
by  military  force.  Let  us  suppose  this  Teutonic  aggregate  to  have
lost  its  foreign  elements  and  at  most  have  acquired  instead  the
Teutonic  provinces  of  Austria.  Then  we  should  have  had  an
example  of  a homogeneous  aggregate  which  would  yet  be  an
empire  in  the  honorific  sense  of  the  word;  for  that  would  be  a
composite  of  homogeneous  Teutonic  nations  or,  as  we  may
conveniently  call  them  sub-nations,  which  would  not  naturally
harbour  any  sentiment  of  separatism,  but  rather,  drawn  always
to  a natural  unity,  would  form  easily  and  inevitably  a psycho-
logical and  not  merely  a political  unit.

But  this  form  in  its  purity  is  now  difficult  to  find.  The  United
States  are  the  example  of  such  an  aggregate,  although  from  the
accident  of  their  rule  by  a periodically  elected  President  and  not
a hereditary  monarch  we  do  not  associate  the  type  with  the  idea


294  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

of  an  empire  at  all.  Still  if  the  imperial  aggregate  is  to  be  changed
from  a political  to  a psychological  unit,  it  would  seem  that  it
must  be  done  by  reproducing  miitatis  mutandis  something  of
the  system  of  the  United  States,  a system  in  which  each  element
could  preserve  a sufficient  local  State  independence  and  separate
power  of  legislative  and  executive  action  and  yet  be  part  of  an
inseparable  greater  aggregate.  This  could  be  effected  most  easily
where  the  elements  are  fairly  homogeneous  as  it  would  be  in  a
federation  of  Great  Britain  and  her  colonies.

A tendency  to  large  homogeneous  aggregations  has  shown
itself  recently  in  political  thought,  as  in  the  dream  of  a Pan-
Germanic  Empire,  a great  Russian  and  Pan-Slavic  Empire  or  the
Pan-Islamic  idea  of  a united  Mahomedan  world.^  But  these  ten-
dencies arc  usually  associated  with  the  control  by  this  homoge-
neous aggregate  over  other  elements  heterogeneous  to  it  under
the  old  principle  of  military  and  political  compulsion,  the  reten-
tion by  Russia  of  Asiatic  nations  under  her  sway,^  the  seizure  by
Germany  of  wholly  or  partially  non-Germanic  countries  and
provinces,  the  control  by  the  Caliphate  of  non-Moslem  subjects.®
Even  if  these  anomalies  were  absent,  the  actual  arrangement  of
the  world  would  lend  itself  with  difficulty  to  a remodelling  of
empire  on  a racial  or  cultural  basis.  Vast  aggregates  of  this  kind
would  find  enclaves  in  their  dominion  inhabited  by  elements
wholly  heterogeneous  to  them  or  mixed.  Quite  apart  therefore
from  the  resistance  and  refusal  of  kindred  nations  to  renounce
their  cherished  nationality  and  fuse  themselves  in  combinations
of  this  kind,  there  would  be  this  incompatibility  of  mixed  or
heterogeneous  factors,  recalcitrant  to  the  idea  and  the  culture
that  .sought  to  absorb  them.  Thus  a Pan-Slavonic  empire  would
necessitate  the  control  of  the  Balkan  Peninsula  by  Russia  as
the  premier  Slav  State;  but  such  a scheme  would  have  to  meet

* At!  three  h-f.e  been  btehen  by  tlw  cHcct  of  revolution  and  war,  but,  if  the  nation  idea
i!  Air!.)!ed,  the  lilt  mir.ht  stiilB!  some  future  d.atc  revive;  thcsccond.  if  Communism  destroyed
the  nationai  idea,  may  stil!  be  n possibility.

’ This  hit  been  modifred  by  the  substitution  of  a Soviet  Union  claiming  to  unite  these
■Sihxi’Z  peoftfs  votim'ariiy  wiih  Rutsia:  but  one  h not  quite  sure  v,-hcthcr  this  is  a permanent
rea'.ty  ct  cr.ly  s iemp«ar30’  apparent  phenomenon.

* Th.ere  t*o  cmr;rm  have  now  disappeared  and  ifiere  seems  to  be  no  possibility  of  their
ftv-.sa!.


Ancient  and  Modern  Methods  of  Empire  295

not  only  the  independent  Serbian  nationality  and  the  imperfect
Slavism  of  the  Bulgar  but  the  quite  incompatible  Rumanian,
Greek  and  Albanian  elements.  Thus  it  does  not  appear  that  this
tendency  towards  vast  homogeneous  aggregates,  although  it  has
for  some  time  played  an  important  part  in  the  world’s  history
and  is  not  exhausted  or  finally  baffled,  is  ever  likely  to  be  the
eventual  solution;  for  even  if  it  triumphed,  it  would  have  to  meet
in  a greater  or  less  degree  the  difficulties  of  the  heterogeneous
type.  The  true  problem  of  empire  therefore  still  remains,  how  to
transform  the  artificial  political  unity  of  a heterogeneous  empire,
heterogeneous  in  racial  composition,  language  and  culture,  into
a real  and  psychological  unity.

History  gives  us  only  one  great  and  definite  example  of  an
attempt  to  solve  this  problem  on  this  large  scale  and  with  ante-
cedent conditions  which  could  at  all  afford  any  guidance  for  the
vast  heterogeneous  modern  empires,  those  of  Russia,  England,^
France  to  which  the  problem  is  now  offered.  The  old  Chinese
empire  of  the  five  nations,  admirably  organised,  was  not  a case
in  point;  for  all  its  constituent  parts  were  Mongolian  in  race  and
presented  no  formidable  cultural  difficulties.  But  the  imperial
Roman  had  to  face  essentially  the  same  problems  as  the  modems
minus  one  or  two  very  important  complications  and  he  solved
them  up  to  a certain  point  with  a masterly  success.  His  empire
endured  through  several  centuries  and,  though  often  threatened
with  dismption,  yet  by  its  inner  principle  of  unity  and  by  its
overpowering  centripetal  attraction  triumphed  over  all  disruptive
tendencies.  Its  one  failure  was  the  bisection  into  the  Eastern  and
Western  empires  which  hastened  its  final  ending.  Still  when  that
end  came  it  was  not  by  a disruption  from  within  but  simply  by
the  decaying  of  its  centre  of  life.  And  it  was  not  till  this  central
life  faded  that  the  pressure  of  the  barbarian  world  without,  to
which  its  ruin  is  wrongly  attributed,  could  prevail  over  its  magni-
ficent solidarity.

The  Roman  effected  his  sway  by  military  conquest  and
military  colonisation;  but  once  that  conquest  was  assured,  he

‘ This  empire  has  so  altered  its  form  into  that  of  a free  Commonwealth  that  the  objection
is  no  longer  relevant;  there 'is  no  longer  an  old-world  empire  but  a free  Commonwealth  and
a number  of  subject  peoples  moving  rapidly  towards  self-government.


296


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

was  not  content  with  holding  it  together  as  an  artificial  political
unity,  nor  did  he  trust  solely  to  that  political  convenience  of  a
good,  efficient  and  well-organised  government  economically  and
administratively  beneficent  which  made  it  at  first  acceptable  to
the  conquered  peoples.  He  had  too  sure  a political  instinct  to
be  so  easily  satisfied;  for  it  is  certain  that  if  he  had  stopped  short
there,  the  empire  would  have  broken  up  at  a much  earlier  date.
The  peoples  under  his  sway  would  have  preserved  their  sense  of
separate  nationality  and,  once  accustomed  to  Roman  efficiency
and  administrative  organisation,  would  inevitably  have  tended
to  the  separate  enjoyment  of  these  advantages  as  independent
organised  nations.  It  was  this  sense  of  separate  nationality  which
the  Roman  rule  succeeded  in  blotting  out  wherever  it  established
its  own  dominant  influence.  And  this  was  done  not  by  the  stupid
expedient  of  a brutal  force  after  the  Teutonic  fashion,  but  by  a
peaceful  pressure.  Rome  first  compounded  with  the  one  rival
culture  that  was  superior  in  certain  respects  to  her  own  and  ac-
cepted it  as  part  of  her  own  cultural  existence  and  even  as  its
most  valuable  part;  she  created  a Graeco-Roman  civilisation,
left  the  Greek  tongue  to  spread  and  secure  it  in  the  East,  but
introduced  it  everywhere  else  by  the  medium  of  the  Latin  lang-
uage and  a Latin  education  and  succeeded  in  peacefully  over-
coming the  decadent  or  inchoate  cultures  of  Gaul  and  her  other
conquered  provinces.  But  since  even  this  process  might  not
have  been  sufficient  to  abolish  all  separatist  tendency,  she  not
only  admitted  her  Latinised  subjects  to  the  highest  military  and
civil  offices  and  even  to  the  imperial  purple,  so  that  within  less
than  a century  after  Augustus,  first  an  Italian  Gaul  and  then  an
Iberian  Spaniard  held  the  name  and  power  of  the  Caesars,  but
she  proceeded  rapidly  enough  to  deprive  of  all  vitality  and  then
even  nominally  to  abolish  all  the  grades  of  civic  privilege  with
which  she  had  started  and  extended  the  full  Roman  citizenship
to  all  her  subjects,  Asiatic,  European  and  African,  without  dis-
tinction.

The  result  was  that  the  whole  empire  became  psychologically
and  not  only  politically  a single  Graeco-Roman  unity.  Not  only
superior  force  or  the  recognition  of  Roman  peace  and  good
government,  but  ail  the  desires,  associations,  pride,  cultural


Ancient  and  Modem  Methods  of  Empire  297

affinities  of  the  provinces  made  them  firmly  attached  to  the  main-
tenance of  the' empire.  Every  attempt  of  provincial  ruler  or  mili-
tary chief  to  start  provincial  empires  for  their  own  benefit  failed
because  it  found  no  basis,  no  supporting  tendency,  no  national
sentiment  and  no  sense  of  either  material  or  any  other  advantage
to  be  gained  by  the  change,  in  the  population  on  whom  the  suc-
cessful continuity  of  the  attempt  had  to  depend.  So  far  the
Roman  succeeded;  where  he  failed,  it  was  due  to  the  essential
vice  of  his  method.  By  crushing  out,  however  peacefully,  the
living  cultures  or  the  incipient  individuality  of  the  peoples  he
ruled,  he  deprived  the  peoples  of  their  sources  of  vitality,  the
roots  of  their  force.  No  doubt,  he  removed  all  positive  causes  of
disruption  and  secured  a passive  force  of  opposition  to  all  dis-
ruptive change;  but  his  empire  lived  only  at  the  centre  and
when  that  centre  tended  to  become  exhausted,  there  was  no  posi-
tive and  abounding  life  throughout  the  body  from  which  it
could  be  replenished.  In  the  end  Rome  could  not  even  depend
on  a supply  of  vigorous  individuals  from  the  peoples  whose  life
she  had  pressed  out  under  the  weight  of  a borrowed  civilisation;
she  had  to  draw  on  the  frontier  barbarians.  And  when  she  fell
to  pieces,  it  was  these  barbarians  and  not  the  old  peoples  resur-
gent who  became  her  heirs.  For  their  barbarism  was  at  least  a
living  force  and  a principle  of  life,  but  the  Graeco-Roman  civilisa-
tion had  become  a principle  of  death.  All  the  living  forces  were
destroyed  by  whose  contact  it  could  have  modified  and  renewed
its  own  force.  In  the  end  it  had  itself  to  be  destroyed  in  its  form
and  its  principle  resown  in  the  virgin  field  of  the  vital  and  vigo-
rous culture  of  mediaeval  Europe.  What  the  Roman  had  not  the
wisdom  to  do  by  his  organised  empire,  — for  even  the  pro-
foundest  and  surest  political  instinct  is  not  wisdom,  — had  to
be  done  by  Nature  herself  in  the  loose  but  living  unity  of  mediae-
val Christendom.

The  example  of  Rome  has  haunted  the  political  imagination
of  Europe  ever  since.  Not  only  has  it  been  behind  the  Holy
Roman  Empire  of  Charlemagne  and  Napoleon’s  gigantic  attempt
and  the  German  dream  of  a world-empire  governed  by  Teutonic
efficiency  and  Teutonic  culture,  but  all  the  imperial  nations,
including  France  and  England,  have  followed  to  a certain  extent


298


TJie  Ideal  of  Hianan  Unity

in  its  footsteps.  But,  significantly  enougli,  every  attempt  at  re-
newing the  Roman  success  has  failed.  The  modern  nations  have
not  been  able  to  follow  Rome  completely  in  the  lines  she  had
traced  out  or  if  they  tried  to  follow,  have  clashed  against  diffe-
rent conditions  and  either  collapsed  or  been  obliged  to  call  a halt.
It  is  as  if  Nature  had  said,  “That  experiment  has  been  carried  once
to  the  logical  consequences  and  once  is  enough.  I have  made
new  conditions;  find  you  new  means  or  at  least  mend  and  add
to  the  old  where  they  were  deficient  or  went  astray.”

The  European  nations  have  extended  their  empires  by  the
old  Roman  method  of  military  conquest  and  colonisation,  aban-
doning for  the  most  part  the  pre-Roman  principle  of  simple  over-
lordship or  hegemony  which  was  practised  by  the  Assyrian  and
Egyptian  kings,  the  Indian  States  and  the  Greek  cities.  But  this
principle  also  has  been  sometimes  used  in  the  shape  of  the
protectorate  to  prepare  the  more  normal  means  of  occupation.
The  colonies  have  not  been  of  the  pure  Roman,  but  of  a mixed
Carthaginian  and  Roman  type,  official  and  military,  enjoying
like  the  Roman  colonies  superior  civic  rights  to  the  indigenous
population,  they  have  been  at  the  same  time  and  far  more
commercial  colonies  of  exploitation.  The  nearest  to  the  Roman
type  has  been  the  English  settlement  in  Ulster,  while  the  German
system  in  Poland  developed  under  modern  conditions  the  old
Roman  principle  of  expropriation.  But  these  are  exceptions,  not
tlie  rule.

Tlie  conquered  territory  once  occupied  and  secure,  the  mo-
dern nations  have  found  themselves  brought  up  short  by  a
difficulty  which  they  have  not  been  able  to  surmount  as  the
Romans  surmounted  it,  — the  difficulty  of  uprooting  the
indigenous  culture  and  with  it  the  indigenous  sense  of  separate-
ness. All  these  empires  have  at  first  carried  with  them  the  idea
of  imposing  their  culture  along  with  the  flag,  first  simply  as  an
instinct  of  the  conqueror  and  as  a necessary  adjunct  to  the  fact
of  political  domination  and  a security  for  its  permanence,  but
latterly  with  the  conscious  intention  of  extending,  as  it  is  some-
what pharisaically  put,  the  benefits  of  civilisation  to  the  “infe-
riori'  races.  It  cannot  be  said  that  the  attempt  has  anywhere  been
verj'  prosperous.  It  was  tried  with  considerable  thoroughness


Ancient  and  Modern  Methods  of  Empire  299

and  ruthlessness  in  Ireland,  but  although  the  Irish  speech  was
stamped  out  except  in  the  wilds  of  Connaught  and  all  distinctive
signs  of  the  old  Irish  culture  disappeared,  the  outraged  nation-
ality simply  clung  to  whatever  other  means  of  distinctiveness  it
could  find,  however  exiguous,  its  Catholic  religion,  its  Celtic  race
and  nationhood,  and  even  when  it  became  Anghcised,  refused  to
become  English.  The  removal  or  slackening  of  the  foreign  pres-
sure has  resulted  in  a violent  recoil,  an  attempt  to  revive  the
Gaelic  speech,  to  reconstitute  the  old  Celtic  spirit  and  culture.
The  German  failed  to  Prussianise  Poland  or  even  his  own  kin
who  speak  his  own  language,  the  Alsatians.  The  Finn. remained
unconquerably  Finnish  in  Russia.  The  mild  Austrian  methods
left  the  Austrian  Pole  as  Polish  as  his  oppressed  brother  in
German  Posen.  Accordingly,  there  began  to  rise  ever5where
a growing  sense  of  the  inutility  of  the  endeavour  and  the  neces-
sity of  leaving  the  soul  of  the  subject  nation  free,  confining  the
action  of  the  sovereign  State  to  the  enforcement  of  new  adminis-
trative and  economic  conditions  with  as  much  social  and  cultural
change  as  may  be  freely  accepted  or  may  come  about  by  educa-
tion and  the  force  of  circumstances.

The  German,  indeed,  new  and  inexperienced  in  imperial
methods,  clung  to  the  old  Roman  idea  of  assimilation  which  he
sought  to  execute  both  by  Roman  and  by  un-Roman  means.
He  showed  even  a tendency  to  go  back  beyond  the  Caesars  of
old,  to  the  methods  of  the  Jew  in  Canaan  and  the  Saxon  in
Eastern  Britain,  methods  of  expulsion  and  massacre.  But  since
he  was,  after  all,  modernised  and  had  some  sense  of  economic
necessity  and  advantage,  he  could  not  carry  out  this  poHcy  with
any  thoroughness  or  in  times  of  peace.  Still  he  insisted  on  the
old  Roman  method,  sought  to  substitute  German  speech  and
culture  for  the  indigenous  and,  as  he  could  not  do  it  by  peace-
ful pressure,  he  tried  it  by  force.  An  attempt  of  this  kind  is  bound
to  fail;  instead  of  bringing  about  the  psychological  unity  at
which  it  aims,  it  succeeds  only  in  accentuating  the  national  spirit
and  plants  a rooted  and  invincible  hatred  which  is  dangerous  to
the  empire  and  may  even  destroy  it  if  the  opposed  elements  are
not  too  small  in  number  and  weak  in  force.  And  if  this  effacing
of  heterogeneous  cultures  is  impossible  in  Europe  where  the


300  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

differences  are  only  variations  of  a common  type  and  there  are
only  small  and  weak  elements  to  overcome,  it  is  obviously  out
of  the  question  for  those  empires  which  have  to  deal  with  great
Asiatic  and  African  masses  rooted  for  many  centuries  in  an  old
and  well-formed  national  culture.  If  a psychological  unity  has
to  be  created,  it  must  be  by  other  means.

The  impact  of  different  cultures  upon  each  other  has  not
ceased  but  has  rather  been  accentuated  by  the  conditions  of  the
modem  world.  But  the  nature  of  the  impact,  the  ends  towards
which  it  moves  and  the  means  by  which  the  ends  can  most
successfully  be  worked  out,  are  profoundly  altered.  The  earth  is
in  travail  now  of  one  common,  large  and  flexible  civilisation  for
the  whole  human  race  into  which  each  modem  and  ancient
culture  shall  bring  its  contribution  and  each  clearly  defined  hu-
man aggregate  shall  introduce  its  necessary  element  of  variation.
In  the  working  out  of  this  aim,  there  must  necessarily  be  some
struggle  for  survival.  The  fittest  to  survive  will  be  here  all  that
can  best  serve  the  tendencies  Nature  is  working  out  in  humanity,
— not  only  the  tendencies  of  the  hour,  but  the  reviving  tendencies
of  the  past  and  the  yet  inchoate  tendencies  of  the  future.  And  it
will  be  too  all  that  can  best  help  as  liberating  and  combining
forces,  best  make  for  adaptation  and  adjustment  and  for  deliver-
ance of  the  hidden  sense  of  the  great  Mother  in  her  strivings.  But
success  in  this  struggle  is  worst  and  not  best  served  by  military
violence  or  political  pressure.  German  culture  for  good  or  ill
was  making  rapid  conquests  throughout  the  world  before  the
mlers  of  Germany  were  ill-advised  enough  to  rouse  the  latent
force  of  opposing  ideals  by  armed  violence.  And  even  now  that
which  is  essential  in  it,  the  State  idea  and  the  organisation  of  the
life  of  the  community  by  the  State  which  is  common  both  to
German  imperialism  and  to  German  socialism,  is  far  more  hkely
to  succeed  by  the  defeat  of  the  former  in  the  War  than  it  could
have  done  by  its  victory  in  a brute  stmggle.

Tliis  change  in  the  movement  and  orientation  of  the  world’s
tendencies  points  to  a law  of  interchange  and  adaptation  and  to
the  emergence  of  a new  birth  out  of  the  meeting  of  many  ele-
ments. Only  those  imperial  aggregates  are  likely  to  succeed  and
eventually  endure  which  recognise  the  new  law  and  shape  their


Ancient  and  Modern  Methods  of  Empire  301

organisation  to  accord  with  it.  Immediate  victories  of  an  oppo-
site kind  may  indeed  be  gained  and  violence  done  to  the  law;
but  such  present  successes  are  won,  as  history  has  repeatedly
shown,  at  the  cost  of  a nation’s  whole  future.  The  recognition  of
the  new  truth  had  already  commenced  as  a result  of  increased
communication  and  the  widening  of  knowledge.  The  value  of
variations  had  begun  to  be  acknowledged  and  the  old  arrogant
claims  of  this  or  that  culture  to  impose  itself  and  crush  out  all
others  were  losing  their  force  and  self-confidence  when  the  old
outworn  creed  suddenly  leaped  up  armed  with  the  German  sword
to  vindicate  itself,  if  it  might,  before  it  perished.  The  only
result  has  been  to  give  added  force  and  clear  recognition  to  the
truth  it  sought  to  deny.  The  importance  even  of  the  smallest
States,  Belgium,  Serbia,^  as  cultural  units  in  the  European  whole
has  been  lifted  almost  to  the  dignity  of  a creed.  The  recognition
of  the  value  of  Asiatic  cultures,  confined  formerly  to  the  thinker,
scholar  and  artist,  has  now  been  brought  into  the  popular  mind  by
association  on  the  battlefield.  The  theory  of  “inferior”  races,
an  inferiority  and  superiority  measured  by  approximation
to  one’s  own  form  of  culture,  has  received  what  may  well  turn
out  to  have  been  its  death-blow.  The  seeds  of  a new  order  of
things  are  being  rapidly  sown  in  the  conscious  mentality  of
the  race.

This  new  turn  of  the  impact  of  cultures  shows  itself  most
clearly  where  the  European  and  the  Asiatic  meet.  French  culture
in  Northern  Africa,  English  culture  in  India  cease  at  once  to  be
French  or  English  and  become  simply  the  common  European
civilisation  in  face  of  the  Asiatic;  it  is  no  longer  an  imperial
domination  intent  to  secure  itself  by  assimilation,  but  continent
parleying  with  continent.  The  political  motive  sinks  into  insigni-
ficance; the  world-motive  takes  its  place.  And  in  this  confron-
tation it  is  no  longer  a self-confident  European  civilisation  that
offers  its  light  and  good  to  the  semi-barbarous  Asiatic  and  the
latter  that  gratefully  accepts  a beneficent  transformation.
Even  adaptable  Japan,  after  the  first  enthusiasm  of  acceptance,
has  retained  all  that  is  fundamental  in  her  culture,  and  every-
where else  the  European  current  has  met  the  opposition  of  an

* Now  Yugoslavia.


302


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

inner  voice  and  force  which  cries  halt  to  its  victorious  impetus.^
The  East  is  on  the  whole,  in  spite  of  certain  questionings  and
scruples,  willing  and,  where  not  wholly  willing,  forced  by  cir-
cumstances and  the  general  tendency  of  mankind  to  accept  the
really  valuable  parts  of  modern  European  culture,  its  science,
its  curiosity,  its  ideal  of  universal  education  and  uplift,  its  aboli-
tion of  privilege,  its  broadening,  liberalising  democratic  tenden-
cy, its  instinct  of  freedom  and  equality,  its  call  for  the  breaking
down  of  narrow  and  oppressive  forms,  for  air,  space,  light.  But
at  a certain  point  the  East  refuses  to  proceed  farther  and  that  is
precisely  in  the  things  which  are  deepest,  most  essential  to  the
future  of  mankind,  the  things  of  the  soul,  the  profound  things  of
the  mind  and  temperament.  Here,  again,  all  points  not  to  substi-
tution and  conquest, -but  to  mutual  understanding  and  inter-
change, mutual  adaptation  and  new  formation.

The  old  idea  is  not  entirely  dead  and  will  not  die  without  a
last  struggle.  There  are  still  those  who  dream  of  a Christianised
India,  the  English  tongue  permanently  dominating  if  not  re-
placing the  indigenous  languages,  or  the  acceptance  of  European
social  forms  and  manners  as  the  necessary  precondition  for  an
equal  status  between  a European  and  Asiatic.  But  they  are
those  who  belong  in  spirit  to  a past  generation  and  cannot  value
the  signs  of  the  hour  which  point  to  a new  era.  Christianity,  for
instance,  has  only  succeeded  where  it  could  apply  its  one  or  two
features  of  distinct  superiority,  the  readiness  to  stoop  and  uplift
the  fallen  and  oppressed  where  the  Hindu  bound  in  the  forms  of
caste  would  not  touch  nor  succour,  its  greater  swiftness  to  give
relief  where  it  is  needed,  in  a word,  the  active  compassion  and
helpfulness  which  it  inherited  from  its  parent  Buddhism.  Where
it  could  not  apply  this  lever,  it  has  failed  totally  and  even  this
lever  it  may  easily  lose;  for  the  soul  of  India  reawakened  by  the
new  impact  is  beginning  to  recover  its  lost  tendencies.  The  social
forms  of  the  past  are  changing  where  they  are  unsuited  to  the
new  political  and  economic  conditions  and  ideals  or  incompatible
with  the  increasing  urge  towards  freedom  and  equality;  but

> TlKn:  has  been  a recrudescence  of  the  Europeanising  turn  in  Turkey  and  in  China  re-
inforced by  the  influence  of  Bolshcs'ist  Russia.  Wherever  there  is  a rctardatory  orthodoxy  to
OYcrcome,  this  movc-mcnl  is  likely  to  appear,  but  only  as  a passing  phase.


Ancient  and  Modem  Methods  of  Empire  303

there  is  no  sign  that  anything  but  a new  Asiatic  society  broadened
and  liberalised  will  emerge  from  this  travail.  The  signs  every-
where are  the  same;  the  forces  everywhere  work  in  the  same
sense.  Neither  France  nor  England  has  the  power  — and  they
are  fast  or  slowly  losing  the  desire  — to  destroy  and  replace  the
Islamic  culture  in  Africa  or  the  Indian  in  India.  All  they  can  do
is  to  give  what  they  have  of  value  to  be  assimilated  according  to
the  needs  and  the  inner  spirit  of  the  older  nations.

It  was  necessary  to  dwell  on  this  question  because  it  is  vital
to  the  future  of  imperialism.  The  replacement  of  the  local  by  the
imperial  culture  and  as  far  as  possible  by  the  speech  of  the  con-
queror was  essential  to  the  old  imperial  theory;  but  the  moment
that  becomes  out  of  the  question  and  the  very  desire  of  it  has  to
be  renounced  as  impracticable,  the  old  Roman  model  of  empire
ceases  to  be  of  any  avail  for  the  solution  of  the  problem.  Some-
thing of  the  Roman  lesson  remains  valid,  — those  features  espe-
cially that  are  essential  to  the  very  essence  of  imperialism  and
the  meaning  of  empire;  but  a new  model  is  demanded.  That  new
model  has  already  begun  to  evolve  in  obedience  to  the  require-
ments of  the  age;  it  is  the  model  of  the  federal  or  else  the  confe-
derate empire.  The  problem  we  have  to  consider  narrows  itself
down  to  this : is  it  possible  to  create  a securely  federated  empire
of  vast  extent  and  composed  of  heterogeneous  races  and  cultures  ?
And  granting  that  in  this  direction  lies  the  future,  how  can
such  an  empire  so  artificial  in  appearance  be  welded  into  a natural
and  psychological  unit?


Chapter  VII


The  Creation  of

the  Heterogeneous  Nation


The  problem  of  a federal  empire  founded
on  the  sole  foundation  that  is  firm  and  secure,  the  creation  of  a
true  psychological  unity,  — an  empire  that  has  to  combine  hete-
rogeneous elements,  — resolves  itself  into  two  different  factors,
the  question  of  the  form  and  the  question  of  the  reality  which
the  form  is  intended  to  serve.  The  former  is  of  great  practical
importance,  but  the  latter  alone  is  vital.  A form  of  unity  may
render  possible,  may  favour  or  even  help  actively  to  create  the
corresponding  reality,  but  it  can  never  replace  it.  And,  as  we
have  seen,  the  true  reality  is  in  this  order  of  Nature  the  psycho-
logical, since  the  mere  physical  fact  of  political  and  administra-
tive union  may  be  nothing  more  than  a temporary  and  artificial
creation  destined  to  collapse  irretrievably  as  soon  as  its  imme-
diate usefulness  is  over,  or  the  circumstances  that  favoured  its
continuance  are  radically  or  even  seriously  altered.  The  first
question,  then,  that  we  have  to  consider  is  what  this  reality  may  be
wliich  it  is  intended  to  create  in  the  form  of  a federal  empire,  and
especially  we  must  consider  whether  it  is  to  be  merely  an  enlarge-
ment of  the  nation-type,  the  largest  successful  human  aggregate
yet  evolved  by  Nature,  or  a new  type  of  aggregate  which  is  to  ex-
ceed and  must  tend  to  supersede  the  nation,  as  that  has  replaced
the  tribe,  the  clan  and  the  city  or  regional  state.

The  first  natural  idea  of  the  human  mind  in  facing  such  a
problem  is  to  favour  the  idea  which  most  flatters  and  seems  to
continue  its  familiar  notions.  For  the  human  mind  is,  in  the
mass,  averse  to  a radical  change  of  conception.  It  accepts  change
most  easily  when  its  reality  is  veiled  by  the  continuation  of  a
habitual  form  of  things  or  else  by  a ceremonial,  legal,  intellectual
or  sentimental  fiction.  It  is  such  a fiction  that  some  think  to
create  as  a bridge  from  the  nation-idea  to  the  empire-idea  of


305


The  Creation  of  the  Heterogeneous  Nation

political  unity.  That  which  unites  men  most  securely  now  is  the
physical  unity  of  a common  country  to  live  in  and  defend,  a
common  economic  life  dependent  on  that  geographical  oneness
and  the  sentiment  of  the  motherland  which  grows  up  around
the  physical  and  economic  fact  and  either  creates  a political  and
administrative  unity  or  keeps  it  to  a secure  permanence,  once
it  has  been  created.  Let  us  then  extend  this  powerful  sentiment
by  a fiction,  let  us  demand  of  the  heterogeneous  constituents  of
the  empire  that  each  shall  regard  not  his  own  physical  mother-
land but  the  empire  as  the  mother  or  at  least,  if  he  clings  to  the
old  sentiment,  learn  to  regard  the  empire  first  and  foremost  as
the  greater  mother.  A variation  of  this  idea  is  the  French  notion
of  the  mother  country,  France;  all  the  other  possessions  of  the
empire,  although  in  English  phraseology  they  would  rather
be  classed  as  dependencies  in  spite  of  the  large  share  of  political
rights  conceded  to  them,  are  to  be  regarded  as  colonies  of  the
mother  country,  grouped  together  in  idea  as  France  beyond  the
seas  and  educated  to  centre  their  national  sentiments  around
the  greatness,  glory  and  lovableness  of  France  the  common
mother.  It  is  a notion  natural  to  the  Celtic-Latin  temperament,
though  alien  to  the  Teutonic,  and  it  is  supported  by  a compara-
tive weakness  of  race  and  colour  prejudice  and  by  that  remark-
able power  of  attraction  and  assimilation  which  the  French  share
with  all  the  Celtic  nations.

The  power,  the  often  miraculous  power  of  such  fictions
ought  not  for  a moment  to  be  ignored.  They  constitute  Nature’s
most  common  and  effective  method  when  she  has  to  deal  with  her
own  ingrained  resistance  to  change  in  her  mentalised  animal,
man.  Still  there  are  conditions  without  which  a fiction  cannot
succeed  for  long  or  altogether.  It  must  in  the  first  place  be  based
on  a plausible  superficial  resemblance.  It  must  lead  to  a reali-
sable fact  strong  enough  either  to  replace  the  fiction  itself  or
eventually  to  justify  it.  And,  this  realisable  fact  must  progressively
realise  itself  and  not  remain  too  long  in  the  stage  of  the  formless
nebula.  There  was  a time  when  these  conditions  were  less  insis-
tently necessary,  a time  when  the  mass  of  men  were  more  imagi-
native, unsophisticated,  satisfied  with  a sentiment  or  an  appear-
ance; but  as  the  race  advances,  it  becomes  more  mentally  alive,


306  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

self-conscious,  critical  and  quick  to  seize  dissonances  between
fact  and  pretension.  Moreover,  the  thinker  is  abroad;  his  words
are  listened  to  and  understood  to  an  extent  unprecedented  in  the
known  history  of  mankind;  and  the  thinker  tends  to  become  more
and  more  an  inquisitor,  a critic,  an  enemy  of  fictions.^

Is  then  this  fiction  based  upon  a realisable  parallel,  — in
other  words,  is  it  true  that  the  true  imperial  unity  when  realised
will  be  only  an  enlarged  national  unity?  or,  if  not,  what  is  the
realisable  fact  which  this  fiction  is  intended  to  prepare?  There
have  been  plenty  of  instances  in  history  of  the  composite  nation
and,  if  the  parallel  is  to  be  accepted  as  effective,  it  is  such  a com-
posite nation  on  a large  scale  which  it  is  the  business  of  the  federal
empire  to  create.  We  must,  therefore,  cast  a glance  at  the  most
typical  instances  of  the  successful  composite  nation  and  see  how
far  the  parallel  applies  and  whether  there  are  difficulties  in  the  way
which  point  rather  to  the  necessity  of  a new  evolution  than  to  the
variation  of  an  old  success.  To  have  a just  idea  of  the  difficulties
may  help  us  to  see  how  they  can  be  overcome.

The  instance  most  before  our  eyes  both  of  the  successfully
evolved  composite  or  heterogeneous  nation  and  of  the  fortunately
evolving  heterogeneous  empire  is  that  of  the  British  nation  in
the  past  and  the  British  Empire  in  the  present,  — successfully,
but,  fortunately,  with  a qualification;  for  it  is  subject  to  the  perils
of  a mass  of  problems  yet  unsolved.^  The  British  nation  has  been
composed  of  an  English-speaking  Anglo-Norman  England,  a
Welsh-speaking  Cymric  Wales,  a half-Saxon,  half-Gaelic  English-
speaking  Scotland  and  very  imperfectly,  very  partially,  of  a Gae-
lic Ireland  with  a mainly  Anglo-Scotch  colony  that  held  it  indeed
by  force  to  the  united  body  but  was  never  able  to  compel  a true
union.  Ireland  was,  until  recently,  the  element  of  failure  in  this
formation  and  it  is  only  now  and  under  another  form  and  under
other  circumstances  than  its  other  members  that  some  kind  of
unity  with  the  whole,  still  very  precarious,  and  with  the  empire,
not  with  the  British  nation,  is  becoming  possible,  although  even

* These  conditions  too  may  very  well  soon  disappear;  for  freedom  of  thought  is  menaced
cs'cry'Ahcrc  and,  where  there  is  no  freedom  of  thought,  there  will  be  the  disappearance  of  the
power  of  the  thinker.

It  must  be  remembered  that  this  was  written  some  decades  ago  and  circumstances  and
the  Empire  itself  have  wholly  changed;  the  problem,  as  it  was  then,  no  longer  poses  itself.


307


The  Creation  of  the  Heterogeneous  nation

yet  it  has  hardly  begun  to  be  real  ^ What  were  the  determining
circumstances  of  this  general  success  and  this  partial  failure
and  what  light  do  they  shed  on  the  possibilities  of  the  larger
problem?

In  building  up  her  human  aggregates.  Nature  has  followed
in  general  principle  the  same  law  that  she  observes  in  her  physical
aggregates.  She  has  provided  first  a natural  body,  next  a com-
mon life  and  vital  interest  for  the  constituents  of  the  body,  last  a
conscious  mind  or  sense  of  unity  and  a centre  or  governing  organ
through  which  that  common  ego-sense  can  realise  itself  and  act.
There  must  be  in  her  ordinary  process  either  a common  bond  of
descent  or  past  association  that  will  enable  like  to  adhere  to  like
and  distinguish  itself  from  unlike  and  a common  habitation,  a
country  so  disposed  that  all  who  inhabit  within  its  natural  boun-
daries are  under  a sort  of  geographical  necessity  to  unite.  In
earlier  times  when  communities  were  less  firmly  rooted  to  the  soil,
the  first  of  these  conditions  was  the  more  important.  In  settled
modem  communities  the  second  predominates;  but  the  unity  of
the  race,  pure  or  mixed  — for  it  need  not  have  been  one  in  its
origin  — remains  a factor  of  importance,  and  strong  disparity
and  difference  may  easily  create  serious  difficulties  in  the  way  of
the  geographical  necessity  imposing  itself  with  any  permanence.
In  order  that  it  may  impose  itself,  there  must  be  a considerable
force  of  the  second  natural  condition,  that  is  to  say,  a necessity
of  economic  unity  or  habit  of  common  sustenance  and  a necessity
of  political  unity  or  habit  of  common  vital  organisation  for  sur-
vival, functioning  and  aggrandisement.  And  in  order  that  this
second  condition  may  fulfil  itself  in  complete  force,  there  must  be
nothing  to  depress  or  destroy  the  third  in  its  creation  or  its  con-
tinuance. Nothing  must  be  done  which  will  have  the  result  of
emphasising  disunity  in  sentiment  or  perpetuating  the  feeling  of
separateness  from  the  totality  of  the  rest  of  the  organism;  for  that
will  tend  to  make  the  centre  or  governing  organ  psychologically
unrepresentative  of  the  whole  and  therefore  not  a true  centre  of
its  ego-sense.  But  we  must  remember  that  separatism  is  not  the
same  thing  as  particularism  which  may  well  coexist  with  unity;

> This  v,-as  w-rittea  when  Home  Rule  seemed  to  be  a possible  solution;  the  failure  has
now  become  a settled  fa«  and  Ireland  has  become  the  independent  P^cpublic  of  Ireland.


308  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

it  is  the  sentiment  of  the  impossibility  of  true  union  that  sepa-
rates, not  the  mere  fact  of  difference.

The  geographical  necessity  of  union  was  obviously  present
in  the  forming  of  the  British  nation;  the  conquest  of  Wales  and
Ireland  and  the  union  with  Scotland  were  historical  events  which
merely  represented  the  working  of  this  necessity;  but  the  unity  of
race  and  past  association  were  wholly  absent  and  had  with  greater
or  less  diflSculty  to  be  created.  It  was  effected  successfully  with
Wales  and  Scotland  in  a greater  or  less  lapse  of  time,  not  at  all
with  Ireland.  Geographical  necessity  is  only  a relative  force;  it
can  be  overridden  by  a powerful  sentiment  of  disunion  when
nothing  is  done  effectively  to  dissolve  the  disintegrating  impul-
sion. Even  when  the  union  has  been  politically  effected,  it  tends
to  be  destroyed,  especially  when  there  is  within  the  geographical
unity  a physical  barrier  or  line  of  division  sufficiently  strong  to  be
the  base  of  conflicting  economic  interests,  — as  in  that  which
divides  Belgium  and  Holland,  Sweden  and  Norway,  Ireland  and
Great  Britain.  In  the  case  of  Ireland,  the  British  rulers  not  only
did  nothing  to  bridge  over  or  dissolve  this  line  of  economic  divi-
sion and  counteract  the  sentiment  of  a separate  body,  a separate
physical  country,  in  the  Irish  mind,  but  by  a violent  miscalcula-
tion of  cause  and  effect  they  emphasised  both  in  the  strongest
possible  manner.

In  the  first  place,  the  economic  life  and  prosperity  of  Ireland
were  deliberately  crushed  in  the  interests  of  British  trade  and
commerce.  After  that  it  was  of  little  use  to  bring  about,  by  means
wliich  one  shrinks  from  scrutinising,  the  political  “union”  of  the
two  islands  in  a common  legislature,  a common  governing  organ;
for  that  governing  organ  was  not  a centre  of  psychological  unity.
\\ffiere  the  most  vital  interests  were  not  only  different  but  in  con-
flict, it  could  only  represent  the  continued  control  and  assertion
of  the  interests  of  the  “predominant  partner”  and  the  continued
subjection  and  denial  of  the  interests  of  the  foreign  body  bound
by  legislative  fetters  to  the  larger  mass  but  not  united  through
a real  fusion.  The  famine  which  depopulated  Ireland  while
England  throve  and  prospered  was  Nature’s  terrible  testimony
to  the  sinister  character  of  this  “union”  which  was  not  unity  but
the  sharpest  opposition  of  the  most  essential  interests.  The  Irish


309


The  Creation  of  the  Heterogeneous  Nation

movements  of  Home  Rule  and  separatism  were  the  natural  and
inevitable  expression  of  Ireland’s  will  to  survive;  they  amounted
to  nothing  more  than  the  instinct  of  self-preservation  divining
and  insisting  on  the  one  obvious  means  of  self-preservation.

In  human  life  economic  interests  are  those  which  are,  ordi-
narily, violated  with  the  least  impunity;  for  they  are  bound  up
with  the  life  itself  and  the  persistent  violation  of  them,  if  it  does
not  destroy  the  oppressed  organism,  provokes  necessarily  the
bitterest  revolt  and  ends  in  one  of  Nature’s  inexorable  retalia-
tions. But  in  the  third  order  of  the  natural  conditions  also
British  statesmanship  in  Ireland  committed  an  equally  radical
mistake  in  its  attempt  to  get  rid  by  violence  of  all  elements  of
Irish  particularism.  Wales  like  Ireland  was  acquired  by  conquest,
but  no  such  elaborate  attempt  was  made  to  assimilate  it;  after
the  first  unease  that  follows  a process  of  violence,  after  one  or
two  abortive  attempts  at  resistance,  Wales  was  left  to  undergo  the
peaceful  pressure  of  natural  conditions  and  its  preservation  of  its
own  race  and  language  has  been  no  obstacle  to  the  gradual  union
of  the  Cymric  race  and  the  Saxon  in  a common  British  nationa-
lity. A similar  non-interference,  apart  from  the  minor  problem
of  the  Highland  clans,  has  resulted  in  a still  more  rapid  fusion  of
the  Scotch  race  with  the  English.  There  is  now  in  the  island  of
Great  Britain  a composite  British  race  with  a common  country
bound  together  by  the  community  of  mingled  blood,  by  a settled
past  association  in  oneness,  by  geographical  necessity,  by  a com-
mon political  and  economic  interest,  by  the  realisation  of  a com-
mon ego.  The  opposite  process  in  Ireland,  the  attempt  to  substi-
tute an  artificial  process  where  the  working  of  natural  conditions
with  a little  help  of  management  and  conciliation  would  have
sufficed,  the  application  of  old-world  methods  to  a new  set  of
circumstances  has  resulted  in  the  opposite  efiect.  And  when  the
error  was  discovered,  the  result  of  the  past  Karma  had  to  be
recognised  and  the  union  has  had  to  be  effected  through  the  me-
thod demanded  by  Irish  interests  and  Irish  particularist  senti-
ments, first  by  the  offer  of  Home  Rule  and  then  by  the  creation
of  the  Free  State  and  not  under  a complete  legislative  union.

This  result  may  well  reach  beyond  itself ; it  may  create  the
necessity  of  an  eventual  remodelling  of  the  British  Empire  and


SIO


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

perhaps  of  the  whole  Anglo-Celtic  nation  on  new  lines  with  the
principle  of  federation  at  the  base.  For  Wales  and  Scotland  have
not  been  fused  into  England  with  the  same  completeness  as  Bre-
ton, Alsatian,  Basque  and  Proven9al  were  fused  into  the  indi-
visible unity  of  France.  Although  no  economic  interest,  no
pressing  physical  necessity  demands  the  application  of  the  fede-
rative principle  to  Wales  and  Scotland,  yet  a sufficient  though
minor  particularist  sentiment  remains  that  may  yet  feel  here-
after the  repercussion  of  the  Irish  settlement  and  awake  to  the
satisfaction  and  convenience  of  a similar  recognition  for  the
provincial  separateness  of  these  two  countries.  And  this  senti-
ment is  bound  to  receive  fresh  strength  and  encouragement  by
the  practical  working  out  of  the  federative  principle  in  the  re-
organisation, which  one  day  may  become  inevitable,  of  the  colo-
nial empire  hitherto  governed  by  Great  Britain  on  the  basis  of
Home  Rule  without  federation.^  The  peculiar  circumstances
both  of  the  national  and  the  colonial  formation  and  expansion  of
tlic  races  inhabiting  the  British  Isles  have  indeed  been  such  as  to
make  it  almost  appear  that  this  Empire  has  throughout  been
intended  and  prepared  by  Nature  in  her  workings  to  be  the  great
field  of  experiment  for  the  creation  of  this  new  type  in  the  history
of  human  aggregates,  the  heterogeneous  federal  empire.


* Horrid  Ruk  now  by  Dominion  Staiu-j  which  means  a confederation  in  fact

la*  fc*TT^.


Chapter  VIII


The  Problem  of  a Federated
Heterogeneous  Empire

If  the  building  up  of  a composite  nation
in  the  British  Isles  was  from  the  beginning  a foregone  conclusion,
a geographical  and  economical  necessity  only  prevented  in  its
entire  completion  by  the  most  violent  and  perverse  errors  of
statesmanship,  the  same  cannot  be  said  of  the  swifter,  but  still
gradual  and  almost  unconscious  process  by  which  the  colonial
empire  of  Great  Britan  has  been  evolving  to  a point  at  which  it
can  become  a real  unity.  It  was  not  so  long  ago  that  the  eventual
separation  of  the  colonies  carrying  with  it  the  evolution  of  Aus-
tralia and  Canada  at  least  into  young  independent  nations  was
considered  the  inevitable  end  of  the  colonial  empire,  its  one  logi-
cal and  hardly  regrettable  conclusion.

There  were  sound  reasons  for  this  mental  attitude.  The
geographical  necessity  of  union  was  entirely  absent;  on  the  con-
trary, distance  created  a positive  mental  separation.  Each  co-
lony had  a clear-cut  separate  physical  body  and  seemed  predes-
tined, on  the  lines  on  which  human  evolution  was  then  running,
to  become  a separate  nation.  The  economic  interests  of  the
mother  country  and  the  colonies  were  disparate,  aloof  from  each
other,  often  opposite  as  was  shown  by  the  adoption  by  the  latter
of  Protection  as  against  the  British  policy  of  Free  Trade.  TTieir
sole  political  interest  in  the  Empire  was  the  safety  given  by  the
British  fleet  and  army  against  foreign  invasion;  they  did  not  share
and  took  no  direct  interest  in  the  government  of  the  Empire  or
the  shaping  of  its  destinies.  Psychologically,  the  sole  tie  was  a
frail  memory  of  origin  and  a tepid  sentiment  which  might  easily
evaporate  and  which  was  combated  by  a definite  separatist  senti-
ment and  the  natural  inclination  of  strongly  marked  human
groupings  to  make  for  themselves  an  independent  life  and  racial
tj'pe.  The  race  origin  varied,  in  Australia  British,  in  South  Africa


312  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

predominantly  Dutch,  in  Canada  half  French  half  English;  but
in  all  three  countries  habits  of  life,  political  tendencies,  a new  type
of  character  and  temperament  and  culture,  if  it  can  be  so  called,
were  being  developed  which  were  as  the  poles  asunder  from  the
old  British  culture,  temperament,  habits  of  life  and  social  and
political  tendencies.  On  the  other  hand,  the  mother  country
derived  no  tangible  political,  military  or  economic  advantage
from  these  offshoots,  only  the  prestige  which  the  possession  of  an
empire  in  itself  could  give  her.  On  both  sides,  therefore,  all  the
circumstances  pointed  to  an  eventual  peaceful  separation  which
would  leave  England  only  the  pride  of  having  been  the  mother  of
so  many  new  nations.

Owing  to  the  drawing  together  of  the  world  by  physical
Science,  the  resulting  tendency  towards  larger  aggregates,
changed  political  world  conditions  and  the  profound  political,
economic  and  social  changes  towards  which  Great  Britain  has
been  moving,  all  the  conditions  now  are  altered  and  it  is  easy  to
see  that  the  fusion  of  the  colonial  empire  into  a great  federated
Commonwealth  or  something  that  can  plausibly  go  by  that  name
is  practically  inevitable.  There  are  difficulties  in  the  way, —
economic  difficulties,  to  begin  with;  for,  as  we  have  seen,  geo-
graphical separation  does  tend  towards  a divergence,  often  an
opposition  of  economic  interests,  and  an  imperial  ZoUverein,
natural  enough  between  the  States  of  the  German  Empire  or  a
Central  European  Confederation  such  as  was  planned  by  one
side  in  the  Great  War,  would  be  an  artificial  creation  as  between
widely  separated  countries  and  would  need  constant  vigilance  and
tender  handling;  yet,  at  the  same  time,  political  unity  tends  to
demand  economic  union  as  its  natural  concomitant  and  seems  to
itself  hardly  complete  without  it.  Political  and  other  difficulties
also  tliere  arc  which  may  yet  become  manifest  and  destroy  the
imperial  formation  if  the  practical  process  of  unification  is  rashly
and  unwisely  handled;  but  none  of  these  need  be  insuperable  or
even  a real  stumbling-block.  The  race  difficulty  which  was  at
one  time  serious  and  menacing  in  South  Africa  and  is  not  yet
eliminated,  need  not  be  more  formidable  than  in  Canada;  for  in
both  countries  there  is  the  English  element  which,  whether  a
majority  or  minority,  can  by  friendly  union  or  fusion  attach  the


The  Problem  of  a Federated  Heterogeneous  Empire  313

foreign  element  to  the  Empire.  Nor  is  there  any  such  powerful
outside  attraction  or  clash  of  formed  cultures  or  incompatible
temperaments  as  made  so  difficult  the  real  union  of  the  Austrian
Empire.

All  that  is  needed  is  that  England  should  continue  to  handle
the  problem  with  a right  instinct  and  not  commit  anything  like
her  fatal  American  blunder  or  the  mistake  she  committed  but
fortunately  receded  from  in  South  Africa.  She  has  to  keep  it
always  in  mind  that  her  possible  destiny  is  not  that  of  a domi-
nant country  compelling  all  the  parts  of  her  dominions  to  uni-
formity with  her  or  to  perpetual  subordination,  but  that  of  the
centre  of  a great  confederation  of  States  and  nations  coalescing
by  her  attraction  into  a new  supra-national  unity.  Here  the  first
condition  is  that  she  must  scrupulously  respect  the  free  internal
life  and  will,  the  social,  cultural,  economic  tendencies  of  the
colonies  while  giving  them  an  equal  part  with  herself  in  the
management  of  the  great  common  questions  of  the  Empire.  She
herself  can  be  nothing  more  in  the  future  of  such  a new  type  of
aggregate  than  a political  and  cultural  centre,  the  clamp  or  nodus
of  the  union.  Given  this  orientation  of  the  governing  mind  in
England,  nothing  short  of  some  unforeseen  cataclysm  can  pre-
vent the  formation  of  an  empire-unit  in  which  Home  Rule  with
a loose  British  suzerainty  will  be  replaced  by  Federation  with
Home  Rule  as  it  basis.^

But  the  problem  becomes  much  more  difficult  when  the
question  of  the  other  two  great  constituent  parts  of  the  Empire
arises,  Egypt  and  India,  — so  difficult  that  the  first  temptation  of
the  political  mind,  supported  by  a hundred  prejudices  and  exist-
ing interests,  was  naturally  to  leave  the  problem  alone  and  create
a federated  colonial  empire  with  these  two  great  countries  as
subject  dependencies.^  It  is  obvious  that  such  a solution  could


‘ All  this,  provided  the  Empire  continues  to  be  victorious  and  prosper;  provided,  too,
Britain’s  foreign  policy  docs  not  make  the  obligations  of  federated  unity  too  irksome  to  the
smaller  members.

• The  question  of  Egypt  has  already  been  settled  since  the  above  was  written,  and  in  a
sense  adverse  to  union.  India,  already  even  then  on  the  road  to  a free  status,  has  already
achieved  it,  although  its  two  separating  parts  have  figured  for  a time  as  Dominions  and  one
of  them  may  possibly  adhere  for  some  time  to  that  status  while  the  other  has  adopted,  although
an  independent  Republic,  a new  formula  of  adhesion  to  the  Commonwealth.


314


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity


not  last  and,  if  obstinately  persisted  in,  would  lead  to  the  most
undesirable  results,  if  not  to  eventual  disaster.  The  renascence  of
India  is  as  inevitable  as  the  rising  of  tomorrow’s  sim,  and  the
renascence  of  a great  nation  of  three  hundred  millions  with  so
peculiar  a temperament,  such  unique  traditions  and  ideas  of  life,
so  powerful  an  intelligence  and  so  great  a mass  of  potential  ener-
gies cannot  but  be  one  of  the  most  formidable  phenomena  of  the
modern  world.  It  is  evident  that  the  new  federated  empire-unit
cannot  afford  to  put  itself  in  permanent  antagonism  to  this  re-
nascent nation  of  three  hundred  millions  and  that  the  short-
sighted statesmanship  of  those  servants  of  today  and  its  interest
who  would  stave  off  the  inevitable  issue  as  long  as  possible  can-
not be  allowed  to  prevail.  This  has  indeed  been  recognised  in
principle;  the  difficulty  will  be  in  the  handling  of  the  problems
that  will  arise  when  the  practical  solution  of  the  Indian  question
can  no  longer  be  put  off  to  an  uncertain  future.

The  nature  of  the  difficulties  in  the  way  of  a practical  union
between  such  different  aggregates  is  sufficiently  obvious.  There
is  first  that  geographical  separateness  which  has  always  made
India  a country  and  a people  apart,  even  when  it  was  unable
to  realise  its  political  unity  and  was  receiving  by  invasion  and
mutual  communication  of  cultures  the  full  shock  of  the  civilisa-
tions around  it.  There  is  the  mere  mass  of  its  population  of  three
hundred  millions  whose  fusion  in  any  sort  with  the  rest  of  the
nations  of  tlie  Empire  would  be  a far  other  matter  than  the
fusion  of  the  comparatively  insignificant  populations  of  Austra-
lia, Canada  and  South  Africa.  There  is  the  salient  line  of  demar-
cation by  race,  colour  and  temperament  between  the  European
and  the  Asiatic.  There  is  the  age-long  past,  the  absolute  diver-
gence of  origins,  indelible  associations,  inherent  tendencies
which  forbid  any  possibility  of  the  line  of  demarcation  being
effaced  or  minimised  by  India’s  acceptance  of  an  entirely  or  pre-
dominantly English  or  European  culture.  All  these  difficulties
need  not  necessarily  mean  the  insolubility  of  the  problem;  on
the  contrary,  we  know  that  no  difficulty  can  be  presented  to  the
human  mind  which  the  human  mind,  if  it  will,  cannot  solve.  We
will  assume  that  in  tills  case  there  will  be  both  the  will  and  the
ncccssao'  wisdom;  that  British  statesmanship  will  commit  no


The  Problem  of  a Federated  Heterogeneous  Empire  315

irreparable  error;  that  from  the  minor  errors  which  it  cannot
fail  to  commit  in  the  handling  of  such  a problem,  it  will  retreat
in  time,  as  has  been  its  temperament  and  habit  in  the  past;  and
that,  accordingly,  a little  sooner  or  a little  later  some  kind  of
psychological  unity  may  possibly  be  created  between  these
two  widely  disparate  aggregates  of  the  human  race.

The  question  remains  under  what  conditions  this  is  possible
and  of  what  nature  the  unity  will  be.  It  is  clear  that  the  govern-
ing race  must  apply  with  a far  greater  scrupulosity  and  firm
resolution  the  principle  it  has  already  applied  elsewhere  with  such
success  and  the  departure  from  which  has  always  after  a certain
stage  been  so  detrimental  to  its  own  wider  interests.  It  must
allow,  respect  and  even  favour  actively  the  free  and  separate
evolution  of  India  subject  to  the  unity  of  the  Empire.  So  long  as
India  does  not  entirely  govern  herself,  her  interests  must  take  a
first  place  in  the  mind  of  those  who  do  govern  her,  and  when  she
has  self-government,  it  must  be  of  a kind  which  will  not  hamper
her  in  her  care  of  her  own  interests.  She  must  not,  for  example,
be  forced  into  an  imperial  Zollverein  which  under  present  condi-
tions would  be  disastrous  to  her  economic  future  until  or  unless
these  conditions  are  changed  by  a resolute  policy  of  stimulating
and  encouraging  her  industrial  development,  even  though  that
will  necessarily  be  prejudicial  to  many  existing  commercial  inte-
rests within  the  Empire.  No  effort  must  be  made  to  impose
English  culture  or  conditions  upon  her  growing  life  or  make  them
a sine  qua  non  for  her  recognition  among  the  free  peoples  of  the
Empire  and  no  effort  of  her  own  to  defend  and  develop  her  own
culture  and  characteristic  development  must  be  interfered  with  or
opposed.  Her  dignity,  sentiments,  national  aspirations  must  be
increasingly  recognised  in  practice  as  well  as  in  principle.  Given
these  conditions,  the  security  of  her  political  and  economic  inte-
rests and  a care  for  her  own  untroubled  growth  might  keep  her
in  the  Empire  and  time  might  be  given  for  the  rest,  for  the  more
subtle  and  difficult  part  of  the  process  of  unification  to  fulfil
itself  more  or  less  rapidly.

The  unity  created  could  never  take  the  form  of  an  Indo-
British  Empire;  that  is  a figment  of  the  imagination,  a chimera
which  it  would  never  do  to  hunt  to  the  detriment  of  the  real


316


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

possibilities.  The  possibilities  might  be,  first,  a firm  political  unity
secured  by  common  interests;  secondly,  a sound  commercial
interchange  and  mutual  industrial  helpfulness  on  healthy  lines;
thirdly,  a new  cultural  relation  of  the  two  most  important  sec-
tions of  humanity,  Europe  and  Asia,  in  which  they  could  ex-
change all  that  is  great  and  valuable  in  either  as  equal  members
of  one  human  household ; and  finally,  it  might  be  hoped,  in  place
of  the  common  past  associations  of  political  and  economical
development  and  military  glory  which  have  chiefly  helped  in
building  up  the  nation-unit,  the  greater  glory  of  association
and  close  partnership  in  the  building  of  a new,  rich  and  various
culture  for  the  life  of  a nobler  humanity.  For  such,  surely,
should  be  the  type  of  the  supra-national  unit  which  is  the  possible
next  step  in  the  progressive  aggregation  of  humanity.

It  is  evident  that  this  next  step  would  have  no  reason  or  value
except  as  a stage  which  would  make  possible  by  practical  demon-
stration and  the  creation  of  new  habits  of  sentiment,  mental
attitude  and  common  life  the  unity  of  the  whole  human  race  in
a single  family.  The  mere  creation  of  a big  empire-unit  would  be
a vulgar  and  even  reactionary  phenomenon  if  it  had  not  this
greater  issue  beyond  it.  The  mere  construction  of  a multi-
coloured Indo-British  unity  arrayed  in  armour  of  battle  and  di-
vided by  commercial,  political  and  military  egoism  from  other
huge  unities,  Russian,  French,  German,  American,  would  be  a
retrogression,  not  an  advance.  If  at  all,  therefore,  this  kind  of
development  is  destined,  — for  we  have  only  taken  the  instance
of  the  British  Empire  as  the  best  example  of  a possible  new  type,
— then  it  must  be  as  such  a half-way  house  and  with  this  ideal
before  us  that  it  can  be  accepted  by  the  lovers  of  humanity
who  arc  not  bound  by  the  limitations  of  the  old  local  patriotism
of  nation  against  nation.  Always  provided  that  the  political
and  administrative  means  are  those  which  are  to  lead  us  to  the
unity  of  the  human  race,  — for  on  that  doubtful  hypothesis  we
arc  at  present  proceeding.  The  probability  of  such  an  eventual
development  is  as  yet  scanty,  for  the  temper  both  of  Muslim  and
Hindu  India  is  still  overwhelmingly  in  the  direction  of  indepen-
dence and  nothing  has  been  done  on  the  English  side  to  build
up  the  other  possibility.  But  the  possibility  had  still  to  be  con-


The  Problem  of  a Federated  Heterogeneous  Empire  317

sidered,  as  it  is  not  utterly  out  of  question  that  under  changed
conditions  there  might  be  an  acceptance  of  virtual  independence
in  place  of  a separate  and  isolated  autonomy.  If  so,  it  would  be
a sign  that  one  of  Nature’s  steps  towards  the  final  result  was  lead-
ing towards  this  passage.  This  much  could  be  said  for  it  that  if
such  a combination  of  two  so  disparate  peoples  and  cultures
proved  to  be  possible,  the  greater  question  of  a world-union
would  begin  to  bear  a less  remote  appearance.^


* Things  have  taken,  as  was  practically  inevitable  all  through,  a different  turn;  but  this
part  of  the  chapter  has  been  left  as  it  was  because  the  consideration  of  this  possibility  was
necessary  to  the  theme.  The  failure  of  that  possible  experiment  to  come  anywhere  near  realisa-
tion is  an  illustration  of  the  fact  that  this  intermediate  stage  in  the  progress  towards  a total
world-union  presents  difficulties  which  make  it  almost  impossible.  Its  place  has  been  taken
by  such  agglomerations  as  the  Commonwealth,  the  Soviet  Union  and  such  possibilities  as  the
proposed  United  States  of  Europe  and  other  continental  combinations  such  as  arc  coming  into
being  as  between  the  two  Americas  and  may  some  day  be  possible  in  Asia.


Chapter  IX


The  Possibility  of  a World-Empire


The  progress  of  the  imperial  idea  from  the
artificial  and  constructive  stage  to  the  position  of  a realised  psy-
chological truth  controlling  the  human  mind  with  the  same
force  and  vitality  which  now  distinguish  the  national  idea  above
all  other  group  motives,  is  only  a possibility,  not  a certainty  of
the  future.  It  is  even  no  more  than  a vaguely  nascent  possibility
and  so  long  as  it  has  not  emerged  from  this  inchoate  condition
in  which  it  is  at  the  mercy  of  the  much  folly  of  statesmen,  the  for-
midable passions  of  great  human  masses,  the  obstinate  self-
interest  of  established  egoisms,  we  can  have  no  surety  that  it  will
not  even  now  die  still-born.  And  if  so,  what  other  possibility
can  there  be  of  the  unification  of  mankind  by  political  and
administrative  means?  That  can  only  come  about  if  either  the
old  ideal  of  a single  world  empire  be,  by  developments  not  now
apparently  possible,  converted  into  an  accomplished  fact,  or  if
the  opposite  ideal  of  a free  association  of  free  nations  overcome
the  hundred  and  one  powerful  obstacles  which  stand  in  the  way
of  its  practical  realisation.

The  idea  of  a world-empire  imposed  by  sheer  force  is  in
direct  opposition,  as  we  have  seen,  to  the  new  conditions  which
the  progressive  nature  of  things  has  introduced  into  the  modern
world.  Nevertheless,  let  us  isolate  these  new  conditions  from
the  problem  and  admit  the  theoretical  possibility  of  a single
great  nation  imposing  its  political  rule  and  its  predominant  cul-
ture on  the  whole  earth  as  Rome  once  imposed  hers  on  the
Mediterranean  peoples  and  on  Gaul  and  Britain.  Or  let  us  even
suppose  that  one  of  the  great  nations  might  possibly  succeed  in
overcoming  all  its  rivals  by  force  and  diplomacy  and  afterwards,
respecting  the  culture  and  separate  internal  life  of  its  subject  na-
tions, secure  its  sway  by  the  attraction  of  a world-peace,  of  bene-
ficent administration  and  of  an  unparalleled  organisation  of


The  Possibility  of  a World-Empire  319

human  knowledge  and  human  resources  for  the  amelioration  of
the  present  state  of  mankind.  We  have  to  see  whether  this  theore-
tical possibility  is  at  all  likely  to  encounter  the  conditions  by
which  it  can  convert  itself  into  a practical  possibility,  and  if
we  consider,  we  shall  find  that  no  such  conditions  now  exist,  on
the  contrary  all  are  against  the  realisation  of  such  a colossal
dream  — it  could  only  come  about  by  immense  changes  as  yet
hidden  in  the  secrecy  of  the  future.

It  is  commonly  supposed  that  the  impulse  which  brought
Germany  to  her  recent  struggle  with  the  world  was  rooted  in  even
such  a dream  of  empire.  How  far  there  was  any  such  conscious
intention  in  her  directing  minds  is  a question,  open  to  some
doubt;  but  it  is  certain  that,  if  she  had  prevailed  in  the  War  as
she  had  first  expected,  the  situation  created  would  inevitably
have  led  her  to  this  greater  endeavour.  For  she  would  have
enjoyed  a dominant  position  such  as  no  nation  has  yet  possessed
during  the  known  period  of  the  world’s  history;  and  the  ideas
which  have  recently  governed  the  German  intellect,  the  idea  of
her  mission,  her  race  superiority,  the  immeasurable  excellence
of  her  culture,  her  science,  her  organisation  of  life  and  her  divine
right  to  lead  the  earth  and  to  impose  on  it  her  will  and  her  ideals,
these  with  the  all-grasping  spirit  of  modern  commercialism  would
have  inevitably  impelled  her  to  undertake  universal  domination
as  a divinely  given  task.  The  fact  that  a modern  nation  and
indeed  the  nation  most  advanced  in  that  efficiency,  that  scientific
utilisation  of  science,  that  spirit  of  organisation,  State  help  and
intelligent  dealing  with  national  and  social  problems  and  order-
ing of  economic  well-being  which  Europe  understands  by  the
word  civilisation,  — the  fact  that  such  a nation  should  be
possessed  and  driven  by  such  ideas  and  impulses  is  certainly  a
proof  that  the  old  gods  are  not  dead,  the  old  ideal  of  dominant
Force  conquering,  governing  and  perfecting  the  world  is  still  a
vital  reality  and  has  not  let  go  its  hold  on  the  psychology  of  the
human  race.  Nor  is  there  any  certainty  that  the  recent  War  has
killed  these  forces  and  this  ideal;  for  the  War  was  decided  by
force  meeting  force,  by  organisation  triumphing  over  organisa-
tion, by  the  superior  or  at  any  rate  the  more  fortunate  utilisation
of  those  very  weapons  which  constituted  the  real  strength  of  the


320  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

great  aggressive  Teutonic  Power.  The  defeat  of  Germany  by  her
own  weapons  could  not  of  itself  kill  the  spirit  theil  incarnate  in
Germany;  it  may  well  lead  merely  to  a new  incarnation  of  it,
perhaps  in  some  other  race  or  empire,  and  the  whole  battle  would
then  have  to  be  fought  over  again.  So  long  as  the  old  gods  are
alive,  the  breaking  or  depression  of  the  body  which  they  animate
is  a small  matter,  for  they  know  well  how  to  transmigrate.
Germany  overthrew  the  Napoleonic  spirit  in  France  in  1813
and  broke  tlie  remnants  of  her  European  leadership  in  1870;
the  same  Germany  became  the  incarnation  of  that  which  it  had
overthrown.  The  phenomenon  is  easily  capable  of  renewal  on
a more  formidable  scale.

Nor  was  the  failure  of  Germany  any  more  a proof  of  the
impossibility  of  this  imperial  dream  than  the  previous  failure  of
Napoleon.  For  the  Teutonic  combination  lacked  all  the  neces-
sary conditions  except  one  for  the  success  of  so  vast  an  aim.
It  had  the  strongest  military,  scientific  and  national  organisation
which  any  people  has  yet  developed,  but  it  lacked  the  gigantic
driving  impulse  which  could  alone  bring  an  attempt  so  colossal
to  fruition,  the  impulse  which  France  possessed  in  a much
greater  degree  in  the  Napoleonic  era.  It  lacked  the  successful
diplomatic  genius  which  creates  the  indispensable  conditions  of
success.  It  lacked  the  companion  force  of  sea-power  which  is
even  more  necessary  than  military  superiority  to  the  endeavour
of  world-domination,  and  by  its  geographical  position  and
the  encircling  position  of  its  enemies  it  was  especially  open
to  all  the  disadvantages  which  must  accompany  the  mastery
of  the  seas  by  its  natural  adversary.  The  combination  of  over-
whelming sea-power  with  overwhelming  land-power^  can  alone
bring  so  vast  an  enterprise  into  the  domain  of  real  possibility;
Rome  itself  could  only  hope  for  something  like  a world-empire
when  it  had  destroyed  the  superior  maritime  force  of  Carthage.
Yet  so  entirely  did  German  statesmanship  miscalculate  the  prob-
lem that  it  entered  into  the  struggle  with  the  predominant  mari-
time Power  of  the  world  already  ranked  in  the  coalition  of  its
enemies.  Instead  of  concentrating  its  efforts  against  this  one  na-
tural adversary,  instead  of  utilising  the  old  hostility  of  Russia

» But  now  aho,  in  a far  greater  degree,  overwheiming  air-power.


321


The  Possibility  of  a World-Empire

and  France  against  England,  its  maladroit  and  brutal  diplomacy
had  already  leagued  these  former  enemies  against  itself;  instead
of  isolating  England,  it  had  succeeded  only  in  isolating  itself  and
the  manner  in  which  it  began  and  conducted  the  War  still  far-
ther separated  it  morally  and  gave  an  added  force  to  the  physical
isolation  effected  by  the  British  blockade.  In  its  one-sided  pursuit
of  a great  military  concentration  of  Central  Europe  and  Turkey,
it  had  even  wantonly  alienated  the  one  maritime  Power  which
might  have  been  on  its  side.

It  is  conceivable  that  the  imperial  enterprise  may  be  renewed
at  some  future  date  in  the  world’s  history  by  a nation  or  by
statesmen  better  situated,  better  equipped,  gifted  with  a subtler
diplomatic  genius,  a nation  as  much  favoured  by  circumstances,
temperament  and  fortune  as  was  Rome  in  the  ancient  world.
What  then  would  be  the  necessary  conditions  for  its  success?
In  the  first  place,  its  aim  would  have  small  chances  of  prospering
if  it  could  not  repeat  that  extraordinary  good  luck  by  which
Rome  was  enabled  to  meet  its  possible  rivals  and  enemies  one
by  one  and  avoid  a successful  coalition  of  hostile  forces.  What
possibility  is  there  of  such  a fortunate  progress  in  a world  so
alert  and  instructed  as  the  modem  where  everything  is  known,
spied  on,  watched  by  jealous  eyes  and  active  minds  under  the
conditions  of  modern  publicity  and  swift  world-wide  communi-
cation? The  mere  possession  of  a dominant  position  is  enough  to
set  the  whole  world  on  its  guard  and  concentrate  its  hostility
against  the  Power  whose  secret  ambitions  it  instinctively  feels.
Therefore  such  a fortunate  succession  would  only  seem  to  be  pos-
sible if,  in  the  first  place,  it  were  carried  out  half  unconsciously
without  any  fixed  and  visible  ambition  on  the  part  of  the  advan-
cing Power  to  awaken  the  general  jealousy  and,  secondly,  by
a series  of  favouring  occurrences  which  would  lead  so  near  to  the
desired  end  that  it  would  be  within  the  grasp  before  those  who
could  still  prevent  it  had  awakened  to  its  possibility.  If,  for
instance,  there  were  a series  of  struggles  between  the  four  or
five  great  Powers  now  dominating  the  world,  each  of  which
left  the  aggressor  broken  without  hope  of  recovery  and  without
any  new  Power  arising  to  take  its  place,  it  is  conceivable  that  at
the  end  one  of  them  would  be  left  in  a position  of  such  natural


322  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

predominance  gained  without  any  deliberate  aggression,  gained
at  least  apparently  in  resisting  the  aggression  of  others  as  to  put
world-empire  naturally  into  its  grasp.  But  with  the  present
conditions  of  life,  especially  with  the  ruinous  nature  of  modern
war,  such  a succession  of  struggles,  quite  natural  and  possible
in  former  times,  seems  to  be  beyond  the  range  of  actual  possi-
bilities.

We  must  then  assume  that  the  Power  moving  towards  world-
domination  would  at  some  time  find  inevitably  a coalition  formed
against  it  by  almost  all  the  Powers  capable  of  opposing  it  and  this
with  the  sympathy  of  the  world  at  their  back.  Given  even  the
happiest  diplomacy,  such  a moment  seems  inevitable.  It  must
then  possess  such  a combined  and  perfectly  organised  military
and  naval  predominance  as  to  succeed  in  this  otherwise  unequal
struggle.  But  where  is  the  modern  empire  that  can  hope  to  arrive
at  such  a predominance?  Of  those  that  already  exist  Russia  might
well  arrive  one  day  at  an  overwhelming  military  power  to  which
the  present  force  of  Germany  would  be  a trifle;  but  that  it  should
combine  with  this  force  by  land  a corresponding  sea-power  is
unthinkable.  England  has  enjoyed  hitherto  an  overwhelming
naval  predominance  which  it  might  so  increase  under  certain
conditions  as  to  defy  the  world  in  arms;^  but  it  could  not  even
with  conscription  and  the  aid  of  all  its  colonies  compass  any-
thing like  a similar  force  by  land,  — unless  indeed  it  created  con-
ditions under  which  it  could  utilise  all  the  military  possibilities
of  India.  Even  then  we  have  only  to  think  of  the  formidable
masses  and  powerful  empires  that  it  must  be  prepared  to  meet
and  we  shall  see  that  tlie  creation  of  this  double  predominance
is  a contingency  which  the  facts  themselves  show  to  be,  if  not
chimerical,  at  least  highly  improbable.

Given  even  largely  superior  numbers  on  the  side  of  its
possible  enemies,  a nation  might  conceivably  prevail  over  the
coalition  of  its  opponents  by  a superior  science  and  a more  skilful
use  of  its  resources.  Germany  relied  on  its  superior  science  for
the  successful  issue  of  its  enterprise;  and  the  principle  on  which
it  proceeded  was  sound.  But  in  the  modern  world  Science  is  a
common  possession  and  even  if  one  nation  steals  such  a march

‘ Thii  is  no  longtr  trot  since  the  enormous  increase  of  the  American  nasy.


The  Possibility  of  a World-Empire  323

on  the  others  as  to  leave  them  in  a position  of  great  inferiority
at  the  beginning,  yet  experience  has  shown  that  given  a -little
time,  — and  a powerful  coalition  is  not  likely  to  be  crushed  at
the  first  blow,  — the  lost  ground  can  be  rapidly  made  up  or  at
least  methods  of  defence  developed  which  will  largely  neutralise
the  advantage  gained.  For  success,  therefore,  we  should  have  to.
suppose  the  development  by  the  ambitious  nation  or  empire
of  a new  science  or  new  discoveries  not  shared  by  the  rest  which
would  place  it  in  something  like  the  position  of  superiority  over
greater  numbers  which  Cortes  and  Pizarro  enjoyed  over  the
Aztecs  and  Peruvians.  The  superiority  of  discipline  and  organi-
sation which  gave  the  advantage  to  the  ancient  Romans  or  to  the
Europeans  in  India  is  no  longer  sufficient  for  so  vast  a purpose.

We  see,  therefore,  that  the  conditions  for  the  successful
pursuit  of  world-empire  are  such  that  we  need  hardly  take  this
mode  of  unification  as  within  the  bounds  of  practical  possibility.
That  it  may  again  be  attempted,  is  possible;  that  it  will  fail,
may  almost  be  prophesied.  At  the  same  time,  we  have  to  take
into  account  the  surprises  of  Nature,  the  large  field  we  have  to
allow  to  the  unexpected  in  her  dealings  with  us.  Therefore  we
cannot  pronounce  this  consummation  an  absolute  impossibility.
On  the  contrary,  if  that  be  her  intention,  she  will  suddenly  or
gradually  create  the  necessary  means  and  conditions.  But  even
if  it  were  to  come  about,  the  empire  so  created  would  have  so
many  forces  to  contend  with  that  its  maintenance  would  be
more  difficult  than  its  creation,  and  either  its  early  collapse  would
bring  the  whole  problem  again  into  the  field  for  a better  solution
or  else  it  would  have,  by  stripping  itself  of  the  elements  of  force
and  domination  which  inspired  its  attempt,  to  contradict  the
essential  aim  of  its  great  effort.  That,  however,  belongs  to  an-
other side  of  our  subject  which  we  must  postpone  for  the  mo-
ment. At  present  we  may  say  that  if  the  gradual  unification  of  the
world  by  the  growth  of  great  heterogeneous  empires  forming
true  psychological  unities  is  only  a vague  and  nascent  possibility,
its  unification  by  a single  forceful  imperial  domination  has  passed
or  is  passing  out  of  the  range  of  possibilities  and  can  only  come
about  by  a new  development  of  the  unexpected  out  of  the  infi-
nite surprises  of  Nature.


Chapter  X


The  United  States  of  Europe


W E HAVE  had  to  dwell  so  long  upon  the
possibilities  of  the  Empire-group  because' the  evolution  of  the
imperial  State  is  a dominating  phenomenon  of  the  modern  world;
it  governs  the  political  tendencies  of  the  later  part  of  the  nine-
teenth and  earlier  part  of  the  twentieth  century  very  much  as
the  evolution  of  the  free  democratised  nation  governed  the  age
which  preceded  ours.  The  dominant  idea  of  the  French  Revolu-
tion was  the  formula  of  the  free  and  sovereign  people  and,  in
spite  of  the  cosmopolitan  element  introduced  into  the  revolu-
tionary formula  by  the  ideal  of  fraternity,  this  idea  became  in
fact  the  assertion  of  the  free,  independent,  democratically  self-
governed  nation.  That  ideal  had  not  at  the  time  of  the  Great
War  wholly  worked  itself  out  even  in  the  occidental  world;  for
central  Europe  was  only  partly  democratised  and  Russia  had  only
just  begun  to  turn  its  face  towards  the  common  goal;  and  even
now  there  are  still  subject  European  peoples  or  fragments  of
peoples.!  Nevertheless,  with  whatever  imperfections,  the  idea
of  the  free  democratic  nation  had  practically  triumphed  in  all
America  and  Europe.  The  peoples  of  Asia  have  equally  accepted
this  governing  ideal  of  the  nineteenth  century,  and  though  the
movements  of  democratic  nationalism  in  the  eastern  countries,
Turkey,  Persia,  India,  China,  were  not  fortunate  in  their  first
attempts  at  self-realisation,  the  profound  and  wide-spread  work-
ing of  the  idea  cannot  be  doubted  by  any  careful  observer.
VTiatever  modifications  may  arrive,  whatever  new  tendencies
intervene,  whatever  reactions  oppose,  it  could  hardly  then  be
doubted  that  the  principal  gifts  of  the  French  Revolution  must
remain  and  be  universalised  as  permanent  acquisitions,  indis-
pensable elements  in  the  future  order  of  the  world,  — national

> No  longer  an  evident  fact,  although  the  substitution  of  a state  of  vassalage  may  still
be  there.


The  United  States  of  Europe  325

self-consciousness  and  self-government,  freedom  and  enlighten-
ment for  the  people  and  so  much  social  equality  and  justice  at
least  as  is  indispensable  to  political  hberty;  for  with  any  form  of
fixed  and.  rigid  inequality  democratic  self-government  is  incom-
patible.

But  before  the  great  nineteenth  century  impulse  could  work
itself  out  everywhere,  before  even  it  could  reahse  itself  entirely
in  Europe,  a new  tendency  has  intervened  and  a new  idea  seized
on  the  progressive  mind  of  humanity.  This  is  the  ideal  of  the
perfectly  organised  State.  Fundamentally,  the  ideal  of  the  per-
fectly organised  State  is  socialistic  and  it  is  based  on  the  second
word  of  the  great  revolutionary  formula,  equality,  just  as  the
movement  of  the  nineteenth  century  centered  round  the  first,
liberty.  The  first  impulse  given  by  the  great  European  upheaval
attained  only  to  a certain  kind  of  political  equality.  An  incom-
plete social  levelling  still  left  untouched  the  one  inequality  and  the
one  form  of  political  preponderance  which  no  competitive
society  can  eliminate,  the  preponderance  of  the  haves  over  the
have-nots,  the  inequaUty  between  the  more  successful  in  the
struggle  of  life  and  the  less  successful  which  is  rendered  inevitable
by  difference  of  capacity,  unequal  opportunity  and  the  handicap
of  circumstance  and  environment.  Socialism  seeks  to  get  rid  of
this  persistent  inequality  by  destroying  the  competitive  form  of
society  and  substituting  the  co-operative.  A co-operative  form  of
human  society  existed  formerly  in  the  shape  of  the  commune;
but  the  restoration  of  the  commune  as  a unit  would  imply  prac-
tically the  return  to  the  old  city-state,  and  as  this  is  not  now
possible  with  the  larger  groupings  and  greater  complexities  of
modern  life,  the  socialistic  idea  could  only  be  realised  through
the  rigorously  orgam'sed  national  State.  To  eliminate  poverty,
not  by  the  crude  idea  of  equal  distribution  but  by  the  holding  of
all  property  in  common  and  its  management  through  the  orga-
nised State,  to  equalise  opportunity  and  capacity  as  far  as  pos-
sible through  universal  education  and  training,  again  by  means
of  tlie  organised  State,  is  the  fundamental  idea  of  modern  Social-
ism. It  implies  an  abrogation  or  at  least  a rigorous  diminution
of  all  individual  liberty.  Democratic  Socialism  still  clings  indeed

thp  ninptfpntfi-rf'ntnrv  iHpnl  nf  nnlitirjll  frepHorri!  if  On


326


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

the  equal  right  of  all  in  the  State  to  choose,  judge,  and  change  their
own  governors,  but  all  other  liberty  it  is  ready  to  sacrifice  to  its
own  central  idea.

The  progress  of  the  Socialistic  idea  would  seem  therefore  to
lead  towards  the  evolution  of  a perfectly  organised  national
State  which  would  provide  for  and  control  the  education  and
training,  manage  and  govern  all  the  economic  activities  and  for
that  purpose  as  well  as  for  the  assurance  of  perfect  efficiency,
morality,  well-being  and  social  justice,  order  the  whole  or  at  any
rate  the  greater  part  of  the  external  and  internal  life  of  its  compo-
nent individuals.  It  would  effect,  in  fact,  by  organised  State  con-
trol what  earlier  societies  attempted  by  social  pressure,  rigorous
rule  of  custom,  minute  code  and  Shastra.  This  was  always  an
inherently  inevitable  development  of  the  revolutionary  ideal.  It
started  to  the  surface  at  first  under  pressure  of  external  danger  in
the  Government  of  France  by  the  Jdcobins  during  the  Reign  of
Terror;  it  has  been  emerging  and  tending  to  realise  itself  under
pressure  of  an  inner  necessity  throughout  the  later  part  of  the
nineteenth  century;  it  has  emerged  not  completely  but  with  a
first  rudimentary  sketch  of  completeness  by  the  combination
of  the  inner  and  the  outer  necessity  during  the  present  War.
What  was  before  only  an  ideal  towards  which  some  imperfect
initial  steps  alone  were  immediately  possible,  has  now  become  a
realisable  programme  with  its  entire  feasibility  established  by
a convincing,  though  necessarily  hasty  and  imperfect,  practical
demonstration.  It  is  true  that  in  order  to  realise  it  even  political
liberty  has  had  to  be  temporarily  abolished;  but  this,  it  may
be  argued,  is  only  an  accident  of  the  moment,  a concession  to
temporary  necessity.  In  freer  conditions  what  was  done  partly
and  for  a time  by  governments  which  the  people  have  consen-
ted to  invest  with  an  absolute  and  temporarily  irresponsible
authority,  may  be  done,  when  there  is  no  pressure  of  war,
wholly  and  permanently  by  the  self-governing  democratic
State.

In  that  case  the  near  future  of  the  human  group  would  seem
to  be  the  nation,  self-governing,  politically  free,  but  aiming  at
perfect  social  and  economic  organisation  and  ready  for  that
purpose  to  hand  over  all  individual  liberty  to  the  control  of  the


The  United  States  of  Europe  327

organised  national  State.^  As  France  was  in  the  end  of  the
eighteenth  and  beginning  of  the  nineteenth  century  the  great  pro-
pagandist and  the  experimental  workshop  of  political  liberty
and  equahty,  so  Germany  has  been  in  the  end  of  the  nineteenth
and  beginning  of  the  twentieth  century  the  chief  propagandist
and  the  experimental  workshop  of  the  idea  of  the  organised  State.
There  the  theory  of  Socialism  has  taken  rise  and  there  its  pro-
paganda has  been  most  effective,  so  that  a large  proportion  of
the  nation  committed  itself  to  the  new  gospel;  there  also  the
great  sociahstic  measures  and  those  which  have  developed  the
control  of  the  individual  by  the  State  for  the  common  good  and
efficiency  of  the  nation  have  been  most  thoroughly  and  admirably
conceived  and  executed.  It  matters  little  that  this  was  done  by
an  anti-sociaUstic,  militarist  and  aristocratic  government;  the
very  fact  is  a proof  of  the  irresistible  strength  of  the  new  ten-
dency, and  the  inevitable  transference  of  the  administrative
power  from  its  past  holders  to  the  people  was  all  that  was
needed  to  complete  its  triumph.

Throughout  the  recent  decades  we  have  seen  the  growth  of
German  ideas  and  the  increasing  tendency  to  follow  the  German
methods  of  State  interference  and  State  control  in  other  coun-
tries, even  in  England,  the  home  of  individualism.  The  defeat
of  Germany  in  the  European  War  no  more  spelt  the  defeat  of
her  ideals  than  the  defeat  of  revolutionary  and  Napoleonic
France  by  the  European  coalition  and  even  the  temporary
triumph  of  the  monarchic  and  aristocratic  system  prevented
the  spread  of  her  new  ideas  over  all  Europe.  Even  if  German
militarism  and  Junkerism  were  destroyed,  the  collapse  of  the
imperial  form  of  government  can  only  hasten  the  more  thorough
development  and  victory  of  that  which  has  been  working  behind
them  and  forcing  them  to  minister  to  it,  the  great  modern  ten-
dency of  the  perfectly  organised  socialistic  State,  while  the  evi-
dent result  of  the  War  in  the  nations  opposed  to  her  has  been  to
force  them  more  rapidly  towards  the  same  ideal.

If  this  were  all,  the  natural  development  of  things  aided  by

> This  was  done  with  a stupendous  beginning  of  thoroughness  in  Bolshevist  Russia,  Nazi
Germany,  Fascist  Italy,  and  the  necessity  of  the  choice  of  it  threatened  at  one  time  to  spread
everywhere.


328


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

the  frustration  of  the  German  form  of  imperialism  would  lead
logically  to  a new  ordering  of  the  world  on  the  basis  of  a system
of  independent  but  increasingly  organised  national  States  asso-
ciated together  more  or  less  closely  for  international  purposes
while  preserving  their  independent  existence.  Such  is  the  ideal
which  has  attracted  the  human  mind  as  a yet  distant  possibility
since  the  great  revolutionary  ferment  set  in;  it  is  the  idea  of  a
federation  of  free  nations,  the  parliament  of  man,  the  federation
of  the  world.  But  the  actual  circumstances  forbid  any  hope  of  any
such  ideal  consummation  in  the  near  future.  For  the  national-
istic, democratic  and  socialistic  ideas  are  not  alone  at  work  in  the
world;  imperialism  is  equally  in  the  ascendant.  Only  a few
European  peoples  at  the  present  moment  are  nations  confined
to  themselves ; each  is  a nation  free  in  itself  but  dominating  over
human  groupings  who  are  not  free  or  only  partially  free.  Even
little  Belgium  has  its  Congo,  little  Portugal  its  colonies,  little
Holland  its  dependencies  in  the  eastern  Archipelago;  even  little
Balkan  States  have  aspired  to  revive  an  “empire”  and  to  rule
over  others  not  of  their  own  nationality  or  have  cherished  the
idea  of  becoming  predominant  in  the  peninsula.  Maz2dni’s  Italy
has  its  imperialistic  ventures  and  ambitions  in  Tripoli,  Abyssinia,
Albania,  the  Greek  islands.  This  imperialistic  tendency  is  likely
to  grow  stronger  for  some  time  in  the  future  rather  than  to
weaken.  The  idea  of  a remodelling  even  of  Europe  itself  on  the
strict  principle  of  nationality,  which  captivated  liberal  minds  in
England  at  the  beginning  of  the  War,  has  not  yet  been  made
practicable  and,  if  .it  were  effected,  there  would  still  remain  the
whole  of  Asia  and  Africa  as  a field  for  the  imperialistic  ambitions
of  the  Western  nations  and  Japan.  The  disinterestedness  that  led
a majority  in  America  to  decree  the  liberation  of  the  Philippines
and  restrained  the  desire  to  take  advantage  of  the  troubles  of
Mexico  is  not  possible  to  the  mentality  of  the  Old  World,  and  it
is  doubtful  how  long  it  can  stand  even  in  America  against  the
rising  tide  of  imperialistic  sentiment.  National  egoism,  the
pride  of  domination  and  the  desire  of  expansion  still  govern  the
mind  of  humanity,  however  modified  they  may  now  be  in  their
methods  by  the  first  weak  beginnings  of  higher  motives  and  a
better  national  morality,  and  until  this  spirit  is  radically  changed,


The  United  States  of  Europe  329

the  union  of  the  human  race  by  a federation  of  free  nations  must
remain  a noble  chimera.

Undoubtedly,  a free  association  and  unity  must  be  the
ultimate  goal  of  our  development  and  until  it  is  realised,  the
world  must  be  subject  to  constant  changes  and  revolutions.
Every  established  order,  because  it  is  imperfect,  because  it  insists
on  arrangements  which  come  to  be  recognised  as  involving  in-
justice or  which  stand  in  the  way  of  new  tendencies  and  forces,
because  it  outlasts  its  utility  and  justification,  must  end  in  malaise,
resistance  and  upheaval,  must  change  itself  or  be  changed  or  else
lead  to  cataclysms  such  as  periodically  trouble  our  human
advance.  But  the  time  has  not  come  when  the  true  principle
of  order  can  replace  those  which  are  artificial  and  imperfect.  It
is  idle  to  hope  for  a federation  of  free  nations  until  either  the  pre-
sent inequalities  between  nation  and  nation  are  removed  or  else
the  whole  world  rises  to  a common  culture  based  upon  a higher
moral  and  spiritual  status  than  is  now  actual  or  possible.  The
imperial  instinct  being  alive  and  dominant  and  stronger  at  pre-
sent than  the  principle  of  nationalism,  the  evolution  of  great  em-
pires can  hardly  fail  to  overshadow  for  a time  at  least  the  ten-
dency to  the  development  of  free  nationalities.  All  that  can  be
hoped  is  that  the  old  artificial,  merely  political  empire  may  be
replaced  by  a truer  and  more  moral  type,  and  that  the  existing
empires,  driven  by  the  necessity  of  strengthening  themselves  and
by  an  enlightened  self-interest,  may  come  to  see  that  the  recog-
nition of  national  autonomy  is  a wise  and  necessary  concession
to  the  still  vital  instinct  of  nationalism  and  can  be  used  so  as  to
strengthen  instead  of  weakening  their  imperial  strength  and  unity.
In  this  way,  while  a federation  of  free  nations  is  for  the  present
impossible,  a system  of  federated  empires  and  free  nations  drawn
together  in  a closer  association  than  the  world  has  yet  seen  is
not  altogether  impossible;  and  through  this  and  other  steps  some
form  of  political  unity  for  mankind  may  at  a more  or  less  distant
date  be  realisable.^


» The  appearance  of  Hitler  and  the  colossal  attempt  at  German  world-domination  have
paradoxically  helped  by  his  defeat,  and  the  reaction  against  him  entirely  altered  the  world
circumstances:  the  United  States  of  Europe  is  now  a practical  possibility  and  has  begun  to  feel
towards  self-accomplishment.


BSO


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

The  War  brought  up  many  suggestions  for  such  a closer
association,  but  as  a rule  they  were  limited  to  a better  ordering
of  the  international  relations  of  Europe.  One  of  these  was  the
elimination  of  war  by  a stricter  international  law  administered
by  an  international  Court  and  supported  by  the  sanction  of  the
nations  which  shall  be  enforced  by  all  of  them  against  any
offender.  Such  a solution  is  chimerical  unless  it  is  immediately
followed  up  by  farther  and  far-reaching  developments.  For  the
law  given  by  the  Court  must  be  enforced  either  by  an  alliance
of  some  of  the  stronger  Powers  as,  for  instance,  the  coalition  of
the  victorious  allies  dominating  the  rest  of  Europe,  or  by  a con-
cert of  all  the  European  Powers  or  else  by  a United  States  of
Europe  or  some  other  form  of  European  federation.  A domina-
ting alliance  of  great  Powers  would  be  simply  a repetition  in  prin-
ciple of  the  system  of  Metternich  and  would  inevitably  break
down  after  some  lapse  of  time,  while  a Concert  of  Europe  must
mean,  as  experience  has  shown,  the  uneasy  attempt  of  rival
groupings  to  maintain  a precarious  understanding  which  may
postpone  but  cannot  eventually  prevent  fresh  struggles  and
collisions.  In  such  imperfect  systems  the  law  would  only  be
obeyed  so  long  as  it  was  expedient,  so  long  only  as  the  Powers
who  desired  new  changes  and  readjustments  not  admitted  by
the  others  did  not  consider  the  moment  opportune  for  resistance.
The  Law  within  a nation  is  only  secure  because  there  is  a recog-
nised authority  empowered  to  determine  it  and  to  make  the  ne-
cessary changes  and  possessed  of  a suflScient  force  to  punish  all
violation  of  its  statutes.  An  international  or  an  inter-European
law  must  have  the  same  advantages  if  it  is  to  exercise  anything
more  than  a merely  moral  force  which  can  be  set  at  nought  by
those  who  are  strong  enough  to  defy  it  and  who  find  an  advan-
tage in  the  violation.  Some  form  of  European  federation,  how-
ever loose,  is  .therefore  essential  if  the  idea  behind  these  sugges-
tions of  a new  order  is  to  be  made  practically  effective,  and  once
commenced,  such  a federation  must  necessarily  be  tightened  and
draw  more  and  more  towards  the  form  of  a United  States  of
Europe.

Whether  such  a European  unity  can  be  formed  or  whether,
if  formed,  it  can  be  maintained  and  perfected  against  the  many


The  United  States  of  Europe  331

forces  of  dissolution,  the  many  causes  of  quarrel  which  would
for  long  try  it  to  the  breaking  point,  only  experience  can  show.
But  it  is  evident  that  in  the  present  state  of  human  egoism  it
would,  if  formed,  become  a tremendously  powerful  instrument
for  domination  and  exploitation  of  the.  rest  of  the  world  by  the
group  of  nations  which  are  at  present  in  the  forefront  of  human
progress.  It  would  inevitably  awaken  in  antagonism  to  it  an
idea  of  Asiatic  unity  and  an  idea  of  American  unity,  and  while
such  continental  groupings  replacing  the  present  smaller  national
unities  might  well  be  an  advance  towards  the  final  union  of  all
mankind,  yet  their  realisation  would  mean  cataclysms  of  a kind
and  scope  which  would  dwarf  the  present  catastrophe  and  in
which  the  hopes  of  mankind  might  founder  and  fatally  collapse
rather  than  progress  nearer  to  fulfilment.  But  the  chief  objection
to  the  idea  of  a United  States  of  Europe  is  that  the  general  sense
of  humanity  is  already  seeking  to  travel  beyond  its  continental
distinctions  and  make  them  subordinate  to  a larger  human  idea.
A division  on  the  continental  basis  might  therefore  be  from  this
point  of  view  a reactionary  step  of  the  gravest  kind  and  might  be
attended  with  the  most  serious  consequences  to  human  progress.

Europe,  indeed,  is  in  this  anomalous  position  that  it  is  at
once  ripe  for  the  Pan-European  idea  and  at  the  same  time  under
the  necessity  of  overpassing  it.  The  conflict  of  the  two  tendencies
was  curiously  exemplified  not  so  long  ago  by  certain  speculations
on  the  nature  of  the  recent  European  struggle.  It  was  suggested
that  the  sin  of  Germany  in  this  War  was  due  to  its  exaggerated
egoistic  idea  of  the  nation  and  its  disregard  of  the  larger  idea  of
Europe  to  which  the  nation-idea  must  now  be  subjected  and  sub-
ordinated. The  total  life  of  Europe  must  now  be  the  all-engross-
ing unity,  its  good  the  paramount  consideration,  and  the  egoism
of  the  nation  must  consent  to  exist  only  as  an  organic  part  of  this
larger  egoism.  In  effect,  this  is  the  acceptance  after  so  many
decades  of  the  idea  of  Nietzsche  who  insisted  that  nationalism
and  war  were  anachronisms  and  the  ideal  of  all  enlightened
minds  must  be  not  to  be  good  patriots  but  good  Europeans.  But
immediately  the  question  arose,  what  then  of  the  increasing  im-
portance of  America  in  world  politics,  what  of  Japan  and  China,
what  of  the  renewed  stirrings  of  life  in  Asia  ? The  writer  had  there-


332  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

fore  to  draw  back  from  his  first  formula  and  to  explain  that  by
Europe  he  meant  not  Europe  but  all  nations  that  had  accepted
the  principles  of  European  civilisation  as  the  basis  of  their  polity
and  social  organisation.  This  more  philosophical  formula  has
the  obvious  or  at  least  the  specious  advantage  that  it  brings  in
America  and  Japan  and  thus  recognises  all  the  actually  free  or
dominant  nations  in  the  circle  of  the  proposed  solidarity  and
holds  out  too  the  hope  of  admission  into  the  circle  to  others
whenever  they  can  prove,  after  the  forceful  manner  of  Japan  or
otherwise,  that  they  too  have  come  up  to  the  European  standard.

Indeed,  though  Europe  is  still  strongly  separate  in  its  own
conception  from  the  rest  of  the  world,  — as  was  shown  by  the
often  expressed  resentrhent  of  the  continual  existence  of  Turkey
in  Europe  and  the  desire  to  put  an  end  to  this  government  of
Europeans  by  Asiatics,  — yet  as  a matter  of  fact  it  is  inextricably
tangled  up  with  America  and  Asia.  Some  of  the  European
nations  have  colonies  in  America,  all  have  possessions  and
ambitions  in  Asia,  where  Japan  alone  is  outside  the  shadow  cast
by  Europe,  or  in  Northern  Africa  which  is  culturally  one  with
Asia.  The  United  States  of  Europe  would  therefore  mean  a
federation  of  free  European  nations  dominant  over  a half-subject
Asia  and  possessor  of  parts  of  America  and  there  standing  in
uneasy  proximity  to  nations  still  free  and  necessarily  troubled,
alarmed  and  overshadowed  by  this  giant  immiscence.  The  in-
evitable result  would  be  in  America  to  bring  together  more  closely
the  Latin  Centre  and  South  and  the  English-speaking  North
and  to  emphasise  immensely  the  Monroe  Doctrine  with  conse-
quences which  cannot  easily  be  foreseen,  while  in  Asia  there
could  be  only  one  of  two  final  endings  to  the  situation,  either
the  disappearance  of  the  remaining  free  Asiatic  States  or  a vast
Asiatic  resurgence  and  the  recoil  of  Europe  from  Asia.  Such
movements  would  be  a prolongation  of  the  old  line  of  human
development  and  set  at  nought  the  new  cosmopolitan  conditions
created  by  modern  culture  and  Science;  but  they  are  inevitable
if  the  nation-idea  in  the  West  is  to  merge  into  the  Europe-idea,
that  is  to  say,  into  the  continental  idea  rather  than  into  the  wider
consciousness  of  a common  humanity.

If,  therefore,  any  new  supra-national  order  is  to  evolve


The  United  States  of  Europe  333

sooner  or  later  as  a result  of  the  present  upheaval,  it  must  be  an
association  that  will  embrace  Asia,  Africa  and  America  as  well
as  Europe  and  it  must  be  in  its  nature  an  organisation  of  inter-
national life  constituted  by  a number  of  free  nations  such  as
Sweden,  Norway,  Denmark,  the  United  States,  the  Latin  re-
publics and  a number  of  imperial  and  colonising  nations  such  as
are  most  of  the  peoples  of  Europe.  Either  the  latter  would  re-
main, as  they  now  are,  free  in  themselves  but  masters  of  subject
peoples  who,  with  the  advance  of  time,  would  become  more  and
more  intolerant  of  the  yoke  imposed  on  them  or  else  they  would
be,  by  an  ethical  advance  which  is  as  yet  very  far  from  accom-
plished, partly  centres  of  free  federal  empires,  partly  nations
holding  in  trust  races  yet  backward  and  undeveloped  until  they
arrived  at  the  capacity  of  self-administration,  as  the  United  States
have  claimed  to  hold  for  a time  the  Philippines.  In  the  former
case,  the  unity,  the  order,  the  common  law  established  would
perpetuate  and  be  partly  founded  on  an  enormous  system  of  in-
justice and  exposed  to  the  revolts  and  revolutions  of  Nature  and
the  great  revenges  by  which  she  finally  vindicates  the  human
spirit  against  wrongs  which  she  tolerates  for  a time  as  necessary
incidents  of  human  development.  In  the  latter,  there  would  be
some  chance  that  the  new  order,  however  far  in  its  beginnings
from  the  ultimate  ideal  of  a free  association  of  free  human
aggregates,  might  lead  peacefully  and  by  a natural  unfolding  of
the  spiritual  and  ethical  progress  of  the  race  to  such  a secure,
just  and  healthy  political,  social  and  economic  foundation  as
might  enable  mankind  to  turn  from  its  preoccupation  with  these
lower  cares  and  begin  at  last  that  development  of  its  higher  self
which  is  the  nobler  part  of  its  potential  destiny,  or  if  not  that,  —
for  who  knows  whether  Nature’s  long  experiment  in  the  human
type  is  foredoomed  to  success  or  failure,  — at  least  the  loftiest
possibility  of  our  future  which  the  human  mind  can  envisage.


Chapter  XI


The  Small  Free  Unit  and
the  Larger  Concentrated  Unity

If  we  consider  the  possibilities  of  a unifica-
tion  of  the  human  race  on  political,  administrative  and  economic
lines,  we  see  that  a certain  sort  of  unity  or  first  step  towards  it
appears  not  only  to  be  possible,  but  to  be  more  or  less  urgently
demanded  by  an  underlying  spirit  and  sense  of  need  in  the  race,
This  spirit  has  been  created  largely  by  increased  mutual  know-
ledge and  close  communication,  partly  by  the  development  of
wider  and  freer  intellectual  ideals  and  emotional  sympathies
in  the  progressive  mind  of  the  race.  The  sense  of  need  is  partly
due  to  the  demand  for  the  satisfaction  of  these  ideals  and  sym-
pathies, partly  to  economic  and  other  material  changes  which
render  the  results  of  divided  national  life,  war,  commercial  rivalry
and  consequent  insecurity  and  peril  to  the  complex  and  easily
vulnerable  modern  social  organisation  more  and  more  irksome
both  for  the  economic  and  political  human  animal  and  for  the
idealistic  thinker.  Partly  also  the  new  turn  is  due  to  the  desire
of  the  successful  nations  to  possess,  enjoy  and  exploit  the  rest
of  the  world  at  ease  without  the  peril  incurred  by  their  own
formidable  rivalries  and  competitions  and  rather  by  some
convenient  understanding  and  compromise  among  themselves.
The  real  strength  of  this  tendency  is  in  its  intellectual,  idealistic
and  emotional  parts.  Its  economic  causes  are  partly  permanent
and  therefore  elements  of  strength  and  secure  fulfilment,  partly
artificial  and  temporary  and  therefore  elements  of  insecurity  and
weakness.  The  political  incentives  are  the  baser  part  in  the  amal-
gam; their  presence  may  even  vitiate  the  whole  result  and  lead  in
the  end  to  a necessary  dissolution  and  reversal  of  whatever
unity  may  be  initially  accomplished.

Still,  a result  of  some  kind  is  possible  in  the  comparatively
near  or  more  distant  future.  We  can  see  on  what  lines  it  is  likely


The  Small  Free  Unit  and  Larger  Concentrated  Unity  335

to  work  itself  out,  if  at  all,  — at  first  by  a sort  of  understanding
and  initial  union  for  the  most  pressing  common  needs,  arrange-
ments of  commerce,  arrangements  of  peace  and  war,  arrange-
ments for  the  common  arbitration  of  disputes,  arrangements  for
the  policing  of  the  world.  These  crude  initial  arrangements,  once
accepted,  will  naturally  develop  by  the  pressure  of  the  governing
idea  and  the  inherent  need  into  a closer  unity  and  even  perhaps
in  the  long  end  into  a common  supreme  government  which  may
endure  till  the  defects  of  the  system  established  and  the  rise  of
other  ideals  and  tendencies  inconsistent  with  its  maintenance
lead  either  to  a new  radical  change  or  to  its  entire  dissolution
into  its  natural  elements  and  constituents.  We  have  seen  also  that
such  a union  is  likely  to  take  place  upon  the  basis  of  the  present
world  somewhat  modified  by  the  changes  that  must  now  inevit-
ably take  place,  — international  changes  that  are  likely  to  be  ad-
justments rather  than  the  introduction  of  a new  radical  principle
•and  social  changes  within  the  nations  themselves  of  a much
more  far-reaching  character.  It  will  take  place,  that  is  to  say,
as  between  the  present  free  nations  and  colonising  empires,  but
with  an  internal  arrangement  of  society  and  an  administrative
mould  progressing  rapidly  towards  a rigorous  State  socialism  and
equality  by  which  the  woman  and  the  worker  will  chiefly  profit.
For  these  are  the  master  tendencies  of  the  hour.  Certainly,  no
one  can  confidently  predict  that  the  hour  will  victoriously  prevail
over  the  whole  future.  We  know  not  what  surprises  of  the  great
human  drama,  what  violent  resurgence  of  the  old  nation-idea,
what  collisions,  failures,  unexpected  results  in  the  working  out
of  the  new  social  tendencies,  what  revolt  of  the  human  spirit
against  a burdensome  and  mechanical  State  collectivism,  what
growth  and  power  perhaps  of  a gospel  of  philosophic  anar-
chism missioned  to  reassert  man’s  ineradicable  yearning  for
individual  liberty  and  free  self-fulfilment,  what  unforeseen  reli-
gious and  spiritual  revolutions  may  not  intervene  in  the  very
course  of  this  present  movement  of  mankind  and  divert  it  to  quite
another  denouement.  The  human  mind  has  not  yet  reached  that
illumination  or  that  sure  science  by  which  it  can  forecast  secure-
ly even  its  morrow.

Let  us  suppose,  however,  that  no  such  unexpected  factor


336


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

intervenes.  The  political  unity  of  mankind,  of  a sort,  may  then
be  realised.  The  question  still  remains  whether  it  is  desirable  that
it  should  be  realised  thus  and  now,  and  if  so,  under  what  circum-
stances, with  what  necessary  conditions  in  the  absence  of  which
the  result  gained  can  only  be  temporary  as  were  former  partial
unifications  of  mankind.  And  first  let  us  remember  at  what  cost
humanity  has  gained  the  larger  unities  it  has  already  achieved  in
the  past.  The  immediate  past  has  actually  created  for  us  the
nation,  the  natural  homogeneous  empire  of  nations  kin  in  race
and  culture  or  united  by  geographical  necessity  and  mutual
attractions,  and  the  artificial  heterogeneous  empire  secured  by
conquest,  maintained  by  force,  by  yoke  of  law,  by  commercial
and  military  colonisation,  but  not  yet  welded  into  true  psycho-
logical unities.  Each  of  these  principles  of  aggregation  has  given
some  actual  gain  or  some  possibility  of  progress  to  mankind  at
large,  but  each  has  brought  with  it  its  temporary  or  inherent  dis-
advantages and  inflicted  some  wound  on  the  complete  human
ideal.

The  creation  of  a new  unity,  when  it  proceeds  by  external
and  mechanical  processes,  has  usually  and  indeed  almost  by  a
practical  necessity  to  go  through  a process  of  internal  contraction
before  the  unit  can  indulge  again  in  a new  and  free  expansion  of
its  inner  life ; for  its  first  need  and  instinct  is  to  form  and  secure
its  own  existence.  To  enforce  its  unity  is  its  predominant  impulse
and  to  that  paramount  need  it  has  to  sacrifice  the  diversity,  har-
monious complexity,  richness  of  various  material,  freedom  of
inner  relations  without  which  the  true  perfection  of  life  is  im-
possible. In  order  to  enforce  a strong  and  sure  unity  it  has  to
create  a paramount  centre,  a concentrated  State  power,  whether
of  king  or  military  aristocracy  or  plutocratic  class  or  other  go-
verning contrivance  to  which  the  liberty  and  free  life  of  the  indi-
vidual, the  commune,  the  city,  the  region  or  any  other  lesser  unit
has  to  be  subordinated  and  sacrificed.  At  the  same  time,  there  is
a tendency  to  create  a firmly  mechanised  and  rigid  state  of  society,
sometimes  a hierarchy  of  classes  or  orders  in  which  the  lower  is
appointed  to  an  inferior  place  and  duty  and  bound  down  to  a
narrower  life  than  the  higher,  such  as  the  hierarchy  of  king,
clergy,  aristocracy,  middle  class,  peasantry,  servile  class  which


The  Small  Free  Unit  and  Larger  Concentrated  Unity  337

replaced  in  Europe  the  rich  and  free  existence  of  the  city  and  the
tribe  or  else  a rigid  caste  system  such  as  the  one  that  replaced  in
India  the  open  and  natural  existence  of  the  vigorous  Aryan  clans.
Moreover,  as  we  have  already  seen,  the  active  and  stimulating
participation  of  all  or  most  in  the  full  vigour  of  the  common  life,
which  was  the  great  advantage  of  the  small  but  free  earlier  com-
munities, is  much  more  difficult  in  a larger  aggregate  and  is  at  first
impossible.  In  its  place,  there  is  the  concentration  of  the  force  of
life  into  a dominant  centre  or  at  most  a governing  and  directing
class  or  classes,  while  the  great  mass  of  the  community  is  left  in
a relative  torpor  and  enjoys  only  a minimum  and  indirect  share  of
that  vitality  in  so  far  as  it  is  allowed  to  filter  down  from  above
and  indirectly  affect  the  grosser,  poorer  and  narrower  life  below.
This  at  least  is  the  phenomenon  we  see  in  the  historic  period  of
human  development  which  preceded  and  led  up  to  the  creation
of  the  modern  world.  In  the  future  also  the  need  of  a concen-
trating and  formative  rigidity  may  be  felt  for  the  firm  formation
and  consohdation  of  the  new  pohtical  and  social  forms  that  are
taking  or  will  take  its  place..

The  small  human  communities  in  which  all  can  easily  take  an
active  part  and  in  which  ideas  and  movements  are  swiftly  and
vividly  felt  by  all  and  can  be  worked  out  rapidly  and  thrown  into
form  without  the  need  of  a large  and  difficult  organisation,  turn
naturally  towards  freedom  as  soon  as  they  cease  to  be  preoccu-
pied with  the  first  absorbing  necessity  of  self-preservation.  Such
forms  as  absolute  monarchy  or  a despotic  oligarchy,  an  infallible
Papacy  or  sacrosanct  theocratic  class  cannot  flourish  at  ease  in
such  an  environment;  they  lack  that  advantage  of  distance  from
the  mass  and  that  remoteness  from  exposure  to,  the  daily  criticism
of  the  individual  mind  on  which  their  prestige  depends  and  they
have  not,  to  justify  them,  the  pressing  need  of  uniformity  among
large  multitudes  and  over  vast  areas  which  they  elsewhere  serve
to  establish  and  maintain.  Therefore  we  find  in  Rome  the  monar-
chical regime  unable  to  maintain  itself  and  in  Greece  looked
upon  as  an  unnatural  and  brieY  usurpation,  while  the  oligarchical
form  of  government,  though  more  vigorous,  could  not  assure  to
itself,  except  in  a purely  military  community  like  Sparta,  either  a
high  and  exclusive  supremacy  or  a firm  duration.  The  tendency


338


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

to  a democratic  freedom  in  which  every  man  had  a natural  part  in
the  civic  life  as  well  as  in  the  cultural  institutions  of  the  State,  an
equal  voice  in  the  determination  of  law  and  policy  and  as  much
share  in  their  execution  as  could  be  assured  to  him  by  his  right  as
a citizen  and  his  capacity  as  an  individual,  — this  democratic
tendency  was  inborn  in  the  spirit  and  inherent  in  the  form  of  the
city-state.  In  Rome  the  tendency  was  equally  present  but  could
not  develop  so  rapidly  or  fulfil  itself  so  entirely  as  in  Greece
because  of  the  necessities  of  a military  and  conquering  State
which  needed  either  an  absolute  head,  an  imperator,  or  a small
oligarchic  body  to  direct  its  foreign  policy  and  its  military  con-
duct; but  even  so,  the  democratic  element  was  always  present  and
the  democratic  tendency  was  so  strong  that  it  began  to  work  and
grow  from  almost  prehistoric  times  even  in  the  midst  of  Rome’s
constant  struggle  for  self-preservation  and  expansion  and  was
only  suspended  by  such  supreme  struggles  as  the  great  duel  with
Carthage  for  the  empire  of  the  Mediterranean.  In  India  the  early
communities  were  free  societies  in  which  the  king  was  only  a
military  head  or  civic  chief;  we  find  the  democratic  element  per-
sisting in  the  days  of  Buddha  and  surviving  in  small  States  in  the
days  of  Chandragupta  and  Megasthenes  even  when  great  bureau-
cratically governed  monarchies  and  empires  were  finally  re-
placing the  free  earlier  polity.  It  was  only  in  proportion  as  the
need  for  a large  organisation  of  Indian  life  over  the,  whole  penin-
sula or  at  least  the  northern  part  of  it  made  itself  increasingly  felt
that  the  form  of  absolute  monarchy  grew  upon  the  country  and
the  learned  and  sacerdotal  caste  imposed  its  theocratic  domina-
tion over  the  communal  mind  and  its  rigid  Shastra  as  the  binding
chain  of  social  unity  and  the  binding  link  of  a national  culture.

As  in  the  political  and  civic,  so  in  the  social  life.  A certain
democratic  equality  is  almost  inevitable  in  a small  community;
the  opposite  phenomenon  of  strong  class  distinctions  and  su-
periorities may  establish  itself  during  the  military  period  of  the
clan  or  tribe  but  cannot  long  be  maintained  in  the  close  intimacy
of  a settled  city-state  except  by  artificial  means  such  as  were  em-
ployed by  Sparta  and  Venice.  Even  when  the  distinction  remains,
its  exclusiveness  is  blunted  and  cannot  deepen  and  intensify  itself
into  the  nature  of  a fixed  hierarchy.  The  natural  social  type  of


The  Small  ' Free  Unit  and  Larger  Concentrated  Unit  339

the  small  community  is  such  as  we  see  in  Athens,  where  not  only
Cleon,  the  tanner,  exercised  as  strong  a political  influence  as  the
highborn  and  wealthy  Nicias  and  the  highest  offices  and  civic
functions  were  open  to  men  of  all  classes,  but  in  social  functions
and  connections  also  there  was  a free  association  and  equality.
We  see  a similar  democratic  equality,  though  of  a different  type,
in  the  earlier  records  of  Indian  civilisation.  The  rigid  hierarchy  of
castes  with  the  pretensions  and  arrogance  of  the  caste  spirit  was  a
later  development;  in  the  simpler  life  of  old,  difference  or  even
superiority  of  function  did  not  carry  with  it  a sense  of  personal  or
class  superiority : at  the  beginning,  the  most  sacred,  religious  and
social  function,  that  of  the  Rishi  and  sacrificer,  seems  to  have
been  open  to  men  of  all  classes  and  occupations.  Theocracy,
caste  and  absolute  kingship  grew  in  force  pari  passu  like  the
Church  and  the  monarchical  power  in  mediaeval  Europe  under
the  compulsion  of  the  new  circumstances  created  by  the  growth
of  large  social  and  political  aggregates.

Societies  advancing  in  culture  under  these  conditions  of  the
early  Greek,  Roman  and  Indian  city  states  and  clan-nations  were
bound  to  develop  a general  vividness  of  life  and  dynamic  force
of  culture  and  creation  which  the  later  national  aggregates  were
obliged  to  forego  and  could  only  recover  after  a long  period  of
self-formation  in  which  the  difficulties  attending  the  development
of  a new  organism  had  to  be  met  and  overcome.  The  cultural
and  civic  life  of  the  Greek  city,  of  which  Athens  was  the  supreme
achievement,  a life  in  which  living  itself  was  an  education,  where
the  poorest  as  well  as  the  richest  sat  together  in  the  theatre  to  see
and  judge  the  dramas  of  Sophocles  and  Euripides  and  the  Athe-
nian trader  and  shopkeeper  took  part  in  the  subtle  philosophical
conversations  of  Socrates,  created  for  Europe  not  only  its  funda-
mental political  types  and  ideals  but  practically  all  its  basic  forms
of  intellectual,  philosophical,  literary  and  artistic  culture.  The
equally  vivid  political,  juridical  and  military  life  of  the  single  city
of  Rome  created  for  Europe  its  types  of  political  activity,  military
discipline  and  science,  jurisprudence  of  law  and  equity  and  even
its  ideals  of  empire  and  colonisation.  And  in  India  it  was  that
early  vivacity  of  spiritual  life  of  which  we  catch  glimpses  in  the
Vedic,  Upanishadic  and  Buddhistic  literature,  which  created


340  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

the  religions,  philosophies,  spiritual  disciplines  that  have  since
by  direct  or  indirect  influence  spread  something  of  their  spirit
and  knowledge  over  Asia  and  Europe.  And  everywhere  the  root
of  this  free,  generalised  and  widely  pulsating  vital  and  dynamic
force,  which  the  modern  world  is  only  now  in  some  sort  recovering,
was  amid  all  differences  the  same;  it  was  the  complete  parti-
cipation not  of  a limited  class,  but  of  the  individual  generally  in
the  many-sided  life  of  the  community,  the  sense  each  had  of  being
full  of  the  energy  of  all  and  of  a certain  freedom  to  grow,  to  be
himself,  to  achieve,  to  think,  to  create  in  the  undammed  flood
of  that  universal  energy.  It  is  this  condition,  this  relation  be-
tween the  individual  and  the  aggregate  which  modern  life  has
tried  to  some  extent  to  restore  in  a cumbrous,  clumsy  and  im-
perfect fashion  but  with  much  vaster  forces  of  life  and  thought
at  its  disposal  than  early  humanity  could  command.

It  is  possible  that,  if  the  old  city-states  and  clan-nations
could  have  endured  and  modified  themselves  so  as  to  create  larger
free  aggregates  without  losing  their  own  life  in  the  new  mass,
many  problems  might  have  been  solved  with  a greater  simpli-
city, direct  vision  and  truth  to  Nature  which  we  have  now  to
settle  in  a very  complex  and  cumbrous  fashion  and  under  peril  of
enormous  dangers  and  wide-spread  convulsions.  But  that  was
not  to  be.  That  early  life  had  vital  defects  which  it  could  not
cure.  In  the  case  of  the  Mediterranean  nations,  two  most  im-
portant exceptions  have  to  be  made  to  the  general  participation
of  all  individuals  in  the  full  civic  and  cultural  life  of  the  commu-
nity; for  that  participation  was  denied  to  the  slave  and  hardly
granted  at  all  in  the  narrow  life  conceded  to  the  woman.  In
India  the  institution  of  slavery  was  practically  absent  and  the
woman  had  at  first  a freer  and  more  dignified  position  than  in
Greece  and  Rome;  but  the  slave  was  soon  replaced  by  the  prole-
tariate, called  in  India  the  Shudra,  and  the  increasing  tendency
to  deny  the  highest  benefits  of  the  common  life  and  culture  to
the  Shudra  and  the  woman  brought  down  Indian  society  to  the
level  of  its  Western  congeners.  It  is  possible  that  these  two  great
problems  of  economic  serfdom  and  the  subjection  of  woman
might  have  been  attacked  and  solved  in  the  early  community  if  it
had  lived  longer,  as  it  has  now  been  attacked  and  is  in  process  of


The  Small  Free  Unit  and  Larger  Concentrated  Unity  341

solution  in  the  modern  State.  But  it  is  doubtful;  only  in  Rome  do
we  glimpse  certain  initial  tendencies  which  might  have  turned
in  that  direction  and  they  never  went  farther  than  faint  hints  of  a
future  possibility.

More  vital  was  the  entire  failure  of  this  early  form  of  human
society  to  solve  the  question  of  the  interrelations  between  com-
munity and  community.  War  remained  their  normal  relation.
All  attempts  at  free  federation  failed,  and  military  conquest  was
left  as  the  sole  means  of  unification.  The  attachment  to  the  small
aggregate  in  which  each  man  felt  himself  to  be  most  alive  had
generated  a sort  of  mental  and  vital  insularity  which  could  not
accommodate  itself  to  the  new  and  wider  ideas  which  philosophy
and  political  thought,  moved  by  the  urge  of  larger  needs  and
tendencies,  brought  into  the  field  of  life.  Therefore  the  old  States
had  to  dissolve  and  disappear,  in  India  into  the  huge  bureau-
cratic empires  of  the  Gupta  and  the  Maurya  to  which  the  Pathan,
the  Moghul  and  the  Englishman  succeeded,  in  the  West  into  the
vast  military  and  commercial  expansions  achieved  by  Alexander,
by  the  Carthaginian  oligarchy  and  by  the  Roman  republic  and
empire.  The  latter  were  not  national  but  supranational  unities,
premature  attempts  at  too  large  unifications  of  mankind  that
could  not  really  be  accomplished  with  any  finality  until  the  in-
termediate nation-unit  had  been  fully  and  healthily  developed.

The  creation  of  the  national  aggregate  was  therefore  reserved
for  the  millennium  that  followed  the  collapse  of  the  Roman
Empire;  and  in  order  to  solve  this  problem  left  to  it,  the  world
during  that  period  had  to  recoil  from  many  and  indeed  most  of
the  gains  which  had  been  achieved  for  mankind  by  the  city-states.
Only  after  this  problem  was  solved  could  there  be  any  real  effort
to  develop  not  only  a firmly  organised  but  a progressive  and  in-
creasingly perfected  community,  not  only  a strong  mould  of
social  life  but  the  free  growth  and  completeness  of  life  itself  within
that  mould.  This  cycle  we  must  briefly  study  before  we  can  con-
sider whether  the  intervention  of  a new  effort  at  a larger  aggre-
gation is  likely  to  be  free  from  the  danger  of  a new  recoil  in  which
the  inner  progress  of  the  race  will  have,  at  least  temporarily,  to
be  sacrificed  in  order  to  concentrate  effort  on  the  development
and  affirmation  of  a massive  external  unity.


Chapter  XII


The  Ancient  Cycle  of  Prenational
Empire-Building  -

The  Modern  Cycle  of  Nation-Building


We  have  seen  that  the  building  of  the
true  national  unit  was  a problem  of  human  aggregation  left  over
by  the  ancient  world  to  the  mediaeval.  The  ancient  world
started  from  the  tribe,  the  city-state,  the  clan,  the  small  regional
state  — all  of  them  minor  units  living  in  the  midst  of  other  like
units  which  were  similar  to  them  in  general  type,  kin  usually  in
language,  and  most  often  or  very  largely  in  race,  marked  oif  at
least  from  other  divisions  of  humanity  by  a tendency  towards  a
common  civilisation  and  protected  in  that  community  with  each
other  and  in  their  diversity  from  others  by  favourable  geogra-
phical circumstances.  Thus  Greece,  Italy,  Gaul,  Egypt,  China,
Medo-Persia,  India,  Arabia,  Israel,  all  began  with  a loose  cul-
tural and  geographical  aggregation  which  made  them  separate
and  distinct  culture-units  before  they  could  become  nation-units.
Within  that  loose  unity  the  tribe,  clan  or  city  or  regional  states
formed  in  the  vague  mass  so  many  points  of  distinct,  vigorous
and  compact  unity  which  felt  indeed  more  and  more  powerfully
the  divergence  and  opposition  of  their  larger  cultural  oneness  to
the  outside  world  but  could  feel  also  and  often  much  more  nearly
and  acutely  their  own  divergences,  contrasts  and  oppositions.
Where  this  sense  of  local  distinctness  was  most  acute,  there  the
problem  of  national  unification  was  necessarily  more  difficult
and  its  solution,  when  made,  tended  to  be  more  illusory.

The  solution  was  in  most  cases  attempted.  In  Egypt  and
Judea  it  was  successfully  found  even  in  that  ancient  cycle  of
historical  evolution;  but  in  the  latter  instance  certainly,  in  the
former  probably,  the  full  result  came  only  by  the  hard  discipline
of  subjection  to  a foreign  yoke.  Where  this  discipline  was  lack-


The  Ancient  Cycle  of  Prenational  Empire-Building  343

ing,  where  the  nation-unity  was  in  some  sort  achieved  from
within,  — usually  through  the  conquest  of  all  the  rest  by  one
strong  claii,  city,  regional  unit  such  as  Rome,  Macedon,  the
mountain  clans  of  Persia,  — the  new  State,  instead  of  waiting  to
base  firmly  its  achievement  and  lay  the  foundations  of  the  na-
tional unity  deep  and  strong,  proceeded  at  once  to  overshoot  its
immediate  necessity  and  embark  on  a career  of  conquest.  Be-
fore the  psychological  roots  of  the  national  unity  had  been  dri-
ven deep,  before  the  nation  was  firmly  self-conscious,  irresistibly
possessed  of  its  oneness  and  invincibly  attached  to  it,  the  govern-
ing State  impelled  by  the  military  impulsion  which  had  carried
it  so  far,  attempted  immediately  to  form  by  the  same  means  a
larger  empire-aggregate.  Assyria,  Macedon,  Rome,  Persia,  later
on  Arabia  followed  all  the  same  tendency  and  the  same  cycle.
The  great  invasion  of  Europe  and  Western  Asia  by  the  Gaelic
race  and  the  subsequent  disunion  and  decline  of  Gaul  were  pro-
bably due  to  the  same  phenomenon  and  proceeded  from  a still
more  immature  and  ill-formed  unification  than  the  Macedom’an.
All  became  the  starting-point  of  great  empire-movements  before
they  had  become  the  keystone  of  securely  built  national  unities.

These  empires,  therefore,  could  not  endure.  Some  lasted
longer  than  others  because  they  had  laid  down  firmer  foundations
in  the  central  nation-unity,  as  did  Rome  in  Italy.  In  Greece
Philip,  the  first  unifier,  made  a rapid  but  imperfect  sketch  of  uni-
fication, the  celerity  of  which  had  been  made  possible  by  the
previous  and  yet  looser  Spartan  domination;  and  had  he  been
followed  by  successors  of  a patient  talent  rather  than  by  a man
of  vast  imagination  and  supreme  genius,  this  first,  rough,  prac-
tical outline  might  have  been  filled  in,  strengthened  and  an
enduring  work  achieved.  One  who  first  founds  on  a large  scale
and  rapidly,  needs  always  as  his  successor  a man  with  the  talent
or  the  genius  for  organisation  rather  than  an  impetus  for  expan-
sion. A Caesar  followed  by  an  Augustus  meant  a work  of
massive  durability;  a Philip  followed  by  an  Alexander,  an
achievement  of  great  importance  to  the  world  by  its  results,  but
in  itself  a mere  splendour  of  short-lived  brilliance.  Rome,  to
whom  careful  Nature  denied  any  man  of  commanding  genius
until  she  had  firmly  unified  Italy  and  laid  the  basis  of  her


344


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

empire,  was  able  to  build  much  more  firmly;  nevertheless,  she
founded  that  empire  not  as  the  centre  and  head  of  a great  nation,
but  still  as  a dominant  city  using  a subject  Italy  for  the  springing-
board  to  leap  upon  and  subjugate  the  surrounding  world.
Therefore  she  had  to  face  a much  more  difficult  problem  of  assi-
milation, that  of  nation-nebulae  and  formed  or  inchoate  cultures
different  from  her  own,  before  she  had  achieved  and  learned  to
apply  to  the  new  problem  the  art  of  complete  and  absolute
unification  on  a smaller  and  easier  scale,  before  she  had  welded
into  one  living  national  organism,  no  longer  Roman  but  Italian,
the  elements  of  difference  and  community  offered  by  the  Gallic,
Latin,  Umbrian,  Oscan  and  Graeco-ApuVian  factors  in  ancient
Italy.  Therefore,  although  her  empire  endured  for  several
centuries,  it  achieved  temporary  conservation  at  the  cost  of
energy,  of  vitality  and  inner  vigour;  it  accomplished  neither  the
nation-unit  nor  the  durable  empire-unity,  and  like  other  ancient
•empires  it  had  to  coUapse  and  make  room  for  a new  era  of  true
nation-building.

It  is  necessary  to  emphasise  where  the  error  lay.  The
administrative,  political,  economic  organisation  of  mankind  in
aggregates  of  smaller  or  greater  size  is  a work  which  belongs
at  its  basis  to  the  same  order  of  phenomena  as  the  creation  of  vital
organisms  in  physical  Nature.  It  uses,  that  is  to  say,  primarily
external  and  physical  methods  governed  by  the  principles  of
physical  life-energy  intent  on  the  creation  of  hving  forms,  al-
though its  inner  object  is  to  deliver,  to  manifest  and  to  bring  into
secure  working  a supraphysical,  a psychological  principle  latent
behind  the  operations  of  the  life  and  the  body.  To  build  a strong
and  durable  body  and  vital  functioning  for  a distinct,  powerful,
well-centred  and  well-diffused  corporate  ego  is  its  whole  aim
and  method.  In  this  process,  as  we  have  seen,  first  smaller  distinct
units  in  a larger  loose  unity  are  formed;  these  have  a strong
psychological  existence  and  a well-developed  body  and  vital
functioning,  but  in  the  larger  mass  the  psychological  sense  and
the  vital  energy  are  present  but  unorganised  and  without  power
of  definite  functioning,  and  the  body  is  a fluid  quantity  or  a
half-nebulous  or  at  most  a half-fluid,  half-solidified  mass,  a
plasm  rather  than  a body.  This  has  in  its  turn  to  be  formed  and


The  Ancient  Cycle  of  Prenational  Empire-Building  345

organised;  a firm  physical  shape  has  to  be  made  for  it,  a weli-
defined  vital  functioning  and  a clear  psychological  reality,  self-
consciousness  and  mental  will-to-be.

Thus  a new  large  unity  is  formed;  and  this  again  finds  itself
among  a number  of  similar  unities  which  it  looks  on  first  as
hostile  and  quite  different  from  itself,  then  enters  into  a sort  of
community  in  difference  with  them,  till  again  we  find  repeated  the
original  phenomenon  of  a number  of  smaller  distinct  units  in  a
wider  loose  unity.  The  contained  units  are  larger  and  more  com-
plex than  before,  the  containing  unity  is  also  larger  and  more
complex  than  before,  but  the  essential  position  is  the  same  and
a similar  problem  presents  itself  for  solution.  Thus  in  the
beginning  there  was  the  phenomenon  of  city-states  and  regional
peoples  coexisting  as  disunited  parts  of  a loose  geographical
and  cultural  unity,  Italy  or  Hellas,  and  there  was  the  problem  of
creating  the  Hellenic  or  Italian  nation.  Afterwards  there  came
instead  the  phenomenon  of  nation-units  formed  or  in  formation
coexisting  as  disunited  parts  of  the  loose  geographical  and
cultural  unity,  first,  of  Christendom,  then,  of  Europe  and  with  it
the  problem  of  the  union  of  this  Christendom  or  of  this  Europe
which,  though  more  than  once  conceived  by  individual  states-
men or  political  thinkers,  was  never  achieved  nor  even  the
first  steps  attempted.  Before  its  difficulties  could  be  solved,
the  modern  movement  with  its  unifying  forces  has  presented  to
us  the  new  and  more  complex  phenomenon  of  a number  of
nation-units  and  empire-units  embedded  in  the  loose,  but
growing  life-interdependehce  and  commercial  close-connection
of  mankind,  and  the  attendant  problem  of  the  unification  of
mankind  already  overshadows  the  unfulfilled  dream  of  the
unification  of  Europe.

In  physical  Nature-  vital  organisms  cannot  live  entirely  on
themselves;  they  live  either  by  interchange  with  other  vital
organisms  or  partly  by  that  interchange  and  partly  by  devouring
others;  for  these  are  the  processes  of  assimilation  common  to
separated  physical  life.  In  unification  of  life,  on  the  other  hand,
an  assimilation  is  possible  which  goes  beyond  this  alternative  of
either  the  devouring  of  one  by  another  or  a continued  separate
distinctness  which  limits  assimilation  to  a mutual  reception  of


346  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

the  energies  discharged  by  one  life  upon  another.  There  can
be  instead  an  association  of  units  consciously  subordinating
themselves  to  a general  unity  which  is  developed  in  the  process
of  their  coming  together.  Some  of  these,  indeed,  are  killed  and
used  as  material  for  new  elements,  but  all  cannot  be  so  treated,
all  cannot  be  devoured  by  one  dominant  unit;  for  in  that  case
there  is  no  unification,  no  creation  of  a larger  unity,  no  con-
tinued greater  life,  but  only  a temporary  survival  of  the  devourer
by  the  digestion  and  utilisation  of  the  energy  of  the  devoured.
In  the  unification  of  human  aggregates,  this  then  is  the  problem,
how  the  component  units  shall  be  subordinated  to  a new  unity
without  their  death  and  disappearance.

The  weakness  of  the  old  empire-unities  created  by  conquest
was  that  they  tended  to  destroy  the  smaller  units  they  assimilated,
as  did  imperial  Rome,  and  to  turn  them  into  food  for  the  life  of
the  dominant  organ.  Gaul,  Spain,  Africa,  Egypt  were  thus  killed,
turned  into  dead  matter  and  their  energy  drawn  into  the  centre,
Rome;  thus  the  empire  became  a great  dying  mass  on  which  the
life  of  Rome  fed  for  several  centuries.  In  such  a method,  how-
ever, the  exhaustion  of  the  life  in  the  subject  parts  must  end  by
leaving  the  dominant  voracious  centre  without  any  source  for
new  storage  of  energy.  At  first  the  best  intellectual  force  of  the
conquered  provinces  flowed  to  Rome  and  their  vital  energy
poured  into  it  a great  supply  of  military  force  and  governing
ability,  but  eventually  both  failed  and  first  the  intellectual  energy
of  Rome  and  then  its  military  and  political  ability  died  away  in
the  midst  of  the  general  death.  Nor  would  Roman  civilisation
have  lived  even  for  so  long  but  for  the  new  ideas  and  motives  it
received  from  the  East.  This  interchange,  however,  had  neither
the  vividness  nor  the  constant  flow  which  marks  the  incoming
and  the  return  of  ever  new  tides  of  thought  and  motives  of  life
in  the  modern  world  and  it  could  not  really  revivify  the  low  vital-
ity of  the  imperial  body  nor  even  arrest  very  long  the  process  of
its  decay.  When  the  Roman  grasp  loosened,  the  world  which  it
had  held  so  firmly  constricted  had  been  for  long  a huge,  decorous,
magnificently  organised  death-in-life  incapable  of  new  organisa-
tion or  self-regeneration;  vitality  could  only  be  restored  through
the  inrush  of  the  vigorous  barbarian  world  from  the  plains  of


The  Ancient  Cycle  of  Prenational  Empire-Building  347

Germany,  the  steppes  beyond  the  Danube  and  the  deserts  of
Arabia.  Dissolution  had  to  precede  a movement  of  sounder
construction.

In  the  mediaeval  period  of  nation-building,  we  see  Nature
mending  this  earlier  error.  When  we  speak  indeed  of  the  errors
of  Nature,  we  use  a figure  illegitimately  borrowed  from  our
human  psychology  and  experience;  for  in  Nature  there  are  no
errors  but  only  the  deliberate  measure  of  her  paces  traced  and  re-
traced in  a prefigured  rhythm,  of  which  each  step  has  a meaning
and  its  place  in  the  action  and  reaction  of  her  gradual  advance
The  crushing  domination  of  Roman  uniformity  was  a device,  not
to  kill  out  permanently,  but  to  discourage  in  their  excessive  sepa-
rative vitality  the  old  smaller  units,  so  that  when  they  revived
again  they  might  not  present  an  insuperable  obstacle  to  the
growth  of  a true  national  unity.  What  the  mere  nation-unity  may
lose  by  not  passing  through  this  cruel  discipline,  — we  leave
aside  the  danger  it  brings  of  an  actual  death  like  the  Assyrian  or
Chaldean  as  well  as  the  spiritual  and  other  gains  that  may  accrue
by  avoiding  it,  — is  shown  in  the  example  of  India  where  the
Maurya,  Gupta,  Andhra,  Moghul  empires,  huge  and  powerful
arid  well-organised  as  they  were,  never  succeeded  in  passing  a
steam-roller  over  the  too  strongly  independent  life  of  the  sub-
ordinate unities  from  the  village  community  to  the  regional  or
linguistic  area.  It  has  needed  the  pressure  of  a rule  neither  indi-
genous in  origin  nor  locally  centred,  the  dominance  of  a foreign
nation  entirely  alien  in  culture  and  morally  armoured  against
the  sympathies  and  attractions  of  India’s  cultural  atmosphere  to
do  in  a century  this  work  which  two  thousand  years  of  a looser
imperialism  had  failed  to  accomplish.  Such  a process  implies
necessarily  a cruel  and  often  dangerous  pressure  and  breaking
up  of  old  institutions;  for  Nature  tired  of  the  obstinate  immo-
bility of  an  age-long  resistance  seems  to  care  little  how  many
beautiful  and  valuable  things  are  destroyed  so  long  as  her  main
end  is  accomplished : but  we  may  be  sure  that  if  destruction  is
done,  it  is  because  for  that  end  the  destruction  was  indispensable.

In  Europe,  after  the  Roman  pressure  was  removed,  the  city-
state  and  regional  nation  revived  as  elements  of  a new  construc-
tion; but  except  in  one  country  and  curiously  enough  in  Italy


348  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

itself  the  city-state  offered  no  real  resistance  to  the  process  of
national  unification.  We  may  ascribe  its  strong  resuscitation  in
Italy  to  two  circumstances,  first,  to  the  premature  Roman  oppres-
sion of  the  ancient  free  city  life  of  Italy  before  it  had  realised  its
full  potentialities  and  secondly,  to  its  survival  in  seed  both  by  the
prolonged  civil  life  of  Rome  itself  and  by  the  persistence  in  the
Italian  municipia  of  a sense  of  separate  life,  oppressed  but  never
quite  ground  out  of  existence  as  was  the  separate  clan-life  of  Gaul
and  Spain  or  the  separate  city  life  of  Greece.  Thus  psycho-
logically the  Italian  city-state  neither  died  satisfied  and  fulfilled
nor  was  broken  up  beyond  recall;  it  revived  in  new  incarnations.
And  this  revival  was  disastrous  to  the  nation-life  of  Italy,  though
an  incalculable  boon  and  advantage  to  the  culture  and  civilisa-
tion of  the  world;  for  as  the  city  life  of  Greece  had  originally
created,  so  the  city  life  of  Italy  recovered,  renewed  and  gave
in  a new  form  to  our  modern  times  the  art,  literature,  thought
and  science  of  the  Graeco-Roman  world.  Elsewhere,  the  city-
unit  revived  only  in  the  shape  of  the  free  or  half-free  municipal-
ities of  mediaeval  France,  Flanders  and  Germany;  and  these
were  at  no  time  an  obstacle  to  unification,  but  rather  helped  to
form  a subconscious  basis  for  it  and  in  the  meanwhile  to  prevent
by  rich  impulses  and  free  movement  of  thought  and  art  the
mediaeval  tendency  to  intellectual  uniformity,  stagnation  and
obscuration.

The  old  clan-nation  perished,  except  in  countries  like
Ireland  and  Northern  and  Western  Scotland  which  had  not
undergone  the  Roman  pressure,  and  there  it  was  as  fatal  to  uni-
fication as  the  city-state  in  Italy;  it  prevented  Ireland  from  evolv-
ing an  organised  unity  and  the  Highland  Celts  from  amalgama-
ting with  the  Anglo-Celtic  Scotch  nation  until  the  yoke  of
England  passed  over  them  and  did  what  the.  Roman  rule  would
have  done  if  it  had  not  been  stayed  in  its  expansion  by  the
Grampians  and  the  Irish  seas.  In  the  rest,  of  Western  Europe,
the  work  done  by  the  Roman  rule  was  so  sound  .that  even  the
domination  of  the  Western  countries  by  the  tribal  nations  of
Germany  failed  to  revive  the  old,  strongly  marked  and  obsti-
nately separative  clan-nation.  It  created  in  its  stead  the  regional
kingdoms  of  Germany  and  the  feudal  and  provincial  divisions  of


The  Ancient  Cycle  of  Prenatioiial  Empire-BuiJding  349

France  and  Spain;  but  it  was  only  in  Germany,  which  like  Ire-
land and  the  Scotch  highlands  had  not  endured  the  Roman  yoke,
that  this  regional  life  proved  a serious  obstacle  to  unification.
In  France  it  seemed  for  a time  to  prevent  it,  but  in  reality  it
resisted  only  long  enough  to  make  itself  of  value  as  an  element
of  richness  and  variation  in  the  final  French  unity.  The  un-
exampled perfection  of  that  unity  is  a sign  of  the  secret  wisdom
concealed  in  the, prolonged  process  we  watch  through  the  history
of  France  which  seems  to  a superficial  glance  so  miserable  and
distracted,  so  long  an  alternation  of  anarchy  with  feudal  or
monarchic  despotism,  so  different  from  the  gradual,  steady  and
much  more  orderly  development  of  the  national  life  of  England.
But  in  England  the  necessary  variation  and  richness  of  the
ultimate  organism  was  otherwise  provided  for  by  the  great
difference  pf  the  races  that  formed  the  new  nation  and  by  the  per-
sistence of  Wales,  Ireland  and  Scotland  as  separate  cultural  units
with  a.  subordinate  self-consciousness  of  their  own  in  the  larger
unity.

The  European  cycle  of  nation-building  differs  therefore  from
the  ancient  cycle  which  led  from  the  regional  and  city-state  to  the
empire,  first,  in  its  not  overshooting  itself  by  proceeding  towards
a larger  unification  to  the  neglect  of  the  necessary  intermediate
aggregate,  secondly,  in  its  slow  and  ripening  progression  through
three  successive  stages  by  which  unity  was  secured  and  yet  the
constituent  elements  not  killed  nor  prematurely  nor.  unduly
oppressed  by  the  instnunents  of  um'fication.  The  first  stage  pro-
gressed through  a long  balancing  of  centripetal  and  centrifugal
tendencies  in  which  the  feudal  system  provided  a principle  of
order  and  of  a loose  but  still  organic  unity.  The  second  was  a
movement  of  unification  and  increasing  uniformity  in  which
certain  features  of  the  ancient  imperial  system  of  Rome -were
repeated,  but  with  a less  crushing  force  and  exhausting  ten-
dency. It  was  marked  first  by  the  creation  of  a metropolitan
centre  which  began  to  draw  to  it;  like  Rome,  the  best  life-
energies  of  all  the  other  parts.  A second  feature  was  the  growth
of  an  absolute  sovereign  authority  whose  function  was  to  impose
a legal,  administrative,  political  and  linguistic  uniformity  and
centralisation  on  the  national  life.  A third  sign  of  this  movement


350


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

was  the  establishment  of  a governing  spiritual  head  and  body
which  served  to  impose  a similar  uniformity  of  religious  thought
and  intellectual  education  and  opinion.  This  unifying  pressure
too  far  pursued  might  have  ended  disastrously  like  the  Roman
but  for  a third  stage  of  revolt  and  diffusion  which  broke  or
subordinated  these  instruments,  feudalism,  monarchy.  Church
authority  as  soon  as  their  work  had  been  done  and  substituted  a
new  movement  directed  towards  the  diffusion  of  the  national
life' through  a strong  and  well-organised  political,  legal,  social
and  cultural  freedom  and  equality.  Its  trend  has  been  to  endea-
vour that  as  in  the  ancient  city,  so  in  the  modern  nation,  all
classes  and  all  individuals  should  enjoy  the  benefits  and  partici-
pate in  the  free  energy  of  the  released  national  existence.

The  third  stage  of  national  life  enjoys  the  advantages  of  unity
and  sufficient  uniformity  created  by  the  second  and  is  able  to
safely  utilise  anew  the  possibilities  of  regional  and  city  life  saved
from  entire  destruction  by  the  first.  By  these  gradations  of  national
progress,  it  has  been  made  increasingly  possible  for  our  modern
times  to  envisage,  if  and  where  it  is  willed  or  needed,  the  idea  of
a federated  nation  or  federal  empire  based  securely  upon  a
fundamental  and  well-realised  psychological  unity;  this  indeed
was  already  achieved  in  a simple  type  in  Germany  and  in  Ame-
rica. Also  we  can  move  now  safely,  if  we  will,  towards  a partial
decentralisation  through  subordinate  governments,  communes,
and  provincial  cities  which  may  help  to  cure  the  malady  of  an
excessive  metropolitan  absorption  of  the  best  national  energies
and  facilitate  their  free  circulation  through  many  centres  and
plexuses.  At  the  same  time,  we  contemplate  the  organised  use
of  a State  intelligently  representative  of  the  whole  conscious,
active,  vitalised  nation  as  a means  for  the  perfection  of  the  life
of  the  individual  and  the  community.  This  is  the  point  which
the  development  of  the  nation-aggregate  has  reached  at  the  mo-
ment when  we  are  again  confronted  either,  according  to  future
trends,  with  the  wider  problem  of  the  imperial  aggregate  or  the
still  vaster  problems  created  by  the  growing  cultural  unity  and
commercial  and  political  interdependence  of  all  mankind.


Chapter  XIII


The  Formation  of  the  Nation-Unit-
The  Three  Stages

The  three  stages  of  development  which
have  marked  the  mediaeval  and  modern  evolution  of  the  nation-
type  may  be  regarded  as  the  natural  process  where  a new  form  of
unity  has  to  be  created  out  of  complex  conditions  and  hetero-
geneous materials  by  an  external  rather  than  an  internal  process.
The  external  method  tries  always  to  mould  the  psychological
condition  of  men  into  changed  forms  and  habits  under  the  pres-
sure of  circumstances  and  institutions  rather  than  by  the  direct
creation  of  a new  psychological  condition  which  would,  on  the
contrary,  develop  freely  and  flexibly  its  own  appropriate  and
serviceable  social  forms.  In  such  a process  there  must  be  in  the
nature  of  things,  first,  some  kind  of  looser  yet  sufficiently  compel-
ling order  of  society  and  common  type  of  civilisation  to  serve
as  a framework  or  scaffolding  within  which  the  new  edifice  shall
arise.  Next,  there  must  come  naturally  a period  of  stringent  or-
ganisation directed  towards  unity  and  centrality  of  control  and
perhaps  a general  levelling  and  uniformity  under  that  central
direction.  Last,  if  the  new  orgam'sm  is  not  to  fossilise  and
stereotype  life,  if  it  is  to  be  still  a living  and  vigorous  creation  of
Nature,  there  must  come  a period  of  free  internal  development
as  soon  as  the  formation  is  assured  and  unity  has  become  a men-
tal and  vital  habit.  This  freer  internal  activity  assured  in  its
heart  and  at  its  basis  by  the  formed  needs,  ideas,  and  instincts  of
the  community  will  no  longer  bring  with  it  the  peril  of  disorder,
disruption  or  arrest  of  the  secure  growth  and  formation  of  the
organism.

The  form  and  principle  of  the  first  looser  system  must  de-
pend upon  the  past  history  and  present  conditions  of  the  elements
that  have  to  be  welded  into  the  new  unity.  But  it  is  noticeable
that  both  in  Europe  and  Asia  there  was  a common  tendency.


352


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

which  we  cannot  trace  to  any  close  interchange  of  ideas  and  must
therefore  attribute,  to  the  operation  of  the  same  natural  cause
and  necessity,  towards  the  evolution  of  a social  hierarchy  based
on  a division  according  to  four  different  social  activities,  — spi-
ritual function,  political  domination  and  the  double  economic
function  of  mercantile  production  and  interchange  and  depen-
dent labour  or  service.  The  spirit,  form  and  equipoise  worked
out  were  very  different  in  different  parts  of  the  world  according
to  the  bent  of  the  community  and  its  circumstances,  but  the  ini-
tial principle  was  almost  identical.  The  motive-force  everywhere
was  the  necessity  of  a large  effective  form  of  common  social  life
marked  by  fixity  of  status  through  which  individual  and  small
communal,  interests  might  be  brought  under  the  yoke  of  a suffi-
cient religious,  political  and  economic  unity  and  likeness.  It  is
notable  that  Islamic  civilisation,  with  its  dominant  principle  of
equality  and  brotherhood  in  the  faith  and  its  curious  institution
of  a slavery  which  did  not  prevent  the  slave  from  rising  even  to
the  throne,  was  never  able  to  evolve  such  a form  of  society
and  failed,  in  spite  of  its  close  contact  with  political  and  progres-
sive Europe,  to  develop  strong  and  living,  well-organised  and
conscious  nation-units  even  after  the  disruption  of  the  empire
of  the  Caliphs ; it  is  only  now  under  the  pressure  of  modern  ideas
and  conditions  that  this  is  being  done.

But  even  where  this  preparatory  stage  was  effectively
brought  into  existence,  the  subsequent  stages  did  not  necessarily
follow.  The  feudal  period  of  Europe  with  its  four  orders  of  the
clergy,  the  king  and  the  nobles,  the  bourgeoisie  and  the  prole-
tariate has  a sufficiently  close  resemblance  to  the  Indian  fourfold
order  of  the  sacerdotal,  military  and  mercantile  classes  and  the
Shudras.  The  Indian  system  took  its  characteristic  stamp  from  a
different  order  of  ideas  more  prominently  religious  and  ethical
than  political,  social  or  economic;  but  still,  practically,  the  domi-
nant function. of  the  system  was  social  and  economic  and  there
seems  at  first  sight  to  be  no  reason  why  it  should  not  have
followed,  with  whatever  differences  of  detail,  the  common  evolu-
tion. Japan  with  its  great  feudal  order  under  the  spiritual  and
secular  headship  of  the  Mikado  and  .afterwards  the  double
headship  of  the  Mikado  and  the  Shogun- evolved  one  of  the  most


353


The  Formation  of  the  Nation-Unit

vigorous  and  self-conscious  nation-units  the  world  has  seen.
China  with  its  great  learned  class  uniting  in  one  the  Brahmin
and  Kshatriya  functions  of  spiritual  and  secular  knowledge  and
executive  rule  and  its  Emperor  and  Son  of  Heaven  for  head  and
type  of  the  national  unity  succeeded  in  becoming  a united  nation.
The  different  result  in  India,  apart  from  other  causes,  was  due
to  the  different  evolution  of  the  social  order.  Elsewhere  that  evo-
lution turned  in  the  direction  of  a secular  organisation  and  head-
ship; it  created  within  the  nation  itself  a clear  political  self-
consciousness  and  as  a consequence  either  the  subordination
of  the  sacerdotal  class  to  the  military  and  administrative  or  else
their  equality  or  even  their  fusion  under  a common  spiritual  and
secular  head.  In  mediaeval  India,  on  the  contrary,  it  turned
towards  the  social  dominance  of  the  sacerdotal  class  and  the
substitution  of  a common  spiritual  for  a common  political
consciousness  as  the  basis  of  the  national  feeling.  No  lasting
secular  centre  was  evolved,  no  great  imperial  or  kingly  head
which  by  its  prestige,  power,  antiquity  and  claim  to  general
reverence  and  obedience  could  overbalance  or  even  merely
balance  this  sacerdotal  prestige  and  predominance  and  create
a sense  of  political  as  well  as  spiritual  and  cultural  oneness.

The  struggle  between  the  Church  and  the  monarchical
State  is  one  of  the  most  important  and  vital  features  of  the
history  of  Europe.  Had  that  conflict  ended  in  an  opposite  result,
the  whole  future  of  humanity  would  have  been  in  jeopardy.  As
it  was,  the  Church  was  obliged  to  renounce  its  claim  to  indepen-
dence and  dominance  over  the  temporal  power.  Even  in  the
nations  which  remained  Catholic,  a real  independence  and  domi-
nance of  the  temporal  authority  was  successfully  vindicated ; for
the  King  of  France  exercised  a control  over  the  Gallican  Church
and  clergy  which  rendered  all  effective  interference  of  the  Pope
in  French  affairs  impossible.  In  Spain,  in  spite  of  the  close  alliance
between  Pope  and  King  and  the  theoretical  admission  of  the
former’s  complete  spiritual  authority,  it  was  really  the  temporal
head  who  decided  the  ecclesiastical  policy  and  commanded  the
terrors  of  the  Inquisition.  In  Italy,  the  immediate  presence  of
the  spiritual  head  of  Catholicism  in  Rome  was  a great  moral
obstacle  to  the  development  of  a politically  united  nation;  the


354  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

passionate  determination  of  the  liberated  Italian  people  to  estab-
lish its  King  in  Rome  was  really  a symbol  of  the  law  that  a self-
conscious  and  politically  organised  nation  can  have  only  one
supreme  and  central  authority  admitted  in  its  midst  and  that
must  be  the  secular  power.  The  nation  which  has  reached  or  is
reaching  this  stage  must  either  separate  the  religious  and  spiri-
tual claim  from  its  common  secular  and  political  life  by  indivi-
dualising religion  or  else  it  must  unite  the  two  by  the  alliance  of
the  State  and  the  Church  to  uphold  the,  single  authority  of  the
temporal  head  or  combine  the  spiritual  and  temporal  headship
in  one  authority  as  was  done  in  Japan  and  China  and  in  England
of  the  Reformation.  Even  in  India  the  people  which  first  deve-
loped some  national  self-consciousness  not  of  a predominantly
spiritual  character,  were  the  Rajputs,  especially  of  Mewar,  to
whom  the  Rajah  was  in  every  way  the  head  of  society  and  of  the
nation;  and  the  people  which  having  achieved  national  self-
consciousness  came  nearest  to  achieving  also  organised  political
unity  were  the  Sikhs  for  whom  Guru  Govind  Singh  deliberately
devised  a common  secular  and  spiritual  centre  in  the  Khalsa,  and
the  Mahrattas  who  not  only  established  a secular  head,  represen-
tative of  the  conscious  nation,  but  so  secularised  themselves  that,
as  it  were,  the  whole  people  indiscriminately.  Brahmin  and
Shudra,  became  for  a time  potentially  a people  of  soldiers,  poli-
ticians and  administrators.

In  other  words,  the  institution  of  a fixed  social  hierarchy,
while  it  seems  to  have  been  a necessary  stage  for  the  first  ten-
dencies of  national  formation,  needed  to  modify  itself  and  prepare
its  own  dissolution  if  the  later  stages  were  to  be  rendered  possible.
An  instrument  good  for  a certain  work  and  set  of  conthtions,  if
it  is  stiU  retained  when  other  work  has  to  be  done  and  condi-
tions change,  becomes  necessarily  an  obstacle.  The  direction
needed  was  a change  from  the  spiritual  authority  of  one  class
and  the  political  authority  of  another  to  a centralisation  of  the
common  life  of  the  evolving  nation  under  a secular  rather  than
a religious  head  or,  if  the  religious  tendency  in  the  people  be  too
strong  to  separate  things  spiritual  and  temporal,  under  a national
head  who  shall  be  the  fountain  of  authority  in  both  departments.
Especially  was  it  necessary  for  the  creation  of  a political  self-


355


The  Formation  of  the  Nation-Unit

consciousness,  without  which  no  separate  nation-unit  can  be
successfully  formed,  that  the  sentiments,  activities,  instruments
proper  to  its  creation  should  for  a time  take  the  lead  and  all
others  stand  behind  and  support  them.  A Church  or  a dominant
sacerdotal  caste  remaining  within  its  own  function  cannot  form
the  organised  political  unity  of  a nation;  for  it  is  governed  by
other  than  political  and  administrative  considerations  and  cannot
be  expected  to  subordinate  to  them  its  own  characteristic
feelings  and  interests.  It  can  only  be  otherwise  if  the  religious
caste  or  sacerdotal  class  become  also  as  in  Tibet  the  actually
ruling  political  class  of  the  country.  In  India,  the  dominance  of
a caste  governed  by  sacerdotal,  religious  and  partly  by  spiritual
interests  and  considerations,  a caste  which  dominated  thought
and  society  and  determined  the  principles  of  the  national  life
but  did  not  actually  rule  and  administer,  has  always  stood  in
the  way  of  the  development  followed  by  the  more  secular-
minded  European  and  Mongolian  peoples.  It  is  only  now  after
the  advent  of  European  civilisation  when  the  Brahmin  caste
has  not  only  lost  the  best  part  of  its  exclusive  hold  on  the  national
life  but  has  largely  secularised  itself,  that  political  and  secular
considerations  have  come  into  the  forefront,  a pervading  poli-
tical self-consciousness  has  been  awakened  and  the  organised
unity  of  the  nation,  as  distinct  from  a spiritual  and  cultural
oneness,  made  possible  in  fact  and  not  only  as  an  unshaped
subconscious  tendency.

The  second  stage  of  the  development  of  the  nation-unit
has  been,  then,  the  modification  of  the  social  structure  so  as  to
make  room  for  a powerful  and  visible  centre  of  political  and
administrative  unity.  This  stage  is  necessarily  attended  by  a
strong  tendency  to  the  abrogation  of  even  such  liberties  as  a
fixed  social  hierarchy  provides  and  the  concentration  of  power
in  the  hands,  usually,  of  a dominant  if  not  always  an  absolute
monarchical  government.  By  modern  democratic  ideas  king-
ship  is  only  tolerated  either  as  an  inoperative  figurehead  or  a
servant  of  the  State  life  or  a convenient  centre  of  the  executive
administration,  it  is  no  longer  indispensable  as  a real  control;
but  the  historical  importance  of  a powerful  kingship  in  the
evolution  of  the  nation-type,  as  it  actually  developed  in  the


356


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

mediaeval  times,  cannot  be  exaggerated.  Even  in  liberty-loving,
insular  and  individualistic  England,  the  Plantagenets  and
Tudors  were  the  real  and  active  nucleus  round  which  the  nation
grew  into  firm  form  and  into  adult  strength;  and  in  Continental
countries  the  part  played  by  the  Capets  and  their  successors
in  France,  by  the  House  of  Castile  in  Spain  and  by  the  Romanoffs
and  their  predecessors  in  Russia  is  still  more  prominent.  In  the
last  of  these  instances,  one  might  almost  say  that  without  the
Ivans,  Peters  and  Catherines  there  would  have  been  no  Russia.
And  even  in  modern  times,  the  almost  mediaeval  role  played
by  the  Hohenzollerns  in  the  unification  and  growth  of  Germany
was  watched  with  an  uneasy  astonishment  by  the  democratic
peoples  to  whom  such  a phenomenon  was  no  longer  intelligible
and  seemed  hardly  to  be  serious.  But  we  may  note  also  the  same
phenomenon  in  the  first  period  of  formation  of  the  new  nations
of  the  Balkans.  The  seeking  for  a king  to  centralise  and  assist
their  growth,  despite  all  the  strange  comedies  and  tragedies
which  have  accompanied  it,  becomes  perfectly  intelligible  as
a manifestation  of  the  sense  of  the  old  necessity,  not  so  truly
necessary  now^  but  felt  in  the  subconscious  minds  of  these
peoples.  In  the  new  formation  of  Japan  into  a nation  of  the
modern  type  the  Mikado  played  a similar  role;  the  instinct  of
the  renovators  brought  him  out  of  his  helpless  seclusion  to  meet
this  inner  need.  The  attempt  of  a brief  dictatorship  in  revolu-
tionary China  to  convert  itself  into  a new  national  monarchy
may  be  attributed  quite  as  much  to  the  same  feeling  in  a prac-
tical mind  as  to  mere  personal  ambition.^  It  is  a sense  of  this
great  role  played  by  the  kingship  in  centralising  and  shaping
national  life  at  the  most  critical  stage  of  its  growth  which  explains
the  tendency  common  in  the  East  and  not  altogether  absent  from
the  history  of  the  West  to  invest  it  with  an  almost  sacred  charac-
ter; it  explains  also  the  passionate  loyalty  with  which  great
national  dynasties  or  their  successors  have  been  served  even
in  the  moment  of  their  degeneration  and  downfall.

' Now  replaced  by  the  spiritual-political  headship  of  an  almost  semi-divine  Leader  in  a
FUhrer  who  incarnates  in  himself,  as  it  were,  the  personality  of  the  race.

• It  should  be  noted  that  even  the  democratic  idealism  of  the  modem  mind  in  China  has
been  obliged  to  crystallise  itself  round  the  “leader”,  a Sun  Yat  Sen  or  Chiang  Kai  Shek  and
the  force  of  inspiration  has  depended  on  the  power  of  this  living  centre.


357


The  Formation  of  the  Nation-Unit

But  this  movement  of  national  development,  however  salu-
tary in  its  peculiar  role,  is  almost  fatally  attended  with  that
suppression  of  the  internal  liberties  of  the  people  which  makes
the  modern  mind  so  naturally,  though  unscientifically,  harsh
in  its  judgment  of  the  old  monarchical  absolutism  and  its
tendencies.  For  always  this  is  a movement  of  concentration,
stringency,  uniformity,  strong  control  and  one-pointed  direc-
tion; to  universalise  one  law,  one  rule,  one  central  authority  is
the  need  it  has  to  meet,  and  therefore  its  spirit  must  be  to  en-
force and  centralise  authority,  to  narrow  or  quite  suppress
liberty  and  free  variation.  In  England,  the  period  of  the  New
Monarchy  from  Edward  IV  to  Elizabeth,  in  France  the  great
Bourbon  period  from  Heniy  IV  to  Louis  XIV,  in  Spain  the
epoch  which  extends  from  Ferdinand  to  Philip  II,  in  Russia
the  rule  of  Peter  the  Great  and  Catherine  were  the  time  in
which  these  nations  reached  their  maturity,  formed  fully  and
confirmed  their  spirit  and  attained  to  a robust  organisation.
And  all  these  were  periods  of  absolutism  or  of  movement  to
absolutism  and  a certain  foundation  of  uniformity  or  attempt
to  found  it.  This  absolutism  clothed  already  in  its  more  pri-
mitive garb  the  reviving  idea  of  the  State  and  its  right  to  impose
its  will  on  the  life  and  thought  and  conscience  of  the  people  so
as  to  make  it  one,  single,  undivided,  perfectly  efficient  and  per-
fectly directed  mind  and  body.^

It  is  from  this  point  of  view  that  we  shall  most  intelligently
understand  the  attempt  of  the  Tudors  and  the  Stuarts  to  impose
both  monarchical  authority  and  religious  uniformity  on  the
people  and  seize  the  real  sense  of  the  religious  wars  in  France,
the  Catholic  monarchical  rule  in  Spain  with  its  atrocious  method
of  the  Inquisition  and  the  oppressive  will  of  the  absolute  Czars
in  Russia  to  impose  also  an  absolute  national  Church.  The  effort
failed  in  England,  because,  after  Elizabeth,  it  no  longer  answered
to  any  genuine  need;  for  the  nation  was  already  well-formed,
strong  and  secure  against  disruption  from  without.  Elsewhere
it  succeeded  both  in  Protestant  and  Catholic  countries,  or  in
the  rare  cases  as  in  Poland  where  this  movement  could  not

> Now  illustrated  with  an  interesting  completeness  in  Russia,  Cermany  and  Italy  —
the  totalitarian  idea.


358


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

take  place  or  failed,  the  result  was  disastrous.  Certainly,  it  was
everywhere  an  outrage  on  the  human  soul,  but  it  was  not  merely
due  to  any  natural  wickedness  of. the  rulers;  it  was  an  inevit-
able stage  in  the  formation  of  the  nation-unit  by  political
and  mechanical  means.  If  it  left  England  the  sole  country  in
Europe  where  liberty  could  progress  by  natural  gradations,
that  was  due,  no  doubt,  largely  to  the  strong  qualities  of  the
people  but  still  more  to  its  fortunate  history  and  insular  cir-
cumstances.

The  monarchical  State  in  this  evolution  crushed  or  sub-
ordinated the  religious  liberties  of  men  and  made  a subservient
or  conciliated  ecclesiastical  order  the  priest  of  its  divine  right,
Religion  the  handmaid  of  a secular  throne.  It  destroyed  the
liberties  of  the  aristocracy  and  left  it  its  privileges  and  those  even
were  allowed  only  that  it  might  support  and  buttress  the  power
of  the  king.  After  using  the  bourgeoisie  against  the  nobles,
it  destroyed,  where  it  could,  its  real  and  living  civic  liberties  and
permitted  only  some  outward  form  and  its  parts  of  special  right
and  privilege.  As  for  the  people  they  had  no  liberties  to  be
destroyed.  Thus  the  monarchical  State  concentrated  in  its  own
activities  the  whole  national  life.  The  Church  served  it  with  its
moral  influence,  the  nobles  with  their  military  traditions  and
ability,  the  bourgeoisie  with  the  talent  or  chicane  of  its  lawyers
and  the  literary  genius  or  administrative  power  of  its  scholars,
thinkers  and  men  of  inborn  business  capacity;  the  people
gave  taxes  and  served  with  their  blood  the  personal  and  national
ambitions  of  the  monarchy.  But  all  this  powerful  structure  and
closely-knit  order  of  things  was  doomed  by  its  very  triumph
and  predestined  to  come  down  either  with  a crash  or  by  a
more  or  less  unwilling  gradual  abdication  before  new  necessities
and  agencies.  It  was  tolerated  and  supported  so  long  as  the
nation  felt  consciously  or  subconsciously  its  need  and  justifica-
tion; once  that  was  fulfilled  and  ceased,  there  came  inevitably
the  old  questioning  which,  now  grown  fully  self-conscious,
could  no  longer  be  suppressed  or  permanently  resisted.  By
changing  the  old  order  into  a mere  simulacrum  the  monarchy
had  destroyed  its  own  base.  The  sacerdotal  authority  of  the
Church,  once  questioned  on  spiritual  grounds,  could  not  be  long


359


The  Formation  of  the  Nation-Unit

maintained  by  temporal  means,  by  the  sword  and  the  law;  the
aristocracy  keeping  its  privileges  but  losing  its  real  functions
became  odious  and  questionable  to  the  classes  below  it;  the
bourgeoisie  conscious  of  its  talent,  irritated  by  its  social  and
political  inferiority,  awakened  by  the  voice  of  its  thinkers,  led
the  movement  of  revolt  and  appealed  to  the  help  of  the  popu-
lace; the  masses  — dumb,  oppressed,  suffering  — rose  with  this
new  support  which  had  been  denied  to  them  before  and  over-
turned the  whole  social  hierarchy.  Hence  the  collapse  of  the
old  world  and  the  birth  of  a new  age.

We  have  already  seen  the  inner  justification  of  this  great
revolutionary  movement.  The  nation-unit  is  not  formed  and
does  not  exist  merely  for  the  sake  of  existing;  its  purpose  is  to
provide  a larger  mould  of  human  aggregation  in  which  the
race,  and  not  only  classes  and  individuals,  may  move  towards
its  full  human  development.  So  long  as  the  labour  of  forma-
tion continues,  this  larger  development  may  be  held  back
and  authority  and  order  be  accepted  as  the  first  consideration,
but  not  when  the  aggregate  is  sure  of  its  existence  and  feels
the  need  of  an  inner  expansion.  Then  the  old  bonds  have  to  be
burst;  the  means  of  formation  have  to  be  discarded  as  obstacles
to  growth.  Liberty  then  becomes  the  watchword  of  the  race.
The  ecclesiastical  order  which  suppressed  liberty  of  thought  and
new  ethical  and  social  development,  has  to  be  dispossessed  of
its  despotic  authority,  so  that  man  may  be  mentally  and  spiri-
tually free.  The  monopolies  and  privileges  of  the  king  and
aristocracy  have  to  be  destroyed,  so  that  all  may  take  their
share  of  the  national  power,  prosperity  and  activity.  Finally,
bourgeois  capitalism  has  to  be  induced  or  forced  to  consent  to
an  economic  order  in  which  suffering,  poverty  and  exploitation
shall  be  eliminated  and  the  wealth  of  the  community  be  more
equally  shared  by  all  who  help  to  create  it.  In  all  directions,
men  have  to  come  into  their  own,  realise  the  dignity  and  free-
dom of  the  manhood  within  them  and  give  play  to  their  utmost
capacity.

For  liberty  is  insufficient,  justice  also  is  necessary  and  be-
comes a pressing  demand;  the  cry  for  equality  arises.  Certainly,
absolute  equality  is  non-existent  in  this  world;  but  the  word


360


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

was  aimed  against  the  unjust  and  unnecessary  inequalities
of  the  old  social  order.  Under  a just  social  order,  there  must
be  an  equal  opportunity,  an  equal  training  for  all  to  develop
their  faculties  and  to  use  them,  and,  so  far  as  may  be,  an  equal
share  in  the  advantages  of  the  aggregate  life  as  the  right  of  all
who  contribute  to  the  existence,  vigour  and  development  of  that
life  by  the  use  of  their  capacities.  As  we  have  noted,  this  need
might  have  taken  the  form  of  an  ideal  of  free  co-operation
guided  and  helped  by  a wise  and  liberal  central  authority  expres-
sing the  common  will,  but  it  has  actually  reverted  to  the  old
notion  of  an  absolute  and  efficient  State  — no  longer  monarch-
ical, ecclesiastical,  aristocratic  but  secular,  democratic  and
socialistic  — with  liberty  sacrificed  to  the  need  of  equality  and
aggregate  efficiency.  The  psychological  causes  of  this  reversion
we  shall  not  now  consider.  Perhaps  liberty  and  equality,  liberty
and  authority,  liberty  and  organised  efficiency  can  never  be  quite
satisfactorily  reconciled  so  long  as  man  individual  and  aggre-
gate lives  by  egoism,  so  long  as  he  cannot  undergo  a great
spiritual  and  psychological  change  and  rise  beyond  mere  com-
munal association  to  that  third  ideal  which  some  vague  inner
sense  made  the  revolutionary  thinkers  of  France  add  to  their
watchwords  of  liberty  and  equality,  — the  greatest  of  all  the
three,  though  till  now  only  an  empty  word  oh  man’s  lips,  the
ideal  of  fraternity  or,  less  sentimentally  and  more  truly  expressed,
an  inner  oneness.  That  no  mechanism  social,  political,  religious
has  ever  created  or  can  create;  it  must  take  birth  in  the  soul
and  rise  from  hidden  and  divine  depths  within.


Chapter  XIV


The  Possibility  of  a First  Step
towards  International  Unity—

Its  Enormous  Difficulties

1 HE  study  of  the  growth  of  the  nation-unit
under  the  pressure  indeed  of  a growing  inner  need  and  idea  but
by  the  agency  of  political,  economic  and  social  forces,  forms
and  instruments  shows  us  a progress  that  began  from  a loose
formation  in  which  various  elements  were  gathered  together
for  unification,  proceeded  through  a period  of  strong  concen-
tration and  coercion  in  which  the  conscious  national  ego  was
developed,  fortified  and  provided  with  a centre  and  instru-
ments of  its  organic  life  and  passed  on  to  a final  period  of  assured
separate  existence  and  internal  unity  as  against  outside  pres-
sure in  which  liberty  and  an  active  and  more  and  more  equal
share  of  all  in  the  benefits  of  the  national  life  became  possible.
If  the  unity  of  the  human  race  is  to  be  brought  about  by  the
same  means  and  agents  and  in  a similar  fashion  to  that  of  the
nation,  we  should  expect  it  to  follow  a similar  course.  That  is
at  least  the  most  visible  probability  and  it  seems  to  be  consistent
with  the  natural  law  of  all  creation  which  starts  from  the  loose
mass,  the  more  or  less  amorphous  vague  of  forces  and  materials
and  proceeds  by  contraction,  constriction,  solidification  into
a firm  mould  in  which  the  rich  evolution  of  various  forms  of
life  is  at  last  securely  possible.

If  we  consider  tlie  actual  state  of  the  world  and  its  imme-
diate possibilities,  we  shall  see  that  a first  period  of  loose  forma-
tion and  imperfect  order  is  inevitable.  Neither  the  intellectual
preparation  of  the  human  race  nor  the  development  of  its  senti-
ments nor  the  economic  and  political  forces  and  conditions  by
which  it  is  moved  and  preoccupied  have  reached  to  such  a point
of  inner  stress  or  external  pressure  as  would  warrant  us  in


362


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

expecting  a total  change  of  the  basis  of  our  life  or  the  establish-
ment of  a complete  or  a real  unity.  There  cannot  as  yet  be  even
a real  external  unity,  far  less  a psychological  oneness.  It  is  true
that  the  vague  sense  and  need  of  something  of  the  kind  has  been
growing  rapidly  and  the  object  lesson  of  the  war  brought  the
master  idea  of  the  future  out  of  the  nascent  condition  in  which
it  was  no  more  than  the  generous  chimera  of  a few  pacifists
or  internationalist  idealists.  It  came  to  be  recognised  that  it
contains  in  itself  some  force  of  eventual  reahty,  and  the  voice
of  those  who  would  cry  it  down  as  the  pet  notion  of  intellectual
cranks  and  faddists  had  no  longer  the  same  volume  and  confi-
dence, because  it  was  no  longer  so  solidly  supported  by  the
common  sense  of  the  average  man,  that  short-sighted  common
sense  of  the  material  mind  which  consists  in  a strong  feeling  for
immediate  actualities  and  an  entire  blindness  to  the  possibilities
of  the  future.  But  there  has  as  yet  been  no  long  intellectual
preparation  of  a more  and  more  dominant  thought  cast  out  by
the  intellectuals  of  the  age  to  remould  the  ideas  of  common
men,  nor  has  there  been  any  such  gathering  to  a head  of  the
growing  revolt  against  present  conditions  as  would  make  it
possible  for  vast  masses  of  men  seized  by  the  passion  for  an  ideal
and  by  the  hope  of  a new  happiness  for  mankind  to  break  up  the
present  basis  of  things  and  construct  a new  scheme  of  collective
life.  In  another  direction,  the  replacing  of  the  individualistic
basis  of  society  by  an  increasing  collectivism,  there  has  been
to  a large  extent  such  an  intellectual  preparation  and  gathering
force  of  revolt;  there  the  war  has  acted  as  a precipitative  force
and  brought  us  much  nearer  to  the  possibility  of  a realised
not  necessarily  a democratic  — State  socialism.  But  there
have  been  no  such  favourable  preconditions  for  a strong  move-
ment of  international  unification.  No  great  effective  outburst
of  a massed  and  dynamic  idealism  in  this  direction  can  be
reasonably  predicted.  The  preparation  may  have  begun,  it
may  have  been  greatly  facilitated  and  hastened  by  recent  events,
but  it  is  stUl  only  in  its  first  stages.

Under  such  conditions  the  ideas  and  schemes  of  the  world’s
intellectuals  who  would  replan  the  whole  status  of  international
life  altogether  and  from  its  roots  in  the  light  of  general  principles,


Possibility  of  a Step  towards  International  Unity  363

are  not  likely  to  find  any  immediate  realisation.  In  the  absence
of  a general  idealistic  outburst  of  creative  human  hope  which
would  make  such  changes  possible,  the  future  will  be  shaped
not  by  the  ideas  of  the  thinker  but  by  the  practical  mind  of  the
politician  which  represents  the  average  reason  and  temperament
of  the  time  and  effects  usually  something  much  nearer  the
minimum  than  the  maximum  of  what  is  possible.  The  average
general  mind  of  a great  mass  of  men,  while  it  is  ready  to  listen
to  such  ideas  as  it  has  been  prepared  to  receive  and  is  accustomed
to  seize  on  this  or  that  notion  with  a partisan  avidity,  is  yet
ruled  in  its  action  not  so  much  by  its  thought  as  by  its  interests,
passions  and  prejudices.  The  politician  and  the  statesman  — and
the  world  is  now  full  of  politicians  but  very  empty  of  statesmen
— act  in  accordance  with  this  average  general  mind  of  the
mass;  the  one  is  governed  by  it,  the  other  has  always  to  take  it
into  chief  account  and  cannot  lead  it  where  he  will,  unless  he  is
one  of  those  great  geniuses  and  powerful  personalities  who
unite  a large  mind  and  dynamic  force  of  conception  with  an
enormous  power  or  influence  over  men.  Moreover,  the  politi-
cal mind  has  limitations  of  its  own  beyond  those  of  the  general
average  mind  of  the  mass;  it  is  even  more  respectful  of  the  status
quo,  more  disinclined  to  great  adventure  in  which  the  safe  footing
of  the  past  has  to  be  abandoned,  more  incapable  of  launching
out  into  the  uncertain  and  the  new.  To  do  that  it  must  either
be  forced  by  general  opinion  or  a powerful  interest  or  else  itself
fall  under  the  spell  of  a great  new  enthusiasm  diffused  in  the
mental  atmosphere  of  the  times.

If  the  politician  mind  is  left  entirely  to  itself,  we  could
expect  no  better  tangible  result  of  the  greatest  international
convulsion  on  record  than  a rearrangement  of  frontiers,  a
redistribution  of  power  and  possessions  and  a few  desirable  or
undesirable  developments  of  international,  commercial  and
other  relations.  That  is  one  disastrous  possibility  leading  to
more  disastrous  convulsions  — so  long  as  the  problem  is  not
solved  — against  which  the  future  of  the  world  is  by  no  means
secure.  Still,  since  the  mind  of  humanity  has  been  greatly
moved  and  its  sentiments  powerfully  awakened,  since  the  sense
is  becoming  fairly  wide-spread  that  the  old  status  of  things  is


364


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

no  longer  tolerable  and  the  undesirability  of  an  international
balance  reposing  on  a ring  of  national  egoisms  held  in  check  only
by  mutual  fear  and  hesitation,  by  ineffective  arbitration  treaties
and  Hague  tribunals  and  the  blundering  discords  of  a European
Concert  must  be  now  fairly  clear  even  to  the  politician  mind,
we  might  expect  that  some  serious  attempt  towards  the  begin-
ning of  a new  order  should  be  the  result  of  the  moral  collapse
of  the  old.  The  passions  and  hatreds  and  selfish  national  hopes
raised  by  the  war  must  certainly  be  a great  obstacle  in  the  way
and  may  easily  render  futile  or  of  a momentary  stability  any
such  beginning.  But,  if  nothing  else,  the  mere  exhaustion  and
internal  reaction  produced  after  the  relaxing  of  the  tensity  of  the
struggle,  might  give  time  for  new  ideas,  feelings,  forces,  events
to  emerge  which  will  counteract  this  pernicious  influence.^
Still,  the  most  that  we  could  at  all  expect  must  needs  be
very  little.  In  the  internal  life  of  the  nations,  the  ultimate  effects
of  the  war  cannot  fail  to  be  powerful  and  radical,  for  there  every-
thing is  ready,  the  pressure  felt  has  been  enormous  and  the
expansion  after  it  has  been  removed  must  be  correspondingly
great  in  its  results;  but  in  international  life  we  can  only  look
forward  at  the  best  to  a certain  minimum  of  radical  change
which,  however  small,  might  yet  in  itself  turn  out  to  be  an
irrevocable  departure,  a seed  of  sufficient  vitality  to  ensure  the
inevitability  of  future  growth.  If,  indeed,  developments  had
occurred  before  the  end  of  this  world-wide  struggle  strong  enough
to  change  the  general  mind  of  Europe,  to  force  the  dwarfish
thoughts  of  its  rulers  into  greater  depths  and  generate  a more
wide-reaching  sense  of  the  necessity  for  radical  change  than  has
yet  been  developed,  more  might  have  been  hoped  for;  but  as  the
great  conflict  drew  nearer  to  its  close,  no  such  probability
emerged;  the  dynamic  period  during  which  in  such  a crisis  the
effective  ideas  and  tendencies  of  men  are  formed,  passed  without

’ Written  originally  in  1916  before  the  end  of  the  war.  This  happier  possibility  could
not  iminediately  materialise,  but  the  growing  insecurity,  confusion  and  disorder  have  made
the  creation  of  some  international  system  more  and  more  imperative  if  modem  civilisation
is  not  to  collapse  in  bloodshed  and  chaos.  The  result  of  this  necessity  has  been  first  the  creation
of  the  League  of  Nations  and  afterwards  the  U.N.O.:  neither  has  proved  very  satisfactory
from  the  political  point  of  >aew,  but  henceforward  the  existence  of  some  such  arranged  centre
of  order  has  become  very  evidently  indispensable.


Possibility  of  a Step  towards  International  Unity  365

the  creation  of  any  great  and  profound  impulse.  There  were  only
two  points  on  which  the  general  mind  of  the  peoples  was  power-
fully affected.  First,  there  was  generated  a sense  of  revolt  against
the  possible  repetition  of  this  vast  catastrophe ; still  more  strongly
felt  was  the  necessity  for  finding  means  to  prevent  the  unparal-
leled dislocation  of  the  economic  life  of  the  race  which  was
brought  about  by  the  convulsion.  Therefore,  it  is  in  these  two
directions  that  some  real  development  could  be  expected;  for  so
much  must  be  attempted  if  the  general  expectation  and  desire
are  to  be  satisfied  and  to  trifle  with  these  would  be  to  declare  the
pohtical  intelligence  of  Europe  bankrupt.  That  failure  would
convict  its  governments  and  ruling  classes  of  moral  and  intellec-
tual impotence  and  might  well  in  the  end  provoke  a general
revolt  of  the  European  peoples  against  their  existing  institutions
and  the  present  blind  and  rudderless  leadership.

There  was  to  be  expected,  then,  some  attempt  to  provide  a
settled  and  effective  means  for  the  regulation  and  minimising
of  war,  for  the  limitation  of  armaments,  for  the  satisfactory  dis-
posal of  dangerous  disputes  and  especially,  though  this  presents
the  greatest  difficulty,  for  meeting  that  conflict  of  commercial
aims  and  interests  which  is  now  the  really  effective,  although  by
no  means  the  only  factor  in  the  conditions  that  compel  the  re-
currence of  war.  If  this  new  arrangement  contained  in  itself  the
seed  of  international  control,  if  it  turned  out  to  be  a first  step
towards  a loose  international  formation  or  perhaps  contained  its
elements  or  initial  lines  or  even  a first  scheme  to  which  the  life  of
humanity  could  turn  for  a mould  of  growth  in  its  reaching  out  to
a unified  existence,  then,  however  rudimentary  or  unsatisfactory
this  arrangement  might  be  at  first,  the  future  would  carry  in  it  an
assured  promise.  Once  begun,  it  will  be  impossible  for  mankind
to  draw  back  and,  whatever  difficulties,  disappointments,  strug-
gles, reactions,  checks  or  brutal  interruptions  might  mark  the
course  of  this  development,  they  would  be  bound  to  help  in  the
end  rather  than  hinder  the  final  and  inevitable  result.

Still,  it  would  be  vain  to  hope  that  the  principle  of  inter-
national control  will  be  thoroughly  effective  at  first  or  that  this
loose  formation,  which  is  likely  to  be  in  the  beginning  half  form,
half  nebula  will  prevent  farther  conflicts,  explosions,  catas-


366


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity


trophes  1 The  difficulties  are  too  great.  The  mind  of  the  race
has  not  as  yet  the  necessary  experience;  the  intellect  of  its  ruling
classes  has  not  acquired  the  needed  minimum  of  wisdom  and
foresight;  the  temperament  of  the  peoples  has  not  developed  the
indispensable  instincts  and  sentiments.  Whatever  arrangement
is  made  will  proceed  on  the  old  basis  of  national  egoisms,
hungers,  cupidities,  self-assertions  and  will  simply  endeavour
to  regulate  them  just  enough  to  prevent  too  disastrous  collisions.
The  first  means  tried  will  necessarily  be  insufficient  because  too
much  respect  will  be  paid  to  those  very  egoisms  which  it  is  sought
to  control.  The  causes  of  strife  will  remain;  the  temper  that
engenders  it  will  live  on,  perhaps  exhausted  and  subdued  for  a
time  in  certain  of  its  activities,  but  unexorcised;  the  means  of
strife  may  be  controlled  but  will  be  allowed  to  remain.  Arma-
ments may  be  restricted,  but  will  not  be  abolished;  national
armies  may  be  limited  in  numbers  — an  illusory  limitation  — but
they  will  be  maintained;  science  will  still  continue  to  minis-
ter ingeniously  to  the  art  of  collective  massacre.  War  can  only
be  abolished  if  national  armies  are  abolished  and  even  then  with
difficulty,  by  the  development  of  some  other  machinery  which
humanity  does  not  yet  know  how  to  form  or,  even  if  formed,
will  not  for  some  time  be  able  or  willing  perfectly  to  utilise.
And  there  is  no  chance  of  national  armies  being  abolished;
for  each  nation  distrusts  all  the  others  too  much,  has  too
many  ambitions  and  hungers,  needs  to  remain  armed,  if  for  no-
thing else,  to  guard  its  markets  and  keep  down  its  dominions,
colonies,  subject  peoples.  Commercial  ambitions  and  rivalries,
poUtical  pride,  dreams,  longings,  jealousies  are  not  going  to
disappear  as  if  by  the  touch  of  a magic  wand  merely  because
Europe  has  in  an  insane  clash  of  long-ripening  ambitions,
jealousies  and  hatreds  decimated  its  manhood  and  flung  in  three
years  the  resources  of  decades  into  the  melting-pot  of  war.  The
awakening  must  go  much  deeper,  lay  hold  upon  much  purer
roots  of  action  before  the  psychology  of  nations  will  be  trans-
muted into  that  something  “wondrous,  rich  and  strange”


1 prediction,  easy  enough  to  make  at  that  time,  and  the  estimate  of  its  causes  have
^n  fully  justified  by  the  course  of  events  and  the  outbreak^of  a stiU  greater,  more  disastrous


Possibility  of  a Step  towards  International  Unity  367

which  will  eliminate  war  and  international  collisions  from  our
distressed  and  stumbling  human  life.

National  egoism  remaining,  the  means  of  strife  remaining,
its  causes,  opportunities,  excuses  will  never  be  wanting.  The
present  war  came  because  all  the  leading  nations  had  long  been
so  acting  as  to  make  it  inevitable;  it  came  because  there  was  a
Balkan  imbroglio  and  a Near-Eastern  hope  and  commercial
and  colonial  rivalries  in  Northern  Africa  over  which  the  domi-
nant nations  had  been  battling  in  peace  long  before  one  or  more
of  them  grasped  at  the  rifle  and  the  shell.  Sarajevo  and  Belgium
were  mere  determining  circumstances ; to  get  to  the  root  causes
we  have  to  go  back  as  far  at  least  as  Agadir  and  Algeciras.  From
Morocco  to  Tripoli,  from  Tripoli  to  Thrace  and  Macedonia,  from
Macedonia  to  Herzegovina  the  electric  chain  ran  with  that  inevit-
able logic  of  causes  and  results,  actions  and  their  fruits  which  we
call  Karma,  creating  minor  detonations  on  its  way  till  it  found  the
inflammable  point  and  created  that  vast  explosion  which  has
filled  Europe  with  blood  and  ruins.  Possibly  the  Balkan  question
may  be  definitively  settled,  though  that  is  far  from  certain;  pos-
sibly the  definitive  expulsion  of  Germany  from  Africa  may  ease
the  situation  by  leaving  that  continent  in  the  possession  of  three
or  four  nations  who  are  for  the  present  allies.  But  even  if
Germany  were  expunged  from  the  map  and  its  resentments  and
ambitions  deleted  as  a European  factor,  the  root  causes  of  strife
would  remain.  There  will  still  be  an  Asiatic  question  of  the
Near  and  the  Far  East  which  may  take  on  new  conditions  and
appearances  and  regroup  its  constituent  elements,  but  must
remain  so  fraught  with  danger  that  if  it  is  stupidly  settled  or
does  not  settle  itself,  it  would  be  fairly  safe  to  predict  the  next
great  human  collision  with  Asia  as  either  its  first  field  or  its  ori-
gin. Even  if  that  difficulty  is  settled,  new  causes  of  strife  must
necessarily  develop  where  the  spirit  of  national  egoism  and
cupidity  seeks  for  satisfaction;  and  so  long  as  it  lives,  satisfac-
tion it  must  seek  and  repletion  can  never  permanently  satisfy  it.
The  tree  must  bear  its  own  proper  fruit,  and  Nature  is  always  a
diligent  gardener.

The  limitation  of  armies  and  armaments  is  an  illusory  reme-
dy. Even  if  there  could  be  found  an  effective  international


368


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

means  of  control,  it  would  cease  to  operate  as  soon  as  the  clash
of  war  actually  came.  The  European  conflict  has  shown  that,  in
the  course  of  war,  a country  can  be  turned  into  a huge  factory  of
arms  and  a nation  convert  its  whole  peaceful  manhood  into  an
army.,  England  which  started  with  a small  and  even  insignificant
armed  force,  was  able  in  the  course  of  a single  year  to  raise  mil-
lions of  men  and  in  two  to  train  and  equip  them  and  throw  them
effectively  into  the  balance.  This  object  lesson  is  sufficient  to
show  that  the  limitation  of  armies  and  armaments  can  only
Hghten  the  national  burden  in  peace,  leaving  it  by  that  very  fact
more  resources  for  the  conflict,  but  cannot  prevent  or  even  mini-
mise the  disastrous  intensity  and  extension  of  war.  Nor  will  the
construction  of  a stronger  international  law  with  a more  effec-
tive sanction  behind  it  be  an  indubitable  or  perfect  remedy.
It  is  often  asserted  that  this  is  what  is  needed;  just  as  in  the
nation  Law  has  replaced  and  suppressed  the  old  barbaric  method
of  settling  disputes  between  individuals,  families  or  clans  by  the
arbitration  of  Might,  a similar  development  ought  to  be  possible
in  the  life  of  nations.  Perhaps  in  the  end;  but  to  expect  it  to  ope-
rate successfully  at  once  is  to  ignore  both  the  real  basis  of  the
effective  authority  of  Law  and  the  difference  between  the  consti-
tuents of  a developed  nation  and  the  constituents  of  that  ill-
developed  international  comity  which  it  is  proposed  to  initiate.

The  authority  of  Law  in  a nation  or  community  does  not
really  depend  on  any  so-called  “majesty”  or  mystic  power  in
man-made  rules  and  enactments.  Its  real  sources  of  power  are
two,  first,  the  strong  interest  of  the  majority  or  of  a dominant
minority  or  of  the  community  as  a whole  in  maintaining  it  and,
secondly,  the  possession  of  a sole  armed  force,  pohce  and  mili-
tary, which  makes  that  interest  effective.  The  metaphorical  sword
of  justice  can  only  act  because  there  is  a real  sword  behind  it  to
enforce  its  decrees  and  its  penalties  against  the  rebel  and  the
dissident.  And  the  essential  character  of  this  armed  force  is  that
it  belongs  to  nobody,  to  no  individual  or  constituent  group  of
the  community  except  alone  to  the  State,  the  king  or  the  govern-
ing class  or  body  in  which  sovereign  authority  is  centred.  Nor
can  there  be  any  security  if  the  armed  force  of  the  State  is  ba-
lanced or  its  sole  effectivity  diminished  by  the  existence  of  other


Possibility  of  a Step  towards  International  Unity  369

armed  forces  belonging  to  groups  and  individuals  and  free  in  any
degree  from  the  central  control  or  able  to  use  their  power  against
the  governing  authority.  Even  so,  even  with  this  authority
backed  by  a sole  and  centralised  armed  force,  Law  has  not  been
able  to  prevent  strife  of  a kind  between  individuals  and  classes
because  it  has  not  been  able  to  remove  the  psychological,  eco-
nomic and  other  causes  of  strife.  Crime  with  its  penalties  is
always  a kind  of  mutual  violence,  a kind  of  revolt  and  civil  strife
and  even  in  the  best-policed  and  most  law-abiding  commu-
nities crime  IS  still  rampant.  Even  the  organisation  of  crime  is
possible  although  it  cannot  usually  endure  or  fix  its  power,  be-
cause It  has  the  whole  vehement  sentiment  and  effective  organisa-
tion of  the  community  against  it.  But  what  is  more  to  the  pur-
pose, Law  has  not  been  able  to  prevent,  although  it  has  mini-
mised, the  possibility  of  civil  strife  and  violent  or  armed  discord
within  the  organised  nation.  Whenever  a class  or  an  opinion
has  thought  itself  oppressed  or  treated  with  intolerable  injustice,
has  found  the  Law  and  its  armed  force  so  entirely  associated  with
an  opposite  interest  that  the  suspension  of  the  principle  of  law
and  an  insurgence  of  the  violence  of  revolt  against  the  violence
of  oppression  were  or  appeared  the  only  remedy,  it  has,  if  it
thought  it  had  a chance  of  success,  appealed  to  the  ancient
arbitration  of  Might.  Even  in  our  own  days  we  have  seen  the
most  law-abiding  of  nations  staggering  on  the  verge  of  a disas-
trous civil  war  and  responsible  statesmen  declaring  their  readi-


ness to  appeal  to  it  if  a measure  disagreeable  to  them  were
enforced,  even  though  it  was  passed  by  the  supreme  legislative
authority  with  the  sanction  of  the  sovereign.

But  in  any  loose  international  formation  presently  possible
the  armed  force  would  still  be  divided  among  its  constituent
^oups;  it  would  belong  to  them,  not  to  any  sovereign  autho-
rity, super-State  or  federal  council.  The  position  would  resemble
the  chaotic  organisation  of  the  feudal  ages  in  which  every  prince
and  baron  had  his  separate  jurisdiction  and  military  resources
and  could  defy  the  authority  of  the  sovereign  if  he  were  powerful
enough  or  if  he  could  command  the  necessary  number  and
strength  of  allies  among  his  peers.  And  in  this  case,  there  would
not  be  even  the  equivalent  of  a feudal  sovereign  — a king  who,


370


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity


if  nothing  else,  if  not  really  a monarch,  was  at  least  the  first
among  his  peers  — with  the  prestige  of  sovereignty  and  some
means  of  developing  it  into  a strong  and  permanent  actuality.

Nor  would  the  matter  be  much  improved  if  there  were  a
composite  armed  force  of  control  set  over  the  nations  and  their
separate  military  strength;  for  this  composite  would  break  apart
and  its  elements  return  to  their  conflicting  sources  on  the  out-
break of  overt  strife.  In  the  developed  nation  the  individual  is
the  unit  and  he  is  lost  among  the  mass  of  individuals,  unable
safely  to  calculate  the  force  he  could  command  in  a conflict,
afraid  of  all  other  individuals  not  bound  to  him,  because  he  sees
in  them  natural  supporters  of  outraged  authority;  revolt  is  to
him  a most  dangerous  and  incalculable  business,  even  the  initial
conspiracy  fraught  at  every  moment  with  a thousand  terrors  and
dangers  that  lower  in  terrible  massed  array  against  a small  modi-
cum of  scattered  chances.  The  soldier  also  is  a solitary  individual,
afraid  of  all  the  rest,  a terrible  punishment  suspended  over  him
and  ready  to  fall  at  the  least  sign  of  insubordination,  never  sure
of  a confident  support  among  his  fellows  or,  even  if  a little
certain,  not  assured  of  any  effective  support  from  the  civil  popu-
lation and  therefore  deprived  of  that  moral  force  which  would
encourage  him  to  defy  the  authority  of  Law  and  Government.
And  in  his  ordinary  sentiment  he  belongs  no  longer  to  individual
or  family  or  class,  but  to  the  State  and  the  country  or  at  the  very
least  to  the  machine  of  which  he  ‘is  a part.  But  here  the
constituents  would  be  a small  number  of  nations,  some  of  them
powerful  empires,  well  able  to  look  around  them,  measure  their
own  force,  make  sure  of  their  allies,  calculate  the  force  against
them;  the  chances  of  success  or  failure  would  be  all  that  they
would  have  to  consider.  And  the  soldiers  of  the  composite  army
would  belong  at  heart  to  their  coimtry  and  not  at  all  to  the
nebulous  entity  which  controlled  them.

Therefore,  pending  the  actual  evolution  of  an  international
State  so  constituted  as  to  be  something  other  than  a mere  loose
conglomerate  of  nations  or  rather  a palaver  of  the  deputies  of
national  governments,  the  reign  of  peace  and  unity  dreamed  of
by  the  idealist  could  never  be  possible  by  these  political  or
administrative  means  or,  if  possible,  could  never  be  secure.  Even


371


Possibility  of  a Step  towards  International  Unity

if  actual  war  were  eliminated,  still  as  in  the  nation  crime  between
individuals  exists,  or  as  other  means  such  as  disastrous  general
strikes  are  used  in  the  war  of  classes,  so  here  too  other  means  of
strife  would  be  developed,  much  more  disastrous  perhaps  than
war.  And  even  they  would  be  needed  and  inevitable  in  the  eco-
nomy of  Nature,  not  only  to  meet  the  psychological  necessity
of  egoistic  discord  and  passion  and  ambition,  but  as  an  outlet
and  an  arm  for  the  sense  of  injustice,  of  oppressed  rights,  of
thwarted  possibilities.  The  law  is  always  the  same,  that  wher-
ever egoism  is  the  root  of  action  it  must  bear  its  own  proper
results  and  reactions  and,  however  minimised  and  kept  down  they
may  be  by  an  external  machinery,  their  eventual  outburst  is  sure
and  can  be  delayed  but  not  prevented  for  ever.

It  is  apparent  at  least  that  no  loose  formation  without  a
powerful  central  control  could  be  satisfactory,  effective  or  endur-
ing, even  if  it  were  much  less  loose,  much  more  compact  than
anything  that  seems  at  present  likely  to  evolve  in  the  near  future.
There  must  be  in  the  nature  of  things  a second  step,  a movement
towards  greater  rigidity,  constriction  of  national  liberties  and
the  erection  of  a unique  central  authority  with  a uniform  control
over  the  earth’s  peoples.


Chapter  XV


Some  Lines  of  Fulfilment


W HAT  favoured  form,  force,  system  among
the  many  that  are  possible  now  or  likely  to  emerge  hereafter  will
be  entrusted  by  the  secret  Will  in  things  with  the  external  unifica-
tion of  mankind,  is  an  interesting  and  to  those  who  can  look
beyond  the  narrow  horizon  of  passing  events,  a fascinating  sub-
ject of  speculation;  but  unfortunately  it  can  at  present  be  no-
thing more.  The  very  multitude  of  the  possibilities  in  a period
of  humanity  so  rife  with  the  most  varied  and  potent  forces,  so
fruitful  of  new  subjective  developments  and  objective  mutations
creates  an  impenetrable  mist  in  which  only  vague  forms  of  giants
can  be  half  glimpsed.  Certain  ideas  suggested  by  the  present  sta-
tus of  forces  and  by  past  experience  are  all  that  we  can  permit
ourselves  in  so  hazardous  a field.


We  have  ruled  out  of  consideration  as  a practical  impossi-
bility in  the  present  international  conditions  and  the  present  state
of  international  mentality  and  morality  the  idea  of  an  immediate
settlement  on  the  basis  of  an  association  of  free  nationahties,
although  this  would  be  obviously  the  ideal  basis.  For  it  would
take  as  its  founding  motive  power  a harmony  of  the  two  great
principles  actually  in  presence,  nationalism  and  internationalism.
Its  adoption  would  mean  that  the  problem  of  human  unity  would
be  approached  at  once  on  a rational  and  a sound  moral  basis,  a
recognition,  on  one  side,  of  the  right  of  all  large  natural  groupings
of  men  to  live  and  to  be  themselves  and  the  enthronement  of  res-


pect for  national  liberty  as  an  established  principle  of  human  con-
duct, on  the  other,  an  adequate  sense  of  the  need  for  order,  help,
a mutual,  a common  participation,  a common  life  and  interests
in  the  unified  and  associated  human  race.  The  ideal  society  or
State  is  that  in  which  respect  for  individual  liberty  and  free
growth  of  the  personal  being  to  his  perfection  is  harmonised  with
respect  for  the  needs,  efficiency,  solidarity,  natural  growth  and


Some  Lines  of  Fulfilment  373

organic  perfection  of  the  corporate  being,  the  society  or  nation.
In  an  ideal  aggregate  of  all  humanity,  in  the  international  society
or  State,  national  liberty  and  free  national  growth  and  self-
realisation  ought  in  the  same  way  to  be  progressively  harmo-
nised with  the  solidarity  and  unified  growth  and  perfection  of
the  human  race.

Therefore,  if  this  basic  principle  were  admitted,  there  might
indeed  be  fluctuations  due  to  the  difficulty  of  a perfect  working
combination,  as  in  the  growth  Of  the  national  aggregate  there  has
been  sometimes  a stress  on  liberty  and  at  others  a stress  on  efS-
ciency  and  order;  but  since  the  right  conditions  of  the  problem
would  have  been  recognised  from  the  beginning  and  not  left  to
be  worked  out  in  a blind  tug-of-war,  there  would  be  some  chance
of  an  earlier  reasonable  solution  with  much  less  friction  and
violence  in  the  process.

But  there  is  little  chance  of  such  an  unprecedented  good  for-
tune for  mankind.  Ideal  conditions  cannot  be  expected,  for  they
demand  a psychological  clarity,  a diffused  reasonableness  and
scientific  intelligence  and,  above  all,  a moral  elevation  and  recti-
tude to  which  neither  the  mass  of  mankind  nor  its  leaders  and
rulers  have  yet  made  any  approach.  In  their  absence,  not  reason
and  justice  and  mutual  kindliness,  but  the  trend  of  forces  and
their  practical  and  legal  adjustment  must  determine  the  working
out  of  this  as  of  other  problems.  And  just  as  the  problem  of  the
State  and  the  individual  has  been  troubled  and  obscured  not  only
by  the  conflict  between  individual  egoism  and  the  corporate  ego-
ism of  the  society,  but  by  the  continual  clash  between  intermediate
powers,  class  strife,  quarrels  of  Church  and  State,  king  and
nobles,  king  and  commons,  aristocracy  and  demos,  capitalist
bourgeoisie  and  labour  proletariate,  this  problem  too  of  nation
and  international  humanity  is  certain  to  be  troubled  by  the  claims
of  just  such  intermediate  powers.  To  say  nothing  of  commercial
interests  and  combinations,  cultural  or  racial  sympathies,  move-
ments of  Pan-Islamism,  Pan-Slavism,  Pan-Germanism,  Pan-
Anglo-Saxonism,  with  a possible  Pan-Americanism  and  Pan-
Mongolianism  looming  up  in  the  future,  to  say  nothing  of  yet
other  unborn  monsters,  there  will  always  be  the  great  inter-
mediate factor  of  Imperialism,  that  huge  armed  and  dominant


374  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

Titan,  that  must  by  its  very  nature  demand  its  own  satisfaction,
at  the  cost  of  every  suppressed  or  inconvenient  national  unit  and
assert  its  own  needs  as  prior  to  the  needs  of  the  new-born  inter-
national comity.  That  satisfaction,  presumably,  it  must  have  for
a time,  that  demand  it  will  be  for  long  impossible  to  resist.  At
any  rate,  to  ignore  its  claims  or  to  imagine  that  they  can  be  put
aside  with  a spurt  of  the  writer’s  pen,  is  to  build  symmetrical
castles  on  the  golden  sands  of  an  impracticable  idealism.

Forces  take  the  first  place  in  actual  effectuation;  moral
principles,  reason,  justice  only  so  far  as  forces  can  be  compelled
or  persuaded  to  admit  them  or,  as  more  often  happens,  use  them
as  subservient  aids  or  inspiring  battle  cries,  a camouflage  for  their
own  interests.  Ideas  sometimes  leap  out  as  armed  forces  and
break  their  way  through  the  hedge  of  unideal  powers ; sometimes
they  reverse  the  position  and  make  interests  their  subordinate
helpers,  a fuel  for  their  own  blaze;  sometimes  they  conquer  by
martyrdom:  but  ordinarily  they  have  to  work  not  only  by  a half-
covert  pressure  but  by  accommodation  to  powerful  forces  or
must  even  bribe  and  cajole  them  or  work  through  and  behind
them.  It  cannot  be  otherwise  until  the  average  and  the  aggregate
man  become  more  of  an  intellectual,  moral  and  spiritual  being
and  less  predominantly  the  vital  and  emotional  half-reasoning
human  animal.  The  unrealised  international  idea  will  have  for
some  time  at  least  to  work  by  this  secondary  method  and  through
such  accommodations  with  the  realised  forces  of  nationalism  and
imperialism.

It  may  be  questioned  whether  by  the  time  that  things  are
ready  for  the  elaboration  of  a firm  and  settled  system,  the  idea
of  a just  internationalism  based  on  respect  for  the  principle  of
free  nationalities  may  not  by  the  efforts  of  the  world’s  thinkers
and  intellectuals  have  made  so  much  progress  as  to  exercise  an
irresistible  pressure  on  States  and  Governments  and  bring  about
its  own  acceptation  in  large  part,  if  not  in  the  entirety  of  its  claims.
The  answer  is  that  States  and  Governments  yield  usually  to  a
moral  pressure  only  so  far  as  it  does  not  compel  them  to  sacri-
fice their  vital  interests.  No  established  empire  will  easily  liberate
its  dependent  parts  or  allow,  unless  compelled,  a nation  now  sub-
ject to  it  to  sit  at  the  board  of  an  international  council  as  its  free


Some  Lines  of  Fulfilment  375

equal.  The  old  enthusiasm  for  liberty  is  an  ideal  which  made
France  intervene  to  aid  the  evolution  of  a free  Italy  or  France  and
England  to  create  a new  Greek  nation.  The  national  liberties
for  which  respect  was  demanded  during  the  war  even  at  the
point  of  the  sword  — or,  we  should  say  now,  even  with  the  voice
of  the  cannon  shell  — were  those  already  established  and  consi-
dered therefore  to  have  the  right  still  to  exist.  All  that  was  pro-
posed beyond  that  limit  was  the  restoration  to  already  existing
free  States  of  men  of  their  own  nationality  still  under  a foreign
yoke.  It  was  proposed  to  realise  a greater  Serbia,  a greater
Rumania,  the  restoration  of  “unredeemed’’  Italy,  and  the  return
of  Alsace-Lorraine  to  France.  Autonomy  under  Russian  sove-
reignty was  all  that  was  promised  to  Poland  till  the  German
victory  over  Russia  altered  the  interest  and  with  it  the  idealism
of  the  Allies.  Autonomy  of  a kind  under  an  imperial  sovereignty
or  where  that  does  not  yet  exist,  under  imperial  “protection”  or
“influence”  are  by  many  considered  as  more  practical  ideas  now
than  the  restoration  of  national  freedom.  That  is  a sign  perhaps
of  the  obscure  growth  of  the  idea  of  federated  empires  which  we
have  discussed  as  one  of  the  possibilities  of  the  future.  National
liberty  as  an  absolute  ideal  has  no  longer  the  old  general  accepta-
tion and  creative  force.  Nations  struggling  for  liberty  have  to
depend  on  their  own  strength  and  enthusiasm ; they  can  expect
only  a tepid  or  uncertain  support  except  from  enthusiastic  indi-
viduals or  small  groups  whose  aid  is  purely  vocal  and  ineffective.
Many  even  of  the  most  advanced  intellectuals  warmly  approve
of  the  idea  of  subordinate  autonomy  for  nations  now  subject,
but  seem  to  look  with  impatience  on  their  velleities  of  complete
independence.  Even  so  far  has  imperialism  travelled  on  its  pros-
perous road  and  the  imperial  aggregate  impressed  its  figure  on
the  freest  imaginations  as  an  accomplished  power  in  human
progress.

How  much  further  may  not  this  sentiment  travel  under  the
new  impulse  of  humanity  to  organise  its  international  existence
on  larger  and  more  convenient  lines!  It  is  even  possible  that  the
impatience  openly  expressed  by  the  German  in  his  imperial  days
against  the  continued  existence  of  small  nationalities  opposing
their  settled  barrier  of  prescribed  rights  to  large  political  and


376


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

commercial  combinations  may,  while  softening  its  rigour,  yet
justify  its  claim  in  the  future,  may  be  accepted  by  the  general
sense  of  humanity  though  in  a less  brutal,  a less  arrogant  and  ag-
gressively egoistic  form.  That  is  to  say,  there  may  grow  up  a
stronger  tendency  in  the  political  reason  of  mankind  to  desire,
perhaps  eventually  to  insist  on  the  rearrangement  of  States  in  a
system  of  large  imperial  combines  and  not  on  the  basis  of  a
status  quo  of  mixed  empires  and  free  nationalities.^

But  even  if  this  development  does  not  take  place  or  does
not  effect  itself  in  time,  the  actually  existing  free  and  non-imperial
States  will  find  themselves  included  indeed  in  whatever  inter-
national council  or  other  system  may  be  established,  but  this
inclusion  is  likely  to  be  very  much  like  the  position  of  the  small
nobles  in  mediaeval  times  in  relation  to  the  great  feudal  princes,
a position  rather  of  vassals  than  of  equals.  The  war  brought  into
relief  the  fact  that  it  is  only  the  great  Powers  that  really  count  in
the  international  scale;  all  others  merely  exist  by  sufferance  or
by  protection  or  by  alliance.  So  long  as  the  world  was  arranged
on  the  principle  of  separate  nationalities,  this  might  have  been
only  a latent  reality  without  actually  important  effects  on  the  life
of  the  smaller  nations,  but  this  immunity  might  cease  when  the
necessity  of  combined  action  or  a continual  active  interaction
became  a recognised  part  or  the  foundation  of  the  world-system.
The  position  of  a minor  State  standing  out  against  the  will  of
large  Powers  or  a party  of  Powers  would  be  worse  even  than
that  of  small  neutrals  in  the  present  war  or  of  a private  company
surrounded  by  great  Trusts.  It  would  be  compelled  to  accept  the
lead  of  one  group  or  another  of  the  leviathans  around  it  and  its
independent  weight  or  action  in  the  council  of  nations  would  be
nil.

Undoubtedly,  the  right  of  small  nations  to  exist  and  assert
their  interests  against  imperialistic  aggression  is  still  a force;
it  was  one  at  least  of  the  issues  in  the  international  collision.
But  the  assertion  of  this  right  against  the  aggression  of  a single
ambitious  Power  is  one  thing",  its  assertion  as  against  any  arrange-
ment for  the  common  interest  of  the  nations  decided  upon  by  a

> If  the  ambitions  of  Italy,  Germany  and  Japan  and  the  Fascist  idea  generally  had
triumphed,  such  an  order  of  things  might  have  eventuated.


Some  Lines  of  Fulfilment  377

majority  of  the  great  Powers  would  very  likely  in  the  near  future
be  regarded  in  quite  another  light.  The  inconvenience  of  a
number  of  small  neutrals  claiming  to  stand  out  and  be  as  little
affected  as  possible  by  an  immense  international  conflict  was
acutely  felt  not  only  by  the  actual  combatants  who  were  obliged
to  use  sometimes  an  indirect,  sometimes  a direct  pressure  to  mini-
mise the  inconveniences,  but  by  the  smaller  neutrals  themselves
to  whom  their  neutrality  was  preferable  only  as  a lesser  evil  than
the  burden  and  disaster  of  active  participation  in  the  struggle.
In  any  international  system,  the  self-assertion  of  these  smaller
liberties  would  probably  be  viewed  as  a petty  egoism  and
intolerable  obstacle  to  great  common  interests,  or,  it  may  be,
to  the  decision  of  conflicts  between  great  world-wide  interests.
It  is  probable  indeed  that  in  any  constitution  of  international
unity  the  great  Powers  would  see  to  it  that  their  voice  was  equal
to  their  force  and  influence;  but  even  if  the  constitution  were
outwardly  democratic,  yet,  in  effect,  it  would  become  an  oli-
garchy of  the  great  Powers.  Constitutions  can  only  disguise  facts,
they  cannot  abrogate  them:  for  whatever  ideas  the  form  of  the
constitution  may  embody,  its  working  is  always  that  of  the
actually  realised  forces  which  can  use  it  with  effect.  Most  govern-
ments either  have  now  or  have  passed  through  a democratic
form,  but  nowhere  yet  has  there  been  a real  democracy;  it  has
been  everywhere  the  propertied  and  professional  classes  and  the
bourgeoisie  who  governed  in  the  name  of  the  people.  So  too  in
any  international  Council  or  control  it  would  be  a few  great
empires  that  would  govern  in  the  name  of  humanity.

At  the  most,  if  it  were  otherwise,  it  could  be  only  for  a short
time,  unless  some  new  forces  came  into  their  own  which  would
arrest  or  dissolve  the  tendency  now  dominant  in  the  world
towards  large  imperial  aggregations.  The  position  would  then  be
for  a time  very  much  like  that  of  feudal  Europe  while  it  was  in
abortive  travail  of  a united  Christendom,  — a great  criss-cross
of  heterogeneous,  complicated,  overlapping  and  mutually  inter-
penetrating interests,  a number  of  small  Powers  counting  for
something,  but  overshadowed  and  partly  coerced  by  a few  great
Powers,  the  great  Powers  working  out  the  inevitable  complica-
tion of  their  allied,  divided  and  contrary  interests  by  whatever


575


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

means  the  new  world-system  provided  and  using  for  that  purpose
whatever  support  of  classes,  ideas,  tendencies,  institutions  they
could  find.  There  would  be  questions  of  Asiatic,  African,  Ameri-
can fiefs  and  markets,  struggles  of  classes  starting  as  national
questions  becoming  international;  Socialism,  Anarchism  and
the  remainder  of  the  competitive  age  of  humanity  struggling
together  for  predominance;  clashes  of  Europeanism,  Asiaticism,
Americanism.  And  from  this  great  tangle  some  result  would
have  to  be  worked  out.  It  might  well  be  by  methods  very  different
from  those  with  which  history  has  made  us  so  familiar;  war
might  be  eliminated  or  reduced  to  a rare  phenomenon  of  civil
war  in  the  international  commonwealth  or  confederacy;  new
forms  of  coercion,  such  as  the  commercial  which  we  now  see  to
be  growing  in  frequency,  might  ordinarily  take  its  place;  other
devices  might  be  brought  into  being  of  which  we  have  at  present
no  conception.  But  the  situation  would  be  essentially  the  same
for  humanity  in  general  as  has  confronted  lesser  unformed
aggregates  in  the  past  and  would  have  to  progress  to  similar
issues  of  success,  modified  realisation  or  failure.

The  most  natural  simplification  of  the  problem,  though  not
one  that  looks  now  possible,  would  be  the  division  of  the  world
into  a few  imperial  aggregates  consisting  partly  of  federal,  partly
of  confederate  commonwealths  or  empires.  Although  unreali-
sable  with  the  present  strength  of  national  egoisms,  the  growth
of  ideas  and  the  force  of  changing  circumstances  might  some
day  bring  about  such  a creation  and  this  might  lead  to  a closer
confederacy.  America  seems  to  be  turning  dimly  towards  a
better  understanding  between  the  increasingly  cosmopolitan
United  States  and  the  Latin  Republics  of  Central  and  South
America  which  may  in  certain  contingencies  materialise  itself
into  a confederate  inter-American  State.  The  idea  of  a confede-
rate Teutonic  empire,  if  Germany  and  Austria  had  not  been
entirely  broken  by  the  result  of  the  war,  might  well  have  realised
itself  in  the  near  future;  and  even  though  they  are  now  broken  it
might  still  realise  itself  in  a more  distant  future.^  Similar  aggre-
gates may  emerge  in  the  Asiatic  world.  Such  a distribution  of

* Unfortunately  this  result  seems  destined  to  disappear  by  the  formidable  survival  of  a
military  Germany  under  the  Fuhrer.


Some  Lines  of  Fulfilment  379

mankind  in  large  natural  aggregates  would  have  the  advantage
of  simphfying  a number  of  difficult  world-problems  and  with
the  growth  of  peace,  mutual  understanding  and  larger  ideas
might  lead  to  a comparatively  painless  final  aggregation  in  a
World-State.

Another  possible  solution  is  suggested  by  the  precedent  of
the  evolution  of  the  nation-type  out  of  its  first  loose  feudal  form.
As  there  the  continual  clash  of  various  forces  and  equipollent
powers  necessitated  the  emergence  of  one  of  them,  at  first  only
prominent  among  his  equals,  the  feudal  king,  into  the  type  of  a
centralised  monarchy,  so  conceivably,  if  the  empires  and  nations
of  the  world  failed  to  arrive  at  a peaceful  solution  among  them-
selves, if  the  class  troubles,  the  inter-commercial  troubles,  the
conflict  of  various  new  ideas  and  tendencies  resulted  in  a long
confusion  and  turmoil  and  constant  changing,  there  might
emerge  a king-nation  with  the  mission  of  evolving  a real  and
settled  out  of  a semi-chaotic  or  half  order.  We  have  concluded
that  the  military  conquest  of  the  world  by  a single  nation  is  not
possible  except  under  conditions  which  do  not  now  exist  and  of
which  there  is  as  yet  no  visible  prospect.  But  an  imperial  nation,
such  as  England  for  example,  spread  over  all  the  world,  possess-
ing the  empire  of  the  seas,  knowing  how  to  federate  successfully
its  constituent  parts  and  organise  their  entire  potential  strength,
having  the  skill  to  make  itself  the  representative  and  protector
of  the  most  progressive  and  liberal  tendencies  of  the  new  times,
allying  itself  with  other  forces  and  nations  interested  in  their
triumph  and  showing  that  it  had  the  secret  of  a just  and  effective
international  organisation,  might  conceivably  become  the  arbiter
of  the  nations  and  the  effective  centre  of  an  international  govern-
ment. Such  a possibility  in  any  form  is  as  yet  entirely  remote,
but  it  could  become  under  new  circumstances  a realisable  possi-
bility of  the  future.

Conceivably,  if  the  task  of  organising  the  world  proved  too
difficult,  if  no  lasting  agreement  could  be  arrived  at  or  no  firmly
constituted  legal  authority  erected,  the  task  might  be  undertaken
not  by  a single  predominant  empire,  but  by  two  or  three  great
imperial  Powers  sufficiently  near  in  interest  and  united  in  idea
to  sink  possible  differences  and  jealousies  and  strong  enough  to


380  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

dominate  or  crush  all  resistance  and  enforce  some  sort  of  effec-
tive international  law  and  government.’^  The  process  would
then  be  a sufficiently  painful  one  and  might  involve  much  brutal-
ity of  moral  and  economic  coercion,  but  if  it  commanded  the
prestige  of  success  and  evolved  some  tolerable  form  of  legality
and  justice  or  even  only  of  prosperous  order,  it  might  in  the  end
conciliate  a general  moral  support  and  prove  a starting-point
for  freer  and  better  forms.

Yet  another  possibility  that  cannot  be  ignored  is  that  the
merely  inter-governmental  and  political  evolution  which  alone  we
have  considered,  may  be  broken  in  upon  by  the  long-threatened
war  of  classes.  Labour  internationalism  broke  down,  like  every
other  form  of  internationalism  — scientific,  cultural,  pacific,
religious  — under  the  fierce  test  of  war  and  during- the  great
crisis  the  struggle  between  Labour  and  Capital  was  suspended.
It  was  then  hoped  that  after  the  war  the  spirit  of  unity,  concilia-
tion and  compromise  would  continue  to  reign  and  the  threatened
conflict  would  be  averted.  Nothing  in  human  nature  or  in  history
warranted  any  such  confident  trust  in  the  hopes  of  the  moment.
The  interclass  conflict  has  long  been  threatening  like  the
European  collision.  The  advent  of  the  latter  was  preceded  by
large  hopes  of  world-peace  and  attempts  at  a European  concert
and  treaties  of  arbitration  which  would  render  war  finally  impos-
sible. The  hope  of  a concert  between  Labour  and  Capital  idyl-
lically  settling  all  their  acute  causes  of  conflict  in  amoebaean
stanzas  of  melodious  compromise  for  the  sake  of  the  higher
national  interests  is  likely  to  be  as  treacherous  and  delusive.
Even  the  socialisation  of  governments  and  the  increasing  national-
isation of  industry  will  not  remove  the  root  cause  of  conflict.
For  there  will  still  remain  the  crucial  question  of  the  form  and
conditions  of  the  new  State  socialism,  whether  it  shall  be  regu-
lated in  the  interests  of  Labour  or  of  the  capitalistic  State  and
whether  its  direction  shall  be  democratic  by  the  workers  them-
selves or  oligarchic  or  bureaucratic  by  the  present  directing
classes.  This  question  may  well  lead  to  struggles  which  may  easily

‘ If,  for  instance,  a struggle  came  to  a head  between  the  democratic  and  the  totalitarian
Powers,  the  combined  force  of  a victorious  Britain,  France  and  America  or  in  the  contrary
event,  of  the  Fascist  Powers,  might  impose  an  initial  order  in  the  world.


381


Some  Lines  of  Fulfilment

grow  into  an  international  or  at  least  an  inter-European  conflict;
it  might  even  rend  each  nation  in  two  instead  of  uniting  it  as  in
the  war  crisis.  And  the  results  of  such  a struggle  may  have  an
incalculable  effect,  either  in  changing  the  ideas  and  life  of  men
dynamically  in  new  directions  or  in  breaking  down  the  barriers
of  existing  nations  and  empires.^


^ This  hypothetic  forecast  was  fully  justified  — and  tended  to  become  more  and  more
so  — by  the  post-war  development  of  national  and  international  life.  The  inhuman
butchery  in  Spain,  the  development  of  two  opposite  types  of  Socialism  in  Russia,  Italy  and
Germany,  the  uneasy  political  situation  in  France  were  examples  of  the  fulfilment  of  these
tendencies.  But  this  tendency  has  reached  its  acme  in  the  emergence  of  Communism  and  it
now  seems  probable  that  the  future  will  belong  to  a struggle  between  Communism  and  a
survnving  capitalistic  Industrialism  in  the  New  World  or  even  between  Communism  and  a
more  moderate  system  of  social  democracy  in  the  two  continents  of  the  Old  World.  But
generally  speaking,  speculations  noted  dosvn  in  this  chapter  at  a time  when  the  possibilities
of  the  future  were  verj-  dilTcrent  from  what  they  arc  now  and  all  ss-as  in  a flux  and  welter
of  dubious  confusion,  arc  out  of  date  since  an  even  more  stupendous  conflict  has  intervened
and  swept  the  previous  existing  conditions  out  of  existence.  Nevertheless,  some  of  them  still
survisc  and  threaten  the  safe  evolution  of  the  new  tentative  world-order  or,  indeed,  any
future  world-order.


Chapter  XVI


The  Problem  of  Uniformity  and  Liberty


The  question  with  which  we  started  has
reached  some  kind  of  answer.  After  sounding  as  thoroughly  as
our  lights  permit  the  possibility  of  a political  and  administrative
unification  of  mankind  by  political  and  economic  motives  and
through  purely  political  and  administrative  means,  it  has  been
concluded  that  it  is  not  only  possible,  but  that  the  thoughts  and
tendencies  of  mankind  and  the  result  of  current  events  and
existing  forces  and  necessities  have  turned  decisively  in  this
direction.  This  is  one  of  the  dominant  drifts  which  the  World-
Nature  has  thrown  up  in  the  flow  of  human  development  and  it  is
the  logical  consequence  of  the  past  history  of  mankind  and  of
our  present  circumstances.  At  the  same  time  nothing  justifies
us  in  predicting  its  painless  or.rapid  development  or  even  its  sure
and  eventual  success.  We  have  seen  some  of  the  difficulties  in  the
way ; we  have  seen  also  what  are  the  lines  on  which  it  may  prac-
tically proceed  to  the  overcoming  of  those  difficulties.  We  have
concluded  that  the  one  line  it  is  not  likely  to  take  is  the  ideal,
that  which  justice  and  the  highest  expediency  and  - the  best
thought  of  mankind  demand,  that  which  would  ensure  it  the
greatest  possibility  of  an  enduring  success.  It  is  not  likely  to
take  perfectly,  until  a probably  much  later  period  of  our  collec-
tive evolution,  the  form  of  a federation  of  free  and  equal  nations
or  adopt  as  its  motive  a perfect  harmony  between  the  contending
principles  of  nationalism  and  internationalism.

And  now  we  have  to  consider  the  second  aspect  of  the  prob-
lem, its  effect  on  the  springs  of  human  life  and  progress.  The
political  and  administrative  unification  of  mankind  is  not  only
possible  but  foreshadowed  by  our  present  evolution;  the  collec-
tive national  egoism  which  resists  it  may  be  overborne  by  an
increasing  flood  of  the  present  unifying  tendency  to  which  the
anguish  of  the  European  war  gave  for  a time  a body  and  an  arti-


383


The  Problem  of  Uniformity  and  Liberty

culate  voice.  But  the  question  remains  whether,  not  in  its  first
loose  formation,  but  as  it  develops  and  becomes  more  complete
and  even  vigorous,  a strictly  unified  order  will  not  necessarily
involve  a considerable  overriding  of  the  liberties  of  mankind,
individual  and  collective,  and  an  oppressive  mechanism  by  which
the  free  development  of  the  soul-life  of  humanity  will  be  for  some
time  at  least  seriously  hindered  or  restricted  or  in  danger  of  an
excessive  repression.  We  have  seen  that  a period  of  loose  forma-
tion is  in  such  developments  usually  followed  by  a period  of  res-
triction and  constriction  in  which  a more  rigid  unification  will
be  attempted  so  that  firm  moulds  may  be  given  to  the  new  unity.
And  this  has  meant  in  past  unifications  and  is  likely  to  mean
here  also  a suppression  of  that  principle  of  liberty  in  human
life  which  is  the  most  .precious  gain  of  humanity’s  past  spiritual,
political  and  social  struggles.  The  circle  of  progression  is  likely
to  work  itself  out  again  on  this  new  line  of  advance.

Such  a development  would  be  not  only  probable,  but  inevit-
able if  the  unification  of  mankind  proceeded  in  accordance
with  the  Germanic  gospel  of  the  increasing  domination  of  the
world  by  the  one  fit  empire,  nation,  race.  It  would  be  equally
inevitable  if  the  means  employed  by  Destiny  were  the  domina-
tion of  humanity  by  two  or  three  great  imperial  nations;  or  if
the  effectuating  force  were  a closely  organised  united  Europe
which  would,  developing  the  scheme  of  a certain  kind  of  political
thinkers,  take  in  hand  the  rest  of  the  world  and  hold  the  darker-
coloured  races  of  mankind  in  tutelage  for  an  indefinite  period.

The  ostensible  object  and  justification  of  such  a tutelage
would  be  to  civilise,  that  is  to  say,  to  Europeanise  the  less  deve-
loped races.  Practically,  we  know  that  it  would  mean  their
exploitation,  since  in  the  course  of  human  nature  the  benevolent
but  forceful  guardian  would  feel  himself  justified  in  making
the  best  profit  out  of  his  advantageous  situation,  always  of  course
in  the  interest  at  once  of  his  own  development  and  that  of  the
world  in  general.  The  regime  would  rest  upon  superior  force
for  its  maintenance  and  oppose  itself  to  the  velleities  of  freedom
in  the  governed  on  the  ground  either  that  they  were  unfit  or  that
the  aspiration  was  immature,  two  arguments  that  may  well
remain  valid  for  ever,  since  they  can  never  be  refuted  to  the


384  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

satisfaction  of  those  who  advance  them.  At  first  this  regime
might  be  so  worked  as  to  preserve  the  principle  of  individual
liberty  for  the  governing  races  while  enforcing  a beneficial
subjection  upon  the  ruled;  but  that  could  not  endure.  The
experience  of  the  past  teaches  us  that  the  habit  of  preferring
the  principle  of  authority  to  the  principle  of  liberty  is  engendered
in  an  imperial  people,  reacts  upon  it  at  home  and  leads  it  first
insensibly  and  then  by  change  of  thought  and  the  development
of  a fate  in  circumstances  to  the  sacrifice  of  its  own  inner  freedom.
There  could  be  only  two  outlets  to  such  a situation,  either  the
growth  of  the  principle  of  liberty  among  the  peoples  still  sub-
ject or,  let  us  say,  administered  by  others  for  their  own  benefit,
or  else  its  general  decline  in  the  world.  Either  the  higher  state
must  envelop  from  above  or  the  lower  from  below;  they  cannot
subsist  perpetually  together  in  the  same  human  economy.  But
nine  times  out  of  ten,  in  the  absence  of  circumstances  ending
the  connection,  it  is  the  unhappier  possibility  that  conquers.^
All  these  means  of  unification  would  proceed  practically
by  the  use  of  force  and  compulsion  and  any  deliberately  planned,
prolonged  and  extended  use  of  restrictive  means  tends  to  dis-
courage the  respect  for  the  principle  of  liberty  in  those  who
apply  the  compulsion  as  well  as  the  fact  of  liberty  in  those  to
whom  it  is  applied.  It  favours  the  growth  of  the  opposite  principle
of  dominating  authority  whose  whole  tendency  is  to  introduce
rigidity,  uniformity,  a mechanised  and  therefore  eventually  an
unprogressive  system  of  life.  This  is  a psychological  relation  of
cause  and  effect  whose  working  cannot  be  avoided  except  by
taking  care  to  found  all  use  of  authority  on  the  widest  possible
basis  of  free  consent.  But  by  their  very  nature  and  origin  the
regimes  of  unification  thus  introduced  would  be  debarred  from
the  free  employment  of  this  corrective;  for  they  would  have  to
proceed  by  compulsion  of  what  might  be  very  largely  a reluctant
material  and  the  imposing  of  their  will  for  the  elimination  of  all
resisting  forces  and  tendencies.  They  would  be  compelled


> Tliese  considerations  have  now  become  irrelevant  to  the  actual  condition  of  things.
Asia  is  now  for  the  most  part  free  or  in  the  process  of  liberation,  the  idea  of  a dominant  West
or  a dominant  Europe  has  no  longer  any  force  and  has  indeed  receded  out  of  men’s  minds  and
practically  out  of  e.xistencc.


385


The  Problem  of  Uniformity  and  Liberty

to  repress,  diminish,  perhaps  even  abolish  all  forms  of  liberty
which  their  experience  found  to  be  used  for  fostering  the  spirit
of  revolt  or  of  resistance;  that  is  to  say,  all  those  larger  liberties
of  free  action  and  free  self-expression  which  make  up  the  best,
the  most  vigorous,  the  most  stimulating  part  of  human  freedom.
They  would  be  obliged  to  abolish,  first  by  violence  and  then  by
legal  suppression  and  repression,  all  the  elements  of  what  we
now  call  national  freedom;  in  the  process  individual  liberty
would  be  destroyed  both  in  the  parts  of  humanity  coerced
and,  by  inevitable  reaction  and  contagion,  in  the  imperial
nation  or  nations.  Relapse  in  this  direction  is  always  easy,
because  the  assertion  of  his  human  dignity  and  freedom  is  a
virtue  man  has  only  acquired  by  long  evolution  and  painful
endeavour;  to  respect  the  freedom  of  others  he  is  still  less
naturally  prone,  though  without  it  his  own  liberty  can  never
be  really  secure;  but  to  oppress  and  dominate  where  he  can
— often,  be  it  noted,  with  excellent  motives  — and  otherwise
to  be  half  dupe  and  half  serf  of  those  who  can  dominate,  are
his  inborn  animal  propensities.  Therefore  in  fact  all  unneces-
sary restriction  of  the  few  common  liberties  man  has  been  able
to  organise  for  himself  becomes  a step  backward,  whatever
immediate  gain  it  may  bring;  and  every  organisation  of  oppres-
sion or  repression  beyond  what  the  imperfect  conditions  of
human  nature  and  society  render  inevitable,  becomes,  no
matter  where  or  by  whom  it  is  practised,  a blow  to  the  progress
of  the  whole  race.

If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  formal  unification  of  the  race  is
effectuated  by  a combination  of  free  nations  and  empires  and  if
these  empires  strive  to  become  psychological  realities  and  there-
fore free  organisms,  or  if  by  that  time  the  race  has  advanced  so
far  that  the  principle  of  free  national  or  cultural  grouping  within
a unified  mankind  can  be  adopted,  then  the  danger  of  retrogres-
sion will  be  greatly  diminished.  Still,  it  will  exist.  For,  as  we
have  seen,  the  principle  of  order,  of  uniformity  is  the  natural
tendency  of  a period  of  unification.  The  principle  of  liberty
offers  a natural  obstacle  to  the  growth  of  uniformity  and,
although  perfectly  reconcilable  with  a true  order  and  easily  co-
existent with  an  order  already  established  into  which  it  has


386  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

been  fitted,  is  not  so  easily  reconciled  as  a matter  of  practice
with  a new  order  which  demands  from  it  new  sacrifices  for  which
it  is  not  yet  psychologically  prepared.  This  in  itself  need  not
matter,  for  all  movement  forward  implies  a certain  amount
of  friction  and  difficulty  of  adjustment;  and  if  in  the  process
liberty  suffered  a few  shocks  on  one  side,  and  order  a few  shocks
on  the  other,  they  would  still  shake  down  easily  enough  into  a
new  adjustment  after  a certain  amount  of  experience.  Unfortun-
ately, it  is  the  nature  of  every  self-asserting  tendency  or  principle
in  the  hour  of  its  growth,  when  it  finds  circumstances  favourable,
to  over-assert  itself  and  exaggerate  its  claim,  to  carry  its  impulses
to  a one-sided  fruition,  to  affirm  its  despotic  rule  and  to  depress
and  even  to  trample  upon  other  tendencies  and  principles  and
especially  on  those  which  it  instinctively  feels  to  be  the  farthest
removed  from  its  own  nature.  And  if  it  finds  a resistance  in  these
opposite  powers,  then  its  impulse  of  self-assertion  becomes
angry,  violent,  tyrannical;  instead  of  the  friction  of  adjustment
we  have  an  inimical  struggle  stumbling  through  violent  vicissi-
tudes, action  and  reaction,  evolution  and  revolution  till  one
side  or  the  other  prevails  in  the  conflict.

This  is  what  has  happened  in  the  past  development  of
mankind;  the  struggle  of  order  and  uniformity  against  liberty
has  been  the  dominant  fact  of  all  great  human  formations  and
developments  — religious,  social,  political.  There  is  as  yet
no  apparent  ground  for  predicting  a more  reasonable  principle
of  development  in  the  near  future.  Man  seems  indeed  to  be
becoming  more  generally  a reasoning  animal  than  in  any  known
past  period  of  his  history,  but  he  has  not  by  that  become,  except
in  one  or  two  directions,  much  more  of  a reasonable  mind  and
a harmonious  spirit;  for  he  still  uses  his  reason  much  more
commonly  to  justify  strife  and  mutual  contradiction  than  to
arrive  at  a wise  agreement.  And  always  his  mind  and  reason
are  very  much  at  the  mercy  of  his  vital  desires  and  passions.
Therefore  we  must  suppose  that  even  under  the  best  circum-
stances the  old  method  of  development  will  assert  itself  and  the
old  struggle  be  renewed  in  the  attempt  at  human  unification.
The  principle  of  authority  and  order  will  attempt  a mechanical
organisation;  the  principle  of  liberty  will  resist  and  claim


387


The  Problem  of  Uniformity  and  Liberty

a more  flexible,  free  and  spacious  system.  The  two  ancient
enemies  will  struggle  for  the  control  of  the  human  unity  as
they  did  in  the  past  for  the  control  of  the  growing  form  of  the
nation.  In  the  process,  the  circumstances  being  favourable
to  the  narrower  power,  both  national  and  individual  liberty  are
likely  to  go  to  the  wall  — happy  if  they  are  not  set  against  it
before  a firing  platoon  of  laws  and  restrictions  to  receive  a
military  quietus.

This  might  not  happen  if  within  the  nations  themselves
the  spirit  of  individual  liberty  still  flourished  in  its  old  vigour;
for  that  would  then  demand,  both  from  an  innate  sympathy  and
for  its  own  sake,  respect  for  the  liberties  of  all  the  constituent
nations.  But,  as  far  as  all  present  appearances  go  to  show,  we
are  entering  into  a period  in  which  the  ideal  of  individual
liberty  is  destined  to  an  entire  eclipse  under  the  shadow  of  the
State  idea,  if  not  to  a sort  of  temporary  death  or  at  least  of  long
stupor,  coma  and  hibernation.  The  constriction  and  mechanisa-
tion of  the  unifying  process  is  likely  to  coincide  with  a simul-
taneous process  of  constriction  and  mechanisation  within  each
constituting  unit.  Where  then  in  this  double  process  will  the
spirit  of  liberty  find  its  safeguard  or  its  alimentation  ? The  old
practical  formulations  of  freedom  would  disappear  in  the  double
process  and  the  only  hope  of  healthy  progress  would  lie  in  a new
formulation  of  liberty  produced  by  a new  powerful  movement
spiritual  or  intellectual  of  the  human  mind  which  will  reconcile
individual  liberty  with  the  collective  ideal  of  a communal  life
and  the  liberty  of  the  group-unit  with  the  new-born  necessity  of
a more  united  life  for  the  human  race.

Meanwhile,  we  have  to  consider  how  far  it  is  either  likely
or  possible  to  carry  the  principle  of  unification  in  those  more
outward  and  mechanical  aspects  which  the  external,  that  is  to
say,  political  and  administrative  method  is  prone  to  favour,  and
how  far  they  will  in  their  more  extreme  formulations  favour
or  retard  the  true  progress  of  the  race  to  its  perfection.  We  have
to  consider  how  far  the  principle  of  nationality  itself  is  likely
to  be  affected,  whether  there  is  any  chance  of  its  entire  dissolu-
tion or,  if  it  is  preserved,  what  place  the  subordinated  nation-
unit  will  take  in  the  new  united  life.  This  involves  the  question


388


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

of  control,  the  idea  of  the  “Parliament  of  Man”  and  other
ideas  of  political  organisation  as  applied  to  this  new  portentous
problem  in  the  science  of  collective  living.  Thirdly,  there  is  the
question  of  uniformity  and  how  far  uniformity  is  either  health-
ful to  the  race  or  necessary  to  unity.  It  is  evident  that  we  enter
here  upon  problems  which  we  shall  have  to  treat  in  a much
more  abstract  fashion  and  with  much  less  sense  of  actuality
than  those  we  have  till  now  been  handling.  For  all  this  is  in
the  dark  future,  and  all  the  light  we  can  have  is  from  past  ex-
perience and  the  general  principles  of  life  and  nature  and  socio-
logy; the  present  gives  us  only  a dim  light  on  the  solution  which
plunges  a little  further  on  in  Time  into  a shadowy  darkness
full  of  incalculable  possibilities.  We  can  foresee  nothing;  we
can  only  speculate  and  lay  down  principles.

We  see  that  there  are  always  two  extreme  possibilities  with
a number  of  more  or  less  probable  compromises.  The  nation  is
at  present  the  firm  group-unit  of  the  human  aggregation  to
which  all  other  units  tend  to  subordinate  themselves;  even  the
imperial  has  hitherto  been  only  a development  of  the  national
and  empires  have  existed  in  recent  times,  not  consciously  for
the  sake  of  a wider  aggregation  as  did  the  imperial  Roman
world,  but  to  serve  the  instinct  of  domination  and  expansion,
the  land  hunger,  money  hunger,  commodity  hunger,  the  vital,
intellectual,  cultural  aggressiveness  of  powerful  and  prosperous
nations.  This,  however,  does  not  secure  the  nation-unit  from
eventual  dissolution  in  a larger  principle  of  aggregation.  Group-
units  there  must  always  be  in  any  human  unity,  even  the  most
entire,  intolerant  and  uniform,  for  that  is  the  very  principle  not
only  of  human  nature,  but  of  life  and  of  every  aggregation;  we
strike  here  on  a fundamental  law  of  universal  existence,  on  the
fundamental  mathematics  and  physics  of  creation.  But  it  does
not  follow  that  the  nation  need  persist  as  the  group-unit.  It  may
disappear  altogether;  even  now  the  rejection  of  the  nation-
idea  has  begun,  the  opposite  idea  of  the  sans-patrie,  the  citizen
of  the  world,  has  been  born  and  was  a growing  force  before
the  war;  and  though  temporarily  overborne,  silenced  and
discouraged,  it  is  by  no  means  slain,  but  is  likely  to  revive  with
an  increased  violence  hereafter.  On  the  other  hand,  the  nation-


389


The  Problem  of  Uniformity  and  Liberty

idea  may  persist  in  full  vitality  or  may  assert  in  the  event  —
after  whatever  struggle  and  apparent  decline  — its  life,  its  free-
dom, its  vigorous  particularism  within  the  larger  unity.  Finally,
it  may  persist,  but  with  a reduced  and  subjected  vitality,  or  even
without  real  vitality  or  any  living  spirit  of  particularism  or
separatism,  as  a convenience,  an  administrative  rather  than  a
psychological  fact  like  a French  department  or  an  English
county.  But  still  it  may  preserve  just  sufficient  mechanical
distinctness  to  form  a starting-point  for  that  subsequent  dissolu-
tion of  human  unity  which  will  come  about  inevitably  if  the
unification  is  more  mechanical  than  real,  — if,  that  is  to  say,  it
continues  to  be  governed  by  the  political  and  administrative
motive,  supported  by  the  experience  of  economic  and  social  or
merely  cultural  ease,  convenience  and  fails  to  serve  as  a material
basis  for  the  spiritual  oneness  of  mankind.

So  also  with  the  ideal  of  uniformity;  for  with  many  minds,
especially  those  of  a rigid,  mechanical  cast,  those  in  which
logic  and  intellectuality  are  stronger  than  the  imagination  and
the- free  vital  instinct  or  those  which  are  easily  seduced  by  the
beauty  of  an  idea  and  prone  to  forget  its  limitations,  uniformity
is  an  ideal,  even  sometimes  the  highest  ideal  of  which  they  can
think.  The  uniformity  of  mankind  is  not  an  impossible  even-
tuality, even  though  impracticable  in  the  present  circumstances
and  in  certain  directions  hardly  conceivable  except  in  a far
distant  future.  For  certainly  there  is  or  has  been  an  immense
drive  towards  uniformity  of  life  habits,  uniformity  of  knowledge,
uniformity  political,  social,  economical,  educational,  and  all
this,  if  followed  out  to  its  final  conclusion,  will  lead  naturally
to  a uniformity  of  culture.  If  that  were  realised,  the  one  barrier
left  against  a dead  level  of  complete  uniformity  would  be  the
difference  of  language;  for  language  creates  and  determines
thought  even  while  it  is  created  and  determined  by  it,  and  so
long  as  there  is  difference  of  language  there  will  always  be  a
certain  amount  of  free  variation  of  thought,  of  knowledge  and  of
culture.  But  it  is  easily  conceivable  that  the  general  uniformity
of  culture  and  intimate  association  of  life  will  give  irresistible
force  to  the  need  already  felt  of  a universal  language,  and  a
universal  language  once  created  or  once  adopted  may  end  by


390  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

killing  out  the  regional  languages  as  Latin  killed  out  the  lan-
guages of  Gaul,  Spain  and  Italy  or  as  English  has  killed  out
Cornish,  Gaelic,  Erse  and  has  been  encroaching  on  the  Welsh
tongue.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is  a revival  nowadays,  due  to
the  growing  subjectivism  of  the  human  mind,  of  the  principle
of  free  variation  and  refusal  of  uniformity.  If  this  tendency
triumphs,  the  unification  of  the  race  will  have  so  to  organise
itself  as  to  respect  the  free  culture,  thought,  life  of  its  consti-
tuent units.  But  there  is  also  the  third  possibility  of  a dominant
uniformity  which  will  allow  or  even  encourage  such  minor
variations  as  do  not  threaten  the  foundations  of  its  rule.  And
here  again  the  variations  may  be  within  their  limits  vital,  force-
ful, to  a certain  extent  particularist  though  not  separatist,  or
they  may  be  quite  minor  tones  and  shades,  yet  sufficient  to  form
a starting-point  for  the  dissolution  of  uniformity  into  a new
cycle  of  various  progress.

So  again  with  the  governing  organisation  of  the  human
race.  It  may  be  a rigid  regimentation  under  a central  authority
such  as  certain  socialistic  schemes  envisage  for  the  nation,  a
regime  suppressing  all  individual  and  regional  liberty  in  the
interests  of  a close  and  uniform  organisation  of  human  training,
economic  life,  social  habits,  morals,  knowledge,  religion  even,
every  department  of  human  activity.  Such  a development  may
seem  impossible,  as  it  would  be  indeed  impracticable  in  the  near
future,  because  of  the  immense  masses  it  would  have  to  em-
brace, the  difficulties  it  would  have  to  surmount,  the  many  prob-
lems that  would  have  to  be  solved  before  it  could  become
possible.  But  this  idea  of  impossibility  leaves  out  of  considera-
tion two  important  factors,  the  growth  of  Science  with  its
increasingly  easy  manipulation  of  huge  masses  — witness  the
present  war  — and  of  large-scale  problems  and  the  rapid  march
of  Socialism.^  Supposing  the  triumph  of  the  socialistic  idea  or
of  its  practice  in  whatever  disguise,  — in  all  the  continents,  —
it  might  naturally  lead  to  an  international  socialisation  which
would  be  rendered  possible  by  the  growth  of  science  and  scienti-

* Even  such  apparent  reactions  as  the  now-defeated  Fascist  regime  in  Italy  merely  pre-
pare or  embody  new  possibilities  of  the  principle  of  State  control  and  direction  which  is  the
essence  of  Socialism.


391


The  Problem  of  Uniformity  and  Liberty

fic  organisation  and  by  the  annihilation  of  space  difficulties  and
numerical  difficulties.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  possible  that  after
a cycle  of  violent  struggle  between  the  ideal  of  regimentation  and
the  ideal  of  liberty  the  socialistic  period  of  mankind  might  prove
comparatively  of  brief  duration  like  that  of  monarchical  absolut-
ism in  Europe  and  might  be  followed  by  another  more  inspired
by  the  principles  of  philosophic  Anarchism,  that  is  to  say,  of
unity  based  upon  the  completest  individual  freedom  and  freedom
also  of  natural  unforced  grouping.  A compromise  might  also
be  reached,  a dominant  regimentation  with  a subordinate
freedom  more  or  less  vital,  but  even  if  less  vital,  yet  a starting-
point  for  the  dissolution  of  the  regime  when  humanity  begins
to  feel  that  regimentation  is  not  its  ultimate  destiny  and  that
a fresh  cycle  of  search  and  experiment  has  become  again  indis-
pensable to  its  future.

It  is  impossible  here  to  consider  these  large  questions  with
any  thoroughness.  To  throw  out  certain  ideas  which  may  guide
us  in  our  approach  to  the  problem  of  unification  is  all  that  we
can  attempt.  The  problem  is  vast  and  obscure  and  even  a
ray  of  light  upon  it  here  and  there  may  help  to  diminish  its
difficulty  and  darkness.


PART  TWO


Chapter  .XVII


Nature’s  Law  in  Our  Progress -
Unity  in  Diversity,  Law  and  Liberty

For  man  alone  of  terrestrial  creatures  to
live  rightly  involves  the  necessity  of  knowing  rightly,  whether,
as  rationalism  pretends,  by  the  sole  or  dominant  instrumenta-
tion of  his  reason  or,  more  largely  and  complexly,  by  the  sum  of
his  faculties;  and  what  he  has  to  know  is  the  true  nature  of
being  and  its  constant  self-effectuation  in  the  values  of  life,  in
less  abstract  language  the  law  of  Nature  and  especially  of  his  own
nature,  the  forces  within  him  and  around  him  and  their  right  uti-
lisation for  his  own  greater  perfection  and  happiness  or  for  that
and  the  greater  perfection  and  happiness  of  his  fellow  creatures.
In  the  old  phrase  his  business  is  to  learn  to  live  according  to
Nature.  But  Nature  can  no  longer  be  imaged,  as  once  it  was,  as
an  eternal  right  rule  from  which  man  has  wandered,  since  it  is
rather  a thing  itself  changing,  progressing,  evolving,  ascending
from  height  to  more  elevated  height,  widem’ng  from  limit  to
broader  limit  of  its  own  possibilities.  Yet  in  all  this  changing
there  are  certain  eternal  principles  or  truths  of  being  which  re-
main the  same  and  upon  them  as  bed-rock,  with  them  as  a pri-
mary material  and  within  them  as  a framework,  our  progress
and  perfection  are  compelled  to  take  place.  Otherwise  there
would  be  an  infinite  chaos  and  not  a world  ordered  even  in  the
clash  of  its  forces.

The  subhuman  life  of  animal  and  plant  is  not  subjected  to
this  necessity  of  knowledge  nor  of  that  which  is  the  necessary  ac-
companiment of  knowledge,  a conscious  will  impelled  always
to  execute  what  knowledge  perceives.  By  this  exemption  it  is
saved  from  an  immense  amount  of  error,  deformation  and
disease,  for  it  lives  spontaneously  according  to  Nature,  its
knowledge  and  will  are  hers  and  incapable,  whether  conscient  or  -
subconscient,  of  variation  from  her  laws  and  dictates.  Man


396


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity


seems,  on  the  contrary,  tu  possess  a power  of  turning  his  mind
and  will  upon  Nature  and  a possibility  of  governing  her  move-
ment, even  of  varying  from  the  course  she  dictates  to  him.  But
here  there  is  really  a deformative  trick  of  language.  For  man’s
mentality  is  also  a part  of  Nature;  his  mentality  is  even  the  most
important,  if  not  the  largest  part  of  his  nature.  It  is,  we  may  say.
Nature  become  partly  conscious  of  her  own  laws  and  forces,
conscious  of  her  struggle  of  progression  and  inspired  with  the
conscious  will  to  impose  a higher  and  higher  law  on  her  own
processes  of  life  and  being.  In  subhuman  life  there  is  a vital  and
physical  struggle,  but  no  mental  conflict.  Man  is  subjected  to
this  mental  conflict  and  is  therefore  at  war  not  only  with  others
but  with  himself;  and  because  he  is  capable  of  this  war  with
himself,  he  is  also  capable  of  that  which  is  denied  to  the  animal,
of  an  inner  evolution,  a progression  from  higher  to  higher  type,
a constant  self-transcending.

This  evolution  takes  place  at  present  by  a conflict  and  pro-
gress of  ideas  applied  to  life.  In  their  primary  aspect  human  ideas
of  life  are  simply  a mental  translation  of  the  forces  and  ten-
dencies of  hfe  itself  as  they  emerge  in  the  form  of  needs,  desires
and  interests.  The  human  mind  has  a practical  intelligence,  more
or  less  clear  and  exact  which  takes  these  things  into  account  and
gives  to  one  and  another  a greater  or  less  value  according  to  its
own  experience,  preference  and  judgment.  Some  the  man  ac-
cepts and  helps  in  their  growth  by  his  will  and  intelligence,  others
he  rejects,  discourages  and  even  succeeds  in  eliminating.  But
from  this  elementary  process  there  emerges  a second  and  more
advanced  character  of  man’s  ideas  about  life;  he  passes  beyond
the  mere  mental  translation  and  ready  dynamic  handling  to  a
regulated  valuation  of  the  forces  and  tendencies  that  have
emerged  or  are  emerging  in  him  and  his  environment  He  studies
them  as  fixed  processes  and  rules  of  Nature  and  endeavours  to
understand  their  law  and  norm.  He  tries  to  determine  the  laws
of  his  mind  and  life  and  body,  the  law  and  rule  of  the  facts  and
forces  about  him  that  constitute  his  environment  and  determine
the  field  and  the  mould  of  his  action.  Since  we  are  imperfect
and  evolutionary  beings,  this  study  of  the  laws  of  life  is  bound  to
envisage  two  aspects;  it  perceives  the  rule  of  what  is  and  the  rule


5P7


Nature's  Law  in  Our  Progress

of  what  may  or  ought  to  be,  the  law  of  our  actualities  and
the  law  of  our  potentialities.  The  latter  takes  for  the  human
intellect  which  tends  always  to  an  arbitrary  and  emphatic
statement  of  things,  the  form  of  a fixed  ideal  standard  or  set  of
principles  from  which  our  actual  life  is  a fall  and  deviation  or
towards  which  it  is  a progress,  and  aspiration.

The  evolutionary  idea  of  Nature  and  life  brings  us  to  a pro-
founder view.  Both  what  is  and  what  may  be  are  expressions
of  the  same  constant  facts  of  existence  and  forces  or  powers  of
our  Nature  from  which  we  cannot  and  are  not  meant  to  escape,
since  all  life  is  Nature  fulfilling  itself  and  not  Nature  destroying
or  denying  itself;  but  we  may  raise  and  we  are  intended  to  raise,
change  and  widen  the  forms,  arrangements  and  values  of  these
constant  facts  and  forces  of  our  nature  and  existence,  and  in  the
course  of  our  progress  the  change  and  perfectioning  may  amount
to  what  seems  a radical  transformation,  although  nothing  essen-
tial is  altered.  Our  actualities  are  the  form  and  value  or  power
of  expression  to  which  our  nature  and  life  have  attained;  their
norm  or  law  is  the  fixed  arrangement  and  process  proper  to  that
stage  of  evolution.  Our  potentialities  point  us  to  a new  form,
value,  power  of  expression  with  their  new  and  appropriate
arrangement  and  process  which  is  their  proper  law  and  norm.
Standing  thus  between  the  actual  and  the  possible,  our  intellect
tends  to  mistake  present  law  and  form  for  the  eternal  law  of
our  nature  and  existence  and  regard  any  change  as  a deviation
and  fall  or  else,  on  the  contrary,  to  mistake  some  future  and  po-
tential law  and  form  for  our  ideal  rule  of  life  and  all  actual  devia-
tion from  that  as  an  error  or  sin  of  our  nature.  In  reality,  only
that  is  eternal  which  is  constant  through  all  changes  and  our
ideal  can  be  no  more  than  a progressive  expression  of  it.  Only
the  utmost  limit  of  height,  wideness  and  fullness  of  self-
expression  possible  to  man,  if  any  such  limit  there  be,  could  be
regarded,  did  we  know  of  it,  — and  as  yet  we  do  not  know  our
utmost  possibilities,  — as  the  eternal  ideal.

Whatever  the  ideas  or  ideals  which  the  human  mind  extracts
from  life  or  tries  to  apply  to  life,  they  can  be  nothing  but  the
expression  of  that  life  itself  as  it  attempts  to  find  more  and  more
and  fix  higher  and  higher  its  own  law  and  realise  its  potentialities.


398


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

Our  mentality  represents  the  conscious  part  of  the  movement
of  Nature  in  this  progressive  self-realisation  and  self-fulfilment
of  the  values  and  potentialities  of  her  human  way  of  living.  If
that  mentality  were  perfect,  it  would  be  one  in  its  knowledge  and
will  with  the  totality  of  the  secret  Knowledge  and  Will  which  she
is  trying  to  bring  to  the  surface  and  there  would  be  no  mental
conflict.  For  we  should  then  be  able  to  identify  ourself  with  her
movement,  know  her  aim  and  follow  intelligently  her  course,
— realising  the  truth  on  which  the  Gita  lays  stress  that  it  is  Na-
ture alone  that  acts  and  the  movements  of  our  mind  and  life  are
only  the  action  of  her  modes.  The  subhuman  life  vitally,  instinc-
tively and  mechanically  does  this  very  thing,  lives  according  to
Nature  within  the  limits  of  its  type  and  is  free  from  internal
conflict  though  not  from  conflict  with  other  life.  A superhuman
life  would  reach  consciously  this  perfection,  make  the  secret
Knowledge  and  Will  in  things  its  own  and  fulfil  itself  through
Nature  by  her  free,  spontaneous  and  harmonious  movement  un-
hasting, unresting,  towards  that  full  development  which  is  her
inherent  and  therefore  her  predestined  aim.  Actually,  because
our  mentality  is  imperfect,  we  catch  only  a glimpse  of  her  tenden-
cies and  objects  and  each  glimpse  we  get  we  erect  into  an  abso-
lute principle  or  ideal  theory  of  our  life  and  conduct;  we  see
only  one  side  of  her  process  and  put  that  forward  as  the  whole
and  perfect  system  which  must  govern  our  ordering  of  our  life.
Working  through  the  imperfect  individual  and  still  more  imper-
fect collective  mind,  she  raises  up  the  facts  and  powers  of  our
existence  as  opposing  principles  and  forces  to  which  we  attach
ourselves  through  our  intellect  and  emotions,  and  favouring
and  depressing  now  this  and  now  another  she  leads  them  in
the  mind  of  man  through  struggle  and  conflict  towards  a
mutual  knowledge  and  the  sense  of  their  mutual  necessity  and
towards  a progressively  right  relation  and  synthesis  of  their
potentialities  which  is  represented  in  an  increasing  harmony
and  combination  of  realised  powers  in  the  elastic  potentiality
of  human  life.

The  social  evolution  of  the  human  race  is  necessarily  a deve-
lopment of  the  relations  between  three  constant  factors,  indi-
viduals, communities  of  various  sorts  and  mankind.  Each  seeks


399


Nature's  Law  in  Our  Progress

its  own  fulfilment  and  satisfaction,  but  each  is  compelled  to
develop  them  not  independently  but  in  relation  to  the  others.
The  first  natural  aim  of  the  individual  must  be  his  own  inner
growth  and  fullness  and  its  expression  in  his  outer  life;  but  this
he  can  only  accomplish  through  his  relations  with  other  indi-
viduals, to  the  various  kinds  of  community  rehgious,  social,
cultural  and  political  to  which  he  belongs  and  to  the  idea  and
need  of  humanity  at  large.  The  community  must  seek  its  own
fulfilment,  but  whatever  its  strength  of  mass  consciousness  and
collective  organisation,  can  accomplish  its  growth  only  through
its  individuals  under  the  stress  of  the  circumstances  set  for  it  by
its  environment  and  subject  to  the  conditions  imposed  by  its
relations  to  other  communities  and  individuals  and  to  humanity
at  large.  Mankind  as  a whole  has  at  present  no  consciously
organised  common  life;  it  has  only  an  inchoate  organisation  de-
termined much  more  by  circumstances  than  by  human  intelli-
gence and  will.  And  yet  the  idea  and  the  fact  of  our  common
human  existence,  nature,  destiny  has  always  exercised  its  strong
influence  on  human  thought  and  action.  One  of  the  chief  preoccu-
pations of  ethics  and  religion  has  been  the  obligations  of  man  to
mankind.  The  pressure  of  the  large  movements  and  fluctuations
of  the  race  has  always  affected  the  destinies  of  its  separate  commu-
nities and  there  has  been  a constant  return-pressure  of  separate
communities  social,  cultural,  political,  religious  to  expand  and
include,  if  it  might  be,  the  totality  of  the  race.  And  if  or  when
the  whole  of  humanity  arrives  at  an  organised  common  life  and
seeks  a common  fulfilment  and  satisfaction,  it  can  only  do  it  by
means  of  the  relation  of  this  whole  to  its  parts  and  by  the  aid  of
the  expanding  life  of  individual  human  beings  and  of  the  com-
munities whose  progress  constitutes  the  larger  terms  of  the  life  of
the  race.

Nature  works  always  through  these  three  terms  and  none  of
them  can  be  abolished.  She  starts  from  the  visible  manifestation
of  the  one  and  the  many,  from  the  totality  and  its  constituent
units  and  creates  intermediary  unities  between  the  two  without
which  there  can  be  no  full  development  either  of  the  totality  or  of
the  units.  In  the  life-type  itself  she  creates  always  the  three  terms
of  genus,  species  and  individual.  But  while  in  the  animal  life  she


400  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

is  satisfied  to  separate  rigidly  and  group  summarily,  in  the  human
she  strives,  on  the  contrary,  to  override  the  divisions  she  has
made  and  lead  the  whole  kind  to  the  sense  of  unity  and  the  reali-
sation of  oneness.  Men’s  communities  are  formed  not  so  much
by  the  instinctive  herding  together  of  a number  of  individuals  of
the  same  genus  or  species  as  by  local  association,  community  of
interests  and  community  of  ideas;  and  these  limits  tend  always
to  be  overcome  in  the  widening  of  human  thoughts  and  sympa-
thies brought  about  by  the  closer  intermingling  of  races,  nations,
interests,  ideas,  cultures.  Still,  if  overcome  in  their  separatism,
they  are  not  abolished  in  their  fact,  because  they  repose  on  an
essential  principle  of  Nature,  — diversity  in  unity.  Therefore  it
would  seem  that  the  ideal  or  ultimate  aim  of  Nature  must  be  to
develop  the  individual  and  all  individuals  to  their  full  capacity,  to
develop  the  community  and  all  communities  to  the  full  expression
of  that  many-sided  existence  and  potentiality  which  their  diffe-
rences were  created  to  express,  and  to  evolve  the  united  life  of
mankind  to  its  full  common  capacity  and  satisfaction,  not  by
suppression  of  the  fullness -of  life  of  the  individual  or  the  smaller
commonalty,  but  by  full  advantage  taken  of  the  diversity  which
they  develop.  This  would  seem  the  soundest  way  to  increase  the
total  riches  of  mankind  and  throw  them  into  a fund  of  common
possession  and  enjoyment.

The  united  progress  of  mankind  would  thus  be  realised  by  a
general  principle  of  interchange  and  assimilation  between  indi-
vidual and  individual  and  again  between  individual  and  commu-
nity, between  community  and  community  and  again  between  the
smaller  commonalty  and  the  totality  of  mankind,  between  the
common  life  and  consciousness  of  mankind  and  its  freely  deve-
loping communal  and  individual  constituents.  As  a matter  of
fact,  although  this  interchange  is  what  Nature  even  now  contrives
to  bring  about  to  a certain  extent,  life  is  far  from  being  governed
by  such  a principle  of  free  and  harmonious  mutuality.  There  is  a
struggle,  an  opposition  of  ideas,  impulses  and  interests,  an  at-
tempt of  each  to  profit  by  various  kinds  of  war  on  the  others,  by
a kind  of  intellectual,  vital,  physical  robbery  and  theft  or  even  by
the  suppression,  devouring,  digestion  of  its  fellows  rather  than  by
a free  and  rich  interchange.  This  is  the  aspect  of  life  which  hu-


401


Nature's  Law  in  our  Progress

manity  in  its  highest  thought  and  aspiration  knows  that  it  has  to
transcend,  but  has  either  not  yet  discovered  the  right  means  or  else
has  not  had  the  force  to  apply  it.  It  now  endeavours  instead  to  get
rid  of  strife  and  the  disorders  of  growth  by  a strong  subordination
or  servitude  of  the  life  of  the  individual  to  the  life  of  the  commu-
nity and,  logically,  it  will  be  led  to  the  attempt  to  get  rid  of  strife
between  communities  by  a strong  subordination  or  servitude  of
the  life  of  the  community  to  the  united  and  organised  life  of  the
human  race.  To  remove  freedom  in  order  to  get  rid  of  disorder,
strife  and  waste,  to  remove  diversity  in  order  to  get  rid  of  sepa-
ratism and  jarring  complexities  is  the  impulse  of  order  and  regi-
mentation by  which  the  arbitrary  rigidity  of  the  intellectual
reason  seeks  to  substitute  its  straight  line  for  the  difficult  curves
of  the  process  of  Nature.

But  freedom  is  as  necessary  to  life  as  law  and  regime;  diver-
sity is  as  necessary  as  unity  to  our  true  completeness.  Exis-
tence is  only  one  in  its  essence  and  totality,  in  its  play  it  is  neces-
sarily multiform.  Absolute  uniformity  would  mean  the  cessation
of  life,  while  on  the  other  hand,  the  vigour  of  the  pulse  of  life  may
be  measured  by  the  richness  of  the  diversities  which  it  creates.  At
the  same  time,  while  diversity  is  essential  for  power  and  fruitful-
ness of  life,  unity  is  necessary  for  its  order,  arrangement  and  stabi-
lity. Unity  we  must  create,  but  not  necessarily  uniformity.  If
man  could  realise  a perfect  spiritual  um'ty,  no  sort  of  uniformity
would  be  necessary;  for  the  utmost  play  of  diversity  would  be
securely  possible  on  that  foundation.  If  again  he  could  realise  a
secure,  clear,  firmly-held  unity  in  the  principle,  a rich,  even  an
unlimited  diversity  in  its  application  might  be  possible  without
any  fear  of  disorder,  confusion  or  strife.  Because  he  cannot  do
either  of  these  things  he  is  tempted  always  to  substitute  unifor-
mity for  real  unity.  While  the  life-power  in  man  demands  diver-
sity, his  reason  favours  uniformity.  It  prefers  it  because  uni-
formity gives  him  a strong  and  ready  illusion  of  unity  in  place  of
the  real  oneness  at  which  it  is  so  much  more  difficult  to  arrive.  It
prefers  it,  secondly,  because  uniformity  makes  easy  for  him  the
otherwise  difficult  business  of  law,  order  and  regimentation.  It
prefers  it  too  because  the  impulse  of  the  mind  in  man  is  to  make
every  considerable  diversity  an  excuse  for  strife  and  separation


402


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

and  therefore  uniformity  seems  to  him  the  one  secure  and  easy
way  to  unification.  Morever,  uniformity  in  any  one  direction  or
department  of  life  helps  him  to  economise  his  energies  for  deve-
lopment in  other  directions.  If  he  can  standardise  his  economic
existence  and  escape  from  its  problems,  he  is  likely  to  have  more
leisure  and  room  to  attencf  to  his  intellectual  and  cultural  growth.
Or  again,  if  he  standardises  his  whole  social  existence  and  rejects
its  farther  possible  problems,  he  is  likely  to  have  peace  and  a free
mind  to  attend  more  energetically  to  his  spiritual  development.
Even  here,  however,  the  complex  unity  of  existence  asserts  its
truth:  in  the  end  man’s  total  intellectual  and  cultural  growth
suffers  by  social  immobihty,  — by  any  restriction  or  poverty  of
his  economic  life ; the  spiritual  existence  of  the  race,  if  it  attains
to  remote  heights,  weakens  at  last  in  its  richness  and  continued
sources  of  vivacity  when  it  depends  on  a too  standardised  and
regimented  society;  the  inertia  from  below  rises  and  touches
even  the  summits.

Owing  to  the  defects  of  our  mentality  uniformity  has  to  a
certain  extent  to  be  admitted  and  sought  after;  still  the  real  aim
of  Nature  is  a true  unity  supporting  a rich  diversity.  Her  secret
is  clear  enough  from  the  fact  that  though  she  moulds  on  one
general  plan,  she  insists  always  on  an  infinite  variation.  The
plan  of  the  human  form  is  one,  yet  no  two  human  beings  are  pre-
cisely alike  in  their  physical  characteristics.  Human  nature  is  one
in  its  constituents  and  its  grand  lines,  but  no  two  human  beings
are  precisely  alike  in  their  temperament,  characteristics  and  psy-
chological substance.  AU  life  is  one  in  its  essential  plan  and  prin-
ciple; even  the  plant  is  a recognisable  brother  of  the  animal,  but
the  unity  of  life  admits  and  encourages  an  infinite  variety  of  types.
The  natural  variation  of  human  communities  from  each  other
proceeds  on  the  same  plan  as  the  variation  of  individuals;  each
develops  its  own  character,  variant  principle,  natural  law.  This
variation  and  fundamental  following  of  its  own  separate  law  is
necessary  to  its  life,  but  it  is  equally  necessary  to  the  healthy  total
life  of  mankind.  For  the  principle  of  variation  does  not  prevent
free  interchange,  does  not  oppose  the  enrichment  of  all  from  a
common  stock  and  of  the  common  stock  by  all  which  we  have
seen  to  be  the  ideal  principle  of  existence;  on  the  contrary,  without


403


Nature's  Law  in  our  Progress

a secure  variation  such  interchange  and  mutual  assimilation
would  be  out  of  the  question.  Therefore  we  see  that  in  this  har-
mony between  our  unity  and  our  diversity  lies  the  secret  of  life;
Nature  insists  equally  in  all  her  works  upon  unity  and  upon  varia-
tion. We  shall  find  that  a real  spiritual  and  psychological  unity
can  allow  a free  diversity  and  dispense  with  all  but  the  minimum
of  uniformity  which  is  sufficient  to  embody  the  community  of
nature  and  of  essential  principle.  Until  we  can  arrive  at  that
perfection,  the  method  of  uniformity  has  to  be  applied,  but  we
must  not  over  apply  it  on  peril  of  discouraging  fife  in  the  very
sources  of  its  power,  richness  and  sane  natural  self-unfolding.

The  quarrel  between  law  and  hberty  stands  on  the  same
ground  and  moves  to  the  same  solution.  The  diversity,  the  varia-
tion must  be  a free  variation.  Nature  does  not  manufacture,  does
not  impose  a pattern  or  a rule  from  outside;  she  impels  life  to
grow  from  within  and  to  assert  its  own  natural  law  and  develop-
ment modified  only  by  its  commerce  with  its  environment.  All
liberty,  individual,  national,  religious,  social,  ethical,  takes  its
ground  upon  this  fundamental  principle  of  our  existence.  By
liberty  we  mean  the  freedom  to  obey  the  law  of  our  being,  to
grow  to  our  natural  self-fulfilment,  to  find  out  naturally  and  freely
our  harmony  with  our  environment.  The  dangers  and  disad-
vantages of  liberty,  the  disorder,  strife,  waste  and  confusion  to
which  its  wrong  use  leads  are  indeed  obvious.  But  they  arise
from  the  absence  or  defect  of  the  sense  of  unity  between  indivi-
dual and  individual,  between  community  and  community,  which
pushes  them  to  assert  themselves  at  the  expense  of  each  other
instead  of  growing  by  mutual  help  and  interchange  and  to  assert
freedom  for  themselves  in  the  very  act  of  encroaching  on  the  free
development  of  their  fellows.  If  a real,  a spiritual  and  psycho-
logical unity  were  effectuated,  liberty  would  have  no  perils  and
disadvantages;  for  free  individuals  enamoured  of  um’ty  would  be
compelled  by  themselves,  by  their  own  need,  to  accommodate
perfectly  their  own  growth  with  the  growth  of  their  fellows  and
would  not  feel  themselves  complete  except  in  the  free  growth  of
others.  Because  of  our  present  imperfection  and  the  ignorance  of
our  mind  and  will,  law  and  regimentation  have  to  be  called  in  to
restrain  and  to  compel  from  outside.  The  facile  advantages  of  a


404  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

strong  law  and  compulsion  are  obvious,  but  equally  great  are  the
disadvantages.  Such  perfection  as  it  succeeds  in  creating  tends  to
be  mechanical  and  even  the  order  it  imposes  turns  out  to  be  arti-
ficial and  liable  to  break  down  if  the  yoke  is  loosened  or  the  res-
training grasp  withdrawn.  Carried  too  far,  an  imposed  order
discourages  the  principle  of  natural  growth  which  is  the  true
method  of  life  and  may  even  slay  the  capacity  for  real  growth.
We  repress  and  overstandardise  life  at  our  peril;  by  over-
regimentation we  crush  Nature’s  initiative  and  habit  of  intuitive
self-adaptation.  Dwarfed  or  robbed  of  elasticity,  the  devitalised  in-
dividuality, even  while  it  seems  outwardly  fair  and  symmetrical,
perishes  from  within.  Better  anarchy  than  the  long  continuance
of  a law  which  is  not  our  own  or  which  our  real  nature  cannot
assimilate.  And  all  repressive  or  preventive  law  is  only  a make-
shift, a substitute  for  the  true  law  which  must  develop  from
within  and  be  not  a check  on  liberty,  but  its  outward  image  and
visible  expression.  Human  society  progresses  really  and  vitally
in  proportion  as  law  becomes  the  child  of  freedom;  it  will  reach
its  perfection  when,  man  having  learned  to  know  and  become
spiritually  one  with  his  fellow-man,  the  spontaneous  law  of  his
society  exists  only  as  the  outward  mould  of  his  self-governed
inner  liberty.


Chapter  XVni


The  Ideal  Solution—

A Free  Grouping  of  Mankind

These  principles  founded  on  the  essential
and  constant  tendencies  of  Nature  in  the  development  of  human
life  ought  clearly  to  be  the  governing  ideas  in  any  intelligent
attempt  at  the  unification  of  the  human  race.  And  it  might  so  be
done  if  that  unification  could  be  realised  after  the  manner  of  a
Lycurgan  constitution  or  by  the  law  of  an  ideal  Manu,  the  per-
fect sage  and  king.  Attempted,  as  it  will  be,  in  very  different
fashion  according  to  the  desires,  passions  and  interests  of  great
masses  of  men  and  guided  by  no  better  light  than  the  half-
enlightened  reason  of  the  world’s  intellectuals  and  the  empirical
opportunism  of  the  world’s  statesmen  and  politicians,  it  is  likely
to  be  done  by  a succession  of  confused  experiments,  recoils  and
returns,  resistances  and  persistences;  it  will  progress  in  spite  of
human  unreason  in  the  midst  of  a clamour  of  rival  ideas  and  in-
terests, stumble  through  a war  of  principles,  advance  by  a clash
of  vehement  parties  ending  in  more  or  less  clumsy  compromises.
It  may  even,  as  we  have  said,  be  managed  in  the  most  unideal,
though  not  the  most  inconvenient  method  of  all,  by  a certain
amount  of  violence,  the  domination  of  a few  vast  and
powerful  empires  or  even  the  emergence  of  a single  predominant
World-Empire,  a King-State  that  will  be  accepted  or  will  impose
itself  as  the  arbiter  if  not  the  ruler  of  mankind.  Not  any  intelligent
principle,  but  necessity  and  convenience,  not  urgent  light  but
urgent  power  is  likely  to  be  the  effective  force  in  any  political,
administrative  and  economic  unification  of  the  race.

Still,  though  the  ideal  may  not  be  immediately  practicable,
it  is  that  to  which  our  action  ought  more  and  more  to  move.  And
if  the  best  method  cannot  always  be  employed,  it  is  well  to  know
the  best  method,  so  that  in  the  strife  of  principles  and  forces  and
interests  something  of  it  may  enter  into  our  dealings  with  each


406


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity


other  and  mitigate  the  errors,  stumblings  and  sufferings  which
our  ignorance  and  unreason  compel  us  to  pay  as  the  price  of  our
progress.  In  principle,  then,  the  ideal  unification  of  mankind
would  be  a system  in  which,  as  a first  rule  of  common  and  har-
monious life,  the  human  peoples  would  be  allowed  to  form  their
own  groupings  according  to  their  natural  divisions  of  locality,
race,  culture,  economic  convenience  and  not  according  to  the
more  violent  accidents  of  history  or  the  egoistic  will  of  powerful
nations  whose  policy  it  must  always  be  to  compel  the  smaller  or
less  timely  organised  to  serve  their  interests  as  dependents  or  obey
their  commands  as  subjects.  The  present  arrangement  of  the
world  has  been  worked  out  by  economic  forces,  by  political
diplomacies,  treaties  and  purchases  and  by  military  violence
without  regard  to  any  moral  principle  or  any  general  rule  of  the
good  of  mankind.  It  has  served  roughly  certain  ends  of  the
World-Force  in  its  development  and  helped  at  much  cost  of
bloodshed,  suffering,  cruelty,  oppression  arid  revolt  to  bring
humanity  more  together.  Like  all  things  that,  though  in  them-
selves unideal,  have  been  and  have  asserted  themselves  with
force,  it  has  had  its  justification,  not  moral  but  biological,  in  the
necessity  of  the  rough  methods  which  Nature  has  to  use  with  a
half-animal  mankind  as  with  her  animal  creation.  But  the'  great
step  of  unification  once  taken,  the  artificial  arrangements  which
have  resulted  would  no  longer  have  any  reason  for  existence.  It
would  be  so  in  the  first  place  because  the  convenience  and  good
of  the  world  at  large  and  not  the  satisfaction  of  the  egoism,  pride
and  greed  of  particular  nations,  would  be  the  object  to  be  held  in
view,  in  the  second  because  whatever  legitimate  claim  any  nation
might  have  upon  others,  such  as  necessities  of  economic  well-
being and  expansion,  would  be  arranged  for  in  a soundly  orga-
nised world-union  or  World-State  no  longer  on  the  principle  of
strife  and  competition,  but  on  a principle  of  co-operation  or
mutual  adjustment  or  at  least  of  competition  regulated  by  law
and  equity  and  just  interchange.  Therefore  no  ground  would
remain  for  forced  and  artificial  groupings  except  that  of  histo-
rical tradition  or  accomplished  fact  which  would  obviously  have
little  weight  in  a great  change  of  world  conditions  impossible  to
achieve  unless  the  race  is  prepared  to  break  hundreds  of  tradi-


The  Ideal  Solution  — A Free  Grouping  of  Mankind  407

tions  and  unsettle  the  great  majority  of  accomplished  facts.

The  first  principle  of  human  unity,  groupings  being  neces-
sary, should  be  a system  of  free  and  natural  groupings  which
would  leave  no  room  for  internal  discords,  incompatibilities
and  repression  and  revolt  as  between  race  and  race  or  people
and  people.  For  otherwise  the  World-State  would  be  founded
in  part  at  least  upon  a system  of  legalised  injustice  and  repres-
sion or  at  the  best  upon  a principle  of  force  and  compulsion,
however  mitigated.  Such  a system  would  contain  dissatisfied
elements  eager  to  seize  upon  any  hope  of  change  and  throw
their  moral  force  and  whatever  material  power  they  might  still
keep  on  the  side  of  any  velleities  that  might  appear  in  the  race
towards  disorder,  secession,  dissolution  of  the  system  and  per-
haps a return  to  the  old  order  of  things.  Moral  centres  of  revolt
would  thus  be  preserved  which,  given  the  restlessness  of  the
human  mind,  could  not  fail  to  have,  in  periods  favourable  to
them,  a great  power  of  contagion  and  self-diffusion.  In  fact,
any  system  which  would  appear  to  stereotype  anomalies,  eternise
injustice  and  inequality  or  rest  permanently  on  a principle  of
compulsion  and  forced  subjection,  could  have  no  security  and
would  be  condemned  by  its  very  nature  to  transience.

This  was  the  principal  weakness  of  the  drift  during  the  war
towards  the  settlement  of  the  world  on  the  basis  of  the  actual
status  quo  that  followed  the  recent  world  convulsion.  Such  a
settlement  must  have  had  the  vice  of  fixing  conditions  which  in
their  nature  must  be  transient.  It  would  mean  not  only  the  rule
of  this  or  that  nation  over  dissatisfied  foreign  minorities  but  the
supremacy  of  Europe  over  most  of  Asia  and  all  Africa.  A league
or  incipient  unity  of  the  nations  would  be  equivalent  under
such  conditions  to  the  control  of  the  enormous  mass  of  man-
kind by  an  oligarchy  of  a few  white  races.  Such  could  not  be  the
principle  of  a long-enduring  settlement  of  the  world.  For  then
one  of  two  alternatives  would  be  inevitable.  A new  system
would  have  to  support  by  law  and  force  the  existing  condition
of  things  and  resist  any  attempt  at  radical  change;  but  this  would
lead  to  an  unnatural  suppression  of  great  natural  and  moral
forces  and  in  the  end  a tremendous  disorder,  perhaps  a world-
shattering  explosion.  Or  else  some  general  legislative  authority


408


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity


and  means  of  ctiange  would  have  to  be  established  by  which  the
judgment  and  sentiment  of  mankind  would  be  able  to  prevail
over  imperialistic  egoisms  and  which  would  enable  the  European,
Asiatic  and  African  peoples  now  subject  to  make  the  claims  of
their  growing  self-consciousness  felt  in  the  councils  of  the  world.^
But  such  an  authority,  interfering  with  the  egoisms  of  great  and
powerful  empires,  would  be  difficult  to  establish,  slow  to  act  and
not  by  any  means  at  ease  in  its  exercise  of  power  or  moral
influence  or  likely  to  be  peaceful  or  harmonious  in  its  delibera-
tions. It  would  either  reduce  itself  to  a representative  of  the
sentiments  and  interests  of  a ruling  oUgarchy  of  great  Powers
or  end  in  such  movements  of  secession  and  civil  war  between
the  States  as  settled  the  question  of  slavery  in  America.  There
would  be  only  one  other  possible  issue,  — that  the  liberal  senti-
ments and  principles  at  first  aroused  by  the  war  in  Europe  should
become  settled  and  permanent  forces  of  action  and  extend  them-
selves to  the  dealings  of  European  nations  with  their  non-
European  dependencies.  In  other  words,  it  must  become  a settled
political  principle  with  European  nations  to  change  the  charac-
ter of  their  imperialism  and  convert  their  empires  as  soon  as
might  be  from  artificial  into  true  psychological  unities.

But  that  would  end  inevitably  in  the  recognition  of  the
principle  we  have  advanced,  the  arrangement  of  the  world  in. a
system  of  free  and  natural  and  not  as  hitherto  of  partly  free  and
partly  forced  groupings.  For  a psychological  unity  could  only
be  assured  by  a free  assent  of  nations  now  subject  to  their  inclu-
sion in  the  imperial  aggregate  and  the  power  of  free  assent  would
imply  a power  of  free  dissent  and  separation.  If  owing  to  incom-
patibility of  culture,  temperament  or  economic  or  other  interest
the  psychological  unity  could  not  be  established,  either  such
separation  would  be  inevitable  or  else  there  might  be  a resort
to  the  old  principle  of  force,  a difficult  matter  when  dealing  with
great  masses  of  men  who  must  in  the  course  of  the  new  process
have  arrived  at  self-consciousness  and  recovered  their  united  in-


* The  League  of  Nations  started  with  some  dim  ideal  of  this  kind;  but  even  its  first  halt-
ing attempts  at  opposing  imperial  egoisms  ended  in  secession  and  avoided  a civil  war  among
its  members  only  by  drawing  back  from  its  own  commitments.  In  fact,  it  was  never  more
than  an  instrument  subservient  to  the  policy  of  a few  great  Powers.


The  Ideal  Solution  — A Free  Grouping  of  Mankind  409


tellectual  force  and  vitality.  Imperial  unities  of  this  kind  must
be  admitted  as  a possible,  but  by  no  means  an  inevitable  next
step  in  the  human  aggregation  easier  to  realise  than  a united
mankind  in  present  conditions;  but  such  unities  could  have  only
two  rational  purposes,  one  as  a half-way  house  to  the  unity  of
all  the  nations  of  the  world  and  an  experiment  in  administrative
and  economic  confederation  on  a large  scale,  the  other  as  a means
of  habituating  nations  of  different  race,  traditions,  colour,  civili-
sation to  dwell  together  in  a common  political  family  as  the
whole  human  race  would  have  to  dwell  in  any  scheme  of  unity
which  respected  the  principle  of  variation  and  did  not  compel  a
dead  level  of  uniformity.  The  imperial  heterogeneous  unit  has  a
value  in  Nature’s  processes  only  as  a means  towards  this  greater
unity  and,  where  not  maintained  afterwards  by  some  natural
attraction  or  by  some  miracle  of  entire  fusion,  — a thing  impro-
bable, if  possible,  — would  cease  to  exist  once  the  greater  unity
was  accomplished.  On  this  line  of  development  also  and  indeed
on  any  line  of  development  the  principle  of  a free  and  natural
grouping  of  peoples  must  be  the  eventual  conclusion,  the  final
and  perfect  basis.  It  must  be  so,  because  on  no  other  foundation
could  the  unification  of  mankind  be  secure  or  sound.  And  it
must  be  so,  because  once  unification  is  firmly  accomplished
and  war  and  jealous  national  competition  replaced  by  better
methods  of  intercourse  and  mutual  adjustment,  there  can  be  no
object  in  maintaining  any  other  more  artificial  system,  and  there-
fore both  reason  and  convenience  would  compel  the  change.
The  institution  of  a natural  system  of  grouping  would  become  as
much  a matter  of  course  as  the  administrative  arrangement  o
a country  according  to  its  natural  provinces.  And  it  wou  e
as  much  a necessity  of  reason  or  convenience  as  the  regar  neces
sarily  paid  in  any  system  of  devolution  or  free  federation
race  or  national  sentiment  or  long-established  loca  uni  les^
Other  considerations  might  modify  the  application  o t e prin
ciple,  but  there  would  be  none  that  could  be  strong  enougn

abrogate  it.  . u uqp

The  natural  unit  in  such  a grouping  is  the  nation,
that  is  the  basis  natural  evolution  has  firmly  create  an
indeed  to  have  provided  with  a view  to  the  greater  uni  y.


410


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

therefore,  unification  is  put  off  to  , a much  later  date  of  our
history  and  in  the  meanwhile  the  national  principle  of  aggre-
gation loses  its  force  and  vitality  and  is  dissolved  in  some
other,  the  free  and  natural  nation-unit  and  perhaps  the  nation-
group  would  be  the  just  and  living  support  of  a sound  and
harmonious  world-system.  Race  still  counts  and  would  enter
in  as  an  element,  but  only  as  a subordinate  element.  In  certain
groupings  it  would  predominate  and  be  decisive;  in  others
it  would  be  set  at  nought  partly  by  a historic  and  national
sentiment  overriding  differences  of  language  and  race,  partly
by  economic  and  other  relations  created  by  local  contact  or
geographical  oneness.  Cultural  unity  would  count,  but  need
not  in  all  cases  prevail;  even  the  united  force  of  race  and  culture
might  not  be  sufiiciently  strong  to  be  decisive.

The  examples  of  this  complexity  are  everywhere.  Switzer-
land belongs  by  language,  race  and  culture  and  even  by  affinities
of  sentiment  to  different  national  aggregations,  two  of  sentiment
and  culture,  the  Latin  and  the  Teutonic,  three  of  race  and
language,  the  German,  French  and  Italian,  and  these  differences
worked  sufficiently  to  bewilder  and  divide  Swiss  sympathies  in
the  clash  of  nations;  but  the  decisive  feeling  overriding  all  others
is  the  sentiment  of  Helvetian  nationality  and  that  would  seem
to  forbid  now  and  always  any  idea  of  a voluntary  partition  or
dissolution  of  Switzerland’s  long-standing  natural,  local  and
historic  unity.  Alsace  belongs  predominantly  by  race,  language
and  early  history  to  a Germanic  union,  but  the  German  appealed
in  vain  to  these  titles  and  laboured  in  vain  to  change  Alsace-
Lorraine  into  Elsass-Lothringen;  the  living  sentiments  and
affinities  of  the  people,  national,  historical,  cultural,  bound  it
still  to  France.  Canada  and  Australia  have  no  geographical
connection  with  the  British  Isles  or  with  each  other  and  the
former  would  seem  to  belong  by  predestination  to  an  American
group-unity;  but  certainly,  in  the  absence  of  a change  of  senti-
ment not  now  easily  foreseen,  both  would  prefer  to  belong  to  a
British  grouping  rather  than  the  one  fuse  itself  into  an  increasingly
cosmopolitan  American  nation  or  the  other  stand  apart  as  an
Australasian  union.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Slavonic  and
Latin  elements  of  Austro-Hungary,  though  they  belonged  by


The  Ideal  Solution  — A Free  Grouping  of  Mankind  411

history,  geographical  position  and  economic  convenience  to  that
empire,  moved  strongly  towards  separation  and,  where  local
sentiments  permitted,  to  union  with  their  racial,  cultural  and
linguistic  kin.  If  Austria  had  dealt  with  her  Slav  subjects  as  with
the  Magyars  or  had  been  able  to  build  a national  culture  of  her
own  out  of  her  German,  Slav,  Magyar  and  Italian  elements,
it  would  have  been  otherwise  and  her  unity  would  have  been
secure  against  all  external  forces  of  disruption.  Race,  language,
local  relations  and  economic  convenience  are  powerful  factors,
but  what  decides  must  be  a dominant  psychological  element  that
makes  for  union.  To  that  subtler  force  all  others,  however
restless  they  may  be,  must  succumb;  however  much  they  may
seek  for  free  particularist  expression  and  self-possession  within
a larger  unity,  they  must  needs  subordinate  themselves  to  the
more  powerful  attraction.

For  this  very  reason  the  basic  principle  adopted  must
be  a free  grouping  and  not  that  of  some  abstract  or  practical
rule  or  principle  of  historic  tradition  or  actual  status  imposed
upon  the  nations.  It  is  easy  to  build  up  a system  in  the  mind
and  propose  to  erect  it  on  foundations  which  would  be  at
first  sight  rational  and  convenient.  At  first  sight  it  would  seem
that  the  unity  of  mankind  could  most  rationally  and  conveniently
arrange  itself  upon  the  basis  of  a European  grouping,  an  Asiatic
grouping,  an  American  grouping,  with  two  or  three  sub-groups
in  America,  Latin  and  English-speaking,  three  in  Asia,  the
Mongolian,  Indian  and  West-Asian,  with  Moslem  North  Africa
perhaps  as  a natural  annexe  to  the  third  of  these,  four  in  Europe,
the  Latin,  Slavonic,  Teutonic  and  Anglo-Celtic,  the  latter  with
the  colonies  that  still  chose  to  adhere  to  it,  while  Central  and
Southern  Africa  might  be  left  to  develop  under  present  condi-
tions but  with  the  more  humane  and  progressive  principles  upon
which  the  sentiment  of  a united  humanity  would  insist.  Certain
of  the  actual  and  obvious  difficulties  might  not  be  of  great
importance  under  a better  system  of  things.  We  know,  for
instance,  that  nations  closely  connected  by  every  apparent  tie,
are  actually  divided  by  stronger  antipathies  than  those  more
ideative  and  less  actual  which  separate  them  from  peoples  who
have  with  them  no  tie  of  affinity.  Mongolian  Japan  and  Mongo-


412


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity


lian  China  are  sharply  divided  from  each  other  in  sentiment;
Arab  and  Turk  and  Persian,  although  one  in  Islamic  religion
and  culture,  would  not,  if  their  present  sentiments  towards  each
other  persisted,  make  an  entirely  happy  family.  Scandinavian
Norway  and  Sweden  had  everything  to  draw  them  together  and
perpetuate  their  union,  — except  a strong,  if  irrational  sentiment
which  made  the  continuance  of  that  union  impossible.  But  these
antipathies  really  persist  only  so  long  as  there  is  some  actual
unfriendly  pressure  or  sense  of  subjugation  or  domination  or
fear  of  the  oppression  of  the  individuality  of  one  by  the  other;
once  that  is  removed  they  would  be  likely  to  disappear.  It  is
notable,  for  instance,  that,  since  the  separation  of  Norway  and
Sweden,  the  three  Scandinavian  States  have  been  increasingly
disposed  to  act  together  and  regard  themselves  as  a natural
grouping  in  Europe.  The  long  antipathy  of  the  Irish  and  English
nations  is  declining  in  the  actuality  of  a juster  though  still  imper-
fect relation  between  those  two  national  individualities,  as  the
antipathy  of  Austrian  and  Magyar  gave  way  when  once  a just
relation  had  been  established  between  the  two  kingdoms.  It  is
easily  conceivable  therefore  that  with  a system  in  which  the
causes  of  hostility  would  disappear,  natural  affinities  would
prevail  and  a grouping  of  the  kind  imagined  might  become  more
easily  practicable.  It  is  arguable  also  that  the  trend  of  mankind
under  a great  stress  of  tendency  towards  unification  would
naturally  move  to  the  creation  of  such  a symmetry.  It  may  be
that  a great  change  and  revolution  in  the  world  would  power-
fully and  rapidly  abolish  all  the  obstacles,  as  the  obstacles  of
the  old  regime  to  a uniform  democratic  system  were  abolished  in
France  by  the  French  Revolution.  But  any  such  arrangement
would  be  quite  impracticable  unless  and  until  the  actual  senti-
ments of  the  peoples  corresponded  with  these  systems  of  rational
convenience:  the  state  of  the  world  is  at  present  far  removed
from  any  such  ideal  correspondence.

The  idea  of  a new  basis  founded  on  the  principle  of  national
sentiment  seemed  at  one  time  to  be  taking  within  a limited
field  the  shape  of  a practical  proposition.  It  was  confined  to  a
European  resettlement  and  even  there  it  was  only  to  be  imposed
by  the  logic  of  war  and  force  upon  defeated  empires.  The  others


The  Ideal  Solution  — A Free  Grouping  of  Mankind  413

proposed  to  recognise  it  for  themselves  only  in  a restricted  form,
Russia  by  the  concession  of  autonomy  to  Poland,  England  by
Home  Rule  in  Ireland  and  a federation  with  her  colonies,  while
other  denials  of  the  principle  were  still  to  persist  and  even
perhaps  one  or  two  new  denials  of  it  to  be  established  in  obe-
dience to  imperial  ambitions  and  exigencies.  A name  even  was
given  to  this  new  principle  and  for  a time  the  idea  of  self-
determination  received  an  official  sanction  and  almost  figured
as  a gospel.  However  imperfect  the  application,  this  practical  en-
forcement of  it,  if  effected,  would  have  meant  the  physical  birth
and  infancy  of  a new  ideal  and  would  have  held  forth  to  the
hopes  of  mankind  the  prospect  of  its  eventual  application  in  a
larger  field  until  it  came  to  be  universalised.  Even  if  the  victory
of  the  Allies  put  an  end  to  these  high  professions,  it  is  no  longer
possible  to  consider  this  ideal  of  a rearrangement  of  the  world
on  the  basis  of  free  national  groupings  as  an  impossible  dream,
an  altogether  chimerical  ideal.

Still,  the  forces  against  it  are  considerable  and  it  is  idle  to
hope  that  they  will  be  overcome  except  after  long  and  difficult
struggles.  National  and  imperial  egoism  is  the  first  and  most
powerful  of  the  contrary  forces.  To  give  up  the  instinct  of
domination  and  the  desire  still  to  be  rulers  and  supreme  where
rule  and  supremacy  have  been  the  reward  of  past  efforts,  to
sacrifice  the  advantages  of  a commercial  exploitation  of  depend-
encies and  colonies  which  can  only  be  assured  by  the  con-
firmation of  dominance  and  supremacy,  to  face  disinterestedly
the  emergence  into  free  national  activity  of  vigorous  and  some-
times enormous  masses  of  men,  once  subjects  and  passive
means  of  self-enrichment  but  henceforth  to  be  powerful  equals
and  perhaps  formidable  rivals,  is  too  great  a demand  upon
egoistic  human  nature  to  be  easily  and  spontaneously  conceded
where  concession  is  not  forced  upon  the  mind  by  actual  necessity
or  the  hope  of  some  great  and  palpable  gain  that  will  compensate
the  immediate  and  visible  loss.  There  is,  too,  the  claim  o
Europe,  not  yet  renounced,  to  hold  the  rest  of  the  world  in  t e
interests  of  civilisation,  by  which  is  meant  European  civilisation,
and  to  insist  upon  its  acceptance  as  a condition  for  the  a ms
sion  of  Asiatic  races  to  any  kind  of  equality  or  freedom.  is


414


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity


claim  which  is  destined  soon  to  lose  all  its  force  in  Asia,  has  still
a strong  justification  in  the  actual  state  of  the  African  conti-
nent. For  the  present  let  us  note  that  it  works  strongly  against  a
wider  recognition  of  the  new-born  ideal  and  that  until  the  prob-
lems it  raises  are  resolved,  the  settlement  of  the  world  on  any
such  ideal  principle  must  wait  upon  the  evolution  of  new  forces
and  the  coming  to  a head  both  in  Asia  and  Europe  of  yet  un-
accomplished spiritual,  intellectual  and  material  revolutions.^


' These  revolutions  have  now  happened  and  these  obstacles,  though  not  yet  entirely,  have
faded  or  are  fading  out  of  existence.


Chapter  XIX


The  Drive  towards  Centralisation
and  Uniformity— Administration  and
Control  of  Foreign  Affairs

Supposing  the  free  grouping  of  the
nations  according  to  their  natural  affinities,  sentiments,  sense  of
economic  and  other  convenience  to  be  the  final  basis  of  a stable
world-union,  the  next  question  that  arises  is  what  precisely
would  be  the  status  of  these  nation-units  in  the  larger  and  more
complex  unity  of  mankind.  Would  they  possess  only  a nominal
separateness  and  become  parts,  of  a machine  or  retain  a real  and
living  individuality  and  an  effective  freedom  and  organic  life?
Practically,  this  comes  to  the  question  whether  the  ideal  of
human  unity  points  to  the  forcible  or  at  least  forceful  fusing  and
welding  of  mankind  into  a single  vast  nation  and  centralised
World-State  with  many  provinces  or  to  its  aggregation  under
a more  complex,  loose  and  flexible  system  into  a world-union  of
free  nationalities.  If  the  former  more  rigorous  idea  or  tendency
or  need  dominated,  we  must  have  a period  of  compression,
constriction,  negation  of  national  and  individual  liberties  as
in  the  second  of  the  three  historical  stages  of  national  formation
in  Europe.  This  process  would  end,  if  entirely  successful,  in  a
centralised  world-government  which  would  impose  its  uniform
rule  and  law,  uniform  administration,  uniform  economic
and  educational  system,  one  culture,  one  social  principle,  one
civilisation,  perhaps  even  one  language  and  one  religion  on  all
mankind.  Centralised,  it  would  delegate  some  of  its  powers  to
national  authorities  and  councils,  but  only  as  the  centralise
French  government  — Parliament  and  bureaucracy  delegate
some  of  their  powers  to  the  departmental  prefects  and  counci  s
and  their  subordinate  officials  and  communes.

Such  a state  of  things  seems  a sufficiently  far-off  dream  an


416  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

assuredly  not,  except  to  the  rigid  doctrinaire;  a very  beautiful
dream.  Certainly,  it  would  take  a long  time  to  become  entirely
practicable  and  would  have  to  be  preceded  by  a period  of  loose
formation  corresponding  to  the  feudal  unity  of  France  or
Germany  in  mediaeval  Europe.  Still,  at  the  rate  of  ever  acce-
lerated speed  with  which  the  world  is  beginning  to  progress
and  with  the  gigantic  revolutions  of  international  thought,
outlook  and  practice  which  the  future  promises,  we  have  to
envisage  it  as  not  only  an  ultimate,  but  it  may  very  well  be  a
not  immeasurably  far-off  possibility.  If  things  continued  to  move
persistently,  victoriously  in  one  direction  and  Science  still  farther
to  annihilate  the  obstacles  of  space  and  of  geographical  and
mental  division  which  yet  exist  and  to  aggrandise  its  means
and  powers  of  vast  and  close  organisation,  it  might  well  become
feasible  within  a century  or  two,  at  the  most  within  three  or  four.
It  would  be  the  logical  conclusion  of  any  process  in  which
force  and  constraint  or  the  predominance  of  a few  great  nations
or  the  emergence  of  a king-State,  an  empire  predominant  on
sea  and  land,  became  the  principal  instrument  of  unification.
It  might  come  about,  supposing  some  looser  unity  to  be  already
established,  by  the  triumph  throughout  the  world  of  the  political
doctrine  and  the  coming  to  political  power  of  a party  of  social-
istic and  internationalistic  doctrinaires  alike  in  mentality  to  the
Unitarian  Jacobins  of  the  French  Revolution  who  would  have
no  tenderness  for  the  sentiments  of  the  past  or  for  any  form  of
group  individualism  and  would  seek  to  crush  out  of  existence
all  their  visible  supports  so  as  to  establish  perfectly  their  idea
of  an  absolute  human  equality  and  unity.

A system  of  the  kind,  however  established,  by  whatever
forces,  governed  by  the  democratic  State  idea  which  inspires
modem  socialism  or  by  the  mere  State  idea  socialistic  perhaps,
but  undemocratic  or  anti-democratic,  would  stand  upon  the
principle  that  perfect  unity  is  only  to  be  realised  by  uniformity.
All  thought  in  fact  that  seeks  to  establish  unity  by  mechanical
or  external  means  is  naturally  attracted  towards  uniformity.
Its  thesis  would  seem  to  be  supported  by  history  and  the  lessons
of  the  past;  for  in  the  formation  of  national  unity,  the  trend
to  centralisation,  and  uniformity  has  been  the  decisive  factor.


The  Drive  towards  Centralisation  and  Uniformity  417

a condition  of  uniformity  the  culminating  point.  The  precedent
of  the  formation  of  diverse  and  often  conflicting  elements  of
a people  into  a single  national  State  would  naturally  be  the
determining  precedent  for  the  formation  of  the  populations  of
the  earth,  the  human  people,  into  a single  world-nation  and
World-State.  In  modern  times  there  have  been  significant
examples  of  the  power  of  this  trend  towards  uniformity  which
increases  as  civilisation  progresses.  The  Turkish  movement
began  with  the  ideal  of  toleration  for  all  the  heterogeneous
elements  — races,  languages,  religions,  cultures  — of  the  ram-
shackle Turkish  empire,  but  inevitably  the  dominant  young
Turk  element  was  carried  away  by  the  instinct  for  establishing,
even  by  coercion,  a uniform  Ottoman  culture  and  Ottoman
nationality.  This  trend  has  found  its  completion,  after  the
elimination  of  the  Greek  element  and  the  loss  of  the  empire,
in  the  small  purely  Turkish  State  of  today,  but  curiously  the
national  uniformity  has  been  topped  by  the  association  with  it
and  assimilation  of  European  culture  and  social  forms  and  habits.
Belgium,  composed  almost  equally  of  Teutonic  Flemings  and
Gallic  Walloons,  grew  into  a nationality  under  the  aegis  of  a
Franco-Belgian  culture  with  French  as  the  dominant  language;
the  Fleming  movement  which  should  logically  have  contented
itself  with  equal  rights  for  the  two  languages,  aimed  really  at  a
reversal  of  the  whole  position  and  not  merely  the  assertion  but
the  dominance  of  the  Flemish  language  and  an  indigenous
Flemish  culture.  Germany,  uniting  her  ancient  elements  into
one  body,  suffered  her  existing  States  with  their  governments
and  administrations  to  continue,  but  the  possibility  of  consi-
derable diversities  thus  left  open  was  annulled  by  the  centralisa-
tion of  national  life  in  Berlin;  a nominal  separateness  existed,
but  overshadowed  by  a real  and  dominant  uniformity  which  all
but  converted  Germany  into  the  image  of  a larger  Prussia  in
spite  of  the  more  democratic  and  humanistic  tendencies  an
institutions  of  the  Southern  States.  There  are  indeed  apparent
types  of  a freer  kind  of  federation,  Switzerland,  the  United
States,  Australia,  South  Africa,  but  even  here  the  spirit  of  uni-
formity really  prevails  or  tends  to  prevail  in  spite  o varia  ion
in  detail  and  the  latitude  of  free  legislation  in  minor  mat  ers


418


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity  '

conceded  to  the  component  States.  Everywhere  unity  seems
to  call  for  and  strive  to  create  a greater  or  less  uniformity  as
its  secure  basis.

The  first  uniformity  from  which  all  the  rest  takes  its  start
is  that  of  a centralised  government  whose  natural  function  is
to  create  and  ensure  a uniform  administration.  A central
government  is  necessary  to  every  aggregate  which  seeks  to
arrive  at  an  organic  unity  of  its  political  and  economic  life.
Although,  nominally  or  to  begin  with,  this  central  government
may  be  only  an  organ  created  by  several  States  that  still  claim
to  be  sovereign  within  their  own  borders,  an  instrument  to  which
for  convenience’  sake  they  attribute  a few  of  their  powers  -for
common  objects,  yet  in  fact  it  tends  always  to  become  itself  the
sovereign  body  and  desires  always  to  concentrate  more  and  more
power  into  its  hands,  and  leave  only  delegated  powers  to  local
legislatures  and  authorities.  The  practical  inconveniences  of  a
looser  system  strengthen  this  tendency  and  weaken  gradually  the
force  of  the  safeguards  erected  against  an  encroachment  which
seems  more  and  more  to  be  entirely  beneficial  and  supported
by  the  logic  of  general  utility.  Even  in  the  United  States  with  its
strong  attachment  to  its  original  constitution  and  slowness  in
accepting  constitutional  innovations  on  other  than  local  lines,
the  tendency  is  manifesting  itself  and  would  certainly  have
resulted  by  this  time  in  great  and  radical  changes  if  there  had
not  been  a Supreme  Court  missioned  to  nullify  any  legislative
interference  with  the  original  constitution,  or  if  the  American
policy  of  aloofness  from  foreign  affairs  and  complications  had
not  removed  the  pressure  of  those  necessities  that  in  other
nations  have  aided  the  central  government  to  engross  all  real
power  and  convert  itself  into  the  source  as  well  as  the  head
or  centre  of  national  activities.  The  traditional  policy  of  the
United  States,  its  pacificism,  its  anti-militarism,  its  aversion  to
entanglement  in  European  complications  or  any  close  touch
with  the  politics  of  Europe,  its  jealousy  of  interference  by  the
European  Powers  in  American  affairs  in  spite  of  their  possession
of  colonies  and  interests  in  the  Western  hemisphere,  are  largely
due  to  the  instinct  that  this  separateness  is  the  sole  security  for
the  maintenance  of  its  institutions  and  the  peculiar  type  of  its


The  Drive  towards  Centralisation  and  Uniformity  419


national  life.  Once  militarised,  once  cast  into  the  vortex  of
old-world  politics,  as  it  at  times  threatens  to  be,  nothing  could
long  protect  the  States  from  the  necessity  of  large  changes  in  the
direction  of  centralisation  and  the  weakening  of  the  federal
principle.^  Switzerland  owes  the  security  of  its  federal  consti-
tution to  a similarly  self-centred  neutrality.

For  the  growth  of  national  centralisation  is  due  to  two
primary  needs  of  which  the  first  and  most  pressing  is  the  neces-
sity of  compactness,  single-mindedness,  a single  and  concentrated
action  against  other  nations,  whether  for  defence  against  external
aggression  or  for  aggression  upon  others  in  the  pursuit  of
national  interests  and  ambitions.  The  centralising  effect  of  war
and  militarism,  its  call  for  a concentration  of  powers,  has  been
a commonplace  of  history  from  the  earliest  times.  It  has  been
the  chief  factor  in  the  evolution  of  centralised  and  absolute
monarchies,  in  the  maintenance  of  close  and  powerful  aristo-
cracies, in  the, welding  together  of  disparate  elements  and  the
discouragement  of  centrifugal  tendencies.  The  nations  which,
faced  with  this  necessity,  have  failed  to  evolve  or  to  preserve
this  concentration  of  powers,  have  always  tended  to  fare  ill  in
the  battle  of  life,  even  if  they  have  not  shared  the  fate  long
endured  by  Italy  and  Poland  in  Europe  or  by  India  in  Asia.
The  strength  of  centralised  Japan,  the  weakness  of  decentralised
China  was  a standing  proof  that  even  in  modern  conditions
the  ancient  rule  holds  good.  Only  yesterday  the  free  States  of
Western  Europe  found  themselves  compelled  to  suspend  all
their  hard-earned  liberties  and  go  back  to  the  ancient  Roman


device  of  an  irresponsible  Senate  and  even  to  a covert  dictator-
ship in  order  to  meet  the  concentrated  strength  of  a nation
powerfully  centralised  and  organised  for  military  defence  and
attack.  If  the  sense  of  this  necessity  could  covertly  or  overtly
survive  the  actual  duration  of  war,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that
democracy  and  liberty  would  receive  the  most  dangerous  and
possibly  fatal  blow  they  have  yet  suffered  since  their  re-establish-


ment  in  modem  times.^

^ The  Roosevelt  policy  and  the  difficulties  it  encountered  illustrate  vividly  the  power  o
these  two  conflicting  forces  in  the  United  States;  and  the  trend  towards  the  strengthening  o

the  federal  case,  however  slow,  is  unmistakable.

* Even  as  it  is,  the  direction  of  the  drive  of  forces  tends  to  be  evidently  aw..>  rom  emo-


420


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity


The  power  of  Prussia  to  take  the  life  of  Germany  into  its
grasp  was  due  almost  wholly  to  the  sense  of  an  insecure  position
between  two  great  and  hostile  nations  and  to  the  feeling  of
encirclement  and  insecurity  for  its  expansion  which  was  imposed
on  the  Reich  by  its  peculiar  placement  in  Europe.  Another
example  of  the  same  tendency  was  the  strength  which  the
idea  of  confederation  acquired  as  a result  of  war  in  England
and  her  colonies.  So  long  as  the  colonies  could  stand  aloof
and  unaffected  by  England’s  wars  and  foreign  policy,  this  idea
had  little  chance  of  effectuation;  but  the,  experience  of  the  war
and  its  embarrassments  and  the  patent  inability  to  compel  a
concentration  of  all  the  potential  strength  of  the  empire  under
a system  of  almost  total  decentralisation  seem  to  have  made
inevitable  a tightening  up  of  the  loose  and  easy  make  of  the
British  Empire  which  may  go  very  far  once  the  principle  has  been
recognised  and  put  initially  into  practice.^  A loose  federation
in  one  form  or  another  serves  well  where  peace  is  the  rule;
wherever  peace  is  insecure  or  the  struggle  of  life  difficult  and
menacing,  looseness  becomes  a disadvantage  and  may  turn
even  into  a fatal  defect,  the  opportunity  of  fate  for  destruction.

The  pressure  of  peril  from  without  and  the  need  of  expan-
sion create  only  the  tendency  towards  a strong  political  and
military  centralisation;  the  growth  of  uniformity  arises  from
the  need  of  a close  internal  organisation  of  which  the  centre
thus  created  becomes  the  instrument.  This  organisation  is
partly  called  for  by  the  same  needs  as  create  the  instrument,
but  much  more  by  the  advantages  of  uniformity  for  a well-
ordered  social  and  economic  life  based  upon  a convenience
of  which  life  is  careless,  but  which  the  intelligence  of  man
constantly  demands,  — a clear,  simple  and,  as  far  as  the  com-
plexity of  life  will  allow,  a facile  principle  of  order.  The  human
intelligence  as  soon  as  it  begins  to  order  life  according  to  its  own


cracy  towards  a more  and  more  rigid  State  control  and  regimentation.

As  yet  this  has  only  gone  so  far  as  equality  of  status  with  close  consultation  in  foreign
affairs,  attempts  at  a closer  economic  co-operation,  but  a continuation  of  large  wars  might
cither  according  to  its  fortunes  dissolve  the  still  loose  or  compel  a more  coherent  system.  At
present,  however,  this  possibility  is  held  back  by  the  arrival  of  true  Domim'on  Status  and  the
Westminster  Statute  which  make  federation  unnecessary  for  any  practical  purpose  and  even
perhaps  undesirable  for  the  sentiment  in  favour  of  a practical  independence.


The  Drive  towards  Centralisation  and  Uniformity  421

fashion  and  not  according  to  the  more  instinctively  supple  and
flexible  principle  of  organic  order  inherent  in  life,  aims  neces-
sarily at  imitating  physical  Nature  in  the  fixity  of  her  uniform
fundamental  principles  of  arrangement,  but  tries  also  to  give  to
them,  as  much  as  may  be,  a uniform  application.  It  drives  at
the  suppression  of  all  important  variations.  It  is  only  when  it
has  enlarged  itself  and  feels  more  competent  to  understand  and
deal  with  natural  complexities  that  it  finds  itself  at  all  at  ease
in  managing  what  the  principle  of  life  seems  always  to  demand,
the  free  variation  and  subtly  diverse  application  of  uniform
principles.  First  of  all  in  the  ordering  of  a national  society,  it
aims  naturally  at  uniformity  in  that  aspect  of  it  which  most
nearly  concerns  the  particular  need  of  the  centre  of  order  which
has  been  called  into  existence,  its  political  and  military  function.
It  aims  first  at  a sufficient  and  then  at  an  absolute  unity  and
uniformity  of  administration.

The  monarchies  which  the  need  of  concentration  called  into
being,  drove  first  at  a preliminary  concentration,  a gathering  of
the  main  threads  of  administration  into  the  hands  of  the  central
authority.  We  see  this  everywhere,  but  the  stages  of  the  process
are  most  clearly  indicated  in  the  political  history  of  France;  for
there  the  confusion  of  feudal  separatism  and  feudal  jurisdictions
created  the  most  formidable  difficulties,  and  yet  by  a constant
centralising  insistence  and  a final  violent  reaction  from  their
surviving  results  it  was  there  that  they  were  most  successfully
resolved  and  removed.  The  centralising  monarchy,  brought
to  supreme  power  by  the  repeated  lessons  of  the  English  inva-
sions, the  Spanish  pressure,  the  civil  wars,  developed  inevitably
that  absolutism  which  the  great  historic  figure  of  Louis  XIV  so
strikingly  personifies.  His  famous  dictum,  “I  am  the  State  ,
expressed  really  the  need  felt  by  the  country  of  the  development
of  one  undisputed  sovereign  Power  which  should  concentrate
in  itself  all  military,  legislative  and  administrative  authority
as  against  the  loose  and  almost  chaotic  organisation  of  feudal
France.  The  system  of  the  Bourbons  aimed  first  at  administra-
tive centralisation  and  unity,  secondarily  at  a certain  amount  of
administrative  uniformity.  It  could  not  carry  this  second  aim  to
an  entirely  successful  conclusion  because  of  its  dependence  on


422  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

the  aristocracy  which  it  had  replaced,  but  to  which  it  was  obliged
to  leave  the  confused  debris  of  its  feudal  privileges.  The  Revo-
lution made  short  work  of  this  aristocracy  and  swept  away  the
relics  of  the  ancient  system.  In  establishing  a rigorous  uniformity
it  did  not  reverse  but  rather  completed  the  work  of  the  monarchy.
An  entire  unity  and  uniformity  legislative,  fiscal,  economic,  judi-
cial, social,  was  the  goal  towards  which  French  absolutism,
monarchical  or  democratic,  was  committed  by  its  original
impulse.  The  rule  of  the  Jacobins  and  the  regime  of  Napoleon
only  brought  rapidly  to  fruition  what  was  slowly  evolving  under
the  monarchy  out  of  the  confused  organism  of  feudal  France.

In  other  countries  the  movement  was  less  direct  and  the
survival  of  old  institutions  even  after  the  loss  of  their  original
reason  for  existence  more  obstinate;  but  everywhere  in  Europe,
even  in  Germany^  and  Russia,  the  trend  has  been  the  same  and
the  eventual  result  is  inevitable.  The  study  of  that  evolution  is
of  considerable  importance  for  the  future;  for  the  difficulties  to
be  surmounted  were  identical  in  essence,  however  different  in
form  and  extent  to  those  which  would  stand  in  the  way  of  the  evo-
lution of  a World-State  out  of  the  loose  and  still  confused  orga-
nism of  the  modern  civilised  world.


Note  the  absolute  culmination  of  this  drive  in  Germany,  in  the  unprecedented  centrali-
sation, the  rigid  standardisation  and  uniformity  of  the  Nationalist  Socialist  regime  under
Hitler.


Chapter  XX


The  Drive  towards  Economic
Centralisation

The  objective  organisation  of  a national
unity  is  not  yet  complete  when  it  has  arrived  at  the  possession
of  a single  central  authority  and  the  unity  and  uniformity  of  its
political,  military  and  strictly  administrative  functions.  There  is
another  side  of  its.  organic  life,  the  legislative  and  its  corollary,
the  judicial  function,  which  is  equally  important;  the  exercise
of  legislative  power  becomes  eventually  indeed,  although  it  was
not  always,  the  characteristic  sign  of  the  sovereign.  Logically,
one  would  suppose  that  the  conscious  and  organised  deter-
mination of  its  own  rules  of  life  should  be  the  first  business  of  a
society  from  which  all  others  should  derive  and  on  which  they
should  be  dependent  and  therefore  it  would  naturally  be  the
earliest  to  develop.  But  life  develops  in  obedience  to  its  own  law
and  the  pressure  of  forces  and  not  according  to  the  law  and  the
logic  of  the  self-conscious  mind;  its  first  course  is  determined  by
the  subconscient  and  is  only  secondarily  and  derivatively  self-
conscious.  The  development  of  human  society  has  been  no  ex-
ception to  the  rule;  for  man,  though  in  the  essence  of  his  nature
a mental  being,  has  practically  started  with  a largely  mechanical
mentality  as  the  conscious  living  being.  Nature’s  human  animal,
and  only  afterwards  can  he  be  the  self-conscious  living  being,
the  self-perfecting  Manu.  That  is  the  course  the  individual  has
had  to  follow;  the  group-man  follows  in  the  wake  of  the  indi-
vidual and  is  always  far  behind  the  highest  individual  develop-
ment. Therefore,  the  development  of  the  society  as  an  organism
consciously  and  entirely  legislating  for  its  own  needs,  which
should  be  by  the  logic  of  reason  the  first  necessary  step,  is  actually
in  the  logic  of  life  the  last  and  culminative  step.  It  enables  the
society  at  last  to  perfect  consciously  by  means  of  the  State  the
whole  organisation  of  its  life,  military,  political,  administrative,


424


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

economic,  social,  cultural.  The  completeness  of  the  process
depends  on  the  completeness  of  the  development  by  which  the
State  and  society  become,  as  far  as  that  may  be,  synonymous.
That  is  the  importance  of  democracy;  that  is  the  importance
also  of  socialism.  They  are  the  sign  that  the  society  is  getting
ready  to  be  an  entirely  self-conscious  and  therefore  a freely
and  consciously  self-regulating  organism.^  But  it  must  be  re-
marked that  modern  democracy  and  modern  socialism  are  only
a first  crude  and  bungling  attempt  at  that  consummation,  an
inefficient  hint  and  not  a freely  intelligent  realisation.

At  first,  in  the  early  stage  of  society,  there  is  no  such  thing
as  what  we  understand  by  law,  the  Roman  lex\  there  are  only  a
mass  of  binding  habits,  nomoi,  mores,  dcdra,  determined  by
the  inner  nature  of  the  group-man  and  according  to  the  action
upon  it  of  the  forces  and  the  necessities  of  his  environment.
They  become  instituta,  things  that  acquire  a fixed  and  formal
status,  institutions,  and  crystallise  into  laws.  Moreover,
they  embrace  the  whole  life  of  the  society;  there  is  no
distinction  between  the  political  and  administrative,  the
social  and  the  religious  law;  these  not  only  all  meet  in  one
system,  but  run  inextricably  into  and  are  determined  by  each
other.  Such  was  the  type  of  the  ancient  Jewish  law  and  of  the
Hindu  Shastra  which  preserved  up  to  recent  times  this  early
principle  of  society  in  spite  of  the  tendencies  of  specialisation
and  separation  which  have  triumphed  elsewhere  as  a result  of
the  normal  development  of  the  analytical  and  practical  reason
of  mankind.  This  complex  , customary  law  evolved  indeed,  but
by  a natural  development  of  the  body  of  social  habits  in  obe-
dience to  changing  ideas  and  more  and  more  complex,  necessities.
There  was  no  single  and  fixed  legislative  authority  to  determine
them  by  conscious  shaping  and  selection  or  in  anticipation  of
popular  consent  or  by  direct  ideative  action  upon  the  general
consensus  of  need  and  opinion.  Kings  and  prophets  and  Rishis
and  Brahmin  jurists  might  exercise  such  an  action  according  to
their  power  and  influence,  but  none  of  these  were  the  constituted
legislative  sovereign;  the  king  in  India  was  the  administrator

' Fascism,  National  Socialism  have  cut  out  the  “freely”  in  this  formula  and  set  about  the
task  of  creating  the  organised  self-regulating  consciousness  by  a violent  regimentation.


The  Drive  towards  Economic  Centralisation  425

of  the  Dharma  and  not  at  all  or  only  exceptionally  and  to  a hardly
noticeable  extent  the  legislator.

It  is  worth  noting,  indeed,  that  this  customary  law  was  often
attributed  to  an  original  legislator,  a Manu,  Moses,  Lycurgus;
but  the  historic  truth  of  any  such  tradition  has  been  discredited
by  modem  inquiry  and  perhaps  rightly,  if  we  consider  only  the
actual  ascertainable  facts  and  the  ordinary  process  of  the  human
mind  and  its  development.  In  fact,  if  we  examine  the  profound
legendary  tradition  of  India,  we  see  that  its  idea  of  the  Manu  is
more  a symbol  than  anything  else.  His  name  means  man  the
mental  being.  He  is  the  divine  legislator,  the  mental  demi-god
in  humanity  who  fixes  the  lines  upon  which  the  race  or  people
has  to  govern  its  evolution.  In  the  Purana  he  or  his  sons  are  said
to  reign  in  subtle  earths  or  worlds  or,  as  we  may  say,  they  reign
in  the  larger  mentality  which  to  us  is  subconscient  and  from  there
have  power  to  determine  the  lines  of  development  of  the  con-
scious life  of  man.  His  law  is  the  mdnava-dharmasastra,  the
science  of  the  law  of  conduct  of  the  mental  or  human  being  and
in  this  sense  we  may  think  of  the  law  of  any  human  society  as
being  the  conscious  evolution  of  the  type  and  lines  which  its
Manu  has  fixed  for  it.  If  there  comes  an  embodied  Manu,  a
living  Moses  or  Mahomed,  he  is  only  the  prophet  or  spokesman
of  the  Divinity  who  is  veiled  in  the  fire  and  the  cloud,  Jehovah
on  Sinai,  Allah  speaking  through  his  angels.  Mahomed,  as  we
know,  only  developed  the  existing  social,  religious  and  adminis-
trative customs  of  the  Arab  people  into  a new  system  dictated  to
him  often  in  a state  of  trance,  in  which  he  passed  from  his  con-
scient  into  his  superconscient  self,  by  the  Divinity  to  his  secret
intuitive  mind.  All  that  may  be  suprarational  or,  if  you  will,
irrational,  but  it  represents  a different  stage  of  human  develop-
ment from  the  government  of  society  by  its  rational  and  practical
mind  which  in  contact  with  life’s  changing  needs  and  permanent
necessities  demands  a created  and  codified  law  determined  by
a fixed  legislative  authority,  the  society’s  organised  brain  or
centre.

This  rational  development  consists,  as  we  have  seen,  in  the
creation  of  a central  authority,  — at  first  a distinct  central  force
but  afterwards  more  and  more  conterminous  with  the  society


426


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity


itself  or  directly  representing  it,  — which  gradually  takes  over
the  specialised  and  separated  parts  of  the  social  activity.  At
first,  this  authority  was  the  king,  elective  or  hereditary,  in  his
original  character  a war  leader  and  at  home  only  the  chief,  the
head  of  the  elders  or  the  strong  men  and  the  convener  of  the
nation  and  the  army,  a nodus  of  its  action,  but  not  the  principal
determinant:  in  war  only,  where  entire  centralisation  of  power
is  the  first  condition  of  effective  action,  was  he  entirely  supreme.
As  host-leader,  strategos,  he  was  also  imperator,  the  giver  of  the
absolute  command.  When  he  extended  this  combination  of
headship  and  the  rule  from  outside  inward,  he  tended  to  become
the  executive  power,  not  merely  the  chief  instrument  of  social
administration  but  the  executive  ruler.

It  was  naturally  easier  for  him  to  become  thus  supreme  in
foreign  than  in  internal  politics.  Even  now  European  govern-
ments which  have  in  internal  affairs  to  defer  to  the  popular  will
or  to  persuade  and  cajole  the  nation,  are  able  in  foreign  politics
to  act  either  entirely  or  very  largely  according  to  their  own  ideas :
for  they  are  allowed  to  determine  their  acts  by  secret  diplo-
macy in  which  the  people  can  have  no  voice  and  the  representa-
tives of  the  nation  have  only  a general  power  of  criticising  or
ratifying  its  results.  Their  action  in  foreign  politics  is  nominal
or  at  any  rate  restricted  to  a minimum,  since  they  cannot  prevent
secret  arrangements  and  treaties ; even  to  such  as  are  made  early
public  they  can  only  withhold  their  ratification  at  the  risk  of
destroying  the  sureness  and  continuity,  the  necessary  uniformity
of  the  external  action  of  the  nation  and  thus  destroying  too
the  confidence  of  foreign  governments  without  which
negotiations  cannot  be  conducted  nor  stable  alliances  and
combinations  formed.  Nor  can  they  really  withhold  their  sanc-
tion in  a crisis,  whether  for  war  or  peace,  at  the  only  moment
when  they  are  effectively  consulted,  the  last  hour  or  rather  the  last
minute  when  either  has  become  inevitable.  Much  more  neces-
sarily was  this  the  case  in  the  old  monarchies  when  the  king  was
the  maker  of  war  and  peace ’and  conducted  the  external  affairs
of  the  country  according  to  his  personal  idea  of  the  national  inte-
rests, largely  affected  by  his  own  passions,  predilections  and  per-
sonal and  family  interests.  But  whatever  the  attendant  disad-


The  Drive  towards  Economic  Centralisation  427

vantages,  the  conduct  of  war  and  peace  and  foreign  politics  as
well  as  the  conduct  of  the  host  in  the  field  of  battle  had  at  least
been  centralised,  unified  in  the  sovereign  authority.  The  demand
for  real  parliamentary  control  of  foreign  policy  and  even  for  an
open  diplomacy  — a difficult  matter  to  our  current  notions,  yet
once  practised  and  perfectly  capable  of  practice  — indicates  one
more  step  in  the  transformation,  far  from  complete  in  spite  of  the
modern  boast  of  democracy,  from  a monarchical  and  oligarchic
to  a democratic  system,  the  taking  over  of  all  sovereign  functions
from  the  one  sovereign  administrator  or  the  few  dominant  exe-
cutive men  by  the  society  as  a whole  organised  in  the  democratic
State.

In  its  seizure  of  the  internal  functionings  the  central  autho-
rity has  a more  difficult  task,  because  its  absorption  of  them  or  of
their  chief  control  has  to  reckon  with  powerful  competing  or  mo-
difying forces  and  interests  and  the  strength  of  established  and
often  cherished  national  habits  and  existing  rights  and  privileges.
But  it  is  bound  in  the  end  to  arrive  at  some  unified  control  of
those  which  are  in  their  nature  executive  and  administrative.  This
administrative  side  of  the  national  organisation  has  three  princi-
pal parts,  financial,  executive  proper  and  judicial.  The  financial
power  carries  with  it  the  control  of  the  public  purse  and  the  ex-
penditure of  the  wealth  contributed  by  the  society  for  national
purposes,  and  it  is  evident  that  this  must  pass  into  the  hands  of
whatever  authority  has  taken  up  the  business  of  organising  and
making  efficient  the  united  action  of  the  community.  But  that
authority  in  its  impulse  towards  an  undivided  and  uncontrolled
gestation,  a complete  unification  of  powers  must  naturally  desire
not  only  to  determine  the  expenditure  according  to  its  own  free
will,  but  to  determine  also  the  contributions  of  the  society  to  the
public  purse  both  in  its  amount  and  in  its  repartition  over  the  in-
dividuals and  classes  who  constitute  the  nation.  Monarchy  in  its
impulse  towards  a despotic  centrality  has  always  sought  to  en-
gross and  struggled  to  retain  this  power;  for  the  control  over  the
purse  of  the  nation  is  the  most  important  sign  and  the  most
effective  element  of  real  sovereignty,  more  essential  perhaps  than
the  control  over  life  and  limb.  In  the  most  despotic  regimes,  this
control  is  absolute  and  extends  to  the  power  of  confiscation  and


428  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

despoliation  otherwise  than  by  judicial  procedure.  On  the  other
hand,  a ruler  who  has  to  bargain  with  his  subjects  over  the
amount  of  their  contribution  and  the  methods  of  taxation,  is  at
once  hedged  in  in  his  sovereignty  and  is  not  in  fact  the  sole  and
entire  sovereign.  A vital  power  is  in  the  hands  of  an  inferior
estate  of  the  realm  and  can  be  turned  against  him  fatally  in  any
struggle  for  the  shifting  of  the  sovereignty  from  him  to  that  es-
tate. That  is  the  reason  why  the  supreme  political  instinct  of  the
English  people  fixed,  in  the  struggle  with  the  monarchy,  upon  this
question  of  taxation  as  the  first  vital  point  in  a conflict  for  the
power  of  the  purse.  Once  that  was  settled  in  the  Parliament  by
the  defeat  of  the  Stuarts,  the  transformation  of  the  monarchical
sovereignty  into  the  sovereignty  of  the  people  or,  more  accu-
rately, the  shifting  of  the  organic  control  from  the  throne  to  the
aristocracy,  thence  to  the  bourgeoisie,  and  again  to  the  whole
people,  — the  latter  two  steps,  one  still  incomplete,  comprising
the  rapid  evolution  of  the  last  eighty  years,  — was  only  a question
of  time.  In  France,  the  successful  practical  absorption  of  this
control  was  the  strength  of  the  monarchy;  it  was  its  inability  to
manage  with  justice  and  economy  the  public  purse,  its  unwilling-
ness to  tax  the  enormous  riches  of  the  aristocracy  and  clergy  as
against  the  crushing  taxation  on  the  people  and  the  consequent
necessity  of  deferring  again  to  the  nation  which  provided  the
opportunity  for  the  Revolution.  In  advanced  modem  countries
we  have  a controlling  authority  which  claims  at  least  to  represent
more  or  less  perfectly  the  whole  nation;  individuals  and  classes
have  to  submit  because  there  is  no  appeal  from  the  will  of  the
whole  society.  But  even  so,  it  is  questions,  not  of  taxation,  but  of
the  proper  organisation  and  administration  of  the  economic  life
of  the  society  which  are  preparing  the  revolutions  of  the  future.


Chapter  XXI


The  Drive  towards  Legislative
and  Social  Centralisation  and
Uniformity

The  gathering  of  the  essential  powers  of
administration  into  the  hands  of  the  sovereign  is  completed  when
there  is  unity  and  uniformity  of  judicial  administration,  — espe-
cially of  the  criminal  side;  for  this  is  intimately  connected  with  the
maintenance  of  order  and  internal  peace.  And  it  is,  besides,
necessary  for  the  ruler  to  have  the  criminal  judicial  authority  in
his  hands  so  that  he  may  use  it  to  crush  all  rebellion  against  him-
self as  treason  and  even,  so  far  as  may  be  possible,  to  stifle
criticism  and  opposition  and  penalise  that  free  thought  and  free
speech  which,  by  their  continual  seeking  for  a more  perfect  social
principle  and  their  subtle  or  direct  encouragement  to  progress,
are  so  dangerous  to  established  powers  and  institutions,  so  sub-
versive of  the  dominant  thing  in  being  by  their  drive  towards  a
better  thing  in  becoming.  Unity  of  jurisdiction,  the  power  to
constitute  tribunals,  to  appoint,  salary  and  remove  judges  and
the  right  to  determine  offences  and  their  punishments  comprise
on  the  criminal  side  the  whole  judicial  power  of  the  sovereign.
A similar  unity  of  jurisdiction,  power  to  constitute  tribunals
administering  the  civil  law  and  the  right  to  modify  the  laws  re-
lating to  property,  marriage  and  other  social  matters  which
concern  the  public  order  of  society,  comprise  its  civil  side.  But
the  unity  and  uniformity  of  the  civil  law  is  of  less  pressing  and
immediate  importance  to  the  State  when  it  is  substituting  itself
for  the  natural  organic  society;  it  is  not  so  directly  essential  as  an
instrument.  Therefore  it  is  the  criminal  jurisdiction  which  is  first
absorbed  in  a greater  or  less  entirety.

Originally,  all  these  powers  belonged  to  the  organic  society
and  were  put  into  force  mainly  by  various  natural  devices  o a


430  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

loose  and  entirely  customary  character,  such  as  the  Indian
panchayet  or  village  jury,  the  jurisdiction  of  guilds  or  other
natural  associations,  the  judicial  power  of  the  assembly  or  con-
vocations of  the  citizens  as  in  the  various  Roman  comitia  or  large
and  unwieldy  juries  chosen  by  lot  or  otherwise  as  in  Rome  and
Athens,  and  only  to  a minor  extent  by  the  judicial  action  of  the
king  or  elders  in  their  administrative  capacity.  Human  societies,
therefore,  in  their  earlier  development  retained  for  a long  time  an
aspect  of  great  complexity  in  their  judicial  administration  and
neither  possessed  nor  felt  any  need  of  a uniformity  of  jurisdiction
or  of  a centralised  unity  in  the  source  of  judicial  authority.  But
as  the  State  idea  develops,  this  unity  and  uniformity  must  arrive.
It  accomplishes  itself  at  first  by  the  gathering  up  of  all  these
various  jurisdictions  with  the  king  as  at  once  the  source  of  their
sanctions  and  a high  court  of  appeal  and  the  possessor  of  ori-
ginal powers,  which  are  exercised  sometimes  as  in  ancient  India
by  judicial  process  but  sometimes  in  more  autocratic  polities
by  ukase  — the  latter  especially  on  the  criminal  side,  in  the
awarding  of  punishments  and  more  particularly  punishments  for
offences  against  the  person  of  the  king  or  the  authority  of  the
State.  Against  this  tendency  to  unification  and  State  authority
there  militates  often  a religious  sense  in  the  community  which
attaches  as  in  most  countries  of  the  East  a sacrosanct  character
to  its  laws  and  customs  and  tends  to  keep  the  king  or  State  in
bounds;  the  ruler  is  accepted  as  the  administrator  of  justice,  but
he  is  supposed  to  be  strictly  bound  by  the  law  of  which  he  is  not
the  fountain  but  the  channel.  Sometimes  this  religious  sense
develops  a theocratical  element  in  the  society,  a Church  with  its
separate  ecclesiastical  authority  and  jurisdiction,  a Shastra  in  the
keeping  of  Brahmin  jurists,  a law  entrusted  to  the  Ulemas.
Where  the  religious  sense  maintains  its  predominance,  a solution
is  found  by  the  association  of  Brahmin  jurists  with  the  king  or
with  the  judge  appointed  by  him  in  every  State  tribunal  and  by
maintenance  of  the  supreme  authority  of  the  Pundits  or  Ulemas
in  all  moot  judicial  questions.  Where,  as  in  Europe,  the  political
instinct  is  stronger  than  the  religious,  the  ecclesiastical  jurisdic-
tion comes  in  time  to  be  subordinated  to  the  State’s  and  finally
disappears.


The  Drive  towards  Legislative  and  Social  Centralisation  431

Thus  eventually  the  State  or  the  monarchy  — that  great
instrument  of  the  transition  from  the  organic  to  the  rational
society  — becomes  the  head  of  the  law  as  well  as  the  embodiment
of  public  order  and  efficiency.  The  danger  of  subordinating  the
judiciary  entirely  to  an  executive  possessed  at  all  of  arbitrary
and  irresponsible  powers  is  obvious;  but  it  is  only  in  England  —
the  one  country  always  where  liberty  has  been  valued  as  of  equal
importance  with  order  and  not  considered  a lesser  necessity  or  no
necessity  at  all  — that  there  was  a successful  attempt  from  an
early  period  to  limit  the  judicial  power  of  the  State.  This  was
done  partly  by  the  firm  tradition  of  the  independence  of  the  tri-
bunals supported  by  the  complete  security  of  the  judges,  once
appointed,  in  their  position  and  emoluments  and  partly  by  the
institution  of  the  jury  system.  Much  room  was  left  for  oppres-
sion and  injustice,  as  in  all  human  institutions  social  or  political,
but  the  object  was  roughly  attained.  Other  countries,  it  may  be
noted,  have  adopted  the  jury  system  but,  more  dominated  by  the
instinct  of  order  and  system,  have  left  the  judiciary  under  the
control  of  the  executive.  This,  however,  is  not  so  serious  a defect
where  the  executive  not  only  represents  but  is  appointed  and  con-
trolled by  the  society  as  where  it  is  independent  of  public  control.

Uniformity  of  the  law  develops  on  different  lines  from  the
unity  and  uniformity  of  judicial  administration.  In  its  begin-
nings, law  is  always  customary  and  where  it  is  freely  customary,
where,  that  is  to  say,  it  merely  expresses  the  social  habits  of  the
people,  it  must,  except  in  small  societies,  naturally  lead  to  or
permit  considerable  variety  of  custom.  In  India,  any  sect  or
even  any  family  was  permitted  to  develop  variations  of  the  reli-
gious and  civil  custom  which  the  general  law  of  the  society  was
bound  within  vague  limits  to  accept,  and  this  freedom  is  still  part
of  the  theory  of  Hindu  law,  although  now  in  practice  it  is  very
difficult  to  get  any  new  departure  recognised.  This  spontaneous
freedom  of  variation  is  the  surviving  sign  of  a former  natura  or
organic  life  of  society  as  opposed  to  an  intellectually  ^

rationalised  or  mechanised  living.  The  organic  group-life  xe  its
general  lines  and  particular  divergences  by  the  general  sense  an
instinct  or  intuition  of  the  group-life  rather  than  by  t e s nc  er
structure  of  the  reason.


432


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity


The  first  marked  sign  of  a rational  evolution  is  the  tendency
of  code  and  constitution  to  prevail  over  custom.  But  still  there
are  codes  and  codes.  For  first  there  are  systems  that  are  un-
written or  only  partly  written  and  do  not  throw  themselves  into
the  strict  code  form,  but  are  a floating  mass  of  laws,  decreta,
precedents,  and  admit  still  of  a large  amount  of  merely  customary
law.  And  again  there  are  systems  that  do  take  the  strict  code
form,  like  the  Hindu  Shastra,  but  are  really  only  an  ossification
of  custom  and  help  to  stereotype  the  life  of  the  society  but  not
to  rationalise  it.  Finally,  there  are  those  deliberately  ordered
codes  which  are  an  attempt  at  intelligent  systematisation;  a sove-
reign authority  fixes  the  cadres  of  the  law  and  admits  from  time  to
time  changes  that  are  intelligent  accommodations  to  new  needs,
variations  that  do  not  disturb  but  merely  modify  and  develop  the
intelligent  unity  and  reasonable  fixity  of  the  system.  The  coming
to  perfection  of  this  last  type  is  the  triumph  of  the  narrower  but
more  self-conscious  and  self-helpful  rational  over  the  larger  but
vaguer  and  more  helpless  life-instinct  in  the  society.  When  it  has
arrived  at  this  triumph  of  a perfectly  self-conscious  and  syste-
matically rational  determination  and  arrangement  of  its  life  on
one  side  by  a fixed  and  uniform  constitution,  on  the  other  by  a
uniform  and  intelligently  structural  civil  and  criminal  law,  the
society  is  ready  for  the  second  stage  of  its  development.  It  can
undertake  the  self-conscious,  uniform  ordering  of  its  whole  life
in  the  light  of  the  reason  which  is  the  principle  of  modern  social-
ism and  has  been  the  drift  of  all  the  Utopias  of  the  thinkers.

But  before  we  can  arrive  at  this  stage,  the  great  question  must
be  settled,  who  is  to  be  the  State?  Is  the  embodiment  of  the  intel-
lect, will  and  conscience  of  the  society  to  be  a king  and  his  coun-
sellors or  a theocratic,  autocratic  or  plutocratic  governing  class
or  a body  which  shall  at  least  seem  to  stand  suflBciently  for  the
whole  society,  or  is  it  to  be  a compromise  between  some  or  all
of  these  possibilities  ? The  whole  course  of  constitutional  history
has  turned  upon  this  question  and  to  all  appearance  wavered
obscurely  between  various  possibilities ; but  in  reality,  we  can  see
that  throughout  there  has  been  acting  the  pressure  of  a necessity
which  travelled  indeed  through  the  monarchical,  aristocratic  and
other  stages,  but  had  to  debouch  in  the  end  in  a democratic  form


The  Drive  towards  Legislative  and  Social  Centralisation  433

of  government.  The  king  in  his  attempt  to  be  the  State  — an
attempt  imposed  on  him  by  the  impulse  of  his  evolution  — must
try  indeed  to  become  the  fountain  as  well  as  the  head  of  the  law;
he  must  seek  to  engross  the  legislative  as  well  as  the  adminis-
trative functions  of  the  society,  its  side  of  efficient  thought  as  well
as  its  side  of  efficient  action.  But  even  in  so  doing  he  was  only
preparing  the  way  for  the  democratic  State.

The  king,  his  council  military  and  civil,  the  priesthood  and
the  assembly  of  freemen  converting  itself  for  the  purposes  of  war
into  the  host,  were  perhaps  everywhere,  but  certainly  in  the
Aryan  races,  the  elements  with  which  the  self-conscious  evolu-
tion of  society  began:  they  represent  the  three  orders  of  the  free
nation  in  its  early  and  elementary  form  with  the  king  as  the  key-
stone of  the  structure.  The  king  may  get  rid  of  the  power  of  the
priesthood,  he  may  reduce  his  council  to  an  instrument  of  his  will
or  the  nobility  which  they  represent  to  a political  and  military
support  for  his  actions,  but  until  he  has  got  rid  of  the  assembly
or  is  no  longer  obliged  to  convoke  it,' — like  the  French  mon-
archy with  its  States-General  summoned  only  once  or  twice  in  the
course  of  centuries  and  under  the  pressure  of  great  difficulties,
— he  cannot  be  the  chief,  much  less  the  sole  legislative  autho-
rity. Even  if  he  leaves  the  practical  work  of  legislation  to  a non-
political, a judicial  body  like  the  French  Parliaments,  he  is  bound
to  find  there  a centre  of  resistance.  Therefore  the  disappearance
of  the  assembly  or  the  power  of  the  monarch  to  convoke  it  or  not
at  his  pleasure  is  always  the  real  mark  of  his  absolutism.  But
when  he  has  got  rid  of  or  subordinated  to  himself  all  the  other
powers  of  the  social  life,  there  at  that  point  of  his  highest  success
his  failure  begins;  the  monarchical  system  has  fulfilled  ite  posi-
tive part  in  the  social  evolution  and  all  that  is  left  to  it  is  either  to
hold  the  State  together  until  it  has  transformed  itself  or  else  to
provoke  by  oppression  the  movement  towards  the  sovereignty
of  the  people.

The  reason  is  that  in  engrossing  the  legislative  power  e
monarchy  has  exceeded  the  right  law  of  its  being,  it  has  gone
beyond  its  Dharma,  it  has  undertaken  functions  which  it  cannot
healthily  and  effectively  fulfil.  Administration  is  simply  the  regu
lation  of  the  outward  life  of  the  people,  the  ordered  maintenance


434


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity


of  the  external  activities  of  its  developed  or  developing  being,
and  the  king  may  well  be  their  regulator;  he  may  well  fulfil  the
function  which  the  Indian  polity  assigned  to  him,  the  upholder
of  the  “Dharma”.  But  legislation,  social  development,  culture,
religion,  even  the  determination  of  the  economic  life  of  the
people  are  outside  his  proper  sphere;  they  constitute  the  expres-
sion of  the  life,  the  thought,  the  soul  of  the  society  which,  if  he  is
a strong  personality  in  touch  with  the  spirit  of  the  age,  he
may  help  to  influence  but  which  he  cannot  determine.  They
constitute  the  national  Dharma,  — we  must  use  the  Indian  word
which  alone  is  capable  of  expressing  the  whole  idea;  for  our
Dharma  means  the  law  of  our  nature  and  it  means  also  its  formu-
lated expression.  Only  the  society  itself  can  determine  the  deve-
lopment of  its  own  Dharma  or  can  formulate  its  expression;
and  if  this  is  to  be  done  not  in  the  old  way  by  a naturally  organic
and  intuitive  development,  but  by  a self-conscious  regulation
through  the  organised  national  reason  and  will,  then  a govern-
ing body  must  be  created  which  will  more  or  less  adequately  re-
present, if  it  cannot  quite  embody,  the  reason  and  will  of  the
whole  society.  A governing  class,  aristocracy  or  intelligent  theo-
cracy may  represent,  not  indeed  this  but  some  vigorous  or  noble
part  of  the  national  reason  and  will ; but  even  that  can  only  be  a
stage  of  development  towards  a democratic  State.  Certainly,
democracy  as  it  is  now  practised  is  not  the  last  or  penultimate
stage;  for  it  is  often  merely  democratic  in  appearance  and  even
at  the  best  amounts  to  the  rule  of  the  majority  and  works  by  the
vicious  method  of  party  • government,  defects  the  increasing
perception  of  which  enters  largely  into  the  present-day  dissatis-
faction with  parliamentary  systems.  Even  a perfect  democracy
is  not  likely  to  be  the  last  stage  of  social  evolution,  but  it  is  still
the  necessary  broad  standing-ground  upon  which  the  self-
consciousness  of  the  social  being  can  come  to  its  own.^  Demo-
cracy and  Socialism  are,  as  we  have  already  said,  the  sign  that
that  self-consciousness  is  beginning  to  ripen  into  fullness.

It  not  follow  that  a true  democracy  must  necessarily  come  into  being  at  some  time.
For  man  individually  or  collectively  to  come  to  a full  self-consciousness  is  a most  difficult
tangle.  Before  a true  democracy  can  be  established,  the  process  is  likely  to  be  overtaken  by  a
prematurely  socialistic  endeavour.


The  Drive  towards  Legislative  and  Social  Centralisation  435

Legislation  may  seem  at  first  sight  to  be  something  external,
simply  a form  for  the  administration,  not  part  of  the  intimate
grain  of  the  social  life  like  its  economic  forms,  its  religion,  its
education  and  culture.  It  so  appears  because  in  the  past  polity
of  the  European  nations  it  has  not  been  like  oriental  legislation
or  Shastra  all-embracing,  but  has  confined  itself  until  recently  to
politics  and  constitutional  law,  the  principles  and  process  of
administration  and  so  much  only  of  social  and  economic  legisla-
tion as  was  barely  necessary  for  the  security  of  property  and  the
maintenance  of  public  order.  All  this,  it  might  seem,  might  well
fall  within  the  province  of  the  king  and  be  discharged  by  him  with
as  much  efficiency  as  by  a democratic  government.  But  it  is  not
so  in  reality,  as  history  bears  witness;  the  king  is  an  inefficient
legislator  and  unmixed  aristocracies  are  not  much  better.  For
the  laws  and  institutions  of  a society  are  the  framework  it  builds
for  its  life  and  its  Dharma.  When  it  begins  to  determine  these
for  itself  by  a self-conscious  action  of  its  reason  and  will  within
whatever  limits,  it  has  taken  the  first  step  in  a movement  which
must  inevitably  end  in  an  attempt  to  regulate  self-consciously  its
whole  social  and  cultural  life;  it  must,  as  its  self-consciousness
increases,  drive  towards  the  endeavour  to  realise  something  like
the  Utopia  of  the  thinker.  For  the  Utopian  thinker  is  the  indi-
vidual mind  forerunning  in  its  turn  of  thought  the  trend  wliich  the
social  mind  must  eventually  take.

But  as  no  individual  thinker  can  determine  in  thought  by
his  arbitrary  reason  the  evolution  of  the  rational  self-conscious
society,  so  no  executive  individual  or  succession  of  executive
individuals  can  determine  it  in  fact  by  his  or  their  arbitrary
power.  It  is  evident  that  he  cannot  determine  the  whole  social
life  of  the  nation,  it  is  much  too  large  for  him;  no  society  would
bear  the  heavy  hand  of  an  arbitrary  individual  on  its  whole
social  living.  He  cannot  determine  the  economic  life,  that  too
is  much  too  large  for  him ; he  can  only  watch  over  it  and  help  it
in  this  or  that  direction  where  help  is  needed.  He  cannot  deter-
mine the  religious  life,  though  that  attempt  has  been  made , it
is  too  deep  for  him;  for  religion  is  the  spiritual  and  ethical  life
of  the  individual,  the  relations  of  his  soul  with  God  and  the
intimate  dealings  of  his  will  and  character  with  other  individuals.


436


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity


and  no  monarch  or  governing  class,  not  even  a theocracy  or
priesthood,  can  really  substitute  itself  for  the  soul  of  the  indi-
vidual or  for  the  soul  of  a nation.  Nor  can  he  determine  the  na-
tional culture;  he  can  only  in  great  flowering  times  of  that
culture  help  by  his  protection  in  fixing  for  it  the  turn  which  by
its  own  force  of  tendency  it  was  already  taking.  To  attempt  more
is  an  irrational  attempt  which  caimot  lead  to  the  development  of
a rational  society.  He  can  only  support  the  attempt  by  autocratic
oppression  which  leads  in  the  end  to  the  feebleness  and  stagnation
of  the  society,  and  justify  it  by  some  mystical  falsity  about  the
divine  right  of  kings  or  monarchy  a peculiarly  divine  institution.
Even  exceptional  rulers,  a Charlemagne,  an  Augustus,  a Napo-
leon, a Chandragupta,  Asoka  or  Akbar,  can  do  no  more  than
fix  certain  new  institutions  which  the  time  needed,  and  help  the
emergence  of  its  best  or  else  its  strongest  tendencies  in  a critical
era.  When  they  attempt  more,  they  fail.  Akbar’s  effort  to  create
a new  Dharma  for  the  Indian  nation  by  his  enlightened  reason
was  a brilliant  futility.  Asoka’s  edicts  remain  graven  upon  pillar
and  rock,  but  the  development  of  Indian  religion  and  culture  took
its  own  line  in  other  and  far  more  complex  directions  deter-
mined by  the  soul  of  a great  people.  Only  the  rare  individual
Manu,  Avatar  or  prophet  who  comes  on  earth  perhaps  once  in
a millennium  can  speak  truly  of  his  divine  right,  for  the  secret
of  his  force  is  not  political  but  spiritual.  For  an  ordinary  political
ruling  man  or  a political  institution  to  have  made  such  a claim
was  one  of  the  most  amazing  among  the  many  follies  of  the
human  mind.

Yet  the  attempt  in  itself,  and  apart  from  its  false  justifica-
tions and  practical  failure,  was  inevitable,  fruitful  and  a neces-
sary step  in  social  evolution.  It  was  inevitable  because  this
transitional  instrument  represented  the  first  idea  of  the  human
reason  and  will,  seizing  on  the  group-life  to  fashion,  mould  and
arrange  it  according  to  its  own  pleasure  and  power  and  intelli-
gent choice,  to  govern  nature  in  the  human  mass  as  it  has  already
learned  partly  to  govern  it  in  the  human  individual.  And  since
the  mass  is  unenlightened  and  incapable  of  such  an  intelligent
effort,  who  can  do  this  for  it,  if  not  the  capable  individual  or  a
body  of  intelligent  and  capable  individuals?  That  is  the  whole


The  Drive  towards  Legislative  and  Social  Centralisation  437


rationale  of  absolutism,  aristocracy  and  theocracy.  Its  idea  is
false  or  only  a half-truth  or  temporary  truth,  because  the  real
business  of  the  advanced  class  or  individual  is  progressively  to
enlighten  and  train  the  whole  body  consciously  to  do  for  itself
its  own  work  and  not  eternally  to  do  things  for  it.^  But  the  idea
had  to  take  its  course  and  the  will  in  the  idea,  — for  every  idea
has  in  itself  a mastering  will  for  self-fulfilment,  — had  necessarily
to  attempt  its  own  extreme.  The  difficulty  was  that  the  ruling
man  or  class  could  take  up  the  more  mechanical  part  of  the  life
of  society,  but  all  that  represented  its  more  intimate  being
eluded  their  grasp;  they  could  not  lay  hands  on  its  soul.  Still,
unless  they  could  do  so,  they  must  remain  unfulfilled  in  their
trend  and  insecure  in  their  possession,  since  at  any  time  they
might  be  replaced  by  more  adequate  powers  that  must  inevitably
rise  up  from  the  larger  mind  of  humanity  to  oust  them  and  occu-
py their  throne.

Two  principal  devices  alone  seemed  adequate  and  have  been
employed  in  all  such  attempts  at  complete  mastery.  One  was
chiefly  negative ; it  worked  by  an  oppression  on  the  life  and  soul
of  the  community,  a more  or  less  complete  inhibition  of  its  free-
dom of  thought,  speech,  association,  individual  and  associated
action,  — often  attended  by  the  most  abominable  methods  of
inquisition  and  interference  and  pressure  on  the  most  sacred  rela-
tions and  liberties  of  man  the  individual  and  social  being,
and  an  encouragement  and  patronage  of  only  such  thought  and
culture  and  activities  as  accepted,  flattered  and  helped  the
governing  absolutism.  Another  was  positive;  it  consisted  in
getting  a control  over  the  religion  of  the  society  and  calling  in
the  priest  as  the  spiritual  helper  of  the  king.  For  in  natura
societies  and  in  those  which,  even  if  partly  intellectualise  , sti
cling  to  the  natural  principles  of  our  being,  religion,  i it  is  no
the  whole  life,  yet  watches  over  and  powerfully  influences  an
moulds  the  whole  life  of  the  individual  and  society,  as  it  did  ti
recent  times  in  India  and  to  a great  extent  in  all  Asiatic  coun  ries.
State  religions  are  an  expression  of  this  endeavour,  u a


* It  is  not  meant  that  in  a perfect  society  there  .-ould
aristocratic  or  theocratic  elements;  but  there  these  woul  u i
conscious  body,  not  maintain  and  propel  an  unconsaous  mass.


438


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

religion  is  an  artificial  monstrosity,  although  a national  religion
may  well  be  a living  reality;  but  even  that,  if  it  is  not  to  formalise
and  kill  in  the  end  the  religious  spirit  or  prevent  spiritual  expan-
sion, has  to  be  tolerant,  self-adaptive,  flexible,  a mirror  of  the
deeper  soul  of  the  society.  Both  these  devices,  however  seemingly
successful  for  a time,  are  foredoomed  to  failure,  failure  by  revolt
of  the  oppressed  social  being  or  failure  by  its  decay,  weakness
and  death  or  life  in  death.  Stagnation  and  weakness  such  as  in
the  end  overtook  Greece,  Rome,  the  Mussulman  nations,  China,
India,  or  else  a saving  spiritual,  social  and  political  revolution
are  the  only  issues  of  absolutism.  Still  it  was  an  inevitable  stage
of  human  development,  an  experiment  that  could  not  fail  to  be
made.  It  was  also  fruitful  in  spite  of  its  failure  and  even  by  reason
of  it;  for  the  absolutist  monarchical  and  aristocratic  State  was
the  father  of  the  modern  idea  of  the  absolutist,  socialistic  State
which  seems  now  to  be  in  process  of  birth.  It  was,  for  all  its  vices,
a necessary  step  because  only  so  could  the  clear  idea  of  an  intelli-
gently self-governing  society  firmly  evolve.

For  what  king  or  aristocracy  could  not  do  the  democratic
State  may,  perhaps  with  a better  chance  of  success  and  a greater
security,  attempt  and  bring  nearer  to  fruition,  — the  conscious
and  organised  unity,  the  regularised  efficiency  on  uniform  and
intelligent  principles,  the  rational  order  and  self-governed  per-
fectioning  of  a developed  society.  That  is  the  idea  and,  however
imperfectly,  the  attempt  of  modern  life;  and  this  attempt  has
been  the  whole  rationale  of  modern  progress.  Unity  and  uni-
formity are  its  principal  trend;  for  how  else  are  the  incalculable
complexities  of  the  vast  and  profound  thing  we  call  life  to  be
taken  hold  of,  dominated,  made  calculable  and  manageable  by  a
logical  intelligence  and  unified  will?  Socialism  is  the  complete
expression  of  this  idea.  Uniformity  of  the  social  and  economic
principles  and  processes  that  govern  the  collectivity  secured  by
means  of  a fundamental  equality  of  all,  and  the  management
of  the  whole  social  and  economic  life  in  all  its  parts  by  the  State ;
uniformity  of  culture  by  the  process  of  a State  education  orga-
nised upon  scientific  lines;  to  regularise  and  maintain  the  whole
a unified,  uniform  and  perfectly  organised  government  and
administration  that  will  represent  and  act  for  the  whole  social


The  Drive  towards  Legislative  and  Social  Centralisation  439

being,  this  is  the  modern  Utopia  which  in  one  form  or  another
it  is  hoped  to  turn,  in  spite  of  all  extant  obstacles  and  opposite
tendencies,  into  a living  reality.  Human  science  will,  it  seems,
replace  the  large  and  obscure  processes  of  Nature  and  bring  about
perfection  or  at  least  some  approach  to  perfection  in  the  collec-
tive human  life.


Chapter  XXII


World-Union  or  World-State


This,  then,  in  principle  is  the  history  of  the
growth  of  the  State.  It  is  a history  of  strict  unification  by  the
development  of  a central  authority  and  of  a growing  uniformity
in  administration,  legislation,  social  and  economic  life  and  cul-
ture and  the  chief  means  of  culture,  education  and  language.  In
all,  the  central  authority  becomes  more  and  more  the  determin-
ing and  regulating  power.  The  process  culminates  by  the  trans-
formation of  this  governing  sole  authority  or  sovereign  power
from  the  rule  of  the  central  executive  man  or  the  capable  class
into  that  of  a body  whose  proposed  function  is  to  represent  the
thought  and  will  of  the  whole  community.  The  change
represents  in  principle  an  evolution  from  a natural  and  organic
to  a rational  and  mechanically  organised  state  of  society.  An
intelligent  centralised  unification  aiming  at  a perfect  rational
efficiency  replaces  a loose  and  natural  unity  whose  efficiency  is
that  of  life  developing  with  a certain  spontaneity  its  organs  and
powers  under  the  pressure  of  inner  impulse  and  the  needs  of  the
environment  and  the  first  conditions  of  existence.  A rational,
ordered,  strict  uniformity  replaces  a loose  oneness  full  of
natural  complexities  and  variations.  The  intelligent  will  of  the
whole  society  expressed  in  a carefully  thought-out  law  and
ordered  regulation  replaces  its  natural  organic  will  expressed
in  a mass  of  customs  and  institutions  which  have  grown  up  as
the  result  of  its  nature  and  temperament.  In  the  last  perfection
of  the  State,  a carefully  devised,  in  the  end  a giant  machi-
nery productive  and  regulative,  replaces  the  vigour  and  ferti-
lity of  life  with  the  natural  simplicity  of  its  great  lines  and
the  obscure,  confused,  luxuriant  complexity  of  its  details.
The  State  is  the  masterful  but  arbitrary  and  intolerant,
science  and  reason  of  man  that  successfully  takes  the
place  of  the  intuitions  and  evolutionary  experimentations  of


World-Union  or  World-State


441


Nature;  intelligent  organisation  replaces  natural  organism.

The  unity  of  the  human  race  by  political  and  administrative
means  implies  eventually  the  formation  and  organisation  of  a
single  World-State  out  of  a newly  created,  though  still  loose,
natural  organic  unity  of  mankind.  For  the  natural  organic
unity  already  exists,  a unity  of  life,  of  involuntary  association,
of  a closely  interdependent  existence  of  the  constituent  parts  in
which  the  life  and  movements  of  one  affect  the  life  of  the  others
in  a way  which  would  have  been  impossible  a hundred  years  ago.
Continent  has  no  longer  a separate  life  from  continent;  no  na-
tion can  any  longer  isolate  itself  at  will  and  live  a separate  exis-
tence. Science,  commerce  and  rapid  communications  have
produced  a state  of  things  in  which  the  disparate  masses  of  human-
ity, once  living  to  themselves,  have  been  drawn  together  by  a
process  of  subtle  unification  into  a single  mass  which  has  already  a
common  vital  and  is  rapidly  forming  a common  mental  existence.
A great  precipitating  and  transforming  shock  was  needed  which
should  make  this  subtle  organic  unity  manifest  and  reveal  the
necessity  and  create  the  will  for  a closer  and  organised  union  and
this  shock  came  with  the  Great  War.  The  idea  of  a World-State
or  world-union  has  been  born  not  only  in  the  speculating
forecasting  mind  of  the  thinker  but  in  the  consciousness  of
humanity  out  of  the  very  necessity  of  this  new  common
existence.

The  World-State  must  now  either  be  brought  about  by  a
mutual  understanding  or  by  the  force  of  circumstances  and  a
series  of  new  and  disastrous  shocks.  For  the  old  still-prevailing
order  of  things  was  founded  on  circumstances  and  conditions
which  no  longer  exist.  A new  order  is  demanded  by  the  new  con-
ditions and,  so  long  as  it  is  not  created,  there  will  be  a transi-
tional era  of  continued  trouble  or  recurrent  disorders,  inevitable
crises  through  which  Nature  will  effect  in  her  own  violent  way
the  working  out  of  the  necessity  which  she  has  evolved.  There
may  be  in  the  process  a maximum  of  loss  and  suffering  through
the  clash  of  national  and  imperial  egoisms  or  else  a minimum,
if  reason  and  goodwill  prevail.  To  that  reason  two  alternative
possibilities  and  therefore  two  Ideals  present  themselves,  a
World-State  founded  upon  the  principle  of  centralisation  and


442  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

uniformity,  a mechanical  and  formal  iinity,  or  a world-union
founded  upon  the  principle  of  liberty  an4  variation  in  a free  and
intelligent  unity.  These  two  ideas  ancl  possibilities  we  have
successively  to  consider.


Chapter  XXIII


Forms  of  Government


The  idea  of  a world-union  of  free  nations
and  empires,  loose  at  first,  but  growing  closer-knit  with  time
and  experience,  seems  at  first  sight  the  most  practicable  form  of
political  unity;  it  is  the  only  form  indeed  which  would  be  imme-
diately practicable,  supposing  the  will  to  unity  to  become  rapidly
effective  in  the  mind  of  the  race.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  the
State  idea  which  is  now  dominant.  The  State  has  been  the  most
successful  and  efficient  means  of  unification  and  has  been  best
able  to  meet  the  various  needs  which  the  progressive  aggregate
life  of  societies  has  created  for  itself  and  is  still  creating.  It  is,
besides,  the  expedient  to  which  the  human  mind  at  present  has
grown  accustomed,  and  it  is  too  the  most  ready  means  both  for
its  logical  and  its  practical  reason  to  work  with  because  it  pro-
vides it  with  what  our  limited  intelligence  is  always  tempted  to
think  its  best  instrument,  a clear-cut  and  precise  machinery  and
a stringent  method  of  organisation.  Therefore  it  is  by  no  means
impossible  that,  even  though  beginning  with  a loose  union,  the
nations  may  be  rapidly  moved  by  the  pressure  of  the  many  prob-
lems which  would  arise  from  the  ever  closer  interworking  of  their
needs  and  interests,  to  convert  it  into  the  more  stringent  form  of
a World-State.  We  can  found  no  safe  conclusion  upon  the
immediate  impracticability  of  its  creation  or  on  the  many
difficulties  which  would  stand  in  its  way;  for  past  experience
shows  that  the  argument  of  impracticability  is  of  very  little  value.
What  the  practical  man  of  today  denies  as  absurd  and  impracti-
cable is  often  enough  precisely  the  thing  that  future  generations
set  about  realising  and  eventually  in  some  form  or  other  succeed
in  bringing  into  effective  existence.

But  a World-State  implies  a strong  central  organ  of  power
that  would  represent  or  at  least  stand  for  the  united  will  of  the
nations.  A unification  of  all  the  necessary  powers  in  the  hands


44^^  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

of  this  central  and  common  governing  body,  at  least  in  their
source  — powers  military,  administrative,  judicial,  economic,
legislative,  social,  educational  would  be  indispensable.  And  as  an
almost  inevitable  result  there  would  be  an  increasing  uniformity
of  human  life  throughout  the  world  in  all  these  departments,
even  perhaps  to  the  choice  or  creation  of  one  common  and  uni-
versal language.  This,  indeed,  is  the  dream  of  a unified  world
which  Utopian  thinkers  have  been  more  and  more  moved  to
place  before  us.  The  difiiculties  in  the  way  of  arriving  at  this
result  are  at  present  obvious,  but  they  are  perhaps  not  so  great  as
they  seem  at  first  sight  and  none  of  them  are  insoluble.  It  is  no
longer  a Utopia  that  can  be  put  aside  as  the  impracticable  dream
of  the  ideal  thinker.

The  first  difficulty  would  be  the  character  and  composition
of  this  governing  body,  a problem  beset  with  doubts  and  perils.
In  ancient  times  it  was  solved  readily  enough  in  smaller  limits  by
the  absolutist  and  monarchical  solution  with  the  rule  of  a conquer-
ing race  as  the  starting-point,  as  in  the  Persian  and  Roman  em-
pires. But  that  resource  is  no  longer  as  easily  open  to  us  in  the
new  conditions  of  human  society,  whatever  dreams  may  in  the
past  have  entered  into  the  minds  of  powerful  nations  or  their
Czars  and  Kaisers.  The  monarchical  idea  itself  is  beginning  to
pass  away  after  a brief  and  fallacious  attempt  at  persistence  and
revival.  Almost  it  seems  to  be  nearing  its  final  agony;  the  seal  of
the  night  is  upon  it.  Contemporary  appearances  are  often  enough
deceptive,  but  they  are  less  likely  to  be  so  in  the  present  instance
than  in  many  others,  because  the  force  which  makes  for  the  dis-
appearance of  the  still-surviving  monarchies  is  strong,  radical  and
ever  increasing.  The  social  aggregates  have  ripened  into  self-
conscious  maturity  and  no  longer  stand  in  need  of  a hereditary
kingship  to  do  their  governing  work  for  them  or  even  to  stand  for
them  — except  perhaps  in  certain  exceptional  cases  such  as  the
British  Empire  — as  the  symbol  of  their  unity.  Either  then  the
monarchy  can  only  survive  in  name,  — as  in  England  where  the
king  has  less  power  even,  if  that  be  possible,  than  the  French
President  and  infinitely  less  than  the  heads  of  the  American  re-
publics, — or  else  it  becomes  a source  of  offence,  a restraint  to
the  growing  democratic  spirit  of  the  peoples  and  to  a greater  or


Forms  of  Government  445

less  degree  a centre,  a refuge  or  at  least  an  opportunity  for  the
forces  of  reaction.  Its  prestige  and  popularity  tend  therefore  not
to  increase  but  to  decline,  and  at  some  crisis  when  it  comes  too
strongly  into  conflict  with  the  sentiment  of  the  nation,  it  falls  with
small  chance  of  lasting  revival.

Monarchy  has  thus  fallen  or  is  threatened  almost  every-
where — and  most  suddenly  in  countries  where  its  tradition  was
once  the  strongest.  Even  in  these  days  it  has  fallen  in  Germany
and  Austria,  in  China,  in  Portugal,  in  Russia;  it  has  been  in  peril
in  Greece  and  Italy  and  it  has  been  cast  out  of  Spain.  In  no  con-
tinental country  is  it  really  safe  except  in  some  of  the  smaller
States.  In  most  of  them  it  exists  for  reasons  that  already  belong
to  the  past  and  may  soon  lose,  if  they  are  not  already  losing,
their  force.  The  continent  of  Europe  seems  destined  to  become
in  time  as  universally  republican  as  the  two  Americas.  For
kingship  there  is  now  only  a survival  of  the  world’s  past;  it  has
no  deep  root  in  the  practical  needs  or  the  ideals  or  the  tempera-
ment of  present-day  humanity.  When  it  disappears,  it  will  be
truer  to  say  of  it  that  it  has  ceased  to  survive  Aan  to  say  that  it
has  ceased  to  live.

The  republican  tendency  is  indeed  Western  in  its  origin,
stronger  as  we  go  more  and  more  to  the  West,  and  has  been  his-
torically powerful  chiefly  in  Western  Europe  and  dominant  in
the  new  societies  of  America.  It  might  be  thought  that  with  the
entrance  of  Asia  into  the  active  united  life  of  the  world,  when  the
eastern  continent  has  passed  through  its  present  throes  of  tran-
sition, the  monarchical  idea  might  recover  strength  and  find  a
new  source  of  life.  For  in  Asia  kingship  has  been  not  only  a
material  fact  resting  upon  political  needs  and  conditions,  but  a
spiritual  symbol  and  invested  with  a sacrosanct  character.  But
in  Asia  no  less  than  in  Europe,  monarchy  has  been  a historical
growth,  the  result  of  circumstances  and  therefore  subject  to  dis-
appearance when  those  circumstances  no  longer  exist.  The  true
mind  of  Asia  has  always  remained,  behind  all  surface  appear-
ances, not  political  but  social,  monarchical  and  aristocratic  at
the  surface  but  with  a fundamental  democratic  trend  and  a theo-
cratic spirit.  Japan  with  its  deep-rooted  monarchic  sentiment  is

» Now  in  Italy  too  it  is  gone  with  practically  no  hope  of  return.


446  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

the  one  prominent  exception  to  this  general  rule.  Already  a great
tendency  of  change  is  manifest.  China,  always  a democratic
country  at  bottom  though  admitting  in  its  democratic  system  an
official  aristocracy  of  intellect  and  a symbolic  imperial  head,  is
now  definitely  republican.  The  difficulty  of  the  attempt  to  revive
monarchy  or  to  replace  it  by  temporary  dictatorships  has  been
due  to  an  innate  democratic  sentiment  now  invigorated  by  the
acceptance  of  a democratic  form  for  the  supreme  government,
the  one  valuable  contribution  of  Western  experience  to  the  prob-
lem at  which  the  old  purely  social  democracies  of  the  East  were
unable  to  arrive.  In  breaking  with  the  last  of  its  long  succession
of  dynasties  China  had  broken  with  an  element  of  her  past  which
was  rather  superficial  than  at  the  very  centre  of  her  social  tempe-
rament and  habits.  In  India  the  monarchical  sentiment,  which
coexisted  with  but  was  never  able  to  prevail  over  the  theocratic
and  social  except  during  the  comparatively  brief  rule  of  the
Moghuls,  was  hopelessly  weakened  though  not  effaced,  by  the
rule  of  a British  bureaucracy  and  the  political  Europeanising  of
the  active  mind  of  the  race.^  In  Western  Asia  monarchy  has  dis-
appeared in  Turkey,  it  exists  only  in  the  States  which  need  the
monarch  as  a centralising  power  or  keystone.

At  the  two  extremes  of  the  Asiatic  world  in  Japan  and  in
Turkey  the  monarchy  after  the  close  of  the  war  still  preserved
something  of  its  old  sacrosanct  character  and  its  appeal  to  the
sentiment  of  the  race.  In  Japan,  still  imperfectly  democratised,
the  sentiment  which  surrounds  the  Mikado  is  visibly  weakened,
his  prestige  survives  but  his  actual  power  is  very  limited,  and  the
growth  of  democracy  and  socialism  is  bound  to  aid  the  weakening
and  limiting  process  and  may  well  produce  the  same  results  as  in
Europe.  The  Moslem  Caliphate,  originally  the  head  of  a theo-
cratic democracy,  was  converted  into  a political  institution  by  the
rapid  growth  of  a Moslem  empire,  now  broken  into  pieces.  The
Caliphate  now  abolished  could  only  have  survived  as  a purely
religious  headship  and  even  in  that  character  its  unity  was  threat-

* Now  with  the  liberation  of  the  country  and  the  establishment  of  a republican  and  demo-
cratic constitution,  the  ruling  princes  have  either  disappeared  or  become  subordinate  heads
with  their  small  kingdoms  becoming  partly  or  wholly  democratised  or  destined  to  melt  into  a
united  India.


Forms  of  Government  447

ened  by  the  rise  of  new  spiritual  and  national  movements  in  Persia,
Arabia  and  Egypt.  But  the  one  real  and  important  fact  in  Asia
of  today  is  this  that  the  whole  active  force  of  its  future  is  centred
not  in  priesthood  or  aristocracy,  but,  as  it  was  formerly  in  Russia
before  the  Revolution,  in  a newly-created  intelligentsia,  small  at
first  in  numbers,  but  increasing  in  energy  and  the  settled  will  to
arrive  and  bound  to  become  exceedingly  dynamic  by  reason  of
the  inherited  force  of  spirituality.  Asia  may  well  preserve  its
ancient  spirituality;  even  in  its  hour  of  greatest  weakness  it
has  been  able  to  impose  its  prestige  increasingly  even  on  the
positive  European  mind.  But  whatever  turn  that  spirituality
takes,  it  will  be  determined  by  the  mentality  of  this  new  intelli-
gentsia and  will  certainly  flow  into  other  channels  than  the  old
ideas  and  symbols.  The  old  forms  of  Asiatic  monarchy  and
theocracy  seem  therefore  destined  to  disappear;  at  present  there
is  no  chance  of  their  revival  in  new  figures,  although  that  may
happen  in  the  future.

The  only  apparent  chance  eventually  for  the  monarchical
idea  is  that  its  form  may  be  retained  as  a convenient  symbol  for
the  unity  of  the  heterogeneous  empires  which  would  be  the  largest
elements  in  any  unification  based  upon  the  present  political  con-
figuration of  the  world.  But  even  for  these  empires  the  symbol
has  not  proved  to  be  indispensable.  France  has  done  without  it,
Russia  has  recently  dispensed  with  it.  In  Austria  it  had  become
odious  to  some  of  the  constituent  races  as  the  badge  of  subjection
and  was  bound  to  perish  even  without  the  collapse  of  the  Great
War.  Only  in  England  and  in  some  small  countries  is  it  at  once
innocuous  and  useful  and  therefore  upheld  by  a general  feeling.
Conceivably,  if  the  British  Empire,^  even  now  the  leading,  the
most  influential,  the  most  powerful  force  in  the  world,  were  to
become  the  nucleus  or  the  pattern  of  the  future  unification,
there  might  be  some  chance  of  the  monarchical  element  surviving
in  the  figure  — and  even  an  empty  figure  is  sometimes  useful  as
a support  and  centre  for  future  potentialities  to  grow  and  fill  with
life.  But  against  this  stands  the  fixed  republican  sentiment  of  the
whole  of  America  and  the  increasing  spread  of  the  republican
form;  there  is  little  chance  that  even  a nominal  kingship  re-

» Now  no  longer  Empire  but  Commonwealth.


448


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

presenting  one  element  of  a very  heterogeneous  whole  would  be
accepted  by  the  rest  in  any  form  of  general  unification.  In  the
past,  at  least,  this  has  only  happened  under  the  stress  of  conquest.
Even  if  the  World-State  found  it  convenient  as  the  result  of  ex-
perience to  introduce  or  to  reintroduce  the  monarchical  element
into  its  constitution,  it  could  only  be  in  some  quite  new  form  of  a
democratic  kingship.  But  a democratic  kingship,  as  opposed  to
a passive  figure  of  monarchy,  the  modem  world  has  not  suc-
ceeded in  evolving.

The  two  determining  facts  in  modern  conditions  which  alter
the  whole  problem  are  that  in  this  kind  of  unification  nations  take
the  place  of  individuals  and  that  these  nations  are  mature  self-
conscious  societies,  predestined  therefore  to  pass  through  pro-
nounced forms  of  social  democracy  or  some  other  form  of  socia-
lism. It  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that  the  World-State  will  tend
to  strive  after  the  same  principle  of  formation  as  that  which
obtains  in  the  separate  societies  which  are  to  constitute  it.  The
problem  would  be  simpler  if  we  could  suppose  the  difficulties
created  by  conflicting  national  temperaments,  interests  and
cultures  to  be  either  eliminated  or  successfully  subordinated  and
minimised  by  the  depression  of  separative  nationalistic  feeling
and  the  growth  of  a cosmopolitan  internationalism.  That  solu-
tion is  not  altogether  impossible  in  spite  of  the  serious  check  to
internationalism  and  the  strong  growth  of  nationalistic  feeling
developed  by  the  World  War.  For,  conceivably,  internationalism
may  revive  with  a redoubled  force  after  the  stress  of  the  feelings
created  by  the  War  has  passed.  In  that  case,  the  tendency  of  uni-
fication may  look  to  the  ideal  of  a world-wide  Republic  with  the
nations  as  provinces,  though  at  first  very  sharply  distinct  provin-
ces, and  governed  by  a council  or  parliament  responsible  to  the
united  democracies  of  the  world.  Or  it  might  be  something  like
the  disguised  oligarchy  of  an  international  council  reposing  its
rule  on  the  assent,  expressed  by  election  or  otherwise,  of  what
might  be  called  a semi-passive  democracy  as  its  first  figure.  For
that  is  what  the  modem  democracy  at  present  is  in  fact;  the  sole
democratic  elements  are  public  opinion,  periodical  elections  and
the  power  of  the  people  to  refuse  re-election  to  those  who  have
displeased  it.  The  government  is  really  in  the  hands  of  the  hour-


Forms  of  Government  449

geoisie,  the  professional  and  business  men,  the  landholders,  — -
where  such  a class  still  exists,  — strengthened  by  a number  of  new
arrivals  from  the  working-class  who  very  soon  assimilate  them-
selves to  the  political  temperament  and  ideas  of  the  governing
classes.^  If  a World-State  were  to  be  established  on  the  present
basis  of  human  society,  it  might  well  try  to  develop  its  central
government  on  this  principle.

But  the  present  is  a moment  of  transition  and  a bourgeois
World-State  is  not  a probable  consummation.  In  each  of  the
more  progressive  nations,  the  dominance  of  the  middle  class  is
threatened  on  two  sides.  There  is  first  the  dissatisfaction  of  the
intellectuals  who  find  in  its  unimaginative  business  practicality
and  obstinate  commercialism  an  obstacle  to  the  realisation  of
their  ideals.  And  there  is  the  dissatisfaction  of  the  great  and
growing  power  of  Labour  which  sees  democratic  ideals  and
changes  continually  exploited  in  the  interests  of  the  middle  class,
though  as  yet  it  has  found  no  alternative  to  the  Parliamentarism
by  which  that  class  ensures  its  rule.^  What  changes  the  alliance
between  these  two  dissatisfactions  may  bring  about,  it  is  impos-
sible to  foresee.  In  Russia,  where  it  was  strongest,  we  have  seen
it  taking  the  lead  of  the  Revolution  and  compelling  the  bour-
geoisie to  undergo  its  control,  although  the  compromise  so
effected  could  not  long  outlast  the  exigencies  of  the  war.  Since
then  the  old  order  there  has  been  “liquidated”  and  the  triumph
of  the  new  tendencies  has  been  complete.  In  two  directions  it
may  lead  to  a new  form  of  modified  oligarchy  with  a democratic
basis.  The  government  of  a modem  society  is  now  growing  an
exceedingly  complicated  business  in  each  part  of  which  a special
knowledge,  special  competence,  special  faculties  are  required  and
every  new  step  towards  State  socialism  must  increase  this  ten-
dency. The  need  of  this  sort  of  special  training  or  faculty  in  the
councillor  and  administrator  combined  with  the  democratic
tendencies  of  the  age  might  well  lead  to  some  modern  form  of
the  old  Chinese  principle  of  government,  a democratic  organisa-

» This  has  now  changed  and  the  Trade  Unions  and  similar  institutions  have  attained
an  equal  power  v\ith  the  other  classes.

* Written  before  the  emergence  of  the  Soviet  State  in  Russia  and  of  the  Fascist  States.

In  the  latter  it  is  the  middle  class  itself  that  rose  against  democracy  and  established  for  a time
a new  form  of  government  and  society.


450


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

tion  of  life  below,  above  the  rule  of  a sort  of  intellectual  bureau-
cracy, an  official  aristocracy  of  special  knowledge  and  capacity
recruited  from  the  general  body  without  distinction  of  classes.
Equal  opportunity  would  be  indispensable  but  this  governing
elite  would  still  form  a class  by  itself  in  the  constitution  of  the
society.  On  the  other  hand,  if  the  industrialism  of  the  modem
nations  changes,  as  some  think  it  will,  and  develops  into  a sort  of
guild  socialism,  a guild  aristocracy  of  Labour  might  well  become
the  governing  body  in  the  society If  any  of  these  things  were
done,  any  movement  towards  a World-State  would  then  take  the
same  direction  and  evolve  a governing  body  of  the  same  model.

But  in  these  two  possibilities  we  leave  out  of  consideration
the  great  factor  of  nationalism  and  the  conflicting  interests  and
tendencies  it  creates.  To  overcome  these  conflicting  interests,  it
has  been  supposed,  the  best  v/ay  is  to  evolve  a sort  of  World-
Parliament  in  which,  it  is  to  be  presumed,  the  freely  formed  and
freely  expressed  opinion  of  the  majority  would  prevail.  Parlia-
mentarism, the  invention  of  the  English  political  genius,  is  a
necessary  stage  in  the  evolution  of  democracy,  for  without  it  the
generalised  faculty  of  considering  and  managing  with  the  least
possible  friction  large  problems  of  politics,  administration,
economics,  legislation  concerning  considerable  aggregates  of  men
cannot  easily  be  developed.  It  has  also  been  the  one  successful
means  yet  discovered  of  preventing  the  State  executive  from  sup-
pressing the  liberties  of  the  individual  and  the  nation.  Nations
emerging  into  the  modern  form  of  society  are  therefore  naturally
and  rightly  attracted  to  this  instrument  of  government.  But  it
has  not  yet  been  found  possible  to  combine  Parliamentarism  and
the  modem  trend  towards  a more  democratic  democracy;  it
has  been  always  an  instmment  either  of  a modified  aristocratic
or  of  a middle  class  rule.  Besides,  its  method  involves  an  im-
mense waste  of  time  and  energy  and  a confused,  swaying  and
uncertain  action  that  “muddle  out”  in  the  end  some  tolerable
result.  This  method  accords  ill  with  the  more  stringent  ideas  of

1 Something  of  the  kind  was  attempted  in  Soviet  Russia  for  a time.  The  existing  condi-
tions were  not  favourable  and  a definite  form  of  government  not  revolutionary  and  provisional
is  not  anywhere  in  sight.  In  Fascist  Italy  a co-operative  State  was  announced  but  this  too  took
no  cfiectual  or  perfect  shape.


Forms  of  Government  451

efficient  government  and  administration  that  are  now  growing
in  force  and  necessity  and  it  might  be  fatal  to  efficiency  in  any-
thing so  complicated  as  the  management  of  the  affairs  of  the
world.  Parliamentarism  means  too,  in  practice,  the  rule  and  often
the  tyranny  of  a majority,  even  of  a very  small  majority,  and
the  modern  mind  attaches  increasing  importance  to  the  rights
of  minorities.  And  these  rights  would  be  still  more  important  in
a World-State  where  any  attempt  to  override  them  might  easily
mean  serious  discontents  and  disorders  or  even  convulsions  fatal
to  the  whole  fabric.  Above  all,  a Parliament  of  the  nations
must  necessarily  be  a united  parliament  of  free  nations  and
could  not  well  come  into  successful  being  in  the  present  ano-
malous and  chaotic  distribution  of  power  in  the  world.  The
Asiatic  problem  alone,  if  still  left  unsolved,  would  be  a fatal
obstacle  and  it  is  not  alone;  the  inequalities  and  anomalies  are
all-pervasive  and  without  number.

A more  feasible  form  would  be  a supreme  council  of  the  free
and  imperial  nations  of  the  existing  world-system,  but  this  also
has  its  difficulties.  It  could  only  be  workable  at  first  if  it  amount-
ed in  fact  to  an  oligarchy  of  a few  strong  imperial  nations  whose
voice  and  volume  would  prevail  at  every  point  over  that  of  the
more  numerous  but  smaller  non-imperialistic  commonwealths
and  it  could  only  endure  by  a progressive  and,  if  possible,  a peace-
ful evolution  from  this  sort  of  oligarchy  of  actual  power  to  a more
just  and  ideal  system  in  which  the  imperialistic  idea  would  dis-
solve and  the  great  empires  merge  their  separate  existence  into
that  of  a unified  mankind.  How  far  national  egoism  would
allow  that  evolution  to  take  place  without  vehement  struggles
and  dangerous  convulsions,  is,  in  spite  of  the  superficial  liberal-
ism now  widely  professed,  a question  still  fraught  with  grave
and  ominous  doubts.

On  the  whole,  then,  whichever  way  we  turn,  this  question
of  the  form  of  a World-State  is  beset  with  doubts  and  difficulties
that  are  for  the  moment  insoluble.  Some  arise  from  the  surviving
sentiments  and  interests  of  the  past;  some  menace  from  the
rapidly  developing  revolutionarj'  forces  of  the  future.  It  does
not  follow  that  they  can  never  or  will  never  be  solved,  but  the
way  and  the  line  any  such  solution  would  take  are  beyond  calcu-


452  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

lation  and  can  really  be  determined  only  by  practical  experience
and  experiment  under  the  pressure  of  the  forces  and  necessities
of  the  modern  world.  For  the  rest,  the  form  of  government  is
not  of  supreme- importance.  The  real  problem  is  that  of  the
unification  of  powers  and  the  uniformity  which  any  manageable
system  of  a World-State  would  render  inevitable.


Chapter  XXIV


The  Need  of  Military  Unification


In  THE  process  of  centralisation  by  which
all  the  powers  of  an  organised  community  come  to  be  centred  in
one  sovereign  governing  body,  — the  process  which  has  been  the
most  prominent  characteristic  of  national  formations,  — mili-
tary necessity  has  played  at  the  beginning  the  largest  overt  part.
This  necessity  was  both  external  and  internal,  — external  for  the
defence  of  the  nation  against  disruption  or  subjection  from
without,  internal  for  its  defence  against  civil  disruption  and
disorder.  If  a common  administrative  authority  is  essential  in
order  to  bind  together  the  constituent  parts  of  a nation  in  the
forming,  the  first  need  and  claim  of  that  central  authority  is  to
have  in  its  hands  the  means  to  prevent  mortal  dissidence  and
violent  strife  that  would  weaken  or  break  up  the  organic  forma-
tion. The  monarchy  or  any  other  central  body  must  effect  this
end  partly  by  moral  force  and  psychological  suggestion.  For  it
stands  as  the  symbol  of  union  and  imposes  respect  for  their  visible
and  consecrated  unity  on  the  constituent  parts,  however  strong
may  be  their  local,  racial,  clan  or  class  instincts  of  separatism.
It  embodies  the  united  authority  of  the  nation  entitled  to  impose
its  moral  force  as  greater  than  the  moral  right  of  the  separate
parts,  even  if  they  be  something  like  sub-nations,  and  to  com-
mand their  obedience.  But  in  the  last  resort,  since  these  motives
may  at  any  moment  fail  when  revolting  interests  or  sentiments
are  strong  and  passions  run  high,  the  governing  body  must  have
always  the  greatest  military  force  at  its  command  so  as  to  over-
awe the  constituent  elements  and  prevent  the  outbreak  of  a dis-
ruptive civil  war.  Or  if  the  civil  war  or  rebellion  comes  about,
as  can  always  happen  when  the  monarchy  or  the  government
is  identified  closely  with  one  of  the  parties  in  a quarrel  or  is  itself
the  subject  of  dissatisfaction  and  attack,  then  it  must  have  so
great  a predominance  of  force  behind  it  as  to  be  morall}'  sure  of


454  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

victory  in  the  conflict.  This  can  only  be  secured  to  the  best  pos-
sible perfection,  — it  cannot  be  done  absolutely  except  by  an
effective  disarmament,  — if  the  whole  military  authority  is
centred  in  the  central  body  and  the  whole  actual  or  potential
military  force  of  the  society  subjected  to  its  undivided  control.

In  the  trend  to  the  formation  of  the  World-State,  however
subconscient,  vague  and  formless  it  may  yet  be,  military  neces-
sity has  begun  to  play  the  same  large  visible  part.  The  peoples
of  the  world  already  possess  a loose  and  chaotic  unity  of  life
in  which  none  can  any  longer  lead  an  isolated,  independent  and
self-dependent  existence.  Each  feels  in  its  culture,  political  ten-
dencies and  economic  existence  the  influence  and  repercussion
of  events  and  movements  in  other  parts  of  the  world.  Each  al-
ready feels  subtly  or  directly  its  separate  life  overshadowed  by
the  life  of  the  whole.  Science,  international  commerce  and  the
political  and  cultural  penetration  of  Asia  and  Africa  by  the
dominant  West  have  been  the  agents  of  this  great  change.  Even
in  this  loose  unacknowledged  and  underlying  unity  the  occur-
rence or  the  possibility  of  great  wars  has  become  a powerful
element  of  disturbance  to  the  whole  fabric,  a disturbance  that
may  one  day  become  mortal  to  the  race.  Even  before  the  Euro-
pean war,  the  necessity  of  avoiding  or  minimising  a collision
between  one  or  two  that  might  prove  fatal  to  all  was  keenly  felt
and  various  well-intentioned  but  feeble  and  blundering  devices
were  tentatively  introduced  which  had  that  end  in  view.  Had
any  of  these  makeshifts  been  tolerably  effective,  the  world  might
long  have  remained  content  with  its  present  very  unideal  condi-
tions and  the  pressing  need  of  a closer  international  organisa-
tion would  not  have  enforced  itself  on  the  general  mind  of  the
race.  But  the  European  collision  rendered  the  indefinite  conti-
nuance of  the  old  chaotic  regime  impossible.  The  necessity  of
avoiding  any  repetition  of  the  catastrophe  was  for  , a time  uni-
versally acknowledged.  A means  of  keeping  international  peace
and  of  creating  an  authority  which  shall  have  the  power  to  dis-
pose of  dangerous  international  questions  and  prevent  what
from  the  new  point  of  view  of  human  unity  we  may  call  civil
war  between  the  peoples  of  mankind,  had  somehow  or  other
to  be  found  or  created.


The  Need  of  Military  Unification  455

Various  ideas  were  put  forward  with  more  or  less  authority  as
to  the  necessary  conditions  of  international  peace.  The  crudest
of  these  was  the  foolish  notion  created  by  a one-sided  propa-
ganda, which  imagined  that  the  destruction  of  German  militar-
ism was  the  one  thing  needful  and  in  itself  sufficient  to  secure  the
future  peace  of  the  wprld.  The  military  power,  the  political  and
commercial  ambitions  of  Germany  and  her  acute  sense  of  her
confined  geographical  position  and  her  encirclement  by  an  un-
friendly alliance  were  the  immediate  moral  cause  of  this  parti-
cular war;  but  the  real  cause  lay  in  the  very  nature  of  the  inter-
national situation  and  the  psychology  of  national  life.  The  chief
feature  of  this  psychology  is  the  predominance  and  worship  of
national  egoism  under  the  sacred  name  of  patriotism.  Every
national  ego,  like  every  organic  life,  desires  a double  self-
fulfilment,  intensive  and  extensive  or  expansive.  The  deepening
and  enriching  of  its  culture,  political  strength  and  economic  well-
being within  its  borders  is  not  felt  to  be  sufficient  if  there  is  not,
without,  an  extension  or  expansion  of  its  culture,  an  increase  of
its  political  extent,  dominion,  power  or  influence  and  a masterful
widening  of  its  commercial  exploitation  of  the  world.  This
natural  and  instinctive  desire  is  not  an  abnormal  moral  depra-
vity but  the  very  instinct  of  egoistic  life;  and  what  life  at  present
is  not  egoistic?  But  it  can  be  satisfied  only  to  a very  limited
degree  by  peaceful  and  unaggressive  means.  And  where  it  feels
itself  hemmed  in  by  obstacles  that  it  thinks  it  can  overcome,
opposed  by  barriers,  encircled,  dissatisfied  with  a share  of  pos-
session and  domination  it  considers  disproportionate  to  its  needs
and  its  strength,  or  where  new  possibilities  of  expansion  open
out  to  it  in  which  only  its  strength  can  obtain  for  it  its  desirable
portion,  it  is  at  once  moved  to  the  use  of  some  kind  of  force  and
can  only  be  restrained  by  the  amount  of  resistance  it  is  likely  to
meet.  If  it  has  a weak  opposition  of  unorganised  or  ill-organised
peoples  to  overcome,  it  will  not  hesitate;  if  it  has  the  opposition
of  powerful  rivals  to  fear,  it  will  pause,  seek  for  alliances  or  watch
for  its  moment.  Germany  had  not  the  monopoly  of  this  expan-
sive instinct  and  egoism;  but  its  egoism  was  the  best  organised
and  least  satisfied,  the  youngest,  crudest,  hungriest,  most
self-confident  and  presumptuous,  most  satisfied  with  the  self-


456


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

righteous  brutality  of  its  desires.  The  breaking  of  German
militarism  might  ease  for  a moment  the  intensity  of  the  many-
headed commercial  wrestle  but  it  cannot,  by  the  removal  of  a
dangerous  and  restless  competitor,  end  it.  So  long  as  any  kind
of  militarism  survives,  so  long  as  fields  of  political  or  commer-
cial aggrandisement  are  there  and  so  long  as  national  egoisms
live  and  are  held  sacred  and  there  is  no  final  check  on  their  in-
herent instinct  of  expansion,  war  will  be  always  a possibility  and
almost  a necessity  of  the  life  of  the  human  peoples.

Another  idea  put  forward  with  great  authorities  behind  it
was  a league  of  free  and  democratic  nations  which  would  keep
the  peace  by  pressure  or  by  the  use  of  force  if  need  be.  If  less
crude,  the  solution  is  not  for  that  any  more  satisfactory  than  the
other.  It  is  an  old  idea,  the  idea  Metternich  put  into  practice
after  the  overthrow  of  Napoleon;  only  in  place  of  a Holy  Alli-
ance of  monarchs  to  maintain  peace  and  monarchical  order  and
keep  down  democracy,  it  was  proposed  to  have  a league  of  free
— and  imperial  — peoples  to  enforce  democracy  and  to  main-
tain peace.  One  thing  is  perfectly  sure  that  the  new  league  would
go  the  way  of  the  old;  it  would  break  up  as  soon  as  the  interests
and  ambitions  of  the  constituent  Powers  became  sufficiently  dis-
united or  a new  situation  arose  such  as  was  created  by  the
violent  resurgence  of  oppressed  democracy  in  1848  or  such  as
would  be  created  by  the  inevitable  future  duel  between  the  young
Titan,  Socialism,  and  the  old  Olympian  gods  of  a bourgeois-
democratic  world.  That  conflict  was  already  outlining  its  formid-
able shadow  in  revolutionary  Russia,  has  now  taken  a body
and  cannot  be  very  long  delayed  throughout  Europe.  For  the  war
and  its  after  consequences  momentarily  suspended  but  it  may
very  well  turn  out  to  have  really  precipitated  the  advent  and
accentuated  its  force.  One  cause  or  the  other  or  both  together
would  bring  a certain  dissolution.  No  voluntary  league  can  be
permanent  in  its  nature.  The  ideas  which  supported  it,  change;
the  interests  which  made  it  possible  and  effective  become  fatally
modified  or  obsolete.

The  supposition  is  that  democracies  will  be  less  ready  to  go
to  war  than  monarchies;  but  this  is  true  only  within  a certain
measure.  What  are  called  democracies  are  bourgeois  States  in


457


The  Need  of  Military  Unification

the  form  either  of  a constitutional  monarchy  or  a middle-class
republic.  But  everywhere  the  middle  class  has  taken  over  with
certain  modifications  the  diplomatic  habits,  foreign  policies  and
international  ideas  of  the  monarchical  or  aristocratic  govern-
ments which  preceded  them.^  This  continuity  seems  to  have  been
a natural  law  of  the  mentality  of  the  ruling  class.  In  Germany  it
was  the  aristocratic  and  the  capitalist  class  combined  that  consti-
tuted the  Pan-German  party  with  its  exaggerated  and  almost
insane  ambition.  In  the  new  Russia  the  bourgeoisie  during  its
brief  rule  rejected  the  political  ideas  of  the  Czardom  in  internal
affairs  and  helped  to  overturn  autocracy,  but  preserved  its  ideas
in  external  affairs  minus  the  German  influence  and  stood  for  the
expansion  of  Russia  and  the  possession  of  Constantinople.
Certainly,  there  is  an  important  difference.  The  monarchical
or  aristocratic  State  is  political  in  its  mentality  and  seeks  first
of  all  territorial  aggrandisement  and  political  predominance  or
hegemony  among  the  nations,  commercial  aims  are  only  a secon-
dary preoccupation  attendant  on  the  other.  In  the  bourgeois
State  there  is  a reverse  order,  for  it  has  its  eye  chiefly  on  the
possession  of  markets,  the  command  of  new  fields  of  wealth,  the
formation  or  conquest  of  colonies  or  dependencies  which  can  be
commercially  and  industrially  exploited  and  on  political  aggran-
disement only  as  a means  for  this  more  cherished  object.  More-
over, the  monarchical  or  aristocratic  statesman  turned  to  war
as  almost  his  first  expedient.  As  soon  as  he  was  dissatisfied
with  the  response  to  his  diplomacy,  he  grasped  at  the  sword  or
the  rifle.  The  bourgeois  statesman  hesitates,  calculates,  gives  a
longer  rope  to  diplomacy,  tries  to  gain  his  ends  by  bargainings,
arrangements,  peaceful  pressure,  demonstrations  of  power.
In  the  end  he  is  ready  to  resort  to  war,  but  only  when  these
expedients  have  failed  him  and  only  if  the  end  seems  commen-
surate with  the  means  and  the  great  speculation  of  war  promises
a very  strong  chance  of  success  and  solid  profit  But  on  the  other
hand,  the  bourgeois  democratic  State  has  developed  a stupen-
dous military  organisation  of  which  the  most  powerful  monarchs
and  aristocracies  could  not  dream.  And  if  this  tends  to  delay  the

* So  also  has  Socialist  Russia  taken  over  from  the  Czars  these  ideas  and  habits  with  very
little  or  no  modification.


458


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

outbreak  of  large  wars,  it  tends  too  to  make  their  final  advent
sure  and  their  proportions  enormous  and  nowadays  incalcul-
able and  immeasurable.

There  was  a strong  suggestion  at  the  time  that  a more  truly
democratic  and  therefore  a more  peaceful  spirit  and  more
thoroughly  democratic  institutions  would  reign  after  the  resto-
ration of  peace  by  the  triumph  of  the  liberal  nations.  One  rule
of  the  new  international  situation  was  to  be  the  right  of  nations
to  dispose  of  their  own  destinies  and  to  be  governed  only  by  their
free  consent.  The  latter  condition  is  impossible  of  immediate
fulfilment  except  in  Europe,  and  even  for  Europe  the  principle
is  not  really  recognised  in  its  total  meaning  or  put  into  entire
practice.  If  it  were  capable  of  universal  application,  if  the  exis-
ting relations  of  peoples  and  the  psychology  of  nations  could  be
so  altered  as  to  establish  it  as  a working  principle,  one  of  the
most  fertile  causes  of  war  and  revolution  would  be  removed,  but
all  causes  would  not  disappear.  The  greater  democratisation  of
the  European  peoples  affords  no  sure  guarantee.  Certainly,
democracy  of  a certain  kind,  democracy  reposing  for  its  natural
constitution  on  individual  liberty  would  be  likely  to  be  indisposed
to  war  except  in  moments  of  great  and  universal  excitement.
War  demands  a violent  concentration  of  all  the  forces,  a spirit
of  submission,  a suspension  of  free-will,  free  action  and  of  the
right  of  criticism  which  is  alien  to  the  true  democratic  instinct.
But  the  democracies  of  the  future  are  likely  to  be  strongly  con-
centrated governments  in  which  the  principle  of  liberty  is  sub-
ordinated to  the  efficient  life  of  the  community  by  some  form
of  State  Socialism.  A democratic  State  of  that  kind  might  well
have  even  a greater  power  for  war,  might  be  able  to  put  forward
a more  violently  concentrated  military  organisation  in  the  event
of  hostilities  than  even  the  bourgeois  democracies  and  it  is  not
at  all  certain  that  it  would  be  less  tempted  to  use  its  means  and
power.  Socialism  has  been  international  and  pacific  in  its  ten-
dencies, because  the  necessity  of  preparation  for  war  is  favour-
able to  the  rule  of  the  upper  classes  and  because  war  itself  is  used
in  the  interests  of  the  governments  and  the  capitalists ; the  ideas
and  classes  it  represents  are  at  present  depressed  and  do
not  grow  by  the  uses  or  share  visibly  in  the  profits  of  war.


459


The  Need  of  Military  Unification

What  will  happen  when  they  have  hold  of  the  government
and  its  temptations  and  opportunities  has  to  be  seen  but  can
easily  be  forecast.  The  possession  of  power  is  the  great  test  of
all  idealisms  and  as  yet  there  have  been  none  religious  or
secular  which  have  withstood  it  or  escaped  diminution  and
corruption.

To  rely  upon  the  common  consent  of  conflicting  national
egoisms  for  the  preservation  of  peace  between  the  nations  is  to
rely  upon  a logical  contradiction.  A practical  improbability
which,  if  we  can  judge  by  reason  and  experience,  amounts  to  an
impossibility,  can  hardly  be  a sound  foundation  for  the  building
of  the  future.  A League  of  Peace  can  only  prevent  armed  strife
for  a time.  A system  of  enforced  arbitration,  even  with  the
threat  of  a large  armed  combination  against  the  offender,  may
minimise  the  chance  of  war  and  may  absolutely  forbid  it  to  the
smaller  or  weaker  nations ; but  a great  nation  which  sees  a chance
of  making  itself  the  centre  of  a strong  combination  of  peoples
interested  in  upsetting  the  settled  order  of  things  for  their  own
benefit,  might  always  choose  to  take  the  risks  of  the  adventure  in
the  hope  of  snatching  advantages  which  in  its  estimation  out-
weighed the  risks.i  Moreover,  in  times  of  great  upheaval  and
movement  when  large  ideas,  enormous  interests  and  inflamed
passions  divide  the  peoples  of  the  world,  the  whole  system  would
be  likely  to  break  to  pieces  and  the  very  elements  of  its  efficacy
would  cease  to  exist.  Any  tentative  and  imperfect  device  would
be  bound  before  long  to  disclose  its  inefficacy  and  the  attempt
at  a deliberate  organisation  of  international  life  would  have  to
be  abandoned  and  the  work  left  to  be  wrought  out  confusedly  by
the  force  of  events.  The  creation  of  a real,  efficient  and  power-
ful authority  which  would  stand  for  the  general  sense  and  the
general  power  of  mankind  in  its  collective  life  and  spirit  and
would  be  something  more  than  a bundle  of  vigorously  separate
States  loosely  tied  together  by  the  frail  bond  of  a violable  moral
agreement  is  the  only  effective  step  possible  on  this  path.  Whe-
ther such  an  authority  can  really  be  created  by  agreement,
whether  it  must  not  rather  create  itself  partly  by  the  growth

* The  subsequent  history  of  the  League  of  NsUons,  which  had  rot  been  formed  at  the  time
of  writing,  has  amply  proved  the  inefEcacy  of  these  devices.


460


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity


of  ideas,  but  still  more  by  the  shock  of  forces,  is  a question  to
which  the  future  alone  can  answer.

An  authority  of  this  nature  would  have  to  command  the
psychological  assent  of  mankind,  exercise  a moral  force  upon
the  nations  greater  than  that  of  their  own  national  authority
and  compel  more  readily  their  obedience  under  all  normal  cir-
cumstances. It  would  have  not  only  to  be  a symbol  and  a centre
of  the  unity  of  the  race  but  make  itself  constantly  serviceable  to
the  world  by  assuring  the  effective  maintenance  and  develop-
ment of  large  common  interests  and  benefits  which  would  out-
weigh all  separate  national  interests  and  satisfy  entirely  the  sense
of  need  that  had  brought  it  into  existence.  It  must  help  more  and
more  to  fix  the  growing  sense  of  a common  humanity  and  a coin-
mon  life  in  which  the  sharp  divisions  which  separate  country
from  country,  race  from  race,  colour  from  colour,  continent  from
continent  would  gradually  lose  their  force  and  undergo  a pro-
gressive effacement.  Given  these  conditions,  it  would  develop  a
moral  authority  which  would  enable  it  to  pursue  with  less  and
less  opposition  and  friction  the  unification  of  mankind.  The
nature  of  the  psychological  assent  it  secured  from  the  beginning
would  depend  largely  on  its  constitution  and  character  and  would
in  its  turn  determine  both  the  nature  and  power  of  the  moral
authority  it  could  exercise  on  the  earth’s  peoples.  If  its  constitu-
tion and  character  were  such  as  to  conciliate  the  sentiment  and
interest  in  its  maintenance  the  active  support  of  all  or  most  of
the  different  sections  of  mankind  or  at  least  those  whose  senti-
ment and  support  counted  powerfully  and  to  represent  the  lead-
ing political,  social,  cultural  ideas  and  interests  of  the  time,  it
would  have  the  maximum  of  psychological  assent  and  moral
authority  and  its  way  would  be  comparatively  smooth.  If  defec-
tive in  these  respects,  it  would  have  to  make  up  the  deficiency  by
a greater  concentration  and  show  of  military  force  at  its  back
and  by  extraordinary  and  striking  services  to  the  general  life,
culture  and  development  of  the  human  race  such  as  assured  for
the  Roman  imperial  authority  the  long  and  general  assent  of
the  Mediterranean  and  Western  peoples  to  the  subjection  and
the  obliteration  of  their  national  existence.

But  in  either  case  the  possession  and  concentration  of


The  Need  of  Military  Unification


461


military  power  would  be  for  long  the  first  condition  of  its
security,  and  the  effectiveness  of  its  own  control  and  this  pos-
session would  have  to  be,  as  soon  as  possible,  a sole  possession.
It  is  difficult  at  present  to  foresee  the  consent  of  the  nations  of
the  world  to  their  own  total  disarmament.  For  so  long  as  strong
national  egoisms  of  any  kind  remained  and  along  with  them
mutual  distrust,  the  nations  would  not  sacrifice  their  possession
of  an  armed  force  on  which  they  could  rely  for  self-defence  if
their  interests  or  at  least  those  that  they  considered  essential  to
their  prosperity  and  their  existence,  came  to  be  threatened.
Any  distrust  of  the  assured  impartiality  of  the  international
government  would  operate  in  the  same  direction.  Yet  such  a
disarmament  would  be  essential  to  the  assured  cessation  of
war  — in  the  absence  of  some  great  and  radical  psychological
and  moral  change.  If  national  armies  exist,  the  possibility,
even  the  certainty  of  war  will  exist  along  with  them.  However
small  they  might  be  made  in  times  of  peace,  and  international
authority,  even  with  a military  force  of  its  own  behind  it,  would
be  in  the  position  of  the  feudal  king  never  quite  sure  of  his
effective  control  over  his  vassals.  The  international  authority
must  hold  under  its  command  the  sole  trained  military  force
in  the  world  for  the  policing  of  the  nations  and  also  otherwise
the  monopoly  would  be  ineffective  — the  sole  disposal  of  the
means  of  manufacturing  arms  and  implements  of  war.  National
and  private  munition  factories  and  arms  factories  must  dis-
appear. National  armies  must  become  like  the  old  baronial
armies  a memory  of  past  and  dead  ages.

This  consummation  would  mark  definitely  the  creation  of
a World-State  in  place  of  the  present  international  conditions.
For  it  can  be  brought  into  truly  effective  existence  only  if  the
international  authority  became,  not  merely  the  arbiter  of  dis-
putes, but  the  source  of  law  and  the  final  power  behind  their
execution.  For  the  execution  of  its  decrees  against  recalcitrant
countries  or  classes,  for  the  prevention  of  all  kinds  of  strife  not
merely  political  but  commercial,  industrial  and  others  or  at
least  of  their  decision  by  any  other  ways  than  a peaceful  resort
to  law  and  arbitration,  for  the  suppression  of  any  attempt  at
violent  change  and  revolution,  the  World-State,  even  at  its


464


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity


to  society,  determined  its  conscious  drift  and  action,  coloured
most  powerfully  all  its  motives.  Commercial  interests  entered
into  the  relations  of  States  and  into  the  motives  of  war  and
peace;  but  they  entered  as  subordinate  and  secondary  pre-
disposing causes  of  amity  or  hostility  and  only  rarely  and  as  it
were  accidentally  came  to  be  enumerated  among  the  overt  and
conscious  causes  of  peace,  alliance  and  strife.  The  political
consciousness,  the  political  motive  dominated;  increase  of
wealth  was  primarily  regarded  as  a means  of  political  power
and  greatness  and  opulence  of  the  mobilisable  resources  of  the
State  than  as  an  end  in  itself  or  a first  consideration.  .

Everything  now  is  changed.  The  phenomenon  of  modem
social  development  is  the  decline  of  the  Brahmin  and  Kshatriya,
of  the  Church,  the  military  aristocracy  and  the  aristocracy  of
letters  and  culture,  and  the  rise  to  power  or  predominance  of
the  commercial  and  industrial  classes,  Vaishya  and  Shudra,
Capital  and  Labour.  Together  they  have  swallowed  up  or  cast
out  their  rivals  and  are  now  engaged  in  a fratricidal  conflict  for
sole  possession  in  which  the  completion  of  the  downward  force
of  social  gravitation,  the  ultimate  triumph  of  Labour  and  the
remodelling  of  all  social  conceptions  and  institutions  with
Labour  as  the  first,  the  most  dignified  term  which  will  give  its
value  to  all  others  seem  to  be  the  visible  writing  of  Fate.  At
present,  however,  it  is  the  Vaishya  who  still  predominates  and
his  stamp  on  the  world  is  commercialism,  the  predominance
of  the  economic  man,  the  universality  of  the  commercial  value
or  the  utilitarian  and  materially  efficient  and  productive  value
for  everything  in  human  life.  Even  in  the  outlook  on  knowledge,
thought,  science,  art,  poetry  and  religion  the  economic  concep-
tion of  life  overrides  all  others.^

For  the  modern  economic  view  of  life,  culture  and  its
products  have  chiefly  a decorative  value;  they  are  costly  and
desirable  luxuries,  not  at  all  indispensable  necessities.  Religion
is  in  this  view  a by-product  of  the  human  mind  with  a very


> It  is  noticeable  that  the  bourgeois  habit  of  the  predominance  of  commercialism  has
been  taken  up  and  continued  in  an  even  larger  scale  by  the  new  Socialist  societies  though  on
the  basis  of  a labour,  instead  of  a bourgeois  economy,  and  an  attempt  at  a new  distribution  of
its  profits  or  else,  more  characteristically,  a concentration  of  all  in  the  hands  of  the  State.


465


War  and  the  Need  of  Economic  Unity


restricted  utility  — if  indeed  it  is  not  a waste  and  a hindrance.
Education  has  a recognised  importance  but  its  object  and  form
are  no  longer  so  much  cultural  as  scientific,  utilitarian  and
economic,  its  value  the  preparation  of  the  efficient  individual
unit  to  take  his  place  in  the  body  of  the  economic  organisation.
Science  is  of  immense  importance  not  because  it  discovers  the
secrets  of  Nature  for  the  advancement  of  knowledge,  but
because  it  utilises  them  for  the  creation  of  machinery  and
develops  and  organises  the  economic  resources  of  the  commu-
nity. The  thought-power  of  the  society,  almost  its  soul-power
— if  it  has  any  longer  so  unsubstantial  and  unproductive  a thing
as  a soul  — is  not  in  its  religion  or  its  literature,  although  the
former  drags  on  a feeble  existence  and  the  latter  teems  and
spawns,  but  in  the  daily  Press  primarily  an  instrument  of  com-
mercialism and  governed  by  the  political  and  commercial  spirit
and  not  like  literature  a direct  instrument  of  culture.  Politics,
government  itself  are  becoming  more  and  more  a machinery
for  the  development  of  an  industrialised  society,  divided  between
the  service  of  bourgeois  capitalism  and  the  office  of  a half-
involuntary  channel  for  the  incoming  of  economic  Socialism.
Free  thought  and  culture  remain  on  the  surface  of  this  great
increasing  mass  of  commercialism  and  influence  and  modify
it,  but  are  themselves  more  and  more  influenced,  penetrated,
coloured,  subjugated  by  the  economic,  commercial  and  indus-


trial view  of  human  life.

This  great  change  has  affected  profoundly  the  character
of  international  relations  in  the  past  and  is  likely  to  affect
them  still  more  openly  and  powerfully  in  the  future.  For  there
is  no  apparent  probability  of  a turn  in  a new  direction  in  the
immediate  future.  Certain  prophetic  voices  announce  indeed
the  speedy  passing  of  the  age  of  commercialism.  But  it  is  not
easy  to  see  how  this  is  to  come  about;  certainly,  it  will  not  be  by
a reversion  to  the  predominantly  political  spirit  of  the  past  or
the  temper  and  forms  of  the  old  aristocratic  social  type.  The  sigh
of  the  extreme  conservative  mind  for  the  golden  age  of  e
past,  which  was  not  so  golden  as  it  appears  to  an  imaginative
eye  in  the  distance,  is  a vain  breath  blown  to  the  winds  by  e
rush  of  the  car  of  the  Time-Spirit  in  the  extreme  velocity  o its


466


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

progress.  The  end  of  commercialism  can  only  come  about  either
by  some  unexpected  development  of  commercialism  itself  or
through  a reawakening  of  spirituality  in  the  race  and  its  coming
to  its  own  by  the  subordination  of  the  political  and  economic
motives  of  life  to  the  spiritual  motive.

Certain  signs  are  thought  to  point  in  this  direction.  The
religious  spirit  is  reviving  and  even  the  old  discouraged  reli-
gious creeds  and  forms  are  recovering  a kind  of  vigour.  In
the  secular  thought  of  mankind  there  are  signs  of  an  idealism
which  increasingly  admits  a spiritual  element  among  its  motives.
But  all  this  is  as  yet  slight  and  superficial;  the  body  of  thought
and  practice,  the  effective  motive,  the  propelling  impulsion
remain  untouched  and  unchanged.  That  impulsion  is  still  to-
wards the  industrialising  of  the  human  race  and  the  perfection
of  the  life  of  society  as  an  economic  and  productive  organism.
Nor  is  this  spirit  likely  to  die  as  yet  by  exhaustion,  for  it  has
not  yet  fulfilled  itself  and  is  growing,  not  declining  in  force.
It  is  aided,  moreover,  by  modern  Socialism  which  promises  to
be  the  master  of  the  future;  for  Socialism  proceeds  on  the
Marxian  principle  that  its  own  reign  has  to  be  preceded  by  an
age  of  bourgeois  capitalism  of  which  it  is  to  be  the  inheritor
and  seize  upon  its  work  and  organisation  in  order  to  turn  it  to
its  own  uses  and  modify  it  by  its  own  principles  and  methods.
It  intends  indeed  to  substitute  Labour  as  the  Master  instead
of  Capital  but  this  only  means  that  all  activities  will  be  valued
by  the  labour  contributed  and  work  produced  rather  than  by  the
wealth  contribution  and  production.  It  will  be  a change  from
one  side  of  economism  to  the  other,  but  not  a change  from
economism  to  the  domination  of  some  other  and  higher  motive
of  human  life.  The  change  itself  is  likely  to  be  one  of  the  chief
factors  with  which  international  unification  will  have  to  deal
and  either  its  greatest  aid  or  its  greatest  difficulty.

In  the  past,  the  effect  of  commercialism  has  been  to  bind
together  the  human  race  into  a real  economic  unity  behind  its

* The  connection  between  Socialism  and  the  democratic  or  equalitarian  idea  or  the  revolt
of  the  proletariate  is  however  an  accident  of  its  history,  not  its  essence.  In  Italian  Fascism
there  arose  a Socialism  undemocratic  and  non-equalitarian  in  its  form,  idea  and  temper.
Fascism  has  gone,  but  there  is  no  inevitable  coimection  between  Socialism  and  the  domination
of  Labour.


467


War  and  the  Need  of  Economic  Unity

apparent  political  separativeness.  But  this  was  a subconscient
unity  of  inseparable  interrelations  and  of  intimate  mutual
dependence,  not  any  oneness  of  the  spirit  or  of  the  conscious
organised  life.  Therefore  these  interrelations  produced  at  once
the  necessity  of  peace  and  the  unavoidability  of  war.  Peace  was
necessary  for  their  normal  action,  war  frightfully  perturbatoiy
to  their  whole  system  of  being.  But  because  the  organised  units
were  politically  separate  and  rival  nations,  their  commercial
interrelations  became  relations  of  rivalry  and  strife  or  rather  a
confused  tangle  of  exchange  and  interdependence  and  hostile
separatism.  Self-defence  against  each  other  by  a wall  of  tariffs,
a race  for  closed  markets  and  fields  of  exploitation,  a struggle
for  place  or  predominance  in  markets  and  fields  which  could
not  be  monopolised  and  an  attempt  at  mutual  interpenetration
in  spite  of  tariff  walls  have  been  the  chief  features  of  this  hostility
and  this  separatism.  The  outbreak  of  war  under  such  conditions
was  only  a matter  of  time;  it  was  bound  to  come  as  soon  as  one
nation  or  else  one  group  of  nations  felt  itself  either  unable  to
proceed  farther  by  pacific  means  or  threatened  with  the  definite
limitation  of  its  expansion  by  the  growing  combination  of  its
rivals.  The  Franco-German  was  the  last  great  war  dictated  by
political  motives.  Since  then  the  political  motive  has  been
mainly  a cover  for  the  commercial.  Not  the  political  subjugation
of  Serbia  which  could  only  be  a fresh  embarrassment  to  the  Aus-
trian empire,  but  the  commercial  possession  of  the  outlet  through
Salonika  was  the  motive  of  Austrian  policy.  Pan-Germanism
covered  the  longings  of  German  industry  for  possession  of
the  great  resources  and  the  large  outlet  into  the  North  Sea
offered  by  the  countries  along  the  Rhine.  To  seize  African  spaces
of  exploitation  and  perhaps  French  coal  fields,  not  to  rule  over
French  territory,  was  the  drift  of  its  real  intention.  In  Africa,
in  China,  in  Persia,  in  Mesopotamia,  commercial  motives
determined  political  and  military  action.  War  is  no  longer  the
legitimate  child  of  ambition  and  earth-hunger,  but  the  bastard
offspring  of  wealth-hunger  or  commercialism  with  political

ambition  as  its  putative  father.

On  the  other  hand,  the  effect,  the  shock  of  war  have  been
rendered  intolerable  by  the  industrial  organisation  of  human


468


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

life  and  the  commercial  interdependence  of  the  nations.  It
would  be  too  much  to  say  that  it  laid  that  organisation  in
ruins,  but  it  turned  it  topsy-turvy,  deranged  its  whole  system
and  diverted  it  to  unnatural  ends.  And  it  produced  a widespread
suffering  and  privation  in  belligerent  and  a gene  and  perturbation
of  life  in  neutral  countries  to  which  the  history  of  the  world
offers  no  parallel.  The  angry  cry  that  tliis  must  not  be  suffered
again  and  that  the  authors  of  this  menace  and  disturbance  to  the
modern  industrial  orgaiusation  of  the  world,  self-styled  civilisa-
tion, must  be  visited  with  condign  punishment  and  remain  for
some  time  as  international  outcasles  under  a ban  and  a boycott,
showed  how  deeply  the  lesson  had  gone  home.  But  it  showed
too,  as  the  post-war  mentality  has  shown,  that  the  real,  the
inner  truth  of  it  all  has  not  yet  been  understood  or  not  seized
at  its  centre.  Certainly,  from  this  point  of  view  also,  the  pre-
vention of  war  must  be  one  of  the  first  preoccupations  of  a new
ordering  of  international  life.  But  how  is  war  to  be  entirely
prevented  if  the  old  state  of  commercial  rivalry  between  poli-
tically separate  nations  is  to  be  perpetuated?  If  peace  is  still  to
be  a covert  war,  an  organisation  of  strife  and  rivalry,  how  is  the
physical  shock  to  be  prevented?  It  may  be  said,  through  the
regulation  of  the  inevitable,  strife  and  rivalry  by  a state  of  law
as  in  the  competitive  commercial  life  of  a nation  before  the  advent
of  Socialism.  But  that  was  only  possible,  because  the  competing
individuals  or  combines  were  part  of  a single  social  organism
subject  to  a single  governmental  authority  and  unable  to  assert
their  individual  will  of  existence  against  it.  Such  a regulation
between  nations  can  therefore  have  no  other  conclusion,  logically
or  practically,  than  the  foiroation  of  a centralised  World-State.

But  let  us  suppose  that  the  physical  shock  of  war  is  pre-
vented, not  by  law,  but  by  the  principle  of  enforced  arbitration
in  extreme  cases  which  might  lead  to  war,  not  by  the  creation
of  an  international  authority,  but  by  the  overhanging  threat  of
international  pressure.  The  state  of  covert  war  will  still  conti-
nue; it  may  even  take  new  and  disastrous  forms.  Deprived  of
other  weapons  the  nations  are  bound  to  have  increasing  resort
to  the  weapon  of  commercial  pressure,  as  did  Capital  and
Labour  in  their  chronic  state  of  “pacific”  struggle  within  the


469


War  and  the  Need  of  Economic  Unity

limits  of  the  national  life.  The  instruments  would  be  different,
but  would  follow  the  same  principle,  that  of  the  strike  and  the
lockout  which  are  on  one  side  a combined  passive  resistance
by  the  weaker  party  to  enforce  its  claims,  on  the  other  a passive
pressure  by  the  stronger  party  to  enforce  its  wishes.  Between
nations,  the  corresponding  weapon  to  the  strike  would  be  a
commercial  boycott,  already  used  more  than  once  in  an  unorga-
nised fashion  both  in  Asia  and  Europe  and  bound  to  be  extremely
effective  and  telling  if  organised  even  by  a politically  or  com-
mercially weak  nation.  For  the  weaker  nation  is  necessary  to
the  stronger,  if  as  nothing  else,  yet  as  a market  or  as  a com-
mercial and  industrial  victim.  The  corresponding  weapons  to
the  lockout  would  be  the  refusal  of  capital  or  machinery,  the
prohibition  of  all  or  of  any  needed  imports  into  the  offending
or  victim  country,  or  even  a naval  blockade  leading,  if  long
maintained,  to  industrial  ruin  or  to  national  starvation.  The
blockade  is  a weapon  used  originally  only  in  a state  of  war,  but  it
was  employed  against  Greece  as  a substitute  for  war,  and  this  use
may  easily  be  extended  in  the  future.  There  is  always  too  the
weapon  of  prohibitive  tariffs.

It  is  clear  that  these  weapons  need  not  be  employed  for
commercial  purposes  or  motives  only,  they  may  be  grasped  at  to
defend  or  to  attack  any  national  interest,  to  enforce  any  claim  of
justice  or  injustice  between  nation  and  nation.  It  has  been  shown
into  how  tremendous  a weapon  commercial  pressure  can  be
turned  when  it  is  used  as  an  aid  to  war.  If  Germany  was  crushed
in  the  end,  the  real  means  of  victory  was  the  blockade,  the  cut-
ting off  of  money,  resources  and  food  and  the  ruin  of  industry
and  commerce.  For  the  military  debacle  was  not  directly  due  to
military  weakness,  but  primarily  to  the  diminution  and  failure
of  resources,  to  exhaustion,  semi-starvation  and  the  moral  de-
pression of  an  intolerable  position  cut  off  from  all  hope  of  re-
plenishment and  recovery.  This  lesson  also  may  have  in  the
future  considerable  application  in  a time  of  “peace”.  Already
it  was  proposed  at  one  time  in  some  quarters  to  continue  the
commercial  war  after  the  political  had  ceased,  in  order  that
Germany  might  not  only  be  struck  off  the  list  of  great  imperial
nations  but  also  permanently  hampered,  disabled  or  even  ruined


m


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

as  a commercial  and  industrial  rival.  A policy  of  refusal  of
capital  and  trade  relations  and  a kind  of  cordon  or  hostile  block-
ade has  been  openly  advocated  and  was  for  a time  almost  in  force
against  Bolshevist  Russia.  And  it  has  been  suggested  too  that  a
League  of  Peace^  might  use  this  weapon  of  commercial  pressure
against  any  recalcitrant  nation  in  place  of  military  force.

But  so  long  as  there  is  not  a firm  international  authority,  the
use  of  this  weapon  would  not  be  likely  to  be  limited  to  such  oc-
casions or  used  only  for  just  and  legitimate  ends.  It  might  be
used  by  a strong  nation,  secure  of  general  indifference,  to  crush
and  violate  the  weak;  it  might  be  used  by  a combination  of  strong
imperial  Powers  to  enforce  their  selfish  and  evil  will  upon  the
world.  Force  and  coercion  of  any  kind  not  concentrated  in  the
hands  of  a just  and  impartial  authority  are  always  liable  to  abuse
and  misapplication.  Therefore  inevitably  in  die  growing  unity  of
mankind  the  evolution  of  such  an  authority  must  become  an  early
and  pressing  need.  The  World-State  even  in  its  early  and  imper-
fect organisation  must  begin  not  only  to  concentrate  military
force  in  its  hands,  but  to  commence  consciously  in  the  beginning
what  the  national  State  only  arrived  at  by  a slow  and  natural
development,  the  ordering  of  the  commercial,  industrial,  eco-
nomic life  of  the  race  and  the  control  at  first,  no  doubt,  only  of
the  principal  relations  of  international  commerce,^  but  inevitably
in  the  end  of  its  whole  system  and  principles.  Since  industry  and
trade  are  now  five-sixths  of  social  life  and  the  economic  principle
the  governing  principle  of  society,  a World-State  which  did  not
control  human  life  in  its  chief  principle  and  its  largest  activity
would  exist  only  in  name.


* Afterwards  realised  as  the  League  of  Nations.

’ Some  first  beginnings  of  this  kind  of  activity  were  trjdng  to  appear  in  the  activities  of
the  now  almost  moribund  League  of  Nations.  These  activities  were  still  only  platonic  and
advisory  as  in  its  futile  discussions  about  disarmament  and  its  inconclusive  attempts  to  regulate
certain  relations  of  Capital  and  Labour,  but  they  showed  that  the  need  is  already  felt  and  were
a signpost  on  the  road  to  the  future.


Chapter  XXVI


The  Need  of  Administrative  Unity


In  almost  all  current  ideas  of  the  first
step  towards  international  organisation,  it  is  taken  for  granted
that  the  nations  will  continue  to  enjoy  their  separate  existence  and
liberties  and  will  only  leave  to  international  action  the  prevention
of  war,  the  regulation  of  dangerous  disputes,  the  power  of  set-
tling great  international  questions  which  they  cannot  settle  by
ordinary  means.  It  is  impossible  that  the  development  should
stop  there;  this  first  step  would  necessarily  lead  to  others  which
could  travel  only  in  one  direction.  Whatever  authority  were  esta-
blished, if  it  is  to  be  a true  authority  in  any  degree  and  not  a mere
concert  for  palaver,  would  find  itself  called  upon  to  act  more
frequently  and  to  assume  always  increasing  powers.  To  avoid
preventible  disturbance  and  friction,  to  avert  hereafter  the  recur-
rence of  troubles  and  disasters  which  in  the  beginning  the  first
limitations  of  its  powers  had  debarred  the  new  authority  from
averting  by  a timely  intervention  before  they  came  to  a head,  to
bring  about  a co-ordination  of  activities  for  common  ends,  would
be  the  principal  motives  impelling  humanity  to  advance  from  a
looser  to  a closer  union,  from  a voluntary  self-subordination  in
great  and  exceptional  matters  to  an  obligatory  subordination  in
most  matters.  The  desire  of  powerful  nations  to  use  it  for  their
own  purposes,  the  utility  for  weaker  nations  of  appealing  to  it
for  the  protection  of  their  interests,  the  shock  of  actual  or  threat-
ened internal  disturbances  and  revolutions  would  all  help  to  pve
the  international  authority  greater  power  and  provide  occasions
for  extending  its  normal  action.  Science,  thought  and  re  igion,
the  three  great  forces  which  in  modern  times  tend  increasing  y
to  override  national  distinctions  and  point  the  race  towards  unity
of  life  and  spirit,  would  become  more  impatient  o na  lona
barriers,  hostilities  and  divisions  and  lend  their  power  u in  u
ence  to  the  change.  The  great  struggle  between  Capital  an


472


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity


Labour  might  become  rapidly  world-wide,  arrive  at  such  an
international  organisation  as  would  precipitate  the  inevitable
step  or  even  present  the  actual  crisis  which  would  bring  about  the
transformation.^

Our  supposition  for  the  moment  is  that  a well-unified  World-
State  with  the  nations  for  its  provinces  would  be  the  final  out-
come. At  first,  taking  up  the  regulation  of  international  disputes
and  of  economic  treaties  and  relations,  the  international  autho-
rity would  start  as  an  arbiter  and  an  occasional  executive  power
and  change  by  degrees  into  a legislative  body  and  a standing
executive  power.  Its  legislation  would  be  absolutely  necessary
in  international  matters,  if  fresh  convulsions  are  to  be  avoided;
for  it  is  idle  to  suppose  that  any  international  arrangement,  any
ordering  of  the  world  arrived  at  after  the  close  of  the  great  war
and  upheaval  could  be  permanent  and  definitive.  Injustice,  in-
equalities, abnormalities,  causes  of  quarrel  or  dissatisfaction
would  remain  in  the  relations  of  nation  with  nation,  continent
with  continent  which  would  lead  to  fresh  hostilities  and  explo-
sions. As  these  are  prevented  in  the  nation-State  by  the  legislative
authority  which  constantly  modifies  the  existing  system  of  things
in  conformity  with  new  ideas,  interests,  forces  and  necessities,
so  it  would  have  to  be  in  the  developing  World-State.  This  legis:
lative  power  as  it  developed,  extended,  regularised  its  actions,
powers  and  processes,  would  become  more  complex  and  would
be  bound  to  interfere  at  many  points  and  override  or  substitute
its  own  for  the  separate  national  action.  That  would  imply  the
growth  also  of  its  executive  power  and  the  development  of  an
international  executive  organisation.  At  first  it  might  confine
itself  to  the  most  important  questions  and  affairs  which  obviously
demanded  its  control ; but  it  would  tend  increasingly  to  stretch  its
hand  to  all  or  most  matters  that  could  be  viewed  as  having  an
international  effect  and  importance.  Before  long  it  would  invade
and  occupy  even  those  fields  in  which  the  nations  are  now  jealous
of  their  own  rights  and  power.  And  eventually  it  would  per-
meate the  whole  system  of  the  national  life  and  subject  it  to  inter-

^ It  might  seem  that  the  general  spread  of  Fascism  would  prevent  this  development  by
abolishing  the  class  war,  but  it  is  still  doubtful  even  in  Fascist  countries  whether  this  abolition
is  not  a mere  interlude,  a suspense  and  not  a definitive  solution.


473


The  Need  of  Administrative  Unity


national  control  in  the  interests  of  the  better  co-ordination  of  the
united  life,  culture,  science,  organisation,  education,  efficiency  of
the  human  race.  It  would  reduce  the  now  free  and  separate
nations  first  to  the  position  of  the  States  of  the  American  Union
or  the  German  Empire  and  eventually  perhaps  to  that  of  geo-
graphical provinces  or  departments  of  the  single  nation  of
mankind.

The  present  obstacle  to  any  such  extreme  consummation  is
the  still  strong  principle  of  nationalism,  the  sense  of  group  sepa-
rateness, the  instinct  of  collective  independence,  its  pride,  its


pleasure  in  itself,  its  various  sources  of  egoistic  self-satisfaction,
its  insistence  on  the  subordination  of  the  human  idea  to  the
national  idea.  But  we  are  supposing  that  the  new-born  idea  of
internationalism  will  grow  apace,  subject  to  itself  the  past  idea
and  temper  of  nationalism,  become  dominant  and  take  pos-
session of  the  human  mind.  As  the  larger  nation-group  has
subordinated  to  itself  and  tended  to  absorb  all  smaller  clan,
tribal  and  regional  groups,  as  the  larger  empire-group  now  tends
to  subordinate  and  might,  if  allowed  to  develop,  eventually
absorb  the  smaller  nation-groups,  we  are  supposing  that  the
complete  human  group  of  united  mankind  will  subordinate  to
itself  in  the  same  way  and  eventually  absorb  all  smaller  groups
of  separated  humanity.  It  is  only  by  a growth  of  the  internafiona
idea,  the  idea  of  a single  humanity,  that  nationalism  can  isap
pear,  if  the  old  natural  device  of  an  external  unification  by  con
quest  or  other  compulsive  force  continues  to  be  no  longer  pos
sible;  for  the  methods  of  war  have  become  too  disastrous  and
no  single  empire  has  the  means  and  the  strength  to  overcoi^,
whether  rapidly  or  in  the  gradual  Roman  way,  the  ® ^

world.  Undoubtedly,  nationalism  is  a more  powerful  obstac
to  farther  unification  than  was  the  separativeness  o e o
pettier  and  less  firmly  self-conscious  groupings  w ic
the  developed  nation-State.  It  is  still  the  most  power  u ^
ment  in  the  collective  human  mind,  still  gives
vitality  to  the  nation  and  is  apt  to  reappear  even  w ere  i s
to  have  been  abolished.  But  we  cannot  argue  sa  e y
present  balance  of  tendencies  in  the  beginning  o a gre
transitions.  Already  there  are  at  work  not  only  i eas


474


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

all  the  more  powerful  for  being  forces  of  the  future  and  not  esta-
blished powers  of  the  present,  which  may  succeed  in  subordi-
nating nationalism  to  themselves  far  earlier  than  we  can  at  pre-
sent conceive.

If  the  principle  of  the  World-State  is  carried  to  its  logical
conclusion  and  to  its  extreme  consequences,  the  result  will  be  a
process  analogous,  in  principle,  with  whatever  necessary  diffe-
rences in  the  manner  or  form  or  extent  of  execution,  to  that  by
which  in  the  building  of  the  nation-State  the  central  government,
first  as  a monarchy,  then  as  a democratic  assembly  and  executive,
gathered  up  the  whole  administration  of  the  national  life.  There
will  be  a centralisation  of  all  control,  military  and  police,  ad-
ministrative, judicial,  legislative,  economic,  social  and  cultural
in  the  one  international  authority.  The  spirit  of  the  centralisa-
tion will  be  a strong  Unitarian  idea  and  the  principle  of  unifor-
mity enforced  for  the  greatest  practical  convenience  and  the
result  a rationalised  mechanism  of  human  life  and  activities
throughout  the  world  with  justice,  universal  well-being,  eco-
nomy of  effort  and  scientific  efficiency  as  its  principal  objects.
Instead  of  the  individual  activities  of  nation-groups  each  work-
ing for  itself  with  the  maximum  of  friction  and  waste  and  conflict,
there  will  be  an  effort  at  co-ordination  such  as  we  now  see  in  a
well-organised  modern  State,  of  which  the  complete  idea  is  a
thorough-going  State  socialism,  nowhere  yet  realised  indeed,  but
rapidly  coming  into  existence.^  If  we  glance  briefly  at  each
department  of  the  communal  activity,  we  shall  see  that  this
development  is  inevitable.

We  have  seen  already  that,  all  military  power  — and  in  the
World-State  that  would  mean  an  international  armed  police  —
must  be  concentrated  in  the  hands  of  one  common  authority;
otherwise  the  State  cannot  endure.  A certain  concentration  of
the  final  power  of  decision  in  economic  matters  would  be  also
in  time  inevitable.  And  in  the  end  this  supremacy  could  not  stop
short  of  a complete  control.  For,  the  economic  life  of  the  world
is  becoming  more  and  more  one  and  indivisible ; but  the  present

* Since  this  was  written,  this  coming  into  existence  has  become  much  more  rapid  and
thorough-going  in  three  at  least  of  the  greatest  nations  and  a more  hesitating  and  less  clearly
self-conscious  imitation  of  it  is  in  evidence  in  smaller  countries.


475


The  Need  of  Administrative  Unity

state  of  international  relations  is  an  anomalous  condition  of
opposite  principles  partly  in  conflict,  partly  accommodated  to
each  other  as  best  they  can  be,  — but  the  best  is  bad  and  harmful
to  the  coihmon  interest.  On  the  one  side,  there  is  the  underlying
unity  which  makes  each  nation  commercially  dependent  on  all
the  rest.  On  the  other,  there  is  the  spirit  of  national  jealousy,
egoism  and  sense  of  separate  existence  which  makes  each  nation
attempt  at  once  to  assert  its  industrial  independence  and  at  the
same  time  reach  out  for  a hold  of  its  outgoing  commercial  acti-
vities upon  foreign  markets.  The  interaction  of  these  two  prin-
ciples is  regulated  at  present  partly  by  the  permitted  working  of
natural  forces,  partly  by  tacit  practice  and  understanding,  partly
by  systems  of  tariff  protection,  bounties,  State  aid  of  one  kind
or  another  on  the  one  hand  and  commercial  treaties  and  agree-
ments on  the  other.  Inevitably,  as  the  World-State  grew,  this
would  be  felt  to  be  an  anomaly,  a wasteful  and  uneconomical
process.  An  efficient  international  authority  would  be  compelled
more  and  more  to  intervene  and  modify  the  free  arrangements
of  nation  with  nation.  The  commercial  interests  of  humanity
at  large  would  be  given  the  first  place;  the  independent  procli-
vities and  commercial  ambitions  or  jealousies  of  this  and  that
nation  would  be  compelled  to  subordinate  themselves  to  the
human  good.  The  ideal  of  mutual  exploitation  would  be  replaced
by  the  ideal  of  a fit  and  proper  share  in  the  united  economic  life
of  the  race.  Especially,  as  socialism  advanced  and  began  to  re-
gulate the  whole  economic  existence  of  separate  countries,  the
same  principle  would  gain  ground  in  the  international  field  and
in  the  end  the  World-State  would  be  called  upon  to  take  up  into
its  hands  the  right  ordering  of  the  industrial  production  and  dis-
tribution of  the  world.  Each  country  might  be  allowed  for  a
time  to  produce  its  own  absolute  necessities:  but  in  the  end  it
would  probably  be  felt  that  this  was  no  more  necessary  than  for
Wales  or  Scotland  to  produce  all  its  own  necessities  indepen-
dently of  the  rest  of  the  British  Isles  or  for  one  province  of  India
to  be  an  economic  unit  independent  of  the  rest  of  the  country ,
each  would  produce  and  distribute  only  what  it  could  to  the
best  advantage,  most  naturally,  most  efficiently  and  most  econo-
mically, for  the  common  need  and  demand  of  mankind  in  which


476  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

its  own  would  be  inseparably  included.  It  would  do  this  accord-
ing to  a system  settled  by  the  common  will  of  mankind  through
its  State  government  and  under  a method  made  uniform  in  its
principles,  however  variable  in  local  detail,  so  as  to  secure  the
simplest,  smoothest  and  most  rational  working  of  a necessarily
complicated  machinery.

The  administration  of  the  general  order  of  society  is  a less
pressing  matter  of  concern  than  it  was  to  the  nation-States  in
their  period  of  formation,  because  those  were  times  when  the
element  of  order  had  almost  to  be  created  and  violence,  crime
and  revolt  were  both  more  easy  and  more  a natural  and  general
propensity  of  mankind.  At  the  present  day,  not  only  are  societies
tolerably  well-organised  in  this  respect  and  equipped  with  the
absolutely  necessary  agreements  between  country  and  country,
but  by  an  elaborate  system  of  national,  regional  and  municipal
governments  linked  up  by  an  increasingly  rapid  power  of  com-
munication, the  State  can  regulate  parts  of  the  order  of  life  with
which  the  cruder  governments  of  old  were  quite  unable  to  deal
with  any  full  effect.  In  the  World-State,  it  may  be  thought,  each
country  may  be  left  to  its  own  free  action  in  matters  of  its  internal
order,  and,  indeed,  of  all  its  separate  political,  social  and  cultural
life.  But  even  here  it  is  probable  that  the  World-State  would
demand  a greater  centralisation  and  uniformity  than  we  can  now
easily  imagine.

In  the  matter,  for  instance,  of  the  continual  struggle  of
society  with  the  still  ineradicable  element  of  crime  which  it  gene-
rates in  its  own  bosom,  the  crudity  of  the  present  system  is  sure  to
be  recognised  and  a serious  attempt  made  to  deal  with  it  in  a very
radical  manner.  The  first  necessity  would  be  the  close  observa-
tion and  supervision  of  the  great  mass  of  constantly  re-created
corrupt  human  material  in  which  the  bacillus  of  crime  finds  its
natural  breeding-ground.  This  is  at  present  done  very  crudely
and  imperfectly  and,  for  the  most  part,  after  the  event  of  actual
crime  by  the  separate  police  of  each  nation  with  extradition
treaties  and  informal  mutual  aid  as  a device  against  evasion  by
place-shift.  The  World-State  would  insist  on  an  international  as
well  as  a local  supervision,  not  only  to  deal  with  the  phenome-
non of  what  may  be  called  international  crime  and  disorder


The  Need  of  Administrative  Unity  477

which  is  likely  to  increase  largely  under  future  conditions,  but  for
the  more  important  object  of  the  prevention  of  crime.

For  the  second  necessity  it  would  feel  would  be  the  need  to
deal  with  crime  at  its  roots  and  in  its  inception.  It  may  attempt
this,  first  by  a more  enlightened  method  of  education  and  moral
and  temperamental  training  which  would  render  the  growth  of
criminal  propensities  more  difficult;  secondly,  by  scientific  or
eugenic  methods  of  observation,  treatment,  isolation,  perhaps
sterilisation  of  corrupt  human  material;  thirdly,  by  a humane
and  enlightened  gaol  system  and  penological  method  which
would  have  for  its  aim  not  the  punishment  but  the  reform  of  the
incipient  and  the  formed  criminal.  It  would  insist  on  a certain
uniformity  of  principle  so  that  there  might  not  be  countries  that
would  persevere  in  backward  and  old-world  or  inferior  or  erratic
systems  and  so  defeat  the  general  object.  For  this  end  centralisa-
tion of  control  would  be  necessary  or  at  least  strongly  advisable.
So  too  with  the  judicial  method.  The  present  system  is  still  con-
sidered as  enlightened  and  civilised,  and  it  is  so  comparatively
with  the  mediaeval  methods ; but  a time  will  surely  come  when  it
will  be  condemned  as  grotesque,  inefficient,  irrational  and  in
many  of  its  principal  features  semi-barbaric,  a half-conversion
at  most  of  the  more  confused  and  arbitrary  methods  of  an  earlier
state  of  social  thought  and  feeling  and  social  life.  With  the  deve-
lopment of  a more  rational  system,  the  preservation  of  the  old
juridical  and  judicial  principles  and  methods  in  any  part  of  the
world  would  be  felt  to  be  intolerable  and  the  World-State  would
be  led  to  standardise  the  new  principles  and  the  new  methods  by
a common  legislation  and  probably  a general  centralised  control.

In  all  these  matters,  it  might  be  admitted,  uniformity  and
centralisation  would  be  beneficial  and  to  some  extent  inevitable,
no  jealousy  of  national  separateness  and  independence  could
be  allowed  under  such  conditions  to  interfere  with  the  common
good  of  humanity.  But  at  least  in  the  choice  of  their  political
system  and  in  other  spheres  of  their  social  life  the  nations  mig  t
well  be  left  to  follow  their  own  ideals  and  propensities  and  to  be
healthily  and  naturally  free.  It  may  even  be  said  that  the  nations
would  never  tolerate  any  serious  interference  in  these  matters
and  that  the  attempt  to  use  the  World-State  for  such  a purpose


478


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity


would  be  fatal  to  its  existence.  But,  as  a matter  of  fact,  the  prin-
ciple of  political  non-interference  is  likely  to  be  much  less  ad-
mitted in  the  future  than  it  has  been  in  the  past  or  is  at  present.
Always  in  times  of  great  and  passionate  struggle  between  conflict-
ing political  ideas,  — between  oligarchy  and  democracy  in
ancient  Greece,  between  the  old  regime  and  the  ideas  of  the
French  Revolution  in  modern  Europe,  — the  principle  of  poli-
tical non-interference  has  gone  to  the  wall.  But  now  we  see
another  phenomenon  — the  opposite  principle  of  interference
slowly  erecting  itself  into  a conscious  rule  of  international  life.
There  is  more  and  more  possible  an  intervention  like  the  Ame-
rican interference  in  Cuba,  not  on  avowed  grounds  of  national
interest,  but  ostensibly  on  behalf  of  liberty,  constitutionalism  and
democracy,  or  of  an  opposite  social  and  political  principle,  on
international  grounds  therefore  and  practically  in  the  force  of
this  idea  that  the  internal  arrangements  of  a country  concern,
under  certain  conditions  of  disorder  or  insufficiency,  not  only
itself,  but  its  neighbours  and  humanity  at  large.  A similar  prin-
ciple was  put  forward  by  the  Allies  in  regard  to  Greece  during
the  war.  It  was  applied  to  one  of  the  most  powerful  nations  of
the  world  in  the  refusal  of  the  Allies  to  treat  with  Germany  or,
practically,  to  re-admit  it  into  the  comity  of  nations  unless  it  set
aside  its  existing  political  system  and  principles  and  adopted  the
forms  of  modem  democracy,  dismissing  all  remnant  of  absolutist
rule.i

This  idea  of  the  common  interest  of  the  race  in  the  internal
affairs  of  a nation  is  bound  to  increase  as  the  life  of  humanity
becomes  more  unified.  The  great  political  question  of  the  future
is  likely  to  be  the  challenge  of  Socialism,  the  full  evolution  of
the  omnipotent  State.  And  if  Socialism  triumphs  in  the  leading
nations  of  the  world,  it  will  inevitably  seek  to  impose  its  rule
everywhere  not  only  by  indirect  pressure,  but  even  by  direct
interference  in  what  it  would  consider  backward  countries.  An
international  authority.  Parliamentary  or  other,  in  which  it

The  hardly  disguised  intervention  of  the  Fascist  Powers  in  Spain  to  combat  and  beat
doTO  the  democratic  Government  of  the  country  is  a striking  example  of  what  is  likely  to
increase  in  the  future.  Since  then  there  has  been  the  interference  in  an  opposite  sense  with  the
Franco  regime  m the  same  country  and  the  pressure  put  upon  it,  however  incomplete  and
wavering,  to  change  its  method  and  principle.


479


The  Need  of  Administrative  Unity


commanded  the  majority  or  the  chief  influence,  would  be  too
ready  a means  to  be  neglected.  Moreover,  a World-State  would
probably  no  more  find  it  possible  to  tolerate  the  continuance  of
certain  nations  as  capitalist  societies,  itself  being  socialistic  in
major  part,  than  a capitalist  or  socialist  Great  Britain  would
tolerate  a socialist  or  capitalist  Scotland  or  Wales.  On  the  other
hand,  if  ail  nations  become  socialistic  in  form,  it  would  be
natural  enough  for  the  World-State  to  co-ordinate  all  these  sepa-
rate socialisms  into  one  great  system  of  human  life.  But  Socialism
pursued  to  its  full  development  means  the  destruction  of  the  dis-
tinction between  political  and  social  activities;  it  means  the  so-
cialisation of  the  common  life  and  its  subjection  in  all  its  parts
to  its  own  organised  government  and  administration.  Nothing
small  or  great  escapes  its  purview.  Birth  and  marriage,  labour
and  amusement  and  rest,  education,  culture,  training  of  physique
and  character,  the  socialistic  sense  leaves  nothing  outside  its
scope  and  its  busy  intolerant  control.  Therefore,  granting  an
international  Socialism,  neither  the  politics  nor  the  social  life
of  the  separate  peoples  is  likely  to  escape  the  centralised  control
of  the  World-State.^

Such  a world-system  is  remote  indeed  from  our  present  con-
ceptions and  established  habits  of  life,  but  these  conceptions  and
habits  are  already  subjected  at  their  roots  to  powerful  forces  of
change.  Uniformity  is  becoming  more  and  more  the  law  of  the
world;  it  is  becoming  more  and  more  difficult,  in  spite  of  senti-
ment and  in  spite  of  conscious  efforts  of  conservation  and  revival,
for  local  individualities  to  survive.  But  the  triumph  of  uniformity
would  naturally  make  for  centralisation;  the  radical  incentive
to  separateness  would  disappear.  And  centralisation  once
accomplished  would  in  its  turn  make  for  a more  complete  uni-
formity. Such  decentralisation  as  might  be  indispensable  in  a
uniform  humanity  would  be  needed  for  convenience  of  adminis-
tration, not  on  the  ground  of  true  separative  variations.  On<^  t e
national  sentiment  has  gone  under  before  a dominant  mter-


‘ This  aspect  of  Socialism  in  action  has  received  a striking  confirmation^  ^
total  governmental  control  in  Germany  and  Italy.  The  strife  bet«-een
ism  and  pure  Marxist  Socialism  could  not  have  been  foreseen  at  the  time  o i

ever  form  prevails,  there  is  an  identical  principle.


480


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity


nationalism,  large  questions  of  culture  and  race  would  be  the  only
grounds  left  for  the  preservation  of  a strong,  though  subordinate,
principle  of  separation  in  the  World-State.  But  difference  of
culture  is  quite  as  much  threatened  today  as  any  other  more
outward  principle  of  group  variation.  The  differences  between
the  European  nations  are  simply  minor  variations  of  a common
occidental  culture.  And  now  that  Science,  that  great  power  for
uniformity  of  thought  and  life  and  method,  is  becoming  more
and  more  the  greater  part  and  threatens  to  become  the  whole
of  culture  and  life,  the  importance  of  these  variations  is  likely  to
decrease.  The  only  radical  difference  that  still  exists  is  between
the  mind  of  the  Occident  and  the  mind  of  the  Orient.  But  here
too  Asia  is  undergoing  the  shock  of  Europeanism  and  Europe
is  beginning  to  feel,  however  slightly,  the  reflux  of  Asiaticism.  A
common  world-culture  is  the  most  probable  outcome.  The  valid
objection  to  centralisation  will  then  be  greatly  diminished  in
force,  if  not  removed  altogether.  Race-sense  is  perhaps  a stronger
obstacle  because  it  is  more  irrational;  but  this  too  maybe  re-
moved by  the  closer  intellectual,  cultural  and  physical  inter-
course which  is  inevitable  in  the  not  distant  future.^

The  dream  of  the  cosmopolitan  socialist  thinker  may  there-
fore be  realised  after  all.  And  given  the  powerful  continuance  of
the  present  trend  of  world-forces,  it  is  in  a way  inevitable.  Even
what  seems  now  most  a chimera,  a common  language,  may
become  a reality.  For  a State  naturally  tends  to  establish  one
language  as  the  instrument  of  all  its  public  affairs,  its  thought,
its  literature;  the  rest  sink  into  patois,  dialects,  provincial
tongues,  like  Welsh  in  Great  Britain  or  Breton  and  Pr6ven9al  in
France;  exceptions  like  Switzerland  are  few,  hardly  more  than
one  or  two  in  number,  and  are  preserved  only  by  unusually  favour-
able conditions.  It  is  difficult  indeed  to  suppose  that  languages
with  powerful  literatures  spoken  by  millions  of  cultured  men  will
allow  themselves  to  be  put  into  a quite  secondary  position,  much
less  snuffed  out  by  any  old  or  new  speech  of  man.  But  it  cannot
be  quite  certainly  said  that  scientific  reason,  taking  possession  of

1 j racialism  strikes  across  this  probability  and,  if  it  remains  irreductible,

would  make  unification  impossible,  except  by  conquest  or  control  of  the  world  by  a few
dominant  nations.  It  is  possible,  however,  that  this  is  only  a passing  phase.


481


The  Need  of  Administrative  Unity

the  mind  of  the  race  and  thrusting  aside  separative  sentiment  as
a barbaric  anachronism,  may  not  accomplish  one  day  even  this
psychological  miracle.  In  any  case,  variety  of  language  need  be  no
insuperable  obstacle  to  uniformity  of  culture,  to  uniformity  of
education,  life  and  organisation  or  to  a regulating  scientific
machinery  applied  to  all  departments  of  life  and  settled  for  the
common  good  by  the  united  will  and  intelligence  of  the  human
race.  For  that  would  be  what  a World-State,  such  as  we  have
imagined,  would  stand  for,  its  meaning,  its  justification,  its
human  object.  It  is  likely  indeed  that  this  and  nothing  less  would
come  in  the  end  to  be  regarded  as  the  full  justification  of  its
existence.


Chapter  XXVII


The  Peril  of  the  World-State


This  then  is  the  extreme  possible  form  of  a
World-State,  the  form  dreamed  of  by  the  socialistic,  scientific,
humanitarian  thinkers  who  represent  the  modern  mind  at  its
highest  point  of  self-consciousness  and  are  therefore  able  to
detect  the  trend  of  its  tendencies,  though  to  the  half-rationalised
mind  of  the  ordinary  man  whose  view  does  not  go  beyond  the
day  and  its  immediate  morrow,  their  speculations  may  seem  to
be  chimerical  and  utopian.  In  reality  they  are  nothing  of  the
kind;  in  their  essence,  not  necessarily  in  their  form,  they  are,
as  we  have  seen,  not  only  the  logical  outcome,  but  the  inevitable
practical  last  end  of  the.  incipient  urge  towards  human  unity,  if  it
is  pursued  by  a principle  of  mechanical  unification,  — that  is  to
say,  by  the  principle  of  the  State.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  we  have
found  it  necessary  to  show  the  operative  principles  and  necessities
which  have  underlain  the  growth  of  the  unified  and  finally  social-
istic nation-State,  in  order  to  see  how  the  same  movement  in
international  unification  must  lead  to  the  same  results  by  an
analogous  necessity  of  development.  The  State  principle  leads
necessarily  to  uniformity,  regulation,  mechanisation;  its  inevit-
able end  is  socialism.  There  is  nothing  fortuitous,  no  room  for
chance  in  political  and  social  development,  and  the  emergence
of  socialism  was  no  accident  or  a thing  that  might  or  might  not
have  been,  but  the  inevitable  result  contained  in  the  very  seed
of  the  State  idea.  It  was  inevitable  from  the  moment  that  idea
began  to  be  hammered  out  in  practice.  The  work  of  the  Alfreds
and  Charlemagnes  and  other  premature  national  or  imperial
unifiers  contained  this  as  a sure  result,  for  men  work  almost
always  without  knowing  for  what  they  have  worked.  But  in
modem  times  the  signs  are  so  clear  that  we  need  not  be  deceived
or  imagine,  when  we  begin  to  lay  a mechanical  base  for  world-
unification,  that  the  result  contained  in  the  very  effort  will  not


483


The  Peril  of  the  World-State

insist  on  developing,  however  far-olf  it  may  seem  at  present  from
any  immediate  or  even  any  distant  possibilities.  A strict  unifica-
tion, a vast  uniformity,  a regulated  socialisation  of  united  man-
kind will  be  the  predestined  fruit  of  our  labour.

This  result  can  only  be  avoided  if  an  opposite  force  inter-
poses and  puts  in  its  veto,  as  happened  in  Asia  where  the  State
idea,  although  strongly  affirmed  within  its  limits,  could  never  go
in  its  realisation  beyond  a certain  point,  because  the  funda-
mental principle  of  the  national  life  was  opposed  to  its  full  into-
lerant development.  The  races  of  Asia,  even  the  most  organised,
have  always  been  peoples  rather  than  nations  in  the  modem
sense.  Or  they  were  nations  only  in  the  sense  of  having  a com-
mon soul-life,  a common  culture,  a common  social  organisation,
a common  political  head,  but  not  nation-States.  The  State  ma-
chine existed  only  for  a restricted  and  superficial  action;  the  real
life  of  the  people  was  determined  by  other  powers  with  which  it
could  not  meddle.  Its  principal  function  was  to  preserve  and
protect  the  national  culture  and  to  maintain  sufficient  political,
social  and  administrative  order  — as  far  as  possible  an  immut-
able order  — for  the  real  life  of  the  people  to  function  undis-
turbed in  its  own  way  and  according  to  its  own  innate  tendencies.
Some  such  unity  for  the  human  race  is  possible  in  the  place  of  an
organised  World-State,  if  the  nations  of  mankind  succeed  in  pre-
serving their  developed  instinct  of  nationalism  intact  and  strong
enough  to  resist  the  domination  of  the  State  idea.  The  result
would  then  be  not  a single  nation  of  mankind  and  a World-State,
but  a single  human  people  with  a free  association  of  its  nation-
units.  Or,  it  may  be,  the  nation  as  we  know  it  might  disappear,
but  there  would  be  some  other  new  kind  of  group-units,  assured
by  some  sufficient  machinery  of  international  order  in  the  peace-
ful and  natural  functioning  of  their  social,  economical  and  cul-
tural relations.

Which  then  of  these  two  major  possibilities  would  be
preferable?  To  answer  that  question  we  have  to  ask  ourselves,
what  would  be  the  account  of  gain  and  loss  for  the  life  of  the  hu-
man race  which  would  result  from  the  creation  of  a unified  World
State.  In  all  probability  the  results  would  be,  with  all  allowan^
for  the  great  difference  between  then  and  now,  very  much  the


484


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

same  in  essence  as  those  which  we  observe  in  the  ancient  Roman
Empire.  On  the  credit  side,  we  should  have  first  one  enormous
gain,  the  assured  peace  of  the  world.  It  might  not  be  absolutely
secure  against  internal  shocks  and  disturbances  but,  supposing
certain  outstanding  questions  to  be  settled  with  some  approach
to  permanence,  it  would  eliminate  even  such  occasional  violences
of  civil  strife  as  disturbed  the  old  Roman  imperial  economy  and,
whatever  perturbations  there  might  still  be,  need  not  disturb  the
settled  fabric  of  civilisation  so  as  to  cast  all  again  into  the  throes
of  a great  radical  and  violent  change.  Peace  assured,  there  would
be  an  unparalleled  development  of  ease  and  well-being.  A great
number  of  outstanding  problems  would  be  solved  by  the  united
intelligence  of  mankind  working  no  longer  in  fragments  but  as
one.  The  vital  life  of  the  race  would  settle  down  into  an  assured
rational  order  comfortable,  well-regulated,  well-informed,  with
a satisfactory  machinery  for  meeting  all  difficulties,  exigencies
and  problems  with  the  least  possible  friction,  disturbance  and
mere  uncertainty  of  adventure  and  peril.  At  first,  there  would  be  a
great  cultural  and  intellectual  efflorescence.  Science  would  orga-
nise itself  for  the  betterment  of  human  life  and  the  increase  of
knowledge  and  mechanical  efficiency.  The  various  cultures  of  the
world  — those  that  still  exist  as  separate  realities  — would  not
only  exchange  ideas  more  intimately,  but  would  throw  their
gains  into  one  common  fund,  and  new  motives  and  forms  would
arise  for  a time  in  thought  and  literature  and  Art.  Men  would
meet  each  other  much  more  closely  and  completely  than  before,
develop  a greater  mutual  understanding  rid  of  many  accidental
motives  of  strife,  hatred  and  repugnance  which  now  exist,  and
arrive,  if  not  at  brotherhood,  — which  cannot  come  by  mere
political,  social  and  cultural  union,  — yet  at  some  imitation  of  it,
a sufficiently  kindly  association  and  interchange.  There  would
be  an  unprecedented  splendour,  ease  and  amenity  in  this  deve-
lopment of  human  life,  and  no  doubt  some  chief  poet  of  the  age,
writing  in  the  common  or  official  tongue  — shall  we  say,  Espe-
ranto ? — would  sing  confidently  of  the  approach  of  the  golden
age  or  even  proclaim  its  actual  arrival  and  eternal  duration.  But
after  a time,  there  would  be  a dying  down  of  force,  a static  condi-
tion of  the  human  mind  and  human  life,  then  stagnation,  decay.


The  Peril  of  the  World-State  485


disintegration.  The  soul  of  man  would  begin  to  wither  in  the
midst  of  his  acquisitions.

This  result  would  come  about  for  the  same  essential  reasons
as  in  the  Roman  example.  The  conditions  of  a vigorous  life
would  be  lost,  liberty,  mobile  variation  and  the  shock  upon  each
other  of  freely  developing  differentiated  lives.  It  may  be  said  that
this  will  not  happen,  because  the  World-State  will  be  a free  demo-
cratic State,  not  a liberty-stifling  empire  or  autocracy,  and  be-
cause liberty  and  progress  are  the  very  principle  of  modern  life
and  no  development  would  be  tolerated  which  went  contrary  to
that  principle.  But  in  all  this,  there  is  not  really  the  security  that
seems  to  be  offered.  For  what  is  now,  need  not  endure  under
quite  different  circumstances  and  the  idea  that  it  will  is  a strange
mirage  thrown  from  the  actualities  of  the  present  on  the  pos-
sibly quite  different  actualities  of  the  future.  Democracy  is  by  no
means  a sure  preservative  of  liberty;  on  the  contrary,  we  see  to-
day the  democratic  system  of  government  march  steadily  towards
such  an  organised  annihilation  of  individual  liberty  as  could
not  have  been  dreamed  of  in  the  old  aristocratic  and  monarchical
systems.  It  may  be  that  from  the  more  violent  and  brutal  forms
of  despotic  oppression  which  were  associated  with  those  systems,
democracy  has  indeed  delivered  those  nations  which  have  been
fortunate  enough  to  achieve  liberal  forms  of  government,  and
that  is  no  doubt  a great  gain.  It  revives  now  only  in  periods  of
revolution  and  of  excitement,  often  in  the  forms  of  mob  tyranny
or  a savage  revolutionary  or  reactionary  repression.  But  there  is
a deprivation  of  liberty  which  is  more  respectable  in  appearance,
more  subtle  and  systematised,  more  mild  in  its  method  because
it  has  a greater  force  at  its  back,  but  for  that  very  reason  more
effective  and  pervading.  The  tyranny  of  the  majority  has  become
a familiar  phrase  and  its  deadening  effects  have  been  epicte
with  a great  force  of  resentment  by  certain  of  the  modern  inte  ec
tuals;i  but  what  the  future  promises  us  is  something  more  or-
midable  still,  the  tyranny  of  the  whole,  of  the  self-hypnotised  mass
over  its  constituent  groups  and  units.^


^ Ibsen  in  his  drama,  “An  Enemy  of  the  People  . .

■ The  first  SCQ  the  tostic  b.einnl»S  of  .his  phsnomsnon  ^

Soviet  Russia.  At  the  time  of  writine  this  development  could  be  seen  on  y p«u


486  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

This  is  a very  remarkable  development,  the  more  so,  as  in
the  origins  of  the  democratic  movement  individual  freedom  was
the  ideal  which  it  set  in  front  both  in  ancient  and  modern  times.
The  Greeks  associated  democracy  with  two  main  ideas,  first,  an
effective  and  personal  share  by  each  citizen  in  the  actual  govern-
ment, legislation,  administration  of  the  community,  secondly,  a
great  freedom  of  individual  temperament  and  action.  But
neither  of  these  characteristics  can  flourish  in  the  modern  type
of  democracy,  although  in  the  United  States  of  America  there
was  at  one  time  a tendency  to  a certain  extent  in  this  direction.
In  large  States,  the  personal  share  of  each  citizen  in  the  govern-
ment cannot  be  effective;  he  can  only  have  an  equal  share  — illu-
sory for  the  individual  although  effective  in  the  mass  — in  the
periodical  choice  of  his  legislators  and  administrators.  Even  if
these  have  not  practically  to  be  elected  from  a class  which  is  not
the  whole  or  even  the  majority  of  the  community,  at  present
almost  everywhere  the  middle  class,  still  these  legislators  and
administrators  do  not  really  represent  their  electors.  The  Power
they  represent  is  another,  a formless  and  bodiless  entity,  which
has  taken  the  place  of  monarch  and  aristocracy,  that  impersonal
group-being  which  assumes  some  sort  of  outward  form  and  body
and  conscious  action  in  the  huge  mechanism  of  the  modern
State.  Against  this  power  the  individual  is  much  more  helpless
than  he  was  against  old  oppressions.  When  he  feels  its  pressure
grinding  him  into  its  uniform  moulds,  he  has  no  resource  except
either  an  impotent  anarchism  or  else  a retreat,  still  to  some
extent  possible,  into  the  freedom  of  his  soul  or  the  freedom  of  his
intellectual  being.

For  this  is  one  gain  of  modem  democracy  which  ancient
liberty  did  not  realise  to  the  same  extent  and  which  has  not  yet
been  renounced,  a full  freedom  of  speech  and  thought.  And  as
long  as  this  freedom  endures,  the  fear  of  a static  condition  of
humanity  and  subsequent  stagnation  might  seem  to  be
groundless,  especially  when  it  is  accompanied  by  universal
education  which  provides  the  largest  possible  human  field  for
producing  an  effectuating  force.  Freedom  of  thought  and  speech

vision.  It  assumed  afterwards  the  proportions  of  a growing  fact  and  we  can  now  see  its  full  and
formidable  body.


487


The  Peril  of  the  World-State

— the  two  necessarily  go  together,  since  there  can  be  no  real
freedom  of  thought  where  a padlock  is  put  upon  freedom  of
speech  — is  not  indeed  complete  without  freedom  of  associa-
tion; for  free  speech  means  free  propagandism  and  propagan-
dism  only  becomes  effective  by  association  for  the  realisation  of
its  objects.  This  third  liberty  also  exists  with  more  or  less  of  qua-
lifying limitations  or  prudent  safeguards  in  all  democratic  States.
But  it  is  a question  whether  these  great  fundamental  liberties
have  been  won  by  the  race  with  an  entire  security,  — apart  from
their  occasional  suspensions  even  in  the  free  nations  and  the  con-
siderable restrictions  with  which  they  are  hedged  in  subject  coun-
tries. It  is  possible  that  the  future  has  certain  surprises  for  us  in
this  direction.^  Freedom  of  thought  would  be  the  last  human
liberty  directly  attacked  by  the  all-regulating  State,  which  will
first  seek  to  regulate  the  whole  life  of  the  individual  in  the  type
approved  by  the  communal  mind  or  by  its  rulers.  But  when  it
sees  how  all-important  is  the  thought  in  shaping  the  life,  it  will
be  led  to  take  hold  of  that  too  by  forming  the  thought  of  the
individual  through  State  education  and  by  training  him  to  the
acceptance  of  the  approved  communal,  ethical,  social,  cultural,
religious  ideas,  as  was  done  in  many  ancient  forms  of  education.
Only  if  it  finds  this  weapon  ineffective,  is  it  likely  to  limit  freedom
of  thought  directly  on  the  plea  of  danger  to  the  State  and  to  civi-
lisation. Already  we  see  the  right  of  the  State  to  interfere  with
individual  thought  announced  here  and  there  in  a most  ominous
manner.  One  would  have  imagined  religious  liberty  at  least  was
assured  to  mankind;  but  recently  we  have  seen  an  exponent
of  “new  thought”  advancing  positively  the  doctrine  that  the
State  is  under  no  obligation  to  recognise  the  religious  liberty
of  the  individual  and  that  even  if  it  grants  freedom  of  religious
thought,  it  can  only  be  conceded  as  a matter  of  expediency,  not
of  right.  There  is  no  obligation,  it  is  contended,  to  allow  free-
dom of  cult;  and  indeed  this  seems  logical;  for  if  the  State  has
the  right  to  regulate  the  whole  life  of  the  individual,  it  must  surely
have  the  right  to  regulate  his  religion,  which  is  so  important  a

* A surprise  no  longer,  but  more  and  more  an  accomplished  fact.  At  this  nioment  fwdom
of  speech  and  thought  exists  no  longer  in  Russia;  it  was  entirely  suspends  or  a m
Germany  and  Southern  Europe.


488  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

part  of  his  life,  and  his  thought,  which  has  so  powerful  an  effect
upon  his  life.^

Supposing  an  all-regulating  socialistic  World-State  to  be
established,  freedom  of  thought  under  such  a regime  would
necessarily  mean  a criticism  not  only  of  the  details,  but  of  the
very  principles  of  the  existing  state  of  things.  This  criticism,  if
it  is  to  look  not  to  the  dead  past  but  to  the  future,  could  only
take  one  direction,  the  direction  of  anarchism,  whether  of  the
spiritual  Tolstoian  kind  or  else  the  intellectual  anarchism  which  is
now  the  creed  of  a small  minority  but  still  a growing  force  in
many  European  countries.  It  would  declare  the  free  development
of  the  individual  as  its  gospel  and  denounce  government  as  an
evil  and  no  longer  at  all  a necessary  evil.  It  would  affirm  the  full
and  free  religious,  ethical,  intellectual  and  temperamental  growth
of  the  individual  from  within  as  the  true  ideal  of  human  life  and
all  else  as  things  not  worth  having  at  the  price  of  the  renunciation
of  this  ideal,  a renunciation  which  it  would  describe  as  the  loss
of  his  soul.  It  would  preach  as  the  ideal  of  society  a free  associa-
tion or  brotherhood  of  individuals  without  government  or  any
kind  of  compulsion.

What  would  the  World-State  do  with  this  kind  of  free
thought?  It  might  tolerate  it  so  long  as  it  did  not  translate  itself
into  individual  and  associated  action;  but  the  moment  it  spread
or  turned  towards  a practical  self-affirmation  in  life,  the  whole
principle  of  the  State  and  its  existence  would  be  attacked  and  its
very  base  would  be  sapped  and  undermined  and  in  imminent
danger.  To  stop  the  destruction  at  its  root  or  else  consent  to  its
own  subversion  would  be  the  only  alternatives  before  the  estab-
lished Power.  But  even  before  any  such  necessity  arises,  the  prin-
ciple of  regulation  of  all  things  by  the  State  would  have  extended
itself  to  the  regulation  of  the  mental  as  well  as  the  physical  life  of
man  by  the  communal  mind,  which  was  the  ideal  of  former
civilisations.  A static  order  of  society  would  be  the  necessary
consequence,  since  without  the  freedom  of  the  individual  a

J It  was  an  error  of  prevision  to  suppose  that  the  State  would  hesitate  for  a time  to  sup-
press freedom  of  thought  altogether.  It  has  been  done  at  once  and  decisively  by  Bolshevist
Russia  and  the  totalitarian  States.  Religious  liberty  is  not  yet  utterly  destroyed,  but  is  being
sternly  ground  out  in  Russia,  as  it  was  in  Germany,  by  State  pressure.


The  Peril  of  the  World-State


489


society  cannot  remain  progressive.  It  must  settle  into  the  rut  or
the  groove  of  a regulated  perfection  or  of  something  to  which  it
gives  that  name  because  of  the  rationality  of  system  and  symmet-
rical idea  of  order  which  it  embodies.  The  communal  mass  is
always  conservative  and  static  in  its  consciousness  and  only
moves  slowly  in  the  tardy  process  of  subconscient  Nature.  The
free  individual  is  the  conscious  progressive:  it  is  only  when  he
is  able  to  impart  his  own  creative  and  mobile  consciousness  to
the  mass  that  a progressive  society  becomes  possible.


Chapter  XXVIII


Diversity  in  Oneness


It  is  essential  to  keep  constantly  in  view
the  fundamental  powers  and  realities  of  life  if  we  are  not  to
be  betrayed  by  the  arbitrary  rule  of  the  logical  reason  and  its
attachment  to  the  rigorous  and  limiting  idea  into  experiments
which,  however  convenient  in  practice  and  however  captivating
to  a Unitarian  and  symmetrical  thought,  may  well  destroy  the
vigour  and  impoverish  the  roots  of  life.  For  that  which  is
perfect  and  satisfying  to  the  system  of  the  logical  reason  may
yet  ignore  the  truth  of  life  and  the  living  needs  of  the  race.
Unity  is  an  idea  which  is  not  at  all  arbitrary  or  unreal;  for
unity  is  the  very  basis  of  existence.  The  oneness  that  is  secretly
at  the  foundation  of  all  things,  the  evolving  spirit  in  Nature
is  moved  to  realise  consciously  at  the  top;  the  evolution  moves
through  diversity,  from  a simple  to  a complex  oneness.  Unity
the  race  moves  towards  and  must  one  day  realise.

But  uniformity  is  not  the  law  of  life.  Life  exists  by  diversity;
it  insists  that  every  group,  every  being  shall  be,  even  while
one  with  all  the  rest  in  its  universality,  yet  by  some  principle
or  ordered  detail  of  variation  unique.  The  over-centralisation
which  is  the  condition  of  a working  uniformity,  is  not  the
healthy  method  of  life.  Order  is  indeed  the  law  of  life,  but  not
an  artificial  regulation.  The  sound  order  is  that  which  comes
from  within,  as  the  result  of  a nature  that  has  discovered  itself
and  found  its  own  law  and  the  law  of  its  relations  with  others.
Therefore  the  truest  order  is  that  which  is  founded  on  the  greatest
possible  liberty;  for  liberty  is  at  once  the  condition  of  vigorous
variation  and  the  condition  of  self-finding.  Nature  secures
variation  by  division  into  groups  and  insists  on  liberty  by  the
force  of  individuality  in  the  members  of  the  group.  Therefore
the  unity  of  the  human  race  to  be  entirely  sound  and  in  conso-
nance with  the  deepest  laws  of  life  must  be  founded  on  free


Diversity  in  Oneness  491

groupings,  and  the  groupings  again  must  be  the  natural  asso-
ciation of  free  individuals.  This  is  an  ideal  which  it  is  certainly
impossible  to  realise  under  present  conditions  or  perhaps  in  any
near  future  of  the  human  race;  but  it  is  an  ideal  which  ought
to  be  kept  in  view,  for  the  more  we  can  approximate  to  it,  the
more  we  can  be  sure  of  being  on  the  right  road.  The  artificiality
of  much  in  human  life  is  the  cause  of  its  most  deep-seated
maladies;  it  is  not  faithful  to  itself  or  sincere  with  Nature  and
therefore  it  stumbles  and  suffers.

The  utility,  the  necessity  of  natural  groupings  may  be
seen  if  we  consider  the  purpose  and  functioning  of  one  great
principle  of  division  in  Nature,  her  insistence  on  diversity  of
language.  The  seeking  for  a common  language  for  all  mankind
was  very  strong  at  the  close  of  the  last  and  the  beginning  of  the
present  century  and  gave  rise  to  several  experiments,  none  of
which  could  get  to  any  vital  permanence.  Now  whatever  may
be  the  need  of  a common  medium  of  communication  for  man-
kind and  however  it  may  be  served  by  the  general  use  either  of
an  artificial  and  conventional  language  or  of  some  natural
tongue,  as  Latin,  and  later  on  to  a slight  extent  French,  was
for  some  time  the  common  cultural  tongue  of  intercourse  between
the  European  nations  or  Sanskrit  for  the  Indian  peoples,  no  uni-
fication which  destroyed  or  overshadowed,  dwarfed  and  dis-
couraged the  large  and  free  use  of  the  varying  natural  languages
of  humanity,  could  fail  to  be  detrimental  to  human  life  and
progress.  The  legend  of  the  Tower  of  Babel  speaks  of  the
diversity  of  tongues  as  a curse  laid  on  the  race;  but  whatever
its  disadvantages,  and  they  tend  more  and  more  to  be  minimised
by  the  growth  of  civilisation  and  increasing  intercourse,  it  has
been  rather  a blessing  than  a curse,  a gift  to  mankind  rather  than
a disability  laid  upon  it.  The  purposeless  exaggeration  of
anything  is  always  an  evil,  and  an  excessive  pullulation  of  varying
tongues  that  serve  no  purpose  in  the  expression  of  a real  diver-
sity of  spirit  and  culture  is  certainly  a stumbling-block  rather
than  a help:  but  this  excess,  though  it  existed  in  the  past,^

1 In  India  the  pedants  enumerate  I know  not  how  many  hundred  languages.  This  is  a
stupid  mis-statement;  there  arc  about  a dozen  great  tongues;  the  rest  are  cither  dialects  or
aboriginal  survivals  of  tribal  speech  that  are  bound  to  disappear.


492  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

is  hardly  a possibility  of  the  future.  The  tendency  is  rather  in
the  opposite  direction.  In  former  times  diversity  of  language
helped  to  create  a barrier  to  knowledge  and  sympathy,  was
often  made  the  pretext  even  of  an  actual  antipathy  and  tended
to  a too  rigid  division.  The  lack  of  sufficient  interpenetration
kept  up  both  a passive  want  of  understanding  and  a fruitful
crop  of  active  misunderstandings.  But  this  was  an  inevitable
evil  of  a particular  stage  of  growth,  an  exaggeration  of  the
necessity  that  then  existed  for  the  vigorous  development  of
strongly  individualised  group-souls  in  the  human  race.  These
disadvantages  have  not  yet  been  abolished,  but  with  closer
intercourse  and  the  growing  desire  of  men  and  nations  for  the
knowledge  of  each  other’s  thought  and  spirit  and  personality,
they  have  diminished  and  tend  to  diminish  more  and  more
and  there  is  no  reason  why  in  the  end  they  should  not  become
inoperative.

Diversity  of  language  serves  two  important  ends  of  the
human  spirit,  a use  of  unification  and  a use  of  variation.  A
language  helps  to  bring  those  who  speak  it  into  a certain  large
unity  of  growing  thought,  formed  temperament,  ripening  spirit.
It  is  an  intellectual,  aesthetic  and  expressive  bond  which  tem-
pers division  where  division  exists  and  strengthens  unity  where
unity  has  been  achieved.  Especially  it  gives  self-consciousness
to  national  or  racial  unity  and  creates  the  bond  of  a common
self-expression  and  a common  record  of  achievement.  On  the
other  hand,  it  is  a means  of  national  differentiation  and  perhaps
the  most  powerful  of  all,  not  a barren  principle  of  division
merely,  but  a fruitful  and  helpful  differentiation.  For  each
language  is  the  sign  and  power  of  the  soul  of  the  people  which
naturally  speaks  it.  Each  develops  therefore  its  own  peculiar
spirit,  thought-temperament,  way  of  dealing  with  life  and
knowledge  and  experience.  If  it  receives  and  welcomes  the
thought,  the  life-experience,  the  spiritual  impact  of  other  nations,
still  it  transforms  them  into  something  new  of  its  own  and  by
that  power  of  transmutation  it  enriches  the  life  of  humanity
with  its  fruitful  borrowings  and  does  not  merely  repeat  what
had  been  gained  elsewhere.  Therefore  it  is  of  the  utmost  value
to  a nation,  a human  group-soul,  to  preserve  its  language  and


493


Diversity  in  Oneness

to  make  of  it  a strong  and  living  cultural  instrument.  A nation,
race  or  people  which  loses  its  language,  cannot  live  its  whole
life  or  its  real  life.  And  this  advantage  to  the  national  life  is  at
the  same  time  an  advantage  to  the  general  life  of  the  human
race.

How  much  a distinct  human  group  loses  by  not  possessing
a separate  tongue  of  its  own  or  by  exchanging  its  natural  self-
expression  for  an  alien  form  of  speech  can  be  seen  by  the
examples  of  the  British  colonies,  the  United  States  of  America
and  Ireland.  The  colonies  are  really  separate  peoples  in  the
psychological  sense,  although  they  are  not  as  yet  separate
nations.  English,  for  the  most  part  or  at  the  lowest  in  great  part,
in  their  origin  and  political  and  social  sympathy,  they  are  yet
not  replicas  of  England,  but  have  already  a different  tempera-
ment, a bent  of  their  own,  a developing  special  character.
But  this  new  personality  can  only  appear  in  the  more  outward
and  mechanical  parts  of  their  life  and  even  there  in  no  great,
effective  and  fruitful  fashion.  The  British  colonies  do  not
count  in  the  culture  of  the  world,  because  they  have  no  native
culture,  because  by  the  fact  of  their  speech  they  are  and  must
be  mere  provinces  of  England.  Whatever  peculiarities  they
may  develop  in  their  mental  life  tend  to  create  a type  of  provin-
cialism and  not  a central  intellectual,  aesthetic,  spiritual  life
of  their  own  with  its  distinct  importance  for  mankind.  For
the  same  reason  the  whole  of  America,  in  spite  of  its  powerfully
independent  political  and  economic  being,  has  tended  to  be
culturally  a province  of  Europe,  the  south  and  centre  by  their
dependence  on  the  Spanish,  and  the  north  by  its  dependence
on  the  English  language.  The  life  of  the  United  States  alone
tends  and  strives  to  become  a great  and  separate  cultural  exis-
tence, but  its  success  is  not  commensurate  with  its  power.  Cul-
turally, it  is  still  to  a great  extent  a province  of  England.  Neither
its  literature,  in  spite  of  two  or  three  great  names,  nor  its  art
nor  its  thought,  nor  anything  else  on  the  higher  levels  of  the
mind,  has  been  able  to  arrive  at  a vigorous  maturity  independent
in  its  soul-type.  And  this  because  its  instrument  of  self-
expression,  the  language  which  the  national  mind  ought  to  shape
and  be  in  turn  shaped  by  it,  was  formed  and  must  continue


494  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

to  be  formed  by  another  country  with  a different  mentality
and  must  there  find  its  centre  and  its  law  of  development.  In
old  times,  America  would  have  evolved  and  changed  the  English
language  according  to  its  own  needs  until  it  became  a new
speech,  as  the  mediaeval  nations  dealt  with  Latin  and  arrived
in  this  way  at  a characteristic  instrument  of  self-expression;
but  under  modem  conditions  this  is  not  easily  possible.’^

Ireland  had  its  own  tongue  when  it  had  its  own  free  national-
ity and  culture  and  its  loss  was  a loss  to  humanity  as  well  as  to
the  Irish  nation.  For  what  might  not  this  Celtic  race  with  its
fine  psychic  turn  and  quick  intelligence  and  delicate  imagina-
tion, which  did  so  much  in  the  beginning  for  European  culture
and  religion,  have  given  to  the  world  through  all  these  centuries
under  natural  conditions?  But  the  forcible  imposition  of  a
foreign  tongue  and  the  turning  of  a nation  into  a province
left  Ireland  for  so  many  centuries  mute  and  culturally  stagnant,
a dead  force  in  the  life  of  Europe.  Nor  can  we  count  as  an
adequate  compensation  for  this  loss  the  small  indirect  influence
of  the  race  upon  English  culture  or  the  few  direct  contributions
made  by  gifted  Irishmen  forced  to  pour  their  natural  genius  into
a foreign  mould  of  thought.  Even  when  Ireland  in  her  struggle
for  freedom  was  striving  to  recover  her  free  soul  and  give  it
a voice,  she  has  been  hampered  by  having  to  use  a tongue
which  does  not  naturally  express  her  spirit  and  peculiar  bent.
In  time  she  may  conquer  the  obstacle,  make  this  tongue  her
own,  force  it  to  express  her,  but  it  will  be  long,  if  ever,  before  .
she  can  do  it  with  the  same  richness,  force  and  unfettered
individuality  as  she  would  have  done  in  her  Gaelic  speech.
That  speech  she  has  tried  to  recover  but  the  natural  obstacles
have  been  and  are  likely  always  to  be  too  heavy  and  too  strongly
established  for  any  complete  success  in  that  endeavour.

Modem  India  is  another  striking  example.  Nothing  has
stood  more  in  the  way  of  the  rapid  progress  in  India,  nothing  has
more  successfully  prevented  her  self-finding  and  development

* It  is  affirmed  that  now  such  an  indep)cndent  development  is  taking  place  in  America;
it  has  to  be  seen  how  far  this  becomes  a truly  vigorous  reality:  at  present  it  has  amounted  only
to  a provincial  turn,  a sort  of  national  slang  or  a racy  oddity.  Even  in  the  farthest  development
it  would  only  be  a sort  of  dialect,  not  a national  language.


Diversity  in  Oneness  495

under  modern  conditions  than  the  long  overshadowing  of  the
Indian  tongues  as  cultural  instruments  by  the  English  language.
It  is  significant  that  the  one  sub-nation  in  India  which  from  the
first  refused  to  undergo  this  yoke,  devoted  itself  to  the  develop-
ment of  its  language,  made  that  for  long  its  principal  pre-
occupation, gave  to  it  its  most  original  minds  and  most  living
energies,  getting  through  everything  else  perfunctorily,  neglecting
commerce,  doing  politics  as  an  intellectual  and  oratorical  pastime,
— that  it  is  Bengal  which  first  recovered  its  soul,  re-spiritualised
itself,  forced  the  whole  world  to  hear  of  its  great  spiritual
personalities,  gave  it  the  first  modern  Indian  poet  and  Indian
scientist  of  world-wide  fame  and  achievement,  restored  the
moribund  art  of  India  to  life  and  power,  first  made  her  count
again  in  the  culture  of  the  world,  first,  as  a reward  in  the  outer
life,  arrived  at  a vital  political  consciousness  and  a living  political
movement  not  imitative  and  derivative  in  its  spirit  and  its
central  ideal.^  For  so  much  does  language  count  in  the  life  of  a
nation;  for  so  much  does  it  count  to  the  advantage  of  humanity
at  large  that  its  group-souls  should  preserve  and  develop  and
use  with  a vigorous  group-individuality  their  natural  instrument
of  expression.

A common  language  makes  for  unity  and  therefore  it
might  be  said  that  the  unity  of  the  human  race  demands  unity
of  language;  the  advantages  of  diversity  must  be  foregone  for
this  greater  good,  however  serious  the  temporary  sacrifice.  But
it  makes  for  a real,  fruitful,  living  unity,  only  when  it  is  the
natural  expression  of  the  race  or  has  been  made  natural  by  a
long  adaptation  and  development  from  within.  The  history  of
universal  tongues  spoken  by  peoples  to  whom  they  were  not
natural,  is  not  encouraging.  Always  they  have  tended  to  become
dead  tongues,  sterilising  so  long  as  they  kept  their  hold,  fruitful
only  when  they  were  decomposed  and  broken  up  into  new
derivative  languages  or  departed  leaving  the  old  speech,  where
that  still  persisted,  to  revive  with  this  new  stamp  and  influence
upon  it.  Latin,  after  its  first  century  of  general  domination  in  the
West,  became  a dead  thing,  impotent  for  creation,  and  generated

* Now,  or  course,  cs’crything  has  changed  and  these  remarks  are  no  longer  applicable  to
the  actual  state  of  things  in  India.


496


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

no  new  or  living  and  evolving  culture  in  the  nations  that  spoke
it;  even  so  great  a force  as  Christianity  could  not  give  it  a new
life.  The  times  during  which  it  was  an  instrument  of  European
thought,  were  precisely  those  in  which  that  thought  was  heaviest,
most  traditional  and  least  fruitful.  A rapid  and  vigorous  new
life  only  grew  up  when  the  languages  which  appeared  out  of  the
detritus  of  dying  Latin  or  the  old  languages  which  had  not
been  lost  took  its  place  as  the  complete  instruments  of  national
culture.  For  it  is  not  enough  that  the  natural  language  should
be  spoken  by  the  people;  it  must  be  the  expression  of  its  higher
life  and  thought.  A language  that  survives  only  as  a patois  or
a provincial  tongue  like  Welsh  after  the  English  conquest  or
Breton  or  Proven9al  in  France  or  as  Czech  survived  once  in
Austria  or  Ruthenian  and  Lithuanian  in  imperial  Russia,
languishes,  becomes  sterile  and  does  not  serve  all  the  true
purpose  of  survival.

Language  is  the  sign  of  the  cultural  life  of  a people,  the
index  of  its  soul  in  thought  and  mind  that  stands  behind  and
enriches  its  soul  in  action.  Therefore  it  is  here  that  the  pheno-
mena and  utilities  of  diversity  may  be  most  readily  seized,  more
than  in  mere  outward  things;  but  these  truths  are  important
because  they  apply  equally  to  the  thing  which  it  expresses  and
symbolises  and  serves  as  an  instrument.  Diversity  of  language
is  worth  keeping  because  diversity  of  cultures  and  differentiation
of  soul-groups  are  worth  keeping  and  because  without  that
diversity  life  cannot  have  full  play;  for  in  its  absence  there  is
a danger,  almost  an  inevitability  of  decline  and  stagnation.
The  disappearance  of  national  variation  into  a single  uniform
human  unity,  of  which  the  systematic  thinker  dreams  as  an
ideal  and  which  we  have  seen  to  be  a substantial  possibility  and
even  a likelihood,  if  a certain  tendency  becomes  dominant,
might  lead  to  political  peace,  economic  well-being,  perfect
administration,  the  solution  of  a hundred  material  problems,
as  did  on  a lesser  scale  the  Roman  unity  in  old  times;  but  to
what  eventual  good  if  it  leads  also  to  an  uncreative  sterilisation
of  the  mind  and  the  stagnation  of  the  soul  of  the  race?  In
laying  this  stress  on  culture,  on  the  things  of  the  mind  and  the
spirit  there  need  be  no  intention  of  undervaluing  the  outward


Diversity  in  Oneness


497


material  side  of  life;  it  is  not  at  all  my  purpose  to  belittle  that
to  which  Nature  always  attaches  so  insistent  an  importance.
On  the  contrary,  the  inner  and  the  outer  depend  upon  each  other.
For  we  see  that  in  the  hfe  of  a nation  a great  period  of  national
culture  and  vigorous  mental  and  soul  life  is  always  part  of  a
general  stirring  and  movement  which  has  its  counterpart  in  the
outward  political,  economic  and  practical  life  of  the  nation.
The  cultural  brings  about  or  increases  the  material  progress  but
also  it  needs  it  that  it  may  itself  flourish  with  an  entirely  full  and
healthy  vigour.  The  peace,  well-being  and  settled  order  of  the
human  world  is  a thing  eminently  to  be  desired  as  a basis  for  a
great  world-culture  in  which  all  humanity  must  be  united;  but
neither  of  these  unities,  the  outward  or  inward,  ought  to  be  de-
void of  an  element  even  more  important  than  peace,  order  and
well-being,  freedom  and  vigour  of  life,  which  can  only  be  assured
by  variation  and  by  the  freedom  of  the  group  and  of  the  indivi-
dual. Not  then  a uniform  unity,  not  a logically  simple,  a scienti-
fically rigid,  a beautifully  neat  and  mechanical  sameness  but  a
living  oneness  full  of  healthy  freedom  and  variation  is  the  ideal
which  we  should  keep  in  view  and  strive  to  get  realised  in  man  s
future.

But  how  is  this  difficult  end  to  be  secured  ? For  if  an  ex-
cessive uniformity  and  centralisation  tends  to  the  disappearance
of  necessary  variations  and  indispensable  liberties,  a vigorous
diversity  and  strong  group-individualism  may  lead  to  an  in-
curable persistence  or  constant  return  of  the  old  separatism  which
will  prevent  human  unity  from  reaching  completeness  or  even  will
not  allow  it  to  take  firm  root.  For  it  will  not  be  enough  for  t e
constituent  groups  or  divisions  to  have  a certain  formal  a minis
trative  and  legislative  separateness  like  the  States  of  the  American
union  if,  as  there,  there  is  liberty  only  in  mechanical  variations
and  all  vivid  departures  from  the  general  norm  proceeding  Irom
a profounder  inner  variation  are  discouraged  or  forbid  en.  or
will  it  be  sufficient  to  found  a unity  plus  local  independence  of  me
German  type;  for  there  the  real  overriding  force  was  a uni  ying
and  disciplined  Pnissianism  and  independence  survive  ony  in
form.  Nor  will  even  the  English  colonial  system  gi^  e us  an>  use
ful  suggestion ; for  there  is  there  local  independence  an  a sep


498  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

rate  vigour  of  life,  but  the  brain,  heart  and  central  spirit  are  in
the  metropolitan  country  and  the  rest  are  at  the  best  only  outlying
posts  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  idea  ^ The  Swiss  cantonal  life  offers
no  fruitful  similitude;  for,  apart  from  the  exiguity  of  its  propor-
tions and  frame,  there  is  the  phenomenon  of  a single  Swiss  life
and  practical  spirit  with  a mental  dependence  on  three  foreign
cultures  sharply  dividing  the  race;  a common  Swiss  culture
does  not  exist.  The  problem  is  rather,  on  a larger  and  more
difficult  scale  and  with  greater  complexities,  that  which  offered
itself  for  a moment  to  the  British  Empire,  how  if  it  is  at  all
possible  to  unite  Great  Britain,  Ireland,  the  Colonies,  Egypt,
India  in  a real  oneness,  throw  their  gains  into  a common  stock,
use  their  energies  for  a common  end,  help  them  to  find  the  ac-
count of  their  national  individuality  in  a supranational  life,  yet
preserve  that  individuality,  — Ireland  keeping  the  Irish  soul  and
life  and  cultural  principle,  India  the  Indian  soul  and  life  and  cul-
tural principle,  the  other  units,  developing  theirs,  not  united
by  a common  Anglicisation,  which  was  the  past  empire-building
ideal,  but  held  together  by  a greater,  as  yet  unrealised  principle
of  free  union.  Nothing  was  suggested  at  any  time  in  the  way  of
a solution  except  some  sort  of  bunch  or  rather  bouquet  system,
unifying  its  clusters  not  by  the  living  stalk  of  a common  origin
or  united  past,  for  that  does  not  exist,  but  by  an  artificial  thread
of  administrative  unity  which  might  at  any  moment  be  snapped
irretrievably  by  centrifugal  forces.

But  after  all,  it  may  be  said,  unity  is  the  first  need  and  should
be  achieved  at  any  cost,  just  as  national  unity  was  achieved  by
crushing  out  the  separate  existence  of  the  local  units;  afterwards
a new  principle  of  group-variation  may  be  found  other  than  the
nation-unit.  But  the  parallel  here  becomes  illusory,  because  an
important  factor  is  lacking.  For  the  history  of  the  birth  of  the
nation  is  a coalescence  of  small  groups  into  a larger  unit  among
many  similar  large  units.  The  old  richness  of  small  units  which
gave  such  splendid  cultural,  but  such  unsatisfactory  political
results  in  Greece,  Italy  and  India  was  lost,  but  the  principle  of
life  made  vivid  by  variative  diversity  was  preserved  with  nations
for  the  diverse  units  and  the  cultural  life  of  a continent  for  the

* This  may  be  less  so  than  before,  but  the  improvement  does  not  go  very  far.


Diversity  in  Oneness


499


common  background.  Here  nothing  of  the  kind  is  possible.
There  will  be  a sole  unity,  the  world-nation,  all  outer  source  of
diversity  will  disappear.  Therefore  the  inner  source  has  to  be
modified  indeed,  subordinated  in  some  way,  but  preserved  and
encouraged  to  survive.  It  may  be  that  this  will  not  happen,  the
Unitarian  idea  may  forcefully  prevail  and  turn  the  existing  nations
into  mere  geographical  provinces  or  administrative  departments
of  a single  well-mechanised  State.  But  in  that  case  the  outraged
need  of  life  will  have  its  revenge,  either  by  a stagnation,  a collapse
and  a detrition  fruitful  of  new  separations  or  by  some  principle
of  revolt  from  within.  A gospel  of  Anarchism  might  enforce
itself,  for  example,  and  break  down  the  world-order  for  a new
creation.  The  question  is  whether  there  is  not  somewhere  a
principle  of  unity  in  diversity  by  which  this  method  of  action  and
reaction,  creation  and  destruction,  realisation  and  relapse  cannot
be,  if  not  altogether  avoided,  yet  mitigated  in  its  action  and  led
to  a more  serene  and  harmonious  working.


Chapter  XXIX


The  Idea  of  a League  of  Nations


The  only  means  that  readily  suggests  itself
by  which  a necessary  group-freedom  can  be  preserved  and  yet
the  unification  of  the  human  race  achieved,  is  to  strive  not  to-
wards a closely  organised  World-State,  but  towards  a free,  elastic
and  progressive  world-union.  If  this  is  to  be  done,  we  shall
have  to  discourage  the  almost  inevitable  tendency  which  must
lead  any  unification  by  political,  economic  and  administrative
means,  in  a word,  by  the  force  of  machinery,  to  follow  the  ana-
logy of  the  evolution  of  the  nation-State.  And  we  shall  have  to
encourage  and  revive  that  force  of  idealistic  nationalism  which,
before  the  war,  seemed  on  the  point  of  being  crushed  on  the  one
side  under  the  weight  of  the  increasing  world-empires  of  England,
Russia,  Germany  and  France,  on  the  other  by  the  progress  of  the
opposite  ideal  of  internationalism  with  its  large  and  devastating
contempt  for  the  narrow  ideas  of  country  and  nation  and  its
denunciation  of  the  evils  of  nationalistic  patriotism.  But  at  the
same  time  we  shall  have  to  find  a cure  for  the  as  yet  incurable
separative  sentiments  natural  to  the  very  idea  to  which  we  shall
have  to  give  a renewed  strength.  How  is  all  this  to  be  done?

On  our  side  in  the  attempt  we  have  the  natural  principle
of  compensating  reactions.  The  law  of  action  and  reaction,  valid
even  in  physical  Science,  is  in  human  action,  which  must  always
depend  largely  on  psychological  forces,  a more  constant  and  per-
vading truth.  That  in  life  to  every  pressure  of  active  forces  there
is  a tendency  of  reaction  of  opposite  or  variative  forces  which
may  not  immediately  operate  but  must  eventually  come  into  the
field  or  which  may  not  act  with  an  equal  and  entirely  compensa-
ting force,  but  must  act  with  some  force  of  compensation,  may
be  taken  as  well  established.  It  is  both  a philosophical  necessity
and  a constant  fact  of  experience.  For  Nature  works  by  a balan-
cing system  of  the  interplay  of  opposite  forces.  When  she  has


501


The  Idea  of  a League  of  Nations

insisted  for  some  time  on  the  dominant  force  of  one  tendency  as
against  all  others,  she  seeks  to  correct  its  exaggerations  by  re-
viving, if  dead,  or  newly  awakening,  if  only  in  slumber,  or  bring-
ing into  the  field  in  a new  and  modified  form  the  tendency  that  is
exactly  opposite.  After  long  insistence  on  centralisation,  she  tries
to  modify  it  by  at  least  a subordinated  decentralisation.  After
insisting  on  more  and  more  uniformity,  she  calls  again  into  play
the  spirit  of  multiform  variation.  The  result  need  not  be  an  equi-
pollence  of  the  two  tendencies,  it  may  be  any  kind  of  compromise.
Or,  instead  of  a compromise  it  may  be  in  act  a fusion  and  in
result  a new  creation  which  shall  be  a compound  of  both  prin-
ciples. We  may  expect  her  to  apply  the  same  method  to  the
tendencies  of  unification  and  group-variation  in  dealing  with  the
great  mass  unit  of  humanity.  At  present,  the  nation  is  the  fulcrum
which  the  latter  tendency  has  been  using  for  its  workings  as
against  the  imperialistic  tendency  of  unifying  assimilation.  Now
the  course  of  Nature’s  working  in  humanity  may  destroy  the
nation-unit,  as  she  destroyed  the  tribe  and  clan,  and  develop  a
quite  new  principle  of  grouping;  but  also  she  may  preserve  it
and  give  it  sufiicient  power  of  vitality  and  duration  to  balance
usefully  the  trend  towards  too  heavy  a force  of  unification.  It
is  this  latter  contingency  that  we  have  to  consider.

The  two  forces  in  action  before  the  war  were  imperialism,  —
of  various  colours,  the  more  rigid  imperialism  of  Germany,
the  more  liberal  imperialism  of  England,  — and  nationalism.
They  were  the  two  sides  of  one  phenomenon,  the  aggressive  or
expansive  and  the  defensive  aspects  of  national  egoism.  But  in
the  trend  of  imperialism  this  egoism  had  some  eventual  chance  of
dissolving  itself  by  excessive  self-enlargement,  as  the  aggressive
tribe  disappeared,  for  example,  the  Persian  tribe,  first  into  the
empire  and  then  into  the  nationality  of  the  Persian  people,  or  as
the  city  state  also  disappeared,  first  into  the  Roman  Empire  and
then  both  tribe  and  city  state  without  hope  of  revival  into  the
nations  which  arose  by  fusion  out  of  the  irruption  of  the  German
tribes  into  the  declining  Latin  unity.  In  the  same  or  a similar
way  aggressive  national  imperialism  by  overspreading  the  world
might  end  in  destroying  altogether  the  nation-unit  as  the  city
state  and  tribe  were  destroyed  by  the  aggressive  expansion  of  a


502


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

few  dominant  city  states  and  tribes.  The  force  of  defensive
nationalism  has  reacted  against  this  tendency,  restricted  it  and
constantly  thwarted  its  evolutionary  aim.  But  before  the  war,
the  separative  force  of  nationalism  seemed  doomed  to  impotence
and  final  suppression  in  face  of  the  tremendous  power  with  which
science,  organisation  and  efficiency  had  armed  the  governing
States  of  the  large  imperial  aggregates.

All  the  facts  were  pointing  in  one  direction.  Korea  had  dis-
appeared into  the  nascent  Japanese  empire  on  the  mainland  of
Asia.  Persian  nationalism  had  succumbed  and  lay  suppressed
under  a system  of  spheres  of  influence  which  were  really  a veiled
protectorate,  — and  all  experience  shows  that  the  beginning  of
a protectorate  is  also  the  beginning  of  the  end  of  the  protected
nation;  it  is  a euphemistic  name  for  the  first  process  of  chewing
previous  to  deglutition.  Tibet  and  Siam  were  so  weak  and  visibly
declining  that  their  continued  immunity  could  not  be  hoped  for.
China  had  only  escaped  by  the  jealousies  of  the  world-Powers
and  by  its  size  which  made  it  an  awkward  morsel  to  swallow,  let
alone  to  digest.  The  partition  of  all  Asia  between  four  or  five  or
at  the  most  six  great  empires  seemed  a foregone  conclusion  which
nothing  but  an  unexampled  international  convulsion  could
prevent.  The  European  conquest  of  Northern  Africa  had.  prac-
tically been  completed  by  the  disappearance  of  Morocco,  the  con-
firmed English  protectorate  over  Egypt  and  the  Italian  hold  on
Tripoli.  Somaliland  was  in  a preliminary  process  of  slow  deglu-
tition; Abyssinia,  saved  once  by  Menelik  but  now  torn  by  inter-
nal discord,  was  the  object  of  a revived  dream  of  Italian  colonial
empire.  The  Boer  republics  had  gone  under  before  the  advan-
cing tide  of  imperialistic  aggression.  All  the  rest  of  Africa
practically  was  the  private  property  of  three  great  Powers  and
two  small  ones.  In  Europe,  no  doubt,  there  were  still  a few  small
independent  nations,  Balkan  and  Teutonic,  and  also  two  quite
unimportant  neutralised  countries.  But  the  Balkans  were  a cons-
tant theatre  of  uncertainty  and  disturbance  and  the  rival  national
egoisms  could  only  have  ended  in  case  of  the  ejection  of  Turkey
from  Europe,  either  by  the  formation  of  a young,  hungry  and
ambitious  Slav  empire  under  the  dominance  of  Serbia  or  Bulga-
ria or  by  their  disappearance  into  the  shadow  of  Austria  and


503


The  Idea  of  a league  of  Nations

Russia.  The  Teutonic  States  were  coveted  by  expanding  Ger-
many and,  had  that  Power  been  guided  by  the  prudently  daring
diplomacy  of  a new  Bismarck,  — a not  unlikely  contingency,
could  William  II  have  gone  to  the  grave  before  letting  loose  the
hounds  of  war,  — their  absorption  might  well  have  been  com-
passed. There  remained  America  where  imperialism  had  not
yet  arisen,  but  it  was  already  emerging  in  the  form  of  Roosevel-
tian  Republicanism,  and  the  interference  in  Mexico,  hesitating
as  it  was,  yet  pointed  to  the  inevitability  of  a protectorate  and  a
final  absorption  of  the  disorderly  Central  American  republics;
the  union  of  South  America  would  then  have  become  a defensive
necessity.  It  was  only  the  stupendous  cataclysm  of  the  world
war  which  interfered  with  the  progressive  march  towards  the
division  of  the  world  into  less  than  a dozen  great  empires.

The  War  revived  with  a startling  force  the  idea  of  free
nationality,  throwing  it  up  in  three  forms,  each  with  a stamp  of
its  own.  First,  in  opposition  to  the  imperialistic  ambitions  of
Germany  in  Europe,  the  allied  nations,  although  empires,  were
obliged  to  appeal  to  a qualified  ideal  of  free  nationality  and  pose
as  its  champions  and  protectors.  America,  more  politically  ideal-
istic than  Europe,  entered  the  war  with  a cry  for  a league  of  free
nations.  Finally  the  original  idealism  of  the  Russian  revolution
cast  into  this  new  creative  chaos  an  entirely  new  element  by  the
distinct,  positive,  uncompromising  recognition,  free  from  all
reserves  of  diplomacy  and  self-interest,  of  the  right  of  every  aggre-
gate of  men  naturally  marked  off  from  other  aggregates  to  decide
its  own  political  status  and  destiny.  These  three  positions  were
in  fact  distinct  from  each  other,  but  each  has  in  effect  some  rela-
tion to  the  actually  possible  future  of  humanity.  The  first  based
itself  upon  the  present  conditions  and  aimed  at  a certain  practical
rearrangement.  The  second  tried  to  hasten  into  immediate  P^~
ticability  a not  entirely  remote  possibility  of  the  future.  The
third  aimed  at  bringing  into  precipitation  by  the  alchemy  of  re-
volution — for  what  we  inappropriately  call  revolution,  is  only
a rapidly  concentrated  movement  of  evolution  a yet  remote
end  which,  in  the  ordinary  course  of  events,  could  only  be  rea-
lised, if  at  all,  in  the  far  distant  future.  All  of  them  have  to  be
considered;  for  a prospect  which  only  takes  into  view  cxis  ing


504


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

realised  forces  of  apparently  realisable  possibilities  is  fore-
doomed to  error.  Moreover,  the  Russian  idea  by  its  attempt  at
self-effectuation,  however  immediately  ineffective,  rendered  it-
self an  actual  force  which  must  be  counted  among  those  that
may  influence  the  future  of  the  race.  A great  idea  already  striving
to  enforce  itself  in  the  field  of  practice  is  a power  which  cannot
be  left  out  of  count,  nor  valued  only  according  to  its  apparent
chances  of  immediate  effectuation  at  the  present  hour.

The  position  taken  by  England,  France  and  Italy,  the  West-
ern European  section  of  the  Allies,  contemplated  a political
rearrangement  of  the  world,  but  not  any  radical  change  of  its  exis-
ting order.  It  is  true  that  it  announced  the  principle  of  free
nationalities;  but  in  international  politics  which  is  still  a play  of
natural  forces  and  interests  and  in  which  ideals  are  only  a compa-
ratively recent  development  of  the  human  mind,  principles  can
only  prevail  where  and  so  far  as  they  are  consonant  with  interests,
or  where  and  so  far  as,  being  hostile  to  interests,  they  are  yet
assisted  by  natural  forces  strong  enough  to  overbear  these  inte-
rests which  oppose  them.  The  pure  application  of  ideals  to  poli-
tics is  as  yet  a revolutionary  method  of  action  which  can  only  be
hoped  for  in  exceptional  crises;  the  day  when  it  becomes  a rule
of  life,  human  nature  and  life  itself  will  have  become  a new
phenomenon,  something  almost  superterrestrial  and  divine.
That  day  is  not  yet.  The  Allied  Powers  in  Europe  were  themselves
nations  with  an  imperial  past  and  an  imperial  future ; they  could
not,  even  if  they  wished,  get  away  by  the  force  of  a mere  idea
from  that  past  and  that  future.  Their  first  interest,  and  therefore
the  first  duty  of  their  statesmen,  must  be  to  preserve  each  its  own
empire,  and  even,  where  it  can  in  their  view  be  legitimately  done,
to  increase  it.  The  principle  of  free  nationality  could  only  be
applied  by  them  in  its  purity  where  their  own  imperial  interests
were  not  affected,  as  against  Turkey  and  the  Central  Powers,
because  there  the  principle  was  consonant  with  their  own  interests
and  could  be  supported  as  against  German,  Austrian  or  Turkish
interests  by  the  natural  forces  of  a successful  war  which  was  or
could  be  made  to  appear  morally  justified  in  its  result  because  it
was  invited  by  the  Powers  which  had  to  suffer.  It  could  not  be
applied  in  its  purity  where  their  own  imperial  interests  were


The  Idea  of  a League  of  Nations


505


affected,  because  there  it  was  opposed  to  existing  forces  and  there
was  no  sufficient  countervailing  force  by  which  that  opposition
could  be  counteracted.  Here,  therefore,  it  must  be  acted  upon
in  a qualified  sense,  as  a force  moderating  that  of  pure  imperial-
ism. So  applied,  it  would  amount  in  fact  at  most  to  the  conces-
sion of  internal  self-government  or  Home  Rule  in  such  propor-
tion, at  such  a time  or  by  such  stages  as  might  be  possible,
practicable  and  expedient  for  the  interests  of  the  empire  and  of
the  subject  nation  so  far  as  they  could  be  accommodated  with  one
another.  It  must  be  understood,  in  other  words,  as  the  common
sense  of  the  ordinary  man  would  understand  it;  it  could  not  be
and  has  nowhere  been  understood  in  the  sense  which  would  be
attached  to  it  by  the  pure  idealist  of  the  Russian  type  who  was
careless  of  all  but  the  naked  purity  of  his  principle.

What  then  would  be  the  practical  consequences  of  this  quali-
fied principle  of  free  nationality  as  it  would  have  been  possible  to
apply  it  after  a complete  victory  of  the  Allied  Powers,  its  repre-
sentatives? In  America,  it  would  have  no  field  of  immediate
application.  In  Africa,  there  are  not  only  no  free  nations,  but
with  the  exception  of  Egypt  and  Abyssinia,  no  nations,  properly
speaking;  for  Africa  is  the  one  part  of  the  world  where  the  old
tribal  conditions  have  still  survived  and  only  tribal  peoples  exist,
not  nations  in  the  political  sense  of  the  word.  Here  then  a com-
plete victory  of  the  Allies  meant  the  partition  of  the  continent
between  three  colonial  empires,  Italy,  France  and  England,  wit
the  continuance  of  the  Belgian,  Spanish  and  Portuguese  enclaves
and  the  precarious  continuance  for  a time  of  the  Abyssinian  ing
dom.  In  Asia,  it  meant  the  appearance  of  three  or  four  new
nationalities  out  of  the  ruins  of  the  Turkish  empire,  ut  t ese
by  their  immaturity  would  all  be  foredoomed  to  remain,  for  a
time  at  least,  under  the  influence  or  the  protection  of  one  or
other  of  the  great  Powers.  In  Europe,  it  implied  the  dimmu  ion
of  Germany  by  the  loss  of  Alsace  and  Poland,  the  disintegration
of  the  Austrian  empire,  the  reversion  of  the  A ^

Serbia  and  Italy,  the  liberation  of  the  Czech  an  ’

some  rearrangement  in  the  Balkan  Peninsula  an  t e ^
countries.  All  this,  it  is  clear,  meant  a great  ctoge  >n  cm
of  the  world,  but  no  radical  transformation.  The  existing


506


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

dency  of  nationalism  would  gain  some  extension  by  the  creation
of  a number  of  new  independent  nations;  the  existing  tendency
of  imperial  aggregation  would  gain  a far  greater  extension  by  the
expansion  of  the  actual  territory,  world-wide  influence  and  inter-
national responsibilities  of  the  successful  empires.

Still,  certain  very  important  results  could  not  but  be  gained
which  must  make  in  the  end  for  a free  world-union.  The  most
important  of  these,  the  result  of  the  Russian  Revolution  born  out
of  the  war  and  its  battle-cry  of  free  nationality  but  contingent
on  the  success  and  maintenance  of  the  revolutionary  principle,
is  the  disappearance  of  Russia  as  an  aggressive  empire  and  its
transformation  from  an  imperialistic  aggregate  into  a congeries
or  a federation  of  free  republics.^  The  second  is  the  destruction
of  the  German  type  of  imperialism  and  the  salvation  of  a number
of  independent  nationalities  which  lay  under  its  menace.^  The
third  is  the  multiplication  of  distinct  nationalities  with  a claim
to  the  recognition  of  their  separate  existence  and  legitimate  voice
in  the  affairs  of  the  world,  which  makes  for  the  strengthening  of
the  idea  of  a free  world-union  as  the  ultimate  solution  of  inter-
national problems.  The  fourth  is  the  definite  recognition  by  the
British  nation  of  the  qualified  principle  of  free  nationality  in  the
inevitable  reorganisation  of  the  Empire.

This  development  took  two  forms,  the  recognition  of  the
principle  of  Home  Rule  in  Ireland  and  India  and  the  recognition
of  the  claim  of  each  constituent  nation  to  a voice,  which  in  the
event  of  Home  Rule^,  must  mean  a free  and  equal  voice,  in  the
councils  of  the  Empire.  Taken  together,  these  two  things  would

* Not  so  free  in  practice  under  Bolshevik  rule  as  in  principle ; but  still  the  principle  is  there
and  capable  of  development  in  a freer  future.

® Unfortunately  this  result  seems  destined  to  disappear  by  the  formidable  survival  of  a
military  Germany  under  the  Fuhrer.

’ Now  called  Dominion  Status.  Unfortunately,  this  recognition  could  not  be  put  into
force  except  after  a violent  struggle  in  Ireland  and  was  marred  by  the  partition  of  the  country.
After  a vehement  passive  resistance  in  India  it  came  to  be  recognised  there  but  in  a truncated
form  shifting  the  full  concession  to  a far  future.  In  Egypt  also  it  was  only  after  a struggle  that
freedom  was  given  but  subject  to  a controlling  British  alliance.  Still  the  nationalistic  principle
worked  in  the  creation  of  a free  Iraq,  the  creation  of  Arab  kingdoms  and  Syrian  republics,
the  withdrawal  of  imperialistic  influence  from  Persia  and,  above  all,  in  the  institution  of  Domi-
nion Status  substituting  an  internally  free  and  equal  position  in  a commonwealth  of  peoples
for  a dominating  Empire.  Yet  these  results,  however  imperfect,  prepared  the  greater  fulfilments
which  we  now  see  accomplished  as  part  of  a new  world  of  free  peoples.


507


The  Idea  of  a League  of  Nations

mean  the  ultimate  conversion  from  an  empire  constituted  on
the  old  principle  of  nationalistic  imperialism  which  was  repre-
sented by  the  supreme  government  of  one  predominant  nation,
England,  into  a free  and  equal  commonwealth  of  nations  mana-
ging their  common  affairs  through  a supple  co-ordination  by
mutual  goodwill  and  agreement.  In  other  words,  such  a develop-
ment could  mean  in  the  end  the  application  within  certain  limits
of  precisely  that  principle  which  would  underlie  the  constitution,
on  the  larger  scale,  of  a free  world-union.  Much  work  would
have  to  be  done,  several  extensions  made,  many  counterforces
overcome  before  such  a commonwealth  could  become  a realised
fact,  but  that  it  should  have  taken  shape  in  the  principle  and  in
the  germ,  constitutes  a notable  event  in  world-history.  Two
questions  remained  for  the  future.  What  would  be  the  effect  of
this  experiment  on  the  other  empires  which  adhere  to  the  old
principle  of  a dominant  centralisation?  Probably  it  would  have
this  effect,  if  it  succeeded,  that,  as  they  are  faced  by  the  growth
of  strong  nationalistic  movements,  they  may  be  led  to  adopt  the
same  or  a similar  solution,  just  as  they  adopted  from  England
with  modifications  her  successful  system  of  Parliamentary
government  in  the  affairs  of  the  nation.  Secondly,  what  of  the
relation  between  these  empires  and  the  many  independent  non-
imperial nations  or  republics  which  would  exist  under  the  new
arrangement  of  the  world?  How  are  they  to  be  preserved  from
fresh  attempts  to  extend  the  imperial  idea,  or  how  is  their  exis-
tence to  be  correlated  in  the  international  comity  with  the  huge
and  overshadowing  power  of  the  empires?  It  is  here  that  the
American  idea  of  the  League  of  Free  Nations  intervened  and
found  a justification  in  principle.

Unfortunately,  it  was  always  difficult  to  know  what  exactly
this  idea  would  mean  in  practice.  The  utterances  of  its  original
spokesman,  President  Wilson,  were  marked  by  a magnificent
nebulous  idealism  full  of  inspiring  ideas  and  phrases,  but  not
attended  by  a clear  and  specific  application.  For  the  idea  behind
the  head  of  the  President  we  must  look  for  light  to  the  past
history  and  the  traditional  temperament  of  the  American  people.
Tlic  United  States  were  always  pacific  and  non-imperialistic  in
sentiment  and  principle,  yet  with  an  undertone  of  nationalistic


508


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

susceptibility  which  threatened  recently  to  take  an  imperialistic
turn  and  led  the  nation  to  make  two  or  three  wars  ending  in
conquests  whose  results  it  had  then  to  reconcile  with  its  non-
imperialistic  pacifism.  It  annexed  Mexican  Texas  by  war  and
then  turned  it  into  a constituent  State  of  the  union,  swamping
it  at  the  same  time  with  American  colonists.  It  conquered  Cuba
from  Spain  and  the  Philippines  first  from  Spain  and  then  from
the  insurgent  Filipinos  and,  not  being  able  to  swamp  them  with
colonists,  gave  Cuba  independence  under  the  American  influence
and  promised  the  Filipinos  a complete  independence.  American
idealism  was  always  governed  by  a shrewd  sense  of  American
interests,  and  highest  among  these  interests  is  reckoned  the
preservation  of  the  American  political  idea  and  its  constitution,
to  which  all  imperialism,  foreign  or  American,  has  to  be  regarded
as  a mortal  peril.

As  a result  and  as  the  result  of  its  inevitable  amalgamation
with  that  much  more  qualified  aim  of  the  Allied  Powers,  a
League  of  Nations  was  bound  to  have  both  an  opportunist  and
idealistic  element.  The  opportunist  element  was  bound  to  take
in  its  first  form  the  legalisation  of  the  map  and  political  forma-
tion of  the  world  as  it  emerged  from  the  convulsion  of  the  war.
Its  idealistic  side,  if  supported  by  the  use  of  the  influence  of
America  in  the  League,  would  favour  the  increasing  application
of  the  democratic  principle  in  its  working,  and  its  result  might  be
the  final  emergence  of  a United  States  of  the  world  with  a demo-
cratic Congress  of  the  nations  as  its  governing  agency.  The  lega-
lisation mi^t  have  the  good  effect  of  minimising  the  chances  of
war,  if  a real  League  of  Nations  proved  practicable  and  suc-
ceeded, — even  under  the  best  conditions  by  no  means  a foregone
conclusion.^  But  it  would  have  the  bad  effect  of  tending  to  stereo-
type a state  of  things  which  must  be  in  part  artificial,  irregular,
anomalous  and  only  temporarily  useful.  Law  is  necessary  for
order  and  stability,  but  it  becomes  a conservative  and  hampering
force  unless  it  provides  itself  with  an  effective  machinery  for
changing  the  laws  as  soon  as  circumstances  and  new  needs  make
that  desirable.  This  can  only  happen  if  a true  Parliament,  Con-

' The  I^gue  was  eventually  formed  with  America  outside  it  and  as  an  instrument  of
European  diplomacy,  which  was  a bad  omen  for  its  future.


509


The  Idea  of  a League  of  Nations

gress  or  free  Council  of  the  nations  becomes  an  accomplished
thing.  Meanwhile,  how  is  the  added  force  for  the  conservation
of  old  principles  to  be  counteracted  and  an  evolution  assured
which  will  lead  to  the  consummation  desired  by  the  democratic
American  ideal?  America’s  presence  and  influence  in  such  a
League  would  not  be  sufficient  for  that  purpose;  for  it  would
have  at  its  side  other  influences  interested  in  preserving  the
status  quo  and  some  interested  in  developing  the  imperialist
solution.  Another  force,  another  influence  would  be  needed.
Here  the  Russian  ideal,  if  truly  applied  and  made  a force,  could
intervene  and  find  its  justification.  For  our  purpose,  it  would
6e  the  most  ititerestnig  ancf  fmportant  of  fAe  three  anCi-
imperialistic  influences  which  Nature  might  throw  as  elements
into  her  great  crucible  to  reshape  the  human  earth-mass  for  a yet
unforeseen  purpose.


Chapter  XXX


The  Principle  of  Free  Confederation


The  issues  of  the  original  Russian  idea  of
a confederation  of  free  self-determining  nationalities  were
greatly  complicated  by  the  transitory  phenomenon  of  a revolu-
tion which  has  sought,  like  the  French  Revolution  before  it,  to
transform  immediately  and  without  easy  intermediate  stages  the
whole  basis  not  only  of  government,  but  of  society,  and  has,
moreover,  been  carried  out  under  pressure  of  a disastrous  war.
This  double  situation  led  inevitably  to  an  unexampled  anarchy
and,  incidentally,  to  the  forceful  domination  of  an  extreme  party
which  represented  the  ideas  of  the  Revolution  in  their  most
uncompromising  and  violent  form.  The  Bolshevik  despotism
corresponds  in  this  respect  to  the  Jacobin  despotism  of  the
French  Reign  of  Terror.  The  latter  lasted  long  enough  to  secure
its  work,  which  was  to  effect  violently  and  irrevocably  the  transi-
tion from  the  post-feudal  system  of  society  to  the  first  middle-
class  basis  of  democratic  development.  The  Labourite  despotism
in  Russia,  the  rule  of  the  Soviets,  fixing  its  hold  and  lasting  long
enough,  could  effect  the  transition  of  society  to  a second  and
more  advanced  basis  of  the  same  or  even  to  a still  farther  deve-
lopment. But  we  are  concerned  only  with  the  effect  on  the  ideal
of  free  nationality.  On  this  point,  all  Russia,  except  the  small
reactionary  party,  was  from  the  first  agreed;  but  the  resort  to
the  principle  of  government  by  force  brought  in  a contradictory
element  which  endangered  its  sound  effectuation  even  in  Russia
itself  and  therefore  weakened  the  force  which  it  might  have  had
in  the  immediate  future  of  the  world-development.^  For  it  stands
on  a moral  principle  which  belongs  to  the  future;  while  govern-
ment of  other  nations  by  force  belongs  to  the  past  and  present

' The  component  States  of  Sovietic  Russia  are  allowed  a certain  cultural,  linguistic  and
other  autonomy,  but  the  rest  is  illusory  as  they  are,  in  fact,  governed  by  the  force  of  a highly
centralised  autocracy  in  Moscow.


511


The  Principle  of  Free  Confederation

and  is  radically  inconsistent  with  the  founding  of  the  new  world-
arrangement  on  the  basis  of  free  choice  and  free  status.  It
must  therefore  be  considered  in  itself  apart  from  any  appli-
cation now  received,  which  must  necessarily  be  curbed  and
imperfect.

The  political  arrangement  of  the  world  hitherto  has  rested
on  an  almost  entirely  physical  and  vital,  that  is  to  say,  geographi-
cal, commercial,  political  and  military  basis.  Both  the  nation  idea
and  the  State  idea  have  been  built  and  have  worked  on  this  foun-
dation. The  first  unity  aimed  at  has  been  a geographical,  com-
mercial, political  and  military  union,  and  in  establishing  this
unity,  the  earlier  vital  principle  of  race  on  which  the  clan  and
tribe  were  founded,  has  been  everywhere  overridden.  It  is  true
that  nationhood  still  founds  itself  largely  on  the  idea  of  race,
but  this  is  in  the  nature  of  a fiction.  It  covers  the  historical  fact
of  a fusion  of  many  races  and  attributes  a natural  motive  to  a
historical  and  geographical  association.  Nationhood  founds
itself  partly  on  this  association,  partly  on  others  which  accentuate
it,  common  interests,  community  of  language,  community  of
culture  and  all  these  in  unison  have  evolved  a psychological
idea,  a psychological  unity,  which  finds  expression  in  the  idea
of  nationalism.  But  the  nation  idea  and  the  State  idea  do  not
everywhere  coincide,  and  in  most  cases  the  former  has  been
overridden  by  the  latter  and  always  on  the  same  physical  and  vital
grounds  — grounds  of  geographical,  political  and  military  neces-
sity or  convenience.  In  the  conflict  between  the  two,  force,  as  in
all  vital  and  physical  struggle,  must  always  be  the  final  arbiter.
But  the  new  principle  proposed,^  that  of  the  right  of  every
natural  grouping  which  feels  its  own  separateness  to  choose  its
own  status  and  partnerships,  makes  a clean  sweep  of  these  vital
and  physical  grounds  and  substitutes  a purely  psychological
principle  of  free-will  and  free  choice  as  against  the  claims  of
political  and  economic  necessity.  Or  rather  the  vital  and  phy-
sical grounds  of  grouping  are  only  to  be  held  valid  when  they
receive  this  psychological  sanction  and  are  to  found  themselves
upon  it.

* This  principle  s'.'as  recognised  in  thcor>’  by  the  Allies  under  the  name  of  seif-determina-
tion but,  needless  to  say,  it  has  been  disregarded  as  soon  as  the  cry  had  served  its  turn.


512


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity


How  the  two  rival  principles  work  out,  can  be  seen  by  the
example  of  Russia  itself  which  is  now  prominently  before  our
eyes.  Russia  has  never  been  a nation-State,  in  the  pure  sense  of
the  word,  like  France,  Spain,  Italy,  Great  Britain  or  modern
Germany;  it  has  been  a congeries  of  nations.  Great  Russia,
Ruthenian  Ukraine,  White  Russia,  Lithuania,  Poland,  Siberia,
all  Slavic  with  a dash  of  Tartar  and  German  blood,  Courland
which  is  mostly  Slav  but  partly  German,  Finland,  which  has  no
community  of  any  kind  with  the  rest  of  Russia,  and  latterly
the  Asiatic  nations  of  Turkistan,  all  bound  together  by  one  bond
only,  the  rule  of  the  Tsar.  The  only  psychological  justification
of  such  a union  was  the  future  possibility  of  fusion  into  a single
nation  with  the  Russian  language  as  its  instrument  of  culture,
thought  and  government,  and.it  was  this  which  the  old  Russian
regime  had  in  view.  The  only  way  to  bring  this  about  was  by
governmental  force,  the  way  that  had  been  long  attempted  by
England  in  Ireland  and  as  attempted  by  Germany  in  German
Poland  and  Lorraine.  The  Austrian  method  of  federation
employed  with  Hungary  as  a second  partner  or  of  a pressure  tem-
pered by  leniency,  by  concessions  and  by  measures  of  adminis-
trative half-autonomy,  might  have  been  tried,  but  their  success
in  Austria  has  been  small.  Federation  has  not  as  yet  proved
a successful  principle  except  between  States  and  nations  or  sub-
nations already  disposed  to  unite  by  ties  of  common  culture,  a
common  past  or  an  already  developed  or  developing  sense  of
common  nationhood;  such  conditions  existed  in  the  American
States  and  in  Germany  and  they  exist  in  China  and  in  India,  but
they  have  not  existed  in  Austria  or  Russia.  Or,  if  things  and
ideas  had  been  ripe,  instead  of  this  attempt,  there  might  have  been
an  endeavour  to  found  a free  union  of  nations  with  the  Tsar  as
the  symbol  of  a supranational  idea  and  bond  of  unity;  but  for
this  the  movement  of  the  world  was  not  yet  ready.  Against  an
obstinate  psychological  resistance  the  vital  and  physical  motive
of  union  could  only  resort  to  force,  military,  administrative  and
political,  which  has  succeeded  often  enough  in  the  past.  In  Russia,
it  was  probably  on  the  way  to  a slow  success  as  far  as  the  Slavic
portions  of  the  Empire  were  concerned;  in  Finland,  perhaps  also
in  Poland,  it  would  probably  have  failed  much  more  irretrievably


513


The  Principle  of  Free  Confederation

than  the  long  reign  of  force  failed  in  Ireland,  partly  because  even
a Russian  or  a German  autocracy  cannot  apply  perfectly  and
simply  the  large,  thorough-going  and  utterly  brutal  and  predatory
methods  of  a Cromwell  or  Elizabeth,^  partly  because  the  resis-
ting psychological  factor  of  nationalism  had  become  too  self-
conscious  and  capable  of  an  organised  passive  resistance  or  at
least  a passive  force  of  survival.

But  if  the  psychological  justification  was  deficient  or  only
in  process  of  creation,  the  vital  and  physical  case  for  a strictly
united  Russia,  not  excluding  Finland,  was  overwhelming.  The
work  of  the  Peters  and  Catherines  was  founded  on  a strong
political,  military  and  economic  necessity.  From  the  political
and  military  point  of  view,  all  these  Slavic  nations  had  every-
thing to  lose  by  disunion,  because,  disunited,  they  were  each  ex-
posed and  they  exposed  each  other  to  the  oppressive  contact  of
any  powerful  neighbour,  Sweden,  Turkey,  Poland,  while  Poland
was  a hostile  and  powerful  State,  or  Germany  and  Austria.  The
union  of  the  Ukraine  Cossacks  with  Russia  was  indeed  brought
about  by  mutual  agreement  as  a measure  of  defence  against
Poland.  Poland  itself,  once  weakened,  stood  a better  chance  by
being  united  with  Russia  than  by  standing  helpless  and  alone
between  three  large  and  powerful  neighbours,  and  her  total  in-
clusion would  certainly  have  been  a better  solution  for  her  than
the  fatal  partition  between  three  hungry  Powers.  On  the  other
hand,  by  union  a State  was  created,  so  geographically  compact,
yet  so  large  in  bulk,  numerous  in  population,  well  defended  by
natural  conditions  and  rich  in  potential  resources  that,  if  it  had
been  properly  organised,  it  could  not  only  have  stood  secure  in
itself,  but  dominated  half  Asia,  as  it  already  does,  and  half
Europe,  as  it  was  once,  even  without  proper  organisation  and
development,  almost  on  the  way  to  do,  when  it  interfered  as
armed  arbiter,  here  deliverer,  there  champion  of  oppression  in
Austro-Hungary  and  in  the  Balkans.  Even  the  assimilation  of
Finland  was  justified  from  this  point  of  view;  for  a free


* This  could  no  longer  be  said  after  the  revival  of  mediaeval  barbaric  cruelty  in  Na/i
Germany,  one  of  the  most  striking  recent  dcs’clopmcnts  of  “modem”  humanity.  But  this  may
be  regarded  perhaps  as  a temporary  backsliding,  though  it  sheds  lurid  lights  on  the  still  csisting
darker  possibilities  of  human  nature.


514


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity


Finland  would  have  left  Russia  geographically  and  economically
incomplete  and  beset  and  limited  in  her  narrow  Baltic  outlet,
while  a Finland  dominated  by  a strong  Sweden  or  a powerful
Germany  would  have  been  a standing  military  menace  to  the
Russian  capital  and  the  Russian  empire.  The  inclusion  of  Fin-
land, on  the  contrary,  made  Russia  secure,  at  ease  and  powerful
at  this  vital  point.  Nor,  might  it  be  argued,  did  Finland  herself
really  lose,  since,  independent,  she  would  be  too  small  and  weak
to  maintain  herself  against  neighbouring  imperial  aggressiveness
and  must  rely  on  the  support  of  Russia.  All  these  advantages
have  been  destroyed,  temporarily  at  least,  by  the  centrifugal
forces  let  loose  by  the  Revolution  and  its  principle  of  the  free
choice  of  nationalities.

It  is  evident  that  these  arguments,  founded  as  they  are  on
vital  and  physical  necessity  and  regardless  of  moral  and  psycho-
logical justification,  might  be  carried  very  far.  They  would  not
only  justify  Austria’s  now  past  domination  of  Trieste  and  her
Slavic  territories,  as  they  justified  England’s  conquest  and  hold-
ing of  Ireland  against  the  continued  resistance  of  the  Irish  people,
but  also,  extended  a little  farther,  Germany’s  scheme  of  Pan-
Germanism  and  even  her  larger  ideas  of  absorption  and  expan-
sion. It  could  be  extended  to  validate  all  that  imperial  expansion
of  the  European  nations  which  has  now  no  moral  justification  and
could  only  have  been  justified  morally  in  the  future  by  the  crea-
tion of  supranational  psychological  unities;  for  the  vital  and
physical  grounds  always  exist.  Even  the  moral,  at  least  the  psy-
chological and  cultural  justification  of  a unified  Russian  culture
and  life  in  process  of  creation,  could  be  extended,  and  the
European  claim  to  spread  and  universalise  European  civilisa-
tion by  annexation  and  governmental  force  presents  on  its
larger  scale  a certain  moral  analogy.  This,  too,  extended,  might
justify  the  pre-war  German  ideal  of  a sort  of  unification  of
the  world  under  the  aegis  of  German  power  and  German
culture.  But,  however  liable  to  abuse  by  extension,  vital
necessity  must  be  allowed  a word  in  a world  still  dominated
fundamentally  by  the  law  of  force,  however  mitigated  in
its  application,  and  by  vital  and  physical  necessity,  so  far  at
least  as  concerns  natural  geographical  unities  like  Russia,  the


515


The  Principle  of  Free  Confederation

United  Kingdom, ^ even  Austria  within  its  natural  frontiers.^
The  Russian  principle  belongs,  in  fact,  to  a possible  future
in  which  moral  and  psychological  principles  will  have  a real
chance  to  dominate,  and  vital  and  physical  necessities  will  have
to  suit  themselves  to  them,  instead  of,  as  now,  the  other  way
round;  it  belongs  to  an  arrangement  of  things  that  would  be
the  exact  reverse  of  the  present  international  system.  As  things
are  at  present,  it  has  to  struggle  against  difficulties  which  may
well  be  insuperable.  The  Russians  were  much  ridiculed  and  more
vilified  for  their  offer  of  a democratic  peace  founded  on  the
free  choice  of  nations  to  autocratic  and  militarist  Germany
bent  on  expansion  like  other  empires  by  dishonest  diplomacy
and  by  the  sword.  From  the  point  of  view  of  practical  states-
manship the  ridicule  was  justified;  for  the  offer  ignored  facts
and  forces  and  founded  itself  on  the  power  of  the  naked  and
unarmed  idea.  The  Russians,  thorough-going  idealists,  acted,
in  fact,  in  the  same  spirit  as  did  once  the  French  in  the  first
fervour  of  their  revolutionary  enthusiasm;  they  offered  their
new  principle  of  liberty  and  democratic  peace  to  the  world,

— not,  at  first,  to  Germany  alone,  — in  the  hope  that  its  moral
beauty  and  truth  and  inspiration  would  compel  acceptance,
not  by  the  Governments  but  by  the  peoples  who  would  force
the  hands  of  the  Governments  or  overturn  them  if  they  opposed.
Like  the  French  Revolutionists,  they  found  that  ours  is  still
a world  in  which  ideals  can  only  be  imposed  if  they  have  a
preponderating  vital  and  physical  force  in  their  hands  or  at
their  backs.  The  French  Jacobins  with  their  ideal  of  Unitarian
nationalism  were  able  to  concentrate  their  energies  and  make
their  principle  triumph  for  a time  by  force  of  arms  against  a
hostile  world.  The  Russian  idealists  found  in  their  attempt
to  effectuate  their  principle  that  the  principle  itself  was  a source
of  weakness;  they  found  themselves  helpless  against  the  hard-
headed  German  cynicism,  not  because  they  were  disorganised,

— for  revolutionary  France  was  also  disorganised  and  overcame
the  difficulty,  — but  because  the  dissolution  of  the  old  Russian

’ Now  we  must  say  Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  for  the  United  Kingdom  exists  no  longer.

' Note  from  this  point  of  view  the  disastrous  economic  results  of  the  breaking  up  of  the
Austrian  empire  in  the  small  nations  that  have  arisen  in  its  place.


516


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity


fabric  to  which  they  had  consented  deprived  them  of  the  means
of  united  and  organised  action.  Nevertheless,  their  principle
was  a more  advanced,  because  a moral  principle,  than  the
aggressive  nationalism  which  was  all  the  international  result
of  the  French  Revolution;  it  has  a greater  meaning  for  the
future.

For  it  belongs  to  a future  of  free  world-union  in  which
precisely  this  principle  of  free  self-determination  must  be  either
the  preliminary  movement  or  the  main  final  result,  to  an  arrange-
ment of  things  in  which  the  world  will  have  done  with  war  and
force  as  the  ultimate  basis  of  national  and  international  relations
and  be  ready  to  adopt  free  agreement  as  a substitute.  If  the
idea  could  work  itself  out,  even  if  only  within  the  bounds  of
Russia,^  and  arrive  at  some  principle  of  common  action,  even
at  the  cost  of  that  aggressive  force  which  national  centralisation
can  alone  give,  it  would  mean  a new  moral  power  in  the  world.
It  would  certainly  not  be  accepted  elsewhere,  except  in  case  of
unexpected  revolutions,  without  enormous  reserves  and  quali-
fications; but  it  would  be  there  working  as  a power  to  make
the  world  ready  for  itself  and,  when  it  is  ready,  would  play  a
large  determining  part  in  the  final  arrangement  of  human  unity.
But  even  if  it  fails  entirely  in  its  present  push  for  realisation,  it
will  still  have  its  part  to  play  in  a better  prepared  future.


> The  idea  was  sincere  at  the  time,  but  it  has  lost  its  significance  because  of  the  principle
of  revolutionary  force  on  which  Sovietism  still  rests.


Chapter  XXXI


The  Conditions  of  a Free  World-Union


A FREE  world-union  must  in  its  very
nature  be  a complex  unity  based  on  a diversity  and  that  diversity
must  be  based  on  free  self-determination.  A mechanical  Uni-


tarian system  would  regard  in  its  idea  the  geographical  groupings
of  men  as  so  many  conveniences  for  provincial  division,  for  the
convenience  of  administration,  much  in  the  same  spirit  as  the
French  Revolution  reconstituted  France  with  an  entire  disregard
of  old  natural  and  historic  divisions.  It  would  regard  mankind
as  one  single  nation  and  it  would  try  to  efface  the  old  separative
national  spirit  altogether;  it  would  arrange  its  system  probably
by  continents  and  subdivide  the  continents  by  convenient
geographical  demarcations.  In  this  other  quite  opposite  idea,
the  geographical,  the  physical  principle  of  union  would  be
subordinated  to  a psychological  principle;  for  not  a mechanical
division,  but  a living  diversity  would  be  its  object.  If  this  object
is  to  be  secured,  the  peoples  of  humanity  must  be  allowed  to
group  themselves  according  to  their  free-will  and  their  natural
affinities;  no  constraint  or  force  could  be  allowed  to  compel
an  unwilling  nation  or  distinct  grouping  of  peoples  to  enter
into  another  system  or  join  itself  or  remain  joined  to  it  for
the  convenience,  aggrandisement  or  political  necessity  of
another  people  or  even  for  the  general  convenience,  in  disregard
of  its  own  wishes.  Nations  or  countries  widely  divided  from  each
other  geographically  like  England  and  Canada  or  England  and
Australia  might  cohere  together.  Nations  closely  grouped  locally
might  choose  to  stand  apart,  like  England  and  Ireland  or  like
Finland  and  Russia.  Unity  would  be  the  largest  principle  of
life,  but  freedom  would  be  its  foundation-stone,^

In  a world  built  on  the  present  political  and  commercial


‘ Ncoc^arily  to  o’er}’  principle  there  must  be  in  application  a reasonable  limit;  otherwise
fantastic  and  impracticable  absurdities  mipfit  take  the  place  of  a Jiving  truth.


518


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

basis  this  system  of  groupings  might  present  often  insuperable
difficulties  or  serious  disadvantages;  but  in  the  condition  of
things  in  which  alone  a free  world-union  would  be  possible,
these  difficulties  and  disadvantages  would  cease  to  operate.
Military  necessity  of  forced  union  for  strength  of  defence  or
for  power  of  aggression  would  be  non-existent,  because  war
would  no  longer  be  possible;  force  as  the  arbiter  of  international
differences  and  a free  world-union  are  two  quite  incompatible
ideas  and  practically  could  not  coexist.  The  political  necessity
would  also  disappear;  for  it  is  largely  made  up  of  that  very
spirit  of  conflict  and  the  consequent  insecure  conditions  of
international  life  apportioning  predominance  in  the  world  to
the  physically  and  organically  strongest  nations  out  of  which
the  military  necessity  arose.  In  a free  world-union  determining
its  affairs  and  settling  its  differences  by  agreement  or,  where
agreement  failed,  by  arbitration,  the  only  political  advantage
of  including  large  masses  of  men,  not  otherwise  allied  to  each
other  in  a single  State,  would  be  the  greater  influence  arising
from  mass  and  population.  But  this  influence  could  not  work
if  the  inclusion  were  against  the  will  of  the  nations  brought
together  in  the  State;  for  then  it  would  rather  be  a source  of
weakness  and  disunion  in  the  State’s  international  action  —
unless  indeed  it  were  allowed  in  the  international  system  to
weigh  by  its  bulk  and  population  without  regard  to  the  will
and  opinion  of  the  peoples  constituting  it.  Thus  the  population
of  Finland  and  Poland  might  swell  the  number  of  voices  which
a united  Russia  could  count  in  the  council  of  the  nations,  but
the  will,  sentiment  and  opinions  of  the  Finns  and  Poles  be
given  no  means  of  expression  in  that  mechanical  and  unreal
unity.i  But  this  would  be  contrary  to  the  modern  sense  of
justice  and  reason  and  incompatible  with  the  principle  of
freedom  which  could  alone  ensure  a sound  and  peaceful  basis
for  the  world-arrangement.. Thus  the  elimination  of  war  and
the  settlement  of  differences  by  peaceful  means  would  remove
the  military  necessity  for  forced  unions,  while  the  right  of
every  people  to  a free  voice  and  status  in  the  world  would  remove

* The  inclusion  of  India  in  the  League  of  Nations  has  evidently  been  an  arrangement  of
this  type.


519


The  Cofiditiom  of  a Free  World-Union

its  political  necessity  and  advantage.  The  elimination  of  war
and  the  recognition  of  the  equal  rights  of  all  peoples  are  inti-
mately bound  up  with  each  other.  That  interdependence,
admitted  for  a moment,  even  though  imperfectly,  during  the
European  conflict,  will  have  to  be  permanently  accepted  if
there  is  to  be  any  unification  of  the  race.

The  economic  question  remains,  and  it  is  the  sole  important
problem  of  a vital  and  physical  order  which  might  possibly
present  in  this  kind  of  world-arrangement  any  serious  difficulties,
or  in  which  the  advantages  of  a Unitarian  system  might  really
outweigh  those  of  this  more  complex  unity.  In  either,  how-
ever, the  forcible  economic  exploitation  of  one  nation  by  another,
which  is  so  large  a part  of  the  present  economic  order,  would
necessarily  be  abolished.  There  would  remain  the  possibility
of  a sort  of  peaceful  economic  struggle,  a separativeness,  a
building  up  of  artificial  barriers,  — a phenomenon  which  has
been  a striking  and  more  and  more  prominent  feature  of  the
present  commercial  civilisation.  But  it  is  likely  that  once  the
element  of  struggle  were  removed  from  the  political  field,  the
stress  of  the  same  struggle  in  the  economic  field  would  greatly
decrease.'  The  advantages  of  self-sufficiency  and  predominance,
to  which  political  rivalry  and  struggle  and  the  possibility  of
hostile  relations  now  give  an  enormous  importance,  would  lose
much  of  their  stringency  and  the  advantages  of  a freer  give  and
take  would  become  more  easily  visible.  It  is  obvious,  for
example,  that  an  independent  Finland  would  profit  much  more
by  encouraging  the  passage  of  Russian  commerce  through
Finnish  ports  or  an  Italian  Trieste  by  encouraging  the  passage
of  commerce  of  the  present  Austrian  provinces  than  by  setting
up  a barrier  between  itself  and  its  natural  feeders.  An  Ireland
politically  or  administratively  independent,  able  to  develop
its  agricultural  and  technical  education  and  intensification  of
productiveness,  would  find  a greater  advantage  in  sharing  the
movement  of  the  commerce  of  Great  Britain  than  in  isolating
itself,  even  as  Great  Britain  would  profit  more  by  an  agreement
with  such  an  Ireland  than  by  keeping  her  a poor  and  starving
helot  on  her  estate.  Throughout  the  world,  the  idea  and  fact
of  union  once  definitely  prevailing,  unity  of  interests  would  be


520


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

more  clearly  seen  and  the  greater  advantage  of  agreement  and
mutual  participation  in  a naturally  harmonised  life  over  the
feverish  artificial  prosperity  created  by  a stressing  of  separative ,
barriers.  That  stressing  is  inevitable  in  an  order  of  struggle  and
international  competition;  it  would  be  seen  to  be  prejudicial
in  an  order  of  peace  and  union  which  would  make  for  mutual
accommodation.  The  principle  of  a free  world-union  being  that
of  the  settlement  of  common  affairs  by  common  agreement,
this  could  not  be  confined  to  the  removal  of  political  differences
and  the  arrangement  of  political  relations  alone,  but  must
naturally  extend  to  economic  differences  and  economic  relations
as  well.  To  the  removal  of  war  and  the  recognition  of  the  right
of  self-determination  of  the  peoples  the  arrangement  of  the
economic  life  of  the  world  in  its  new  order  by  mutual  and
common  agreement  would  have  to  be  added  as  the  third  condi-
tion of  a free  union.

There  remains  the  psychological  question  of  the  advantage
to  the  soul  of  humanity,  to  its  culture,  to  its  intellectual,  moral,
aesthetic,  spiritual  growth.  At  present,  the  first  great  need  of
the  psychological  life  of  humanity  is  the  growth  towards  a
greater  unity;  but  its  need  is  that  of  a living  unity,  not  in  the
externals  of  civilisation,  in  dress,  manners,  habits  of  life,  details
of  political,  social  and  economic  order,  not  a uniformity,  which
is  the  unity  towards  which  the  mechanical  age  of  civilisation
has  been  driving,  but  a free  development  everywhere  with  a
constant  friendly  interchange,  a close  understanding,  a feeling
of  our  common  humanity,  its  great  common  ideals  and  the
truths  towards  which  it  is  driving  and  a certain  unity  and  cor-
relation of  effort  in  the  united  human  advance.  At  present  it
may  seem  that  this  is  better  helped  and  advanced  by  many
different  nations  and  cultures  living  together  in  one  political
State-union  than  by  their  political  separateness.  Temporarily,
this  may  be  true  to  a certain  extent,  but  let  us  see  within  what
limits.

The  old  psychological  argument  for  the  forcible  inclusion
of  a subject  nation  by  a dominant  people  was  the  right  or
advantage  of  imposing  a superior  civilisation  upon  one  that  was
inferior  or  upon  a barbarous  race.  Thus  the  Welsh  and  Irish


521


The  Conditions  of  a Free  World-Union

people  used  to  be  told  that  their  subjugation  was  a great  blessing
to  their  countries,  their  languages  petty  patois  which  ought  to
disappear  as  soon  as  possible,  and  in  embracing  English  speech,
English  institutions,  English  ideas  lay  their  sole  road  to  civili-
sation, culture  and  prosperity.  The  British  domination  in  India
was  justified  by  the  priceless  gift  of  British  civilisation  and
British  ideals,  to  say  nothing  of  the  one  and  only  true  religion,
Christianity,  to  a heathen,  orientally  benighted  and  semi-
barbarous  nation.  All  this  is  now  an  exploded  myth.  We  can
see  clearly  enough  that  the  long  suppression  of  the  Celtic  spirit
and  Celtic  culture,  superior  in  spirituality  if  inferior  in  certain
practical  directions  to  the  Latin  and  Teutonic,  was  a loss  not
only  to  the  Celtic  peoples,  but  to  the  world.  India  has  vehe-
mently rejected  the  pretensions  to  superiority  of  British  civilisa-
tion, culture  and  religion,  while  still  admitting,  not  so  much
the  British,  as  the  modern  ideals  and  methods  in  politics  and  in
the  trend  to  a greater  social  equality;  and  it  is  becoming  clear
now,  even  to  the  more  well-informed  European  minds  that
the  Anglicisation  of  India  would  have  been  a wrong  not  only
to  India  itself  but  to  humanity.

Still  it  may  be  said  that,  if  the  old  principle  of  the  associa-
tion was  wrong,  yet  the  association  itself  leads  eventually  to  a
good  result.  If  Ireleand  has  lost  for  the  most  part  its  old  national
speech  and  Wales  has  ceased  to  have  a living  literature,  yet  as
a large  compensation  the  Celtic  spirit  is  now  reviving  and  putting
its  stamp  on  the  English  tongue  spoken  by  millions  throughout
the  world,  and  the  inclusion  of  the  Celtic  countries  in  the  British
Empire  may  lead  to  the  development  of  an  Anglo-Celtic  life  and
culture  better  for  the  world  than  the  separate  development  of
the  two  elements.  India  by  the  partial  possession  of  the  English
language  has  been  able  to  link  herself  to  the  life  of  the  modern
world  and  to  reshape  her  literature,  life  and  culture  on  a larger
basis  and,  now  that  she  is  reviving  her  own  spirit  and  ideals  in
a new  mould,  is  producing  an  effect  on  the  thouglit  of  the  West;
a perpetual  union  of  the  two  countries  and  a constant  mutual
interaction  of  their  culture  by  this  close  association  would  be
more  advantageous  to  them  and  to  the  world  than  their  cultural
isolation  from  each  other  in  a separate  existence.


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

There  is  a temporary  apparent  truth  in  this  idea,  though
it  is  not  the  whole  truth  of  the  position,  and  we  have  given
it  full  weight  in  considering  the  claims  of  the  imperialistic
solution  or  line  of  advance  on  the  way  to  unity.  But  even  the
elements  of  truth  in  it  can  only  be  admitted,  provided  a free
and  equal  union  replaces  the  present  abnorhial,  irritating
and  falsifying  relations.  Moreover,  these  advantages  could  only
be  valuable  as  a stage  towards  a greater  unity  in  which  this
close  association  would  no  longer  be  of  the  same  importance.
For  the  final  end  is  a common  world-culture  in  which  each
national  culture  should  be,  not  merged  into  or  fused  with  some
other  culture  differing  from  it  in  principle  or  temperament,
but  evolved  to  its  full  power  and  could  then  profit  to  that  end' by
all  the  others  as  well  as  give  its  gains  and  influences  to  them,
all  serving  by  their  separateness  and  their  interaction  the  common
aim  and  idea  of  human  perfection.  This  would  best  be  served,
not  by  separateness  and  isolation,  of  which  there  would  be  no
danger,  but  yet  by  a certain  distinctness  and  independence
of  life  not  subordinated  to  the  mechanising  force  of  an  artificial
unity.  Even  within  the  independent  nation  itself,  there  might
be  with  advantage  a tendency  towards  greater  local  freedom
of  development  and  variation,  a sort  of  return  to  the  vivid  local
and  regional  life  of  ancient  Greece  and  India  and  mediaeval
Italy;  for  the  disadvantages  of  strife,  political  weakness  and
precariousness  of  the  nation’s  independence  would  no  longer
exist  in  a condition  of  things  from  which  the  old  terms  of  phy-
sical conflict  had  been  excluded,  while  all  the  cultural  and
psychological  advantages  might  be  recovered.  A world  secure
of  its  peace  and  freedom  might  freely  devote  itself  to  the  intensi-
fication of  its  real  human  powers  of  life  by  the  full  encourage-
ment and  flowering  of  the  individual,  local,  regional,  national
mind  and  power  in  the  firm  frame  of  a united  humanity.

What  precise  form  the  framework  might  take,  it  is  impos-
sible to  forecast  and  useless  to  speculate;  only  certain  now
current  ideas  would  have  to  be  modified  or  abandoned.  The
idea  of  a world-Parliament  is  attractive  at  first  sight,  because
the  parliamentary  form  is  that  to  which  our  minds  are
accustomed;  but  an  assembly  of  the  present  Unitarian  national


523


The  Conditions  of  a Free  World-Union

type  could  not  be  the  proper  instrument  of  a free  world-union
of  this  large  and  complex  kind;  it  could  only  be  the  instrument
of  a Unitarian  World-State.  The  idea  of  a world-federation,
if  by  that  be  understood  the  Germanic  or  American  form,
would  be  equally  inappropriate  to  the  greater  diversity  and
freedom  of  national  development  which  this  type  of  world-union
would  hold  as  one  of  its  cardinal  principles.  Rather  some  kind
of  confederation  of  the  peoples  for  common  human  ends,  for
the  removal  of  all  causes  of  strife  and  difference,  for  interrelation
and  the  regulation  of  mutual  aid  and  interchange,  yet  leaving  to
each  unit  a full  internal  freedom  and  power  of  self-determination,
would  be  the  right  principle  of  this  unity.

But,  since  this  is  a much  looser  unity,  what  would  prevent
the  spirit  of  separativeness  and  the  causes  of  clash  and  difference
from  surviving  in  so  powerful  a form  as  to  endanger  the
endurance  of  the  larger  principle  of  oneness,  — even  if  that
spirit  and  those  causes  at  all  allowed  it  to  reach  some  kind  of
sufficient  fulfilment?  The  Unitarian  ideal,  on  the  contrary,
seeks  to  efface  these  opposite  tendencies  in  their  forms  and  even
in  their  root  cause  and  by  so  doing  would  seem  to  ensure  an
enduring  union.  But  it  may  be  pointed  out  in  answer  that,  if
it  is  by  political  ideas  and  machinery,  under  the  pressure  of  the
political  and  economic  spirit  that  the  unity  is  brought  about,
that  is  to  say,  by  the  idea  and  experience  of  the  material  ad-
vantages, conveniences,  well-being  secured  by  unification,  then
the  Unitarian  system  also  could  not  be  sure  of  durability.  For
in  the  constant  mutability  of  the  human  mind  and  earthly
circumstances,  as  long  as  life  is  active,  new  ideas  and  changes
are  inevitable.  The  suppressed  desire  to  recover  the  lost  element
of  variability,  separateness,  independent  living  might  well  take
advantage  of  them  for  what  would  then  be  considered  as  a
wholesome  and  necessary  reaction.  The  lifeless  unity  accom-
plished would  dissolve  from  the  pressure  of  the  need  of  life
within,  as  the  Roman  unity  dissolved  by  its  lifelessness  in
helpless  response  to  a pressure  from  without,  and  once  again
local,  regional,  national  egoism  would  reconstitute  for  itself

fresh  forms  and  new  centres.

On  the  other  hand,  in  a free  world-union  though  originally


524


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity


starting  from  the  national  basis,  the  national  idea  might  be
expected  to  undergo  a radical  transformation;  it  might  even
disappear  into  a new  and  less  strenuously  compact  form  and
idea  of  group-aggregation  which  would  not  be  separative  in
spirit,  yet  would  preserve  the  necessary  element  of  independence
and  variation  needed  by  both  individual  and  grouping  for  their
full  satisfaction  and  their  healthy  existence.  Moreover,  by  em-
phasising the  psychological  quite  as  much  as  the  political  and
mechanical  idea  and  basis,  it  would  give  a freer  and  less  artificial
form  and  opportunity  for  the  secure  development  of  the  necessary
intellectual  and  psychological  change;  for  such  an  inner  change
could  alone  give  some  chance  of  durability  to  the  unification.
That  change  would  be  the  growth  of  the  living  idea  or  religion  of
humanity;  for  only  so  could  there  come  the  psychological  modi-
fication of  life  and  feeling  and  outlook  which  would  accustom
both  individual  and  group  to  live  in  their  common  humanity  first
and  most,  subduing  their  individual  and  group-egoism,  yet  losing
nothing  of  their  individual  or  group-power  to  develop  and  ex-
press in  its  own  way  the  divinity  in  man  which,  once  the  race  was
assured  of  its  material  existence,  would  emerge  as  the  true  object
of  human  existence.


Chapter  XXXII


Internationalism


The  idea  of  humanity  as  a single  race  of
beings  with  a common  life  and  a common  general  interest  is
among  the  most  characteristic  and  significant  products  of  modern
thought.  It  is  an  outcome  of  the  European  mind  which  proceeds
characteristically  from  life-experience  to  the  idea  and,  without
going  deeper,  returns  from  the  idea  upon  life  in  an  attempt  to
change  its  outward  forms  and  institutions,  its  order  and  system.
In  the  European  mentality  it  has  taken  the  shape  known  currently
as  internationalism.  Internationalism  is  the  attempt  of  the  hu-
man mind  and  life  to  grow  out  of  the  national  idea  and  form  and
even  in  a way  to  destroy  it  in  the  interest  of  the  larger  synthesis  of
mankind.  An  idea  proceeding  on  these  lines  needs  always  to
attach  itself  to  some  actual  force  or  developing  power  in  the  life
of  the  times  before  it  can  exercise  a practical  effect.  But  usually
it  suffers  by  contact  with  the  interest  and  pre-possessions  of  its
grosser  ally  some  lesser  or  greater  diminution  of  itself  or  even  a
distortion,  and  in  that  form,  no  longer  pure  and  absolute,  enters
on  the  first  stage  of  practice.

The  idea  of  internationalism  was  born  of  the  thought  of  the
eighteenth  century  and  it  took  some  kind  of  voice  in  the  first
idealistic  stages  of  the  French  Revolution.  But  at  that  time,  it
was  rather  a vague  intellectual  sentiment  than  a clear  idea  seeing
its  way  to  practice;  it  found  no  strong  force  in  life  to  help  it  to  take
visible  body.  What  came  out  of  the  French  Revolution  and  the
struggle  that  grew  around  it,  was  a complete  and  self-conscious
nationalism  and  not  internationalism.  During  the  nineteenth
century  we  see  the  larger  idea  growing  again  in  the  minds  of
thinkers,  sometimes  in  a modified  form,  sometimes  in  its  own  pure
idealism,  till  allying  itself  with  the  growing  forces  of  socialism  and
anarchism  it  took  a clear  body  and  a recognisable  vital  force.  In
its  absolute  form,  it  became  the  internationalism  of  the  intellcc-


526  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

tuals,  intolerant  of  nationalism  as  a narrow  spirit  of  the  past,
contemptuous  of  patriotism  as  an  irrational  prejudice,  a male-
ficent corporate  egoism  characteristic  of  narrow  intellects  and
creative  of  arrogance,  prejudice,  hatred,  oppression,  division  and
strife  between  nation  and  nation,  a gross  survival  of  the  past
which  the  growth  of  reason  was  destined  to  destroy.  It  is  founded
on  a view  of  things  which  looks  at  man  in  his  manhood  only  and
casts  away  all  those  physical  and  social  accidents  of  birth,  rank,
class,  colour,  creed,  nationality,  which  have  been  erected  into  so
many  walls  and  screens  behind  which  man  has  hidden  himself
from  his  fellow-man;  he  has  turned  them  into  sympathy-proof
shelters  and  trenches  from  which  he  wages  against  him  a war  of
defence  and  aggression,  war  of  nations,  war  of  continents,  war  of
classes,  war  of  colour  with  colour,  creed  with  creed,  culture  with
culture.  All  this  barbarism  the  idea  of  the  intellectual  inter-
nationalist seeks  to  abolish  by  putting  man  face  to  face  with  man
on  the  basis  of  their  common  human  sympathy,  aims,  highest
interests  of  the  future.  It  is  entirely  futurist  in  its  view;  it  turns
away  from  the  confused  and  darkened  good  of  the  past  to  the
purer  good  of  the  future  when  man,  at  last  beginning  to  become
a truly  intelligent  and  ethical  being,  will  shake  away  from  him  all
these  sources  of  prejudice  and  passion  and  evil.  Humanity  will
become  one  in  idea  and  feeling,  and  life  be  consciously  what  it
now  is  in  spite  of  itself,  one  in  its  status  on  earth  and  its  destiny.

The  height  and  nobility  of  the  idea  is  not  to  be  questioned
and  certainly  a mankind  which  set  its  life  upon  this  basis  would
make  a better,  purer,  more  peaceful  and  enlightened  race  than
anything  we  can  hope  to  have  at  present.  But  as  the  human  being
is  now  made,  the  pure  idea,  though  always  a great  power,  is  also
afflicted  by  a great  weakness.  It  has  an  eventual  capacity,  once
born,  of  taking  hold  of  the  rest  of  the  human  being  and  forcing
him  in  the  end  to  acknowledge  its  truth  and  make  some  kind  of
attempt  to  embody  it;  that  is  its  strength.  But  also  because  man
at  present  lives  more  in  the  outward  than  in  the  inward,  is  go-
verned principally  by  his  vital  existence,  sensations,  feelings  and
customary  mentality  rather  than  by  his  higher  thought-mind,  and
feels  himself  in  these  to  be  really  alive,  really  to  exist  and  be,  while
the  world  of  ideas  is  to  him  something  remote  and  abstract  and.


Internationalism


527


however  powerful  and  interesting  in  its  way,  not  a living  thing,
the  pure  idea  seems,  until  it  is  embodied  in  life,  something  not
quite  real;  in  that  abstractness  and  remoteness  lies  its  weakness.

The  sense  of  this  abstractness  imposes  on  the  idea  an  undue
haste  to  get  itself  recognised  by  life  and  embodied  in  a form.  If
it  could  have  confidence  in  its  strength  and  be  content  to  grow,
to  insist,  to  impress  itself  till  it  got  well  into  the  spirit  of  man,  it
might  conceivably  become  a real  part  of  his  soul-life,  a perma-
nent power  in  his  psychology  and  might  succeed  in  remoulding
his  whole  life  in  its  image.  But  it  has  inevitably  a desire  to  get  as
soon  as  possible  admitted  into  a form  of  the  life,  for  until  then  it
does  not  feel  itself  strong  and  cannot  quite  be  sure  that  it  has
vindicated  its  truth.  It  hurries  into  action  before  it  has  real
knowledge  of  itself  and  thereby  prepares  its  own  disappoint-
ment, even  when  it  seems  to  triumph  and  fulfil  its  object.  For  in
order  to  succeed,  it  allies  itself  with  powers  and  movements  which
are  impelled  by  another  aim  than  its  own,  but  are  glad  enough  to
get  its  aid  so  that  they  may  strengthen  their  own  case  and  claim.
Thus  when  it  realises  itself  at  last,  it  does  it  in  a mixed,  impure
and  ineffective  form.  Life  accepts  it  as  a partial  habit,  but  not
completely,  not  quite  sincerely.  That  has  been  the  history  of
every  idea  in  succession  and  one  reason  at  least  why  there  is  almost
always  something  unreal,  inconclusive  and  tormented  about
human  progress.

There  are  many  conditions  and  tendencies  in  human  life  at
present  which  are  favourable  to  the  progress  of  the  internationa-
list idea.  The  strongest  of  these  favourable  forces  is  the  constant
drawing  closer  of  the  knots  of  international  life,  the  multiplica-
tion of  points  of  contact  and  threads  of  communication  and  an
increasing  community  in  thought,  in  science  and  in  knowledge.
Science  especially  has  been  a great  force  in  its  direction;  for  science
is  a thing  common  to  all  men  in  its  conclusions,  open  to  all  in  its
methods,  available  to  all  in  its  results:  it  is  international  in  its
very  nature;  there  can  be  no  such  thing  as  a national  science,  but
only  the  nations’  contributions  to  the  work  and  gro\'.'th  of  science
which  are  the  indivisible  inheritance  of  all  humanity.  There-
fore it  is  easier  for  men  of  science  or  those  strongly  influenced  by
science  to  grow  into  the  international  spirit  and  all  the  world  is


528


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

now  beginning  to  feel  the  scientific  influence  and  to  live  in  it.
Science  also  has  created  that  closer  contact  of  every  part  of  the
world  with  every  other  part,  out  of  which  some  sort  of  inter-
national mind  is  growing.  Even  cosmopolitan  habits  of  life  are
now  not  uncommon  and  there  are  a fair  number  of  persons  who
are  as  much  or  more  citizens  of  the  world  as  citizens  of  their  own
nation.  The  growth  of  knowledge  is  interesting  the  peoples  in
each  other’s  art,  culture,  religion,  ideas  and  is  breaking  down  at
many  points  the  prejudice,  arrogance  and  exclusiveness  of  the
old  nationalistic  sentiment.  Religion,  which  ought  to  have  led
the  way,  but  owing  to  its  greater  dependence  on  its  external
parts  and  its  infrarational  rather  than  its  spiritual  impulses,  has
been  as  much,  or  even  more,  a sower  of  discord  as  a teacher  of
unity,  — religion  is  beginning  to  realise,  a little  dimly  and  in-
effectively as  yet,  that  spirituality  is  after  all  its  own  chief  business
and  true  aim  and  that  it  is  also  the  common  element  and  the
common  bond  of  all  religions.  As  these  inffuences  grow  and
come  more  and  more  consciously  to  co-operate  with  each  other,
it  might  be  hoped  that  the  necessary  psychological  modification
will  quietly,  gradually,  but  still  irresistibly  and  at  last  with  an
increasing  force  of  rapidity,  take  place  which  can  prepare  a real
and  fundamental  change  in  the  life  of  humanity.

But  this  is  at  present  a slow  process,  and  meanwhile  the
internationalist  idea,  eager  for  effectuation,  allied  and  almost
identified  itself  with  two  increasingly  powerful  movements  which
have  both  assumed  an  international  character.  Socialism  and
Anarchism.  Indeed,  it  is  this  alliance  that  most  commonly  went
by  the  name  of  internationalism.  But  this  socialistic  and  anar-
chistic internationalism  was  recently  put  to  the  test,  the  fiery  test
of  the  European  war,  and  thus  tried,  it  was  found  sadly  wanting.
In  every  country,  the  Socialist  party  shed  its  internationalist
promise  with  the  greatest  ease  and  lightness,  German  socialism,
.the  protagonist  of  the  idea,  massively  leading  the  way  in  this
formidable  abjuration.  It  is  true  that  a small  minority  in  each
country  either  remained  heroically  faithful  to  its  principles  or
soon  returned  to  them,  and  as  the  general  weariness  of  the  great
international  massacre  grew,  even  the  majority  showed  a sensible
turn  in  the  same  direction;  but  this  was  rather  the  fruit  of  cir-


Internationalism


529


cumstance  than  of  principle.  Russian  socialism,  it  may  be  said,
has,  at  least  in  its  extremer  form,  shown  a stronger  root  of  inter-
nationalistic  feeling.  But  what  it  has  actually  attempted  to
accomplish  is  a development  of  Labour  rule  on  the  basis  of  a puri-
fied nationalism,  non-aggressive  except  for  revolutionary  pur-
poses and  self-contained,  and  not  on  the  larger  international  idea.
In  any  case,  the  actual  results  of  the  Russian  attempt  show  only
up  to  the  present  a failure  of  the  idea  to  acquire  the  vital  strength
and  efficiency  which  would  justify  it  to  life;  it  is  possible  to  use
them  much  more  as  a telling  argument  against  internationalism
than  as  a justification  of  its  truth  or  at  least  of  its  applicability  in
the  present  stage  of  human  progress.

But  what  is  the  cause  of  this  almost  total  bankruptcy  of  the
international  ideal  under  the  strong  test  of  life  ? Partly  it  may  be
because  the  triumph  of  socialism  is  not  necessarily  bound  up  with
the  progress  of  internationalism.  Socialism  is  really  an  attempt
to  complete  the  growth  of  the  national  community  by  making
the  individual  do  what  he  has  never  yet  done,  live  for  the  com-
munity more  than  for  himself.  It  is  an  outgrowth  of  the  national,
not  of  the  international  idea.  No  doubt,  when  the  society  of  the
nation  has  been  perfected,  the  society  of  nations  can  and  even
must  be  formed ; but  this  is  a later  possible  or  eventual  result  of
socialism,  not  its  primary  vital  necessity.  In  the  crises  of  life  it  is
the  primary  vital  necessity  which  tells,  while  the  other  and  remoter
element  betrays  itself  to  be  a mere  idea  not  yet  ready  for  accom-
plishment; it  can  only  become  powerful  when  it  also  becomes
either  a vital  or  a psychological  necessity.  The  real  truth,  the  real
cause  of  the  failure  is  that  internationalism  is  as  yet,  except  with
some  exceptional  men,  merely  an  idea;  it  is  not  yet  a thing  near  to
our  vital  feelings  or  otherwise  a part  of  our  psychology.  The
normal  socialist  or  syndicalist  cannot  escape  from  the  general
human  feeling  and  in  the  test  he  too  turns  out,  even  though  he
were  a professed  sans-patrie  in  ordinary  times,  in  his  inner  heart
and  being  a nationalist.  As  a vital  fact,  moreover,  these  move-
ments have  been  a revolt  of  Labour  aided  by  a number  of  intellec-
tuals aginst  the  established  state  of  things,  and  they  have  only
allied  themselves  with  internationalism,  because  that  too  is  an
intellectual  revolt  and  because  its  idea  helps  them  in  the  batt  e.


530


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity


If  Labour  comes  to  power,  will  it  keep  or  shed  its  internationa-
listic  tendencies  ? The  experience  of  countries  in  which  it  is  or  has
been  at  the  head  of  affairs  does  not  give  an  encouraging  answer,
and  it  may  at  least  be  said  that,  unless  at  that  time  the  psycholo-
gical change  in  humanity  has  gone  much  farther  that  it  has  now.
Labour  in  power  is  likely  to  shed  more  of  the  internationalist
feeling  than  it  will  succeed  in  keeping  and  to  act  very  much  from
the  old  human  motives.

No  doubt,  the  European  war  itself  was  an  explosion  of  all
that  was  dangerous  and  evil  in  successful  nationalism,  and  the
resulting  conflagration  may  well  turn  out  to  have  been  a puri-
ficatory process  that  has  burned  up  many  things  that  needed  to
die.  It  has  already  strengthened  the  international  idea  and  forced
it  on  governments  and  peoples.  But  we  cannot  rely  too  greatly
on  ideas  and  resolutions  formed  in  a moment  of  abnormal  crisis
under  the  violent  stress  of  exceptional  circumstances.  Some  effect
there  may  be  in  the  end,  some  first  recognition  of  juster  prin-
ciples in  international  dealings,  some  attempt  at  a better,  more
rational  or  at  least  a more  convenient  international  order.  But
until  the  idea  of  humanity  has  grown  not  only  upon  the  intelli-
gence but  in  the  sentiments,  feelings,  natural  sympathies  and
mental  habits  of  man,  the  progress  made  is  likely  to  be  more  in
external  adjustments  than  in  the  vital  matters,  more  in  a use  of
the  ideal  for  mixed  and  egoistic  purposes  than  at  once  or  soon  in
a large  and  sincere  realisation  of  the  ideal.  Until  man  in  his  heart
is  ready,  a profound  change  of  the  world  conditions  cannot  come;
or  it  can  only  be  brought  about  by  force,  physical  force  or  else
force  of  circumstances,  and  that  leaves  all  the  real  work  to  be
done.  A frame  may  have  then  been  made,  but  the  soul  will  have
still  to  grow  into  that  mechanical  body.


Chapter  XXXIII


Internationalism  and  Human  Unity


The  great  necessity,  then,  and  the  great
difficulty  is  to  help  this  idea  of  humanity  which  is  already  at  work
upon  our  minds  and  has  even  begun  in  a very  slight  degree  to
influence  from  above  our  actions,  and  turn  it  into  something
more  than  an  idea,  however  strong,  to  make  it  a central  motive
and  a fixed  part  of  our  nature.  Its  satisfaction  must  become  a
necessity  of  our  psychological  being,  just  as  the  family  idea  or
the  national  idea  has  become  each  a psychological  motive  with
its  own  need  of  satisfaction.  But  how  is  this  to  be  done?  The
family  idea  had  the  advantage  of  growing  out  of  a primary  vital
need  in  our  being  and  therefore  it  had  not  the  least  difficulty  in
becoming  a psychological  motive  and  need;  for  our  readiest  and
strongest  mental  motives  and  psychological  needs  are  those
which  grow  out  of  our  vital  necessities  and  instincts.  The  clan
and  the  tribe  ideas  had  a similar  origin,  less  primary  and  com-
pelling, and  therefore  looser  and  more  dissoluble;  but  still  they
arose  from  the  vital  necessity  in  human  nature  for  aggregation
and  the  ready  basis  given  to  it  by  the  inevitable  physical  growth
of  the  family  into  clan  or  tribe.  These  were  natural  aggregations,
evolutionary  forms  already  prepared  on  the  animal  level.

The  nation  idea,  on  the  contrary,  did  not  arise  from  a pri-
mary vital  need,  but  from  a secondary  or  even  tertiary  necessity
which  resulted  not  from  anything  inherent  in  our  vital  nature,
but  from  circumstances,  from  environmental  evolution;  it  arose
not  from  a vital,  but  from  a geographical  and  historical  neces-
sity. And  we  notice  that  as  one  result  it  had  to  be  created  most
commonly  by  force,  force  of  circumstances  partly,  no  doubt,  but
also  by  physical  force,  by  the  power  of  the  king  and  the  conquer-
ing tribe  converted  into  a military  and  dominant  State,  Or  else  it
came  by  a reaction  against  force,  a revolt  against  conquest  and
domination  that  brought  a slow  or  sudden  compactness  to


532  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

peoples  who,  though  geographically  or  even  historically  and  cul-
turally one,  had  lacked  power  of  cohesion  and  remained  too
conscious  of  an  original  heterogeneity  or  of  local  and  regional
and  other  divisions.  But  still  the  necessity  was  there,  and  the
nation  form  after  many  failures  and  false  successes  got  into  being,
and  the  psychological  motive  of  patriotism,  a sign  of  the  growth
of  a conscious  national  ego,  arose  in  the  form  as  the  expression
of  its  soul  and  the  guarantee  of  its  durability.  For  without  such
a soul,  such  a psychological  force  and  presence  within  the  frame,
there  can  be  no  guarantee  of  durability.  Without  it,  what  cir-
cumstances have  created,  circumstances  easily  will  destroy.  It
was  for  this  reason  that  the  ancient  world  failed  to  create  nations,
except  on  a small  scale,  little  clans  and  small  regional  nations
of  brief  duration  and  usually  of  loose  structure;  it  created  only
artificial  empires  which  went  to  pieces  and  left  chaos  behind  them.

What  then  of  this  international  unity  now  in  the  first  obs-
cure throes  of  the  preformatory  state  resembling  a ferment
of  cells  drawing  together  for  amalgamation?  What  is  the
compelling  necessity  behind  it?  If  we  look  at  outward  things
only,  the  necessity  is  much  less  direct  and  much  less  compelling
than  any  that  preceded  it.  There  is  here  no  vital  necessity;
mankind  as  a whole  can  get  on  well  enough  without  international
unity,  so  far  as  mere  living  goes;  it  will  not  be  at  all  a perfect,
rational  or  ideal  collective  living  of  the  race,  — but  after  all
where  is  there  yet  any  element  in  human  life  or  society  which
is  perfect,  rational  or  ideal?  As  yet  at  least  none;  still  we  get
on  somehow  with  life,  because  the  vital  man  in  us,  who  is  the
dominant  element  in  our  instincts  and  in  our  actions,  cares  for
none  of  these  things  and  is  quite  satisfied  with  any  just  tolerable
or  any  precariously  or  partly  agreeable  form  of  living,  because
that  is  all  to  which  he  is  accustomed  and  all  therefore  that  he
feels  to  be  necessary.  The  men  who  are  not  satisfied,  the  thinkers,
the  idealists,  are  always  a minority  and  in  the  end  an  ineffectual
minority,  because  though  always  in  the  end  they  do  get  their
way  partly,  their  victory  yet  turns  into  a defeat;  for  the  vital
man  remains  still  the  majority  and  degrades  the  apparent
success  into  a pitiful  parody  of  their  rational  hope,  their  clear-
sighted ideal  or  their  strong  counsel  of  perfection.


Internationalism  and  Human  Unity


533


Tlie  geographical  necessity  for  a unification  of  this  kind  does
not  exist,  unless  we  consider  that  it  has  been  created  through
the  drawing  closer  together  of  the  earth  and  its  inhabitants
by  Science  and  her  magical  lessening  of  physical  distances  and
attenuation  of  barriers.  But  whatever  may  happen  in  the
future,  this  is  as  yet  not  sufficient;  earth  is  still  large  enough
and  her  divisions  still  real  enough  for  her  to  do  without  any
formal  unity.  If  there  is  any  strong  need,  it  may  be  described  —
if  such  an  epithet  can  be  applied  to  a thing  in  the  present  and
the  future  — as  a historical  necessity,  that  is,  a need  which  has
arisen  as  the  result  of  certain  actual  circumstances  that  have
grown  up  in  the  evolution  of  international  relations.  And  that
need  is  economic,  political,  mechanical,  likely  under  certain
circumstances  to  create  some  tentative  or  preliminary  frame-
work, but  not  at  first  a psychological  reality  which  will  vivify
the  frame.  Moreover,  it  is  not  yet  sufficiently  vital  to  be  pre-
cisely a necessity;  for  it  amounts  mainly  to  a need  for  the
removal  of  certain  perils  and  inconveniences,  such  as  the  constant
danger  of  war,  and  at  most  to  the  strong  desirability  of  a better
international  co-ordination.  But  by  itself  this  creates  only  a
possibility,  not  even  a moral  certainty,  of  a first  vague  sketch
and  loose  framework  of  unity  which  may  or  may  not  lead  to

something  more  close  and  real.

But  there  is  another  power  than  that  of  external  circum-
stance which  we  have  a right  to  take  into  consideration.  For
behind  all  the  external  circumstances  and  necessities  of  which
we  are  more  easily  aware  in  Nature,  there  is  always  an  interna
necessity  in  the  being,  a will  and  a design  in  Nature  itself  which
precedes  the  outward  signals  of  its  development  and  in  spite  o
all  obstacles  and  failures  must  in  the  long  end  inevitably  get  itse
realised.  Nowadays  we  can  see  this  truth  everywhere  in  ature
down  to  her  lowest  forms ; a will  in  the  very  seed  ° ^ ®
not  quite  conscious  or  only  partially  conscious  in  t e orm
itself,  but  still  present  there  in  Nature.  It  is  subconscious  or
even  inconscient  if  you  like,  but  it  is  still  a blin  wi  , a °

idea  which  contains  beforehand  the  form  it  is  going  o ’

is  aware  of  a necessity  other  than  the  environmenta  , a necessi
contained  in  the  very  being  itself,  and  creates  persisten  y a


534


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

inevitably  a form  that  best  answers  to  tbe  necessity,  however
we  may  labour  to  interfere  with  or  thwart  its  operations.

This  is  true  biologically,  but  it  is  also,  though  in  a more
subtle  and  variable  way,  psychologically  true.  Now  the  very
nature  of  man  is  that  of  an  individual  who  on  one  side  is  always
emphasising  and  developing  his  individual  being  to  the  extent
of  his  power  but  who  is  also  driven  by  the  Idea  or  Truth  within
him  to  unify  himself  with  others  of  his  species,  to  join  himself
to  them  or  agglutinate  them  to  him,  to  create  human  groups,
aggregates  and  collectivities.  And  if  there  is  an  aggregate  or
collectivity  which  it  is  possible  for  him  to  realise  but  is  not  yet
realised,  we  may  be  sure  that  that  too  in  the  end  he  will  create.
This  will  in  him  is  not  always  or  often  quite  conscient  or  fore-
seeing; it  is  often  largely  subconscient,  but  even  then  it  is
eventually  irresistible.  And  if  it  gets  into  his  conscious  mind,
as  the  international  idea  has  now  done,  we  may  count  on  a
more  rapid  evolution.  Such  a will  in  Nature  creates  for  itself
favourable  external  circumstances  and  happenings  or  finds
them  created  for  it  in  the  stress  of  events.  And  even  if  they
are  insufficient,  she  will  still  often  use  them  beyond  their  apparent
power  of  effectivity,  not  minding  the  possibility  of  failure,  for
she  knows  that  in  the  end  she  will  succeed  and  every  experience
of  failure  will  help  to  better  the  eventual  success.

Well,  then,  it  may  be  said,  let  us  trust  to  this  inevitable
will  in  Nature  and  let  us  follow  out  her  method  of  operation.
Let  us  create  anyhow  this  framework,  any  framework  of  the
aggregate;  for  she  knows  already  the  complete  form  she  intends
and  she  will  work  out  eventually  in  her  own  time  by  the  power
of  the  idea  and  our  will  to  realise  it,  by  help  of  strong  force  of
circumstances,  by  pressure  of  all  kinds,  by  physical  force  even,
if  need  be,  since  that  too  seems  still  to  be  a part  of  her  necessary
machinery;  let  us  create  it.  Let  us  have  the  body;  the  soul
will  grow  in  the  body.  And  we  need  not  mind  if  the  bodily  forma-
tion is  artificial  with  at  first  a small  or  no  conscious  psychologi-
cal reality  to  vivify  it.  That  will  begin  to  form  itself  as  soon  as
the  body  has  been  formed;  for  the  nation  too  was  at  first  more
or  less  artificially  formed  out  of  incoherent  elements  actually
brought  together  by  the  necessity  of  a subconscient  idea,  though


535


Internationalism  and  Human  Unity

apparently  it  was  done  only  by  physical  force  and  the  force  of
circumstances.  As  a national  ego  formed  which  identified  itself
with  the  geographical  body  of  the  nation  and  developed  in  it
the  psychological  instinct  of  national  unity  and  the  need  of  its
satisfaction,  so  a collective  human  ego  will  develop  in  the
international  body  and  will  evolve  in  it  the  psychological  instinct
of  human  unity  and  the  need  of  its  satisfaction.  That  will  be  the
guarantee  of  duration.  And  that  possibly  is  how  the  thing  will
happen,  man  being  what  he  is;  indeed  if  we  cannot  do  better,
it  will  so  happen,  since  happen  somehow  it  must,  whether  in
the  worse  way  or  the  better.

It  may  be  as  well  to  review  here  briefly  in  the  light  of  these
considerations  the  main  possibilities  and  powers  which  are
shaping  us  towards  such  an  end  in  the  present  world  conditions.
The  old  means  of  unification,  conquest  by  a single  great  Power,
which  would  reduce  part  of  the  world  by  force  and  bring  the
remaining  nations  into  the  condition  of  dependencies,  protec-
torates and  dependent  allies,  the  whole  forming  the  basic  struc-
ture of  a great  final  unification,  — this  was  the  character  of  the
ancient  Roman  precedent,  — does  not  seem  immediately
possible."  It  would  require  a great  predominance  of  force  simul-
taneously by  sea  and  land,^  an  irresistibly  superior  science
and  organisation  and  with  all  this  a constantly  successful
diplomacy  and  an  invincible  good  fortune.  If  war  and  diplomacy
are  still  to  be  the  decisive  factors  in  international  politics  in  the
future  as  in  the  past,  it  would  be  rash  to  predict  that  such  a
combination  may  not  arise,  and  if  other  means  fail,  it  rnust
arise;  for  there  is  nothing  that  can  be  set  down  as  impossib  e
in  the  chances  of  the  future,  and  the  urge  in  Nature  always
creates  its  own  means.  But,  at  present,  the  possibilities  o
the  future  do  not  seem  to  point  in  this  direction.  There  is,  on
the  other  hand,  a very  strong  possibility  of  the  whole  earth,  or
at  least  the  three  continents  of  the  eastern  hemisphere,  eing
dominated  by  three  or  four  great  empires  largely  increase  in
extent  of  dominion,  spheres  of  influence,  protectorates,  an
thereby  exercising  a pre-eminence  which  they  cou  ei  c
maintain  by  agreements,  avoiding  all  causes  of  con  ict,  or  in

> Now  also  by  air.


536


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity


a rivalry  which  would  be  the  cause  of  fresh  wars  and  changes.
This  would  normally  have  been  the  result  of  the  great  European
conflict.

But  there  has  struck  across  this  possibility  a revived  strength
of  the  idea  of  nationality  expressed  in  the  novel  formula  of
the  principle  of  self-determination  to  which  the  great  world-
empires  have  had  to  pay  at  least  a verbal  homage.  The  idea  of
international  unity  to  which  this  intervention  of  the  revived
force  of  nationality  is  leading,  takes  the  form  of  a so-called
League  of  Nations.  Practically,  however,  the  League  of  Nations
under  present  conditions  or  any  likely  to  be  immediately  realised
would  still  mean  the  control  of  the  earth  by  a few  great  Powers,

— a control  that  would  be  checked  only  by  the  necessity  of
conciliating  the  sympathy  and  support  of  the  more  numerous
smaller  or  less  powerful  nations.  On  the  force  and  influence  of
these  few  would  rest  practically,  if  not  admittedly,  the  decision
of  all  important  debatable  questions.  And  without  it  there
could  be  no  chance  of  enforcing  the  decisions  of  the  majority
against  any  recalcitrant  great  Power  or  combination  of  Powers.
The  growth  of  democratic  institutions  would  perhaps  help  to
minimise  the  chances  of  conflict  and  of  the  abuse  of  power,

— though  that  is  not  at  all  certain;  but  it  would  not  alter  this
real  character  of  the  combination.

In  all  this  there  is  no  immediate  prospect  of  any  such  form
of  unification  as  would  give  room  for  a real  psychological  sense
of  unity,  much  less  necessitate  its  growth.  Such  a form  might
evolve;  but  we  should  have  to  trust  for  it  to  the  chapter  of
accidents  or  at  best  to  the  already  declared  urge  in  Nature
expressed  in  the  internationalist  idea.  On  that  side,  there  was
at  one  time  a possibility  which  seemed  to  be  very  suddenly  and
rapidly  growing  into  something  more,  the  emergence  of  a
powerful  party  in  all  the  advanced  countries  of  the  world  pledged
to  internationalism,  conscious  of  its  necessity  as  a first  condi-
tion for  their  other  aims  and  more  and  more  determined  to  give
it  precedence  and  to  unite  internationally  to  bring  it  about.
That  combination  of  the  intellectuals  with  Labour  which
created  the  Socialist  parties  in  Germany,  Russia  and  Austria,
formed  anew  recently  the  Labour  party  in  England  and  has  had


537


Internationalism  and  Human  Unity

its  cx)unterparts  in  most  other  European  countries,  seems  to  be
travelling  in  that  direction.  This  world-wide  movement  which
made  internationalism  and  Labour  rule  its  two  main  principles,
had  already  created  the  Russian  revolution  and  seemed  ready
to  bring  about  another  great  socialistic  revolution  in  central
Europe.  It  was  conceivable  that  this  party  might  everywhere
draw  together.  By  a chain  of  revolutions  such  as  took  place  in
the  nineteenth  century  and  of  less  violent  but  still  rapid  evolu-
tions brought  about  by  the  pressure  of  their  example,  or  even
by  simply  growing  into  the  majority  in  each  country,  the  party
might  control  Europe.  It  might  create  counterparts  of  itself
in  all  the  American  republics  and  in  Asiatic  countries.  It  might
by  using  the  machinery  of  the  League  of  Nations  or,  where
necessary,  by  physical  force  or  economic  or  other  pressure
persuade  or  compel  all  the  nations  into  some  more  stringent
system  of  international  unification.  A World-State  or  else  a
close  confederation  of  democratic  peoples  might  be  created
with  a common  governing  body  for  the  decision  of  principles
and  for  all  generally  important  affairs  or  at  least  for  all  properly
international  affairs  and  problems;  a common  law  of  the
nations  might  grow  up  and  international  courts  to  administer
it  and  some  kind  of  system  of  international  police  control  to
maintain  and  enforce  it.  In  this  way,  by  the  general  victory
of  an  idea,  socialist  or  other,  seeking  to  organise  humanity
according  to  its  own  model  or  by  any  other  yet  unforeseen  way,
a sufficient  formal  unity  might  come  into  existence.

The  question  then  arises,  how  out  of  this  purely  formal
unity  a real  psychological  unity  can  be  created  and  whether
it  can  be  made  a living  oneness.  For  a mere  formal,  mechanical,
administrative,  political  and  economic  union  does  not  news-
sarily  create  a psychological  unity.  None  of  the  great  empires
have  yet  succeeded  in  doing  that,  and  even  in  the  Roman  where
some  sense  of  unity  did  come  into  being,  it  was  nothing  very
close  and  living;  it  could  not  withstand  all  shocks  from  within
and  without,  it  could  not  prevent  what  was  much  more  dan
gerous,  the  peril  of  decay  and  devitalisation  which  the  diminu-
tion of  the  natural  elements  of  free  variation  and  helpful  struggle
brought  with  it.  A complete  world-union  would  have  indeed


538  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

this  advantage  that  it  would  have  no  need  to  fear  forces  from
without,  for  no  such  forces  would  any  longer  exist.  But  this
very  absence  of  outer  pressure  might  well  give  greater  room
and  power  to  internal  elements  of  disintegration  and  still
more  to  the  opportunities  of  decay.  It  might  indeed  for  a long
time  foster  an  internal  intellectual  and  political  activity  and
social  progress  which  would  keep  it  living;  but  this  principle  of
progress  would  not  be  always  secure  against  a natural  tendency
to  exhaustion  and  stagnation  which  every  diminution  of  variety
and  even  the  very  satisfaction  of  social  and  economic  well-being
might  well  hasten.  Disruption  of  unity  would  then  be  necessary
to  restore  humanity  to  life.  Again,  while  the  Roman  Empire
appealed  only  to  the  idea  of  Roman  unity,  an  artificial  and
accidental  principle,  this  World-State  would  appeal  to  the
idea  of  human  unity,  a real  and  vital  principle.  But  if  the  idea
of  unity  can  appeal  to  the  human  mind,  so  too  can  the  idea  of
separative  life,  for  both  address  themselves  to  vital  instincts  of
his  nature.  What  guarantee  will  there  be  that  the  latter  will  not
prevail  when  man  has  once  tried  unity  and  finds  perhaps  that
its  advantages  do  not  satisfy  his  whole  nature?  Only  the  growth
of  some  very  powerful  psychological  factor  will  make  unity
necessary  to  him,  whatever  other  changes  and  manipulations
might  be  desirable  to  satisfy  his  other  needs  and  instincts.

The  formal  unification  of  mankind  would  come  in  upon
us  in  the  shape  of  a system  which  would  be  bom,  grow,  come  to
its  culmination.  But  every  system  by  the  very  nature  of  things
tends  after  its  culmination  to  decay  and  die.  To  prevent  the
organism  from  decaying  and  dying  there  must  be  such  a psycho-
logical reality  within  as  will  persist  and  survive  all  changes  of
its  body.  Nations  have  that  in  a sort  of  collective  national  ego
which  persists  through  all  vital  changes.  But  this  ego  is  not  by
any  means  self-existent  and  immortal;  it  supports  itself  on
certain  things  with  which  it  is  identified.  First,  there  is  the
geographical  body,  the  country;  secondly,  the  common  interests
of  all  who  inhabit  the  same  country,  defence,  economic  well-
being and  progress,  political  liberty  etc.;  thirdly,  a common
name,  sentiment,  culture.  But  we  have  to  mark  that  this  national
ego  owes  its  life  to  the  coalescence  of  the  separative  instinct  and


539


Internationalism  and  Human  Unity

the  instinct  of  unity;  for  the  nation  feels  itself  one  as  dis-
tinguished from  other  nations;  it  owes  its  vitality  to  interchange
with  them  and  struggle  with  them  in  all  the  activities  of  its
nature.  Nor  are  all  these  altogether  sufficient;  there  is  a deeper
factor.  There  must  be  a sort  of  religion  of  country,  a constant
even  if  not  always  explicit  recognition  not  only  of  the  sacredness
of  the  physical  mother,  the  land,  but  also,  in  however  obscure
a way,  of  the  nation  as  a collective  soul  which  it  is  the  first  duty
and  need  of  every  man  to  keep  alive,  to  defend  from  suppression
or  mortal  attaint  or,  if  suppressed,  then  to  watch,  wait  and
struggle  for  its  release  and  rehabilitation,  if  sicklied  over  with
the  touch  of  any  fatal  spiritual  ailment,  then  to  labour  always
to  heal  and  revivify  and  save  alive.

The  World-State  will  give  its  inhabitants  the  great  advan-
tages of  peace,  economic  well-being,  general  security,  combi-
nation for  intellectual,  cultural,  social  activity  and  progress.
None  of  these  are  in  themselves  sufficient  to  create  the  thing
needed.  Peace  and  security  we  all  desire  at  present,  because
we  have  them  not  in  sufficiency;  but  we  must  remember  that
man  has  also  within  him  the  need  of  combat,  adventure,  struggle,
almost  requires  these  for  his  growth  and  healthy  living;  that
instinct  would  be  largely  suppressed  by  a universal  peace  and
a flat  security  and  it  might  rise  up  successfully  against  suppres-
sion. Economic  well-being  by  itself  cannot  permanently  satisfy
and  the  price  paid  for  it  might  be  so  heavy  as  to  diminish  its
appeal  and  value.  The  human  instinct  for  liberty,  individual  and
national,  might  well  be  a constant  menace  to  the  World-State,
unless  it  so  skilfully  arranged  its  system  as  to  give  them  sufficient
free  play.  A common  intellectual  and  cultural  activity  and
progress  may  do  much,  but  need  not  by  themselves  be  sufficient
to  bring  into  being  the  fully  powerful  psychological  factor
that  would  be  required.  And  the  collective  ego  created  would
have  to  rely  on  the  instinct  of  unity  alone;  for  it  would  be  in
conflict  with  the  separative  instinct  which  gives  the  national
ego  half  its  vitality.

It  is  not  impossible  that  the  indispensable  inner  factor
for  this  outer  frame  might  be  increasingly  created,  in  its  very
process  of  growth,  but  certain  psychological  elements  would  have


540  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

to  be  present  in  great  strength.  There  would  be  needed,  to
make  the  change  persist,  a religion  of  humanity  or  an  equivalent
sentiment  much  more  powerful,  explicit,  self-conscious,  uni-
versal in  its  appeal  than  the  nationalist’s  religion  of  country;
the  clear  recognition  by  man  in  all  his  thought  and  life  of  a
single  soul  in  humanity  of  which  each  man  and  each  people  is
an  incarnation  and  soul-form;  an  ascension  of  man  beyond  the
principle  of  ego  which  lives  by  separativeness,  — and  yet  there
must  be  no  destruction  of  individuality,  for  without  that  man
would  stagnate;  a principle  and  arrangement  of  the  common
life  which  would  give  free  play  to  the  individual  variation,
interchange  in  diversity  and  the  need  of  adventure  and  con-
quest by  which  the  soul  of  man  lives  and  grows  great,  and
suflBcient  means  of  expressing  all  the  resultant  complex  life  and
growth  in  a flexible  and  progressive  form  of  human  society.


Chapter  XXXIV


The  Religion  of  Humanity


A RELIGION  of  humanity  may  be  either  an
intellectual  and  sentimental  ideal,  a living  dogma  with  intel-
lectual, psychological  and  practical  effects,  or  else  a spiritual
aspiration  and  rule  of  living,  and  partly  the  sign,  partly  the
cause  of  a change  of  soul  in  humanity.  The  intellectual  religion
of  humanity  already  to  a certain  extent  exists,  partly  as  a con-
scious creed  in  the  minds  of  a few,  partly  as  a potent  shadow  in
the  consciousness  of  the  race.  It  is  the  shadow  of  a spirit  that  is
yet  unborn,  but  is  preparing  for  its  birth.  This  material  world
of  ours,  besides  its  fully  embodied  things  of  the  present,  is
peopled  by  such  powerful  shadows,  ghosts  of  things  dead  and
the  spirit  of  things  yet  unborn.  The  ghosts  of  things  dead  are
very  troublesome  actualities  and  they  now  abound,  ghosts  of
dead  religions,  dead  arts,  dead  moralities,  dead  political  theories,
which  still  claim  either  to  keep  their  rotting  bodies  or  to  animate
partly  the  existing  body  of  things.  Repeating  obstinately  their
sacred  formulas  of  the  past,  they  hypnotise  backward-looking
minds  and  daunt  even  the  progressive  portion  of  humanity.  But
there  are  too  those  unborn  spirits  which  are  still  unable  to  take
a definite  body,  but  are  already  mind-bom  and  exist  as  influ-
ences of  which  the  human  mind  is  aware  and  to  which
responds  in  a desultory  and  confused  fashion.  The  re  igion
of  humanity  was  mind-born  in  the  eighteenth  centuty,  t e
manasa  putrd^  of  the  rationalist  thinkers  who  brought  it  orwar
as  a substitute  for  the  formal  spiritualism  of  ecclesiastica
Christianity.  It  tried  to  give  itself  a body  in  Positivism,  w ic
was  an  attempt  to  formulate  the  dogmas  of  this  religion,  but
on  too  heavily  and  severely  rationalistic  a basis  for  acceptani^
even  by  an  Age  of  Reason.  Humanitarianism  has  been  its
most  prominent  emotional  result.  Philanthropy,  socia  ser\ice

» Mind-bom  child,  an  idea  and  expression  of  Indian  Puranic  cosmologv.


542


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity


and  other  kindred  activities  have  been  its  outward  expression
of  good  works!  Democracy,  socialism,  pacificism  are  to  a
great  extent  its  by-products  or  at  least  owe  much  of  their  vigour
to  its  inner  presence.

The  fundamental  idea  is  that  mankind  is  the  godhead  to  be
worshipped  and  served  by  man  and  that  the  respect,  the  service,
the  progress  of  the  human  being  and  human  life  are  the  chief
duty  and  chief  aim  of  the  human  spirit.  No  other  idol,  neither
the  nation,  the  State,  the  family  nor  anything  else  ought  to  take
its  place;  they  are  only  worthy  of  respect  so  far  as  they  are
images  of  the  human  spirit  and  enshrine  its  presence  and  aid  its
self-manifestation.  But  where  the  cult  of  these  idols  seeks  to
usurp  the  place  of  the  spirit  and  makes  demands  inconsistent
with  its  service,  they  should  be  put  aside.  No  injunctions  of  old
creeds,  religious,  political,  social  or  cultural,  are  valid  when
they  go  against  its  claims.  Science  even,  though  it  is  one  of  the
chief  modern  idols,  must  not  be  allowed  to  make  claims  contrary
to  its  ethical  temperament  and  aim,  for  science  is  only  valuable
in  so  far  as  it  helps  and  serves  by  knowledge  and  progress  the
religion  of  humanity.  War,  capital  punishment,  the  taking  of
human  life,  cruelty  of  all  kinds  whether  committed  by  the  indi-
vidual, the  State  or  society,  not  only  physical  cruelty,  but  moral
cruelty,  the  degradation  of  any  human  being  or  any  class  of  hu-
man beings  under  whatever  specious  plea  or  in  whatever  interest,
the  oppression  and  exploitation  of  man  by  man,  of  class  by  class,
of  nation  by  nation  and  all  those  habits  of  life  and  institutions  of
society  of  a similar  kind  which  religion  and  ethics  formerly
tolerated  or  even  favoured  in  practice,  whatever  they  might  do
in  their  ideal  rule  or  creed,  are  crimes  against  the  religion  of  hu-
manity, abominable  to  its  ethical  mind,  forbidden  by  its  primary
tenets,  to  be  fought  against  always,  in  no  degree  to  be  tolerated.
Man  must  be  sacred  to  man  regardless  of  all  distinctions  of  race,
creed,  colour,  nationality,  status,  political  or  social  advancement.
The  body  of  man  is  to  be  respected,  made  immune  from  vio-
lence and  outrage,  fortified  by  science  against  disease  and
preventable  death.  The  life  of  man  is  to  be  held  sacred,  preserved,
strengthened,  ennobled,  uplifted.  The  heart  of  man  is  to  be  held
sacred  also,  given  scope,  protected  from  violation,  from  suppres-


The  Religion  of  Humanity


543


sion,  from  mechanisation,  freed  from  belittling  influences.  The
mind  of  man  is  to  be  released  from  all  bonds,  allowed  freedom
and  range  and  opportunity,  given  all  its  means  of  self-training
and  self-development  and  organised  in  the  play  of  its  powers
for  the  service  of  humanity.  And  all  this  too  is  not  to  be  held  as
an  abstract  of  pious  sentiment,  but  given  full  and  practical  recog-
nition in  the  persons  of  men  and  nations  and  mankind.  This,
speaking  largely,  is  the  idea  and  spirit  of  the  intellectual  religion
of  humanity.

One  has  only  to  compare  human  life  and  thought  and  feeling
a century  or  two  ago  with  human  life,  thought  and  feeling  in  the
pre-war  period  to  see  how  great  an  influence  this  religion  of  hu-
manity has  exercised  and  how  fruitful  a work  it  has  done.  It
accomplished  rapidly  many  things  which  orthodox  religion
failed  to  do  effectively,  largely  because  it  acted  as  a constant
intellectual  and  critical  solvent,  an  unsparing  assailant  of


the  thing  that  is  and  an  unflinching  champion  of  the  thing
to  be,  faithful  always  to  the  future,  while  orthodox  religion
allied  itself  with  the  powers  of  the  present,  even  of  the  past,  bound
itself  by  its  pact  with  them  and  could  act  only  at  best  as^  a mode-
rating but  not  as  a reforming  force.  Moreover,  this  religion  has
faith  in  humanity  and  its  earthly  future  and  can  therefore  aid  its
earthly  progress,  while  the  orthodox  religions  looked  with  eyes
of  pious  sorrow  and  gloom  on  the  earthly  life  of  man  and  were
very  ready  to  bid  him  bear  peacefully  and  contentedly,  even  to
welcome  its  crudities,  cruelties,  oppressions,  tribulations  as  a
means  for  learning  to  appreciate  and  for  earning  the  better  i e
which  will  be  given  us  hereafter.  Faith,  even  an  intellectua  ai  i,
must  always  be  a worker  of  miracles,  and  this  religion  o luma
nity,  even  without  taking  bodily  shape  or  a compelling  orm
or  a visible  means  of  self-effectuation,  was  yet  a e to  e ec
comparatively  much  of  what  it  set  out  to  do.  It,  to  some  cgree,
humanised  society,  humanised  law  and  punishment,  umamse
the  outlook  of  man  on  man,  abolished  legalised  torture  an
cruder  forms  of  slavery,  raised  those  who  were
fallen,  gave  large  hopes  to  humanity,  stimulate  p i an  r
and  charity  and  the  service  of  mankind,  encourage
the  desire  of  freedom,  put  a curb  on  oppression  an  grea


544


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity


mised  its  more  brutal  expressions.  It  had  almost  succeeded  in
humanising  war  and  would  perhaps  have  succeeded  entirely
but  for  the  contrary  trend  of  modern  Science.  It  made  it  possible
for  man  to  conceive  of  a world  free  from  war  as  imaginable  even
without  waiting  for  the  Christian  millennium.  At  any  rate,  this
much  change  came  about  that,  while  peace  was  formerly  a rare
interlude  of  constant  war,  war  became  an  interlude,  if  a much  too
frequent  interlude  of  peace,  though  as  yet  only  of  an  armed
peace.  That  may  not  be  a great  step,  but  still  it  was  a step  for-
ward. It  gave  new  conceptions  of  the  dignity  of  the  human  being
and  opened  new  ideas  and  new  vistas  of  his  education,  self-
development and  potentiality.  It  spread  enlightenment;  it  made
man  feel  more  his  responsibility  for  the  progress  and  happiness
of  the  race;  it  raised  the  average  self-respect  and  capacity  of
mankind;  it  gave  hope  to  the  serf,  self-assertion  to  the  down-
trodden and  made  the  labourer  in  his  manhood  the  potential
equal  of  the  rich  and  powerful.  True,  if  we  compare  what  is  with
what  should  be,  the  actual  achievement  with  the  ideal,  all  this
will  seem  only  a scanty  work  of  preparation.  But  it  was  a re-
markable record  for  a century  and  a half  or  a little  more  and
for  an  unembodied  spirit  which  had  to  work  through  what
instruments  it  could  find  and  had  as  yet  no  form,  habitation  or
visible  engine  of  its  own  concentrated  workings.  But  perhaps  it
was  in  this  that  lay  its  power  and  advantage,  since  that  saved  it
from  crystallising  into  a form  and  getting  petrified  or  at  least
losing  its  more  free  and  subtle  action.

But  still  in  order  to  accomplish  all  its  future,  this  idea  and
religion  of  humanity  has  to  make  itself  more  explicit,  insistent
and  categorically  imperative.  For  otherwise  it  can  only  work
with  clarity  in  the  minds  of  the  few  and  with  the  mass  it  will  be
only  a modifying  influence,  but  will  not  be  the  rule  of  human
life.  And  so  long  as  that  is  so,  it  cannot  entirely  prevail  over  its
own  principal  enemy.  That  enemy,  the  enemy  of  all  real  religion,
is  human  egoism,  the  egoism  of  the  individual,  the  egoism  of
class  and  nation.  These  it  could  for  a time  soften,  modify,  force
to  curb  their  more  arrogant,  open  and  brutal  expressions,
oblige  to  adopt  better  institutions,  but  not  to  give  place  to  the
love  of  mankind,  not  to  recognise  a real  unity  between  man  and


The  Religion  of  Humanity


545


man.  For  that  essentially  must  be  the  aim  of  the  religion  of
humanity,  as  it  must  be  the  earthly  aim  of  all  human  religion,
love,  mutual  recognition  of  human  brotherhood,  a living  sense
of  human  oneness  and  practice  of  human  oneness  in  thought,
feeling  and  life,  the  ideal  which  was  expressed  first  some  thou-
sands of  years  ago  in  the  ancient  Vedic  hymn^  and  must  always
remain  the  highest  injunction  of  the  Spirit  within  us  to  human
life  upon  earth.  Till  that  is  brought  about,  the  religion  of  huma-
nity remains  unaccomplished.  With  that  done,  the  one  necessary
psychological  change  will  have  been  effected  without  which  no
formal  and  mechanical,  no  political  and  administrative  unity
can  be  real  and  secure.  If  it  is  done,  that  outward  unification  may
not  even  be  indispensable  or,  if  indispensable,  it  will  come  about
naturally,  not  as  now  it  seems  likely  to  be,  by  catastrophic  means,
but  by  the  demand  of  the  human  mind,  and  will  be  held  secure  by
an  essential  need  of  our  perfected  and  developed  human  nature.

But  this  is  the  question  whether  a purely  intellectual  and
sentimental  religion  of  humanity  will  be  sufficient  to  bring  about
so  great  a change  in  our  psychology.  The  weakness  of  the  intel-
lectual idea,  even  when  it  supports  itself  by  an  appeal  to  the  sen-
timents and  emotions,  is  that  it  does  not  get  at  the  centre  of  man  s
being.  The  intellect  and  the  feelings  are  only  instruments  of  the
being  and  they  may  be  the  instruments  of  either  its  lower  external
form  or  of  the  inner  and  higher  man,  servants  of  the  ego  or  channels
of  the  soul.  The  aim  of  the  religion  of  humanity  was  formulated
in  the  eighteenth  century  by  a sort  of  primal  intuition,  that  aim
was  and  it  is  still  to  re-create  human  society  in  the  image  o
kindred  ideas,  liberty,  equality  and  fraternity.  None  o ^
has  really  been  won  in  spite  of  all  the  progress  that  has  een
achieved.  The  liberty  that  has  been  so  loudly  proclaimed  as  an
essential  of  modem  progress  is  an  outward  and  mech^ica  an
unreal  liberty.  The  equality  that  has  been  so  mu^ch  sougn
after  and  battled  for  is  equally  an  outward  and  anica  an
will  turn  out  to  be  an  unreal  equality.  Fraternity  is  no  even
claimed  to  be  a practicable  principle  of  the  ordering  o ‘ ®
what  is  put  forward  as  its  substitute  is  the  outwar  an  rnec  a
nical  principle  of  equal  association  or  at  the  best  a comra  es  ii

• Rig  Veda,  X.  191.


546  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

of  labour.  This  is  because  the  idea  of  humanity  has  been  obliged
in  an  intellectual  age  to  mask  its  true  character  of  a religion
and  a thing  of  the  soul  and  the  spirit  and  to  appeal  to  the  vital
and  physical  mind  of  man  rather  than  his  inner  being.  It  has
limited  his  effort  to  the  attempt  to  revolutionise  political  and
social  institutions  and  to  bring  about  such  a modification  of  the
ideas  and  sentiments  of  the  common  mind  of  mankind  as  would
make  these  institutions  practicable;  it  has  worked  at  the  machi-
nery of  human  life  and  on  the  outer  mind  much  more  than  upon
the  soul  of  the  race.  It  has  laboured  to  establish  a political,
social  and  legal  liberty,  equality  and  mutual  help  in  an  equal
association.

But  though  these  aims  are  of  great  importance  in  their  own
field,  they  are  not  the  central  thing;  they  can  only  be  secure
when  founded  upon  a change  of  the  inner  human  nature  and
inner  way  of  living;  they  are  themselves  of  importance  only  as
means  for  giving  a greater  scope  and  a better  field  for  man’s
development  towards  that  change  and,  when  it  is  once  achieved,
as  an  outward  expression  of  the  larger  inward  life.  Freedom,
equality,  brotherhood  are  three  godheads  of  the  soul;  they  can-
not be  really  achieved  through  the  external  machinery  of  society
or  by  man  so  long  as  he  lives  only  in  the  individual  and  the
communal  ego.  When  the  ego  claims  liberty,  it  arrives  at  compe-
titive individualism.  When  it  asserts  equality,  it  arrives  first
at  strife,  then  at  an  attempt  to  ignore  the  variations  of  Nature,
and,  as  the  sole  way  of  doing  that  successfully,  it  constructs  an
artificial  and  machine-made  society.  A society  that  pursues
liberty  as  its  ideal  is  unable  to  achieve  equality;  a society  that
aims  at  equality  will  be  obliged  to  sacrifice  liberty.  For  the  ego  to
speak  of  fraternity  is  for  it  to  speak  of  something  contrary  to  its
nature.  All  that  it  knows  is  association  for  the  pursuit  of  com-
mon egoistic  ends  and  the  utmost  that  it  can  arrive  at  is  a closer
organisation  for  the  equal  distribution  of  labour,  production,
consumption  and  enjoyment.

Yet  is  brotherhood  the  real  key  to  the  triple  gospel  of  the
idea  of  humanity.  The  union  of  liberty  and  equality  can  only  be
achieved  by  the  power  of  human  brotherhood  and  it  cannot  be
founded  on  anything  else.  But  brotherhood  exists  only  in  the


The  Religion  of  Humanity  547

soul  and  by  the  soul;  it  can  exist  by  nothing  else.  For  this  bro-
therhood is  not  a matter  either  of  physical  kinship  or  of  vital
association  or  of  intellectual  agreement.  When  the  soul  claims
freedom,  it  is  the  freedom  of  its  self-development,  the  self-deve-
lopment of  the  divine  in  man  in  all  his  being.  When  it  claims
equality,  what  it  is  claiming  is  that  freedom  equally  for  all  and
the  recognition  of  the  same  soul,  the  same  godhead  in  all  human
beings.  When  it  strives  for  brotherhood,  it  is  founding  that  equal
freedom  of  self-development  on  a common  aim,  a common  life,
a unity  of  mind  and  feeling  founded  upon  the  recognition  of  this
inner  spiritual  unity.  These  three  things  are  in  fact  the  nature  of
the  soul;  for  freedom,  equality,  unity  are  the  eternal  attributes
of  the  Spirit.  It  is  the  practical  recognition  of  this  truth,  it  is  the
awakening  of  the  soul  in  man  and  the  attempt  to  get  him  to  live
from  his  soul  and  not  from  his  ego  which  is  the  inner  meaning  of
religion,  and  it  is  that  to  which  the  religion  of  humanity  also  must
arrive  before  it  can  fulfil  itself  in  the  life  of  the  race.


Chapter  XXXV


Summary  and  Conclusion


In  OTHER  words,  — and  this  is  the  con-
clusion at  which  we  arrive,  — while  it  is  possible  to  construct  a
precarious  and  quite  mechanical  unity  by  political  and  adminis-
trative means,  the  unity  of  the  human  race,  even  if  achieved,  can
only  be  secured  and  can  only  be  made  real  if  the.  religion  of  hu-
manity, which  is  at  present  the  highest  active  ideal  of  mankind,
spiritualises  itself  and  becomes  the  general  inner  law  of  human
life.

The  outward  unity  may  well  achieve  itself,  — possibly,
though  by  no  means  certainly,  in  a measurable  time,  — because
that  is  the  inevitable  final  trend  of  the  working  of  Nature  in
human  society,  which  makes  for  larger  and  yet  larger  aggrega-
tions and  cannot  fail  to  arrive  at  a total  aggregation  of  mankind
in  a closer  international  system.

This  working  of  Nature  depends  for  its  means  of  fulfilment
upon  two  forces  which  combine  to  make  the  larger  aggregation
inevitable.  First,  there  is  the  increasing  closeness  of  common  inte-
rests or  at  least  the  interlacing  and  interrelation  of  interests  in  a
larger  and  yet  larger  circle  which  makes  old  divisions  an  obstacle
and  a cause  of  weakness,  obstruction  and  friction,  and  the  clash
and  collision  that  comes  out  of  this  friction  a ruinous  calamity  to
all,  even  to  the  victor  who  has  to  pay  a too  heavy  price  for  his
gains;  and  even  these  expected  gains,  as  war  becomes  more  com-
plex and  disastrous,  are  becoming  more  and  more  difficult  to
achieve  and  the  success  problematical.  An  increasing  perception
of  this  community  or  interrelation  of  interests  and  a growing  un-
willingness to  face  the  consequences  of  collision  and  ruinous
struggle  must  push  men  to  welcome  any  means  for  mitigating  the
divisions  which  lead  to  such  disasters.  If  the  trend  to  the  miti-
gation of  divisions  is  once  given  a definite  form,  that  commences
an  impetus  which  drives  towards  closer  and  closer  union.  If  she


Summary  and  Conclusion


549


cannot  arrive  by  these  means,  if  the  incoherence  is  too  great  for
the  trend  of  unification  to  triumph,  Nature  will  use  other  means,
such  as  war  and  conquest  or  the  temporary  domination  of  the
powerful  State  or  empire  or  the  menace  of  such  a domination
which  will  compel  those  threatened  to  adopt  a closer  system  of
union.  It  is  these  means  and  this  force  of  outward  necessity
which  she  used  to  create  nation-units  and  national  empires,  and,
however  modified  in  the  circumstances  and  workings,  it  is  at
bottom  the  same  force  and  the  same  means  which  she  is  using  to
drive  mankind  towards  international  unification.

But,  secondly,  there  is  the  force  of  a common  uniting  senti-
ment. This  may  work  in  two  ways;  it  may  come  before  as  an
originating  or  contributory  cause  or  it  may  come  afterwards  as  a
cementing  result.  In  the  first  case,  the  sentiment  of  a larger
unity  springs  up  among  units  which  were  previously  divided  and
leads  them  to  seek  after  a form  of  union  which  may  then  be
brought  about  principally  by  the  force  of  the  sentiment  and  its
idea  or  by  that  secondarily  as  an  aid  to  other  and  more  outward
events  and  causes.  We  may  note  that  in  earlier  times  this  senti-
ment was  insufficiently  effective,  as  among  the  petty  clans  or  re-
gional nations;  unity  had  ordinarily  to  be  effected  by  outward
circumstances  and  generally  by  the  grossest  of  them,  by  war  and
conquest,  by  the  domination  of  the  most  powerful  among  many
warring  or  contiguous  peoples.  But  in  later  times  the  force  of  the
sentiment  of  unity,  supported  as  it  has  been  by  a clearer  political
idea,  has  become  more  effective.  The  larger  national  aggregates
have  grown  up  by  a simple  act  of  federation  or  union,  though  this
has  sometimes  had  to  be  preceded  by  a common  struggle  or
liberty  or  a union  in  war  against  a common  enemy,  so  ave
grown  into  one  the  United  States,  Italy,  Germany,  and  more
peacefully  the  Australian  and  South  African  federations,  ut  in
other  cases,  especially  in  the  earlier  national  aggregations,  t e
sentiment  of  unity  has  grown  up  largely  or  entirely  as  ^e  resu  t o
the  formal,  outward  or  mechanical  union.  But  whet  er  to  orm
or  to  preserve  the  growth  of  the  sentiment,  the  psyc  o ogica
factor  is  indispensable ; without  it  there  can  be  no  secure  an
lasting  union.  Its  absence,  the  failure  to  create  sue  a sen
or  to  make  it  sufficiently  living,  natural,  forcible  as  cen


550


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

cause  of  the  precariousness  of  such  aggregates  as  Austro-
Hungary  and  of  the  ephemeral  character  of  the  empires  of  the
past,  even  as  it  is  likely  to  bring  about,  unless  circumstances
change,  the  collapse  or  disintegration  of  the  great  present-day
empires.

The  trend  of  forces  towards  some  kind  of  international
world-organisation  eventuating  in  a possible  far-off  unification,
which  is  now  just  beginning  to  declare  itself  as  an  idea  or  aspira-
tion thou^  the  causes  which  made  it  inevitable  have  been  for
some  time  at  work,  is  enforced  by  the  pressure  of  need  and  en-
vironment, by  outward  circumstances.  At  the  same  time,  there  is
a sentiment  helped  and  stimulated  by  these  outward  circum-
stances, a cosmopolitan,  international  sentiment,  still  rather
nebulous  and  vaguely  ideal,  which  may  accelerate  the  growth  of
the  formal  union.  In  itself  this  sentiment  would  be  an  insufficient
cement  for  the  preservation  of  any  mechanical  union  which  might
be  created;  for  it  could  not  easily  be  so  close  and  forcible  a senti-
ment as  national  feeling.  It  would  have  to  subsist  on  the  conve-
niences of  union  as  its  only  substantial  provender.  But  the  ex-
perience of  the  past  shows  that  this  mere  necessity  of  convenience
is  in  the  end  not  strong  enough  to  resist  the  pressure  of  unfa-
vourable circumstances  and  the  reassertion  of  old  or  the  effective
growth  of  new  centrifugal  forces.  There  is,  however,  at  work  a
more  powerful  force,  a sort  of  intellectual  religion  of  humanity,
clear  in  the  minds  of  the  few,  vaguely  felt  in  its  effects  and  its
disguises  by  the  many,  which  has  largely  helped  to  bring  about
much  of  the  trend  of  the  modem  mind  and  the  drift  of  its  deve-
loping institutions.  This  is  a psychological  force  which  tends  to
break  beyond  the  formula  of  the  nation  and  aspires  to  replace
the  religion  of  country  and  even,  in  its  more  extreme  forms,  to
destroy  altogether  the  national  sentiment  and  to  abolish  its  divi-
sions so  as  to  create  the  single  nation  of  mankind.

We  may  say,  then,  that  this  trend  must  eventually  realise
itself,  however  great  may  be  the  difficulties;  and  they  are  really
enormous,  much  greater  than  those  which  attended  the  national
formation.  If  the  present  unsatisfactory  condition  of  internatio-
nal relations  should  lead  to  a series  of  cataclysms,  either  large  and
world-embracing  like  the  present  war  or,  though  each  more


Summary  and  Conclusion


551


limited  in  scope,  yet  in  their  sum  world-pervading  and  necessa-
rily, by  the  growing  interrelation  of  interests,  affecting  even  those
who  do  not  fall  directly  under  their  touch,  then  mankind  will
finally  be  forced  in  self-defence  to  a new,  closer  and  more  strin-
gently unified  order  of  things.  Its  choice  will  be  between  that  and
a lingering  suicide.  If  the  human  reason  cannot  find  out  the  way.
Nature  herself  is  sure  to  shape  these  upheavals  in  such  a way  as
to  bring  about  her  end.  Therefore,  — whether  soon  or  in  the
long  run,  whether  brought  about  by  its  own  growing  sentiment  of
unity,  stimulated  by  common  interests  and  convenience,  or  by  the
evolutionary  pressure  of  circumstances,  — we  may  take  it  that
an  eventual  unification  or  at  least  some  formal  organisation  of
human  life  on  earth  is,  the  incalculable  being  always  allowed  for,
practically  inevitable.

I have  tried  to  show  from  the  analogy  of  the  past  evolution
of  the  nation  that  this  international  unification  must  culminate
or  at  least  is  likely  to  culminate  in  one  of  two  forms.  There  is
likely  to  be  either  a centralised  World-State  or  a looser  world-
union  which  may  be  either  a close  federation  or  a simple  confe-
deracy of  the  peoples  for  the  common  ends  of  mankind.  The
last  form  is  the  most  desirable,  because  it  gives  sufficient  scope
for  the  principle  of  variation  which  is  necessary  for  the  free  play
of  life  and  the  healthy  progress  of  the  race.  The  process  by  which
the  World-State  may  come  starts  with  the  creation  of  a central
body  which  will  at  first  have  very  limited  functions,  but,  once
created,  must  absorb  by  degrees  all  the  different  utilities  of  a
centralised  international  control,  as  the  State,  first  in  the  form
of  a monarchy  and  then  of  a parliament,  has  been  absorbing  by
degrees  the  whole  control  of  the  life  of  the  nation,  so  that  we  are
now  within  measurable  distance  of  a centralised  socialistic  State
which  will  leave  no  part  of  the  life  of  its  individuals  unregulated.
A similar  process  in  the  World-State  will  end  in  the  teking  up
and  the  regulation  of  the  whole  life  of  the  peoples  into  its  an  s,
it  may  even  end  by  abolishing  national  individuality  and  turning
the  divisions  that  it  has  created  into  mere  departmental  group-
ings, provinces  and  districts  of  the  one  common  State.  . uc  an
eventuality  may  seem  now  a fantastic  dream  or  an  unrea  isa
idea;  but  it  is  one  which,  under  certain  conditions  that  arc  by  no


552


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

means  beyond  the  scope  of  ultimate  possibility,  may  well  become
feasible  and  even,  after  a certain  point  is  reached,  inevitable.  A
federal  system  and  still  more  a confederacy  would  mean,  on  the
other  hand,  the  preservation  of  the  national  basis  and  a greater
or  less  freedom  of  national  life,  but  the  subordination  of  the
separate  national  to  the  larger  common  interests  and  of  full
separate  freedom  to  the  greater  international  necessities.

It  may  be  questioned  whether  past  analogies  are  a safe  guide
in  a problem  so  new  and  whether  something  else  might  not  be
evolved  more  intimately  and  independently  arising  from  it  and
suitable  to  its  complexities..  But  mankind  even  in  dealing  with
its  new  problems  works  upon  past  experience  and  therefore  upon
past  motives  and  analogies.  Even  when  it  seizes  on  new  ideas,  it
goes  to  the  past  for  the  form  it  gives  to  them.  Behind  the  appa-
rent changes  of  the  most  radical  revolutions  we  see  this  un-
avoidable principle  of  continuity  surviving  in  the  heart  of  the  new
order.  Moreover,  these  alternatives  seem  the  only  way  in  which
the  two  forces  in  presence  can  work  out  their  conflict,  either  by
the  disappearance  of  the  one,  the  separative  national  instinct,  or
by  an  accommodation  between  them.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is
quite  possible  that  human  thought  and  action  may  take  so  new  a
turn  as  to  bring  in  a number  of  unforeseen  possibilities  and  lead
to  a quite  different  ending.  And  one  might  upon  these  lines  set
one’s  imagination  to  work  and  produce  perhaps  a utopia  of  a
better  kind.  Such  constructive  efforts  of  the  human  imagination
have  their  value  and  often  a very  great  value;  but  any  such  specu-
lations would  evidently  have  been  out  of  place  in  the  study  I
have  attempted.

Assuredly,  neither  of  the  two  alternatives  and  none  of  the
three  forms  considered  are  free  from  serious  objections.  A cen-
tralised World-State  would  signify  the  triumph  of  the  idea  of
mechanical  unity  or  rather  of  uniformity.  It  would  inevitably
mean  the  undue  depression  of  an  indispensable  element  in  the
vigour  of  human  life  and  progress,  the  free  life  of  the  individual,
the  free  variation  of  the  peoples.  It  must  end,  if  it  becomes
permanent  and  fulfils  all  its  tendencies,  either  in  a death  in  life,
a stagnation,  or  by  the  insurgence  of  some  new  saving  but  re-
volutionary force  or  principle  which  would  shatter  the  whole


Summary  and  Conclusion


553


fabric  into  pieces.  The  mechanical  tendency  is  one  to  which  the
logical  reason  of  man,  itself  a precise  machine,  is  easily  addicted
and  its  operations  are  obviously  the  easiest  to  manage  and  the
most  ready  to  hand;  its  full  evolution  may  seem  to  the  reason
desirable,  necessary,  inevitable,  but  its  end  is  predestined.  A
centralised  socialistic  State  may  be  a necessity  of  the  future,  once
it  is  founded,  but  a reaction  from  it  will  be  equally  an  eventual
necessity  of  the  future.  The  greater  its  pressure,  the  more  cer-
tainly will  it  be  met  by  spread  of  the  spiritual,  the  intellectual,
the  vital  and  practical  principle  of  Anarchism  in  revolt  against
that  mechanical  pressure.  So,  too,  a centralised  mechanical
World-State  must  rouse  in  the  end  a similar  force  against  it  and
might  well  terminate  in  a crumbling  up  and  disintegration,  even
in  the  necessity  for  a repetition  of  the  cycle  of  humanity  ending
in  a better  attempt  to  solve  the  problem.  It  could  be  kept  in  being
only  if  humanity  agreed  to  allow  all  the  rest  of  its  life  to  be  re-
gularised for  it  for  the  sake  of  peace  and  stability  and  took  refuge
for  its  individual  freedom  in  the  spiritual  life,  as  happened  once
under  the  Roman  Empire.  But  even  that  would  be  only  a tem-
porary solution.  A federal  system  also  would  tend  inevitably  to
establish  one  general  type  for  human  life,  institutions  and  acti-
vities; it  could  allow  only  a play  of  minor  variations.  But  the
need  of  variation  in  living  Nature  could  not  always  rest  satisfied
with  that  scanty  sustenance.  On  the  other  hand,  a looser  confe-
deracy might  well  be  open  to  the  objection  that  it  would  give  too
ready  a handle  for  centrifugal  forces,  were  such  to  arise  in  new
strength.  A loose  confederation  could  not  be  permanent,  it  must
turn  in  one  direction  or  the  other,  end  either  in  a close  and  rigid
centralisation  or  at  last  by  a break-up  of  the  loose  unity  into  its
original  elements.

The  saving  power  needed  is  a new  psychological  factor  which
will  at  once  make  a united  life  necessary  to  humanity  and  orcc
it  to  respect  the  principle  of  freedom.  The  religion  of  humanity
seems  to  be  the  one  growing  force  which  tends  in  that  direction,
for  it  makes  for  the  sense  of  human  oneness,  it  has  the  i ea  o t e
race,  and  yet  at  the  same  time  it  respects  the  human  in  ivi  ua
and  the  natural  human  grouping.  But  its  present  inte  ec  iia
form  seems  hardly  sufficient.  The  idea,  powerful  in  itsc  an  in


554  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

its  effects,  is  yet  not  powerful  enough  to  mould  the  whole  life  of
the  race  in  its  image.  For  it  has  to.  concede  too  much  to  the
egoistic  side  of  human  nature,  once  all  and  still  nine-tenths  of
our  being,  with  which  its  larger  idea  is  in  conflict.  On  the  other
side,  because  it  leans  principally  on  the  reason,  it  turns  too  readily
to  the  mechanical  solution.  For  the  rational  idea  ends  always
as  a captive  of  its  machinery,  becomes  a slave  of  its  own  too  bind-
ing process.  A new  idea  with  another  turn  of  the  logical  machine
revolts  against  it  and  breaks  up  the  machinery,  but  only  to  substi-
tute in  the  end  another  mechanical  system,  another  credo,
formula  and  practice.

A spiritual  religion  of  humanity  is  the  hope  of  the  future.
By  this  is  not  meant  what  is  ordinarily  called  a universal  religion,
a system,  a thing  of  creed  and  intellectual  belief  and  dogma  and
outward  rite.  Mankind  has  tried  unity  by  that  means;  it  has
failed  and  deserved  to  fail,  because  there  can  be  no  universal
religious  system,  one  in  mental  creed  and  vital  form.  The  inner
spirit  is  indeed  one,  but  more  than  any  other  the  spiritual  life
insists  on  freedom  and  variation  in  its  self-expression  and  means
of  development.  A religion  of  humanity  means  the  growing
realisation  that  there  is  a secret  Spirit,  a divine  Reality,  in  which
we  are  all  one,  that  humanity  is  its  highest  present  vehicle  on
earth,  that  the  human  race  and  the  human  being  are  the  means
by  which  it  will  progressively  reveal  itself  here.  It  implies  a grow--
ing  attempt  to  live  out  this  knowledge  and  bring  about  a kingdom
of  this  divine  Spirit  upon  earth.  By  its  growth  within  us  oneness
with  our  fellow-men  will  become  the  leading  principle  of  all  our
life,  not  merely  a principle  of  co-operation  but  a deeper  brother-
hood, a real  and  an  inner  sense  of  unity  and  equality  and  a com-
mon life.  There  must  be  the  realisation  by  the  individual  that
only  in  the  life  of  his  fellow-men  is  his  own  life  complete.  There
must  be  the  realisation  by  the  race  that  only  on  the  free  and  full
life  of  the  individual  can  its  own  perfection  and  permanent
happiness  be  founded.  There  must  be  too  a discipline  and  a way
of  salvation  in  accordance  with  this  religion,  that  is  to  say,  a
means  by  which  it  can  be  developed  by  each  man  within  himself,
so  that  it  may  be  developed  in  the  life  of  the  race.  To  go  into  all
that  this  implies  would  be  too  large  a subject  to  be  entered  upon


Summary  and  Conclusion


555


here;  it  is  enough  to  point  out  that  in  this  direction  lies  the
eventual  road.  No  doubt,  if  this  is  only  an  idea  like  the  rest,  it
will  go  the  way  of  all  ideas.  But  if  it  is  at  all  a truth  of  our  being,
then  it  must  be  the  truth  to  which  all  is  moving  and  in  it  must
be  found  the  means  of  a fundamental,  an  inner,  a complete,  a
real  human  unity  which  would  be  the  one  secure  base  of  a unifica-
tion of  human  life.  A spiritual  oneness  which  would  create  a
psychological  oneness  not  dependent  upon  any  intellectual  or
outward  uniformity  and  compel  a oneness  of  life  not  bound  up
with  its  mechanical  means  of  unification,  but  ready  always  to
enrich  its  secure  unity  by  a free  inner  variation  and  a freely
varied  outer  self-expression,  this  would  be  the  basis  for  a higher
type  of  human  existence.

Could  such  a realisation  develop  rapidly  in  mankind,  we
might  then  solve  the  problem  of  unification  in  a deeper  and  truer
way  from  the  inner  truth  to  the  outer  forms.  Until  then,  the
attempt  to  bring  it  about  by  mechanical  means  must  proceed.
But  the  higher  hope  of  humanity  lies  in  the  growing  number
of  men  who  will  realise  this  truth  and  seek  to  develop  it  in  them-
selves, so  that  when  the  mind  of  man  is  ready  to  escape  from  its
mechanical  bent,  — perhaps  when  it  finds  that  its  mechanical
solutions  are  all  temporary  and  disappointing,  — the  truth  of
the  Spirit  may  step  in  and  lead  humanity  to  the  path  of  its
highest  possible  happiness  and  perfection.


A Postscript  Chapter


A-T  the  time  when  this  book  was  being
brought  to  its  close,  the  first  attempt  at  the  foundation  of  sortie
initial  hesitating  beginning  of  the  new  world-order,  which  both
governments  and  peoples  had  begun  to  envisage  as  a permanent
necessity  if  there  was  to  be  any  order  in  the  world  at  all,  was
under  debate  and  consideration  but  had  not  yet  been  given  a con-
crete and  practical  form;  but  this  had  to  come  and  eventually
a momentous  beginning  was  made.  It  took  the  name  and  appear-
ance of  what  was  called  a League  of  Nations.  It  was  not  happy
in  its  conception,  well-inspired  in  its  formation  or  destined  to
any  considerable  longevity  or  a supremely  successful  career.
But  that  such  an  organised  endeavour  should  be  launched  at
all  and  proceed  on  its  way  for  some  time  without  an  early  break-
down was  in  itself  an  event  of  capital  importance  and  meant
the  initiation  of  a new  era  in  world  history;  especially,  it  was
an  initiative  which,  even  if  it  failed,  could  not  be  allowed  to
remain  without  a sequel  but  had  to  be  taken  up  again  until  a
successful  solution  has  safeguarded  the  future  of  mankind,  not
only  against  continued  disorder  and  lethal  peril  but  against
destructive  possibilities  which  could  easily  prepare  the  collapse
of  civilisation  and  perhaps  eventually  something  even  that  could
be  described  as  the  suicide  of  the  human  race.  Accordingly,
the  League  of  Nations  disappeared  but  was  replaced  by  the
United  Nations  Organisation  which  now  stands  in  the  forefront
of  the  world  and  struggles  towards  some  kind  of  secure  perma-
nence and  success  in  the  great  and  far-reaching  endeavour  on
which  depends  the  world’s  future.

This  is  the  capital  event,  the  crucial  and  decisive  outcome
of  the  world-wide  tendencies  which  Nature  has  set  in  motion  for
her  destined  purpose.  In  spite  of  the  constant  shortcomings  of
human  effort  and  its  stumbling  mentality,  in  spite  of  adverse
possibilities  that  may  baulk  or  delay  for  a time  the  success  of  this
great  adventure,  it  is  in  this  event  that  lies  the  determination  of


557


A Postscript  Chapter

what  must  be.  All  the  catastrophes  that  have  attended  this
course  of  events  and  seem  to  arise  of  purpose  in  order  to  prevent
the  working  out  of  her  intention  have  not  prevented,  and  even
further  catastrophes  will  not  prevent,  the  successful  emergence
and  development  of  an  enterprise  which  has  become  a necessity
for  the  progress  and  perhaps  the  very  existence  of  the  race.  Two
stupendous  and  world-devastating  wars  have  swept  over  the
globe  and  have  been  accompanied  or  followed  by  revolutions
with  far-reaching  consequences  which  have  altered  the  political
map  of  the  earth  and  the  international  balance,  the  once  fairly
stable  equilibrium  of  five  continents,  and  changed  the  whole
future.  A third  still  more  disastrous  war  with  a prospect  of  the
use  of  weapons  and  other  scientific  means  of  destruction  far  more
fatal  and  of  wider  reach  than  any  ever  yet  invented,  weapons
whose  far-spread  use  might  bring  down  civilisation  with  a crash
and  whose  effects  might  tend  towards  something  like  extermina-
tion on  a large  scale,  looms  in  prospect;  the  constant  apprehen-
sion of  it  weighs  upon  the  mind  of  the  nations  and  stimulates
them  towards  further  preparations  for  war  and  creates  an  atmos-
phere of  prolonged  antagonism,  if  not  yet  of  conflict,  extending
to  what  is  called  “cold  war”  even  in  times  of  peace.  But  the  two
wars  that  have  come  and  gone  have  not  prevented  the  formation
of  the  first  and  second  considerable  efforts  towards  the  begin-
ning of  an  attempt  at  union  and  the  practical  formation  of  a con-
crete body,  an  organised  instrument  with  that  object : rather  they
have  caused  and  hastened  this  new  creation.  The  League  of
Nations  came  into  being  as  a direct  consequence  of  the  first  war,
the  U.N.O.  similarly  as  a consequence  of  the  second  world-wide
conflict.  If  the  third  war  which  is  regarded  by  many  if  not  by
most  as  inevitable  does  come,  it  is  likely  to  precipitate  as
inevitably  a further  step  and  perhaps  the  final  outcome  of  this
great  world-endeavour.  Nature  uses  such  means,  apparently
opposed  and  dangerous  to  her  intended  purpose,  to  bring  about
the  fruition  of  that  purpose.  As  in  the  practice  of  the  spiritual
science  and  art  of  Yoga  one  has  to  raise  up  the  psychological
possibilities  which  are  there  in  the  nature  and  stand  in  the  \va)
of  its  spiritual  perfection  and  fulfilment  so  as  to  eliminate  them,
even,  it  may  be,  the  sleeping  possibilities  which  might  arise  in


558


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity


future  to  break  the  work  that  has  been  done,  so  too  Nature  acts
with  the  world-forces  that  meet  her  on  her  way,  not  only  calling
up  those  which  will  assist  her  but  raising  too,  so  as  to  finish  with
them,  those  that  she  knows  to  be  the  normal  or  even  the
unavoidable  obstacles  which  cannot  but  start  up  to  impede  her
secret  will.  This  one  has  often  seen  in  the  history  of  mankind;
one  sees  it  exampled  today  with  an  enormous  force  commen-
surable with  the  magnitude  of  the  thing  that  has  to  be  done.
But  always  these  resistances  turn  out  to  have  assisted  by  the
resistance  much  more  than  they  have  impeded  the  intention
of  the  great  Creatrix  and  her  Mover.

We  may  then  look  with  a legitimate  optimism  on  what
has  been  hitherto  achieved  and  on  the  prospects  of  further
achievement  in  the  future.  This  optimism  need  not  and  should
not  blind  us  to  undesirable  features,  perilous  tendencies  and  the
possibilities  of  serious  interruptions  in  the  work  and  even
disorders  in  the  human  world  that  might  possibly  subvert  the
work  done.  As  regards  the  actual  conditions  of  the  moment  it
may  even  be  admitted  that  most  men  nowadays  look  with  dissatis-
faction on  the  defects  of  the  United  Nations  Organisation  and
its  blunders  and  the  malignancies  that  endanger  its  existence
and  many  feel  a growing  pessimism  and  regard  with  doubt  the
possibility  of  its  final  success.  This  pessimism  it  is  unnecessary
and  unwise  to  share;  for  such  a psychology  tends  to  bring  about,
to  make  possible  the  results  which  it  predicts  but  which  need
not  at  all  ensue.  At  the  same  time,  we  must  not  ignore  the  danger.
The  leaders  of  the  nations,  who  have  the  will  to  succeed  and  who
will  be  held  responsible  by  posterity  for  any  avoidable  failure,
must  be  on  guard  against  unwise  policies  or  fatal  errors ; the  defi-
ciencies that  exist  in  the  organisation  or  its  constitution  have  to
be  quickly  remedied  or  slowly  and  cautiously  eliminated;  if
there  are  obstinate  oppositions  to  necessary  change,  they  have
somehow  to  be  overcome  or  circumvented  without  breaking  the
institution;  progress  towards  its  perfection,  even  if  it  cannot
be  easily  or  swiftly  made,  must  yet  be  undertaken  and  the  frustra-
tion of  the  world’s  hope  prevented  at  any  cost.  There  is  no  other
way  for  mankind  than  this,  unless  indeed  a greater  way  is  laid
open  to  it  by  the  Power  that  guides  through  some  delivering  turn


A Postscript  Chapter


559


or  change  in  human  will  or  human  nature  or  some  sudden  evolu-
tionary progress,  a not  easily  foreseeable  leap,  saltus,  which  will
make  another  and  greater  solution  of  our  human  destiny  feasible.

In  the  first  idea  and  form  of  a beginning  of  world-union
which  took  the  shape  of  the  League  of  Nations,  although  there
were  errors  in  the  structure  such  as  the  insistence  on  unanimity
which  tended  to  sterilise,  to  limit  or  to  obstruct  the  practical
action  and  effectuality  of  the  League,  the  main  defect  was
inherent  in  its  conception  and  in  its  general  build,  and  that  again
arose  naturally  and  as  a direct  consequence  from  the  condition
of  the  world  at  that  time.  The  League  of  Nations  was  in  fact  an
oligarchy  of  big  Powers  each  drawing  behind  it  a retinue  of
small  States  and  using  the  general  body  so  far  as  possible  for  the
furtherance  of  its  own  policy  much  more  than  for  the  general
interest  and  the  good  of  the  world  at  large.  This  character  came
out  most  in  the  political  sphere,  and  the  manoeuvres  and  dis-
cords, accommodations  and  compromises  inevitable  in  this  con-
dition of  things  did  not  help  to  make  the  action  of  the  League
beneficial  or  effective  as  it  purposed  or  set  out  to  be.  The  absence
of  America  and  the  position  of  Russia  had  helped  to  make  the
final  ill-success  of  this  first  venture  a natural  consequence,  if
not  indeed  unavoidable.  In  the  constitution  of  the  U.N.O.  an
attempt  was  made,  in  principle  at  least,  to  escape  from  these
errors;  but  the  attempt  was  not  thorough-going  and  not  alto-
gether successful.  A strong  surviving  element  of  oligarchy  re-
mained in  the  preponderant  place  assigned  to  the  five  great
Powers  in  the  Security  Council  and  was  clinched  by  the  device  of
the  veto ; these  were  concessions  to  a sense  of  realism  and  the
necessity  of  recognising  the  actual  condition  of  things  and  the
results  of  the  second  great  war  and  could  not  perhaps  have  been
avoided,  but  they  have  done  more  to  create  trouble,  hamper  t e
action  and  diminish  the  success  of  the  new  institution  than  any-
thing else  in  its  make-up  or  the  way  of  action  forced  upon  it  y
the  world  situation  or  the  difficulties  of  a combine  wor  'ing
inherent  in  its  very  structure.  A too  hasty  or  radical  en  eavour
to  get  rid  of  these  defects  might  lead  to  a crash  of  t e \\  o e
edifice;  to  leave  them  unmodified  prolongs  a malaise,  an  ^
of  harmony  and  smooth  working  and  a consequent  iscre  i


560


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity


a sense  of  limited  and  abortive  action,  cause  of  the  widespread
feeling  of  futility  and  the  regard  of  doubt  the  world  at  large  has
begun  to  cast  on  this  great  and  necessary  institution  which  was
founded  with  such  high  hopes  and  without  which  world  condi-
tions would  be  infinitely  worse  and  more  dangerous,  even  perhaps
irremediable.  A third  attempt,  the  substitution  of  a differently
constituted  body,  could  only  come  if  this  institution  collapsed
as  the  result  of  a new  catastrophe:  if  certain  dubious  portents
fulfil  their  menace,  it  might  emerge  into  being  and  might  even
this  time  be  more  successful  because  of  an  increased  and  a more
general  determination  not  to  allow  such  a calamity  to  occur
again;  but  it  would  be  after  a third  cataclysmal  struggle  which
might  shake  to  its  foundations  the  international  structure  now
holding  together  after  two  upheavals  with  so  much  ditficulty  and
unease.  Yet,  even  in  such  a contingency,  the  intention  in  the
working  of  Nature  is  likely  to  overcome  the  obstacles  she  has
herself  raised  up  and  they  may  be  got  rid  of  once  and  for  all.
But  for  that  it  will  be  necessary  to  build,  eventually  at  least,  a
true  World-State  without  exclusions  and  on  a principle  of
equality  into  which  considerations  of  size  and  strength  will  not
enter.  These  may  be  left  to  exercise  whatever  influence  is  natural
to  them  in  a well-ordered  harmony  of  the  world’s  peoples  safe-
guarded by  the  law  of  a new  international  order.  A sure  justice,
a fundamental  equality  and  combination  of  rights  and  interests
must  be  the  law  of  this  World-State  and  the  basis  of  its  entire
edifice.

The  real  danger  at  the  present  second  stage,  of  the  progress
towards  unity  lies  no.t  in  any  faults,  however  serious,  in  the
building  of  the  United  Nations  Assembly  but  in  the  division  of
the  peoples  into  two  camps  which  tend  to  be  natural  opponents
and  might  at  any  moment  become  declared  enemies  irreconcilable
and  even  their  common  existence  incompatible.  This  is  because
the  so-called  Communism  of  Bolshevist  Russia  came  to  birth
as  the  result,  not  of  a rapid  evolution,  but  of  an  unprecedentedly
fierce  and  prolonged  revolution  sanguinary  in  the  extreme  and
created  an  autocratic  and  intolerant  State  system  founded  upon
a war  of  classes  in  which  all  others  except  the  proletariat  were
crushed  out  of  existence,  “liquidated,”  upon  a “dictatorship  of


A Postscript  Chapter


561


the  proletariat”  or  rather  of  a narrow  but  all-powerful  party
system  acting  in  its  name,  a Police  State,  and  a mortal  struggle
with  the  outside  world:  the  fierceness  of  this  struggle  generated
in  the  minds  of  the  organisers  of  the  new  State  a fixed  idea  of
the  necessity  not  only  of  survival  but  of  continued  struggle  and
the  spread  of  its  domination  until  the  new.  order  had  destroyed
the  old  or  evicted  it,  if  not  from  the  whole  earth,  yet  from  the
greater  part  of  it  and  the  imposition  of  a new  political  and  social
gospel  or  its  general  acceptance  by  the  world’s  peoples.  But
this  condition  of  things  might  change,  lose  its  acrimony  and  full
consequence,  as  it  has  done  to  some  degree,  with  the  arrival  of


security  and  the  cessation  of  the  first  ferocity,  bitterness  and  exas-
peration of  the  conflict;  the  most  intolerant  and  oppressive  ele-
ments of  the  new  order  might  have  been  moderated  and  the  sense
of  incompatibility  or  inability  to  live  together  or  side  by  side
would  then  have  disappeared  and  a more  secure  modus  vivendi
been  made  possible.  If  much  of  the  unease,  the  sense  of  inevit-
able struggle,  the  difficulty  of  mutual  toleration  and  economic
accommodation  still  exists,  it  is  rather  because  the  idea  of  using
the  ideological  struggle  as  a means  for  world  domination  is  there
and  keeps  the  nations  in  a position  of  mutual  apprehension  and
preparation  for  armed  defence  and  attack  than  because  the
coexistence  of  the  two  ideologies  is  impossible.  If  this  element  is
eliminated,  a world  in  which  these  two  ideologies  could  live
together,  arrive  at  an  economic  interchange,  draw  closer  toge
ther,  need  not  be  at  all  out  of  the  question;  for  the
moving  towards  a greater  development  of  the  principle  o tate
control  over  the  life  of  the  community,  and  a congeries  o socia
listic  States  on  the  one  hand,  and  on  the  other,  of  t^es  co
ordinating  and  controlling  a modified  Capitalism  migh  we
come  to  exist  side  by  side  and  develop  friendly  .

each  other.  Even  a World-State  in  which  both
own  institutions  and  sit  in  a common  assembly  mig  t
being  and  a single  world-union  on  this  foundation  wou  ”
impossible.  This  development  is  indeed  the  fina  ou
the  foundation  of  the  U.N.O.  presupposes,  or  t e pr
ganisation  cannot  be  itself  final,  it  is  only  an  ^ larpcr
ning  useful  and  necessary  as  a primary  nuc  eus  o


562


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

institution  in  which  all  the  peoples  of  the  earth  can  meet  each
other  in  a single  international  unity:  the  creation  of  a World-
State  is,  in  a movement  of  this  kind,  the  one  logical  and  inevit-
able ultimate  outcome.

This  view  of  the  future  may  under  present  circumstances
be  stigmatised  as  a too  facile  optimism,  but  this  turn  of  things
is  quite  as  possible  as  the  more  disastrous  turn  expected  by  the
pessimists,  since  the  cataclysm  and  crash  of  civilisation  some-
times predicted  by  them  need  not  at  all  be  the  result  of  a new  war.
Mankind  has  a habit  of  surviving  the  worst  catastrophes  created
by  its  own  errors  or  by  the  violent  turns  of  Nature  and  it  must  be
so  if  there  is  any  meaning  in  its  existence,  if  its  long  history  and
continuous  survival  is  not  the  accident  of  a fortuitously  self-
organising  Chance,  which  it  must  be  in  a purely  materialistic
view  of  the  nature  of  the  world.  If  man  is  intended  to  survive
and  carry  forward  the  evolution  of  which  he  is  at  present  the
head  and,  to  some  extent,  a half-conscious  leader  of  its  march,
he  must  come  out  of  his  present  chaotic  international  life  and
arrive  at  a beginning  of  organised  united  action;  some  kind  of
World-State,  unitary  or  federal,  or  a confederacy  or  a coalition
he  must  arrive  at  in  the  end;  no  smaller  or  looser  expedient
would  adequately  serve  the  purpose.  In  that  case,  the  general
thesis  advanced  in  this  book  would  stand  justified  and  we  can
foreshadow  with  some  confidence  the  main  line  of  advance  which
the  course  of  events  is  likely  to  take,  at  least  the  main  trend  of
the  future  history  of  the  human  peoples.

The  question  now  put  by  evolving  Nature  to  mankind  is
whether  its  existing  international  system,  if  system  it  can  be  called,
a sort  of  provisional  order  maintained  with  constant  evolutionary
or  revolutionary  changes,  cannot  be  replaced  by  a willed  and
thought-out  fixed  arrangement,  a true  system,  eventually  a real
unity  serving  all  the  common  interests  of  the  earth’s  peoples.  An
original  welter  and  chaos  with  its  jumble  of  forces  forming,
wherever  it  could,  larger  or  smaller  masses  of  civilisation  and
order  which  were  in  danger  of  crumbling  or  being  shaken  to
pieces  by  attacks  from  the  outer  chaos  was  the  first  attempt  at
cosmos  successfully  arrived  at  by  the  genius  of  humanity.  This
was  finally  replaced  by  something  like  an  international  system


563


A Postscript  Chapter

with  the  elements  of  what  could  be  called  international  law  or
fixed  habits  of  intercommunication  and  interchange  which
allowed  the  nations  to  live  together  in  spite  of  antagonisms  and
conflicts,  a security  alternating  with  precariousness  and  peril  and
permitting  of  too  many  ugly  features,  however  local,  of  oppres-
sion, bloodshed,  revolt  and  disorder,  not  to  speak  of  wars  which
sometimes  devastated  large  areas  of  the  globe.  The  indwelling
deity  who  presides  over  the  destiny  of  the  race  has  raised  in  man’s
mind  and  heart  the  idea,  the  hope  of  a new  order  which  will
replace  the  old  unsatisfactory  order,  and  substitute  for  it  condi-
tions of  the  world’s  life  which  will  in  the  end  have  a reasonable
chance  of  establishing  permanent  peace  and  well-being.  This
would  for  the  first  time  turn  into  an  assured  fact  the  ideal  of  hu-
man unity  which,  cheris'hed  by  a few,  seemed  for  so  long  a noble
chimera;  then  might  be  created  a firm  ground  of  peace  and
harmony  and  even  a free  room  for  the  realisation  of  the  highest
human  dreams,  for  the  perfectibility  of  the  race,  a perfect  society,
a higher  upward  evolution  of  the  human  soul  and  human  nature.
It  is  for  the  men  of  our  day  and,  at  the  most,  of  tomorrow  to  give
the  answer.  For,  too  long  a postponement  or  too  continued  a
failure  will  open  the  way  to  a series  of  increasing  catastrophes
which  might  create  a too  prolonged  and  disastrous  confusion  and
chaos  and  render  a solution  too  difficult  or  impossible;  it  might
even  end  in  something  like  an  irremediable  crash  not  only  of  the
present  world-civilisation  but  of  all  civilisation.  A new,  a
difficult  and  uncertain  beginning  might  have  to  be  made  in  the
midst  of  the  chaos  and  ruin  after  perhaps  an  extermination  on  a
large  scale,  and  a more  successful  creation  could  be  predicted
only  if  a way  was  found  to  develop  a better  humanity  or  perhaps

a greater,  a superhuman  race.

The  central  question  is  whether  the  nation,  the  largest
natural  unit  which  humanity  has  been  able  to  create  and  maintain
for  its  collective  living,  is  also  its  last  and  ultimate  unit  or  whether
a greater  aggregate  can  be  formed  which  will  englobe  many  and
even  most  nations  and  finally  all  in  its  united  totality.  The  im-
pulse to  build  more  largely,  the  push  towards  the  creation  o
considerable  and  even  very  vast  supranational  aggregates  as
not  been  wanting;  it  has  even  been  a permanent  feature  in  the


564


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity


life-instincts  of  the  race.  But  the  form  it  took  was  the  desire  of  a
strong  nation  for  mastery  over  others,  permanent  possession  of
their  territories,  subjugation  of  their  peoples,  exploitation  of
their  resources : there  was  also  an  attempt  at  quasi-assimilation,
an  imposition  of  the  culture  of  a dominant  race  and,  in  general,
a system  of  absorption  wholesale  or  as  complete  as  possible.  The
Roman  Empire  was  the  classic  example  of  this  kind  of  endeavour
and  the  Graeco-Roman  unity  of  a single  way  of  life  and  culture
in  a vast  framework  of  political  and  administrative  unity  was  the
nearest  approach  within  the  geographical  limits  reached  by  this
civilisation  to  something  one  might  regard  as  a first  figure  or  an
incomplete  suggestion  of  a figure  of  human  unity.  Other  similar
attempts  have  been  made  though  not  on  so"  large  a scale  and  with
a less  consummate  ability  throughout  the  course  of  history,  but
nothing  has  endured  for  more  than  a small  number  of  centuries.
The  method  used  was  fundamentally  unsound  inasmuch  as  it
contradicted  other  life-instincts  which  were  necessary  to  the
vitality  and  healthy  evolution  of  mankind  and  the  denial  of  which
must  end  in  some  kind  of  stagnation  and  arrested  progress.  The
imperial  aggregate  could  not  acquire  the  unconquerable  vitality
and  power  of  survival  of  the  nation-unit.  The  only  enduring
empire-units  have  been  in  reality  large  nation-units  which  took
that  name  like  Germany  and  China  and  these  were  not  forms  of
the  supranational  State  and  need  not  be  reckoned  in  the  history
of  the  formation  of  the  imperial  aggregate.  So,  although  the  ten-
dency to  the  creation  of  empire  testifies  to  an  urge  in  Nature
towards  larger  unities  of  human  life,  — and  we  can  see  concealed
in  it  a will  to  unite  the  disparate  masses  of  humanity  on  a larger
scale  into  a single  coalescing  or  combined  life-unit,  — it  must  be
regarded  as  an  unsuccessful  formation  without  a sequel  and  un-
serviceable for  any  further  progress  in  this  direction.  In  actual
fact  a new  attempt  of  world-wide  domination  could  succeed  only
by  a new  instrumentation  or  under  novel  circumstances  in  en-
globing  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  or  persuading  or  forcing
them  into  some  kind  of  union.  An  ideology,  a successful  combi-
nation of  peoples  with  one  aim  and  a powerful  head  like  Com-
munist Russia,  might  have  a temporary  success  in  bringing  about
such  an  objective.  But  such  an  outcome,  not  very  desirable  in


A Postscript  Chapter


565


itself,  would  not  be  likely  to  ensure  the  creation  of  an  enduring
World-State.  There  would  be  tendencies,  resistances,  urges
towards  other  developments  which  would  sooner  or  later  bring
about  its  collapse  or  some  revolutionary  change  which  would
mean  its  disappearance.  Finally,  any  such  stage  would  have  to
be  overpassed;  only  the  formation  of  a true  World-State,  either
of  a unitary  but  still  elastic  kind,  — for  a rigidly  unitary  State
might  bring  about  stagnation  and  decay  of  the  springs  of  life,  —
or  a union  of  free  peoples  could  open  the  prospect  of  a sound  and
lasting  world-order.

It  is  not  necessary  to  repeat  or  review,  except  in  certain  di-
rections, the  considerations  and  conclusions  set  forward  in  this
book  with  regard  to  the  means  and  methods  or  the  lines  of  di-
vergence or  successive  development  which  the  actual  realisation
of  human  unity  may  take.  But  still  on  some  sides  possibilities
have  arisen  which  call  for  some  modification  of  what  has  been
written  or  the  conclusions  arrived  at  in  these  chapters.  It  had
been  concluded,  for  instance,  that  there  was  no  likelihood  of  the
conquest  and  unification  of  the  world  by  a single  dominant
people  or  empire.  This  is  no  longer  altogether  so  certain,  for  we
have  just  had  to  admit  the  possibility  of  such  an  attempt  under
certain  circumstances.  A dominant  Power  may  be  able  to  group
round  itself  strong  allies  subordinated  to  it  but  still  considerable
in  strength  and  resources  and  throw  them  into  a world  struggle
with  other  Powers  and  peoples.  This  possibility  would  be  in-
creased if  the  dominating  Power  managed  to  procure,  even  i
only  for  the  time  being,  a monopoly  of  an  overwhelming  supe
riority  in  the  use  of  some  of  the  tremendous  means  of  aggre^ive
military  action  which  Science  has  set  out  to  discover  and  e ec
tively  utilise.  The  terror  of  destruction  and  even  of  large-scale
extermination  created  by  these  ominous  discoveries  rnay  ring
about  a will  in  the  governments  and  peoples  to  ban  an  preven
the  military  use  of  these  inventions,  but,  so  long  as  t le  nature  o
mankind  has  not  changed,  this  prevention  must  remain  unccr  ain
and  precarious  and  an  unscrupulous  ambition  may  even  ge  y i
a chance  of  secrecy  and  surprise  and  the  utilisation  o a ecisiv^e
moment  which  might  conceivably  give  it  victory  J
risk  the  tremendous  chance.  It  may  be  argued  that  t ic  ns  or


566


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity


the  last  war  runs  counter  to  this  possibility,  for  in  conditions  not
quite  realising  but  approximating  to  such  a combination  of  cir-
cumstances the  aggressive  Powers  failed  in  their  attempt  and  un-
derwent the  disastrous  consequences  of  a terrible  defeat.  But
after  all,  they  came  for  a time  within  a hair’s  breadth  of  success
and  there  might  not  be  the  same  good  fortune  for  the  world  in
some  later  and  more  sagaciously  conducted  and  organised  ad-
venture. At  least,  the  possibility  has  to  be  noted  and  guarded
against  by  those  who  have  the  power  of  prevention  and  the
welfare  of  the  race  in  their  charge.

One  of  the  possibilities  suggested  at  the  time  was  the  growth
of  continental  agglomerates,  a united  Europe,  some  kind  of  a
combine  of  the  peoples  of  the  American  continent  under  the
leadership  of  the  United  States,  even  possibly  in  the  resurgence  of
Asia  and  its  drive  towards  independence  from  the  dominance  of
the  European  peoples  a drawing  together  for  self-defensive  com-
bination of  the  nations  of  this  continent;  such  an  eventuality  of
large  continental  combinations  might  even  be  a stage  in  the  final
formation  of  a world-union.  This  possibility  has  tended  to  take
shape  to  a certain  extent  with  a celerity  that  could  not  then  be
anticipated.  In  the  two  American  continents  it  has  actually  as-
sumed a predominating  and  practical  form,  though  not  in  its
totality.  The  idea  of  a United  States  of  Europe  has  also  actually
taken  shape  and  is  assuming  a formal  existence,  but  is  not  yet
able  to  develop  into  a completed  and  fully  realised  possibility
because  of  the  antagonism  based  on  conflicting  ideologies  which
cuts  olf  from  each  other  Russia  and  her  satellites  behind  their  iron
curtain  and  Western  Europe.  This  separation  has  gone  so  far
that  it  is  difficult  to  envisage  its  cessation  at  any  foreseeable  time
in  a predictable  future.  Under  other  circumstances  a tendency
towards  such  combinations  might  have  created  the  apprehension
of  huge  continental  clashes  such  as  the  collision,  at  one  time
imagined  as  possible,  between  a resurgent  Asia  and  the  Occi-
dent. The  acceptance  by  Europe  and  America  of  the  Asiatic  re-
surgence and  the  eventual  total  liberation  of  the  Oriental  peoples,
as  also  the  downfall  of  Japan  which  figured  at  one  time  and  in-
deed actually  presented  itself  to  the  world  as  the  liberator  and
leader  of  a free  Asia  against  the  domination  of  the  West,  have


A Postscript  Chapter


567


removed  this  dangerous  possibility.  Here  again,  as  elsewhere,
the  actual  danger  presents  itself  rather  as  a clash  between  two
opposing  ideologies,  one  led  by  Russia  and  Red  China  and
trying  to  impose  the  Communistic  extreme  partly  by  military
and  partly  by  forceful  political  means  on  a reluctant  or  at  least
an  infected  but  not  altogether  willing  Asia  and  Europe,  and  on
the  other  side  a combination  of  peoples,  partly  capitalist,
partly  moderate  socialist  who  still  cling  with  some  attachment
to  the  idea  of  liberty,  — to  freedom  of  thought  and  some  remnant
of  the  free  life  of  the  individual.  In  America  there  seems  to  be  a
push,  especially  in  the  Latin  peoples,  towards  a rather  intolerant
completeness  of  the  Americanisation  of  the  whole  continent  and
the  adjacent  islands,  a sort  of  extended  Monroe  Doctrine,  which
might  create  friction  with  the  European  Powers  still  holding
possessions  in  the  northern  part  of  the  continent.  But  this  could
only  generate  minor  difficulties  and  disagreements  and  not  the
possibility  of  any  serious  collision,  a case  perhaps  for  arbitration
or  arrangement  by  the  U.N.O.,  not  any  more  serious  conse-
quence. In  Asia  a more  perilous  situation  has  arisen,  standing
sharply  across  the  way  to  any  possibility  of  a continental  unity
of  the  peoples  of  this  part  of  the  world,  in  the  emergence  of
Communist  China.  This  creates  a gigantic  bloc  which  could
easily  englobe  the  whole  of  Northern  Asia  in  a combination
between  two  enormous  Communist  Powers,  Russia  and  China,
and  would  overshadow  with  a threat  of  absorption  South-
Western  Asia  and  Tibet  and  might  be  pushed  to  overrun  all  up
to  the  whole  frontier  of  India,  menacing  her  security  and  that  of
Western  Asia  with  the  possibility  of  an  invasion  and  an  over-
running and  subjection  by*  penetration  or  even  by  overwhelming
military  force  to  an  unwanted  ideology,  political  and  social  insti
tutions  and  dominance  of  this  militant  mass  of  Conununism
whose  push  might  easily  prove  irresistible.  In  any  ®

continent  would  be  divided  between  two  huge  blocs  which  might
enter  into  active  mutual  opposition  and  the  possibility  o a stu
pendous  world-conflict  would  arise  dwarfing  anything  previous  y
experienced:  the  possibility  of  any  world-union  might  even  with-
out any  actual  outbreak  of  hostilities  be  indefinite  y postpone
by  the  incompatibility  of  interests  and  ideologies  on  a sc<.  e


568


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

which  would  render  their  inclusion  in  a single  body  hardly  reali-
sable. The  possibility  of  a coming  into  being  of  three  or  four
continental  unions,  which  might  subsequently  coalesce  into  a
single  unity,  would  then  be  very  remote  and,  except  after  a world-
shaking struggle,  hardly  feasible.

At  one  time  it  was  possible  to  regard  as  an  eventual  possi-
bility the  extension  of  Socialism  to  all  the  nations;  an  inter-
national unity  could  then  have  been  created  by  its  innate  tenden-
cies which  turned  naturally  towards  an  overcoming  of  the  di-
viding force  of  the  nation-idea  with  its  separatism  and  its  turn
towards  competitions  and  rivalries  often  culminating  in  open
strife;  this  could  have  been  regarded  as  the  natural  road  and
could  have  turned  in  fact  into  the  eventual  way  towards  world-
union.  But,  in  the  first  place.  Socialism  has  under  certain  stresses
proved  to  be  by  no  means  immune  against  infection  by  the  divi-
ding national  spirit  and  its  international  tendency  might  not  sur-
vive its  coming  into  power  in  separate  national  States  and  a re-
sulting inheritance  of  competing  national  interests  and  necessi-
ties: the  old  spirit  might  very  well  survive  in  the  new  socialist
bodies.  But  also  there  might  not  be  or  not  for  a long  time  to
come  an  inevitable  tide  of  the  spread  of  Socialism  to  all  the
peoples  of  the  earth:  other  forces  mi^t  arise  which  would  dispute
what  seemed  at  one  time  and  perhaps  still  seems  the  most  likely
outcome  of  existing  world  tendencies;  the  conflict  between  Com-
munism and  the  less  extreme  socialistic  idea  which  still  respects
the  principle  of  liberty,  even  though  a restricted  liberty,  and  the
freedom  of  conscience,  of  thought,  of  personality  of  the  indi-
vidual, if  this  difference  perpetuated  itself,  might  create  a serious
difficulty  in  the  formation  of  a World-State.  It  would  not  be  easy
to  build  a constitution,  a harmonised  State-law  and  practice  in
which  any  modicum  of  genuine  freedom  for  the  individual  or  any
continued  existence  of  him  except  as  a cell  in  the  working  of  a
rigidly  determined  automatism  of  the  body  of  the  collectivist
State  or  a part  of  a machine  would  be  possible  or  conceivable.
It  is  not  that  the  principle  of  Communism  necessitates  any  such
results  or  that  its  system  must  lead  to  a termite  civilisation  or  the
suppression  of  the  individual;  it  could  well  be,  on  the  contrary,
a means  at  once  of  the  fulfilment  of  the  individual  and  the


A Postscript  Chapter


569


perfect  harmony  of  a collective  being.  The  already  developed
systems  which  go  by  the  name  are  not  really  Communism  but
constructions  of  an  inordinately  rigid  State  Socialism.  But  So-
cialism itself  might  well  develop  away  from  the  Marxist  groove
and  evolve  less  rigid  modes;  a co-operative  Socialism,  for  in-
stance; without  any  bureaucratic  rigour  of  a coercive  adminis-
tration, of  a Police  State,  might  one  day  come  into  existence,  but
the  generalisation  of  Socialism  throughout  the  world  is  not  under
existing  circumstances  easily  foreseeable,  hardly  even  a predo-
minant possibility:  in  spite  of  certain  possibilities  or  tendencies
created  by  recent  events  in  the  Far  East,  a division  of  the  earth
between  the  two  systems,  capitalistic  and  socialistic,  seems  for
the  present  a more  likely  issue.  In  America  the  attachment  to
individualism  and  the  capitalistic  system  of  society  and  a strong
antagonism  not  only  to  Communism  but  to  even  a moderate
Socialism  remains  complete  and  one  can  foresee  little  possi-
bility of  any  abatement  in  its  intensity.  The  extreme  success  of
Communism  creeping  over  the  continents  of  the  Old  World,
which  we  have  had  to  envisage  as  a possibility,  is  yet,  if  we  con-
sider existing  circumstances  and  the  balance  of  opposing  Powers,
highly  improbable  and,  even  if  it  occurred,  some  accommoda-
tion would  still  be  necessary,  unless  one  of  the  two  forces  gained
an  overwhelming  eventual  victory  over  its  opponent.  A success-
ful accommodation  would  demand  the  creation  of  a body  in
which  all  questions  of  possible  dispute  could  be  solved  as  they
arose  without  any  breaking  out  of  open  conflict,  and  this  wou
be  a successor  of  the  League  of  Nations  and  the  U.N.O.  an
move  in  the  same  direction.  As  Russia  and  America,  in  spite  o
the  constant  opposition  of  policy  and  ideology,  have
far  any  step  that  would  make  the  preservation  of  the  U.  . . too
difficult  or  impossible,  this  third  body  would  be  preserve  y ic
same  necessity  or  imperative  utility  of  its  continue  existence.
The  same  forces  would  work  in  the  same  direction  an  a crea  ion
of  an  effective  world-union  would  still  be  possible,  in  le  en
the  mass  of  general  needs  of  the  race  and  its  nee  o se
preservation  could  well  be  relied  on  to  make  it  ine\i  a o.

There  is  nothing  then  in  the  development  ,

establishment  of  the  United -Nations  Organisation,  m the  q


570


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity


to  the  great  initiation  at  San  Francisco  of  the  decisive  step  to-
wards the  creation  of  a world-body  which  might  end  in  the  estab-
lishment of  a true  world-unity,  that  need  discourage  us  in  the
expectation  of  an  ultimate  success  of  this  great  enterprise.  There
are  dangers  and  difficulties,  there  can  be  an  apprehension  of  con-
flicts, even  of  colossal  conflicts  that  might  jeopardise  the  future,
but  total  failure  need  not  be  envisaged  unless  we  are  disposed  to
predict  the  failure  of  the  race.  The  thesis  we  have  undertaken  to
establish  of  the  drive  of  Nature  towards  larger  agglomerations
and  the  final  establishment  of  the  largest  of  all  and  the  ultimate
union  of  the  world’s  peoples  still  remains  unaltered:  this  is  evi-
dently the  line  which  the  future  of  the  human  race  demands  and
which  conflicts  and  perturbations,  however  immense,  may  delay,
even  as  they  may  modify  greatly  the  forms  it  now  promises  to
take,  but  are  not  likely  to  prevent;  for  a general  destruction
would  be  the  only  alternative  destiny  of  mankind.  But  such  a
destruction,  whatever  the  catastrophic  possibilities  balancing  the
almost  certain  beneficial  results,  hardly  limitable  in  their  extent,
of  the  recent  discoveries  and  inventions  of  Science,  has  every
chance  of  being  as  chimerical  as  any  early  expectation  of  final
peace  and  felicity  or  a perfected  society  of  the  human  peoples.
We  may  rely,  if  on  nothing  else,  on  the  evolutionary  urge  and,  if
on  no  other  greater  hidden  Power,  on  the  manifest  working  and
drift  or  intention  in  the  World-Energy  we  call  Nature  to  carry
mankind  at  least  as  far  as  the  necessary  next  step  to  be  taken,  a
self-preserving  next  step : for  the  necessity  is  there,  at  least  some
general  recognition  of  it  has  been  achieved  and  of  the  thing  to
which  it  must  eventually  lead  the  idea  has  been  born  and  the  body
of  it  is  already  calling  for  its  creation.  We  have  indicated  in  this
book  the  conditions,  possibilities,  forms  which  this  new  creation
may  take  and  those  which  seem  to  be  most  desirable  without
dogmatising  or  giving  prominence  to  personaT opinion;  an  im-
partial consideration  of  the  forces  that  work  and  the  results  that
are  likely  to  ensue  was  the  object  of  this  study.  The  rest  will
depend  on  the  intellectual  and  moral  capacity  of  humanity  to
carry  out  what  is  evidently  now  the  one  thing  needful.

We  conclude  then  that  in  the  conditions  of  the  world  at
present,  even  taking  into  consideration  its  most  disparaging


A Postscript  Chapter  571

features  and  dangerous  possibilities,  there  is  nothing  that  need
alter  the  view  we  have  taken  of  the  necessity  and  inevitability  of
some  kind  of  world-union;  the  drive  of  Nature,  the  compulsion
of  circumstances  and  the  present  and  future  need  of  mankind
make  it  inevitable.  The  general  conclusions  we  have  arrived  at
will  stand  and  the  consideration  of  the  modalities  and  possible
forms  or  lines  of  alternative  or  successive  development  it  may
take.  The  ultimate  result  must  be  the  formation  of  a World-State
and  the  most  desirable  form  of  it  would  be  a federation  of  free
nationalities  in  which  all  subjection  or  forced  inequality  and
subordination  of  one  to  another  would  have  disappeared  and,
though  some  might  preserve  a greater  natural  influence,  all  would
have  an  equal  status.  A confederacy  would  give  the  greatest
freedom  to  the  nations  constituting  the  World-State,  but  this
might  give  too  much  room  for  fissiparous  or  centrifugal  tenden-
cies to  operate;  a federal  order  would  then  be  the  most  desirable.
All  else  would  be  determined  by  the  course  of  events  and  by
general  agreement  or  the  shape  given  by  the  ideas  and  necessities
that  may  grow  up  in  the  future.  A world-union  of  this  kind
would  have  the  greatest  chances  of  long  survival  or  permanent
existence.  This  is  a mutable  world  and  uncertainties  and  dangers
might  assail  or  trouble  for  a time;  the  formed  structure  might  be
subjected  to  revolutionary  tendencies  as  new  ideas  and  forces
emerged  and  produced  their  effect  on  the  general  mind  of  huma-
nity, but  the  essential  step  would  have  been  taken  and  the  future
of  the  race  assured  or  at  least  the  present  era  overpassed  in
which  it  is  threatened  and  disturbed  by  unsolved  needs  and  diffi-
culties, precarious  conditions,  immense  upheavals,  huge  and  san-
guinary world-wide  conflicts  and  the  threat  of  others  to  come.
The  ideal  of  human  unity  would  be  no  longer  an  unfulfilled  ideal
but  an  accomplished  fact  and  its  preservation  given  into  the
charge  of  the  united  human  peoples.  Its  future  destiny  would  lie
on  the  knees  of  the  gods  and,  if  the  gods  have  a use  for  the  conti-
nued existence  of  the  race,  may  be  left  to  lie  there  safe.


The  End


WAR  AND  SELF-DETERMINATION


FOREWORD  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION


The  four  essays^  published  in  this  volume
were  not  written  at  one  time  or  conceived  with  any  intentional
connection  between  them  in  idea  or  purpose.  The  first  was
written  in  the  early  months  of  the  war,  two  others  when  it  was
closing,  the  last  recently  during  the  formation  and  first  opera-
tions of  that  remarkably  ill-jointed,  stumbling  and  hesitating
machine,  the  League  of  Nations.  But  still  they  happen  to  be
bound  together  by  a common  idea  or  at  least  look  at  four  related
subjects  from  a single  general  standpoint,  — the  obvious  but
practically  quite  forgotten  truth  that  the  destiny  of  the  race  in
this  age  of  crisis  and  revolution  will  depend  much  more  on  the
spirit  which  we  are  than  on  the  machinery  we  shall  use.  A few
words  on  the  present  bearing  of  this  truth  by  way  of  foreword
may  not  be  out  of  place.

The  whole  difficulty  of  the  present  situation  turns  upon  the
peculiar  and  critical  character  of  the  age  in  which  we  are  living.
It  is  a period  of  immense  and  rapid  changes  so  swift  that  few  of
us  who  live  among  them  can  hope  to  seize  their  whole  burden
or  their  inmost  meaning  or  to  form  any  safe  estimate  of  their
probable  outcome.  Great  hopes  are  abroad,  higli  and  large
ideals  fill  the  view,  enormous  forces  are  in  the  field.  It  is  one  of
those  vast  critical  moments  in  the  life  of  the  race  when  ^
pressing  towards  change  and  reconstitution.  Die  ideals  of  t e
future,  especially  the  ideals  of  freedom,  equality,  commonalty,
unity,  are  demanding  to  be  brought  out  from  their  limite  e
in  the  spiritual  life  or  the  idealism  of  the  few  and  to  be
beginning  of  a true  soul  of  action  and  bodily  shape  in  t e i e o
the  race.  But  banded  against  any  such  fulfilment  there  are  power
ful  obstacles,  and  the  greatest  of  them  come  not  fro^i  outsi  c
but  from  within.  For  they  are  the  old  continued  impulsions  an
obstinate  recalcitrance  of  mankind’s  past  nature,  t e ^
total  subjection  of  its  normal  mind  to  egoistic,  vita  an  ma  en
interests  and  ambitions  which  make  not  for  union  ut  or  s ri

» A fifth  one  "After  the  War”  has  been  added  in  this  edition.


576


Foreword


and  discord,  the  plausibilities  of  the  practical  reason  which  looks
at  the  possibilities  of  the  day  and  the  morrow  and  shuts  its  eyes
to  the  consequences  of  the  day  after,  the  habits  of  pretence  and
fiction  which  impel  men  and  nations  to  pursue  and  forward  their
own  interest  under  the  camouflage  of  a specious  idealism,  a habit
made  up  only  partly  of  the  diplomatic  hypocrisy  of  politicians,
but  much  more  of  a general  half-voluntary  self-deception,  and,
finally,  the  inrush  of  blinder  unsatisfied  forces  and  crude  imper-
fect idealisms  — of  such  is  the  creed  of  Bolshevism  — to  take
advantage  of  the  unrest  and  dissatisfaction  prevalent  in  such
times  and  lay  hold  for  a while  on  the  life  of  mankind.  It  is  these
things  which  we  see  dominant  around  us  and  not  in  the  least
degree  any  effort  to  be  of  the  right  spirit  and  evolve  from  it  the
right  method.  The  one  way  out  harped  on  by  the  modern  mind
which  has  been  as  much  blinded  as  enlightened  by  the  victories
of  physical  science,  is  the  approved  western  device  of  salvation
by  machinery;  get  the  right  kind  of  machine  to  work  and  every-
thing can  be  done,  this  seems  to  be  the  modern  creed.  But  the
destinies  of  mankind  cannot  be  turned  out  to  order  in  an  Ameri-
can factory.  It  is  a subtler  thing  than  that  which  is  now  putting
its  momentous  problem  before  us,  and  if  the  spirit  of  the  things
we  profess  is  absent  or  falsified,  no  method  or  machinery  can  turn
them  out  for  us  or  deliver  the  promised  goods.  That  is  the  one
truth  which  the  scientific  and  industrialised  modern  mind  for-
gets always,  because  it  looks  at  process  and  commodity  and
production  and  ignores  the  spirit  in  man  and  the  deeper  inner
law  of  his  being.

The  elimination  of  war  is  one  of  the  cherished  ideals  and
expectations  of  the  age.  But  what  lies  at  the  root  of  this  desire  ?
A greater  unity  of  heart,  sympathy,  understanding  between  men
and  nations,  a settled  will  to  get  rid  of  national  hatreds,  greeds,
ambitions,  all  the  fertile  seeds  of  strife  and  war  ? If  so,  it  is  well
with  us  and  success  will  surely  crown  our  efforts.  But  of  this
deeper  thing  there  may  be  something  in  sentiment,  but  there  is
still  very  little  in  action  and  dominant  motive.  For  the  masses
of  men  the  idea  is  rather  to  labour  and  produce  and  amass
at  ease  and  in  security  without  the  disturbance  of  war;  for  the
statesmen  and  governing  classes  the  idea  is  to  have  peace  and


Foreword


577


security  for  the  maintenance  of  past  acquisitions  and  an  un-
troubled domination  and  exploitation  of  the  world  by  the  great
highly  organised  imperial  and  industrial  nations  without  the  per-
turbing appearance  of  new  unsatisfied  hungers  and  the  peril  of
violent  unrests,  revolts,  revolutions.  War,  it  was  hoped  at  one
time,  would  eliminate  itself  by  becoming  impossible,  but  that
delightfully  easy  solution  no  longer  commands  credit.  But  now
it  is  hoped  to  conjure  or  engineer  it  out  of  existence  by  the  machi-
nery of  a league  of  victorious  nations  admitting  the  rest,  some
if  they  will,  others  whether  they  like  it  or  not,  as  subordinate
partners  or  as  proteges.  In  the  magic  of  this  just  and  beautiful
arrangement  the  intelligence  and  goodwill  of  closeted  statesmen
and  governments  supported  by  the  intelligence  and  goodwill  of
the  peoples  is  to  combine  and  accommodate  interests,  to  settle
or  evade  difficulties,  to  circumvent  the  natural  results,  the  inevit-
able Karma  of  national  selfishness  and  passions  and  to  evolve  out
of  the  present  chaos  a fair  and  charmingly  well-mechanised
cosmos  of  international  order,  security,  peace  and  welfare.  Get
the  clockwork  going,  put  your  penny-worth  of  excellent  profes-
sions or  passably  good  intentions  in  the  slot  and  all  will  go  well,
this  seems  to  be  the  principle.  But  it  is  too  often  the  floor  of
Hell  that  is  paved  with  these  excellent  professions  and  passable
intentions,  and  the  cause  is  that  while  the  better  reason  and  will
of  man  may  be  one  hopeful  factor  in  Nature,  they  are  not  the
whole  of  nature  and  existence  and  not  by  any  means  the  whole
of  our  human  nature.  There  are  other  and  very  formidable  things
in  us  and  in  the  world  and  if  we  juggle  with  them  or  put  on  them,
in  order  to  get  them  admitted,  these  masks  of  reason  and  senti-
ment, — as  unfortunately  we  have  all  the  habit  of  doing  and  t lat
is  still  the  greater  part  of  the  game  of  politics,  the  results  are  a
foregone  conclusion.  War  and  violent  revolution  can  e e imi
nated,  if  we  will,  though  not  without  immense  difficulty,  but  on
the  condition  that  we  get  rid  of  the  inner  causes  of  war  and  the
constantly  accumulating  Karma  of  successful  injustice  o
violent  revolutions  are  the  natural  reactions.  Otherwise,  tlierc
can  be  only  at  best  a fallacious  period  of  artificial  peace  W la
was  in  the  past  will  be  sown  still  in  the  present  an  con  inuc
return  on  us  in  the  future.


578


Foreword


The  intelligent  mind  or  the  best  intellectual,  reason  and
science  of  man  are  not  the  sole  disposers  of  our  future.  Fortu-
nately for  the  order  of  things  a greater  unseen  power,  a Universal
Will,  or,  if  you  please,  a universal  Force  or  Law  is  there  which
not  only  gives  us  all  the  framework  and  conditions  of  our  idea
and  effort,  but  evolves  by  them  and  by  the  law  of  these  condi-
tions out  of  the  thing  in  being  the  thing  that  is  to  be.  And  this
power  deals  with  us  not  so  much  according  to  the  devices  of  our
reason,  the  truths  or  fictions  of  our  intelligence,  but  much  rather
according  to  the  truth  of  what  man  is  and  the  real  soul  and  mean-
ing of  what  he  does.  God  is  not  to  be  deceived,  says  the  Scrip-
ture. The  modern  mind  does  not  believe  in  God,  but  it  believes
in  Nature:  but  Nature  too  is  not  to  be  deceived;  she  enforces  her
law,  she  works  out  always  her  results  from  the  thing  that  really
is  and  from  the  real  spirit  and  character  of  the  energy  we  put  into
action.  And  this,  especially  is  one  of  the  ages  in  which  mankind
is  very  closely  put  to  the  question.  The  hopes,  the  ideals,  the
aspirations  that  are  abroad  in  it  are  themselves  so  many  severe
and  pregnant  questions  put  to  us,  not  merely  to  our  intelligence
but  to  the  spirit  of  our  being  and  action.  In  this  fateful  examina-
tion it  is  not  skill  and  cleverness,  machinery  and  organisation
which  will  ultimately  prevail,  — that  was  the  faith  which  Ger-
many professed,  and  we  know  how  it  ended,  — but  the  truth  and
sincerity  of  our  living.  It  is  not  impossible  for  man  to  realise  his
ideals  so  that  he  may  move  on  to  yet  greater  undreamed  things,
but  on  condition  that  he  makes  them  totally  an  inner  in  order
that  they  may  become  too  an  outer  reality.  The  changes  which
this  age  of  reconstruction  portends  will  certainly  come,  but  the
gain  they  will  bring  to  humanity  depends  on  the  spirit  which
governs  us  during  the  time  of  their  execution.

We  of  to-day  have  not  the  excuse  of  ignorance  since  we  have
before  us  perfectly  clear  ideals  and  conditions.  Freedom  and
unity,  the  self-determination  of  men  and  nations  in  the  frame-
work of  a life  drawn  together  by  co-operation,  comradeship,
brotherhood  if  it  may  be,  the  acceptance  of  a close  interrelation
of  the  common  aims  and  interests  of  the  race,  an  increasing  one-
ness of  human  life  in  which  we  cannot  deny  any  longer  to  others
what  we  claim  for  ourselves,  — are  things  of  which  we  have


Foreword


579

formed  a definite  conception.  The  acknowledgment  of  them  is
there  in  the  human  mind,  but  not  as  yet  any  settled  will  to  prac-
tise. Words  and  professions  are  excellent  things  in  themselves
and  we  will  do  them  all  homage;  but  facts  are  for  the  present
more  powerful  and  the  facts  will  have  their  results,  but  the
results  which  we  deserve  and  not  those  aimed  at  by  our  egoism.
The  principle  of  self-determination  is  not  in  itself  a chimera,  it
is  only  that  if  we  choose  to  make  it  so.  It  is  the  condition  of  the
better  order  of  the  world  which  we  wish  to  bring  into  being,  and  to
make  jettison  of  it  at  the  very  first  opportunity  is  an  unpromising
beginning  for  so  great  and  difficult  an  endeavour.  Self-determi-
nation is  not  a principle  which  can  stand  by  itself  and  be  made
the  one  rule  to  be  followed ; no  principle  can  rightly  stand  in  that
way  isolated  and  solely  dominant  in  the  complicated  web  of  life
and,  if  we  so  treat  it,  it  gets  falsified  in  its  meaning  and  loses
much  of  its  virtue.  Moreover,  individual  self-determination  must
harmonise  with  a common  self-determination,  freedom  must
move  in  the  frame  of  unity  or  towards  the  realisation  of  a free
unity.  And  it  may  readily  be  conceded  to  the  opportunist,  the
practical  man  and  all  the  minds  that  find  a difficulty  in  looking
beyond  the  circumstances  of  the  past  and  present,  that  there  are
in  very  many  instances  great  difficulties  in  the  way  of  applying
the  principle  immediately  and  in  its  full  degree.  But  when  in  the
light  of  a great  revealing  moment  a principle  of  this  kind  has  been
recognised  not  only  as  an  ideal  but  as  a clear  condition  of  the
result  at  which  we  aim,  it  has  to  be  accepted  as  a leading  factor
of  the  problem  to  be  worked  out,  the  difficulties  sincerely  consi-
dered and  met  and  a way  found  by  which  without  evasion  or
equivocation  and  without  unnecessary  delay  it  can  be  developed
and  given  its  proper  place  in  the  solution.  But  it  is  the  very
opposite  method  that  has  been  adopted  by  the  governments  of
the  world,  and  admitted  by  its  peoples.  The  natural  result  is  that
things  are  being  worked  out  in  the  old  way  with  a new  name  or
at  the  most  with  some  halting  change  and  partial  improvement
of  the  method.

The  botched  constitution  and  limping  action  of  the  League
of  Nations  is  the  result  of  this  ancient  manoeuvre.  The  League
has  been  got  into  being  by  sacrificing  the  principles  which


580


Foreword


governed  the  idea  behind  its  inception.  The  one  thing  that  has
been  gained  is  a formal,  regularised  and  established  instrument
by  which  the  governments  of  the  leading  nations  can  meet
together  habitually,  consult,  accommodate  their  interests,  give
some  kind  of  consideration  to  the  voice  and  the  claim  of  the
smaller  free  nations,  try  to  administer  with  a common  under-
standing certain  common  or  conflicting  interests,  delay  dangerous
outbreaks  and  collisions  or  minimise  them  when  they  come,
govern  the  life  of  the  nations  that  are  not  free  and  not  already
subjects  of  the  successful  empires  under  the  cover  of  a mandate
instead  of  the  rough-and-tumble  chances  of  a scramble  for
markets,  colonies  and  dependencies.  The  machine  does  not
seem  to  be  acting  even  for  these  ends  with  any  remarkable
efficiency,  but  it  is  at  least  something,  it  may  be  said,  that  it
can  be  got  to  act  at  all.  In  any  case  it  is  an  accomplished  fact
which  has  to  be  accepted  without  enthusiasm,  for  it  merits  none,
but  with  a practical  acquiescence  or  an  enforced  recognition.
All  the  more  reason  that  the  imperfections  it  embodies  and  the
evils  and  dangers  its  action  involves  or  keeps  in  being,  should
not  be  thrust  into  the  background,  but  kept  in  the  full  light
so  that  the  imperfections  may  be  recognised  and  mended  and
there  may  be  some  chance  of  avoiding  the  worst  incidence  of  the
threatened  evils  and  dangers.  And  all  the  more  too  that  the
ideals  which  have  been  ignored  or  converted  in  the  practice
into  a fiction,  should  insist  on  themselves  and,  defrauded  of
the  present;  still  lift  their  voice  to  lay  their  claim  on  the  future.

For  these  ideals  stand  and  they  represent  the  greater
aims  of  the  spirit  in  man  which  through  all  the  denials,  obstacles
and  imperfections  of  his  present  incomplete  nature  knows  always
the  perfection  towards  which  it  moves  and  the  greatness  of  which
it  is  capable.  Circumstances  and  force  and  external  necessity
and  past  nature  may  still  be  too  strong  for  us,  the  Rudra  powers
still  govern  our  destinies  and  the  Lords  of  truth  and  justice
and  the  Lords  of  love  have  to  wait  for  their  reign,  but  if  the
light  of  the  ideal  is  kept  burning  in  its  flame  of  knowledge  and
its  flame  of  power,  it  will  seize  even  on  these  things  and  create
out  of  their  evil  its  greater  inevitable  good.  At  present  it  may
seem  only  an  idea  and  a word  unable  to  become  a living  reality.


Foreword


581


but  it  is  the  Idea  and  the  Word  expressing  what  was  concealed
in  the  Spirit  which  preside  over  creation.  The  time  will  come
when  they  will  be  able  to  seize  on  the  Force  that  works  and
turn  it  into  the  instrument  of  a greater  and  fairer  creation.
The  nearness  or  the  distance  of  the  time  depends  on  the  fidelity
of  the  mind  and  will  of  man  to  the  best  that  he  sees  and  the
insistence  of  his  self-knowledge,  unobsessed  by  subjection  to
the  circumstances  he  suffers  and  the  machinery  he  uses,  to  live
out  its  truth  within  himself  so  that  his  environment  may  accept
it  and  his  outward  life  be  shaped  in  its  image.


The  Passing  of  War?


The  progress  of  humanity  proceeds  by  a
series  of  imaginations  which  the  Will  in  the  race  turns  into
accomplished  facts  and  a train  of  illusions  which  contain  each
of  them  an  inevitable  truth.  The  truth  is  there  in  the  secret
Will  and  Knowledge  that  are  conducting  our  affairs  for  us  and
it  reflects  itself  in  the  soul  of  mankind;  the  illusion  is  in  the
shape  we  give  to  that  reflection,  the  veil  of  arbitrary  fixations
of  time,  place  and  circumstance  which  that  deceptive  organ  of
knowledge,  the  human  intellect,  weaves  over  the  face  of  the
Truth.  Human  imaginations  are  often  fulfilled  to  the  letter;
our  illusions  on  the  contrary  find  the  truth  behind  them  realised
most  unexpectedly,  at  a time,  in  ways,  under  circumstances
far  other  than  those  we  had  fixed  for  them.

Man’s  illusions  are  of  all  sorts  and  kinds,  some  of  them
petty  though  not  unimportant,  — for  nothing  in  the  world
is  unimportant,  — others  vast  and  grandiose.  The  greatest
of  them  all  are  those  which  cluster  round  the  hope  of  a per-
fected society,  a perfected  race,  a terrestrial  millennium.  Each
new  idea,  religious  or  social,  which  takes  possession  of  the
epoch  and  seizes  on  large  masses  of  men,  is  in  turn  to  be  the
instrument  of  these  high  realisations;  each  in  turn  betrays  the
hope  which  gave  it  its  force  to  conquer.  And  the  reason  is
plain  enough  to  whosoever  chooses  to  see;  it  is  that  no  change
of  ideas  or  of  the  intellectual  outlook  upon  life,  no  belief  in
God  or  Avatar  or  Prophet,  no  victorious  science  or  liberating
philosophy,  no  social  scheme  or  system,  no  sort  of  machinery
internal  or  external  can  really  bring  about  the  great  desire
implanted  in  the  race,  true  though  that  desire  is  in  itself  and
the  index  of  the  goal  to  which  we  are  being  led.  Because  man  is
himself  not  a machine  nor  a device,  but  a being  and  a most  com-
plex one  at  that,  therefore  he  cannot  be  saved  by  machinery;  only
by  an  entire  change  which  shall  affect  all  the  members  of  his
being,  can  he  be  liberated  from  his  discords  and  imperfections.


The  Passing  of  War?


583


One  of  the  illusions  incidental  to  this  great  hope  is  the
expectation  of  the  passing  of  war.  This  grand  event  in  human
progress  is  always  being  confidently  expected,  and  since  we  are
now  all  scientific  minds  and  rational  beings,  we  no  longer
expect  it  by  a divine  intervention,  but  assign  sound  physical
and  economical  reasons  for  the  faith  that  is  in  us.  The  first
form  taken  by  this  new  gospel  was  the  expectation  and  the
prophecy  that  the  extension  of  commerce  would  be  the  extinc-
tion of  war.  Commercialism  was  the  natural  enemy  of  militarism
and  would  drive  it  from  the  face  of  the  earth.  The  growing  and
universal  lust  of  gold  and  the  habit  of  comfort  and  the  necessities
of  increased  production  and  intricate  interchange  would  crush
out  the  lust  of  power  and  dominion  and  glory  and  battle.
Gold-hunger  or  commodity-hunger  would  drive  out  earth-
hunger,  the  dharma  of  the  Vaishya  would  set  its  foot  on  the
dharma  of  the  Kshatriya  and  give  it  its  painless  quietus.  The
ironic  reply  of  the  gods  has  not  been  long  in  coming.  Actually
this  very  reign  of  commercialism,  this  increase  of  production
and  interchange,  this  desire  for  commodities  and  markets  and
this  piling  up  of  a huge  burden  of  unnecessary  necessities  has
been  the  cause  of  half  the  wars  that  have  since  afflicted  the
human  race.  And  now  we  see  militarism  and  commercialism
united  in  a loving  clasp,  coalescing  into  a sacred  biune  duality
of  national  life  and  patriotic  aspiration  and  causing  and  driving
by  their  force  the  most  irrational,  the  most  monstrous  and
nearly  cataclysmic,  the  hugest  war  of  modern  and  indeed  of  all
historic  times.

Another  illusion  was  that  the  growth  of  democracy
mean  the  growth  of  pacifism  and  the  end  of  war.  It  was  on  y
thought  that  wars  are  in  their  nature  dynastic  and  aristocratic;
greedy  kings  and  martial  nobles  driven  by  earth-hunger  an
battle-hunger,  diplomatists  playing  at  chess  with  the  lives  o
men  and  the  fortunes  of  nations,  these  were  the  guilty
of  war  who  drove  the  unfortunate  peoples  to  the  battle  e i 'c
sheep  to  the  shambles.  These  proletariates,  mere  oo  or
powder,  who  had  no  interest,  no  desire,  no  battle-hunger
them  to  armed  conflict,  had  only  to  become  instrocte  an
dominant  to  embrace  each  other  and  all  the  wor  m a


584  War  and  Self-Determination

and  fraternal  amity.  Man  refuses  to  learn  from  that  history  of
whose  lessons  the  wise  prate  to  us;  otherwise  the  story  of  old
democracies  ought  to  have  been  enough  to  prevent  this  parti-
cular illusion.  In  any  case  the  answer  of  the  gods  has  been,
here  too,  sufficiently  ironic.  If  kings  and  diplomatists  are  still
often  the  movers  of  war,  none  more  ready  than  the  modern
democracy  to  make  itself  their  enthusiastic  and  noisy  accom-
plice, and  we  see  even  the  modern  spectacle  of  governments
and  diplomats  hanging  back  in  affright  or  doubt  from  the
yawning  clamorous  abyss  while  angry  shouting  peoples  impel
them  to  the  verge.  Bewildered  pacifists  who  still  cling  to  their
principles  and  illusions,  find  themselves  howled  down  by  the
people  and,  what  is  piquant  enough,  by  their  own  recent  com-
rades and  leaders.  The  socialist,  the  syndicalist,  the  inter-
nationalist of  yesterday  stands  forward  as  a banner-bearer  in
the  great  mutual  massacre  and  his  voice  is  the  loudest  to  cheer
on  the  dogs  of  war.

Another  recent  illusion  was  the  power  of  Courts  of  Arbi-
tration and  Concerts  of  Europe  to  prevent  war.  There  again  the
course  that  events  immediately  took  was  sufficiently  ironic;
for  the  institution  of  the  great  Court  of  International  Arbitration
was  followed  up  by  a series  of  little  and  great  wars  which  led  by
an  inexorable  logical  chain  to  the  long-dreaded  European
conflict,  and  the  monarch  who  had  first  conceived  the  idea,
was  also  the  first  to  unsheath  his  sword  in  a conflict  dictated  on
both  sides  by  the  most  unrighteous  greed  and  aggression.  In
fact  this  series  of  wars,  whether  fought  in  Northern  or  Southern
Africa,  in  Manchuria  or  the  Balkans,  was  marked  most  promi-
nently by  the  spirit  which  disregards  cynically  that  very  idea  of
inherent  and  existing  rights,  that  balance  of  law  and  equity
upon  which  alone  arbitration  can  be  founded.  As  for  the
Concert  of  Europe,  it  seems  far  enough  from  us  now,  almost
antediluvian  in  its  antiquity,  as  it  belongs  indeed  to  the  age
before  the  deluge;  but  we  can  remember  well  enough  what  an
unmusical  and  discordant  concert  it  was,  what  a series  of
fumblings  and  blunderings  and  how  its  diplomacy  led  us  fatally
to  the  inevitable  event  against  which  it  struggled.  Now  it  is
suggested  by  many  to  substitute  a United  States  of  Europe


The  Passing  of  War?


585


for  the  defunct  Concert  and  for  the  poor  helpless  Hague  tribunal
an  effective  Court  of  International  Law  with  force  behind  it  to
impose  its  decisions.  But  so  long  as  men  go  on  believing  in  the
sovereign  power  of  machinery,  it  is  not  likely  that  the  gods
either  will  cease  from  their  studied  irony.

There  have  been  other  speculations  and  reasonings;
ingenious  minds  have  searched  for  a firmer  and  more  rational
ground  of  faith.  The  first  of  these  was  propounded  in  a book  by
a Russian  writer  which  had  an  enormous  success  in  its  day
but  has  now  passed  into  the  silence.  Science  was  to  bring
war  to  an  end  by  making  it  physically  impossible.  It  was  mathe-
matically proved  that  with  modern  weapons  two  equal  armies
would  fight  each  other  to  a standstill,  attack  would  become
impossible  except  by  numbers  thrice  those  of  the  defence  and
war  therefore  would  bring  no  military  decision  but  only  an
infructuous  upheaval  and  disturbance  of  the  organised  life  of
the  nations.  When  the  Russo-Japanese  war  almost  immediately
proved  that  attack  and  victory  were  still  possible  and  the  battle-
fury  of  man  superior  to  the  fury  of  his  death-dealing  engines,
another  book  was  published  called  by  a title  which  has  turned
into  a jest  upon  the  writer,  the  “Great  Illusion”,  to  prove  that
the  idea  of  a commercial  advantage  to  be  gained  by  war  and
conquest  was  an  illusion  and  that  as  soon  as  this  was  under-
stood and  the  sole  benefit  of  peaceful  interchange  realised,  the
peoples  would  abandon  a method  of  settlement  now  chiefly
undertaken  from  motives  of  commercial  expansion,  yet  whose
disastrous  result  was  only  to  disorganise  fatally  the  commercial
prosperity  it  sought  to  serve.  The  present  war  came  as  the
immediate  answer  of  the  gods  to  this  sober  and  rational  pro
position.  It  has  been  fought  for  conquest  and  comrnercia
expansion  and  it  is  proposed,  even  when  it  has  been  foug  t out
on  the  field,  to  follow  it  up  by  a commercial  struggle  between

the  belligerent  nations.

The  men  who  wrote  these  books  were  capable  thinkers,
but  they  ignored  the  one  thing  that  matters,  hurnan  nature.
The  present  war  has  justified  to  a certain  extent  t le
writer,  though  by  developments  he  did  not  foresee,  scicn  i ic
warfare  has  brought  military  movement  to  a stan  sti


586  War  and  Self-Determination

baffled  the  strategist  and  the  tactician,  it  has  rendered  decisive
victory  impossible  except  by  overwhelming  numbers  or  an
overwhelming  weight  of  artillery.  But  this  has  not  made  war
impossible,  it  has  only  changed  its  character;  it  has  at  the  most
replaced  the.  war  of  military  decisions  by  that  of  military  and
financial  exhaustion  aided  by  the  grim  weapon  of  famine.  The
English  writer  on  the  other  hand  erred  by  isolating  the  economic
motive  as  the  one  factor  that  weighed;  he  ignored  the  human
lust  of  dominion  which,  carried  into  the  terms  of  commercialism
means  the  undisputed  control  of  markets  and  the  exploitation
of  helpless  populations.  Again,  when  we  rely  upon  the  distur-
bance of  organised  national  and  international  life  as  a preventive
of  war,  we  forget  the  boundless  power  of  self-adaptation  which
man  possesses;  that  power  has  been  shown  strikingly  enough
in  the  skill  and  ease  with  which  the  organisation  and  finance  of
peace  were  replaced  in  the  present  crisis  by  the  organisation  and
finance  of  war.  And  when  we  rely  upon  Science  to  make  war
impossible,  we  forget  that  the  progress  of  Science  means  a
series  of  surprises  and  that  it  means  also  a constant  efibrt  of
human  ingenuity  to  overcome  impossibilities  and  find  fresh
means  of  satisfying  our  ideas,  desires  and  instincts.  Science
may  well  make  war  of  the  present  type  with  shot  and  shell  and
mines  and  battleships  an  impossibility  and  yet  develop  and
put  in  their  place  simpler  or  more  summary  means  which  may
bring  back  an  easier  organisation  of  warfare.

So  long  as  war  does  not  become  psychologically  impossible,
it  will  remain  or,  if  banished  for  a while,  return.  War  itself,
it  is  hoped,  will  end  war;  the  expense,  the  horror,  the  butchery,
the  disturbance  of  tranquil  life,  the  whole  confused  sanguinary
madness  of  the  thing  has  reached  or  will  reach  such  colossal
proportions  that  the  human  race  will  fling  the  monstrosity
behind  it  in  weariness  and  disgust.  But  weariness  and  disgust,
horror  and  pity,  even  the  opening  of  the  eyes  to  reason  by  the
practical  facts  of  the  waste  of  human  life  and  energy  and  the
harm  and  extravagance  are  not  permanent  factors;  they  last
only  while  the  lesson  is  fresh.  Afterwards,  there  is  forgetfulness;
human  nature  recuperates  itself  and  recovers  the  instincts  that
were  temporarily  dominated.  A long  peace,  even  a certain


587


The  Passing  of  War?

organisation  of  peace,  may  conceivably  result,  but  so  long  as
the  heart  of  man  remains  what  it  is,  the  peace  will  come  to  an
end;  the  organisation  will  break  down  under  the  stress  of  human
passions.  War  is  no  longer,  perhaps,  a biological  necessity,
but  it  is  still  a psychological  necessity;  what  is  within  us,  must
manifest  itself  outside.

Meanwhile  it  is  well  that  every  false  hope  and  confident  pre-
diction should  be  answered  as  soon  as  may  well  be  by  the  irony
of  the  gods;  for  only  so  can  we  be  driven  to  the  perception  of  the
real  remedy.  Only  when  man  has  developed  not  merely  a fellow-
feeling  with  all  men,  but  a dominant  sense  of  unity  and  com-
monalty, only  when  he  is  aware  of  them  not  merely  as  brothers,
— that  is  a fragile  bond,  — but  as  parts  of  himself,  only  when  he
has  learned  to  live,  not  in  his  separate  personal  and  communal
ego-sense,  but  in  a large  universal  consciousness,  can  the  pheno-
menon of  war,  with  whatever  weapons,  pass  out  of  his  life  with-
out the  possibility  of  return.  Meanwhile  that  he  should  struggle
even  by  illusions  towards  that  end,  is  an  excellent  sign;  for  it
shows  that  the  truth  behind  the  illusion  is  pressing  towards  the
hour  when  it  may  become  manifest  as  reality.


The  Unseen  Power


A.  WAR  has  ended,  a world  has  perished
in  the  realm  of  thought  and  begun  to  disappear  in  the  order  of
outward  Nature.  The  war  that  has  ended,  was  fought  in  physical
trenches,  with  shell  and  shot,  with  machine-gun  and  tank  and
aeroplane,  with  mangling  of  limbs  and  crash  of  physical  edifices
and  rude  uptearing  of  the  bosom  of  our  mother  earth;  the  new
war,  or  the  old  continued  in  another  form,  that  is  already  be-
ginning, will  be  fought  more  with  mental  trenches  and  bomb-
proof shelters,  with  reconnaissances  and  batteries  and  moving
machines  of  thought  and  word,  propaganda  and  parties  and  pro-
grammes, with  mangling  of  the  desire-souls  of  men  and  of  na-
tions, crash  of  many  kinds  of  thrones  and  high-built  institutions
and  strong  uptearing  of  the  old  earth  of  custom  which  man  has
formed  as  a layer  over  the  restless  molten  forces  of  evolutionary
Nature.  The  old  world  that  is  shaken  outwardly  in  its  bases  and
already  crumbling  in  some  of  its  parts,  is  the  economical  and
materialistic  civilisation  which  mankind  has  been  forming  for
the  last  few  centuries  from  once  new  materials  now  growing
rapidly  effete  pieced  out  with  broken  remnants  of  antiquity  and
the  middle  ages.  The  period  of  military  conflict  just  at  an  end
came  to'breach  that  which  thought  had  already  been  sapping,  an
era  of  revolutions  has  opened  which  is  likely  to  complete  the  ruin
and  prepare  the  building  of  a new  structure.  In  this  struggle  the
question  arises  to  the  thinking  man,  what  Power  or  what  Powers
are  expressing  their  will  or  their  strivings  in  this  upheaval  ? and
we,  what  power  or  powers  shall  we  serve  ? to  what  thing  inward
or  superhuman,  since  outward  thrones  and  systems  are  but  as
leaves  driven  before  the  storm-wind  of  the  breath  of  Time,  shall
we  owe  allegiance?  what  or  whom  is  it  that  we  shall  fight  to
enthrone?

Men  fight  for  their  personal  or  communal  or  national  inte-
rests or  for  ideas  and  principles  of  which  they  make  watchwords
and  battle-cries.  But  the  largest  human  interests  are  only  means


The  Unseen  Power


589


and  instruments  which  some  Force  greater  than  themselves
breaks  or  uses  in  its  inconscient  impulse  or  else  for  its  conscious
purposes;  ideas  and  principles  are  births  of  our  minds  which  are
born,  reign  and  pass  away  and  they  are  mere  words  unless  they
express  some  power  of  our  being  and  of  world-being  which  finds
in  them  a mental  self-expression.  Something  there  is  greater  than
our  thoughts  and  desires,  something  more  constant  and  insistent
which  lasts  and  grows  beyond  and  yet  by  their  changings.  If  no
such  thing  were,  then  all  this  human  effort  would  be  a vain  per-
turbation, the  life  of  man  only  the  busy  instinctive  routine  of  the
hive  and  the  ant-hill  on  a little  higher  scale,  but  with  more  useless
suffering  in  it  and  less  economy  and  wisdom,  and  our  thought  a
vain  glittering  of  imaginations  weaving  out  involuntarily  a web
like  that  of  old  legend  that  is  spun  and  respun  only  to  be  undone
and  again  undone  and  of  reasonings  that  build  a series  of  intellec-
tual and  practical  conventions  which  we  represent  to  ourselves
as  the  truth  and  the  right,  making  the  fallacies  of  our  minds  a
substitute  for  wisdom  and  the  fallacies  of  our  social  living  a sub-
stitute for  happiness.  For  this  is  certain  that  nothing  we  form  and
no  outward  system  we  create  can  last  beyond  its  appointed  or
else  its  possible  time.  As  this  great  materialistic  civilisation  of
Europe  to  which  the  high  glowing  dawn  of  the  Renaissance  gave
its  brilliant  birth  and  the  dry  brazen  afternoon  of  nineteenth-
century  rationalism  its  hard  maturity,  is  passing  away  and  the
bosom  of  earth  and  the  soul  of  man  heave  a sigh  of  relief  at  its
going,  so  whatever  new  civilisation  we  construct  after  this  evening
of  the  cycle,  yuga-sandhyd,  on  which  we  are  entering,  for  those
are  surely  mistaken  who  think  it  is  already  the  true  dawn,  wi
also  live  its  time  and  collapse  fiercely  or  decay  dully,  ^un  ess
indeed  there  is  that  eternal  Spirit  in  things  and  he  shoul  ave
found  in  its  key-note  the  first  sounds  of  the  strain  of  his  rea
harmony,  in  which  case  it  may  be  the  first  of  an  ascending  senes
of  changes  to  the  creation  of  a greater  humanity.  Ot  ^

this  vast  clash  and  onset  of  peoples  and  world-wide  oo  s
would  be  only  a fortuitous  nightmare,  and  the  happiest  mo  n
age  of  nation  or  mankind  only  the  pleasant  dream  o a momen  .
Then  the  old-world  gospel  which  bade  us  look  upon  luman
as  a vanity  of  vanities,  would  be  the  only  wisdom.


590


^ar  and  Self-Determination


But  with  that  creed  the  soul  of  man  has  never  remained
contented  and  still  less  can  we  at  the  present  day  live  in  it,  because
this  intuition  of  a greater  Power  than  our  apparent  selves  in  the
workings  of  the  world  is  now  growing  upon  the  race  and  the  vast
sense  of  an  unaccomplished  aim  in  the  urge  of  life  is  driving  it  to
an  unprecedented  effort  of  human  thought  and  energy.  In  such
a moment  even  the  hugest  calamities  cannot  exhaust  the  life  or
discourage  its  impetus,  but  rather  impel  it  to  a new  elan  of  en-
deavour; for  the  flames  of  thought  rise  higher  than  the  flames  of
the  conflagration  that  destroys  and  see  in  it  a meaning  and  the
promise  of  a new  creation.  In  the  destruction  that  has  been
effected,  in  the  void  that  has  been  left,  the  mind  sees  only  more
room  for  hope  to  grow  and  a wide  space  that  the  Spirit  who
builds  in  Time  has  cleared  for  his  new  structure.  For  who  that
has  eyes  at  all  to  see  cannot  see  this,  that  in  what  has  happened,
immense  Powers  have  been  at  work  which  nourish  a vaster  world-
purpose  than  the  egoistic  mind  of  individual  or  nation  could
mete  with  their  yard-measure  of  narrow  personal  idea  or  com-
munal interest  and  for  which  the  motives  and  passions  of  govern-
ments and  peoples  were  only  tools  or  opportunities  ? When  the
autocrats  and  the  war-lords  of  the  east  and  the  centre  resolved
to  dare  this  huge  catastrophe  in  order  to  seize  from  it  the  crown
of  their  ambitions,  when  they  drove  madly  to  the  precipice  of  an
incalculable  world-conflict,  they  could  have  no  inkling  that  within
four  years  or  less  their  thrones  would  have  fallen,  themselves  be
slain  or  flee  into  exile  and  all  for  which  they  stood  be  hastening
into  the  night  of  the  past;  only  that  which  impelled  them  foresaw
and  intended  it.  Nor  were  the  peoples  who  staggered  unwillingly
over  the  brink  of  war,  more  enlightened  of  the  secret  purpose:
defence  of  what  they  were  and  possessed,  wrath  at  a monstrous
aggression  which  was  a menace  to  their  ordered  European  civi-
lisation, drove  their  will  and  inflamed  their  resolution.  Yet  to
convict  that  civilisation  of  error  and  prepare  another  era  of  hu-
manity was  the  intention  of  the  Force  that  has  given  them  vic-
tory, its  voice  echoed  confusedly  in  their  thought  and  growing
clearer  in  the  minds  of  those  who  entered  later  with  a deliberate
and  conscious  will  into  the  struggle.

Great  has  been  the  havoc  and  ruin,  immense  the  suffering.


The  Unseen  Power


591


thick  the  blood-red  cloud  of  darkness  enveloping  the  world,
heavy  the  toll  of  life,  bottomless  the  expenditure  of  treasure  and
human  resources,  and  all  has  not  yet  been  worked  out,  the  whole
price  has  not  yet  been  paid;  for  the  after-effects  of  the  war  are
likely  to  be  much  greater  than  its  present  effects,  and  much  that
by  an  effort  of  concentration  has  resisted  the  full  shock  of  the
earthquake,  will  fall  in  the  after-tremblings.  Well  might  the  mind
of  a man  during  the  calamity,  aware  of  the  Power  that  stood  over
the  world  wrapped  in  this  tempest,  repeat  the  words  of  Arjuna  on
the  held  of  Kurukshetra,  —

drstvadbhutam  rupam  ugram  tavedam
lokatrayam pravyathitam  mahdtman...
drstvd  hi  tvam  pravyathitdntardtma
dhrtim  na  vinddmi  samam  ca  visno...
yathd  nadindm  bahavo^mbuvegdJj
samudramevdbhimukhd  dravanti,
tathd  tavdmi  naradoka-virdb
visanti  vaktrdr^yabhivijvalantU
yathd  pradiptam  jvalanam  patahgdlj
visanti  ndsdya  samrddhavegdh
tathaiva  ndsdya  visanti  lokds
tavdpi  vaktrdni  samrddhavegdh
lelihyase  grasamdnahi  samantdt
lokdn  samagrdn  vadanairjvaladbhili
tejobhir  dpurya  jagat  samagram
bhdsastavogrdh  pratapanti  visno
dkhydhi  me  ko  bhavdnugrarupo
namo'stu  te  devavara  prasida
vijhdtumicchdmi  bhavantamddyam
na  hi  prajdndmi  tava  pravrttim.

“When  is  seen  this  Thy  fierce  and  astounding  form,  the  three
worlds  are  all  in  pain  and  suffer,  O Thou  mighty  Spirit. . . . Trou  e
and  in  anguish  is  the  soul  within  me  as  I look  upon  Thee  an

find  no  peace  or  gladness As  is  the  speed  of  many  rushing  wa  er

racing  towards  the  ocean,  so  all  these  heroes  of  the  wor  o me
are  entering  into  Thy  many  mouths  of  flame.  As  a swarm  o


592


War  and  Self-Determination

motlis  with  ever-increasing  speed  fall  to  their  destruction  into  a
fire  that  someone  has  kindled,  so  now  the  nations  with  ever-
increasing  speed  are  entering  into  Thy  jaws  of  doom.  Thou
lickest  the  regions  all  around  with  Thy  tongues  and  Thou  art
swallowing  up  all  the  nations  in  Thy  mouths  of  burning;  all  the
world  is  filled  with  the  blaze  of  Thy  energies;  fierce  and  terrible
are  Thy  lustres  and  they  burn  us,  O Vishnu.  Declare  to  me  who
art  Thou  that  comest  to  us  in  this  form  of  fierceness ; salutation
to  Thee,  O Thou  great  Godhead,  turn  Thy  heart  to  grace.  I
would  know  who  art  Thou  who  wast  from  the  beginning,  for  I
know  not  the  will  of  Thy  workings.”

If  the  first  answer  might  seem  to  come  in  the  same  words  that
answered  the  appeal  of  Arjuna,  “I  am  the  Time-Spirit,  destroyer
of  the  world,  arisen  huge-statured  for  the  destruction  of  the
nations”,

kdlo'smi  hka-ksaya-krt  pravrddhah

lokdn  samdhartum  iha  pravrttajji,

and  the  voice  the  same  to  those  who  would  shrink  back  hesitating
from  participation  in  the  devastating  struggle  and  massacre,
“Even  without  thee  all  these  shall  cease  to  be  who  stand  in  the
opposing  hosts,  for  already  have  I slain  them  in  my  foreseeing
will;  know  thyself  to  be  an  instrument  only  of  an  end  predestined”,
— still  in  the  end  it  is  the  Friend  of  man,  the  Charioteer  of  his
battle  and  his  journey  who  appears  in  the  place  of  the  form  of
destruction  and  the  outcome  of  all  the  ruin  is  the  dharmardjya,
the  kingdom  of  the  Dharma.  To  humanity  as  to  the  warrior  of
Kurukshetra  the  concluding  message  has  been  uttered,  “There-
fore arise,  destroy  the  foe,  enjoy  a rich  and  happy  kingdom.”
But  the  kingdom  of  what  Dharma?  It  is  doubtful  enough  whether
as  the  nations  were  blind  to  the  nature  of  the  destruction  that  was
coming,  they  may  not  be  at  least  purblind  to  the  nature  of  the
construction  that  is  to  be  created.  An  increase  of  mechanical
freedom  to  be  lavished  or  doled  out  according  to  the  needs,  in-
terests, hesitations  of  the  old-world  forces  that  still  remain  erect,
a union  effected  by  a patchwork  of  the  remnants  of  the  past  and
the  unshaped  materials  of  the  future,  a credit  and  debit  account


The  Unseen  Power


593


with  fate  writing  off  so  much  of  the  evil  and  error  of  the  past  as
can  no  longer  be  kept  and  writing  up  as  good  capital,  — with
some  diminutions  by  way  of  acquitment  of  conscience,  part  pay-
ment of  overdue  debts,  — all  that  has  not  been  hopelessly  des-
troyed, an  acceptance  of  the  change  already  effected  by  the
tempest  or  made  immediately  inevitable  and  a new  system  of  em-
bankments to  prevent  the  further  encroachments  of  the  flood,  is
not  likely  to  put  a successful  term  to  the  cataclysm.  Even  if  a
short-sighted  sagacity  could  bring  this  about  for  a time  by  a com-
bined effort  of  successful  and  organised  egoisms  making  terms
with  the  powerful  Idea-forces  that  are  abroad  as  the  messengers
of  the  Time-Spirit,  still  it 'would  be  only  an  artificial  check  lead-
ing to  a new  upheaval  in  the  not  distant  future.  A liquidation  of
the  old  bankrupt  materialistic  economism  which  will  enable
it  to  set  up  business  again  under  a new  name  with  a reserve  capital
and  a clean  ledger,  will  be  a futile  attempt  to  cheat  destiny.
Commercialism  has  no  doubt  its  own  Dharma,  its  ideal  of  utili-
tarian justice  and  law  and  adjustment,  its  civilisation  presided
over  by  the  sign  of  the  Balance,  and  its  old  measures  being  now
annulled,  it  is  eager  enough  to  start  afresh  with  a new  system  of
calculated  values.  But  a dharmarajya  of  the  half-penitent  Vai-
shya  is  not  to  be  the  final  consummation  of  a tinie  like  ours
pregnant  with  new  revelations  of  thought  and  spirit  and  new
creations  in  life,  nor  is  a golden  or  rather  a copper-gilt  age  ° ^ ®
sign  of  the  Balance  to  be  the  glorious  reward  of  this  anguish  and
travail  of  humanity.  It  is  surely  the  kingdom  of  another  an


higher  Dharma  that  is  in  preparation.

What  that  Dharma  is  we  can  only  know  if
Power  whose  being  and  whose  thought  are  at  work  be  iin  a
we  attempt  and  suffer,  conceive  and  strive  for.  A ^

raanity  conceived  of  it  as  a creative  Divinity  or  almig  y o\
high  above  man  and  his  being  and  his  effort  or  of  a pan
hierarchy  of  universal  Powers  who  looked  upon  an  ^

labour  and  passion  and  thought  of  the  race.  But
cosmic  deities  lacked  a base  and  a principle  o uni  _

workings  and  above  it  the  ancients  were  obli^  to  ‘

vague  and  ineffable  Divinity,  the  unknown  God
built  a nameless  altar,  or  a Necessity  with  face  o


594


War  and  Self-Determination

bands  of  bronze  to  whom  the  gods  themselves  had  to  give  an
ignorant  obedience,  and  it  left  the  life  of  man  at  once  the  victim
of  an  inscrutable  fate  and  the  puppet  of  superhuman  caprices.
That  to  a great  extent  he  is,  so  long  as  he  lives  in  his  vital  ego  and
is  the  servant  of  his  own  personal  ideas  and  passions.  Later  reli-
gions gave  a name  and  some  body  of  form  and  quality  to  the  one
unknown  Godhead  and  proclaimed  an  ideal  law  which  they  gave
out  as  his  word  and  scripture.  But  the  dogmatism  of  a partial  and
unlived  knowledge  and  the  external  tendencies  of  the  human
mind  darkened  the  illuminations  of  religion  with  the  confusions
or  error  and  threw  over  its  face  strange  masks  of  childish  and
cruel  superstitions.  Religion  too  by  putting  God  far  above  in
distant  heavens  made  man  too  much  of  a worm  of  the  earth,
little  and  vile  before  his  Creator  and  admitted  only  by  a caprice
of  his  favour  to  a doubtful  salvation  in  superhuman  worlds.
Modern  thought  seeking  to  make  a clear  riddance  of  these  past
conceptions  had  to  substitute  something  else  in  its  place,  and
what  it  saw  and  put  there  was  the  material  law  of  Nature  and  the
biological  law  of  life  of  which  human  reason  was  to  be  the
faithful  exponent  and  human  science  the  productive  utiliser  and
profiteer.  But  to  apply  the  mechanical  blindness  of  the  rule  of
physical  Nature  as  the  sole  guide  of  thinking  and  seeing  man  is  to
go  against  the  diviner  law  of  his  being  and  maim  his  higher  poten-
tiality. Material  and  vital  Nature  is  only  a first  form  of  our  being
and  to  overcome  and  rise  beyond  its  formula  is  the  very  sense  of
a human  evolution.  Another  and  greater  Power  than  hers  is  the
master  of  this  effort,  and  human  reason  or  human  science  is
not  that  Godhead,  but  can  only  be  ait  best  one  and  not  the  great-
est of  its  ministers.  It  is  not  human  reason  and  human  science
which  have  been  working  out  their  ends  in  or  through  the  tempest
that  has  laid  low  so  many  of  their  constructions.  A greater  Spirit
awaits  a deeper  questioning  to  reveal  his  unseen  form  and  his
hidden  purpose.

Something  of  this  truth  we  have  begun  to  see  dimly,  in  the
return  to  more  spiritual  notions  and  in  the  idea  of  a kingdom  of
God  to  be  built  in  the  life  of  humanity.  On  the  old  sense  of  a
Power  in  the  universe  of  which  the  world  that  we  live  in  is  the
field,  is  supervening  the  nearer  perception  of  a Godhead  in  man.


The  Unseen  Power


595


the  unseen  king  of  whom  the  outer  man  is  the  veil  and  of  whom
our  mind  and  life  can  be  the  servants  and  living  instruments  and
our  perfected  souls  the  clear  mirrors.  But  we  have  to  see  more
lucidly  and  in  the  whole  before  we  can  know  this  Godhead.
There  are  three  powers  and  forms  in  which  the  Being  who  is  at
work  in  things  presents  himself  to  our  vision.  There  is  first  the
form  of  him  that  we  behold  in  the  universe,  but  that  or  at  least
what  we  see  of  it  in  the  appearances  of  things,  is  not  the  whole
truth  of  him;  it  is  indeed  only  a first  material  shape  and  vital
foundation  which  he  has  offered  for  the  starting-point  of  our
growth,  an  initial  sum  of  preliminary  realisations  from  which  we
have  to  proceed  and  to  transcend  them.  The  next  form  is  that  of
which  man  alone  here  has  the  secret,  for  in  him  it  is  progressively
revealing  itself  in  a partial  and  always  incomplete  accomplishing
and  unfolding.  His  thoughts,  his  ideals,  his  dreams,  his  attempts
at  a high  self-exceeding  are  the  clues  by  which  he  attempts  to  dis-
cover the  Spirit,  the  moulds  in  which  he  tries  to  seize  the  form  of
the  Divinity.  But  they  too  are  only  a partial  light  and  not  the
whole  form  of  the  Godhead.  Something  waits  beyond  which
the  human  mind  approaches  in  a shapeless  aspiration  to  an  in-
effable Perfection,  an  infinite  Light,  an  infinite  Power,  an  infinite
Love,  a universal  Good  and  Beauty.  This  is  not  something  that
is  not  yet  in  perfect  being,  a God  who  is  becoming  or  who  has  to
be  created  by  man;  it  is  the  Eternal  of  whom  this  infinite  ideal
is  a mental  reflection.  It  is  beyond  the  form  of  the  universe  and
these  psychological  realisations  of  the  human  being  and  yet  it  is
here  too  in  man  and  subsists  surrounding  him  in  all  the  powers
of  the  world  he  lives  in.  It  is  both  the  Spirit  who  is  in  the  universe
and  the  invisible  king  in  man  who  is  the  master  of  his  works.  It
develops  in  the  universe  through  laws  which  are  not  complete
here  or  not  filled  in  in  their  sense  and  action  until  humanity  shall
have  fully  evolved  in  its  nature  the  potentialities  of  the  mind  and
spirit.  It  works  in  man,  but  through  his  individual  and  corporate
ego  so  long  as  he  dwells  within  the  knot  of  his  present  menta  ity.
Only  when  his  race  knows  God  and  lives  in  the  Divine,  ^ ®
ideal  sense  of  liis  strivings  begin  to  unfold  itself  and  the  king  om

be  founded,  raj'yam  samrddham.

When  we  try  to  build  our  outer  life  in  obedience  to  our


596


War  and  Self-Determination


ego,  our  interests,  our  passions  or  our  vital  needs  only  or  else
in  a form  of  our  vital  needs  served  and  enlarged  by  our  intellect,
but  not  enlightened  with  a greater  spiritual  meaning,  we  are
living  within  the  law  of  the  first  cosmic  formulation.  It  is  as  in-
sistent Rudra  that  the  unseen  Power  meets  us  there,  the  Master
of  the  evolution,  the  Lord  of  Karma,  the  King  of  justice  and
judgment,  who  is  easily  placated  with  sacrifice  and  effort,  for  even
to  the  Asura  and  Rakshasa,  the  Titan  and  the  giant  he  gives  the
fruit  of  their  tapasyd,  but  who  is  swift  also  to  wrath  and  every
time  that  man  offends  against  the  law,  even  though  it  be  in  igno-
rance, or  stands  stiff  in  his  ego  against  the  urge  of  the  evolution
or  provokes  the  rebound  of  Karma,  he  strikes  without
mercy;  through  strife  and  stumblings,  tlu'ough  passioning  and
yearning  and  fierce  stress  of  will  and  giant  endeavour,  construc-
tion and  destruction,  slow  labour  of  evolution  and  rushing  speed
of  revolution  Rudra  works  out  the  divine  purpose.  When  on
the  contrary  we  seek  to  shape  our  life  by  the  Ideal,  it  is  the  severe
Lord  of  Truth  who  meets  us  with  his  questioning.  Then  in  so
far  as  we  work  in  the  sincerity  of  the  inner  truth,  we  shall  live  in
an  increasing  harmony  of  the  result  of  a divine  working.  But  if
the  measures  of  our  ideal  are  false  or  if  we  cast  into  the  balance
the  unjust  weight  of  our  egoism  and  hypocrisy  and  self-deceiving
or  if  we  misuse  the  truth  for  our  narrower  ends,  if  we  turn  it  into
a lie  or  a convention  or  an  outward  machinery  without  the  living
soul  of  the  truth  in  it,  then  we  must  pay  a heavy  reckoning.  For
as  before  we  fell  into  the  terrible  hand  of  Rudra,  so  now  we  fall
into  the  subtler  more  dangerous  noose  of  Varuna.  Only  if  we  can
see  the  Truth  and  live  in  it,  shall  our  aspiration  be  satisfied.  Then
it  is  the  Master  of  Freedom,  the  Lord  of  Love,  the  Spirit  of  unity
who  shall  inform  the  soul  of  the  individual  and  take  up  the
world’s  endeavour.  He  is  the  great  Liberator  and  the  strong  and
gentle  founder  of  Perfection.

It  is  the  wrath  of  Rudra  that  has  swept  over  the  earth  and
the  track  of  his  foot-prints  can  be  seen  in  these  ruins.  There  has
come  as  a result  upon  the  race  the  sense  of  having  lived  in  many
falsehoods  and  the  need  of  building  according  to  an  ideal.  There- ,
fore  we  have  now  to  meet  the  question  of  the  Master  of  Truth.
Two  great  words  of  the  divine  Truth  have  forced  themselves  in-


The  Unseen  Power


597


sistently  on  our  minds  through  the  crash  of  the  ruin  and  the
breath  of  the  tempest  and  are  now  the  leading  words  of  the
hoped-for  reconstruction,  — freedom  and  unity.  But  everything
depends,  first,  upon  the  truth  of  our  vision  of  them,  secondly,
upon  the  sincerity  with  which  we  apply  it,  last  and  especially
on  the  inwardness  of  our  realisation.  Vain  will  be  the  mecha-
nical construction  of  unity,  if  unity  is  not  in  the  heart  of  the  race
and  if  it  be  made  only  a means  for  safeguarding  and  organising
our  interests;  the  result  will  then  be  only,  as  it  was  in  the  imme-
diate past,  a fiercer  strife  and  new  outbreaks  of  revolution  and
anarchy.  No  paltering  mechanisms  which  have  the  appearance
but  not  the  truth  of  freedom,  will  help  us;  the  new  structure,
however  imposing,  will  only  become  another  prison  and  compel
a fresh  struggle  for  liberation.  The  one  safety  for  man  lies  in
learning  to  live  from  within  outward,  not  depending  on
institutions  and  machinery  to  perfect  him,  but  out  of  his  grow-
ing inner  perfection  availing  to  shape  a more  perfect  form  and
frame  of  life ; for  by  this  inwardness  we  shall  best  be  able  both
to  see  the  truth  of  the  high  things  which  we  now  only  speak  with
our  lips  and  form  into  outward  intellectual  constructions,  and  to
apply  their  truth  sincerely  to  all  our  outward  living.  If  we  are  to
found  the  kingdom  of  God  in  humanity,  we  must  first  know  God
and  see  and  live  the  diviner  truth  of  our  being  in  ourselves,
otherwise  how  shall  a new  manipulation  of  the  constructions
of  the  reason  and  scientific  systems  of  efficiency  which  have  failed
us  in  the  past,  avail  to  establish  it?  It  is  because  there  are  plenty
of  signs  that  the  old  error  continues  and  only  a minority,  leaders
perhaps  in  light,  but  not  yet  in  action,  are  striving  to  see  more
clearly,  inwardly  and  truly,  that  we  must  expect  as  yet  rather  the
last  twilight  which  divides  the  dying  from  the  unborn  age  than  tic
real  dawning.  For  a time,  since  the  mind  of  man  is  not  yet  rea  >,
the  old  spirit  and  method  may  yet  be  strong  and  seem  for  a s lort
while  to  prosper;  but  the  future  lies  with  the  men  and  nations
who  first  see  beyond  both  the  glare  and  the  dusk  the  go  s o t ic
morning  and  prepare  themselves  to  be  fit  instruments  o
Power  that  is  pressing  towards  the  light  of  a greater  i ca  .


Self-Determination


A.  NEW  phrase  has  recently  been  cast  out
from  the  bloodstained  yeast  of  war  into  the  shifty  language  of
politics,  — that  strange  language  full  of  Maya  and  falsities  of
self-illusion  and  deliberate  delusion  of  others,  which  almost
immediately  turns  all  true  and  vivid  phrases  into  a jargon,  so  that
men  may  fight  in  a cloud  of  words  without  any  clear  sense  of  the
thing  they  are  battling  for,  — it  is  the  luminous  description  of
liberty  as  the  just  power,  the  freely  exercised  right  of  self-deter-
mination. The  word  is  in  itself  a happy  discovery,  a thought-sign
of  real  usefulness.  For  it  helps  to  make  definite  and  manageable
what  was  apt  till  now  to  be  splendidly  vague  and  nebulous.  Its
invention  is  a sign  at  once  of  a growing  clarity  of  conception
about  this  great  good  which  man  has  been  striving  to  achieve
for  himself  through  the  centuries,  as  yet  without  any  satisfying
success  to  boast  of  anywhere,  and  of  the  increasing  subjectivity
of  our  ideas  about  life.  This  clarity  and  this  subjectivity  must
indeed  go  together;  for  we  can  only  get  good  hold  of  the
right  end  of  the  great  ideas  which  should  govern  our  ways  of
living  when  we  begin  to  understand  that  their  healthful  process
is  from  within  outward,  and  that  the  opposite  method,  the  mecha-
nical, ends  always  by  turning  living  realities  into  formal  conven-
tions. No  doubt,  to  man  the  animal,  the  mechanical  alone  seems
to  be  real;  but  to  man  the  soul,  man  the  thinker  through  whom
we  arrive  at  our  inner  manhood,  only  that  is  true  which  he  can
feel  as  a truth  within  him  and  feel  without  as  his  external  self-
expression.  All  else  is  a deceptive  charlatanry,  an  acceptance  of
shows  for  truths,  of  external  appearances  for  realities,  which  are
so  many  devices  to  keep  him  in  bondage.

Liberty  in  one  shape  or  another  ranks  among  the  most
ancient  and  certainly  among  the  most  diflEicult  aspirations  of  our
race;  it  arises  from  a radical  instinct  of  our  being  and  is  yet
opposed  to  all  our  circumstances;  it  is  our  eternal  good  and  our
condition  of  perfection,  but  our  temporal  being  has  failed  to  find


Self-Determination


599


its  key.  That  perhaps  is  because  true  freedom  is  only  possible  if
we  live  in  the  infinite,  live,  as  the  Vedanta  bids  us,  in  and  from  our
self-existent  being;  but  our  natural  and  temporal  energies  seek
for  it  at  first  not  in  ourselves,  but  in  our  external  conditions.
This  great  indefinable  thing,  liberty,  is  in  its  highest  and  ultimate
sense  a state  of  being;  it  is  self  living  in  itself  and  determining  by
its  own  energy  what  it  shall  be  inwardly  and,  eventually,  by  the
growth  of  a divine  spiritual  power  within  determining  too  what
it  shall  make  of  its  external  circumstances  and  environment;
that  is  the  largest  and  freest  sense  of  self-determination.  But
when  we  start  from  the  natural  and  temporal  life,  what  we
practically  come  to  mean  by  liberty  is  a convenient  elbow-room
for  our  natural  energies  to  satisfy  themselves  without  being  too
much  impinged  upon  by  the  self-assertiveness  of  others.  And  that
is  a difficult  problem  to  solve,  because  the  liberty  of  one,  imme-
diately it  begins  to  act,  knocks  up  fatally  against  the  liberty  of
another;  the  free  running  of  many  in  the  same  field  means  a free
chaos  of  collisions.  That  was  at  one  time  glorified  under  the
name  of  the  competitive  system,  and  dissatisfaction  with  its  re-
sults has  led  to  the  opposite  idea  of  State  socialism,  which
supposes  that  the  negation  of  individual  liberty  in  the  collective
being  of  the  State  can  be  made  to  amount  by  some  mechanical
process  to  a positive  sum  of  liberty  nicely  distributable  to  a in
a carefully  guarded  equality.  The  individual  gives  up  his  ree
dom  of  action  and  possession  to  the  State  which  in  return  o es
out  to  him  a regulated  liberty,  let  us  say,  a sufficient  elbow
so  parcelled  out  that  he  shall  not  at  all  butt  into  the  ri  s o
neighbour.  It  is  admirable  in  theory,  logically  quite  unexcep  ion
able,  but  in  practice,  one  suspects,  it  would  amount  to  a ve
oppressive,  because  a very  mechanical  slavery  of  ®
to  the  community,  or  rather  to  something  indefinite  a


tself  the  community.  , tn

Experience  has  so  far  shown  us  that  the  uman  ^ .

irrive  at  a mechanical  freedom  has  only  resulte  in  a ve
iberty  and  even  that  has  been  enjoyed  for  the  mos  -

It  the  expense  of  others.  It  has  amounted  usua  y o
be  majority  by  a minority,  and  many  strange  t mgs
lone  in  its  name.  Ancient  liberty  and  democracy  meant  m


600


War  and  Self-Determination


Greece  the  self-rule  — variegated  by  periodical  orgies  of  mutual
throat-cutting  — of  a smaller  number  of  free  men  of  all  ranks
who  lived  by  the  labour  of  a great  mass  of  slaves.  In  recent  times
liberty  and  democracy  have  been,  and  still  are,  a cant  assertion
which  veils  under  a skilfully  moderated  plutocratic  system  the
rule  of  ah  organised  successful  bourgeoisie  over  a proletariate  at
first  submissive,  afterwards  increasingly  dissatisfied  and  combined
for  recalcitrant  self-assertion.  The  earliest  use  of  liberty  and
democracy  by  the  emancipated  proletariate  has  been  the  crude
forceful  tyranny  of  an  ill-organised  labour  oligarchy  over  a quite
disorganised  peasantry  and  an  impotently  recalcitrant  bourgeoi-
sie. And  just  as  the  glorious  possession  of  liberty  by  the  commu-
nity has  been  held  to  be  consistent  with  the  oppression  of  four-
fifths  or  three-fifths  of  the  population  by  the  remaining  fraction,
so  it  has  till  lately  been  held  to  be  quite  consistent  with  the  com-
plete subjection  of  one  half  of  mankind,  the  woman  half,  to  the
physically  stronger  male.  The  series  continues  through  a whole
volume  of  anomalies,  including  of  course  the  gloriously  bene-
ficent and  profitable  exploitation  of  subject  peoples  by  emanci-
pated nations  who,  it  seems,  are  entitled  to  that  domination  by
their  priesthood  of  the  sacred  cult  of  freedom.  They  mean  no
doubt  to  extend  it  to  the  exploited  at  some  distant  date,  but  take
care  meanwhile  to  pay  themselves  the  full  price  of  their  holy  office
before  they  deliver  the  article.  Even  the  best  machinery  of  this
mechanical  freedom  yet  discovered  amounts  to  the  unmodified
will  of  a bare  majority,  or  rather  to  its  selection  of  a body  of
rulers  who  coerce  in  its  name  all  minorities  and  lead  it  to  issues
of  which  it  has  itself  no  clear  perception.

These  anomalies,  — anomalies  of  many  kinds  are  insepa-
rable from  the  mechanical  method,  — are  a sign  that  the  real
meaning  of  liberty  has  not  yet  been  understood.  Nevertheless
the  aspiration  and  the  effort  itself  towards  the  realisation  of  a
great  idea  ca'nnot  fail  to  bear  some  fruit,  and  modern  liberty  and
democracy,  however  imperfect  and  relative,  have  had  this  result
that  for  the  communities  which  have  followed  them,  they
have  removed  the  pressure  of  the  more  obvious,  outward  and
aggressive  forms  of  oppression  and  domination  which  were  inhe-
rent in  the  systems  of  the  past.  They  have  made  life  a little  more


Self-Determination


601


tolerable  for  the  mass,  and  if  they  have  not  yet  made  life  free,
they  have  at  least  given  more  liberty  to  thought  and  to  the  effort
to  embody  a freer  thought  in  a more  adequate  form  of  life.  This
larger  space  for  the  thought  in  man  and  its  workings  was  the
necessary  condition  for  a growing  clarity  which  must  enlighten
in  the  end  the  crude  conceptions  with  which  the  race  has  started
and  refine  the  crude  methods  and  forms  in  which  it  has  embodied
them.  The  attempt  to  govern  life  by  an  increasing  light  of
thought  rather  than  allow  the  rough  and  imperfect  actualities
of  life  to  govern  and  to  limit  the  mind  is  a distinct  sign  of  advance
in  human  progress.  But  the  true  turning-point  will  come  with
the  farther  step  which  initiates  the  attempt  to  govern  life  by  that
of  which  thought  itself  is  only  a sign  and  an  instrument,  the  soul,
the  inner  being,  and  to  make  our  ways  of  living  a freer  opportu-
nity for  the  growing  height  and  breadth  of  its  need  of  self-
fulfilment.  That  is  the  real,  the  profounder  sense  which  we  shall
have  to  learn  to  attach  to  the  idea  of  self-determination  as  the
effective  principle  of  liberty.

The  principle  of  self-determination  really  means  this  that
within  every  living  human  creature,  man,  woman  and  child,
and  equally  within  every  distinct  human  collectivity  growing  or
grown,  half  developed  or  adult  there  is  a self,  a being,  which  has
the  right  to  grow  in  its  own  way,  to  find  itself,  to  make  its  life  a
full  and  a satisfied  instrument  and  image  of  its  being.  This  is  the
first  principle  which  must  contain  and  overtop  all  others ; the  rest
is  a question  of  conditions,  means,  expedients,  accommodations,
opportunities,  capacities,  limitations,  none  of  which  must  e
allowed  to  abrogate  the  sovereignty  of  the  first  essential  pnn
ciple.  But  it  can  only  prevail  if  it  is  understood  with  a ri^it
idea  of  this  Self  and  its  needs  and  claims.  The  first  danpr  to  t e
principle  of  self-determination,  as  to  all  others,  is  that  it  ^
interpreted,  like  most  of  the  ideals  of  our  human  existence  in  le
past,  in  the  light  of  the  ego,  its  interests  and  its  will  towards  sc  -
satisfaction.  So  interpreted  it  will  carry  us  no  farther  t lan  e or  ,
we  shall  arrive  at  a point  where  our  principle  is  broug  it  up  s lor  ,
fails  us,  turns  into  a false  or  a half-true  assertion  o ic  mi
and  a convention  of  form  which  covers  realities  t la
the  opposite  of  itself.


602  War  and  Self-Determination

For  the  ego  has  inalienably  the  instinct  of  a double  self-
assertion,  its  self-assertion  against  other  egos  and  its  self-assertion
by  means  of  other  egos;  in  all  its  expansion  it  is  impelled  to  sub-
ordinate their  need  to  its  own,  to  use  them  for  its  own  purpose
and  for  that  purpose  to  establish  some  kind  of  control  or  domi-
nation or  property  in  what  it  uses,  whether  by  force  or  by  dex-
terity, openly  or  covertly,  by  absorption  or  by  some  skilful  turn
of  exploitation.  Human  lives  cannot  run  upon  free  parallels;
for  they  are  compelled  by  Nature  continually  to  meet,  impinge
on  each  other,  intermix,  and  in  the  ego-life  that  means  always  a
clash.  The  first  idea  of  our  reason  suggests  that  our  human  rela-
tions may  be  subjected  to  a mechanical  accommodation  of  inte-
rests which  will  get  rid  of  the  clash  and  the  strife;  but  this  can
only  be  done  up  to  a certain  point:  at  best  we  diminish  some  of
the  violence  and  crude  obviousness  of  the  clashing  and  the  friction
and  give  them  a more  subtle  and  less  grossly  perceptible  form.
Within  that  subtler  form  the  principle  of  strife  and  exploitation
continues;  for  always  the  egoistic  instinct  must  be  to  use  the
accommodations  to  which  it  is  obliged  or  induced  to  assent,  as
far  as  possible  for  its  own  advantage,  and  it  is  only  limited  in  this
impulse  by  the  limits  of  its  strength  and  capacity,  by  the  sense  of
expediency  and  consequence,  by  the  perception  of  some  neces-
sity for  respecting  other  egoisms  in  order  that  its  own  egoism  too
may  be  respected.  But  these  considerations  can  only  tone  down
or  hedge  in  the  desire  of  a gross  or  a subtle  domination  and
exploitation  of  others;  they  do  not  abrogate  it.

The  human  mind  has  resorted  to  ethics  as  a corrective;
but  the  first  laws  of  ethical  conduct  also  succeed  at  best  in  check-
ing only  the  egoistic  rule  of  life  and  do  not  overcome  it.  There-
fore the  ethical  idea  has  pushed  itself  forward  into  the  other  and
opposite  principle  of  altruism.  The  main  general  results  have
been  a clearer  perception  of  collective  egoisms  and  their  claim
on  the  individual  egoism  and,  secondly,  a quite  uncertain  and
indefinable  mixture,  strife  and  balancing  of  egoistic  and  altruistic
motives  in  our  conduct.  Often  enough  altruism  is  there  chiefly
in  profession  or  at  best  a quite  superficial  will  which  does  not
belong  to  the  centre  of  our  action;  it  becomes  then  either  a
deliberate  or  else  a half-conscious  camouflage  by  which  egoism


Self-Determination


603


masks  itself  and  gets  at  its  object  without  being  suspected.  But
even  a sincere  altruism  hides  within  itself  the  ego,  and  to  be  able
to  discover  the  amount  of  it  hidden  up  in  our  most  benevolent
or  even  self-sacrificing  actions  is  the  acid  test  of  sincere  self-
introspection, nor  can  anyone  really  quite  know  himself  who  has
not  made  ruthlessly  this  often  painful  analysis.  It  could  not  be
otherwise;  for  the  law  of  life  cannot  be  self-immolation;  self-
sacrifice  can  only  be  a step  in  self-fulfilment.  Nor  can  life  be  in
its  nature  a one-sided  self-giving;  all  giving  must  contain  in  itself
some  measure  of  receiving  to  have  any  fruitful  value  or  signi-
ficance. Altruism  itself  is  more  important  even  by  the  good  it
does  to  ourselves  than  by  the  good  it  does  to  others;  for  the  latter
is  often  problematical,  but  the  former  is  certain,  and  its  good  con-
sists in  the  growth  of  self,  in  an  inner  self-heightening  and  self-
expansion. Not  then  any  general  law  of  altruism,  but  rather  a
self-recognition  based  upon  mutual  recognition  must  be  the  broad
rule  of  our  human  relations.  Life  is  self-fulfilment  which  moves
upon  a ground  of  mutuality;  it  involves  a mutual  use  of  one  by
the  other,  in  the  end  of  all  by  all.  The  whole  question  is  whether
this  shall  be  done  on  the  lower  basis  of  the  ego  attended  by
strife,  friction  and  collision  with  whatever  checks  and  controls,
or  whether  it  cannot  be  done  by  a higher  law  of  our  being  which
shall  discover  a means  of  reconciliation,  free  reciprocity  and
unity.

A right  idea  of  the  rule  of  self-determination  may  help  to
set  us  on  the  way  to  the  discovery  of  this  higher  law.  For  we  may
note  that  this  phrase,  self-determination,  reconciles  and  brings
together  in  one  complex  notion  the  idea  of  liberty  and  the  idea
of  law.  These  two  powers  of  being  tend  in  our  first  conceptions,
as  in  the  first  appearances  of  life  itself,  to  be  opposed  to  eac
other  as  rivals  or  enemies;  we  find  therefore  ranged  against  eac
other  the  champions  of  law  and  order  and  the  defenders  of  li  erty.
There  is  the  ideal  which  sets  order  first  and  liberty  either  now  ere
or  in  an  inferior  category,  because  it  is  willing  to  accept  any  coer
cion  of  liberty  which  will  maintain  the  mechanical  stabi  ity  oi
order;  and  there  is  the  ideal  which  on  the  contrary  sets  i er  y
first  and  regards  law  either  as  a hostile  compression  or  a tempoia
rily  necessary  evil  or  at  best  a means  of  securing  liberty  y guar


604  War  and  Self-Determination

ing  against  any  violent  and  aggressive  interference  with  it  as
between  man  and  man.  This  use  of  law  as  a means  of  liberty  may
be  advocated  only  in  a minimum  reducible  to  the  just  quantity
necessary  for  its  purpose,  the  individualistic  idea  of  the  matter,
or  raised  to  a maximum  as  in  the  socialistic  idea  that  the  largest
sum  of  regulation  will  total  up  to  or  at  least  lead  up  to  or  secure
the  larger  sum  of  freedom.  We  have  continually  too  the  most
curious  mixing  up  of  the  two  ideas,  as  in  the  old-time  claim  of
the  capitalist  to  prevent  the  freedom  of  labour  to  organise  so
that  the  liberty  of  contract  might  be  preserved,  or  in  the  singular
sophistical  contention  of  the  Indian  defenders  of  orthodox  caste
rigidity  on  its  economical  side  that  coercion  of  a man  to  follow
his  ancestral  profession  ia  disregard  not  only  of  his  inclinations,
but  of  his  natural  tendencies  and  aptitudes  is  a securing  to  the
individual  of  his  natural  right,  his  freedom  to  follow  his  here-
ditary nature.  We  see  a similar  confusion  of  ideas  in  the  claim
of  European  statesmen  to  train  Asiatic  or  African  peoples  to
liberty,  which  means  in  fact  to  teach  them  in  the  beginning
liberty  in  the  school  of  subjection  and  afterwards  to  compel  them
at  each  stage  in  the  progress  of  a mechanical  self-government  to
satisfy  the  tests  and  notions  imposed  on  them  by  an  alien  being
and  consciousness  instead  of  developing  freely  a type  and  law  of
their  own.  The  right  idea  of  self-determination  makes  a clean
sweep  of  these  confusions.  It  makes  it  clear  that  liberty  should
proceed  by  the  development  of  the  law  of  one’s  own  being  deter-
mined from  within,  evolving  out  of  oneself  and  not  determined
from  outside  by  the  idea  and  will  of  another.  There  remains  the
problem  of  relations,  of  the  individual  and  the  collective  self-
determination  and  of  the  interaction  of  the  self-determination
of  one  on  the  self-determination  of  another.  That  cannot  be
finally  settled  by  any  mechanical  solution,  but  only  by  the  dis-
covery of  some  meeting-place  of  the  law  of  our  self-determination
with  the  common  law  of  mutuality,  where  they  begin  to  become
one.  It  signifies  in  fact  the  discovery  of  an  inner  and  larger  self
other  than  the  mere  ego,  in  which  our  individual  self-fulfilment
no  longer  separates  us  from  others  but  at  each  step  of  our  growth
calls  for  an  increasing  unity.

But  it  is  from  the  self-determination  of  the  free  individual


Self-Determination


605


within  the  free  collectivity  in  which  he  lives  that  we  have  to
start,  because  so  only  can  we  be  sure  of  a healthy  growth  of
freedom  and  because  too  the  unity  to  be  arrived  at  is  that  of  indi-
viduals growing  freely  towards  perfection  and  not  of  human
machines  working  in  regulated  unison  or  of  souls  suppressed,
mutilated  and  cut  into  one  or  more  fixed  geometrical  patterns.
The  moment  we  sincerely  accept  this  idea,  we  have  to  travel  alto-
gether away  from  the  old  notion  of  the  right  of  property  of  man
in  man  which  still  lurks  in  the  human  mind  where  it  does  not
possess  it.  The  trail  of  this  notion  is  all  over  our  past,  the  right
of  property  of  the  father  over  the  child,  of  the  man  over  the  wo-
man, of  the  ruler  or  the  ruling  class  or  power  over  the  ruled,  of
the  State  over  the  individual.  The  child  was  in  the  ancient  patri-
archal idea  the  live  property  of  the  father;  he  was  his  creation,  his
production,  his  own  reproduction  of  himself;  the  father,  rather
than  God  or  the  universal  Life  in  place  of  God,  stood  as  the  au-
thor of  the  child’s  being;  and  the  creator  has  every  right  over
his  creation,  the  producer  over  his  manufacture.  He  had  the  right
to  make  of  him  what  he  willed,  and  not  what  the  being  of  the
child  really  was  within,  to  train  and  shape  and  cut  him  according
to  the  parental  ideas  and  not  rear  him  according  to  his  own
nature’s  deepest  needs,  to  bind  him  to  the  paternal  career  or  the
career  chosen  by  the  parent  and  not  that  to  which  his  nature  and
capacity  and  inclination  pointed,  to  fix  for  him  all  the  critical
turning-points  of  his  life  even  after  he  had  reached  maturity.  In
education  the  child  was  regarded  not  as  a soul  meant  to  grou,  but
as  brute  psychological  stuff  to  be  shaped  into  a fixed  mould  ^
teacher.  We  have  travelled  to  another  conception  of  the  child
as  a soul  with  a being,  a nature  and  capacities  of  his  own  \\  lo
must  be  helped  to  find  them,  to  find  himself,  to  grow  into  their
maturity,  into  a fullness  of  physical  and  vital  energy  an  t ic
utmost  breadth,  depth,  and  height  of  his  emotional,  us  mte
lectual  and  his  spiritual  being.  So  too  the  subjection  o
the  property  of  the  man  over  the  woman,  was  once  an
of  social  life  and  has  only  in  recent  times  been  ^
challenged.  So  strong  was  or  had  become  the  instinc  o
domination  in  the  male  animal  man,  that  c%en  .

philosophy  have  had  to  sanction  it,  very  much  in  t lat


606


War  and  Self-Determination


in  wliich  Milton  expresses  the  height  of  masculine  egoism,
“He  for  God  only,  she  for  God  in  him”,  — if  not  actually
indeed  for  him  in  the  place  of  God.  This  idea  too  is  crumbling
into  the  dust,  though  its  remnants  still  cling  to  life  by  many
strong  tentacles  of  old  legislation,  continued  instinct,  persistence
of  traditional  ideas;  the  fiat  has  gone  out  against  it  in  the
claim  of  woman  to  be  regarded,  she  too,  as  a free  individual
being.  The  right  of  property  of  the  rulers  in  the  ruled  has
perished  by  the  advance  of  liberty  and  democracy;  in  the  form
of  national  imperialism  it  still  indeed  persists,  though  more  now
by  commercial  greed  than  by  the  instinct  of  political  domina-
tion; intellectually  this  form  too  of  possessional  egoism  has
received  its  deathblow,  vitally  it  still  endures.  The  right  of
property  of  the  State  in  the  individual  which  threatened  to  take
the  place  of  all  these,  has  now  had  its  real  spiritual  consequence
thrown  into  relief  by  the  lurid  light  of  the  war,  and  we  may
hope  that  its  menace  to  human  liberty  will  be  diminished  by
this  clearer  knowledge.  We  are  at  least  advancing  to  a point
at  which  it  may  be  possible  .to  make  the  principle  of  self-
determination  a present  and  pressing,  if  not  yet  an  altogether
dominant  force  in  the  whole  shaping  of  human  life.

Self-determination  viewed  from  this  subjective  standpoint
carries  us  back  at  once  towards  the  old  spiritual  idea  of  the
Being  within,  whose  action,  once  known  and  self-revealed,  is
not  an  obedience  to  external  and  mechanical  impulses,  but
proceeds  in  each  from  the  powers  of  the  soul,  an  action  self-
determined  by  the  essential  quality  and  principle  of  which  all  our
becoming  is  the  apparent  movement,  svabhdvaniyatam  karma.
But  it  is  only  as  we  rise  higher  and  higher  in  ourselves  and  find
out  our  true  self  and  its  true  powers  that  we  can  get  at  the
full  truth  of  this  Swabhava.  Our  present  existence  is  at  the  most  a
growth  towards  it  and  therefore  an  imperfection,  and  its  chief
imperfection  is  the  individual’s  egoistic  idea  of  self  which  re-
appears enlarged  in  the  collective  egoism.  Therefore  an  egoistic
self-determination  or  a modified  individualism,  is  not  the
true  solution;  if  that  were  all,  we  could  never  get  beyond  a
balance  and,  in  progress,  a zigzag  of  conflict  and  accommoda-
tion. The  ego  is  not  the  true  circle  of  the  self;  the  law  of  mutual-


Self-Determination


607


ity  which  meets  it  at  every  turn  and  which  it  misuses,  arises
from  the  truth  that  there  is  a secret  unity  between  our  self
and  the  self  of  others  and  therefore  between  our  own  lives
and  the  hves  of  others.  The  law  of  our  self-determination
has  to  wed  itself  to  the  self-determination  of  others  and  to
find  the  way  to  enact  a real  union  through  this  mutuality.
But  its  basis  can  only  be  found  within  and  not  through  any
mechanical  adjustment.  It  lies  in  the  discovery  within  by
the  being  in  the  course  of  its  self-expansion  and  self-fulfilment
that  these  things  at  every  turn  depend  on  the  self-expansion
and  self-fulfilment  of  those  around  us,  because  we  are  secretly
one  being  with  them  and  one  life.  It  is  in  philosophical  language
the  recognition  of  the  one  self  in  all  who  fulfils  himself  variously
in  each;  it  is  the  finding  of  the  law  of  the  divine  being  in  each
unifying  itself  with  the  law  of  the  divine  being  in  all.  At  once
the  key  of  the  problem  is  shifted  from  without  to  within,  from  the
visible  externalities  of  social  and  political  adjustment  to  the
spiritual  life  and  truth  which  can  alone  provide  its  key.

Not  that  the  outer  life  has  to  be  neglected;  on  the  contrary
the  pursual  of  the  principle  in  one  field  or  on  one  level,  provided
we  do  not  limit  or  fix  ourselves  in  it,  helps  its  disclosure  in
other  fields  and  upon  other  levels.  Still  if  we  have  not  the  unity
within,  it  is  in  vain  that  we  shall  try  to  enforce  it  from  without
by  law  and  compulsion  or  by  any  assertion  in  outward  forms.
Intellectual  assertion  too,  like  the  mechanical,  is  insufiicient,
only  the  spiritual  can  give  it,  because  it  alone  has  the  secure
power  of  realisation.  The  ancient  truth  of  the  self  is  the  eternal
truth;  we  have  to  go  back  upon  it  in  order  to  carry  it  out  in
newer  and  fuller  ways  for  which  a past  humanity  was  no
ready.  The  recognition  and  fulfilment  of  die  divine  being  m one-
self and  in  man,  the  kingdom  of  God  within  and  in  t e race  is
the  basis  on  which  man  must  come  in  the  end  to  the
of  himself  as  a free  self-determining  being  and  of  man  in  o
in  a mutually  possessing  self-expansion  as  a armonio
self-determining  united  existence.


A League  of  Nations


Ancient  tradition  believed  in  a golden
age  of  mankind  which  lay  in  the  splendid  infancy  of  a primeval
past;  it  looked  back  to  some  type  or  symbol  of  original  per-
fection, Saturnian  epoch,  Satya  Yuga,  an  age  of  sincere  being
and  free  unity  when  the  sons  of  heaven  were  leaders  of  the
human  life  and  mind  and  the  law  of  God  was  written,  not  in
ineffective  books,  but  on  the  tablets  of  man’s  heart.  Then  he
needed  no  violence  of  outer  law  or  government  to  restrain  him
from  evil  or  to  cut  and  force  his  free  being  into  the  machine-
made  Procrustean  mould  of  a social  ideal;  for  a natural  divine
rule  in  his  members  was  the  spontaneous  and  sufficient  safeguard
of  his  liberty.  This  tradition  was  once  so  universal  that  one
might  almost  be  tempted  to  see  in  it  the  race  memory  of  some
golden  and  splendid  realisation,  not  perhaps  a miraculous
divine  beginning,  but.  some  past  spiral  cusp  and  apex,  some
topmost  gloriously  mounting  arc  of  the  cycles,  — if  there  were
not  the  equal  chance  of  its  being  no  more  than  a heightened
example  of  that  very  common  ideally  retrospective  tendency  in
the  human  mind  which  glorifies  the  past  out  of  all  perspective
or  proportion,  blots  out  its  shadows  and  sees  it  in  some  haze
or  deceiving  light  against  the  dark  immediate  shadow  of  the
present,  — or  else  a projection  from  his  sense  of  the  something
divine,  pure  and  perfect  within  him  from  which  he  has  fallen,
placed  by  symbolic  legend  not  in  the  eternal  but  in  time,  not
inwardly  in  his  spiritual  being,  but  outwardly  in  his  obscure
existence  on  this  crude  and  transient  crust  of  Earth.  What
concerns  us  more  is  that  we  find  often  associated  with  this


memory  or  this  backward-looking  illusion,  a vague  hope  far
or  near,  or  even  a more  precise  prophetic  or  religious  forward-
looking  tradition  of  a coming  back  to  us  of  that  golden  perfec-
tion, Astraea  redux,  Saturnia  regna,  — let  us  say,  a return  from
the  falling  line  of  the  cycle  to  another  similar,  perhaps  even
greater  high-glowing  cusp  and  apex.  Thus  in  the  human  mind


A League  of  Nations


609


which  looks  always  before  and  after,  its  great  dream  of  the
ideal  past  completed  itself  by  a greater  dream  of  the  ideal  future.
These  things  modern  man  with  his  scientific  and  secularised
mentality  finds  it  difficult  to  believe  in  unless  he  has  first  theo-
sophised  or  mysticised  himself  into  a fine  freedom  from  the  posi-
tive scientific  intelligence.  Science  which  traces  so  confidently
the  nobly  complete  and  astonishing  evolution  of  our  race  in  a
fairly  swift  straight  line  from  the  ape  man  to  the  dazzlingly
unfixable  brilliancy  of  Mr.  Lloyd  George  and  the  dyspeptic
greatness  of  Rockefeller,  rejects  the  old  traditions  as  dreams  and
poetic  figments.  But  to  recompense  us  for  our  loss  it  has  given
us  instead  a more  practicable,  persistent  and  immediate  vision
of  modern  progress  and  the  future  hope  of  a rational  and
mechanically  perfectible  society:  that  is  the  one  real  religion
still  left,  the  new  Jerusalem  of  the  modern  creed  of  a positivist
sociology.  The  ideal  past  has  lost  its  glamour,  but  a sober
glamour  of  the  future  is  brought  near  to  us  and  takes  on  to  the
constructive  human  reason  a closer  hue  of  reality.  The  Asiatic


mind  is  indeed  still  incurably  prone  to  the  older  type  of  imagina-
tion which  took  and  still  takes  so  many  inspiring  forms,  second
coming  of  Christ,  City  of  God,  the  Divine  Family,  advent  of
Messiah,  Mahdi  or  Avatar,  — but  whatever  the  variety  of  the
form,  the  essence  is  the  same,  a religious  or  spiritual  idealisation
of  a possible  future  humanity.  The  European  temperament
— and  we  are  all  trying  to  become  for  the  moment,  super
ficially  at  least,  white,  brown,  yellow  or  black  Europeans,
demands  something  more  familiarly  terrestrial  and  tarigi  e,
a secular,  social,  political  dream  of  evolving  humanity,  a
perfected  democracy,  socialism,  communism,  anarc  ism.  u
whichever  line  we  take  and  whether  it  be  truth  or  illusion,
thing  behind  is  the  same  and  would  seem  to  be  a necessity  o ou
human  mind  and  will  to  action.  We  cannot  do  without  some  'i
of  futurist  idealism.  Something  we  must  labour  to  ui  i
vidually  and  collectively  out  of  ourselves  and  our  lifc,
would  be  content  with  the  commonness  and  stum  I"  .

of  a half-made  and  half-animal  manhood,  — - a se  e ^ i

to  which  that  which  is  greatest  in  us  will  never  cons  ’
and  man  cannot  build  greatly  whether  in  art  or  i ,


610  War  and  Self-Determination

he  can  conceive  an  idea  and  form  of  perfection  and,  con-
ceiving, believe  in  his  power  to  achieve  it  out  of  however
rebellious  and  unductile  a stuff  of  nature..  Deprive  him  of  this
faith  in  his  power  for  perfection  and  you  slay  or  maim  his
greatest  creative  or  self-creative  faculty.  In  the  absence  then
of  any  immediate  practicability  of  that  higher  and  profounder
dream  of  a spiritually  united  and  perfected  humanity,  the
dream  of  social  and  political  meliorism  may  be  accepted  as  the
strongest  available  incentive  to  keep  humanity  going  forward.
It  is  better  that  it  should  have  the  ideal  of  a saving  machinery
than  that  it  should  have  no  ideal  at  all,  no  figure  of  a larger,
better  and  sweeter  life.

This  secular  dream  of  a future  golden  or  half-golden  age
of  a more  perfected,  rational  and  peacefully  co-operative
society  has  taken  recently  a singular  step  forward  in  the  effec-
tuating imagination  of  mankind  and  even  got  as  far  as  some
attempt  at  a first  step  towards  actual  effectuation.  In  ideal  and
imagination  it  has  assumed  the  form  of  a political  and  economic
society  of  the  nations  which  will  get  rid  of  the  cruel  and  devastat-
ing device  of  war,  establish  a reign  of  international  law  and
order  and  solve  without  clash,  strife  or  collision,  by  reason,  by
co-operation,  by  arbitration,  by  mutual  accommodation  all
the  more  dangerous  problems  which  still  disturb  or  imperil  the
comfortable  peace,  amity  and  organised  productiveness  which
should  be  the  reasonable  state  of  mankind.  International  peace,
an  ordered  legality  and  arrangement  of  the  world’s  affairs,  a
guaranteed  liberty,  — or  for  the  unfit  a preparation  and  school-
ing for  liberty,  — an  organised  unity  of  the  life  of  the  race,
this  is  the  figure  of  the  golden  age  which  we  are  now  promised.
At  the  first  sight  one  has  some  sense  of  a lacuna  somewhere,
a suspicion  of  a perfection  too  external  and  too  well-regulated
by  clock-work  and  a timidly  insistent  idea  that  it  may  perhaps
be  neither  so  readily  feasible  nor  so  lyrically  enchanting  as  its
prophets  pretend.  One  may  be  disposed  to  ask,  what  of  the
spirit  and  soul  of  man,  the  greatness  of  the  inner  perfection
which  can  alone  support  and  give  security  and  some  kind  of
psychological  reality  to  even  the  most  ideal  arrangement  of  his
outer  life,  — how  far  that  has  gone  or  is  likely  to  go  in  the  near


611


A League  of  Nations

future,  or  what  means  or  opportunities  the  new  order  proposes
to  offer  for  its  growth  and  satisfaction?  But  this  is  no  doubt
too  esoteric  a way  of  looking  at  things.  The  practical  western
mind  does  not  trouble  itself  overmuch  with  these  subtleties;
it  prefers,  and  rightly  enough,  since  to  get  something  done
seems  to  be  the  chief  actual  business  of  man  in  life,  to  hasten  to
the  matter  in  hand  and  realise  something  useful,  visible  and
tangible,  good  enough  for  a practical  beginning  or  step  forward.
It  believes  besides  in  the  omnipotence  of  law  and  institution
to  make  the  life  of  man  conformable  to  his  intellectual  or
spiritual  ideals;  it  is  satisfied  if  it  can  write  down  and  find
sanctions  for  a good  and  convenient  system  of  laws,  a compact
or  constitution,  set  up  the  mechanical  means  for  the  enforce-
ment of  its  idea,  build  into  effective  form  a workable  institution.
Other  less  palpable  things,  if  they  are  at  all  indispensable,  are
expected  to  develop  of  themselves,  as  surely  they  ought  under
good  mechanical  conditions.

Good  philosophical  as  well  as  practical  justification  may
be  put  forward  for  this  attitude.  Form,  after  all,  is  an  effective
suggestion  to  the  soul;  machinery,  as  even  churches  and  reli-
gions have  been  prone  to  .believe,  is  all-powerful  and  can  be
trusted  to  create  whatever  you  may  need  of  the  spirit.  God
himself  or  contriving  Nature  had  first  to  invent  the  machinery
and  form  of  a universe  and  could  only  then  work  out  in  its  mould
some  figure  of  the  spirit.  Therefore,  the  sign  of  great  hope,
the  good  tidings  of  peace  and  good  will  unto  men  is  not  that
a new  and  diviner  or  simply  a more  human  spirit  has  been  born
into  humanity,  seized  upon  its  leaders  and  extended  itself  among
its  ego-ridden,  passion-driven,  interest-governed  millions,  but
that  an  institution  has  been  begotten  at  Paris  with  the  blessings
of  Premiers  and  Presidents,  — the  constitution  of  an  inter-
national society,  supported  by  the  armed  force  of  great  nations
and  empires  and  therefore  sure  to  be  practicable,  prosper
and  succeed,  has  been  got  into  shape  which  will  make  war,
militarism,  oppression,  exploitation  an  ugly  dream  of  the  past,
induce  Capital  and  Labour,  lion  and  lamb,  to  lie  down  side  by
side  in  peace  and  not,  as  a wicked  Bolshevism  proposes,  one
well  digested  inside  the  other,  and  in  fact  bring  about  e ore


612


War  and  Self-Determination

long,  sooner  it  is  hoped  rather  than  later,  the  grand  fraternity  of
mankind.  This  is  good  news,  if  true.  Still,  before  we  enter  the
house  of  thanksgiving,  let  us  pause  a little  and  cast  an  eye  of
scrutiny  on  this  new  infant  phenomenon.

A just,  generous,  cordial  and  valid  League  of  Nations  is
the  thing  which  has  been  created,  it  seems  to  replace  the  old
unjust  Balances  of  Power  and  stumbling,  quarrelsome  Concerts.
And  if  it  is  to  succeed  better  than  the  loose,  ineffective  and
easily  dissoluble  things  which  it  supplants,  it  must  satisfy,  one
would  think,  certain  conditions  which  they  did  not  even  attempt
to  fulfil.  And  one  would  at  first  sight  fix  something  like  the
following  as  the  indispensable  conditions.  First,  this  League
must  draw  into  its  circle  in  one  way  or  another  all  the  existing
nations  of  the  earth;  and  that  it  must  do  on  both  just  and
agreeable  terms  so  that  they  may  join  willingly  and  gladly  and
without  any  serious  misgivings,  reservations  or  heart-burnings;
it  must  satisfy  each  and  all  by  a fair  and  effective  and,  one
must  add  in  these  democratic  days,  an  honourable  and  equal
position  in  this  new  society  of  the  peoples.  Since  it  should
command  and  retain  their  moral  assent  and  support,  if  it  is  to
maintain  in  being  an  otherwise  insecure  material  adhesion,  it
must,  in  order  to  do  that  constantly,  not  only  at  the  moment  of
formation  but  in  the  future,  base  itself  on  no  self-regarding  law
or  established  table  of  institutions  fixed  by  any  arbitrary  will  of
those  who  for  the  moment  are  the  strongest  but  on  some  firm,
recognisable  and  always  evolvable  principle  of  equity  and
justice,  for  only  where  these  things  are  is  there  a moral  guarantee
and  security.  The  constitution  of  the  League  must  provide  a
trustworthy  means  for  the  solution  of  all  difficult,  delicate  and
embarrassing  questions  which  may  hereafter  endanger  the
infant  and  precarious  framework  of  international  society,  and
for  that  purpose  it  must  establish  a permanent,  a central  and  a
strong  authority  which  all  nations  can  readily  recognise  and
accept  as  a natural  head  and  faithful  dynamic  expression  of  the
corporate  being  of  mankind.  These,  one  would  think,  are  not  at
all  nebulous,  fanciful  or  too  idealistic  demands,  but  the  practical
necessities  of  any  system  of  yet  loose  unification  such  as  now  is
contemplated,  conditions  it  must  from  the  first  and  increasingly


A League  of  Nations


613


satisfy  if  it  is  to  survive  the  enormous  difficulties  of  an  enter-
prise which,  as  it  proceeds,  will  have  to  work  out  of  being  most
of  the  natural  egoistic  instincts  and  rooted  past  habits  of  the
international  mentality  of  the  race.

This  new  gigantic  bantling  which  has  come  into  existence
with  War  for  its  father  and  an  armed  and  enforced  Peace  for  its
mother,  with  threatening  and  bloodily  suppressed  revolutions,
a truncated  internationalistic  idealism  and  many  half-curbed,
just  snaffled  rearing  national  egoisms  for  its  witnesses  and
god-parents,  has  not,  when  looked  at  from  this  standpoint,  in
spite  of  certain  elements  of  promise,  an  altogether  reassuring
appearance.  The  circumstances  of  its  inception  were  adverse
and  except  by  a tremendous  effort  of  self-conquest  in  the  minds
of  the  rulers  and  statesmen  of  the  victorious  nations,  a self-
conquest rendered  a thousand  times  more  difficult  by  the  stu-
pendous magnitude  and  the  intoxicating  completeness  of  their
victory,  any  at  all  complete  result  and  auspicious  new  beginning
could  not  be  hoped  for.  This  league  now  in  the  last  throes  of
formation  has  not  been  a spontaneous  creation  of  a peaceful,
equal  and  well-combined  will  towards  unity  of  all  the  world  s
peoples.  It  comes  into  being  overshadowed  by  the  legacy  of
hatreds,  reprisals,  apprehensions,  ambitions  of  a murderous
world  war  chequered  by  revolutions  which  have  opened  a new
and  alarming  vista  of  world-wide  unrest  and  disturbance.
It  has  grown  out  of  a vague  but  strong  aspiration,  more
among  the  rank  and  file  of  the  nations,  and  even  so  not  equally
common  to  all  of  them,  than  among  their  governing  men  or
classes,  — to  find  some  means  for  the  future  avoidance  o
violent  catastrophes  in  the  international  life  of  mankin  . t
has  been  precipitated  into  actual  and  immediate  being  y
the  determination  of  an  eminent  idealistic  statesman  wit  e
modified  and  in  some  cases  unwilling  assent  of  others  w o
shared  only  partially  or  not  at  all  his  idealism,  one  man  o
strong  will  who,  aided  by  a commanding  position
by  circumstances  and  a flexible  obstinacy  in  his  use  o t
been  able  to  impose  some  shadow  or  some  ,

form  of  his  ideal  — the  future  alone  can  show  w ic  i is
— on  the  crude  course  of  events  and  the  realistic  egoi


614  War  and  Self-Determination

governments  and  imperial  nations.  But  in  present  fact  the
large  and  complete  ideal  with  which  he  began  his  work,  has  been
so  impinged  upon  by  the  necessities  of  national  passions,
ambition,  self-interest  and  by  pressure  of  the  force  of  cir-
cumstances, — still  in  spite  of  all  idealism  the  chief  determining
factors  of  life,  — that  it  is  difficult  to  put  one’s  hand  on  any
thing  in  the  concrete  arrangement  formulated  and  say  without
doubt  or  qualm  that  here  is  the  very  embodiment  of  the  high
principles  in  whose  name  the  great  war  was  fought  and  won.
This  is  not  surprising,  nor  should  it  be  disappointing  except  to
those  who  trusted  more  to  their  hopes  than  to  experience.
All  we  have  to  see  is  whether  those  high  original  principles  were
indeed  necessary  to  the  future  security  and  evolution  of  this  new
association  of  the  peoples  and,  if  so,  what  chance  they  have  of
emerging  from  the  forms  in  which  they  now  seem  to  have  been
rather  buried  than  given  a body.  And  that  will  depend  on  the
extent  to  which  the  conditions  already  suggested  are  realised  or
evolvable  from  the  League’s  incipient  constitution.

An  effective  League  of  Nations  must  draw  into  itself
all  the  existing  nations  of  mankind;  for  any  considerable
omission  or  exclusion  will  bring  in  almost  inevitably  an  ele-
ment of  future  danger,  of  possible  disagreements  and  collisions,
perhaps  of  a rival  grouping  with  jealousies  which  must  lead  to
another  and  more  colossal  catastrophe.  In  its  ostensible  figure
this  new  League  does  not  by  any  means  wear  a catholic  appear-
ance. Professedly,  it  is  nothing  but  an  association  of  actual
friends  and  allies.  In  the  front  rank  stand  confident  and  master-
ful five  great  and  powerful  empires  or  nations,  — the  sole  great
Powers  left  standing  by  the  hurricane  in  unimpaired  strength,
and  two  of  them  indeed  with  an  enormously  increased  power,
influence  and  dominion:  behind  crowd  in  dimly  and  ineffectively
a number  of  smaller  European  and  American  peoples,  those
who  were  allied  to  them  or  otherwise  on  their  side  in  the  war,
and  one  feeble  and  disjointed  oriental  leviathan;  but  all  these
seem  to  partake  only  with  a passive  assent  or  a subordinate
co-operation,  — and  in  fact  with  very  much  of  the  first  and
very  little  of  the  latter,  — whether  in  the  determining  of  the
form  of  the  League  or  in  its  control  and  government.  And  the


A League  of  Nations


615


immediate  professed  object  of  the  association  is  not  to  knit
the  world  together  in  the  beginnings  of  a well-conceived  unity,
— that  could  only  have  been  done  if  all  the  peoples  had  taken
a free  and  equal  part  in  these  deliberations,  whereas  in  fact  the
whole  thing  has  been  hastily  constructed  in  semi-secret  con-
ference by  the  victors  of  the  war,  and  chiefly  by  the  will  of  the
five  leading  Powers.  Its  object  is  to  regulate  the  interests  and
mutual  relations  of  the  members  of  the  League  by  rule,  agree-
ment, deliberation  and  arbitration  and  their  relations  with  other


States  outside  the  League  as  much  as  may  be  by  the  same  means;
it  is  this  only  and  in  the  beginning  it  is  nothing  more.  But  a door
is  left  open  for  the  nations  still  outside  to  enter  in  a given  time,
provided  they  subscribe  unquestioningly  to  a system  which  they
will  have  had  no  hand  in  framing,  though  under  it  they  will  have
to  live.  On  the  other  hand  a door  of  egress  is  also  provided  for
any  nation  wishing  to  recede  hereafter  from  the  League,  and
if  disunion  should  set  in  among  the  greater  Powers,  this
dangerous,  though  under  the  circumstances  perhaps  unavoidable
provision,  may  easily  lead  to  the  automatic  dissolution  of  even
this  hesitating  first  frame  of  a partial  unity.

But  the  facts  and  forces  of  the  situation  are  perhaps  more
favourable  than  ostensible  paper  provisions.  The  nations  not
yet  included  are  with  two  great  and  perilous  exceptions  sma
and  inconsiderable  and  their  position  outside  will  be  so  is
advantageous,  they  will  be  at  every  turn  so  much  at  the  mercy
of  this  formidable  combination,  — for  the  five  dominant
will  easily  be  able,  if  they  are  determined  and  unite  , to  en  or
their  will  vigorously  against  all  dissidents,  — that  they  may  e
expected  to  subscribe  more  or  less  readily  to  its  terms  or  a ^
rate  to  enter  in  after  a few  years’  experience  of  _

Great  Powers  too  are  not  likely  to  have  strong  reasons  or
ing  asunder  for  some  years  to  come,  and  time  may  per
vided  no  new  revolutions  sweep  across  the  wor  , con
habit  of  united  action.  We  may  assume  that  here  we  av
though  not  yet  in  name,  the  beginnings  of  a counci  or


ect  federation  of  the  world’s  peoples.  under

But  the  constitution  of  this  Council  and  t e con  i i
vhich  the  variously  circumstanced  nations  are  a mi


616


War  and  Self-Determination

brought  under  it,  have  a still  more  baffling  appearance.  They  do
not  at  all  correspond  with  the  democratic  idealism  of  the  human
mind  of  to-day  but  rather  strike  one  as  a structure  of  almost  me-
diaeval irregularity,  complexity,  incoherent  construction,  a
well-nigh  feudal  political  building  with  some  formal  concessions
on  its  ground  floor  to  the  modern  canon  of  liberty  and  equality.
A uniflcation  of  mankind  may  proceed  very  much  on  the  same
lines  as  past  unifications  of  smaller  peoples  into  nations  or  em-
pires. It  might  have  been  brought  about  by  the  military  force
or  the  political  influence  of  some  powerful  king-state  preponder-
ant by  land  and  sea,  — pampotent  par  terre  et  mer,  as  Nostrada-
mus prophetically  described  the  British  Ernpire,  — not  neces-
sarily despotic  and  absolute  but  easily  first  among  equals;  and
that  I suppose  is  what  would  have  happened  if  Germany  had
come  up  top  dog  in  the  struggle  instead  of  a very  much  mutilated
and  flattened  undermost.  Nor  is  it  at  all  certain  that  something
of  the  sort  will  not  eventually  come  about  if  the  present  attempt
or  crude  sketch  of  a system  should  come  to  grief;  but  for  the
moment  this  contingency  has  been  prevented  or  at  least  post-
poned. That  possibility  eliminated,  the  unification  may  still  take
the  form  of  an  oligarchy  or  hegemony  of  great  Powers,  leaders
and  masters  of  the  herd,  with  the  weaker  rabble  rest  hanging  on
the  flanks  or  posteriors  of  their  mighty  bellwethers  and  following
them  and  their  omnipotent  decisions  in  sometimes  a submissive
and  approbatory,  sometimes  a mutinous  and  discordant  chorus ;
something  very  much  of  this  kind  is  what  this  new  League  has
certainly  been  in  its  formation  and  is  likely  to  turn  out  in  its
execution.  But  there  was  also  the  vain  present  hope  or  dream,
the  strong  future  though  far-off  possibility  of  an  equal,  just  and
democratic  federation  of  the  peoples  in  which  the  dwarf  and
Goliath  nations,  the  strong  and  the  weak,  the  wealthy  and  the  less
wealthy,  the  immediately  successful  and  the  long  or  temporarily
unfortunate,  — who  may  yet  have  better  gifts,  have  done  really
more  for  mankind  than  the  arrivistes  among  the  nations,  — will
have,  as  is  the  rule  or  the  ideal  in  all  democratic  bodies,  in  law
and  in  initial  fact  an  equal  position  and  there  will  be  only  a na-
tural leadership  and  influence  to  differentiate  by  a freely  accord-
ed greater  weight  and  voice.  These  were  the  three  possibilities.


A League  of  Nations


617


and  they  represent  respectively  the  ideal  of  the  past  which  is  said
to  have  been  buried  in  the  grave  of  imperial  Germany,  the  fact
of  the  present  which  is  a fact  only  and  to  none  an  ideal,  and  the
ideal  of  the  future,  loudly  trumpeted  during  the  war,  though
there  is  none  now,  except  the  vanquished,  the  subject  and  the
revolutionary,  so  poor  and  weak  as  to  do  it  reverence.

The  initial  constitution  of  the  League  is  almost  frankly  oli-
garchic in  its  disposal  of  the  international  balance  of  power,
— not  quite  an  absolute  oligarchy,  indeed,  for  there  is  certainly
a general  assembly  which  is  so  far  democratic  that  all  its  mem-
bers will  exult  in  the  dignifying  possession  of  an  equal  vote.
Honduras  and  Guatemala  may,  if  the  fancy  pleases  them,  indulge
themselves  in  some  feeling  of  being  lifted  up  to  an  equality  with
imperial  England,  America,  the  new  arbiter  of  the  world,  and  vic-
torious France.  But  this  is  an  illusion,  a trompe  Vceil.  For  we
find  that  this  general  assembly  is  in  no  sense  the  governing  body
but  only  a secondary  authority,  a court  of  approval  and  refe-
rence, to  which  the  powerful  executive  nations  will  refer,  mostly
at  their  own  discretion,  this  or  that  doubtful  question  for  discus-
sion. In  practice  and  fact  the  new  sovereign  of  the  world  under
this  constitution,  — jagadisvaro  vdl — will  be  the  executive  body
of  League  of  Nations.  But  there  the  five  great  Powers  will
sit  in  a secure  and  formidable  permanence,  while  a changeable
selection  of  representatives  picked  out  from  the  common  herd
will  diminutively  assist  their  deliberations,  assisting  or  discussing
in  the  giant  obscurity  of  their  shadow.  One  can  easily  see  how  the
superior  management  of  the  world’s  affairs  will  go  under  these
conditions  and  in  fact  have  already  had  a taste  of  its  quality  in
the  process  of  this  formation  and  this  building  of  a basis  for  what
it  is  still  hoped  by  many  will  be  a long  or  even  a permanent  peace.
Evidently  in  such  a governing  body  the  Great  Five  will  eter
mine  the  whole  policy  and  action;  nothing  will  readily  pass
which  will  be  at  all  displeasing  to  these  new  masters  of  the  eartn,
or  let  us  say,  to  this  new  composite  hegemony,  lor  its  eci
sions  will  at  no  time  be  guided  by  that  perilous,  ucti  e an
variable  thing,  a majority,  but  must  be  by  unanimity.  \ na
principle  is  this  system  but  a novel,  an  improved,  an  enlarged  ana
regularised  edition  of  the  Concert  of  Powers,  h era  ise


618  War  and  Self-Determination

in  form  because  buttressed  by  a democratic  general  assembly
which  may,  indeed,  as  circumstances  develop  and  conditions
change,  become  something,  but  may  equally  remain  a dignified  or
jindignified  cypher,  — but  still  in  essence  another  and  firmer
Avatar  of  that  old,  loose  and  dubious  body?  Even  something  of
that  historic  device,  the  balance  of  power,  though  now  much
changed,  shifted,  disjointed  and  perilously  lopsided,  still  remains
subtly  concealed  in  this  form  of  a novel  order.  And  that  element
is  likely  to  pronounce  itself  later  on;  for  where  there  is  no  imper-
sonal governing  principle  and  no  clear  original  structure  in  the
international  body,  its  motions  must  be  determined  by  a balance
of  interests,  and  the  balance  of  interests  can  only  be  kept  reason-
ably steady  by  carefully  preserving  an  established  balance  of
power.  That  was  the  justification  of  the  old  armed  order;  it  is
likely  to  be  a necessity  of  this  new  system  for  regulating  chaos.

This  creation  is  a realistic  practical  construction  with  a
very  minimum  concession  to  the  new  idealism:  it  has  been  erected
by  statesmen  who  have  been  concerned  to  legalise  the  actual
facts  and  organise  the  actual  forces  which  have  emerged  from
the  World  War  — a few  inconveniently  new-born  and  of  a
menacing  significance  which  have  been  barred  and  boycotted,
blockaded  or  pressed  out  of  existence : it  is  hoped  also  to  secure
their  system  against  attack  by  any  resuscitable  ghost  of  the  past
or  violently  subversive  genius  of  the  future.  From  that  point  of
view  it  has  been  constructed  with  a remarkable  skill  and  fidelity
to  present  realities,  though  one  may  be  tempted  to  think  with  an
insufficient  allowance  for  obscure  but  already  visible  potential-
ities. The  correspondence  between  fact  and  form  is  accurate  to
perfection.  Five  Powers  have  been  the  real  victors  of  the  war,
three  of  them  central  and  decisive  forces  who  now  actually  con-
trol the  world  by  their  will,  and  two  others  who  intervened  as
less  powerful  subsidiary  strengths,  but  can  put  in  some  effec-
tive claim  and  material  weight  into  the  future  balance  of  forces.
This  fact  is  reproduced  in  the  constitution  of  the  governing  body;
it  is  these  Five  who  by  virtue  of  their  wealth  and  force  are  to  have
in  it  a permanent  voice,  the  three  great  ones  to  strike  the  major
chords  and  determine  the  general  harmony  of  the  concert,  the
two  others  to  bring  in,  as  best  they  can  and  when  they  can,  minor


619


A League  of  Nations


chords  and  unessential  variations.  Then  there  are  the  great
number  of  small  or  weaker  nations  who  have  at  their  command
minor  material  effectives  and,  though  incapable  of  being  princi-
pals in  any  very  great  conflict  may  be  useful  as  minor  auxiliaries,
the  free  peoples,  allies  included  from  the  beginning  by  right,  neu-
trals invited  to  participate  in  a settled  organisation  of  peace
though  they  did  not  throw  their  weight  into  the  decision  of  war,
enemies,  old  or  new,  who  may  be  admitted  when  they  have  satis-
fied more  or  less  onerous  or  crushing  and  disabling  conditions.
These  will  make  the  general  assembly:  some  of  them  will  have
from  time  to  time  an  uncertain  voice  in  the  governing  body;
the  rest  will  be  the  mass,  the  commons,  the  general  body  who
will  possess  some  limited  amount  of  actual  power  and  some  kind
of  moral  force  behind  the  executive.  Labour  too  has  been  made
by  the  War  a great  though  as  yet  incoherent  international  power,
and  the  League,  wishing  evidently  to  be  wise  in  time  and  make
terms  with  this  formidable  new  fact,  recognises  at  its  side  Labour


in  a special  separate  conference.

But  there  are  also  new  Asiatic  peoples  who  cannot  now  be
admitted,  because  they  are  infants  and  unripe ; there  are
and  protected  nations  for  whom  the  war  was  not  foug  t an
who  cannot  share  in  the  once  hoped-for  general  free  om,  u
must  trust  to  the  generous  and  unselfish  liberalism  of  t eir  ru  ers
and  protectors;  there  are  African  tribes  who  are  the  yet  unmanu
factured  raw  material  of  humanity.  These  are  to  be  e t
the  old  or  put  under  a new  control  or  are  to  be  entrus  e o
paternal  hands  of  this  or  that  governing  power  who  wi  e in
legal  style  of  the  new  dispensation,  not  masters  an  ’

— for  in  this  just  and  miraculous  peace  there  are  no  ’

only  rectified  arrangements  of  control  and  terntoiy,
tees,  mandatories,  A mandate  from  the  League  wi  e
guard  of  these  less  fortunate  peoples.  For  ‘ con-

to  live  in  quite  a new  moralized  world  in  whic  e g
science  of  mankind  will  be  wide  awake  an  e ec  i
League  is  .here  to  represent  it.  As  its  at

a periodical  report  of  their  trust  * themselves  at  once
as  the  great  Powers  of  the  League  wil
mandatories,  leaders  and  deputies  of  t


620


War  and  Self-Determination


science.  All  existing  forces  are  represented  in  just  proportions  in
this  very  remarkable  constitution.

The  idealist  may  find  much  to  object  against  the  perpetua-
tion and  hardening  of  the  unideal  existent  fact  on  which  the
system  of  the  League  is  founded,  but  undoubtedly  that  system
has  a good  deal  to  say  for  itself,  can  urge  very  urgent  considera-
tions from  the  point  of  view  of  practical  possibility.  One  indis-
pensable condition  of  its  success  is  a solid  central  authority,
strong  and  permanent,  capable  of  enforcing  its  decisions,  and  it
must  be  an  organ  which  all  nations  can  accept  as  the  natural
head  and  faithful  dynamic  expression  of  the  corporate  being  of
mankind.  As  far  as  is  at  all  practicable  at  the  moment,  here  is,
it  may  be  said,  just  such  an  authority.  The  international  body
of  mankind  is  still  an  amorphous  mass,  its  constituent  peoples
unaccustomed  to  act  together,  heterogeneous  by  virtue  of  their
various  degrees  of  development,  organised  power,  experience,
civilisation:  a free  general  assembly,  a parliament  of  the  world,
an  equal  federation  of  mankind,  is  out  of  the  question;  even  an
equal  federation  of  free  and  civilised  peoples  is  likely  to  be  an
incoherent  and  futile  body  incapable  of  effective  corporate  action.
What  is  to  enforce  and  give  practicality  to  the  general  needs  and
desires  if  not  the  power,  influence,  authority  and,  where  need  is,
the  strong  arm  of  the  great  nations  and  empires  acting  in  concert
but  with  a due  regard  for  the  common  interests  and  general
voice?  Who  else  are  to  determine  preponderatingly  the  decisions
they  will  have  to  enforce  or  can  give  to  them  a permanent  prin-
ciple or  sustained  practical  policy?  No  combination  of  little
American  republics  and  minor  European  Powers  could  dictate  a
world  policy  to  the  United  States,  France  and  the  British  Empire
or  could  be  allowed  to  play  by  the  blind  rule  of  a majority  with
these  great  interests.  But  in  the  League  the  various  constituents
of  the  corporate  body  are  so  ranked  and  related  as  to  give  precisely
a faithful  dynamic  expression  of  it  in  its  present  conditions;  '
whatever  evolution  is  necessary  can  be  worked  out  through
a general  control  and  a periodical  revision  of  treaties  and  rela-
tions. In  brief,  the  whole  international  condition  of  the  world  is
a chaos  that  has  to  be  brought  into  order  and  shape,  and  that  is
a work  which  cannot  be  done  by  an  idyllic  idealism  or  an  abs-


A League  of  Nations


621


tract  perfection  of  principles  which  are  not  in  correspondence
with  the  actualities  of  things  and,  if  prematurely  applied,  are
likely  to  bring  in  a worse  confusion,  but  can  only  be  accom-
plished by  a strong  and  capable  organised  Force  which  will  take
things  as  they  stand,  impose  a new  system  of  law  and  order  on
this  chaos,  some  firm  however  imperfect  initial  framework,  and
watch  over  its  development  with  a strict  eye  on  the  practical
possibilities  of  progress.  On  that  safe  and  firm  basis  a slow  but
sure  and  deliberate  advance  can  be  made  towards  a future  better
law  and  ideal  order.  There  is  another  side  to  the  question,  but
let  us  suppress  it  for  the  moment  and  give  full  value  and  weight
to  the  considerations.

But  all  the  more  indispensable  does  it  then  become  that
the  principles  of  the  progress  to  be  made  shall  be  recognised
from  the  beginning  in  the  law  and  constitution  of  the  League,
or  at  least  indicated  in  such  a way  and  so  impressed  on  its  system
as  to  ensure  that  on  those  lines  or  towards  the  fulfilment  of  those


principles  its  action  should  proceed  and  not  be  diverted  to  other,
baser,  reactionary  or  obstructive  uses.  The  declaration  of  genera
principles  and  their  embodiments  and  safeguards  in  the  democra-
tic constitutions  promulgated  in  the  eighteenth  century  were
no  barren  ideologists’  formularies,  — any  more  than  the  a rma
tion  of  constitutional  principles  in  earlier  documents  li  e t e
Magna  Charta,  — but  laid  down  the  basis  on  which  governmen
and  progress  must  proceed  in  the  new-born  ordei  of  t e wor
and  were  at  once  a signpost  and  an  effective  moral  guaran  ee
for  the  assured  march  of  Democracy.  We  look  iri  vain  in  t
stitution  of  the  League  for  any  such  great  Sliding  pnncip  -
The  provisions  for  the  diminution  of  the  possibi  ities  o \ >

the  creation  of  some  new  small  nation  and  the  sa  e y S*''
those  that  already  existed  can  hardly  be  calle  y ^ *
There  is  here  no  hint  of  any  charter  of  the  internationa  n
duties  of  the  peoples  in  a new  order  making  at  once
and  union.  The  principle  of  self-determination  thrown

later  stages  of  the  war  were  fought  has  ba™  ™ pot-beliicd
overboard  and  swallowed  up  in  the  jaws  o »
diplomatic  transaction.  - it  may  be  only  for  a ‘""a  ^ P

phet  in  the  stomach  of  the  whale,  but  for  the  non


622  War  and  Self-Determination

almost  perfect  disappearance.  Some  infinitesimal  shadow  of  it
we  see  in  petty  transactions  like  the  arrangements  about  Schles-
wig-Holstein, but  for  the  rest  the  map  of  the  world  has  been
altered  very  much  in  the  old  familiar  fashion  without  any  consis-
tent regard  to  nationality  or  choice,  but  rather  by  the  agreement
and  fiat  of  armed  victorious  nations.  A famous  pronouncement
during  the  war  had  denounced  the  theory  of  trusteeship,  that
cloak  which  can  cover  with  so  noble  a grace  the  hard  reality  of
domination  and  exploitation,  — things  now  too  gross  in  their
nakedness  to  be  presented  undraped  to  the  squeamish  moral
sense  of  a modern  humanity.  But  in  this  after-war  system  that
very  theory  of  trusteeship  is  glorified  and  consecrated,  though
with  the  gloss  of  a mandate  subject  to  examination  — by  a body
whose  action  and  deliberation  will  be  controlled  by  the  trustees.
Subject  nations  are  still  to  exist  in  this  world ; for  the  system  of
mandates  is  only  to  be  applied  where  a previous  subjection  has
been  abrogated,  it  is  to  be  applied  to  some  of  the  Asiatic  or
African  peoples  who  lay  under  the  uplifted  scourge  of  the  now
fallen  empires ; the  rest  who  had  the  advantage  of  milder  masters,
the  remaining  subject  peoples  from  Ireland  to  Korea,  have  no
need  of  any  such  safeguard!

It  may  be  that  all  this  denial  of  a too  ideal  principle  of  liberty
was  inevitable;  for  we  must,  we  are  now  told,  not  be  in  too  great
a hurry  to  get  from  midnight  to  midday;  the  law  of  the  times
and  seasons  must  be  observed,  a mitigated  darkness  must  first
come  and  then  twilight  and  then  dawn  and  then  the  glad  con-
fident morning  before  we  can  live  in  the  golden  noon  of  a univer-
salised  liberty  and  justice.  But  meanwhile  what  other  guiding
principle,  what  embodied  idea  of  law  and  right,  what  equitable
and  equal  balance  of  obligations  is  to  be  the  firm  basis  of  the  new
order  ? We  find  none,  only  a machinery  for  the  diminution  of  the
chances  of  war,  not  for  their  removal,  by  compulsory  arbitration,
by  the  threat  or  actuality  of  armed  force  and  economic  pressure ;
for  the  revision  of  treaties;  for  the  secured  possession  of  colo-
nies, dependencies,  markets,  frontiers,  ports,  mandates;  for  the
international  discussion  and  settlement  of  the  conflicting  claims
of  Capital  and  Labour.  There  is  a system  of  immediately
practicable  relations,  an  attempt  to  affirm  and  to  secure  a new


A League  of  Nations  623

status  quo,  a provision  for  minor  manipulations  and  alterations;
but  there  is  little  actual  foundation  for  a new  and  nobler  world-
order.  A preparation  for  it  may  have  been  the  intention  of  the
institutors,  but  the  fulfilment  of  their  intention  is  left  very  much
at  the  mercy  of  the  uncertain  chances  of  the  future.  The  idealism
of  the  founder  has  so  far  triumphed  as  to  get  some  limited  form
of  a League  of  Nations  admitted  and  put  into  shape,  but  at  every
other  point  the  idealist  has  gone  under  and  the  stamp  of  the
politician  and  diplomat  is  over  this  whole  new  modern  machine,
— of  the  mere  practical  man  with  his  short  sight  and  his  rough
and  ready  methods.  It  is  a leaky  and  ill-balanced  ship  launched
on  waters  of  tempest  and  chaos  without  a chart  or  compass  or
sailing  instructions.

Well,  but  in  other  times  devices  as  rough  and  unbecoming
have  been  the  foundations  of  great  structures,  and  if  this  League
can  be  kept  in  being  there  may  be  some  chance  of  getting  it
suffused  with  the  principles  and  ideals  for  whose  realisation  the
vague  heart  and  conscience  of  mankind,  baffled  always  by  its
own  lax  complicities,  is  beginning  to  thirst  and  weary.  But  to  the
eye  of  the  critic  this  new  pact  would  seem  to  carry  in  itself  the
ominous  seeds  of  its  own  future  mutability  and  perhaps  dissolu-
tion. For  first  of  all  the  League  is  entering  into  being  with  a
very  limited  and  feeble  enthusiasm  on  its  behalf  even  in  the
nations  which  are  interested  in  its  maintenance;  America  does
not  seem  to  be  in  a quite  flawless  harmony  of  agreement  with  its
President  in  his  self-satisfaction  over  the  shapely  beauty  of  his
nursling;  the  world  of  Labour  and  socialism  is  critical,  dissatis-
fied, distrustful,  uneasy,  simmering  over  into  brief  and  uncertain
but  widespread  and  menacing  strikes  and  formidable  demands
and  murmurings.  These  are  not  favourable  signs.  The  League
will  need  all  the  support  and  hearty  acquiescence  it  can  get  to
overcome  the  difficulties  that  it  will  meet  in  constructing  the  world
according  to  its  own  idea  and  fashion,  a task  which  will  not  en
but  only  be  just  beginning  when  peace  is  concluded,  and  it  is
doubtful  whether  it  will  have  what  it  needs  in  any  but  the  most
grudging  measure.  Not  enthusiastic  support,  but  a sort  o
muttering  acquiescence  for  want  of  any  chance  of  a better  t ing
at  the  moment  is  the  general  mood  of  the  world  s pcop  es  w lose


624


War  and  Self-Determination


interests  it  proposes  to  manage.  A poor  starting  wind  for  so
momentous  a voyage.

But  let  us  suppose  the  system  accepted  and  under  way,  —
what  are  the  actual  facts  which  will  meet  it  in  the  future  ? Its  sys-
tem will  stand  for  a long  time  to  come  for  the  nations  conquered
in  the  war  as  a perpetuation  of  their  downfall,  diminution  and
disgrace;  it  will  be  to  them  a gaoler  and  inflicter  of  penalties,  a
guardian  of  tasks  and  payments  with  an  uplifted  scourge.  It
need  not  have  been  so,  if  a generous  and  equal  peace  had  been
made  or,  better,  if  apart  from  all  such  questions,  there  had  been
a peace  based  not  on  the  will  of  a conquering  might,  even  though
better-minded  than  the  might  it  conquered,  but  on  clear  and
undeniable  principles,  such  as  the  utmost  possible  self-determina-
tion, equal  opportunity,  equal  position  for  the  world’s  peoples;
that  would  have  been  indeed  a peace  without  any  other  victors
or  vanquished  than  vanquished  force  and  wrong  and  victorious
equity.  But  the  leading  nations  have  chosen  to  impose  a diplo-
matic peace  in  which  the  League  which  imposes  it  figures  as  an
administrator  of  criminal  justice.  The  vanquished  nations,
now  for  the  most  part  democracies  and  no  longer  the  old  aggres-
sive militarisms  which  made  the  war,  were,  it  is  said,  criminals
and  breakers  of  peace  and  the  penalty  inflicted  is  far  too  light  in
comparison  with  their  crimes.  It  may  be  so  in  literal  terms,  —
though  a criminal  justice  inflicted  by  one  of  two  parties  in  a quar-
rel on  his  beaten  opponent  and  not  by  an  impartial  judge  is  apt
rightly  or  wrongly  to  be  suspect  to  the  mere  human  reason  and
at  best  much  of  what  is  called  justice  is  only  legalised  revenge,
— but  still  it  may  be  that  nothing  but  justice  or  even  less  than
justice  has  been  done.  But  that  makes  no  difference  to  the  fact
that  a number  of  new  democracies,  vigorous  and  intellectual
peoples,  born  to  a new  life  which  should  have  been  one  of  hope
and  good  will  to  the  coming  order,  will  be  there  inevitably  as  a
source  of  revolt  and  disorder,  eager  to  support  any  change  which
will  remove  their  burdens,  gratify  resentment  and  heal  their  fester-
ing wounds.  They  may  be  held  down,  kept  weak  and  maimed,
even  though  one  of  them  is  laborious,  skilful,  organised  Ger-
many, but  that  will  mean  a weakness  and  an  ill-balance  in  the
new  order  itself,  and  if  they  recover  strength,  it  will  not  be  to


625


A League  of  Nations

acquiesce  in  their  inferior  place  and  the  perpetual  triumph  and
greatness  of  their  ancient  rivals.  Only  in  a legalised  system  of
equal  democracies  can  there  be  some  true  chance  of  the  cessa-
tion of  these  jealousies,  enmities,  recurrent  struggles.  Otherwise
war  will  break  put  again  or  in  some  other  form  the  old  battle
continue.  An  unequal  balance  can  never  be  a security  for  a steady
and  peaceful  world-system.

Pass,  if  this  were  the  only  peril  of  the  newly  inaugurated  sys-
tem. But  this  League  seems  also  to  stand  for  a perpetuation  of  a
new  status  quo  to  be  arrived  at  by  the  peace  which  is  being  made
its  foundation.  The  great  Powers,  it  would  seem,  have  arrived  at
a compact  to  secure  their  dominions  and  holdings  against  any
future  menace  of  diminution.  This  arrangement  is  of  the  nature
at  once  of  a balance  of  power,  — but  with  all  the  dangers  of  an
unequal  balance,  — and  of  an  attempt  to  perpetuate  for  ever
certain  at  present  preponderating  influences  and  established
greatnesses.  That  attempt  is  against  all  the  teaching  of  history
and  all  the  perennial  movement  of  Nature;  the  League  which
stands  committed  to  it  is  committed  to  a jealously  guarded  inse-
curity and  the  preservation  of  an  unstable  equilibrium.  It  is  not
certain  that  the  constructing  Powers  themselves  remain  consis-
tently satisfied  with  the  terms  of  their  compact  or  able  to  resist
that  urge  of  national  and  of  human  destiny  which  is  greater  than
any  diplomatic  arrangement  or  the  wills  of  governments  and
statesmen.  But  even  if  that  unheard-of  thing  be  realised  between
them,  a durable  international  friendship  and  alliance,  it  may
serve  for  a time,  but  will  it  serve  for  a very  long  time  against  the
world’s  urge  towards  change?  Power  rots  by  having  security,
and  those  who  are  powerful  to-day  to  impose  their  will  on  the
nations,  may  not  always  keep  that  force  in  spite  of  their  bulk
and  wealth  and  armed  magnitudes.  Then  there  are  old  sores
perpetuated  and  new  sores  opened  by  this  arrangement  of  a
hastily  made  peace  of  devices  and  compromises.  Whether  the
Balkan  question  will  be  permanently  settled  is  at  least  dubious,
but  there  will  be  now  the  question  of  a German  Bohemia,  a part!
coloured  Poland,  perhaps,  a Saar  region  with  its  wealth  m the
possession  of  a foreign  Power,  an  insoluble  question  o u^o
Slav  and  Italian,  a new  question  of  Tyrol,  an  Irish  trou  e an


626


War  and  Self-Determination

Korean  trouble  in  which  the  League  cannot  interfere  without
deep  offence  to  England  and  Japan  and  which  yet  clamour  more
and  more  for  a settlement,  a Russian  chaos.  There  is  a Maho-
medan  world  which  will  one  day  have  a word  to  say  about  the
new  status  quo.  There  is  the  whole  question  of  Asia  and  Africa,
which  is  the  most  formidable  but  of  which  much  need  not  be
said,  for  its  issues  are  patent  to  every  eye.  The  partition  of  Africa
between  a few  European  powers  with  all  its  economical  advan-
tages can  be  no  permanent  solution.  Asia  is  arising  in  the  surge
of  an  upward  wave  and  cannot  always  be  kept  in  a condition
of  weakness,  tutelage  and  vassalage.  When  the  time  comes,  how
will  a league  mainly  of  European  and  American  peoples  deal
with  her  claims?  Will  Europe  be  content  to  recede  from  Asia?
Will  the  mandatories  be  in  any  haste  to  determine  their  mandate  ?
Can  there  be  any  modified  perpetuation  of  present  conditions
which  will  be  at  all  compatible  with  an  equality  between  the  two
continents  ? These  are  questions  which  no  imperfect  sketch  of  a
league  of  nations  on  the  existing  basis  can  decide  according  to
its  phantasy;  only  the  onward  moving  world-spirit  can  give  them
their  answer.

None  of  these  dangers  and  difficulties  are  as  yet  formidable
in  their  immediate  incidence,  but  there  is  another  problem  of  a
pressing,  immediate  insistency  and  menace  which  touches  with  its
close  foreshadowing  finger  the  very  life  of  any  new  international
system  and  that  is  the  approaching  struggle  for  supremacy  be-
tween Capital  and  Labour.  This  is  a far  other  matter  than  the
clash  of  conflicting  imperialisms  in  the  broad  spaces  or  the  wran-
gle of  quarrelsome  nationalisms  snarling  at  each  other’s  heels  or
tearing  each  other  in  the  narrower  ways  of  the  Earth ; for  those  are
questions  at  most  of  division  of  power,  territory  and  economic
opportunity  on  the  present  basis  of  society,  but  this  means  a
questioning  of  that  basis  and  a shaking  of  the  very  foundations  of
the  European  world-order.  This  League  is  a league  of  govern-
ments, and  all  these  governments  are  bourgeois  monarchies  or
republics,  instruments  of  a capitalistic  system  assailed  by  the  tides
of  socialism.  Their  policy  is  to  compromise,  to  concede  in  detail,
but  to  prolong  their  own  principle  so  that  they  may  survive  and
capitalism  be  still  the  dominant  power  of  a new  mixed  semi-


627


A League  of  Nations

socialistic  order,  very  much  as  the  governments  which  formed  the
Holy  Alliance  sought  to  save  the  dominance  of  the  old  idea  of
aristocratic  monarchy  by  a compromise  with  the  growing  spirit
of  democracy.  What  they  offer  is  better  and  more  human  condi-
tions for  the  labourer,  even  a certain  association  in  the  govern-
ment of  the  society,  but  still  a second  and  not  a primary  place  in
the  scale.  This  was  indeed  all  to  which  Labour  itself  formerly
aspired,  and  it  is  all  to  which  the  rear  of  its  army  still  looks  for-
ward, but  it  is  already  ceasing  to  be  the  significance  of  the  Labour
movement;  a new  idea  has  arisen,  the  dominance,  the  rule  of
labour,  and  it  has  already  formulated  itself  and  captured  a great
portion  of  the  forces  of  socialism.  It  has  even  established  for  a
while  in  Russia  a new  kind  of  government,  a dictatorship  of  the
proletariate,  which  aspires  to  effect  a rapid  transition  to  another
order  of  society.

Against  this  novel  idea  and  its  force  the  existing  governments
are  compelled  by  the  very  principle  of  their  being  to  declare  war
and  to  struggle  against  its  coming  with  all  the  strength  at  their
disposal  and  strive  to  mobilise  against  it  whatever  faith  in  existing
things  still  remains  in  the  mind  of  the  peoples.  The  old  order  has
still  no  doubt  strength  enough  to  crush  out  of  existence,  if  it  wills,
the  form  which  this  coming  of  Demogorgon  has  already  taken  and
to  make  a more  or  less  speedy  end  of  Russian  Bolshevism.  The
Bolshevist  system,  isolated  in  a single  country,  weakened  by  its
own  initial  crudities  and  revolutionary  violences,  struggling
fiercely  against  impracticable  odds,  may  well  be  annihilated,  but
the  thing  which  is  behind  Bolshevism  and  has  given  it  its  un-
expected virility  and  vitality,  cannot  be  so  easily  conjured  or
pressed  out  of  being.  That  thing  is  the  transference  of  the  basis
of  society  from  wealth  to  labour,  from  the  power  of  money  to
the  simple  power  of  the  man  and  his  work,  and  that  cann^  e
stopped  or  prevented,  — though  it  may  be  for  a time  put  oh,  —
not  because  labour  any  more  than  wealth  is  the  true  asis  o
society,  but  because  this  is  the  logical  and  inevitable  outcome  o
the  whole  evolution  of  European  society.  The  rule  ® f ^ warno
and  aristocrat,  the  Kshatriya,  founded  upon  power  as
place  to  the  rule  of  the  Vaishyas,  the  professional  and
classes,  founded  upon  wealth  and  legalism,  an  t a agai


628  War  and  Self-Determination

yield  to  the  rule  of  the  Shudra,  the  proletariate,  founded  upon
work  and  association.  This  change  like  the  others  cannot  be  ac-
complished without  much  strife  and  upheaval  and  there  is  every
sign  that  its  course  will  be  attended  with  the  shattering  violence
of  revolution.

It  is  proposed  indeed  to  the  new  force  that  it  shall  work  itself
out  calmly,  slowly,  peacefully  by  the  recognised  means  of  Parlia-
mentarism; but  Parliamentarism  is  passing  through  a phase  of
considerable  discredit,  and  a doubt  has  arisen  in  the  minds  of
the  workers  whether  it  is  at  all  a right  or  possible  means  for  their
object  and  whether  by  a reliance  upon  it  they  will  not  be  playing
into  the  hands  of  their  opponents:  for  Parliament  is  actually  a
great  machine  of  the  propertied  classes  and  even  the  Parliamen-
tary socialist  tends  easily  to  become  a semi-disguised  or  a half
and  half  bourgeois.  The  new  order  of  society  would  seem  to  de-
mand the  institution  of  a new  system  of  govermnent.  If  then  a
new  order  of  society  is  bound  to  come  with  its  inevitable  reversal
of  existing  conditions,  and  still  more  if  it  comes  by  a revolu-
tionary struggle,  how  will  a system  of  a League  of  Nations  based
upon  existing  conditions,  a League  not  really  of  nations  but  of
governments,  and  of  governments  committed  to  the  maintenance
of  the  old  order  and  using  their  closer  association  as  a means  for
combating  the  new  idea  Which  is  hostile  to  their  own  form  of
existence,  be  likely  to  fare  in  this  earth-shaking  or  this  tornado  ?
It  is  more  likely  to  disappear  than  to  undergo  a gentle  transfor-
mation, and  if  it  disappears,  another  system  of  international
comity  may  replace  it,  but  it  will  not  be  a League  of  Nations.

We  will  suppose,  however,  or  even  trust,  that  the  League
embodying  in  spite  of  appearances  the  best  combined  statesman-
ship of  the  world,  circumvents  all  these  perils,  weathers  every
storm  and  leads  forward  the  destinies  of  mankind  in  the  paths
of  an  at  first  more  or  less  uneasy,  but  eventually  firmer  increasing
peace  and  mutual  accommodation.  What  is  it  then  that  it  will
have  at  the  beginning  or  in  the  end  actually  accomplished  ? It  will
have  made  some  beginning  of  the  substitution  of  a state  of  law
for  the  older  international  status  which  alternated  and  oscillated
between  outbreaks  of  war  and  an  armed  peace.  That,  no  doubt,
if  at  all  firmly  done,  will  be  a great  step  forward  in  the  known


A League  of  Nations


629


history  of  human  civilisation.  For  it  will  mean  that  what  was
founded  in  the  unit  of  the  nation  centuries  ago,  will  be  now  at
last  founded  in  the  society  of  the  nations.  But  let  us  not  leap  too
easily  at  what  may  well  be  an  unsound  parallel.  What  civilised
society  has  done  most  effectively  from  the  beginning  is  to  subs-
titute some  kind  of  legalised  relation,  legalised  offence  and  de-
fence, legalised  compensation  or  revenge  for  injuries  in  place  of
the  state  of  insecure  peace  and  frequent  private  or  tribal  warfare
in  which  each  man  had  to  claim  what  he  considered  to  be  justice
by  the  aid  of  his  kin  or  the  strength  of  his  own  hand.  At  present
the  persistent  survival  of  crime  is  the  only  remnant  of  that  earlier
pre-legal  state  of  natural  violence.  But  for  an  organised  society
to  deal  with  the  refractory  individual  is  a comparatively  facile
task;  here  the  units  are  nations  with  a complex  corporate  perso-


nality, great  masses  of  men  themselves  too  organised,  represent-
ing the  vital  interests,  claims,  passions  of  millions  of  men  divided
by  corporate,  powerful  and  persistent  exclusivenesses,  hatreds,
jealousies,  antipathies  which  the  founding  of  this  would-be  all-
healing League  and  new  society  of  peoples  finds  much  acerbated,
much  more  pronounced  than  in  the  days  before  the  deluge  when
a tolerant  and’ easy  cosmopolitanism  was  more  in  fashion,  an
which  its  disposition  seems  calculated  to  deepen  and  perpetuate
rather  than  to  heal  and  abolish.  And  it  is  on  tins  incoherent  mass
of  peoples  void  of  all  living  principle  or  urgent  will  of  union  that
a status  of  peace  and  settled  law  has  to  be  imposed  an  t is  in  a
period  of  increasing  chaos,  upheaval,  menace  of  reyo  ution.

The  national  society  succeeded  only  in  proportion
veloped  an  indivisible  unity  and  a single  homogeneous  au  i
which  could  both  legislate,  or  at  least  codify  an  mam  am  c ,
and  see  to  the  rigorous  execution  of  its  settled  ru  es,  ,

ordinances.  Here  the  work  has  to  be  done  by  an  ms  i u
represents  no  embodied  unity,  but  rather
together  of  very  strongly  separate  units,  and  w ic  i ^ »

latlbutonlypassesverypartialandopportunistspe^

hoc,  and  to  enforce  them  has  constantly  to  resor  o

blockade,  economical  pressure,  menace  of  a w o thincs

of  peoples,  menace  of  violent  military
which  prolong  the  after-war  state  of  unrest  an


630


War  and  Self-Determination


secondary  effects  upon  the  countries  whose  governments  are  en-
gaged in  this  singular  international  pastime.  It  is  not  difficult  to
see  that  a better  system  and  a better  means  must  be  found  if  the
latest  strong  hope  of  humanity  is  to  turn  out  anything  more  than
one  other  generous  illusion  of  the  intellectuals  and  one  other
chimerical  wave  of  longing  in  the  vague  heart  of  the  peoples.

Even  the  national  society  has  not  been  able  after  so  long  a
time  and  so  much  experience  to  eliminate  in  its  own  body  the
disease  of  strife  between  its  members,  class  war,  bitter  hostility
of  interests  and  ideas  breaking  out  at  times  into  bloody  clashes,
civil  wars,  sanguinary  revolutions  or  disastrous,  grimly  obstinate
and  ruthless  economical  struggles  which  are  the  preparers  of  an
eventual  physical  conflict.  And  the  reason  is  not  far  to  seek.
Law  for  all  its  ermine  of  pomp  and  solemn  bewigged  pretension
of  dignity  was  in  its  origin  nothing  but  the  law  of  the  stronger  and
the  more  skilful  and  successful  who  imposed  their  rule  on  the
acquiescent  or  subjugated  rest  of  the  people.  It  was  the  decrees
of  the  dominant  class  which  were  imposed  on  the  previous  mass
of  existing  customs  and  new-shaped  them  into  the  mould  of  the
prevailing  idea  and  interest;  Law  was  itself  a regulated  and  or-
ganised Force  establishing  its  own  rules  of  administration  and
maintaining  them  by  an  imminent  menace  of  penalty  and  coercion.
That  is  the  sense  of  the  symbolic  sword  of  Justice,  and  as  for  her
more  mythical  balance,  a balance  is  a commercial  and  artificial
sign,  not  a symbol  of  either  natural  or  ideal  equity,  and  even  so
this  balance  of  Justice  had  for  its  use  only  a theoretical  or  not
always  even  a theoretical  equality  of  weights  and  measures.  Law
was  often  in  great  measure  a system  of  legalised  oppression  and
exploitation  and  on  its  political  side  has  had  often  enough  plainly
that  stamp,  though  it  has  assumed  always  the  solemn  face  of  a
sacrosanct  order  and  government  and  justice.

The  history  of  mankind  has  been  very  largely  a long  struggle
to  get  unjust  law  changed  into  justice,  — not  a mystic  justice  of
an  imposed  decree  and  rule  “by  law  established”  claiming  to  be
right  because  it  is  established,  but  the  intelligible  justice  of  equa-
lity and  equity.  Much  has  been  done,  but  as  much  or  more  still
remains  to  be  done,  and  so  long  as  it  is  not  established,  there  can
be  no  sure  end  to  civil  strife  and  unrest  and  revolution.  For  the


631


A League  of  Nations

injustice  of  law  can  only  be  tolerated  so  long  as  there  is  either  in
those  who  suffer  by  it  a torpid  blindness  or  acquiescent  submis-
sion or  else,  the  desire  of  equity  once  awakened,  a ready  means
to  their  hand  of  natural  and  peaceful  rectification.  And  a parti-
cular unjust  law  may  indeed  be  got  altered  with  less  of  effort  and
difficulty,  but  if  injustice  or,  let  us  say  simply,  absence  of  just
equality  and  equity  pervades  a state  of  things,  a system,  then
there  must  be  grave  trouble  and  there  can  be  no  real  equilibrium
and  peace  till  it  is  amended.  Thus  in  modern  society  strikes  and
lockouts  are  its  form  of  civil  war,  disastrous  enough  to  both  sides,
but  still  they  are  constantly  resorted  to  and  cannot  be  replaced  by
a better  way,  because  there  is  no  confidence  in  any  possible  legal
award  or  “compulsory”  arbitration  which  can  be  provided  for
under  the  existing  conditions.  The  stronger  side  relies  on  the  ad-
vantage which  it  enjoys  under  the  established  system,  the  weaker
feels  that  the  legalised  balance  of  the  State  exists  by  a law  which
still  favours  the  capitalist  interest  and  the  domination  of  wealth
and  that  at  most  it  can  get  from  this  State  only  inadequate  con-
cessions which  involve  by  their  inadequacy  more  numerous  strug-
gles in  the  future.  They  cling  to  the  strike  as  their  natural  weapon
and  one  trustworthy  resource.  For  that  reason  all  ingeminations
and  exhortations  to  economical  peace  and  brotherhood  are  a
futile  counsel.  The  only  remedy  is  a better,  more  equal  and  more
equitable  system  of  society.  And  this  is  only  a particular  instance
of  a situation  common  enough  in  different  forms  under  the  pre-
sent world-order.

The  application  is  evident  to  the  present  internationa  at
tempt  and  its  hopes  of  a legalised  and  peaceful  human  society.
The  League  of  Nations  has  been  established  by  victorious  Force,
claiming  no  doubt  to  be  the  force  of  victorious  right  and  justice,
but  incapable  by  the  vice  of  its  birth  of  embodying  the  rea  non
combatant  justice  of  an  equal  and  impartial  equity.  Its
and  acts  are  based  on  no  ascertainable  impersonal  principle,  Dui
are  mainly  the  decrees,  the  sic  volo,  sic  jubeo  of  ffiree  or  our
mighty  nations.  Even  if  they  happen  to  be  just,  t .

fatal  vice  that  there  is  nothing  to  convince  the  ° ^

parties  or  even  the  common  mind  that  there  is  - m -

surety  of  a general  and  reliable  equity,  and  as  a ma  er


632  War  and  Self-Determination

many  of  them  have  aroused  very  generally  grave  dissatisfaction
and  hostile  criticism.  And  the  Supreme  Council,  that  veiled
hieratic  autocrat  of  the  situation,  does  not  seem  itself  to  appeal
to  any  distinct  higher  principles  in  itS' action,  even  when  such  do
actually  exist  and  could  be  insisted  on  with  force  and  clarity.  At
the  time  of  writing,  there  has  been  a case  of  the  denudation  of  a
suffering  and  now  half-starved  country  by  the  army  of  a small
occupying  power  — victorious  not  by  its  own  arms,  but  by  the
moral  and  economic  pressure  of  the  League  — and  the  council
has  very  rightly  interfered.  But  it  has  not  done  that  publicly  on
grounds  that  have  anything  to  do  with  international  justice  or
humanity  or  even  the  rudiments  of  international  ethics,  such  as
they  are,  but  on  this  ground  that  the  property  of  the  vanquished
country  is  the  common  spoil,  or,  let  us  say,  means  of  compensa-
tion of  the  victors  and  this  one  little  rapacious  ally  cannot  be
allowed  to  appropriate  it  all  by  main  force  to  the  detriment  of  its
greater  fellow-administrators  of  a self-regarding  justice,  — who
may  even  as  a result  find  Hungary  thrown  as  a starving  pauper
on  their  hands  instead  of  serving  their  will  as  a solvent  debtor!
If  this  realistic  spirit  is  to  be  the  spirit  of  the  new  international
system  and  that  is  to  persist,  its  success  is  likely  to  be  more  formi-
dable to  humanity  than  its  failure.  For  it  may  mean  to  the  suffer-
ing portions  of  mankind  the  legalisation  and  perpetuation  of  in-
tolerable existing  injustices  for  which  there  could  have  been  a
hope  of  more  easy  remedy  and  redress  in  the  previous  looser
conditions.  If  this  League  of  Nations  is  to  serve  and  not  merely
to  dominate  mankind,  if  it  is  to  raise  and  free,  as  it  claims  and
professes,  and  not  to  bind  and  depress  humanity,  it  must  be  cast
in  another  mould  and  animated  by  another  spirit.  This  age  is  not
like  that  in  which  the  reign  of  law  was  established  in  individual
nations ; men  are  no  longer  inclined,  as  then  they  were,  to  submit
to  existing  conditions  in  the  idea  that  they  are  an  inevitable  dis-
pensation of  Nature.  The  idea  of  equity,  of  equality,  of  common
rights  has  been  generalised  in  the  mind  of  the  race,  and  human
society  must  move  henceforward  steadily  towards  its  satisfaction
on  peril  of  constant  unrest  and  a rising  gradation  of  catastrophe.

That  means  that  the  whole  spirit  and  system  of  the  League
will  have  to  be  remodelled,  the  initial  mistakes  of  its  composition


A League  of  Nations


633


rectified  and  the  defects  inherent  in  its  origin  got  rid  of,  before  it
can  be  brought  into  real  consonance  with  the  nobler  hopes  or
even  the  pressing  needs  of  the  human  race.  At  present  it  is,  to
reverse  the  old  phrase,  a pouring  of  an  old  and  very  musty  wine
into  showy  new  bottles,  — the  old  discredited  spirit  of  the  diplo-
macy of  concert  and  balance  and  the  government  of  the  strongest,
of  the  few  dominant  kingdoms.  States  and  empires.  That  must
disappear  in  a more  just  and  democratic  international  system.
The  evil  legacy  of  the  war  with  its  distinctions  between  “enemy”,
allied  and  friendly  nations  or  more  favoured  or  less  favoured
peoples,  will  have  to  be  got  out  of  the  system  of  the  League,  for
so  long  as  it  is  there,  it  will  act  as  a virus  which  will  prevent  all
healthy  growth  and  functioning.  A League  of  Nations  which  is
to  bring  a real  peace  and  beginning  of  justice  and  ordered  comity
in  progress  to  the  world  and  a secret  council  of  allied  govern-
ments imposing  as  best  they  can  their  irresponsible  will  on  a
troubled  and  dissatisfied  Europe,  Asia  and  Africa  are  two  very
different  things,  and  while  one  lasts,  the  other  cannot  be  got  into
being.  The  haphazard  make  of  the  League  will  have  to  be  re-
moulded into  a thing  of  plain  and  candid  structure  and  meaning
and  made  to  admit  that  element  of  clear  principle  which  it  has
omitted  from  its  constitution.  An  equal  system  of  international


rights  and  .obligations,  just  liberties  and  wholesome  necessary
restrictions  can  alone  be  a sound  basis  of  international  law  and
order.  And  there  can  be  no  other  really  sound  basis  of  the  just  an
squal  liberty  of  the  peoples  than  that  principle  of  self-determina-
tion which  was  so  loudly  trumpeted  during  the  war,  but
an  opportunist  statesmanship  has  made  short  work  and  re  uce
to  a deplorable  nullity.  A true  principle  of  self-determination  is
not  at  all  incompatible  with  international  unity  and  mutual  obli-
gation, the  two  are  rather  indispensable  complements,  even  as
individual  liberty  in  its  right  sense  of  a just  and  sufficient  room  or
healthy  self-development  and  self-determination  ^

incompatible  with  unity  of  spirit  and  mutual  o
tween  man  and  man.  How  to  develop  it  out  o .

tions,  antipathies,  ambitions,  grievances,  nationa  u ’
busies,  egoisms  is  indeed  a problem,  but  it  is  a pro
will  have  to  be  attended  to  to-day  or  to-morrow  on  pen


634


War  and  Self-Determination


things.  To  say  that  these  developments  are  impossible  is  to  say
that  a league  of  nations  in  the  real  sense  as  opposed  to  a league
of  some  nations  for  their  common  benefit,  a dominant  alliance,
is  an  impossibility.  In  that  case  the  present  institution  called  by
that  imposing  name  can  only  be  an  enlarged  and  more  mecha-
nised edition  of  the  old  Concert  or  a latter-day  Holy  Alliance
of  the  governments  and  will  sooner  or  later  go  the  way  of  its
predecessors.  If  that  is  so,  then  the  sooner  we  recognise  it,  the
better  for  all  concerned;  there  will  be  less  of  false  hopes  and
misdirected  energies  with  their  burden  of  disappointment,  unrest,
irritation  and  perilous  reaction.  To  go  on  upon  the  present
lines  is  to  lead  straight  towards  another  and  greater  catastrophe.

To  insist  on  these  things  is  not  to  discourage  unduly  the
spirit  of  hope  which  humanity  needs  for  its  progress;  it  is
necessary  in  order  that  that  hope  may  not  nourish  itself  on
illusions  and  turn  towards  misdirecting  paths,  but  may  rather
see  clearly  the  right  conditions  of  its  fulfilment  and  fix  its  energy
on  their  realisation.  It  is  a comfortable  but  a dangerous  thing
to  trust  with  a facile  faith  that  a bad  system  will  automatically
develop  into  a good  thing  or  that  some  easy  change  is  bound  to
come  which  will  make  for  salvation,  as  for  instance  that  Europe
will  evolve  true  democracy  and  that  the  League  of  Nations,  now
so  imperfectly  established,  will  be  made  perfect  by  its  better
spirit.  The  usual  result  of  this  temper  of  sanguine  acceptance
or  toleration  is  that  the  expected  better  State  makes  indeed
some  ameliorations  when  it  comes,  but  takes  into  it  too  a
legacy  of  the  past,  much  of  its  obscure  spirit  and  a goodly  inherit-
ance of  its  evils,  while  it  adds  to  the  burden  new  errors  of  its
own  making.  Certainly,  the  thing  which  was  behind  this  new
formation,  this  league  of  governments,  is  bound  in  some
way  or  other  to  come;  for  I take  it  that  a closer  system  of
international  life  is  sooner  or  later  inevitable  because  it  is  a
necessary  outcome  of  modern  conditions,  of  the  now  much
closer  relations  and  interactions  of  the  life  of  the  human  race,
and  the  only  alternative  is  increasing  trouble,  disorder  and
ultimate  chaos.  But  this  inevitable  development  may  take,
according  to  the  way  and  principle  we  follow,  a better  or  a w;orse
turn.  It  may  come  in  the  form  of  a mechanical  and  oppressive


A League  of  Nations


635


system  as  false  and  defective  as  the  industrial  civilization  of
Europe  which  in  its  inflated  and  monstrous  course  brought
about  the  present  wreck,  or  it  may  come  in  the  form  and  healthy
movement  of  a sounder  shaping  force  which  can  be  made  the
basis  or  at  least  the  starting-point  for  a still  greater  and  more
beneficial  human  progress.  No  system  indeed  by  its  own  force
can  bring  about  the  change  that  humanity  really  needs ; for  that
can  only  come  by  its  growth  into  the  firmly  realised  possibilities
of  its  own  higher  nature,  and  this  growth  depends  on  an  inner
and  not  an  outer  change.  But  outer  changes  may  at  least  prepare
favourable  conditions  for  that  more  real  amelioration,  — or  on
the  contrary  they  may  lead  to  such  conditions  that  the  sword  of
Kalki  can  alone  purify  the  earth  from  the  burden  of  an  obstin-
ately Asuric  humanity.  The  choice  lies  with  the  race  itself;
for  as  it  sows,  so  shall  it  reap  the  fruit  of  its  Karma.

And  that  brings  us  back  to  the  idea  with  which  we  started
and  with  it  we  may  as  well  close,  however  remote  it  may  sound
to  the  practical  mind  of  a still  materialistic  generation.  The
idea  which  Europe  follows  of  an  outer  political  and  social
perfection  reposes,  as  far  as  it  goes,  on  a truth,  but  only  on
one  half  of  the  truth  and  that  the  lower  half  of  its  periphery.
A greater  side  of  it  is  hidden  behind  the  other  older  idea,  still
not  quite  dead  in  Asia  and  now  strong  enough  to  be  born
again  in  Europe,  that  as  with  the  individual,  so  with  the  com-
munity of  mankind,  salvation  cannot  come  by  the  outer  Uw
alone;  for  the  Law  is  only  an  intermediate  means  intended  to
impose  a rein  of  stringent  obligation  and  a better  stan  ar
on  the  original  disorder  of  our  egoistic  nature.  Salvation  or
individual  or  community  comes  not  by  the  Law  but  y
Spirit.^  The  conditions  of  individual  and  social  per  ection  ar
indeed  the  same,  freedom  and  unity;  the  two  things  are  comp
ments  and  to  follow  one  at  the  expense  of  the  other  is  a vai
heresy.  But  real  unity  cannot  come  to  the  race,  unti  m
surmounting  his  egoistic  nature  is  one  in  heart  an  spin
man  and  real  freedom  cannot  be  till  he  is  free
lower  nature  and  finds  the  force  of  the  truth  w ic  a

» We  in  India  have  also  yet  to  realise  that  truth -not  by  the  Shastra.  but  by  the
Atman.


636


War  and  Self-Determination


so  vainly  taught  by  the  saints  and  sages  that  the  fullness  of
his  perfected  individuality  is  one  thing  with  a universality  by
which  he  can  embrace  all  mankind  in  his  heart,  mind  and
spirit.  But  at  present  individuals  and  nations  are  equally  remote
from  accepting  any  such  inner  mantra  of  unity  and  we  can  only
hope  at  most  that  the  best  will  increasingly  turn  their  minds  in
that  direction  and  create  again  and  this  time  with  a newer  and
more  luminous  insistence  a higher  standard  of  human  aspiration.
Till  dien  jarring  leagues  of  nations  and  some  mechanical  dis-
soluble federation  of  the  race  niust  serve  our  turn  for  practice
and  for  a far-off  expectation.  But  only  then  can  the  dream  of
a golden  age  of  a true  communal  living  become  feasible  and  be
founded  on  a spiritual  and  therefore  a real  reign  of  freedom  and
unity  when  the  race  learns  to  turn  its  eyes  inward  and  not  any
longer  these  things,  but  mankind,  the  people  of  God  and  a soul
and  body  of  the  Divine,  becomes  the  ideal  of  our  perfection.


After  the  War


The  great  war  has  for  some  time  been
over:  it  is  already  receding  into  the  near  distances  of  the  past.
Around  us  is  a black  mist  and  welter  of  the  present,  before  us
the  face  of  a dim  and  ambiguous  future.  It  is  just  possible,
however,  to  take  some  stock  of  the  immediate  results  of  the
war,  although  by  no  stretch  of  language  can  the  world  situation
be  called  clear,  for  it  is  marked  rather  by  chaotic  drift  and  an
unexampled  confusion.  The  ideals  which  were  so  loud  of
mouth  during  the  collision,  — mainly  as  advertising  agents  of
its  conflicting  interests,  — are  now  discredited  and  silent:  an
uneasy -locked  struggle  of  irreconcilable  forces  entangled  in  an
inextricable  clasp  of  enmity,  but  too  weak  or  too  exhausted  to
prevail  against  each  other  and  unable  to  separate,  a bewildered
opportunism  incapable  of  guiding  itself  or  finding  an  issue  is
the  character  of  the  present  situation.  Humanity  has  the  figure
of  a derelict  with  broken  mast  and  rudder  drifting  on  a sea  still
upheaved  by  the  after-swell  of  the  tempest,  the  statesmen  of
the  Supreme  Council  figuring  as  its  impotent  captains  an
shouting  directions  that  have  not  the  least  chance  of  use  u
execution  and  have  to  be  changed  from  moment  to  moment.
Nowhere  is  there  a guiding  illumination  or  a just  idea  t at  is
at  all  practicable.  A great  intellectual  and  moral  ban  ruptcy,
an  immense  emptiness  and  depression  has  succeede  to


ilirium  of  massacre.  ^ ,.  /•

This  is  indeed  the  most  striking  immediate  a ter  resu

le  war,  the  atmosphere  of  a world-wide  .

sillusionment  and  the  failure  of  great  hopes  and  i ea  s.
gh  and  large  and  dazzling  things  were  promise  us  ,

ar,  and  where  are  they  now  ? Rejected,  tarnis  e ,
tey  lie  cast  aside  dead  and  stripped  and  desecrate  on
ained  refuse  heap  that  the  war  has  left  be  in  ^

:mains  to  us.  The  war  that  was  fought  to  en  war  a
le  parent  of  fresh  armed  conflict  and  civi  iscor


638  War  and  Self-Determination

the  exhaustion  that  followed  it  which  alone  prevents  as  yet
another  vast  and  sanguinary  struggle.  The  new  fair  and  peace-
ful world-order  that  was  promised  us  has  gone  far  away  into  the
land  of  the  chimeras.  The  League  of  Nations  that  was  to  have
embodied  it  hardly  even  exists  or  exists  only  as  a mockery  and  a
byword.  It  is  an  ornamental,  a quite  helpless  and  otiose  appen-
dage to  the  Supreme  Council,  at  present  only  a lank  promise
dangled  before  the  vague  and  futile  idealism  of  those  who  are
still  faithful  to  its  sterile  formula,  a League  on  paper  and  with
little  chance,  even  if  it  becomes  more  apparently  active,  of
being  anything  more  than  a transparent  cover  or  a passive
support  for  the  domination  of  the  earth  by  a close  oligarchy  of
powerful  governments  or,  it  may  be  even,  of  two  allied  and
imperialistic  nations.  The  principle  of  self-determination  once
so  loudly  asserted  is  now  openly  denied  and  summarily  put  aside
by  the  victorious  empires.  In  its  place  we  have  the  map  of
Europe  remade  on  old  diplomatic  principles,  Africa  appro-
priated and  partitioned  as  the  personal  property  of  two  or
three  great  European  Powers  and  western  Asia  condemned  to
be  administered  under  a system  of  mandates  that  are  now  quite
openly  justified  as  instruments  of  commercial  exploitation  and
have  to  be  forced  on  unwilling  peoples  by  the  sovereign  right
of  the  machine-gun  and  the  bayonet.  The  spectacle  of  subject
peoples  and  “protected”  nations  demanding  freedom  and
held  down  by  military  force  continues  to  be  a principal  feature
of  the  new  order.  The  promised  death  of  militarism  is  as  far  off'
as  ever;  its  spirit  and  its  actuality  survive  everywhere,  and  only
its  centre  of  strength  and  main  operation  has  shifted  west-
ward — and  eastward.  All  these  things  were  foreseen  while  yet
the  war  continued  by  a few  who  even  while  holding  to  the
ideal  persisted  in  seeing  clearly : they  are  now  popular  common-
places.

This  however  is  only  one  side  of  the  situation,  the  most
present,  insistent  and  obvious,  but  not  therefore  the  most
important  and  significant.  It  marks  a stage,  it  is  not  the  definite
result  of  the  great  upheaval.  The  expectation  of  an  immediate
and  magically  complete  transformation  and  regeneration  of  the
world  by  the  radical  operation  of  the  war  was  itself  an  error.


After  the  War


639


It  was  an  error  to  imagine  that  the  power  of  the  past  rooted  in
the  soil  of  long-seated  human  custom  and  character  would  dis-
appear in  one  fierce  moment  or  abdicate  at  once  to  the  virgin
power  of  the  future.  The  task  to  be  accomplished  is  too  great
to  be  so  easy:  the  regeneration  of  man  and  his  life,  his  rebirth
into  a higher  nature  is  not  to  be  effected  by  so  summary  and
outward  a process.  It  was  an  error  to  suppose  that  the  war  was
or  could  be  the  painful,  the  terrible,  but  in  the  end  the  salutary
crisis  by  which  that  great  change  would  be  decisively  effected,
— a change  that  would  mean  a complete  renovation  and  puri-
fication of  the  soul,  mind  and  life  of  humanity.  The  war  came
only  as  a first  shock  and  overturn,  an  opportunity  for  certain
clearances,  a death-blow  to  the  moral  though  not  as  yet  to  the
material  hold  of  certain  ideas  and  powers  that  were  till  then
confident  and  throned,  sure  of  the  present  and  hopeful  of  their  ^
possession  of  the  future.  It  has  loosened  the  soil,  but  the  up-
rooting of  all  the  old  growths  was  more  than  it  could  effectuate.
It  has  cleared  a certain  amount  of  ground,  but  the  fruitful
filling  of  that  ground  is  an  operation  for  other  forces:  it  has
ploughed  and  upturned  much  soil,  but  it  is  as  yet  a far  cry  to
the  new  sowing  and  the  harvest.  It  was,  finally,  and  it  still
continues  a cherished  error  to  imagine  that  the  mere  alteration,
however  considerable,  of  political  or  other  machinery  is  the
sufficient  panacea  for  the  shortcomings  of  civilisation.  It  is  a
change  of  spirit,  therefore  a spiritual  change,  that  can  alone  e
the  sanction  and  the  foundation  of  a greater  and  better  human


existence.

The  survival  of  old  principles  and  conditions  is  still  not  t e
important  matter.  However  great  their  appearance  of
and  material  strength,  inwardly  they  are  sick,  wea  ene  an
have  forfeited  the  promise  of  the  future:  all  their  in  ®
and  moral  hold  is  gone  and  with  that  disappearance
evident  a notable  failing  of  their  practical  effectuating  wis
and  of  their  sustaining  self-confidence.  The  instinc  ,
continuation,  the  impetus  of  their  past  motion  keeps  ^ ’

and  they  must  last  so  long  as  they  have  some  o m
continuity  of  the  past  mental  and  vital  habit  of  the  ^
and  are  not  pushed  over  by  the  growing  an  ansin


640  War  and  Self-Determination

of  the  new  forces  that  belong  to  the  future.  All  their  movements
only  serve  to  increase  that  strength,  and  whether  they  seek  to
perpetuate  themselves  by  a violent  insistence  on  their  own
principle  or  haggle  and  compromise  with  the  quite  opposite
principles  that  are  destined  to  replace  them,  each  step  they  take
brings  them  nearer  to  their  ending.  It  is  more  fruitful  to  regard
rather  the  new  things  that  are  not  yet  in  possession  of  the  present
but  already  struggling  to  assert  themselves  against  its  ponderous
and  effective  but  ephemeral  pressure.

It  was  very  evident  during  the  progress  of  the  war  that  there
were  two  great  questions  that  it  would  not  solve  but  rather  must
prepare  for  an  acute  stage  of  crisis,  the  growing  struggle  between
Capital  and  Labour  and  the  Asiatic  question,  no  longer  a
quarrel  now  between  rival  exploiters  but  the  issue  between
invading  Europe  and  a resurgent  Asia.  The  war  itself  was  in  its
immediate  aspect  a battle  between  the  German  idea  and  the
middle-class  liberalism  represented  by  the  western  peoples,
France,  England,  America,  and  during  the  settlement  of  that
present  issue  the  other  two  questions  more  momentous  for  the
future  had  to  be  held  in  abeyance.  There  was  a truce  between
Capital  and  Labour,  a truce  determined  only  by  a violent
concentration  of  national  feeling  that  proved  too  strong  for
the  vague  idealistic  internationalism  of  the  orthodox  socialistic
idea,  not  by  any  essential  issue;  for  the  futile  idyllic  promise
of  a rapprochement  and  a reconciliation  between  the  hostile
classes  was  too  hollow  an  unreality  to  count  as  a factor.  At  the
same  time  the  Asiatic  question  too  was  in  suspension  and
even  enticing  prospects  of  self-determination  and  independence
or  more  qualified  but  still  tempting  allurements  were  proffered
by  the  liberal  empires  to  peoples  who  had  been  till  then  held
as  beyond  the  pale  of  civilisation.  The  Asiatic  peoples  too  weak
for  an  independent  action  ranged  themselves  on  the  side  whose
success  seemed  to  offer  to  them  the  greater  hope  or  else  the  least
formidable  menace.  All  this  is  now  of  the  past:  the  natural
and  inevitable  relations  have  reasserted  themselves  and  these
great  questions  are  coming  to  a head.  The  modern  contest
between  Capital  and  Labour  has  entered  into  a new  phase  and  the
two  incurably  antagonistic  principles  are  evidently  moving


After  the  War


641


in  spite  of  many  hesitations  and  indecisions  towards  the  final
and  decisive  battle.  In  Asia  the  issue  has  already  been  joined
between  the  old  rule  of  dependency  and  protectorate  with  their
new  parti-coloured  variation  the  mandate  and  the  clear  claim
of  the  Asiatic  peoples  to  equality  and  independence.  All  other
things  still  in  the  forefront  belong  to  the  prolongation  of  the
surviving  or  else  to  the  liquidation  of  the  dead  past:  these  two
alone  are  living  questions  of  the  immediate  future.

The  forces  of  Socialism  and  Capitalism  now  look  each


other  in  the  face  all  over  Europe,  — all  other  distinctions  are
fading,  the  old  rriinor  political  quarrels  within  the  nation  grow
meaningless,  — but  have  not  yet  joined  battle.  The  old  middle-
class  regime  still  holds  the  material  power,  keeps  by  the  pres-
tige of  possession  and  men’s  habit  of  preferring  present  ills
to  an  insecure  adventure  the  mind  of  the  uncertain  mass  and
summons  all  its  remaining  forces  to  maintain  its  position.
It  is  faced  by  the  first  actuality  of  a successful  socialistic  an
revolutionary  regime  in  Russia,  but  hitherto,  although  its
repeated  efforts  to  stifle  it  in  its  birth  have  been  in  vain,  it  as
succeeded  in  isolating,  in  blockading  and  half  starving  it,  in
erecting  against  its  westward  urge  an  artificial  frontier  an  in
stemming  the  more  rapid  propagation  of  its  master  i eas  y
a constant  campaign  of  discredit.  Attempts  at  any
revolution  west  of  the  Russian  line  have  been  put  an  en  o
the  moment  by  legal  or  military  repression.  On  t e o ’

the  economic  condition  of  the  world  becomes  worse
better  every  year  and  it  is  becoming  more  , jx

that  Capitalism  has  not  only  lost  its  moral  ere  i ^ ,

unable  to  solve  the  material  problems  it  has  i ,;niution.
brought  to  a head,  while  it  blocks  the  way  to  any  ® increase

Every  year  that  passes  in  this  deadlock  sees  an  enor  Quality

in  the  strength  of  the  socialistic  idea  and  the  number

and  the  extremist  fervour  of  its  adherents.  ncentration  of

almost  everywhere  a temporary  stiffening  an  co  .
the  old  regime;  this  as  a phenomenon  vety  and

similar  stiffening  and  concentration  of  between

aristocratic  regime  that  was  the  reality  of

revolutionary  France  and  Europe;  bu  i


642


War  and  Self-Determination


force  and  little  chance  of  an  equal  duration;  for  the  current
of  revolution  is  now  only  checked  and  not  as  then  temporarily
fatigued  and  exhausted  and  the  accumulated  rush  of  the  ideas
and  forces  that  make  for  change  is  in  our  day  immeasurably
greater.  The  materials  of  an  immense  political,  social  and
economic  overturn,  perhaps  of  a series  of  formidable  explosions
strengthened  in  force  by  each  check  and  compression,  every-
where visibly  accumulate.

The  outstanding  portent  of  things  to  come  is  the  continued
existence,  success,  unbroken  progress  of  the  Russian  revolution.
This  event  promises  to  be  as  significant  in  human  history  as
the  great  overturn  of  established  ideas  and  institutions  initiated
in  France  in  the  eighteenth  century,  and  to  posterity  it  may
well  be  this  and  not  the  downfall  of  Germany  for  which  the
Great  War  will  be  ever  memorable.  Its  importance  is  quite
independent  of  the  merits  and  demerits  or  the  chances  of  sur-
vival of  the  present  Bolshevik  , regime.  The  Bolshevik  dictator-
ship is  admittedly  only  an  instrument  of  transition,  a temporary
concentration  of  revolutionary  force,  just  as  the  Supreme  Council
and  all  that  it  supports  is  a temporary  concentration  of  the
opposing  conservative  forces.  The  achievements  of  this  extra-
ordinary government  have  been  of  a sufficiently  astonishing
character.  Assailed  continually  from  within  and  without,  ruth-
lessly blockaded  and  starved  and  deprived  of  all  means  of
sustenance  and  action  except  those  it  could  create  for  itself
out  of  itself  or  else  conquer,  repeatedly  brought  to  the  verge  of
downfall,  it  has  survived  all  difficulties  and  dangers  and  rather
derived  always  new  strength  from  misfortune,  overcome  its
internal  and  withstood  its  external  enemies,  spread  itself  in
Asia  beyond  its  own  borders,  organised  out  of  chaos  a strong
civil  and  military  instrument,  and  has  had  the  force  in  the  midst
of  scarcity,  civil  strife  and  foreign  menace  to  lay  the  initial
basis  of  a new  type  of  society.  This  miracle  of  human  energy
is  in  itself  no  more  than  that,  a repetition  under  more  unfavour-
able circumstances  of  the  extraordinary  achievement  of  the
Jacobins  during  the  French  Revolution.  More  important  is  the
power  of  the  idea  that  is  behind  these  successes  and  has  made
them  possible.  It  is  a fact  of  only  outward  significance  that  the


After  the  War


643


Bolsheviks  not  so  long  ago  threatened  with  the  loss  of  Moscow
are  now  on  the  road  to  Warsaw.  It  is  of  much  more  significance
that  the  western  Powers  find  themselves  driven  at  last  to  nego-
tiate with  the  first  successful  communist  government  of  modem
times  still  denounced  by  them  as  a monstrosity  to  be  destroyed
and  a danger  to  civilisation.  But  the  thing  of  real  significance
is  not  these  events  that  might  have  gone  and  might  still  go
otherwise  and  might  turn  out  to  be  only  an  episode;  it  is  rather
this  fundamental  fact  affecting  future  possibilities  that  a great
nation  marked  out  as  one  of  the  coming  leaders  of  humanity
has  taken  a bold  leap  into  the  hidden  gulfs  of  the  future,  abol-
ished the  past  foundations,  made  and  persisted  in  a radical
experiment  of  communism,  replaced  middle-class  parliamen-
tarism by  a new  form  of  government  and  used  its  first  energy
of  free  life  to  initiate  an  entirely  novel  social  order.  It  is  acts
of  faith  and  audacities  of  this  scale  that  change  or  hasten  the
course  of  human  progress.  It  does  not  follow  necessarily  that
what  is  being  attempted  now  is  the  desirable  or  the  definite
form  of  the  future  society,  but  is  a certain  sign  that  a phase  o
civilisation  is  beginning  to  pass  and  the  Time-Spirit  preparing


new  phase  and  a new  order.

It  may  well  take  time  for  the  communistic  idea  f ^

/ay  westward  and  it  may  too  undergo  considerable  mo  i ca  ions
a the  passage,  but  there  is  already  a remarka  e
a that  sense.  The  Labour  movement  is  everywhere  co
ag  its  transformation  from  a reformist  into  ^ ,

herefore  necessarily,  in  spite  of  present  hesitations,  a
ionary  type.  The  struggle  of  Labour  for  a better

ind  a share  in  the  government  has  grown  obso  • -ocietv
deal  is  now  the  abolition  of  the  capitalistic  struc  ure
ind  the  substitution  of  labour  for  wealth  as  t ® , r

he  governing  power.  The  differenres  '"‘thm  e
novement  touch  no  longer  the  principle  ^ tn  the  coming
process  of  the  change  and  precise  form  to  be  given  jjjyision
socialistic  government  and  society.  It  is  ony  j-gygnts
3f  counsels  that  still  retards  the  onward  mo  i .

^he  joining  of  the  decided  issue  of  battle.  ^ increases  as
the  strength  of  the  socialist  and  communis  i


644  War  and  Self-Determination

one  goes  eastward,  diminishes  in  the  opposite  direction:  the
movement  or  progress  is  no  longer  from  the  west  eastwards  but
from  the  east  towards  the  Occident.  The  more  extreme  forces
are  however  daily  increasing  everywhere  and  are  making  them-
selves felt  even  in  plutocratic  America.  In  any  case,  whatever
retardation  of  pace  there  may  be,  the  direction  of  the  stream  is
already  clear  and  the  result  hardly  doubtful.  The  existing
European  system  of  civilisation  at  least  in  its  figure  of  capitalistic
industrialism  has  reached  its  own  monstrous  limits,  broken
itself  by  its  own  mass  and  is  condemned  to  perish.  The  issue  of
the  future  lies  between  a labour  industrialism  not  very  different
except  in  organisation  from  its  predecessor,  some  greater  spirit
and  form  of  socialistic  or  communistic  society  such  as  is  being
attempted  in  Russia  or  else  the  emergence  of  a new  and  as  yet
unforeseen  principle.

The  upcoming  force  that  opens  a certain  latitude  for  this
last  possibility  is  the  resurgence  of  Asia.  It  is  difiicult  to  believe
that  Asia  once  free  to  think,  act  and  live  for  herself  will  be  for
long  content  merely  to  imitate  the  past  or  the  present  evolution
of  Europe.  The  temperament  of  her  peoples  is  marked  off  by
too  deep-seated  a difference,  the  build  and  movement  of  their
minds  is  of  another  character.  At  present,  however,  the  move-
ment of  resurgence  in  Asia  is  finding  expression  more  by  a
preface,  an  attempt  to  vindicate  her  bare  right  to  live  for  her-
self, than  by  any  pregnant  effort  of  independent  creative  thought
or  action.  The  Asiatic  unrest  is  still  the  second  prominent
feature  of  the  situation.  It  is  manifest  in  different  forms  from
Egypt  to  China.  It  takes  the  shape  in  the  Moslem  world  of  a
rejection  of  protectorates  and  mandates  and  a ferment  of
formation  of  independent  Asiatic  States.  It  manifests  in  India
in  a growing  dissatisfaction  with  half  methods  and  a constantly
accentuated  vehemence  of  the  demand  for  complete  and  early
self-government.  It  is  creating  in  the  Far  East  obscurer  move-
ments the  sense  of  which  has  yet  to  emerge.  This  unrest  envisages
as  yet  little  beyond  the  beginnings  of  a free  action  and  existence.
It  appeals  to  the  ideas  of  liberty  that  have  long  been  fully  self-
conscious  and  the  formulas  that  are  systematically  applied  in
Europe,  self-government,  Home  Rule,  democracy,  national


After  the  War


645


independence.  At  the  same  time  there  is  involved,  subconscient
as  yet  in  the  great  Asiatic  masses  but  already  defining  itself
in  more  awakened  minds,  another  issue  that  may  seem  at  first
sight  incompatible  or  at  least  disparate  with  this  imitative
seizing  on  principles  associated  with  the  modem  forms  of
freedom  and  progress,  — an  ideal  of  spiritual  and  moral  inde-
pendence and  the  defence  against  the  European  invasion  of  the
subtle  principle  of  Asiatic  culture.  In  India  the  notion  of  an
Asiatic,  a spiritualised  democracy  has  begun  to  be  voiced,
though  it  is  as  yet  vague  and  formless.  The  Khilafat  agitation
has  a religious  and  therefore  a cultural  as  well  as  a political
motive  and  temper.  The  regime  of  the  mandate  is  resisted
because  it  signifies  the  political  control  and  economic  exploita-
tion of  Asia  by  Europe,  but  there  is  another  more  latent  source
of  repugnance.  The  effective  exploitation  is  impossible  without
the  breaking  and  recasting  of  Asiatic  life  into  the  harsh  moulds
of  European  capitalism  and  industrialism  and,  although  Asia
must  learn  to  live  no  longer  in  the  magnificent  but  insufficient
past  but  in  the  future,  she  must  too  demand  to  create  that  future
in  her  own  image.  It  is  this  twofold  claim  carrying  in  it  t e
necessity  of  a double,  an  inner  and  an  outer  resistance  t a is
the  present  meaning  of  the  Asiatic  unrest  and  the  estine


meaning  of  the  Asiatic  resurgence.

The  capitalistic  governments  of  Europe  em
Asiatic  unrest  and  resistance  attempt  to  meet  it  wi  a
cession  in  form  and  a denial  in  fact  and  princip  e.  n
granted  not  the  beginning  of  responsible  govemmen ,
first  “substantial”  step  towards  it;  but  it  is  a step  ^ ,

with  a paralysing  accumulation  of  safeguards  . j.

and  capitalistic  interests  and  a significant  con  i
farther  progress  must  depend  on  the  extent  to  w i
prepared  to  reform  herself  politically,  economica  ^ ^

in  the  image  of  the  British  spirit.  A French  Jj,

occupies  Damascus,  expels  the  king  and  goyernme
the  people,  but  promises  to  establish  an  . England

subservient  to  the  European  interest  and  its  2^

offers  Mesopotamia  an  Arab  government  sa  j^aterial

Anglo-Indian  administration  and  the  mora


646


War  and  Self-Determination

benefits  of  the  exploitation  of  the  oil  of  the  Mosul;  meanwhile
she  is  fighting  the  insurgent  population  in  order  to  force  on  it
its  own  greater  good  against  its  own  barbarous  and  ignorant  will
to  independence.  A British  control  is  to  guarantee  the  integrity
of  Persia.  Palestine  is  to  be  colonised  by  a Jewish  immigration
from  Europe  and  to  be  administered  by  a High  Commissioner
in  the  interests  — but  against  the  will  — of  all  its  races.  The
Turkish  people  stripped  of  temporal  empire  and  the  prestige
of  the  Khalifate  are  to  be  free  under  a strict  and  close  inter-
national control  and  to  be  compelled  by  a Greek  army  to
accept  this  unprecedented  happiness  and  this  unequalled  op-
portunity of  becoming  a civilised  modem  nation.  Here  much
more  than  against  the  organised  forces  of  Labour  the  old
regime  has  the  material  power  to  enforce  its  dictates.  It  remains
nonetheless  certain  that  a solution  of  this  kind  will  not  put  an
end  to  the  unrest  of  Asia.  The  attempt  is  likely  to  recoil  upon
itself,  for  these  new  burdens  must  impose  a greatly  added  strain
on  an  already  impossible  financial  condition  and  hasten  the  social
and  economic  revolution  in  Europe.  And  even  if  it  were  other-
wise, the  resurgence  of  a great  continent  cannot  be  so  held  under.
One  day  it  will  surely  prevail  against  whatever  difficulties  and
possess  its  inevitable  future.

These  two  predestined  forces  of  the  future,  socialism  and  the
Asiatic  resurgence,  tend  for  the  moment  to  form  at  least  a moral
alliance.  The  Labour  and  socialistic  parties  in  the  now  dominant
nations  are  strongly  opposed  to  the  policy  of  their  governments
and  extend  their  support  to  the  claims  of  subject  or  menaced
nationalities  in  Asia  as  well  as  in  Europe.  In  the  more  advanced
Asiatic  countries,  as  in  Ireland,  the  national  movement  allies  itself
closely  with  a nascent  labour  movement.  Bolshevik  Russia  is  in
alliance  with  or  sovietises  and  controls  the  policy  of  the  existing
independent  States  of  central  Asia,  casts  a ferment  into  Persia
and  lends  whatever  moral  support  it  can  to  the  Turk  or  the  Arab.
This  tendency  may  have  in  itself  little  meaning  beyond  the  sym-
pathy created  by  reaction  against  a common  pressure.  Forces
and  interests  in  action  are  always  opportunist  and  grasp  in  emer-
gency at  help  or  convenience  from  whatever  quarter;  but  these
alliances  of  pure  interest,  unless  they  find  some  more  permanent


After  the  War


647


support,  are  fragile  and  ephemeral  combinations.  Bolshevist
Russia  may  set  up  Soviet  governments  in  Georgia  and  Azerbai-
jan, but  if  these  are  only  governments  of  occasion,  if  Sovietism
does  not  correspond  to  or  touch  something  more  profound  in  the
instinct,  temperament  and  idea  of  these  peoples,  they  are  not  likely
to  be  durable.  British  Labour,  although  it  makes  no  present  con-
ditions, expects  a self-governing  India  to  evolve  in  the  sense  of  its
own  social  and  economic  idea,  but  it  is  conceivable  that  a self-


governing  India  may  break  away  from  the  now  normal  line  of
development  and  discover  her  own  and  unexpected  social  and
economic  order.  All  that  we  can  say  certainly  at  present  is  that
the  dominant  governments  of  Europe  have  so  managed  that  they
find  their  scheme  of  things  in  opposition  at  once  to  the  spirit  and
menaced  by  the  growth  of  two  great  world  forces,  both  compres-
sed and  held  back  by  it  and  both  evident  possessors  of  the  future.

That  means  that  we  are  as  yet  far  from  a durable  order  and
can  therefore  look  forward  to  no  suspension  of  the  earth  s trou-
bles. The  balance  of  the  present,  if  such  a chaotic  fluctuation  o
shifts  and  devices  can  be  called  a balance,  has  no  promise  o ura


tion,  is  only  a moment  of  arrest,  and  we  must  expect,  as  soon  as
the  sufficient  momentum  can  come  or  circumstance  open  a oor
of  escape  for  the  release  of  compressed  forces,  more  surprising
and  considerable  movements,  radical  reversals  an  immens
changes.  The  subject  of  supreme  interest  is  not  the
that  will  set  free  their  paths,  for  fate  when  it  is  rea  y
vantage  of  any  and  every  circumstance,  but  the  direction
take  and  the  meaning  they  will  envelop.  The  evo  u lo
socialistic  society  and  the  resurgence  of  Asia  mus  e
changes  and  yet  they  may  not  realise  the  larger
Socialism  may  bring  in  a greater  equality  and  a c oser
into  human  life,  but  if  it  is  only  a material  ^ burden  of

other  needed  things  and  even  aggravate  the  mec  am  5pji-it,
humanity  and  crush  more  heavily  towards  t e ear  .

The  resurgence  of  Asia,  if  it  means  only  a ressi

of  the  international  balance,  will  be  a step  m forward

element  of  the  renovation,  not  a condition  o

and  out  of  the  groove  that  is  now  felt  however  ^ Labour

one  thing  needful.  The  present  international  policy


648


War  and  Self-Determination

carries  in  itself  indeed  at  its  end,  — provided  Labour  in  power
is  faithful  to  the  mind  of  Labour  in  opposition,  — one  conside-
rable promise,  a juster  equation  between  the  national  and  the
international  idea,  an  international  comity  of  free  nations,  a free,
equal  and  democratic  league  of  peoples  in  place  of  the  present
close  oligarchy  of  powers  that  only  carries  the  shadow  of  an  un-
real League  as  its  appendage.  An  international  equality  and  co-
operation in  place  of  the  past  disorder  or  barbaric  order  of  do-
mination and  exploitation  is  indeed  a first  image  that  we  have
formed  of  the  better  future.  But  that. is  not  all:  it  is  only  a frame-
work. It  may  be  at  lowest  a novel  machinery  of  international
convenience,  it  may  be  at  most  a better  articulated  body  for  the
human  race.  The  spirit,  the  power,  the  idea  and  will  that  are
meant  to  inform  or  use  it  is  the  greater  question,  the  face  and  di-
rection of  destiny  that  will  be  decisive.

The  two  forces  that  are  arising  to  possess  the  future  repre-
sent two  great  things,  the  intellectual  idealism  of  Europe  and  the
soul  of  Asia.  The  mind  of  Europe  laboured  by  Hellenism  and
Christianity  and  enlarging  its  horizons  by  free  thought  and
science  has  arrived  at  an  idea  of  human  perfectibility  or  progress
expressed  in  the  terms  of  an  intellectual,  material  and  vital  free-
dom, equality  and  unity  of  close  association,  an  active  fraternity
or  comradeship  in  thought  and  feeling  and  labour.  The  difficulty
is  to  make  of  the  component  parts  of  this  idea  a combined  and
real  reality  in  practice  and  the  effort  of  European  progress  has
been  a labour  to  discover  and  set  up  a social  machinery  that  shall
automatically  turn  out  this  production.  The  first  equation  dis-
covered, an  individualistic  democracy,  a system  of  political  liberty
and  equality  before  the  law,  has  helped  only  to  a levelling  as
between  the  higher  orders,  the  competitive  liberty  of  the  strongest
and  most  skilful  to  arrive,  an  inhuman  social  inequality  and
economic  exploitation,  an  incessant  class  war  and  a monstrous
and  opulently  sordid  reign  of  wealth  and  productive  machinery.
It  is  the  turn  now  of  another  equation,  an  equality  as  absolute  as
can  be  fabricated  amid  the  inequalities  of  Nature  by  reason  and
social  science  and  machinery,  — and  most  of  all  an  equal  asso-
ciation in  the  labour  and  the  common  profits  of  a collective  life.
It  is  not  certain  that  this  formula  will  succeed  very  much  better


After  the  War


649


than  its  predecessor.  This  equality  can  only  be  presently  secured
by  strict  regulation,  and  that  means  that  liberty  at  least  for  a time
must  go  under.  And  at  any  rate  the  root  of  the  whole  difficulty  is
ignored,  that  nothing  can  be  real  in  life  that  is  not  made  real  in
the  spirit.  It  is  only  if  men  can  be  made  free,  equal  and  united  in
spirit  that  there  can  be  a secure  freedom,  equality  and  brother-
hood in  their  life.  The  idea  and  sentiment  are  not  enough,  for
they  are  incomplete  and  combated  by  deep-seated  nature  and
instinct  and  they  are  besides  inconstant  and  fluctuate.  There
must  be  an  immense  advance  that  will  make  freedom,  equality
and  unity  our  necessary  internal  and  external  atmosphere.  This
can  come  only  by  a spiritual  change  and  the  intellect  of  Europe
is  beginning  to  see  that  the  spiritual  change  is  at  least  a neces-
sity; but  it  is  still  too  intent  on  rational  formula  and  on  mecha-
nical effort  to  spare  much  time  for  discovery  and  realisation  of


the  things  of  the  spirit.

Asia  has  made  no  such  great  endeavour,  no  such  travail  o
social  effort  and  progress.  Order,  a secure  ethical  and  religious
framework,  a settled  economical  system,  a natural,  becoming
fatally  a conventional  and  artificial,  hierarchy  have  been  er
ordinary  methods,  everywhere  indeed  where  she  reached  a i^
development  of  culture.  These  things  she  founded  on  her  re  i
gious  sense  and  sweetened  and  made  tolerable  by  a strong  com
munal  feeling,  a living  humanity  and  sympathy  and
cesses  to  a human  equality  and  closeness.  Her  suprenie  e
was  to  discover  not  an  external  but  a spiritual  and  inner
and  that  carried  with  it  a great  realisation  of  spiritua  ity,  equ
and  oneness.  This  spiritual  travail  was  not  universa  ise
endeavour  made  to  shape  the  whole  of  human  T e in  i s i
The  result  was  a disparateness  between  the  hig  est  inn
vidual  and  the  outward  social  life,  in  India  the  increasin
exodus  of  the  best  who  lived  in  the  spirit  out  o ®
narrow  walls  of  the  ordinary  existence  and  could

that  the  greatest  universal  truth  of  spirit  disco vere  . • jg

yet  not  bo  the  spirit  of  that  life  and  is  only  i3  being

But  now  Asia  enduring  the  powerful  pressure  -ppcssity  of
forced  to  face  the  life  problem  again  under  the
another  and  a more  active  solution.  Assimi  a ive.


650


War  and  Self-Determination


produce  or  imitate  the  occidental  experiment  of  industrialism,  its
first  phase  of  capitalism,  its  second  phase  of  socialism;  but  then
her  resurgence  will  bring  no  new  meaning  or  possibility  into  the
human  endeavour.  Or  the  closer  meeting  of  these  two  halves  of
the  mind  of  humanity  may  set  up  a more  powerful  connection
between  the  two  poles  of  our  being  and  realise  some  sufficient
equation  of  the  highest  ideals  of  each,  the  inner  and  the  outer
freedom,  the  inner  and  the  outer  equality,  the  inner  and  the  outer
unity.  That  is  the  largest  hope  that  can  be  formed  on  present  data
and  circumstance  for  the  human  future.

But  also,  as  from  the  mixing  of  various  elements  an  un-
foreseen form  emerges,  so  there  may  be  a greater  unknown
something  concealed  and  in  preparation,  not  yet  formulated  in
the  experimental  laboratory  of  Time,  not  yet  disclosed  in  the
design  of  Nature.  And  that  then,  some  greater  unexpected  birth
from  the  stress  of  the  evolution  may  be  the  justifying  result  of
which  this  unquiet  age  of  gigantic  ferment,  chaos  of  ideas  and  in-
ventions, clash  of  enormous  forces,  creation  and  catastrophe  and
dissolution  is  actually  amid  the  formidable  agony  and  tension  of
this  great  imperfect  body  and  soul  of  mankind  in  creative  labour.


1919


The  year  1919  comes  to  us  with  the  ap-
pearance of  one  of  the  most  pregnant  and  historic  dates  of  the
modern  world.  It  has  ended  the  greatest  war  in  history,  begotten
a new  thing  in  the  history  of  mankind,  a League  of  Nations  which
claims  to  be  the  foundation-stone  for  the  future  united  life  of  the


human  race,  and  cleared  the  stage  for  fresh  and  momentous  other
constructions  or  destructions,  which  will  bring  us  into  another
structure  of  society  and  of  the  framework  of  human  life  than  has
yet  been  known  in  the  recorded  memory  of  the  earth  s peoples.
This  is  record  enough  for  a single  year  and  it  looks  as  if  there
were  already  sufficient  to  give  this  ^date  an  undisputed  pre-
eminence in  the  twentieth  century.  But  it  is  possible  that  things
are  not  quite  what  they  look  to  the  contemporary  eye  and  t at
posterity  may  see  them  in  a very  different  focus.  1815  rnusthave
seemed  the  date  of  dates  to  the  men  of  the  day  whose  min  s were
filled  with  the  view  of  the  long  struggle  between  the  ancient  re-
gimes and  revolutionary  France  and  then  between  Europe  an
Napoleon.  But  when  we  look  back  at  present,  we  see  ^ ^

only  a stage,  the  end  of  the  acutest  phase  of  ^ .

mencement  of  a breathing-time,  the  date  of  a ma  es  i
could  not  endure.  We  look  back  from  it  to  1789  whic  g
the  destruction  of  an  old  order  and  the  birth  of  a ^ ^ , ,

beyond  it  to  later  dates  which  mark  the  progress  o
towards  its  broadening  realisation.  So  too  catas-

look  back  beyond  this  year  1919  to  the  beginning  o
trophe  which  marks  the  first  collapse  of  the

order  and  forward  beyond  it  to  dates  yet  ^ ® "^nikation  of

future  which  will  mark  the  progress  towards  re

whatever  order  and  ideal  is  destined  to  rep  ace  i .

too  may  be  only  the  end  of  an  acute  phase  o ^ ^ make-

the  commencement  of  a breathing-time,  the  yea

shift,  the  temporary  halt  of  a flood  nor

because  it  has  not  realised  the  deeper  mind  of  human.l)


652  War  and  Self-Determination

answered  to  the  far-reaching  intention  of  the  Time-Spirit.

In  the  enthusiasm  of  the  struggle  a hope  arose  that  it  would
sweep  away  all  the  piled-up  obstacles  to  human  progress  and
usher  in  with  a miraculous  immediateness  a new  age.  A vague
ideal  also  syllabled  eloquently  of  peace,  of  brotherhood,  of  free-
dom, of  unity,  which  for  the  moment  partly  enlightened  and
kindled  the  soul  of  the  race  and  gave  its  intellect  a broader  vista.
Men  spoke  of  the  powers  of  good  and  evil  separated  on  opposite
sides  and  locked  in  a decisive  conflict.  These  ideas  were  the  ex-
aggerations of  sentiment  and  idealistic  reason  and  in  their  ex-
cessive and  blinding  light  many  things  took  cover  which  were  of
a very  different  nature.  The  hope  could  not  but  be  an  illusion,  a
haloscene  of  the  dream  mind  when  it  sees  a future  possibility  in
its  own  light  apart  from  existing  conditions.  Human  mind  and
action  are  too  much  of  a tangled  coil  to  adroit  of  such  miraculous
suddennesses ; the  physical  shock  of  war  and  revolution  can  break
down  stifling  obstructions,  but  they  cannot  of  themselves  create
either  the  kingdom  of  good  or  the  kingdom  of  God;  for  that  a
mental  and  spiritual  change  is  needed  to  which  our  slowly  mo-
ving human  nature  takes  time  to  shape  its  customary  being.
The  ideal,  a thing  of  the  intellect  and  the  sentiment  only,  cannot
so  easily  bring  about  its  own  effectuation ; force  of  circumstance,
the  will  to  survive  of  existing  actualities,  the  insistent  past  of  our
own  nature  are  not  so  easily  blown  away  by  the  eager  shouting
of  a few  high  and  great  words  or  even  by  the  breath  of  the  thought
behind  them,  however  loudly  blare  the  trumpets  of  the  ideal.
Nor  was  the  war  itself  precisely  a definite  issue  between  pure  good
and  pure  evil, — such  distinctions  belong  to  the  world  of  the  idea-
listic reason  of  which  our  actual  intricate  existence  in  whose  net
opposites  are  very  bafilingly  fused  together,  is  as  yet  at  least  no
faithful  reproduction,  — but  a very  confused  clash  and  cata-
strophe of  the  intertangled  powers  of  the  past,  present  and  future.
The  result  actually  realised  is  only  such  as  might  have  been  ex-
pected from  the  balance  of  the  forces  at  work.  It  is  not  the  last
result  nor  the  end  of  the  whole  matter,  but  it  represents  the  first
sum  of  things  that  was  ready  for  working  out  in  the  immediate-
ness of  the  moment’s  potency.  More  was  involved  which  will
now  press  for  its  reign,  but  belongs  to  the  future.


1919


The  cataclysm  of  the  last  five  years  haH  , i .
turned  towards  the  past  one  Pirntw  * / "“*

dealings  with  the  past  it ’was  a contr  >'*

represented  by  Germany  and  thT*^

America  and  the  w“steL  «*^r  by

perial  Germany  represented  * “ Outwardly,  Im-

Md  militarism  satisfied  of  its*  very  nakedly  brutal  imperialism

«><i  opposed  to  afbt  1 * Td."f
mocracy  tainted  with  a half-hen^rf  d*  ***  democracy  - but  de-
rism  and  a liberalised  <-  “oeasy,  unwilling  milita-

of  western  Europe  Burtb^”'*^’^  half-idealistic  imperialism  -

in  itself  it  would^not  hnl^l  “alter,

a catastrophe.  Imperial  ^ sufficient  occasion  for  so  great

go  because  it  wS  the  I ”'‘•7  ^^P“'nuted  had  to

throned  in  all  the  ol  European  civilisation  en-

effidency  Its  ® mechanical  and  scientific

Mammon  seated^b^^..!!!  f.  ^ Moloch  and


oftheoldsnirjf  ^ combination  of  the  remnants

past

gressive  commit  ’-^r  ^ modern  burdensome  organised  ag-
itate socialit!  industrialism  and  of  a mechanised

^ii  guided  b ^ ^ nimistered  by  an  empire  and  a bureaucracy,
tnpIe-hppH«J  intelligence  and  power  of  science.  This

claim  to  fair  ^ future  ideal  for  the  world,  with  its

l^ad  to  be  P^^^^^^inn  of  the  race  and  mechanise  its  life  for  it,
phantoms  passed  away  almost  all  the  old

"^hich  stiller  ^^c[  survivals  of  aristocratic  monarchy

^uch  the  increasingly  democratic  Europe.  So

result swept  away;  but  its  more  important  and  posi-
cf  the  n destruction  of  the  past,  but  a shaking  even

tbe  future^^^^  i^nses  and  a clearing  of  the  field  for  the  forces  of

class  d^^  does  not  belong  to  that  hybrid  thing,  a middle-
^^htion^h^^^^^  infected  with  the  old  theory  of  international
spirit  of  "'d  modffied  by  concessions  to  a new  broader

part  ^ The  peace  which  closes  the  war  is  evidently

im^  Prolongation  of  the  past  and  a thing  of  the  moment,  its
Portance  for  the  future  is  its  association  with  the  plan


654  War  and  Self-Determination

for  a league  of  nations.  But  this  league  also  is  a makeshift,  a tem-
porary device  awaiting  the  possibility  of  a more  perfect  forma-
tion. Its  insecurity  lies  in  the  degree  to  which  it  is  a concession
to  the  past  and  founded  on  a present  which  is  indeed  still  domi-
nant, but  very  evidently  doomed  to  a rapid  passing.  The  future
destined  to  replace  this  present  is  evident  enough  in  some  of  its
main  outward  tendencies,  in  society  away  from  plutocracy  and
middle-class  democracy  to  some  completeness  of  socialism  and
attempt  at  a broad  and  equal  commonalty  of  social  living,  in  the
relations  of  the  peoples  away  from  aggressive  nationalism  and
balances  of  power  to  some  closer  international  comity.  But
these  are  only  symptoms,  feelings-out,  mechanical  tendencies,
not  likely  by  themselves,  whatever  changes  they  bring,  to  satisfy
for  long  the  soul  of  humanity.  Behind  them  lies  a greater  ques-
tion of  the  spirit  and  ideal  which  are  to  govern  the  relations  of
man  with  man  and  people  with  people  in  the  age  that  is  opening,
the  most  critical  because  the  most  far-reaching  in  its  hopes  of  all
the  historic  ages  of  humanity.

Meanwhile  much  is  gone  that  had  to  go,  though  relics  and
dregs  of  it  remain  for  destruction,  and  the  agony  of  a sanguinary
struggle  is  ended,  and  for  that  there  may  well  be  rejoicing.  But  if
something  is  ended,  all  has  yet  to  be  begun.  The  human  spirit
has  still  to  find  itself,  its  idea  and  its  greater  orientation.


The  End


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  NOTES


The  Human  Cycle

The  Author's  Note  in  the  1949  Edition

“The  chapters  constituting  this  book  were  written  under  the  title
The  Psychology  of  Social  Development  from  month  to  month
in  the  philosophical  monthly,  Arya,  from  August  15,  1916  to  July
15,  1918  and  used  recent  and  contemporary  events  as  well  as  illus-
trations from  the  history  of  the  past  in  its  explanation  of  the  theory
of  social  evolution  put  forward  in  these  pages.  The  reader  has  there-
fore to  go  back  in  mind  to  the  events  of  that  period  in  order  to
follow  the  line  of  thought  and  the  atmosphere  in  which  it  developed
and  at  one  time  there  suggested  itself  the  necessity  of  bringing  this
part  up  to  date,  especially  by  some  reference  to  later  developments
in  Nazi  Germany  and  the  development  of  a totalitarian  Communist
regime  in  Russia.  But  afterwards  it  was  felt  that  there  was  suffi-
cient prevision  and  allusion  to  these  events  and  more  elaborate  des-
cription or  criticism  of  them  was  not  essential;  there  was  already
without  them  an  adequate  working  out  and  elucidation  of  this  theory
of  the  social  cycle.”

November,  1949


Publishers'  Note

The  second  edition  of  The  Human  Cycle  was  published  by  the
Sri  Aurobindo  Library,  New  York  in  1950.  The  Sri  Aurobindo  In-
ternational Centre  of  Education  brought  out  in  1962  a combined
edition  of  The  Human  Cycle,  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity  and
War  and  Self-Determination  to  bring  together  Sri  Aurobindo’s
social  and  political  thought  under  one  cover.


The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity

The  Author's  Note  in  the  1950  Edition

“The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity  first  appeared  in  the  Arya  (Vol.  II,
No.  2 — Vol.  IV,  No.  12)  complete  in  35  Chapters,  serially  from
September,  1915  to  July,  1918.

“It  was  reproduced  in  book-form  in  1919  by  the  Sons  of  India
Ltd.,  Madras  (with  three  Appendices,  a Preface  and  a detailed  syn-
opsis of  the  Chapters.  The  Appendices  contained  articles  from  the
Aryn  setting  forth  the  ideals  of  the  Review).

“The  present  edition  is  a revised  edition;  but  the  revision  was


done  before  the  last  World  War.  It  is,  -however,  printed  almost  in
that  form  brought  up  to  date  by  the  addition  of  a Postscript  Chapter
dealing  with  the  world  conditions  today.”

April,  1950


Publishers'  Note

The  third  edition  of  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity  was  published
by  the  Sri  Aurobindo  Library,  New  York  in  1950.  As  stated  above,
this  book  formed  a part  of  the  combined  edition  brought  out  in
1962  by  the  Sri  Aurobindo  International  Centre  of  Education.


War,  and  Self-Determination

Publishers'  Note

War  and  Self-Determination  was  published  in  1920  by  S.R.
Murthy  & Co,,  Madras  and  contained  the  three  essays  — The  Pas-
sing of  War,  The  Unseen  Power  and  Self-Determination  published
originally  in  the  Arya  (1916-1920)  with  a Foreword  and  The  Lea-
gue of  Nations  especially  written  for  that  edition.  In  1922  it  was
reprinted  and  published  by  Miss  Sarojini  Ghose,  sister  of  Sri
Aurobindo.  In  the  third  edition  published  by  the  Sri  Aurobindo  Ash-
ram in  1957  one  more  article.  After  the  War,  from  the  Arya,  was
added.  The  combined  edition  included  an  article  from  the  Arya  en-
titled 1919.

The  present  edition  in  the  Centenary  series  is  a reprint  of  the
1962  combined  edition  and  has  been  once  more  checked.
