Essays on the Gita (Sri Aurobindo, 1922)
==========================================================
Aurobindo's 1922 Essays on the Gita — the revolutionary yogi's spiritual reinterpretation of the Bhagavad Gita as the scripture of divine action. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

5TT*r 5T$T§7 STTSsft THSEfcl SWTT?R 3 WJRlft

L.B.S National Academy of Administration

HtlO

MUSSOORIE

g KWMH

LIBRARY


3RTfc?r >TOT
Accession No.

w mm

Class No.

mm

Book No.


Ft Y\vL.


GL 294.5924
AUR 5TH ED V.1


102221

LBSNAA


SRI AUROBINDO

ESSAYS ON THE GITA

FIRST SERIES


CALCUTTA

ARYA PUBLISHING HOUSE

COLLEGE STREET


First published in the “Ary a” from August, 1916 to July % 1918


First Edition • ••••• 1922

# Second Edition 1926

Third Edition 1937

Fourth Edition • • • . . 1944

Fifth Edition 1949


All Rights Reserved


Published by T. Patro for the Arya Publishing House,
63, College Street, Calcutta 12
Printed at the Sri Aurobindo Ashram Press, Pondicherry

Pr i nted in India


729/49/2,500


CONTENTS


Chap. Page

I. Our Demand and Need from the Gita 3

II. The Divine Teacher . . ... 14

III. The Human Disciple . . 24

IV. The Co£e of the Teaching . . 36

V. Kurukshetra . . 49

VI. Man and the Battle of Life . . 59

'VII. The Creed of the Aryan Fighter .. 71

VIII. Sankhya and Yoga . . 84

IX. Sankhya, Yoga and Vedanta . . 101

X. The Yoga of the Intelligent Will.. 117

XI. Works and Sacrifice . . ..131

XII. The Significance of Sacrifice . . 142

XIII. The Lqrd of the Sacrifice . . 154

XIV. THEyPatneiPLE of Divine WbRKS . . 166

XV. Thb» —Possibility and Purpose of

Avatar hood . . . . 180

XVI. The Process of Avatarhood . . 196

XVII. The Divine Birth and Divine Works 209
XVIII. The Divine Worker . . . . 220

XIX. Equality . . . . . . 234

XX. Equality and Knowledge . . 249

XXI. The Determinism of Nature . . 264

XXII. Beyond the Modes of Nature . . 279

XXIII. Nirvana and Works in the World . . 291

XXIV. The Gist of the Karmayoga . . 308


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


FIRST SERIES


I

OUR DEMAND AND NEED FROM THE GITA

The world abounds with scriptures sacred and profane,
with revelations and half-revelations, with religions and
philosophies, sects and schools and systems. To these
the many minds of a half-ripe knowledge or no knowledge
at all attach themselves with exclusiveness and passion
and will have it that this or the other book is alone the
eternal Word of God and all others are either impostures
or at best imperfectly inspired, that this or that philosophy
is the last word of the reasoning intellect and other sys-
tems are either errors or saved only by such partial truth
in them as links them to the one true philosophical cult.
Even the discoveries of physical Science have been ele-
vated into a creed and in its name religion and spirituality
banned as ignorance and superstition, philosophy as
frippery and moonshine. And to these bigoted exclusions
and vain wranglings even the wise have often lent them-
selves, misled by some spirit of darkness that has mingled
with their light and overshadowed it with some cloud of
intellectual egoism or spiritual pride. Mankind seems
now indeed inclined to grow a little modester and wiser;
we no longer slay our fellows in the name of God’s truth
or because they have minds differently trained or dif-
ferently constituted from ours ; we are less ready to curse
and revile our neighbour because he is wicked or pre-
sumptuous enough to differ from us in opinion; we are


3


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


ready even to admit that Truth is everywhere and cannot
be our sole monopoly; we are beginning to look at other
religions and philosophies for the truth and help they
contain and no longer merely in order to damn them as
false or criticise what we conceive to be their errors. But
we are still apt to declare that our truth gives us the su-
preme knowledge which other religions or philosophies
have missed or only imperfectly grasped so that they deal
either with subsidiary and inferior aspects of the truth of
things or can merely prepare less evolved -minds for the
heights to which we have arrived. And we are still prone
to force upon ourselves or others the whole sacred mass
of the book or gospel we admire, insisting that all shall
be accepted as eternally valid truth and no iota or under-
line or diaeresis denied its part of the plenary inspiration.

It may therefore be useful in approaching an ancient
Scripture, such as the Veda, Upanishads or Gita, to
indicate precisely the spirit in which we approach it and
what exactly we think we may derive from it that is of
value to humanity and its future. First of all, there is
undoubtedly a Truth one and eternal which we are seek-
ing, from which all other truth derives, by the light of
which all other truth finds its right place, explanation
and relation to the scheme of knowledge. But precisely
for that reason it cannot be shut up in a single trenchant
formula, it is not likely to be found in its entirety or in
all its bearings in any single philosophy or Scripture or
uttered altogether and for ever by any one teacher,
thinker, prophet or Avatar. Nor has it been wholly found
by us if our view of it necessitates the intolerant exclusion
of the truth underlying other systems; for when we reject
passionately, we mean simply that we cannot appreciate
and explain. Secondly, this Truth, though it is one and


4


OUR DEMAND AND NEED FROM THE GITA


eternal, expresses itself in Time and through the mind
of man; therefore every Scripture must necessarily con-
tain two elements, one temporary, perishable, belonging
to the ideas of the period and country in which it was
produced, the other eternal and imperishable and
applicable in all ages and countries. Moreover, in the
statement of the Truth the actual form given to it, the
system and arrangement, the metaphysical and intellectual
mould, the precise expression used must be largely sub-
ject to the mutations of Time and cease to have the same
force; for the human intellect modifies itself always;
continually dividing and putting together it is obliged
to shift its divisions continually and to rearrange its
syntheses; it is always leaving old expression and symbol
for new or, if it uses the old, it so changes its connotation
or at least its exact content and association that we can
never be quite sure of understanding an ancient book of
this kind precisely in the sense and spirit it bore to its
contemporaries. What is of entirely permanent value is
that which besides being universal has been experienced,
lived and seen with a higher than the intellectual vision.

I hold it therefore of small importance to extract from
the Gita its exact metaphysical connotation as it was
understood by the men of the time, — even If that were
accurately possible. That it is not possible, is shown by
the divergence of the original commentaries which have
been and are still being written upon it; for they all agree
in each disagreeing with all the others, each finds in
the Gita its own system of metaphysics and trend of
religious thought. Nor will even the most painstaking and
disinterested scholarship and the most luminous theories
of the historical development of Indian philosophy save us
from inevitable error. But what we can do with profit


5


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


is to seek in the Gita for the actual living truths it con-
tains, apart from their metaphysical form, to extract
from it what can help us or the world at large and to
put it in the most natural and vital form and expression
we can find that will be suitable to the mentality and
helpful to the spiritual needs of our present-day humanity.
No doubt, in this attempt we may mix a good deal of
error born of our own individuality and of the ideas in
which we live, as did greater men before us, but if we
steep ourselves in the spirit of this great Scripture and,
above all, if we have tried to live in that spirit, we may
be sure of finding in it as much real truth as we are
capable of receiving as well as the spiritual influence and
actual help that, personally, we were intended to derive
from it. And that is after all what Scriptures were written
to give; the rest is academical disputation or theological
dogma. Only those Scriptures, religions, philosophies
which can be thus constantly renewed, relived, their
stuff of permanent truth constantly reshaped and
developed in the inner thought and spiritual experience of
a developing humanity, continue to be of living impor-
tance to mankind. The rest remain as monuments of
the past, but have no actual force or vital impulse for
the future.

In the Gita there is very little that is merely local or
temporal and its spirit is so large, profound and universal
that even this little can easily be universalised without
the sense of the teaching suffering any diminution or
violation; rather by giving an ampler scope to it than
belonged to the country and epoch, the teaching gains
in depth, truth and power. Often indeed the Gita itself
suggests the wider scope that can in this way be given
to an idea in itself local or limited. Thus it dwells on th t


6


OUR DEMAND AND NEED FROM THE GITA


. ancient Indian system and idea of sacrifice as an inter-
change between gods and men, — a system and idea which
have long been practically obsolete in India itself and
are no longer real to the general human mind; but we
find here a sense so entirely subtle, figurative and sym-
bolic given to the word “sacrifice” and the conception
of the gods is so little local or mythological, so entirely
cosmic and philosophical that we can easily accept
both as expressive of a practical fact of psychology and
general law of Nature and so apply them to the modern
conceptions of interchange between life and life and of
ethical sacrifice and self-giving as to widen and deepen
these and cast over them a more spiritual aspect and the
light of a profounder and more far-reaching Truth.
Equally the idea of action according to the Shastra, the
fourfold order of society, the allusion to the relative posi-
tion of the four orders or the comparative spiritual dis-
abilities of Shudras and women seem at first sight local
and temporal, and, if they are too much pressed in their
literal sense, narrow so much at least of the teaching,
deprive it of its universality and spiritual depth and limit
its validity for mankind at large. But if we look behind
to the spirit and sense and not at the local name and
temporal institution, we see that here too the sense is
deep and true and the spirit philosophical, spiritual and
universal. By Shastra we perceive that the Gita means
the law imposed on itself by humanity as a substitute
•for the purely egoistic action of the natural unregenerate
man and a control on his tendency to seek in the satis-
faction of his desire the standard and aim of his life.
We see too that the fourfold order of society is merely the
concrete form of a spiritual truth which is itself inde-
pendent of the form; it rests on the conception of right


7


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


works as a rightly ordered expression of the nature of
the individual being through whom the work is done,
that nature assigning him his line and scope in life
according to his inborn quality and his self-expressive
function. Since this is the spirit in which the Gita
advances its most local and particular instances, we are
justified in pursuing always the same- principle and
looking always for the deeper general truth which is sure
to underlie whatever seems at first sight merely local and
of the time. For we shall find always that the deeper
truth and principle is implied in the grain of the thought
even when it is not expressly stated in its language.

Nor shall we deal in any other spirit with the element
of philosophical dogma or religious creed which either
enters into the Gita or hangs about it owing to its use
of the philosophical terms and religious symbols current
at the time. When the Gita speaks of Sankhya and
Yoga, we shall not discuss beyond the limits of what is
just essential for our statement, the relations of the San-
khya of the Gita with its one Purusha and strong Vedantic
colouring to the non-theistic or “atheistic” Sankhya that
has come down to us bringing with it its scheme of many
Purushas and one Prakriti, nor of the Yoga of the Gita,
many-sided, subtle, rich and flexible to the thcistic
doctrine and the fixed, scientific, rigorously defined and
graded system of the Yoga of Patanjalt. In the Gita the
Sankhya and Yoga are evidently only two convergent
parts of the same Vedantic truth or rather two concur-
rent ways of approaching its realisation, the one philo-
sophical, intellectual, analytic, the other intuitional,
devotional, practical, ethical, synthetic, reaching know-
ledge through experience. The Gita recognises no* real
difference in their teachings. Still less need we discuss


$


OUR DEMAND AND NEED FROM THE GITA


the theories which regard the Gita as the fruit of some
particular religious system or tradition. Its teaching is
universal whatever may have been its origins.

The philosophical system of the Gita, its arrangement
of truth, is not that part of its teaching which is the
most vital, profound, eternally durable; but most
of the material of which the system is composed, the
principal ideas suggestive and penetrating which are
woven into its complex harmony, are eternally valuable
and valid; for they are not merely the luminous ideas or
striking speculations of a philosophic intellect, but rather
enduring truths of spiritual experience, verifiable facts
of our highest psychological possibilities which no attempt
to read deeply the mystery of existence can afford to
neglect. Whatever the system may be, it is not, as the com-
mentators strive to make it, framed or intended to support
any exclusive school of philosophical thought or to put
forward predominantly the claims of any one form of Yoga.
The language of the Gita, the structure of thought, the
combination and balancing of ideas belong neither to the
temper of a sectarian teacher nor to the spirit of a rigorous
analytical dialectics cutting off one angle of the truth
to exclude all the others; but rather there is a wide,
undulating, encircling movement of ideas which is the
manifestation of a vast synthetic mind and a rich synthetic
experience. This is one of those great syntheses in which
Indian spirituality has been as rich as in its creation of
the more intensive, exclusive movements of knowledge
and religious realisation that follow out with an absolute
concentration one clue, one path to its extreme issues.
It does not cleave asunder, but reconciles and unifies.

The thought of the Gita is not pure Monisfti although
it sees in one unchanging, pure, eternal Self the foundation


9


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


of all cosmic existence, nor Mayavada although it
speaks of the Maya of the three modes of Prakriti omni-
present in the created world; nor is it qualified Monism
although it places in the One his eternal supreme Prakriti
manifested in the form of the Jiva and lays most stress
on dwelling in God rather than dissolution as the supreme
state of spiritual consciousness; nor is it Sankhya although
it explains the created world by the double principle of
Purusha and Prakriti; nor is it Vaishnava Theism although
it presents to us Krishna, who is the Avatar of Vishnu
according to the Puranas, as the supreme Deity and allows
no essential difference nor any actual superiority of the
status of the indefinable relationless Brahman over that
of this Lord of beings who is the Master of the universe
and the Friend of all creatures. Like the earlier spiritual
synthesis of the Upanishads this later synthesis at once
spiritual and intellectual avoids naturally every such rigid
determination as would injure its universal comprehensive-
ness. Its aim is precisely the opposite to that of the polemist
commentators who found this Scripture established
as one of the three highest Vedantic authorities and
attempted to turn it into a weapon of offence and defence
against other schools and systems. The Gita is not a wea-
pon for dialectical warfare; it is a gate opening on the
whole world of spiritual truth and experience and the view
it gives us embraces all the provinces of that supreme
region. It maps out, but it does not cut up or build walls
or hedges to confine our vision.

There have been other syntheses in the long history
of Indian thought. We start with the Vedic synthesis
of the psychological being of man in its highest flights
and widest rangings of divine knowledge, power, joy,
life and glory with the cosmic existence of the gods,


10


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


body and of mental askesis for the opening up of the divine
life on all its planes, to which the Gita gives only a passing
and perfunctory attention. Moreover it grasps at that
idea of the divine perfectibility of man, possessed by the
Vedic Rishis but thrown into the background by the inter-
mediate ages, which is destined to fill so large, a place in
any future synthesis of human thought, experience and
aspiration.

We of the coming day stand at the head of a new age
of development which must lead to such a new and larger
synthesis. We are not called upon to be orthodox Vedan-
tins of any of the three schools or Tantrics or to adhere
to one of the theistic religions of the past or to entrench
ourselves within the four corners of the teaching of the
Gita. That would be to limit ourselves and to attempt to
create our spiritual life out of the being, knowledge and
nature of others, of the men of the past, instead of building
it out of our own being and potentialities. We do not be-
long to the past dawns, but to the noons of the future. A
mass of new material is flowing into us ; wc have not only
to assimilate the influences of the great theistic religions of
India and of the world and a recovered sense of the mean-
ing of Buddhism, but to take full account of the potent
though limited revelations of modern knowledge and seek-
ing; and, beyond that, the remote and dateless past which
seemed to be dead is returning upon us with an effulgence
of many luminous secrets long lost to the consciousness
of mankind but now breaking out again from behind the
veil. All this points to a new, a very rich, a very vast syn-
thesis; a fresh and widely embracing harmonisation of
our gains is both an intellectual and a spiritual necessity
of the future. But just as the past syntheses have taken
those which preceded them for their starting-point, so


12


OUR DEMAND AND NEED FROM THE GITA


also must that of the future, to be on firm ground, proceed
from what the great bodies of realised spiritual thought
and experience in the past have given. Among them
the Gita takes a most important place.

Our object , : then, in studying the Gita will not be a
scholastic or academical scrutiny of its thought, nor to
place its philosophy in the history of metaphysical specu-
lation, nor shall we deal with it in the fnanner of the ana-
lytical dialectician. We approach it for help and light
and our aim must be to distinguish its essential and living
message, that in it on which humanity has to seize for its
perfection and its highest spiritual welfare.


13


II


THE DIVINE TEACHER

The peculiarity of the Gita among the great religious books
of the world is that it does not stand apart as a work by
itself, the fruit of the spiritual life of a creative personality
like Christ, Mahomed or Buddha or of an epoch of
pure spiritual searching like the Veda and Upanishads,
but is given as an episode in an epic history of nations and
their wars and men and their deeds and arises out of a
critical moment in the soul of one of its leading personages
face to face with the crowning action of his life, a work
terrible, violent and sanguinary, at the point when he must
either recoil from it altogether or carry it through to its
inexorable completion. It matters little whether or no, as
modern criticism supposes, the Gita is a later composition
inserted into the mass of the Mahabharata by its author
in order to invest its teaching with the authority and
popularity of the great national epic. There seem to me
to be strong grounds against this supposition for which,
besides, the evidence, extrinsic or internal, is in the last
degree scanty and insufficient. But even if it be sound,
there remains the fact that the author has not only taken
pains to interweave his work inextricably into the vast
web of the larger poem, but is careful again and again to
remind us of the situation from which the teaching has
arisen; he returns to it prominently, not only at the end,
but in the middle of his profoundest philosophical


14


THE DIVINE TEACHER


disquisitions. We must accept the insistence the author
and give its full importance to this recurrent preoccupation
of the Teacher and the disciple. The teaching of the Gita
must therefore be regarded not merely in the light of a
general spiritual philosophy or ethical doctrine, but as
bearing upon a practical crisis in the application of ethics
and spirituality to human life. For what that crisis stands,
what is the significance of the battle of Kurukshetra and
its effect on Arjuna’s inner being, we have first to deter-
mine if we would grasp the central drift of the ideas of the
Gita,

Very obviously a great body of the profoundest teaching
cannot be built round an ordinary occurrence which has
no gulfs of deep suggestion and hazardous difficulty behind
its superficial and outward aspects and can be governed
well enough by the ordinary everyday standards of
thought and action. There are indeed three things in the
Gita which are spiritually significant, almost symbolic,
typical of the profoundest relations and problems of the
spiritual life and of human existence at its roots; they are
the divine personality of the Teacher, his characteristic
relations with his disciple and the occasion of his teaching.
The teacher is God himself descended into humanity; the
disciple is the first, as we might say in modern language,
the representative man of his age, closest friend and chosen
instrument of the Avatar* his protagonist in an immense
work and struggle the secret purpose of which is unknown
to the actors in it, known only to the incarnate. Godhead
who guides it all from behind the veil of his unfathomable
mind of knowledge; the occasion is the violent crisis
of that work and struggle at the moment when the
anguish and moral difficulty and blind violence of its
apparent movements forces itself with the shock of a


15


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


visible revel^ion on the mind of its representative man
and raises the whole question of the meaning of God
in the world and the goal and drift and sense of human
life and conduct.

India has from ancient times held strongly a belief
in the reality of the Avatar, the descent into form, the
revelation of the Godhead in humanity. In the West
this belief has never really stamped itself upon the mind
because it has been presented through exoteric Christi-
anity as a theological dogma without any roots in the
reason and general consciousness and attitude towards
life. But in India it has grown up and persisted as a
logical outcome of the Vedantic view of life and taken
firm root in the consciousness of the race. All existence
is a manifestation of God because He is the only existence
and nothing can be except as either a real figuring or
else a figment of that one reality. Therefore every con-
scious being is in part or in some way a descent of the
Infinite into the apparent finiteness of name and form.
But it is a veiled manifestation and there is a gradation
between the supreme being 1 * of the Divine and the con-
sciousness shrouded partly or wholly by ignorance of self
in the finite. The conscious embodied soul* is the spark
of the divine fire and that soul in man opens out to
self-knowledge as it develops out of ignorance of self
into self-being. The Divine also, pouring itself into the
forms of the cosmic existence, is revealed ordinarily in
an efflorescence of its powers, in energies and magnitudes
of its knowledge, love, joy, developed force of being , 3 in
degrees and faces of its .divinity. But when the divine

1 para bhdva

* dehi 9 vibhUti


16


THE DIVINE TEACHER


Consciousness and Power, taking upon itself the human
form and the human mode of action, possesses it not only
by powers and magnitudes, by degrees and outward
faces of itself but out of its eternal self-knowledge, when
the Unborn knows itself and acts in the frame of the
mental being and the appearance of birth, that is the
height of the conditioned manifestation; it is the full
and conscious descent of the Godhead, it is the Avatar.

The Vaishnava form of Vedantism which has laid
most stress upon this conception expresses the relation
of God in man to man in God by the double figure of
Nara-Narayana, associated historically with the origin
of a religious school very similar in its doctrines to the
teaching of the Gita. Nara is the human soul which,
eternal companion of the Divine, finds itself only when
it awakens to that companionship and begins, as the
Gita would say, to live in God. Narayana is the divine
Soul always present in our humanity, the secret guide,
friend and helper 'of the human being, the “Lord who
abides within the heart of creatures” of the Gita; when
within us the veil of that secret sanctuary is withdrawn
and man speaks face to face with God, hears the divine
voice, receives the divine light, acts in the divine power,
then becomes possible the supreme uplifting of the em-
bodied human conscious-being into the unborn and
eternal. He becomes capable of that dwelling in God
and giving up of his whole consciousness into the Divine
which the Gita upholds as the best or highest secret of
things, uttamam rahasyam. When this eternal divine
Consciousness always present in every human being,
this God in man, takes possession partly 1 or wholly of

1 Chaitanya, the Avatar of Nadiya, is said to have been thus partly or
occasionally occupied by the divine Consciousness and Power.


17


Essays on the gita


the human consciousness and becomes in visible human
shape the guide, teacher, leader of the world, not as
those who living in their humanity yet feel something of
the power or light or love of the divine Gnosis informing
and conducting them, but out of that divine Gnosis itself,
direct from its central force and plenitude, then we have
the manifest Avatar. The inner Divinity is the eternal
Avatar in man; the human manifestation is its sign and
development in the external world.

When we thus understand the conception of Avatar-
hood, we see that whether for the fundamental teaching
of the Gita, our present subject, or for spiritual life
generally the external aspect has only a secondary im-
portance. Such controversies as the one that has raged
in Europe over the historicity of Christ, would seem to
a spiritually-minded Indian largely a waste of time; he
would concede to it a considerable historical, but hardly
any religious importance; for what does it matter in the
end whether a Jesus son of the carpenter Joseph was
actually born in Nazareth or Bethlehem, lived and
taught and was done to death on a real or trumped-up
charge of sedition, so long as we can know by spiritual
experience the inner Christ, live uplifted in the light of
his teaching and escape from the yoke of the natural Law
by that atonement of man with God of which the cruci-
fixion is the symbol? If the Christ, God-made man,
lives within our spiritual being, it would seem tc> matter
little whether or not a son of Mary physically lived and
suffered and died in Judea. So too the Krishna who
matters to us is the eternal incarnation of the Divine and
not the historical teacher and leader of men.

In seeking the kernel of the thought of the Gita we
need, therefore, only concern ourselves with tlie spiritual


18


THE DIVINE TEACHER


significance of the human-divine Krishna of the Maha-
bharata who is presented to us as the teacher of Arjuna on
the battle-field of Kurukshetra. The historical Krishna, no
doubt, existed. We meet the name first in the Chhan-
dogya Upanishad where all we can gather about him is
that he was well-known in spiritual tradition as a knower
of the Brahman, so well-known indeed in his personality
and the circumstances of his life that it Was sufficient to
refer to him by the name of his mother as Krishna
son of Devaki for all to understand who was nieant.
In the same Upanishad we find mention of King Dhrita-
rashtra son of Vichitravirya, and since tradition associated
the two together so closely that they are both of them
leading personages in the action of the Mahabharata, we
may fairly conclude that they were actually contempo-
raries and that the epic is to a great extent dealing with
historical characters and in the war of Kurukshetra with
a historical occurrence imprinted firmly on the memory
of the race. We know too that Krishna and Aijuna were
the object of religious worship in the pre-Christian centu-
ries; and there is some reason to suppose that they were
so in connection with a religious and philosophical tradi-
tion from which the Gita may have gathered many of its
elements and even the foundation of its synthesis of know-
ledge, devotion and works, and perhaps also that the
human Krishna was the founder, restorer or at the least
one of the early teachers of this school. The Gita may
well in spite of its later form represent the outcome in
Indian thought of the teaching of Krishna and the con-
nection of that teaching with the historical Krishna, with
Aijuna and with the war of Kurukshetra may be some-
thing more than a dramatic fiction. In the Mahabharata
Krishna is represented both as the historical character


19


essays on the gita


the Avatar is unseen or appears only for occasional comfort
and aid, but at every crisis his hand is felt, yet in such a
way that all imagine themselves to be the protagonists
and even Aijuna, his nearest friend and chief instrument,
does not perceive that he is an instrument and has to
confess at last that all the while he did not really know
his divine Friend. He has received counsel from his wis-
dom, help from his power, has loved and been loved, has
even adored without understanding his divine nature;
but he has been guided like all others through his own
egoism and the counsel, help and directipn have been
given in the language and received by the thoughts of
the Ignorance. Until the moment when all has been
pushed to the terrible issue of the struggle on the field of
Kurukshetra and the Avatar stands at last, still not as
fighter, but as the charioteer in the battle-car which carries
the destiny of the fight, he has not revealed Himself
even to those whom he has chosen.

Thus the figure of Krishna becomes, as it were, the sym-
bol of the divine dealings with humanity. Through our
egoism and ignorance we are moved, thinking that we
are the doers of the work, vaunting of ourselves as the
real causes of the result, and that which moves us we see
only occasionally as some vague or even some human and
earthly fountain of knowledge, aspiration, force, some
Principle or Light or Power which we acknowledge and
adore without knowing what it is until the occasion arises
that forces us to stand arrested before the Veil. And the
action in which this divine figure moves is the whole wide
action of man in life, not merely the inner life, but all
this obscure course of the world which we can judge only
by the twilight of the human reason as it opens up dimly
before our uncertain advance the little span in front,

22


THE DIVINE TEACHER


This is the distinguishing feature of the Gita that it is
the culmination of such an action which gives rise to
its teaching and assigns that prominence and bold relief
to the gospel of works which it enunciates with an em-
phasis and force we do not find in other Indian Scriptures.
Not only in the Gita, but in other passages of the Maha-
bharata we meet with Krishna declaring emphatically
the necessity of action, but it is here that he reveals its
secret and the divinity behind our works.

The symbolic companionship of Arjuna and Krishna,
the human and the divine soul, is expressed elsewhere
in Indian thought, in the heavenward journey of Indra
and Kutsa seated in one chariot, in the figure of the two
birds upon one tree in the Upanishad, in the twin figures
of Nara and Narayana, the seers who do tapasya together
for the knowledge. But in all three it is the idea of the
divine knowledge in which, as the Gita says, all action
culminates that is in view; here it is instead the action
which leads to that knowledge and in which the divine
Knower figures Himself. Arjuna and Krishna, this
human and this divine, stand together not as seers in the
peaceful hermitage of meditation, but as fighter and
holder of the reins in the clamorous field, in the midst
of the hurtling shafts, in the chariot of battle. The
Teacher of the Gita is therefore not only the God in man
who unveils Himself in the world of knowledge, but the
God in man who moves our whole world of action, by
and for whom all our humanity exists and struggles and
labours, towards whom all human life travels and pro-
gresses. He is the secret Master of works and sacrifice
and the Friend of the human peoples.


23


Ill


THE HUMAN DISCIPLE

Such then is the divine Teacher of the Gita, the eternal
Avatar, the Divine who has descended into the human
consciousness, the Lord seated within the heart of all
beings, He who guides from behind the veil all our
thought and action and heart’s seeking even as He directs
from behind the veil of visible and sensible forms and
forces and tendencies the great universal action of the
world which He has manifested in His own being. All
the strife of our upward endeavour and seeking finds
its culmination and ceases in a satisfied fulfilment when
we can rend the veil and get behind our apparent self
to this real Self, can realise our whole being in this true
Lord of our being, can give up our personality to and into
this one real Person, merge our ever-dispersed and
ever-converging mental activities into His plenary light,
offer up our errant and struggling will and energies into
His vast, luminous and undivided Will, at once renounce
and satisfy all our dissipated outward-moving desires
and emotions in the plenitude of His self-existent Bliss.
This is the world-Teacher of whose eternal knowledge
all .other highest teaching is but the various reflection
and partial word, this the Voice to which the hearing
of our soul has to awaken.

Arjuna, the disciple who receives his initiation on the
battle-field, is a counterpart of this conception; he is the


24


THE HUMAN DISCIPLE


type of the struggling human soul who has not yet re-
ceived the knowledge, but has grown fit to receive it by
action in the world in a close companionship and an
increasing nearness to the higher and divine Self in
humanity. There is a method of explaining the Gita
in which not only this episode but the whole Maha-
bharata is turned into an allegory of the inner life and
has nothing to do with our outward human life and
action, but only with the battles of the soul and the
powers that strive within us for possession. That is a
view which the general character and the actual language
of the epic do not justify and, if pressed,' would turn
the straightforward philosophical language of the Gita
into a constant, laborious and somewhat puerile mysti-
fication. The language of the Veda and part at least of
the Puranas is plainly symbolic, full of figures and con-
crete representations of things that lie behind the veil,
but the Gita is written in plain terms and professes to solve
the great ethical and spiritual difficulties which the life
of man raises, and it will not do to go behind this plain
language and thought and wrest them to the service of
our fancy. But there is this much of truth in -the view,
that the setting of the doctrine though not symbolical,
is certainly typical, as indeed the setting of such a dis-
course as the Gita must necessarily be if it is to have any
relation at all with that which it frames. Arjuna, as we
have seen, is the representative man of a great world-
struggle and divinely-guided movement of men and
nations; in the Gita he typifies the human soul of action
brought face to face through that action in its highest
and most violent crisis with the problem of human life
and its apparent incompatibility with the spiritual state
or even with a purely ethical ideal of perfection.


25 :


Essays on the gita


Arjuna is the fighter in the chariot with the divine
Krishna as his charioteer. In the Veda also we have
this image of the human soul and the divine riding in one
chariot through a great battle to the goal of a high-
aspiring effort. But there it is a pure figure and symbol.
The Divine is there Indra, the Master of the World of
Light and Immortality, the power of divine knowledge
which descends to the aid of the human seeker battling
with the sons of falsehood, darkness, limitation, mortality;
the battle is with spiritual enemies who bar the way
to the higher world of our being; and the goal is that
plane of vast being resplendent with the light of the
supreme Truth and uplifted to the conscious immortality
of the perfected soul, of which Indra is the master. The
human soul is Kutsa, he who constantly seeks the seer-
knowledge, as his name implies, and he is the son of
Arjuna or Arjuni, the White One, child of Switra the
White Mother; he is, that is to say, the sattwic or puri-
fied and light-filled soul which is open to the unbroken
glories of the divine knowledge. And when the chariot
reaches the end of its journey, the own home of Indra,
the human Kutsa has grown into such an exact likeness
of his divine companion that he can only be distinguished
by Sachi, the wife of Indra, because she is “truth-con-
scious”. The parable is evidently of the inner life of man;
it is a figure of the human growing into the likeness of the
eternal divine by the increasing illumination of Know-
ledge. But the Gita starts from action and Aijuna is the
man of action and not of knowledge, the fighter, never
the seer or the thinker.

From the beginning of the Gita this characteristic
temperament of the disciple is clearly indicated and it
is maintained throughout. It becomes first evident in


THE HUMAN HlSClPLfc


the maimer in which he is awakened to the sense of what
he is doing, the great slaughter of which he is to be the
chief instrument, in the thoughts which immediately
rise in him, in the standpoint and the psychological
motives which make him recoil from the whole terrible
catastrophe. They are not the thoughts, the standpoint,
the motives of a philosophical or even of a deeply reflec-
tive mind or a spiritual temperament confronted with the
same or a similar problem. They are those, as we might
say, of the practical or the pragmatic man, the emotional,
sensational, moral and intelligent human being not
habituated to profound and original reflection or any
sounding of the depths, accustomed rather to high but
fixed standards of thought and action and a confident
treading through all vicissitudes and difficulties, ' who
now finds all his standards failing him and all the basis
of his confidence in himself and his life shorn away from
under him at a single stroke. That is the nature of the
crisis which he undergoes.

Arjuna is, in the language of the Gita, a man subject
to the action of the three gunas or modes of the Nature-
Force and habituated to move unquestioningly in that
field, like the generality of men. He justifies his name
only in being so far pure and sattwic as to be governed
by high and clear principles and impulses and habitually
control his lower nature by the noblest Law which he
knows. He is not of a violent Asuric disposition, not the
slave of his passions, but has been trained to a high calm
and self-control, to an unswerving performance of his
duties and firm obedience to the best principles of the
time and society in which he has lived and the religion
and ethics to which he has been brought up. He is egois-
tic like other men, but with the purer or sattwic egoism


27


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


which regards the moral law and society and the claims
of others and not only or predominantly his own interests,
desires and passions. He has lived and guided himself
by the Shastra, the moral and social code. The thought
which preoccupies him, the standard which he obeys is
the dharma, that collective Indian conception of the
religious, social and moral rule of conduct, and especially
the rule of the station and function to which he belongs,
he the Kshatriya, the high-minded, self-governed, chival-
rous prince and warrior and leader of Aryan men. Fol-
lowing always this rule, conscious of virtue and right
dealing he has travelled so far and finds suddenly that
it has led him to become the protagonist of a terrific and
unparallelled slaughter, a monstrous civil war involving
all the cultured Aryan nations which must lead to the
complete destruction of the flower of their manhood
and threatens their ordered civilisation with chaos and
collapse.

It is typical again of the pragmatic man that it is through
his sensations that he awakens to the meaning of his
action. He has asked his friend and charioteer to place
him between the two armies, not with any profounder
idea, but with the proud intention of viewing and looking
in the face these myriads of the champions of unrighteous-
ness whom he has to meet and conquer and slay “in this
holiday of fight” so that the right may prevail. It is
as he gazes that the revelation of the meaning of a civil
and domestic war comes home to him, a war in which
not only men of the same race, the same nation, the
same clan, but those of the same family and household
stand upon opposite sides. All whom the social man
holds most dear and sacred, he must meet as enemies and
slay, — the worshipped teacher and preceptor, the old

l


28


THE HUMAN DISCIPLE


friend, comrade and companion in arms, grandsires,
uncles, those who stood in the - relation to him of father,
of son, of grandson, connections by blood and connections
by marriage, — all these social ties have to be cut asunder
by the sword. It is not that he did not know these things
before, but he has never realised it all; obsessed by his
claims and wrongs and by the principles of his life, the
struggle for the right, the duty of the Kshatriya to protect
justice and the law and fight and beat down injustice and
lawless violence, he has neither thought out deeply nor
felt it in his heart and at the core of his life. And now it
is shown to his vision by the divine charioteer, placed
sensationally before his eyes, and comes home to him like
a blow delivered at the very centre of his sensational,
vital and emotional being.

The first result is a violent sensational and physical
crisis which produces a disgust of the action and its
material objects and of life itself. He rejects the vital
aim pursued by egoistic humanity in its action, — happi-
ness and enjoyment; he rejects the vital aim of the
Kshatriya, victory and rule and power and the govern-
ment of men. What after all is this fight for justice when
reduced to its practical terms, but just this, a fight for
the interests of himself, his brothers and his party, for
possession and enjoyment and rule? But at such a cost
these things are not worth having. For they are of no
value in themselves, but only as a means to the right
maintenance of social and national life and it is these*
very aims that in the person of "his kin and his race
he is about to destroy. And then comes the cry of the
emotions. These are they for whose sake life and happi-
ness are desired, our “own people”. Who would consent
to slay these for the sake of all the earth, or even for the


29


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


kmgdom of the three worlds? What pleasure can there
be in life, what happiness, what satisfaction in oneself
after such a deed? The whole thing is a dreadful sin, —
for now the moral sense awakens to justify the revolt of
the sensations and the emotions. It is a sin, there is no
right nor justice in mutual slaughter; especially are
those who are to be slain the natural objects of reverence
and of love, those without whom one would not care
to live, and to violate these sacred feelings can be no
virtue, can be nothing but a heinous crime. Granted
that the offence, the aggression, the first sin, the crimes
of greed and selfish passion which have brought things
to such a pass came from the other side; yet armed
resistance to wrong under such circumstances would be
itself a sip and crime worse than theirs because they
are blinded by passion and unconscious of guilt, while
on this side it would be with a clear sense of guilt
that the sin would be committed. And for what? For the
maintenance of family morality, of the social law and
the law of the nation? These are the very standards
that will be destroyed by this civil war; the family itself
will be brought to the point of annihilation, corruption
of morals and loss of the purity of race will be engen-
dered, the eternal laws of the race and moral law of the
family will be destroyed. Ruin of the race, the collapse
of its high traditions, ethical degradation and hell for
the authors of such a crime, these are the only practical
'results possible of this monstrous civil strife. “Therefore,”
cries Aijuna, casting down the divine bow and inexhaus-
tible quiver given to him by the gods for that tremendous
hour, “it is more for my welfare that the sons of Dhrita-
rashtra armed should slay me unarmed and unresisting.
I will not fight.”


30


THE HUMAN DISCIPLE


The character of this inner crisis is therefore not the
questioning of the thinker; it is not a recoil from the
appearances of life and a turning of the eye inward in
search of the truth of things, the real meaning of existence
and a solution or an escape from the dark riddle of the
world. It is the sensational, emotional and moral revolt
of the man hitherto satisfied with action and its current
standards who finds himself cast by them into a hideous
chaos where they are in violent conflict with each other
and with themselves and there is no moral standing-
ground left, nothing to lay hold of and walk by, no
dharma 1 . That for the soul of action in the mental being
is the worst possible crisis, failure and overthrow. The
revolt itself is the most elemental and simple possible;
sensationally, the elemental feeling of horror, pity and
disgust; vitally, the loss of attraction and faith in the
recognised and familiar objects of action and aims of
fife; emotionally, the recoil of the ordinary feelings of
social man, affection, reverence, desire of a common
happiness and satisfaction, from a stern duty outraging
them all; morally, the elementary sense of sin and hell
and rejection. of “blood-stained enjoyments”; practically,
the sense that the standards of action have led to a result
which destroys the practical aims of action. But the
whole upshot is that all-embracing inner bankruptcy
which Aijuna expresses wh^n he says that his whole
conscious being, not the thought alone but heart and
vital desires and all, are utterly bewildered and can
find nowhere the dharma, nowhere any valid law of
action. For this alone he takes refuge as a disciple with

1 Dharma means literally that which one lays hold of and which holds
things together, the law, the norm, the rule of nature, action and life:


31


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


Krishna; give me, he practically asks, that which I
have lost, a true law, a clear rule of action, a path by
which I can again confidently walk. He does not ask
for the secret of life or of the world, the meaning and
purpose of it all, but for a dharma.

Yet it is precisely this secret for which he does not
ask, or at least so much of the knowledge as is necessary
to lead him into a higher life, to which the divine Teacher
intends to lead this disciple; for he means him to give
up all dharmas except the one broad and vast rule of
living consciously in the Divine and acting from that
consciousness. Therefore after testing the completeness
of his revolt from the ordinary standards of conduct,
he proceeds to tell him much that has to do with the
state of the soul, but nothing of any outward rule of
action. He must be equal in soul, abandon the desire
of the fruits of work, rise above his intellectual notions
of sin and virtue, live and act in Yoga with a mind in
Samadhi, firmly fixed, that is to say, in the Divine alone.
Aijuna is not satisfied : he wishes to know how the change
to this state will affect the outward action of the man,
what result it will have on his speech, his movements,
his state, what difference it will make in this acting,
living human being. Krishna persists merely in en-
larging upon the ideas he has already brought forward,
on the soul-state behind the action, not on the action
itself. It is the fixed anchoring of the intelligence in a
state of desireless equality that is the one thing needed.
Aijuna breaks out impatiently, — for here is no rule of
conduct such as he sought, but rather, as it seems to
him, the negation of all action, — “If thou holdest the
intelligence to be greater than action, why then dost
thou appoint me to an action terrible in its nature?


32


THE HUMAN DISCIPLE


Thou bewilderest my understanding with a mingled
word: speak one thing decisively by which I can attain
to what is the best.” It is always the pragmatic man
who has no value for metaphysical thought or for the
inner life except when they help him to his one demand,
a dharma , a law of life in the world or, if need be, of leaving
the world; for that too is a decisive action which he can
understand. But to live and act in the world, yet be above
it, this is a “mingled” and confusing word the sense
of which he has no patience to grasp.

The rest of Arjuna’s questions and utterances proceed
from the same temperament and character. When he
is told that once the soul-state is assured there need be
no apparent change in the action, he must act always
by the law of his nature, even if the act itself seem faulty
and deficient compared with that of another law than his
own, he is troubled. The nature! but what of this sense
of sin in the action with which he is preoccupied? is it
not this very nature which drives men as if by force and
even against their better will into sin and guilt? His
practical intelligence is baffled by Krishna’s assertion
that it was he who in ancient times revealed to Viva-
svan this Yoga, since lost, which he is now again revealing
to Arjuna, and by jhis demand for an explanation he
provokes the famous and oft-quoted statement of Avatar-
hood and its mundane purpose. He is again perplexed
by the words in which Krishna continues to reconcile
action and renunciation of action and asks once again
for a decisive statement of that' which is the best and
highest, not this “mingled” word. When he realises
fully the nature of the Yoga which he is bidden to em-
brace, his pragmatic nature accustomed to act from
mental will and preference and desire is appalled by


3


33


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


its difficulty and he asks what is the end of the soul which
attempts and fails, whether it does not lose both this life
of human activity and thought and emotion which it has
left behind and the Brahmic consciousness to which it
aspires and falling from both perish like a dissolving
cloud?

When his doubts and perplexities are resolved and he
knows that it is the Divine which must be his law, he
aims again and always at such clear and decisive know-
ledge as will guide him practically to this source and this
rule of his future action. How is the Divine to be distin-
guished among the various states of being which cons-
titute our ordinary experience? What are the great
manifestations of its self-energy in the world in which he
can recognise and realise it by meditation? May he not
see even now the divine cosmic Form of That which is
actually speaking to him through the veil of the human
mind and body? And his last questions demand a clear
distinction between renunciation of works and this subtler
renunciation he is asked to prefer; the actual difference
between Purusha and Prakriti, the Field and the Knower
of the Field, so important for the practice of desireless
action under the drive of the divine Will; and finally a
clear statement of the practical operations and results of
the three modes of Prakriti which he is bidden to sur-
mount.

To such a disciple the Teacher of the Gita gives his
divine teaching. He seizes him at a moment of his psy-
chological development by egoistic action when all the
mental, moral, emotional values of the ordinary egoistic
and social life of man have collapsed in a sudden bank-
ruptcy, and he has to lift him up out of this lower life
into a higher consciousness, out of ignorant attachment


34


THE HUMAN DISCIPLE


to action into that which transcends, yet originates and
orders action, out of ego into Self, out of life in mind,
vitality and body into that higher nature beyond mind
which is the status of the Divine. He has at the same
time to give him that for which he asks and for which he
is inspired to seek by the guidance within him, a new
Law of life and action high above the insufficient rule of
the ordinary human existence with its endless conflicts
and oppositions, perplexities and illusory certainties, a
higher Law by which the soul shall be free from this
bondage of works and yet powerful to act and conquer
in the vast liberty of its divine being. For the action must
be performed, the world must fulfil its cycles and the
soul of the humaif being must not turn back in ignorance
from the work it is here to do. The whole course of the
teaching of the Gita is determined and directed, even in
its widest wheelings, towards the fulfilment of these three
objects.


35


IV


THE CORE OF THE TEACHING

We know the divine Teacher, we see the human disciple;
it remains to form a clear conception of the doctrine. A
clear conception fastening upon the essential idea, the
central heart of the teaching is especially necessary here
because the Gita with its rich and many-sided thought,
its synthetical grasp of different aspects of the spiritual
life and the fluent winding motion of its argument lends
itself, even more than other Scriptures, to one-sided mis-
representations born of a partisan intellectuality. The
unconscious or half-conscious wresting of fact and word
and idea to suit a preconceived notion or the doctrine or
principle of one’s preference is recognised by Indian logi-
cians as one of the most fruitful sources of fallacy; and it
is perhaps the one which it is most difficult for even the
most conscientious thinker to avoid. For the human reason
is incapable of always playing the detective upon itself in
this respect; it is its very nature to seize upon some partial
conclusion, idea, principle, become its partisan and make
it the key to all truth, and it has an infinite faculty of
doubling upon itself so as to avoid detecting in its opera-
tions this necessary and cherished weakness. The Gita
lends itself easily to this kind of error, because it is easy,
by throwing particular emphasis on one of its aspects or
even on some salient and emphatic text and putting all
the rest of the eighteen chapters into the background or


36


THE CORE OF THE TEACHING


making them a subordinate and auxiliary teaching, to
turn it into a partisan of our own doctrine or dogma.

Thus, there are those who make the Gita teach, not
works at all, but a discipline of preparation for renouncing
}ife and works : the indifferent performance of prescribed
actions or of whatever task may lie ready to the hands,
becomes the means, the discipline; the final renunciation
of life and works is the sole real object. It is quite easy to
justify this view by citations from the book and by a cer-
tain arrangement of stress in following out its argument,
especially if we shut our eyes to the peculiar way in which
it uses such a word as sannyasa, renunciation ; but it is quite
impossible to persist in this view on an impartial reading
in face of the continual assertion to the very end that
action should be preferred to inaction and that superiority
lies with the true, the inner renunciation of desire by
equality and the giving up of works to the supreme
Purusha.

Others again speak of the Gita as if the doctrine of devo-
tion were its whole teaching and put in the background its
monistic elements and the high place it gives to quietistic
immergence in the one self of all. And undoubtedly its
emphasis on devotion, its insistence on the aspect of the
Divine as Lord and Purusha and its doctrine of the
Purushottama, the Supreme Being who is superior both
to the mutable Being and to the Immutable and who is
what in His relation to the world we know as God, are
the most striking and among the most vital elements of
the Gita. Still, this Lord is the Self in whom all knowledge
culminates and the Master of sacrifice to whom all .works
lead as well as the Lord of Love into whose being the heart
of devotion enters, and the Gita preserves a perfectly equal
balance, emphasising now knowledge, now works, now


37


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


devotion, but for the purposes of the immediate trend of
the thought, not with any absolute separate preference of
one over the others. He in whom all three meet and
become one, He is the Supreme Being, the Purushottama.

But at the present day, since in fact the modern mind
began to recognise and deal at all with the Gita, the ten-
dency is to subordinate its elements of knowledge and
devotion, to take advantage of its continual insistence on
action and to find in it a scripture of the Karmayoga, a
Light leading us on the path of action, a Gospel of Works.
Undoubtedly, the Gita is a Gospel of Works, but of works
which culminate in knowledge, that is, in spiritual reali-
sation and quietude, and of works motived by devotion,
that is, a conscious surrender of one’s whole self first into
the hands and then into the being of the Supreme, and not
at all of works as they are understood by the modern mind,
not at all an action dictated by egoistic and altruistic, by
personal, social, humanitarian motives, principles, ideals.
Yet this is what present-day interpretations seek to make
of the Gita. We are told continually by many authori-
tative voices that the Gita, opposing in this the ordinary
ascetic and quietistic tendency of Indian thought and
spirituality, proclaims with no uncertain sound the gospel
of human action, the ideal of disinterested performance
of social duties, nay, even, it would seem, the quite modern
ideal of social service. To all this I can only reply that
very patently and even on the very surface of it the Gita
does nothing of the kind and that this is a modern mis-
reading, a reading of the modern mind into an ancient
book, of the present-day European or Europeanised in-
tellect into a thoroughly antique, a thoroughly Oriental
and Indian teaching. That which the Gita teaches is not
a human, but a divine action; not the performance of


38


THE CORE OF THE TEACHING


social duties, but the abandonment of all other standards
of duty or conduct for a selfless performance of the divine
will working through our nature; not social service, but
the action of the Best, the God-possessed, the Master-men
done impersonally for the sake of the world and as a sacri-
fice to Him who stands behind man and Nature.

In other words, the Gita is not a book of practical
ethics, but of the spiritual life. The modern mind is just
now the European mind, such as it has become after
having abandoned not only the philosophic idealism of
the highest Graeco-Roman culture from which it started,
but the Christian devotionalism of the Middle Ages;
these it has replaced by or transmuted into a practical
idealism and social, patriotic and philanthropic devotion.
It has got rid of God or kept Him only for Sunday use
and erected in His place man as its deity and society as
its visible idol. At its best it is practical, ethical, social,
pragmatic, altruistic humanitarian. Now all these things
are good, are especially needed at the present day, are
part of the divine Will or they would not have become sp
dominant in humanity. Nor is there any reason why the
divine man, the man who lives in the Brahmic conscious-
ness, in the God-being should not be all of these things in
his action; he will be, if they are the best ideal of the age,
the Yugadharma, and there is no yet higher ideal to be
established, no great radical change to be effected. For
he is, as the Teacher points out to his disciple, the best
who has to set the standard for others; and in fact Arjuna
is called upon to live according to the highest ideals of his
age and the prevailing culture, but with knpwledge, with
understanding of that which lay behind, and not as
ordinary men, with a following of the merely outward
law and rule.


39


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


But the point here is that the modern mind has exiled
from its practical motive-power the two essential things,
God or the Eternal and spirituality or the . God-state,
which are the master conceptions of the Gita. It lives in
humanity only, and the Gita would have us live in God,
though for the world in God; in its life, heart and intellect
only, and the Gita would have us live in the spirit; in the
mutable Being who is f ‘all creatures”, and the Gita would
have us live also in the Immutable and the Supreme; in
the changing march of Time, and the Gita would have
us live in the Eternal. Or if these higher things are now
beginning to be vaguely envisaged, it is only to make them
subservient to man and society; but God and spirituality
exist in their own right and not as adjuncts. And in prac-
tice the lower in us must learn to exist for the higher, in
order that the higher also may in us consciously exist
for the lower, to draw it nearer to its own altitudes.

Therefore it is a mistake to interpret the Gita from the
standpoint of the mentality of today and force it to teach
us the disinterested performance of duty as the highest
and all-sufficient law. A little consideration of the situation
with which the Gita deals will show us that this could not
be its meaning. For the whole point of the teaching, that
from which it arises, that which compels the disciple to
seek the Teacher, is an inextricable clash of the various
related conceptions of duty ending in the collapse of the
whole useful intellectual and moral edifice erected by the
human mind. In human life some sort of a clash arises
fairly often, as for instance between domestic duties and
the call of the country or the cause, or between the claim
of the country and the good of humanity or some larger
religious or moral principle. An inner situation may even
arise, as with the Buddha, in which all duties have to be


40


THE CORE OF THE TEACHING


abandoned, trampled on, flung aside in order to follow
the call of the Divine within. I cannot think that the Gita
would solve such an inner situation by sending Buddha
back to his wife and father and the government of the
Sakya State, or would direct a Ramakrishna to become
a Pundit in a vernacular school and disinterestedly teach
little boys their lessons, or bind down a Vivekananda to
support his family and for that to follow dispassionately
the law or medicine or journalism. The Gita does not
teach the disinterested performance of duties but the
following of the divine life, the abandonment of all
Dharmas, sarvadhamdn, to take refuge in the Supreme
alone, and the divine activity of a Buddha, a Ramakrishna,
a Vivekananda is perfectly in consonance with this
teaching. Nay, although the Gita prefers action to
inaction, it does not rule out the renunciation of works,
but accepts it as one of the ways to the Divine. If that
can only be attained by renouncing works and life and
all duties and the call is strong within us, then into the
bonfire they must go, and there is no help for it. The call
of God is imperative and cannot be weighed against any
other considerations.

But here there is this further difficulty that the action
which Arjuna must do is one from which his moral sense
recoils. It is his duty to fight, you say? But that duty has
now become to his mind a terrible sin. How does it help
him or solve his difficulty, to tell him that he must do his
duty disinterestedly, dispassionately? He will want to
know which is his duty or how it can be his duty to destroy
in a sanguinary massacre his kin, his race and his country.
He is told that he has right on his side, but that does not
and cannot satisfy him, because his very point is that the
justice of his legal claim does not justify him in supporting

1 41


ESASYS ON THE GITA


it by a pitiless massacre destructive to the future of his
nation. Is he then to act dispassionately in the sense of
not caring whether it is a sin or what its consequences
may be so long as he does his duty as a soldier? That
may be the teaching of a State, of politicians, of lawyers,
of ethical casuists ; it can never be the teaching of a great
religious and philosophical Scripture which sets out to
solve the problem of life and action from the very roots.
And if that is what the Gita has to say on a most poignant
moral and spiritual problem, we must put it out of the
list of the world’s Scriptures and thrust it, if anywhere,
then into our library of political science and ethical
casuistry.

Undoubtedly, the Gita does, like the Upanishads,
teach the equality which rises 'above sin and virtue,
beyond good and evil, but only as a part of the Brahmic
consciousness and for the man who is on the path and
advanced enough to fulfil the supreme rule. It does not
preach indifference to good and evil for the ordinary
life of man, where such a doctrine would have the most
pernicious consequences. On the contrary, it affirms
that the doers of evil shall not attain to God. Therefore
if Aijuna simply seeks to fulfil in the best way the ordinary
law of man’s life, disinterested performance of what he
feels to be a sin, a thing of Hell, will not help him, even
though that sin be his duty as a soldier. He must refrain
from what his conscience abhors though a thousand duties
were shattered to pieces.

We must remember that duty is an idea which in
practice rests upon social conceptions. We may extend
the term beyond its proper connotation and talk of
our duty to ourselves or we may, if we like, say in a
transcendent sense that it was Buddha’s duty to abandon.


42


THE CORE OF THE TEACHING


all, or even that it is the ascetic’s duty to sit motionless
in a cave! But this is obviously to play with words.
Duty is a relative term and depends upon our relation
to others. It is a father’s duty, as a father, to nurture and
educate his children; a lawyer’s to do his best for his client
even if he knows him to be guilty and his defence to be a
lie ; a soldier’s to fight and shoot to order even if he kills
his own kin and countrymen; a judge’s to send the
guilty to prison and hang the murderer. And so long as
these positions are accepted, the duty remains clear, a
practical matter of course even when it is not a point
of honour or affection, and overrides the absolute religious
or moral law. But what if the inner view is changed, if
the lawyer is awakened to the absolute sinfulness of
falsehood, the judge becomes convinced that capital
punishment is a crime against humanity, the man called
upon to the battlefield feels, like the conscientious
ohjcctor of today or as a Tolstoy would feel, that in no
circumstances is it permissible to take human life any
more than to eat human flesh? It is obvious that here
the moral law which is above all relative duties must
prevail; and that law depends on no social relation or con-
ception of duty but on the awakened inner perception
of man, the moral being.

There are in the world, in fact, two different laws
of conduct each valid on its own plane, the rule principally
dependent on external status and the rule independent
of status and entirely dependent on the thought and
conscience. The Gita does not teach us to subordinate
the higher plane to the lower, it does not ask the awakened
moral consciousness to slay itself on the altar of duty as a
sacrifice and victim to the law of the social status. It calls
us higher and not lower; from the conflict of the two


43


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


planes it bids us ascend to a supreme poise above the
mainly practical, above the purely ethical, to the Brahmic
consciousness. It replaces the conception of social duty
by a divine obligation. The subjection to external law
gives place to a certain principle of inner self-determina-
tion of action proceeding by the soul’s freedom from the
tangled law of works. And this, as we shall see, — the
Brahmic consciousness, the soul’s freedom from works
and the determination of works in the nature by the
Lord within and above us, — is the kernel of the Gita’s
teaching with regard to action.

The Gita can only be understood, like any other great
work of the kind, by studying it in its entirety and as a
developing argument. But the modern interpreters,
starting from the great writer Bankim Chandra Chatteiji
who first gave to the Gita this new sense of a Gospel of
Duty, have laid an almost exclusive stress on the first
three or four chapters and in those on the idea of equality,
on the expression karlavyam karma , the work that is to be
done, which they render by duty, and on the phrase
“Thou hast a right to action, but none to the fruits of
action” which is now popularly quoted as the great word,
mahavakya, of the Gita. The rest of the eighteen chapters
with their high philosophy arc given a secondary impor-
tance, except indeed the great vision in the eleventh.
This is natural enough for the modern mind which is, or
has been till yesterday, inclined to be impatient of meta-
physical subtleties and far-off spiritual seekings, eager
to get to work and, like Arjuna himself, mainly concerned
for a workable law of works, a dharma. But it is the wrong
way to handle this Scripture.

The equality which the Gita preaches is not disinterest-
edness, — the great command to Arjuna given after the


44


The core of the teaching


foundation and main structure of the teaching have
been laid and built, “Arise, slay thy enemies, enjoy a
prosperous kingdom”, has not the ring of an uncompro-
mising altruism or of a white, dispassionate abnegation;
it is a state of inner poise and wideness which is the founda-
tion of spiritual freedom. With that poise, in that freedom
we have to do the “work that is to be done”, a. phrase
which the Gita uses with the greatest wideness including
in it all works, sarvakarmdni , and which far exceeds,
though it may include, social duties or ethical obligations.
What is the work to be done is not to be determined
by the individual choice; nor is the right to the action
and the rejection ofclaim to the fruit the great word of the
Gita, but only a preliminary word governing the first
state of the disciple when he begins ascending the hill of
Yoga. It is practically superseded at a subsequent stage.
For the Gita goes on to affirm emphatically that the man
is not the doer of the action; it is Prakriti, it is Nature,
it is the great Force with its three modes of action that
works through him, and he must learn to see that it is
not he who does the work. Therefore the “right to action”
is an idea which is only valid so long as we are still under
the illusion of being the doer; it must necessarily disappear
from the mind like the claim to the fruit, as soon as we
cease to be to our own consciousness the doer of our works.
All pragmatic egoism, whether of the claim to fruits or
of the right to action, is then at an end.

But the determinism of Prakriti is not the last word of
the Gita. The equality of the will and the rejection of
fruits are only means for entering with the mind and the
heart and the understanding into the divine consciousness
and living in it; and the Gita expressly says that they are
to be employed as a means as long as the disciple is unable


45


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


so to live or even to seek by practice the gradual develop-
ment of this higher state. And what is this Divine, whom
Krishna declares himself to be? It is the Purushottama
beyond the Self that acts not, beyond the Prakriti that
acts, foundation of the one, master of the other, the Lord
of whom all is the manifestation, who even in our present
subjection to Maya sits in the heart of His creatures
governing the works of Prakriti, He by whom the armies
on the field of Kurukshetra have already been slain while
yet they live and who uses Arjuna only as an instrument
or immediate occasion of this great slaughter. Prakriti
is only His executive force. The disciple has to rise beyond
this Force and its three modes or gurias; he has to become
trigunatita. Not to her has he to surrender his actions,
over which he has no longer any claim or “right”, but
into the being of the Supreme. Reposing his mind and
understanding, heart and will in Him, with self-know-
ledge, with God-knowledge, with world-knowledge, with
a perfect equality, a perfect devotion, an absolute self-
giving, he has to do works as an offering to the Master
of all self-energisings and all sacrifice. Identified in
will, conscious with that consciousness, That shall decide
and initiate the action. This is the solution which the
Divine Teacher offers to the disciple.

What the great, the supreme word of the Gita is, its
mahavakya, we have not to seek; for the Gita itself declares
it in its last utterance, the crowning note of the great
diapason. “With the Lord in thy heart take refuge with
all thy being; by His grace thou shalt attain to the supreme
peace and the eternal status. So have I expounded to thee
a knowledge more secret than that which is hidden.
Further hear the most secret, the supreme word that I
shall spedk to thee. Become my-minded, devoted to Me,


46


THE CORE OF THE TEACHING


to Me do sacrifice and adoration; infallibly, thou shalt
come to Me, for dear to Me art thou. Abandoning all
laws of conduct seek refuge in Me alone. I will release
thee- from all sin; do not grieve.”

The argument of the Gita resolves itself into three
great steps by which action rises out of the human into
the divine plane leaving the bondage of the lower for
the liberty of a higher law. First, by the renunciation
of desire and a perfect equality works have to be done
as a sacrifice by man as the doer, a sacrifice to a deity
who is the supreme and only Self though by him not
yet realised in his own being. This is the initial step.
Secondly, not only the desire of the fruit, but the claim
to be the doer of works has to be renounced in the realisa-
tion of the Self as the equal, the inactive, the immutable
principle and of all works as simply the operation of
universal Force, of the Nature-Soul, Prakriti, the unequal,
active, mutable power. Lastly, the supreme Self has to
be seen as the supreme Purusha governing this Prakriti,
of whom the soul in Nature is a partial manifestation,
by whom all works are directed, in a perfect transcendence,
through Nature. To Him love and adoration and the sacri-
fice of works have to be offered; the whole being has
to be surrendered to Him and the whole consciousness
raised up to dwell in this divine consciousness so that the
human soul may share in His divine transcendence of
Nature and of His works and act in a perfect spiritual
liberty.

The first step is Karmayoga, the selfless sacrifice of
works, and here the Gita’s insistence is on action. The
second is Jnanayoga, the self-realisation and knowledge
of the true nature of the self and the world, and here
the insistence is on knowledge; but the sacrifice of works


47


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


continues and the path of Works becomes bne with but
does not disappear into the path of Knowledge. The last
step is Bhaktiyoga, adoration and seeking of the supreme
Self as the Divine Being, and here the insistence is
on devotion; but the knowledge is not subordinated, only
raised, vitalised and fulfilled, and still the sacrifice of works
continues; the double path becomes the triune way of
knowledge, works and devotion. And the fruit of the
sacrifice, the one fruit still placed before the seeker, is
attained, union with the divine Being and oneness with
the supreme divine Nature.


48


V

KURUKSHETRA

Before we can proceed, following in the large steps of
the Teacher of the Gita, to watch his tracing of the
triune path of man, — the path which is that of his will,
heart, thought raising themselves to the Highest and
into the being of that which is the supreme object of all
action, love and knowledge, we must consider once
more the situation from which the Gita arises, but now
in its largest bearings as a type of human life and even
of all world-existence. For although Aquna is himself
concerned only with his own situation, his inner struggle
and the law of action he must follow, yet, as we have
seen, the particular question he raises, in the manner in
which he raises it does really bring up the whole question
of human life and action, what the world is and why it
is and how possibly, it being what it is, life here in the
world can be reconciled with life in the Spirit. And all
this deep and difficult matter the Teacher insists on
resolving as the very foundation of his command to an
action which must proceed from a new poise of being and
by the light of a liberating' knowledge.

But what, then, is it that makes the difficulty for the
man who has to take the world as it is and act in it and
yet would live, within, the spiritual life? What is this
aspect of existence which appals his awakened mind and
brings about what the title of the first chapter of the Gita


49


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


calls significantly the Yoga of the dejection of Aijuna,
the dejection and discouragement felt by the human
being when he is forced to face the spectacle of the uni-
verse as it really is with the veil of the ethical illusion,
the illusion of self-righteousness torn from his eyes, before
a higher reconciliation with himself is effected? It is that
aspect which is figured outwardly in the carnage and
massacre of Kurukshetra and spiritually by the vision of
the Lord of all things as Time arising to devour and des-
troy the creatures whom it has made. This is the vision
of the Lord of all existence as the universal Creator but
also the universal Destroyer, of whom the ancient Scrip-
ture can say in a ruthless image, “The sages and the
heroes are his food and death is the spice of his banquet.”
It is on§ and the same truth seen first indirectly and obs-
curely in the facts of life and then directly and clearly
in the soul’s vision of that which manifests itself in life.
The outward aspect is that of world-existence and human
existence proceeding by struggle and slaughter; the
inward aspect is that of the universal Being fulfilling
himself in a vast creation and a vast destruction. Life a
battle and a field of death, this is Kurukshetra; God the
Terrible, this is the vision that Aijuna sees on that field
of massacre.

War, said Heraclitus, is the father of all things, War
is the king of all; and the saying, like most of the apoph-
thegms of the Greek thinker, suggests a profound truth.
From a clash of material or other forces everything in this
world, if not the world itself, seems to be born; by a
struggle of forces, tendencies, principles, beings it seems
to proceed, ever creating new things, ever destroying the
old, marching one knows not very well whither, — to a
final self-destruction, say some; in an unending series of


50


KURUKSHETRA


vain cycles, say others; in progressive cycles, is the most
optimistic conclusion, leading through whatever trouble
and apparent confusion towards a higher and higher
approximation to some divine apocalypse. However that
may be, this is certain that there is not only no construc-
tion here without destruction, no harmony except by a
poise of contending forces won out of many actual and
potential discords, but also no continued existence of life
except by a constant self-feeding and devouring of other
life. Our very bodily life is a constant dying and being
reborn, the body itself a beleaguered city attacked by
assailing, protected by defending forces whose business
is to devour each other: and this is only a type of all our
existence. The command seems to have gone out from
the beginning, “Thou shalt not conquer except by battle
with thy fellows and thy surroundings; thou shalt not
even live except by battle and struggle and by absorbing
into thyself other life. The first law of this world that I
have made is creation and preservation by destruction.”

Ancient thought accepted this starting-point so far as
it could see it by scrutiny of the universe. The old Upa-
nishads saw it very clearly and phrased it with an
uncompromising thoroughness which will have nothing to
do with any honeyed glosses or optimistic scuttlings of
the truth. Hunger that is Death, they said, is the creator
and master of this world, and they figured vital existence
in the image of the Horse of the sacrifice. Matter they
described by a name which means ordinarily food and
they said, we call it food because it is devoured and
devours creatures. The eater eating is eaten, this is the
formula of the material world, as the Darwinians redis-
covered when they laid it down that the struggle for life
is the law of evolutionary existence. Modem Science


51


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


has only rephrased the old truths that had already been
expressed in much more forcible, wide and accurate
formulas by the apophthegm of Heraclitus and the
figures employed by the Upanishads.

Nietzsche’s insistence upon war as an aspect of life and
the ideal man as a warrior,— the camel-pian he may be
to begin with and the child-man hereafter, but the lion-
man he must become in the middle, if he is to attain his
perfection, — these now much-decried theories of Nietzsche
have, however much we may differ from many of the
moral and practical conclusions he drew from them,
their undeniable justification and recall us to a truth we
like to hide out of sight. It is good that we should be
reminded of it; first, because to see it has for every strong
soul a tonic effect which saves us from the flabbiness and
relaxation encouraged by a too mellifluous philosophic,
religious or ethical sentimentalism, that which loves to
look upon Nature as love and life and beauty and good,
but turns away from her grim mask of death, adoring
God as Shiva but refusing to adore him as Rudra; se-
condly, because unless we have the honesty and courage
to look existence straight in the face, we shall never arrive
at any effective solution of its discords and oppositions.
We must see first what life and the world are; afterwards,
we can all the better set about finding the right way to
transform them into what they should be. If this repellent
aspect of existence holds in itself some secret of the final
harmony, we shall by ignoring or belittling it miss that
secret and all our efforts at a solution will fail by fault
of our self-indulgent ignoring of the true elements of the
problem. If, on the other hand, it is an enemy to be
beaten down, trampled on, excised, eliminated, still we
gain nothing by underrating its power and hold upon


52


KURUKSHETRA


life or refusing to see how firmly it is rooted in the effect-
ive past and the actually operative principles of existence.

War and destruction are not only a universal principle
of our life here in its purely material aspects, but also of
our mental and moral existence. It is self-evident that
in the actual life of man intellectual, social, political,
moral we can make no real step forward without a strug-
gle, a battle between what exists and lives and what seeks
to exist and live and between all that stands behind
either. It is impossible, at least as men and things are,
to advance, to grow, to fulfil and still to observe really
and utterly that principle of harmlessness which is yet
placed before us as the highest and best law of conduct.
We will use only soul-force and nfever destroy by. war or
any even defensive employment of physical violence?
Good, though until soul-force is effective, the Asuric force
in men and nations tramples down, breaks, slaughters,
bums, pollutes, as we see it doing today, but then at its
ease and unhindered, and you have perhaps caused as
much destruction of life by your abstinence as others by
resort to violence; still you have set up an ideal which
may some day and at any rate ought to lead up to better
things. But even soul-force, when it is effective, destroys.
Only those who have used it with eyes open, know how
much more terrible and destructive it is than the sword
and the cannon; and only those who do not limit their
view to the act and its immediate results, can see how
tremendous are its after-effects, how much is eventually
destroyed and with that much all the life that depended
on it and fed upon it. Evil cannot perish without the
destruction of much that lives by the evil, and it is no less
destruction even if we personally are saved the pain of a
sensational act of violence.


53


ESSAYS ON THE GlTA


Moreover, every time we use soul-force we raise a
great force of Karma against our adversary, the after-
movements of which we have no power to control.
Vasishtha uses soul-force against the military violence of
Viswamitra and armies of Huns and Shakas and Pallavas
hurl themselves on the aggressor. The very quiescence
and passivity of the spiritual man under violence and
aggression awakens the tremendous forces of the world
to a retributive action; and it may even be more merciful
to stay in their path, though by force, those who represent
evil than to allow them to trample on until they call down
on themselves a worse destruction than we would ever
think of inflicting. It is not enough that our own hands
should remain clean and our souls unstained for the law
of strife and destruction to die out of the world; that
which is its root must first disappear out of humanity.
Much less will mere immobility and inertia unwilling to
use or incapable of using any kind of resistance to evil,
abrogate the law; inertia, tamas, indeed, injures much
more than can the rajasic principle of strife which at
least creates more than it destroys. Therefore, so far as
the problem of the individual’s action goes, his abstention
from strife and its inevitable concomitant destruction in
their more gross and physical form may help his own
moral being, but it leaves the Slayer of creatures
unabolished.

For the rest, the whole of human history bears witness
to the inexorable vitality and persistent prevalence of
this principle in the world. It is natural that we should
attempt to palliate, to lay stress on other aspects.
Strife and destruction are not all; there is the saving
principle of association and mutual help as well as the
force of dissociation and mutual strife; a power of love


54


KURUKSHETRA


no less than a power of egoistic self-assertion; an impulse
to sacrifice ourselves for others as well as the impulse to
sacrifice others to ourselves. But when we see how these
have actually worked, we shall not be tempted to gloss
over or ignore the power of their opposites. Association
has been worked not only for mutual help, but at the
same time for defence and aggression, to strengthen us
against all that attacks or resists in the struggle for life.
Association itself has been a servant of war, egoism and
the self-assertion of life against life. Love itself has been
constantly a power of death. Especially the love of good
and the love of God, as embraced by the human ego,
have been responsible for much strife, slaughter and
destruction. Self-sacrifice is great and noble, but at its
highest it is an acknowledgment of the law of Life by
death and becomes an offering on the altar of some Power
that demands a victim in order that the work desired may
be done. The mother bird facing the animal of prey in
defence of its young, the patriot dying for his country’s
freedom, the religious martyr or the martyr, of an idea,
these in the lower and the superior scale of animal life
are highest examples of self-sacrifice and it is evident to
what they bear witness.

But if we look at after results, an easy optimism be-
comes even less possible. See the patriot dying in order
that his country may be free, and mark that country a
few decades after the Lord of Karma has paid the price
of the blood and the suffering that was given; you shall
see it in its turn an oppressor, an exploiter and conqueror
of colonies and dependencies devouring others that it
may live and succeed aggressively in life. .The Christian
martyrs perish in their thousands, setting soul-force
against empire-force that Christ may conquer, Christianity


55


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


prevail. Soul-force does triumph, Christianity does pre-
vail, — but not Christ; the victorious religion becomes a
militant and dominant Church and a more fanatically
persecuting power than the creed and the empire which
it replaced. The very religions organise themselves into
powers of mutual strife and battle together fiercely to live,
to grow, to possess the world.

All which seems to show that here is an element in
existence, perhaps the initial element, which we do not
know how to conquer either because it cannot be con-
quered or because we have not looked at it with a strong
and impartial gaze so as to recognise it calmly and fairly
and know what it is. We must look existence in the face
if our aim is to arrive at a right solution, whatever that
solution may be. And to look existence in the face is to
look God in the face; for the two cannot be separated,
nor the responsibility for the laws of world-existence be
shifted away from Him who created them or from That
which constituted it. Yet here too we love to palliate and
equivocate. We erect a God of Love and Mercy, a God
of good,, a God just, righteous and virtuous according to
our own moral conceptions of justice, virtue and righteous-
ness, and all the rest, we say, is not He or is not His, but
was made by some diabolical Power which He suffered
for some reason to work out its wicked will or by some
dark Ahriman counterbalancing our gracious Ormuzd,
or was even the fault of selfish and sinful man who has
spoiled ^what was made originally perfect by God. As
if man had created the law of death and devouring in the
animal world or that tremendous process by which
Nature creates indeed and preserves but in the same
step and by the same inextricable action slays and des-
troys. It is only a few religions which have had the courage


56


KVRUKSHETRA


to say without any reserve, like the Indian, that this enig-
matic World-Power is one Deity, one Trinity, to lift up
the image of the Force that acts in the world in the
figure not only of the beneficent Durga, but of the terrible
Kali in her blood-stained dance of destruction and to say,
“This too is the Mother; this also know to be God; this
too, if thou hast the strength, adore.” And it is signi-
ficant that the religion which has had this unflinching
honesty and tremendous courage, has succeeded in creat-
ing a profound and wide-spread spirituality such as no
other can parallel. For truth is the foundation of real
spirituality and courage is its soul. Tasyai salyam ayatanam.

All this is not to say that strife and destruction are
the alpha and omega of existence, that harmony is not
greater than war, love more the manifest divine than
death or that we must not move towards the replace-
ment of physical force by soul-force, of war by peace,
of strife by union, of devouring by love, of egoism by
universality, of death by immortal life. God is not only
the Destroyer, but the Friend of creatures; not only the
cosmic Trinity, but the Transcendent; the terrible Kali
is also the loving and beneficent Mother; the lord of
Kurukshelra is the divine comrade and charioteer, the
attracter of beings, incarnate Krishna. And whither-
soever he is driving through all the strife and clash and
qpnfusion, to whatever goal or godhead he may be attract-
ing us, it is — no doubt of that — to some transcendence
of all ' these aspects upon which we have been so firmly
insisting. But where, how, with what kind of tran-
scendence, under what conditions, this we have to dis-
cover; and to discover it, the first necessity is to see the
world as it is, to observe and Value rightly his action as
it reveals itself at the start and now; afterwards the way


57


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


and the goal will better reveal themselves. We must
acknowledge Kurukshetra; we must submit to the law of
Life by Death before we can find our way to the life
immortal; we must open our eyes, with a less appalled
gaze than Arjuna’s, to the vision of our Lord of Time
and Death and cease to deny, hate or recoil from the
universal Destroyer.


58


VI


MAN AND THE BATTLE OF LIFE

Thus, if wc are to appreciate in its catholicity the teaching
of the Gita, wc must accept intellectually its standpoint
and courageous envisaging of the manifest nature and
process of the world. The divine charioteer of Kuru-
kshetra reveals himself on one side as the Lord of all the
worlds and the Friend and omniscient Guide of all
creatures, on the other as Time the Destroyer “arisen
for the destruction of these peoples 55 . The Gita, following
in this the spirit of the catholic Hindu religion, affirms
this also as God ; it does not attempt to evade the enigma
of the world by escaping from it through a side-door.
If, in fact, we do not regard existence merely as the mecha-
nic action of a brute and indifferent material Force or,
on the other hand, as an equally mechanical play of ideas
and energies arising out of an original Non-Existence
or else reflected in the passive Soul or the evolution of a
dream or nightmare in the surface consciousness of an
indifferent, immutable Transcendence which is unaffect-
ed by the dream and has no real part in it, — if we accept
at all, as the Gita accepts, the existence of God, that is
to say, of the omnipresent, omniscient, omnipotent, yet
always transcendent Being who manifests the world and
Himself in the world, who is not the slave but the lord of
His creative Consciousness, Nature or Force (Maya,
Frakriti or Shakti), who is not baffled or thwarted in


59


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


His world-conception or design by His creatures, man or
devil, who does not need to justify Himself by shifting the
responsibility for any part of His creation or manifestation
on that which is created or manifested, then the human
being has to start from a great, a difficult act of faith.
Finding himself in a world which is apparently a chaos
of battling powers, a clash of vast and obscure forces, a
life which subsists only by constant change and death,
menaced from every side by pain, suffering, evil and des-
truction, he has to sec the omnipresent Deity in it all and
conscious that of this enigma there must be a solution and
beyond this Ignorance in which he dwells a Knowledge
that reconciles, he has to take his stand upon this faith,
“ Though Thou slay me, yet will I trust in Thee.” All
human thought or faith that is active and affirmative,
whether it be theistic, pantheistic or atheistic, does in fact
involve more or less explicitly and completely such an
attitude. It admits and it believes: admits the discords
of the world, believes /in some highest principle of God,
universal Being or Nature which shall enable us to tran-
scend, overcome or harmonise these discords, perhaps
even to do all three at once, to harmonise by overcoming
and transcending.

Then, as to human life in its actualities, we have to
accept its aspect of a struggle and a battle mounting into
supreme crises such as that of Kurukshetra. The Gita,
as we have seen, takes for its frame such a period of
transition and crisis as humanity periodically experiences
in its history, in which great forces clash together for a
huge destruction and reconstruction, intellectual, social,
moral, religious, political, and these in the actual psycho-
logical and social stage of human evolution culminate
usually through a violent physical convulsion of strife.


60


MAN AND THE BATTLE OF LIFE


war or revolution. The Gita proceeds from the acceptance
of the necessity in Nature for such vehement crises and it
accepts not only the moral aspect, the struggle between
righteousness and unrighteousness, between the self-
affirming law of Good and the forces that oppose its pro-
gression, but also the physical aspect, the actual armed
war or other vehement physical strife between the human
beings who represent the antagonistic powers. We must
remember that the Gita was composed at a time when
war was even more than it is now a necessary part of
human activity and the idea of its elimination from the
scheme of life would have been an absolute chimera.
The gospel of universal peace and goodwill among men —
for without a universal and entire mutual goodwill there
can be no real and abiding peace — has never succeeded
for a moment in possessing itself of human life during the
historic cycle of our progress, because morally, socially,
spiritually the race was not prepared and the poise of
Nature in its evolution would not admit of its being
immediately prepared for any such transcendence. Even
now we have not actually progressed beyond the feasi-
bility of a system of accommodation between conflicting
interests which may minimise the recurrence of the worst
forms of strife. And towards this consummation the
method, the approach which humanity has been forced by
its own nature to adopt, is a monstrous mutual massacre
unparallelled in history; a universal war, full of bitterness
and irreconcilable hatred, is the straight way and the
triumphant means modern man has found for the estab-
lishment of universal peace! That consummation, too,
founded not upon any fundamental change in human
nature, but upon intellectual notions, economic conve-
nience, vital and sentimental shrinkings from the loss


61


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


of life, discomfort and horror of war, effected by nothing
better than political adjustments, gives no very certain
promise of firm foundation and long duration. A day
may come, must surely come, we will say, when humanity
will be ready spiritually, morally, socially for the reign
of universal peace; meanwhile the aspect of battle and
the nature and function of man as a fighter have to be
accepted and accounted for by any practical philosophy
and religion. The Gita, taking life as it is and not only
as it may be in some distant future, puts the question
how this aspect and function of life, which is really an
aspect and function of human activity in general, can
be harmonised with the spiritual existence.

The Gita is therefore addressed to a fighter, a man of
action, one whose duty in life is that of war and protec-
tion, war as a part of government for the protection of
those who are excused from that duty, debarred from
protecting themselves and therefore at the mercy of the
strong and the violent, war, secondly and. by a moral
extension of this idea, for the protection of the weak and
the oppressed and for the maintenance of right and justice
in the world. For all these ideas, the social and practical,
the moral and the chivalrous enter into the Indian con-
ception of the Kshatriya, the man who is a warrior and
ruler by function and a knight and king in his nature.
Although the more general and universal ideas of the
Gita are those which are the most important to us, we
ought not to leave out of consideration altogether the
colouring and trend they take from the peculiar Indian
culture and social system in the midst of which they arose.
That system differed from the modern in its conception.
To the modern mind man is a thinker, worker or producer
and a fighter all in one, and the tendency of the social


62


MAN AND THE BATTLE OF LIFE


system is to lump all these activities and to demand from
each individual his contribution to the intellectual, eco-
nomical and military life and needs of the community
without paying any heed to the demands of his individual
nature and temperament. The ancient Indian civilisation
laid peculiar stress on the individual nature, tendency,
temperament and sought to determine by it the ethical
type, function and place in the society. Nor did it
consider man primarily as a social being or the fullness of
his social existence as the highest ideal, but rather as a
spiritual being in process of formation and develop-
ment and his social life, ethical law, play of temperament
and exercise of function as means and stages of spiritual
formation. Thought and knowledge, war and government,
production and distribution, labour and service were
carefully differentiated functions of society, each assigned
to those who were naturally called to it and providing
the right means by which they could individually
proceed towards their spiritual development and self-
perfection.

The modern idea of a common obligation in all the
main departments of human activity has its advantages;
it helps to greater solidarity, unity and fullness in the
life of the community and a more all-round development
of the complete human being as opposed to the endless
divisions and over-specialisation and the narrowing and
artificial shackling of the life of the individual to which
the Indian system eventually led. But it has also its dis-
advantages and in certain of its developments the too
logical application of it has led to grotesque and disas-
trous absurdities. This is evident enough in the character
of modern war. From the idea of a common military
obligation binding on every individual to defend and


63


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


fight for the community by which he lives and profits,
has arisen the system by which the whole manhood of the
nation is hurled into the bloody trench to slay and be
slain, thinkers, artists, philbsophers, priests, merchants,
artisans all torn from their natural functions, the whole
life of the community disorganised, reason and conscience
overridden, even the minister of religion who is salaried
by the State or called by his function to preach the gospel
of peace and love forced to deny his creed and become a
butcher of his fellow-men ! Not only are conscience and
nature violated by the arbitrary fiat of the military
State, but national defence carried to an insane extreme
makes its best attempt to become a national suicide.

Indian civilisation, on the contrary, made it its chief
aim to minimise the incidence and disaster of war. For
this purpose it limited the military obligation to the small
class who by their birth, nature and traditions were
marked out for this function and found in it their natural
means of self-development through the flowering of the
soul in the qualities of courage, disciplined force, strong
helpfulness and chivalrous nobility for which the war-
rior’s life pursued under the stress of a high ideal gives a
field and opportunities. The rest of the community was
in every way guarded from slaughter and outrage; their
life and occupations were as little interfered with as
possible and the combative and destructive tendencies
of human nature were given a restricted field, confined
in a sort of lists so as to do the minimum amount of
harm to the general life of the race, while at the same time
by being subjected to high ethical ideals and every pos-
sible rule of humanity and chivalry the function of war
was obliged to help in ennobling and elevating instead
of brutalising those who performed it. It must be


64


MAN AND THE BATTLE OF LIFE


remembered that it is war of this kind and under these
conditions that the Gita had in view, war considered as an
inevitable part of human life, but so restricted and regu-
lated as to serve like other activities the ethical and
spiritual development which was then regarded as the
whole real object of life, war destructive within certain,
carefully fixed limits of the bodily life of individual men
but constructive of their inner life and of the ethical
elevation of the race. That war in the past has, when
subjected to ap ideal, helped in this elevation, as in the
development of knighthood and chivalry, the Indian
ideal of the Kshatriya, the Japanese ideal of the Samurai,
can only be denied by the fanatics of pacifism. When it
has fulfilled its function, it may well disappear; for if it
tries to survive its utility, it will appear as an unrelieved
brutality of violence stripped of its ideal and constructive
aspects and will be rejected by the progressive mind of
humanity; but its past service to the race must be
admitted in any reasonable view of our evolution.

The physical fact of war, however, is only a special
and outward manifestation of a general principle in life
and the Kshatriya is only the outward manifestation and
type of a general characteristic necessary to the com-
pleteness of human perfection. War typifies and embodies
physically the aspect of battle and struggle which belongs
to all life, both to our inner and our outer living, in a
world .whose method is a meeting and wrestling of forces
which progress by mutual destruction towards a con-
tinually changing adjustment expressive of a progressive
harmonising and hopeful of a perfect harmony based
upon some yet ungrasped potentiality of oneness. The
Kshatriya is the type and embodiment of the fighter in
man who accepts this principle in* life and faces it as a


65


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


warrior striving towards mastery, not shrinking from the
destruction of bodies and forms, but through it all aiming
at the realisation of some principle of right, justice, law
which shall be the basis of the harmony towards which
the struggle tends. The Gita accepts this aspect of the
. world-energy and the physical fact of war which embodies
it, and it addresses itself to the man of action, the striver
and fighter, the Kshatriya, — war which is the extreme
contradiction of the soul’s high aspiration to peace within
and harmlessness 1 without, the striver and fighter whose
necessary turmoil of struggle and action seems to be the
very contradiction of the soul’s Jiigh ideal of calm mas-
tery and self-possession, — and it seeks for an issue from
the contradiction, a point at which its terms meet and a
poise which shall be the first essential basis of harmony
and transcendence.

Man meets the battle of life in the manner most
consonant with the essential quality most dominant in
his nature. There are, according to the Sankhya philo-
sophy accepted in this respect by the Gita, three essential
qualities or modes of the world-energy and therefore
also of human nature, sattva, the mode of poise, know-
ledge and satisfaction, rajas, the mode of passion, action
and struggling emotion, tamas, the mode of ignorance and
inertia. Dominated by tamas, man does not so much meet
the rush and shock of the world-energies whirling about
him and converging upon him as he succumbs to them,
is overborne by them, afflicted, subjected; or, at the most,
helped by the other qualities, the tamasic man seeks only
somehow to survive, to subsist so long as he may, to
shelter himself in the fortress of an established routine of


1 Ahirhsd


66


MAN AND THE BATTLE OF LIFE


thought and action in which he feels himself to a certain
extent protected from the battle, able to reject the demand
which his higher nature makes upon him, excused from
accepting the necessity of farther struggle and the ideal
of an increasing effort and mastery. Dominated by rajas,
man flings himself into the battle and attempts to use
the struggle of forces for his own egoistic benefit, to slay,
conquer, dominate, enjoy; or, helped by a certain measure
of the sattwic quality, the rajasic man makes the struggle
itself a means of increasing inner mastery, joy, power,
possession. The battle of life -becomes his delight and
passion partly for its own sake, for the pleasure of activity
and the sense of power, partly as a means of his increase
and natural self-development. Dominated by saltva,
man seeks in the midst of the strife for a principle of law,
right, poise, harmony, peace, satisfaction. The purely
sattwic man tends to seek this within, whether for him-
self alone or with an impulse to communicate it, when
won, to other human minds, but usually by a sort of
inner detachment from or else an outer rejection of
the strife and turmoil of the active world-energy; but
if the sattwic mind accepts partly the rajasic impulse,
it seeks rather to impose this poise and harmony upon
the struggle and apparent chaos, to vindicate a victory
for peace, love and harmony over the principle of war,
discord and struggle. All the attitudes adopted by the
human mind towards the problem of life either derive
from the domination of one or other of these qualities or
else from an attempt at balance and harmony between
them.

But there comes also a stage in which the mind recoils
from the whole problem and, dissatisfied with the solu-
tions given by the threefold mode of Nature, traigunya,


67


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


seeks for some higher solution outside of it or else above
it. It looks for an escape either into something which
is outside and void of all qualities and therefore of all
activity or in something which is superior to the three
qualities and master of them and therefore at once
capable of action and unaffected, undominated by its
own action, in the nirguij.a or the trigunatita. It aspires to
an absolute peace and unconditioned existence or to a
dominant calm and superior existence. The natural
movement of the former attitude is towards the renun-
ciation of the world, sannyasa\ of the latter towards
superiority to the claims of the lower nature and its
whirl of actions and reactions, and its principle is equality
and the inner renunciation of passion and desire. The
former is the first impulse of Aijuna recoiling from the
calamitous culmination of all his heroic activity in the
great cataclysm of battle and massacre, Kurukshetra;
losing his whole past principle of action, inaction and the
rejection of life and its claims seem to him the only issue.
But it is to an inner superiority and not to the physical
renunciation of life and action that he is called by the
voice of the divine Teacher.

Aijuna is the Kshatriya, the rajasic man who governs
his rajasic action by a high sattwic ideal. He advances.'
to this gigantic struggle, to this Kurukshetra with the
full acceptance of the joy of battle, as to “a holiday of
fight”, but with a proud confidence in the righteousness
of his cause; he advances in his rapid chariot tearing the
hearts of his enemies with the victorious clamour of his
war-conch; for he wishes to look upon all these Kings of
men who have come here to champion against him the
cause of unrighteousness and establish as a rule of Kfe
the disregard of law, justice and truth which they would


68


MAN AND THE BATTLE OF LIFE


replace by the rule of a selfish and arrogant egoism.
When this confidence is shattered within him, when he
is smitten down from his customary attitude and mental
basis of life, it is by the uprush of the tamasic quality
into the rajasic man, inducing a recoil of astonishment,
grief, horror, dismay, dejection, bewilderment of the
mind and the war of reason against itself, a collapse
towards the principle of ignorance and inertia. As a
result he turns towards renunciation. Better the life of
the mendicant living upon alms than this dharma of the
Kshatriya, this battle and action culminating in undis-
criminating ' massacre, this principle of mastery and
glory and power which can only be won by destruction
and bloodshed, this conquest of blood-stained enjoy-
ments, this vindication of justice and right by a means
which contradicts all righteousness and this affirmation
of the social law by a war which destroys in its process
and result all that constitutes society.

Sannyasa is the renunciation of life and action and of
the threefold modes of Nature, but it has to be approached
through one or other of the three qualities. The impulse
may be tamasic, a feeling of impotence, fear, ^version,
disgust, horror of the .world and life; or it may be the
rajasic quality tending towards tamas, an impulse of
weariness of the struggle, grief, disappointment, refusal
to accept any longer this vain turmoil of activity with
its pains and its eternal discontent. Or the impulse may
be that of rajas tending towards sattwa, the impulse to
arrive at something superior to anything life can give,
to conquer a higher state, to trample down life itself
under the feet of an inner strength which seeks to break
all bonds and transcend all limits. Or it may be sattwic,
an intellectual perception of the vanity of life and the


69


ESSAYS ON THE GtTA


absence of any real goal or justification for this ever-cycl-
ing world-existence or else a spiritual perception of the
Timeless, the Infinite, the Silent, the nameless and form-
less Peace beyond. The recoil of Arjuna is the tamasic
recoil from action of the sattwa-rajasic man. The
Teacher may confirm it in its direction, using it as a
dark entry to the purity and peace of the ascetic life;
or he may purify it at once and raise it towards the
rare altitudes of the sattwic tendency of renunciation.
In fact, he does neither. He discourages the tamasic
recoil and the tendency to renunciation and enjoins the
continuance of action and even of the same fierce and
terrible action, but he points the disciple towards another
and inner renunciation which is the real issue from his
crisis and the way towards the soul’s superiority to the
world-Nature and yet its calm and self-possessed action
in the world. Not a physical asceticism, but an inner
askesis is the teaching of the Gita.


70


VII


THE CREED OF THE ARYAN FIGHTER*

The answer of the divine Teacher to the first flood of
Arjuna’s passionate self-questioning, his shrinking from
slaughter, his sense of sorrow and sin, his grieving for an
empty and* desolate life, his forecast of evil results of an
evil deed, is a strongly-worded rebuke. All this, it is
replied, is confusion of mind and delusion, a weakness
of the heart, an unmanliness, a fall from the virility of
the fighter and the hero. Not this was fitting in the son
of Pritha, not thus should the champion and chief hope
of a righteods cause abandon it in the hour of crisis and
peril or suffer the sudden amazement of his heart and
senses, the clouding of his reason and the downfall of
his will to betray him into the casting away of his divine
weapons and the refusal of his God-given work. This
is not the way cherished and followed by the Aryan man;
this mood came not from heaven nor can it lead to
heaven, and on earth it is the forfeiting of the glory that
waits upon strength and heroism and noble works. Let
him put from him this weak and self-indulgent pity, let
him rise and smite his enemies!

The answer of a hero to a hero, shall we say, but not
that which we should expect from a divine Teacher from
whom we demand rather that he shall encourage always


* Gita II, 1-38.


71


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


gentleness and saiintliness and self-abnegation and the
recoil from worldly aims and cessation from the ways of
the world? The Gita expressly says that Arjuna has
thus lapsed into unheroic weakness, “his eyes full and
distressed with tears, his heart overcome by depression
and discouragement,” because he is invaded by pity,
krpayavistam. Is this not then a divine weakness? Is not
pity a divine emotion which should not thus be discour-
aged with harsh rebuke? Or are we in face of a mere
gospel of war and heroic action, a Nietzschean creed of
power and high-browed strength, of Hebraic or old
Teutonic hardness which holds pity to be a weakness
and thinks like the Norwegian hero who thanked God
because He had given him a hard heart? But the teaching
of the Gita springs from an Indian creed and to the
Indian mind compassion has always figured as one of the
largest elements of the divine nature. The Teacher
himself enumerating in a later chapter the qualities of
the godlike nature in man places among them compas-
sion to creatures, gentleness, freedom from wrath and
from the desire to slay and do hurt, no less than fear-
lessness and high spirit and energy. Harshness and
hardness and fierceness and a satisfaction in slaying
enemies and amassing wealth and unjust enjoyments
are Asuric qualities; they come from the violent Titanic
nature which denies the Divine in the world and the
Divine in man and worships Desire only as its deity.
It is not then from any such standpoint that the
weakness of Aijuna merits rebuke.

“Whence has come to thee this dejection, this stain
and darkness of the soul in the hour of difficulty and
peril?” asks Krishna of Arjuna. The question points to
the real nature of Arjuna’s deviation from his heroic


72


THE CREED OF THE ARYAN FIGHTER


qualities. There is a divine compassion which descends
to us from on high and for the man whose nature does
not possess it, is not cast in its mould, to pretend to be
the superior man, the master-man or the superman is
a folly and an insolence, for he alone is the superman
who most manifests the highest nature of the Godhead
in humanity. This compassion observes with an eye of
love and wisdom and calm strength the battle and the
struggle, the strength and weakness of man, his virtues
and sins, his joy and suffering, his knowledge and his
ignorance, his wisdom and his folly, his aspiration and
his failure and it enters into it all to help and to heal.
In the saint and philanthropist it may cast itself into
the mould of a plenitude of love or charity; in the thinker
and hero it assumes the largeness and the force of a
helpful wisdom and strength. It is this compassion in
the Aryan fighter, the soul of his chivalry, which will not
break the bruised reed, but helps and protects the weak
and the oppressed and the wounded and the fallen. But
it is also the divine compassion that smites down the
strong tyrant and the confident oppressor, not in wrath
and with hatred, — for these are not the high divine qua-
lities, the wrath of God against the sinner, God’s hatred
of the wicked are the fables of half-enlightened creeds,
as much a fable as the eternal torture of the Hells they
have invented, — but, as the old Indian spirituality clearly
saw, with as much love and compassion for the strong
Titan erring by his strength and slain for his sins as for
the sufferer and the oppressed who have to be saved from
his violence and injustice.

But such is not the compassion which actuates Arjuna
in the rejection of his work and mission. That is not
compassion but an impotence full of a weak self-pity, a


73


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


recoil from the mental suffering which his act must entail
on himself, — “I see not what shall thrust from me the
sorrow that dries up the senses”, — and of all things self-
pity is among the most ignoble and un-Aryan of moods.
Its pity for others is also a form of self-indulgence; it is
the physical shrinking of the nerves from the act of
slaughter, the egoistic emotional shrinking of the heart
from the destruction of the Dhritarashtrians because
they are “one’s own people” and without them life will
be empty. This pity is a weakness of the mind and
senses, — a weakness which may well be beneficial to men
of a lower grade of development, who have to be weak
because otherwise they will be hard and cruel; for they
have to cure the harsher by the gentler forms of sensa-
tional egoism, they have to call in tamas, the debile
principle, to help sattwa, the principle of light, in quel-
ling the strength and excess of their rajasic' passions.
But this way is not for the developed Aryan man who
has to grow not by weakness, but by an ascension from
strength to strength. Arjuna is the divine man, the
master-man in the making and as such he has been chosen
by the gods. He has a work given to him, he has God
beside him in his chariot, he has the heavenly bow
Gandiva in his hand, he has the champions of unright-
eousness, the opponents of the divine leading of the world
in his front. Not his is the right to determine what he
shall do or not do according to his emotions and his
passions, or to shrink from a necessary destruction by the
claim of his egoistic heart and reason, or to decline his
work because it will bring sorrow and emptiness to his
life or because its earthly result has no value to him in
the absence of the thousands who must perish. All that
is a weak falling from his higher nature. He has to see


74


THE CREED OF THE ARYAN FIGHTER


only the work that must be done, kartavyam karma, to hear
only the divine command breathed through his warrior
nature, to feel only for the world and the destiny of
mankind calling to him as its god-sent man to assist
its march and clear its path of the dark armies that
beset it.

Aijuna in his reply to Krishna admits the rebuke even
while he strives against and refuses the command. He
is aware of his weakness and yet accepts subjection to it.
It is poorness of spirit, he owns, that has smitten away
from him his true heroic nature; his whole consciousness
is bewildered in its view of right and wrong and he ac-
cepts the divine Friend as his teacher; but the emotional
and intellectual props on which he had supported his sense
of righteousness have been entirely cast down and he
cannot accept a command which seems to appeal only
to his old standpoint and gives him no new basis for
action. He attempts still to justify his refusal of the
work and puts forward in its support the claim of his
nervous and sensational being which shrinks from the
slaughter with its sequel of blood-stained enjoyments,
the claim of his heart which recoils from the sorrow
and emptiness of life that will follow his act, the claim of
his customary moral notions which are appalled by the
necessity of slaying his gurus, Bhishma and Drona, the
claim of his reason which sees no good but only evil results
of the terrible and violent work assigned to him. He is
resolved that on the old basis of thought and motive he
will not fight and he awaits in silence the answer to objec-
tions that seem to him unanswerable. It is these «~1ai m s
of Arjuna’s egoistic being that Krishna sets out first to
destroy in order to make place for the higher law which
shall transcend all egoistic motives of action.


75


essavs on the gita


The answer of the Teacher proceeds upon two different
lines, first, a brief reply founded upon the highest ideas
of the general Aryan culture in which Arjuna has been
educated, secondly, another and larger founded on a more
intimate knowledge, opening into deeper truths of our
being, which is the real starting-point of the teaching
of the Gita. This first answer relies on the philosophic
and moral conceptions of the Vedantic philosophy and
the social idea of duty and honour which formed the
ethical basis of Aryan society. Arjuna has sought to justify
his refusal on ethical and rational grounds, but he has
merely cloaked by words of apparent rationality the revolt
of his ignorant and unchastened emotions. He has spoken
of the physical life and the death of the body as if these
were the primary realities ; but they have no such essential
value to the sage and the thinker. The sorrow for the
bodily death of his friends and kindred is a grief to which
wisdom and the true knowledge of life lend no sanction.
The enlightened man does not mourn either for the living
or the dead, for he knows that suffering and death are
merely incidents in the history of the soul. The soul,
not the body, is the reality. All these kings of men for
whose approaching death he mourns, have lived before,
they will live again in the human body; for as the soul
passes physically through childhood and youth and age,
so it passes on to the changing of the body. The calm
and wise mind, the dhira, the thinker who looks upon life
steadily and does not allow himself to be disturbed and
blinded by his sensations and emotions, is not deceived
by material appearances; he does not allow the clamour
of his blood and his nerves and his heart to cloud his
judgment or to contradict his knowledge. He looks beyond
the apparent facts of the life of the body and senses to the


76


THE CREED OF THE ARYAN FIGHTER

real fact of his being and rises beyond the emotional and
physical desires of the ignorant nature to the true and
only aim of the human existence.

What is that real fact? that highest aim? This, that
human life and death repeated through the aeons in the
great cycles of the world are only a long progress by
which the human being prepares and makes himself fit
for immortality. And how shall he prepare himself?
who is the man that is fit? The man who rises above the
conception of himself as a life and a body, who does
not accept the material and sensational touches of the
world at their own value or at the value which the phy-
sical man attaches to them, who knows himself and all
as souls, learns himself to live in his soul and not in his
body and deals with others too as souls and not as mere
physical beings. For by immortality is meant not the sur-
vival of death, — that is already given to every creature
born with a mind, — but the transcendence of life and
death. It means that ascension by which man ceases to
live as a mind-informed body and lives at last as a spirit
and in the Spirit. Whoever is subject to grief and sorrow,
a slave to the sensations and emotions, occupied by the
touches of things transient cannot become fit for immorta-
lity. These things must be borne until they are conquered,
till they can give no pain to the liberated man, till he
is able to receive all the material happenings of the
world whether joyful or sorrowful with a wise and calm
equality, even as the tranquil eternal Spirit secret within
us receives them. To be disturbed by sorrow and horror
as Aijuna has been disturbed, to be deflected by them
from the path that has to be travelled, to be overcome
by self-pity and intolerance of sorrow and recoil from the
unavoidable and trivial circumstance of the death of the


77


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


body, this is un-Aryan ignorance. It is not the way of the
Aryan climbing in calm strength towards the immortal life.

There is no such thing as death, for it is the body that
dies and the body is not the man. That which really is,
cannot go out of existence, though it may change the
forms through which it appeal's, just as that which is non-
existent cannot come into being. The soul is and cannot
cease to be. This opposition of is and is not, this balance
of being and becoming which is the mind’s view of exis-
tence, finds its end in the realisation of the soul as the one
imperishable self by whom all this universe has been
extended. Finite bodies have an end, but that which
possesses and uses the body is infinite, illimitable, eternal,
indestructible. It casts away old and takes up new
bodies as a man changes worn-out raiment for new; and
what is there in this to grieve at and recoil and shrink?
This is not born, nor does it die, nor is it a thing that
comes into being once and passing away will never come
into being again. It is unborn, ancient, sempiternal; it
is not slain with the slaying of the body. Who can slay
the immortal spirit? Weapons cannot cleave it, nor the
fire burn, nor do the waters drench it, nor the wind dry.
Eternally stable, immobile, all-pervading, it is for ever
and for ever. Not manifested like the body, but greater
than all manifestation, not to be analysed by the thought,
but greater than all mind, not capable of change and
modification like the life and its organs and their objects,
but beyond the changes of mind and life and body, it is
yet the Reality which all these strive to figure.

Even if the truth of our being were a thing less sub-
lime, vast, intangible by death and life, if the self were
constantly subject to birth and death, still the death of
beings ought not to be a cause of sorrow. For that is an


78


THE CREED OF THE ARYAN FIGHTER


inevitable circumstance of the soul’s self-manifestation.
Its birth is an appearing out of some state in which it
is not non-existent but unmanifest to our mortal senses,
its death is a return to that unmanifest world or condi-
tion and out of it it will again appear in the physical
manifestation. The to-do made by the physical mind
and senses about death and the horror of death whether
on the sick-bed or the battlefield, is the most ignorant of
nervous clamours. Our sorrow for the death of men is
an ignorant grieving for those for whom there is no cause
to grieve, since they have neither gone out of existence
nor suffered any painful or terrible change of condition,
but are beyond death no less in being and no more un-
happy in circumstance than in life. But in reality the
higher truth is the real truth. All are that Self, that
One, that Divine whom we look on and speak and hear
of as the wonderful beyond our comprehension, for after
all our seeking and declaring of knowledge and learning
from those who have knowledge no human mind has
ever known this Absolute. It is this which is here veiled
by the world, the master of the body; all life is only its
shadow; the coming of the soul into physical manifesta-
tion and our passing out of it by death is only one of
its minor movements. When we have known ourselves
as this, then to speak of ourselves as slayer or slain is
an absurdity. One thing only is the truth in which we
have to live, the Eternal manifesting itself as the soul
of man in the great cycle of its pilgrimage with birth and
death for milestones, with worlds beyond as resting-places,
with all the circumstances of life happy or unhappy
as the means of our progress and battle and victory
and with immortality as the home to which the soul
travels.


79


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


Therefore, says the Teacher, put away this vain sorrow
and shrinking, fight, O son of Bharata. But wherefore
such a conclusion? This high and great knowledge,
this strenuous self-discipline of the mind and soul by
which it is to rise beyond the clamour of the emotions
and the cheat of the senses to true self-knowledge, may
well free us from grief and delusion ; it may well cure us of
the fear of death and the sorrow for the dead ; it may well
show us that those whom we speak of as dead are not
dead at all nor to be sorrowed for, since they have only
gone beyond; it may well teach us to look undisturbed
upon the most terrible assaults of life and upon the death
of the body as a trifle; it may exalt us to the conception of
all life’s circumstances as a manifestation of the One and
as a means for our souls to raise themselves above appear-
ances by an upward evolution until we know ourselves
as the immortal Spirit. But how does it justify the action
demanded of Arjuna and the slaughter of Kurukshetra?
The answer is that this is the action required of Arjuna
in the path he has to travel ; it has come inevitably in the
performance of the function demanded of him by his
svadharma, his social duty, the law of his life and the law
of his being. This world, this manifestation of the Self in
the material universe is not only a cycle of inner develop-
ment, but a field in which the external circumstances of
life have to be accepted as an environment and an occasion
for that development. It is a world of mutual help and
struggle; not a serene and peaceful gliding. through easy
joys is the progress it allows us, but every step has to be
gained by heroic effort and through a clash of opposing
forces. Those who take up the inner and the outer struggle
even to the most physical clash of all, that of war, are the
Kshatriyas, the mighty men; war, force, nobility, courage


80


THE CREED OF THE ARYAN FIGHTER


are their nature; protection of the right and an unflinching
acceptance of the gage of battle is their virtue and their
duty. For there is continually a struggle between right
and wrong, justice and injustice, the force that protects
and the force that violates and oppresses, and when this
has once been brought to the issue of physical strife, the
champion and standard-bearer of the Right must not
shake and tremble at the violent and terrible nature of
the work he has to do; he must not abandon his followers
or fellow-fighters, betray his cause and leave the standard
of Right and Justice to trail in the dust and be trampled
into mire by the blood-stained feet of the oppressor, be-
cause of a weak pity for the violent and cruel and a physi-
cal horror of the vastness of the destruction decreed. His
virtue and his duty lie in battle and not in abstention from
battle; it is not slaughter, but non-slaying which would
here be the sin.

The Teacher then turns aside for a moment to give
another answer to the cry of Arjuna over the sorrow of
th$ death of kindred which will empty his life of the causes
and objects of living. What is the true object of the
Kshatriya’s life and his true happiness? Not self-pleasing
and domestic happiness and a life of comfort and peaceful
joy with friends and relatives, but to battle for the right
is his true, object of life and to find a cause for which he
can lay down his life or by victory win the crown and
glory of the hero’s existence is his greatest happiness.
“There is no greater good for the Kshatriya than righteous
battle, and when such a battle comes to them of itself
like the open gate of heaven, happy are the Kshatriyas
then. If thou dost not this battle for the right, then hast
thou abandoned thy duty and virtue and thy glory, and
sin shall be thy portion.” He will by such a refusal incur


81


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


disgrace and the reproach of fear and weakness and the
loss of his Kshatriya honour. For what is worst grief for
a Kshatriya? It is the loss of his honour, his fame, his
noble station among the mighty men, the men of courage
and power; that to him is much worse than death. Battle,
courage, power, rule, the honour of the brave, the heaven
of those who fall nobly, this is the warrior’s ideal. To
lower that ideal, to allow a smirch to fall on that honour,
to give the example of a hero among heroes whose action
lays itself open to the reproach of cowardice and weakness
and thus to lower the moral standard of mankind, is to
be false to himself and to the demand of the world on its
leaders and kings. “Slain thou shalt win Heaven, victo-
rious thou shalt enjoy the earth; therefore arise, O son
of Kunti, resolved upon battle.’’

This heroic appeal may seem to be on a lower level
than the stoical spirituality which precedes and the deeper
spirituality which follows ; for in the next verse the Teacher
bids him to make grief and happiness, loss and gain, vic-
tory and defeat equal to his soul and then turn to the
battle, — the real teaching of the Gita. But Indian ethics
has always seen the practical necessity of graded ideals
for the developing moral and spiritual life of man. The
Kshatriya ideal, the ideal of the four orders is here placed
in its social aspect, not as afterwards in its. spiritual
meaning. This, says Krishna in effect, is my answer to
you if you insist on joy and sorrow and the result of your
actions as your motive of action. I have shown you in
what direction the higher knowledge of self and the world
points you; I have now shown you in what direction
your social duty and the ethical standard of your order
point you, svadharmam api caveksya. Whichever you cori-
sider, the result is the same. But if you are not satisfied


82


THE CREED OF THE ARYAN FIGHTER


with your social duty and the virtue of your order, if you
think that leads you to sorrow and sin, then I bid you
rise to a higher and not sink to a lower ideal. Put away
all egoism from you, disregard joy and sorrow, disregard
gain and loss and all worldly results; look only at the
cause you must serve and the work that you must achieve
by divine command; “so thou shalt not incur sin.”
Thus Aijuna’s plea of sorrow, his plea of the recoil from
slaughter, his plea of the sense of sin, his plea of the un-
happy results of his action, are answered according to
the highest knowledge and ethical ideals to which his
race and age had attained.

It is the creed of the Aryan fighter. “Know God,” it
says, “know thyself, help man; protect the Right, do
without fear or weakness or faltering thy work of battle
in the world. Thou art the eternal and imperishable
Spirit, thy soul is here on its upward path to immortality;
life and death are nothing, sorrow and wounds and suffer-
ing are nothing, for these things have to be conquered
and overcome. Look not at thy own pleasure and gain
and profit, but above and around, abbve at the shining
summits to which thou climbest, around at this world
of battle and trial in which good and evil, progress and
retrogression are locked in stern conflict. Men call to
thee,, their strong man, their hero for help; help then,
fight. Destroy when by destruction the world must ad-
vance, but hate not that which thou destroyest, Reither
grieve for all those who perish, Know everywhere the
one self, know all to be immortal souls and the bqdy to
be but dust. Do thy work with a calm, strong an<$equal
spirit; fight and fall nobly or conquer mightily. For this
is the work that God and thy nature have given tp thee
to accomplish.”


83


VIII


SANKHYA AND YOGA

In the moment of his turning from this first and summary
answer to Arjuna’s difficulties and in the very first words
which strike the keynote of a spiritual solution, the
Teacher makes at once a distinction which is of the
utmost importance for the understanding of the Gita, —
the distinction of Sankhya and Yoga. “Such is the
intelligence (the intelligent knowledge of things and
will) declared to thee in the Sankhya, hear now this in
the Yoga, for if thou art in Yoga by this intelligence, O
son of Pritha, thou shalt cast away the bondage of works.”
That is the literal translation of the words in which the
Gita announces the distinction it intends to make.

The Gita is in^its foundation a Vedantic work; it is
one of the three recognised authorities for the Vedantic
teaching and, although not described as a revealed
Scripture, although, that is to say, it is largely intellectual,
ratiocinative, philosophical in its method, founded indeed
on the Truth, but not the directly inspired Word which
is the revelation of the Truth through the higher faculties
of the seer, it is yet so highly esteemed as to be ranked
almost as a thirteenth Upanishad. But still its Vedantic
ideas are throughout and thoroughly coloured by the
ideas of the Sankhya and the Yoga way erf" thinking and
it derives from this colouring the peculiar synthetic
character of its philosophy. It is in fact primarily a


84


SANKHYA AND YOGA


practical system of Yoga that it teaches and it brings in
metaphysical ideas only as explanatory of its practical
system; nor does it merely declare Vedantic knowledge,
but it founds knowledge and devotion upon works, even
as it uplifts works to knowledge, their culmination, and
informs them with devotion as their very heart and
kernel of their spirit. Again its Yoga is founded upon
the analytical philosophy of the Sankhyas, takes that as
a starting point and always keeps it as a large element
of its method and doctrine; but still it proceeds far
beyond it, negatives even some of its characteristic
tendencies and finds a means of reconciling the lower
analytical knowledge of Sankhya with the higher syn-
thetic and Vedantic truth.

What, then, are the Sankhya and Yoga of which the
Gita speaks? They are certainly not the systems which
have come down to us under these names as enunciated
respectively in the Sankhya Karika of Ishwara Krishna
and the Yoga aphorisms of Patanjali. This Sankhya is
not the system of the Karikas, — at least as that is gene-
rally understood; for the Gita nowhere for a moment
admits the multiplicity of Purushas as a primal truth of
being and it affirms emphatically what the traditional
Sankhya strenuously denies, the One as Self and Purusha,
that One again as the Lord, Ishwara or Purushottama,
and Ishwara as the cause of the universe. The traditional
Sankhya is, to use our modern distinctions, atheistic;
the Sankhya of the Gita admits and subtly reconciles the
theistic, pantheistic and monistic views of the universe.

Nor is this Yoga the Yoga system of Patanjali; for that
is a purely subjective method of Rajayoga, an internal
discipline, limited, rigidly cut out, severely and* scientifi-
cally graded, by which the mind is progressively stilled


85


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


and taken up into Samadhi so that we may gain the
temporal and eternal results of this self-exceeding, the
temporal in a great expansion of the soul’s knowledge
and powers, the eternal in the divine union. But the
Yoga of the Gita is a large, flexible and many-sided system
with various elements, which are all successfully harmo-
nised by a sort of natural and living assimilation, and of
these elements Rajayoga is only one and not the most
important and vital. This Yoga does not adopt any strict
and scientific gradation but is a process of natural soul-
development; it seeks by the adoption of a few principles
of subjective poise and action to bring about a renovation'
of the soul and a sort of change, ascension or new birth
out of the lower nature into the divine. Accordingly,
its idea of Samadhi is quite different from the ordinary
notion of the Yogic trance; and while Patanjali gives
to works only an initial importance for moral purification
and religious concentration, the Gita goes so far as to
make works the distinctive characteristic of Yoga. Action
to Patanjali is only a preliminary, in the Gita it is a
permanent foundation; in the Rajayoga it has practically
to be put aside when its result has been attained or at
any rate ceases very soon to be a means for the Yoga, for
the Gita it is a means of the highest ascent and continues
even after the complete liberation of the soul.

This much has to be said in order to avoid any confu-
sion of thought’ that might be created by the use of
familiar words in a connotation wider than the technical
sense now familiar to us. Still, all that is essential in the
Sankhya and Yoga systems, all in them that is large,
catholic and universally true, is admitted by the Gita,
even though it does not limit itself by them like the
opposing schools. Its Sankhya is the catholic and Vedan-


96


SANKHYA AND YOGA


tic Sankhya such as we find it in its first principles and
elements in the great Vedantic synthesis of the Upani-
shads and in the later developments of the Puranas. Its
idea of Yoga is that large idea of a principally subjective
practice and inner change* necessary for the finding of
the Self or the union with God, of which the Rajayoga
is only one special application. The Gita insists that
Sankhya and Yoga are not two different, incompatible
and discordant systems, but one in their principle and
aim; they differ only in their method and starting-point.
The Sankhya' also is a Yoga, but it proceeds by know-
ledge; it starts, that is to say, by intellectual discrimina-
tion and analysis of the principles of our being and
attains its aim through the vision and possession of the
Truth. Yoga, on the other hand, proceeds by works;
it is in its first principle Karmayoga; but it is evident
from the whole teaching of the Gita and its later defini-
tions that the word karma is used in a very wide sense and
that by Yoga is meant the selfless devotion of all the inner
as well as the outer activities as a sacrifice to the Lord
of all works, offered to the Eternal as Master of all the
soul’s energies and austerities. Yoga is the practice of
the Truth of which knowledge gives the vision, and its
practice has for its motor-power a spirit of illumined
devotion, of calm or fervent consecration to that which
knowledge sees to be the Highest.

But what are the truths of Sankhya? The philosophy
drew its name from its analytical process. Sankhya is the
analysis, the enumeration, the separative and discrimi-
native setting forth of the principles of our being ojf which
the ordinary mind sees only the combinations and results
of combination. It did not seek at all to synthetise. Its
original standpoint is in fact dualistic, not with the very'


87


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


relative dualism of the Vedantic schools which call them-
selves by that name, Dwaita, but in a very absolute and
trenchant fashion. For it explains existence not by one,
but by two original principles whose inter-relation is the
cause of the universe, — Purusha, the inactive, Prakriti,
the active. Purusha is the Soul, not in the ordinary or
popular sense of the word, but of pure conscious Being
immobile, immutable and self-luminous. Prakriti is Ener-
gy and its process. Purusha does nothing, but it reflects
the action of Energy and its processes; Prakriti is mecha-
nical, but by being reflected in Purusha it assumes the
appearance of consciousness in its activities, and thus
there are created those phenomena of creation, conserva-
tion, dissolution, birth and life and death, consciousness
and unconsciousness, sense-knowledge and intellectual
knowledge and ignorance, action and inaction, happiness
and suffering which the Purusha under the influence of
Prakriti attributes to itself although they belong not at
all to itself but to the action or movement of Prakriti
alone.

For Prakriti is constituted of three gu$as or essential
modes of energy; sattwa, the seed of intelligence, con-
serves the workings of energy; rajas, the seed of force and
action, creates the workings of energy; tamas, the seed of
inertia and non-intelligence, the denial of sattwa and
rajas, dissolves what they create and conserve. When
these three powers of the energy of Prakriti are in a state
of equilibrium, all is in rest, there is no movement, action
or creation and there is therefore nothing to be reflected
in the immutable luminous being of the conscious Soul.
But when the equilibrium is disturbed, then the three
gunas fall into a state of inequality in which they strive
with and act upon each other and the whole inextricable


88


SANKHYA AND YOGA


business of ceaseless creation, conservation and dissolu-
tion begins, unrolling the phenomena of the cosmos.
This continues so long as the Purusha consents to reflect
the disturbance which obscures his eternal nature and
attributes to it the nature of Prakriti ; but when he with-
draws his consent, the gunas fall into equilibrium and
the soul returns to its eternal, unchanging immobility;
it is delivered from phenomena. This reflection and this
giving or withdrawal of consent s^em to be the only
powers of Purusha ; he is the witness of Nature by virtue
of reflection and the giver of the sanction, saksl and anu-
manta of the Gita, but not actively the Ishwara. Even
his giving of consent is passive and his withdrawing of
consent is only another passivity. All action subjective
or objective is foreign to the Soul; it has neither an
active will nor an active intelligence. It cannot therefore
be the sole cause of the cosmos and the affirmation of a
second cause becomes necessary. Not Soul alone by its
nature of conscious knowledge, will and delight is the
cause of the universe, but Soul and Nature are the dual
cause, a passive Consciousness and an active Energy.
So the Sankhya explains the existence of the cosmos.

But whence then come thi$ conscious intelligence and
conscious will which we perceive to be so large a part
of our being and which we commonly and instinctively
refer not to the Prakriti, but to the Purusha? According
to the Sankhya this intelligence and will are entirely a
part of the mechanical energy of Nature and are not
properties of the soul; they are the principle of Buddhi,
one of the twenty-four tattvas, the twenty-four cosmic
principles. Prakriti in the evolution of the world bases
herself with her three gunas in her as the original subs-
tance of things, unmanifest, inconscient, out of which are


89


ESSAYS ON tHE GlTA


evolved successively five elemental conditions of Energy
or Matter — for Matter and Force are the same in the
Sankhya philosophy. These are called by the names of
the five concrete elements of ancient thought, ether, air,
fire, water and earth; but it must be remembered that
they are riot elements in the modern scientific sense but
subtle conditions of material energy and nowhere to be
found in their purity in the gross material world. All
objects are created by the combination of these five subtle
conditions or elements. Again, each of these five is the
base of one of five subtle properties of Energy or Matter,
sound, touch, form, taste and smell, which constitute
the way in which the mind-sense perceives objects.
Thus by these five elements of Matter put forth from
primary energy and these five sense relations through
which Matter is known is evolved what we would call
in modem language the objective aspect of cosmic
existence.

Thirteen other principles constitute the subjective
aspect of the cosmic Energy, — Buddhi or Mahat, Ahan-
kara, Manas and its ten sense-functions, five of knowledge,
five of action. Manas, mind, is the original sense which
perceives all objects and reacts upon them; for it has at
once an inferent and an efferent activity, receives by
perception what the Gita calls the outward touches of
things, bahya sparsa , and so forms its idea of the world
and exercises its reactions of active vitality. But it spe-
cialises its most ordinary functions of reception by aid of
the five perceptive senses of hearing, touch, sight, taste
and smell, which make the five properties of things their
respective objects, and specialises certain necessary vital
functions of reaction by aid of the five active senses which
operate for speech, locomotion, the seizing of things*


90


SANKHYA AND YOGA


ejection and generation. Buddhi, the discriminating
principle, is at once intelligence and will; it is that power
in Nature which discriminates and co-ordinates. Ahan-
kara, the ego-sense, is the subjective principle in Buddhi
by which the Purusha is induced to identify himself with
Prakriti and her activities. But these subjective principles
are themselves as mechanical, as much a part of the
inconscient energy as those which constitute her objective
operations. If we find it difficult to realise how intelli-
gence and will can be properties of the mechanical In-
conscient and themselves mechanical ( jada ) we have
only to remember that modern Science itself has been
driven to the same conclusion. Even in the mechanical
action of the atom there is a power which can only
be called an inconscient will and in all the works of
Nature that pervading will does inconsciently the works
of intelligence. What we call mental intelligence is pre-
cisely the same thing in its essence as that which discri-
minates and co-ordinates subconsciously in all the acti-
vities of the material universe, and conscious Mind itself.
Science has tried to demonstrate, is only a result and
transcript of the mechanical action of the inconscient.
But Sankhya explains what modern Science leaves in
obscurity, the process by which the mechanical and
inconscient takes on the appearance of consciousness. It
is because of the reflection of Prakriti in Purusha; the
light of consciousness of the Soul is attributed to the
workings of the mechanical energy and it is thus that
the Purusha, observing Nature as the witness and forget-
ting himself, is deluded with the idea generated in her
that it is he who thinks, feels, wills, acts, while all the
time the operation of thinking, feeling, willing, acting is
conducted really by her and her three modes and not


91


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


by himself at all. To get rid of this delusion is the first
step towards the liberation of the soul from Nature and
her works.

There are certainly plenty of things in our existence
which the Sankhya does not explain at all or does hot
explain satisfactorily, but if all we need is a rational ex-
planation of the cosmic processes in their principles as a
basis for the great object common to the ancient philo-
sophies, the liberation of the soul from the obsession of
cosmic Nature, then the Sankhya explanation of the world
and the Sankhya way of liberation seem as good and as
effective as any other. What we do not seize at first is
why it should bring in an element of pluralism into its
dualism by affirming one Prakriti, but many Purushas.
It would seem that the existence of one Purusha and one
Prakriti should be sufficient to account for the creation
and procession of the universe. But the Sankhya was
bound to evolve pluralism by its rigidly analytical obser-
vation of the principles of things. First, actually, we find
that there are many conscious beings in the world and
each regards the same world in his own way and has his
independent experience of its subjective and objective
things, his separate dealings with the same perceptive
and reactive processes. If there were only one Purusha,
there would not be this central independence and separa-
tiveness, but all would see the world in an identical fashion
and with a common subjectivity and objectivity. Because
Prakriti is one, all witness the same world; because her
principles are everywhere the same, the general principles
which constitute internal and external experience are
the same for all; but the infinite difference of view and
outlook and attitude, action and experience and escape
from experience — a difference not of the natural opera-


92


SANKHYA AND YOGA


tions which are the same but of the witnessing conscious-
ness, — are utterly inexplicable except on the supposition
that there is a multiplicity of witnesses, many Purushas.
The separative ego-sense, we may say, is a sufficient ex-
planation. But the ego-sense is a common principle of
Nature and need not vary; for by itself it simply induces
the Purusha to identify himself with Prakriti, and if there
is only one Purusha, all beings would be one, joined and
alike in their egoistic consciousness; however different in
detail might be the mere forms and combinations Of their
natural parts, there would be no difference of soul-outlook
and soul-experience. The variations of Nature ought not
to make all this central difference, this multiplicity of
outlook and from beginning to end this separateness of
experience in one Witness, one Purusha. Therefore the
pluralism of souls is a logical necessity to a pure Sankhya
system divorced from the Vedantic elements of the ancient
knowledge which first gave it birth. The cosmos and its
process can be explained by the commerce of one Prakriti
with one Purusha, but not the multiplicity of conscious
beings in the cosmos.

There is another difficulty quite as formidable. Libera-
tion is the object set before itself by this philosophy as by
others. This liberation is effected, we have said, by the
Purusha’s withdrawal of his consent from the activities of
Prakriti which she conducts only for. his pleasure; but,
in sum, this is only a way 6f speaking. The Purusha is
passive and the act of giving or withdrawing consent
cannot really belong to it, but must be a movement in
Prakriti itself. If we consider, we shall see that it is, so far
as it is an operation, a movement of reversal or recoil in
the principle of Buddhi, the discriminative will. Buddhi
has been lending itself to the perceptions of the mind-


93


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


sense; it has been busy discriminating and co-ordinating
the operations of the cosmic energy and by the aid of the
ego-sense identifying the Witness with her works of
thought, sense and action. It arrives by the process of
discriminating things at the acid and dissolvent realisa-
tion that this identity is a delusion; it discriminates finally
the Purusha from Prakriti and perceives that all is mere
disturbance of the equilibrium of the gunas; the Buddhi,
at once intelligence and will, recoils from the falsehood
which it has been supporting and the Purusha, ceasing to
be bound, no longer associates himself with the interest
of the mind in the cosmic play. The ultimate result will
be that Prakriti will lose her power to reflect herself in
the Purusha; for the effect of the ego-sense is destroyed
and the intelligent will becoming indifferent ceases to be
the means of her sanction: necessarily then her gunas
must fall into a state of equilibrium, the cosmic play must
cease, the Purusha return to his immobile repose. But if
there were only the one Purusha and this recoil of the
discriminating principle from its delusions took place, all
cosmos would cease. As it is, we see that nothing of the
kind happens. A few beings among innumerable millions
attain to liberation or move towards it; the rest are in no
way affected, nor is cosmic Nature in her play with them
one whit inconvenienced by this summary rejection which
should be the end of all her processes. Only by the theory
of many independent Pprushas can this fact be explained.
The only at all logical explanation from the point of view
of Vendantic monism is that of the Mayavada; but there
the whole thing becomes a dream, both bondage and
liberation are circumstances of the unreality,; the empii
rical blunderings of Maya; in reality there is none freed,
none bound. The more realistic Sankhya view of things


94


SANKHYA AND YOGA


does not admit this phantasmagoric idea of existence
and therefore cannot adopt this solution. Here too we
see that the multiplicity of souls is an inevitable conclusion
from the data of the Sankhya analysis of existence.

The Gita starts from this analysis and seems at first,
even in its setting forth of Yoga, to accept it almost wholly.
It accepts Prakriti *ind her three gunas and twenty-four
principles; accepts the attribution of all action to the
Prakriti and the passivity of the Purusha; accepts the
multiplicity of conscious beings in the cosmos; accepts
the dissolution of the identifying ego-sense, the discrimi-
nating action of the intelligent will and the transcendence
of the action of the three modes of energy as the means
of liberation. The Yoga which Arjuna is asked to practise
from the outset is Yoga by the Buddhi, the intelligent will.
But there is one deviation of capital importance, — the
Purusha is regarded as one, not many; for the free, imma-
terial, immobile, eternal, immutable Self of the Gita,
but for one detail, is a Vedantic description of the eternal,
passive, immobile, immutable Purusha of the Sankhyas.
But the capital difference is that there is One and not
many. This brings in the whole difficulty which the
Sankhya multiplicity avoids and necessitates a quite
different solution. This the Gita provides by bringing
into its Vedantic Sankhya the ideas and principles of
Vedantic Yoga.

The first important new element we find is in the con-
ception of Purusha itself. Prakriti conducts her activities
for the pleasure of Purusha; but how is that pleasure
determined? In the strict Sankhya analysis it can only
be by a passive consent of the silent Witness. Passively
the Witness consents to the action of the intelligent will
and the ego-sense, passively he consents to the recoil of


95


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


that will from the ego-sense. He is Witness, source of the
consent, by reflection upholder of the work of Nature,
saksi ammanta bharta, but nothing more. But the Purusha
of the Gita is also the Lord of Nature; he is Ishwara. If
the operation of the intelligent will belongs to Nature,
the origination and power of the will proceed from the
conscious Soul; he is the Lord of Nature. If the act of
intelligence of the Will is the act of Prakriti, the source
and light of the intelligence are actively contributed by
the Purusha; he is not only the Witness, but the Lord
and Knower, master of knowledge and will, jnata iharah.
He is the supreme cause of the action of Prakriti, the sup-
reme cause of its withdrawal from action. In the Sankhya
analysis Purusha and Prakriti in their dualism are the
cause of the cosmos; in this synthetic Sankhya Purusha
by his Prakriti is the cause of the cosmos. We see at once
how far we have travelled from the rigid purism of the
traditional analysis.

But what of the one self immutable, immobile, eter-
nally free, with which the Gita began? That is free from
all change or involution in change, avikarya, unborn,
unmanifested, the Brahman, yet it Is that “by which all
this is extended”. Therefore it would seem that the
principle of the Ishwara is in its being; if it is immobile,
it is. yet the cause and lord of all action and mobility.
But how? And what of the multiplicity of conscious being
in the cosmos? They do not seem to be the Lord, but
rather very much not the Lord, anif, for they are sub-
ject to the action of the three gunas' and the delusion of
the ego-sense, and if, as the Gita seems to say, they are
all the one self, how did this involution, subjection and
delusion come about or how is it explicable except by the
pure passivity of the Purusha? And whence the multi-


96


SANKHYA AND YOGA


plicity? or how is it that the one self in one body and
mind attains to liberation while in others it remains un-
der the delusion of bondage? These are difficulties which
cannot be passed by without a solution.

The Gita answers them in its later chapters by an
analysis of Purusha and Prakriti which brings in new
elements very proper to a Vedantic Yoga, but alien to
the traditional Sankhya. It speaks of three Purushas or
rather a triple status of the Purusha. The Upanishads in
dealing with the truths of Sankhya seem sometimes to
speak only of two Purushas. There is one unborn of
three colours, says a text, the eternal feminine principle
of Prakriti with its three gunas, ever creating; there are
two unborn, two Purushas, of whom one cleaves to and
enjoys her, the other abandons her because he has en-
joyed all her enjoyments. In another verse they are
described as two birds on one tree, eternally yoked
companions, one of whom eats the fruits of the tree, —
the Purusha in Nature enjoying her cosmos, — the other
eats not, but watches his fellow, — the silent Witness,
withdrawn from the enjoyment; when the first sees the
second and knows that all is his greatness, then he is
delivered from sorrow. The point of view in the two verses
is different, but they have a common implication. One
of the birds is the eternally silent, unbound Self or Puru-
sha by whom all this is extended and he regards the cos-
mos he has extended, but is aloof from it; the other is the
Purusha involved in Prakriti: The first verse indicates
that the two are the same, represent different states,
•bound and liberated, of the same conscious being, —
for the second Unborn has descended into the enjoyment
of Nature a'nd withdrawn from her; the other verse
brings out what we would not gather from the former,


97


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


that in its' higher status of unity the self is for ever free,
inactive, unattached, though it descends in its lower
being into the multiplicity of the creatures of Prakriti
and withdraws from it by reversion in any individual
creature to the higher status. This theory of the double
status of the one conscious soul opens a door; but the
process of the multiplicity of the One is still obscure.

To these two the Gita, developing the thought of
other passages in the Upanishads , 1 adds yet another, the
supreme, the Purushottama, the highest Purusha, whose
greatness all this creation is. Thus there are three, the
Kshara, the Akshara, the Uttama. Kshara, the mobile,
the mutable is Nature, svabhava, it is the various be-
coming of the soul; the Purusha here is the multiplicity
of the divine Being; it is the Purusha multiple not apart
from, but in Prakriti. Akshara, the immobile, the im-
mutable, is the silent and inactive self, it is the unity of
the divine Being, Witness of Nature, but not involved
in its movement ; it is the inactive Purusha free from Pra-
kriti and her works. The Uttama is the Lord, the supreme
Brahman, the supreme Self, who possesses both the
immutable unity and the mobile multiplicity. It is by
a large mobility and action of His nature, His energy,
His will and power, that He manifests Himself in the
world and by a greater stillness and immobility of His
being that He is aloof from it; yet is He as Purushottama
above both the aloofness from Nature and the attachment
to Nature. This idea of the Purushottama, though
continually implied in the Upanishads, is disengaged
and definitely brought out by the Gita and has exer-

‘‘Purufah akfarat paralah parah — although the Akshara is

supreme there is a supreme Purusha higher than it, says the Upanishad.


98


SANKHYA AND YOGA


cised a powerful influence on the later developments
of the Indian religious consciousness. It is the founda-
tion of the highest Bhakti-yoga which claims to exceed
the rigid definitions of monistic philosophy; it is at the
back of the philosophy of the devotional Puranas.

The Gita is not content, either, to abide within the
Sankhya Analysis of Prakriti; for that makes room only
for the ego-sense and not for the multiple Purusha,
which is there not a part of Prakriti, but separate from
her. The Gita affirms on the contrary that the Lord by
His nature becomes the Jiva. How is that possible,
since there are only the twenty-four principles of the
cosmic Energy and no others? Yes, says the divine
Teacher in effect, that is a perfectly valid account for the
apparent operations of the cosmic Prakriti with its three
gunas, and the relation attributed to Purusha and Pra-
kriti there is also quite valid and of great use for the prac-
tical purposes of the involution and the withdrawal.
But this is only the lower Prakriti of the three modes,
the inconscient, the apparent; there is a higher, a sup-
reme, a conscient and divine Nature, and it is that which
has become the individual soul, the Jiva. In the lower
nature each being appears as the ego, in the higher he
is the individual Purusha. In other words multiplicity
is part of the spiritual nature of the One. This individual
soul is myself, in the creation it is a partial manifestation
of me, mamaiva amah , and it possesses all my powers;
it is witness, giver of the sanction, upholder, knower,
lord. It descends into the lower nature and thinks itself
bound by action, so to enjoy the lower being: it can draw
back and know itself as the passive Purusha free from all
action. It can rise above the three gunas and, liberated
from the bondage of action, yet possess action, even as


99


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


I do myself, and by adoration of the Purushottama and
union with him it can enjoy wholly its divine Nature.

Such is the analysis, not confining itself to the apparent
cosmic process but penetrating into the occult secrets of
superconscious Nature, uttamam rahasyam i by which the
Gita founds its synthesis of Vedanta, Sankhya and Yoga,
its synthesis of knowledge, works and devotion. By the
pure Sankhya alone the combining of works and liberation
is contradictory and impossible. By pure Monism alone
the permanent continuation of works as a part of Yoga
and the indulgence of devotion after perfect knowledge
and liberation and union are attained, become impossible
or at least irrational and otiose. The Sankhya knowledge
of the Gita dissipates and the Yoga system of the Gita
triumphs over all these obstacles.


IX


SANKHYA, YOGA AND VEDANTA

The whole object of the first six chapters of the Gita
is to synthetise in a large frame of Vedantic truth the
two methods, ordinarily supposed to be diverse and even
opposite, of the Sankhyas and the Yogins. The Sankhya
is taken as the starting-point and the basis; but it is from
the beginning and with a progressively increasing emphasis
permeated with the ideas and methods of Yoga and
remoulded in its spirit. The practical difference, as it
seems to have presented itself to the religious minds of that
day, lay first in this that Sankhya proceeded by knowledge
and through the Yoga of the intelligence, while Yoga
proceeded by works and the transformation of the active
consciousness and, secondly, — a corollary of this first
distinction, — that Sankhya led to entire passivity and
the renunciation of works, sannyasa, while Yoga held to
be quite sufficient the inner renunciation of desire, the
purification of the subjective principle which leads to
action and the turning of works Godwards, towards the
divine existence and towards liberation. Yet both had
the same aim, the transcendence of birth and of this
terrestrial existence and the union of the human soul with
the Highest. This at least is the difference as it is presented
to us by the Gita.

The difficulty which Arjuna feels in understanding
any possible synthesis of these oppositions is an indication


101


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


of the hard line that was driven in between these two
systems in .the normal ideas of the time. The Teacher
sets out by reconciling works and the Yoga of the intelli-
gence: the latter, he says, is far superior to mere works;
it is by the Yoga of the Buddhi, by knowledge raising man
out of the ordinary human mind and its desires into the
purity and equality of the Brahmic condition free from all
desire that works can be made acceptable. Yet are works
a means of salvation, but works thus purified by know-
ledge. Filled with the notions of the then prevailing
culture, misled by the emphasis which the Teacher lays
upon the ideas proper to Vedantic Sankhya, conquest
of the senses, withdrawal from mind into the Self, ascent
into the Brahmic condition, extinction of our lower
personality in the Nirvana of impersonality, — for the
ideas proper to Yoga are as yet subordinated and largely
held back, — Aijuna is perplexed and asks, “If thou
holdest the intelligence to be greater than works, why
then dost thou appoint me to a terrible work? Thou
seemest to bewilder my intelligence with a confused and
mingled speech; tell me then decisively that one thing by
which I may attain to my soul’s weal.”

In answer Krishna affirms that the Sankhya goes
by knowledge and renunciation, the Yoga by works;
but the real renunciation is impossible without Yoga,
without works done as a sacrifice, done with equality and
without desire of the fruit, with the perception that it is
Nature which docs the actions and not the soul; but
immediately afterwards he declares that the sacrifice
of knowledge is the highest, all work finds its consumma-
tion in knowledge, by the fire of knowledge all works are
burnt up; therefore by Yoga works are renounced and
their bondage overcome for the man who is in possession


102


SANKHYA, YOGA AND VEDANTA


of his Self. Agaip Arjuna is perplexed; here are desircless,
works, the principle of Yoga, and renunciation of works,
the principle of Sankhya, put together side by side as if
part of one method, yet there is no evident reconciliation
between them. For the kind of reconciliation which the
Teacher has already given, — in outward inaction to see
action still persisting and in apparent action to sec a real
inaction since the soul has renounced its illusion of the
worker and given up works into the hands of the Master
of sacrifice, — is for the practical mind of Arjuna too
slight, too subtle and expressed almost in riddling words;
he has not caught their sense or at least not penetrated
into their spirit and reality. Therefore he asks again,
“Thou declarest to me the renunciation of works, O
Krishna, and again thou declarest to me Yoga; which
one of these is the better way, that tell me with a clear
decisiveness.”

The answer is important, for it puts the whole distinc-
tion very clearly and indicates though it does not develop
entirely the line of reconciliation. “Renunciation and
Yoga of works both bring about the soul’s salvation,
but of the two the Yoga of works is distinguished above
the renunciation of works. He should be known as always
a Sannyasin (even when he is doing action) who neither
dislikes nor desires ; for free from the dualities he is released
easily and happily from the bondage. Children speak of
Sankhya and Yoga apart from each other, mot the wise;
if a man applies himself integrally to one, he gets the fruit
of both,” because in their integrality each contains the
other. “The status which is attained by the Sankhya,
to that the men of the Yoga also arrive; who sees Sankhya
and Yoga as one, he sees. But renunciation is difficult
to attain without Yoga; the sage who has Yoga attains


103


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


soon to the Brahman ; his self becomes tl\e self of all exis-
tences (of all things that have become), and even though
he does works, he is not involved in them.” He knows
that the actions are not his, but Nature’s and by that very
knowledge he is free; he has renounced works, does no
actions, though actions are done through him; he becomes
the Self, the Brahman, brahmabhuta, he sets all existences
as becomings ( bhutdni ) of that self-existent Being, his own
only one of them, all their actions as only the development
of cosmic Nature working through their individual nature
and his own actions also as a part of the same cosmic
activity. This is not the whole teaching of the Gita; for
as yet there is only the idea of the immutable self or
Purusha, the Akshara Brahman, and of Nature, Prakriti,
as that which is responsible for the cosmos and not yet
the idea, clearly expressed, of the Ishwara, the Purushot-
tama; as yet only the synthesis of works and knowledge
and not yet, in spite of certain hints, the introduction of
the supreme element of devotion which becomes so
important afterwards; as yet only the one inactive
Purusha and the lower Prakriti and not yet the distinc-
tion of the triple Purusha and the double Prakriti. It is
true the Ishwara is spoken of, but his relation to the self
and nature is not yet made definite. The first six chapters
only carry the synthesis so far as it can be carried without
the clear expression and decisive entrance of these all-
important trbths which, when they come in, must
necessarily enlarge and modify, though without abolish-
ing, these first reconciliations.

Twofold, says Krishna, is the self-application of the
soul by which it enters into the Brahmic condition:
“that of the Sankhyas by the Yoga of knowledge, that
of the Yogins by the Yoga of works.” This identification


104


SANKHYA, YOGA AND VEDANTA


of Sankhya with Jnanayoga and of Yoga with the way
of works is interesting; for it shows that quite a different
order of ideas prevailed at that time from those we now
possess as the result of the great Vedantic development
of Indian thought, subsequent evidently to the compo-
sition of the Gita, by which the other Vcdic philosophies
fell into desuetude as practical methods of liberation.
To justify the language of the Gita we must suppose that
at that time it was the Sankhya method which was
very commonly 1 adopted by those who followed the
path of knowledge. Subsequently, with the spread of
Buddhism, the Sankhya method of knowledge must have
been much overshadowed by the Buddhistic. Buddhism,
like the Sankhya non-Theis.tic and anti-Monistic, laid
stress on the impermanence of the results of the cosmic
energy, which it presented not as Prakriti but as Karma
because the Buddhists admitted neither the Vedantic
Brahman nor the inactive Soul of the Sankhyas, and it
made the recognition of this impermanence by the
discriminating mind its means of liberation. When the
reaction against Buddhism arrived, it took up not the
old Sankhya notion, but the Vedantic form popularised
by Shankara who replaced the Buddhistic impermanence
by the cognate Vedantic idea of illusion, Maya, and the
Buddhistic idea of Non-Being, indefinable Nirvana, a
negative Absolute, .by the opposite and yet cognate
Vedantic idea of the indefinable Being, Brahman, an
ineffably positive Absolute in which all feature and action
and energy cease because in That they never really


1 The systems of the Puranas and Tantras are full of the ideas of the
Sankhya, though subordinated to the Vedantic idea and mingled with
many others.


105


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


existed and are mere illusions of the mind. It is the
method of Shankara based upon these concepts of his
philosophy, it is the renunciation of life as an illusion
of which we ordinarily think when we speak now
of the Yoga of knowledge. But in the time of the Gita
Maya was evidently not yet quite the master word of the
Vedantic philosophy, nor had it, at least with any
decisive clearness, the connotation which Shankara
brought out of it with such a luminous force and dis-
tinctness ; for in the Gita there is little talk of Maya and
much of Prakriti and, even, the former word is used as
little more than an equivalent of the latter but only in
its inferior status; it is the lower Prakriti of the three
gunas, traigunyamayl maya. Prakriti, not illusive Maya,
is in the teaching of the Gita the effective cause of cosmic
existence.

Still, whatever the precise distinctions of their meta-
physical ideas, the practical difference between the
Sankhya and Yoga as developed by the Gita is the same
as that which now exists between Vedantic Yogas of
knowledge and of works, and the practical results of the
difference are also the same. The Sankhya proceeded
like the Vedantic Yoga of knowledge by the Buddhi, by
the discriminating intelligence; it arrived by reflective
thought, vie dr a, at right discrimination, viveka, of the true
nature of the soul and of the imposition on it of the
works of Prakriti through attachment and identification,
just as the Vedantic method arrives by the same means
at the right discrimination of the true nature of the
Self and of the imposition on it of cosmic appearances
by mental illusion which leads to egoistic identification
and attachment. In the Vedantic method Maya ceases
for the soul by its return to its true and eternal status as


106


SANKHYA, YOGA AND VEDANTA


the one Self, the Brahman, and the cosmic action
disappears; in the Sankhya method the working of the
gunas falls to rest by the return of the soul to its true
and eternal status as the inactive Purusha and the cosmic
action ends. The" Brahman of the Mayavadins is silent,
immutable and inactive; so too is the Purusha of the
Sankhya; therefore for both ascetic renunciation of life
and works is a necessary means of liberation. But for the
Yoga of the Gita, as for the Vedantic Yoga of works,
action is not only a preparation but itself the means of
liberation; and it is the justice of this view which the
Gita seeks to bring out with such an unceasing force and
insistence, — an insistence, unfortunately, which could not
prevail in India against the tremendous tide of Buddhism , 2
was lost afterwards in the intensity of ascetic illusionism
and the fervour of world-shunning saints and devotees
and is only now beginning to exercise its real and salutary
influence on the Indian mind. Renunciation is indis-
pensable, but the true renunciation is the inner rejection
of desire and egoism; without that the outer physical
abandoning of works is a thing unreal and ineffective,
with it it ceases even to be necessary, although it is not
forbidden. Knowledge is essential, there is no higher
force for liberation, but works with knowledge are also
needed ; by the union of knowledge and works the soul
dwells entirely in the Br&hmic status not only in repose
and inactive calm, but in the very midst and stress and


2 At the same time the Gita seems to have largely influenced Mahayanist
Buddhism and texts are taken bodily from it into the Buddhist Scriptures.
It may therefore have helped largely to turn Buddhism, originally a school
of quietistic and illuminated ascetics, into that religion of meditative
devotion and compassionate action which has so powerfully influenced
Asiatic culture.


107


■t* .#

< < *'

ESSAYS ON THE GITA

violence of action. Devotion is all-important, but works
with devotion are also important; by the union of know-
ledge, devotion and works the soul is taken up into the
highest status of the Ishwara to dwell there in the Puru-
shottama who is master at once of the eternal spiritual
calm and the eternal cosmic activity. This is the synthesis
of the Gita.

But, apart from the distinction between the Sankhya
way of knowledge and the Yoga way of works, there was
another and similar opposition in the Vedanta itself, and
this also the Gita has to deal with, to correct and to fuse
into its large restatement of the Aryan spiritual culture.
This was the distinction between Karmakanda and
Jnanakanda, between the original thought that led to
the philosophy ol the Purva Mimansa, the Vedavada,
and that which led to the philosophy of the Uttara
Mimansa , 3 the Brahmavada, between those who dwelt
in the tradition of the Vedic hymns and the Vedic sacri-
fice and those who put these aside as a lower knowledge
and laid stress on the lofty metaphysical knowledge which
emerges from the Upanishads. For the pragmatic mind
of the Vedavadins the Aryan religion of the Rishis meant
the strict performance of the Vedic sacrifices and the
use of the sacred Vedic mantras in order to possess all
human desires in this world, wealth, progeny, victory,
every kind of good fortune, and the joys of immortality
in Paradise beyond. For the idealism of the Brahma-
vadins this was only a preliminary preparation and the


®Jaimini’s idea of liberation is the eternal Brahmaloka in which the soul
that has come to know Brahman still possesses a divine body and divine
enjoyments. For the Gita the Brahmaloka is not liberation; the soul must
pass beyond to the supracosmic status.


108


SANKHYA , YOGA AND VEDANTA


real object of man, true purusartha , began with his turning
to the knowledge of the Brahman which would give him
the true immortality of an ineffable spiritual bliss far
beyond the lower joys of this world or of any inferior
heaven. Whatever may have been the true and original
sense of the Veda, this was the distinction which had
long established itself and with which therefore the Gita
has to deal.

Almost the first word of the synthesis of works
and knowledge is a strong, almost a violent censure
and repudiation of the Vedavada, “this flowery word
which they declare who have not clear discernment,
devoted to the creed of the Veda, whose creed
is that there is nothing else, souls of desire, seekers
of Paradise, — it gives the fruits of the works of birth, it
is multifarious with specialities of rites, it is directed to
enjoyment and lordship as its goal.” The Gita even
seems to go on to attack the Veda itself which, though
it has been practically cast aside, is still to Indian senti-
ment intangible, inviolable, the sacred origin and autho-
rity for all its philosophy and religion. “The action of
the three gunas is the subject-matter of the Veda; but
do thou become free from the triple guna, O Arjuna.”

The Vedas in the widest terms, “all the Vedas”, — which
might well include the Upanishads also and seems to
include them, for the general term Sruti is used later on,

— are declared to be unnecessary for the man who knows.

“As much use as there is in a well with water in flood on
every side, so much is there in all the Vedas for the
Brahmin who has the knowledge.” Nay, the Scriptures
are even a stumbling block; for the letter of the Word —
perhaps because of its conflict of texts and its various
and mutually dissentient interpretations — bewilders the

109 %TB. S N.-*- Am

•f A«lrn " :t \ / )«*#«(•/
Am. n* -MSXpH


U3JX I


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


understanding, which can only find certainty and con-
centration by the light within. “When thy intelligence
shall cross beyond the whorl of delusion, then shalt thou
become indifferent to Scripture heard or that which thou
hast yet to hear, gantasi nirvedam srotaiyasya srutasya ca.
When thy intelligence which is bewildered by the Sruti,
Jrutivipratipannd, shall stand unmoving and stable in Sama-
dhi, then shalt thou attain to Yoga.” So offensive is all
this to conventional religious sentiment that attempts
are naturally made by the convenient and indispensable
human faculty of text-twisting to put a different sense on
some of these verses, but the meaning is plain and hangs
together from beginning to end. It is confirmed and em-
phasised by a subsequent passage in which tfie knowledge
of the knower is described as passing beyond the range of
Veda and Upanishad, sabdabrahmativartate.

Let us see, however, what all this means; for we may
be sure that a synthetic and catholic system like the- Gita’s
will not treat such important parts of the Aryan culture
in a spirit of mere negation and repudiation. The Gita
has to synthetise the Yoga doctrine of liberation by works
and the Sankhya doctrine of liberation by knowledge;
it has to fuse karma with jhana. It has at the same time to
synthetise the Purusha and Prakriti idea common to
Sankhya and Yoga with the Brahmavada of the current
Vedanta in which the Purusha, Deva, Ishwara, — supreme
Soul, God, Lord, — of the Upanishads all became merged
in the one all-swallowing concept of the immutable Brah-
man; and it has to bring out again from its overshadow-
ing by that concept but not with any denial of it the Yoga
idea of the Lord or Ishwara. It has too its own luminous
thought to add, the crown of its synthetic system, the
doctrine of the Purushottama and of the triple Purusha


110


SANKHYA , YOGA AND VEDANTA


for which, though the idea is there, no precise and indis-
putable authority can be easily found in the Upanishads
and which seems indeed at first sight to be in contradic-
tion with that text of the Sruti where only two Purushas
are recognised. Moreover, in synthetising works and
knowledge it has to take account not only of the opposi-
tion of Yoga and Sankhya, but of the opposition of works
to knowledge in Vedanta itself, where the connotation
of the two words and therefore their point of conflict is
not quite the same as the point of the Sankhya-Yoga
opposition. It is not surprising at all, one may observe
in passing, that with the conflict of so many philosophical
schools all founding themselves on the texts of the Veda
and Upanishads, the Gita should describe the under-
standing as being perplexed and confused, led in different
directions by the Sruti, srutivipralipanna. What battles
are even now delivered by Indian pundits and metaphysi-
cians over the meaning of the ancient texts and to what
different conclusions they lead! The understanding may
well get disgusted and indifferent, gantasi nirvedam , refuse
to hear any more texts new or old, srolavyasya srutasya ca,
and go into itself to discover the truth in the light of a
deeper and inner and direct experience.

In the first six chapters the Gita lays a large foundation
for its synthesis of works and knowledge, its synthesis of
Sankhya, Yoga and Vedanta. But first it finds that karma,
works, has a particular sense in the language of the
Vedantins; it means the Vedic sacrifices and ceremonies
or at most that and the ordering of life according to the
Grihyasutras in which these rites are the most important
part, the religious kernel of the life. By works the Vedan-
tins understood these religious works, the sacrificial sys-
tem, the yajila, full of a careful order, vidhi, of exact and


111


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


complicated rites, kriyd-visesa bahulam . But in Yoga works
had a much wider significance. The Gita insists on this
wider significance ; in our conception of spiritual activity
all works have to be included, sarvakarmdnu At the same
time it does not, like Buddhism, reject the idea of the
sacrifice, it prefers to uplift and enlarge it. Yes, it says
in effect, not only is sacrifice, yajfla, the most important
part of life, but all life, all works should be regarded as
sacrifice, are yajna, though by the ignorant they are per-
formed without the higher knowledge and by the most
ignorant not in the true order, avidhipurvakam . Sacrifice
is the very condition of life ; with sacrifice as their eternal
companion the Father of creatures created the peoples.
But the sacrifices of the Vedavadins are offerings of desire
directed towards material rewards, desire eager for the
result of works, desire looking to a larger enjoyment in
Paradise as immortality and highest salvation. This the
system of the Gita cannot admit; for that in its very
inception starts with the renunciation of desire, with its
rejection and destruction as the enemy of 'the soul. The
Gita does not deny the validity even of the Vedic sacri-
ficial works; it admits them, it admits that by these means
one may get enjoyment here and Paradise beyond; it is
I myself, says the divine Teacher, who accept these sacri-
fices and to whom they are offered, I who give these
fruits in the form of the gods since so men choose to
approach me. But this is not the true road, nor is the
enjoyment of Paradise the liberation and fulfilment which
man has to seek. It is the ignorant who worship the
gods, not knowing whom they are worshipping ignorantly
in these divine forms; for they are worshipping, though
in ignorance, the One, the Lord, the only Deva, and it
is he who accepts their offering. To that Lord must the


112


SANKHYA, YOGA AND VEDANTA


sacrifice be offered, the true sacrifice of all the life’s ener-
gies and activities, with devotion, without desire, for
His sake and for the welfare of the peoples. It is because
the Vedavada obscures this truth and with its tangle of
ritual ties man down to the action of the three gunas
that it has to be so severely censured and put roughly
aside; but its central idea is not destroyed; transfigured
and uplifted, it is turned into a most important part
of the true spiritual experience and of the method of
liberation.

The Vedantic idea of knowledge does not present the
same difficulties. The Gita takes it over at once and
completely and throughout the six chapters quietly sub-
stitutes the still immutable Brahman of the Vedantins,
the One without a second immanent in all cosmos, for
the still immutable but multiple Purusha of the Sankhyas.
It accepts throughout these chapters knowledge and
realisation of the Brahman as the most important, the
indispensable means of liberation, even while it insists
on desireless works as an essential part of knowledge.
It accepts equally Nirvana of the ego in the infinite equa-
lity of the immutable, impersonal Brahman as essential
to liberation; it practically identifies this extinction with
the Sankhya return of the inactive immutable Purusha
upon itself when it emerges out of identification with the
actions of Prakriti; it combines and fuses the. language
of the Vedanta with the language of the Sankhya, as had
already indeed been done by certain of the Upanishads . 4
But still there is a defect in the Vedantic position which
has to be overcome, We may, perhaps, conjecture that
at this time the Vedanta had not yet redeveloped the


4 Especially the Swetaswatara.


8


its


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


later theistic tendencies which in the Upanishads are
already present as an element, but not so prominent as
in the Vaishnava philosophies of the later Vedantins
where they become indeed not only prominent but para-
mount. We may take it that the orthodox Vedanta was,
at any rate in its main tendencies, pantheistic at the basis,
monistic at the summit . 6 It knew of the Brahman, one with
out a second; it knew of the Gods, Vishnu, Shiva, Brahma
and the rest, who all resolve themselves into the Brahman;
but the one supreme Brahman as the one Ishwara, Puru-
sha, Deva — words often applied to it in the Upanishads
and justifying to that -extent, yet passing beyond the
Sankhya and the theistic conceptions — was an idea that
had fallen from its pride of place;® the names could only
be applied in a strictly logical Brahma vada to subordinate
or inferior phases of the Brahman-idea. The Gita proposes
not only to restore the original equality of these names
and therefore of the conceptions they indicate, but to go
a step farther. The Brahman in its supreme and not in
any lower aspect has to be presented as the- Purusha with
the lower Prakriti for its Maya, so to synthetisc thoroughly
Vedanta and Sankhya, and as Ishwara, so to synthetise
thoroughly both with Yoga; but the Gita is going to re-
present the Ishwara, the Purushottama, as higher even
than the still and immutable Brahman, and the loss of
ego in the impersonal comes in at the beginning as only
a great initial and necessary step towards union with the

‘The pantheistic formula is that God and the All are one, the
monistic adds that God or Brahman alone exists and the cosmos is only
an illusory appearance or else a real but partial manifestation.

* This is a little doubtful, but we may say at least that there was a strong
tendency in that direction of which Shankara’s philosophy was the last
culmination.


114


SANKHYA, YOGA AND VEDANTA


Purushottama. For the Purushottama is the supreme
Brahman. It therefore passes boldly beyond the Veda
and the Upanishads as they were taught by their best
authorised exponents and affirms a teaching of its own
which it has developed from them, but which may not
be capable of being fitted in within the four corners of
their meaning as ordinarily interpreted by the Vedantins . 7
In fact without this free and synthetic dealing with the
letter of the Scripture a work of large synthesis in the
then state of conflict between numerous schools and with
the current methods of Vedic exegesis would have been
impossible.

The Gita in later chapters speaks highly of the Veda
and the Upanishads. They are divine Scriptures,
they are the Word. The Lord himself is the knower
of Veda and the author of Vedanta, vedavid vedan-
takrt ; the Lord is the one object of knowledge in
all the Vedas, sarvair vedair aham eva vedyah, a language
which implies that the word Veda means the book of
knowledge and that these Scriptures deserve their appel-
lation. The Purushottama from his high supremacy above
the Immutable and the mutable has extended himself in
the world and in the Veda. Still the letter of the Scripture
binds and confuses, as the apostle of Christianity warned
his disciples when he said that the letter killeth and it is
the spirit that saves; and there is a point beyond which
the utility of the Scripture itself ceases. The real source

7 In reality the idea of the Purushottama is already announced in the
Upanishads, though in a more scattered fashion than in the Gita and, as
in the Gita, the Supreme Brahman or Supreme Purusha is constantly
described as containing in himself the opposition of the Brahman with
qualities and without qualities, nirguQQ gu$i. He is not one of these things to
the exclusion of the other which seems to our intellect to be its contrary


115


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


of knowledge is the Lord in the heart; “I am seated in
the heart of every man and from Me is knowledge”,
says the Gita; the Scripture is only a verbal form of that
inner Veda, of that self-luminous Reality, it is sabdabrahma:
the mantra, says the Veda, has risen from the 'heart, from
the secret place where is the seat of the truth, sadanad
rtasya , guhdyam. That origin is its sanction; but still the
infinite Truth is greater than its word. Nor shall you
say of any Scripture that it alone is all-sufficient and no
other truth can be admitted, as the Vedavadins said of
the V tA?L,nanyad astlti vadinah . This is a saving and libera-
ting word which must be applied to all the Scriptures
of the world. Take all the Scriptures that are or have
been, Bible and Koran and the books of the Chinese,

Veda and Upanishads and Purana and Tantra and

Shastra and the Gita itself and the sayings of thinkers
and sages, prophets and Avatars, still you shall not say
that there is nothing else or that the truth your intellect
cannot find there is not true because you cannot find it
there. That is the limited thought of the sectarian or
the composite thought of the eclectic religionist, not
the untrammelled truth-seeking of the free and illumined
mind and God-experienced soul. Heard or unheard

before, that always is the truth which is seen by the heart

of man in its illumined depths or heard within from the
Master of all knowledge, the knower of the eternal Veda.


116


X

THE YOGA OF THE INTELLIGENT WILL

I have had to deviate in the last two essays and to drag
the reader with me into the arid tracts of metaphysical
dogma, — however cursorily and with a very insuffi-
cient and superficial treatment, — so that we might
understand why the Gita follows the peculiar line of
development it has taken, working out first a partial
truth with only subdued hints of its deeper meanings
then returning upon its hints and bringing out their
significance until it rises to its last great suggestion, its
supreme mystery which it does not work out at all, but
leaves to be lived out, as the later ages of Indian spiri-
tuality tried to live it out in great waves of love, of
surrender, of ecstasy. Its eye is always on its synthesis
and all its strains arc the gradiial preparation of the
mind for its high closing note.

. I have declared to you the poise of a self-liberating
intelligence in Sankhya, says the divine Teacher to
Arjuna. I will now declare to you another poise in Yoga.
You are Shrinking from the results of your works, you
desire other results and turn from your right path in life
because it does not lead you to them. But this idea of
works and their result, desire of result as the motive,
the work as a means for the satisfaction of desire, is the
bondage of the ignorant who know not what works are,
nor their true source, nor their real operation, nor their


U7


ESSAYS ON fHE GItA


high utility. My Yoga will free you from all bondage
of the soul to its works, - karmabandham prahasyasi. You
are afraid of many things, afraid of sin, afraid of suffering,
afraid of hell and punishment, afraid of God, afraid
of this world, afraid of the hereafter, afraid of yourself.
What is it that you arc not afraid of at this moment, you
the Aryan fighter, the world’s chief hero? But this is
the great fear which besieges humanity, its fear of sin
and suffering now and hereafter, its fear in a world of
whose true nature it is ignorant, of a God whose true
being also it has not seen and whose cosmic purpose it
does not understand. My Yoga will deliver you from the
great fear and even a little of it will bring deliverance.
When you have once set out on this path, you will find
that no step is lost; every least movement will be a gain;
you will find there no obstacle that can baulk you of your
advance. A bold and absolute promise and one to which
the fearful and hesitating mind beset and stumbling
in all its paths cannot easily lend an assured trust; nor
is the large and full truth of it apparent unless with these
first words of the message of the Gita we read also the
last, “Abandon all laws of conduct and take refuge in
Me alone; I will deliver you from all sin and evil; do not
grieve.”

But it is not with this deep and moving word of God
to man, but rather with the first necessary rays of light
on the path, directed not like that to the soul, feut to the
intellect, that the exposition begins. Not the Friend
and Lover of man speaks first, but the Guide and Teacher
who has to remove from him his ignorance of his true
self and of the nature of the world and of the springs
of his own action. For it is because he acts ignorantly,
with a wrong intelligence and therefore a wrong will


118


THE YOGA OF THE INTELLIGENT WILL


in these matters, that man is or seems to be bound by his
works; otherwise works are no bondage to the free soul.
It is because of this wrong intelligence that he has hope
and fear, wrath and grief and transient joy; otherwise
works are possible with a perfect serenity and freedom.
Therefore it is the Yoga of the Buddhi, the intelligence,
that is first enjoined on Arjuna. To act with right intel-
ligence and, therefore, a right will, fixed in the One,
aware of the one self in all and acting out of its equal
serenity, not running about in different directions under
the thousand impulses of our superficial mental self, is
the Yoga of the intelligent will.

There are, says the Gita, two types of intelligence
in the human being. The first is concentrated, poised,
one, homogeneous, directed singly towards the Truth;
unity is its characteristic, concentrated fixity is its very
being. In the other there is no single will, no unified
intelligence, but only an endless number of ideas many-
branching, coursing about, that is to say, in this or that
direction in pursuit of the desires which are offered to
it by life and by the environment. Buddhi, the word
used, means, properly speaking, the mental power of
understanding but it is evidently used by the Gita in a
large philosophic sense for the whole action of the dis-
criminating and deciding mind which determines both
the direction and use of our thoughts and the direction
and use of our acts; thought, intelligence, judgment,
perceptive choice and aim are all included in its func-
tioning: for the characteristic of the unified intelligence
is not only concentration of the mind that knows,
but especially concentration .of the mind that decides
and persists in the decision, vyavasaya , while the sign
of the dissipated intelligence is not so much even


119


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


discursiveness of the ideas and perceptions as discursiveness
of the aims and desires, therefore of the will. Will,
then, and knowledge are the two functions of the Buddhi.
The unified intelligent will is fixed in the enlightened
soul, it is concentrated in inner self-knowledge; the many-
branching and multifarious, busied with many things,
careless of the one thing needful is, on the contrary,
subject to the restless and discursive action of the mind,
dispersed in outward life and works and their fruits.
“Works are far inferior,” says the Teacher, “to Yoga
of the intelligence; desire rather refuge in the intelligence;
poor and wretched souls are they who make the
fruit of their works the object of their thoughts and
activities.”

■ We must remember the psychological order of the
Sankhya which the Gita accepts. On one side there is
the Purusha, the soul calm, inactive, immutable, one,
not evolutive; on the other side there is Prakriti or
Nature-force inert without the conscious Soul, active but
only by juxtaposition to that consciousness, by contact
with it, as we would say, not so much one at first as
indeterminate, triple in its qualities, capable of evolu-
tion and involution. The contact of soul and nature
generates the play of subjectivity and objectivity which
is our experience of being; what is to us the subjective
first evolves, because the soul-consciousness is the first
cause, inconscient Nature-force only the second and
dependent cause; but still it is Nature and not Soul which
supplies the instruments of our subjectivity. First in order
come Buddhi, discriminative or determinative power
evolving out of Nature-force, and its subordinate power
of self-discriminating ego. Then as a secondary evolution
there arises out of these the power which seizes the


120


THE YOGA OP THE INTELLIGENT WILL


discriminations of objects, sense-mind or Manas, — we
must record the Indian names because the corresponding
English words are not real equivalents. As a tertiary-
evolution out of sense-mind we have the specialising
organic senses, ten in number, five of perception, five
of action; next the powers of each sense of perception,
sound, form, scent, etc., which give their value to objects
for the mind and make things what they are to our
subjectivity, — and, as the substantial basis of these, the
primary conditions of the objects of sense, the five ele-
ments of ancient philosophy or rather elementary con-
ditions of Nature, pahea bhiita, which constitute objects
by their various combination.

Reflected in the pure consciousness of Purusha these
degrees and powers of Nature-force become the material
of our impure subjectivity, impure because its action
is dependent on the perceptions of the objective world
and on their subjective reactions. Buddhi, which is
simply the determinative power that determines all inertly
out of indeterminate inconscient Force, takes for us the
form of intelligence and will. Manas, the inconscient force
which seizes Nature’s discriminations by objective action
and reaction and grasps at them by attraction, becomes
sense-perception and desire, the two crude terms or de-
gradations of intelligence and will, — becomes the sense-
mind sensational, emotive, volitional in the lower sense
of wish, hope, longing passion, vital impulsion, all the
deformations ( vikara ) of will. The senses become the in-
struments of sense-mind, the perceptive five of our sense-
knowledge, the active five of our impulsions and vital
habits, mediators between the subjective and objective;
the rest are the objects of our consciousness, visayas of the
senses. '


121


teSSAYS ON THE GITA


This order of evolution seems contrary to that which
we perceive as the order of the material evolution; but
if we remember that even Buddhi is in itself an inert action
of inconscient Nature and that there is certainly in this
sense an inconscient will and intelligence, a discriminative
and determinative force even in the atom, if we observe
the crude inconscient stuff of sensation, emotion, memory,
impulsion in the plant and in the subconscient forms
of existence, if we look at these powers of Nature-force
assuming the forms of our subjectivity in the evolving
consciousness of animal and man, we shall see that the
Sankhya system squares well enough with all that modern
enquiry has elicited by its observation of material Nature.
In the evolution of the soul back from Prakriti towards
Purusha, the reverse order has to be taken to the original
Nature-evolution, and that is how the Upanishads and
the Gita following and almost quoting the Upanishads
state the ascending order of our subjective powers. “Su-
preme,” they say, “beyond their objects are the senses,
supreme over the senses the mind, supreme over the mind
the intelligent will : that which is supreme over the intel-
ligent will, is he,” — is the conscious self, the Purusha.
Therefore, says the Gita, it is this Purusha, this supreme
cause of our subjective life which we have to understand
and become aware of by the intelligence; in that we have
to fix our will. So holding our lower subjective self in
Nature firmly poised and stilled by means of the greater
really conscient self, we can destroy the restless ever-
active enemy of our peace and self-mastery, the mind’s
desire.

For evidently there are two possibilities of the action of
the intelligent will. It may take its downward and
outward orientation towards a discursive action of the


122


THIS YOGA OF THfc iNTfeLLIGtNT WILL


perceptions and the will in the triple play of Prakriti, or
it may take its upward and inward orientation towards a
settled peace and equality in the calm and immutable
purity of the conscious silent soul no longer subject to the
distractions of Nature. In the former alternative the sub-
jective being is at the mercy of the objects of sense, it
lives in the outward contact of things. That life is the
life of desire. For the senses excited by their objects create
a restless or often violent disturbance, a strong or even
headlong outward movement towards the seizure of these
objects and their enjoyment, and they carry away the
sense-mind, “as the winds carry away a ship upon the
sea” ; the mind subjected to the emotions, passions, long-
ings, impulsions awakened by this outward movement of
the senses carries away similarly the intelligent will,
which loses therefore its power of calm discrimination
and mastery. Subjection of the soul to the confused play
of the three gunas of Prakriti in their eternal entangled
twining and wrestling, ignorance, a false, sensuous, ob-
jective life of the soul, enslavement to grief and wrath and
attachment and passion, are the results of the downward
trend of the Buddhi, — the troubled life of the ordinary,
unenlightened, undisciplined man. Those who like the
Vedavadins make sense-enjoyment the object of action
and its fulfilment the highest aim of the soul, are mis-
leading guides. The inner subjective self-delight indepen-
dent of objects is our true aim and the high and wide
poise of our peace and liberation.

Therefore, it is the upward and inward orientation of
the intelligent will that we must resolutely choose with
a settled concentration and perseverance, vyavasdya) we
must fix it firmly in the calm self-knowledge of the Puru-
sha. The first movement must be obviously to get rid of

123


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


desire which is the whole root of the evil and suffering;
and in order to get rid of desire, we must put an end to
the cause of desire, the rushing out of the senses to seize
and enjoy their objects. We must draw them back when
they are inclined thus to rush out, draw them away from
their objects, — as the tortoise draws in his limbs into the
shell, so these into their source, quiescent in the mind,
the mind quiescent in intelligence, the intelligence quies-
cent in the soul and its self-knowledge, observing the
action of Nature, but not subject to it, not desiring any-
thing that the objective life can give.

It is not an external asceticism, the physical renuncia-
tion of the objects of sense that I am teaching, suggests
Krishna immediately to avoid a misunderstanding which
is likely at once to arise. Not the renunciation of the
Sankhyas or the austerities of the rigid ascetic with his
fasts, his maceration of the body, his attempt to abstain
even from food; that is not the self-discipline or the abs-
tinence which I mean, for I speak of an inner withdrawal,
a renunciation of desire. The embodied soul, having a
body, has to support it normally by food for its normal
physical action ; by abstention from food it simply removes
from itself the physical contact with the object of sense,
but does not get rid of the inner relation which makes
that contact hurtful. It retains the pleasure of the sense
in the object, the rasa, the liking and disliking, — for rasa
has two sides; the soul must, on the contrary, be capable
of enduring the physical contact without suffering in-
wardly this sensuous reaction. Otherwise there is nivftti,
cessation of the object, visaya vinivartanie, but no subjective
cessation, no nivftti of the mind ; but the senses are of the
mind, subjective, and subjective cessation of the rasa is
the only real sign of mastery. But how is this desireless


124


THE YOGA OF THE INTELLIGENT WILL


contact with objects, this unsensuous use of the senses
possible? It is possible, param drstva, by the vision of the
supreme, — param, the Soul, the Purusha, — and by living
in the Yoga, in union or oneness of the whole subjective
being with that, through the Yoga of the intelligence; for
the one Soul is calm, satisfied in its own delight, and that
delight free from duality can take, once we see this su-
preme thing in us and fix the mind and will on that, the
place of the sensuous object-ridden pleasures and repul-
sions of the mind. This is the true way of liberation.
Certainly self-discipline, self-control is never easy. All
intelligent human beings know that they must exercise
some control over themselves and nothing is more com-
mon than this advice to control the senses; but ordinarily
it is only advised imperfectly and practised imperfectly
in the most limited and insufficient fashion. Even, how-
ever, the sage, the man of clear, wise and discerning soul
who really labours to acquire complete self-mastery finds
himself hurried and carried away by the senses. That is
because the mind naturally lends itself to the senses; it
observes the objects of sense with an inner interest, settles
upon them and makes them the object of absorbing
thought for the intelligence and of strong interest for the
will. By that attachment comes, by attachment dfesire,
by desire distress, passion and anger when the desire is
not satisfied or is thwarted or opposed, and by passion
the sou\ is obscured, the intelligence and will forget to
see and be seated in the calm observing soul; there is a
fall from the memory of one’s true self, and by that lapse
the intelligent will is also obscured, destroyed even. For,
for the time being, it no longer exists to our memory of
ourselves, it disappears in a cloud of passion ; we become
passion, wrath, grief and cease to be self and intelligence


125


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


and will. This then must be prevented and all the senses
brought utterly under control; for only by an absolute
control of the senses can the wise and calm intelligence
be firmly established in its proper seat.

This cannot be done perfectly by the act of the intel-
ligence itself, by a merely mental self-discipline; it can
only be done by Yoga with something which is higher
than itself and in which calm and self-mastery are in-
herent. And this Yoga can only arrive at its success by
devoting, by consecrating, by giving up the whole self
to the Divine, “to Me,” says Krishna; for the Liberator
is within us, but it is not our mind, nor our intelligence,
nor our personal will, — they are only instruments. It is
the Lord in whom, as we are told in the end, we have
utterly to take refuge. And for that we must at first make
him the object of our whole being and keep in soul-contact
with him. This is the sense of the phrase “he must sit firm
in Yoga, wholly given up to Me” ; but as yet it is the merest
passing hint after the manner of the Gita, three words
only which contain in seed the whole gist of the highest
secret yet to be developed, yukta asita matparah.

If this is done, then it becomes possible to move among
the objects of sense, in contact with them, acting on them,
but with the senses entirely under the control of the sub-
jective self, — not at the mercy of the objects and their
contacts and reactions, — and that self again obedient to
the highest self, the Purusha. Then, free from reactions,
the senses will be delivered from the affections of liking
and disliking, escape the duality of positive and negative
desire, and calm, peace, clearness, happy tranquillity,
atmaprasada, will settle upon the man. That clear tran-
quillity is the source of the soul’s felicity; all grief begins to
lose its power of touching the tranquil soul; the intelligence


126


THE YOGA OF THE INTELLIGENT WILL


is rapidly established in the peace of the self; suffering
is destroyed. It is this calm, desireless, griefless fixity of
the buddhi in self-poise and self-knowledge to which the
Gita gives the name of Samadhi.

The sign of the man in Samadhi is not that he loses
consciousness of objects and surroundings and of his
mental and physical self and cannot be recalled to it even
by burning or torture of the body, — the ordinary idea of
the matter; trance is a particular intensity, not the essen-
tial sign. The test is the expulsion of all desires, their
inability to get at the mind, and it is the inner state from
which this freedom arises, the delight of the soul gathered
within itself with the mind equal and still and high-poised
above the attractions and repulsions, the alternations of
sunshine and storm and stress of the external life. It is
drawn inward even when acting outwardly; it is con-
centrated in self even when gazing out upon things ; it is
directed wholly to the Divine even when to the outward
vision of others busy and preoccupied with the affairs of
the world. Arjuna, voicing the average human mind,
asks for some outward, physical, practically discernible
sign of this great Samadhi ; how does such a man speak,
how sit, how walk? No such signs can be given, nor does
the Teacher attempt to supply them; for the only possible
test of its possession is inward and that there are plenty
of hostile psychological forces to apply. Equality is the
great stamp of the liberated soul and of that equality even
the most discernible signs are still subjective. “A man
with mind untroubled by sorrows, who has done with
desire for pleasures, from whom liking and wrath and
fear have passed away, such is the sage whose understand-
ing has become founded in stability.” He is “without
the triple action of the qualities of Prakriti, without the


127


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


dualities, ever based in his true being, without getting or
having, possessed of his self.” For what gettings and
havings has the free soul? Once we are possessed of the
Self, we are in possession of all things.

And yet he does not cease from work and action. There
is the originality and power of the Gita, that having
affirmed this static condition, this superiority to nature,
this emptiness even of all that constitutes ordinarily the
action of Nature for the liberated soul, it is still able to
vindicate for it, to enjoin on it even the continuance of
works and thus avoid the great defect of the merely quiet-
istic and ascetic philosophies, — the defect from which
we find them today attempting to escape. “Thou hast
a right to action, but only to action, never to its fruits;
let not the fruits of thy works be thy motive, neither let
there be in thee any attachment to inactivity.” There-
fore it is not the works practised with desire by the
Vedavadins, it is not the claim for the satisfaction of the
restless and energetic mind by a constant activity, the
claim made by the practical or the kinetic man, which
is here enjoined. “Fixed in Yoga do thy actions, having
abandoned attachment, having become equal in failure
and success; for it is equality that is meant by Yoga,”
Action is distressed .by the choice between a relative
good and evil, the fear of sin and the difficult endeavour
towards virtue? But the liberated who has united his
reason and will with the Divine, casts away from him
even here in this world of dualities both good doing and
evil doing; for he rises to a higher law beyond good and
evil, founded in the liberty of self-knowledge. Such
desireless action can have no decisiveness, no effectiveness,
no efficient motive, no large or vigorous creative power?
Not so; action done in Yoga is not only the highest but


128


THE YOGA OF THE INTELLIGENT WILL


the wisest, the most potent and efficient even for the
affairs of the world; for it is informed by the knowledge
and will of the Master of works: “Yoga is skill in works.”
But all action directed towards life leads away from the
universal aim of the Yogin which is by common consent
to escape from bondage to this distressed and sorrowful
human birth? Not so, either; the sages who do works
without desire for fruits and in Yoga with the Divine
are liberated from the bondage of birth and reach that
other perfect status in which there are none of the mala-
dies which afflict the mind and life of a suffering
humanity.

The status he reaches is the Brahmic condition; he
gets to firm standing in the Brahman, brahmi slhiti . It
is a reversal of the whole view, experience, knowledge^
values, seeings of earth-bound creatures. This life of
the dualities which is to them their day, their waking,
their consciousness, their bright condition of activity
and knowledge, is to him a night, a troubled sleep and
darkness of the soul ; that higher being which is to them a
night, a sleep in which all knowledge and will cease, is
to the self-mastering sage his waking, his luminous day
of true being, knowledge and power. They are troubled
and muddy waters disturbed by every little inrush of
desire; he is an ocean of wide being and consciousness
which is ever being filled, yet ever motionless in its large
poise of his soul; all the desires of the world enter into
him as waters into the sea, yet he has no desire nor is
troubled. For while they are filled with the troubling
sense of ego and mine and thine, he is one with the
one Self in all and has no “I” or “mine”. He acts
as others, but he has abandoned all desires and their
longings. He* attains to the great peace and is not


129


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


bewildered by the shows of things; he has extinguished his
individual ego in the One, lives in that unity and, fixed
in that status at his end, can attain to extinction in the
Brahman, Nirvana, — not the negative self-annihilation
of the Buddhists, but the great immergence of the
separate personal self into the vast reality of the one infinite
impersonal Existence.

Such, subtly unifying Sankhya, Yoga and Vedanta,
is the first foundation of the teaching of the Gita. It is
far from being all, but it is the first indispensable prac-
tical unity of knowledge and works with a hint already
of the third crowning intensest element in the soul’s
completeness, divine love and devotion.


130


XI


WORKS AND SACRIFICE

The Yoga of the intelligent will and its culmination in
the Brahmic status, which occupies all the close of the
second chapter, contains the seed of much of the teach-
ing of the Gita, — its doctrine of desireless works, of
equality, of the rejection of outward renunciation, of
devotion to the Divine; but as yet all this is slight and
obscure. What is most strongly emphasised as yet is
the withdrawal of the will from the ordinary motive
of human activities, desire, from man’s normal tempera-
ment of the sense-seeking thought and will with its pas-
sions and ignorance, and from its customary habit of
troubled many-branching ideas and wishes to the desire-
less calm unity and passionless serenity of the Brahmic
poise. So much Arjuna has understood. He is not
unfamiliar with all this ; it is the substance of the current
teaching which points man to the path of knowledge
and to the renunciation of life and works as his way
of perfection. The intelligence withdrawing from sense
and desire and human action and turning to the High-
est, to the One, to the actionless Purusha, to the immobile,
to the featureless Brahman, that surely is the eternal
seed of knowledge. There is no room here for works,
since works belong to the Ignorance; action is the very
opposite of knowledge; its seed is desire and its fruit is
bondage. That is the orthodox philosophical doctrine,


131


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


and Krishna seems quite to admit it when he says that
works are far inferior to the Yoga of the intelligence.
And yet works are insisted upon as part of the Yoga;
so that there seems to be in this teaching a radical incon-
sistency. Not only so; for some kind of work no doubt
may persist for a while, the minimum, the most inoffen-
sive; but here is a work wholly inconsistent with know-
ledge, with serenity and with the motionless peace of
the self-delighted soul, — a work terrible, even monstrous,
a bloody strife, a ruthless battle, a giant massacre. Yet
it is this that is enjoined,, this that it is sought to justify
by the teaching of inner peace and desireless equality and
status in the Brahman! Here then is an unreconciled
contradiction. Arjuna complains that he has been given
a contradictory and confusing doctrine, not the clear,
strenuously single road by which the human intelligence
can move straight and trenchantly to the supreme good.
It is in answer to this objection that the Gita begins at
once to develop more clearly its positive and imperative
doctrine of Works.

The Teacher first makes a distinction between the
two means of salvation on which in this world men can
concentrate separately, the Yoga of knowledge, the
Yoga of works, the one implying, it is usually supposed,
renunciation of works as an obstacle to salvation, the
other accepting works as a means of salvation. He
does not yet insist strongly on any fusion of them, on
any reconciliation of the thought that divides them,
but begins by showing that the renunciation of the
Sankhyas, the physical renunciation, Sannyasa, is neither
the only way, nor at all the better way. Naiskarmya , a
calm voidness from works, is no doubt that to which th$
soul, the Purusha has to attain; for it is Prakriti which does


132


WORKS AND SACRIFICE


the work and the soul has to rise above involution in the
activities of the being and attain to a free serenity and
poise watching over the operations of Prakriti, but not
affected by them. That, and not cessation of the work of
Prakriti, is what is really meant by the soul’s naiskarmya .
Therefore it is an error to think that by not engaging in
any kind of action this actionlcss state of the soul can be
attained and enjoyed. Mere renunciation of works is not a
sufficient, not even quite a proper means for salvation.
“Not by abstention from works does a man enjoy action-
lessness, nor by mere renunciation (of works) does he
attain to his perfection,” — to siddhi , the accomplishment
of the aims of his self-discipline by Yoga.

But at least it must be one necessary means, indispen-
sable, imperative? For how, if the works of Prakriti con-
tinue, can the soul help being involved in them? How
can I fight and yet in my soul not think or feel that I the
individual am fighting, not desire victory nor be inwardly
touched by defeat? This is the teaching of the Sankhyas
that the intelligence of the man who engages in the acti-
vities of Nature, is entangled in egoism, ignorance and
desire and therefore drawn to action; on the contrary,
if the intelligence draws back, then the action must cease
with the cessation of the desire and the ignorance. There-
fore the giving up of life and works is a necessary part, an
inevitable circumstance and an indispensable last means
of the movement to liberation. This objection of a current
l 0 gi c — it is not expressed by Aijuna, but it is in his mind
as the turn of his subsequent utterances shows, — the
Teacher immediately anticipates. No, he says, such renun-
ciation, far from being indispensable, is not even possible.
“For none stands even for a moment not doing work;
everyone is made to do action helplessly by the modes


133


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


born of Prakriti.” The strong perception of the great
cosmic action and the eternal activity and power of the
cosmic energy which was so much emphasised afterwards
by the teaching of the Tantric Shaktas who even made
Prakriti or Shakti superior to Purusha, is a very remarkable
feature of the Gita. Although here an undertone, it is
still strong enough, coupled with what we might call
the theistic and devotional elements of its thought, to
bring in that activism which so strongly modifies in its
scheme of Yoga the quietistic tendencies of the old meta-
physical Vedanta. Man embodied in the natural world
cannot cease from action, not for a moment, not for a
second; his very existence here is an action; the whole
universe is an act of God, mere living even is His
movement.

Our physical life, its maintenance, its continuance is
a journey, a pilgrimage of the body sarira-yatra, and that
cannot be effected without action. But even if a man could
leave his body unmaintained, otiose, if he could stand
still always like a tree or sit inert like a stone, tisthaii,
that vegetable or material immobility would not save
him from the hands of Nature; he would not be liberated
from her workings. For it is not our physical movements
and activities alone which are meant by works, by karma;
our mental existence also is a great complex action, it is
even the greater and more important part of the works
of the unresting energy, — subjective cause and determi-
nant of the physical. We have gained nothing if we repress
the effect but retain the activity of the subjective cause.
The objects of sense are only an occasion for our bondage,
the mind’s insistence on them is the means, the instru-
mental cause. A man may control his organs of action
and refuse to give them their natural play, but he has


134


WORKS AND SACRIFICE


gained nothing if his mind continues to remember and
dwell upon the objects of sense. Such a man has bewil-
dered himself with false notions of self-discipline; he
has not understood its object or its truth, nor the first
principles of his subjective existence; therefore all his
methods of self-discipline are false and null. 1 The body’s
actions, even the mind’s actions are nothing in themselves,
neither a bondage, nor the first cause of bondage. What
is vital is the mighty energy of Nature which will have
her way and her play in her great field of mind and life
and body; what is dangerous in her, is the power of her
three gurias, modes or qualities to confuse and bewilder
the intelligence and so obscure the soul. That, as we shall
see later, is the whole crux of action and liberation for the
Gita. Be free from obscuration and bewilderment by the
three gunas and action can continue, as it must continue,
and even the largest, richest or most enormous and violent
action; it does not matter, for nothing then touches the
Purusha, the soul has naiskarmya.

But at present the Gita docs not proceed to that larger
point. Since the mind is the instrumental cause, since
inaction is impossible, what is rational, necessary, the
right way is a controlled action of the subjective and
objective organism. The mind must bring the senses
under its control as an instrument of the intelligent will
and then the organs of action must be used for their proper
office, for action, but for action done as Yoga. But what
is the essence of this self-control, what is meant by action


1 1 cannot think that mithydedra means a hypocrite. How is a man a
hypocrite who inflicts on himself so severe and complete a privation? He
is mistaken and deluded, vimudhdtmd, and his dear a, his formally regulated
method of sclf-disciplinc, is a false and vain method, — this surely is all that
the Gita means.


135


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


done as Yoga, Karmayoga? It is non-attachment, it is to
do works without clinging with the mind to the objects
of sense and the fruit of the works. Not complete inaction,
which is an error, a confusion, a self-delusion, an impossi-
bility, but action full and free done without subjection to
sense and passion, desireless and unattached works, are
the first secret of perfection. Do action thus self-controlled,
says Krishna, niyatam kuru karma tvam : I have said that
knowledge, the intelligence, is greater than works, jydyasi
karmano buddhih , but I did not mean that inaction is greater
than action; the contrary is the truth, karma jyayo akar-
manah. For knowledge does not mean renunciation of
works, it means equality and non-attachment to desire
and the objects of sense; and it means the poise of the
intelligent will in the Soul free and high-uplifted above
the lower instrumentation of Prakriti 2 and controlling
the works of the mind and the senses and body in the power
of self-knowledge and the pure objectless self-delight
of spiritual realisation, niyatam karma . Buddhiyoga is ful-
filled by karmayoga \ the Yoga of the self-liberating intelli-
gent will finds its full meaning by the Yoga of
dcsirelcss works. Thus the Gita founds its teaching of the
necessity of desireless works, niskama karma , and unites


2 Again, I cannot accept the current interpretation of niyatam karma as if it
meant fixed and formal works and were equivalent to the Vcdic nityakarma %
the regular works of sacrifice, ceremonial and the daily rule of Vedic living.
Surely, niyata simply takes up the niyamya of the last verse. Krishna makes a
statement, “he who controlling the senses by the mind engages with the organs
of action in Yoga of action, he excels,” manasd niyamya drabhate karmayogam
and he immediately goes on to draw from the statement an injunction to
sum it up and convert it into a rule. “Do thou do controlled action”, niyatam
kuru karma tvam: niyatam takes up the niyamya, kuru karma takes up the drabhate
karmayogam. Not formal works fixed by an external rule, but desireless works
controlled by the liberated buddhi , is the Gita’s teaching.


136


WORKS AND SACRIFICE


the subjective practice of the Sankhyas — rejecting their
merely physical rule — with the practice of Yoga.

But still there is an essential difficulty unsolved. Desire
is the ordinary motive of all human actions, and if the
soul is free from desire, then there is no farther rationale
for action. We may be compelled to do certain works
for the maintenance of the body, but even that is a subjec-
tion to the desire of the body which we ought to get rid
of if we are to attain perfection. But granting that this
cannot be done, the only way* is to fix a rule for action
outside ourselves, not dictated by anything in our subjec-
tivity, the nilyakarma of the Vedic rule, the routine of
ceremonial sacrifice, daily conduct and social duty, which
the man who seeks liberation may do simply because it is
enjoined upon him, without any personal purpose or
subjective interest in them, with an absolute indifference
to the doing, not because he is compelled by his nature
but because it is enjoined by the Shastra. But if the prin-
ciple of the action is not to be external to the nature but
subjective, if the actions even of the liberated and the
sage are to be controlled and determined by his nature,
svabhava-niyalam, then the only subjective principle of
action is desire of whatever kind, lust of the flesh or
emotion of the heart or base or noble aim of the mind,
but all subject to the gums of Prakriti. Let us then inter-
pret the niyala karma of the Gita as the nilyakarma of the
Vedic rule, its karlavya karma or work that has to be done
as the Aryan rule of social duty and let us take too its work
done as a sacrifice to mean simply these Vedic sacrifices
and this fixed social duty performed disinterestedly and
without any personal object. This is how the Gita’s
doctrine of desireless work is often interpreted. But it
seems to me that the Gita’s teaching is not so crude and


137


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


simple, not so local and temporal and narrow as all that.
It is large, free, subtle and profound ; it is for all time and
for all men, not for a particular age and country. Espe-
cially, it is always breaking free from external forms,
details, dogmatic notions and going back to principles
and the great facts of our nature and our -being. It is a
work of large philosophic truth and spiritual practicality,
not of constrained religious and philosophical formulas
and stereotyped dogmas.

The difficulty is this, how, our nature being what it is
and desire the common principle of its action, is it possible
to institute a really desircless action? For what we call
ordinarily disinterested action is not really desireless;
it is simply a replacement of certain smaller personal
interests by other larger desires which have only the
appearance of being impersonal, virtue, country, man-
kind. All action, moreover, as Krishna insists, is done
by the gunas of Prakriti, by our nature; in acting according
to the Shastra we are still acting according to our nature,
— even if this Shastric action is not, as it usually is, a
mere cover for our desires, prejudices, passions, egoisms,
our personal, national, sectarian vanities, sentiments
and preferences; but even otherwise, even at the purest,
still we obey a choice of our nature, and if our nature
were different and the gunas acted on our intelligence
and will in some other combination, we would not accept
the Shastra, but live according to our pleasure or our
intellectual notions or else break free from the social law
to live the life of the solitary or the ascetic. We cannot
become impersonal by obeying something outside
ourselves, for we cannot so get outside ourselves; we can
only do it by rising to the highest in ourselves, into our
free Soul and Self which is the same and one in all and


m


WORKS AND SACRIFICE


has therefore no personal interests, to the Divine in our
being who possesses Himself transcendent of cosmos and
is therefore not bound by His cosmic works or His indi-
vidual action. That is what the Gita teaches and dcsire-
lessness is only a means to this end, not an aim in itself.
Yes, but how is it to be brought about? By doing all
works with sacrifice as the only object, is the reply of the
divine Teacher. “By doing works otherwise than for
sacrifice, this world of men is in bondage to works; for
sacrifice practise works, O son of Kunti, becoming free
from all attachment.” It is evident that 'all works and
not merely sacrifice and social duties can be done in this
spirit; any action may be done either from the ego-sense
narrow or enlarged or for the sake of the Divine. All
being and all action of Prakriti exist only for the sake of
the Divine; from that it proceeds, by that it endures, to
that it is directed. But so long as we are dominated by
the ego-sense we cannot perceive or act in the spirit of
this truth, but act for the satisfaction of the ego and in
the spirit of the ego, otherwise than for sacrifice. Egoism
is the knot of the bondage. By acting Godwards, without
any thought of ego, we loosen this knot and finally arrive
at freedom.

At first, however, the Gita takes up the Vedic statement
of the idea of sacrifice and phrases the law of sacrifice in
its current terms. This it does with a definite object. We
have seen that the quarrel between renunciation and
works has two forms, the opposition of Sankhya and Yoga
which is already in principle reconciled and the oppo-
sition of Vedism and Vendantism which the Teacher
has yet to reconcile. The first is a larger statement of the
opposition in which the idea of works is general and
wjde. The Sankhya starts from the notion of the divine


139


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


status as that of the immutable and. inactive Purusha
which each soul is in reality and makes an opposition
between inactivity of Purusha and activity of Prakriti;
so its logical culmination is cessation of all works. Yoga
starts from the notion of the Divine as Ishwara, lord of
the operations of Prakriti and therefore superior to them,
and its logical culmination is not cessation of works but
the soul’s superiority to them and freedom even though
doing all works. In the opposition of Vedism and Vedan-
tism works, karma , are restricted to Vedic works and
sometimes even to Vedic sacrifice ancl ritualised works,
all else being excluded as not useful to salvation. Vedism
of the Mimansakas insisted on them as the means, Ve-
dantism taking its stand on the Upanishads looked on
them as only a preliminary belonging to the state of
ignorance and in the end to be overpassed and rejected,
an obstacle to the seeker of liberation. Vedism wor-
shipped the Devas, the gods, with sacrifice and held them
to be the powers who assist our salvation. Vedantism was
inclined to regard them as powers of the mental and
material world opposed to our salvation (men, says the
Upanishad, are the cattle of the gods, who do not
desire man to know and be free) ; it saw the Divine as
the immutable Brahman who has to be attained not by
works of sacrifice and worship but by knowledge. Works
only lead to material results and to an inferior Paradise;
therefore they have to be renounced.

The Gita resolves this opposition by insisting that the
Devas are only forms of the one Deva, the Ishwara, the
Lord of all Yoga and worship and sacrifice and austerity,
and if it is true that sacrifice offered to the Devas leads
only to material results and to Paradise, it is also true
that sacrifice offered to the Ishwara leads beyond them

140


WORKS AND SACRIFICE


to the great liberation. For the Lord and the immutable
Brahman are not two different beings, but one and the
same Being, and whoever strives towards either, is
striving towards that one divine Existence. All works
in their totality find their culmination and completeness
in the knowledge of the Divine, sarvam karmakhilam partha
jflane parisamdpyate. They are not an obstacle, hut the
way to the supreme knowledge. Thus this opposition too
is reconciled with the help of a large elucidation of the
meaning of sacrifice. In fact its conflict is only a restricted
form of the larger opposition between Yoga and Sankhya.
Vedism is a specialised and narrow form of Yoga; the
principle of the Vedantists is identical with that of the
Sankhyas, for to both the movement of salvation is the
recoil of the intelligence, the buddhi, from the differen-
tiating powers of Nature, from ego, mind, senses, from the
subjective and the objective, and its return to the undif-
ferentiated and the immutable. It is with this object of
reconciliation in his mind that the Teacher first approaches
his statement of the doctrine of sacrifice; but throughout,
even from the very beginning, he keeps his eye not on the
restricted Vedic sense of sacrifice and works, but on their
larger and universal application, — that widening of
narrow and formal notions to admit the great general
truths they unduly restrict which is always the method
of the Gita.


141


XII


THE SIGNIFICANCE OF SACRIFICE

The Gita’s theory of sacrifice is stated in two separate
passages; one we find in the third chapter, another in the
fourth; the first gives it in language which might, taken
by itself, seem to be speaking only of the ceremonial
sacrifice; the second interpreting that into the sense of
a large philosophical symbolism, transforms at once its
whole significance and raises it to a plane of high psy-
chological and spiritual truth. “With sacrifice the Lord
of creatures of old created creatures and said, By this
shall you bring forth (fruits or offspring), let this be your
milker of desires. Foster by this the gods and let the
gods foster you; fostering each other, you shall attain to
the supreme good. Fostered by sacrifice the gods shall
give you desired enjoyments; who enjoys their given
enjoyments and has not given to them, he is a thief.
The good who eat what is left from the sacrifice, are
released from all sin; but evil are they and enjoy sin
who cook (the food) for their own sake. From food crea-
tures come into being, from rain is the birth of food, from
sacrifice comes into being the rain, sacrifice is bom of
work; work know to be born of Brahman, Brahman
is born of the Immutable; therefore is the all-pervading
Brahman established in the sacrifice. He who follows
not here the wheel thus set in movement, evil is his
being, sensual is his delight, in vain, O Partha, that man


142


THE SIGNIFICANCE OF SACRIFICE


lives.’” Having thus stated the necessity of sacrifice, —
we shall see hereafter in what sense we may understand
a passage which seems at first sight to convey only a
traditional theory of ritualism and the necessity of the
ceremonial offering, — Krishna proceeds to state the
superiority of the spiritual man to works. “But the man
whose delight is in the Self and who is satisfied with the
enjoyment of the Self and in the Self he is content, for
him there exists no work that needs to be done. He has
no object here to be gained by action done and none to
be gained by action undone; he has no dependence on
all these existences for any object to be gained.”

Here then are the two ideals, Vedist and Vedantist,
standing as if in all their sharp original separation and
opposition, on one side the active ideal of acquiring
enjoyments here and the highest good beyond by sacrifice
and the mutual dependence of the human being and the
divine powers and on the other, facing it, the austerer
ideal of the liberated man who, independent in the Spirit^
has nothing to do with enjoyment or works or the human
or the divine worlds, but exists only in the peace of the
supreme Self, joys only in the calm joy of the Brahman.
The next verses create a ground for the reconciliation
between the two extremes; the secret is not inaction as
soon as one turns towards the higher truth, but desireless
action both before and after it is reached. The liberated
man has nothing to gain by action, but nothing also to
gain by inaction, and it is not at all for any personal
object that he has to make his choice. “Therefore without
attachment perform ever the work that is to be done
(done for the sake of the world, lokasamgraha, as is made
clear immediately afterward) ; for by doing work without
attachment man attains to the highest. For it was even


143


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


by works that Janaka and the rest attained to perfection.”
It is true that works and sacrifice are a means of arriving
at the highest good, sreyah param avapsyatha ; but there are
three kinds of works, that done without sacrifice for per-
sonal enjoyment which is entirely selfish and egoistic
and misses the true law and aim and utility of life,
mogharn partha sa jlvati, that done with desire, but with
sacrifice and the enjoyment only as a result of sacrifice
and therefore to that extent consecrated and sanctified,
and that done without desire or attachment of any kind.
It is the last which brings the soul of man to the highest,
param apnoti purusah.

The whole sense and drift of this teaching turns upon
the interpretation we arc to give to the important words,
yajna, karma , brahma, sacrifice, work, Brahman. If the
sacrifice is simply the Vedic sacrifice, if the work from
which it is born is the Vedic rule of works and if the
brahman from which the work itself is born is the sabda-
brahman in the sense only of the letter of the Veda, then
all the positions of the Vedist dogma are conceded and
there is nothing more. Ceremonial sacrifice is the right
means of gaining children, wealth, enjoyment; by cere-
monial sacrifice rain is brought down from heaven and
the prosperity and continuity of the race assured; life is
a continual transaction between the gods and men in
which man offers ceremonial gifts to the gods from the
gifts they have bestowed on him and in return is enriched,
protected, fostered. Therefore all human works have to
be accompanied and turned into a sacrament by cere-
monial sacrifice and ritualistic worship; work not so
dedicated is accursed, enjoyment without previous cere-
monial sacrifice and ritual consecration is a sin. Even
salvation, even the highest good is to be gained by


144


THE SIGNIFICANCE OF SACRIFICE


ceremonial sacrifice. It must never be abandoned. Even
the seeker of liberation has to continue to do ceremonial
sacrifice, although without attachment; it is by ceremo-
nial sacrifice and ritualistic works done without attach-
ment that men of the type of Janaka attained to spiritual
perfection and liberation.

Obviously, this cannot be the meaning of the Gita,
for it would be in contradiction with all the rest of the
book. Even in the passage itself, without the illumining
interpretation afterwards given to it in the fourth chapter,
we have already an indication of a wider sense where
it is said that sacrifice is born from work, work from
brahman , brahman from the Akshara, and therefore the
all-pervading Brahman, sarvagatam brahma , is established
in the sacrifice. The connecting logic of the “therefore”
and the repetition of the word brahma are significant;
for it shows clearly that the brahman from which all work
is born has to be understood with an eye not so much, to
the current Vedic teaching in which it means the Veda
as to a symbolical sense in which the creative Word is
identical with the all-pervading Brahman, the Eternal,
the one Self present in all existences, sarvabhutesu , and.
present in all the workings of existence. The Veda is the
knowledge of the Divine, the Eternal, — “I am He who
is to be known in all the books of the Knowledge”,
vedesu vedyah , Krishna will say in a subsequent chapter;
but it is the knowledge of him in the workings of Prakriti,
in the workings of the three gunas , first qualities or modes
of Nature, traiguyyavisaya vedah. This Brahman or Divine
in the workings of Nature is born, as we may say, out of
the Akshara, the immutable Purusha, the Self who stands
above all the modes or qualities or workings of Nature,
nistraiguqya . The Brahman is one but self-displayed in


10


145


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


two aspects, the immutable Being and the creator and
originator of works in the mutable becoming, dtmart ,
sarvabhutani; it is the immobile omnipresent Soul of things
and it is the spiritual principle of the mobile working
of things, Purusha poised in himself and Purusha active
in Prakriti; it is aksara and ksara. In both of these aspects
the Divine Being, Purushottama, manifests himself in the
universe; the immutable above all qualities is His poise
of peace, self-possession, equality, samam Brahma ; from
that proceeds His manifestation in the qualities of Prakriti
and their universal workings; from the Purusha in Pra-
kriti, from this Brahman with qualities, proceed all the
works 1 of the universal energy, Karma, in man and in all
existences; from that work proceeds the principle of
sacrifice. FA r en the material interchange between gods
and men proceeds upon this principle, as typified in the
dependence of rain and its product food on this working
and on them the physical birth of creatures. For all the
working of Prakriti is in its true nature a sacrifice, yajha ,
with the Divine Being as the enjover of all energisms and
works and sacrifice and the great Lord of all existences,
Moktaram yajhatapasam sarvabhuta-mahesvaram, and to know


1 That this is the right interpretation results also from the opening of the
eighth chapter where the universal principles are enumerated, akfara (brahma),
svabhdva , karma , kfara bhdva , purttfa , adhiyajha. Akshara is the immutable Brah-
man, spirit or self, Atman; swabhava is the principle of the self, adhydtma ,
operative as the original nature of the being, “own way of becoming”, and
this proceeds out of the self, the Akshara; Karma proceeds from that aud is
the creative movement, visarga, which brings all natural beings and all chang-
ing subjective and objective shapes of being into existence; the result of Karma
therefore is all this mutable becoming, the changes of nature developed out
of the original self-nature, k$ara bhdva out of svabhdva ; Purusha is the soul,
the divine element in the becoming, adhidaivata , by whose presence the work-
ings of Karma become a sacrifice, yajha, to the divine within; adhiyajha is this
secret Divine who receives the sacrifice.


146 -


THE SIGNIFICANCE OF SACRIFICE


this Divine all-pervading and established in sacrifice,
sarvagatam yajfle pratisthitam, is the true, the Vedic
knowledge.

But he may be known in an inferior action through
the devas, the gods, the powers of the divine Soul in
Nature and in the eternal interaction of these powers
and the soul of man, mutually giving and receiving,
mutually helping, increasing, raising each other’s work-
ings and satisfaction, a commerce in which man rises
towards a growing fitness for the supreme good. He re-
cognises that his life is a part of this divine actipn in
Nature and not a thing separate and to be held and
pursued for its own sake. He regards his enjoyments and
the satisfaction of his desires as the fruit of sacrifice and
the gift of the gods in their divine universal workings
and he ceases to pursue them in the false and evil spirit
of sinful egoistic selfishness as if they were a good to be
seized from life by his own unaided strength without
return and without thankfulness. As this spirit increases
in him, he subordinates his desires, becomes satisfied with
sacrifice as the law of life and works and is content with
whatever remains over from the sacrifice, giving up all
the rest freely as an offering in the great and beneficent
interchange between his life and the world-life. Whoever
goes contrary to this law of action and pursues works and
enjoyment for his own isolated personal self-interest, lives
in vain; he misses the true meaning and aim and utility
of living and the upward growth of the soul; he is not on
the path which leads to the highest good. But the highest
only comes when the sacrifice is no longer to the gods,
but to the one all-pervading Divine established in the
sacrifice, of whom the gods are inferior forms and powers,
and when he puts away the lower self that desires and


147


ESSAYS ON THE GITA

*

enjoys and gives up his personal sense of being the worker
to the true executrix of all works, Prakriti, and his personal
sense of being the enjoyer to the Divine Purusha, the
higher and universal Self who is the real enjoyer of the
works of Prakriti. In that Self and not in any personal
enjoyment he finds now his sole satisfaction, complete
content, pure delight; he has nothing to gain by action
or inaction, depends neither on gods nor men for anything,
seeks no profit from any, for the self-delight is all-sufficient
to him, but does works for the sake of the Divine only, as
a pure sacrifice, without attachment or desire. Thus he
gains equality and becomes free from the modes of Nature,
nistraigunya ; his soul takes its poise not in the insecurity
of Prakriti, but in the peace of the immutable Brahman,
even while his actions continue in the movement of
Prakriti. Thus is sacrifice his way of attaining to the
•Highest.

• That this is the sense of the passage is made clear in
what follows, by the affirmation of lokasajhgraha as the
object of works, of Prakriti as the sole doer of works and
the divine Purusha as their equal upholder, to whom
works have to be given up even in their doing, — this inner
giving up of works and yet physical doing of them is the
culmination of sacrifice, — and by the affirmation that
the result of such active sacrifice with an equal and
desireless mind is liberation from the bondage of works.
“He who is satisfied with whatever gain comes to him
and equal in failure and success, is not bound even when
he acts. When a man liberated, free from attachment,
acts for sacrifice, all his action is dissolved,” leaves, that
is to say, no result of bondage or after-impression on his
free, pure, perfect and equal soul. To these passages we
shall have to return. They are followed by a perfectly


148


THE SIGNIFICANCE OF SACRIFICE


explicit and detailed interpretation of the meaning of yajria
in the language of the Gita which leaves no doubt at all
about the symbolic use of the words and the psychological
character of the sacrifice enjoined by this teaching. In
the ancient Vedic system there was always a double sense
physical and psychological, outward and symbolic, the
exterior form of the sacrifice and the inner meaning of all
its circumstances. But the secret symbolism of the ancient
Vcdic mystics, exact, curious, poetic, psychological, had
been long forgotten by this time and it is now replaced by
another, large, general and philosophical in the spirit of
Vedanta and a later Yoga. The fire of sacrifice, agni,
is no material flame, but brahmagni, the fire of the Brah-
man, or it is the Brahman-ward energy, inner Agni, priest
of the sacrifice, into which the offering is poured ; the fire
is self-control or it is a purified sense-action or it is the vital
energy in that discipline of the control of the vital being
through the control of the breath which is common to
Rajayoga and Hathayoga, or it is the fire of self-know-
ledge, the flame of the supreme sacrifice. The food eaten
as the leavings of the sacrifice is, it is explained, the nectar
of immortality, amrta, left over from the offering; and here
we have still something of the old Vedic symbolism in
which the Soma-wine was the physical symbol of the
amj-ta , the immortalising delight of the divine ecstasy won
by the sacrifice, offered to the gods and drunk by men.
The offering itself is whatever working of his energy,
physical or psychological, is consecrated by him in action
of body or action of mind to the gods or God, to the Self
or to the universal powers, to one’s own higher Self or to
the Self in mankind and in all existences.

This elaborate explanation of the Yajna sets out with
a vast and comprehensive definition in which it is


149


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


declared that the act and energy and materials of the sacri-
fice, the giver and receiver of the sacrifice, the goal and
object of the sacrifice are all the one Brahman. “Brahman
is the giving, Brahman is the food-offering, by Brahman
it is offered into the Brahman-fire, Brahman is that
which is to be attained by samadhi in Brahman-action.”
This then is the knowledge in which the liberated man
has to do works of sacrifice. It is the knowledge declared
of old in the great Vedantic utterances, “I am He”,
“All this verily is the Brahman, Brahman is this Self”.
It is the knowledge of the entire unity; it is the One
manifest as the doer and the deed and the object of
works, knower and knowledge and the object of know-
ledge. The universal energy into which the action is
poured is the Divine; the consecrated energy of the
giving is the Divine; whatever is offered is only some
form of the Divine; the giver of the offering is the Divine
himself in man; the action, the work, the sacrifice is
itself the Divine in movement, in activity; the goal to
be reached by sacrifice is the Divine. For the man who
has this knowledge and lives and acts in it, there can
be no binding works, no personal and egoistically appro-
priated action; there is only the divine Purusha acting
by the divine Prakriti in His own being, offering every-
thing into the fire of His self-conscious cosmic energy,
while the knowledge and the possession of His divine
existence and consciousness by the soul unified with
Him is the goal of all this God-directed movement and
activity. To know that and to live and act in this uni-
fying consciousness is to be free.

But all even of the Yogins have not attained to this
knowledge. “Some Yogins follow after the sacrifice which
is of the gods; others offer the sacrifice by the sacrifice


THE SIGNIFICANCE OF SACRIFICE


itself into the Brahman-fire.” The former conceive of
the Divine in various forms and powers and seek him
by various means, ordinances, dharmas, laws or, as we
might say, settled rites of action, self-discipline, conse-
crated works; for the latter, those who already know,
the simple fact of sacrifice, of offering whatever work
to the Divine itself, of casting all their activities into
the unified divine consciousness and energy, is their one
means, their one dharma. The means of sacrifice are
various ; the offerings are of many kinds. There is the psy-
chological sacrifice of self-control and self-discipline which
leads to the higher self-possession and self-knowledge.
“Some offer their senses into the fires of control, others
offer the objects of sense into the fires of sense, and others
offer all the actions of the sense and all the actions of
the vital force into the fire of the Yoga of self-control
kindled by knowledge.” There is, that is to say, the
discipline which receives the objects of sense-perception
without allowing the mind to be disturbed or affected
by its sense-activities, the senses themselves becoming
pure fires of sacrifipc; there is the discipline which stills
the senses so that the soul in its purity may appear from
behind the veil of mind-action, calm and still; there is
the discipline by which, when the self is known, all the
action of the sense-perceptions and all the action of
the vital being are received into that one still and tran-
quil soul. The offering of the striver after perfection
may be material and physical, draiya-yajiia, like that
consecrated in worship by the devotee to his deity, or
it may be the austerity of his self-discipline and energy
of bis soul directed to some high aim, tapo-yajrla, or it
may be some form of Yoga like the Pranayama of the
Rajayogins and Hathayogins, or any other yoga-yajna.


15i


J2SSAYS ON THE GITA


All these tend to the purification of the being; all sacri-
fice is a way towards the attainment of the highest.

The one thing needful, the saving principle constant
in all these variations, is to subordinate the lower activi-
ties, to diminish the control of desire and replace it by
a superior energy, to abandon the purely egoistic enjoy-
ment for that diviner delight which comes by sacrifice,
by self-dedication, by self-mastery, by the giving up
of one’s lower impulses to a greater and higher aim.
“They who enjoy the nectar of immortality left over
from the sacrifice attain to the eternal Brahman.” Sacri-
fice is the law of the world and nothing can be gained
without it, neither mastery here, nor the possession of
heavens beyond, nor the supreme possession of all; “this
world is not for him who docth not sacrifice, how then
any other world?” Therefore all these and many other
forms of sacrifice have been “extended in the mouth of
the Brahman”, the mouth of that Fire which receives
all offerings; they are all means and forms of the one
great Existence in activity, means by which the action
of the human being can be offered up to That of which
his outward Existence is a part and with which his
inmost self is one. They are “all born of work”; all
proceed from and are ordained by the one vast energy
of the divine which manifests itself in the universal
karma and makes all the cosmic activity a progressive
offering to the one Self and Lord and of which the last
stage for the human being is self-knowledge and the
possession of the divine or Brahmic consciousness. “So
knowing thou shalt become free.”

But there are gradations in the range of these various
forms of sacrifice, the physical offering the lowest, the
sacrifice of knowledge the highest. Knowledge is tha t


152


THE SIGNIFICANCE OF SACRIFICE


in which all this action culminates, not any lower
knowledge, but the highest self-knowledge and God-
knowledge, that which we can learn from those who know
the true principles of existence, that by possessing which
we shall not fall again into the bewilderment of the
mind’s ignorance and into its bondage to mere sense-
knowledge and to the inferior activity of the desires and
passions. The knowledge in which all culminates is that
by which “thou shalt see all existences (becomings,
bhutani) without exception in the Self, then in Me”. For
the • Self is that one, immutable, all-pervading, all-
containing, self-existent reality or Brahman hidden behind
our mental being into which our consciousness widens
out when it is liberated from the ego; we come to see
all beings as becomings, bhutani, within that one self-
existence.

But this Self or immutable Brahman we see too to be
the self-presentation to our essential psychological con-
sciousness of a supreme Being who is the source of our
existence and of whom all that is mutable or immutable
is the manifestation. He is God, the Divine, the Puru-
shottama. To Him we offer everything as a sacrifice;
into His hands we give up our actions; in His existence
we live and move; unified with Him in our nature and
with all existence in Him, we become one soul and one
power of being with Him and with all beings; with His
supreme reality we identify and unite our self-being.
By works done for sacrifice, eliminating desire, we arrive
at knowledge and at the soul’s possession of itself; by
works done in self-knowledge and God-knowledge we
are liberated into the unity, peace and joy of the divine
existence.


153


THE LORD OF THE SACRIFICE


We have, before we can proceed further, to gather up
all that has been said in its main principles. The whole
of the Gita’s gospel of works rests upon its idea of sacri-
fice and contains in fact the eternal connecting truth
of God and the world and works. The human mind seizes
ordinarily only fragmentary notions and standpoints of
a many-sided eternal truth of existence and builds upon
them its various theories of life and ethics and religion,
stressing this or that sign or appearance, but to some
entirety of it it must always tend to reawaken whenever
it returns in an age of large enlightenment to any entire
and synthetic relation of its world-knowledge with its
God-knowledge and self-knowledge. The gospel of the
Gita reposes upon this fundamental Vcdantic truth that
all being is the one Brahman and all existence the wheel
of Brahman, a divine movement opening out from God
and returning to God. All is the expressive activity of
Nature and Nature a power of the Divine which works
out the consciousness and will of the divine Soul master
of her works and inhabitant of her forms. It is for his
satisfaction that she descends into the absorption of the
forms of things and the works of life and mind and
returns again through mind and self-knowledge to the
conscious possession of the Soul that dwells within her.
There is first an involving of self and all it is or means


THE LORD Of THE SACRIFICE


in an evolution of phenomena; there is afterwards an
evolution of self, a revelation of all it is and means,
all that is hidden and yet suggested by the phenomenal
creation. This cycle of Nature could not be what it
is but for the Purusha assuming and maintaining simul-
taneously three eternal poises each of which is necessary
to the totality of this action. It must manifest itself in the
mutable, and there wc see it as the finite, the many,
all existences, sarvabhutani. It appears to us as the finite
personality of these million creatures with their infinite
diversities and various relations and it appears to us behind
these as the soul and force of the action of the gods, —
that is to say, the cosmic powers and qualities of the
Divine which preside over the workings of the life of the
universe and constitute to our perception different
universal forms of the one Existence, or, it may be, various
self-statements of personality of the one supreme Person.
Then, secret behind and within all forms and existences,
we perceive too an immutable, an infinite, a timeless, an
impersonal, a one unchanging spirit of existence, an
indivisible Self of all that is, in which all these many
find themselves to be really one. And therefore by return-
ing to that the active, finite personality of the individual
being discovers that it can release itself into a silent
largeness of universality and the peace and poise of an
immutable and unattached unity with all that proceeds
from and is supported by this indivisible Infinite. Or even
he may escape into it from individual existence. But the
highest secret of all, uttamam rahasyam, is the Purushottama.
This is the supreme Divine, God, who possesses both the
infinite and the finite and in whom the personal and the
impersonal, the one Self and the many existences, being
and becoming, the world-action and the supracosmic


essays on the gita


peace, pravrtli and nivrtti, meet, are united, are possessed
together and in each other. In God all things find their
secret truth and their absolute reconciliation.

All truth of works must depend upon the truth of being.
All active existence must be in its inmost reality a sacrifice
of works offered by Prakriti to Purusha, Nature offering
to the supreme and infinite Soul the desire of the multiple
finite Soul within her. Life is an altar to which she brings
her workings and the fruits of her workings and lays them
before whatever aspect of the Divinity the consciousness
in her has reached for whatever result of the sacrifice
the desire of the living .soul can seize on as its immediate
or its highest good. According to the grade of conscious-
ness and being which the soul has reached in Nature, will
be the Divinity it worships, the delight which it seeks
and the hope for which it sacrifices. And in the movement
of the mutable Purusha in Nature all is and must be inter-
change; for existence is one and its divisions must found
themselves on some law of mutual dependence, each grow-
ing by each and living by all. Where .sacrifice is not
willingly given, Nature exacts it by force, she satisfies
the law of her living, A mutual giving and receiving is the
law of Life without which it cannot for one moment
endure, and this fact is the stamp of the divine creative
Will on the world it has manifested in its being, the proof
that with sacrifice as their eternal companion the Lord
of creatures has created all these existences. The universal
law of sacrifice is the sign that the world is of God and
belongs to God and that life is his dominion and house
of worship and not a field for the self-satisfaction of the
independent ego; not the fulfilment of the ego, — that is
only our crude and obscure beginning, but the discovery
of God, the worship and seeking of the Divine and the


THE LORD OF THE SACRIFICE

Infinite through a constantly enlarging sacrifice culmina-
ting in a perfect self-giving founded on a perfect self-
knowledge is that to which the experience of life is
■at last intended to lead.

But the individual being begins with ignorance and per-
sists long in ignorance. Acutely conscious of himself he
sees the ego as the cause and whole meaning of life and
not the Divine. He sees himself as the doer of works and
does not see that all the workings of existence including
his own internal and external activities are the workings
of one universal Nature and nothing else. He sees himself
as the cnjoyer of works and imagines that for him all
exists and him Nature ought to satisfy and obey his
personal will; he does not see that she is not at all con-
cerned with satisfying him or at all careful of his will,
but obeys a higher universal will and seeks to satisfy a
Godhead who transcends her and her works and creations ;
his finite being, his will and his satisfactions are hers and
not his, and she offers them at every moment as a sacrifice
to the Divine of whose purpose in her she makes all this
the covert instrumentation. Because of this ignorance
whose seal is egoism, the creature ignores the law of
sacrifice and seeks to take all he can for himself and gives
only what Nature by her internal and external com-
pulsion forces him to give. He can really take nothing
except what she allows him to receive as his portion,
what the divine Powers within her yield to his desire.
The egoistic soul in a world of sacrifice is as if a thief or
robber who takes what these Powers bring to him and has
no mind to give in return. He misses the true meaning of
life and, since he does not use life and works for the
enlargement and elevation of his being through sacrifice,
he lives in vain.


157


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


Only when the individual being begins to perceive and
acknowledge in his acts the value of the self in others as
well as the power and needs of his own ego, begins to
perceive universal Nature behind his own workings and-
through the cosmic godheads gets some glimpse of the
One and the Infinite, is he on his way to the transcendence
of his limitation by the ego and the discovery of his soul.
He begins to discover a law other than that of his desires,
to which his desires must be more and more subordinated
and subjected; he develops the purely egoistic into the
understanding and ethical being. He begins to give
more value to the claims of the self in others and less
to the claims of his ego; he admits the strife between egoism
and altruism and by the increase of his altruistic tendencies
he prepares the enlargement of his own consciousness
and being. He begins to perceive Nature and divine
Powers in Nature to whom he owes sacrifice, adoration,
obedience, because it is by them and by their law that
the workings both of the mental and the material world
are controlled, and he learns that only by increasing their
presence and their greatness in his thought and will and
life can he himself increase his powers, knowledge, right
action and the satisfactions which these things bring to
him. Thus he adds the religious and supraphysical to
the material and egoistic sense of life and prepares him-
self to rise through the finite to the Infinite.

But this is only a long intermediate stage. It is still
subject to the law of desire, to the centrality of all things
in the conceptions and needs of his ego and to the control
of his being as well as his works by Nature, though it
is a regulated and governed desire, a clarified ego and
a Nature more and more subtilised and enlightened by
the sattwic, the highest natural principle. All this is


158


THE LORD OF THE SACRIFICE


still within the domain, though the very much enlarged
domain, of the mutable, finite and personal. The real
self-knowledge and consequently the right way of works
lies beyond; for the sacrifice done with knowledge is the
highest sacrifice and that alone brings a perfect working.
That can only come when he perceives that the self
in him and the self in others are one being and this self is
something higher than the ego, an infinite, an impersonal,
a universal existence in whom all move and have their
being, — when he perceives that all the cosmic gods to
whom he offers his sacrifice are forms of one infinite
Godhead and when again, leaving all his limited jind
limiting conceptions of that one Godhead, he perceives
him to be the supreme and ineffable Deity who is at
once the finite and the infinite, the one self and the
many, beyond Nature though manifesting himself
through Nature, beyond limitation by qualities though
formulating the power of his being through infinite
quality. This is the Purushottama to whom the sacrifice
has to be offered, not for any transient personal fruit of
works, but for the soul’s possession of God and in order
to live in harmony and union with the Divine.

In other words, man’s way to liberation and perfection
lies through an increasing impersonality. It is his
ancient and constant experience that the more he opens
himself to the impersonal and infinite, to that which
is pure and high and one and common in all things and
beings, the impersonal and infinite in Nature, the im-
personal and infinite in life, the impersonal and infinite
in his own subjectivity, the less he is bound by his ego
and by the circle of the finite, the more he feels a sense
of largeness, peace, pure happiness. The pleasure, joy,
satisfaction which the finite by itself can give or the


159


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


ego in its own right attain, is transitory, petty and
insecure. To dwell entirely in the ego-sense and its
finite conceptions, powers, satisfactions is to find this
world for ever full of transience and suffering, anityam
asukham ; the finite life is always troubled by a certain
sense of vanity for this fundamental reason that the finite
is not the whole or the highest truth of life; life is not
entirely real until it opens into the sense of the infinite.
It is for this reason that the Gita opens its gospel of
works by insisting on the Brahmic. consciousness, the
impersonal life, that great object of the discipline of
the, ancient sages. For the impersonal, the infinite, the
One in which all the permanent, mutable, multiple
activity of the world finds above itself its base of perma-
nence, security and peace, is the immobile Self, the
Akshara, the Brahman. If we see this, we shall see that
to raise one’s consciousness and the poise of one’s being
out of limited personality into this infinite and impersonal
Brahman is the first spiritual necessity. To see all beings
in this one Self is the knowledge which raises the soul
out of egoistic ignorance and its works and results; to
live in it is to acquire peace and firm spiritual foundation.

The way to bring about this great transformation
follows a double path; for there is the way of knowledge
and there is the way of works, and the Gita combines
them in a firm synthesis. The way of knowledge is to
turn the understanding, the intelligent will away from
its downward absorption in the workings of the mind and
the senses and upward to the self, the Purusha or Brah-
man; it is to make it dwell always on the one idea of the
one Self and not in the many-branching conceptions of
the mind and many-streaming impulses of desire. Taken
by itself this path would seem to lead to the complete


160


THE LORD OF THE SACRIFICE


renunciation of works, to an immobile passivity and to
the severance of the soul front Nature. But in reality such
an absolute renunciation, passivity and severance are
impossible. Purusha and Prakriti are twin principles of
being which cannot be severed, and so long as we remain
in Nature, our workings in Nature must continue, even
though they may take a different form or rather a different
sense from those of the unenlightened soul. The real
renunciation — for renunciation, sannyasa, there must be
— is not the fleeing from works, but the slaying of ego
and desire. The way is to abandon attachment to
the fruit of works even while doing them, and the way
is to recognise Nature as the agent and leave her to do
her works and to live in the soul as the witness and
sustainer, watching and sustaining her, but not attached
either to her actions or their fruits. The ego, the limited
and troubled personality is then quieted and merged
in the consciousness of the one impersonal Self, while
the works of Nature continue to our vision to operate
through all these “becomings” or existences who are
now seen by us as living and acting and moving, under
her impulsion entirely, in this one infinite Being; our
own finite existence is seen and felt to be only one of these
and its workings are seen and felt to be those of Nature,
not of our real self which is the silent impersonal unity.
The ego claimed them as its own doings and therefore
we thought them ours ; but the ego is now dead
and henceforth they are no longer ours, but Nature’s.
We have achieved by the slaying of ego impersonality
in our being and consciousness; we have achieved by
the renunciation of desire impersonality in the works of
our nature. We are free not only in inaction, but in
action; our liberty does not depend on a physical and


ll


161


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


temperamental immobility land vacancy, nor do we
fall from freedom directly \ye act. Even in a full current
of natural action the impersonal soul in us remains calm,
still and free.

The liberation given by this perfect impersonality
is real, is complete, is indispensable; but is it the last
word, the end of the whole matter? All life, all world-
existence, we have said, is the sacrifice offered by Nature
to the Purusha, the one and secret soul in Nature, in
whom all her workings take place; but its real sense is
obscured in us by ego, by desire, by our limited, active,
multiple personality. We have risen out of ego and
desire and limited personality and by impersonality,
its great corrective, we have found the impersonal
Godhead; we have identified our being with the one
self and soul in whom all exist. The sacrifice of works
continues, conducted not by ourselves any longer, but
by Nature, — Nature operating through the finite part
of our being, mind, senses, body — but in our infinite
being. But to whom then is this sacrifice offered and
with what object? For the impersonal has no activity
and no desires, no object to be gained, no dependence
for anything on all this world of creatures; it exists for
itself, in its own self-delight, in its own immutable eternal
being. We may have to do works without desire as a
means in order to reach this impersonal self-existence
and self-delight, but, that movement once executed, the
object of works is finished; the sacrifice is no longer
needed. Works may even then continue because Nature
continues and her activities; but there is no longer any
further object in these works. The sole reason for our
continuing to act after liberation is purely negative; it
is the compulsion of Nature on our finite parts of mind


THE LORD OF THE SACRIFICE


and body. But if that be all, then, first, works may
well be whittled down and reduced to a minimum, may
be confined to what Nature’s compulsion absolutely will
have from our bodies; and secondly, even if there is
no reduction to a minimum, — since action does not
matter and inaction also is no object, — then the nature
of the works also does not matter. Arjuna, once having
attained knowledge, may continue to fight out the battle
of Kurukshetra, following his old Kshatriya nature, or
he may leave it and live the life of the Sannyasin, fol-
lowing his new quietistic impulse. Which of these things
he does, becomes quite indifferent; or rather the second
is the better way, since it will discourage more quickly
the impulses of Nature which still have a hold on his
mind owing to past created tendency and, when his body
has fallen from him, he will securely depart into the
Infinite and Impersonal with no necessity of returning
again to the trouble and madness of life in this transient
and sorrowful world, anityam asukham imam lokam.

If this were so, the Gita would lose all its meaning;
for its first and central object would be defeated. But
the Gita insists that the nature of the action does matter
and that there is a positive sanction for continuance in
works, not only that one quite negative and mechanical
reason, the objectless compulsion of Nature. There is
still, after the ego has been conquered, a divine Lord
and enjoyer of the sacrifice, bhoktdram yajHatapasam, and
there is still an object in the sacrifice. The impersonal
Brahman is not the very last word, not the utterly highest
secret of our being; for impersonal and personal, finite
and infinite turn out to> be only two opposite, yet con-
comitant aspects of a divine Being unlimited by these
distinctions who is both these things at once. God is an


163


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


ever unmanifest Infinite ever self-impelled to manifest
himself in the finite; he is the great impersonal Person
of whom all personalities are partial appearances; he
is the Divine who reveals himself in the human being,
the Lord seated in the heart of man. Knowledge teaches
us to see all beings in the one impersonal self, for so we
are liberated from the separative ego-sense, and then
through this delivering impersonality to see them in this
God, almani atho mayi, “in the Self and then in Me.” Our
ego, our limiting personalities stand in the way of our
recognising the Divine who is in all and in whom all
have their being; for, subject to personality, we see only
such fragmentary aspects of Him as the finite appearances
of things suffer us to seize. We have to arrive at him
not through our lower personality, but through the high,
infinite and impersonal part of our being, and that we
find by becoming this self one in all in whose existence
the whole world is comprised. This infinite containing,
not excluding all finite appearances, this impersonal
admitting, not rejecting all individualities and personali-
ties, this immobile sustaining, pervading, containing,
not standing apart from all the movement of Nature,
is the clear mirror in which the Divine will reveal His
being. Therefore it is to the Impersonal that we have
first to attain; through the cosmic deities, through the
aspects of the finite alone the perfect knowledge of God
cannot be totally obtained. But neither is the silent im-
mobility of the impersonal Self, conceived as shut into
itself and divorced from all that it sustains, contains and
pervades, the whole all-revealing all-satisfying truth of
the Divine. To see that we have to look through its
silence to the Purushottama, and he in his divine
greatness possesses both the Akshara and the Kshara;


164


THE LORD OF THE SACRIFICE


he is seated in the immobility, but he manifests himself
in the movement and in all the action of cosmic Nature;
to him even after liberation the sacrifice of works in
Nature continues to be offered.

The real goal of the Yoga is then a living and self-
completing union with the divine Purushottama and
is not merely a self-extinguishing immcrgence in the
impersonal Being. To raise our whole existence to the
Divine Being, to dwell in him ( mayyeva nivasisyasi ) , to be
at one with him, unify our consciousness with his, to make
our fragmentary nature a reflection of his perfect nature,
to be inspired in our thought and sense wholly by the
divine knowledge, to be moved in will and action utterly
and faultlessly by the divine will, to lose desire in his love
and delight, is man’s perfection ; it is that which the Gita
describes as the highest secret. It is the true goal and
the last sense of human living and the highest step in
out progressive sacrifice of works. For he remains to the
end the master of works and the soul of sacrifice.


165


XIV


THE PRINCIPLE OF DIVINE WORKS

This then is the sense of the Gita’s doctrine of sacrifice.
Its full significance depends on the idea of the Purush-
ottama which as yet is not developed, — we find it set
forth clearly only much later in the eighteen chapters, —
and therefore we have had to anticipate, at whatever
cost of infidelity to the progressive method of the Gita’s
exposition, that central teaching. At present the Teacher
simply gives a hint, merely adumbrates this supreme
presence of the Purushottama and his relation to the
immobile Self in whom it is our first business, our pressing
spiritual need to find our poise of perfect peace and
equality by attainment to the Brahmic condition. He
speaks as yet not at all in set terms of the Purushottama,
but of himself, — “I”, Krishna, Narayana, the Avatar,
the God in man who is also the Lord in, the universe
incarnated in the figure of the divine charioteer of
Kurukshetra. “In the Self, then in Me,” is the formula he
gives, implying that the transcendence of the individual
personality by seeing it as a “becoming” in the impersonal
self-existent Being is simply a means of arriving at that
great secret impersonal Personality, which is thus silent,
calm and uplifted above Nature in the impersonal Being,
but also present and active in Nature in all these million
becomings. Losing our lower individual personality in
the Impersonal, we arrive finally at union with that


166


THE PRINCIPLE OF DIVINE WORKS


supreme Personality which is not separate and individual,
but yet assumes all individualities. Transcending the
lower nature of the three gunas and seating the soul in
the immobile Purusha beyond the three gunas, we can
ascend finally into the higher nature of the infinite
Godhead which is not bound by the three gunas even
when it acts through Nature. Reaching the inner action-
lessness of the silent Purusha, naiskarmya, and leaving
Prakriti to do her works, we can attain supremely
beyond to the status of the divine Mastery which is able
to do all works and yet be bound by none. The idea of
the Purushottama, seen here as the incarnate Narayana,
Krishna, is therefore the key. Without it the withdrawal
from the lower nature to the Brahmic condition leads
necessarily to inaction of the liberated man, his indiffer-
ence to the works of the world; with it the same with-
drawal becomes a step by which the works of the world
are taken up in the spirit, with the nature and in the
freedom of the Divine. See the silent Brahman as the
goal and the world with all its activities has to be for-
saken; see God, the Divine, the Purushottama as the
goal, superior to action yet its inner spiritual cause and
object and original will, and the world with all its acti-
vities is conquered and possessed in a divine transcendence
of the world. It can become instead of a prison-house an
opulent kingdom, rajyam samrddham, which we have
conquered for the spiritual life by slaying the limitation
of the tyrant ego and overcoming the bondage of
our gaoler desires and breaking the prison of our indi-
vidualistic possession and enjoyment. The liberated
universalised soul becomes svarat samrat, self-ruler and
emperor.

The works of sacrifice are thus vindicated as a means


167


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


of liberation and absolute spiritual perfection, samsiddhu
So Janaka and other great Karmayogins of the mighty
ancient Yoga attained to perfection, by equal and desire-
less works done as a sacrifice, without the least egoistic
aim or attachment — karmanaiva hi samsiddhim asthild
janakadayah . So too and with the same desirelessness, after
liberation and perfection, works can and have to be
continued by us in a large divine spirit, with the calm
high nature of a spiritual royalty. “Thou shouldst do
works regarding also the holding together of the peoples,
lokasamgraham evdpi sampasyam'kartum arhasi. Whatsoever
the Best doeth, that the lower kind of man puts into
practice; the standard he creates, the people follows.
O son of Pritha, I have no work that I need to do in all
the three worlds, I have nothing that I have not ‘gained
and have yet to gain, and I abide verily in the paths of
action,” varta eva ca karmani , — eva implying, I abide in
it and do not leave it as the Sannyasin thinks himself
bound to abandon works. “For if I did not abide sleep-
lessly in the paths of action, men follow in every way
my path, these peoples would sink to destruction if I did
not works and I should be the creator of confusion and
slay these creatures. As those who know not act with
attachment to the action, he who knows should act
without attachment, having for his motive to hold
together the peoples. He should not create a division of
their understanding in the ignorant who are attached to
their works; he should set them to all actions, doing them
himself with knowledge and in Yoga.” There are few
more important passages in the Gita than these seven
striking couplets. v

But let us clearly understand that they must not be
interpreted, as the modern pragmatic tendency concerned


m


THE PRINCIPLE OP DIVINE WORKS


much more with the present affairs of the world than with
any high and far-off spiritual possibility seeks to interpret
them, as no more than a philosophical and religious justi-
fication of social service, patriotic, cosmopolitan and
humanitarian effort and attachment to the hundred eager
social schemes and dreams which attract the modern
intellect. It is not the rule of a large moral and intellectual
altruism which is here announced, but that of a spiritual
unity with God and with this world of beings who dwell
in him and in whom he dwells. It is not an injunction to
subordinate the individual to society and humanity or
immolate egoism on the altar of the human collectivity,
but to fulfil the individual in God and to sacrifice the
ego on the one true altar of the all-embracing Divinity.
The Gita moves on a plane of ideas and experiences higher
than those of the modern mind which is at the stage indeed
of a struggle to shake off the coils of egoism, but is still
mundane in its outlook and intellectual and moral rather
than spiritual in its temperament. Patriotism, cosmo-
politanism, service of society, collectivism, humanitarian-
ism, the ideal or religion of humanity are admirable aids to-
wards our escape from our primary condition of individual,
family, social, national egoism into a secondary stage in
which the individual realises, as far as it can be done on
the intellectual, moral and emotional level, — on that level
he cannot do it entirely in the right and perfect way, the
way of the integral truth of his being, — the oneness of his
existence with the existence of other beings. But the
thought of the Gita reaches beyond to a tertiary condition
of our developing self-consciousness towards which the
secondary is only a partial stage of advance.

The Indian social tendency has been to subordinate
the individual to the claims of society, but Indian religious


169


ESSAYS ON THE GltA


#

thought and spiritual seeking have been always loftily
individualistic in their aims. An Indian system of thought
like the Gita’s cannot possibly fail to put first the deve-
lopment of the individual, the highest need of the indi-
vidual, his claim to discover and exercise his largest
spiritual freedom, greatness, splendour, royalty, — his
aim to develop into the illumined seer and king in the
spiritual sense of seerdom and kingship, which was the
first great charter of the ideal humanity promulgated by
the ancient Vedic sages. To exceed himself was their
goal for the individual, not by losing all his personal aims
in the aims of an organised human society, but by en-
larging, heightening, aggrandising himself into the con-
sciousness of the Godhead. The rule given here by the
Gita is the rule for the master-man, the superman, the
divinised human being, the Best, not in the sense of any
Nietzschean, any one-sided and lopsided, any Olympian,
Apollonian or Dionysian, any angelic or demoniac super-
manhood, but in that of the man whose whole personality
has been offered up into the being, nature and con-
sciousness of the one transcendent and universal Divinity
and by loss of the smaller self has found its greater self,
has been divinised.

To exalt oneself out of the lower imperfect Prakriti,
traigunyamayi maya , into unity with the divine being,
consciousness and nature , 1 madbhdvam dgatah, is the object
of the Yoga. But when this object is fulfilled, when the
man is in the Brahmic status and sees no longer with the
false egoistic vision himself and the world, but sees all
beings in the Self, ii\ God, and the Self in all beings, God


1 ^dyujya, sdlokya and sddrsya or iddharmya. Sadharmya is becoming of one
law of being and action with the Divine.


•170


THE PRINCIPLE OF DIVINE WORKS


in all beings, what shall be the action, — since action there
still is, — which results from that seeing, and what shall
be the cosmic or individual motive of all his works? It is
the question of Aijuna 2 but answered from a standpoint
other than that from which Arjuna had put it. The
motive cannot be personal desire on the intellectual,
moral, emotional level, for that has been abandoned, —
even, the moral motive has been abandoned, since the
liberated man has passed beyond the lower distinction of
sin and virtue, lives in a glorified purity beyond good and
evil. It cannol* be the spiritual call to his perfect self-
development by means of disinterested works, for the call
has been answered, the development is perfect and ful-
filled. His motive of action can only be the holding to-
gether of the peoples, cikirsur lokasamgraham. This great
march of the peoples towards a far-off divine ideal has to
be held together, prevented from falling into the
bewilderment, confusion and utter discord of the under-
standing which would lead to dissolution and destruction
and to which the world moving forward in the night or
dark twilight of ignorance would be too easily prone if
it were not held together, conducted, kept to the great
lines of its discipline by the illumination, by the strength,
by the rule and example, by the visible standard and the
invisible influence of its Best. The best, the individuals
who are in advance of the general line and above the
general level of the collectivity, are the natural leaders
of mankind, for it is they who can point to the race both
the way they must follow and the standard or ideal they
have to keep to or to attain. But the divinised man is
the Best in no ordinary sense of the word and his influence,

* kim prablmeta kim asila irajeta km.


171


ESSAYS ON THE OITA


his example must have a power which that of no ordinarily
superior man can exercise. What example then shall
he give? What rule or standard shall he uphold?

In order to indicate more perfectly his meaning, the
divine Teacher, the Avatar gives his own example, his
own standard to Arjuna. “I abide in the path of action,”
he seems to say, “the path that all men follow; thou too
must abide in action. In the way I act, in that way . thou
too must act. I am above the necessity of works, for I have
nothing to gain by them; I am the Divine who possess
all things and all beings in the world and I am myself
beyond the world as well as in it and I do not depend
upon anything or anyone in all the three worlds for any
object; yet I act. This too must be thy manner and spirit
of working. I, the Divine, am the rule and the standard; it
is I who make the path in which men tread ; I am the way
and the goal. But I do all this largely, universally, visibly
in part, but far more invisibly; and men do not really
know the way of my workings. Thou, when thou know-
cst and scest, when thou hast become - the divinised
man, must be the individual power of God, the human
yet divine example, even as I am in my avatars. Most
men dwell in the ignorance, the God-seer dwells in the
knowledge; but let him not confuse the minds of men
by a dangerous example, rejecting in his superiority
the works of the world ; let him not cut short the thread
of action before it is spun out, let him not perplex and
falsify the stages and gradations of the ways I have
hewn. The whole range of human action has been de-
creed by Me with a view to the progress of man from
the lower to the higher nature, from the apparent un-
divine to the conscious Divine. The whole range of
human works must be that in which the God-knowcr


172


THE PRINCIPLE OF DIVINE WORKS


shall move. All individual, all social action, all ^he
works of the intellect, the heart and the body arc still
his, not any longer for his own separate sake, but for
the sake of God in the world, of God in all beings and
that all those beings may move forward, as he has moved,
by the path of works towards the discovery of the Divine
in themselves. Outwardly his actions may not seem
to differ essentially from theirs; battle and rule as well
as teaching and thought, all the various commerce of
man with man may fall in his range ; but the spirit in which
he does them must be very different, and it is that spirit
which by its influence shall be the great attraction draw-
ing men upwards to his own level, the great lever lifting
the mass of men higher in their ascent.”

The giving of the exajnple of God himself to the libe-
rated man is profoundly significant; for it reveals the
whole basis of the Gita’s philosophy of divine works. The
liberated man is he who has exalted himself into the
divine nature and according to that divine nature must
be his actions. But what is the divine nature? It is not
entirely and solely that of the Akshara, the immobile,
inactive, impersonal self; for that by itself would lead
the liberated man to actionless immobility. It is not
characteristically that of the Kshara, the multitudinous,
the personal, the Purusha self-subjected to Prakriti; for
that by itself would lead him back into subjection to his
personality and to the lower nature and its qualities.
It is the nature of the Purushottama who holds both
these together and by his supreme divinity reconciles
them in a divine reconciliation which is the highest
secret of his being, rahasyam hyetad uttamam. He is not
the doer of works in the personal sense of our action
involved in Prakriti; for God works through his power,


173


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


conscious nature, effective force, — Shakti, Maya,
Prakriti, — but yet above it, not. involved in it, not subject
to it, not unable to lift himself beyond the laws, workings,
habits of action it creates, not affected or bound by them,
not unable to distinguish himself, as we are unable,
from the workings of life, mind and body. He is the
doer of works who acts not, kartdram akarlaram. “Know
Me” says Krishna, “for the doer of this (the fourfold
law of human workings) who am yet the imperishable
non-doer. Works fix not themselves on me (na limpanti),
nor have I desire for the fruits of action.” But neither
is he the inactive, impassive, unpuissant Witness and
nothing else; for it is he who works in the steps and
measures of his power; every movement of it, every
particle of the world of beings it forms is instinct with
his presence, full of his consciousness, impelled by his
will, shaped by his knowledge.

He is, besides, the Supreme without qualities who
is possessed of all qualities, nirguno gum. 3 He is not bound
by any mode of nature or action, nor consists, as our
personality consists, of a sum of qualities, modes of
nature, characteristic operations of the mental, moral,
emotional, vital, physical being, but is the source of all
modes and qualities, capable of developing any he wills
in whatever way and to whatever degree he wills; he is
the infinite being of which they are ways of becoming,
the immeasurable quantity and unbound ineffable of
which they are measures, numbers and figures, . which
they seem to rhythmise and arithmise in the standards
of the universe. Yet neither is he merely an impersonal
indeterminate, nor a mere stuff of conscious existence.


3 Upanishad.


THE PRINCIPLE OF DIVINE WORKS


for all determinations and personalisings to draw upon
for their material, but a supreme Being, the one original
conscious Existent, the perfect Personality capable of
all " relations even to the most human, concrete and
intimate; for he is friend, comrade, lover, playmate,
guide, teacher, master, ministrant of knowledge or
ministrant of joy, yet in all relations unbound, free and
absolute. This too the divinised man becomes in the
measure of his attainment, impersonal in his personality,
unbound by quality or action even when maintaining
the most personal and intimate relations with men,
unbound by any dharma even when following in appear-
ance this or that dharma. Neither the dynamism of the
kinetic man nor the actionless light of the ascetic or
quietist, neither the vehement personality of the rrfan
of action nor the indifferent impersonality of the philo-
sophic sage is the complete divine ideal. These are the
two conflicting standards of the man of this world and
the ascetic or the quietist philosopher, one immersed in
the action of the Kshara, the other striving to dwell
entirely in the peace of the Akshara; but the complete
divine ideal proceeds from the nature of the Purushottama
which transcends this conflict and reconciles all divine
possibilities.

The kinetic man is not satisfied with any ideal which
does not depend upon the fulfilment of this cosmic
nature, this play of the three qualities of that nature, this
human activity of mind and heart and body. The high-
est fulfilment of that activity, he might say, is my idea
of human perfection, of the divine possibility in man;
some ideal that satisfies the intellect, the heart, the
moral being, some ideal of our human nature in its
action can alone satisfy the human ( being; he. must


175


ESSAYS ON TflE GITA


have 'something that he can seek in the workings of his
mind and life and body. For that is his nature, his
dharma, and how can he be fulfilled in something out-
side his nature? For to his nature each being is bound
and within it he must seek for his perfection. According
to our human nature must be our human perfection;
and each man must strive for it according to the line
of his personality, his svadharma, but in life, in action,
not outside life and action. Yes, there is a truth in that,
replies the Gita; the fulfilment of God in man, the play
of the Divine in life is part of the ideal perfection. But
if you seek it only in the external, in life, in the principle
of action, you will never find it; for you will then not
only act according to your nature, which is in itself a
rule of perfection, but you will be — and this is a rule
of the imperfection — eternally subject to its modes,
its dualities of liking and dislike, pain and pleasure and
especially to the rajasic mode with its principle of desire
and its snare of wrath and grief and longing, — the rest-
less, all-devouring principle of desire, the insatiable fire
which besieges your worldly action, the eternal enemy
of knowledge by which it is covered over here in your
nature as is a fire by smoke or a mirror by dust and
which you must slay in order to live in the calm, clear,
luminous truth of the spirit. The senses, mind and
intellect are the seat of this eternal cause of imperfection
and yet it is within this sense, mind and intellect, this
play of the lower nature that you would limit your search
for perfection! The effort is vain. The kinetic side of
your nature must first seek to add to itself the quietistic;
you must uplift yourself beyond this lower nature to
that which is above the three gunas, that which is founded
in the highest principle, in the soul. Only when you have


176


THE PRINCIPLE OF DIVINE WORKS


attained to peace of soul, can you become capable of a
free and divine action.

The quietist, the ascetic, on the other hand, cannot
see any possibility of perfection into which life and action
enter. Are they not the very seat of bondage and imperfec-
tion? Is not all action imperfect in its nature, like a
fire that must produce smoke, is not the principle of
action itself rajasic, the father of desire, a cause that must
have its effect of obscuration of knowledge, its round of
longing and success and failure, its oscillations of joy
and grief, its duality of virtue and sin? God may be in the
world, but he is not of the world ; he is a God of renuncia-
tion and not the Master or cause of our works ; the master
of our works is desire and the cause of works is ignorance.
If the world, the Kshara is in a sense a manifestation or
a Ilia of the Divine, it is an imperfect play with the igno-
rance of Nature, an obscuration rather than a manifesta-
tion. That is surely evident from our very first glance at
the nature of the world and does not the fullest experience
of the world teach us always the same truth? is it not a
wheel of the ignorance ’ binding the soul to continual
birth by the impulse of desire and action until at last
that is exhausted or cast away? Not only desire, but action
also must be flung away; seated in the silent self the soul
will then pass away into the motionless, actionless,
imperturbable, absolute Brahman. To this objection of
the impersonalising quietist the Gita is at more pains to
answer than to that of the man of the world, the kinetic
individual. For this quietism having hold of a higher and
moire powerful truth which is yet not the whole or the
highest truth, its promulgation as the universal, complete,
highest ideal of human life is likely to be more confusing
and disastrous to the advance of the human race towards


12


111


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


its. goal than the error of an exclusive kinetism. A strong
one-sided truth, when set forth as the whole truth, creates
a strong light but also a strong confusion; for the very
strength of its element of truth increases the strength
of its element of error. The error of the kinetic ideal can
only prolong the ignorance and retard the human advance
by setting it in search of perfection where perfection
cannot be found ; but the error of the quietistic ideal con-
tains in itself the very principle of world-destruction.
Were I to act upon it, says Krishna, I should destroy the
peoples and be the author of confusion; and though the
error of an individual human being, even though a
nearly divine man, cannot destroy the whole race, it
may produce a widespread confusion which may be in
its nature destructive of the principle of human life and
disturbing to the settled line of its advance.

Therefore the quietistic tendency in man must be
got to recognise its own incompleteness and admit on
an equality with itself the truth which lies behind the
kinetic tendency, — the fulfilment of God in man and the
presence of the Divine in all the action of the human
race. God is there not only in the silence, but in the
action; the quietism of the impassive soul unaffected
by Nature and the kinetism of the soul giving itself to
Nature so that the great world-sacrifice, the Purusha-
Yajna, may be effected, are not a reality and a falsehood
in perpetual struggle nor yet two hostile realities, one
superior, the other inferior, each fatal to the other; they
are the double term of the divine manifestation. The
Akshara alone is not the whole key of their fulfilment,
not the very highest secret. The double fulfilment, the
reconciliation is to be sought in the Purushottama repre-
sented here by Krishna, at once supreme Being, Lord of


178


THE PRINCIPLE OF DIVINE WORKS


the worlds and Avatar. The divinised man entering into
his divine nature will act even as he acts; he will not
give himself up to inaction. The Divine is at work in
man in the ignorance and at work in man in the know-
ledge. To know Him is our soul’s highest welfare and the
condition of its perfection, but to know and realise Him
as a transcendent peace and silence is not all ; the secret
that has to be learned is at once the secret of the eternal
and unborn Divine and the secret of the divine birth
and works, janma karma ca me divyam. The action which
proceeds from that knowledge, will be free from all
bondage; “he who so knoweth Me” says the Teacher,
‘‘is not bound by works.” If the escape from the obliga-
tion of works and desire and from the wheel of rebirth
is to be the aim and the ideal, then this knowledge is to be
taken as the true, the broad way of escape; for, says the
Gita, “he who knows in their right principles My divine
birth and works, comes when he leaves hii? body, not to
rebirth, but to Me, O Arjuna.” Through the knowledge
and possession of the divine birth he comes to the unborn
and imperishable Divine who is the self of all beings,
ajo avyaya atma ; through the knowledge and execution
of divine works to the Master of works, the lord of all
beings, bhutanam isvara. He lives in that unborn being;
his works are those of that universal Mastery.


179


XV

THE POSSIBILITY AND PURPOSE OF
AVATARHOOD

In speaking of this Yoga in which action and knowledge
become one, the Yoga of the sacrifice of works with
knowledge, in which works are fulfilled in knowledge,
knowledge supports, changes and enlightens works,
and both are offered to the Purushottama, the supreme
Divinity who becomes manifest within us as Narayana,
Lord of all our being and action seated secret in our
hearts for ever, who becomes manifest even in the human
form as the Avatar, the divine birth taking possession
of our humanity, Krishna has declared in passing that
this was the ancient and original Yoga which he gave
to Vivasvan, the Sun-God, Vivasvan gave it to Manu,
the father of men, Manu gave it to Ikshvaku, head of the
Solar line, and so it came down from royal sage to royal
sage till it was lost in the great lapse of Time and is now
renewed for Arjuna, because he is the lover and devotee,
friend and comrade of the Avatar. For this, he says,
is the highest secret, — thus claiming for it a superiority
to all other forms of Yoga, because those others lead to the
impersonal Brahman or to a personal Deity, to a libera-
tion in actionless knowledge or a liberation in absorbed
beatitude, but this gives the highest secret and the whole
secret; it brings us to divine peace and divine works, to
divine knowledge, action and ecstasy unified in a perfect


180


THE POSSIBILITY AND PURPOSE OF AVATARHOOD


freedom; it unites into itself all the Yogic paths as the high-
est being of the Divine reconciles and makes one in itself
all the different and even contrary powers and principles
of its manifested being. Therefore this Yoga of the Gita
is not, as some contend, only the Karmayoga, one and the
lowest, according to them, of the three paths, but a
highest Yoga synthetic and integral directing Godward
all the powers of our being.

Arjuna takes the declaration about the transmission of
the Yoga in its most physical sense, — there is another
significance in which it can be taken, — and asks how the
Sun-God, one of the first-born of beings, ancestor of the
Solar dynasty, can have received the Yoga from the man
Krishna who is only now born into the world. Krishna
does not reply, as we might have expected him to have
done, that it was as the Divine who is the source of all
knowledge that he gave the Word to the Deva who is his
form of knowledge, giver of all inner and outer light, —
bhargo savitur devasya yo no dhiyah pracodayat; he accepts
instead the opportunity which Arjuna gives him of de-
claring his concealed Godhead, a declaration for which
he had prepared when he gave himself as the divine
example for the worker who is not bound by his works,
but which he has not yet quite explicitly made. He now
openly announces himself as the incarnate Godhead,
the Avatar.

We have had occasion already, when speaking of the
divine Teacher, to state briefly the doctrine of Avatar-
hood as it appears to us in the light of Vedanta, the light
in which the Gita presents it to us. We must now look a
little more closely at this Avatarhood' and at the signi-
ficance of the divine Birth of which it is the outward
expression; for that is a link of considerable importance in


.181


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


the integral teaching of the Gita. And we may first trans-
late the words of the Teacher himself in which the
nature and purpose of Avatarhood are given summarily
and remind ourselves also of other passages or references
which bear upon it. “Many are my lives that are past,
and thine also, O Arjuna; all of them I know, but thou
knowest not, O scourge of the foe. Though I am the
unborn, though I am imperishable in my self-existence,
though I am the Lord of all existences, yet I stand upon
my own Nature and I come into birth by my self-Maya.
For whensoever there is the fading of the Dharma and
the uprising of unrighteousness, then *1 loose myself
forth into birth. For the deliverance of the good, for the
destruction of the evil-doers, for the enthroning of the
Right I am born from age to age. He who knoweth thus
in its right principles my divine birth and my divine work,
when he abandons his body, comes not to rebirth, he comes
to Me, O Arjuna. Delivered from liking and fear and
wrath, full of me, taking refuge in me, many purified
by austerity of knowledge have arrived at my nature of
being ( madbhavam , the divine nature of the Purushottama).
As men approach Me, so I accept them to my love ( bhaja -
mi ) ; men follow in every way my path, O son of Pritha.”

But most men, the' Gita goes on to say, desiring the
fulfilment of their works, sacrifice to the gods, to various
forms and personalities of the one Godhead, because
the fulfilment ( siddhi ) that is born of works, — of works
without knowledge, — is very swift and easy in the human
world; it belongs indeed to that world alone. The
other, the divine self-fulfilment in man by the sacrifice
with knowledge to the supreme Godhead, is much more
difficult; its results belong to a higher plane of existence
and they are less easily grasped. Men therefore have


182


THE POSSIBILITY AND PURPOSE OF AVATARHOOD


to follow the fourfold law of their nature and works and
on this plane of mundane action they seek the Godhead
through his various qualities. But, $ays Krishna, though
I am the doer of the fourfold works and creator of its
fourfold law, yet I must be known also as the non-doer,
the imperishable, the immutable Self. “Works affect
Me not, nor have I desire for the fruit of works;” for
God is the impersonal beyond this egoistic personality
and this strife of the modes of Nature, and as the Puru-
shottama also, the impersonal Personality, he possesses
this supreme freedom even in works. Therefore the
doer of divine works even while following the fourfold
law has to know and live in that which is beyond, in
the impersonal Self and so in the supreme Godhead.
“He who thus knows Me is not bound by his works.
So knowing was work done by the men of old who sought
liberation; do therefore, thou also, work of that more
ancient kind done by ancient men.”

The second portion of these passages which has here
been given in substance, explains the nature of divine
works, divyam karma , with the principle of which we have
had to deal in the last essay; the first, which has been
fully translated, explains the way of the divine birth,
divyam janma, the Avatar hood. But we have to remark
carefully that the upholding of Dharma in the world is
not the only object of the descent of the Avatar, that
great mystery of the Divine manifest in humanity; for
the upholding of the Dharma is not an all-sufficient
object in itself, not the supreme possible aim for the
manifestation of a Christ, a Krishna, a Buddha, but
is only the general condition of a higher aim and a
more supreme, and divine utility. For there are two
aspects of the divine birth; one is a -descent, the birth


183


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


of God in humanity, the Godhead manifesting itself
in the human form and nature, the eternal Avatar;
the other is an ascent, the birth of man into the Godhead,
man rising into the divine nature and consciousness,
madbhavam agatah ; it is the being bom anew in a second
birth of the soul. It is that new birth which Avatarhood
and the upholding of the Dharma are intended to serve.
This double aspect in the Gita’s doctrine of Avatarhood
is apt to be missed by the cursory reader satisfied, as
most are, with catching a superficial view of its profound
teachings, and it is missed too by the formal commentator
petrified in the rigidity of the schools. Yet it is necessary,
surely, to the whole meaning of the doctrine. Otherwise
the Avatar idea would be only a dogma, a popular
superstition, or an imaginative or mystic deification of
historical or legendary supermen, not what the Gita
makes all its teaching, a deep philosophical and religious
truth and an esssential part of or .step to the supreme
mystery of all, rahasyam uttamam.

If there were not this rising of man into the Godhead
to be helped by the descent of God into humanity,
Avatarhood for the sake of the Dharma would be an
otiose phenomenon, since mere Right, mere justice or
standards of virtue can always be upheld by the divine
omnipotence through its ordinary means, by great men
or great movements, by the life and work of sages and
kings and religious teachers, without any actual incar-
nation. The Avatar comes as the manifestation of the
divine nature in the human nature, the apocalypse of
its Christhood, Krishnahood, Buddhahood, in order
that the human nature may by moulding its principle,
thought, feeling, action, being on the lines of that
Christhood, Krishnahood, Buddhahood transfigure itself

184


THE POSSIBILITY AND PURPOSE OF AVATARHOOD


into the divine. The law, the Dharma which the Avatar
establishes is given for that purpose chiefly; the Christ,
Krishna, Buddha stands in its centre as the gate, he
makes through himself the way men shall follow. That is
why each Incarnation holds before men his own example
and declares of himself that he is the way and the gate;
he declares too the oneness of his humanity with the
divine being, declares that the Son of Man and the
Father above from whom he has descended are one, that
Krishna in the human body, manusim tanum asritam, and
the supreme Lord and Friend of all creatures are but
two revelations of the same divine Purushottama, revealed
there in his own being, revealed here in. the type of
humanity.

That the Gita contains as its kernel this second and
real object of the Avatarhood, is evident even from this
passage by itself rightly considered; but it becomes much
clearer if we take it, not by itself, — always the wrong way
to deal with the texts of the Gita, — but in its right close
connection with other passages and with the whole
teaching. We have to remember and take together its
doctrine of the one Self in all, of the Godhead seated
in the heart of every creature, its teaching about the
relations between the' Creator and his creation, its
strongly emphasised idea of the vibhiiti , — noting too the
language in which the Teacher gives his own divine
example of selfless works which applies equally to the
human Krishna and the divine Lord of the worlds, and
giving their due weight to such passages as that in the
ninth chapter, “Deluded minds despise Me lodged in
the human body because they know not My ^supreme
nature of being, Lord of all existences”; and we. have
to read in the light of these ideas this passage we find


185


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


before us and its declaration that by the knowledge of
his divine birth and divine works man comes to the
Divine and by becoming full of him and even as he and
taking refuge in him they arrive at his nature and
status of being, madbhavam. For then we shall understand
the divine birth and its object, not as an isolated and
miraculous phenomenon, but in its proper place in the
whole scheme of the world-manifestation; without that
we cannot arrive at its divine mystery, but shall either
scout it altogether or accept it ignorantly and, it may
be, superstitiously or fall into the petty and superficial
ideas of the modern mind about it by which it loses all
its inner and helpful significance.

For to the modern mind Avatarhood is one of the most
difficult to accept or to understand of all the ideas that
are streaming in from the East upon the rationalised
human consciousness. It is apt to take it at the best for
a mere figure for some high manifestation of human
power, character, genius, great work done for the world
or in the world, and at the worst to regard it as a super-
stition, — to the heathen a foolishness and tp the Greeks
a stumbling-block. The materialist, necessarily, cannot
even look at it, since he does not believe in God; to the
rationalist or the Deist it is a folly and a thing of derision;
to the thoroughgoing dualist who sees an unbridgeable gulf
between the human and the divine nature, it sounds like
a blasphemy. The rationalist objects that if God exists,
he is extra-cosmic or supracosmic and does not intervene
in the affairs of the world, but allows them to be go-
verned by a fixed machinery of law, — he is, in fact, a sort
of far-off constitutional monarch or spiritual King Log,
at the best an indifferent inactive Spirit behind the
activity of Nature, like some generalised or abstract


18 $


THE POSSIBILITY AND PURPOSE OF AVATARHOOD


witness Purusha of the Sankhyas; he is pure Spirit and
cannot put on a body, infinite and cannot be finite as
the human being is finite, the ever unborn creator and
cannot be the creature born into the world, — these
things are impossible even to his absolute omnipotence.
To these objections the thoroughgoing dualist would
add that God is in his person, his role and his nature
different and separate from man; the perfect cannot
put on human imperfection; the unborn personal God
cannot be born as a human personality; the Ruler of
the worlds cannot be limited in a nature-bound human
action and in a perishable human body. These objec-
tions, so formidable at first sjght to the reason, seem to
have been present to the mind of the Teacher in the
Gita when he says that although the Divine is unborn,
imperishable in his self-existence, the Lord of all beings,
yet he assumes birth by a supreme resort to the action
of his Nature and by force of his self-Maya; that he whom
the deluded despise because lodged in a human body,
is verily in his supreme being the Lord of all; that he is
in the action of the divine consciousness the creator of
the fourfold Law and the doer of the works of the world
and at the same time in the silence of the divine con-
sciousness the impartial witness of the works of his own
Nature, — for he is always, beyond both the silence and
the action, the supreme Purushotfcama. And the Gita
is able to meet all these oppositions and to reconcile all
these contraries because it starts from the Vedantic view
of existence, of God and the universe.

For in the Vedantic view of things all these apparently
formidable objections are null and void from the begin-
ning. The idea of the Avatar is not indeed indispensable
to its scheme, but it comes in naturally into it as a


187


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


perfectly rational and logical conception. For all here is
God, is the Spirit or Self-existence, is Brahman, ekam-
evadvitlyam , — there is nothing else, nothing other and
different from it and there can be nothing else, can be
nothing other and different from it; Nature is and can
be nothing else than a power of the divine consciousness;
all beings are and can be nothing else than inner and
outer, subjective and objective soul-forms and bodily
forms of the divine being which exist in or result from
the power of its consciousness. Far from the Infinite being
unable to take on finiteness, the whole universe is nothing
else but that; we can see, look as we may, nothing else
at all in the whole wide world we inhabit. Far from the
Spirit being incapable of form or disdaining to connect
itself with form of matter or mind and to assume a limited
nature or a body, all here is nothing but that, the world
exists only by that connection, that assumption. Far from
the world being a mechanism of law with no soul or
spirit intervening in the movement of its forces or the
action of its minds and bodies, — only some original
indifferent Spirit passively existing somewhere outside
or above it, — the whole world and every particle of it
is on the contrary nothing but the divine force in action
and that divine force determines and governs its every
movement, inhabits its every form, possesses here every
soul and mind; all is in God and in him moves and has
its being, in all he is, acts and displays his being; every
creature is the disguised Narayana.

Far from the unborn being unable to assume birth,
all beings are even in their individuality unborn spirits,
eternal without beginning or end, and in their essential
existence and their universality all are the one unborn
.Spirit of whom birth and death are only a phenomenon


188


THE POSSIBILITY AND PURPOSE OF AVATARHOOD


of the assumption and change of forms. The assump-
tion of imperfection by the perfect is the whole mystic
phenomenon of the universe; but the imperfection
appears in the form and action of the mind or body
assumed, subsists in the phenomenon, — in that which
assumes it there is no imperfection, even as in the Sun
which illumines all there is no defect of light or of vision,
but only in the capacities of the individual organ of
vision. Nor does God rule the world from some remote
heaven, but by his intimate omnipresence; each finite
working of force is an act of infinite Force and not of a
limited separate self-existent energy labouring in its own
underived strength; in every finite working of will and
knowledge we can discover, supporting it, an act of the
infinite all-will and all-knowledge. God’s rule is not an
absentee, foreign and external government; he governs
all because he exceeds all, but also because he dwells
within all movements and is their absolute soul and
spirit. Therefore none of the objections opposed by our
reason to the possibility of Avatarhood can stand in their
principle; for the principle is a vain division made by
the intellectual reason which the whole phenomenon and
the whole reality of the world are busy every moment
contradicting and disproving.

But still, apart from the possibility, there is the ques-
tion of the actual divine working, — whether actually
the divine consciousness does appear coming forward
from beyond the veil to act at all directly in the pheno-
menal, the finite, the mental and material, the limited,
the imperfect. The finite is indeed nothing but a defini-
tion, a face-value of the Infinite’s self-representations to
its own variations of consciousness; the real value of each
finite phenomenon is an infinite in its self-existence,


189


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


whatever it may be in the action of its phenomenal
nature, its temporal self-representation. The man is not,
when we look closely, himself alone, a rigidly separate
self-existent individual, but humanity in a mind and
body of itself; and humanity too is no rigidly separate
self-existent species or genus, it is the All-existence, the
universal Godhead figuring itself in the type of humanity;
there it works out certain possibilities, develops, evolves,
as we now say, certain powers of its manifestations. What
it evolves, is itself, is the Spirit.

For what we mean by Spirit is self-existent being
with an infinite power of consciousness and unconditioned
delight in its being; it is either that or nothing, or at
least nothing which has anything to do with man and
the world or with which, therefore, man or the world
has anything to do. Matter, body is only a massed
motion of force of conscious being employed as a starting-
point for the variable relations of consciousness working
through its power of sense ; ngr is Matter anywhere really
void of consciousness, for even in the atom, the cell
there is, as is now made abundantly clear in spite of
itself by modern Science, a power of will, an intelligence
at work; but that, power is the power of will and intelli-
gence of the Self, Spirit or Godhead within it, it is not
the separate, self-derived will or idea of the mechanical
cell or atom. This universal will and intelligence, in-
volved, develops its powers from form to form, and on
earth at least it is in man that it draws nearest to the full
divine and there first becomes, even in the outward
intelligence in the form, obscurely conscious of its divi-
nity. But still there too there is a limitation, there is that
imperfection of the manifestation which prevents the
lower forms from having the self-knowledge of their


190


THE POSSIBILITY AND PURPOSE OF AVATARHOOD


identity with the Divjne. For in each limited being the
limitation of the phenomenal action is accompanied by
a limitation also of the phenomenal consciousness which
defines the nature of the being and makes the inner
difference between creature and creature. The Divine
works behind indeed and governs its special manifesta-
tion through this outer and imperfect consciousness and
will, but is itself secret in the cavern, guhqydm, as the
Veda puts it, or as the Gita expresses it, “In the heart
of all existences the Lord abides turning all existences as
if mounted on a machine by Maya.” This secret work-
ing of the Lord hidden in the heart from the egoistic
nature-consciousness through which he works, is God’s
universal method with creatures. Why then should
we suppose that in any form he comes forward into the
frontal, the phenomenal consciousness for a more direct
and consciously divine action? Obviously, if at all, then
to break the veil between himself and humanity which
man limited in his own nature, could never lift.

The ,Gita explains the ordinary imperfect action of
the creature by its subjection to the mechanism of Pra-
kriti and its limitation by the self-representations of
Maya. These two terms are only complementary aspects
of one and the same effective force of divine conscious-
ness. Maya is not essentially illusion, — the element or
appearance of illusion only enters in by the ignorance
of the lower Prakriti, Maya of the three modes of
Nature, — it is the divine consciousness in its power of
various self-representation of its being, while Prakriti is the
effective force of that consciousness which operates to
work out each such self-representation according to its
own law and fundamental idea, svabhava and svadhama,
in its own proper quality and particular' force of


191


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


working, gupa-karma. “Leaning — pressing down upon my
own Nature (Prakriti) I create (loose forth into various
being) all this multitude of existences, all helplessly
subject to the control of Nature.” Those who know not
the Divine lodged in the human body, are ignorant of
it because they are grossly subject to this mechanism of
Prakriti, helplessly subject to its mental limitations and
acquiescent in them, and dwelj in an Asuric nature that
deludes with desire and bewilders with egoism the will
and the intelligence, mohinim prakrtim airitah. For the
Purushottama within is not readily manifest to any and
every being; he conceals himself in a thick cloud of
darkness or a bright cloud of light, utterly he envelops
and wraps himself in his Yogamaya . 1 “All this world”, says
the Gita, “because it is bewildered by the three states of
being determined by the modes of Nature, fails to re-
cognise me; for this my divine Maya of the modes of
Nature is hard to get beyond ; those cross beyond it who
approach Me; but those who dwell in the Asuric nature
of being have their knowledge reft from them by Maya.”
In other words, there is the inherent consciousness of the
divine in all, for in all the Divine dwells; but he dwells
there covered by his Maya and the essential self-know-
ledge of beings is reft from them, turned into the error of
egoism by the action of Maya, the action of the mechanism
of Prakriti. Still by drawing back from the mechanism
of Nature to her inner and secret Master man can become
conscious of the indwelling Divinity.

Now it is notable that with a slight but important varia-
tion of language the Gita describes in the same way both
the action of the Divine in bringing about the ordinary

1 naham prakatah sarvasya yogam&ya*samdvftab .


192


THE POSSIBILITY AND PURPOSE OF AVATARHOOD


birth of creatures and his action in his birth as the Avatar.
“Leaning upon my own Nature, prakrlim svdm avastabhya”
it will say later “I loose forth variously, visrjami, this multi-
tude of creatures helplessly subject owing to the control
of Prakriti, avasam prakrter vasat .” “Standing upon my own
Nature,” it says here, “I am born by my self-Maya, pra-
krtim svdm adhisthdya . . .dlmamayaya, I loose forth myself,
atmdnam srjdmi." The action implied in the word avasta-
bhya is a forceful downward pressure by which the object
controlled is overcome, oppressed, blocked or limited
in its movement or working and becomes helplessly subject
to the controlling power, avasam vasat ; Nature in this action
becomes mechanical and its multitude of creatures are
held helpless in the mechanism, not lords of their own
•action. On the contrary the action implied in the word
adhisthdya is a dwelling in, but also a standing upon and
over the Nature, a conscious control and government by
the indwelling Godhead, adhisthdlrl devata t in which the
Purusha is not helplessly driven by the Prakriti through
ignorance, but rather the Prakriti is full of the light and
the will of the Purusha. Therefore in the normal birth
that which is loosed forth, — created, as we say, — is the
multitude of creatures or becomings, bhutagrdmam; in the
divine birth that which is loosed forth, self-created, is
the self-conscious self-existent being, atmdnam ; for the
Vedantic distinction between atmd and bhutani is that
which is made in European philosophy between the Being
and its becomings. In both cases Maya is the means of
the creation or manifestation, but in the divine birth it
is by self-Maya, dtmamdyayd, not the involution in the lower
Maya of the ignorance, but the conscious action of the
self-existent Godhead in its phenomenal self-representa-
tion, well aware of its operation and its purpose, — that


13


193


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


which the Gita calls elsewhere Yogamaya. In the ordinary
birth Yogamaya is used by the Divine to envelop arid
conceal itself from the lower consciousness, so it becomes
for us the means of the ignorance, avidya-maya; but it is
by this same Yogamaya that self-knowledge also is made
manifest in the return of our consciousness to the Divine,
it is the means of the knowledge, vidyamaya ; and in the
.divine birth it so operates — as the knowledge controlling
and enlightening the works which are ordinarily done in
the Ignorance.

The language of the Gita shows therefore that the divine
birth is that of the conscious Godhead in our humanity
and essentially the opposite of the ordinary birth even
though the same means are used, because it is not the birth
into the Ignorance, but the birth of the knowledge, not
a physical phenomenon, but a soul-birth. It is the Soul’s
coming into birth as the self-existent Being controlling
consciously its becoming and not lost to self-knowledge in
the cloud of the ignorance. It is the Soul born into the
body as Lord of Nature, standing above and operating
in her freely by its will, not entangled and helplessly driven
round and round in the mechanism; for it works in the
knowledge and not, as most do, in the ignorance. It is
the secret Soul in all coming forward from its governing
secrecy behind the veil to possess wholly in a human
type, but as the Divine, the birth which ordinarily it
possesses only from behind the veil as the Ishwara while
the outward consciousness in front of the veil is rather
possessed than in possession because there it is a partially
conscious being, the Jiva lost to self-knowledge and
bound in its works through a phenomenal subjection to
Nature. The Avatar 2 therefore is a direct manifestation

•The word Avatara means a descent; it is a coming down of the

194


THE POSSIBILITY AND PURPOSE OF AVATARHOOD


in humanity by Krishna the divine Soul of that divine
condition of being to which Arjuna, the human soul, the
type of a highest human being, a Vibhuti, is called upon
by the Teacher to arise, and to which he can only arise
by climbing out of the ignorance and limitation of his
ordinary humanity. It is the manifestation from above
of that which we have to develop from below; it is the
descent of God into that divine birth of the human being
into which we mortal creatures must climb; it is the
attracting divine example given by God to man in the
very type and form and perfected model of our human
existence.

Divine below the line which divides the divine from the human world
or status.


195


XVI


THE PROCESS OF AVATARHOOD

We sec that the mystery of the divine Incarnation in man,
the assumption by the Godhead of the human type and
the human nature, is in the view of the Gita only the other
side of the eternal mystery of human birth itself which is
always in its essence, though not in its phenomenal
appearance, even such a miraculous assumption. The
eternal and universal self of every human being is God ;
even his personal self is a part of the Godhead, mamaivamsa ,
— not a fraction or fragment, surely, since we cannot think
of God -as broken up into little pieces, but a partial con-
sciousness of the one Consciousness, a partial power of the
one Power, a partial enjoyment of world-being by the one
and universal Delight of being, and therefore in mani-
festation or, as we say, in Nature a limited and finite
being of the one infinite and illimitable Being. The stamp
of that limitation is an ignorance by which he forgets,
not only the Godhead from which he came forth, but
the Godhead which is always within him, there living in
the secret heart of his own nature, there burning like a
veiled Fire on the inner altar in his own temple-house of
human consciousness.

He is ignorant because there is upon the eyes of his soul
and all its organs the seal of that Nature, Prakriti, Maya,
by which he has been put forth into manifestation out of
God’s eternal being; she has minted him like a coin out


196


THE PROCESS OF AVATARHOOD


of the precious metal of the divine substance, but over-
laid with a strong coating of the alloy of her phenomenal
qualities, stamped with her own stamp and mark of animal
humanity, and although the secret sign of the Godhead is
there, it is at first indistinguishable and always with diffi-
culty decipherable, not to be really discovered except
by that initiation into the mystery of our own being
which distinguishes a Godward from an earthward
humanity. In the Avatar, the divinely-born Man, the real
substance shines through the coating; the mark of the
seal is there only for form, the vision is that of the secret
Godhead, the power of the life is that of the secret God-
head, and it breaks through the seals of the assumed
human nature; the sign of the Godhead, an inner soul-sign,
not outward, not physical, stands out legible for all to read
who care to see or who can see ; for the Asuric nature is
always blind to these things, it sees the body and not the
soul, the external being and not the internal, the mask and
not the Person. In the ordinary human birth the Nature-
aspect of the universal Divine assuming humanity pre-
vails; in the incarnation the God-aspect of the same phe-
nomenon takes its place. In the one he allows the human
nature to take possession of his partial being and to domi-
nate it; in the other he takes possession of his partial
type of being and its nature and divinely dominates it.
Not by evolution or ascent like the ordinary man, the
Gita seems to tell us, not by a growing into the divine
birth, but by a direct descent into the stuff of humanity
and a taking up of its moulds.

But it is to assist that ascent or evolution the descent
is made or accepted; that the Gita makes very clear.
It is, we might say, to exemplify the possibility of the
Divine manifest in the human being, so that man may


197


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


sec what that is and take courage to grow into it. It is
also to leave the influence of that manifestation vibrating
in the earth-nature and the soul of that manifestation
presiding over its upward endeavour. It is to give a
spiritual mould of divine manhood into which the seeking
soul of the human being can cast itself. It is to give a
dharma, a religion — not a mere creed, but a method
of inner and outer living, — a way, a rule and law of
self-moulding by which he can grow towards divinity.
It is too, since this growth, this ascent is no mere isolated
and individual phenomenon, but like all in the divine
world-activities a collective business, a work and the
work for the race, to assist the human march, to hold
it together in its great crises, to break the forces of the
downward gravitation when they grow too insistent, to
uphold or restore the great dharma of the Godward law
in man’s nature, to prepare even, however far off, the
kingdom of God, the victory of the seekers of light and
perfection, sadhunam, and the overthrow of those who
fight for the continuance of the evil and the darkness.
All these are recognised objects of the descent of the
Avatar, and it is usually by his work that the mass of
men seek to distinguish him and for that that they are
ready to worship him. It is only the spiritual who see
that this external Avatarhood is a sign, in the symbol
of a human life, of the eternal inner Godhead making
himself manifest in the field of their own human mentality
and corporeality so that they can grow into unity with
that and be possessed by it. The divine manifestation
of a Christ, Krishna, Buddha in external humanity
has for its inner truth the same manifestation of the
eternal Avatar within in our own inner humanity.
That which has been done in the outer human life of


19 $


THE PROCESS OF AVATARHOOD


earth, may be repeated in the inner life of all human
beings.

This is the object of the incarnation, but what is the
method? First, we have the rational or minimising view
of Avatarhood which sees in it only an extraordinary
manifestation of the diviner qualities moral, intellectual
and dynamic by which average humanity is exceeded.
In this idea there is a certain truth. The Avatar is at
the same time the Vibhuti. This Krishna who in his
divine inner being is the Godhead in a human form,
is in his outer human being the leader of his age, the
great man of the Vrishnis. This is from the point of
view of the Nature, not of the soul. The Divine mani-
fests himself through infinite qualities of his nature and
the intensity of the manifestation is measured by their
power and their achievement. The vibhuti of the Divine
is therefore, impersonally, the manifest power of his
quality, it is his outflowing, in whatever form, of Know-
ledge, Energy, Love, Strength and the rest; personally,
it is the mental form and the animate being in whom
this power is achieved and docs its great works. A pre-
eminence in this inner and outer achievement, a greater
power of divine quality, an effective energy is always
the sign. The human vibhuti is the hero of the race’s
struggle towards divine achievement, the hero in the
Carlylean sense of heroism, a power of God in man.
“I am Vasudeva (Krishna) among the Vrishnis,” says
the Lord in the .Gita, “Dhananjaya (Arjuna) among the
Pandavas, Vyasa among the sages, the seer-poet Ushanas
among the seer-poets,” the first in each category, the
greatest of each group, the most powerfully representative
of the qualities and works in which its characteristic
soul-power manifests itself. This heightening, of the


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


powers of the being is a very necessary step in the pro-
gress of the divine manifestation. Every great man who
rises above our average level, raises by that very fact
our common humanity; he is a living assurance of our
divine possibilities, a promise of the Godhead, a
glow of the divine Light and a breath of the divine
Povyer.

It is this truth which lies behind the natural human
tendency to the deification of great minds and heroic
characters; it comes out clearly enough in the Indian
habit of mind which easily sees a partial (arhsa) Avatar
in great saints, teachers, founders, or most significantly
in the belief of southern Vaishnavas that some of their
saints were incarnations of the symbolic living weapons
of Vishnu, — for that is what all great spirits are, living
powers and weapons of the Divine in the upward march
and battle. This idea is innate and inevitable in any
mystic or spiritual view of life which does not draw an
inexorable line between the being and nature of the
Divine and our human being and nature; it is the sense
of the divine in humanity. But still the Vibhuti is not
the Avatar; otherwise Arjuna, Vyasa, Ushanas would
be Avatars as well as Krishna, even if in a less degree of
the power of Avatarhood. The divine quality is not
enough; there must be the inner consciousness of the
Lord and Self governing the human nature by his divine
presence. The heightening of the power of the qualities
is part of the becoming, bhutagrdma, an ascent in the ordi-
nary manifestation; in the Avatar there is the special
manifestation, the divine birth from above, the eternal
and universal Godhead descended into a form of indivi-
dual humanity, atmanam srjdmi, and conscious not only
behind the veil but in the outward nature.


m


THE PROCESS OF AVATARHOOD


There is an intermediary idea, a more mystical view
of Avatarhood which supposes that a human soul calls
down this descent into himself and is either possessed
by the divine consciousness or becomes an effective
reflection or channel of it. This view rests upon certain
truths of spiritual experience. The divine birth in man,
his ascent, is itself a growing of the human into the divine
consciousness, and in its intensest culmination is a losing
of the separate self in that. The soul merges its individual-
ity in an infinite and universal being or loses it in the
heights of a transcendent being; it becomes one with the
Self, the Brahman, the Divine or, as it is sometimes more
absolutely put, becomes the one Self, the Brahman, the
Divine. The Gita itself speaks of the soul becoming
the Brahman, brahmabhuta , and of its thereby dwelling
in the Lord, in Krishna, but it does not, it must be marked,
speak of it as becoming the Lord or the Purushottama,
though it does declare that the Jiva himself is always
Ishwara, the partial being of the Lord, mamaivamJah.
For this greatest union, this highest becoming is still
part of the ascent; while it is the divine birth to which
every Jiva arrives, it is not the descent of the Godhead,
not Avatarhood, but at most Buddhahood according to
the doctrine of the Buddhists, it is the soul awakened
from its present mundane individuality into an infinite
superconsciousness. That need not carry with it either
the inner consciousness or the characteristic action of
the Avatar.

On the other hand, this entering into the divine con-
sciousness may be attended by a reflex action of the
Divine entering or coming forward into the human parts
of our being, pouring himself into the nature, the activity,
the mentality, the corporeality even of the man; and that


80 i


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


may well be at least a partial Avatarhood. The Lord
stands in the heart, says the Gita, — by which it means of
course the heart of the subtle being, the nodus of the
emotions, sensations, mental consciousness, where the
individual Purusha also is seated, — but he stands there
veiled, enveloped by his Maya. But above, on a plane
within us but now superconscient to us, called heaven by
the ancient mystics, the Lord and the Jiva stand together
revealed as of one essence of being, the Father and the
Son of certain symbolisms, the Divine Being and the
divine Man who comes forth from Him born of the
higher divine Nature , 1 the virgin Mother, para prakrti,
para majia, into the lower or human nature. This seems to
be the inner doctrine of the Christian incarnation; in its
Trinity the Father is above in this inner Heaven; the
Son or supreme Prakriti become Jiva of the Gita descends
as the divine Man upon earth, in the mortal body; the
Holy Spirit, pure Self, Brahmic consciousness is that which
makes them one and that also in which they communicate;
for we hear of the Holy Spirit descending upon Jesus and
it is the same descent which brings down the powers of the
higher consciousness into the simple humanity of the
Apostles.

But also the higher divine consciousness of the Puru-
shottama may itself descend into the humanity and that
of the Jiva disappear into it. This is said by his contempo-
raries to have happened in the occasional transfigurations
of Chaitanya when he who in his normal consciousness
was only the lover and devotee of the Lord and rejected

1 In the Buddhist legend the name of the mother of Buddha makes
the symbolism clear; in the Christian the symbol seems to have been
attached by a familiar mythopoeic process to the actual human mother
of Jesus of Nazareth*


202


THE PROCESS OF AVATARHOOD


all deification, became in these abnormal moments the
Lord himself and so .spoke and acted, with all the out-
flooding light and love and power of the divine Presence.
Supposing this to be the normal condition, the human
receptacle to be constantly no more than a vessel of this
divine Presence and divine Consciousness, we should have
the Avatar according to this intermediary -idea of the
incarnation. That easily recommends itself as possible
to our human notions; for if the human being can elevate
his nature so as to feel a unity with the being of the
Divine and himself a mere channel of its consciousness,
light, power, love, his own will and personality lost in
that will and that being, — and this is a recognised spiri-
tual status, — then there is no inherent impossibility of
the reflex action of that Will, Being, Power, Love, Light,
Consciousness occupying the whole personality of the
human Jiva. And this would not be merely an ascent of
our humanity into the divine birth and the divine nature,
but a descent of the divine Purusha into humanity, an
Avatar.

The Gita, however, goes much farther. It speaks clearly
of the Lord himself being born ; Krishna speaks of his many
births that are past and makes it clear by his language
that it is not merely the receptive human being but the
Divine of whom he makes this affirmation, because he uses
the very language of the Creator, the same language which
he will employ when he has to describe his creation of
the world. “Although I am the unborn Lord of creatures,
I create (loose forth) my self by my Maya,” presiding over
the actions of my Prakriti. Here there is no question of
the Lord and the human Jiva or of the Father and the Son,
the divine Man, but only of the Lord and his Prakriti.
The Divine descends by his own Prakriti into birth in its


203


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


human form and type and brings into it the divine Con-
sciousness and the divine Power, though consenting,
though willing to act in the form, type, mould of humanity,
and he governs its actions in the body as the indwelling
and over-dwelling Soul, aihisthaya. From above he governs
always, indeed, for so he governs all nature, the human
included; from within also he governs all nature, always,
but hidden; the difference here is that he is manifest, that
the nature is conscious of the divine Presence as the
Lord, the Inhabitant, and it is not by his secret will
from above, “the will of the Father which is in heaven,”
but by his quite direct and apparent will that he moves
the nature. And here there seems to be no room for the
human intermediary; for it is by resort to his own nature,
prakrtim svam, and not the special nature of the Jiva
that the Lord of all existence thus takes upon himself
the human birth.

This doctrine is a hard saying, a difficult thing for the
human reason to accept; and for an obvious reason, be-
cause of the evident humanity of the Avatar. The Avatar
is always a dual phenomenon of divinity and humanity;
the Divine takes upon himself the human nature with all
its outward limitations and makes them the circumstances,
means, instruments of the divine consciousness and the
divine power, a vessel of the divine birth and the divine
works. But so surely it must be, since otherwise the object
of the Avatar’s descent is not fulfilled ; for that object is
precisely to show that the human birth with all its limita-
tions can be made such a means and instrument of the
divine birth and divine works, precisely to show that
the human type of consciousness can be compatible with
the divine essence of consciousness made manifest, can be
converted into its vessel, drawn into nearer conformity


204


THE PROCESS OF AVATARHOOD


with it by a change of its mould and a heightening of
its powers of light and love and strength and purity; and
to show also how it can be done. If the Avatar were to act
in an entirely supernormal fashion, this object would not
be fulfilled. A merely supernormal or miraculous Avatar
would be a meaningless absurdity; not that there need
be an entire absence of the use of supernormal powers such
as Christ’s so-called miracles of healing, for the use of
supernormal powers is quite a possibility of human
nature; but there need not be that at all, nor in any
case is it the root of the matter, nor would it at all do if
the life were nothing else but a display of supernormal
fireworks. The Avatar does not qome as a thaumaturgip
magician, but as the divine leader of humanity and the
exemplar of a divine humanity. Even human sorrow and
physical suffering he must assume and use so as to show,
first, how that suffering may be a means of redemption, —
as did Christ, — secondly, to show how, having been assum-
ed by the divine soul in the human nature, it can also be
overcome in the same nature, — as did Buddha. The
rationalist who would have cried to Christ, “If thou
art the Son of God, come down from the cross,” or points
out sagely that the Avatar was not divine because he died
and died too by disease, — as a dog dieth, — knows
not what he is saying: for he has missed the root
of the whole matter. Even, the Avatar of sorrow
and suffering must come before there can be the Avatar
of divine joy; the human limitation must be assumed
in order to show how it can be overcome; and the
way and the extent of the overcoming, whether internal
only or external also, depends upon the stage of the
human advance; it must not be done by a non-human
miracle.


205


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


The question then arises, and it is the sole real diffi-
culty, for here the intellect falters and stumbles over
its own limits, how is this human mind and body
assumed? For they were not created suddenly and all
of a piece, but by some kind of evolution, physical or
spiritual or both. No doubt, the descent of the Avatar,
like the divine birth from the other side, is essentially
a spiritual phenomenon, as is shown by the Gita’s atma-
nam srjdmi, it is a soul-birth; but still there is here an
attendant physical birth. How then were this human
mind and body of the Avatar created? If we suppose
that the body is always created by the hereditary evo-
lution, by inconscient Nature and its immanent Life-
spirit without the intervention of the individual soul,
the matter becomes simple. A physical and mental
body is prepared fit for the divine incarnation by a
pure or great heredity and the descending Godhead
takes possession of it. But the Gita in this very passage
applies the doctrine of reincarnation, boldly enough,
to the Avatar himself, and in the usual theory of re-
incarnation the reincarnating soul by its past spiritual
and psychological evolution itself determines and in
a way prepares its own mental and physical body. The
soul prepares its own body, the body is not prepared
for it without any reference to the soul. Are we then to
suppose an eternal or continual Avatar himself evolving,
we might say, his own fit mental and physical body
according to the needs and pace of the human evolution
and so appearing from age to age, yuge yuge ? In some
such spirit some would interpret the ten incarnations
of Vishnu, first in animal forms, then in the animal
man, then in the dwarf man-soul, Vamana, the violent
Asuric man, Rama of the axe, the divinely-natured


206


THE PROCESS OF AVATARHOOD


man, a greater Rama, the awakened spiritual man,
Buddha, and, preceding him in time, but final in place,
the complete divine manhood, Krishna, — for the last
Avatar, Kalki, only accomplishes the work Krishna
began, — he fulfils in power the great struggle which
the previous Avatars prepared in all its potentialities.
It is a difficult assumption to our modern mentality,
but the language of the Gita seems to demand it. Or,
since the Gita does not expressly solve the problem, we
may solve it in some other way of our own, as that the
body is prepared by the Jiva but assumed from birth
by the Godhead or that it is prepared by one of the
four Manus, catvaro manavah, of the Gita, the spiritual
Fathers of every human mind and body. This is going
far into the mystic field from which the modern reason
is still averse; but once we admit Avatarhood, we have
already entered into it and, once entered, may as well
tread in it with firm footsteps.

There the Gita’s- doctrine of Avatarhood stands.
We have had to advert to it at length in this aspect of its
method, as we did to the question of its possibility, be-
cause it is necessary to look at it and face the difficulties
which the reasoning mind of man is likely to offer to it.
It is true that the physical Avatarhood does not fill a
large space in the Gita, but still it does occupy a definite
place in the chain of its teachings and is implied in the
whole scheme, the very framework being the Avatar
leading the vibkuti, the man who has risen to the greatest
heights of mere manhood, to the divine birth and divine
works. No doubt, too, the inner descent of the God-
head to raise the human soul into himself is the main
thing, — it is the inner Christ, Krishna or Buddha that
matters. But just as the outer life is of immense impor-


207


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


tance for the inner development, so the external Avatar-
hood is of no mean importance for this great spiritual
manifestation. The consummation in the mental and
physical symbol assists the growth of the inner reality;
afterwards the inner reality expresses itself with greater
power in a more perfect symbolisation of itself through the
outer life. Between these two, spiritual reality and mental
and physical expression, acting and returning upon each
other constantly the manifestation of the Divine in
humanity has elected to move always in the cycles of
its concealment and its revelation.


208


XVII


THE DIVINE BIRTH AND DIVINE WORKS

The work for which the Avatar descends has like his
birth a double sense and a double form. It has an out-
ward side of the divine force acting upon the external
world in order to maintain there and to reshape the
divine law by which the Godward effort of humanity is
kept from decisive retrogression and instead decisively
carried forward in spite of the rule of action and reaction,
the rhythm of advance and relapse by which Nature
proceeds. It has an inward side of the divine force of
the Godward consciousness acting upon the soul of the
individual and the soul of the race, so that it may receive
new froms of revelation of the Divine in man and may be
sustained, renewed and enriched in its power of upward
self-unfolding. The Avatar does not descend merely
for a great outward action, as the pragmatic sense in
humanity is too often tempted to suppose. Action and
event have no value in themselves, but only take their
value from the force which they represent and the idea
which they symbolise and which the force is there to
serve.

The crisis in which the Avatar appears, though
apparent to the outward eye only as a crisis of events and
great material changes, is always in its source and
real meaning a crisis in the consciousness of humanity
when it has to undergo some grand modification and


14


209


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


effect some new development. For this action of change
a divine force is needed; but the force varies always
according to the power of consciousness which it embodies;
hence the necessity of a divine consciousness manifesting
in the mind and soul of humanity. Where, indeed, the
change is mainly intellectual and practical, the inter-
vention of the Avatar is not needed; there is a great
uplifting of consciousness, a great manifestation of power
in which men are for the time being exalted above their
normal selves, and this surge of consciousness and power
finds its wave-crests in certain exceptional individuals,

. vibhutis, whose action leading the general action is suffi-
cient for the change intended. The Reformation in
Europe and the French Revolution were crises of this
character ; they were not great spiritual events, but intel-
lectual and practical changes, one in religious, the other
in social and political ideas, forms and motives, and the
modification of the general consciousness brought about
was a mental and dynamic, but not a spiritual modi-
fication. But when the crisis has a spiritual seed or
intention, then a complete or a partial manifestation of
the God-consciousness in a human mind and soul comes
as its originator or leader. That is the Avatar.

The outward action of the Avatar is described in
the Gita as the restoration of the Dharma; when from
age to age the Dharma fades, languishes, loses force and
its opposite arises, strong and oppressive, then the Avatar
comes and raises it again to power; and as then things
in idea are always represented by things in action and
by human beings who obey their impulsion, his mission
is, in its most human and outward terms, to relieve the
seekers of the Dharma who are oppressed by the reign
of the reactionary darkness and to destroy the wrong-doers


210


THE DIVINE BIRTH AND DIVINE WORKS


who seek to maintain the denial of the Dharma. But
the language used can easily be given a poor and insuffi-
cient connotation which would deprive Avatarhood of all
its spiritual depth of meaning. Dharma is a word which
has an ethical and practical, a natural and philosophical
and a religious and spiritual significance, and it may be
used in any of these senses exclusive of the others, in a
purely ethical, a purely philosophical or a purely religious
sense. Ethically it means the law of righteousness, the
moral rule of conduct, or in a still more outward and
and practical significance social and political justice,
or even simply the observation of the social law. If used
in this sense we shall have to understand that when
unrighteousness, injustice and oppression prevail, the
Avatar descends to deliver the good and destroy the
wicked, to break down injustice and oppression and res-
tore the ethical balance of mankind.

Thus the popular and mythical account of the Krishna
avatar is that the unrighteousness of the Kurus as incar-
nated in Duryodhana and his brothers became so great
a burden to the earth that she had to call upon God to
descend and lighten her load; accordingly Vishnu incar-
nated as Krishna, delivered the oppressed Pandavas and
destroyed the unjust Kauravas. A similar account is given
of the descent of the previous Vishnu avatars, of Rama
to destroy the unrighteous oppression of Ravana, of
Parashurama to destroy the unrighteous license of the
military and princely caste, the Kshatriyas, of the dwarf
Vamana to destroy the rule of the Titan Bali. But ob-
viously the purely practical, ethical or social and political
mission of the Avatar which is thus thrown into popular
and mythical form, does not give a right account of the
phenomenon of Avatarhood. It does not cover its spiritual


211


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


sense, and if this outward utility were all, we should have
to exclude Buddha and Christ whose mission was not at
all to destroy evil-doers and deliver the good, but to bring
to all men a new spiritual message and a new law of divine
growth and spiritual realisation. On the other hand,
if we give to the word dharma only its religious sense, in
which it means a law of religious and spiritual life, we
shall indeed get to the kernel of the matter, but we shall
be in danger of excluding a most important part of the
work done by the Avatar. Always we see in the history
of the divine incarnations the double work, and inevitably,
because the Avatar takes up the workings of God in human
life, the way of the divine Will and Wisdom in the world,
and that always fulfils itself externally as well as internally,
by inner progress in the soul and by an outer change in
the life.

The Avatar may descend as a great spiritual teacher
and saviour, the Christ, the Buddha, but always his work
leads, after he has finished his earthly manifestation, to
a profound and powerful change not only in the ethical,
but in the social and outward life and ideals of the race.
He may, on the other hand, descend as an incarnation of
the divine life, the divine personality and power in its
characteristic action, for a mission ostensibly social, ethical
and political, as is represented in the story of Rama or
Krishna; but always then this descent becomes in the soul
of the race a permanent power for the inner living and
the spiritual rebirth. It is indeed curious to note that the
permanent, vital, universal effect of Buddhism and
Christianity has been the force of their ethical, social and
practical ideals and their influence even on the men and
the ages which have rejected their religious and spiritual
beliefs, forms and disciplines; later Hinduism which


212


THE DIVINE BIRTH AND DIVINE WORKS


rejected Buddha, his sathgha, and his dharma, bears the
ineffaceable imprint of the social and ethical influence of
Buddhism and its effect on the ideas and the life of the
race, while in modern Europe, Christian only in name,
humanitarianism is the translation into the ethical and
social sphere and the aspiration to liberty, equality and
fraternity the translation into the social and political
sphere of the spiritual truths of Christianity, the latter
especially being effected by men who aggressively re-
jected the Christian religion and spiritual discipline and
by an age which in its intellectual effort of emancipation
tried to get rid of Christianity as a creed. On the other
hand, the life of Rama and Krishna belongs to the pre-
historic past which has come down only in poetry and
legend and may even be regarded as myths; but it is
quite immaterial whether we regard them as myths or
historical facts, because their permanent truth and value
lie in their persistence as a spiritual form, presence, in-
fluence in the inner consciousness of the race and the life
of the human soul. Avatarhood is a fact of divine life and
consciousness which may realise itself in an outward
action, but must persist, when that action is over and has
done its work, in a spiritual influence ; or may realise itself
in a spiritual influence and teaching, but must then have
its permanent effect, even when the new religion or disci-
pline is exhausted, in the thought, temperament and
outward life of mankind.

We must then, in order to understand the Gita’s des-
cription of the work of the Avatar, take the idea of the
Dharma in its fullest, deepest and largest conception,
as the inner and the outer law by which the divine Will
and Wisdom work out the spiritual evolution of mankind
and its circumstances and results in the life of the race.


213


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


Dharma in the Indian conception is not merely the good,
the right, morality and justice, ethics; it is the whole
government of all the relations of man with other beings,
with Nature, with God, considered from the point of view
of a divine principle working itself out in forms and laws
of action, forms of the inner and the outer life, orderings
of relations of every kind in the world. Dharma 1 is both
that which we hold to and that which holds together our
inner and outer activities. In its primary sense it means a
fundamental law of our nature which secretly conditions
all our activities, and in this sense each being, type, species,
individual, group has its own dharma. Secondly, there
is the divine nature which has to develop and manifest
in us, and in this sense dharma is the law of the inner
workings by which that grows in our being. Thirdly,
there is the law by which we govern our outgoing thought
and action and our relations with each other so as to help
best both our own growth and that of the human race
towards the divine ideal.

Dharma is generally spoken of as something eternal
and unchanging, and so it is in the fundamental principle,
in the ideal, but in its forms it is continually changing
and evolving, because man does not already possess the
ideal or live in it, but aspires more or less perfectly to-
wards it, is growing towards its knowledge and practice.
And in this growth dharma is all that helps us to grow
into the divine purity, largeness, light, freedom, power,
strength, joy, love, good, unity, beauty, and against it
stands its shadow and denial, all that resists its growth
and has not undergone its law, all that has not yielded
up and does not will to yield up its secret of divine values,

‘The word means "holding” from the root dhf, to hold.


214


THE divine birth and divine works


but presents a front of perversion and contradiction, of
impurity, narrowness, bondage, darkness, weakness,
vileness, discord and suffering and division, and the
hideous and the crude, all that man has to leave behind
in his progress. This is the adharma, not-dharma, which
strives with and seeks to overcome the dharma, to draw
backward and downward, the reactionary force which
makes for evil, ignorance and darkness. Between the
two there is perpetual battle and struggle, oscillation of
victory and defeat in which sometimes the upward and
sometimes the downward forces prevail. This has been
typified in the Vedic image of the struggle between
the Divine and the Titanic powers, the sons of the Light
and the undivided Infinity and the children of the Dark-
ness and Division, in Zoroastrianism by Ahuramazda and
Ahriman, and in later religions in the contest between
God and his angels and Satan or Iblis and his demons
for the possession of human life and the human soul.

It is these things that condition and determine the
work of the Avatar. In the Buddhistic formula the
disciple takes refuge from all that opposes his liberation
in three powers, the dharma, the sathgha, the Buddha.
So in Christianity we have the law of Christian living,
the Church and the Christ. These three are always the
necessary elements of the work of the Avatar. He gives
a dharma, a law of self-discipline by which to grow out
of the lower into the higher life and which necessarily
includes a rule of action and of relations with our fellow-
men and other beings, endeavour in the eightfold path
or the law of faith, love and purity or any other such
revelation of the nature of the divine in life. Then
because every tendency in man has its collective as well
as its individual aspect, because those who follow one


215


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


way are naturally drawn together into spiritual com-
panionship and unity, he establishes the samgha, the
fellowship and union of those whom his personality and
his teaching unite. In Vaishnavism there is the same
trio, bhdgavat, bhakta, bhagavan , — the bhdgavat, which is the
law of the Vaishnava dispensation of adoration and
love, the bhakta representing the fellowship of those in
whom that law is manifest, bhagavan, the divine Lover
and Beloved in whose being and nature the divine law
of love is founded and fulfils itself. The Avatar represents
this third element, the divine personality, nature and
being who is the soul of the dharma and the samgha,
informs them with himself, keeps them living and draws
men towards the felicity and the liberation.

In the teaching of the Gita, which is more catholic
and complex than other specialised teachings and dis-
ciplines, these things assume a larger meaning. For the
unity here is the all-embracing Vedantic unity by which
the soul sees all in itself and itself in all and makes itself
one with all beings. The dharma is therefore the taking
up of all human relations into a higher divine meaning;
starting from the established ethical, social and religious
rule which binds together the whole community in which
the God-seeker lives, it lifts it up by informing it with
the Brahmic consciousness; the law it gives is the law
of oneness, of equality, of liberated, desireless, God-
governed action, of God-knowledge and self-knowledge
enlightening and drawing to itself all the nature and
all the action, drawing it towards divine being and
divine consciousness, and of God-love as the supreme
power and crown of the knowledge and the action,
v The idea of companionship and mutual aid in God-love
and God-seeking which is at the basis of the idea of


216


THE DIVINE BIRTH AND DIVINE WORKS


the samgha or divine fellowship, is brought in when the
Gita speaks of the seeking of God through love and
adoration, but the real samgha of this teaching is all
humanity. The whole world is moving towards this
dharma, each man according to his capacity, — “it is My
path that men follow in every way,” — and the God-
seeker, making himself one with all, making their joy
and sorrow and all their life his own, the liberated made
already one self with all beings, lives in the life of human-
ity, lives for the one Self in humanity, for God in all
beings, acts for lokasamgraha, for the maintaining of all
in their dharma and the Dharma, for the maintenance
of their growth in all its stages and in all its paths towards
the Divine. For the Avatar here, though he is manifest
in the name and form of Krishna, lays no exclusive
stress on this one form of his human birth, but on that
which it represents, the Divine, the Purushottama, of
whom all Avatars are the human births, of whom all
forms and names of the Godhead worshipped by men
are the figures. The way declared by Krishna here is
indeed announced as the way by which man can reach
the real knowledge and the real liberation, but it is one
that is inclusive of all paths and not exclusive. For the
Divine takes up into his universality all Avatars and
all teachings and all dharmas.

The Gita lays stress upon the struggle of which the
world is the theatre, in its two aspects, the inner struggle
and the outer battle. In the inner struggle the enemies
are within, in the individual, and the slaying of desire,
ignorance, egoism is the victory. But there is an outer
struggle between the powers of the Dharma and the
Ad ha rm a in the human collectivity. The former is
supported by the divine, the godlike nature in man, and


217


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


by those who represent it or strive to realise it in human
life, the latter by the Titanic or demoniac, the Asuric
and Rakshasic nature whose head is a violent egoism,
and by those who represent and strive to satisfy it. This
is the war of the Gods and Titans, the symbol of which
the old Indian literature is full, the struggle of the Maha-
bharata of which Krishna is the central figure being often
represented in that image; the Pandavas who fight for the
establishment of the kingdom of the Dharma, are the
sons of the Gods, their powers in human form, their
adversaries are incarnations of the Titanic powers,
they are Asuras. This outer struggle too the Avatar comes
to aid, directly or indirectly, to destroy the reign of the
Asuras, the evil-doers, and in them depress the power
they represent and to restore the oppressed ideals of the
Dharma. He comes to bring nearer the kingdom of
heaven on earth in the collectivity as well as to build
the kingdom of heaven within in the individual human
soul.

The inner fruit of the Avatar’s coming is gained by
those who learn from it the true nature of the divine
birth and the divine works and who, growing full of
him in their consciousness and taking refuge in him
with their whole being, manmaya mam upasrilah, purified
by the realising force of their knowledge and delivered
from the lower nature, attain to the divine being and
divine nature, madbhavam. The Avatar comes to reveal
the divine nature in man above this lower nature and to
show what are the divine works, free, uncgoistic, dis-
interested, impersonal, universal, full of the divine light,
the divine power and the divine love. He comes as the
divine personality which shall fill the consciousness of
the human being and replace the limited egoistic


218


THE DIVINE BIRTH AND DIVINE WORKS


personality, so that it shall be liberated out of ego into
infinity and universality, out of # birth into immortality.
He comes as the divine power and love which calls
men to itself, so that they may take refuge in that and
no longer in the insufficiency of their' human wills and
the strife of their human fear, wrath and passion, and
liberated from all this unquiet and suffering may live
in the calm and bliss of the Divine . 1 Nor does it matter
essentially in what form and name or putting forward
what aspect of the Divine he comes; for in all ways,
varying with their nature, men are following the path
set to them by the Divine which will in the end lead
them to him and the aspect of him which suits their
nature is that which they can best follow when he comes
to lead them; in whatever way men accept, love and
take joy in God, in that way God accepts, loves and
takes joy in man. Ye yatha mam prapadyante tarns tathaiva
bhajamyaham.


1 janma karma ca me diiyam evam yo vetti taltvatah,
tyaktvd deham punarjanma naiti mam eli so'rjuna.
vitardgabhayakrodha manmayd mam updsritdfi .
bahavo jhanatapasa pula madbhdvam dgatdh.


219


XVIII


THE DIVINE WORKER

To attain to the divine birth,— a divinising new birth
of the soul into a higher consciousness, — and to do divine
works both as a means towards that before it is attained
and as an expression of it after it is attained, is then all
the Karmayoga of the Gita. The Gita does not try to
define works by any outward signs through which it
can be recognisable to an external gaze, measurable by the
criticism of the world; it deliberately renounces even the
ordinary ethical distinctions by which men seek to guide
themselves in the light of the human reason. The signs
by which it distinguishes divine works are all profoundly
intimate and subjective; the stamp by which they are
known is invisible, spiritual, supra-ethical.

They are recognisable only by the light of the soul
from which they come. For, it says “what is action and
what is inaction, as to this even the sages are perplexed
and deluded”, because, judging by practical, social,
ethical, intellectual standards, they discriminate by
accidentals and do not go to the root of the matter; “I
will declare to thee that action by the knowledge of which
thou shalt be released from all ills. One has to under-
stand about action as well as to understand about wrong
action and about inaction one has to understand; thick and
tangled is the way of works.” Action in the world is like
a deep forest, gahana, through which man goes stumbling


220


THE DIVINE WORKER


as best he can, by the light of the ideas of his time,
the standards of his personality, his environment, or rather
of many times, many personalities, layers of thought and
ethics from many social stages all inextricably confused
together, temporal and conventional amidst all their
claim to absoluteness and immutable truth, empirical and
irrational in spite of their aping of right reason. And
finally the sage seeking in the midst of it all a highest
foundation of fixed law and an original truth finds himself
obliged to raise the last supreme question, whether all
action and life itself are not a delusion and a snare and
whether cessation from action, akarma, is not the last
resort of the tired and disillusioned human soul.
But, says Krishna, in this matter even the sages
are perplexed and deluded. For by action, by works,
not by inaction comes the knowledge and the
release.

What then is the solution? what is that type of works
by which we shall be released from the ills of life, from this
doubt, this error, this grief, from this mixed, impure and
baffling result even of our purest and best-intentioned acts,
from these million forms of evil and suffering? No out-
ward distinctions need be made, is the reply; no work
the world needs, be shunned ; no limit or hedge set round
our human activities; on the contrary, all actions should
be done, but from a soul in Yoga with the Divine, yuktah
kftsna-karma-krt. Akarma, cessation from action is not the
way; the man who has attained to the insight of the highest
reason, perceives that such inaction is itself a constant
action, a state subject to the workings of Nature and her
qualities. The mind that takes refuge in physical inacti-
vity, is still under the delusion that it and not Nature
is the doer of works; it has mistaken inertia for liberation;


221


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


it does not see that even in what seems absolute inertia
greater than that of the stone or clod, Nature is at work,
keeps unimpaired her hold. On the contrary, in the full
flood of action the soul is free from its works, is not the
doer, not bound by what is done, and he who lives in the
freedom of the soul, not in the bondage of the modes of
Nature, alone has release from works. This is what the
Gita clearly means when it says that he who in action
can see inaction and can see action still continuing
in cessation from works, is the man of true reason and
discernment among men. This saying hinges upon
the Sankhya distinction between Purusha and Prakriti,
between the free inactive soul, eternally calm, pure
and unmoved in the midst of works, and ever active
Nature operative as much in inertia and cessation as in
the overt turmoil of her visible hurry of labour. This
is the knowledge which the highest effort of the discrimi-
nating reason, the buddhi, gives to us, and therefore who-
ever possesses it is the truly rational and discerning man,
sa buddhiman manusyesu , — not the perplexed thinker who
judges life and works by the external, uncertain and imper-
manent distinctions of the lower reason. Therefore the
liberated man is not afraid of action, he is a large and
universal doer of all works, krtsna-karma-krt ; not as others
do them in subjection to Nature, but poised in the silent
calm of the soul, tranquilly in Yoga with the Divine.
The Divine is the lord of his works, he is only their channel
through the instrumentality of his nature conscious of and
subject to her Lord. By the flaming intensity and purity
of this knowledge all his works are burned up as in a fine
and his mind remains without any stain or disfiguring
mark from them, calm, silent, unperturbed, white and
: clean and pure. To do all in this liberating knowledge,


222


THE DIVINE WORKER


without the personal egoism of the doer, is the first sign of
the divine worker.

The second sign is freedom from desire; for where there
is not the personal egoism of the doer, desire becomes
impossible; it is starved out, sinks for want of a support,
dies of inanition. Outwardly the liberated man seems to
undertake works of all kinds like other men, on a larger
scale perhaps with a more powerful will and driving-force,
for the might of the divine will works in his active nature;
but from all his inceptions and undertakings the inferior
concept and nether will of desire is entirely banished,
sane samarambhah kamasamkalpavarjitah. He has abandoned
all attachment to the fruits of his works, and where one
does not work for the fruit, but solely as an impersonal
instrument of the Master of works, desire can find no
place, — not even the desire to serve successfully, for the
fruit is the Lord’s and determined by him and not by
the personal will and effort, or to serve with credit and to
the Master’s satisfaction, for the real doer is the Lord him-
self and all glory belongs to a form of his Shakti missioned
in the nature and not to the limited human personality.
The human mind and soul of the liberated man does
nothing, na kificit karoti; even though through his nature
he engages in action, it is the Nature, the executive
Shakti, it is the conscious Goddess governed by the
divine Inhabitant who does the work.

It does not follow that the work is not to be done
perfectly, with success, with a right adaptation of means
to ends: on the contrary, a perfect working is easier
to action done tranquilly in Yoga than to action done
in the blindness of hopes and fears, lamed by the judg-
ments of the stumbling reason, running about i amidst
the eager trepidations of the hasty human will: Yoga,


223


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


says the Gita elsewhere, is the true skill in works, yogah
karmasu kausalam. But all this is done impersonally by
the action of a great universal light and power operating
through the individual nature. The Karmayogin knows
that the power given to him will be adapted to the
fruit decreed, the divine thought behind the work equated
with the work he has to do, the will in him — which will
not be wish or desire, but an impersonal drive of con-
scious power directed towards an aim not his own, —
subtly regulated in its energy and direction by the divine
wisdom. The result may be success, as the ordinary mind
understands it, or it may seem to that mind to be defeat
and failure; but to him it is always the success intended,
not by him, but by the all-wise manipulator of action
and result, because he does not seek for victory, but
only for the fulfilment of the divine will and wisdom
which works out its ends through apparent failure as
well as and often with greater force than through appa-
rent triumph. Arjuna, bidden to fight, is assured of
victory; but even if certain defeat were before him, he
must still fight because that is the present work assigned
to him as his immediate share in the great sum of energies
by which the divine will is surely accomplished.

The liberated man has no personal hopes; he does
not seize on things as his personal possessions; he receives
what the divine Will, brings him, covets nothing, is
jealous of none: what comes to him he takes without
repulsion and without attachment; what goes from him
he allows to depart into the whirl of things without
repining or grief or sense of loss. His heart and self
are under perfect control; they are free from reaction
and passion, they make no turbulent response to the
touches of outward things. His action is indeed a purely


224


THE DIVINE WORKER


physical action, sariram kevalam karma ; for all else comes
from above, is not generated on the human plane, is only
a reflection of the will, knowledge, joy of the divine
Purushottama. Therefore he does not by a stress on
doing and its objects bring about in his mind and heart
any of those reactions which we call passion and sin. For
sin consists not at all in the outward deed, but in an
impure reaction of the personal will, mind and heart
which accompanies it or causes it; the impersonal, the
spiritual is always pure, apapaviddham, and gives to all
that it does its own inalienable purity. This spiritual
impersonality is a third sign of the divine worker. All
human souls, indeed, who have attained to a certain
greatness and largeness are conscious of an impersonal
Force or Love or Will and Knowldege working through
them, but they are not free from egoistic reactions,
sometimes violent enough, of their human personality.
But this freedom the liberated soul has attained; for
he has cast his personality into the impersonal, where
it is no longer his, but is taken up by the divine Person,
the Purushottama, who uses all finite qualities infinitely
and freely and is bound by none. He has become a soul
and ceased to be a sum of natural qualities; and such
appearance of personality as remains for the operations
of Nature, is something unbound, large, flexible, uni-
versal; it is a free mould for the Infinite, it is a living
mask of the Purushottama.

The result of this knowledge, this desirelessness and
this impersonality is a perfect equality in the soul and
the nature. Equality is the fourth sign of the divine
worker. He has, says the Gita, passed beyond the dual-
ities; he is dvandvatita. We have seen that he regards
with ■ equal eyes, without any disturbance of feeling,


IS


225


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


failure and success, victory and defeat; but not only
these, all dualities are in him surpassed and reconciled.
The outward distinctions by which men deterrriine their
psychological* attitude towards the happenings of the
world, have for him only a subordinate and instrumental
meaning. He does not ignore them, but he is above
them. Good happening and evil happening, so all-
important to the human soul subject to desire, are to
the desireless divine soul equally welcome since by their
mingled strand are worked out the developing forms
of the eternal good. He cannot be defeated, since all for
him is moving towards the divine victory in the Kuru-
kshetra of Nature, dharmaksetre kuruksetre , the field of
doings which is the field of the evolving Dharma, and
every turn of the conflict has been designed and mapped
by the foreseeing eye of the Master of the battle, the
Lord of works and Guide of the dharma. Honour and
dishonour from men cannot move him, nor their praise
nor their blame ; for he has a greater clear-seeing judge
and another standard for his action, and his motive
admits no dependence upon worldly reward. Arjuna
the Kshatriya prizes naturally honour and reputation
and is right in shunning disgrace and the name of coward
as worse than death ; for to maintain the point of honour
and the standard of courage in the world is part of his
dharma: but Arjuna the liberated soul need care for
none of these things, he has only to know the kartavyam
karma , the work which the supreme Self demands from
him, and to do that and leave the result to the Lord of
his actions. He has passed even beyond that distinction
of sin and virtue which is so all-important to the Jhuman
soul while it is struggling to minimise the hold of its
egoism and lighten the heavy and violent yoke of its


* 226


THE DIVINE WORKER


passions, — the liberated has risen above these struggles
and is seated firmly in the purity of the witnessing and
enlightened soul. Sin has fallen away from him, and not
a virtue acquired and increased by good action and
impaired or lost by evil action, but the inalienable and
unalterable purity of a divine and selfless nature is the
peak to which he has climbed and the seat upon which
he is founded. There the sense of sin and the sense of
virtue have no starting-point or applicability.

Arjuna, still in the ignorance, , may feel in his heart
the call of right and justice and may argue in his mind
that abstention from battle would be a sin entailing
responsibility for all the suffering that injustice and
oppression and the evil karma of the triumph of wrong
bring upon men and nations, or he may feel in his heart
the recoil from violence and slaughter and argue in his
mind that all shedding of blood is a sin which nothing
can justify. Both of these attitudes would appeal with
equal right to virtue and reason and it would depend
upon the man, the circumstances and the time which
of these might prevail in his mind or before the eyes of
the world. Or he might simply feel constrained by his
heart and his . honour to support his friends against his
enemies, the cause of the good and just against the cause
of the evil and oppressive. The liberated soul looks
beyond these conflicting standards; he sees simply what
the supreme Self demands from him as needful for the
maintenance or for the bringing forward of the
evolving Dharma. He has no personal ends to serve,
no personal loves and hatreds to satisfy, no rigidly fixed
standard of action which opposes its rock-line to the
flexible advancing march of the progress of the human
race or stands up defiant against the call of the Infinite.


227


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


He has no personal enemies to be conquered or slain,
but sees only men who have been brought up against
him by circumstances and the will in things to help
by their opposition the march of destiny. Against them
he can have no wrath or hatred; for wrath and hatred
are foreign to the divine nature. The Asura’s desire
to break and slay what opposes him, the Rakshasa’s
grim lust of slaughter are impossible to his calm and
peace and his all-embracing sympathy and understanding.
He has no wish to injure, but, on the contrary, a uni-
versal friendliness and compassion, maitrah karuna eva ca:
but this compassion is that of a divine soul overlooking
men, embracing all other souls in himself, not the shrink-
ing of the heart and the nerves and the flesh which is the
ordinary human form of pity: nor does he attach a
supreme importance to the life of the body, but looks
beyond to the life of the soul and attaches to the other
only an instrumental value. He will not hasten to slaught-
er and strife, but if war comes in the wave of the Dharma,
he will accept it with a large equality and a perfect
understanding and sympathy for those whose power
and pleasure of domination he has to break and whose
joy of triumphant life he has to destroy.

For in all he sees two things, the Divine inhabiting
every being equally, the varying manifestation unequal
only in its temporary circumstances. In the animal and
man, in the dog, the unclean outcast and the learned
and virtuous Brahmin, in the saint and the sinner, in
the indifferent and the friendly and the hostile, in those
who love him and benefit and those who hate him and
afflict, he sees himself, he sees God and has at heart
for all the same equal kindliness, the same divine affection.
Circumstances may determine the outward clasp or the


• 228


THE DIVINE WORKER


outward conflict, but can never afl'ect his equal eye, his
open heart, his inner embrace of all. And in all his actions
there will be the same principle of soul, a perfect equality,
and the same principle of work, the will of the Divine in
him active for the need of the race in its gradually deve-
loping advance towards the Godhead.

Again, the sign of the divine worker is that which is
central to the divine consciousness itself, a perfect inner
joy and peace which depends upon nothing in the world
for its source or its continuance ; it is innate, it is the very
stuff of the soul’s consciousness, it is the very nature of
divine being. The ordinary man depends upon outward
things for his happiness ; therefore he has desire ; therefore
he has anger and passion, pleasure and pain, joy and grief;
therefore he measures all things in the balance of good
fortune and evil fortune. None of these things can affect
the divine soul; it is ever satisfied without any kind of
dependence, nitya-lrplo nirdirayah ; for its delight, its divine
ease, its happiness, its glad light are eternal within, in-
grained in itself, atma-ratih , antah-sukho ’ntar dramas tathanlar -
jyotir eva ca. What joy it takes in outward things is not for
their sake, not for things which it seeks in them and can
miss, but for the self in them, for their expression of the
Divine, for that which is eternal in them and which it
cannot miss. It is without attachment to their outward
touches, but finds everywhere the same joy that it finds
in itself, because its self is theirs, has become one self with
the self of all beings, because it is united with the one and
equal Brahman in them through all their differences,
brahmayoga-yuktdtma sarvabhutdtma-bhutdtmd. It does not
rejoice in the touches of the pleasant or feel anguish in
the touches of the unpleasant; neither the wounds of
things, nor the wounds of friends, nor the wounds of


229


ASSAYS ON THE GITA


enemies can disturb the firmness of its outgazing mind or
bewilder its receiving heart; this soul is in its nature, as
the Upanishad puts it, avranam , without wound or scar.
In all things it has the same imperishable Ananda, sukham
aksayam amute. 1

That equality, impersonality, peace, joy, freedom do
not depend on so outward a thing as doing or not doing
works. The Gita insists repeatedly on the difference be-
tween the inward and the outward renunciation, tyaga
and sannyasa. The latter, it says, is valueless without the
former, hardly possible even to attain without it, and
unnecessary when there is the inward freedom. In fact
tyaga itself is the real and sufficient Sannyasa. “He
should be known as the eternal Sannyasin who neither
hates nor desires; free from the dualities he is happily
and easily released from all bondage.” The painful process
of outward Sannyasa, duhkham dptum, is an unnecessary
process. It is perfectly true that all actions, as well as the
fruit of action, have to be given up, to be renounced, but
inwardly, not outwardly, not into the inertia of Nature,
but to the Lord in sacrifice, into the calm and joy of the
Impersonal from whom all action proceeds without dis-
turbing his peace. The true Sannyasa of action is the
reposing of all works on the Brahman. “He who, having
abandoned attachment, acts reposing (or founding) his
works on the Brahman, brakmaqyddhdya karmayi , is not
stained by sin even as water clings not to the lotus-leaf.”
Therefore the Yogins first “do works with the body,
mind, understanding, or even merely with the organs
of action, abandoning attachment, for self-purification,
sangam tyaktvatmasuddhaye . By abandoning attachment to
the fruits of works the soul in union with Brahman
attains to peace of rapt foundation in Brahman, but the


230


THE DIVINE WORKER


soul not in union is attached to the fruit and bound by
the action of desire.” The foundation, the purity, the
peace once attained, the embodied soul perfectly con-
trolling its nature, having renounced all its actions by
the mind, inwardly, not outwardly, “sits in its nine-
gated city neither doing nor causing to be done.” For
this soul is the one impersonal Soul in all, the all-per-
vading Lord, prabhu, vibhu, who, as the impersonal, neither
creates the works of the world, nor the mind’s idea of
being the doer, na kartrtvan na karmani, nor the coupling of
works to their fruits, the chain of cause and effect. All
that is worked out by the Nature in the man, svabhdva,
his principle of self-becoming, as the word literally
means. The all-pervading Impersonal accepts neither
the sin nor the virtue of any: these are things created by
the ignorance in the creature, by his egoism of the doer,
by his ignorance of his highest self, by his involution in
the operations of Nature, and when the self-knowledge
within him is released from this dark envelope, that
knowledge lights up like a sun the real self within him;
he knows himself then to be the soul supreme above
the instruments of Nature. Pure, infinite, inviolable,
immutable, he is no longer affected; no longer does he
imagine himself to be modified by her workings.- By
complete identification with the Impersonal he can, too,
release himself from the necessity of returning by birth
into her movement.

And yet this liberation does not at all prevent him
from acting. Only, he knows that it is not he who is
active, but the modes, the qualities of Nature, her triple
guyas. “The man .who knows the principles, of things
thinks, his mind in Yoga (with the inactive Impersonal),
‘I am doing nothing’, when he sees, hears, tastes, smells,


231


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


eats, moves, sleeps, breathes, speaks, takes, ejects, opens
his eyes or closes them, he holds that it is only the senses
acting upon the objects of the senses.” He himself, safe
in the immutable unmodified soul, is beyond the grip
of the three gunas, trigunatlla ; he is neither sattwic, rajasic
nor tamasic; he sees with a clear untroubled spirit the
alternations of the natural modes and qualities in his
action, their rhythmic play of light and happiness, activity
and force, rest and inertia. This superiority of the calm
soul observing its action but not involved in it, this
traigunatitya, is also a high sign of the divine worker.
By itself the idea might lead to a doctrine of the mecha-
nical determinism of Nature and the perfect aloofness
and irresponsibility of the soul; but the Gita effectively
avoids this fault of an insufficient thought by its illu-
mining supertheistic idea of the Purushottama. It makes
it clear that it is not in the end Nature which mecha-
nically determines its own action; it is the will of the
Supreme which inspires her; he who has already slain
the Dhritarashtrians, he of whom Arjuna is only the
human instrument, a universal Soul, a transcendent
Godhead is the master of her labour. The reposing of
works in the Impersonal is a means of getting rid of
the personal egoism of the doer, but the end is to give
up all our actions to that great Lord of all, sarva-bhuta-
mahesvara. “With a consciousness identified with the Self,
renouncing all thy actions into Me, mayi sarvani karmani
samnyasyadhyatmacetasa, freed from personal hopes and
desires, from the thought of ‘I* and ‘mine’, delivered
from the fever of the soul, fight”, work, do My will in
the world. The Divine motives, inspires, determines the
entire action; the human soul impersonal in the Brahman
is the pure and silent channel of his power; that power


232


THE DIVINE WORKER


in the Nature executes the divine movement. Such
only are the works of the liberated soul, muklasya karma ,
for in nothing does he act from a personal inception;
such are the actions of the accomplished Karmayogin.
They rise from a free spirit and disappear without modi-
fying it, like waves that rise and disappear on the surface
of conscious immutable depths. Gata-.sahga.sya muktasya
jndndvasthita-cetasah, yajndydcaratah karma samagram pra-
villyate.


233


XIX


EQUALITY

Since knowledge, desirelessness, impersonality, equality,
the inner self-existent peace and bliss, freedom from or at
least superiority to the tangled interlocking of the three
modes of Nature are the signs of the liberated soul, they
must accompany it in all its activities. They are the condi-
tion of that unalterable calm which this soul preserves in
all the movement, all the shock, all the clash of forces
which surround it in the world. That calm reflects the
equable immutability of the Brahman in the midst of all
mutations, and it belongs to the indivisible and impartial
Oneness which is for ever immanent in all the multipli-
cities of the universe. For an equal and all-equalising spirit
is that Oneness in the midst of the million differences
and inequalities of the world ; and equality of the spirit
is the sole real equality. For in all else in existence there
can only be similarity, adjustment and balance; but even
in the greatest similarities of the world we find difference
of inequality and difference of unlikeness and the adjusted
balancings of the world can only come about by a poising
of combined unequal weights.

Hence the immense importance attached by the Gita
in its elements of Karmayoga to equality; it is the nodus
of the free spirit's free relations with the world. Self-
knowledge, desirelessness, impersonality, bliss, freedom
from the modes of Nature, when withdrawn into them-


234


£q.Ual1tY


selves, self-absorbed, inactive, have no need of equality;
for they take no cognisance of the things in which the op-
position of equality and inequality arises. But the moment
the spirit takes cognisance of and deals with the multi-
plicities, personalities, differences, inequalities of the action
of Nature, it , has to effectuate these other signs of its free
status by this one manifesting sign of equality. Knowledge
is the consciousness of unity with the One ; and in relation
with the many different beings and existences of the uni-
verse it must show itself by an equal oneness with all.
Impersonality is the one immutable spirit’s superiority
to the variations of its multiple personality in the world ;
in its dealings with the personalities of the universe it
must show itself in the equal and impartial spirit of its
action with regard to all, however various that action may
be made by the variety of relations into which it is moulded
or of the conditions under which it has to take place.
So Krishna in the Gita says that none is dear to him,
none hated, to all he is equal in spirit; yet is the God-
lover the special receiver of his grace, because the relation
he has created is different and the one impartial Lord
of all yet meets each soul according to its way of approach
to him. Desirelessncss is the illimitable Spirit’s superiority
to the limiting attraction of the separate objects of desire
in the world; when it has to enter into relations with
those objects, it must show it either by an equal and* im-
partial indifference in their possession or by an equal
and impartial unattached delight in all and love for all
which, because it is self-existent, does not depend upon
possession or non-possession, but is in its essence unper-
turbed and immutable. For the spirit’s bliss is in itself,
and if this bliss is to enter into relations with things and
creatures, it is only in this way that it can manifest its free


235


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


spirituality. Traigutfdtitya, transcendence of the gunas, is
the unperturbed spirit’s superiority to that flux of action
of the modes of Nature which is in its constant character
perturbed and unequal; if it has to enter into relations
with the conflicting and unequal activities of Nature, if
the free soul is to allow its nature any action at all, it must
show its superiority by an impartial equality towards all
activities, results or happenings.

Equality is the sign and also for the aspirant the test.
Where there is inequality in, the soul, there there is in
evidence some unequal play of the modes of Nature,
motion of desire, play of personal will, feeling and action,
activity of joy and grief or that disturbed and disturbing
delight which is not true spiritual bliss but a mental satis-
faction bringing in its train inevitably a counterpart or
recoil of mental dissatisfaction. Where there is inequality
of soul, there there is deviation from knowledge, loss of
steadfast abiding in the all-embracing and all-reconciling
oneness of the Brahman and unity of things. By his
equality the Karmayogin knows in the midst of his action
that he is free.

It is the spiritual nature of the equality enjoined, high
and universal in its character and comprehension, which
gives its distinctive note to the teaching of the Gita in
this matter. For otherwise the mere teaching of equality
in itself as the most desirable status of the mind, feelings
and temperament in which we rise superior to human
weakness, is by no means peculiar to the Gita. Equality
has always been held up to admiration as the philosophic
ideal and the characteristic temperament of the sages.
The Gita takes up indeed this philosophic ideal, but car-
ries it far beyond into a higher region where we find
ourselves breathing a larger and purer air. The Stoic


236


EQUALITY


poise, the philosophic poise of the soul are only its first
and second steps of ascension out of the whirl of the pas-
sions and the tossings of desire to a serenity and bliss,
not of the Gods, but of the Divine himself in his supreme
self-mastery. The Stoic equality, making character its
pivot, founds itself upon self-mastery by austere endur-
ance; the happier and serener philosophic equality pre-
fers self-mastery by knowledge, by detachment, by a high
intellectual indifference seated above the disturbances
to which our nature is prone, udaslnavad aslnah, as the Gita
expresses it ; there is also the religious or Christian equality
which is a perpetual kneeling or a prostrate resignation
and submission to the will of God. These are the three
steps and means towards divine peace, heroic endurdfhce,
sage indifference, pious resignation, titiksa, uddslnatd,
namas or nati. The Gita takes them all in its large synthetic
manner and weaves them into its upward soul-movement,
but it gives to each a profounder root, a larger outlook,
a more universal and transcendent significance. For to
each it gives the values of the spirit, its power of spiritual
being beyond the strain of character, beyond the difficult
poise of the understanding, beyond the stress of the
emotions.

The ordinary human soul takes a pleasure in the custo-
mary disturbances of its nature-life; it is because it has
this pleasure and because, having it, it gives a sanction to
the troubled play of the lower nature that the play conti-
nues perpetually; for the Prakriti does nothing except
for the pleasure and with the sanction of its lover and
enjoyer, the Purusha. We do not recognise this truth
because under the- actual stroke of the adverse disturbance,
smitten by grief, pain,' discomfort, misfortune, failure,
defeat, blame, dishonour, the mind shrinks back from the


2 37


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


blow, while it leaps eagerly to the embrace of the opposite
and pleasurable disturbances, joy, pleasure, satisfactions
of all kinds, prosperity, success, victory, glory, praise;
but this does not alter the truth of the soul’s pleasure in
life which remains constant behind the dualities of the
mind. The warrior does not feel physical pleasure in his
wounds or find mental satisfaction in his defeats; but he
has a complete delight in the godhead of battle which
brings to him defeat and wounds as well as the joy of
victory, and he accepts the chances of the former and the
hope of the latter as part of the mingled weft of war, the
thing which the delight in him pursues. Even, wounds
bring him a joy and pride in memory, complete when
the 'pain of them has passed, but often enough present
even while it is there and actually fed by the pain. Defeat
keeps for him the joy and pride of indomitable resistance
to a superior adversary, or, if he is of a baser kind, the
passions of hatred and revenge which also have their
darker and crueller pleasures. So it is with the pleasure
of the soul in the normal play of our life.

The mind recoils by pain and dislike from the
adverse strokes of life; that is Nature’s device for enforcing
a principle of self-protection, jugupsa, so that the vul-
nerable nervous and bodily parts of us may not unduly
rush upon self-destruction to embrace it: it takes joy
in the favourable touches of life; that is Nature’s lure
of rajasic pleasure, so that the force in the creature may
overcome the tamasic tendencies of inertia and inactivity
and be impelled fully towards action, desire, struggle,
success, and by its attachment to these things her ends
may be worked out. Our secret soul takes a pleasure
in this strife and effort, and even a pleasure in adversity
and suffering, which can be complete enough in memory


EQUALITY


and retrospect, but is present too behind at the time and
often even rises to the surface of the afflicted mind to
support it in its passion; but what really attracts the
soul is the whole mingled weft of the thing we call life
with all its disturbance of struggle and seeking, its attrac-
tions and repulsions, its offer and its menace, its varieties
of every kind. To the rajasic. desire-soul in us a mono-
tonous pleasure, success without struggle, joy without
a shadow must after a time become fatiguing, insipid,
cloying; it needs a background of darkness to give full
value to its enjoyment of light: for the happiness it
seeks and enjoys is of that very nature, it is in its very
essence relative and dependent on the perception and
experience of its opposite. The joy of the soul in the
dualities is the secret of the mind’s pleasure in living.

Ask it to rise out of all this disturbance to the un-
mingled joy of the pure bliss-soul which all the time
secretly supports its strength in the struggle and makes
its own continued existence possible, — it will draw back
at once from the call. It does not believe in such an
existence; or it believes that it would not be life, that
it would not be at all the varied existence in the world
around it in which it is accustomed to take pleasure;
it would be something tasteless and without savour. Or
it feels that the effort- would be too difficult for it; it recoils
from the struggle of the ascent, although in reality the
spiritual change is not, at all more difficult than the
realisation of the dreams the desire-soul pursues, nor
entails more struggle and labour in the attainment than
the tremendous effort which the desire-soul expends in
its passionate chase after its own transient objects of
pleasure and desire. The true cause of its unwillingness
is that it is asked to rise above its own atmosphere and


239


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


breathe a rarer and purer air of life, whose bliss and
power it cannot realise and hardly even conceives as
real, while the joy of this lower turbid nature is to it the
one thing familiar and palpable. Nor is this lower satis-
faction in itself a thing evil and unprofitable; it is rather
the condition for the upward evolution of our human
nature out of the tamasic ignorance and inertia to wbich
its material being is most subject; it is the rajasic stage
of the graded ascent of man towards the supreme self-
knowledge, power and bliss. But if we rest eternally on
this plane, the madhyama gatih of the Gita, our ascent
remains unfinished, the evolution of the soul incomplete.
Through the sattwic being and nature to that which
is beyond the three gunas lies the way of the soul to
its perfection.

The movement which will lead us out of the disturb-
ances of the lower nature must be necessarily a move-
ment towards equality in the mind, in the emotional
temperament, in the soul. But it is to be noted that,
although in the end we must arrive at a superiority to
all the three gunas of the lower nature, it is yet in its
incipience by a resort to one or other of the three that
the movement must begin. The beginning of equality
may be sattwic, rajasic or tamasic; for there is a possibi-
lity in the human nature of a tamasic equality. It may
be purely tamasic, the heavy equability of a vital tem-
perament rendered inertly irresponsive to the shocks
of existence by a sort of dull insensibility undesirous of
the joy of life. Or it may result from a weariness of the
emotions and desires accumulated by a surfeit and
satiety of the pleasure or else, on the contrary, a dis-
appointment and a disgust and shrinking from the pain
of life, a lassitude, a fear and horror and dislike of the


240


EQUALITY


world: it is then in its nature a mixed movement,
rajaso-tamasic* but the lower quality predominates. Or,
approaching the sattwic principle, it may aid itself by the
intellectual perception that the desires of life cannot
be satisfied, that the soul is too weak to master life, that
the whole thing is nothing but sorrow and transient effort
and nowhere in it is there any real truth or sanity or
light or happiness; this is the sattwo-tamasic principle
of equality and is not so much equality, though it may
lead to that, as indifference or equal refusal. Essentially,
the movement of tamasic equality is a generalisation of
Nature’s principle of jugupsa or self-protecting recoil
extended from the shunning of particular painful effects
to a shunning of the whole life of Nature itself as in sum
leading to pain and self-tormenting and not to the
delight which the soul demands.

In tamasic equality by itself there is no real liberation;
but it can be made a powerful starting-point, if, as in
Indian asceticism, it is turned into the sattwic by the
perception of the greater existence, the true power, the
higher delight of the immutable Self above Nature. The
natural turn of such a movement, however, is towards
Sannyasa, the renunciation of life and works, rather
than to that union of inner renunciation of desire with
continued activity in the world of Nature which the
Gita advocates. The Gita, however, admits and makes
room for this movement; it allows as a recoiling starting-
point the perception of the defects of the world-existence,
birth and disease and death and old age and sorrow,
the historic starting-point of the Buddha, janma-mrtyu-
jard-vyddhi~duhkha-dosdnudarianam> and it accepts the effort
of those whose self-discipline is motived by a desire for
release, even in this spirit, from the curse of age and


16


241


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


or troubled. It seeks to make man the conqueror and king
of his nature.

The Gita, making its call on the warrior nature of
Arjuna, starts with this heroic movement. It calls on
him to turn on the great enemy desire and slay it. Its
first description of equality is that of the Stoic philosopher.
“He whose mind is undisturbed in the midst of sorrows
and amid pleasures is free from desire, from whom liking
and fear and wrath have passed away, is the sage of settled
understanding. Who in all things is without affection
though visited by this good or that evil and neither
hates nor rejoices, his intelligence sits firmly founded in
wisdom.” If one abstains from food, it says, giving a phy-
sical example, the object of sense ceases to affect, but the
affection itself of the sense, the rasa , remains; it is only
when, even in the exercise of the sense, it can keep back
from seeking its sensuous aim in the object, artha , and aban-
don the affection, the desire for the pleasure of taste, that
the highest level of the soul is reached * It is by using the
mental organs on the objects, “ranging over them with
the senses,” visayan iniriyaikaran , but with senses subject to
the self, freed from liking and disliking, that one gets into
a large and sweet clearness of soul and temperament in
which passion and grief find no place. All desires have
to enter into the soul, as waters into the sea, and yet it
has to remain immovable, filled but not disturbed: so
in the end all desires can be abandoned. To be freed from
wrath and passion and fear and attraction is repeatedly
stressed as a necessary condition of the liberated status,
and for this we must learn to bear their shocks, which
cannot be done without exposing ourselves to their causes.
“He who can bear here in the body the velocity of wrath
and desire, is the Yogin, the happy man.” Titikfa , the will


244


EQUALITY


and power to endure, is the means. “The material touches
which cause heat and cold, happiness and pain, things
transient which come and go, these learn to endure.
For the man whom these do not trouble nor pain, the
firm and wise who is equal in pleasure and suffering,
makes himself apt for immortality.” The equal-soulcd
has to bear suffering and not hate, to receive pleasure and
not rejoice. Even the physical affections are to be mastered
by endurance and this too is part of the Stoic discipline.
Age, death, suffering, pain are not fled from, but accepted
and vanquished by a high indifference . 1 Not to flee appal-
led from Nature in her lower masks, but to meet and
conquer her is the true instinct of the strong nature,
purusarsabha, the leonine soul among men. Thus compelled,
she throws aside her mask and reveals to him his true
nature as the free soul, not her subject but her king and
lord, svarat, samrat.

But the Gita accepts this Stoic discipline, this heroic
philosophy, on the same condition that it accepts the tama-
sic recoil, — it must have above it the sattwic vision of
knowledge, at its root the aim at self-realisation and in
its steps the ascent to the divine Nature. A Stoic discipline
which merely crushed down the common affections of our
human nature, — although less dangerous than a tamasic
weariness of life, unfruitful pessimism and sterile inertia,
because it would at least increase the -power and self-
mastery of the soul, — would still be no unmixed good,
since it might lead to insensibility and an inhuman
isolation without giving the true spiritual release. The
Stoic equality is justified as an element in the discipline

1 Dhiras tatra na muhyati , says the Gita; the strong and wise soul is not
perplexed, troubled or moved by them. But still they are accepted only
to be conquered, jard*mararia*mokfdya yatantu


245


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


of the Gita because it can be associated with and can
help to the realisation of the free immutable Self in the
mobile human being, param drstva , and to status in that new
self-consciousness, esa brahml sthitih. “Awakening by
the understanding to the Highest which is beyond even
the discerning mind, put force on the self by the self to
make it firm and still, and slay this enemy who is so hard
to assail, Desire.” Both the tamasic recoil of escape and
the rajasic movement of struggle and victory are only
justified when they look beyond themselves through the
sattwic principle to the self-knowledge which legitimises
both the recoil and the struggle.

The pure philosopher, the thinker, the born sage
not only relies upon the sattwic principle in him as his
ultimate justification, but uses it from the beginning
as his instrument of self-mastery. He starts from the
sattwic equality. He too observes the transitoriness
of the material and external world and its failure to
satisfy the desires or to give the true delight, but this
causes in him no grief, fear or disappointment. He
observes all with an eye of tranquil discernment and
makes his choice without repulsion or perplexity. “The
enjoyments born of the touches of things are causes of
sorrow, they have a beginning and an end; therefore
the sage, the man of awakened understanding, budhah,
does not place his delight in these.” “The self in him is
unattached to the touches of external things; he finds
his happiness in himself.” He sees, as the Gita puts it,
that he is himself his own enemy and his own friend,
and therefore he takes care not to dethrone himself by
casting his being into the hands of desire and passion,
natmanam avasadayet, but delivers himself out of that
imprisonment by his own inner power uddhared atmanat-


246


EQUAL1TV


manam ; for whoever has conquered his lower self, finds
in his higher self his best friend and ally. He becomes
satisfied with knowledge, master of his senses, a Yogin
by sattwic equality, — for equality is Yoga, samalvamyoga
ucyate , — regarding alike clod and stone and gold, tranquil
and self-poised in heat and cold, suffering and happiness,
honour and disgrace. He is equal in soul to friend and
enemy and to neutral and indifferent, because he sees
that these are transitory relations born of the changing
conditions of life. Even by the pretensions of learning
and purity and virtue and the claims to superiority
which men base upon these things, he is not led away.
He is cqual-souled to all men, to the sinner and the
saint, to the virtuous, learned and cultured Brahmin
and the fallen outcaste. All these are the Gita’s des-
criptions of the sattwic equality, and they sum up well
enough what is familiar to the world as the calm philo-
sophic equality of the sage.

Where then is the difference between this and the
larger equality taught by the Gita? It lies in the difference
between the intellectual and philosophic discernment
and the spiritual, the Vedantic knowledge of unity on
which the Gita founds its teaching. The philosopher
maintains his equality by the power of the buddhi, the
discerning mind; but even that by itself is a doubtful
foundation. For, though master of himself on the whole
by a constant attention or an acquired habit of mind,
in reality he is not free from his lower nature, and it
does actually assert itself in many ways and may at
any moment take a violent revenge for its rejection and
suppression. For, always, the play of the lower nature
is a triple play, and the rajasic and tamasic qualities
are ever lying in wait for the sattwic man. “Even the


247


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


mind of the wise man who labours for perfection is
carried away by the vehement insistence of the senses.”
Perfect security can only be had by resorting to something
higher than the sattwic quality, something higher than
the discerning mind, to the Self, — not the philosopher’s
intelligent self, but the divine sage’s spiritual self which
is beyond the three gunas. All must be consummated
by a divine birth into the higher spiritual nature.

And the philosopher’s equality is like the Stoic’s,
like the world-fleeing ascetic’s, inwardly a lonely free-
dom, remote and aloof from men ; but the man bom to
the divine birth has found the Divine not only in himself,
but in all beings. He has realised his unity with all
and his equality is therefore full of sympathy and oneness.
He sees all as himself and is not intent on his lonely
salvation ; he even takes upon himself the burden of their
happiness and sorrow by which he is not himself affected
or subjected. The perfect sage, the Gita more than
once repeats, is ever engaged with a large equality in
doing good to all creatures and makes that his occupa-
tion and delight, sarvabhula~hile ratali „ The perfect Yogin
is no solitary musing on the Self in his ivory tower of
spiritual isolation, but yuktah krtsna-karma-krt, a many-
sided universal worker for the good of the world, for God
in the world. For he is a bhakta, a lover and devotee of the
Divine, as well as a sage and a Yogin, a lover who loves
God wherever he finds Him and who finds Him every-
where ; and what he loves, he does- not disdain to serve,
nor does action carry him away from the bliss of union,
since all his acts proceed from the One in him and to the
One in all they are directed. The equality of the Gita is
a large synthetic equality in which all is lifted up into the
integrality of the divine being and the divine nature.


248


Essays on the gita


as soon as done, suffers laya , as one might say, in
the being of the Brahman, praviliyate\ it has no reactionary
consequence on the soul of the apparent doer. The work
is done by the Lord through his Nature, it is no longer
personal to the human instrument. The work itself be-
comes but power of the nature and substance of the being
of the Brahman.

It is in this sense that the Gita is speaking when it says
that all the totality of work finds its completion, culmi-
nation, end in knowledge, sarvam karmakhilam jnane pari-
samapyate. “As a fire kindled turns to ashes its fuel, so the
fire of knowledge turns all works to ashes.” By this it is
not at all meant that when knowledge is complete, there
is cessation from works. What is meant is made clear by
the Gita when it says that he who has destroyed all doubt
by knowledge and has by Yoga given up all works and is
in possession of the Self is not bound by his works, yoga -
samnyastakarmanam dtmavantam na karmani nibadhnanti , and
that he whose self has become the self of all existences,
acts and yet is not affected by his works, is not caught in
them, receives from them no soul-ensnaring reaction,
kurvann api na lipyaie . Therefore, it says, the Yoga of works
is better than the physical renunciation of works, be-
cause, while Sannyasa is difficult for embodied beings
who must do works so long as they are in the body, Yoga
of works is entirely sufficient and it rapidly and easily
brings the soul to Brahman. That Yoga of works is, we
have seen, the offering of all action to the Lord, which
induces as its culmination an inner and not an outer, a
spiritual, not a physical giving up of works into the
Brahman, into the being of the Lord, brahmani adhaya
karmani mayi samnyasya. When works arc thus “reposed
on the Brahman”, the personality of the instrumental


250


EQ.UAti’rV AND KNOWLEDGE


doer ceases; though he acts, he does nothing; for he has
given up not only the fruits of his works, but the works
themselves and the doing of them to the Lord. The Divine
then takes the burden of works from him; the Supreme
becomes the doer and the act and the result.

This knowledge of which the Gita speaks, is not an
intellectual activity of the mind; it is a luminous growth
into the highest state of being by the outshining of the
light of the divine sun of Truth, “that Truth, the Sun
lying concealed in the darkness” of our ignorance of which
the Rigveda speaks, tat satyam suryam tamasi ksiyantam.
The immutable Brahman is there in the spirit’s skies
above this troubled lower nature of the dualities, un-
touched either by its virtue or by its sin, accepting neither
our sense of sin nor our self-righteousness, untouched by
its joy and its sorrow, indifferent to our joy in success
and our grief in failure, master of all, supreme, all-per-
vading, prabhu vibhu, calm, strong, pure, equal in all things,
the source of Nature, not the direct doer of our works,
but the witness of Nature and her works, not imposing
on us either the illusion of being the doer, for that illusion
is the result of the ignorance of this lower Nature. But
this freedom, mastery, purity we < cannot see; we are
bewildered by the natural ignorance which hides from us
the eternal self-knowledge of the Brahman secret within
our being. But knowledge comes to its persistent seeker
and removes the natural self-ignorance; it shines out like
a long-hidden sun and lights up to our vision that self-
being supreme beyond the dualities of this lower exis-
tence, Sdityavat prakasayati tat param. By a long whole-
hearted endeavour, by directing our whole conscious
being to that, by making that our whole aim, by turning
it into the whole object of our discerning mind and so


251


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


seeing it not only in ourselves but everywhere, we be-
come one thought and self with that, tad~buddhayas tad -
atmdnah , we are washed dean of all the darkness and
suffering of the lower man by the waters of knowledge , 1
jndna-nirdhuta-kalmasah.

The result is, says the Gita, a perfect equality to all
things and all persons; and then only can we repose our
works completely in the Brahman. For the Brahman is
equal, samam brahma , and it is only when we have this
perfect equality, samye sthitam manah , “seeing with an
equal eye the learned and cultured Brahmin, the cow,
the elephant, the dog, the outcastc” and knowing all as
one Brahman, that we can, living in that oneness, see
like the Brahman our works proceeding from the nature
freely without any fear of attachment, sin or bondage.
Sin and stain then cannot be; for we have overcome that
creation full of desire and its works and reactions which
belongs to the ignorance, tair jitah sargah , and living in
the supreme and divine Nature there is no longer fault
or defect in our works; for these are created by the in-
equalities of the ignorance. The equal Brahman is
faultless, nirdosam hi samam brahma , beyond the confusion
of good and evil, and living in the Brahman we too rise
beyond good and evil; we act in that purity, stainlessly,
with an equal and single purpose of fulfilling the wel-
fare of all existences, ksina*kalmasak sarvabhuta-hite ratah.
The Lord in our hearts is in the ignorance also the cause
of our actions, but through his Maya, through the egoism
of our lower nature which creates the tangled web of


1 The Rigveda so speaks of the streams of the Truth, the waters
that have perfect knowledge, the waters that are full of the divine
sunlight, ftasya dkarah, dpo vicetasafr, svarvaltr apak* What are here meta-
phors, are there concrete symbols.


252


EQUALITY AND KNOWLEDGE


our actions and brings back upon our egoism the recoil
of their tangled reactions affecting us inwardly as sin
and virtue, affecting us outwardly as suffering and
pleasure, evil fortune and good fortune, the great chain
of Karma. When we are freed by knowledge, the Lord,
no longer hidden in our hearts, but manifest as our
supreme self, takes up our works and uses us as fault-
less instruments, nimitta-matram, for the helping of the
world. Such is the intimate union between knowledge
and equality; knowledge here in the buddhi reflected as
equality in the temperament; above, on a higher plane
of consciousness, knowledge as the light of the Being,
equality as the stuff of the Nature.

Always in this sense of a supreme self-knowledge
is this word jhana used in Indian philosophy and Yoga;
it is the light by which we grow into our true being,
not the knowledge by which we increase our information
and our intellectual riches; it is not scientific or psy-
chological or philosophic or ethical or aesthetic or worldly
and practical knowledge. These too no doubt help us
to grow, but only in the becoming, not in the being;
they enter into the definition of Yogic knowledge only
when we use them as aids to know the Supreme, the
Self, the Divine, — scientific knowledge, when we can
get through the veil of processes and phenomena and
see the one Reality behind which explains them all;
psychological knowledge, when we use it to know our-
selves and to distinguish the lower from the higher, so
that this we may renounce and into that we may grow;
philosophical knowledge, when we turn it as a light
upon the essential principles of existence so as to dis-
* cover and live in that which is eternal; ethical know-
ledge, when by it having distinguished sin from virtue


253


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


we put away the one and rise above the other into the
pure innocence of the divine Nature; aesthetic know-
ledge, when we discover by it the beauty of the Divine;
knowledge of the world, when wc see through it the
way of the Lord with his creatures and use it for the
service of the Divine in man. Even then they are only
aids; the real knowledge is that which is a secret to
the mind, of which the mind only gets reflections, but
which lives in the spirit.

The Gita in describing how we come by this know-
ledge, says that we get first initiation into it from the
men of knowledge who have seen , not those who know
merely by the intellect, its essential truths ; but the
actuality of it comes from within ourselves: “the man
who is perfected by Yoga, finds it of himself in the self
by the course of Time”, it grows within him, that is to
say, and he grows into it as he goes on increasing in
desirelessness, in equality, in devotion to the Divine.
It is only of the supreme knowledge that this can alto-
gether be said; the knowledge which the intellect of man
amasses, is gathered laboriously by the senses and the
reason from outside. To get this other knowledge, self-
existent, intuitive, self-experiencing, self-revealing, we
must have conquered and controlled our mind and
senses, samyatendriyak , so that we are no longer subject
to their delusions, but rather the mind and senses be-
come its pure mirror; we must have fixed our whole
conscious being on the truth of that supreme reality in
which all exists, tat-pardh , so that it may display in us
its luminous self-existence.

Finally, we must have a faith which no intellectual
doubt can be allowed to disturb, iraddhdvdn labhate jfldnam .
“The ignorant who has not faith, the soul of doubt


254


EQUALITY AND KNOWLEDGE


goeth to perdition; neither this world, nor the supreme
world, nor any happiness is for the soul full of doubts.”
In fact, it is true that without faith nothing decisive
can be achieved either in this world or for possession of
the world above, and that it is only by laying hold of
some sure basis and positive support that man can
attain any measure of terrestrial or celestial success and
satisfaction and happiness; the merely sceptical mind
loses, itself in the void. But still in the lower knowledge
doubt and scepticism have their temporary uses; in the
higher they are stumbling-blocks: for there the whole
secret is not the balancing of truth and error, but a
constantly progressing realisation of revealed truth. In
intellectual knowledge there is always a mixture of false-
hood or incompleteness which has to be got rid of by
subjecting the truth itself to sceptical inquiry; but in the
higher knowledge falsehood cannot enter and that which
intellect contributes by attaching itself to this or that
opinion, cannot be got rid of by mere questioning, but
will fall away of itself by persistence in realisation. What-
ever incompleteness there is in the knowledge attained, it
must be got rid of, not by questioning in its roots what
has already been realised, but by proceeding to further
and more complete realisation through a deeper, higher
and wider living in the Spirit. And what is not yet realised
must be prepared for by faith, not by sceptical question-
ing, because this truth is one which the intellect cannot
give and which is indeed often quite opposed to the ideas
in which the reasoning and logical mind gets entangled:
it is not a truth which has to be proved, but a truth which
has to be lived inwardly, a greater reality into which we
have to grow. Finally* it is in itself a self-existent truth
and would be self-evident if it were not for the sorceries of


255


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


the ignorance in which we live; the doubts, the perplexities
which prevent us from accepting and following it, arise
from that ignorance, from the sense-bewildered, opinion-
perplexed heart and mind, living as they do in a lower
and phenomenal truth and therefore questioning the
higher realities, ajndna-satnbhutam hrtstham samsayam. They
have to be cut away by the sword of knowledge, says the
Gita, by the knowledge that realises, by resorting cons-
tantly to Yoga, that is, by living out the union with the
Supreme whose truth being known all is known, yasmin
vijnate sarvam vijndtam.

The higher knowledge we there get is that which is to
the knower of Brahman his constant vision of things when
he lives uninterruptedly in the Brahman, brahmavid brahma -
ni sthitah . That is not a vision or knowledge or conscious-
ness of Brahman to the exclusion of all else, but a seeing
of all in Brahman and as the self. For, it is said, the
knowledge by which we rise beyond all relapse back into
the bewilderment of our mental nature, is “that by which
thou shalt see all existences without exception in the Self,
then in Me . 55 Elsewhere the Gita puts it more largely,
“Equal-visioned everywhere, he sees the Self in all exis-
tences and all existences in the Self. He who sees Me
everywhere and all and each in Me, is never lost to Me
nor I to him. He who has reached oneness and loves
Me in all beings, that Yogin, howsoever he lives and acts,
is living and acting in Me. O Arjuna, he who sees all
equally everywhere as himself, whether it be happiness
or suffering, I hold him to be the supreme Yogin . 55 That
is the old Vedantic knowledge of the Upanishads which
the Gita holds up constantly before us ; but it is its supe-
riority to other later formulations \of it that it turns per-
sistently this knowledge into a great practical philosophy


256


EQUALITY AND KNOWLEDGE


of divine living. Always it insists on the relation between
this knowledge of oneness and Karmayoga, and therefore
on the knowledge of oneness as the basis of a liberated
action in the world. Whenever it speaks of knowledge,
it turns at once to speak of equality which is its result;
whenever it speaks of equality, it turns to speak too of the
knowledge which is its basis. The equality it enjoins
does not begin and end in a static condition of the soul
useful only for self-liberation ; it is always a basis of works.
The peace of the Brahman in the liberated soul is the
foundation; the large, free, equal, world-wide action of
the Lord in the liberated nature radiates the power which
proceeds from that peace; these two made one synthesise
divine works and God-knowledge.

We see at once what a profound extension we get here
for the ideas which otherwise the Gita has in common
with other systems of philosophic, ethical or religious
living. Endurance, philosophic indifference, resignation
are, we have said, the foundation of three kinds of equali-
ty; but the Gita’s truth of knowledge not only gathers
them all up together, but gives them an infinitely pro-
found, a magnificently ample significance. The Stoic
knowledge is that of the soul’s power of self-mastery by
fortitude, an equality attained by a struggle with one’s
nature, maintained by a constant vigilance and control
against its natural rebellions: it gives a noble peace, an
austere happiness, but not the supreme joy of the liberated
self living not by a rule, but in the pure, easy, spontaneous
perfection of its divine being, so that “however it may act
and live, it acts and lives in the Divine”, because here
perfection is not only attained but possessed in its own
right and has no longer to be maintained by effort, for
it has become the very nature of the soul’s being. The


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


Gita accepts the endurance and fortitude of our struggle
with the lower nature as a preliminary movement; but if
a certain mastery comes by our individual strength, the
freedom of mastery only comes by our union with God,
by a merging or dwelling of the personality in the one
divine Person and the loss of the personal will in the divine
Will. There is a divine Master of Nature and her works,
above her though inhabiting her, who is our highest being
and our universal self; to be one with him is to make
ourselves divine. By union with God we enter into a su-
preme freedom and a supreme mastery. The ideal of the
Stoic, the sage who is king because by self-rule he becomes
master also of outward conditions, resembles superficially
the Vedantic idea of the self-ruler and all-ruler, svarat
samrat ; but it is on a lower plane. The Stoic kingship is
maintained by a force put upon self and environment;
the entirely liberated kingship of the Yogin exists naturally
by the eternal royalty of the divine nature, a union with
its unfettered universality, a finally unforced dwelling in
its superiority to the instrumental nature through which
it acts. His mastery over things is because he has become
one soul with all things. To take an image from Roman
institutions, the Stoic freedom is that of the libertus, the
freedman, who is still really a dependent on the power
that once held him enslaved; his is a freedom allowed by
Nature because he has merited it. The freedom of the Gita
is that of the freeman, the true freedom of the birth into
the higher nature, self-existent in its divinity. Whatever
he does and however he lives, the free soul lives in the
Divine; he is the privileged child of the mansion, balavat,
who cannot err or fall because all he is and does is full
of the Perfect, the All-blissful, the All-loving, the All-
beautiful. The kingdom which he enjoys, rajyam samrddham ,


258


EQUALITY AND KNOWLEDGE


is a sweet and happy dominion of which it may be said,
in the pregnant phrase of the Greek thinker, “The
kingdom is of the child”.

The knowledge of the philosopher is that of the true
nature of mundane existence, the transience of outward
things, the vanity of the world’s differences and distinc-
tions, the superiority of the inner calm, peace, light, self-
dependence. It is an equality of philosophic indifference ;
it brings a high calm, but not the greater spiritual joy; it
is an isolated freedom, a wisdom like that of the Lucretian
sage high in his superiority, upon the cliff-top whence he
looks down on men tossed still upon the tempestuous
waters from which he has escaped, — in the end something
after all aloof and ineffective. The Gita admits the philo-
sophic motive of indifference as a preliminary movement;
but the indifference to which it finally arrives, if indeed
that inadequate word can be at all applied, has nothing
in it of the philosophic aloofness. It is indeed a position
as of one seated above, udaslnavat , but as the Divine is
seated above, having no need at all in the world, yet he
does works always and is present everywhere supporting,
helping, guiding the labour of creatures. This equality
is founded upon oneness with all beings. It brings in what
is wanting to the philosophic equality; for its soul is the
soul of peace, but also it is the soul of love. It sees all
beings without exception in the Divine, it is one self
with the Self of all existences and therefore it is in supreme
sympathy with all of them. Without exception, asesena,
not only with all that is good and fair and pleases; nothing
and no one, however vile, fallen, criminal, repellent
in appearance, can be excluded from this universal,
this whole-souled sympathy and spiritual oneness. Here
there is no room, not merely for hatred or anger or


259


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


uncharitableness, but for aloofness, disdain or any petty
pride of superiority. A divine compassion for the igno-
rance of the struggling mind, a divine will to pour forth
on it all light and power and happiness there will be,
indeed, for the apparent man; but for the divine Soul
within him there will be more, there will be adoration
and love. For from all, from the thief and the harlot and
the outcaste as from the saint and the sage, the Beloved
looks forth and cries to us, “This is I”. “He who loves
Me in all beings”, — what greater word of power for the
utmost intensities and profundities of divine and uni-
versal love, has been uttered by any philosophy or any
religion?

Resignation is the basis of a kind of religious equality,
submission to the divine will, a patient bearing of the
cross, a submissive forbearance. In the Gita this element
takes the more ample form of an entire surrender of the
whole being to God. It is not merely a passive submission,
but an active self-giving; not only a seeing and an
accepting of the divine Will in all things, but a giving up
of one’s own will to be the instrument of the Master of
works, and this not with the lesser idea of being a servant
of God, but eventually at least, of such a complete renun-
ciation both of the consciousness and the works to him
that our being becomes one with his being and the im-
personalised nature only an instrument and nothing
else. All result good or bad, pleasing or unpleasing,
fortunate or unfortunate, is accepted as belonging to
the Master of our actions, so that finally not only are
grief and suffering borne, but they are banished: a
perfect equality of the emotional mind is established*
There is no assumption of personal will in the instrument;
it is seen that all is already worked out in the omniscient


260


EQUALITY AND KNOWLEDGE


prescience and omnipotent effective power of the uni-
versal Divine and that the egoism of men cannot alter
the workings of that Will. Therefore, the final attitude
is that enjoined on Arjuna in a later chapter, “All
has been already done by Me in my divine will and
foresight; become only the occasion, O Arjuna”, nimitla -
matram bhava savyasacin . This attitude must lead finally
to an absolute union of the personal with the Divine
Will and, with the growth of knowledge, bring about
a faultless response of the instrument to the divine Power
and Knowledge. A perfect, an absolute equality of self-
surrender, the mentality a passive channel of the divine
Light and Power, the active being a mightily effective
instrument for its work in the world, will be the poise
of this supreme union of the Transcendent, the universal
and the individual.

Equality too there will be with regard to the action of
others upon us. Nothing that they can do will alter
the inner oneness, love, sympathy which arise from the
perception of the one Self in all, the Divine in all beings.
But a resigned forbearance and submission to them and
their deeds, a passive non-resistance, will be no necessary
part of the action; it cannot be, since a constant instru-
mental obedience to the divine and universal Will must
mean in the shock of opposite forces that fill the world
a conflict with personal wills which seek rather their
own egoistic satisfaction. Therefore Arjuna is bidden to
resist, to fight, to conquer; but, to fight without hatred
or personal desire or personal enmity or antagonism,
since to the liberated soul these feelings are impossible.
To act for the lokasamgraha , impersonally, for the keeping
and leading of the peoples on the path to the divine goal,
is a rule which rises necessarily from the oneness of the


261


essays on the gita


soul with the Divine, the universal Being, since that is
the whole sense and drift of the universal action. Nor
does it conflict with our oneness with all beings, even
those who present themselves here as opponents and
enemies. For the divine goal is their goal also, since it
is the secret aim of all, even of those whose outward
minds, misled by ignorance and egoism, would wander
from the path and resist the impulsion. Resistance and
defeat are the best outward service that can be done to
them. By this perception the Gita avoids the limiting
conclusion which might have been drawn from a doc-
trine of equality impracticably overriding all relations
and of a weakening love without knowledge, while it
keeps the one thing essential unimpaired. For the soul
oneness with all, for the heart calm universal love, sym-
pathy, compassion, but for the hands freedom to work
out impersonally the good, not of this or that person
only without regard to or to the detriment of the divine
plan, but the purpose of the creation, the progressing wel-
fare and salvation of men, the total good of all existences.

Oneness with God, oneness with all beings, the reali-
sation of the eternal divine unity everywhere and the
drawing onwards of men towards that oneness are the
law of life which arises from the teachings of the Gita.
There can be none greater, wider, more profound.
Liberated oneself, to live in this oneness, to help man-
kind on the path that leads towards it and meanwhile
to do all works for God and help man also to do with
joy and acceptance all the works to which he is called
krtsna karma-krt, sarvakarmani josayan, no greater or more
liberal rule of divine works can be given. This freedom
and this oneness are the secret goal of our human nature
and the ultimate will in the existence of the race. It is


262


EQUALITY AND KNOWLEDGE


that to which it must turn for the happiness all mankind
is now vainly seeking, when once men- lift their eyes and
their hearts to see the Divine in them and around, in all
and everywhere, sarvesu , sarvatra , and learn that it is in
him they live, while this lower nature of division is only
a prison-wall which they must break down or at best an
infant-school which they must outgrow, so that they
may become adult in nature and free in spirit. To be
made one self with God above and God in man and
God in the world is the sense of liberation and the secret
of perfection.


263


XXI

THE DETERMINISM OF NATURE

When we can live in the higher Self by the unity of
works and self-knowledge, we become superior to the
method of the lower workings of Prakriti. We are no
longer enslaved to Nature and her gunas, but, one with
the Ishwara, the master of our nature, we are able to
use her without subjection to the chain of Karma, for
the purposes of the Divine Will in us; for that is what the
greater Self in us is, he is the Lord of her works and un-
affected by the troubled stress of her reactions. The soul
ignorant in Nature, on the contrary, is enslaved by that
ignorance to her modes, because it is identified there,
not felicitously with its true self, not with the Divine
who is seated above her, but stupidly and unhappily
with the ego-mind which is a subordinate factor in her
Qperations in spite of the exaggerated figure it makes,
a mere mental knot and point of reference for the play of
the natural workings. To break this knot, no longer to
make the ego the centre and beneficiary of our works,
but to derive all from and refer all to the divine Supersoul
is the way to become superior to all the restless trouble of
Nature’s modes. For it is to live in the ‘supreme con-
sciousness, of which the* ego-mind is a degradation, and *
to act in an equal and unified Will and Force and not in
the unequal play of the gunas which is a broken seeking
and striving, a disturbance, an inferior Maya,


264


THE DETERMINISM O F NATURE


The passages in which the Gita lays stress on the
subjection of the ego-soul to Nature, have by some been
understood as the enunciation of an absolute and a mecha-
nical determinism which leaves no room for any freedom
within the cosmic existence. Certainly, the language it
uses is emphatic and seems very absolute. But we must
take, here as elsewhere, the thought of the Gita as a whole
and not force its affirmations in their solitary sense quite
detached from each other, — as indeed every truth, how-
ever true in itself, yet, taken apart from others which
at once limit and complete it, becomes a snare to bind the
intellect and a misleading dogma; for in reality each’ is
one thread of a complex weft and no thread must be taken
apart from the weft. Everything in the Gita is even so
interwoven and must be understood in its relation to the
whole. The Gita itself makes a distinction between
those who have not the knowledge of the whole, akrtsna -
vidah , and are misled by the partial truths of existence,
and the Yogin who has the synthetic knowledge of the
totality, krtsna-vit . To see all existence steadily and sec it
whole and not be misled by its conflicting truths, is the
first necessity for the calm and complete wisdom to which
the Yogin is called upon to rise. A certain absolute
freedom is one aspect of the soul’s relations with Nature
at one pole of our complex being; a certain absolute deter-
minism by Nature is the opposite aspect at its opposite
pole; and there is also a partial and apparent, therefore an
unreal eidolon of liberty which the soul receives by a
contorted reflection of these two opposite truths in the
developing mentality. It is the latter to which we ordi-
narily give, more or less inaccurately, the name of free
will; but the Gita regards nothing as freedom which is not
a complete liberation and mastery.


265


ESSAYS ON THE GlTA


We have always to keep in mind the two great doctrines
which stand behind all the Gita’s teachings with regard
to the soul and Nature, — the Sankhya truth of the Purusha
and Prakriti corrected and completed by the Vedantic
truth of the threefold Purusha and the double Prakriti
of which the lower form is the Maya of the three gunas
and the higher is the divine nature and the true soul-
nature. This is the key which reconciles and explains what
we might have otherwise to leave as contradictions and
inconsistencies. There are, in fact, different planes of our
conscious existence, and what is practical truth on one
plane ceases to be true, because it assumes a quite different
appearance, as soon as wc rise to a higher level from
which wc can see things more in the whole. Recent
scientific discovery has shown that man, animal, plant
and even the metal have essentially the same vital reac-
tions and they would, therefore, if each has a certain kind
of what for want of a better word we must call nervous
consciousness, possess the same basis of mechanical
psychology. Yet if each of these could give its own mental
account of what it experiences, we should have four
quite different and largely contradictory statements of the
same reactions and the same natural principles, because
they get, as we rise in the scale of being, a different
meaning and value and have to be judged by a different
outlook. So it is with the levels of the human soul. What
we now call in our ordinary mentality our free will and
have a certain limited justification for so calling it, yet
appears to the Yogin who has climbed beyond and to
whom our night is day and our day night, not free will
at all, but a subjection to the modes of Nature. He regards
the same facts, but from the higher outlook of the whole-
knower, kftsiia-vit, while we view it altogether from the


266


THE DETERMINISM OF NATURE


more limited mentality of our partial knowledge, akrtsna -
vidah , which is an ignorance. What we vaunt of as our free-
dom is to him bondage.

The perception of the ignorance of our assumption
of freedom while one is all the time in the meshes of this
lower nature, is the view-point at which the Gita arrives
and it is in contradiction to this ignorant claim that it
affirms the complete subjection of the ego-soul on this
plane to the gunas. “While the actions are being entirely
done by the . modes of Nature,” it says, “he whose self
is bewildered by egoism thinks that it is his T which is
doing them. But one who knows the true principles of the
divisions of the modes and of works, realises that it is
the modes which are acting and reacting on each other
and is not caught in them by attachment. Those who are
bewildered by the modes, not knowers of the whole,
let not the knower of the whole disturb in their mental
standpoint. Giving up thy works to Me, free from desire
and egoism, fight delivered from the fever of thy soul.”
Jlere there is the clear distinction between two levels
of consciousness, two standpoints of action, that of the
soul caught in the web of its egoistic nature and doing
works with the idea, but not the reality of free will, under
the impulsion of Nature, and that of the soul delivered
from its identification with the ego, observing, sanctioning
and governing the works of Nature from above her.

We speak of the soul being subject to Nature; but,
on the other hand, the Gita in distinguishing the proper-
ties of the soul and Nature affirms that while Nature is
the executrix, the soul is always the lord, Isvara. It speaks
here of the self being bewildered by egoism, but the real
Self to the Vedantin is the divine, eternally free and
self-aware. What then is this self that is bewildered by


267


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


Nature, this soul that is subject to her? The answer
is that wc are speaking here in the common parlance of
our lower or mental view of things ; we are speaking of the
apparent self, or the apparent soul, not of the real self,
not of the true Purusha. It is really the ego which is sub-
ject to Nature, inevitably, because it is itself part of
Nature, one functioning of her machinery; but when the
self-awareness in the mind-consciousness identifies itself
with the ego, it creates the appearance of a lower self,
an ego-self. And so too what we think of ordinarily as the
soul is really the natural personality, not the true Person,
the Purusha, but the desire-soul in us which is a reflection
of the consciousness of the Purusha in the workings of
Prakriti: it is, in fact, itself only an action of the three
modes and therefore a part of Nature. Thus there are,
we may say, two souls in us, the apparent or desire-soul,
which changes with the mutations of the gunas and
is entirely constituted and determined by them, and
the free and eternal Purusha not limited by Nature
and her gunas. We have two selves, the apparent self,
which is only the ego, that mental centre in us which
takes up this mutable action of Prakriti, this mutable
personality, and which says “I am this personality, I
am this natural being who am doing these works”, —
but the natural being is simply Nature, a composite of
the gunas, — and the true self which is, indeed, the
upholder, the possessor and the lord of Nature and
figured in her, but is not itself the mutable^ natural
personality. The way to be free must then be to get rid
of the desires of this desire-soul and the false self-view
of this ego. “Having become free from desire and ego-
ism,” cries the Teacher, “fight with all the fever of thy
soul passed away from thee ”, — niraixr nirmamo bhutva .


268


THE DETERMINISM OF NATURE


This view of our being starts from the Sankhya analysis
of the dual principle in our nature, Purusha and Prakriti.
Purusha is inactive, akarta; Prakriti is active kartrl ;
Purusha is the being full of the light of consciousness;
Prakriti is the Nature, mechanical, reflecting all her
works in the conscious witness, the Purusha. Prakriti
works by the inequality of her three modes, gunas, in
perpetual collision and intermixture and mutation with
each other; and by her function of ego-mind she gets
the Purusha to identify himself with all this working and
so creates the sense of active, mutSble, temporal perso-
nality in the silent eternity of the Self. The impure
natural consciousness overclouds the pure soul-con-
sciousness; the mind forgets the Person in the ego and
the personality; we suffer the discriminating intelligence
to be carried away by the sense-mind and its outgoing
functions and by the desire of the life and the body.
So long as the Purusha sanctions this action, ego and
desire and ignorance must govern the natural being.

But if this were all, then the only remedy would be
to withdraw altogether the sanction, suffer or compel
all our nature by this withdrawal to fall into a motion-
less equilibrium of the three gunas and so cease from
all action. But this is precisely the remedy, — though
it is undoubtedly a remedy, one which abolishes, we
might say, the patient along with the disease, — which
the Gita constantly discourages. Especially, to resort
to a tamasic inaction is just what the ignorant will do
if this truth is thrust upon them; the discriminating
mind in them will fall into a false division, a false oppo-
sition, buddhibheda ; their active nature and their intelli-
gence will be divided against each other and produce
a disturbance and confusion without true issue, a false


269


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


and self-deceiving line of action, mithyacara, or else a
mere tamasic inertia, cessation of works, diminution of
the will to life and action, not therefore a liberation,
but rather a subjection to the lowest of the three gunas,
to tamos, the principle of ignorance and of inertia. Or
else they will not be able to understand at all, they will
find fault with this higher teaching, assert against it
their present mental experience, their ignorant idea of
free will and, yet more confirmed by the plausibility of
their logic in their bewilderment and the deception of
ego and desire, lose their chance of liberation in a deeper,
more obstinate confirmation of the ignorance.

In fact, these higher truths can only be helpful, because
there only they are true to experience and can be lived,
on a higher and vaster plane of consciousness and being.
To view these truths from below is to mis-see, misunder-
stand and probably to misuse them. It is a higher
truth that the distinction of good and evil is indeed a
practical fact and law valid for the egoistic human life
which is the stage of transition from the animal to the
divine, but on a higher plane we rise beyond good and
evil, are above their duality even as the Godhead is
above it. But the unripe mind, seizing on this truth
without rising from the lower consciousness where it is
not practically valid, will simply make it a convenient
excuse for indulging its Asuric propensities, denying the
distinction between good and evil altogether and falling
by self-indulgence deeper into the morass of perdition,
sarva-jndnavimudhdn nastan acetasah. So too with this truth
of the determinism of Nature; it will be mis-seen and
misused, as those misuse it who declare that a man is
what his nature has made him and cannot do otherwise
than as his nature compels him. It is true in a sense,


270


THE DETERMINISM OF NATURE


but not in the sense which is attached to it, not in the
sense that the ego-self can claim irresponsibility and
impunity for itself in its works ; for it has will and it has
desire and so long as it acts according to its will and
desire, even though that be its nature, it must bear the
reactions of its Karma. It is in a net, if you will, a snare
which may well seem perplexing, illogical, unjust, terrible
to its present experience, to its limited self-knowledge,
but a snare of its own choice, a net of its own weaving.

The Gita says, indeed, “All existences follow their
nature and what shall coercing it avail?” which seems,
if we take it by itself, a hopelessly absolute assertion of
the omnipotence of Nature over the soul; “even the man
of knowledge acts according to his own nature”. And
on this it founds the injunction to follow faithfully in
our action the law of our nature. “Better is one’s own
law of works, svadharma, though in itself faulty than an
alien law well wrought out; death in one’s own law of
being is better, perilous is it to follow an alien law.”
What is precisely meant by this svadharma we have to
wait to see until we get to the more elaborate disquisition
in the closing chapters about Purusha and Prakriti and
the gunas; but certainly it does not mean that we are
to follow any impulse, even though evil, which what we
call our nature dictates to us. For between these two
verses the Gita throws in this further injunction, “In
the object of this or that sense liking and disliking are
set in ambush; fall not into their power, for ijiey are the
besetters of the soul in its path.” And immediately after
this, in answer to Arjuna’s objection who asks him, if
there is no fault in following our Nature, what are we
then to say of that in us which drives a man to sin, as
if by force, even against his own struggling will, the


271


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


Teacher replies that this is desire and its companion
wrath, children of rajas, the second guna, the principle
of passion, and this desire is the soul’s great enemy and
has to be slain. Abstention from evil-doing it declares to
be the first condition for liberation, and always it enjoins
self-mastery, self-control, samyama , control of the mind,
senses, all the lower being.

There is therefore a distinction to be made between
what is essential in the nature, its native and inevitable
action, which it avails not at all to repress, suppress, coerce,
and what is accidental to it, its wanderings, confusions,
perversions, over which we must certainly get control.
There is a distinction implied too between coercion and
suppression, nigraha , and control with right use and right
guidance, samyama . The former is a violence done to the
nature by the will, which in the end depresses the natural
powers of the being, atmdnam avasadayet; the latter is the
control of the lower by the higher self, which successfully
gives to those powers their right action and their maxi-
mum efficiency —yogah karmasu kausalam. This nature of
samyama is made very clear by the Gita in the opening of
its sixth chapter, “By the self thou shouldst deliver the
self, thou shouldst not depress and cast down the self
(whether by self-indulgence or suppression); for the self
is the friend of the self and the self is the enemy. To the
man is his self a friend in whom the (lower) self has been
conquered by the (higher) self, but to him who is not in
possession pf his (higher) self, the (lower) self is as if an
enemy and it acts as an enemy.” When one has conquered
one’s self and attained to the calm of a perfect self-mastery
and self-possession, then is the supreme self in a man
founded and poised even in his outwardly conscious
human being, samahita. In other words, to master the


272


THE DETERMINISM OF NATURE

lower self by the higher, the natural self by the spiritual
is the way of man’s perfection and liberation.

Here then is a very great qualification of the deter-
minism of Nature, a precise limitation of its meaning and
scope. How the passage from subjection to mastery works
out is best seen if we observe the working of the gunas
in the scale of Nature from the bottom to the top. At
the bottom are the existences in which the principle of
tamas is supreme, the beings who have not yet attained
to the light of self-consciousness and are utterly driven
by the current of Nature. There is a will even in the atom,
but we see clearly enough that it is not free-will, because
it is mechanical and the atom does not possess the will,
but is possessed by it. Here the buddhi, the clement of
intelligence and will in Prakriti, is actually and plainly
what the Sankhya asserts it to be, jada, a mechanical,
even an inconscient principle in which the light of the
conscious Soul has not at all struggled to the surface : the
atom is not conscious of an intelligent will; tamas, the
inert and ignorant principle, has its grip on it, contains
rajas, conceals sattva within itself and holds a high holiday
of mastery, Nature compelling this form of existence to
act with a stupendous force indeed, but as a mechanical
instrument, yantrarudham mdyaya. Next, in the plant the
principle of rajas has struggled to the surface, with its
power of life, with its capacity of the nervous reactions
which in us are recognisable as pleasure and suffering,
but sattva is quite involved, has not yet emerged to awaken
the light of a conscious intelligent will ; all is still mecha-
nical, subconscient or half-conscient, tamas stronger than
rajas, both gaolers of the imprisoned sattwa.

In the animal, though tamas is still strong, though
We may still describe him as belonging to the tamasic

18


273


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


creation, tamasa sarga, yet rajas prevails much more
against tamas, brings with it its developed power of life,
desire, emotion, passion, pleasure, suffering, while sattwa,
emerging, but still dependent on the lower action, con-
tributes to these the first light of the conscious mind,
the mechanical sense of ego, conscious memory, a certain
kind of thought, especially the wonders of instinct and
animal intuition. But as yet the buddhi, the intelligent
will, has not developed the full light of consciousness;
therefore, no responsibility can be attributed to the
animal for its actions. The tiger can be no more blamed
for killing and devouring than the atom for its blind
movements, the fire for burning and consuming or the
storm for its destructions. If it could answer the question,
the tiger would indeed say, like man, that it had free
will, it would have the egoism of the doer, It would say,
“I kill, I devour”; but we can see clearly enough that it
is not really the tiger, but Nature in the tiger that kills,
it is Nature in the tiger that devours; and if it refrains
from killing or devouring, it is from satiety, from fear
or from indolence, from another principle of Nature in
it, from the action of the guna called tamas. As it was
Nature in the animal that killed, so it is Nature in the
animal that refrained from killing. Whatever soul is in
it, sanctions passively the action of Nature, is as much
passive in its passion and activity as in its indolence or
inaction. The animal like the atom acts according to the
mechanism of its Nature, and not otherwise, sadrsam cestate
svasyah prakrteh, as if mounted on a machine, yantrarudho
mayaya.

Well, but in man at least there is another action, a
free soul, a free will, a sense of responsibility, a real doer
other than Nature, other than the mechanism of Maya?


274


THE DETERMINISM OF NATURE


So it seems, because in man there is a conscious intelli-
gent will; buddhi is full of the light of the observing Pu-
rusha, who through it, it seems, observes, understands,
approves or disapproves, -gives or withholds the sanction,
seems indeed at last to begin to be the lord of his nature.
Man is not like the tiger or the fire or the storm; he
cannot kill and say as a sufficient justification, “I am
acting according to my nature”, and he cannot do it,
because he has not the nature and not, therefore, the
law of action, svadharma, of the tiger, storm or fire. He
has a conscious intelligent will, a buddhi , and to that he
must refer his actions. If he does not do so, if he acts
blindly according to his impulses and passions, then the
law of his being is not rightly worked out, svadkarmah
su-anusthitah, he has not acted according to the full mea-
sure of his humanity, but even as might the animal. It
is true that the principle of rajas or the principle of tamas
gets hold of his buddhi and induces it to justify any and
every action he commits or any avoidance of action; but
still the justification or at least the reference to the
buddhi must be there either before or after the action is
committed. And, besides, in man sattva is awake and acts
not only as intelligence and intelligent will, but as a seek-
ing for light, for right knowledge and right action accord-
ing to that knowledge, as a sympathetic perception of the
existence and claims of others, as an attempt to know
the higher law of his own nature, which the sattwic
principle in him creates, and to obey it, and as a concep-
tion of the greater peace and happiness which virtue,
knowledge and sympathy bring in their train. He knows
more or less imperfectly that he has to govern his rajasic
and tamasic by his sattwic nature and that thither tends
the perfection of his normal humanity.


275


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


But is the condition of the predominantly sattwic nature
freedom and is this will in man a free will? That the Gita
from the standpoint of a higher consciousness in which
alone is true freedom, denies. The buddhi or conscious
intelligent will is still an instrument of Nature and when
it acts, even in the most sattwic sense, it is still Nature
which acts and the soul which is carried on the wheel by
Maya. At any rate, at least nine- tenths of our freedom
of will is a palpable fiction ; that will is created and deter-
mined not by its own self-existent action at a given mo-
ment, but by our past, our heredity, our training, our
environment, the whole tremendous complex thing we
call Karma, which is, behind us, the whole past action
of Nature on us and the world converging in the indi-
vidual, determining what he is, determining what his will
shall be at a given moment and determining, as far as
analysis can see, even its action at that moment. The
ego associates itself always with its Karma and it says
“I did” and “I will” and “I suffer”, but if it looks at
itself and sees how it was made, it is obliged to say of man
as of the animal, “Nature did this in me, Nature wills
in me”, and if it qualifies by saying “my Nature”, that
only means “Nature as self-determined in this individual
creature”. It was the strong perception of this aspect of
existence which compelled the Buddhists to declare that
all is Karma and that there is no self in existence, that
the idea of self is only a delusion of the ego-mind. When
the ego thinks “I choose and will this virtuous and not
that evil action”, it is simply associating itself, somewhat
like the fly on the wheel, or rather as might a cog or other
part of a mechanism if it were conscious, with a predomi-
nant wave or a formed current of the sattwic principle by
which Nature chooses through the buddhi one' type of


276


THE DETERMINISM OF NATURE


action in preference to another. Nature forms itself in us
and wills in us, the Sankhya would say, for the pleasure
of the inactive observing Purusha.

But even if this extreme statement has to be qualified,
and we shall see hereafter in what sense, still the freedom
of our individual will, if we choose to give it that name, is
very relative and almost infinitesimal, so much is it mixed
up with other determining elements. Its strongest power
does not amount to mastery. It cannot be relied upon to
resist the strong wave of circumstance or of other nature
which either overbears or modifies or mixes up with it
or at the best subtly deceives and circumvents it. Even
the most sattwic will is so overborne or mixed up with or
circumvented by the rajasic and tamasic gunas as to be
only in part sattwic, and thence arises that sufficiently
strong element of self-deception, of a quite involuntary
and even -innocent make-believe and hiding from oneself
which the merciless eye of the psychologist detects even
in the best human action. When we think that we are
acting quite freely, powers arc concealed behind our
action which escape the most careful self-introspection;
when we think that we are free from ego, the ego is
there, concealed, in the mind of the saint as in that of
the sinner. When our eyes are really opened on our
action and its springs, we are obliged to say with the
Gita “gu$d guyesu vartante'% “it was the modes of Nature
that were acting upon the modes”.

For this reason even a high predominance of the
sattwic principle does not constitute freedom. For, as
the Gita points out, the sattwa binds, as much as the
other gunas, and binds just in the same way, by desire,
by ego; a nobler desire, a purer ego, — but so long as
in any form these two hold the being, there is no freedom.


277


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


The man of virtue, of knowledge, has his ego of the
virtuous man, his ego of knowledge, and it is that sat-
twic ego which he seeks to satisfy; for his own sake he
seeks virtue and knowledge. Only when we cease to
satisfy the ego, to think and to will from the ego, the
limited “I” in us, then is there a real freedom. In other
words, freedom, highest self-mastery begin when above
the natural self we see and hold the supreme Self of
which the ego is an obstructing veil and a blinding
shadow. And that can only be when we see the one Self
in us seated above Nature and make our individual being
one with it in being and consciousness and in its indi-
vidual nature of action only an instrument of a supreme
Will, the one Will that is really free. For that we must
rise high above the three gunas, become trigunatlta; for
that Self is beyond even the sattwic principle. We have
to climb to it through the sattwa, but we attain to it
only when we get beyond sattwa; we reach out to it
from the ego, but only reach it by leaving the ego. We
are drawn towards it by the highest, most passionate,
most stupendous and ecstatic of all desires; but we can
securely live in it only when all desire drops away from
us. We have at a certain stage to liberate ourselves even
from the desire of our liberation.


278


XXII


BEYOND THE MODES OF NATURE

So far then extends the determinism of Nature, and
what it amounts to is this that the ego from which wc
act is itself an instrument of the action of Prakriti and
cannot therefore be free from the control of Prakriti;
the will of the ego is a will determined by Prakriti, it is
a part of the nature as it has been formed in us by the
sum of its own past action and self-modification, and
by the nature in us so formed and the will in it so formed
our present action also is determined. It is said by
some that the first initiating action is always free to
our choice however much all that follows may be deter-
mined by that, and in this power of initiation and its
effect on our future lies our responsibility. But where is
that first action in Nature which has no determining past
behind it, where that present condition of our nature
which is not in sum and detail the result of the action
of our past nature? We have that impression of a free
initial act because we are living at every moment from
our present on towards our future and we do not live
back constantly from our present into our past, so that
what is strongly vivid to our minds is the present and its
consequences while we have a much less vivid hold of our
present as entirely the consequence of our past; this latter
we are apt to look on as if it were dead and done with. *
We speak and act as if we were perfectly free in the


279


ESSAYS ON THE GiTA


pure and virgin moment to do what we will with our-
selves using an absolute inward independence of choice.
But there is no such absolute liberty, our choice has
no such independence.

Certainly the will in us has always to choose between
a certain number of possibilities, for that is the way
in which Nature always acts; even our passivity, our
refusal to will, is itself a choice, itself an act of the will
of Nature in us; even in the atom there is a will always
at its work. The whole difference is the extent to which
we associate our idea of self with the action of the will
in Nature; when we so associate ourselves, we think
of it as our will and say that it is a free will and that it
is we who are acting. And error or not, illusion or not,
this idea of our will, of our action is not a thing of no
consequence, of no utility; everything in Nature has
a consequence and a utility. It is rather that process
of our conscious being by which Nature in us becomes
more and more aware of and responsive to the presence
of the secret Purusha within her and opens by that
increase of knowledge to a greater possibility of action;
it is by the aid of the ego-idea and the personal will
that she raises herself to her own higher possibilities,
rises out of the sheer or else the predominant passivi.ty
of the tamasic nature into the passion and the struggle
of the rajasic nature and from the passion and the struggle
of the rajasic nature to the greater light, happiness and
purity of the sattwic nature. The relative self-mastery
gained by the natural man over himself is the dominion
achieved by the higher possibilities of his nature over
its lower possibilities, and this is done in him when
0 he associates his idea of self with the struggle of the
higher guna to get the mastery, the predominance over


m


BEYOND THE MODES OF NATURE


the lower guna. The sense of free will, illusion or not,
is a necessary machinery of the action of Nature, neces-
sary for man during his progress, and it would be disas-
trous for him to lose it before he is ready for a higher
truth. If it be said, as it has been said, that Nature
deludes man to fulfil her behests and that the idea of
a free individual will is the most powerful of these delu-
sions, then it must also be said that the delusion is for
his good and without it he could not rise to his full pos-
sibilities.

But it is not a sheer delusion, it is only an error of
standpoint and an error of placement. The ego thinks
that it is the real self and acts as if it were the true centre
of action and as if all existed for its sake, and there it
commits an error of standpoint and placement. It is not
wrong in thinking that there is something or someone
within ourselves, within this action of our nature, who
is the true centre of its action and for whom all exists;
but this is not the ego, it is the Lord secret within our
heai'ts, the divine Purusha, and the Jiva, other than ego,
who is a portion of his being. The self-assertion of ego-
sense is the broken and distorted shadow in our minds
of the truth that there is a real Self within us which is
the master of all and for whom and at whose behest Nature
goes about her works. So too the ego’s idea of free will
is a distorted and misplaced sense of the truth that there
is a free Self within us and that the will in Nature is
only a modified and partial reflection of its will, modi-
fied and partial because it lives in the successive moments
of Time and acts by a constant series of modifications
which forget much of their own precedents and are
only imperfectly conscious of their own consequences
and aims. But the Will within, exceeding the moments


281


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


of Time, knows all these, and the action of Nature in
us is an attempt, we might say, to work out under the
difficult conditions of a natural and egoistic ignorance
what is foreseen in full supramental light by the inner
Will and Knowledge.

But a time must come in our progress when we are
ready to open our eyes to the real truth of our being,
and then the error of our egoistic free-will must fall
away from us. The rejection of the idea of egoistic
free-will does not imply a cessation of action, because
Nature is the doer and carries out her action after this
machinery is dispensed with even as she did before it
came into usage in the process of her evolution. In the
man who has rejected it, it may even be possible for
her to develop a greater action; for his mind may be
more aware of all that his nature is by the self-creation
of the past, more aware of the powers that environ and
are working upon it to help or to hinder its growth, more
aware too of the latent greater possibilities which it
contains by virtue of all in it that is unexpressed, yet
capable of expression ; and this mind may be a freer
channel for the sanction of the Purusha to the greater
possibilities that it sees and a freer instrument for the res-
ponse of Nature, for her resultant attempt at their deve-
lopment and realisation. But the rejection of free-will
must not be a mere fatalism or idea of natural deter-
minism in the understanding without any vision of the
real Self in us; for then the ego still remains as our sole
idea of Self and, as that is always the instrument of
Prakriti, we still act by the ego and with our will as
her instrument, and the idea in us brings no real change,
but only a modification of our intellectual attitude.
We shall have accepted the .phenomenal truth of the


282


BEYOND THE MODES OE NATURE '


determination of our egoistic being and action by Nature,
we shall have seen our subjection: but we shall not have
seen the unborn Self within which is above the action
of the gunas; we shall not have seen wherein lies our
gate of freedom. Nature and ego are not all we are; there
is the free soul, the Purusha.

But in what consists this freedom of. the Purusha?
The Purusha of the current Sankhya philosophy is
free in the essence of his being, but because he is the
non-doer, akarta ; and in so far as he permits Nature
to throw on the inactive Soul her shadow of action,
he becomes bound phenomenally by the actions of the
gunas and cannot recover his freedom except by dis-
sociation from her and by cessation of her activities.
If then a man casts from him the idea of himself as the
doer or of the works as his, if, as the Gita enjoins, he
fixes himself in the view of himself as the inactive non-
doer, atmanam akariaram, and all action as not his own
but Nature’s, as the play of hef gunas, will not a like
result follow? The Sankhya Purusha is the giver of
the sanction, but a passive sanction only, anumati, the
work is entirely Nature’s; essentially he is the witness
and sustainer, not the governing and active consciousness
of the universal Godhead. He is the Soul that sees and
accepts, as a spectator accepts the representation of a
play he is watching, not the Soul that both governs and
watches the play planned by himself and staged in his
own being. If then he withdraws the sanction, if he refuses
to acknowledge the illusion of doing by which the play
continues, he ceases also to be the sustainer and the action
comes to a stop, since it is only for the pleasure of the
witnessing conscious Soul that Nature performs it and
only by his support that she. can maintain it. Therefore


283


ASSAYS ON THE GITA


it is evident that the Gita’s conception of the relations of
the Purusha and Prakriti are not the Sankhya’s, since
the same movement leads to a quite different result, in
one case to cessation of works, in the other to a great, a
selfless and desircless, a divine action. In the Sankhya
Soul and Nature are two different entities, in the Gita
they are two aspects, two powers of one self-existent
being; the Soul is not only giver of the sanction, but lord
of Nature, Ishwara, through her enjoying the play of
the world, through her executing divine will and know-
ledge in a scheme of things supported by his sanction
and existing by his immanent presence, existing in his
being, governed by the law of his being and by the con-
scious will within it. To know, to respond to, to live in
the divine being and nature of this Soul is the object of
withdrawing from the ego and its action. One rises then
above the lower nature of the gunas to the higher divine .
nature.

The movement by which this ascension is determined
results from the complex poise of the Soul in its relations
with Nature; it depends on the Gita’s idea of the triple
Purusha. The Soul that immediately informs the action,
the mutations, the successive becomings of Nature, is the
Kshara, that which seems to change with her changes,
to move in her motion, the Person who follows in his
idea of his being the changes of his personality brought
about by the continuous action of her Karma. Nature
here is Kshara, a constant movement and mutation in
Time, a constant becoming. But this Nature is simply
the -executive power of the Soul itself; for only by what
he is, can she become, only according to the possibilities
of his becoming, can she act; she works out the becoming
of his being. Her Karma is determined by Swabhava,


BEYOND THE MODES OF NATURE


the own-nature, the law of self-becoming of the soul,
even though, because it is the agent and executive of
the becoming, the action rather seems often to determine
the nature. According to what we are, we act, and by
our action we develop, we work out what we are. Nature
is the action, the mutation, the becoming, and it is the
Power that executes all these ; but the Soul is the conscious
Being from which that Power proceeds, from whose lumi-
nous stuff of consciousness she has drawn the variable
will that changes and expresses its changes in her actions.
And this Soul is One and Many; it is the one Life-being
out of which all life is constituted and it is all these living
beings; it is the cosmic Existent and it is all this multitude
of cosmic existences, sarvabhulani , for all these are One;
all the many Purushas are in their original being the one
and only Purusha. But the mechanism of the ego-sense
in Nature, which is part of her action, induces the mind
to identify the soul’s consciousness with the limited
becoming of the moment, with the sum of her active con-
sciousness in a given field of space and time, with the
result from moment to moment of the sum of her past
actions. It is possible to realise in a way the unity of all
these beings even in Nature herself and to become aware
of a cosmic Soul which is manifest in the whole action
of cosmic Nature, Nature manifesting the Soul, the Soul
constituting the Nature. But this is to become aware
only of the great cosmic Becoming, which is not false
or unreal, but the knowledge of which alone does not give
us the true knowledge of our Self; for our true Self
is always something more than this and something
beyond it.

For, beyond the soul manifest in Nature and bound
up with its action, is another status of the Purusha, which


285


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


is entirely a status and not at all an action; that is the
silent, the immutable', the all-pervading, self-existent,
motionless Self, sarvagatam acalam, immutable Being and
not Becoming, the Akshara. In the Kshara the Soul is
involved in the action of Nature, therefore it is con-
centrated, loses itself, as it were, in the moments of
Time, in the waves of the Becoming, not really, but only
in appearance and by following the current; in the
Akshara Nature falls to silence and rest in the Soul, there-
fore it becomes aware of its immutable Being. The Kshara
is the Sankhya’s Purusha when it reflects the varied
workings of the gunas of Nature, and it knows itself as
the Saguna, the Personal; the Akshara is the Sankhya’s
Purusha when these gunas have fallen into a state of
equilibrium, and it knows itself as the Nirguna, the
Impersonal. Therefore while the Kshara, associating itself
with the work of Prakriti, seems to be the doer of works,
karta, the Akshara dissociated from all the workings of
the gunas is the inactive non-doer, akarta, and witness.
The soul of man, when it takes the poise of the Kshara,
identifies itself with the play of personality and readily
clouds its self-knowledge with the ego-sense in Nature,
so that he thinks of himself as the ego-doer of works;
when it takes its poise in the Akshara, it identifies itself
with the Impersonal and is aware of Nature as the doer
and itself as the inactive witnessing Self, akartaram. The
mind of man has to tend to one of these poises, it takes
them as alternatives; it is bound by Nature to action in
the mutations of quality and personality or it is free from
her workings in immutable impersonality.

But these two, the status and immutability of the Soul
and the action of the Soul and its mutability in Nature,
actually coexist. And this would be an anomaly


286


BEYOND THE MODES OF NATURE


irreconcilable except by some such theory as that of Maya
or else of a double and divided being, if there were not
a supreme reality of the Soul’s existence of which these
are the two contrary aspects, but which is limited by
neither of them. We have seen that the Gita finds this
in the Purushottama. The supreme Soul is the Ishwara,
God, the Master of all beings, sarvabhuta-mahesvara. He
puts forth his own active nature, his Prakriti, — svarii
prakrlim, says the Gita, — manifest in the Jiva, worked out
by the svabhava, “own-becoming”, of each Jiva according
to the law of the divine being in it, the great lines of which
each Jiva must follow, but worked out too in the egoistic
nature by the bewildering play of the three gunas upon
each other, gund gunesu vartante. That is the traigunyamayi
mayd, the Maya hard for man to get beyond, duratyaya , —
yet can one get beyond it by transcending the three gunas.
For while all this is done by the Ishwara through his
Nature-Power in the Kshara, in the Akshara he is un-
touched, indifferent, regarding all equally, extended
within all, yet above all. In all three he is the Lord, the
supreme Ishwara in the highest, the presiding and all-
pervading Impersonality, prabhu and vibhu, in the Akshara,
and the immanent Will and present active Lord in the
Kshara. He is free in his impersonality even while work-
ing out the play of his personality; he is not either merely
impersonal or personal, but one and the same being in
two aspects; he is the impersonal-personal, nirguno gunt ,
of the Upanishad. By him all has been willed even before
it' is worked out, — as he says of the still living Dhartra-
rashtrians “already have they been slain by Me” mayd
nihatafi purvam eva, and the working out by Nature is only
the result of his Will; yet by virtue of his impersonality
behind he is not bound by his works, kartaram akartaram.


287


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


But man as the individual self, owing to his ignorant
self-identification with the work and the becoming, as if
that were all his soul and not a power of his soul, a power
proceeding from it, is bewildered by the ego-sense. He
thinks that it is he and others who are doing all ; he does
not see that Nature is doing all and that he is misrepresent-
ing and disfiguring her works to himself by ignorance and
attachment. He is enslaved by the gunas, now hampered
in the dull ease of tamas, now blown by the strong winds
of rajas, now limited by the partial lights of sattwa, not
distinguishing hifnself at all from the nature-mind which
alone is thus modified -by the gunas. He is therefore
mastered by pain and pleasure, happiness and grief, desire
and passion, attachment and disgust: he has no freedom.

He must, to be free, get back from the Nature action to
the status of the Akshara; he will then be trigunatlta,
beyond the gunas. Knowing himself as the Akshara
Brahman, the unchanging Purusha, he will know himself
as an immutable impersonal self, the Atman, tranquilly
observing and impartially supporting the action, but him-
self calm, indifferent, untouched, motionless, pure,* one
with all beings in their self, not one with Nature and her
workings. This self, though by its presence authorising
the works of Nature, though by its all-pervading exis-
tence supporting and consenting to them, prabhu vibku,
does not itself create works or the state of the doer or the
joining of the works to their fruit, na kartrtvam na karmani
srjati na karma-phala-samyogam, but only watches nature in
the Kshara working out these things, svabh&vas tu pravar-
tate; it accepts neither the sin nor the virtue of the living
creatures born into this birth as its own, n&datte kasyadl
papam na caiva sukrtam ; it preserves its spiritual purity. It
is the ego bewildered by ignorance which attributes these


288


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


and by his will, now no longer distorted and disfigured
by the ego-sense, the Nature works out the actions by the
swabhava; the individual soul makes the divinised natural
being an instrument of the divine Will, nimittamatram.
He remains even in action trigunatita , beyond the gunas,
free from the gunas, nistraigunya , he fulfils entirely at last
the early injunction of the Gita, nistraigunyo bhavdrjuna .
He is indeed still the enjoyer of the gunas, as is the Brah-
man, though not limited by them, nirgunam gunabhoktr ca ,
unattached, yet all-supporting, even as is that Brahman,
asaktam sarvabhrt : but the action of the gunas within him
is quite changed; it is lifted above their egoistic character
and reactions. For he has unified his whole being in the
Purushottama, has assumed the divine being and the
higher divine nature of becoming, madbhava> has unified
even his mind and natural consciousness with the Divine,
manmana macciltah . This change is the final evolution of
the nature and the consummation of the divine birth,
rahasyam uttamam . When it is accomplished, the soul is
aware of itself as the master of its nature and, grown a
light of the divine Light and will of the divine Will, is
able to change its natural workings into a divine action.


290


XXIII


NIRVANA AND WORKS IN THE WORLD

The union of the soul with the Purushottama by a Yoga
of the whole being is the complete teaching of the Gita
and not only the union with the immutable Self as in
the narrower doctrine which follows the exclusive way
of knowledge. That is why the Gita subsequently, after
it has effected the reconciliation of knowledge and works,
is able to develop the idea of love and devotion, unified
with both works and knowledge, as the highest height
of the way to the supreme secret. For if the union with
the immutable Self were the sole secret or the highest
secret, that would not at all be possible; for then at a given
point our inner basis for love and devotion, no less than
our inner foundation of works, would crumble away and
collapse. Union utter and exclusive with the immutable
Self alone means the abolition of the whole point of view
of the mutable being, not only in its ordinary and infe-
rior action but in its very roots, in all that makes its
existence possible, not only in the works of its ignorance,
but in the works of its knowledge. It would mean the
abolition of all that difference in conscious poise and acti-
vity between the human soul and the Divine which makes
possible the play of the Kshara; for the action of the
Kshara would become then entirely a play of the igno-
rance without any root or basis of divine reality, in it. On
the contrary, union by Yoga with the Purushottama means


291


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


the knowledge and enjoyment of our oneness with him
in our self-existent being and of a certain differentiation
in our active being. It is the persistence of the latter in a
play of divine works which are urged by the motive power
of divine love and constituted by a perfected divine
Nature, it is the vision of the Divine in the world harmo-
nised with a realisation of the Divine in the self which
makes action and devotion possible to the liberated man,
and not only possible but inevitable in the perfect mode
of his being.

But the direct way to union lies through the firm reali-
sation of the immutable Self, and it is the Gita’s insis-
tence on this as a first necessity, after which alone works
and devotion can acquire their whole divine meaning,
that makes it possible for us to mistake its drift. For if
we take the passages in which it insists most rigorously
upon this necessity and neglect to observe the whole
sequence of thought in which they stand, we may easily
come to the conclusion that it does really teach actionless
absorption as the final state of the soul and action only
as a preliminary means towards stillness in the motionless
Immutable. It is in the close of the fifth and throughout
the sixth chapter that this insistence is strongest and most
comprehensive. There we get the description of a Yoga
which would seem at first sight to be incompatible with
works and we get the repeated use of the word Nirvana
to describe the status to which the Yogin arrives.

The mark of this status is the supreme peace of a
calm self-extinction, fantim nirvana-paramam , and, as if
to make it quite clear that it is not the Buddhist’s Nirvana
in a blissful negation of being, but the Vedantic loss of
a partial in a perfect being that it intends, the Gita uses
always the phrase brahma-nirvana , extinction in the


292


ESSAYS ON THE GlTA


to remain in the idea that the perfect release will come
by a putting off of the body ; a perfect spiritual freedom
is to be won here upon earth and possessed and enjoyed
in the human life, prdk sarlra-vimoksanal . It then continues,
“He who has the inner happiness and the inner ease
and repose and the inner light, that Yogin becomes the
Brahman and reaches self-extinction in the Brahman,
brahma-nirvanam” Here, very clearly, Nirvana means
the extinction of the ego in the higher spiritual, inner
Self, that which is for ever timeless, spaceless, not bound
by the chain of cause and effect and the changes of the
world-mutation, self-blissful, self-illumined and for ever
at peace. The Yogin ceases to be the ego, the little
person limited by the mind and the body; he becomes
the Brahman; he is unified in consciousness with the
immutable divinity of the eternal Self which is immanent
in his natural being.

But is this a going in into some deep sleep of samadhi
away from all world-consciousness, or is it the preparatory
movement for a dissolution of the natural being and the
individual soul into some absolute Self who is utterly
and for ever beyond Nature and her works, laya , moksai
Is that withdrawal necessary before we can enter into
Nirvana, or is Nirvana, as the context seems to suggest,
a state which can exist simultaneously with world-
consciousness and even in its own way include it? Appa-
rently the latter, for in the succeeding verse the Gita
goes on to say, “Sages win Nirvana in the Brahman,
they in whom the stains of sin are effaced and the knot
of doubt is cut asunder, masters of their selves, who
are occupied in doing good to all creatures, sarva-bhuta -
kite ratdh” That would almost seem to mean that to
be thus is to be in Nirvana. But the next verse is quite


294


NIRVANA AND WORKS IN THE WORLD


clear and decisive. “ Tatis (those who practise self-mastery
by Yoga and austerity) who are delivered from desire
and wrath and have gained self-mastery, for them
Nirvana in the Brahman exists all about them, encom-
passes them, they already live in it because they have
knowledge of the Self.” That is to say, to have know-
ledge and possession of the self is to exist in Nirvana.
This is clearly a large extension of the idea of Nirvana.
Freedom from all stain of the passions, the self-mastery
of the equal mind on which that freedom is founded,
equality to all beings, sarvabhulesu , and beneficial
love for all, final destruction of that doubt and obscurity
of the ignorance which keeps us divided from the all-
unifying Divine and the knowledge of the One Self
within us and in all are evidently the conditions of
Nirvana which are laid down in these verses of the Gita,
go to constitute it and are its spiritual substance.

Thus Nirvana is clearly compatible with world-con-
sciousness and with action in the world. For the sages
who possess it are conscious of and in intimate relation
by works with the Divine in the mutable universe; they
are occupied with the good of all creatures, sarvabhuta -
kite. They have not renounced the experiences of the
Kshara Purusha, they have divinised them ; for the
Kshara, the Gita tells us, is all existences, sarvabhutani>
and the doing universal good to all is a divine action
in the mutability of Nature. This action in the world is
not inconsistent with living in Brahman, it is rather
its inevitable condition and outward result because
the Brahman in whom we find Nirvana, the spiritual
consciousness in which we lose the separative ego-con-
sciousness, is not only within us but within all these
existences, exists not only above and apart from all these


295


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


universal happenings, but pervades them, contains them
and is extended in them. Therefore by Nirvana in the
Brahman must be meant a destruction or extinction of
the limited separative consciousness, falsifying and
dividing, which is brought into being on the surface of
existence by the lower Maya of the .three gunas, and
entry into Nirvana is a passage into this other true uni-
fying consciousness which is the heart of existence and
its continent and its whole containing and supporting,
its whole original and eternal and final truth. Nirvana
when we gain it, enter into it, is not only within us, but
all around, abhilo variate , because this is not only the
Brahman-consciousness which lives secret within us,
but the Brahman-consciousness in which we live. It is
the Self which we are within, the supreme Self of our
individual being but also the Self which we are without,
the supreme Self of the universe, the self of all existences.
By living in that self we live in all, and no longer in
our egoistic being alone; by oneness with that self a
steadfast oneness with all in the universe becomes the
very nature of our being and the root status of our active
consciousness and root motive of all our action.

But again we get immediately afterwards two verses
which might seem to lead away from this conclusion.
“Having put outside of himself all outward touches and
concentrated the vision between the eye-brows and
made equal the prana and the apana moving within
the nostrils, having controlled the senses, the mind and
the understanding, the sage devoted to liberation, from
whom desire and wrath and fear have passed away is
ever free.” Here we have a process of Yoga that brings
in an element which seems quite other than the Yoga
of works and other even than the pure Yoga


NIRVANA AND WORKS IN THE WORLD


of knowledge by discrimination and contemplation; it
belongs in all its characteristic features to the system,
introduces the psycho-physical askesis of Rajayoga.
There is the conquest of all the movements of the mind,
cillavrltinirodha; there is the control of the breathing,
Pranayama; there is the drawing in of the sense and
the vision. All of them are processes which lead to the
inner trance of Samadhi, the object of all of them moksa,
and moksa signifies in ordinary parlance the renunciation
not only of the separative ego-consciousness, but of the
whole active consciousness, a dissolution of our being into
the highest Brahman. Arc we to suppose that the Gita
gives this process in that sense as the last movement of a
release by dissolution or only as a special means and a
strong aid to overcome the outward -going mind? Is this
the finale, the climax, the last word ? We shall find reason
to regard it as both a special means, an aid, and at least
one gate of a final departure, not by dissolution, but by
an uplifting to the supracosmic existence. For even here
in this passage this is not the last word; the last word,
the finale, the climax comes in a verse that follows and
is the last couplet of the chapter. “When a man has known
Me as the Enjoyer of sacrifice and tapasya (of all askesis
and energisms), the mighty lord of all the worlds, the
friend of all creatures, he comes by the peace.” The power
of the Karmayoga comes in again; the knowledge of the
active Brahman, the cosmic supersoul, is insisted on
among the conditions of the peace of Nirvana.

We get back to the great idea of the Gita, the idea of
the Purushottama, — though that name is not given till
close upon the end, it is always that which Krishna means
by his “I” and “Me”, the Divine who is there as the one
self in our timeless immutable being, who is present too


297


ESSAYS ON I HE GITA


in the world, in all existences, in all activities, the
master of the silence and the peace, the master of the
power and the action, who is here incarnate as the divine
charioteer of the stupendous conflict, the Transcendent,
the Self, the All, the master of every individual being.
He is the enjoyer of all sacrifice and of all tapasya, there-
fore shall the seeker of liberation do works as a sacrifice
and as a tapasya; he is the lord of all the worlds, mani-
fested in Nature and in these beings, therefore shall the
liberated man still do works for the right government
and leading on of the peoples in these worlds, loka-
samgraha; he is the friend of all existences, therefore is
the sage who has found Nirvana within him and all
around, still and always occupied w'ith the good of all
creatures, — even as the Nirvana of Mahayana Buddhism
took for its highest sign the works of a universal compas-
sion. Therefore too, even when he has found oneness
with the Divine in his timeless and immutable self, is he
still capable, since he embraces the relations also of the
play of Nature, of divine love for man and of love for the
Divine, of bhakti.

That this is the drift of the meaning, becomes clearer
when we have fathomed the sense of the sixth chapter
which is a large comment on and a full development of
■ the idea of these closing verses of the fifth, — that shows
the importance which the Gita attaches to them. We
shall therefore run as briefly as possible through the
substance of this sixth chapter. First the Teacher em-
phasises— and this is very significant— his often repeated
asseveration about the real essence of Sannyasa, that it
is an inward, not an outward renunciation. “Whoever
does the work to be done without resort to its fruits, he
is the Sannyasin and the Yogin, not the man who lights


298


NIRVANA AND WORKS IN THE WORLD


not the sacrificial fire and docs not the works. What
they have called renunciation (Sannyasa), know to be
in truth Yoga; for none bccoipes a Yogin who has not
renounced the desire- will in the mind.” Works are to be
done, but with what purpose and in what order? They
are first to be done while ascending the hill of Yoga, for
then works arc the cause, karanam. The cause of what?
The cause of self-perfection, of liberation, of nirvana in
the Brahman; for by doing works with a steady practice
of the inner renunciation this perfection, this liberation,
this conquest of the desire-mind and the ego-self and
the lower nature are easily accomplished.

But when one has got to the top? Then works are
no longer the cause; the calm of self-mastery and self-
possession gained by works becomes the cause. Again,
the cause of what? Of fixity in the Self, in the Brahman-
consciousness and of the perfect equality in which the
divine works of the liberated man are done. “For when
one does not get attached to the objects of sense or to
works and has renounced all will of desire in the mind,
then is he said to have ascended to the top of Yoga.”
That, as we know already, is the spirit in which the
liberated man docs works; he does them without desire
and attachment, without the egoistic personal will and
the mental seeking which is the parent of desire. He has
conquered his lower self, reached the perfect calm in
which his highest self is manifest to him, that highest self
always concentrated in its own being, samahita, in
Samadhi, not only in the trance of the inward-drawn
consciousness, but always, in the waking state of the mind
as well, in exposure to the causes of desire and of the dis-
turbance of calm, to grief and pleasure, heat and cold,
honour and disgrace, all the dualities, iitosi}a-sukha-


299


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


duhkhesu tathd mandpamanayoh . This higher self is the
Akshara, kutastha , which stands above the changes and
the perturbations of the natural being; and the Yogin
is said to be in Yoga with it when he also is like it, kutastha ,
when he is superior to all appearances and mutations,
when he is satisfied with self-knowledge, when he is equal-
minded to all things and happenings and persons.

But this Yoga is after all no easy thing to acquire, as
Arjuna indeed shortly afterwards suggests, for the restless
mind is always liable to be pulled down from these heights
by the attacks of outward things and to fall back into the
strong control of grief and passion and inequality. There-
fore, it would seem, the Gita proceeds to give us in addi-
tion to its general method of knowledge and works a
special process of Rajayogic meditation also, a powerful
method of practice, abhyasa , a strong way to the complete
control of the mind and all its workings. In this process
the Yogin is directed to practise continually union with
the Self so that that may become his normal conscious-
ness. He is to sit apart and alone, with all desire and
idea of possession banished from his mind, self-controlled
in his whole being and consciousness. “He should set in
a pure spot his firm seat, neither too high, nor yet too
low, covered with a cloth, with a deer-skin, with sacred
grass, and there seated with a concentrated mind and
with the workings of the mental consciousness and the
senses under control he should practise Yoga for self-
purification, atma-viSuddhaye” The posture he takes must
be the motionless erect posture proper to the practice of
Rajayoga; the* vision should be drawn in and fixed be-
tween the eye-brows, “not regarding the regions”. The
mind is to be kept calm and free from fear and the vow
of Brahmacharya observed ; the whole controlled mentality


300


NIRVANA AND WORKS IN THE WORLD


must be devoted and turned to the Divine so that
the lower action of the consciousness shall be merged in
the higher peace. For the object to be attained is the
still peace of Nirvana. “Thus always putting himself in
Yoga by control of his mind the Yogin attains to the
supreme peace of Nirvana which has its foundation in
Me, idnlim nirvdna-paramdm matsamsthdm .”

This peace of Nirvana is reached when all the mental
consciousness is perfectly controlled and liberated from
desire and remains still in the Self, when, motionless like
the light of a lamp in a windless place, it ceases from
its restless action, shut in from its outward motion, and
by the silence and stillness of the mind the Self is seen
within, not disfigured as in the mind, but in the Self, seen,
not as it is mistranslated falsely or partially by the mind
and represented to us through the ego, but self-perceived
by the Self, svaprakasa. Then the soul is satisfied and knows
its own true and exceeding bliss, not that untranquil
happiness which is the portion of the mind and the senses,
but an inner and serene felicity in which it is safe from
the mind’s perturbations and can no longer fall away
from the spiritual truth of its being. Not even the fiercest
assault of mental grief can disturb it; for mental grief
comes to us from outside, is a reaction to external touches,
and this is the inner, the self-existent happiness of those
who no longer accept the slavery of the unstable mental
reactions to external touches. It is the putting away of
the contact with pain, the divorce of the mind’s marriage
with grief, duhkhasamyoga-viyogam. The firm winning of
this inalienable spiritual bliss is Yoga, it is the divine
union ; it is the greatest of all gains and the treasure beside
which all others lose their value. Therefore is this Yoga
to be resolutely practised without yielding to any


301


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


discouragement by difficulty or failure until the release,
until the bliss of Nirvana is secured as an eternal
possession.

The main stress here has fallen on the stilling of the
emotive mind, the mind of desire and the senses which
are the recipients of outward touches and reply to them
with our customary emotional reactions; but even the
mental thought has to be stilled in the silence of the
self-existent being. First, all the desires born of the desire-
will have to be wholly abandoned without any exception
or residue and the senses have to be held in by the mind
so that they shall not run out to all sides after their usual
disorderly and restless habit; but next the mind itself has
to be seized by the buddhi and drawn inward. One should
slowly cease from mental action by a buddhi held in the
grasp of fixity and having fixed the mind in the higher
self one should not think of anything at all. Whenever
the restless and unquiet mind goes forth, it should be
controlled and brought into subjection in the Self. When
the mind is thoroughly quieted, then there comes upon
the Yogin, the highest stainless, passionless bliss of the
soul that has become the Brahman. “Thus freed from
stain of passion and putting himself constantly into Yoga,
the Yogin easily and happily enjoys the touch of the
Brahman which is an exceeding bliss . 55

And yet the result is not, while one yet lives, a Nirvana
which puts away every possibility of action in the world,
every relation with beings in the world. It would seem
at first that it ought to be so. When all the desires and
passions have ceased, when the mind is no longer per-
mitted to throw itself out in thought, when the practice
of this silent and solitary Yoga has become the rule, what
farther action or relation with the world of outward


302


NIRVANA AND WORKS IN THE WORLD


touches and mutable appearances is any longer possible?
No doubt, the Yogin for a time still remains in the body,
but the cave, the forest, the mountain-top seem now the
fittest, the only possible scene of his continued living and
constant trance of Samadhi his sole joy and occupation.
But, first, while this solitary Yoga is being pursued, the
renunciation of all other action is not recommended by
the Gita. This Yoga, it says, is not for the man who gives
up sleep and food and play and action, even as it is not
for those who indulge too much in these things of the life
and the body; but the sleep and waking, the food, the
play, the putting forth of effort in works should all b cyukia.
This is generally interpreted as meaning that all should
be moderate, regulated, done in fit measure, and that
may indeed be the significance. But at any rate when
the Yoga is attained, all this has to be yukta in another
sense, the ordinary sense of the word everywhere else in
the Gita. In all states, in waking and in sleeping, in food
and play and action, the Yogin will then be in Yoga with
the Divine, and all will be done by him in the consciousness
of the Divine as the self and as the All and as that which
supports and contains his own life and his action. Desire
and ego and personal will and the thought of the mind are
the motives of action only in the lower nature; when the
ego is lost and the Yogin becomes Brahman, when he lives
in and is, even, a transcendent and universal conscious-
ness, action comes spontaneously out of that, luminous
knowledge higher than the mental thought comes out of
that, a power other and mightier than the personal will
comes out of that to do for him his works and bring its
fruits: personal action has ceased, all has been taken up
into the Brahman and assumed by the Divine, mayi
sarhnyasya karmdni.


303


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


For when the Gita describes the nature of this self-
realisation and the result of the Yoga 1 which comes
by Nirvana of the separative ego-mind and its motives
of thought and feeling and action into the Brahman-
consciousness, it includes the cosmic sense, though lifted
into a new kind of vision. “The man whose self is in Yoga,
sees the self in all beings and all beings in the self, he sees
all with an equal vision.” All that he sees is to him the
Self, all is his self, all is the Divine. But is there no danger,
if he dwells at all in the mutability of the Kshara, of his
losing all the results of this difficult Yoga, losing the Self
and falling back into the mind, of the Divine losing him
and the world getting him, of his losing the Divine
and getting back in its place the ego and the lower nature?
No, says the Gita; “He who sees Me everywhere and sees
all in Me, to him I do not get lost, nor does he get lost to
Me.” For this peace of Nirvana, though it is gained
through the Akshara, is founded upon the being of the
Purushottama, mat-samstham , and that is extended, the
Divine, the Brahman is extended too in the world of beings
and, though transcendent of it, not imprisoned in its own
transcendence. One has to see all things as He and live
and act wholly in that vision ; that is the perfect fruit of
the Yog&.

But why act? Is it not safer to sit in one’s solitude
looking out upon the world, if you will, seeing it in
Brahman, in the Divine, but not taking part in it, not
moving in it, not living in it, not acting in it, living
rather ordinarily in the inner Samadhi? Should not that
be the law, the rule, the dharma of this highest spiritual
condition? No, again; for the liberated Yogin there is no


1 yoga-ksemam vahamyaham. .


304


NIRVANA AND WORKS IN THE WORLD


other law, rule, dharma than simply this, to live in the
Divine and love the Divine and be one with all beings;
his freedom is an absolute and not a contingent freedom,
self-existent and not dependent any longer on any rule
of conduct, law of life or limitation of any kind. He has
no longer any need of a process of Yoga, because he is now
perpetually in Yoga. “The Yogin who has taken his stand
upon oneness and loves Me in all beings, however and in
all ways he lives and acts, lives and acts in Me.” The love
of the world spiritualised, changed from a sense experience
to a soul-experience, is founded on the love of God and
in that love there is no peril and no shortcoming. Fear
and disgust of the world may often be necessary for the
recoil from the lower nature, for it is really the fear and
disgust of our own ego which reflects itself in the world.
But to see God in the world is to fear nothing, it is to
embrace all in the being of God ; to see all as the Divine
is to hate and loathe nothing, but love God in the world
and the world in God.

But at least the things of the lower nature will be
shunned and feared, the things which the Yogin has taken
so much trouble to surmount? Not this either; all is
embraced in the equality of the self-vision. “He, O
Arjuna, who sees with equality everything in the image
of the Self, whether it be grief or it be happiness, him I
hold to be the supreme Yogin.” And by this it is not
meant at all that he himself shall fall from the griefless
spiritual bliss and feel again worldly unhappiness, even
in the sorrow of others, but seeing in others the play
of the dualities which he himself has left and surmounted,
he shall still see all as, himself, his self in all, God in all and,
not disturbed or bewildered by the appearances of these
things, moved only by them to help and heal, to occupy


20


305


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


himself with the good of all beings, to lead men to the
spiritual bliss, to work for the progress of the world
Godwards, he shall live the divine life, so long as days
upon earth are his portion. The God-lover who can
do this, can thus embrace all things in God, can look
calmly on the lower nature and the works of the Maya
of the three gunas and act in them and upon them without
perturbation or fall or disturbance from the height and
power of the spiritual oneness, free in the largeness of the
God-vision, sweet and great and luminous in the strength
of the God-nature, may well be declared to be the supreme
Yogin. He indeed has conquered the creation, jitahsarga h.

The Gita brings in here as always bhakti as the climax
of the Yoga, sarvabhulasthitam yo mam bhajali ekalvam
asthilah ; that may almost be said to sum up the whole
final result of the Gita’s teaching — whoever loves God
in all and his soul is founded upon the divine oneness,
however he lives and acts, lives and acts in God. And
to emphasise it still more, after an intervention of Arjuna
and a reply to his doubt as to how so difficult a Yoga
can be at all possible for the restless mind of man, the
divine Teacher returns to this idea and makes it his culmi-
nating utterance. “The Yogin is greater than the doers
of askesis, greater than the men of knowledge, greater
than the men of works; become then the Yogin, O
Arjuna,” the Yogin, one who seeks for and attains, by
works and knowledge and askesis or by whatever other
means, not even spiritual knowledge or power or anything
else for their own sake, but the union with God alone;
for in that all else is contained and in that lifted beyond
itself to a divinest significance. But even among Yogins the
greatest is the Bhakta. “Of all Yogins he who with all
his inner self given up to Me, for Me has love and faith,


306


NIRVANA AND WORKS IN THE WORLD


iraddhavan bhajate , him I hold to be the most united with
Me in Yoga.” It is this that is the closing word of these
first six chapters and contains in itself the seed of the
rest, of that which still remains unspoken and is nowhere
entirely spoken; for it is always and remains something
of a mystery and a secret, rahasyam , the highest spiritual
mystery and the divine secret.


307


XXIV


THE GIST OF THE KARMAYOGA

The first six chapters of the Gita form a sort of preliminary
block of the y teaching; all the rest, all the other twelve
chapters are the working out of certain unfinished figures
in this block which here are seen only as hints behind the
large-size execution of the main motives, yet are in them-
selves of capital importance and are therefore reserved
for a yet larger treatment on the other two faces of the
work. If the Gita were not a great written Scripture
which must be carried to its end, if it were actually a
discourse by a living teacher to a disciple which could
be resumed in good time, when the disciple was ready for
farther truth, one could conceive of his stopping here at
the end of the sixth chapter and saying, “Work this out
first, there is plenty for you to do to realise it and you
have the largest possible basis; as difficulties arise, they
will solve themselves or I will solve them for you. But
at present live out what I have told you; work in this
spirit. 55 True, there are many things here which cannot
be properly understood except in the light thrown on
them by what is to come after. In order to clear up
immediate difficulties and obviate possible misunderstand-
ings, I have had myself to anticipate a good deal, to
bring in repeatedly, for example, the idea of the Purushot-
tama, for without that it would have been impossible to
clear up certain obscurities about the Self and action


308


THE GIST OF THE KARMAYOGA


and the Lord of action, which the Gita deliberately accepts
so that it may not disturb the firmness of the first steps
by reaching out prematurely to things too great as yet
for the mind of the human disciple.

Arjuna, himself, if the Teacher were to break off his
discourse here, might well object: “You have spoken
much of the destruction of desire and attachment, of
equality, of the conquest of the senses and the stilling of
the mind, of passionless and impersonal action, of the
sacrifice of works, of the inner as preferable to the outer
renunciation, and these things I understand intellectually,
however difficult they may appear to me in practice.
But you have also spoken of rising above the gunas, while
yet one remains in action, and you have not told me how
the gunas work, and unless 1 know that, it will be difficult
for me to detect and rise above them. Besides, you have
spoken of bhakti as the greatest element in Yoga, yet you
have talked much of works and knowledge, but very
little or nothing of bhakti. And to whom is bhakti,
this greatest thing, to be offered? Not to the still imper-
sonal Self, certainly, but to you, the Lord. Tell me, then,
what you are, who, as bhakti is greater even than this
self-knowledge, are greater than the immutable Self,
which is yet itself greater than mutable Nature and the
world of action, even as knowledge is greater than works.
What is the relation between these three things? between
works and knowledge and divine love? between the soul
in Nature and the immutable Self and that which is at
once the changeless Self of all and the Master of know-
ledge and love and works, the supreme Divinity who is
here with me in this great battle and massacre, my
charioteer in the chariot of this fierce and terrible action?”
It is to answer these questions that the rest of the Gita


309


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


is written, and in a complete intellectual solution they,
have indeed to be taken up without delay and resolved.
But in actual sadhand one has to advance from stage to
stage, leaving many things, indeed the greatest things
to arise subsequently and solve themselves fully by the
light of the advance we have made in spiritual expe-
rience. The Gita follows to a certain extent this curve of
experience and puts first a sort of large preliminary
basis of works and knowledge which contains an element
leading up to bhakti and to a greater knowledge, but
not yet fully arriving. The six chapters present us with
that basis.

We may then pause to consider how far they have
carried the solution of the original problem with which
the Gita started. The problem in itself, it may be useful
again to remark, need not necessarily have led up to
the whole question of the nature of existence and of
the replacement of the normal by the spiritual life. It
might have been dealt with on a pragmatical or an
ethical basis or from an intellectual or an ideal standpoint
or by a consideration of all of these together; that in
fact would have been our modern method of solving the
difficulty. By itself it raises in the first instance just
this question, whether Arjuna should be governed by
the ethical sense of personal sin in slaughter or by the
consideration equally ethical of his public and social
duty, the defence of the Right, the opposition demanded
by conscience from all noble natures to the armed forces
of injustice and oppression? That question has been
raised in our own time and the present hour, and it
can be solved, as we solve it now, by one or other of
very various solutions, but all from the standpoint of
our normal life and our normal human mind. It may


310


THE GIST OF THE KARMAYOGA


be answered as a question between the personal conscience
and our duty to the society and the State, between an
ideal and a practical morality, between “soul-force”
and the recognition of the troublesome fact that life is
not yet at least all soul and that to take up arms for
the right in a physical struggle is sometimes inevitable.
All these solutions are, however, intellectual, tempera-
mental, emotional; they depend upon the individual
standpoint and arc at the best our own proper way of
meeting the difficulty offered to us, proper because
suitable to our nature and the stage of our ethical and
intellectual evolution, the best we can, with the light we
have, see and do; it leads to no final solution. And this
is so because it proceeds from the normal mind which
is always a tangle of various tendencies of our being and
can only arrive at a choice or an accommodation between
them, between our reason, our ethical being, our dynamic
needs, our life-instincts, our emotional being and those
rarer movements which we may perhaps call soul-ins-
tincts or psychical preferences. The Gita recognises that
from this standpoint there can be no absolute, only an
immediate practical solution and, after offering to Arjuna
from the highest ideals of his age just such a practical
solution, which he is in no mood to accept and indeed
is evidently not intended to accept, it proceeds to quite
a different standpoint and to quite another answer.

The Gita’s solution is to rise above our natural being
and normal mind, above our intellectual and ethical
perplexities into another consciousness with another
law of being and therefore another standpoint for our
action; where personal desire and personal emotions no
longer govern it; where the dualities fall away; where
the action is no longer our own and where therefore the


311


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


sense of personal virtue and personal sin is exceeded;
where the universal, the impersonal, the divine spirit
works out through us its purpose in the world; where we
are ourselves by a new T and divine birth changed into
being of that Being, consciousness of that Consciousness,
power of that Power, bliss of that Bliss, and, living no
longer in our lower nature, have no works to do of our
own, no personal aim to pursue of our own, but if we do
works at all, — and that is the one real problem and
difficulty left, — do only the divine works, those of which
our outward nature is only a passive instrument and no
longer the cause, no longer provides the motive; for
the motive-power is above us in the will of the Master
of our works. And this is presented to us as the true
solution, because it goes back to the real truth of our
being and to live according to the real truth of our
being is evidently the highest solution and the sole entirely
true solution of the problems of our existence. Our
mental and vital personality is a truth of our natural
existence, but a truth of the ignorance, and all that
attaches itself to it is also truth of that order, practically
valid for the works of the ignorance, but no longer valid
when we get back to the real truth of our being.
But how can we actually be sure that this is the truth?
We cannot so long as we remain satisfied with our ordi-
nary mental experience; for our normal mental expe-
rience is wholly that of this lower nature full of the
ignorance. We can only know this greater truth by living
it, that is to say, by passing beyond the mental into
the spiritual experience, by Ypga. For the living out
of spiritual experience until we cease to be mind and
become spirit, until, liberated from the imperfections
of our present nature, wc are able to live entirely in our


312


THE GIST OF THE KARMAYOGA


true and divine being is what in the end we mean by
Yoga.

This upward transference of our centre of being and
the consequent transformation of our whole existence
and consciousness, with a resultant change in the whole
spirit and motive of our action, the action often remaining
precisely the same in all its outward appearances, makes
the gist of the Gita’s Karmayoga. Change your being,
be reborn into the spirit and by that new birth proefeed
with the action to which the Spirit within has appoint-
ed you, may be said to be the heart of its message. Or
again, put otherwise, with a deeper and more spiritual
import, — make the work you have to do here your means
of inner spiritual rebirth, the divine birth, and, having
become divine, do still divine works as an instrument
of the Divine for the leading of the peoples. Therefore
there are here two things which have to be clearly laid
down and clearly grasped, the way to the change, to
this upward transference, this new divine birth, and
the nature of the work or rather the spirit in which it
has to be done, since the outward form of it need not
at all change, although really its scope and aim become
quite different. But these two things are practically
the same, for the elucidation of one elucidates the other.
The spirit of our action arises from the nature of our
being and the inner foundation it has taken, but also
this nature is itself affected by the trend and spiritual
effect of our action; a very great change in the spirit
of our works changes the nature of our being and alters
the foundation it has taken; it shifts the centre of con-
scious force from which we act. If life and action were
entirely illusory, as some would have it, if the Spirit had
nothing to do with works or life, this would not be so;


313


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


but the soul in us develops itself by life and works and,
not indeed so much the action itself, but the way of our
soul’s inner force of working determines its relations to
the Spirit. This is, indeed, the justification of Karma-
yoga as a practical means of the higher self-realisation.

We start from this foundation that the present inner
life of man, almost entirely dependent as it is upon his
vital and physical nature, only lifted beyond it by a
limited play of mental energy, is not the whole of his
possible existence, not even the whole of his present real
existence. There is within him a hidden Self, of which
his present nature is either only an outer appearance
or is a partial dynamic result. The Gita seems through-
out to admit its dynamic reality and not to adopt the
severer view of the extreme Vedantists that it is only an
appearance, a view which strikes at the very roots of all
works and action. Its way of formulating this clement of
its philosophical thought, — it might be done in a different
way, — is to admit the Sankhya distinction between the
Soul and Nature, the power that knows, supports and
informs and the power that works, acts, provides all the
variations of instrument, medium and process. Only it
takes the free and immutable Soul of the Sankhyas, calls
it in Vedantic language the one immutable omnipresent
Self or Brahman, and distinguishes it from this other soul
involved in Nature, which is our mutable and dynamic
being, the multiple soul of things, the basis of variation
and personality. But in what then consists this action of
Nature?

It consists in a power of process, Prakriti, which is the
interplay of three fundamental modes of its working,
three qualities, gunas. And what is the medium? It is
the complex system of existence created by a graded


314


THE GIST OF THE KARMAYOGA


evolution of the instruments of Prakriti, which, as they
are reflected here in the soul’s experience of her workings,
we may call successively the reason and the ego, the
mind, the senses and the elements of material energy
which arc the basis of its forms. These are all mechanical,
a complex engine of Nature, yanlra; and from our modern
point of view we may say that they are all involved in
material energy and manifest themselves in it as^ the
soul in Nature becomes aware of itself by an upward
evolution of each instrument, but in the inverse order
to that which we have stated, matter first, then sensation,
then mind, next reason, last spiritual consciousness.
Reason, which is at first only preoccupied with the work- ,
ings of Nature, may then detect their ultimate character,
may see them only as a play of the three gunas in which
the soul is entangled, may distinguish between the soul
and these workings; then the soul gets a chance of dis-
entangling itself and of going back to its original free-
dom and immutable existence. In Vedantic language,
it sees the spirit, the being; it ceases to identify itself
with the instruments and workings of Nature, with its
becoming; it identifies itself with its true Self and being
and recovers its immutable spiritual self-existence. It
is then from this spiritual self-existence, according to the
Gita, that it can freely and as the master of its being,
the Ishwara, support the action of its becoming.

Looking only at the psychological facts on which
these philosophical distinctions are founded, — philosophy
is only a way of formulating to ourselves intellectually
in their essential significance the psychological and phy-
sical facts of existence and their relation to any ultimate
reality that may exist, — we may say that there are two
lives we can lead, the life of the soul engrossed in the


315


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


workings of its active nature, identified with its psycholo-
gical and physical instruments, limited by them, bound
by its personality, subject to Nature, and the life of the
Spirit, superior to these things, large, impersonal, uni-
versal, free, unlimited, transcendent, supporting with an
infinite equality its natural being and action, but exceed-
ing them by its freedom and infinity. We may live in
what is now our natural being or we may live in our
greater and spiritual being. This is the first great dis-
tinction on which the Karmayoga of the Gita is founded.

The whole question and the whole method lie then
in the liberation of the soul from the limitations of our
present natural being. In our natural life the first domi-
nating fact is our subjection to the forms of material
Nature, the outward touches of things. These present
themselves to our life through the senses, and the life
through the senses immediately returns upon these
objects to seize upon them and deal with them, desires,
attaches itself, seeks for results. The mind in all its inner
sensations, reactions, emotions, habitual ways of per-
ceiving, thinking and feeling obeys this action of the
senses; the reason too carried away by the mind gives
itself up to this life of the senses, this life in which the
inner being is subject to the externality of things and
cannot for a moment really get above it or outside the
circle of its action upon Us and its psychological results
and reactions within us. It cannot get beyond them
because there is the principle of ego by which the reason
differentiates the sum of the action of Nature upon our
mind, will, sense, body from her action in other minds,
wills, nervous organisms, bodies; and life to us means
only the way she affects our ego and the way our ego
replies to her touches. We know nothing else, we seem to


316


THE GIST OF THE KARMAYOGA


be nothing else; the soul itself seems then only a separate
mass of mind, will, emotional and nervous reception and
reaction. We may enlarge our ego, identify ourselves
with the family, clan, class, country, nation, humanity
even, but still the ego remains in all these disguises the
root of our actions, only it finds a larger satisfaction of
its separate being by these wider dealings with external
things.

What acts in us is still the will of the natural being
seizing upon the touches of the external world to satisfy
the different phases of its personality, and the will in this
seizing is always a will of desire and passion and attach-
ment to our works and their results, the will of Nature
in us; our personal will, we say, but our ego personality
is a creation of Nature, it is not and cannot be our free
self, our independent being. The whole is the action of
the modes of Nature. It may be a tainasic action, and then
we have an inert personality subject to and satisfied with
the mechanical round of things, incapable of any strong
effort at a freer action and mastery. Or it may be the
rajasic action, an<? then we have the restless active perso-
nality which throws itself upon Nature and tries to make
her serve its needs and desires, but does not see that its
apparent mastery is a servitude, since its needs and desires
are those of Nature, and while we are subject to them,
there can be for us ho freedom. Or it may be a sattwic
action, and then wc have the enlightened personality
which tries to live by reason or to realise some preferred
ideal of good, truth or beauty; but this, reason is still sub-
ject to the appearances of Nature and these ideals are
only c hanging phases of our personality in which we find
in the end no sure rule or permanent satisfaction. We
are still carried on a wheel of mutation, obeying in our


317


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


circlings through the ego some Power within us and within
all this, but not ourselves that Power or in union and
communion with it. Still there is no freedom, no real
mastery.

Yet freedom is possible. For that we have to get first
away into ourselves from the action of the external world
upon our senses; that is to say, we have to live inwardly
and be able to hold back the natural running of the senses
after their external objects. A mastery of the senses, an
ability to do without all that they hanker after, is the first
condition of the true soul life ; only so can we begin to feel
that there is a soul within us which is other than the muta-
tions of mind in its reception of the touches of outward
things, a soul which in its depths goes back to something
self-existent, immutable, tranquil, self-possessed, gran-
diose, serene and august, master of itself and unaffected
by the eager runnings of our external nature. But this
cannot be done so long as we are subject to desire. For
it is desire, the principle of all our superficial life, which
satisfies itself with the life of the senses and finds its whole
account in the play of the passions. Wfc must get rid then
of desire and, that propensity of our natural being des-
troyed, the passions which are its emotional results will
fall into quietude; for the joy and grief of possession and
of loss, success and failure, pleasant and Unpleasant
touches, which entertain them, will pass out of our souls.
A calm equality will then be gained. And since we have
still to live and act in the world and our nature in works
is to seek for the fruits of our works, we must change
that nature and do works without attachment to their
fruits, otherwise desire and all its results remain. But
how can we change this nature of the doer of works in us?
By dissociating works from ego and personality, by seeing


318


THE GIST OF THE KARMAYOGA


through the reason that all this is only the play of the
gunas of Nature, and by dissociating our soul from
the play, by making it first of all the observer of the
workings of Nature and leaving those works to the Power
that is really behind them, the something in Nature which
is greater than ourselves, not our personality, but the
Master of the universe. But the mind will not permit all
this; its nature is to run out after the senses and carry
the reason and will with it. Then we must learn to still
the mind. We must attain that absolute peace and still-
ness in which we become aware of the calm, motionless,
blissful Self within us which is eternally untroubled and
unaffected by the touches of things, is sufficient to itself
and finds there alone its eternal satisfaction.

This Self is our self-existent being. It is not limited by
our personal existence. It is the same in all existences,
pervasive, equal to all things, supporting the whole
universal action with its infinity, but unlimited by all
that is finite, unmodified by the changings of Nature and
personality. When this Self is revealed within us, when
we feel its peace and stillness, we can grow into that;
we can transfer the poise of our soul from its lower im-
mergence in Nature and draw it back into the Self. We
can do this by the force of the things we have attained,
calm, equality, passionless impersonality. For as we grow
in these things, carry them to their fullness, subject all
our nature to them, we are growing into this calm, equal,
passionless, impersonal, all-pervading Self. Our senses
fall into that stillness and receive the touches of the world
on us with a supreme tranquillity; our mind falls into still-
ness and becomes the calm universal witness; our ego
dissolves itself into this impersonal existence. All things
we see in this self which wc have become in ourself; and


319


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


we sec this self in all ; we become one being with all beings
in the spiritual basis of their existence. By doing works
in this selfless tranquillity and impersonality, our works
cease to be ours, cease to bind or trouble us with their
reactions. Nature and her gunas weave the web of her
works, but without affecting our griefless self-existent tran-
quillity. All is given up into that one equal and universal
Brahman.

But here there are two difficulties. First, there seems
to be an antinomy between this tranquil and immutable
Self and the action of Nature. How then does the action
at all exist or how can it continue once we have entered
into the immutable Self-existence? Where in that is the
will to works which would make the action of our nature
possible? If we say with the Sankhya that the will is in
Nature and not in the Self, still there must be a motive
in Nature and the power in her to draw the soul into its
workings by interest, ego and attachment, and when these
things cease to reflect themselves in the soul consciousness,
her power ceases and the motive of works ceases with
it. But the Gita does not accept this view, which seems
indeed to necessitate the existence of many purushas
and not one universal Purusha, otherwise the separate
experience of the soul and its separate liberation while
millions of others are still involved, would not be intel-
ligible. Nature is not a separate principle, but the power
of the Supreme going forth in cosmic creation. But if
the Supreme is pnly this immutable Self and the indivi-
dual is only something that has gone forth from him in
the Power, then the moment it returns and takes its
poise in the self, everything must cease except the supreme
unity and the supreme calm. Secondly, even if in some
mysterious way action still continues, yet since the Self


330


THE GIST OF THE KARMAYOGA

is equal to all things, it cannot matter whether works
are done or, if they are done, it cannot matter what work
is done. Why then this insistence on the most violent
and disastrous form of action, this chariot, this battle,
this warrior, this divine charioteer?

The Gita answers by presenting the Supreme as
something greater even than the immutable Self, more
comprehensive, one who is at once this Self and the
Master of works in Nature. But he directs the works
of Nature with the eternal calm, the equality, the supe-
riority to works and personality which belong to the
immutable. This, we may say, is the poise of being from
which he directs works, and by growing into this we are
growing into his being and into the poise of divine works.
From this he goes forth as the Will and Power of his
being in Nature, manifests himself in all existences, is
born as Man in the world, is there in the heart of all men,
reveals himself as the Avatar, the divine birth in man;
and as man grows into his being, it is into the divine
birth that he grows. Works must be done as a sacrifice
to this Lord of our works, and we must by growing into
the Self realise our oneness with him in our being and
see our personality as a partial manifestation of him
in Nature. One with him in being, we grow one with
all beings in the universe and do divine works, not as
ours, but as his workings through us, for the maintenance
and leading of the peoples.

This is the essential thing to be done, and once this
is done, the difficulties which present themselves to
Arjuna will disappear. The problem is no longer one of
our personal action, for that which makes our personality
becomes a thing temporal and subordinate, the ques-
tion is then only one of the workings of the divine Will


321


ESSAYS ON THE GITA


through us in the universe. To understand that we must
know what this supreme Being is in himself and in
Nature, what the workings of Nature are and what they
lead to, and the intimate relation between the soul in
Nature and this supreme Soul, of which bhakti with know-
ledge is the foundation. The elucidation of these questions
is the subject of the rest of the Gita.

END OF THE FIRST SERIES


322


vTTST TTCfta SP?mR ar*T5*fr, ^cHPR*

Lai Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administration Library

MUSSOORIE

3T^Tf r ?r?r* .

Acc. No jf.

IT'tjtt 3*^7 qrt fafeer f^rt^ 3T s*r% qf to
qr? £ i


Please return this book on or before the date last stamped
below.


Date

Borrower’s

No.

Date

spt *TWT

Borrower’s

No.


- ■


— — .

—


* — - — ■


GL 294.5924
AUR 5TH ED V.1


lllillllllllllilllil


294.5924

Aur

V4

ftHecL.

Class No.

Author
! wi’^raRT

tsh&rzh

fiwr
V.l


4&H

3T^^T

Acc No. I 0 ***'

T^rT^T

Book No.


LIBRARY

LAL BAHADUR SHASTRI

ati&nai Academy of Administration

MUSSOORIE


■tat


Accession No.


joJAAl


1. Books are issued for 15 days only but
may have to be recalled earlier if urgen-
tly required.

2. An over-due charge of 25 Paise per day per
volume will be charged.

3* Books may be renewed on request, at the
discretion of the Librarian.

4. Periodicals, Rare and Reference books may
not be issued and may be consulted only
in the Library.

6. Books lost, defaced or Injured In any way
shall have to be replaced or its double
price shall be paid by the borrower.


Help to keep this book fresh, clean & moving
