================================================================================
Ausonius, Vol. II
Decimus Magnus Ausonius | With an English translation by Hugh G. Evelyn White (Loeb Classical Library, 1921)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Internet Archive: Loeb Classical Library, Ausonius vol. 2 (1921)
Source URL: https://archive.org/details/ausoniuswithengl02ausouoft
Rights: Public Domain (U.S.)
Staged: 2026-10-09 | Tower of Babel Library, Batch 09a (classical-literature lane)
================================================================================

; LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY

EDITED BY
'H.D.,  LL.D. T.  E.  PAGE,  Litt.D. W.  H.  D.  ROUSE,  Litt.I).


AUSONIUS
II


y


^y


AUSONIUS

WITH  AN  ENGLISH  TRANSLATION  BY

HUGH  G.  EVELYN  WHITE,  M.A.

SOMKTIME SCHOLAR OF WAbHAM C'lLLEOE, OXKUKL"


IN  TWO  VOLUMES
II


AVITH THE EUCHARISTICUS OF
PAULINUS PELL^TTS


LONDON :  WILLIAM HEINEMANN
NEW YORK : G. P. PUTNAM'S SONS

iMCM.XXI


PR

Czzi
1/^


CONTENTS


PACK

BOOK XVIII. — THE EPISTLES 3

BOOK XIX. — EPIGRAMS OF AUSONIUS ON VARIOUS

MATTERS 155

BOOK XX. — THE THANKSGIVING OF ACSOMUS OF BOR-
DEAUX, THE VASATE, FOR HIS CONSULSHIP,

ADDRESSED TO THE EMPEROR GRATIAN ....  219

APPENDIX TO AUSONIUS 271

THE EVCHARISTICl'S OF PAULINUS  PELL.^':US 29.3

INDEX 353


AUSONIUS

OPUSCULA


D. MAGNI AUSONII

OPUSCULA

LIBER XVIII
EPISTULARUM

I. — Symmachus AUSONIO

Merum  mihi  gaudium  eruditionis  tuae  scripta  tri-
buerunt,  quae  Capuae  locatus  accepi.  erat  quippe  in
his  oblita  Tulliano  melle  festivitas  et  sermonis  mei
non  tarn  vera^  quam  blaflda  laudatio.  quid  igitur
magis  mirer,  sententiae  incertus  addubito,  ornamenta
oris  an  pectoris  tui.  quippe  ita  facundia  antistas  ce-
teris, ut  sit  formido  rescribere ;  ita  benigne  nostra
conprobas,  ut  libeat  non  tacere.  si  plura  de  te  prae-
dicem,  videbor  niutuuni  scabere  et  magis  imitator  tui
esse  adloquii  quam  probator.  simul  quod  ipse  nihil
ostentandi  gratia  facis,  verendum  est  genuina  in  te
bona  tamquam  adfectata  laudare.  unum  hoc  tamen
a  nobis  indubitata  veritate  cognosce,  neminem  esse
niortalium  quern  prae  te  diligam  ;  sic  vadatuni  me
lionorabili  amore  tenuisti.

2


AUSONIUS

BOOK XVIII
THE  EPISTLES

I. — Symmachus  to AUSONIUS

Your  learned  pages,  which  I  received  while  stay-
ing at  Capua,  brought  me  sheer  delight.  For  there
was  in  them  a  certain  gaiety  overlaid  with  honey
from  Tully's  hive,  and  some  eulogy  on  my  discourse
flattering  rather  than  deserved.  And  so  I  am  at  a
loss  to  decide  which  to  admire  the  more — the  graces
of  your  diction  or  of  your  disposition.  Indeed  you
so  far  surpass  all  others  in  eloquence  that  I  fear  to
write  in  reply ;  you  so  generously  approve  my  essays
that  I  am  glad  not  to  keep  silence.  If  I  say  more
in  your  praise,  I  shall  seem  to  be  ''scratching  your
back"  and  to  be  copying  more  than  complimenting
your  address  to  me.  Moreover,  since  you  do  nothing
consciously  for  the  sake  of  display,  I  must  beware
of  praising  your  natural  good  qualities  as  though
they  were  studied.  Tliis  one  thing,  however,  I  must
tell  you  as  an  absolute  fact — that  there  is  no  man
alive  whom  I  love  more  than  you,  so  deeply  pledged
in  honest  affection  have  vou  always  held  me.


B 2


AUSONIUS

Set  in  eo  mihi  verecundus  niniio  plus  videre.  quod
libclli  tui  arguis  proditorem.  nam  facilius  est  av-
dentes  favillas  ore  compiimere  quam  luculenti  operis
servare  secretum.  cum  semel  a  te  profectum  car-
men est;  ius  omne  posuisti :  oratio  publicata  res
libera  est.  an  vereris  aemuli  venena  lectoris,  ne
libellus  tuns  admorsu  duri  dentis  uratiir?  tibi  uni
ad  hoc  locorum  nihil  gratia  praestitit  aut  dempsit
invidia.  ingratis  scaevo  cuique  proboque  laudabihs
es.  proinde  cassas  dehinc  seclude  tbrmidines  et  in-
dulge stilo,  ut  saepe  pi'odaris.  certe  aliquod  didas-
calicum  seu  protrepticum  nostro  quoque  nomini
carmen  adiudica.  fac  periculum  silentii  mei,  quod
etsi  tibi  exhibere  opto,  tamen  spondere  non  audeo.
novi  ego,  quae  sit  prurigo  emuttiendi  operis,  quod
probaris.  nam  quodam  pacto  societatem  laudis  ad-
fectat,  qui  aliena  bene  dicta  primus  enuntiat.  ea
{)ropter  in  comoediis  summatim  quidem  gloriam
scriptores  tulerunt,  Roscio  tamen  atque  Ambivio
ceterisque  actoribus  fama  non  defuit.

Ergo  tali  negotio  expende  otium  tuum  et  novis
voluminibus  ieiunia  nostra  sustenta.  quod  si  iac-
tantiae  fugax  garrulum  indicem  pertimescis,  praesta
etiam  tu  silentium  mihi,  ut  tiito  simulem  nostra
esse,  quae  scripseris. vale.


'  Q.  Rosciu.s  Gallus,  a  freedman  of  Lanuvium,  was  raised
to  equestriiin  rank  bj*  Sulla  and  defended  by  Cicero  in  a
speech  still extant. His  fame  as  a  comic  actor  made hi<


THE EPISTLES

But  in  this  1  think  you  are  excessively  modest,
that  you  complain  of  me  for  playing  traitor  to  your
book.  For  it  is  easier  to  hold  hot  coals  in  one's
mouth  than  to  keep  the  secret  of  a  brilliant  work.
Once  you  have  let  a  poem  out  of  your  hands,  you
have  i-enounced  all  your  rights  :  a  speech  delivered
is  common  property.  Or  do  you  fear  the  venom  of
some  jealous  reader,  and  that  your  book  may  smart
from  the  snap  of  his  rude  fangs  ?  You  are  the  one
man  who  u[)  to  now  has  owed  nothing  to  partiality,
lost  nothing  through  jealousy.  Involuntarily  every-
one, perverse  or  honest,  finds  you  admirable.  There-
fore banish  henceforth  your  groundless  fears,  and  let
your  pen  run  on  so  that  you  may  often  be  betrayed.
At  any  rate  assign  some  didactic  or  hortatory'  poem
to  my  name  also.  Run  the  risk  of  my  keeping
silence  ;  and  though  I  desire  to  give  you  proof  of
it,  yet  I  dare  not  guarantee  it.  Well  I  know  how  I
itch  to  give  voice  to  your  work  when  you  are  so
popular.  For  somehow  he  secures  a  partnership  in
the  glory  who  first  pronounces  another's  neat  phrases.
That  is  why  in  comedy  authors  have  won  but  slight
renown,  while  Roscius,  Ambivius,^  and  the  other
players  have  had  no  lack  of  fame.

So  spend  your  leisure  in  such  occupation  and  re-
lieve my  famine  with  fresh  books.  But  if  in  your
flight  from  vainglory  you  dread  a  chattering  in-
former, do  you  also  guarantee  me  your  silence,  that
I  may  safely  pretend  that  what  you  have  written  is
mine  ! Farewell.

name  proverbial  (rjy.  Horace,  Epist.ii.  i.  82).  Ambivius  was
intimately  associated  with  Terence,  in  most  of  whose  plays  he
acted.


AUSONIUS

II. AUSONIUS SyM MACHO

MoDo  intellego,  quam  mellea  res  sit  oratio  ;  quani
delinifica  et  quam  suada  facundia.  persuasisti  mihi,
quod  epistulae  meae  aput  Capuam  tibi  redditae  con-
cinnatio  inhumana  non  esset ;  set  hoc  non  diutius,
quam  dum  epistulam  tuam  legi,  quae  me  blanditiis
iuhiantem  tuis  velut  suco  nectaris  delibuta  perducit.
ubi  enim  chartulam  pono  et  me  ipsum  interrogo,
turn  absinthium  meum  resipit  et  circumlita  melle
tuo  pocula  depi'ehendo.  si  vero,  id  quod  saepe  facio,
ad  epistulam  tuam  redii^  rursus  inhcior  :  et  rursum
ille  suavissimus,  ille  floi'idus  tui  sermonis  adflatus
deposita  lectione  vanescit  et  testimonii  pondus  pro-
hibet  inesse  dulcedini.  hoc  me  velut  aerius  bratteae
fucus  aut  picta  nebula  non  longius.  quam  dum  vi-
detur,  oblectat  chamaeleontis  bestiolae  vice,  quae  de
subiectis  sumit  colorem.  alind  sentio  ex  epistula
tua^  aliud  ex  conscientia  mea.  et  tu  me  audes  fa-
cundissimorum  hominum  laude  dignari  ?  tu,  inquam,
mihi  ista,  qui  te  ultra  emendationem  omnium  pro-
tulisti  ?  quisquamne  ita  nitet,  ut  conparatus  tibi
non  sordeat  ?  quis  ita  Aesopi  venustatem,  quis  so-
phisticas  Isocratis  conc-lusiones,  quis  ad  enthyme-
mata  Demosthenis  aut  opulentiam  Tullianam  aut
proprietatem  nostri  Maronis  accedat  ?  quis  ita  ad-
fectet  singula,  ut  tu  imples  omnia  ? quid  enim  aliud

'  A  mode  of  .ulministerinp;  bitter  medioine. '•;).  Lucretius.

6


THE EPISTLES


II. — AusoNius  TO  Symmachus

Now  1  understand  how  honey-sweet  is  the  power
of  speech,  how  enchanting  and  j)ersuasive  a  thing  is
eloquence  I  You  have  made  me  believe  that  my
letter  delivered  to  you  at  Capua  was  not  a  barbarous
compilation  ;  but  this  only  for  so  long  as  I  am  actu-
ally reading  your  letter,  which  is  so  spread,  as  it
were,  with  the  syrop  of  your  nectar  as  to  over-
persuade  me  Avhile  I  hang  agape  over  its  allure-
ments. For  as  soon  as  I  lay  down  your  page  and
question  myself,  back  comes  the  taste  of  my  own
wormwood,  and  I  realize  that  the  cup  is  smeared
round  with  your  honey. ^  If  indeed — as  I  often  do —
I  return  to  your  letter,  I  am  enticed  again:  and  then
again  that  most  soothing,  that  most  fragrant  per-
fume of  your  words  dies  away  when  I  have  done
reading,  and  denies  that  sweetness  carries  weight
as  evidence.  Like  the  Haunting  glitter  of  tinsel  or
a  tinted  cloud,  it  delights  me  only  for  so  long  as  I
see  it — like  that  little  creature  the  chameleon,  which
takes  its  colour  from  whatever  is  beneath  it.  Your
letter  makes  me  feel  one  thing,  my  own  conscience
another.  And  do  you  venture  to  count  me  worthy
of  praise  belonging  to  the  most  eloquent  ?  Do  you,
I  say,  speak  so  of  me — you  who  soar  above  all  writers
in  faultlessness  ?  What  author  is  there  so  brilliant,
l>ut  he  appears  unpolished  by  comparison  with  you  ?
Who  like  you  can  approach  the  charm  of  Aesop,  the
logical  deductions  of  Isocrates,  the  arguments  of
Demosthenes,  the  richness  of  Tully,  or  the  felicity
of  our  own  Maro  ?  Wlio  can  aspire  to  such  success
in  any  one  of  these,  as  you  fully  attain  in  them
all  ? For what else  are  vou  but  the concentrated


ALISON  I  us

es,  quam  ex  omni  boiiarum  artium  iageniu  collecta
perfectio  ?

Haec,  doniine  mi  fill  Syiumache,  noa  vereor.  ne
in  te  blandius  dicta  videantur  esse  quani  verius.  et
expertus  cs  fidem  meani  mentis  atqiie  dictorum,
dum  in  comitatu  degimus  ambo  aevo  dispari,  ubi  tu
veteris  militiae  praemia  tiro  mei'uisti,  ego  tirocinium
iam  veteranus  exercui.  in  comitatu  tibi  verus  fui,
nedum  me  peregre  existimes  conposita  fabulari.  in
comitatu,  inquam,  qui  frontes  hominum  aperit,  men-
tes  tegit,  ibi  me  et  parentem  et  amicum  et,  si  quid
utroque  carius  est,  cariorem  fuisse  sensisti.  set  abe-
amus  ab  his  :  ne  ista  haec  conmemoratio  ad  illam
Sosiae  formidinem  videatur  accedere.

lilud,  quod  paene  praeterii,  qua  adfectatione  ad-
didisti,  ut  ad  te  didascalicum  aliquod  opusculum  aut
sermonem  protrepticum  mitterem  ?  ego  te  docebo
docendus  adhuc,  si  essem  id  aetatis,  ut  discerem  ?
aut  ego  te  vegetum  atque  alacrem  commonebo  ?
eadem  opera  et  Musas  hortabor,  ut  canant,  et  maria,
ut  effluant,  et  auras,  ut  vigeant,  et  ignes,  ut  caleant,
admonebo  :  et,  si  quid  invitis  quoque  nobis  natura
fit,  superHuus  instigator  agitabo.  sat  est  unius  er-
roris  quod  aliquid  meorum  me  paenitente  vulgatum
est,  quod  bona  fortuna  in  manus  amicorum  incidit.
nam  si  contra  id  evenisset,  nee  tu  mihi  persuaderes
placere  me  posse.


cp.  Cic.  Pro  Planco,  vi.  16  :  tabella  quae  frontes  aperit

linum,  mentos  togit.


hominum
8


thp:  p:pistles

essence  of  e\ery  great  mind  in  the  ie;ilni  of  the
liberal  arts  ?

My  lord,  my  son  Symniachus,  I  do  not  fear  that
you  may  think  I  speak  thus  of  you  more  smoothly
than  truly.  Indeed,  you  have  proved  how  truthful
I  am  both  in  thought  and  word  while  the  two  of  us,
so  ill-matched  in  years,  lived  at  court,  Avhere  you,  a
recruit,  eai'ned  a  veteran's  pay,  while  I,  already  a
veteran,  went  through  my  recruit's  training.  At
court  I  was  truthful  with  you  :  much  less  when  I
am  away  from  it  should  you  think  I  tell  stories.  At
court,  I  repeat,  which  bares  the  face  and  veils  the
heart  ^ — there  you  felt  that  I  was  a  father  and  a
friend  and,  if  anything  can  be  dearer  than  either,
then  something  dearer  still.  But  let  us  leave  this
mattei',  lest  such  a  reminder  seem  too  like  the  fear
felt  by  Sosias.^

Now  for  that  matter  which  I  almost  passed  over.
What  mock  humility  of  j-ours  is  this,  that  you  add  a
request  for  me  to  send  you  some  didactic  Avork  or
hortatory  discourse  ?  Shall  I  teach  you  Avhen  I  my-
self need  teaching ^  were  I  of  an  age  to  learn?  Shall
I  counsel  you,  whose  mind  is  so  alert  and  vigorous  .^
As  well  exhort  the  Muses  to  sing  and  advise  the
waves  to  flow,  the  breezes  to  blow  freely,  fire  to  give
heat,  and  where  anything  occurs  naturally,  whether
we  will  or  no,  to  urge  it  forward  with  superfluous
zeal !  Enough  this  one  mistake  that  a  work  of  mine
has,  to  my  regret,  become  public  property  :  though
by  good  fortune  it  has  fallen  into  the  hands  of
friends.  For  had  it  been  otherwise,  not  even  you
would  convince  me  that  I  can  give  satisfaction.

^  Terence,  Aiidria  43  f.,  nam  istaec  comniemoratio  Quasi
exprobratio  est  intnemori  benefici.

^  Horace.  Episf.  i.  xvii.  .S,  rlisce  docendus  adhnc

9


AUSONIUS

Haec  ad  litteras  tuas  responsa  sint :  cetera,  quae
noscere  aves,  conpendi  faciam  ;  sic  quoque  iam  longa
est  epistula.  lulianum  tamen  familiarein  domus
vestrae,  si  quid  de  nobis  percontandum  arbitraris,
adlego;  simul  admoneo,  ut,  cum  causam  adventus
eius  agnoveris,  iuves  studium,  quod  ex  parte  fovi,sti.
vale.

III.— SVMMACHIJS AUSONIO

Etsi  plerumque  vera  est  aput  parentes  praedi-
catio  filiorum,  nescio  quo  tamen  pacto  detrimentum
meriti  sui  patiatur,  dum  personarum  spectare  gratiam
iudicatur.  quaero  igitur  incertus  animi.  quae  mihi
nunc  potissimuni  super  viro  honorabili  Thalassio
genero  tuo  verba  sumenda  sint.  si  parce  decora
morum  eius  adtingam,  liventi  similis  existimabor :
si  iuste  persequar,  ero  proxiinus  blandienti.  imitabor
igitur  Sallustiani  testimonii  castigationem.  habes
virum  dignum  te  et  per  te  familia  consular!^  quem
fortuna  honoris  parti  maiorem  beneficiis  suis  rep-
perit,  emendatio  animi  et  sanctitas  potioril)u^  iam
paravit. vale.


THE EPISTLES

Let  that  be  my  answer  to  your  letter :  with  the
other  matters  which  you  desire  to  know,  I  will  make
short  work  :  even  so  this  letter  is  already  long.  How-
ever, I  depute  Julian,  an  intimate  of  your  household,
to  answer  any  questions  you  care  to  ask  concerning
me  :  at  the  same  time  I  urge  that,  when  you  learn
his  reason  for  coming,  you  aid  him  in  a  purpose
which  to  some  extent  you  have  already  favoured.
Farewell.


in. — SyMiMachus  to  Ausoniu.s

Although  praise  bestowed  upon  their  children  is
generally  accepted  as  gospel  by  parents,  yet  it  is
somehow  discounted  when  it  is  considered  to  have
an  eye  to  the  favour  of  the  great.  I  am  at  a  stand,
therefore,  and  ask  what  words  I  shall  choose  especi-
ally at  this  time  in  S})eaking  of  that  worshipful  man,
Thalassius,  your  son-in-law.  If  I  touch  sparingly
upon  the  graces  of  his  character,  I  shall  be  thought
to  show  signs  of  jealousy :  if  I  duly  enlarge  upon
them,  I  shall  be  next  door  to  a  flatterer.  I  will
therefore  copy  Sallust  ^  in  his  rigid  mode  of  giving
evidence.  You  have  as  son-in-law  a  man  woi-thy  of
you,  and,  through  you,  of  a  consular  family — one
whom  Fortune  in  her  bestowal  of  distinctions  has
found  too  great  to  need  her  benefits,  whom  a  fault-
less nature  and  stainless  character  have  already
furnished  with  higher  gifts. Farewell.

'  Jugurtha, ix. 3: habes virum te dignnm et avo f?uo
.Masinissa.


AUSONIUS


IV^  -Au.soNius  Axio Paulo UnEroni  Sal.

Tanoem  eluctati  retiuacula  blanda  morarimi

Burdigalae  molles  liquinuis  inlecebras.
Santonicaiiique  itrbem  viciuo  accessimus  agro  :

(|uod  tibi  si  gratuin  est,  optime  Paule,  proba.
cornipedes  rapiant  inposta  petorrita  mulae  ;  5

vel  cisio  triiiigi^,  si  placet,  insilias,
vel  celerern  mannum  vel  riiptum  terga  veraeduni

conscendas,  propere  dum  modo  iain  venias  ;
instantis  revocant  quia  iios  sollemnia  Paschae

libera  nee  nobis  ^  est  mora  desidiae.  10

})erfer  in  excursu  vel  teriuga  niilia  epodon

vel  falsas  lites,  quas  schola  vestra  serit.
nobisciun  invenies  nullas,  quia  liquimus  istic

nugaruni  veteres  cum  sale  relliquias."^

V. — AusoNius  Paulo

OsTREA  nobilium  cenis  sumptuque  nepotuni

cognita  divei'soque  maris  deprensa  profundo,

aut  refugis  nudata  vadis  aut  scrupea  subter

antra  et  muriceis  scopulorum  mersa  lacunis,

quae  viridis  niuscus,  quae  decolor  alga  recondil. "i

quae  testis  concreta  suis  ceu  saxa  cohaerent,

quae  mutata  loco,  pingui  mox  consita  limo,

nutrit  secretus  conclusae  uliginis  umor,

enumerare  iubes,  vetus  o  milii  Paule  sodalis,

adsuefacte  meis  ioculari  carmine  nugis.  10

'  vobis,  G.

^  .Z'adds  :  Vale  valere  si  voles  me  vel  vola.

*  The  word  is  said  to  be  a  Celtic  compound  :  petor  =  four,
rif  —  whppl.  '  A  convPVRnce  with  tvrn  wheels.


THE EPISTLES

IV. — Ausoxius  TO  Axius  Paulus  tmk  RuiiruinciAN,
Greeting

At  last,  having  struggled  free  from  delay's  seduc-
tive toils,  I  have  left  Bordeaux's  soft  enticements
and  on  a  neighbouring  farm  dwell  nigh  the  town
of  Saintes  :  if  this  pleases  you,  friend  Paulus,  give
me  proof  of  it.  Let  horn-hoofed  mules  whirl  hither
a  harnessed  four-wheeled  car,^  or,  if  you  please,
jump  in  a  three-horse  gig,'-  or  mount  a  cob,  or  else
a  back-broken  hack,  if  only  you  come  quickly ;  for
approaching  Easter's  rites  summon  me  back,  nor
am  I  free  to  linger  idly  here.  Bring  over  on  your
jaunt  thrice  a  thousand  lyrics  or  the  feigned  cases '^
which  your  pupils  weave.  With  me  you  will  find
none,  for  I  have  left  yonder  the  old  remnants  of  my
trifles  together  with  my  wit.

v.- AuSONlUS TO Paum's

Of  o^fsters  famed  through  the  lavish  feasts  ot
high-born  prodigals,  whether  dredged  from  the
depths  of  various  seas  or  left  bare  by  ebbing  shal-
lows, or  sheltered  beneath  rugged  caves  and  in
jagged  clefts  amid  the  rocks,  those  which  green
moss,  which  stained  seaweed  hides,  whose  welded
shells  are  firm-shut  as  the  stones,  which  when  re-
moved* from  their  home  and  planted  in  rich  ooze
are  fattened  by  the  inward  moisture  of  the  packed
slime  ; — of  these  you  bid  me  tell  all  the  kinds,  Paulus,
my  old  comrade,  made  used  to  my  trifling  by  sportive

■*  sc.  the  declamations  (in  the  form  of  imaginary  lawsuits)
composed  as  exercises  in  tlie  rhetoi-ical  schools.

*  i.e.  transplanted  to  specially  prepared  beds  for  fattening:
<-p.  Pliny,  N.H.  xxxii.  6.

13


AUSONIUS

adgrediar  ;  quainvis  curam  non  ista  senileni
sollicitent  frugique  viro  dignanda  putentur.
nam  mihi  non  Saliare  epulum,  non  aura  dapalis,
qualem  Penelopae  nebulonum  mensa  procorum
Alcinoique  habuit  nitidae  cutis  uncta  inventus.^ 15
enumerabo  tamen  famam  testesque  secutus
pro  studiis  hominum  semper  diversa  probantum.

Set  mihi  prae  cunctis  lectissima,  quae  Medulorum
educat  Oceanus^  quae  Burdigalensia  nomen
usque  ad  Caesai'eas  tulit  admiratio  mensas,  20

non  laudata  minus,  nostri  quam  gloria  vini.
haec  inter  cunctas  ])almam  meruere  priorem,
omnibus  ex  longo  cedentibus  :  ista  et  opimi
visceris  et  nivei  duleique  tenerrima  suco
miscent  aequoi'eum  tenui  sale  tincta  saporem.  25

proxima  sint  quamvis,  sunt  longe  pi'oxima  multo
ex  intervallo,  quae  Massiliensia,  portum
quae  Narbo  ad  Veneris  nutrit ;  cultuque  carentia
Hellespontiaci  quae  protegit  aequor  Abydi ;
vel  quae  Baianis  pendent  Huitantia  palis ;  30

Santonico  quae  tecta  salo  ;  quae  nota  Genonis  ;
aut  Eborae  mixtus  pelago  quae  protegit  amnis,
ut  multo  iaceant  algarum  obducta  recessu  :
aspera  quae  testis  et  dulcia,  farris  opimi.

Sunt  et  Aremorici  qui  laudent  ostrea  jionti,  35

et  quae  Pictonici  legit  accola  litoris,  et  quae
mira  Caledoniis  nonnunquam  detegit  aestus.

1  cp.  Horace,  Epiet.  i.  ii.  28  f.

^  The  Salii,  priests  of  Mars,  were  famous  for  their  banquets.

*  cp.  Horace, Epi^f.  i.  ii.  28  f.  : sponsi  Penelopae  nebu

lones  Ah^inoique  In  cute  curandn  plus  aequrt  operata  inventus.

14


THE EPISTLES

verse.  I  will  approach  the  taskj  albeit  the  theme
stir  not  an  old  man's  zest  nor  be  thought  fit  for  the
notice  of  a  frugal  man.  For  I  have  no  Salian  fare,^
no  repasts  of  savour  such  as  had  the  banquets  ot
Penelope's  wastrel  suitors  or  of  the  sleek  and  scented
youth  about  Alcinoiis.^  Yet  will  I  tell  o'er  the  tale^
following  report  and  testimony  according  to  the  tastes
of  men  ever  diverse  in  judgment.

1^  Howbeit,  for  me  the  choicest  above  all  are  those
bred  by  the  Ocean  of  the  Meduli,'^  which,  named
after  Bordeaux,  high  esteem  hath  raised  even  to
Caesar's  board,  no  less  renowned  than  are  our  famous
wines.  These  amongst  all  have  won  the  pride  of
place,  the  rest  lagging  far  behind :  these  be  of  sub-
stance both  full  fat  and  snowy  white,  and  with  their
sweet  juice  most  delicately  mingle  some  flavour  ot
the  sea  touched  with  a  fine  taste  of  salt.  Next,
though  next  at  distance  of  long  interval,  are  the
oysters  of  Marseilles,  which  Narbo  feeds  near  Venus'
haven  ;  ^  and  those  which,  untended,  the  Hellespon-
tine  wave  shelters  at  Abydos;  or  those  which  cling
afloat  to  the  piles  of  Baiae  ;  those  washed  by  the
Santonic  surge ;  those  known  to  the  Genoni ;  or
those  harboured  by  Ebora's  ^  stream  where  it  joins
the  sea,  so  that  they  lie  covered  with  a  deep  bed  of
weed  :  rough  of  shell  are  these,  and  sweet  and  rich
of  meat.

2^  There  are,  too,  such  as  praise  the  oysters  of  the
Armoric  deep,  and  those  which  shoremen  gather  on
Pictonic  coasts,  and  which  the  tide  sometimes  leaves
bare  for the wondering Caledonian.'^ Add those

^  The  people  of  Medoc.  *  Port  Vendres.

^  Ebora  (or  Libertas  lulia),  on  the  Guadalquivir.
^  cp.  Mo,sella. 68  ff. The reference  is no doubt  to  Ihe
pearl-oj'sters  of  Britain,  on  which  see  Tacitus,  Agric.  xii.

15


AUSONIUS

acceduiit,  quae  fania  recens  Bj^zantia  subter

litora  et  insnna  generata  Propontidis  acta

promoti  celebrata  ducis  de  nomine  laudat.  +0

Haec  tibi  non  vates,  non  histoiious  neque  toto
orbe  vagus  conviva  loquor.  set  tradita  niultis,
ut  solitum,  quotiens  dextrae  invitatio  niensae
sollicitat  lenem  comi  sermone  Lyaeum.
haec  non  per  valgum  inihi  cognita  percjue  popinas 4  5
aut  parasitorum  collegia  Plautinorum,
set  festos  quia  saepe  dies  partim  ipse  nieoruni
excolui  inque  vicem  conviva  vocatus  adivi,
natalis  si  forte  fait  sollemnis  amico
coniugiove  dapes  aut  sacra  repotia  patruni,  ■')()

audivi  memiiiique  bonos  landare  frequentes.

^'I. — I.wriA'no AD Paui  I  M

Si  qua  tides  I'alsis  umquani  est  adhibenda  poetis

nee  plasma  semper  adlinunt^
Paule,  Camenarum  celeberrime  Castaliaruni

alumne  quondam,  nunc  jiater,
aut  avus,  aut  proavis  antiquior,  ut  fuit  olini  D

Tartesiorum  regulus  :
intemerata  tibi  maneant  promissa,  memento.

Phoebus  iubet  varum  loqui :

'  An  officer  of  Tlieodosius  I.  who  defeated  the  (iruthungi
on  the  Danube  in  3S6,  served  against  Maxinms  in  388,  and
was  consul  in  389. He  was  assassinated  c.  391  a.d.

'■^  The  meaning  is  :  I  have  gained  my  knowledge  partlj"  at
feasts  given  l)y  myself  and  pavtl}'  at  those  to  which  I  have
been  invited.

i6


THE EPISTLES

which,  reared  below  ByzaDtium's  shores  and  the
vexed  beaches  of  Propontis,  late-born  renown  now
honours  with  distinction  after  the  name  of  Promotus
the  general.^

^1  These  I  tell  thee,  no  bard,  no  historian,  nor  yet  a
world-wandering  gourmand,  but  things  I  have  heard
from  many,  as  wont  is,  whenever  a  challenge  from
a  table  on  the  right  provokes  gentle  Lyaeus  with
friendly  converse.  These  are  known  to  me  not  from
common  company  nor  from  taverns,  nor  from  the
guilds  of  Plautine  parasites,  but  because  I  myself
have  often  celebrated  festal  days,  sometimes  with
gatherings  of  my  friends,"  or  going  in  turn  to  ban-
quets as  a  bidden  guest,  when  perchance  a  friend
observed  a  birthday  or  a  marriage  feast,  or  a
carouse^  sanctioned  l)y  our  fathers'  custom  :  there
I  have  heard  many  a  worthy  man  praise  these,  and
I  remember  them.


VI. — An Invit.'vtion  to  Paui.us

If  any  trust  is  ever  to  be  placed  in  the  feigned
words  of  poets,  and  if  they  scrawl  not  ever  fiction,
Paulu.s — once  the  most  famous  child  of  the  Castalian
Camenae,  now  tlieir  father  or  grandfather  or  yet
more  ancient  than  a  great-grandfather,  as  was  of  old
the  kinglet  of  Tartessus  ^—remember  to  keep  your
promises inviolate. Phoebus bids us  speak  truth  :

^  Bepoti'i  were  drinking  bouts  held  on  the  day  after  any
festival.

*  sc.  Argantonius,  king  of  Tartcssus,  ^ho  reigned  eighty,
and  lived  one  hundred  and  twenty  years  (Hdt.  i.  163  :  cp.
Cicero,  de  S€7t.  69).  But  Silius  Itat.  (iii.  397)  makes  him  live
three  hundred  years,  and  observes:  "rex  proavis  fuit
liumani  ditissimus  aevi.'"

17


AUSONIUS

etsi  Pieriab  patiUir  lirare  sorores,

numquam  ipse  torquet  avAa«a.  10

te  quoque  ne  pigeat  consponsi  foederis :  et  iam

citus  veni  remo  aut  rota,
aequoris  undosi  qua  multiplicata  recursu

Garunina  pontum  provocat,
aut  iterataruni  qua  glarea  trita  viarum  15

fert  militarem  ad  Blaviam.
iios  etenim  primis  sanctum  post  Pascha  diebus

avemus  agrum  visere.
Nam  populi  coetus  et  compita  sordida  rixis

fastidientes  cernimus  20

angustas  fervere  vias  et  eongrege  volgo

nomen  plateas  perdere.
turbida  congestis  referitur  vocibus  echo  :

"  Tene,  feri,  due,  da,  cave  !  "
sus  lutulenta  fugit,  rabidus  canis  impete  saevo 25

et  impares  plaustro  boves.
nee  prodest  penetrale  domus  et  operta  subire  :

per  tecta  clamores  meant,
liaec  et  quae  possunt  placidos  offendere  mores,

cogunt  relinqui  moenia,  30

dulcia  secreti  repetantur  ut  otia  ruris,

nugis  amoena  seriis  ;
tempora  disponas  ubi  tu  tua  iusque  tuum  sit,

ut  nil  agas  vel  quod  voles,
ad  quae  si  properas,  tota  cum  merce  tuarum  35

veni  Camenarum  citus :
dactylicos,  elegos,  choriambum  carmen,  epodos,

socci  et  coturni  musicam

^  cp.  Ordo  Urh.  Nob.  xx.  15,  where  however  Ausonius
contradicts  this  reflexion  on  the  "broadways"'  of  Bordeaux.

-  Horace,  Epist.  it.  ii.  7") :  Iiac  rahiosa  fugit  eanis,  hao
hitiilenta  riiit  sus.


THE EPISTLES

altliough  he  suffers  the  Pierian  sisters  to  swerve
from  the  line,  he  himself  never  twists  a  furrow.
You  also  must  not  regret  your  plighted  bond ;  come
quickly  now  by  river  or  by  road,  either  where  Ga-
ronne, swelled  with  the  flood-tide  of  the  billowy
deep,  challenges  the  main,  or  whei'e  the  beaten
gravel  of  the  relaid  road  leads  to  the  garrison  of
Blaye.  For  in  the  first  days  after  holy  Easter  I
long  to  visit  my  estate.

1^  For  I  am  weary  at  the  sight  of  throngs  of  people,
the  vulgar  l)rawls  at  the  cross-roads,  the  narrow  lanes
a-swarm,  and  the  broadways  belying  their  name  ^  for
the  rabble  herded  there.  Confused  Echo  resounds
with  a  babel  of  cries:  "Hold!" — "Strike!" — -"Lead!"
— "  Give  !  " — "  Look  out !  "  Here  is  a  mucky  sow  in
flight,  there  a  mad  dog  in  fell  career,^  there  oxen
too  weak  for  the  waggon.  No  use  to  steal  into  the
inner  chamber  and  the  recesses  of  your  home  :  the
cries  penetrate  through  the  house. ^  These,  and  what
else  can  shock  the  orderly,  force  me  to  leave  the
walled  city  and  seek  again  the  sweet  peace  of  the
retired  country  and  the  delights  of  trifling  seriously  ;
and  there  you  may  arrange  your  own  hours  and  have
the  right  to  do  nothing  or  else  what  you  will.  If
you  haste  after  these  joys,  come  quickly  with  all  the
wares  of  your  Camenae  :*  dactyls,  elegiacs,  choriam-
bics,  lyrics,  comedy  and  tragedy — pack  them  all  in


°  Lucr.  de  Rerum  Nat.  i.  354  :  inter  saepta  meant  voces  et
clausa  domorum  Transvolitant.

*  Horace,  Od.  iv.  xii.  21  :  ad  quae  si  properas  gaudia  cum
lua  velox  merce  veni.

J9


AUSONIUS

carpentis  impoue  tuis  :  )iam  tota  supellex

vatum  pioruni  chartea  est.  -HJ

nobiscum  invenies  kut'  evavrta,  si  libet  uti
lion  Poena  ^  sed  Gvaeca  fide.

VII. — Hkscriptum P.^i'LO  Suo

Versus  meos  utili  et  conscio  sibi  pudore  celatos
carmine  tuo  et  sermone  praemissis  duui  putas  elici,
repi'essisti.  nam  qui  ipse  facundus  et  musicus  editi-
onis  alienae  prolectat  audaciam,  consilio,  quo  suadet,
exterret.  tegat  oportet  auditoi*  doctrinam  suam,  qui
volet  ad  dicendum  sollicitare  trepidantem,  nee  eme-
rita  adversum  tirunculos  arma  concutiat  vetei-ana
calliditas.  sensit  hoc  Venus  de  pulchritudinis  palnia
diu  ambiguo  ampliatu  iudicio.  pudenter  enini  ut
apud  patrem  velata  certaverat  nee  deterrebat  aemu-
las  ornatus  aequalis  ;  at  postquani  in  pastoi'is  ex-
amen  deducta  est  lis  dearum,  qualis  emerserat  mari
aut  cum  Marte  convenerat^  et  consternavit  arbitrum
et  contendentium  certanien  oppressit.  ergo  nisi  De-
lirus  tuus  in  re  tenui  non  tenuitcr  laboratus  opuscula
mea,  quae  promi  studueras,  retardasset,  iam  duduni
ego  ut  jialmes  audacior  in  hibernas  adhuc  auras  im-
probum germen egissem, periculum iudicii gravis

^ T  (poema, Al :  penna,  rji.  princ):  irpoiKa.  Feiper  (a,iter
Weil.).


'  Plaut.  Asin.  199  :  cetera  quae  volumus  uti,  Graeca  nier-
camur  fide — i.e.  for  ca.sh  down.  The  meaning  is :  I  will
repay  you,  not  witli  vague  (Punic)  promises,  l)ut  poem  for
poem.


THE EPISTLES

your  carriage,  for  the  devout  poet's  baggage  is  all
paper.  With  me  you  will  find  a  qiiid  pro  quo  if  you
please  to  trade  on  Greek,'  not  Punic,  terms.


VII. — A Kki*i.\ lo Ills  Friend  Paulus

As  for  my  verses,  which  a  salutary  and  self-con-
scious sense  of  shame  had  sent  into  hiding,  while  you
thought  you  were  enticing  them  forth  by  sending
forward  your  own  poetry  and  prose,  you  have  di*iven
them  back.  For  when  one  who  is  himself  eloquent
and  a  poet  tries  to  lure  an  author  to  venture  on  publi-
cation, he  frightens  the  other  out  of  the  purpose  which
he  advocates.  A  listener  ought  to  conceal  his  own
skill  if  he  wishes  to  induce  a  nervous  orator  to  speak,
and  a  practised  veteran  should  not  brandish  in  the
face  of  mere  recruits  weapons  he  has  wielded  through
a  full  term  of  service.  Venus  understood  this  in  the
matter  of  the  prize  for  beauty  so  long  withheld  for
lack  of  a  decisive  verdict.  For  it  was  modestly
arrayed,  when  in  the  presence  of  her  father,  that  she
had  contended,  and  her  similar  adornment  did  not
discourage  her  rivals  ;  but  when  the  suit  of  the  god-
desses was  brought  down  for  a  shepherd's  decision,
she  appeared  as  when  she  had  risen  from  the  sea
or  had  met  with  Mars,  both  overwhelming  the  judge
and  crushing  her  competitors*  rivalry.  And  so,  had
not  your  Crazi/  Man,  slight  in  theme  though  not  in
finish,^  checked  my  poor  little  works  which  you  were
eager  to  have  brought  out  to  light,  I  should  long-
since,  like  a  too  venturesome  shoot,  have  put  forth
an  impudent  bud  in  the  still  wintry  air,  only  to  run

-  cp.  Virgil,  Oeorgics,  iv.  H.


AUSONIUS

inconsulta  festinatione  subiturus.  denique  pisonem^
quem  tollenonem  existimo  proprie  a  philologis  ap-
pellatum,  adhibere,  ut  iubebas,  recenti  versuuiu
tuoriim  lectione  non  ausus,  ea  quae  tibi  iam  cursim
fuerant  recitata,  transinisi.  etenim  hoc  poposcisti
atque  id  ego  maluij  tu  ut  tua  culpa  ad  eundem
lapidem  bis  ofFenderes,  ego  auteni,  quaecumque
fortuna  esset, semel  erubescereni.

Vide,  mi  Paule,  quani  inej)tum  laccssieris  in  verbis
rudem,  in  eloquendo  hiulcuni^  a  pvopositis  discre-
pantenij  in  versibus  concinnationis  expertem^  in  ca-
villando  nee  natura  venustum  nee  arte  conditum,
diluti  salis^  fellis  ignavi,  nee  de  niimo  planipedem
nee  de  comoediis  histrionem.  ac  nisi  liaec  a  nobis
missa  ipse  lecturus  esses,  etiam  de  pronuntiatione
rideres.  nunc  coinmodiore  fato  sunt,  quod,  licet
apud  nos  genuina,  aput  te  erunt  adoptiva.

Vinum  ^  cuni  biiugo  parabo  plaustru
primo  tempore  Santonos  vehendum,
ovum  tu  quoque  -  passeris  marini,
quod  nunc  promus  ait  procul  relictum
in  fundo  patriae  Bigerritanae,


^  Ho  T :  viium.  Pciper  and  other  MSS.
^  So  if :  coqiie,  Scaliger,  Feiper.

^  A  beam  working  on  a  pivot,  bj-  which  a  cage  full  of
men  was  raised  to  the  height  of  the  enemy's  walls  in  a  siege.
Ausonius  suggests  that  to  send  his  complete  collection
would  be  like  emploj'ing  such  an  engine— like  our  "heavy
artillery."


THE EPISTLES

the  risk  of  heavy  censure  for  my  ill-advised  haste.
In  short,  to  bring  into  play,  as  you  bade  me,  the
"  swipe  "  ^ — which,  I  fancy,  is  correctly  termed  by
scholars  a  "  swing-beam  ' — I  did  not  dare  after  lately
reading  your  verses ;  but  I  send  you  those  pieces
which  have  already  been  hurriedly  recited  to  you.
For  indeed  this  you  demand  and  I  prefer ;  so  that
you,  through  your  own  fault,  may  stumble  twice
over  the  same  stone,  while  I,  whate'er  befall,  may
blush  but  once.

See,  my  dear  Paulus,  what  a  sorry  poet  you  have
provoked ! — in  wording  harsh,  in  utterance  halting,
wandering  from  his  points,  in  versifying  without  ele-
gance, in  satire  without  natural  grace  or  spice  of
art,  watery  in  wit,  sluggish  in  spleen,  no  true  per-
former in  mime,2  no  actor  in  comedy.  And  were
not  you  yourself  to  read  these  pieces  I  send,  you
would  laugh  at  my  delivery  also.  As  it  is,  theirs  is
a  more  kindly  destiny,  because  though  begotten  by
me  they  will  be  adopted  by  you.

So  soon  as  I  shall  get  wine  carried  to  Saintes  by
two-horse  cart,  do  you  also  get  your  cup  of  ostrich-
shell  which  your  steward  says  was  left  on  your  fami
far  away  in  your  native  Bigorre,^


-  In  miine  neither  slipper  (as  in  comedy)  nor  buskin  (as
in  tragedy)  was  worn.

^  In  the  Di^pt.  des  Hautes  Pyr^n^es.  The  meaning  of
the  verses  is  (apparently)  that  Ausonius  is  to  get  in  a  cart-
load of  wine,  while  Paulus  is  to  come  with  a  large  cup
made  from  an  ostrich's  ("sea  sparrow's")  shell  to  help
to  drink  it  up.


23


AUSONIUS

\'lll.— AY20iM02 UAYAiil

'EA,\a6iKi}s  /u,eTo^ov  fxova-ijs Latiaeque  fainenaf
'A^Lov  Auo-ovios  serinone  adludo  bilingui.

Musae,  quid  tacinms .' tl  Kd'alatv  i(j> kkiriiiii'  atVuis
ludinius  d<f>puSir]aiv  iv  r^ixan  yqpd(jKovTf.<i ;
iavTOVtKots  Ka/XTTOicnv,  ottol  Kpios  a^evov  earTLi;  'J

erramus  gelidorpo/xepot  koX  frigdopoetae,
flicpiSwr  T€vipoTrXoKu.fxwv  ^epuTroi'res  inertcs.
TrdvTa  8'  e;^€i  Trayerds  T€  pedum  Kat  KpovcrfW<s  666vt<.ov,
OaXiTixiprj  quia  nulla  cftoKov  ^to^ooSet  -^ioprj,
et  duplicant  frigus  \pvxp(>-  cax'mina  yu.?;ridoJvres.  10

dp^d/Acvos  8 apa  /at^vI  veo)  lavop  re  calendai?
primitias  Paulo  iiostrae  ■7r€p.\!ji»fjLf.v  uot8^?.

Mi'/z/xocriVi/s  Kpi]oep.voK6fj.ov  —oXt'cantica  nKva,
(vvea  verbosae  Kpivvo(rr(.(^avoL  re  puellae,
evd dye  jxoi  iroX^'risa  ctt;^,  cr/covpciSea  /xoXttt^i',  1  5

frontibus  u/xcrcpats  Trrepiyov  pi'aeferte  triumphuui —
u/aSs  ytip  KaXeo)  crKutos  AtovutrorroiJ/riys —
ITavAci)  €(f)apfJiO(T(TaiTe  /xeiJ.Ly/x€vo(3dp/3apov  ioSrjV.
ov  yap  p,oi  ^ep,ts  ecrriv  in  hac  regione  jUvovti

A^LOV  ab  nostris  eTrioei'tu  tiie  KaixyvaL<;-  -0

K€tvos  €/Aoi  TravTwi'  fxtToxo'i,  qui  seria  nostra,
qui  ioca  TravToSaTTT^  novit  tractare  trakaicrTpij.
KoX  vvv  sepositus  /Aora;^u»  evX  rare  Kpejihvov
dcTTa^i'Aco  €vt  ^(dipiii  habet  OvfiaXyea  AeVvfjr
oure  <f>i\ois  kTdpoi<i  nee  niensae  aecouiniodus  ulli. 25
otia  ^eX^tvdois  aeger  o-vfifie/xtfieTaL  Movaais-

'  No  attempt  can  liere  be  made  to  repiotiuce  this  macaronie
verse.

'^  "Alios  is  of  course  used  in  a  dtmblr  sense,  as  proper  uuiiie
and  epithet.

24


THE EPISTLES

VTII.— AusoNius  To  Paulus  ^

To  Axius.  worthy  -  participant  in  Hellenic  poesy
and  Roman  song,  I,  Ausonius,  send  playful  greeting
in  a  medley  of  the  two  tongues.

2  Muses,  what  do  we  ?  Wherefore  with  empty-
hopes  do  I  sport  idly,  heedless  of  growing  older  day
by  day  ?  O'er  the  Santonic  plains,  where  fi'ost  ac-
cords chill  welcome,  I  wander  shivering  with  cold,
a  frigid  bard  indeed,  a  servant  unemplo3'ed  of  the
soft-tressed  Pierides.  Cold  feet  and  chattering  of
teeth  are  each  man's  lot,  because  no  hearth  gives
warmth  in  this  snowy  country,  and  men  redouble
all  the  cold  with  meditating  their  frigid  verse.  Yet
even  so,  at  the  beginning  of  the  new  month  and  on
the  first  of  Januarv  let  me  send  to  Paulus  the  first-
fruits  of  my  song.

^2  Ye  songful  children  of  Mnemosyne  with  tresses
coiffed,  nine  wordy  maids  with  locks  begarlanded,
come  now  with  chant  ridiculous  and  macaronic  -^  lay,
wear  winged  triumph  on  your  brows — for  'tis  on  you
I  call,  a  clumsy  bottle-bard — compose  for  Paulus
some  mixed  barbarian  strain  I  For  I  may  not,  albeit
tarrying  in  these  parts,  leave  worthy  Axius  lacking
my  poesy.  He  shareth  all  with  me,  and  knoweth
all  sorts  of  tricks  for  wrestling  with  my  serious  and
my  jesting  verse.  And  now  retired  in  the  lonely
country  of  Crebennus  he  hath  his  heart-vexing
dwelling  in  a  grapeless  land,  remote  alike  from  his
dear  friends  and  from  all  dinner-tables.  There,  sick
at  heart,  he  chides  the  heart-soothing  Muses  for  his
loneliness.

•'  —  Lat.  .■iciirrili!',  fi'oiri  Hcarra,  a  daudy,  fop,  macaroni  or
l>uffooii.


AUSONIUS

lam  satis^  o  ^tAe  IlaCAe,  ttovov  air ^ir^LprjSrj^iv
£v  T€  foro)  causais  re  koI  ingratatcri  Ka^e'Spais,
prjTopiKois  AovSoTcrt,  kol  IttXcto  oi'Scv  oveiap-
aW  ^Sr)  Ktivos  fxkv  uttus  iuvenalios  iS^jws  30

CKKc^uTai  yu,€/\eojv,  rpofxiprj  Se  TrdpeaTi.  senectus
Kttt  minus  in  sumptum  8a7ravas  levis  area  ministrat.
ou  yap  t)(€i  OTTaAaftvos  air/p  KouatcrTo')Sea  lucrov,
KAetviKos  ovTt  yepntv  )(pv(Te-)]v  ipyd^€T ajxoijiyjv.
aequaninius  quod  si  fueris  et  Travra  vel  au-civ  35

malueris,  \i]6r]  ttovov  eaatruL  rj^k  Trtvii]^.
Keh'o  Se  TrayKaAAto-Toi',  ut  omnibus  undique  Musis
crl'V  <3!)iaA7jque  oii'wque,  irewi'  avvoTrdovL  Moucrwv,
Ovfxov  aKi])(efxivov  solacia  blanda  reqriras.
hie  erit  et  fructus  A7;/x,r;Te'pos  dyXaoKapirov,  40

€v6a  ct'es  OaXepoi,  TroXv^^avhea  pocula  cvOa,
Kipvav  €L  K€  6eXoi<;  veKrap  ovlvoio  jSovoio.
anibo  igitur  nostrae  irapaOeX^ofx^v  otia  vitae,

dum  res  et  aetas  et  sororum

i'r;/xaTa  7rop<f}vp€a  TrXiKrjTai.  45

IX.— AY20NI02  nAYAfil

PoilMaiwv  uTTttTos  dpeTaAoyo)  rjoe  TroirjTfj,
Aicrovios  UavXto' cnrevSe  cfiiXovs  ISeav.

X

Aequoream  liqui  te  propter,  amice,  Garumnani.

te  propter  campos  incolo  Santonicos  ;
congressus  igitur  nostros  pete, si  tibi  cura.

quae  mihi,  conspectu  iam  potiere  meo.

^ =  Lat.  quaestwiux,  since  official  payments  were  made  by
tlie  (juaestor.

26


THE EPISTLES

-'^  Enough  experience  have  I  had  of  toil  ere  now,
friend  Paulus,  both  as  a  pleader  in  the  courts  and
in  the  thankless  professorial  chair  at  Schools  of
Rhetoric,  and  got  therefrom  no  profit.  But  now
has  all  that  youthful  energy  oozed  from  these  limbs,
trembling  old  age  is  nigh,  and  my  strong-box  grown
light  furnishes  means  for  outlay  less  readily.  For
the  helpless  draws  no  salary  from  the  Exchequer,^
and  the  bed-ridden  dotard  earns  no  golden  fees.
Yet  if  only  thou  Avilt  i)e  of  unruffled  mind  and
rather  see  good  in  everything,  thy  toil  and  po\  ert}"
will  find  oblivion.  But  this  is  the  very  best  of  all,
from  all  the  Muses  everywhere — not  without  bowl
and  wine,  comrade  of  the  true  Muses — to  seek  sooth-
ing consolation  for  a  troubled  heart.  Here  shalt  thou
find  the  fruit  of  Demeter,  rich  in  crops,  here  fat
swine,  here  capacious  goblets  if  thou  wouldst  mix
the  nectar  of  good  wine.  So  shall  we  twain  cheer
the  blank  hours  of  our  life,  so  long  as  means  and
age  allow  and  the  Three  Sisters  spin  their  purple
thread."

IX. — AusoNius  TO Paui.us

AusoNius,  consul  of  the  Romans,  to  Paulus,  poet
and  declaimer  :  ^  haste  to  see  thy  friends.

X

For  thee  1  left  the  flood  of  the  Garonne,  for  thee
I  dwell  amid  the  plains  of  Saintes ;  our  meeting,
therefore,  be  thy  aim !  If  thou  art  eager  as  1,  full
soon  wilt  thou  enjoy  the sight  of  me. But  make

-  cp.  Horace,  Od.  ii.  iii.  15  f.  :  dum  resetaetas  et  sororum
Fila  trium  patiuntur  atra.

■*  Primarily  one  who  vaunts  his  good  i|ualities,  and  so  by
transitions  a  declaimer,  a  rhetorician.

27


AUSONIUS

sed  tantiuii  ad})ropfra,  quantum  pote  corpore  et  aevo;

ut  salvum  videam,  sat  cito  te  video.  6

si  post  infaustas  vigor  integratus  habenas

et  rediit  menibris  iam  sua  iiiobilitas,
si  riguain  laetis  recolis  Pipleida  Musis,

iam  vates  et  nun  flagrifer  Automedoii.  10

pelle  soporiferi  senium  nubem(pie  veterni

atque  alacri  mediam  carpe  vigore  viani.
sed  cisium  aut  pigrum  cautus  conscende  veraedum  :

non  tibi  sit  raedae,  non  amor  acris  equi.
cantheris  moneo  male  nota  petorrita  vites,  1 5

ne  celeres  mulas  ipse  Metiscus  agas.
sic  tibi  sint  Musae  faciles,  meditatio  prompta

et  memor,  et  liquidi  mel  fluat  eloquii :
sic,  qui  venalis  tarn  longa  aetate  Crebennuh

non  habet  emptorem,  sit  tibi  pro  pretio.  20

Attamen  ut  citius  venias  leviusque  vehare,

historiam,  mimos,  earmina  linque  domi.
grande  onus  in  musis :  tot  saecula  condita  cliartis.

quae  sua  vix  tolerant  tempora,  nostra  gravant.
nobiscum  invenies  eTrt'wv  7roXvfxop(f)iu  ttXtjOvv,  '2o

ypufJiixaTLKMV  T€  TrXoKus  KoX  XoyoZaiiaXirfv,
haKTvXov  Yjpwoi'  Kut  doL^OTToXiov  )^opiafxfSov,

tTVv  @aXir]<;  kc6/xw  crvpfX-UTa  T€p\}/L\6pr)<;,

(XCOTaSlKOV  T«  KLVatSoV, ioil'lKOV  aiJ.(fiOTdp(JiOiV,

pvOj-Lwy  TlLvSapLKwv  ivvo/xov  iveTrirjv.  30

'  A  fountain  in  Pieria,  sacred  to  the  Muses
-  Tile  cliaiioLecr  of  Acliilles  :  cp.  Virgil,  Atu.  li.  476  f.
•'  This  is  usually  described  as  a  four-wheeled  ear,  hut  it
was  evidently  somewhat  dangerous.


THE EPISTLES

such  haste  as  thy  strength  and  yeai's  permit ;  so  that
I  see  thee  safe,  I  see  thee  soon  enough.  If  after
that  unlucky  drive  thy  powers  are  restored,  and  if
thy  limbs  have  now  regained  their  wonted  pliancy,
if  to  the  Muses'  joy  thou  dost  again  frequent  well-
watered  Pimpla,!  a  bard  once  more  and  no  scorching
Automedon,2  banish  the  clouds  of  eld  which  haunt
a  drowsy  greybeard,  briskly  devour  the  intervening
road.  But  be  heedful,  mounting  some  chaise  or  slow
j)Ost-horse :  let  no  dog-cart  ^  tempt  thee,  no  high-
mettled  steed.  I  counsel  thee  avoid  four-wheeled
cars  ■*  with  their  notorious  geldings,  drive  no  swift
mules  thyself  to  play  Metiscus.''  So  be  the  Muses
gracious  to  thee,  thy  conception  ready,  thy  memory
sound,  and  free  thy  flow  of  melting  honey :  so  may
Crebennus,  so  long  for  sale  without  a  purchaser,  be
thine  for  a  reward.

-1  But  that  thou  mayest  come  more  quickly,  travel-
ling the  lighter,  leave  histories,  mimes,  and  h'rics  all
at  home.  Muses  make  heavy  baggage  :  those  books
stored  with  so  manj'  centuries,  which  scarce  endure
their  own  ages,  are  crushed  by  ours.  With  me  thou
wilt  find  a  motley  throng  of  epics,  grammarians'
subtilties  and  niceties  of  speech,  the  heroic  dactyl
and  the  lyrist's  choriambus,  Thaleia's  comedj'  beside
Terpsichore's  tragic  train,  Sotades'  ^  wanton  verse,
the  Ionic  of  both  kinds,'  the  ordered  sweetness  of

■•  See  note  on  E^yist.  iv.  .'>.  This  too  was  a  swift  and
dangerous  conveyance.

*  The  charioteer  of  Turnus  struck  down  by  .Juturna  :  see
Virgil,  Aen.  xii.  469  f.

*  Sotades  of  Crete,  notorious  for  his  wanton  poems  and  for
Sotadic  verse,  which  could  be  read  backwards  way.

^  i.e.  Ionic  a  maiore  and  a  minore.  But  since  Sotades
wi'ote  in  Ionic,  another  meaning  was  probaVtly  intended.

29


AUSONIUS

uXiiroBrjV  (TKii^ovTo.  xai  ow  o"/ca^ovTa  Tpi/xtrpoi',

OKTO)  ®ovKv8i8ov,  cvvea  'HpoSorov.
p-qropLKwv  Oa'qixa,  (to(^mv  ipiKV^ia  cfivXa,

irdvTa  jxdX oacr'  e^eXeis,  Kai  Trkeoi',  €i  k£  di\oi<;.
Hoc  tibi  de  nostris  dcnraaTiKoi'  offero  libris.  35

vale  ;  valere  si  voles  me,  iam  veni.


XI. — AusoNius  Tetradio  Sal.

O  QUI  vetustos  uberi  facundia

sales  opimas,  Tetradi,
cavesque,  ne  sit  tristis  et  dulci  careiis

amara  eoncinnatio ;
qui  felle  cai'men  atque  melle  temperans  ')

torpere  musas  non  sinis
pariterque  fucas,  quaeque  gustu  ignava  sunt,

et  quae  sapore  tristia ;
nides  camenas  qui  Suessae  praevenis

aevoque  cedis,  non  stilo  :  1 0

cur  me  pvopinquum  Santonorum  moenibus

declinas,  ut  Lucas  boves
olini  resumpto  praeferoces  proelio

fugit  iuventus  Romula.''
non  ut  tigris  te,  non  leonis  impetu,  15

amore  sed  caro  expeto.
videre  alumni  gestio  vultus  mei

et  indole  optata  frui.
invitus  olitn  devoravi  absentiae

necessilatem  pristinae,  20

quondam  docendi  munere  adstrictum  gravi

Iculisma  cum  te  absconderet,

'  The  scazon  was  an  iambic  trimeter  M'ith  a  spondee  or
trochee  in  the  sixth  foot,  causing  the  verse  to  limp  or  drag.

3°


THE EPISTLES

Pindaric  rhythms,  the  shambling  scazon  ^  and  the
unlimping  trimeter,  eight  books  of  Thucydides,  nine
of  Herodotus,  a  goodly  show  of  orators,  and  the
philosophers  in  glorious  tribes — all  that  thou  wouldst,
and  still  more  shouldst  thou  wish.

2^  This  word  of  greeting  I  send  thee  from  my
books.  Farewell ;  if  thou  wouldst  have  me  fare  well,
fare  hither  now.

XI. — AusoNius  TO  Tetradius,^  Greeting

O  THOU,  who  with  copious  eloquence  enrichest  our
ancient  stores  of  wit,  Teti-adius,  and  takest  heed
that  thy  tart  compositions  be  not  gloomy  and  bereft
of  sweetness ;  who,  blending  gall  and  honey  in  thy
verse,  sufFerest  not  thy  Muses  to  grow  dull,  and
flavourest  alike  what  is  insipid  to  the  taste  and  what
bitter  to  the  palate;  thou  who  outstrip'st  the  un-
polished Muses  of  Suessa,^  yielding  in  age  to  them
but  not  in  style  ;  why  dost  thou  shun  me,  neighbour
to  the  walls  of  Saintes,  as  of  old  the  Roman  youth
fled  from  the  Lucanian  oxen"*  who  renewed  the  battle
with  exceeding  fury?  Not  like  a  tiger,  not  with
lion's  spring,  but  in  fond  love  I  seek  thee  out.  I
3'earn  to  see  my  pupil's  countenance  and  to  enjoy
the  longed-for  fruits  of  his  mind.  Reluctant  hitlierto
I  have  gulped  down  the  necessity  which  parted  us
in  bygone  days  when  Iculisma^  kept  thee  hidden,
once fettered  with the  heavy  chains of teaching,

*  Otherwise  unknown.

^  Now  Sessa,  in  Campania ;  the  birthplace  of  Lucilius  the
satirist.

*  "  Lucanian  Oxen "  was  the  name  given  by  the  Romans
to  elephants  as  first  seen  in  Lucania  in  the  army  of  Pj'rrhus.

°  Now  Angouleme.

31


AUSONIUS

et  iiividebam  devio  ac  solo  loco

opus  camenarum  tegi.
at  nunc  — frequentes  atque  clavos  nee  ])rocul 25

cum  floreas  inter  viros
tibique  nostras  ventus  auras  deferat

auresque  sei*nio  verberet —
cur  me  supino  pectoris  fastu  tumens

spernis  poetam  consulenij  ?iO

tuique  amantem  teque  iiiirantein  ac  tua

desiderantem  carmina
oblitus  alto  neglegis  fastidio  ?

plectendus  exemplo  tuo,
ni  stabilis  aevo  pectoris  nostri  fides  35

quamquam  recusantes  amet.
Vale, valere  si  voles  me,  pervola

cum  serinio  et  musis  tuis.

XII. — -AusoNius  Probo Praefecto Praetorio  S.

Oblata  per  antiquarios  mora  scio  promissi  mei
gratiam  expectatione  consumptam,  Probe,  vir  op-
time  ;  in  secundis  tamen  habeo  non  fefellisse.  apo-
logos  Titiani  et  Nepotis  chronica  quasi  alios  apologos
(nam  et  ipsa  instar  sunt  fabularum)  ad  nobilitatem
tuam  misi,  gaudens  atque  etiam  glorians  fore  ali-
quid,  quod  ad  institutionem  tuorum  sedulitatis  meae
studio  conferatur.

Libello  tamen  apologorum  autetuli  paucos  epodos,
studio in te observantiae meae impudentissimo,

'  Sextu-s  Petrouius  Probus,  born  c.  .3.3i»  a.d. ,  was  proconsul
of  Africa  in  358,  consul  witli  Graliau  in  371.  Ammianus
Marcellinus  (xxvii.  ii.  1),  referring  to  liis  first  appointment
as  praetorian  prefect,  in  368,  speaks  of  his  immense  wealtli
but  equivocal  character  as  a  friend. He  died  r.  398  a.d.

*  Probably  Julius  Titianus,  tutor  of  Maximinus,  who  was
raised  to  the  consulate  {cp.  Gratiariim  Act.  vii.).

32


THE EPISTLES

and  I  would  grudge  that  in  so  remote  and  lonely  a
spot  the  Muses'  handiwork  was  concealed.  But  now
— seeing  thou  flourishest  amid  throngs  of  famous
men  and  not  far  hence,  where  the  wind  wafts  to
thee  my  renown  and  talk  of  me  rings  in  thine  ears —
why,  puffing  out  thy  chest  with  proud  disdain,  dost
thou  scorn  me,  a  poet-consul,  and  to  one  who  loves
thee,  admires  thee,  longs  to  enjoy  thy  verse,  for-
getfully show  neglect  and  proud  contempt?  Thou
shouldst  be  punished  after  thine  own  example,  did
not  the  loyalty  of  my  heai-t,  unmoved  by  time,  love
even  the  reluctant.

^'  Farewell. If  thou  wilt  my  welfare,  whirl  here
forthwith  with  writing-case  and  all  thy  Muses.


XII. — AusoNius  TO Probus,^ Praetorian
Prefect,  Greeting

After  the  delay  caused  by  the  copyists,  I  know
that  the  pleasure  caused  by  my  promise  has  been
outworn  by  hope  deferred,  most  noble  Probus  ;  yet
I  count  it  good  fortune  that  I  have  not  broken  my
word.  1'he  Fables  of  Titianus^  and  the  Chronicles
of  Nepos  3- — as  though  they  were  further  fables  ;  for
they,  too,  are  like  fairy  tales — I  now  send  your  ex-
cellency, glad,  nay  exultant,  that  there  will  be  some-
thing which  my  devotion  and  pains  can  contribute
towards  your  children's  education.

To  the  little  book  of  Fables,  however,  I  have,  in
the  zeal  of  my  respect  for  you,  taken  the  extreme
liberty  of  prefixing  a  few  verses — few  at  least  as  I

^  The  friend  and  contemporary  of  Cicero  and  Catullus
(celebrated  by  the  latter,  i.  5).  He  died  during  the  princi-
pate  of  Augustus  :  his  Chronicles  are  not  extant.

33

vol.. II.  D


AUSONIUS

paucos  quidem,  ut  ego  loquax  iudico ;  verum  tu,
cum  legeris,  etiam  niniiuni  multos  putabis.  adiuro
benevolentiain  tuain,  verecundiae  meae  testem,  eos
inihi  subita  persuasione  fluxisse.  nam  qiiis  hos  diu
cogitai-et?  quod  sane  ipsi  per  se  probabunt.  fors
fuat,  ut  si  mihi  vita  suppetet,  aliquid  rerum  tuarum
quamvis  incultus  expoliam :  quod  tu  etsi  lectum  non
probes,  scriptum  boni  consules.  cumque  ego  imi-
tatus  sim  vesaniam  Choerili,  tu  ignoscas  magnani-
mitate  Alexandri.

Hi  igitur,  ut  Plautus  ait,  interim  erunt  antelogium
fabularum,  garruli  et  deceptores.  qui  compositi
ad  honorificentiae  obsequium,  ad  auriuni  convicium
concurrerunt. vale  et  me  dilige.

Perge,  o  libel le,  Sirmium

et  die  ero  meo  ac  tuo

have  atque  salve  j)lurimum.

quis  iste  sit  nobis  erus,

nescis,  libelle  ? an,  cum  scias,  5

libenter  audis,  quod  iuvat  ?

posseni  absolute  dicere,

sed  dulcius  eircumloquar

diuque  fando  perfruar.

hunc  dico,  qui  lingua  potens  10

minorem  Atridam  praeterit

orando  pauca  et  musica  ;

qui  grandines  Clixei

et  mel  fluentem  Nestora

concinnat  ore  Tulli ;  15

qui  solus  exceptis  tribus


*  A  poet  who  sang  the  praises  of  Alexander  in  bad  verse
and  was  rewarded  in  good  coin  :  cp.  Horace,  Epist.  ii.  i.  232  f.,
Ars  Pott.  357.

34


THE EPISTLES

judge^  Avilo  am  a  man  of  words;  though  you,  when
you  have  read  them,  Mill  think  them  all  too  many.
I  solemnly  assure  3'our  good-natured  self,  who  can
vouch  for  my  honour,  that  I  gave  vent  to  them  on  a
sudden  impulse.  For  who  would  need  to  ponder
long  over  these  .''  This,  indeed,  the  verses  them-
selves will  confirm.  It  may  be  that,  if  I  live  long
enough,  I  will  fashion  out  some  work  on  your  career,
rude  craftsman  though  I  am  :  even  should  you  not
be  satisfied  with  the  reading  of  it,  you  will  take  the
writing  in  good  part.  And  since  I  have  copied
Choerilus  in  his  madness,  you  must  pardon  me  with
the  generosity  of  Alexander.'

These  verses  then  (to  use  Plautus'  word  -)  will  serve
meanwhile  as  "  Foreword  "  to  the  Fables,  wordy  and
treacherous  though  they  are.  Though  put  together
to  convey  my  dutiful  compliments  to  you,  they  liave
I'ushed  oft"  with  one  accord  to  oftend  your  ears.

Farewell,  and  give  me  3'our  good  regard.

Go  forth,  little  book,  to  Sirmium,  and  to  thy  lord
and  mine  bid  hearty  health  and  greeting.  Thou
knowest  not,  little  book,  who  is  that  our  lord  ?  Or
though  thou  knowest,  dost  thou  love  to  hear  what
delights  thee  ?  I  might  tell  thee  outright,  but  for
more  pleasure  I  will  talk  in  mazes  and  with  speech
drawn  out  get  full  enjoyment.  Him  I  mean  who,
full  eloquent,  outstrips  Atreus'  younger  son  ^  in
pleading  with  few  but  melodious  words ;  who  com-
bines Ulysses'  hail  and  Nestor's  honeyed  flow  with
Tully's utterance  ; who  is the  all-highest  save  the

^  See  Plautus,  Menaechmus,  Prol.  13  :  hoc  arguniento  ante-
logium  fuit.

^  cp.  Homer,  Iliad,  iii.  214,  2-22  ;  i.  248  f.  and  Pro//."  xxi.
21  ff.

35
D 2


AUSONIUS

eris  erorum  primus  est

praetorioque  maximus.

dico  hunc  senati  praesulem,

praefectum  eundeni  et  consulem  20

(nam  consul  aeternum  cluet

collega  Augusti  consulis),

columen  curulis  Romulae

primum  in  secundis  fascibus  ;

nam  primus  e  cunctis  erit  25

consul,  secundus  princi}M.

Generi  hie  superstes  aureo
satorque  prolis  aureae
convincit  Ascraeum  senem,
non  esse  saeclum  ferreum,  30

qui  viiicit  aevi  iniuriam
stirpis  novator  Anniae
paribusque  comit  infulis
Aniciorum  stemmata.

Probum  loquor  :  scis  optirae,  35

quern  nemo  fando  dixerit,
qui  non  prius  laudaverit.
perge,  o  libelle,  et  utere
felicitate  intermina.

Quin  et  require,  si  sinet  40

tenore  fari  obnoxio  :
"Age  vera  proles  Roniuli,
effare  causam  nominis.
utrumne  mores  hoe  tui
nomen  dedere,  an  nomen  hoc  45

secuta  morum  regula?
an  ille  venturi  sciens
nmndi  supremus  arbiter,
qualem  creavit  moribus,
iussit  vocari  nomine  ?  ''  50


36


THE EPISTLES

three  Lords  of  Lords,^  and  supreme  in  the  Prae-
torium.  Hmi  I  mean,  the  Senate's  chief,  prefect
likewise  and  consul  (for  as  consul  he  has  endless
fame  as  colleague  of  an  Emperor-consul),  prop  of
the  Roman  curule  chair — first,  though  his  authority
is  second  in  degree  ;  for  first  of  all  citizens  shall  he
be  as  consul,  but  second  to  the  Prince.

^"  He,  the  survivor  of  the  Golden  Race,  begetter
of  a  golden  progeny,  refutes  the  sage  of  Ascra,^
showing  this  is  no  Iron  Age,  since,  conquering  Time's
ravages,  he  renews  the  line  of  the  Annii  and  has
equal  right  to  deck  with  fillets  the  Anician  family-
tree.^

^^  Of  Probus  speak  I  :  thou  knowest  him  full  well
— whom  none  ever  named  in  speech  without  first
praising  him.*  Go  forth,  my  little  book,  there  to
enjoy  boundless  good  fortune.

'^^  And  ask  withal,  if  he  will  suff'er  thee  to  address
him  in  humble  tones:  ''Prithee,  true  son  of  Romulus,
declare  the  reason  of  thy  name.  Was  it  thy  conduct
earned  thee  this  name,  or  to  this  name  hath  thy  rule
of  conduct  conformed  ?  Or  of  his  fore-knowledge
did  the  supreme  Disposer  of  the  world  bid  thee  be
called  by  a  name  expressive  of  the  nature  with  which
he  created  thee  ?  "

^  i.e.  Valentinian,  Valciis,  and  (iratian.

^  sc.  Hesiod  :  see  W.  and  D.  176.

'  Sttmmala  could  oiil}'  be  decorated  with  wreaths  by
actual  members  of  the  fauiily :  Probus  was  such  by  mar-
riage with  Anicia  Fultoiiia  Proba.

*  i.e.  they  are  compelled  to  call  hiui  " />ro/yK»'''=" upright":
see  U.  43  flF.

37


AUSONIUS

Nomen  datum  pracconiis
vitaeque  testimonio.
libelle  felix,  quern  sinu
vir  tantus  evolvet  suo

nee  occupari  tempora  55

grato  queretur  otio,
quein  melleae  vocis  modis
leni  aut  susurro  impertiet,
cui  nigellae  luminum

vacare  dignabunt  corae,  60

queni  mente  et  aiire  consciis,
quibusdam  omissis^  perleget :

Quaecumque  fortuna  est  tibi,
perge,  o  libelle,  et  utere
felicitate  iutermina.  65

die  me  valere  et  vivere,
die  vivere  ex  voto  pio,
Sanctis  precantem  vocibus,
ut,  quern  curulis  proxima
collegio  nati  dedit,  70

hunc  rursus  Augustus  prior
suis  perennet  fascibus.
subnecte  et  illud  leniter  :
"  Apologos  en  misit  tibi
ab  usque  Rheni  limite  75

Ausonius,  nomen  Italum,
praeceptor  Augusti  tui,
Aesopiam  trimetriam,
quam  vertit  exili  stilo
pedestre  concinnans  opus  80

fandi  Titianus  artifex  ;
ut  hinc  avi  ac  patris  decus,
mixto  i-esurgens  sanguine,
probiano  itemque  Anicio,


38


THE EPISTLES

^1  The  name  was  given  in  his  praise  and  for  a
token  of  his  life.  Ah,  happy  little  book,  that  such
a  man  will  unroll  thee  on  his  knee  and  not  complain
that  thou  takest  up  the  hours  of  his  welcome  leisure ;
that  he  will  vouchsafe  thee  the  tones  of  his  honeyed
voice  or  his  soft  whispers ;  that  for  thee  the  dear
dark  pupils  of  his  eyes  will  deign  to  find  leisure  ;
that  with  mind  and  ear  in  unison  he  will  read  thee
through,  some  pages  skipped.

63  Whate'er  thy  fortune,  go  forth,  little  book,  and
enjoy  thy  boundless  happiness.  Say  that  I  fare
well  and  live,  say  that  I  live  as  I  devoutly  asked,
praying  with  hallowed  words  that,  as  the  last  consul-
ship made  him  colleague  of  the  son,  so  again  Au-
gustus the  sirei  will  renown  him  with  partnership
in  his  own  honours.  This  also  gently  add :  "  Lo,
from  the  very  borders  of  the  Rhine  Ausonius,  Italian
of  name,2  tutor  of  thy  belov'd  Augustus,  sends  thee
these  Fables,  by  Aesop  writ  in  trimeters,  but  ren-
dered in  simple  style  and  adapted  into  prose  by  Ti-
tianus,  artist  in  words ;  that  hereby  he  who  is  his
father's  and  grandfather's  pride,  sprung  from  the
mingled  strains  of  the Probi  and  Anicii — as  of  old

^  sc.  Valentinian  I.

^  ^M.^omM.s=  Italian,  as  in  Aen.  vii.  547.

39


AUSONIUS

ut  quondam  in  Albae  moenibus  85

su])remus  Aenea  satus

Silvios  lulis  miscuil:^

sic  iste,  qui  natus  tui,

flos  flosculorum  Romuli,

nutricis  inter  lemmata  90

lallique  somniferos  modos

suescat  peritus  fabulis

simul  et  iocari  et  discere."

His  adde  votum,  quod  pio
concepimus  rei  deo  :  95

"  Ut  genitor  Augustus  dedit
collegio  nati  Probum,
sic  Gratianus  hunc  novum
stirpi  futurae  copulet."
rata  sunt  futura,  quae  loquor  :  ]  00

sic  merita  factorum  iubent.

Set  iam  ut  loquatur  lulius,
fandi  inodum  invita  accipe,
volucripes  dimetria,
haveque  dicto  die  vale.  105

XIII.— Ad  Uksulum  Grammaticum  Trevirorum  cui
Strenas  Kalendis  Ianuariis  ab  Impkratore  non
datas reddi  fe(  it

Primus  iueundi  foret^  hie  tibi  fructus  honoris
Augustae  faustum  munus  habere  manus  :

proximus  ex  longo  gradus  est  quaestoris  amici
curam  pro  strenis  excubuisse  tuis.

'  So  MSS.  (Z):  fuat,  Toll:  fuit,  Avantius,  Feiper.

'  Silvias,  eon  of  Aeneas  by  Lavinia,  and  half-brother  and
successor  of  lulus  [cp.  Virgil,  Atn.  vi.  760  fif. ).
*  sc.  Julius  Titianus,  the  translator  of  the  Fablts.

40


THE EPISTLES

in  Alba  town  the  last  scion  of  Aeneas'  stock  united
the  lines  of  Silvius^  and  lulus — so  he  who  is  thy  off-
spring, flower  of  the  flowerlets  of  Rome,  amid  nurse's
tales  and  drowsy  strains  of  lullaby,  may  become  versed
in  fables,  growing  used  to  play  and  learn  at  the  same
time."

^^  Thereto  add  tliis  prayer  which  1,  though  sinful,
have  addressed  to  the  all-loving  God :  "  Even  as
Augustus  the  sire  hath  made  Probus  colleague  to
his  son,  so  may  Gratian  link  this  new  Probus  with
his  offspring  which  shall  be."  Fulfilled  hereafter
shall  be  the  words  I  speak :  the  worth  of  Probus'
deeds  demands  it  so.

'"-  But  now,  that  Julius  ^  may  speak,  though  all
unwilling  make  an  end  of  words,  swift  -  footed
dimeter,  and  having  said  "hail,"  say  now  "fare-
well ! "


XIII. — To  Ursulu.s,  a  Grammari.'\n  of  Treves,  to
whom  he  had  caused  to  be  paid  the  bounty  ^
which  had  not  been  given  to  him  by  the
Emperor  on  the  First  of  January

Fullest  enjoyment  of  a  sweet  distinction  for  thee
were  this — to  have  an  auspicious  gift  from  Imperial
hands  :  next — though  far  inferior  in  degree — that  thy
quaestor-friend  took  tireless  pains  to  gain  thy  New

*  Sty-enae  were  New  Year's  presents  given  for  the  sake  of
good  omen,  and  such  were  regularly  distributed  by  the
Emperors  :  see  Suetonius,  A  iig.  57,  Tib.  34.

41


AUSONIUS

ergo  interceptos  regale  nomisma  Philippos  5

accipe  tot  numero^  quot  duo  Geryones ;
quot  terni  biiuges  demptoque  triente  Camenae

quotque  super  terram  sidera  zodiaci ;
quot  commissa  viris  Romana  Albanaque  fata

quotque  doces  horis  quotque  domi  resides  ;  10

ostia  quot  pi'o  parte  aperit  stridentia  circus

excepto,  medium  quod  patet  ad  stadium  ;
quot  pedibus  gradiuntur  apes  et  versus  Homeri

quotque  horis  pelagus  profluit  aut  refluit ;
protulit  in  scaenam  quot  dramata  fabellarum^  15

Arcadiae  medio  qui  iacet  in  gremio,
vel  quot  iuncturas  geometrica  forma  favorum

conserit  extremis  omnibus  et  mediis  ;
quot  telios  primus  numerus  solusque  probatur ;

quot  par  atque  impar  partibus  aequiperat,  20

bis  ternos  et  ter  binos  qui  conserit  unus,

qui  solus  totidem  congeminatus  habet,
quot  faciunt  iuncti  subterque  supraque  locati ;

qui  numerant  Hyadas  Pleiadasque  simul.


^  cp.  Horace  Epid.  ii.  i.  234  :  rettulit  acceptos,  regale
nomisma,  Philippos.

*  sc.  the  Horatii  and  Curiatii,  who  fought  for  Rome  and
Alba  respectively  in  the  time  of  Tullus  Hostilius  :  see  Livy,
i.  24.

^  The  teaching  profession,  therefore,  enjoyed  a  six-hour
day.

*  The  circus  having  twelve  gates  in  all,  a  single  half  of  it
contained  seven  :  one  of  these  (the  gate  looking  along  the
spina)  has  to  be  omitted  from  the  count.

42


THE EPISTLES

Year's  bounty.  Therefore  of  royal  coinage,  of  Phi-
lippes  d'or^  waylaid  by  me  receive  as  many  as  two
Geryons  ;  as  three  pair  of  horses,  or  as  the  Muses  less
one-third  their  band,  or  as  those  stars  of  the  Zodiac
that  are  above  the  earth  ;  as  many  as  the  heroes  to
whom  were  committed  the  destinies  of  Rome  and
Alba,-  or  as  the  hours  wherein  thou  dost  teach  ^  or
wherein  thou  dost  rest  at  home  ;  as  many  as  the  jarring
gates  which  open  on  one  half  of  the  circus,  except-
ing that  which  looks  along  the  axis  of  the  course ;  "*
as  many  as  the  feet  whereon  bees  and  Homer's  verses
move,  or  as  the  hours  of  the  tide's  flow  and  ebb  ;
as  many  as  the  dramatic  plots  put  on  the  stage  by
him  who  rests  in  the  midst  of  Arcadia's  bosom,^  or
as  the  angles  which  the  geometric  figure  of  the
honey-cell  forms  by  the  meeting  of  its  extreme  and
intervening  sides ;  "^  as  many  as  that  which  is  ap-
proved the  one  and  only  perfect  number  ; '  as  that
which  consists  equally  of  odd  and  even  numbers,
which  alone  unites  in  itself  twice  three  and  thrice
two — the  only  number  which,  if  doubled,  contains
as  many  units  as  the  numbers  ^  above  it  and  below
when  added  contain,  and  as  the  joint  total  of  the
Hyades  and  Pleiades.^

^  Terence,  who  is  said  to  have  died  at  Stymphalus  in
Arcadia.

**  In  ])lan  the  hexagonal  honeycomb  appears  to  have  two
perpendicular  (or  "  middle ")  sides  and  two  pair  of  con-
verging (or  "extreme")  sides  which  connect  the  "middle"

sides  at  top  and  bottom,  thus  : | |  .

\/

'  fsc.  six,  as  the  first  compound  of  odd  and  even  factor
(2  X  3,  or  1  -I-  2  -I-  3).

^  sc.  5  and  7.

'  The  Hyades  are  five,  the  Pleiades  seven  in  number.

43


AUSONIUS

[Tot  numero  auratos  pro  strenis  accipe  nummos  ^]  25

Ursule  coUega  nobilis  Harmonio,
Harmonic,  quem  Claranus,  quern  Scaurus  et  Asper,

quern  sibi  conferret  Varro  priorque  Crates
quique  sacri  lacerum  collegit  corpus  Homeri

quique  notas  spuriis  versibus  adposuit :  30

Cecropiae  commune  decus  Latiaeque  camenae,

solus  qui  Cliium  miscet  et  Ammineum.

XIV. — AusoNius  Theoni

AusoNius,  cuius  ferulam  nunc  sceptra  verentur,
paganum  Medulis  iubeo  salvere  Theonem.

Quid  geris  extremis  positus  telluris  in  oris,
cultor  harenarum  vates,  cui  litus  arandum
oceani  finem  iuxta  solemque  cadentem,  5

vilis  harundineis  cohibet  quem  pergula  tectis
et  tinguit  piceo  lacrimosa  colonica  fumo  ?
quid  rerum  Musaeque  gerunt  et  cantor  Apollo —
Musae  non  Helicone  satae  nee  fonte  caballi,
set  quae  facundo  de  pectore  Clementini  10

inspirant  vacuos  aliena  mente  poetas  ?
iure  quidem  :  nam  quis  malit  sua  carmina  dici,
qui  te  securo  possit  proscindere  risu  ?
^  Suppl.  Translator.

^  See  Martial,  Ep.  x.  xxi.  1  f.

-  See  notes  on  Praef.  i.  20.

'  Crates  of  M alius  in  Cilicia,  founder  of  the  Pergamene
school  of  critics,  and  rival  of  Aristarchus.

■*  Zenodotus,  to  wliom  is  here  attributed  tlie  work  with
which  Pisistratus  is  traditionalh-  credited.  On  this  subject  see
Pausanias,  vii.  xxvi.  6,  and  Monro,  Ody>>!'fy,  XIII. -XXIV.
pp.  403  f .

44


THE EPISTLES

25  So  many  sovereigns  take  as  thy  New  Year's
gift,  Ursulas,  famed  as  colleague  of  Harmonius —
Harmonius,  whom  Claranus/  whom  Scaurus  and
Asper,2  whom  Varro  would  rank  as  his  equal,  or
Crates^  in  earlier  days,  or  he  who  gathered  the
mangled  limbs  of  sacred  Homer ;  *  or  who  placed
symbols  to  mark  out  spurious  verses  :  ^  Harmonius,
glory  alike  of  the  Attic  and  the  Latin  Muse,  who
alone  dost  mingle  wine  of  Chios  and  Aminaea/'

XI V^. — AusoNius  TO  Theon

AusoNius,  whose  rod  now  overawes  a  sceptre,  sends
greeting  to  rustic  Theon  at  Medoc.

3  What  dost  thou,  dwelling  on  earth's  farthest
verge,  poetic  tiller  of  the  sands,  who  must  plough
the  shore  next  Ocean's  border  and  the  setting  sun,
whom  a  poor  hovel,  thatched  with  reeds,  confines,
and  a  peasant's  hut  smothers  with  sooty  smoke  that
brings  tears  to  the  eyes?  What  can  the  Muses  be
doing,  and  songster  Apollo — Muses  not  sprung  from
Helicon  nor  from  the  Horse'sSpring,''  but  those  which,
springing  from  Clementinus'  eloquent  breast,  inspire
empty-headed  bards  with  borrowed  thoughts  ?  And
rightly  so :  for  who  would  rather  have  verses  called
his  when  he  can  safely  rend  thee  with  his  laughter  ?  *

*  Aristarchus  of  Samos,  who  in  his  edition  of  Homer
employed  such  critical  marks.

*  Aminaea  in  Picenum  was  famous  for  its  wine,  cp.
Virgil,  Gtorg.  ii.  97.

'  i.t.  Hippocrene.

'  i.e.  Clementinus  rightly  lets  you  claim  his  verses  ;  for  to
hear  you  recite  them  is  worth  the  price,  you  do  it  so
ridiculously :  cp.  Martial,  Ep.  i.  38  f.  The  whole  piece  is  a
burlesque  remonstrance  with  Theon  for  not  sending  any  of
his  "  trifles  "  {cp.  xv.  ad  init.)

45


AUSONIUS

liaec  quoque  ne  nostrum  possint  urgere  pudorem,
tu  recita,  et  vere  poterunt  tiia  dicta  videri.  15

Quam  tamen  exerces  Medulorum  in  litore  vitam  ?
mercatusne  agitas  leviore  noniismate  captans^
insanis  quod  mox  ])retiis  gravis  auctio  vendat —
albentis  sevi  globulos  et  pinguia  cerae
pondera  Naryciamque  picem  scisf^amque  papyruni  20
fumantesque  olidum,  paganica  luniina,  taedas  ?

An  niaiora  gerens  tota  regione  vagantes
persequeris  fures,  qui  te  postrema  tinientes
ill  partem  praedamque  voceiit  ? tu  mitis  et  osor
sanguinis  huniani  condonas  crimina  nummis  25

erroremque  vocas  pretiumque  inponis  abactis
bubus  et  in  j)artem  scelerum  de  iudice  transis  ?

An  cum  fratre  vagos  dumeta  per  avia  cervos
circumdas  maculis  et  niulta  indagine  pinnae  r
aut  spumantis  apri  cursum  clamoribus  urges  30

subsidisque  fero  ? moneo  tamen,  usque  recuses
stringere  fuhnineo  venabula  comminus  hosti.
exemplum  de  fratre  time,  qui  veste  reducta
ostentat  foedas  pro})e  turpia  membra  lacunas
perfossasque  nates  vicino  podice  nudat.  35

inde  ostentator  volitat,  mirentur  ut  ipsum
Gcdippa  Ursiiiusque  suus  prolesque  lovini
taurinusque  ipsum  ])riscis  lieroibus  aequans,
qualis  in  Olenio  victor  Calydonius  apro
aut  Erymantheo^  jnibes  fuit  Attica  monstro.  40

^  So  VZ :  Cromyoneo,  Peij)er.

^  A  conventional  epithet  {cp.  Virgil,  Aen.  xii.  750),
Naryx  being  a  city  of  the  Ozolian  Locrians.

'•^  i.e.  bunches  of  feathers  tier!  on  a  cord  to  scare  the  prey
and  prevent  it  from  escaping  through  gaps.  rp.  Virgil,
Aen.  xii.  750.

*  Meleager.  ''  Theseus.

46


THE EPISTLE

These  verses  also,  lest  they  may  force  my  blushes,
do  thou  recite :  and  truly  they  will  easily  seem  thy
very  words.

^^  Yet  what  life  dost  thou  pursue  on  the  coasts
of  Medoc  ?  Art  busy  trafficking,  snapping  up  for
a  clipped  coinage  goods  presently  to  be  sold  in  dear
salerooms  at  outrageous  prices — as  balls  of  sickly
tallow,  greasy  lumps  of  wax,  Narjxian  ^  pitch,  torn
paper,  and  rank-smoking  torches,  your  country  lights?

2^  Or  art  thou  busy  about  greater  matters,  chasing
the  thieves  who  roam  through  all  thy  neighbour-
hood, until  they  fear  the  worst  and  invite  thee  to
share  their  spoils  ?  Dost  thou  through  tenderness
and  hatred  of  bloodshed  compound  felonies  for  cash,
call  them  mistakes,  levy  fines  for  cattle  rieved,  and
leave  the  part  of  judge  to  share  the  crime  ?

28  ()j.  -with  thy  brother  amid  impenetrable  thickets
dost  thou  surround  the  wandering  harts  Avith  mesh
and  feathers  ^  in  wide  circle  ?  Or  dost  thou  urge  on
with  shouts  the  foaming  boar's  career  and  lay  wait
for  the  monster  ?  Yet  I  warn  thee  ever  to  avoid
wielding  thy  spear  at  close  quarters  with  a  bolt-like
foe.  Take  warning  from  thy  brother,  who  pulls
back  his  clothes  displaying  ugly  scars  near  his  privy
parts,  and  bares  his  breech  to  show  how  awkwardly
'twas  pierced.  Then  to  display  his  wounds  he  flits
away  to  be  admired  by  Gedippa,  and  his  friend  Ur-
sinus,  and  Jovinus'  young  hopeful,  and  Taui'inus  who
ranks  him  with  ancient  heroes  such  as  was  the  Caly-
donian  conqueror  ^  of  the  boar  in  Olenus,  or  the  Attic
stripling**  victorious  o'er  the  Erymanthian^  monster.

^  Theseus,  however,  killed  the  wild  sow  of  Croniniyon  :  it
was  Hercules  who  slew  the  Erymanthian  boar.  But  the  slip
is  due  to  Ausonius  himself,  nob  to  his  copyists.  Peiper's
correction  is  therefore  needless.

47


AUSONIUS

Set  tu  parce  feris  venatibus  et  fuge  nota
crimina  silvai'um,  ne  sis  Cinyreia  proles
accedasque  iteruni  Veneri  plorandus  Adonis,
sic  certe  crinem  flavus  iiiveusque  lacertos
caesariem  rutilam  per  Candida  colla  refundis,  45

pectore  sic  tenero,  plana  sic  iunceus  alvo,
per  teretes  feminum  gyros  surasque  nitentes
descendis,  talos  a  vertice  pulcher  ad  imos —
qualis  floricoma  quondam  populator  in  Aetna
virgineas  inter  choreas  Deoida  raptam  50

sustulit  emersus  Stygiis  fornacibus  Orcus.

An,  quia  venatus  ob  tanta  pericula  vitas,
piscandi  traheris  studio? nam  tota  supellex
Dumnitoni  tales  solita  est  ostendere  gazas,
nodosas  vestes  animantum  Nerinorum  55

et  iacula  et  fundas  et,  nomina  vilica,  lina
colaque  et  insutos  terrenis  vermibus  hamos.
his  opibus  confise  tumes  ? domus  omnis  abunda
litoreis  dives  spoliis. referuntur  ab  unda
corroco,  letalis  trygon  mollesque  platessae,  60

urentes  thynni  et  male  tecti  spina  elacati  ^
nee  duraturi  post  bina  trihoria  corvi.

An  te  carminibus  iuvat  incestare  canoras
Mnemosynes  natas,  aut  tris  aut  octo  sorores  ?
et  quoniam  hue  ventum,  si  vis  agnoscere,  quid  sit  65

''Tnrnehus  :  ligari,  ligati,  or  ligatri,  MSS.:  ligatri,  Peiper.

*  cp.  'Horace,  Epist.  ii.  ii.  4.  Tlie  caricature  is  clumsy,
for  Theon  (cp.  xvi.  31),  thougli  rounded,  was  not  slim.

^  Probably  hooks  sewn  on  a  long  line  (such  as  are  used  for
sea-fishing)  and  baited  with  earthworms.

^  The  nature  of  this  fish  is  doubtful :  Vinet  identifies  it
with  that  known  at  Bordeaux  as  crtac  (sturgeon) ;  Corpet
equates  it  with  tlie  Spanish  corrujo  (a  kind  of  turbot).

48


THE EPISTLES

*^  But  do  thou  give  up  the  chase  and  shun  the
well-known  tragedies  of  the  woods,  lest  thou  be
as  the  son  of  Cinyras  and  become  a  second  Adonis
for  Venus  to  mourn.  Like  him,  assuredly,  fair-haired
and  snowy-white  of  arms,  thou  dost  let  stream  ruddy
locks  over  a  gleaming  neck  ;  like  him  soft  of  breast,
like  him  slender  as  a  reed  with  shapely  body,  dost
thou  pass  lower  into  smoothly  curving  hips  and
shining  ankles,  beauteous  from  top  to  toe  ^ — even
such  as  of  old  the  ravisher  in  flowery  Aetna,  who
from  amid  maiden  throngs  carried  off  Deo's  daughter
— Orcus,  arisen  from  his  Stygian  furnaces  !

^2  Or,  because  thou  avoidest  the  chase  by  reason
of  such  great  dangers,  does  zeal  for  fishing  draw
thee  ?  For  all  the  gear  at  Dumnitonus  is  wont  to
display  such  treasures  as  the  knotty  wraps  of  Nereus'
creatures,  casting-nets,  drag-nets,  lines  with  rustic
names,  wears,  and  stitched  hooks  for  earthworms.'^
On  this  outfit  dost  thou  proudly  rely  ?  The  whole
house  is  rich  to  overflowing  with  the  spoils  of  the  sea-
shore. From  the  waves  are  brought  home  sturgeon,^
the  deadly  sting-ray,  soft  tender  plaice,  bitter  tun-
nies,'* spindle-fish  ^  ill-guarded  by  their  spines,  and
grayling  which  will  not  keep  above  twice  three
hours.

63  Or  dost  thou  delight  to  outrage  with  thy  verses
the  songful  daughters  of  Mnemosyne,  be  they  sisters
three  or  eight .''  ^  And  since  we  are  come  to  this,  if
thou  wouldst  learn  what  is  midway  between  leai'ned

*  ep.  Matthew  Arnold,  Scholar  Gipsy:  "  Tunnies  steeped
in  brine."

^  A  species  of  tunny  shaped  like  a  spindle  {riAaKarrj).

^  For  three  Muses  rp.  Griphus,  31  :  the  number  eight  is
otherwise  unknown  and  is  perhaps  dictated  by  metrical
necessity.

49


AUSONIUS

inter  doctrinam  dei'idendasque  camenas,

accipe  congestas,  mysteria  frivola,  nugas,

quas  tamen  explicitis  nequeas  deprendere  chartis,

scillite  decies  nisi  cor  purgeris  aceto

Anticyi'aeve  bibas  ^  Samii  Lucumonis  acumen.  70

aut  adsit  interpres  tuus,

aenigmatuni  qui  cognitor

fuit  meoruni;,  cum  tibi

Cadmi  nigellas  filias,

Melonis  albam  paginam  75

notasque  furvae  sepiae

Gnidiosque  nodos  prodidit.

nunc  adsit  et  certe,  modo

praesul  creatus  litteris,

enucleabit  protinus  80

quod  lusitantes  scribimus.

Notos  fingo  tibi;,  poeta,  versus,
quos  scis  hendecasyllabos  vocari,
set  nescis  modulis  tribus  moveri.
istos  conposuit  Phalaecus  dim,  85

qui  penthemimeren  liabent  priorem
et  post  semipedem  duos  iambos.
sunt  quos  hexametri  creant  revulsi,
ut  penthemimeres  prior  locetur,

1  Peiper  :  Antichirainque  bibas,  Z  :  anticipesque  vivum,
or  anticipetque  tuum,  V.

*  For  this  mixture  see  Pliny,  X.H.  xxvi.  viii.  48.

*  i.e.  "  until  \ou  drink  hellebore  at  Anticj-ra  and  become
as  wise  as  Pythagoras  of  Samos."  Lucumo  is  probably  an
Etruscan  prince.

^  i.e.  the  letters  (invented  by  Cadmus)  written  on  papyrus
from  Egypt  (Melo  =  the  Nile)  with  ink  taken  from  the
cuttle-fish  with  a  reed  pen  (for  Cnidian  knots  cp.  Epi/<t.
XV.  20).  Probably  the  riddle  is  a  scribe's  "conceit.'"  An
analogous  piece  of  wit  was  affected  by  Striae  scribes,  as  :

50


THE EPISTLES

verse  and  verse  ridiculous,  take  this  trumped-up
rubbish,  this  trifling  mystery,  though  with  the  sheet
unrolled  thou  wilt  not  be  able  to  comprehend  it  un-
less thou  dost  purge  thy  wits  ten  times  over  with
vinegar  seasoned  with  squills,^  or  at  Anticyra  drink
in  the  sagacity  of  the  Samian  nabob. ^

"1  Or  let  thy  interpreter  come  to  thy  aid,  he  who
read  my  riddles  and  revealed  to  thee  the  secret  of
"  Cadmus'  little  darky-girls,  Melo's  white  page,  the
marks  of  the  swart  cuttlefish,  and  the  knots  of
Cnidos."'  ^  Let  him  now  come  to  thy  help,  and  cer-
tainly once  appointed  literary  dictator,  he  will  worry
out  forthwith  what  I  write  playfully.

^^  I  am  making  up  verses,  Master  Poet,  well
known  to  thee,  and  which  thou  knowest  are  called
hendecasyllables,  though  thou  knowest  not  that  they
move  to  three  measures.  Those  were  composed  by
Phalaecus"*  of  old,  in  which  a  penthemimeris  is  fol-
lowed by  a  half-foot  after  two  iambi.  Others  are  so
formed  from  a  mutilated  hexameter  that  the  pen-
themimeris is  placed  first,  and  then,  what  left  after

"  Lord,  let  not  be  withheld  the  reward  of  the  five  twins  who
have  laboured,  and  the  two  who  have  exerted  themselves  and
sowed  seed  in  the  field  of  animals  with  the  feathers  of  birds,"
{i.e.  the  five  ^mirs  of  fingers  and  the  two  hands  which  have
written  on  parchment  with  quills).  See  VV^right,  Cat.  of  Syr.
MSS.  in  the  B.M.,  p.  107.

*  A  lyrist  of  uncertain  date  Ausonius  i-epresents  him  as
early,  but  some  moderns  regard  him  as  an  Alexandrine.
Ausonius  means  that  there  are  three  varieties  of  hendeca-
syllables : —

(1) ^^-^-^--

(2) .^__^^__

E 2


AUSONIUS

turn  quod  bucolice  tome  relinquit.  90

sunt  et  quos  generat  puella  Sappho  :

quos  primus  regit  hippius  secundus^

ut  cludat  choriaml)on  antibacchus.

set  iam  non  poteris,  Theon,  doceri,

nee  fas  est  mihi  regio  magistro  95

plebeian!  numeros  docere  pulpam.

Verimi  protinus  ede,  quod  requiro.
nil  quaero,  nisi  quod  libris  tenetur
et  quod  non  opicae  tegunt  papyri,
quas  si  solveris,  o  poeta^  nugas^,  100

totam  trado  tibi  simul  Vacunam,
nee  iam  post  metues  ubique  dictum  :
"  Hie  est  ille  Theon  poeta  falsus,
bonorum  mala  carminum  Laverna."


X.V. AUSONIUS ThEONI cum EI TRIGINTA OsTREA

GKANDFA QUIDEM SET TAM PAUCA MISISSET

ExPECTAVERAM,  ut  rescHberes  ad  ea,  quae  dudum
ioculariter  luseram  de  cessatione  tua  valde  impia  et
mea  efflagitatione,  cuius  rei  munus  reciprocum  quo-
niam  in  me  colendo  fastidisti,  inventa  inter  tineas
epistula  vetere,  quam  de  ostreis  et  musculis  adfec-
tata  obscuritate  eondideram,  quae  adulescens  temere
fuderam,  iam  senior  retractavi.  set  in  eundem  modum
instaurata  est  satirica  et  ridicula  concinnatio,  saltem
ut  nunc  respondeas  novissimae  cantilenae,  qui  illam
noviciam  silentio  condemnasti.

'  Vacuna  is  the  goddess  of  leisure:  i.e.  Theon  shall  be
immune  from  further  bantering.

^  Patroness  of  gain,  good  or  bad,  and  so  the  goddess  of
thieves.

52


THE EPISTLES

the  bucolic  caesura.  There  are  also  those  which
the  girl  Sappho  brought  forthj  where  first  reigns
a  second  hippius^  leaving  an  antibacchius  to  cap  a
choriambus.

^*  But  thou  wilt  no  longer  be  able  to  learn,  Theon,
and  'tis  not  lawful  for  me,  a  royal  schoolmaster,  to
teach  prosody  to  common  clay.

^'  But  forthwith  produce  what  I  demand.  I  ask
for  naught  but  what  thy  notebooks  hold  and
unsoiled  sheets  contain.  If  thou.  Sir  Poet,  wilt
pay  me  this  trifle,  all  Vacuna  i  do  I  cede  to  thee
outright,  and  no  more  hereafter  shalt  thou  dread  the
universal  cry  :  "  This  is  that  feigned  poet,  Theon,
the  bad  Laverna^  of  good  poetry."


XV. — AusoNius  TO  Theon,  who  had  sent  him  thirty
Oysters  :  he  complains  that  though  large
they  are  so  few

I  have  been  looking  for  a  reply  from  you  to  the
letter  I  wrote  some  time  ago  dealing  {)layfully  with
your  positively  unnatural  neglect  of  me  and  my  own
urgent  demands ;  and  since  you  have  disdained  to
do  me  the  courtesy  of  sending  a  favour  in  return,
having  found  an  old  letter,  half  worm-eaten,  which
I  once  composed  in  a  style  of  deliberate  obscurity
on  oysters  and  mussels,  now  tliat  I  am  older  I  have
revised  that  careless  effusion  of  my  youth.  But
though  recast,  this  composition  still  retains  the
same  satirical  and  burlesque  character,  that  now  at
least  you  may  send  an  answer  to  my  ditty  in  its
newest  guise,  though  by  your  silence  you  condemned
it  when  new  born.

53


AUSONIUS

Ostrea  Baianis  certantia,  quae  Medulorum
dulcibus  in  stagnis  reflui  maris  aestus  opimat,
accepi,  dilecte  Theon,  numerabile  munus.
verum  quot  fuerint,  subiecta  monosticha  signant :

Quot  tei'  luctatus  cum  pollice  computat  index  : 5
Geryones  quot  erant^  decies  si  multiplicentur ;
ter  quot  erant  Phi-ygii  numerata  decennia  belli,
aut  iter  ut  solidi  mensis  tenet  ignicomus  Sol ;
cornibus  a  primis  quot  habet  vaga  Cynthia  noctes  ;
singula  percurrit  Titan  quot  signa  diebus  10

quotque  annis  sublimis  agit  sua  saecula  Phaenon  ;
quot  numero  annorum  Vestalis  virgo  ministrat
Dardaniusque  nepos  regno  quot  protulit  annos ;
Priamidae  quot  erant,  si  bis  deni  retrahantur,
bisque  viros  numeres,  qui  fata  Amphrysia  servant; 15
quot  genuit  fetus  Albana  sub  ilicibus  sus
et  quot  sunt  asses,  ubi  nonaginta  trientes,
vel  quot  habet  iunctos  Vasatica  raeda  caballos.

Quod  si  figuras  fabulis  adumbratas
numerumque  doctis  involutum  ambagibus 20
ignorat  alto  mens  obesa  viscere,
numerare  saltim  more  vulgi  ut  noveris,
in  se  retortas  explicabo  summulas.

Ter  denas  puto  quinquiesve  senas,

vel  bis  quinque,  dehine  decern  decemque,  25

vel  senas  quater  et  bis  adde  ternas ;

septenis  quater  adde  et  unum  et  unum,  27

^  i.e.  XXX.

^  i.e.  in  which  the  sun  passes  from  one  Sign  of  the  Zodiac
to  another.

^  A  Vestal  spent  ten  years  in  learning  her  duties,  another
ten  in  performing  them,  and  a  final  ten  in  instructing  novices.

*  Priam.

54


THE EPISTLES

Oysters  rivalling  those  of  Baiae,  which  the  surge
of  the  ebbing  sea  fattens  in  the  lush  marshes  of
Medoc,  I  have  received,  dear  Theon — a  gift  not
beyond  reckoning.  But  what  was  their  number,  the
following  single  lines  declare.

^  As  many  were  they  as  the  forefinger  thrice
crossed  with  the  thumb  ^  reckons  up ;  as  many  as
there  were  Geiyons,  if  ten  times  multiplied  ;  thrice
as  many  as  the  decades  told  over  in  the  Phrygian
(Trojan)  War,  or  as  the  journeys  made  by  the  flame-
tressed  Sun  in  a  full  month  ;  as  the  nights  which
wandering  Cynthia  enjoys  after  she  first  shows  her
horns ;  as  the  days  wherein  Titan  traverses  each
sevei'al  Sign ;  ^  as  the  years  in  which  Phaenon  (Sa-
turn) accomplishes  his  circuit  aloft ;  as  the  tale  of
years  in  which  a  Vestal  maid  does  service,^  and  as
those  o'er  which  the  scion  of  Dardanus*  prolonged
his  reign ;  as  many  as  Priam's  sons  if  twice  ten  are
deducted,  or,  if  you  count  them  twice,  as  they  who
keep  the  Amphrysian  Oracles , '"  as  the  young  lit-
tered beneath  the  oaks  by  the  Alban  sow,®  and  as  the
unit  when  there  are  ninety  thirds — or  as  many  hacks
as  are  harnessed  to  a  car  at  Bazas.

1^  But  if  the  figure  shadowed  forth  in  story,  and
the  number  wrapped  up  in  this  learned  rigmarole
baffles  a  mind  smothered  deep  in  fat — that  you
may  know  how  to  count  in  the  common  way  at  least,
I  will  unfold  the  sum  reduced  to  its  factors.

2*  Thrice  ten,  methinks,  or  five  times  six,  or  two
times  five  plus  ten  and  ten,  or  four  times  six  with
twice  three  added  ;  to  seven  times  four  add  one  and

^  The  Sibj'lline  Oracles,  kept  by  fifteen  commissioners  (see
note  on  Oripktis,  86  f.).  Amphrysian  is  here  a  purely  con-
ventional epithet.

"  See  Virgil,  Aen.  iii.  390  f.

55


AUSONIUS

aut  tev  quattuor  adde  bis  novenis ;  29

due  binas  decies  semelque  denas  ;  28

octonas  quater,  hinc  duae  recedant ;  30

binas  ter  decies,  semel  quaternas.
et  sex  adde  novem  vel  octo  septem,
aut  septem  geminis  bis  octo  iunge,
aut — ne  sim  tibi  pluribus  molestus,
triginta  numero  fuere  cunctae.  35

lunctus  liinicolis  musculus  ostreis
primo  conposuit  fercula  prandio,
gratus  deliciis  nobiliuni  cibus
et  suiiiptu  modicus  paiiperibus  focis.
nou  hie  navifrago  quaeritur  aequore,  40

ut  crescat  pretium  grande  periculis  ;
set  primore  vado  post  refugum  mare
algoso  legitur  litore  concolor.
nam  testae  duplicis  conditui*  in  specu,
quae  ferventis  aquae  lota  vaporibus  45

carnem  lacteoli  visceris  indicat.

Set  damnosa  nimis  panditur  area,
fac  campum  replices,  Musa,  papyrium
nee  iani  fissipedis  per  calami  vias
grassetur  Gnidiae  sulcus  harundinis,  50

pingens  aridulae  subdita  ])aginae
Cadmi  filiolis  atricoloribus.
aut  cunctis  pariter  versibus  oblinat
furvam  lacticolor  sphongia  sepiam.

Parcamus  vitio  Dumnitonae  domus,  55

ne  sit  charta  mihi  carior  ostreis.

XVI. — AusoNius  Theonm

AusoNius  salve  caro  mihi  dico  Theoni,

versibus  expediens,  quod  volo  quodve  queror.

56


THE EPISTLES

one,  or  to  thrice  four  add  nine  twice  over ;  take  ten
times  two  and  one  time  ten,  four  times  eight  with
two  subtracted,  two  thirteen  times  plus  a  single  four.
Add  also  six  to  nine  and  eight  to  seven,  or  with  twin
sevens  twice  join  eight,  or — not  to  bother  you  with
more — thirty  in  number  were  they  all.

^''  The  mussel  not  without  mud-haunting  oysters,
makes  up  a  course  for  early  luncheon — a  food  delight-
ful to  the  taste  of  lords  and  cheap  enough  for  poor
folks'  kitchens.  'Tis  not  sought  on  the  ship-wrecking
deep  so  that  the  price  grows  great  to  match  the
danger,  but  is  picked  up  in  the  nearest  shallows
after  the  sea's  ebb,  matching  m  colour  the  weed-
itrewn  shore.  For  it  is  hidden  in  the  cavern  of
a  double  shell  which,  warmed  by  the  steam  of
boiling  water,  reveals  the  milk-white  substance
within.

*^  But  too  careless  of  cost  this  broad  sheet  is
spreading  out.  See  that  thou  abridge,  my  Muse,  thy
acreage  of  paper,  and  no  longer  let  the  turrow  of  the
Cnidian  reed  proceed  along  the  paths  of  the  cloven-
footed  pen  painting  the  surface  of  my  poor  parched
page  with  Cadmus'  dark-hued  little  daughters.  Or
from  all  the  lines  alike  let  a  milk-white  sponge  blot
out  the  dusky  sepia.

^^  Let  us  spare  the  shortcomings  of  the  folk  at
Dumnitonus,  lest  paper  cost  me  more  than  the  value
of  the  oysters.


XVI. — AusoNius  TO  Theon

I,  AusoNius,  send  greeting  to  my  dear  Theon,  here
setting  out  in  verse  my  wishes  and  complaints.

57


AUSONIUS

Tertia  fissipedes  renovavit  Luna  iiivencas,

ut  fugitas  nostram,  dulcis  amice,  domuni.
nonaginta  dies  sine  te,  carissime,  traxi ;  5

hue  adde  aestivos  :  hoc  mihi  paene  duplum  est.
vis  novies  denos  dicam  deciesque  novenos

isse  dies  ? anni  portio  quarta  abiit.
sexaginta  horas  super  et  duo  niiUa  centum

te  sine  consumpsi,  quo  sine  et  hora  gravis.  10

milia  bis  nongenta  iubet  demensio  legum

adnumerata  reos  per  tot  obire  dies,
iam  potui  Romam  pedes  ire  pedesque  reverti,

ex  quo  te  dirimunt  miha  pauca  mihi.
scirpea  Dumnitoni  tanti  est  habitatio  vati  ?  15

Pauliacos  tanti  non  mihi  villa  foret.
an  quia  per  tabulam  dicto  pangente  notatam

debita  summa  mihi  est^  ne  repetamus,  abes  ?
bis  septem  rutilos  regale  nomisma  Philippos,

nee  tanti  fuerint,  perdere  malo,  Theon,  20

implicitum  quam  te  nostris  interne  medullis

defore  tarn  longi  temporis  in  spatio.
ergo  aut  praedictos  iam  nunc  rescribe  Darios

et  redime,  ut  mora  sit  libera  desidiae,
aut  alios  a  me  totidem  dabo,  dum  modo  cari  25

conspicer  ora  viri.  pauperis  usque  licet.
Puppe  citus  propera  sinuosaque  lintea  veli

pande  : Medullini  te  feret  aura  ^  noti

^  So  Souclay  :  ora,  Peiptr.

^  Some  late  authors  represent  the  chariot  of  the  moon  as
drawn  by  oxen.

*  Roman  law  required  the  defendant  to  travel  (if  necessary)
twenty  miles  per  day  in  order  to  appear  in  Court  at  the

58


THE EPISTLES

3  Thrice  hath  Luna  renewed  her  cloven-footed
heifers,!  since  thou,  sweet  friend,  dost  avoid  my
house.  Ninety  days  without  thee  have  I  dragged
out,  my  dearest  comrade  ;  add  further,  summer  days:
this  makes  them  nearly  twice  as  long  for  me.  Wouldst
have  me  say  that  nine  times  ten  days  or  ten  times
nine  are  gone  ?  A  fourth  part  of  the  year  is  passed
away.  Sixty  hours  and  two  thousand  and  a  hundred
beside  without  thee  have  I  spent — without  whom
even  an  hour  hangs  heavy.  Miles  twice  nine  hundred
the  laws'  appointment  bids  men  accused  traverse  to
full  reckoning  in  so  many  days."  By  this  time  could
I  have  gone  afoot  to  Rome,  and  afoot  returned,  since
the  time  when  a  few  miles  have  parted  thee  from  me.
Has  a  thatched  cot  at  Dumnitonus  such  charms  for  a
bard.^  My  villa  Pauliacos^  would  not  weigh  so  with
me.  Or  because  by  bond  drawn  up  hard  and  fast
money  is  owed  to  me,  dost  thou  keep  from  me  lest  I
claim  it  back  ?  Those  twice  seven  gleaming  Philippes
d\)r  of  royal  mintage,*  Theon,  I  had  rather  lose — they
Avould  not  be  worth  so  much — than  that  thou,  who
art  so  closely  twined  about  my  heart,  shouldst  desert
me  over  this  long  stretch  of  time.  So  either  send
back  now  forthwith  the  aforesaid  lotiis  and  buy  back
thy  freedom  slothfuUy  to  linger,  or  I  will  freely  give
as  many  more  besides,  provided  I  behold  the  face  of
one  so  dear,  however  poor  he  be.^

-^  Haste  hither,  sped  by  boat,  and  spread  the
bellying  canvas  of  thy  sail :  the  breath  of  the  south
wind  from Medoc  will  waft  thee  reclining  beneath

stated  time  ;  otherwise  the  case  went  against  him  by  default
{Digest  ii.  xi.  1).

^  Possibly  Pauliac  on  the  (raronne.

*  See  note  on  Epist.  xiii.  5.

^  Presumably,  "however  often  I  have  to  pay  this  sum."

59


AUSONIUS

expositum  subter  paradas  lectoque  iacentem,

corporis  ut  tanti  non  moveatiir  onus.  30

unus  Dumnitoni  te  litore  perferet  aestus

Condatem  ad  portum,  si  modo  deproperes
inque  vicem  veil,  quotiens  tua  fiamina  cessant,

remipedem  iubeas  protinus  ire  ratem.
invenies  praesto  subiuncta  petorrita  mulis  :  35

villa  Lucani-  mox  potieris  -aco.
rescisso  disces  conponere  nomine  versum  :

Lucili  vatis  sic  imitator  eris.

XVII. — <AusoNius  Thkoni>
AusoNius  consul  vatem  resaluto  Theonem.

Aurea  mala,  Theon,  set  plumbea  carmina  mittis ;

unius  massae  quis  putet  has  species  ?
anum  nomen  utrisque,  set  est  discrimen  utrisque  :

poma  ut  mala  voces,  carmina  verte  mala.  5

Vale  beatis  nomen  a  divis  Theon,
metoche  set  ista  saepe  currentem  indicat.

XVIII. — AusoNius  Hesperio  S.  D.

QuAi.is  Picenae  populator  turdus  olivae

chines  opimat  cereas
vel  qui  lucentes  rapuit  de  vitibus  uvas,

pendetque  nexus  retibus.

According  to  d'Anville  this  port,  no  longer  existing,  was
at  Condat  near  Libourne  in  the  Dordogne.

*  Identified  with  Lugaignac  in  the  canton  of  Brannes.
Ennius  is  more  famous  for  his  split  nouns,  as  in  "saxo
cere-  coniminuit  -brum."

'  i.e. "alter your verse — even  if  it  means  calling  your

6o


THE EPISTLES

an  awning  and  stretched  upon  a  couch,  that  the  bulk
of  so  great  a  body  be  not  shaken.  One  tide  will
bear  thee  from  the  shore  of  Dumnitonus  right  to  the
harbour  of  Condate,^  if  only  thou  makest  good  haste,
and  in  place  of  sail,  whene'er  thy  favouring  breezes
die  away,  biddest  the  bark  speed  straight  on  pro-
pelled with  oars.  Thou  shalt  find  ready  a  four-
wheeled  car  with  team  of  mules  :  soon  wilt  thou
gain  the  Lucani-  villa  -acus.^  Thou  shalt  learn  to
make  verse  with  such  split  nouns :  thus  shalt  thou
be  a  copier  of  the  bard  Lucilius.

XVII. — AusoNius  TO  Theon

I,  AusoNius  the  Consul,  return  greeting  to  Theon
the  Bard.

2  Apples  of  gold  thou  sendest,  Theon,  but  verse
of  lead  ;  who  would  think  these  species  were  of  the
same  substance  ?  Both  have  one  name,  but  both
have  differences  :  to  call  your  apples  quinces,  alter
your  quinsied  verse. ^

^  Farewell,  Theon,  whose  name  is  from  the  blessed
gods,  but  often  as  a  participle  it  means  one  running.^

XVni  -— AusoNius  TO Hesperius  sends  Greeting

Even  as  the  thrush  who,  ravaging  the  olives  ot
Picenum,^  fattens  his  waxen  haunches,^  or  who  has
torn  the  gleaming  clusters  from  the  vines  and  now
hangs  entangled  in  the  nets  which  in  the  evening

apples  by  another  name."  But  the  play  on  7nala  .  .  .  mala
cannot  adequately  be  reproduced.

*  Theon  might  be  either  deu>v  or  Otuv.

*  cp.  Martial,  Epigr.  ix.  Iv.  1 :  Si  mihi  Picena  turdus
palleret  oliva.

*  id.  Xiii.  V.  1  :  Cerea  quae  patulo  lucet  ficedula  lumbo.

6i


AUSONIUS

quae  vespertinis  fluitant  nebulosa  sub  horis  5

vel  mane  tenta  roscido  :
tales  hibernis  ad  te  de  saepibus,  ipsos

capi  volentes^  misimus
bis  denos  ;  tot  enim  crepero  sub  lucis  eoae

praeceps  volatus  intulit.  10

tuni,  quas  vicinae  suggessit  praeda  lacunae,

anites  maritas  iunximus,
remipedes,  lato  populantes  caerula  rostro

et  crure  rubras  Punico,
iricolor  vario  pinxit  quas  pluma  colore,  15

colluni  columbis  aemulas.
Defrudata  meae  non  sunt  haec  fercula  mensae  :

vescente  te  fruimur  magis.

Vale  bene,  ut  valeam.


XIX. — AusoNius  AD  Patrem  de  Suscepto  Filio

Credideram  nil  posse  meis  adfectibus  addi,

quo,  venerande  pater,  diligerere  magis.
accessit  (grates  superis  medioque  nepoti,

bina  dedit  nostris  qui  iuga  nominibus)  4

accessit  titulus,  tua  quo  reverentia  crescat,  9

quo  doceam  natum,  quid  sit  amare  patrem.  10

ipse  nepos  te  fecit  avum  :  milii  iilius  idem  5

et  tibi  ego  :  hoc  nato  nos  sunms  ambo  patres.
nee  iam  sola  mihi  pietas  mea  suadet  amorem  :

nomine  te  gemini  iam  genitoris  amo.  8

quippe  tibi  aequatus  videor,  quia  parvulus  isto  11

nomine  honoratum  me  quoque  nobilitat :


^  It  was  customary  for  a  father  to  take  up  isnscipere)  a
newborn  son  as  a  sign  that  he  acknowledged  it  and  would

62


THE EPISTLES

hour  float  loose  like  clouds^  or  in  the  morn  are  taut
with  dew — sucli  are  the  birds  I  send  thee  from  our
wintry  hedges,  themselves  glad  to  be  caught,  twice
ten  in  all ;  for  so  many  in  the  twilight  of  early  dawn
flew  headlong  into  the  net.  Thereto  I  add  full-grown
ducks  which  a  raid  on  the  neighbouring  meres  sup-
plies, web-footed  birds  whose  broad  beaks  ravage  the
blue  waters,  with  legs  of  crimson-red  and  plumage
rich  as  the  rainbow  dight  with  various  colours,  with
necks  that  rival  doves.

1^  I  have  not  cheated  my  own  table  to  send  these
dainties  :  that  thou  shouldst  eat  them  causes  me
more  enjoyment.

^^  Fare  thee  well,  that  so  I  may  fare  well.

XIX. — AusoNius  TO  HIS  Father  on  the
Acknowledgment  ^  of  his  Son

I  HAD  believed  that  nought  could  be  added  to  the
sum  of  my  affection  whereby,  mine  honoured  father,
my  love  might  be  increased.  Added  (thanks  to  the
gods  above  and  to  thy  grandson,  their  instrument,  who
has  laid  upon  our  names  a  two-fold  yoke),  added  is
a  title  whereby  my  reverence  for  thee  is  increased,
whereby  I  may  teach  my  son  what  'tis  to  love  a
father.  This  grandson  himself  hath  made  thee  a
grandfather :  to  me  he  too  is  son,  and  to  thee  am  1  :
his  birth  makes  us  both  fathers.  No  longer  doth
natural  affection  alone  inspire  me  w^ith  love  for  thee  :
as  doubly  a  father  I  love  thee  now.  For  I  seem
made  thy  peer,  because  a  little  boy  ennobles  me  too
with  the  distinction  of  that  name  ;  not  because  our

rear  it.  For  the  circumstances  in  which  this  fulsome  piece
was  written  see  Introduction,  p.  xv.

63


AUSONIUS

non  aetas  quia  nostra  eadem  :  nam  subparis  aevi

sura  tibi  ego  et  possum  fratris  habere  vicenij
nee  tantum  nostris  spatium  interponitur  annis, 15

quanta  solent  alios  tempoi'a  dividere.
vidi  ego  natales  fratrum  distare  tot  annis,

quot  nostros  :  aevum  nomina  non  onerant.
pulchra  iuventa  tibi  senium  sic  iungit,  ut  aevum

quod  prius  est  maneat,  quod  modo  ut  incipiat. 20
et  placuisse  reor  geminis  aetatibus,  ut  se

non  festinato  tempore  utraque  daret,
leniter  haec  flueret,  liaec  non  properata  veniret,

maturam  frugem  flore  manente  ferens.
annos  me  nescire  tuos,  pater  optime,  testor  25

totque  putare  tuos,  quot  reor  esse  meos.
nesciat  hos  natus,  numeret  properantior  heres,

testamenta  magis  quam  pia  vota  fovens
exemploque  docens  pravo  iuvenescere  natos,

ut  nolint  patres  se  quoque  habere  senes.  30

verum  ego  primaevo  genitus  genitore  fatebor

subparis  haec  aevi  tempora  grata  mihi.
debeo  quod  natus,  suadet  pia  cura  nepotis

addendum  patri^  quo  veneremur  avum.
tu  quoque,  mi  genitor,  geminata  vocabula  gaude, 35

nati  primaevi  nomine  factus  avus.
exiguum,  quod  avus  :  faveant  pia  numina  divura

deque  nepote  suo  fiat  avus  proavus.
largius  et  poterunt  producere  fata  senectam  :

set  rata  vota  reor,  quae  moderata,  magis.  40


64


THE EPISTLES

age  is  the  same,  since  I  somewhat  approach  thee
in  age  and  can  pass  as  thy  brother,  nor  does  so
great  a  span  divide  our  years  as  the  seasons  which
part  others.  I  have  seen  brothers  whose  birth-
days were  separated  by  as  many  years  as  ours  :
names  add  no  weight  to  years.  Fair  youth  so  blends
with  old  age  in  thee,  that  thy  earlier  time  of  life
lingers,  while  thy  present  but  begins.  And,  me-
thinks,  these  two  ages  have  agreed  each  to  present
itself  without  hurrying  on  their  seasons,  this  gently
gliding  onwards,  that  approaching  without  haste,
bringing  ripe  fruit  while  yet  the  flower  remains.  I
vow,  my  dearest  father,  that  1  know  not  thy  years,
and  account  thine  as  many  as  I  deem  my  own.  Let
no  son  know  these,  let  the  too  hasty  heir  reckon
them  up,  his  heart  set  more  on  inheritance  than
loving  wishes,  teaching  his  sons  to  grow  tip  after
such  bad  pattern  as  to  hope  they  too  have  no  long-
lived  father.  But  1,  born  when  my  sire  was  in  his
earliest  youth,  will  avow  that  I  delight  that  our
times  of  life  are  so  nearly  matched.  What  I  owe
as  a  son,  my  dear  love  for  thy  grandson  moves  me,
his  father,  to  increase,  the  more  to  honour  thee  as
a  grandsire.  Thou  too,  my  sire,  I'ejoice  in  thy  doubled
title  now  that  thy  son  in  early  youth  hath  made  thee
grandfather.  A  small  thing  'tis  to  be  a  grandfather :
may  the  kind  powers  be  propitious,  and  by  his  own
grandson  may  the  grandfather  be  made  great-grand-
father. Even  further  the  Fates  will  have  power  to
prolong  thine  age  :  but  those  prayers,  methinks,  are
rather  answered  which  are  moderate.


65


AUSONIUS

XX. — Pater  ao  Filium  cum tempoiubus  tvhannicis
IPSE  Treveris  remansisset  et  Tjlius  ad  Patriam

PROFECTUS ESSET. HoC INCOHATUM NEQUE IN-
PLETUM SIC DE LiTURARIlS SCRIPTUM


Debeo  et  hanc  nostris,  fill  dulcissime,  curis
historiam  :  quamquam  titiilo  non  digna  sereno
anxia  niaestarum  fuerit  querinionia  rerum.

lam  super  egelidae  stagnautia  terga  Mosellae
protulerat  te,  nate,  ratis  maestique  parentis  5

oscula  et  amplexus  discreverat  invidiis  amnis.
solus  ego  et  quamvis  coetu  celebratus  amico
solus  eram  profugaeque  dabam  pia  vota  carinae
solus  adhuc  te,  nate,  videns ;  celerisque  remuici
culpabam  properos  ad  verso  flumine  cursus.  10

quis  fuit  ille  dies  ?  non  annus  longior  ille  est^
Attica  quern  docti  collegit  cura  Metonis.
desertus  vacuis  solisque  exerceor  oris,
nunc  ego  pubentes  salicum  deverbero  frondes,
gi-amineos  nunc  frango  toros  viridesque  per  ulvas 15
iubrica  substratis  vestigia  libro  lapillis.
sic  lux  prima  abiit,  sic  altera  meta  diei,
sic  geminas  alterna  rotat  vertigo  tenebras,
sic  alias  :  totusque  mihi  sic  annus  abibit,
restituant  donee  tua  me  tibi  fata  parentem.  20

hac  ego  condicione  licet  vel  morte  paciscar,
dum  decores  suj)renia  patris  tu^  nate^  superstes.

^  i.e.  Ausonius  to  Hesperiiis.

-  i.e.  in  .383  a.u.  when  Maxinius  seized  the  Empire  of  the
West :  see  IiUroduction,  jjp.  xi  f. ,  xx.

*  On  the  importance  of  this  editorial  note  see  Introduction,
p.  xxxvi.

66


THE EPISTLES
XX. — The  Father  to  his  Son,^  when  in  the  days  of

USURPATION  2 HE HIMSELF REMAINED AT TrKVES
AND HIS Son SET OUT FOR HIS NATIVE PLACE.

This Poem,  begun  but  never  finished,  has  been

COPIED as it stands FROM THE ROUC.II DRAFT  -^


This  narrative  also  I  owe  to  my  cares  for  thee,
my  dearest  son  ;  although  this  troubled  plaint  for
my  gloomy  fortunes  scarce  deserves  so  mild  a  term.

^  Already  o'er  the  sluggish  surface  of  chill  Moselle
the  bark  had  borne  thee  forward,  O  my  son,  and
from  the  kisses  and  embraces  of  thy  weeping  sire
the  envious  stream  had  parted  thee.  Alone  !  though
compassed  with  a  throng  of  friends,  I  was  alone  and
offered  yearning  prayers  for  that  fleeting  craft;  alone,
though  still  I  saw  you,  my  child,  and  grudged  the
hasty  speed  of  the  swift  oarage  plying  against  the
stream.  What  day  was  that .''  No  longer  is  that
year  which  Attic  Meton  ^  worked  out  with  such
patient  skill.  Forlorn  I  pace  the  empty,  lonely
shores.  Now  I  strike  down  the  sprouting  willow-
shoots,  now  I  crush  beds  of  turf  and  o'er  green
sedge  I  poise  my  slippery  footsteps  on  the  pebbles
strewn  beneath.  So  the  first  day  passed  away,  so
the  second  reached  its  bourne,  so  the  two  nights
which  wheeled  revolving  after  each,  so  others  :  and
the  whole  year  for  me  w'ill  so  pass  by  until  thy
destiny  gives  back  me,  thy  sire,  to  thee.  With  this
condition  I  may  bargain  even  for  death,  that  thou,
my  son,  payest  thy  father  the  last  tributes,  surviving
him.

*  Meton  of  Athens  (flor.  c.  432  B.C.)  discovered  the  Lunar
Cycle  in  which  235  hinar  months  =  19  solar  years.  By
annus  Aus.  seems  to  mean  the  C^^cle,  not  the  Lunar  Year.

67
F 2


AUSONIUS

XXI. — Genethliacos  ad  AusoNiuM  Nepotem
Ausonius  Avus  Aiisonio  Kepoti

Carmina  prima  tibi  cum  iam  puerilibus  annis
traderet  adsidui  permulcens  cura  magistri
inbiieretque  novas  aures  sensusque  sequaces,
ut  respondendas  docili  quoque  murmure  voces
emendata  rudi  perferret  lingua  palato,  5

addidimus  nil  triste  senes,  ne  cura  monendi
laederet  aut  dulces  gustus  vitiaret  amaris.
at  modo,  cum  motu  vigeas  iam  puberis  aevi
fortiaque  a  teneris  possis  secernere  et  ipse
admonitor  morumque  tibi  fandique  videri,  10

accipe  non  praecepta  equidem,  set  vota  precaniis
et  gratantis  avi  festum  ad  sollemne  nepotis.

adnuit;  ut  reducem  fatorum  ab  fine  senectam
sospes  agam  festumque  diem  dubitataque  cernam
sidera,  deposito  prope  conclamatus  in  aevo.  15

hoc,  mellite  nepos,  duplicato  faenore  partum
natali  accedente  tuo,  munusque  salutis
plenius  hoc  nostrae,  quod  iam  tibi  puberis  aevi
crescit  honos  iuvenemque  senex  iam  cerno  nepotem.
Sexta  tibi  haec  primo  remeat  trieteris  ab  anno,  20
Septembres  notis  referens  natalibus  idus.


^  i.e.  as  pieces  of  repetition.

*  i.e.  the  boy  repeats  the  words  of  the  poem  after  his  tutor,
so  that  his  faults  of  pronunciation  may  be  corrected.

68


THE  EPISTLES

XXI. — A Birthday Letter to his Grandson

AusoKius

Amonius  the  Grandfather  to  Ausonius  his  Grandson

Whh.e  thy  persistent  master  with  coaxing pains
was  committing  to  thee, still  of  boyish years,  thy
earliest  poems,' and  was  training  thy  prentice  ear
and  the  faculties  it  guides,  so  that  thy  tongue,  cor-
rected of  the  unskilled  palate's  faults,  might  produce
the  words  to  be  repeated  with  an  obedient  murmur,^
I,  an old man, added naught severe lest anxious
admonition  might  gall,  or  mar  the  sweet  first-taste
with  bitterness. But  now,  when  thou  dost  feel  the
stir  and  pulse  of  youth,  and  canst  distinguish  between
the manly  and the  feeble  and  show  thyself  thine
own  councillor  in  behaviour  as  in  speech,  accept,  not
indeed  precepts,  but  prayers  of  thy  grandfather  who
entreats  while  rejoicing  at  the  high  festival  of  his
grandson's birthday.  ......

(I  thank  Heaven  which)  has  consented  that,  re-
covered, I  may  spend  my  old  age  brought  back  from
the  Fates'  borderland,^  and  behold  this  happy  day
and  the  stars  I  scarce  hoped  to  see,  I  who  was  well-
nigh  mourned  as  one  dead.  This,  my  sweet  grand-
son, is  a  gift  doubly  profitable,  in  that  thy  birthday
now  occurs,  and  the  prize  of  my  own  safety  is  by
this  the  richer  that  the  glory  of  thy  ripening  age
now  waxes,  and  that  I,  now  old,  behold  my  grandson
attain  to  youth.

20  Now  comes  round  for  thee  the  sixth  period  of
thi-ee  years  since  thou  wert  born,  bringing  back  the

•^  Apparently Ausonius had just recovered from some
serious  illness  of  which  he  had  well-nigh  died.

69


AUSONIUS

Idus  alma  dies,  geniis  quoque  culta  deorum.
Sextiles  Hecate  Latonia  vindicat  idus,
Mercurius  Maias,  superorum  adiunctus  honori.
Octobres  olim  genitus  Maro  dedicat  idus  :  25

Idus  saepe  colas  bis  senis  mensibus  omnes,
Ausonii  quicumque  mei  celebraveris  idus.
Vale  nepos  dulcissime.


XXII. — Liber  Protrehticus  ad  Nei'otem
Ausonius  Hesperio  Filio

LiBELLUM,  quern  ad  nepotulum  meum,  sororis  tuae
filium,  instai'  protreptici  luseram,  venturus  ipse  prae-
misi  legendum.  hoc  enim  malui  quam  ipse  I'ecitare,
esset  ut  tibi  censura  liberior,  quae  duabus  causis
impediri  solet :  quod  aures  nostras  audita  velocius
quam  lecta  praetereunt  et  quod  sinceritas  iudicandi
praesentia  recitantis  oneratur.  nunc  tibi  utrumque
integrum  est,  quia  et  legenti  libera  mora  est  et
iudicaturo  non  obstat  nostri  verecundia.

Set  heus  tu,  fili  dulcissime,  habeo  quod  admo-
neam.  si  qua  tibi  in  his  versiculis  videbuntur  (nam
vereor,  ut  multa  sint)  fucatius  concinnata  quam  ve-
rius et plus coloris  quam  suci habere,  ipse  sciens


^  LI.  23  fF.  are  in  imitation  of  Martial  xii.  Ixvii.  : —
Maiae  Mercnrium  creastis  Idus;
Augustis  redit  Idibus  Diana  ;


70


THE EPISTLES

Ides  of  September.  The  Ides  is  an  auspicious  day,  ob-
served too  by  the  genii  of  gods.  In  Sextilis  Hecate,
Leto's  daughter,  claims  the  Ides  ;  in  May,  Mercury,
who  was  raised  to  the  ranks  of  the  gods.  October's
Ides  are  hallowed  by  the  birth  of  Maro  long  ago.

^t"  Oft  mayest  thou  observe  each  Ides  of  all  the
twice  six  months,  whoso  shalt  celebrate  the  Ides  of
my  Ausonius.'^

^^  Farewell  my  sweetest  grandson.

XXII. — A  Book  of  Exhortation  to his  Grandson

Aimonius  to  his  Son Hesperius

Being  about  to  come  myself,  I  send  on  ahead  a
booklet  which  I  have  amused  myself  by  writing
in  the  form  of  an  exhortation  to  my  little  grandson,
your  sister's  son.  For  this  I  j)refer  to  reciting  it
myself,  in  order  that  you  may  feel  less  restraint  in
your  criticism — a  faculty  which  is  usually  hampered
by  two  circumstances  :  first  that  what  is  heard  passes
over  our  ears  more  quickly  than  what  is  read  ;  and
second  the  presence  of  the  reciter  handicaps  the
frankness  of  the  critic.  As  it  is,  you  have  nothing
to  fear  on  either  score,  because  both  as  you  read  you
are  free  to  linger,  and  as  you  come  to  criticize  your
feelings  for  me  do  not  stand  in  your  way.

But  look  you,  my  dearest  son,  I  have  a  caution
to  add.  If  any  passages  in  these  verses  shall  appear
to  you  (and  I  fear  that  there  are  many  such)  to  be
composed  with  more  brilliance  than  truth,  and  have
more  colour  than  vigour,  know  that  I  deliberately

Octobres  Maro  consecravit  Idus.
Idas  saepe  colas  et  has  et  illas,
Qui  magni  celebras  Maronis  Idus.

71


AUSONIUS

fluere permisi, venustula ut esserit magis, quam
forticula,  instar  virginuni,

qiias  matres  student
demissis  umeris  esse,  vincto pectore, ut graciles
sient.

nosti  cetera.

Superest  igitur^  ut  dicas  :  quid  rnoraris  iudicatio-
nem  meam  de  eo,  quod  ipse  pronuntias  esse  men-
dosum  ?  dicam  scilicet  nie  huiusmodi  versibus  foris
erubescere^  set  intra  nos  minus  verecundari ;  namque
ego  haec  annis  ilHus  magis  quam  meis  scripsi  aut
fortasse  et  meis:  8ts  TratSe?  ol  yepovrcs.  ad  summam
valeat  austeritas  tua :  mihi  cum  infante  [ratio  est].

Vale,  fili  dulcissime.  ^

Ad  Ncpotem  Ausonium

Sunt  etiam  musis  sua  ludicra  :  mixta  camenis

otia  sunt,  mellite  nepos ;  nee  semper  acerbi

exercet  pueros  vox  imperiosa  magistri,

set  requie  studiique  vices  rata  tempora  servant.

et  satis  est  puero  niemori  legisse  libenter,  5

et  cessare  licet. Graio  scliola  nomine  dicta  est,

iusta  laboriferis  tribuantur  ut  otia  musis.

quo  magis  alternum  certus  succedere  ludum

disce  Hbens  :  longum  delinitura  laborem

intervalla  damus. studium  puerile  fatiscit,  10

laeta  nisi  austeris  varientur,  festa  profestis.

disce  libens,  tetrici  nee  praeceptoris  habenas

*  Terence,  Enn.  313.
72


THE EPISTLES

allow  them  to  run  on smoothly^  so  that  these  little /
bits  may  be  attractive  rather  than  forceful,  like  those
marriageable  daughters —

"  whom  their  mothers  seek  to  make
Low-shouldered  and  tight-laced,  to  seem  more  trim  "  ^

— you  know  the  rest.

It  only  remains,  then,  for  you  to  say  :  "  Why  do
you  wait  for  my  criticism  on  what  you  yourself  pro-
claim to  be  a  faulty  piece  of  work  ?  "  My  answer,
of  course,  will  be  that  I  blush  for  verses  of  this  sort
in  public,  but  am  less  ashamed  of  them  when  be-
tween you  and  me  ;  for  I  write  them  to  suit  his
years  rather  than  my  own — or  perhaps  to  suit  mine
also  :  old  men  are  twice  children  !  In  short,  good-
bye to  your  strictures : I  have  to  do  with  a  child.

Farewell,  my  darling  son.

To  Ausonius  my  Grandson

The  Muses  also  have  their  own  sports  :  hours  of
ease  find  place  among  the  Camenae,  my  honey-
sweet  grandson ;  nor  does  the  sour  schoolmaster's
domineering  voice  always  harass  boys,  but  spells  of
rest  and  study  keep  each  their  appointed  times.
As  for  an  attentive  boy  to  have  read  his  lessons
willingly  is  enough,  so  to  rest  is  lawful.  "School"
has  been  called  by  that  Greek  name,  that  the  labo-
rious Muses  may  be  allowed  due  share  of  leisure.
Wherefore  the  more,  assured  that  play  follows  work
in  turn,  learn  willingly :  to  beguile  the  weariness  of
long  toil  we  grant  spells  of  leisure.  Boyish  zeal
flags  unless  serious  work  is  interspersed  with  merri-
ment, and  workaday  with  holiday.  Learn  readily,
and  loathe not,  my  grandson,  the  control  of  your

73


AUSONIUS

detestere,  nepos. numquam  horrida  forma  magistri.

ille  licet  tristis  senio  nee  voce  serenus

aspera  coiitractae  minitetur  iurgia  frontiSj  15

numquam  inmanis  erit,  placida  suetudine  vultus

qui  1  semel  inbuerit. rugas  nutricis  amabit,

qui  refugit  matrem. pappos  aviasque  trementes

anteferunt  patribus  seri,  nova  cura,  nepotes.

sic  neque  Peliaden  terrebat  Chiron  Achillem  20

Thessalico  permixtus  equo  nee  pinifer  Atlans

Amphitryoniadem  puerum,  set  blandus  uterque

mitibus  adloquiis  teneros  mulcebat  aluninos.

tu  quoque  ne  metuas,  quamvis  schola  verbei*e  multo

increpet  et  truculenta  senex  gerat  ora  magister  : 25

degeneres  aninios  timor  arguit. at  tibi  consta

intrepidus,  nee  te  clamor  plagaeque  sonantes,

nee  matutinis  agitet  formido  sub  horis.

quod  sceptrum  vibrat  ferulae,  quod  multa  supellex

virgea,  quod  fallax  scuticam  pi'aetexit  aluta,  30

(piod  fervent. trepido  subsellia  vestra  tumultu,

pompa  loci  et  vani  fucatur  scaena  timoris.

haec  dim  genitorque  tuus  genetrixque  secuti

securam  placido  mihi  permulsere  senectam.

tu  senium,  quodcumque  superlabentibus  annis  35

fata  dabunt,  qui  nomen  avi  geris,  indole  prima,

prime  nepos,  vel  re  vel  spe  mihi  porge  fruendum.

mnic  ego  te  puerum,  mox  in  iuvenalibus  annis

iamque  virum  cernam,  si  fors  ita  iusserit ;  aut  si

1  MSS.: cui,  Peiper.
74


THE EPISTLES

grim  teacher.  A  master's  looks  need  never  cause  a
shudder.  Though  he  be  grim  with  age  and,  ungentle
of  voice,  threaten  harsh  outbursts  with  frowning
brows,  never  will  he  seem  savage  to  one  who  has
tutored  his  face  to  habitual  calm.  A  child  will  love
its  nurse's  wrinkles,  who  shrinks  from  its  mother ;
grandchildren  when  they  come  at  last,  a  new  anxiety,
prefer  doddering  grandsires  and  granddams  to  their
parents.  So  Thessalian  Chiron  did  not  affright  Achilles,
Peleus'  son,  though  he  was  quite  half  a  horse,  nor
pine-bearing  Atlas  scare  Amphitryo's  youthful  son,
but  both  coaxingly  used  to  soothe  their  3-oung  pupils
with  gentle  words.  You  also  be  not  afraid,  though
the  school  resound  with  many  a  stroke  and  the  old
master  wear  a  lowering  face  :  "  fear  proves  a  spirit
degenerate."  ^  But  to  yourself  be  true,  mocking  at
fear,  and  let  no  outcry,  nor  sound  of  stripes,  nor
dread,  make  you  quake  as  the  morning  hours  come
on.  That  he  brandishes  the  cane  for  sceptre,  that  he
has  a  full  outfit  of  birches,  that  he  has  a  tawse
artfully  hidden  in  innocent  washleather,  that  scared
confusion  sets  your  benches  abuzz,  is  but  the  outward
show  of  the  place  and  painted  scenery  to  cause  idle
fears.  Your  father  and  mother  went  through  all
this  in  their  day,  and  have  lived  to  soothe  my  peace-
ful and  serene  old  age.  To  that  old  age,  for  what-
ever space  the  Fates  shall  grant  in  the  still  coming
years,  do  you,  who  bear  j'our  grandfather's  name,
my  first-born  grandson,  with  your  first-born  powers,
afford  the  joy  that  springs  from  achievement  or
from  promise.  Now  I  see  you  a  boy,  soon  shall  I
see  you  in  years  of  youth,  and  by  and  by  a  man,  if
Chance  so  bid ; or  if  this be grudged,  yet  will  I

^  Virgil,  Aen.  iv.  \X

75


AUSONIUS

invidia  est,  sperabo  tamen,  nee  vota  fatiscent,  40

lit  patris  utque  mei  non  inmemor  ardua  semper
praemia  musarum  cupias  facundiis  et  olini
liac  gradiare  via,  qua  nos  praecessinius  et  cui
proconsul  genitor,  praefectus  avunculus  instant.

Perlege,  quodcumque est memorabile. prima
monebo.  45

conditor  Iliados  et  amabilis  orsa  Menandri
evolvenda  tibi :  tu  flexu  et  acumine  vocis
innumeros  numeros  doctis  accentibus  effer
adfectusque  inpone  legens. distinctio  sensum
auget  et  ignavis  dant  intervalla  vigorem.  50

Ecquando  ista  meae  contingent  dona  senectae  ?
quando  oblita  mihi  tot  carmina  totque  per  aevum
conexa  liistoriae,  soccos  aulaeaque  regum
et  melicos  lyricosque  modos  profando  novabis
obductosque  seni  facies  puerascere  sensus  ?  55

te  praeeunte,  nepos,  modulata  poemata  Flacci
altisonumqu^  iterum  fas  est  didicisse  Maronem.
tu  quoque,  qui  Latium  lecto  sermone,  Terenti,
comis  et  adstricto  percurris  pulpita  socco,


1  Tliessalius  (the  father)  was  proconsul  of  Africa  (378-
379  A.D.) ;  Hesperius  (the  uncle)  prefect  of  Ital^',  Illyricum
and  Africa  (377-380).

^  i.e.  the  loose  measures  of  Comedy :  cp.  the  epitaph  of
Plautus  np.  Auhis  (Jellius,  i.  24  : —

Scena  est  descrta. Uein  Risus,  Ludu',  .locusrjue
Et  nuineri  innumeri  sinud  oiniies  collacruinarunt.

•"  For  the  general  sense  of  this  passage  compare  the  obser-
vation of  the  Comte  de  Tressan  on  the  Abbe  Le  >Sage  (quoted
in  Sir  Walter  Scott's  Life  of  Le  Sage)  :  "  He  possessed  the

76


THE EPISTLES

hope — nor  shall  my  prayers  grow  weary — that,  not
unmindful  of  your  father  and  myself,  you  may  ever
strive  to  win  through  eloquence  the  hard-won  prizes
of  the  Muses,  and  some  day  tread  this  path  wherein
I  have  gone  before  and  your  father,  the  proconsul,
and  your  uncle  the  prefect  ^  now  press  on.

^^  Read  thoroughly  whatever  is  worth  remember-
ing: I  will  give  you  some  first  hints.  You  must  open
the  pages  of  the  Iliad's  creator,  study  the  works
of  lovable  Menander :  with  modulation  and  with
stress  of  voice  bring  out  "measureless  measures  "  ^
with  a  scholar's  accent,  and  infuse  expression  as  you
read.  Punctuation  enforces  the  meaning,  and  pauses
give  strength  even  to  dull  passages.^

^1  Ah,  when  shall  these  gifts  reward  mine  old  age?
When  shall  those  many  poems  by  me  forgot,  those
many  links  in  the  chain  of  history  through  the  ages,
those  comedies,  royal  tragedies,  and  strains  melic
and  lyric  *  by  thine  ^  utterance  be  recalled  ?  When
wilt  thou  make  an  old  man's  clouded  faculties  grow
youthful .''  With  thee  for  guide,  my  grandson,  once
more  may  I  dare  to  learn  Flaccus'  rhythmic  sti'ains
and  Maro's  sonorous  lines.  Do  thou,  too,  Terence,
who  with  thy  choice  speech  ^  adornest  Latium,  and
with  well-fitting  sock^  trippest  o'er  our  stage,  compel


uncommon  art  of  that  variation  of  tone  and  of  employing
those  brief  pauses,  which,  without  being  actual  declamation,
impress  on  the  hearers  the  sentiments  and  beauties  of  the
author."

■*  i.e.  adapted  for  the  flute  or  the  lyre.

^  The  style  being  here  elevated,  a  change  to  the  second
person  singular  may  be  permitted.

*  cp.  Cicero  quoted  in  Suetonius,  Life  of  Terence  :  tu  quo-
qiie  qui  solus  lecto  sermone,  Terenti.  .  .  .

^  cp.  Milton,  L'Alle(/ro  : "  If  Jonson's  learned  sock  be  on."

77


AUSONIUS

ad  nova  vix  inemorem  diverbia  coge  senectam. 60

iani  facimis,  Catilina,  timin  Lcpidiqiie  tuniultum,

ab  Lepido  et  Catulo  iain  res  et  tempora  Romae

orsus  bis  senos  seriem  coiiecto  })er  annos.

iaiii  lego  eivili  mixtura  mavorte  duellum,

niovit  quod  socio  Sertorius  exul  Hibero.  65

Nee  rudis  haec  avus  admoneOj  set  mille  docendo
ingenia  expertus. multos  lactantibus  aiinis
ipse  alui  gremioque  fovens  et  niurmura  solveus
eripui  tenerum  blandis  nutricibus  aevum.
mox  pueros  niolli  monitu  et  forniidine  leni  70

pellexi,  lit  mites  peterent  per  acerba  profectus,
carpturi  duleem  fructum  radicis  amarae.
idem  vesticipes  motu  iam  puberis  aevi
ad  mores  artesque  bonas  fandique  vigorem
produxi,  quamquam  imperium  eervice  negarent 75
ferre  nee  insertis  praeberent  ora  lupatis.
ardiia  teniperies,  dura  experientia,  rarus
eventuSj  longo  rerum  spectatus  ab  usu,
ut  regat  indocilem  mitis  censura  iuventam.
quae  tolerata  mihi,  donee  iam  aerumna  iuvaret 80
leniretque  usu  bona  eonsuetudo  laborem,
donee  ad  Augustae  pia  munera  diseiplinae
accirer  varioque  accingerer  auctus  lionore,
aurea  cum  parere  mihi  pulatia  iussum.
absistat  Nemesis,  ferat  et  fortuna  iocantem  :  85


^  «■(■. 78  IJ.C. Aiisonius liere adapts a fragment from
Sallust's  Histories  (frag.  1).

78


THE EPISTLES

my  scarce-remembering  age  to  new  delight  in  tliy
dialogues.  Now,  Catiline,  thy  monstrous  plot,  now
Lepidus'  sedition,  now  from  the  year  of  Le})idus
and  Catulus  ^  the  fortunes  and  vicissitudes  of  Rome
do  I  commence  and  trace  their  sequence  through
twice  six  years.  Now  read  I  of  that  war,  not  free
from  civil  strife,"  which  banished  Sertorius  stiri'ed
up  with  the  aid  of  his Iberian  allies.

^^  And  not  without  skill  do  I,  thy  grandfather,
counsel  thee  thus,  but  from  the  experience  gained
in  training  a  thousand  minds.  Many  from  their  in-
fant years  have  I  myself  brought  up,  and,  cherishing
them  in  ray  bosom  and  hushing  their  complaints,
have  stolen  their  tender  years  from  their  fond  nurses.
Presently,  as  boys,  with  mild  warnings  and  gentle
threats  I  lured  them  to  seek  through  sourness  for
ripe  success  and  pluck  sweet  fruit  sprung  from  a
bitter  root.  I,  too,  when  they  assumed  manhood's
garb  and  reached  their  vigorous  prime,  led  them  on
towards  good  living  and  sound  learning  and  forceful
speaking,  even  though  they  refused  to  bear  the  yoke
of  command  upon  their  necks  and  submitted  not
their  mouths  to  the  jagged  bits  thrust  upon  them.
Hard  the  control,  rough  the  experience,  scanty  the
result  when  viewed  after  long  practice,  to  govern
headstrong  youth  with  mild  correction  I  These  toils
did  I  endure  until— when  now  my  pains  were  be-
coming pleasant  and  kindly  Custom  was  lightening
my  toil  through  use — until,  invoked  to  the  sacred
task  of  an  Emjieror's  instruction,  I  am  exalted  and
compassed  about  with  honours  manifold,  what  time
the  golden  Palace  was  bidden  to  obey  me.  Let
Nemesis  hold  aloof,  and  may  Fortune  bear  with  my

*  Sertorius  was  joined  by  a  number  of  Marian  refugees,
particularly  by  Perpenna  who  assassinated  him  in  72  ii.c.

79


AUSONIUS

praesedi  imperio,  dum  praetextatus  in  ostro

et  sceptro  et  solio  praefert  sibi  iura  magistri

maioresque  putat  nostros  Augustus  honores.

quos  mox  sublimi  maturus  protulit  auctu,

quaestox*  ut  Augustis,  patri  natoque,  crearer,  90

ut  praefecturani  duplicem  sellamque  curulem,

ut  trabeani  pictamque  togam,  mea  praeniia,  consul

induerem  fastisque  meis  praelatus  haberer.

His  ego  quaesivi  meritum  quam  grande  nepoti
consul  avus  lumenque  tuae  praeluceo  vitae.  95

quamvis  et  patrio  iamdudum  nomine  clarus,
posses  ornatus,  posses  oneratus  haberi ;
accessit  tamen  ex  nobis  honor  inclitus. hunc  tu
effice,  ne  sit  onus,  per  te  ut  conixus  in  altum
conscendas  speresque  tuos  te  consule  fasces.  100

XXIII. — AusoNius PoNTio Paulino filio cum ii.le

MISISSET PoEMATIUM VERSIBUS PI.URIMIS UE Re-
GIBUS EX TrANQUILLO COLLECTIS

CoNDiDERAT  iam  Solis  equos  Tartesia  Calpe
stridebatque  freto  Titan  iam  segnis  Hibero :

'  Gratian.  -  See  Introduction,  p.  xi.

^  i.e.  he  was  exalted  aljove  his  colleague,  in  that  the  year
was  designated  "Consule  Ausonio."

*  The  characteristic  play  on  ornatus  .  .  .  oneratus  cannot
well  be  reproduced.

'■'  Paulinus,  born  at  Bordeaux  (?)  in  353  or  354  a.d.,  had
been  a  pupil  of  Ans(jnius.  He  practised  in  the  courts  and
quickly  rose  to  high  honours,  becoming  consul  in  378. He

8o


THE EPISTLES

light  speaking :  I  held  sway  o'er  the  Empire,  while
a  schoolboy  ^  endowed  with  jiurple,  sceptre,  throne,
submitted  himself  to  a  tutor's  laws,  and  Augustus
held  my  dignity  above  his  own.  That  dignity  in
due  time,  when  grown  to  manhood,  he  advanced  to
dizzy  heights,  so  that  I  was  created  Quaestor  by
the  Augusti,  father  and  sou ;  so  that  a  two-fold
prefecture  ^  and  curule  chair  were  mine ;  so  that,
for  my  reward,  as  consid  was  I  invested  with  the
purple  robe  and  the  embroidered  toga,  and  was  held
pre-eminent  in  the  annals  of  my  year.^

^*  Thus  have  I  gained  all  possible  advantage  for
my  grandchild,  thy  consul-grandfather,  and  shine
forth  the  beacon  of  thy  life.  Even  though,  long
since  distinguished  even  through  thy  father's  fame,
thou  mightst  seem  graced,  mightst  seem  laden ;  *
yet  from  me  thou  hast  gained  signal  renown  besides.
This  render  thou  no  load,  but  by  thine  own  efforts
struggle  to  climb  on  high  and  hope  for  thine  own
insignia,  thine  own  consulate.

XXIII. — AusoNius  TO Pontius Pauunus,^ his  Son,

WHEN THE LATTER HAD SENT HIM A PoEM ON

THE Kings, of great length and based on
Tranquillus

Now  had  Tartesian  Calpe  hidden  the  Sun's  coursers
and  Titan,  now  feeble,  plunged  hissing"  'neath  the

married  a  Spanish  wife,  Therasia  (the  "  Tanaquil "  of  sub-
sequent letters)  ;  but  in  389  or  390  retired  from  the  world  to
Barcelona,  where  he  was  baptized  and  ordained  priest  in  393.
In  394  he  left  for  Nola,  where  he  dwelt  as  an  ascetic  near
the  tomlj  of  St.  Felix.  About  409  a.d.  he  was  consecrated
bishop  of  Nola,  and  died  in  431  a.d.

^  C2J.  Juvenal  Sal.  xiv.  279  f.  :  aed  longe  Calpe  relicta
Audiet  Herculeo  stridentem  gurgite  solem.

8i

VOL. II.  O


AUSONIUS

iam  succedentes  quatiebat  Luna  iuvencas,
vinceret  ut  tenebras  radiis  velut  aemula  fratris  ;
iam  volucres  hominuraque  genus  superabile  curis 5
mulcebant  placidi  tranquilla  oblivia  somni ;
transierant  Idus,  medius  suprema  December
tempora  venturo  properabat  iungere  lano  ;
et  nonas  decimas  ab  se  Nox  longa  Kalendas
iugiter  acciri  celebranda  ad  festa  iubebat.  10

Neseis^  puto,  quid  velim  tot  versibus  dicere.  me-
dius fidius  neque  ego  bene  intellego:  tamen  suspicor.
iam  prima  nox  erat  ante  diem  nonum  decimum  kal.
Ian.,  cum  redditae  sunt  mihi  litterae  tuae  oppido
quam  litteratae.  his  longe  iucundissimum  poema
subdideras,  quod  de  tribus  Suetonii  libris,  quos  ille
de  regibus  dedit,  in  epitomen  coegisti  tanta  ele-
gantia,  solus  ut  mihi  videare  adsecutus,  quod  contra
rerum  naturam  est,  brevitas  ut  obsciu'a  non  esset.
in  his  versibus  ego  ista  collegi :

Europamque  Asiamque  duo  vel  maxima  terrae
membra,  quibus  Libyam  dubie  Sallustius  addit
Europae  adiunctam,  possit  cum  tertia  dici,
regnatas  multis,  quos  tama  oblitterat  et  quos
barbara  Romanae  non  tradunt  nomina  linguae — 5
Illibanum  Numidamque  Avelim  Parthumque Vononem
et  Caranum,  Pellalfea  dedit  qui  nomina  regum.


1  i.e.  Dec.  14th.

*  For  the  opening  of  the letter  down  to  this point  cp.
Seneca,  Apocolocynlosis,  2.

'  Tliis  work  is  no  longer  extant.

*  The  first  two  kings  are  unknown  :  for  Vouones  see  Tac.

82


THE EPISTLES

Iberian  wave  ;  now  Avas  Luna  lashing  on  her  advanc-
ing heifers  to  vanquish  darkness  with  her  beams  as
though  vying  with  her  brother ;  now  birds  and
human  kind,  so  vuhierable  by  care,  were  wooing
peaceful  sleep  and  calm  forgetfulness ;  the  Ides
were  passed,  and  mid-December  was  hastening  to
link  his  last  days  with  approaching  Janus ;  and  long
Night  was  bidding  the  nineteenth  day  of  the  Calends  ^
be  summoned  forthwith  to  celebrate  the  feast.

You  do  not  know,  I  expect,  what  I  wish  to  say
in  all  these  verses.  So  help  me  Heaven  !  even  I  do
not  clearly  understand  :  yet  I  have  a  glimmering.
It  was  early  in  the  night  preceding  the  nine-
teenth day  of  the  Calends  of  Januai-y^  when
your  wonderfully  lettered  letter  was  delivered  me.
Together  with  this  you  sent  an  extremely  delightful
poem  wherein  you  have  condensed  the  three  books  of
Suetonius,  which  he  devotes  to  the  Kings,^  so  grace-
fully that  I  regai'd  you  as  having  alone  achieved
what  is  contrary  to  the  ordinary  course  of  things —
conciseness  without  obscurity.  Amongst  these  verses
I  have  picked  out  the  following  : —

"Europe  and  Asia,  Earth's  two  greatest  mem-
bers, whereto  uncertainly  Sallust  adds  Libya  as  ap-
panage of  Europe,  whereas  it  might  be  called  a
third  part  of  the  globe,  have  been  ruled  by  many
kings  whom  Fame  blots  from  her  page,  and  whom
their  uncouth  names  perpetuate  not  in  Roman  speech
— Illibanus,  Numidian  Avelis,  Vonones  the  Parthian,
Caranus  who  founded  the  dynasty  of  Pella,*  and  he

Aim.  ii.  1,  58,  68.  Caranus,  a  Heraclid,  was  the  reputed
successor  of  Macedon,  son  of  Deucalion,  and  ancestor  of  the
Macedonian  kings.  For  Nechepsos  see  .Julius  Firmicus,
Math.  viii.  5,  and  for  Sesostris,  Herodotus  ii.  104  ff.

83
o  2


AUSONIUS

quique  magos  docuit  mysteria  vana  Nechepsos
et  (jui  regnavit  sine  nomine  moxcjue  Sesostris  .  .  .

Haec  tu  quam  perite  et  concinne,  quam  modulate
et  dulciter,  ita  iiixta  naturam  Romanorum  accentuum
enuntiasti,  ut  tamen  veris  et  primigenis  vocibus  sua
fastigia  non  perirent.  iam  quid  de  eloquentia  dicam?
liquido  adiurare  possum  nullum  tibi  ad  poeticam  fa-
eundiam  Romanae  iuventutis  aequari :  certe  ita  milii
videri.  si  erro,  pater  sum,  fer  me  et  noli  exigere
iudicium  obstante  pietate.  verum  ego  cum  pie  dili-
gam,  sincere  et  severe  iudico.  adfice  me,  oro,  tali
munei'e  frequenter,  quo  et  oblector  et  lionoror.  ac-
cessit  tibi  ad  artem  poeticam  mellea  adulatio.  quid
enim  aliud  agunt :

Audax  Icario  qui  fecit  nomina  ponto

et  qui  Chalcidicas  moderate  enavit  ad  arces,

nisi  ut  tu  vegetam  et  sublimem  alacritatem  tuam
temeritatem  voces,  me  vero,  et  consultum  et  quem
filius  debeat  imitari,  salutari  prudentia  praeditum
dicas  ?  quod  equidem  contra  est.  nam  tu  summa
sic  adpetis,  ut  non  decidas  :  senectus  mea  satis
habet,  si  consistat.

Haec  ad  te  breviter  et  illico  vesperis  illius  secuto
mane  dictavi ;  ita  enim  tabellarius  tuus,  ut  epistulam

^  cp.  Virgil,  Aen.  vi.  16.
84


THE EPISTLES

who  taught  the  wizards  unavailing  mysteries,  Ne-
chepsos,  or  reigned  and  left  no  name,  and  afterwards
Sesostris  .  .  ."

How  skilfully  and  neatly,  how  harmoniously  and
sweetly  have  you  delivered  these  names,  conforming
at  once  to  the  character  of  our  Roman  accent,  yet
not  allowing  the  true  and  original  sounds  to  lose
their  proper  stress !  And  then  what  shall  I  say  of
your  gift  for  expression  ?  I  can  absolutely  take  my
oath  that  for  fluency  in  verse  none  of  our  Roman
youths  is  your  equal :  at  any  rate,  that  is  my  opinion.
If  I  am  wrong,  I  am  your  father,  bear  Avith  me  and
do  not  force  from  me  a  verdict  which  my  natural
feelings  reject.  But  in  fact,  while  I  love  fondly,  I
criticise  frankly  and  strictly.  Bestow  on  me,  I  beg,
such  favours  constantly,  thereby  both  delighting  and
complimenting  me.  Your  skill  in  poetry  has  the
additional  attraction  of  delicious  flattery.  For  what
else  do  these  lines  mean  ? —
"  He  who  through rashness  gave his  name  to the

Icarian  Sea
And he who, prudent, winged his way to the

Chalcidian  hold,"  ^

save  that  you  call  your  own  lively  and  soaring  vigour
rashness,  but  aflirm  that  I,  being  both  wary  and  one
whom  a  son  ought  to  imitate,  am  endowed  with  a
wholesome  cautiousness  ?  -  But  indeed  the  reverse  is
true.  For  you  fly  high  in  such  wise  that  you  do
not fall :  my  old  age  is  content  to  stay  still.

I  make  this  brief  pronouncement  out  of  hand  on
the  morning  next  after  the  evening  mentioned  ;  for
your  messenger  is  only  waiting  long  enough  to  take

^  i.e.  Paulinus  compares  himself  to  Icarus  and  Ausoiiius
to  Daedalus.

85


AUSONIUS

referretj  instabat.  nam  si  mihi  otium  fuerit,  oblec-
tabile  negotium  erit  ad  te  prolixius  delirarCj  te  ut
cliciam,  mihi  ut  satisfaciam. vale.

XXIV. — AusoNius  Paulino  Sal. Pl. D.

Paulino  Ausonius. metrum  sic  suasit,  ut  esses

tu  prior  at  nomen  praegrederere  meum,
quamquam  et  fastorum  titulo  prior  et  tua  Romae

praecessit  nostrum  sella  curulis  ebur,
et,  quae  iamdudum  tibi  palma  poetica  pollet,  5

lemnisco  ornata  est,  quo  mea  palma  caret,
longaevae  tantum  superamus  honore  senectae.

quid  refert? cornix  non  ideo  ante  cycnum ;
nee  quia  mille  annos  vivit  Gangeticus  ales,

vincit  centum  oculos,  regie  pavo,  tuos.  10

cedimus  ingenio,  quantum  praecedimus  aevo  ;

adsurgit  Musae  nostra  Camena  tuae.
Vive,  vale  et  totidem  venturos  consere  ianos,

quot  tuus  aut  noster  conseruere  patres.

XXV. — Ausonius  Paulino  Suo  Sal. Pl. D.

QuANTo  me  adfecit  beneficio  non  delata  equidem,
sed  suscepta  mea  querimonia,  Pauline  fili !  veritus
displicuisse  oleum,  quod  miseras,  munus  iterasti,  ad-
dito  etiam  Barcinonensis  muriae  condimento  cumu-


^  The /emniscus was a streamer attached to  a  victor's
crown,  as  a  mark  of  extraordinary  distinction.
^  The  Phoenix  :  cp.  iTriphun  16.

86


THE EPISTLES

back  a  reply.  For  if  I  have  spare  time,  it  will  be
a  delightful  occupation  to  maunder  on  at  greater
length  to  you,  partly  to  draw  you  out,  and  partly
to  please  myself. Farewell.

XXIV. — AusoNius  TO  Paulinus  sends  hearty
Greeting

To  Paulinus,  Ausonius.  Metre  so  bids,  placing
vou  before  me  and  setting  your  name  in  front  of
mine.  And  yet  before  mine  comes  your  name  in  our
annals,  and  at  Rome  your  curule  chair  of  ivory  has
precedence  of  mine,  and  in  poetry  your  palm  is
long  since  decked  with  ribbons  ^  which  my  palm
lacks.  'Tis  in  the  glory  of  prolonged  old  age  alone
I  have  the  advantage — what  matters  that .''  The
crow  is  not  therein  above  the  swan,  nor,  because  he
lives  a  thousand  years,  does  the  bird  of  Ganges  ^
surpass  the  kingly  peacock  with  his  hundred  eyes.
I  am  beneath  you  in  genius  as  far  as  I  am  above
you  in  age  ;  my  homely  Muse  rises  in  deference  to
yours.

13  Live,  keep  well,  and  in  the  time  to  come  link
New  Year  to  New  Year  as  oft  as  did  your  father  or
mine.

XXV. — Ausonius  to  his  dear  Paulinus  sends
HEARTY  Greeting

What  kind  treatment  of  me,  that  my  complaint
is  dealt  with  without  even  being  delivered,  my  son
Paulinus !  Fearing  that  the  oil  you  sent  had  not
given  satisfaction,  you  repeat  the  gift  and,  by  the
addition  of  some  Barcelona  sauce  called  muria,^  in-

*  =  a.\fj.vpls  :  a  sauce  prepared  by  pickling  the  intestines
of  tunnies  or  scombers  in  brine.

87


AUSONIUS

latius  praestitisti.  scis  autem  nie  id  nomen  muriae,
quod  in  usu  vulgi  est,  nee  solere  nee  posse  dicere,
cum  scientissimi  veterum  et  Graeca  vocabula  fasti-
dientes  Latinum  in  gari  a{)pellatione  non  habeant.
sed  ego,  quocumque  nomine  liquor  iste  sociorum
vocatur,

lam  patinas  implebo  meas,  ut  parcior  ille
maiorum  mensis  applaria  sucus  inundet.

Quid  autem  tam  amabile  tamque  hosjjitale,  quam
quod  tu,  ut  me  participes,  delicias  tuas  in  ipsa  pri-
mitiarum  novitate  defrudas  ?  o  melle  dulcior,  o
Gratiarum  venustate  festivior,  o  ab  omnibus  patrio
stringende  complexu  !  sed  haec  atque  alia  huius
modi  documenta  liberalis  animi  aliquis  fortasse  et
aliquando,  quamvis  varus :  illud  de  epistularum  tu-
arum  eruditione,  de  poematis  iucunditate,  de  inven-
tione  et  concinnatione  iuro  omnia  nulli  uraquam
imitabile  futurum,  etsi  fateatur  imitandum.  de  quo
opusculo,  ut  iubes,  faciam.  exquisitim  universa  li-
mabo  et  quamvis  per  te  manus  summa  contigerit,
caelum  superfluae  expolitionis  adhibebo,  magis  ut
tibi  paream,  quam  ut  perfectis  aliquid  adiciam.

Interea  tamen,  ne  sine  corollario  j)oetico  tabella-
rius tuus rediret, paucis iambicis praeludendum


'  =  yapov,  a  variety  of  mnria  prepared  from  the  ydpos,  or
scomber.

*  C]>.  Pliny,  X.II.  xxxi.  94  :  aliud  etiamnum  liquoris  ex-
quisiti  geniis, quod  garon  vocavere, intestinis  piscium  .  .  .


THE EPISTLES

crease  its  measure.  But  you  know  that  I  am  neither
accustomed  nor  able  to  pronounce  that  name  tnuria
which  is  popularly  used,  though  the  most  learned  of
the  ancients,  even  while  disdaining  to  use  Greek
terms,  have  no  Latin  name  by  which  to  call  garum.^
But  by  whatever  name  that  "  Liquor  of  the  Allies  "  ^
is  called,

"  ni  Hood  mv  plate  :  tiiis  juice,  too  little  used
Bv  our  forefathers,  must  overHow  the  spoon."

But  what  could  be  more  friendly  or  more  generous
than  that  you,  to  give  me  a  share,  should  cheat
yourself  of  your  own  dainties  just  when  freshly
coming  into  season  ? O  friend  sweeter  than  honey,

0  more  delightsome  than  the  Graces'  charms,  O
worthy  to  be  clasped  by  everyone  in  a  fatherly
embrace  !  However,  these  and  other  tokens  of  a
generous  nature  some  other,  [)erchance,  some  day,
though  but  rarely,  may  reveal  :  as  for  your  talent
shown  in  the  scholarliness  of  your  letter,  in  the
sweetness  of  your  poem,  in  imagination  and  in  apt
composition,  I  swear  by  everything  that  it  will  never
be  imitable  by  any  man,  however  much  he  admit
that  it  deserves  imitation. As  for  the  work  itself,

1  will  do  as  you  bid.  I  will  work  over  the  whole
minutely,  and  although  it  has  received  the  highest
finish  at  your  hands,  I  will  apply  my  chisel  to  give  a
superfinish  however  needless,  but  rather  to  obey  you
than  to  add  aught  to  what  is  perfect.

Meanwhile,  however,  that  your  messenger  may
not  return  without  a  douceur  of  verse,  I  think  I
must  make  a  preliminary  gambol  in  a  few  iambics

sale  maceratis  ut  sit  ilia  putrescentium  sanies  .  .  .  Sociorum
id  appellatur.

89


AUSONIUS

putavi,  dum  illud,  quod  a  me  heroico  metro  desi-
deras,  incohatur.  isti  tamen,  ita  te  et  Hesperium
salvos  habeam,  quod  spatio  lucubratiunculae  unius
effusi,  quamquam  hoc  ipsi  de  se  probabunt,  tamen
nihil  diligentiae  ulterioris  habuerunt. vale.

lambe  Parthis  et  Cydonum  spiculis,
iambe  pinnis  alitum  velocior,
Padi  ruentis  impetu  torrentior,
magna  sonorae  grandinis  vi  densior,
flammis  corusci  fulminis  vibratior, *  5

iam  nunc  per  auras  Persei  talaribus
petasoque  ditis  Arcados  vectus  vola.
si  vera  fania  est  Hippocrene^  quam  pedis
pulsu  citatam  cornipes  fudit  fremens,
tu,  fonte  in  ipso  procreatus  Pegasi,  10

primus  novorum  metra  iunxisti  pedum
sanctisque  Musis  concinentibus  novem
caedem  in  draconis  concitasti  Delium.

Fer  banc  salutem  praepes  et  volucripes
Paulini  ad  usque  moenia,  Hebromagum  loquor, 15
et  protinus,  iam  si  resumptis  viribus
alacri  refecti  corporis  motu  viget,
salvere  iussum  mox  reposce  mutuum.
nihil  moreris  iamque,  dum  loquor,  redi,
imitatus  ilium  stirpis  auctorem  tuae,  20

triplici  furentcm  qui  Chimaeram  incendio
supervolavit  tutus  igne  proximo,
die  "te  valere,"  die:  "salvere  te  iubet
amicus  et  vicinus  et  fautor  tuus,

1  Mercury  (born  in  Arcadia)  was  god  of  messengers :  the
pelasus,  with  which  he  is  represented,  was  worn  bj' travellers
and  in- later  art  is  represented  as  winged.

-  The  first  verse  ever  invented  was  believed  to  be  the
iambic Irj iroiaV, Iri traidi', trj iraiav—a. strain with which

90


THE EPISTLES

while  the  work  in  heroic  strains  which  you  want  of
me  is  beginning.  But — so  may  I  have  you  and
Hesperius  safe !  —  since  they  are  dashed  off  in  a
single  evening  (though  this  they  in  themselves  Avill
guarantee),  have  had  no  further  pains  bestowed  upon
them. Farewell.

Iambus  than  Parthian  or  Cydonian  dart,  Iambus
than  wings  of  birds  more  fleet,  than  rushing  Padus'
current  more  impetuous,  than  the  downpour  of  ratt-
ling hail  more  searching,  than  lightning's  dazzling
flash  more  darting,  even  now  speed  through  the
air  borne  by  Perseus'  winged  sandals  and  with  the
cap  of  the  Arcadian  god.^  If  'tis  truly  told  that
Hippocrene  gushed  forth  at  the  hoof-beat  of  the
impatient  courser,  thou,  begotten  in  the  very  fount
of  Pegasus,  wast  first  to  link  new  rhvthmic  feet
and,  while  the  nine  holy  Muses  sang  in  harmony,
didst  urge  the  lord  of  Delos  to  slaughter  of  the
dragon.2

1^  Bear  this  my  greeting,  fleetfoot,  winged-foot,
even  to  the  town  where  Paulinus  dwells,  I  mean
Hebromagus,  and  straightway,  if,  his  strength  now
regained,  brisk  vigour  nerves  his  refreshed  frame,
bid  him  "  hail,  "  then  demand  of  him  a  return.  Tarry
not  at  all,  and  return  now  ere  I  cease  to  speak,  after
the  example  of  that  author  of  thy  source,^  who  o'er
Chimaera  with  her  triple  blast  of  raging  flame  flew
safe  from  the  fire  so  near.  Say  "  hail  to  thee,"  say
"  greetings  to  thee  sends  thy  friend  and  neighbour

Apollo  was  encouraged  in  his  struggle  w  ith  the  dragon  for
the  possession  of  Delphi  (see  1.  13).  See  Terentianus  Maurus,
1558  ff.,  a  passage  which  is  almost  paraphrased  here.

•  i.e.  Hippocrene,  which  burst  forth  at  the  hoof-beat  of
Pegasus  (auctor) ;  cp.  11.  8  ff.

91


AUSONIUS

honoris  auctor^  altor  ingenii  tui."  25

die  et  magister,  die  parens^  die  omnia
blanda  atqiie  sancta  caritatis  nomina.
haveque  dicto  die  vale,  actutum  et  red!.

Quod  si  rogabitj  quid  super  scriptis  novis
maturus  aevi  nee  rudis  diiudicem  :  30

nescire  diees,  sed  paratum  iam  fore
heroicorum  versuuni  plenum  essedum.
eui  subiugabo  de  molarum  ambagibus,
qui  maehinali  saxa  volvunt  pondere,
tripedes  caballos  terga  ruptos  verbere,  35

his  ut  vehantur  tres  sodales  nuntii.
fors  et  rogabit,  quos  sodales  dixeris
sinml  venire  ? die  :  "  Trinodem  dactylum
vidi  paratum  crucianti  cantherio  :
spondeus  illi  lentipes  ibat  comes,  40

paribus  moratur  qui  locis  cursum  meum,
mihique  similis,  semper  adversus  tamen,
nee  par,  nee  impar,  qui  trochaeus  dicitur."

Haec  fare  cursim  nee  moratus  per  vol  a,
aliquid  reportans  interim  munusculi  45

de  largitate  musici  jiromjitarii.

XXVI. — AusoNius  Paulino  suo  Sal. Pl. D.

MuLTAs  et  frequentes  mihi  gratiae  tuae  eausas  et
occasio  subinde  nata  concinnat  et  naturae  tuae  faci-
litas  benigna  conciliat,  Pauline  fill, nam  quia  niiiil


^  Paulinus  owed  his  consulship  to  the  influence  of  Ausonius.
92


THE EPISTLES

and  tliy  patron,  the  source  of  thine  honours,^  the
fosterer  of  thy  intellect."  Say  also  "master,"  say
"  father,"  say  every  caressing  name  of  hallowed
affection.  And  havin<j^  said  "  Hail,"  say  "  Farewell  "
and  instantly  return.

■'^•'  But  if  he  ask  what  judgment  my  i*ipe  and  not
unskilful  age  pronounces  on  his  latest  writings,  say
thou  knowest  not,  but  that  soon  there  will  be  ready
a  waggon  full  of  heroic  verses.  Thereto  I  will  yoke
a  pair  of  three-legged  screws,  back-broken  with  the
lash,  taken  from  the  labyrinths  of  the  mill,  where
by  the  heavy  crank  they  turn  the  millstones,  that
by  these  may  travel  three  jovial  messengers.  Per-
chance, too,  he  will  ask  who  are  these  jovial  fellows
whom  thou  dost  say  are  coming  in  a  troop  ?  Then
say  :  "  I  saw  tliree-jointed  Dactyl  ready  on  a  heart-
breaking hack  ;  ^  slow-footed  Spondee  was  tramping
in  his  company — he  who  at  equal  intervals  checks
my  career— and  one  much  like  me  but  always  facing
about,  neither  equal  to  me  nor  unequal,  who  is  called
Trochee."

^^  Thus  speak  :  then  in  haste  fly  hither  straight
without  delay,  bringing  back  meanwhile  some  little
gift  from  the  abundance  of  that  storehouse  of  poetry.

XXVI. AUSONIUS TO HIS FRIEND PaULINUS SENDS

HEARTY  Greeting

Many  and  various  are  the  causes  I  have  for  grati-
tude to  you,  which  both  circumstance,  arising  from
time  to  time,  happily  introduces,  and  the  ready
generosity  of  your  nature  voluntarily  invites,  my
son Paulinus. For  in that you deny me nothing

"  cp.  Plautus,  Caplivi,'8,\'\::  qui  advehuntur  quadrupedanti
crucianti  cantherio.

93


AUSONIUS

poscente  nie  abnuis,  magis  acuis  procaciam  quam
retundis :  ut  nunc  quoque  in  causa  Philonis  procu-
ratoris  quondam  mei  experiere,  qui  apud  Hebro-
niaguni  conditis  mercibus,  quas  per  agros  diversos
coemit,  concesso  ab  liominibus  tuis  usus  hospitio,
inmature  periclitatur  expelli.  quod  nisi  indulseris
rogante  me,  ut  et  mora  habitandi  ad  commodum
suum  utatur  et  nauso  aliave  qua  navi  usque  ad  op-
pidum  praebita  frugis  aliquantum  nostrae  advehi
possit,  Lucaniacus  ut  inopia  liberetur  mature  :  tota
ilia  familia  hominis  litterati  non  ad  Tullii  frumen-
tariani,  sed  ad  Curculionem  Plauti  pertinebit.

Hoc  quo  facilius  impetrarem,  aut  quo  maiorem
verereris  molestiam,  si  negares,  concinnatam  iambis
signatamque  ad  te  epistulam  misi,  ne  subornatum
diceres  tabellarium,  si  ad  te  sine  signi  fide  veniret.
signavi  autem,  non,  ut  Plautus  ait.

Per  ceram  et  linum  ^  litterasque  intei'pretes  ;

sed  per  poeticum  characterem :  magis  notam  inustam,
quam  signum  impressum  iudicares.

Philon,  meis  qui  vilicatus  praediis,

ut  ij)se  vult,  eVtrpoTTo?,
(nam  gloriosuni  (iraeculus  nomen  putat,

quod  sermo  fucat  Dorius)

^  So  Plautua,  Pseud.  42 :  lignum,  MSS.  and  Peiper.

^  Or  Eburoinagus,  the  muilern  Brain,  iitar  the  foot  of  llie
eastern  Pyrenees.  *  A.'s  estate.

94


THE EPISTLES

when  I  demand,  you  whet  my  effrontery  rather  than
blunt  it ;  as  now  again  you  will  realize  in  the  matter
of  Philo,  formerly  my  bailiff,  who,  after  storing  at
Hebromagus  ^  goods  which  he  has  bought  up  on
various  estates,  is  in  danger  of  being  driven  in-
conveniently from  the  slielter  which  your  people
afforded  him.  And  unless  you  kindly  grant  this  my
request — namely  that  he  be  permitted  to  stay  on
there  as  suits  his  purpose,  and  that  a  barge  or  some
sort  of  vessel  be  furnished  him,  that  a  little  of  my
corn  may  be  transported  as  far  as  the  town,  thereby
delivering  Lucaniacus  •^  from  famine  betimes — a  lite-
rary man's  whole  household  there  will  be  reduced,
not  to  Cicero's  Speech  on  the  Corn  Stipply,^  but  to  the
Weevil  of  Plautus.

That  I  may  the  more  easily  obtain  this  boon,  or
that  you  may  fear  greater  bother  if  you  refuse,  I
send  you  a  letter  composed  in  iambics,  and  duly
sealed,  that  you  may  not  say  the  messenger  has
been  tampered  with,  should  he  come  to  you  without
the  guarantee  of  a  seal.  Yet  I  have  sealed  it,  not,
as  Plautus  says —

"  With  wax  and  thread  and  signs  significant,"  ^

but  with  a  poetic  stamp  :  this  you  may  regard  more
as  a  brand  burnt  in  than  a  seal  impressed.^

Philo,  who  is  bailiff  of  my  estate,  or  as  he  him-
self wishes,  the  administrator  (for  your  Greekling
thinks  that  a  fine-sounding  name  wiiich shows  the

*  i.e.  the  third  speech  against  Verres,  dealing  witli  the
Sicilian  corn  supplies,  ''  Pseudolus,  42.

*  i.e.  "my  style  is  like  the  brand  of  a  hot  iron,  not  super-
ficial like  the  impression  of  a  seal."

95


AUSONIUS

suis  querellis  adsei'it  nostras  preces,  5

qiias  ipse  lentus  prosequor.
videbis  ipsuni,  qualis  adstet  coinmimis,

imago  fortunae  suae,
canus,  comosus,  liispidus,  trux,  atrihiix,

Terentianus  Phormio,  10

horrens  capillis  ut  marinus  asperis

echinus  aut  versus  niei.
liic  saepe  falsus  niessibus  vegrandibus

nomen  perosus  vilici,
semente  sera  sive  multum  praecoqua  15

et  siderali  inscitia
caelum  lacessens  seque  culpae  subtrahens

reos  peregit  caelites.
non  cultor  instans,  non  arator  gnaruris,

promusque  quam  condus  magis,  20

terram  infidelem  nee  feracem  criminans

negotiari  maluit
mercator  quo  <libet>  foro  venalium,

mutator  ad  Graecam  fidem,
sapiensque  supra  Graeciae  septem  viros  25

octavus  accessit  sophos.
et  nunc  jiaravit  ^  triticum  casco  sale

novusque  pollet  emporus ;
adit  inquilinos,  rura,  vicos,  oppida

soli  et  sali  commercio  ;  30

acatis,  phaselis,  lintribus,  stlattis,  rate

Tarnim  et  Garumnam  permeat

^  Z :  parahit,  Peiptr.


^  cp.  Cic.  Pro  Caecina,  x.  27  :  nee  minus  niger,  nee  minus
confidens  quam  ille  Terentianus  est  Phormio.

^  Hor.  Epod.  V.  'J7  f.  :  horret  capillis  ut  niaiiuus  asperis
echinus  aut  Laurens  aper.


96


THE EPISTLES

gilt  of  the  classic  tongue),  unites  with  his  complaints
my  prayers,  which  reluctantly  I  myself  dispatch.
You  shall  see  the  man  himself  as  he  stands  close  by
me,  the  very  image  of  his  class,  grey,  bushy-haired,
unkempt,  blustering,  bullying,  Terence's  Phormio,^
with  stiff  hair  bristling  like  a  sea-urchin-  or  my  lines.
This  fellow,  when  light  harvests  had  oft  belied  his
promises,  came  to  hate  the  name  of  bailiff;  and,
after  sowing  late  or  nmch  too  early  through  igno-
rance of  the  stars,^  made  accusation  against  the
powers  above,  carping  at  heaven  and  shifting  the
blame  from  himself  No  diligent  husbandman,  no
experienced  ploughman,  a  spender  rather  than  a
getter,*  abusing  the  land  as  treacherous  and  un-
fruitful, he  preferred  to  do  business  as  a  dealer  in
any  sale-market,  bartering  for  "Greek  credit,"  ''  and,
wiser  than  the  Seven  VV^orthies  of  Greece,  has  joined
them  as  an  eighth  sage.  And  now  he  has  provided
grain  at  the  price  of  old  salt,*^  and  blossoms  out
as  a  new  trader ;  he  visits  tenants,  country  parts,
villages  and  townships,  travelling  by  land  and  sea  ;
by  bark,  skiff,  schooner,  galley,  he  traverses  the
windings of  the Tarn and the Garonne, and by

'  i.e. of those which mark the time for sowing. Soe
Hesiod,  W.  and  D.  384,  615  f.

*  cp.  Plant.  Psend.  (j08  :  coiuliis  promus  procurator  pen!.
^  See  iJpi.st.  vi.  42  (note).

•  i.e.  ]]\  bartering  salt  for  grain.

97

vol.. II.  H


AUSONIUS

ac  lucra  dainiiis,  danina  mutans  fVaudibus

se  ditat  et  me  pauperat.
Is  nunc  ad  usque  vectus  Hebiomagum  tuani 35

sedem  locavit  niercibus,
ut  inde  nauso  devehat[ur  tritiouni  *]

nostros  in  usus,  ut  refert.
hunc  ergo  paucis  ne  graveris  hospitem

[cura  diebus  ut  meet,^]  40

adactus  ut  niox  navis  auxilio  tuae

ad  usque  portus  oppidi
iam  iam  Perusina,  iam  Saguntina  fame

Lucaniacum  Hberet.
Hoc  si  impetratum  munus  abs  te  accepero, 45

prior  colere  quam  Ceres  :
Triptolemon  olim,  sive  Epimenidem  vocant,

aut  viUconum  Buzygem,
tuo  locabo  postferendos  numini,

nam  munus  hoc  fiet  tuum.  50

XXVI  I. — Ad eundem cum ille ad alia magis

RESPONDEHET NEQUE SE VENTURUM POLl.ICERETUR

DiscuTiMUs,  Pauline,  iugum^  quod  nota  fovebat
temperies,  leve  quod  positu  et  venerabile  iunctis
tractabat  paribus  Concordia  mitis  liabenis  ;
quod  per  tarn  longam  seriem  volventibus  annis
tabula  non  umquam,  numquam  querimonia  movit, 5
nulla  querella  loco  pepulit,  non  ira  nee  error
^  Suppl.  Schenld.  "  Suppl.  Translator.

^  i.e.  where  there  is  a  profit  he  represents  it  (in  his
accounts)  as  a  loss ;  and  where  there  is  really  loss  he
fraudulently  enlarges  it.

■''  Perusia,  held  by  L.  Antonius,  was  reduced  through
famine  by  Oolavian  (41-40  B.C.)  ;  Saguntuni  was  similarly
taken  by  Hannibal  (219  B.C.).

98


THE EPISTLES

changing  profits  into  losses  and  losses  into  frauds,^
he  makes  himself  rich  and  me  poor.

^^  He  now  has  sailed  right  up  to  your  villa  He-
bromagus  and  made  it  the  depot  for  his  goods,  that
thence  by  barge  grain  may  be  carried  down  for  my
service,  as  he  avers.  This  guest,  then,  lest  you  be
burdened,  speed  on  his  way  in  a  few  days,  that,
transported  forthwith  by  the  help  of  your  vessel
as  far  as  the  township's  harbour,  he  may  deliver
Lucaniacus  from  famine  by  now,  by  now  Perusian,
by  now  Saguntine.^

■'^  If  I  receive  this  boon  I  ask  of  you,  you  shall
be  worshipped  above  Ceres :  old  Triptolemus  or,  as
some  call  him,  Epimenides,  or  Buzyges,^  the  bailiff's
patron,  will  I  arrange  to  make  inferior  to  your  god-
head, for  this  corn  will  become  your  gift.

XXVH. — To THF. SAME PaULINUS, WHEN HE REPLIED
TO EVERYTHING ELSE WITHOUT PROMISING TO COME

We  are  shaking  off'  a  yoke,  Paulinus,  which  its
tried  equableness  once  made  easy,  a  yoke  liglitly
laid  and  worthy  the  respect  of  those  it  joined,  which
mild  Concord  used  to  guide  with  even  reins  ;  which
through  so  long  a  line  of  rolling  years  never  an  idle
tale,  never  a  peevish  complaint  has  stirred,  nor
quarrel  thrust  from  its  place,  nor  anger,  nor  mis-
apprehension, nor  Suspicion  which,  lending  too  ready

'■'  According  to  Hesycliius,  an  Attic  liero  who  first  yoked
oxen  to  tlie  plough :  lie  was  also  known  as  Epimenides.
Triptolemus  was  otherwise  believed  to  have  made  this  in-
vention.

99


AUSONILTS

nee  quae  conpositis  male  suadae  crediila  causis
conciiinat  veri  similes  suspiciu  cuIjkis  ;
tarn  placidum,  tam  mite  iiigum,  quod  utrique  parentes
ad  senium  nostri  traxere  ab  origine  vitae  10

inpositumque  piis  lieredibus  usque  niauere
optai'uiit,  dum  longa  dies  dissolveret  aevum.
et  mansit,  dum  laeta  fides  nee  cura  laborat
officii  servare  vices,  set  sponte  feruntur
iucustoditum  sibi  continuantia  cursum.  15

Hoc  tam  mite  iugum  docili  cervice  subirent
Martis  equi  stabuloque  feri  Diomedis  abacti
et  qui  mutatis  ignoti  Solis  habenis
fubnineum  Phaethonta  Pado  mersere  iugales.
discutitur,  Pauline,  tamen  :  nee  culpa  duorum  20

ista,  set  unius  tantum  tua. namque  ego  semper
contenta  cervice  feram. consorte  laborum
destituor,  nee  tam  promptum  gestata  duobus
unum  deficiente  pari  perferre  sodalem.
non  animus  viresque  labant,  sed  iniqua  ferendo 25
condicio  est  oneri,  cum  pondus  utrumque  relicto
ingruit  acceduntque  alienae  pondera  librae,
sic  pars  aegra  hominis  trahit  ad  contagia  sanum
corpus  et  exigui  quamvis  discrimine  membri
tota  per  innumeros  artus  conpago  vacillat.  30

obruar  usque  tamen,  veteris  ne  desit  amici
me  durante  fides  memorique  ut  fixa  sub  aevo
restituant  profugum,  solacia  cassa,  sodalem.

Inpie,  Pirithoo  disiungere  Thesea  posses
Euryalumque  suo  socium  secernere  Niso  ;  35


THE EPISTLES

ears  to  Persuasion's  truinped-up  pretexts,  forms  from
them  grievances  to  look  like  truth  ;  so  gentle,  so
easy  a  yoke  which  both  our  fathers  drew  on  into
old  age  from  the  beginning  of  their  life,  which,  laid
upon  tiieir  duteous  heirs,  they  would  have  had  re-
main throughout  till  length  of  days  broke  up  our
lives.  And  remain  it  did,  while  there  was  joyous
trust  and  no  laborious  care  to  maintain  exchange
of  good  offices,  but  they  flowed  freely,  keeping
unbroken  their  unguarded  course.

^^  This  yoke  so  mild  Mars'  horses  would  endure
with  obedient  neck,  and  those  wild  steeds  stolen
from  the  stable  of  Diomedes,  and  even  that  team
which,  when  another  than  the  Sun  held  their  reins,
plunged  lightning-blasted  Phaethon  in  the  Padus.
Yet  it  is  being  shaken  off,  Paulinus  ;  and  that,  not
through  the  fault  of  both,  but  of  one  alone — of
thee.  For  my  neck  will  ever  bear  it  gladly.  It  is
the  partner  of  my  toil  deserts  me,  and  'tis  not  so
easy  for  one,  when  his  fellow  fails,  to  carr}^  on  alone
that  which  the  two  bare  as  comrades.  Heart  and
strength  fail  not,  but  unfair  is  the  condition  of
carrying  a  burden,  when  both  loads  are  laid  on  the
partner  left  and  the  weight  of  another's  charge  is
added.  So  one  ailing  member  in  a  man  involves  the
sound  body  in  infection,  and  the  j)eril  even  of  a  tiny
limb  makes  the  whole  knitted  frame  totter  in  all  its
countless  joints.  Yet  let  me  even  be  crushed  if  only
loyalty  to  my  old  friend  fail  not  while  I  endure,  and
memory  deep-planted  in  the  years  bring  back — vain
consolation  ! — my  errant  comrade.

^*  Ah,  heartless !  From  Peirithous  thou  couldst
part  Theseus  and  separate  Euryalus  from  the  com-
pany  of his dear  Nisus ; urged to flight by  thee,

lOI


AUSONIUS

te  suadente  fugam  Pylades  liquisset  Oresten

nee  ciistodisset  Siculus  vadimonia  Damon.

quantum  oblectamen  populi,  quae  vota  bonorum

sperato  fraudata  l)ono  I  gratantia  cuncti

verba  loquebantur:  iam  nomina  nostra  parabant iO

inserere  antiquis  aevi  melioris  amicis.

cedebat  Pylades,  Phrygii  quoque  gloria  Nisi

iam  minor  et  promissa  obiens  vadimonia  Damon.

nos  documenta  magis  felicia,  qualia  magnus

Scipio  longaevique  dedit  sapientia  Laeli :  45

nos  studiis  animisque  isdem  miracula  cunctis,

lioc  maiora,  pares  fuimus  quod  dispare  in  aevo.

ocius  ilia  iugi  fatalis  solvere  lora

Pellaeum  potuisse  ducem  reor,  abdita  opertis

principiis  et  utroque  caput  celantia  nodo.  50

Grande  aliquod  verbum  nimirum  diximus,  ut  se
inferret  nimiis  vindex  Rhamnusia  votis  ;
Arsacidae  ut  quondam  regis  non  laeta  triumphis
grandia  verba  premens  ultrix  dea  Medica  belli
sistere  Cecropiduni  in  terris  nionumenta  paranti 55
obstitit  et  Graio  iam  iam  Agenda  tropaeo
ultro  etiam  victis  Nemesis  stetit  Attica  Persis.

Quae  tibi  Romulidas  proceres  vexare  libido  est?
in  Medos  Arabasque  tuos  per  nubila  et  atrum
perge  chaos  : Romana  procul  tibi  nomina  sunto. 60

^  cp.  Epigr.  xlii.  Pausanias  (i.  xxxiii.  2)  relates  that  the
Persians,  making  sure  of  victory,  brought  with  them  to  Mara-
tlion  a  block  of  Parian  marlile  to  l)e  erected  there  as  a
trophy  (Graio  iam  iumfgenda  tropaeo).  After  the  rout  of  the

102


THE EPISTLES

Pylades  would  have  left  Orestes,  and  Sicilian  Damon
would  not  have  kept  his  bond  !  What  general  de-
light, what  good  men's  prayers  have  thus  been
cheated  of  their  looked-for  gain  !  They  all  were
speaking  words  of  congratulation:  already  the}'  were
about  to  enter  our  names  in  the  lists  of  friends  be-
longing to  nobler  days  of  old.  Pylades  was  giving
place,  Phrygian  Nisus  also  now  was  growing  less
famed,  and  Damon  who  met  his  promised  bail.  We
showed  less  tragic  tokens  of  friendship,  even  as
great  Scipio  and  Laelius,  long-lived  in  wisdom  :  we,
with  pursuits  and  hearts  the  same,  were  marvellous
to  all,  the  more  for  this  that  we  were  equals  though
unequal-aged.  Sooner,  methinks,  could  the  Pellaean
war-lord  have  loosed  the  lashings  of  that  fate-fraught
yoke,  although  their  beginning  was  concealed  from
view  and  their  end  hidden  by  a  double  knot.

^1  Some  presumptuous  word  we  surely  spoke,  that
the  vengeful  queen  of  Rhamnus  thus  made  onslaught
on  our  excessive  hopes;  as  in  old  days  when,  angered
at  the  vaunting  of  Arsaces'  royal  son,  the  avenging
goddess,  crushing  his  presumptuous  boasts,  with-
stood his  purpose  to  set  up  in  the  land  of  Cecrops'
sons  a  memorial  of  the  Median  arms,  and  just  when
she  was  to  be  raised  to  support  a  trophy  of  Greek
arms,  deliberately  took  her  stand  as  Attic  Nemesis
to  mark  the  Persian  rout.^

^8  What  caprice  of  thine  is  this  to  harass  nobles
of  the  seed  of  Romulus  ?  Against  Medes  and  Arabs,
thy  natural  foes,  advance  through  clouds  and  chaos
black :  from men of  Roman name  keep  thou  afar.

Persians  tliis  was  wrouglit  by  Phidias  (others  say  Agora-
critus)  into  a  statue  of  Nemesis  and  set  up  at  Rhamnus
(see  1.  52).

103


AUSONIUS

illic  quaere  alios  oppugnatura  sodales,

livor  ubi  iste  tuus  ferrugineumque  veiicnum

opportuna  tuis  inimical  pectora  fucis.

Paulimim  Ausoniumque,  viros,  quos  sacra  Quirini

purpura  et  auratus  trabeae  velavit  amictus,  Gu

non  decet  insidiis  peregrinae  cedere  divae.

Quid  queror  eoique  insector  crimina  inoiistri  ?
occidui  me  ripa  Tagi,  me  Punica  laedit
BarcinOj  me  bimavis  iuga  ninguida  Pyrenaei.
[laedis  et  ipse  tuos  qui  deseris  ultro,  relictis  ^]
moenibus  et  patrio  forsan  quoque  vestis  et  oris 70
[more,  interque  novos  qui  nunc  versaris  amicos']
quemque  suo  longe  dirimat  provincia  tractu
trans  montes  solemque  alium,  trans  flumina  et  urbes
et  quod  terrarum  caelique  extenditur  inter
Emeritensis  Anae  lataeque  fluenta  Garumnae.

Quod  si  intervalli  spatium  tolerabile  limes  75

poneret  exiguus  (quamvis  longa  omnia  credant,
qui  simul  esse  volunt),  faceret  tamen  ipsa  propinquos
cura  locos,  mediis  iungens  distantia  verbis;
Santonus  ut  sibi  IJurdigalam,  mox  iungit  Aginnum
ilia  sibi  et  po])ulos  Aquitanica  rura  colentes  ;  80

utque  duplex  Arelas  Alpinae  tecta  Viennae,
Narbonemque  pari  spatio  sibi  consent,  et  mox
quinquiplicem  socias  tibi,  Martie  Narbo,  Tolosam.
hoc  mihi  si  spatium  vicinis  moenibus  esset,

^  Suppl.  Translator.
104


THE EPISTLES

There  rather  seek  thou  friendships  to  assail,  where
that  jealousy  of  thine  and  rankling  venom  estranges
hearts  well-fitted  for  thy  deceits.  For  Paulinus  and
Ausonius,  men  whom  the  sacred  purple  of  Quirinus
and  the  golden  tissue  of  the  consul's  robe  have
enwrapped,  to  yield  to  the  stratagems  of  a  foreign
goddess  is  not  seemly.

^"^  Wherefore  do  I  complain  and  cry  out  on  the
ravage  of  an  eastern  monster  ?  'Tis  western  Tagus'
shores,  'tis  Punic  Barcelona  that  does  me  hurt,  'tis
the  Pj^renees  whose  snowy  crests  join  sea  to  sea,
thou  thyself  also  dost  me  hurt,  thou  who  abandonest
thy  friends  witliout  a  cause,  deserting  th}^  town  and,
])erchance,  the  native  fashion  of  thy  dress  and  speech,
thou  who  now  dwellest  among  new  friends,  whom
the  extent  of  a  wide  province  parts  from  me  beyond
mountains  'neath  an  alien  sun,  beyond  rivers  and
cities  and  all  the  land  and  sky  which  lie  outsj)read
betwixt  Merida  by  Ana's  streams  and  the  wide  flood
of  the  Garonne.

"^  If  only  the  division  were  narrow  and  interposed
a  separating  space  not  too  formidable  (albeit  they
think  every  place  far  off  who  seek  to  be  together),
even  so  affection's  self  would  make  the  places  near,
spanning  the  interval  with  a  bridge  of  words  ;  even
as  Saintes  keeps  touch  with  Bordeaux,  and  she  again
with  Agen  and  the  folk  who  till  the  country  parts
of  Aquitaine  ;  and  as  two-fold  Aries  ^  links  to  her-
self at  equal  distances  the  roofs  of  Alpine  Vienne
and  Narbonne  ;  and  then  thou,  Martian  "^  Narbonne,
alliest  with  thee  five-fold  Toulouse.^  If  such  the
distance severing our neighbouring towns, then


1  cp.  Ordo  Urb.  Xoh.  x.  1.

-  id.  2;  xix.  1. ^  id.  xviii.  7  flf.


105


AUSONIUS

tunc  ego  te  ut  nostris  aptum  conplecterer  ulnis 85
adflaretqiie  tuas  aures  nostrae  aura  loquellae.

Nunc  tibi  trans  Alpes  et  marmoream  Pyrenen
Caesarea  est  Augusta  domus,  Tyrrlienica  j^ropter
Tarraco  et  ostrifero  super  addita  Barcino  ponto :
me  iuga  Burdigala/  trino  me  flumina  coetu  90

secernunt  turbis  popularibus  otiaque  inter
vitiferi  exercent  coUes  laetumque  colonis
uber  agri^  tum  prata  virentia,  tum  nemus  umbris
mobilibus  celebrique  frequens  ecclesia  vico
totque  mea  in  Novaro  sibi  proxima  praedia  pago, 95
dispositis  totum  vicibus  variata  per  annum,
egelidae  ut  tepeant  liiemes  rabidosque  per  aestus
adspirent  tenues  frigus  subtile  Aquilones.
te  sine  set  nullus  grata  vice  provenit  annus,
ver  pluvium  sine  flore  fugit,  Canis  aestifer  ardet, 100
nulla  autumnales  variat  Pomona  sapores
effusaque  hiemem  contristat  Aquarius  unda.
agnoscisne  tuam,  Ponti  dulcissime,  culpam?
nam  mihi  certa  fides  nee  conmutabilis  umquam
Paulini  illius  veteris  reverentia  durat  105

quaeque  meoque  tuoque  fuit  concordia  patri.
si  tendi  facilis  cuiquam  fuit  arcus  Ulixei
aut  praeter  dominum  vibrabilis  ornus  Achilli,
nos  quoque  tarn  longo  Rhamnusia  foedere  solvet.

^  P  :  Burdigalae,  Peiper.

'  Originally  8aldiiba,  it  was  renamed  in  honour  of  Augus-
tus in  25  B.C.

io6


THE EPISTLES

would  I  clasp  thee,  ready  to  my  embrace,  and  the
air  of  my  complaint  would  be  breathed  into  thy
ears.

^'^  Now  for  thee  beyond  the  Alps  and  stony
Pyrenees,  Saragossa  is  thy  home,^  Tyrrhenian  Tarra-
gona'^ is  near  by,  and  Barcelona  built  above  the
oyster-bearing  sea:  me  hills, me  rivers  in  tri])le  array  ^
part  from  Bordeaux  and  from  the  common  throng,  and
in  my  leisure  the  vine-clad  hills  engage  me,  the  rich
glebe  with  its  blithe  peasantry,  now  the  green  meads,
now  the  copse  with  its  dancing  shades,  the  church  *
thronged  with  crowding  villagers,  and  all  those  my
domains  hard  by  each  other  in  Novarus  village,
which  enjoy  such  change  at  the  various  seasons
throughout  the  year,  that  the  chill  winters  are  warm
for  them  and  in  the  furious  summer  heats  soft  north
winds  breathe  over  them  a  gentle  coolness.  Yet
without  thee  the  year  advances,  bringing  no  grate-
ful change.  The  rainy  Spring  flits  by  lacking  its
flower,  the  heat-bringing  Dog-Star  parches,  Pomona
brings  not  variety  of  sweet  autumn  fruits,  and  with
outpoured  water  Aquarius  makes  gloomy  all  the
winter.  Dost  thou  perceive  thy  fault,  my  dearest
Pontius  ?  For  my  loyalty  remains  steadfast  and,
never  to  be  changed,  inv  regard  for  the  Paulinus  of
old  days  endures,  even  as  the  harmony  betwixt  my
sire  and  thine.  If  Ulysses'  bow  Avas  easy  to  be
strung  by  any  man,  or  if  Achilles'  spear  could  be
wielded  save  by  its  lord,  then  shall  the  queen  of
Rhamnus  loose  us  from  so  long  a  bond.

^  Tarragona  was  not  an  Etrurian  foundation,  but  looks
out  over  the  Etruscan  Sea.

■*  The  Garonne,  the  Durane,  and  the  Charente.
*  Or  assembly.

107


AUSONIUS

Set  cm-  tam  maesto  sero  tristia  carmina  versu 110
et  non  in  meliora  animus  se  vota  propinquat  ?
sit  procul  iste  metus. certa  est  fiduoia  nobis,
si  genitor  natusque  dei  pia  verba  volentum
accipiat,  nostro  reddi  te  })osse  precatu,
ne  sparsam  raptamque  doniiim  lacerataque  centum
per  dominos  veteris  Paulini  regna  Heamus  116

teque  vagum  toto  quam  longa  Hispania  tractu,
inmemorem  veterum  peregrinis  fidere  amicis.

Adcurre,  o  nostrum  decus,  o  mea  maxima  cura,
votis  ominibusque  bonis  ])recibusque  vocatus,  ll'O

adpropera,  dum  tu  iuvenis,  dum  nostra  senectus
servat  inexliaustuni  tibi  gratificata  vigorem.
ecquando  iste  meas  inpellet  nuntius  aures  ?
"  Ecce  tuus  Paulinus  adest ;  iam  ninguida  linquit
oppida  Hiberorum,  Tarbellica  iam  tenet  arva, 125
Hebromagi  iam  tecta  subit,  iam  praedia  fratris
vicina  ingreditur,  iam  labitur  amne  secundo
iamque  in  conspectu  est:  iam  prora  obvertitur  amni  :
ingressusque  sui  celebrata  per  ostia  portus
totum  occursantis  populi  praevertitiir  agmen  130

et  sua  praeteriens  iam  iam  tua  limina  pulsat.  "

Credimus  an,  qui  amant,  i])si  sibi  somnia  fingunt?


loS


THE EPISTLES

110  But  why  weave  1  sucli  sad  refrain  in  niournt'iii
verse,  why  does  my  heart  nut  turn  to  nobler  prayers?
Far  he  that  fear!  Sure  is  my  confidence  that,  if
tlie  Father  and  the  Son  of  God  accept  the  reverent
words  of  those  who  seek,  thou  canst  be  restored  at
my  prayer,  that  I  may  weep  not  for  a  home  scattered
and  ravaged,  for  the  reahii  rent  in  pieces  between
a  hundred  owners,  once  Pauhnus's,  and  for  thee,
that,  wandering  with  a  range  as  wide  as  the  extent
of  Spain,  unmindful  of  old  friends  thou  dost  trust
in  strangers.

119  O  hasten  hither,  my  pride,  my  chiefest  care,
summoned  with  vows,  good  omens,  and  with  prayers
speed  thee  hither,  while  thou  art  young  and  while
my  old  age  to  win  thy  favour  preserves  its  vigour
unconsumed.  Ah,  when  shall  this  news  break  on
my  ears  ?  "  Lo,  thy  Paulinus  is  at  hand  :  now  he
leaves  the  snowy  towns  of  Sjiain,  now  reaches  the
fields  of  Tarbellae,  now  approaches  the  homesteads
of  Hebromagus,  now  enters  his  brother's  domains
hard  by,  now  glides  down  stream,  and  now  is  in
sight :  now  the  prow  is  being  swung  out  into  the
stream  :  i  now  he  has  passed  the  thronged  entrance
of  his  home-port,  outstrips  the  whole  host  of  folk
who  hurry  to  meet  him,  and  passing  his  own  doors
now,  even  now  beats  at  thine."

"  Do  I  believe,  or  do  those  who  love  feign  dreams
for  their  own  selves."  '^

1  cp.  V^irgil,  Aen.  vi.  .S  :  obvertunt  pelago  proras.  The
prow  was  swung  outwards,  the  stern  brought  in  to  land  for
mooring.  *  Virgil,  Ed.  viii.  108.


109


AUSONIUS
XXVI I [. — Ad eundem Pontium  Paulinum  Epistui.a

SUBINDE SCUIPTA

Proxima  quae  nostrae  fuerat  queriinonia  chartae,

credideram  quod  te,  Pauline,  inflectere  posset

eliceretque  tuarn  blanda  obiurgatio  voeem.

set  tu,  iuratis  velut  alta  silentia  sacris

devotus  teneas,  perstas  in  lege  tacendi.  5

non  licet  ? anne  pudet,  si  quis  tibi  iure  j)aterno

vivat  amicus  adhuc  maneasque  obnoxius  heres  ?

ignavos  agitet  talis  timor,  at  tibi  nuUus

sit  metus  et  morem  missae  acceptaeque  salutis

audacter  retine. vel  si  tibi  proditor  instat  10

aut  quaesitoris  gravior  censura  timetur,

occurre  ingenio,  quo  saepe  occulta  teguntur.

Thraeicii  quondam  quam  saeva  licentia  regis

fecerat  elinguem,  per  licia  texta  querellas

edidit  et  tacitis  mandavit  criniina  telis.  15

et  pudibunda  sues  malo  commisit  amores

virgo  nee  erubuit  tacituro  conscia  pomo.

depressis  scrobibus  vitium  regale  minister

credidit  idque  diu  texit  fidissima  tellus  :

inspirata  deliinc  vento  cantavit  harundo.  20

lacte  incide  notas  :  arescens  charta  tenebit

semper  inaspicuas  ;  prodentur  scripta  favillis.

vel  Lacedaemoniam  scytalen  imitare,  libelli

segmina  Pergamei  tereti  circumdata  ligno

^  The  allusion  is  probably  to  the  rule  of  silence  on  which
monks  at  this  period  laid  gi-eat  stress.

^  Therasia,  I'aulinus'  wife  is  meant :  cp.  1.  31  (below).

*  For  the  story  of  Piiilomela  and  Tereus  see  Ovid,  Metam.
vi.  574  fl".


THE EPISTLES

XXVIII. To  THE  SAME PoNTIUS  PaULINUS: A  LeTTER

WKITTEN  JUST  AFTER  THE  PRECEDING

I  HOPED  that  the  coniphiint  which  filled  my  latest
letter  might  be  able  to  move  thee,  Paulinus,  and
that  my  caressing  re{)roof  might  lure  thee  to  reply.
But  thou,  as  if  after  swearing  by  holy  things  thou
wast  vowed  to  keep  deep  silence,  abidest  obstinately
by  the  rule  of  speechlessness.^  Is  it  not  allowed  ?  Or
art  thou  ashamed  to  have  a  friend  still  alive  who  claims
a  father's  rights,  whilst  thou  remainest  the  dependent
heir?  Let  cowards  quake  with  such  dread,  but  have
thou  no  fear,  and  boldly  keep  the  custom  of  giving
and  returning  greeting.  Or  if  an  informer  is  beside
thee,  and  if  'tis  an  inquisitor's  ^  too  stern  rebuke  is
feared,  baffle  it  with  a  device  vhereby  secrets  are
oft  concealed.  She  wliom  the  brutal  outrage  of  the
Thracian  king  had  robbed  of  her  tongue,  revealed
her  sorrows  by  means  of  woven  threads  and  com-
mitted the  story  of  her  wrongs  to  the  silent  loom."
Also  a  shamefast  maid  entrusted  the  tale  of  her  love
to  an  apple,"*  and  blushed  not  to  share  her  secret
with  fruit  which  could  never  speak.  To  deep-dug
pits  a  servant  revealed  his  royal  lord's  deformity,^
and  long  the  earth  hid  the  secret  most  faithfully :
thereafter  the  reed,  breathed  on  by  the  wind,  sang
the  story.  Trace  letters  with  milk  :  the  })aper  as  it
dries  will  keep  them  ever  invisible ;  yet  with  ashes
the  writing  is  brought  to  light.^  Or  imitate  the
Spartan  scylule,  writing  on  strips  of  parchment  wound

*  Cydippe  :  see  Ovid,  Htroides,  xx.  9  f.

^  Midas  :  for  the  story  see  Ovid,  Metam xi.  180  ff.

*  If  a  paper  written  as  prescribed  is  sprinkled  with  ashes,
which  are  then  shaken  off,  the  writing  shows  up  faintly  in
grey.

Ill


AUSOXIUS

l)erj)etuo  inscrihens  versu,  qui  deiude  solutus,  25

lion  respondentes  sparse  dabit  ordine  formas,
donee  eonsiniilis  lii>iii  repliectur  in  orheni.

Innuineras  possum  celandi  osteiidere  formas
et  clandestinas  veterum  reserare  loquellas  :
si  prodi,  Pauline,  times  nostraeque  vereris  30

ei-imen  amicitiae;  Tanaquil  tua  neseiat  islud.
tu  contemne  alios  nee  dedignare  parentem
adfari  verbis, ego  sum  tuus  altor  et  ille
praeceptor,  primus  veterum  largitor  lionorum,
primus  in  Aonidum  qui  te  collegia  duxi.  35

XXIX.  —  Cum Pontius Paulinus iunior quartis

JAM LITTERIS NON RESPONDISSET SIC AD EUM
SCRIPTUM EST

QuARTA  tibi  haec  notos  detexit  epistula  questus,
Pauline,  et  blando  residem  sermone  lacessit.
officium  set  nulla  piuni  mihi  pagina  reddit,
I'austa  salutigeris  adscribens  orsa  libellis.
unde  istam  meruit  non  felix  charta  repulsam,  5

spernit  tam  longo  cessatio  quam  tua  fastu  ?
hostis  ab  hoste  tamen  per  barbara  verba  salutem
accipit  et  Salve  mediis  intervenit  armis.
respondent  et  saxa  homini  et  percussus  ab  antris
sermo  redit,  redit  et  neinorum  vocalis  imago;  10

*  See  Aulus  Gellius, xvii.  ix.  6  ff.

^  i.e.  for  enciphering  and  deciphering.

'  c]-).  Juvenal,  vi.  560.  Tanaquil  (wife  of  the  elder  Tar-
(juin),  the  typical  domineering  woman,  represents  Therasia,
the  wife  of  I'aulinus.


THE EPISTLES

about  a  rounded  stick  in  continuous  lines,  wliich,
afterwards  unrolled,  will  show  characters  incoherent
because  sequence  is  lost,  until  they  are  I'olled  again
about  just  such  another  stick. ^

2^  I  can  show  thee  countless  codes  of  the  ancients
for  concealing  and  unlocking  secret  messages  " ;  if
thou,  Paulinus,  fearest  to  be  betrayed  and  dread'st
the  charge  of  my  friendship,  let  thy  Tanaquil  ^  know
naught  of  it.  Do  thou  scorn  others,  but  disdain
not  to  address  thy  father.  I  am  thy  nourisher,  thy  old
tutor,  the  first  to  lavish  on  thee  the  honours  of  old
time,*  the  first  to  introduce  thee  into  the  guild  of
the  Aonides.

XXIX. — When  Pontius  Paulinus the  younger  did

NOT reply to the FOUR LETTER* ALREADY SENT,
THE FOLLOWING WAS WRITTEN TO HIM

This  is  the  fourth  letter  in  which  I  have  laid  bare
to  thee,  Paulinus,  my  familiar  complaint,  and  with
caressing  words  sought  to  stir  thee  from  thy  lethargy.
But  never  a  page  comes  to  repay  my  loving  atten-
tions, no  propitious  words  writ  at  the  head  of  sheets
whicli  bring  me  greeting.^  How  has  my  luckless
letter,  for  which  your  long  neglect  shows  such
disdain,  deserved  this  rebuff?  Yet  foe  from  foe
receives  greeting  ^  in  savage  speech  and  "hail  "  comes
between  opposed  arms.  Even  rocks  make  answer  to
mankind  and  speech  beating  back  from  caves  returns,
returns  too  the  vocal  mimicry  of  the  woods;  cliffs  by

■•  The  reference  may  be  either  to  the  consulship  which
Ausonius  procured  for  Paulinus  in  378  a.d.,  or  to  the  glories
of  ancient  literature.

'^  i.e..  no  letter  with  the  formula,  ftaliittm  dal  plurimam.

^  As  pugilists  shake  hands  on  entering  the  ring.

VOL- "•  I


AUSONIUS

litorei  clamant  scopuli,  daiit  murmiira  rivi,
Hyblaeis  apibus  saepes  depasta  susurrat.
est  et  Iiarundineis  modulatio  musica  ripis
cumque  suis  loquitur  tremulum  coma  j)inea  ventis.
incubuit  foliis  quotiens  levis  eurus  acutis,  15

Dindyma  Gargarico  resjjondent  cantica  luco.
nil  mutum  natura  dedit. non  aeris  ales
quadrupedesve  silent,  habet  et  sua  sibila  serpens,
et  pecus  aequoreum  tenui  vice  vocis  anhelat.
cymbala  dant  flictu  sonitum,  dant  pulpita  saltu 20
icta  j)edum,  tentis  reboant  cava  tympana  tergis  ;
Isiacos  agitant  Mareotica  sistra  tumultus
nee  Dodonaei  cessat  tinnitus  aeni,
in  numerum  quotiens  radiis  ferientibus  ictae
respondent  dociles  modulato  verbere  pelves.  25

Tu  velut  Oebaliis  habites  taciturnus  Amvclis
aut  tua  Sigalion  Aegyptius  oscula  signet,
obnixum,  Pauline,  taces. agnosco  j)udorem,
quod  vitium  fovet  ipsa  suum  cessatio  iugis,
dumque  pudet  tacuisse  diu,  placet  officiorum  30

non  servare  vices ;  et  amant  longa  otia  culpam.
quis  j)rohibet  Salve  atque  Vale  brevitate  ])arata
scribere  felicesque  notas  mandare  libellis?
non  ego,  longinquos  ut  texat  pagina  versus,
postulo  multiplicique  oneret  sermone  tabellas.  35

1  cp.  Virgil,  Ed.  i.  54  ff.  :  saepes  Hyblaeis  apibus  floreni
depasta  salicti,  etc.

-  Dindymus,  near  Pessinus,  was  famed  for  the'  noisy  rites
of  Cybele  held  there  :  Gargara  is  a  part  of  Mount  Ida.

•*  i.e.  Egyptian  Tiie  i^iMrum  was  a  rattle  consisting  of
rings  strung  on  the  cross-bars  of  a  metal  frame,  and  was  used
for  ritual  purposes.

114


THE EPISTLES

the  sea-shore  cry  out,  streams  utter  their  murmurs,
the  hedges,  whereon  bees  of  Hybla  feed,^  are
ever  wliispering.  Reed-grown  banks  also  have  their
tuneful  harmonies,  and  the  pine's  foliage  in  trem-
bling accents  talks  with  its  beloved  winds.  So  oft  as
the  light  eastern  breeze  leans  on  the  shrill-voiced
leaves,  strains  of  Dindymus  respond  to  the  grove  of
Gargara.-  Nature  made  nothing  dumb.  Birds  of
the  air  and  four-footed  beasts  are  not  mute,  even  the
serpent  has  its  own  hissing  note,  and  the  herds  of
the  deep  sigh  with  faint  semblance  of  a  voice.
Cymbals  give  sound  at  a  clash,  stages  at  beat  of
bounding  feet,  the  taut  skins  of  hollow  drums  give
back  a  booming ;  Mareotic  ^  sistra  raise  rattling  din
in  Isis'  honour  nor  does  Dodona's  brazen  tinkling  cease
as  oft  as  the  lavers  at  the  clappers'  measured  stroke
obediently  reply  with  rhythmic  beat.*

2*5  Thou,  as  though  thou  wert  a  mute  citizen  of
Oebalian  Amyclae,''  or  Egyptian  Sigalion  ^  were
sealing  thy  lips,  stubbornly  keepest  silence,  Paulinus.
I  recognise  shame  in  thee,  for  continued  negli-
gence cherishes  her  own  defect,  and  in  shame
for  long  silence  thou  dost  resolve  not  to  main-
tain interchange  of  courtesies  ;  and  lengthened
idleness  loves  its  own  fault.  Who  forbids  you  to
write  "hail"  and  "farewell"  with  studied  brevity,
and  to  commit  to  paper  these  words  of  greeting  ?
I  do  not  demand  that  thy  page  should  Aveave  a  long
drawn  out  web  of  verse  and  burden  thy  letter  with  a

*  The  Oracle  at  Uodona  was  surrounded  by  a  circle  of
brazen  pans  hung  in  trees  which  were  either  struck  by  a
priest,  or  clashed  together  in  the  wind.

*  See  Profe.ssoref,  xv.  6  and  note.

*  i.e.  Harpocrates  (Heru-pa-khrat),  who  is  represented  in
EgN'ptian  art  with  his  finger  upon  his  lips.

I  2


AUSONIUS

una  fuit  tantum,  qua  respondere  Lacones
littera,  et  irato  vegi  placuere  negantes.
est  etenim  comis  brevitas  :  sic  fania  renatum
Pythagoram  docuisse  refert. cum  multa  loquaces
ambiguis  sererent  verbis,  contra  omnia  solum  40

Est,  respondebat,  vel  Non. o  cei'ta  loquendi
regula !  nam  brevius  nihil  est  et  plenius  istis,
quae  firmata  probant  aut  infirmata  relidunt.
nemo  silens  placuit,  multi  bi*evitate  loquendi.

Verum  ego  quo  stulte  dudum  spatiosa  locutus 45
provehor  ? ut  diversa  sibi  vicinaque  culpa  est  !
multa  loquens  et  cuncta  silens  non  ambo  placemus.
nee  possum  reticere,  iugum  quod  libera  numquam
fert  pietas  nee  amat  blandis  postponere  verum.
vertistij  Pauline,  tuos  dulcissime  mores  }  50

Vasconis  hoc  saltus  et  ninguida  Pyrenaei
hospitia  et  nostri  facit  hoc  olilivio  caeli  ?
inprecer  ex  merito  quid  non  tibi,  Hiberia  tellus !
te  populent  Poeni,  te  perfidus  Hannibal  urat,
te  belli  sedem  repetat  Sertorius  exul.  55

ergo  meum  patriaeque  decus  columenque  senati
Birbilis  aut  haerens  scopulis  Calagorris  habebit,
aut  quae  deiectis  iuga  per  scruposa  minis
arida  torrentem  Sicorim  despectat  Hilerda.''
hie  trabeam,  Pauline,  tuam  Latiamque  curulem 60
constituis,  patriosque  istic  sepelibis  honores  ?

Quis  tamen  iste  tibi  tam  longa  silentia  suasit

*  When  Philip  asked  leave  to  visit  their  city,  the  '^l)artalls
replied  o  ( =  ov). See  Technopueyn.  xiii.  5  and  note.

Il6


THE EPISTLES

multitude  of  words.  Twas  but  one  letter  wherewith
the  Spartans  made  reply  and,  though  refusing,
pleased  the  angry  king.^  For  indeed  terseness  is
courteous  ;  so,  report  says,  taught  reborn  Pythagoras.  2
While  babblers  would  be  stringing  indecisive  words,
in  all  cases  he  would  answer  only  "Yes"  or  "  No."

0  stable  rule  of  speech  !  For  nothing  is  shorter  and
more  adequate  than  these,  Avhich  approve  the  valid
or  reject  the  invalid.  None  pleased  by  silence ;
many  by  brief  reply.

*^  But  I,  whither  with  foolish  amplitude  of  speech
have  I  been  long  careering  ?  How  distant  from
itself  and  yet  how  near  is  error  !  1  with  long  speech,
thou  with  utter  silence,  we  both  displease. Yet  can

1  not  keep  silence,  for  free  affection  never  bears
yoke,  nor  loves  to  screen  truth  with  glozing  words.
Hast  thou,  dearest  Paulinus,  changed  thy  nature  ?
Do  Biscayan  glades  and  sojourns  in  the  snowy
Pyrenees  and  doth  forgetfulness  of  our  clime  work
thus  ?  What  curse  shall  I  not  righteously  call  down
on  thee,  O  land  of  Spain  ?  May  Carthaginians
ravage  thee,  may  faithless  Hannibal  waste  thee  with
fire,  may  banished  Sertorius  again  seek  in  thee  the
seat  of  war !  Shall  then  Birbilis  or  Calagorris  cling-
ing to  its  crags,  or  parched  Ilerda  ^  whose  ruins,
littered  over  rugged  hills,  look  down  on  brawling
Sicoris,  possess  him  who  is  mine  and  his  country's
pride,  the  mainstay  of  the  Senate  ?  Here  dost  thou,
Paulinus,  establish  thy  robe  consular  and  Roman
curule  chair,  and  wilt  thou  bury  there  thy  native
honours  ?

^2  But  who  is  that  unhallowed  wretch who has

-  Pythagoras  claimed  to  be  a  reincarnation  of  Euphorbus.
3  The  places  named  are  Baubola,  Calahorra,  and  Lerida.

117


AUSONJUS

inipius? lit  nullos  hie  vocem  vertat  in  usus,
gaudia  non  ilium  vegetent,  non  dulcia  vatum
carmina,  non  blandae  modulatio  flexa  querellae, 65
non  fera,  non  ilium  pecudes,  non  mulceat  ales^
non  quae  pastorum  nemoralibus  abdita  lucis
solatur  nostras  Echo  resecuta  loquellas.
tristis,  egens  deserta  colat  tacitusque  [)ererret
Alpinis  conexa  iugis,  ceu  dicitur  olim  70

mentis  inops  coetus  hominum  et  vestigia  vitans
avia  perlustrasse  vagus  loca  Bellerophontes.

Haec  precor,  banc  vocem,  Boeotia  numina  Musae,
accipite  et  Latiis  vatem  I'evocate  camenis.

XXX. — AusoNio  Paulinus

CoNTiNUATA  meae  durare  silentia  linguae
te  numquam  tacito  memoras  placitamque  latebris
desidiam  exprobras  neglectaeque  insuper  addis
crimen  amicitiae  t'ormidatamque  iugalem
obicis  et  durum  iacis  in  mea  viscera  versum.  5

parce,  precor,  lacerare  tuum,  nee  amara  paternis
admiscere  velis,  ceu  melle  absinthia,  verbis.
Cura  mihi  semper  fuit  et  manet  ofKciis  te
omnibus  excolere,  adfeetu  observare  tideli.
non  uinquam  tenui  saltim  tua  gratia  naevo  10

conmaculata  mihi  est ;  ipso  te  laederc  vultu
semper  et  incauta  timui  violai'e  figura  ;
cumque  tua  accessi,  venerans  mea  cautius  ora


^  See  Homer  Z  '.01  f.

-  On  I'aulinus  see  Introduction,  and Eput. xxiii. (note).

llS


THE EPISTLES  .

urged  you  to  so  long  silence  ?  May  he  turn  no
sound  to  any  advantage,  may  no  joys  enliven  him,
no  sweet  poets'  lays,  no  melting  harmonies  of  se-
ductive elegy,  maj-  no  cry  of  beast  nor  low  of  cattle
nor  song  of  bird  cheer  him,  nor  yet  Echo,  who
hidden  in  shepherds'  bosky  groves  consoles  us  while
repeating  our  complaints.  Sad,  needy  let  him  dwell
in  waste  places  and  in  silence  roam  the  borders  of
Alpine  hills,  even  as,  'tis  said,  in  days  of  old  Beller-
ophon,  distraught,  avoided  the  company  of  men  and
wandered  straying  through  untrodden  places.^

"^  This  is  my  prayer,  this  cry,  Boeotian  Muses
divine,  receive  ye  and  with  Latin  strains  call  back
your  bard !

XXX. PaULINUS  2 TO AusoNius

Thou  tellest  me  that  my  tongue  keeps  unbroken
silence  while  thou  art  never  dumb,  and  reproachest
me  with  choosing  idleness  in  secret  retreats,  and
withal  addest  the  charge  of  neglected  friendship  and
tauntest  me  with  terror  of  my  spouse,  launching
a  cruel  line  against  my  very  heart.^  Cease,  I  prithee,
to  wound  thy  friend,  and  seek  not  to  mingle  bitter-
ness— as  wormwood  with  honey— with  a  father's
words.

8  My  care  has  been  and  still,  endures,  to  honour
thee  with  every  friendly  token,  to  compass  thee
with  faithful  affection.  No  blemish,  however  slight,
has  ever  marred  my  devotion  towards  thee  ;  even  by
a  look  I  have  ever  feared  to  hurt  thee  and  to  wrong
thee  with  an.  unguarded  aspect ;  and  when  I  have
approached  thee,  out  of  respect I  have the  more

'  i.e.  against  Therasiu,  herself.

119


AUSONIUS

conposui  et  laeto  formavi  lumine  fronteni,

ne  qua  vel  a  tacito  contractam  pectore  nubem  15

duceret  in  sanctum  suspicio  falsa  parentem.

hoc  mea  te  domus  exemplo  coluitque  colitque

inque  tuum  tantus  nobis  consensus  amorem  est,

quantus  et  in  Christum  conexa  mente  colendum.

Quis  tua>  quaeso,  tuis  obduxit  pectora  Hvor  ? 20
quo  rumore  pium  facihs  tibi  fama  per  aures
inrupit  pepulitque  animum  contraque  vetustam
experta  pietate  fidem  nova  vulnera  movit,
laederet  ut  natis  placidum  male  suada  parentem  ?

Set  mihi  non  fictae  mens  conscia  simplicitatis 25
nee  patris  inculti  pietas  rea  respuit  omne
inmeritum  et  falso  perstringi  crimine  non  fert,
inmunis  vero  :  gravius  violatur  iniquo
vulnere,  tam  tenera  offensae,  quam  libera  culpae.

Discussisse  iugum  quereris  me,  quo  tibi  doctis 30
iunctus  eram  studiis. hoc  nee  gestasse  quidem  me
adsei'o. namque  pares  subeunt  iuga  :  nemo  valentes
copulat  infirmis  neque  sunt  concordia  frena,
si  sit  conpulsis  mensura  iugalibus  inpar.
si  vitulum  tauro  vel  equum  committis  onagro ;  35

si  confers  fulicas  cycnis  et  aedona  j)arraej
castaneis  corulos  ;  aequas  viburna  oupressis  ;
me  conpone  tibi :  vix  Tullius  et  Maro  tecum
sustineant  aequale  iugum. si  iungar  amore.


THE EPISTLES

heedfully  ordered  my  looks  and  given  my  featm-es  a
bright  and  cheerful  cast,  that  no  ungrounded  sus-
picion might  bring  down  a  cloud  upon  thee,  my
revered  father,  even  though  arising  from  an  un-
spoken thought.  After  like  pattern  my  household
has  honoured  and  honours  thee,  and  in  love  for  thee
we  are  as  agreed  together  as  our  hearts  are  linked
together  in  worship  of  Christ.

2<i  What  rancour,  I  beg  of  thee,  against  thy  friends
is  crept  over  thy  heart  ?  With  what  idle  tale  has
nimble  Slander  forced  her  way  into  thy  ears,  smitten
thy  fond  heart,  and  aimed  late  blows  against
the  tried  affection  of  ancient  faith,  so  as  to  harm  a
son  by  cozening  a  sire  from  his  peace  ?

2'^'  i3ut  my  heart  is  conscious  of  no  feigned  sin-
cerity, my  devotion,  guiltless  of  neglect  towards  my
father,  hurls  back  with  scorn  every  undeserved  taunt,
and  brooks  not  to  be  scarred  with  a  false  charge
because  in  truth  innocent :  as  easy  hurt  as  it  is
free  from  fault,  it  is  the  more  sorely  injured  by  an
unjust  blow.

'^^  Thou  dost  complain  that  I  have  shaken  off  the
yoke  ^  wlierewith  I  was  joined  with  thee  in  the
pursuit  of  letters.  This  I  declare  that  I  have  never
even  borne.  For  only  equals  share  one  yoke  :  no  one
links  the  powerful  with  the  weak,  and  no  team
works  with  one  Avill,  if  the  forced  yoke-fellows  are  of
unequal  measure.  If  thou  dost  match  calves  with
bulls  or  horses  with  wild-asses ;  if  thou  comparest
moorhens  with  swans,  and  nightingales  with  owls,
hazels  with  chestnuts,  or  rankest  wayside  shrubs
with  cypresses ; — then  place  me  beside  thee  :  Tully
and  Maro  scarce  could  uphold  a  like  yoke  with
thee.  If  I  be  yoked  in  love,  in  that  alone  will
1  In  reply  to  Epist.  xxvii.  If.


AUSONIUS

hoc  tantum  tibi  me  iactare  audebo  iugalem,  40

quo  modicus  sociis  magno  contendit  habenis.
dulcis  amicitia  aeterno  mihi  foedere  tecum
et  paribus  semper  redamandi  legibus  aequat.
hoc  nostra  cervice  iugum  non  scaeva  resolvit
fabula,  non  terris  absentia  longa  diremit,  45

nee  perimet,  toto  licet  abstrahar  orbe  vel  aevo.
nuniquani  animo  divisus  agam  :  prius  ipsa  recedet
corpore  vita  meo,  quam  vester  pectore  vultus.

Ego  te  per  omne  quod  datum  mortalibus

et  destinatum  saeculum  est,  50

claudente  donee  continebor  corpore,

discernar  orbe  quambbet,
nee  orbe  longe  nee  remotum  lumine

tenebo  fibris  insitum  :
videbo  corde,  mente  conplectar  pia  55

ubique  praesentem  mihi.
et  cum  solutus  corporaH  carcere

terraquc  jirovohivero,
quo  me  locarit  axe  communis  pater,

ilUc  quoque  animo  te  geram  ;  60

neque  finis  idem,  qui  meo  me  corpore

et  amore  laxabit  tuo.
mens  quippe,  lapsis  quae  superstes  artubus

de  stirpe  durat  caeliti,
sensus  necesse  est  simul  et  adfeclus  suos  65

teneat  aecjue  ut  vitam  suam,
et  ut  mori,  sic  oblivisci  non  capit,

perenne  vivax  et  memor.

Vale  domine  ilhistris.


122


THE EPISTLES

I  dare  boast  myself  thy  yoke-fellow  wherein  the
humble  vies  with  the  great  in  even  career.  Sweet
friendship  makes  us  peers  through  the  eternal  bond
betwixt  me  and  thee  and  through  the  equal  laws  of
endless  mutual  love.  This  yoke  no  malicious  tale
has  unloosed  from  my  neck,  no  long  absence  from
my  land  has  broken  it  nor  ever  shall  destroy  it,
though  I  should  be  removed  from  thee  by  the  whole
span  of  space  and  time.  Never  shall  I  live  separate
from  thee  in  soul :  sooner  shall  life  itself  depart
from  my  frame  than  thy  face  from  my  heart.

4^  Through  all  the  length  of  time  given  to  mortals
and  ordained,  so  long  as  I  shall  be  confined  in  this
halting  frame,  though  I  be  held  a  world  apart,  thee
neither  parted  by  a  world  nor  severed  from  my  sight  I
will  keep  implanted  in  my  inmost  being:  in  heart  I
shall  see  thee,  in  loving  thought  embrace  thee,  having
thee  with  me  everywhere.  And  when,  released
from  the  prison  of  the  body,  I  shall  have  flown  forth
from  the  earth,  in  whatever  clime  our  general  Father
shall  place  me,  there  also  will  I  bear  thee  in  my
heart ;  nor  shall  the  selfsame  end  which  severs  me
from  my  body,  unloose  mc  from  love  of  thee.  For
the  soul,  which,  surviving  the  body's  ruin,  endures  in
virtue  of  heavenly  birth,  must  needs  keep  both  its
own  faculties  and  affections  no  less  than  its  own  life,
and  so  admits  forgetfulness  no  more  than  death,  re-
maining ever  living,  ever  mindful.

^^  Farewell,  illustrious  master.


123


AUSONIUS

XXXI. — AusoNio  Paulinos

QuARTA  redit  duris  haec  iam  messoribus  aestas,

et  totiens  cano  bruma  gelu  rigiiit,
ex  quo  nulla  tuo  milii  littera  venit  ab  ore,

nulla  tua  vidi  scripta  notata  manu,
ante  salutifero  felix  quam  charta  libello  5

dona  negata  diu  multiplicata  daret.
trina  etenim  vario  florebat  epistula  textu,

set  numerosa  triplex  pagina  carmen  erat.
dulcia  multimodis  qiiaedam  subamara  querellis,

anxia  censurae  miscuerat  pietas.  10

sed  mihi  mite  patris  plus  quam  censoris  acerbum

sedit,  et  e  blandis  aspera  penso  animo.
ista  suo  regerenda  loco  tamen  et  graviore

vindieis  heroi  sunt  agitanda  sono.
interea  levior  paucis  praecurret  iambus  15

discrete  referens  mutua  verba  pede.
Nunc  elegi  salvere  iubent  dictaque  salute,

ut  fecere  aliis  orsa  gradumque,  silent.

Au.soNio  Pa  u I.I  N us

Quid  abdicatas  in  meam  curam,  pater,

redire  Musas  praecipis  ?  20

negant  Camenis  nee  patent  A})ollini

dicata  Christo  pectora.
fuit  ista  quondam  non  ope,  sed  studio  pari

tecum  mihi  concordia.


124


THE EPISTLES

XXXI. — Paulinus  to  Ausonius

'Tis  the  fourth  summer  now  returns  for  hardy
reapers,  and  as  oft  has  winter  grown  stark  with
hoary  rime,  since  any  syllable  from  thy  lips  reached
me,  since  I  saw  any  letter  penned  by  thy  hand —
ere  thy  page,  auspicious  with  its  message  of
greeting,  bestowed  manifold  the  gift  so  long  denied.
For  indeed  'twas  a  triple  letter  enriched  with  various
flowers  of  composition,  but  the  melodious  sheets
were  a  three-fold  poem.  Things  sweet,  though
somewhat  soured  with  manifold  complaints,  troubled
affection  had  mingled  with  criticism.  But  with  me
the  father's  gentleness  rather  than  the  critic's  bitter-
ness finds  a  resting  place,  and  in  my  heart  I  draw
from  the  kindly  words  what  may  weigh  against  the
harsh.  But  these  charges  must  be  refuted  in  their
proper  place  and  canvassed  in  the  sterner  tones  of
the  avenging  lieroic  measure.  Meanwhile,  though
briefly,  lighter  iambus  shall  hurry  on  ahead,  in
separate  metre  ^  paying  back  his  debt  of  words.

1''  Now  my  elegiacs  bid  thee  "hail"  and  having
hailed  thee,  since  they  have  made  for  others  a
beginning  and  a  step,  cease  to  speak.

Paulinus  to  Ausonius

Why  dost  thou  bid  the  deposed  Muses  return  to
my  affection,  my  father  ?  Hearts  consecrate  to
Christ  give  refusal  to  the  Camenae,  are  closed  to
Apollo.  Once  was  there  this  accord  betwixt  me
and  thee,  equals  in  zeal  but  not  in  power — to  call  forth

^  i.e.  as  distinct  from  the  hexameters  of  11.  103  S.  :  the
double  sense  of  pede  cannot  well  be  reproduced.  The  debt
of  words  is  the  obligation  to  reply  to  the  strictures  of
Ausonius.

125


AUSONIUS

ciere  surdum  Deli)hica  Phoebuni  specu,  25

vocare  Musas  miniina,
fandique  munus  inunere  indiiltuin  dei

petere  e  nemoribiis  aut  iugis.
nunc  alia  nientem  vis  agit,  maior  deus,

aliosque  mores  postulat  30

sibi  reposcens  ab  honiine  ^  niunus  suuni,

vivamus  ut  vitae  patri.
vacare  vanis,  otio  aut  negotio,

et  fabulosis  litteris
vetat ;  suis  ut  pareamus  legibus  35

lucemque  cernamus  suam^
quam  vis  sophorum  callida  arsque  rhetoruni  et

fignienta  vatum  nubilant,
qui  corda  falsis  atque  vanis  inibuunt

tantumque  linguas  instruunt,  40

nihil  adferentes.  ut  saluteni  conferant,

quod  veritatem  detegat.
quid  enim  tenere  vel  bonum  aut  veruui  queant,

qui  non  tenent  summae  caputs
veri  bonique  fomitem  et  fontem  deum,  45

quern  nemo  nisi  in  Christo  videt  ?
Hie  veritatis  lumen  est,  vitae  via,

vis,  mens,  manus,  virtus  patris,
sol  aequitatis,  fons  bonorum,  flos  dei,

natus  deo,  mundi  sator,  50

mortalitatis  vita  nostrae  et  mors  necis.

magister  hie  virtutium,
deusque  nobis  atque  pro  nobis  homo,

nos  induendus  induit,
aeterna  iungens  homines  inter  et  deum  55

in  utrumque  se  commereia.
hie  ergo  nostris  ut  suum  praecordiis

vibraverit  caelo  iubar,

,  ^  MSS.  :  nomine,  Peiper.

126


THE EPISTLES

(leaf  Apollo  from  his  Delphic  cave,  to  invoke  the  Muses
as  divine,  to  seek  from  groves  or  hills  the  gift  of  utter-
ance by  the  god's  gift  bestowed.  Now  'tis  another
force  governs  my  heart,  a  greater  God,  who  demands
another  mode  of  life,  claiming  for  himself  from  man
the  gift  he  gave,  that  we  may  live  for  the  Father  of
life.  To  spend  time  on  empty  things,  whether  in
pastime  or  pursuit,  and  on  literature  full  of  idle  tales,
he  forbids  ;  that  we  may  obey  his  laws  and  behold
his  light  which  sophists'  cunning  skill,  the  art  of
rhetoric,  and  poets'  feignings  overcloud.  For  these
steep  our  hearts  in  things  false  and  vain,  and  train
our  tongues  alone  imparting  naught  which  can
reveal  the  truth.  For  what  good  thing  or  true  can
they  hold  who  hold  not  the  head  of  all,  God,  the
enkindler  and  source  of  the  good  and  true,  whom
no  man  seeth  save  in  Christ.

^'  He  is  the  light  of  truth,  the  path  of  life,  the
strength,  mind,  hand,  and  power  of  the  Father,  the
sun  of  righteousness,  the  fount  of  blessings,  the
flower  of  God,  born  of  God,  creator  of  the  world,
life  of  our  mortality  and  death  of  Death.  He,  the
Lord  of  \'irtues,  to  us  God  and  for  us  Man,  puts  on
our  nature  as  we  must  put  on  his,  linking  God  with
man  in  perpetual  intercourse,  himself  of  each  par-
taking. He,  then,  when  he  has  launched  his  beams
from heaven upon  our  hearts,  wipes  off  the  sorry

127


ALISON  I  US

abstergit  aegruin  corporis  pigri  situm

habitumque  mentis  innovat :  60

exhaurit  onme,  quod  iuvabat  antea,

castae  voluptatis  vice,
totusque  nostra  iure  domini  vindicat

et  corda  et  ora  et  temjiora.
se  cogitari,  intellegi,  credi,  legi,  65

se  vult  timeri  et  diligi.
aestus  inanes,  quos  movet  vitae  labor

praesentis  aevi  tramite,
abolet  futura  cum  deo  vitae  fides.

quae,  quas  videmur  spernere,  70

non  ut  profanas  abicit  aut  viles  opes,

set  ut  magis  caras  monet
caelo  i-eponi  creditas  Christo  deo,

qui  plura  promisit  datis,
contempta  praesens  vel  mage  deposita  sibi  75

multo  ut  rependat  faenore.
sine  fraude  custos,  aucta  creditoribus

bonus  aera  reddet  debitor
multaque  spretam  largior  pecuniam

restituet  usura  deus.  80

Huic  vacantem  vel  studentem  et  deditum,

in  hoc  reponentem  onniia
ne  quaeso  segneni  neve  perversum  putes

nee  crimineris  impiuni.
pietas  abesse  Christiano  qui  potest  ?  85

namque  argumentum  mutuuni  est
pietatis,  esse  Christianuni,  et  inipii,

non  esse  Christo  subditum.
banc  cum  tenere  discimus,  possum  tibi

non  exhibere,  id  est  patri,  yO

cui  cuncta  sancta  iura,  cara  nomina

debere  me  voluit  deus?

128


THE EPISTLES

filth  of  our  dull  bodies  and  renews  the  disposition  ot
our  hearts :  he  draws  forth  all  which  aforetime  used
to  please,  giving  unsullied  pleasure  in  return,  and
absolutely  with  a  master's  right  claims  both  our
hearts  and  lips  and  time.  He  seeks  himself  to  en-
gross our  thoughts,  our  minds,  belief  and  choice,  him-
self to  be  feared  and  loved.  Those  aimless  surges,
which  the  toils  of  life  stir  up  in  the  course  of  this
present  span  of  time,  are  brought  to  naught  by  faith
in  a  life  to  come  with  God.  This  casts  not  away
the  riches,  which  we  are  thought  to  scorn,  as  un-
hallowed or  little  worth,  but,  as  more  dear,  bids
them  be  laid  up  in  Heaven  in  trust  with  Christ  our
God,  who  has  promised  more  than  he  receives,  to
pay  back  with  large  usury  those  things  now  despised
or  rather  laid  up  in  his  keeping.  A  faithful  guardian,
an  unfailing  debtor,  he  will  repay  witii  increase
wealth  entrusted  to  him,  and  of  his  bounty  God
with  abundant  interest  will  restore  the  money  we
have  spurned.

8^  To  Him  given  up,  whether  waiting  or  serving,
in  Him  laying  up  my  all,  think  me  not,  I  beseech
thee,  slothful  nor  wayward,  nor  charge  me  with
want  of  filial  piety.  How  can  piety  be  wanting  in  a
Christian.''  For  "piety"  has  the  acquired  meaning  to
be  a  Christian,  and  "  the  impious  "  one  not  subject  to
Christ.  When  I  am  learning  to  hold  fast  this,  can  I
fail  to  show  it  toward  thee,  that  is,  towards  my  father,
to  whom  God  has  willed  that  I  should  owe  all  sacred
duties and names of  affection  ? To  thee I owe

129

VOL.  ir.  K


AUSONIUS

tibi  disciplinas,  dignitatem,  litteras,

linguae^  togae,  famae  decus
})rovectus,  altus,  institutus  debeo,  95

})atrone,  praeceptor,  pater.
Sed  cur  remotus  tamdiu  degam^  arguis

pioque  motu  irasceris.
conducit  istud  aut  necesse  est  aiit  placet :

veniale,  quidquid  horunij  erit.  100

ignosce  anianti,  si  geram  quod  expedit ;

gratare,  si  vivam^  ut  libet.


Ausoxro  Paulinus

Uefore  me  patriis  tota  trieteride  terris

atque  alium  legisse  vagis  erroribus  orbem,

culta  prius  vestrae  oblitum  consortia  vitae^  105

increpitas  Sanctis  mota  pietate  querellis.

amplector  patrio  venerandos  pectore  motus

et  mihi  gratandas  salvis  adfectibus  iras.

set  reditum  inde  meum,  genitor,  te  poscere  raallem,

uude  dari  possit. revocandum  me  tibi  credam, 110

cum  steriles  fundas  non  ad  divina  precatus,

Castalidis  supj)lex  averso  numine  Musis  ?

non  his  numinibus  tibi  me  patriaeque  reduces.

surda  vocas  et  nulla  rogas  (levis  hoc  feret  aura,

quod  daturin  nihilum)  sine  numine  nomina  Musas.  115

inrita  ventosae  rapiunt  haec  vota  procellae,

quae  non  missa  deo  vacuis  in  nubibus  haerent

nee  penetrant  superi  stellantem  regis  in  aulam.

130


THE EPISTLES

training,  lionours,  learning,  my  pride  of  eloquence,
of  civil  rank,  of  reputation,  being  by  thee  ad-
vanced, fostered,  and  instructed,  my  patron,  tutor,
father.

'-•'  But  why  do  I  live  so  long  retired,  thou  askest
reproachfully,  and  art  stirred  with  a  loving  anger.  It
is  expedient,  or  'tis  necessary,  or  'tis  my  pleasure  :
whichever  of  these  it  be,  it  will  be  pardonable.
Forgive  me,  as  I  love  thee,  if  I  do  what  is  convenient;
be  thankful  if  I  live  as  pleases  me.

Paulinus  to  Ausonius

That  I  shall  be  absent  from  my  native  land  full
three  years'  space,  and  that  I  have  traversed  another
world  in  aimless  wanderings,  forgetful  of  that  fellow-
ship in  thy  life,  once  cherished — thou  dost  reproach
me  with  complaints  hallowed  by  the  love  whence
they  spring.  I  welcome  with  reverence  due  the
emotions  of  a  father's  heart  and  the  anger  which
claims  my  gratitude  leaving  affection  unimpaired.
Yet  for  my  return,  my  father,  I  would  rather  thou
should'st  ask  it  there  where  it  can  be  granted.
Shall  I  believe  that  thou  canst  call  me  back  to  thee
while  thou  pourest  forth  barren  prayers  to  beings
not  divine,  suppliant  to  the  Castalian  Muses  while
God  turns  from  thee  ?  Not  through  such  deities
wilt  thou  bring  me  back  to  thee  and  to  my  country.
Thou  call'st  the  deaf,  implorest  things  of  naught —
a  light  breeze  will  bear  away  what  is  addressed  to
a  nothing — the  Muses,  who  are  names  but  non-
entities. The  stormy  winds  whirl  away  ineffectual
such  prayers  as  these,  which,  not  addressed  to  God,
catch  in  the  empty  clouds  nor  make  their  way  into
the  starry  court  of  the  King  of  Heaven.

K  2


AUSONIUS

Si  tibi  cura  mei  reditus,  ilium  adspice  et  ora,
qui  tonitru  summi  quatit  ignea  culniina  caeli,  120

qui  trifido  igne  micat  nee  inania  murmura  niiscet
quique  satis  caelo  soles  largitur  et  imbres^
qui  super  omne,  quod  est;,  vel  in  omni  totus  ubique,
omnibus  infuso  rebus  regit  omnia  Christo  :
quo  mentes  tenet  atque  movet,  quo  tempora  nostra  1 25
et  loca  disponit. quod  si  contraria  votis
constituat  nostri^  prece  deflectendus  in  ilia  est,
quae  volumus.

Quid  me  aecusas  ?  si  displicet  actus
quem  gero  agente  deo,  prius  est :  fiat  reus  auctor,
cui  placet  aut  formare  meos  aut  vertere  sensus. 130
nam  mea  si  reputes,  quae  pristina,  quae  tibi  nota.
sponte  fatebor  eum  modo  me  non  esse,  sub  illo
tempore  qui  fuerim,  quo  non  perversus  habebar
et  perversus  eram  falsi  caligine  cernens,
stulta  dei  sapiens  et  mortis  pabula  vivens.  135

quo  magis  ignosci  mihi  fas,  quia  promptius  ex  hoc
agnosci  datur  a  summo  genitore  novari,
quod  non  more  meo  geritur  :  non,  arbitror,  istic
confessus  dicar  mutatae  in  prava  notandum
errorem  mentis,  quoniam  sim  sponte  professus 1-10
me  non  mente  mea  vitam  mutasse  priorem.
mens  nova  mi,fateor,mensnonmea  :  non  meaquondam,
set  mea  nunc  auctore  deo,  qui,  si  quid  in  actu
ingeniove  meo  sua  dignum  ad  munia  vidit,

1  cp.  1  Cov.  iii.  19.
132


THE EPISTLES

^1^  If  thou  carest  for  my  return,  look  towards  liim
and  pray  to  him  who  with  his  thunder  shakes  the
fiery  heights  of  highest  Heaven,  who  shoots  forth  his
triple  flash  of  flame,  nor  mingles  it  with  idle  sounds,
who  on  the  crops  graciously  bestows  sunshine  and
rains  from  heaven,  who  being  above  all  that  is,  or
wholly  in  all  things  everywhere,  reigns  over  all
through  Christ  who  permeates  all  things :  through
whom  he  occupies  and  sways  our  minds,  through
whom  he  orders  our  times  and  places.  But  if  he
ordains  things  opposed  to  our  hopes,  by  prayer  he
may  be  turned  aside  to  that  which  we  desire.

v^s  Why  blamest  thou  me  }  If  thou  mislikest  the
course  which  I  pursue  under  God's  influence,  there
is  an  earlier  step  :  let  the  Author  be  accused,  who  is
pleased  either  to  shape  or  change  my  feelings.  For
if  thou  thinkest  my  nature  is  as  of  old  and  as  'twas
known  to  thee,  I  will  avow  of  myself  that  now  I  am
not  the  man  I  was  about  that  time  when  I  was  not
thought  wayward  though  wayward  I  was,  seeing  with
the  darkness  of  error,  wise  in  what  with  God  is
foolishness,^  and  living  on  the  food  of  death.  Where-
fore thou  art  the  more  bound  to  pardon  me,  because
by  this  the  more  readily  'tis  permitted  thee  to
recognize  that  this  change  is  from  the  most  high
Father — that  'tis  not  in  accordance  with  my  nature:
by  this  I  shall  not,  methinks,  be  held  to  have  ad-
mitted a  lamentable  distraction  of  a  mind  changed
for  the  worse,  since  I  have  openly  avowed  that  not
my  own  mind  has  caused  me  to  change  my  former
life.  I  have  a  new  mind,  I  confess— a  mind  not
my  ov/n :  not  mine  aforetime,  though  mine  now
through  God's  influence — and  if  in  my  deeds  or
thoughts  he  sees  anything  worthy  for  his  gifts,  to

133


AUSONIUS

gratia  prima  tibij  tibi  gloria  debita  cedit,  145

cuius  praeceptis  partum  estj  quod  Christus  amaret.

Quare  gratandum  magis  est  tibi^  quam  queritandum^
quod  tuus  ille,  tuis  studiis  et  moribus  ortus,
Pauliiuis,  cui  te  non  infitiare  parentem,
nee  modo,  cum  credis  perversum,  sic  mea  verti 150
consilia,  ut  sim  promeritus  Christi  fore,  dum  sum
Ausonii.  feret  ille  tuae  sua  praemia  laudi
deque  tua  primum  tibi  deferet  arbore  fructum.

Unde,  precor,  meliora  putes  nee  maxima  perdas
praemia  detestando  tuis  bona  fontibus  orta.  155

non  etenim  mihi  mens  vaga,  sed  neque  participantum
vita  fugax  hominum,  Lyciae  qua  scribis  in  antris
Pegaseum  vixisse  equitem,  licet  avia  multi
numine  agente  colant,  clari  velut  ante  sophorum
pro  studiis  xiiusisque  suis :  ut  nunc  quoque,  castis  160
qui  Christum  sumpsere  animis,  agitare  frequentant,
non  inopes  animi  neque  de  feritate  legentes
desertis  habitare  locis ;  sed  in  ardua  versi
sidera  spectantesque  deum  verique  profunda
perspicere  intenti  de  vanis  libera  curis  1G5

otia  amant  strepitumque  fori  rerumque  tumultus
cunctaque  divinis  inimica  negotia  donis,
et  Christi  imperiis  et  amore  salutis,  abhorrent
speque  fideque  deum  sponsa  mercede  sequuntur,
quam  referet  certus  non  desperantibus  auctor, 170
si  modo  non  vincant  vacuis  praesentia  rebus,

^  cp.  Epi-if.  xxix.  70  ft".


THE EPISTLES

thee  chief  gratitude,  to  thee  the  glory  falls  due,
since  thy  instruction  has  produced  what  Christ  could
love.

I*''  Wherefore  thou  shouldst  give  thanks  rather  than
complain  because  I — that  son  of  thine,  offspring  of
thy  learning  and  thy  character,  Paulinus,  whose
parentage  thou  dost  not  deny,  even  now  when  thou
believest  me  wayward — have  so  changed  my  prin-
ciples that  I  have  gained  grace  to  become  the  child
of  Christ  while  I  am  the  child  of  Ausonius.  He  will
confer  his  rewards  u})on  thy  merit  and  from  this  tree
of  thine  proifer  the  first  fruit  to  thee.

^^^  And  so,  I  pray  thee,  think  nobler  thoughts  and
lose  not  the  highest  rewards  by  execrating  good
things  which  have  their  source  from  thee.  For
indeed  my  mind  does  not  wander,  nor  even  does
my  life  flee  from  intercourse  with  men — even  as
thou  writest  that  Pegasus'  rider  lived  in  Lycian
caves  1 — albeit  many  dwell  in  pathless  places  through
God's  leading,  just  as  before  them  men  famous
among  the  sages  did  for  the  sake  of  their  learning
and  their  inspiration.  Even  so  in  these  days  also,
they  who  with  pure  hearts  have  adopted  Christ
are  wont  to  live — not  as  beside  themselves,  nor  out
of  savagery  choosing  to  dwell  in  desert  places  ;  but
because — turning  their  faces  to  the  stars  on  high,
contemplating  God,  and  intent  to  scan  the  deep
wells  of  truth — they  love  repose  void  of  empty  cares,
and  shun  the  din  of  public  life,  the  bustle  of  affairs,
and  all  concerns  hostile  to  the  gifts  of  Heaven  both
by  Christ's  command  and  in  desire  for  salvation.  By
hope  and  faith  these  follow  God  for  the  pledged
reward  which  he,  whose  promise  cannot  fail,  will
bestow  on  such  as  persevere,  if  only  this  present  life

135


AUSONIUS

quaeque  videt  spcrnat^  quae  non  videt  ut  meieatur
secreta  ignitus  penetrans  caelestia  sensiis.
namque  caduca  patent  nostris,  aeterna  negantui*
visibus;  etnuncspesequiniur,quodmentevidemus,  175
spernentes  varias^  rerum  spectacula,  fornias
et  male  corporeos  bona  sollicitantia  visus.
attamen  haec  sedisse  illis  sententia  visa  est,
tota  quibus  iam  lux  patuit  verique  bonique,
venturi  aeternum  saecli  et  praesentis  inane.  180

At  mihi,  non  eadem  cui  gloria,  cur  eadem  sit
fama  ?  fides  voti  par  est,  sed  amoena  colenti,
nunc  etiam  et  blanda  posito  locupletis  in  acta
litoris,  unde  haec  iam  tarn  festinata  locorum
invidia  est?  utinam  iustus  me  carpere  livor  185

incipiat :  Christi  sub  nomine  probra  placebunt.
non  patitur  tenerum  mens  numine  firma  pudorem,
et  laus  hie  contempta  redit  mihi  iudice  Christo.

Ne  me  igitur,  venerande  parens,  his  ut  male  vei'sum
increpites  studiis  neque  me  vel  coniuge  carpas 190
vel  mentis  vitio :  non  anxia  Bellerophontis
mens  est  nee  Tanaquil  milii,  sed  Lucretia  coniunx.
nee  mihi  nunc  patrii  est,  ut  visa,  oblivio  caeli,
qui  summum  suspecto  patrem,  quem  qui  colit  unum,
hie  vere  memor  est  caeli. crede  ergo,  pater,  nos  195
nee  caeli  inmemores  nee  vivere  mentis  egentes,
liumanisque  agitare  loeis. studia  ipsa  piorum


^  There  is  an  inept  play  on  the  two-fold  meaning  of  codum
=  heavens  (clime)  and  Heaven.

T36


THE EPISTLES

with  its  vain  interests  does  not  prevail,  and  the  fiery
perceptions,  penetrating  to  Heaven's  secret  places,
scorn  what  they  see  to  gain  what  they  see  not.  For
things  perishable  are  open  to  our  sight,  the  eternal
are  denied  ;  and  now  in  hope  we  pursue  Avhat  with
the  mind  we  see,  scorning  the  various  shapes,  the
iiTiages  of  things,  and  the  attractions  which  provoke
our  natural  sight.  And  yet  such  resolve  has  been
found  to  lodge  in  those  to  whom  already  is  revealed
the  light  of  the  good  and  true,  the  eternity  of  the
world  to  come  and  the  emptiness  of  that  which  is.

1^1  But  I,  who  have  not  the  same  cause  for
boasting,  why  do  I  bear  the  same  reproach?  My
surety  of  hope  is  no  less  ;  but  since  I  dwell  in  pleasant
places,  and  even  now  abide  upon  the  agreeable
shores  of  a  prosperous  coast,  whence  this  so  premature
carping  at  my  abode  ':  I  would  that  jealousy  with
good  grounds  may  begin  to  pluck  at  me  :  bearing  the
name  of  Christ  I  shall  welcome  taunts.  A  mind
strengthened  by  power  divine  feels  no  weak  shame,
and  the  praise  I  here  despise  is  restored  to  me  when
Christ  is  judge.

180  Do  not,  then,  chide  me,  my  honoured  father,  as
though  I  had  turned  to  these  pursuits  perversely,  and
do  not  twit  me  with  my  wife  or  with  defect  of  mind:
mine  is  not  the  perturbed  mind  of  Bellerophon,  nor
is  my  wife  a  Tanaquil  but  a  Lucretia.  Nor  am  I  now
forgetful,  as  thou  thinkest,  of  the  heavens  'neath
which  my  fathers  dwelt,  seeing  that  I  look  up  to  the
all-highest  Father,  and  that  whoso  worships  Him
alone  he  is  truly  mindful  of  Heaven.^  Believe  then,
father,  that  I  am  not  unmindful  of  the  heavens  and
do  not  live  distraught  in  mind,  but  dwell  in  a  civilized
place  : pursuits themselves bear witness to the

137


AUSONIUS

testantur  mores  hominum  ;  nee  enim  impia  summum

gens  poterit  novisse  deum  :  sint  multa  locoruni,

multa  hominum  studiis  inculta,  expertia  legum, 200

quae  regio  agresti  ritu  caret  ?  aut  quid  in  istis

improbitas  aliena  nocet  ?  quod  tu  mihi  vastos

Vasconiae  saltus  et  ninguida  Pyrenaei

obicis  hospitia,  in  primo  quasi  limine  fixus

Hispanae  regionis  agam  nee  sit  locus  usquam  205

rure  vel  urbe  mihi,  summum  qua  dives  in  orbem

usque  patet  mersos  spectans  Hispania  soles,

sed  fuerit  fortuna  iugis  habitasse  latronum,

num  lare  barbarico  rigui  mutatus  in  ipsos,

inter  quos  habui,  socia  feritate  colonos  ?  210

non  recipit  mens  pura  malum  neque  levibus  haerent

inspersae  fibris  maculae  :  si  Vascone  saltu

quisquis  agit  purus  sceleris  vitam,  integer  aeque

nulla  ab  inhumane  morum  contagia  ducit

hospite. sed  mihi  cur  sit  ab  illo  nomine  crimen,  215

qui  di versa  colo,  ut  colui,  loca  iuncta  superbis

urbibus  et  laetis  hominum  celeberrima  cultis?

ac  si  Vasconicis  mihi  vita  fuisset  in  oris,

cur  non  more  meo  potius  formata  ferinos

poneret,  in  nostros  migrans,  gens  barbara  ritus? 220

Nam  quod  in  eversis  habitacula  ponis  Hibera
urbibus  et  deserta  tuo  legis  oppida  versu
montanamque  mihi  Calagorrim  et  Birbilim  acutis
pendentem  scopulis  coUemque  iacentis  Hilerdae


'  i.e.  if  they  are  just  as  wicked  as  others,  that  is  no  special
objection  against  them.

138


THE EPISTLES

character  of  righteous  men  ;  for  an  unrighteous  race
will  not  be  able  to  know  the  most  high  God:  granted
that  much  of  the  country,  much  of  the  folk  is
unimproved  and  ignorant  of  laws,  yet  what  tract  is
without  its  rustic  worshij)  ?  Or  what  offence  in  them
is  wickedness  common  to  other  parts  P^  And  yet
thou  dost  taunt  me  with  tlie  woodlands  of  Vasconia
and  snowy  lodgings  in  the  Pyrenees,  as  tiiough  I
live  tied  down  at  the  very  frontier  of  the  whole
realm  of  Spain  and  have  no  place  of  my  own  any-
where in  country  or  in  town,  where  wealthy  Spain
outstretched  along  the  world's  boundary  watches  the
suns  dip  down  into  the  sea.  But  suppose  it  had
been  my  lot  to  dwell  amid  the  hills  of  brigands,
have  I  become  a  block  in  a  savage's  hut,  changed  into
the  very  serfs  amid  whom  I  lived,  partaking  of  their
wildness  ?  A  pure  heart  admits  no  evil,  even  as
filth  spattered  upon  smooth  bristles  does  not  stick:  if
one  without  stain  of  wickedness  spends  his  life  in  a
Vasconian  glade,  his  character,  unblemished  as  before,
draws  no  infection  from  his  host's  barbarity.  But
why  am  I  charged  on  that  account  when  I  dwell,  as
I  have  dwelt,  in  a  far  different  country  bordering
on  splendid  cities  and  thickly  covered  with  man's
prosperous  tillage  .''  And  if  my  life  had  been  led  on
the  borders  of  Vasconia,  why  should  not  the  savage
folk  rather  have  been  moulded  after  my  mode  of  life,
laying  aside  their  barbarous  customs  to  come  over  to
our  own  ?

2-21  po,.  whereas  thou  dost  fix  my  Spanish  dwelling-
place  in  ruined  cities,  traversing  in  thy  verse  desolate
towns,  and  castest  in  my  teeth  mountain  Calahorra,
Bambola  hanging  from  its  jagged  crags,  and  Lerida
prostrate  on  its  hill-side — as  though,  an  exile  from

139


AUSONIUS

exprobras,  velut  his  habitem  laris  exul  et  urbis 225

extra  liominum  tecta  atque  vias  ; — an  credis  Hiberae

has  telluris  opes,  Hispani  nescius  orbis,

quo  gravis  ille  poli  sub  pondere  constitit  Allans,

ultima  nunc  eius  mons  portio  metaque  terrae,

disci  udit  bimarem  eel  so  qui  vertice  Calpen  ?  230

Birbilis  huic  tantum,  Calagorris,  Hilerda  notantur,

Caesarea  est  Augusta  cui,  Barcinus  amoena

et  capite  insigni  despectans  Tarraco  pontum  ?

Quid  numerem  egregias  terris  et  moenibus  urbes,
quas  geminum  felix  Hispania  tendit  in  aequor, 235
(jua  Betis  Oceanum  TA'rrhenumque  auget  Hiberus,
lataque  distantis  pelagi  divortia  conplet,
orbe  suo  finem  ponens  in  liniite  niundi  ?
anne  tibi,  o  doniine  inlustris,  si  scribere  sit  mens,
qua  regione  habites,  placeat  reticere  nitentem 240
Burdigalam  et  piceos  malis  describere  Boios  ?
cumque  Maroialicis  tua  prodigis  otia  thermis
inter  et  umbrosos  donas  tibi  vivere  lucos,
laeta  locis  et  mira  colens  habitacula  tectis :
nigrantesne  casas  et  texta  mapalia  culnio  245

dignaque  pellitis  habitas  deserta  Bigerris  ?
quique  superba  tuae  contenmis  moenia  Romae
consul,  arenosas  non  dedignare  Vasatas?
vel  quia  Pictonicis  tibi  fertile  rus  viret  arvis,
Raraunum  Ausonias  heu  devenisse  curules  250

^  Tlie  Guaclal((uivii-,  "  the  Great  River."

2  The  l':bro.

•^  The  niixlerii  Ijourbonnais  of  tlie  l)cp.  tie  rAUier.

140


THE EPISTLES

home  and  city,  I  were  dwelling  in  these  far  from  the
dwellings  and  highways  of  men  ;  dost  thou  believe
these  ai'e  the  i-esources  of  the  Iberian  land,  ignorant
of  the  Spanish  world  where  laden  Atlas  took  his
stand  beneath  the  load  of  Heaven,  he  whose  moun-
tain, now  the  furthest  fragment  and  boundary  of  the
earth,  shuts  out  with  its  lofty  peak  Calpe  tliat  lies
betwixt  two  seas  ?  Are  only  Bambola,  Calahorra,
Lerida,  placed  to  tlie  credit  of  this  land  which  has  its
Saragossa,  pleasant  Barcelona,  and  Tarragona  looking
from  majestic  heights  down  to  the  sea  ?

2'^*  What  need  for  me  to  tell  over  the  cities,
distinguished  for  their  territories  and  walls  which
prosperous  Spain  thrusts  forth  between  two  seas ;
where  Betis  ^  swells  the  Atlantic,  Hiberus  -  theTuscan
sea — Spain  whose  compass  occupies  the  wide  inter-
vening tract  which  parts  main  irom  main,  setting  its
bounds  at  the  extreme  verge  of  the  world  ?  If  thou,
O  famous  master.  Avert  minded  to  describe  the
region  where  thou  dwellest,  wouldst  thou  be  content
to  leave  unnamed  cheerful  Bordeaux  preferring  to
write  of  the  pitchy  Boii  ■*  ?  And  when  thou  bestowest
thy  leisure  on  the  hot  springs  of  Maroialum^  and
permittest  thyself  to  live  amid  shady  groves,  dwelling
amid  cheerful  scenery  and  habitations  marvellously
built,  dost  thou  inhabit  murky  hovels  and  cabins  of
twisted  straw  amid  a  wilderness  fit  for  the  skin-clad
natives  of  Bigorre  ?  Dost  thou,  a  consul,  scorn  the
proud  walls  of  thine  own  Rome  while  not  disdaining
Bazas  amid  its  sand  hills?  Or  because  the  fertile
country  and  green  fields  of  Poiteau  are  about  thee,
shall  I  lament  that  the  Ausonian  consulate — alas  !  —
has  sunk  to  the  level  of  Raraunum,^  and  that  the


*  Probably  Bagueres  de  BigoiTe.
^  Now  R(jm  or  Raiun.


141


AUSONIUS

conquerar,  et  trabeam  veteri  sordescere  fano ;
quae  tamen  augusta  Latiaris  in  urbe  Quirini
Caesareas  inter  parili  titulo  palmatas
fulget  inadtrito  longum  venerabilis  auro,
florentem  retinens  meriti  vivacis  honorem.  255

aut  cum  Lueani  retineris  culmine  fundi,
aeniula  Romuleis  habitans  fastigia  tectis,
materiam  pi-aebente  loco,  qui  proxima  signat,
in  Condatino  diceris  degere  vico  ?

Multa  iocis  pateant,  liceat  quoque  ludere  fictis  ;  260
sed  lingua  mulcente  gravem  interlidere  dentem,
ludere  blanditiis  urentibus  et  male  dulces
fermentare  iocos  satirae  niordacis  aceto
saepe  i)oetarum,  numquam  decet  esse  parentum.
namque  fides  pietasque  petunt,  ut,  quod  mala  nectens
insinuat  castis  fama  auribus,  hoc  bona  voti  266

mens  patris  adfigi  fixumque  haerescere  cordi
non  sinat. et  vulgus  scaevo  rumore  malignum
ante  habitos  mores,  non  semper  flectere  vitam
crimen  habct :  namque  est  laudi  bene  vertere. cum  me
inmutatum  andis,  studium  ofticiumque  require. 271
si  pravo  rectum,  si  relligiosa  profanis,
luxurie  parcum,  turpi  mutatur  honestum,
segnis,  iners,  obscurus  ago,  miserere  sodalis
in  mala  perversi :  blandum  licet  ira  j^arentem 275
excitet,  ut  lapsum  rectis  instauret  amicum
moribus  et  monitu  reparet  meliora  severo.

>  Elsewhere  (e.g.  Epist.  xxvi.  44)  called  Lucaniacus.
142


THE EPISTLES

official  robe  grows  shabby  in  some  mouldering  shrine  ;
whereas  in  fact  it  hangs  in  the  renoAvned  city  of
Roman  Quirinus  along  with  the  imperial  palm-
broidered  robes,  trophies  of  like  distinction,  there
gleaming,  long  venerable,  with  unfrayed  gold,  keep-
ing fresh  the  glorious  bloom  of  thy  deathless  achieve-
ment ?  Or  when  thou  art  lodged  under  the  roof  ot
Lucanus,^  thy  country  house,  inhabiting  a  pile  vying
with  the  halls  of  Rome,  shall  we  take  the  pretext
afforded  by  the  place  whicli  gives  its  name  to  the
vicinity,  saying  thou  dwellest  in  the  hamlet  of
Condate^?

-'*''  Let  much  admit  of  jests,  let  sportive  fiction
also  be  allowed ;  but  with  a  smooth  tongue  to  strike
against  an  aching  tooth,  to  sport  with  stinging
compliments,  and  to  season  jests  ill-relished  with  the
vinegar  of  tart  satire,  oft  befits  a  poet,  never  a  father.
For  loyalty  and  natural  affection  demand  that  what
slander-spinning  Rumour  instils  into  guileless  ears,
that  the  good-hoping  mind  of  a  father  should  not
suffer  to  take  hold  and  gain  firm  lodgment  in  the
heart.  Even  the  common  herd,  malignant  in  its
brutal  sneers  towards  habits  formerly  observed,  does
not  always  hold  it  crime  to  alter  one's  life  :  for  to
alter  wisely  is  accounted  praise.  When  thou  hearest
I  am  changed,  ask  what  is  my  pursuit  and  my
business.  If  'tis  a  change  from  right  to  wrong,  from
godliness  to  wickedness,  from  temperance  to  luxury,
from  honour  to  baseness,  if  I  live  slothftd,  sluggish,
ignoble,  take  pity  on  a  comrade  strayed  into  evil ;
a  gentle  father  well  may  be  stirred  with  anger  to
restore  a  fallen  friend  to  right  living  and  by  stern
reproof  to  bring  him  back  to  better  things.

^  Cognac,  near  Saintes.

143


AUSONIUS

At  si  forte  itidem,  quod  legi  et  quod  sequor,  audis,
corda  pio  vovisse  deo  venerabile  Christi
imperium  docili  pro  credulitate  sequentem,  280

persuasumque  dei  rnonitis  aeterna  parari
praemia  mortal!  damnis  praesentibus  empta,
non  reor  id  sancto  sic  displicuisse  parenti,
mentis  ut  errorem  credat  sic  vivere  Christo,
ut  Christus  sanxit. iuvat  hoc  nee  paenitet  luiius  285
erroris. stultus  diversa  sequentibus  esse
nil  moror,  aeterno  mea  dum  sententia  regi
sit  sapiens, breve^  quidquid  homo  est,  liomo  corporis

aegri,
temporis  occidui  et  sine  Christo  pulvis  et  umbra :
quod  probat  aut  damnat  tanti  est,  quanti  arbiter  ipse,
ipse  obit  atque  illi  suus  est  comitabilis  error  291

cumque  suo  moriens  sententia  iudice  transit.

Et  nisi,  dum  tempus  praesens  datur,  anxia  nobis
cura  sit  ad  domini  praeceptiim  vivere  Christi,
sei-a  erit  exutis  homini  querimonia  membris,  295

dum  levia  humanae  metuit  convicia  linguae,
non  timuisse  gi*aves  divini  iudicis  iras ;
quem  patris  aeterni  solio  dexti'aque  sedentem,
omnibus  impositum  regem  et  labentibus  annis
venturum,  ut  cunctas  aequato  examine  gentes 300
iudicet  et  variis  referat  sua  praemia  gestis,
credo  equidem  et  metuens  studio  properante  laboro.
si  qua  datur,  ne  morte  pi-ius  quam  crimine  solvar.

Huius  in  adventum  trepidis  mihi  credula  fibris

M4


THE EPISTLES

^'s  But  if  perchance  thou  dost  likewise  hear — and
'tis  what  I  hav'e  chosen  and  what  I  pursue — that  I
have  vowed  my  heart  to  our  holy  God,  following  in
accord  with  obedient  belief  the  awful  behest  of
Christ,  and  that  I  am  convinced  by  God's  word  that
deathless  rewards  are  laid  up  for  man,  purchased  by
present  loss,  that,  methinks,  has  not  so  displeased  my
revered  father  that  he  thinks  it  a  perversion  of  the
mind  so  to  live  for  Christ  as  Christ  appointed.  This
is  my  delight,  and  this  "perversion"  I  regret  not.
That  I  am  foolish  in  the  eyes  of  those  who  follow
other  aims  gives  me  no  pause,  if  only  in  sight  of  the
eternal  King  my  opinion  be  wise.  A  short-lived
thing  is  man  at  best,  man  with  his  frail  body  and
passing  season,  dust  and  a  shadow  without  Christ :
his  praise  and  blame  are  so  much  worth  as  the  arbiter
himself.  Himself  he  perishes  and  his  own  mistake
must  bear  him  company,  and  with  the  judge  who
pronounced  it  a  verdict  dies  and  passes.

2^^  And  unless,  while  this  present  time  is  granted,
we  take  careful  heed  to  live  according  to  the  com-
mand of  Christ  our  Lord,  too  late,  when  man  has
put  off  his  mortal  frame,  will  be  his  complaint  that
while  he  feared  the  light  rebuke  of  human  tongues,  he
feared  not  the  severe  wrath  of  the  Heavenly  Judge.
And  that  He  sitteth  on  the  throne  at  the  right
hand  of  the  eternal  Father,  that  He  is  set  over  all  as
king,  and  that  as  years  roll  away  He  will  come  to  try
all  races  with  even-balanced  judgment,  and  bestow
due  rewards  upon  their  several  deeds,  I  for  my  part
believe,  and,  fearing,  toil  with  restless  zeal  tliat,  if
so  it  may  be,  I  be  not  cut  off  by  death  ere  I  am  cut
off  from  sin.

304  Against  His  coming  my  believing  heart  trembles

M5


A U SON  I  us

corda  treniunt  gestitque  aniina  id  iam  cauta  futuri,  305
praemetuens,  ne  vincta  aegris  pro  corpore  curis
ponderibusque  gravis  rerum,  si  forte  recluso
increpitet  tuba  vasta  polo,  non  possit  in  auras
regis  ad  occursum  levil)us  se  tollere  pinnis,
inter  honora  volans  sanctorum  milia  caelo,  310

qui  per  inane  levis  neque  mundi  conpede  vinctos
ardua  in  astra  pedes  facili  moliniine  tollent
et  teneris  vecti  per  sidera  nubibus  ibunt,
caelestem  ut  medio  venerentur  in  aere  regem
claraque  adorato  coniungant  agmina  Christo.  315

Hie  metus  est,  labor  iste,  dies  ne  me  ultimus  atris
sopitum  tenebris  sterili  deprendat  in  actu,
tempora  sub  vacuis  ducentem  perdita  curis.
nam  quid  agam,  lentis  si,  dum  coniveo  votis,
Christus  ab  aetheria  mihi  proditus  arce  coruscet 320
et,  subitis  domini  caelo  venientis  aperto
praestrictus  radiis,  obscurae  tristia  noctis
suffugia  inlato  confusus  lumine  quaeram  ?

Quod  mihi  ne  pareret  vel  diffidentia  veri,
vel  praesentis  amor  vitae  rerumque  voluptas  325

curarumque  labor,  placuit  praevertere  casus
proposito  et  curas  finire  superstite  vita
communemque  adeo  ventura  in  saecula  rebus
expectai'e  truceni  securo  pectore  mortem.

Si  placet  hoc,  gratare  tui  spe  divite  amici : 330
si  contra  est,  Christo  tantum  me  linque  probari.


146


THE EPISTLES

with  fluttering  strings  and  my  soul,  even  now  aware
of  what  shall  be,  quakes  with  foreboding  lest,
shackled  with  paltry  cares  for  the  body  and  weighted
with  a  load  of  l)usiness,  if  perchance  the  awful  trump
should  peal  from  the  opened  heaven,  it  should  fail
to  raise  itself  on  light  pinions  into  the  air  to  meet
the  Lord,^  flitting  in  Heaven  amid  glorified  thousands
of  the  saints,  who  through  the  void  up  to  the  stars
on  high  shall  with  unlaborious  effort  uplift  light  feet,
unshackled  with  the  world's  fetters,  and  wafted  on
soft  clouds  shall  pass  amid  the  stars  to  worship  the
Heavenly  King  in  mid  air  and  join  their  glorious
companies  with  Christ  whom  they  adore.

^1'^  This  is  my  fear,  this  my  task,  that  the  Last  Day
overtake  me  not  asleep  in  the  black  darkness  of
profitless  pursuits,  spending  wasted  time  amid  empty
cares.  For  what  shall  I  do  if,  while  I  drowse  amid
sluggish  hopes,  Christ,  disclosed  to  me  from  his
heavenly  citadel,  should  flash  forth,  and  I,  dazzled  by
the  sudden  beams  of  my  Lord  coming  from  opened
Heaven,  should  seek  the  doleful  refuge  of  murky
night,  confounded  by  the  o'erwhelming  light .''

3-^  Wherefore,  that  neither  doubt  of  the  truth,  nor
love  of  this  present  life  with  delight  in  worldly
things  and  anxious  toil  should  bring  this  on  me,  I
am  resolved  to  forestall  calamity  by  my  plan  of  life,
to  end  anxieties  while  life  remains,  awaiting  with
untroubled  heart  fierce  Death,  the  general  doom  of
things  for  ages  yet  to  come.

^"•^  If  this  thou  dost  approve,  rejoice  in  thy  friend's
rich  hope  :  if  otherwise,  leave  me  to  be  approved  by
Christ  alone.

^  cp.  1  Thessa/onians  iv.  16  f.


147


AUSONIUS

XXXII. — Oratio  Faulini

Omnipotens  genitor  reruin,  ciii  sumnia  potestas,
exaudij  si  iiista  precor. ne  sit  mihi  tristis
ulla  dies,  placidam  nox  rumj)at  nulla  quietem.
nee  placeant  aliena  mihi,  quin  et  mea  prosint
supplicibus  nullusque  habeat  mihi  vota  nocendi 5
aut  habeat  nocitura  mihi. male  velle  facultas
nulla  sit  ac  bene  posse  adsit  tranquilla  potestas.
mens  contenta  suo  nee  turpi  dedita  lucro
vincat  corporeas  casto  bene  eonscia  leeto
inlecebras,  turpesque  iocos  obscenaque  dicta  10

oderit  ilia  nocens  et  multum  grata  malignis
auribus  efFuso  semper  rea  lingua  veneno.
non  obitu  adfligar  cuiusquam  aut  funere  crescam,
invideam  numquam  cuiquam  nee  mentiar  umquam.
adsit  laeta  domus  epulisque  adludat  inemptis  15

verna  satur  fidusque  comes  nitidusque  minister,
morigera  et  coniunx  caraque  ex  coniuge  nati.

Moribus  haec  castis  tribuit  deus  :  hi  sibi  mores
perpetuam  spondent  ventura  in  saecula  vitam.

XXXIIl. — <Paulinus  Gestidio>

Domino  merito  suspiciendo  Geslidio  Paulivus.

Iniuria  quidem  est  patri  familias  maritimis  deliciis

abundanti terrenum aliquid et agreste praebere ;

sed  ego,  ut  et  causa  mihi  esset  aput  unanimitatem

148


THE EPISTLES

XXXII.— A Prayer  of  Paulinus

ALMUiHTV  Father  of  all  things,  to  whom  supreme
power  belongs,  hear,  if  I  pray  aright.  Let  no  day  be
passed  by  me  in  sadness,  no  night  disturb  my  calm
repose.  Let  others'  goods  not  atti'act  me,  but  rather
let  my  own  avail  such  as  implore  my  aid  :  may  none
have  a  wish  to  hurt  me  or  the  means  to  hurt  me.
Let  me  have  no  occasion  to  will  ill  and  let  the
unruffled  power  to  do  well  be  with  me.  Let  my
mind,  content  with  its  own  and  not  given  to  base
gains,  overcome  bodily  enticements  keeping  the
conscience  of  chaste  conduct.  Let  that  offending
member,  the  ever-guilty  tongue,  well-pleasing  to
malicious  ears  for  the  poison  it  sheds,  hate  lewd
jesting  and  unseemly  words.  Let  me  not  be  over-
come by  any  man's  decease,  nor  prosper  through  the
death  of  any ;  let  me  never  envy  any  man
nor  ever  tell  a  lie.  Be  mine  a  cheerful  home,  and
at  my  unpurchased  ^  repasts  may  a  Avell-fed
slave  bred  in  my  house,  my  trusty  comrade  and
prosperous  henchman,  serve  blithely ;  and  mine  an
obedient  wife  with  children  born  of  my  dear  wife.

1^  Upon  pure  conduct  God  bestows  such  gifts :  such
conduct  assures  itself  of  life  unending  against  the
world  to  come.

XXXIII. — Paulinus  to  Gestidius

Faulinus  to  the  justly  respected  lord  Gestidius.

It  is  an  insult  to  present  a  man  of  standing  who
has  plenty  of  sea  dainties  with  anything  derived  from
the  land  and  country-side. But,  that  I  might  have

^  i.e.  consisting  of  "home-grown  "  products,  and  so  homely,
not  luxurious.

149


AUSONIUS

tuani  aliquid  conloquendi  et  aliquod  sermoni  hm'c
obsequium  viderer  adiungere,  pauculas  de  paucis-
simis,  quas  pueruli  vespere  inferunt,  ficedulas  misi.
quarum  cum  erubescerem  paucitatem,  plura  etiam
versiculis  verba  subtexui,  quasi  vero  numerum
loquacitate  facturus.  sed  quia  utraque  culpabilia
sunt,  tu  utrisque  benigne  ac  familiariter  ignoscendo
fades,  ut  nee  inhumana  videatur  paucitas  nee
odiosa  garrulitas.

Sume  igitur  pastas  dunioso  in  rure  volucres,

quas  latitans  filicis  sub  tegmine  callidus  auceps,

dum  simili  mentitur  aves  fallitque  susurro,

agmina  viscatis  suspendit  credula  virgis.

tunc  referens  tenueni  non  parvo  muneie  praedam 5

digerit  aucupiuni  tabulis  :  et  primus  opimis

ordo  nitet,  sensim  tenuatus  ad  ima  tabellae.

ut  minus  offendat  macies,  praelata  saginae

gratia  praeventos  pingui  iuvat  alite  visus.


XXXIV. — Ad  Eundem

Pauperis  ut  placeat  carum  tibi  munus  amici,

munera  ne  reputes,  quae  mittis  ditia  nobis.

nam  tibi  quid  dignum  referam  pro  piscibus  illis,

quos  tibi  vicinum  locupleti  gurgite  litus

suppeditat  miros  specie  formaque  diremptos  ?  5

at  mihi  vix  alto  vada  per  saxosa  profundo

150


THE EPISTLES

excuse  for  some  converse  with  you,  my  bosom  friend,
and  to  make  a  show  of  accompanying  tliese  words  of
mine  with  some  token  of  respect,  I  am  sending  a
poor  few  of  the  very  few  fig-peckers  which  my  lads
bring  home  of  an  evening.  And  since  I  blush  for
their  small  number,  I  added  on  more  words  to  my
verses,  as  though  indeed  I  could  increase  their
number  by  my  chatter.  But  since  both  alike  are
open  to  criticism,  you  will  do  a  kind  and  friendly
action  by  pardoning  both,  so  as  to  make  the  fewness
of  the  birds  not  appear  mean,  and  my  wordiness  not
tiresome.

Take,  then,  these  fowl  fed  in  the  thickets  of  the
country-side,  which  the  cunning  fowler,  lurking
beneath  a  screen  of  bracken,  while  he  beguiles  and
decoys  birds  with  a  call  like  their  Own,  has  taken
hanging  on  his  limed  twigs — a  silly  tribe.  Then,
bringing  home  his  light  prey  of  no  slight  price,  he
sets  out  the  catch  upon  his  stall  :  and  the  array
makes  goodly  show  of  prime  birds  in  front  gradually
thinning  out  towards  the  back  of  the  counter.  That
the  more  skinny  may  not  displease,  the  fat  birds  with
their  attractive  plumpness  hold  the  foremost  place,
forestalling  and  delighting  the  gaze.


XXXIV^— To THE SAME

That  thy  poor  friend's  loving  gift  may  find  favour
Avith  thee,  think  not  on  the  rich  gifts  which  thou
sendest  me.  For  what  fit  return  can  I  make  thee  for
those  fish  which  the  neighbouring  shore  supplies  thee
from  its  teeming  pools,  so  wondrous  in  appearance,  so
diverse  in  shape  ? But  for  me  in  the  deep  pools  amid

151


AUSONIUS

rarus  in  obscura  generatur  spliondylus  alga.

hinc  te  participans  bis  quinque  et  bis  tibi  ternas

transmisi  aequoreo  redolentes  nectare  testas,

qiias  viscus  praedulce  replet  bicolore  medulla.  10

Oro  libens  sumaSj  nee  vilia  dedigneris,
quae  sunt  parva  modum  magno  metitus  aniore,

XXXV. — Fragmenta  Epistulahum

1  Redite  sursum  flumina  !

2  investigatum  ferre  dolo  leporem.

3  quae  tantae  tenuere  morae  rumore  sub  omni  ?


152


THE EPISTLES

the  rocky  shallows  only  a  few  shell-fish  are  bred
among  the  dark  seaweed.  Of  these  I  give  thee  a
share  sending  across  to  thee  twice  five  and  twice
three  shells  smelling  of  the  sea's  fragrance,  filled  with
delicious  meat  and  substance  of  double  hue.

"  I  pray  thee  accept  them  gracefully  and  despise
them  not  as  little  worth  :  if  they  are  few,  use  great
love  in  measuring  their  quantity.


XXXV. — Fragments  of  Epistles  ^

1  Ye  rivers,  backwards  return  !

2  To  carry  off  a  hare  tracked  down  by  craft.

3  What  things  have  kept  thee  lingering  so  long,
while  Rumour  is  rife  ?

1  These  three  citations  from  epistles  no  longer  extant
are  preserved  by  an  anonj'nious  gramniarian  of  the  seventli
centurv.


153


LIBER XIX

EPIGRAMMATA AUSONII DE DIVEKSIS
REBUS

I

I. — Tlpo(TWTro7roiLa IN Chartam

Si  tineas  carienique  pati  te,  charta,  necesse  est^

incipe  versiculis  ante  perire  meis.
"malo,  inquis,  tineis." sapis,  aerumnose  libelle,

perfungi  mavis  quod  leviore  malo.
ast  ego  damnosae  nolo  otia  perdere  Musae,  5

iaeturani  somni  quae  parit  atque  olei.
"  utilius  dormire  I'uit,  quani  perdere  soninum

atque  oleum." bene  ais  : causa  sed  ista  mihi  est :
irascor  Proculo,  cuius  facundia  tanta  est,

quantus  honos. scripsit  plurima,  quae  cohibet.  10
hunc  studeo  ulcisci ;  et  prompta  est  ultio  vati :

qui  sua  non  edit  carmina,  nostra  legat.
Indus  in  arbitrio  est,  seu  te  iuvenescere  cedro,

seu  iubeat  duris  vermibus  esse  cibum.
huic  ego,  quod  nobis  superest  ignobilis  oti,  15

deputo,  sive  legat,  quae  dabo,  sive  tegat.


^  Possibly  the  son  of  Titianus,  Count  of  the  East  in  382-3,
executed  392  a.d.


BOOK XIX

EPIGRAMS  OF  AUSONIUS  ON  VARIOUS
MATTERS

I

I. — A Personal  Address  to  his  Paper

If  worms  and  decay  must  needs  be  thy  lot,  my
sheet,  begin  to  perish  under  my  verses  first.
"Rather,"  thou  sayest,  "the  worms."  Wisely,  my
woeful  little  book,  dost  thou  choose  to  endure  the
lesser  evil.  But  I  like  not  to  lose  the  leisure  given
to  the  wasteful  Muse,  who  causes  loss  of  slumber  and
lamp-oil  too.  "  It  had  been  better  to  sleep  than  to
lose  both  slumber  and  oil."  Well  said  :  but  this  is
my  reason  for  it.  I  am  angry  with  Proculus  ^  whose
eloquence  is  equal  to  his  rank.  He  has  written
reams,  but  keeps  all  close.  On  him  I  long  to  be
avenged,  and  a  poet  has  vengeance  ready  to  hand  :
let  him  who  publishes  not  his  own  verse  read  mine.
For  him  is  it  to  decide  whether  to  bid  thee  keep  thy
youth  with  cedar  oil,^  or  to  be  food  for  cruel  worms.
To  him  I  commit  all  that  I  have  to  show  for  my
inglorious  leisure,  either  to  scan  what  I  shall  give
him  or  to  ban  it.

-  Cedar-oil  was  used  to  preserve  books  from  the  attacks  of
worms.


AUSONIUS

II. EXMOUTATIO AD MoDESTIAM

Fama  est  fictilibus  cenasse  Agatlioclea  regem

atque  abacum  Samio  saepe  onerasse  luto,
fercula  genimatis  cum  ponevet  horrida  ^  vasis

et  misceret  opes  pauperiemque  simiil.
quaerenti  caiisam  respondit :  "  Rex  ego  qui  sum

Sicaniae,  figulo  sum  genitore  satus."
fortunam  reverenter  habe,  quicumque  repente

dives  ab  exili  progrediere  loco.


III. — In  Eumpinam^  Adulteram

Toxica  zelotypo  dedit  uxor  moecha  marito,

nee  satis  ad  mortem  credidit  esse  datum,
miscuit  argenti  letalia  pondera  vivi^

cogeret  ut  celerein  vis  geminata  necem.
dividat  haec  si  quis,  faciunt  discreta  venenum  ;  5

antidotum  sumet,  qui  sociata  bibet.
ergo  inter  sese  dum  noxia  pocula  certant,

cessit  letaHs  noxa  salutiferae.
protinus  et  vacuos  alvi  petiere  recessus,

lubrica  deiectis  qua  via  nota  cibis.  10

quam  pia  cura  deum  !  prodest  crudelior  uxor  :

etj  cum  fata  volunt,  bina  venena  iuvant.


IV. — In  Eunomum  Medicum

Languentem  Gaium  moriturum  dixerat  olim
EuDomus. evasit  fati  ope,  non  medici.

'  So  V :  aurea,  Z.

-  So  VZ :  Kuripulam  ?  (  =  Euripylam),  Peiper  :  Kuripinam
Schejdi.


EPIGRAMS ON VARIOUS MATTERS

II. — An  Exhortation  to  Moderation

'Tis  said  that  Agathocles  ^  when  king  dined  off
earthen  plates  and  that  his  sideboard  oft  bare  a  load
of  Samian  ware,  whereas  he  used  to  lay  his  rustic
trays  with  jewelled  cups,  thus  mingling  wealth  and
poverty  together.  To  one  who  asked  his  reason  he
replied  :  "  I,  who  am  king  of  Sicily,  was  born  a
potter's  son."

'  Bear  good  fortune  modestly,  whoe'er  thou  art
who  from  a  lowly  place  shall  rise  suddenly  to
riches.

III.— To EUMPINA A FAITHLESS WiFE

A  FAITHLESS  wifc  gavc  poison  to  her  jealous  spouse,
but  believed  that  not  enough  was  given  to  cause
death.  She  added  quicksilver  of  deadly  weight,  that
the  poison's  redoubled  strength  might  force  on  a
speedy  end.  If  one  keej)  these  apart,  separate  they
act  as  poison  ;  whoso  shall  drink  them  together,  will
take  an  antidote.  Therefore  while  these  baleful
draughts  strove  with  each  other,  the  deadly  force
yielded  to  the  wholesome.  Forthwith  they  sought
the  void  recesses  of  the  belly  by  the  accustomed  easy
path  for  swallowed  food.

^^  Mark  well  the  loving  kindness  of  the  gods  !  A
wife  too  ruthless  is  a  gain,  and,  when  the  Fates  will,
two  poisons  work  for  good.

IV. — To  EuNOMUs  A Physician

EuNOMus  had  once  pronounced  that  Gaius  would
die  of  his  sickness. He  slipped  away.  Fate— not  the

1  King  or  tyrant  of  Sicily,  317-289  B.C.


AUSONIUS

paulo  post  ipsum  videt,  aut  vidisse  putavit,

pallentem  et  niulta  mortis  in  eftigie.
"  Quis  tu  ?  " "Gains,"  ait. '' \')visne  ?  "  liicabnuit.  5
"  Et  quid

nunc  agis  hie  ?  " "  Missu  Ditis,  ait,  venio,
ut,  quia  notitiam  rerunique  honiinunique  tenerem,

accirem  medicos.  " Eunomus  obriguit.
turn Gains : "  Metuas  nihil, Eunome. dixi  ego et
onines,

nuHum,  qui  saperet,  dicere  te  medicum."  10

V. — In  Hominem  Vocis  absonae

Latuatus  catulorum,  hinnitus  fingis  equoruni,

caprigenumque  pecus  lanigerosque  greges
balatu  adsimulas  ;  asinos  quoque  rudere  dicas,

cum  vis  Arcadicum  fingere,  Marce,  pecus.
gallorum  cantus  et  ovantes  gutture  corvos  5

et  quidquid  vocuni  belua  et  ales  habet,
omnia  cum  siniules  ita  vere,  ut  ficta  negentur,

non  potes  humanae  vocis  habere  sonum.

Yl. — De  Alxii.io  Grammatko

Emenoata  })otest  quaenam  vox  esse  magistri,
nomen  qui  proprium  cum  vitio  loquitur?

auxilium  te  nempe  vocas,  inscite  magister  ?
da  rectum  casum  :  iam  solicismus  eris.

^  i.e.  asses.
iS8


EPIGRAMS ON VARIOUS MATTERS

doctor — aiding.  A  little  afterwards  the  doctor  saw,
or  thought  he  saw,  the  man,  pale,  and  in  death's
very  likeness.  "  Who  art  thou  ?  "  he  asked.
"  Gaius,"  he  answered.  "Art  thou  alive.''"  He
answered  "  No."  "  And  what  now  dost  thou  here  ?  "
"  I  come,"  said  he,  "at  the  behest  of  Dis,  because  I
still  retained  knowledge  of  the  world  and  men,  to
summon  to  him  doctors."  Eunomus  grew  stiff  with
fright.  Then  Gaius  :  "  Fear  nothing,  Eunomus  :  I
said,  as  all  men  say,  that  no  man  who  is  wise  calls
you  a  doctor."

V. — To  A  Man with  a  discordant  Voice

Whelps'  barking,  horses'  neighing  thou  dost  copy,
and  imitate  the  bleating  of  herds  of  goats  and
woolly  flocks,  and  a  man  would  say  asses  were  bray-
ing, when  thou,  Marcus,  wouldst  mimic  the  Arcadian
herd.^  The  cock's  crow,  the  raven's  throaty  caw  and
whatever  cry  is  uttered  by  beast  or  bird — though
these  thou  canst  imitate  so  naturally  that  no  one
believes  them  feigned,  thou  canst  not  command  the
sound  of  the  human  voice.


VI. — On  Auxilius  a  Gkammar-Master

How  can  a  master  speak  a  word  correctly  who
cannot  utter  his  own  name  without  mistake  .''  "Aux  -
ilium  ~  "  (a  help)  callest  thou  thyself  forsooth,  ignorant
usher  }  Give  the  nominative  :  straightway  thou  wilt
be  a  solecism  !

*  There  is  a  i>lay  on  the  word  as  both  a  proper  and  a
common  noun.


AUSONIUS

VII. — De  Phii.omuso  Ghammatico

Emptis  quod  libris  tibi  bibliotheca  referta  est,
doctuni  et  gr.animaticum  te,  Philomuse,  putas?

lioc  genere  et  chordas  et  plectra  et  barbita  condes
omnia  mercatus  eras  citharoedus  eris.


VIII. — De  Rufo  Ruetore

"Reminisco"  Riifus  dixit  in  versu  suo :
cor  ergo  versus,  inimo  Rufus,  non  habet.

IX. — In  Statuam eiusdem Rheturis

Rhetoris  haec  Rufi  statiia  est:  nil  verius  ;  ipse  est,
ipse,  adeo  linguani  non  habet  et  cei'ebrum.

et  riget  et  surda  est  et  non  videt :  haec  sibi  constant ;
unum  dissimile  est :  mollior  ille  fuit.

X.— Idem

"Ore pulcro,  et ore niuto, scire vis quae sini  .^ "
"Volo."
"  Imago  Rufi  rhetoris  Pictavici."
"  Diceret  set  ipse,  vellem,  rhetor  hoc  mi." "Non
potest."
"  Cur  ?  " "  Ipse  rhetor  est  imago  imaginis."

XI. — Idem

"  Rhetoris  haec  Rufi  statua  est  .'*  " "Si  saxea,  Rufi."
"  Cur  id  ais  ?  " "'  Semper  saxeus  ipse  fuit."

*  For  reminiftcor  :  cor  in  1.  2  =  wit,  intelligence.
160


EPIGRAMS ON VARIOUS MATTERS

\^II. — On Philomusus  a  Grammar-Master

Because  with  purchased  books  thy  library  is
crammed,  dost  think  thyself  a  learned  man  and
scholarly,  Philomusus  ?  After  this  sort  thou  wilt
lay  up  strings,  keys,  and  lyres,  and,  having  pur-
chased all,  to-morrow  thou  wilt  be  a  musician.

VIII. — On Rukus  a Rhetorician

Reminisco,^  wrote  Rufus  in  his  verse :  so  then  the
verse — nay,  Rufus — has  no  cor  (wit).

IX. — For  a  Statue  ok  the  same  Rhetorician-

This  is  a  statue  of  Rufus  the  Rhetorician  ;  nothing
more  life-like  :  'tis  the  man  himself,  so  much  lacks
it  tongue  and  brain.  'Tis  stiff'  and  dumb  and  sees
not :  in  these  points  it  tallies.  One  single  point  of
difference  is  there — he  was  a  little  softer.

X. — The  same  Sub.iect

"  With  lips  so  fair  and  lips  so  dumb,  wouldst  know
who  I  am?"  "  I  would."  "  I  am  a  figure  of  Rufus
the  Pictavian  rhetorician."  "  Nay,  I  would  have  the
rhetorician  tell  me  this  himself."  '•  He  cannot."
'' Why  .^ "  "The  real  rhetorician  is  an  image  of
this  image."

XI. — The  same  Suriect^

"  Is  this  a  statue  of  Rufus  the  rhetorician  t"  "  If
'tis  of  stone,  'tis  Rufus's."  "  Why  sayest  thou  so  ?  "
"  Rufus  himself  was  always  made  of  stone.  '

-'  n>.  Anth.  Pal.  xi.  14.'>,  149,  151.
•'  cji.  id.  xvi.  317.

i6i


AUSONIUS

XII. — Idkm

Elingukm  quis  te  dicentis  imagine  piuxit?

die  niihi,  Ruf'e. taces  ? nil  tibi  tani  simile  est.

XIII. — Idkm

"  Haec Rufi tabula est." "Nil verius. ipse ubi
Rufus  f  "
"  In  cathedra." "  Quid  agit  ?  " "  Hoe,  quod  et  in
tabula."


XIV'. Dk EO qui ThESAURUM REIM'EHIT (  um se

Laqueo  vellet  suspendere
[ex  Graeco]

Qui  laqueum  collo  neetebat,  repperit  aurum

thesaurique  loco  deposuit  laqueum.
at  qui  condiderat,  postquam  non  repj)erit  auruni,

aptavit  collo  quern  reperit  laqueum.

XV. — Ex  Graeco

^PXV  ^^  '"*^'  r/fxLcrv  TravTos
Incipe: dimidium  facti  est  coepisse. superfit
dimidium  :  rursum  hoc  incipe  et  etHcies.

XVI. — Ex  Graeco
d  Xapts  d  (3pa8vTrov^  a)^api<s  X"-P'-^
Gr.\tia,  quae  tarda  est,  ingrata  est. gratia  namque
cum  fieri  properat,  gratia  grata  magis.


1  =  Anth.  Pal.  xvi.  318. ^  _  {^ [^ 44 a  Lucian,  Somn.  li.
162


EPIGRAMS ON  VARIOUS MATTERS

XII. — The  same  Subject  ^

Who  painted  tliee,  Rufus,  tongue-tied,  in  the  like-
ness of  a  speaking  man  ?  Tell  me,  Rufus.  Thou
art  silent.^ Nothing  is  more  like  you.

XIII. — The  same  Subject

"  This  is  a  })icture  of  Rufus."  "  Nothing  more
lifelike.  Where  is  Rufus  himself.'*"  "  In  his  chair."
"What  is  he  doing?"  "The  same  as  in  the
picture."

XIV. — On  the  Man who  found  a  Treasure  when

HE meant to hang HIMSELF (FROM THE GrEEk) -

He  who  was  knotting  a  halter  for  his  own  neck,
found  gold  and  buried  the  halter  in  the  treasure's
place.  But  he  who  had  hidden  the  gold,  not
finding  it,  fitted  about  his  neck  the  halter  which  he
found.

XV. — From  the  Greek

The  heginning  is  half  the  whole.^

Begin  :  to  have  commenced  is  half  the  deed.  Half
yet  remains :  begin  again  on  this  and  thou  wilt
finish  all.

XVI. — From  the  Greek*
"Favours  slow-footed  are  unfavoured  favours.''
Favours  which  tarry meet  small favour. For a
favour  when  it  hastes  to  be  performed,  is  a  favour
more  favoured.^

■• =  Anth.  Pal.  x.  .SO.  *'  i.e.  more  acceptable.

163
M 2


AUSONILS

W'll Ex EODEM

Si  bene  (jiiid  facias,  facias  cito. nam  cito  factum
oratum  erit. iiii^ratum  gratia  tarda  facit.

XVIII. — Ue  eo  vui  Capanelm  saltans  uuit

Deceptae  felix  casus  se  miseuit  arti :
histrio,  saltabat  qui  Capanea,  ruit.

XIX. — In Dcjorai.em

Dodra  ex  dodrante  est. sic  collige  :  ius,  aqua,  vinum,
sal,  oleum,  panis,  mel,  piper,  lierba  :  novem.

XX. — Idem

'•  Dodra  vocor." '  Quae  causa.-  " "  Novem  species

gero." "Quae  sunt?"
"lus,  aqua,  mel,  vinum,  panis,  piper,  herba,  oleum,

sal."

XXI. — Idem

AdSpa  TTOTov  Ktti  dpi^/xds,  ex*^  M^^'i  olvov,  iXator,
apTOV,  a\a?,  (Soravrji',  ^wfiov,  v8wp,  ireTrepi.

XXII. — Ad Marclm Amiccm de Discordia quam

HA  BET CUM PuEl-LIS

"  Hanc amo quae me odit, contra illam quae me
amat,  odi.
compone  inter  nos,  si  jjotes,  alma  \'enus !  "

1  i.e.  the  acrobat  made  a  slip  and  fell,  but  as  he  was  in  the
part  of  Capaneus,  the  accident  was  appropriate, cp.  Anth.

164


EPIGRAMS ON  VARIOUS MATTERS

XVII. — From  the  same

If  thou  doest  aught  good,  do  it  quickly.  For  what
is  done  quickly  will  be  acceptable.  Favours  slow
granted  are  unfavourably  received.

X\'III. On ax A(  KOliAT WHO FELL WHILE UANCING

AS CaI'ANEL'S

A  HAiM'v  chance  combined  with  a  fault  in  skill :
a  tumbler,  dancing  the  part  of  Capaneus,  fell  to  the
ground.^

XIX. — On a HifEW  (  ALLEi)  "DunnA"

Dodra"'  ("nines")  is  from  dodrans  (nine-twelfths).
Thus  compound  :  brotli,  water,  wine,  salt,  oil,  bread,
honey,  pepper,  herbs  :  there's  nine  I

XX. — The  same  Sliuect

"  I  AM  called  dodra."  "  Why  so?  "  "  I  am  made
of  nine  ingredients.  "  "  Wiiat  are  they  ?  "  "Broth,
water,  honey,  wine,  bread,  pejiper,  herbs,  oil,  salt,"

XXI. — The  same  Subject

I,  dodra,  brew  and  number  both,  contain  honey,
wine,  oil,  bread,  salt,  herbs,  broth,  water,  pepper.

XXII. — To  Marcus  a  Friend  on his  Lack  of  Con-
roRi)  WITH Girls

"  I  love  one  girl  who  hates  me,  and  again  another
who  loves  me  I  hate. Settle  the  trouble  between  us,

Pal. xi. 2.54, 1—4. Capaneus, one of tlie Seven against
Thebes,  was  smitten  by  a  thunderbolt  and  fell  from  the  walls.
-  A  drink  compounded  of  nine  ingredients.

165


AUSONIUS

'*  Perfacile  id  faciam  :  mores  niutabo  et  amores  ;

oderit  haec,  amet  haec." "  Rursus  idem  patiar."
"  Vis  ambas  ut  ames  ?  " "  Si  diligat  utiaque,  vellem."  5

"  Hoc  tibi  tu  praesta,  Marce  : ut  ameris^  ama."

XXIII.— DVSKUOS

"SuAsisTi,  Venus,  ecce,  duas  dyseros  ut  aniareni.

odit  utraque  :  aliud  da  modo  consilium."
''  Vince  datis  ambas." "  Cupio  :  verum  arta  domi  res."

"  Pellice  promissis." "  Nulla  fides  inopi."
"  Antestare  deos." "  Nee  fas  mihi  f'allere  divos." 5

"  Pervigila  ante  foi'es." "  Nocte  capi  metuo."
"Scribe  elegos." "  Nequeo,  Musarum  et  Apolliiiis
expers."

"  Frange  fores." "  Poenas  iudicii  metuo."
"  Stulte,  ab  amore  mori  pateris  :  non  vis  ob  amorem  ?  "

"  Malo  miser  dici,  quam  miser  atque  reus."  10

"  Suasi,  quod  j)otui  :  tu  alios  modo  consule." "Die
quos  ?  "

"  Quod  sibi  suaserunt,  Phaedra  et  Elissa  dabunt,
quod  Canace  Phyllisque  et  fastidita  Phaoni."  ^

"  Hoc  das  consilium  f  tale  datur  miseris."

XXI\^ Dk KO yli| Tk.sTAM HoMlNIS INMISKHILOK-

DITKU DISSII'ARK VOLUIT

AniKCTA  in  triviis  inininiati  glal)ra  iacebat
testa  hominis,  nudum  iani  cute  calvitiuni.

*  So  V :  I'haedra  el  ^>li.s^sa  tibi  dent  hKiueuiii  aiU  glailiuiii,
praecipilcui  pelago  vol  LeiK-ados  eligc  rupeni,  Z.

l66


EPIGRAMS ON VARIOUS MATTERS

sweet  Venus,  if  thou  canst.  "  "Right  easily  will  I  :
I  will  change  thy  leanings  and  thy  loves ;  the  one
shall  hate,  the  other  love."  "Again  I  shall  suffer
the  same  fate."  "  Wouklst  love  them  both  .'' "  "If
both  should  love  me,  I  would."  "  Bestow  this,  Marcus,
on  thyself:  to  be  beloved,  love."

XXIII. A POOR LoVKR

"  Lo,  Venus,  thou  hast  persuaded  me  to  love  two
girls,  a  luckless  lover.  Each  hates  me  :  give  me
another  counsel  now."  '^' Overcome  both  with  gifts."
"  Fain  would  I  :  but  scant  is  my  store  at  home."
"  Tempt  them  with  promises."  "  A  poor  man  has  no
credit."  "Swear  by  the  gods."  "But  'twere  a  sin
to  deceive  the  gods."  "  Keep  watch  before  their
doors."  "I  fear  to  be  caught  at  night."  "Write
sonnets."  "I  cannot,  having  no  .skill  of  the
Muses  and  Apollo."  "  Break  down  their  doors."
"  I  fear  the  legal  penalties."  "  Fool,  thou  dost  let
thyself  be  killed  by  love  :  wouklst  thou  not  die  for
love  ?  "  "  I  would  rather  be  called  poor  fellow  than
poor  prisoner."  "  I  have  advised  thee  all  I  can  :
now  take  others'  counsel."  "Tell  me  whose?"
"  Phaedra  and  Elissa  will  give  the  advice  they  gave
themselves,  Canace,  too,  and  Phyllis,  and  she  whom
Phaon  scorned."  "Do  you  give  this  counsel  ?  Such
is  given  to  the  unhappy  !  "

XXIV. — On the Man \vh<» imtii.ksslv ruir.n to

RRKAK !N IMElKS A HuMAN SkI'I.I.

Till';  bare  skull  of  an  unburied  man  lay  cast  away
where  three  roads  met — a  l)ald  thing  now  stripped  of

167


AUSONIUS

fleverunt  alii :  fletu  iion  inotus  Achilas,
insuper  et  silicis  verbere  dissicuit.

eminus  ergo  icto  rediit  lapis  iiltor  ab  osse
auctorisque  siii  tVontem  ociilostjue  ])etit.

sic  utinain  certos  mamis  inipia  dirigat  ictus,
auctorem  ut  feriant  tela  retorta  siiiini.


11

XX\\ CoMMKNUATlO CODU  IS

Est  quod  mane  legas,  est  et  quod  vespere  ;  laetis

seria  niiscuiiiius,  tem))ore  uti  placeant.
lion  unus  vitae  color  est  iiec  cariiiinis  unus

lector;  liabet  teiiipus  j)agina  quaetjue  siuiui  ;
hoc  iiiitrata  \'enus,  probat  hoc  galeata  Minerva  ;

Stoicus  has  partes,  has  f!,picurus  aiiiat ;
salva  niilii  veteruiii  nianeat  duni  regula  iiioruni,

plaudat  perniissis  sobria  musa  iocis.


XXVI. --[1)e  AtciusToi]

Fhoehk  potens  nunieris,  praeses  Tritonia  bellis,

tu  quoque  ab  aerio  praepes  Victoria  lapsu,

come  serenatuni  duplici  diadeniate  froiitem

serta  fereiis,  quae  dona  togae,  quae  praemia  pugiiae.

bellaiidi  fandique  potens  Augustus  honoiem  5

bis  meret,  ut  gcniinct  titulos,  cpii  proclia  Musis

teniperat  et  (ieticuin  iiioderatur  Apolline  Marteni.

* Sll|l|)l. /'ll/llKlllll.

'  'I'liis  culleotioii  as  a  whole  is  finiiul  only  in  ihc  /!  gcoui)  of
M8S.,  i.e.  in  the  first  published  collection  of  Ausoiiins's
work  :  see  Introdudion.

1 68


EPIGRAMS ON VARIOUS MATTERS

skin.  Other  men  wept :  by  weeping  all  unmoved,
Achilas  even  struck  and  cleft  it  with  a  stone.  And
so  the  avenginj^  stone,  glancing  from  the  skull,  flew
back  and  caught  the  face  and  eyes  of  him  who
threw  it.  So  may  an  impious  hand  ever  aim  its
deadly  blows,  that  the  weapon  may  rebound  and
smite  the  wieldcr.

Ill

XXV^ — \ Recommendation  ok  mis  Book

.Hkre  is  what  thou  mayest  read  at  m(»rn,  here  also
what  at  eve  ;  I  have  mingled  grave  with  gay,  each  to
give  pleasure  at  its  season.  Life  wears  not  one  hue,
nor  has  my  verse  one  reader  only  ;  each  page  has  its
due  season  ;  mitred  \  enus  approves  this,  helmed
Minerva  that  ;  the  Stoic  loves  this  part,  Epicurus
that.  So  long  as  the  code  of  ancient  manners
remains  by  me  unbroken,  let  the  grave  Muse  applaud
at  lawful  jests.

XXVI.— On  Augustus

Phoeiuis,  tliou  lord  of  song  and  thou,  Tritonia,
queen  of  war,  thou  also,  Victory,  down-swooping  in
dizzy  flight,  deck  Avith  a  two-fold  diadem  an  unknitted
brow  ■^ ;  bring  garlands,  those  which  are  gifts  in
peace,  those  which  are  ])rizes  in  fight.  Mighty  in
war  and  eloquence,  Augustus-'  doubly  wins  renown,
so  that  he  claims  a  two-fold  title,  since  by  the
Muses'  aid  he  allays  wars  and  by  Apollo's  restrains

-  i.e.  on  the  Emperor's  brow,  no  longer  sternly  knitted  in
war.

'  i.e.  Gratian.

169


AUSONIUS

arma  inter  Chunosqiie  truces  furtoque  nocentes
Sauromatas,  quantum  cessat  de  tempore  belli,
indulget  Clariis  tantum  inter  castra  Camenis.  10

vix  posuit  volucres  stridentia  tela  sagittas  :
Musarum  ad  calamos  fertur  manus,  otia  nescit
et  commutata  meditatur  arundine  carmen  :
sed  carmen  non  molle  modis  ;  bella  horrida  Martis
Odrysii  Tliraessaeque  viraginis  arma  retractat. 15
exulta,  Aeacide  :  celebraris  vate  superbo
rursum  Romanusque  tibi  contingit  Homerus.

XXVII. — [De Feua  a  Caesare  interfecta ']  •

Cedere  quae  lato  nescit  fera  saucia  ferro

armatique  urget  tela  cruenta  viri,
quam  grandes  parvo  patitur  sub  vulnere  mortes

et  solam  leti  vim  probat  esse  manum  !
mirantur  easusque  novos  subitasque  ruinas  :  5

nee  contenta  ictos  letaliter  ire  per  artus,

coniungit  mortes  una  sagitta  duas.
plurima  communi  pei'eunt  si  fulminis  ictu,

haec  quoque  de  caelo  vulnera  missa  putes.  10

XXVIII. — An FoNTEM Danuvii Iussu \\\lentimani

AUGUSTI

li.i.vnK  IS  rcgiialor  acpiis,  tibi,  Nile,  secundus
Damivius  laetum  profero  fontc  caput.

' Sii])|>l.  Arai)/iii<i.


^  The  Muses  arc  calltMl  Claiiaii  from  their  connection  with
Apollo,  wlio  was  \vorsliip|ie<l  al  Claros,  near  Coloplum.

170


EPIGRAMS ON VARIOUS MATTERS

the  Getic  Mars.  'Midst  arms  and  Huns  ferocious  and
Sauromatae  dangerous  in  stealthy  whatever  rest  he
has  from  hours  of  war,  in  camp  he  lavishes  it  all
upon  the  Clarian  ^  Muses.  Scarce  has  he  laid  aside
his  swift  arrows,  those  whirring  darts  :  'tis  to  the
Muses'  sliafts  he  turns  his  hand,  repose  lie  knows
not,  and  setting  the  reed  to  new  employ  essays  a
song  :  yet  'tis  a  song  not  soft  of  strain  ;  the  frightful
wars  of  Odrysian  Mars  and  the  prowess  of  the
Tliracian  warrior-maid  he  treats  anew.  Rejoice,
thou  son  of  Aeacus  !  Thou  art  sung  once  more  by
a  lofty  bard  and  thou  art  blessed  with  a  Roman
Homer.2

XXVII. — On a  Wild  Beast  slain  by  Caesar

The  beast  which  knows  not  how  to  yield  when
pierced  with  the  broad  steel,  but  hurls  itself  upon
the  gory  spear  of  a  full-armed  man,  how  marvellous
the  death  it  suffers  from  a  tiny  wound,  showing  that
on  the  hand  alone  death's  might  depends.  Men
wonder at swift disasters and sudden downfalls

and  not  content  to  drive  its  deadly  course  through
the  stricken  limbs,  a  single  arrow  deals  two  deaths
at  once.  If  full  many  deaths  come  from  one  light-
ning stroke,  these  wounds  also  thou  mayest  deem
sent  from  heaven.

XX\TH. — On  the  Soukc  e  ok  the  Danuue. Whitten
i)v  Command  of  the  EMrEuou  \'ai.entima\

LoKD  among  streams  of  lilyricum,  next  to  thee
in  greatness,  O  Nile,  I,  Danube,  from  m\-  source  put

-  (iratian  appears  to  have  been  composing  an  epic  on
Achilles.

171


AUSONIUS

salvere  Augustus  iubeo,  natuinque  patremque,

armiferis  alvi  (juos  ego  Pannoniis.
nuntius  Euxino  iam  nunc  volo  cm'rere  poiito,  ')

ut  sfiat  hoc  superuni  cura  secunda  Valens,
caedc,  fuga,  flaniinis  stratos  periisse  Suebos

nee  Rlienum  Gallis  limitis  esse  loco,
quod  si  lege  maris  reHuus  uiilii  curreret  amnis,

hue  possem  victos  inde  referre  Gothos.  10

XXIX. V\\LENTINI.\N<) luNIORI IN SlCiNUM

MAKMORKUM

Nunc  te  niarnioreuni  pro  suniptu  fecinius  :  at  cum
Augustus  frater  remeaverit,  aureus  esto.

XXX. Plt'TUHAK SUUniTl Ulil Lko una SAtilTTA A

Gratiano  occisus  est

Quod  leo  tani  tenui  patitur  sub  harundinc  letum,
non  vires  ferri,  sed  ferientis  agunt.

XXXI. — Au FoNTEM Danuvii Jussu Valkntiniani

AUGUSTI

Danuvius  penitis  caput  oecultatus  in  oris

totus  sub  vcstra  iam  dicione  Huo :
qua  gelidum  fontcm  mediis  eft'undo  Suebis,

iniperiis  gravidas  qua  seco  Pannonias,


'  Valentinian  I.  aiulGratian  :  Valentinian's  father,  anotlier
C4ratian,  was  a  Pannouian.

2  For  the  events  commemoratcil  see  Iidroducdoii.


EPIGRAMS ON  VARIOUS MATTERS

fortli  my  head  in  joy.  1  bid  the  Emperors  hail,
father  and  son,i  whom  I  have  nurtured  amid  the
sword-wearing  Pannonians.  As  herald  to  the  Euxine
Sea  even  now  I  long  to  speed,  that  \^alens,  who  is
Heaven's  next  care,  may  learn  of  this — that  with
slaughter,  Hight,  and  fire  the  Swabians^  are  hurled
to  destruction,  and  Rhine  no  longer  is  accounted  the
frontier  of  Gaul.  But  if  at  the  sea's  behest  my
stream  should  flow  backwards  may  I  hither  bring
from  there  news  that  the  Goths  are  vanquished.

XXIX. — To \^alentiman the Younoer. For a
MARBLE  Statue

Now  we  have  made  thee  of  marble,  as  our  means
afford  :  but  when  thine  Emperor-brother  is  returned,
be  thou  of  gold.'^

XXX. — Links  inscribed  under a Picture showixo
A  Lion  slain  by  Gratian  with  a  sinole  Arrow

The  death  which  the  lion  suffers  through  so  frail
a  reed  is  due,  not  to  the  weapon's  power,  but  to  the
wielder's.

XXXI. — To  THE  Source  of  the  Danube. By  Command
OF  THE  Emperor  Valentinian

I,  Danube,  whose  head  was  once  concealed  in
lands  remote,  now  flow  at  full  length  under  your
sway  :  where  'midst  the  Suebi  I  pour  forth  my  chill
source,  where  I  divide  the  Pannonias  pregnant  with

•'  cp.  Virgil,  Ed.  vii.  35  f.  :  nunc  te  niarnioreum  pro  tem-
pore feeimua  ;  at  tu,  Si  fetura  gregem  suppleverit,  aiu-eus
esto.


AUSONIUS

et  qua  dives  aquis  Scytliico  solvo  ostiu  ponto,  5

omnia  su]^  vestrum  flumina  mitto  iugum.

Augusto  dahitur  sed  proxiina  palma  Valeiiti  :
invrniet  fontes  liic  quoqiie,  Nile,  tiios.

XXXII.  — In  Echo Pictam

Vane,  quid  adfectas  faciem  mihi  ponere,  pietor,

ignotamque  oculis  sollicitare  deani  ?
Aeris  et  Linguae  sum  filia,  mater  inanis

indicii,  vocem  quae  sine  mente  gero.
extremos  pereunte  modos  a  fine  reducens,  5

ludificata  sequor  verba  aliena  meis.
auribus  in  vestris  habito  penetrabilis  Rclio  :

et,  si  vis  similem  pingere,  pinge  sonum.

XXXIII. — In  Simulacrum  Occasionis  et
Paenitentiae

Cuius  opus  f Phidiae  :  qui  signum  Pallados,  eius

quique  lovem  fecit ;  tertia  palma  ego  sum.
sum  dea  quae  rara  et  paucis  occasio  nota.

quid  rotulae  insistis  ? stare  loco  nequeo.
quid  talaria  liabes  ? volucris  sum. Mercurius  quae  ")

fortunare  solet,  trado  ego,  cum  volui.
crine  tegis  faciem. cognosci  nolo, sed  lieus  tu

occipiti  calvo  es .'' ne  tenear  fugiens.
quae  tibi  iuncta  comes  r dicat  tibi. die  rogo,  quae  sis.

sum  dea,  cui  nomen  nee  Cicero  ipse  dedit.  10

*  Because  Valentinian  was  of  Pannoiiian  origin,
174


epic;kams  on  various  matters

eni])ire^^  and  wliere  with  wealtli  of  waters  I  open  my
mouth  to  the  Scythian  sea,  all  my  streams  1  cause  to
pass  beneath  your  Roman  yoke.  I'o  Augustus  shall
the  chief  palm  be  given,  but  the  next  to  V'alens  :  he
too  shall  find  out  sources — even  thine,  O  Nile.

XXXII. — To  A  Painting  of  Echo

Fond  painter,  why  dost  thou  essay  to  limn  my
face,  and  vex  a  goddess  whom  eyes  never  saw .''  I
am  the  daughter  of  Air  and  Speech,  mother  of  empty
utterance,  in  that  I  have  a  voice  without  a  mind.
From  their  dying  close  I  bring  back  failing  strains
and  in  mimicry  repeat  the  words  of  strangers  with
my  own.  I  am  Echo,  dwelling  in  the  recesses  of
your  ears  :  and  if  thou  wouldst  paint  my  likeness,
paint  sound.

XXXIII.  —  For  a  Figurk  of  Opportunity  and  Regret

"  Whose  work  art  thou.''"  "  Pheidias's  :  his  who
made  Pallas'  statue,  who  made  Jove's :  his  third
masterpiece  am  I.  I  am  a  goddess  seldom  found
and  known  to  few.  Opportunity  my  name."  "  Why
stand'st  thou  on  a  wheel  ?"  "  I  cannot  stand  still."
"  Why  wearest  thou  winged  sandals  ?  "  "I  am
ever  flying.  The  gifts  which  Mercury  scatters  at
I'andom  I  bestow  when  I  will."  "  Thou  coverest  thy
face  with  thy  hair."  "  I  would  not  be  recognised.  "
"  But — what ! — art  thou  bald  at  the  back  of  thy
head?"  "That  none  may  catch  me  as  I  flee."
"  Who  is  she  who  bears  thee  company  }  "  "  Let  her
tell  thee."  "Tell  me,  I  beg,  who  thou  art."  "I
am  a  goddess  to  whom  not  even  Cicero  himself  gave

175


AUSONIUS

sum  flea,  quae  factique  et  non  facti  exigo  pneiias,
nempe  ut  paeniteat. sie  mktanof.a  vocor.

tu  modo  die,  quid  agat  tecum, quandoque  volavi,
haee  manet ;  liane  retinent,  quos  ego  praeterii.

tu  quoque  dum  rogitas,  dum  percontando  moraris,  15
elapsam  dices  me  tibi  de  manibus.

XXX IV. — An  Gallam  Puellam  iam  senescentrm

DicEBAM  tibi :  "  Galla,  senescimus  ;  efFugit  aetas,

utere  rene  tuo  :  casta  puella  anus  est."
sprevisti. obrepsit  non  intellecta  senectus

nee  revocare  potes,  qui  periere,  dies,
nunc  piget  et  quereris,  quod  non  aut  ista  voluntas 5

tunc  fuit,  aut  non  est  nunc  ea  forma  tibi.
da  tamen  amplexus  o])litaque  gaudia  iunge.

da  :  IVuar,  et  si  non  quod  volo,  quod  vohii.

XXXV. — De  Lei'oue  (  ai>to  a  Cane  M  \iii\o

Thin ACKii  quondam  eurrentem  in  litoris  ora

ante  canes  leporem  caeruleus  rapuit.
at  lepus  :  "  In  me  omnis  terrae  pelagique  raj)ina  est,

forsitan  et  caeli ;  si  canis  astra  tenet."


*  =  nerauota,  primarily  change  of  disposition  and  ])iirpose,
then  the  emotion  accompanying  such  change,  and  finally
"  regret,"  "  remorse  '  gencralh'.


176


EPIGRAMS ON  VARIOUS MATTERS

a  name.  I  am  a  goddess  who  exacts  penalties  for
what  is  done  and  what  undone,  to  cause  repentance.
So  I  am  called  Melanoea.^"  "  Do  thou  -  now  tell  me
what  does  she  along  with  thee  ? ''  "  When  I  have
flown  away  she  remains :  she  is  retained  by  those
I  have  passed  b}'.  Thou  also  whilst  thou  keepest
asking,  whilst  thou  tarriest  with  questioning  wilt  say
that  I  have  slipped  away  out  of  thy  hands."


XXXI\  . To A M  AID,  GaI.I.A, now (iHI)\VIN(i or.i)  ^

I  usKo  to  say  to  thee  :  ''  (ialla,  we  grow  old,  Time
Hies  away,  enjoy  thy  life  :  a  chaste  girl  is  an  old
woman."  Thou  didst  scorn  my  warning.  Age  has
crept  upon  thee  unperceived,  nor  canst  thou  call
back  the  days  that  are  gone.  Now  thou  art  sorry
and  dost  lament,  either  because  then  thou  wert  dis-
inclined, or  because  now  thou  hast  not  that  former
beauty.  Yet  give  me  thine  embrace  and  share  for-
gotten joys  with  me.  Give  :  I  will  take,  albeit  not
what  I  would,  yet  what  T  once  would.


XXX\\ — On  a Hahr  caught  nv  a  Ska-Doo  *

Onck  on  the  strand  of  Sicily  a  sea-dog  snapped  up
a  hare  speeding  before  the  hounds.  Then  said  the
hare  :  "  Against  me  both  sea  and  land  direct  their
ravages,  perchance  heaven  also ;  since  there  is  a  Dog
among  the  stars."

*  The  poet  liere  turns  again  to  Oi)portunity.
^  After  Auth.  Pal.  v.  21.
^  id.  ix.  18.


177


AUSONIUS
aXX\'I. — Df. Pkroamo ScniPTOHE fugitivo qv\

CAPTUS KUER AT

Tam  segnis  scriptor,  quain  lentus,  Pergaiue,  cursor,

fugisti  et  prinio  cajjtus  es  in  stadio.
ergo  notas  scripto  tolerasti,  Perganie,  vultu

et  qiias  neglexit  dextera,  frons  patitiir.

XXXVII. — <In  eundem  Pergamum  ^>

Pergame,  non  recte  punitus  fronte  subisti
supplicium,  lentae  quod  meruere  manus.

at  tu,  qui  dominus,  peccantia  membra  coherce  :
iniustum  falsos  excruciare  reos.

aut  inscribe  istani,  quae  non  vult  scribere,  dextram,
aut  j)rofugos  ferri  pondere  necte  pedes.

XXXVIII. — De  Myrone  qui  Laidis  Noctem
rogaverat

Canus  rogabat  Laidis  noctem  MjTon  :

tulit  repulsam  protinus
causamque  sensit  et  caput  fuligine

fucavit  atra  candidum.
idemque  vultu,  crine  non  idem  Myron  5

orabat  oratum  prius.
sed  ilia  formam  cum  cajMllo  comparans

similemque,  non  ij)sum,  rata
(fortasse  et  ipsum,  sed  volens  ludo  frui)

sic  est  adorta  callidum  :  10

"  Inepte,  quid  me,  quod  recusavi,  rogas  ?

patri  negavi  iam  tuo."
'  Coinlnned  in  the  MSS.  -witli  tlie  fores,'oing  epigram  •
.78


EPIGRAMS ON  VARIOUS MATTERS
XXXVI. — On  Pergamus,  a  Runaway  Scribe,  who  had

BEEN  CAUGHT

As  lazy  a  scribe  as  a  sluggish  runner,  thou,  Perga-
mus, didst  run  away  and  wert  caught  at  the  first  lap.
Therefore  thou  hast  felt  letters^  branded,  Pergamus,
upon  thy  face,  and  those  which  thy  right  hand
neglected  thy  brow  endures.

XXXVII. — On  the  same  Pergamus

Pergamus,  when  thou  wast  punished  'twas  not  just
thy  brow  should  bear  the  penalty  which  thy  slow
hands  earned.  Nay,  do  thou,  their  master,  control
thy  errant  limbs :  it  is  unfair  to  torment  those  not
really  guilty.  Either  mark  that  right-hand  which
will  not  make  a  mark,  or  shackle  those  errant  feet
with  an  iron  weight.

XXXVIII. — On Mvron who asked Lais for ax

Assignation  -

Hoar-headed  Myron  asked  Lais  for  an  assignation,
and  was  refused  outright :  he  understood  the  cause,
and  dyed  his  white  poll  with  black  soot.  In  face —
though  not  in  hair— the  selfsame  Myron,  he  begged
what  he  had  begged  before.  But  she,  contrasting
his  features  with  his  hair,  and  thinking  him  like,
though  not  the  same  (perchance  even  thinking  him
the  same,  but  wishing  to  enjoy  the  jest),  thus  ad-
dressed the  artful  gallant :  "  Fool,  why  askest  thou
what  I  have  refused  ?  I  have  already  rejected  thy
father."

'  i.e.  rrc;  =  fwjUivus.

-  cp.  Spartianus,  Vita  Hadriani,  xx.  8.

179

N 2


A U SON  I  us

XXXIX. — De OriMONE QUAM DK II.I.O IIAISEHAT
KITS UXOU

Laioas  et  Glyceras,  lasi-ivae  iiomina  faiiiae,
coniunx  in  nostro  carmine  cinii  legeret,

ludere  me  dixit  falsoque  in  amore  iocari.
tanta  illi  nostra  est  de  probitate  fides.

XL. A  I) UXOREM

Uxo«,  vivamus  quod  viximiis^  et  teneamus

nomina,  quae  primo  sumpsimus  in  tlialamo  :
nee  ferat  ulla  dies,  ut  commutemur  in  aevo ;

quin  tibi  sim  iuvenis  tuque  puella  milii.
Nestore  sim  quamvis  provectior  aemulaque  aiinis 5

vincas  Cumanam  tu  quoque  Deiphoben  ;
nos  ignoremus,  quid  sit  matura  senectus.

scire  aevi  meritum,  non  numerare  decet.

XLI. — In  Meuoex  Anum  ebuiosam

Qui  primus,  meroe,  nomen  tibi  condidit,  ille

Thesidae  nomen  condidit  Hippolvto.
nam  divinare  est,  nomen  componere,  quod  sit

fortunae  et  morum  vel  necis  indicium.
Protesilae,  tibi  nomen  sic  fata  dederunt,  5

victima  quod  Troiae  prima  futurus  eras.
Idmona  quod  vatem,  medicum  quod  lapyga  dicunt,

discendas  artes  nomina  praeveniunt.
et  tu  sic  Meroe,  non  quod  sis  atra  colore,

ut  quae  Niliaca  nascitur  in  Meroe ;  10


'  i.e.  tlie  Sil)\'l  of  Ciuiiae,  daughter  of  Glaucus  (see  Virgil,
Aeii.  vi.  .36).

*  See  Epitaphia,  xii.  1-2  (note).

l8o


EPIGRAMS ON VARIOUS MATTERS

XXXIX. How HIGHLY  THE PoET's  WifE  THOUtiHT  OF

HIM

Of  Lais  and  Glycera,  ladies  of  naughty  fame,
whene'er  my  wife  read  in  my  verse,  she  said  I  did  but
play  and  feign  strange  loves  in  jest.  Sueh  is  her
confidence  in  my  integrity.

XL. — To  HIS  Wife

Dear  wife,  as  we  have  lived,  so  let  us  live  and
keep  the  names  we  took  when  first  we  wedded  :  let
no  day  ever  make  us  change  in  lapse  of  time ;  but  I
will  be  thy  "  Lad  "  still  and  thou  wilt  be  my  "  Lass."
Though  I  should  outlive  Nestor,  and  thou  too
shouldst  outstrip  Deiphobe  of  Cumae  ^  in  rivalry  of
years,  let  us  refuse  to  know  the  meaning  of  ripe  age.
Better  to  know  Time's  worth  than  count  his  years.

XLI. — To  Meroe,  a  drunken  Hag

Who  first  compounded  thee  thy  name,  Meroe,  he
for  Hippolytus,  Theseus'  son,  compounded  a  name.
For  'tis  divining  to  make  such  a  name  as  betokens
lot,  or  character,  or  death.  So,  Protesilaiis,  the  Fates
gave  thee  thy  name,  because  thou  wert  to  be  Troy's
first  victim.2  When  men  call  a  poet  Idmon,^  a
physician  lapyx,*  the  names  anticipate  the  arts  they
are  to  learn.  Even  so  art  thou  Meroe,  not  because
thou art dusky-hued as  one born in Nile-washed

3  Jdmon  (from  the  root  i5-)  was  the  bard  and  seer  who
accompanied  the  Argonauts.

■*  lapyx  was  the  physician  who  tended  Aeneas  (Virgil,  Aen.
xxii.  391  ff'.).

i8i


AUSONIUS

infusuni  scd  quod  vinuin  nun  diluis  undis,
potare  inniixtum  sueta  nierinn(|iie  nieruin.

XLII. Ex GllAFXO THAOUCTUM OE StATUA NkMKSIs

Mk  laj)idem  (juondam  Persae  advexerc,  tropaeinn
ut  fiereni  bello  :  nunc  ego  sum  Nemesis.

ac  sicut  Graecis  victoribus  adsto  tropaeum,
punio  sic  Persas  vaniloquos  Xeniesis.

XLIII. — De Thrasybulo Laceuaemonio yui loii-

TISSIME DIMICANS OCCUBUIT

ExciPis  adverse  quod  pectoie  vulnera  sepLem,

arma  super  veheris  quod,  Thrasybule,  tua,
non  dolor  hie  patris  est,  Pitanae  sed  gloria  maior.

varum,  tarn  pulchro  funere  posse  frui.
quem  postquam  maesto  socii  posuere  feretro,  5

talia  magnanimus  edidit  orsa  pater  :
"  Flete  alios, natus  lacrimis  non  indiget  ullis,

et  meus,  "et  talis,  et  Lacedaemonius."

XLIV^ — Ex  Graeco  traductum  de  Matre

MAGNANIMA

Mater  Lacaena  clipeo  obarmans  filium,
"Cum  hoc,"  inquit,  "  aut  in  hoc  redi."

The  play  upon  ^^e)oe  .  .  .  menim  cannot  be  reproduced.
^  =  Anth.  xvi.  "JGo.
^  See  Epist.  xxvii.  53  tt'.  and  note.

182


EPIGRAMS ON VARIOUS MATTERS

Meroe  ;  but  because  thou  never  slakest  wine  with
water,  being  used  to  drink  draughts  unallayed  of
wine,  pure  wine.^

XLII. TllANSLATEO FROM  THE  GltEEK.^ On A  SxATUE

OF  Nemesis

As  a  stone  the  Persians  once  brought  me  here  to
be  a  trophy  of  war  ; now  am I Nemesis.  And

even  as  I  stand  here  a  trophy  of  Greek  victory,  so  as
Nemesis  I  requite  the  idly-boasting  Persians.**

XLIII. — On  Thrasybulus  the  Lacedaemonian who

FELL  FIGHTING MOST  BRAVELY  *

That  thou  receivest  seven  gashes  all  in  front,  that
thou  art  borne,  Thrasybulus,  upon  thy  shield,  this
grieves  not  thy  sire,  but  adds  greater  glory  to  Pitana.^
Rare  is  the  opportunity  of  so  fair  a  death.  After  thy
comrades  laid  thee  upon  the  mournful  bier,  these
words  did  thy  stout-heai*ted  sire  pronounce  :  "  Weep
ye  for  others  :  a  son  needs  not  any  tears,  being  mine,
so  glorious,  and  a  Spartan."

XLIV. — Translated  from  the  Greek. '^ On  a  brave
Mother

A  Spartan  mother  slinging  her  son's  shield,
"  Return  with  this,"  said  she,  "or  upon  it."

*  =  Anth.  Pal.  vii.  2'29.

*  A  Spcartaii  town  on  the  Eurotas.

'  Plut.  Apophth.  Laraen.  Incert.  15  :  tck^oc,  etpyu  h  tou'  f)
iir]  ras.

183


AUSONIUS

XLV. — In  Dkgeneiikm  piviikm  Moecho  (iF.MTi  m

C^riDAM  superhiis  opibus  et  fastu  tumcns

taiituiiKjiie  verbis  nubilis
spernit  vigeiitis  clara  saecli  nomiiia,

antiqua  captans  stemmata,
Martem  Renuimque  et  conditorem  Roniulmn  5

jirivos  j)areiites  nuncupans.
lios  ille  Serum  veste  contexi  iubet :

hos  caelat  argento  jri'^vi,
ceris  inurens  ianuarum  liniina

et  atrioruni  jiegmata.  10

credo,  quod  illi  nee  pater  certus  fuit

et  mater  est  vere  lupa.

XL\'l. — Antisthenis  C^  nu  I  Imagini  suhditi

Inventor  primus  Cvnices  ego. "Quae  ratio  istaec .'

Alcides  inulto  dicitur  esse  prior."
Alcida  quondam  fueram  doctore  secundus  :

nunc  ego  sum  Cynices  primus,  et  ille  deus.


XLVII.— [De  Eodem]

Dis(  ipui.rs  melior  null!  meliorve  magisler
€1?  ('if)iTr]i'  avve/Si]  Kal  KvyiKi]i'  aocftiijv.

dicere  me  novit  verum,  qui  novit  utrumquc,
KUL  6e6v A\K€L^r]V',  Kal  Kvva  Atoy€i'>;i'.


'  Antisthenes, pupil first of  (iorgias, then of  Socrates,
founder  of  the  Cynic  school,  used  to  quote  Heracles  as  illus-


uS4


EPIGRAMS ON VARIOUS MATTERS

XLV. — To  A RICH Degkneua'ik basely  horn

A  FELLOW,  purse-proud  and  swollen-headed,  hijih
born  in  words  alone,  scorns  the  illustrious  names  of
the  current  age,  hankering  after  an  ancient  pedigree
and  claiming  Mars,  Remus,  and  Romulus  our
founder  as  his  own  s})ecial  forebears.  Their  figures
he  bids  be  woven  in  his  silken  robes,  theirs  he  chases
on  his  massy  plate,  or  paints  in  encaustic  on  his
threshold  and  on  the  ceiling  of  his  halls.  True  for
him  !  For  his  father  was  not  known  and  his  mother
surely  is  a  bitch.

XL\T. — Written under a Portrait ok Antis-

THENES THE CyNIC

"I  AM  the  first  discoverer  of  the  Cynic  rule."
"  How  can  that  be  ?  Men  say  Alcides  ^  long  pre-
ceded thee."  "Once  I  was  second  with  Alcides
for  my  master  ;  now  I  am  the  first  Cynic  and  he  a
god."

XLV'II. — On  the  same

None  had  a  better  pupil  or  a  better  master  in
virtue  and  the  Cynic  lore.  He  knows  that  I  speak
truth  who  knows  each  of  the  two,  Alcides  the  god
and  Diogenes  the  dog  (Cynic).

t rating  his  doctrine  that  labour  is  a  good.  Diogenes  (412-
82.3  B.C.),  disciple  of  Antislhenes,  compared  his  mantle  to  the
lion's  skin  of  Heracles.


i85


AUSONIUS

XLVlil. MlXOBAIlUAIlON LiBEIU PaTRIS Sl(iN() MAU-

MOREo IN Villa nostra omnium Deorim
Argumenta iiabenti

OciVGinAE^  me  Bacchum  vocant,

Osirin  Aegypti  putant,

Mysi  Phaiiacen  nominant,

Dionyson  Indi  existiinaut,

Romana  sacra  Liberuni,  5

Arabica  gens  Adoneum,

Lucaniacus  Pantheuni.

XLIX. — LiBEHo Patri
AiyuTTTtoji^  /x€v Ocripis  eyo),  Mvuwi'  ok  4>ai'a/<';/s,

TTupoyci'i;?,  StKcptos,  TiraioXcTT;?,  Aidvvcros.

L. — In  C()Rvd<*nem  marmoreum
€15  At^os  eK  Trai/Tojj/  Atros  cyw  KopuSwv.

LI. In SiMULAtRUM SaPI'HIS

Lesijia  Pieriis  Sappho  soroi*  addita  Musis,

£l/x' ivOLTI] \vplKWl', AoVlSwV SeKULTt].

Lll.  —  Deae  A'eneri

Orta  salo,  suscej)ta  solo,  patre  edita  Caelo,
Aeneadum  genetrix,  hie  habito  alnia  Venus.

1  cp.  Statins,  T/i>:b.  ii.  5S6  :  Ogygiac,  MSS.

'  i.e. the  Thcbaiis : Ogyges  was  the  mythical  founder  of
the  citj'.  ^  Ausoniu.s'  estate.

I  86


EPIGRAMS ON VARIOUS MATTERS

XLV^III. — An  outlandish  Medley  to  a  marble
Statue  of  Liueii  Pater  in  my  Country  House,
having  the  attributes  of  various  gods

The  sons  of  Ogyges  ^  call  me  IJacohus,  Egyptians
think  me  Osiris,  Mysians  name  me  Phanaces,  Indians
regard  me  as  Dionysus,  Roman  rites  make  me  Liber,
the  Aral)  race  thinks  me  AdoneuSj  Lueaniacus^  the
Universal  God.

XLIX. — To Liber  Pater

I  AM  Osiris  of  the  Egvj)tians,  Phanaces  of  the
Mysians,  Bacchus  among  the  living,  Adoneus  among
the  dead.  Fire-born,  Twy-horned,  Titan-slayer,  Dio-
nysus.

L. To A MARBLE StaTUE OF CoRN DON

A  f.oAT,  a  ram,  a  wallet,  a  shepherd  with  his  staff,
an  olive-tree,  all  in  a  monolith  make  up  lithe '^
Cory  don.

LL — To  A Figure  of  Sappho  *

I,  Lesbian  Sappho,  adopted  sister  of  the  Muses,
am  ninth  of  the  lyrists,^  tenth  of  the  Aonides.

LIL — To  THE  Goddess  Venus

Risen  from  the  firth,  received  by  earth.  Heaven's
child  by  birth,  mother  of  Aeneas'  line,  I,  kindly
Venus,  here  do  dwell.

"'  The  play  on  a/9os  .  .  .  Aito's  cannot  full}'  be  reproduced.
■*  cp.  Anth.  Pal.  ix.  506,  571  (11.  7  f.).

®  In  reference  to  the  Alexandrine  Canons  of  standard
authors  (Nine  Lyrists,  Ten  Orators,  and  so  forth).

187


AlKSONinS

LIll. N'ERsUS in N'e.sTE (ONTEXTl

Laudet  Achaemenias  orientis  gloria  telas  :
molle  auruni  pallis,  Graecia,  texe  tuis ;

non  minus  Ausoiiiam  celebret  duni  fania  Sahiuain,
parcentem  magnis  sumptil)us,  arte  j)areui.

LI  v.— Item

SiVE  probas  Tyrio  texlam  subtemine  vestem
sen  placet  inscripti  commoditas  tituli,

ipsius  hoc  doniinae  concinnat  utrumque  venustas,
has  iicminas  artes  una  Sabina  colit.


LV'. — 1)e  eadem  Sabina

Lu  lA  qui  texunt  et  carniina,  carmina  Musis,

licia  conlribuunt,  casta  Minerva,  tibi.
ast  ego  rem  sociam  non  dissociabo  Sabina,

versibus  inscripsi  quae  mea  texta  meis.

LVl. — De  Puella  yiAM  amabat

Hanc  volo,  quae  non  vult ;  illam,  quae  vult,  ego  nolo  :

vincere  vult  aninios,  non  satiare  \  enus.
oblatas  sperno  illeoebras,  detrecto  negatas  :

nee  satiare  aninnmi  nee  cruciare  volo.
nee  bis  cincta  Diana  placet  nee  nuda  Cythere  :  5

ilia  voluptatis  nil  habet,  haee  nimium.
callida  sed  mediae  Veneris  mihi  venditet  artem

femina,  quae  iungat,  quod  volo  nolo  vocant.

'  Again  ,4 /coH  ("ft  bears  a  double  meaning,  "western  '  and
"  wife  of  Ansonius."'

*  cp.  Anth.  Pal.  xii.  -iOtt.

188


EPIGRAMS ON VARIOUS MATTERS

LI II. — Lines  woven in a Robe

Let  the  proud  Orient  extol  its  Achaemenian
looms:  weave  in  thy  robes,  O  Greece,  soft  threads  of
gold;  but  let  fame  ecjually  renown  Ausonian^  Sabina
who,  shunning  their  costliness,  matches  their  skill.

Liy. — ^A  Second  Set

Whetweu  thou  dost  admire  robes  woven  in  Tyrian
looms,  or  lovcst  a  motto  neatly  traced,  my  mistress
w  ith  her  charming  skill  combines  the  twain  :  one
hand — Sabina's — practises  these  twin  arts.

LV'. — On  the  same  Sabina

Some  weave  yarn  and  some  weave  verse  :  these  of
their  verse  make  tribute  to  the  Muses,  those  of  their
yarn  to  thee,  O  chaste  Minerva.  But  I,  Sabina,  will
not  divorce  mated  arts,  who  on  my  own  webs  have
inscribed  my  verse.

LVI. — On  the  M  \in  whom he i.ovEn -

Hek  I  would  have  who  will  not,  and  her,  who
will,  I  would  not  :  V  enus  would  vanquish,  not  satisfy,
the  heart.  Charms  offered  me  I  scorn,  depreciate
those  denied  :  1  would  neither  sate  my  heart  nor
torture  it.  Neither  twice-girt  Dian  pleases,  nor  nude
Cythere  :  the  one  gives  no  delight,  the  other  over-
much. Be  mine  a  mistress  skilfully  to  display  the
art  of  attempered  love,  who  can  unite  what  "  I
would,"  "  I  would  not"  mean."^

'■^  i.e.  "who  can  unite  the  two  attitudes  these  words
imply."

189


AUSONKJS

LVII.  —  Dk  Dioitiis  FiiA'nuBus

Xpi}aTos, AkivSvvos,  avroaBeXcfieoi,  o'lKTpa  8e  TtKi'a,
moribus  anibo  nialis  nomina  falsa  gerunt :

ovo ouTos  ^py/crros,  ovh ovt(j<;  ciku'Svvos  icmv.
una  potest  ambos  littera  corrigere.

ai  Kev  Xp^cTTOs  iXil  """/^ aSeX(fiov  ' AkivSvvov  aX.<f>QL,  5

ku'Sdi'os  hie  fiet,  frater  a^p-qcTTo<i  erit.

L\'II1. De ChRESTO ET AciNDYNO QlIBtS KUERAT

MALE XOMEN IMPOSITUM

Cjermam  fratres  sunt,  CIn-estos,  Acindynos  alter,
falsuni  nomen  utrique  :  sed  ut  verinn  sit  utrique,
alpha  siiinn  Chresto  det  Acindynos^  ipse  sine  alpha
permaneat ;  veiuni  nomen  uterque  geret.

LIX.  —  QUODDAM QUASI AeNIGMA DE TRICLS IncESTIS

"Tris  uno  in  lecto  :  stiiprum  duo  perpetiuntur.

et  duo  committunt." "' Quattuor  esse  rcor."
"  Falleris :  extremis  da  singula  crimina  et  ilium

bis  nuniera  medium,  qui  focit  et  patitur.  "

LX. — De his qui dicunt Reminisco quod no\

EST LaTINUM

Qui  reminisco  i)utat  se  dieere  posse  latine

hie  ubi  co  scriptum  est,  faceret  cor,  si  cor  haberet.


190


EPIGRAMS ON  VARIOUS MATTERS

LVII. — On  two  Brothers

Chrestus  and  Aeindynus,  own  brothers  but  hap-
less children,  bear  names  which  belie  their  unhappy
qualities  :  neither  this  one  is  "  Gracious/'  nor  this
"  Riskless."  One  letter  can  correct  them  both.  If
Chrestus  should  borrow  alpha  ("-less"),  from  his
brother  Aeindynus,  one  will  become  "  Risk  "  and  his
brother  will  be  "Graceless."


L\'III. — On Chrestus ano Acindvnus who hau

BEEN INAPI'ROI'RIATELV NAMED

These  are  two  own  brothers,  Chrestus  and  Aein-
dynus. Both  have  been  wrongly  named  :  but  that
both  may  be  set  right,  let  Aeindynus  give  his  (dpha
to  Chrestus,  himself  remaining  without  alpha  ;  each
will  be  an  appropriate  name.

LIX.— A  Kind  of  Riddle  on  three  lewd  Fellows  ^

"  Tris  uno  in  lecto  :  stuprum  duo  perpetiuntur,
et  duo  committunt." "  Quattuor  esse  reor."

"  Falleris  :  extremis  da  singula  crimina  et  ilium
bis  numera  medium,  qui  facit  et  patitur."

LX. — On those who say "  Reminlsco," which  is
not  Latin

He  who  thinks  he  can  say  reminisco  and  speak
Latin,  would  put  cor  where  co  is  written,  if  he  had
any  sense.

1 =  Anth.  Pal.  xi.  225.

191


AUSONILS


LXI.— Dk  Vkuuis Ih'ii

RuKUis  vocatus  rhetttr  olim  ad  luijitias,

celebri  ut  fit  in  convivio,
grammaticae  ut  artis  se  perituni  ostenderet,

l\aec  vota  dixit  nuptiis  :
"  Et  masculini  et  feniinini  <rignite  •">

generisque  iieutri  filios."

LXII. 1)k (tLAU(1\ INMATUHA MoRTE I'KAKVKNTO

Lakta  his  octono  til)i  iani  sub  fonsule  pubes

cingebat  teneras,  Cilaiuia  adultc,  geuas.
et  iani  desieras  puer  aiine  piiella  videri  :

cum  properata  dies  abstulit  onine  decus.
sed  neque  functoruin  socius  iniscebere  vulgo  5

nee  nietues  Stygios  Hebilis  umbra  laeus,
verum  aut  Persephoiiae  ("inyreius  ibis  Adonis,

aut  lovis  FJvsii  tu  Catamitus  eris.

LXIII. — In  SuiNUM Makmokkum Niobes

VivEBAM  :  sum  facta  silex,  quae  deinde  polita

Praxiteb  manibus  vi\o  iterum  Niobe.
reddidit  artificis  manus  omnia,  sed  sine  sensii  :

bunc  ego,  cum  htesi  numina,  non  habui.

LXI\'. De PaI.I.AOE VOl.EXTE CERTAHE AllMIs (  LM

\'enehe

Armatam  vidit  Venerem  Lacedaemone  Pallas.

"Nunc  eertemus,"  ait,  "iudice  vel  Paride."
cui  Venus  :  "  Armatam  tu  me,  temeraria,  temnis,

quae,  quo  te  vici  tempore,  nuda  fui  ?  "

'  cp.  generally  A)ith.  Pa/,  ix.  489.

*  Meaning  apparentlj'  that  a  rhetorician  was  often  invited
and  expected  to  make  a  speech.

192


EPIGRAMS ON VAR[OUS MATTERS

LXI. On an llTTERANrE OF RuFus  1

RuFUS  the  rhetorician,  being  once  invited  to  a
wedding — a  thing  oft  done  at  crowded  festivals'- —
to  show  his  skill  in  grammar,  expressed  these
wishes  for  the  wedded  pair  :  "  May  ye  get  sons  of
gender  masculine,  feminine  and  neuter."

LXII. — On  Glaucias,  cut  off  by  an  untimelv
Death
Glad  youth  verging  upon  thy  sixteenth  year
already  was  encircling  thy  soft  cheeks*  with  down,
young  Glaucias.  And  already  thou  hadst  ceased  to
seem  boy  or  maid  indifferently  when  the  day  came
too  hurriedly  and  bare  off  all  thy  comeliness.  Yet
neither  shalt  thou  join  company  with  the  common
throng  of  dead,  nor  shalt  thou,  a  piteous  shade,
dread  the  Stygian  pools,  but  thou  shalt  go  thither
as  Persephone's  Adonis,  the  son  of  Cinyras,  or  thou
shalt  be  the  Ganymede  of  Elysian  Jove.

LXI II. —  For a  marble  Statue  of  Niobe^

I  USED  to  live  :  I  became  stone,  and  then  being
polished  by  the  hand  of  Praxiteles,  I  now  live  again
as  Niobe.  The  artist's  hand  has  restored  me  all  but
sense  :  that,  when  I  offended  gods,  I  had  not.

LXIV. — On  Pallas  offering  to  do  Combat  with
Venus  •*
At  Lacedaemon  Pallas  saw  Venus  armed.  "  Now,"
quoth  she,  "let  us  contend,  even  with  Paris  for
judge."  Venus  replied  :  "  When  I  am  armed,  rash
maid,  dost  thou  despise  me,  seeing  that  when  I  con-
quered thee  I  was  bare  f  "

»  cp.  Anth.  xvi.  129.  " =  Anlh.  xvi.  174.

•93

VOL. II.  O


AUSONIUS

LXV.— De Laide  dicante Veneri  Speculum suum

Lais  anus  Veneri  speculum  dico :  dignum  habeat  se

aeterna  aeternum  forma  ministerium.
at  mihi  nuUus  in  hoc  usus,  quia  cernere  talem,

qualis  sum,  nolo,  qualis  eram,  nequeo.


LXVI. — [De  Castore, Poli.uce  et  Helena]

IsTos  tergemino  nasci  quos  cernis  ab  ovo,
patribus  ambiguis  et  matribus  adsere  nates,
hos  genuit  Nemesis,  sed  Leda  puerpura  fovit ;
Tyndareus  pater  his  et  luppiter  :  hie  putat.  hio  scit.

LXVII. — De  Imaoine  Veneris  sculpta  a Phaxitelf

\'era  Venus  Gnidiam  cum  vidit  Cyprida.  dixit  :

"  Vidisti  nudam  me,  puto,  Praxitele."
"  Non  vidi,  nee  fas  :  sed  ferro  opus  omne  polinuis.

ferrum  Gradivi  Martis  in  arbitrio.
quulem  igitur  domino  scierant  placuisse  Cytheren, O

talem  fecerunt  ferrea  caela  deam."

LXV'III. — In  Buculam  Aeream  Mvroms

But  ULA  sum,  caelo  genitoris  facta  Myronis
aerea :  nee  factam  me  puto,  sed  genitam,

sic  me  taurus  init,  sic  proxima  bucula  mugit,
sic  vitulus  sitiens  ubera  nostra  petit.

1  (•;;.  Anfh.  Pal.  vi.  1.  *  -ju.  Gorgia;:,  Helm,  S.  '.'».


EPIGRAMS ON VARIOUS MATTERS


LXV. — On  Lais dedicating  her  Mirror  to Venus '^

I,  Lais,  grown  old,  to  Venus  dedicate  my  mirror  :
let  eternal  beauty  have  the  eternal  service  which
befits  it.  But  for  me  there  is  no  profit  in  this,  for  to
behold  myself  such  as  I  am  I  would  not,  such  as  I
was  I  cannot.


LX\'I. — On  Castor, Pollux,  and  Helen

Those  whom  thou  seest  springing  from  a  triple
egg,  declare  their  ancestry  doubtful  on  either  side.
These  Nemesis  conceived,  but  pregnant  Leda  bare
them  in  her  womb ;  Tyndareus  to  them  was  father
and  Juppiter :  the  one  believes  he  is,  the  other
knows.  2

LXVII. — On a Statue ok Venus sculptured by
Praxiteles  2

The  real  \'enus,  when  she  saw  the  Cnidian  Cypris,
said  :  "  Methinks,  Praxiteles,  thou  hast  seen  me  un-
clad." "I  have  not  seen  thee,  'twould  be  sin  :  but
'tis  with  steel  I  finish  every  work.  Steel  is  at  the
disposal  of  Mars  Gradivus.  Therefore  my  steel  chisel
has  fashioned  a  goddess  such  as  the  Cvthera  whom
it  knew  to  have  pleased  its  lord."

LXVTII. — On  the  Bronze  Heifer  of  Myron  *

I  AM  a  heifer,  wrought  in  bronze  by  the  chisel
of  Myron  my  creator :  nay,  I  think  I  was  not
wrought  but  born,  so  does  the  bull  make  for  me,  so
does  the  heifer  by  my  side  low,  so  the  calf  athirst

3  Anth.  xvi.  160  (cp.  162).

«  cp.  Anth.  Pal.  ix.  713,  726,  730.


AUSONIUS

miraris,  quod  fallo  gregem  ? gregis  ipse  inagister 5
inter  pascentes  me  numerare  solct.

LXIX. — De  eadkm Bucula Myronis

Ubera  quid  pulsas  frigentia  matris  aenae,
o  vitule,  et  sucum  lactis  ab  aere  petis  ?

Iiunc  quoque  praestarem,  si  me  pro  parte  parasset
exteriore  Myron,  interiore  deus.

L-XX. — Ad  Daedalum  de  eadem  Bucula

Daedale,  cur  vana  consumis  in  arte  laborem  ?

me  po£ius  clausa  subice  Pasiphae.
illecebras  verae  si  vis  dare,  Daedale,  vaccae,

viva  tibi  species  vacca  Myronis  erit.

LXXI. — De eadem Myronis Bucula iam habente
Shiritum

Aerea  mugitum  poterat  dare  vacca  Myronis  ;

sed  timet  artificis  deterere  ingenium.
fingere  nam  similem  vivae,  quam  vivere,  plus  est ;

nee  sunt  facta  dei  mira,  sed  artificis.

LXXII. — De eadem  Bucula  iam habente  Spiritum

Aerea  bos  steteram  ;  mactata  est  vacca  Minervae  ;

sed  dea  proflatam  transtulit  hue  animam.
et  modo  sum  duplex  :  pars  aerea,  pars  animata.

haec  manus  artificis  dicitur,  ilia  deae.


196


EPIGRAMS ON VARIOUS MATTERS

seeks  my  udders.  Dost  wonder  that  the  herd  mis-
takes me  ?  The  master  of  the  herd  himself  oft
reckons  me  with  his  grazing  beasts.

LXIX. — On  the  same  Heifer  of  Myron

Whv  thrustest  thou  at  the  cold  udders  of  a  brazen
dam,  O  calf,  and  seekest  milky  liquid  from  bronze  .''
That  also  would  I  supply  had  Heaven  made  me
within  as  Myron  without.

LXX. — To  Daedalus  on  the  same Heifer

Daedalus,  why  wastest  thou  pains  in  idle  craft  ?
Rather  expose  me  with  Pasiphae  enclosed  within.
If  thou  wouldst  offer  the  allurement  of  a  real  cow,
Myron's  shall  be  for  thee  a  living  image.

LXXI. — On the same Heifer of Mvron now

ENDOWED WITH BrEATH

Myron's  brazen  heifer  could  low  aloud,  but  fears
to  spoil  the  artist's  craftsmanship.  For  to  make  me
seem  alive  is  more  than  to  make  me  live  ;  and  not
the  works  of  God  are  wondrous,  but  the  artist's. ^

LXXII. — On  the  same Heifer  now  endowed  with
Breath

I  HAD  stood  here  a  brazen  heifer ;  a  cow  was
slaughtered  to  Minerva  ;  but  the  goddess  transferred
to  me  the  life  breathed  forth.  And  now  I  am  two-
fold :  part  is  brazen,  part  alive.  This  is  ascribed  to
the  artist's  skill,  that  to  the  goddess.

^  i.e.  natural  objects  ;ire  taken  for  granted  and  excite  no
wonder  :  it  is  tlie  artificial  which  meets  with  admiration.

197


AUSONIUS


LXXIII. — Ad  Taurum  de  eadem  Bucula

Quid  me,  taure,  paras  specie  deceptus  inire  ?
non  sum  ego  Minoae  machina  Pasi])haae.


LXXIV. — De  eadem  Myronis  Bucula

Necdum  caduco  sole,  iam  sub  vespere,
ageret  iuvencas  cum  domum  pastor  suas,
suam  relinquens  me  nioiiebat  ut  suam.


LXXV". — De eadem Myroms  Bucula

Unam  iuvencam  pastor  forte  amiserat,

numerumque  iussus  reddere
me  defuisse  conquerebatur,  sequi

quae  noluissem  ceteras.

LXXVI.— <QuAE  Sexum  mutarint>

Vallebanae  (nova  res  et  vix  credenda  poetis,

sed  quae  de  vera  promitur  historia)
femineam  in  speciem  convertit  niasculus  ales

pavaque  de  pavo  constitit  ante  oculos.
cuncti  admirantur  monstrum  :  sed  mollior  agna 5

[talia  virginea  voce  puella  refert :  ^]
"  Quid  stolidi  ad  speciem  notae  novitatis  hebetis  ?

an  vos  Nasonis  carmina  non  legitis  ?
Caenida  convertit  proles  Saturnia  Consus

ambiguoque  fuit  corpore  Tiresias.  10

vidit  scmivirum  tons  Salmacis  Hermaphnxlitum  :

vidit  nubentem  Plinius  Androgynum.

' Supjil.  Translalor
198


EPIGRAMS ON VARIOUS MATTERS

LXXIII. — To  A  Bull  on  the  same Heifer

Why  seekest  thou  to  make  for  me,  lord  of  the
herd,  beguiled  by  appearance  ?  I  am  no  contrivance
of  Pasiphae,  Minos'  wife.

LXXIV. — On  the  same  Heifer  of  Myron

Ere  the  sinking  sun  was  set,  evening  now  drawing
on,  the  neatherd,  while  he  drove  his  heifers  home,
left  one  of  his  own  and  chid  me  as  though  one  of

his.

LXXV^ — On  the  same Heifer  of  Myron

A  neatherd  chanced  to  have  lost  a  single  heifer,
and,  bidden  to  deliver  up  the  tale,  complained  that  I
was  missing  because  I  would  not  follow  the  others
home.

LXXVI. — They who have  changed  their  Sex

At  Vallebana  ^  (a  thing  strange  and  scarce  credible
in  a  poet,  but  which  is  taken  from  a  truthful  tale)  a
male  bird  changed  into  female  form,  and  an  erstwhile
peacock  stood  a  peahen  before  men's  eyes.  All
marvelled  at  the  portent ;  but  a  girl  softer  than  any
lamb  spake  thus  with  maiden  voice  :  "  Fools,  why  so
amazed  to  see  a  thing  strange  yet  not  unknown  .''Or
do  ye  not  read  Naso's  verse  ?  Consus,  old  Saturn's
son,  changed  Caenis  to  a  boy  and  Tiresias  was  not
always  of  one  sex.  The  fount  Salmacis  saw  Herma-
phroditus  the  half-man  - ; Pliny  ^  saw  a  man-woman

' Unkuown.

-  SeeOvid,  Mttam.  xii.  189  ft.;  iii.  323a.;  iv.  2Sn  ti.

■■■  See  Pliny  X.II.  vii.  3G.

199


AUSONIUS

nee  satis  antiquum,  quod  Campana  in  Benevento

unus  epheborum  virgo  repente  fuit.
nolo  tamen  veteris  documenta  arcessere  famae. 15

ecce  ego  sum  factus  femina  de  puero."

LXXVII. — Ad  Pythagoram de Marco  qui

DICEBATUR Pui.LARIA

"  Pytiiagora  Euphorbi,  reparas  qui  semina  reruni

corporibusque  novis  das  reduces  aninias,
die,  quid  erit  Mareus  iam  fata  novissima  functus,

si  redeat  vitam  rursus  in  aeriani  ?  "
"Quis  Marcus?" "  Feles  nuper  pullaria  dictus, 5

corrupit  totum  qui  puerile  seeus,
perversae  Veneris  postieo  vulnere  fossor,

Lueili  vatis  subj)ilo  pullipremo."
"  Non  taurus,  non  mulus  erit,  non  hippocamelus,

non  caper  aut  aries,  sed  searabaeus  erit."  10

LXXVIII. — De  Castore Fellatore  yui  slam
lingebat  Uxorem

Lambere  cum  vellet  mediorum  membra  virorum
Castor  nee  posset  vulgus  habere  domi,

repperit,  ut  nullum  fellator  perderet  inguen  :
uxoris  coepit  lingere  membra  suae.

LXXIX. SUBSCRU'TUM PlCTURAE Ml'LIERIS

IMPUniCAE

Pkaetf-.u  legitimi  genialia  foedera  coetus
repperit  obscenas  veneres  vitiosa  libido  :
Herculis  lieredi  quani  Lemnia  suasit  egestas,


EPIGRAMS ON VARIOUS MATTERS

in  the  act.  Nor  is  the  tale  yet  old  that  in  Campanian
Beneventum  a  certain  lad  suddenly  became  a  maid.
Yet  I  would  not  cite  you  instances  of  old  report :  lo,
I  was  changed  from  boy  to  girl."


LXXVII. — To Pythagoras on Marcus who was

SAID to be a KiDNAPPKR

a  Pythagoras,  Euphorbus'  son,  thou  who  dost
renew  the  seeds  of  nature  and  to  fresh  bodies  dost
assign  souls  brought  back  to  earth,  say,  what  will
Marcus  be  who  has  now  felt  fate's  final  stroke,  if  he
return  again  to  live  in  our  air  ?  "  "  Who  is  Marcus  ?  "
"  One  lately  known  as  seducer  and  kidnapper,  who
has  debauched  the  entire  sex,  an  unnatural  scoundrel,
01-,  as  the  bard  Lucilius  says,  a  pilfering  paederast."
"  No  bull,  no  mule,  no  hippocaniel  shall  he  be,  no
goat  or  ram,  but  he  shall  be  a  scarabaeus.  "  ^

LXXVIII.— De  Castore  Fellatore  qui  suam
lingebat Uxorem

Lambere  cum  vellet  mediorum  membra  virorum
Castor  nee  posset  vulgus  habere  domi,

repperit,  ut  nullum  fellator  perderet  inguen  :
uxoris  coepit  lingere  membra  suae.

LXXIX. — Written  under  the  Portrait  of  a  lewd
Woman

Puaeter  legitinii  genialia  foedera  coetus
repperit  obscenas  veneres  vitiosa  libido  :
Herculis  heredi  quam  Lemnia  suasit  egestas,

'  The  Egyptian  dung-beetle.


AUSONIUS

quam  toga  facundi  scaenis  agitavit  Afrani
et  quam  Nolanis  capitalis  liixus  inussit.
Crispa  tamen  cunctas  exercet  corpore  in  uno  :
deglubit,  fellat,  molitur  per  utramque  cavernam,
ne  quid  inexpertum  frustra  inoritura  relinquat.


LXXX. — De  Alcone  Medico  qui  Hakusprem

VANILOQUUM FECIT

Languenti  Marco  dixit  Diodorus  haruspex
ad  vitam  non  plus  sex  superesse  dies.

sed  medicus  divis  fatisque  potentior  Alcon
falsum  convicit  illico  haruspicium

tractavitque  manuni  victuri,  ni  tetigisset ;
illico  nam  Marco  sex  periere  dies.

LXXXI. — De  Signo  Iovis  tacto  ab  Alcone
Medico

Al(  ON  hesterno  signum  Iovis  attigit.  ille
quamvis  marmoreus  vim  patitur  medici.

ecce  hodie  iussus  transferri  e  sede  vetusta
efFertur,  quamvis  sit  deus  atque  lapis.

LXXXII. — In  EuNUiM  Ligcrritorem

KuNE,  quid  adfectas  vendentem  Phyliida  odores.^
diceris  banc  mediam  lambere,  non  molere.

perspice,  ne  mercis  fallant  te  nomina,  vel  ne
aere  Seplasiae  decipiare  cave,

dum  Kvadov  Koo-roique  putas  connnunis  odoris
et  narduin  ac  sardas  esse  sapore  p.iri.


EPIGRAMS ON VARIOUS MATTERS

quam  toga  facundi  scaenis  agitavit  Afrani
et  quam  Nolanis  capitalis  luxus  inussit.
Crispatamen  cunctas  exercet  corpore  in  uno  :
deglubit,  fellat,  molitur  per  utrainque  cavernam,
ne  quid  inexpertuiii  frustra  nioritura  relinquat.

LXXX. — On  Alcon  a  Doctor  who  made  a  Sooth-
saver  A  FALSE  Prophet
When  Marcus  was  sick,  Diodorus  the  soothsayer
told  him  that  no  more  than  six  days  of  Hfe  remained.
But  the  doctor,  Alcon,  more  potent  than  the  gods
and  fates,  straightway  proved  the  divination  false
and  touched  his  patient's  hand  who  might  have
lived  had  he  not  touched ;  for  straightway  Marcus'
six  days  came  to  an  end.

LXXXl. — On  a  Statue  of  Jove  touched  by Alcon
THE  Doctor

Yesterday  Alcon  touched  Jove's  statue.  He,
though  of  marble,  felt  the  doctor's  influence.  To-day,
lo,  he  is  being  carried  off,  bidden  to  be  removed
from  his  ancient  place,  for  all  he  is  a  god  and  made
of  stone.

LXXXII. To EUNUS A LECHEROUS FeLLOW

EuNus,  why  dost  thou  seek  to  win  Phyllis,  the
scent-seller  ?  Diceris  banc  mediam  lambei'e,  non
molere.  Look  that  the  names  of  her  wares  do  not
deceive  thee,  or  that  thou  beest  not  deceived  by  the
scent  of  Seplasia,^  while  you  think  rank  and  fragrant
smell  alike  and  that  spikenard  and  stockfish  have  the
same  savour.

^  A  street  in  Capua  where  scents  were  sold.

203


AUSONIUS


LXXXIII. — <1n  eundem  Eunum>

DiVERSA  infelix  et  lambit  et  olfacit  Eunus  :
dissimilem  olfactum  naris  et  oris  habet.


LXXXIW — Ad eundem Eunum quod non velit

DENE NEC MALE OLERE

Salgama  non  hoc  sunt,  quod  balsama  :  cedite  odores.
nee  male  olere  mihi,  nee  bene  olere  placet.

LXXXV. — <Ad  eundem  Eunum>

Lais  Eros  et  Itys,  Chiron  et  Eros,  Itys  alter
nomina  si  scribis,  prima  elementa  adime,

ut  facias  verbum,  quod  tu  facis,  Eune  magister.
dicere  me  Latium  non  decet  oj)probrium.

LXXXVI. — Ad Eunum qui Uxoris suae Inguina

LAMBEBAT

Eune,  quod  uxoris  gravidae  putria  inguina  lambis,
festinas  glossas  non  natis  tradere  natis.

LXXXVII. — -Ad  Eunum Ligurritorem Paedagogi  m

Eunus  Syriscus,  inguinum  ligurritor,

opicus  magister  (sic  eum  docet  Phyllis)

muliebre  membrum  quadriangulum  cernit :

triquetro  coactu  .^.  litteram  ducit.

de  valle  femorum  altrinsecus  pares  rugas  5

niediumque,  fissi  rima  qua  patet,  callem

.^V.  dicit  esse  :  nam  trifissilis  forma  est.

cui  ipse  linguam  cum  dedit  suam,  .A.  est :

204


EPIGRAMS O.V VARIOUS MATTERS

LXXXIII. — To  THz SAME Elms

Lnhappv  Eunus  tastes  and  smells  thiii<is  much
unlike  :  his  nose  has  one  sense,  his  tongue  another.

LXXXI\  . — To  THE  SAME  Elnls,  because  he  Would

SMELL NEITHER SWEET NOR RANK

Pickles  are  one  thing,  balsam  another  :  away  with
scents  I Neither  to  smell  rank  nor  to  smell  sweet

jileases  me.

LXXXV. — To  THE  same  Eunus

Lais,  Eros,  and  Itvs,  Chiron  and  Eros,  Itvs  again,
these  names  wTite  down  and  take  their  initials,  that
thou  mayest  form  a  word  describing  what  thou  dost,
schoolmaster  Eunus.  To  name  the  infamv  in  Latin
becomes  me  not.

LXXXX'I. — An EuNUM qui L.xoris suae Inguina
lambebat

EiNE,  quod  uxoris gravidae  putria  inguina Iambic.
festinas  glossas  non  natis  tradere  natis.

LXXX\  II. — To  Eunus, a lecherous  Schoolmaster

EuNus  Syriscus,  inguinum  ligurritor,
opicus  magister  (sic  enim  docet  Phyllis)
muliebre  membrum  quadriangulum  cernit :
triquetro  coactu  .A.litteram  ducit.
de  valle  femorum  altrinsecus  pares  rugas
mediumque,  fissi  rima  qua  patet.  callem
.^.  dicit  esse  :  nam  trifissilis  forma  est.
cui  ipselinguam  cum  dedit  suam.  .A.  est  :


AUSONIUS

veramque  in  illis  esse  .<l>.  notain  sentit.

quid,  imperite,'.P.  putas  ibi  scriptuni,  10

ubi  locari  .1.  convenit  longmn  ?

miselle  doctor,  .y.  tibi  sit  obsceno,

tuumque  iiomen  .0.  sectilis  signet.

LXXXVIII. — Au  Crispam  quae  a  quibusdam

niCEBATUR DEFORMIS

Deformem  quidani  te  dicunt,  Crispa  :  ego  istud
nescio  :  mi  pulchra  es,  iudice  me  satis  est.

quin  etiam  cupio,  iunctus  quia  zelus  amori  est,
ut  videare  aliis  foeda,  decora  mibi.

LXXXIX^— -QuALEM  velit  habere  Amicam

Sit  mini  talis  arnica  velim,

iurgia  (juae  temere  incipiat,

nee  studeat  quasi  casta  loqui  :

pulcra  procax  petulante  manu,

verbera  quae  ferat  et  i-egerat  Z

eaesaque  ad  oscula  confugiat.

nam  nisi  moribus  his  fuerit,

casta  modesta  pudenter  agens,

dicere  aboniinor,  uxor  erit.

XC. Ex GrAECO TRADUCTUM ad CUPIDINEM

Hoc,  quod  amare  vocant,  solve  aut  misceto,  Cupido
aut  neutrum  flammis  ure  vel  ure  duo.

XCI. — Ad  Dionen  de  Amore  suo
Aut  restingue  ignem,  quo  torreor,  alma  Dione,
aut  transire  iube  :  vel  fac  utrimque  parem.

2o6


EPIGRAMS ON VARIOUS MATTERS

veramque  in  illis  esse  .<!>.  notam  sentit.
quid,  imperite,  .P.  putas  ibi  scriptum,
ubi  locare  .1.  convenit  longuni  ?
miselle  doctor,  .S.  tibi  sit  obsceno,
tuumque  nomen  .®.  sectilis  signet.

LXXX\'in. — To  Crispa,  said bv some to be

DEFORMED

Some  say  that  thou  art  deformed,  Crispa  :  that  I
know  not  :  for  me  thou  art  fair,  'tis  enough  since  I
am  judge.  Nay  more,  I  long — for  jealousy  is  yoked
with  love — that  thou  mayest  seem  to  others  ugly,
comely  to  me  alone.

LXXXIX. — What Sort of Mistress he would

HAVE

Fain  would  I  have  such  a  mistress  as  may  lightly
start  a  quarrel,  nor  be  careful  to  speak  as  if  an  honest
woman  ;  pretty,  saucy,  hasty  of  hand,  one  to  take
blows  and  return  them,  and,  if  beaten,  to  take  refuge
in  kisses.  For  if  she  be  not  of  this  character,  but
live  chaste,  subdued,  shamefastiy — 1  shudder  to  say
it — she  will  be  a  wile.

XC. — To  Cupid. Transl.\ted  from  the  Greek  ^

This  thing  which  they  call  love  bring  to  an  end
or  spread  evenly,  Cupid  :  either  burn  neither  with
thy  Hame  or  burn  both.

XCI. — To  DioxE  ON HIS  Passion  ^

Either  put  out  this  fire  wherein  I  burn,  sweet
Dione,  or  bid  it  pass  over  from  me,  or  make  it  equal
on  both  sides.

1  cp.  Anfli.  Pal.  V.  68.  -  cp.  id.  v.  88.

207


AUSONIUS
XC'II.  -De Iufus Consui.to qui Uxorkm habebat

ADUI.TERAM

luRis  coiisulto,  ciii  vivit  adultera  coniunx,

PAPiA  lex  placuit,  iulia  displicuit.
(|uaeritis^  unde  liaec  sit  distantia  ? semivir  ipse

scANTiNiAM  metuens  non  metuit  titiam.

XCIII. — Ad  quendam  qui  leuia  sibi Incjuina

FACIEBAT

Inguina  quod  calido  levas  tibi  dropace,  causa  est:

irritant  volsas  levia  membra  lupas.
sed  quod  et  elixo  plantaria  podice  velHs

et  teris  incusas  pumice  Clazomenas,
causa  latet :  bimarem  nisi  quod  patientia  inorbum 5

adpetit  et  tergo  femina,  pube  vir  es.

XCIV. Au ZoiLUM QUI UXOREM MOECHAM DUXERAT

Semivir  uxorem  duxisti,  Zoile,  moecham  :

o  quantus  fiet  quaestus  utrimque  domi,
cum  dabit  uxori  molitor  tuus  et  tibi  adulter,

quantum  deprensi  damna  pudoris  ement  I
sed  modo  quae  vobis  lucrosa  libido  videtur,  5

iacturam  senio  mox  subeunte  feret :
incipient  operas  conducti  vendere  moechi,

(juos  modo  muniHcos  lena  iuventa  tenet.

XCV. — PuLCHRUM Dei Responsum

DocTus  Hylas  caestu,  Phegeus  catus  arte  palaestrae,
clarus  Olympiads  et  Lycus  in  stadiis,

'  The  Lex  Papia  Poppaea  (9  a.d.),  intended  to  promote
marriage  {cp.  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  32  ;  iii.  25,  28).

-  Lex  Iulia  de  Adulteriis,  promulgated  bv  Augustus
(17  B.C.).

208


EPIGRAMS ON VARIOUS MATTERS

XCII. — To  A  Lawyer  who had  a faithless  Wife

A  LAWYER  who  had  a  faithless  wife  approved  of
the  Papian  statute  ^  but  disapproved  of  the  Julian.-
Do  ye  ask  why  this  difference  ?  Effeminate  himself,
fearing  the  Scantinian,^  he  feared  not  the  Titian
Law.^

XCII  I. — Ad  quendam gui levia  sibi  Inguina

FACIEBAT

Inguina  quod  calido  levas  tibi  dropace,  causa  est  :

irritant  volsas  levia  membra  lupas.
sed  quod  et  elixo  plantaria  podice  vellis

et  teris  incusas  pumice  Clazomenas,
causa  latet :  bimarem  nisi  quod  patientia  morbum

adpetit  et  tergo  femfna,  pube  vir  es.

XCIV^ To  ZoiLUS  WHO HAD MARRIED  A  LEWD  WoMAN

Effeminate  thyself,  Zoilus,  thou  hast  wedded  an
unchaste  wife  :  how  great  a  profit  Avill  ye  twain  earn
at  home,  when  thy  debaucher  pays  thy  wife,  and
her  lover  thee,  the  fees  of  shame  !  But  lust,  which
now  seems  to  you  profitable,  will  soon,  as  age  creeps
on,  cause  loss  :  lovers  will  begin  to  sell  you  their
services  for  pay,  whom  prostituted  youth  now  makes
your  customers.

XCV. — A  NEAT  Answer  of  the  Oracle  ^

H\LAs,  the  boxer,  with  Phegeus,  skilled  in  wrest-
ling,  and Lycus, famous on the Olympian track,

■'*  .«'■.  dc"  nefanda  Venere  :  the  date  is  uncertain.
'  ?  31 B.C.:  it directed provincial governors  to appoint
guardians  to  safeguard  orphans.  ^  A7ith.  Pal.  xi.  Ki.S.

2og

V(l[.. 11.  P


AUSONIUS

an  possent  omnes  venturo  vincere  agoiie,
Hammonem  Libyae  consuluere  deuni.

sed  deus,  ut  sapiens  :  "  Dabitur  victoria  voliis
indubitata  equideni,  si  caveatis  "  ait,

"  ne  quis  Hylam  caestu,  ne  quis  certamine  luctae
Phegea,  ne  eursu  te,  Lyce,  praetei'eat.  "


XCVI. — <Df.  Hermiones  Zona>

PuNicA  turgentes  redimibat  zona  jiapillas
Hermiones  :  zonae  textum  elegeon  erat :

"  Qui  legis  hunc  tituluni,  Papliie  tibi  niandat,  ames  me
exemploque  tuo  neminem  amare  vetes."


XCVII. — De Hyi.a  quem  Naiades  RAruEnuNT

Adsfice,  quam  blandae  necis  ambitione  fruatur
letifera  experiens  gaudia  pulclier  Hylas.

oscula  et  infestos  inter  moriturus  amores
ancipites  patitur  Naidas  Eumenidas.


XCVI II. — Nymphis  quae Hylam  merserunt

FuRiTis  prdcaces  Xaides
amore  saevo  et  irrito  :
ephebus  iste  Hos  erit.


XCIX. — Ad  Narcissum  qui  sui  ipsius  Amohe

CAPTUS erat

Si  cnperes  alium,  posses,  Narcisse,  potiri.
nunc  tibi  amoris  adest  copia,  fructus  abest.


EPIGRAMS ON VARIOUS MATTERS

asked  Ammon  at  his  Libyan  slirine  ^  whether  they
all  would  win  at  the  approachincf  games.  But  the
god  (so  wise  was  he)  replied  :  "  Victory  shall  be
assured  you,  if  only  ye  take  heed  that  none  excel
Hylas  with  the  gloves,  Phegeus  in  clinching,  and
thee,  Lycus,  in  speed  of  foot.  "

XCV^I. — On Hermione's  Girdle  ^

A  CRIMSON  girdle  bound  Hermione's  swelling
breasts  :  and  on  the  girdle  this  couplet  was  embroi-
'dered  :  "  Thou  who  dost  read  this  inscription,  know
that  the  Paphian  commands  thee  to  love  me,  and  by
thy  conduct  to  forbid  none  to  love."

XCVII. — On Hylas  seized  by  the  Nymphs

Behold  with  how  sweet  and  proud  a  death  is  fair
Hylas  blessed^  tasting  of  joys  that  bring  destruction  !
Doomed  to  perish  amid  kisses  and  fatal  love,  'twere
hard  to  say  whether  Naiads  or  Eumenides  so  afflict
him.

XCV  III. — To  THE  Nymphs  who  drowned Hylas

Ye  rave,  ye  wanton  Nymphs,  with  love  as  cruel  as
'tis  fruitless. That  lad  shall  be  a  flower.

XCIX. — To  Narcissus  seized  with  Love  for  himself

Wert  thou  to  desire  another.  Narcissus,  then
mightest  thou  win  him.  Of  love  thou  hast  abundance  ;
'tis  the  enjoyment  fails.

^  In  the  Oasis  of  Siwah  in  the  Libyan  desert.
-  A  nth.  Pal.  v.  158.


AUSONIUS


C. — Dk  Eodkm


Qi!ii)  noil  ex  luiius  forni.i  pateretur  ainalor.
ipse  suani  qui  sic  deperit  effisjiem  ?

CI. — De  Echo  dolente  propter Mortem Narcissi

CoMMORiTUR,  Narcisse,  tibi  resonabilis  Echo,

vocis  ad  extremos  exaniniata  modos  :
et  pereuntis  adhuc  gemituni  i-esecuta  querellis,

ultima  nunc  etiam  verba  loquentis  amat.

CII. — De HERMAPHROniTO ET EIUS NaTI'R  \

Mercurio  genitore  satus,  genetrice  Cvthere,
noniinis  ut  niixti,  sic  corporis  Hermaphroditus,
concretus  sexu,  sed  non  jierfectus,  utroque  :
ambiguae  Veneris,  neutro  potiendus  amori.

cm. — De  Comunctione  Sai.macis  cum
Hermaphrodito

Salmacis  optato  concreta  est  nympha  niarito.

felix  virgo,  sibi  si  scit  inesse  viruni  :
et  tu  formosae,  iuvenis,  permixte  puellae

bis  felix,  unum  si  licet  esse  duos.

CI\'. — Ad  Apoi.mnem de  Daphne  fugiente

Pone  arcuni.  Paean,  celeresque  reconde  sagittas :
non  te  virgo  fugit,  sed  tua  tela  timet.


EPIGRAMS ON VARIOUS MATTERS

C On  thk  same  Subject

What  would  a  lover  not  suffer  through  the  beauty
of  this  youth  who  thus  pines  away  for  his  own
reflection  ?

CI. — On  Echo  ouikvinu koii  Narcissus' Dkatfi

Along  with  thee.  Narcissus,  dies  resounding  Echo,
her  spirit  passing  with  the  last  tones  of  thy  voice  :
both  while  thou  wert  pining  away,  thy  sighs  she  has
hitherto  answered  with  her  plaints,  and  now  also
when  she  loves  the  latest  words  of  thy  voice.

CII. — On  Hermaphroi>itus  and  his  Nature  "^

Bv  Mercury  begotten,  conceived  by  Cythera,
Hermaphroditus,  compound  alike  in  name  and  frame,
combining  either  sex,  complete  in  neither,  neutral  in
love,  unable  to  enjoy  either  passion.

cm. — On  the  Union  of  Salmacis  and  Hermai'hho-
ditus

The  nymph  Salmacis  grew  one  with  the  mate
she  desired.  Ah,  happy  maid,  if  she  is  conscious
of  a  man's  embrace.  And  twice  happy  thou,
O  youth,  united  with  a  lovely  bride,  if  one  being
may  still  be  two.

CIV. — To  Apollo  : on  Daphne  fleeing  him

Put  by  thy  bow.  Paean,  and  hide  thy  swift  aiTows  :
not  thee  the  maid  flees,  but  fears  thy  shafts.

'  cp.  Anth.  Pal.  ix.  783.

213


AUSONIUS

CV. — De  Daphne  tecta  Coutice

Invide,  cur  properas,  cortex,  operire  puellam?'
laurca  debetur  Phoeho,  si  virgo  negatur.

C\'I. — In  scabiosum Polygitonkm

Thermarum  in  solio  si  qiiis  Polygitona  viilit

ulcera  niembrorum  scabie  putrefacta  foventeni,

praeposuit  cunctis  spectacula  talia  hulls.

j)rincipi()  treniiilis  gannitibus  aera  pulsat

verbaque  lascivos  meretricum  imitaiitia  coetus  5

vibrat  et  obscenae  numeros  pruriginis  iinplet.

brachia  deinde  rotat  velut  enthea  daenione  Maenas ;

pectus,  crura,  latus,  ventrem,  femora,  inguina,  suras,

tergum,  colla,  uineros,  luteae  Symplegadis  antrum,

tarn  diversa  locis  vaga  carnificina  pererrat,  10

donee  marcentem  caHdi  fervore  lavacri

blandus  letali  solvat  dulcedine  morbus.

desectos  sic  fama  viros,  ubi  cassa  libido

femineos  coetus  et  non  sua  bella  lacessit.

irrita  vexato  consumere  gaudia  lecto,  15

titillata  brevi  cum  iam  sub  fine  volu})tas

fervet  et  ingesto  peragit  ludibria  morsu  :

torpida  non  aliter  Polygiton  membra  resolvit.

et,  quia  debentur  suprema  piacula  vitae,

ad  Phlegethonteas  sese  iam  praeparet  undas.  20

CVII. — De  quodam Silvio  Bono  qui  erat  Brito

Sii.vius  ille  Bonus,  qui  carmina  nostra  lacessit,
nostra  magis  meruit  disticha,  Brito  bonus.


*  Apparently  "a  good man"  and  "a  Briton"  were  re
garded  as  a  contradiction  in  terms,  ami  a  Briton  surnamed

214


EPIGRAMS ON VARIOUS MATTERS

CV. — On  Daphne  covered with Bark

Too  envious  bark,  why  hastest  thou  to  overlap  the
maid?  Laurel  is  Phoebus'  due,  if  the  damsel  is
denied.

CVI. — On  mangy Polvgiton

Whoe'er  has  seen  Polyg'iton  in  a  tub  at  the  baths
chafing  the  caked  and  rotting  ulcers  on  his  limbs,
ranks  such  a  sight  above  every  comic  show.  First,  he
makes  the  air  ring  with  his  quavering  howls,  yells
words  suggestive  of  a  brothel  and  sounds  the  full
gamut  of  impurity.  Next,  he  whirls  his  arms  like
a  Maenad  possessed  by  some  spirit,  while  the  itch
strays  at  random,  now  in  this  part  now  in  that,  over
his  breast,  legs,  flanks,  belly,  thighs,  loins  and
calves,  his  back,  neck,  shoulders,  and  his  hinder
parts.  At  length  he  droops  with  the  heat  of  his
scalding  bath,  and  kind  exhaustion  makes  him  relax
in  a  death-like  swoon.  Just  as  they  say  that  men
emasculate,  when  vain  desire  attacks  them,  exhaust
themselves  without  fruition,  mocked  by  pleasure
unachieved ;  even  so  Polygiton  relaxes  his  nerveless
limbs.  And,  since  at  the  last  he  must  expiate  his
life,  let  him  now  make  ready  for  the  waters  of
Phlegethon.

CVII. — On  one  Silvius  "  Good  "  who  was  a Briton

That  Silvius  "  Good  "  who  attacks  my  verse,  has
the  more  fully  earned  my  lampoon,  being  a  good
Briton.^

Bonus  as  something  extremely  humorous. The  expression
"good  Indian  "  (=  a  dead  Indian)  is  somewhat  similar.

215


AUSONIUS

CVill.- loKM

SiLVius  hie  Bonus  est. "Quis  Silvius?" Iste  Britannus.
"  Aut  Brito  hie  nun  est  Silvius,  aut  mains  est."

CIX. — Idem

Silvius  esse  Bonus  fertur  ferturque  Britannus  :
quis  credat  civem  degenerasse  bonum  ?

ex. — Idem

Nemo  bonus  Brito  est. si  simplex  Silvius  esse
incipiat,  simplex  desinat  esse  bonus.

CXI— Idem

Sii.vius  hie  Bonus  est,  sed  Brito  est  Silvius  idem  :
simplicior  res  est,  credite,  Brito  malus.

CXII.— Idem

SiLvi,  Brito  Bonus  :  quamvis  homo  non  bonus  esse
ferris  nee  <se  quit>  iungere  Brito  Bono.


216


EPIGRAMS ON VARIOUS MATTERS

CVIII.  -The  Same

"  This  is  Silvius  '  Good.'  "  "  Who  is  Silvius  ?  "  "  He
is  a  Briton."  "  Either  this  Silvius  is  no  Briton,  or  he
is  Silvius  '  Bad.'  "

CIX.— The  Same

Sh.vius  is  called  Good  and  called  a  Briton  :  who
would  believe  a  good  citizen  had  sunk  so  low  ?

ex. — The  Same

No  good  man  is  a  Briton.  If  he  should  begin  to
be  plain  Silvius,  let  the  plain  man  cease  to  be  good.

CXI. — The  Same

This  is  Silvius  Good,  but  the  same  Silvius  is  a  Briton:
a  plainer  thing — believe  me — is  a  bad  Briton.

CXII. — The  Same

Thou  Silvius  art  Good,  a  Briton  :  yet  'tis  said  thou
art  no  good  man,  nor  can  a  Briton  link  himself  with
Good.


217


LIBER XX

AUSONII BURDIGALENSIS VASATIS

GRATIARUM  ACTIO  AD  GRATIANLM

IMPERATOREM PRO  CONSULATU

I.  A(io  tibi  gratias,  imperator  Auguste  ;  si  possem,
etiam  referrem.  sed  neque  tua  fortuna  desiderat
remunerandi  vicem  neque  nostra  suggerit  restituendi
facultatem.  privatorum  ista  copia  est  inter  se  esse
munificos :  tua  beneficia  ut  maiestate  praecellunt,  ita
mutuum  non  reposcunt.  quod  solum  igitur  nostrae
opis  est,  gratias  ago :  verum  ita,  ut  apud  deum  fieri
amat,  sentiendo  copiosius  quam  loquendo.  atque
non  in  sacrario  [loco]  imperialis  oraculi,  qui  locus
horrore  tranquillo  et  pavore  venerabili  raro  eundem
animum  praestat  et  vultum  tui ;  sed  usquequaque
gratias  ago,  turn  tacens,  turn  loquens,  turn  in  coetu
hominum,  turn  ipse  mecum,  et  cum  voce  patui,  et
cum  meditatione  secessi,  omni  loco  actu  habitu  et
tempore,  nee  mirum,  si  ego  terminum  non  statuo
tam grata  profitendi, cum tu finem facere nescias


*  i.e.  belonging  (by  origin)  to  Bazas,  the  birthplace  of  the
orator's  father.

2l8


BOOK XX

THE THANKSGIVING OF AUSONIUS OF

BORDEAUX, THE VASATE,i FOR HIS

CONSULSHIP,  ADDRESSED  TO  THE

EMPEROR  GRATIAN

I.  I  EXPRESS  my  thanks  to  you,  most  gracious
Emperor  ;  could  I  do  so,  I  would  also  make  repay-
ment. But  neither  does  your  estate  need  any
interchange  of  bounty,  nor  does  mine  supply
the  ability  to  return  it.  Men  of  private  station
alone  have  the  opportunity  for  being  liberal  to  one
another :  your  favours  at  once  surpass  all  others  in
their  princely  scale  and  demand  no  requital.  And
so  I  express  my  thanks — all  that  is  in  my  power  to
do  :  yet  in  such  a  way  as  one  is  wont  to  do  in  the
presence  of  God,  with  greater  fulness  of  feeling  than
of  speech.  And  it  is  not  in  the  shrine  of  the
imperial  oracle,  a  place  where  feelings  of  subdued
fear  and  reverent  awe  rarely  permit  your  subject  to
exhibit  outwardly  all  that  he  feels  within  ;  but  it  is
at  all  times  and  in  all  places  that  I  express  my  thanks,
now  silently  in  my  own  heart,  now  with  my  tongue,
now  in  company  with  others,  now  by  myself,  whether
I  speak  openly  or  reflect  inwardly  and  apart,  in
every  place,  deed,  habit,  and  season.  Nor  is  it
surprising  that  I  set  no  limit  to  the  expression  of
my  gratitude,  seeing  that  you  do  not  know how  to

219


AUSONIUS

honorantli.  quis  enim  locus  est  aut  dies,  qui  non  me
huius  aut  siinilis  gratulationis  adnioneat?  admoiieat
autfin  ?  o  iiiertiain  significationis  ignavae  I  quis,
inquam,  locus  est,  qui  non  beneficiis  tuis  agitet,  in-
rianmiet  ?  nullus,  inquam,  imperator  Augusta,  quiii
admirandam  speciem  tuae  venerationis  incutiat :  non
palatium,  quod  tu,  cum  terribile  acceperis,  amabile
praestitisti ;  non  forum  et  basilicae,  olim  negotiis
})lena,  nunc  votis  pro  tua  salute  susceptis :  nam  de
sua  cui  non  te  imperante  securitas  ?  non  curia
honorificis  modo  laeta  decretis,  olim  sollicitis  maesta
(juerimoniis  ;  non  publicum,  in  quo  occursus  gauden-
tium  plurimorum  neminem  patitur  solum  gratulari  ;
non  domus  commune  secretum.  lectus  ipse,  ad
quietem  datus,  beneficiorum  tuorum  reputatione
ti'anquillior.  somnus,  abolitor  onmiuni.  imagines
tuas  offert.  ista  autem  sedes  honoris,  sella  curulis,
gloriosa  pompis  imperialis  officii,  in  cuius  me  fastigio
ex  (jua  mediocritate  posuisti,  quotiens  a  me  cogitatur,
vincor  magnitudine  et  redigor  ad  silentium,  non
oneratus  beneficiis,  sed  oppressus.  ades  enim  locis
omnibus,  nee  iam  miramur  licentiam  poetarum,  qui
220


THANKSGIVING  FOR  HIS  CONSULSHIP

set  any  bound  to  your  gracious  favours.  For  what
place,  what  time  is  there  which  does  not  remind  me
of  this  or  some  similar  cause  for  thankfulness?  Do
I  say  "  remind  "  ?  What  a  weak  and  feeble  conno-
tation has  that  word  !  Is  there  any  place,  I  say,
which  does  not  thrill  and  fire  me  with  a  sense  of
your  bounty  ?  There  is  no  place,  1  say.  Most
(irracious  Emperor,  but  stamps  my  consciousness  with
the  wondrous  image  of  your  most  worshipful  majesty  ;
not  the  Court,  which  was  so  formidable  when  you
succeeded,  and  which  you  have  made  so  agreeable  ;
not  the  forum  and  basilicas,  which  once  reechoed
with  legal  business,  but  now  with  the  taking  of  vows
for  your  well-being — for  under  your  rule  who  is  there
whose  property  is  not  secure  ? — ;  not  the  Senate-
house,  now  happy  in  the  business  of  passing  reso-
lutions in  your  honour  as  formerly  gloomy  and
troubled  with  complaints  ;  not  the  public  highways
where  the  sight  of  so  many  joyous  faces  suffers  no
one  to  be  alone  in  showing  delight ;  not  the  univer-
sal privacy  ot  the  home.  The  very  bed,  destined
for  our  repose,  is  made  more  restful  as  we  reflect
upon  your  benefits  :  slumber,  which  blots  out  every-
thing, nevertheless  presents  your  picture  to  our  gaze.
As  for  that  throne  of  honour,  the  curule  chair
surrounded  with  all  the  splendid  circumstance
which  belongs  to  a  rank  which  confers  the
imperium,  to  the  proud  elevation  of  which  you
have  exalted  me  from  so  ordinary  a  station,  as
often  as  I  think  of  it,  its  grandeur  overpowers  me
and  I  am  reduced  to  silence,  being  not  merely  loaded
by  your  bounty,  but  overwhelmed.  Your  presence,
indeed,  is  felt  in  all  places  and  we  are  no  longer
surprised  at  the  supposed  extravagance  of  the  poets


AUSONIUS

oinnia  deo  plena  dixcruiiL.  spcni  supcras,  cupiciula
praeveiiis,  vota  praecurris :  quaeque  animi  nostri
celeritas  divinuni  instar  adfectat,  beneficiis  praeeun-
tibus  anteceditur.  praestare  tibi  est,  quain  nobis
optare,  velocius.

II.  Ago  igitur  gratias,  optime  iniperator.  ac  si
quis  hunc  serinoneni  meum  isdem  verbis  tam  saepe
repetitum  inopiae  loquentis  adsignat,  experiatur  lioc
idem  persequi,  et  nihil  poterit  ])roferre  facundius.
aguntur  enim  gratiae  non  propter  niaiestatis  ambitum
nee  sine  argumentis  imperatori  fortissimo  :  testis  est
uno  pacatus  in  anno  et  Danuvii  limes  et  Rheni  ;
liberalissimo :  ostentat  hoc  dives  exercitus ;  indul-
gentissimo  :  docet  securitas  erroris  humani ;  consul-
tissinio  :  probat  hoc  tali  principe  oriens  ordinatus ;
j)iissimo :  huius  vero  laudis  locui)letissimum  testi-
monium est  pater  divinis  honoribus  eonsecratus,
instar  filii  ad  imperium  frater  adscitus,  a  eontumelia
belli  j)atruus  vindieatus,  ad  praefecturae  collegium
filius  cum  patre  coniunctus,  ad  consulatum  praeceptor
electus. possum ire per omnes  appellationes  tuas,


1  cp.  Virgil,  Ed.  iii.  60.

-  After tin; defeat of Uic .\l;iinaiini at Argentaria in

S A.l).

'  Valentiniau  II.,  laised  to  tlie  puiple  as  emperor  of  the
Kast  iti  ."iT.")  A.u.

*  Valens  was  killed  in  battle  witli  the  (jotlis  at  Adriano])le
in  .S78  A.I),  and  his  body  burned.  The  (ioths  were  actually
driven  out  bv  Thcodosius.


THANKSGIVING  FOR HIS  CONSULSHIP

who  have  declaied  that  "^all  things  are  full  of  God.  "*
>'oii  surpass  our  hopes,  you  anticipate  all  we  can
desire,  you  outstrip  our  fondest  wishes ;  and  the
swiftness  of  our  thought,  which  claims  to  be  some-
thing divine,  is  outdistanced  by  your  benefits  which
outrun  it.  For  you  to  fulfil  a  wish  is  more  in-
stantaneous than  for  us  to  conceive  it.

II.  Therefore  I  express  my  thanks,  most  gracious
Emperor.  And  if  anyone  attributes  so  frequent  a
repetition  in  the  same  words  of  this  phrase  of  mine
to  the  speaker's  poverty  of  speech,  let  him  try  to
work  out  this  same  theme,  and  he  w^ill  not  be  able  to
produce  anything  more  eloquent.  For  I  am  now
expressing  thanks,  not  with  intent  to  flatter  any  royal
vanity  and  not  without  proofs  of  my  assertions,  to  a
most  valiant  emperor— as  witness  the  pacification  in
a  single  year  of  the  Danubian  and  Rhenish  frontiers  :  -
to  one  most  generous;  the  wealth  of  the  Army  shows
as  much  :  to  one  most  merciful  ;  the  safety  which
man's  waywardness  enjoys  declares  this:  to  one
most  statesmanlike  ;  the  organization  of  the  east  by
so  great  a  prince  is  proof  enough  :  to  one  most
dutiful ;  there  is  the  amplest  evidence  to  confirm
this  tribute — the  canonization  of  his  father  with
divine  honours,  the  association  of  his  brother,^  just  as
though  he  were  a  son,  with  himself  in  the  imperial
authority,  the  avenging  of  the  outrage  suffered  by  his
uncle  in  war,'*  the  pairing  of  a  son  and  father  together
in  joint  control  of  a  praefecture,'  and  the  election
of  his  tutor  to  the  consulate.  I  could  enumerate  all
those  titles  which  your  valour  has  won  for  you  in  the

°  In  .378  A.D.  Ausonius  ami  his  son  Thalassius  were  col-
leagues in  the  administration  of  the  double  prefecture  of  the
(Jauls  and  Italy.


AUSONIUS

quas  olim  virtus  dedit,  qu.as  proxime  f'ortuna  concessit,
quas  adhiic-  indulc^entia  divina  meditatur  :  vocarem  '
Germaniciini  deditione  gentilium,  Alaruannicum  tra-
ductione  captoruni,  vincendo  et  ignoscendo  Sarma-
ticuni :  conecterem  omnia  merita  virtutis  et  cogno-
mina  felicitatis :  sed  alia  est  ista  materia  et  suo
parata  secreto,  cum  placuerit  signanter  et  breviter
omnia,  quae  novimus,  indicare  nee  persequi,  ut  qui
terrarum  orbem  unius  tabulae  ambitu  circumscribunt
aliquanto  detrimento  magnitudinis,  nullo  dispendio
veritatis.

Nunc  autem,  quod  diei  huius  proprium,  de  con-
sulatu  gratias  agam.  Sed  procurrunt  et  aliae  dig-
nitates  atque  in  vocem  gratulationis  erumpunt  ac  se
prius  debere  profitentur.  tot  gradus  nomine  comitis
propter  tua  incrementa  congesti  :  ex  tuo  merito  te  ac
patre  j^rincipibus  quaestura  communis  et  tui  tantum
praefectura  beneficii,  quae  et  ipsa  non  vult  vice  sim-
plici  gratulari,  liberalius  divisa  quam  iuncta :  cum
teneanms  duo  integrum,  neuter  desiderat  separatum.

III. Sed  ilia,  ut  paulo  ante  promisi,  habebunt  sui

muuens peculiare secretum. consulatus hie nieus

'  Acidalius  :  voca,  Z,  Feiper.

^  The  Sarmatae  were  actually  conquered  bj'  Theodosius  in
378-379  A. I).

224


THANKSGIVING  FOR  HIS  CONSULSHIP

pastj  those  which  Fortune  has  granted  you  so
recently,  and  those  which  Heaven's  favour  is  still
designing  for  you  :  I  might  call  you  Germanicus  in
virtue  of  the  surrender  of  that  race  to  you  ;  Alaman-
nicus,  because  of  the  prisoners  whom  you  transplanted ;
Sarmaticus,^  because  you  conquered  and  forgave
that  people  :  I  might  string  together  all  the  distinc-
tions won  by  your  valour,  and  all  the  titles  earned  by
your  good  fortune  ;  but  that  is  another  theme  and
one  which  will  be  treated  in  its  own  separate  place,
when  I  decide  that  the  time  has  come  to  sketch
distinctly  and  brieHy  all  my  facts  without  following
them  out  in  detail — like  those  who  confine  a  map  of
the  world  to  the  compass  of  a  single  sheet,  thereby
causing  it  to  lose  something  in  impi*essiveness,  but
without  any  saci'ifice  of  truth.

But  now  for  the  special  business  of  this  day,  which
is  to  express  thanks  for  my  consulate.  And  yet  there
are  other  distinctions  besides,  which  push  to  the
front  and  burst  out  into  cries  of  acknowledgment,
claiming  that  they  have  the  right  to  do  this  first.
All  those  honours  heaped  upon  me  at  once  under  the
title  of  '-companion"  in  acknowledgment  of  your
upbringing ;  the  quaestorship  for  which  I  have  to
thank  you,  though  it  was  held  under  the  joint
sovereignty  of  your  father  and  yourself,  and  the
praefecture  which  I  owe  to  your  kindness  alone.
This  latter  in  its  very  self  is  not  content  with  a
single  acknowledgment  for  the  larger  bounty  which
divided  rather  than  kept  it  one  :  since  two  of  us
now  possess  it  complete,  neither  desires  it  apart.

III.  But  these  honours,  as  I  promised  just  now.
shall  have  their  special  place  apart  for  paying  their
tribute. At the present moment my consulship


AUSONIUS

orat  atque  obsecrat,  ut  obnoxiam  tibi  uni  sinas  fieri
eius  dignitatem,  quern  omnibus  praetulisti.  quot
quidem  et  ipse  sibi  invenit  gradus  I  cum  clarissimo
viro  collega  meo  honore  coniunctus,  nuncupatione
praelatus,  consul  ego,  imperator  Auguste,  munere
tuo  non  passus  saepta  neque  campum,  non  suffragia,
non  puncta,  non  loculos :  qui  non  prensaverim  manus
nee  salutantium  confusus  occursu  aut  sua  amicis
nomina  non  reddiderim,  aut  aliena  imposuerim :  qui
tribus  non  circumivi,  centurias  non  adulavi,  vocatis
classibus  non  intremui,  nihil  cum  sequestre  deposui,
cum  distributore  nil  pepigi.  Romanus  populus,
Martius  campus,  equester  ordo,  rostra,  ovilia,  senatus,
curia,  unus  mihi  omnia  Gratianus.  iure  meo,  Auguste
niaxime,  adfirmare  possum  incolumi  omnium  gratia,
qui  ad  liunc  honorem  diversa  umquam  virtute
venerunt  venturique  sunt  (suus  enim  cuique  animus,
suum  meritum  sibique  mens  conscia  est),  iure,  inquam
meo  adfirmare  possum  me  mihi  videri  a  ceteris  esse
secretum.  sunt  quos  votorum  cruciat  inanitas  :  non
optavi ;  quos  exercet  ambitus :  non  petivi ;  qui  ad-
siduitate  exprimunt:  non  coegi ;  qui  offeruntur
occasione  : non  adfui ;  quos  iuvat  opulentia :  obstat

1  This  was  Q.  Clodiiis  Honnogeniauus  Olybrius.
*  i.e.  they  happen  to  l)e before the Kinpeior  when  he  is
designating  tJie  consuls.

226


THANKSGIVING  FOR  HIS  CONSULSHIP

begs  and  prays  j-ou  to  allow  one  whom  you  have
set  above  all  to  submit  his  high  degree  to  your-
self alone.  And  how  many  further  degrees  were
added  to  this  honour  I  Not  only  was  I  associated
in  this  high  office  with  a  distinguished  colleague,^
and  designated  as  the  senior,  but  by  your  favour,
most  gracious  Emperor,  I  became  consul  without
undergoing  the  ordeal  of  the  hustings,  the  Cam-
pus Martius,  the  canvassing,  the  registration,  the
gratuities ;  I  have  not  had  to  shake  hands,  nor
have  I  been  so  confused  by  crowds  of  people
pressing  to  greet  me  as  to  have  been  unable  to  call
my  friends  by  their  proper  names,  or  to  have  given
them  names  which  were  not  theirs  :  I  have  not  had
to  visit  the  tribes,  to  flatter  the  centuries,  I  have  not
trembled  as  the  classes  were  called  upon  to  vote.  I
have  made  no  deposit  with  a  trustee,  nor  given  any
pledge  to  a  financial  agent.  The  Roman  people,  the
Field  of  Mars,  the  Equestrian  Class,  the  Rostra,  the
hustings,  the  Senate  and  the  Senate  House — Gratian
alone  was  all  of  these  for  me.  I  have  the  right  to
declare,  most  mighty  Emperor,  and  that  without
offending  any  of  those  who  have  ever  attained  or
shall  attain  hereafter  to  this  distinction  in  right  of
various  qualities  (for  everyone  has  his  own  spirit,  his
own  deserts,  his  own  conscience) :  I  can,  I  repeat,
rightfully  declare  that  my  consulship  seems  to  stand
apart  from  the  consulships  of  other  men.  Some  are
cruelly  grieved  by  the  disappointment  of  their  hopes :
I  longed  for  nothing ;  some  busy  themselves  in  canvass-
ing for  this  honour :  I  never  sought  it ;  some  extort
it  by  their  importunity  :  I  brought  no  pressure  to
bear ;  some  owe  their  designation  to  the  accident  of
their  presence  :  ^  I  was  not  at  the  court ;  some  use

227


AUSONIUS

teniporum  disciplina :  non  erDi_,  nee  possum  con-
linentiani  iactare :  non  habui.  uniun  praestarc
temptavi,  et  hoc  ipsum  quasi  nieuni  vindicare  non
possum  :  in  tua  enim  positum  est  opinione,  si  merui.

IV.  Fecisti  autem  et  faeies  alios  quoque  consuleS;,
piissime  Gratiane,  sed  non  et  causa  pari,  viros
gloriae  militaris :  habent  enim  tecum^  ut  semper
laboriS;  ita  dignitatis  plerumque  consortium^  virtutis
quam  honoris  antiquiore  collegio ;  viros  nobilitatis
antiquae  :  dantuv  enim  multa  nominibus  et  est  fama
pro  nierito ;  viros  fide  inclitos  et  officiis  probatos  :
(juorum  me  etiamsi  non  secerno  numero,  tamen^  quod
ad  honoris  viam  pertinet,  ratione  dispei'tio.

Quartum  hunc  gradum  novi  beneficii  tu,  Auguste,
constituis :  differre  tibi  ipsi,  quo  alter  ornetur,  bona
animi  tui  ad  alienam  referre  praestantiam  eruditio-
nemque  natui'ae^,  quam  dec  et  patri  et  tibi  debes,  ad
alterius  efficaciam  gratius  retorquere  quam  verius.
tua  haec  verba  sunt  a  te  mihi  scripta  :  solvere  te,  quod
debeds  el  adhuc  dehere,  quod  solveris.  o  mentis  aureae
dictum bratteatum ! o de pectore candidissimo


'  i.f.  ill  addition  to  tlic  llii-ce  detailed  iniiiiediiitely  above.
228


THANKSGIVING  FOR  HIS  CONSULSHIP

theii-  wealth  to  help  them :  the  morality  of  our  age
forbids  such  a  practice  ;  I  did  not  buy  this  honour,
yet  cannot  boast  any  self-restraint  :  I  had  no  money.
One  thing  only  I  have  tried  to  make  sure  of,  and
even  that  I  cannot  claim  as  my  own  ;  for  it  de-
pends upon  your  valuation  whether  I  have  been
deserving.

IV.  You  have  appointed,  and  will  appoint  others
also  as  consuls,  most  kindly  Gratian,  but  never  on
similar  grounds.  Men  of  military  renown  :  and  as
these  are  always  associated  with  you  in  the  toils  of
empire,  so  they,  in  common  with  you,  hold  the
greater  share  in  its  distinctions,  having  been  your
colleagues  in  soldierly  virtue  before  they  became
so  in  civil  dignities  ;  men  of  ancient  and  famous
lineage  :  for  an  illustrious  name  secures  much,  and
distinction  may  serve  as  a  substitute  for  achieve-
ments ;  men  distinguished  for  their  trustworthiness
and  tested  by  official  duties  :  and  though  I  do  not
place  myself  outside  this  category,  yet,  so  far  as
the  path  to  honours  is  concerned,  I  differ  in  my
qualifications.

And  to  this  new  favour  of  yours,  your  Majest}',
you  add  a  fourth  degree,^  in  that  you  disparage
yourself  to  do  another  honour,  give  the  credit  of  the
excellences  of  your  mind  to  the  efficacy  of  exterior
influence,  and  with  greater  generosity  than  truth,
misrepresent  those  natural  accomplishments  which
you  owe  to  God,  to  your  father,  and  to  yourself
as  the  product  of  a  stranger's  efforts.  Your  own
words  written  to  me  in  your  own  hand  declare  :
that  you  are  discharging  a  debt  which  yon  owe,  and  still
owe  ivhat  yon  have  discharged.  Oh,  how  that  sentence
is  overlaid with the gold of your nature ! How

229


AUSONIUS

lactei  sermonis  alimoniam  !  quisquamne  tam  parcus
est  in  ostentatione  beneficii  ?  quisquam  pondus
gratiae  suae  vim  nieriti  profitetur  alien)  ?  quisquam
denique  quod  indulget,  quasi  ab  obnoxio  deferatur,
pretium  mavult  vocare  quam  donuin  ?  certent  huic
sententiae  veteres  illi  et  Homerici  oratores,  subtiUs
deducta  oratione  Menelaus  et  instar  profundae  gran-
dinis  ductor  Ithacensius  et  melleo  delibutus  eloquio
iam  tertiae  Nestor  aetatis  :  sed  neque  ille  concinnius
eloquetur,  qui  se  Laconica  brevitate  collegit,  nee  ille
contortius,  qui  cum  sensibus  verba  glomeravit,  nee
iste  dulcius,  cuius  lenis  oratio  mulcendo  potius  quam
extorquendo  persuasit.  solvere  te  dicis^  quod  debeas
et  debiturum  esse,  cum  solveris.  Auguste  iuvenis,
caeli  tibi  et  humani  generis  rector  hoc  tribuat,  ut
praelatus  antiquis,  quos  etiam  elegantia  sententiae
istius  antecessisti,  vincas  propria  singulorum  :  in
Menelao  regiam  dignationem,  in  Ulixe  prudentiam,
in  Nestore  senectutem.

V,  Subiciet  aliquis  :  ista  quideni  adeptus  es,  sed
efFare,  quo  merito?  quid  me  oneras,  sciscitator  ?
rationem  felicitatis  nemo  reddit.  deus  et  qui  deo
proximus  tacito  muiiera  dispcrtit  arbitrio  vt  benefi-
ciurum  suoruui  iiulignatus  per  homines  start-  iudiciuni,

230


THANKSGIVING  FOR  HIS CONSULSHIP

sustaining  is  the  milk  of"  these  words,  springing  from
the  sincerest  of  breasts !  Is  there  anyone  who
shrinks  so  modestly  from  arrogant  display  of  his
generosity  ?  Anyone  who  thus  alleges  that  his
favours  have  no  other  weight  but  the  receiver's
work  ?  Anyone  who,  in  a  word,  prefers  to  call  his
gifts  payment  as  though  rendered  by  a  debtor  ?  Let
those  famous  spokesmen  of  old,  those  orators  of
Homer — Menelaus,  with  his  subdued  but  subtle
mode  of  speech,  the  chieftain  of  Ithaca,  so  like  a
heavy  storm  of  hail,  Nestor,  the  survivor  of  three
generations,  whose  lips  were  steeped  in  honey — let
those  seek  to  rival  such  a  sentence  !  Yet  for  all  his
compression  and  Spartan  conciseness,  the  first  will
utter  nothing  neater  ;  the  second,  though  he  heap  up
words  and  ideas,  nothing  more  forcible ;  the  last,
nothing  sweeter,  although  his  gentle  speech  per-
suaded rather  by  charming  than  overbearing.  You
say  that  you  are  paying  a  debt  you  owe  and  will  still
be  in  debt  when  you  have  paid.  My  young  sovereign,
may  He  who  is  the  Ruler  of  heaven  and  of  mankind
grant  that  you  may  excel  those  ancients,  even  above
whom  the  choiceness  of  that  one  sentence  has  placed
you,  and  outstrip  each  one  of  them  in  his  peculiar
quality — Menelaus  in  kingly  majesty,  Ulysses  in
discretion,  and  Nestor  in  length  of  days.

V.  Someone  will  interpose  :  "  It  is  true  you  have
received  all  these  benefits,  but,  tell  me,  how  have
you  deserved  them  ?  "  Why  do  you  cast  this  burden
upon  me.  Master  Inquisitor  ?  No  man  gives  a
reason  for  his  prosperity.  God,  and  he  who  stands
next  to  God,  distributes  blessings  at  will,  and  dis-
daining to  await  man's  verdict  on  his  favours,  chooses
rather  in  the  persons  of  the  uplifted  to  perform  a

231


AUSONIUS

mavult  de  subditis  dedisse  miraculum.  quo,  inquis,
merito?  ego  nullum  scio,  nisi  quod  tu,  piissime
imperator,  debere  te  dicis :  et  hoc  debere  latissime
pertinet,  sive  hoc  eruditionis  tuae  faenus  existimas,
sive  sine  faenore  gloriam  liberalitatis  adfectas,  sive
te  pondere  conceptae  sponsionis  exoneras,  seu  fidei
commissum  patris  exsolvis,seu  magnanimitate  caelesti,
ostentatione  suppressa,  dei  munus  imitaris.  debere
te  dicis.  cui  ?  quando  ?  quo  nomine  ?  lege  syngra-
pham,  nomina  creditorem  ;  accepti  et  expensi  tabulae
conferantur :  videbis  alio  summae  istius  transire  ra-
tionem.  tibi  coepit  deus  debere  pro  nobis,  quid
autem  mihi  debes,  gratissime  imperator?  patitur
enim  humanitas  tua,  ut  praeter  regias  virtutes  ])rivata
appellatione  lauderis.  quid  tu  mihi  debes  ?  et  contra
quid  non  ego  tibi  debeo  ?  anne  quod  docui  ?  hoc  ego
j)ossum  verius  retorquere,  dignum  me  habitum,  qui
docerem ;  tot  facundia  doctrinaque  praestantes  in-
clinata  in  me  dignatione  praeteritos,  ut  esset  quem
tu  matura  iam  aetate  succinctum  per  omnes  honorum
gradus  festinata  bonitate  proveheres  ;  timere  ut  vide-
reris,  ne  in  me  vita  deficeret,  dum  tibi  adhuc  aliquid,
quod  deberes  jiraestare,  superesset.

V'l. Negat  Cicero  consularis  ultra  se  habere,  quod

^  There  is  of  course  a  pla}'  on  [irntixsimc  and  the  Emperor's
own  name.

232


THANKSGIVING  FOR  HIS  CONSULSHIP

miracle.  "How  have  I  deserved  them,"  you  ask  ?
I  knovif  of  no  grounds,  except  that  you,  most  kindly
Emperor,  say  that  you  owe  a  debt :  and  this  Avord
"owe"  admits  of  very  wide  interpretation.  Either
you  consider  this  debt  to  be  the  interest  on  the
principal  of  your  education  ;  or,  apart  from  this
interest,  you  seek  after  the  renown  which  bounty
earns  ;  or  you  are  discharging  yourself  of  the  burden
of  a  pledge  which  you  have  incurred  ;  or  else  with  a
heavenly  loftiness  of  soul  and  without  a  trace  of
vanity  you  are  imitating  God's  function.  You  say
you  owe  a  debt.  To  whom  then  ?  Or  when  did  you
contract  it  ?  On  what  account  }  Read  the  bill  over  :
name  the  creditor  :  let  the  accounts  for  receipts  and
expenditure  be  laid  before  the  court.  When  this  is
done  you  will  see  that  the  debit  balance  is  not
against  you  but  against  another.  It  is  God  who  now
begins  to  owe  you  a  debt  on  my  behalf.  But  what
do  you  owe  me,  most  gracious  Emperor — for  your
kindly  nature  permits  me  to  set  aside  your  kingly
qualities  and  use  this  familiar  form  of  complimentary
address  ?  ^  What  do  you  owe  me  ?  And  on  the  other
side,  what  do  I  jiot  owe  you  .''  Is  it  because  I  was
your  tutor  ?  I  can  turn  this  about  and  say  more
exactly  that  I  was  deemed  worthy  to  teach  you  ;
that  so  many  men  superior  to  me  in  eloquence  and
learning  were  passed  over  ;  that  the  honourable
choice  fell  upon  me,  in  order  that  you  might  have  a
man  equipped  with  ripe  years  whom  your  impetuous
generosity  might  advance  through  all  the  stages  of
a  distinguished  career ;  and  that  you  seemed  to  fear
that  my  life  might  fail  while  there  still  remained
imbestowed  something  which  you  ought  to  bestow.
VI.  Cicero,  after  his  consulate,  declared that  he

233


AUSONIUS

cupiat.  ego  autem  iam  consul  et  senex  adhuc  avidi-
tatem  meam  fatebor.  te  videre  saepius  in  hoc  magi-
stratUj  Gratiane^  desidero,  ut  et  sex  Val.  Corvini  et
septem  C.  Marii  et  cognominis  tiii  Augusti  tredecim
consulatus  unus  aequiperes.  plures  tibi  potest  aetas
et  fortnna  tua  praestare  ;  verum  ego  in  numero  par-
cior,  quia  tu  in  munere  Hberalior :  ipsum  enim  te
saepius  hoc  honore  defraudas,  ut  et  abis  largiaris.
scis  enim,  imperator  doctissime  (rursum  enim  utar
laude  privata),  scis,  inquam,  septem  ac  decern  Domi-
tiani  consulatus,  quos  ille  invidia  alios  provehendi
continuando  conseruit,  ita  in  eius  aviditate  derisos,  ut
haec  eum  pagina  fastorum  suorum,  immo  fastidiorum,
fecerit  insolentem  nee  potuerit  praestare  felicem.
(|uod  si  principi  honoris  istius  temperata  et  quae
vocatur  aurea  debet  esse  mediocritas,  quid  privati
status  hominibus,  quid  aequanimis,  quid  iam  senibus
erga  se  oportet  esse  moderaminis  ?  ego  quideni,
quod  ad  honores  meos  pertinet,  et  vota  saturavi :  tu
tanien,  imperator  optime,  tu  piissime,  tu  quem  non
fatigat  liberalitas,  nisi  quando  cessavit :  tu,  inquam,
indulgentissime  Gratiane,  ut  ad  benefaciendum
subito  es  necopinus  ingenio,  adhuc  aliquid,  quod  hoc
nomine  mihi  praestetur,  invcnies.  invenies  ?  sic,
intellexere omnes, sic  nobis ordinem ipse fecisti.


'  pro  Plnnco.  '2o.  *  cp.  Suet.  AmjuMus,  26.

"  See  Suet.  Doin.  VA.


234


THANKSGIVING  FOR  HIS CONSULSHIP

had  nothing  more  to  long  for.^  I  for  my  part,  though
I  am  a  consul  and  an  old  man  to  boot,  will  confess  to
a  ravenous  appetite.  I  long  to  see  you,  Gratian,
holding  this  office  so  many  more  times  that  your
total  may  equal  the  sum  of  the  six  consulships  of
Valerius  Corvinus,"  the  seven  of  Caius  Marius,  and
the  thirteen  of  Augustus,  whose  name  you  bear.
Your  youth  and  your  exalted  station  can  secure  for
you  a  still  greater  number  ;  but  I  am  sparing  in  my
estimate,  because  you  are  so  generous  in  bestowing
this  honour.  For  too  often  you  cheat  yourself  of  it
to  lavish  it  upon  others.  You  know,  most  learned
Emperor  (for  once  again  I  will  use  a  personal  mode
of  complimentary  address),  you  know,  I  say,  that  the
seventeen  consulates  of  Domitian  ^  which,  in  his
jealousy  of  the  advancement  of  others,  he  held  in  an
unbroken  series,  brought  down  such  ridicule  upon
his  selfishness  that  this  page  of  his  annals,  nay,  rather,
of  his  arrogance,  made  him  overbearingly  proud  but
could  not  make  him  happy.  But  if  the  Sovereign
ought  to  observe  a  well-calculated  and,  as  the  saying
goes,  a  golden  mean  in  holding  this  dignity,  what
moderation  ought  men  of  private  station,  of  calm
judgment,  and  lastly,  of  advanced  age  to  observe  .''  For
myself,  I  have  sated  even  my  desires,  so  far  as  my
own  distinctions  are  concerned  ;  but  you,  my  most
excellent,  my  most  gracious  Sovereign,  you  who  never
weary  in  your  generosity  except  when  you  have  no
scope  for  it,  you,  I  repeat,  most  bountiful  Gratian,
have  such  a  quick  and  surprising  inventiveness  in
conferring  favours,  that  even  now  some  addition  to
be  conferred  upon  me  under  this  head  will  be
found.  "Will  be  found  ".^  Such  a  conviction  have  all
men  felt,  in  such  wise  have  you  yourself  created  this

235


AUSONIUS

sic  amicus  deo  es,  ut  a  te  iam  impetratum  sit,  quod
o])tatur,  a  quo  et  quod  nondum  optanius,  adipiscimur.
VII.  Et  rursum  aliquis  adiciet  aut  sermone  libere
aut  cogitatione  liberius  :  nonne  olim  et  apud  veteres
niulti  eiusdeni  modi  doctores  fuerunt?  an  tu  solus
praeceptor  Augiisti  ?  immo  ego  cum  multis  con-
iunctus  officio,  sed  cum  paucissimis  secretus  exemplo.
nolo  Constantini  temporum  taxare  collegas  :  Caesares
docebantur.  superiora  contingam.  dives  Seneca,
nee  tamen  consul,  arguetur  rectius  quam  praedica-
bitur  non  erudiisse  indolem  Neronis,  sed  armasse
saevitiam.  Quintilianus  consularia  per  Clementem
ornamenta  sortitus  honestamenta  nominis  jiotius
videtur  quam  insignia  potestatis  habuisse.  quo
modo  Titianus  magister,  sed  gloriosus  ille,  munici-
palem  scholam  apud  Visontionem  Lugdunumque
variando  non  aetate  equidem,  sed  vilitate  consenuit.
unica  mihi  et  amplectenda  est  Frontonis  imitatio  :
quem  tamen  Augusti  magistrum  sic  consulatus  orna-
vit,  ut  praefectura  non  cingeret.  sed  consulatus  ille
cuius  modi  ?  ordinario  suffectus,  bimenstri  spatio
interpositus,  in  sexta  anni  parte  consumptus,  quae-


^  Possibly  T.  Flavius  Clemens,  uncle  of  Domitian.  Quin
tilian  appears  to  have  been  a  "consul  suffectus,"' appointed
to  fill  a  vacancy  due  to  death  or  some  other  cause.

*  The  tutor  of  the  younger  Maximin  :  cp.  Episf.  xii.

•'  M.  Cornelius  Fronto.  of  Cirta  in  Nuniidia,  the  tutor  of
Marcus  Aurelius  and  Lucius  Verus  :  r.  90-16S  .a.i>.

236


rHANKSGIVlNG  FOR HIS  CONSULSHIP

rank,  for  me,  such  is  your  intimacy  with  the  deity,  that
what  we  hope  for  is  straightway  granted  by  you,  and
what  we  have  not  yet  hoped  for  is  bestowed  upon  us.
VII.  But  again  someone  will  comment  freely  in
speech,  yet  more  freely  in  thought :  "  Were  there
not  in  the  past  and  even  in  ancient  times  many  such
tutors  ?  Or  are  you  the  only  maij  who  has  had  an
Emperor  for  his  pupil  ?  "  No,  indeed  !  But  while  I
am  only  one  of  many  so  far  as  my  employment  goes,
1  stand  apart  with  very  few  in  virtue  of  this  distinc-
tion. I  do  not  wish  to  cast  reflections  upon  my
fellows  in  this  calling  in  the  age  of  Constantine  :
there  wei'e  pi'inces  and  they  were  instructed.  I  will
go  back  to  earlier  times.  Fact  proves  more  surely
than  words  that  Seneca,  who  for  all  his  wealth  was
not  a  consul,  did  not  discipline  the  nature  of  Nero,
but  merely  gave  arms  to  his  cruelty.  And  though
Quintilian  obtained  the  consular  distinction  by  grace
of  Clemens,^  he  seems  to  have  held  an  honorary
title  rather  than  the  actual  emblems  of  power.  So
too  with  the  tutor  Titianus  ;  -  but  for  all  his  boastful
assumption,  while  alternating  between  the  provincial
school  of  Visontio  (Besan^on)  and  Lugdunum  (Lyons),
not  through  years  but  through  light  esteem  he  fell
into  a  decline.  The  one  and  only  precedent  and  one
which  I  must  frankly  accept  is  the  case  of  Fronto  ;  •■'
and  yet  this  tutor  to  an  Emperor,  though  he  had
the  distinction  of  a  consulate,  was  never  invested
with  the  authority  of  a  prefect.  But  what  sort  of  a
consulship  was  it  which  he  held  ?  Acting  as  the  substi-
tute to  an  ordinary  *  consul,  made  to  fill  up  a  gap  of  two
months,  and  dismissed  in  the  sixth  part  of  a  year,  this

*  The  "  consul  ordiuarius  "'  is  junior  of  the  two,  the  senioi'
{i.e.  the  first  to  be  designated)  giving  his  name  to  the  year.

237


AUSONIUS

rendum  ut  reliquerit  tantus  orator,  quibus  consulibus
jjjesserit  consulatuni.

Ecce  aliud,  quod  aliquis  opponat :  in  tanti  te  ergo
oratoris  fastigium  gloriosus  attollis  r  cui  talia  requi-
renti  respondebo  breviter :  non  ego  me  contendo
Frontoni,  sed  Antonino  praefero  Gratianum.  cele-
brant equidem  sollenines  istos  dies  oinnes  ubique
urbes,  quae  sub  legibus  agunt.  et  Roma  de  more  et
Constantinopolis  de  imitatione  et  Antiochia  pro  luxu
et  Carthago  discincta  et  donum  fluminis  Alexandria  :
sed  Treveri  principis  beneficio  et  mox  cum  ipso
auctore  beneficii.  loca  inter  se  distant,  vota  con-
sentiunt.  unus  in  ore  omnium  Gratianus,  potestate
imperator,  virtute  victor,  Augustus  sanctitate,  pon-
tifex  religione,  indulgentia  pater,  aetate  filius,  pietate
utrumque.

Vlll.  '■'  Non  possum  fidei  causa  ostendere  imagines
maiorum  meorum,"  ut  ait  apud  Sallustium  Marius,
nee  deductum  ab  heroibus  genus  vel  deorum  stemma
replicare,  nee  ignotas  opes  et  patrimonia  sparsa  sub
regnis :  sed  ea,  quae  nota  sunt,  dicere  potius,  quam
praedicare : patriam non obscuram, familiam non


^  The  connection  of  thought  with  the  foregoiug  seems  to
be  :  Giatiaii's  unique  position  is  proved  by  the  affectionate
popularity  with  which  he  is  universally  regarded.

-  In  imitation  of  Herodotus'  dictum  that  "  Egypt  is  tlie
gift  of  the  Nile."' But  Alexandria  is  not  on  a  river.

238


THANKSGIVING  FOR HIS  CONSULSHIP

great  orator  has  left  us  to  find  out  for  ourselves  in
which  year  he  held  the  consulate.

But  here  is  another  objection  which  may  be
raised :  "  Are  you  then  so  conceited  as  to  exalt
yourself  to  the  height  attained  by  that  great  orator?"
To  such  a  question  I  will  answer  briefly :  No,  I  do  not
set  myself  up  as  Fronto's  rival,  but  I  rank  Gratian
before  Antoninus.  It  is  true  ^  that  all  the  world
over,  every  city  which  lives  under  our  governance
observes  these  annual  days  of  festival,  Rome  as  a
matter  of  custom,  Constantinople  out  of  imitation,
Antioch  out  of  love  for  indulgence,  as  also  do
degenerate  Carthage  and  Alexandria,  the  gift  of  its
river  ^  ;  but  Treves  is  enabled  to  do  this  by  the  kind-
ness of  our  prince,  and  will  soon  do  so  in  company
with  the  author  of  that  kindness.  All  these  places
are  far  apart,  but  the  prayers  they  offer  up  are  all  to
one  effect  :  one  name  is  on  the  lips  of  all — the  name
of  Gratian,  Gratian  who  in  virtue  of  his  authority  is
styled  Imperator ;  of  his  courage,  the  Victorious  ;  ^
of  his  sacred  person,  Augustus ;  of  his  devotion,
Pontifex;  of  his  tenderness.  Father;  of  his  age,  a  Son;
and  of  natural  affection,  both  one  and  the  other.

Vm.  "I  am  not  able  to  display  portraits  of  my
ancestors  in  proof  of  good  faith,"  as  Marius  says  in
Sallust  :  *  I  cannot  unroll  a  pedigree  to  show  my
descent  from  heroes,  or  that  I  am  of  the  lineage  of
the  gods  :  I  cannot  boast  of  uncounted  wealth  and
ancestral  estates  dotted  all  over  the  kingdoms  of  the
world  :  but  I  can  mention  without  vaunting  advan-
tages which  are  less  fabulous.  I  can  mention  my
birthplace,  a  city  not  unrenowned  ; my  family, of


■'  For  most  of  these  titles  cp.  C.I.L.  vi.  i.  1175.
•*  Jjignrtka,  Ixxxv.  29.


239


AUSONIUS

paenitendanij  domum  innocentem,  innocentiam  non
coactain,  angustas  opes,  verumtamen  libris  et  litteris
dilatatas,  frugalitatem  sine  sordibuSj  ingenium  libe-
rale,  animum  non  inlibei'alem^  victum,  vestitum,
supellectilem  niunda,  nun  splendida :  veteribus  ut
illis  consulibus  (excej)ta,  quae  turn  erant,  bellicarum
conlatione  virtutum)  si  quis  me  conferre  dignetur,
seponat  opulentiam  non  derogatiirus  industriam.

Verum  quoniam  gratiis  agendis  iamdudum  suc-
cumbo  materiae  :  tu  orationi  meae,  Gratiane,  succede.
tu,  Gratiane^  qui  hoc  nomen  sic  per  fortunam  adep-
tus  es,  ut  nemo  verius  ambitione  quaesierit :  neque
enim  iustius  Metellus  cognomento  Pius  patre  revo-
cato,  qui  esset  impius  exulante ;  aut  verius  Sulla
Felix,  qui  felicior  ante,  quam  vocaretur ;  quam  tu,
Gratianus :  cui  et  hoc  nomen  est,  et  ilia  Metelli
Sullaeque  cognomina.  tu,  inquam,  Gratiane,  qui
hoc  non  singulis  factis,  sed  perpetua  grate  agendi
benignitate  meruisti :  cui,  nisi  ab  avo  deductum
esset,  ab  omnibus  adderetur :  tu  ipse  tibi,  inquam,
pro  me  gratiam  refer,  tu  tuaeque  virtutes :  bonitas,
qua  in  omnes  prolixus  es,  perpetuus  in  me ;  pietas,
qua  orbem  tuum  temperas,  quam  in  ulciscendo  patruo

2:^0


THANKSGIVING  FOH HIS  CONSULSHIP

which  I  have  no  need  to  be  ashamed ;  my  unblem-
ished home  ;  my  life  passed  of  my  own  free  will
without  a  spot ;  my  scanty  means  (though  enriched
with  books  and  learning) ;  my  simple  yet  not  stingy
tastes  ;  my  liberal  intellect ;  my  not  illiberal  spirit ;
the  unostentatious  refinement  of  my  diet,  my  dress
and  the  appointments  of  my  house  ;  so  that,  if  anyone
should  think  me  worthy  of  comparison  with  those
famous  consuls  of  past  days  (excluding  from  the  com-
parison those  war-like  qualities  which  then  flourished),
let  him  deny  me  their  wealth  without  belittling  my
diligence.

But  in  this  expression  of  gratitude,  my  subject
has  long  overpowered  me  :  you,  Gratian,  must  come
to  the  help  of  my  words.  You,  Gratian,  who  have
received  this  name  by  chance,  yet  by  so  happy  a
chance  that  no  one  out  of  flattery  has  ever  tried  to
find  one  more  appropriate — for  Metellus  was  less
rightly  surnamed  the  Dutiful  when  he  recalled  his
father  (since  he  would  have  been  undutiful  had  he
kept  him  in  exile),  and  Sulla  was  less  exactly  called
the  Lucky  (since  he  was  luckier  before  he  was  so
named),  than  you  are  named  Gratian ;  you,  who
besides  this  name  also  bear  those  titles  of  Metellus
and  Sulla,  you,  Gratian,  I  repeat,  who  have  earned
your  name  not  by  isolated  deeds  but  by  the  continual
kindliness  of  your  gracious  life,  you  who  would  have
received  this  as  a  surname  by  general  consent  had
you  not  inherited  it  from  your  grandfather,  you,  I
repeat,  must  yourself  render  thanks  to  yourself  on
my  behalf.  It  is  a  task  for  you  and  for  your  high
powers  :  for  that  kindness,  so  frequently  shown  to  all,
and  so  continually  to  me  ;  for  that  natural  affection
with  which  you  guide  your  subject  world,  and  which

241


ALISON  I  us

probas,  tuendo  in  fratre  cumulas^  ornando  in  prae-
ceptore  multi|)licas.  agat  gratias  dementia^  quam
humano  generi  impertis  ;  liberalitas^  qua  ditas  omnes  ;
fortitude,  qua  vincis,  et  mens  ista  aurea,  quam  de
communi  deo  plus  quam  unus  liausisti.  agant  et  pro
me  gratias  voces  omnium  Galliarum,  quarum  praefecto
hanc  honorificentiam  detulisti.  ultra  progredior,  et
hoc  quia  debere  te  dicis  :  agat,  quae  optime  agere
potest,  vox  ista,  quam  docui.

IX.  lamdudum  autem  quam  grati  animi,  tam  ser-
monis  exigui,  ut  supra  dictum  est,  succumbo  materiae,
neque  adhuc  ilia  perstrinxi,  quae  ne  infantissimus
quidem,  nisi  idem  impiissimus,  eminentia  per  famam
et  omnium  gaudiis  testata  supprimeret ;  quae  supra
vires  dicendi  meas  posita  cunctor  attingere,  aut  ingrati
criniine  arguendus  aut  tenierarii  professione  culpan-
dus  :  tamen,  alterum  cum  subeundum  sit,  audaciam
quam  malevolentiam  malo  reprehendi.  tu,  Auguste
venerabilis,  districtus  maximo  bello,  adsultantibus  tot
milibus  barbarorum,  quot  Danuvii  ora  praetexitur,
comitia  consulatus  mei  armatus  exerces.  tributa  ista
quod  in  urbe  Sirmio  geruntur,  an,  ut  quod  in  pro-
242


THANKSGIVIXG  FOR  HIS  CONSULSHIP

you  proved  by  avenging  your  uncle  s  death,  doubled
by  maintaining  your  brother,  and  redoubled  by-
raising  your  tutor  to  distinction.  Let  that  indulgence
which  you  vouchsafe  to  mankind  render  you  thanks  ;
that  generosity  with  which  you  enrich  all ;  that
courage  which  enables  you  to  conquer ;  and  that
golden  spirit  which  you  have  drawn  more  freely  than
any  single  man  from  the  God  of  us  all.  So  also  let
the  voice  of  every  province  in  the  three  Gauls  render
thanks  on  my  behalf,  since  it  is  upon  their  prefect
that  you  have  bestowed  this  distinction.  I  go  even
farther — and  this  I  add  because  you  say  you  are  in
my  debt :  let  that  render  you  thanks  which  can  best
render  it,  I  mean  that  voice  which  I  have  trained.

IX.  But  grateful  as  my  heart  is,  my  words  are  all
too  feeble,  and,  as  I  have  already  said,  I  have  long
sunk  under  the  theme.  Moreover,  I  have  not  yet
touched  upon  tliose  matters  which  not  even  the
sorriest  speaker,  unless  he  were  likewise  the  most
sacrilegious,  would  pass  over,  exalted  as  they  are  by
fame  and  attested  by  universal  delight — matters  so
far  beyond  my  powers  of  speech  that  I  hesitate
to  touch  ujion  them,  and  I  must  either  be  proved  guilty
on  a  charge  of  ingratitude,  or  be  blamed  for  my  rash
pretensions.  And  yet  since  I  must  suffer  one  of  these
two  things,  I  prefer  to  be  censured  for  over  boldness
than  for  ill-will.  You,  most  worshipful  Emperor,
amid  all  the  distractions  of  a  most  serious  war,
amid  the  onslaughts  of  all  those  thousands  of
.savages  who  dwell  along  the  shores  of  the  Danube,
held  the  elections  for  my  consulate  in  full  panoply.
Shall  I  speak  of  them  as  elections  by  the  people  in
tribes  because  they  were  held  in  the  city  of
Sirmium  f Or  in  centuries,  because  they  were  held

243


AUSONIUS

cinctu,  centuriati  dicentur?  an  ut  quondam  ponti-
ficalia vocabuntur,  sine  arbitrio  multitudinis  sacer-
dotuni  tractata  collegio?  sic  potius,  sic  vocentur
quae  tu  pontifex  niaximus  deo  participatus  habuisti.

Non  est  ingenii  mei,  piissime  imperator,  talia  com-
minisci.  verba  sunt  litterarum  tuarum  :  quibus  apud
me  auctoritatem  summi  numinis  et  tuae  voluntatis
amplificas.  sic  enim  loqueris :  cum  de  consulibus  hi
annum  creandis  solus  mecuvi  volutarem,  7if  me  nosli  aUjue
id  foce.re  debut  et  velle  te  scivi^  consilium  meum  ad  deum
retidi.  eius  auctorilaii  obsecidus  te  const/lem  designaii  et
declaravi  et  priorem  nnncupavi.  cuius  orationis  ordo
lucidior?  quae  doctrina  tam  diligens  propriis  comi-
tiorum  verbis  loqui  nee  vocabulis  moris  antiqui
nomina  peregrina  miscere  ?  valete  modo.  classes
populi  et  ui-banarum  tribuum  praerogativae  et  cen-
turiae  iui'e  vocatae.  quae  comitia  pleniora  um-
quam  fuerunt  quam  quibus  praestitit  deus  consilium,
imperator  obsequium  ?

X.  Et  nunc  ego,  piissime  imperator,  ne  fastigium
auditorii  sacri,  dictorum  tuorum  timidus  interpres.
ofFendam,  divinitatis  tuae  pro !  levi  cum  piaculo
verba  transcurro.  cum  de  consulibus,  inquis,  in  annum
creandis : erudita vox et cura soUemnis ! mecum

^  The  pontifices  filled  up  vacancies  in  their  college  bj  co-
option  until  102  B.C.,  when  Cn.  Domitius  Ahenobarbu.s  trans-
ferred the  right  of  election  to  the  people.

244


THANKSGIVING  FOR  HIS  CONSULSHIP

in  the  war-zone?  Or  shall  we  call  them  pontifical
elections,  as  in  old  days/  since  they  were  held,  as
elections  to  the  priestly  college  were  held,  without
reference  to  the  people's  will  ?  That  is  best,  that
is  their  right  description,  seeing  that  you,  who
presided  over  them,  are  the  Pontifex  Maximus  and
a  participator  in  the  designs  of  God.

It  is  not  a  part  of  my  character,  most  devout  Em-
peror, to  invent  such  words  as  these.  They  are  the
words  of  your  letter,  in  which  you  enlarge  upon  the
authority  of  the  Supreme  Disposer  and  of  your  own
will.  This  is  what  you  say  :  When  I  was  privalely  con-
sidering the  appoiiitment  of  consuls  for  the  year,  I  re-
ferred my  purpose  to  God,  as  you  knoiv  I  do,  and  as  I
was  hound  to  do,  and  as  I  knew  you  wished  me  to  do.
In  obedience  to  his  prompting  I  have  designated  you  as
consul,  proclaimed  you  as  such,  and  given  your  name
the  precedence.  What  speech  could  be  more  clearly
arranged .''  What  learned  man  more  careful  to  use
only  the  terms  customary  at  elections,  without
mixing  untechnical  Avords  with  the  time-honoured
phrases  ?  No  more  of  you  henceforth,  you  classes
of  the  people,  you  privileged  city-tribes  and
centuries  called  up  in  due  order  !  What  elections  have
ever  been  more  adequately  attended  than  these,
where  God  furnished  the  design,  and  the  Emperor
gave  it  effect .''

X.  And  now,  most  devout  Emperor,  that  I  may  not
insult  the  majesty  of  this  sacred  Audience-Chamber
by  shrinking  from  interpreting  your  utterances,  with
the  forgiveness  of  your  godhead,  though  not  without
some  slight  sacrilege,  I  run  over  your  words.  When,
you  say,  /  was  considering  the  appointment  of  consuls
for the  year. What a learned phrase  ! What a

245


AUSONIUS

vohdarcm  :  o  prufundi  altitudo  secret!  I  habes  ergo
consiliatoreni  et  non  metuis  proditorem.  id  vie  nnsti  :
quid  familiarius,  id  J'accrc  debui :  quid  constantius,  id
ve.llr  tc  scivi :  quid  dici  blandius  potest?  consilitnn
niciim  (id  dcuni  retuli.  et  quemadmoduni  solus,  cui
praesto  est  tarn  grande  consilium  ?  an  plenius  cum
senatu,  cum  equestri  ordine,  cum  plebe  Romana,
cum  exercitu  tuo  et  provinciis  omnibus  debberasses  ?
consilium  vieum  ad  deum  retuli.  non  ut,  credo,  novum
sumeres,  sed  ut  sanctius  fieret,  quod  volebas.  eius
auctoiilati  ohsecidus  :  scibcet  ut  in  coiisecrando  patre,
in  ulciscendo  patruo,  in  cooptando  fratre  fecisti.  te
consiilem  designavi  et  declaravi  el  priorem  nuncupavi.
quis  baec  verba  te  docuit  ?  ego  tam  propria  et  tam
Latina  nescivi.  designavi  et  declaravi  et  nuncupavi.
non  fit  hoc  temere.  habet  moras  suas  dispertitis
gradibus  tam  matura  cunctatio.  has  ego  Utteras  tuas
si  in  omnibus  pilis  atque  porticibus,  unde  de  piano
legi  possint,  instar  edicti  pendere  mandavero,  nonne
tot  statuis  honorabor,  quot  fuerint  paginae  libellorum  ?
XI.  Sed  ad  blandiora  festino.  ab  hac  enim  litte-
rarum  ad  me  datarum  parte  digressus,  eo  quoque
descendisti,  ut  quaereres,  qualis  ad  me  trabea  mitte-
retur.  omne  largitionum  tuarum  ministerium  solli-
citudine  fatigasti. non  ergo  supra  consulatum  mihi

246


THANKSGIVING  FOR  HIS  CONSULSHIP

solemn  task  !  /  was  pondering  inwardly.  What  depths
to  the  secrets  of  your  heart  I  You  have,  then,  a
counsellor  without  fearing  betrayal.  As  you  hiow  I
do  :  what  could  be  more  intimate  ?  As  I  was  bound
to  do  :  what  more  uncompromising  ?  As  I  knew  you
wished  :  what  more  courteous  phrase  could  be  used  ?
/  referred  my  purpose  to  God :  how,  then,  can  you
say  privately  when  such  vast  wisdom  is  ready  to  aid
you  ?  Could  you  have  weighed  the  matter  more
thoroughly  if  the  Senate,  the  Equestrian  Order,  and  the
People  together  with  your  army  and  all  the  provinces
had  been  aiding  you  ?  /  referred  my  purpose  to  God.
Not,  I  am  sure,  in  order  to  gain  some  new  plan,  but
to  consecrate  your  own  inclination.  In  obedience  to  his
will :  that  is  to  say,  as  you  have  acted  in  canonizing
your  father,  in  avenging  your  uncle,  in  associating
your  brother  with  you.  /  have  designated  you  as
con.<iul,  proclaimed  you  as  such,  and  given  your  name  the
preference.  Who  taught  you  these  words?  1  knew  none
so  fitting,  so  thoroughly  Roman.  /  have  designated,
proclaimed,  and  named  you.  This  is  no  random
writing.  The  ripe  deliberation  of  these  words  with
its  pauses  allows  them  to  progress  by  well-marked
degrees.  If  I  have  this  letter  of  yours  posted  up  like
an  edict  on  every  pillar  and  in  every  portico  where  it
could  easily  be  read,  shall  I  not  have  as  many  statues
in  my  honour  as  there  were  placarded  sheets .''

XI.  But  I  hasten  on  to  what  is  still  more  agree-
able. For  in  your  letter  which  was  delivered  to  me,
you  diverged  from  this  subject,  and  so  far  con-
descended as  to  ask  me  what  sort  of  robe  should  be
sent  me.  With  your  anxiety  you  have  worn  out  the
whole  staff  of  officials  in  charge  of  your  bounties.
Have  I  not  then  received  over  and  above  the  con-

247


AUSONIUS

est  adhibitn  per  te  cura  tarn  diligens,  pro  me  cura
tam  felix  ?  in  Illyrico  arma  quatiuntur  :  tu  mea  causa
per  Gallias  civilium  decorum  indumenta  dispensas,
loricatus  de  toga  mea  tractas,  in  procinctu  et  cum
maxima  dimicaturus  palmatae  vestis  meae  ornamenta
disponis  :  feliciter  et  bono  omine.  namque  iste  habi-
tus, ut  in  pace  consulis  est,  sic  in  victoria  trium-
phantis.  parum  est,  si,  qualis  ad  me  trabea  mittatur,
interroges  :  te  coram  promi  iubes.  nee  satis  habes,  ut
largitionum  ministri  ex  more  fungantur :  eligis  ipse
de  multis  et,  cum  elegeris,  munera  tua  verborum
honore  prosequeris.  palmatam,  inquis,  tibi  rnisi,  in
qua  divus  Constantius  parens  ?io,ster  intextns  est.  me
beatum,  cuius  insignibus  talis  cura  praestatur !  haec
plane,  haec  est  picta,  ut  dicitur,  vestis,  non  magis
auro  suo  quam  tuis  verbis,  sed  multo  plura  sunt  in
eius  ornatu,  quae  per  te  instructus  intellego.  gemi-
num  quippe  in  uno  habitu  radiat  nomen  August).
Constantius  in  argumento  vestis  intexitur,  Gratianus
in  muneris  honore  sentitur.

XII.  Accessit  tam  inpenso  beneficio  tuo  pondus
quorundam  sciscitatione  cumulatum.  interrogatus,
quem  priorem  decerneres  consulem,  nee  dnbitandum

*  fic.  the  son  of  Constantine  the  Great,  father  of  Faustina
and  grandfather  of  Constantia,  Gratian's  wife.

248


THANKSGIVING  FOR  HIS  CONSULSHIP

sulate  an  additional  gift  in  these  pains,  which  cost  you
so  much  trouble  and  caused  ine  so  much  happiness  ':
Swords  are  being  drawn  in  Illyricum  :  for  my  sake,
you  distribute  robes  of  civil  dignities  in  Gaul  :  you,
wearing  your  equipment,  deal  with  the  question  of
my  gown  ;  while  prepared  for  battle  and  on  the
verge  of  a  supreme  struggle,  you  make  arrangements
for  the  decoration  of  my  palm-broidered  garb.
Yet  the  omen  was  happy  and  auspicious.  For  just  as
in  peace  time  this  apparel  marks  the  consul,  so  in
victory  it  distinguishes  the  conqueror  in  his  triumph.
But  it  is  not  enough  for  you  to  ask  what  kind  of  robe
shall  be  sent  me  :  you  must  have  it  produced  before
your  eyes.  You  are  not  content  that  the  officials  of
your  largess  should  perform  their  ordinary  duties  :
you  choose  one  robe  out  of  many  with  your  own
hands,  and  having  chosen  it,  follow  up  your  gift  with
words  of  compliment.  You  say  :  /  have  sent  you  a
palm-broidered  robe  in  7vhick  is  worked  a  Jigure  of  the
sainted  Constantins  ^  my  ancestor.  Happ}'  am  I  that
such  pains  should  be  bestowed  upon  my  vestments  !
It  is,  it  most  surely  is,  a  broidered  robe,  as  you  say  ;
but  embroidered  more  richly  with  your  words  than
with  its  own  threads  of  gold.  But,  since  it  is  you
who  have  invested  me,  I  perceive  that  its  enrichment
means  far  more.  For  the  light  which  flashes  from
this  single  garment  bespeaks  two  imperial  personages:
Constantius  is  embroidered  in  the  actual  fabric  of  the
robe ;  but  in  the  com}ilimentary  nature  of  the  gift,
I  feel  the  presence  of  Gratian.

XII.  To  your  favour,  already  so  weighty,  was
added  the  weight  which  a  question  put  by  certain
persons  piled  upon  it.  When  they  inquired  whom
you  appointed  senior  of  the  two  consuls,  you  replied

249


AUSONIUS

esse  dixisti  tu,  et  qui  tecum  boiii  sunt,  dubitare
non  poterant.  sed  tamen  ad  hoc  dictum  erexerant
animos,  qui  libenter  clarissimum  virum  collegam
meum,  quern  praesentem  habebat  occasio,  praelatuni
credidissent.  fatigantes  tamen,  quod  intellexerant,
requirebant.  hie  tu,  sicut  mihi  renuntiatum  est,
noto  illo  pudore  tuo  j)aulisper  haesisti  non  rationis
ambiguus,  sed  eorum  dubitationem  vultu  et  rubore
condemnans,  qui  studium  suum  interpretationis
errore  palpabant.  deinde  ilHco  subdidisti :  quid  dc
duobus  consulibus  desigiiatis  quueritis,  quis  ordo  sil  niin-
ciipationis  ?  anne  alius  quam  quern  praej'edura  consti-
tuil  ?  o  feHcem  verecundiam  tuam,  cui  ista  popularis
ratio  tarn  prudenter  occurrit !  scisti  aliud,  Gratiane,
quod  diceres :  sed  propter  quorundam  verecundiam
dicere  noluisti.  scopulosus  hie  mihi  locus  est  et
propter  eam,  quam  numquam  adpetivi,  gloriam,  re-
cusandus.  cum  prior  renuntiatus  sim,  satis  est
tuum  tenere  iudicium  :  interpretes  valete  meritorum.
neque  autem  ego,  sacratissime  imperator,  in  tenui
beneficio  gradum  nuncupationis  amplector.  non  est
haec  gloria  ignota  Ciceroni :  praetorem  me,  inquit,
populus  Romanus  primum  fecit,  consulem  priorem.
ex  ipsa  eius  sententia  intellegitur  commendabilius
uni videri quam pluribus esse praepositum. nulla


^  In  Piaonem  i.  2,  3.
as©


THANKSGIVING  FOR  HIS  CONSULSHIP

that  there  could  be  710  inicerlainly  as  In  Uiat ;  and  the
honourable  men  who  surround  you  could not feel
uncertainty. Nevertheless, this pronouncement
aroused  the  expectations  of  those  who  would  have
been  glad  to  think  that  the  most  distinj^uished  man,
who is my colleague, and who happened to be
present  at  the  time,  had  been  awarded  the  precedence.
At anv rate,  they made  themselves  wearisome  by
seeking  for  that  meaning  which  the}^  had  read  into
your  answer. Whereupon,  as  I  am  informed,  your
well-known  modesty  caused  you  for  a  while  to  hesi-
tate, not  through  indecision  as  to  your  course,  but  to
reprove with  your  flushed glance those  who  were
Mattering  their  own  hopes  by  their  affected  inability
to  understand. Then  you  replied  outright : Whif  do
you ask  in  7vhal order of  precedence  the  two  consuls
designate  are  to  stand  ? Can they  stand  in  any  other
order than that which the prefecture has already
determined  ? What happy modesty, so sagely to
suggest  that  popular  reason  I You  could  have  made
another reply, Gratian, but refrained  in order  to
spare  the feelings of  certain persons. But I find
myself  on  dangerous  ground  and  for  the  sake  of  that
distinction  which I  never  coveted,  I  must  avoid  it.
Since  I  have  been  declared  the  senior,  it  is  enough
for  me  to  keep  to  your  decision  :  so  farewell,  you  who
would  examine  merits  ! I  do  not,  however,  regard
this  honour  of  precedence  as  a  trifling  favour,  my
most  gracious  Sovereign. It  confers  a  glory  of  which
Cicero  was  fully  conscious  :  "  The  Roman  People,"  he
says,  "made  me  chief  praetor  and  senior  consul."  ^
His  very  form  of  expression  makes  us  clearly  under-
stand that  it  is  more  honourable  to  receive  precedence
over  one  person,  than  over  many ;  for  while  there  is

251


AUSONIUS

enim  est  equidem  contumelia  secundi,  sed  in  duobus
gloria  magna  {)raelati.

Alexandri  Macedouis  hoc  fertur,  cum  legissL't
illos  versus  Homericos,  quibus  Hectore  provocante
de  noveni  ducibus,  qui  omnes  pugnare  cuf)iebant,
unum  deligi  placeret  sortis  eventu,  trepida  ubi  con-
tentione  votorum  lovem  optimum  maximum  totus
])recatur  exercitus,  ut  Aiacem  vel  Tydei  filium  aut
ipsum  regem  ditium  Myeenarum  sortiri  patiatur
Agamemnonem  :  occiderem,  inquit,  ilium,  qui  me
tertium  nominasset.  o  magnanimitatem  fortissimi
viri !  nominari  inter  novem  tertius  recusabat ;  ubi
certe  pluribus  antecelleret  quam  subesset.  quanta
hie  verecundia  gravaretur  posterior  de  duobus  ?  est
enim  in  hoc  numero  arduae  plena  dignationis  electio.
cum  universis  mortalibus  duo,  qui  fiant  consules,
praeferuntur,  qui  alteri  praeponitur,  non  uni,  sed
omnibus  antefertur.

XIII.  Expectare  nunc  aures  praeseutium  scio  et
eminere  in  omnium  vultu  intellego,  quod  desiderio
concipiatur  animorum.  existimant  enim,  cum  ea,
quae  ad  grates  agendas  ])ertinebant,  summatim  et
tenuiore  filo,  sicut  dieitur,  deducta  libaverim,  aliqua
me  etiam  de  maiestatis  tuae  laudibus  debere  per-
stringere.  quamquam  me  istam  dixerim  seposuisse
materiam  et  in  tempus  aliud  reservare  ;  nihilominus
tamen,  ut  nunc  aliqua  contingam,  nutu  et  prope  mur-
mure eohortantur. itaque faciam,  quando cogunt


1  H  161-180.  ■•'  Horace,  Epv>  ".  i.  226.

252


THANKSGIVING  FOR  HIS  CONSULSHIP

indeed  no  disgrace  in  taking  the  second  place,  the
one  of  two  who  is  preferred  is  signally  distinguished.

It  is  said  of  Alexander  of  Macedon  that,  after
reading  that  passage  in  Horner^  relating  the  decision
to  select  by  lot  one  of  the  nine  chiefs  who  were
all  eager  to  fight  in  answer  to  Hector's  challenge,
and  how  the  whole  host  besought  Jupiter  the  Best
and  Greatest  with  anxiously  conflicting  prayers  to
suffer  Ajax,  or  the  son  of  Tydeus,  or  even  Agamem-
non, the  king  of  rich  Mycenae,  to  be  chosen ;  he  ex-
claimed :  "  I  would  have  killed  the  man  who  named
nie  third!"  See  the  high  sjnrit  of  the  dauntless
hero  !  He  scorned  to  be  placed  third  in  a  list  of  nine
persons,  even  though,  of  course,  lie  would  have  more
below  him  than  above  him.  How  deeply  ashamed
he  would  feel  if  he  were  the  second  of  two  persons
only  !  For  where  there  are  two  candidates,  the  choice
of  one  is  rich  in  high  distinction.  If  the  two  who
are  made  consuls  are  exalted  over  all  mankind,  then
the  one  who  has  precedence  over  his  colleague  is  set
not  above  one  only,  but  over  all.

XIII.  I  know  that  the  ears  of  my  audience  are  now
eagerly  waiting,  I  can  read  on  every  face  the  thought
which  springs  from  the  longing  of  each  heart.  They
think  that  now  that  I  have  touched  on  every  topic
which  has  reference  to  my  Thanksgiving — however
summarily,  or,  as  our  poet  says,^  "  spun  out  with
meagre  thread  "  — I  am  bound  to  touch  upon  the
praises  of  your  Majesty.  Although  I  have  said  that
I  have  put  that  subject  on  one  side  and  am  keeping
it  for  another  occasion,  nevertheless  they  all  urge
with  nods,  nay,  almost  with  protests,  to  make  some
reference  to  it  now.  1  will  do  as  they  bid  (for  I
welcome  this  compulsion),  but  I  must  lay  aside  the

253


AUSONIUS

volentem,  sed  niaioribus  separatis  tenuiora  memorabo.
nulla  spe  rid  plenum  exequendi,  sed  uriiversi  ut
iiitellegant  eoruni^  quae  inter  [familiaria]  praedi-
eanda  sunt,  a  me  poscendam  esse  notitiam,  ab  aliis
dignitatem,  nee  excellentia,  sed  cotidiana  tractabo.
XI\'.  Nullum  tu  umquam  diem  ab  adulescentia
tua  nisi  adorato  dei  numine  et  reus  voti  et  illico
absolutus  egisti,  lautis  manibus,  mente  pura,  inmacu-
labili  conscientia  et,  quod  in  paucis  est,  cogitatione
sincera.  cuius  autem  umquam  egressus  auspicatior
fuit  aut  incessus  modestior  aut  habitudo  cohibitior
aut  familiaris  habitus  condeeentior  aut  militaris
accinctior  ?  in  exercendo  corpore  quis  cursum  tarn
perniciter  incitavit  ?  quis  palaestram  tani  lubricus
expedivit?  quis  saltum  in  tam  sublime  collegit  ?
nemo  adductius  iacula  contorsit,  nemo  sjMcula  crebrius
iecit  aut  certius  destinata  percussit.  mirabamur
poetam,  qui  infrenos  dixerat  Numidas,  et  alterum,
qui  ita  coUegerat,  ut  diceret  in  equitando  verbera  et
praecepta  esse  fugae  et  praecepta  sistendi.  obscurum
hoc  nobis  legentibus  erat :  intelleximus  te  videntes,
cum  idem  arcum  intenderes  et  habenas  remitteres
aut  equum  segnius  euntem  verbere  concitares  vel
eodem  verbere  intemperantiam  coherceres.  qui  te
visi  sunt  hoc  docuisse,  non  faciunt : immo  qui  visi


'  Virgil,  Ae}i.  iv.  41.

-  Nemesian, Cynaj. 268  : verbera  sunt praecepta fugae,
sunt  verbera  freni.


IHANKSGIVING  FOR  HIS  CONSULSHIP

larger  aspects  of  the  subject  and  speak  only  of  the-
slighter  ;  and  this  not  with  any  hope  of  according
them  adequate  treatment,  but  to  let  all  men  know-
that  from  me  they  are  to  expect  a  relation  only  of
those  personal  qualities  which  deserve  praise,  and  to
look  to  others  for  an  estimate  of  your  higher
virtues.  I  shall  deal  therefore  not  with  your  loftiest
qualities,  but  those  of  your  every-day  life.

XIV.  From  your  boyhood  you  have  never  let  a
single  day  pass  without  worshipping  God,  without
discharging  your  vows  the  moment  that  they  became
due,  with  clean  hands  and  a  pure  heart,  a  stainless
conscience,  and — a  rare  quality—  with  undivided
thoughts.  Was  there  ever  a  prince  whose  going
forth  was  attended  with  better  auguries,  whose  pro-
gress was  less  ostentatious,  whose  state  was  less
extravagant,  whose  attire  in  private  life  was  more
seemly  or  in  the  field  more  severe .'  In  athletic  pur-
suits who  ever  matched  your  fleetness  of  foot,  who  so
supple  in  disengaging  at  wrestling,  who  cleared  so
great  a  height  in  leaping  ?  No  one  ever  launched  a
javelin  with  a  more  forceful  swing,  no  one  hurled
darts  with  greater  speed  or  struck  the  mark  more
surely.  We  used  to  wonder  at  the  poet  ^  when  he
spoke  of  Numidians  who  use  no  reins,  and  at  that
other  who  summed  up  by  saying  that  in  riding  it  is
with  the  lash  alone  that  they  urge  their  horses  to  full
speed  or  make  them  stand.-  While  we  read  we  could
not  understand  this,  but  we  realized  it  when  we  saw
you  drop  the  reins  and  at  the  same  time  draw  your
bow,  or  urge  on  your  horse  with  the  whip  when  he
slackened  speed  and  check  his  exuberance  likewise
with  the  whip.  Those  who  were  supposed  to  instruct
you in this do  not do  these  things  : nay, rather,

255


AUSONIUS

sunt  docuisse,  nunc  discunt. in fibis  autem cuius

sacerdotis abstinentior caerimonia  ? in vino cuius

senis mensa frugalior? operto conclavis tui nou

sanetior  ara  VestaliS;,  non  j)ontifi(is  cubile  castius  nee

pulvinar  flaminis  tarn  pudicuni. in  officiis  amicoruni

111)11 dico paria reddis : antevenis et, quotiens in

obsequendo  praecedimus,  erubescis  pudore  tain  ob-

noxio, quam in nobis esse  deberet  ab  imperatore

praeventis. in  ilia  vero  sede,  ut  ex  more  loquimur.

consistorii,  ut  ego  sentio,  sacrarii  tui,  nullus  umquain

superiorum aut  dicenda pensius  cogitavit  aut  con-

sultius cogitata disposuit aut disposita niaturius

expedivit.

XV.  Et  aliqua  de  oratoriis  virtutibus  tuis  dicerem^

nisi vererer mihi gratificari. non enim Sulpicius

aerior  in  contionibus  nee  niaioris  Gracchi  connnenda-

bilioi-  niodestia  fuit  nee  patris  tui  gravior  auctoritas.

(jui  tenor  vocis,  cum  incitata  pronuntias  ;  quae  inHexio,

cum remissa ; quae temperatio, cum utraque dis-

pensas  ! (juis oratorum laeta iucundius^ facunda

cultius,  j)ugnantia  densius,  densata  glomerosius  aut

dixit aut, quod est liberum, cogitavit  ? vellem, si

rerum  natura  pateretur,  Xenophon  Attice,  in  aevum
250


THANKSGIVING  FOR  HIS  CONSULSHIP

those  who  are  supposed  to  instruct  you  are  now
learning  from  you.  Again,  in  the  matter  of  foodj
was  ever  a  priest  more  self-denying  on  religious
grounds  ?  Or  in  the  matter  of  wine,  was  there  ever
an  old  man  more  sparing  at  table  ?  The  altar  of
Vesta  is  not  more  hallowed  than  the  pi-ivac}-  of  your
bed-chamber,  the  couch  of  a  priest  is  not  more  pure,
the  bed  of  a  prophet  not  more  chaste.  In  your  rela-
tions with  your  friends  I  do  not  say  that  you  return
like  for  like  :  you  anticipate  our  services,  or  whenever
we  have  the  advantage  in  paying  our  duty  to  you,
you  flush  up  shyly  with  an  embarrassment  which  we
rather  ought  to  feel  when  we  have  been  anticipated
by  our  Sovereign.  In  that  place  which  we  ordinarilv
speak  of  as  your  Consistory,  but  which  I  regard  as
your  sanctuary,  none  of  your  predecessors  ever
thought  out  more  deeply  what  he  had  to  say,  or
arranged  his  thoughts  more  skilfully,  or  delivered
them,  when  so  arranged,  in  a  more  masterly  style.

XV.  I  would  also  make  some  remarks  on  your
excellence  as  a  speaker,  were  I  not  afraid  of  flattering
myself.  Sulpicius  was  not  more  vehement  in  harangue,
nor  the  elder  Gracchus  more  deserving  of  praise  for
self-control,  nor  your  own  father  more  weighty,  more
impressive.  How  your  voice  rings  out  when  you
declaim  some  stirring  theme  !  How  gentle  in  unim-
passioned  passages  I  How  skilfully  regulated  when
you  deal  with  both  !  Which  of  the  orators  either
in  speech  or  in  the  free  domain  of  thought  dealt
with  cheerful  themes  more  charmingly,  on  eloquent
themes  more  choicely,  on  the  strenuous  more  in-
tensely, on  the  intense  more  forcibly?  Ah,  Attic
Xenophon,  I  would  that  it  were  possible  in  the
nature  of  things for  you  to come  to life  again in

'^57


AUSONIUS

nostrum  venires^  tu,  qui  ad  Cyri  virtutes  exequendas
votum  potius,  quain  historiam  commodasti :  cum
diceres,  non  qualis  esset,  sed  qualis  esse  deberet.
si  nunc  in  tempora  ista  procedereSj  in  nostra  Giatiano
cei'neres,  quod  in  Cyro  tuo  non  videras,  sed  optabas.
atque  ista  omnia^  quae  punctis  quibusdam  acuminata
signavi,  si  facundia  pro  voluntate  suppeteret^  quam-
quani  non  copiosius^  exequerer,  ubertatem  stilo  reruni
magnitudine  suggerente.  sed  nee  huius  diei  nee
huius  ista  materiae.  qui  dicturi  estis  laudes  principis
nostri,  habetis  velut  seminarium,  unde  orationum
vestrarum  iugera  compleatis.  ego  ista  perstrinxi
atque,  ut  sciunt  omnes,  possum  videri  familiaris
notitiae  secretus  interpres  domestica  istaec  non  tarn
praedicare  quam  prodere.

Atque  ut  ista  dixi  de  cognitis  mihi  atque  intra
aulam  familiaribus,  possem  et  foris  celebrata  memo-
rare,  nisi  omnia  omnes  et  separatim  sibi  quisque
novisset.  pcssem  pari  brevitute  dicere,  qua  supe-
riora  :  emendatissimi  liri  est  pigcnda  non  facere :  at
tu  numquam  paenitenda  fecisti  et  semper  veniam
paenitentibus  obtulisti.  puhhrim  est  indulgere  timen-
tihiis :  sed  tu  perpetuae  bonitatis  edictis  occurristi
258


THANKSGIVING  FOR  HIS  CONSULSHIP

this  age — you  who  celebrated  the  virtues  of  Cyrus
by  following  the  line  of  your  own  desires  rather  than
his  actual  history,  since  you  described  him  not  as  he
was,  but  as  he  ought  to  have  been.  If  you  could
take  a  stride  forward  into  these  present  times,  you
would  behold  in  our  beloved  Gratian  not  what  you
actually  saw  in  your  favourite  Cyrus,  but  what  you
wished  to  see.  All  these  qualities,  the  salient  points
of  which  I  have  sketched  in  a  few  dashes,  I  would
describe  in  detail  M^ere  my  powers  of  speaking  pro-
portionate to  my  will ;  for  however  much  I  may  lack
fluency,  the  greatness  of  the  subject  would  inspire
my  pen.  But  all  that  is  appropriate  neither  to  this
occasion,  nor  to  this  subject.  You,  who  hereafter
shall  pronounce  the  praises  of  our  Sovereign  have
here,  if  I  may  call  it  so,  a  nursery-garden  on  which
you  can  draw  to  fill  out  the  acres  of  your  own  dis-
courses. I  have  merely  touched  upon  the  subject,
and  being — as  all  are  aware — the  exponent  of  secrets
known  to  me  through  my  close  intimacy,  I  may  be
thought  merely  to  divulge  rather  than  to  belaud
these  personal  virtues.

And  as  I  have  spoken  of  mattei-s  known  to  me
and  to  all  who  share  the  inner  life  of  the
Court,  I  might  also  tell  of  those  which  are  con-
stantly spoken  of  beyond  its  precincts,  were  it  not
that  they  are  all  known  to  all  men  and  individually
to  each.  I  could  say  in  as  few  words  as  I  have
done  above :  a  most  perfect  hero  does  nothing  of
which  he  need  he  ashamed;  but  you  have  never
done  anything  which  calls  for  repentance,  while
you  have  always  extended  pardon  to  those  who
repent.  It  is  noble  to  he  merciful  to  those  who  fear ;
but  so continual is  your  kindness  that  your edicts

259


AUSONIUS

omnibus,  lie  Huierent.  mngnijicuvi  largtri  Iwnorcs :
tu  honoratos  et  libernlitate  ditasti.  laudabile  est  un-
peratorem  faciles  interpellantibus  praebeie  adiliis  nee  dc
occupatione  cuusari :  tu  confirmas  adire  cunctantes ;
et  iam  querimoniis  explicatis^  ne  quid  adhuc  sileatur,
interrogas.

XVI.  Celebre  fuit  Titi  Caesaris  dictum,  perdidisse
se  diem,  quo  nihil  bo/ii  fecerat ;  sed  celebre  fuit,  quia
Vespasiani  successor  dixerat,  cuius  nimia  parsiraonia
et  austeritas  vix  ferenda  miram  fecerat  filii  lenitatem.
tu  Valentiniano  genitus,  cuius  alta  bonitas,  praesens
comitas,  temperata  severitas  fuit,  parto  et  condito
Optimo  I'eipublicae  statu,  intellegis  posse  te  esse
lenissimum  sine  dispendio  disciplinae.  neque  vero
unum  aliquod  bonum  uno  die  praestas :  sed  indul-
gentias  singulares  per  singula  horarum  momenta
multiplicas.  vel  illud  unum  cuius  modi  est  de  con-
donatis  residuis  tributorum .''  quod  tu  quam  cumu-
lata  bonitate  fecisti  I  quis  umquam  imperatorum
hoc  pi-ovinciis  suis  aut  uberiore  indulgentia  dedit,
aut  certiore  securitate  prospexit,  aut  prudentia  con-
sultiore  munivit }  fecerat  et  Traianus  olim,  sed  par-
tibus  retentis  non  habebat  tantam  oblectationem
concessi debiti portio, quanta suberat amaritudo


1  Suet.  Tifufi,  viii.

-  Coins  of  Trajan  bear  references  to  this  remission.

260


THANKSGIVING  FOR  HIS  CONSULSHIP

I'emove  all  cause  for  fear.  It  is  splendid  to  lavish  dis-
tinctions :  you  not  only  bestow  distinctions,  but  also
generously  enrich  the  recipients.  It  is  praisenorthij
in  an  Emperor  to  grant  petitioners  easy  access  and  not  to
refuse  them  on  the  pretext  of  engagements  :  you  encourage
those  who  hesitate  to  approach  you,  and  when  they
have  declared  their  complaints,  you  ask  them  whether
they  have  left  anything  still  unmentioned.

XVI.  The  saying  of  Titus  Caesar^  that  he  had  lost
that  day  in  ivhich  he  had  not  performed  a  good  action,
has  become  famous  ;  but  it  has  become  famous  because
it  was  uttered  by  the  successor  of  Vespasian,  a  man
whose  excessive  economy  and  almost  intolerable
strictness  made  his  son's  easier  rule  seem  remarkable.
You,  the  son  of  Valentinian,  whose  kindness  was  so
profound,  whose  affability  was  never  lacking,  whose
sternness  was  so  well  controlled — you  realize  that,  now
that  the  State  has  gained  and  established  a  thoroughly
sound  condition,  you  can  show  all  the  gentleness  of
your  nature  without  prejudice  to  good  order.  And,
indeed,  it  is  not  just  one  good  deed  a  day  that  you
perform  :  every  moment  of  every  hour  you  increase
the  sum  of  your  momentous  favours.  How  shall  we
speak  of  that  single  measure  by  which  the  arrears  of
tribute  were  remitted  ?  What  a  wealth  of  generosity
there  was  in  this  act !  What  Emperor  has  ever  granted
such  a  boon  to  his  subject  provinces  with  a  more
generous  consideration,  or  calculated  its  results  with
a  surer  confidence,  or  safeguarded  it  with  more
experience  and  wisdom  ?  Trajan  -  also  did  the  same
thing  in  past  times  ;  but  since  he  retained  a  claim  to
a  certain  amount  of  the  arrears,  the  pleasure  caused
by  that  portion  of  the  debt  which  he  forgave  was  less
than  the  underlying  discontent  left  unremoved  by

261


AUSONIUS

servati.  et  Antoninus  indulserat,  sed  imperii,  non
beneficii  successor  invidit,  qui  ex  docunientis  tabu-
lisque  populi  condonata  repetivit.  tu  argumenta
omnia  flagitandi  publicitus  ardere  iussisti.  videre  in
suis  quaeque  foris  omnes  civitates  conflagrationem
salubris  incendii.  ardebant  stirpes  fraudium  vete-
rum :  ardebant  semina  futurarum.  iam  se  cum
pulvere  favilla  miscuerat,  iam  nubibus  fumus  se
involverat :  et  adhuc  obnoxii  in  paginis  concrematis
ductus  apicum  et  sestertiorum  notas  cum  substan-
tiolae  I'atione  cernebant,  quod  meminerant  lectum,
legi  posse  metuentes.  quid  te,  imperator  Auguste,
indulgentius,  quid  potest  esse  consultius  ?  quae  bona
praestas,  efficis,  ne  caduca  sint :  quae  mala  adimis,
prospicis  ne  possint  esse  recidiva.  haec  provin-
cialibus  indulgentiae  bona,  quid  ilia  nostro  ordini  ?
([uid  ilia  militibus  ?  Antoninorum  cognita  fuit  et
iam  ante  Germanicorum  in  cohorte  amicorum  et
legionibus  familiaris  lunnanitas.  sed  ego  nolo
benevolentiam  tuam  aliorum  collatione  praecellere
abundant  in  te  ea  bonitatis  et  virtutis  exempla,  quae
sequi  cupiat  ventura  posteritas  et,  si  rerum  natura
patei'etur,  adscribi  sibi  voluisset  antiquitas.

XVII.  Necesse est tamen aliquid comjiarari, ut
possit  intellegi,  bona  nostra  quo  praestent. Aegro-

262


THANKSGIVING  FOR  HIS  CONSULSHIP

the  amount  which  he  retained.  Antoninus,  too,
granted  the  same  favour ;  but  he  who  inherited  his
throne  but  not  his  kindhness,  grudged  this  remission
of  arrears  and  reclaimed  from  his  people  the  full
amount  as  entered  in  the  schedules  and  registers.
You  gave  orders  for  all  these  evidences  of  claim  to  be
burned  publicly.  Every  township  beheld  in  its  own
mai'ket-place  the  blaze  of  the  relieving  fire.  Burning
were  the  roots  of  by-gone  wrongs  :  burning  were  the
seeds  of  those  to  come.  Ali-eady  the  ashes  had  mingled
with  the  dust,  already  the  smoke  had  been  absorbed
in  the  clouds ;  but  still  the  debtors  beheld  in  the
charred  pages  the  lines  of  lettering  and  the  figures
in  the  cash-column  together  with  the  valuation  of
their  little  propei'ties:  still  they  feared  that  what
they  remembered  to  have  heard  read  could  even  now
be  read.  What  then  can  there  be  which  is  more
mei'ciful,  more  sagacious  than  you,  most  gracious
Emperor.''  You  give  good  gifts  and  make  sure  that
they  shall  not  be  transitory  :  you  remove  ills,  and  take
precautions  against  their  revival.  Such  are  the  favours
you  have  lavished  upon  the  provinces ;  but  what  of
those  conferred  upon  our  own  order  ?  Or  upon  the
Army  ?  The  personal  interest  taken  by  the  Antonines,
and  even  earlier  by  the  Germanici,  in  their  suite  of
friends  and  in  their  legions,  was  a  recognized  fact.
But  I  do  not  care  to  extol  your  benevolences  by  com-
paring others.  You  furnish  a  host  of  such  instances
of  goodness  and  virtue  as  generations  to  come  Avill
long  to  imitate,  and  as  ages  past  would  have  wished,
did  the  nature  of  things  allow,  to  have  attributed
to  themselves.

XVII.  Nevertheless, some comparison must be
made  in  order  to  make  clear  the  superiority  of  our

263


AUSONIUS

tantes  amicos  Traianiis  visere  solebat :  hacteiius  in
eo  comitas  praedicanda  est.  tu  et  visere  solitus  et
mederi  praebes  ministros,  instruis  ciboSj  toinenta
dispensas,  sumptuni  adicis  niedellarum,  consolaris
adfectos,  revalescentibus  gratularis.  in  quot  vias  de
una  eius  humanitate  progrederis  I  legionibus  uuiver-
siSj  ut  in  communi  Marte  evenit,  si  quid  adversi
aceiderat,  vidi  te  circumire  tentoria,  "satin  salvae?  "
quaerere,  tractare  vulnera  sauciorum  et^  ut  salutiferae
adponerentur  medellae  atque  ut  non  cessaretur,  in-
stare.  vidi  quosdani  fastidientes  cibum  te  commen-
dante  sumpsisse.  audivi  confirmantia  ad  saluteni
verba  praefari,  occurrere  desideriis  singulorum  :  huius
sarcinas  mulis  aulicis  vehere,  his  specialia  iumenta
praebere,  illis  ministeria  perditorum  instaurare  lixa-
rum,  aliorum  egestatem  tolerare  sumptu^  horum
nuditatem  velare  vestitu,  omnia  agere  indefesse  et
benigne,  pietate  maxima,  ostentatione  nulla,  omnia
praebere  aegris,  nihil  exprobrare  sanatis.  inde
cunctis  salute  nostra  carior  factus  meruisti,  ut  haberes
amicos  obnoxios,  promptos,  devotos^  fideles,  in  aevum
omne  mansuros,  quales  caritas  potius  quam  fortuna
conciliat.
=  64


I


THANKSGIVING  FOR  HIS  CONSULSHIP

blessinn;s.  Trajan  was  in  the  habit  of  visiting  his
friends  when  they  were  sick  :  so  far  we  may  grant
that  he  had  a  considerate  nature.  Your  practice  is
both  to  visit  and  to  heal  them  :  you  provide  them
with  attendants,  you  order  their  diet,  you  prescribe
medicines,  you  fui-nish  the  cost  of  remedies,  you
comfort  them  in  their  pain,  and  you  congratulate
them  on  their  recovery.  See  in  how  many  ways  you
show  advance  beyond  Trajan's  single  form  of  con-
sideration !  With  the  legions  one  and  all,  whenever
any  regrettable  incident  had  occurred,  as  is  the
fortune  of  war,  I  have  seen  you  go  round  the
men's  lines,  asking  "How  goes  it  ? ",  attending  to
the  wounds  of  casualties,  giving  strict  orders  that
healing  remedies  should  be  applied  and  that  there
should  be  no  delay  about  it.  I  have  seen  men  who
turned  from  their  iood  with  loathing  take  it  on  your
recommendation  :  I  have  heard  you  speak  words
which  gave  them  heart  to  recover.  You  anticipated
what  each  man  sorely  needed,  causing  this  man's  pack
to  be  carried  by  the  mules  of  the  royal  train,  pro-
viding special  beasts  for  some  to  ride,  furnishing
others  with  servants  in  place  of  those  whom  they  had
lost :  sometimes  you  would  relieve  the  poorer  soldiers
out  of  your  own  purse,  sometimes  cover  the  naked-
ness of  the  thinly  clad.  You  would  do  all  unweary-
ingly  and  cheerfully,  Avith  the  deepest  charity  and
without  a  trace  of  display,  bestowing  everything
upon  the  sick  and  claiming  nothing  from  the  cured.
Thus  it  is  that  you  have  become  dearer  to  us  than
our  lives,  and  have  deservedly  gained  friends  who
are  obedient,  ready,  devoted,  faithful — men  who  will
stand  by  you  for  ever,  since  it  is  affection  rather
than  accident  which  makes  them  yours.

265


AUSONIUS

XVIII.  Concludani deinceps orationem meam,

piissime  Auguste,  sermonis  magis  fine,  qiiam  gratiae.

namque  ilia  perpetua  est  et  spatio  non  transmeabili

terminum  calcis  ignorat. flexu  tamen  parvo,  nee  a

te procul, convertar ad deum. aeterne omnium

genitor, ipse non genite, opifex et causa niundi,

prineipio  antiquior, fine  diuturnior,  qui  templa  tibi

et  aras penetrabilibus  initiatorum mentibus condi-

disti,  tu Gratiano  humanarum  rerum domino eius-

modi  semina  nostri  amoris  inolesti,  ut  nihil  in  digressu

segnior  factus  meminisset  et  relicti,  illustraret  absen-

tem,  praesentibus  anteferret ;  deinde  quia  interesse

primordiis  dignitatis  per  locorum  intervalla  non  po-

terat,  ad  sollemnitatem  condendi  honoris  occurreret,

beneficiis  ne  deesset  officium. quae  enim  maiorum

umquam memoria transcursum tantae celeritatis

vel  in  audacibus  Graecorum  fabulis  commenta  est  ?

Pegasus volucer actus a Lycia non ultra Ciliciam

permeavit. Cyllarus atque Arion inter Argos Ne-

meamque senuerunt. ipsi Castorum equi, quod

longissimum  iter  est,  non  nisi  mutato  vectore  trans-

currunt. tu,  Gratiane,  tot Romani  imperii  limites,

tot  flumina  et lacus, tot  veterum intersaepta reg-

norum ab  usque  Thracia per  totum,  quam  longum

^  Possibly  =  tlie  baptized.

-  For  Cyllarus  (the  steed  of  Pollux),  see  Virgil,  Otorg.  iii.
90  ;  Arion  is  the  famous  horse  of  Adrastus.

266


THANKSGIVING  FOR  HIS  CONSULSHIP

XV^III.  After  this  I  must  bring  my  speech  to  a
close,  most  Sacred  Majesty :  though  it  is  my  words
I'ather  than  my  gratitude  which  will  end.  For  the
latter  is  unending :  its  course  can  never  be  run,  for
it  knows  no  stopping  point.  Yet  I  must  make  a
slight  digression  and  turn  not  very  far  from  you  to
God.  Eternal  Begetter  of  all  things,  thyself  un-
begotten,  Creator  and  Cause  of  the  universe,  more
ancient  than  its  beginning,  outlasting  its  end.  Thou
who  hast  built  thine  own  temples  and  altars  in  the
inmost  hearts  of  the  initiated  ^  worshippers  :  Thou
hast  implanted  in  Gratian,  the  lord  of  this  world
below,  such  seeds  of  love  towards  me  that  separation
has  not  weakened  his  remembrance  of  me  though
parted  from  him.  He  has  honoured  me  though  I
was  no  longer  in  his  presence,  he  has  preferred
me  above  those  who  stand  before  him  ;  and  further :
because  distance  would  not  allow  him  to  be  present
at  the  opening  ceremony  of  my  elevation,  he  has
hastened  to  attend  the  solemnities  of  my  laying  down
office,  that  his  bounties  might  be  completed  by  his
courtesy.  For  what  record  is  there,  even  in  the
daring  fjibles  of  the  Greeks,  of  a  journey  so  swiftly
accomplished  ?  Winged  Pegasus  starting  from  Lycia
travelled  no  further  than  Cilicia  :  Cyllarus  and  Arion  -
grew  old  between  Argos  and  Nemea.  Even  the
steeds  of  a  Castor  do  not  accomplish  that  endless
journey  of  theirs  without  changing  their  riders.-^
You,  Gratian,  speed  across  all  those  frontiers  of  the
Roman  Empire,  all  those  rivers  and  lakes,  all  those
barriers  of  old-established  kingdoms,  from  distant
Thrace  and  along  the  whole  coast,  through all  its

'  Probably  referring  to  the  journej"  of  Castor  and  Polhix
to  and  from  the  world  below  :  cp.  Virgil,  A  m.  vi.  121  f .

267


AUSONIUS

est,  latus  Illyrici,  Venetiam  Liguriamque  et  Galliam
veterem^  insuperabilia  Rhaetiae,  Rheni  vadosa,  Se-
quanorum  invia,  porrecta  Germaniae,  celeriore  trans-
cursu,  quam  est  properatio  nostri  sermoniSj  evolvis,
nulla  requie  otii,  ne  somni  quidem  aut  cibi  nuinere
liberali,  ut  Gallias  tuas  inopinatus  illustres,  ut  con-
sulem  tuum,  quamvis  desideratus,  anticipes,  ut  illani
ipsam,  quae  auras  praecedere  solet,  famam  facias
tardiorem.  hoc  senectuti  meae,  hoc  honori  a  te
datum,  supremus  ille  imperii  et  consiliorum  tuorum
deus  conscius  et  arbiter  et  auctor  indulsit,  ut  sellam
curulem,  cuius  sedem  frequenter  ornabis,  ut  prae-
textani  meam  purpurae  tuae  luce  fucatam,  ut  trabeam
non  magis  auro  suo  quam  munere  tuo  s{)lendidam,
quae  ab  Illyrico  sermonis  dignitas  honestavit,  apud
Gallias  illustriora  praestares,  quaestorem  ut  tuum,
praefectum  ut  tuo  praetorio^  consulem  tuum  et,  quod
adhuc  cunctis  meis  nominibus  anteponis,  praecep-
torem  tuum,  quern  pia  voce  declaraveras,  iusta  ratione
praetuleras,  liberali  largitate  ditaveras,  Augustae
dignationis  ofiiciis  consecrares.

Finit  s>'(iiianii)/  act  to.


268


THANKSGIVING  FOR  HIS  CONSULSHIP

length,  ot  lUyricum,  through  Venetia,  Ligiiria,  and
old  Gaulj  over  the  forbidding  peaks  of  Rhaetia,  across
the  fords  of  the  Rhine,  through  the  thick  country
of  the  Sequani  and  across  the  plains  of  Germany  ;
you  speed  across  them,  I  repeat,  swifter  in  your
passage  than  my  rapid  speech,  without  stopping  for
rest,  without  indulging  fully  in  sleep  or  in  food  ;  and
all  to  shed  the  unexpected  light  of  your  presence
upon  your  favourite  Gaul,  to  surprise  (how  welcome
the  surprise  ! )  your  own  consul  while  still  in  office,
to  make  even  Rumour,  who  is  usually  swifter  than  the
winds,  a  slower  traveller  than  yourself.  This  was
your  tribute  to  my  age,  this  to  my  dignity  !  God,  that
supreme  confidant,  controller  and  author  both  of  your
throne  and  of  your  counsels,  has  graciously  permitted
that  the  curule  chair  (which  you  will  often  fill  with  so
much  grace),  that  my  magisterial  robe  dyed  with  your
glowing  purple,  that  my  consular  apparel  which  is
enriched  less  by  its  own  gold  than  by  your  muni-
ficence— that  all  these  favours,  which  your  noble
letter  from  Illyricum  made  yet  more  honourable,
should  gain  yet  further  in  lustre  by  your  presence  in
Gaul ;  that  your  quaestor,  your  praetorian  prefect,
your  consul,  and — a  name  which  you  still  rate  above
all  my  titles — your  tutor,  he  whom  you  designated
with  your  sacred  lips,  whom  you  named  as  senior
consul  on  substantial  grounds,  whom  you  enriched
with  your  generous  bounty,  should  be  hallowed  by
the  condescension  of  your  royal  attentions.

End  of  the  Thanksgiving.


2U)


APPENDIX TO AUSONIUS

This  Appendix,  corresponding  to  book  XXII.  of
the  Teubner  edition,  contains  various  poems  of
relatively  ancient  date  which,  though  ordinarily
edited  with  the  works  of  Ausonius,  are  in  fact
anonymous.  Two  only  of  these  woi'ks  call  for
notice.

The  elegiac  poem  De  liosis  Xasceutibus  (H.)  is
interesting — apart  from  some  trace  of  naturalistic
feeling  in  11.  7  ff. — both  as  the  humble  source  of
Herrick's  Gather  ye  Rosebuds  (11.  49  f ),  and  as  having
once  been  attributed  to  Virgil  himself.  ^  It  cannot,
however,  be  regarded  as  earlier  than  the  fourth
century  a.u.,  and  was  associated  with  the  works  of
Ausonius  by  Aleander  in  the  Paris  edition  of  1511.

Sulpicia's  Complaint  on  the  State  of  the  Common-
wealth (V.)  seems  to  belong  to  the  same  age  and  is
not  unreasonably  considered  a  school-piece  or  liter-
ary exercise.  The  real  Sulpicia  flourished  in  the
later  part  of  the  first  century  a.d.  and  was  famous
for  a  series  of  amatory  poems  composed  in  a  variety
of  metres  {see  11.  4  ff.)  and  addressed  to  her  husband
Calenus.  According  to  Martial  {Epigr.  x.  35.  1  ff.)
her  work  was  distinguished  by  its  morality,  though
not  perhaps  by  its  delicacy  (id.  x.  38.  1  ff.),  and
Ausonius  in  his  exculpatory  address  to  Paulus  at  the
close  of  the  Cento  Xiiptialis'^  alleges  that  prurire
opiisculum  Sulpiciae,  frontem  cape?  are.  The  piece  was
first  published  in  an  edition  of  Ausonius  by  Ugoletus
in  1496  A.D.

^  See  Ribbeck's  Virgil,  iv.  p.  181  (Appendix  Vergi/iann).
-  See  vol.  i.  p.  390.

271


APPENDIX AUSONI  ANA  i

I. — Septem  Sapientum  Sententiae

(i) Bias  Prieueiis

QuAENAM  summa  boni  est?  mens  semper  eonscia  recti,
pernieies  homini  quae  maxima  ?  solus  homo  alter,
quis  dives  ?  qui  nil  cu})iet. quis  pau})er  .''  avarus.
quae  dos  matronis  pulcherrima  ? vita  pudica.
quae  casta  est  ?  de  qua  mentiri  fama  veretur.  5

quod  prudentis  opus  ?  cum  possis,  nolle  nocere  :
quid  stulti  proprium  ?  non  posse  et  velle  nocere.

(ii)  Piltaciis  Mitylenaens

Loqui  ignorabitj  qui  tacere  nesciat.

bono  probari  malo  quam  multis  malis.

demens  superbis  invidet  felicibus  ;  10

demens  dolorem  ridet  infelicium.

pareto  legi^  quisque  legem  sanxeris.

plures  amicos  re  secunda  compares  :

paucos  amicos  rebus  adversis  probas.

1 =  Peiper,  Book  XXII.
272


APPENDIX TO AUSONIUSi


I. — Sayings  of  the  Seven  Sages

(i)  Bias  o/"  Priene

What  is  the  sum  of  all  good?  A  heart  ever
conscious  of  right.  What  is  man's  greatest  bane  ?
His  brother  man  alone.  Who  is  the  rich  man  ?  He
who  will  long  for  nothing.  Who  is  the  poor  man  i
The  miser.  What  is  the  fairest  dowry  wedded  wives
can  bring  ?  A  modest  life.  Who  is  the  chaste
woman  ?  She  about  whom  scandal  fears  to  lie.
What  deed  marks  a  wise  man  ?  To  refuse  to  hurt
another  when  he  might.  What  is  the  fool's  badge?
To  wish  to  hurt  another  though  he  cannot.

(ii) PittacKs  of  Mitijlene

He  who  cannot  hold  his  tongue  will  not  know
how  to  speak.  I  would  rather  please  one  good  man
than  many  bad.  A  fool  envies  the  proud  man  in
prosperity,  a  fool  laughs  at  the  grief  of  the  unhappy.
Obey  the  law  whoever  you  be  who  made  the  law.
If  Fortune  smile,  you  gather  many  friends :  if
Fortune  frowns,  you  find  few  true  friends.

*  The  following  poems,  formerly  iiichided  ii)  tiie  works  of
Ausoiiius,  are  by  unknown  authors.

273
VOL.  n.  T


AUSONIUS

(hi)  C/eohi/li/s  Linditis

Quanto  plus  liceat,  tani  libeat  minus.  15

fortunae  invidia  est  immeritus  miser.

felix  criminibus  non  erit  hoc  diu.

ignoscas  aliis  multa,  nihil  tibi.

parcit  quisque  malis,  perdere  vult  bonos.

maiorum  meritis  gloria  non  datur :  20

turpis  saepe  datur  fama  minoribus.

(iv)  Periandej-  Cormlhiti.s

Numquam  discrepat  utile  ab  decoro.

plus  est  sollieitus  magis  beatus.

mortem  optare  malum,  timere  peius.

taxis,  ut  libeat,  quod  est  necesse.  25

multis  terribilis  caveto  multos.

si  fortuna  iuvat,  nihil  laboris  :

si  non  adiuvat,  hoc  minus  laboris.

(\)  Solou Alheniensis

Tunc  beatam  dico  vitam,  cum  peracta  fata  sunt.

par  pari  iugator  coniunx  ;  quidquid  inpar,  dissidet.  30

non  erunt  honores  umquam  fortuiti  muneris.

clam  coarguas  propinquum,  quem  palam  laudaveris.

pulchrius  multo  parari  quam  creari  nobilem.

certa  si  decreta  sors  est,  quid  cavere  jjroderit?

sive  sunt  incerta  cuncta,  quid  timere  convtnit? 35

(vi)  Chi/on  Lacedacmoniu,s

Nolo  minor  me  timeat  despiciatque  maior.
vive  memor  mortis,  item  vive  memor  salutis,
tristia  cuncta  exsuperans  aut  animo,  aut  amico.
tu  bene  si  quid  facias,  nee  meniinisse  fas  est ;
274


APPF.NDIX TO AUSONIUS

(ill)  Cleobulus  of  Lindos

The  greatei-  your  liberty,  the  less  be  your  lusts.
A  just  man  suffering  wi-ongfully  is  Fortune's
indictment.  A  man  may  thrive  on  wrong,  but  not
for  long.  Overlook  much  in  others,  nothing  in
yourself  He  who  spares  the  bad,  seeks  to  corrupt
the  good.  The  good  deeds  of  the  fathers  bring  no
glory  to  their  posterity  ;  but  ill-repute  is  often
inherited.

(iv)  Peiiaii(hr  of  Corinth

The  expedient  and  the  honourable  never  disagree.
The  greater  your  fortune,  the  greater  your  cares.
'Tis  bad  to  wish  for  death,  but  worse  to  fear  it.  See
that  you  do  willingly  that  which  you  needs  must
do.  If  many  dread  you,  then  beware  of  many.  If
Fortune  aids,  no  need  for  toil  :  if  she  aids  not,  so
much  the  less  toil.^

(v)  Solon  of  Athens

I  only  call  a  life  happy  after  its  fated  course  is  run.
Let  like  mate  with  like ;  the  ill-matched  never
agree.  True  fame  will  never  be  in  Chance's  gift.
Rebuke  a  kinsman  privately,  but  praise  him  openly.
'Tis  fairer  far  to  win  nobility  than  to  be  born  to  it.  If
our  lot  is  certainly  decreed,  what  profit  is  it  to  guard
against  it  ?  Or  if  all  is  uncertain,  what  is  the  use  of
fear.

(vi)  Chilon  of  Lacedaemon

I  hate  when  one  below  me  fears  me,  and  one
above  me  despises  me.  Live  and  forget  not  death,
but  also  live  and  forget  not  safety :  let  courage  or  the
support  of  friends  conquer  all  your  griefs. If  you

'  i.e.  because  you  can  do  notliiiig  to  withstand  her.

275
T 2


ALISON  I  US

(juae  bene  facta  accipias,  perpetuo  memento.  U)

strata  senectus  homiiii,  quae  parilis  iuventae :
ilia  iuventa  est  gravior,  quae  similis  senectae.


(vii) Anacharsix  Scythes

Turpe  quid  ausurus  te  sine  teste  time.

vita  perit,  mortis  gloria  non  moritur.

quod  facturus  eris,  dicere  distuleris.  4o

crux  est,  si  nietuas,  vincere  quod  nequeas.

cum  vere  obiui'ges,  sic  inimice  iuvas  :

cum  tklso  laudes,  tunc  et  amice  noces.

nil  nimium. satis  hoc,  ne  sit  et  hoc  nimium.


II. — De Rosis  Nasckntibus

Ver  erat  et  blando  mordenti  a  frigore  sensu

spirabat  croceo  mane  revecta  dies,
strictior  eoos  praecesserat  aura  iugales

aestiferum  suadens  anticipare  diem,
errabam  riguis  per  quadrua  compita  in  liortis

maturo  cupiens  me  vegetare  die.
vidi  concretas  per  gramina  flexa  pruinas

pendere  aut  holerum  stare  cacuminibus,
caulibus  et  teretes  patulis  conludere  guttas


10


vidi  Paestano  gaudere  rosaria  cultu
exoriente  novo  roscida  lucifero.

rara  pruinosis  canebat  gennna  fVutectis
ad  primi  radios  interitura  die.


'  The  poem  On  the  Seren  Sa(/c.<  (Peiper,  i.  viii.),  a  tr.anslatioii
of  Anth.  Pal.  ix.  366,  is  omitted  as  spurious,  being found


276


APPENDIX TO AUSONIUS

confer  a  benefit,  never  i-emember  it ;  if  you  receive
one,  never  forget  it.  Old  age  may  be  sweet,  if  it  be
made  like  youth  ;  but  youth  is  burdensome  if  it  be
like  old  age.

(vii)  Anacharsis  of  Scythia

When  you  would  perpetrate  some  deed  of  shame.,
fear  yourself  even  without  a  witness.  Life  passes,
but  a  glorious  death  can  never  die.  Avoid  speaking
of  what  you  plan  to  do.  True  torment  is  to  fear
what  you  cannot  overcome.  A  just  reproof  is  an
unfriendly  help,  feigned  praise  a  friendly  injury.  Do
nothing  to  excess.  That  is  enough  ;  or  precept  too
Avill  run  to  excess.^

II. — Ox  BuDDiNci  Roses  2

'TwAs  sjn-ing-time,  and  day  brought  back  by  saffron
morn  Avas  breathing  with  a  pleasing  influence  after
the  biting  cold.  A  shrewder  air  had  run  before
Dawn's  coursers,  moving  me  to  forestall  heat-bringing
Day.  I  was  straying  along  the  paths  dividing  the
well-watered  garden-plots,  seeking  to  drink  in  the
freshness  of  day's  prime.  I  saw  the  hoar-frost
hanging  caked  upon  the  bending  grass  or  resting  on
the  tops  of  garden  herbs,  and  round  drops  rolling
together  upon  the  cabbage-leaves  ....  I  saw
such  rose-beds  as  Paestum  cultivates  smiling  all  dewy
at  the  new-risen  harbinger  of  light.  Upon  the
frosted  bushes  a  white  pearl  glimmered  here  and
there,  to  perish  at  the  earliest  rays  of  day. 'Twere

in  no  MS.  and  appearing  first  in  the  edition  of  Ugoletus,  to
whom  it  is  probably  due.

2  This  poem  is  sometimes  attributed  in  MSS.  to  Virgil.

277


AUSONIUS

ambigeres,  raperetne  rosis  Aurora  ruborem  15

an  daret  et  flores  tingueret  orta  dies,
ros  unus,  c*olor  unus  et  unum  mane  duorum  ;

sideris  et  floris  nam  domina  una  Venus,
f'orsan  et  unus  odor  :  sed  celsior  ille  per  auras

diffluit :  expirat  proximus  iste  niagis.  20

communis  Paphie  dea  sideris  et  dea  floris

praecipit  unius  muricis  esse  habitum.
Momentum  intererat,  quo  se  nascentia  floruni

germina  conparibus  dividerent  spatiis.
haec  viret  angusto  foHorum  tecta  galero.  2o

banc  tenui  folio  purpura  rubra  notat.
liaec  aperit  primi  fastigia  celsa  obe-lisci

mucronem  absolvens  purpurei  capitis,
vertiee  colleetos  ilia  exsinuabat  amictus,

iam  meditans  foliis  se  numerare  suis :  .•()

nee  mora  :  ridentis  calathi  patefecit  honorem

prodens  inclusi  semina  densa  croci.
baec  modo,  quae  toto  rutilaverat  igne  coniarum

pallida  conlapsis  deseritur  foliis.
mirabar  celerem  fugitiva  aetate  rapinam  35

et,  dum  nascuntur,  consenuisse  rosas.
ecce  et  defluxit  rutili  coma  puniea  floris,

dum  loquor,  et  tellus  tecta  rubore  micat.
tot  species  tantosque  ortus  variosque  novatus

una  dies  aperit,  conficit  ipsa  dies.  40

Conquerimur,  Natura,  brevis  quod  gratia  talis  :

ostentata  oculis  illico  dona  rapis.
quam  longa  una  dies,  aetas  tam  longa  rosjuinn  :

cum  pubescent!  iuncta  senecta  brevis.
278


APPENDIX TO AUSONIUS

hard  to  say  whether  Aurora  were  stealing  blushes
from  the  rose,  or  lending  them  and  risen  da}^  were
dyeing  the  flowers.  One  is  the  dew,  one  the  tint,
one  the  morn  of  both  ;  for  Venus  is  the  one  queen
both  of  the  morning-star  and  of  the  flower.  Perchance,
too,  one  is  their  fragrance ;  but  that  is  diffused  on
the  breezes  far  above  us,  this,  near  at  hand,  breathes
forth  a  sweetness  more  perceptible.  The  queen  of
Paphos,  goddess  of  the  star  and  flower  alike,  bids
both  be  habited  in  one  ruddy  hue.

-3  The  time  was  just  at  hand  for  the  teeming  buds
to  split  in  equal  segments.  One  is  close  capped
with  a  covering  of  green  leaves ;  another  flecks  her
narrow  sheath  with  ruddy  purple  ;  a  third  is  oj)ening
the  tip  of  her  tapering  spire  and  freeing  the  point
of  her  crimson  head.  Another  was  disengaging  at
her  peak  her  furled  array,  already  planning  to  take
count  of  herself  with  her  petals.  Then  on  a  sudden
she  has  laid  open  the  glories  of  her  smiling  calyx
displaying  the  close-packed  saffron  seeds  which  lie
within.  Another,  which  but  late  had  glowed  with
all  the  fires  of  her  bloom,  now  fades,  abandoned  by
her  falling  petals.  I  marvelled  at  the  swift  ruin
wrought  by  the  fleeting  season,  to  see  the  roses  all
withered  even  while  they  bloom.  See,  even  while  I
speak,  a  glowing  flower  has  shed  the  ruddy  honours
of  its  head,  and  earth  gleams  carpeted  with  crimson.
These  many  forms,  these  various  births  and  changes,
one  day  brings  forth  and  the  same  day  ends.

^1  Nature,  we  grieve  that  such  beauty  is  short-
lived :  once  displayed  to  our  eyes  forthwith  you
snatch  away  your  gifts.  As  long  as  is  one  day,  so
long  is  the  life  of  the  rose  ;  her  brief  youth  and
age  go  hand  in  hand. The  flower  which  the  bright

279


AUSONIUS

quam  niodo  nasceiitem  rutilus  conspexit  Eons, 45
banc  rediens  sero  vespere  vidit  anum.

sed  bene,  quod  paucis  licet  interitura  diebiis
succedens  aevum  prorogat  ipsa  suiim.

colbge,  virgo,  rosas,  dum  flos  novus  et  nova  pubes,
et  menior  esto  aevum  sic  properave  tuum.  50

III. — Nomina Musarum

Clio  gesta  caiiens  transaetis  tempora  reddit.
dulciloquis  calamos  Euterpe  flatibus  urguet.
comica  lascivo  gaudet  sermone  Thalia.
Melpomene  tragico  proclamat  maesta  boatu.
Terpsichore  att'ectus  citharis  movet,  imperat,  auget.  5
plectra  gerens  Erato  saltat  pede  carmine  vultu.
Urania  motusque  jioli  scrutatur  et  astra.
carmina  Calliope  libris  heroica  mandat.
signat  cuncta  manu  loquiturque  Polymuia  gestu.
mentis  Apollineae  vis  has  movet  undique  Musas  : 10
ill  medio  residens  complectitur  omnia  Phoebus.

IV. — 1)e  SiGNi-s  Caelestiuis

Ad  Boreae  partes  Arctoe  vertuntur  et  Anguis.
post  has  Arctophylax  pariterque  Corona,  genuque
prolapsus,  Lyra,  Avis,  Cepheus  et  Cassiopeia,
Auriga  et  Perseus,  Deltoton  et  Andromedae  astrum,
Pegasus et Delphin Tehniique, .Aquila .\nguite-
nensque.  5


APPENDIX TO AUSOXIl  S

Morning  Star  beheld  just  being  born,  that,  returning
with  late  evening,  he  sees  a  withered  thing.  But  'tis
well ;  for  though  in  a  few  days  the  rose  must  die,
she  springs  anew  prolonging  her  own  life.  Then,
maidens,  gather  roses,  while  blooms  are  fresh  and
youth  is  fresh,  and  be  mindful  that  so  your  life-time
hastes  awav.^

III. — The  Namks  of  the  Muses

Clio,  singing  of  famous  deeds,  restores  times  past
to  life.  Euterpe's  breath  fills  the  sweet-voiced
flutes.  Thalia  rejoices  in  the  loose  speech  of  comedy.
Melpomene  cries  aloud  with  the  echoing  voice  of
gloomy  tragedy.  Terpsichore  Avith  her  lyre  stirs,
swells,  and  governs  the  emotions.  Erato  bearing
the  plectrum  harmonises  foot,  song  and  voice  in  the
dance.  Urania  examines  the  motions  of  the  heaven
and  stars.  Calliope  commits  heroic  songs  to  writing.
Polymnia  expresses  all  things  with  her  hands  and
speaks  by  gesture.  The  power  of  Apollo's  will  enlivens
the  whole  circle  of  these  Muses  :  Phoebus  sits  in  their
midst  and  in  himself  possesses  all  their  gifts.

IV. — On  the  Heavenly  Signs

Towards  the  realm  of  Boreas  the  two Bears  and
the  Snake  turn  in  the  sky. Next  come  the  Bear-
warden  and  the  Crown  together,  the  Kneeling  Man,
the  Lyre, the Bird, Cepheus and Cassiopeia, the
Charioteer  and  Perseus,  the  Triangle  and  Andromeda's
constellation,  Pegasus and the Dolphin and the
'  Lines  45-50  inspired  Herrick's  stanza  : —
'■  feather  ye  rosebuds  while  ye  may  :
Old  Time  is  still  a-flying,
And  this  same  flower,  that  smiles  to-day,
To-morrow  will  be  dving."

281


AUSONIUS

Signifer  inde  subest,  bis  sex  et  sidera  complent
hunc  :  Aries,  Taurus,  Gemini,  Cancer,  Leo,  Virgo,
Libra,  Scorpius,  Arquitenens,  Capricornus  et  urnani
qui  tenet,  et  Pisces, post  sunt  in  partibus  Austri
Orion,  Procyon,  Lepus,  ardens  Sirius,  Argo,  10

Hydrus,  Chiron,  Turibulum  quoque  Piscis  et  ingens
hinc  sequitur  Pistrix  simul  P2ridani(jue  fiuenta.


V. SULPICIA yUlililTLK UE StaTU RkIP. Kl

Temporibus  Domitiani  *

MusA,  quibus  numeris  heroas  et  arma  frequentas,

t'abellam  j)ermitte  mihi  detexere  paucis  ;

nam  tibi  secessi  tecum  penetrale  letractans

consilium, quare  nee  carmine  curro  Phalaeco,

nee  trimetro  iambo,  nee  qui  pede  fractus  eodem 5

fortiter  irasci  didicit  duce  Clazomenio.

cetei'a  quin  etiam,  quot  deinceps  milia  lusi

primaque  Romanes  docui  contendere  Grais

et  salibus  variare  novis,  constanter  omitto

teque,  quibus  princeps  et  facundissima  calles,  10

adgredior  :  precibus  descende  clientis  et  audi.

Die  mihi,  Calliope,  quid  iam  pater  ille  deorum
cogitat  .'•  an  terras  et  patria  saecula  mutat
quasque  dedit  quondam  marcentibus  eripit  artes  ?

'  A  hendecasyllabic  metre.

-  Hipponax  of  Ephesus  (flm:  546-520  u.c.)  invented  the
variety  of  iambic  metre  known  as  "scazon"  (limping),  in  which

282


APPENDIX TO AUSONIUS

Arrow,  the  Eagle  and  the  Snake-holder.  Below  these
comes  the  Zodiac  which  twelve  constellations  occupy:
the  Ram,  the  Bull,  the  Twins,  the  Crab,  the  Lion  and
the  Virgin,  the  Scales,  the  Scorpion,  the  Archer,
Capricornus,  and  He  who  holds  the  Water-Jar,  and
the  Fishes.  Next,  in  the  Southern  Hemisphere  are
found  :  Orion,  Antecanis,  the  Hare  with  fiery  Sirius,
Argo  and  the  Water-snake,  Chiron,  the  Censer  (Ara)
also  and  the  Great  Fish.  After  these  together  follow
the  Whale  and  the  streams  of  Eridanus.

\'.— sulpicia  complains  of  the  coxoition  of  the
State  and  of  the  Times  of  Domitian

Muse,  suffer  me  to  weave  in  few  words  my  tale,
using  those  numbers  wherewith  thou  celebratest
heroes  and  deeds  of  war  ;  for  'tis  for  thee  I  have
retired,  with  thee  pondering  my  inward  purpose.
Wherefore  my  song  trips  not  to  the  measure  of
Phalaecus,^  nor  to  the  iambic  trimeter,  nor  to  that
which,  limping  on  the  last  foot,  learned  under  the
guidance  of  him  of  Clazomenae  boldly  to  be  angry  !  "
Nay,  and  all  those  other  innumerable  measures  with
which  I  have  trifled,  and  wherein  I  first  taught
Romans  to  vie  with  Greeks  and  season  their  vei*se
with  an  array  of  new  flavours,  I  firmly  pass  by  :  thee
I  approach  in  that  metre  in  which  thou  hast  the  chief
and  richest  skill.

^■^  Tell  me.  Calliope,  what  ponders  now  that  Father
of  the  Gods  ?  Is  he  changing  the  whole  earth
and  ages  past,  and  is  he  snatching  from  our  drooping
hands  the  arts  which  he  once  gave  us? Is  it  his

the  last  foot  is  a  spondee  ( — )  or  trochee  (-w)  instead  of  an
iambus  (^  -).  This  metre  he  used  with  effect  in  writing
lampoons.

283


AUSONIUS

nosque  iubet  tacitos  et  iam  rationis  egentes,  15

non  aliter,  primo  quam  cum  surreximus  arvo,

glandibus  et  purae  rursus  procumbere  lyrnphae  ?

an  reliquas  terras  conservat  amicus  et  urbes,

sed  genus  Ausonium  Rutulique  extirpat  alumnos  ?

quid?  reputemus  enim :  duo  sunt,  quibus  extulit  ingens

Roma  caput,  virtus  belli  et  sapientia  pacis.  21

sed  virtus,  agitata  domi  et  socialibus  armis,

in  freta  Sicaniae  et  Carthaginis  exulat  arces

ceteraque  imperia  et  totum  simul  abstulit  orbem.

deinde,  velut  stadio  victor  qui  solus  Achaeo  25

languet  et  immota  sensim  virtute  fatiscit,

sic  itidem  Romana  manus,  contendei'e  postquam

destitit  et  pacem  longis  frenavit  habenis.

ipsa  domi  leges  et  Graia  inventa  retractans,

omnia  bellorum  terra  quaesita  marique  30

praemia  consilio  et  molli  ratione  regebat :

stabat  in  his  (neque  enim  poterat  constare  sine  istis)  :

liaut  frustra  auctori  mendaxque  Diespiter  olim,

"  Imperium  sine  fine  dedi "  ^  dixisse  probatur.

Nunc  igitur  qui  rex  Romanos  imperat  inter, 35
non  trabe,  sed  tergo  prolapsus  et  ingluvie  albus,
et  studia  et  sapiens  hominum  nomenque  genusque
omnia  abire  foras  atque  urbe  excedere  iussit  ?
quid  fugimus  Graios  hominumque  reliquimus  urbes,
ut  Romana  foret  magis  his  instructa  magistris, 40
iam  (Capitohno  veluti  turbante  Camillo

»  Virgil.  Aeti.  i,  279.
284


APPENDIX TO AUSONIUS

will  that  speechless  and  bereft  of  reason,  even  as
when  first  we  rose  up  out  of  the  soil,  we  feed  on
acorns  and  again  lap  up  unmixed  water?  Or  does
he  kindly  keep  all  other  lands  and  cities  in  their
former  state,  but  roots  out  the  Roman  race  and  the
sons  of  Latium  ?  What  ?  Let  us  but  reflect.  Two
things  there  are  whereby  mighty  Rome  raised  up  her
head,  valour  in  war  and  wisdom  in  peace.  But  valour,
exercised  at  home  and  in  our  Social  Wars,  travelled
abroad  against  the  fleets  of  Sicily  and  the  towers
of  Carthage,  pulled  down  those  other  empires  and
seized  upon  tlie  whole  world  at  once.  Then,  as  an
unmatched  athlete  on  the  Olympic  course  grows
feeble  and  with  unstirred  mettle  declines  gradually,
even  so  the  might  of  Rome  after  it  ceased  to  strive,
and  gave  loose  rein  to  peace.  She  also,  pondering  at
home  her  laws  and  the  discoveries  of  Greece,  used  to
govern  the  prizes  won  by  her  wars  on  land  and  sea
with  wisdom  and  the  gentle  rule  of  reason  :  on  these
she  used  to  stand  (for  indeed  without  them  she  could
not  have  stood  whole).  Surely  it  was  no  vain  or  lying
word  when  to  the  father  of  our  race  Jupiter  said  of
old  :  "  I  have  given  you  an  Empire  without  bounds."
3^  Has  he,  then,  who  now  reigns  as  king  amongst
the  Romans,  bestial  and  dead-white  through  gluttony,
ordered  learning  and  the  whole  name  and  race  of
our  philosophers  to  get  gone  and  leave  the  city } '
Why  do  we  flee  the  Greeks  and  have  left  the  cities
of  mankind  that  Rome  might  the  better  be  sup-
plied 2  with  such  teachers,  if  now  (as  the  Gauls  fled
leaving  the  sword  and  scales  when  Camillus,  the  old

^  Dom'itian  expelled  all  the  philosophers  from  Rome  and
Ital}-. cp.  Suet.  Dom.  x.
-  i.e.  b}'  our  absence,  which  gives  the  Greeks  a  free  Held.

285


AUSONIIIS

ensibiis  ^  et  trutina  Galli  I'ugere  relictaj

si  nostri  palare  senes  adiguntur  et  ipsi

ut  ferale  suos  onus  exportare  libellos  ?

ergo  Numantinus  Libycusque  erravit  in  isto  45

Scipio,  qui  Rhodio  crevit  formante  niagistro,

ceteraque  ilia  manus  bello  facunda  secundo  ?

quos  inter  prisci  sententia  dia  Catonis  ^

scire  adeo  magni  fecisset,  utrumne  secundis

an  magis  adversis  staret  Romana  propago.  50

scilicet  adversis  !  nam,  cum  defendier  armis

suadet  amor  patriae  et  caritui'a  penatibus  uxor,

convenit,  ut  vespis,  quarum  domus  arce  Monetae,

turba  rigens  strictis  per  lutea  corpora  telis  ;

ast  ubi  res  secura  redit,  oblita  furorum  55

plebs  rectorque  una  somno  moriuntur  obeso  :

Romulidarum  igitur  longa  et  gravis  exitiura  pax. —

Hie  fabella  modo  pausam  tacit, optima,  posthac,
Musa,  velim  moneas,  sine  qua  mihi  nulla  voluptas
vivere  :  uti  quondam,  dum  Smyrna  Byblisque  peribat,
nunc  itidem  migrare  vacat. vel  denique  quidvis ()1
ut  dea  quaere  aliud  :  tantum  Romana  Caleno
moenia  iucundos  pariterque  averte  Sabinos.

Haec  ego. turn  paucis  dea  me  dignarier  infit :

^  So  j3/.§»S'.  :  censibus,  Ptiper. "  Ensibus"' is  a  jocular  allusion
to  the  sword  which  Breniius  cast  into  the  scale.
*  cp.  Horace,  Sat.  i.  ii.  32.  ,


'  An  allusion  to  the  well-known  deliverance  of  the  Capitol
when  besieged  by  Gauls  under  Brennus  in  390  B.C.

286


APPENDIX TO AUSONIUS

hero  of  the  Capitol,  routed  them  ^)  our  old  sages  are
forced  to  go  a-wandering  and  to  carry  out  their  own
books  like  the  deadly  burden  borne  by  criminals. '-^
Was  Scipio,  then,  misguided  in  this,  the  hero  of
Numantia  and  Libya"  who  prospered  under  the
guidance  of  a  Rhodian  director  * ;  and  the  others
of  that  company  who  joined  eloquence  with  success
in  war?  And  among  these,  how  important  would
old  Cato  with  his  heaven-sent  prudence  have  held  it
only  to  know  whether  the  Roman  race  stood  firmer  in
prosperity  or  in  adversity.  Surely  in  adversity  !  For
when  love  of  country  and  fear  that  their  wives  may
lose  their  homes  moves  them  to  defend  themselves,
they  muster  ;  even  as  the  wasps  whose  home  is  in
Moneta's  stronghold,  a  swarm  formidable  with  un-
sheathed weapons  upon  their  yellow  bodies  ;  but
when  security  returns,  the  commons  and  their  ruler
alike  forgetful  of  their  rage  perish  in  full-fed  sleep.
Therefore  a  long,  heavy  peace  is  the  ruin  of  the  sons
of  Romulus.

^^  Here  now  my  tale  must  rest.  Hereafter,  sweetest
Muse,  without  whom  I  find  no  pleasure  in  life,  I  fain
would  hear  thy  grave  warnings  :  even  as  of  old,  while
Smyrna  and  Byblis  were  perishing,  so  now  there  is  yet
time  to  go  into  other  lands.  Or,  as  a  goddess  ma}',
find  any  other  plan  :  only  keep  Calenus  ^  from  the
walls  of  Rome  and  from  the  pleasant  Sabine  land.

^*  Such  was  my  prayer. Then  first  the  goddess

*  i.e.  the  cioss.  Or,  possibly,  "as  though  their  books
were  some  noxious  load  "  (which  needed  to  be  got  rid  of).

"  sc.  Scipio  Afrioanus  Minor,  who  took  Carthage  in  146  B.C.
and  Numantia  in  133  e.c.

■*  Panaetius,  the  Stoic  of  Rhodes,  the  intimate  friend  of
Scipio  and  Laelius.

*  Calenus  was  the  husband  of  Sulpicia.

287


AUSONIUS

''  Pone  inetus  aegros,  cultrix  mea  :  summa  tyraiino  65
haee  instant  odia  et  nosti-o  periturus  honore  est.
nam  laureta  Numae  fontisque  habitamus  eosdeni,
et  comite  Egeria  ridemus  inania  coepta.
vive,  vale  !  manet  hunc  pulchruin  sua  fania  dolorem  :
Musarum  spondet  chorus  et  Romanus  Apollo." 70

VI. — In  Puerum  Formosum

DuM  dubitat  natura,  niarem  feceretne  puellam  :
factus  es,  o  pulcher,  paene  puella,  puer.

Yll. — Dk  Matre  Augusti

Ante  omnes  alias  felix  tamen  hoc  ego  dicar,
sive  hominem  peperi  femina  sive  viruni.

VIII.— Dinoxi

Infeli.x  Dido,  nulli  bene  nupta  niarito  :
hoc  pereunte  fugis,  hoc  fugiente  peris.

IX. — Ai>  Amicam

EccE  rubes  nee  causa  subest. me  teste  pudicus
iste  tuus  culpam  nescit  habere  rubor.


288


APPENDIX TO AUSONIUS

vouchsafed  me  these  few  words :  "  Cast  off  your
anxious  fears,  my  devotee  :  hatred  for  these  crowning
offences  threatens  to  overwhelm  the  tyrant,  and  he
shall  perish  to  expiate  the  slight  he  put  upon  me.
For  I  dwell  in  the  laurel  groves  that  Numa  haunted
and  by  the  same  springs  ;  and,  with  Egeria  for  mv
companion,  I  laugh  to  scorn  such  vain  attempts.
Long  life  and  farewell  I  So  noble  a  grief  shall  find
the  fame  that  is  its  due  ;  and  this  the  choir  of  Muses
and  Roman  Apollo  pro)nise  thee."

VI. To A GRACEFUL BoY

While  Nature  was  in  doubt  whether  to  make  a
boy  or  girl,  thou  didst  become  almost  a  girl,  my
handsome  boy.

^  II. — On  the  Mother  ok  an  Emperor

Yet  for  this  cause  ^  I  shall  be  called  happy  above  all
others,  whether  I,  a  woman,  have  borne  a  man  or
hero.

VIII.— To Dido

Ah  !  luckless  Dido,  unhappy  in  both  husbands :
this,  dying,  caused  thy  flight ;  that,  fleeing,  caused
thy  death.

IX. — To  A Mistress

See,  thou  dost  blush  ;  and  yet  there  is  no  secret
cause. I  can  bear  witness  that  this  modest  blush  of

'  sc.  because  I  am  mother  of  an  Emperor,  whatever  his
qualities  may  be.  This  couplet  appears  to  be  a  fragment
from  the  end  of  an  epigram.


AUSONIUS

et  vice  populeae  frondis  treniis,  et  vice  lunae
puniceani  maculant  lutea  signa  cutem.

amplexus  etiam  nostros  pudibunda  vecusas
et,  si  testis  adest,  oscula  sueta  fugis.

X

CoNsuETUDO  oculis  nil  sinit  esse  novum.


290


APPENDIX TO AUSONIUS

thine  is  innocent  of  guilt.  Now  like  a  poplar-leaf
thou  tremblest,  now  like  the  moon  pale  marks  dapple
thy  rosy  cheeks.  Shamefast,  thou  dost  shun  even
my  embrace,  and  if  a  witness  is  at  hand,  thou  fleest
my  wonted  kisses.

X

Cltstom  suffers  naught  to  be  strange  to  the  eye.


2gi
V  2


PAULINUS PELLiEUS

THE EUCHARISTICUS


INTRODUCTION


Thk  Authoh

The  auLlior  of  the  Kiirharislicus  is  in  some  sense  an
elusive  pei'sonage  ;  for  while  the  one  surviving  MS.
states  that  the  woi-k  is  by  an  unknown  writer
(incerti  mictoris),  the  editio  princeps  attributes  it  to
St.  Paulinus  of  Nola.  This  ascription  was  almost
certainly  found  in  the  MS.  (now  lost)  used  by  the
first  editor;  and  though  quite  impossible^  as  it  stands,
it  has  so  far  been  taken  seriously  by  modern  scholars
that  the  poem  is  ascribed,  not  to  the  Saint,  but  to
some  other  person  of  the  same  name.

Paulinus,  as  we  may  therefore  call  him,  makes
certain  allusions  to  his  relatives  which  show  at  any
I'ate  to  what  family  he  belonged.  In  11.  26  ff.  he
refei's  to  his  father  as  vicarius  of  Macedonia,  and
again  (1.  3-5)  as  proconsul  of  Africa :  further  on
(1.  48  f.)  he  mentions  a  visit  to  Bordeaux  in  the  same
year  in  which  his  grandfather  was  consul,  and  finally
(1.  332)  alludes  to  Bazas  as  the  native  place  of  his
forefathers.  The  chronology  of  the  author's  life
leaves  no  room  for  doubt  that  the  grandfather  was
Decimus  Magnus  Ausonius,  the  poet-rhetorician,
who  was  consul  in  379  a.d.  But  here  our  certainty
ends. Was  Paulinus  the  son  of  Hesperius  (as  Brandes

^  The  history  of  the  author  is  entirely  different  from  the
known  history  of  Paulinus  of  Nola.

295


INTRODUCTION

argues),  or  of  a  daughter  of  Ausonius  by  Thalassius,^
as  Seeck  and  Peiper  maintain  ?  The  complete
arguments  on  either  side  are  too  minute  and  too
complicated  to  be  summarised  here  ;  nor,  after  all,
is  the  question  important.  All  that  need  be  said
is  that  the  author's  references  to  Gaulish  estates
inherited  from  his  grandfather  (jes  avitae,  II.  422,  570)
and  to  others  in  Macedonia  left  by  his  mother
(inalenii  census,  1.  414)  strongly  favour  Brandes'  view
that  Paulinus  was  a  son  of  Hesjierius  by  a  Mace-
donian wife.

We  may  now  turn  to  the  life  history  of  the  author.
He  was  born  at  Fella  in  Macedonia  in  .376  a.d.  and
carried  to  Carthage  nine  months  later  on  his  father's
promotion  to  the  Proconsulship  of  Africa  (11.  24-33).
After  eighteen  months  in  this  province  he  was  taken
first  to  Rome  and  then  to  Bordeaux,  which  he  reached
in  379  A.D.  (11.  34-49).  Here  his  education  began.
After  passing  through  the  elementary  stage,  he  was
advanced  to  read  Plato,  Homer  and  Virgil ;  though,
being  used  to  converse  in  Greek  and  almost  ignorant
of  Latin,  he  found  the  last-named  a  trying  author
(11.  65-80).  It  is  worthy  of  notice  that  at  this  early
])eriod  he  had  a  boyish  ambition  to  be  set  ajiart —
apparently  for  the  monastic  life  (11.  92  ff.).  Just  as
he  was  beginning  to  take  an  interest  in  study  and  to
show  some  promise,  he  was  struck  down  by  an  ague.
Doctors  recommended  exercise  and  amusement,  with
the  result  that  horses,  hounds  and  hunting  took  the
place  of  books  (11.  113  fF.).

The  youth,  now  rapidly  growing  up,  next  developed
a  love  of  finery  and  general  magnificence,  succeeded

*  If  so,  "Paulinus"  is  really  the  grandson  Au.sonius  of
Epist.  xxi.-xxii. (Above,  pp.  68  fl. )

296


INTRODUCTION

by  indulgence  in  other  amusements  which  he  fol-
lowed with  a  stronger  sense  of  caution  than  of
morality  (11.  140-175).  Hereupon  parents  intervened
with  the  remedy  of  a  marriage  of  convenience.
Paulinus  gained  a  wife,  for  whom  he  shows  scant
affection,  but  found  an  outlet  for  his  energies  in
restoring  to  order  the  neglected  estate  which  was
her  portion  (11.  176  ff.).  The  independent  means
thus  acquired  were  laid  out  in  forming  a  comfortable
and  luxurious  establishment,  and  Paulinus  bade  fair
to  settle  down  to  an  indolent,  if  blameless,  life
(11.  202  ff.).

But  this  period  of  ease  came  to  an  abrupt  end.  In
406  A.D.  his  father  died  almost  at  the  same  time  that
the  barbarians  burst  into  the  Roman  Empire(ll.  226ff.).
The  attempts  of  his  brother  to  upset  his  father's  will
was  the  first  and  least  of  his  troubles  (11.  248  ff.)  :
Bordeaux  was  occupied  by  the  Visigoths,  who  sacked
the  city  ere  they  evacuated  it  in  414  a.d.  Paulinus,
absent  at  the  time,  had  failed  to  take  the  precaution
which  might  have  saved  his  property ;  and  conse-
quently his  house  was  given  up  to  plunder  (11.  271  ff.,
308  ff.).  To  make  matters  worse,  the  puppet-
Emperor  Priscus  Attalus  inflicted  on  him  the  empty
but  apparently  burdensome  title  of  Count  of  the
Private  Largesses.  Driven  from  his  home  which  was
burned,  Paulinus  fled  with  his  family  to  Bazas,  only
to  be  besieged  in  the  town,  where  he  narrowly
escaped  assassination  (11.  328  ff.).  His  attempts  to
extricate  himself  had  the  unexpected  result  of
ending  the  siege  by  detaching  the  Alans  from  their
Gothic  allies  (11.  343  ff.).

His  position,  however,  was  now  diflficult.  Hostile
Goths  and  dishonest  Romans  had  made  away  with

297


INTRODUCTION

all,  or  nearly  all,  of  his  inherited  property.  Natur-
ally he  thought  of  removing  to  Macedonia,  where
his  mother's  estates  remained  intact,  but  was  thwarted
in  this  by  his  wife's  obstinate  refusal  to  make  the
voyage  (11.  404  ff.,  480  ff.,  494).

Probably  it  was  in  desperation  at  his  difficulties
that  Paulinas  sought  to  abandon  the  world  (and  his
family)  by  becoming  a  monk  (11.  4o5  ff.)  ;  but  from
this  purpose  he  was  deterred  by  the  advice  of  certain
"holy  men."  A  course  of  penance  was  imposed
upon  him,  and  at  Easter,  421  A.n.,  he  felt  fitted  to
receive  the  Communion  (11.  464-478).

As  years  passed  by,  his  position  grew  worse  and
worse ;  his  mother-in-law,  mother,  and  wife  (of
whom  he  speaks  with  some  bitterness)  died  one
after  another  ;  his  sons  left  him  to  make  their  way
at  Bordeaux,  where  they  too  died  (11.  492-515).
His  means,  too,  were  now  so  small  that  he  retired
to  Marseilles  and  there  endeavoured  to  make  a
livelihood  by  working  a  very  small  property  which
he  owned  there.  But  this  effort  also  failed  and
he  returned  to  Bordeaux  to  live,  apparently,  in
dependence  (11.  520  ff.).

But  at  length  his  continuous  ill-fortune  was  re-
lieved. His  estate  at  Marseilles,  though  somehow
embarrassed,  was  purchased  by  an  unknown  Goth
who  paid,  if  not  the  fair  price,  yet  a  sum  sufficient
to  make  him  independent  once  more  (11.  575  ff.).  It
is  evident  that  Paulinas  expects  that  the  proceeds
will  suffice  to  support  his  remaining  years;  and  we
may  therefore  take  it  that  the  transaction  was  carried
out  not  long  before  the  Eucharisticiis  was  written,
and  that  it  was  the  last  incident  of  importance  in
this  stranjre  life.


INTRODUCTION

The  poem  was  composed  when  the  author  was  in
his  eighty-third  year  (11.  12-14:),  i.e.  in  459  a.d.  :  in
the  nature  of  things  his  death  must  have  followed
not  long  after  that  date.

The  EucHARiSTicns  as  Literature

Paulinus  openly  avows  that  his  purpose  in  writing
the  Eucharisticus  is  to  show  how  his  whole  life  had
been  ordered  and  directed  by  Providence,  and
thereby  in  some  measure  to  return  thanks  for  such
guidance.  He  is  careful  to  disclaim  both  literary
merit  and  literary  ambition.  And  indeed  in  any
strictly  literary  sense  the  value  of  the  poem  must  be
regarded  as  slight.

It  is  probable  that  the  nature  of  his  subject —
reflexions  upon  times  long  gone  by — induced  him
to  adopt  a  slow  and  deliberate  style.  Yet  even
if  this  is  so,  it  cannot  excuse  the  long  and  laboured
periods  in  which  he  unfolds  his  experiences.  In
the  tangle  of  absolute,  temporal,  and  relative
clauses,  complicated  by  parentheses  and  conditions,
the  reader  is  often  hard  put  to  it  to  follow  the
trend  of  the  author's  thought ;  sometimes  (as  in
II.  1-19-153)  a  main  verb  is  altogether  lacking.  A
certain  almost  wilful  ponderousness  of  expression
(as  in  11.  458  f. :  "  qui  sibi  servari  consuetam  indi-
cere  curam  |  posse  viderentur "),  and  a  habit  of
introducing  sentence  after  sentence  with  a  relative
(11.  81,  85,  92)  only  increase  the  monotonous  effect.
It  is  not  that  Paulinus  scorns  any  form  of  literary
refinement  and  embellishment.  He  imitates  such
authors  as  were  known  to  him — Virgil  among  the
ancients,  and  Ausonius,  Paulinus  of  Nola,  Juvencus,-

299


INTRODUCTION

Sedulius  among  the  moderns.  Moreover,  as  became
a  grandson  of  Ausonius,  lie  was  by  no  means  in-
different to  rhetorical  and  verbal  effects,  indulging
largely  in  such  antitheses  as  :  "  effectum  .  .  .  pro-
fectum  "  (1.  6),  or  "  officeret  .  .  .  succedente  .  .  .  ce-
dente  .  .  .  sufficeret  "  (11.  137-14U).  The  note  struck
by  one  word  is  frequently  repeated  with  some
variation  further  on  (as  in  11.  4  f .  :  "  placidus  .  .  .
|)lacita,"  or  in  432-4  "  complacuit  .  .  .  placatum  ").
Alliteration  also  was  frequently  though  not  regularlv
brought  into  play  ;  thus  in  11.  182  ff.  we  have
'' possessa  placeret  |  ad  praesens  posset"  followed
by  "  dudum  desidia  domini  "  ;  in  1.  209  "  pretio
quam  pondere  praestans  "  ;  in  1.  149  "  vegetus  veloci
currere  vectus  ]  equo."  Sometimes,  but  more  rarely,
he  indulges  in  such  plays  as  "  ponere  finem  |  nescis
et  ignaris  solis  succurrere  nosti  "  (1.  445).

Of  the  metrical  and  rhythmic  aspects  of  the
Eucharisticus  no  adequate  account  can  here  be
given. 1  Licences  such  as  status  (1.  194,  genitive)
and  compertd  (1.  197,  ablative)  may  be  due  to  the
changes  which  Latin  had  undergone  and  was  undei--
going ;  but  it  is  evident  that  Paulinus  used  the
hexameter  as  a  purely  conventional  mould  into
which  his  words  were  to  be  forced.  As  a  result,  his
verses  move  as  regardless  of  rhythm  as  a  slow  train
over  an  ill-laid  line.

But  though  we  must  deny  to  Paulinus  literarv
precision,  technical  ease  and  grace,"^  his  work  pre-
sents certain  aspects  which  must not be ignoi-ed.

'  On  this  see  the  Prolegomena  toBrandes'  edition,  §  iii.

*  As  Brandes  observes,  many  of  the  blemishes  in  this
work  may  be  due  to  the  interruption  of  the  author's  training
ere  he  had  attained  an  adequate  knowledge  of  Latin.

300


INTRODUCTION

Consciously  or  unconsciously  he  chose  a  subject  which
has  something  of  the  unity  and  regular  development
of  a  Greek  tragedy.  The  varying  phases  of  the  first
half  of  the  author's  life  unfold  themselves  in  an
atmosphere  of  almost  insolent  prosperity  seeming
to  invite  the  catastrophe  or  "  reversal  of  fortune  "
which  forms  the  central  point.  Misfortune  after
misfoi'tuiie  follows  until  it  seems  likely  that  the
"hero"  will  be  overwhelmed;  only  towards  the
close  is  the  picture  brightened  (as  in  the  Samson
Agonisles)  by  some  measure  of  consolation.  Here,
moreover,  as  in  Milton's  drama,  the  pervading  idea
of  continuous  divine  direction  is  an  additional  bond
of  unity.  And  lastly,  if  we  seek  for  individual
})assages,  most  will  admit  that  the  conclusion  at
least  (11.  590  ff.)  has  a  solemn  and  majestic  dignity
of  its  own.  Paulinus  lacks  literary  craftsmanship,  but
he  has,  what  many  literary  craftsmen  lack,  sincerity
and  real  experience  of  what  he  describes  ;  his  poem,
though  essentially  religious,  is  quite  pure  of  the
mendacious  assumption  of  emotions  never  experi-
enced which  poisons  so  man}-  "religious  poems."

HisTORic.M,  Value  ok  the Poem

When  all  allowance  has  been  made,  we  must  still
admit  that  it  is  as  an  historical  document  that
the  Euc/iaristinis  deserves  to  be  read.  Even  here  it
is  not  the  few  concrete  facts  recorded  (the  sack  of
Bordeaux,  the  siege  of  Bazas  and  the  like)  which
are  chiefly  important.  The  phrases  "barbarian  in-
vasion," "collapse  of  the  Roman  power,"  and  such
like  mean  little  unless  their  implication  is  under-
stood ;  and  the  Eucharisticus  does  indeed  reveal  in
a single instance what these events implied for

301


INTRODUCTION

thousands  of  happy  and  jirosperous  homes.  First
the  free,  gay  and  luxurious  life  of  the  well-to-do
is  depicted ;  then  the  storm  breaks,  and

apparent  rari  nantes  in  gurgite  vasto.

The  surviving  unfortunates  struggle  on  for  a  time,
catching  at  expedient  after  expedient,  but  always
sinking  deeper.  If  in  the  end  certain  of  them  found
some  ark  of  safety,  they  might  well  see  in  their
preservation  a  token  of  divine  mercy.

Nor  is  the  poem  unimportant  for  social  and  moral
history.  The  author's  account  of  his  youth  and
early  manhood  well  illustrates  the  life  led  by  a
young  provincial  squire — set  upon  having  the  best
that  money  could  buy  in  the  way  of  horses,  hounds,
and  the  like  ;  fond  of  hunting  and  a  gallop  across
country,  and  withal,  careful  to  be  in  the  latest
fashion.  One  passage  at  least  (11.  160  fF.)  is  a
remarkable  commentary  on  ancient  slaverj'  aTid  the
curious  moral  distinctions  based  upon  it.

MS.S. AND  Editions  of  the  Poem

Only  two  MSS.  of  the  Knchaiisiicus  are  known  to
have  survived  into  modern  times:  (1)  An  MS.  (P)
used  by  the  first  editor.  Of  the  earlier  and  later
history  of  this,  nothing  is  known.  (2)  A  ninth-cen-
tury MS.  (^B),  now  at  Berne  (No.  317),  and  showing
corrections  by  three  subsequent  hands  (distinguished
as  B--B^).  Both  MSS.  were  derived  from  a  single
archetype.

The  following  have  published  editions  of  the
Enchansticus :  —

(1) Marguarinus  de  la  Bigne,  in  BihUolkeca  Sanc-
torum Patritm, Appendix (Vol. III.), Paris, 1579
{Edilio  Princeps).
302


INTRODUCTION

(2)  Caspar  Barth,  Animadversiones,  Frankfurt,  1624
(republished  with  considerable  augmentations  and
an  emended  text  (pp.  150  ff.)  in  Christian  Daum's
Paidinus  Petricorius,  Leipzig,  1681).

(3)  Colledio  Pisaitretms,  Vol.  VI.  (Pisauri,  1766).

(4)  Ludovicus  Leipziger,  Paii/ini  Carmen  Euchar-
usticum,  Wratislau,  1858.

(5)  VVilhelm  Brandes,  in  Poetae  Ckrisliani  Minores,
Pars  I.,  Vienna,  1888.  (^Corpus  Srriptonun  Ecclesias-
ticoriim  Lalinoruni,  Vol.  XXVI.)

The  text  of  the  present  edition  is  that  of  Brandes
with  a  few  negligible  changes  in  punctuation.

There  appears  to  be  no  English  translation  of  the
poem,  and  none  in  a  foreign  language  is  known  to
me.  In  the  present  version,  intended  as  it  is  to
stand  side  by  side  with  the  original,  I  have  judged
it  better  for  the  most  part  not  to  attempt  to  break
Op  the  author's  long  sentences.  However  desirable
that  process  may  be,  it  is  calculated  to  perplex  the
reader  who  desires  help  in  following  the  original
rather  than  an  independent  version.


303


SANCTl PAULINP ETXAPISTIKON

Praefatio

(1)  Scio  quosdam  inlustrium  viroruin  pro  suaruni
splendore  virtutuni  ad  perpetuandani  suae  gloriae
dignitatem  ephemeridem  gestorum  suorum  propi-io
sermone  consei'iptam  memoriae  tradidisse.  a  quo-
rum me  praestantissimis  meritis  tarn  longe  profecto
quam  ipsa  temporis  antiquitate  discretum  non  utiqiie
ratio  aequa  consilii  ad  contexendum  eiusdem  prope
materiae  opusculuin  provocavit,  cum  mihi  neque  ulla
sint  gesta  tam  splendida,  de  quibus  aliquam  possini
captare  gloriolam,  nee  eloquii  tanta  fiducia  ut  facile
audeam  cuiusquam  opera  scriptoris  aemulari,  (2)  sed,
quod  non  piget  confiteri,  iamdudum  me  in  peregri-
natione  diuturna  aerumnosi  otii  maerorc  marcescen-
tem  misericordia,  ut  confido,  divina  ad  luiiusmodi  me
solacia  afFectanda  pellexit,  quae  simul  et  bene  sibi
consciae  senectuti  et  religioso  proposito  convenirent
— ut,  qui  me  scilicet  totam  vitam  meam  deo  debere
meminissem,  totius  quoque  vitae  meae  actus  ipsius
devotos  obsequiis  exhiberem  eiusdemque  gratia  con-
cessa  mihi  tempora  reeensendo  eucharisticon  ipsi
opusculum  sub  ephemeridis  meae  relatione  contexe-
rem, (3)  sciens  profecto  et  benignae  ipsius  miseri-

'  P  : Incerti  auctoris  EuxapitrTiK6s,  B^'  ••.
304


THE THANKSGIVING OF
ST. PAULINUS

The PriEFACE

I  KNOW  that  among  famous  men  there  have
been  some  who,  in  right  of  their  briUiant  qualities
and  to  immortalise  the  eminence  of  their  renown,
have  handed  down  to  posterity  a  memoir  of  their
doings  compiled  in  their  own  words.  Since  I  am  of
course  as  far  removed  from  these  in  their  outstanding
worth  as  in  point  of  time,  it  is  certainly  no  similar
reason  and  design  which  has  induced  me  to  put
together  a  little  work  almost  identical  in  subject ;
for  I  have  neither  any  such  brilliant  achievements
whereby  1  might  hope  to  snatch  some  little  gleam
of  fame,  nor  so  great  a  confidence  in  my  powers  of
expression  as  lightly  to  dare  to  challenge  the  work
of  any  author.  But — I  am  not  ashamed  to  avow  it —
I,  who  in  my  lengthy  pilgrimage  have  long  languished
in  the  misery  of  care-fraught  idleness,  have  been  led
on,  as  I  surely  believe,  by  divine  mercy  to  seek  such
consolations  as  befitted  alike  a  good  conscience  in
old  age  and  a  devout  purpose  ;  I  mean  that  I,  who
indeed  felt  that  I  owed  my  whole  life  to  God,
should  show  that  my  whole  life's  doings  also  have
been  subject  to  his  direction  ;  and  that,  by  telling
over  the  seasons  granted  me  by  his  same  grace,  I
should  form  a  little  work,  a  Thmiksgiving  to  him,  in
the  guise  of  a  narrative  memoir.  For  I  know  indeed
botli that the  care  of  his  kindly  mercy  was  about


PA ULIN us PFXL.EUS

cordiae  circa  me  fuisse,  quod  indultis  humano  generi
temporariis  voluptatibus  etiam  ipse  prima  mea  aetate
non  carui,  et  in  hac  quoque  parte  curam  mihi  provi-
dentiae  ipsius  profuisse,  quod  me  udsiduis  adversi-
trttibus  moderanter  exercens  evidenter  instruxit  nee
inpensius  me  praesentem  beatitudinem  debere  dili-
gere  quam  amittere  posse  me  scirem,  nee  adversis
magnopere  terreri,  in  quibus  subvenire  mihi  posse
misericordias  ipsius  adprobassem.

(4)  Proinde  si  quando  hoc  opusculum  meum  in
cuiusquam  manus  venerit,  ex  ipso  libelH  titulo  prae-
notato  evidenter  debet  advertere  me  hane  medita-
tiunculam  meam,  quam  omnipotenti  deo  dedico,  otio
meo  potius  quam  alieno  negotio  praestitisse,  magis-
que  id  meorum  esse  votorum,  ut  hoc  qualecumque
obsequium  meum  acceptum  deo  sit,  quam  ut  carmen
incultum  ad  notitiam  perveniat  doctiorum.  (5)  At-
tamen  si  cui  forsitan  magis  curioso  tantum  otii  ab  re
sua  fuerit,  ut  laboriosum  vitae  meae  ordinem  velit
agnoscere,  exoratum  eum  cupio  ut,  sive  aliquid  seu
torsitan  nihil  in  gestis  vel  in  versibus  meis  quod
possit  probare  rej)pererit,  ea  tamen  ipsa  quae  ele-
gerit  oblivioni  potius  inculcanda  deleget  quam
memoriae  diiudicanda  commendtt.


€YXAPICTIK0C Deo  sun  EpHKMRiunis  meaf
I'extu.

Ekarhaiie  parans  annorum  lapsa  meorum
tt-mpora  et  in  seriem  deducere  gesta  dieruni
ambigua  exactos  vit.ie  (juos  sorte  cucurri.

306


THE EUCHARISTICUS

me,  because  in  my  early  life  I  lacked  not  even  the
fleeting  pleasures  natural  to  mankind  ;  and  that  in
this  part  of  it  also  the  care  of  his  providence  has  been
before  me,  because,  while  reasonably  chastening  me
with  continual  misfortunes,  he  has  clearly  taught  me
that  1  ought  neither  to  love  too  earnestly  present
prosperity  which  I  knew  I  might  lose,  nor  to  be
greatly  dismayed  by  adversities  wherein  1  had  found
that  his  mercies  could  succour  me.

Therefore,  if  ever  this  little  work  of  mine  should
come  into  the  hands  of  any,  from  the  very  title
prefixed  to  the  book  he  ought  clearly  to  understand
that  this  my  little  musing,  which  1  consecrate  to
God  Almighty,  is  a  gift  to  my  leisure,  rather  than  to
another's  pleasure  ;  and  that  my  prayer  is  rather  that
this  my  service,  such  as  it  is,  may  be  accepted  by
God,  than  that  my  uncouth  poem  should  win  its  wa}'
to  the  attention  of  the  learned.  Nevertheless,  if
someone  perchance  more  inquisitive  than  ordinary
should  have  so  much  leisure  from  his  own  affairs
as  to  seek  to  learn  the  toilsome  progress  of  my  life,  1
wish  to  beg  him— whether  he  find  anything,  or  perhaps
nothing,  in  my  doings  or  in  my  verses  which  he  can
praise — yet  to  elect  for  the  trampling  of  oblivion
those  very  features  whicli  he  has  selected,  rather
than  to  commend  them  to  the  discernment  of
posterity.

A  Thanksgiving  to  God  in  thk  Form  of  mv
Memoirs

Now  as  I  make  ready  to  tell  o'er  the  bygone
seasons  of  my  years  and  to  trace  out  the  succession
of past days through whicli I have sped with

307


PAULINUS PELL^.US

te,  deus  omnipotens,  placidus  mihi,  deprecor,  adsis

adspiransque  operi  placita  tibi  coepta  secundes, 5

effectum  scriptis  tribuens  votisqiu-  profectum,

lit  tua  te  merear  percurrere  dona  iuvante.

Omnia  namque  meae  tibi  debeo  tempora  vitae,

auram  ex  quo  prinium  vitalis  luminis  hausi,

inter  et  adversas  iactatus  saepe  procellas  10

instabilis  mundi  te  protectore  seneseens

altera  ab  undecima  annorum  currente  meonim

hebdomade  sex  aestivi  flagrantia  soHs

solstitia  et  totidem  bnimae  iani  frigora  vidi

te  donante^  deus,  lapsi  qui  temporis  annos  IH

instaurando  novas  cursu  revolubilis  aevi.

Sit  mihi  fas  igitur  versu  tua  dona  canentem

pangere  et  expressas  verbis  quoque  pendere  grates,

quas  equidem  et  clausas  scimus  tibi  corde  patere,

ultro  sed  abrumpens  tacitae  penetralia  mentis  20

fontem  exundantis  voti  vox  conscia  pi'odit.

Tu  mihi  lactanti  vires  in  corpore  inerti
ad  toleranda  viae  j)elagique  incerta  dedisti,
editus  ut  Pellis  inter  cunabula  quondam
regis  Alexandri  prope  moenia  Thessaloniees  '2^

patre  gerente  vices  inlustris  praefecturae,
orbis  ad  alterius  disci'etas  aequore  terras
j)erveherer  trepidis  nutricum  creditus  ulnis,
ninguida  perque  iuga  et  sectas  torrentibus  Alpes


>  Literally  "success  to  my  writings  and  fulfilment  to  my
prayers";  but  it  is  desirable  to  reproduce  the  play  oil
ejfectimi  .  .  .  profrctum.

308


THE EUCHARISTICUS

changeful  fortunes,  thee  I  implore,  Almight}'  God,
favourably  to  be  nigh  me  and,  breathing  on  my
work,  to  prosper  a  design  favoured  by  thee,  in
granting  me  sustainment  in  my  task,  attainment  in
my  prayers,^  thai  by  thy  aid  I  may  be  worthy  to  run
o'er  the  list  of  thy  gifts.  For  all  the  seasons  of  my
life  I  owe  to  thee  ever  since  I  drew  in  the  breath  of
enlivening  light,  and,  though  oft  tossed  amid  the
storms  of  this  inconstant  world,  under  thy  protection
I  grow  old  and  in  the  course  of  my  twelfth  hebdomad
of  years  have  now  seen  six  scorching  solstices  of  the
summer  sun  and  as  many  winters'  frosts — this
through  thy  gift,  O  God,  who  venewest  the  years  of
bygone  time  in  repairing  the  course  of  the  circling
Ages.2  Be  it  permitted  me,  therefore,  singing  to  re-
cord thy  gifts  in  verse,  and  in  setting  forth  of  words
also  to  pay  thanks  which,  indeed,  even  when  shut
Avithin  the  heart,  we  know  are  open  to  thee,  but  the
fraught  voice  unbidden  breaks  through  the  barriers
of  the  silent  mind  and  reveals  a  fount  of  out-gushing
prayer.

Thou  in  my  infancy  didst  give  my  helpless  frame
strength  to  endure  the  hazards  of  travel  by  land  and
sea,  that  I — born  at  Pella,  the  nursery  of  King
Alexander  of  old,  near  Salonika's  walls,  where  mv
father  was  vicegerent  '^  of  the  illustrious  Prefect —
might  be  conveyed  to  the  shores  of  another  world,
cut  off  by  sea,  entrusted  to  my  nurses'  trembling-
arms,  and  so  across  snowy  ridges  and  toi-rent-riven
ranges, across the main and the waves of the

-  The  reference  is  to  the  cycle  of  ages :  cp.  Virgil,  Kc/.
iv.  5.

'  i.e.  Vicariiis  (deputy  of  the  Prefect)  of  Macedonia.  But
possibly  the  rendering  may  be  merely  "  performed  the
functions  of  the  illustrious  Prefect."


PAULINOS PELL.i:US

Oceanumque  fretum  Tyrrheiii  et  gurgitis  undas 30

moenia  Sidoniae  Carthaginis  usque  venirem,

ante  suum  nouo  quam  menstrua  luna  recursu

luce  novata  orbem  nostro  compleret  ah  ortu.

lUic,  ut  didici,  ter  senis  mensibus  aetis

sub  genitore  nieo  proconsule  rursus  ad  aecjuor  35

expertasque  vias  revocor,  visurus  et  orbis

inclita  culminibus  praeclarae  moenia  Romae  :

quae  tamen  liaud  etiam  sensu  agnoscenda  tuentis

subiacuere  milii,  sed  post  eomperta  relatu

adsiduo  illorum  quibus  haec  tarn  nota  fuere,  40

propositum  servans  operis  subdenda  putavi.

Tandem  autem  exacto  longarum  fine  viarum
maiorum  in  patriam  tectisque  adve(;tus  avitis
Burdigalam  veni,  cuius  speciosa  Garunma
moenibus  Oceani  refluas  maris  invehit  undas  4r)

navigeram  per  portam,  quae  portum  s})atiosun)
nunc  etiam  muris  spatiosa  includit  in  urbe.
Tunc  et  avus  primum  illic  fit  mihi  cognitus,  anni
eiusdem  consul,  nostra  trieteride  prima.
Quae  postquam  est  expleta  mihi  firmavit  et  artus oO
invalidos  crescens  vigor  et  mens  conscia  seusus
adsuefacta  usum  didicit  cognoscere  rerum —
quidquid  iam  .  .  .^  potui  meminisse,  necesse  est
ipse  fide  propria  de  me  agnoscenda  retexam.

Sed  quid  ego  ex  nostris  aliud  puerilibus  annis, 5')
quos  mihi  libertas  ludusque  et  laetior  aetas
conciliare  suis  meritis  potuisse  videntur,

'  A  word  in  lost.
310


THE KUCHARLSTICUS

Tyrrhenian  flood,  might  come  to  the  far  walls  of
Sidonian  Carthage,  ere  yet  the  monthly  moon  in
her  ninth  orbit  since  my  birth  filled  her  disk  with
renewed  light.  There,  as  I  have  learned,  when
thrice  six  months  were  passed  under  the  proconsul-
ship  of  my  father,  I  was  called  back  again  to  the  sea
and  paths  already  tried,  soon  also  to  behold  the  famed
bulwarks  of  all-glorious  Rome  on  the  world's  heights.^
All  this  which  passed  befoi-e  me,  though  not  even  to
be  comprehended  by  my  sense  of  sight  but  later
learned  through  the  careful  report  of  those  to  whom
these  matters  were  well  known,  I  have  deemed
worthy  of  mention  in  accordance  with  the  purpose
of  my  work.

But  at  length,  the  end  of  my  long  journeying
reached,  I  was  borne  into  the  land  of  my  forefathers
and  to  my  grandfather's  house,  coming  to  Bordeaux
where  beauteous  Garonne  draws  Ocean's  tidal  waves
within  the  walls  through  a  ship-traversed  portal
which  even  now  enfolds  a  roomy  port  within  the
roomy  city's  barriers.  Then  also  my  grandfather,
consul  in  that  same  year,  was  there  first  known  to
me  in  my  first  triennium.  And  after  this  period  was
outgrown,  and  when  waxing  power  strengthened  my
feeble  limbs  and  my  mind,  aware  of  its  faculties,
learned  through  wont  to  know  the  properties  of
things— so  far  as  now  ...  I  can  remember,  I  myself
with  due  truth  must  needs  narrate  what  is  to  be
known  concerning  me.

But  what  else  in  my  boyish  years,  which  free-
dom, play,  and  blithesome  youth  seemed  to  have  been
able  to  commend  to  me  by  their  own  virtues,  shall  I

'  i.e.  "on  the  heights  which  dominate  the  world."  But
the  expression  is  very  obscure.


PAULINUS PELL.4-:US

\  el  magis  ipse  libens  recolam,  vel  dignius  ausim
inserere  huic  nostro,  quern  vei-su  cudo,  libello
quam  pietatis  opus  studiumque  insigne  parentum 60
permixtis  semper  docta  exercere  perituni
blanditiis  gnaramque  apto  nioderamine  curani
insinuare  mihi  inorum  instrumenta  bonorum
ingenioque  rudi  celerem  conferre  profectuni —
ipsius  alphabet!  inter  prope  j)rinia  elementa  65

nosse  cavere  decern  specialia  signa  amathiae
nee  minus  et  vitia  vitare  aKoivovorjTa  ?
Quarum  iam  duduni  nullus  vigeat  licet  usus
disciplinarum^  vitiato  scilicet  aevo,
me  Romana  tamen^  fateor,  servata  vetustas  70

plus  iuvat  atque  seni  propria  est  acceptior  aetas.

Nee  sero  exacto  primi  mox  tempore  lustri
dogmata  Socratus  et  bellica  plasmata  Homeri
erroresque  legens  cognoscere  cogor  Ulixis.
Protinus  et  libros  etiam  transire  Maronis  75

vix  bene  conperto  iubeor  sermone  Latino,
conloquio  Graiorum  adsuefactus  famulorum,
quos  mihi  iam  longus  ludorum  iunxerat  usus  ;
unde  labor  puero,  fateor,  fuit  hie  mihi  maior,
eloquium  librorum  ignotae  apprehendere  linguae. 80

Quae  doctrina  duplex  sicut  est  potioribus  apta
ingeniis  geminoque  ornat  splendore  peritos,
sic  sterilis  nimium  nostri,  ut  modo  sentio,  cordis
exilem  facile  exhausit  divisio  venam.
Quodinnic  invito  quoquemehaec  mea  pagina  prodit,85
inconsulta  quidem,  quam  sponte  expono  legendam,
sed  mihi  non  rebus,  quantum  confido.  pudenda,
quarum  notitiam  scriptis  contexere  conor  :
namque  ita  me  sollers  castorum  cura  parentum
a  puero  instituit,  laedi  ne  quando  sinistro  90


THE EUCHARISTICUS

more  gladly  dwell  u})on  or  more  fitly  dare  to  set  in
this  little  book  which  I  fashion  in  verse,  than  affec-
tion's work  and  my  parents'  noble  pains,  skilled  to
season  learning  with  mingled  enticements,  and  their
wise  care,  exercising  due  control,  to  instil  into  me  the
means  of  good  living  and  on  my  untrained  mind  to
bestow  speedy  development — almost  along  with  my
first  steps  in  the  alphabet  itself  to  learn  to  shun  the
ten  special  marks  of  ignorance  and  equally  to  avoid
vices  anathematised  r  And  albeit  this  discipline  has
long  since  fallen  out  of  use  through  the  corruption,
doubtless,  of  the  age,  yet,  I  declare,  the  antique
Roman  fashion  1  observed  delights  me  more,  and  the
life  natural  to  an  old  man  is  more  tolerable  therefor.

Full  early,  when  the  days  of  my  first  lustrum
were  well-nigh  spent,  I  was  made  to  con  and  learn
the  doctrines  of  Socrates,  Homer's  wai'like  fantasies,
and  Ulysses'  wanderings.  And  forthwith  I  was
bidden  to  traverse  Maro's  works  as  well,  ere  I  well
understood  the  Latin  tongue,  used  as  I  was  to  the
converse  of  Greek  servants  with  whom  long  pui'suit
of  pla}'  had  made  me  intimate  ;  whereby,  I  affirm,
this  was  too  heavy  a  task  for  me,  a  boy,  to  grasp  the
eloquence  of  works  in  an  unknown  tongue.

This  double  learning,  as  it  is  suited  to  more
powerful  minds  and  decks  those  skilled  in  it  with
a  two-fold  radiance,  so  its  wide  range  soon  drained
dry  the  vein  of  my  mind — too  barren,  as  I  now
understand.  So  much  now  even  despite  me  this
my  page  reveals — a  page  ill-judged,  indeed,  which
I  unasked  set  forth  to  be  read,  yet,  as  I  hope,  not
disgracing  me  in  the  matters  whereof  I  seek  to  form
a  written  record ;  for  so  my  chaste  parents  careful
taught me from my boyhood, lest some day  the

313


PAULINUS PELL.EUS

cuiusquani  sermone  mea  se  fama  tinieret.

Quae  licet  obtineat  propriiim  bene  parta  decoreni,

hac  potiore  tamen  turn  nie  decorasset  hoiiore,

consona  si  nostris  primo  sub  tempore  votis

hac  in  parte  etiam  mansissent  vota  parentum,  95

perpetuQ^  ut  pueruni  servarent  me  tibi,  Christe,

rectius  banc  curam  pro  me  pietatis  babentes,

earnis  ut  inlecebris  breviter  praesentibus  expers

aeternos  caperem  venture  in  tempore  fructus.

Sed  quoniam  nunc  iam  magis  hoc  me  credere  fas  est  lOU

conduxisse  mihi,  quod  te  voluisse  probasti,

omnipotens  aeterne  deus,  qui  cuncta  gubernas^

culpato  renovando  mihi  vital ia  dona,

hoc  nunc  maiores  pro  me  tibi  debeo  grates,

maiorum  quanto  erroruni  cognosco  reatum.  10")

Namque  et,  incautus  quidquid  culpabile  gessi

inlicitumque  vagus  per  lubrica  tempora  vitae,

te  indulgente  mihi  totum  scio  posse  remitti

ex  quo  me  reprobans  lapsum  ad  tua  iura  refugi,

et,  si  ulla  unquam  potui  peccata  cavere,  110

quae  mihi  maiorem  parerent  commissa  reatum,

hoc  quoque  me  indeptum  divino  munere  novi.

Sed  redeo  ad  seriem  decursaque  illius  aevi
tempora,  (juo  studiis  intentus  litteraturae
ultro  libens  aliquem  iam  me  mihi  ipse  videbar 1 15
votivum  inpensi  operis  sentire  profectum,
Argolico  pariter  Latioque  instante  magistro,
cepissemque  etiam  forsan  fructum  quoque  dignum,
ni  subito  incumbens  quarterna  acerba  meorum
conatus  placitos  studiorum  destituisset  120

vix  impleta  aevi  quinta  trieteride  nostri.
Consternata  autem  pro  me  pietate  parentum.


THE EUCHARISTICUS

malignant  tongue  of  any  man  might  endanger  my
repute.  And  though  this  repute,  well  earned,  still
keeps  the  lustre  due  to  it,  yet  with  this  higher
grace  would  it  then  have  adorned  me,  if  with  my
hopes  in  early  life  my  parents'  hopes  had  continued
to  agree  in  this  respect,  namely,  that  forever  they
should  keep  me  as  thy  child,  O  Christ,  moi'e  rightly
making  this  the  aim  of  their  love  for  me — that  by
brief  sacrifice  of  the  present  joys  of  the  flesh  1
might  win  endless  reward  in  the  world  to  come.
But — since  I  now  am  bound  to  believe  that  this  has
more  profited  me  which  thou,  O  God,  almiglity,
everlasting,  hast  shown  to  have  been  thy  will  by
renewing  to  me,  though  sinful,  thy  gifts  of  life — so
much  the  greater  thanks  I  now  owe  thee  on  my  behalf,
as  I  perceive  the  greater  guilt  of  my  transgressions.
For  both  I  know  that — whatever  deed  blameworthy
or  act  unlawful  I  have  unwarily  committed,  straying
through  life's  treacherous  seasons — thou  in  thy
mercy  canst  wholly  forgive,  ever  since  scorning  my
fallen  self  I  fled  back  to  thy  obedience  ;  and,  if  ever
I  have  been  able  to  shun  any  sins  which,  committed,
would  bring  me  greater  guilt,  this  too  I  feel  that  I
have  gained  through  Heaven's  bounty.

But  I  return  to  my  course  and  to  the  seasons  I
passed  through  at  the  time  when,  wrapt  in  study
and  in  learning,  I  gladly  fancied  to  myself  that
already  I  felt  some  of  the  desired  outcome  of  my
pains  lavished  under  the  constant  care  of  Greek  and
Latin  tutors  both,  and  I  should  also  have  gained,
perchance,  a  meet  return,  had  not  a  sharp  quartan
fever,  suddenly  falling  upon  me,  defrauded  my
willing  eflbrts  in  learning,  when  the  fifth  triad  of
my  life  was  scarce  completed.  But  when  my
parents'  love  for  me  was  stricken  with  alarm  at  this


PAULINUS PELL.^US

quippe  quibus  potior  visa  est  curatio  iiostri
corporis  invalidi  quani  doctae  instructio  linguae,
primitus  hoc  medicis  suadentibus,  ut  inihi  iugis \2')
laetitia  atque  animo  grata  omnia  perspicerentur ;
quae  pater  in  tantum  studuit  per  se  ipse  })arare,
deposits  ut  nuper  venandi  attentius  usu  —
causa  equideni  sola  studioruni  c|ui})pe  meoruui,
neve  his  ofliceret,  sibi  me  ad  sua  ludicra  iungens,  130
neu  sine  me  placitis  umquam  solus  frueretur —
me  propter  rui'sus  cura  maiore  resumens
eiusdem  ludi  cuncta  instrumenta  novaret,
ex  quibus  optatam  possem  captare  salutem.
Quae  protracta  diu  longi  per  temjiora  niorbi  loO

invexere  mihi  iugem  iam  deinde  legendi
desidiam,  oflficeret  durans  quae  postea  sano
succedente  novo  mundi  fallacis  amore
et  tenero  nimium  affectu  cedente  parentum.
sufficeret  quibus  ex  nostra  gaudere  salute.  1 40

Qua  ratione  auctus  noster  quoque  crevit  et  error,
rtrmatus  facile  ad  iuvenalia  vota  sequenda,
ut  mihi  pulcher  equus  falerisque  ornatior  esset,
strator  procerus,  velox  canis  et  speciosus
accipiter,  Romana  et  nuper  ab  urbe  petita  14")

aurata  instrueret  nostrum  sphaera  concita  ludum,
cultior  utque  mihi  vestis  foret  et  nova  saepe
(juaeque  Arabi  muris  leni  fragraret  odore.
Nee  minus  et  vegetus  veloci  currere  vectus
semper  equo  gaudens  quotiens  evasero  casus  150

abruptos,  recolens — Christi  me  munere  fas  est
credere  servatum,  quod  tum  nescisse  dolendum  est,
scilicet  inlecebris  urgentibus  undique  mundi.
316


THE EUCHARISTICUS

— seeing  they  deemed  more  urgent  the  recovery  of
my  enfeebled  body  than  the  training  of  my  tongue
in  eloquence,  and  as  physicians  from  the  first  advised
that  continual  gaiety  and  amusement  should  be
devised  for  me — my  father  was  so  eager  by  his  own
efforts  to  secure  this  end  that,  though  of  late  he
had  laid  by  his  wont  of  hunting  zealously  ('twas
indeed  for  my  studies'  sake  alone,  that  he  might
not  hinder  them  by  making  me  the  companion  of
his  pastimes,  nor  without  me  ever  enjoy  his
delight  alone),  on  my  account  he  returned  to  it
with  greater  interest,  renewing  all  means  this
sport  affords,  in  hope  that  thereby  I  might
woo  health.  These  pursuits,  long  continued  during
the  slow  period  of  my  sickness,  caused  in  me
a  distaste  for  study,  thenceforward  chronic,  which
persisting  afterwards  in  time  of  health,  harmed  me
when  love  of  the  false  world  made  way  and  the  too
pliant  fondness  of  my  parents  gave  way,  charmed
with  delight  at  my  recovery.

Wherefore,  as  my  growth,  so  my  waywardness
increased,  readily  settling  down  to  the  pursuit  of
youthful  desires — as  to  have  a  fine  horse  bedecked
with  special  trappings,  a  tall  groom,  a  swift  hound,
a  shapely  hawk,  a  tinselled  ball,  fresh  brought  from
Rome,  to  serve  me  in  my  games  of  pitching,  to
wear  the  height  of  fashion,  and  to  have  each  latest
novelty  perfumed  with  sweet-smelling  myrrh  of
Araby.  Likewise  when  1  recall  how,  grown  robust,
I  ever  loved  to  gallop  riding  a  racing  steed,  and  how
many  a  headlong  fall  I  escaped,  'tis  right  I  should
believe  I  was  preserved  by  Christ's  mercy ;  and  pity
'tis  that  then  I  knew  it  not  by  reason  of  the  world's
thronging  enticements.

317


PAULINUS PELL^EUS

Quas  inter  fluitans  interque  et  vota  parentum
iugiter  in  nostram  tendentia  posteritatem,  155

iani  prope  sero  calens  aevi  pro  tempore  nostri
in  nova  prorupi  iuvenalis  gaudia  luxus,
quae  facile  ante  puer  rebar  me  posse  cavere.
Attamen  in  quantum  lasciva  licentia  eauto
stricta  coherceri  j)otuit  moderamine  freni,  1 00

congererem  graviora  meis  ne  crimina  culpis,
hac  mea  castigans  lege  incentiva  repressi  ;
invitam  ne  quando  ullam  iurisve  alieni
adjieterem  carumque  memor  servare  pudorem
cedere  et  ingenuis  oblatis  sponte  caverem,  1G5

contentus  domus  inlecebris  famulantibus  uti,
quippe  reus  culpae  potius  quam  criminis  esse
praeponens  famaeque  timens  incurrere  damna.
Sed  neque  hoc  etiam  mea  inter  gesta  silebo^
unum  me  nosse  ex  me  illo  in  tempore  natum, 170
visum  autem  neque  ilium  turn,  quia  est  cito  functus,
nee  queniquam,  fuerit  spurius  post  qui  mens,  umquam
cum  mihi  lascivae  inlecebris  sociata  iuventae
libertas  gravius  quisset  dominando  nocere,
ni  tibi,  Christe,  mei  iam  tunc  quoque  cura  fuisset. 1  75

Talis  vita  mihi  a  ter  senis  circiter  annis
usque  duo  durans  impleta  decennia  mansit
donee  me  invitum,  fateor,  pia  cura  parentum
cogeret  invectum  blanda  suetudine  ritum
deserere  atque  novum  compelleret  esse  maritum  180
coniugis,  antique)  potius  cuius  domus  esset
nouunc  magiiifica.  quam  (piae  possessa  placere


i8


THE EUCHARISTICUS

As  I  was  wavering  betwixt  such  interests  and
my  parents'  wishes  which  were  set  constantly  upon
the  renewal  of  their  line  through  me,  at  length,
late  for  my  time  of  life,  I  felt  new  fires  and  broke
out  into  the  pleasui*es  of  youthful  wantonness  whicli,
as  a  boy,  1  used  to  think  I  could  easily  avoid.  How-
beit,  so  far  as  wilful  wantonness  could  be  curbed  and
bridled  with  prudent  restraint,  lest  I  should  heap
heavier  offences  on  my  faults,  I  checked  my  passions
with  this  chastening  rule  :  that  I  should  never  seek
an  unwilling  victim,  nor  transgress  another  s  rights,
and,  heedful  to  keep  unstained  my  cherished
reputation,  should  beware  of  yielding  to  free-born
loves  though  voluntarily  offered,  but  be  satisfied  with
servile  amours  in  my  own  home  ;  for  I  preferred  to
be  guilty  of  a  fault  rather  than  of  an  offence,^  fear-
ing to  suffer  loss  of  my  good  name.  Yet  even  this
also  among  my  doings  1  will  confess  :  one  son  I  know
was  born  to  me  at  that  time  — though  neither  he
then  (since  he  soon  died),  nor  any  bastard  of  mine
afterwards,  Avas  ever  seen  by  me — when  freedom,
allied  with  lusty  youth's  allurements,  might  by  gain-
ing mastery  have  more  gravely  harmed  me,  hadst
not  thou,  ()  Christ,  even  then  had  care  for  me.

Such  was  the  life  I  led  from  about  my  eighteenth
year,  and  so  continued  until  my  second  decade's
close,  when  my  parent's  anxious  care  forced  me,
unwillingl)-,  I  admit,  to  give  up  this  state,  grown
easy  through  soft  custom,  and  drove  me  by  way  of
change  to  mate  with  a  wife,  whose  pvo{)erty  was  rather
glorious  for  its  ancient  name  than  for  the  present
a portion potent to please, because of  the sore

'  Cii/p(i  is  a  transgression  of  moral,  rriiiifn  of  statutor}-,
law.


PAULINUS PELL.?iUS

ad  praesens  posset  nimiis  obnoxia  curis,

dudum  desidia  domini  neglecta  senili,

parva  cui  neptis  functo  genitore  superstes  185

successit,  taedisque  meis  quae  postea  cessit.

Sed  semel  inpositum  statuens  tolerare  laborem,

sufFragante  animi  studiis  fervore  iuventae

vix  paucis  domus  indeptae  exercere  diebus

gaudia  contentus,  malesuada  otia  curis  190

mutare  insolitis,  cito  meque  meosque  eoegi,

quos  potui  exemplo  proprii  invitando  laboris,

quosdam  autem  invitos  domini  adstn'ngendo  rigore.

Atqiie  ita  suscepti  status  actibus  inpiger  instans

protinus  et  culturam  agris  adhibere  refectis,  1  9")

et  fessis  celerem  properavi  inpendere  curani

vinetis  conperta  mihi  ratione  novandis

et,  quod  pi-aecipue  plerisque  videtur  amarum,

ultro  libens  primus  fiscalia  debita  certo

tempore  persolvens,  propere  mihi  fida  paravi  200

otia  privatae  post  inpendenda  quieti.

Quae  et  mihi  cara  nimis  semper  tuit  ingenioque

congrua  prima  meo  mediocria  desideranti,

proxima  deliciis  et  ab  ambitione  remota,

ut  mihi  compta  domus  spatiosis  aedibus  asset 205

et  diversa  anni  per  tempora  iugiter  apta,

mensa  opulenta  nitens,  plures  iuvenesque  ministri

inque  usus  varios  grata  et  numerosa  supellex

argentumque  magis  pretio  quam  pondere  praestaiis

et  diversae  artis  cito  iussa  explere  periti  210

*  i.e. the house was to  be  equipped  witli summer  and
winter  «(uarters— tho latter lioated  by hyixicausts  such as

■^20


THE EUCHARISTICUS

anxiety  it  involved^  as  long  uncared  for  through  the
lethargy  of  its  aged  lord,  to  whom,  surviving  her
own  father's  death,  a  young  grandchild  succeeded —
she  who  afterwards  acceded  to  wedlock  with  me.
But  once  I  was  i-esolved  to  bear  the  toil  laid  upon
me,  youth's  zeal  seconding  my  mind's  desire,  in
but  few  days  I  was  content  to  enjoy  the  pleasures
of  the  estate  thus  gained,  and  soon  forced  both
myself  and  my  thralls  to  exchange  seductive  idleness
for  unwonted  toils — inciting  such  as  I  could  by  the
example  of  my  own  labour,  but  compelling  some
against  their  will  with  a  master's  sternness.  And  so,
tirelessly  bent  upon  the  pursuits  of  the  condition  I
had  adopted,  forthwith  I  hastened  to  bring  fallowed
lands  under  tillage,  and  promptly  to  lavish  pains  in  re-
newing the  exhausted  vineyards  in  the  manner  1  had
learned,  and  also — though  to  many  a  one  this  seems
especially  vexatious — by  voluntarily  paying  down  out-
right my  taxes  at  the  appointed  time,  I  rapidly
earned  for  myself  an  assured  leisure  to  lavish  after-
wards upon  my  own  relaxation.  This  was  ever  too
much  prized  by  me,  and  though  at  first  it  was
conformable  with  my  nature  which  then  sought
but  moderate  satisfaction,  later  it  became  luxurious
and  estranged  from  high  purj)ose,  only  concerned
that  my  house  should  be  equipped  with  spacious
apartments  and  at  all  times  suited  to  meet  the
varying  seasons  of  the  year,^  my  table  lavish  and
attractive,  my  servants  many  and  those  young,
the  furniture  abundant  and  agreeable  for  various
purposes,  plate  more  preeminent  in  price  than
poundage,  workmen  of  divers  crafts  trained  promptly

may  be  seen  in  the  existing  remains  of  the  more  important
Roman  houses.

321


PAULINUS PELL.*: US

artifices  stabula  et  iumentis  plena  refectis^

tunc  et  c^'pentis  evectio  tuta  decoris.

Nee  tamen  his  ipsis  attentior  aniplificandis,

quam  conservandis  studiosior  et  neque  census

augendi  cupidus  nimis  aut  ambitor  honoruni,  215

sed  potius^  fateor,  sectator  deliciarum,

si  qua  tamen  minimo  pretio  expensaque  parari

et  salvo  famae  possent  constare  decore,

ne  nota  luxuriae  studium  niacularet  honestum.

Quae  niihi  cuncta  tamen  grata  acceptaque  fruenti  220

cara  magis  pietas  superabat  magna  parentum,

obstringens  sibi  me  nexu  dominantis  amoris,

maiore  ut  parte  anni  ipsis  praesentia  nostra

serviret,  paribus  perdurans  consona  votis

communemque  parans  per  mutua  gaudia  fructum.  225

Cuius  vitae  utinani  nobis  prolixior  usus
concessus  largo  mansisset  munere  Christi,
persistente  simul  priscae  quoque  tempore  pacis  !
Multimodis  quisset  nostrae  prodesse  iuventae
consulti  patris  adsidua  conlatio  verbi  230

exemplisque  bonis  studiorum  instructio  crescens.
Sed  transacta  aevi  post  trina  decennia  nostri
successit  duplicis  non  felix  cura  laboris,
publica  quippe  simul  clade  in  commune  dolenda
hostibus  infusis  Romani  in  viscera  regni  235

privata  cum  sorte  patris  de  funere  functi  :
ultima  namque  eius  finitae  tempora  vitae
temporibus  ruptae  pacis  prope  iuncta  fuere.

322


THE E UCHA  RISTICUS

to  fulfil  my  behests,  my  stables  filled  with  well-
conditioned  beasts  and,  withal,  stately  carriages  to
convey  me  safe  abroad.  And  yet  I  was  not  so  much
bent  on  increasing  these  same  things  as  zealous  in
preserving  them,  neither  too  eager  to  increase  my
wealth  nor  a  seeker  for  distinctions,  but  rather — I
admit — a  follower  of  luxury,  though  only  when  it
could  be  attained  at  trifling  cost  and  outlay  and
without  loss  of  fair  repute  that  the  brand  of  prodi-
gality should  not  disgrace  a  blameless  pursuit.  But
while  I  found  all  these  things  sweet  and  pleasant  to
enjoy,  my  great  affection  for  my  parents,  dearer  still,
outweighed  them,  so  binding  me  to  them  with  the
stronger  bands  of  overmastering  love  that  for  the
most  part  of  the  year  my  visits  put  me  at  their
service — visits  which  passed  their  length  accordant
with  our  prayers, 1  winning  througli  mutual  joys  a
general  gain.

Of  this  life  would  tiiat  the  enjoyment  granted
by  Christ's  rich  bounty  had  continued  longer  for
us,  the  foi'mer  times  of  peace  enduring  likewise  !
In  many  ways  could  my  youth  have  profited  by
frequent  application  of  my  father's  spoken  counsel
and  by  the  growth  in  my  training  won  from  his
good  example  I  But  after  the  third  decade  of  my  life
was  passed,  there  followed  hopeless  sorrow  caused
by  a  double  burden — a  general  grief  at  public
calamity,  when  foes  burst  into  the  vitals  of  the  Roman
realm,  together  with  ])ersonal  misfortune  in  the
end  and  death  of  my  father  ;  for  the  last  days  which
closed  his  life  were  almost  continuous  with  the  days

'  i.e.  these  visits,  though  long,  passed  without  an}'  friction
arising  to  disturb  the  relations  between  Paulinus  and  liis
parents.

y  2


PA  U  LIN  US PELL^:US

At  mihi  damna  domus  populantem  inlata  per  hostem,

per  se  magna  licet,  multo  leviora  fuere  240

defuncti  patris  immodico  conlata  dolori,

per  quern  cara  mihi  et  patria  et  domus  ipsa  fiebat :

tamque  etenim  fido  tradentes  mutua  nobis

offieia  affectu  conserto  viximus  aevo,

vinceret  aequaevos  nostra  ut  concordia  amicos. 245

Hoc  igitur  mihi  subtracto  inter  prima  iuventae

tempora  tam  caro  socio  et  monitore  fideli,

ilico  me  indocilis  fratris  discordia  acerba

excepit,  validum  genitoris  testamentum

solvere  conantis  specialia  commoda  matris  250

inpugnandi  animo,  cuius  mihi  cura  tuendae

hoc  quoque  maior  erat,  quo  iustior,  et  pietatis

non  minor  affectus  studium  firmabat  honestum.

Insuper  adversis  me  pluribus  exagitandum

laeva  facultatum  prorumpens  fama  meorum  255

exposuit  blandas  inter  vanae  ambitionis

inlecebras  gravibus  coniuncta  et  damna  periclis.

Quae  meminisse  licet  pigeat  transactaque  duduiji

oblivione  sua  malim  sopita  silere,

invitant  adversa  tamen  per  nostra  tuorum  260

cognita  donorum  solacia,  Christe,  bonorum

emensis  indepta  malis  tua  munera  fando

prodere  et  in  lucem  proferre  recondita  corde.

Namque  et  quanta  mihi  per  te  conlata  potentum

gratia  praestiterit,  facile  experiendo  probavi,  265

saepe  prius  claro  procerum  conlatus  honori

ignorans,  proprio  quam  praeditus  ijise  potirer,


324


THE EUCHARISTICUS

when  peace  was  broken.  But  for  me  the  havoc
wrought  on  my  home  by  the  ravage  of  the  enemy,
though  great  in  itself,  was  much  Hghter  when
compared  with  boundless  grief  for  my  departed
father,  who  made  both  my  country  and  my
home  itself  dear  to  me.  For,  indeed,  by  rendering
kindness  to  each  other  in  genuine  affection,  we  so
knit  in  one  our  uneven  ages,  that  in  our  agreement
we  surpassed  friends  of  even  ages.  He,  then,  so
dear  a  comrade  and  trusty  counsellor,  was  with-
drawn from  me  in  the  early  season  of  my  youth  ;  and
straightway  succeeded  bitter  disagreement  caused
by  my  wilful  brother,  who  sought  to  overthrow  our
father's  valid  will,  desiring  to  annul  the  special
benefits  therein  granted  to  my  mother  ;  and  to  safe-
guard her  caused  me  concern  the  greater  as  it  was
natural,  my  just  endeavours  being  strengthened  by
the  yet  greater  impulse  of  affection.  Besides,  luck-
less rumour  of  my  means  being  spread  abroad  exposed
me  to  be  tossed  by  yet  more  misfortunes  amid  the
enticing  lures  of  empty  ambition  and  its  forfeits
close-linked  with  sore  dangers.  And  though  their
memory  irks  me,  and  I  would  fain  leave  these
passages  of  long  ago  silently  buried  in  their  due
oblivion,  yet  the  comfort  of  thy  good  gifts
realized  through  my  misfortunes,  call  upon  me,
O  Christ,  to  reveal  them  and  to  bring  them  forth  to
light  from  the  depths  of  my  heart,  in  declaring  thy
bounty  gained  after  full  measure  of  ills.  For  I  soon
learned  through  expei-ience  both  what  advantage  the
favour  of  the  powerful,  bestowed  on  me  through
thee,  afforded,  when  ofttimes  I  was  accredited
unconsciously  with  my  ancestor's  bright  distinctions,
ere  yet  I  myself  acquired  such  attributes  of  my  own ;

325


PAULINUS PELL/EUS

quantum  et  e  contra  vi  impugnante  maligna

ipsa  patronarum  mihi  ambitiosa  meorum

obfuerint  studia  et  nostri  evidenter  honores.  270

Ac  milii  ante  omnes  specialiter,  altera  cuius
pars  orientis  erat  patria,  in  qua  scilicet  ortus
possessorque  etiam  non  ultimus  esse  videbar,
iniecere  manum  mala,  sed  mihi  debita  dudum,
quod  me  et  invitum  protracto  errore  tenerent 275
agminis  ipsa  mei  primum  molitio  pigra,
dissona  et  interdum  carorum  vota  meorum,
saepius  et  propriis  certans  mens  obvia  votis,
ambigui  eventus  quotiens  formido  recurrens
tardabat  coepto  sorte  obsistente  paratus  ;  280

allicerent  et  contra  animum  suetudo  quietis,
otia  nota,  domus  specialia  commoda  plura,
omnibus  heu  I  nimium  blandis  magnisque  refertae
deliciis  cunctisque  bonis  in  tempore  duro,
hospite  tunc  etiam  Gothico  quae  sola  careret ; 285
quod  post  eventu  cessit  non  sero  sinistro,
nuUo  ut  quippe  domura  speciali  lure  tuente
cederet  in  praedam  populo  permissa  abeunti :
nam  quosdam  scimus  summa  humanitate  Gothoruni
hospitibus  studuisse  suis  prodesse  tuendis.  290

Sed  mihi  ad  sortem  praefatae  condicionis
addita  maioris  nova  est  quoque  causa  laboris,
ut  me,  conquirens  solacia  vana,  tyrannus

^  Prisons  Attahis  was  an  Ionian  and  oiiginally  a  Pagan.
He  was  a  Senator  and  Praefect  of  the  city  at  the  second
siege  of  Rome.  He  was  set  up  as  a  puppet  Kniperor  by  the
(ioths,  but  deposed  in  410  a.d.  He  remained  in  the  company
of  Ataulf  the  Uotli,  at  whose  wedding  with Placidia  he  per-

326


THE EUCHARISTICUS

and  on  the  other  hand  what  hindrance  in  the
assaults  of  ill-will  my  patrons'  own  ambitious  aims
and  my  own  distinctions  surely  presented.

And  on  me  particularly  above  all,  who  had
a  second  country  in  the  East — where  indeed  I
was  born  and  was  also  held  to  be  an  owner
of  great  consequence— did  misfortunes  lay  hold,
yet  such  as  were  long  my  due ;  because,  albeit
reluctant,  I  was  kept  absent  on  a  journey  pro-
longed, first  by  the  mere  sluggish  effort  of  my
train,  sometimes  also  by  the  conflicting  wishes
of  my  dear  ones,  and  too  often  by  the  struggle  of
their  resolves  with  my  own  wishes  whenever  their
returning  dread  of  an  uncertain  issue  delayed  by  some
perverse  chance  preparations  already  begun  ;  and
on  the  other  hand  because  my  nature  was  enticed
by  my  habits  of  .ease,  my  wonted  repose,  the  many
special  comforts  of  my  home — too  full,  alas  !  with  all
great  and  pleasant  luxuries  and  every  blessing  in
those  rough  days,  and  which  alone  at  that  time
lacked  a  Gothic  guest.  This  circumstance  was
followed  not  long  afterwards  by  a  disastrous  result,
namely  that,  since  no  particular  authority  protected
it,  my  house  was  given  up  to  be  pillaged  by  the
retiring  horde  ;  for  I  know  that  certain  of  the  Goths
most  generously  strove  to  serve  their  liosts  by  pro-
tecting them.

But  on  me,  besides  my  lot  in  the  condition
just  described,  a  fresh  cause  of  greater  trouble  was
also  imposed  ;  namely  that  in  his  general  groping
after  empty  consolations,  the  tyrant  Attalus  ^  bur-
formed  as  a  musician.  During  the  revolt  of  Jovinus  he  was
again  set  up  as  a  rival  Emperor,  but  was  soon  abandoned,
and  in  416  a.d.  was  banished  by  Honorius  to  Lipari.  On
Attalus  see  Gibbon  (ed.  Bury),  iii.  .31S  tf.

327


PAULINUS PELL/EUS

Attalus  absentem  casso  oneraret  honoris

nomine,  privatae  comitivam  largitionis  295

dans  mihi,  quam  sciret  nullo  subsistere  censii

iamque  suo  ipse  etiam  desisset  fidere  regno,

solis  quippe  Gothis  fretus  male  iam  sibi  notis,

quos  ad  praesidium  vitae  praesentis  habere,

non  etiam  imperii  poterat,  per  se  nihil  ipse  300

aut  opibus  propriis  aut  ullo  milite  nixus.

Unde  ego  non  partes  infirmi  omnino  tyranni,

sed  Gothicam  fateor  pacem  me  esse  secutum,

quae  tune  ipsorum  consensu  optata  Gothorum

paulo  post  aliis  cessit  mercede  redempta  305

nee  penitenda  manet,  cum  iam  in  re  publica  nostra

cernamus  plures  Gothico  florere  favore,

tristia  quaeque  tamen  perpessis  antea  multis,

pars  ego  magna  fui  quorum,  privatus  et  ipse

cunctis  quippe  bonis  propriis  patriaeque  superstes.  310

Namque  profecturi  regis  praecepto  Atiulfi

nostra  ex  urbe  Gothi,  fuerant  qui  in  pace  recepti,

non  aliter  nobis  quam  belli  iure  subactis

aspera  quaeque  omni  urbe  inrogavere  cremata  :

in  qua  me  inventum  comitem  tum  principis  eius,  315

imperio  cuius  sociatos  non  sibi  norant,

nudavere  bonis  simul  omnibus  et  genetricem

iuxta  meam  mecum,  communi  sorte  subactos,

uno  hoc  se  nobis  credentes  parcere  captis,

quod  nos  immunes  poena  paterentur  abire,  320

^  Alaric's  brother-in-law,  who  brought  reinforcements  of
Goths  and  Huns  to  aid  Alaric  in  409  a.d.  In  410  he  became
King  of the Visigotlis  on  the  death  of  Alaric. Later  he

328


THE EUCHARISTICUS

dened  me  in  my  absence  with  an  empty  title  of
distinction,  making  me  Count  of  Private  Largesses,
although  he  knew  that  this  office  was  sustained  by
no  revenue,  and  even  himself  had  now  ceased  to
believe  in  his  own  royalty,  dependent  as  he  was
upon  the  Goths  alone  of  whom  already  he  had  had
bitter  experience,  finding  with  them  protection  at
the  moment  of  his  life  but  not  of  his  authority,
while  of  himself  he  was  supported  neither  by  re
sources  of  his  own  nor  by  any  soldiery.  Wherefore
'twas  by  no  means  the  cause  of  that  tottering  tyrant,
but,  I  declare,  peace  with  the  Goths  that  I  pursued
— peace  which,  at  that  time  desired  by  the  general
consent  of  the  Goths  themselves,  was  soon  after
granted  to  others  and,  though  purchased  at  a  price,
remains  unregretted,  since  already  in  our  state  we
see  full  many  prospering  through  Gothic  favour,
though  many  first  endured  the  full  range  of  suffering,
not  least  of  whom  was  I,  seeing  that  I  was  stripped
of  all  my  goods  and  outlived  my  fatherland.  For  when
about  to  depart  from  our  city  at  the  command  of
their  king  Ataulf,i  the  Goths,  though  they  had
been  received  peaceably,  imposed  the  harshest  treat-
ment on  us,  as  though  subdued  by  right  of  war,  by
burning  the  whole  cit3\  There  finding  me — then  a
Count  of  that  Prince,  whose  allies  they  did  not
recognise  as  their  own  —  tliey  stripped  me  of  all  my
goods,  and  next  my  motlier  also,  both  of  us  over-
taken by  the  same  lot,  for  this  one  grace  considering
that  they  were  showing  us,  their  prisoners,  mercy —
that they suffered us to depart without injury ;

married  Placidia,  sister  of  Honorius,  and  was  murdered  at
Barcelona  (see  Gibbon,  ed.  Bury,  iii.  313,  318  fF.).  The
name  Ataulf  survives  in  the  modern  Adolf.


PAULINUS PELL.EUS

cunctaruinque  tamen  comitum.siniul  et  famulariim,

eventum  fuerant  nostrum  quaecumque  secutae,

inlaeso  penitus  nullo  adtemptante  pudore,

me  graviore  tamen  relevato  suspicione

munere  divino,  iuges  cui  debeo  grates,  325

filia  ut  ante  mea  per  me  sociata  marito

excedens  patria  commiini  clade  careret.

Nee  postrema  tamen  tolerati  meta  laboris
ista  fuit  nostri,  quem  diximus. Ilico  namque
exactos  laribus  patriis  tectisque  crematis  '530

obsidio  hostilis  vicina  excepit  in  urbe
Vasatis,  patria  maiorum  et  ipsa  meorum,
et  gravior  multo  circumfusa  hostilitate
factio  servilis  paucorum  mixta  furori
insano  iuvenum  [nequam  ^j  licet  ingenuorum, 335
armata  in  caedem  specialem  nobilitatis.
Quam  tu,  iuste  deus,  insonti  a  sanguine  avertens
ilico  paucorum  sedasti  morte  reorum
instantemque  mihi  specialem  percussorem
me  ignorante  alio  iussisti  ultore  perire,  340

suetus  quippe  novis  tibi  me  obstringere  donis,
pro  quis  me  scirem  grates  debere  perennes.

Sed  mihi  tam  subiti  concusso  sorte  pericli,
quo  me  intra  urbem  percelli  posse  viderem,
subrepsit,  fateor,  nimium  trepido  novus  error, 345
ut  me  praesidio  regis  dudum  mihi  cari,
cuius  nos  populus  longa  obsidione  premebat,

'  Suppl.  Dvandex.


THE EUCHARISriCUS

howbeit,  of  all  the  companions  and  handmaidens
who  had  followed  our  fortunes  none  suffered  any
M'rong  at  all  done  to  her  honour,  nor  was  any  assault
offered,  yet  I  was  spared  more  serious  anxiety  by  the
divine  goodness,  to  which  I  owe  constant  thanks,
because  my  daughter,  previously  wedded  by  me
to  a  husband,  was  spared  the  general  calamity  by
her  absence  from  our  country.

But  not  even  this  was  the  extreme  limit  of  the
sufferings  we  endured,  as  I  have  said  :  for  when  we
were  driven  from  our  ancestral  home  and  our  house
burned,  straightway  siege  by  the  enemy  overtook  us
in  the  neighbouring  city  of  Bazas,  which  also  was
my  forefathers'  native  place,'  and,  far  more  dan-
gerous than  the  beleaguering  foe,  a  conspiracy  of
slaves  supported  by  the  senseless  frenzy  of  some  few
youths,  abandoned  though  of  free  estate,  and  armed
specially  for  the  slaughter  of  the  gentry.  From
this  danger  thou,  O  rigliteous  God,  didst  shield  the
innocent  blood,  quelling  it  forthwith  by  the  death  of
some  few  guilty  ones,  and  didst  ordain  that  the
special  assassin  threatening  me  should  without  my
knowledge  perish  by  another's  avenging  hand,  even
as  thou  hast  been  wont  to  bind  me  to  thee  with
fresh  gifts  for  which  I  might  feel  I  owed  thee
endless  thanks.

But  in  my  alarm  at  the  hap  of  so  sudden  a
danger  by  which  I  saw  I  might  be  stricken  down
within  the  city,  there  entered  into  me — too  fearful,
I  admit — a  new  error  of  judgment,  leading  me  to
hope  that  under  the  protection  of  the  king,-  long
since  my  friend,  whose  people  were  afflicting  us  with

'  cp.  Ausonius,  EpireAion  1.  4  (Vol.  I.  pp.  42  f.),  where
Julius  Ausonius  (Paulinus'  great-grandfather)  declares  that
Bazas  was  his  native  place.  '^  i.e.  Ataulf.

Z2>^


PAULINUS PELL^.US

urbe  a  obsessa  sperarem  abscedere  posse
agmine  carorum  magno  comitante  meorum,
hac  tamen  hos  nostros  spe  sollicitante  paratus, 350
quod  scirem  imperio  gentis  cogente  Gothorum
invitum  rcgem  populis  inciimbere  nostris.
Explorandi  igitur  studio  digressus  ab  urbe
ad  regem  intrepidus  nullo  obsistente  tetendi,
laetior  ante  tamen^  primo  quam  affarer  amicum 355
alloquio,  gratumque  magis  fore  queni»mihi  rebar.
Perscrutato  autenij  ut  potui,  interius  viri  voto
praesidium  se  posse  mihi  praestare  negavit
extra  urbem  posito,  nee  tutum  iam  sibi  prodens,
ut  visum  remeare  aliter  pateretur  ad  urbem,  360

ipse  nisi  inecum  mox  susciperetur  in  urbe,
gnarus  quippe  Gothos  rursum  mihi  dira  minari
seque  ab  ipsorum  cupiens  absolvere  lure.
Obstipui,  fateor,  pavefactus  condicione
proposita  et  nimio  indicti  terrore  pericli,  365

sed  miserante  deo,  afflictis  qui  semper  ubique
imploratus  adest,  paulo  post  mente  resumpta
ipse  licet  trepidus,  sed  adliuc  nutantis  amici
consilium  audacter  studui  pro  me  ipse  fovere,
ardua  dissuadens,  quae  scirem  omnino  neganda, 370
praestanda  quae  autem,  quam  mox  temptanda
perurgens.
Quae  non  sero  probans  vir  prudens  ipse  secutus,
ilico  consultis  per  se  primatibus  urbis
rem  coeptam  adcelerans  una  sub  nocte  peregit
auxiliante  deo,  cuius  iam  munus  habebat,  375


33-'


THE EUCHARISTICUS

the  long  siege,  I  might  be  able  to  escape  from  the
besieged  city  together  with  the  large  train  of  my
dear  ones  :  and  yet  this  hope  induced  this  attempt
of  mine,  because  I  knew  that  'twas  by  the  constrain-
ing will  of  the  Gothic  host  that  the  king  reluctantly
oppressed  our  folk.  So,  purposing  to  investigate,  I
set  out  from  the  city  and  hastened  to  the  king,  no  man
withstanding  me,  yet  with  greater  cheer  before  I
addressed  my  first  words  to  the  friend  who,  I
thought,  would  be  more  favourable  to  me.  But
when  I  had  closely  examined  as  best  I  might  the
inwardness  of  the  man's  intent,  he  declared  he  could
not  afford  me  protection  if  dwelHng  outside  the  city,
avowing  that  it  was  no  longer  safe  for  him,  having
once  seen  me,  to  suffer  me  to  return  to  the  city  on
other  terms  than  that  he  himself  should  presently
be  admitted  with  me  into  the  city — for  he  knew
that  the  Goths  again  meant  me  mischief,  and  he
himself  desired  to  break  free  from  their  influence.  I
was  dumbfounded,  I  admit,  with  alarm  at  the  terms
proposed  and  with  exceeding  fear  at  the  danger
threatened,  but  by  the  mercy  of  God  who  always  and
everywhere  is  with  them  who  beseech  his  aid,  1  pre-
sently regained  my  faculties  and,  albeit  quaking,
boldly  set  myself  to  foster  in  my  interest  the  design
of  my  still  wavering  friend,  discouraging  difficult  con-
ditions which  I  knew  must  be  utterly  rejected,  but
strongly  pressing  for  instant  attempt  to  secure  the
attainable.

These  the  far-siglited  man  speedily  approved
and  adopted.  Straightway,  when  he  had  for  him-
self conferred  with  the  leaders  of  the  city,  he  so
hastened  on  the  business  in  hand  as  to  complete  it
in  a  single  night  through  the  help  of  God,  whose

333


PAULINUS PELL.*;US

quo  nobis  populoque  suo  succurrere  posset.

Concurrit  pariter  cunctis  ab  sedibus  oninis

turba  Alanarum  annatis  sociata  maritis.

Prima  uxor  regis  Romanis  traditur  obses,

adiuncto  pariter  regis  caro  quoque  nato,  380

reddor  et  ipse  meis  pactae  inter  foedera  pacis,

communi  tamquam  Gothico  salutatus  ab  hoste,

vallanturque  urbis  pomeria  milite  Alano,

aeceptaque  dataque  fide  certare  parato

pro  nobis,  nuper  qiios  ipse  obsederat  hostis.  385

Mira  urbis  facies  cuius  magna  undique  muros

turba  indiscreti  sexus  circumdat  inermis

subiecta  exterius  ;  muris  haerentia  nostris

agmina  barbarica  plaustris  vallantur  et  armis.

Qua  se  truncatam  parte  agminis  baud  medioeri  ^ 390

circumiecta  videns  populantum  turba  Gotborum,

ilico  diffidens  tuto  se  posse  niorari

hospite  intestino  subito  in  sua  viscera  verso.

nil  temptare  ausa  ulterius  properanter  abii'c

sponte  sua  legit. Cuius  non  sero  secuti  395

exemplum  et  nostri,  quos  diximus,  auxiliares

discessere,  fidem  pacis  servare  parati

Romanis,  quoque  ipsos  sors  oblata  tulisset.

Atque  ita  res  [ingens"]  temere  a  me  coepta  benigno

uaxilio  domini  eventu  est  expleta  secundo,  400

eiroremque  meuni  deus  in  nova  gaudia  vertit

nuiltorum  pai'iter  mecum  obsidione  levata,

^  Suggested  bj'  Braiides  :  inediocris,  BP.
*  Suppl.  Braiides.

334


THE EUCHARISriCUS

bounty  he  now  enjoyed^  thereby  to  help  us  and  his
own  people.  The  whole  throng  of  Alan  women
Hocks  together  from  all  their  abodes  in  company
with  their  warrior  lords. ^  First  the  king's  wife  is
delivered  to  the  Romans  as  a  hostage,  the  king's
favourite  son  also  accompanying  her,  while  I  myself
am  restored  to  my  friends  by  one  of  the  articles  of
peace,  as  though  I  had  been  rescued  from  our
common  enemy  the  Goths :  the  city's  boundaries  are
fenced  round  with  a  bulwark  of  Alan  soldiery  pre-
pared for  pledges  given  and  received  to  fight  for  us
whom  they,  lately  our  enemies,  had  besieged.
Strange  was  the  aspect  of  the  city,  whose  unmanned
walls  were  compassed  on  every  side  with  a  great
throng  of  men  and  women  mixed  who  lay  without ;
while,  clinging  to  our  walls,  barbai-ian  hosts  were
fenced  in  with  waggons  and  armed  men.  But  when
they  saw  themselves  thus  shorn  of  no  slight  portion
of  their  host,  the  encircling  hordes  of  ravaging
Goths,  straightway  feeling  they  could  not  safely
tarry  now  that  their  bosom  friends  were  turned  to
mortal  enemies,  ventured  no  further  effort,  but  chose
of  their  own  accord  to  retire  hurriedly.  And  not  long
after  our  allies  also,  above  named,  followed  their
example  and  departed,  though  prepared  to  maintain
loyally  the  peace  made  with  the  Romans  wherever
the  chance  which  befell  might  have  carried  them.
Thus  did  a  great  business,  rashly  commenced  by  me,
result  in  a  happy  issue  through  the  Lord's  kindly
aid,  and  God  turned  my  misjudgment  into  fresh
joys in the deliverance of  many  from the siege

'  The  army  besieging  Bazas  was  partly  of  Goths  and
partly  of  Alans.  The  latter,  headed  by  Ataulf,  went  over
to  the  Roman  side  and  prepared  to  defend  the  city  against
the  Goths.

335


PAULINUS PELL.^^:US

adcrescunt  quae  cuncta  mihi  simul  ad  referendas,

Christe,  tibi  grates,  quas  inpos  solvere  verbis

parte  rependo  aliqua  semper  debere  professus. 405

Sit  tanien  ista  satis  super  his  me  esse  profatum,
inter  barbarieas  longo  quae  tempore  gentes
expositus  gessi. Quorum  mihi  jihirima  saepe
adversa  experto  rursum  suasere  moranti
linquendas  patriae  sedes  quantocius  esse —  410

quod  fecisse  prius  fuerat  magis  utile  nobis —
ilia  ut  contento  peteremus  litora  cursu,
pars  ubi  magna  mihi  etiamnunc  salva  manebat
materni  census,  complures  sparsa  per  urbes
Argivas  atque  Epiri  veterisque  novaeque  ;  415

per  quas  non  minima  numerosis  farta  colonis
praedia  diffusa  nee  multum  dissociata
quamvis  profusis  dominis  nimiumque  remissis
praebere  expensas  potuissent  exuberantes.
Sed  nee  sero  mea  est  proventus  vota  secutus, 420
ut  vel  migrare  exoptata  hinc  ad  loca  possem,
vel  mihi  pars  aliqua  ex  rebus  superesset  avitis
inter  barbarieas  hostili  iure  rapinas
Romanumque  nefas,  contra  omnia  iura  licenter
in  mea  grassatum  diverso  tempore  damna.  425

A  quo  se  exuere  admisso  nee  nomina  possunt
cara  mihi,  maior  nostri  est  quae  causa  doloris,
cum  mihi  damna  rei  damnis  cumulentur  amoris,
quem  scio  me  fidum  primis  debere  proj)inquis,
quamlibet  offensum,  nee  fas  non  reddere  duco. 430
Sed  bene  si  sapio,  gratanda  haec  nunc  mihi  sors  est,
quae  tibi  conplacuit,  multo  potiora  parante
iani  te,  Christe,  mihi,  quam  cum  securior  ipse

336


THE EUCHARISTJCUS

along  with  me — all  which  things  increase  niv  debt
of  thanks  to  thee,  O  Christ ;  which  knowing  not  how
to  discharge,  I  repay  in  some  measui-e  in  words
by  declaring  my  continual  indebtedness.

But  let  it  suffice  that  I  have  said  so  much  on
what  I  did  during  the  long  period  when  I  was  ex-
posed amid  barbarous  peoples.  Through  them  I
suffered  so  numerous  reverses  as  again  convinced
me,  lingering  still,  that  I  should  leave  my  country
witli  all  speed  possible  (and  to  have  done  so  earlier
had  been  more  profitable  for  me),  to  make  my  way
directly  to  that  land  where  a  large  part  of  my
mother's  pi'operty  still  remained  intact,  scattered
among  full  many  states  of  Greece  and  Epirus  the
Old  and  New  ;  for  there  the  extensive  farms,  well-
manned  by  numerous  serfs,  though  scattered,  were
not  widely  separated  and  even  for  a  prodigal  or
a  careless  lord  might  have  furnished  means  abun-
dant. But  not  even  at  this  stage  did  success  follow
my  hope,  either  to  be  able  to  depart  hence  to  the
land  I  longed  for,  or  to  recover  some  part  of  my
grandfather's  property  dispersed  partly  through  the
ravages  of  barbarians  acting  by  the  laws  of  war  and
partly  through  the  iniquity  of  Romans,  proceeding
wantonly  and  in  defiance  of  all  laws  to  my  hurt  at
various  times.  Of  this  guilt  even  persons  dear  to
me  cannot  rid  themselves;  and  'tis  the  chief  cause
of  my  pain,  since  upon  hurt  to  my  substance  is
heaj)ed  hurt  to  that  affection  which  I  feel  I  owe
inviolate,  however  slighted,  to  my  nearest  kin,  and
which  1  deem  it  sinful  not  to  render.  But  if  1  am
truly  wise,  I  should  now  rejoice  in  this  lot  of  mine
which  thou,  O  Christ,  didst  approve,  since  thou  dost
prepare for  me far  better  things now  than when,

337


PAULINUS PELL.EUS

placatum  rebar  nostris  adsistere  votis,

cum  mihi  laeta  domus  magnis  floreret  abundans 435

deliciis,  nee  pompa  minor  polleret  honoris

instructa  obsequiis  et  turbis  fulta  clientum.

Quae  peritura  cite  illo  me  in  tempore  amasse

nunc  piget  et  tandem  sensu  meliore  senescens

utiliter  subtracta  mihi  cognosco  fuisse^  44:0

amissis  opibus  terrenis  atque  caducls

perpetuo  potius  mansura  ut  quaerere  nossem —

sero  quidem,  sed  nil  umquam,  deus,  est  tibi  serum,

qui  sine  fine  manens  miserandi  ponere  finem

nescis  et  ignaris  solis  succurrere  nosti  445

praeveniendo  prior  multorum  vota  precantum

et  supra  quam  petimus  bona  nobis  prospiciendo

ambiguisque  etiam,  quid  pro  se  quisque  precetur,

plura  petita  negas,  magis  apta  his  dare  paratus,

qui  sapiunt  tua  dona  suis  praeponere  votis.  450

Namque  et  me  moresque  meos  quanto  j^rior  ipso

me  melius  nosses,  in  me  prodendo  probasti,

quem  maiora  meis  audentem  viribus  ante

prospiciens  melius  per  te  mihi  consuluisti

conatus  inhibendo  meos  nimis  alta  petentes,  455

auderem  ut  monachi  perfecto  vivere  ritu,

cum  mihi  plena  domus  caris  affectibus  esset,

qui  sibi  servari  consuetam  indicere  curam

posse  viderentur,  filii,  mater  socrus,  uxor

338


THE EUCHARIST ICUS

more  free  from  care,  I  fancied  that  tliy  approval
furthered  my  hopes  ;  when  my  house  was  gay  and
prosperous  in  the  great  abundance  of  its  luxury  ;
and  when  the  pageantry  of  my  rank  flourished  no
less  in  its  setting  of  deferential  crowds  and  throngs
of  supporting  clients.  That  in  those  days  I  loved
such  things,  quicklv  doomed  to  perish,  I  now  regret,
and  with  perception  improving  with  old  age  I  recog-
nise at  last  that  to  my  profit  they  were  withdrawn
from  me,  that  by  the  loss  of  eai-thly  and  failing
riches  I  might  learn  to  seek  rather  those  which  will
endure  for  ever.  'Tis  late,  indeed,  but  nought,  O
God,  is  ever  late  with  thee  who,  continuing  without
end,  knowest  not  how  to  make  an  end  of  pity,
and  knowest  how  to  aid  those  who  unaided
know  not  how,  by  anticipating  the  prayers  of
many  ere  they  ask,  and  by  providing  good  things
for  us  beyond  what  we  seek — and  who  to  the  mis-
guided ^  also,  whatso  each  one  prays  for  himself,
dost  refuse  full  many  a  request,  though  ready  to
grant  things  more  expedient  to  those  wise  enough
to  prefer  thy  gifts  to  their  own  wishes.  For  how
much  better  than  I  myself  thou  didst  know  me  and
my  character  thou  didst  prove  in  preventing  me
when,  foreseeing  that  I  was  venturing  on  a  task
beyond  my  strength,  thou  of  thyself  didst  take
better  measure  for  me  by  thwarting  my  designs
which  aimed  too  high  in  venturing  to  live  after  the
perfect  pattern  of  a  monk,  though  my  home  was  full
of  dear  i-elatives  who  seemed  to  have  the  right  to
claim  for  themselves  continuance  of  my  wonted
care — sons, mother, wife's mother, wife, with

'  i.e.  those  who  pray  for  what  they  themselves  desire,  but
which  is  not  for  their  ultimate  good.

339


PAULINUS PELL.i<:US

cum  grege  non  miniino  famularum  quippe  suarum,  460

quern  totum  jiariter  peregrinae  exponere  terrae

nee  ratio  aut  pietas  mens  aut  religiosa  sinebat.

Sed  tua  magna  manus  divina  et  provida  virtus

consilio  sanctorum  cuncta  operando  peregit,

suadentum  mihi  tum  morem  servare  vetustum, 4G5

quern  semel  invectum  maiorum  traditione

nunc  etiam  servans  ecclesia  nostra  teneret ;

confessusque  igitur,  penitenda  quae  mihi  noram,

proposita  studui  constrictus  vivere  lege^,

non  digno  fortasse  j)ians  commissa  labore,  470

sed  rectam  servare  fidem  non  inscius  ipse,

errorum  discendo  vias  per  dogmata  prava,

quae  reprobans  sociata  aliis  nunc  respuo  cul{)is.

Post  autem,  exacta  iam  ter  trieteride  quinta,

rite  recurrente  statuto  tempore  Pasclia  475

ad  tua,  Christe  Deus,  altaria  sacra  reversus

te  miserante  tua  gaudens  sacramenta  recepi

ante  hos  ter  decies  super  et  bis  i  quatttior  annos — ■

salvo  tunc  etiam  propriae  domus  ordine,  nuper

qui  fuerat,  linqui  et  quam  iam  non  posse  probarem  480

nee  retinere  tanien  peregrino  iugiter  esset

possibile  adstricto  iam  censu  ;  quominus  autem

rem  propriam  expeterem,  cuius  meritumque  situmque

anteriore  loco  iam  me  exposuisse  recordor,

obstabat  flecti  ad  eonimunia  commoda  coniunx 485

indocilis  nimioque  metu  navigare  recusans,

quam  Jiec  invitam  trahere  usquam  fas  mihi  rebar

l)arque  nefas  esset  subtractis  linquere  natis.

»  Barth  (accepted  by  Braiules)  :  his,  BP.
340


THE EUCHARIST ICUS

the  considerable  company  of  their  attendants  :  for
to  expose  all  these  together  to  the  strangeness
of  a  foreign  land  neither  reason^  nor  affection,  nor
religious  feeling  would  allow.  But  thy  mighty
hand  divine  and  foreseeing  power  directed  all  things
through  the  counsel  of  the  saints,  who  then  urged
me  to  follow  the  ancient  custom  which,  once  intro-
duced by  the  tradition  of  our  forefathers,  our
Church  still  retained  and  held.  So  when  I  had  con-
fessed such  deeds  as  I  knew  needed  repentance,  I
set  myself  to  live  under  the  discipline  of  a  set  rule —
not,  as  it  chanced,  atoning  for  my  sins  by  any  meet
penance,  but,  though  of  myself  not  without  know-
ledge to  keep  the  right  faith,  by  learning  the  paths
of  error  through  corrupt  doctrines,'-  which  now  I
reject  and  repudiate  along  with  my  other  faults.
But  afterwards,  when  now  I  had  passed  thrice  five
Iriennia,  and  Easter  duly  came  round  at  its  appointed
season,  to  thy  holy  altar,  Christ  my  God,  I  retui'ned,
and  through  thy  mercy  joyfully  received  thy  Sacra-
ment— thrice  ten  and  twice  four  years  ago.  Then
also  stil!  unbroken  were  the  ranks  of  my  own  family
which  I  now  found  I  could  not  leave  and  yet  could
not  continually  maintain,  now  that  my  foreign  in-
come was  curtailed.  But  from  seeking  out  my  own
property — whose  value  and  position,  I  recall,  was  set
forth  by  me  in  a  previous  passage — I  was  hindered
by  my  wife  who  stubbornly  refused  to  yield  for  our
general  good,  refusing  from  undue  fear  to  make  the
voyage  ;  and  I  held  it  right  for  me  not  to  tear  her
away  anywhere  against  her  will,  and  no  less  wrong
to  leave  her,  tearing  her  children  from  her.

'  Paulinus  passed  a  season  in  performing  some  form  of
penance.  How  he  came  to  lapse  into  "  <>nirupt  doctrine"
(pos.<iibly  Arianjsm)  is  not  clear.

34t


PAULINUS PELL.EUS

Atque  ita  frustratus  spe  iam  meliore  quietis
in  rebus  propriis  post  plura  ad  versa  fruendae  490

perpetuum  exilium  diversa  sorte  dierum
exigo,  iam  dudum  cunctis  affectibus  expers,
primo  socru  ac  matre,  dehinc  et  eoniuge  functa,
quae  mihi  cum  fuerit  rectis  contraria  votis
officiente  metu,  fuit  et  defuncta  dolori,  495

turn  subtracta,  meae  potuisset  cum  magis  esse
apta  senectuti  iunctae  ad  solamina  vitae  ;
quae  mihi  iam  derant  natis  abeuntibus  a  me,
non  equidem  paribus  studiis  nee  tempore  eodem,
succensis  pai-iter  sed  libertatis  amore,  500

quam  sibi  maiorem  contingere  posse  putabant
Burdigalae,  Gothico  quamquam  consorte  colono.
Quod  licet  invito  me  illos  voluisse  dolerem,
sic  compensandum  tamen  hoc  ipsum  mihi  I'ebar,
commoda  ut  absentis  pi-aesentum  cura  iuvaret, 505
fructus  quippe  rei  nostrae,  quicumque  fuissent,
sponte  sua  mecum  paulatim  participando.
Sed  cito  praereptus  iuvenis  iam  presbyter  unus
morte  repentina  hictum  mihi  Hquit  acerbum,
summa  autem  rerum,  tenuit  quascumque,mearum 510
tota  erepta  mihi  multis  fuit  una  rapina.
Insuper  ipse  etiam,  velut  ad  solacia  nostra
qui  superest,  actu  simul  eventuque  sinistro
inter  amicitias  regis  versatus  et  iras
destituit  prope  cuncta  pari  mea  commoda  sorte. 515


342


THE EUCHARLSTICUS

Thus  disappointed  in  my  brightening  hopes  of
enjoying  repose  on  my  own  property  after  so  many
misfortunes,  I  now  spend  my  days  in  perpetual  exile
with  varying  fortunes,  long  since  deprived  of  all  my
dear  ones.  For  first  my  wife's  mother  and  my
mother  died ;  then  my  wife  also,  who,  when  she
lived,  thwarted  my  natural  hopes  through  the
hindrance  of  her  fears,  and  in  her  death  caused  me
grief  in  being  reft  from  me  at  a  time  when  her  life,
if  continuous  with  mine,  might  have  been  more
serviceable  in  affording  my  old  age  consolations
which  now  it  lacked,  as  my  sons  left  me.  These
went,  not  with  like  aims,  indeed,  nor  at  the  same
time ;  but  both  alike  were  fired  with  the  desire  for
freedom  which  they  thought  they  could  find  in
greater  measure  at  Bordeaux,  albeit  in  company
with  Gothic  settlers.  And  though  I  grieved  that
their  desires  thus  ran  counter  to  my  own,  yet  I
thought  that  this  same  thing  would  so  be  made  up
to  me  that  their  care  while  present  in  Bordeaux
would  advance  the  interests  of  their  absent  father,
namely,  by  gradually  sharing  with  me  of  their  own
will  the  income  of  our  property,  such  as  it  might
be.^  But  soon  was  one —  a  youtli,  yet  already  a
})riest — hurried  off"  untimely  by  a  sudden  death,
leaving  me  bitter  sorrow ;  while  all  such  of  my
possessions  as  he  held  were  wholly  torn  from  me  by
the  single  act  of  many  robbers.  Moreover,  he  also,
who  was  left  as  though  to  console  me,  ill-starred
alike  in  his  course  and  its  consequence,  experienced
both  the  king's  friendship  and  his  enmity,  and  after
losing  almost  all  my  goods  came  to  a  like  end

^  i.e.  he  hoped  that  his  sons  living  in  Bordeaux  might  be
able  to  recover  some  of  the  wreck  of  his  property.  Paulinus
himself  seems  to  have  feared  to  reside  in  the  city.

343


PAIKJNUS PELL.EUS

Atquc  it;i  subtrac-ta  spe  omni  solacioruin,
quae  mihi  per  nostros  rebar  contingere  posse,
cunctaque  sero  probans  a  te  magis  esse  petenda,
quae  cupimus,  dens  alme,  subest  cui  summa  potestas,
Massiliae  demum  paulisper  consistere  legi,  520

urbe  quidein  in  qua  plures  sancti  essent  mihi  cari,
parva  autem  census  substantia  faniiliaris
nee  spes  magna  novis  subitura  ex  fructibus  esset,
non  ager  instructus  propriis  cultoribus  ullus,
non  vineta — quibus  solis  urbs  utitur  ipsa  525

onine  ad  j)raesidium  vitae  aliunde  paranduni —
sed  tantuni  domus  urbana  vicinus  et  hortus
atque  ad  perfugium  secret!  parvus  agellus,
non  sine  vite  quidem  vel  pomis,  sed  sine  terra
digna  coli  ;  verum  exigui  iactura  laboris  530

suasit  et  in  vacuum  culturae  inpendere  curam
vix  plena  exesi  per  iugera  quattuor  agri
et  fundare  domum  summa  in  crepidine  saxi,
ne  quid  de  spatio  terrae  minuisse  viderer.
Porro  autem  expensas,  vitae  quas  posceret  usus, 535
conductis  studui  ex  agris  sperare  paratas,
donee  plena  magis  servis  mansit  domus  et  dum
maiores  melior  vires  mihi  praebuit  aetas.
At  postquam  in  peius  pariter  mutavit  utraque
condicio  instabilis  semper  generaliter  aevi,  540

paulatim,  fateor,  curis  evictus  et  annis
exul  inops  caelebs  [caris]  facile  in  nova  versus
consilia  et  varia  multum  ratione  vacillans,
Burdigalam  revocare  gradum  conducere  duxi.
Xeo  tamen  effectus  nostra  est  incepta  secutus, 545
utilitas  cum  vota  sibi  coniuncta  iuvaret ;

344


THE EUCHARISTICUS

When  thus  all  hope  of  that  solace,  which  I
thought  I  might  gain  through  my  family,  was  with-
drawn, finding,  though  late,  that  all  things  we
desire  are  rather  to  he  sought  of  thee,  O  bounteous
God,  with  whom  all  power  rests,  I  chose  at  length
to  settle  awhile  at  Marseilles,  a  city  where  indeed
were  many  saints  dear  to  me,  but  only  a  small
property,  part  of  my  famil}^  estate.  Here  no  fresh
revenues  were  like  to  give  rise  to  great  hopes — no
tilth  tended  by  appointed  labourers,  no  vineyards
(on  which  alone  that  city  relies  to  procure  from
elsewliere  every  necessary  of  life),  but,  as  a  refuge
for  my  loneliness,  only  a  house  in  the  city  with  a
garden  neai*,  and  a  small  plot,  not  destitute  of  vines,
indeed,  and  fruit-trees,  but  without  land  worth
tillage.  Yet  the  outlay  of  a  little  toil  induced  me
to  lavish  pains  in  tilling  the  vacant  part — scarce
four  full  acres — of  my  exhausted  land,  and  to  build
a  house  upon  the  crest  of  the  rock,  lest  I  should
seem  to  have  reduced  the  extent  of  soil  avail-
able.  Further,  for  the  outlay  which  the  needs  of
life  demand,  I  made  it  my  hope  to  earn  them  by
renting  land,  so  long  as  my  house  remained  well
stocked  with  slaves,  and  while  my  more  active  years
furnished  me  with  undiminished  strength.  But
afterwards,  when  my  fortunes  in  a  world  generally
ever  variable  changed  for  the  worse  in  both  these
respects,  by  degrees,  I  admit,  I  was  broken  down
by  troubles  and  by  age :  so  as  a  wanderer,  poor,
bereaved  of  my  loved  ones,  I  readily  inclined  to  new
designs,  and,  greatly  wavering  betwixt  various  pur-
poses, thought  it  profitable  to  return  to  Bordeaux.
Yet  my  efforts  did  not  attain  success ;  though  ex-
pediency seconded my prayers allied with it.

345


PAULINUS PELL.EUS

quod  mihi  firmandae  fidei,  quantum  puto,  causa
a  te  provisum  fas  est  me  credere,  Cliriste,
ut,  praestare  mihi  quantum  tua  gratia  posset,
prolixo  paulatim  usu  experiendo  probarem,  550

plurima  subtracto  cum  per  dispendia  censu
perdurare  mihi  speciem  domus  et  renovatas
saepius  expensas  te  prospieiente  viderem.
Pro  qua  sorte  quidem  vitae  scio  me  tibi  grates
immodicas  debere,  deus,  pro  me  tamen  ipse  555

nescio,  si  salvo  possim  gaudere  pudore —
sive  quod  ipse  adhuc  propriae  specie  domus  utens,
seu  quod  divitibus  contentus  cedere  natis
omnia  quae  possunt  etiamnunc  nostra  videri,
expensis  patior  me  sustentai-i  alienis —  560

ni  mihi  nostra  fides  quae  nil  proprium  docet  esse,
subveniat,  tam  tuto  aliena  ut  nostra  putemus,
quam  nos  nostra  aliis  debemus  participanda.

Nee  tamen  hoc  ipso  vitae  me  in  ordine  passus
ambiguum  nutare  diu,  velociter  ultro  565

solari  es  dignatus,  deus,  nostramque  senectam
invalidam  variis  diverso  tempore  morbis
iugiter  adsuetus  blandis  palpare  medellis,
nunc  quoque  sic  ipsi  iuvenascere  posse  dedisti,
ut,  cum  iam  penitus  fructus  de  rebus  avitis  570

sperare  ulterius  nullos  me  posse  probasses,
cunctaque  ipsa  etiam,  quae  iam  tenuatus  habere
Massiliae  potui,  amissa  iam  proprietate
conseripta  adstrictus  sub  condicione  tenereni,

'  i.e.  the  house  was  only  his  by  courtesy.
*  Yet  his  sons  (11.  498  tf.)  had  died  previously. Possibly
tliese  are  younger  sons  ignored  in  the  earlier  passage.


THE EUCHARISTICUS

This  I  may  lawfully  believe  to  have  been  ordained
by  thee,  O  Christ,  for  the  strengthening  of  my
faith,  as  I  suppose,  that  by  prolonged  experience  I
might  gradually  find  out  how  far  thy  favour  could
avail  me,  when,  though  deprived  of  means  through
countless  losses,  I  still  saw  the  semblance^  of  a  house
always  remained  to  me,  and  my  means  ofttimes  re-
plenished by  thy  providence.  For  this  lot,  indeed,
I  know  I  owe  thee  boundless  thanks,  O  God ;  yet
on  my  own  account  I  know  not  whether  I  can
rejoice  with  full  self-respect — because,  whether  in
occupying  a  house  in  semblance  still  my  own,  or  in
contentedly  resigning  to  my  wealthy  sons  -  all  that
can  still  be  thought  of  as  my  own,  I  suffer  myself  to
be  supported  at  others'  charges^ — did  not  our  faith
come  to  my  aid,  teaching  that  nothing  is  our  own  ;
so  that  we  may  as  surely  consider  othei's'  goods  to
be  ours,  as  we  are  bound  to  share  our  own  with
others.

Yet  in  this  same  state  of  life  thou  didst  not
suffer  me  long  to  drowse  in  doubt,  but  unasked,
O  God,  didst  speedily  deign  to  comfort  me ;  and —
ever  wont  to  soothe  with  gentle  remedies  my  old
age  weakened  at  various  times  with  divers  sick-
nesses— now  also  thou  didst  enable  it  to  grow  young
again.  For  when  thou  hadst  shown  I  could  no
longer  hope  for  further  profit  from  my  grand-
father's property  ;  and  when  all  that  also  which  in
my  poverty  I  was  able  to  hold  at  Marseilles  was
retained  by  me  under  the  terms  of  a  written  contract,
the  freehold  now  being  lost — thou  didst  raise  up  for

^  The  use  of  the  present  tense  here  suggests  that  11.  564  ff.
(in  which  he  tells  of  his  improved  fortunes)  were  subsequently
added.

347


PAULINOS PEI.L.^:US

emptorem  milii  ignotum  de  gente  Gothoruin 575

excires,  nostri  (juondam  qui  iuris  agellum

mercari  cupiens  pretiiim  transmitteret  iiltro,

haut  equidem  iustimi,  verumtamen  accipienti

votivum^  fateor,  possem  quo  scilicet  una

et  veteres  lapsi  census  fulcire  ruinas  580

et  vitare  nova  cari  niihi  damna  piidoris.

Quo  me  donatum  praestanti  munere  gaudens
ecce  novas,  deus  omnipotens,  tibi  debeo  grates,
exuperent  quae  paene  alias  cumulentque  priores,
quas  contestatus  tota  haec  mea  pagina  praesens 585
continet ;  et  quamquam  spatiis  prolixior  amplis
evagata  diu  claudi  se  iam  prope  poscat,
nostra  tamen  iiigis  devotio  ponere  finem
nescit  ad  explenda  tibi  debita  munia,  Christe,
hoc  unum  ipse  bonum  statuens,hoc  esse  tenendum  590
conscius,  hoc  toto  cupiens  adquirere  corde.
omnibus  usque  locis  et  tempore  iugiter  omni
te  praefando  loqui,  te  [et']  meminisse  silendo.
quo  circa  et  totum  tibi  me,  deus  optime,  debens
ciinctaque  quae  mea  sunt,  opus  hoc  abs  te,  deus,

orsus  595

nunc  quoque  concludens  tibi  desino  teque  precatus
saepius  attente  nunc  multo  inpensius  oro,
ut — quia  vita  in  hac,  qua  nunc  ego  dego,  senili
ipsa  morte  magis  plura  [haut  ^]  agnosco  timenda,
nee  mihi,  quid  potius  cupiam,  discernere  promptum

est—  600

(juamcumque  in  partem  tua  iam  sententia  vergit,
(la,  precor,  intrepidam  contra  omnia  tristia  mentem
constantemque  tuae  virtutis  munere  ])raesta,
ut,  qui  iam  dudum  placitis  tibi  vivo  dicatus
legibus  et  sponsam  conor  captare  salutem,  605

' 8uppl.  Brandr.i.

34«


THE EV(  HA  lUSTlCUS

me  a  purchaser  among  the  Goths  who  desired  to
acquire  the  small  farm,  once  wholly  mine,  and  of  his
own  accord  sent  me  a  sum,  not  indeed  equitable,  yet
nevertheless  a  godsend,  I  admit,  for  me  to  receive,
since  thereby  I  could  at  once  support  the  tottering
remnants  of  my  shattered  fortune  and  escape  fresh
hurt  to  my  cherished  self-respect.

Rejoicing  in  my  enrichment  with  this  exceeding
gift,  to  thee,  Almighty  God,  I  owe  fresh  thanks,
such  as  may  almost  overwhelm  and  bury  all  those
preceding,  whereof  each  page  of  mine  holds  record.
And  although  my  constant  devotion,  grown  too
lengthy,  has  o'erspread  its  wide  limits  this  while
past,  and  almost  calls  upon  itself  to  halt ;  yet  it
knows  not  how  to  make  an  end  of  dwelling  on  the
gifts  I  owe  to  thee,  O  Christ.  This  I  make  my  only
good,  this  I  feel  must  be  held  fast,  this  with  my
whole  heart  1  long  to  secure — in  all  places  every-
where and  at  all  times  continually,  in  utterance  to
tell  of  thee,  and  in  silence  to  remember  thee.
Wherefore— owing  all  myself  to  thee,  O  God  most
excellent,  and  all  things  that  are  mine— as  I  began
this  work  from  thee,  so  in  finishing  it  I  end  to
thee  ;  and  while  I  have  often  prayed  thee  earnestly,
now  much  more  fervently  I  beseech  thee  — seeing
that  in  this  decre})it  age  which  I  now  spend  I  see
nought  more  to  be  feared  but  death  itself,  and
cannot  readily  descry  what  further  I  can  desire —
whichever  way  thy  will  inclines,^  grant  me,  I  pray,
a  heart  unflinching  in  the  face  of  any  sorrow,  and
make  it  steadfast  by  the  gift  of  thy  power  ;  that  I
who  long  have  lived  obedient  to  the  laws  approved

1  it.  whether  sorrows  are  or  are  not  to  be  my  lot.

349


PAULINUS PELL.5iUS

nee  vieina  magis  pro  eondicione  seneetae

tempora  plus  metuam  mortis,  cui  subiacet  omnis

aetas,  ambiguae  nee  me  discrimine  ^  vitae

suspectum  exagitent  varii  formidine  easus,

vitari  quos  posse,  deus,  te  praesule  ndo,  610

sed,  quaecumque  manet  nostrum  sors  ultima  finem,

mitiget  hane  spes,  Christe,  tui  conspectus  et  omnem

discutiat  dubium  fiducia  eerta  pavorem,

me,  vel  in  hoc  proprio  mortali  corpora  duin  sum,

esse  tuum,  cuius  sunt  omnia,  vel  resolutuni  615

corporis  in  quacumque  tui  me  parte  futurum.

^  Brandcs  :  diacrimina,  B^,  P.


35°


THE EUCHARISTICUS

of  thee,  and  seek  to  win  thy  promise  of  salvation,
may  not  too  greatly  dread  the  hour  of  death — now
nearer  by  reason  of  my  advanced  age,  though  every
season  of  life  is  subject  to  him.  And  at  the  crisis  of
my  changeful  life  may  no  idle  chances — for  these,  I
trust,  may  be  avoided  under  thy  leadership,  O  God
— distress  me  with  misdoubtful  fears  ;  but  whatever
lot  awaits  me  at  my  end  let  hope  of  beholding  thee,
O  Christ,  assuage  it,  and  let  all  fearful  doubts  be
dispelled  by  the  sure  confidence  that  alike  while  I
am  in  this  mortal  body  I  am  thine,  since  all  is
thine,  and  that  when  released  from  it  I  shall  be  in
some  part  of  thy  body.


351


INDEX


[Note. — Fictitious  names  are  distinguisiied by an asterisk (•). Tiie
abbreviations  Aus.,  Mt.,  R.  stand  for  Ausonius,  Mountain,  River.]


Abydos,  li.  15

Acliaeans,  The,  l.  155,  279

Acliaemenian  (Persian),  ii.  189

*Achilas,  II.  169.

Achilles,  taught  by  Cheiron,  I.  5  ;
143,  151,  155,  299;  II.  75;
spear  of,  107,  171

Acilinus  of  Bordeaux,  I.  135

*Acindynus,  ii.  191

Actium,  Battle  of,  i.  241

Adam,  I.  19,  37

Adoneus  (Bacchus),  II.  187

Adonis,  I.  209,  213,  299  ;  II.  49.  193

Adour  (R.  Aturrus),  I.  263

Aeacus,  I.  5,  143,  145,  151,  299 ;
II.  171

Aeas  of  Salamis,  I.  209

Aedui,  I.  3,  63,  123

Aeliiis  (see  Hadrian)

Aemilia  Aeouia  (mother  of  Aus.),
I.  viii,  61

Aemilia  C'orinthia  Maura  (grand-
mother of  Aus.),  I.  ix,  65,  67,  123

Aemilia  Dryadia  (aunt  of  Aus.),
I.  91

Aemilia Hilaria (aunt of Aus.),

I.  67

Aemilius  (Asper),  I.  5

Aeneas,  I.  149,  151  ; sons  of,  185,

331,  337  ; II.  41,  187
Aesculapius,  I.  335
Aesop,  II.  7,  39
Aetna,  II.  49
Afranius, Thais of, I. 287, 371  ;

II.  203

.\frica.  Province  of,  II.  295,  296
Agamemnon,  I.  141  ; II.  253
Aganippe,  I.  261
Agathocles  of  Sicily,  II.  157
Agen  (Aginnum),  ii.  105


AUSONIUS  II.


Agenor,  Bull  of,  I.  191

Aglaus,  I.  319

AgriciTis, Censorinus Atticus (a

grammarian),  II.  119
Aisne  (R.  Axona),  I.  261
Ajax,  1.  ]  43  ; II.  253
Alamanni, Expedition against, I.

X,  xvi
Alamannicus  (Title  of  Gratian),  ii.

225
Alani,  Alans,  I.  29,  51  ; II.  297,  335
Alba,  II.  41,  43
Alban  Sow,  II.  55
Alcaeus,  I.  5,  195
Alcides  (Hercules).  Ii.  185
Alcinous,  I.  153  ; ii.  15
♦Alcon,  II.  203
Alectryon,  I.  316  and  note
Alethius, Lattnus Alcimus, I. ix,

101
Alethius Minervius (rhetorician),

I.  109

Alexander  the  Great,  l.  217,  271  ;

II.  35,  103,  239,  253,  309
Alexandria,  Character  and  site  of,

I.  271  ; n.  239
Alisontia  (R.  Elz),  I.  255
Allobroges,  The.  I.  281
Alps,  The,  II.  107
Amazon,  I.  201  ; il.  171
Ambivius  (actor),  ii.  5
Aminaea  (wine  of),  ii.  45
Ammon,  Libyan  Oracle  of,  II.  211
Ammonius  (grammarian),  I.  115
Amphimachu<,  I.  151
Amphitryo,  ii.  75
Amphrysian (Sibylline) Oracles,

II.  55

Amyclae,  Silence  at,  i.  121  ; ii.  115
Ana  (R.  Guadiana),  II.  105

353


INDEX


Anaballianus,  I.  125

Anacharsis,  II.  277

Anastasius  (grammarian),  i.  115

Anchorets,  II.  135

Andromache,  l.  299

Andromeda  (constellation),  II.  281

Anicia,  Gens,  II.  37,  39

Annii,  The,  II.  37

Annianus (writer of fescennine

verse),  I.  391
Antecanis  (constellation),  il.  283
Anthedon,  I.  245
Ajiticyra,  ii.  51

Antilochus  (s.  of  Nestor),  i.  145
Antioch,  i.  271 :  ii.  239
AntiphUa,  l.  309,  327
Antoninus Pius, I. 343 ; II.  239,
263  (see  also  Caracalla,  Helioga-
balus)
Aonia, Aonides, I. 261, 363 ; II.

113,  187
Aphrodite,  I.  185  (see  also  Venus)
Apollo,  I.  169  ;  games  of,  197,  323  ;
II.  45  ;  slays  the  dragon,  91,  105,
125,  167,  169,  213,  281,  289
Aponus  (Bagni  d'Abano),  i.  285
Apuleius,  I.  391
Aquarius (constellation), i. 203 ;

II.  107,  283
Aquileia,  Maximus  slain  at,  I.  275
Aquitaine, I. 261,  277,  279,  281  ;

II.  105
Ara  (constellation),  ii.  283
Arabia,  ll.  317
Arabs,  II.  103,  187
Arborius,  Aem.  Magnus,  i.  ix,  61  f.,

79,  81,  123,  129
Arborius,  Caecilius  Argicius,  I.  viii,

63
Arcadia,  Terence  buried  in,  ii.  43
Arcadian  God  (Mercury), ii.  91  ;

—  herd  (asses),  159
Archemorus,  i.  193,  195
Archer,  The  (constellation),  i.  191,

203  ; II.  283
Archimedes, i. 247 and note;

puzzle  of,  395
Architects,  The  Seven,  l.  247
Arelate  : see  Aries
Arethusa,  Legend  of,  i.  270
Argicius,  I.  123
Argo  (constellation),  II.  283
Argos,  Argives,  I.  145,  149  ; ii.  267
Ariadne,  I.  211
Arianism,  II.  34

354


Arion  (steed  of  Adrastus),  I.  161  ;
II.  267

Aristarchus  (Homeric  critic),  i.
119,  311  ; II.  45

Aristides,  l.  87,  255

Aristippus,  I.  33

Aries  (Arelate),  "two-fold,"  l.  263;
described,  277  ; li.  105

Arrow,  The  (constellation),  n.  233

Arsaces,  ii.  103

Arsinoe,  I.  249

Ascra,  Sage  of  (Hesiod),  Ii.  37

Asia,  I.  149,  153,  301 ;  II.  83

Asper,  Aemllius,  I.  5  ; II.  45

Astyana.x,  I.  149

Ataulf  (King  of  the  Goths),  II.  329,
331,  333

Athens,  I.  167,  277,  313

Atlantic,  The,  i.  235  ; II.  141

Atlas,  Teacher  of  Hercules,  i.  5  ;
II.  75,  141

Atreus,  I.  141.  143,  145  ; II.  35

Atropos,  I.  77

Attains,  Priscus  (Puppet-Emperor),
II.  297,  327

Attic  Colonization  of  Ionia,  l.  297

Attusia  Lucana  Sabina  :  see  Sabina

Attusia  Lucana  Tallsia  (relative
of  Aus.),  I.  85

Attusius  Lucanus  Talisius  (f. -in-
law of  Aus.),  I.  69

Aturrus  : see  Adour

Augeas,  Stables  of,  l.  201

Augustus  :  see  Gratian,  Octavian,
Theodosius,  Yalentinian

Aurora,  ii.  279

Ausci  (Auch),  I.  129

Ausonian,  II.  141,  189

Ausonius  (s.  of  the  poet),  i.  ix,  73

.A  usonius  (grandson),  II.  69,  73

Ausonius,  D.  Magnus,  I.  vii ;  life  of,
viii  ff. ;  as  a  Christian,  xii  ti.  ;
his  literary  work,  xiv ;  his
classical  reading,  xxix  ;  effect
of  rhetoric  on,  xxx  ;  place  as  a
poet,  xxxiv  ;  textual  hist,  of  his
works,  xxxiv  ;  ancient  editions
of,  xx.xvi ;  MSS.  of,  xxxvii
3,  7,  9,  39,  49  ;  Consulship  of,  51
and  passim,  53,  73,  103,  259,  261,
265,  311,  331,  349  ;  Consulslup
of,  351,  371 ;  II.  3,  7,  13,  25,  27,
31,  39,  45,  53,  57,  63,  67,  69,  71  ;
experience  as  teacher,  79  ;  career
of,  31,  37,  93,  105,  i;9,  125,  131,


INDEX


135,  155  ff.  :  Consulship  of,  219
fl.  libique ;  271  It'.;  grandfather
of  Paulinus  Pellaeus.  295  ;  imi-
tated by  Paulinus,  299,  311

*Auxilius,  II.  159

Avelis  (Numidian  King),  II.  83

Avernus,  I.  241

Avitianus  (brother  of  Aus.),  I.  77

Axona  : see  Aisne


Bacchanals,  l.  391

Bacchus,  I.  185,  189,  227,  235,  363  ;

II.  187
Baiae,  i.  253  ;  oysters  of.  It.  15,  55
Balbus.  I.  315
Bambola  : see  Birbillis
Barbel  (in  the  Moselle),  l.  231
Barcelona,  n.  87  ; Punic,  105,  107,

141
Bassianus  ; sec  Caracalla
Bayeux  Baiocassium,  i.  105
Bazas  (Cossio  Vasatum),  I.  3, 43,

89 ; II.  55,  219,  295  ; besieged,

297,  301,  331  f.
Bears,  The  two  (constellations),  II.

281
Bearwarden,  n.  281
Belcae,  I.  281
Belenus  (a  Celtic  god),  I.  ix,  xxxii,

105,  115
Belgae,  I.  227,  229,  257,  259,  261
Bellerophon,  Madness  of, II. 119,

135,  137
Beneventum,  II.  201
Betis  (R.  Guadalquivir),  II.  141
Bias  of Priene, l. 315, 325; II.

273
BibUs,  II.  287
Bigone,  II.  23,  141
Bingen  : see  Vincum
Birbilis  (Bambola),  II.  117,  139,  141
Bird,  The  (constellation),  Ii.  281
Biscayan,  ii.  117  (see  Vasconia)
Bissula,  I.  xvii,  217,  219  ff.
Blavia  (Blaye),  II.  19
Bleak  (fish  in  the  Moselle;,  i.  235
Boeotian,  I.  307
Boii,  The,  li.  141 •
Bootes,  I.  203
Bordeaux  (Burdigala),  i.  \iii  f.,  3,

43,  69  ; Senate  of,  79  ; scholars

at,  115,  125,  127  ; professors  at,

141 ; described, 243, 285 ; II.

13,  15,  105,  107,  141,  219,  295  f.  ;


sacked  by  Goths,  297  f.,  301,  311,

343
Boreas,  II.  281
Braga  (Bracara),  I.  277
Briton, Britons, I. 229, 257; II.

215  If.
Bromius,  I.  263
Bull, The (constellation), I. 201  ;

II.  283
Byrne,  Miss,  I.  xxii  (note),  xliii
Byrsa  (  =  Carthage),  I.  269
Byzantium,  Byzantine,  l.  123,  269  :

oysters  of,  Ii.  17
Byzyges  (patron  of  bailiffs),  n.  99


Cadmus, Daughters of (letters),

II.  51,  57
Cadurca  (Cahors),  l.  125
Caenis,  i.  209  :  II.  199
Caesar (Gaius), I. 331, 333  ;

(Gratian),  II. 171 and passim ;

(JuUus),  I.  331,  333,  335
Caesares, The, Double  edition  of,

I.  xxiii,  331

Calagorris (Calahorra), I. 97 ; II.

117,  139,  141
Caledonian  Tides,  i.  179,  229  ; n.

15
Calends,  The,  l.  187,  189  ; ii.  83
Calenus,  II.  271,  287
Caligula  (Gaius  Caesar),  l.  331,  333,

337
Calliope,  II.  281,  233 ■
Callipio  (JuUus),  I.  69
Calpe,  II.  81,  141
Calpurnia,  Gens,  I.  87
Calydonian  Boar,  The,  II.  47
Camenae (Muses), II. 17, 19, 73,

125
Camillus  and  the  Gauls,  II.  285
Campania,  l.  273  ; ii.  201
Campus Martins, The, I. 313 ;

II.  227

Canace,  i.  211 ;  Ii.  167

Cancer,  Tropic  of,  l.  169,  189,  191,

201  ; II.  283
Cannae,  Battle  of,  i.  225
Capaueus,  ll.  165
Capitol, The, Kestorations of, I.

281 ; II.  287
Capri,  I.  333,  337
Capricornus,  Tropic  of,  l.  169,  189,

203  ; II.  283
Caprotine  Nones,  I.  197


355


INDEX


Oapua,  Ambition  and  fall  of,  I.  273,

275; n.  3
Caracalla  (Emperor),  I.  347
Carautonus  (K.  Charente),  1.  261
Caranus, Founder of Macedonian

Kingdom,  li.  83
Carians,  Character  of,  i.  301
Carpathian  Sea,  The,  l.  245
Carthage,  I.  269,  275  ; ii.  117,  239,

296,  311
*Carus,  I.  161

Cassiopeia  (constellation),  ii.  281
Castalian  (Muses),  II.  131
Castor,  i.  (Hero),  I.  161  ; ii.  195,

267 : ii. (Historian), I. 133 ;

iii.  (Flctitio\is),  il.  201
Catalepta  or  Catalecta  of  Virgil,  I.

307
Catamitus  (Ganymede),  ii.  193
Catana,  Legend  of,  I.  279
Cataphronia,  Julia  (aunt  of  Aus.),

I.  xxxii,  91
Catiline,  Conspiracy  of,  ii.  79
Cato,  M.  Porcius,  i.  87,  255  ; ii.

287
Catullus,  I.  163,  353
Catulus,  I.  281 ; Consulship  of,  ii.

79
Caucasus, Prometheus on the, i.

165
Cecrops,  Cecropian,  I.  305  ; ll.  103
Celbis  (B.  Kyll),  I.  253
Celtic  words  in  Virgil,  I.  307
Censor (Severus — Julianus),  I.  87,

95
Cento,  The  Nuptial,  I.  xvi,  xxxiv.

371  ; composition  of, 373, 375,

377
Cephalus,  l.  209
C^epheus  (constellation),  ii.  281
Cerberus,  l.  159,  201,  361
Ceres,  l.  9,  217,  361,  379  ; II.  99
Cevennes,  The  (Cebennae),  i.  279,

281
Chaerea  assassinates  Caligula,  i.  333
Chalcedon,  I.  247
Chalcidian,  ii.  85
Chamaves,  The,  r.  259
Chance  (Fors),  II.  75
Charente  :  see  Carautonus
Charioteer,  The  (constellation),  ii.

281
Cheiron  (Chiron), teaches  Achilles,

I.  5  ; II.  75,  205  ;  (constellation),

283


Chilon,  I.  315,  321  ; II.  275
Chimaera,  I.  369  ; li.  91
Chinese  ("Chink"),  I.  301,  303
Chios,  II.  45
Choaspes,  JR.,  I.  285
Choerilus  (poet),  n.  36
♦Chrestus,  ii.  191
Christ,  I.  35,  39  ; II.  121,  125,  127,

129,  133,  135  ff.,  145  ff.,  315  If.

(pas  Htm)
Chromius  (Mysian  Hero),  i.  153
Chub,  The. found  In  the  Moselle,

I.  231

Cicero,  M.  TulUus,  I.  133,  309,  391  ;

II.  3,  7,  35,  95,  121,  175  ; Con-
sulship of,  231,  251

Cicero,  Quintus,  Verses  ascribed  to,

1.201
Cicones,  The,  i.  151
Cilicia,  ll.  267
Cineas  of  Epirus,  I.  121
Cinyras,  li.  49,  193
Circe,  i.  245

Circus,  Factions  in,  i.  173
Citarius  (grammarian),  I.  119
Cithaeron,  l.  363
Claranus,  li.  45
Clarentius  of  Xarbonne,  I.  127
Clarian  Muses,  ii.  171
Claros,  I.  195

Claudius  (Emperor),  l.  331,  333,  337
Clazomenae,  ii.  209,  283
Cleanthes  the  Stoic,  I.  121
Clemens,  T.  Flavins,  il.  237
Clementinus  (poet),  ii.  45
Cleobulus  of  Lindos,  I. 317, 323  ;

II.  275
Cleonae,  Lion  of,  I.  199
Clio,  II.  281
Clytemnestra,  I.  141
Cnidos,  II. 51, 57 ; Venus  of,  n,

196
Colossus  of  Rhodes,  i.  367
Commodus  (Emperor),  i.  345
Communion,  ii.  298,  341
Concordius  (grammarian),  I.  ix,  116
Condate,  II.  61,  143
Consistory,  The  Imperial,  II.  257
Constaiitine (Emperor), I. Jx,

brothers  of,  123; II.  237
Constantinople,  I.  ix,  63,  97,  123,

269  ; II.  239
Constantius  (Emperor),  II.  249
Constellations,  The,  I.  201 ;  li.  281,

283


356


INDEX


Consus.  Feast  of,  i.  199,  277,  297  ;

n.  199
Contemtus,  Clemens,  I.  69
Cordova  (Corduba),  I.  277
Corinth,  Gaines  at,  I.  195
Corinthius  (grammarian),  I.  ix,  111
Corrector  (Spanish  official),  I.  91
Corvinus,  Val.,  II.  235
Corydon,  ii.  187
Cos,  I.  303

Cossio  Vasatum,  I.  89  : see  Bazas
Crab  (constellation) : see  Cancer
Crates  (Homeric  critic),  ll.  45
Crebennus,  ii.  25,  29
Cretan  Bull,  The,  i.  201  .—legend,

211
*Crispa,  n.  203,  207
Crispns  (grammarian),  I.  131
Crocus,  I.  209

Croesus,  I.  157,  315,  319,  321
Crown,  The  (constellation),  II.  281
Cumae, i. 133, 241, 247, 253  ;

Sibyl  of,  II.  181
Cupid, Crucified,  I.  207, 215  ; II.

207
Cures,  Priest  at,  i.  133
Curia,  i.  313
Curius,  I.  391
Cybele,  I.  197  note
Cydonian,  ii.  191
Cynic,  Cynics,  ii.  157,  185
Cynosema,  i.  155
Cynthia,  I.  51  ; ll.  55
Cypris  ^Venus),  ii.  195
Cyrus  and  Croesus,  I.  319  ; ii.  259
Cythere  (Venus),  ii.  189,  195,  213
Cytherea,  i.  385


Daedalus,  l.  211,  247,  301  ; II.  85,

197
Dalmatius,  i.  125
Damon,  li.  103
Danaans,  The,  I.  147,  153
Danube, R.,  I. 51, 221  ; li. 171,

173  ; Frontier  of,  223,  243
Daphne,  ii.  213,  215
Dardanus,  i.  135  ; il.  55
David,  I.  23

Dax  (Aquae  Tarbellae),  i.  viii,  3,  65
Deiphobe  (a  Sibyl),  ii.  181
Deiphobus,  I.  149
Delos,  II.  91
Delphi, I. 105  ; centre of the


earth. 147  ; oracle at, 169;

299  ; Solon's  Maxim  at,  315
Delphians.  I.  195
Delphic  God  (Apollo),  i.  317,  321  ;

II.  127
Delphirtius, Attius Tiro (rhetori-
cian), I.  ix,  xxxii,  105
Demosthenes,  I.  99  ;  II.  7
Deo,  II.  49

Diana,  Feast  of,  I.  197  ; II.  189
Didius  Julianus  (Emperor),  I.  345
Dido,  II.  289  : see  Elissa
Dindymus,  II.  115
Dinochares,  I.  249
*Diodorus,  II.  203
Diogenes,  I.  33,  157  ; ii.  185
Diomedes.  I.  145,  147  ; horses  of,

201  ; II.  101
Dione,  Star  of,  I.  185  ; II.  207
Dionysiac  Games,  I.  199
Dionysus,  I.  377  ;  II.  187
Dis,  I.  297,  309  ;  II.  159
Divona (spring at Bordeaux), I.

285
Dodona,  ii.  115
Dodra  (a  drink),  ii.  165
Dog-star,  il.  177
Dolphin, The (constellation), ii.

281
Domitian,  I.  333,  335,  341  ; ii.  235,

283  fit.
Don,  R.,  I.  267
Dordogne,  I.  261
Draco,  Code  of,  I.  133
Dragon,  The  (constellation),  I.  203
Drahonus  (R.  Thron),  I.  253
Drepanius  : see  Pacatus
Dromo  (Terentian  character),  I.  327
Druentia  (R.  Durance),  t.  263
Druids,  I.  ix,  105,  115
Druna  (R.  Drome),  I.  263
Dryadia, Aemilia  (aunt  of Aus.),

I.  91
Dryadia,  Julia (sister  of  Aus.),  I.

75,  87,  89


Eagle,  The  (constellation),  II.  83

Easter,  I.  35  ;  It.  13,  19,  298,  341

Ebora.  II.  15

Ebro,  The,  II.  141

Echo,  I.  247; ii.  119,  175,  213

Eelpont,  The  (found  in  the  Moselle),

I.  233
Egeria  (nymph),  ll.  289


357


INDEX


Egypt,  I.  267; Eayptians,  ii.  187

Elias,  I.  19

Elissa  (Dido),  I.  211,  269  ; ii.  167

Elysium,  l.  143

Endymiou,  Legend  of,  I.  13,  211

Ennius,  I.  307,  309

Ennomiis,  i.  153

Enoch,  I.  19

Ephemeris,  The, Date  of,  I.  xxi  f.

xxxix
Ephesup,  I.  249
Ephyra,  I.  327
Epicedion.  The,  Double  edition  of,

I. xxiii, xxvi, xxxv  f., xxxix,

41  ff.
Epicurean,  ii.  169
Epinaenides,  II.  99
Epirus,  Old  and  K^ew  Provinces,  ii.

317
Epitaphia,  The,  Double  edition  of,

I.  xxiii,  xxix,  141,  161
Equina, Festival of, I. 199 and

note
Equites,  Order  of,  I.  369  ; li.  227,

247
Erasinus,  I.  219
Erato.  II.  281

Eridanus  (constellation),  ii.  283
Erigone,  I.  157
Erinyes,  I.  369
Eriphyle,  I.  211
Eros,  II.  205
Erubris  (R.  Ruwar),  Stone  sawmills

on,  I.  253
Erymanthus,  Boar  of,  i.  201 ;  Ii.  47
Ethiopians,  I.  295
Euboea, i. 301  : Euboean

(  =  CHmaean),  i.  241,  247,  253
Eiicharisticus,  The, authorship of,

n. 295 ; literary character of,

299  f. ;  historical  value  of,  301  f.  :

MSS.  and  editions  of,  302  f. :  305
Euchrotia, executed as a Pris-

cillianist,  I.  107  (note)
Euclio  (in  Plautus),  i.  353
Eumenides,  II.  211
•Eumpina,  II.  157
*Eunomus,  Ii.  157,  159
•Eunus,  II.  203,  205
Euphemus  (chief  of  the Cicones),

I.  151
Euphorbus,  ii.  201
Euripus  (  =  aqueduct),  i.  283
EuroDQius  (Val.  Latinus),  i.  77
Europe,  ii.  83


Euryalus,  i.  147  :  ii.  101
Eusebius,  I.  81
Euterpe,  Ii.  2S1
Euxine  Sea.  li.  173
Eve,  I.  19,  37
Evenus,  l.  391


Fates,  The,  I.  361.  385  : II.  69,  75,

157,  181
Father, God the, l. 17 ff., 37  ;

II.  109,  145,  149
Fauns,  i.  237
Februa  (Festival),  i.  183  and  note,

185
Fescennine  Songs.  I.  387,  391
Fish.  The  Great  (constellation),  il.

283
Fishes  (constellation),  i.  191,  201  ;

II.  283
Flaccus : see  Horace
Flavia,  Gens,  I.  341
*Fla\inus,  i.  135
Floralia  (Feast  of  Flora),  i.  199
Franks,  I.  51,  259
Fronto,  M.  Cornelius,  II.  237,  239
Frugi, epithet of L. Calpumius

Piso,  I.  87


•Gaius.  II.  157

Gains  Caesar  :  see  Caligula

Galba  (Emperor),  i.  333,  335,  339

•Galla,  II.  175

Rallius,  I.  313

Callus  (Alectryon).  I.  361

Ganges,  bird  of  (Phoenix),  i.  361  ;

II.  87
Ganymedes,  II.  193
Gargara,  II.  115
Garonne, R.. I. 237, 263, 279  ;

II.  19.  27,  97,  311
Garum  (a  sauce),  ii.  89
Gaul,  Prefecture  of,  l.  5, 47  ; II.

173,  243,  249  : Old  Gaul,  269
Gaurus,  i.  237,  241
Gedippa,  II.  47

Oenethliacos,  The.  I.  xxi ; II.  69
Genoni,  The,  II.  15
German,  Germiins,  Germany,  i.  x,

259,  263  : II.  225,  269
Germanici,  The.  II.  263
Germanicus (title  of  Gratian^, n.

225


358


INDEX


Gervones,  l.  201,  369 ; li.  43,  55

Gestidius,  ll.  149

Getae,  l.  51,  301

Getic  Mars,  II.  171

Glabrio, Acilius (grammarian), I.

135,  137
Gladiatorial  Shows  at  Funerals,  I.

363
•Glaucias,  II.  193
Glaucus,  Legend  of,  I.  245
*Glycera,  ii.  181
God.  I.  15  ff.,  365,  369  ;  II.  109,  127,

129,  267,  307  ff.  (passim)
Gorgons,  The,  i.  369
Gortyn,  l.  247
Goths,  Gothic,  l.  51,  301  ; II.  171,

173, 297  ; piUage Bordeaux,

327,  329,  333,  335,  343,  349
Gracchus,  the  Elder,  II.  257
Graces,  The,  I.  361  ; II.  89
Gradivus,  I.  51
Gratian  (Emperor),  taught  by  Aus.,

I.  ix, xi ; dedication of Epi-
grams tc),  xxxviii ; 5, 39, 41  ;

II.  79,  81  ; as  poet-warrior,  169,
171,  219  ff.  (passim)

Grayling  in  the  Moselle,  I.  231
Greece,  II.  285,  337  and  passim.
Greek  Rules  for  drinking,  I.  355  ;

—  credit,  li.  21,  97  ;  —  fables,  Ii.

267  ;  —  invasion  of  Rome,  285  ;

— tutors,  315
Gregorius  Proculus,  I. xxxv,  207,

349,  351
Grivhus, The, I. x.  xxviii,  xxxiv,

353  ff.
Gudgeon  in  the  Moselle,  i.  235
Gunes  (hero),  l.  147


Hades,  i.  167

Hadrian,  I.  34,)

Haemus,  l.  283

Hamadryad  Kymphs,  l.  175,  299

Hannibal,  Relations with Capua,

I.  275  ;  death  of,  301  ;  II.  117
Hare,  The  (constellation),  ii.  283
Harmonia,  I.  211
Harmonius  (grammarian),  ii.  45
Harpies,  The,  i.  369
Hebromagus (estate of Paulinus

of  Nola),  II.  91,  95,  99,  109
Hecate,  l.  361  ; ii.  71
Hector,  l.  149,  151.  153


Hecuba,  l.  155

Helen,  l.  141  ; origin  of,  361  ; II.

195
Helicon,  n.  45
Heliogabalus (Emperor), i. xix,

347
Helle,  I.  247
Helvius  : see  Pertinax
Herculanus, Pomponius Maximus

(nephew of  Aus., grammarian),

I.  81,  117

Hercules, taught  by  Atlas, I. 5  ;

birthday  of,  199  ;  363  ; II.  201
Herculeus  (sc.  Maximian),  Baths  of,

at  Milan,  I.  273
Hermaphroditus,  II.  199,  213
Hermes  Trismegistus,  I.  357
*Hermione,  ii.  211
Herodotus,  I.  129  ; Works of, in

library  of  Aus.,  il.  31
Herrick, Debt  to  poem  de  Rosis,

II.  271,  281  and  note

Hesiod,  I.  173,  203  (note) ; II.  37
Hesperides,  Apples  of,  I.  201
Hesperius  (s.  of  Aus.), I.  ix,  xix,
xxxv,  xxxvi, 75, 331, 349; II.
61,  67,  71,  91,  295,  296
Hesperus,  I.  239
Hiberus  (R.  Ebro),  II.  141
Hippocratas,  I.  303
Hippocrene,  II.  45,  91
Hippolytus, Fate of, I. 165 ;
=  Virbius, 373; significance of
his  name,  li.  181
Hlpponax  of  Ephesus,  II.  283  note
Hippothous  (Trojan  War  hero),  I.

153
Hispalis  : see  SevUle
Homer, I. 131, 143 ; work of
Zenodotus and Aristarchus on,
311  ; II.  43  ;  his  scattered  verses
collected by  Zenodotus  (sic),  45
and  note  ; read  in  schools,  77 ;
171,  231 ; used  in  schools,  296,
313
Horace,  imitated  by  Aus.,  i.  xxix,
15: 131, 217, 355; read in
schools,  II.  77
Huns,  I.  51  ; II.  171
Hyacinthus,  I.  209
Hyades,  Ii.  43
Hybla,  Bees  of,  II.  115
*Hylas,  II.  209.  211
Hylas  and  the  Nymphs,  ii.  211
Hyperion,  l.  241

359


INDEX


Iambus,  l.  15  ; ii.  91

*Iapyx,  H.  181

Iberian (Spanish), I. 277, 270 :

II.  79,  83,  Ul
Icarian  Sea,  ii.  85
Icarus,  I.  247  ; II.  85
Ictinus  tlie  Architect,  I.  249
Iculisma  (Angoulfime),  II.  31
Idalia,  Julia  (cousin  of  Aus.),  I.  93
Ides, The, l.  187, 189, 197; an

auspicious  day,  ii.  71
*Idmon,  II.  181
Ilerde, li. 117, 139 ; see also

Lerida
Iliad,  The,  read  in  schools,  II.  77,

313
Ilithyia,  i.  181
Ihum,  I.  149,  2.55
Illibanus  (an  unknown  king),  ii.  83
Illyricum, Illyria,  etc.,  Prefecture
of,  I.  xi,  47,  233,  275  ; II.  171,
249,  269
Indians  and  Dionysus,  Ii.  187
lo,  Wanderings  of,  I.  299
Ionia  colonised  from  Attica,  I.  279
Isis,  Feast  of  the  Bark  of.  I.  199  ;

Sistra  of,  II.  115
Ismarus,  I.  237
Isocrates,  ii.  7
Ister (R. Danube), I. 233, 259 :

see  also  Danube
Isthmian  Games,  The,  l.  195
Italy,  Prefecture  of, I. xi, 5, 47,

257,  275
Itys,  II.  205
lulus,  II.  41
Ixion,  I.  299  (note)


Janus,  I.  49  ff.,  183,  185,  189,  191,

333 ; II.  83
Jocasta,  I.  363  (note)
Jordan,  11.,  I.  39
Jove  : see  Jupiter
Jovinus,  II.  47

Jucundus  (grammarian),  I.  113
Judgment,  The  Last,  II.  145
Juhan  (Emperor),  i.  101
Julian  (?  a  freedman),  XI.  11
Julius  :  see  Caesar
Juniadae  (sons  of  Junius  Brutus),

I.  363  and  note
Juno,  I.  185,  189,  361,  385
Jupiter,  Jove,  l.  149,  165,  (Planet)

175,  183,  193,  195,  205,  297,  301  ;


Stygian Jove (Dis), 307, 361 ;

Pheidias' statue of, ii. 175 ;

Jove  and  Ganymedes,  193,  195,

203
Juturna,  i.  165
Juvenal  ((noted  by  Aus.,  i.  391
.luvencus,  ii.  299
Juventa,  i.  185,  299


Lacedemon, Armed  Aphrodite  at,
II.  193

Lachesis,  I.  133

Laconian  : see  Spartan

Laelius,  II.  103

Laertes,  i.  143,  147  ;  son  of  — :  see
Ulysses

Luevius, Erotopaegnia  of,  I.  391

*Lais,  II.  179,  181,  195,  205

Laodamia,  I.  211  and  note

Lapith  (Ixion),  i.  299

Lar,  I.  297

Larissa,  I.  143

Larunda,  I.  297

Lascivus  : see  Leoutius

Latium,  l.  275  ; II.  77,  28.5

Latmus,  I.  211

Laverna,  Ii.  53

Leda,  ii.  195

Leman,  Lake,  i.  281

Leo (constellation), I. 49, 157,

203  ; II.  283
Leontius Lascivus (grammarian),

I.  Ill,  113
Lepidus,  II.  79
Lerida (Herda), I. 135; II. 117,

139,  141
Lesura  (R.  Lieser),  I.  253
Leto,  II.  71
Leucus,  I.  211,  241
Libanus,  Mt.,  I.  303
Liber  Pater  (Bacchus),  I.  199,  217,

241  ; II.  187
Libs  (S.W.  wind),  l.  297
Libya, l. xi, 5, 47, 91, 309 ; n.

83,  287
Libyan Amraon, ii. 211 ; —  Sea,

281,  299
Liger  (R.  Loire),  l.  261
Liguria,  II.  267

Ligurians,  Character  of,  i.  301
Livy,  I.  129
Locriaus,  The,  i.  133
Love,  I.  211  tf.


360


INDEX


Lucaniacus  (villa  of  Au3.),  I. Ill

and note ; ii. 61,  95, 99, 143

(Lucanus),  187
Lucanian Oxen (elephants),  II.  31

and  note
Lucifer,  I.  383
Lucilius,  I.  33; ii.  61,  201
Lucina,  I.  187,  385
Luciolus  (rlietorician),  I.  103
♦Lucius,  I.  159; nickname  for  the

pike,  233
Lucretia,  II.  137
Lugudunum (Lyons), I. 63 ; ii.

237
Luna,  I.  211  ; U.  59,  81
Lupodunum  (?  Ladenburg),  Battle

of,  I.  259
Lyaeus,  I.  237  ; ii.  17
Lycia,  ii.  135,  267
Lycian  (Sarpedon),  I.  149
*Lycus,  II.  209,  211
Lydia,  Lydians,  I.  301,  319
Lygos  (  =  Byzantium),  l.  260
Lyre,  The  (con.stellation),  ii.  281
Lyrna,  Hydra  of,  l.  201


Macedonia, Province of, II. 295,

296.  298
Macrinus  (grammarian),  i.  ix,  115:

Opilius  — ,  347
Maeander,  R.,  I.  305
Maenad,  ll.  215
Mantua, Birthplace of Virgil, I.

255
Manuscripts  of  Ausonius,  their  in-
terrelation, xxxvii,  xli.
Marcellus  (grammarian),  I.  217
*Marcius,  I.  159

Marcus  (  =  M.  Ter.  Varro),  I.  247
•Marcus,  n.  159,  165,  167,  201,  203
Marcus  Aurelius  (Emperor),  I.  343
Mareotic  (  =  Egyptian),  n.  115
•Marius,  i.  159  ; G.  — ,  II.  235,  239
Marne,  R.  (Matrona),  I.  261
Maro  : see  Virgil
Maroialum  (Bagueres  de  Bigorre),

II.  141
Mars,  I.  9,  151,  165,  183,  185,  189,

205, 281, 291, 297, 361, 367  ;

horses of, ii. 101, 171, 185  ;

—  Gradivus,  195
Marseilles  (Massilia),  Oysters  of,  ii.

15  ; Paulinus  Pell,  at,  298,  345,

347


Martial,  I.  391  ; li.  271
Matrona  : see  Marne
Maura, Aemilia  Corinthia (grand-
mother of  Aus.),  I.  ix,  67
Maximus (Pretender), i. xi f.,
xxii, 107 and note  : slain at
Aquileia,  275  ; II.  67  (note)
May,  Etymology  of,  I.  183,  185
Medes,  Median,  i.  285  ; II.  103
Medoc  (Meduli),  Oysters  of,  it.  15,

45,  47,  55,  59
Megalesia  (festival),  I.  197
3Iegentira  (niece  of  Aus.),  I.  87
Melanla, Aemilia  (sister  of  Aus.),

I.  93
Meleager,  il.  47
Meliboean  purple,  I.  381
Melicertes,  I.  195  (note)
Melo  (  =  Egypt),  Ii.  51
Melpomene,  Ii.  281
Memphian  (  =  Egyptian),  I.  251
Menander, I. 391, 393 ; read in

schools,  II.  77
Menecrates  (architect),  I.  249  and

note
Menelaus,  I.  131,  143  ; II.  231
Menestheus  (grammarian),  I.  Ill
Mercury,  I.  183  ; festival  of,  197  ;

patron of thieves, 203, 303  ;

festival  of,  Ii.  71.  175,  213
Merida,  II.  105

*Meroe,  II.  181  ; city  in  Nubia,  ib.
Metanoea  (regret),  Ii.  77
Metellus,  i.  159  ; n.  241
Metiscus (charioteer of Turnus),

II.  29

Meton  of  Athens,  Cycle  of,  II.  67

Midas,  I.  35

Milan  (Mediolanum),  Buildings  of,
I.  273

Milton,  John,  Ii.  301

Minerva,  Citadel  of  (the  Acropolis),
I.  249  ; II.  169,  189,  197

Jlinervius,  Tib.  Victor  (rhetori-
cian), I.  97

Minos,  I.  133,  211,  303; II.  199

Mirmillo  (gladiator),  I.  303

Mitylene,  l.  327  ; II.  273

Mnemosynae  (sic,  =  Muses),  I.
363  ; II.  25,  49

Moneta,  Temple  of,  n.  287

Moon,  The,  I.  183,  205,  211  ;  see
also  Luna

Moselle,  R.,  I.  xvii  f.,  xxxi,  227  ff.  :
fish of, 231 tf.  ; vineyards  of.


361


INDEX


235  ff . ;  scenery  on,  237  f.  ;  aqua-
tic sports  on,  239  f.  ;  fishing  on,
243  f.  ;  country-houses  by,  245
ff.  ;  tributaries  of,  253  ff.  ;
the  Mostlie  praised  by  Sym-
machus,  265,  267;  271  ; II.  67

Muraena,  Theatre  of,  I.  313  ;
Augurship  of,  355

Muses,  The,  l.  361  ;  II.  27,  73,  87,
91,  119,  131,  155,  167,  169,  171,
187,  189  ;  names  of,  281 ;  289

Mycenae,  II.  253

Mylae  (=Mj'lasa),  Battle  of,  i.
241  and  note

•Myron,  ii.  179 ;  —  the  sculptor
(Heiffer  of),  II.  195  fT.

Mysja,  I.  153


Naiads,  u.  211

Xar  (R.  Nera),  I.  297

Narbonne,  Province  of,  i.  63  :  citv

of,  127,  129,  277  ;  described,  28i;

II.  15,  105
Narcissus,  I.  209,  299  : II.  211,  213
Naso  : see  Ovid

Nastes  (hero  of  Trojan  War),  I.  151
Xava  (R.  Nahe),  I.  225
Nazarius  (rhetorician),  I.  121
Nealces  (arti.st),  I.  355
Nechepsos  (Egyptian  king),  II.  85
Nemausus  (NJmes),  I.  285
Nemean  Games,  I.  195  ; II.  267
Nemesa  (R.  Nims),  I.  253
Nemesis,  I.  53,  255  ; li.  79  : wor-

sliipped  at  Rhamnus,  103  : 107,

183,  195
Nepa  (  =  Scorpio),  I.  203
Nephela,  i.  247
Nepos,  Chronicles  of,  ii.  33
Nepotianus  (grammarian),  I.  121
Neptunalia,  I.  199
Neptune, I. 9 ; builder of  Trov,

149,  195,  199
Nereus,  I.  245

Nero,  I.  331,  333,  335,  337  ; II.  237
Nerva  (Emperor),  i.  341
Nestor, l. 131, 145, 361  ; 11. 35,

181,  231
Nicer  (R.  Neckar),  l.  257  '

Nile,  R.,  I.  241,  267,  271  ; II.  171,

175,  181
Niobe,  I.  155 ; n.  193
Nisus,  II.  101


Noiomagus (Neumagen), I. 225,

note
Nola,  II.  203
Nomion  (hero),  I.  151
Nones,  The,  I.  187  ; Caprotine  — ,

197
Novarus  (hamlet  in  Aqiiitaine),  II.

107
Novempopulonia,  l.  63,  129
Numa,  estabhshes  the  Parentalia,

I. 57,  59 ; 133  ; establishes  the

Februa, 183, 185; montli of
. (February), 189, 191  ; —  and

Egeria,  n.  289
Numantia, reduced  by  Scipio, ii.

287
Numidians,  II.  255
Nymphs, of  the Moselle, i. 231,

237  ; —  and  Hylas,  li.  211


Oceanus,  lather  of  Alcinous,  l.  153  ;

(the  Atlantic),  283  ; U.  141
Octa%ian  (Emperor),  r.  9,  315,  335  ;

consulships  of,  ii.  235
Odryssian  Mars,  ii.  171
Odyssey,  The,  l.  143  ; U.  313
Oebalus, Oebalian, i. 209, 299 ;

II.  115
Ogyges,  Founder  of  Thebes,  n.  187
Olenus,  II.  47

Olympia,  Stadium  at,  ll.  209
Olympian  Games,  The,  I.  195
Ops  (Rhea),  Feast  of,  1. 197,  297,  359
Oratory,  Three  styles  of,  i.  367
Orcus,  II.  49
Oreads,  I.  237
Orestes,  i.  147  ; U.  103
Orion  (constellation),  II.  283
Orpheus,  Tripod  of,  I.  367
Osiris,  II.  187
Ostia,  I.  197
Ostomachia (a picture-puzzle), i.

375,  395  tf.
Ostrich egg-shell used  as  a  cup,

II.  23
Otho  (Emperor),  l.  333,  335,  339
Ovid,  Metamorphoses  of,  II.  199


Pacatus, Drepanius, l. xxiii, 163,

287,  293.  309,  311
Padus  (R.  Po),  II.  91,  101
Paean  (Apollo),  il.  213
Paestum,  Koses  of,  Ii.  277


362


INDEX


Palaemon,  I.  103

Palamedes.  I.  307

Pallas,  Strife  of.  with  Poseidon  for
Attica.  I.  277 ;  statue  of,  by
Piieidias,  II.  175;  103

Pan,  Pans,  I.  237,  207

Panaetius  of  Rliodes,  II.  287  (note)

Panatkenaicus  of  Isocrates,  The,
I.  09

Pangaean  Hills,  The,  I.  237

Pannonians,  The,  II.  173  bis

Panope,  I.  237

Paphian,  The  (Venus),  II.  211,  279

Paphos,  II.  279

Papia,  Lex,  ii.  209

Paradise,  I.  41

Parcae  : see  Fates

Parentalia,  Tlie,  I.  xx,  xxxiv,  57  ff.

Parian  marble,  I.  281,  283

Paris,  II.  21,  93

•Parmeno,  I.  13,  15

Parnassus,  l.  195 ;  Parnassian,  il.
299

Parthenias  {sc.  Virgil),  I.  393

Parthian  darts,  II.  91

Pasiphae,  I.  211,  303  ; II.  197,  199

Pastor  (grandson  of  Aus.),  I.  75

Patera,  Attius  (rhetorician),  I.
103,  109,  121

Paul,  St.,  I.  41

Pauliacos  (?Pauliac,  a  villa  of
Aus  ) II 59

Paulinus  of  Nola,  on  literary
value  of  Aus.,  I.  vii  ;  relations
with  Aus.,  xiii,  xxiii ;  corre-
spondence with  Aus.  and  life,
xxiv ;  dedication  of  Techno-
■paegnion  to,  289 ;  author  of
poem  on  the  Emperors,  II.  81 ;
87.  89.  91,  93,  99,  101,  105,  107,
109,  111,  113,  110,  125,  131,  135  ;
prayer  of.  149 ;  295,  299

Paulinus  of  Pella,  History  of,  II.
295  ff.  ; Eiicharisticus  of,  299  ff.

Paulus,  Axius  (rhetorician),  I.  219,
371,  391  ;  II.  13,  17,  21,  23,  25,
27,  35,  271

Pegasus,  I.  161,  355;  li.  91,  135,
267:  (constellation),  281

Peirithoiis,  li.  101

Peleus,  II.  75

Pella,  II.  83,  103,  296,  309

Pelops,  I.  195  and  note

PeloTus,  I.  241

Pelusian  (  =  Egyptian),  i.  297


Penance,  ll.  341

Penelope,  ii.  15

Perch  in  the  Moselle,  i.  233

Perfect  Number,  The,  I.  365

*Pergamus,  ii.  179

Periander  of  Corinth,  I.  317,  327

II.  275
Persephone,  II.  193
Perseus,  II.  91  ;  (constellation),  281
Persians,  i.  271,  319  : II.  103,  183
Pertinax  (Emperor),  I.  345
Perusia,  Famine and siege of,  II.

99  and  note
Phaeacians,  The,  I.  303
Phaedra,  l.  211  ; II.  167
Phaethon,  Fate  of,  n.  101
Phaenon  (i.g.  Saturn),  i.  175
Phalaecus,  II.  51,  283
Phanaces  (Mysian  Bacchus),  n.  187
Phaon (Sappho's lover), I. 211  ;

II.  167
Pharos  at  Alexandria,  Pharian,  I.

240.  251
♦Phegeus,  ii.  209,  211
Pheidias  the  sculptor,  ii.  175
Philo  (Athenian  architect),  i.  247  ;

(Bailiff  of  Aus.),  ii.  93
Philomela.  I.  301
*Philomusus,  il.  161
Philopoemen,  Death  of,  l.  299  and

note
Phlegethon,  R.,  II.  215
Phoebe  (the  Moon),  I.  175
Phoebicius  (grammarian),  i.  115
Phoebus,  I.  55,  105,  181,  193,  225,

271,  299,  325,  361,  363  ; II.  17,

169,  215,  281
Phoenix,  The,  l.  173,  361  ; II.  87
Phormio  of  Terence,  II.  97
Phosphorus  (a  race-horse),  I.  159
Phrixus,  Ram  of,  I.  189
Phrygian  marble,  I.  229  :  —  char-
acter, 301
Phyllis,  II.  167  ;  *— ,  203,  205
Picenum,  II.  61

Pieria,  Pierian,  I.  257  ; ir.  10,  25
Pike  in  the  Moselle,  I.  233
Pimpla,  II.  29

Pindar,  I.  323  ;  Pindaric,  II.  31
Pisa  (in  Elis).  I.  195
Pitana  (in  Sparta),  II.  183
Pittacus  of  Mitylene,  I.  315,  327  ;

II.  273
Planets,  Influence  of  the,  l.  179
Plato,  I.  139,  343,  355,  391  ;  II.  296


363


INDEX


Plautiis, Plautine, I. 371  : H. 17,

Pleiades,  The,  II.  43
Pleisthenes,  son  of:  see  Menehun
Pleuronia,  i.  147
Pliny the Younger, i. 391  ; the

Elder,  II.  199
Poictiers,  I.  115,  117
Poiteau,  ll.  141
Pollux,  II.  195
Polydorus  (hero),  I.  151
*Polygiton,  II.  215
Polymnia  (Muse),  Ii.  281
Poly.\eaa  (dau.  of  Priam),  I.  155
Pomona,  I.  49,  183  ; II.  107
Pompey  the  Great,  I.  315
Pomponius Maximus (brother-in-
law  of  Aus.),  I.  79
Pontiflces,  Code  of,  I.  133
Pope,  Windsor  Forest  of,  I.  239  note
Portumnus,  I.  195
Praxiteles  (sculptor),  ii.  193,  195
Priam,  I. 147  note, 153, 155 ; ii.

55
Priene,  i.  315,  325
Priscillianist Martyrs, I. xxi, 107

note
Probus,  M.  Valerius,  I.  5,  121,  129  ;

— ,  Sex. Petronius, l.  xvii,  257

and  note  ; II.  33  and  note,  37,  41
Procopius,  Revolt  of,  I.  107  note
Procris,  I.  209
Proculus  : see  Gregorius
Professores,  The,  i.  xx  f.,  xxxiv,  97

ff.
Promea  (R.  Priim),  I.  253
Prometheus,  I.  165,  299
Propontis,  li.  17
Proserpine,  I.  213
Protesilaus,  I.  147  ; Ii.  181
Protrepticus,  Tlie,  II.  71
Provence,  l.  281
Ptolemy,  I.  249
Pudentilla,  Namia  (sister-in-law  of

Aus.),  I.  83
Punic,  I.  345  ;  —  wars,  361 ; -  faith,

II.  21
Pylades,  li.  103
Pyleus  (hero),  i.  153
Pyrene,  I.  261  ; Pyrenees,  279  ; ii.

105,  107,  117,  139
Pyrois  (the  planet  Mars),  i. 175  ;

II.  55
Pyrrhus (s. of Achilles), i. 147;

(King  of  Epirusl,  299  note


Pythia,  Cave  of  the,  i.  217
Pythian  Games,  The,  i.  195
Pythagoras  of  Samos.  "  Two  Ways  "
of,  I.  117,  .305  and  note  ; "Yea
and  Nay  "  of,  l.  171  f.,  Ii.  117
Pythagoreans, l. 163 ; massacre
of,  167,  169


Quinquatrus  (Feast  of  Pallas),  I.  197

Quintilis  (July),  I.  183

Quintilian, M. Fabius, I. 97, 99,

257  : II.  237
Quirinus,  I.  49,  351  ; II.  105,  143
(iuirites,  i.  133


Ram,  The  (constellation),  li.  283
Raraunum  (Raum),  ii.  141
Regifugium,  Festival  of,  I.  197
Regulus, Minucius (brother-in-law

of  Aus.),  I.  85
Remiis,  II.  185

Rhamnus.  Nemesis  of,  II.  103,  107
Rhea,  i.  295,  359

Rhine,  The,  I.  221,  257,  259,  271,
283  ; II.  39  ; frontier  of,  223  ;
269
Rhodauus  : see  Rhone
Rhodes,  Oratory  of,  I.  367  ;  Colos-
sus of,  ib.  ; II.  287
Rhodope,  I.  133,  237
Rhone,  R..  I.  263,  277,  281
Rhopalic  Verse,  l.  39  and  note
Ripa  Dextra  (a  quarter  of  Aries),

I.  263
Roach  in  the  Moselle,  l.  231
Roman  education,  ii.  313
Rome, I. 49, 109, 129, 255, 269,
273, 285, 331, 347, 351, 367,
377  ;  II.  43,  59,  87,  141,  143,  239,
285,  296,  311,  317
Romulus,  sons  of,  I.  297,  313  ; ii.
37, 103, 185, 287  ; (a gram-
marian), T.  ix,  111
Roscius  (actor),  II.  5
Rubrius, Banquet  of,  in  Cicero,  i.

355
Rudiae,  Birthplace  of  Ennius,  I.  309
•Rufus,  II.  161,  163,  193 -
Rumour,  II.  143,  153,  269
Rutupiae (port of Richborough),
I.  G9,  83,  275


364


INDEX


Sabiiia, Attnsia Lucana (wife of

Au?.). I. ix,  xxvii ; lament  for,

71  f..  85  ;  11.  181,  189
Sacred  Mount,  the,  I.  367
Sages, The Seven, l. 61,  311  ff. ;

11.  97,  273  S.
Saguntum,  Siege and destruction

of,  I.  165  ; II.  99
Salamis,  I.  209
^^alian  fare,  II.  15
Sallust  the  historian,  ii.  11  ; read

in  scliools,  79 ;  83,  239  ; (fourth

century  colleague  of  Julian),  i.

103
Salmacis,  ii.  199,  213
Salmon  in  the  Moselle,  i.  233
Salmona  (R.  Salm),  I.  253
Salonika  (Thessalonica),  II.  309
Samian  Ware,  II.  157
Sanctus,  Fla^ius  (relative  of  Aus.),

I.  83

Santones  (people  of  Salutes),  I.  85  ;

II.  13,  23,  25,  27,  31,  105
Sapphic  Metre,  The,  l.  15
Sappho,  I.  209  ; II.  53,  167,  187
Saragossa (Caesarea  Augusta^, II.

107,  141
Saravus  (B.  Saar),  I.  231,  253
Sardanapalus,  I.  165
Sarmatians,  I.  51,  225
Sarpedon  of  Lycia,  I.  149
Sarran  (Tyrian)  fabrics,  I.  29
Saturn,  I.  165,  183; feast  of,  199;

205 : castrates Uranus, 299 ;

II.  199
Saturnalia,  The,  i.  197
Satyrs,  i.  237
Sauromatae,  n.  171
Scaean  Oate  at  Troy,  I.  149
Scales,  The (constellation),  I.  191,

203  ; II.  283
Scarabaeus,  II.  201
Scatinia,  Lex,  II.  209
Scaurus, Q.  Ter.. I. 5, 121, 129;

II.  45
Scipio,  II.  103,  287
Scorpion, The (constellation),  i.

191  ; II.  283
Scylla,  I.  369
Scytale  (Spartan  cipher-device),  ii.

Ill
Scythia. i. 267 ; Scythian Sea

(  =  The  Euxine),  II.  175
Sedatus  (rhetorician),  1.  127
Sedulius,  n.  300


Seleucus,  Founder  oi  Antioch.  I.  271

Semele,  i.  209

Seueca,  ll.  237

Seplasia  (a  quarter  of  Capua), ii.

203
Sequani,  The,  n.  269
Serpent  (the  Devil),  I.  19
Sertorius,  ii.  79,  117
Sesostris,  li.  85
Sestos,  I.  209,  247
Severus  Censor  Julianus,  I.  87
Severus, Septimius (Emperor), 1.

345
SevUle  (HispaUs),  l.  277
SextUis  (August),  I.  189  ; il.  71
Shad  in  the  Moselle,  I.  235
Sheat,  fish  in  the  Moselle.  I.  235
Sibyl, Sibyls, The Three,  i.  369  :

II.  181  and  note
Sicily,  I.  133,  361 ;  SiciUan  Medim-

nus,  363  : II.  157,  177
Sicoris  (B.  Segre),  II.  117
Sidonian,  II.  311
Sigalion  (Harpoerates),  II.  115
Sigeum,  I.  143,  147
Sigillaria,  Feast  of,  I.  199
Significance  of  names,  I.  147,  149  ;

n.  181
Silvius (son of Aeneas), Ii. 41  ;

(a  Briton),  II.  215  ff.
Simols,  R.,  I.  255
Simonides  of  Ceos,  i.  119
Sipylus,  Mt.,  I.  155
Sirens,  The,  I.  121,  361
Sirius  (constellation),  I.  49  ; ii.  283
Sirmium,  II.  243
Siwa,  Oasis  of,  Ii.  211,  note
Smyrna,  i.  255  : li.  287
Snake-holder,  The (constellation),

II.  283
Socrates,  II.  313
Solon, Laws  of, I. 133 ; — and

Croesus,  315,  317  ; n.  275
Son  of  God,  The,  II.  109
*8osias, I. 23, 25 ; (in Terence),

n.  9
Sotades,  ii.  29
Spain,  Spanish, ii. 109, 117, 139,

141
Spartan brevity, I. 265, 321 ;
— cipher,  II. Ill ; —  brevity,
117  ;  —  stoicism,  183
Spercheus  (grammarian),  i.  Ill
Sphinx  of  Thebes,  The,  i.  301,  363
Spirit,  The  Holy,  l.  19,  37


365


INDEX


Staphylius  (rhetorician),  i.  129

Steplien,  I.  41

Sthenelus,  I.  147

Stilboii  (tlie  plauet  Mercury),  l.  1 75

Stoic,  11.  169

Stymphalus,  Birds  of,  I.  201

Styx,  Stygian,  l.  169,  297  ; II._  193

Sucuro  (grammarian),  I.  ix,  115

Suessa  (birthplace  of  Lucilius),  II.

31
Suetonius,  i.  331,  337  ; It.  81,  83
SuUa,  II.  239
Sulpicia  (poetess),  l.  391  ; II.  271,

283
Sun,  The,  i.  183,  205 ;  Ii.  81,  101
Sura  (R.  Sauer),  I.  253
Swabian,  Suebi,  I.  219  ; II.  173
Syagriu.s,  l.  7
Symmachus, Q. Aurelius, I. vii,

XXXV,  265  ; II.  3,  7,  9,  11
Syracuse,  l.  247,  279


Tabernae  (Berncastel),  I.  225
Tables,  The  Twelve,  I.  365
Tagus,  R.,  II.  105
Tanaquil  (wife  of  Tarquin),  I.  9o  ;

II.  113,  137
Tantalus,  l.  195
Tarbellae,  Aquae,  I.  65,  123,  263;

II.  109;  see  also  Dax
Tarentum,  Games  at,  I.  363
Tarnes  (R.  Tarn),  I.  263  ; II.  97
Tarpeiau  Rock,  The,  I.  363
Taniuin,  I.  281
Tarrac!ona (Tarraco), I. 91, 277 ;

II.  107,  141
Tartessus,  II.  17  ; Tartesian,  81
Taurinus  (a  provincial),  U.  47
Technopaegnion, The, I. xxviii ;

double  edition  of.  xxxv ;  xl ;  287,

289  ff.
Telles (or Tellos), the Athenian,

I.  319
Tench  in  the  Moselle,  I.  235
Terence,  I.  323,  327,  329  ; burled

in Arcadia, ii._  43 ; read in

schools,  n.  77,  97
Tereus,  i.  105,  301  (note)
Terpsichore,  ll.  29,  281
Tethys,  l.  245

Tetradius  (grammarian),  II.  31
Tetrici,  The,  I.  viii,  65
Teutosagi,  The,  I.  281


Textual History of Ausonius'

Poems,  I.  xxxiv  f.
Thais  of  Afranius,  I.  287
Thalassius (son-in-law of Aus.),

II.  11,  290
Thalassus  (grammarian),  i.  117
Thales  of  Miletus,  I.  317,  323
Thalia,  n.  29,  281
Theano  (wife  of  Pythagoras),  i.  95
Theatres in Greece used for de-
liberation, I.  313
Thebes, I. 155, 195 ; festival of

Dionysus  at,  363
Themis,  I.  133,  295
Theodosius  (Emperor),  overthrows

Maximus,  I.  xii ; asks  for  poem.s

of  Aus.,  xxxvi,  7,  9
Theon  of  M6doc,  I.  xxxiii ; ii.  45,

53,  59
Therasia  (wife  of  Paulinus  of  Jfola),

II.  113  note,  119,  137
Theseus,  li.  47,  101,  181
Thessalonica,  II.  309
Thisbe,  I.  211
Thrace,  Thracian.  —  cruelty,  1. 151,

291  ;  — priest,  379  ;  —Amazons,

II.  171  ;  267
Thrasybulus  (Spartan  warrior),  Ii.

183
Thucydides,  Bisiory  of,  II.  31
Thymele,  l.  219
Thyone,  i.  373
Tiber,  I.  197,  255
Tiberius,  Nero  Claudius  (Emperor).

I.  331,  333,  335,  337
Tilianus,  Codex,  I.  xxxvii
Timavus  (R.  Timao),  l.  285
Timon  of  Athens,  I.  167
Tiresias,  Ii.  199

Titan  (the  Sun),  I.  175  ;  n.  55,  81
Titia,  Lex,  ii.  209
Titianus,  Julius,  the  Fables  oi,  n.

33,  237
Titus  (Emperor),  I.  333,  335,  341 ;

saying  of,  li.  261
Toulouse  (Tolosa),  I.  63,  123,  125,

127,  279  ;  II.  105
Trajan  (Emperor),  I.  343  ; remits

arrears  of  taxation,  II.  261,  265
Tranquillus,  see  Suetonius
Treves (Augusta Treverorum), I.

xii, XX, 207 ; Senate of. 257  ;

described,  271 ; n.  41.  67,  239
Triangle,  Forms  of,  I. 365  ;  (con-
stellation), n.  281


366


INDEX


Tribunes, derivation of  the  title,

I.  367

Trinity,  The,  analogous  with  the
Three  Emperors,  I.  37; 369

Triptolemus,  II.  99

Tritonia  (Athene),  ii.  169

Troilus,  I.  151

Trojan  War,  the.  Heroes  of,  1. 141  ;
length  of,  n.  55

Tropics,  The  two,  I.  53

Tros,  son  of  Dardanus,  i.  301

Trout,  I.  231

Troy,  I.  149,  151,  153,  155 ; II.  181

Tully : see  Cicero

Tuscan  Sea,  The,  n.  141,  311

Twins,  The  (constellation),  i.  201  ;

II.  283
Tydeiis,  il.  253

Tyndareus,  reputed  father  of
Castor,  Pollux,  and  Helen,  I.
143  ; n.  195

Tynan  fabrics,  n.  189

Tyrrhenian :  see  Tuscan


Ulysses,  I.  121,  131,  143,  147 ; n.

35,  107  ;  bow  of,  107,  231,  313
Urania,  n.  281
Urbica, Pomponia (relative by

marriage  of  Aus.),  I.  95
Urbicus  (grammarian),  I.  131
Ursinus  (a  provincial),  II.  47
Ursulus  (grammarian),  II.  41,  45


Vacuna,  II.  53

Valens (Emperor), n. 173, 175 ;

death  of,  243
Valentinian  I.  (Emperor),  I.  x,  371 ;

n.  173,  261
Valentinian  II. (Emperor), i. xi ;

birth  of,  xvii ; II.  173
Valentinus,  I.  79
Vallebana  (unknown),  II.  199
Varro  (M.  Terentius),  l.  129,  357  ;

II.  45
Vasconia  (Basque  country),  il.  117,

139
Veneria,  Julia,  aunt  of  Aus.,  i.  93
Venetia,  n.  269

Venus  (planet),  I.  175,  183  ;  (god-
dess), 205,  213,  215,  241,  291,  299.

381, 393  ; n. 49, 167,  169,  187,


189; represented as armed at

Sparta,  193,  195,  279
Venus'  Haven  (Port  Vendres),  n.  15
Veria  Liceria,  i.  79
Verona,  l.  63
Vespasian  (Emperor),  I.  333,  335,

339; II.  261
Vesta,  I.  361 ; II.  257
Vestal  Virgins,  II.  55
Vesuvius,  I.  241
Victoria,  II.  169
Victorinus (one of the "  Thirty

Tjrrants  "),  I.  viii,  65
Victorius  (grammarian),  I.  133
Vienne (Vienna), I. 63, 277  ; n.

105
Vincum  (Bingen),  I.  225
Virbius  (  =  Hippolytus),  I.  373
Virgil,  I.  131, 133, 149,  207,  209,

267  ; Catalepta  of,  307  ; Bucolics

of, 309, 371, 387, 393 ; n. 7 ;

birthday  of,  71 ;  read  in  schools,

77,  121,  296,  299,  313
Virgin,  The  (constellation),  ii.  283
Visontio  (BesanQon),  ii.  237
Vitellius  (Emperor),  i.  333,  335,  339
Vivisci (Bituriges, dwelling  about

Bordeaux),  I.  259
Vonones  (Parthian  King),  II.  83
Vossianus,  Codex,  I.  xxxvii.
Vulcan,  Festival  of,  197,  251 ;  355,

393

Wain,  The  (constellation),  I.  203
Water-Snake, The (constellation),

II.  283
Whale,  The  (constellation),  n.  283
Word  of  God,  The,  l.  17,  23,  37
Wordsworth, Wm.,  Laodameia  of,

I.  211  note

Xenophon,  Cyropaedia  of,  n.  257
Xerxes,  I.  247,  285

Zaleucus  (the  Locrian  Lawgiver),
I.  133

Zenodotus  (Homeric  critic),  i.  119,
311 ;  "  collects  "  the  scattered
remains  of  Homer,  li.  45

Zodiac,  Signs  of  the,  n.  283

•Zoilus,  II.  209

Zoilus  of  Treves,  I.  207


367


PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY

THE CORNWALL PRESS, LTD., 1-ARlS GARDEN,

STAMFORD  STREET,  LONDON,  S.E.  1.


0


'-?^

^
