Lectures on Jurisprudence; or, The Philosophy of Positive Law, Vol. II (John Austin; Robert Campbell, ed., 1885)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of Campbell's 5th edition, vol. II (https://archive.org/details/lecturesonjuris00austgoog).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

JUETSPEUDENCE


VOL.  11.


LECTUEES


ON


JURISPRUDENCE


OR


THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  POSITIVE  LAW


\2\


By  the  late  JOHN  AUSTIN

or  THE  nnrsB  temple,  babri8TEb-at*law


•


FIFTH EDITION, REVISED AND EDITED

By  ROBERT  CAMPBELL

ADVOCATE  (SCOTCH  BAB), AND  OF  LINCOLN'S  INN, BABBISTER-AT-LAW


IN  TWO  VOLS.— VOL.  IL


LONDON
JOHN MURRAY,  ALBEMARLE STREET

1885

Th$  fipki  qftmntlaiUm  is  reserved.


Printed  by  R.  &  K.  Clakk,  Edinburgh.


CONTENTS

OF

THE SECOND VOLUME.


LAW  IN  EELATION  TO  ITS  SOUECES.

LECTURE  XXVIII.

Prospective  view  of  the  remainder  of  the  course. — Meanings  of  the  phrase
'  Sources  of  the  Law.' — 1.  The  direct  or  immediate  author  of  the  law  ;  2.
The  earliest  documents  by  which  the  existence  of  law  is  evidenced. — Law
n^Titten  and  unwritten. — As  understood  by  the  modem  Civilians,  and  by
Hale  and  Blackstone. — Written  and  unwritten  law  sensu  Roman  lawyers.
WritUn  and  unwritten  law,  according  to  the  improper  and  juridical
meaning  of  the  terms,  is  an  important  distinction.  —  The  distinction
stated  in  appropriate  terms.  —  Examples  of  laws  made  directly  by  the
sovereign  : — 1.  Acts  of  the  British  Parliament ;  2.  Ordinances  made  by
the  '  Etats  Gen^raux '  in  old  France,  while  they  subsisted,  and  by  the  king
afterwards  ;  3.  The  Uges^  pUbiacUa^  and  senaiv^'ConiniUa  of  the  Romans ;
4.  The  constitutions  of  the  Roman  Emperors. — General  Constitutions. —
Special  Constitutions.  —  (a)  Extraordinary  mandate.  —  (6)  Privilegia. —
(c)  Decreta  and  rescripta. — Judicial  powers  are  implied  in  sovereignty,
but  commonly  delegated. — Nature  of  oblique  legislation,  ot  judiciary  law
introduced.  —  Examples  of  law  not  made  directly  by  the  sovereign  or
supreme  legislature  : — (1)  Laws  made  by  the  Irish  Parliament,  1719-1782.
— Colonial  Assemblies  ;  (2)  Bye-laws  made  by  collegia  or  corporate  bodies ;
(3)  Laws  made  in  the  way  of  direct  legislation  by  Courts  of  Justice. — (a)
ReguUz  praxis  of  our  own  Courts. — (6)  The  arrUs  rigUmentaires  of  the
French  ParlemaUa, — (c)  The  edicts  of  the  Roman  Praetors. — (4)  Laws
made  in  the  way  of  judicial  decisions. — Laws  originating  in  customs,  and
in  the  opinions  of  the  jurists,  not  distinguishable  from  other  laws  in
rc-spect  of  their  source.— (5)  Autonomic  Laws .... Page  509


LECTURE  XXIX.

Ke-atatement  of  the  distinction  between  written  and  unwritten  law. —  The
same  distinction  sometimes  improperly  expressed  by  the  terms  promulged
and  un promulged. — Written  and  unwritten  law  setisu  gramnuUico,  dis-
parate from  the  distinction  sensu  juridico. — Written  and  unwritten  law
se^isu  Hale  and  Blackstone. — Their  confusion  of  the  two  senses. — Distinc-
tion between  law  established  in  the  direct  or  legislative  mode  and  law
obtaining  obliquely 525


vi  Contents  of  t/ie  Secofid  Volume.


LECTURE  XXX.

Recapitulation. — Supposed  kinds  of  positive  law. — Customary  laws  ;  notorious,
and  needing  proof. — Civil  and  Canon  laws,  as  recepta,  ranked  by  Black-
stone  with  particular  customs.  —  A  custom  is  only  a  moral  rule  until
enforced  by  the  tribunals. — When  turned  into  a  law,  it  is  law  emanating
from  the  sovereign,  or  from  a  subordinate  legislator  or  judge. — Extension
of  'source  *  to  every  'remote  cause '  of  law. — Generation  of  custoDuiry  laic
per  Cicero. — Hypothesis  of  Blackstone,  etc.  about  customary  law. — The
prevalent  notion  about  nature  of  customary  law  suggested  to  moderns
by  passage  in  Pandects. — Blackstoue's  supplement  to  Julian. — Jus  ;>rM-
dentUms  composUunu  Law  supposed  to  arise  from  the  unauthorised  opinions
of  private  lawyers. — Customary  law  and  law  suggested  by  the  opinions
of  jurisconsults  compared.  —  God,  or  nature,  not  a  source  of  positive
law. — Extension  of  'source '  to  every  '  remote  cause '  of  law,  leads  to  con-
fusion. — Supposition  that  the  sovereign  merely  declares  pre-existing  law,
criticised . . . Page  633


LECTURE  XXXL

Different  meanings  of  jus  gentium  at  different  periods :  1 .  Ancient  Roman
law  ;  2.  Classical  jurists  ;  3.  Ulpian's  jus  naturale,  —  Statement  of  the
ius  gentium  of  the  earlier  Roman  lawyers.  —  According  to  Roman  law,
strangers  had  no 'rights.  —  Condition  of  aliens,  members  of  conquered
nations.  —  Difficulties  arising  from  their  position.  —  Creation  of  Prcvtor
Peregrinus,  to  administer  justice  in  Italy  between  Romans  and  members
of  Italian  States^  and  between  members  of  any  of  those  states,  and  mem-
bers of  any  other. — Lau)s  administered  by  Frcetor  Peregrinus. — Origin  of
the  term  jus  gentium. — Origin  of  the  term  equity. — Extension  .of  the  jus
gentium  created  by  the  Proetores  Peregrini  to  the  outlying  provinces. —
Resumed  statement  of  the  subsidiary  law  obtaining  in  Roman  empire.  —
Uniformity  of  this  subsidiary  law  throughout  the  Roman  empire. — This
subsidiary  law  was  styled  jus  gentium^  jus  equujn,  etc.  ;  and  was  the  jus
gentium  of  the  earlier  Roman  lawyers. — i£quitas,  the  term. — Jus  civile
as  opposed  to  jus  gentium  of  Roman  origin. — Near  equivalence  of  that
distinction  to  *jus  civile  et  jus  praUorium.^ — Absorption  of  jus  gentium
by  proper  law  of  Urbs  Roma, — Causes  of  fitness  of  Roman  law  for  a  welt-
recht,  or  universal  law. — The  distinction  of  jus  civile  into  jus  civile  ctjus
gentium,  which  was  made  by  the  classical  jurists,  and  occurs  in  Justinian's
compilations. — The  distinction  between  jus  civile  and  jtts  gentium^  which
occurs  in  Justinian's  compilations,  is  speculative  rather  than  practical.  —
Modes  of  acquisition  ex  jure  civili  axid  ex  jure  gentium. — Double  meaning
of  jvs  naturale. — Of  jus  gentium  as  signifying  international  morality. —
Ulpian's  jus  naturale 550


LECTURE  XXXIL

The  distinction  of  positive  law  into  natural  and  positive,  as  commonly  under-
stood by  modem  writers  on  jurisprudence. — Rationale  of  the  distinction. —
This  natural  law,  as  i)Ositive  law,  is  closely  analogous  to  the  jus  gentium
of  the  earlier  Roman  lawyers,  etc.  —  Natural  law  of  mo<lerns,  and  jus
gentium  of  Justinian's  compilations,  embrace  positive  morality  (esi)ecially
international)  as  well  as  positive  law. — Argument  for  the  distinction  of


Contents  of  the  Second  Volume.  vii

positiye  law  and  morality  into  neUuraZ  KndjMsitive :  with  purposelessness
of  it,  if  general  utility  be  the  only  index  to  Law  of  Deity  or  Nature. — A
distinction  of  crimes  into  '  nuHa  in  te '  and  '  miHa  quia  prohibita,*  which,
though  utility  be  the  only  index  to  the  laws  of  the  Deity,  might  not,
perhaps,  be  ill  founded.  —  'Natural  Law,*  as  meaning  certain  rules  of
human  position  ;  and  '  Natural  Law,'  as  meaning  some  standard  to  which
human  rules  should  conform. — Natural  Rights .... Page  567


LECTURE  XXXIIL

Origin  of  term  Equity  as  meaning  Law. — Equity  as  meaning  impartiality. —
Equity  as  meaning  any  law,  or  principle  of  legislation,  which  the  speaker
means  to  commend. — Confusion  of  Equity  as  meaning  Law,  with  Equity
in  its  other  senses. — Supposition  that '  Law  and  Equity  *  is  a  universal
and  necessary  distinction. — Confusion  of  Equity  as  meaning  Law,  with
Equity  as  meaning  arhitrium, — Equity  =  universality.  Ergo,  Impartiality.
— ErgOf  applicable  to  any  good  law,  etc. — Equity  as  meaning  extensive  (or
restrictive)  interpretation,  ex  ralione  legia, — Equity,  as  meaning  judicial
impartiality. — Equity  as  meaning  arbitrium. — Equity,  as  meaning  stand-
ard, legislative  (or  other  ethical)  principles. — Equity,  as  meaning  per-
formance of  imperfect  obligations.  —  As  meaning  Morality.  —  Origin  of
application  of  term  to  equity  as  meaning  Law 576


LECTURE  XXXIV.

Various  equivalent  circumlocutions  for  '  Equity '  as  meaning  positive  Law,  or
a  portion  or  department  of  a  system  of  positive  Law. — Equity  of  Praetors
called  jus  prcctorium  ;  cequitaa  not  being  the  Law  which  he  makes,  but  the
(personified)  principle  of  legislation  (utility  or  other)  which  determines
him  to  make  it. — English  Equity  ought  to  be  called,  rather,  Chancery  Law,
— Taking  equity  as  not  meaning  law.  Courts  of  Equity  and  Courts  of  Law
are  ecjually  concerned' with  it,  or  equally  strangers  to  it. — Equity  as  a
department  of  law  :  an  historical  and  particular  notion. — Criminal  Juris-
diction libcrd  republicdf  >vith  distinction  of  wrongs  into  public  and  private,
— CivilJurisdictiou  of  Prsetores  Urbani. — Order  of  procedure  before  the
Praetor  as  exercising  his  judicial  functions. — Juriadictio:  CoercUio:  Im-
perium  mcrum:  mixtum, — Procedure  before  Praetor  compared  with  that
in  our  Common  Law  Courts. — Approximation  of  the  former  to  natural
procedure. — Afterwards  altered. — Procedure  on  an  Interdict  (see  next
Lecture). — Cognitio,  or  proceeding  ea:^ra  ordinem. — Ultimately  cognilio,  or
proceeding  extra  ordinem,  universal 583

LECTURE  XXXV.

The  direct  legislative  power  of  the  Pnetors  was  originally  confined  to  Pro-
cedure, but  afterwards  extended  to  Substantive  Law. — Difference  between
general  and  special  Edicts. — Why  the  general  Edicts  of  the  Praetores  were
styled  perpetual.  —  Edictum  tralaiitium,  or  the  Edict  of  the  Pnctor  or
Prdetors. — The  'jus  pnetorium'  was  formed  by  the  Edicts  of  the  Praetors.
— The  jus  prcctorium  a  part  of  the  jus  honorarium.  —  Materials  out  of
which  the  jus  prxtorium  was  formed. — Tlie  term  Equity. — ^quitas  —
l/tilitas,  or  other  approved  principle  of  legislation. — JustUia,  as  meaning
tUilitas,  or  other  approved  principle,  etc. — Jus  Praetorium,  an  incondite
heap  of  insulated  rules. — Implication  of  substantive  law,  and  in  particular


viii  Contents  of  the  Second  Volume,

of  substantive  pnetoriau  law,  with  procedure. — Actiones  ViUes  et  In
faxtwrnn — History  of  the  Prsetorian  edict  from  the  end  of  the  popular
government  to  the  reign  of  Justinian. — Change  under  Hadrian. — The
Prsetorian  Legislation  after  the  change  under  Hadrian. — Sources  of  the
law  administered  by  the  tribunals,  from  Alexander  Severus  to  the  acces-
sion of  Justinian Page  591


,  LECTURE  XXXVL

Matter  of  the  Code  and  Pandects. — Arrangement  of  the  Code  and  Pandects. —
Supposition  that  the  direct  legislative  power  exercised  by  the  Prsetors  was
usurped  and  introduced  per  aries. — ^Why  judges  have  employed  fictions.
— Examination  of  some  current  and  erroneous  opinions  concerning  the
r€Uionale  of  the  distinction  between  strict  Law  and  Equity. — Examination
of  the  opinion  that  the  distinction  of  law  into  law  and  equity  is  necessary
or  essential. — The  distinction  is  accidental  and  historical.  —  Is  nearly
confined  to  Roman  and  English  Law. — Dififerences  between  Roman  and
English  Equity 605


LECTURE  XXXVII.

Subjects  of  Lecture. — The  principal  or'  leading  difference  between  statute  and
judiciary  law. — The  principal  difference  between  statute  and  judiciary
law  lies  in  a  difference  between  the  forms  in  which  they  are  respectively
expressed. — An  enormous  fault  of  the  Pandects  and  Codes,  considered  as
a  Code, — Batio  legis  et  ratio  decidendi, — The  interpretation  or  construc-
tion of  statute  law,  and  the  peculiar  process  of  abstraction  and  induction,
etc. — Competition  of  analogies: — Paley  and  Romilly. — Blackstone's  re-
mark concerning  the  decretes  of  the  Roman  emperors.  — The  order  in
which  law  is  naturally  generated. — Cases  apparently  intermediate  be-
tween judiciary  and  statute  law. — How  law  derived  from  anterior  law  is
formed. — How  the  competition  of  opposite  analogies  may  arise. — Q,
Whether  difficulties  may  not  arise  from  inconsistency  of  competing  rules
of  statute  law  ? 620


LECTURE  XXXVIII.

Bentham's  objection  to  judiciary  law,  that  it  is  not  law. — A  second  ground-
less objection  to  judiciary  law  :  want  of  public  control  over  legislators. —
A  third  groundless  objection  to  judiciary  law :  that  judges  legislate  arbi-
trarily 641


LECTURE  XXXIX.

marks  on  the  terms  'judiciary  law,'  'code,'  etc — Tenable  objections  to  judi-
ciary law.  — First  tenable  objection :  implicated  with  the  particular  facts.
— A  second  tenable  objection :  haste. — A  third  tenable  objection  :  ex  post
fado. — A  fourth  tenable  objection  :  enormous  bulk. — An  evil  not  inherent
in  judiciary  law :  no  authoritative  record. — A  fifth  tenable  objection  to
judiciary  law :  no  certain  test  of  its  authority. — A  sixth  tenable  objection  :
rules  not  comprehensive. — A  seventh  tenable  objection :  its  injurious
effect  on  the/orwi  of  the  collateral  statute  law. — Introduction  to  question
of  codification. — First  leading  objection  to  codification :  necessary  inconi-


Contents  of  the  Second  Volume.  ix

pleteness. — Second  objection. — Failure  of  the  French  and  Prussian  codes
— examined. — These  codes  have  failed,  not  as  codes,  but  by  reason  of
their  faulty  construction. — First  defect  in  the  French  code,  it  is  totally
devoid  of  definitions  of  the  technical  terms,  and  explanations  of  the
leading  principles  of  the  French  law. — So  the  Prussian  code. — Failure
of  the  Prussian  and  French  codes  grossly  exaggerated.  —  The  French
code  never  intended  by  its  authors  to  be  a  code,  properly  so  called —
that  is,  to  supersede  all  other  law ;  but  meant  to  be  eked  out  by  various
suUidia. — Monstrous  ignorance  of  the  authors  of  the  French  code  with
regard  to  the  Roman  law. — Extreme  haste  with  which  the  French  code
was  drawn  up. — No  provision  for  amending  the  Prussian  and  French  codes,
and  for  keeping  down  the  growth  of  judiciary  and  supplemental  law  by
working  them  into  the  code  from  time  to  time. — Savigny*s  objections  to
codification  examined Page  647


LAW:  ITS  PUEPOSES  AND  SUBJECTS.

LECTURE  XL

vrha,t  constitutes  a  sUUiis^  or  condition. — The  distinction  between  the  rights  and
duties  capacities  and  incapacities  constituting  a  statust  and  any  other  rights
duties  capacities  and  incapacities,  not  susceptible  of  any  strict  definition.
— No  generic  character  common  to  them  all ;  but  they  bear  the  following
marks  :  1.  They  reside  in  an  individual  as  belonging  to  a  class. — 2.  The
rights  and  duties  capacities  and  incapacities  constituting  a  status,  com-
monly impart  to  the  party  invested  with  them  a  conspicuous  character,
and  have  an  extensive  influence  over  his  social  relations.  This  not  a
certain  mark  of  status, — 3.  They  regard  specially  the  class  of  persons  by
whom  the  stcUus  is  borne. — This  last  circumstance  constitutes  the  rationale
of  the  distinction  between  the  Law  of  Things  and  the  Law  of  Persons.  —
An  objection  answered. — The  class  must  be  such  as  from  its  nature  cannot
include  all  or  nearly  all  persons. — Uses  of  the  distinction  :  1.  Repetition,
and  consequent  voluminousness,  avoided  ;  2.  The  portions  of  law  specially
affecting  peculiar  classes,  rendered  more  accessible  and  cognoscible. —
Identity  of  the  division  into  Law  of  Things  and  Law  of  Persons  with  Mr.
Bentham's  division  into  General  and  Special  Codes. — Two  other  possible
divisions  of  the  Corpus  Juris. — The  division  into  Law  of  Things  and  Law
of  Persons  preferable  to  either. — The  distinction  not  correctly  and  con-
sistently followed  out  by  its  authors 683


LECTURE  XLI.

Recapitulation. — Certain  erroneous  definitions  of  the  idea  of  stcUu^  and  of  the
distinction  (founded  on  that  idea)  between  jus  personarum  et  jus  rcrum.
First  erroneous  definition :  Statics  an  occult  quality  (modem  civilians).
— Second  erroneous  definition  :  *  Consequences  of  the  same  investitive
fact'  (Bentham). — Third  erroneous  definition:  /Sto^M*  constituted  by  the
diviiribility  of  the  collection  of  rights  and  duties  into  those  arising  imme-
dialcly  from  the  title  which  engenders  the  aggregate,  and  those  arising
nudiaUly  from  that  title,  through  special  titles. — Fourth  erroneous  defini-
tion :  Status  constituted  by  jv>s  in  rem  in  the  complexion  or  aggregate  of
rights. — Thibaut's  definition  of  Ato^uj  criticised 695


Contents  of  the  Second  Volume.


LECTURE  XLIL

Fifth  erroneous  definition :  Stains  a  capacity  or  ability  {facuUaSy  rcchU-
fahigkeit). — Nature  of  a  capacity  or  ability. — Subject  of  a  right. — Statics^
a  capacity,  etc. — Tria  capita. — The  true  nature  of  the  idea  of  status,
and  of  the  distinction  between  Jus  jtersonarum  and  ju^  rcrum  resug-
gested Page  709


LECTURE  XLIII.

Supplementary  remarks. — Jus  actionum  co-ordinated  by  the  Roman  lawyers
with  jus  rerum  and  jus  personarum.  This  is  a  logical  blunder. — Logical
inaccuracy  of  Blackstone's  division  of  the  corpus  juris  into  law  regarding
rights  and  law  regarding  wrongs. — The  law  of  things  should  precede  the
law  of  persons  in  the  corpus  juris. — Natural  or  inborn  rigJUs,  what  J —
Gross  absurdities  of  Blackstone  on  this  subject. — Notes  on  methods .  725


LECTURE  XLIV.

JtLS  publicum :  Two  senses. — Narrower  sense  :  the  law  of  political  conditions.
— An  account  of  public  law  in  this  sense  must  comprise  some  of  the  rules
of  positive  morality. — Difficulty  of  distinguishing  iwlitical  from  private
conditions. — Public  law,  or  the  law  of  j)olitical  conditions,  should  not  be
opposed  to  the  rest  of  the  legal  system,  but  should  form  one  member  or
head  of  the  law  of  persons. — Public  law  in  its  large  and  vague  significa-
tion, originates  with  the  use  made  of  the  term  by  the  Roman  lawyers.  —
Logical  mistake  of  the  distinctions  built  upon  it. — Various  other  meanings
of  the  phrase  *  public  law.* — An  anomaly  in  the  arrangements  of  the  Con-
tinental jurists  noticed. — No  intelligible  basis  for  the  distinction  between
public  and  private  law  as  co-ordinate  departments,  whether  public  law  bo
taken  in  its  large  or  its  narrower  sense 744


LECTURE  XLV.

Division  of  the  law  of  things  (or  the  law  minus  the  law  of  persons)  into  primary
and  sanctioning  rights,  etc. — Bentham's  terms  *  substantive '  and  *  adjec-
tive* law  commented  on. — Explanation  of  author's  terms  and  reasons  for
adopting  them 760


LECTURE  XLVI.

First  great  division  of  primary  rights  into  rights  in  rem  and  in  personam.  — A
mistake  of  modem  Grerman  jurists  respecting  the  signification  of  jus
rerum,  — Various  meanings  of  the  word  thing  in  the  Roman  law.  — In
Elnglish  law. — Distinctions  among  things  in  established  systems  of  law  : —
1.  Corporeal  and  incorporeal ;  2.  Movable  and  immovable ;  3.  22t*  inancipi
and  res  nee  mancipi ;  4.  Things  determined  specifically:,  and  things  deter-
mined by  their  kiTid  ;  5.  Fungible  and  not  fungible  ;  6.  Res  singula;  and
univcrsitaies  rerum 773


Contents  of  the  Second  Volume.  xi


LECTURE  XLVII.

Primary  rights,  with  primary  relative  duties. — Postponement  of  primary
absolnte  duties. — Distribution  of  primary  rights  under  four  sub-depart-
ments.— This  division,  why  preferable  to  that  of  the  Roman  lawyers. —
An  objection  to  a  former  position  examined. — Positive  duties  (or  duties
to  do  or  perform)  which  lie  upon  persons  generally  and  indeterminately.
— Rights  in  rem  as  ezistin'g  per  8e,  with  reference  to  differences  between
their  subjects. — Rights  to  liberty,  what  ? — Rights  in  rem  over  things^  the
only  rights  which  I  shall  treat  directly. — Distinction  between  property  or
diminion  and  easement  or  aervitua.  — Various  meanings  of  '  property  *  or
'  dominion,'  etc Page  783

LECTURE  XLVIII.

Recapitulation. — Distinction  between  dominion  or  property  and  aervitua  or
easement. — Property  is  susceptible  of  various  modes. — Property  pre-
eminently so-called  :  viz.  which  is  accompanied  with  the  largest  power  of
user,  and  therefore  with  a  power  of  aliening  from  contingent  successors. —
Property  pre-eminently  so-called,  is  not  unlimited  in  respect  of  the  power
of  user. — Property  pre-eminently  so-called,  or  any  of  its  modes,  cannot
be  defined  (in  respect  of  the  power  of  user)  exactly. — The  modes  of  pro-
perty are  distinguishable  from  one  another  by  precise  lines  of  demarcation.
—The  definitions  (or  no  definitions)  of  property,  in  various  codes  or
systematic  treatises .  . .  ' 793


LECTURE  XLIX.

Recapituladon. — Speaking  generally,  a  right  of  servitude  is  a  fraction  of  a
right  of  property  residing  in  another  or  others. — But  a  right  of  servitude
may  exist  over  a  subject  which  has  not  an  owner  properly  so  called. —
Primary  rights,  etc.  ;  Rights  in  remjper  ae. — DiflSculties  encumbering  the
terms  *  property,*  'servitus/and  *  easement.' — Quaere,  Whether  a  negative
servitude  be  a  right  of  itaing  the  subject  ?  And  whether  it  be  not  merely
jus  in  personam  against  the  owner  or  occupant  ? — Order  wherein  the
nature  and  kinds  of  servitudes  will  be  considered. — Distinction  between
afirmative  or  posUivCf  and  negative  servitudes. — Every  servitude  is  jua
in  ran. — A  servitude  is  not  a  right  to  apecifically  determined  uses,  or  to
tpedfically  determined  forbearances  on  the  part  of  owner  or  other  occu-
pant.— Positive  or  affirmative  servitudes  {qua  in  patiendo  conaiatunt)  and
negative  servitudes  {qiuje  in  nonfaciendo  conaiatunt). — Doubtful  whether
there  is  any  scientific  foundation  for  this  distinction. — No  right  of  servi-
tude can  consist  in  faciejido. — Whether  a  negative  servitude  he  jus  in
rem? — Ilea  aervU, — Nulli  rea  aua  acrvit. — ^ ServUua*  means  the  ont^,  or
theyw*  in  re, — A  right  of  servitude  may  co-exist  with  any  mode  of  pro-
perty, etc — Absolute  duties  (positive  or  negative)  annexed  to  property
are  not  servitudes 802


LECTURE  L.

IHstinction  between  real  and  peraonal  servitudes. — Examples  of  real  and  per-
sonal servitudes. — The  modes  of  property ,  which,  in  the  language  of  the
Roman  law,  and  of  the  modem  systems  borrowing  its  terms  and  classifi-
cations, are  improperly  styled  *  servitudes ' 815


xii  Contents  of  the  Second  Volu7ne,


LECTURE  LI.

Primary  rights,  etc. — Rights  in  rem,  per  se.—Of  such  distinctions  between
rights  as  are  founded  on  differences  between  their  durations. — Such  dis-
tinctions inseparably  implicated  with  modes  of  acquisition,  or  titles. —
Rights  considered  in  respect  of  duration  are  of  limited  duration  :  Of
duration,  limited  but  not  definite :  or,  of  definite  duration. — Right  of
unlimited  duration. — Right  of  limited  duration. — A  right  of  unlimited
duration  does  not  necessarily  imply  alienability  by  the  party  actually
bearing  the  right — Nor  is  idienability  confined  to  rights  of  unlimited
duration. — Restrictions  on  alienation,  when  allowed  in  practice. — Abso-
lute property  defined. — Power  of  alienation  from  every  possible  successor
is  of  the;  essence  of  absolute  property. — Absolute  property  in  land  dis-
tinguished from  our  estate  in  fee  simple. — And  from  the  Roman  emphy-
teusis.— Unlimited  duration,  though  coupled  with  absolute  property  in
all  established  systems,  is  not  necessarily  involved  in  it . . Page  829


LECTURE  LIL

The  distinction  between  Jus  in  re  proprid  and  Jus  in  re  aliend :  jus  in  rem  in
re  aliend. — Property  pre-eminently  so-called,  absolute  property,  dominium
(8.S.)  01  jus  in  re  proprid. — JRes  publicce  (in  the  largest  sense  of  the  ex-
pression).— Res  puhlicm  (in  the  narrower  setise)  and  resprivatae. — Classes
of  res  publicce  (in  the  narrower  sense  of  the  term). — Quasi-sermtus  over  a
thing,  reserved  by  the  state  to  itself. — Quasi-servUus  reserved  by  the  state
over  a  res  jmvata, — Absolute  property,  dominium  (s.s.),  ox  jus  in  re  pro-
prid.— Jura  in  re  aliend, — Different  jura  in  re  aliend  are  different  frac-
tions of  the  various  rights  which  constitute  the  dominium  from  which
they  are  respectively  detached. — The  classes  of  jura  in  re  aliend  which
are  noted  by  expositors  of  the  Roman  law  :  viz.  Servitus,  Emphyteusis^
SuperJicieSf  and  Jus  pignoris  ei  hypotheeoe. — Servitus. — Emphyteusis. —
Superficies. — The/iw  in  rem  of  the  creditor  in  a  thing  pledged  or  mort-
gaged.— Remarks  on  the  term  *jura  in  re  aliend^'  sometimes  called  jura
in  re,  or  jura. — Rights  of  which  it  is  difficult  to  fix  the  class . . .  839


LECTURE  LIII.

A  present  of  vested  right,  what — A  future  or  contingent  right,  what. — No
rights  can  be  future  without  being  contingent. — Rights  subject  to  a  con-
tingency, or  condition  resolutive 856


LECTURE  LIV.

Recapitulation. — Primary  rights,  etc. — Rights  in  rem,  per  5c. —Introduction
to  the  consideration  of  Titles,  or  of  Investitive  and  Divestitive  Facts .  870


LECTURE  LV.

Titles  considered  generally. — Rights  ex  lege  immediaU, — Functions  of  titles.
— Bentham's  criticism  on  the  word  title. — Proposed  use  of  tUle  with  ex-
tended meaning  874


Contents  of  the  Second  Volume.  xiii


LECTURE  LVI.

Titles  distinguished  into  simple  and  complex :  but  really  always  complex. —
Component  elements  of  a  complex  title. — Principal  and  accessory. — Im-
proper application  of  the  expressions  tx  lege  immediaUt  etc. — 1st.  Their
use  to  indicate  whether  or  not  an  act  of  the  party  raitiUed  is  part  of  the
title. — 2ndly.  To  distinguish  certain  well-known  titles . . Page  886


LECTUIIE  LVII.

Titles  by  which  rights  in  rem  are  acquired  or  lost. — ^Various  attempts  at
classification. — Doubtful  whether  any  successful 898


FRAGMENT  ON  QUASI-CONTRACTS  AND  QUASI-DELICTS . . 911


TABLES  AND  NOTES 917


ESSAYS  ON  INTERPRETATION  AND  ANALOGY .... 989


NOTES  ON  CODIFICATION 1021


NOTES  ON  CRIMINAL  LAW 1040


ON  THE  USES  OF  THE  STUDY  OF  JURISPRUDENCE.

Proper  subject  of  Jurisprudence. — Inevitable  (and  sometimes  intentional)  im-
plication of  legislation  with  jurisprudence. — Value  of  the  study  of  Roman
law. — Uses  of  the  study  of  jurisprudence. — System  adopted  in  Prussia.
— Training  of  a  lawyer. — Necessity  for  a  law  faculty ....  1071


CODIFICATION  AND  LAW  REFORM.

Probability  of  some  attempts  at  codification. — Re-construction  must  be
accomplished,  if  at  all,  by  scientific  lawyers. — All  attempts  at  codification
must  be  wrought  out  on  one  preconceived  plan. — Legislation  must  be
accomplished  by  scientific  lawyers. — Bigum^.  of  the  question  of  codifica-
tion 1092

INDEX 1108


Lectures  on  Jurisprudence.


LAW IN  RELATION TO ITS SOURCES

AND  THE

MODES  IN  WHICH  IT  BEGINS  AND  ENDS.


LECTURE  XXVIII.

ON  THE  VARIOUS  SOURCES  OF  LAW.

In  the  ensuing  lectures  I  shall  treat  of  the  following  subjects : — Lbot.

Ist,  The  sources  of  law,  and  the  various  modes  in  which  it v
originates :  under  which  head  I  shall  treat  of  the  distinctions  Pros^t-
between  law  written  and  unwritten ;  law  positive  and  natural ;  of  the  re-
jus  civile  and  jus  gentium  ;  law  and  equity :  touching  on  various  ™*"*der  of
other  topics  which  are  suggested  by  them.

2ndly,  From  the  sources  of  law,  and  the  modes  in  which  it
originated,  I  shall  proceed  to  the  distinction  between  the  law
of  things  and  the  law  of  persons ;  and  in  endeavouring  to  analyse
that  distinction,  I  shall  examine  the  notion  of  staius  or  condition,
and  the  distinction  between  public  and  private  law :  for  the  term
public  law,  unless  it  be  used  in  a  sense  which  would  include  all
law,  denotes,  as  it  appears  to  me,  a  particular  department  of  the
law  of  persons.

Srdly,  I  shall  examine  the  arrangement  of  the  Eoman
lawyers  in  their  institutional  and  elementary  writings;  an
arrangement  which  I  believe  to  be  just  in  the  main,  and  which
is  unquestionably  the  groundwork  of  most  of  the  modem
attempts  to  give  a  systematic  shape  to  the  whole  body  of  any
system  of  law.

And  this  I  am  a&aid  will  be  nearly  all  which  I  shall  be
enabled  to  accomplish  within  the  present  course.  I  have  thought
it  better  to  explain  fully,  and  with  passable  distinctness,  a  few
leading  topics,  than  to  touch  on  a  great  number  lightly  and
hastily.  The  gentlemen  who  have  so  kindly  come  forward  to
support  me  in  my  first  attempt,  will,  I  am  sure,  make  the  due

VOL.  n.  B


510  Law :  Sources  and  Modes.

Lect. allowance  for  the  imperfections  unavoidable  in  a  commencement

^  and  for  the  occasional  interruptions  which  have  been  caused  b}

inevitable  illness. If  I  am  able  to  get  through these  topics

before  the  expiration  of  the  session,  I  will  then  touch  upon  some

of  the  details of  the  science,  such  as  the  various  species  of

rights  in  rem ;  dominium,  servitus,  and  so  on :  the  distinction

between  contracts  and  quasi-contracts, and  an  outline  of  the

various species of contracts. I am extremely sorry to be

obliged  to  leave  off  in  this  lame  manner,  but  I  hope  that  I  shall

meet  with  the  indulgence  due  to  a  first  attempt.

Meanings  In  many  legal  treatises,  and  especially  in  treatises  which

phrase profess  to  expound  the  Boman  law,  that  department  or  division

*  Sources which  regards  the  origin  of  laws,  is  frequently  entitled  'De  juris

1.  The  ^ fontibus! The expression  fontes  juris,  or  sources  of law, is

direct  or ambiguous.

immediate  x  i* -j.  xi_  i? -i • 'a. j  • j. •

author  of  ^^  ^^^  ^^  its  senses,  the  source  of  a  law  is  its  direct  or  im-

the  law.  mediate  author.  For  either  directly  or  remotely,  the  sovereign,
or  supreme  legislator,  is  the  author  of  all  law ;  and  all  laws  are
derived  from  the  same  source;  but  immediately  and  directly
laws  have  different  authors.  As  proceeding  from  immediate
authors  of  different  characters  or  descriptions,  laws  are  talked  of
(in  the  language  of  metaphor)  as  if  they  arose  and  flowed  from
different  fountains  or  sources:  in  other  words,  the  immediate
author  of  a  given  Eule  (whether  that  author  be  the  sovereign
or  any  individual  or  body  legislating  in  subordination  to  the
sovereign),  is  styled  the  fountain,  or  tie  source,  from  which  the
rule  in  question  springs  and  streams.  But  this  talk  is  rather
fanciful  than  just ;  for,  applying  the  metaphor  with  the  consist-
ency which  even  poetry  requires,  rules  established  immediately
by  the  supreme  legislature  are  the  only  rules  springing  from  a
fons  or  source.  Individuals  or  bodies  legislating  in  subordination
to  the  sovereign,  are  more  properly  reservoirs  fed  from  the  source
of  all  law,  the  supreme  legislature,  and  again  emitting  the
borrowed  waters  which  they  receive  from  that  Fountain  of  Law.
Taken  in  the  sense  to  which  I  have  now  adverted,  the
fountains  or  sources  of  laws  are  their  immediate  authors  or
makers.  Thus  the  supreme  legislature  is  the  author  or  source
of  the  laws  which  it  publishes  directly.  A  corporate  body,  or
a  subordinate  legislature  (like  those  of  our  colonies),  is  the
source  of  those  laws  which  it  makes  and  publishes  with  the
sovereign's  consent.  Courts  of  justice  are  a  source  of  law,  in  so
far  as  the  law  consists  of  judicial  decisions,  binding  upon  sub-
sequent judges. And  admitting  for  the  present  that  customs


Pontes  Juris — Meaning  of  the  Term.  5 1 1

institute  a  distinct  species  of  law,  custom,  or  the  persons  with Leot.

whom  the  custom  originated,  are  authors  or  sources  of  law.  ^

In  another  acceptation  of  the  term,  the  fountains  or  sources  2.  The  ear-

of  laws  are  the  original  or  earliest  extant  monuments  or  docu-  Heat  docu-

^^  ments  by

ments  by  which  the  existence  and  purport  of  the  body  of  law  which  the
may  be  known  or  conjectured.  of^^te^

Taken  in  this  acceptation,  the  fountains  br  sources  of  laws  evidenced,
are  properly  sources  of  the  hwowUdgt  which  is  conversant  about
laws :  *  fontes  e  quibus  juris  notitia  hauritur.'

But  the  term  'fontes '  (as  thus  understood)  is  restricted  to
the  original,  or  to  the  earliest  extant,  documents.  Documents
which  are  copies  of  these,  or  which  give  at  second-hand  the
evidence  contained  in  these,  are  not  fontes  or  sources  of  know-
ledge, but  rivi  or  conduits  through  which  it  emanates  from  the
sources.  For  example:  Considered  in  mass,  all  the  relics  of
antiquity,  which  regard  the  Eoman  law,  are  'fontes  juris
Bomani ;'  'fontes  e  quibus  juris  Bomani  notitia  hodie  hauritur/
For  (speaking  generally)  the  extracts  from  the  classical  jurists
contained  in  Justinian's  Digest,  the  Imperial  Constitutions  con-
tained in  his  Code,  with  such  other  relics  of  antiquity  as  regard
the  Soman  law,  are  the  earliest  evidence,  or  the  earliest  extant
evidence,  for  the  several  parts  of  the  system  to  which  they
respectively  relate. These,  therefore,  are  '  fontes.'

But  the  works  of  the  Glossators  and  Commentators  who
wrote  in  the  Middle  Ages,  with  the  works  of  Civilians  who  have
written  in  subsequent  periods,  aie  not  fountains  or  sources  of
that  knowledge  of  the  system  which  may  be  gotten  at  the
present  hour.  For  the  countless  authors  of  those  countless
volumes  derived  their  own  knowledge  of  the  Roman  Law  from
ancient  documents  or  monuments  which  are  still  extant  and
accessible.  Accordingly,  the  works  of  the  Glossators  and
Commentators  who  wrote  in  the  Middle  Ages,  with  the  works
of  Civilians  who  have  written  in  subsequent  periods,  are  by  the
German  writers  on  jurisprudence  distinguished  from  the  docu-
ments which  constitute  the  fontes  or  sources  by  the  general  and
collective  name  of  ' Literatura'

The  term  '  fontes  juris '  has,  therefore,  a  double  signification.
As  proceeding  from  immediate  authors,  of  various  characters  or
descriptions,  laws  are  said  to  emanate  from  various  sources  or
springs :  whilst  the  earliest  extant  documents  which  attest  their
being  or  purport  are  also  entitled  *  sources  or  springs  of  law,'
or  source  or  springs  of  the  knowledge  which  is  conversant
about  it


512

Leot.
XXVIII


Law  writ-
ten and
unwritten.

As  under-
stood by
the  mod-
em Civil-
ians, and
by  Hale
and  Black-
stone.


Law :  Sources  and

And  80 (in  regard  to  the  English
reports  of  judicial  decisions with the  ^
treatises  which  are  equivalent  to  reports,
of  English  jurisprudence;  whilst  the  t
law,  which  merely  expound  the  matte*
reports,  are  not  sources  of  English  jurispr.
a  legal  literature  drawn  or  derived  from  ,

Law  considered  with  reference  to
distinguished  into  law  written  and  unwri

The  distinction  between  written  and
modem  acceptation  of  the  term,  is  this
which  the  supreme  legislature  establishe.
law  is  not  made  by  the  supreme  legislati  *
validity,  or  is  law  by  the  authority,  expi**
of  the  sovereign  or  state. Accordingly "
with  whom  the  distinction  as  thus  under'
monly  ranked  under  jvs  scriptum,  laws  mr  -
plebs, senatiiS'CansvJta  and the constitutic
Laws  enacted  by  the  people  assembled  in  *
by  the  supreme  legislature,  and  were  ther-i
the  sense  above  explained;  and  the  same
constitutions  or  orders  of  the  emperors  after .
the  style  of  sovereignty. How  the  plebs  o.
be  held  equivalent  to  the  populus  assemble
be  considered  in  a  subsequent  part  of  this  le

*  According  to  the  same  division,  the  ec  .
and  other  judicial  functionaries,  the  rules  ..
practice  of  the  tribunals,  the  writings  and
consults,  and  laws  established  by  custom,  w
or  jus  non  scriptum.  For  although  law  or,
these  sources,  owed  its  validity  to  the  asse:
legislature,  it  was  not  made  by  the  supreme  i
and  immediately.

The  distinction  between  written  and  amwri"'
by  the  modem  Civilians,  was  adopted  by  Hj
by  Blackstone  into  his  Commentaries. Both
stone  restrict  leges  scriptce,  or  written  laws  of
statute  acts  or  edicts  made  by  the  king,  by  and
of  the  lords  spiritual  and  temporal
assembled. General
by  the  practice
rum  scriptce,  or

^  The  foregoing


Wrti^  and  Unwritten  Law  {Roman  Lawyeri).  513

By  the  Eoman  Lawyers  themselves,  little  importance  was Lect.
attaobe(J^to  the  distinction  between  written  and  unwritten  law. ^
And,  in  every  instance  in  which  they  take  the  distinction,  they  Written
understand  it  in  its  literal  sense. When  they  talk  of  Tmitten  written
law,  they  do  not  mean  law  proceeding  directly  from  the  supreme  ^  **^**'*
L^islature,  but  law  which  was  committed  to  writing  at  its  Lawyers"
origin :  qiuxl  ai  initio  Uteris  mandatum  est. And  accordingly
they  include  in  written  law,  not  only  the  laws  of  the  Popvlus
and  Plebs,  with  the  Senatus-considta  and  Constitutions  of  the
Emperors,  but  also  the  Edicts  of  the  Praetors  and  other  Magis-
trates, and  the  Besponses  of  the  Jurisconsults.

Law  originating  in  custom,  or  ex  disptUcUione  fori,  they  style
jus  non  scriptum.  For  law  originating  in  custom,  or  floating
traditionally  amongst  lawyers  (as  in  England  it  is  well  known
that  there  is  much  law  constantly  manufacturing  at  the  bar,
which  in  time  is  adopted  by  the  judges,  and  by  them  again
emitted  to  the  bar),  is  not  committed  to  writing  ah  initio,
although  it  may  afterwards  be  recorded  in  legal  treatises,  or
may  be  adopted  by  the  supreme  legislature  and  promulged  in  a
¥nitten  form.  Justinian,  in  the  second  title  of  the  first  book
of  his  Institutes,  mentions  the  distinction  in  the  sense  last
adverted  to.  Gaius,  in  his  enumeration  of  the  sources  of  Law,
passes  over  the  distinction  in  silence.  The  latter  sajrs, '  Constant
autem  jura  ex  legibus,  plebiscitis,  senatus-consultis,  constitution-
ibus  Principum,  edictis  eorum  qui  jus  edicendi  habent,  responsis
prudentium.'^'^  He  afterwards  speaks  of  Customary  Law,  or  of
the  'jus  quod  consensu  receptum  est;'  and  also  of  Mos  as  a
source  of  law.  But  he  nowhere  adverts  to  writing,  or  to  the
absence  of  writing,  as  forming  a  ground  of  distinction  between
the  species  of  laws.

The  distinction  (if  such  it  can  be  termed)  which  was  taken
by  the  Boman  Lawyers,  is  altogether  insignificant :  Insignificant,
inasmuch  as  commission  to  writing,  h/,  or  by  atUhority  of
immediate  author,  is  an  accident ;  though  no  considerable  body
of  law  can  be  preserved  and  known,  unless  written,  with  or
without  authority.

That  which  has  been  taken  by  the  modems  is  important. WHUen
But  nothing  can  be  less  significant  or  more  misleading  than  the  ^rium
language  in  which  it  is  conveyed. For,  first,  law,  though  it  law,  ac-
originate  with  the  supreme  legislature,  is  not  necessarily  written.  ^  theun-

corresponding  part  of  the  MS.  having  (as  it  appears)  been  missing. It  is  here
mpfdied  from  J.  S.  M.'8  notes. — K  C.

»  Dig.  I.  1,  6.  ^  Gaii  Comm.  I.  2.


5 1 4  Law :  Sources  and  Modes.

Leot. It  may  be,  and  in  many  nations has been,  established and

Cii^ promulged without writing. And,  on the other hand,  law

proper  and  flowing  from  another  source,  though  obtaining  as  law  with  the

J,^SSof  consent  of  the  supreme  legislature,  may  be  committed  to  writing

the  termfl, ^t  its  origin. Such,  for  instance,  are  the  laws  of  Provincial' and

IS  ftu  ini'*

portant  Colonial  Legislatures. And  such  especially  (as  I  shall shew

dwtmc-  hereafter)  were  the  edicts  of  the  praetors.

rpijg  ^jg.  Laws,  then,  are  distinguished  in  respect  of  their  sources,  or

tinction  of  their  direct  or  immediate  authors,  into  laws  which  are  made

fltftflAfi  IT)

appropri- directly  and  immediately  by  the  supreme  legislature,  and  laws

ate  terms, which  are  not  made  directly  and  immediately  by  the  supreme

legislature,  although  they  derive  their  validity  from  its  express

or  tacit  authority. I  shall  now  proceed  to  give  examples  of

these  two  kinds  of  laws.

Examples  An  example  of  laws  made  by  the  sovereign  body  directly

madedi- ^^^  immediately,  is  that  of  our  own  Acts  of  Parliament,  which

rectlyby are made  directly by  the supreme legislature in its three

peign. branches,  the  King,  the  House  of  Lords,  and  the  House of

1.  Acts  of (Jommons.

Parlia-  Another  example  is  that  of  the  enactments  passed  by  the

ment  ]6tat6-G(Sn(Sraux  in  France,  while  that  body  continued  to  exist

nances*  ^^'^  to  be  recognised  as  the  supreme  legislature. When  the

S**^^L  ^^8^  ^^  France  became  constitutionally  the  sovereigns,  or  when

G^n^raux  the  French  Government  became  a  monarchy,  the  royal  ordinances

S^^*^  were  laws  of  the  same  kind.

France,

while  they  In  Rome  under  the  Commonwealth,  or  in  liberd  republic^,

andnJnho  ^^^®  established  by  the  supreme  legislature  were  of  three  kinds:
Kinffafter-  there  were  three  distinct  bodies  whose  decrees  were  considered

^^.  ««  "-^^  ^y  ^«  ^^^^^^^  «^  «^P'«°^«  ''^^'^' These  were
pleHaeUa, 1st — the  popidus,  assembled  in  curice,  according  to  the  most

ua^n^ ancient  form,  or,  according  to  the  manner  subsequently  intro-

aulta  of duced,  in  centimes ;  2ndly,  the  plebs,  assembled  in  tribes ;  and

^f- 3rdly.  the  aenofe.

Strictly  speaking,  the  sovereignty  resided  in  the  populus;

which  included every  Boman  invested  with  political  powers,

and  therefore  included  members  of  the  senate,  as  well  as  citizens

who  were  not  senators. To  laws  made  by  the  popuiiis  (whether

assembled  in  curice,  according  to  the  more  ancient  manner ;  or

in  centuries,  according  to  the  more  recent  fashion),  the  term

'leges*  or  'statutes'  (when  used  with  technical  exactness)  was

exclusively  applied. But  as  the  term  *  leges '  or  '  statutes  *  was

afterwards extended  improperly  to  laws  made by the  plebs,

'leges'  strictly  so  called,  or  laws  made  by  the  popultcs,  were


Written  and  Unwritten  Law  (Sensu  Juridico).  5 1 S

oommonly  styled,  for  the  sake  of  distinction,  '  Leges  curicUce '  or ^^^X*.
'  Leges  cerUuriatce,'

The  plebs  (as  distinguished  from  the  senate)  included  all
citizens  of  plebeian  birth  who  were  not  senators.

The  senate  (as  distinguished  from  the  plebs)  included  all
citizens  of  patrician  birth,  and  also  all  citizens  of  plebeian
birth  who  filled  (or  had  filled)  certain  of  the  higher  offices.
For  example :  Consuls,  prsetors,  and  tribunes  of  the  plebs,  to-
gether with  ea;- consuls  and  «a;-pr8etors,  were  members  of  the
assembly  styled  the  senate,  whether  they  were  patricians  or
plebeians.

The  distinction  between  patrician  and  plebeian,  and  the
distinction  between  senate  and  plebs,  were  therefore  disparate.
For,  although  every  patrician  seems  to  have  been  a  senator,
many  of  plebeian  birth  sat  and  voted  in  the  senate.

A  law  passed  by  the  plebs  was  styled,  in  accurate  language,
a  pkbiscitum.  But  as  every  plebiscfUwm  was  equivalent  to  a  lex,
the  term  'leges'  was  extended  improperly  from  laws  made  by
the  paptdvs  to  laws  made  by  the  plebs.

How  plebisdta  acquired  the  form  of  leges,  or  came  to  be
considered  as  laws  made  by  the  supreme  legislature,  it  is  not
very  easy  to  determine.  For  the  plebs  was  only  a  portion  of
the  whole  Eoman  People,  and  therefore  was  not  the  body
wherein  the  sovereignty  resided  It  seems  not  unlikely,  that
the  plebs  (instigated  by  their  Tribunes)  assumed  the  power  of
l^islating  for  the  whole  community :  and  that  the  senate  (too
feeble  to  resist)  yielded,  after  a  struggle,  to  the  unconstitutional
pretension.  Gains  tells  us  expressly,  that  the  senate  at  first
refused  to  recognize  plebisdta  as  leges  generally  binding;  but
that  the  force  of  leges  was  at  length  imparted  to  plebisdta
through  a  law  passed  by  the  popvlus,^

It  also  seems  probable  (as  is  suggested  by  Hugo,  an  eminent
Grerman  writer  on  the  Boman  Law),  that  a  compromise  took
place,  and  the  plebiscita  were  prepared  first  by  the  senate  and
then  adopted  by  the  plebs.  And,  if  that  supposition  be  just,
every  law  of  the  kind  was  made  with  the  concurrence  of  both,
and  was  nearly  equivalent  to  a  Lex,  or  statute  made  by  the
entire  people.  The  power  of  supreme  legislation,  instead  of
being  exercised  by  the  popvlus  assembled  in  a  single  body,  was
exercised  by  two  bodies  into  which  the  populus  was  divided.
One  of  these  bodies  (namely  the  senate)  possessed  the  initiative,
or  the  power  of  proposing  laws. The  other  of  these  bodies

•  Gaii  Comm.  I.  8.


5 1 6  Law :  Sources  and  Modes.

YY^TT (^*°^®ly  ^®  i?fo6s)  possessed  the  power  of  passing  or  rejecting
laws  concocted  and  proposed  by  the  senate.

Laws  passed  by  the  senate  (which  were  styled  senatus-
cansuita)  were  also  equivalent  to  leges  made  by  the  assembled
poptUvs.

It  has  often  been  inferred  from  a  passage  in  Tacitus,  that
consults  or  acts  of  the  senate  first  acquired  this  virtue  under
the  reign  of  Tiberius.  But  they  are  distinctly  placed  by  Cicero
(writing  liberd  reptiblicd)  on  a  level  with  leges  and  plebiscita.
Nor  is  there  here  the  slightest  diflSculty.  For,  since  the
tribunes  of  the  pleibs  sat  in  the  senate,  and  by  simply  uttering
their  veto  might  have  arrested  its  proceedings,  it  follows  that  a
consult  of  the  senate  was  passed  with  the  concurrence  of  the
plebs,  assenting  to  the  act  by  its  representatives.  Senaius-
cormUta  therefore  were  not  acts  of  the  senate  alone,  but  acts  of
the  senate  in  which  the  plebs  by  their  representatives  concurred.

The  result  then  seems  to  be  this :

Liberd  repvhlicdy  or,  during  the  Commonwealth,  the  supreme
legislative  power  resided  in  the  Eoman  People  (including  the
senate  and  plebs).

This  legislative  power  was  sometimes  exercised  by  the
people,  as  collected  in  a  single  assembly.  At  other  times,  it
was  exercised  by  the  same  people  as  divided  into  two  bodies :
— namely,  by  the  plebs,  with  the  concurrence  of  the  senate ;  or
by  the  senate,  with  the  concurrence  of  the  plebs.  And,  in  either
of  these  last -mentioned  cases,  the  joint  act  of  the  parts  into
which  the  whole  was  divided,  was  equivalent  to  an  act  of  that
sovereign  whole  as  united  in  one  assembly.  If  our  House  of
Lords  and  House  of  Commons  sometimes  sat  and  voted  in  one
assembly,  and  sometimes  separately  as  at  present,  they  would
afford  an  exact  parallel  to  the  manner  in  which  the  sovereignty
was  divided  in  the  Boman  Republic.  Acts  passed  by  the  two
bodies  assembled  in  one  house,  would  correspond  to  leges  curicUcc
and  centuriatcB ;  acts  originating  in  the  one  House  and  adopted
by  the  other,  would  be  plebiscita  or  sencUus-consulta,  The  only
difi&culty  in  this  explanation  is,  that  the  equestrian  order,
although  of  course  members  of  the  popvlvs,  were  not  members
either  of  the  seifuUe  or  plebs.  Enactments  passed  by  one  of
those  bodies  with  the  concurrence  of  the  other  were  therefore
not,  strictly  speaking,  acts  of  the  entire  popvlus ;  though  acts
of  the  populus,  united  in  cutUb  or  cerdurice,  were  so.

The  Constitution  of  the  Eoman  Republic  is  not  very  ac-
curately known ;  nor,  with  a  view  to  the  study  of  the  Eoman


Written  and  Unwritten  Law  (Sensu  Juridico).  517

law,  is  any  very  accurate  knowledge  of  it  necessary ;  since  the J^S\\^
whole  of  the  body  of  Boman  law  which  existed  in  the  time  >

of  Justinian  was  of  a  date  posterior  to  the  termination  of  the
lepublican  government.  But  a  knowledge  of  the  general
outline  of  the  Boman  constitution  is  necessary  for  understanding
the  law  terms.

While,  then,  the  Boman  Commonwealth  virtually  existed,
law  created  immediately  by  the  supreme  legislature  was  estab-
lished in  three  modes : — ^by  Uges,  or  statiUes,  strictly  so  called  ;
by  plebiscita,  also  styled  leges  ;  and  by  senaius-consvlta.

While  I  am  on  the  subject  of  leges,  I  will  just  observe,  that
lex  in  the  Boman  writers  is  always  equivalent  to  the  word
statute.  It  invariably  signifies  some  particular  law,  made  in
a  manner  which  would  induce  us  to  call  it  a  statute ;  and  is
never  used  (like  our  word  law)  as  a  collective  name  to  signify
all  law,  whatever  its  form  or  origin.  The  word  which  the
Boman  writers  employ  for  this  purpose  is  jtis ;  which  denotes
all  laws  and  all  rules  of  law,  let  their  origin  be  what  it  may.
It  is  a  sure  sign  of  utter  unacquaintance  with  the  Boman
writers,  to  use  the  word  lex  in  that  enlarged  sense ;  thus  Chief
Baron  Gilbert,  by  speaking  of  lex  prcetoria,  betrays  his  ignorance
of  the  Boman  Law.

After the destruction of the Commonwealth and the  4.Thecon-
estabHshment  of  the Empire,  the  supreme  legislative  power,  of^^^**°*
though  it  virtually  resided  in  a  monarch,  was  long  exercised  to  Roman
appeararice  in the ancient  and constitutional modes. Laws "^P®^"-
were  still  made  by  the  pojndus,  plebs,  or  senate,  although  those
bodies  were  obedient  instruments  of  the  Emperor,  and  legislated
at  his  suggestion,  or  at  the  suggestion  of  his  creatures. As
assemblies  of the  popvlvs  or  plebs  were  the  less  commodious
tools,  the  work  of  supreme  legislation  was  commonly  done  to
appearance  by  the  smaller  and  more  manageable  body. The
laws  which really  emanated  from the  military  chief  of  the
Empire,  were  usually  voted  by  the  senate  at  the  instance  of  the
prince ('ad orationem principis'), and were promulged or
published  as  senatvs-constdta.

And  here  it  may  be  observed  that  the  only  constitutional
title  of  the  chief  of  the  state  was  Princeps :  which  corresponds
not  exactly  to  the  term  president  of  the  senate,  but  rather  to
our  phrase  father  of  the  senate ;  the  oldest  and  most  authori-
tative member  who  had  no  particular  rights  in  consequence
of  his  rank, except  that  of  preaudience,  and  some  honorary


Si8


Law :  Sources  and  Modes.


Leot.
XXVIII


Goneral

Constita'

tiona.


Special
Constitu-
tions,
(a)  Extra-
ordinary
mandate.


(6)  Privi-
legia.


observances.  The  head  of  the  state,  though  really  despotic,
was  by  fiction  nothing  more  than  princeps  se7iatiis;  he  was
never  called  emperor  (imperator),  which  was  a  mere  military  title
and  denoted  general ;  except  when  he  was  considered  as  chief
of  the  army. Princeps  is  the  title  invariably  given  by  Tacitus.

From  the  accession  of  Hadrian,  and  perhaps  from  an  earlier
period,  the  Emperors  openly  assumed  the  supreme  legisla-
tive power  which  they  had  before  exercised  covertly.  Instead
of  emitting  their  laws  through  the  populus,  plebs,  or  senate,
they  began  to  legislate  avowedly  as  monarchs  and  autocrators,
and  to  notify  their  commands  to  their  subjects  in  Imjyerial
Constitutions.

These  imperial  constitutions  (which  are  not  unfrequently
styled  prindpum  pladta)  were  general  or  special.

By  a  General  Constitution  (edictum,  lex  edictalis,  epistola
generalis)  the  emperor  or  prince,  acting  in  his  legislative
capacity,  established  a  law  or  rule  of  a  universal  or  general
character,  and  not  regarding  specifically  a  single  person  or
case.

Special  constitutions  were  of  various  kinds,  but  agreed  in
this:  that  they  regarded  specifically  single  persons  or  cases.
One  kind  of  special  constitution  was  called  an  extraordinary
mandate;  and  was  an  order  addressed  to  a  civil  or  military
ofl&cer,  for  the  regulation  of  his  general  conduct  in  the  execution
of  his  ofl&ce,  or  even  for  the  regulation  of  his  conduct  on  a
particular  occasion.  But  the  most  important  and  remarkable
of  all  these  special  constitutions,  were  those  decretes  and  rescripts
which  were  made  by  the  Emperors,  not  in  their  quality  of
sovereign  legislators,  but  in  their  quality  of  sovereign  judges :
a  decrete  being  an  order  made  on  a  regular  appeal  from  the
judgment  of  a  lower  tribunal ;  and  a  rescript  being  an  order
preceding  the  judgment  of  the  lower  tribunal,  and  instructing
that  lower  tribunal  how  to  decide  the  cause.

By  a  Special  Constitution  of  another  class,  the  Emperor
conferred  on  some  single  person  some  anomalous  or  irregular
right,  or  imposed  upon  some  single  person  some  anomalous  or
irregular  obligation,  or  inflicted  on  some  single  person  some
anomalous  or  irregular  punishment.  Such  constitutions  were
styled  privUegia.  Or,  speaking  more  accurately,  such  constitu-
tions were  privHegia  issued  by  the  Emperors.  For  a  Lex  or
SenaiuS'Consultwm  of  the  same  purport  or  effect,  would  also
have  been  a  privilegium.  When  such  privUegia  conferred
anomalous  rights,  they  were styled  favourable. When they


Written  and  Unwritten  Law  (Sensu  Juridico).  519

imposed  anomalous  oblkfations,  or  inflicted  anomalous  punish- Lbct.

.  •  XXVIII

ments, they were styled odioits. An act of the British v
Parliament  giving  to  the  inventor  of  a  machine  an  exclusive
right  of  selling  it,  would  be  styled  in  the  language  of  the
Soman  Law  'a  favourable  privilege/ An  Act  of  Attainder
would  be  styled  in  the  same  language  '  an  odious  privilege/

A  privilegium,  in  shorty  is  a  special  act  affecting  special
persons  with  an  anomalous  advantage,  or  with  an  anomalous
buryien.  It  is  derived  from  privatum,  which,  as  opposed  to
publicum,  signified  anything  which  regards  persons  considered
individually ;  publicum  being  anything  which  regards  persons
considered  collectively,  and  as  forming  a  society.  Privilege
in  English  denotes  rather  the  anomalous  right  than  the  law
giving  the  anomalous  right,  or  impressing  an  anomalous
obligation.  Thus  it  would  be  said  that  an  inventor  had
obtained  the  privilege  of  being  the  only  seller  of  his  invention ;
not  that  the  legislature  had  enacted  a  privilege  conferring  on
him  that  right  In  common  and  loose  tsdk,  our  word  privilege
seems  to  be  merely  synonjrmous  with  right.  It  may  here  be
observed  that  although  a  privilegium,  considered  from  one  aspect,
regards  a  single  or  determinate  person ;  considered  from  another
aspect,  it  regards  persons  generally.  Although  by  a  patent,  an
exclusive  right  of  selling  a  given  article  be  conferred  solely  on
me,  the  same  law  is  evidently  general  so  far  as  respects  the
corresponding  obligation  on  other  persons  to  abstain  from
violating  my  right  And  the  same  may  be  said  of  a  privilegium
imposing  an  obligation  upon  an  individual ;  it  supposes  obliga-
tions on  other  persons  generally  to  forbear  from  all  acts  which
would  hinder  the  performance  of  the  obligation.  It  is  for  this
reason  that  it  is  necessary  to  define  a  General  Constitution
negatively,  as  I  have  done  in  the  definition  above  given :
namely,  a  law  or  rule  of  a  universal  or  general  character,  and
not  regarding  specifically  a  single  person  or  case.

A  third  class  of  these  Special  Constitutions,  and  the  most  (c)Decreta
important  and  remarkable,  consisted  of  those  decretes  and  g^ripta.
rescripts  which  were  made  by  the  Emperors,  not  in  their
quality  of  sovereign  legislators,  but  in  their  quality  of  sovereign
judges ;  a  decrete  being  an  order  made  on  a  regular  appeal  from
the  judgment  of  a  lower  tribimal;  and  a  rescript  being  an
order  preceding  the  judgment  of  the  lower  tribunal,  and
instructing  that  lower  tribimal  how  to  decide  the  cause.^ For,

^  Like  the  rescripts  of  the  Roman epistles  of  the  Popes  are  all  rescripts  in
Emperors the  canon  laws  or  decretal  the  strictest  sense.


520  Law :  Sources  and  Modes.

Lbct. although  in  modem  Europe  the  judicial  power  residing  in  the
V ^ ^ sovereign  is  commonly  delegated  by  him  to  individuals  called
judges,  the  Boman  emperors  were  themselves  judges  in  the  last
resort.
Judicial  \  finct  this  a  convenient  opportunity  to  observe  that  sove-

mplied  in  reignty,  being  imlimited  and  incapable  of  any  legal  limitation,
tv^^b^t^  includes  the  judicial  as  well  as  the  legislative  power.  The
commonly  judicial  powers  implied  in  sovereignty  are  in  our  own  times
delegated,  commonly  delegated  wholly  or  in  part ;  but  in  the  nations  of
antiquity  and  in  the  Middle  Ages  the  person  or  body  of  per-
sons composing  the  supreme  legislature  was  also  the  judge  in
the  last  resort,  or  even  in  the  first  instance.  The  popvXus  of
Bome,  which  was  the  supreme  legislative  body,  was  also  the
judge  in  capital  cases.  The  Mickle-mote  or  Wittenage-mote  of
the  Anglo-Saxons  was  both  the  legislature  and  a  Court  of
Justice.  Even  after  the  Norman  Conquest,  the  Aula  Regis  or
Great  Court  Baron  of  the  kingdom,  was  a  Court  of  Justice  as
well  as  the  sovereign  or  supreme  legislature ;  and  it  is  from  the
Aula  JRegis  that  our  House  of  Lords,  although  no  longer  the
same  assembly,  and  not  now  the  sovereign,  but  a  branch  of
the  supreme  legislature,  derives  the  judicial  power  which  it  still
exercises.  I  cannot  remember  that  Parliament  in  its  collective
capacity  ever  exercised  judicial  power,  although  there  is  one
case  (by  the  statute  of  Treasons,  25  Edward  II.  c.  2)  wherein
our  present  Parliament  (meaning  the  King,  Lords,  and  Commons)
appears  to  have  been  invested  by  statute  with  the  powers  of  a
Court  of  Justice.  Indeed,  the  judicial  power  seems  to  have  been
more  completely  detached  from  the  legislative  in  our  own
country  than  in  any  other.

The  proper  purpose  of  a  decrete  was  the  decision  of  some
question  touching  the  existing  law  which  had  arisen  in  a  par-
ticular cause  between  particular  parties.  But  the  law  was  often
made  by  imperial  decretes,  as  it  is  by  the  decision  of  our  Courts.
Where  the  existing  law  afforded  no  principle  applicable  to  the
•  case,  or  where  the  supreme  judge  was  ignorant  of  the  existing
law,  or  disliked  it  and  was  desirous  of  setting  it  aside,  he  decided
the  case  on  some  new  ground,  which  usually  became  law  as  com-
pletely as  if  it  had  been  solemnly  enacted  by  an  edict.  To  use
our  own  expression,  it  served  as  a  precedent.  The  principle  on
which  it  was  founded  was  considered  as  law,  and  applied  as  such
to  the  decision  of  subsequent  cases.
Nature  of  This  mode  of  establishing  laws  I  shall  analyse  hereafter ;  in

legisla- the  meantime  I  will  mention  that  the  manner  of  legislating  by


Written  and  Unwritten  Law  (Sensu  Juridico).  521

judicial  decision  is  the  same,  whether  the  judge  be  sovereign  or Lect.
subordinate ;  though  the  law  in  the  two  cases  is  derived  from v
different  sources. As  a  subordinate  body  clothed  by  the  sovereign  tion,  or
with  legislative  power  may  make  laws  by  direct  enactment,  so  iaw^^hra-
the  sovereign,  acting  in  the  capacity  of  a  judge,  may  make  them  duced.
in the indirect  mode  of  judicial  decision. This distinction
between  direct  and  oblique  legislation,  or  legislation  in  the  legis-
lative and  in  the  judicial  mode,  is  far  more  important  than  the
distinction  between  written  and  unwritten  law,  or  law  made
directly  by  the  sovereign,  and  law  made  immediately  by  a  sub-
ordinate authority.

Having  now  given  examples  of  law  made  directly  and  im-  Examples
mediately  by  the  sovereign,  I  proceed  to  examples  of  law  not  ^ade  di-
made  db-ectly  and  immediately  by  the  sovereign,  although  it  rectlyby
exists  or  obtains  as  law  by  the  express  or  tacit  authority  of  the  reign  or
supreme  legislature.  supreme

And,  first,  laws  made  by  subordinate  legislatures,  in  the  tare.
direct  or  legislative  manner,  are  not  established  immediately
by  the  supreme legislature,  although  they  derive  their  force
from  the  authority  of  the  sovereign.

Such  were  the  laws  made  by  the  Irish  Parliament  before  (i)  Laws
that  Act  of  the  British  Parliament  which  acknowledged  the  the  Iris?i
independence  of  Ireland. In  fact  and  practice,  the  Irish  Legis-  Parlia-
lature  (consisting  of  the  King  and  the  Irish  Houses  of  Parlia-  1719-1782.
ment)  was  in  a  state  of  subjection  to  the  supreme  legislature  of  Colonial
Britain:  that  is  to  say,  to  the  same  King  and  the  British  Houses  blies.
of  Parliament. An  Act  of  the  British  Legislature  bound  the
inhabitants  of  Ireland,  if  the  Act  contained  a  provision  extending
it  to  that  country. And  acts  of  the  Irish  Legislature  might
have  been  abrogated  or  modified  by  acts  of  the  British.

Laws  made  by  Collegia,  or  by  Corporate  bodies,  belong  to  (2)  Bye-
the  same  class. They  are  made  immediately  by  the  Corporate  bya>™4^
bodies  themselves,  but  owe  their  legal  validity  to  the  authority  ^  cor-
of  the  sovereign.  ^es.

The  power  of  subordinate  legislation  granted  to  a  subordinate
legislature,  is  conferred  by  the  sovereign  legislature  expressly  or
tacitly.

If  it  be  granted  or  admitted  by  written  or  oral  declaration,
it  is  conferred  by  the  sovereign  expressly.

The  sovereign  confers  it  tacitly,  by  any  conduct  (not  con-
sisting in  such  declaration)  which  necessarily  supposes  that  he
acknowledges  or  admits  it For  example,  if  he  enforce  a  law


522  Law :  Sources  and  Modes.

Lect. made by  a  subordinate  legislature,  or  permits  his Courts of
.  Justice  to  enforce  that  law,  his  positive  or  negative  conduct

necessarily  supposes  that  he  acknowledges  a  power  of  legislation
in  the  immediate  author  of  the  law.

(3)  Laws  Of  laws  made  by  subordinate  legislatures  in  the  direct  or
Se  way  of  legislative  mode,  the  most  remarkable  are  those  which  are  made
direct  by  Courts  of  Justice,  not  in  their  judicial  capacity,  and  in  the
by^Surte  ^^^7  ^^  decisions  on  special  cases,  but  by  a  power  of  proper
of  Justice, legislation  conferred  upon  them  expressly  or  tacitly  by  the

supreme  legislature,
(a)  B^gvXa Such  are  the  regulos  praxis  published  by  our  own  Courts  of
^^J^"^ Justice,  which  are  distinguished  broadly  from  the  laws  estab-
Courts. lished  by  the  same  Courts  in  the  indirect  mode  of  judicial

decision.
(h)  The  ar-  Such  also  were  the  arrits  riglementaires  of  the  French  park-

^J^J^j^  ments;  which  were  not  judicial  decisions  on  specific  or  particular
of  the  cases,  but  general  laws  or  statutes,  promulged  by  the  parlmi-ents
Park-  acting  as  subordinate  legislatures.  Their  decisions  on  special
ments.  cases  were  not  only  different  in  their  character,  but  bore  a
different  name :  arrSts  jvdidaires,  which  is  equivalent  to  judg-
ments or  decisions,
(c)  The  Such  above  all  were  the  edicts  of  the  Eoman  Praetors  form-

fidicts  of

theRomvi  ^S  ^^^  body  of  law  called  Jiis  Prcetorium,  The  manner  in
Protors.  which  this  portion  of  the  Boman  Law  was  made,  and  the  causes
of  its  being  made,  are  among  the  most  interesting  phenomena
in  the  history  of  jurisprudence.  It  was  not  made  in  the  way
of  decisions  in  particular  cases,  but  consisted  of  general  laws,
made  and  promulged  in  the  way  of  direct  legislation ;  by  virtue
of  a  power  assumed  at  first  by  the  Praetors,  with  the  acquiescence
of  the  supreme  legislature,  and  subsequently  confirmed  to  them
by  its  express  recognition  and  authority.  Agreeably  to  their
application  of  the  terms  written  and  unwritten  law,  corre-
sponding to  the  distinction  which  I  am  now  illustrating,  Jits
Pnztorium  is  invariably  classed  by  the  modem  Civilians  under
the  head  of  unwritten  law.  For  though  such  rules  were  written
(in  the  grammatical  sense  of  the  expression),  and  moreover  were
promulged  or  published,  they  yet  proceeded  immediately  from
stbbardinate  authors,  and  are  therefore  rightly  classed  imder
unwritten  law,  according  to  the  improper  sense  of  the  opposed
epithets  written  and  unwrUten  as  applied  to  law,  which  I  call
their  juridical  sense.

(4)  Laws  Another  species  of  laws  emanating  immediately  from  a  sub-
the  way  of  Ordinate  authority,  consists  of  laws  established  obliquely,  or  by


Written  and  Unwritten  Law  (Sensu  Juridico).  523

judicial decisions: namely,  by  the decisions of  subordinate Lect.

XXVIII

tribunals :  for  laws,  as  has  already  been  observed,  are  occasion-  ^  ^  -
ally  made  in  this  oblique  manner  by  the  sovereign  himSelf.  judicial
And  agreeably  to  their  application  of  the  terms  written  and
unwritten  law  in  the  jvHdicdl  sense,  the  term  unvrritten  law  is
applied  by  the  same  modem  Civilians  to  the  rules  of  jucHdary
law  which  were  engendered  by  the  usfos  fori :  that  is  to  say,
which  were  immediately  created  by  the  Praetors,  and  other  sub-
ordinate judges,  as  directly  and  properly  exercising  their  judicial
functions.

The  term  unwritten  law  in  the  same  meaning  is  applied  by  Lawsongi-
the  same  Civilians  to  jtts  morilms  condittUum,  and  jus  prudenti"  ^^^^
bus  composUum,  that  is  to  say,  law  emanating  (or  supposed  to  and  in  the
emanate)  firom  opinions  emitted  by  respected,  but  merely  private,  tfeju^te,
jurisconsults  in  responses,  in  commentaries,  or  in  systematic  notdistin-
treatises. But  neither  laws  originating  in  customs,  nor  laws  Smother
originating  in  the  private  opinions  of  jurisconsults  or  institu-  laws  in
tional  writers,  are  (properly  speaking)  distinct  species  of  law  in  the^
respect  of  their  sources.  source.

A  custom,  as  such,  independently  of  legislative  sanction,  is
not  a  law,  but  a  moral  rule.  When  it  has  been  embodied  or
promulged  in  a  statute,  or  made  the  ground  of  a  judicial  decision,
it  has  the  force  of  law ;  but  then  it  is  statute  law  built  on  an
anterior  custom,  or  law  established  by  a  judicial  decision  of
which  anterior  custom  was  the  basis  or  principle.

The  same  reasoning  applies  to  law  originating  in  the  opinions
of  private  jurisconsults.  The  writings  and  opinions  of  juriscon-
sults are  often  causes  of  law  by  determining  acts  of  legislation,
and  oftener  by  determining  decisions  of  Courts  of  Justice.  But
the  source  or  immediate  author  of  the  law  is  the  legislator,
sovereign,  or  subordinate  who  legislates  in  pursuance  of  their
opinions,  or  the  judge,  sovereign,  or  subordinate  whose  decisions
their  opinions  determine.

There  are  certain  opinions  of  Boman  jurisconsults  to  which
this  observation  does  not  apply,  if  we  give  credence  to  certain
statements  in  the  Digest  as  to  the  authority  conceded  to  these
jurisconsults.*^  For,  assuming  that  these  jurisconsults  had  the
authority  there  alleged  to  have  been  conceded  to  them,  they
were  in  effect,  though  not  in  name,  judges  of  the  law ;  and  their
opinion  was  therefore  tantamount  to  a  judicial  decision.  But  it
is  more  likely  that  the  responses  of  private  jurisconsults  were
never  sources  of  law,  though  they  exerted  upon  the  decisions  of

^  Dig.  I.  2,  2,  §  47. Inst  I.  2,  §  8. And  vide  post,  p.  545.


524


Law :  Sources  and  Modes.


Lect.
XXVIII


(5)  Auto-
nomic
laws.


judges  that  influence  which  ia  naturally  exercised  by  known
and  expert  persons  over  persons  comparatively  ignorant  and
unMdlful.

The  great  influence  which  the  responsa  prudenUium,  or
opinions  of  private  jurisconsults,  naturally  exercised  in  the
making  of  the  law,  is  manifest  from  this,  that  the  Pandects
are  wholly  composed  of  excerpts  from  their  writings.  These
writings  and  the  Imperial  Constitutions  had,  in  the  time  of
Justinian,  entirely  superseded  all  the  other  sources  of  law,  and
his  compilations,  the  Pandects  and  Code,  wholly  consist  of  them.
Some  of  our  own  writers  have  exercised  the  same  kind  of  influ-
ence: Lord  Coke,  for  example,  whose  opinion,  though  not  in
itself  a  source  of  law,  would  be  considered  as  conclusive  evi-
dence of  the  law  as  it  existed  in  his  time.^^

Another  species  of  laws  not  made  by  the  supreme  legis-
lature, are  laws  (if  such  they  can  be  called)  which  are  estab-
lished by  private  persons,  and  to  which  the  supreme  legislature
lends  its  sanction.  These  (in  truth)  are  nothing  but  obligations
imposed  by  virtue  of  rights  which  the  legislator  has  conferred.
For  example.  By  my  will  I  may  impose  certain  conditions  upon
devisees  or  legatees.  By  virtue  of  a  contract,  the  contracting
parties  impose  upon  one  another  certain  obligations.  As  a
father  or  guardian,  I  may  prescribe  to  my  child  or  ward  certain
conduct,  which  the  Courts  of  Justice  will  compel  him  to  foUow.

I  mention  this  because  such  commands  are  styled  by  some
modem  writers  atUonomitl^-gesetze,  which  is  equivalent  to  laws
made  autonomically,  or  by  private  authority.  This,  however,  is
incorrect,  because  a  private  person  cannot  be  the  author  of  law ;
though  he  may  be  a  party  to  -a  transaction,  by  which  transaction,
in  virtue  of  a  general  law  made  by  the  legislator,  he  gives  certain
rigfUs  and  creates  certain  obligations.^^

Having  stated  and  exemplified  the  distinction  between  laws
made  directly  by  the  sovereign  and  laws  not  made  by  him
directly,  although  existing  as  laws  by  his  express  or  tacit  con-
sent, I  shall  next  re -state  the  distinction,  or  rather  the  two
disparate  distinctions,  between  written  and  unwritten  law,  and
then  proceed  to  state  various  distinctions  between  laws,  partly


"  There  is  perhaps  no  modem  body  of
law  which  directly  owes  less  to  the  cause
last  mentioned  (namely  the  opinions
and  writings  of  private  lawyers)  than
the  English  law.  The  reason  of  this  is
partly  its  extreme  wealth  in  the  memory
(assisted  by  reports)  of  judicial  prece-
dent, and  partly  its  extreme  poverty  in


systematic  treatises.  But  indirectly  it
owes  much  to  this  cause,  as  will  be  found
insisted  on  by  the  author  in  Lecture
XXX.  post,  pp.  646,  547.— R.  C.

•*  For  the  more  complete  analysis  of
the  compound  nature  of  an  autonomic
law,  refer  to  vol.  L  p.  180,  and  note
there.


Written  and  Unwritten  Law,  525

founded  on  the  difference  between  their  sources,  and  partly  on Lbct.
the  difference  between  the  modes  in  which  they  originate  or v  I

arise.


LECTUEE XXIX.

LAW: WBITTEN AND UNWRITTEN STATUTE AND JUDICIARY.

Laws  are  distinguishable  not  only  by  the  difference  of  their  Leot.
sources,  or  immediate  authors :  They  also  originate  in  different  .  ^^^^^
ways,  or  wear  different  forms  at  their  origin.  Laws  emanating
firom  a  common  source,  may  originate  in  different  modes ;  and
laws  which  originate  in  the  same  mode,  may  emanate  immedi-
ately from  different  authors  or  sources.  For  example,  a  law,
whether  established  immediately  by  a  monarch  or  sovereign
number,  or  immediately  by  a  subject  individual  or  body,  may
either  be  established  directly,  that  is,  in  the  way  of  proper
legislation,  or  else  obliquely,  that  is,  in  the  judicial  mode,  by  a
particular  decision  on  a  special  point  or  case.  And  if  established
in  the  way  of  proper  legislation,  it  may  be  promulged  either  in
writing  or  orally ;  whether  its  immediate  author  be  sovereign  or
subordinate.

Having  premised  these  remarks,  I  shall  now  re-state  the  Restate-
distinction,  or  rather  the  disparate  distinctions,  between  written  JhcT^.
and  unwritten  law. In  one  of  these  distinctions  the  terms  are  tinction
taken  in  the  meaning  which  I  have  styled  their  juridical  sense ;  writterT
in  the  other,  they  are  taken  in  the  meaning  which  may  be  styled  and  un-
their  grammatical  or  literal  sense. The  two  distinctions,  being  j^w.
founded  on  different  properties  of  the  subject  to  be  distinguished,
cross  at  innumerable  points.

The  distinction  between  written  and  imwritten  law  (sctww
juridico)  arose  with  the  modem  Civilians,  by  reasons  which  it
would  be  too  long  to  state,  from  a  gross  misconstruction  of  the
meaning  of  certain  passages  in  the  Digest.  In  this  sense,  law
established  immediately  by  the  sovereign  is  jvs  scriptum  or
written  law ;  and  law  not  so  established  is  jus  non  scriptum  or
unwritten  law ;  whether  established  directly,  that  is  in  the  legis-
lative mode;  or  established  obliquely,  that  is  in  the  judicial
mode ;  whether  promulged  by  writing  or  published  orally.
Whatever  be  its  origin,  it  is  written  law  if  it  emanate  from  the
sovereign  immediately,  and  if  it  do  not,  it  is  unwritten.

This  distinction,  therefore,  is  foimded  exclusively  on  differ-
ence of  source. In  spite  of  the  terms  written  and  unwritten,  the
VOL.  n.  ,  c


526  Law :  Sources  and  Modes.

Lect. writing  or not  writing  is accidental or immaterial,  as will
V  abundantly  appear  on  consideration  of  the  examples  already

given  in  the  foregoing  Lecture.
The  same  The  distinction  between  written  and  unwritten  law,  in  the

distinction ..j.-i  •  t*  ±.\^ i.  • i j i.j*j.r 'i-

sometimes  jundical  meamng  of  the  terms,  is  also  denoted  m  the  wntmgs
impro-  of  the  same  Civilians,  by  the  opposed  epithets  promvlged  and
unpromviged. Law  made  by  the  supreme  legislature  is  called


ly  the promvlged  law,  and  law  emanating  immediately  firom  a  subor-

mulged dinate  source  is  called  unpromviged  law.

"^4^^'"°"  But  the  terms  promvlged  and  unpromviged,  as  thus  applied,  are

not  less  misexpressive  than  written  and  unwritten  {sensu  juridico).
For,  first,  laws  established  immediately  by  sovereign  authors
are  not  necessarily  promvlged:  that  is,  published,  or  made
known,  orally  or  in  writing,  for  the  information  and  guidance  of
those  who  are  bound  to  obey  them.

In  this  country,  a  Bill,  which  has  passed  the  two  Houses,
is  a  statute,  or  becomes  ohligatary,  from  the  moment  at  which  it
receives  the  Eoyal  Assent.  The  concurrence  of  the  various
members  which  compose  the  supreme  legislature  (as  that  con-
currence is  completed  by  the  royal  assent)  is  the  only  sign  given
to  the  subject  community.  No  promulgation  is  requisite.
'  Because '  (as  Blackstone  remarks)  '  every  man  in  England  is,  in
judgment  of  Law,  party  to  the  makin{f  of  an  Act  of  Parliament,
being  present  thereat  by  his  representatives'

It  is  true,  that  Acts  of  Parliament  are  printed,  and  may  be
had  by  those  who  choose  to  buy  them ;  but  this  is  not  promulga-
tion ;  for,  before  an  Act  is  printed,  and  whether  it  is  printed  or
not,  it  is  a  statute,  and  is  legally  binding.  If  the  printing  were
a  promulgation,  in  the  proper  sense  of  the  term,  it  would  be  a
necessary  consideration  precedent  to  the  existence  of  the  law  as
binding  on  those  whom  it  concerns.  The  printing  is,  in  this
case,  merely  intended  to  refresh  the  memory  of  the  parties  whom
it  concerns ;  who,  being  all  of  them  present  at  the  enactment  of
the  law,  were  then  and  there  sufficiently  informed  ctf  its  exist-
ence and  purport  Presence  by  ourselves  and  presence  by  our
representatives  are  manifestly  the  same  thing ;  and  the  know-
ledge so  obtained  is  the  more  satisfactory  because  five-sixths  or
nine-tenths  of  us  have  no  representatives  whatever.^

**  The  above  paragraph  is  here  re-  was  partially  directed  against  the  system

stored  from  J.S.M.'s  Notes. The  refer-  whicn  existed  in  lieu  of  representation

ence  to  Blackstone's  reason  which,  as  (before  the  Reform  Act  of  1832),  I  think

the  passage  stood  in  the  last  edition,  it  is  rather  directed  against  the  reasoning

seemed  to  be  treated  with  an  unosaal  of  Blackstone  in  defence  of  a  legal  fiction,

respect,  is  thus  shown  to  be  ironical.  — R.  C.
For  although  it  is  possible  that  the  irony


Written  and  Unwritten  Law.  527

According  to  the  practice  which  obtained  under  the  Boman  Lkct.
Emperors,  their  general  or  edictcU  Constitutions  were  not  binding  ,  ^^^^  ^
until  they  were  published.  And,  hence,  it  probably  has
happened,  that  modem  Civilians  have  applied  the  term  'pro-
mulged '  to  Laws  proceeding  immediately  from  sovereign  authors.
But  the  rescripts  of  the  Emperors,  with  others  of  their  special
constitutions,  were  exclusively  addressed  (for  the  most  part)  to
the  particular  or  determinate  persons  whom  they  specifically
i^arded.  And  yet,  through  these  special  constitutions.  Law
was  established,  immediately  by  those  sovereign  princes,  in  their
judicial  (or  legislative)  capacity.

And  (secondly),  as  Law  made  immediately  by  a  sovereign
author  is  not  necessarily  promulged,  so  Law  may  be  promulged
though  it  emanates  from  a  subordinate  source.  Such,  for
example,  was  the  case  with  the  Law  or  Equity  of  the  Praetors ;
whose  Edicts  were  published  carefully  and  conspicuously,  in
order  that  all,  whose  interests  they  might  touch,  might  know
their  provisions  and  regulate  their  conduct  accordingly.

And  here  I  may  remark  that  the  expression  promtdgare
Itgem  had  not  originally  its  present  import

According  to  the  meaning  now  annexed  to  the  expression,
'to  promulge  a  law,'  is  to  publish  a  law  already  made,  in  order
that  those  whom  it  binds  may  know  its  existence  and  purport.
According  to  the  meaning  originally  annexed  to  the  expression,
'  to  promrdge  a  law,'  was  to  submit  a  proposed  law  to  the  members
'  of  the  L^islature,  in  order  that  they  might  know  its  contents
j and  consider  the  expediency  of  passing  it.

Such  was  the  meaning  of  the  expression,  in  the  language  of
Koman  Jurisprudence,  during  the  Commonwealth.  Under  the
Emperors,  the  expression  acquired  the  sense  which  is  now
universally  attached  to  it.

The  distinction  between  written  and  unwritten  law,  in  the  Written
improper  or  juridical  sense,  or  between  promulged  and  impro-  ^^^tten
mulged  law  in  the  same  improper  sense,  is  founded  on  difference  law  sensu
of  source. For  written  or  promulged  law  in  this  sense  is  law  ^H^o,
emanating  directly  from  the  supreme  legislator:  unwritten  or  disparate
unpromulged  law  in  the  same  sense  is  law  made  immediately  distinction
bv  a  subordinate  authority. But  the  distinction  between  written  ^^'i.

•'  jurulico.

and  unwritten  law,  taking  the  terms  in  their  grammatical  mean-
ing, is  built  exclusively  upon  a  difference  in  the  mode  in  which
they  originate.  Written  law  is  law  which  exists  in  writing  at
or  before  its  origin ;  unwritten  law  is  law  which  neither  exists
in  a  written  state  previously,  nor  is  committed  to  writing  at  its


528  Law :  Sources  and  Modes.

Lbct. oriffin. The  distinction  between  written  and  unwritten  law  (in

XXIX

.  the  juridical  sense  of  the  terms),  and  the  distinction  between

written  and  unwritten  law  (in  the  gramTnatical  sense  of  the
terms),  are  therefore  disparate  and  cross  distinctions.

According  to  the  distinction  in  the  grammatical  sense  of  the
tenns,  any  law  (whether  it  be  statute  or  judiciary,  or  whether  it
emanate  from  a  sovereign  or  a  subordinate  source)  is  written  law,
or  {jus  quod  scripto  venit)  if  it  be  written,  at  the  time  of  its
origin,  by  the  authority  of  its  immediate  maker.  If  it  be  not
so  written,  it  is  unvrrUten  law,  or  jus  quod  sine  scripto  venit.

Such,  at  least,  is  the  only  distinction  between  written  and
unwritten  law,  that  appears  to  be  known  to  the  Eoman  lawyers.
Lex,  Plebiscita,  Senatus-consulta,  Principum  Placita,  are  ranked
by  Justinian  with  jvs  scriptum,  not  because  they  emanated
directly  from  the  sovereign  authority,  but  because  they  existed
in  a  written  form  at  their  origin.  That  this  was  the  ground
manifestly  appears,  because  the  Praetorian  edicts  and  the  responsa
pmden^tium  are  entitled  by  Justinian,  jus  scriptum.  But  the
Praetorian  edicts  are  clearly  unwritten  law  in  the  juridical  sense
of  the  term ;  and  the  responsa  prudentium,  assuming  that  those
private  jurisconsults  were  properly  authors  of  law,  are  necessarily
unwritten  law,  in  the  juridical  meaning  of  the  expression.

Customary  Law  is,  according  to  Justinian,  jus  non  scriptum.
And  so  it  is  in  the  grammatical  sense;  for,  assuming  that
customary  law  obtains  as  positive  law  by  virtue  of  the  consensus
v^ntium,  it  naturally  originates  sine  scripto.

Law  originating  in  the  iisus  fori,  or  made  by  subordinate
tribunals  through  judicial  decisions,  is  not  referred  by  Justinian
to  either  class.

But  I  would  remark,  that  it  may  belong  to  either  class
(taking  the  opposed  terms  in  their  grammatical  sense).  If  the
decisions  of  the  tribimals  were  committed  to  writing  by  authority
(in  the  manner  proposed  by  Lord  Bacon),"  law  established  by
such  decisions  would  be  written  law.  If  they  are  not  committed
to  writing  (or  are  conunitted  to  writing  by  private  and  un-
authorised reporters)  the  law  established  by  them  is  unwritten.

Our  old  Year-books,  if  they  had  been  regularly  kept  and
preserved,  would  belong  to  the  class  of  unwritten  law,  since

**  Or  as  now  practised  by  the  Judicial  mirable  method,  considering  the  q%uisi-

Committee  of  the  Privy  Council ;  where  legislative  character  attaching  to  judg-

the  judgment,  in  cases  of  importance,  ments  by  an  appellate  tribunal  of  the

is  jointly  considered  and  committed  to  last  resort. — R.  C.
writing  be/ore  being  delivered;  an  ad-


Written  and  Unwritten  Law.  529

they  would be received as  evidence of  previously existing Lect.
law.  vi?iL

In  modem  Europe,  or  in  some  coimtries  of  modem  Europe,
the  so-called  jva  rec^tum^  is  deemed  written  Law,  if  it  existed
in  writing  before  and  at  its  adoption.  It  is  called  vmtten  law,
though  not  written  as  received,  if  written  when  adopted.

An  example  is  afforded  by  those  phrases  in  the  old  French
law :  Pays  de  droit  icrU  and  Pays  de  coutumes.  Pays  de  droit
Scrit  meant  those  parts  of  France  where  the  Boman  law  pre-
vailed. It  was  written  law  in  the  literal  or  grammatical  sense,
but  not  in  the  other  sense.  It  was  not  law  made  and  published
by  the  supreme  legislator:  for  it  obtained  not  by  his  direct
enactment^  but  by  his  tacit  consent,  having  been  established  in
those  coui^tries  before  they  were  conquered  by  the  Franks.
But  it  was  written  law  in  the  sense  which  I  have  called  the
grammatical  sense,  for  it  already  existed  in  writing  when  it  was
adopted  by  the  French  Courts.

The  distinction  between  written  and  unwritten  Law  (as  Written
drawn  by  modem  Civilians)  has  been  adopted  by  Sir  Matthew  ^tten"
Hale  in  his  history  of  the  Common  Law,  and  imported  by  Sir  law  senm
William  Blackstone  into  his  Commentaries. By  these  writers  BUck-^
on  English  Law,  the  terms  '  written  law '  and  *  umoritten  law '  st^^^^e.
are  apparently  taken  in  their  juridical  meanings. They  both
of  them  restrict  the  expression  leges  scriptce,  or  the  written  laws
of  this  kingdom,  to  '  statutes,  acts,  or  edicts,  made  by  the  King's
majesty,  by  and with  the advice  and  consent  of  the Lords
spiritual  and  temporal,  and  Commons,  in  parliament  assembled.'
General  and  particular  customs,  together  with  laws  established
by  the  practice  or  usage  of  Courts,  they  refer  to  the  leges  non
scriptcB,  or  unwritten  law.

It  must,  however,  be  remarked  that  they  seem  to  confound  Their  con-
the  distinction  sensu  juridico  and  the  distinction  sensu  gram-  [^e^o^
matico ;  and,  by  consequence,  to  arrive at  a  division  of  law  senses.
which  is  incomplete  and  perplexed.

Speaking  of  the  unwritten  Law,  Blackstone  says,  '  I  style
these  parts  of  our  Law  leges  Twn  scriptce,  because  their  original
institution  and  authority  are  Tiot  set  down  in  writing,  as  Acts  of
Parliament  are,  but  they  receive  their  binding  power,  and  the

**  Jus  reoepium :  With  respect  to  this, .  . ( Foreign positive Law,

Law  has  acmdimes been  supposed  to ^  ^.  ^^7 \  or

obtain  independently  of  sovereign  an- ^as'^ioiie^  o^ y  International  Morality,
thority.  The  tenn 'jus  receptum*  has even

been  extended  to  customary  law


5  30  Law :  Sources  and  Modes.

Lect. force of  laws,  by  long  and  immemorial  usage,  and  by  their
V ^ > universal  reception  throughout  the  kingdom.*

Now  (according  to  this)  the  division  of  Blackstone  and
Hale  stands  thus.

Acts  of  the  supreme  Legislature  are  lege&  scriptce :  (Whether
as  made  immediately  by  the  supreme  Legislature,  or  as  set
down  in  writing  by  the  authority  of  the  makers,  does  not
distinctly  appear).

But  any  law  (not  created  immediately  by  the  supreme
Legislature)  is  non  scriptum :  Provided,  that  is,  that  its  original
institution  be  Twt  set  down  in  writing.

Now  (according  to  this  division  in  which  the  two  distinctions
are  manifestly  confounded)  what  becomes  of  laws  made  imme-
diately by  subordinate  L^islatures  ?  as,  for  instance,  by  the
Irish  or  Colonial  Legislatures,  or  by  Courts  of  Justice  (making
rules  of  practice)  ?  These  are  set  down  in  writing  by  their
immediate  authors,  and  are  not  created  immediately  by  the
supreme  Legislature  Consequently,  they  cannot  be  brought
under  either  member  of  the  division  as  it  has  been  conceived
by  Blackstone  and  Hale.

And  what  would  be  the  class  of  the  judiciary  law  recorded
in  the  Year-books  ?  Or  what  would  be  the  class  of  the  law
recorded  in  any  of  the  reports,  in  case  Lord  Bacon's  suggestion
had  met  with  the  attention  due  to  it ;  and  the  decisions  of  every
tribunal  had  been  recorded  by  authorised  reporters  ?

It  may  be  here  observed  that  the  terms  themselves,  written
and  unwritten  law,  are  foreign  to  the  language  of  English  law,
though  found  in  Bracton  (who  evidently  borrowed  them  from
the  Roman  lawyers),  and  in  Hale  and  Blackstone  subsequently.
The  terms  proper  to  the  English  law  are  not  written  and
unvrrUten  law,  but  statute  law  and  common  law ;  a  classification
which  also  seems  to  exclude  the  laws  made  in  the  direct  or
legislative  mode  by  subordinate  legislation.^

"  The  following  passage  in  Glanville's  serentur,  majoris  (procul  dubio)  author!-

Preface  is  worth  citing  here,  both  for  his  tatis  robur  ipsis  legibns  yideretur  ac-

use  of  the  term  scriptum  as  applied  to  commodare  scriptura,  quam  vel  decer-

law,  and  also  for  the  light  which it  nentis equitas, vel ratio statnentis.

throws  upon  the  early  ^owth  of  the  Leges  autem  et  jura  regni  scrijito  univer*

common  law  of  England. He says :  saliter concluoi nostris temx)oribus

*  Leges  namque  Anglicanas, licet  non  omnino  quidem impossibile  est : cum

scriptas, leges appellari non videtur  propter  scribentium  i^orantiam, turn

absurdum  (cum  hoc  ipsum  lex  sit,  quod  propter  earum  multitudinem  confusam  :

principi  placet,  et  legis  habet  vigorcm),  verum  sunt  quedam  in  Curid,  generalia,  et

eas  scilicet,  quas  super  dubiis  in  consilio  frequentius  usitata,  que  scripto  common -

definiendis,  procerum  quidem  consilio,  dare  non  mihi  videtur  presumptuosum,

et  principis  accedente  authoritate  constat  sed  et  plerisque  perutile,  et  ad  adjuvan-

esse  promulgatis. Si  enim  ob  scripture  dam  memoriam  admodum  necessarium.

solummodo  defectum  leges  minime  cen-  Harum  itaque  particulam  quandam  in


Statute  and  yudiciary  Law,  531

The  distinction  between  law  established  directly  and  law Lect.
obtaining  obliquely,  depends  not  on  a  difference  in  the  sources . ^ .
from  whence  the  law  emanates,  but  on  a  difference  in  the  modes  Distinc-
in  which  it  originates. When  the  law  or  rule  is  established  between
directly,  the  proper  purpose  of  its  immediate  author  or  authors  }?^  ^^^*
is  the  establishment  of  a  law  or  rule. When  the  law  or  rule  the  direct
is  introduced  obliquely,  the  proper  purpose  of  its  immediate  ??*^®^^"
author  or  authors  is  the  decision  of  a  specific  case  or  of  a  specific  and  law
point  or  question. Although  this  specific  case  is  decided  by  a  «^^"^i^«
new  rule,  the  proper  purpose  of  the  judge  is  not  the  introduction
of  that  rule,  but  the  decision  of  the  specific  case  to  which  the
mle  is  applied,  and  so,  speaking  generally,  the  show  of  legislation
is  avoided. Grenerally  the  new  rule  is  not  introduced  professedly,
but  the  existing  law  is  professedly  ascertained  by  interpretation
or  construction,  or  by  a  process  which  I  shall  hereafter  describe
analogous  to  interpretation  or  construction;  and  is  then  pro-
fessedly applied  to  the  case  or  question  which  awaits  decision.
If  the  new  rule  obtains  as  law  thereafter,  it  does  not  obtain
directly,  but  because  the  decision  passes  into  a  precedent :  that
is  to  say,  is  considered  as  evidence  of  the  previous  state  of  the
law ;  and  the  new  rule,  thus  disguised  under  the  garb  of  an  old
one,  is  applied  as  law  to  new  cases.

Now,  whether  established  directly  or  obliquely,  a  law  or
rule  may  emanate  either  from  the  sovereign  or  from  an  inferior
or  subordinate  source.  The  judicial  power,  like  all  other
power,  resides  in  the  sovereign,  although  in  most  of  the
governments  of  modem  Europe  it  is  committed  by  the  sovereign
to  subject  or  subordinate*  tribimals.  In  the  Eoman  Empire,
where  judicial  powers  were  occasionally  exercised  by  the
sovereign  in  person,  the  sovereign  might  legislate  either  directly
or  obliquely. According  to  the  expression  of  Thibaut,  in  his

scripta  redigere  decrevi,  stilo  vulgari  et  By  GlanviUe  following the Roman

Terbifl  curialibns  utens  ex  induBtria  ad  lawyers,  scriptum  .as  applied  to  jus  is

notitiam  comparandam  eis  qui  hujnsmodi  understood in  its literal  sense. His

rnlgBiitate  minus  sunt  exercitati  argument  is,  '  If  under  the  Roman  sys-

BracUm  borrows  part  of  this  passage,  tem  the  pleasure  of  the  Princeps  was

bat,  Tniamng  the  fine  irony  of  the  refer-  law,  much  more  rationally  may  we  call

ence to the doctrine of  the Roman  that  law  which though  unwritten is

lawyers  and  the  elegance  of  the  argu-  known  to  have  been  the  sentence  of  the

ment  d  fortiorif  has  reduced  it  to  what  Great  Council,  with  the  authority  of  the

oar  aatiior might  well call 'jargon.'  King  to  boot,  given  after  solemn  delibe-

^^acton  says:  'Sed  absurdum  non  erit  ration  upon  doubtful  questions  referred

leges  Anglicanas  (licet  non  scriptas)  leges  to  their  determination. To  reduce  into

appellare, cum legis vigorem habeat,  writing  the  laws  thus  floating  in  the

qmoqoid  de  conailio  et  de  consensu  mag-  cognisance  and  memory  of  those  conver-

Datum,  etreipablicaecommunisponsione,  sant  with  the  practice  of  the  Curia  is

aathoritater^^iBsiveprincipisprecedente,  the  task  humbly  undertaken  by  that

jost^  foerit  definitam  et  approbatum.'  great  lawyer. — R.  C.


532  Law :  Sources  and  Modes.

Lect.  admirable  work  on  interpretation,  he  either  legislated  getetzgebend ;
V  ^  >  that  is,  professedly  legislating ;  or  ricfUend,  professedly  judging.
The  same  observation  applies  to  the  subordinate  judge.  When
he  is  expressly  or  tacitly  entrusted  with  powers  of  direct
legislation,  his  laws  are  established  in  the  legislative  manner :
otherwise  they  are  established  in  the  way  of  judioial  decisions
on  specific  questions  or  cases.  This  distinction  therefore  is
foimded  on  a  difference  in  the  mode  in  which  laws  originate,
not  in  the  source  from  which  they  flow.

As  no  short  names  are  afforded  by  established  language,  I
shall  indicate  the  distinction  in  question  by  periphrasis  or
circumlocution.

For  example :  Law  belonging  to  one  of  the  kinds  in  question,
I  shall  style,  '  Law  established  directly ; '  '  Law  established  in
the  legislative  manner;'  or,  'Law  established  in  the  way  of
proper  legislation : '  That  is  to  say,  established  immediately  by
the  sovereign,  or  by  any  subordinate  author,  as  properly  exercising
legislative,  and  not  jvdicial  functions  (As  gesetzgebend,  and  not
as  richtend).

Laws  belonging  to  the  opposite  kind,  I  shall  style,  'Law
introduced  and  obtaining  obliquely ; '  '  Law  established  or  intro-
duced in  the  judicial  mode ; '  or  *  Law  established  or  introduced
in  the  way  of  jvdicial  legislation : '  That  is  to  say,  introduced
immediately  by  the  sovereign,  or  by  any  subordinate  author,  as
properly  exercising  judicial,  and  not  legislative  functions  (As
richtend,  and  not  as  gesetzgebend).

Law  of  this  latter  kind  (or  rather,  perhaps,  a  certain  sort  of
it)  has  been  styled  by  Mr.  Bentham  '  Judge-made  law : ' — a  term
pithy  and  homely,  and  which  I  therefore  love,  but  which
nevertheless  I  am  constrained  to  reject.

For,  first,  it  does,  in  some  sort,  smack  or  savour  of  disrespect.
And,  as  I  cannot  concur  with  Mr.  Bentham,  in  his  sweeping
dislike  of  law  made  by  judges,  I  cannot  consent  to  mark  or
brand  it  with  a  name  importing  irreverence.

Secondly,  it  tends  to  confound  the  sources,  from  which  law
immediately  proceeds,  with  the  modes  in  which  it  originates.
The  term  '  Judge-made  law '  would  seem  to  denote  law  made  by
subject  judges,  as  opposed  to  law  made  by  the  sovereign  Legislature.
At  least,  it  would  seem  to  denote  law  made  by  subject  judges
as  exercising  their  judicial  functions :  which  (I  believe)  is  the
sense  annexed  to  the  expression  by  Mr.  Bentham.

Now  (as  I  shall  endeavour  to  shew  in  a  future  Lecture)  the
important  difference  is  the  difference  of modes,  and  not the


Statute  and  judiciary  Law.  533

difference  of  sources. Provided  it  be  made  in  the  direct  or  in Leot.
the  legislative  manner,  law,  established  immediately  by  subject .  .

judges,  is  just  as  good  as  law  emanating  immediately  from,  the
sovereign.

Nay,  judges  legislating  avowedly  in  the  manner  of  the
Boman  Prsetors,  might  do  the  business  better  than  any  of  the
sovereign  legislatures  which  have  yet  existed  in  the  world

I  would  briefly  remark,  in  conclusion,  that  every  possible
law,  or  rule  of  law,  is,  on  the  one  hand,  statute  or  judiciary  law,
and,  on  the  other  hand,  vrritten  or  unwritten  law  (in  the  jv/ridical
meanings  of  the  terms) :  Or,  in  other  words,  that  it  ema^ates,
in  tlie  way  of  direct,  or  oi  judicial  legislation,  firom  a  sovereign  or
subordiTuUe  source.


LECTUEE XXX.


ation.


CERTAIN SUPPOSED SOURCES OF LAW EXAMINED. JUS MORIBUS

CONSTITUTUM,  JUS  PRUDENTIBUS  COMPOSITUM,  JUS  NATURALE.

In  my  last  two  Lectures  I  endeavoured  to  explain  or  indicate Lect.
the  respective  natures  and  the  mutual  relations,  of  the  three .
disparate  distinctions  which  I  will  now  enumerate :  Recapitul

1st.  The  distinction  between  written  or  promulged  law  and
unwritten  or  unpromulged  law,  in  those  improper  senses,
annexed  to  the  opposed  epithets,  which  are  styled  their  juridical
senses  :  or,  between  law  proceeding  immediately  from  a  sovereign
or  supreme  maker,  and  law  proceeding  immediately  from  a
subject  or  subordinate  maker  (with  the  authority  of  a  sovereign
or  supreme).

2ndly.  The  distinction  between  written  law  and  unwritten
law,  in  those  more  proper  senses,  annexed  to  the  opposed
epithets,  which  are  styled  their  grammatical  or  literal  senses.

3rdly.  The  more  important  distinction,  between  law  esta-
blished directly,  and  law  established  obliquely ;  or  between  law
established  in  the  legislative  maimer,  or  in  the  way  of  proper
l^:islation,  and  law  established  or  introduced  in  the  judicial
mode,  or  by  way  of  judicial  legislation:  or  between  law
established  by  its  immediate  author,  as  directly  and  properly
exercising  l^islative  functions,  and  law  established  or  intro-
duced by  its  immediate  author,  as  properly  exercising  judicial
fanctions.


534  Law :  Sources  and  Modes.

Lect-  I  also  stated  and  examined  the  distinction  between  written

V  "^  -  V  and  unwritten  law,  which  is  made  by  Sir  Matthew  Hale  and
Sir  William  Blackstone ;  who  apparently  intend  the  distinction
between  written  and  unwritten  law,  in  the  juridical  meanings
of  the  terms ;  but  who  seem  to  blend  and  confound  this  last-
mentioned  distinction  with  the  utterly  disparate  distinction
between  written  and  unwritten  law,  in  the  gramniatical  senses
of  the  expressions.

Having  briefly  recalled  to  your  recollection  these  distinctions,

I  will  now  suggest  the  subjects  of  the  present  lecture.

Supposed  Every  Positive  Law,  obtaining  in any  community, is a

TOsitivf creature  of  the  Sovereign  or  State : having been  established

law.  immediately  by the m^onarch  or  supreme body,  as exercising

legislative or  judicial functions: or  having  been  established

immediately  by  a  subject  individual  or  body,  as  exercising  rights

or  powers  of  direct  or  judicial  legislation,  which  the  monarch  or

supreme  body  had  expressly  or  tacitly  conferred.

But  though  every  positive  law  exists  as  positive  law  through
the  position  or  institution  given  to  it  by  a  sovereign  government,
it  is  supposed  by  a  multitude  of  writers  on  general  and  particular
jurisprudence,  that  there  are  positive  laws  which  exist  as  positive
laws,  independently  of  a  sovereign  authority.

The  kinds  of  positive  law  to  which  this  independent  existence
is  the  most  frequently  attributed,  are  the  following :

V  Customary  law:  or,  the  positive  law  which  is  made  by
its  immediate  authors  on  customs  or  mores : —

2°  The  positive  law  which  is  made  by  its  immediate  authors
on  opinions  and  practices  of  private  lawyers : —

3°  The  law,  which,  as  forming  a  part  (or  as  deemed  to  form
a  part)  of  every  system  or  body  of  positive  law,  is  styled  natural
or  universal

To  show  the  falsity  of  the  supposition  in  question,  through

a  brief  examination  of  the  natures  of  these  three  kinds  of  law,

is  the  main  object  of  the  present  lecture. The  nature  of  cus-

Uymary  law,  of  law  formed  on  opinions  of  privaie  lawyers,  and  of

natural  law  (as  a  kind  of  positive  law),  are  therefore  its  principal

subjects :  And  to  these  subjects  I  will  now  address  myself  in  the

order  in  which  I  have  announced  them.

Customary  The  laws  or  rules  styled  customary  may  be  divided  into  two

laws;  no- classes: — Those  which  are  enforced  by  the  tribunals,  without

and  need- proof  of  their  existence ;  and  those  which  must  be  proved,  before

ing  proof, ^.j^^  tribunals  will  enforce  them.

Laws  or  rules  of  the  former  class,  are  styled  notorious. Or


Jus  :  Moribus  Const. — Prudentibus  Comp. — Naturale.  535

it  is  said  that  the  tribunals  take  Judicial  notice  of  them ;  or Lect.
that  the  tribunals  are  conscious  judicially  of  their  existence.  .


The  division  which  I  have  now  stated,  must  not  be  con-
founded with  the  division  of  laws  into  general  and  particular.
General  Laws  or  Bules  (or  as  they  are  sometimes  styled  Common
Laws  or  Bules)  obtain  throughout  the  territory  of  the  given  inde-
pendent society.  PartictUar  Laws  or  Eules  obtain  in  districts
or  places,  which  are  portions  of  that  territory.

This  division  and  the  former  division,  are  disparate  or  cross
divisions.

For,  first ;  Many  particular  laws  (or  many  of  the  laws  which
are  restricted  to  districts  or  places)  are  not  customary,  but  statute
laws.  And  (secondly)  many  laws  which  are  at  once  particular
and  customary,  are  noticed  judicially  by  the  tribunals.  Such,  for
instance,  are  the  particular  laws,  styled  the  custom  of  gavelkind,
which  are  restricted  to  a  certain  region  of  our  own  coimtry.

It  is  remarkable  that  the  Civil  and  Canon  Laws  (as  obtain-  Civil  and
ing  in  England)  are  ranked  by  Blackstone  and  Hale  with  partic-  La^g'^as
ular  customary  laws. Inasmuch  as  they  are  not  restricted  to  rece^,
districts  or  places,  but  obtain  as  Law  throughout  the  kingdom,  ^cLtone
it  is  dear  that  they  are  general,  and  not  particular  (taking  the  "^^^  P^^-
terms  in  the  meaning  which  I  have  just  stated). If  they  are  toms.
particular,  because  they  are  only  applicable  to  particular  matters
or  subjects  (as  marriage,  testaments,  and  so  on),  it  follows  that
every  law  is  a  particular  law. For  no  one  law  regards  all  the
subjects  about  which  the  aggregate  of  Laws  is  conversant. If
they  are  particular,  because  they  are  enforced  by  particular  or
peculiar  Courts,  so  is  Equity  particular,  and  so  are  certain  of
the  Eules  enforced by  the  General  Courts  of  Common  Law.
Each  of  these  Courts  has  rules  peculiar  to  itself:  the  practice
of  the  Exchequer,  and  of  the  Common  Pleas,  varying  from  one
another,  and  from  the  practice  of  the  King's  Bench.

The  truth  is,  that  the  Canon  and  Civil  Laws  (as  obtaining  in
England)  are  what  would  be  styled  by  the  Boman  Jurists  '  migu-
lar:*  that  is  to  say,  not  singular,  as  applying  exclusively  to  peculiar
subjects,  or  as  obtaining  in  districts  or  places,  but  as  not  harmon-
ising or  being  homogeneous  with  the  great  bulk  of  the  system.

This  want  of  harmony  or  consistency  with  the  great  bulk  of
the  system,  the  Boman  Lawyers  denote  by  a  very  odd  expres-
sion :  '  indeffantia  juris.' ^^ Now  the  Canon  and  Civil  Laws  (as

"  'Sed  postea  divus  Hadrianus  ini-  anus  inelegantia  juris  motus,  restituit

qnitate  rei  et  inelegantift  juris  motus,  juris gentium regulam,' etc  —  Gait

restituit,'  etc.  Comm.  I.  84,  85.

'  Sed  et  in  hac  specie  divus  Vespasi-


536  Law :  Sources  and  Modes.

Lect. they  obtain  in  England)  may  be  singvlar  or  indegarU,  but  they
w " > are  not  less  portions  of  the  general  law  of  the  land  than  Common


Law  or  Equity.

The  division  of  laws  into  general  and  particular^  I  shall
consider  in  a  future  Lecture.  With  reference  to  my  present
purpose,  a  particular  customary  law  is  not  distinguishable  from
a  general,  provided  it  belong  to  that  class  of  customary  laws  of
which  the  tribunals  are  judicially  conscious  or  informed,  and
which  they  will  enforce  without  proof  of  their  existence.

I  shall  now  advert  to  general  customary  laws,  and  to  those
particular  customary  laws  which  tribunals  will  enforce  without
proof  of  their  existence.  Those  particular  customary  laws  of
which  the  tribuneds  are  not  judicially  informed,  I  shall  consider
afterwards.  For  to  them,  many  of  the  remarks  immediately
following  will  not  apply.
A  custom  Independently  of  the  position  or  establishment  which  it  may

mwal^TOle  receive  from  the  sovereign,  the  rule  which  a  Custom  implies  (or
until  en- in  the  observance  of  which  a  custom  consists)  derives  the  whole
the  tri- of  its  obligatory  force  from  those  concurring  sentiments  which
bunals. are  styled  public  opinion. Lidependently  of  the  position  or
establishment  which  it  may  receive  &om  the  sovereign,  it  is
merely  a  rule  morally  sanctioned,  or  a  rule  of  positive  (or  actual)
morality. It  is,  properly,  jvs  rrwribvs  constitutum. It  properly
obtains  as  a  rule  through  the  consensus  tUentium  ;  its  only  source
or  its  only  avihors,  are  those  who  observe  it  spontaneously,  or
without  compulsion  by  the  state.
When  Now  a  merely  moral,  or  merely  customary  rule,  may  take

Sto  a  law  ^^®  quality  of  a  legal  rule  in  two  ways : — ^it  may  be  adopted  by
it  is  law  a  sovereign  or  subordinate  legislature,  and  turned  into  a  law  in
fromthe ^.  the  direct  mode ;  or  it  may  be  taken  as  the  ground  of  a  judicial
soverei^  decision,  which  afterwards  obtains  as  a  precedent ;  and  in  this
subordin-  case  it  is  converted  into  a  law  after  the  judicial  fashion*  In
ate  legiala-  whichever  of  these  ways  it  becomes  a  legal  rule,  the  law  into
judge.  which  it  is  turned  emanates  from  the  sovereign  or  subordinate
legislature  or  judge,  who  transmutes  the  moral  or  imperfect  rule
into  a  legal  or  perfect  one.

On  the  first  of  these  suppositions,  the  legal  rule  which  is
derived  from  the  customary,  is  Statute  Law :  and  it  is  styled
statute,  and  not  customary  law,  although  it  is  made,  by  its  im-
mediate author,  on  a  pre-existing  custom.  For  since  he  utters
it,  openly  and  professedly,  as  and  for  a  positive  law,  no  one
confounds  the  source  of  the  positive  law  itself  with  the  source  of
the  customary  rule  on  which  it  is  shaped  by  the  legislator.


Jus  Moribus  Constitutum.  537

On  the  second  of  these  suppositions,  the  legal  rule  which  is Lect-
denred  &om  the  customary,  is  a  rule  of  judiciary  law. But


though,  as  a  rule  of  judiciary  law,  it  is  not  less  positive  law
than  it  would  be  if  it  were  a  statute,  it  often  is  deemed  law
emanating  fix)m  custom,  or  jvs  morOms  constitutum.  For  since
the  judiciGd  legislator  is  properly  acting  judicially,  and  there-'
fore  abstains  naturally  from  the  shew  of  legislation,  he  apparently
applies  a  pre-existing  rule,  instead  of  making  and  applying  a
new  rola  And  as  the  pre-existing  rule  which  he  appears  to
apply  is  apparently  the  customary  rule  on  which  he  shapes  the
positive^  the  source  of  that  customary  rule,  and  the  source  of  the
positive  law  which  he  virtually  establishes,  are  not  unfrequently
confonnded.

Whether  the  moral  rule  be  converted  into  judiciary  or  into
statute  law,  it  emanates  as  law  from  the  legislator,  who  groimds
a  statute  upon  it,  or  from  the  judge,  who  assumes  it  as  the  basis
of  a  judicial  decision.  The  source  or  fons  of  the  legal  rule,  is
not  eonsensvs  utentium,  although  it  retains  the  name  of  customary
law,  when  clothed  with  the  legal  sanction  in  the  judicisd  mode.
Those  who  maintain  that  it  existed  as  law  before  it  was
enforced  by  the  legal  sanction,  or  that  it  was  established  as  law
cxmsensu  utentium,  confound  law  with  positive  morality,  and  run
mto  numberless  inconsistencies  which  they  cannot  possibly  avoid.
They  are  obliged  to  admit  that  its  continuance  as  law  depends
on  the  sovereign  pleasure ;  although  if  it  existed  as  law  inde-
pendently of  the  will  of  the  sovereign,  no  one  could  abrogate  it,
except  its  authors.

Taking  the  term  '  source '  in  a  loose  signification,  Customs  Extension
may  be  styled  sources  of  laws. For  the  existence  of  a  custom,  ^  eve^^^
with  the  general  opinion  in  favour  of  it,  is  the  cause  or  occasion,  *  remote
or  is  one  of  the  causes  or  occasions,  of  that  legal  rule  which  is  ^^  ^
moulded  or  fashioned  upon  it. But  taking  the  term  '  source '  in
the  same  loose  signification,  the  causes  of  the  custom  from  which
the  law  emerges  are  also  a  source  or  fountain  of  the  law  itself:
And,  generally,  any  cause  of  any  law  must  be  ranked  with  its
sources  or  foimtains.

Accordingly,  certain  writers  (as  I  shall  shew  hereafter,  when
I  come  to  Natural  Law)  have  ranked  experience  and  reason,  to-
gether with  the  external  circumstances  wherein  mankind  are
placed,  amongst  the  sources  of  the  laws  whereby  mankind  are
governed.

A  happier  reductio  ad  ahsurdum  of  the  position  maintained
by  those  writers  could  hardly  be  devised.


538  Law :  Sources  and  Modes.

Lect.  AxwLoritas  Prudentium,  Authority  of  Conveyancers,  etc.,  are

V  in  the  same  predicament  as  Customary  Law. So  of  Practices  of

Lawyers,  etc.  But  if  by  'source'  be  meant  the  legislative
authority  from  which  law  proceeds,  they  are  not  sources  although
they  are  causes.  If  you  like,  you  may  indeed  extend  the  word
'  sources '  to  these,  but  then  you  ought  also  to  extend  it  to  any
cause  whatever  which  leads  to  the  establishment  of  Law:  e.g.:
Seasons  assigned  in  debate;  the  particular  incidents  which
have  occasioned  certain  laws,  etc. ;  any  circumstance,  in  short,
which  determined  the  Legislator  or  Judge  to  create  the  rule.
As  I  have  already  endeavoured  to  shew,  there  can  be  no  law
without  a  legislative  act;  and  for  the  sake  of  distinctness  I
should  wish  to  limit  the  word  '  sources '  to  the  legislative  power
by  which  Law  is  established ;  and  to  designate  the  causes  which
lead  to  its  establishment  by  the  word  'causes,*  or  by  some
equivalent  expression.
Generation  That  a  custom  becomes  law,  only  when  enforced  by  the

ary  Law,  political  sanction,  was  clearly  perceived  by  Cicero,  and  stated
per  Cicero,  ^y  him  with  more  of  precision  than  is  commonly  met  with  in
his  writings.  If  we  reject  the  talk  about  ruUure,  and  allow  for
his  habit  or  trick  of  sacrificing  precision  to  euphony,  we  shall
find,  in  the  following  passage,  a  correct  statement  of  the  origin
of  customary  law.  '  Justitiae  initium  est  a  naturS,  profectum.
Deinde  qusedam  in  consuetudinem  ex  utilitatis  ratione  venerunt.
Postea  res,  et  a  natur^  profectas,  et  a  consuetudine  probatas,
leffum  metvs  et  religio  sanxit'

Law  styled  customary,  then,  is  not  to  be  considered  a
distinct  kind  of  law.  It  is  nothing  but  judiciary  law  founded
on  an  anterior  customu  As  merely  customary  law  (in  the  loose
and  improper  sense  of  the  term  law),  or  rather  as  merely  positive
morality,  it  comes  immediately  from  the  subject  members  of  the
community  by  whom  it  was  observed  spontaneously  or  without
compulsion  by  the  State;  but  as  positive  law,  it  comes  immedi-
ately from  the  sovereign  or  subordinate  judges  who  transmute
the  moral  and  imperfect  into  legal  and  perfect  rules.
Hypo-  But  though  this  accoimt  of  the  matter  is  palpably  true,  it

thesiaof  jg  commonly  supposed  by  writers  on  jurisprudence  (Boman,
stone,  etc.  English,  German,  and  others)  that  law  shaped  upon  customs
about  Cus-  obtains  as  positive  law,  independently  of  the  sanction  adjected
Law.  to  the  customs  by  the  State. It  is  supposed  for  example  by

Hale  and  Blackstone  (and  by  other  writers  on  English  juris-
prudence) that  all  the  judiciary  law  administered  by  the  Common
Law  Courts (excepting the judiciary  law which they have


Jus  Moribus  Constitutum.  539

made upon statutes) is  customary  law:  and  that since  this Lect.


customary  law  exists  as  positive  law  by  force  of  immemorial
usage^  the  decisions  of  those  Courts  have  not  created^  but  have  |
merely  expounded  or  declared  it

The  following  are  a  few  specimens  of  the  numerous  ab-
surdities and  inconsistencies  with  which  this  hypothesis  is
pregnant.

All  the  customs  immemorially  current  in  the  nation  are
not  l^ally  binding.  But  cM  these  customs  woiM  he  legally
binding,  if  the  positive  laws,  which  have  been  made  upon  some
of  them,  obtained  as  positive  laws  by  force  of  immemorial
usage.

Positive  law  made  upon  custom  is  often  abolished  by  Par-
liament or  by  judicial  decisions.  But  supposing  it  existed  as
positive  law  by  virtue  of  the  consensus  tUentium,  it  could  not  be
abolished,  conformably  to  that  supposition,  without  the  consent
and  authority  of  these  its  imaginary  foimders.

According  to  the  hypothesis  in  question,  customary  laws
are  not  positive  laws  imtil  their  existence  as  such  is  declared  to
the  people  by  decisions  of  the  Common  Law  Courts.  But  if
they  existed  as  positive  laws,  hecatcse  the  people  had  observed
them  as  merely  customary  rules,  such  decisions  would  not  be
necessary  preliminaries  to  their  existence  in  the  former  char-
acter ;  since  the  people  would  know  their  existence  as  positive
laws,  without  the  testimony  of  the  judges.

If  all  our  customary  laws  have  obtained  from  time  imme-
morial, all  of  them  may  have  obtained  from  the  very  beginning
of  the  community.  But  many  of  the  subjects  about  which  these
laws  are  conversant  (as,  for  example,  bills  of  exchange),  had  no
existence  tiU  times  comparatively  recent  The  imaginary
authors,  therefore,  of  these  immemorial  laws,  legislated  with  a
spirit  of  prophecy,  and  on  matters  which  could  not  have  con-
cerned them.

There  is  much  of  the  judiciary  law,  administered  by  the
Common  Law  Courts,  which  has  not  been  formed  upon  im-
memorial custom,  or  upon  any  custom:  much  of  it  having
been  made  in  recent  times,  on  customs  of  recent  origin ;  and
much  of  it  having  been  derived  by  its  authors,  the  Judges,
from  their  own  conceptions  of  public  policy  or  expediency.

Finally  the  hypothesis  seems  to  be  restricted  to  the  rules
of  judiciary  law  which  are  administered  by  the  Common  Law
Courts ;  though  if  all  the  judiciary  law  administered  by  the7ii
must,  as  judiciary  law,  be  deemed  customary  law,  the  hypo-


XXX


5  40  Law :  Sources  and  Modes.

Lect. thesis  ought  to  be  extended  to  all  the  judiciary  law  administeied
V  by  the  other  tribunals.


The  preva-  The  conceit  that  customary  law  obtains  as  positive  law  by
a^ut*^*^^"^  virtue  of  the  conse^njsm  tUerUium,  was  suggested  to  its  numerous
nature  of  modem  partisans  by  certain  passages  in  Justinian's  Pandects,
Law  sog-^^ .  particularly  a  passage  of  Julian.  The  effect  of  the  passage  in
gested  to question  may  be  stated  thus :

bypissage  '  -^  custom long  observed  by  the  Eoman  People,  is equi-

m  Fan- valent  to  a  lex  OT  statute  which  the  people  formally  establish.

For  the  written  statute  is  legally  binding,  because  the  Sovereign

People,  h/  certain  formalities,  manifest  their  pleasure  that  it

shall  legally  bind.

'  And  the  t^Tiwritten  custom  is  also  a  positive  law,  inasmuch
as  the  people,  by  their  observance  of  it,  manifest  their  pleasure
that  it  shall  be  a  positive  law.'

The  passage  itself  runs  in  the  following  manner :
'  Inveterata  consuetude  pro  lege  non  immerito  custoditur :
Et  hoc  est  jus,  quod  dicitur  morSms  constitutum.  Nam  quum
ipsse  leges  null&  alid.  ex  caus&  nos  teneant,  quam  quod  judicio
populi  receptee  sunt,  merito  et  ea,  qusB  sine  ullo  scripto  populus
probavit,  tenebunt  omnes.  Nam  quid  interest,  populus  suffra^
voluntatem  suam  declaret,  an  rebus  ipsis  et  factis  ? '  ^

Without  pausing  to  analyse  the  passage,  I  shall  briefly
remark  on  a  few  of  the  errors  with  which  it  overflows.  First,
it  confounds  an  act  of  the  people  in  its  collective  and  sovereign
capacity  with  the  acts  of  its  members  considered  severally,  and
as  subjects  of  the  sovereign  whole.  The  laws  which  were  made
by  the  people  in  its  collective  and  sovereign  capacity,  were
broadly  different  from  the  customary  rules  which  were  observed
spontaneously  by  its  several  and  subject  members.  The  former
were  positive  Law.  The  latter  had  not  the  effect  of  positive  Law,
until  they  were  adopted  as  such  by  the  collective  and  sovereign
people,  or  by  those  to  whom  it  had  delegated  legislative  or
judicial  powers.

Secondly :  The  position  maintained  in  the  passage  is  this :
— ^That  a  customary  rule  which  the  people  actually  observes,
is  equivalent  to  a  law  which  the  people  establishes  formally;
since  the  people  {which  is  the  sovereign)  is  the  immediate  author
of  each.

Now,  admitting  that  the  position  will  hold,  where  the  people
is  the  sovereign,  how  can  the  position  possibly  apply,  where  the

»  Digest,  i.  3,  32.


Jus  Moribus  Constitutum.  541

people  is  ruled  by  an  oligarchy,  or  where  it  is  subject  to  a Lict.


monarch  ?  There,  laws,  established  formally  by  the  sovereign
one  or  few,  are  not  established  by  the  subject  many.  And,  on
the  other  hand,  customs  observed  spontaneously  by  the  subject
people,  are  not  the  production  of  the  monarch,  or  of  the  sovereign
body.

During  the  virtual  existence  of  the  Boman  Commonwealth,
the  position  maintained  in  the  passage  might  have  been  plausible.
But  it  is  strange  that  the  author  of  the  passage  (who  lived
under  Hadrian  and  the  Antonines)  did  not  perceive  its  absurdity.
He  must  have  known  that  the  Boman  World  was  virtually
governed  by  a  monarch ;  and  that  laws  established  formally  by
that  virtual  monarch,  and  customs  observed  spontaneously  by
the  subject  Boman  commimity,  could  not  be  referred  (in  any
sense  whatever)  to  one  and  the  same  source.

And  here  I  would  remark,  by  the  bye,  that  the  juridical
meaning  of  the  terms  '  written  and  tmwritten  Law '  arose  from
a  misconstruction,  by  modem  Civilians,  of  the  passage  which  I
have  read  and  examined.  The  misconstruction  is  scarcely
credible;  since  customary  law  and  statute  law  are  expressly
referred  by  the  passage  to  one  and  the  same  source :  namely,
the  sovereign  Boman  People.  It  therefore  is  manifest,  that  the
term  'jiLs  scriptum '  is  used  by  the  author  of  the  passage,  in  the
grammatical  or  literal  sense.  It  is  applied  to  the  leges  passed
by  the  Boman  poptUvs,  because  they  were  committed  to  writing,
at  the  time  of  their  origin,  by  the  authority  of  their  immediate
maker.  And  these  leges  are  opposed  (under  the  name  of  jiis
scriptum),  to  customary  laws  ;  because  the  latter  (in  so  far  as  they
originated  in  the  consensus  utentium)  originated  sine  scHpto.

Julian's conceit exactly hits the taste of Sir William  Black-
Blackstone,  who  borrows  it  with  much  complacency,  gratefully  stone's
enhancing  its  original  absurdity  by  adding  nonsense  of  his  own.  ment  to
'  Thus'  he  remarks  (after  he  has  cited  the  passage), — ' thus  did  '^^^^•
they reason,  while  Bome  had  some  remains  of  her  freedom.
And,  indeed,  it  is  one  of  the  characteristic  marks  of  English
liberty, that  our common  law  depends upon custom ;  which
carries  this  internal  evidence  of  freedom  along  with  it,  that  it
was  probably  introduced  by  the  voluntary  consent  of  the  people.'
Now  customary  law  (as  positive  law)  is  established  by  the
sovereign- And,  consequently,  whether  it  be  introduced  (or  not)
by  the consent  of  the  people,  depends  upon  the form  of  the
government. If  the  people  are  the  sovereign,  or  if  they  share
the  sovereignty  with one  or  a  few,  customary  law  (like  other
VOL.  n.  D


542  Law :  Sources  and  Modes.

Leot.  law)  is,  of  course,  introduced  by  their  consent  (in  the  strict
acceptation  of  the  term) :  the  people  solely  (or  the  people  with
the  monarch  or  oligarchs)  being  its  immediate  or  ultimate  authors.
But  if  the  people  have  no  share  in  the  sovereignty,  they  have
no  part  whatever  in  the  introduction  of  positive  law,  be  it
customary  or  other.  In  the  large  sense,  indeed,  of  the  term
'  consent,'  customary  law  (Uke  otJier  law)  is  truly  introduced  by
their  consent,  although  the  government  be  a  monarchy  or
oligarchy :  since  they  consent  to  the  existence  of  the  government,
and  of  the  laws  established  by  the  government,  because  they
are  determined  by  fear,  or  by  some  other  inducement,  to  yield
the  government  their  obedience.

And  under  monarchies  or  oligarchies,  as  well  as  under
governments  purely  or  partially  popular,  much  or  most  of  the
law  which  obtains  in  the  commimity  is  (commonly)  customary
law.  So  that  if  customary  law  be  a  mark  of  freedom  (or  shew
that  the  government  of  the  community  is  purely  or  partially
popular),  monarchies  and  oligarchies  are  commonly  democracies,
or  commonly  partake  of  the  democratical  form.  I  would  there-
fore submit,  that  we  cannot  argue  that  the  people  are  free
beeause  their  law  is  customary.  Though  if  we  know  aliunde
that  the  people  are  free,  we  may  conclude  that  their  law,
whether  customary  or  not,  was  introduced  by  their  consent.

Sir  William  Blackstone's  meaning  may  have  been  this : —
That  the  antecedent  customs,  which  are  the  groundwork  of
customary  law,  are  necessarily  introduced  by  the  consent  of
the  people :  Or,  in  other  words,  are  necessarily  consonant  to
their  interests  or  wishes.

But  even  this  is  false.

If  the  people  be  enlightened  and  strong,  custom,  like  law,
will  commonly  be  consonant  to  their  interests  and  wishes.

If  they  be  ignorant  and  weak,  custom,  as  well  as  law,  will
commonly  be  agednst  them.

During  the  Middle  Ages,  the  body  of  the  people,  throughout
Europe,  were  in  the  serf  or  slavish  condition.  And  this  slavish
condition  of  the  body  of  the  people  originated  in  custom :  Al-
though the  imperfect  rights  which  custom  gave  to  their  masters,
together  with  the  imperfect  obligations  which  custom  imposed
on  themselves,  were  afterwards  enforced  by  Law  of  which  that
custom  was  the  basis.  In  various  parts  of  Europe,  the  people
have  gradually  escaped  from  the  servile  condition  through
successive  acts  of  the  Legislature.  So  that  the  body  of  the
people  in  many  of  the  European  nations,  have  been  released,


Jus  Moribus  Constitutum.  543

hy  direct  legidation,  from the  servile  and abject  thraldom  in Lect.
which  they  had  been  held  by  custom,  and  by  law  framed  upon .  ^^^  ,
custom.

In  Eome,  the  absolute  dominion  of  the  paterfamilias  over
his  wife  and  descendants,  arose  from  custom  and  consequent
customary  law,  and  was  gradually  abridged  by  direct  legislation:
namely,  by  the  edicts  of  the  Praetors,  the  laws  of  the  People,
and  the  edictal  constitutions  of  the  Emperors.

Let  us  turn  our  eyes  in  what  direction  we  may,  we  shall
find  that  there  is  no  connection  between  customary  law,  and
the  well-being  of  the  many.

In  spite,  then,  of  the  grandiloquous  talk  by  which  it  has
been  extolled  and  obscured,  customary  law  has  nothing  of  the
magnificent  or  mysterious  about  it.  It  is  but  a  species  of
judiciary  law,  or  of  law  introduced  by  sovereign  or  subordinate
judges  as  properly  exercising  their  judicial  functions.  And  it
differs  from  other  species  of  the  same  kind  of  law  merely  by
this  peculiarity ;  that  it  is  formed  or  fashioned  by  the  judges,
who  are  its  sources  or  immediate  authors,  upon  pre-existing
rules  observed  spontaneously,  or  wholly  deriving  their  imperfect
obligatory  force  from  the  religious  or  moral  sanctions.

The  motives  which  determine  its  authors  to  adopt  these
rules  as  law,  are  numberless.

But  (generally  speaking)  the  mere  pre -existence  of  the
customs  upon  which  the  law  is  moulded,  is  am/)ngst  those
motives,  if  not  the  only  one.  For,  if  the  habits  and  expecta-
tions of  the  community,  or  of  the  influential  classes  of  the
community,  have  been  accommodated  to  a  given  custom,  that  is
a  strong  reason  for  erecting  the  custom  into  Law,  provided  that
the  adjection  of  the  legal  sanction  would  give  to  the  custom
additional  efficacy  or  force.

From  whence  it  follows  that  Custom  (or  rather  the  pleasure  of
those,  in  whose  observance  or  practice  custom  consists)  is  amongst
the  most  frequent  of  the  causes  of  Law,  although  it  is  not  a  source
or  fountain  of  law  (taking  those  terms  in  their  strict  signification).

From  Customary  Law,  I  pass  to  positive  law  which  is  made  Juspru-
by  its  inunediate  authors  on  opinions  and  practices  of  private  ^^.
lawyers. Law  of  this  kind  is  named  by  the  Roman  Lawyers  tum.  Law
jus  prudentibus  compositum; law  constructed  by  private  juris-  to^nse
consults  respected  for  their  knowledge  and  judgment.  from  the

The  remarks  which  I  have  applied  to  the  law  styled  cus-  l^o^^l


544  Law :  Sources  and  Modes.

Lect.  tomary,  will  apply  (with  a  few  variations)  to  that  imaginary
^  ^  >  law,  which  is  supposed  to  emanate  from  the  Arictoritas  pru-
ions  of  dentium,  or  from  the  opinions  of  private  lawyers  eminent  for
Lawyers, their  knowledge  and  ability.

By  the  Boman  Lawyers,  these  merely  private  though  re-
spected jurisconsults  are  styled  conditores  or  foimders  of  law.
And  by  modem  Civilians  generally,  and  apparently  by  the
Eoman  Lawyers,  they  are  deemed  the  sources  of  the  law,  or  the
immediate  authors  of  the  law,  which  really  was  formed  upon
their  opinions  by  legislators  or  judges.  Positive  Law  of  the
kind  in  question,  as  well  as  the  positive  law  formed  upon
custom,  has  therefore  been  thought  to  obtain  as  positive  law,
independently  of  sovereign  authority.

But  merely  private  jurisconsults,  respected  for  their  know-
ledge and  judgment,  are  not  conditores  or  foimders  of  Law,  al-
though the  weight  of  their  opinions  may  determine  oth^s  to
found  it.  If  their  opinions  determine  the  legislator,  the  in-
fluence of  those  opinions  is  a  remote  cause  of  the  Law,  of  which
the  Legislator  himself  is  exclusively  the  immediate  cause,  or  is
exclusively  the  source.  But  any  inducement  whatever,  leading
the  legislator  to  establish  the  Law,  were  just  as  much  a  remote
cause  of  its  establishment  as  the  opinions  by  which  he  is  guided.
Justinian  legislated  by  the  advice  of  Tribonian.  He  also
legislated  at  the  instance  of  his  Empress.  And  the  blandish-
ments of  the  wife,  as  well  as  the  responses  of  the  legal  oracle,
were  remote  causes  of  laws  emanating  from  the  Emperor  as  their
source.

Nay,  the  writings  of  private  lawyers  are  not  law,  although
it  be  declared  by  the  legislator  that  they  shall  thereafter  be  law.
For  they  are  not  law  as  being  the  production  of  the  writers,
but  by  virtue  of  the  Legislator's  adoption.  Such,  for  example,
is  the  case  with  those  excerpts  from  the  writings  of  jurists,  of
which  Justinian's  Digest  is  almost  exclusively  composed.  As
forming  parts  of  those  writings,  they  were  not  law;  but  as
compiled  and  promulged  by  Justinian,  they  took  the  quality  of
law  immediately  proceeding  from  the  sovereign.

'  Quicquid  ibi  scriptum,  hoc  nostrum,  et  ex  nostril  voluntate
compositum.'— Such  is  the  language  of  Justinian  himself  when
speaking  of  the  excerpts  in  the  Act  confirming  the  compilation.

If  a  judicial  decision,  introducing  a  new  rule,  be  suggested
by  the  opinion  of  a  private  lawyer,  his  opinion  is  a  remote  cause,
but  it  is  not  the  soicrce  of  the  rule  which  the  decision  introduces.
The  source  or  immsdiate  autlior  of  the  new  rule  of  law,  is  that


Jus  Prudentibus  Compositum.  545

Sovereign,  or  that  subordinate  judge,  whose  decision  is  deter- Leot.
mined  by  the  authority  of  the  legal  sage.  ^

Under  the  Commonwealth,  the  opinions  of  a  Eomcm  Juris-
consult derived  the  whole  of  their  weight  from  the  estimation  in
which  he  was  held  on  accoimt  of  his  knowledge  and  judgment.
His  opinions  naturally  influenced  the  decisions  of  the  tribunals,
but  the  tribimals  were  not  obliged  to  follow  them.

But,  according  to  an  obscure  story  told  in  the  Digest,^  the
tribunals  were  instructed  (under  Augustus),  to  take  the  Law,  in
doubtful  cases,  fix)m  certain  jurisconsults  who  were  appointed  by
the  L^islature  to  expound  it  Now,  if  this  story  be  true,  these
jurisconsults  ('  quibus  permissum  erat  jura  condere  *)  ^  were,  in
truth,  judges  of  Law.  They  formed  an  extraordinary  tribimal
to  which  the  ordinary  judges  were  bound  to  defer.

And,  on  that  supposition,  their  responses  were  judicial
decisions,  and  not  the  opinions  of  merely  private  jurisconsults.

The  story,  however,  is  beset  with  inexplicable  difficulties.

It  is  most  probable,  that  the  responses  and  writings  of
jurisconsults  were  never  sources  of  Law:  Although  they  ac-
quired the  influence  which  the  opinions  of  the  instructed  and
expert  will  naturally  obtain.

If  an  ignorant  and  incompetent  judge  be  swayed  by  the
opinions  of  a  learned  and  able  advocate,  the  law,  which  lus
decisions  might  introduce,  are  his  law.  It  would  flow  from
him,  as  from  its  source  or  immediate  author,  although  the  know-
ledge, enabling  him  to  decide,  would  be  poured  into  his  mind
by  the  learned  advocate  who  predominated  over  him  from  the
bar  of  his  own  tribunal.

The  law  introduced  by  judges  on  the  authority  of  private  Customary
jurisconsults,  and  the  law  which  they  make and  mould  upon  }*^  ^^^
pre-existing  custom,  are  merely  species  of  the  same  kind. Both  pested  by
are  judiciary  law,  or  law  introduced  obliquely ; and  the  only  [^  ®g°^/°'
difference  between  them  lies  in  their  causes ; The  opinions  and  juriscon-
authority  of  jurisconsults being a  cause  of  the one,  as pre-  pajl^.^^™"
existing  custom  is  a  cause  of  the  other. In  the  Roman  Law,
the  two  species  are  distinguished  by  distinct  names. The  one
is  styled  'jus  moribus  constitutum  ;'  the  other  is  styled  'jus  com-
posit  um  a  prudentiJms,  ot  jiis  civile  (in  the  narrowest  acceptation
of  the  term).

In  the  language  of  our  own  law,  the  two  species  (though
distinct)  are  not  distinguished  by  distinct  names.  For  all
judicial decisions which serve as precedents, are considered

»  Digest,  L  2,  2,  S  47.  *^  Inst  i.  2,  §  8.


5  46  Law :  Sources  and  Modes.

Lfxt.  as  evidence  of  Law  established  by  Custom,  And,  by  consequence,
w  "  ^  >  all  judiciary  law  (though  its  causes  are  various)  is  named  after
the  source  from  which  it  is  feigned  to  emanate.  All  of  it  is
styled  customary  law.

In  neither  system,  does  statute  law,  or  law  established
directly,  take  various  names  in  respect  of  its  various  causes.
Whether  it  be  made  upon  pre-existing  custom,  or  whether
(as  often  happens)  it  be  made  (in  effect)  by  lawyers,  it  is
considered  as  emanating  from  the  legislator  who  is  its  immediate
author,  and  is  named  accordingly.  For,  here,  the  source  is  more
obvious  than  where  the  law  is  judiciary ;  and  the  confusion  of
the  sources  with  the  remote  causes  of  law,  is  consequently  avoided.

The  jus  a  prudentihis  compositum  (though  not  marked,  with
us,  by  a  distinct  name)  is  not  a  stranger  to  our  own  law.

For  example ;  much  of  the  law  in  my  Lord  Coke's  writings,
consists  (in  the  language  of  Hale)  'of  illations  made  by  the
writer  upon  existing  law :'  much  of  it,  of  positions  and  con-
clusions founded  upon  the  writer's  notions  of  general  UtiUty.
For  (as  he  says  himself  over  and  over  again)  '  argumenturn,  ah
inconvenienti  plurimum  valet  in  lege.'  And,  undoubtedly,
many  of  these  illations  and  conclusions  of  this  most  illustrious
of  our  jpruderUes,  have  served  as  the  basis  of  judicial  decisions,
and  have  thus  been  incorporated  with  English  judiciary  Law.

The  only  diflference  (in  this  respect)  between  our  own  and
the  Eoman  Law,  lies  in  the  different  turns  given  to  the
expression.

With  the  Romans,  judiciary  law,  bottomed  in  such  illations
and  conclusions,  would  at  once  be  referred  to  its  remote  cause.
It  would  be  styled  jus  a  prudentihis  compositum.

With  us,  the  authority  of  the  prudentes  is  affectedly  sunk ;
and  the  judicial  decisions,  really  framed  upon  their  opinions,
are  considered  declaratious  of  Law  established  by  immemorial
custom.

Again :  Much  of  the  law  of  real  property  is  notoriously
taken  from  opinions  and  practices,  which  have  grown  up,  and
are  daily  growing  up,  amongst  conveyancers.  And,  I  may
observe,  that  the  body  of  eminent  conveyancers  for  the  time
being,  is  a  partial  picture  (in  little)  of  that  body  of  eminent
jurisconsults  who  (at  any  given  period)  were  the  pruderUes
in  ancient  Rome.  Neither  the  eminent  conveyancers,  nor
the  prudentes,  can  be  considered  as  sources  or  authors  of  Law.
But  the  opinions  of  both,  as  determining  the  decisions  of  the
tribunals,  may  be  considered  as  causes  of  that  law,  which  (in  spite


Jus  Prudentibus  Compositum.  547

ol  the  puerile  fiction  about  immemorial  usage)  is  notoriously Lect


introduced  by  judges  acting  in  their  judicial  capacity.

With  regard  to  the  responses  of  the  jurisconsults,  to  whose
opinions  the  tribunals  were  bound  to  defer,  I  remarked  (in
a  former  Lecture),  that  the  responses  of  these  jurisconsults,
when  given  in  answer  to  the  inquiries  of  the  tribunals,  were
properly  judicisd  decisions : — ^judicial  decisions  of  extraordinary
judges,  who  were  appointed  by  the  sovereign  to  determine
questions  of  Law,  when  the  ordinary  judges  should  find  them-
selves at  fi&ult

(consequently,  the  authors  of  these responses  were  pro-
perly/liris  eanditares. '  Nam  eis  hoc  majestas  imperialis  permisit/
Whether  such  extraordinary  referees  were  ever  really  ap-
pointed, is  one  of  the  most  difficult  questions  which  the  history
of  the  Boman  Law  presents.

Strictly  speaking,  customs,  or  writings  and  opinions  of
lawyers,  are  Law  in  so  far  as  they  have  been  recognised  by
judicial  decisions,  and  no  farther.  As  we  have  already  shewn,
there  can  be  no  law  without  a  judicial  Sanction,  and  until  a
custom  has  been  adopted  as  Law  by  Courts  of  Justice,  it  is  always
uncertain  whether  it  will  be  sustained  by  that  sanction  or  not

Where,  however,  the  positions  of  a  legal  writer  have  been
in  part  adopted,  the  rest  of  his  doctrines  are  ordinarily  con-
sidered as  Law,  in  so  far  as  they  are  related  by  consequence
OP  analogy  to  that  which  has  been  actually  recognised.  In
consequence  of  this  relation,  it  is  probable  that  it  unll  be  re-
cognised should  a  question  ever  arise,  and  it  is  therefore  acted
upon  with  almost  as  much  assurance  as  if  it  had  actually
received  the  judicial  approbation.  Strictly  speaking,  it  is  not
law,  but  it  probably  vrill  be  Law,  should  the  acts  which  are
done  in  pursuance  or  in  contravention  of  it,  be  ever  brought  in
question  before  a  Court  of  Justice.

And  it  must  be  observed,  that  the  probability  of  its  re-
ceiving such  adoption  increases  with  the  number  of  acts  which
have  been  done  in  pursuance  of  it.  A  natural  reluctance  on
the  part  of  the  Courts  to  defeat  the  expectations  which  its  being
r^arded  as  law  have  begotten,  determines  the  tribunal  to  adopt
it  almost  independently  of  its  connection  in  the  way  of  conse-
quence or  analogy  with  already  existing  doctrines.  The  authority
of  lawyers,  numerous  and  experienced,  has  here  great  weight.

Having  thus  entered  upon  the examination of  the  laws
supposed  to  emanate  firom  custom,  from  the  private  or  un-


xxx


548  Law :  Sources  and  Modes.

Lect. authorised lawyers, and  from  the  fancied  legislatrix,  nature,
-  I  have  now  examined  the  two  former  of  these  three  kinds  of


supposed  law,  and  endeavoured  to  demonstrate  that  custom
is  not  a  source  or  fountain  of  law,  although  the  law  styled
customary  is  fashioned  on  a  pre-existing  custom  by  sovereign
or  subordinate  judges;  and  that  private  or  unauthorised
lawyers  are  not  founders  of  law,  although  the  laws  of  which
they  are  styled  the  founders,  are  introduced  by  judicial  decisions,
which  their  opinions  determine  or  influence.  In  accordance  with
the  plan  set  out  at  the  commencement  of  this  Lecture,  I  should
next  proceed  to  examine  the  laws  which  are  said  to  emanate
from  nature,  and  to  shew  that  the  law  styled  natural,  like  all
other  law,  is  introduced  by  the  sovereign  as  legislating,  or  as
judging,  or  by  legislatures  or  tribunals  which  derive  their  powers
from  the  sovereign.

But  it  will  be  convenient  to  postpone  the  complete  examina-
tion of  the  laws  styled  natural,  and  the  distinction  made  between
laws  natural  and  positive,  until  after  I  have  explained  the  jvA
gentium  of  the  earlier  Boman  lawyers,  and  the  distinction  between
jn^  gentium  and  dviley  as  made  by  them  and  by  the  classical
jurists.
Gk)d  or  Eeserving  the  examination  of  the  law  styled  natural,  I  shall

a  9(Ai,rix  of  here  content  myself  with  remarking  that  God  or  nature  is  not  a
positive  source  of  law  in  the  strict  sense ;  that  is,  of  law  established  by
the  sovereign  or  state  immediately  or  remotely.  God,  or  nature,
is  ranked  among  the  sources  of  law,  through  the  same  confusion
of  the  sources  of  law  with  its  remoter  causes,  which  I  pointed
out  in.  treating  of  the  law  supposed  to  emanate  from  custom,  and
of  the  law  supposed  to  emanate  from  private  lawyers  or  juris-
consults. Taking  the  principle  of  general  utility  as  the  only
index  to  the  will  of  God,  every  useful  law  set  by  the  sovereign
accords  with  the  law  set  by  Grod,  or  (adopting  the  current  and
foolish  phrase)  with  the  law  set  by  nature ;  or,  assuming  the
existence  of  a  moral  sense,  every  law  which  obtjdns  in  all
societies,  is  made  by  sovereign  legislatures  on  a  Divine  or
natural  original:  But  in  either  case  it  is  a  law,  strictly  so
called,  by  the  establishment  it  receives  from  the  human  sovereign.
The  sovereign  is  the  author  of  all  law  strictly  so  called,  although
it  be  fashioned  by  him  on  the  law  of  God  or  nature ;  just  as
customary  law  is  established  by  the  sovereign,  although  he
fashions  it  after  a  pre-existing  custom.  God,  or  nature,  is  the
remote  cause  of  the  law,  but  its  source  and  proximate  cause  is
the  earthly  sovereign,  by  whom  it  is  positum  or  established.


Supposed  Sources  examined.  549

The  'jus  quod  natura  inter  omnes  homines  constituit,'  the  Lbct.
'jus  moribus  constitutum,'  and  the  'jus  a  prudentibus  conditum  -

give  compositum,'  are  manifestly  in  the  same  predicament. Each  Extension^
derives  its  distinctive  name  from  its  remote  cause  or  one  of  its  to  every
remote  causes. And  deriving  its  distinctive  name  from  a  cause  *remot®

"  cause of

Uading  to  its  establishment,  it  is  supposed  to  emanate  from  that  Law,  leads
cause  as  from  its  fouTitain  or  source,  and  to  exist  as  Law  (strictly  ^^^*
so  called),  independently  of  the  position  or  institution  which  it
receives  from  the  sovereign  or  state.

The  grossness  of  this  confusion  of  ideas  may  be  shewn
briefly  and  clearly  by  a  fanuliar  example.  In  common  talk,
though  not  in  technical  language,  an  Act  of  our  own  Parliament
is  sometimes  named  after  t^e  person  who  proposed  it  or  intro-
duced it  as  a  bill  Now  since  it  derives  its  name  from  the
Lord  or  Conmioner  who  introduced  it,  and  since  its  introduction
by  him  was  amongst  the  causes  leading  to  its  enactment,  it
follows  (by  analogy)  that  he,  and  not  Parliament^  was  its  source
or  author.  Grenville  or  Eldon  was  clearly  the  conditor  or
founder  of  Grenville's  or  Eldon's  Act.  For  is  it  not  called
Grenville's  or  Eldon's  Act,  and  did  not  the  introduction  of  the
bill  by  Grenville  or  Eldon  precede  the  act  of  the  Legislature  ?

According  to  the  suppositions  which  I  have  now  ex-  Supposi-
amined,  Customary  Law,  and  law  formed  on  the  opinions  of  thTg^ve-
private  lawyers,  obtain  as  positive  law  independently  of  sovereign  reign

.1 ..  merely  de-

authority.  c^ampre-

By  certain  writers  on  general  jurisprudence,  a  similar  sup-  existing
position  has  been  made  in  respect  to  ail  law. The  law  (say  criticised,
they), which  obtains in  any  conmiunity  is  not  arbitrary  or
capricious. It  is caused by  the  circumstances  in  which  the
society  is  placed ; or  the  sovereign  is  determined  to  make  it,
and  to  make  it  what  it  is,  by  those  very  circumstances. The
Sovereign,  therefore,  is  not  the  author  of  Law,  but  merely  describes
or  defines  Law  already  made  to  his  hand.
From  whence  it  follows ;

That  a  law,  and  the  reason  which  determines  its  author  to
make  it,  are  one  and  the  same  thing :  And  that  if  any  private
man  conceive  and  describe  a  law,  which  hits  the  circumstances
in  which  the  society  is  placed,  that  project  of  his  is  parcel  of
the  law  of  the  land,  and  he  a  legislator  and  monarch.

The  origin  of  this  absurd  speculation  is  obvious.  Much  of
the  positive  law  obtaining  in  any  community  is  Custom  turned
into  Law  by  the  adjection  of  the  legal  sanction.  Now,  in  this
case, it may  be  said,  in  a  certain  sense,  that  the  sovereign


$  $0  Law :  Sources  and  Modes.

x'y  y  ^ti¥:ri\ifA  ^  4e6oe»  law  pre-«xktmg ;  espedaOj  if  tbe  custom,
>  JMx  sA^jlA^  \jy  the  wveniga,  take  the  shape  of  a  statute.  The
rule  exifsVfA  aa  cusumk  in  a  compaiatnrelT  Tague  foim,  and  is
tUsnf:ri\Mid  more  accurately  in  the  statute.  Thoo^  it  is  manifest
that  if  the  sovereign  merely  described  the  custom,  that  descrip-
ti/m  would  not  make  it  Law.  The  description^  completion,
and  c^/rrection  of  positive  morality,  are  as  much  an  end  for
which  fiolitical  government  is  wanted,  as  the  obtaining,  by  its
establbhment,  a  more  cogent  sanction.

But  tlie  Sovereign  makes  it  law,  not  by  the  mere  descrip-
tion, but  by  the  sanction  with  which  he  clothes  it


LECTURE XXXI.

JUS GENTIUiL


Lk<t. 1  NOW  proceed  to  consider  the  jus  gentium  of  the  earlier  Boman
lawyers,  and  the  distinction  between  jus  gentium  and  dvik,  as
underHtood  by  them  and  by  the  classical  jurists. My  chief
motive  for  this  inquiry  is  the  intimate  connexion  of  the  Boman
juH  (jvntium  with  equity,  when  equity  means  a  department  of
])()8itive  law,  and  not  some  standard  to  which,  in  the  opinion  of
the  writer  or  speaker,  positive  law  should conform,  nor  the
arbitrary  pleasure  of  judges,  deciding  against  law,  nor  the  species
of  judicial  legislation  in  the  guise  of  interpretation  or  construc-
tion, by  which  the  i)recepts  of  some  positive  law  are  extended
or  roHtricted. The  equity  of  which  I  am  now  speaking  includes
as well  the  Ilomon  jus  prcetorium  as  our own equity ; the
one  introduced  by  the  edicts  of  the  Praetors  in  the  way  of  direct
legislation :  Uie  other  by  English  Chancellors,  as  judges  exercis-
ing tlioir  extiniordinary  jurisdiction. As  I  shall  hereafter  shew,
noiUior  of  these  is  a  law  of  a  distinct  class. The  jus  prcetorium
is  statute  law,  or  law  in  the  direct  form,  emanating  from  a  sub-
onliuati)  legislature :  our  own  equity  is  partly  Acts  of  Parliament,
jHivtly  law introilueed  in the  judicial  manner  by  decrees  of
exception,  w  decisions  of  an  extraordinary  tribunal All  the
s^wX  and  jargon  by  which  the  subject  has  been  obscured,  arises
h\au  tlie  name. This  portion  of  the  law  is  called  equity ;  and
oquitv.  OS  denoting  pnetorian  and  chancery  law,  is  frequently
uwdexstiHxl  by  talkers  and  writers  on  the  subject  in  one  of  the
other  and  uumervnis  meanings  which  are  aUachevl  to  that  slippery
ex)xres:jdi>n. By  stating  the  history  of  the  phrase,  I  shidl  be


Jus  Gentium.  551

enabled  to  dispel  the  darkness  in  which  it  is  involved ;  but  in Lect.

XXXI

order  to  state  the  history  of  the  term  equity,  I  must  explain  the v "^^ .
original  meaning  of  jus  gentium,  and  the  meanings  which  may
afterwards  be  annexed  to  that  term  and  to  the  partly  corre-
sponding, partly disparate expression,  jus  naturale. I shall
accordingly  deal  with  these  subjects  in  the  following  order.

First;  I  shaU  endeavour  to  explain the  meaning  of  the  Different
term  jus  gentium,  as  understood  by  the  Roman  lawyers,  before  ^^f^^
thej  imported  into  their  own  system  of  positive  law,  notions  or  geiuium  at
principles  borrowed  from  the  philosophy  of  the  Greeks.  periods*

Secondly ; Having  explained  the  meaning  of  the  term  as  i-  Ancient
understood  by the  earlier  Boman  Lawyers,  I shall state  its  La^.*
meaning  as  used  by  Justinian  in  the  Institutes  and  Pandects,  or  2.  Classical
rather  as  used  by  the  jurists  styled  classical,  of  whose  writings,
or  excerpts  from  whose  writings,  the  Institutes  and  Pandects  are
principally  composed.

To  these  lawyers,  who  lived  between  the  birth  of  Cicero,  or  of
his  friend  Servius  Sulpicius,  and  the  reign  of  Alexander  Severus
in  the  beginning  of  the  third  century,  the  Eoman  law  owes  the
regularity  and  symmetry  of  its  form  and  the  matchless  consist-
enqr  of  its  parts.  But  in  spite  of  their  manly  sense  and  admir-
able logic,  they  unluckily  introduced  into  their  expositions  of
their  own  positive  system,  notions  or  principles  drawn  from  the
Greek  philosophers,  with  which  empty  declaimers  have  been
hugely  taken,  but  which  have  no  connexion  with  the  system  on
which  they  are  injudiciously  struck,  and  which  we  must  detach
from  the  fabric  before  we  can  perceive  the  beauty  of  its  pro-
portions, and  feel  a  due  admiration  for  the  scientific  correctness
and  elegance  of  its  structure.  Among  these  notions  I  am  com-
pelled to  rank  the  jtis  gentium,  or  as  it  is  often  termed  jits
naturale,  as  understood  by  the  classical  jurists,  and  as  it  appears
in  the  Institutes  and  Pandects.  Jus  gentium,  otherwise  jics
naiurale,  differs  from  the  jus  gentium  of  the  earlier  Eoman  law,
and  tallies  with  the  natural  law  of  the  moderns.  Accordingly,
the  phrase,  as  used  by  the  classical  jurists,  is  ambiguous.  It
sometimes  denotes  that  portion  of  positive  law  which  forms  a
constituent  part  of  every  body  of  law ;  which  obtains  as  law  in
every  independent  society  that  has  ascended  to  a  state  of  govern-
ment But,  instead  of  denoting  a  portion  of  positive  law,  it
sometimes  denotes  the  standard  to  which,  in  the  opinion  of  the
writer  or  speaker,  positive  law  ought  to  conform.

Thirdly ; From  the  jus  gentium  of  the  older  Eoman  law,  8.  Ulpian's
and  from  the  jus  gentium  or  naturale  of  the  Classical  Jurists,  I  ^^^n^^'


552  Law :  Sources  and  Modes,

Leot. shall  advert  to  a  jwi  naturale  (a  mirum  jus  naturale  !)  which  I
V ^ V take  the  liberty  of  styling  '  Ulpian's  Law  of  Nature/

In  two  or  three  excerpts  from  Ulpian  which  are  given  in  the
beginning  of  the  Pandects,  and  one  of  which  also  occurs  at  the
beginning  of  Justinian's  Institutes,  he  opposes  to  that  jvs  gentium
which  tallies  with  the  law  natural  of  the  moderns,  a  certain
jus  TvaturaU  common  to  man  and  beast: — 'Jus  quod  natura
omnia  animalia  docuit'

This  last-mentioned  jus  naiurale  (which,  as  I  shall  shew
hereafter,  accords  with  an  admired  conceit  of  Hooker  and
Montesquieu)  seems  to  have  been  taken  by  the  good  Ulpian  from
certain  inept  speculations  of  certain  Stoic  philosophers.  Since
it  is  peculiar  to  Ulpian,  and  since  no  attempt  to  apply  it  occurs
in  the  Pandects  or  Institutes,  it  can  scarcely  be  considered  the
natural  Law  of  th^  Bomans,  nor  can  it  be  fairly  imputed  to  the
body  of  the  Classical  Jurists;  who  (heaven  knows)  have  enough  to
answer  for,  in  that  they  adopted  from  the  Greeks  the  other  jus
naturale,  and  were  thus  the  remote  authors  of  that  modem  Law
of  Nature  which  has  so  thoroughly  perplexed  and  obscured  the
sciences  of  Jurisprudence  and  Ethics.

Having  premised  these  brief  explanations,  I  proceed  to  the
jus  gentium  of  Eoman  origin,  or  of  the Eoman  lawyers  who
preceded  the  Classical  Jurists.
Statement  According  to  the  Boman  Law,  a  member  of  an  independent

gentium'  i^^tion,  not  in  alliance  with  the  Roman  people,  had  no  rights  as
of  the  against  Eomans,  or  as  between  himself  and  other  foreigners  or
Roman  aliens.  And  even  a  member  of  an  independent  nation,  the  ally
Lawyers,  of  the  Roman  People,  had  no  rights  (as  against  Bomans  or
^^^  foreigners),  except  the  rights  conferred  on  members  of  that  nation
Law,  by  the  provisions  of  the  fcedus  or  alliance.

^^^"  When  I  say  that  the  members  of  an  independent  nation,  noi

riglits. in  alliance  with  the  Roman  People,  had  no  rights  as  against  Eomans
or  foreigners,  I  understand  the  proposition  with  limitations.

When  a  member  of  any  such  nation  was  residing  in  the
Rom/an  territory,  it  is  probable  that  his  person  was  protected
from  violence  and  insult :  And,-  although  he  was  incapable  of  ac-
quiring by  transfer  or  succession,  or  of  suing  upon  any  contract
into  which  he  had  affected  to  enter,  goods  actually  in  his  posses-
sion were  probably  his  goods,  as  against  all  who  could  shew  no
title  whatever.  Unless  we  understand  the  proposition  with  these
limitations,  a  peregrinus  or  alien,  not  a  socius  or  ally  of  the
Eoman  people,  was  obnoxious  to  murder  and  spoliation  at  every
instant,  when  dwelling  on  Eoman  soil


Jus  Gentium — Its  History.  553

In  short,  the  condition  of  such  an  alien,  whefti  residing  on  the Legt.

XXXI

Bman  terrUary,  probably  resembled  the  condition  of  an  alien v
enmy,  living  within  the  ligeance  of  our  own  King. The  latter
is  protected  from  bodily  harm  and  spoliation,  although  he  is  gene-
ally  incapable  of  suing  in  the  Courts  of  Justice,  and  although  it
s  said  (in  loose  language)  that  he  has  no  rights.

I  believe  it  is  now  usual,  on  the  breaking  out  of  a  war,  for  the
Cing  to  grant  a  special  permission  to  the  enemy's  subjects  to
eside  in  the  country ;  and  under  this  permission  they  have  the
ame  rights  as  alien  friends.  But  Lord  Coke  lays  it  down  posi-
ivdy,  tiiat  an  alien  enemy  has  no  rights ;  by  which  it  can  only
«  meant  that  he  has  not  the  right  of  suing  in  our  courts,  just
8  a  person  outlawed  is  commonly  said  to  carry  caput  lupinuvi,
Ithough  there  is  no  doubt  that  to  kill  him  intentionally  would
16  murder.

But,  taking  the  proposition  with  the  limitations  which  I  have
QSt  suggested,  the  members  of  an  independent  nation,  not  in
K)sitive  alliance  with  the  Boman  people,  had  no  rights,  which
he  Boman  Tribunals  would  enforce.  For  although  they  were
lot  positively  enemies  of  the  Eoman  People,  neither  were  they
xwitively  its  allies  or  friends.  And,  agreeably  to  the  maxim
irhich  prevailed  in  every  nation  of  antiquity,  they  were  therefore
X)nsidered  by  the  Eoman  Law  as  not  existing.

This  unsocial  maxim  (of  which  there  are  vestiges  even  in
VIodem  Europe)  obtained  in  the  Eoman  Law  from  the  very
foundation  of  the  city  to  the  age  of  Justinian.  It  is  laid  down
broadly  in  an  excerpt  in  the  Pandects,  '  that  every  people,  not
in  alliance  with  vs,  keep  everything  of  ours  which  they  can
contrive  to  take ;  whilst  we,  in  return,  appropriate  everything  of
theirs  which  happens  to  fall  into  our  hands.*  'Si  cum  gente  aliqua
Qeque  amicitiam,  neque  hospitium,  neque  fcedus  amicitim  causd
factum  habemus,  hi  hostes  quidem  non  sunt.  Quod  autem  ex  nostro
mI  eos  pervenit,  illorum  fit ;  et  liber  homo  noster  ab  eis  captus
senrus  fit  eorum. Idemque  est,  si  ab  illis  ad  nos  aliquid  perveniat/

It  may  therefore  be  affirmed  generally,  that,  according  to
he  Eoman  Law  (and  according  to  the  law  of  every  nation  of
Jitiquity),  the  members  of  a  foreign  and  independent  com-
Qonity  had  no  Eights :  Eights  which  they  might  have  acquired
J  virtue  of  any  positive  alliance,  being  created  specially  by  the
provisions  of  the  particular  treaty,  and  by  way  of  exception
rom  the  exclusive  and  general  maxim.

From the  puri  peregrini  or  aliens  (or  from  members of  Condition


554


Law  :  Sources  amd  Modes,


XXXI


Diffi'
enities

ffoni  wtAr
yomtion.


i


ff/rtyfn  and  imdepemdmi  nafOaosu  I  tmii  lo  the  members  of  the
cfMomaiutks  wfakJi  fcsmerir  Imd  been  iwiependent,  bat  which
had  been  sobdiKd  br  the  Soman  amB,  and  bm^lit  into  a  state
fA  sobjectkn  to  the  Boman  Commonwealth.

The  members  of  an  mdependent  oommimitT  sabdned  by  the
Boman  arms,  were  placed  in  a  peeoliar  position.  Thej  were
nc4  admitted  to  the  r^fats  of  Boman  Citixens,  nor  were  they
reduced  to  the  serrile  conditicMi  and  stiii^Kd  ci  all  right&
Generally  spealm^  they  retained  their  ancient  government  and
their  ancient  laws,  so  far  as  the  continnance  of  those  insti-
tntions  consisted  with  a  state  of  snbjecticm  to  the  Boman
Commonwealth.

It  is  cleariy  laid  down  in  the  Digests,  that,  miless  the
sovereign  l^;islatare  has  spedficaDy  directed  the  contrary,  the
judge  shaU  consult,  in  the  first  instance,  the  law  peculiar  to  the
particular  region :  And  that  the  Law  of  Bome  itself  ('jus  quo
nrbs  Boma  utitur ')  shall  not  be  applied  to  the  case  which  awaits
decision,  unless  the  law  peculiar  to  the  particular  r^on  shall
afiord  no  solution  of  the  l^al  difficulty.

Such  being  the  condition  of  the  conquered  and  subject
nations,  the  following  difficulties  inevitably  arose.

Inasmuch  as  those  conquered  and  subject  nations  were  not
incorporated  with  the  conquering  and  sovereign  community,
their  members  had  no  rights  as  against  Boman  Citizens,  accord-
ing to  the  ancient  and  strict  law  obtaining  in  Bome  itselfl  For,
during  the  period  in  which  that  law  arose,  those  conquered  and
subject  nations  were  foreign  and  independent  societies;  and
agreeably  to  the  unsocial  maxim  which  I  have  already  explained,
their  members  had  no  rights  which  the  Boman  tribunals  would
enforce.

And,  agreeably  to  the  same  maxim,  members  of  one  of  those
nations  had  no  rights  as  against  members  of  another.  For,
although  those  nations  were  now  subject  to  their  common
sovereign,  Rome,  they  had  been  foreign  and  independent  nations.
vnth  reference  to  one  (mother,  as  well  as  with  reference  to  the
dominant  nation  which  had  beaten  and  subdued  them  alL  In
consequence,  therefore,  of  the  maxim  to  which  I  have  alluded,
the  law  peculiar  to  any  of  those  subject  nations  imparted  no
rights  to  the  members  of  another  community.

Consequently,  whenever  a  controversy  arose  between  a
Boman  and  a  Provincial,  or  between  a  provincial  of  one  and
a  provincial  of  another  Province,  there  was  no  law  applicable  to
the  case,  and  the  party  who  had  suffered  the  damage  was  left


Jus  Gentium — Its  History.  555

without  redress. As  between Eomans  and  prorincials,  or  as liEcr.

XXXI

between  provincials  of  one  and  provincials  of  another  Province, . " " ^
the  Boman Law  afforded  no  remedy. For  the  Boman  Law
acknowledged  no  rights  in  any  but  Boman  Citizens.

In  either  of  the  same  cases,  the  particular  law  of  any  par-
ticular Province  was  equally  inefficacious.  For  the  people  of
that  Province  had  been  an  independent  community ;  whose  law
(like  that  of  Bome)  acknowledged  no  rights  in  any  but  its  own
members.

To  meet  such  cases,  there  was  a  manifest  necessity  for  a  Creation  of
svstem  of  rules  which  should  embrace  all  the  nations  composing  ^^
the  Boman  Empire:  which  should serve as  a  supplement  or  grinus,
subsidium  to  the  Law  of  Bome  itself,  and  to  each  of  the  various  ^teHus^
systems  of  provincial  law  obtaining  in  the  conquered  territory, tice  m

The  obvious  and  urgent  want  was  supplied  in  the  following  between
manner : —  Romans

In  the  earlier  ages  of  Bome,  and  before  she  had  extended  ^^  of
her  empire  beyond  the  bounds  of  Italy,  the  inconvenience  which  l^iti^
I  have  tried  to  explain  inevitably  arose,  in  consequence  of  the  between
unsocial  character  of  the  old  Boman  Law,  and  of  the  equally  mem^"
exclusive  character  of  the  various  systems  of  law  obtaining  in  those
the Italian States which the Boman people had subdued,  ^^^j^^
Accordingly,  in  addition  to  the  ancient  Praetor  (who  judged  in  of  any
civil  questions  between  Boman  Citizens,  and  agreeably  to  the  law  ^ '
peculiar  to  the  Urhs  Boma),  a  Praetor  was  appointed  to  determine
the  civil  cases  which  arose  from  the  relations  between  the  vic-
torious republic  and  the  subject  or  dependent  conmiunities.

This  new  Magistrate  (who  resided  in  Bome  itself,  but  who
seems  to  have  made  periodical  circuits  through  the  conquered
States  of  Italy)  exercised  ci\'il  jurisdiction  in  the  following
cases :  namely — 1st,  in  all  questions  of  controversies  between
Roman  citizens  and  members  of  the  Italian  States  which  were
rassals  and  dependents  of  the  Boman  people ;  2ndly,  between
members  of  any  one  of  these  vassal  states  and  members  of  any
other ;  3rdly,  between  members  of  subject  states  when  residing
in  Bome  itself;  which  might  be  considered  as  a  distinct  class  of
questions,  because,  if  the  parties  were  members  of  the  same
community,  the  dispute  was  properly  decided  by  the  law  of  that
community.

This  new  magistrate  was  styled  '  Prcetor  Peregrinus:'  Not
l-ecause  his  jurisdiction  was  restricted  to  questions  between
forei{jfner8 ; but because the questions,  over  which  his  juris-


5  5  6  Law :  Sources  and  Modes.

Lect.  diction  extended,  arose  more  freqiiently  between  foreigners  and
V  ^  V  foreigners  than  between  foreigners  and  Eoman  Citizens :  '  Quod
plerumque  inter  peregrinos  jus  dicebat'

In  the  strict  sense  of  the  term  PeregrinuSy  the  parties,  whose
causes  he  commonly  determined,  were  not  peregrini,  or  foreigners,
but  friends  and  vassals  of  Eome.  But  since  they  had  been
foreigners  before  their  subjection  to  Rome,  and  had  not  been
admitted  afterwards  to  the  rights  of  Eomans,  they  were  still
entitled  peregrini  or  foreigners  (as  distinguished  from  Cives  or
Boman  Citizens).

As  I  have  remarked  already,  it  is  not  probable  that  a
foreigner  (in  the  strict  acceptation  of  the  term)  could  regularly
maintain  a  civil  action  before  any  of  the  Eoman  Tribunals.

After  the  appointment  of  the  Prastor  Peregrinus,  the  ancient
and  ordinary  Praetor  was  styled  (by  way  of  distinction)  Praetor
Urbanus :  Partly  because  his  tribunal  was  immovably  fixed  at
Eome,  and  partly  because  he  decided  between  Eomans  and
Eomans,  agreeably  to  the  peculiar  law  of  their  own  pre-
eminent City.

Law  Ad'  From  the  appointment  of  the  Prcetor  Peregrintis,  and  the

^j^fgtor causes  which  led  to  the  creation  of  his  new  and  extraordinary
Pere-  office,  I  proceed  to  the  law  which  he  administered.

In  questions  between  foreigners  and  Eomans,  and  between
foreigners  of  different  dependent  States,  the  Jirst  Praetor  Pere-
grinus  must  have  begun  with  judging  arbitrarily.  For  neither
the  law  of  Eome  herself,  nor  the  law  obtaining  in  any  of  the
vassal  nations,  afforded  a  body  of  rules  by  which  such  questions
could  be  solved.

But  a  body  of  subsidiary  law,  applicable  to  such  questions,
was  gradually  established  by  the  successive  Edicts  which  he  and
his  successors  (imitating  the  Prcetorcs  Urhani)  emitted  on  their
accession  to  ofiSce.  This  subsidiary  law,  thus  established  by  the
Foreign  Praetors,  was  probably  framed,  in  part,  upon  general
considerations  of  general  utility.  But,  in  the  main,  it  seems  to
have  been  an  abstradum  (gathered  by  comparison  and  induction)
from  the  peculiar  Law  of  Eome  herself,  and  the  various  peculiar
systems  of  the  subject  or  dependent  nations.

Perpetually  engaged  in  judging  between  foreigners  and
citizens  of  Eome,  and  between  foreigners  of  different  dependent
States,  these  magistrates  were  led  to  compare  the  several  systems
of  law  which  obtained  in  the  several  communities  composing  the
Eoman  Umpire. And,  comparing  the  several  systems  obtaining


Jus  Gentium — Its  History,  557

in  those  several  communities,  they  naturally  extracted  from  those Lkot.

XXXI

several  systems  a  system  of  a  liberal  character ;  free  from  the ^
nanrow  peculiarities  of  each  particular  system,  and  meeting  the
common  necessities  of  the  entire  Eoman  World.

This  body  of  law,  thus  introduced  by  successive  edicts,
acquired  the  name  of  jus  gmiium,  and  this  was  the  meaning
originally  annexed  to  that  ambiguous  and  obscure  expression.

It  probably  acquired  this name  for  one  of  the  following  Origin  of
reasons: — First,  as  extending  to all communities  (including  y^*^™
Bome  itself)  which  formed  part  of  the  Roman  Empire,  it  was  Hvm.
properly  jus  gentium  or  jus  omnium  gentium,  as  opposed  to  the
law  peculiar  to  Eome  and  contradistinguished  from  the  law  of  a
single dependent Stata This  is  the  likeliest  origin  of  the
expression. Secondly,  though applied between Romans and
foreigners,  as  well  as  between members of diflferent  foreign
States,  the  questions  or  controversies,  which  it  was  framed  to
meet,  naturally  arose  pUrwmgue  inter  peregrinos;  but  peregHni
or  foreigners  when  contradistinguished  fronv  Bomani  dves,  are
frequently  styled  gentes. Thus,  Gives  and  gentes, — Jews  and
gentiles, — ^''EXXiyi/e?  xal  BdpfiapoL, — express  distinctions  pre-
cisely similar ;  they  denote  persons  other  than  the  countrymen
of  the  person  employing  them,  as  opposed  to  his  own  country-
men. Jus  gentium,  therefore,  does  not  denote  law  obtaining
universally  or  generally,  but  law conversant  about  gentes  or
foreigners — namely,  those  foreigners  who  were  subjects  of  the
Boman  People  and  with  whom  it  was  most  concerned.

Extending  to  all  the  nations,  which  composed  the  Roman  Origin  of
Empire,  and  not  being  peculiar  to  one  community,  it  was  also  g^^^"^
entitled  jus  cequabUe,  jus  cequum  or  ceguitas,  that  is,  universal  or
general  law  as  opposed  to  partial  or  particular. Nothing  can
be  homelier  than  the  origin  of  the  term  equity,  or  less  related
to  the  jargon  in  which  it  has  subsequently  been  involved. But
instead  of  denoting  this  universal  or  equable  law,  cequitas  some-
times denoted conformity to that law; as  justitia  denoted
conformity  to  jus. Since  the  law  denoted  by  the  term  equity,
or  the  law  conformity  to  which  was  denoted  by  the  term  equity,
was  a  law  of  an  impartial  or  liberal  character,  equity  came  by  a
natural  transference  of  signification,  to  mean  fairness. It  was
consequently  used  by  every  innovating  judge,  who  sought  to
cover  his  innovations  by  a  specious  and  imposing  name ;  and  by
this  obvious  and  effectual  artifice,  the  term  was  extended  from
the  law  established  by  the  prcetores  peregrini,  to  the  law  created
by  the  ordinary  prsetors,  and  by  our  own  chancellors.

VOL.  n.  E


558  Law :  Sources  and  Modes.

Lbot.  After  the  dominion  of  Borne  had  extended  beyond  Italy,

.  ^  V  the  subsidiary  Law  introduced  into  Italy  by  the  edicts  of  the
Extension  Prcetores  peregrini,  was  adopted  and  improved  by  the  Edicts  of
^^enHurn^  ^®  varioiis  Eoman  (Jovemors,  who  (under  the  various  names  of
treated  by  Proconsuls,  Prsetors,  Propraetors,  or  Presidents)  represented  the
tores  pere- Eoman  People  in  the  outlying  Provinces.

9J^'^^  For  the  governors  of  these  outlying  provinces (like  the

lying  pro- Prsetor  Peregrinus,  whose  jurisdiction  was  confined  to  Italy,  and

vinces. jjj^^  ^.j^g  proper  magistrates  of  the  Boman  People)  were  tacitly  or

expressly  authorised  to  legislate,  as  well  as  to  judge; 'jus

edicere '  as  well  as  *  dicere/

As  between  Provincials  of  his  own  province,  the  governor  of
an  outlying  province  regularly  administered  the  law  which  had
obtained  in  the  province  before  its  subjection  to  Borne.  As
between  Bomans  and  Bomans  residing  within  his  province,  he
regularly  administered  the  law  pecidiar  to  Bome  hersel£  But
neither  the  peculiar  law  of  his  own  province,  nor  the  peculiar
law  of  Bome  (in  its  old  and  unsocial  form),  would  apply  to  civil
cases  between  Bomans  and  Provincials  or  between  Provincials
of  different  provinces.

In  questions,  therefore,  between  Boman  Citizens  and  Pro-
vincials, or  between  Provincials residing  in  his  province  (hut
belonging  to  different  provinces),  he  administered  the  subsidiary
law  created  by  the  Prcetores  Peregrini,  or  a  similiar  subsidiary
Resumed law created by himself  or his predecessors. Consequently,

*?Ae^8ub-  ^/^^  ^"^^  ^^^  ^^®  dominion  of  Bome  had  extended  beyond
sidi^  law  Italy,  a  law  was  administered  in  Italy  (by  the  Prcetores  Ptfrtr
in^n grinx)  in  aid  of  the  law  peculiar  to  Bome  herself,  or  to  any  of
Roman the  Italian  communities  which  Bome  had  subdued. Aftefr  the
™^*^' dominion  of  Bome  had  extended  beyond  Italy,  the  same  or  a
similar  law  was  administered  in  the  outlying  provinces  (by  their
respective  Presidents  or  Governors),  in  aid  of  the  law  peculiar
to  Bome  herself,  or  of  the  law  obtaining  in  any  of  those  pro-
vinces before  its  subjection  to  the  conquering  City. And  this
subsidiary  law,  thus  administered  in  Italy  and  in  the  outlying
provinces,  was  applied  to  civil  questions  between  citizens  of
Bome  and  members  of  the  nations  subject  to  Bome,  or  between
members  of  any  of  those  nations  and  members  of  any  other,
ity  of  this  Since  the  want  which  led  to  the  creation  of  this  subsidiary

subsidiary  j^w  was  the  same  in  Italy  and  the  outlying  Provinces,  and  since
through-  aU  its  immediate  authors  were  representatives  of  the  same
RoiMn  sovereign,  it  naturally  was  nearly  uniform  throughout  the  Boman
Empire. World,  notwithstanding  the  multiplicity  of  its  sources. The


Jus  Gentium — Its  History.  559

Presidents  of  the  outlying  provinces  naturally  borrowed  from Lect.
the  Edicts  of  PrcBtores  PeregHni ;  and  the  Proetores  Peregrini  as ^
naturally  adopted  the  improvements  which  the  Edicts  of  those
Presidents  introduced

As  distinguished  from  the  system  of  law  which  was  peculiar  TJ"*  subei-
to  Borne  herself,  and  also  from  the  systems  of  law  which  were  was  styled
respectively  peculiar  to  the  subject  or  dependent  communities,  f^^
this  subsidiary  law was styled  jus  gentium,,  or  jvs  omnium  jua
gmiium : the  law  of  all  the  nations  (including  the  conquering  «^^t
and  sovereign  nation)  which  composed  the  Boman  World. As  was  the
being  the  law  common  to  these  various  nations,  or  administered  -j^,^^  ^f
equally  or  universally  to  members  of  these  various  nations,  it  the  earlier
was  also  styled  jus  cequum,  jus  cequdbile,  cequitas :  Though  the  LaOTOTs.
temi '  aquitas '  seems  to  have  denoted  properly,  not  this  common
or  equal  law,  but  conformity  or  consonance  to  this  common  or
equal  law ;  as  the  more  extensive  but  analogous  term  justitia
Mgnifies  conformity  or  consonance  to  any  jus  or  law  of  any  kind
or  sort And  the  jus  gentium  which  I  have  now  attempted  to
describe,  was  the  only  jus  gentium  that  was  known  to  the  Boman
Law,  till  the  jus  gentiumi  or  naturale,  which  occurs  in  Justinian's
compilations,  was  imported  into  it,  by  the  jurists  who  are  styled
Classical,  from  speculations  of  Greek  Philosophers  on  Law  and
Morals.

Originally,  the  jus  gentium  which  I  have  attempted  to
describe,  was  not  parcel  of  the  proper  Boman  Law,  or  the  law
peculiar  to  Bome  herself.

But  the  first  arose  in  an  age  comparatively  enlightened,  and
was  a  product  of  large  experience ;  whilst  the  last  had  arisen  in
an  age  comparatively  barbarous,  and  was  a  product  of  narrow
experience.  The  jus  gentiumi,  therefore,  was  so  conspicuously
hetter  than  the  proper  Boman  Law  that  naturally  it  gradually
passed  into  the  latter ;  or  became  incorporated  with  the  latter.

It  influenced  the  legislation  of  the  Populus,  Plebs,  and
Senate;  it  influenced  the  opinions  held  and  emitted  by  the
Prudentes  ;  and  (above  all)  it  served  as  a  pattern  to  the  Prastores
Urhani,  in  the  large  and  frequent  innovations  which  they  made
by  their  general  edicts,  upon  the  old,  rude,  and  inconmiodious
law  peculiar  to  the  Urhs  Boma,

So  much  indeed  of  the  jus  gentium  passed  into  the  jus
prcetorium  (or  the  law  which  the  Prastores  Urbani  created  by
their  general  edicts),  that  one  of  the  names  given  to  the  latter
was  probably  transferred  to  it  from  the  former.  It  probably
was  named  cequitas  (or  jus  cequum)  after  that  cequal  or  commxm


56o  Law :  Sources  and  Modes,

Lect. law,  from  which  it  had  borrowed  the  bulk  or  a  large  portion  of

XXXI  o A

w ^ > its  provisions.

^quitas  The  law  formed  by  the  Edicts  of  the  Frcetores  Urbani  (or

the  term,  ^y^e  Praetors  who  sat  immovably  in  the  Urbs  Roma,  and  admin-
istered justice  between  Roman  Citizens)  was  commonly  called
jus  prcetorium.  But  having  borrowed  largely  from  the  jtis
gentium,  it  was  also  styled,  like  the  jus  gerUium,  '  cequitas :'  A
name  which  was  extended  to  it  the  rather,  for  this  reason : —
that  cequitas  had  become  synonymous  with  general  utility  ;  and
that  the  jus  prcetorium  (when  contrasted  with  the  old  law,  to
which  it  was  a  corrective  and  supplement)  was  distinguished  by
a  spirit  of  impartiality  or  fairness,  or  by  its  regard  for  the
interests  of  the  weak  as  well  as  for  the  interests  of  the  strong:
e.g.,  It  enlarged  the  rights  of  women :  gave  to  the  JUius  families
rights  against  the  father ;  to  the  members  of  the  subject  States
rights  against  Roman  Citizens.
Jua  Civile  Now  after  the  incorporation  of  the  jus  gentium  with  the

u>^u^  proper  Law  of  the  Urhs  Roma,  the  latter  was  distinguishable,
OerUium  and  was  often  distinguished,  into  two  portions — namely,  the  jus
origiiT*^  ^reTi^mm  which  had  been  incorporated  with  it,  and  that  renmant
Near  equi-  of  the  older  law  which  the  jus  gentium  had  not  superseded.

valence  of  ** v  m,

that  dis- ^  being  proper  or  peculiar  to  the  City  of  Rome,  this  remnant

tinction  to  of  the  older  law  (when  contradistinguished  from  the  jus  gentium)

etjuaprx-  was  styled  jus  civile:  that  is  to  say,  the  proper  or  peculiar  Law

toHum,: q{  i^hat  Civitas  or  Independent  State. Though  (as  I  shall  shew

hereafter)  jus  civile  (taken  in  a  larger  meaning)  included  the

whole  of  the  Roman  Law :  the  jus  gentium  which  it  had  borrowed,

as  weU  as  the  jus  civile  (taking  the  expression  in  the  narrower

meaning)  upon  which  the  jiis  gentium  had  been  superinduced.

This  distinction  between  jus  civile  et  gentium  (as  denoting
different  portions  of  the  more  recent  Roman  Law)  nearly  tallied
with  the  distinction  between  jus  civile  et  prcetorium.  For  first;
Though  much  of  the  jiis  Prcetorium  (or  the  law  introduced  by
the  edicts  of  the  Prcetores  Urbani)  was  not  suggested  to  its
authors  by  the  jus  gentium,  most  of  it  was  naturally  formed
upon  the  model  or  pattern  which  that  jus  cequum  presented  to
imitation.

Secondly ;  although  the  incorporation  of  the  latter  with  the
Law  of  the  Urbs  Roma,  was  partly  accomplished  by  acts  of  the
Populvs,  Plebs,  and  Senate,  still  it  was  principally  effected
through  the  edicts  of  the  Urban  Praetors :  By  whom  (as  I  shall
shew  in  a  future  Lecture)  the  business  of  Civil  Legislation  was
mainly  carried  on.


J  us  Gentium — Its  History.  561

Now  as  most  of  the  jus  prcptorium  consisted  o{fus  gentium,  and  Lect.
as  most  of  the  jus  gentium  (imported  into  the  Roman  Law)  was  ^  ^  >
imported  by  the  edicts  of  those  Praetors,  it  is  not  wonderful  or
remarkable  (considering  the  clumsy  manner  in  which  language
is  usually  constructed)  that  fus  Prcctorium  and  jus  gentium  were
considered  synonymous  expressions : — that  the  distinction  be-
tween JUS  civile  et  fus  gentium,  and  the  distinction  between  ju^
civile  et  jus  prcetorium,  were  considered  as  equivalent  distinctions
(although,  in  truth,  they  were  disparate).

And (for the same reason) the  extension of the term  iEqoitas.
'wquitds^ was  restricted to the  jus  prcetorium; though the
terai  might  have  been  extended  to  a  lex,  or  a  Senatus-consultum
which  had borrowed its  provisions  or  principle  from  the  jus
gentium.

The  jus  gentium  therefore  of  the  earlier  Eoman  Lawyers,
was  the  common  law  of  the  community  composing  the  Eoman
world,  as  contradistinguished  to  the  particular  systems  which
were  respectively  peculiar  to  those  several  communities  or  gentes.

But  in  consequence  of  this  incorporation  of  the  jus  gentium  Absorp-
with  the  law  peculiar  to  the  Urbs  JRoma,  the  jus  gentium,  as  a  ge^iumhy
separate  system,  eventually  disappeared. For  the  proper  Eoman  proper  law
Law,  having  adopted  and  absorbed  it,  became  applicable  to  the  jioma,
casa  which  it  had  been  made  to  meet :  That  is  to  say,  to  civil
questions  between  Citizens  of  Eome  and  members  of  the  com-
munities which  Eome  had  subdued,  or  between  members  of  any
of  those conmiunities  and members  of  any  other. And,  by
consequence,  the  office  of  the  Proctor  Peregrinus  thereafter  fell
into  disuse ;  and  the  Edicts  of  the  Presidents  in  the  various
provinces were thereafter exclusively occupied with purely
provincial  interests.

The Eoman  Law  having  absorbed the  jus  gentium,  and  Causes  of
tending  in  every  direction  to  universality,  had  now  put  off  much  rq^q^
of  its  exclusive  character. Although  that  older  portion  of  it.  Law  for  a
which  was  marked  with  the  distinctive  name  of  jics  civile,  was  jig^^  q^
still  the  peculiar  law  of  Eoman  Citizens,  much  of  the  later  law  jnivereal

Law.

introduced  by  the  people  and  Senate,  and  more  of  the  law
established  by  the  Urban  Praetors,  was  adapted  to  the  conmion
necessities  of  the  entire  Eoman  world.  Hence  the  Law  of  the
Urbs  Bomxi  (though  originally  the  peculiar  law  of  the  dominant
City)  was  applied  {in  subsidium)  to  cases  between  Provincials,
although  the  contending  parties  were  members  of  the  same
province,  and  were  actually  within  the  jurisdiction  of  its  peculiar
tribunaL Owing  to  the  character  of  universality  which  it  thus


562  Law:  Sources  and  Modes.

Lect. acquired,  and  which  was  afterwards  heightened  by  the  labours

V ^ ^ of  the  Classical  Jurists,  the  Eoman  Law  (though  the  law  of  a

single  people  living  in  a  remote  age)  has  obtained  as  auxiliary

law  in  the  nations  of  Modem  Europe,  or  has  been  incorporated

with  their  own  peculiar  systems.

And  here  I  would  remark  that  a  common  law  or  jva  (Bquvm,
nearly  resembling  the  jua  gentium  in  question,  has  obtained  in
almost  every  nation  with  which  we  are  acquainted.*^  For  every
system  which  is  common  to  a  limited  number  of  nations,  or  to
all  the  members  of  a  single  nation,  is  a  jus  gentium  (as  the
phrase  was  understood  by  the  earlier  Eoman  Lawyers)  when
opposed  to  the  particular  systems  of  those  several  communities,
or  to  the  particular  bodies  of  law  obtaining  in  that  one
community.

Wherever,  in  short,  there  coexist  various  systems  of  par-
ticular law,  and  a  general  system,  there  is  a  jus  gentium  (in  the
sense  of  the  older  Boman  Lawyers).

From  the  jus  gentium  of  the  older  Eoman  Law  I  pass  to
the  jus  gentium,  otherwise  jus  naturale,  of  the  Institutes  and
Pandects.

The  jus  gentium  or  naturale  of  the  Institutes  and  Pandects
compiled  by  Justinian,  has  little  or  no  connexion  with  the  jus
gentium^  explained  above.  The  jus  gentium  of  the  Institutes
and  Pandects  was  imported  into  the  Eoman  Law  from  the
systems  of  the  Grecian  philosophers  by  the  jurists  styled
classical :  that  is,  the  juri3ts  who  lived  and  wrote  during  the
period  intervening  between  the  birth  of  Cicero,  and  the  reign  or
death  of  the  Emperor  Alexander  Severus,  and  of  whose  writings
the  Institutes  and  Pandects  are  almost  entirely  composed.
Servius  Sulpicius,  the  friend  of  Cicero,  is  generally,  I  believe,
considered  the  first  of  the  classical  jurists;  Ulpian,  who  held

^ {E.g.)  Roman Law  as  subsidiary  America, which  is  applied  by  Federal

law  of  a  limited  number  of  modem  na-  Courts  in  cases  over  which  the  Constita-

tions. General  Feudal  Law  (or  ahstrac-  tion  has  given  them  jurisdiction,  in  de-

twm,  contained  in  Libri  Feudorum)  as  fault  of  law  made  or  specified  by  the

subsidiary  law  of  a  limited  number  of  Constitution  or  by  Congress,

modem  (or  middle  age)  nations.  Common  Law  of  England,  as  origin-

Ju8  commune  Oermanicum^  since  the  ally  understood : though  original  idea

dissolution  of  the  Empire.  now cut down to Law judiciary  —

Law  Mercantile.  not  made  on  statutes — administered  by

Canon  Law.  Courts  of  Common  Law,  and  obtaining

Jus commune Oermanicum, before  as  Law  throughout  the  BLealm.

dissolution  of  Empire.  Falck, §  124. Blackstone, vol. ii.

Law  contained  in  General Prassian  44  ;  vol.  iv.  67.

Code.  Du  Ponceau's  Jurisdiction  of  Federal

Common  Law  of United States of  Courts.


Jus  Gentium — Its  History.  563

the  post  of  Prsefectus  annonse  and  other  offices  under  Alexander Leot.

XXXI

Seyeros,  closed  the  series.  They  are  esteemed  classical  probably  ^  ^  >
because  many  of  them  lived  in  the  time  of  Augustus  or  in  the
classical,  ages  which  immediately  succeeded  him,  and  those  who
lived  at  a  later  period  retained  the  classical  manner.  The  latin
of  Ulpian,  though  too  declamatory  for  my  taste,  is  by  many
esteemed  the  best  latin  in  the  Pandects.

It  is  said  in  the  Pandects  and  Institutes  of  Justinian,  and  The  dis-
also  in  the  Institutes  of  Gains  (from  which  Justinian's  Institutes  jub  civile
were  principally  copied),  that  every  independent  nation  has  a  ^^^^J^
positive  law  and  morality  (*  leges  et  mores '),  which  are  peculiar  jus  gm-
to  itself,  of  which  the  given  community  is  the  source  or  immedi-  ^**f7*,

'  o  •'  which  was

ate  author,  and  which,  as  being  peculiar  to  that  given  community  made  by
or  dviias,  may  be  styled  aptly  jus  civile :  But  that  every  nation,  J^j -^^^
moreover,  has  a  positive  law  and  morality  which  it  shares  with  and  occurs
every  other  nation ;  of  which  a  natural  reason  is  the  source  or  ^i^»g
immediate  author ;  and  which,  as  being  observed  by  aU  nations,  compila-
may  be  styled  aptly  ^jus  gentium,'  or  'jus  omnium  gentium,'  ^^^'

*  Omnes  populi,  qui  legibus  et  moribus  reguntur,  partim  suo
proprio,  partim  communi  omnium  hominum  jure  utuntur.  Nam
quod  quisque  populus  ipse  sibi  jus  constituit,  id  ipsius  proprium
est,  vocaturque  jus  civile ;  quasi  jus  proprium  ipsius  civitatis.
Quod  vero  naturalis  ratio  inter  omnes  homines  constituit,  id
apud  omnes  populos  peraeque  custoditur,  vocaturque  jus  gentium ;
quad  quo  jure  onmes  gentes  utuntur/

And  the  fus  gentium  described  in  the  foregoing  passage  is
described  in  other  passages  in  the  Pandects  and  Institutes  as
the  'commime  omnium  hominum  (sive  civitatum)  jus:'  the
'antiquius  jus  quod  cum  ipso  genere  humano  proditum  est :'  the
'naturale  jus  quod  vocatur  jus  gentium;  quod  divinfi,  quSdam
providenti^  constitutum,  semper  firmum  atque  immutabUe  per-
manet'

It  is  manifest,  moreover,  from  the  language  of  these  passages
that  the  fus  gentium  occurring  in  Justinian's  compilations  is  the
natural  or  divinum  jus  which  occurs  in  the  writings  of  Cicero ;
and  which  Cicero  himself,  as  well  as  the  Classical  Jurists,  who
probably  were  influenced  by  his  example,  borrowed  from  the
^vauchv  hUaiov,  or  natural  rule  of  right,  conceived  by  Greek
speculators  on  Law  and  Morals.

I  remarked  just  now,  that  the  jus  prcetorium,  or  the  Law
created  by  the  general  edicts  of  the  Prsetores  Urbani,  borrowed
the  bulk,  or  a  large  portion  of  its  provisions,  from  the  jus  gentium
(or  jus  asquum  or  commum),  which  was  properly  of  Eoman  origin.


5  64  Law :  Sources  and  Modes.

Lect.  And  it  is  not  unworthy  of  observation,  that  Cicero's  jvjs  nattirale

XXXI  '  ./

w  is  opposed  to  the  Jus  prcetorium,  and  therefore,  to  the  jus  gentium


which  was  properly  of  Eoman  origin,  as  well  as  to  the  law  which

the  jus  prcctoriwrn  modified,  and  which  was  strictly  peculiar  to

the  Urbs  Eoma.

'Non  a  duodecim  tabulis  (says  Cicero,)  neque  a  Praetoris

edicto, sed penitus, ex intimS, philosophia, haurienda juris

disciplina.'
The  dia-  It  seems  to  follow  from  the  foregoing  statement,  that  the

beSJ^n  distinction  between  jus  civile  and  jus  gentium,  which  occurs  in
jusGivUe  Justinian's  compilations,  is  speculative  rather  than  practical;
^ntivm  ^^^  ^^^^  *'^®  Classical  Jurists  introduced  it  into  their  treatises
which  oc- on  the  Eoman  Law,  rather  to  display  their  acquaintance  with

curs  in  •  •

Justin- the  ethical  philosophy  of  the  Greeks,  than  because  it  was  a  fit

ian's  com- basis  for  a  superstructure  of  legal  conclusions.

u  specula-  Accordingly,  a  legal  inference  drawn  from  the  distinction

tive  rather  j[g  scarcely  to  be  met  with  in  any  of  Justinian's  compilations ;

tical.  though,  since  the  distinction  is  placed  at  the  beginning  of  the

Pandects  and  Institutes,  and  is  there  announced  to  the  reader

with  a  deal  of  formality  and  pother,  one  might  naturally  think

it  the  forerunner  to  a  host  of  important  consequences.

Modes  of  In  the  Institutes,  indeed,  of  Justinian  (following  the  Insti-

^^" tutes  of  Gains),  titles,  or  modes  of  acquisition,  are  divided  into

jure  Hmli,  ciqyjl  and  natural,  or  modes of  acquisition  ex  jure  dvili  and

gentium, niodes  of  acquisition  ex  jv/re  gentium:  the  former,  it  is  said,

being a peculiar oflFspring of the system of positive law

peculiar  to  the  Eoman  Civitas  ;  and  the  latter,  it  is  said,  being

sanctioned legally in all political societies, and sanctioned

morally  or  by  custom  in all  societies  whatever. But this

division of  modes  of  acquisition  is  not  followed  by  a  single

inference. And  (what  is equally  remarkable)  the modes  of

acquiring  obligationes,  or  jura  in  personam,  are  not  divided  in

the  same  manner ;  though  of  these  also,  some  are  common  to

all  or  most  systems  of  law,  and  others  (such  as  stipulatio)  strictly

peculiar  to  the  Eoman  law :  while  if  the  classification  had  been

important  legally,  it  would  have  been  found  in  both  classy  of

modes  of  acquisition. In  truth  the  distinction  between  jus

gentium  and  jvs  civile,  as  thus  understood,  is  of  no  consequence

at  all  in  the  Eoman  law. Certain  obligations,  the  Eoman  jurists

do  style  natural,  but  the  word  has  here  a  singular  and  peculiar

meaning : it  denotes  certain  obligations  which  are  imperfect,

which  the  law  will  not  enforce. In  certain  cases  the  law  is

said  to  reprobate  a  particular  transaction,  but  will  not  set  aside


Jus  Gentium — Its  History.  565

the  transaction  if  done  against  the  law ;  and  though  the  party  may  Leot.
be  morally  bound  to  make  restitution  of  any  advantage  which  he
may  acquire  by  the  transaction  which  the  law  reprobates,  the
law  will  not  enforce  the  obligation.  It  is  then  styled  a  natural
obligation.  For  instance,  a  gambling  transaction  is  said  to  be
void,  and  to  be  reprobated  by  the  law ;  but  if  the  party  has
paid  a  gambling  debt,  he  cannot  afterwards  recover  it.

The  only  instance  occurring  to  me,  in  which  a  consequence
is  built  upon  the  distinction  between  the  jv;s  civile  and  jm
gmiium,  is  the  difiference  which  I  have  formerly  mentioned
between  crimes  with  reference  to  the  cases  in  which  ignorantia
juris  is  an  excusa  Persons  belonging  to  the  classes  quihus  per-
missum  est  jura  ignorare^  are  not  excused  if  they  have  com-
mitted an  offence  against  jus  gentium  or  naturale ;  for  jus
gentium  being  known  naiurali  ratione,  or  by  a  moral  sense  or
instiQct,  the  party  must  have  known  that  he  was  violating  the
law  of  nature,  and  must  have  surmised  that  he  was  violating  the
law  of  the  State,  and  the  plea  of  ignorance  therefore  must  be
false.  In  this  case  a  set  of  inferences  are  deduced  from  the
distinction,  but  this  is  the  only  instance  which  I  can  find.

The  distinction  between  jus  civile  and  jus  prcetorium,  is  just
as  penetrating  and  as  pregnant  with  consequences  as  our  dis-
tinction between  law  and  equity.  But,  as  a  legal  distinction,
that  oijus  civile  ondjus  gentium  is  nearly  barren.

The  jus  naturale  or  gentium  of  the  classical  jurists,  like  the  Double

law  natural  of  their  modem  imitators,  is  ambiguous. It  some-  ^^^^^^°

times  means  that  portion  of  positive  law  which  is  a  constituent  naturale.

part  of  all positive  systems,  and  sometimes the  standard to

which,  in  the  opinion  of  the  writer  or  speaker,  law  should  con-

fonn. For  example,  slavery  in  certain  passages  of  the  classical

jurists,  is  said  to  exist  jure  naturali  or  jure  gentium ; for  the

institution  of  slavery  was  common  to  all  nations  with  which  the

Bomans  were  acquainted. But,  in  other  passages,  it  is  asserted

that  all men  are  naturally  free,  and that the  institution  of

slavery  [is  repugnant  to  the  law  of  nature. Now,  the  law  of

nature  which  authorized  slavery and  that  which  repugns  it

cannot  be  the  same  law  of  nature,  but  must  be  set  or  established

by  hostile  natures. In  the  one  case,  the  writers  were  speaking

of  that  which  is  actually  an  integral  portion  of  all  positive  law ;

in  the  other,  they  were  probably  speaking  of  law  as  it  should

be,  and  styled  the  standard  to  which  it  ought  to  conform,  the

law  of  nature. Again, /ws  civile  is  defined  by  Ulpian  and  others

as  '  quod  neque  in  totum  a  naturali  vel  gentium  recedit,  nee  per


566


Law :  Sources  and  Modes.


Lbot.
XXXI


Of/tM

as  signify-
ing inter-
national
morality.


Ulpian's
rale.


omnia  ei  servit :  Quod  itaque  efficimus,  cum  aliquid  addimus  vel
detrahimus  juri  communi  V  Now,  the  jus  nuturale  or  gentium
as  meaning  an  actual  part  of  all  systems  of  positive  law,  is  not
susceptible  of  detraction  or  abrogation.  It  is/i^  naturale  OTJus
quo  omnes  gerUes  utuntur  ;  precisely,  because  it  is  in  force  every-
where. If  it  were  abrogated  in  any  system,  it  would  lose  the
universality  which  is  essential  to  its  existence.  The  phrase,
therefore,  must  here  mean  something  else ;  probably  the
standard,  the  law  of  God,  as  indicated  naturali  ratione.

Before  I  conclude,  I  shall  advert  to  certain  meanings  otjus
gentium  different  from  those  which  I  have  explained.  It  some-
tunes  seems  to  include  positive  morality,  as  well  as  positive
law,  especially  that  part  of  positive  morality  which  is  styled
international  law,  and  which  is  supposed  to  be  a  constituent
portion  of  all  positive  morality.  As  including  all  law,  and  all
morality  supposed  to  be  general  or  universal,  the  phrase  jus
gentium  necessarily  includes  that  morality  which  exists  inter
gentes.  It  is  not  certain  that  the  phrase  is  ever  used  in  this
sense  by  the  Roman  Jurists,  but  certainly  Livy  and  Sallust  so
employ  it  International  law  is  styled  by  Gains,  as  by  Grotius
and  others  of  the  modems,  jus  belli  ;  by  other  Soman  jurists  it
is  termed  jus  fedale  ;  and  even  by  Livy  and  Sallust  jus  gentium
is  not  applied  specially  to  international  law,  though  it  includes
that  with  many  other  objects.

In  some  modem  treatises,  almost  any  system  of  law  which
enters  into  many  positive  systems,  is  styled  jus  gentium,  Spel-
man,  for  example,  styles  the  feudal  law  the  jas  gentium  or  law
of  nature  of  this  western  world.  The  same  notion  which  the
Soman  Jurists  expressed  by  thei  term  is  here  applied  on  a
different  scale.  In  the  same  manner  the  name  jus  gentium
might  be  given  to  the  Soman  Law  as  applied  in  the  states  of
modern  Europe,  since  it  forms  a  part  of  almost  all  their  systems
of  law.

Agreeably  to  the  plan  which  I  have  sketched  in  the  outset
of  this  lecture,  I  should  next  examine  the  jus  naturale,  which  I
style,  for  the  sake  of  distinction,  Ulpian's  law  of  nature — a  law
which,  according  to  him,  is  common  to  man  and  beast;  and
which  he  contradistinguishes  from  that  jxis  gentium  or  naturcUe,
which  tallies  with  the  law  natural  of  modem  jurists  and
moralists.

But  since  Ulpian's  law  natural  is  peculiar  to  himself,  since
it  only  occurs  in  two  or  three  passages  of  Justinian's  Institutes
and  Pandects,  and  has  no  influence  upon  the  matter,  or  even


Law  Natural  and  Positive.  $67

upon  the  farm,  of  the  Soman  Law,  I  shall  not  occupy  yonr Lbot.
time  with  it

Did  it  not  stand  at  the  beginning  of  the  Institutes  and
Pandects,  and  were  it  not  the  source  of  certain  conceits  which
have  gotten  good  success,  I  should  have  dismissed  it  without
eiaminatioiL  But  since  it  occupies  the  foremost  place  in
Justinian's  Institutes  and  Pandects,  and  since  it  is  manifestly
the  groundwork  of  more  imposing  nonsense,  it  possesses  an
extrinsic  or  accidental  importance  which  demands  a  passing  and
brief  notice.


LECTUEE XXXII.

LAW  NATUKAL  AND  POSITIVE.


From  Uie  fus  gentiwrn  of  the  earlier  Eoman  Lawyers  I  proceed Lect.

to  the  distinction  of  positive  law  into  natural  and  positive,  as .

the  distinction  is  commonly  understood  by  modem  writers  on  The  dis-

• • J  tinction

junsprudenca  of  positive

The  rationcde  of  this  distinction  may,  perhaps,  be  conceived  ^*^*^t*^

and  expressed  in  the  following  manner.  and  posi-

The  positive  laws  of  any  political  community  are  divisible  *^^®»  *®  ,

*  •'■'•.  •'  commonly

into  two  kinds :  under-

Some  it  would  probably  observe  as  moral  or  customary  Jj^,^^
rales,  although  it  were  a  natural  society (or  a  society  n/)t  writers  on
political),  and  although  it  were  also  in  the  savage  state  which  ^d^^,"^*
commonly  accompanies  the  absence of politicsd  government.  JiationaU
For  they  rest  upon  grounds  of  utility which are  strikingly  tinction.^
obvious; and  which extend, moreover, through all  societies
(natural  or  political,  savage  or  refined). The  positive  laws,  for
example,  which,  in  political  societies,  shield  the  lives  of  the
citizens,  are  admitted  as  moral  rules,  and  commonly  are  observed
as  such,  even  by  the  members  of  the  natural  societies  which
have  not  ascended  &om  the  savage  state.

There  are  others  of  the  positive  laws  obtaining  in  a  political
community,  which  it  would  not  observe  as  moral  or  customary
roles,  if  it  were  a  natural  society,  and  were  also  in  the  savage
condition.  For  some  of  the  positive  laws  obtaining  in  a  political
community,  suppose  that  the  given  community  is  a  political
community;  and  therefore  could  not  obtain  in  it  if  it  were  a
natural  society.  Such,  for  example,  are  the  positive  laws  which
determine  the  powers  and  duties  of  the  ministers  of  justice,  and


568  Law :  Sources  and  Modes.

Lect. of the other  political or  public  persons subordinate to the
sovereign  government.

Some,  moreover,  of  the  positive  laws  obtaining  in  a  political
community,  would  probably  be  useless  to  a  natural  society
which  had  not  ascended  from  the  savage  state.  And  others
which  might  be  useful  even  to  such  a  society,  it  probably  would
not  observe ;  inasmuch  as  the  ignorance  and  stupidity  which
had  prevented  its  submission  to  political  government,  would
probably  prevent  it  from  observing  every  rule  of  conduct  that
had  not  been  forced  upon  it  by  the  coarsest  and  most  imperious
necessity.

The  positive  laws,  therefore,  of  any  political  community  are
divisible  into  two  kinds.

Some  it  would  probably  observe  as  moral  or  customary  rules,
although  it  were  a  society  not  political,  and  also  had  not  ascended
from  the  savage  state.  Others  it  certainly  or  probably  would
not  so  observe,  if  it  were  a  natural  society,  and  were  also  in  the
savage  condition.

The  positive  laws,  moreover,  of  any  political  community  may
be  distinguished  in  the  foUowing  manner :

Some  are  peculiar  or  proper  to  that  single  political  com-
munity, or,  at  least,  are  not  common  to  all  political  communities.
Others  are  common  to  all  political  communities,  or  form  a
constituent  part  of  every  positive  system.

But  it  is  probable  that  some  of  the  laws  which  obtain  as
positive  laws  in  all  political  communities,  would  obtain  as  moral
rules  in  any  political  community,  although  it  were  a  natural
society,  and  living  in  the  savage  condition.  For,  since  there  are
political  communities  that  scarcely  have  ascended  from  the
savage  state,  it  is  probable  that  some  of  these  laws  rest  upon
grounds  of  utility  which  are  strictly  universal  and  also  strikingly
obvious  ;  which  extend  through  all  societies  (natural  or  political,
savage  or  refined),  and  which  even  a  natural  society,  in  the  rudest
condition  of  humanity,  could  hardly  fail  to  perceive.

Now  the  positive  laws  which  are  common  to  all  political
conmiunities,  and  which,  moreover,  are  universally  and  palpably
useful,  are  apparently  the  '  natural  laws '  usually  contemplated
by  modem  writers  on  jurisprudence  when  they  mean  by  the
expression  '  natural  laws '  a  kind  of  the  laws  that  are  properly
the  subject  of  their  science.

The  rationale  of  the  distinction  of  positive  laws  into  natural
laws  and  positive  laws,  may  therefore  be  stated  thus.

The  former  are common  to  all  political  societies,  in  the


Law  Natural  and  Positive.  5  69

character  of  positive  laws :  and  being  palpably  useful  to  every Lect.
society  whatever,  they  are  common  to  all  societies,  political  or ^
nataral,  in  the  character  oT  moral  rules.

The  latter  are  not  common,  as  positive  laws,  to  all  political
societies;  or  though  they  be  common,  as  positive  laws,  to  all
political  societies,  they  are  not  common,  as  moral  rules,  to  all
societies  (political  or  natural).

And  here  I  would  remark  that  the  natural  law  in  question  This  natu-
when  considered  as  positive  law,  is  closely  analogous  to  the  jus  TOsitive  ^
jentium  of  the  earlier  Eoman  Lawyers,  and  to  any  of  the  systems  faw,  is
of  common  or  general  law  which  resemble  their  jus  gentium,  andogous
For  the  natural  law  in  question  is  the  common  positive  law  of  ^  t^e
all  independent  nations ;  and  the  jus  gentium  of  the  earlier  ^tiumof
Eoman  Lawyers,  or  any  of  the  systems  of  general  law  which  S^®  earlier
lesemole  their  jtis  gentiv/m,  is  a  common  positive  law  of  a  com-  Lawyers,
paiatively  restricted extension: being common  to a  limited  ®^*
nimiber  of  independent  nations,  or  common  to  all  the  members
of  a  single  independent  nation.

But  it  must  be  remarked  that  the  natural  law  of  modem  Natural
writeis  on  jurisprudence  (like  the  jvs  gentium  or  naturale  which  modems,
occurs  in  Justinian's  Compilations),  is  not  restricted  to  positive  andi^
laws,  but  comprises  merely  moral,  or  merely  customary  rules.  Justinian's
It  comprises  every  rule  which  is  common  to  all  societies,  though  compila-
the  rule  may  not  obtain,  as  positive  law,  in  all  political  com-  embrace
munities,  or  in  any  political  community. And  consequently,  ^q^[^
the  natural  law  of  those  modem  writers  (like  the  jus  gentium  x>v  (especially
naturale  which  occurs  in  those  Compilations),  embraces  all  the  J^J^^f  *
laws  (or  rules  of  positive  morality)  which  are  styled  international  well  as
laws,  or  the  laws  of  nations. Or,  rather,  it  embraces  all  those  faw!^^^
rules  of  international  morality,  which  are  not  observed  exclu-
sively by  a  limited  number  of  nations,  but  obtain,  or  are  deemed
to  obtain^  between  all  nations  whatsoever.

The  jtis  gentium,  therefore,  which  occurs  in  Justinian's  Com-
pilations^ is  a  much  larger  expression  than  *  the  law  of  nations '
as  meaning  international  law,  or  the  law  which  obtains  between
nations.  International  morality  is  only  a  small  part  of  the  jus
gentium  in  question ;  since  it  comprises  every  rule  (be  it  positive
and  moral,  or  be  it  exdusivdy  moral)  which  is  common  to  all
societies  (political  or  natural).  '  Jus  fedale  *  or  *J2is  belli  etpa^*
and  not  'jus  gentium,'  or  the  *  law  of  nations,'  is  the  name  which
is  always  given  to  international  morality,  by  the  Eoman  lawyers
themselves.

<>  Falck,  2S3,  79 ;  Hugo,  Enc  p.  279 ;  Gaii  Comm.  iiL  94.


as


570


Law :  Sources  and  Modes.


Lect.
XXXII

Argoment
for  the  dis-
tinction of
positiye
law  and
morality
into  ncUU'
raX  and
positive:
with  pur-
poseless-
ness  of  it,
if  general
utuity  be
the  only
index  to
Law  of
Deity  or
Nature.


I  have  stated  the  modem  distinction  of  positive  laws  (which
includes  a  similar  distinction  of  merely  moral  roles)  into  naJtwrd
and  positive  (or  natural  and  simply  positive).  But  since  the
distinction,  apparently,  is  utterly  or  nearly  useless  (though  it
rests  upon  a  real  difference  between  those  laws  and  rules),  I  will
now  add  to  the  foregoing  statement  of  it,  a  short  notice  of  the
argument  by  which  it  commonly  is  maintained.

That  current  argument  may  be  put  in  the  following  manner:

There  are  positive  rules  of  conduct  (legal  avd  moral,  or  «?•
clusivdy  moral),  which  obtain  universally,  or  are  observed  by  all
societies.  But,  since  they  obtain  universally,  they  must  have
been  made  or  shaped,  by  their  human  authors,  on  laws  of  the
Deity  or  Nature  which  were  known  to  those  authors  through  an
instinct.  For  varying  and  fallible  reason,  as  merely  informed
and  advised  by  general  utility  or  expedience,  could  not  have
determined  all  societies  to  the  adoption  and  observance  of  the
same  body  of  rules.  And  the  inference  is  confirmed  by  this
further  consideration ;  and  these  rules  are  observed  concurrently
by  unconnected  societies  of  men  who  have  not  ascended  fipwn
the  savage  condition ;  whose  intelligence  is  scarcely  superior  to
that  of  the  lower  animals ;  and  whose  imbecile  reason,  as  left  to
the  imcertain  guidance  of  general  utility,  could  hardly  have  con-
ducted them  to  a  perfectly  uniform  result.

The  human  authors,  therefore,  of  these  universal  rules,  copied
them  from  divine  originals :  which  divine  originals  were  known
to^  those  human  authors,  not  through  fallible  reason  led  by  a
fallible  guide,  but  through  an  instinct  or  sense,  or  through  im-
mediate consciousness.

But  since  their  human  authors  copied  them  from  divine
originals,  which  were  known  to  those  hiunan  authors  through  a
perfectly  infallible  index,  they  are  not  so  properly  rules  of  human
position  or  establishment,  as  rules  proceeding  immediately  horn
the  Deity  himself,  or  the  intelligent  and  rational  Nature  which
animates  and  directs  the  universe.  They  are  properly  natural
rules,  or  rules  created  immediately  by  Nature  or  the  Deity,
although  the  men  who  are  deemed  their  authors  have  armed  them
with  additional  sanctions,  legal  or  moral

But  there  also  are  positive  rules  (legal  and  moral,  or  exclu-
sively moral),  which  are  not  universal  And  since  these  rules
are  not  universal,  there  is  no  ground  for  inferring  that  they  were
copied  from  divine  originals,  or  from  divine  originals  as  known
instinctively  and  infallibly.  They  either  were  not  copied  from
divine  or  natural  originaLs; or  they  were copied from  such


Law  Natural  and  Positive.  5  7 1

originals,  as  conjectured  by  the  imperfect  light  of  general  utility  or Lbct.
experience. Consequently,  they  certainly  or  probably  are  of  purely v
hmnan  position :  and  therefore  may  aptly  be  opposed  to  universal
and  natural  rules,  by  the  epithet  of  positive  or  merely  positive.

Though  I  shall  not  examine  the  argimient  which  I  have  now
stated,  I  must  remark  that  the  distinction  of  positive  rules  into
natural  and  positive  seems  to  rest  exclusively  (or  nearly  exclu-
siyely)  on  the  supposition  of  a  moral  instinct;  or  (as  this  real
or  imaginary  endowment  is  named  by  the  Boman  Lawyers  and
by  various  modem  writers),  a  natural  reason,  or  a  universal  and
practical  reason.

The  distinction,  indeed,  is  not  unmeaning,  although  the
principle  of  general  utility  be  the  ordy  index  to  the  laws  of
Nature  or  the  Deity.  For  as  some  of  the  dictates  of  general
Qtihty  are  exactly  or  nearly  the  same  at  all  times  and  places,
and  also  are  so  strikingly  obvious  that  they  can  hardly  be  over-
looked or  misconstrued,  there  are  positive  or  human  rules  which
are  absolutely  or  nearly  universal,  and  the  expediency  of  which
must  be  seen  by  merely  natural  reason,  or  reason  without  the
lights  of  extensive  experience  and  observation.

Assuming,  then,  that  general  utility  is  the  only  index  to  the
laws  of  the  Deity,  the  distinction  answers  to  a  difference  between
positive  or  human  rules,  which  certainly  is  not  imaginary,
though  no  one  can  describe  it  precisely.  For  no  one  (I  pre-
sume) can  determine  exactly,  what  positive  rules  are  strictly
universal,  and  which  of  them  are  merely  particular.

But  if  the  principle  of  general  utility  be  the  only  index  to
the  laws  of  the  Deity,  the  distinction,  though  not  unmeaning,
seems  to  be  utterly  or  nearly  purposeless.  For  every  human
rule  (be  it  universal  or  particular)  which  accords  with  the
principle  of  utility,  must  accord  with  the  Divine  Law  of  which
that  principle  is  the  exponent.  So  that  all  positive  rules,
particular  as  well  as  universal,  which  may  be  deemed  beneficent,
may  also  be  deemed  ncUurcU  laws,  or  laws  of  Nature  or  the
Deity  which  men  have  adopted  and  sanctioned.

Besides,  rules  which  are  peculiar  to  particular  coimtries  may
be  just  as  ustfvl  as  rules  which  are  common  to  all  countries.
The  laws  which  determine  the  distribution  of  water  in  hot  and
arid  climates,  or  which  regard  the  construction  and  preservation
of  embankments  in  coimtries  exposed  to  inundation,  are  not  less
vstful  (although  they  are  limited  to  certain  regions)  than  the
laws  which  have  gotten  the  specious  name  of  natural  because
they  are  suggested  by  necessities  pressing  upon  all  mankind.


572  Law :  Sources  and  Modes.

Lect.  Laws imposing taxes necessary to the maintenance  of

XXXII  r-  o  J

political  government,  are  not  less  useful  than  the  laws  which
guard  property  or  life :  though  the  former  are  merely  positive
(as  following  the  existence  of  government),  whilst  the  ktter
obtain  universally  (in  the  character  of  moral  rules),  and  there-
fore are  deemed  natural.  Yet,  so  confused  and  perverse  are  the
moral  perceptions  of  the  vulgar,  that  many  an  honest  man,  who
would  boggle  at  a  theft,  shall  cheat  the  public  revenue  with  a
perfectly  tranquil  conscience.
A  distinc-  If  a  law  set  by  the  state  be  pernicious  or  useless,  may  we

^^J^  °^into  ^^^^  ^^  without  offence  against  the  Law  of  God  ?  The  specific
'mala  in  consequence  of  breaking  the  specific  law,  would  (by  the  suppod-
^malaquia  ^^^^)  ^®  harmless  if  not  positively  good.  But  a  breach  of  a
prohibita,'  mischievous  law  tends  (in  the  way  of  example)  to  produce
thourfi  oflFences  against  other  laws  which  are  decidedly  beneficent  To
utility  be  import  goods  which  are  prohibited,  for  the  absurd  and  mischievous
index  to  purpose  of  protecting  domestic  manufactures,  is  a  perfectly
the  laws  of  innocent  act,  with  reference  to  its  specific  consequences.  But
might  not,  since  the  importation  of  these  tends  generally  to  embolden
perhaps, smugglers,  a  man  of  a  delicate  conscience  would  hardly  import

founded. them.

Now  if  an  offence  would  be  mischievous  on  the  whole,
although  the  violated  law  were  itself  useless  or  pernicious,  it
might  be  styled  malum  prohibitum,  or  malum  quia  prohibitwnL
The  act  would  he  malum  (or  an  offence  against  the  Law  of  God
as  well  as  the  Law  of  Man)  merely  because  the  act  had  been
prohibited  by  the  latter,  and  because  the  breach  of  the  useless  or
mischievous  prohibition  might  lead  to  violations  of  beneficent
obligations.  If  the  breach  of  the  useless  or  mischievous  law
would  not  be  mischievous  (with  reference  to  the  sum  of  its  con-
sequences) it  would  not  be  malum  at  all.

According  to  the  principle  of  Utility,  the  distinction  (if
worth  taking)  would  therefore  stand  thus :  Mala  m  ae  aie
offences  against  useful  laws :  Mala  prohihUa,  or  quia  prohibikti
are  mischievous  offences  against  laws  which  are  themselves
useless  or  mischievous.

Innocuous  offences  against  useless  or  mischievous  laws  are
not  mala :  In  other  words,  they  are  not  pernicious ;  and  there-
fore are  not  violations  of  the  Law  of  God  or  Nature.

The  distinction  of  crimes,  made  by  the  Eoman  Law  into
crimes  juris  gentium  and  crimes  jure  cfvUi,  tallies  with  the  dis-
tinction of  crimes  made  by  modern  writers  into  m^la  in  se  and


Law  Natural  and  Positive.  573

vda,  prokQnta. Offences  against  human  rules which obtain Lbct.

XXXII

tmiveisallyy  are  (according  to  these  writers)  malay  or  oflFences  in  ^
Uj  inasmuch  as  they  would  he  offences  against  the  law  of
Xature  or  the  Deity,  although  they  were  not  oflFences  against
roles  of  human  position.  But  offences  against  human  rules
which  only  obtain  partially,  are  not,  according  to  those  writers,
offences  against  laws  of  nature.  Or  at  least,  they  would  not
be  offences  against  laws  of  the  Deity  if  they  were  not  oflFences
against  positive  law  or  morality.  And  therefore  they  are  mala,
or  offences,  quia  prohibita,  or  they  take  their  quality  of  oflFences
from  human  prohibitions  and  injxmctions.

I  believe  that  no  l^al  consequence  has  been  built  on  this
last  distinction,  by  any  of  the  systems  of  positive  law  which
have  obtained  in  modem  Europe.

I  will  here  advert  for  a  moment  to  two  of  the  disparate  'Natural

IjftD7 ftf)

meanings which are annexed to the ambiguous expression  meaning
'Natural  I^w/  by  writers  on  jurisprudence  and  morals.  -tain^

Taken  with  the  meaning  which  I  have  endeavoured to  human
explain,  it  signifies  certain  rules  of  human  position ;  namely  the  P^?*f^ »
luunan  or  positive  rules  which  are  common  to  all  societies,  in  the  ural  Law'
character  of  law  and  morality,  or  in  the  character  of  morality. as  meaning

•''  J some

Bat  taken  with  another  meaning,  it  signifies  the  laws  which  Htandard
are  set  to  mankind  by  Nature  or  the  Deity,  or  more  generally,  J^„^n
it  signifies  the  standard  (whether  that  standard  be  the  laws  of  rules
the  Deity,  or  a  standard  of  man's  imagining)  to  which,  in  the  conform,
opimon  of  the  writer,  human  or  positive  rules  oiight  to  conform.
And  by  the  confusion  of  the  meaning  which  I  endeavoured  to
explain,  with  the  meaning  which  I  now  have  suggested,  the
grossest  contradiction  and  nonsense  is  frequently  engendered.

The  ambiguity  is  the  same  with  that  already  spoken  of  in
the  last  lecture  with  regard  to  the  jtis  gentium  or  naturale,  as
the  terms  are  employed  by  the  classical  jurists :  for  example,
^heie  the  institution  of  slavery  is  at  one  time  said  to  be  the
creature  of  the  jm  naturale  or  gentium,  and  at  another  to  be
repugnant  to  natural  law ;  and  where  the  jus  civile  is  said  to  be
the  law  we  make  when  we  add  anything  to,  or  detract  anything
from,  the  law  of  nature.^

Before  I  conclude,  I  will  oflFer  a  few  remarks  upon  Natural  Natural
%A/.(v.v.)  ^•'^•'*»*'

Xatural  Eights  would  naturally  signify  the  rights  which

**  See  pp.  665,  666,  aiUe.
**  Hugo,  Naturrecnt. Blackstone,  vol.  i.  p.  123.

VOL.  n.  F


574  Law :  Sources  attd  Modes.

Lect. correspond  to  Natural  Law :  Eights  which  are  given  by  all  or
V  " ^ by  most  positive  systems,  and  which  would  exist  as  moral  rights
though  government  had  never  arisen.

But  by  the  term  '  natural  rights/  is  frequently  meant  the
rights  and  capacities  which  are  said  to  be  original  or  innate.

Now  original  or  innate  rights,  and  original  or  innate  capa-
cities to  take  or  acquire  rights,  are  those  rights  and  capacities
which  a  man  has  as  simply  being  a  man,  or  as  simply  living
under  the  protection  of  the  state.  Such  (for  example)  is  the
right  which  Blackstone  styles  the  right  to  personal  security,  the
right  to  reputation,  or  the  capacity  to  acquire  rights  by  con-
veyance or  contract.  Eights  of  this  class  are  styled  original  or
innate  as  opposed  to  acquired.  They  reside  in  the  party  with-
out any  other  title  or  investitive  event  than  the  mere  fact  of  his
being  a  citizen  of  the  community.

All  other  rights  and  capacities  originate  in  some  particuhi
incident  or  mode  of  acquisition,  and  are  again  divided  into  those
which  arise  out  of  some  particular  statm  or  condition,  and  those
which  are  said  to  arise  ex  speciali  titulo,  as  by  a  contract;  the
word  title,  or  mode  of  acquisition,  being  confined  to  those
incidents  which  do  not,  uno  ictu,  give  a  whole  set  of  rights  and
capacities,  such  as  constitute  a  status.

The  rights  called  natural  rights  in  this  acceptation  of  the
term,  are  said  to  be  bom  with  a  man,  for  the  reason  which  I
have  just  stated.  But  natural  rights,  thus  understood,  aie
totally  different  from  natural  rights  in  the  other  sense  which  I
before  explained,  namely,  rights  which  would  obtain  as  sanctioned
by  positive  morality,  although  government  had  never  existed.
TTie  right  to  reputation,  for  example,  could  hardly  consist  in  a
savage  condition.  Yet  the  right  to  reputation  is  a  natural  right
in  the  sense  in  which  natural  rights  are  said  to  be  innate  or
opposed  to  acquired  rights.

Blackstone  htts  confounded  natural  rights  as  taken  in  these
two  distinct  senses ;  and  because  he  has  styled  natural  rights
(in  the  sense  of  rights  not  acquired  by  a  particular  incident)
the  absolute  rights  of  persons,  he  h£ts  supposed  them  to  belong
to  the  law  of  persons,  although,  as  I  shall  shew  hereafter,  rights
of  this  class  belong  pre-eminently  to the  law  of  things. I
suppose  that  he  called  them  absolute  rights  of  persons  for  the
same  reason  which  has  induced  others  to  call  them  natural  or
inherent  rights ;  namely,  because  they  are  not  dependent  on  the
happening  of  any  particular  incident,  but  we  acquire  them  merely
by  being  bom.


Notes.  575


Notes.  Lbct.

XXXII
The  objections  to  applying  the  term  *  Law '  to  natural  or  revealed
rules  are  two : Ist,  A$  such  rules  they  are  not  law ;  although  it  may
be  incumbent  (morally  or  religiously)  upon  the  Legislator  or  judge
to  lend  them  the  legal  sanction,  and  although  they  become  law  as
soon  as  they  receive  it. 2ndly,  Many  of  these  natural  rules  and  re-
vealed principles  may  not  be  fit  for  law^  although  their  observance
IS  mond  and  religious  rules  is  necessary  to  the  well-being  of  society.
These  objections  hold,  assuming  that  there  are  any  such  rules. —
Marginal  Noie  in  Falck,  p.  100.


The  tendency  to  append  International  Law  to  the  so-called  Law
of  Nature,  illustrates  the  character  of  the  latter.  International  law
(so  far  as  it  is  independent  of  usage)  is  a  branch  of  Ethics :  i.e,  of
Natural  Law.  But  as  municipal  law  is  broadly  distinguished  from
Ethics,  even  those  who  admitted  the  existence  of  a  natural  law  were
ODconsciously  led  to  touch  upon  it  but  slightly  in  their  expositions
of  law  municipal  Consistently  with  the  hypothesis  of  a  natural  law,
an  exposition  of  a  municipal  system  should  divide  it  into  two  parts  :
viz.,  that  which,  as  conforming  with  natural  law  t^  (not  oitght  to  he)
Law ;  and  that  which,  as  conflicting  with  law  natural,  is  not  Law. —
Marginal  Note  in  Falck,  §  139.

The  ancient  idea  of  a  Law  of  Nations  (Yolkerrecht)  is  connected
with  the  assumption  of  a  Law  of  Nature  which  is  universally  binding,
independently  of  political  obligation. — Falck,  §  46.

International  Law,  according  to  the  above-mentioned  notion,
supposes  a  Law  of  Nature :  i,e,  A  law  obligatory  upon  all  mankind,
Wt  wanting  the  political  sanction.  If  there  be  no  law  without  that
sanction,  the  admitted  maxims  for  the  conduct  of  international  trans-
actions are  not  Law,  but  Ethics.  Bach  State  may,  however,  adopt  an
International  Law  of  its  own ;  enforcing  that  law  by  its  own  tribunals,
or  by  its  military  force  (at  least),  as  against  other  nations.

This,  however,  is  not  International,  but  National  or  Civil  Law ;
i^.  in  regard  to  the  sanction.  For  in  regard  to  the  subject,  and
(where  there  is  good  faith),  to  the  object,  it  Tnay  be  styled  inter-
national

If  the  same  system  of  International  Law  were  adopted  and  fairly
enforced  by  every  nation,  the  system  would  answer  the  end  of  law,
but^  for  want  of  a  common  superior,  could  not  be  called  so  with  pro-
priety. If  courts  common  to  all  nations  administered  a  common
system  of  International  Law,  this  system,  though  eminently  eflective,
would  still,  for  the  same  reason,  be  a  moral  system.  The  concurrence
of  any  nation  in  the  support  of  such  tribunals,  and  its  submission  to
their  decrees,  might  at  any  moment  be  withdrawn  without  legal
danger.  The  moral  system  so  administered  would  of  course  be
eminently  precise. — Marginal  Note  in  Falck,


576


Law :  Sources  and  Modes.


LECTUEE XXXIIL


Legt.
XXXIII


-/


Origin  of
term

Equity  as
meaning
Law.


Equity  as
meaning
impar-
tiality.


Equity  as

meaning

an^  law,  or

pnnciple

of  legisla-

tioUfWhich

the

speaker

means  to

commend.


DIFFERENT MEANINGS OF EQUITY.

As  I  remarked  in  the  Lecture  before  the  last,  the  original /i
gentium  is  the  universal  and  subsidiary  law  which  was  introduce
into  Italy  by  the  edicts  of  the  Prcetores  Peregrini,  and  was  aftei
wards  extended  to  the  outlying  Provinces  by  the  edicts  of  thei
Presidents  or  Governors.

This  law,  introduced  in  svhsidium  by  the  edicts  of  thes
Praetors  and  Presidents,  was  styled  jus  gentium,  or  Jus  amniui
gentium,  because  it  was  comnwn  to  the  nations  composing  th
Soman  world,  and  was  neither  peculiar  to  the  sovereign  Stat<
nor  to  any  of  the  States  (formerly  foreign  and  independent)  whicl
her  victorious  arms  had  reduced  to  dependence  or  subjection.

Being  common  to  the  nations  composing  the  Roman  world
and  not  peculiar  to  Some  or  any  of  the  subordinate  communities
this  law,  introduced  in  suhsidium  by  the  edicts  of  the  Praeton
and  Presidents,  was  also  styled  yt«s  (Bquum,jibs  ccguabile,  or  a^itas
That  is  to  say.  Law  imiversal  or  general,  and  not  particular  oi
partial.

This  subsidiary  law  being  distinguished  from  the  peculiar
systems  to  which  it  was  a  supplement  by  its  comparatively  laig^
and  liberal  spirit,  (equitas,  which  was  one  of  its  names,  and  whicl
(as  one  of  its  names)  indicated  its  universality,  gradually  cam(
to  signify  impartiality:  regard  to  the  interest  of  oil  whose
interests  ought  to  be  regarded,  as  distingiiished  from  exclusive
or  partial  regard  to  the  interests  of  some.

This  is  the  secondary  sense  of  the  term  ayuitas,  when  it  i
used  in  a  secondary  sense  with  perfect  propriety :  Though  th'
term  is  often  applied,  by  an  improper  extension  of  its  meaninj
to  some  system  of  law,  or  to  some  principle  of  direct  or  judida
legislation,  which  the  speaker  or  writer,  for  any  reason,  praise
or  commends.

Of  all  the  various  objects  which  are  denoted  by  this  slipper
expression,  the  most  interesting,  and  the  most  complex,  are  thos
portions  of  Soman  and  of  English  law,  which  arose  from  th
Edicts  of  the  Praetores  Urbani,  and  from  judicial  decisions  (
our  own  Chancellors  as  exercising  their  extraordinary  jurisdictioi
And,  accordingly,  those  portions  of  Roman  and  of  English  Lax
are  the  Equitas,  or  the  Equity,  to  which  I  shall  more  especiall
direct  my  attention.


Meanings  of  the  Word  Equity.  577

But  before  I  proceed  to  '  Equity  *  as  meaning  a  department Lect.
of  Law,  I  will  briefly  advert  to  a  few  of  the  other  and  numerous ^ ^ >
meanings  which  are  not unfrequently  attached  to  that  most  Confusion
ambiguous  term. For  'equity/  (as  meaning  law)  being  often  as  meaning
confounded  with  '  equity '  as  meaning  something  different,  gross  ^^»T^.*^
misconceptions  of  '  equity/  as  denoting  a  portion  or  department  its  other
of  positive  law,  are  commonly  entertained  by  the  simple  laity,  ®«°8^-
and  not  unfrequently  by  lawyers.  ^^P^Xat

If  I  liked,  I  could  point  at  books  and  speeches,  by  living  *  Law  and
kwyers  of  name,  wherein  the  nature  of  the  Equity  administered  a^i^r-"
by  the  Chancellor,  or  the  nature  of  the  jurisdiction  (styled  extra-  ^  and  ne-
ordinary)  which  the  Chancellor  exercises,  is  thoroughly  mis-  tin^n.
apprehended : — ^Wherein  the  anomalous  distinction  between  Law  Confusion
and  Equity  is  supposed  to  rest  upon  principles  necessary  or  ^^eanini?
universal ;  or  (what  is  scarcely  credible)  wherein  the  functions  Law,  with
of  the  Chancellor,  as  exercising  his  extraordinary  jurisdiction,  meanmg^
aie  compared  to  the  arhUrium  boni  viri,  or  to  the  functions  of  an  arbUHum,
arbiter  released  from  the  observance  of  rules.

It  is  manifest  on  a  moment's  reflection,  that,  if  our  Courts
of  Equity  were  arbitrary  tribunals,  they  would  destroy  the
security,  and  the  feeling  of  security,  which  ought  to  be  the
principal  end  of  political  government  and  law.

Taken  in  its  primary  sense,  equity,  or  opquity,  is  synonymous  Equity  =
with  universality. In  which  primary  sense  it  was  applied  to  sality.
the;i«  gentium  of  the  earlier  Eoman  Law,  because  the  j\is  gentium  ^^90*  Im-
of  the  earlier  Boman  Law  was  ccqimm,  or  common,  and not  Ergo,  ap-
restricted  or  particular.^^ The  nis  gentium  to  which  it  was  plicaWe  to
applied  being  distinguished  by  comparative  fairness,  equity  came  law,  etc.
to  denote  (in  a  secondary  sense)  impartiality. And  impartiality
being  good,  equity  is  often  extended  (as  a  vague  name  of  praise)
to  any  system  of  law,  or  to  any  principle  of  direct  or  judicial
legislation,  which,  for  any  reason,  is  supposed  to  be  worthy  of
commendation.

The  applications  of  the  term  'equity'  are  extremely  numerous.
But,  in  almost  every  instance  wherein  it  is  applied,  one  of  the
meanings  now  indicated  is  the  basis  of  the  complex  notion  which
the  term  is  employed  to  mark  With  this  preliminary  remark  I
shall  proceed  to  enumerate  certain  of  the  senses  which  the  term
hears,  when  it  does  not  denote  a  certain  portion  of  positive  law.

First  :)^  There  is  a  species  of  interpretation  or  construction

•  Properly  an  abstraction  of  oequum ^  It  appears  from  the  MS.  that  the

(JQi),  bat  like  justUia,  in  made  mother  author intended to use the passage

of  itf  own  parent : e.g.  when  it  means  beginning  at  this  line  and  ending  at

good  prind^es  of  legiidation.  p.  583,  towards  the  construction  of  an


5/8  Law :  Sources  and  Modes.

Lect. (or  rather  of  judicial  l^islation  disguised  with  the  name  of  inter-

V  pretation)  by  which  the  defective  but  clear  provisions  of  a  statute

Equity  as are  extended  to  a  case  which  those  provisions  have  omitted.

extensive ^  ^  shall  endeavour  to  shew  (when  I  attempt  to  examine  the

(or  nitric-  difference  between  direct  and  judicial  l^islation),  this  species  of

pietetion, interpretation  or  construction  is  not  interpretation  or  construction

^T^***^ properly  so  called. The  specific  provisions  of  the  statute,  and

the  specific  intention  of  the  lawgiver,  are  perfectly  unequivocal

or  certain. It  is  certain  that  the  case  is  not  embraced  by  the

law,  and  was  not  present  to  the  mind  of  the  lawgiver  when  he

constructed the law. But since its  provisions  wovld  have

embraced  the  case,  if  its  author  had  pursued  consequentially  his

own  general  design  the  judge  (exercising  a  power  expressly  or

tacitly  given  to  him)  completes  the  defective  provisions  actually

comprised  in  the  law ;  and  supplies  the  defective  intention  which

its  maker  actually  entertained,  fix)m  the  predominant  purpose  or

end  which  moved  him  to  make  the  statute. The  judge  extends

the  law  to  the  omitted  case,  because  the  omitted  case  falls  within

the  general  design,  although  it  is  not  embraced  by  the  actual  and

unequivocal  provisions. Or,  adopting  the  current  but  absurd

expression,  the  judge  irUerprets  the  law  extensively,  in  pursuance

of  its  reason  or  principle.

The  so-called  interpretation  which  I  have  briefly  and  loosely
described  is  widely  different  from  the  genuine  extensive  interpre-
tation which  takes  the  reason  of  the  law  as  its  index  or  guide.
In  the  latter  case,  the  reason  or  general  design  is  unaffectedly
employed  as  a  mean  for  discovering  or  ascertaining  the  specific
and  doubtful  intention.  In  the  former  case  the  reason  or
principle  of  the  statute  is  itself  erected  into  a  law,  and  is  applied
to  a  species  or  case  which  the  lawgiver  has  manifestly  overlooked.
The  bastard  extensive  interpretation  ex  ratione  legis,  is  not  unfre-
quently  styled  equity.  Or  a  law  is  said  to  be  interpreted  agree-
ably to  the  demands  of  equity,  when  its  provisions  are  extended
to  an  omitted  case,  because  that  omitted  case  falls  within  its
reason.

Now  in  this  application  of  the  term  '  jEquitasI  the  radical
idea  is  '  uniformity  *  or  '  universality'  The  law  (it  is  supposed)
should  be  applied  unifomUy  to  all  the  cases  which  come  within
its  principle.  For  the  law  (it  is  assumed)  would  have  embraced
all  such  cases,  if  the  legislator  had  adverted  completely  to  the

'  Essa^  on  Codification/  for  which  some  and  a  short  '  Essay  on  Interpretation '
materials  exist.  It  seems  probable  that  (which  is  ])erfect)  had  the  same  destina-
an  incomplete  *  Excursus  on  Analogy* tion. — S.  A.


Meanings  of  the  Word  Equity.  $79

consequences  which  its  principle  implies. 'Quod  in  re  pari Lect.
Talet,  valeat  in  hac  quae  par  est Valeat  cequitas :  quae  paribus ^
in  causis paria  jura desiderat.' For the  same  reason,  this
bastard extensive  interpretation  ex  ratione  legis  is  frequently
styled  'analogical.'

The  cases  which  the  law  omits  (but  which  fall  within  its
principle)  and  the  cases  which  fall  within  its  principle,  and
which  it  actually  includes,  are  analogous.  Or  (changing  the
expression)  they  are  resembling  cases,  vnth  reference  to  that
common  principle,  in  spite  of  the  differences  by  which  they  are
distinguished  when  viewed  from  other  aspects.  And,  since  they
are  resembling  cases  with  reference  to  the  principle  of  the  law,
analogy  (as  well  as  equity)  is  said  to  require,  that  the  law  should
be  applied  to  all  of  them  in  an  equable  or  uniform  manner.
Equity  and  Analogy  (as  thus  understood)  are  exactly  equivalent
expressions.  '  -^uitas  (say  the  lawyers)  paribus  in  causis  paria
jura  desiderat'  '  Analogia  (say  the  Grammarians)  est  similium
similis  declinatio.'

In  that  bastard  interpretation  ex  rations  legis,  which  is  styled
tdenrive,  the  law  is  applied  to  a  case  which  it  clearly  omits,
because  the  omitted  case  falls  within  its  principle.  In  that
spurious  interpretation  ex  ratione  legis,  which  is  styled  restrictive,
the  law  is  not  applied  to  a  case  which  it  certainly  includes,
because  the  case,  which  is  included  by  its  actual  provisions,  is
not  embraced  by  the  general  design  of  the  lawgiver.

By  Grotius,  the  term  *  cequitas '  has  also  been  applied  to  this
last-mentioned  species  of  pretended  interpretation  or  construction.
Or,  according  to  Grotius,  a  law  is  also  interpreted  agreeably  to
the  demands  of  Equity,  when  it  is  not  applied  to  a  case  which
it  actually  includes,  but  which  (looking  at  its  purpose)  its  pro-
visions should  not  embrace.  Now  the  term  Equity  as  thus
applied,  hardly  imports  uniformity  or  universality.  But  still  it
imports  the  consistency  which  is  implied  in  uniformity,  and
which  is  the  ground  of  the  so-called  extensive  interpretation  ex
ratione  legis.

By  the  so-called  extensive  interpretation  ex  ratione  legis,  the
provisions  of  the  law  are  extended  agreeably  to  its  principle.
Why?  Because  it  is  presumed  that  its  maker  must  have
wished  to  be  consistent  with  himself  And,  for  precisely  the
same  reason,  the  provisions  of  the  law  are  restricted,  agreeably
to  its  principle,  where  its  provisions  and  principle  positively
conflict  In  either  case,  it  is  presumed  that  the  author  of  the
law  must  have  wished  to  be  consistent  with  himself ;  and  the


58o


Law :  Sources  and  Modes.


Lect.
XXXIII


Equity  as
meaning
judicial
impartial-
ity.


defect  or  incoherency  of  his  specific  and  proximate  intention  is
accordingly  supplied  or  corrected  from  his  general  and  remote
design.  But  the  term '  equity/  as  applied  to  restrictive  interpre-
tation, certainly  deflects  considerably  from  its  primary  meaning.
It  scarcely  imports  uniformity ;  although  it  imports  the  consist-
ency ( — the  harmony  or  elegantia)  which  imiformity  necessarily
implies.

By  the  ancient  writers,  'aequitas'  (I  believe)  is  never
applied  to  restrictive  interpretation.  The  'cequitas'  of  Cicero
and  the  Classical  Jurists  (when  they  mean  by  cequitas,  interpre-
tation or  construction)  is  the  so-called  extensive  interpretation  ex
ratione  legis  of  modem  writers  upon  Jurisprudence ;  the  '  sequitas,
quae  paribus  in  causis  paria  jura  desiderat.'

It  may  indeed  be  doubted  (as  I  shall  shew  in  the  proper
place),  whether  the  so-called  interpretation,  which  restricts  He
operation  of  statutes,  was  permitted  by  the  Soman  Law,  or
ought  to  be  permitted  by  any.

It  may  seem,  at  first  sight,  that  the  pretended  interpretation
which  extends,  and  the  pretended  interpretation  which  restricts
are  nearly  alike.  For,  in  either  case,  the  specific  intentions,
which  the  provisions  of  the  law  evince,  are  amended  by  the
general  design  which  predominated  in  the  mind  of  its  author.

But  (as  I  shall  endeavour  to  shew  in  the  proper  place)  the
consequences  of  the  former  and  the  consequences  of  the  latter
are  widely  different.  Defects  in  the  provisions  of  a  law  may  be
supplied  from  its  manifest  reason,  with  little  or  no  inconvenience.
But  if  judges  might  abrogate  laws,  wholly  or  in  part,  whenever
their  actual  provisions  were  not  consistent  with  their  grounds,
all  statute  laws  would  become  uncertain,  and  the  cases  which
they  include  would  be  abandoned  to  the  arhitrium  of  the
tribunals :  '  Cessante  ratione  legis  cessat  lex  ipsa,'  is  a  maxim
which  sounds  well,  but  which  tends  directly  to  tyranny.

Secondly  :)  Equity  often  signi&es  judicial  impartiality :  That
virtue  which  is  practised  by  judges,  when  they  administer  the
law,  agreeably  to  its  spirit  or  purport,  uninfluenced  by  extrinsic
considerations.

In  this  sense.  Equity  has  been  defined  by  many  jurists,
'  The  application  of  Statute  Law  to  the  given  case,  agreeably  to
the  specific  intention  or  the  general  design  of  the  legislator.'
To  abide  by  the  grammatical  sense  of  the  legislator's  words,  as
evidenced  by  clear  marks,  is  to  administer  '  summum  fus,'  and  if
such  administration  be  callida  rather  than  asinina,  if  it  proceed
from  a  mischievous  intent  rather  than  from  sincere  error,  the


Meanings  of  the  Word  Equity.  5  8 1

judge  who  so  administers  the  law  is  guilty  of  ' summa  injurna*  Lbct.
'jEguUas  nihil  est  (says  a  celebrated  modem  jurist)  quam  ^
hmigna  et  hvmana  juris  scripti  interpretation  non  ex  verbis,  sed
ii  mente  l^islatoris  facta.'  '  Benignivs  (say  the  Pandects)  leges
ioteipretandsB  sunt,  quo  voluntas  earum  conserveturJ  In  which
definition  and  precept,  'Equity'  and  'Benignity'  would  seem
to  be  merely  synonymous  with  '  sincerity '  and  *  impartiality.'
The  judge  is  admonished  to  apply  the  law  agreeably  to  the
specific  intention  or  general  design  of  the  legislator.

Thirdly:)  Taken  in  the  significations  which  I  have  now  Equity  as
considered,  Equity  means  something  determinate  and  precise.  ™bi^Mi
Bat,  frequently,  it  signifies  nothing  more  than  the  arbitrary
pleasure  of  the  judge,  disguised  with  a  name  which  imports
piaise,  and  which  therefore  is  spacious  and  captivating.  Equity,
as  defined  by  Cicero  and  others,  is  nothing  more  than  the  mere
oiMtrium  of  the  judge,  or  is  nothing  more  than  the  arbUrium  of
the  judge  as  determined  by  narrow  considerations  of  particular
good  and  eviL

According  to  some,  it  is  the  office  of  Equity  (meaning  the
Equity  of  Judges  as  exercising  their  judicial  fimctions)  to  correct
the  particular  evils  which  flow  from  the  generality  of  the  Law.
'£quita8  (says  Cicero  in  precisely  the  same  spirit)  est  laxa-
mentum  juris.'  And  here  I  may  remark,  that  if  the  general
rale  be  good  in  the  main,  the  equity  which  affects  to  correct  its
particular  evil  consequences  is  clearly  mischievous.  It  is  hardly
possible  to  imagine  a  case,  wherein  the  application  of  a  general
rale  is  not  productive  of  some  consequence  which  a  good-natured
judge  would  wish  to  avert  So  that  if  it  were  competent  to  the
judge  to  apply  or  dispense  with  niles,  agreeably  to  his  notions
of  particular  consequences,  there  would  be  no  law  to  which
expectations  could  be  accommodated,  and  by  which  conduct
could  be  guided.

Where  Bules  are  bad  (and  the  Legislature  is  incapable  or
sapine)  it  is  indeed  expedient  (as  I  shall  shew  in  a  future
lecture)  that  the  judge  should  do  the  business  of  the  supine  or
incapable  legislature,  and  abrogate  or  amend  the  pernicious  or
defective  law.  But  to  abrogate  or  amend  a  law  directly  or
iiidiiectly,  is  widely  difiTerent  from  the  Equity  which  allows  the
law  to  remain,  and  simply  dispenses  with  it  in  specific  cases.
By  abolishing  or  amending  the  law  once  for  all,  partial  evil
loay  be  inflicted.  But  the  bad  law  is  itself  removed,  and  a
good  rule  of  conduct  is  substituted  in  its  stead.  The  Equity
which  dispenses  with the  law  in  particular  instances,  leaves


582


Law :  Sources  and  Modes.


Lect.
XXXIII


Equity,  as

meaniDg

standara,

legislative

(or  other

ethical)

principles.


Equity,  as
meaning
perform-
ance of  im-
perfect ob-
ligations.


the  standing  nuisance  untonched,  and  lenders  all  Law  utterly
uncertain.

The  evils  of  the  Equity  which  I  have  now  described  are  not
badly  put  in  the  following  passage:  which  I  take  from  a
tractate,  or  dissertation,  by  a  certain  lavdatus  but  somewhat
obscure  writer,  '  pro  summo  jure  contra  sequitatis  defensores.*

'Non  sunt  illae  injurise,  quas  subtilitatis  studium  et  ob6e^
vatio  juris  introduxit,  tarn  lamentabiles  quam  illi  dolores  qnoa
pant  aequitas.  Est  longe  melius  unum  quandoque  aut  alteram
hedi,  quam  fortune  hominum  k  sola  «quitate  et  arbitrio  judids,
seu,  ut  rectius  dicam,  k  fato  dependere.  Quis  volubilem  adeo  et
incertam  aequitatem  ut  juris  justitiseque  normam  agnoscet?
Admiss^  hac  justi  norm^  merito  conqueri  possumus,  leges  habere
cereum  nasum,  et  quamcunque  in  partem  infiecti  posse.'

Fourthly :)  I  remarked  in  a  former  Lecture  that  the  jut
naturale  or  gentium  of  the  classical  jurists  and  the  Law  Natural
of  modem  writers  on  jurisprudence,  often  mean  nothing  more
than  that  standard  to  which,  in  the  opinion  of  the  speaker,  law
should  conform.

The  same  may  be  said  of  cequitas,  or  naturalis  cequUcLS.

In  this  sense  it  is  said  that  equity  is  the  spirit  of  laws :  or
(as  the  French  have  it)  *  L'^quit^  est  I'esprit  de  nos  lois.' In
this  sense  of  the  term,  writers  often  talk  of  an  JSqmtas  Uguk-
toria,  by  which,  if  they  mean  anything  distinct,  they  must  mean
general  utility. In  this  sense,  JSquitas  is  reckoned  by  Cicero
amongst  the  sources  of  Law ;  which  is  obviously  absurd,  thou^
cequitas,  in  the  sense  here  used,  may  be  one  of  the  inducements
which  lead  to  the  enactment  of  a  law. He  enumerates  the
following  as  the  sources  of  the  Roman  law :  Leges,  Senatus-ccn-
stdta,  res  judicaioe  (by  this  he  means  law  established  by  specific
decisions),  juris-peritorum  auctontas  edida  magistratuum,  mas  or
customary  law,  and  lastly  a  certain  cequitas;  by  which  it  is
manifest  that  he  cannot  mean  anything  more  than  what  I  have
just  expressed. In  the  same  vague  sense  as  meaning  utility,  or
any  standard whatever,  innovating  judges  (whether Prsetors,
Chancellors,  or  Chief  Justices)  have  generally  applied  the  term
'  equity '  or  *  equitable '  to  the  new  rules  which  they  have  ven-
tured to  introduce.

Fifthly)  and  lastly.  Equity  is  often  synonymous  with  the
performance  of  imperfect  obligations.*^  An  equitable  or  just
man  is  a  man  who,  though  not  compelled  by  the  legal  sanction,
performs  the  obligations  imposed  by  the  moral  and  religious

^  Miihlenbrucb,  vol.  L  p.  76.


Meanings  of  the  Word  Equity.  583

sanctions. In  like  manner  equity  is  often  used  as  synonymous Lect.

XXXIII

with  morality.** Whether with positive morality, or with ^ ^ ^
morality  as  it  ought  to  be,  is  generally  left  undetermined ;  for  ^8  "jean-
the  notions  of  the  ancients  seem  to  have  been  perfectly  vague  as  ity . "
to  the  bounds  which  separate  laws  from  morality,  or  positive  law
and  positive  morality  from  the  principles  of  legislation and
leontology. JSquitas  is  often  spoken  of  as  synonymous  with
\onesia8. Jus  gentium  and  naturale  often  have  the  same  meaning,
rhey  denote  morality,  I  believe  positive  morality,  as  distinguished
lom  positive  law.

Notes.

The  term  •  equity,'  as  meaning  a  portion  of  positive  law,  seems  Origin  of
to  be  equivalent  to  impartiality  or  equality :  JPP"^'

E.g.  Older  Jm  gentium.  term  to

Again :  Jus  jprcdorium,  either  as  having  borrowed  largely  from  Equity  as
that  jus  geniium,  or  as  being  itself  .of  a  more  equal  and  impartial  meaning
character  than  the  jus  civile :  e.g.  Giving  rights  to  strangers,  persons
\np(^estate,  etc.

Again :  Expected  of  Praetors  and  other  legislating  magistrates,
that  their  law  should  be  cequurn,  et  non  amhitiose  factum.  Thence,
applied  to  any  law  which  any  one  wished  to  commend ;  especially
bj  innovating  judges  seeking  to  commend  to  others  their  innovations.
Equity, — not  the  name  of  jus  prcetorium,  but  the  law  itself — said
to  arise  from  the  suggestions  of  the  personified  abstraction  styled
'equity.*

Seems,  in  England,  to  be  the  name  of  the  law. The  law  would
be  called  better,  '  Chancery  Law.' Circumlocutions  for  Equity  Law.


LECTUEE XXXIV.


EQUITY  AS  A  DEPARTMENT  OF  LAW  CONSIDERED  fflSTORICALLY.
JURISDICTION  OF  THE  PILETOR  URBANUS.

Having  examined  certain  meaninj^s  of  the  term  *  Equity '  as  not Lect.

denoting  Law  (or  a  portion  of  some  body  of  law),  I  proceed  to  /  ^^^  ^

those  portions  of  certain  bodies  of  law  which  are  distinguished  A'arious

by  the  name  of '  equity,'  or  by  the  epithet  of '  equitable ;'  or  ^ii^ivalent

which are said to owe their  creation  to the suggestions of  cutionsfor

'eqiuty ;'  or  which  are  said  to  be  remarkable  for  their '  equitable '  ^ineamnc

spirit ;  or  which  are  said  to  rest  exclusively,  or  in  the  main,  positive

upon  '  equitable '  grounds  or  principles.  J^rtion'or

Of  all  those  portions  or  departments  of  bodies  or  systems  uepart-

ment  of  a
•  'Tclut  erga  Deam  religio  :  ut  parentibus  et  patrise  pareamus/ D.  i.  1,  2.


584


Law :  Sources  arid  Modes.


Lect.
XXXIV

^ — . — '

system  of

positive

Law.


Equity  of
Praetors
called  jxLs
prcBtor-
turn  ;
(xquilaa
not  being
the  Law
which  he
makes,  but
the  (per-
sonined)
principle
of  legisla-
tion (util-
ity or
other)
which
determines
him  to
make  it.
English
Equity
ought  to
be  called,
rather,
Chancery
Law,

Taking
equity  as
Twt  mean-
ing law,
Courts  of
Equity
and  Courts
of  Law  are
equally
concerned
with  it,  or
equally
strangers
to  it

Eouity  as
a  depart-
ment of
law :  an
historical
and  partic-
ular no-
tion.


of  Law,  which  have  gotten  the  name  of  '  Equity/  or  the  i
'  equitable,'  the  most  remarkable  and  interesting  are  th
ing:  namely,  that  portion  or  department  of  the  Rom
which  was  introduced  by  the  perpetual  Edicts  of  the
Urhani  ;  and  that  portion  or  department  of  the  Law  of
which  is  exclusively**  administered  by  tribunals  stylec
of  Equity/  and  waa  introduced  by  judicial  decision
English  Chancellors  as  exercising  their  extraordinary  jui

That  portion  of  the  Eoman  Law  which  waa  intro<
the  perpetual  edicts  of  the  Prcctores  Urhani,  is  commoi
Jv^  prcUorium,  That  portion  of  the  Law  of  England
exclusively  administered  by  Courts  styled  '  of  Equity,
call  * Chancei^y  Law*  For,  though  it  is  not  administer
Court  of  Chancery  only,  it  was  introduced,  and  (in  the  i
been  formed,  by  judicial  decisions  of  that  high  tribunal

The  application  of  the  term  '  Equity '  to  that  portic
Law,  and  of  the  phrase  '  Courts  of  Equity '  to  the  tril
which  it  is  administered,  is  grossly  improper,  and  leads
misconceptions.  Taking  the  term  '  Equity '  as  meaning
of  interpretation ;  or  as  meaning  the  impartiality  whi
cumbent  on  judges  and  arbiters  ;  or  as  meaning  judicia
not  determined  by  rules;  or  as  meaning  good  prii
direct  or  judicial  legislation ;  or  as  meaning  the  che
formance  of  imperfect  duties ;  or  as  meaning  positive
or  good  principles  of  deontology,  the  Courts  styled  '  ol
and  the  Courts  styled  'of  Law'  are  equally  concer
Equity,  or  are  equally  strangers  to  Equity.

Having  premised  these  remarks,  together  with  the
explanations  contained  in  my  last  Lecture,  I  shall  end
compare  or  contrast  Praetorian  and  Chancery  Law  as
ously  and  as  correctly  as  the  brevity  to  which  I  am  c(
will  permit.

This  comparison  or  contrast  will  subserve  a  doubh

First :  It  will  shew  that  the  distinction  between
Equity  (meaning  by  equity  a  portion  or  department  of  1
deducible  from  the  universal  principles  of  jurispruder
accidental  and  anomalous  :  that  in  every  system  of  law
the  distinction  obtains,  the  import  of  the  distinction  i
or  peculiar,  or  (changing  the  expression)  that  the  c
between  Law  and  Equity,  which  obtains  in  otu  system,
in  name,  rather  than  in  substance,  the  distinction  bet^
and  Equity  which  obtains  in  aiwther,

«  See  note,  p.  601,  post.—^  C.


Criminal  yurisdiction.  585

Secondly :  By  previously  comparing  or  contrasting  Praetorian  Lect.
and  Chancery  Law^  I  shall  be  able  to  state  and  examine,  with  '
more  clearness  and  effect,  the  distinctive  properties  of  direct  and
judicial  l^islation :  the  respective  advantages  and  disadvantages
of  the  two  species ;  with  the  much  agitated  and  interesting
question,  which  regards  the  expediency  of  reducing  bodies  of
Law  into  formal  systems  or  Codes.

But  in  order  that  I  may  institute  this  projected  comparison
Of  contrast,  and  may  make  it  subserve  the  purposes  at  which  I
have  now  pointed,  I  must  state  the  nature  of  the  jurisdiction
exercised  by  the  PraUores  Urbani;  and  also  the  nature  and
causes  of  the  direct  legislative  power,  which  they  first  exercised
with  the  tacit,  and  then  with  the  express,  authority  of  the
sovereign  Boman  People.

The  history  and  nature  of  the  jurisdiction  exercised  by  the
Court  of  Chancery  is,  I  may  confidently  assume,  well  understood
by  my  hearers.  To  that,  therefore,  as  to  something  sufificiently
known,  I  shall  merely  allude.

Liberd  repvhlicd,  or  before  the  virtual  dissolution  of  the  free  Criminal
or  popular  government,  criminal  cases  were  regularly  tried  and  tion^ft«r4
detenuined  by  the  assembled  Eoman  People :  Though,  by  virtue  r^ubiicd,
of  particular  and  exceptional  laws,  the  particular  criminal  cases,  Unction  of
to  which  those  laws  related,  were  tried  and  determined  by  bodies  wrongs
of  judices,  or  jurymen,  to  which,  as  to  committees  of  its  own  ^d  ^•-  ^
number  or body,  the  sovereign  people delegated  its  judicial  ^'**^-
powers.

Hence  it  is,  that  the  parts  of  the  Institutes  and  Pandects
which  relate  to  criminal  procedure,  bear  the  title  '  De  judiciis
puUieis'  And  hence  it  is,  that  '  crimen '  is  often  styled  in  the
lai^uage  of  the  Eoman  Law  'delictum  publicmn*  Since  the
regular  or  ordinary  tribunal  was  the  people,  community,  or  public,
the  trial  and  judgment  were  naturally  styled  'pvhlic ;'  and  the
epithet  naturally  applied  to  the  trial  and  judgment,  was  as
natnially  extended  to  the  delict  or  offence  itself

After  the  popular  government  had  been  virtually  dissolved,
and  the  trial  of  criminal  cases  gradually  withdrawn  from  the
people,  criminal  procedure  and  crimes  still  kept  the  names  of
'judicia  et  delicta  publica:'  Although  the  epithet  'public'  (in
its  primary  import)  was  now  no  more  applicable  to  criminal  pro-
cedure or  crimes  than  to  civil  procedure  or  the  delicts  styled
'  private.'

And  since  crimes  and  criminal  procedure  kept  the  epithet


586


Law :  Sources  and  Modes.


Lbct.
XXXIV


CivilJuris-
diction  of
Pree  tores
Urbani.


Order  of
procedure
Defore  the
Proetor  as
exercising
his  judi-
cial func-
tion.


of '  public/  although  (in  its  primary  import)  it  had  ceased  to
apply  with  propriety,  the  Classical  Jurists  justified  or  accounted
for  the  epithet  in  the  following  manner :  They  supposed  that
crimes  aflfect  the  public  or  community;  whilst  the  mischief  of
private  delicts,  and  of  other  civil  injuries,  is  limited  to  the  in-
jured individuals.  That  it  is,  therefore,  the  interest  of  the  public
to  pursue  or  prevent  crimes ;  whilst  the  pursuit  or  prevention  of
private  delicts,  and  of  other  civil  injuries,  may  be  left  to  the
discretion  of  the  individuals  who  feel  or  who  are  obnoxious  to
the  damage.

In  the  earlier  ages  of  the  Boman  Republic,  civil  jurisdiction
(or  jurisdiction  properly  so  called)  was  exercised  by  the  Consuls.
But  as  the  Consuls  were  commonly  busied  with  military  com-
mand, a  magistracy  styled  'Prsetura'  was  afterwards  created;
and  to  the  magistrate  by  whom  this  office  was  filled,  the  civil
jurisdiction  originally  exercised  by  the  Consuls  was  completely
transferred.

When  I  say  that  civil  jurisdiction  was  originally  exercised
by  the  Consuls,  and  afterwards  by  the  Praetors  (as  representa-
tives or  substitutes  of  the  Consuls),  I  understand  the  proposition
with  certain  limitations.  For,  in  certain  excepted  cases,  civil
jurisdiction  was  exercised  by  magistrates  styled  CerUumviri;  by
the  JSdiles  (or  the  conservators  of  public  buildings,  roads
and  markets) ;  and  also  by  the  Pontifices  (or  priests).  But  in
respect  of  my  present  purpose,  these  exceptions  are  immaterial,
and  may  therefore  be  dismissed  with  this  brief  and  passing
notica

The  tribunal  of  the  original  Praetor  (or  of  the  Praetor  who
was  appointed  as  the  representative  or  substitute  of  the  Consuls)
was  fixed  immovably  in  the  City  of  Eome :  And  (owing  to  the
cause  which  I  explained  in  a  former  Lecture)  his  jurisdiction
was  originally  restricted  to  civil  cases  arising  between  Roman
Citizens.  Consequently,  after  the  subsequent  appointment  of
the  Proctor  Peregrinus,  and  of  Presidents  or  Governors  (sometimes
styled  *  Prcetors  *)  to  the  outlying  provinces,  he  was  styled,  by
way  of  distinction,  Prcetor  Urbanus,  When  that  distinctive
epithet  was  not  needed,  he  was  styled  Prcetor  simply.

The  judicial  functions  of  the  Praetor  bore  less  resemblance
to  the  functions  of  our  own  Court  of  Chancery,  than  to  those  of
our  own  Court  of  Common  Pleas,  or  of  our  other  Common  Law
Courts  (regarded  as  civil  Tribunals).

For,  in  causes  falling  within  his  jurisdiction,  the  ordinary  or
regular  procedure  was  this : —


Roman  Procedure.  587

The  Praetor  alone  disposed  of  the  cause,  or  the  Prsetor  alone Lbct.
heard  and  determined^  in  the  following  events :  ^ ^ >

First,  If  the  defendant  confessed  the  facts  contained  in  the
plaintiffs  case,  without  disputing  their  sufiGlciency  in  law  to
sustain  the  demand  :

Secondly,  If  the  contending  parties  were  agreed  as  to  the
facts^  but  came  to  an  issue  of  law :

Thirdly,  If  the  defendant  disputed  the  truth  of  the  plaintiff's
statement,  but  the  statement  was  supported  by  evidence  so  short,
clear,  and  convincing,  that  the  Praetor  could  decide  the  issue  of
fact  without  an  elaborate  and  nice  inquiry.

But  if  the  parties  came  to  an  issue  involving  a  question  of
fact,  and  the  evidence  produced  to  the  Praetor  appeared  doubtful,
the  Prsetor  defined  or  made  up  the  issue,  or  put  the  disputed
point  into  a  formula  or  statement.

The  formvia  (or  statement  of  the  issue)  being  prepared  by
the  PrastoT,  the  issue  was  submitted  to  the  decision  of  a  Judex
or  Arbiter :  Who  (it  seems)  was  appointed  for  the  particular  or
specific  occasion ;  and  is  rather  to  be  regarded  as  a  juryman
(taken  pro  re  natd  from  the  citizens  at  large)  than  as  a  permanent
judicial  ofi&cer.

The  judex  or  arbiter  thus  appointed,  not  only  inquired  into
the  question  of  fact,  but  gave  judgment  generally  upon  the  issue
submitted  to  his  decision.

The  formula  (or  statement  of  the  issue),  together  with  the
judgment  of  the  judex  or  arbiter,  was  remitted  to  the  Prcetor  (or
to  the  Court  above).

The  judgment  of  the  judex  or  arbiter,  was  then  carried  into
execution  by  or  by  the  command  of  the  Prsetor:  By  whom  (in
every  cause)  the  consummation,  as  well  as  the  initiative  of  the
procedure,  was  superintended  or  directed.

It  may  here  be  observed  that  jurisdictio  was  properly  the  Juris-
power  of  hearing  and  determining  causes,  or  of  associating  a  ^^'
judex  or  arbiter  when  necessary. This  was  all  that  the  word  CoercUio.
meant,  and  the  Praetor  had  this  power  by  virtue  of  his  jurisdictio.  ^^m"'^
Jurisdictio  was  distinct  from  the  coercUio  (or  power  of  compelling  wix^M7n.
and  restraining)  which  might  be  necessary  to  carry  into  effect
the  judgment  of  the  Praetor  or  judex.

The  power  of  compelling  or  restraining  (when  vested  in
criminal  tribunals)  was  called  imperium,  or  imperium  merum ;  and
is  often  synonymous  with  our  '  criminal  jurisdiction.'  *  Juris-
diction '  (in  Boman  law-language)  is  seldom  or  never  applied  to


588


Law :  Sources  and  Modes,


Lect.
XXXIV


Order  of
procedure
Defore  the
Praetor,
etc.


criminal  jurisdiction. When  combined  with  civil  jurisdiction,
the  power  of  coercing  was  styled  imperium  mixtum.

Imperium  Toerum,  as  well  as  mixtum,  resided  in  the  Piesi-
dents  or  Governors  of  Provinces.

The  Praetors,  whose  jurisdiction  was  merely  civil,  had
imperium  mixtum  only.

The  Prcefectiis  urbi  (under  the  emperors)  imperium  merum
only.

From  this  division  of  judicial  power  between  the  prcetor  bsiA
the  judex,  the  functions  of  the  praetor  more  resembled  those  of
the  Courts  of  Common  Law,  than  those  of  the  Court  of  Chanceij.

The  important  differences  between  the  functions  of  the  prsetor
and  those  of  our  Common  Law  Courts  were  the  following :

First,  the  formula  empowered  the  judex  not  simply  to  find
for  one  party  or  for  the  other,  but  to  add  to  the  finding  what
should  be  done  by  the  parties  in  pursuance  of  the  finding;  not
only  to  give  a  verdict  but  to  give  judgment ;  the  verdict  being
involved  in  the  terms  of  the  judgment  which  he  gava  This
was  then  remitted  to  the  court  above,  and  by  them  meiely
executed.  With  us  the  jury  merely  finds  for  one  party  or  the
other :  what  shall  be  done  in  pursuance  of  the  finding,  is  deter-
mined by  the  court  above.

Secondly,  another  very  important  difference  is  this.  With
us,  where  the  parties  come  to  an  issue  of  fact,  the  cause  goes  to
the  jury  at  all  events ;  but  in  the  Eoman  law,  the  cause  was
not  necessarily  referred  to  a  judex  because  the  issue  was  an  issue
of  fact.  It  was  at  the  discretion  of  the  prsetor  either  to  give  a
judex  or  not  When  he  did  so  he  acted  more  like  the  chancellor
when  he  directs  an  issue.  The  cases  would  be  exactly  alike,
if  the  chancellor  granted  an  issue  whenever  the  question  of  fieust
could  not  be  properly  tried  in  the  court  above.  There  was  the
same  difficulty  in  settling  the  bounds  between  the  power  of  the
prsetor  and  that  of  the  judex,  as  with  us  between  the  judge  and
the  jury,  where  the  boundary  is  perfectly  indefinite.  It  is  often
said  indeed  that  the  court  judges  of  the  law,  the  jury  only  of  the
fact :  but  it  is  only  necessary  to  look  at  the  terms  of  the  finding,
to  see  that  this  maxim  is  false.  Generally,  and  notoriously,  the
jury  is  judge  of  law  as  well  as  of  fact.  In  the  Boman  law  there
was  the  same  difficulty ;  for  though  the  issues  were  made  up
with  great  preciseness,  they  often  involved  questions  of  law:
and  the  judgment  often  directed  the  prsetor  to  come  to  a  certain
conclusion  if  certain  premises  were  established :  which  involved
a  proposition  of  law  as  well  as  of  fact. Si  parti  Avium  Egerium


Roman  Procedure,  589

pwrf  NuiMfriwm  Egerium  argentum  deposuisse  idque  die  nomincUo Lbct.
iumerius  Egerivs  AtUo  Hgerio  rum  reddiderit  .  .  .  condemncUo.  >

I  may  remark  also  that  the  proceedings  before  the  praetor  jua  et
rere  called  proceedings  injure  ;  those  before  thejvdex  or  arbiter  J'^*^^^-
0  whom  he  remitted  any  part  of  the  case,  proceedings  in  jvdido.

I  shall  also  observe,  that  the  original  proceedings  before  the  Natural
)i«tor  approached  more  closely  than  any  other  proceedings  which  ^iter^"'^*
i  know  to  what  Mr.  Bentham  calls  natural  procedure ;  for  the  wards
Aole  pleading  or  process  by  which  the  precise  point  at  issue  is  '  ^
ilicited,  took  place  vivd  voce  in  the  presence  of  the  praetor  him-
sdL The  witnesses  were  present  and  the  praetor  himself  decided
the  cause  immediately  and  on  the  spot,  if  the  question  of  fact
was  not attended  with  difficulty. Nothing could be more
sommary  or  less  dilatory  and  expensive.

After  the  judicial  constitution  was  changed,  the  distinction
between  the  praetor  and  the  judex  was  abolished,  and  the  whole
proceeding  took  place  before  a  single  judge.  A  similar  alteration
took  place  about  the  same  period  in  the  manner  of  conducting
ibe  pleading.  The  parties  began  to  put  in  their  mutual  allega-
tioiis  in  writing,  in  the  modem  form :  which  has  introduced  the
dday  and  expense  of  the  administration  of  justice  in  modem
times.

In  certain  cases,  the  praetor  at  the  outset  gave  provisional  Procedure
or  conditional  judgments,  or  issued  provisional  commands  on  an  5S^ic<
^ parte  statement  by  the  Plaintiff: a  process  like  an  injunction  See  next
in  Chancery  or  a  mandamics  in  the  Courts  of  Common  Law.  ^^*^''*-
The  command  being  iasued  provisionally  by  the  praetors,  the
parties  to  whom  it  was  addressed  were  compelled  to  obey  it  if
4ey  considered  that  they  had  not  a  case ;  i£  they  considered
4at  they  had,  they  might  shew  cause  why  they  should  not  obey
^he  conmiand  provisionally  issued. If  the  party  in  possession
Jisputed  the  command  and  shewed  cause  against  it,  and  there
appeared  doubt  as  to  a  question  of  fact,  this  question  was  treated
n  the  regular  manner  and  remitted  to  a  judex.

What  I  have  now  described  was  the  regular  and  ordinary  CognUio,
>roceeding. In  certain  cases,  which  it  is  not  necessary  to  detail,  ^^^^^^'
he  prsetor  was  said  to  have  not  only  jurisdictio  but  cognitio.  ordinem.
5e  might  enquire  into  a  question  of  fact,  whatever  might  be  its
lifficolties,  and  dispose  of  the  whole  case  without  a  judex  or
wetter. The  praetor,  too,  like  some  modern  courts  of  justice,
iWcised  a  voluntary  jurisdiction  in  cases  relating  to  contracts.
Hie  proceedings  in  such  cases  are  not  suits  at  all :  though  it  is
within  the  province  of  courts  of  justice  to  give  judicial  authority

VOL.  IL  G


590  Law :  Sources  and  Modes.

Lect. to  the  oenventioii  and  to  facilitate  the  production  of  evidence  if

XXXIV

V  ^  V  any  difficulty  arise.  In  the  old  Boman  law,  the  praetor  exercised
this  jurisdiction  dt  plaru),  not  pro  tribunalL  As  the  cause  was
not  a  suit  irUer  partes,  but  merely  a  convention  or  contract,  it
was  not  conducted  with  the  forms  of  judicature.  The  pnetor
lent  his  auspices,  not  as  a  judge,  but  as  sanctioning  the  pro-
ceeding. Fines  and  recoveries  in  the  Common  Fleas  ^  are  veiy
similar  to  this  jurisdiction  of  the  Praetors ;  and  what  was  called
in  jure  cessio  ^^  is  exactly  analogous  to  fine  and  recovery.  Thi«
was  a  mere  conveyance,  in  the  form  of  a  fictitious  suit,  carried
on  in  the  presence  of  the  prsetor,  with  nearly  all  the  formalitiej
which  accompanied  a  real  suit.
Ulti-  The  jurisdiction  which  I  have  attempted  to  describe,  anc

nUio  ^r^ ^^^  division  of  the  judicial  powers  in  certain  cases  between  th(
proceeding  court  above  and  an  occasional  temporary  tribunal,  seems  to  hav(
nem!  uni^ ^^^T^  altered  about  the  end  of  the  third  century. Itwasii
veraal. force  in  the  time  of  Gains :  but  in  the  time  of  Justinian  the  ol<
judicial  establishments  had  been  completely  altered. It  is  fa
that  reason  asserted  in  the  Institutes  fiodie  omnia  judicia  mn
extra  ordinem. The  cognisance  of  the  suit  from  its  institutuH
to  its  completion  was  then  wholly  had  by  a  single  judge,  aiM
the  original  practice,  which  seems  to  have  been  generally  adopted
of  dividing  the  judicial  power  in  the  manner  above  mentioned
was  dropped.


The  only  dose  resemblance  between  Eoman  and  English  Equity
appears  to  be  this :  that  under  each  system  the  law  corrected  o
abrogated  by  the  so-called  equity  law  is  allowed  to  exist  in  form.

Another  resen4)lance :  that  Roman  and  English  Equity  has  beei
formed  to  some  extent  by  analogy  on  the  law  to  which  it  is  contrasted
the  one  by  analogy  to  jus  civile  {subsequUur  jus  civile) ;  the  other,  t
Common  Law  (seguitur  legem).  Of  course  they  must  have  deviated
but  analogy  was  observed  to  some  considerable  extent.  This,  ho^
ever,  is  not  a  proof  of  resemblance,  since  much  of  every  body  (
innovating  law  is  formed  by  the  same  analogy.

^  An  instance  of  modem  procedure  ^'  Gaii  Comm.  n,  §  22.

bearing  probably  a  still  closer  analogy  Bes  mancipi  were  alienable  by  Man*

to  the  interposition  of  judicial  authority  pation  (a  fictitious  sale) ;  injure  ceatio

mentioned  m  the  text,  is  furnished  by  fictitious  suit) ;  or  (if  corporeal)  by  at

bonds  and  contracts  bearing  a  clause  of  capion  working  upon  simple  traditk

registration  for  execution,  according  to  — Marginal  note  in  Oaitis.
the  Scotch  practice. — R.  C.


Pratorian  Legislation.  ^  591


LECTURE XXXV.

LEGISLATION OF THE PRJETORS.

Feom  the  judicial  fonctions  of  the  Prc^tores  Urbani,  I  proceed  to Lect.
that  power  of  direct  legislation  which  they  exercised  (at  first) . \
with  the  tacit  consent,  and  (afterwards)  with  the  express  authority
of  the  sovereign  Boman  People.

Originally  and  properly,  the  Praetor  was  merely  a  judge.  The  direct
It  was  his  business  to  administer  the  Law,  established  by  the  ^®g^^*^J®

'  •'  power  of

Supreme  Legislature,  in  specific  cases  falling  within  his  juris-  the
diction.  ^^^^'^ .

uiwxv/u.  ^^  origi-

But  though  it  waa  his  business  to  administer  the  law  estab-  nallv  con-
lished  by  the  supreme  legislature,  the  manner  of  administration,  ^^cedure
or  the  mode  of  procedure,  was  left,  in  a  great  measure,  to  his  ^^^  after-
own  discretion. Accordingly,  every  Praetor,  on  his  accession  to  tended  to
the  Praetorship,  made  and  published litUes of  Procedure  or  Subst^n-
Pradice :  Bules  to  be  observed,  during  his  continuance  in  oflBlce,
by  those  who  might  happen  to  be  concerned  (as  parties,  or  other-
wise) in  causes  coming  before  him.

Such,  originally,  was  the  direct  legislative  power  exercised
by  the  Praetors,  It  extended  to  procedure  or  practice,  but  not
to  the  substantive  law  which  it  was  their  business  to  administer.
It  may  be  likened  to  the  power  of  making  Regulce  Praxis  which
is  ttot  unfrequently  exercised  by  our  own  Courts  of  Justice.

But,  in  consequence  of  incessant  changes  in  the  circumstances
and  opinions  of  the  Boman  community,  corresponding  changes
in  its  institutions  were  absolutely  necessary.  And,  inasmuch  as
tbe  demand  for  innovation  was  slowly  and  imperfectly  supplied
by  the  supreme  and  regular  legislature,  the  Praetors  ventured
to  extend  their  direct  legislative  power,  and  to  amend  or  alter
the  substantive  law  which  properly  it  was  their  office  to  ad-
nunister.

As  I  have  used  the  expression  substantive  law,  I  may  here
note  that  this  name  is  applied  by  Mr.  Bentham  to  the  law  which
the  Ck>urt8  are  established  to  administer,  as  opposed  to  the  rules
according  to  which  the  substantive  law  is  itself  administered.
These  last,  or  the  rules  of  procedure  or  practice,  he  has  termed
adjective  law.  These  expressions  appear  at  first  sight  somewhat
odd ;  but  they  are  closely  analogous  to  the  terms  employed  to
ienote  tie  same  two  departments  of  law,  in  a  very  able  report
^resented  to  the  Prussian Government  in 1811. What  Mr.


592


Law :  Sources  and  Modes,


Lect.
XXXV


Difference

between

general


Bentham  calls  substantive  law,  the  framer  of  the  report  calls
material  law ;  the  adjective  law  of  Mr.  Bentham  he  caUs  formal
law.  The  only  difference  is  that  the  one  writer  draws  his  meta-
phor from  the  language  of  grammarians,  the  other  from  that  of
logicians.  The  expressions  of  the  French  law  are  nearly  similar.
Substantive  law,  or  the  law  which  the  Courts  are  appointed  to
administer,  is  called  by  the  French  lawyers  U  fonds  du  dmi:
adjective  law,  or  the  rules  according  to  which  the  substantive
law  is  to  be  administered,  they  call  la  forme.  There  is  really
nothing  odd  or  eccentric  in  Mr.  Bentham's  phrases.  There  are
indeed  many  objections  to  them,  and  I  think  that  it  would  be
better  to  express  the  meaning  by  a  circumlocution;  becaoae
there  are  many  rules  which  are  not  properly  rules  of  procedore,
but  which  might  with  equal  propriety  be  called  adjective  law,  2
or  formal  law ;  such  as  the  formalities  prescribed  by  law  in
entering  into  contracts.

I  adopt,  for  the  present,  the  distinction  between  substantive
and  adjective  law,  although,  as  I  shall  shew  hereafter,  it  cannot
be  made  the  basis  of  a  just  division.

The  Law  introduced  by  the  Prsetor  (whether  it  consisted  of
substantive  law,  or  of  rules  of  procedure  or  practice)  was  intro-
andspecial  duced  (for  the  most  part)  by  their  general  Edicts,  or  by  their
^^^- Edicts  (simply  so  called).

The  Edicts,  Orders,  or  Precepts,  issued  by  the  Praetors,  were
of  two  kinds :  general  and  special.

A  general  Edict  was  made  and  published  by  a  Praetor  in
his  legislative  capacity.  A  special  Edict  waa  made  and  issued
by  a  Praetor  in  the  exercise  of  his  judicial  functions.

A  general  edict  consisted  of  a  rule  or  rules,  which  had  no
specific  relation  to  a  specific  case  or  cases,  but  regarded  indiffer-
ently all  cases  of  a  given  class  or  classes.  A  special  edict  was
issued  in  a  specific  cause ;  was  addressed  to  a  person  or  persons
concerned  in  that  cause,  and  specifically  regarded  the  person  or
persons  to  whom  it  was  addressed.

In  short,  a  general  edict  was  a  statute,  or  a  body  of  statute
law ;  and  was  made  and  published  by  its  author  as  a  subordinaJU
legislator.  A  special  edict  was  an  order,  made  in  a  specific
cause ;  and  was  made  and  issued  by  its  author  o^  a  jvdge.

It  appears,  then,  that  the  term  '  Edict '  was  often  applied
indifferently,  to  the  general  rules  or  orders  which  were  published
by  the  Praetors  as  legislators,  and  to  the  special  orders  or  com-
mands which  they  made  and  issued  as  judges.  But  when  the
Edicts  of  the  Praetors  are  mentioned  without  qualification,  their


Pratortan  Legislation.  593

general  or  l^islatdve  edicts,  and  not  their  particular  or  judicial, Lect.
are  commonly  or  always  referred  to  by  the  writer.

In  like  manner,  the  jtis  ediceTidi,  which  is  ascribed  to  the
Praetors,  denotes  their  power  or  right  of  making  general  rules,
and  not  their  power  or  right  of  making  special  orders  in  the
exercise  of  their  judicial  functions.  And  so,  ' edicere'  or  'jtis
idieere'  is  to  legislate  directly:  The  act  oijvdging  (or  of  apply-
ing existing  law  in  specific  causes)  being  denoted  by  the  expres-
sion *ju8  dicere '  (or  'jtis  decemere ').

In the orations  of Cicero  against  Verres, '  edicefi^e*  and
'decemere'  are  directly  and distinctly  opposed  in  the  senses
which  I  have  now  referred  to. For  one  of  the  charges  against
"Verres  (who  as  Governor  or  President  of  a  province  was  in-
Tested with  the  fas  edicendt)  is  this : quod  aliter,  atque  ut
(dixercU,  decrevisset : — that  in  the  decrees  or  orders,  which  he
issued  as  judge,  he  violated  the  rules,  which  he  had  established
in  his  l^islative  capacity,  by  his  own  general  edict. In  like
manner,  the  general  constitutions  promulged  by  the  Emperors  as
legislators  (when  opposed  to  the  decrees  which  they  issued  as
judges  in  the  last  resort)  are  frequently  styled  *  edictal.'

IrUerdicere  (as  well  as  dicere  and  decemere)  is  also  opposed
to  edicere.  But  an  interdictum  was  a  special  and  judicial  order
of  a  particular  species.  It  was  a  provisional  or  conditional
order  made  by  the  Praetor  on  the  ex  parte  statement  of  the
applicant:  The  party  to  whom  it  was  addressed  having  the
power  of  shewing  cause  why  the  order  should  not  be  carried
into  effect  In  short,  it  waa  what  would  be  styled,  in  the
language  of  our  own  law,  an  injunction  or  mandamus.

Any  Prsetor  might  publish  a  general  edict  at  any  period  why  the
during  his  stay  in  office. But,  generally  speaking,  all  tJie  rules  ^"^te^of
or  laws,  which were  published by  any given Praetor, were  the  PraB-
published  or  promulged  immediaiely  after  his  accession,  and  were  ^ty\l^^^^
comprised  in  one  edict,  or  constituted  one  edict.  perpetual

The  edict  which  was  published  by  any  given  Praetor,  was
not  legally  binding  upon  his  successor  in  the  Praetorship,  and
only  obtained  as  Law  till  the  end  of  the  year  during  which  he
liimself  continued  in  office.  And,  accordingly,  the  general  edicts
of  the  Praetors,  or  their  edicts  simply  so  called,  are  styled  by
Cicero  and  others  *  JEdicta  annua'  or  *  leges  anmice*

But  though  a  general  edict  was  merely  annual  (or  merely
obtained  as  Law  while  its  author  continued  in  office),  the  general
or  legislative  Edicts,  made  and  promulged  by  the  Praetors,  are
nevertheless  styled 'perpetual,' Now  the  epithet  'perpetual'


594  Law:  Sources  and  Modes.

Lect.  (taken  in  its  ordinary  meaning)  is  hardly  applicable  to  a  law  or
statute  of  a  certain  or  definite  duration.  A  perpettial  law  or
statute  (taking  the  terms  in  their  ordinary  meaning)  would  seem
to  denote  a  law  which  was  intended  to  be  irrevocable,  or  which
(at  least)  was  intended  to  endure  until  some  competent  authonty
should  abrogate  or  repeal  it.

Accordingly,  the  epithet  '  perpetual '  (when  applied  to  the
legislative  edicts  made  and  published  by  the  Prsetor)  indicates
their  generality,  and  not  their  duration.  When  thus  applied,
the  epithet  *  perpetual '  is  opposed  to  '  occasional'  and  is  used  to
distinguish  the  general  edicts  of  the  Praetors  from  the  qxeial
edicts  or  orders  which  they  issued  in  their  judicial  capacity.

And  (taking  the  epithet  '  perpetual '  in  this  meaning)  it  was
justly  applicable  to  these  general  or  legislative  edicts,  although
their  duration  was  definite  or  certain.  For  a  special  or  judicial
edict  was  issued  in  a  given  cause :  was  restricted  to  the  cause
in  which  it  was  issued ;  and  expired  with  the  specific  exigency
which  it  was  intended  to  meet.  It  was  an  occasional  cider
concerning  a  particular  case,  and  not  extending  generally  to  |
cases  of  a  class.  In  the  language  of  the  Boman  Law,  it  was
made  and  issued  ^pro  re  natd'  (or  Sprout  res  inddit').

But  an  edict  issued  by  a  Pnetor,  as  exercising  his  legislative
powers,  consisted  of  general  Eules. It  was  neither  provoked  by
a  specific  occasion,  nor  did  it  expire  with  any  of  the  specific
occasions  on  which  its  general  provisions  were  actually  applied.
It  was  intended  to  apply  to  entire  classes  of  cases ;  and  was
applicable  to  every  case  belonging  to  any  of  those  classes,  so
long  as  the  Prsetor  by  whom  it  was  promulged  should  occupy
his  oflBce. In  the  language  of  the  Eoman  Law,  it  was  made
and  issued,  '  nan  prout  res  incidit,  sed  jurisdictionis  perpetiUZt
cslvlsL' It  was  not  provoked  by  a  specific  incident  or  occasion;
but  was  intended  to  serve  as  a  guide  to  all  who  might  be  con-
cerned in  causes,  so  long  as  the  Prsetor  who  issued  or  promulged
it  should  continue  to  exercise  the  jurisdiction  annexed  to  his
oflBce.

The  epithet  'perpetual'  when  applied  to  the  Edict  of  a
Praetor,  is  therefore  synonymous  with  *  general'  (as  opposed  to
*  specific '  or  '  occasional ').  It  denotes  that  the  Edict  consisted
of  general  provisions ;  and  not  that  it  was  calculated  to  endure
in  perpetuum,  or  until  it  should  be  abrogated  or  repealed  by  a
supreme  or  subordinate  legislature.  As  opposed  to  general  and
legislative  edicts,  special  and  judicial  edicts  are  frequently  styled
repen^ina :  An  epithet  which  does  not  denote  that  they  were


Prcetorian  Legislation.  595

issued  in  haste,  but  that  they  were  made  on  the  spur  of  a  specific Lect.

.. ,  .  ^  r  r  XXXV

or  particular  occasion.  v

The  Praetorian  Edict,  which  was  in  force  at  any  given  period,  Edidum
was  properly  the  edict  of  the  Pnetor  who  then  occupied  the  JJ^^*or
Pnetorship.  For  the  edict  which  was  promulged  by  any  given  th^  Edict
Praetor,  expired  with  the  year  during  which  he  stayed  in  the  prsetor  or
office,  and  yielded  to  a  similar  edict  promulged  by  his  immediate  Praetors.
successor.

But  though  the  edict  of  every  foregoing  Praetor  was  super-
seded by  the  edict  of  his  immediate  successor  in  the  office,  every
succeeding  Praetor  inserted  in  his  own  edict,  all  such  rules  and
{ffovisions,  contained  in  the  edict  of  his  predecessor,  as  had
found  favour  with  the  public  at  large,  or  had  met  with  the
approbation  of  the  classes  who  influenced  the  community.
For,  as  the  legislative  power  of  the  Praetors  was  derived  from
the  tacit  consent  of  the  sovereign  people,  its  exercise  was
inevitably  determined  by  general  opinion.

Such  being  the  case,  the  edict  promulged  by  every  succeed-
ing Praetor  was  a  simple  or  modified  copy  of  the  edict  promulged
by  his  predecessor.  He  simply  republished  the  edict  which  his
inunediate  predecessor  had  issued,  or  else  he  republished  it  with
8uch  omissions  and  additions  as  were  demanded  by  general
opinion  or  suggested  by  general  expediency.  If  he  simply  copied
tbe  edict  which  the  foregoing  Praetor  had  promulged,  the  edict
promulged  by  himself  was  simply  translatitimcs,  or  tralatitious.
in  other  words,  it  merely  consisted  of  rules  and  provisions,
^hich  he  translated  (transferred  or  adopted)  from  the  edict  of
lus  immediate  predecessor.

If  he  copied  the  edict  of  his  predecessor  with  certain
Diodifications,  the  edict  promulged  by  himself  was  partly  Edictum
trdatitium,  and  partly  Edictum  novum.  So  far  as  it  consisted
of  provisions  taken  from  the  edict  of  his  predecessor,  it  was
BdidtMn  tralatiiium.  So  far  as  it  consisted  of  provisions  devised
and  introduced  by  himself,  it  was  not  Edictum  tralatitiuvi,  but
dictum  novum.

It  rarely  happened  that  the  general  edict  of  a  Praetor  was
purely  traiatitious.  For  incessant  changes  in  the  position  and
[  opiiuons  of  the  community  created  an  incessant  demand  for
o^nesponding  changes  in  its  law.  And  since  this  continued
demand  was  slowly  and  imperfectly  satisfied  by  the  supreme
ttni  ordinary  legislature,  the  Praetors  were  provoked  to  supply
the  demand  by  a  continued  though  cautious  exercise  of  their
legislative  powers.


596  Law :  Sources  and  Modes,

LvoT.  It  is  remarkable  that  all  the  edicts  of  all  the  successiYe

XXXV

.  Prsetors are  frequently  considered  as constituting  <m«  Edict


They  are  frequently  styled  (in  the  singular  number)  *  iht  Edict;*
*  the  Praetorian  Edict ;'  ox 'the  Edict  of  the  Praetors  or  Praetor.'
The  process  of  translation  or  transference  which  I  have  attemptid
to  describe,  explains  this  form  of  expression.

With  reference  to  its  pramtUgation,  the  general  Edict,  which
was  in  force  at  any  given  period,  was  the  edict  of  the  Prsetar
who  then  occupied  the  Praetorship.  But  with  reference  to  its
contents,  or  to  the  rules  of  which  it  consisted,  it  was  partly  ilie
production  of  the  Praetor  who  then  occupied  the  Praetorship,  and
partly  the  production  of  his  various  predecessors  in  the  office
For  much  of  the  edict  promulged  by  every  Praetor,  was  translated
into  the  edict  promulged  by  his  immediate  follower.  Witt
reference,  therefore,  to  their  contents  (though  not  with  reference
to  their  promulgation),  the  series  of  edicts,  issued  by  a  series  ol
Praetors,  constituted  an  indivisible  whole,  or  formed  a  continuous
chain.  Although  the  edict  for  the  time  being  had  been  pro-
mulged by  the  actual  Praetor,  his  predecessors  as  well  as  himself,
had  lent  a  hand  to  the  formation  of  its  provisions.

And  here  I  may  remark,  that,  after  the  Praetors  had  legislated
through  a  long  tract  of  time,  the  general  Edict  of  the  Praetor  foi
the  time  being  naturally  consisted  (for  the  most  part)  of  deriva-
tive or  translatitious  rules.  For  as  the  legislative  power  of  the
Praetor  was  commonly  exercised  discreetly,  the  rules,  introduced
originally  by  the  Praetor,  for  the  time  being,  were  comparative!}

«  few  and unimportant. They  bore a  small  and  insignificant

proportion  to  those  provisions  of  his  predecessors  which  wen
also  a  part  of  his  edict,  and  which  had  accumulated  through  i
series  of  ages.

The* jus  The aggregate of rules,  which had been introduced  b;

R!!!*?!l-» successive  edicts,  and  which  were  embodied  in  the  edict  obtair

lum was ^  '

formed  by  ing  for  the  time  being,  formed  or  constituted,  at  any  give
of  the  *^^  period,  the  portion  of  the  Roman  Law  which  was  styled  '«/t
Pwetors. Prcctorium*

A  part  of  the  Roman  Law  (like  much  of  the  Law  of  Englanc
was  made  by  judicial  decisions  on  specific  or  particular  case
Decided  cases,  serving  as  precedents,  formed  a  portion  of  tl
Roman,  as  well  as  of  our  own  system.  In  the  language  of  tl
Roman  Law,  as  well  as  in  the  language  of  the  English,  sue
decided  cases  are  frequently  ccUled  precedents : — 'prcefiidicu
More  commonly,  however,  such  decided  cases  are  styled  'r
judicatce  ;* And  their  influence  (as  precedents)  upon  subsequti


Pratorian  Legislation.  597

ludidal  decisions,  is  styled  '  auctoritas  rerum  perpetuo  similiter l^E^rr.
pidicatanun/  '  ^xxv^

Now  as  most  civil  cases  fell  within  the  jurisdiction  of  the
Praetor,  most  of  the  civil  law,  which  was  formed  by  judicial
decisions,  migkt  have  been  styled  with  propriety  '  prsetorian  law.'
Where  the  Praetor  decided  without  an  arbiter  or  jvdex,  the
questions  of  law  which  happened  to  arise  in  the  cause  were  of
course  determined  by  himself.  And  where  he  remitted  the
cause  to  a  fudex  or  arbiter,  the  questions  of  law,  which  the
fmaula  happened  to  involve,  were  probably  decided  in  efifect  by
the  Court  above,  and  not  by  the  secondary  or  subordinate
tribunal.  The  jiuUx  probably  took  the  opinion  of  the  Court
tbove  on  the  point  of  law,  and  decided  accordingly.  I  have
not  been  able  to  discover,  whether  it  was  incumbent  on  the  fudex
to  take  the  Law  from  the  Prsetor,  and  whether  the  latter  could
grant  a  new  trial  in  case  the  fudex  or  arbiter  decided  against  the
law,  but  it  is  probable  that,  in  practice,  such  a  miscarriage  in
judicio  seldom  occurred.

But  though  most  of  the  law,  formed  by  judicial  decisions,
was  made  by  the  Prsetors  (as  judges),  and  migJU  have  been  styled
'pretorian,'  the  term  *ju$  piwtarium '  was  exclusively  applied
to  the  law  which  they  made  by  their  general  edicts  in  the  way
of  direct  legislation.

This  is  a  fact  which  I  cannot  account  for  satisfactorily ;  but
which  (perhaps)  may  be  explained  in  the  following  manner.

Though  part  of  the  Roman  Law  was  formed  by  judicial
decisions,  that  part  of  it  which  was  so  formed  bore  an  insignificant
proportion  to  the  rest  of  the  system.  Demand  for  law  of  the
kind  was  superseded,  in  a  great  measure,  by  the  law  which  the
Praetors  intixxiuced  in  the  exercise  of  their  legislative  powers.
And  since  the  law  which  they  introduced  through  the  medium
of  their  general  edicts,  eclipsed  the  law  which  they  established
hy  their  decisions  on  specific  cases,  general  attention  was  fixed
on  the  former,  whilst  the  existence  of  the  latter  was  generally
forgotten.  The  former  being  conspicuouSy  and  being  conspicuously
the  work  of  the  Praetors,  it  obtained  exclusively  the  name  oijus.
fnxtorium,  although  the  name  might  with  equal  propriety  have
heen  extended  to  the  latter.

The  jus  edicendi  (or  the  power  of  legislating  directly  by  The  jua
general  edicts  or  statutes)  was  not confined  to  the  Prcetores  ^^^^/^
Ufiani It  was  exercised  by  every  magistrate  of  a  superior  or  the  jus  ho-
isted rank,  with  reference  to  such  matters  as  fell  within  his  ^^^°^^^^^'
jurisdiction. It  was  exercised  by  the  high  priests  or  Pontifices


598


Law :  Sources  and  Modes.


Lect.
XXXV


maximi.  It  was  exercised  by  the  JEdUes,  or  the  surveyors  and
curators  of  public  buildings,  roads,  and  markets.  With  reference
to  cases  arising  in  Italy,  between  provincials  and  provinciab,  or
between  provincials  and  Boman  citizens,  it  was  exercised  by  the
Prcetores  Peregrini.  In  the  outlying  provinces,  it  was  exerdaed
by  the  Proconsuls,  and  other  Presidents  or  Rulers,  to  whom  the
government  of  those  provinces  was  committed  by  the  Boman
People.

The  rules  which  were  established  by  the  general  edicts  of
the  magistrates  who  enjoyed  the  fus  edicendi,  were  often  con-
sidered as  constituting  a  whole,  and  were  styled  (when  considered
as  a  whole)  the  jvs  honorarium.  For,  as  every  office  of  an
elevated  character  honoured  or  distinguished  the  person  by  whom
it  was  occupied,  every  office  of  the  kind  was  styled  'Aotuw.'
And  since  the  magistrates  who  enjoyed  and  exercised  the  power
of  promulging  general  edicts,  enjoyed  it  by  virtue  of  their  honoreSt
or  of  the  elevated  offices  which  they  filled,  the  law  which  thejr
created  by  their  general  edicts  was  naturally  styled  jus  Jumorariim.

Hence  it  follows,  that  the  jus  proetorium  was  merely  a  po^
tion  of  the  jus  honorarium.  But  as  no  other  portion  of  the  pa
honorarium  was  equal  in  extent  and  importance  to  the  /itf
prcetorium,  the  term  jiLS  honorarium  is  frequently  restricted  to
the  latter.

'  Prsetores  (says  Pomponius)  edicta  proponebant :  quae  edicta
prsetorum  jus  honorarium  constituerunt.  Honorarium  dicitor,
quod  ab  honore  prsetoris  venerat.'

'  Jus  prsetorium  (says  Papinian)  et  honorarium  dicitur :  ad
honorem  prsetorum  {or  ex  honore  prsetorum)  sic  nominatum/


Materials  The  jvs  pra^orium  (or  the  law  which  the  prcetores  urbani

which  the introduced  by  their  general  edicts)  seems  to  have  been  made  by
jusprcetO' those  distinguished  magistrates  out  of  the  following  materials.

TiuiTL  was  v^  t/  ^

formed.  TiTst :)  They  gave  the  force  of  Law  (through  the  medium  of

their  general  edicts)  to  various  customary  or  merely  moral  rules
which  had  obtained  generally  amongst  the  Boman  people.

Secondly:)  They  imported  into  the  Boman  Law  (through
the  medium  of  their  general  edicts)  much  of  that  jus  gentium,
or  that  aequal  or  common  Law,  which  had  been  formed  by
the  Prcetores  Peregrini,  and  by  the  Presidents  of  the  outlying
provinces.

Thirdly :)  So  far  as  the  opinion  of  the  Boman  public  invited
or  permitted  such  changes,  they  suppKed  the  defects  of  the  jus
civile,  or  proper  Boman  Law,  and  even  abolished  portions  of  it,


•  r" »  -ui


5, to Wl:-.

[leral  r?ii
ere  cfbcn
ten  C7  I15--I

stvlt^l  ■'■.
lise*!  th£  7-'
Df  their  .\:-
aw  whiti


laerelv  t
rtion  of  "ii

DCe to ill:

:lv  resi


mt : qu:


1:. .


PriBtorian  Legislatiofi,

agreeably  to  their  own  notions  of  public  or  general  utility. —
'Jus  Prsetoiium  est  (says  Papinian)  quod  prsetores  (supplendi
vel  corrigendi  juris  civilis  gratia)  introduxerunt,  propter  utUitateni
fMieanL*

Inasmuch  as  the  body  of  law,  formed  by  the  Prcetores  Vrhaniy
was  partly  derived  from  the  jus  gentium,  and  was  partly  fashioned
upon  Utility  (as  conceived  by  the  Praetors  and  the  public),  it
was  naturally  styled  the  Equity  of  the  Praetors,  or  was  said  to
be  founded  by  the  Praetors  upon  equitable  grounds  or  principles.
For  (as  I  remarked  in  a  former  Lecture)  the  jus  gentium  was
styled  jus  ceguum,  whilst  general  utility  (or  principles  of  legislation
supposed  to  accord  with  it)  was  often  styled  '  -^uitas.'

It  is  said  in  a  passage  of  the  Digests  (referring  to  a  certain
rule  of  the  jus  prcetarium)  '  hoc  cequitas  suggerit  etsi  jure  deficia-
BBir:'  That  is  to  say,  the  rule  was  commended  by  general  utility
(or  equity),  although  it  was  not  recognised  by  that  portion  of
tke  Boman  Law  which  was  opposed  to  the  jus  prcetorium  by  the
Mme  of  *jus  civile'  Though  that  which  conforms  to  the  jus
fntimum  is  commonly  styled  erg^wm,  it  is  frequently  styled
'JM^Km.'  That  which  does  not  conform  to  the  jus  prcetorium,
is  commonly  styled  '  iniqimm*  and  not  unfrequently,  '  injustumJ

Inasmuch  as  the  jus  prcetorium  grew  gradually,  or  was
fenned  by  successive  edicts  of  many  successive  Praetors,  it  was
not  a  formal  system  or  digested  body  of  law,  but  an  incondite
collection  or  heap  of  single  and  insulated  rules.  No  Praetor
thought  of  l^islating  systematically:  Nor  would  his  stay  in
oiBce  have  allowed  him  to  legislate  systematically,  although  the
opinion  of  the  public  had  favoured  the  attempt,  and  the  supreme
or  i^ular  legislator  had  inclined  to  acquiesce  in  it.  When  the
Pnetor  for  the  time  being  was  struck  by  a  particular  defect  in
the  existing  law,  and  when  the  general  opinion  invited  or  pro-
voked him  to  supply  it,  he  cured  that  particular  defect  by  a
putacolar  provision.  And  if  he  thought  a  particular  rule
Uliiiwm  or  mischievous,  and  general  opinion  favoured  or  de-
loanded  its  abolition,  he  inserted  a  clause  in  his  edict  abolishing
the  specific  mischief.

It  is  also  remarkable,  that  even  the  substantive  law  intro-
^^  by  the  Edicts  of  the  Praetors,  wore  a  practical  shape  or
^  implicated  with  procedure.

If  the  Praetor  gave  a  right  unknown  to  the  jus  civile,  he  did
^  give  that  right  explicitly  and  directly.  He  promised  or
dedared,  through  the  medium  of  his  general  edict,  that,  in  case
^J  party  should  be  placed  in  a  certain  position,  he,  the  Praetor,


Tl

Ef
A

or
ap

Vt

tic
tU
m<
ut

ot:

pr

et(


Ji
tm
iiK
he
im
ru


In

tic
su
ti\
an

^

ti\
to:
wi
ce<


6oo  Law :  Sources  and  Modes.

Lect. would  inve  him  an  action,  or  would  entertain  an  action  if  he

XXXV

^  ^  >  should  think  fit  to  bring  one.  If  the  Praetor  abolished  a  ruk
which  was  parcel  of  the  jva  civile,  he  did  not  abolish  or  repeal
it  formally  and  explicitly.  He  promised  or  declared,  throng
the  medium  of  his  general  edict,  that  in  case  an  attempt  shoidd
be  made  to  enforce  the  rule  by  action,  he  would  empower  or
permit  the  defendant  to  except  to  the  plaintiff's  action,  or  to
defeat  the  plaintiff^s  action,  by  demurrer  or  plea.  For  example;
Many  conventions  or  pacts,  which  were  void  jure  civili,  were
rendered  legally  binding  by  the  Edicts  of  the  Praetors.  But
when  a  Praetor  (through  the  medium  of  his  general  edict)  gave
validity  to  a  convention  which  was  void  jure  civili,  he  did  not
determine  formally  the  rights  and  obligations  of  the  parties.
He  merely  indicated  the  action  which  he  would  give  to  the  pro-
misee, in  case  the  promisor  should  neglect  or  refuse  performance.

Again :  According  to  the  jtis  civile,  a  party  obliged  (by  con-
tract or  otherwise)  was  not  freed  from  the  performance  of  the
obligation  by  a  simple  promise  on  the  part  of  the  obligee,  not  to
enforce  it  by  action.  According  to  the  jus  civile,  the  obligor  was
not  freed  from  performance  without  a  formal  release  (styled
acceptilcUio)  executed  by  the  obligee.

Now  the  Praetors  determined,  by  their  general  edicts,  that
the  obligation  should  be  extinguished,  in  case  the  obligee  merely
promised  that  he  would  not  require  performance.  But  instead
of  abolishing  the  old  law  explicitly  and  directly,  the  PraetorB
gave  to  the  obligor  an  exception  founded  on  the  promise.  Instead
of  declaring  explicitly  that  the  obligee  had  no  rights  they  leR
him  (in  appearance)  his  right  of  action,  but  empowered  the
obligor  to  defeat  that  apparent  right  by  a  defence  bottomed  in
Equity  (or  in  the  jua  proetorium).

This  obscure  and  absurd  mode  of  abrogating  law  has  also
been  pursued  by  our  own  Chancellors.  Where  a  common-law
rule  is  superseded  by  a  rule  of  equity,  it  is  left  to  appearance
unabrogated  and  imtouched.  But  in  case  an  attempt  be  made
to  enforce  it  by  action,  the  plaintiff  is  restrained  by  the
Chancellor  from  pursuing  his  empty  right

The  only  difference  between  the  cases  arises  from  this :

In  Home,  there  was  no  distinct  tribunal  affecting  to  admin-
ister a  distinct  system  of  Law  under  the  name  of  Equity.
Consequently,  the  equitable  defence  was  submitted  to  the  Praetor
himself,  or  to  the  very  tribunal  in  which  the  action  was  brought

In  England,  there  is  a  distinct  Court  affecting  to  administer
a  distinct  system  of  Law  under  the  name  of  Equity. Conse-


Prcetorian  Legislation.  60 1

quently,  the  action  is  brought  before  one  Court,  and  the  defence Lect.
(in  the  shape  of  a  suit)  is  submitted  to  another. The  action  is .'
hnmght  in  a  common-law  Court,  and  in  that  Court  the  action  is
not  to  be  resisted.** But  the  Chancellor  (on  the  application  of
tk  defendant)  issues  an  order,  restraining  the  plaintiff  at  Law
fiom  pursuing  his  l^al  demand.

In  Borne,  there  was  one  suit.  The  plaintiff  presented  his
demand  (founided  on  the  jus  civile)  to  the  Praetor ;  and  the
defendant  submitted  his  defence  (founded  on  the  jvs  prcetorium)
to  the  same  tribunal

In  England,  there  are  two  suits.  The  plaintiff  brings  his
action  before  a  Common-law  Court :  and  the  defendant  institutes
a  suit  before  a  Court  of  Equity,  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  an
order  to  stay  the  proceedings  of  his  adversary.  In  England,
the  mess  of  complication  and  absurdity  is  somewhat  thicker
duin  it  was  in  ancient  Borne.

To  revert  to  the  subject  from  which  I  have  digressed  for  a
moment :  Wherever  the  Praetor,  by  his  edict,  gave  a  right,  he
did  not  give  the  right  directly  and  explicitly.  He  merely  pro-
loised  a  certain  remedy,  in  case  the  right,  which  he  gave  in
tftd,  should  be  violated  or  disturbed.  And  the  nature  of  the
tight  which  he  thus  virtually  created,  was  implied  (or  described
implicitly)  in  his  description  of  the  remedial  process.

Before  I  quit  this  subject,  I  will  advert  to  two  peculiarities  Actiones
of  the  Boman  Law  language  which  are  extremely  perplexing. jnj^um.

The  actions  (or  rights  of  action)  created  by  the  Praetorian
Edicts  are  frequently  styled  voiles.

It  commonly  or  often  happened,  that  actions  given  by  the
jus  pr<ztcrium  were  analogous  to  actions  given  by  the  jv^  civile.
Or  (speaking  more  accurately)  a  case  wherein  the  Praetor  gave
an  action,  was  often  analogous  to  a  case  wherein  an  action  had

"  According  to  the  letter  of  our  selves  to  effect  the  purpose  which  the
fltitote  law  tms  is  no  longer  precisely  promoters  of  the  statute  may  be  con-
tbe  caae.  Bat  the  provisions  Tor  con-  jectured  to  have  had  in  view.  If  it  be
lierring  an  eqaitable  jurisdiction  on  the  wished  effectually  to  invest  the  Common
Common  Law  Courts,  contained  in  the  Law  Courts  with  jurisdiction  now  pro-
Common  Law  Procedure  Act,  1854,  have  perly  belonging  to  Courts  of  Equity,  or
wored,  especially  in  relation  to  equitable  vice  versd,  the  Court  on  which  the  new
defences^  of  little  practical  value.  jurisdiction is  conferred  must be in-

Tlna  fiulore  has  been  owin^  partly  to  vested,  in  relation  to  the  subject-matter,

the  extreme  pressure  of  public  business  with  the  whole  powers of the  Court

ao  oat  Common  Law  Courts,  and  the  already  having jurisdiction. This is

eonteqaent  reluctance  of  the  judges  to  the  mode  adopted  in  the  Acts  conferring

give  a  libexml  interpretation to their  an  equitable  jurisdiction  on  the  County

new  jurisdiction. But  it  is  also  due  to  Courts  ;  and  the  successful  operation  of

the  inadequacy  of  the  enactments  them-  these  Acts  is  now  beyond  donbt. — R.  C.


6o2  Law:  Sources  and  Modes.

Lect. been  given  by  the  jm  civile. Although  the  case  for  which  the
V  Praetor  provided,  fell  not  within  the  provision  of  the  jus  civik,  it

fell  within  the  principle  upon  which  that  provision  was  foundei
Hence  the  right  of  action  given  by  the  Praetor  was  given  by
way  of  analogy :  by  way  of  analogy  to  a  right  of  action  whidi
had  already  been  given  by  the  jus  civile.  And,  being  given  by
way  of  analogy,  the  action  given  by  the  Praetor  was  styled
viilis.  For  the  term  viilis  (as  taken  in  this  sense)  is  not
derived  from  vli  the  verb,  but  is  related  to  lUi  the  adverb.  The
Praetor  gave  the  action,  cw  he  would  have  given  it,  if  the  case,
submitted  by  the  applicant,  had  fallen  within  the  provision  of
the  jus  civile.  An  actio  lUilis  (as  thus  understood)  may  be
likened  to  an  action  on  the  Ca>se.  For  an  action  on  the  case  (or
an  action  of  trespass  on  the  case)  was  originally  an  action
founded  on  a  writ  issued  in  consimili  casu :  that  is  to  say,  in  a
case  analogous  to  a  case  for  which  the  ancient  law  had  already
provided.

In  the  language  of  the  Soman  Law,  tUUis  is  often  synony-
mous with  'l^ally  valid  or  operative.'  But,  as  applied  to
praetorian  actions,  it  seems  to  be  synonymous  with  '  analogous.'
For,  since  many  praetorian  actions  were  really  analogous  to
actions  given  by  the  jus  civile,  praetorian  actions  were  styled
utiles,  even  in  cases  where  no  such  analogy  obtained.

Actions  given  by  the  Edicts  of  the  Praetors  are  also  fre-
quently styled  'actiones  in  factum,'  or  'actiones  in  factum
conceptae.'  A  form  of  expression  which  seems  to  have  arisen
from  a  peculiarity  in  the  form  of  procedure.  Where  an  action
was  foimded  on  the  jus  civile,  it  would  seem  that  the  plaintiff
not  only  stated  his  case,  but  alleged  or  quoted  the  law  upon
which  he  rested  his  demand.  Whence  such  actions  were  styled
actions  in  jtis,  or  actions  in  jus  conceptce.  But  where  an  action
was  founded  on  thejvs  prcetorium,  the  plaintiflF  merely  stated
the  facts  (or  case),  vdthout  adverting  to  the  law  which  gave  him
a  right  to  sue.  And  since  the  actor  merely  detailed  the  facts
his  action  was  styled  an  action  in  factum,  or  an  action  in  factum
concepta^  The  reason  of  this  difference  in  forms  I  am  not  able
to  explain ;  nor,  perhaps,  is  it  worth  explaining.  But  it  is  o\
importance  that  the  import  of  the  expression  *  action  in  fajdum
should  be  marked  and  understood.  For,  looking  at  the  shape
of  the  expression,  it  would  seem  to  denote  an  action  allowed  bj
the  Praetor  arbitrarily,  rather  than  an  action  founded  on  the  jtu
prcetorium,  or  on  the  settled  Lata  which  the  Praetors  had  intro-
duced by  their  edicts.


Pra tartan  Legislation.  603

Under  the  virtual  sovereignty  of  the  Emperors  or  Princes, i^^^ir

le  Pwetors  exercised,  at  least  till  the  reign  of  Hadrian,  the  ^ ^ >

loperly legislative powers which they exercised in liberd  S^*5^^^

epici/icd,  or  during the  substantial  existence  of  the  popular  torian

ovemment. But  with  this  difference :  thJi'^end'S

Liberd rqmblicd,  the Praetors exercised those legislative  thepopu-

lowers  by  the  express  or  tacit  authority  of  the  sovereign  Boman  J^f  ^  ^™*

%opfe  .*  the  reign

After  the  virtual  dissolution  of  the  popular  government,  the  tiniim"
?i«tor8  exercised  those  legislative  powers  by  the  express  or
adt  authority  of  the  Emperors  or  Princes,  who  at  first  were
mbstantially  though  covertly,  and  at  length  were  substantially
md  avowedly,  monarchs  or  autocrators  in  the  Boman  World.

Till  the  reign  of  Hadrian  the  praetorian  law  retained  the  Change
iharacters  which  I  have  just  described. It  was  merely  an  Hadrian,
noondite mass  of occasional  and insulated  rules,  that had
px)wn,  by  a  slow  and  nearly  insensible  aggregation,  through  a
long  succession  of  ages.

As  having  been  promulged  by  the  Praetor  for  the  time  being
or  as  being  comprised  in  the  edict  in  force  for  the  time  being),
ids  body  of  rules  was  merely  annualy  or  was  merely  calculated
olast  during  his  stay  in  the  office.  But  most  of  the  rules
omprised  in  that  present  edict  had  been  translated  or  transferred
rom  the  edicts  of  his  predecessors.  And  (of  course)  most  of
hem  would  also  be  translated  into  the  edicts  of  his  successors ;
nd  (by  virtue  of  the  republications  which  his  successors  would
ive  to  them)  would  continue  to  constitute  a  large  and  important
ortion  of  the  entire  Boman  Law.

In  the  reign  of  Hadrian,  the  Jvs  Prwtorium,  or  the  Praetorian
Idict,  underwent  a  considerable  change.  It  was  amended  or
Itered  by  the  jurisconsult  Julian,  and  was  then  promulged,  by
lie  command  of  Hadrian,  in  the  form  of  a  body  of  rules  pro-
eeding  immediaiefy  from  the  sovereign.  Taking  the  terms
Tritten  and  unwritten  in  their  juridical  and  improper  meanings,
he  jus  prcetoriiim  passed  from  the  department  of  unvrritten,  into
he  department  of  written  law.

As  thus  promulged  by  the  command  of  Hadrism,  the  jv^
OTcetorium  ought  not  to  have  retained  the  name.  For,  as  thus
promulged  by  the  command  of  Hadrian,  it  was  not  properly  the
law  of  the  Praetors,  but  was  Law  proceeding  immediately  from
the  sovereign  legislator :  Just  as  the  excerpts  from  the  writings
of  jurisconsults,  of  which  Justinian's  Pandects  are  mainly  com-
posed, are  not  (as  constituting  the  Pandects)  the  production  of


6o4  Z^ze/ :  Sources  and  Modes.

Lect. the  original  writers,  but  are  properly  the  productioii  of  the

V ' . monarch  who  selected,  published,  and  sanctioned  them. But,  as

chiefly  consisting  of  rules  which  the  Prsetors had originallj

introduced,  the  jus  prcctorium  retained  its  original  narM,  after

its  nature  had  been  changed  by  Hadrian's  promulgation.

Before  the  change  to  which  I  have  now  adverted,  the
general  edicts  of  the  Praetors  were  styled  '  perpetticU*  inasmuch
as  they  consisted  of  general  and  prospective  rules,  and  weie  not
issued  Sprout  res  incidit'  or  on  the  spur  of  specific  occasions.
They  were  styled  'perpettial'  as  opposed  to  the  ocawiona/ edicts
which  the  Praetors  issued  judicially  in  particular  causes.

But  the  Praetorian  Edict,  as  promulged  by  the  conmiand  of

Hadrian,  was  styled  *  perpetticU,'  in  another  signification  of  the

epithet As promulged by the command of Hadrian,  the

praetorian edict was not edictum  annuum; or it was  not

calculated  to  endure  to  the  end  of  a  definite  period,  and  \im

to  cease  as  Law,  unless  it  should  be  republished. The  Edict

amended  by  Julian,  and  promulged  by  Hadrian,  was  calculated

to  endure  in  perpetuum,  or  imtil  it  should  be  abrogated  hf

competent  authority.

ThePrreto- Whether  the  Praetors  after  this change under Hadrian,

HM  Liegia-  continued  to  legislate  directly  (or  to  legislate  by  general  edicts),

after  the is  an  agitated  and  doubtful  question. It  would  rather  appear

undw^ that  Hadrian,  in  making  the  change,  intended  (amongst  other

Hadrian, objects)  to  obviate  the  necessity  and  demand  for  the  subordinate

legislation  of  the  magistracy.

Sources  of  Whether  such  general  edicts  were  or  were  not  issued,  after

J^l^j^^, this  change  under  Hadrian,  it  is  certain  that  the  Praetors  ceased
tered  by to  legislate  directly  in  the  course  of  the  third  century,
bunais,  ^^  ^^  before  the  close  of  the  third century,  the direct

from  Alex-  legislation  of  the  Praetors,  and  also  the  legislation  of  the  PcpuhOt
Severus  to  Pl^hSy  and  Senate,  had  yielded  to  the  avowed  legislation  of  the
the  acces- virtual  monarchs  or  autocrators.

Justinian.  At  or  before  the  close  of  the  third  century,  and  from  thence

to  the  accession  of  Justinian,  the  living  Boman  Law  or  the
Eoman  Law  administered  and  enforced  by  the  tribunals,  was
drawn  exclusively  from  the  two  following  sources :  namely,  the
general  and  special  Constitutions  of  the  Emperors  or  Princes,
and  the  writings  of  the  jurisconsults  whose  opinions  were
deemed  authoritative.

For  though  the  authors  of  those  writings  were  not  properly
founders  of  law,  their  expositions  of  principles,  and  their  solutions


J\is  Praetorium  in  Code  and  Pandects,  605

specific cases,  were  equivalent,  in  efifect, to  statutes and }^^
lidal  decisions ;  since  those  expositions  and  solutions  guided
e  tribunals,  in  all  the  cases  coming  before  them,  for  which
e  Constitutions  of  the  Emperors  had  not  provided.


LECTUEE  XXXVI.

JUS  PRiETORIUM  AND  ENGUSH  EQUITY  COMPARED.

iviNG  sketched  the  history  of  the  Prsetorian  Edict  to  the Lect.

XXXVI

jession  and  reign  of  Justinian,  I  will  note  the  effect  of  its -  ■  ^ -
acture  on  the  arrangement  of  his  Code  and  Pandects,  before  I
imine  the  opinions  concerning  the  nature  of  Equity  to  which
illuded  in  my  last  discourse.

The  Eoman  Law,  as  it  was  left  by  Justinian,  lies  mainly  in
I  Code  and  Pandects :  it  having  been  the  intention  of  their
perial  projector,  that  they  should  comprise  the  whole  of  the
man  Law  to  obtain  thereafter  in  the  Empire.

His  Institutes  are  properly  a  hornbook  for  the  instruction

institution  of  students; though,  since  its  publication  was

heqtunt  to  the  publications  of  the  Code  and  Pandects,  this

operly  institutional  treatise  was  regarded  as  a  source  of  law,  in

far  as  it  conflicted  with  those  two  compilations,  or  in  so  far

it  was  concerned  with  matters  for  which  those  two  compila-

)ns  had  not  provided.

The  publications  of  his  Code,  Pandects  and  Institutes,  com-
eted  the  design  of  the  imperial  reformer.  His  Novels,  or  new
Mistitutions;  were  published  subsequently;  and  are  merely
irtial  supplements,  or  partial  correctives,  to  the  three  compila-
)n8  embraced  by  his  original  project

His  Code  and  Pandects  are  digests  of  Roman  Law  in  force  Matter  of
the  time  of  their  conception:  ffis  Code  being  a  compilation  of  andPa^^-
iperial  constitutions  issued  by  his  predecessors  and  himself;  dects.
d  his  Pandects  or  Digests being  a  compilation  of  excerpts
nn  the  writings of  the  jurisconsults whose  opinions were
emed  authoritative.

There  are,  indeed,  in  these  two  compilations  (though  com-
•sed  of  imperial  constitutions  £ind  excerpts  from  writings  by
risconsults)  numerous  traces  of  laws  established  by  the  Populus
d  Plebs,  of  Consults  emanating  from  the  Senate,  and  of  general
licts  issued  by  the  Praetors.  For  laws  of  the  populus  and
bs,  consults  of  the  senate,  and  general  edicts  of  the  prsetors,

VOL.  II.  H


6o6  Lmw  :  Sources  and  Modes.

Lect. are  referred  or  aUuded  to  in  many  of  the  oonstitations  and
^ ^ . excerpts  of  which  these  two  compilations  properly  consist

The  matter,  therefore,  of  his  Code  and  Pandects,  may  lie
conceived  and  described  in  the  following  manner :

His  Code  is  composed  partly  of  edictal  or  general  oonstita-
tions :  that  is  to  say,  statutes  made  and  promnlged  by  Soman
Emperors  or  Princes,  in  their  quality  of  sovereign  legislaton.
But  it  also  is  composed  partly  of  special  constitutions ;  that  is
to  say,  judicial  decretes  (and  orders  analogous  to  decretes)  issued
by  Boman  Emperors  in  their  quality  of  sovereign  administratois.

His  Pandects  are  composed  entirely,  or  almost  entirely,  of
excerpts  from  writings  by  jurisconsults.  Some  of  these  exceipts
are  analogous  and  equivalent  to  statutes :  being  didactic  exposi-
tions, in  general  or  abstract  terms,  of  laws  or  principles  of  law.
Others  are  mere  resolutions  of  specific  or  particular  questions;
and  therefore  are  analogous  and  equivalent  to  judicial  decisions.
— ^Nay,  as  having  been  adopted  and  promulged  by  Justinian,
(who  was  sovereign  in  the  Boman  World),  these  general  expod'
tions  and  particular  resolutions  are  properly  statutes  and  judicial
decisions;  although  those  characters  cannot  be  properly  attributed
to  them  as  being  the  productions  of  their  original  authors.

Each,  therefore,  of  these  two  compilations  is  a  compound  of

statute  and  judiciary  law :  being  partly  a  collection  of  statutes

proceeding  immediately  from  a  sovereign  legislator,  and  partly  a

collection  of  judicial  decisions  proceeding  immediately  from  a

sovereign  judge.

Arrange-  Though  the  Code  is  a  collection  of  imperial  constitutions,

Code  and ^^^  ^^®  Pandects  are  a  collection  of  excerpts  from  writings  by

Pandects, jurisconsults,  the  order  or  arrangement  of  each  of  these  two

compilations  is  copied  from  the  order  of  the  Perpetual  Edicts

that  is  to  say,  the  praetorian  edict  (or  chain  of  praetorian  edicts),

as  altered  by  the  jurisconsult  Julian,  and  promulged  by  ih&

Emperor  Hadrian.

This  appears from the Commission  (to  adopt  a  modem
expression),  by  which Tribonian,  and certain  associates,  art
commanded  to  select  excerpts  from  the  writings  of  the  authori-
tative jurisconsults,  and  to  place  such  excerpts  in  Pandects  (or
in  compartments  constructed  for  the  reception  of  them). For
in  this  Commission  (which  is  prefixed  to  the  Digests  or  Pandects,
and  is  styled  Justinian's  Constitution,  '  De  Conceptione  Digtt
torum*)  he  commands  Tribonian  and  his  associates  to  arrange
the selected excerpts,  'tam secimdum nostri constitutioneni
codicis,  quam  edicti  perpetui  imitationem.*


Jus  Praetorium  in  Code  and  Pandects.  607

It  is  probable  that  the  order  of  the  Code  and  Pandects Legt-

XXXVI

imitated  the  order  of  the  Perpetual  Edict,  for  the  following
reasons  or  causes.

In  the  first  place :  Neither  the  laws  of  the  PopiUvs  or  Plebs,
nor  the  consults  of  the  Senate,  nor  the  constitutions  of  the
Emperors,  nor  the  judicial  decisions  of  the  subordinate  tribimals,
had  ever  been  digested  or  even  collected.  Consequently,  The
order  of  the  Prsetorian  Edict  (which,  though  it  was  a  shapeless
mass  of  occasional  and  insulated  rules,  was,  at  least,  a  collection
of  roles)  was  the  only  known  model  for  the  arrangement  of  the
projected  compilations.  And,  since  Tribonian  and  his  associates
were  uninventive  and  servile  copiers,  they  naturally  ordered  the
matter  of  these  compilations  according  to  the  solitary  pattern
which  the  Edict  presented  to  their  imitation.

like  the  redactors  of  the  Prussian  and  French  Codes,  they

migJU  have  arranged  the  matter  of  these  compilations,  according

to  the  scientific  or  systematic  method  which  had  been  pursued

by  most  of  the  Classical  Jurists  who  had  composed  elementary

treatises  for  the  instruction  of  students. But  this  scientific

method  had  never  in  fact  been  observed  by  any  but  instittUional

mien. And  consequently,  although  it  was  followed  by  these

slavish  imitators  in  the  composition  of  Justinian's  Institutes,

they  never  thought  of  pursuing  it  in  the  composition  of  those

larger  compilations  which  were  destined  to  embrace  the  detail  of

Justinian's  legislation.

In  the  second  place:  Many  of  the  writings  of  the  juris-
consults whose  opinions  were  deemed  authoritative,  were  running
annotations  or  commentaries  on  the  fus  prcetorium. And  the
writings  of  these  jurisconsults  at,  and  long  before,  the  accession
of  Justinian,  were  perpetually  consulted  by  judges  and  practising
lawyCTS. And  this  may  have  been  a  reason  for  arranging  the
Code  and  Pandects  according  to  the  order  of  the  Praetorian
Edict. Their  contents  (it  may  have  been  thought)  would  be
more  accessible  to  judges  and  practising  lawyers,  if  arranged
according  to  a  method  with  which  they  were  already  familiar.

As  I  shall  shew  hereafter,  when  I  touch  upon  the  nameless
absurdities  of  these  clumsy  compilations,  the  compilers  meant
them  to  contain  the  whole  of  the  law.  Yet  many  of  the  provir
sions  contained  in  them  must  have  been  unintelligible,  except
by  referring  to  the  ancient  law  which  they  were  designed  to
supersede.

Since  the  contents  of  the  Code  and  Pandects  were  arranged


6o8


Law :  Sources  and  Modes.


Lkct.
XXXVI


according  to  the  order  of  the  Prsetorian  Edict,  their  arrangement
has  as  little  pretension  to  the  name  of  systematic  as  if  it  were
merely  alphabetical

Till  the  reign  of  Hadrian,  the  various  rules,  comprised  by
the  Prsetorian  Edict,  stood  in  the  order  of  the  lespective  ivm
at  which  they  had  been  introduced  through  a  long  succession  of
ages.  Nor  does  it  appear  that  Julian,  who  wrought  upon  the
edict  under  Hadrian,  did  anything  of  much  importance  towaids
ordering  or  arranging  its  contents.  As  promulged  by  Hadrian,
the  Edict  of  the  Praetors  (though  considerably  altered  in  its
details)  seems  to  have  retained  its  ancient  and  venerable  fom
(or  its  ancient  and  venerated  deformity).

The  arrangement  of  the  Code  and  Pandects  may  therefore
be  suggested  by  the  following  comparison : — ^Let  us  imagine  tbt
the  rules  or  principles  which  constitute  the  equity  of  the  Ghan-
cellors,  stood  in  the  order  of  the  times  at  which  they  wen
respectively  introduced :  That  the  Law  created  by  Acts  of  Pw-
liament  were  digested  in  that  order :  That  excerpts  from  the
decisions  of  our  various  tribunals  (and  the  writings  of  our
authoritative  lawyers),  were  digested  in  the  same  order:  And
that  these  two  digests  of  our  statute  and  judiciary  law  were
passed  and  promulged,  by  an  Act  of  the  Parliament,  as  the  Lav
to  obtain  thereafter  in  England  or  the  United  Kingdom.

Now  the  imagined  Digest  of  our  statute  law  would  answer
nearly  to  Justinian's  Code,  I  say  '  nearly.'  For  many  of  the
imperial  constitutions  of  which  that  chaos  is  composed,  are  not
edictcU  or  general  constitutions  (or  statutes  promulged  by  the
Emperors  in  their  legislative  capacity),  but  are  decrees  issued  hf
the  Emperors  as  judges  in  the  last  resort.

The  imagined  digest  of  our  judiciary  law  would  correspond
to  Justinian's  Pandects.  But  with  this  difference:  That  the
Pandects  consist  of  excerpts  from  the  writings  of  authoritative
lawyers;  whilst  the* imagined  digest  in  question  (though  partly
consisting  of  such  excerpts)  would  principally  consist  of  excerpts
from  the  judicial  decisions  of  our  tribunals.


Supposi-
tion that
the  direct
legislative
power
exercised
by  the
I^tors
was
usurped,


By  many  modem  writers,  the  direct  legislative  power
exercised  by  the  Praetors  is  considered  as  icsurped.  It  is  sup-
posed that  the  changes,  which  they  wrought  in  the  Soman  Law,
were  introduced  per  artes  (or  surreptitiously),  and  were  a  cheat
upon  the  sovereign  legislature.

It  is  said,  for  example,  by  Heineccius,  in  his  excellent  Anti-
quities of  the  Roman  Law :


Jus  Praetorium.  609

*  Quamvis  vero  Praetores  initio  magistratus  in  legis  jurarent : Lbct.
levera  tamen  leges  edictis  snis  evertebant  sub  specie  aequitatis.  ^

Utebantur  banc  in  rem  variis  artibus,  veluti  fictionihus  ;  quando,  and  intro-
verbi  gratis,  fingebant,  rem  usueaptam,  quae  usucapta  baud  esset,  o^  ^^
vel  contra,  etc.'**  Now  fictions  like  that  which  Heineccius  here
dtes  (and  all  the  praetorian  fictions  were  equally  palpable),  could
not  have  deceived  any  one.  The  praetorian  fictions,  therefore,
were  not  artes,  nor  was  it  the  purpose  of  their  authors  to  intro-
duce their  innovations  covertly.

When,  for  example,  the  Praetor  declared  by  his  edict,  '  that,
in  certain  cases,  a  thing  acquired  by  usucapion,  would  be  by
him  considered  as  not  having  been  so  acquired,'  he  abrogated  a
portion  of  the  jvs  civile  relating  to  usucapion,  as  avowedly  and
openly  as  if  he  had  formally  annulled  it And  aU  the  fictions
by  which  the  Praetors  upset  the  Jus  civile,  were  just  as  palpable
as  that  to  which  I  now  have  adverted. They  commonly  consisted
in  feigning  or  assuming,  *  that  something  which  obviously  was,
'^iA  not ;  or  that  something  which  obviously  was  not,  was! It
is  ridiculous  to  suppose  that  such  fictions could  deceive,  or
were  intended  to  deceive. Nay,  the  very  writers  who  reproach
the  Praetors  with  their  artes,  laugh  at  the  grossness  of  the  so-
called  lies,  with  which  (as  they  imagine)  the  Praetors  accom-
plished their  unholy  purposes.
iJ And  the  remark  which  I  now  have  made,  will  apply  to  the
fictions  through  which  our  own  tribunals  have  abrogated  certain
portions  of  the  statute  law. Can  it  be  conceited  for  a  moment,
by  any  reasonable  person,  that  fines  and  recoveries  (for  example)
ever  deceived  anybody,  or  were  intended  to  deceive  ?  that  the
authors  of  these  absurdities  hoped  to  impose  upon  the  nobility
whose  great  estates  they  were  trying  to  break  down  ?  or  that
heirs  in  tail,  or  remaindermen  and  reversioners,  were  tr&panned
out  of  their  interests  by  that  ridiculous  juggling  ? Such  a  con-
ceit is  really  more  absurd  than  the  foolery  to  which  it  relates.

It  is,  indeed,  extremely  difficult  to  determine,  why  sub-
ordinate judges,  in  innovating  on  existing  law,  have  so  often
accomplished  their  object  through  the  medium  of  fictions.  I
incline  to  impute  this  curious  phaenomenon  to  two  causes.

1°.  A  respect  on  the  part  of  the  innovating  judges  for  the
law  which  they  virtually  changed.  By  accomplishing  the  change
through  a  fiction,  they  rather  eluded  the  existing  law,  than
formally  annulled  it :  they  preserved  its  integrity  to  appearance,
although  they  broke  it  in  effect.

»  Antiq.  Rom.  Syntagma. Ed.  Haubold.  Lib.  I.  Tit  2.  c.  24.


\


6 1  o  Law :  Sources  and  Modes.

Lect.  2"".  a  wish  tx)  conciliate  (as  far  as  possible)  the  friends  or

XXXVI

lovers  of  the  law  which  they  really  annulled.  K  a  prsetoi,  or
other  subordinate  judge,  had  said  openly  and  avowedly,  *I
abrogate  such  a  law/  or  '  I  make  such  a  law/  he  might  have
given  offence  to  the  lovers  of  things  ancient,  by  his  direct  and
arrogant  assumption  of  legislative  power.  By  covering  the  in-
novation with  a  decent  lie,  he  treated  the  abrogated  law  with
all  seemly  respect,  whilst  he  knocked  it  on  the  head.  Willi
regard  to  their  causes  and  effects,  the  fictions  through  whidi
judges  innovate  on  existing  law,  may  be  likened  to  those  con-
ventional, and  not  incommodious  lies,  through  which  much  of
the  intercourse  of  polished  society  is  habitually  carried  on.  If
a  man,  for  example,  caU  at  your  house,  and  you  flatly  let  \m
know  that  you  don't  wish  to  see  him,  you  insult  him.  But  if
you  say,  through  your  servant,  *  not  at  home/  yon  intimate  just
as  clearly  the  same  thing,  and  you  let  him  know  your  meaning
in  a  respectful  and  inoffensive  manner.

Such  (I  think)  are  the  causes  to  which  we  may  impute  ^
fictions  through  which  innovations  by  judges  have  been  so  often
accomplished.

For  many  of  the  fictions  (or  as  some  choose  to  call  \bM,
lies)  by  which  positive  law  is  so  often  darkened  and  disgraced,
I  cannot  account  For  they  seem  to  be  assumed  without
necessity,  or  to  answer  no  purpose.

Such,  for  example,  is  the  fiction,  in  our  own  law,  'thafc
husband  and  wife  are  one  person  :*  Or  the  fiction,  in  the  older
Eoman  Law,  'that  the  wife  is  the  daughter  of  her  hvJbani'!
Or  the  fiction,  in  the  Boman  Law  (which  Sterne  has  laughed  at
in  his  '  Tristram  Shandy '),  '  that  the  mother  and  son  are  noi  of
kin*

The  meaning  of  these  several  fictions,  is  merely  this:  That
the  parties  have  certain  rights,  or  lie  under  certain  duties,  or
certain  incapacities.  When  it  is  said,  for  example, '  that  husband
and  wife  are  one  person/  the  meaning  merely  is,  that  they  lie
under  certain  incapacities  with  respect  to  one  another.  And
where  those  incapacities  do  not  intervene,  the  fiction  of  their
unity  ceases,  and  they  are  deemed  twain.

When  it  is  said  '  that  the  wife  is  the  daughter  of  the  hus-
band/ the  meaning  is  merely  this: — That,  like  his  sons  and
daughters,  she  is  subject  to  his  dominium  or  potestas :  that,  like
his  sons  and  daughters,  she  succeeds  to  him  ab  intesiato :  and
that  succeeding  to  her  husband  ab  intestato,  and  being  to  certain


Jus  Praetorium.  6ii

uposes  a  member  of  his  family,  she  is  excluded  from  succeed- Lbot.
I  ah  inteskUo  to  members  of  the  family  out  of  which  she - ^ -
oried

When  it  is  said  '  that  the  mother  is  not  of  kin  to  her  son/
)  meaning  is  merely  this :  That  she  is  not  related  to  the  son
offncUian,  or  through  male  progenitors :  and  that,  not  being
ited  to  her  son  through  agnation,  she  could  not  succeed  to
1  (Jure  eivili)  as  an  agnat,  though  she  could  succeed  to  him
his  eofffuU  by  virtue  of  the  praetorian  edict  which  admitted
nats  to  succession.

Why  the  plain  meanings  which  I  now  have  stated  should
obscured  by  the  fictions  to  which  I  have  just  adverted,  I
mot  conjecture.  A  wish  on  the  part  of  the  authors  of  the
ions  to  render  the  law  as  uncognoscible  as  may  be,  is  probably
)  cause  which  Mr.  Bentham  would  assign.  I  judge  not,  I
ifess,  so  uncharitably.  I  rather  impute  such  fictions  to  the
5er  imbecility  (or,  if  you  will,  to  the  active  and  sportive
ides)  of  their  grave  and  venerable  authors,  than  to  any
liberate  design,  good  or  eviL

That  the  direct  l^islative  power  assumed  by  the  Praetors
s  not  iisurped  and  was  not  assumed  covertly,  will  also  amply
pear  bom  the  following  obvious  considerations.

Though  it  was  not  assumed,  in  the  beginning,  by  the  direct
thority  of  the  sovereign  Boman  People,  it  was  assumed  and
srcised,  from  the  beginning,  with  their  tacit  approbation.  For
)  law  made  by  the  Praetors  in  the  exercise  of  this  legislative
wer,  was  made  under  the  eyes  of  the  people,  whose  interests
concerned,  and  who,  by  an  expression  of  their  will,  might
re  abolished  it,  and  called  its  makers  to  account.  And  being
tute  law,  briefly  expressed  and  formally  and  conspicuously
nnulged,  neither  the  fact  of  its  enactment,  nor  the  purpose  at
ich  it  aimed,  could  have  been  overlooked  or  misconceived  by
t  most  incurious  and  the  least  intelligent

Add  to  this,  that  it  was  made  and  promulged  under  the
»,  and  therefore  with  the  approbation,  of  the  Tribunes  of  the
>ple  :**  who  by  their  veto  might  have  prevented  it  fix^m  taking
«t,  and  forced  its  authors  to  recall  it.

And  though  the  legislative  power  exercised  by  the  Praetors
I  not  assumed  in  the  beginning  by  the  direct  authority  of  the
pie,  it  afterwards  was  sanctioned  directly  by  acts  of  the
ereign  l^islature. For  numberless  leges  of  the  populus  and

»*  Hngo,  Gesch.  pp.  373,  890.


6 1 2  Law :  Sources  and  Modes.

Lect.  r)W>s.  with  numberless  consults  of  the  senate,  assume  that  the
jus  proctorium  is  parcel  of  the  Eoman  law,  and  accommodate
their  enactments  to  its  provisions:  just  as  acts  of  our  own
parliament  are  moulded  and  fashioned  on  the  judge-made  law
of  the  tribunals.

The  obvious  truth  is,  that  in  Bome  (as  in  most  other  com-
munities), powers  of  l^islation,  direct  and  judicial,  were  assumed
and  exercised  by  subordinate  judges;  at  first  with  the  tadt
approbation,  and  in  time  by  the  direct  authority,  of  the  sovereign
legislature.

In  almost  every  community,  such  has  been  the  incapacity,
or  such  the  negligence,  of  the  sovereign  l^islature,  that  unlea
the  work  of  legislation  had  been  performed  mainly  by  sub-
ordinate judges,  it  would  not  have  been  performed  at  all,  or
would  have  been  performed  most  ineflfectuaUy :  with  regard  to  a
multitude  of  most  important  subjects,  the  society  would  have
lived  without  law ;  and  with  regard  to  a  multitude  of  others,
the  law  would  have  remained  in  pristine  barbarity.

Perceiving  this  palpable  truth,  the  sovereign  l^[islature,  in
almost  every  community,  has  permitted  and  authorised  sub-
ordinate judges  to  perform  functions  which  it  ought  to  exerdse
itselfc  And  till  sovereign  legislatures  are  much  better  constructed
than  they  have  been  heretofore,  this  palpable  necessity  for  judge-
made  law  will  inevitably  continue.

Judge-made  law,  or  law  made  by  subordinate  judges,  has
therefore  obtained,  in  almost  every  community,  on  account  of
its  obvious  utility.  But  the  jus  prcctorium  was  peculiarly  accept-
able to  the  Boman  people,  on  account  of  the  mode  in  which  it
was  made :  because  it  was  not  judiciary  law,  imbedded  in  a  heap
of  particular  decisions,  but  was  clear  and  concise  statute  law,
really  serving  as  a  guide  of  conduct.  In  the  Digests,  it  is
favourably  contrasted,  for  this  very  reason,  with  judiciary  law:
the  certainty  of  the  one  being  opposed  to  the  comparative
uncertainty  and  ex  post  facto  operation  of  the  other.

*  Magistratus  quoque  (says  Pomponius)  jura  reddebant.  Et
ut  scirent  cives,  quod  jus  de  qu&que  causA  quisque  dicturua
esset,  seque  pi^cciiiunirent,  edicta  magistratus  proponebant:  qua
edicta  praetorum  jus  honorarium  constituerunt.'  Lord  Coke's
redactions  (if  authorised)  would  have  strongly  resembled  Praetorian
Edicts,  and  been  statute :  for  law  given  in  general  formulae  is
statute  law.

The  only  circumstance  to  be  regretted  is,  that  the  legislative
power  of  the  judges  is  not  exercised  directly  and  avowedly  with


Jus  Praetorium.  613

us,  as  it  was  in  Borne ;  that  judge-made  law  is  not  made  in  the Lbct.

XXXVI

form  of  statute  law,  but  in  that  of  judiciary  law ;  that  our  Courts ^ ^ >
do  not,  like  the  Prsetors,  promulge  their  law  in  the  form  of
^eral  rules,  and  thus  legislate  openly  instead  of  covertly.

All  the  mischief  and  confusion  which  have  been  occasioned
)7  our  judge-made  law,  have  arisen  from  the  covert  mode  in
rhich  it  has  been  introduced.  But  this  was  the  effect  of  con-
ititational  jealousy,  which  seldom  interferes  but  to  prevent  some
jood.  Ck)nstitutional  jealousy  would  have  forbidden  the  judges
0  assume  and  exercise  eo  nomine  the  power  of  legislation,  but  it
allows  them,  on  condition  of  proceeding  bit  by  bit,  to  nibble
iway  really  good  institutions.  This  same  constitutional  jealousy
is  always  perverse  and  absurd.  It  is  always  straining  at  gnats
and  swallowing  camels. {e.g.  Police,  Army.)

I  may  here  remark  upon  a  strange  inconsistency  of  Hugo  and
odier  German  jurists,  who  are  great  enemies  of  codes,  and  admirers
of  customary  law,  as  being  made  by  the  people  themselves,  but
who  yet  profess  the  greatest  admiration  of  the  Boman  Law.

As  lovers  of  customary  law,  they  depreciate  statute  law
generally,  and  especially  abhor  codes,  or  compact  and  systematic
bodies  of  law.  As  historians  and  admirers  of  the  Boman  Law,
ihey  insist  (and  justly  insist)  on  those  excellencies  of  the  jiis
J^ratorium  which  I  have  briefly  stated  or  suggested.  They  do
Dot  perceive  that  those  excellences  belong  to  it  05  being  a  faint
ofproach  to  a  code :  and  that  they  belong  to  a  well-made  code  in
a  d^ree  incomparably  higher.

[Defective  constitution  of  legislature  (where  a  numerous  body).

Changes  in  state  of  society,  which,  owing  to  such  constitution,
etc,  are  not  provided  for  by  requisite  changes  and  adaptations  of  the
law. (Hugo,  GescL  p.  501.)

Fictions.  (Hugo,  Gesch.  pp.  391,  583;  Enc.  pp.  19-28.  Savigny
Vm  Beruf,  etc.  p.  32.)

Causes  of  the  incompleteness  of  Written  Law  in  all  coimtries :
ind  comparative  merits  of  the  various  substitutes  for  direct  and
qneme  legislation.

r.  V,  Incapacity  of  hereditary  monarchs  for  the  business  of  legis-
ition.

r.  V.  Incapacity  of  legislatures  consisting  of  numerous  bodies.
EusiDess  of  legislation  ought  to  be  performed  by  persons  who  are
;  onoe  thoroughly  versed  in  the  sciences  of  jurisprudence  and  legis-
tioUy  and  in  the  particular  system  of  the  given  community :  The
lyereign  legislature  merely  authorizing  and  checking,  and  not  affect-
g  to  l^;islate  itself.

f.  V.  Peculiar  incapacity  of  bodies. A  faiiiori,  applicable  to  such
tdies  as  the  Boman  populus  and  plehsJ]  ^


6 1 4  Law :  Sources  and  Modes.

Lkct.  From  the  foregoing  Historical  Sketch  of  the  Prsetorian  Edict
.  (and  of  the  effect  produced  by  its  form  on  the  forms  of  the  Code
Examina-  and  Pandects),  I  proceed  to  a  short  examination  of  some  cur-
some  cur-  ^^^  ^^^  erroneous  opinions  concerning  the  raJtuynale  of  the  dis-
rent  and  tinction  between  strict  Law  and  Equity.  In  the  course  of  which
opinions  examination,  I  shall  briefly  compare  or  contrast  the/us  jmE^orttfM^
S"  m?"*^  and  the  rvles  of  equity  introduced  hy  the  English  Chancellors.
fuUe  of  the  It  seems  to  be  imagined  by  many,  that  the  distinction  in
b^tween^^  question  is  necessary  or  essential ;  or,  in  other  words,  that  efoery
stria  Law  system  of  positive  law  is  distinguished  or  distinguishable  into
^^^  Law  and  Equity.  But,  in  truth,  the  distinction  is  confined  to
Examina-  the  particular  systems  of  some  particular  nations.  In  eveiy
opinion  ^  nation,  moreover,  whose  legal  system  has  been  distinguished  into
that  the  law  and  equity,  the  distinction  arose  entirely  or  principally  from

distinction  v'i_  .j  i'i-x-la.  •*..

of  law  into  causes  which  operated  exclusively  m  that  very  conmiunitj.
^^.?^4  And  accordingly,  the  equity  obtaining  in  any  of  the  systems  to
necessary  which  the  distinction  is  confined,  is  widely  different  from  the
jr®"^B: equity  obtaining  in  any  of  the  rest

distinction  The  distinction,  therefore,  is  not  universal  and  necessaiji

dentel  and  ^^^  ^  particular  and  accidental And,  being  particular  and
historical accidental,  it  may  be  styled  an  historical  distinction ;  since  its
import  is  not  to  be  found  in  the  principles  of  general  jurispru-
dence, but  must  be  gathered  from  the  respective  histories  of  the
several  systems  of  law  to  which  it  is  respectively  peculiar.
Is  nearly  So  far  is  the  distinction  from  being  universal  and  necessaiji

^^^  that  I  believe  it  is  nearly  confined  to  the  Eoman  and  English
English Law. In  most,  indeed,  of  the  Anglo-American  States,  a  distinct
^'  body  of  law  bearing  the  name  of  equity,  is  administered  by  dis-

tinct courts,  styled  Courts  of  Equity,  or  is  administered,  in  con-
junction with  the  Common  Law,  by  the  ordinary  tribunals.
But  since  the  law  of  most  of  those  states  is  mainly  a  derivatiTe
of  the  English,  it  may  be  said  that  equity,  as  meaning  a  portion
of  positive  law,  is  nearly  confined  to  the  Boman  and  EngUsb
systems.  In  other  particular  systems  there  is  equity,  in  the
other  senses  to  which  I  shall  advert  hereafter.

There  is  equity  (for  instance),  as  meaning  judicial  impa^
tiality:  equity  as  meaning  oequitas  leqislatoria,  or  impartial
maxims  of  legislation :  equity,  as  meaning  the  arbUrium  of  the
judge :  or  equity,  as  meaning  the  parity  or  analogy  which  is  the
ground  of  the  so-caUed  interpretation  ex  ratione  legis.  But  there
is  no  body  of  positive  law,  distinguished  by  the  name  of  equity,
and  opposed,  under  that  denomination,  to  other  portions  of  the
legal  system.


Law  and  Equity  not  an  Essential  Distinction.  6 1 5

In  France,  for  example,  the  arrSts  r^glemerUaireSy  issued  by  Leot.
tbe  ancient  parliaments,  bore  a  close  resemblance  to  the  edicts  of  .  ^  .
the  Boman  Praetors.  For  thej  were  properly  statutes,  not  con-
oemed  exclusively  with  mere  procedure  or  practice,  and  often
annulling  or  modifying  laws  proceeding  immediately  from  the
80?ereign  l^islature.  But  the  law  made  by  the  parliaments
through  these  arrits,  never  acquired  the  name  of  equity ;  nor
was  it,  I  believe,  distinguished  from  the  rest  of  the  legal  system,
by  any  appropriate  denomination.  And,  in  France,  there  cer-
tainly was  no  equity  resembling  the  body  of  law  which  in
England  has  gotten  that  nama  There  was  no  body  of  law
styled  '  equity,*  and  exclusively  administered  by  extraordinary
trilmnals  styled  '  Courts  of  Equity.'

The  origin  and  history  of  the  peculiar  Courts  in  this  country,
styled  Courts  of  Equity,  has  been  given  with  great  clearness  by
Blackstone,  in  probably  the  best  chapter  of  his  whole  work.
Fnmi  the  fisu^ts  detailed  by  him,  it  is  obvious  that  equity  arose
from  the  sulkiness  and  obstinacy  of  the  Common  Law  Courts,
which  refused  to  suit  themselves  to  the  changes  which  took
place  in  opinion  and  in  the  circumstances  of  society. If  the
Courts  of  Common  Law  had  not  refused  to  introduce  certain
roles  of  law  or  of  procedure  which  were  required  by  the  exigen-
cies of  society,  the  equitable  or  extraordinary  jurisdiction  of  the
Chancellor  would  not  have  arisen,  and  the  distinction  between
law  and  equity  would  never  have  been  heard  of. If,  for  instance,
the  Conmion  Law  Courts  would  have  extorted  evidence  from  the
parties,  plaintiffs  would  not  haveiiad  recourse  to  the  Chancellor,
incases  in  which  they  required  the  power  of  interrogating  the
defendant If,  ^^^,  the  Common  Law  Courts  would  have  con-
sented to  enforce  certain  trusts,  trusts  as  a  subject  of  the
JQiisdiction  of  Courts  of  Equity  would  never  have  been  heard  of.
There  would  indeed  have  been  trusts,  and  suits  in  relation  to
trusts,  these  being  involved  in  almost  all  law,  but  those  par-
ticular classes  of  trusts  which  are  enforced  by  Courts  of  Equity
would  never  have  been  heard  of,  as  distinguished  from  others.
Enterprising  judges  of  the  Courts  of  Common  Law  have  even,
It  comparatively  recent  periods,  tried  to  get  back  the  jurisdiction
rhich  their  predecessors  had  not  thought  fit  to  exercise. Lord
Cansfield,  for  example,  made  several  such  attempts;  and  was
lafBed. Even  that  stickler  for  antiquity,  Lord  Kenyon,  in  one
ifltance  successfully  attempted  the  same  thing :  in  the  case  of
tead  V.  Brookman,  when  he  took  upon  himself  to  dispense  with
lie  profert  of  a  bond,  and  enable  parties  when  unable  to  produce


6 1 6  Law :  Sources  and  Modes.

Lect.  the  bond  to  prove  that  it  had  existed  and  had  been  lost :  vhich
V  ^  .  could  formerly  be  done  only  in  a  Court  of  Equity.  Whether  it
is  desirable  that  judges  should  thus  break  through  established
rules,  by  piecemeal,  for  the  sake  of  some  small  improvement  is
another  question.  I  am  myself  inclined  to  the  opinion  that
these  attempts  to  alter  the  law  in  little  bits,  are  productive  of
more  mischief  by  thickening  the  general  confusion,  than  of  good
by  their  direct  operation.  I  only  adverted  to  these  facts  becaiue
they  strikingly  illustrate  the  absurdity  of  the  distinction  between
equity  and  law.

Not  only  is  this  verbal  distinction  pecuUar  to  the  Boman
and  to  the  English  Law,  but  it  means  in  each  of  those  systems,
something  peculiar  to  those  systems  respectively.

From  the  historical  sketch  given  in  former  Lectures,  it  has
been  seen  how  peculiar  was  the  origin  of  the  praetorian  law.
The  history  of  the  equitable  jurisdiction  of  the  English  Chan-
cellors may  be  found  in  Sir  William  Blackstone,  and  in  a  work
of  Chief  Baron  Gilbert.

I  shall  contrast  the  two  systems,  for  the  purpose  of  shewing
how  dissimilar  they  are,  and  of  adding  a  few  short  remarks.
Differ-  The  first  difference  is,  that  the  praetorian  equity  was  ad-

encea^be- ministered  by  the  ordinary  civil  tribunals ;  English  equity,  by
Roman an exceptional  or  extraordinary  tribunal The  equity  of  the
Sifflish praetor  resembles  in  this  respect  not  the  equity  of  the  Chancellor,
Equity. but  rather  the  corrections  made  by  the  common-law  tribunals  to
the  statute  law :  whereas  the  English  Courts  of  Equity  not  only
innovate  on  the  law  made  by  the  sovereign  legislature,  but  on
that  made  by  the  ordinary  subordinate  tribunals. To  have
resembled  English  equity,  the  equity  of  the  Bomans  should  have
been  administered,  not  by  the  prsetor  urbanus,  but  by  an  extra-
ordinary praetor.

A  second,  and  still  more  important,  difference  is,  that  the
equity  administered  by  the  Boman  praetors  was  statute  law,  or
law  promulged  in  an  abstract  or  general  form :  whereas  all  or
almost  all  Chancery  law  is  not  statute,  but  judiciary  law.

The  Chancellor,  as  Chancellor,  or  as  properly  exercising  hia
extraordinary  jurisdiction,  makes  and  promulges,  as  far  as  I  am
aware,  no  general  rules  whatever,  except  rules  of  practice  or
procedure.  In  Bankruptcy  indeed  he  occasionally  establiahea
general  rules ;  but  he  can  scarcely  be  considered  to  judge  Bank-
ruptcy causes  by  virtue  of  his  extraordinary  jurisdiction  in
Chancery,  but  rather  by  a  special  jurisdiction  under  special
Acts  of  Parliament.


Equity  in  English  and  Roman  Systems.  617

A  third  distinction  between  the  equity  of  the  Boman  and Leot.

^ '^  XXXVI


t  of  the  English  law  consists  in  this :  that,  as  might  have
Q  expected,  the  subjects  with  which  they  are  conversant  are
dy  different

It  is  impossible  to  compare  the  subjects  in  detail,  since  it
lid  require  volumes  to  enumerate  them.  I  shall  merely
ition  two  or  three  remarkable  cases  to  shew  the  extent  of
dissimilarity.

The  Praetors,  by  gradual  innovations,  altered  the  whole  law
the  important  subject  of  succession  ab  intestato,  by  letting  in
nates  or  relations  in  the  female  line,  who  were  nearer  of  kin,
preference  to  agnates  or  relations  in  the  male  line,  to  whom
cession  ab  intestato  was  originally  confined,  the  female  line
Dg  entirely  excluded.  The  law  on  this  subject,  as  laid  down
Justinian's  Code  and  Novels,  is  entirely  copied  from  the
3torian  equity ;  it  formed  no  part  of  the  old  Eoman  Law  or
(torn,  but  originated  in  the  praetorian  edicts,  which  have  thus
med  the  foundation  of  the  law  obtaining  on  this  great  subject
England  and  throughout  Europe.

Under  the  influence  of  similar  good  intentions  the  pr»tors
idually  limited  the  power  of  testamentary  bequest  By  the
elve  tables  a  testator  was  empowered  to  dispose  of  his  property

The  praetors  afterwards  took  upon  themselves  to  set  aside
lis  by  which  a  father  disinherited  his  children,  under  the
stext  that  an  act  so  inofficious,  and  denoting  so  insane  a
•getfulness  of  moral  obligation,  might  be  assumed  to  proceed
im  actual  mental  alienation.  And  this  was  the  origin  of  the
iHma  portio  of  the  Eoman  Law,  the  l^itime  of  French  Law.^

•  A  difierent  view,  however,  of  the  both  survive ;  bijpartite,  if  wife  only  or

paal  intention  of  this  law  of the  children  only. One  share  is  sublect  to

elve  Tables  will  be  found  in  the  able  the  disposal  of  the  deceased ; toe re-

I  mgenious  chapter  on  the  history  of  maining  shares  belong  to  the  wife  and

^unentary  succession  in  Maine's  An-  children  respectively. The children's

tf  Xair. — B.  C.  share,  in  Scotch  law,  was  anciently  and

'  I  should  think  it  probable  that  the  properly  described  as  the  Bairns*  part ;

Hme  of  the  old  French  law,  as  it  out  when  the  study  of  the  civil  law

sted  in  the  Pays  de  CoviumCf  had  a  became prevalent, it was improperly

t  homely,  though  not  less  venerable  and  by  analog  styled  the  legitim. The

lio,  in  the  archaic  notion  of  the  com-  division  obviously  corresponds  neither

li^  of  goods  in  the  family  subject  to  to  the  quarta  Uyitima  of  the  middle

right  of  administration  of  the  hus-  Roman  law,  nor  to  the  rule  adopted  by

d  and  father. To  a  similar  ori^,  Justinian. That  the  same  principle  of

not  to  a  Roman  source,  I  thmk,  division  anciently  obtained  oy  the  law

lid  be  referred  that  division  of  the  of  England, is  testified by  the high

mUe  goods  which  in  the  twelfth  cen-  anthonty  of  Glanville  (book  vii.  c. 5,

'  was  common  to  England  and  Scot-  temp.  Henry  II.) It  is  also  recognis^

1,  and  which  in  the  latter  country  by  the  Council  of  Cashel  (a.d. 1172,

lins  unchanged  to  this  day. The  Ireland)  as  the  basis  of  an  arrangement  .

ikm  is  tripartite,  if  wife  and  children  between  the  claims  of  the  church  on  the  ^k


3

I

3


6 1 8  Law :  Sources  and  Modes.

Lbct.  For,  first,  when  the  children  were  entirely  passed  over,  the
testator  was  pronounced  to  be  insane;  and  finally  the  same
conclusion  was  drawn,  if  he  did  not  leave  to  each  a  certain
portion.  And  in  time  this  determinate  portion,  which  the  tes-
tator was  compelled  to  leave  to  each  of  his  children,  on  pain  of
having  the  will  set  aside,  came  to  be  adopted  by  the  sovereign
legislature,  and  now  obtains  as  law  in  probably  every  country
in  Europe  except  England.  1

That  institution  which  Mr.  M^CuUoch  and  others  have  J
imagined  to  be  Jacobinical  and  revolutionary,  is,  in  feet,  about  :i
2100  years  old.  The  Constituent  Assembly  in  France  did  not  ^
establish  the  law,  but  only  a  little  enlarged  the  legitime,  and
somewhat  abridged  the  power  of  willing  which  existed  under  the  -
ancient  laws  of  France.

Thus  completely  to  alter  the  law  on  the  important  subjects
of  succession  and  testamentary  disposition,  as  was  done  by  tiie A
Boman  Praetors,  is  certainly  monstrous. Our  Courts  of  Equity
have  never  meddled  with  either  subject The  maxim,  ce^iUa
sequitur  legem  has  in  general  been  strictly  adhered  to.

Another  striking  distinction  between  the  equity  administeied
by  the  Eoman  Praetor  and  that  administered  by  the  EngM
Chancellors  is  the  following : —

One  of  the  principal  subjects  of  the  jurisdiction  of  our
Courts  of  Equity,  is  what  are  called  technically  trusts :  not  that
trusts  are  peculiar  to  equity,  since  they  are  of  the  essence  of  aU
law  whatever ;  but  that  there  are  certain  trusts  which  are  not
enforced  by  the  ordinary  tribunals.  In  the  Soman  Law  there
were  also  what  were  called  fideicommissa,  equivalent  to  trusts;
but  these,  it  is  remarkable  that  the  tribunals  and  the  prsetois
themselves  would  not  enforce ;  they  were  first  enforced  by  the
Emperors.  It  was  Augustus  who  gave  to  extraordinary  praetors,
called  prcdores  fideicommissarii,  the  power  of  enforcing  trusts
which  had  never  been  enforced  by  the  ordinary  praetors ;  and
these  trusts  came  in  time  to  occupy  as  conspicuous  a  place  in

one  side  and  those  of  the  family  on  the  pars  omnium  bonomm  debeiur  filiia  et

other  ( Wilkins'  Concilia^  vol.  i.  p.  473,  nliabus  ipsorum  *  (Leges  IV.  Bnigoram,

Art 6). The *  bairns'  part*  in  Scot-  c. 115: vol. i. of  Thomson's Aeui

land  has  a  still  more  venerable  autho-  These  laws  of  the  four  burghs,  one  of

rity, namely, the  Leges  Burgorum  of  which  was  Newcastle,  are  also  valuable

David  I.  (1124-1158),  a  document,  un-  collateral  evidence  of  contemporary  Eoff*

like  some  others  ascribed  to  the  *  Scotch  lish  customs. The  shares  of  the  wue

Justinian,'  of  unquestioned  genuineness,  and  children  appear  to  have  vanished  la

It  is  there  stated,  *  Consuetude  est  omni-  England  owing  to  the  accident  of  their

bus  burgis  Scocie  a  tempore  de  quo  non  having  been  marked  by  the  ambiguoos

extat  memoria  in  contrarium  quod  si  word  rationabiUs  partes  (see  Blackstone,

aliquis  burgensis  liberos  procreaverit  de  voL  iL  p.  492). — R.  C.
uzore  sua  legitima  et  ipse  decedat,  terda


Equity  in  English  and  Roman  Systems.  6 1 9

he  Boman  Law,  as  trusts  occupy  in  our  own. Thus,  then,  one Lbot.
f  the  chief  subjects  of  the  equity  jurisdiction  of  the  Chancellor ^ ^ >
m  completely  excluded  from  that  of  the  Boman  praetor.

The  only  resemblances  between  Boman  and  English  equity
re,  in  fetct^  two.  First,  they  both  are  unsystematic  in  their
)rm,  and  were  introduced  by  gradual  innovations.  Neither  of
lem  is  a  system  of  law.  It  is  impossible  to  give  any  idea  of
iter,  in  general  or  abstract  expressions.  In  order  to  convey
ly  notion  of  them,  it  is  necessary  to  enter  into  the  whole
(tent  of  the  details.  In  order  to  explain  to  a  foreigner  the
ature  of  English  equity,  it  would  be  necessary  to  enumerate  all
le  cases  in  which  the  Chancellor  had  interposed  to  supply  or
)iTect  the  defects  of  the  law  administered  by  the  Common  Law
carts.  The  notion  that  there  is  any  essential  or  necessary
istinction  is  the  merest  absurdity.
The  other  resemblance  is,  that  in  both  cases  the  party  said  to
dminister  equity  affects  not  to  alter  the  other  system,  but  to
onect  or  supply  its  deficiencies.  In  ostent,  or  to  appearance,
lie  law  which  is  superseded  still  continues  to  exist ;  so  that
liere  are  two  systems  going  at  the  same  time,  containing
ontrary  provisions  as  to  the  same  matter;  one  of  them  the
hadow  of  a  law  which  has  been  superseded  but  is  feigned  still
a  exist  as  law,  the  other  the  law  which  has  superseded  it.

Another  erroneous  notion  frequently  entertained  concerning
iquity,  is,  that  it  is  the  scope  and  function  of  Equity  to  supply
he  defects  and  correct  the  errors  and  iniquities  of  Law.  This
3  a  very  prevalent  notion,  and  seems  to  have  been  borrowed
rom  a  passf^e  of  Papinian,  quoted  in  my  last  Lecture.  This,
lowever,  is  not  a  description  of  Equity  as  a  species  of  Law,  but
f  aujwUas  Ugislaioria,  or  good  legislation,  by  whatever  parties
dtroduced  What  is  here  represented  as  the  peculiar  object  of
iquity,  is  in  truth  the  scope  or  purpose  of  all  law.  What  else
an  be  intended  by  making  new  law,  than  to  cure  the  faults  or
apply  the  deficiencies  of  the  old  ?  And  this  is  equally  true,
rhether  the  law  be  made  by  one  party  or  another.  The  above
escription  of  Equity  is  as  applicable  to  the  Common  Law
idges  when  they  introduce  new  rules  of  law,  as  to  the  Chancellor.
t  is  applicable  equally  to  the  legislative  functions  of  Parliament.
;  is  impossible  to  give  any  description  of  equity  which  shall
lark  out  equitable  legislation  from  any  other  good  legislation.

Another  very  common  error  is  to  suppose  that  equity  is  not
body  of  laws  or  rules,  but  is  moulded  at  the  pleasure  of  the
ibunals :  that,  in  short,  equity  as  meaning  law,  is  equity  as


620

Lect.
XXXVI


Law :  Sources  and  Modes.

meaning  the  arbitrium  of  the  judge.  This  is  an  error  of  which,
strange  as  it  may  appear,  even  English  lawyers  of  consideiable
reputation  have  been  guilty.  I  remember  that  Mr.  John
Williams,  in  Parliament,  a  few  years  ago,  quoted  as  applicable
to  the  Courts  of  Equity  of  the  present  day,  a  passage  of  Selden
written  200  years  ago,  in  which  he  describes  Equity  as  being
regulated  by  the  Chancellor's  conscience,  and  compares  snch
a  mode  of  administering  justice  in  point  of  certainty  to  the
regulation  of  it  by  the  length  of  the  Chancellor's  foot

This  description  is  altogether  inapplicable  to  the  Chancellor's
jurisdiction  at  present,  when  he  is  as  much  bound  by  precedents,
and  has  as  little  left  to  his  discretion  as  any  other  of  the  judges.
It  is  obvious,  that  a  Court  which  does  not  follow  any  law  or
precedent,  but  decides  arbitrarily  in  every  case,  could  not  exist
in  any  civilised  community.  For,  by  the  uncertainty  it  would
introduce,  it  would  defeat  all  the  ends  of  law,  more  than  an
army  of  robbers.

The  first  decision  on  each  point  must  have  been  arbitraiy,
but  not  those  which  followed  it  Yet  this  error  is  entertained
by  most  foreign  jurists  who  have  written  about  English  Equity;
although  the  Germans,  at  least,  are  well  acquainted  with  the
Roman  Law,  and  with  the  tralatitious  edicts  of  the  prsetore;
and  it  might  have  occurred  to  them  that  the  same  motives
which  induced  the  praetor  to  copy  the  edict  of  his  predecessor,
must  naturally  determine  every  Chancellor  to  abide  by  the
decrees  of  former  Chancellors.


LECTURE  XXXVII.


STATUTE  AND  JUDICIARY  LAW.

Lect. In  the  following  discourse,  I  shall  call  your  attention  to  a  few
w ^ > of  the  numerous  differences  which  distinguish  statute  law  (or
Subjects  of  la^  made  by  direct,  or  proper  legislation)  from  judiciary  law
(or  law  made  by  judicial,  or  improper  legislation). And  having
stated  or  suggested  a  few  of  those  numerous  differences,  I  shall
remark  upon  the  advantages  and  disadvantages  of  judicial  or
improper  legislation,  and  the  possibility  of  excluding  that  prevalent
mode  of  legislation,  by  means  of  codes,  or  systems  of  stcUtUe  law,
I  would  briefly  remark,  before  I  proceed  to  the  former
subject,  that  I  do  not  mean  exclusively,  by  the  term  '  statute
law/  statute  law  made  directly  by  sovereign  or  supreme  l^;is-


Statute  and  Judiciary  Law.  62 1

itares:  and  that  I  do  not  mean  exclusivelj,  bj  the  term  Lbot.
indidaiy  law,'  judiciaiy  law  made  directly  by  subordinate  ^  ^  -
tdges  or  tribnnals.  As  I  have  shewn  sufficiently  in  preceding
ctores,  there  is  no  necessary  connection  between  direct  and
jmrnt^  or  between  jtuiicicU  and  subordinate  legislation.  Statute
«r  may  proceed  directly  from  subject,  or  subordinate  authors :
liOst  a  monarch  or  supreme  body  may  exercise  the  judicial
fwers  inhering  necessarily  in  the  Sovereign,  and  therefore  may

directly  the  author  of  law  made  in  the  judicial  manner.

By  the  opposed  expressions  '  statute  law,'  and  'judiciary  law,'
point  at  a  difference  (not  between  the  sources  bom  which  law
oceeds,  but)  between  the  modes  in  which  it  begins.  By  the
cm  '  statute  law,'  I  mean  any  law  (whether  it  proceed  from  a
bordinate,  or  from  a  sovereign  source)  which  is  made  directly,

in  the  way  of  proper  legislation.  By  the  term  'judiciary
w/ 1  mean  any  law  (whether  it  proceed  from  a  sovereign,  or  a
bordinate  source)  which  is  made  indirectly,  or  in  the  way  of
didal  or  improper  legislation.

Having  premised  this  explanation,  I  call  your  attention  to  a
w  of  the  numerous  differences  which  distinguish  stattUe  from
iieiary  law.

The  principal  or  leading  difference  between  those  kinds  of  The  prin-
v,  is,  I  apprehend,  the  following :  f^^^

A  law  made  judicially  is  made  on  the  occasion  of  a  judicial  difference
xision. The  direct  or  proper  purpose  of  its  immediate  author  gtatuteand
,  the  decision  of  the  specific  case  to  which  the  rule  is  applied,  judiciary
id  not  the  establishment  of  the  rula Inasmuch  as  the  grounds

the  decision  may  serve  as  grounds  of  decision  in  future  and
Diilar  cases,  its  author  legislates  substantially  or  in  effect:
nd  his  decision  is  commonly  determined  (not  only  by  a  con-
ieration  of  the  case  before  him,  but)  by  a  consideration  of  the
ect  which  the  grounds  of  his  decision  may  produce  as  a  general
w  or  rule.  He  knows  that  similar  cases  may  be  decided  in  a
oilar  manner ;  and  that  the  principles  or  grounds  of  his  decision
ly  therefore  be  a  law  by  which  the  members  of  the  community
y  be  bound  to  guide  their  conduct. — But,  this  notwithstand-
'^  his  direct  and  proper  purpose  is  not  the  establishment  of
!  rule,  but  the  decision  of  the  specific  case  to  which  he
>lie8  it.  He  legislates  as  properly  judging,  and  not  as  properly
dating.

But  a  statute  law,  or  a  law  made  in  the  way  of  direct  legis-
on,  is  made  solely,  and  is  made  professedly,  as  a  law  or  rule.
B  not  the  instrument  or  mean  of  deciding  a  specific  case,  but

'OL.IL  I


62  2  Law :  Sources  and  Modes.

LxoT. is  intended  solely  to  serve  as  a  role  of  conduct,  and  theiefore  to

XXXVII

w ^ . guide  the  tribunals  in  their  decisions  upon  classes  of  cases.
Tho  prin-  The principal diflference, therefore,  *  between statute  and

^Sbe-^^ judiciary  law,  lies  in  a  difference  between  the  forms  in  which
tTto  ^  ■*** they  are  respectively  expressed,

jadiciar}r  A  statute  law  is  expressed  in  general  or  abstract  terms,  or

^^J^  ^^  wears  the  form  or  shape  of  a  law  or  rule,
between  A  law  (or  rule  of  law)  made  by  judicial  decisions,  erists

^whiS^  nowhere  in  a  general  or  abstract  form.  Before  it  can  be  known,
they  are  it  must  be  gathered  from  the  grounds  or  reasons  of  the  specific
iJei^wc-  decision  or  decisions  by  which  it  was  virtually  established.  It
pressed.  therefore  is  implicated  with  the  peculiarities  of  the  specific  case
or  cases,  to  the  adjudication  or  decision  of  which  it  was  applied
by  the  tribunals.  In  order  that  its  import  may  be  correcdy
ascertained,  the  peculiar  circumstances  of  the  cases  to  which  it
was  applied,  as  well  as  the  general  propositions  which  occur  in
the  decisions,  must  be  observed  and  considered  For  those
general  propositions  being  thrown  out  by  the  tribunals  with  a
view  to  the  decision  of  a  specific  case,  they  must  be  taken  in
conjunction  with,  and  must  be  limited  by,  the  specific  or  indi-
vidual peculiarities  by  which  that  case  was  distinguished.  Such
general  propositions,  occurring  in  the  course  of  a  decision,  as
have  not  this  implication  with  the  specific  peculiarities  of  the
case,  are  commonly  styled  extra-judicial,  and  commonly  have  no
authority.

In  short,  although  a  rule  or  principle  is  established  by  the
decision  or  decisions,  and  is  applicable  and  actually  applied  to
subsequent  and  resembling  cases,  that  rule  or  principle  lies
in  concreto,  and  must  be  gotten  from  the  decisions  by  which  it
was  established,  through  a  process  of  abstraction  and  induction.
Before  we  can  find  the  import  of  the  general  principle  or  rule,
we  must  exclude  the  peculiarities  of  the  cases  to  which  it  was
applied,  and  must  consider  the  decision  to  which  the  tribunal
would  have  come,  if  its  decision  had  not  been  modified  by  those
specific  differences.

Looking  at  the  general  reasons  alleged  by  the  Court  for  its
decisions,  and  abstracting  those  reasons  from  the  Tnodificatiom
which  were  suggested  ty  the  peciUiarities  of  the  cases,  we  arrive  al
a  ground  or  principle  of  decision,  which  will  apply  imiversally  t(
cases  of  a  class,  and  which,  like  a  statute  law,  may  serve  as  i
rule  of  conduct.

But  without  this  process  of  abstraction,  no  judicial  decisioi


Statute  and  Jtidiciary  Law.  6zz

can  serve  as  a  guide  of  conduct,  or  can  be  applied  to  the  solution Lbot.

XXXVII

of  subsequent  cases. For  as  every  c6U3e  has  features  of  its  own, ^  ^ ^
and  as  every  judicial  decision  is  a  decision  on  a  specific  case,  a
judicial  decision  a^  a  whole  (or  as  considered  in  conc7'eto),  can
have  no  application  to  another,  and,  therefore,  a  different  case.

And  here  I  will  remark  (before  I  proceed  further)  an  enormous  An  enor-  '
firalt  of  Justinian's  Pandects  and  Code,  considered  as  a  code  (in  ^^^^  p^^^,
the  modem  acceptation  of  the  term) :  that  is  to  say,  as  a  body  dects  and

i  ^ ^  Code,  con-

ot  general  rules.  sidered  as

Though  much  of  his  Code  consists  of  edictal  or  general  Con-  *  ^<^
sdtutions  (which,  as  I  have  stated  already,  are  statute  laws),
much  of  it  consists  of  constitutions  which  are  special  or  particular :
that  is  to  say,  which  are  judicial  decisions  of  the  Boman  Emperors
as  the  supreme  judicatory  of  the  empire,  and  not,  like  the  edictal
constitutions  of  the  same  emperors,  general  laws  or  rules.

Consequently,  his  Code  is  a  compilation  of  statutes,  and  of
judicial  decisions :  a  heterogeneous  mass  of  objects  having  no
otiher  relation,  than  that  they  are  all  of  them  Imperial  Constitu-
tions :  that  is  to  say,  statutes  and  other  orders  emanating  from
the  Emperors  directly,  and  not  emanating  directly  from  subor-
dinate l^islatures  or  tribunals.

His  Pandects  (as  I  stated  in  my  last  Lecture)  consist  mainly
of  excerpts  or  fragments  from  the  writings  of  celebrated  and
anthoritative  jurisconsults.  But  most  of  those  writings  were
casuistical,  or  consisted  of  opinions  of  the  writers  on  specific  or
particular  cases.  They  consisted  of  applications  of  actual  law
to  specific  cases ;  or  of  applications  to  specific  cases,  of  law
atUieipaied  by  the  writers :  that  is  to  say,  of  law,  which  (in  the
opinion  of  the  writers)  the  tribunals  would  probably  emit,  in  the
event  of  the  cases  in  question  coming  under  judicial  cognisance.

Most  of  those  writings,  therefore,  were  closely  analogous  to

compilations  of  judicial  decisions:  The  only  difference  being,

that  judicial  decisions  are  opinions  pronounced  by  sovereign

authority,  whilst  the  decisions  or  opinions,  which  were  contained

in  those  writings  of  jurisconsults,  were  decisions  or  opinions  on

particular  cases,  emitted  by  private  or  unauthorised  persons.

[But  were  rendered  law  by  Justinian's  sanction :  i,e.  tantamount

to  judicial  decisions.]

Some  of  the  writings  of  jurisconsults,  from  which  excerpts
are  inserted  in  the  Pandects,  were  undoubtedly  didactic :  that  is
to  say,  they  consisted  of  expositions,  in  general  terms,  of  the
Soman  Law. And,  by  consequence,  they  are  more  analogous  to


624  Law :  Sources  and  Modes.

Lbot. statutes  than  to  judicial  decisions. [And  were  rendered  such,
V  through  Justinian's  ordination  and  promulgation.] They  consist

of  expositions  of  law  in  abstract  or  general  terms,  as  statutes
consist  of  commands  conceived  in  similar  expressiona  The
difierence  between  those  writings  and  statutes  or  legislatiYe
enactments,  mainly  consists  in  this :  that  statutes  are  general
rules  set  by  sovereign  authority ;  whilst  the  writings  in  question
(though  conceived  in  general  expressions)  were  merely  exposi-
tions of  law  by  private  or  unauthorised  lawyers.

The  literal  meaning  of  the  words  in  which  a  statute  is
expressed  (or  their  grammatical,  customary,  or  obvious  meaning)
is  the  primary  index  to  the  sense  which  the  author  of  the  statute
annexed  to  them:  Or  (changing  the  phrase),  it  is  the  primaiy
index  to  the  intention  with  which  the  statute  was  made,  or  tbe
primary  index  to  the  law  which  the  legislature  intended  to
establish.

But  the  interpreter  regarding  and  consulting  the  lit^
meaning  of  the  words,  may  find  that  the  intention  which  the
legislature  held  is  indeterminate  and  dubious :  that  is  to  say,
he  may  not  be  able  to  discover  in  the  literal  meaning  of  the
words,  any  determinate  purpose  that  the  legislature  may  have
entertained.  Now,  if  he  cannot  discover  in  the  literal  meaning
of  the  words,  any  such  definite  and  possible  purpose,  he  may
seek  in  other  indicia,  the  intention  which  the  legislature  held:
He  may  seek  it,  for  example,  in  the  reason  of  the  statute,  as  indi-
cated by  the  statute  itself;  or  in  the  reason  of  the  statute,  as  indi-
cated by  the  history  of  the  statute ;  or  in  the  clear  enactments
of  other  statutes  made  by  the  same  legislature  in  pari  nuUerid.

But  if  he  be  able  to  discover  in  the  literal  meaning  of  the
words,  any  such  definite  and  possible  purpose,  he  commonly
ought  to  abide  by  the  literal  meaning  of  the  words,  though
it  vary  from  the  other  indices  to  the  actual  intention  of  the
legislature. Or (changing the phrase), though the literal
meaning  of  the  words  vary  from  the  other  indicia,  he  commonly
should  take  the  intention  which their literal meaning  may
point  at,  as  and  for  the  intention  with  which  the  statute  was
made. For  by  reason  of  the  abstract  form  which  is  given  to  a
statute  law,  the  very  words  of  the  statute  are  almost  parcel  of
the  statute. The  terms  through  which  the  legislature  tried  to
convey  its  intention,  were  probably  measured  as  carefully  as  the
intention  which  it  tried  to  convey. And  the  interpreter  ought
to  infer  (unless  the  contrary  manifestly  appear),  that  it  employed


Statute  and  yndiciary  Law.  62  5

them  with  the  obvious  meaning  which  custom  has  annexed  to Lbot.

XXXVII

them,  and  not  with  a  sense  which  is  unusual^  and  therefore
leoondite  and  obscure.

K  the  literal  meaning  of  the  words  were  not  the  primary
index  (or  were  not  scrupulously  regarded  by  the  interpreter),
an  the  advantages  (real  or  supposed)  of  statute  legislation  would
be  lost  For  the  purpose  is,  to  give  an  index  more  compendious,
compact  (or  lying  together),  and  therefore  less  fallible,  than  is
that  to  a  judiciary  rula  But  if  the  interpreter  might,  ad  liJntum,
desert  the  literal  meaning,  no  such  index  could  be  given.

In  the  case,  therefore,  of  a  statute,  the  primary  index  to
the  law  which  the  lawgiver  intended  to  establish,  is  the  gram-
matical sense  of  the  words  in  which  the  statute  is  expressed.

But  the  primary  index  to  a  rule  created  by  a  judicial
dedsion,  is  not  the  grammatical  sense  of  the  very  words  or
terms  in  which  the  judicial  decision  was  pronounced  by  the
legislating  judge:  And,  d  fortiori,  it  is  not  the  grammatical
sense  of  the  very  words  or  terms  in  which  the  legislating  judge
uttered  his  general  propositions.  As  taken  apart  (or  by  them-
sdves),  and  as  taken  with  their  literal  meaning,  the  terms  of
his  entire  decision  (and,  d  fortiori,  the  terms  of  his  general
propositions)  are  scarcely  a  clue  to  the  rule  which  his  decision
impUes.  In  order  to  an  induction  of  the  rule  which  his  decision
implies,  their  literal  meaning  should  be  modified  by  the  other
indices  to  the  rule,  from  the  very  commencement  of  the  process.
From  the  very  beginning  of  our  endeavour  to  extricate  the
implicated  rule,  we  should  construe  or  interpret  the  terms  of  his
entire  decision  and  discourse,  by  the  nature  of  the  case  which
he  decided ;  and  we  should  construe  or  interpret  the  terms  of
his  general  or  abstract  propositions,  by  the  various  specific
peculiarities  which  the  decision  and  case  must  comprise.  For
it  is  likely  that  the  terms  of  his  decision  were  not  very
scmpulously  measured,  or  were  far  less  carefully  measured  than
those  of  a  statute ;  insomuch  that  the  reasons  for  his  decision,
wiiich  their  literal  meaning  may  indicate,  probably  tally
imperfectly  with  the  reasons  upon  which  it  is  founded.  And
his  general  propositions  are  impertinent,  and  ought  to  have  no
authority,  unless  they  be  imported  necessarily  (and  therefore
were  provoked  naturally)  by  his  judicial  decision  of  the  very
case  before  him.^^

"  Nor  is  it  neoeisary,  that  the  general  construed  (or  receiving  light)  from  the

pounds should be expressed  by  the  nature  or  class  of  the  case. An  inference

lodge. In  which  case,  the  onl^  index  ex  rei  ncUurd,—See  ThibatU  and  MUhleri"

IB,  the  spedslities  of  the  decision  as  hruch.


626  Law :  Sources  and  Modes.

Lect.  Most,  however,  of  the  writings  of  jurisconsults  (of  excerpt

V  from  which  the  Pandects  are  composed),  are  rather  opinioni

on  specific  cases,  than  expositions  (in  abstract  terms)  of  the
Boman  Law.

A  large  portion  of  the  Code,  and  a  larger  portion  of  the
Pandects,  cdnsist  not  of  general  rules  (or  of  statute  laws),  but  of
judicial  decisions  (or  of  opinions  analogous  to  such  decisions),
from  which  rules  must  be  gathered  by  a  process  of  abstraction
and  induction.

And,  what  is  worse,  the  portion  of  the  Code  and  Pandects
which  consists  of  such  decisions  and  opinions,  is  constructed
with  so  little  reflection  and  so  little  skill,  that  the  general
reasons  or  principles  which  were  the  bases  of  the  decisions  and
opinions  are  often  extremely  uncertain.

As  I  have  stated  already,  the  general  propositions  which
occur  in  a  judicial  decision,  must  always  be  taken  with  reference
to  the  specific  peculiarities  of  the  case.  For,  as  the  proper
purpose  of  the  judge  is  the  decision  of  the  specific  case,  any
general  proposition  which  does  not  properly  concern  it  is  extia-
judicial  and  unauthoritative.  And  (moreover)  as  the  judge  is
not  (like  the  legislator)  occupied  in  constructing  a  rule,  his
general  propositions  are  often  crudely  expressed,  and  must  be
carefully  construed  by  a  constant  reference  to  his  direct  and
proper  purpose.  Any  of  his  general  propositions,  taken  by
itself,  is  commonly  broader  or  narrower  than  the  intention
which  he  really  entertains.  The  inaccurate  expressions  in
which  it  is  conveyed,  must,  therefore,  be  enlarged  or  restricted
by  the  scope  of  his  entire  discourse.  And  the  scope  of  his
entire  discourse  cannot  be  known  with  assurance,  unless  the
case  which  he  decides  is  known  in  all  its  detail.

But,  for  the  sake  of  conciseness,  or  for  the  sake  of  getting
at  propositions  of  an  abstract  or  general  form,  the  facts  of  the
cases  contained  in  the  Code  and  Pandects  are  often  suppressed
by  the  compilers.  The  general  propositions  contained  in  the
special  Constitutions  (or  contained  in  the  analogous  opinions  of
the  jurisprudential  writers),  are  detached  from  the  facts  to
which  they  were  applied,  and  which  are  requisite  guides  to
their  exact  import

Consequently,  before  we  can  arrive  at  their  exact  impoit,
we  must  perform  a  double  process.  From  the  remaining
fragments  of  the  particular  case  to  which  a  proposition  of  the
kind  was  applied  by  the  judge  or  jurisconsult,  we  must  gathei
the  residue  of  that  specific  case. And  having  thus  conjectured


Statute  and  yudiciary  Law.  627

le subject  of  the  decision  or  opinion,  we  must  collect the Lbct.
nport  of  the  proposition  (as  a  general  principle  or  rule),  by  the - ^ -
locess  of  abstraction  and  induction  to  which  I  have  already
idverted.

Conceive  a  general  proposition  of  my  Lord  Eldon,  detached
bom  the  case  in  which  it  occurs,  and  from  the  careful  limita-
tions  (suggested  by  the  peculiarities  of  the  case)  with  which  the
poposition  is  guarded.

Now  a  collection  of  propositions  so  detached  (and  of  which
the  exact  import  must  therefore  be  extremely  uncertain),  will
afford  a  conception  of  most  or  much  of  the  matter,  which
Tnbonian  and  his  associates  inserted  in  the  Code  and  Pandects,
as  the  future  law  of  the  Soman  Empire.

It  follows  from  what  has  preceded,  that  law  made  judicially  BaJdo  legis
most  be  found  in  the  general  grotmds  (or  must  be  found  in  the  ^J^^^
geoeial  reasons)  of  judicial  decisions  or  resolutions  of  specific  or
partieular  cases :  that  is  to  say,  in  such  grounds,  or  such  reasons,
aa  detached  or  abstracted  from  the  specific  peculiarities  of  the
decided  or  resolved  cases.  Since  no  two  cases  are  precisely
aEke,  the  decision  of  a  specific  case  may  partly  turn  upon
leasons  which  are  suggested  to  the  judge  by  its  specific  peculi-
arities or  differences.  And  that  part  of  the  decision  which
toms  on  those  differences  (or  that  part  of  the  decision  which
consists  of  those  special  reasons),  cannot  serve  as  a  precedent  for
subsequent  decisions,  and  cannot  serve  as  a  rule  or  guide  of
oondnct

The  general  reasons  or  principles  of  a  judicial  decision  (as
thus  abstracted  from  any  peculiarities  of  the  case)  are  commonly
styled,  by  writers  on  jurisprudence,  the  ratio  decidendi.  And
this  ratio  decidendi  must  be  carefully  distinguished  from  that,
which  is  commonly  called  ratio  legis.  The  latter  is  the  end  or
purpose  which  moved  the  legislator  to  establish  a  statute  law.
Or  it  is  the  end  or  purpose  of  any  of  its  particular  provisions :
an  end  or  purpose  which  is  subordinate  to  the  general  design  of
the  statute.

Eatio  decidendi  is  itself  a  law :  or,  at  least,  it  is  the  general
ground  or  principle  of  a  judicial  decision  or  decisions.  For
Rrant  of  a  statute  law,  it  performs  the  functions  of  a  general
rule,  or  of  a  guide  of  conduct  Though  not  a  rule  in  form,  it
s  tantamount  to  a  general  command  proceeding  from  the
(overeign  or  state,  or  from  any  of  its  authorised  subordinates.
For,  since  it  is  its  known  will  that  the  general  reason  of  a


628


Law :  Sources  and  Modes.


Leot.
XXXVII


decision  on  a  particular  or  specific  case  shall  govern  dedsions
on  future  resembling  cases,  the  subjects  receive  from  the  state
(on  the  occasion  of  such  a  decision)  an  expression  or  Intimation
of  its  sovereign  will,  that  they  shall  shape  their  conduct  to  the
reason  or  principle  thereof!

And  here  I  will  briefly  remark,  that,  when  I  speak  of  a
rule  made  by  a  judicial  decision,  I  mean,  of  course,  such  a
judicial  decision  as  is  not  a  mere  application  of  previously
existing  law.  By  such  a  judicial  decision,  as  is  merely  an
application  of  previously  existing  law,  no  rule  is  mada  In
such  a  decision,  the  raJtio  decidendi  is  the  general  ground  of
the  decision  which  the  judge  applied  to  the  given  case :  that  is
to  say,  the  general  ground  of  decision  is  either  some  statute
law,  or  else  the  general  ground  of  some  anterior  decision  by
which  a  new  rule  had  been  already  introduced  and  created.  In
every  judicial  decision  by  which  law  is  made,  the  rcUio  deeidendi
is  a  new  ground  or  principle,  or  a  groimd  or  principle  nd
prevumsly  law.


The  inter-
pretation
or  con-
stractioii
of  statute
law,  and
the^weu-
lioT  pro-
ceas  of  ab-
straction
and  induc-
tion, etc.


It  appears,  then,  from  what  has  foregone,  that  raiio  decidendi
(or  the  ground  or  principle  of  a  judiciad  decision  which  is  not
merely  an  application  of  pre-existing  law)  is  itself  a  law,  or
performs  the  functions  of  a  law.

But  ratio  legis  is  not  a  law ;  nor  does  it  perform,  in  any
respect,  the  functions  of  a  law.  It  is  the  general  and  paramount
cause  of  a  statute  law  (or  else  the  particular  and  subordinate
reason  of  any  of  its  particular  and  subordinate  provisions).  The
rule  to  be  observed  by  the  governed  is  not  the  ratio  legis,  but
the  lex  ipsa.  The  rule  to  be  observed  by  the  governed  must  be
collected  from  the  terms  wherein  the  statute  is  expressed:
though,  to  the  end  of  ascertaining  the  meaning  annexed  to  those
terms  by  the  legislator,  the  ratio  legis  (as  a  mean  or  instrument
of  interpretation  or  construction)  must  commonly  be  consulted
by  the  judges  who  apply  the  statute  judicially,  and  by  all  who
would  shape  their  conduct  to  the  provisions  of  the  statute.

Hence  it  follows,  that  the  interpretation  or  construction  of  a
statute  law  widely  difiers  from  the  analogous  process  of  induction,
by  which  a  rule  made  judicially  is  collected  from  decided  cases.

Since  a  statute  law  is  expressed  in  determinate  expressions,
and  those  expressions  were  intended  to  convey  the  will  of  the
legislator,  it  follows  that  the  import  or  meaning  which  he
annexed  to  those  very  expressions  is  the  object  of  genuine  inter-
pretation. If  those  terms  be  of  doubtful  import,  the  ratio  or


ion  which  is  present  to  his  mind  when  he  is  constructing
atate,  may  chance  to  differ  from  the  end  which  moves  him
iblish  the  statute.  Although  he  conceive  that  intention
)erfect  clearness  and  precision,  and  although  he  express  it
statute  with  similar  clearness  and  precision,  he  may  not
3  the  scope,  nor  adhere  to  the  principle,  of  the  statute  with
t  completeness  and  consistency.  Consequently,  notwith-
ng  the  clearness  and  the  precision  with  which  he  conceives
q)resses  his  actual  intention  or  purpose,  the  statute  may
ed  imperfectly  to  accomplish  the  end  or  purpose  by  which
determined  to  make  it  And  hence  the  spurious  inter-
ion,  ex  ratione  Ugis,  through  which  a  statute,  unequivo-
MTOided  by  the  lawgiver,  is  extended  or  restricted  by  the

J  such  extensive  or  restrictive  interpretation  the  judge
jepart  from  the  manifest  sense  of  a  statute,  in  order  that
y  carry  into  effect  its  ratio  or  scope.  But,  in  these  cases,
not  a  jvdge  properly  interpreting  the  law,  but  a  subordi-
yidaiar  correcting  its  errors  or  defects.  He  supposes  the
sions  which  the  lawgiver  tootUd  have  used  (or  he  supposes
ovisions  which  the  lawgiver  v?(nUd  have  made),  if  the  latter
:pre8sed  his  intention  in  appropriate  terms  (or  had  pursued
ope  of  the  statute  in  a  consistent  manner) :  And  those
led  expressions,  or  those  supposed  provisions,  he  svbstitutes
s  dear  expressions  which  the  lawp^ver  has  actually  used.


630  Law :  Sources  and  Modes.

YY^^iT  ^^  wliich  it  is  expressed  are  necessarily  the  main  index  to  the
- ^ - legislator  s  purpose.

But  in  the  analogous  process  of  induction,  by  which  a  role
of  law  is  extracted  from  judicial  decisions,  Uiat  scrupulous
attention  to  the  language  used  by  the  legislating  judge  would
commonly  defeat  the  end  for  which  the  process  is  performed
As  the  general  propositions  which  the  decision  contains  are  not
commonly  expressed  with  much  premeditation,  and  as  they  must
be  taken  in  connection  with  all  the  peculiarities  of  the  case,  it
follows  that  the  very  terms  in  which  those  propositions  are
clothed  are  not  the  main  index  to  the  raiio  decidendi; — to  the
general  rule  or  principle  which  that  decision  established,  and
which  is  the  governing  principle  of  the  case  awaiting  solution.

In  short,  a  statute  law  is  expressed  in  general  or  abstract
terms  which  are  parcel  of  the  law  itself.  And,  consequently,
the  proper  end  of  interpretation  is  the  discovery  of  the  meaning
which  was  actually  annexed  by  the  l^islator  to  those  veiy
expressions.  For  if  judges  could  depart  ad  libitum  &om  the
meaning  of  those  expressions,  and  collect  the  provisions  of  the
statute  from  other  indicia,  they  would  desert  (generally  speaking)
a  more  certain,  for  a  less  certain  guide.

But  a  rule  of  law  established  by  judicial  decision,  exists
nowhere  in  precise  expressions,  or  in  expressions  which  are  pared
of  the  ratio  decidendi.  The  terms  or  expressions  employed  by
the  judicial  legislator,  are  rather  faint  traces  from  which  the
principle  may  be  conjectured,  than  a  guide  to  be  followed
inflexibly  in  case  their  obvious  meaning  be  perfectly  certain.

Broad  as  the  distinction  is  between  the  interpretation  of
statute  law  and  the  analogous  process  of  induction  by  which  a
rule  is  extracted  from  a  judicial  decision  or  decisions,  the  two
distinct  processes  have  commonly  been  confounded  by  those  who
have  written  on  the  interpretation  of  the  Boman  law.

As  I  have  remarked  above,  a  part  of  Justinian's  Cknie
consists  of  edidal  Constitutions,  or  of  proper  or  statute  lawE
made  and  promulged  by  the  Emperors  as  legislators.  But  f
part  of  it  consists  of  special  Constitutions;  that  is  to  say,  0!
judicial  decisions  by  the  Emperors  as  the  supreme  judges  of  tiw
Empire:  whilst  the  Pandects  consist  of  excerpts  from  th<
writings  of  jurists,  which  not  uncommonly  are  solutions  of  cases
and  closely  analogous  to  judicial  decisions.

[Owing  to  the  sanction  imparted  to  them  by  the  Emperor,  the
are  substantially  judicial  decisions.]


Statute  and  Judiciary  Law.  631

Now  most  of  the  modem  Civilians  who  have  treated  of „^2I;,,
interpretation^  have  applied  to the  statute  law  contained  in
Jnstuiian's compilations,  and to  the  decisions  and casuistical
idutums  which  the  compilations  also  comprise,  the  same  rules  of
interpretation  or  construction.

For  example:  They  have  confounded  extensive  interpreta-
tion of  statute  law  with  the  application  of  a  decided  case  to  a
resembling  case.

The  80-caUed  extensive  interpretation  of  statute  law  ex  ratione
kgis,  is  the  extension  of  the  provisions  of  the  law  to  a  case  which
they  do  not  comprise,  because  the  case  falls  within  the  scope  of
the  kw,  although  the  provisions  of  the  law  do  not  include  it.
There  is  truly  an  extension  of  the  law.

But  the  application  of  a  decided  case  to  the  solution  of  a
similar  case,  is  the  direct  application  of  the  judiciary  law  itself,
and  not  the  extension  of  the  law  agreeably  to  its  reason  or  scope.
For,  here,  the  law  cannot  be  extended  agreeably  to  the  reason  of
&e  decision,  inasmuch  as  the  reason  of  the  decision  (or  the
ground  or  principle  of  the  decision)  is  itself  the  law.  The
application,  therefore,  of  a  decided  case  to  the  solution  of  a
resembling  case,  is  the  direct  stibsumption  of  a  case  to  which  the
law  itself  directly  applies,  and  not  the  extension  of  a  law  ex
fdione  ejus  to  a  case  or  species  obveniens  which  the  law  does  not
embrace.

[v.  V.  The  way  in  which  they  have  confounded  their  subject,  from
not  perceiving  the  distinction  to  which  I  have  now  adverted.

^Ampliant  istam  regulam  ut  tum  maxime  procedat  si  ratio  in
fe^^  sU  expressa  ;  tunc  enim  non  est  extensio  sed  potius  comprehensio.
H&betur  enim  ratio  in  lege  expressa  pro  lege  generali.'^^]

Again : One  of  their  commonest  rules  of  interpretation —

ceisante  ratione  legis,  cessat  lex  ipsa — applies  solely  to  precedents,

and  does  not  apply  to  statute  law. For  in  statute  law,  the  law

is  one  thing,  the  reason  another ;  the  law,  as  a  command,  may

continue  to  exist,  although  its  reason  has  ceased,  and  the  law

consequently  ought  to  be  abrogated ;  but  there  it  is,  the  solemn

and  unchanged  will  of  the  legislator,  which  the  judge  should  not

take  upon  himself  to  set  aside,  though  he  may  think  it  desirable

that  it  should  be  altered. But  in  the  case  of  judiciary  law,  if

the  ground  of  the  decision  has  fallen  away  or  ceased,  the  ratio

decidendi  being  gone,  there  is  no  law  left.

*  Decided  case  resting  upon  a  ground ^  B.  Forster,  de  Juris  Interpretatione,

wliich  (whether  it  be  expressed  or  not  in  lib.  ii  c.  2,  quoted  by  Thibaut,  Theorie

the  case)  ia  in  truth  the  Law. — Marginal  der  logiscben  Ausleguug  des  romischen

NoU.  Rechts,  p.  67.


632  Law:  Sources  and  Modes.

Lbot.  Professor  Thibaut  of  Heidelberg  (in  his  Interpretation  of  the

^  ^  V  Boman  Law)  was  the  first  (I  believe)  who  saw  distinctly,  that
the  rules  of  interpretation  which  will  apply  to  the  edictal  Con-
stitutions contained  in  Justinian's  compilations,  have  little  or  do
applicability  to  those  judicial  decisions  (or  to  those  solutions  of
cases  that  are  analogous  to  judicial  decisions)  which  the  same
combinations  also  embrace.

It  is  to  be  regretted  that  the  excellent  work  of  Professor
Thibaut  is  on  the  interpretation  of  the  Boman  law  only,  not  on
the  interpretation  of  law  in  general ;  for,  consequently,  owing  to
the  strong  peculiarities  of  Justinian's  compilations  it  has  little
to  do  with  the  general  principles  of  construction.  But  I  am
scarcely  acquainted  with  any  book  which,  within  so  small  a
compass,  contains  so  much  original  thinking.  As  was  said  by
Gassendi  of  some  work  of  Hobbes,  parmis  est  libellus,  cU  meduM
scateL
Oompeti-  As  being  connected  with  the  subject  which  I  am  now  con-

amdi^es : sidering,  I  will  advert  to  an  oversight  of  Sir  Samuel  Eomilly,  in
— Paley his  admirable  article  in  the  Hdiniurgh  Beview,  on  Mr.  Bentham's •
Romilly. papers  relative  to  Codification.

The  passage  is  as  follows : —

*  It  is  very  extraordinary,  that,  with  such  accurate  notions
as  Paley  appears  to  have  had  on  this  subject,  he  should  not
have  seen,  that  this  ''  Source  of  disputation,"  as  he  calls  it,  was
peculiar  to  an  unwritten  law. He  strangely  supposes  it  to
belong  equally  to  the  Statute  as  to  the  Common  Law. "  After
all  the  certainty  and  rest,"  he  says,  "  that  can  be  given  to  points
of  law,  either  by  the  interposition  of  the  Legislature,  or  tiie
authority  of  precedents,  one  principal  source  of  disputation,  and
into  which,  indeed,  the  greater  part  of  legal  controversies  may
be  resolved,  will  remain  still,  namely,  the  competition  of  opposite
analogies." DiflSculties  undoubtedly  often  arise  in  the  applica-
tion of  written  statutes,  and  Paley  himself  has  well  pointed  th^n
out ;  but  they  are  quite  of  a  different  nature  from  those  which
attend  the administration  of  the  common law,  and  certainly
cannot  be  surmounted  by  that  competition  of  opposite  analogies
which  he  mentions.'  ^

Now  it  seems  to  me,  that  'the  competition  of  opposite
analogies '  (if  the  phrase  mean  anything)  is  just  as  likely  to
arise  on  the  application  of  statute  law,  as  on  the  application  of
judiciary  law.  Paley  must  be  speaking  (if  he  mean  anything),
not of  the  discovery  of  the  law  by  interpretation or  other

^  Edin.  Rev.  vol.  xxix.  p.  224.


Statute  and  judiciary  Law.  633

induction,  but  of  the  application  of  the  law.  as  already  ascer- Leot.

XXXYII

tamed,  to  the  case  which  awaits  solution.  ^ ^ ^

With  regard  to  the  process  of  interpretation,  or  the  analogous
process  of  induction  which  I  have  already  described,  the  phrase
'competition  of  analogies'  has  no  meaning.  The  purpose  (in
tihe  case  of  the  induction)  is  to  deduce  the  rule  of  law  from  the
decided  case  or  cases  by  which  the  rule  was  established.  If  the
role  of  law  was  established  by  one  decided  case  the  rule  cannot
haye  been  founded  on  opposite  analogies.  If  it  was  established
by  several  cases,  it  was  founded  on  the  resembling,  and  not  on
the  differing  properties  of  those  several  cases ;  so  that  here  also,
it  was  not  founded  on  opposite,  but  on  analogous  analogies.

But  with  regard  to  the  application  of  the  law  to  the  case
awaiting  solution,  '  the  competition  of  opposite  analogies '  may
certainly  arise.  For  the  case  awaiting  solution  may  re-
mble  in  some  of  its  points  the  case  or  cases  to  which  the
nde  of  law  has  actually  been  applied.  But  it  may  also  resemble
in  other  of  its  points  a  case  or  cases  from  which  the  application
of  the  law  has  been  withheld.  Now,  with  reference  to  the  rule
of  law  (or  with  reference  to  the  applicability  of  the  rule  to  the
case  which  awaits  solution),  the  resemblances  of  the  case  to  the
cases  to  which  the  law  has  been  applied,  and  the  resemblances
of  the  case  to  the  cases  from  which  the  law  has  been  withheld,
aie '  opposite  and  competing  analogies : '  the  first  invitiag  the
tnbimal  to  apply  the  rule ;  the  second  admonishing  the  tribunal
that  the  rule  is  not  applicable.

But  this  is  not  peculiar  (as  Sir  S.  Bomilly  supposes)  to  judi-
ciary law.  Wherever  law  of  any  kind  is  to  be  applied,  this  *  com-
petition of  opposite  analogies '  may  embarrass  and  vex  the  tribunal.

As  being  connected  with  the  subject  which  I  am  now  con-  Black-
aidering,  I will advert  to  a  foolish remark  of  Sir  William  ^^  con-
Blackstone concerning the judicial decretes of  the Boman  ceming

He  tells  us  that  these  decretes,  '  contrary  to  all  true  forms  of  the  Roman
reasoning,  argue  from  particulars  to  generals.'  perors."

The  truth  is,  that  an  imperial  decrete  of  the  kind  to  which
Blackstone  alludes,  is  a  judicial  decision  establishing  a  new
principla  Consequently,  the  application  of  the  new  principle
to  the  case  wherein  it  is  established,  is  not  the  decision  of  a
^eral  by  a  particular,  but  the  decision  of  a  particular  by  a
;eneraL If  he  had  said  that  the  principle  applied  is  a  new

«  Vol.  i  p.  69.


634  Law :  Sources  and  Modes.

Lect. principle,  and,  therefore,  an  ex  post  facto  law  with  reference  to
^ ^ > that  case,  he  would  say  truly. But  the  same  objection  (it  is
quite  manifest)  applies  to  our  own  precedents.

What  hindered  him  from  seeing  this,  was  the  childish  fiction
employed  by  our  judges,  that  judiciary  or  common  law  is  not
made  by  them,  but  is  a  miraculous  something  made  by  nobodj,
existing,  I  suppose,  from  eternity,  and  merely  declared  from  time
to  time  by  the  judges.  This  being  the  case,  of  course  there  can
be  no  ea;  post  facto  legislation  in  the  English  Judiciary  law.

Before  I  proceed  to  the  advantages  and  disadvantages  of
judicial  legislation,  and  to  the  question  of  codification,  I  will  make
a  few  remarks  upon  certain  topics  on  which  I  may  touch  con-
veniently at  the  present  point  of  my  Course.

As  I  observed  in  former  Lectures,  judiciary  law  is  suggested
by  various  causes,  and  often  takes  from  these  various  causes,
various  names.  With  reference  to  its  suggesting  causes,  it
consists  mainly  of: —

V,  Bules  which  have  grown  up  by  custom  or  usage,  and
which  become  Law  by  judicial  adoption.

Bules  which  are  formed  fix)m  these  by  consequence  or
analogy. ^^  To  law  formed  in  this  manner  the  term  *  Customaiy
Law,'  is  commonly  confined.

2**.  Bules  which  are  established  by  judges  ex  proprio  arbitrio :
i.e.,  according  to  their  own  notions  of  what  ought  to  be  Law;
whether  the  standard  be  utility  or  any  other.

Bules  which  are  formed  out  of  these,  in  the  way  of  conse-
quence and  analogy.

Law  formed  in  this  way  has  received  various  names.  In
most  of  the  countries  on  the  Continent  it  is  said  to  originate
in  the  vsus  fori,  *  OericfUsgebrauch!  In  France  it  is  commonly
called  '  JurispmdeTice'  In  the  Boman  Law  it  has  no  peculiar
name ;  *  Auctoritas^  etc. :  Nor  does  it  seem  in  that  law  to  ba^
been  of  any  great  extent ;  the  use  of  decided  cases  as  a  sooroe
of  law,  having  been  rendered  to  a  great  degree  unnecessary  by
those  predeterminations  of  the  Praetors  which  were  contained  in
their  Edicts.  In  the  English  Law,  it  has  no  peculiar  name;
the  whole  of  the  judicial  law  being  confounded  together.

y.  Law  fashioned  on  opinions  and  practices  which  obtain
amongst  lawyers ;  and  which  naturally  have  a  great  eflfect  upcm
the  decisions  of  judges.

In  Bome,  the  Jva  Civile,  strictly  so  called,  was entirely

"  Hale,  Hist.  Com.  Law,  ch.  iv.


Statute  and  ytuliciary  Law.  635

fonned  in  this  manner.  The  opinions  of  experienced  juris-  Lbot.
consults  were  naturally  influential  with  the  community  and  v
with  the  courts,  and  the  decisions  of  the  tribunal  were  fre-
quently fashioned  on  them.  Much  law  has  been  thus  made  in
England :  by  judges  adopting  the  views  of  authoritative  exposi-
tory writers,  or  the  practice  of  conveyancers,  and  enforcing  them
as  law.

4^  Law  formed  by  judicial  decisions  upon  questions  which
arise  out  of  the  statute  law.

Decisions  on  statutes  are  of  two  sorts.  The  judge  applies
tlie  law  to  the  fact,  according  to  his  opinion  of  the  meaning ;  or
(by  a  process  which  is  generally  confounded  with  interpretation
or  construction,  but  which  in  truth  is  legislation)  he  decides
according  to  his  own  notion  of  what  the  legislator  ought  to  have
established.  By  this  extensive  or  restrictive  interpretation  ex
ratiotie  legis,  much  judiciary  law  grows  up.  A  striking  example
of  this  is  equity,  as  it  is  called,  of  the  statute  De  Bonis ;  that
is,  its  application  by  judges,  to  cases  coming  within  the  pre-
dominating purpose  of  the  statute,  though  omitted  out  of  its
proviBions.  The  Statute  of  Frauds  is  another  striking  example.
The  decisions  of  the  Courts  on  this  single  statute  are  nearly  equal
in  bulk  to  the  whole  of  the  French  civil  code.  The  whole  of
these  decisions  are  judge-made  law  introduced  on  the  occasion
of  pretended  applications  of  the  statute.

S"*.  Law  framed  on  foreign  law  or  positive  international
morality.

Much  of  the  law  made  in  our  Ecclesiastical  Courts  originated
in  this  manner,  for  the  law  administered  in  these  courts  was
mainly  fashioned  upon  the  civil  and  canon  law.  The  law
obtaining  in  the  dififerent  states  of  Germany  for  the  most  part
consists  of  the  Soman  Law,  that  is,  of  the  Soman  Law  as
established  by  the  German  legislators  and  tribunals.  It  is  in
fivce,  as  German  Law,  of  course,  but  it  is  German  Law  moulded
en  a  Soman  model

In  like  manner  judiciary  law,  particularly,  for  instance,  that
administered  in  our  Admiralty  Courts,  often  originates  in  posi-
thre  international  morality.  As  positive  international  morality
(so-called  international  law)  it  has  no  force  within  any  one
nation ;  but  a  nation  may  adopt  it  and  enforce  it  as  positive

law  within  itself  Tj^e  order

The  natural  or  customary  order  in  which  the  law  of  any  jn  which
ixmntry  arises,  or  is  founded,  seems  to  be  this :  naturally

"  Savigny,  Vom  Benif,  etc.  pp.  16-19. Hugo,  Enc.  pp.  25-28.  rated.  ••


636  Law :  Sources  and  Modes.

YTYviT  ^^^  Rules  of  positive  morality.

^ ^ '  2ndl7.  The  adoption  and  enforcement  of  these  roles  by  the

tribunals.

Srdly.  The  addition  of  other  rules  drawn  from  the  fiDimer
by  consequence  or  analogy.

4thly.  The  introduction  of  new  rules  by  the  judges,  jnnpyA
arlitrio ;  and  illations  from  these.

6thly.  Legislation  proper,  by  the  sovereign  l^slature,  in
the  same  order.

6thly.  The  action  and  reaction  of  judicial  legislation  and
legislation  proper.

The  sovereign  legislature  by  its  acts  acknowledges  tk
existence  of  law  made  by  the  tribunal,  and  moulds  its  own
enactments  upon  it ;  the  application  of  the  law  made  by  the  '
sovereign  gives  rise  to  further  judicial  legislation ;  and  in  scNne
cases  the  sovereign  legislature,  acting  as  the  supreme  judicatoij,
makes  judiciary  law  by  its  own  judicial  decisions.  :

7thly  and  lastly :  A  Coda  -j

The  conception  of  a  code,  or  systematic  and  complete  body 4
of  statute  law,  intended  to  supersede  all  other  law  whatever,  does
not  seem  to  belong  to  any  age  less  civilised  than  our  own. It
is  essentially  a  modem  thought.^  %^

Such  can  hardly  be  conceived  to  have  been  the  purpose  of
Justinian.  It  does  indeed  appear  from  the  Pandects,  that  he
intended  them  and  the  code  to  be  the  only  law  thereafter  to  :^
obtain  in  the  Roman  Empire ;  but  we  can  only  marvel  at  the  ^
conceit.  For  so  ill  did  the  compilers  of  those  works  accomplish  ^^
their  task,  that  they  were  scarcely  promulgated  before  he  was  j
obliged  to  add  to  them  a  body  of  Novels  as  big  as  themselvefl^  ^
and  to  set  about  a  new  edition  of  the  Compilation.

This,  however,  is  the  only  example  occurring,  as  far  as  I  am
aware,  in  ancient  times,  which  can  be  considered  as  an  approach
to  the  conception  of  a  Code.  Caesar's  idea  does  not  seem  to  have
gone  beyond  a  compilation  of  the  leges  of  the  popvius  and  |?feJs;
a  digest  of  the  then  existing  statute  law.

The  conceptions  entertained  of  a  Code  in  modem  times  have
generally  been  as  indistinct  as  Justinian's.^  And  this  is  the
chief  cause  of  the  imperfections  of  all  recent  attempts  at  codifica-
tion, and  the  cause  by  reason  of  which  the  codifiers  have  left  to

•*  Anciently,  all  collections  of  Laws  the  middle  of  the  last  century. First

(or  legal  rules)  promulged  by  the  legis-  examples  of  such  Codes : in Prnnia.

lature,  were  caUed  Codes. The  modem  1747  ; Austria, 1763  ; Russia, 1767  •

idea  of  a  Code — a  complete  and  exclu-  f^nce,  1793. '

give  body  of  law— did  not  arise  till  after  ••  Bentham,  Principles,  etc.  p.  828.


Statute  and  yudiciary  Law.  637

be  covered  by  judiciary  law  the  wilderness  which  they  knew  not L»ot.
kow  to  deal  with.  xxxvn

Judiciary  and  statute  law  often  run  into  one  another. An  Cases  ap.
ample  of  this  is  a  declaratory  law. A  d^laraicry  law^  P^^tly
hough  not  a  decision  upon  a  question  of  law  in  the  course  of  mediate
ididal  procedure  (that  is,  though  it  has  not  necessarily  any  jjjj]^^
feet  upon  the  interests  of  determinate  parties),  has  yet  the  and
mtion  of  a  judicial  decision  with  respect  to  cases  in  general  ^J^*®
;  is  not  the  establishment  of  a  new  law,  but  determines  the
iport  of  pre-existing  law.

K  it  introduce  a  new  rule  under  colour  of  explaining  an
d  one,  it  is  not  in  substance  a  declaratory  law ;  and  is  then
udogous  to  the  cases  in  which  judges  made  judicial  law,  under
>Ioar  of  interpreting  statute  law,  or  of  getting  by  induction  at
m  judge-made  law.

If  the  declaratory  law  relate  to  an  anterior  statute,  it  is  in
kt  a  republication  of  that  statute  in  a  more  correct  form : —
a  form  which  expresses  more  precisely  the  real  or  supposed
mention  with  which  the  statute  was  passed.  If  it  relate  to
lidal  law,  it  converts  judicial  into  statute  law ;  superseding
5  authority  of  the  decision  upon  which  the  judicial  law  formerly
ted. Thus  the  Pandects  of  Justinian  may  be  considered  as

express  declaration  by  the  Legislator,  that  certain  writings
ich  had  acquired  authority  in  the  tribunals  should  thenceforth
statute  law. [Sed  qacere,  judicial  decisions  ?]

There  is  the  same  difference  (with  regard  to  the  occasion  of
^  declaration)  between  declaratory  laws,  that  there  is  between
ginal  laws:  i,e.  A  declaratory  law  is  either  emitted  as  a
leral  rule,  independently  of  a  particular  incident,  or  on  occa-
n  of  a  particular  incident.  Laws  of  the  former  sort  are,  de-
iiatory  Acts,  etc..  Edicts  of  the  Prsetor,  so  fttr  as  interpreting :
W8  of  the  latter  sort.  Opinions  given  by  the  Boman  Ijnperors
the  instance  of  particular  parties ;  Opinions  which  Courts  of
stice  might  be  authorised  to  give  on  occasion  of  transactions
itemplated:  Rescripts.*^

The  great  difference  here  (as  in  original  legislation)  is  this ;
it  in  the  former  case  the  law  is  not  only  formally  promulged
hich  is  an  accident)  but  is  given  in  abstract,  in  the  form  of  a
leral  proposition  or  propositions  detached  from  any  actual
ident :  in  the  latter,  it  is  given  as  part  of  an  opinion  or  deci-
a  upon  a  particular  incident ;  and  must  always  be  taken  into

*  Bentham,  Principles,  etc  p.  328.
^  See  p.  519,  ante. Falck,  §  16. Blackstone,  vol.  i  p.  86.

eOL.  XL  K


63l8  .  Law :  Sources  and  Modes.

Lscrr.  consideration  jointly  with  that  incident,  in  order  that  we  may
^^ form  a  correct  estimate  of  its  import

The  Bescripts  of  the  Soman  Emperors^  though  issuing  from
the  legislature,  were  not  statute  law.  They  were  either  deciaions
on  appeal  declaratory ;  or  instructions  how  to  decide,  issued  to
inferior  judicatories.

In  England  we  have  nothing  analogous  to  this :  Acts  of
Parliament  relating  to  particular  cases  are  not  decisions  in  the
way  of  appeal,  but  privileffia :  and  the  House  of  Lords,  though
it  sit  as  a  Court  of  Judicature,  is  not  the  legislature,  but  only
a  branch  of  it. [Provision  in  Statute  of  Treasons.^]

In  France,  perhaps  the  judicial  decisions  of  the  Conseii  dm
Boi,  which,  before  the  Eevolution,  performed  the  functions  ol
the  present  Court  of  Cassation,  may  have  resembled,  in  this
respect,  the  rescripts  of  the  Soman  Emperors.  But  whetki
such  decisions  were  given  in  the  name  of  the  King  (who  for  a
century  or  two  before  the  Sevolution  was  substantially  the
legislature)  I  am  not  able  to  determine.  If  not  supposed  tc
proceed  from  him  by  the  advice  of  his  Conseii,  but  to  be  the  acl
of  the  Conseii  itself,  sitting  as  a  Court  of  Cessation,  they  were
not  analogous  to  rescripts.

Declaratory  laws  are  sometimes  provoked  by  a  particnk
case,  and  are  so  far  analogous  to  judicial  decisions.^  Such  w
the  laws  made  by  the  Prussian  Law  Commission.  If  the  judges
whose  duty  it  is  to  decide  according  to  the  provisions  of  th(
Prussian  Code,  differ  in  their  interpretation  of  it,  and  canno
unravel  the  meaning,  the  decision  of  the  last  Court  of  Appeal  i
referred  to  the  Law  Commission,  who  have  power,  not  to  alte
the  decision  as  respects  the  particular  case,  but  to  amend  th
law  in  futurum,  and  what  they  promulge  is  a  law  declaratory  (
what  shall  be  deemed  law  in  future  on  the  occurrence  of  a  simiU
case.

[The  matter  contained  in  the  following  pages  formed  no  part
the  Lectures, It  was  found  among  loose  papers. — S.  A.]

Where  there  is  no  rule  in  the  system  applicable  to  the  cai
the  judge  virtually  makes  one,  if  he  decides  at  all,  or  decides  <
any  general  ground.

Now  where  the  judge  makes  a  judiciary  rule,  he  may  bui
it  on  any  of  various  grounds,  or  derive  it  from  any  of  varic
sources :  e,g,  a  custom  not  having  force  of  law,  but  obtaini

"  Blackstone,  vol  iv.  pp.  84,  85. See  ante,  p.  520.


Statute  and  yudiciary  Law.  639

throughout  the  community,  or  in  some  class  of  it;  a  maxim  of Lect.
international  law ;  his  own  views  of  what  law  ought  to  be  (be


standard  which  he  assumes,  general  utility  or  any  other).

[All  which  I  will  shortly  explain  elsewhere.]

But  it  often  (perhaps,  most  commonly)  happens,  that  he
derives  the  new  rule,  by  a  consequence  built  on  analogy,  from  a
role  or  rules  actually  part  of  the  system.  And  it  is  to  the
creation  of  law  thus  derived  from  pre-existing  law,  that  the
competition  of  opposite  analogies  to  which  judicial  legislation  is
liable,  is  peculiarly,  if  not  exclusively,  incident.

Law  thus  derived  from  pre-existing  law,  has  received  various
names.  It  is  styled  by  Hale,  law  formed  by  illations  on  anterior
law:**  by  others,  law  derived  from  pre-existing  law,  by  conse-
quence or  analogy :  by  others,  jus  quod  ex  jure  eflScitur  argu-
mniandoT^  By  others  it  is  styled  law  built  upon  technical
grounds :  i«.  upon  grounds  like  those  of  the  rules  from  which  it
is  derived^  rather  than  on  considerations  of  utility  which  regard
the  actual  state  of  the  community.

The  judge  makes,  and  applies  to  the  subjects  wanting  a  rule.  How  law
a  role  analogous  to  an  existing  rule  (statute  or  judiciary)  which  ^^^/^^
regards  analogous  subjects. Kg. :  The  extension  of  a  statute  anterior
miequivocaUy  expressed,  to  cases  embraced  by  its  scope,  but  foJJn^
oinitted  by  the  lawgiver ;  or  its  extension  to  subjects  not  existing
when  it  was  made,  but  analogous  to  subjects  embraced  by  its  pro-
visions or  scopa Or  (supposing  that  promissory  notes  preceded
Uls  of  exchange),  the  rules  applicable  to  the  latter  were  formed
by  consequence  and  analogy  from  rules  regarding  the  former.

In  every  case,  therefore,  the  new  rule  thus  derived  is  applied
to  some  species  or  sort  of  a  given  genus  or  kind.

But  the  rule  may  be  derived  from  a  rule  regarding  generally
the  whole  genus,  or  from  a  rule  regarding  specially  some  of  its
species.  Kg, :  A  new  rule  regarding  contracts  of  a  species  or
sort,  may  be  derived  from  a  rule  regarding  contracts  generally,
or  from  a  rule  regarding  specially  some  other  species  of  contracts.
Considering  the  way  in  which  law  is  gradually  built  out,  the
latter  is  the  more  ordinary  process.

In  either  case,  the  new  rule  is  derived  from  the  pre-existing
nile  by  consequence  and  analogy,  or  rather  by  a  consequence
founded  on  analogy.  For  the  new  rule  is  made  what  it  is,  in
contequence  of  the  existence  of  a  similar  rule  applpng  to  subjects
which  are  analogous  to  (or  of  the  same  genus  with)  the  subjects
which  itself  particularly  concerns.

*  Hala,  Hist  Com.  Law,  ch.  iv.  sub  fine.  ^^  Miihlenbrach,  vol.  L  lib.  i.  §  42.


640


Law :  Sources  and  Modes.


LlOT.

XXXVII


How  the
competi-
tion of  op-
posite ana-
lo^es  may
arise.


Q.  Whe-
Uier  diffi-
culties
may  not
arise  from
inconsist-
ency of
competing
roles?


There  is,  in  eveiy  case,  a  consequence,  an  analogy,  and  1
difference.

The  new  rule  is  formed  by  consequence  fix>m  the  anterio
rula  The  subjects  of  the  new  rule  are  analogous  to  those  (
the  old  one.  But,  by  reason  of  the  specific  difference  of  tb
species  or  sort  which  its  peculiar  subjects  belong  to,  the  ne^
rule  is  different  from,  as  well  as  Uke,  the  old  ona

However,  where  the  new  rule  is  formed  firom  an  old  ml
regarding  the  genus  generally,  the  new  rule  is  not  co-ordinat
with  the  old  one,  but  is  included  under  it,  as  the  minor  of
syllogism  is  included  under  the  major.  But  where  the  new  ral
is  derived  from  an  old  rule  specially  r^arding  a  species  or  soil
the  new  rule  is  merely  co-ordinate  with  the  old  and  is  no
included  in  it  as  a  consequence.

And  hence  probably  the  difference  between  rules  formed  b}
consequence,  and  rules  formed  by  analogy.

\Sed  fpicere.  For,  if  there  were  merely  a  consequence,  in
the  case  of  the  generic  rule,  there  would  not  be  a  new  rule,  bol
merely  a  subsumption  of  the  new  species  under  the  old  ona]

Subjects  calling  for  a  rule,  may  be  like,  in  some  respects,  tc
subjects  of  anterior  rule  A ;  but,  in  other  respects,  to  subject!
of  anterior  rule  B,  which  is  essentially  different  from  A.

The  two  likenesses  are  competing  analogies.  One  invitio{
the  judge  to  model  the  rule  in  projection  on  A ;  and  the  otha
inviting  him  to  model  it  on  B :  one  inviting  him  to  decide  tb
case  analogously  (but  not  exactly  similarly)  to  decisions  by  A
and  the  other,  etc.

This  is  the  competition  specially  contemplated  by  Paley.—
He  supposes  a  question  which  can  only  be  trought  within  oa!
fixed  rule  by  analog,  i,e,  which  ought  to  be  decided  by  a  rul
analogous  to  a  fixed  or  existing  rule.  For,  if  the  case  wei
brougM  wUhin  a  fixed  rule,  it  would  be  directly  subsimied  unde
that  rule,  and  the  difficulty  would  not  exist.  He  commits  th
usual  mistake  of  supposing  that  a  rule  can  be  extended.  lils
the  mistake  of  supposing  that  the  judge  extends  a  statute,  whe
he  ekes  it  out  by  a  judiciary  rule.

It  has  been  supposed  by  Sir  Samuel  Bomilly  that  the  con
petition  of  opposite  analogies  could  not  arise,  if  the  system  <
law  were  entirely  statute  (codified  or  not).

Now  with  regard  to  that  competition  which  is  incident  '
the  application  of  law,  it  is  manifestly  incident  to  statute  la^
For  statutes  may  be  inconsistent  inter  se,  or  a  single  statu
may  be  inconsistent  with  itself. Nor  is  direct  legislation,  mo


Statute  and  Jtidiciary  Law.

than  judicial,  free  from  a  competition  of  analogies.  For  a  statute,
like  a  judiciary  rule,  is  often  derived,  by  a  consequence  foimded
on  analogy,  from  an  anterior  statute  or  an  anterior  judiciary
rnle

A  remarkable  example  of  this  is  furnished  by  the  legislation
of  the  Prsetors,  by  whom  most  of  the  working  civil  law  was
fomed.  Now  though  they  legislated  directly  (or  by  way  of
what  the  French  would  call  arrHs  girUravx  et  rSglemerUaires),
thqr  l^iislated,  commonly,  agreeably  to  the  maxim  which  has
goided  the  judicial  legislation  of  our  own  Chancellors, '  ./EqtMas
lijwUur  legem  :*  ^  that  is  to  say,  the  law  which  they  made,  was
made  by  consequence  and  analogy  to  the  jus  civile  or  common
law,  much  more  than  in  pursuance  of  their  own  views  of  public
utility.  Though  this  last  was  consulted  too,  or  their  cequitas
would  have  been  nugatoiy.

Nothing,  indeed,  can  be  more  natural,  than  that  legislators,
diiect  or  judicial  (especially  if  they  be  narrow-minded,  timid,
and  unskilful),  should  lean  as  much  as  they  can  on  the  examples
Bet  by  their  predecessors.  The  internal  history  of  almost  every
syBtem  of  law,  consists  mainly  in  tracing  the  course  wherein
the  system  was  formed  by  successive  illations.

Sir  Samuel  Bomilly  supposes  that  the  competition  of  opposite
uialogies  is  a  means  of  surmoimting  the  difficulty.  It  is,  in
tmth,  the  difficulty  to  be  surmoimted.  He  falls  into  the  mistake
of  oonfoimding  the  competition  incident  to  the  application,  with
the  competition  incident  to  the  creation,  of  law.  This  arose
hmi  his  assuming  unconsciously  at  the  moment  (against  what
be  had  shewn  in  the  text)  that  common  or  judiciary  law,  when
riitoally  made,  is  only  administered  or  appUed.


641


LECTUKE XXXVIIL


LXOT.

XXXVII


GROUNDLESS  GBJECTIQNS  TO  JUDICIAL  LEGISLATION.

Sating  touched  upon  a  few  of  the  numerous  differences  which
listinguish  stcUute  from  jvduAary  law,  I  pass  to  the  advantages
lid  disadvantages  of  judicial  or  improper  legislation,  and  the
•oadbility  of  excluding  that  prevalent  mode  of  legislation,  by
leans  of  codes,  or  systems  of  statute  law.

I  will  first  consider  some  groundless  objections  which  are
lade  to  judiciary  law. I  then  will  remark  on  some  of  the  evils

^  Digest,  zxii.  5  Pe  Testibns),  L  14,


LscT.
XXXVIII


642  Law:  Sources  and  Modes.

Lbot. with  which  it  reaUy  is  pregnant. And  having  remarked  on

V  those  evils,  I  will  proceed  to  the  scabrous  question  of  eodifimJinxm,

Bentham's  It  seems  to  be  denied  by  Bentham,  that  judiciaiy  law  is

to  judicr* properly  law :  that  is  to  say,  that  it  is  law  imperative. He  says

»fy^^» it  consists, at  the most,  of  oim^-commands :  of  objects  not

that  it  18  ,,  ,,  ,

not  law. commands,  but  merely  ammogous  to  commands.

This  objection  I  have  partly  answered  in  preceding  lectures,
I  will,  however,  advert  to  it,  for  a  moment,  in  the  present  place.

It  appears  to  me  that  judiciary  law,  whether  made  by  the
sovereign  or  by  subordinate  judges,  quadrates  with  Bentbam's
own  definition  of  a  genuine  but  tacit  command,  as  given  in  a
note  to  his  '  Fragment  on  Government'  Where  it  is  perfectly
well  known  to  be  the  will  of  the  legislator  that  the  principles
or  grounds  of  judicial  decisions  should  be  observed  as  rules  of
conduct  by  the  subjects,  and  that  they  should  be  punished  for
violating  them,  the  intimation  of  the  legislator's  will  is  as
complete  as  in  any  other  case.  The  raJtio  decidendi  of  a  dedaion
may,  perhaps,  indeed  be  that  properly  called  not  a  law,  but  a
norma  or  model,  which  the  law  obliges  you  to  observe,  the  law
itself  being  properly  the  intimation  of  the  legislator's  wilL  Bnt
this  would  be  equally  a  reason  for  excluding  from  the  name  bv»
all  the  expository  part  of  statute  law ;  for  instance,  the  descrip-
tion of  the  act  which  is  to  be  done  or  forborne,  previously  to
ordering  that  it  be  done  or  forborne.

Aaecond  Another objection to  judical legislation which is  often

oy^on*^  insisted  upon  (and  which  is  urged  by  Sir  Samuel  Eomilly,  in
tojndici-  the  article  already  referred  to),  is  also  (I  think)  foimded  in
mistake.  It  is  objected  to  judicial  legislation,  that  where
subordinate  judges  have  the  power  of  making  laws,  the  com-
munity has  little  or  no  control  over  those  who  make  the  laws
by  which  its  conduct  must  be  governed.  Now  this  objection,  it
is  manifest,  is  not  an  objection  to  judiciary  law,  but  to  law
proceeding  from  authors  (judicial  or  not)  who  are  not  sufficiently
responsible  to  the  bulk  or  mass  of  the  conmiunity.  It  applies
to  statute  law  made  by  the  Sovereign  directly,  in  case  the
supreme  government  be  purely  monarchical,  or  in  case  it  consist
of  a  number  with  interests  adverse  to  the  majority.  It  applio
to  statute  law  made  by  subordinate  judges  (or  made  directly  Iq
any  subordinate  legislature),  in  case  that  subordinate  author  b
the  creature  of  a  monarch  or  oligarchy,  or,  for  any  reason,  b
too  independent  of  the  people.  It  applies  (it  is  true),  to  th<
decretes  of  the  Bopian  Emperors,  acting  as  supreme  judges :  ba


Groundless  Objections  to  Judicial  Legislation.  643

it  applies  to  the  Edictal  Gonstitations  of  the  same  Emperors  or Lect.

XXXVIII

Princes,  acting  as  sovereign  legislators.  . ^ .

In  short,  the  objection  is  not  an  objection  to  judicial  legis-
lation, but  to  any  legislation  of  any  parties  who  are  not  sufficiently
controlled  by  positive  law,  or  by  the  law  (improperly  so  called)
rhich  general  opinion  imposes.

As  aimed  particularly  at  Engli&h  judiciary  law,  the  objection
n  qaestion  amounts  to  this : — that  the  judges  are  made  by
ihe  King,  and  not  by  the  people  or  their  representatives ;  and
ikerefore,  are  prone  to  regard  the  sinister  interests  of  their
lUkker,  rather  than  the  general  interests,  or  the  interests  of  the
immunity  at  lip:ge.

But  the  objection  in  question,  as  aimed  particularly  at
iinglish  judiciary  law,  would  apply  to  statute  law,  made  by  the
English  judges  after  the  manner  of  the  Boman  Praetors.  It
rodd  apply,  at  least,  to  such  statute  law,  in  a  considerable
figree.  For  a  legislator  going  to  work  in  the  way  of  judicial
igislation,  has  certainly  more  opportunities  of  covering  a  sinister
itent,  than  a  l^slator  who  sets  a  rule  directly  and  professedly.
L  statute  law  being  expressed  in  an  abstract  or  general  form,  its
cope  or  purpose  is  commonly  manifest.  In  case,  therefore,  its
nipose  be  pernicious,  its  author  cannot  escape  from  general
ensure.  But  a  law  made  judicially  being  implicated  with  a
•ecoliar  case,  and  its  purpose  not  being  expressed  in  any  deter-
ainate  shape,  its  author  can  retract  and  disavow,  with  compara-
ive  ease,  in  case  his  intent  be  dishonest,  and  excite  attention
md  criticism.

It  is  a  remark  of  Kant,  that  the  expression  in  ahstract  and
meral  terms  of  a  given  maxim  or  principle,  affords  a  proof  (or
I  presumption),  that  the  maxim  or  principle,  as  a  maxim  or
)rinciple,  is  consonant  to  truth  and  reason.  'Der  allgemeine
losdruck  einer  Maxime  zum  Beweise  dient,  sie  sey  als  Maxime
'emtinflig.' — It  certainly  affords  a  proof  (or  a  presumption),
hat,  in  the  opinion  of  the  party  who  so  expresses  the  maxim,
he  maxim  is  consonant  to  reason,  and  may  be  laid  open  and
ue  to  the  examination  of  others.

And,  moreover,  the  objection  in  question,  as  aimed  par-
icnlarly  at  English  judiciary  law,  is  not  an  objection  to  judicial
^slation,  but  an  objection  to  the  manner  in  which  the  judges
re  appointed.  If  their  appointment  by  the  crown  render  them
imoxious  to  its  influence,  and  if  their  obnoxiousness  to  the
ifluence  of  the  crown  produce  judicial  legislation  adverse  to  the
neral  interests,  let  their  appointment  be  vested  in  some  party


644  Law  :  Sources  and  Modes.

LxoT. or  another  whose  interestB  do  not  conflict  with  those  of  the
^^J}^  community  at  large.

In  the  last  result,  indeed,  the  objection  in  question,  as  aimed
particularly  at  English  judiciary  law,  is  virtually  an  objection  to
the  constitution  or  conduct  of  the  sovereign  legislature  of  Britain.
For  the  judicial  law  made  by  the  English  judges  (like  the  statute
law  made  by  the  Boman  Praetors),  has  been  formed  under  the
eyes  of  the  sovereign  legislature,  has  been  made  with  the
acquiescence  of  the  sovereign  legislature,  and  has  been  confirmed,
in  innumerable  instances,  by  its  explicit  or  tacit  adoption  in
statutes  passed  by  itself.

In  short,  the  objection  which  I  now  am  considering,  is  not
an  objection  to  judiciary  law.  It  is  an  objection  to  judidaiy
law  (or  to  any  law)  which  is  made  by  the  direct  establishment^
or  by  the  express  or  tacit  authority,  of  a  lad  sovereign  govern-
ment :  of  a  government  whose  interests  are  adverse  to  those  of
the  generality  of  its  subjects;  or  which  is  too  ignorant  and
incapable,  or  too  indififerent  and  lazy,  to  conduct  or  inspect
advantageously  the  important  business  of  legislation.

A  tliird  Another  current  objection  to  judiciary  law,  is  also  bottomed,

^^r  it  appears  to  me.  upon  a  complete  misapprehensioii  of  its  natuie
to  jadi. It  supposes  that  judicial  legislators  legislate  arbitrarily :  that  the
^^^"^ ^' body  of  the  law  by  which  the  community  is  governed,  is,  there-
fore, varying  and  uncertain :  and  that  the  body  of  the  law  bx
the  time  being  is,  therefore,  incoherent

Now  this  may  be  true,  to  some  extent,  of  supreme  judicial
legislation,  for  the  Sovereign  in  the  character  of  judge  (LQce  the
Sovereign  in  the  character  of  legislator)  is  controlled  by  nothing
but  the  opinions  or  sentiments  of  the  conmiunity.

But,  even  in  respect  of  supreme  legislation,  this  objection
(like  the  former)  is  not  peculiarly  applicable  to  judidaiy  law.
It  is  equally  applicable  to  statute  law  made  directly  by  the
sovereign  legislature.

To  judiciary  law  made  by  subordinate  judges  (which,  in
almost  every  community,  forms  the  greater  portion  of  judiciary
law)  the  objection  in  question  will  hardly  apply  at  alL  For  the
arbitrium  of  subordinate  judges  (like  that  of  the  sovereign
legislature)  is  controlled  by  pubUc  opinion.  It  is  oontroUed,
moreover,  by  the  sovereign  legislature :  under  whose  inspection
their  decisions  are  made:  by  whose  authority  their  decisions
may  be  reversed:  and  by  whom  their  misconduct  may  be
punished. Their  arbitrium  is  controlled  particularly  by  courts


)


Groundless  Objections  to  Judicial  Legislation.  645

of  qypeal :  by  whose  judgments  their  decisions  may  be  reveised : Lbot.
azid  who  may  point  them  out  to  general  disapprobation,  or  may ^ ^ ^
maik  them  out  as  fit  objects  for  legal  penalties.

And  (admitting  that  the  objection  will  apply  to  that  judiciary
law  which  is  made  directly  by  subordinate  judges)  it  also  will
apply,  with  a  few  modifications,  to  all  statute  law  which  is
established  by  subordinate  authors.

The objection,  therefore,  in  question,  is  an objection to
mibordinatt  legislation,  rather  than  to  jvdidary  law.

Bat,  owing  to  the  restraints  to  which  I  have  just  adverted,

it  is  dear  that  subordinate  judges  will  rarely  l^slate  arbitrarily,

whether  they  legislate  directly  (in  the  manner  of  the  Praetors  by

their  Edicts)  or  l^islate  indirectly  (in  the  manner  of  our  own

Courts). Where  subordinate  judges  subvert  existing  law,  they

commonly  are  doing  that  which  the  opinion  of  the  commimity

requires ;  to  which  the  sovereign  legislature  expressly  or  tacitly

ooDsents ;  and  which  the  sovereign  legislature  would  do  directly,

if  it  cared  sufficiently  for  the  general  interests,  or  were  competent

to  the  business  of  l^islation.

Before  I  quit  the  topic  which  I  am  immediately  considering,
I  will  advert  to  another  cause  which  controls  the  arUtrium  of
judges,  and  makes  the  rules  which  they  establish  by  their  deci-
ooDs  (or  the  rules  which  they  establish  by  direct  legislation)
consonant  with  existing  law,  and  consonant  with  one  another.

The  cause  in  question  is  the  influence  of  private  lawyers,
wiUi  the  authority  which  is  naturally  acquired  by  their  profes-
sional opinions  and  practices.  The  supervision  and  censure  of
the  bar,  and  of  other  practitioners  of  the  law,  prevent  deviations
&om  existing  law,  unless  they  be  consonant  to  the  interests  of
the  community,  or,  at  least,  to  the  interests  of  the  craft.  And
though  the  interests  of  the  craft  are  not  unfrequently  opposed
to  the  interests  of  the  community,  the  two  sets  of  interests  do,
in  the  main,  chima

The  judiciary  law  made  by  the  tribunals,  is,  in  effect,  the
jomt  product  of  the  legal  profession,  or  rather  of  the  most  experi-
enced and  most  skilful  part  of  it:  the  joint  product  of  the
tobonals  themselves,  and  of  the  private  lawyers  who  by  their
cnnning  in  the  law  have  gotten  the  ear  of  the  judicial  legislators.
In  the  somewhat  disrespectful  language  of  Mr.  Bentham,  it  is
not  the  product  of  judge  only,  but  it  is  the  joint  product  of
Judge  and  Co.  So  great  is  the  influence  of  the  general  opinion
of  the  profession,  that  it  frequently  forces  upon  the  Courts  the


646  Law :  Sources  and  Modes*

Leot.  adoption  of  a  rule  of  law,  by  a  sort  of  moral  necessity.  When
v^  .  the  illations  or  anticipations  of  lawyers  as  to  what  the  Courts
would  probably  decide  if  the  case  came  before  them,  has  been
often  acted  upon,  so  many  interests  are  adjusted  to  it,  that  the
Courts  are  compelled  to  make  it  law.  What  a  howl  would  be
set  up  (and  not  unjustly)  if  the  Courts  were  to  disregard  the
established  practice  of  conveyancers ;  although,  until  sanctioned
by  judicial  decisions,  it  is  not  strictly  law.  Being  constantly
acted  upon,  and  engaging  a  vast  variety  of  incidents  in  its
favour,  it  performs  the  functions  of  a  law,  and  will  probably
become  law  as  the  particular  cases  arise.

The  way  in  which  law  is  made  by  private  lawyers,  is  well
described  in  the  Digests,  by  an  excerpt  from  Pcnnponivs.  *  Con-
stare  non  potest  jus,  nisi  sit  aliquis  jurisperitus,  per  quem  possit
quotidie  in  melius  produci'  This  is  almost  inevitably  the
growth  of  law.  The  laity  (or  non-lawyer  part  of  the  community)
are  competent  to  conceive  the  more  general  rules :  but  none  bnt
lawyers  (or  those  whose  minds  are  constantly  occupied  with  the
rules)  can  produce  (or  evolve)  those  numerous  consequences
which  the  rules  imply,  or  can  give  to  the  rules  themselves  the
requisite  precision.

Herr  von  Savigny  describes  modem  law  as  composed  of  two
elements,  the  one  element  being  a  part  of  the  national  life  itself,
and  the  other  element  being  the  product  of  the  lawyers'  craft
The  first  he  names  the  political,  and  the  last  the  technical
element.

Independently  of  the  checks  which  I  have  just  mentioned,
judges  are  naturally  determined  to  abide  by  old  rules,  or  to  fonn
new  ones,  by  consequence  from,  or  analogy  to,  the  old.

{v.  V,)  They  are  naturally  determined  by  two  causes.

1.  A  regard  for  the  interests  and  expectations  which  have
grown  up  under  established  rules:  or  under  consequences  and
analogies  deducible  from  them.

2.  A  perception  of  consequence  and  analogy :  which
determines  the  understanding,  independently  of  any  other  con-
sideration.

The  truth  is,  that  too  great  a  respect  for  established  rules,
and  too  great  a  regard  for  consequence  and  analogy,  has  generally
been  shewn  by  the  authors  of  judiciary  law.  Where  the  intro-
duction of  a  new  rule  would  interfere  with  interests  and  expec-
tations which  have  grown  out  of  established  ones,  it  is  clearly


t


Groundless  Objections  to  Jtidicial  Legislation.

incumbent  on  the  Judge  stare  decisis;  since  it  is  not  in  his
power  to  indemnify  the  injured  parties.  But  it  is  much  to  be
regretted  that  Judges  of  capacity,  experience  and  weight,  have
not  seized  every  opportunity  of  introducing  a  new  rule  (a  rule
beneficial  for  the  future),  wherever  its  introduction  would  have
no  such  efTect.  This  is  the  reproach  I  should  be  inclined  to
make  against  Lord  Eldon.

A  striking  example  of  this  backwardness  of  Judges  to
innovate,  is  to  be  found  in  the  origin  of  the  distinction  between
law  and  equity ;  which  arose  because  the  Judges  of  the  Common
Law  Courts  would  not  do  what  they  ought  to  have  done,  namely
to  model  their  rules  of  law  and  of  procedure  to  the  growing
exigencies  of  society,  instead  of  stupidly  and  sulkily  adhering  to
the  old  and  barbarous  usages.  Equity,  when  it  arose,  has
remained  equally  barbarous  from  the  same  cause:  the  rule
tBjuiUis  sequiiur  legem  has  been  too  much  regarded;  a  rule
which,  if  followed  literally,  would  leave  nothing  for  the  Courts
of  Equity  to  perform.

Owing  to  the  causes  to  which  I  now  have  adverted,  and  to
others  which  I  pass  in  silence,  there  is  more  of  stability  and
coherency  in  judiciary  law,  than  might,  at  the  first  blush,  be
imagined.

And  here  I  must  stop  for  the  present.  In  my  next  Lecture,
I  will  remark  on  some  of  the  evils  with  which  judiciary  law  is
reaDy  pregnant :  and  I  will  also  advert  (as  fully  as  my  limits
will  allow)  to  the  question  of  codification.

These  two  topics,  with  a  few  others  on  which  I  must  touch,
will  fill  a  long  discourse.  With  that  discourse,  I  shall  close  my
disquisitions  on  the  sources  of  law,  and  on  the  modes  in  which  it
begins  and  ends.


647


LSOT.

XXXVIII


LECTUKE XXXIX.

DISADVANTAGES OF  JUDICIAL  LEGISLATION. THE QUESTION  OF

CODIFICATION DISCUSSED.

b  my  last  evening's  discourse,  I  called  your  attention  to  a  few
of  the  numerous  differences  which  distinguish  statute  law  (or  law
niade  by  direct,  or  proper  legislation)  from  judiciary  law  (or  law
oude  by  judicial,  or  improper  legislation).

Having  stated  (or  suggested)  a  few  of  those  numerous  differ-
ences, I  passed  to  the  advantages  and  disadvantages  of  judicial
or  improper  legislation,  and  to  the  possibility  of  excluding  that


LSCT.

XXXIX


648  Law  :  Sources  and  Modes.

f  Lbot. prevalent  mode  of  legislation^  by  means  of  compUU  codes,  or

.  complete  systems  of  stattUe  law.

Adverting  to  the  last-mentioned  subject,  I  proposed  con-
sidering the  following  topics  in  the  following  order:  First,
certain  groundless  objections  which  have  been  made  to  judiciary
law ;  secondly,  certain  of  the  evils,  which,  in  my  opinion,  judiciaiy
law  really  produces ;  thirdly,  the  possibility  of  excluding  judicial
legislation,  by  means  of  complete  codes,  or  complete  bodies  of
statute  law.

In  pursuance  of  that  purpose,  I  examined  certain  objections
to  judiciary  law,  which,  in  my  opinion,  are  founded  in  misappre-
hension. In  pursuance  of  the  same  purpose,  I  now  shall  state
or  suggest  a  few  of  the  nimierous  evils  which  judiciary  law
really  produces :  And,  having  stated  or  suggested  a  few  of  tikoee
numerous  evils,  I  shall  give  to  the  question  of  codification  that
brief  and  insufficient  notice  which  is  all  that  my  time  and  limits
will  allow  me  to  bestow  upon  it.
Note  on  Before  I  proceed  with  the  subject  of  judiciary  law  I  must

the  terms  101  1

'jndidary make  a  few  remarks  upon  the  term.

1^^,  Perhaps  I  ought  to  have  called  it  *  judicial  law.' The

etc.  epithet  'judicial '  has  been  appUed  by  Sir  Samuel  BomiUy  and

other  eminent  men,  to  improper  or  indirect  legislation. And

judges  who  legislate  as  properly  judgiry,  are  styled  by  the  same

eminent  persons  'judicial  legislators.'

I  find,  however,  on  looking  into  Benthson,  that  he  styles
the  law  which  is  made  by  judges,-  as  pr(yp€rly  and  direeOf
exercising  their  judiciai  functions,  'jvdiciary  law.*  And  in  the
language  of  French  lawyers,  the  judicial  decisions  of  jadges  are
opposed  by  the  name  of  '  arrets  judiciaires '  to  their  *  anStB
gin^aux  et  riglementaires ;'  that  is  to  say,  to  their  statute
laws.  The  difficulty  of  finding  a  term  at  once  significant  and
unambiguous  is  extreme.

The  numerous  ambiguities  of  '  unwritten,'  I  have  explained
in  preceding  Lectures.

At  the  end  of  this  evening's  discourse,  or  at  the  b^innii^
of  my  next  Lecture,  I  shall  shew  that  the  term  '  commum  law '
will  not  answer  the  purpose.  I  will  merely  remark  at  present^
that,  as  opposed  to  '  statute  law,'  '  common  law '  excludes  statute
law,  but  does  not  of  necessity  comprise  the  whole  of  judiciaiy
law.  As  opposed,  therefore,  to  statute  law,  '  common  law '  is
inadequate.  And  as  opposed  to  the  law  (styled  '  equity  *)  which
is  administered  by  the  extraordinary  tribimals  styled  '  courts  of
equity,'  '  common  law '  is  not  synonymous  with  'judiciary  law.'


Disadvantages  of  Jtidicial  Legislation.  649

opposed  to  *  equity/  it  only  includes  the  judiciary  law  which Lbot.
administered  by  the  Courts  styled  '  Courts  of  Common  Law ;' XXXg
1  it  comprises,  moreover,  the  statute  law  administered  by  the
ne  tribunals.

'  Judge-made  law '  (as  it  has  been  appUed)  is  also  insufficient
i  it  has  been  appUed,  it  means  any  law  made  by  whordvMJiJU
dges,  GT  jiiduAary  law  made  by  subordinaie  judges.  As  mean-
ig  the  first,  it  includes  statute  law  as  well  as  judiciary  law.
js  meaning  the  second,  it  excludes  the  judiciary  law  which  is
stablished  directly  by  the  judicial  decisions  of  sovereign  or
opieme  judges.

We  want  a  term  for  the  following  object:  namely,  law
oade  judicially  (or  made  through  particular  decisions  on  par-
yedar  cases)  by  sovereign  or  subordinate  judges.  And  I
ihink  that  the  term  *  judicial  law,'  or  the  term  'judiciary  law,'
s  the  only  term  which  will  denote  the  object  adequately  and
inambiguously«

There  is  the  same  difficulty  about  the  word  '  Code.'  This
irord  is  frequently  taken  for  a  collection,  not  of  the  entire  law
of  a  coimtry,  but  only  of  portions  of  it :  such  is  Justinian's
'Codex '  or  Code :  it  is  not  a  complete  code  of  law,  but  a  com-
pflation  of  the  constitutions  of  the  Emperors.  Justinian's  Code,
in  the  sense  of  a  complete  and  exclusive  body  of  law  intended
to  comprise  all  the  law  thereafter  to  obtain  in  the  Boman  £m-
pbe,  consisted  of  the  Code,  the  Pandects,  and  likewise  the  Insti-
totes,  wherever  that  expository  treatise  had  the  force  of  law,  as
being  necessary  for  the  understanding  of  the  Code  and  Pandects.

There  is  the  same  ambiguity  in  the  German  word  Oesetzbuch.
QtteU  is  translated  stattUum  or  lex  ;  and  Gesetzbuch  according  to
tlus  analogy  should  mean  any  collection  of  statute  law ;  which
it  accordingly  does :  but  it  also  occasionally  denotes  a  complete
Code.  We  want  a  term  to  denote  a  complete  body  of  statute
Uw,  being  or  intended  to  be  the  only  positive  law  obtaining  in
the  community.  To  express  this,  there  is  no  term  which  is
wholly  unambiguous.  The  word  'Code'  is  that  which,  with
these  explanations,  I  shall  find  it  most  convenient  to  use.

Having  made  these  remarks  upon  terms,  I  proceed  to  state  Tenable
or  suggest  a  few  of  the  numerous  evils  which,  in  my  opinion,  ^  j^S-°"
jodidaiy  law  really  produces.  ciary  law.

First :  As  I  shewed  in  my  last  Lecture,  a  judiciary  law  (or  ^^"*  ^'
I  rale  of  judiciary  law)  exists  nowhere  in  fixed  or  determinate  tion  to
sxpressions. It  lies  m  concreto:  Or  it  is  implicated  with  the  J^^^ciary


650  Law:  Sources  and  Modes.

Lect.  peculiarities  of  the  particular  case  or  cases  by  the  decision  c
XXXIX  (jecisions  whereon  the  law  or  rule  was  established.  Before  w
can  arrive  at  the  rule,  we  must  abstract  the  raJtio  deeidend
(which  really  constitutes  the  rule)  from  all  that  is  peculiar  t
the  case  through  which  the  rule  was  introduced,  or  to  thi
resolution  of  which  the  rule  was  originally  applied.  And  ii
trying  to  arrive  at  the  rule  by  this  process  of  abstraction  anc
induction,  we  must  not  confine  our  attention  to  the  general
positions  or  expressions  which  the  judicial  legislator  actuallj
employed.  We  must  look  at  the  whole  case  which  it  was  hia
business  to  decide,  and  to  the  whole  of  the  discourse  by  which
he  signified  his  decision.  And  from  the  whole  of  his  discourse,
combined  with  the  whole  of  the  case,  we  must  extract  that  ratio
decidendi,  or  that  general  principle  or  ground,  which  truly  con-
stitutes the  law  that  the  particular  decision  established.

But  the  process  of  abstraction  and  induction  to  which  I
now  have  alluded  (and  which  I  analysed  at  length  in  my  last
Lecture),  is  not  uncommonly  a  delicate  and  difficult  process ;  its
difficulty  being  proportioned  to  the  number  and  the  intricacy  of
the  cases  from  which  the  rule  that  is  sought  must  be  abstracted
and  induced.  Consequently,  a  rule  of  judiciary  law  is  lees
accessible  and  knowable  than  a  statute  law :  provided  (that  is  to
say)  that  the  statute  law  with  which  the  rule  is  compared,  be
not  only  expressed  in  abstract  and  brief  expressions,  but  also  in
such  expressions  as  are  apt  and  unanibigtums  as  may  be.  For
(as  I  shall  shew  immediately)  the  very  indeterminateness  of  its
form  (or  the  very  indeterminateness  of  the  signs  by  which  it  is
signified  or  indicated)  renders  a  judiciary  law  less  uncertain  in
effect  than  a  statute  law  unaptly  and  dubiously  worded.  But^
assuming  that  a  statute  law  is  aptly  and  imambiguously  worded
(or  as  aptly  and  unambiguously  worded  as  the  subject  and
language  will  permit),  it  is  more  accessible  and  knowable  ihBB
a  rule  of  judiciary  law  which  must  be  obtained  through  the
process  to  which  I  have  adverted  above.

And  it  must  be  recollected,  that  whether  it  be  performed
by  judges  applying  the  rule  to  subsequent  cases,  or  by  private
persons  in  the  course  of  extra-judicial  business,  this  delicate
and  difficult  process  is  commonly  performed  in  haste.  Inso-
much that  judges  in  the  exercise  of  their  judicial  functions,  and
private  persons  in  their  extra-judicial  transactions,  must  often
mistake  the  import  of  the  rule  which  they  are  trying  to  ascertain
and  apply.
^^^°  And this naturally  conducts  me  to a  second  objection:


Disculvantages  of  Judicial  Legislation.  65 1

namely, that  judiciary  law  (generally  speakiiig)  is  not  only Leot.
applied  in  haste,  but  is  also  made  in  haste. It  is  made  (gener- ^
ally  speaking)  in  the  huny  of  judicial  business,  and  not  with  objection
the  mature deliberation  which legislation  requires,  and  with  ciiuylaw.
which  statute  law  is  or  might  be  constructed.

This  objection  does  not  apply  to  all  judiciary  law ;  for  when
made  on  appeal,  after  solemn  argument  and  deliberation,  it  may
le  made  with  as  much  care  and  foresight,  perhaps,  as  any
statute  law.  This  was  the  case  with  many  of  the  decretes  of
the  Soman  Emperors,  as  the  supreme  judicatory  of  the  empire,
which  was  drawn  up  by  the  Prcefedus  prcetorii,  commonly  the
most  eminent  lawyer  in  the  empire,  or  by  the  eminent  juris-
coosnlts  whom  he  consulted.  The  same  may  be  the  case  with
the  law  made  by  the  Prussian  Law-Commission  (if  this  can  be
legaided  as  a  court  of  appeal).^^

I  would  not,  therefore,  aflSrm  of  all  judiciary  law,  that  it  is
nude  with  less  deliberation  than  statute  law;  but  (speaking
generally)  it  is  made  in  the  course  of  business,  and  therefore  is
not  constructed  with  the  requisite  forethought.  The  position  in
which  judges  are  placed  gives  them  ample  opportunities  for
maildng  the  defects  of  the  law,  and  often  enables  them  to  offer
to  the  l^islator  invaluable  suggestions ;  but  it  does  not,  I  con-
ceive, render  them  the  best  of  legislators,  nor  does  it  fit  them
pre-eminently  for  actual  legislation :  I  mean,  as  engaged  in  their
judicial  function ;  for  out  of  it  they  are  of  course  the  very  best
legislators  possible,  if  they  are  enlightened  as  well  as  experienced
lawyers.

Thirdly:  In  relation  to  the  decided  case  by  which  the  rule  A  third
is  introduced,  a  rule  of  judiciary  law  is  always  (strictly  speaking)  objection
an  ex  post  facto  law. And  in  relation  to  the  case  to  which  it  is  to  judi-
first  applied,  it  has  commonly  (though  not  universally)  the  effect  ^
of  a  law  of  the  kind. — I  think  that  the  objection  on  which  I
now  am  insisting,  must  be  taken  with  the slight  limitation
which  I  have  just  suggested,  and  which  I  will  briefly  explain.

As  I  observed  in  my  last  Lecture,  the  decisions  of  the  Courts
are  often  anticipated  by  private  practitioners.  And  the  law  thus
anticipated,  though  not  strictly  law,  performs  the  functions  of
actual  law,  and  generally  becomes  such  ultimately.  Now  where
a  role  of  judiciary  law  has  been  thus  anticipated,  it  may  not
have  the  efiect  of  an  ea;  post  facto  law  with  reference  to  the  case
by  which  it  is  introduced. For  though  the  parties  to  the  case

'^  And  with the  law  made  by  the the  Privy  Council  according  to  the  pre-
dedsioQs  of  the  Judicial  Committee  of  sent  practice. See  note,  p.  528. — R.  C.


6S2


Law  :  Sources  and  Modes.


LSOT.

XXXIX


A  fourth
tenable
objection
to  judi-
ciary law.


have  not  been  forewarned  by  the  l^islatore,  they  may  have  been
forewarned  by  the  opinion  or  practice  of  those  whose  opinions
and  practices  the  tribunals  commonly  follow.  They  could  not
have  guided  their  conduct  by  the  actual  law,  but  they  might
have  guided  their  conduct  by  what  it  probably  would  be.

The  same  observation  applies  wherever  the  parties  can  infer,
by  probable  argumentation,  the  decision  which  the  tribunals
will  come  to.  In  every  such  case  the  law  is  strictly  expostfddo,
and  the  parties  cannot  therefore  obey  the  law,  but  they  nev6^
theless  have  an  inkling  of  the  rule  by  which  their  case  will
probably  be  decided.

I  suggest  the  limitation,  being  unwilling  to  exaggerate.

The  limitation,  however,  is  so  insignificant,  that  (speaking
generally)  a  rule  of  judiciary  law,  with  reference  to  the  ease  to
which  it  is  first  applied,  is  not  only  strictly  an  ex  post  fa/do  law,
but  has  aU  the  mischievous  consequences  of  ex  post  fado
legislation.

fourthly:  For  the  reasons  which  I  assigned  in  my  last
Lecture,  and  for  others  which  I  passed  in  silence,  there  is  more
of  stability  and  coherency  in  judiciary  law,  than  might,  at  the
first  blush,  be  imagined.  But  though  it  be  never  so  stable  and
never  so  coherent,  every  system  of  judiciary  law  has  all  the  evilB
of  a  system  which  is  really  vague  and  inconsistent  This  arises
mainly  from  two  causes :  the  enormous  bulk  of  the  documents
in  which  the  law  must  be  sought,  and  the  difficulty  of  extracting
the  law  (supposing  the  decisions  known)  from  the  particular
decided  cases  in  which  it  lies  imbedded.

By  consequence,  a  system  of  judiciary  law  (as  every  candid
man  will  readily  admit)  is  nearly  unknown  to  the  bulk  of  the
community,  although  they  are  bound  to  adjust  their  conduct  to
the  rules  or  principles  of  which  it  consists.  Nay,  it  is  known
imperfectly  to  the  mass  of  lawyers,  and  even  to  the  most  experi-
enced of  the  legal  profession.  A  man  of  Lord  Eldon's  l^al
learning,  and  of  Lord  Eldon's  acuteness  and  comprehension,  may
know  where  to  find  the  docimients  in  which  the  law  is  preserved,
and  may  be  able  to  extract  from  the  documents  the  rule  for  which
he  is  seeking.  To  a  man,  therefore,  of  Lord  Eldon's  learning,
and  of  Lord  Eldon's  acuteness,  the  law  might  really  serve  as  a
guide  of  conduct  But  by  the  great  body  of  the  legal  profession
(when  engaged  in  advising  those  who  resort  to  them  for  counsel),
the  law  (generally  speaking)  is  divined  rather  than  ascertained :
And  whoever  has  seen  opinions  even  of  celebrated  lawyers,  must
know  that  they  are  often  worded  with  a  discreet  and  studied


Disadvantages  of  Judicial  Legislation.  653

mbifmity,  which,  whilst  it  saves  the  credit  of  the  uncertain  and Lect.

XXXIX

perplexed  adviser,  thickens  the  doubts  of  the  party  who  is
leeking  instruction  and  guidance. And  as  to  the  bulk  of  the
community — ^the  simple-minded  laity  (to  whom,  by  reason  of
their  simplicity,  the  law  is  so  benign) — ^they  might  as  well  be
Bobject  to  the  mere  arhitrvwm  of  the  tribunals,  as  to  a  system
ol  law  made  by  judicial  decisions. A  few  of  its  rules  or  princi-
y^  are  extremely  simple,  and  are  also  exemplified  practically
in  the  ordinary  course  of  affairs :  Such,  for  example,  are  the  rules
which  relate  to  certain  crimes,  and  to  contracts  of  frequent
occurrence. And  of  these  rules  or  principles,  the  bulk  of  the
community  have  some  notion. But  those  portions  of  the  law
which  are  somewhat  complex,  and  are  not  daily  and  hourly
exemplified  in  practice,  are  by  the  mass  of  the  community  utterly
imknown,  and  are  by  the  mass  of  the  community  utterly  un-
knowable. Of  those,  for  example,  who  marry,  or  of  those  who
purchase  land,  not  one  in  a  hundred  (I  will  venture  to  af&rm)  has
a  distinct  notion  of  the  consequences  which  the  law  annexes
to  the  transaction.

Consequently,  Although  judiciary  law  be  really  certain  and
coherent,  it  has  aU  the  mischievous  effect  (in  regard  to  the  bulk
rf  the  community)  of  ex  post  facto  legislation. Unable  to  obtain
professional  advice,  or  unable  to  obtain  advice  which  is  sound
and  safe,  men  enter  into  transactions  of  which  they  know  not
the  consequences,  and  then  (to  their  surprise  and  dismay)  find
themselves  saddled  with  duties  which  they  never  contemplated.
The ordinary course is  this: A  man  enters into some
transaction  (say,  for  example,  a  contract)  either  without  advice,
or  with  the  advice  of  an  incompetent  attorney.
By  consequence,  he  gets  into  a  scrape.
Finding  himself  in  a  scrape,  he  submits  a  case,  through  his
attorney,  to  counsel.

And,  for  the  fee  to  attorney  and  counsel,  he  has  the  exquisite
satisfaction  of  learning  with  certainty  that  the  mischief  is
irremediable.

I  am  far  from  thinking,  that  the  law  can  ever  be  so  con-
densed and  simplified,  that  any  considerable  portion  of  the
conmitmity  may  know  the  whole  or  much  of  it.

But  I  think  that  it  may  be  so  condensed  and  simplified  that
ImftTB  may  know  it :  And  that,  at  a  moderate  expense,  the  rest
of  the  community  may  learn  from  lawyers  beforehand  the  legal
^fect  of  transactions  in  which  they  are  about  to  engage.

VOL  n.  L


654


Law :  Sources  and  Modes.


Lect.
XXXIX


An  evil
not  in-
herent in
jadiciftry
law.


This  expectation  appears  to  me  not  to  be  romantic
extravagant,  and  my  view  of  the  possibility  of  simplifying  '
law  extends  so  far :  anything  further  certainly  appears  to  me
be  visionary.  It  would,  indeed,  as  I  shall  shew  in  treating
the  rationale  of  the  distinction  between  the  law  of  things  a
the  law  of  persons,  be  practicable  to  break  down  the  law  ii
commodious  parts,  such  that  each  class  of  persons  might  kn<
something  of  that  part  of  the  law  which  peculiarly  r^ai
themselves.  And  the  legislator  might  also  construct  technii
formula  for  difierent  legal  transactions,  with  proper  instructio
in  the  margin,  which  would  enable  persons  to  engage  in  sn
transactions  with  much  greater  safety  than  at  present.

i?.  V,  Mischief  done  to  the  cause  of  codification,  by  overstatii
the  degree  of  simplicity  which  can  be  given  to  the  law.

Inconsistency  of  Bentham  and  others  in  this  respect.  Wlu
speaking  of  law  in  general,  they  insist  on  the  simplicity  ai
brevity  which  may  be  given  to  the  system :  When  descendii
to  its  particular  parts,  they  insist  on  its  complexity.

The  evil  upon  which  I  am  insisting,  is  certainly  not  jTec^i
to  judiciary  law.  Statute  law  badly  expressed,  and  made  bit  1
bit,  may  be  just  as  bulky  and  just  as  inaccessible  as  law  of  t
opposite  kind.  But  there  is  this  essential  diflTerence  betwe
the  kinds  of  law.  The  evil  is  inherent  in  judiciary  law,  althoui
it  be  as  well  constructed  as  judiciary  law  can  be.  But  statu
law  (though  it  often  is  bulky  and  obscure)  may  be  compact  a
perspicuous,  if  constructed  with  care  and  skill.  There  is  in  tl
respect  an  essential  difference  between  statute  and  judiciary  la

An  objection  is  sometimes  made  to  judiciary  law,  which
foimded  on  an  accident  rather  than  inherent  in  its  nature :  ti
it  is  not  attested  by  authoritative  documents,  but  resides  in  t
memory  of  the  judges,  or  is  attested  by  the  disputable  recoi
of  private  reporters.  This,  however,  is  the  effect  of  the  legislate
negligence.  It  is  clear  that  there  might  be  authorised  reporU
and  that  their  reports  might  be  made  official  evidence.  1
decisions  of  our  courts,  as  recorded  in  the  year  books,  w
formerly  official  and  authoritative  evidence.  And  it  was  p
posed  by  Lord  Bacon  to  James  the  First,  that  this  anci(
practice  should  be  renewed.^^  On  the  other  hand,  statute  1
itself  is  not  necessarily  written,  any  more  than  that  it  is  nee
sarily  promulged.

^  See  anU,  p.  628.


Disadvantages  of  Jtidicial  Legislation.  655

In  some  of  the  smaller  States  of  Germany,  the  decisions  of J^j'^

he  Courts  are  not  recorded  and  promulged,  even  by  private  -

reporters,  in  consequence  of  the  smallness  of  the  State,  and  the

small  quantity  of  business,  which  is not  sufficient  to  pay  a

leporter. In  these  States  the  law  must  be  utterly  unknown !

There  is  scarcely  anything  which  can  properly  be  called  law.

It  precariously  resides  in  the  memory  of  the  judge  or  of  the

officials  of  the  Court According  to  Thibaut,^*  there  is  not  one

kwyer  in  those  States  who  has  any  idea  what  the  law  is,  or

possesses  any  considerable  portion  of  the  documents  from  which

it  is  to  be  gathered There  is  an  approximation  to  this  in  certain

cases  in  our  own  country :  in  local  Courts,  for  instance,  such  as

that  of  the  Duchy  of  Lancaster. The  peculiar  law  administered

bjr  these  Courts  dwells  entirely  in  the  memory  of  the  registrar ;

that  is,  it  exists  somewhere,  but  is  entirely  what  he  chooses  to

make  it  in  the  particular  case. And  every  one  who  frequents

our  Courts  must  have  seen  that  occasionally,  when  the  judge  is

it  a  standstill,  he  stoops  down  and  whispers  to  the  registrar  of

the  Court,  in  whose  Bewusdseyn,  or  consciousness,  that  portion

of  the  law  of  the  Court  does  really  reside.

Fifthly :  I  am  not  aware  that  there  is  any  test  by  which  the  A  fifth
vaUdity  of  a  rule  made  judicially  can  be  ascertained.  objection

Is  it  the  number  of  decisions  in  which  a  rule  has  been  tojudi-
followed,  that  makes  it  law  binding  on  future  judges  ?  or  is  it
the  degarUia  of  the  rule  (to  borrow  the  language  of  the  Boman
lawyers),  or  its  consistency  and  harmony  with  the  bulk  of  the
legal  system  ?  Or  is  it  the  reptUcUion  of  the  judge  or  judges  by
irtiom  the  case  or  cases  introducing  the  rule  were  decided  ?

In  the  Koman  law,  the  operation  of  judicial  decisions,  in
the  way  of  establishing  law,  is  styled  (as  I  have  stated  before)
'auctoritas  rerum  perpetuo  similiter  judicatarum.*  And,  looking
it  the  form  of  the  expression,  we  might  infer  that  a  rule  is  not
binding,  unless  it  has  been  applied  to  the  decision  of  many
lesembling  cases,  or,  at  least,  of  more  cases  than  one.  But,  this
notwithstanding,  there  are  many  rules  of  law  in  the  Eoman
system  which  rest  on  a  single  decision  of  a  single  tribunal.^^

In  fine,  we  can  never  be  absolutely  certain  (so  far  as  I  know)
that  any  judiciary  rule  is  good  or  valid  law,  and  will  certainly
he  followed  by  future  judges  in  cases  resembling  the  cases  by
which  it  has  been  introduced.

'*  'Ueber  die  Nothwendigkeit  eines  rately,  Heidelberg,  4th  edit.). This  is

•%n>eiiicn biirgerlicheii Rechts fiir  thebooktowhichSavigny'a'Vom  Bernf,'

I^cutachknd ' (in the '  CiviliBtische  etc.,  was  an  answer.
Abhindlnngen/  and  also  printed  sepa- ^  Falck,  §  10,  note  (12).


6  $6  Law:  Sources  and  Modes.

m

Lect.  Here  then  is  a  cause  of  uncertainty  which  seems  to  be  of

the  essence  of  judiciary  law. For  I  am  not  aware  of  any  con-
trivance by  which  the  inconvenience  could  be  obviated

It  is  manifestly  not  of  the  essence  of  stattUe  law.  For
assuming  that  statute  law  is  well  constructed^  and  is  also
approved  of  by  the  bulk  of  the  community,  it  is  absolutely
certain  until  it  is  repealed.

If,  indeed,  it  be  obscure,  or  if  it  be  generally  disliked,  it  is
not  more  certain  than  judiciary  law.  If  it  be  x)b8cure,  it  is  not
knowable.  And  if  it  be  generally  disliked,  although  it  be
perfectly  perspicuous,  it  probably  will  be  abrogated  by  the
tribunals  at  the  instance  of  public  opinion.  A  curious  case  of
this  has  been  mentioned  to  me  by  Colonel  Murat,^*  son  of  the
late  King  of  Naples,  who,  curiously  enough,  has  practised  as  an
English  barrister  in  the  Floridas,  and  seems  to  have  a  very
pretty  knowledge  of  English  law.  He  says  that  the  Acts  of
the  American  State  legislatures,  or  at  least  the  Acts  of  the
legislatures  of  those  States  in  which  he  has  resided,  are  habita-
ally  overruled  by  the  judges  and  the  bar.  At  the  beginning  rf
every  term  they  meet  and  settle  what  of  the  Acts  of  the  preced-
ing session  of  the  legislature  they  will  abide  by ;  and  such  is
the  general  conviction  of  the  incapacity  of  the  State  legislature,
and  of  the  comparative  capacity  and  the  experience  of  the  judges
and  the  bar,  that  the  public  habitually  acquiesce  in  this  proceed-
ing. Accordingly,  if  a  law,  which  the  profession  have  agreed
not  to  obey,  is  cited  in  judicial  proceedings,  it  is  absolutely
rejected  and  put  down  by  the  lawyers  sans  cSr&monie.  In  such
a  case  as  this  it  is  evident  that  the  statute  law  is  not  certainly
law,  unless  it  chime  in  with  the  opinion  of  the  judges  and  of
the  bar.

I  have  used  the  word  induction  to  denote  the  process  of
collecting  a  rule  of  judiciary  law  from  a  case  or  cases. It
been  suggested  to  me  that  the  word  induction  will  hardly
when  the  rule  is  abstracted  from  a  single  case ;  but  I  conceive
that  the  term  may  properly  be  applied  even  then. I  apprehend

^'  It  may  not  be  impertinent  to  say,  It  was strange  to  hear  the  technicd

that  the '  Murat '  here alluded  to  is  language  of  English  law  familiarly  natl

Achille  Murat, the  eldest  son  of  the  by  a  man  whose  features  reminded  <«•

somewhile  King  of  Naples. After  the  at  every  moment  of  his  origin,  andrf

fall  of  Bonaparte  he  settled  in  America,  the  widely  different  destiny  which  W

where he married a grandniece of  seemed  to  await  him. M.  Murat  aft**

Washington  and  became a practising  wards  wrote  a  book  in  which  the  iDifr

advocate  at  the  American  bar. In  1831  tution  of  slavery  was  represented  as  ©•

he  and  his  wife  resided  for  some  time  in  dispensable to the higliest forms  rf

England  and  frequently  visited  us. The  civilisation. He  died  some  years  ig*

conversation between  Mr. Austin  and  — S.  A.
M.  Murat  almost  always  turned  on  law.


Disadvantages  of  Judicial  Legislation.  657

that  in physical  science  a  single  experiment  conducted  with Lect.
accuracy  is  deemed  a  good  basis  for  a  universal  or  general  con- v" ^ ^
elusion,  and  is  properly  called  induction.

I  have  also  called  the  operation  of  which  I  am  speaking  a
peevdiar  process  of  induction,  to  distinguish  it  from  the  interpre-
tation of  statute  law ;  since  this  also  comes  under  the  general
word  induction.  It  is  extremely  difficult  to  find  suitable  terms
for  distinguishing  ideas  so  closely  related,  though  requiring  to
be  carefully  discriminated.

Sixthly:  In consequence  of  the  implication  of  the  ratio  A  sixth
decidendi  with  the  peculiarities of  the  decided  case,  the  rule  objection
established  by  the  decision  (or  the  ratiOy  or  the  general  principle  *?  J^<^-
of  the  decision)  is  never  or  rarely  comprehensive.^^ It  is  almost  ^
necessarily  confined  to  such  future  cases  as closely  resemble
the  case  actually  decided :  although  other  cases,  more  remotely
lesembling,  may  need  the  care  of  the  legislator. In  other  words,
the  rule  is  necessarily  limited  to  a  narrow  species  or  sort,  although
the  genus  or  kind,  which  includes  that  species  or  sort,  ought  to
be  provided  for  at  the  same  time  by  one  comprehensive  law.

This  is excellently  explained  by  Sir  Samuel  Romilly,  in
that  admirable  article  on Codification  which I ventured to
criticise  in  my  last  evening's  discourse.
The  passage  is  as  follows :

'Not  only  is  the  Judge,  who,  at  the  very  moment  when  he
is  making  law,  is  bound  to  profess  that  it  is  his  proAince  only
to  declare  it ;  not  only  is  he  thus  confined  to  technical  doctrines
and  to  artificial  reasoning, — he  is  further  compelled  to  take  the
narrowest  view  possible  of  every  subject  on  which  he  legislates.
.  Tk  laic  he  mcikes  is  necessarily  restricted  to  the  particular  com
^hich  gives  occasion  for  its  promulgation. Often  when  he  is  pro-
viding for  that  particular  case,  or,  according  to  the  fiction  of  our
Constitution,  is  declaring  how  the  ancient  and  long -forgotten
law  has  provided  for  it,  he  represents  to  himself  other  cases
which  probably  may  arise,  though  there  is  no  record  of  their
ever  having  yet  occurred,  which  will  as urgently  caU  for  a
remedy,  as  that  which  it  is  his  duty  to  decide. It  would  be  a
prudent  part  to  provide,  by  one  comprehensive  rule,  as  well  for
these  possible  events,  as  for  the  actual  case  that  is  in  dispute,
and,  while  terminating  the  existing  litigation,  to obviate  and
prevent  aU  future  contests. This,  however,  is,  to  the  judicial

^  Extension  or  restriction  of  the  ratio  ratio  being  expressed  by  its  introducer

dicidtndi  is  possible  (but  must  not  be  inadequately, may  be  extended  or  re-

confonnded  with  an  extension  or  restric-  striated  (in  expression  and  application)

tioQ  of  the  decision  itself) :  or,  rather,  by  subsequent  judges.


658  Law :  Sources  and  Modes.

Lect. legislator,  strictly  forbidden ;  and  if,  in  illustrating  the  grounds
^  of  his  judgment,  he  adverts  to  other  and  analogous  cases,  and

presumes  to  anticipate  how  they  should  be  decided,  he  is  con-
sidered as  exceeding  his  province ;  and  the  opinions  thus
delivered,  are  treated  by  succeeding  judges  as  extra-judicial,  and
as  entitled  to  no  authority/  ^®

An  example  is  afforded  by  the  decision  of  Lord  KenycHi,
in  the  case  of  Eead  and  Brookman,^®  to  which  I  have  alreadj
alluded.  The  case  arose  on  the  proof  of  a  lost  bond,  and  Loid
Kenyon  decided  that  the  profert  of  the  bond  might  be  dispensed
with.  Had  he  said  that  it  might  be  dispensed  with  in  the  case
of  a  lost  instruToerU  of  any  kind,  he  would  probably  have  beei
held  to  have  departed  out  of  the  case  before  him ;  it  would  hav«
been  said  that  he  had  taken  into  his  decision  objects  to  which
the  immediate  case  had  no  reference,  and  that  he  ought  to  hafB
confined  himself  to  a  horid.  His  decision,  so  far  as  it  extended
beyond  this,  would  not  have  obtained  as  authority.  Thus  the
exigencies  of  society  are  provided  for  bit  by  bit,  in  the  slowest
and  most  inefficient  manner,  and  the  documents  containing  the
law  are  swelled  to  an  immense  volume.  In  lieu  of  one  com-
prehensive rule  determining  a  geniis  of  cases,  there  are  many
several  and  narrow  rules  severally  and  successively  determinii^
the  various  species  which  that  genus  includes.

And  this  inconvenience  (for  a  reason  which  I  have  noticed
above)  is  probably  of  the  essence  of  judiciary  law.  So  deUcate
and  difficult  is  the  task  of  legislation,  that  any  comprehensive
rule,  made  in  haste,  and  under  a  pressure  of  business,  would
probably  be  ill  adapted  to  meet  the  contemplated  purpose.  B
is  certain  that  the  most  experienced  and  the  most  learned  and
able  of  our  judges,  have  commonly  abstained  the  most  scrupu-
lously from  throwing  out  general  propositions  which  were  not
as  proximate  as  possible  to  the  case  awaiting  solution :  Thou^
(for  the  reasons  which  I  stated  in  my  last  Lecture,  and  to  which
I  shall  revert  immediately)  the  ratio  decidendi  (or  ground  or
'principle  of  decision)  is  necessarily  a  general  position  applying
to  a  class  of  cases,  and  does  not  concern  exclusively  the  p8^
ticular  case  in  question.  I  have  heard  Lord  Eldon  declare  (more
than  once)  that  nothing  should  provoke  him  to  decide  more  thaa
the  decision  of  the  case  in  question  absolutely  required*

[Conversely,  the  reason  may  be  too  large. And  hence  the
necessity  of  narrowing  it  by  distinctions.]

7>  Edinburgh  Review,  vol.  xxix.  p.  331.  ^  8  T.  R.  161.


Disadvantages  of  Jtidicial  Legislation.  659

SeventMy :  wherever  much  of  the  law  is  judiciary  law,  the J^Si'^
itute  law  which  co-exists  with  it,  is  imperfect,  unsystematic, - ^ >

d  bulky.  ^  seventh
»  tenftble

For  the  judiciary  law  is,  as  it  were,  the  nucleus  around  objection
hich  the  statute  law  is  formed.  The  judiciary  law  contains  ^^^^
le  legal  dictionary,  or  the  definitions  and  expositions  (in  so
\t  as  such  exist)  of  the  leading  technical  terms  of  the  entire
^  system.  The  statute  law  is  not  a  whole  of  itself,  but  is
Dnned  or  fashioned  on  the  judiciary  law,  and  tacitly  refers
hroughout  to  those  leading  terms  and  principles  which  are
zpounded  by  the  judiciary. — And  hence,  as  I  shall  shew
(Dinediately,  arises  the  greatest  difficulty  in  the  way  of  codifica-
km.  For,  in  order  to  the  exclusion  of  the  judiciary  law,  and
0  the  making  of  the  code  a  complete  body  of  law,  the  terms
nd  principles  of  the  judiciary  must  not  be  assumed  tacitly,
fut  must  be  defined  and  expounded  by  the  code  itself:  A
irocess  which  people  may  think  an  easy  one — ^until  they  come
0  try  it

Wherever,  therefore,  much  of  the  law  consists  of  judiciary
aw,  the  statute  law  is  not  of  itself  complete,  but  is  merely  a
Mitial  and  irregular  supplement  to  that  judiciary  law  which  is
he  mass  and  bulk  of  the  system.  The  statute  law  is  not  of
taelf  an  edifice,  but  is  merely  a  set  of  irregular  or  unsystematic
»tches  stuck  fix)m  time  to  time  upon  the  edifice  reared  by
ndges.

It  is  true  that  a  body  of  statute  law  (though  it  be  not
tuck  patchwise  on  a  groundwork  of  judiciary  law)  may  be
rregular  and  bulky.

This  is  actually  the  case  with  that  portion  of  the  Prussian
iw  which  has  been  made  from  time  to  time  for  the  purpose
i  amending  the  Code.  This  is  done  by  the  Prussian  Law
Commission,  by  virtue  of  a  provision  that  when  the  Courts
lie  in  doubt,  they  shall  refer  the  case  to  the  Cbmmission,  who
olve  the  question  of  law,  but  leave  untouched  the  decision  of
he  last  Court  of  Appeal  on  the  particular  case.^  Now  the
unoont  of  the  declaratory  laws  made  by  this  Commission  is
Jieady  many  times  the  bulk  of  the  Code  which  they  are
intended  to  explain.  This,  however,  arises  mainly  from  the
original  bad  construction  of  the  Prussian  Code,  and  the  neglect
of  the  Government  in  not  remodelling  the  Code  from  time  to
^e,  and  inserting  the  amendments  which  have  been  suggested
^1  experience.

•*  See  Savigny,  Vom  Beruf,  etc.,  p.  89.


66o


Law :  Sources  and  Modes.


Lect.
XXXIX


Introduc-
tion to
queation
of  codifica-
tion.


The  evil  therefore  is  not  of  the  essence  of  statute  kv,
though  the  bulk  of  the  latter  is  often  in  point  of  fetct  as
formidable  as  that  of  judiciary  law.

And  there  is  this  essential  difierence  between  a  comply
body  of  statute  law,  and  a  body  of  statute  law  stuck  patchwke
on  a  groundwork  of  judiciary  law.  The  latter  must  be  irr^ular;
must  be  bulky ;  and  therefore  must  be  diiB&cult  of  accesa  He
latter  may.  be  systematic ;  mxiy  be  compact ;  and  therefore  wsj
be  (in  the  language  of  Mr.  Bentham)  cognoscible.

Wherever,  therefore,  much  of  the  law  consists  of  judiciaiy
law,  the  entire  legal  system,  or  the  entire  corpus  juris,  is
necessarily  a  monstrous  chaos :  (partly  consisting  of  judidani
law,  introduced  bit  by  bit,  and  imbedded  in  a  measureless  heap
of  particular  judicial  decisions,  and  partly  of  legislative  law
stuck  by  patches  on  the  judiciary  law,  and  imbedded  in  a
measureless  heap  of  occasional  and  supplemental  statutes.

Since  such  are  the  monstrous  evils  of  judicial  l^islation,  it
would  seem  that  the  expediency  of  a  Code  (or  of  a  complete  or
exclusive  body  of  statute  law)  wiU  hardly  admit  of  a  douR
Nor  would  it,  provided  that  the  chaos  of  judiciary  law,  and  of
the  statute  law  stuck  patchwise  on  the  judiciary,  could  be
superseded  by  a  good  code.  For  when  we  contrast  the  chaos
with  a  positive  code,  we  must  not  contrast  it  with  the  very
best  of  possible  or  conceivable  Codes,  but  with  the  Code,  which,
under  the  given  circumstances  of  the  given  community,  would
probably  be  the  result  of  an  attempt  to  codify.

Whoever  has  considered  the  difficulty  of  making  a  good
statute,  will  not  think  lightly  of  the  difficulty  of  making  a
Code.

To  conceive  distinctly  the  general  purpose  of  a  statute,  to
conceive  distinctly  the  subordinate  provisions  through  which  its
general  purpose  must  be  accomplished,  and  to  express  that
general  purpose  and  those  subordinate  provisions  in  perfecfly
adequate  and  not  ambiguous  language,  is  a  business  of  extreme
delicacy,  and  of  extreme  difficulty,  though  it  is  frequentij
tossed  by  legislators  to  inferior  and  incompetent  workmen.
wiU  venture  to  affirm,  that  what  is  commonly  called  the  technics
part  of  legislation,  is  incomparably  more  difficult  than  what  ma;
be  styled  the  ethical.  In  other  words,  it  is  far  easier  to  coe
ceive  justly  what  would  be  useful  law,  than  so  to  construct  the
same  law  that  it  may  accomplish  the  design  of  the  lawgiver.

Accordingly,  statutes  made  with  great  deliberation,  and  b
learned  and  judicious  lawyers,  have  been  expressed  so  obscurel;


Introduction  to  Question  of  Codification.  66 1

or  have  been  constructed  so  unaptly,  that  decisions  interpreting  Lect.
the  sense  of  their  provisions,  or  supplying  and  correcting  their  /  ^  .
provisions  ex  ratione  legis,  have  been  of  necessity  heaped  upon
them  by  the  Courts  of  Justice.  Such,  for  example,  is  the  case
with  the  Statute  of  Frauds ;  which  was  made  by  three  of  the
wisest  lawyers  in  the  reign  of  Charles  the  Second :  Sir  M.  Hale
(if  I  remember  aright)  being  one  of  them.

And  here  I  may  remark,  that,  unless  a  statute  be  well
made,  it  commonly  is  more  uncertain  than  a  rule  of  judiciary
law.

In  performing  the  process  of  induction  (described  in  my

last  Lecture)  by  which  a  judiciary  rule  is  extracted from  a

particular  decision,  the  interpreting  judge  is  not  tied  to  the

expressions which lus legislating predecessor has actually

employed. He  may  collect  the  ratio  decidendi  (or  the  general

ground  or  principle  which  constitutes  the  rule  that  is  sought)

ftom  any  indicia  whatever  which  the  case  or  its  circumstances

may  afford.

But  a  judge  who  interprets  or  construes  (in  the  proper  sense
of  the  word)  a  provision  of  a  statute  law,  is  tied  to  the  very
expressions  in  which  the  provision  is  given. And  looking  at
those  very  expressions,  and  at  the  design  of  the  provision  and
the  statute,  he may  find it impossible to determine with
certainty  the  import  of  the  provision. For  the  expressions  in
^hich  it  ia  conceived  may  seem  to  say  one  thing,  whilst  the
particular  scope  of  the  provision,  or  the  predominant  design  of
the  statute,  may  indicate  a  different meaning. Now if  he
might  gather  the  meaning  from  any  indicia  (Like  the  judge  who
extracts  a  rule  from a  judicial decision) he  would find  no
difficulty. He would resort at once to the design  of the
provision,  or  the  design  of  the  whole  statute,  and  put  upon  the
terms  of  the  provision  such  a  construction  as  would  make  the
legislator  consistent  with  himself. But  being  obliged  to  attend
partly  to  the  probable  grammatical  meaning  of  the  very  terms,
he  can  hardly  decide  with  a  perfect  assurance  that  he  is  con-
struing the  statute  correctly.

Its  very  want  of  a  precise  form  renders  a  judicial  rule  (in
spite  of  its  inherent  uncertainty)  less  uncertain  than  a  badly
constructed  statute.

It  is  hardly  necessary  to  add,  that  I  limit  the  remark  to  a
badly  constructed  statute.  For  no  judicious  or  candid  man  will
doubt  or  dispute  for  a  moment,  that  a  well-made  statute  is
incomparably  superior  to  a  rule  of  judiciary  law.


662  Law :  Sources  and  Modes.

Leot.  It  follows  from  what  I have  premised,  and  will  appe

XXXIX  •

V  clearly  from  the  remainder  of  my  discourse,  that  the  questic

of  codification  is  a  question  of  time  and  place.  Speaking  i
abstract  (or  without  reference  to  the  circumstances  of  a  giv(
community)  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  a  complete  code
better  than  a  body  of  judiciary  law :  or  is  better  than  a  bod
of  law  partly  consisting  of  judiciary  law,  and  partly  of  statui
law  stuck  patchwise  on  a  body  of  judiciary.

But  taking  the  question  in  concrete  (or  with  a  view  to  ti
expediency  of  codification  in  this  or  that  community)  a  doul
may  arise.  For  here  we  must  contrast  the  existing  law  (m
with  the  heau  icUal  of  possible  codes,  but)  with  that  particuL
code  which  an  attempt  to  codify  would  then  and  there  engende
And  that  particular  and  practical  question  (as  Savigny  h
rightly  judged)  will  turn  mainly  on  the  answer  that  must  1
given  to  another:  namely.  Are  there  men,  then  and  thei
competent  to  the  difficult  task  of  successful  codification?
producing  a  code,  which,  on  the  whole,  would  more  than  coi
pensate  the  evil  that  must  necessarily  attend  the  change  ?  TI
vast  difficulty  of  successful  codification,  no  rational  advocate
codification  will  deny  or  doubt.  Its  impossibility,  none  of  i
rational  opponents  will  venture  to  affirm.

Before  I  proceed  to  the  question,  I  beg  leave  to  explain
remark  which  I  made  last  evening. — When  I  said  that  t*
question  of  codification  lay  in  a  narrow  compass,  I  meant,  th
little  could  be  said  pertinently  about  the  question  in  ahstra
The  question  in  concrete  (or  with  reference  to  a  given  commimi
at  a  given  time)  involves,  of  course,  a  considerable  number
particular  considerations :  considerations,  however,  which  f)
not  within  my  design,  and  to  which,  therefore,  I  did  i
advert.  And  in  order  to  shew  the  little  which  can  be  sf
about  the  question  in  abstract,  it  is  necessary  to  shew  t
impertinence  of  almost  all  the  argimients  which  have  be
adduced  by  the  advocates  on  each  of  the  two  sides.  To  sti
the  question  of  those  impertinent  arguments,  and  to  shew  h<
little  can  be  said  about  it  in  a  pertinent  manner,  is  therefore
task  of  considerable  length,  although  the  pertinent  consideratic
occupy  a  narrow  space.

In  my  opinion,  a  mere  statement  of  the  evils  inherent
judiciary  law,  is  amply  sufficient  to  demonstrate  (considering  \
question  in  abstract)  that  codification  is  expedient.

I  have  above  enumerated  the  principal  evils  inherent  ii


The  Question  of  Codification.  663

body  of  judiciary  law,  or  in  a  body  composed  of  judiciary  law liBcr.
and  statutes  supplementaiy  to  it ;  that  is  to  say,  of  law  uncodi-  ^

fied. Any  direct  proof  other  than  this  of  the  expediency  of
codification  is  superfluous.

In  considering,  therefore,  the  question  of  codification  (to

which  I  now  proceed),  I  shall  merely  shew  the  futility  of  the

leading  or  principal  argimients  which  are  advanced  against  codi-

. fication  considered  generally  or  in  abstract. A  consideration  of

1 its  expediency  here  or  there,  would  involve  particular  considera-

' tions  beside  the  scope  of  my  Course,  and  surpassing  the  space

and  time  which  I  can  afford  to  assign  to  the  subject.

Before  I  advert  to  those  arguments,  I  would  briefly  interpose
the  following  remarks : —

In  speaking  of  the  advantages  and  disadvantages  of  statute
and  judiciary  law  I  advert  to  the  form  and  not  to  the  matter.
It  is  clear  that  these  considerations  are  completely  distinct.  It
is  dear  that  judiciary  law  of  which  the  purposes  are  beneficent,
may  produce  all  the  evils  on  which  I  have  insisted.  It  is  clear
that  statute  law,  well  arranged  and  expressed,  may  aim  at  per-
nidons  ends.

In  like  manner,  codification  does  not  involve  any  innovation
on  the  maJtUr  of  the  existing  law.  It  is  clear  that  the  Law  of
England  might  change  its  shape  completely,  although  the  rights
and  duties  which  it  confers  and  imposes  remained  substantially
the  sama  In  treating  of  codification,  I  consider  law  from  its
merely  technical  side,  or  with  a  view  to  the  consequences,  good
01  evil,  of  arrangement  and  expression.

These  distinct  ideas  are  often  confoimded.  The  opponents
of  codification  often  suppose  it  to  mean  an  entire  change  of  all
the  law  obtaining  in  the  country.

The  first  and  most  current  objection  to  codification,  is  the  First  lead-
necessary  incompleteness  of  a  code. It  is  said  that  the  indi-  t^^^^^^^'
^ual  cases  which  may  arise  in  fact  or  practice,  are  infinite ;  codifica-
8fid  that,  therefore,  they  cannot  be  anticipated,  and  provided  for,  **^°*
hy  a  body  of  general  rules. The  objection  (as  applied  to  statute
law  generally)  is  thus  put  by  Lord  Mansfield  in  the  case  of
Omychimd  and  Barker. [He  was  then  Solicitor-General.] *  Cases
of  law  depend  upon  occasions  which  give  rise  to  them. All
occasions  do  not  arise  at  once. A  statute  very  seldom  can  take
in  all  cases. Therefore  the  common  law  that  works  itself  pure
by  roles  drawn  from  the  fountains  of  justice,  is  superior  to  an
act  of  parliament.'

My  answer  to  this  objection  is,  that  it  is  equally  applicable


664  Law :  Sources  and  Modes

xxxj'x ^  ^  ^^^ '  ^^^  ^^^^^  ^^  implies  in  the  partisans  of  judiciary  lav
V y ^ (who  are  pleased  to  insist  upon  it),  a  profound  ignorance,  or  i
complete  forgetfulness,  of  the  nature  of  the  law  which  is  estab
lished  by  judicial  decisions.

Judiciary  law  consists  of  nUes,  or  it  is  merely  a  heap  oi
particular  decisions  inapplicable  to  the  solution  of  future  casea
On  the  last  supposition,  it  is  not  law  at  all :  And  the  judges
who  apply  decided  cases  to  the  resolution  of  other  cases,  are  not
resolving  the  latter  by  any  determinate  law,  but  are  deciding
them  arbitrarily.

Tlie  truth,  however,  is,  as  I  shewed  in  my  last  Lecture,  that
the  general  grounds  or  principles  of  judicial  decisions  are  as
completely  Law  as  statute  law  itself,  though  they  diflfer  consider-
ably from  statutes  in  the  manner  and  form  of  expression.  And
being  law,  it  is  clear  that  they  are  liable  to  the  very  imperfection
which  is  objected  to  statute  law.  Be  the  law  statute  or  judiciary,
it  cannot  anticipate  all  the  cases  which  may  possibly  arise  in
practice.

The  objection  implies,  that  all  judicial  decisions  which  are
not  applications  of  statutes  are  merely  arbitrary.  It  therefore
involves  a  double  mistake.  It  mistakes  the  nature  of  judi-
ciary law,  and  it  confounds  law  with  the  arbitrium  of  the
judge.  Deciding  arbitrarily,  the  judge  no  doubt  may  provide
for  all  possible  cases.  But  whether  providing  for  them  thus
be  providing  for  them  by  law,  I  leave  it  to  the  judicious  to
consider.

Yet  this  objection  is  insisted  on  by  many  of  the  redactors
of  the  French  Code,  whom  one  might  almost  suppose  to  be
enemies  of  codification,  and  desirous  to  defeat  the  purpose  of  the
code  which  they  were  appointed  to  make.  In  the  Gonftrtu^
diL  Code  NapoUoUy  a  work  containing  a  report  of  the  discussions
in  the  Council  of  State  upon  the  original  project  of  the  code,
Portalis  says  that  a  code  can  provide  only  very  imperfectly  foi
the  variety  of  cases  which  arise,  and  that  much  must  be  left  to
le  hmi  sens  and  ViquiU.  Now  if  le  Ion  sens  and  t^quiU,  that  is,
the  arbitrium  of  the  judge,  are  to  decide,  I  cannot  see  the  use
of  all  the  pother  about  legislation.  So  far  as  the  judge's  arW/mJft
extends,  there  is  no  law  at  all.

If  law,  as  reduced  into  a  code,  would  be  incomplete,  so  is  it
incomplete  as  not  so  reduced.  For  codification  is  the  re-expres-
sion of  existing  law.  It  is  true,  that  the  code  might  be  incom-
plete, owing  to  an  oversight  of  redactors.  But  this  is  an  objection
to  codification  in  jxirticular.


Codification.  665

Hugo's  objection®^  jt/roceeds  on  the  mistake  of  supposing Lect.
that  a  Code  must  provide  for  every  possible  concrete  case. But
this  (as  I  have  shewn  already)  is  what  no  law  (statute  or  written)
can  possibly  accomplish. It  would  be  endless.

His  objection  is,  that  if  a  body  of  law  afiected  to  provide
for  eveiy  possible  question,  its  provisions  would  be  so  numerous
that  no  judge  could  embrace  them :  And  as  to  the  cases  which
it  left  undecided  (which  would  necessarily  be  numerous)  the
conflicting  analogies  presented  by  those  cases  would  be  in  exact
proportion  to  the  number  and  minuteness  of  its  provisions.

As  to  the  first  part  of  the  objection,  it  is  necessary  to  provide
h  priori  for  cases  to  arise  in  future,  or  to  leave  such  cases  to  the
mere  arbiirium  of  the  judge.  And  I  would  submit,  that  you  do
not  obviate  the  incompleteness  inherent  in  statute  law  by  makiyig
no  Jaw.

The  second  part  of  the  objection  is  foimded  on  the  supposi-
tion that  the  provisions  of  a  code  are  more  minute  and  numerous
than  the  rules  embraced  by  a  system  of  judiciary  law :  that  the
more  minute  and  numerous  the  rules,  the  more  likely  it  is  that
they  will  conflict ;  and  that,  in  trying  to  apply  the  law  to  a
given  case,  a  conflict  of  opposite  rules  will  arise.

Now  it  seems  to  me  that  this  is  the  reverse  of  the  trutL

As  I  have  shewn  above,  a  rule  made  by  judicial  decision  is
almost  necessarily  narrow:  whilst  statute  laws  may  be  made
comprehensively,  and  may  embrace  a  whole  genus  of  cases,  in-
stead of  embracing  only  one  of  the  species  which  it  contains.

And  which,  I  would  ask,  is  the  most  likely  to  be  bulky  and
inconsistent :  A  system  of  rules  formed  together,  and  made  on  a
comprehensive  survey  of  the  whole  field  of  law  ?  or  a  congeries
of  decisions  made  one  at  a  time,  and  in  the  hurry  of  judicial
business  ?

Repetition  and  inconsistency  are  far  more  likely  where  rules
we  formed  one  by  one  (and,  perhaps,  without  concert  by  many

^Hugo's  objection,  as  cited  by  Sa-  whole  field  of  law? or  a  congeries  of

Tigny,  is  as  follows :  *  Wenn  alle  Rechts-  decisions  made  one  at  a  time,  and  in  the

fr^eDTon  oben  herab  entschieden  wer-  hurry  of  judicial  business? And  observe,

<ien  soUten,  so  wiirde  es  solcher  £nt-  this  last  objection  applies  to  customary

Kbddongen so viele geben, dass es  as  well  as  to  (strictly  so  called)  juris-

bnm  mc^ch  ware,  sie  alle  zn  kennen  ;  pniderUiaX  or  judicial  law  ;  for  though

ond  far  die  nnentschiedenen  Falle,  deren  custom may exist independently of

Aoeh  immer  genug  iibrig  blieben,  gabe  decisions,  it  only  becomes  law  in  so  far

ei  DOT  um 80 mebr  widersprechende  as  it  is  recognised by the tribunals.

Intlocien.'  And  observe  further,  that  all  the  objec-

Which  is  the  most  likely  to  abound  tions  which  may  be  urged  against  codi-

with  '  competing  analogies'  I A  system  fication, apply  in a  higher  degree  to

of  decisions  formed  at  onco,  and  resting  private  and  unauthorised  exposition. —

npon a comprehensive survey  of the  Marginal  Note,  Vom  Beru/y  etc.,  p.  24.


666  Law :  Sources  and  Modes.

Lect. distinct  tribunals),  than  where  all  are  made  at  oncse  by  a  sing]
^  ^  ^  '  V individual  or  body,  who  are  trying  to  embrace  the  whole  field  (
law,  and  so  to  construct  every  rule  as  that  it  may  harmonis
with  the  rest.

And  here  I  would  make  a  remark  which  the  objection  ii
question  suggests,  and  which,  to  my  understandings  is  qniti
conclusive.

Eules  of  judiciary  law  are  not  decided  cases,  but  the  gerurcu
grounds  or  principles  (or  the  rcUiones  decidendi)  whereon  the
cases  are  decided.  Now,  by  the  practical  admission  of  those
who  apply  these  grounds  or  principles,  they  may  be  codified,  or
turned  into  statute  laws.  For  what  is  that  process  of  induction
by  which  the  principle  is  gathered  before  it  is  applied,  but  thia
very  process  of  codifying  such  principles,  performed  on  a  pa^
ticular  occasion,  and  performed  on  a  small  scale  ?  If  it  be
possible  to  extract  from  a  case,  or  from  a  few  cases,  the  ratio
decidendi,  or  general  principle  of  decision,  it  is  possible  to  extract
from  all  decided  cases  their  respective  grounds  of  decisions,  and
to  turn  them  into  a  body  of  law,  abstract  in  its  form,  and  there-
fore compact  and  accessible.

Assuming  that  judiciary  law  is  really  law,  it  clearly  may  be
codified.

Eeverting  to  the  objection,  I  admit  that  no  code  can  be
complete  or  perfect.  But  it  may  be  less  incomplete  than  judge-
made  law,  and  (if  well  constructed)  free  from  the  great  defedB
which  I  have  pointed  out  in  the  latter.  It  may  be  brief,  com-
pact, systematic,  and  therefore  knowable  as  far  as  it  goes.  And
many  devices  may  be  hit  upon,  which  have  never  yet  been
thought  of,  or  which  have  been  neglected,  for  removing  the
defects  incident  to  codes.®^  That  the  defects  of  the  French  and
Prussian  codes,  in  the  original  conception  and  construction,
render  them  necessarily  imperfect  and  no  fair  sample  of  possible
codes,  will  be  seen  in  the  sequel.
Second  ob-  A  second  objection  to  codification  is  founded  on  the  alleged

co^fica-^  ill  success  of  the  so-called  codes  which  have  been  compiled  in
tion— fail-  France,  Prussia,  and  other  countries,  by  order  of  the  government
Fi^nch  ^  ^^^  established  as  law  by  its  authority.  I  now  proceed  U
and  consider  this  objection,  and  shall  afterwards  note  various  objeo

Prussian •  •

codes— tioiis  which  have  been  made  to  codification  by  Savigny,  in  hi


examined.


^  Amongst  such  devices  may  be  in-  under  the  authority  of  Her  Majesty'

stanced  the  method  adopted  by  the  com-  Commissioners ; a method,  combimiii

pilers  of  a  code  for  India,  instalments  concise  statement  of  principles  wiUiUlai

of  which  have  been  made  and  published  tration  by  practical  ezamj^es. — IL  C


Codification.  667

specious  but  hollow  treatise  on  that  subject.^ The  professed Leot.
purpose  of  the  treatise  is  not  to  deny  the  expediency  of  codifica- .
tion  generally,  but  to  shew  its  inexpediency  in  Germany  at  the
present  time. In  so  far  as  his  arguments  apply  to  the  professed
and  proper  purpose  of  his  work,  I  have  no  concern  with  it ;  for
die  advantages  or  disadvantages  of  codification  in  the  abstract,
are  the  subjects  to  which  I  confine  myself. But  his  arguments
are  often  aimed  directly,  and  of tener  obliquely,  against  codification
in  general ;  and  so  far  as  they  are  so,  they  fall  within  my  scope.
In  the  course  of  his  book  he  adverts  to  the  objection  which  I
fiist  mentioned,  that  which  is  founded  upon  the  necessary  in-
completeness of  a  code,  and  also  to  the  second,  the  ill  success  of
the  codes  which  have  been  already  established. I  shall,  therefore,
in  considering  this  objection,  occasionally  advert  to  Savigny's
Ixwk;  reserving  the  special  examination  of  it  for  the  latter
portion  of  the  present  Lecture.

With  respect,  then,  to  the  alleged  ill  success  of  the  codes
already  established,  it  must  be  admitted  that  they  have  not
accomplished  the  primary  ends  of  a  code  in  the  modem  sense
of  the  term,  that  is,  a  complete  body  of  law  intended  to  super-
sede all  the  other  law  obtaining  in  the  coimtry.  In  France
and  Prussia,  to  the  codes  of  which  countries  I  shall  confine
my  remarks,  the  law  does  not  possess  that  compactness  and
accessibility,  which  are  the  main  ends  of  codes  as  such;  for
the  matter  and  substance  of  the  law  must  be  excluded  from
cwiaideration,  as  things  with  which  the  question  of  codification
has  httle  connection.

In  France,  the  code  is  buried  under  a  heap  of  subsequent
enactments  of  the  legislature,  and  of  judiciary  law  subsequently
introduced  by  the  tribunals.  In  Prussia,  the  mass  of  new  laws
*nd  authoritative  interpretations  which  have  been  introduced
subsequently  by  the  promulgation  of  the  code,  fills,  I  believe,
shout  thirty  quarto  volumes,  the  code  itself  consisting  of  eight
Often.

And  here  I  may  remark  that  the  so-called  Prussian  code
^as  not  intended  by  its  author,  the  great  Frederic,  or  by  the
persons  whom  he  employed  to  draw  it  up,  as  a  code  in  the
I  modem  acceptation,  that  is,  a  complete  body  of  law.  In  most
of  the  German  States  before  the  introduction  of  codes,  the  state
of  the  law  was  as  follows : — ^they  were  partly  governed  by  their
own  local  laws,  and  partly  by  what  was  called  Gemeines  BecfU,

^  Vom  Berof  nnserer  Zeit  ftir  Gresetzgebung  und  Rechtswissenschaft. Heidel-

Wk.  1814.


\


668  Law:  Sources  and  Modes.

Leot. or  common  law  of  Germany,  consisting  in  part  of  the  Soman
and  the  Canon  law,  in  part  of  rules  of  domestic  or  strictlj
German  growth,  which  were  got  at  by  comparing  the  different
local  systems  in  the  way  of  abstraction  and  induction. This
common  law  was  resorted  to  in  cases  for  which  the  local  laws
or  customs  of  the different States  did  not  afford  a  solution.
Now  the  Prussian  code  was  not  intended  to  codify  all  the  law
obtaining  in Prussia,  but  only  this  subsidiary common  law;
leaving  the  codification  of  the  different  laws  obtaining  in  parti-
cular parts  of  the  Prussian  dominions  to  a  future  opportunity.
This  was  all  that  it  intended,  and  this  is  all  that  it  has  perfonned.
And  although  the  code  has  now  been  in  force  for  nearly  half  a
century,  none  of  the  local  laws  of  any  districts  of  the  Prussian
dominions  have  yet  been  codified,  except  those  obtaining  in  a
very  small  part  of  that  kingdom,  the  district  called  East  Prussia
I  may  also  observe  that,  by  virtue  of  a  provision  of  tiw
code,  prcejwdida  or  precedents  have  no  authority. The  Courts
are  expressly  forbidden  to  guide  their  decisions  by  the  dedsionB
of  their  predecessors. Consequently,  although  the  code  is  ove^
whelmed  by  a  quantity  of  explanation,  no  judiciary  law,  propedy
so-called,  has  been  stuck  upon  it. As  I  have  mentioned  mere
than  once,  all doubtful  points  of  law  are  referred  to  a  Law
Commission,  who  emit  a  declaratory  law  on  the  occasion  of  every
case  so  submitted  to  them. The  thirty  volumes  or  thereabouts
of  supplementary  law  which  I  have  already  mentioned  are,  in
consequence,  not  decisions  on  the  code,  but  acts  of  authoritatlTe
interpretation,  issued  immediately  by  the  government This  at
least  is  the  theory  of  the  Prussian  system. In  practice  I  beUeve
that  prcejudida  or  decided  cases  do  influence  the  decisions  of
the  Courts. For  it  is  certain  that  reports  of  decided  cases  are
published  regularly  at  Berlin ;  and  I  can  conceive  no  motive  to
publishing  them  if  they  were  not  cited  in  the  Courts,  and  did
not  influence  the  judgments  of  the  Courts. They  probably  have
an  influence  similar  to  that  which  the  decisions  of  the  English
Courts  are  known  to  have  in  the  United  States. It  cannot  be-
said  that  the  decisions  of  the Court  of  King's Bench  have
authority  in  New  York,  but  they  do  in  fact  influence  the  conduct
of  the  American  tribunals. The  treatises  of  reputation  which
appear  in  this  coimtry  on  the  law,  are  frequently  republished  in
the  United  States,  with  notes  by  American  lawyers. I  have
myself  seen  a  copy  of  an  American  edition  of  Sugden  on  the
Law  of  Vendors  and  Purchasers.

To  return  to  my  more  immediate  subject. The  ill  success


Codification.  669

aiticolar  codes,  admitting  their  failure  to  be  as  complete  as Lect.
ffinned^  would  prove  nothing  against  codification. Those ^ ^
\  would  make  it  tell  as  an  objection  to  codes  in  general,  must  l^^ao
97  that  the  particular  codes  in  question  have  failed  as  being  failed,  not
ea,  or  by  virtue  of  the  qualities  belonging  to  them  as  codes,  ^  ^^
•  by  defects  peculiar  to  the  codes  in  question;  defects  merely  reason  of
idental,  which  care  and  skill  might  have  obviated. This  ^^
f-evident  truth  the  objectors  to  codification  never  saw,  or  constmc-
ingenuously  passed  over. They  first  boldly  affirm,  contrary  ^°*
the  fact,  that  the  French  and  Prussian  codes  have  completely
led,  and  then  infer  from  the  failure,  that  successful  codification
imiversally  impracticable. They  first  misstate  or  distort  and
aggerate  the  fact; and  then,  on  the  fact  so  misstated  or
aggerated,  they  found  a  sophistical  inference.

The  inconsistency  of  Savigny  is  here  remarkable ;  for  he
mself  in  the  very  work  in  which  he  urges  the  failure  of  the
rench  and  Prussian  codes  as  an  argument  against  codification,
ants  out  defects  both  in  the  conception  and  in  the  construction
those  codes,  which,  on  his  own  shewing,  were  anything  but
fivitabla  He  treats  the  authors  of  the  French  code  with
icrited  severity  for  their  gross  incompetency  to  their  task,  yet
3  brings  forward  the  defects  in  their  workmanship  as  a  reason
gainst  codification  in  Germany,  and  against  codification  in
meraL  He  in  fact  argues  thus :  Here  is  a  code  swarming
ith  defects  which  were  anything  but  unavoidable ;  defects  so
ro68  and  flagrant,  that  the  authors  richly  merit  the  critical  lash
hich  I  am  now  mercilessly  laying  on  them :  ergo  codes  and
)dification  are  manifestly  naught.

To  shew  that  the  objection  is  untenable,  I  shall  advert  to
arious  accidental  circumstances  which  are  quite  sufficient  to
soount  for  the  imperfections  of  the  French  code,  and  to  prove
lat  the  objection  is  the  merest  sophistry ;  I  shall  mainly  confine
ly  observations  to  the  French  code,  because  its  failure  is  the
lost  remarkable,  and  because  it  is  the  best  known,  or  the  only
ne  which  is  known,  to  English  lawyers.  Some  of  its  faults  are
mentioned  by  Savigny ;  others,  which  are  more  important,  he
as  not  mentioned.

The  first  glaring  deficiency  of  the  French  code  is  the  total  First  de-
Hint  of  definitions  of  its  technical  terms,  and  explanations  of  ^nc^^*
be  leading  principles  and  distinctions  upon  which  it  is  founded,  code :  it
lis  grievous defect Savigny  has  not mentioned. Without  jev^id  of
lefinitions  of  the  technical  terms  and  explanations  of  the  leading  definitions
Principles  and  distinctions,  the  particular  provisions  of  the  code  technical

VOL.  n.  M


670  Law :  Sources  and  Modes.

Lect. must  be  defective and  incoherent,  and  its  language  dubion
.  > For,  unless  these  leading  principles  are  habitually  present  to  tl

terms,  and  minds  of  the  authors,  how  are  they  to  thread  with  certainty  th
2^  ^l labyrinth  of  the  details  ? How  can  they  follow  the  piindple
the  lead- to  all  their  consequences  ? Unless the  technical terms  ai
dpl«i™' employed  everywhere  precisely  in  the  same  meanings,  how  an
the  French  they  to  express  themselves  without  ambiguity  ? But  unless  tb
leading  principles  and  distinctions  are  defined,  how  are  those
leading  principles  and  distinctions  to  be  constantly  present  to
the  minds  of  the  codifiers  in  a  definite  shape  ?  and  unless  tb
technical  terms  are  defined,  how  are  those  terms  to  be  unifomilf
employed  in  the  same  meanings  ? Again,  unless  both  sets  of
definitions  are  contained  in  the  code  itself,  the  judges  and  aU
other  persons  who  have  occasion  to  apply  it,  must  be  perpetoallf
at  a  loss  for  the  meaning. Although  a  code  may  be  constructed
with  consummate  care  and  skill,  none  of  its  detailed  provisiins
can  ever  be  complete  .in  itself:  unless  viewed  in  conjnnctum
with  the  other  details  and  with  the  leading  principles,  a  particulir
provision  can  have  no  complete  meaning. Unless,  therefore,  till
code  contains  a  statement  of  leading  principles  as  well  as  details^
the  code  itself  does  not  furnish  the  necessary  guides  to  its  otm
meaning ;  if  those  guides  exist  at  all,  they  exist  en,  dthon  of  the
code.

Now,  of  the  necessity  of  explanations  of  the  leading  prm-
ciples  and  distinctions  and  of  definitions  of  the  technical  tenns,
the  compilers  of  the  French  code  had  no  idea.  The  principles
and  distinctions  they  tacitly  borrowed  from  the  ancient  law,  and
clothed  them  in  the  technical  terms  of  the  same  law,  without
any  attention  to  determining  the  meaning  of  those  terms,  under
a  tacit  assumption  that  it  is  known  and  certain.  Moreover,  the
French  code  is  not  a  body  of  law,  or  is  not  a  body  of  law  fonn-
ing  a  substantive  whole.  It  is  nothing  but  a  loose  abstract  of
the  former  law,  or  an  index  to  a  body  of  law  existing  ithan
itself.  This  very  defect  in  the  French  code  is  one  princifal
cause  of  the  fallacious  brevity  which  its  injudicious  admiren
Iiave  frequently  selected  as  matter  of  praise ;  forgetting  that  the
brevity  which  arises  from  incompleteness,  in  the  end  leads  to
unnecessary  bulk  from  the  mass  of  supplemental  statutes  and
decisions  which  it  of  necessity  gives  rise  to.  The  code  ia
consequently  defective  and  incoherent,  and  is  often  expressed
dubiously :  and  in  order  to  correct  its  defects  and  incoherences
and  to  explain  its«  meaning,  the  old  law  to  which  it  constantly
refers  has  been  let  in  by  the  Courts  upon  it ;  and  an  immenss


Codification.  671

'  of  jurisprude7i>ce  (in  the  French  sense  of  the  tenn)  intro- Lbct.

XXXIX

d  by  the  tribunals,  obtains  as  law  by  the  side  of  it.  From
onginal  defect  in  the  conception  of  the  code,  this  was  a
ssaiy  consequence:  but  it  might  manifestly  have  been
ated.

The  Prussian  code  has  the  same  vice.  Being  based  on  the  So  the
lan  law,  it  refers  throughout  to  the  principles  and  distinctions  cST
he  Soman  law,  and  borrows  the  technical  language  of  that
ran,  without  the  requisite  explanation  of  the  import  of  that
[uaga  A  knowledge  of  the  Soman  law,  and  of  the  other
ems  of  law  previously  obtaining  in  Germany,  is  still  a  neces-
'  preliminary  to  a  study  of  the  coda  The  code  has  not
srseded  completely  the  old  subsidiary  or  common  law  which
ras  intended  to  supplant.

It  is  remarkable  that  the  authors  of  Justinian's  compilations,
pite  of  their  general  incompetency,  had  some  notion  of  the
assity  of  explaining  in  the  code  itself,  its  leading  principles
distinctions,  and  defining  its  technical  terms.  The  compilers
the  French  code  seem  to  have  had  no  such  idea  at  alL
tinian,  if  we  judge  from  the  prefaces  to  his  compilations,
•nded  those  works  to  supersede  the  law  of  which  they  were
gling  abridgments;  and  he  accordingly  forbids  the  judges
reafter  to  resort  to  the  old  law  or  to  the  old  law  authorities,
render  needless  this  recourse,  he  has  hit  upon  two  devices,
i  first  of  these  is  an  attempt,  though  executed  very  imperfectly,
Dsert  definitions  of  certain  leading  terms :  the  last  title  but
of  the  Pandects  is  de  verhorvmi  significatione.  The  second  is
ittempt  to  define  certain  of  the  legal  rules  {regvloR  juris)  which
through  the  whole  law.  Another  means  was  also  taken  to
der  reference  to  the  previous  law  unnecessary :  this  was  the
sition  in  the  Pandects,  and  in  various  places  in  the  code,  of
ch  historical  matter;  much  similar  matter  is  also  left  in
excerpts,  for  the  clearer  imderstanding  of  those  excerpts,
s  historical  matter  is  unskiKully  inserted,  and  has  often  been
founded  by  modem  commentators  with  the  imperative
t  of  the  law ;  whereby  they  have  been  led  to  imagine  the
idects  to  be  more  inconsistent  than  they  really  are ;  fancy-
they  found  antinomies  where  they  are  indeed  two  contra-
loiy  laws,  but  where  one  only  is  inserted  as  law ;  the  other  is
J  leferred  to  as  an  historical  fact  in  order  to  explain  some-
ig  elsa

It  may  be  said,  that  it  is  impossible  to  give  in  the  code
[f  explanations  of  the  leading  principles  and  distinctions,  and


672  Law:  Sources  and  Modes.

Lect.  definitions  of  the  technical  terms.  My  answer  is,  that  it  is
XXXIX  undoubtedly  diflBcult,  but  it  cannot  be  impossible ;  for  the  prin-
ciples and  distinctions  must  exist  somewhere:  and  the  tenns
must  have  a  determinate  meaning,  which  it  must  be  possible  to
find :  and  though  the  principles  and  distinctions  and  the  mean-
ings of  the  terms  may  be  imbedded  in  much  other  matter,  tiiqr
may  be  extracted  and  put  into  an  abstract  shape.
Failure  of  After  all,  the  alleged  ill  success  of  the  French  and  Prussiin

♦Via  T*ma

sian  and  codes  is  greatly  exaggerated.  They  at  least  give  a  compendiona^
French  though  a  defective,  view  of  the  old  law ;  they  have  cleared  it  of
grossly  ex-  A  load  of  inconsistencies  and  much  reduced  its  bulk,  though  Usssi
aggerated.  jj^ve  not  superseded  it  completely.  If  any  Frenchman  or  Gennai
of  the  requisite  knowledge  is  asked  whether  the  code,  even  as  it
is,  be  preferable  or  not  to  the  law  in  its  previous  state,  he  does
not  hesitate  to  say  that  it  is  greatly  preferable,  and  that  the
quantity  of  litigation  arising  from  doubt  as  to  the  law  is  very
greatly  diminished.  I  know  this  to  be  the  opinion  of  seveid
Frenchmen  who  are  in  every  respect  competent  witnesses,  and  I
never  met  with  any  German  practitioner  who  did  not  laugh  at
the  objections  made  to  codification  by  the  professors  in  tibe
Universities.  The  truth  is  that  in  Germany  the  enemies  <)(
codification  are  not  the  practising  lawyers,  but  (what  one  would
not  have  expected)  the  theorists :  chiefly  the  professors  of  the
Eoman,  the  Canon,  and  the  old  German  law :  partly  no  doubt
from  attachment  to  the  systems  of  law  with  which  they  aie
conversant,  partly  from  fear  lest  the  demand  for  a  knowledge  rf
that  old  law  might  be  superseded,  if  codes  were  introduced:  *
fear,  I  believe,  wholly  imfounded  as  far  as  regards  the  Boman
law,  and  the  history  of  German  law.  It  is  obvious  that  no
instructed  body  of  lawyers  will  ever  confijie  themselves  to  tiia
study  of  a  code,  how  perfect  soever  it  may  be.  Unless  th«
history  and  philosophy  of  law  were  well  understood,  no  good
code  could  possibly  be  constructed:  and  unless  those  branches
of  knowledge  continued  to  be  studied,  a  good  code,  even  when
constructed,  would  infallibly  deteriorate.
The  Another  defect  of  the  French  code  is  pointed  out  by  Savigny.

code  ^never  ^^  appears  from  the  Conf&rerices  or  discussions  in  the  Council  of
intended  State  upon  the  project  of  the  Code,  that  it  wtis  not  the  design
authors  ^^  ^^®  compilers  to  make  it  a  code  in  the  modem  sense  of  tke
to  be  a  term,  that  is,  a  complete  body  of  statute  law.  In  those  discns-
perly  so°  sions  they  refer  perpetually  to  various  subMid  with  which  it  is
caUed—  to  be  eked  out.  Of  these  siibsidia,  as  of  the  work  itself  which
supersede they  were  engaged  in,  they  had  no  definite  notion :  but  in  the


Codification.  67  3

main  they  intended  that  where  the  code  should  not  be  found  Lect.

• •  XXXTX

sufficient,  the  Courts  should  decide  by  what  they  called  usage  .

and  doctrine :  that  is,  the  customary  law  previously  obtaining  all  other

the  resort  of  the  particular  Court,  and  the  jurisprudence  meant  to


commonly  followed  by  former  tribunals  within  that  same  resort.  l>®  ^j^ed

To  shew  the  indefiniteness  of  their  notions,  I  shall  mention  some  various

of  the  sybsidia  which  are  referred  to  in  their  discussions. 1.  «**»w^*».

MquriU  TuUureUe,  Id  naturelle. 2.  The  Soman  law. 3. The

andent customs. 4. Usage,  exemple,  decisions,  jurisprudence.

6,  Droit commun. 6. Frincipes  gin&raux,  maximes,  doctrine,

Mcience, It  thus  appears  that  they  intended  to  leave  many  of  the

p(ant8  which  the  code  should  have  embraced  to  usage  and  doctrine:

that  is,  to  the  tribunals  as  guided  by  usa^e  and  doctrine,  not  by

fhe  code  itself. This  arose  partly,  no  doubt,  from  a  leaning  in

fcyour  of  the  old  institutions  in  which  they  had  been  trained  up,

Int  chiefly  from  loose  conceptions  of  the  nature  of  a  code.

lliibaut,  who,  though  a  strong  advocate  of  codification,  entertains

«  boundless  contempt  for  the  authors  of  the  French  code,  says

rf  them  that  whenever  they  fell  upon  a  subject  which  they  knew

not  how  to  handle,  they  left  it  to  jurisprudence :  that  is,  to  the

dd  law  previously  obtaining,  to  such  new  dispositions  as  the

Comts  might  thereafter  introduce,  or  to  the  mere  arbitrium  of

the  tribunals. How,  then,  is  it  possible  for  any  candid  person

to  argue,  that  when  the  very  authors  of  the  so-called  French

code  did  not  intend  to  make  it  a  code  which  should  supersede

an  other  law,  its  not  having  done  so  is  a  proof  that  what  they

did  not  attempt  cannot  be  accomplished  ?

In  my  future  Lectures,  when  treating  of  the  law  of  persons  Monstrous
and  of  things,  and  other  questions  of  arrangement,  I  shall  point  ^'^^^
out  the  principal  defects  in  the  details  of  the  code,  and  the  *?^^^^®f
ignorance  of  the  principles  and  distinctions  of  the  Eoman  law  code  with
which  it  evinces. At  present  I  shall  mention  one  monstrous  ff8*£^*^

*  the  fioman

example  of  this  ignorance.  Without  a  distinct  conception  of  the  law.
distinction  between  jura  in  rem  and  jura  in  personam,  or  (as  it
was  expressed  by  the  classical  jurists)  between  dominia  and
Migatumes,  no  clear  conception  can  be  formed  of  the  general
stmcture  of  the  Boman  Law,  or  indeed  of  what  must  necessarily
be  the  structure  of  any  body  of  law  whatever.  Now,  as  Savigny
remarks,  the  authors  of  the  French  code  have  never  conceived
this  distinction  at  all,  or  at  least  have  never  conceived  it  in  its
whole  universality,  but  only  here  and  there  in  particular  instances.
The  darkness,  confusion,  and  incoherency  which  have  been  intro-
duced by  the  want  of  a  clear  conception  of  that  distinction,  is


674  Law:  Sources  and  Modes.

Lect. scarcely  conceivable. Among  other  blunders  into  which  it  has
. ^ > led  the  authors  of  the  codes,  they  have  adopted  the  antiquated
and  false  doctrine  which  I  have  mentioned  in  a  former  Lecture
about  titultis  and  viodus  acquirendiy  and  have  spoken  oifroptniji
as  being  the  consequence  of  obligations,  a  profundity  of  ignorance
the  more  unpardonable  because  a  mistake  of  the  same  kind  had
already  been  committed  in  the  Prussian  code. By  the  authority
of  the  Chancellor  Von  Kramer,  overruling  Suarez  (the  man  of
real  capacity  among  the  framers  of  the  Prussian  code)  the  head
of  contracts  had  been  stuck  into  dominium,  under  the  erroneous
notion  that  every  acquisition  of  property  is  preceded  by  a  modm
cuiquirendi :  that  is,  obligationes  had  been  stuffed  into  the  opposite
department  of  dominium  or  property. This  blunder  had  beea
so  much  commented  upon  by  German  writers,  that  the  compilers
of  the  French  code  ought  to  have  been  thoroughly  acquainted
with  the  merits  of  the  controversy. But,  knowing  nothing  about
the  matter,  instead  of  clearing  up  they  have  only  thickened  tie
confusion.
Extreme  Another  and  a  perfectly  sufficient  reason  for  the  defects  of

whicli  the ^^  French  code  is  the  extreme  haste  with  which  it  was  drawn
French up. The  original  projet  was  prepared,  in  little  more  than  four
drawn  up. months,  by  a  commission consisting  of  Tronchet,  MalleviJle,
Portalis,  and  Bigot -Pr^ameneu;  it  was  then  submitted  to  the
Council  of  State,  where  it  was  discussed  article  by  articl& But
it  is  obvious  that  the  examination  it  received  in  the  debates  d
this  numerous  body,  many  of  whom  were  not  even  lawyers,  could
have  no  tendency  to  correct  the  vices  in  the  original  conception.
The  Council  of  State  had  in  fact  no  notion  whatever  of  the
technical  part  of  legislation. Accordingly,  while  many  pages
and  chapters  in  the  Conf&rences  relate  to  legislative  points  of
hardly  any  importance,  scarcely  the  slightest  notice  was  taken
of  many  most  important  questions  of  arrangement  and  expression.
In  the  case  of  a  code,  as  of  everything  that  should  be  systematic,
the  excellence  of  the  first  conception  is  everything; and  no
alteration  in  the  mere  details  can  cure  vices  in  the  original
conception.

Of  the  profound  ignorance  of  the  authors  of  the  code  on  the
subject  of  the  Eoman  law,  on  which  the  then  existing  French
law  was  wholly  founded,  and  of  which  in  truth  the  code  itself
is  little  but  a  richauffie,  Savigny  mentions  numerous  instances.
They  had  indeed  a  superstitious  veneration  for  the  Boman  law,
but  they  knew  scarcely  anything  of  it :  what  they  knew  was
derived  solely  from  Justinian's  Institutes,  and  from  the  various


Codification.  675

popular  compendia  which  for  the  most  part  follow  the  Institutes. Lect.
And  this  accounts  for  many  of  the  defects  of  the  coda It .  .

explains  their  having  passed  over  many  highly  important  ques-
tions  of  law,  because  these  did  not  fall  within  the  scope  of  that
institutional  treatise,  or  of  the  many  popular  expositions  founded
<m  it

As  I  remarked,  no  code  can  be  perfect ;  there  should  there-  No  provi-
Ibte  be  a  perpetual  provision  for  its  amendment,  on  suggestions  ^^^
from  the  judges  who  are  engaged  in  applying  it,  and  who  are  in  the  Pros-
the  best  of  all  situations  for  observing  its  defects. By  this  means  French
the  growth  of  judiciary  law  explanatory  of,  and  supplementary  codes,  and
to,  the  code,  cannot  indeed  be  prevented  altogether,  but  it  may  ing  do^
be  kept  within  a  moderate  bulk,  by  being  wrought  into  the  code  the  growth
itself  from  time  to  time. In  France  this  has  been  completely  ciary  and
neglected;  a  fact  which  would  of  itself  suffice  to  account  for  JJJ^^^'jj^^
the  allied  failure  of  the  code. An  endless  quantity  of  judiciary  by  work-
kw  has  been  inbx)duced ;  acts  of  the  legislature,  and  ordonnances  j^*^™
of  the  King  issued  by  authority  of  the  legislature,  have  been  code  from
emitted  from  time  to  time  separately ;  but  there  has  been  no  ^^^
attempt  to  work  them  into  the  body  of  the  code. So  with  the
Prassian  code. The  Kovels  or  new  constitutions,  and  the  acts
d  authentic  interpretation  emanating  from  the  Law  Commission
exist  in  a  separate  state ;  there  has  been  no  attempt  to  work
them  into  the  code,  or  to  amend  it  in  pursuance  of  them.

The  accidental  defects  which  I  have  now  mentioned,  as  well
as  others  which  I  shall  advert  to  hereafter,  and  many  on  which
I  shall  be  silent,  account  for  the  partial  failure  of  the  Prussian
and  French  codes,  not  to  mention  that  this  failure  has  been
groedy  exaggerated.  After  all,  these  codes  are  great  improve-
ments on  the  former  state  of  the  law.

I  now  proceed  to  notice  the  objections  which  have  been  Sayigny's
particularly  urged  by  Savigny,  in  his  treatise Vom  Bern/,  etc.  to"^^ifi^
(cm  the  Vocation  of  our  Age  to  Legislation  and  Jurisprudence),  cation  ex-
The  professed purpose of  this  work is,  as I  have  already  *°^'^^*
.mentioned,  to  prove  the  inexpediency,  not  of  codification  in
general,  but  of  codification  for  a  part  of  (Jermany,  and  especially
of  a  code  proposed  by  Thibaut So  far,  therefore,  as  the  work  is
in  keeping  with  its  professed  purpose,  it  does not  apply  to
codification  in  general  or  in  the  abstract,  but  to  codification,  and
to  a  specific  scheme  of  the  codification  at  a  given  place  and  time.
So  &r,  the  warmest  partisan  of  codification  might  assent  to
Savigny's  conclusion  without  renouncing  his  own  general  views.
But  while  pursuing  this  ostensible  purpose,  Savigny  employs


676  Law :  Sources  and  Modes.

Lect.  many  arguments  which  either  directly  or  obliquely  impngi
codification  considered  generally  or  in  the  abstract ;  and  so  fiu
as  this  is  the  case,  his  work  falls  within  the  scope  of  my  presenl
examination.  I  advert  to  these  arguments  on  account  of  ik
attention  which  is  due  to  whatever  emanates  from  a  man  d
Savigny's  genius  and  learning,  and  because,  if  his  objections  caD
be  answered  completely,!  those  of  other  and  inferior  persons  ma|
safely  be  dismissed  without  notice.

Savigny  is  not  absolutely  an  enemy  to  codification,  as  thfl
purpose  of  his  book  proves ;  for  if  he  thought  he  could  prove
generally  that  codes  are  good  for  nothing,  he  would  scaicelf
insist  upon  arguments  peculiar  to  that  particular  juncture. He
is  himself  an  advocate  for  a  code,  even  in  Germany,  to  a  c^rt^
limited  extent :  he  holds  a  code  to  be  expedient,  if  it  could  te
confined  to  the  codification  of  the  existing  law,  without  affedaif
to  anticipate  future  cases. This  is  in  reality  an admiasiiB
almost  of  the  whole  question. Most  of  the  partisans  of  codifici-
tion  would  be  extremely  well  content  to  have  a  concise  and
clear  description of  the  law  actually  existing,  and  actually
applied  to  past  cases,  which description would  of  course  be
applicable to all future cases resembling those past  ones.
Savigny  thus  gives  up  almost  the  whole  question. As  to  tie
anticipation  of  cases  which  have  not  actually  arisen,  nor  resemUe
any  which  have  actually  arisen,  it  is  impossible  that  any  code
can  include  them  completely ;  but  judiciary  law  is  in  a  much
worse  plight  for  this  purpose  than  a  code;  for  the  reason  so
well  stated  by  Sir  Samuel  Eomilly,  namely,  that  judiciary  legis-
lation is  necessarily  extremely  narrow,  being  confined  to  the  veiy
case  on  the  occasion  of  which  the  rule  is  introduced,  or  to  cases
proximately  or closely  resembling  that case. Although  the
judicial  legislator  may  see  at  the  very  time  a  variety  of  analo-
gous cases,  which  he  might  provide  for  by  a  complete  law,  he  ifi
obliged  to  confine  himself  to  the  narrowest  possible  generalisation
It  is,  therefore,  clear,  that  although  a  code  cannot  exhaust  al
future  cases,  judiciary  law  is  in  this  respect  more imperfect
stiU.

Savigny  himself  suggests  one  of  the  best  arguments  for  th
possibility  of  codification,  by  shewing  that  one  of  its  greates
difficulties  is  not  insurmountable.  In  arguing  against  codifies
tion  in  Germany,  he  is  led  to  examine  the  worth  of  the  la^
now  obtaining  which  a  code  would  supersede.  This  law  i
mainly  founded  on  the  Eoman  law  ;  and  he  is  thus  led  to  spea
of  the  Eoman  law. In  speaking  of  this  legal  system,  or  of  th


Codification.  677

fortion  of  it  which  was  made  by  the  writings  or  opinions  of Lbot.

jniscoxisultSy  and  which  is  known  in  Germany  by  the  distinctive ^

mne  of  Pandect  law,  he  is  led  to  admit  and  praise  its  coherency.

Alilxmgh  it  was  made  in  succession  by  a  series  of  jurisconsults

eoDtuming  for  more  than  two  centuries,  each  of  these  jurisconsults

was  80  completely  possessed  of  the  principles  of  the  Boman  law,

and  they  were  all  so  completely  masters  of  the  same  mode  of

msoning  from  and  appljning  those  principles,  that  their  successive

voiks  have  the  coherency  commonly  belonging  only  to  the

productions  of  one  master  mind. Leibnitz  and others  had

nmarked,  that  of  the  forty  jurisconsults (or  thereabouts),  of

ezoeipts  from  whose  writings  the  Pandects  are  composed,  the

pissages  from  any  one  are  so  like  those  from  all  the  others  in

manner  and  style,  that  it  is  impossible  from  internal  evidence  to

:  distinguish them. Leibnitz expressed  this  by  rather  an  odd

ploaae,  borrowed  from  the  Soman  law  itself,  calling  ^h&xcL  fwagMe

ftnms:  res  fungibiles  being  the  technical  term  for  articles  which

are  bought  and  sold  in  genere,  not  individually. Each  of  these

wnters  was  master  of  the  Boman  law  in  its  full  extent ;  each

had  the  whole  of  its  principles  constantly  present  to  his  mind,

and  could  argue  down  from  them  and  apply  them  with  the

greatest  certainty. Now  this  suggests  an  answer  to  the  greatest

difficulty  about  codification. For  the  greatest  practical  difficulty

in  accomplishing  it  is,  that  the  code  cannot  possibly  be  made  by

one  mind ;  and  if  made  by  a  number,  would  probably  not  be

coherent. Now  if  the  production  of  a  succession  of  jurisconsults,

filling  two  centuries,  possesses  perfect  coherency,  d  fortiori  it  is

possible  that  a  body  of  law  may  be  equally  coherent  if  produced

hy  a  number  of  persons  working  in  concert,  provided  they  be  as

fully  masters  of  its  principles,  and  as  capable  of  arguing  from

them  and  applying  them,  as  the  Eoman  lawyers  were. Such

a  set  of  persons  would  be  in  a  much  more  favourable  position  for

producing  a  homogeneous  and  consecutive  whole  than  persons

working  in  a  disjointed  and  unconnected  manner.

But  in  spite  of  Savigny's  admission  of  the  expediency  of
codification  in  a  limited  sense,  and  his  suggestion  of  a  ground
for  believing  it  to  be  practicable,  many  of  his  arguments  are
directly,  and  still  more  of  them  obliquely,  aimed  at  codification
in  general  I  have  already  adverted  to  two  of  these:  the
impossibility  of  anticipating  all  future  cases,  and  the  alleged
failure  of  past  attempts  at  codification.  All  the  remainder  of
his  arguments  are  equally  fallacious,  and  some  of  them  almost
too  ridiculous  to  mention.


678  Law :  Sources  and  Modes.

Lbot.  One  is  the  assumption  that  no  determinate  leading  principles

will  be  followed  consistently  by  the  makers  of  the  code,  and
therefore  its  provisions  must  be  defective  and  incoherenL  This
argument  applies  only  where  the  makers  of  the  code  are  incapable
of  defining  and  conceiving  distinctly  and  steadily  the  leading
principles  of  their  own  system.  It  applies  to  the  authors  of  the
French  code,  but,  by  his  own  admission,  not  to  the  Boman
lawyers.

Secondly:  he  asserts  that  in  an  age  capable  of  prododng
a  good  code,  no  code  could  be  necessary.  Because  Papinian
and  the  other  great  jurisconsults  who  made  the  Boman  law  were
able  lawyers,  and  because  good  expositions  of  the  law  have  been
made  by  private  hands,  does  it  follow  that  a  code  is  useless?
Good  expositions,  and  good  judiciary  law  made  by  able  juris-
consults, do  not  supply  the  demand  for  a  code,  though  they  render
it  somewhat  less  necessary.  Savigny  falls  into  the  extreme
absurdity  of  putting  expositions  of  the  law  by  private  hands
precisely  on  a  level  with  the  codification  of  it  by  the  authority
of  the  supreme  legislature.  The  exposition  may  be  just  as  well
constructed  as  the  code,  but  the  essential  difference  wUl  remain,
that  the  one  is  authorised  and  the  judge  is  bound  to  abide  I7
it ;  the  other  is  no  expression  of  the  will  of  the  sovereign,  and
the  judge  is  not  obliged  to  follow  it :  which  makes  all  the
difference  between  imcertain  and  certain  law.

Savigny  affirms,  contrary  to  the  fact,  that  during  the  times
of  the  classical  jurists  the  want  of  a  code  or  digest  was  not  fdt
This  assertion  is  directly  in  the  teeth  of  a  passage  of  Suetonins,
quoted  by  himself  at  the  bottom  of  the  very  same  page,  where
that  author  mentions  it  as  a  purpose  of  Caesar,  ju&  civik  ad
cerium  modum  redigere,  atque  ex  immensd  diffiisdque  legum  eopUt
optima  quceqv£  et  neccssaria  in  paucissim/>s  conferre  libros. livy
also,  who  lived  at  the  beginning  of  the  period  of  the  classical
jurists,  and  Tacitus,  who,  like  Suetonius,  lived  about  the  middle
of  the  same  period,  speak  in  the  same  strong  terms  as  Suetonius
of  the  enormous  bulk  of  the  law,  shewing  the  want  of  a  code  or
digest  to  have  been  generally  felt.

That  a  code  constructed  in  an  age  incapable  of  making  a
good  one,  has  a  tendency  to  give  perpetuity  to  the  ideas  of  that
incapable  age,  may  to  a  certain  limited  extent  be  true.  And
this  leads  me  to  advert  to  the  strange  assumption  of  Hugo  and
other  enemies  of  codification,  that  the  code  when  made  will  be
unalterable,  and  will  therefore  transmit  to  more  enlightened
ages  the  comparatively  bad  legislation  of  a  comparatively  dark


Codification.  679

cine. I  cannot  understand  why  any  such  absurd  supposition  is Leot.
entertained.  XXXIX

T

Another  equally  absurd  argument  is  this :  that  all  law  is
not  in  all  respects  the  work  of  the  sovereign  legislature,  but  is
very  generally  formed  from  customs  which  were  rules  of  positive
molality  anterior  to  their  adoption  by  the  legislator.  In  this
there  is  nothing  new ;  nothing  that  has  not  been  known  at  all
times.  From  this,  however,  some  of  the  German  jurists  infer —
I  cannot  conceive  how — that  codification  itself  is  bad.

The  idea  darkly  floating  before  their  minds  may  be,  that
legislation  ought  to  be  governed  by  actual  experience  of  the
wants  and  exigencies  of  mankind.  And  here  I  would  remark
that  a  great  mistake  is  often  made  with  respect  to  Bentham's
notions  of  law.  Bentham  belongs  strictly  to  the  historical
school  of  jurisprudence.  The  proper  sense  of  that  term  as  used
by  the  Germans  is,  that  the  jurists  thus  designated  think  that
a  body  of  law  cannot  be  spun  out  from  a  few  general  principles
asBomed  d  priori,  but  must  be  founded  on  experience  of  the
sabjects  and  objects  with  which  law  is  conversant.  Bentham
therefore  manifestly  belongs  to  this  school.  He  has  again  and
igain  declared  in  his  works  that  the  reports  of  the  decisions  of
the  English  Courts  are  an  invaluable  mine  of  experience  for
the  legislator.  The  character  of  the  historical  school  of  juris-
prudence in  Germany  is  commonly  misconceived.  They  are
imagined  to  be  enemies  of  codification,  because  one  or  two  of  the
nu)st  remarkable  individuals  among  them,  such  as  Hugo  and
Savigny,  are  so ;  but  many  others,  Thibaut  for  example,  are  its
zealous  friends.  The  meaning  of  their  being  called  the  historical
school  is  simply  this,  that  they  agree  with  Bentham  in  thinking
that  law  should  be  founded  on  an  experimental  view  of  the
objects  and  objects  of  law,  and  should  be  determined  by  general
^ty,  not  drawn  out  from  a  few  arbitrary  assumptions  d  priori
caDed  the  law  of  nature. '  A  fitter  name  for  them  would  be  the
inductive  and  tUUitarian  school.

Another  strange  objection  made  by  Savigny  to  codification
is  this :  He  assumes  that  it  is  bad,  because  its  effect  would  be
to  make  the  necessary  defects  of  the  law  more  visible ;  so  that
persons  knavishly  inclined  might  avail  themselves  of  the  bad
parts  of  the  law  to  injure  other  people.  This  is  a  mere  repetition
of  the  old  argument  for  law  taxes,  that  they  check  litigation.  It
womes  that  the  law  is  inevitably  uncertain,  and  that  no  attempt
fihould  be  made  to  secure  rights,  lest,  by  the  abortive  attempt,
biaves  should  be  apprised  of  their  hopeless  insecurity. The


68o  Law:  Sources  and  Modes.

Lbot. obiection  moreover  conflicts  with  itself ;  for  if  the  defects  of  the
'^^ law  are  rendered  more  conspicuous  by  codification,  codification
must  tend  to  cure  those  defects. If  they  are  made  to  stand
out more clearly by codification, this must tend to their
correction.

Another  argument,  which  none  but  those  who  know  the
Germans  can  appreciate,  is  this :  that  if  a  code  could  be  made
mechanically  and  without  any  difficulty  at  all,  this  would  be  a
reason  for  rejecting  it. An  assumption  that  difficulty  is  good
for  its  own  sake. The  merit  of  removing  the  difficulty  is  great,
ergo  it  is  inferred  that  a  code,  if  it  can  be  made  easily,  cannot
be  good. Such  an  argument  from  such  a  man  may  well  appear
astonishing. But  the  truth  seems  to  be  that  Savigny's  dislike
to  the  codification  is  not  the  effect  of  his  own  arguments,  or  of
any  arguments,  but  of  a  natural  antipathy  to  the  French  (who
were  long  hated  in  Germany  because  they  behaved  infamously
there),  transferred  by  a  natural  association  from  the  French  to
their  code,  and  from  the  French  code  to  all  codes. There  is  no
more  striking  example  how  rash  it  is  to  argue  from  a  man's
absurdity  on one  occasion to prove his general  incapacity.
Savign/s  argument,  even  as  against  codification  in  Germany
itself,  is  null. It  rests  on  the  assumption  that  men  competent
to  the  task  cannot  be  found :  but  this  he  only  assimies,  not
proves ;  and  it  is  inconsistent  with  his  own  admission  of  the
desirableness  of  a  code,  provided  it  do  not  attempt  to  include
future  cases :  but  to  make  such  a  code  as  he  is  willing  to  admit,
would  be  nearly  as  difficult  as  to  make  that  which  he  rejects.
Further,  he  himseK  proposed  that  a  complete  and  systematic
exposition  of  German  law  should  be  executed  by  the  jurisconsnltB
of  Germany ;  and  anticipates  great  advantage  from  this  work,  if
entrusted  to  competent  hands. But  the  difficulty  of  systematic-
ally expounding  the  law  is  evidently  equal  to  the  difficulty  of
codifying  it. A  code  is  merely  an  exposition  sanctioned  by  the
supreme  legislator  and  by  his  will  converted  into  law.

Before  I  quit  the  subject  of  codification,  I  shall  just  remark
that  one  advantage  not  generally  adverted  to  would  flow  from
it: an  improvement  in  the  character  of  the  legal  profession.
If  the  law  were  more  simple  and  scientific,  minds  of  a  higher
order  would  enter  into  the  profession,  and  men  in  independent
circumstances  would  embrace  it,  who  are  now  deterred  by  its
disgusting  character ;  for  disgusting  it  really  is. What  man  of
literary  education  and  cultivated  intellect  can  bear  the  absurdity
of  the  books  of  practice,  for  example :  and  many  other  parts  of


Codification.  6  8 1

?  Nothing  but  a  strong  necessity,  or  a  strong  detennina-  Lbct.
•  get  at  the  rationale  of  law  through  the  crust  which
it,  could  carry  any  such  person  through  the  labour.  But
law  were  properly  codified,  such  minds  would  study  it ;
t  might  then  look  for  incomparably  better  legislation,  and
ur  administration  of  justice,  than  now.  The  profession
not  be  merely  venal  and  fee-gathering  as  at  present,  but,,
ncient  Bome,  would  be  the  road  to  honours  and  political
ance.  Much,  no  doubt,  of  the  drudgery  of  the  profession
still  be  performed  by  persons  aiming  only  at  pecuniary
,  but  the  morality  prevailing  in  the  entire  profession
be  set,  in  a  great  degree,  by  this  high  part  of  it,  which
also  comprise  the  practical  legislators  of  the  community,
ould  be  a  highly  important  consequence  of  the  simpli-
i  of  the  law:  for  I  am  fully  convinced  that  only
'.nlightened  and  experienced  lawyers  is  any  substantial
ement  of  the  law  ever  to  be  hoped  for.


Lectures  on  Jurisprudence.


ON LAW

CONSIDERED WITH REFERENCE TO

ITS  PURPOSES,

AND TO THE

CTS  WITH  WHICH  IT  IS  CONVERSANT:

AND, IN PARTICULAR, OP THE

)F  THINGS  AND  THE  LAW  OF  PERSONS  OR  STATUS.


LECTURE  XL

— At  the  time  of  the  publication  of  the  former  edition  of  these Lect.
it  was  supposed  by  their  late  editor  that  this  Lecture  had  been ^^
ibly  lost ;  and  in  a  note  announcing  the  unavoidable  hiatus,  it  was

n  hardly  hope  that  any  member  of  Mr.  Austin's  class  still  possesses
bis  course.  But  if  any  such  memoranda  are  in  existence,  I  should
lyself  under  a  great  obligation  to  any  gentleman  who  would  permit
I  them. — S,  A  J

is,  I  believe,  in  answer  to  this  appeal,  that  the  very  full  and  clear
the  Course  of  Lectures  preserved  by  Mr.  John  Stuart  Mill  were
I  by  him  for  the  use  of  the  late  Mrs.  Austin.  These  notes  have  now
ated  with  the  former  edition  for  the  purpose  of  the  present  revisal,
3  most  fortunate  that  the  present  Lecture,  which  commences  the
leading  division  of  the  main  part  of  his  subject,  can  be  supplied
)urce  so  reliable.

y  further  remark  here,  that  the  extent  of  the  hiatus  in  this  place
fully  known  to  the  late  editor.  The  latter  part  of  Lecture  XXXIX
printed),  containing  the  greater  part  of  the  author's  remarks  upon
on,  and  entirely  omitted  from  the  Lectures  as  formerly  published,
J.  S.  M.'s  notes  the  matter  of  an  entire  Lecture  of  more  than  usual
The  recovery  of  this  Lecture  is  at  the  present  time  also  peculiarly
.— R.C.


AW  considered  with  reference  to  its  sources,  and  to  the
r  in  which  it  begins  and  ends,  I  pass  to  law  considered
sference  to  its  purposes,  and  to  the  subjects  about  which
)nversant.


684  Law  :  Purposes  and  Stdyects.

Lect.  The  first  great  distinction  of  Law  considered  under  this


aspect,  is  the  celebrated  one  into  the  Law  of  Persons  and  the
Law  of  Things ;  or  (as  I  think  it  ought  to  be  stated)^  the  Law
of  Things  and  the  Law  of  Persons.

This  distinction  may  be  stated  generally  (as  I  have  stated  it
in  my  Outline)  as  follows : —

'  There  are  certain  rights  and  dtUies,  with  certain  eapadiies
and  incapacities  to  take  rights  and  incur  duties,  by  which  pemm,
as  subjects  of  law,  are  variously  determined  to  certain  dosses,

'  The  rights,  duties,  capacities,  or  incapacities,  which  dete^
mine  a  given  person  to  any  of  these  classes,  constitute  a  eonditm
or  status  which  the  person  occupies,  or  with  which  the  person  is
invested.

'  One  and  the  same  person  may  belong  to  many  of  the
classes,  or  may  occupy,  or  be  invested  with,  Tnany  conditions  or
status.  For  example,  one  and  the  same  person,  at  one  and  the
same  time,  may  be  son,  husband,  father,  guardian,  advocate,  or
trader,  member  of  a  sovereign  number,  and  minister  of  that
sovereign  body.  And  various  status,  or  various  conditions,  may
thus  meet  or  unite  in  one  and  the  same  person,  in  infinitelj
various  ways.

*  The  rights,  duties,  capacities,  and  incapacities,  whereof  con-
ditions or  stattis  are  respectively  constituted  or  composed,  are
the  appropriate  matter  of  the  department  of  law  which  common^
is  named  the  law  of  persons — Jus  quod  ad  Personas  perUnd,
Less  ambiguously,  and  more  significantly,  that  department  of
law  might  be  styled  the  "  Law  of  Status."  For  though  the  teim
persons  is  properly  synonymous  with  the  term  status,  such  is  not
its  usual  and  more  commodious  signification.  Taken  with  its
usual  and  more  commodious  signification,  it  denotes  homo,  a  num
(including  woman  and  child);  or  it  denotes  an  aggregate  or  collec-
tion of  men.  Taken  with  its  usual  and  more  commodious  signi-
fication, it  does  not  denote  a  status  with  which  a  man  is  invested.

'  The  department,  then,  of  law,  which  is  styled  the  Law  of
Persons,  is  conversant  about  status  or  conditions ;  or  (expressing
the  same  thing  in  another  form)  it  is  conversant  ahont  persons
(meaning  men)  as  bearing  or  invested  with  persons  (meaning
status  or  conditions),

'  The  department  of  law  which  is  opposed  to  the  Law  of
Persons,  is  commonly  named  the  Law  of  Things ;  Jus  quod  ad
lies  pcrtinet,*^

^  Outline,  pp.  40,  41,  vol.  L  ante.


Law  of  Things. — Law  of  Persons.  685

This  most  obscure  and  obscuring  expression  may  be  explained Leot.
tt  follows : —  ^ ^ >

Eti^  in  the  language  of  the  Boman  law,  has  two  principal
meanings.  It  denotes,  in  the  first  place,  things,  properly  so
called,  together  with  persons,  octa,  and  forbearances,  considered  as
the  subjects  and  objects  of  rights  and  duties.  These  are  called
by  the  Boman  jurists  res  corporales,  which  they  define  materia
ntfi  mtjeda,  in  qud  jura  versantv/r  ;  ea  quoe  juri  nostra  affiduntur,
jm  tanquam  materia  ei  smU  proposita.  In  the  second  sense,  res
denotes  what  are  termed  by  the  same  jurists  res  incorporates ;
which  they  define  ea  qv/B  ad  jura  pertinent;  ut  jus  hasreditatis,jus
tkndi  fnufndi,jus  servitutis,  obligationes  quocunque  Toodo  contractor.

This  division  of  things  into  corporeal  and  incorporeal,
tangible  and  intangible,  sensible  and  insensible,  arose  from  a
tendency  which  I  formerly  pointed  out,  in  the  Boman  jurists,  to
import  into  their  legal  system  the  terms  and  distinctions  of  the
Gieek  philosophy.  In  the  philosophy  of  the  Stoics,  the  words
kngiUe  and  intangible  were  equivalent  to  sensible  and  insensible.
Tonqible  was  not  confined  to  objects  perceptible  by  the  sense  of
tOQch,  but  extended  to  aU  objects  perceptible  by  the  senses.
htangible  meant  not  perceptible  by  the  senses.  By  the  Epi-
eareans,  the  same  words  appear  to  have  been  used  in  a  sense
precisely  equivalent,  as  is  proved  by  the  well-known  line  of
Lucretius :  Tangere  enim  et  tangi,  nisi  corpus,  nvlla  potest  res ;
where  the  context  proves  that  he  is  not  speaking  only  of  the
Bense  of  touch,  but  of  perception  by  any  of  the  senses.

The  application  of  the  term  corporeal  things  to  the  subjects
and  objects  of  rights  and  duties,  and  of  the  term  incorporeal
AMigs  to  rights  and  duties  themselves,  is  remarkably  unhappy.
For  though  some  of  the  former  are  corporeal,  others  are  as
incorporeal  as  rights  and  duties  themselves.  Such,  for  example,
aie  forbearances,  which  are  the  objects  of  innumerable  rights ;
bot  forbearances,  far  &om  being  sensible,  are  mere  negations  of
ictions  in  pursuance  of  desires  and  intentions.  Accordingly,
nothing  can  be  more  inconsistent  than  the  language  of  the
Boman  lawyers.  They  begin  by  limiting  things  corporeal  to
(kiiigs  properly  so  caUed :  that  is,  to  those  permanent  extemai
<iiect8  which  are  not  persons,  considered  as  the  subjects  and
objects  of  rights,  and  to  persons  considered  from  the  same  aspect.
These  are  doubtless  corporeal.  But  in  the  details  of  their
treatises  the  same  jurists  include  in  the  terms  res  corporales,  the
objects  of  obligationes  {stricto  sensu);  as,  for  instance,  of  the
obligations  arising  from  contracts.

VOL.  IL  N


686  Law  :  Purposes  and  Stdjects.

In  English  law,  we  find  the  same  useless  and  Tnifllflm^ing
jargon,  and  employed,  as  usual,  still  more  inconsistently ;  for  in
English  law  the  word  incorporeal  is  applied,  not  to  all  rights
and  duties,  but  to  certain  hereditaments.  Hereditaments  are
divided  into  corporeal  hereditaments  and  incorporeal  heredita^
ments.  But  if  the  hereditament  mean  the  rigJU  itself,  that  is
always  incorporeal,  not  less  in  the  case  of  what  are  called
corporeal  than  what  are  called  incorporeal  hereditaments.

If  the  hereditament  mean  the  subject  of  the  right,  the  subject
of  an  incorporeal  hereditament  is  as  corporeal  as  the  subject  of
a  corporeal  hereditament.  For  instance,  a  right  to  tithes  is  an
incorporeal  hereditament,  and  the  right  is  incorporeal ;  but  so  is
the  landlord's  right  to  the  estate  itself;  yet  that  is  called  a  cor-
poreal  hereditament  The  subjects  of  both  rights  are  the  same:
the  land  itself,  or  its  produce ;  which  are  of  course  ooipoieaL
The  distinction,  in  short,  is  totally  unmeaning.  It  cannot  be
expounded  accurately  by  abstract  and  general  terms.  In  oider
to  know  what  is  an  incorporeal  hereditament,  it  is  necessaiy  to
go  through  the  whole  list  of  the  rights  which  the  law  marks
with  that  name. They  have  no  properties  in  common  whateveL

Now,  since  the  Law  of  Persons  means  the  law  of  status  or
conditions,  and  since  res  signifies  rights  and  duties,  the  Law  of
Things  was  probably  so  called  for  the  following  reason : — ^Being
conversant  with  rights  and  duties  as  abstracted  from  conditions
or  status,  or  being  conversant  with  rights  and  duties  considered
in  a  general  or  a1:]^tract  manner,  it  was  caUed  the  Law  of  Things;
or  the  Law  of  Incorporeal  Things :  that  is,  the  department  ct
law  relating  to  rights  and  duties  generally,  or  to  all  rights  and
duties  except  those  constituting  statiis  or  conditions.

The  Law  of  Things  in  short  is  The  Law — the  entire  corpus
jwris ;  minus  certain  portions  of  it  affecting  peculiar  classes  of
persons,  which,  for  the  sake  of  commodious  exposition,  are
severed  from  the  whole  of  which  they  are  a  part,  and  placed  in
separate  heads  or  chapters.  Such  was  most  probably  the  origin
of  the  name,  which  would  be  of  little  moment  if  the  expression
had  not  given  rise  to  many  absurd  speculations  on  the  appropiiate
subjects  of  the  two  departments.

The  Law  of  Persons,  then,  is  that  part  of  the  law  which
relates  to  status  or  conditions.

The  Law  of  Things,  like  the  Law  of  Persons,  relates  to  rights
and  duties,  but  to  rights  and  duties  considered  generally  and  in
the  abstract ;  exclusively  of  the  rights  and  duties  which  are  the
constituent  elements  of  conditions  or  stains. That  such  was  the


Status.  687

general  conception  of  the  distinction  by  the  Boman  jurists,  is Lbot.
manifest  from  the  order  adopted  in  the  Institutes. The  second v ^ .
book  of  the  Institutes  opens  with  words  to  this  effect :

'Having  treated  of  the  Persons,  let  us  now  treat  de  rebus!
It  then  proceeds  to  divide  res  into  corporales  and  incorporales,
tnd  then  treats  of  rights  and  duties  under  their  various  sub-
divisions.

It  is  absurd  to  suppose  that  the  Law  of  Persons  can  peculi-
idj  relate  to  persons,  meaning  homines  or  human  beings ;  or  the
Liw  of  Things  to  things,  in  the  proper  sense  of  the  term.  They
bA  relate  to  rights  and  duties  which  reside  in  or  are  incumbent
iqpon  men.  Each,  therefore,  relates  to  persons  in  that  proper
WDse  of  the  term,  quite  as  much  as  the  other.  Many  rights  and
dnties  treated  of  in  the  Law  of  Persons  relate  to  things  properly
ao  called :  as,  for  instance,  an  estate  in  land  belonging  to  a
aanied  woman :  and  many  rights  and  duties  treated  of  in  the
Uir  of  Things  have  no  regeurd  to  things  proper :  as,  for  instance,
die  light  arising  &om  an  obligation  to  forbear  imder  a  contract

Much,  therefore,  of  the  Law  of  Persons  relates  to  things
properly  so  called,  while  much  of  the  Law  of  Things  does  not.

The  distinction,  therefore,  between  the  Law  of  Things  and
tile  Law  of  Persons  rests  upon  the  notion  of  stattts  or  condition.
Ihe  Law  of  Things  is  the  law ;  the  corpus  juris,  minus  the  law
q{  status  or  conditions.  The  Law  of  Persons  is  the  law  of  status
cr  conditions,  detached  for  the  sake  of  convenience  from  the
Iniy  of  the  entire  legal  system.

The  question,  therefore,  which  first  arises  is  this :  What  What  con-
constitutes  a  status  or  condition  ?  luuus,  or
The  notion  is  not  capable  of  being  fixed  with  perfect  exact-  condition.
0688. There  are  sets  of  rights  and  duties,  capacities  and  in-
capacities, which  one  person  might  deem  to  constitute  status  or
CQ&ditions,  while  another  might  refer  them  to  the  Law  of  Things.

After  the  best  consideration  which  I  have  been  able  to  give  The  dis-
'■ to  the  subject,  and  after  an  extensive  examination  of  the  opinions  ^et^n
rf  others,  I  still  find  no  mark  by  which  a  status  or  condition  can  the  rights
ke  distinguished  from  any  other  collection  of  rights  and  duties. Opacities*
The  sets  of  rights  and  duties,  or  of  capacities  and  incapacities,  ^^,  ipca-
iiaerted  as  status  in  the  Law  of  Persons,  are  placed  there  merely  ^gtdtut-
bi  the  sake  of  commodious  exposition. The  same  reason  retains  ^^S  ^
^Hsjij  important  sets  of  rights  and  duties,  which  might  form  any  other
itiany  so-called  status  or  conditions,  in  the  Law  of  Things.  d^^^

The  sets  of  rights  and  duties  called  condition  or  status  have  pacities
Ho  common  generic  character  which  determines  what  a  status  or  p^j^^"


688


Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.


Lect.
XL

not  SOS-
ceptible  of
any  strict
definition.

No  generic
chancter
common  to
them  all ;
but  they
bear  the
following
marks:
1.  Thejr
reside  m
an  indi-
Tidoal  as
belonging
to  a  class.


2.  The
rights  and
duties
capacities
and  inca-
pacities,
constitut-
ing a

commonly
impart  to
the  party
invested
with  them
a  conspicu-
ous char-
acter, and
have  an
extensive
influence
over  his
social  rela-
tions.
This  not
a  certain
mark  of


3.  They

regard

specially


condition  is.  Certain  sets  of  rights  and  duties  are  detache
convenience  from  the  body  of  the  legal  system,  and  these  «
rights  and  duties  are  styled  statvA  or  conditions.

Speaking,  however,  generally,  the  rights  and  duties  capa
and  incapacities  which  constitute  staJtvjs  or  conditions,  bea
following  marks : —

First :  universally,  or  nearly  universally,  a  staJbuA  or  con(
resides  in  the  party  who  is  invested  with  it,  as  being  a  mc
of  a  cfows  of  persons,  not  as  being  that  very  individual  p
Singvlar  or  peculiar  rights  may  be  conferred  on  a  party
privilege,  or  duties  or  incap6U)ities  may  be  laid  upon  a  partj
privilege  ;  but  these  are  not  considered  as  forming  a  conditi
staius  with  which  he  is  invested.  The  reason  of  this  sec
caprice  has  been  given  in  a  note  to  my  Tables.  It  is  o
the  purpose  of  a  body  of  law  to  insert  in  it  rights  or  c
peculiarly  affecting  given  individuals.  The  party  asserting
rights,  or  endeavouring  to  enforce  these  duties,  is  obliged  to
the  special  act  of  the  sovereign  legislature  which  confeir
imposed  them;  the  claimant  must  prove  the  rights  conj
upon  him  by  the  privilege  as  he  would  prove  his  rights  ud
special  contract  A  privilege  is  rather  a  peculiar  title  i
general  law  of  which  the  tribunals  take  notice.

Secondly :  the  rights  and  duties  capacities  and  incapfl
which  constitute  a  status  or  condition,  are  commonly  consid<
in  number  and  various  in  kind ;  or,  at  least,  are  commonlj
siderable  in  number;  so  much  so  as  to  impart  to  the
invested  with  them  a  conspicuous  character,  and  affect  fa
most  or  many  of  his  social  relations.

Such  are  the  rights  and  duties  capacities  and  incapacit
husband  and  wife,  parent  and  child,  guardian  and  ward,  s
and  slave,  of  an  alien,  an  insane  person,  or  a  magistrate,
of  these  sets  of  rights  and  duties  modify  extensively  the  vi
relations  to  his  fellow-creatures  of  the  party  invested.

But  this  is  no  certain  mark  for  distinguishing  a  stai
condition.  For  the  sake  of  commodious  arrangement  a
rights  or  duties,  of  no  considerable  importance,  might  be  det
from  the  body  of  the  law  and  placed  in  a  chapter  apart
ing  at  the  ends  of  the  distinction  between  Law  of  PersoB
Law  of  Things,  any  set  of  rights  and  duties  may  be  pla<
the  Law  of  Persons,  if  it  regard  specially  a  doss  of  perse
whom  it  resides,  or  on  whom  it  is  incumbent

Thirdly:  the  rights  and  duties  capacities  and  incap
constituting  statiis  or  conditions,  regard  specially  the  cl


Status.  689

ersons  by  whom  the  status  or  condition  is  borne. There  are Lect.

XT

^ts  and  duties  capacities  and incapacities  which  have  no v
pedal  regard  to  any  peculiar  class. Such,  for  example,  are  the  t^e  class  of
^ts  and  duties  which  the  law  has  annexed  to  contracts ;  or  the  ^^SaUi/
apadty  to  enter  into  a  contract,  whether  as  promisor  or  promisee.  ^^'^^  '^
ifith  the  exception  of  a  few  classes  of  persons  who  are  legally
mable  to  enter  into  contracts,  or  who  can  do  so  only  in  a
palified  manner,  the  rights  and  duties  arising  &om  a  contract
nay  attach  to  persons  of  any  cldss. But  there  are  also  rights
ind  duties  capacities  and incapacities  which  regard  peculiar
lasses  of  persons. Such,  for  instance,  are  the  incapacities  of
ofiBUits  and  married  women ;  the  peculiar  rights  of  masters  and
ervants,  of  bankrupts,  of  magistrates,  of  soldiers,  and  of  other
lasses  of  persons  in  indefinite  variety. It  is  true  that  these
lights  and  duties  capacities  and  incapacities  also  regard  persons
f  other  classes  in  so  far  as  they  happen  to  be  related  by  special
IBS  to  persons  of  these  peculiar  classes. For  example,  if  you
ontract  with  an  infant,  the  consequences  of  the  contract  to
iNiis^  are  modified  by  his  peculiar  status  or  condition  and  the
icapacities  which  constitute  it Still,  though  these  rights  and
Qties  capacities  and  incapacities  do  not  regard  exdusivdy  persons
f  the  particular  class,  they  do  specially  regard  such  persons.
Lnd  here,  if  anywhere,  will  be  foimd  the  rationale  of  the  dis-  This  last
inction  between  the  Law  of  Things  and  the  Law  of  Persons.  ^J^^°^'

o  stance  con-

whenever  a  set  of  rights  and  duties  capacities  and  incapacities  stitutes
^ards  specially  and  constantly  one  class  of  persons,  every  person  «;« oFthiT
(f  that  class  has  a  status  or  condition,  composed  of  those  special  distinction
ights  and  duties  capacities  and  incapacities. But  those  rights  the^w
ind  duties  capacities  and  incapacities  which  have  no  peculiar  o^  Things
regard  to  any  peculiar  class,  are  matter  for  the  Law  of  Things.  La^  of
Fhat  such  is  the  import  of  the  distinction,  as  it  is  commonly  Persons.
irawn,  I  would  not  afl&rm ;  but  such  it  must  be,  if  the  distinction
tnean  anything  determinate.

On  the  whole,  then,  the  marks  of  a  status  or  condition  are
these: — First,  it  resides  in  a  person  as  member  of  a  dass.
Secondly,  the  rights  and  duties  capacities  and  incapacities  com-
posing the  status  or  condition,  regard  or  interest  specially  th^
peraons  of  that  class.  Thirdly,  these  rights  and  duties  capacities
ind  incapacities  are  so  considerable  in  number,  that  they  give  a
xmspicuous  character  to  the  individual,  or  extensively  influence
lis  relations  with  other  members  of  society.  This  last  property
B,  I  think,  not  essential :  and  would  not  be  regarded  in  a  body
f  law  rationally  constructed.


690


Lect.
XL


An  objec-
tion an-
swered.


The  class
most  be
such  as
from  its
nature
cannot  in-
clude all
or  nearly
all  persons.


Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

Having  stated  the  distinction  between  the  Law  of  Things
and  the  Law  of  Persons,  I  shall  proceed  to  state  what  appear  to
me  to  be  the  uses  of  the  distinction :  the  statement  of  which  will
throw  additional  light  upon  its  natwn.  But  I  have  first  an
observation  to  make.

Any  rights  and  duties,  not  dngvlar^  or  peculiar  to  a  specific
or  determinate  individual,  are  properly  determined  to  a  rfa»  of
persons.  For  example,  the  rights  and  duties  arising  from  a  con-
tract, are  determined  to  the  class  of  carUractors.  The  rights  and
duties  arising  from  a  mortgage,  are  determined  to  the  dass  of
mortgagors,  and  to  that  of  mortgagees.  If  we  liked,  we  mi^
place  the  rights  residing  in,  and  the  duties  incumbent  upon,,
these  classes  of  persons,  in  the  jits  personarum,  and  deem  tbem
to  constitute  statiis  or  conditions.

But  we  must  consider,  in  order  to  clear  up  this  difiBculty,
that  classes  of  persons  are  of  two  kinds :  first,  classes  which
might  comprise  persons  of  any  description,  or  nearly  so;  no
persons  being  necessarily  excluded,  except  some  classes  laboniing  ^
under  a  special  incapacity  which  would  itself  constitute  a  status:  J
secondly,  classes  which  can  only  comprise  persons  of  one  giv®  e
description. For  example,  whatever  be  his  other  characteis,  any
person  may  be  a  contractor. None,  except  persons  who,  being
under  twenty-one  years  of  age,  are  infants  by  the  English  law,  j^
are  under  incapacity  to  contract. Rights  and  duties  belongmg  \
to  the  Law  of  Things,  are  of  a  large  and  miscellaneous  claflB,  r
having  no  special  regard  to  peculiarities  of  position ;  they  regard  1
equally  all  persons,  except  persons  in  a  special  position,  and  under  i
a  peculiar  incapacity. The  rights and  duties, for  instance,  !
which  arise  out  of  a  contract,  regard  all  contractors,  and  thou^ '■
contractors  are  a  special  class,  there  is  scarcely  any  person  who
may  not  belong  to  that  class. I  ought,  therefore,  to  have  added
to  the  distinguishing  mark  of  a  status,  that  the  class  itself  mnflt
not  be  such  that  it  may  comprise  any,  or  nearly  any,  person
whatever. Classes  possessing  a  status  or  condition  are  dasses
which  can  only  comprise  a  part  of  the  community ;  as  husband*
and  wives,  masters  and  servants,  parents  and  children ;  any  or
all  of  whom  may  be promisors for  promisees,  mortgagors  or
mortgagees,  contractors,  and  so  on.

This  observation  is,  I  think,  an  answer  to  Mr.  BentiaiB»
who,  I  am  forced  to  admit,  appears  to  me  to  be  inconsistent
and  obscure  in  all  he  says  on  this  subject  The  difficulty  of
dealing  with  the  word  class,  on  account  of  its  ambiguity,  creates
the  whole  difficulty  of  the  case. By  taking  the  word  dass  in


Law  of  Things. — Law  of  Persons.  69 1

its  widest  sense,  we  might  throw  the  whole  body  of  law  into Lbot.
the  Law  of  Persons :  but  that  was  not  the  object  of  those  who .
luLve  taken  the  distinction :  they  wished  to  separate  the  rights
and  duties  specially  affecting  portions  of  the  community  from
Tights  and  duties  of  more  general  interest.

I  now  proceed  to  the  uses  of  the  distinction.  Uses  of  the

The  Law  of  Things  is  that  department  of  the  corpus  jvnis  ^^^
which  r^ards  rights  and  duties  capacities  and  incapacities,
considered  in  a  general  or  abstract  manner :  that  is  to  say,  as
abstracted  firom  the  rights  and  duties  capacities  and  incapacities
constituting  conditions  or  statvA.  The  Law  of  Persons  is  that
department  of  the  entire  body  of  law  which  is  concerned  with
conditions  or  status.

Now,  although  the  idea  of  status  or  condition  is  essential

or  necessary,  and  must  exist  in  every  body  of  law,  the  division

of  the  corpus  juris  into  Jus  Personarum  and  Jus  Rerum  is  not

flBsential  or  inevitable It  is  adapted  as  being  commodious;

18  being  a  good  basis  for  the  arrangement  of  the  corpus  juris.

fiat  it  is  easy  to  conceive  arrangements  founded  on  principles

altogether  dissimilar. The  main advantages of  this division

leem  to  me  to  be  these.

First :  m  the  Law  of Things,  or  the  Law  of  Things  In-  1.  Repeti-
corporeal,  or the Law of  Eights  and Duties,  or The Law  ^°^f"^
generally,  all  which  can  be  affirmed  of  rights  and  duties  con-  quemt  vol-
aidered  generally,  or  as  abstracted  from  status  or  condition,  is  Jl^^^'
atated  once  for  aU. One  advantage,  therefore,  of  the  division  is  avoided.
that  it  is  productive  of  brevity:  again,  the  general  rules  and
principles  with  which  the  Law  of  Things  is  properly  or  directly
concerned,  are  preserved  detached  and  abstracted  from  every-
thing peculiarly  relating  to  particular  classes  or  persons;  they
are,  therefore,  presented  more  clearly  than  if  they  were  inter-
spersed with  that  more  special  matter. Each  rule  or  principle
is  apprehended  more  easily  and  distinctly  than  if  the  modifica-
tions which  it  receives  from that  more  special  matter,  were
appended  or  annexed  to  it. Being  brought  together  more  closely,
their  mutual  relation  and  dependency  is  more  easily  perceived.
The  brevity,  therefore,  which  this  division  of  the  corpus  juris
produces,  tends  also  to  its  clearness. For  example,  the  rights  and
duties  which  constitute,  and  are  annexed  to  an  estate  in  fee,  or
property  in  a  personal  chattel ;  the  rights  and  duties  arising  from
contracts,  or  from  delicts,  are  stated  much  more  clearly  than  they
could  be  if  they  were  presented  as  modified  by  the  peculiar
lights,  or  the  pecidiar  incapacities,  of  married  women  or  of  infants.


692  Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects*

Leot.  Secondly:  by  distinguishing  such  parts  of  the  law  1

V ^ ^  peculiar  to  particular  classes  from  the  parts  which  are  coi

2,4The  and  of  universal  application,  and  by  placing  the  former

kw  speci-  &  peculiar  head,  or  appending  them  to  the  body  of  the  1

ally  aflFect-  a  separate  chapter,  the  matter  peculiar  to  every  particular

liardafises,  is  rendered  easy  of  reference. The  distinction  is  thus  att<

rendered  /qj.  yjrould  be  attended,  if  its  principle  were  steadily  ad

more  ac- ^  ^  r r  j

cessible to)  with one great and indisputable advantage, whicl

^iiS^" rational advocates of codification have most insisted

The  law,  I am  satisfied,  can  only  be  known  extensive]

lawyers;  but  every class  of  persons might  know,  to  a

siderable extent,  the parts of  the  law specially  relatii

themselves. To  this  end,  those  special  provisions  must  n

interspersed  through  the  whole  body  of  the  law,  but  mu

placed  by  themselves  under  a  peculiar  head. This  head

again comprise  under  itself  many  other  smaller  heads

example,  the  head  'Trader'  might  be  divided  into  a  varie

subordinate  heads,  to  facilitate  the  knowledge  of the  n

peculiarly  affecting  each  class  of  traders ;  and  might  thu

in  little,  what  the  corpus  juris,  on  a  larger  scale,  ought  to  1

Identity  of This  plan  of  collecting  imder  separate  heads  such  poi

sioninto ^^  ^^®  ^^^  ^  ^^®  peculiar  to  special  or  particular  class

Law  of strongly  and  justly  recommended by  Bentham. His  ge

and^w code, as distinguished from his proposed special code

^^-fh^^^  bodies  of  law  specially  relating  to  particular  classes,  is  ii

Bentham's  the  jvs  rerum,  or  Law  of  Things,  of  the  classical  Boman  ji

diyiaion jf  Bentham  had  ever  given  to  the  Eoman  law  the  atte

into  Gene-  °

ral  and it  well  deserves,  he  would  have  found  that  his  own  distic

^P?^ precisely  tallied  with  that  which  he  rejects  with  immea£

and  what,  in  spite  of  my  veneration  for  Mr.  Bentham,  I

call  ignorant,  disdain. His  mistake  is excusable,  becaus

had  never  read  the  Eoman  law  itself,  and  only  imderstooc

distinction  as  it  was  distorted  and  travestied  by  Sir  Wi

Blackstone, who,  misunderstanding the ambiguous  word

actually  translates  Jura  personarum  and  jura  rerum  the  1

of  persons  and  the  rights  of  things! It  is  a  strong  presum

in  favour  of  the  distinction,  that  Mr.  Bentham  by  his  unasj

invention  arrived  at  it;  for  he  certainly  did  not  derive  it

the  Boman  law.

Two  other  Instead  of  this  division,  there  are  many  other  diviaio

^I^Q^g the  corpus  juris  which  might  be  adopted. I  shall  briefly  a

oftheCor-  to  two  of  these  possible  divisions,  because  they  may  ser

pu8  ur%8. ^^^g|JJ^|^  ^^^  Qf  which  I  have  been  treating.


Law  of  Things. — Law  of  Persons.  693

First ;  t<he  head  jm  rerum  might  be  rejected,  and  the  whole Lbct.


ody  of  the  law  divided  into  special  codes,  heads,  or  chapters,
ff^opriate  to  peculiar  classes  of  persons. The  inconvenience
if  this  would  be,  that  the  matter  which  is  common  or  universal
n  has  no  special  relation  to  any  peculiar  class,  must  be  in-
serted under  every  head. In  efifect,  each  of  the  special  codes
voold  consist  of  the  whole  of  the  common  matter,  plus  the
matter  specially  referring  to  the  peculiar  class. The  repetitions
of  the  general  matter  would  be  as  numerous  as  the  special
classes ;  and  consequently  the  bulk  of  the  whole  body  of  law
would  be  truly  immense. By  adopting  the  division  into  Jus
Berom  and  Jus  Personarum,  the  description  of  the  common
iDatter  is  disposed  of  at  once. No  inconvenience  arises  from
tbe  separation:  each  of  the  particular  codes  is  equally  complete;
the  fiacility  to  persons  belonging  to  any  special  class,  of  re-
&rring  to  the  whole  of  law  affecting  them,  is  as  great:  the
only  difference  is,  that  they  must  look  for  it  under  two  heads
or  chapters  instead  of  one;  which  is  no  increase  of  the  trouble.
For  example,  an  infant  is  about  to  enter  into  a  contract :  the
infiint  or  the  person  designing  to  contract  with  him  refers  to
the  chapter  on  infants  to  find  in  what  manner  the  statiLS  of  an
in&nt  modifies  the  general  provisions  of  the  law  on  the  subject
d  contracts;  and  if  this  is  not  intelligible  to  hJTT^  he  refers  to
the  title  '  Contracts '  in  the  General  Code. The  operation  is
analogous  to  the  logical  process  of  laying  a  species  on  a  genus.
By  adding  the  properties  peculiar  to  the  species,  to  those  com-
mon to  the  genus,  we  obtain  the  whole  essence  of  the  species,
or  all  the  properties  belonging  to  it. The  general  matter  which
fonns  the  jus  rerum,  is  related to  the  matter  of  the  several
chapters constituting the  jura  personamm,  as  the  genera  of
logicians  are  related  to  the  species  imder  them. By  the  generic
name  all  the  properties  which  are  common  to  all  the  species
ornarrower  classes  included  in  the  genus,  are  marked  at  once;
the  peculiar  properties  of  each  species  are  marked  afterwards
by  specific  names. So  in  the  jus  rerum,  the  rights  and  duties
capacities  and  incapacities common  to  all  parties,  or  which
have  no  peculiar  reference  to  any  separate  class,  are  described
wice  for  all ;  and the rights  and  duties  capacities  and  in-
capacities which  refer  peculiarly  to  classes  of  persons,  are  placed
in  codes  or  chapters  respectively  appropriated  to  those  classes.
In  each  operation  there  is  a  sort  of  classification  or  of  ab-
straction ; in  each  the  effects  are  comprehension  brevity  and
clearness.


^


694  Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

Not  to  exaggerate,  however,  the  efiect  of  this  separation
of  the  body  of  law  into  the  General  Code  and  a  number  of
special  Codes,  in  rendering  the  law  cognoscible,  I  must  observe
that  a  complete  knowledge  of  any  of  these  separate  parts  im-
plies a  knowledge  of  the  jfUA  rerwm  of  which  they  are  ouly  a
modification,  and  requires  therefore  a  knowledge  of  that  immense
whole  which  it  modifies. In  the  example  which  I  have  already
made  use  of,  that  of  an  infant  entering  into  a  contract,  it »
obvious  that  we  must  know  the  general  nature  of  contracts,
and  the  rights and  duties  annexed  to  them,  to  enable  us  to
know  in  what  manner  those  rights  and  duties  are  modified  bj
the  peculiar  stai/w^  of  an  infant

A second possible division is the following : — ^The  )w
personarwm  might  be  rejected,  and  the  sets  of  special  provisions
relating  peculiarly  to  special  classes,  not  collected  under  appro-
priate chapters,  but  appended  to  the  more  general  provisions
which  they  modify  and  control. For  example,  under  the  head
of  husband  and  wife,  we  find  the  provision  specially  affecting
married  persons,  detached  from  the  description  of  the  right  of
property  and  the  effects  of  contracts  in  the  General  Coda But
the  special  chapter  might  be  expunged,  and  the  special  matter
which  it  contains  might  be  appended  to  that  general  description.
On  this  principle  of  arrangement  the  Code  might  be  as  condae
as  on  the  esteemed  and  ancient  one  of  the  classical  jurists. Bnt
brevity  and  clearness  in  the  exposition  of  the  general  principka
would  be  lost; for  to  every  principle,  all  the  modifications  it
receives  from  the  peculiar  position  of  every  particular  class  must
be  appended ;  and  the  peculiar  law  of  each  class  being  scattered
everywhere  through  the  Code,  the  class  could  not  easily  find
their  own  peculiar  law,  but  must  pick  it  out  bit  by  bit;  not
finding  it  collected  to  their  hands.
The  divi-  The  division  into  jus  personarum  and  jus  rerum  combines  the

La^  of  advantages  of  both  these  adverse  methods.  Like  the  one,  it
Things  enables  all  classes  to  find  easily  the  law  peculiarly  affecting
of  Persons  themselves ;  like  the  other,  it  presents  in  a  coimected  series
preferable those  principles  of  the  law  which  are  common  to  all  classes.

to  either.  r r

The  difl.  These,  however,  are  not  so  much  the  advantages  which  the
tinction  division  has  produced  as  those  it  wovld  produce  if  its  principles
^jtl^Mid  ^®^®  clearly  and  strictly  pursued.  By  the  Soman  lawyers,  as
consist-  for  example  in  the  Institutes,  the  special  law  of  particular  classes
lowed  out  ^  often  placed  in  the  Law  of  Things :  and  the  same  in  Black-
ly ito  stone,  in  the  French  Code,  and  in  almost  all  the  other  compila-
tions of  lawyers. Hence  the  question  has  been  much  agitated.


Law  of  Things. — Law  of  Persons.  69S

bether  the  jtis  personarum  of  the  Eoman  lawyers  was  properly  Leot.
le  law  of  status  (or  the  description  of  the  rights  and  duties,  ^
ipacities  and  incapacities  constituting  status) ;  or  merely  a
BBcription  of  the  facts  or  events  by  which  status  is  invested  or
ivested.  Whether  for  instance,  under  marriage  all  the  rights
nd  duties  peculiarly  affecting  husbands  and  wives,  were  intended
0  be  inserted,  or  merely  marriage  itself,  the  incident  by  which
ihe  status  arises,  with  the  modes  by  which  marriage  may  be
lissolved.  The  truth  is  that  the  authors  of  the  distinction  have
not  been  consistent  Sometimes  they  inserted  in  the  jus  person-
drum  descriptions  of  the  rights  and  duties  composing  the  status,
while  in  other  cases  they  simply  described  the  investing  and
divesting  facts,  reserving  the  description  of  the  rights  themselves
for  the  Law  of  Things.

If,  therefore,  we  take  the  distinction  not  as  it  would  exist
if  its  principle  were  steadily  and  consistently  pursued,  but  as  it
stands  ia  all  existing  bodies  of  law,  it  is  impossible  to  describe
it  with  precision  and  clearness.  But  if  the  Law  of  Persons  is
ticily  the  law  of  status  or  conditions,  that  is,  of  the  classes  of
onditions  which  for  commodious  exposition  are  kept  out  of  the
AW  of  Things,  the  distinction  is  clear.  Sometimes  matter  which
light  be  placed  in  the  Law  of  Persons,  is  inserted  in  the  Law
f  Things  for  the  same  purpose,  convenience  of  exposition.  Why
»r  instance  should  not  heir,  or  executor,  or  administrator  be  a
fUus,  as  well  as  husband  and  wife  ?  Sir  Matthew  Hale  actually
laces  in  the  Law  of  Persons  the  relation  of  ancestor  and  heir ;
it  by  a  strange  inconsistency  places  the  law  of  executors  and
Iministrators  in  the  Law  of  Things.  But  perhaps  it  answers
itter  the  purpose  of  commodious  exposition,  to  append  this  part
:  the  law  to  the  general  principles  which  it  modifies.

To  describe,  then,  the  distinction  as  it  exists  in  any  particu-
ir  body  of  law,  is  to  describe  the  whole  arrangement  of  the
rrpus  juris,  and  to  assign  the  reason  why  every  part  of  it  is  in
liat  particular  place.  This  is  not  relevant  to  the  purpose  of  my
resent  course.


LECTUEE XLT.

STATUS. ^ERKONEOUS DEFINITIONS EXAMINED.

1  «y-—

r  my  last  Lecture,  I  endeavoured  to  explain  the  import  of  the XLI*
sdnction  between  the  Law  of  Persons  and  the  Law  of  Things.
Endeavouring  to  explain  the  import  of  the  distinction,  I  lation.


^


696  Law :  Purposes  and  Stibjects.

Lk^t.  stated  the  meanings  of  the  obscure  and  obscuring  expressions
'jus  personarum'  and  'jus  rerum:'  or  (in  the  language  of  the
classical  Eoman  jurists)  '  jus  ad  persanas  pertinens,  et  jus  ad  res
pertinens/  And  I  also  stated  the  import  of  the  distinction,  as  it
was  conceived  in  general  by  those  who  devised  it:  namely  the  same
Classical  Jurists  in  their  elementary  or  institutional  treatises.

Having  explained  the  import  of  the  distinction,  and  cleared
up  the  terms  in  which  it  is  usually  expressed,  I  proceeded  to
illustrate  its  nature,  by  shewing  its  purposes  and  uses.  I  shewed
that  the  distinction  is  purely  arbitrary :  or  that  the  distinction
was  devised  by  its  authors,  to  facilitate  the  arrangement  and
exposition  of  the  corpus  juris,  or  entire  body  or  system  of  positive
law.  I  showed  that  the  arrangements  which  are  built  on  the
distinction  (or  which  might  be  buUt  on  the  distinction),  are
probably  the  most  commodious  of  which  the  corpus  juris  will
admit  And  I  shortly  contrasted  the  arrangements  which  aie
built  on  this  distinction,  with  certain  possible  arrangements
founded  on  other  principles.

The  Law  of  Persons  being  the  Law  of  Status,  and  the  Law
of  Things  being  the  Law  minus  the  Law  of  Status,  it  is  clear  that
the  distinction  between  the  Law  of  Persons  and  the  Law  of
Things,  turns  upon  the  notion  of  Status  or  Condition,  or  upon
the  notion  of  person  as  meaning  status  or  condition.  The  sets
of  rights  or  duties,  capacities  or  incapacities,  which  are  deemed
status,  conditions,  or  persons,  are  detached  from  the  bulk  of  the
legal  system,  and  placed  in  a  peculiar  department  styled  the
Law  of  Persons  :  Or  certain  sets  of  rights,  etc.  are  detached  ficom
the  bulk  of  the  legal  system  and  placed  in  that  peculiar  depait-
ment,  and  are  styled  therefore  status,  conditions,  or  peisons.
And  the  bulk  of  the  legal  system,  mimis  these  staiiis  or  condi-
tions, is  distinguished  by  the  name  of  '  the  Law  of  Things,'  from
that  peculiar  department  to  which  conditions  are  banished.

*I  have  remarked'  (observes  Savigny,  in  the  treatise  on
which  I  commented  the  other  evening),  *  that  the  ideas  o{jusin
rem  et  jus  in  personam  (or  dominium  et  ohligatio)  are,  in  the
Eoman  Law,  all-pervading  ;  "  uberalleingreifend.'*  ^  And  the
same  remark  will  apply  to  the  idea  of  status :  for  on  the  idea  of
status  the  distinction  between  the  Law  of  Persons  and  the  Law
of  Things  is  founded.'

Accordingly,  I  endeavoured  in  my  last  Lecture  to  determine

^'  '.  .  .  .  wie  wichtig  and  iiberall-  Dasselbe  mlt  von  Begriff des  Status

einffreifend im romischen  Rechte die  Hier  nun  liegt  die  Unterscheidung  Ton

hochst bcstimmte Beffriffe von dinfij-  Personenrechten  and  ^M^enrechten  zom

lichen  Rechten  and  Obligationen  sind.  Orande.'— Savigny,  VomBentf,ete,'p,96,


Definitions  of  Status  criticised.  697

the  notion  of  status. Or  (rather)  I  endeavoured  to  shew  that  the Ijwr-
notion  cannot  be  detennined  with  a  close  approach  to  precision : ^ ^ ^
that  certain  sets  of  rights  or  duties,  or  cap£U)ities  or  incapacities,
are,  for  the  sake  of  commodious  arrangement,  detached  from  the
body  of  the  law,  and  placed  in  a  peculiar  department :  and  that
to  Uiose  sets  of  rights,  etc.,  which  for  the  sake  of  arrangement
ind  exposition  it  is  found  convenient  thus  to  detach,  the  name
of  status  is  applied,  or  is  more  particularly  applied.

I  now  will  examine  certain  definitions  of  status,  with  certain  Certain
definitions  of  the  distinction  founded  on  the  idea  of  staius,  which,  a^J^tions
in  my  opinion,  are  thoroughly  erroneous,  and  have  engendered  o^  the  idea
much  of  the  obscurity  wherein  the  idea  and  the  distinction  are  and  of  the

inyolved.  ^^^^^^

According  to  a  definition  of  sta^ttis,  which  now  (I  think)  is  on  that
exploded,  but  which  was  formerly  current  with  modem  civilians,  ij^^^^"
'Status  est  qualitas,  cujus  ratione  homines  diverse  jure  utuntur/  peraon-
'Exempli  gratia,'  (adds  Heineccius,) '  alio  jure  utitur  liber  homo ;  SJJ*^^,!^
iKo,  servus;  alio,  civis;  alio,  peregrinus.'®*  First  erro-

Now  a  given  person  bears  a  given  condition  (or,  in  other  ^^on:*
words,  belongs  to  a  given  class),  by  virtue  of  the  rights  or  duties,  suum  an
the  capacities  or  incapacities,  which  are  peculiar  to  persons  of  ^^ty
that  given  kind  or  sort Those  rights  or  duties,  capacities  or  (^^®™
incapacities,  are  the  condition  or  status  with  which  the  person
iB  clothed. They  are  considered  as  forming  a  complex  whole :
And,  as  forming  a  complex  whole,  they  are  said  to  constitute  a
Milts  which  the  person  occupies,  or  a  condition,  character,  or
ftrson,  which  the  person  bears.

But,  according  to  the  definition  which  I  am  now  considering,
die  rights  or  duties,  capacities  or  incapacities,  are  not  themselves
the  staius :  but  the  staius  is  a  quality  which  lies  or  inheres  in
die  given  person,  and  of  which  the  rights  or  duties,  capacities
or  incapacities,  are  merely  products  or  consequences.

The  definition  (it  is  manifest)  is  merely  a  <xLse  of  the  once
current  jargon  about  occult  qualities.  Wherever  phenomena  were
oomiected  in  the  way  of  cause  and  efiect  (or  of  customary  ante-
eedence  and  sequence,  or  customary  coexistence),  it  was  usual  to  im-
pute the  so-called  effect  (not  to  the  customary  antecedent,  or  to
the  customary  coexistent),  but  to  an  occult  quality,  or  occult  pro-
perty, which  was  supposed  to  intervene  in  the  business  of  causation«

**  '  Homo  et  pentma  ^^rammatice  sunt  pore  homano :  ast  persona  est  homo  cum

fysonyma,  at  jmidice  differunt. Omnis  statu  suo  consideratus.  Quiitaquestatum

Qiddem  penona  homo  est,  sed  non  omnis  non  habet,  is  nee  est  persona.' — Heineccii

ooBM)  est  penona. Hotjm  est,  quicumque  MeeitationeSf  lib.  L  tit.  8.
babet  mentem  ratione  pr»ditun  in  cor-


698  Law:  Purposes  and  Subjects.

LxoT.  For  example :  In  the  case  of  volition  followed  by  action  <nr


XLI


forbearance  (which  I  analysed  in  a  former  lecture),  the  antecedent
desire  or  aversion,  with  the  consequent  action  or  forbearance,
are  really  the  only  entities.  But,  this  notwithstanding,  a  certain
entity  styled  the  will  (or  a  certain  willing  will),  is  supposed  to
be  the  cause  of  the  desire  or  aversion  which  is  truly  the  caiue
or  antecedent  of  the  consequent  suction  or  forbearance.

In  the  case  of  a  condition  or  staivA,  the  occult  quality  (if  it
mean  anything)  is  the  fact  or  event  from  which  the  condition
arises :  that  is  to  say,  through  or  by  which,  or  raiwiu  cujus,  the
party  bears  the  rights,  or  i&  subject  to  the  duties,  of  which  the
condition  is  composed.  In  the  case,  for  example,  of  the  correlat-
ing conditions  which  are  borne  by  husband  and  wife,  the  occult
quality  (if  it  mean  anything)  is  the  fact  of  the  marriage :  For
through  or  in  consequence  of  the  marriage  (or  rcUione  qm)  the
parties  to  the  marriage  contract '  diverso  jure  utuntwr  ;*  that  is
to  say,  they  cu*e  clothed  with  the  rights  and  capacities,  and
subjected  to  the  duties  and  incapacities,  which  Hiflf;ingnii>h
husbands  and  wives  from  persons  of  other  classes,  or  which
constitute  the  staius  or  conditions  borne  by  husbands  and  wive&

But,  not  content  with  this  homely  account  of  the  matter,
the  scholastic  jurists  imagined  a  fictitious  entity  intervening
between  the  condition  and  the  fact  engendering  the  condition:
'  qualitas  ratione  cujus  homo  diverso  jure  tUitur:'  an  occcdt
quality  inhering  in  the  given  person,  by  virtue  whereof  he  is
clothed  with  distinguishing  rights,  or  is  subjected  to  distinguish-
ing duties.  And  to  this  fictitious  entity  (and  not  to  those  rights
or  duties,  or  to  the  fact  which  begets  them),  these  scholastic
jurists  gave  the  name  of  status.

Before  I  dismiss  the  definition  which  I  am  now  considering,
I  will  remark  that  the  qualitas  in  question  (assuming  its  exist-
ence), will  not  distinguish  a  status  or  condition  from  another  set
or  collection  of  rights  or  duties.  If  the  rights  or  duties  which
constitute  a  status  or  condition  spring  from  an  occult  qualit7
Ijdng  in  the  person  who  bears  it,  every  right  or  duty  must  spring
from  a  similar  quality  in  the  person  who  is  clothed  with  the
right,  or  on  whom  the  duty  is  incumbent  For  example :  An
estate  in  fee-simple,  or  an  estate  for  life  or  years,  is  not  the  effect
or  consequence  of  the  descent  from  the  deceased  ancestor,  or  of
the  conveyance  or  demise.  It  is  clearly  the  effect  or  consequence
of  a  certain  occult  quality  which  lies  in  the  tenant  in  fee  or  the
tenant  for  life  or  years.  It  springs  from  an  estate-in-fee-giving
quality,  or  an  estate-for-life  or  an  estate-for-years-giving  quality,


Definitions  of  Status  criticised.  699

rhich  resides  in  the  party  who  is  clothed  with  the  right  or Lect.
nteiest. As  (in  the  scholastic  philosophy)  a  house  was  burnt .  ^^
by  fire,  or  a  block  split  by  a  wedge,  through  a  certain  house-
burning  quality,  or  a  certain  block-splitting  quality,  which  in-
hered in  the  fire  or  the  wedge. It  is  pertinently  asked  by
Thibaut,  who,  with  his  usual  perspicacity,  detects  the  absurdity
of  the  definition,  wherein  the  inlying  quality  of  a  husband  or
goazdian  can  consist,  unless  it  consists  in  the  fact  of  the  marriage,
or  in  the  acceptance  by  the  guardian  of  the  proffered  wardship?^
And  if  the  marriage  or  acceptance  constitute  an  occult  quality
inhering  or  lying  in  the  husband  or  guardian,  must  not  a  similar
quality  reside  in  every  party,  who,  by  a  contract,  or  by  any
other  fact,  acquires  any  right,  or  is  subjected  to  any  duty.

The  supposition  that  a  stains  is  a  quality  inhering  in  the
puty  who  bears  it,  has  every  fault  which  can  possibly  belong
to  a  figment  The  supposed  quality  is  merely  fictitious.  And,
admitting  the  fiction,  it  will  not  serve  to  characterise  the  object,
for  the  purpose  of  distinguishing  which,  the  fictitious  quality
was  devised.

It  is  remarkable  that  Bentham  (who  has  cleared  the  moral
aoences  from  loads  of  the  like  rubbish)  adopts  this  occult
qoality  under  a  different  name.  In  the  chapter  in  the  Trwiiis
ii  Legislation,  which  treats  of  Etats  (or  of  statibs  or  conditions),
he  defines  a  status  thus :  '  Un  ^t  domestique  ou  civil  n'est
fiwM  base  idtale,  autour  de  laquelle  se  rangent  des  droits  et  des
devoirs,  et  quelquefois  des  incapacit^s.'^

Now  this  bcLse  icUale  (which  is  distinct  from  the  rights  or
duties  constituting  the  condition,  and  also  from  the  fact  or  event
\tj  which  the  condition  is  engendered)  is  clearly  the  fictitious
quality  (expressed  in  another  shape)  which,  according  to  the
scholastic  jurists,  forms  the  status.

And  the  error  is  the  more  remarkable,  inasmuch  as  Bentham
in  the  next  sentence  but  one,  tells  us,  with  perfect  correctness,
that '  connaitre  un  ^tat,  c'est  connaitre  s^par^ment  les  droits  et
les  devoirs  qui  y  sont  r^unis :'  implying  that  a  status  or  condition
is  nothing  fictitious  or  ideal,  but  a  lot  of  rights  or  duties  marked

^  Der  Begriff  vom  Statu  (sensu  stric-  anheischig  mache,  ein  Mandat  zu  tiber-

fe)  lit  to  rag,  daas  er  alien  Unterschied  nehmen  ?  als  wenn  ich  erklare,  ein  £rb-

twimhen  jus  persoTiarum  nnd  rerum  auf-  schaft  haben  zu  wollen  u.  s.  w.  ? — Thi-

hitbL fFodureh  entaUht  die  QtuUiUU,  dcus  bant,  Versuche,  vol.  ii.  p.  19.

iemsnd  Tutor,  Magi^rat,  oder  Ehenumn  ^  ^itat :  A  collective  name  for  the  ac-

ittt Doch  dorch  nichts  anders,  als  da-  tual  and  possible  rights  and  obligations

lueht  das8  er  die  Wiirde  und  Tutel  uber-  of  some  given  person,  and  for  su^  inca-

limmt,  nnd  die  Ehe  achliesst Ist  diess  pacities  and  exemptions  as  he  may  lie

nehr  in  der  Person  liegende  Qualitat,  under  or  ei^joy. — Marginal  Note  in  Ben-

la  wean  ich  mich  durcn  einen  Vertrag  (ham,  TraiUs,  etc.  voL  i.  p.  294.


700  Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

Lbot.  by  a  collective  name,  and  bound  by  that  name  into  a  oomple:

XLI  -^ .  ^  ^

v__^  aggregate.


I  will  briefly  remark,  before  I  proceed  to  the  next  topie
that  the  status  consists  of  the  peculiar  righJts  or  dvJties  (or  th
peculiar  capacities  or  incapacities),  and  not  of  the  fact  or  evm
which  is  mediately  or  immediately  their  legal  cause  or  antecedent
For  example:  The  peculiar  rights  and  duties  of  husband  ad
wife,  and  not  the  marriage  from  which  they  arise,  constitute  Hn
correlating  conditions  borne  by  the  two  parties.

The  absurd  definitions  of  statvs  which  I  have  examined
probably  arose  from  neglect  of  the  very  obvious  truth  whidi
I  now  have  suggested.

Through  an  ellipsis  (or  an  abridged  form  of  expression)  m
ascribe  the  rights  or  duties  which  constitute  a  stattis  (not  to  tfai
fact  or  event  which  engendered  the  status,  but)  to  the  very  gtatm
of  which  they  are  constituent  elements.  We  talk,  for  examph
of  an  action  ex  statu,  or  of  a  right  of  action  founded  on  a  statui^
meaning  in  truth  (if  we  speak  with  a  determinate  meaning  f
right  of  action  arising  from  the  fact  by  which  the  stains  wai
begotten.  For  the  right  of  action  being  parcel  of  the  status,  k
not  the  legal  consequence  of  the  status  itself,  but  (with  the  real
of  the  status  of  which  it  is  parcel)  is  the  legal  consequence  d
the  fact  from  which  the  status  arises.

The  authors,  therefore,  of  the  absurd  definitions  in  question
naturally  reasoned  thus :  '  The  fact  or  event  from  which  a  staim
arises,  is  not  the  status  itself.  Nov  is  status,  conditio,  or  persona,
a  collective  name  for  an  aggregate  of  rights  or  duties :  inasmuch
as  rights  or  duties  are  styled  "  ex  statu,"  or  are  said  to  bo  con-
sequences of  status.  Consequently,  there  must  be  a  tertium  quii
(distinct  from  the  fact,  on  the  one  hand ;  and  from  the  rights  or
duties,  on  the  other),  of  which  those  rights  or  duties  are  prodadi
or  eflfects.  But  what  is  that  tertium  quid  t  Why,  clearly,  an
occult  quality  lying  or  inhering  in  the  person  by  whom  the  stefttf
or  person  is  said  to  be  borne  or  sustained.'

I  will  also  remark,  before  I  proceed  to  the  next  topic,  that
the  rights  or  duties  which  are  constituted  elements  of  a  staJtiOt
are  of  two  kinds,  l**.  Those  which  arise  solely  from  the  very
fact  or  event  by  which  the  party  was  invested  with  the  condition.
2°.  Those  which  arise  from  the  fact  or  event  coupled  witk
another  and  a  subordinate  fact  or  event.  For  example:  lli«
right  of  the  husband  or  wife  to  the  consortiu/m  or  company  (A
the  other  (either  against  the  other,  or  against  third  persons  ox


Definitions  of  Status  criticised.  yo  i

nngeis),  is  a  right  which  arises  solely  from  the  mere  fact  of  Leot.
le  marriage.  But  a  right  or  interest  of  either  in  goods  or  land  .  ^  .
oquired  by  the  other,  is  the  joint  result  of  the  caiLsa  or  fact  by
lideh  the  goods  or  land  were  acquired,  and  of  the  marriage
bMl£  From  that  acquisitive  fact,  the  right  of  the  husband  or
rife  in  the  goods  or  land  arises :  By  virtue  of  the  marriage,
bt  right  or  interest  is  so  modified,  that  a  right  or  interest  in
he  same  subject  accrues  to  the  other  of  the  two  parties.

Bights  or  duties  which  arise  solely  from  the  fact  engendering
he  condition,  are  said  to  arise  ex  statu  immediatd.  Those  which
Dae  from  the  fact  engendering  the  condition  coupled  with
■other  and  subordinate  fact,  are  said  to  arise  ex  statu  mediate
9te  latter  are  also  said  to  arise  from  those  capacities  or  abilities
ihich  are  immediate  consequences  of  the  fact  engendering  the
Mndition.  For  without  the  intervention  of  the  particular  and
■boidinate  fact,  the  fact  engendering  the  condition  does  not
■gender  the  particular  right  or  duty :  It  merely  engenders  a
wgmtj  or  ability  to  take  or  incur  a  right  or  duty  of  the  kind,
i  ease  a  particular  or  subordinate  fact  of  the  kind  shall  happen
le  intervena  For  example :  By  the  marriage,  the  husband
JKoordii^  to  the  law  of  England)  is  clothed  with  a  capacity  or
Iktty  to  acquire  choses  in  action  belonging  to  the  wife.  But,
■order  that  he  may  really  acquire,  in  pursuance  of  that  capacity
t  ability,  two  particular  facts,  subordinate  to  the  fact  of  the
Bimage,  must  necessarily  intervene:  namely,  the  acquisition
If  the  wife  of  a  chose  in  action,  and  the  reduction  into  possession
J  ihe  husband  of  that  same  chose  in  action.

Rights  which  arise  solely  from  the  fact  engendering  a  con-
tion  (or  rights  which  arise  ex  statu  immediate),  are  closely
ialogous  (as  I  shall  shew  in  my  next  lecture)  to  the  rights
^h  are  styled  by  Blackstone  *  absolute  rights,'  and  which  are
fled  commonly  '  naiv/ral  or  innate  rights.'

The  only  diflference  between  them  is  this :  The  former  are
i^oXb  which  arise  solely  &om  the  fact  engendering  a  condition :
le  latter  are  rights  which  arise  solely  from  the  fact  of  the  party
ho  bears  them  being  imder  the  protection  of  the  state.  By
me  writers,  accordingly,  absolute  rights,  or  natural  or  innate
i^bts,  are  styled,  aptly  enough, '  rights  arising  sine  speciaii  tUvlo!
Bie  only  objection  to  the  phrase  is  this :  that  it  applies  to  rights
jiQsiiig  ex  statu  immediati,  as  well  as  to  those  more  general  (and,
[TDdeed,  imiversal)  rights,  which  are  styled  natural  or  inborn.

According  to  the  definition  of  a  status  which  I  now  have  Second

vrvT  T,  ^  erroncoas

^oun,  0


702


Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.


Lect.
XLI


definition :
'Gonse-
quences  of
tne  same
investi-
tive  fact '
(Ben-
tham).


If


examined,  a  staius  is  an  occult  quality  inhering  in  the  person  who
bears  it :  Or  it  is  an  ideal  basis  on  which  the  rights  or  duties,
capacities  or  incapacities,  really  constituting  the  status,  rest  or
repose.

In  the  chapter  in  the  Traits  de  Z^islation,  which  treats  of
£tats  (or  of  statiis  or  conditions),  there  is  the  following  passage:

Having  said  very  truly,  that  '  connaltre  un  ^tat,  c'est  can-
naitre  s^par^ment  les  droits  et  les  devoirs  qui  y  sont  r^unis,'
Bentham  goes  on  to  ask, '  mais  quel  est  le  pnncipe  d'union  qui
les  ressemble,  pour  en  faire  la  chose  factice  qu'on  appelle  un  M
ou  une  condition  V  And  to  the  question  which  he  thus  suggeed^
he  gives  the  following  answer :  '  Cest  Tidentit^  de  r^v^iemeot
investitif,  par  rapport  k  la  possession  de  cet  itai*

It  may  (I  think)  be  inferred  from  this  answer,  that,  in  Benr
tham's  opinion,  the  following  are  the  teds,  or  distinguidmi
marks,  of  a  status,  condition,  or  person.

1.  A  status  is  Si  set  OT  collection  of  various  rights  or  datifli>
or  of  various  capacities  or  incapacities  to  take  or  incur  rights  or
duties.  2.  The  rights  or  duties  which  are  its  constitaenfc  Ji
elements,  are  legal  effects  or  consequences  of  one  investitive  bat,
of  one  title  or  mode  of  acquisition,  or  (in  the  usual  language  of  ^
the  Boman  lawyers)  of  one  causa  or  antecedent.  It  is  the  ftd
of  their  springing  from  a  common  source,  or  the  fact  of  tiieir
arising  in  common  from  am  antecedent  or  causa,  which  makfli
them  the  collective  whole,  or  the  complex  aggregate,  styled  t
siaJtus  or  condition.

Now  it  certainly  is  true,  that  a  status  is  a  s^  or  coUectum  of
various  rights  or  duties.  And  it  certainly  is  also  true,  that  the
rights  or  duties  which  are  its  constituent  elements,  are  kgd
effects  or  consequences,  mediately  or  immediately,  of  one  and
the  same  title  or  investitive  fact  or  event  The  status,  fiv
example,  of  husband  or  wife,  is  a  set  or  collection  of  vanooi
rights  and  duties,  and  various  capacities  and  incapacities:  AH
which  rights  and  duties,  capacities  and  incapacities  arise  from
the  status,  mediate  or  immediati:  that  is  to  say,  they  axJaay
mediately  or  immediately,  from  the  one  fact  of  the  marriage,  or
from  the  on£  title  or  causa  by  which  the  status  is  engendered.

But  though  these  two  properties  belong  to  every  status,  they
are  not  tests  or  characters  of  a  status,  or  will  not  distinguish  sUM
or  conditions  from  those  rights  and  duties  which  are  matter  for
the  Law  of  Things.

For,  first,  these  properties  belong  to  every  of  the  aggregate
which  are  styled  by  modem  civilians  universitates  Juris :  that  ii


Definitions  (t/*  Status  criticised.  703

to  say,  complex  sets  or  collections  of  rights  or  duties.  And  Le(t.
though  every  statvA  (which  is  not  purely  burthensome)  may  be
deemed  a  univemUas  juris,  there  are  many  of  these  universities
which  are  not  esteemed  statiLs  ;  but  are  always  inserted  (and,  I
Aink,  properly)  in  that  general  department  of  the  law  which  is
ifyled  the  Law  of  Things.

The  abrogate,  for  example,  of  the  rights  and  duties  which
piflaes  by  testament  or  intestacy  to  the  general  representative  of
%  deceased  person,  has  never  been  deemed  a  status  or  condition,
bat  has  always  been  considered  as  part  and  parcel  of  the  bulk
of  the  legal  systenL  In  the  institutional  writings  of  the  Eoman
hwyers,  in  the  French  and  Prussian  codes,  and  in  every  system-
itic  code  (or  every  systematic  exposition  of  a  corpus  juris)  of
wUch  I  have  any  knowledge,  the  rights  and  duties  of  heirs  (or
of  universal  successors  to  deceased  persons)  are  placed  in  the
fu  rerwm  and  not  in  the  jus  personarum.  And  by  our  own
Hale  and  Blackstone  (the  only  syste;natic  expositors  of  our  own
wrpusjuris)^  the  rights  and  duties  of  the  executor  and  adminis-
tmtor  (who  are  properly  the  hoeres  testamerUarius  and  the  hceres
bfitimus  of  the  Boman  Law)  are  inserted  in  the  general  depart-
Bent  which  they  style  the  rights  of  things,  and  not  in  the
ifiedal  and  exceptional  department  which  they  style  the  rights
i  persons.  By  Hale,  indeed,  in  his  analysis  of  the  law,  the
ij^ts  and  duties  of  the  heir  (who,  in  some  respects,  though  not
i&  all,  is  successor  universalis)  are  placed,  inconsistently  enough,
in  the  Law  of  Persons,  as  well  as  in  the  Law  of  Things.

Now  the  aggregate  of  rights  and  duties,  which  devolves  by
hstament  or  intestacy  to  the  general  representative  of  a  deceased
jerson,  has  both  the  properties  (although  it  never  is  deemed  a
Matus  or  condition)  by  which,  in  Bentham's  opinion,  a  status  or
Condition  is  characterised  For  it  is  a  56^  or  collection  of  various
t^ts  and  duties  (and  a  set  or  collection  extremely  complex  or
Qranpoeite).  And  the  rights  and  duties  which  are  its  constituent
Blements,  are  consequences,  mediately  and  immediately,  of  one
md  the  same  title :  namely,  of  the  testament,  and  the  acceptance  of
9ie  heritage  by  the  testamentary  heir  or  representative ;  or  of  the
fiomplex  title,  or  complex  mode  of  acquisition,  by  which  the  herit-
ige,  in  the  case  of  intestacy,  passes  to  the  legitimate  successor.

And,  secondly,  the  two  properties,  which,  in  Mr.  Bentham's
ipmion,  characterise  a  staius  or  condition,  are  not  even  peculiar
x>  thoee  aggregates  of  rights  and  duties  which  are  styled  by
nodem  civilians  universitcUes  juris.  They  are  foimd  in  most
ft  many  of  those  numerous  rights  or  duties,  which,  as  contra-


704  Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

Lect.  distinguished  to  universities  of  rights  and  duties,  are  deemed
^  particular  or  singular .  For,  as  I  shall  shew  hereafter,  the  differ-
ence between  a  university  or  complex  aggregate  of  rights  or
duties,  and  a  right  or  duty  deemed  particular  or  singular,  is  not
a  difference  which  can  be  described  precisely,  but  is  one  of  the
vague  differences  which  are  styled  differences  of  degree.

Most  rights  and  duties  are  not  in  strictness  singular,  bat
are  complexions  or  aggregates  of  elementary  rights  and  duties.
And  the  difference  between  a  right  or  duty  deemed  singvioT,
and  a  so-called  university  of  rights  and  duties,  merely  lies  in
this :  that  the  former  is  a  less  complex,  and  the  latter  a  moie
complex  lot.

Take,  for  example,  a  right,  always  esteemed  singtdar,  which
is  not  the  most  complex  of  rights  of  that  description :  namely,
the  right  of  dominion  or  property  in  a  specifically  determined
thing :  as,  a  horse,  a  slave,  a  garment,  a  house,  a  field,  or  what
not.  It  is  manifest  that  the  right,  though  deemed  singular,  is
truly  a  collection  or  aggregate  of  rights  of  which  an  adequate
description  would  occupy  a  bulky  volume.  It  consists,  ftr
example,  of  the  right  of  exclusive  user  or  possession ;  of  the  [I
right  of  disposing  or  aliening  totally  or  partially ;  of  rights  rf
vindication,  and  other  rights  of  action,  in  the  event  of  a  distorb-
ance  of  any  of  those  primary  rights :  Each  of  which  rights,  con-
stituting the  right  of  dominion,  may  itself  be  resolved  into  otibtf
rights  which  are  less  complex  or  composite.

Suppose  that  the  thing,  which  is  the  subject  of  the  right  of
dominion,  is  also  pledged  or  mortgaged,  and  you  get  at  a  ri^
in  the  mortgagor  or  mortgagee  which  is  more  complex  stilL  For
each  has  jus  in  rem,  not  less  complex  than  the  simple  right  of
dominion,  coupled  with  rights  in  personam  availing  against  the  \  |
other.  And  yet  this  intricate  right  of  the  mortgagor  or  mort-
gagee, is  deemed  a  singular  or  particular  right,  and  not  «
university  of  rights.

The  two  properties  which,  in  the  opinion  of  Bentham,  charac-
terise a  status  or  condition,  are  therefore  found  in  most  of  the
rights  which  are  deemed  singular  or  particular ;  and  which,  in
every  code,  and  by  every  private  expositor  of  a  corpus  juris,  are
placed  in  the  general  department  styled  the  Law  of  Things.  In
the  case  of  every  right  deemed  particular  or  singular  (excepting
the  elementary  rights,  which,  in  the  last  result,  are  the  constitu-
ents of  all  others),  the  right,  in  truth,  is  not  particular  or  singular,
but  like  a  statics  or  condition,  is  a  collection  of  various  rights:
which  various  rights,  like  the  rights  and  duties  that  are  oon-


Definitions  ^Status  criticised.  705

titaent  elements  of  a  condition,  are  consequences,  mediately  or Lbct.
amiediately,  of  one  title  or  antecedent.  .  ^^^  .

I  have  remarked  above,  that  the  rights  or  duties  which  are  Third  eno-
Bonstituent  elements,  of  a  staius,  are  commonly  divisible  into  nJSon:
two  kinds :  Ist,  those  which  arise  immediately  or  directly  from  iSitohMcon-
the  paramount  and  more  general  title  which  engenders  the  staJt'm :  ^e  divia^
2iidly,  those  which  arise  mediately  from  that  paramoimt  and  ^^*y  o^
more  general  title,  through  subordinate  and  more  special  titles, tion  of

And,  at  the  first  glance,  I imagined  that  this was  the  ?^i*®^i
distiDguishing  mark  of  a  stattis  or  condition. But  I  am  not  those  aris-
me,  that  every  set  of  rights  or  duties,  deemed  a  stattis  or  con-  ^f*^*^"
dition,  is  divisible  in  that  manner. And  I  am  quite  sure,  that  from  the
Drivereities  of  rights  and  duties  not  deemed  conditions,  with  ^^^
lets  of rights or  duties  deemed particular  or  singular,  are  theaggre-
iivisible  in  that  manner:  that  is  to  say,  some  of  the  rights  or  ^J^
hties  composing  the  aggregate  or  set,  arise  immediately  from  a  arising
Kiamount  and  more  general  title  by  which  the  aggregate  or  set  ^^^  tha^
I  itself  engendered:  whilst  others  arise  mediately  from  that  ^^^»
inunount  and  more  general  title,  through  subordinate  and  more  spediS
»ecial  titles.  ^^^

For  example:  All  the  rights  and  duties  of  the  English
:ecator  (who,  as  imiversal  successor,  has  properly  juris  uni-
rntas)  arise  in  a  certain  sense,  fix)m  one  complex  title  :  namely,
le  will  and  probate.  But  some  of  his  rights  and  duties  arise
imediately  and  directly  from  that  his  paramount  and  more
meral  title :  whilst  others  are  not  engendered  by  that  para-
lonnt  and  more  general  title  without  the  intervention  of
Kondary  and  more  special  titles.  Such,  for  example,  are
ghts  arising  from  a  contract  into  which  the  executor  may
ftter,  touching  the  effects  of  the  testator ;  or  a  right  of  action
rising  from  an  injury  done  to  him  in  his  character  of  executor,
nd  not  arising  from  an  injury  done  to  the  deceased.

And  the  rights  which  are  constituent  elements  of  the  right
f  dominion  or  property  (always  deemed  a  singular  or  particular
ig^t)  are  divisible  in  the  same  manner.  Some  arise  from  the
mveyance  (or  from  the  other  title  by  which  the  dominion  is
squired),  immediately  or  directly.  But  others  arise  from  the
tie  by  which  the  dominion  is  acquired,  through  the  intervention
•  a  secondary  or  more  special  title.  For  example :  The  right
'  dominion  comprises  (amongst  numerous  other  rights)  a  right
vindication :  that  is  to  say,  of  restoration  to  the  exercise  of
e  right  of  dominion,  if  the  exercise  be  prevented  by  eviction.


7o6


Lect.
XLI


Fourtli
erroneous
definition :
SieUuscon-
stitntedby
ju8  in  rem
in  the  com-
plexion or
aggregate
ofngnts.


Thibaut's
definition
of  status
criticised.


Law :  Purposes  and  Stibjects.

or  hindered  by  any  disturbance.  But  before  the  right  of  vindi-
cation can  completely  accrue  to  the  daminiLS,  he  must  be  evicted
from  the  possession,  or  otherwise  disturbed  in  the  enjoyment

A  person  clothed  with  a  condition,  or  bearing  a  person  or
character,  heis  fus  in  rem  (or  a  right  availing  against  the  woiM
at  large)  in  the  complexion  or  aggregate  of  the  rights  which  are
constituent  elements  of  the  status.

At  first  I  imagined  that  this  might  distinguish  a  status,  from
the  set  of  rights  or  duties  which  are  not  status.  But,  for  varioos
conclusive  reasons,  I  am  convinced  that  this  jv^  in  rem  over  the
status  itself  is  not  a  character  or  distinguishing  mark  by  which
we  can  determine  what  a  status  is.

The  jus  in  rem  over  the  aggregate  of  the  rights  which  are
constituent  elements  of  a  status,  is  therefore  not  a  character,  or
a  distinguishing  mark  by  which  we  can  distinguish  statua  «
conditions  from  the  sets  of  rights  or  duties  which  are  not  Mha
or  conditions.

For,  1st,  in  purely  onerous  conditions,  the  mark  is  n<?^  to  be
foimd :  a  right  to  a  burthen,  or  to  vindicate  the  enjoyment  of  i
burthen,  being  an  absurdity.

And  2ndly,  the  mark  is  to  be  found  in  universities  of  rightB»
which  have  never  been  deemed  conditions  or  status,  but  ha^
been  placed  by  common  consent  in  the  Law  of  Things.  Sudi,
for  example,  are  the  universities  or  complex  aggregates  of  rights
which  reside  in  the  universal  successors  to  testators  and  intestates.

3rdly,  I  almost  incline  to  think  that  the  same  mark  may  1)6
found  in  many  of  the  sets  of  rights  which  are  deemed  singnltf
or  particular.  E,g,  Eight  of  dominion  would  seem  to  import  a
right  in  the  set  or  collection  of  rights  into  which  dominion  nu^
be  analysed.  When  the  owner  vindicates  his  possession  he
reinstates  himself  in  the  enjoyment  of  many  separate  rights.
And  what  more  is  done  by  an  action  ex  statu,  or  by  any  othtf
action  founded  on  a  juris  universitas  ?

But  to  this  consideration  I  must  revert  hereafter,  and  wiB
not  pursue  it  here.

In  an  excellent  treatise  on  Jus  personarum  et  rerum,  whkh
occurs  in  his  '  Versuche,'  or  Essays,  Thibaut  of  Heidelberg  states
the  import  of  the  distinction  in  the  following  manner.®*

He  says  that  the  department  of  the  corpus  Juris  which  is
styled  jus  personarum,  is  concerned  with  the  differences  betweea
persons :  whilst  that  department  of  the corpus  juris  which  is

^  Thibaut,  Verstiche,  etc.  vol.  ii.  pp.  5,  6,  7,  9,  21.


:


■


Definitions  of  Status  criticised,  707

yled  jfm  rerum,  is  concerned  with  all  other  matters  about  which Leot.
iw  is  conversant,  and  more  especially  about  things  incorporeal, .
r  about  rights  and  duties. This  account  of  the  distinction
ooords  exactly  or  nearly  with  that  account  of  it  which  I  gave
1  my  last  lecture.

But^  I  think,  it  will  not  enable  us  to  determine  with  pre-
isk)D,  the  subject  or  matter  of  the  law  of  persons.

When  he  says  that  this  department  is  concerned  with  the
ifferences  between  persons,  he  means  by  the  term  'persons,'
mines,  or  human  beings,  or  he  means  status  or  conditions.  If
e  means  statvs  or  conditions,  he  is  right  in  saying  that  the  Law
f  Peisons  is  concerned  with  differences  between  persons :  for
is  concerned  with  describing  and  distinguishing  the  various
fUus  or  conditions.  But  this  leaves  the  main  difficulty
itouched.  For  why  are  the  sets  of  rights  and  duties,  which
e  detached  from  the  bulk  of  the  legal  system  and  styled  status
conditions,  so  detached  in  preference  to  others  ?  Or,  in  other
nds,  what  is  the  common  mark  which  severs  the  so-called
Uus  firom  the  sets  of  rights  or  duties  which  have  not  been
sated  as  such  ?

And  if  he  means  by  persons,  homines  or  human  beings,  the
ne  difficulty  presents  itself  in  a  somewhat  different  form.  It
manifest  that  those  differences  hetween  persons,  which  occur  in
B  science  of  jurisprudence  (or  those  classes  of  persons  which
BUT  in  the  science  of  jurisprudence),  are  entirely  founded  on
Serences  between  the  rights  and  duties,  with  and  to  which
isons,  as  meaning  men,  are  invested  and  subjected :  or,  what
mes  to  the  same  thing,  they  are  founded  on  those  differences
itween  the  facts  and  circumstances  touching  or  concerning
bisons,  which  make  it  necessary  to  determine  differently  certain
'  their  rights  and  duties.  Whence,  for  example,  the  class  of
ifants,  or  the  difference  between  infants  and  other  classes  of
ersons  ?  Why,  clearly  from  the  rights,  duties,  and  incapacities,
^hich  are  peculiar  to  infants :  or,  what  comes  to  exactly  the
ame  thing,  from  that  youth  and  inexperience,  incident  to
afancy,  which  renders  it  necessary  to  arm  and  protect  infants
nth  those  peculiar  rights,  duties,  and  incapacities.

This  is  admitted  by  Thibaut  himself :  who  says,  *  The  Law
i  Persons  is  concerned  with  differences  between  persons :  not,
However,  absolutely ;  but  only  in  so  far  as  the  differences  between
peiaons  influence'  their  rights  and  duties.'

Now,  as  I  remarked  in  my  last  Lecture,  there  is  no  right
redding  in  several  persons,  and  no  duty  incumbent  upon  several


70S  Law:  Purposes  and  Sheets.

LioT.  persons,  which  might  not  be  made  the  basis  of  a  dass  of  pereoia
Every  right  or  duty  (excepting  a  right  or  duty  peculiar  to  a
specifically  determined  individual)  might  determine  the  persons
clothed  with  it,  or  the  persons  subject  to  it,  to  a  kind  or  soil
Insomuch  that  the  possible  classes  of  persons  are  as  numerous
as  the  possible  diflferences  between  rights  and  duties.

Why,  then,  are  only  certain  classes  of  persons  made  the
subjects  of  the  Law  of  Persons  ?  Or  (what  is  the  same  ques-
tion put  in  another  form),  why  are  certain  sets  of  rights  and
duties  inserted  in  the  Law  of  Conditions,  whilst  others  aie  not
deemed  conditions,  and  are  not  detached  from  the  bulk  of  the
legal  system  ?

Thibaut  may  probably  mean,  that  the  Law  of  Persons  is  not
concerned  properly  with  status  or  conditions,  but  only  with  tbe
titles  or  facts  by  which  Btaius  or  conditions  are  invested  and  :
divested :  the  description  of  stat'm  or  conditions,  or  of  the  rights  .
or  duties  which  are  their  constituent  elements,  being  remitted  \
to  the  Law  of  Things.  This  question,  on  which  I  touched  in  7
my  last  Lecture,  I  shall  examine  in  my  next  t


Notes.

For  Savigny's  conception  of  the  order  or  method  which  is  observed
by  Gains  and  Justinian  in  treating  the  Law  of  Things,  see  Vom  Brnft
etc,  p.  66.

Vermogensrecht :  i.e,  jus  facvJUUum  ;

the  law  of  righto  and  duties  ;  or
the  law  of  things  incorporeal


The  law  of  *  dingliche  The  law  of  *  Obligationen,'

Rechte,' dominia,  or  jura  in  personam.


jura  %n  rerriy  or  jura
realia.


The  two  passages  in  his  Vom  Beruf,  etc  pp.  98  and  66,  are  un-
fortunately the  only  parts  of  his  works  in  which  Savigny  has  intimated
his  opinion  concerning  the  method  of  the  Institutes.^ — See  (»fe,
p.  696.

The  legal  relations*^  between  private  persons,  apart  from  the

^  These  lectures  were  written  hefore ^^  The  extract  here  made  appears  to

the  publication  by  Savigny  of  his  *  Sys-  have  been  intended  by  the  anther  ratlwr

tern  des  heuti^n  rdmischen  Rechts,'  in  as  a  paraphrase  of  the  passage  in  lUck,

which  this  subject  is  discussed. See  vol.  than  an  expression  of  his  own  views.—

L§69,  p.  398.  R.C.


Status /uriAer  considered.  709

political  sanctions  by  which  those  relations  are  maintained,  is  the Leot.
■Ageet  matter  of  Civil  Law.  ^^I

CSvil  Law.

I


I  I

Liw  relating  To  things  To  obligations,

to  persons.  (/t»  in  re).

The  consideration  of  these  branches  of  Civil  Law,  should  be  pre-
esded  by  a  review  of  the  various  Sfai'm  or  Conditions :  %.t,  of  the
tfisrent  capacUies  of  different  members  of  the  society ;  or,  in  other
finds,  of  the  varying  clusters  of  rights  and  obligations  of  which  they
m  severally  susceptible.

Amongst  the  ancients  the  distinctions  between  the  various  cpndi-
tioiis  were  much  broader  than  amongst  the  modems;  with  whom
ainost  every  legal  incapacity  is  founded  upon  a  corresponding
fhjBcal  one.

Of  the  various  conditions  or  status,  some  are  the  creatures  of
(oivemment ;  others  would  exist  without  government ;  although  the
i^stB  and  obligations  of  which  they  severally  consist  would  in  that
ease  be  merely  moral

These  various  conditions  constitute  the  subject-matter  of  the
bw  which  relates  to  persons;  although  it  is  more  especially  con-
versant with  domestic  or  quasi-domestic  conditions. — Marginal  Nate
n  Fakk,  p.  47,  §  27.

Das  Personen-Eecht  soil  von  den  Verschiedenheiten  der  Personen
landeln;  aber  natiirlich  nicht  unbedingt,  sondem  nur  sofem,  als
liess  anf  die  Yerschiedenheit  der  Kechte  und  Yerbindlichkeiten  £in-
tnis  hat.  Das  Sachenrecht  soil  von  Sachen  handeln,  und  muss  wieder
Q  zwei  Theile,  Lehre  von  den  korperlichen,  und  Lehre  von  den  un-
corperlichen  Sachen,  zerfallen.  Zu  dem  letzen  Theil  gehort  die  ganze
iiiterie  von  den  Kechten  und  Yerbindlichkeiten,  well  diese  Arten
ler  nnkorperlichen  Sachen  sind.  Das  Personen-Recht  soil  sich  also
nit  alien  dem  Juristen  wichtigen  Yerschiedenheiten  der  Personen,
vdche  keine  Kechte  und  Yerbindlichkeiten  sind,  beschaftigen ;  das
3cchenrecht  mit  Sachen,  und  besonders  mit  der  Einen  Art  derselben,
ien  Rechten  und  Yerbindlichkeiten. — Thibaut,  Versuche  iiber  einzelne
Theile  der  Theorie  des  Bechts,  vol.  ii.  p.  6.


LECTURE  XLIL

STATUS  FURTHER  CONSIDERED.


.V  the  Lecture  before  the  last,  I  explained  or  suggested  the Lbct.
aport  of  the  distinction  between  the  Law  of  Persons  and  the
iw  of  Things :  Meaning  by  '  the  law  of  persons,'  the  law  of
Uus  or  conditions,  or  the  law  of  persons  as  denoting  status  or


7 1  o  Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

Leot. conditions :  And  meaning  by  '  the  law  of  things/  the  bulk  or
V ^ . mass  of  the  corpus  juris  as  abstracted  from  staius  or  conditions,
or  the  Law  minus  the  law  of  stcUus.

That  such  (stated  generally)  is  the  import  of  this  celebrated
distinction,  appears  from  the  short  exposition  of  it  which  I  then
gave,  and  also  from  the  passages  from  Savigny  and  Thibant,
which  I  read  in  my  last  lecture.

Having  stated  the  import  of  the  distinction  in  question,  and
adverted  to  the  idea  of  status  (which  is  the  basis  of  the  distinc-
tion), I  proceeded  to  examine  certain  definitions  of  the  distinction
and  of  the  implied  idea  of  status,  which  in  my  opinion  are
erroneous  or  defective,  and  have  engendered  much  of  the
obscurity  wherein  the  idea  and  the  distinction  are  involved.
Fifth  I  now  proceed  to  a  definition  of  statTis  which,  in  my  opinion,

dXtiS^ :  ^  iiot  less  erroneous  than  any  of  the  various  definitions  that  I
Status  a examined  in  my  last  lecture.

abS^^**' According  to  the  definition  of  a  status,^  to  which  I  am  now
(faeuUaa adverting,  a  status  is  a  capacity  or  faculty :  for  in  the  language
f&higkeU). oi  modem  Civilians  (and  of  all  modern  jurists  whose  terms  are
fashioned  on  the  language  of  modem  Civilians),  the  teirm  faeuUf,
though  commonly  denoting  a  right,  also  signfies  a  eapacity\(X
ability  to  take  or  acquire  a  right,  or  to  incur,  or  become  subjed
to,  a  duty. In  the  language  of  the  German  jurists,  who  adopt ,
the  definition  of  a  status  to  which  I  now  am  adverting,  a  «te<«
is  denominated  Hechtsfdhigkeit :  literally,  or  strictly,  a  capacity
or  ability  to  take  or  acquire  a  right ;  but  meaning  a  capacity  or
ability  to  take  or  acquire  a  right,  or  to  incur,  or  become  subject
to,  a  duty. For,  amongst  the  numerous  ambiguities  by  whiA
the German  '  Recht  *  (like  the Latin  *jus ')  is perplexed  and
obscured,  is  this :  that  though  it  signifies  a  right,  it  occasionally
embraces  in  its  comprehension,  a  duty. For  example :  to  succeed
*  in  omne  pis  defuncti,'  is  to  succeed,  by  universal  succession,  or
per  tiniversitaiem,  to  all  the  descendible  duties,  as  well  as  to  all
the  descendible  rights,  of  the  deceased  testator  or  intestate.

A  cai»city  Before  I  remark  on  the  falsity  of  the  definition  to  which  I  now

or  a ity. ^^  adverting,  I  will  briefly  consider  the  nature  of  a  capacity,  or,
as  Hale  and  others  of  our  writers  also  style  it,  an  ability,

A  person  is  capable  of  a  given  right,  or  is  capable  of  a
given  duty,  if,  on  the  happening  of  a  given  event,  the  law  would
invest  the  person  with  that  given  right,  or  would  impose  on  the
person  that  given  duty. A  person  is  incapable  of  the  given  right

•2  Namely,  that  contained  in  Thibaut's  'System,'  voL  i  p.  160,  §  207.


Status — a  Capacity y  etc.  7 1 1

or  duty,  if  on  the  hapipemng  of  the  given  event,  the  law  would  L»ot.
not  invest  him  with  the  given  right,  or  would  not  impose  upon
him  the  given  duty.  A  slave,  for  example,  is  incapable  of  ac-
qmiing  property,  by  conveyance  for  valuable  consideration,  free
gift,  descent,  or  otherwise.  A  freeman  is  capable  of  acquiring
that  right,  by  those  or  other  means.  An  alien,  by  the  law  of
England,  is  incapable  of  taking  land  by  conveyance  for  valuable
OQDsideration,  or  otherwise.  A  native  is  capable  of  acquiring  it,
by  that,  and  other  modes  of  acquisition.  An  adult,  speaking
geoeially,  is  capable  of  incurring  a  duty,  through  an  agreement
to  which  he  is  a  party.  An  infant,  speaking  generally,  is  incap-
able of  incurring  a  duty,  through  an  agreement  to  which  he  is
a  party.

It  is  manifest  that  the  terms  capable  and  incapable  must  be
taken  with  relation  to  the  given  investitive  fact,  as  well  as  to  the
[iven  right  or  given  duty.  For  a  person  incapable  on  one  event,
f  a  given  right  or  duty,  may  be  capable  of  the  right  or  duty  on
he  happening  of  another.  We  may  conceive,  for  example,  that
n  in&nt  though  incapable  of  binding  himself  by  a  naked  contract,
i^t  be  capable  of  binding  himself  by  a  contract  of  the  same
ind,  if,  to  prevent  fraud,  it  were  clothed  with  certain  solemnities.
liongh  incapable  of  incurring  a  given  duty  by  the  contract  alone,
e  yet  might  be  capable  of  incurring  that  very  same  duty,  by
bat  very  same  contract  coupled  with  other  incidents.

The  term  capacity  or  incapacity  is  the  abstract  of  the  term
^pable  or  incapable.  To  have  a  capacity,  is  to  be  capable ;  and
a  be  capable,  is  to  have  a  capacity.  Although  a  capacity  is  not
f  itself  a  right,  a  person  may  have  a  right  in  a  capacity  to  ajcquire
>  right.  Certain  status,  for  example,  are  partly  composed  of
apadties  to  take  rights,  as  well  as  of  actual  rights :  as  others
le  composed,  wholly  or  in  part,  of  incapacities  to  acquire,
fow,  by  the  modes,  direct  or  oblique,  to  which  I  adverted
n  my  last  Lecture,  a  person  may  assert  or  vindicate  a  stains
i  the  former  kind,  or  may  repel  a  statiLs  of  the  latter.  In
ather  of  which  casies  he  reinstates  himself  in  certain  capacities
ts  well  as  in  certain  rights.  A  person,  for  example,  who  is  un-
awfdlly  treated  as  a  slave,  may  repel  the  status  of  slave  by  an
iction,  and  so  recover  the  capacities  which  belong  to  him  as  a
reeman.

And  here  I  would  remark,  that  the  term  capacity  or  ability,
r  incapacity  or  inability,  can  hardly  be  used,  with  perfect
ropriety,  in  relation  to  a  duty.  A  capacity  or  incapacity  to
\eur or became  subject  to a duty,  certainly  sounds  harshly.


712  Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

Lect. Consulting  mere  propriety  of  speech,  I  should  rather  style  it
.  . liability  to  a  duty,  or  eocemption,  from  a  duty. But  I  use  the

term  in  relation  to  a  duty,  as  well  as  in  relation  to  a  right,  for
the  sake  of  the  conciseness  which  thence  results.  You  will  find
on  making  the  experiment,  that,  if  you  use  one  name  for  a  capacity
to  take  a  right,  and  another  name  for  a  capacity  to  incur  a  duty,
you  will  often  be  forced  to  express  yourself,  when  speaking  of
the  capacities  jointly,  in  sentences  of  suffocating  length.  And  .
in  giving  to  *  capacity,'  the  common  or  generic  meaning  witi
which  I  employ  the  term,  I  am  justified  by  the  similar  use  of  tie
equivalent  term  *  faculty,'  which  is  made,  as  will  appear  immedi-
ately, by  authors  of  good  repute.

A  similar  difficulty  arises  with  regard  to  the  term '  title,'  and
the  term  'mode  of  acquisition.'  We  can  hardly  say,  with  propriety,
that  a  duty  arises  from  a  title,  or  that  a  duty  is  acquired.  But
yet  we  want  a  name  for  those  facts  or  events  to  which  duties  or
obligations  are  annexed  by  the  law.  For  we  may  have  occasion
to  speak  of  the  origin  of  a  relative  duty,  as  abstracted  from  the
origin  of  the  corresponding  right :  not  to  mention,  that  many
duties  are  absolute.  To  obviate  this  difficulty,  Bentham  adopts
the  term  *  investitive  fact  or  event,'  and  uses  it  as  a  common  or
generic  expression  :  that  is  to  say,  as  denoting  any  fact,  to  which
the  law  annexes  a  right  or  duty.  Perhaps  he  would  have  done
better,  if  he  had  ventured  to  use  *  title '  in  the  same  generic
sense,  or  had  adopted  the  '  causa '  of  the  Eoman  Lawyers.

It  is  doubtful  whether  more  uncertainty  does  not  arise  fifom
the  introduction  of  new  terms,  the  meaning  of  which,  of  course,
will  not  for  some  time  be  understood,  than  from  the  employment
of  established  terms  however  ambiguous ;  and  whether  the  wiit«i
himself  does  not,  from  want  of  familiarity  with  his  own  terms,
incur  considerable  risk  of  using  them  ambiguously.  I  prefer  tfl
adhere  to  the  established  terms,  and  in  the  pithy  language  of
Hobbes  muffihem  with  apt  distinctions  and  definitions,  and  when,
being  snuflfed,  they  give  light,  then  to  use  them.

Subject  of  As  not  unconnected  with  the  present  matter,  I  will  here

a  right make  a  remark,  which  may  be  very  convenient  to  those  who  may
happen  to  look  into  German  books  in  anywise  concerning  law.

When  I  speak  of  the  subject  of  a  right,  I  mean  not  the  person
in  whom  the  right  resides,  but  the  thing  (strictly  so  called),  or
the  person,  over,  in,  or  to  which,  the  person  entitled  has  the
right :  Supposing  (I  mean)  that  the  right  be  one  of  the  rights
which  are  rights  to  things  or  persons. For  an  dbligaiio,  or  j«tf


Subjects  of  Right Sy  what.  713

personam^  is  not  a  right  to  a  thing  or  person,  but  to  acts Lbct.
forbearances  from  a  person :  And  even  many  of  the  rights
ich  avail  against  the  .world  at  large,  are  not  rights  to  persons

things,  but  merely  rights  to  forbearances  from  persons
lerally.

But  in  the  language  of  the  German  jurists  the  subject  of  a
ht,  is  the  person  who  has  the  right,  or  in  whom  it  resides.
id  they  employ  the  term  subject  in  the  same  manner,  not  only
th  T^ard  to  rights,  but  with  r^ard  to  duties,  capacities,  and
opacities.  In  their  language,  the  party  who  has  the
»city,  or  who  lies  under  the  duty  or  incapacity,  is  the  svi-
\  of  the  same.

For  various  reasons  it  appears  to  me,  that  my  own  use  of
3  term  is  the  usual  one,  and  is  justified  by  many  analogies.
ith  these  reasons,  I  will  not  trouble  you.  But  I  will  add  to
3  explanation  which  I  now  have  given,  that  this  their  use  of
J  term  subject  partly  accounts  for  an  absurdity  of  theirs  to
iich  I  have  alluded  in  my  published  lectures.*^

Now  I  think  it  extremely  probable,  that  they  were  led  into
8  strange  jargon  by  that  use  of  the  term  subject  to  which  I
ire  refeired.  Inasmuch  as  the  person  having  a  right,  is  the
jeet  of  the  right,  the  term  Beckty  as  meaning  a  right,  must
ley  fancied)  have  something  to  do  with  the  subjectivUy  of
int:  And,  of  course,  the  opposed  Recht,  which  means  law^
ist  also  (they  fancied)  have  something  to  do  with  that
edwUy  which  Kant  contradistinguishes  to  subjectivity.

It  is  manifest  that  the terms are  completely  misapplied.

the  Kantian  language,  subjective  existences  are  either  parcel
the  understanding,  or  ideas  which  the  imderstanding  knows

itself  alone.  They  are  pretty  nearly,  if  not  exactly,  the
leas  gotten  by  reflection'  which  are  opposed  by  Locke  to
leas  gotten  by  sensation.'  And  in  the  language  of  Kant,  that
ists  objectively,  which  lies  without  the  understanding,  or  which
3  understanding  knows  by  looking  beyond  itself.

Now,  admitting  all  this  jargon,  it  is  clear  that  the  two
ins,  objective  and  subjective,  are  not  applicable  respectively  to
0  and  rights.  For,  though  a  right  resides  in  the  person,  and
may  be  analogous  to  subjects  of  consciousness,  most  of  that
lich  a  right  necessarily  implies,  is,  as  to  the  person,  objective,
le  law  giving  him  the  right  (which  according  to  themselves,
objective),  together  with  the  relative  duty  which  the  law
iposes  upon  others,  are  not  in  him,  or  parcel  of  him,  but  are

*  See  p.  285,  voL  i.  ante.


7 1 4  Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

Lect. as  completely  external  to  him,  as  an  object  of  sensation  is
^  external  to  the  percipient  mind.


It  is  really  lamentable  that  the  instructive  and  admirable
books  which  many  of  the  German  jurists  have  certainly
produced,  should  be  rendered  inaccessible,  or  extremely  difficult
of  access,  by  the  thick  coat  of  obscuring  jargon  with  which  they
have  wantonly  incrusted  their  necessarily  difl&cult  science.

Status-;-  From  this  digression  concerning  capacities  and  incapacities^

ampacity,  j  xeveit  to  the  definition  of  a  status,  which  is  the  proper  subject
of  the  present  examination.

According to that  definition,  a  status  or  condition,  or  a
person  as  meaning  a  status  or  condition,  is  a  capacity  or  ability
to  take  rights,  or  to  incur  or  become  subject  to  duties  which
the  law  confers  or  imposes  upon  the  person,  as  meaning  the
homo  or  man. In  Miihlenbruch's  Doctrina Pandectarum  the
definition  is  given  thus  :

'Personam  (quae  quidem  a  personando  dicitur)  potestaten
juris  vocamus;  sive  facultatem  et  jurium  exercendorom  efe
officiorum  subeundorum,  hominibus  jure  accommodatam  et  veliii'
impositam.  £x  quo  intelligitur,  quid  sit,  quod  persona  abjndi-
cetur  iis,  qui  aut  prorsus  nullo  aut  valde  imperfecto  gaudeant
jure,  etc/^

According  to  a  definition  of  jus  personarum,  which  is
equivalent  to  the  above  definition  of  persona  or  status,  the  law
of  persons  is  concerned  with  the  capacities  of  persons  (as  mean-
ing men)  to  take  rights  or  incur  duties ;  or  it  is  concerned  with
persons  (as  meaning  men)  in  so  far  as  they  are  capable  of  rights
or  duties.

This  definition  of  status  (with  the  equivalent  definition  of
JUS  personarum)  is  liable  to  the  following,  amongst  other
objections.

1st.  There  are  capacities  which  are  common  to  all  persons,
who  either  completely,  or  to  certain  limited  intents,  aie
members  of  the  given  society  political  and  independent^  or
subjects  of  its  sovereign  government.  Every  person,  for  ex-
ample, whether  free  or  slave,  citizen  or  foreigner,  adult  or  in&nt,
married  or  unmarried,  trader  or  not  trader,  has  a  capacity
(unless  he  be  excluded  completely  or  nearly  from  all  legal
rights)  to  purchase  and  acquire  property  in  such  outward  things
as  are  necessary  to  the  sustenance  of  life.  Granting,  then,  that
a  condition  is  a  capacity,  its  being  a  capacity  will  not  serve  to

•*  Miihl,  vol.  ii.  p.  1.


Status — a  Capacity y  etc.  715

iora^^eme  it;  seeing  that  there  are  capacities  which  are  not I'Bc^-
imditions. A  condition  regards  specially  persons  of  a  given
lass,  and  cannot  consist  of  aught  which  regards  indifferently
Q  or  most  classes.

2ndly.  There  are  many  conditions  which  consist  mainly,
lot  of  capacities,  but  of  incapacities.  The  condition,  for  example,
f  the  slave,  consists  mainly  of  incapacities  to  take  rights :  The
ondition  of  the  infant  freeman,  of  incapacities  (mainly  or
fholly  imposed  upon  him  for  his  own  benefit)  to  take  certain
i^ts,  and  incur  certain  duties.  Nay,  there  are,  I  believe,
K)nditions  (though  I  cannot  recollect,  at  the  moment,  a  con-
iition  of  the  kind)  which  consist  entirely  of  disabilities:  of
iicapadties  to  acquire  certain  rights  of  which  persons  generally
lie  capable;  or  of  exemptions  from  certain  duties  to  which
)ei8ons  generally  are  liabla

3rdly.  As  I  remarked  in  my  last  Lecture,  and  shall  explain
.  little  more  fully  hereafter,  the  rights  or  duties,  which  as  well
8  capacities  or  incapacities,  are  of  the  constituent  elements  of
nest  conditions,  are  divisible  into  two  kinds :  namely,  rights  or
Inties  which  arise  &om  the  status  immediat^y  and  rights  or
Aties  which  arise  from  the  status  mediatd.  In  other  words  of
he  rights  or  duties  which  are  constituent  elements  of  the
ondition,  some  arise  solely  and  directly  from  the  general  and
aramount  fact  which  engenders  the  condition :  whilst  others
rise  from  that  general  and  paramount  fact,  through  a  particular
Ad  subordinate  fact.  For  example :  the  right  of  the  husband
T  wife  to  the  consortium  or  company  of  the  other  (either  as
tgainst  the  other,  or  as  against  third  persons  generally)  arises
lirectly  and  exclusively  from  that  fact  of  the  marriage  which
ilothed  the  husband  and  wife  with  their  several  but  correlating
iatus.  But  a  right  or  interest  of  either  in  goods  acquired  by
lie  other,  arises  from  the  fact  of  the  marriage,  through  the  title
)r  causa  by  which  the  goods  are  acquired.

Now  the  rights  or  duties  which  arise  from  the  statics
vuiiatelif  (or  from  the  fact  engendering  the  status,  through  a
subordinate  fact),  are  consequences  of  capacities  which  are  parcel
of  the  status,  and  which  arise  directly  from  the  fact  engendering
the  status.  But  the  rights  or  duties  which  arise  from  the  status
vsmediately  (or  which  arise  directly  from  the  fact  engendering
the  Uatus),  are  rigJUs  or  duties,  and  not  capacities  or  faculties
'jwium  exercendorum  et  officiorum  subeundorum' — Wherever,
^lefore,  the  constituents  of  a  status,  are  divisible  in  the
^J^anner  which  I  have  now  suggested  (and  the  constituents  of


7 1 6  Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

Leot. most  siaius  are  so  divisible),  the  staivji  is  not  a  capacity,  ^  a
^  bundle  of  capacities,  but  an  aggregate  of  rights  or  duties  iwA


capacities.

Tria  I  remarked  in a  former lecture,  that there  are certain

^'"''*^  pre-eminent  status  which  the  Soman  lawyers  seem  to  have
distinguished  from  others  by  the  name  of  capita :  namely,  Ist^
statiLs  libertatis  (or  the  condition  of  the  freeman,  as  opposed  to
that  of  the  slave) ;  secondly,  stattis  dvitatis  (or  the  condition  of
the  Boman  citizen,  as  opposed  to  that  of  the  foreigner) :  and,
thirdly,  status  famUice :  that  is  to  say,  the  condition  of  being  a
member  of  a  given  family,  and  as  such  enjoying  certain  rights^
or  being  capable  of  certain  rights.  For  example:  Unless  a
person  were  a  member  of  a  given  family,  he  could  not  take  bjr
succession  ab  intestato  from  any  member  of  that  family.  AnH,
by  consequence,  when  a  man  was  adopted  by  the  head  of
another  family,  or  when  a  woman  married  and  thereby  became
a  member  of  her  husband's  family,  the  status  familice  (wiUi
reference  to  the  family  quitted)  was  lost :  though  a  new  statw
familiar  (in  reference  to  the  family  entered)  was  at  ihe  sane
time  acquired.

Now  a  definition  of  caput  (resembling  the  definition  of  status
which  I  have  just  examined)  is  given  by  many  German  civilians.
They  say  that  a  capiU  is  a  condition  precedent  {Bedingung)  to
the  acquisition  of  rights :  which  merely  means  (if  it  mean  anj-
thing)  that  a  caput  comprises  capacities  to  acquire  rights. —
The  definition,  therefore,  is  liable  to  one  of  the  objections  which
I  made  to  the  definition  of  a  status  that  I  have  just  examined.
A  caput,  indeed,  comprises  capacities ;  and,  in  so  far  as  it  com-
prises them,  is  a  condition  precedent  to  the  acquisition  of  rights.
But  it  comprises  rights  and  duties  arising  from  the  staiMS  m-
mcdiatd,  as  well  as  mere  capacities  to  take  and  incur  rights  and
duties  on  the  happening  of  particular  and  subordinate  facts.

I  remarked,  in  a  former  Lecture  (when  explaining  the
various  meanings  of  the  term  person,  page  351  ante),  that  a
certain  absurd  definition  of  the  term  person  arose  fix)m  a  con-
fusion of  caput  and  stcUTis :  from  a  supposition  that  the  Boman
lawyers  limited  the  term  stattis  to  those  peculiar  status  which
they  called  capita.  I  remarked  that  those  three  staitts  were
probably  called  capita  (or  capital  or  principal  status),  because
they  comprised  extremely  numerous  and  important  rights  and
capacities;  and  because  the  want  of  them  implied  extremely
numerous  and  important  incapacities.


Tria  Capita.  717

Unless,  for  example,  a  man  was  free  (or  had  the  statm Lbot.

XT  TT

iertaiis),  he  was  excluded  from  all  rights,  and  was  only  subject .  .

id  liable  to  duties.  Unless  he  was  a  Soman  citizen,  he  was
ccluded  very  generally  from  rights,  though  not  from  alL
nless  he  was  an  agncU  of  a  given  family,  he  was  excluded,  in
gard  to  that  family,  from  the  weighty  right  of  succeeding  to
I  members  db  irUestato,

But  that  the  Soman  lawyers  limited  the  term  stattis  to
eae  three  capita,  is  utterly  and  palpably  falsa  They  speak,
r  example,  of  the  status  of  a  slave  who  had  not,  and  could
t  have  caput:  the  want  of  liberty  impl3ring  a  want  of
uenship,  and  also  of  relationship  to  a  family  of  Soman
izens.  They  also  speak  of  the  staivs  of  a  peregrinvs  or
feigner :  of  the  status  of  a  senator :  of  the  staius  lesa^  existima-
ntf,  or  of  a  status  consisting  of  certain  incapacities  consequent

having  been  noted  or  branded  by  the  censors.  In  a  note
on  status  which  I  have  appended  to  my  second  Table,  I  refer
various  places  in  the  Institutes  and  Digests,  wherein  the
m  siaius  is  applied  to  many  sets  of  rights  or  duties,  or
padties  or  incapacities,  which  could  not  have  been  deemed
iiHS,  if  the  term  had  been  restricted  to  capita.

But  there  is  one  consideration  which  is  quite  conclusive.
;  the  first  book  of  Gains'  and  Justinian's  Institutes,  peregrini

foreigners,  libertini  or  freedmen,  masters  and  slaves,  fathers
id  children,  husbands  and  wives,  guardians  and  wards,  with
her  classes  of  persons,  are  passed  in  review :  And  to  the
liole  book,  r^arding  specisdly  these  various  classes  of  persons,
e  common  title  of  de  personis  (and  in  Gains,  the  title  of  de
fditume  Jumiinum  also)  is  prefixed.*^

Before  I  dismiss  this  subject,  I  would  remark,  that  the  tria
fUa  are  not  properly  stattis.

To  describe  the  rights,  etc.  of  a  freeman  and  citizen,  is  to
!8cribe  generally  the  matter  of  the  Law  of  Things.  For  a
Bonan  and  citizen  (except  in  so  far  as  he  is  excluded  by
edal  incapacities)  is  capable  of  the  rights  and  duties  with
liich  the  Law  of  Things  is  properly  concerned.  To  put  the
^ts  and  duties  of  a  freeman  and  citizen  into  the  Law  of
rsons,  were  to  repeat  imder  a  head  of  the  Law  of  Persons
3  whole  matter  of  the  contradistinguished  department

You  will  find,  accordingly  (if  you  examine  any  systematic
le,  or  systematic  exposition  of  a  codex  juris),  that,  although

^  Inst  i.  3. Gaii  Comin.  L  §  8.

VOL.  n.  p


7 1 8  Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

Legt. freemen  and  citizens  are  distinguished  from  slaves  and  strangeis,


XLII


their  rights  and  duties  are  not  considered  in  the  Law  A
Persons.  Their  rights  and  duties  are  defined  negatively  by  the
definitions  of  the  incapacities  which  are  incumbent  on  slaves
and  foreigners.  If  a  man  be  free  and  a  citizen,  he  is  capable
(speaking  generally)  of  aU  the  rights  and  duties  of  which  a
slave  and  foreigner  is  incapable,  and  also  of  all  others  contained
in  the  Law  of  Things.

If  you  look  into  the  tenth  chapter  of  his  first  book  (entitled
'  Of  the  People,  whether  Aliens,  Denizens,  or  Natives ')  you  will
find  that  Sir  William  Blackstone  passes  over  the  rights  of
native-bom  subjects  '  as  heivjg  the  principal  subject  of  his  tckoU
treatise :'  though  he  considers  the  incapacities  of  aliens,  inasmncb
as  they  regard  specially  a  comparatively  narrow  class,  and
therefore  are  fit  matter  for  that  exceptional  department  whidi
is  styled  the  Law  of  Persons.

I  apprehend,  therefore,  that  the  rights,  etc.  of  a  freeman
and  citizen  are  not  properly  a  staivs :  meaning  by  a  status  (the
only  meaning  which  I  can  possibly  attach  to  it),  a  set  of  ri^iti
and  duties,  specially  regarding  persons  of  a  given  class,  whieii
for  the  sake  of  a  convenient  arrangement,  it  is  expedient  to
detach  from  the  body  of  the  legal  system.

It  cannot,  however,  be  inferred  from  what  I  have  now  said^
that  the  Law  of  Things  contains  the  rights,  eta  of  a  citizen  and
freeman :  or,  in  other  words,  that  it  relates  to  the  status  d  i
citizen  and  freeman.  For  a  citizen  and  fireeman  may  beir
many  statics  which  consist  of  rights  or  incapacities  peculiar  to
certain  classes  of  citizens.  An  infant  citizen,  for  example,  or  a
citizen  who  is  guardian,  is  clothed  with  peculiar  rights  besidfli
those  which  are  matter  for  the  Law  of  Things,  and  is  subject  to
peculiar  incapacities  which  disable  him  from  taking  some  of  (to
rights  with  which  the  Law  of  Things  is  concerned.

A  mistake  similar  to  that  against  which  I  have  offered  tUi
caution,  is  made  by  M.  Blondeau  (the  Doyen  of  the  Faculty  of
Law  at  Paris)  in  his  excellent  Analytical  Tables  of  the  Bomtt
Law.  He  divides  the  corpus  juris  into  law  concerning '  eopoUi^'
and  law  concerning  '  incapailes :'  meaning  by  a  *  eapahU^  a
Boman  citizen  suiju/ris  and  not  in  wardship :  and  by  '  ineapdtla!
all  who  are  incapable  of  more  or  fewer  of  the  rights  of  which  a
Eoman  citizen  sui  Juris  is  capabla  His  law,  therefore,  d
capailes,  is  pretty  nearly  the  Law  of  Things  considered  as  an
exposition  of  the  rights,  etc.  of  a  freeman  and  citizen.  Brt
this  division,  though  extremely  specious,  is  false  and  defectiTe.


Tria  Capita  not  Status.  719

leie is no class of persons who are absolutely eapahles, Lsot.
Siongh  some  are  subject  to  fewer  incapacities  than  others. ^^^^
or perhaps are there any who are absolutely incapahles,
though  the  incapacities  of  some  are  comparatively  numerous.

It  is  also  manifest  that  a  Soman  citizen  mi  juris,  must  bear
any  characters  or  many  statics :  in  respect  of  each  of  which
i  has  peculiar  rights  and  duties,  or  peculiar  incapacities :  as,  for
cample,  the  character  of  magistrate,  guardian,  patrician,  plebeian,
\c  And  how  can  these  peculiarities  find  a  place  in  a  depart-
lent  which  is  concerned  generally  with  Eoman  citizens  sui  juris  ?

As  to  the  statues  famiiice  the  term  status  is  not  properly
[^lied  to  it  for  another  reason :  because  the  peculiar  rights  of
rluch  it  consists  in  every  system  or  systematic  exposition  of
iw  with  which  I  am  acquainted,  are  matter  for  the  Law  of
nimgs.  They  relate  to  the  law  of  succession,  and  cannot  with
1D7  propriety  be  considered  a  status.

Before  I  quit  this  subject,  I  must  remark  on  another
ihcoring  distinction,  which  is  a  great  obstacle  to  clearness  of
MDoeption.  This  is  the  division  of  staius  or  condition  into
wtural  and  dvil :  or,  as  Heineccius  has  it,  status  qui  ex  ipsd
^urd  prqficiscmUu/r,  et  status  qui  ex  jure  dvUi  descendunt.^
Diese  latter  were  the  tria  capita  already  mentioned.  Now
itery  sUUus  must  be  civUis ;  that  is  the  creature  of  positive  law :
or  it  consists  of  rights  and  duties  which  positive  law  attaches
)  some  given  incident.  Nor  do  the  phrases  suggest  any
itelligible  distinction  even  as  to  the  facts  in  which  the  status
riginates.  To  be  twenty-one  years  of  age  is  not  more  natural
lan  to  be  bom  out  of  the  commimity.  The  error  arose  from
16  confusion,  already  adverted  to,  of  status  and  caput.  It  was
rst  assumed  that  these  terms  were  synonymous;  then  the
srm  staivs  was  limited  to  the  three  so-called  status  which  are
ijptto,  and  these  were  called  status  civiles.  But  finding  that
leie  were  other  differences  between  persons  which  engendered
lings  looking  exceedingly  like  status,  civilians  called  these,  to
istinguish  them  from  the  others,  status  naturales.  This  was
erfeedy  gratuitous ;  the  Boman  lawyers  said  nothing  about  it,
nd  called  many  other  things  status  besides  the  three  capita.

Having  examined  various  definitions  of  the  idea  of  status,  The  true
ttd  of  the  distinction  founded  on  that  idea,  I  will  now  offer  a  SJ^g^^of
m  suggestions  which  may  perhaps  conduct  the  hearer  to  their  status,  and

„^  ^-4.„_-  ofthedis-

•ue  nature.  ti^^„„

**  For  entire  passage  see  end  of  this  Lecture.


720  Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

liECT.  Though  the  rights,  etc.,  which  are  constituent  elements  of  \

^  XLII  ^ condition,  are  peculiar  to  the  class  invested  with  conditionB  o

between the  kind,  it  is  not  true  (e  wn/oerso)  that  the  rights,  etc.,  whicl

•J^JJ^^"  are  matter  for  the  Law  of  Things,  are  common  to  persons  of  a]

pa  rervm classes,  or  reside  in  or  are  incimibent  upon  alL

^JIJS.  For  example:  All  persons  are  not  capable  of  being  con

tractors,  mortgagees  or  mortgagors,  purchasers,  eta Nay,  soin

staivA consist exclusively,  or consist partly, in incapacitie

to  take  or  incur  the  duties  which  are  matter  for  the  law  o

things.

When,  therefore,  I  said  in  a  former  Lecture,  that  the  Law
of  Things  is  to  the  Law  of  Persons,  as  the  genus  is  to  the
species  imder  it,  the  expression  must  be  taken  with  the  modi-
fication now  suggested.

An  expression  more  nearly  approaching  to  the  truth  is
this :  that  the  rights,  etc.  which  are  matter  of  the  Law  of
Things,  must  be  taken  into  consideration  before  we  can  unde^
stand  the  rights,  etc.  which  are  constituent  elements  of  anf
given  statics:  Whereas,  the  rights,  eta  which  are  constitaenl
elements  of  any  status,  need  not  (generally  speaking)  be  takoi
into  consideration  in  order  to  an  imderstanding  of  the  Lav  d
Things.  They  have  no  necessary  currency  with  the  bulk  of  tta
legal  system,  and  may  be  detached  from  it  without  breaking  iti
continuity.  This  is  one  principal  reason  for  detaching  it:  te
it  does  not  break  continuity,  and  renders  the  exposition  of  tb
bulk  of  the  system  more  compact  and  coherent.

The  first  reason  (namely,  that  the  matter  of  the  law  oi
things  must  be  taken  into  consideration  in  order  to  a  ri^
understanding  of  almost  any  status)  will  account  for  the  difficulty
which  I  suggested  the  other  night,  namely,  that  certain  sdatii
rights  and  duties  which  would  seem  to  r^ard  specially  ooDi'
paratively  narrow  classes,  are  placed,  nevertheless,  in  Uie  Lav
of  Things.  They  have  such  a  coherency  with  the  bulk  of  the
legal  system,  that  if  they  were  detached  from  it,  the  requtfiii
continuity  in  the  statement  or  exposition  of  it  would  be  lost

Such,  for  example,  is  the  bulk  of  the  rights  and  duties  dft
volving  on  the  heirs  of  a  deceased  person.  Though  thisjNfi
universitas  ia  not  distinguishable  from  a  stattis,  yet  if  it  wer
not  placed  in  the  Law  of  Things,  the  inconvenience  would  b
incurred  which  I  have  already  adverted  to,  since  without  a
explanation  of  these  rights,  many  rights  of  general  interest  an
apparently  of  an  elementary  kind,  could  not  be  understood.
Or,  again,  A  right  of  unlimited  duration  (as  contradisti]


True  Notion  ^Status.  721

gnished  from  one  of  limited  duration),  etc.  could  not  be  under- I<bct.
ilood  without  an  explanation  of  the  law  of  succession.^

It  is  true,  then,  generally,  that  the  matter  of  the  law  of
diiiigB  must  be  taken  into  consideration,  before  we  can  under-
stand the  rights,  eta  which  are  elements  of  any  given  ^status.
Whereas,  the  matter  of  any  staJtvA  need  not  be  taken  into
coDsideration,  in  order  to  an  imderstanding  of  the  Law  of
Oiiiigs.

This  last  is,  however,  not  true  universally.  For  the  matter
of  many  sets  of  rights,  etc.  deemed  statvs,  must  be  taken  into
DQDsideration  partly,  in  order  to  an  understanding  of  the  Law
if  Persons.  We  cannot,  for  example,  understand  the  law  of
mcoession  without  considering  the  law  of  marriage,  because
(accession  depends  upon  legitimacy.  The  truth  is  that  each
bpaitment  contains  prsecognoscenda  necessary  to  the  other;
int  those  contained  in  the  Law  of  Things  are  incomparably  the
nore  weighty  and  nimierous.

A  consequence  of  this  is  that,  in  different  arrangements  of
Sie  anjnts  juris,  the  law  is  variously  distributed  between  the
biro  departments.  Many  sets  of  rights  and  duties  which  by
nme  are  reckoned  statvs  are  by  others  included  in  the  Law  of
Ihings.  By  many  German  expository  writers,  and  by  M.
Hondeau,  tlie  law  of  husband  and  wife,  parent  and  child,
goaidian  and  ward,  and  almost  that  of  master  and  servant ;  all
the  domestic  conditions,  in  short,  are  inserted  in  the  Law  of
Ihings  immediately  before  the  law  of  succession,  because  the
latter  cannot  be  understood  without  adverting  to  them.*®

The  arrangement  is  illogical  in  this  particular  case,  because,
tihough  certain  portions  of  the  law  relating  to  the  domestic
oonditions  must  be  known  in  order  to  understand  the  law  of
nocession,  there  need  only  be  certain  small  portions,  and  the
Uance  therefore  of  convenience  inclines  to  placing  this  depart-
ment of  law  in  the  jtis  personartimi ;  and  convenience  is  the  only
consideration  by  which  the  expositor  would  be  guided.  Thus,
for  instance,  the  exposition  of  Procedure  requires  the  considera-
tion of  the  sovereign  authority ;  but  it  would  be  absurd  for  this
leason  to  insert  an  exposition  of  political  status  in  the  Law  of
Ihings  immediately  before  the  head  of  Procedure.

On  the  whole,  the  two  principal  reasons  for  detaching  sets
[if  rights,  etc.,  from  the  body  of  the  legal  system  seem  to  be,

1st  That  the  rights,  etc.  constituting  the  status,  regard
ipecially  a  comparatively  narrow  class  of  the  community ;  and

^  See  note  upon  tUAua  in  Table  II.  stibfine,  ^  Hugo,  Enc  p.  74.


722  Law :  Purposes  and  Stibjects.

Leot. that  it  is  convenient  to  have  them  got  together  for  the  use  of
^E^ that  class.

2ndly.  That  they  can  be  detached  from  the  bulk  of  the  system
without  breaking  the  continuity  of  the  eicposition.  And  that
the  so  detaching  them  tends  to  give  clearness  and  compactnen
to  the  exposition  of  the  bulk  of  the  law.

And  therefore,  if  to  state  them  would  break  much  contmuity
of  exposition,  these  rights  are  left  in  jua  rervmv,  though  spedaiUj
regarding  a  narrower  class.

Where  the  two  conditions  concur,  the  two  objects  which  I
pointed  out  in  the  last  lecture  are  accomplished ;  i,e.  1.  assem-
blage of  rights,  etc.  under  a  common  head :  2.  relief  of  general
exposition  from  special  matter.  I  will  not  say  that  these  are
the  only  reasons,  but  they  are  the  principal

In  practice  it  has  not  been  usual  to  detach  them,  although
both  conditions  concur  (i.e.  though  the  rights  be  peculiar  to  a l
comparatively narrow class,  and though detachable  witiioat ^
breaking  continuity)  if  the  rights,  etc.  are  few  in  number  asd
imimportant.^

But  this  is  illogical  and  unsystematic  They  ought  to  be
detached,  whether  numerous  or  not,  if  they  can  be  detached
commodiously.  Where  a  set  of  rights  and  duties,  capacitiei
and  incapacities,  specially  afiTecting  a  narrow  class  of  persons,  is
detached  from  the  bulk  of  the  leged  system,  and  placed  under  a
separate  head  for  the  convenience  of  exposition,  that  set  of  rights
and  duties,  capacities  and  incapacities,  is  called  a  stcUus.  And
this,  it  appears  to  me,  is  the  whole  rationale  of  the  matteL
Though,  such  is  the  pother  made  about  stattis,  that  nothing  bat
a  most  laborious  inquiry  into  the  subject  could  convince  me
that  there  was  not  more  in  it.

It  is  dij£cult  to  state  the  distinction,  because  it  is  a  distinc-
tion suggested  by  considerations  of  arrangement,  and  therefoie
vague.  But  the  distinction  is  not  therefore  useless,  because  not
precise :  and  the  same  objection  applies  to  most  attempts  at
classification  and  arrangement.

It  is  important  to  explain  it  fuUy,  on  account  of  the  extreme
obscurity  in  which  it  has  involved  the  science  of  junsprudenoe.

This  distinction,  too,  with  that  of  jtis  in  rem  et  fus  in  p^
sonam  (or  delicts  and  obligations)  is  the  principal  key  to  the
necessary  structure  of  Law.

I  must  here  explain  an  apparent  inconsistency. In  my

»  Blondeau,  VII.  XI.


Status. — Notes.  723

OuUiiie,  I  saj  that  the  idea  of  status  is  a  necessary  one ;  and  I Lbot.
Bud  the  same  in  my  last  Lecture. And  yet  I  say  that  a  stattis .  .

hm  no  certain  mark,  and  that  the  distinction  between  jtis  per-
wnairum  and  fus  rerwm  is  merely  adopted  for  the  sake  of  a  con-
venient arrangement

My  explanation  is  this:  That  the  differences  (though  not
pofectly  precise)  which  suggested  the  distinction,  do  exist  in
way  system.

In  every  system,  there  are  rights.  et(X  which  concern  speciaUy
Bomparatiyely  narrow  classes,  and  which  can  be  detached  from
9ie  bulk  of  the  system  with  little  or  no  inconvenience.

In  every  system  there  are  also  rights,  etc.  of  a  more  general
nterest,  or  which  it  were  impossible  to  detach  from  the  bulk  of
be  system  without  breaking  its  coherence  and  continuity.

There  are  therefore  reasons  in  every  system  for  adopting
iie  distinction,  although  it  may  not  be  described  precisely  alike
B  any  two  systems.  That  this  is  true,  is  proved  by  its  almost
mnrersal  adoption.  It  is  also,  I  repeat,  a  strong  presimiption
D  ite  favour  that  Bentham  by  a  sort  of  instinct  has  been  led  to
\  distinction  identical  with  this  which  he  treats  with  so  much
mtempt ;  his  division  of  the  corpus  jv/ris  into  the  general  and
lie  special  codes  coinciding  in  principle  with  the  distinction
letween  the  Law  of  Things  and  the  Law  of  Persons.


Notes.

Blondeau's  terms  suppose  that  the  persons  whom  he  calls  '  In-
9pabU3  *  are  distinguished  from  those  whom  he  calls  '  Capdbles '  only
rj  incapacities.^  But  this  is  an  error.  Both  are  capables  and  in-
apables :  each  is  capable  (i.e.  would  acquire  certain  rights  etc.  and
^mijed  to  certain  obligations  etc.  on  the  happening  of  certain  incidents)
f  lights  and  obUgations  of  which  the  other  is  incapable ;  and  each
I  incapable,  etc. — Capacity  and  Incapacity,  therefore,  cannot  be  made
iie  basb  of  this  distinction.

Excluding  special  and  political  Status  as  he  does,  the  Law  of
^Sifables  is  with  him  equivalent  to  the  Law  of  Things  ;  for  it  includes  all
Ale  lights,  etc.  which  regard  the  other  classes ;  and  patres-famUias
[bdng  considered  apart  from  the  modifications  which  special  stcUus
etc  might  work  upon  their  private  rights)  may  be  said  to  be  capable
^  aU  these  rights.  The  division,  however,  in  truth,  is  a  division
inko  patres-familiaSy  and  those  who  are  not ;  patresfamiliaSf  in  abstract,
^^^  capMe  of  all  etc

The  rights  and  obligations  of  capable  persons  are  those  which,

^  See  p.  718,  aiUe.


724  Law  :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

Lbct. though  not  belonging  to  every  staiiis^  most  be  taken  into  considention

^^ wUh  reference  to  every  status.

Besides,  many  of  the  elements  of  many  status  are  not  incapacitiei,
but  rights  or  powers  not  possessed  by  other  cksses :  tjg,  tutor  or
guardian,  magistrate,  etc.

Perhaps  there  is  no  man  a  *  Capable  /' — If  by  capable  be  meant  a
person  invested  with  all  the  rights  and  capacities,  and  subject  to  aD
the  obligations  which  are  described,  or  ought  to  be  described,  under
the  |fcatf  of  Things ;  certainly  there  is  no  one  who  is  capable  of  (HI
th^irii^'ts  and  obligations  which  are  described  in  both  departmenta
It*^ay;be  said  of  a  man  that  he  is  not  subject  to  this  or  that  incapacity
or  ih^^  Of  thai  exemption ;  but  it  can  haidly  be  said  of  him  that  he
is  free  from  all,  or  susceptible  of  none.  In  fine,  everybody  belongs  to
some  class.


Tria  capita,^


Queeritur  itaque.  Quid  sit  Status )  Eesp.  Esse  qualitatem,  ct^
ratione  homines  di verso  jure  utuntur,  e,g,  quia  alio  jure  utitur  liber
homo,  alio  servus,  alio  civis,  alio  peregrinus ;  hinc  libertas  et  civifttf
dicuntur  status.  Yocatur  alias  status  in  jure  nostro,  capui,  StiliBi
Jurisconsultis  duplex  est,  naiuralis  et  dvUis,  Naturalis  est,  qui  ib
ips&  natur&  proficiscitur,  e,g,  quod  alii  sint  masculi,  alii  feminse,  ali
nati,  alii  nascituri  vel  ventres.  CivUis  est  qui  ex  jure  civili  descendit^
uti  differentia  inter  liberos  et  servos,  cives  et  peregrinos,  patres  et
filios-familias.  Hinc  stattis  civilis  triplex  est;  libertaiis,  secundm
quam  alii  sunt  liberi,  alii  sunt  servi ;  civitaiis,  secundum  quam  ain
cives,  alii  peregrini ;  et  denique  familim,  secundum  quam  alii  patrea^
familias,  alii  filii-familias.  Jam  ergo  facile  intelligitur  axioma :  qoi-
cumque  nullo  horum  trium  statuum  gaudet,  is  non  est  persona  secundum
jus  Romanum,  sed  res,  quamvis  homo  sit, — Heineccius,  BecU,  p.  52.


Hominum  jura  civilia,  qusecunque  sunt,  tribus  hisce  tanquam
involucris  continentur :  libertate,  civitate,  famili^  qui  quidem  sbitiu
appellantur. — Miihlenbruch,  D,  P.  vol.  ii.  §  214.


Die  biirgerliche  Rechtsfahigkeit  ist  das,  was  die  Romer  capni  oder
sUUus  nennen.  Die  Neueren  nennen  sie  dagegen,  verbunden  mit  aUen
durch  die  Gesetze  erzeugten  Eigenschaften,  wovon  einzelne  Bechte
abhangen,  status  civilis :  die  natiirliche  Rechtsfahigkeit  bingegen,  ▼8^
bunden  mit  physischen  Eigenschaften,  welche  besondere  Rechtarer
haltnisse  zur  Folge  haben,  status  naturalis, — Thibaut^  System,  vol.  L  §  3.

Bentham  (misled  by  Blackstone  and  others)  treats  the  distincti<Mi
oi jus persoTiarum  et  rerum  with  great  contempt;  asking  (and  juaflf
enough)  how  things can  have  rights,  or  what  rights  there  can  ^

'  See  p.  716,  ante.


Status.  725

fUeh  aie  not  rights  of  persons  7 The  truth  is,  that  a  distinction Lbot.
ii^ggested  by  himself  nearly  tallies  with  the  one  which  he  rejects ^^1^  ^
wi^  disdain ;  or  would  tally  with  the  latter,  if  the  Eoman  lawyers '
hi  pursued  the  principle  of  the  distinction  consistently. — AtUhov's
KoU.

For  Bentham's  Method,  see  Table  IX.  (post).


LECTUEE  XLIIL

THE  SAME  SUBJECT  CONTINUED.

Haying  endeavoured  to  settle  the  import  of  the  distinction Lbot.
between  jus  rerum  and  jtis  persanarum,  and  to  define  the  notion .
of  status  or  condition,  on  which  that  distinction  is  founded,  I  Supple-
will  now  add  a  few  remarks,  supplementary  to  the  lectures  in  J^^^Su^
which  I  have  discussed  this  subject.

First  then :  It  has  been  doubted  whether  the  Boman  lawyers
intended  to  insert  in  the  fus  personarum  the  description  of  the
xi^ts  duties  capacities  and  incapacities  of  which  status  or  con-
ditions are  comprised ;  or  to  confine  themselves  to  the  facts  or
erents  by  which  the  status  are  invested  and  by  which  they  are
divested.  The  solution  of  this  doubt  is,  that  neither  the  Boman
lawyers,  nor  those  modem  civilians  who  have  adopted  from  them
the  distinction  o{fus  rerum  and  personarum,  conceived  with  per-
fect distinctness  its  purpose,  nor  did  any  of  them  in  the  detail
of  their  writings  pursue  it  consistently.

Both  the  Boman  lawyers  and  Sir  William  Blackstone  incon-
sistently inserted  in  the  Law  of  Things  many  rights  and  duties
manifestly  arising  ex  statu :  and  the  Boman  lawyers  in  many
cases  inserted  in  the  Law  of  Persons  a  description  only  of  the
event  which  engendered  the  status,  and  the  events  by  which  it
was  d^troyed :  not  of  the  rights  and  duties  of  which  it  consisted.
For  instance,  in  the  Law  of  Marriage,  they  inserted  only  the
manner  in  which  marriages  were  contracted,  the  different  con-
ditions of  a  vaiid  marriage,  and  the  modes  in  which  marriage
was  dissolved.  In  the  law  of  tutelage  and  guardianship,  on  the
(contrary,  they  inserted  not  only  the  modes  in  which  the  staitcs
WBS  acquired  or  lost,  but  also  the  rights  and  duties  which  con-
ttituted  it  They  had  in  truth  no  distinct  conception  of  their
iwn  purpose,  and  they  therefore  pursued  it  in  the  detail  in-
oncdstently.

Through  blending,  as  they  do,  the  two  methods,  they  lose


726


Law :  Purposes  and  Stibjects.


Lbot.
XLIII


Howwmf  co-
ordinated
by  the
KomBn
lawyers
wimjiu
rerum  and
jus  pet'
mmaru/m,.
This  is  a
logical
blunder.


the  advantage  of  the  first ;  keep  the  disadvantage  of  the  second
and  add  a  difficulty  of  their  own:  i.e.  that  of  obliging  the
seeker  to  look  for  the  peculiarities  of  status^  not  only  under  the
descriptions  of  the  several  rights  and  titles,  but  also  under  tiu
(as  by  them  treated)  purposeless  department  oi  jura  personarvnk.
The  next  remark  which  I  have  to  make  is  more  important
Roman  lawyers  divide  law,  in  the  first  place,  into  jvs  ptMieum
and  Jvs  privatum ;  and  in  their  institutional  treatises  they  con-
fine themselves  principally  to  jus  privatwm.  This  they  again
divide  into  jus  personanmi,  jus  rerum,  and  jus  adianum,  includ-
ing under  this  third  head  the  law  of  civil  procedure.  This  last
distinction  is  also  adopted  in  the  Commentaries  of  Sir  William
Blackstone,  whose  object  was  more  comprehensive,  as  he  treats
not  only  of  what  the  Boman  lawyers  called  private  law,  but  abo
of  what  they  comprised  under  the  name  of  public  law,  namdy»
the  law  of  political  conditions ;  criminal  law ;  and  the  law  of
criminal  procedure.  Both  in  the  Boman  lawyers  and  in  Black-
stone  this  division  is  grossly  inconsistent ;  it  deviates  firom  the
object  of  the  distinction  between  the  Law  of  Things  and  the
Law  of  Persons.  For  according  to  this  arrangement  jus  odicnMMy
instead  of  being  considered  as  a  species,  is  co-ordinated  with  tlid
two  genera.  It  is  manifest  that  the  law  of  injuries,  whether
civil  injuries  or  criminal,  and  of  the  rights  and  duties  arising
from  injuries,  and  the  law  of  civil  and  criminal  procedure,  reatty
consist  of  a  variety  of  species  belonging  to  those  two  genera,  and
should  therefore  not  be  co-ordinated  with  jus  personarum  et  renm,
but  distributed  under  both.^  All  matter  contained  in  theee
departments  of  law,  which  relates  peculiarly  to  any  of  the  daraee
of  persons  which  have  been  put  into  the  jus  personarum,,  shonUi
be  placed  in  that  branch  of  the  law.  For  example,  under  the
status  of  an  infant  should  be  placed  the  description  of  crimen
civil  injuries,  civil  and  criminal  procedure  as  modified  by  infancy.
For  example,  an  infant,  in  a  great  number  of  cases,  is  not  liable
criminally,  and  in  a  logical  arrangement  these  exemptions  would
be  placed  in  the  jus  personarum.  When  an  infant  sues  or  is
sued,  the  situation  of  plaintiff  or  of  defendant  is  filled  by  his
guardian  instead  of  himself.  This  is  not  properly  matter  for  the
jus  rerum  but  for  the  jus  personarum,  imder  the  head  of  infency.
All  the  generalia  of  the  jus  actionv/m,  should  be  left  in  the  jfti
rerum,  while  those  parts  which  have  relation  specially  to  partica-
lar  classes  of  persons,  and  which  can  be  detached  from  the  bulk
of  the  legal  system  without  breaking  its  continuity,  should  be

»  Thibaut,  Versuche,  etc,  voL  ii  pp.  8,  9,  19.


Arrangement  of  Corpus  J uris.  727

[daced  under  the  respective  heads  of  the  jvs  personarwm  to  which Leot.
%  belong.  s^^^

The  division  therefore  of  the  corpus  juris  into  jus  personarum,  Logical
jfii  rerum,  and  jm  actionum  is  a  gross  logical  error. In  Black-  ^^^^^^
ftoDB,  the  error  is  a  consequence  of  his  original  division. For  stone's
lie  does  not,  like  the  Eoman  lawyers,  begin  by  dividing  the  law  ^^^^
iatojus  publicum  and  jus  privcUum,  and  this  last  into  jvs  person-  Juris  into
•nwii  and  jus  rerum  ;  but  he  divides  the  whole  corpus  juris  into  ing  ^?^S
law  regarding  rights  and  law  regarding  vrrongs. By  law  regard-  and  kw
ing  righiSy  he  means  law  regarding  injuries,  the  rights  and  duties  ^^^g^
ttising  from  injuries,  and  civil  and  criminal  procedure. Having
divided  the  corpus  juris  into  these  two  divisions,  and  having  then
divided  the  first,  or  law  regarding  rights,  into  jus  personarum
mAjus  rerum,  he  could  not  include  in  either  of  these  heads  the
Isw  r^arding  actions. His  division  is  illogical,  it  being  mani-
fat  that  the  law  regarding  wrongs  does  not  regard  wrongs  only,
lot  rights  also,  namely,  the  rights  which  arise  out  of  wrongs ;  as
trill  be  sufBciently  evident  to  any  one  who  looks  through  the
liuid  book  of  his  Commentaries,  and  observes  the  matter  of  which
it  is  composed.

The  nature  of  the  distinction  between  public  and  private
kw  I  shall  advert  to  in  my  next  Lecture ;  when  I  shall  shew
that  it  is  as  erroileous  as  this  distinction  of  Blackstone's ;  and
that  public  law  is  not  one  main  half  of  the  corpus  juris  which
OQght  to  be  opposed  to  the  other  half,  but  a  very  small  portion
of  it,  which  ought  to  be  included  in  the  Law  of  Persons  as
a  subordinate  member :  and  Blackstone,  in  imitation  of  Sir
Matthew  Hale,  has  so  included  it.  I  am  now  speaking  of  public
kw  in  its  narrower  acceptation,  for  in  its  larger,  the  whole  of
CEiminal  law  is  included  in  it.  Criminal  law  as  a  part  of  public
kw  {laiius  cuxeptum)  is  excluded  by  the  Boman  jurists  from  Law
of  Persons  and  Law  of  Thiugs.  But  it  ought  to  be  distributed
mder  those  two  departments.

The  next  topic  to  which  I  shall  advert  is  the  order  id  which  The  law  of
loe  Law  of  Things  and  the  Law  of  Persons  should  stand  rela-  ^^^^
tively  to  each  other. If  my  account  of  the  rationale  of  the  dis-  precede
tbction  is  correct,  the  Law  of  Things  ought  to  precede  the  Law  ][>ersoM  ^
ol  Persons ;  because  the  Law  of  Things  is  the  law,  minus  the  the  corpus
Uw  of  Persons,  while  the  Law  of  Persons  contains  such  portions  ^^^^'
<rf  the  Law  as  relate  to  specific  and  narrow  classes  of  persons,
uid  can  be  detached  from  the  body  of  the  law  without  breaking
Its  continuity. Consequently  the  general  code should come
fast,  and  the  comparatively  miscellaneous  matters,  which  are


728  Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

YTHT  P^P®rly  a  sort  of  appendix,  should  come  last.  Accordingly,  \
-  ^  ^  Sir  Matthew  Hale  suggested,  and  Sir  William  Blackstone  piacti-  f-
cally  adopted,  this  order.  It  is,  however,  impossible  to  sever  (^
completely  the  jv^  persoTiarvmi  and  the  jtLS  rerum  from  one  m
another.  Even  the  jv^  personarum,  though  consistiiig  mainly  rf  ^.-
the  narrower  positions  and  rules  which  modify  the  more  general
matter  comprising  the  jus  rerum,  yet  contains  many  positions,  j
which  must  be  anticipated  before  it  is  possible  to  explain  the  <
Law  of  Things.  But  the  number  of  the  prcccognoscenda  in  the
Law  of  Things  is  incomparably  greater  than  the  number  of  those
in  the  Law  of  Persons.  Although  the  two  departments  can
never  be  completely  disengaged  from  one  another,  the  student
must  begin  somewhere :  and  he  should  begin  where  he  will  re-
quire fewest  references  to  what  is  to  come  afterwards.  This
topic  is  not  of  very  great  importance ;  it  regards  chiefly  the  ^
logical  symmetry  of  the  body  of  law.  ]

Natural  or I  may  immediately  explain  in  this  place  the  nature  of  certun ]
JJ^^ rights, which have been confounded  by  mysterious  jargon; i
what  f namely,  those  which  are  called  natural  or  iniam,  and  by  Blade- \
stone absolute  rights. For  his  'law  regarding  the  rights  of j
persons '  is  not  the  jus  persoTiarum  of  the  Eoman  jurists ;  tt«f
jus  personanim  is  only  one  species  of  his  law  regarding  the  rights .
of  persons,  a  species  which  he  calls  *  law  regarding  the  rdaii»
rights  of  persons';  as  contradistinguished  from  another  spedeSi
namely,  law  regarding  the  absolute  rights  of  persons,  that  is, ^
these  natural  or  inborn  rights.

I  have  already  observed,  that  the  rights  or  duties  constitutive
of  status  arise  in  two  ways  :  they  arise  ex  statu  immediaU,  either
directly  from  the  general  or  paramount  title  which  engenden
status ;  or  from  that  general  title  through  some  subordinate  tiflft
The  distinction  between  natural  or  inborn  rights  and  any  other
rights  is  analogous  to  this.

Natural  or  inborn  rights  are  those  which  reside  in  a  paity
merely  as  living  under  the  protection  of  the  state,  or  as  being
within  the  jurisdiction  of  the  state ;  if  the  party  have  any  rights  \
whatever,  which  the  Boman  slave  had  not.  Now  these  are
exactly  what  Blackstone  called  absolute  rights.  Such,  for
instance,  is  the  right  of  personal  security :  the  most  general  of
any.  This  right  is  called  natural  or  inborn  merely  because  it
arises  sine  spedali  titulo ;  that  is,  it  resides  in  a  party,  merely
as  living  under  the  protection  or  within  the  jurisdiction  of  the
state ;  now  this  fact  having  no  special  name,  the  right  seemB
to  arise  without  any  title,  and  therefore  ex  lege  im/nudiati;  iw^


System  and  A  rrangement.  — Blackstone.  729

quiiing  to  be  annexed  by  the  law  to  any  investitive  event Lxct.
batever. I  agree,  however,  with  Thibaut  that  this  is  a  mistake, v
nd  that  rights  are  always  annexed  to  some  fact  or  other ;  but
his  fact  has  not  received  any  concise  name,  nor  is  anywhere
leacribed.

Such  then  are  these  rights,  and  such  the  origin  of  the  name,
rhey  are  the  most  general  of  any :  they  reside  in  all  who  live
mder  the  protection  of  the  state  or  within  its  jurisdiction,  and
reside  in  them  by  reason  of  their  living  imder  its  protection :
ind  are  called  natural  or  inborn  rights,  because  there  is  no  precise
EKt,  bearing  a  concise  name,  to  which  they  are  annexed  by  the
law.  It  is  manifest  that  they  are  not  natural  or  inborn ;  for  they
ire  as  much  the  creatures  of  the  law,  as  any  other  legal  rights.

Although  the  term  is  applied  to  rights  only,  it  is  equally
ipplicable  to  many  duties.  There  are  many  duties  to  which  a
peraon  is  subjected  merely  by  reason  of  his  being  imder  the
protection  of  the  state,  or  being  altogether,  or  to  certain  limited
pmposes,  a  subject  of  the  state.  Such,  for  instance,  are  duties
xnraids  the  government  itself ;  the  duty  of  abstaining  from  any
let  of  resistance,  of  abstcdning  from  any  act  of  tumult,  and  so
n.  These  duties  are  as  properly  natural  or  inborn,  as  the
^ts  which  are  so-called.

Blackstone  here  runs  into  a  signal  confusion  of  ideas,  for  he  Oroas  ab-
pposes  these  natural  or  inborn  rights,  by  the  name  of  absolute  ^  Black-
ights,  to  what  he  calls  the  relative  rights  of  persons.  But  there  s^ne  on
re  no  such  things  as  absolute  rights :  all  rights  are  relative ;  ject
hey  suppose  duties  incumbent  on  other  persons.  He  defines
hese  absolute  rights  to  be  rights  appertaining  to  them  merely  as
odividuals  or  single  persons.  But  I  cannot  conceive  how  they
an  be  distinguished  by  that.  All  or  most  rights  must  belong
0  particular  persons,  and  must  belong  to  them  as  particular
)ei8ons.  Dominium,  for  instance,  and  all  rights  arising  from
xmtracts,  come  imder  this  description.  He  further  defines  them,
eights  which  would  belong  to  persons  in  a  state  of  nature ;  rights
irhich  they  would  be  entitled  to  enjoy  either  in  or  out  of  society.
But  many  other  rights  are  in  the  same  predicament.  Contracts,
tor  instance,  or  at  least  conventions,  must  have  preceded  society ;
or  it  is  difficult  to  see  how  society  could  have  arisen.  No  legal
light,  indeed,  would  in  a  state  of  nature  be  engendered  by  a
convention,  biit  a  moral  right  would ;  which  would  be  as  com-
pletely a  right  as  those  mentioned  by  Blackstone.  And  as  to
^(2  rights,  with  which  alone  Blackstone  was  properly  concerned,
^hey ,  it  is  obvious,  can  only  belong  to  a  man  in  society.


730  Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

Leot.  Amongst  others  of  these  absurdities,  Blackstone  instances,

XLIII  ^ 03,  jyjj  absolute  right,  the  right  of  private  property ! A  right
which,  it  is  quite  obvious,  cannot  exist  out  of  a  state  of  society ;
and  which  is  indeed  the  main  object  of  his  second  volume. The
word  property  is  a  term  of  exceedingly  complex  meaning,  com-
prising a  vast  variety  of  rights :  and  he  himself  includes  under
it  all  the  rights  over  real  and  personal  property,  which  are  de-
scribed in  his  second  volume. I  suppose  he  must  here  mean  by
the  right  of  private  property,  not  any  particular  rights  of  private
property  but  capacities  to  take  rights  of  private  property. But
even  these  do  not  properly  fall  under  this  head :  for  many  such
capacities  do  not  belong  to  all  persons,  certain  classes  (as,  for
example,  aliens)  being  excluded  from  them. He  should  hare
inserted  only  those  rights  which  necessarily  reside  in  every  peraon
who  is  subject  to  the  state  either  generally  or  to  any  limited
purpose,  or  who  is  within  its  jurisdiction.

Another  error  of  Blackstone  is  that  of  putting  those  absolvk
rights  of  persons  imder  the  head  Bights  of  Persons  at  alL  is
residing  in  cdl  persons,  these  rights  are  not  matter  for  the  Law
of  Persons,  but  for  the  Law  of  Things;  and  by  the  Eoman
lawyers  are  so  treated.  The  cause  why  this  was  overlooked  bj
Blackstone  seems  to  be  that  in  this,  as  in  other  instances,  the
rights  are  not  explained  by  the  Boman  lawyers  directly,  but  odIj
by  implication,  under  the  head  of  delicts ;  and  the  explanation
nowhere  else  occurs.'*  \

Order  of  Law  of  Things  and  Law  of  Persons.

Possible  simplification.  Implication  of  one  staiiLS  with  every
other,  as  well  as  of  every  status  with  jiis  rerum  or  the  body  of
the  system :  e.g.  a  married  infant,  a  husband-soldier,  a  maiiied  |
woman,  a  trader,  etc.  But  unless  the  system  be  simplified,
lawyers  cannot  understand  all  of  it  And  not  understanding  all,
cannot  have  complete  knowledge  of  any  part.  If  it  were  acces-
sible to  all  lawyers,  expense  and  uncertainty  would  be  mightily
diminished.

[We have  now  no Lord  Coke. His  resemblance  to  Boman
Lawyers.]

Queries  as  to  the  (hUline  of  the  Method.

[Should  the  Law  of  Things  be  preceded  by  an  enumeration  of  the

^  This,  according  to  J.  S.  M.'s  notes,  it  stood  in  the  last  edition. These  fing-

is  the  end  of  this  Lecture  as  delivered,  ments,  although  less  mature  than  the  pi»-

What  follows,  consisting  of  fragments  re-  ceding  matter,  seem  to  be  of  some  r£u,

lating  to  the  same  subject,  is  retained  as  and  are  at  least  suggestiye. — ^B.  C.


System  and  Arrangement — Fragments.  7  3 1

srenl  classes  of  persons  % Or  should  this  be  prefixed  to  the  Law  of  Lect.

^ersons,  and  only  so  much  relative  to  dolus  in  general  precede  the  ^LHI
Dnner,  as  suffices  to  illustrate  the  distinction  between  these  two  '

;nnd  diyisions  ?]

n^  Meihod  pu/rsued  in  the  Law  of  Things  should  he  pursued
under  each  head  of  the  Law  of  Persons, {See  (hdline.)

In  treating  of  any  staius  (whether  generic  or  specific)  the
n^ts  and  obligations,  etc.  direct  or  correlated,  which  grow  out
of  it  [or  make  it  up]  must  be  considered  in  the  order  observed
under  the  Law  of  Things :  i.e.  Primary  rights,  with  their  sub-
divisions oi  jura  in  re,jwra  ad  rem,  compoimds  of  both  jura  in
mwrsiiattbus,  etc. ;  and  violations  of  these  primary  rights  and
obligations,  with  the  secondary  or  instrumental  rights  and  obli-
gitions  by  which  such  violations  are  remedied  or  prevented.

Principles  on  which  Bights  and  Obligations  are  to  be  referred  to

this  or  that  Status.

The  rights  and  obligations,  capacities  and  incapacities,  sus-
ceptibilities and  exemptions,  which  belong  to  a  certain  class  as
iiuA  (whether  such  rights,  etc.  are  originally  rights,  etc.  of  that
hiatus,  or  restorations  of  jura  rerum  in  derogation  of  the  rights,
etc  of  another  status  with  which  it  is  combined),  must  be  con-
tidered  together.

E.g. :  All  that  relates  to  the  status  '  Infancy,'  abstracted  from
^y  other  staius,  must  be  considered  together.  All  that  relates
to  the  status  '  Trader '  must  also  be  considered  together :  includ-
bg  thereimder  such  generic  rights  and  obligations  as  infants  when
traders  enjoy  or  are  subjected  to,  contrary  to  the  general  rules
touching  infancy.

In  order  to  determine  the  status  to  which  any  given  right  with
'ts  correlating  obligation  shall  belong ,  inquire  (1°)  whether  the
)bligation  exist  for  the  sake  of  the  right,  or  the  right  for  the
lake  of  the  obligation :  (2°)  whether  the  right  or  the  obligation
[as  the  case  may  be)  grow  out  of,  or  exist  by  reason  of,  any,  and
svhat,  statues.  Having  foimd  that  it  exists  as  a  consequence  of
Jie  existence  of  such  or  such  a  class,  treat  the  right  with  its
correlating  obligations,  or  the  obligation  with  its  correlating
-ights,  as  forming  part  of  (or  falling  imder)  the  status  of  that
^lass.

Under  any  department  of  the  Law  of  Persons  are  to  be  con-
udered  not  only  the  rights  and  obligations  peculiar  to  the  status,


732


Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.


XLIII


Wherein

Status

consifltB.


the  status  as  modified  hy  it.


belonging


•  4^  t


A  Right  or  Obligation,  how  it  arises  out  of  this  or  that  Status.

If  a  right,  it  has  a  correlated  obligation  imposed  upon  othem
But  inasmuch  as  this  obligation  exists  for  the  sake  of  the  ligbt^
and  that,  as  we  have  shown,  exists  by  reason  of  the  status^  it
follows,  that  the  obligation  is  also  a  consequence  of  the  stai%
exists  for  the  sake  of  it,  and  ought  to  be  treated  with  it  The
same  reasoning  is  applicable  to  obligations,  wherever  they  indnoe
the  consideration  of  their  correlated  rights  though  existing  in
others ;  also  to  exemptions  and  incapacities.

The  principles  which  lead  to  the  distribution  of  the  whole
matter  of  the  law  into  *  Law  of  Persons  and  Law  of  Things,'
must  also  determine  the  departments  and  subdepartments  into
which  the  Law  of  Persons  should  be  divided,  with  the  order  of
those  departments  and  of  their  several  subdepartments.

1st  principle ;  Separation  of  that  which  is  peculiar  to  certain
classes.

Status  divisible  into  (l**)  those  which  (though  they  mag
attach  upon  any,  or  upon  almost  any)  are  limited  to  a  few;  and
(2'')  those  which  attach  upon  every  one  (at  some  time  or  other
of  his  life),  or  which,  if  not  universal,  are  very  widely  spread.
Instances  of  the  first  genus;  trades,  professions,  government
offices,  etc. :  of  the  second  genus ;  the  various  domestic  condi-
tions :  of  the  first  species  of  this  second  genus,  infancy,  and  the
filial  condition :  of  the  second  species  of  the  same,  marriage  and
paternity.

The  second  genus,  as  being  of  more  general  application,  shoold
precede  the  first.

2nd  principle ;  From  the  less  to  the  more  composite :  From
those  which  (to  be  complete)  suppose  not  the  explication  of
other  or  many  sta^tvs,  to  those  which  suppose  such  explicati(HL
But  quaere  if  there  be  any  such  principle,  excqpt  in  comiinatim
with  the  first.  For  the  modifications  of  the  more  general  by  the
more  special  status,  it  is  natural  to  look,  not  into  the  first  bnt
into  the  last :  e,g,  for  *  Infant  trader,'  not  under  '  Infant,'  bnt
under  '  Trader.'  Insomuch  that '  trader '  supposes  an  explicatioa
of  infant^

Wherein  Status  consists.
The  peculiarities  of  status  seem  to  consist :  (1**)  In  rights*

'  Blackstone,  vol.  ii.  p.  476.


Status. — Fragments.  733

ohligBtions,  and  capacities  peculiar  to  the  class ;  whether  such }^{,
lights,  etc.  be  9ui  gerieris,  or  only  modifications  of  others. (2"*)  ^

In  peculiar  incapacities.  (3'')  In  peculiar  conditions  to  be  ful-
Slled  or  observed  before  incidents  can  have  their  usual  effect :
Bat  these  seem  to  come  under  the  head  of  peculiar  rights,
oUgations,  etc,  or  incapacities;  i,e,  conditional  rights,  etc.  or
incapacities.

So  that  wherever  a  set  of  persons  have  rights,  obligations,
eta  peculiar  to  themselves;  or  are  incapable  of  such  as  are
common  to  many  others,  there  is  a  stattis :  or,  in  other  words,
the  persons  are  determined  to,  or  constitute  a  class.

Bights,  obligations  (and  capacities),  which  are  not  confined
to  one  class,  do  not  originate  in  statvs.

What  it  is  that  determines  a  Person  to  this  or  thai  Class,  or

what  it  is  that  maJces  the  Class,

V.  The  being  clothed  with  actual  rights  and  subject  to
ictnal  obligations,  peculiar  to  persons  of  the  class ;  the  being
cqMtble  of  investment  with  such  peculiar  rights,  and  of  sub-
jection to  such  peculiar  objections ;  or  the  being  incapable  of
certain  rights  and  obligations  of  which  persons  of  other  classes
gBDerally  are  capable.

2"*.  Bights  and  duties  ex  speciali  titulo,  and  rights  and  duties
imnudiat^  ex  statu,  or  arising  from  the  mere  fact  that  the  party
IB  living  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Government*

Generally  speaking,  a  right  or  duty  forming  a  constituent
dement  of  a  condition  has  been  preceded  by  two  events :  1.
The  event  investing  the  stattis.  2.  A  title  specially  investing
tlie  right  or  duty :  e,g.  the  peculiar  right  of  a  married  woman
to  land  or  goods.

This,  however,  is  not  true  universally. There  are  rights  or

duties  ex  statu  immediate,  or  arising  from  the  event  investing

fhe  st€Uus,  without  the  intervention  of  a  special  titulvs. Such

5b  the  right  in  rem  to  the  sta^tus  itself Such  too  is  the  right

of  the  father  to  exact  obedience  from  the  child,  and  to  punish

ia  case  of  disobedience. Such  too  is  the  corresponding  duty  of

the  child  to  render  obedience  ;  The  right  of  the  child  to  support :

Certain  rights  and  duties  of  husband  and  wife,  guardian  and

^Md,  master  and  slave.

There  are  rights  and  duties  in  or  upon  aU,  sine  speciali  titulo,

^  See  p.  728,  tmU. See  Table  II.  note  5,  post. Note  in  OaUine  abont  Pablio
»A»,  pp.  70-72,  voL  L  anU,

^OUIL  Q


734  Law:  Purposes  amd Smiyats,


arifiDg  from  the  mere  Cm:!  of  thor  being  wiilm  the  ji^^
^  ^  -  of  the  given  soTereign  goreniment  (nnleas  ^ednl  incapicity
intervened).  [E^.  B^t  to  peiaoul  aecnmr,  etcf  Such  ng^
are  called  '  natural  or  inborn,'  because,  arising  time  tftciaH  tiimki
there  is  no  obrioos  investitiTe  fact.  But  in  truth,  th^^e  ii
scarcely  a  right  or  daty  imwudiaU  tx  Ugu  (Whj  called  ao,  866
Thibaut,  Jub  in  rem  et  in  perwnamL)

This  applies  to  duties  as  well  as  to  rights.  There  are  many
that  might  be  deemed  inborn  rights  besides  those  usually  called
such :  e^.  capacity  of  an  heir  apparent  or  presumptLve,  or  befoQ
adiiio  (in  Roman  law).  Here  there  is  no  special  titvlm,  but
merely  a  general  capacity  to  take  a  numba  of  rights  (merely  oo
the  happening  of  certain  incidents).

A  right,  duty,  capacity,  or  incapacity,  which  originates  in
status  (or  forms  a  constituent  element  of  a  status),  is  peculiar  to
persons  of  the  given  class ;  although  it  may  happen  to  be  denoted
by  a  generic  expression  which  comprises  a  right  or  duty  in  oi
on  persons  of  other  classes.  £.g.  An  infant  may  be  bound  in  I
contract — but  subject  to  conditions  and  modifications  peculiar  tt
contracts  made  by  infants.

An  incapacity  (as,  to  contract,  take  by  purchase,  etc.)  ma]
be  common  to  many  classes,  as  to  aliens,  persons  convicted  aiui
attainted,  infants  or  married  women  (in  certain  cases)  :  but,  io
each  case,  the  incapacity  has  something  peculiar,  in  extend
ground,  etc.

The  Terms  '  Zaw  of  Things '  and  '  Law  of  Persons '  (unth  their
established  Equivalents)  are  insignijicant :

Le.  They  give  no  notion  of  the  purpose  of  the  distincdoo
which  they  are  intended  to  mark.  Law  is  concerned  with  right!
and  obligations  (or  capacity  or  incapacity  for  them) :  eveiy  ri^
resides  in  a  person,  and  most  rights  concern  things  (in  the  Somai
sense) ;  every  obligation  is  also  imposed  upon  a  person,  ad
generally  concerns  a  thing :  therefore  all  law  is  of  or  eoncemi^
persons,  and  most  law,  of  or  concerning  things.^

'  General  and  Particular*^  would  suffice ;  but  the  same  termi
are  also  used  in  other  senses:  namely,  to  denote  law  wind
obtains  through  the  whole  of  any  State,  as  opposed  to  that  whid
is  peculiar  to  districts  or  places.

'  See  Blackstone,  vol.  L  p.  121. Natu- "  See '  Method  of  Blackstooe,'  nc
ral  rights,  inborn  rights,  absolute  rights, page.

Blackstone's  confusion  of  meanings  of *  Trait^s,  etc  voL  L  pp^  150»  29^
'natural,*  and  p.  728,  ante.


Notes.  735

'  Law  of  Things '  and  'Law  of  Persons'  (Blackstone)  is  further Lsot.
Igectionable  for  my  purpose,  because  these  two  departments - ^ -
idnde  Delicts,  public  and  private,  and  Procedure,  as  modified
f  fiatvA :  an  extension,  which  (though  absurdly)  has  not  been
Jron  to  them  by  others.^® It  may  also  be  doubted  whether
of  Things  was  intended  to  include  Jura  ad  Bern.


General  or  generic  Law  and  Law  of  Status.

Law  of  the  summum  genua  '  Persons '  (or  Law  directly  inter-
itiiig,  or  regarding,  all  persons) :  and,  Law  directly  regarding  the
meral  genera  and  species  into  which  Persons  are  divisible.


Notes.

The  following  notes  entitled  '  Methods,'  etc.,  and  frequently
rferred  to  in  this  and  the  succeeding  Lectures,  were  foimd
■ong  papers  some  of  which  contain  matter  apparently  destined
b  be  employed  in  the  completion  of  the  Tables. — S.A.

(1.)

Method  observed  by  Sir  William  Blackstone  (vol.  i.  p.  122).

1.  Law  of  Persons  and  Law  of  Things,  so  far  as  regards  primary
l^\A  and  obligations.

2.  (a)  Law  of  Civil  Lijories — (b)  of  the  rights  and  obligations
Hdch  thence  arise — (c)  and  of  civil  procedure : — abandoning,  here,
Reformer  division  into  *Law  of  Persons  and  Law  of  Things;'  and
ibg^g  civil  injuries,  etc.  as  unmodified  by  statits  (or  as  they  concern
iK  classes),  with  the  same,  as  modified  by  status.

3.  (a)  Law  of  Crimes,  etc. : — abandoning  again,  etc.

Method  as  to  Sources — Equity  and  many  other  branches  only
iflitly  touched  upon  (vol.  iii.  p.  23).

Bat  Crimes,  Special  Law,  and  PubUe  Law  are  not  omitted.  (See
'PtabUe  and  Special  Law.')

Great  superiority  of  Blackstone's  method  to  that  of  the  Roman
htitntional  Writers,  the  French  Code,  etc. : —

r.  In  treating  civil  injuries — rights,  etc.  ez  delicto  privaiOf  and
ifil  procedure,  each  apart  from  the  other,  instead  of  treating  any
Be  or  two  of  liiem  implicitly  with  another  (vol.  iii.  pp.  115,  118).

2*.  In  treating  crimes — rights,  etc.  ex  delicto  publico — and  criminal
tooedore,  in  the  same  manner. '  See  Delicta'

^  See  '  Method  of  the  Roman  Lawyers  and  Blackstone,'  pp.  787*741,  jm?<


73^  Law  :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

Lect.

XLIII  Remarks  upon  the  Method  observed  by  Sir  WiUiam  BladcsUmt.


Like  Gaius  and  the  compilers  of  the  Institutes,  he  has  no  defimto
purpose  in  detaching  the  Law  of  Persons  from  that  of  Thingib
Throughout  the  Law  of  Things,  much  that  arises  out  of  stoliu  ii
considered.  Therefore^  if  he  intended  to  make  law  of  persons  relili
to  rights,  etc.  ex  statu,  he  has  not  adhered  to  that  intention.  On  dn
contrary,  much  that  relates  to  status,  is  considered  under  the  law  d-
persons ;  so  that  if  he  intended  law  of  persons  to  contain  a  meiti
enumeration  of  status,  with  the  modes  in  which  they  begin  and  eodi
he  has  equally  deviated  from  that.

[For  a  fuller  account  of  the  Method  observed  by  Sir  Wm.  Blad^
stone,  see  Table  VIII.  post,]


Bights  of  Persons  as  defined  by  Blackstone  (vol.  i.  p.  122).  J

Bights  of  Things :  ibid.  1

The  distinction  supposes  that  Things  can  have  rights.
This  is  founded  upon  a  misapprehension  of  the  terms  of  thfti
Eoman  Law.  By  jura  personarum  and  jura  rerum  the  Soman  lawyers;
intended,  not  the  rights  of  Persons  and  Things,  but  the  law  of  or
relating  to  persons,  and  the  law  of  or  relating  to  things.  This  id
manifest  from  Gaius,  the  Institutes,  etc.  The  former  having  dividM
Jus  or  Law  into  jus  geniium  and  jus  civile,  and  having  shown  tM
various  sources  of  the  Eoman  Law  or  Jus,  proceeds  to  divide  thiM
same  subject  according  to  the  objects  or  subjects  with  which  it  ii
conversant :  '  Omne  jus  quo  utimur  vel  ad  personas  pertinet,  vd  a^
res,  vel  ad  actiones.  Sed  prius  videamus  de  personis.'  (Gaii
i.  §  8.)  And  having  finished  the  jus  personarum,  proceeds  to
not  of  the  rights  or  even  of  the  *  law  *  of  things,  but  of  their  Divi
and  Acquisition.

The  misapprehension  is  founded  upon  that  ambiguity  (the  appK
cation  of  the  same  term  to  law  and  to  one  of  the  consequences  <K
creatures  of  law)  from  which,  as  we  have  already  observed,  our  owl
law  language  is  almost  alone  exempt.  (Jus ;  Diritto ;  Droit ;  De^
echo;  Recht.)

But  the  distinction  as  explained  in  the  cited  places  is  not  od|f
founded  upon  a  misapplication  of  language,  and  thereby  involvi
subject  in  obscurity: — it  is  also  inconsistent  with  the  su
exposition  which  Sir  William  Blackstone  gives  of  these  same
According  to  the  terms  of  the  distinction,  the  Rights  of  Persons  all
such  rights  as  men  have  to  their  own  persons  or  bodies:  Le,  Tte
right  of  moving  without  obstruction  by  others  from  place  to  plftoik
subject  to  limitations  imposed  by  law :  and  the  right  of  freedom  fros
bodily  harm,  subject  to  the  same  restriction.  So  that  all  such  ii|^
as  a  man  may  have  in,  over,  or  to  external  objects  (whether  c^
persons  or  things),  ought,  in  pursuance  of  the  same  distincttoOy  k
have  been  excluded  from  the  rights  of  persons,  and  treated  of  BO
where  but  under  the  rights  of  things.


Methods.  73Z

[Instances  from  the  Commentaries  in  which  Sir  William  Black- Lscr.
atMie  has  treated  rights  to  things  under  *  Eights  of  persons '  (in  his ^^^^^^
«He)  and  conversely. Husband  and  Wife,  Father  and  Child,  etc.
wA  i.  p.  128. Property,  p.  138.]

In  consequence  of  his  misapprehension  of  the  term  'Eights  of
jfmmmB^*  he  has  treated  (Book  L  c.  1)  rights  to  life,  reputation,  etc.
mOk  the  obligations  to  respect  them,  under  the  rights  of  persons ;
■bliOQgh,  as  being  conmion  to  every  status,  it  is  manifest  that  they
kloog  to  the  rights  of  things.  Tliey  are  in  truth  universal  jWa  in
Hme  tUulo,

Hie  Eoman  Law  is  free  from  this  error ;  its  error  consisting  in
fmiiaUy  expounding  the  peculiarities  of  certain  status  under  the  *  Jus
ftnmarum*  instead  of  either  giving  thereunder  a  complete  exposition
of  rights  ex  statu  (on  the  one  hand),  or  of  limiting  that  department
(on  the  other)  to  a  mere  enumeration  of  status  themselves,  and  of  the
Bodes  of  their  investment  and  divestment  There  is,  however,  no
Mingling  of  universal  and  particular  rights,  etc.  under  that  department.


[ The  Distinction  between  the  Jura  Personarum  and  Jura  Berum^  as

stated  by  the  Roman  Lavn/ers,

1^ Is  not,  like  that  of  Blackstone,  liable  to  the  objection  that  things
Wb  supposed  capable  of  rights.

' It  is  however  liable  to  the  second  objection  which  we  have  pre-
■Bad  to  advance  against  the  method  of  the  learned  Commentator.

Law,  as  it  relates  to  Persons,  ought  to  have  been  the  only  subject
if  the  first  grand  division.  Instead  of  this,  innumerable  instances
|Mgr  be  cited  in  which  the  law  as  it  relates  to  Things  is  therein
mfted  of.  The  Law  of  Persons  is  not  confined  to  a  mere  enumera-
Bon  of  staius,  and  a  description  of  the  modes  in  which  they  begin
Md  end.  Instances  of  rights,  obligations,  etc.  ex  statu,  are  scattered
hp  and  down  the  other  departments.


(2.)

Methods  of  the  Roman  writers.

Whether,  according  to  the  Institutional  method  of  the  Eoman
fwyers,  jura  ad  rem,  or  obligations  strido  sensu,  belong  to  the  Law  of
ilbgst

The  dispute  seems  to  have  arisen  from  confounding  jura  in  re
with  the  jus  quod  ad  res  pertinet.

The  first  belong  parUy  to  the  Law  of  Things  and  partly  to  that
rf  Persons ;  not  being  (generically  considered)  either  dependent  upon
ir  independent  of  status,  but  being  distinguished  by  this :  that  they
Ifafl  against  mankind  generally.

The  latter  was  intended  to  include,  not  only  all  such  jura  in  re
•  are  independent  of  status,  but  also  all  such  jura  ad  rem  as  are  inde-
Mident  of  status.  Actions  being  intended  to  comprise  Procedure
Dly.


738  Law:  Purposes  and  Subjects.

LxoT.  Proofs : — The  announcement  of  the  tripartite  division  with  the

^XLIII  ^ corresponding  method  of  treatment :  The  place  occupied  by  sueeei-
' sion  jper  universUcUem  (sed  qusBie). Sir  William  Blackstone's  view  of
the  subject ;  who  places  Property,  etc.  and  Contract,  et«.  under  t
common  department :  viz.  '  Rights  (or,  as  it  ought  to  be,  Law)  d
Things.' — This  also  accords  with  the  opinion  of  Suarez,  who  di^dei
Law  {Le.  primary  rights  and  obligations),  in  the  same  manner  into
two  departments, '  Law  of  Things  and  Persons.'
The  scheme  may  have  been  the  following : —
1st.  Rights,  etc.  ex  skUu  (or  perhaps  a  mere  enumeration  of  staks),
2nd.  Rights,  etc.  not  ex  statu.


"%


(2.)  Jura  ad

rem.

1

ex  c :
ex  q.  c :
ex  q.  d.

1

ex

I  I

(1.)  Jura  in  re  (including (2.)  Jura  ad  rem.  (3.)  Procednni

such  an  anticipation  of  jura
ad  rem  as  was  necessary  to
make  Universitates  juris  in-
telligible).

But,  according  to  the  announcement,  Procedure  and  jut  t n  rv  (in  OM
of  which  jura  ad  rem  must  be  comprised)  co-ordinate  with  jus  penonanm.

Want  of  a  generic  expression  may  have  led  to  all  the  confoM.
Wanting  a  generic  expression  to  denote  the  half  which  it  wu  in-
tended to  oppose  to  jus  persmarum,  they  have  co-ordinated  its  parti
with  jus  personarumf  forgetting  one  of  them.

The  eifect  of  the  whole  is  this :  They  intended  (thou^  theii-
tention  was  obscure)  to  divide  the  whole  of  Private  Law  (exdadilg
therefrom,  not  only  political  status,  but  also  professional  sktim  ani
the  whole  of  criminal  law)  into  two  principal  departments ;  one  of
which  they  further  meant  to  divide  into  three  divisions.  But  for
want  of  a  generic  name  wherewith  to  designate  this  department,  tkj
have  treated  its  divisions  as  if  they  were  of  the  same  rank  as  dn
other  department.  And  further,  through  forgetfulness  (or  for  khbi
unaccountable  reason)  they  have  degraded  one  of  these  three  dirisiofli
to  the  rank  of  a  subdivision  of  one  of  the  others,  leaving  it  uncertaii
to  which  they  intended  to  refer  it.

If  this  were  the  scheme,  *  Obligaiio*  belongs  neither  to  */«»
Rerum*  nor  to  ^Adiones,'  but  is  a  division  (on  the  same  line  wiik  tf^
either  (1°)  of  the  great  department,  *  Law  of  Rights,  etc.  rum  ex  staif^i
or  (2°)  of  the  whole  of  private  law  (assuming  that  the  proper  subject
of  the  Law  of  Persons  is  a  mere  enumeration  of  status,  etc.)


(3.)

Remarks  upon  the  method  observed  by  Gains.

In  pursuance  of  that  well-founded  distinction  between  Law  ^
Persons  and  Law  of  Things  which  Gains,  in  common  with  other  fr
stitutional  writers,  has  adopted,  the  main  division  (according  to  Bsda


Methods.  739

ad  Subjects)  skoM  not  have  been  threefold  {stUl  less  fourfold),  but  two- Lxor.
frii;  the  matter  of  the  Law  of  Actions  (i.e.  civil  procedure),  as  un- ^  XLIII
■odified  by  stahis  (or,  in  other  words,  the  generalia  of  the  law  of
Mtioos),  being  included  under  the  Law  of  Things,  and  the  several
■edifications,  under  the  several  status  out  of  which  they  arise.

The  treatise  is  confined  to  Private  Law:  i,e,  all  that  relates  to
pditical  status — to  the  Sovereign  and  to  the  administration  of  the
lovereign  power — ^is  excluded.  No  regular  account  even  is  given  of
die  constitution  of  Courts  of  Justice,  without  which  the  law  of  actions
b  not  intelligible.

Criminal  Law,  or  publica  judicia  (briefly  mentioned  in  the  Listi-
tates):  ix,  crimes,  punishments,  and  criminal  procedure,  are  altogether
omitted ;  though  the  greater  part  of  crimes  are  as  much  violations  of
piivite  primary  rights  as  the  private  delicts  of  which  he  treats.  (So
ibo  Blondeau,  X.)

The  purpose  of  the  distinction  between  Law  of  Persons  and  Law
jf  lliings,  is  not  only  forgotten  with  reference  to  civil  procedure ;
bot  rights  and  obligations  of  all  other  sorts,  without  distinction  to
iiieir  universality  or  particularity,  are  scattered  up  and  down  through
he  two  (or  three)  first  divisions.  If  the  purpose  was  to  sever  Law
i  Persons  from  Law  of  Things  in  the  manner  supposed,  all  the  rights,
tL  ex  statu  should  have  been  put  into  the  former,  and  it  should  have
leen  placed  last

If  the  purpose  merely  was  to  enumerate  the  several  status  and
0  explain  the  respective  modes  in  which  they  begin  and  end,  and
hen  to  deal  with  rights  and  their  respective  modifications  ex  statu  in
Beeesrion  (as  explained  above),  the  matter  of  the  treatise  should
■tie  been  divided  in  a  totally  different  manner;  and  none  of  the
Bights,  etc.  which  originate  in  the  several  status  should  have  been
kast  into  the  preliminary  enumeration  of  them.

On  that  supposition,  there  would  have  been  no  such  division  as
liit  into  Law  of  Persons  and  Law  of  Things.  But  the  space  now
Mcopied  by  what  is  called  the  law  of  persons,  would  have  been
ioely  an  introductory  disquisition  on  the  several  status; — the  body
of  the  work  comprising  all  rights  and  obligations ;  those  which  origin-
tte  in  status,  as  well  as  those  which  do  not

Another  great  defect  is,  the  desultory  and  defective  manner  of  dealing
•tt  ddids.  For,  first,  he  confines  the  term  to  violations  of  jure  in
fi;  only  treating  ex  professo  of  these :  as  if  violations  of  rights  ex
Mrocftt  and  of  other  jura  ad  rem  were  not  just  as  essential  to  a
complete  view  of  the  subject.  Secondly,  he  scatters  them  through
tltit  part  of  the  Law  of  Things  which  relates  to  Obligations,  strido
*wii,  or  to  jura  ad  rem,  and  also  through  the  book  which  is  pro-
fessedly devoted  to  Procedure; — thus  confounding  the  matter  of
letions  and  Exceptions,  etc.  with  the  mode  in  which  these  several
ig^ts  are  enforced.  Violations  of  jura  ad  rem  are  in  the  same  case;
id,  as  is  said  above,  are  nowhere  expounded  explicitly  and  pro-
vedly:  being  either  considered  implicitly  (under  the  head  ^  De
iUffoiiombus ')  on  occasion  of  the  obligations  of  which  they  are  viola-
;  or  explicitly  under  ^actions.*


740  Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

LsoT.  Another  defect  common  to  Gains  and  the  Institates^  is  the  oon

_^^^ founding  combinations  of  Alienation  and  Contract  with  Contract;  m

the  placing  universUaies  juris  before  jwa  ad  rem. See  *  ComUnatioii

of  jus  in  re  and  jus  ad  rem.'


(4)

Remarks  upon  the  Method  observed  in  the  Institutes,

Having  announced  a  threefold  division  (and  the  same  objectii
applies  to  Gaius) — Persons,  Things,  and  Actions,  the  compiler  mail
a  fourfold  one ;  treating  under  *  Things,'  of  jura  in  re,  and  nnd
'Obligations,'  oi  jura  ad  rem:  thus  opposing  one  species  of  rights ai
obligations  to  another  (not  by  names,  one  of  which  denotes  one  spec
of  rights,  etc.;  and  another,  another;  but)  by  names  the  last
which,  indeed,  has  reference  to  a  species  of  rights,  but  the  first
which  denotes  the  subjects  of  rights.  The  result  of  this  division
that  instead  of  treating  of  'Things'  apart,  and  then  opposLog  o
species  of  rights  over  things  (and  other  subjects)  to  another; — ^he  i
dicates  things  and  a  species  of  rights  by  a  name  which  seems
oppose  things  to  rights;  and,  what  is  worse,  to  oppose  them  to  a  a
of  rights.  A  consequence  of  which  is,  that  jura  in  re  seem  to
suppressed.

Another  objection  is,  that  as  the  obligations  which  correspond
jura  in  re  are  not  treated  of  explicitly  (but  left  to  be  collected  fro
'delicts'),  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  term  'obligation '.is  used
denote  jura  ad  rem,  as  well  as  their  corresponding  obligations,  the  fir
seem  to  be  rights  without  obligations,  and  the  second  obligatioi
without  rights.  But  this  arises  from  that  remarkable  defect  in  tl
Roman  law  language  which  I  have  observed  upon  above.

The  modes  in  which  jura  in  re  end,  are  not  described.


(5.)
Method  of  the  French  Codes.

The  Law  distributed  under  Jive  Codes;  viz,:

Matter  of  the  Civil  Code.

Matter  of  the  Commercial  Code.

Matter  of  the  Code  of  Civil  Procedure.

Matter  of  the  Penal  Code.

Matter  of  the  Code  of  Criminal  Procedure.

Defects:  Only  so  much  of  the  Law  of  Persons  as  concerns  domes
and  quasi-domestic  Status  is  comprised  in  the  Civil  Code.  The  I
which  relates  to  Traders  (and  which,  for  reasons  given  above,  oii(
to  enter  into  the  Civil  Code  under  the  head  of  Law  of  Persons]
made  the  subject  of  a  distinct  Code,  and  opposed,  as  it  were,  to
law  of  which  it  is  only  a  member. It  is  like  dividing  the  hon


Methods.  74 1;

bodj  into  the  right  or  left  arm,  and  all  such  parts  of  it  as  are  not Lsot.
in^  or  left  arm.  V.5HIL

He  administration  of  the  law  relating  to  traders  by  distinct
tribunals  is  itself  an  absurdity,  and  not  suggested  by  reason,  but  the
VDrk  of  blind  imitation.  And  admitting  that  the  separation  of
jnrifldiction  is  a  good,*  that  is  no  reason  for  this  mutilation.  All  that
ii  peculiar  to  traders  (tribunal,  as  well  as  other  peculiarities)  would,
of  coarse,  in  a  just  Corpus  Juris,  be  contained  under  a  distinct  head;
vliich  is  all  that  is  done  now;  the  Code  de  Commerce  supposing  all
other  parts  of  the  Code.

The  rest  of  the  law  which  relates  to  Status  is  not  in  any  Code  or
Codes  at  all:  having  never,  so  far  as  I  know,  been  reclaimed  from
einos:  and  being  only  to  be  found,  either  in  the  Jurisprudence  of  the
tribunals,  or  in  an  immense  mass  of  laws  issued  from  time  to  time
vithout  system.

Cmt  Injuries  are  nowhere  described  ;  being  merely  implied  in  the
ioKription  of  the  rights  of  which  they  are  violations,  or  in  the
ioKription  of  the  Procedure  by  which  the  Rights  and  Obligations
rideh  they  generate  are  enforced. (Quaere.)

Rights  and  Obligations  ex  delicto  private  are,  in  the  same  manner,
Brtablished  by  implication. (Qusere.)

Crimes  are  nowhere  described  apart;  being  implicated  with,  and
ieacribed  indirectly  in  the  Code  of  Punishment  or  that  of  Criminal
Piocedure.


(6.)
Beniham^s  Ideas  of  Method,

*  General  Law  and  Particular  Law' — {TraitiSy  etc.  vol.  i.  p.  150.)

Here,  the  purpose  of  the  distinction  into  Law  of  Things  and
Uw  of  Persons,  is  clearly,  though  briefly  indicated,  and  well  ex-
^^J^essed:  being  the  purpose  of  the  very  distinction  between  jura
^^rum  sLnd  jura  pers&narum  which  he  reprobates  (pp.  259,  294,  299).

Penal — Civil — Constitutional.^^ (See  various  meanings  of  Civil.)

Confusion  of  Status  {i.e,  the  belonging  to  a  class  having  peculiar
^ts,  eta)  with  the  being  invested  with  rights,  etc.  which  arise  out
i  a  character  that  may  belong  to  many  classes :  as  *  H&itiery  Fendeur,*
tc  '  Foleur,  Sddudeur,'  etc.  pp.  300,  304.

[According  to  this  plan,  all  that  relates  to  Contract  must  be
epeated  under  every  status.

Where  a  difference  in  the  law  is  bottomed  in  some  peculiarity  in
le  subject  of  the]^right,  the  difference  should  be  described  under  the
iTiaion  *  Things.'  Quaere :  Whether  any  peculiarities  of  persons  (as
ibjects  of  rights)  should  be  considered  under  the  several  Status,  or
ider  *  Things '  ?] — Marginal  Note.

'  This  refers  to  the  following  sentence droit  constitutionnel,  est  la  plus  com-
Bentbsm  : — '  De tontes ces divi- pl^te et  la plus commode.' — TraiUs,
m,  ceUe  en  droit  p^al  droit  civil  et  vol.  i.  p.  151.


s


742  Law:  Purposes  and  Subjects.

Lbot.  Idea  of  treaiing  Obligations  ea^esdy  and  all  Rights  impHcUy.

■r— ^  Conftision  of  that  part  of  the  Code  which  treats  of  Civil  Injuria^  i«A

thai  which  treats  of  Crimes.

[Wherever  a  distinct  status  is  created  (whether  it  be  domeetie,
special,  or  public),  the  peculiarities  (whether  lights,  obligations,  in-
capacities, or  exemptions)  in  which  it  consists^  should  not  be  mixed  up
with  the  provisions  which  are  generally  applicable.  It  is  merely
because  it  is  expedient  to  treat  of  these  peculiarities  apart,  that  a
status  is  created :  i,e,  that  they  are  professedly  treated  apiurt.

Where  the  mischievous  act  by  reason  of  which  compensation  is
due  from  the  actor  to  the  sufferer,  is  not  intentional  or  negligent^  can
it  be  called  an  injury  or  a  violation  of  a  right )  Being  followed  hj
the  same  consequence,  viz.  liability  to  make  compensation  (or  restita-
tion),  it  may,  by  analogy,  be  csJled  an  injury  ^  a  quasi-delict),  as
incidents  not  contracts  are  called  quasi-contracts.] — TraUis,  eUx  vol
L  p.  334,  Marginal  Note,

Distinction  between  civil  and  criminal^  pp.  160,  298.

'  Chaque  loi  civile  forme  un  titre  particulier  qui  doit  enfin  abontir
a  une  loi  p^nale.'

[That  is,  if  the  obligation  to  repair  a  civil  injury  be  considered
as  a  punishment.] — Traitds,  voL  L  p.  161,  Margined  Note,

The  next  folio  is  headed,

'  Remarks  upon  Mr.  Bentham's  Ideas  of  Method ;'  but  the  rest  is  a
blank.  The  nature  of  some  of  the  intended  '  Remarks '  may  be  gathered
from  the  foregoing  hints  ;  and  from  the  marginal  notes  extracted  from  tiie
*  Trait4s.'~6\  A,


(7.)
Method  of  Falch

In  Falck,  civil  injuries  are  mixed  up,  as  in  the  Institutes,  wiA
contracts  and  quasi-contracts :  and  (as  also  in  the  Institutes)  noD0
but  violations  of  jura  in  re  are  directly  described :  violations  of  cott-
tract  and  quasi-contract  being  either  left  to  be  deduced  from  th^
description  of  the  contract  and  quasi-contract  itself,  or  being  mixed
up  with  actions :  i,e,  civil  procedure.

The  Eights  and  Obligations  arising  out  of  civil  injuries  are  eithel
annexed  to  the  description  of  the  violations,  or  are  confounded
with  procedure.

Crimes,  the  obligations  arising  out  of  them,  and  criminal  pro
cedure,  are  blended  together ;  though  civil  procedure  is  professed!;
treated  apart  from  civil  injuries  and  the  rights  which  they  beget

Criminal  Law  is  placed  on  the  same  line  with,  and  opposed  t(
Civil  Law ;  which  is  absurd  for  many  reasons.  First,  to  oppose  (tj
not  merely  to  distinguish  from,  but  to  co-ordinate  with)  a  pecaUi
species  of  violations,  etc.  of  primary  rights,  to  those  primary  ri^t
and  to  other  violations  of  them,  etc.  is  absurd :  Primary  Kig^ts  as


Methods.  743

ObligatioDB  being  opposed,  not  to  a  spedts  of  violations  and  sanctions, Lior.
tat  to  the  whde  of  them.  ^  XLIII^

Secondly,  Civil  Procedure,  being  by  him  separated  from  primary  '

i^hts  and  civil  injuries,  etc.  is  thus  left  out  of  the  division  into  Civil
nd  Criminal.  And  to  make  it  a  co-ordinate  class  with  them  seems
to  be  absurd.

See  'Public  and  Special  Law.'

See  Falck,  Jnrisl,  Eneyd.  Einleitung,  §  21.


[The  following  is  the  passage  referred  to  in  Falck.

'Mit  Backsicht  auf  die  angegebenen  Hauptgesichtspunkte  werden
odi  folgende  Theile  ergeben  :

'  1.  Das  Privatrecht  mit  den  Unterabtheilungen  in  (a)  das  biir-
gerliche  Kecht^  (6)  das  Kirchenrecht,  (c)  das  Polizeirecht,  (d)  das
Griminalrecht^  und  das  Prozessrecht.

'  2.  Das  offentliche  Eecht^  zu  welchem,  gehoren :  (a)  das  Staats-
recht,  (b)  das  Regierungsrecht^  (c)  das  Finanz-  und  Cameralrecht^  und
(i)  das  Yolkerrecht.'

In  the  margin  of  the  same  page  are  the  following  remarks : —

Law  (or  the  Science  of  Law — Jurisprudence)  cannot  be  expounded
without  dividing  it  into  parts.

The  division  most  in  use  is  founded  upon  an  enumeration  of  the
iereral  sorts  of  Rights :  but^  inasmuch  as  right  correlates  with  obliga-
tioD,an  enumeration  of  the  several  sorts  of  Obligations  would  be  just
M  good  a  basis  for  a  division.

Both  Right  and  Obligation  (i.e.  legal  right  and  obligation)  being
creatures  of  Law,  the  notion  of  Law  (or  of  a  politically  sanctioned
Bole)  ought  to  be  placed  in  front  (or  to  be  made  the  punctum  saliens)
of  a  division.

ate.  •

The  bases  are  substantially  the  same.  Whether  you  divide  Law
u  it  relates  to  different  subjects,  or  Rights  (with  their  obligations)
is  they  relate  to  those  same  subjects,  your  divisions  will  severally  be
eonversant  about  the  same  sets  of  subjects.

A  division,  of  which  each  part  should  exclude  the  subject  of  every
other,  IB  not  possible.]


(8.)
Method  of  Hugo.

1.  Opposition  of  Public  and  Private  Law.

2.  Inclusion  of  Litemational  Law  in  public  law,  and  treating  it
with  Military  Status.

3.  Liconsistency  of  treating  Civil  Injuries  and  Rights  ex  delicto
mtaiOf  as  a  portion  of  private  law ;  though  he  puts  Civil  Procedure,
!!rim68,  etc.  under  Public.


744


Leot.
XLIII


Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

4.  The  making  Folizd-Eechi  a  distinct  department  of  a  system,
into  all  the  departments  of  which  its  matter  enters.

[The  portion  of  Hugo  referred  to,  is  the  chapter  called  'TheOe  dee
Rechts,'  in  the  *  Lehrbuch  der  juristischen  Encyclopedic'  The  following
comments  are  copied  from  the  margin.]

Eights  of  Action  are  classed  with  Obligations ;  whilst  obligations
to  suffer  punishment  (which  are  not  more  sanctionative  than  the
former)  are  referred  (together  with  crimes  and  criminal  procedure)
to  Public  Law.  Civil  procedure  is  completely  separated  from  tbd
Eights  of  Action  and  the  matter  for  exception,  upon  which  it  is  built
Civil  injuries  are  not  considered  directly.  Sanctionative  Civil  Rights,
which  are  exercised  extrajudicially,  are  forgotten.  Confusion  of
Crimes,  and  their  consequent  obligations,  are  classed  with  Criminal
Procedure.


All  the  other  departments  into  which  Law  may  be  distributed,
are  but  collections  of  fragments  detached  from  the  two  essential  ones;
viz.  Law  of  Things  or  General  Law,  and  Law  of  Persons  or  Particular
Law.

Law  which  is  conversant  with  persons  as  not  arranged  under
classes ;  Law  which  is  conversant  with  persons  as  arranged  under
classes,  or,  in  other  words,  as  invested  with  status  or  conditions.
The  former  is  analagous  to  the  supreme  genus :  the  latter,  to  the
genera  and  species  which  are  contained  in  the  supreme  genus.  Onlj
analagous ;  because  the  Eights,  etc.  which  are  the  subject  of  the
former,  are  not  all  of  them  common  to  all  classes.  It  is,  howeTer,
analogous,  inasmuch  as  the  consideration  of  it  is  necessarily  implied
in  the  consideration  of  every  status.


Lect.
XLIV


Jus  Publi-
cum:  Two
eenses.


Narrower
sense.
The  law  of
political
conditions.


LECTUEE XLIV.

LAW,  PUBLIC  AND  PRIVATE.

Having  discussed  the  distinction  between  Law  of  Things  9sA
Law  of  Persons,  I  proceed  to  the  connected  distinction  between
Public  Law  and  Private  Law.

The  term  'picblic  law*  has  two  principal  significations:  one
of  which  significations  is  large  and  vague ;  the  other,  strict  and
definite.

Taken  with  its  strict  and  definite  signification  (to  which  I
will  advert  in  the  first  instance),  the  term  public  law  is  confined
to  that  portion  of  law  which  is  concerned  with  political  eondi'
tions :  that  is  to  say,  with  the  powers  rights  duties  capadties
and  incapacities,  which  are  peculiar  to  political  superiors,  supremo
and  subordinate.


Public  and  Private  Law.  745

Taken  with  its  strict  and  definite  meaning,  public  law  ought Leot.
lot  (I  think)  to  be  opposed  to  all  the  rest  of  the  law,  but  ought
0  be  inserted  in  the  Law  of  Persons,  as  one  of  the  limbs  or
oembeis  of  that  supplemental  department.

But  before  I  proceed  to  the  plojce  which  public  law  (as  thus
udeistood)  ought  to  occupy  in  an  arrangement  of  a  corjms  juris,
will  touch  briefly  on  two  difliculties,  which,  it  appears  to  me,
le  the  only  difficulties  that  the  subject  really  presents.

I  have  said  that  public  law  (in  its  strict  and  definite  sig-  An  ac-
ification)  is  confined  to  that  portion  of  law  which  is  concerned  ^^^  kw
dth  political  conditions :  that  is  to  say,  with  the  powers,  rights,  m  this
Qties,  capacities  and  incapacities,  which  are  peculiar  to  political  ^^^Hae
aperiors,  supreme  and  subordinate.  some  of

Now,  so  far  as  public  law  relates  to  the  Sovereign,  it  \a  clear  of  positive
liat  much  of  it  is  not  law,  but  is  merely  positive  morality,  or  morality.
thical  maxims.  As  against  the  monarch  properly  so  called,  or
3  against  the  sovereign  body  in  its  collective  and  sovereign
ipadty,  the  so-called  laws  which  determine  the  constitution  of
le  State,  or  which  determine  the  ends  or  modes  to  and  in  which
le  sovereign  powers  shall  be  exercised,  are  not  properly  positive
iws,  but  are  laws  set  by  general  opinion,  or  merely  ethical
laxims  which  the  Sovereign  spontaneously  observes.

In  strictness,  therefore,  much  of  the  public  law  which  relates
0  the  Sovereign  or  State,  is  not  matter  for  any  portion  of  the
orpms  juris :  understanding  by  the  corpus  jtcris  the  system  or
JoUective  whole  of  the  positive  laws  which  obtain  in  any  society,
)oIitical  and  independent.

And,  for  the  same  reason,  it  particularly  is  not  matter  for
ie  Law  of  Persons  or  Status,  For  a  status  or  condition,  pro-
perly so  called,  consists  of  kgal  rights  and  duties,  and  of  capaci-
ties and  incapacities  to  take  and  incur  them.  And,  consequently,
^  sovereign  government  of  one,  or  a  sovereign  government  of  a
xnimber  in  its  collective  and  sovereign  capacity,  is  not  invested
^ith  a  status  (in  the  proper  acceptation  of  the  term) :  or  it  is
iwt  invested  with  a  status  (in  the  proper  acceptation  of  the  term)
derived  from  the  positive  law  of  its  own  political  community.

But  though,  in  logical  rigour,  much  of  the  so-called  law
liiich  relates  to  the  Sovereign,  ought  to  be  banished  from  the
mjms  juris,  it  ought  to  be  inserted  in  the  corpus  juris  for  reasons
f  convenience  which  are  paramount  to  logical  symmetry.  For
[longh,  in  strictness,  it  belongs  to  positive  morality  or  to  ethics,
knowledge  of  it  is  absolutely  necessary  in  order  to  a  knowledge


746  Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

Leot. of  the  positive  law  with  which  the  corpus  juris  is  properly
.  concemecL

The  case  which  I  am  now  considerii^  is  one  of  the  numerona
cases  wherein  law  and  morality  are  so  intimately  and  indissolubly
allied,  that,  though  they  are  of  distinct  natures  and  ought  to  be
carefully  distinguished,  it  is  necessary  nevertheless  to  consider
them  in  conjunction.  A  description,  therefore,  of  the  law  which
regards  the  constitution  of  the  State,  and  which  determines  the
ends  or  modes  to  and  in  which  the  Sovereign  exercises  the
sovereign  powers,  is  an  essential  part  of  a  complete  corpus  jum,
although,  properly  speaking,  that  so-called  law  is  not  positive
law.

The  law  of  England,  for  example,  cannot  be  understood,
without  a  knowledge  of  the  constitution  of  Parliament,  and  of
the  various  rules  by  which  that  sovereign  body  conducts  the
business  of  legislation :  although  it  is  manifest  that  much  of  the
law  which  determines  the  constitution  of  the  Parliament,  and
many  of  the  rules  which  Parliament  follows  in  legislating,  are
either  mere  law  imposed  by  the  opinion  of  the  community,  or
merely  ethical  maxims  which  the  body  spontaneously  observes.

So  much,  therefore,  of  the  law,  regarding  the  Sovereign,  as
is  necessary  to  a  due  understanding  of  the  corpus  juris,  ought  to
be  inserted  in  the  corpus  juris,  although  it  comes  not  within  the
predicament  oi  positive  law.  And,  since  the  law  regarding  the
Sovereign  ought  to  be  inserted  in  the  Law  of  Persons,  we  may
say,  by  way  of  analogy,  that  the  Sovereign  has  a  sUUvs  or  con-
dition ;  although  a  status,  properly  so  called,  is  composed  of  Ugd
rights  and  legal  duties,  or  of  capacities  or  incapacities  to  take  or
incur  legal  rights  and  duties.

And  here  I  will  remark,  that  public  law  (in  its  strict  and
definite  meaning)  is  not  unfrequently  divided  into  two  portions:
constitutioKial  law,  and  administrative  law :  (StcuUs-BedU  (S
ConstitutionS'Rechty  and  Regierungs-Rccht),  The  first  comprises
the  law  which  determines  the  constitution  of  the  sovereign
government :  The  second  comprises  the  law  which  relates  to  lie
exercise  of  the  sovereign  powers,  either  by  the  Sovereign  or  by
political  subordinates.

This  division  of  public  law  does  not  tally  with  the  division
of  it  into  law  which  regards  the  status  of  the  Sovereign,  and
law  which  regards  the  rights  and  duties  of  political  subordinateSi
The  latter,  indeed,  is  probably  comprised  under  administrative
law,  but  the  former  does  not  coincide  with  constitutional  law:
a  considerable  portion  of  it  likewise  falls  under  administrative


Public  and  Private  Law.  747

law. A  great  portion  of  our  parliamentary  law  relates  to  the Lior.
Donstitation  of  the  supreme  body,  but  much  of  it  only  consists .
)f  rules  observed  by  the  body  itself  in  conducting  the  business
i  l^islation  and  of  supreme  government,  which  is  properly
idministrative  law.

The  second  of  the  two  diflBculties  to  which  I  have  adverted,  Difficulty
\  the  difficulty  of  drawing  the  line  of  demarcation,  by  which  ^^S^i


he  conditions  of  private  persons  are  severed  from  the  conditions  poUticar
f  political  subordinates. The  powers  of  master,  father  or  guar-  vate  wn-


ian  subserve,  in  many  respects,  the  very  purposes  for  which  ditiona.
owers  are  conferred  on  judges.

This  difficulty  I  have  stated  in  my  Outline  (p.  71,  voL  L
)ife)  in  the  following  words : —

'  It  is  somewhat  difficult  to  describe  the  boundary  by  which
he  conditions  of  political  subordinates  are  severed  from  the
imditions  of  private  persons.  The  rights  and  duties  of  political
abordinates,  and  the  rights  and  duties  of  private  persons,  are
Features  of  a  common  author :  namely,  the  Sovereign  or  State.
Jid  if  we  examine  the  purposes  for  which  their  rights  and
aties  are  conferred  and  imposed  by  the  Sovereign,  we  shall  find
)at  the  purposes  of  the  rights  and  duties  which  the  Sovereign
infers  and  imposes  on  private  persons,  often  coincide  with  the
Qiposes  of  those  which  the  Sovereign  confers  and  imposes  on
ibordinate  political  superiors.  Accordingly,  the  conditions  of
urent  and  guardian  (with  the  answering  conditions  of  child  and
•aid)  are  not  unfrequently  treated  by  writers  on  jurisprudence,
i  portions  of  pvhlic  law.  For  example :  The  patria  potestas
nd  the  tvUela  of  the  Soman  Law,  are  treated  thus,  in  his  mas-
Jrly  System  des  Pandekten-Bechts,  by  Thibaut  of  Heidelberg:
^ho,  for  penetrating  acuteness,  rectitude  of  judgment,  depth  of
naming,  and  vigour  and  elegance  of  exposition,  may  be  placed
J  the  side  of  Savigny,  at  the  head  of  all  living  Civilians.*

The  powers  residing  in  a  master  over  his  slave,  in  a  father
(^er  his  child,  and  in  a  guardian  over  his  ward,  subserve  the
ime  general  purposes  as  the  powers  of  judges  and  other  ministers
justice,  because  they  are  designed,  amongst  other  purposes,
r  the  prevention  of  crime.  The  powers  of  punishment  which
e  Boman  law  originally  entrusted  to  the  paterfamilias  were  so
tensive,  that  this  accounts  for  the  very  small  space  occupied
'  criminal  law  in  the  early  Soman  law. The  place  of  criminal


748  Law:  Purposes  and SMijects.

Lbot.  law  was  mostly  supplied  by  the  powers  vested  in  those  ]
persons,  who  being  the  proprietary  and  respectable  daa
little  tempted  to  commit  crimes,  while  the  remainder
community  were  subject  to  these  powers  residing  in  the;
were  thereby  prevented  from  committing  crimes ;  or,  if  tl
conmiit  crimes,  were  punished  by  those  in  whose  potesta
were,  at  the  discretion  of  those  persons.

I  cannot  see  how  any  precise  line  of  demarcation  b
political  and  private  conditions  can  possibly  be  drawn,  m
be  this :  that  when  the  condition  is  private,  the  powers
in  the  person  who  bears  it  more  peculiarly  r^ard  persons
mined  specifically ;  when  public,  those  powers  more  pec
regard  the  public  considered  indeterminately.  For  exam]
powers  of  the  master  over  his  slaves,  of  the  father  o^
children,  or  of  the  guardian  over  his  ward,  regard  peculia
slaves  of  that  master,  the  children  of  that  father,  or  the  i
that  guardian,  all  of  whom  are  persons  determined  speci
Whereas  the  powers  vested  in  a  judge,  or  other  officer  of ,
are  not  given  with  reference  to  this  or  that  determinate  ind
or  individuals,  but  generally  to  the  whole  community.

This,  however,  is  so  extremely  vague,  that  different  \
might  refer  the  same  condition;  some  to  political,  otl
private  conditions.  Accordingly,  such  is  the  case.  The
potestas  and  the  tiUela  of  the  Bomans  are  placed  by  Thiba
other  German  writers,  under  the  head  of  public  law,  wk
others,  of  equal  eminence,  they  are  placed  in  private  h
am  not  aware,  however,  that  this  is  of  very  great  impo
Most  of  the  so-called  public  conditions  evidently  regard  pri
the  public  indiscriminately ;  while  most  of  the  private  com
manifestly  primarily  regard  specifically  determined  persoi
would  therefore  be  put  into  that  class  without  hesitation.

^^^^  Having  touched  on  these  difficulties,  I  now  proceed  t

law' of  my  reasons  for  the  proposition  which  I  laid  down  at  the

oondi.  ^^  ^^  Lecture,  namely,  that  public  law,  in  it«  strict  and  c

tions,  meaning,  as  the  law  of  political  conditions,  shoidd  not  be  o

be*opp<»ed  ^  ^^®  ^^^  ^^  ^^®  ^^^»  ^^^  should  be  inserted  in  the  I
to  the  rest  Persons,  as one  member  or  head  of  that  department

of  the

legal  eys- «>^y^  J"^^-

tern,  but  Of the  various  reasons  which  might  be given fc

form  one arrangement,  the  following  reason,  I  think,  will  amply  su:
h^S^^th'  In  explaining  the  nature  of  the  distinction  between

Law  of Things  and  Law  of  Persons  I  said  that  there  are  two  reas

Persons.


Public  and  Private  Law.  749

the  rights  and  duties  of  certain  classes  from  the  body Lect.
^  system :  1st  That  it  is  convenient  to  place  them ^
mder  separate  heads,  instead  of  leaving  them  dispersed
it  the  whole  extent  of  the  corpus  juris :  2ndly.  That

be  detached  from  the  body  of  the  legal  system  without
the  coherence  of  the  latter :  nay,  that  the  exposition
ter  is  more  compact  and  clear,  in  consequence  of  those
1  duties  being  detached  from  it,  and  remitted  to  the
Qt  or  appendix  styled  the  Law  of  Persons,
both  these  reasons  apply  in  an  eminent  degree  to  the
ights,  and  duties  of political  superiors. With  the

of  the  powers  and  duties  of  judges  and  other  ministers

(which  perhaps  it  is  expedient  to  prefix  to  the  general
xjedure),  there  are  no  classes  of  persons  whose  peculiar
I  duties  may  be  detached  more  commodiously  from  the
le  l^al  system  than  those  of  public  or  political  persons,
be  powers,  rights,  and  duties  of  political  persons  ought
iched  from  the  bulk  of  the  legal  system,  it  is  clear  that
it  not  to  be  opposed  to  all  the  rest  of  the  system ;  but

form  a  limb  of  the  miscellaneous  and  supplemental
it  which  is  marked  with  the  common  name  of  the  Law
3.  For  the  law  which  regards  specially  the  powers  and
political  persons,  is  not  of  itself  a  complete  whole,  but
lubly  connected,  like  the  law  of  any  other  status,  with
3  general  matter  which  is  contained  in  the  Law  of
ad  also  with  the  law  regarding  other  conditions.

for  example,  the  case  of  our  own  King.  It  is  clear
owledge  of  his  peculiar  powers,  rights,  and  exemptions
«s  a  knowledge  of  the  Law  of  Things,  and  also  of  many
Uv^  which  are  styled  private.  Without  a  knowledge
ueral  rules  of  property,  his  peculiar  proprietary  rights,
re  not  intelligible.  Without  a  knowledge  of  the  law
ts,  the  peculiarities  of  his  title  to  the  crown  are  not  to
tood.  Without  a  knowledge  of  the  law  of  marriage,  his
elations  to  his  royal  consort  are  not  explicable.

the  same  may  be  said  of  the  powers  and  duties  of  any  •■

person  whatever.  Considered  by  themselves,  they  are
fragment. Before  they  can  be  fully  understood,  they  ill

taken  with  their  various  relations  to  the  rest  of  the
em.

3n,  the  law  of  political  persons  be  opposed  by  the  name
law  to  the  rest  of  the  legal  system,  one  of  these  absurd-
itably  ensues. Either a  bit  of the  corpus  juris  is  !|

R


7 so  Law  :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

YTnr opposed  to  the  bulk  or  mass :  Or  (to  avoid  that  ahsmdity)  the

- ^ - rest  of  the  l^al  system  must  be  appended  to  public  law ;  and

public  law,  'plus  the  rest  of  the  legal  system,  must  be  opposed

to  that  rest  of  the  legal  system  from  which  public  law  is  severe!

There  can  be  no  more  reason  for  opposing  public  law  to  the
rest  of  the  legal  system,  than  for  opposing  any  department  of
the  Law  of  Persons  to  the  bulk  of  the  corpus  juris.  What
should  we  say  to  a  division  of  law  which  opposed  the  law  of
bankruptcy,  or  the  law  of  marriage,  to  the  Law  ?  And  yet  the
division  of  law  into  jus  publicum  and  jus  privatum  involves  the
same  absurdity.  For  jus  publicum  is  the  law  of  political  condi-
tions, and  jus  privatum  is  all  the  law,  minus  the  law  of  political
conditions.  The  opposed  terms  public  and  private  law  tend
moreover,  in  my  opinion,  to  generate  a  complete  misconception
of  the  real  ends  and  purposes  of  law.  Every  part  of  the  law
is  in  a  certain  sense  public,  and  every  part  of  it  is  in  a  certain
sense  private  also.  There  is  scarcely  a  single  provision  of  the
law  which  does  not  interest  the  public,  and  there  is  not  one
which  does  not  interest,  singly  and  individually,  the  persons  d
whom  that  public  is  composed.  Some  parts  indeed  of  the  lair,
as,  for  instance,  the  law  of  political  conditions,  primarily  regard
perhaps  more  peculiarly  the  public  considered  generally ;  while
other  portions  regard  primarily  the  single  individuals  of  wheat
the  public  is  composed.  But  this  line  of  demarcation  is  too
loose  to  justify  the  division ;  which  seems  to  import  that  some
portions  of  the  law  exclusively  regard  the  public,  and  others
exclusively  regard  single  individuals.

Agreeably  to  the  view  which  I  now  have  taken  of  the
subject.  Sir  Matthew  Hale,  in  his  Analysis  of  the  Law,  and  Si
William  Blackstone,  following  Sir  M.  Hale,  have  placed  the  laf
of  political  persons  (sovereign  or  subordinate)  in  the  Lawrf
Persons  :  instead  of  opposing  it,  as  one  great  half  of  the  law,  to
the  rest  of  the  legal  system.^^  Blackstone  divides  what  he  calk  ^
law  regarding  the  relative  rights  of  persons  into  law  r^ardiog  j
public  relations,  and  law  regarding  private  relations.  Undef
the  first  of  these  he  places  constitutional  law  and  the  poweH^
rights,  and  duties  of  subordinate  magistrates,  of  the  clergy,  and
of  persons  employed  by  land  or  sea  in  the  military  defence  of
the  State.

This  placing  the  law  of  political  persons  in  the  Law  of
Persons  as  one  of  its  limbs  or  members,  instead  of  opposing  it
to  the  rest  of  the  corpus  juris,  is  nearly  peculiar  to  Hale  and

^  See  Table  VIII.  post.


Ptiblic  and  Private  Law.  7  5 1

lackstone;  and  originated  with  Hale.  Among  continental  Leot.
iiists,  many  of  whom  I  have  diligently  perused,  I  have  not  .
let  with  a  single  instance:  though  Falck  of  Gottingen  says
Kat  the  Danish  Code,  and  the  systematic  expositions  of  the
Danish  Code,  follow  this  arrangement^^  The  German  jurists
reat  this  arrangement  as  a  great  absurdity,  importing  great
^erwirrungy  or  confusion  of  ideas,  though  the  direct  contrary
.ppears  to  me  to  be  the  truth.  And  the  adoption  of  this  arrange-
oent  by  Sir  Matthew  Hale,  appears  to  me  a  striking  indication
if  Ms  originality  and  depth  of  thought,  since  if  he  had  been  a
Here  copyist,  he  would  have  adopted  the  arrangement  which
iras  already  familiar  to  him  in  the  writings  of  the  Civilians.

From  public  law  with  its  strict  and  definite  meaning,  I  pass  Public  law
to  public  law  with  its  large  and  vague  signification.  andva^^

Endeavouring  to  explain  its  import,  as  taken  with  its  large  significa-
and  vague  signification,  I  will  advert  to  the  distinction  between  natinT^
/itt  publicum  et  privatum  as  drawn  by  the  Eoman  lawyers  :  that  with  the
Wng  the  model  or  pattern  upon  which  the  modem  distinctions  of  the  term
into  public  and  private  law  have  all  of  them  been  formed.  ^y  ^^®

The  Boman  lawyers  divide  the  corpus  juris  into  two  opposed  lawyers.
departments : — the  one  including  the  law  of  political  conditions,  ^^.^^  ^
and  the  law  relating  to  crimes and  criminal  procedure :  the  the  dis-
other  including  the  rest  of  the  law. The  first  they  style  jus  ^^^y^upo„
fMicum,  the  second  they  style  jus  privatum,  it.

In  a  former  Lecture  ^*  I  explained  the  origin  of  the  term

*pubUc  wrongs,'  as  applied  to  crimes. I  observed  that  they

acquired  this  name  from  a  mere  accident,  from  the  fact  that

crimes  were  originally  tried  by  a  body  which  might  be  called

without  impropriety  the  public,  namely,  the  sovereign  Roman

Peopla The  original  reason  ceased  when  the  jurisdiction  in

criminal  causes  was  removed  from the  people,  and  vested  in

aobordinate  judges. But  the  name  remaining,  it  was  supposed

afterwards  by  the  Eoman  jurists,  that  crimes  were  called  public

'^ngs,  not  because  of  the  tribunal  by  which  they  were  originally

*tied,  but  because  crimes  affected  more  immediately  the  interests

^  the  whole  community. I  exposed  this  fallacy  completely  in

^  earlier  part  of  my  Course. I  then  shewed  that  what  are

^ed  civil  injuries  affect  the  public  interest  as  much  as  crimes,

"  *In  den  Bechtssystemen  aasland-  Personenrecht  gezogen. Diese  Verwir-

^tcher  Gelehrten,  z.  B.  der  Diinen  und  rung  der  Begriffe  kommt  bei  uns  gar

^glander,  wird  bisweilen  die  Abhand-  nicht  vor.' — Falck^  p.  48,  §  27  (note),

(^i^  der  staatsrechtlichen  Verschieden-  ^^  See  pp.  404,  601,  vol.  i.  ante.
^eit  unter  den  Menschen  auch  in  der


752  Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

Lect. and  that  the  distinction  rests  not  upon  any  difference,  in  thei

XLIV

w  ^  V  consequences  and  effects,  but  upon  the  different  way  in  whid
they  are  pursued.  It  is  expedient  to  leave  the  prosecution  c
some  offences  to  the  discretion  of  the  injured  parties:  other
cannot  expediently  be  so  left,  and  the  State  is  obliged  to  tak
the  prosecution  of  them  upon  itself.  The  distinction  is  quit
arbitrary ;  that  is  a  civil  injury  in  one  system  of  law  which  i
a  crime  in  another.

Inasmuch  as  crimes  were,  however,  supposed  to  affect  mop
directly  the  interests  of  the  whole  community,  and  inasmuch  a
the  law  of  political  statws  does  really  regard  it  in  a  more  direc
manner  than  any  other  portion,  criminal  law  and  the  kw  a
political  conditions  were  placed  by  the  classical  jurists  together,
and  were  opposed  to  all  the  rest  of  the  corpus  juris}^

They  style  criminal  law  and  the  law  of  political  conditions
jus  puMicum :  for,  say  they,  '  ad  statum  rei  Eomanse,  ad  puUix
utilia  spectat*

They  style  the  opposed  department  of  the  corpus  juris  ju
privatum :  for,  say  they,  *  ad  singulorum  utilitatem,  ad  privaJ^
utilia  spectat.'

This  explains  the  order  of  Justinian's  Institutes.  It  is
merely  a  treatise  upon  private  law.  By  consequence,  criminal
law,  with  the  law  of  political  status,  is  not  comprised  by  it:
Tlie  classical  jurists,  from  whose  elementary  works  the  Institutes
were  copied,  having  thought  that  public  law  was  not  a  fit  subject
for  an  institutional  or  elementary  treatise.  I  know  not  why:
for  a  knowledge  of  the  constitution  of  the  state  is  as  necessary
to  a  knowledge  of  private  law,  as  the  latter  is  to  a  knowledge
of  the  constitution  of  the  state.  All  the  parts  of  the  owyitf
juris  are  in  truth  so  implicated  with  one  another,  that  they
cannot  be  separated.

Blackstone's  Commentaries  are  not  confined  to  private  law,
but  are  intended  to  serve  as  an  institutional  treatise  on  the
whole  Law  of  England :  though  he  touches  upon  certain  parts
(as  upon  equity  and  ecclesiastical  law)  in  a  comparatively  brirf
and  superficial  manner.^^  The  distinction  between  public  and
private  law  is  rejected  or  suppressed  altogether,  or  neariy
altogether  by  him.  He  does  not  style  the  law  regarding  political
conditions  a  branch  of  public  law,  but  places  it  in  the  law  of
persons. But,  this  notwithstanding,  there  is  still  a  trace  of  the

"  Method  of  Roman  Lawyers,  p.  871  ; ^  Method  of  Blackstone,  p.  735,  fl*^
Bentham's  Method,  p.  741. See  Table See  Table  VIII.
IX.  post.


Public  and  Private  Law.  753

iistinction  in  Blackstone's  Commentaries.  He  styles  the  depart-  ^^^
nent  which  relates  to  crimes,  and  to  punishments  and  criminal  -  ^  -
iiocedure,  '  Public  Wrongs.'  This  is,  I  believe,  the  only  vestige
)f  the  distinction  which  Blackstone  retains.  Hale  returns  none
It  all :  for,  in  his  analysis,  he  throws  out  criminal  law  alto-
^er.  In  his  Pleas  of  the  Crown,  he  does  not  designate
nimes  by  the  name  of  public  wrongs,  but  calls  them  much
more  appropriately,  pleas  of  the  crown,  that  is,  offences  of
irhich  the  Crown  or  State  retains  the  prosecution  in  its  own
lunds.^^

With  reference  to  its  ultimate  purpose,  the  law  of  political
iaiuA^  and  criminal  law,  is  not  to  be  distinguished  from  the  so-
alled  private  law.  Each  tends  to  the  security  of  the  public  :
leaning  by  the  pvhlic,  the  several  individuals  who  compose  the
xdety,  as  considered  collectively  or  without  discrimination.
ach  tends  to  the  good  of  those  same  individuals  considered
ngly  or  severally.  The  only  difference  is,  that  in  the  one
ise  the  good  of  the  whole  is  considered  more  directly ;  whilst,
I  the  other,  the  more  immediate  object  is  the  good  of  deter-
inate  individuals.

Another  reason  against  the  distinction  is  this.  That  the
atter  of  the  Law  of  Things  is  just  as  much  implicated  with
ablic  law  as  with  the  law  of  private  conditions.

The  logical  error  of  opposing  a  small  bit  of  the  law  to  the
onainder  of  the  body,  is  not  confined  to  the  distinction  between
le  law  of  things,  and  the  law  of  persons,  or  between  public
id  private  law.  Many  writers,  for  example,  detach  crimiTial
iw  from  the  whole  legal  system,  calling  the  rest  of  the  law
ytlL  Others  detach  ecclesiastical  law,  and  oppose  all  the
nnainder  to  it,  by  the  name  of  civil.  Others  distinguish  the
iw  into  military  and  civil.  The  word  civil  has  about  twelve
ifferent  meanings ;  it  is  applied  to  all  manner  of  objects,  which
re  perfectly  disparate.  As  opposed  to  criminal,  it  means  all
IW  not  criminal  As  opposed  to  ecclesiastical,  it  means  all
IW  not  ecclesiastical :  as  opposed  to  military,  it  means  all  law
Mrt  military,  and  so  on.  Even  jus  privatxtm  is  sometimes  also
sailed  jus  civile.

Nothing  can  be  more  varying  than  the  views  taken  by  some
nodem  writers  of  the  distinction  between  public  and  private
aw.  Some  include  in  public  law,  besides  the  law  of  political
•onditions,  and  of  crimes  and  criminal  procedure,  the  whole  law

^  For  an  examination  of  the  distinc- drawn  by  the  classical  jurists,  see  Table
on  into  pablic and  private  law, as I.,  Notes  2  and  8, 7?o^.


754


Law :  Purposes  and  Subfects.


Lect.
XLIV


Various
other
meanings
of  the


also  of  civil  procedure.  As  the  distinction  between  public  and
private  law  rests  upon  no  intelligible  basis,  there  is  certainly
no  reason  why  public  law  should  not  include  this,  or  any  otlier
portion  of  the  corpus  juris.  If  these  writers  had  any  particnlar
reason  for  including  it,  their  reason  probably  was,  that  puUic
law  is  administered  by  public  persons,  namely  by  judges,  and
other  ministers  of  justice,  and  that  the  law  of  civil  procedure  is
administered  by  the  same  persons.  But  a  great  deal  of  the  law
of  civil  procedure  comprises  rights  vested  in  private  persons:
namely,  rights  vested  in  the  parties  to  the  cause  as  against  die
judges!  or  in  one  party  against  the  other,  in  con^Z*  i
circumstances  arising  in  the  course  of  the  cause.  And,  moie*
over,  it  is  manifest  that  the  whole  of  the  law  is  administered  bf
judges ;  not  the  law  of  procedure  only.

From  the  utter  impossibility  of  finding  a  stable  basis  for
the  division,  others  exclude  criminal  law.  They  see  that  a
multitude  of  crimes  affect  individuals  as  directly  as  the  delicti
which  are  styled  civil.

But  the  greatest  logical  error  of  all  is  that  committed  bf
many  continental  jurists,  who  include  in  public  law,  not  only
the  law  of  political  conditions,  of  crimes,  and  of  civil  and
criminal  procedure,  but  also  international  law ;  which  is  not
positive  law  at  all,  but  a  branch  of  positive  morality.  It  is
sometimes  expedient  to  include  in  the  corpus  juris  a  part  of
what  is  really  positive  morality,  because  positive  law  is  nol
intelligible  without  it ;  but  there  is  no  such  reason  for  includlBg
international  law  considered  as  a  complete  system  of  morals,  or
any  part  of  it,  except  those  parts  which  have  changed  their
nature,  and  by  adoption  have  been  changed  fix)m  positive
morality  to  a  part  of  the  positive  law  obtaining  in  the  particnltf
country.  If  not  parts  only,  but  the  whole  of  international  law
is  to  be  included  in  the  corpus  juris,  there  is  the  same  reasoD
for  including  it  in  the  whole  of  the  positive  morality  of  tie
particular  country;  for  on  this,  as  well  as  on  intematioiial
morality,  positive  law  is  in  a  great  measure  founded.

Every  division  of  law  into  which  this  detestable  word  enters
must  be  indefinite.  To  shew  the  thickness  of  the  confusion
which  surrounds  it,  we  may  refer  to  the  impotent  attempt  of
Burke  in  a  passage  of  his  'Thoughts  on  Scarcity'  to  define
public  law.

The  phrase  ptiblic  law  has  at  least  four  or  five  totallj
different  meanings.  1st;  it  has  either  of  the  two  meaning
above  adverted  to :  its  strict  or  definite  and  its  large  or  vagn(


Public  and  Private  Law.  7  S  S

Sndly;  it  sometimes  means  the  law  which  proceeds ^^^
im  the  supreme  legislature,  or  from  subordinate  political


,  as  distinguished  from  what  have  been  termed  laws  P^^
c,  that  is,  laws  set  by  private  persons  in  pursuance  of  law.'
hts  with  which  they  are  invested.  These  laws  which
indirectly  from  the  sovereign  legislature,  through  rights
3h  it  has  invested  private  persons,  are  called  private  laws,
other  public  laws.  Srdly ;  public  laws  are  sometimes
to  laws  creating  privUegia,  Laws  of  this  kind  are
IS  called  jiis  singulare,  and  jvs  publicum,  as  opposed  to
called  jtis  commune.  I  may  here  observe,  that  if  the
tm  confer  a  right,  or  if  that  right  be  of  the  class  of
or  Jura  in  rem,  that  is,  rights  availing  against  the  world
the  law  creating  the  privHegium  is  so  far  as  much
or  commune  as  any  other  law,  since  it  imposes  a  duty
persons  indiscriminately.  4thly ;  under  public  law  are
s  classed  definite  and  obligatory  modes  of  performing
tmsactions.  '  Testamenti  factio  non  privati  sed  publici
5thly :  by  public  laws  are  sometimes  meant  the  laws
ohibitive  or  absohUely  binding,  as  opposed  to  the  laws
ispositive  or  provisional.  The  legislator  in  certain
determines  absolutely  what  shall  be  the  effect  of  a
insaction,  namely,  determining  what  effect  the  trans-
all  have,  if  the  parties  do  not  provide  otherwise.  Now,
I  legislature  determines  absolutely  the  effect  of  a  trans-
e  law  is  called  public :  when  he  leaves  a  certain  latitude
arties,  it  is  called  dispositive  or  provisional ;  being  to
ct  only  in  case  no  disposition  is  made  by  the  parties
3S.  In  France,  this  is  the  case  with  the  law  of  marriage.
>  lays  down  two  or  three  different  sets  of  rights  and
lich  may  be  the  consequences  of  marriage  at  the  option  of
38 ;  only  determining  what  legal  effect  the  marriage  shall
he  parties  do  not  contravene  the  disposition  of  the  law.
of  terms  accounts  for  the  meaning  of  several  principles
hich  appear  to  have  a  great  sense  in  them,  but  which
jly  identical  propositions.  Jus  pvilicum  privatorum
Uari  non  potest :  but  jus  publicum  is  the  law  which
e  so  changed;  the  proposition,  therefore,  only  means
which  cannot  be  modified  by  private  connections,  can-
odified  by  private  conventions.  In  like  manner  pacts
ed  into  pa^cta  q^i/e  ad  jus  spectant,  and  pacta  quce  ad
n  spectant.  Another  of  these  saws,  which  is  equally
EUit,  is  this  :  privata  conventio  juri  publico  nihil  derogat.


756


Lect.
XLIV


An  ano-
maly in  the
arrange-
ments of
the  conti-
nental
jurists
noticed.


Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

This  use  of  the  term  jus  pyhli4mm  is  eminently  abenrd.  Thd
law  so-called  is  no  more  public  law  than  any  other.  It  is  expe-
dient in  the  one  case,  for  the  sake  of  the  public,  that  the  eSMi
of  a  transaction  should  be  definitively  settled  by  the  legislatme;
in  the  other  case  it  is  expedient  that  the  effect  should  not  be
thus  peremptorily  predetermined,  but  that  a  certain  d^ree  rf
latitude  should  be  allowed  to  the  parties.

A  similar  logical  error  to  those  which  I  have  pointed  oi^
is  the  separation  from  the  rest  of  the  law  by  the  jurists  ol
France  and  Germany,  of  special  law,  or  the  law  of  the  oonditioni
which  I  call  professional;  conditions  not  domestic,  or,  in  the
words  of  Hale,  economicaly  but  arising  by  reason  of  carrying  «
certain  trades  or  professions.  By  the  laws,  and  the  expositoiy
writers  of  the  Continent,  the  law  of  professional  conditions  is
not  placed  in  the  law  of  persons  as  a  limb  or  member  of  it,  but
is  severed  from  the  whole  coirpus  juris,  and  opposed  thereto.  Bm
most  remarkable  instance  of  this  is  in  the  French  Code.  Only
so  much  of  the  Law  of  Persons  as  concerns  the  domestic  and
quasi-domestic  conditions,  is  placed  in  the  civil  code ;  the  law
of  traders  is  the  subject  of  a  separate  code,  termed  the  Code  k
Coviinerce,  which  stands  opposed  to  the  body  of  the  law.  There
is  also  a  Code  rural,  relating  to  the  conditions  which  have  ^efe^
ence  to  agriculture.  The  other  professional  conditions  are  nd
mentioned  in  any  code  at  all,  but  seem  to  be  left  to  the  old
chaos  of  Jurisprudence,

This  is  a  remarkable  instance  of  the  servility  with  which  the
French  code  was  compiled.  The  traders  and  others  are  subject
to  peculiar  laws,  and  a  peculiar  procedure,  arose  from  mere
accident.  A  king  of  France,  I  think  Francis  I.,  was  bribed  by
the  merchants  of  Marseilles,  to  give  to  merchants  the  privilege
of  being  ruled  by  a  better  law,  and  a  better  and  cheaper  joo-
cedure.  This  accordingly  was  blindly  adopted  by  the  authois  rf
the  French  code ;  never  considering  whether,  if  the  procedure  of
their  peculiar  tribunals  be  really  better  than  that  generally  pre-
vailing in  France,  it  ought  not  to  be  introduced  into  the  ordinary
courts.


No  inteUi-
gible  basis
lor  the  dis-
tinction
between
public  and
private  law
as  co-ordi-
nate de-


Public  and  special  law,  or  law  of  political  and  professional
status,  are  departments  of  the  Law  of  Persons.  Public  Law,  in
this  (or  any  other  sense)  is  not  distinguishable  from  any  othff
portion  of  internal  law  by  its  final  cause :  viz.  the  good  of  the
Public.  Public  Law  in  this  sense,  is  adjective,  instrumental  or
sanctioning :  but  so  is  the  law  of  crimes  and  civil  injuries,  of


rower
sense.


Public  and  Private  Law.  757

x^ts  ex  delicto,  and  of  procedure :  nay,  so  are  many  portions  of ^?^
pimary,  or  civil,  rights,  etc. If,  therefore,  the  distinction  into  -

pirate  and  public  law  is  to  be  observed,  these  must  enter  into  partments,
pubKc  law. — If  crimes  and  criminal  procedure  are  to  be  included  public  law
b  public  law  by  reason  of  their  sanctioning  character,  so  must  ^^^^^  ^
civil  injuries,  etc. (See  Notes,  p.  735  et  seq.)  in  its  nar-

Public  Law  and  Private  Law  cannot  (in  these  senses)  be
opposed  to  one  another,  or  treated  as  co-ordinate  departments  of
I  common  whole.  The  Law  of  Things  (and  even  the  law  of
kscents  and  professional  staius)  contained  matter  which  political
iatm  suppose ;  and  which  are  also  supposed  by  public  law  in
my  other  sense.*®  The  term  *  public  law '  is  mis-expressive ;  as
fenoting,  not  merely  the  law  of  political  status,  but  either  all  law.
Iff  all  law  which  regards  violations  and  sanctioning  rights,  etc.

The  distinction  between  private  law  and  public  law  (considered
B  ethardinaie  departments)  rests  upon  no  intelligible  basis,  and
b  inconvenient.  K  it  be  said  that  the  end  of  public  law  is  the
potection  and  enforcement  of  primary  rights  and  obligations  in
Bid  on  individuals,  the  answer  is,  that  that  is  also  the  end  or
bal  cause  of  the  law  of  civil  injuries,  etc.,  and  of  the  law  of
oimes,  etc.  A  property  or  quality  which  belongs  to  several
Ejects  can  be  no  ground  for  distinguishing  some  of  them  from
ierest.

By  '  the  Public '  (where  it  means  anything)  we  mean  all  the
riividuals  who  compose  the  community,  governors  as  well  as
>vemed.  In  which  sense  of  the  word  public,  all  Law  is  picblic  ;
hettier  we  look  to  the  persons  in  whom  rights  and  obligations
aide,  or  whether  we  look  to  what  is,  or  at  least  ought  to  be,
©  end  of  law : — that  end  being  the  good  of  all.  If  it  be  said,
at  by  *the  public*  is  meant  the  governors,  and  by  private
QTSons,  the  governed ;  by  Public  Law,  the  law  which  relates  to
e  powers,  rights,  and  obligations  of  the  governors  as  such ;  and
f"  Private  Law,  the  rights,  etc.  of  the  governed  as  such ;  the
iswer  is  that  the  terms  are  equivocal :  '  public,'  denoting  some-
ing  besides  'relating  to  governors.'  Taken  with  its  large
unification,  the  distinction  (if  there  is  one)  which  the  term
public  law '  gives  rise  to  must  be  this  : —

Public  Law  is  that  portion  of  tlie  law  of  any  country  which

termines  the  powers,  rights,  and  obligations  of  certain  status  :

z.  those  of  governors  as  such ;  and,  by  implication,  those  of  the

vemed  as  such.

Private  Law : — that  which  determines  all  the  rights,  etc.  of

"  Blackstone :  Instances  in  Parliament,  King,  etc  vol.  L  p.  193.


758  Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

Lect. all  the  other  classes,  exclusive  of  their  rights,  etc.  in  regard  to
the  governors.

There  is  no  reason  for  opposing  the  rights,  eta  which  grow
out  of  apolitical  status  to  all  others ;  more  than  for  opposing  the
rights,  etc.  which  grow  out  of  any  other  staitis  to  the  rest  of  the
law.

If  it  be  said  that  these  rights,  etc.  arepurdy  instrumented;
the  answer  is,  so  is  Criminal  Law.  And  if  it  be  said  that
that  is  also  public,  so  is  the  law  of  civil  injuries ;  nay,  so  are
many  of  the  primary  rights  which  are  confessedly  private  or
civil ;  as  e,g,  those  of  trustees — those  of  parents,  to  a  consider-
able extent.

It  is  not  contended  that  they  ought  not  to  be  separated;  but
it  is  contended  that  they  ought  not  to  be  opposed  to  all  the  rest
All  relations  of  subject  to  subject  imply  another  relation
to  the  Sovereign  as  wielding  the  sanction ;  And  in  this  senae
absolute  obligations  are  relative :  i,e.  relative  to  the  power  or
right  of  punishing,  in  case  of  violation.

The  great  reason  against  the  division  is  this : — That  many
or  most  of  the  generalia  which  are  contained  in  the  Law  of
Things  are  just  as  applicable  to  the  statics  of  governors  as  to  any
of  those  of  the  governed  :  e,g.  the  governor  is  proprietor ;  makes
contracts,  etc.  These  generalia,  therefore,  applying  to  all  statm,
you  cannot  logically  separate  one  of  these  status  from  the  reati
and  oppose  it  not  only  to  the  rest,  but  also  to  that  generical
matter  which  is  common  to  it  with  the  rest.  Suppose  I  opposed
animals  and  horses  to  men,  by  reason  of  an  imaginary  superiority
in  men  to  other  animals.

The  judicial,  military,  and  other  political  staius  stand  in  the
same  relation  to  primary  rights,  as  sanctioning  rights  and
obligations ;  i,e.  they  minister  to  the  protection  of  those  primary
rights.  This  is  a  reason  for  rejecting  the  division  into  fl^
privatum  et  jus  publicum.  For  either  delicts,  rights  ex  ddid^
and  procedure,  must  be  arranged  with  jus  privatum,  contraiy  to
the  division ;  or  the  division  must  be  preserved,  and  the  con-
nection between  primary  rights,  etc.  and  sanctions  lost  sight  d
in  consequence  of  the  burying  these  last  in  the  rights,  etc.  of
governors.  Again ;  the  primary  rights  of  governors  stand,  witk
the  sanctioned  rights  of  the  governed,  in  a  common  relation  to
sanctioning  rights  and  obligations.  The  Sovereign  is  not  only
the  author  of  Law,  but  is  also  protected  in  his  primary  rights
by  the  sanction  which  emanates  from  himseK.^*

18  See  'Outline,'  p.  43,  vol.  i  ante.


Public  and  Private  Law.  759

Again  ;  many  of  the  definitions  and  explanations  contained  L^cr.
i/t«jpritxrfttm  are  equally  applicable  to  fus  jmblicum.  Where  v
ien,  with  this  division,  are  they  to  be  placed  ?  Are  they  to
e  placed  under  juspvhlicum  ?  or  repeated  in  both  ?  or  separated
x)m  both,  and  treated  under  a  common  head  ?  [Kg.  All  those
Eurts  of  procedure  which  are  not  specially  applicable  on  behalf
r,  or  against  political  persons,  ought  to  be  placed  under  jus
rivatum  (Law  of  Things  and  Law  of  Persons),  and  yet  that
art  of  them  which  belongs  to  Law  of  Things,  is  as  much  a
rcecognoscendvm  to  political  as  to  private  8tatus.'\

Jus  publicum^  so  far  as  it  has  a  meaning,  denotes  all  those
ights  and  obligations  (including  institutions)  which  minister  to
he  protection  of  other  rights.  In  this  sense,  the  law  of  civil
DJQiies,  crimes,  etc.  is  a  part  oijv^s  pvilicum.  To  sever  there-
ore  jus  publicum  from  jus  privatum  would  lead  to  a  most
nconvenient  arrangement ;  destructive  of  the  division  into  Law
li  Things  and  Law  of  Persons.

The  fundamental  distinction  of  Law  of  Things  and  Law  of
Persons,  is  built  upon  the  conveniency  of  considering  the  genus
ipart  from,  and  before,  the  several  species  contained  under  it.
By  consequence,  so  mu4ih  of  jus  publicum  (whether  it  consists  of
constitutional,  judicial,  or  any  other  branch  of  administration)
» is  necessary  to  the  apprehension  of  the  genus  '  Law  of  Things,'
ihould  be  put  into  the  Law  of  Things ;  the  rest  dismissed  to
Bie  Law  of  Persons.  The  objection  urged  by  Falck  to  Black-
stone  in  this  respect  appears  to  me  to  be  imfounded.

International  law,  so  far  as  adopted,  etc.  is,  in  a  great  measure,
pntJofe  law  {i,e,  it  regards  the  relative  rights  and  obligations  of
HvaU  persons,  members  of  separate  states);  and  belongs  to  Law
f  Persons :  Aliens,  seamen,  etc.

If  private  law  ought  to  he  opposed  to  public,  it  ought  to  precede ;
bee  that  part  of  it  which  is  called  the  Law  of  Things  contains
\iinb&r\esi&  prcecogrwscenda  which  are  equally  applicable  under
Ublic  law,  and  which,  therefore,  must  otherwise  be  repeated.

To  oppose  public  law  to  private,  is  to  oppose  the  law  which
igards  certain  classes  of  persons  to  all  the  rest  of  the  law :  ix.
ot  only  to  the  law  which  regards  the  rights,  etc.  that  are  par-
cular  to  all  other  classes,  but  to  the  rights,  etc.  which  regard  all
>ablic  persons  included).  Much  of  what  must  be  looked  at
t  considering  public  law  is,  in  every  system,  included  under
ivate  law ;  so  that  here  is  a  division,  of  which  one  of  the
embers  contains  much  that  belongs  to  the  other.  Ecclesiastical
id  Civil,  Military  and  CivU,  etc.  are  in  the  same  case.


76o


Law :  Purposes  and  Snbjects.


Lect.
XLIV


Notes.

The  only  wrongs  which,  with  propriety,  can  be  called  'public
are  violations  of  such  rights  (if  any  such  there  be)  as  are  vested  i
the  public  (not  in  the  government /<»•  the  public):*  Meaning  by  tl:
Public,  in  the  first  instance,  a  corporate  or  juridical  person ;  and  \
the  Public  (in  the  second  instance)  that  aggregate  of  individual  ai
juridical  persons  who  can  only  be  considered  as  a  whole,  by  reas(
of  their  living  under  the  protection  of  the  same  government  ]
some  of  the  United  States,  Indictments,  etc  are  drawn  in  the  nai
of  the  People,  Commonwealth,  etc. ;  but  this  is  a  mere  flourisL

Any  injury  cognisable  by  the  law  of  England  will  be  found  to  1
an  injury  to  some  person  or  body  of  persons.  Public  nuisances  f
instance ;  offences  against  ftorws  mores^  etc.,  which  seem  to  be  viol
tions  of  obligations  to  which  there  are  no  corresponding  rights
any  given  person  or  persons ;  and  which  may  be  called  public  offena
by  reason  of  the  injury  being  entirely  contingent,  and  being  liable
fall  upon  any  of  the  whole  heterogeneous  mass  which  is  called  ti
Public.  In  all  other  cases  of  intentional  or  negligent  violation,  tihei
is  the  same  contingent  evil,  but  there  is  also  a  past  injury  done  t
some  assignable  individual,  either  in  his  own  right  or  as  trustee  fi
others. — Margitwd  Note  in  Blackstone,  vol.  iii.  chap.  1 3.


Jus  publicum.

1°.  Jus  quod  ad  statum  rei  publicae  spectat.

2°.  Jus  legislatore  [publice]  ^  j  Normis  privatorumvolnntafc

constitutum  [idque  directe  vel  >  oppositum  <  legibus  consentientibn!
indirecte].  j  ( constitutia.

3°.  Jus  commune,  oppositum  singulari.

4°. Jus  prohibit! vum  sive  )  .. f  ,. ... .  -^i^^j;

, ,  ^ ,,.^  >  oppositum  <  dispositivo  81  ve  proviaonalL

absolute  obligans.  j x-x-  (

MS. Table  in  margin  of  Muhlenhruchy  vol.  i.  p.  70.


LECTURE  XLV.


Lect.
XLV

^ i '

Division
of  the  Law
of  Things
(or  the  Law
minus  the
Law  of
Persons)
into  pri-
mary and
sanction-


LAW  OF  THINGS. ITS  MAIN  DIVISIONS.

I  HAVE  endeavoured  to  suggest  the  purport  and  uses  of  tl
division  into  Law  of  Things  and  Law  of  Persons :  into  Gencfi
Law  and  Special  Law:  into  a  General  Code  and  Particali
Codes :  or  into  the  Law  considered  generally,  and  those  portioi
of  the  law  which  peculiarly  regard  peculiar  classes  of  persoi
and  which  it  is  commodious  to  detach  from  the  bulk  of  t
system,  and  to  consider  (iq  appropriate  chapters)  under  a  d
tinct  department.

I  have  also  endeavoured  to  explara  the  various  meanii


Rights  and  Duties,  Primary  and  Sanctioning.  761

ich  are  annexed  to  the  expression  jfm  publicum : — ^to  explain Leot.

two disparate  distinctions between  jtis  pvilicum  and  jus  ^

mium  ; — to  shew  that  the  distinctions  are  needless  and  per-  ing  rights,
ring ; — ^and  that  public  law,  taken  with  a  definite  meaning
as  meaning  the  law  of  political  conditions),  ought  not  to  be
osed  to  the  rest  of  the  law,  but  ought  to  be  inserted  in  the
T  of  Persons,  as  one  of  its  limbs  or  members.
I  will  now  endeavour  to  explain  the  main  division,  which,
ay  opinion,  should  be  given  to  the  Law  of  Things.

The  leading  division  which  I  would  give  to  the  Law  of
Qgs,  I  will  first  read  from  my  Outline,  and  will  then  endea-
r  to  illustrate  by  additional  remarks.

1.  There  are  facts  or  events  from  which  rights  and  duties  arise,
ch  are  legal  causes  or  antecedents  of  rights  and  duties,  or  of
ch  rights  and  duties  are  legal  effects  or  consequences.  There  are
>  fiicts  or  events  which  extinguish  rights  and  duties,  or  in  which
its  and  duties  terminate  or  cease.  The  events  which  are  causes  of
tits  and  duties  may  be  divided  in  the  following  manner :  namely,
D  acts,  forbearances,  and  onussions,  which  are  violations  of  rights
duties,  and  events  which  are  not  violations  of  rights  or  duties.

Acts,  forbearances,  and  omissions,  which  are  violations  of  rights
duties,  are  styled  delicts,  injuries,  or  offences.

Eights  and  duties  which  are  consequences  of  delicts,  are  sanction-
I  (or  preventive)  and  remedial  (or  reparative).  In  other  words  the
is  or  purposes  for  which  they  are  conferred  and  imposed,  are  two :
st  to  prevent  violations  of  rights  and  duties  which  are  not  conse-
ences  of  delicts ;  secondly  to  cure  the  evils  or  repair  the  mischiefs
lich  such  violations  engender.

Rights  and  duties  not  arising  from  delicts,  may  be  distinguished
)m  rights  and  duties  which  are  consequences  of  delicts,  by  the
jne  of  'primary'  (or  principal).  Rights  and  duties  arising  from
tlicts,  may  be  distinguished  from  rights  and  duties  which  are  not
usequences  of  delicts  by  the  name  of  *  sanctioning  *  (or  *  secondary ').

My  main  division  of  the  matter  of  the  Law  of  Things,  rests  upon
16  basis  or  principle  at  which  I  have  now  pointed  :  namely,  the  dis-
Qction  of  rights  and  duties  (relative  and  absolute)  into  primary  and
nctioning.  Accordingly,  I  distribute  the  matter  of  the  Law  of
hings,  under  two  capital  departments — 1.  Primary  rights,  with
imary  relative  duties.  2.  Sanctioning  rights  with  sanctioning  duties
elative  and  absolute):  Delicts  or  injuries  (which  are  causes  or
itecedents  of  sanctioning  rights  and  duties)  included.^

If  I  adopted  the  language  of  Bentham,  and  of  certain  German
iters,  I  should  style  the  law  of  primary  rights  and  duties,

*  Outline,  pp.  43,  44,  vol.  i.  ante.


762  Law :  Purposes  and  Siibjects.

Lect.  suistantive  law ;  and  the  law  of  sanctioning  or  secondary  rights
and  duties,  adjective  or  instnimientdl  law.  In  other  words,  I
should  divide  the  Law  of  Things,  or  the  bulk  of  the  legal  system,
into  law  conversant  about  rights  and  duties  which  are  not  means
or  instruments  for  rendering  others  available ;  and  law  conver-
sant about  rights  and  duties  which  are  merely  means  or  instm*
ments  for  rendering  others  available  Substantive  law  as  thus
understood  is  conversant  about  the  rights  and  duties  which  I ;
style  primary :  Adjective  law,  about  the  rights  and  duties  whidi
I  style  secondary.

But  it  will  appear,  on  a  moment's  reflection,  that  the  terms
substantive  and  adjective  law  tend  to  suggest  a  complete  mis-
conception of  the  nature  of  the  basis  on  which  the  division
rests.

All  the  rights  and  duties  which  I  style  sanctioning  or
secondary,  are  undoubtedly  means  or  instruments  for  making :
the  primary  available.  They  arise  out  of  violations  of  primaij  i
rights,  and  are  mainly  intended  to  prevent  such  violations: ::
though  in  the  case  of  the  rights  and  duties  which  arise  out  of  \
civil  injuries,  the  secondary  rights  and  duties  also  answer  the  j
subordinate  purpose  of  giving  redress  to  the  injured  parties.

But  though  secondary  rights  and  duties  are  merely  adjective  I
or  instrumental,  many  of  the  rights  and  duties  which  I  style  ;
primary  are  also  of  the  same  character.  Kg, :  The  rights  and  i
duties  of  Guardians  are  merely  subservient  to  those  of  the  ward:
The  guardian  is  clothed  with  rights  and  duties  in  order  that  tlie  :
rights  of  the  ward  may  be  more  efiectually  protected,  and  in
order  that  the  duties  incumbent  on  the  ward  may  be  more  >.
efiectually  fulfilled.

The  same  may  be  said  of  many  of  the  rights  and  duties  of
Parents :  of  most  of  the  rights  and  duties  of  subordinate  poUtical
superiors,  and,  generally,  of  all  rights  which  are  merely  fidudaiy,
or  are  coupled  with  trusts.  These  rights  and  duties  suppose
the  existence  of  others,  for  the  protection  and  enforcement  of
which  they  are  conferred  by  the  State.

In  short,  rights  and  duties  are  of  two  classes :

1st.  Those  which  exist  in  and  per  se :  which  are,  as  it  weie,
the  ends  for  which  law  exists :  or  which  subserve  immediately
the  ends  or  purposes  of  law.  2ndly.  Those  which  imply  the
existence  of  other  rights  and  duties,  and  which  are  merely  con-
ferred for  the  better  protection  and  enforcement  of  those  other
rights  and  duties  whose  existence  they  so  suppose.

Though  secondary  rights  and  duties  (or  rights  and  duties


Rights  and  Duties^  Primary  and  Sanctioning.  763

Bing  out  of  injuries)  are  of  this  instrumental  character,  many ^eot.
hts  and  duties  which  are  primary  or  principal  (or  which  do  >

b  arise  out  of  injuries)  are  also  of  the  same  nature.  The
rision  therefore  of  Law  into  law  regarding  primary  rights  and
ties,  and  law  regarding  secondary  rights  and  duties,  cannot
referred  to  a  diflference  between  the  purposes  for  which  those
hts  and  duties  are  respectively  given  by  the  State.  And  I
;ect  to  the  names,  '  Substantive  and  Adjective  Law,'  as  tend-
;  to  suggest  that  such  is  the  basis  of  the  division.  It  appears
me  that  the  division  rests  exclusively  upon  a  difference
ween  the  events  from  which  the  rights  and  duties  respectively
Be.

Those  which  I  call  primary  do  not  arise  from  injuries,  or
m  violations  of  other  rights  and  duties.  Those  which  I  call
iondary  or  sanctioning  (I  style  them  sanctioning  because  their
)per  purpose  is  to  prevent  delicts  or  offences)  arise  from
^ladons  of  other  rights  and  duties,  or  from  injuries,  delicts,  or
isnces.

The  rights  and  duties  which  I  style  secondary,  suppose  that
e  obedience  to  the  law  is  not  perfect,  and  arise  entirely  from
at  imperfect  obedience.  If  the  obedience  to  the  law  were
solutely  perfect,  primary  rights  and  duties  are  the  only  ones
idch  would  exist ;  or,  at  least  are  the  only  ones  which  would
er  be  exercised,  or  which  could  ever  assume  a  practical  form.
the  obedience  to  the  law  were  absolutely  perfect,  it  is  manifest
at  sanctions  would  be  dormant :  and  that  none  of  the  rights
id  duties  which  sanction  others,  or  which  are  mainly  intended
•  protect  others  from  violation,  could  ever  exist  in  fact  or
ractice,  although  they  would  be  ready  to  start  into  existence
1  the  conmiission  of  injuries  or  wrongs.  If  the  disposition  to
bey  the  law  were  perfect,  and  if  the  law  were  perfectly  known
jr  all,  there  would  be  no  injuries  or  violations  of  the  law :  and,
y  consequence,  all  the  law  relating  to  injuries,  to  the  rights,
nties,  and  other  consequences  flowing  from  injuries,  and  to
locedure,  would  lie  dormant

We  undoubtedly  can  conceive  a  state  of  society  so  improved
nd  refined  that  the  obedience  to  the  law  would  be  perfect
bd  this  notion  is  what  possibly  led  to  the  speculations  of
»odwin,  Fichte,  and  others,  about  the  possibility  of  doing  with-
ttt  a  government  Fichte  said  that  it  was  the  proper  duty  of
^eiy  Government,  atcA  sdhst  eifitlehrlich  zu  machen,  to  enable
Self  to  be  dispensed  with.  But  though  we  may  conceive  a
M;e  of  society  thus  highly  cultivated  and  improved,  we  cannot


764  Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

Lect. look  forward  to  its  being  realised,  though  undoubtedly  a  Govern-


XLV


ment  is  good  or  bad  in  the  ratio  in  which  it  approaches  ot
recedes  from  that  ideal.  The  speculations  of  these  writeis  on
the  subject  are  not  only  useless,  but  there  is  a  confusion  of  ideas
in  their  own  supposition.  It  is  possible  to  conceive  societj
without  a  government  proper,  and  without  law  properly  so
called ;  without  a  commanding  head  and  without  law  whick
properly  commands;  having  merely  a  guiding  and  directXDg
head  which  issues  not  properly  imperative  laws,  but  merely
recommendations;  or,  as  they  have  been  called  by  Civilian^
laws  of  imperfect  obligation.  But  it  is  impossible  (except  iii
the  first  made  state)  to  conceive  society  without  one  guiding  01
directing  body;  for  positive  morality,  or  the  principal  of  iti
parts,  namely  the  law  set  by  general  opinion,  is  necessarily  flO
uncertain  that  it  cannot  serve  as  a  complete  guide  of  condiie^
nor  can  it  be  sufficiently  minute  and  detailed.  The  speculation^
therefore,  of  Fichte  and  Godwin,  not  only  sin  in  this  respec^
that  by  their  exaggeration  they  render  practicable  improvenwil^
ridiculous,  but  iq  that  they  are  founded  on  a  complete  confusiflt;
of  ideas.

I  do  not  deny  that  rights  of  the  sort  which  I  have  calkl
primary,  may  arise  from  injuries  in  a  remote  and  consequent^
manner;  as,  for  example,  the  rights  arising  from  a  judgment,*
the  lien  of  the  plaintiff  on  the  lands  and  goods  of  the  defendant
But  these  rights  do  not  arise  so  much  from  the  injury  itself,  1
from  a  peculiar  title  or  mode  of  acquisition,  namely  the  judgmaA
and  the  institution  of  the  suit.  In  order,  however,  to  meet  this
objection,  I  will  define  primary  rights  and  duties  to  be  thoec
which  do  not  arise  from  violations  of  other  rights  or  duti»!
directly.

My  main  division  of  the  Law  of  Things  is,  therefore,  this;!
1st.  Law  regarding  rights  and  duties  which  do  not  arise  fiW
injuries  or  wrongs,  or  do  not  arise  from  injuries  or  wromjl
directly  or  immediately.  2ndly.  Law  regarding  rights  and  dutill
which  arise  directly  and  exclusively  from  injuries  or  wrongi.
Or,  law  enforced  directly  by  the  Tribunals  or  Courts  of  Justice*?
and  law  which  they  only  enforce  indirectly  or  by  consequence.
For  it  is  only  by  enforcing  rights  and  duties  which  grow  out  fli
injuries,  that  they  enforce  those  rights  and  duties  which  aiisB
from  events  or  titles  of  other  and  different  natures.

Under  the  department  of  the  law  which  relates  to  secondary
rights  and  duties  I  include  Procedure,  civil  and  criminal Fcf


Jus. — Medium  Jus  Persequendi.  7^5

it  JB  manifest  that  much  of  procedure  consists  of  rights  and  duties, Lect.
Mod  that  all  of  it  relates  to  the  manner  in  which  secondary  rights ^ ^ >
and  duties  are  exercised  or  enforced.

And  here  Bentham's  arrangement  seems  to  me  to  be  defective,
M  is  also  that  of  several  German  writers  who  have  adopted  the
[aune  views. In  the  Traitis  de  Idgidation  Bentham  severs  from
sidkstantif  or  the  law,  droit  adjectif  or  the  law  of  procedure.
as  it  appears  to  me,  involves  a  double  logical  error. For
droit  substantif  he  includes  droit  civU  (as  opposed  to  droit
and  droit  pSnal ;  including  under  droit  p&nal,  the  law  re-
to  civil  injuries  and  to  crimes  with  their  punishments,
(tiher  with  the  rights  and  duties  growing  out  of  those  delicts
of  those  punishments. But  first,  as  I  have  already  remarked
substantive  law  as  thus understood,  much  is  adjective or
lentaL For  all  rights  of  action  arising  out  of  civil  injuries
purely  instrumental  or  adjective ;  as  well  as  the  whole  of
dual  law  and  the  whole  law  relating  to  punishments. And
ly,  if  he  calls  the  law  of  procedure  droit  adjectif ,  he  ought  to
id  that  term  to  the  law  relating  to  the  rights  and  duties
from  civil injuries  and  from  ciimes  and  punishments.
division  itself,  therefore,  is  illogical,  and  his  limitation  of
ive  law  to  the  law  of  procedure  only,  involves  a  second
error.


idinetion  between  an  action  considered  as  a  right,  and  an  action
eongidered  as  an  instrument  by  which  the  right  of  action  is
itsdf  enforced,

it  is  said  by  Heineccius,  '  actio  non  est  jvs,  sed  medium  jus  per-

'ittequendi.' But  it  is  impossible  to  distinguish  completely  a  riglit

\^fSf  cLction  from  the  action  or  procedure  which  enforces  it. For

^^nich  of  the  right  of  action  consists  of  rights  to  take  those  very

by  which  the  end  of  the  action  is  accomplished. It  is

lectly  true,  that  the  scope  or  purpose  of  the  right  of  action  is

inct  from  the  procedure  resorted  to  when  the  right  is  enforced.

[uch  of  the  procedure  consists  of  rights  which  avail  against  the

iBunisters  of  justice  rather  than  against  the  defendant. And  the

^iits  of  it  which  consist  of  rights  against  the  defendant  himself,

«e  totally  distinct  from  the  end  which  it  is  the  object  of  the

I  Jsocess  to  accomplish.

Bat  still  it  is  impossible  to  extricate  the  right  of  action  itself

from  those  subsidiary  rights  by  which  it  is  enforced. And  it  is

ifesdy  absurd  to  deny  that  the  process  involves  rights,  because


VOL.  IL


766  Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

Lbct. the  rights  which  it  involves  are  instruments  for  the  attainmeot

XLV

^ ^ V of  another  right. And  this  is  a  reason  for  joining  the  kw
procedure  to  the  law  of  civil  injuries  and  crimes.

While  I  am  upon  this  subject,  I  will  observe  that  a  positic
of  mine  in  a  former  part  of  my  course,  that  every  right  of
arises  from  an  injury,  or  violation  of  some  other  rights,  has
objected  to.

But  it  seems  to  me  that  the  only  cases  in  which  a  right
action  does  not  presuppose  an  injury,  arise  from  that  anomaly
the  English  Law  which  I  endeavoured  to  explain  in  a  pi
Lecture ;  i.e.  cases  in  which  a  right  of  action  is  given,  althoi
there  has  been  no  wrong  on  account  of  the  want  of  wroi
consciousness  on  the  part  of  the  defendant.

Instance : — Possession  hoinA  fide :  as  in  cases  of  money
and  received  under  a  mistake :  or  of  possession  by  pi
from  a  stranger  who  had  no  title :  So  long  as  the  uncoi
ne^  lasts,  the  possessor  is  not  guilty  of  a  wrong,  but  lies
a  quasi-contract  to  restore. So  soon  as  consciousness  arises,
is  guilty  of  a  wrong.

In  the  case  of  an  amicable  pursuit,  it  may  appear  that
is  a  right  of  action  without  a  wrong. But,  in  these  cases,
question  always  is,  whether  there  be  in  truth  a  wrong  or
A  question  arising  from  the  uncertainty  of  the  law,  or
some  uncertainty  as  to  the  fact.

What  I  affirm  is,  that  every  right  of  action  arises  fromi
wrong.  I  do  not  affirm  that  an  action  may  not  be  wroi
brought,  or  may  not  be  brought  in  a  case  where  there  has
no  wrong.  So  long  as  law  and  fact  shall  continue  unceitaill
questions  will  frequently  arise  as  to  whether  a  wrong  has  bed
really  committed  or  not.  To  determrue  this  very  question  i
manifestly  the  purpose  of  the  process  which  is  styled  pleading
i.e.  of  every  step  in  the  process  which  succeeds  the  plaintiifl
demand.

No  Court  of  Justice  {acting  as  such)  would  decide  cm  i
question  of  law  or  fact  without  a  suggestion,  on  the  part  of  ^
plaintiff,  of  a  wrong,  actual  or  impending.  The  Courts  wool
not  decide  a  purely  speculative  case,  or  advise  the  parties  as  t
their  future  transactions ;  or  if  they  did,  they  would  not  b
acting  as  courts  of  justice.  In  exercising  voluntary  jurisdictioi
they  are  rather  lending  solemnities  to  certain  contracts.  TlM|
are  rather  acting  as  registration  offices  than  as  courts  of  jostia
What  is  called  voluntary,  and  what  is  called  contentious  juni
diction,  are  only  linked  up  together  under  one  name,  becM


Primary  and  Sanctioning. — Object  of  Distinction.  767

ihe  judges,  who,  as  such,  have  to  do  with  the  latter  alone,  some- Leot.
imes  combine  with  it  the  former,  as  they  do  various other
Sanctions.

In  most  systems  of  law,  a  vast  number  of  primary  rights
and  duties  are  not  separated  from  the  secondary:  That  is  to
say ;  The  primary  right  and  duty  is  not  described  in  a  distinct
and  substantive  manner;  but  it  is  created  or  imposed  by  a
declaration  on  the  part  of  the  legislature,  that  such  or  such  an
act,  or  such  and  such  a  forbearance  or  omission,  shall  amount  to
an  injury :  And  that  the  party  sustaining  the  injury  shall  have
«uch  or  such  a  remedy  against  the  party  injuring;  or  that
the  party  injuring  shall  be  punished  in  a  certain  manner.

Nay,  in  some  cases,  the  law  which  confers  or  imposes  the
pimary  right  or  duty,  and  which  defines  the  nature  of  the
injury,  is  contained  by  implication  in  the  law  which  gives  the
lemedy,  or  which  determines  the  punishment.^^

And  it  is  perfectly  clear  that  the  law  which  gives  the
'Bmedy,  or  which  determines  the  punishment,  is  the  only  one
iiat  is  absolutely  necessary.  For  the  remedy  or  punishment
mplies  a  foregone  injury,  and  a  foregone  injury  implies  that  a
vimary  right  or  duty  has  been  violated.  And,  further,  the
rimary  right  or  duty  owes  its  existence  as  such  to  the  in-
inction  or  prohibition  of  certain  acts,  and  t<^  the  remedy  or
onishment  to  be  applied  in  the  event  of  disobedience.

The  essential  part  of  every  imperative  law  is  the  imperative
art  of  it :  t.e.  the  injunction  or  prohibition  of  some  given  act,
id  the  menace  of  an  evil  in  case  of  non-compliance.

The  reason  for  describing  the  primary  right  and  duty  apart ;
T  describing  the  injury  apart ;  and  for  describing  the  remedy
r  punishment  apart,  is  the  clearness  and  compactness  which
isalts  from  the  separation.  The  cause  of  the  greater  compact-
ess  is  that  the  same  remedial  pix)cess  is  often  applicable,  not
lerely  to  this  particular  right,  but  to  a  great  variety  of  classes
F  rights ;  and,  therefore,  if  it  be  separated  from  the  rights  to
hich  it  is  applicable,  it  may  be  disposed  of  at  once ;  otherwise

n  'Bat  thoagh  a  simply  imperatiye  to  which  it  is  appended.' — Bentham,

.Wy  and  the  punitory  law  attached  to  Principles,  etc.  p.  329.
,  are  so  far  distinct  laws, that  the Not  so. The  two  branches  (impera-

vmer  contains  nothing  of  the  latter,  tive  and  ponitory)  of  the  law,  correlate.

id  the  latter,  in  its  direct  tenor,  con-  If  the  imperative  branch  of  the  law  did

ilns  nothing  of  the  former  ; yet  by  not  import  the  sanctioning,  it  would  not

wpUeaHtm  (and  that  a  necessary  one)  be  imperative,  and  e  converse, — Marginal

m  punitory  does  inyolve  and  include  note.
18  import  of  the  simply  imperative  law


768  Law :  Purposes  and  Sulyects.

Leot. it  must  be  frequently  repeated. But  it  is  perfectly  clear  that


XLV


the  description  of  any  of  the  separate  elements,  is  not  complete
without  reference  to  the  rest.  I  have  no  right,  independently
of  the  injunction  or  prohibition  which  declares  that  some  given
act,  forbearance  or  omission,  would  be  a  violation  of  my  right;
nor  would  the  act  or  forbearance  be  a  violation  of  my  rights
unless  my  right  and  the  corresponding  duty  were  clothed  with
a  sanction,  criminal  or  civil

In  strictness,  my  own  terms,  '  primary  and  secondary  rights
and  duties,'  do  not  represent  a  logical  distinction.  For  a
primary  right  or  duty  is  not  of  itself  a  right  or  duty,  without
the  secondary  right  or  duty  by  which  it  is  sustained;  and
e  converso.

So  complete  is  the  complication  of  the  one  branch  of  the
law  with  the  other,  that  some  primary  duties  cannot  be  described
with  any  approach  to  completeness  in  their  own  part  of  the
law  ;  they  can  only  be  apprehended  by  looking  at  the  description
of  the  corresponding  injury.  Of  this  the  two  great  classes  of
jura  in  rem,  dominium  and  servitus,  are  instances.  SfU  «<flt
tuo  vi  alienum  non  Icedas:  how  can  this  duty  be  under-
stood  without  first  knowing  the  meaning  of  tuum  and  injury?
There  is  often  to  be  found  .no  definition  of  a  particular  rights
only  an  approximation  to  a  definition,  in  so  far  as  the  acts  and
forbearances  which  are  violations  of  it  are  declared  to  be  crimei
or  injuries,  and  described  in  that  portion  of  the  law  whidi
relates  to  crimes  and  injuries.  In  Blackstone,  the  right  rf
property  is  nowhere  defined ;  and  in  the  Eomau  lawyers,  only  in
the  most  general  way,  with  no  attempt  to  enumerate  the  pa^
ticular  rights  composing  it  and  duties  annexed  to  it.

Examples  of  the  involution  of  primary  rights  and  duties,  in
the  description  of  the  injuries,  or  of  the  remedies  or  punishmente.

The  rights  which  Blackstone  styles  absolute,  are  by  him
described  apart  from  the  corresponding  injuries,  and  from  \h
corresponding  remedies  or  punishments.  Not  so  in  the  Insti-
tutes :  There  they  are  described  implicitly,  together  with  the
corresponding  injuries,  in  the  department  which  relates  to
obligations  arising  from  delicts.  Owing  to  this,  and  to  his  no<
understanding  the  expression,  '  Law  of  Peisons  or  Conditions,'
he  has  placed  them  with  the  Eights  of  Peisons.  He  fancied
that  the  Roman  Lawyers  had  forgotten  them,  and  that  otherwi»
they  would  have  placed  them  there ;  whereas  they  did  not  over
look  them,  but  placed  them  where  they  should  be,  in  the  Lai
of  Things.


Primary  and  Sanctioning, — Object  of  Distinction.  7^9

Again,  the  duties which  I  have called  absolute,  as, for ^oj-
nstance,  the  duties  owed  immediately  to  the  State,  are  scarcely
5Yer  described  explicitly,  but  involved  in  the  description  of  the
idB  or  omissions  which  are  violations  of  them,  or  of  the  pro-
ledure  by  which  these  violations  are  to  be  pursued.

Another  instance  is  the  Prsetorian  Edict.  As  I  stated  in  a
onner  Lecture,^  the  Praetor  by  his  Edict  did  not  formally
iedare  that  he  conferred  such  or  such  rights,  or  imposed  such
ir  such  duties.  He  declared  that  in  certain  cases  he  would
;ive  certain  actions,  or  would  give  certain  defences :  the
lescription  of  the  action  involving  a  description  of  the  injury,
nd  supposing  a  right  conferred.

To  shew  how  little  logic  is  to  be  found  in  the  very  best
attempts  yet  made  to  distribute  the  corpus  juris  into  parts,  I
fill  observe  that  the  description  of  the  injury  and  of  the  remedy
s  sometimes  annexed  immediately  to  the  primary  right  or  duty ;
n  other  cases,  removed  to  a  totally  distinct  department.  An
ixample  of  this  is  the  order  of  the  Institutes  in  respect  to  rights
ind  duties  which  arise  from  the  infringement  of  rights  ex  con-
ndu,  and  qu>asi  ex  contractu.  By  oUigationes  ex  delicto,  they
leant  what  we  mean  by  the  same  phrase  in  English  law,  namely,
aties  arising  from  violations  of  rights  which  avail  against  the
orld  at  large.  Now  the  authors  of  the  Institutes  oppose  to  these,
iigationes  ex  contractu  and  quasi  ex  contractu :  but  rights  and
ities  arising  from  contracts  and  quasi-contracts  are  rights  and
ities  existing  for  their  own  sake,  as  the  Germans  express  it :
ley  belong  to  the  class  of  primary  or  principal  rights  and
tities.  Consequently  there  is  no  place  for  the  obligations
rising  from  the  breach  of  obligations  ex  contractu  and  quasi  ex
miradu ;  these  are  consequently  attached  to  the  description  of
lose  obligations  themselves.  By  this  rule,  however,  obligcUiones
;  delicto  (by  which  the  authors  of  the  Institutes  meant  obliga-
ons  which  arise  from  violations  ot  jura  in  rem)  ought,  in  con-
stency,  to  be  attached  to  that  part  of  the  law  which  is  concerned
ith  dominia  or  jura  in  rem ;  or,  if  banished  to  a  separate  head,
)ligations  arising  by  offence^  against  the  rights  founded  on
tntracts  and  quasi-contracts  ought  to  be  placed  there  along
ttii  them.  Such,  for  instance,  are  rights  of  action  arising  from
contract ;  for  it  is  evident  that  there  can  be  no  action  upon  a
ntract  until  it  is  broken.

Blackstone's  method,  though  in  general  greatly  inferior  to
sit  of  the  Boman  Lawyers,  is  here  superior  to  it. Under  the

^  See  p.  600  wiUe,


77^  Law :  Purposes  afid  Subjects.

head  of  personal  property  he  treats  of  those  obligations  arising
from  contracts  and  quasi-contracts  which  are  primary :  in  his
third  volume,  when  treating  of  wrongs,  he  adverts  to  thoee
obligations  growing  out  of  contracts  or  quasi-contracts  which
arise  from  breaches  of  those  primary  ones.


[The  following  Notes  were  found  at  the  end  of  the  foregoing  Lectnrt
They  are  written  on  loose  sheets  of  paper,  without  any  mark  as  to  the  order
in  which  they  were  to  follow. — S,  A.^

Several  Divisions  of  Law.

Primary  (or  sanctioned)  Eights  and  Obli^foiions  distinguished  Jrm
sanctioning :

Law  has  sometimes  been  divided  into  substantive  law  and
adjective  or  instrumental  law,  i.e.  Law  which  relates  to  Rights  and
Obligations ;  and  Law  which  relates  to  the  means  of  enforcing  thea»
rights  and  obligations.

Objection  :  Many  of  the  rights  and  obligations  which  are  indodei
under  substantive  law  are  adjective  or  instrumental;  as,  e,g,  tiift
powers  and  rights  of  Governors ;  those  of  Trustees.

The  rights  and  obligations,  therefore,  which  are  the  matttf  rf
substantive  law,  cannot  be  distinguished  universally  from  the  matUT
of  adjective  law,  by  their  immediate  end  or  purpose. Though  moit
of  them  ai*e  rights  and  obligations  for  the  enforcement  of  which  tha  j
others  exist,  some  of  them  are  altogether  instrumental. Though  many  ;
of  the  rights  of  Governors  are  substantive,  yet  the  rights  which  th^  \
possess  in  this  capacity  belong  to  them  as  private  persons. The
powers  and  rights  which  belong  to  them  as  Governors,  oughi  at  least
to  belong  to  them,  not  for  their  peculiar  advantage,  but  for  that
of  all.

As  these  rights,  independently  of  violation,  cannot  be  classed  with
those  which  suppose  violation,  it  is  manifest  that  we  must  find  some
other  basis  for  the  distinction  between  primary  and  sanctioning  than
this :  viz.  that  the  first  are  the  rights  and  obligations  to  be  secoiedy
the  others  are  merely  securing.  The  distinction  seems  to  be  founded
upon  the  difierence  of  the  incidents  in  which  they  directly  begin*
The  first  do  not  begin  in  violation,  the  second  do.  I  say  diredlf:
because  (as  in  judgments)  the  second  may  end  in  a  fact  which  gene^
ates  one  of  the  first.

With  reference  to  the  final  cause  or  ultimate  purpose  of  law  (be
it  exactly  what  it  ought  to  be  or  not),  rights  and  obligations  are
divisible  into  two  sorts :  Those  which  minister  directly  to  that  end,
and  those  which  are  intended  to  prevent  or  remedy  violations  of  the
former.

Or  the  distinction  may  be  expressed  thus ; — the  first  are  nd
immediately  enforced  by  the  judicial  power;  the  second  are  those
which  are  immediately  enforced.


Different  Divisions  suggested.  77^

The  distinction  seems  to  be  into  Eights  and  Obligations  which  do Lkot.
wl  irise  out  of  violations,  and  those  which  do. Amongst  the  former  ,,  ^^^
[at,  e,g,  the  powers  of  Courts  of  Justice),  many  are  sanctioning.
So  that  the  division  into  sanctioned  and  sanctioning  is  not  complete  ;
nanv  of  those  which  are  sanctumed  being  also  sanctioning.

The  division,  therefore  (a  division  which  applies  to  law  of  things
ind  to  law  of  persons  equally),  is  this :  1.  Eights  and  Obligations
fhich  do  not  arise  out  of  infractions.  2.  Violations.  3.  Eights,
&tc.  which  do:  i,e.  Primary  (or  original  or  civil)  rights,  etc.  and
rights,  etc  ex  delicto.

Rights  and  obligations  which  it  is  the  end  of  the  Law  to  secure
ind  to  enforce. — Eights  and  Obligations  which  are  created  for  the
pwpose  of  securing  and  enforcing  the  others.

This,  from  its  simplicity,  is  specious,  but  will  not  suffice.

Distinction  between  Eights,  etc.  ex  delicto^  and  the  Procedure  (also
xnisigting  in  the  exercise  of  rights)  by  which  they  are  enforced.

Distinction  between  Civil  and  Criminal.  The  latter  might  (and
D  fact  to  a  great  extent  does)  contain  the  former :  i,e.  In  the  Code  of
Semedies,  the  rights  intended  to  be  protected,  with  the  violations  of
hem,  might  be  (and  in  fact  to  a  great  extent  are)  implicitly  contained.

This  is  the  case  with  most  rights  established  by  judicial  decision ;
ddsions  being  directly  decisions  upon  secondary  or  sanctioning
g^ts:  The  case  also  with  the  Praetorian  edict;  the  Praetor  only
iving  actions,  exceptions,  etc

This  is  also  the  case  with  almost  all  obligations  correlating  with
mra  in  re :  and  with  rights  of  personal  security,  etc.

Absolute  Obligations  are,  for  the  most  part,  first  announced  under
le  description  of  the  acts  which  amount  to  violation  of  them.


Uasons  for  separating  Rights  and  Obligations  ex  delicto  from  the
rights,  whether  in  re  or  ad  rem,  out  of  violations  of  which  they  arise.

If  we  attach  to  the  description  of  each  primary  Eight  and  Obli-
gation, the  description  of  the  rights  and  obligations  which  grow  out
if  a  breach  of  it,  we  must  also  attach  to  it  a  description  of  the  acts
thich  are  violations  of  it ;  since  the  conception  of  these  must  pre-
cede the  conception  of  those.  And,  to  be  consistent,  we  must  also
Wc  to  each  right  and  obligation  ex  delicto  a  description  of  the  pro-
BM8,  civil  or  criminal,  by  which  it  is  to  be  enforced.^  Thus  (as  I
htve  already  remarked)  losing  the  advantage  of  the  conciseness  which
teeults  from  treating  together  all  such  violations  as  are  susceptible  of
ft«  same  description^  though  they  are  violations  of  different  primary
rtghts ;  all  such  rights,  etc.  ex  delicto  as  are  susceptible  of  the  same
description,  though  they  grow  out  of  different  delicts ;  and  all  such
•teps  in  procedure  as  are  susceptible  of  the  same  description,  although
they  are  applicable  to  the  enforcement  of  different  rights  and  obliga-

*  Another  reason  is,  that  many  delicts  are  complex  ;  i.e.  are  violations  of  several
distinct  rights.


772

Lect.
XLV


Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

m

tions  ex  ddido.  The  effect  of  this  morcellemeni  would  be  endleu
repetition.  It  would  be  analogous  to  the  rejection  of  generic  terms.
But  if  to  every  primary  right  and  obligation  the  yiolation  of  it^
etc.  were  annexed,  the  extent  of  the  right  in  respect  of  sendees  (so
far  as  settled)  would  be  given  in  one  and  the  same  place :  ie.  sup-
posing that  the  definitions  of  Eighis  are  implicated  with  the  violatioDi
of  them.


Scheme  (in
fleneral)-—
'Primary
Riglits/
•Tiola-
tions,'
'Rights  «e
delicto/
And  •Pro-
cedure/ to
be  sever-
ally con-
sidered
apart
Bieasons
for—
Seasons
against —
Race  for
absolute
Obliga-
tions.


Reasons  for  separating  Rights  and  ObligaHons  ex  delicto  from

Violations^  and  each  from  Procedure,

1st.  Distinctness  of  conception  is  thereby  aided.  2nd.  The  pnur-
alia  of  each  may  thereby  be  detached ;  which  could  not  be  done,  %
to  every  particular  violation,  the  rights  etc.  which  it  generates  wan
annexed;  and  to  this,  the  particular  mode  of  procedure  by  which  it
is  asserted  and  enforced.  3rd.  As  one  and  the  same  act  may  be
a  violation  of  any  of  a  number  of  primary  rights  (which  is  a  reaaai
for  considering  '  violations '  apart  f^om  '  primary  rights '),  so  one  uH
the  same  Eight  or  Obligation  ex  delicto,  may  result  from  any  of  i
number  of  violations ;  and  one  and  the  same  mode  of  procedure  be
applicable  to  any  of  a  number  of  such  secondary  rights  and  obligatioiiei
This  last  advantage  seems  to  be  the  second,  stated  in  another  manner.

All  these  parts  ought  to  be  considered  as  members  of  one  tfM^
and  bear  a  common  name :  whereas  the  plural,  '  Codes,'  would  eeeei
to  oppose  them.

It  would  seem  that  the  definition  of  primary  rights  cannot  be
made  complete  (not  even  approximately)  without  reference  to  tbe
acts  which  are  violations  of  them.  Absolute  obligations  (as  not  belong
ing  to  either yt^ra  in  re  or  ad  rem)  cannot  be  considered  under  PiimiiJ
Rights,  to  which  they  in  a  certain  sense  belong.


\Jus  in  re  {with  its  corresponding  obligaiion)  is  passive :  i,e.  it  sup-
poses no  obligation  on  the  part  of  anybody  to  d6,  or  suffer  (by  pep
sonal  intervention).  When  violated,  a  right  of  another  sort^  in  the
injured  party  (or  a  public  officer)  against  a  determinate  individosl,
is  generated.

The  negative  or  passive  nature  of  these  obligations,  may  accoonl
for  their  not  being  noticed.  They  are  merely  obligations  to  fmhfot,
and  the  nature  of  them  is  described,  not  in  conjunction  with  tkA
corresponding  rights,  but  under  the  description  of  those  violations  o
them  (called  delicts  in  the  narrower  sense)  which  generate  obligation
proper.]

Not  only  are  the  obligations  which  correspond  with  Jura  ta  i
established  in  this  indirect  manner ;  but  certain  of  the  rights  then
selves  are  nowhere  described,  except  under  the  head  of  '  delicts^'  or  c
the  Rights  and  Obligations  which  they  generate.

These  are  the  rights  which  are  not  preceded  by  a  tittdus.


Division  of  Primary  Rights,  773


LECTURE  XLVI.

ON  C5EKTAIN  DISTINCTIONS  AMONG  THINGS.

distinguishing  primary  or  principal  from secondary  or Lbot.
ning  rights  and  duties,  I  next  proceed  to  subdivide  the v_rll^
division,  or  that  of  primary  rights.

e  first  great  distinction  among  primary  rights  has  been  First  great
idly  explained in  a  preceding  part  of  this Course. I  ^JJ^^^
to  the  distinction  between  dominia  and  ohligationes,  as  they  rights  mto
ailed  by  the  classical  jurists ;  between  jura  in  rem  and  J^J^^^^
^  persoTiam,  as  they  have  been  styled  by  modem  Civilians,  personam,
ler  between  jura  in  rem,  jura  in  personam,  and  combina-
f  rights  of  the  former  class  with  rights  of  the  latter. I
ice  this  third  class  to  avoid  the  incongruities  into  which
man  Lawyers  were  led,  in  the  attempt  to  wrest  all  rights
actions  of  rights  either  into  the  class  of  dominia  or  into
r  obligationes. Those  collections  of  rights,  for  example,
are  called  universitates  juris,  or  complex  aggregates  of
the  Eoman  Lawyers  placed  under  dominia,  ox  jura  in  rem ;
it  is  evident  that  they  commonly  include  along  with  rights
g  against  the  world  at  large,  other  rights  availing  against
and  determinate  persons.

is  seems  not  an  improper  occasion  for  adverting  to  the  A  mistake
I  current  among  the  German  jurists  of  the  present  day  with  Geman™
to  the  arrangement  of  the  Institutes.  jurists

cording  to  the  Civilians  of  the  l7th  and  18th  centuries,  the^^^^.
J  rerum  relates  to  rights  in  personam  as  well  as  to  rights  Ration  of

It  is  the  law  or  doctrine  of  substantive  rights  and  obli-
as  opposed  to  the  law  of  conditions  or  persons,  and  to  the
procedure.  But,  according  to  some  later  German  Civilians,
oification  of  jus  rerum  is  narrower.  It  means  the  law  or
e  of  dominia,  or  rights  in  rem ;  of  real  rights :  die  Lehre
glichen  Rechten.  They  distinguish  the  Law  of  Things  from
w  of  Persons,  and  also  from  the  law  of  Obligations  and
ions;  and  in  this  division  of  the  Corpus  Juris, ^ura  in
m  belong  to  the  head  Jus  Actionum,  not  to  that  of  Jus

In  the  same  head  they  would,  if  they  were  consistent,
t  the  Law  of  Procedure ;  but  they  detach  this,  and  place
separate  head,  under  the  name  jus  judiciarium  privatum,
rill  not  trouble  you  with  the  reasons  which  they  give  for
this  view  of  the  arrangement  of  the  Institutes,  nor  with
sons  for  thinking  their  opinion  unfounded ;  the  question


774  Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

Lbct. being  one  which  relates  only  to  the  particular  legal  system,  and
V  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  principles  of  general  jurisprudence.

I  will  merely  observe,  that  their  opinion  seems  to  me  to  be
contradicted  by  the  announcement  at  the  beginning  of  the  Second
Book  of  the  Institutes,  of  the  order  intended  to  be  followed  in
setting  forth  the  jus  rerum.  In  this  announcement,  things  are
divided  into  res  corporcdes  and  res  incorporcUes  ;  these  last  being
rights  and  duties  (and  therefore  including  dbligaiiorus,  or  jura  m
personam) ;  then  the  work  proceeds  to  treat  of  res  inoorporaUs^  or
rights  and  duties,  under  the  two  divisions  of  dominia  and  Mtgor
tiones :  all  this  under  the  head  of  jus  rerum.  I  find  also  that  the
opinion  of  Savigny  and  of  Thibaut  concurs  with  mine ;  which,
joined  to  the  reasons  which  have  occurred  to  myself,  gives  me
great  confidence  in  my  opinion.

In  the  Prussian  Code,  Sachen-recht,  or  jus  rerum,  has  a
meaning  still  more  remarkable.  That  Code  divides  the  Corpua
Juris,  or  that  part  of  it  which  is  called  Privat-recht,  or  jusprir
vatum  (according  to  the  erroneous  distinction  which  I  have  before
adverted  to),  into  two  branches,  Personen-recht  and  Sachen-recht
Under  the  first  head,  Personen-recht,  the  law  and  its  expositon
naturally  treat  of  rights  of  both  classes,  dominia  and  obligaiiom ;
but  by  Sachen-recht,  they  mean  only  the  law  of  dominia,  while
at  the  same  time  they  treat  of  obligationcs  incidentally,  and  as  it
were  in  the  belly  of  the  opposite  class,  or  that  of  dominia,  Thii
is  owing  to  a  mistake  of  the  authors  of  the  Prussian  Code,  whid
I  have  pointed  out  in  my  printed  Tables,  viz.  their  confounding
titulus  with  modus  acquirendi ;  and,  supposing  that  a  jus  in  pef'
sonam  was  in  all  cases  merely  a  step  to  the  acquisition  of  a  /»
in  rem.  Now,  though  jus  in  personam  is  often  only  a  step  t(
acquiring  a  jus  in  rem  (as  in  the  case  of  a  right  by  contract  t(
the  payment  of  a  sum  of  money),  in  many  cases  it  is  not  so  (a
in  the  case  of  a  right  by  contract  to  a  forbearance  from  a  certaii
individual).  In  the  French  Code,  whose  authors  adopted  fipoB
the  Prussian  Code  this  very  mistake,  obligations  are  described  i
the  same  incidental  manner.

Before  I  proceed  to  the  detail  of  primary  rights,  I  shall  mal
a  few  observations  on  things  considered  as  subjects  of  rights,
had  intended  to  make  some  remarks  on  fa/is  or  events,  consider
as  modes  of  acquisition,  but  these  I  find  I  shall  have  bett
opportunities  of  introducing,  a  Lecture  or  two  further  on.
Various  Excluding  from  the  word  things,  rights  and  duties,  which  a

Stiwword  often  called  by  jurists, things  incorporeal ;  the  word  thing
thing  in used  by  the  Roman  Lawyers  in  three  distinct  meanings.


Distinctions  between  Things.  775

Taken  with  the  most  extensive  sense,  it  embraces  every  Lrot.
bject,  positive  or  negative,  which  may  be  the  subject  or  object  v  ^  >
f  a  ri^t  or  duty.  Taken  with  this  extensive  sense,  it  embraces  t^®  Roman
iret)  any  permanent  external  object  which  may  be  the  subject  of
i^t  or  duty,  and  which  is  not  a  physical  person,  or  a  collection
t  physical  persons.  2ndly ;  It  embraces  persons  considered  as
le  mere  subjects  of  rights :  that  is  to  say,  considered  as  the
ibjects  of  rights  residing  in  other  persons,  and  availing  against
lird  persons.  In  this  sense,  a  slave  is  styled  a  thing.  3rdly ;
;  embraces  acts  and  forbearances  considered  as  the  objects  of
ghtd  and  duties :  that  is  to  say,  acts  which  are  to  be  done  or
obearances  which  are  to  be  observed  agreeably  to  rights  or
nties.  For  example,  If  I  am  bound  by  contract  to  deliver
oods,  or  to  refrain  from  sending  goods  of  a  sort  to  this  or  that
larket,  the  act  or  forbearance  to  which  I  am  bound  would  be
tyled  '  rtsl  or  a  '  Thing/

In  a  sense  more  circumscribed,  It  excludes  persons,  considered
I  subjects  of  rights,  and  includes  only  the  following  objects  :  1.
lennanent  external  objects,  not  being  persons,  and  considered  as
ibjects  of  rights  and  duties :  2.  Acts  and  forbearances  as  subjects
flights  and  duties.

In  a  sense  which  is  still  narrower,  it  excludes  persons  as
ibjects  of  rights  and  duties,  it  excludes  acts  and  forbearances
9  objects  of  rights  and  duties,  and  it  merely  embraces  such  per-
ument  external  objects  as  fall  not  within  the  description  of
eisons,  and  are  actual  or  possible  subjects  of  rights  or  duties.
lis  last  is  nearly  the  sense  which  is  attached  to  the  term  HhiTig*
a  ordinary  discourse  or  parlance.  When  we  speak  of  a  thing,
re  usually  mean  an  object  which  is  sensible  and  permanent,  and
fhich  is  not  a  person.  We  contradistinguish  it,  on  the  one  hand,
0  fact  or  event ;  and  we  contradistinguish  it,  on  the  other,  to
lerson,  hovvo,  or  man.  Sometimes,  however,  we  take  it  in  a
ense  which  is  somewhat  narrower.  When  we  speak  of  a  thing,
re  mean  a  sensible  permanent  object  which  is  inanimate.

Sometimes,  again,  we  take  it  in  a  sense  so  extremely  ex-
mded,  that  it  denotes  any  object,  whether  it  be  actual  or  pos-
ble,  real  or  imaginary,  which  may  become  an  object  of  concep-
em,  or  may  be  made  an  object  of  discourse.

In  the  language  of  the  English  law,  it  would  not  appear  In  English
lat  the  term  *  thing '  has  any  determinate  import. The  writers *
ho  pretend  to  define  it,  seem  to  limit  the  term  to  certain  classes
rights,  and  to  things  properly  so  called. This,  for  instance.


776


Lbot.
XLVI


Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

is  the  case  with  Blackstone,  in  the  second  chapter  of  his  second
book.  But  when  they  come  to  the  detail,  thej  seem  to  indade
under  things,  persons  as  the  subjects  of  rights,  and  acts  and
forbearances  as  their  objects.

For  example  :  A  slave  is  a  chattel,  and  a  chattel  is  a  thing:
Insomuch  that a  slave  is  a  thing  as  comprised  in  the  tern
chattel,  although  he  is  excluded  (inconsistently  enough)  ism
the  import  of  the  term  thing  as  explained  in  a  general  manneL.
Again  :  Blackstone  in  his  second  chapter  tells  us  that  the  objedB
of  dominion  or  property  are  things:  and  by  things,  he  there
means  permanent  external  objects,  not  persons. But  it  appeazi
(from  the  rest  of  the  second  book)  that  he  comprises  in  dominioi
or  property  the  whole  class  of  rights  which  may  be  styled  oUfc:
gations:  that  is  to  say,  rights  arising  directly  from  contndf:
and  quasi-contracts,  together  with  the  rights  to  redress  whiok
arise  from  civil  injuries. And  as  the  objects  of  obligations  n
always  acts  or  forbearances,  it  follows  that  he  includes  these  ia
the  import  of  the  term  thing,  although  he  excludes  them  finm
his  formal  definition  of  them.

In  short,  the  extension  of  the  term  thing  is  so  extrem^
uncertain,  that  if  it  were  expelled  from  the  language  of  law,
much  confusion  would  be  avoided.  Where  it  has  a  definitB
meaning,  it  denotes  such  sensible  objects  as  are  subjects  of
rights  and  duties.  The  immediate  objects  of  rights  and  dutiei
are  acts  and  forbearances.  But,  in  some  cases,  these  acts  and
forbearances  have  themselves  specific  objects  with  reference  to
which  they  are  to  be  done  or  exercised.  E.g,  Right  to  coar
veyance  or  delivery.  Right  in  a  house  or  field.  Right  in  i
slave.

Sensible  objects,  considered  as  the  subjects  of  rights  and  ^i
duties,  might  be  styled  things. Men,  as  invested  with  ri^ilBk
or  as  bound  to  acts  or  forbearances,  might  be  styled  persons:
And  the  acts  or  forbearances  which  are  immediately  or  propedy
the  objects  of  rights  or  duties  might  be  distinguished  from  things
and  persons. Or  the  objects  about  which  rights  and  duties  art
conversant  might  be  distinguished  into  persons,  objects  of  rights
and  duties,  and  subjects  of  rights  and  duties :  Meaning  by  perstms,
men  as  invested  with  rights,  or  as  bound  to  acts  or  forbearances:
Meaning  by  the  ohfects  of  rights  and  duties,  the  acts  to  be  done,
and  the  forbearances  to  be  observed,  in  pursuance  of  rights  and
duties^:  and  meaning  by  the  svJbjects  of  rights  and  duties,  the
sensible  and  permanent  objects  which  are  the  objects  of  those
acts  and  forbearances.


Distinctions  between  Things.  777

Having  made  these  general  remarks  on  the  import  of  the Lkot.
gm  *  thing*  I  will  now  pass in  review  certain  divisions  of  ^

iingB  which  are  made  in  the  Boman  and  English  Law.  Distmc-

The  distinction  between  things  corporeal  and  things  incor-  among
ireal  I  have  already  attempted  to  explain.^*  ^^^  '^

In  the  Eoman  Law,  things  corporeal  are  permanent  sensible  lishedsys-
gects  (whether  things  or  persons)  considered  as  the  subjects  ^^  ®^
'  lights  and  duties ;  and  acts  and  forbearances  considered  as  ^  corpo-

dr  objects.  real  and

Things  incorporeal  are  rights  and  duties  themselves.  l^S"^'

The  distinction  is  utterly  useless ;  inasmuch  as  rights  and
ities,  having  names  of  their  own,  need  not  be  styled  '  incor-
nreal  things.'  And  the  distinction  is  either  imperfect,  or  else
Wg  with  contradiction.  For  either  forbearances  are  not
uked  with  corporeal  things,  in  which  case  an  object  of  the
irtinction  is  omitted:  or  they  are;  in  which  case  insensible
bjects  are  ranked  with  sensible.

In  the  English  Law,  the  same  distinction  obtains.  It  is
owever  applied  less  extensively,  and  still  more  inconsistently.

Corporeal  hereditaments  are  such  sensible  immovable  things
B  aie  the  subjects  of  heritable  rights.  Incorporeal  heredita-
lents  are  certain  heritable  rights  themselves.  The  term
Chattels'  is  also  applied  in  the  same  inconsistent  manner,
ihattels  reed  are  such  rights  or  interests  in  corporeal  and  im-
iovable  things  as  devolve  to  executors  or  administrators.  Of
liattels  personal  some  are  movable  thiiigs  in  the  proper  accepta-
ion  of  the  term,  whilst  others  are  rights  :  namely,  rights  arising
Kiectly  from  contracts  or  quasi-contracts,  or  rights  of  action.
Is  applied  in  some  cases,  the  term  chattel  signifies  a  right ;  as
ippUed  in  other  cases,  it  signifies  a  thing,  considered  as  the
nbject  of  a  right.

Permanent sensible objects which are not persons, are  2.  Movable
livided  into  things  movable  and  things  immovable.  movable.

Physically,  Movable  things  are  such  as  can  be  moved  from
ie  places  which  they  presently  occupy,  without  an  essential
liange  in  their  actual  natures.

Physically,  Immovable  things  are  such  as  cannot  be  moved
rom  their  present  places ;  or  cannot  be  moved  from  their
resent  places  without  an  essential  change  in  their  actual
atmes.  A  field  is  an  example  of  the  first.  A  house,  a  grow-
ig  tree,  or  growing  corn  is  an  example  of  the  second.

But  things  which  are  physically  movable  may  be  immovable

^*  See  p.  361,  vol.  i  ante.


778  Law:  Purposes  and  Subjects.

Leot.  by  iDstitution.  For  example,  an  heirloom,  though  physic
movable,  is  immovable  by  institution.  The  meaning  of  wl
is  merely  this :  that  the  thing,  though  physically  movable
arbitrarily  annexed  to  an  immovable  thing,  so  as  to  be  (
sidered  as  a  part  of  it,  and  to  be  comprised  in  its  name.

Sometimes  the  meaning  is  somewhat  different.  The  movi
thing  is  made  the  subject  of  rights  which  are  commonly  confi
to  immovables :  e.g.  Money  directed  to  be  laid  out  in  land,
descending  to  the  heir,  is  impressed  with  the  character  of  la
i,e,  descending,  though  not  land,  as  land  itself  descends  accord
to  the  English  law.

Another  division  of  sensible  permanent  things  is,  into  thi
determined  specifically  or  individually,  and things  which
merely  determined  by  the classes  to  which  they  belong:
The  field  called  Blackacre,  or  a  field. This  or  that  horse,  o
horse. A  bushel  of  corn,  a  yard  of  cloth,  a  pound  of  golc
given  number  of  guineas ;  or  the  bushel  of  com  contained
such  a  bag,  or  the  yard  of  cloth,  the  pound  of  gold  bearing  8i
a  mark,  or  the  ten  specific  guineas  now  in  your  purse.
8.  Besman-  Things  were  divided  in  Eoman  law  into  res  mandpi  and

ci/n  and  ^^^  mandpi.  This  distinction  turns  on  forms  of  conveyaE
mandpi.  Res  viancipi  were  things  which  could  only  be  aliened  by  a  c
tain  mode  of  conveyance.  If  they  were  not  conveyed  by  i
prescribed  form,  the  party  could  only  acquire  them  by  usucapi
working  on  his  actual  possession.  The  mere  conveyance  i
parted  no  interest  to  him.
4.  Things  Things  are  either  determined  specifically  or  individually,

mined they  are  merely  determined  by  the  kinds  to  which  they  belo
^pcdfically  You  may  be  boimd  to  convey  to  me  the  field  called  Eladc&

and  things  n  1 1 i  • i i  •  i  -i  i

deter- or  a  field ;  the  particular  horse  m  y&ur  stable,  or  a  horse  o!

?"t^- certain  description ;  a  bushel  of  com ;  a  yard  of  cloth ;  a  poi

kind,  of  gold ;  a  given  number  of  guineas ;  or  the  bushel  of  corn

such  a  bag ;  the  yard  of  cloth ;  a  pound  of  gold  bearing  sue

mark ;  the  ten  guineas  in  your  purse.

In  the  language  of  the  Eoman  Lawyers,  a  thing  individui
determined  is  styled  ' species'  A  thing  which  is  merely  de
mined  by  the  class  to  which  it  belongs,  is  styled  '^
Sometimes,  genvs  signifies  the  class  of  things,  and  the  ii
terminate  individual  belonging  to  the  determined  class  is  st]
*  quantitas  :*  though  the  term  quantitas  is  usually  limited  to  s
indeterminate  things  of  determinate  classes  as  mensurd,  nun
vel  pondere  constant :  As,  to  a  bushel  of  com,  a  pound  of  (
and  so  on. The  thing  is  determined  by  mensuration  as  '


Distinctions  between  Things.  779

by  kind,  although  it  is  not  determined  specifieally  or  indi- Lect.
dually.  V ,-^

The  terms  sptcMs  and  gefMi&y  in  the  language  of  jurisprudence,
ive  therefore  a  meaning  different  from  that  which  they  bear
I  the  language  of  logicians.  In  the  language  of  logicians,  a
»iu8  is  a  larger  class,  and  a  species  is  a  narrower  class  contained
7  the  genus.  As  animals  are  a  genus,  men  are  a  species  of
nunals.

In  the  language  of  jurisprudence,  genvs  denotes  a  doss
whether  it  be  a  genvs  or  species  in  the  language  of  logicians),
)r  it  denotes  an  individual  or  portion  not  specifically  deter-
nined,  belonging  to  a  determined  class.  Hence  the  expression,
specific  legacy,  specific  performance.'  In  the  language  of
qgicians,  it  would  signify  something  totally  different.  A
pecific  legacy  would  be  a  gift  of  an  indeterminate  something
belonging  to  a  determinate  class.

Again,  specific  performance  would  mean  something  totally
ifferent  from  what  it  actually  denotes.  It  would  not  mean  a
«rfonnance  of  an  obligation  in  the  very  terms  of  it ;  for  in-
tance,  by  conveying  that  specifically  determined  house;  but
rould  be  equally  applicable  if  I  merely  conveyed  a  house,  or
omething  standing  in  lieu  of  one.  I  therefore  conceive  that
his  use  of  the  word  specific  corresponds  to  the  term  species  of
he  Roman  jurists,  with  whom  species  always  meant  an  individual.

Allied  to  the  distinction  between  species  and  genus,  or  species  6.  Fun-
nd  quantitas,  is  the  distinction  of  things  into  fungible  and  not  ^^^f^.
angible.  gible.

Where  a  thing  which  is  the  subject  of  an  obligation  (i.e.
^hich  one  man  is  bound  or  obliged  to  deliver  to  another)  must
«  delivered  in  specie,  the  thing  is  not  fungible :  ie,  that  very
ndividual  thing,  and  not  another  thing  of  the  same  or  another
Jass,  in  lieu  of  it,  must  be  delivered.

Where  the  subject  of  the  obligation  is  a  thing  of  a  given
lass,  the  thing  is  said  to  be  fungible :  i.e.  the  delivery  of  any
»bject  which  answers  to  the  generic  description  will  satisfy  the
enns  of  the  obligation.  '  In  genere  suo  functionem  recipiunt :'
leaning  that  the  obligation  is  performed  by  the  delivery  of  genus
r  quarUUas.  '  Una  fungitur  vice  alterius.'  In  the  language  of
lie  German  jurists,  fungible  things  are  styled  *  vertretbar ' — ^re-
resentable.  This  expression  is  perhaps  better  than  the  other.
I  fungible  or  representable  thing  is  a  thing  whose  place,  lieu,  or
X)m,  may  be  supplied  by  a  thing  of  the  same  kind,  or  even  by
thing  not  of  the  same  kind,  as  money  in  the  form  of  damages.


78o


Law  :  Purposes  and  SubjectsJ


LXOT.

XLVI


9.  Res  sin-
gules  and
Wiiversi-
tates
rerwm.


Things  are  fungible  or  not  fungible,  not  in  their  own  a
but  with  reference  to  the  tenns  of  the  given  obligation.  C
wise,  any  thing  of  any  class  may  be  either  fungible  or  nol
man  may  devise  a  farm,  or  a  house,  though  it  is  not  like
would  do  so,  and  though  the  bequest  would  probably  be  vc
reason  of  uncertainty.  But,  in  the  writings  of  the  B
Lawyers,  there  are  actual  instances  of  facts  of  the  kind.

Fungible  things  are  generally  confounded  with  thingi
U8U  consumuntur  because  these,  for  obvious  reasons,  are  ui
sold  in  gcTvere,  not  in  specie.  But  these  things  may  be  the  o
of  a  specific  obligation,  as  the  others  may  of  generic.  I  m
bound  to  deliver  to  you,  not  only  so  much  wine,  but  that  s]
parcel  of  it  now  lying  in  my  cellar,  and  in  such  a  comer
The  distinction  does  not  arise  from  any  physical  differen
the  nature  of  the  things,  although  there  are  some  things  '
are  most  naturally  sold  in  genere,  and  others  of  a  permanent
most  naturally  sold  in  specie.

This  distinction  is  of  considerable  importance  in  pr
with  reference  to  performance  in  specie  or  recovery  in
Almost  the  only  ground  for  enforcing  specific  performan
that  nothing  else  can  completely  supply  the  place  of  that
thing  for  which  the  party  contracted.  Where  it  can,  ih)
no  reason  for  enforcing  the  contract  in  specie.

In  English  Equity,  a  specific  delivery  is  not  enforced  i
the  subject  of  the  contract  is  land.  There  is  one  case  o
books  in  which  it  was  enforced  in  the  case  of  a  contract  foi
but  I  never  could  understand  on  what  ground.  Contnu
deliver  movable  objects  have  been  specifically  enforced,  Ix
the  objects  were  of  so  peculiar  a  nature  that  they  could  i
replaced.  Such  was  the  case  of  the  Pusey  horn,  an  obj(
specific  and  so  completely  sui  generis,  that  the  party  never
have  replaced  it.  But  in  the  case  of  iron  I  never  could  i
stand  the  motive ;  money  in  the  form  of  damages  would
sufficed  as  completely  as  it  can  in  any  case.  The  distinct
also  of  importance  with  reference  to  recovery  in  specie,  wl
party  has  been  wrongfully  dispossessed  of  a  specifically
mined  thing.  Neither  is  specific  delivery  enforced  by  oui
mon  law,  unless  by  the  action  of  detinue,  and  there  the  al
tive  is  always  allowed.  The  analogous  action  of  trover  is  n
for  damages.

Things  are  again  divided  into  res  singulce  and  univer
rerum;  things  which  are  themselves  individual  and  single,  an
not  be  divided  without  completely  destroying  their  actual  i


r


^


Distinctions  between  Things.  781

tod  lota  or  collections  of  individual  things.  A  sheep  belongs  to  Lect.
the  first  daas^  a  flock  of  sheep  to  the  second.  This  is  not  a  dis-  ^
tiDdaon  without  a  difference.  If  a  man  contracts  to  deliver
80  many  sheep^  and  if  he  contracts  to  deliver  a  flock  consisting
of  that  number  of  sheep,  his  legal  position  is  not  the  same  in  the
two  cases.  If  some  of  the  sheep  die  in  the  interval,  he  must
yet,  in  the  first  case,  deliver  the  stipulated  number;  in  the
second,  he  need  not,  because  you  bought  them  in  the  gross.^

The  only  reason  for  defining  and  distinguishing  things  in
Ae  law,  or  in  the  expositions  of  it,  is  in  order  that  dispositions
of  things  and  contracts  relating  to  them  may  thereby  be  facil-
itated ;  that  parties  may  know  the  eflect  of  using  such  and  such
ezpiessions  in  contracts  and  conveyances. It  is  important  that
the  meaning  of  such  terms  as  messuage,  for  instance,  should  be
practically  settled,  in  order  that  the  import  of  the  words  used  in  '
«  contract,  for  example,  may  be exactly  known. There  are
several  cases  in  our  law  books  turning  on  that  very  question.^*
^Vhat  does  a  party  dispose  of,  by  disposing  of  his  furniture,  or
by  disposing  of  all  his  efiects  ? The  law  must  determine :  that
18^  must  determine  the  meaning  it  will  attach  to  the  words  if  the
parties  have  not  explained  clearly  the  exact  meaning  which  they
annex  to  them,  so  that  a  party  may  exactly  know  what  construc-
tion in  the  courts  of  justice  will  be  put  upon  those  names.

Bentham,  in  his  Vue  g&rUrale  d^un  Corps  complet  de  Droit
{tit. '  Des  Chases '),  has  not,  so  far  as  I  can  observe,  at  all  im-
proved upon  the  old  distinctions,  extremely  imperfect  as  they
'Udoubtedly  are ;  and  he  has  even  misapprehended  some  of  those
distinctiona  He  first  divides  things  into  choses  naturelles  and
^iosM  artifidelles,  a  distinction  of  which  I  cannot  perceive  the
pnrpose.  Next  into  movable  and  immovable,  an  old  distinction.
iJext  into  things  consumable  and  things  which  may  be  used  with-

.  "  Intennediate  between  the  two  cases  on  the  bales  respectively  being  weighed

H  a  contract  snch  as  the  sale  of  cotton  over  or  '  passins  the  scale.' The  Queen's

to  arrive  according  to  the  usage  of  the  Bench  (Michaelmas  Term,  1868)  refused

Liverpool  market  at  that  sta^  of  the  to  disturb  a  verdict  dven  in  accordance

^iVttaction  where  the  bales  have  been  with  this  understanding. — R.  C.

'Woiced,  but  not  weighed  over. It  is  a  *  *  What  is  part  of  a  house '  has  of

^  of  specific  bales  with  an  implied  late  years  formed  a  fruitful  subject  of

^Qgigement  to  replace  any  that  may  be  legislation,  owing  to  the  92nd  section  of

wit  or  damaged  with others of  the  the  L.  C.  C.  Act,  1845. The  most  recent

^Qality  specified. The  precise  nature  cases  on  the  subject  are  Steele  v.  Midland

^  the  contract  becomes  important  when  Railway  Company,  L.  R.  1  Ch.  275,  and

*  question  arises  as  to  periculum  rei  Marson  v.  London,  Chatham,  and  Dover

^UcB, In  the  contract  here  instanced  Railway  Company,  L.  R.  6,  £q.  101. —

^tppeais  to  be  the  understanding  of  R.  C.
^  market  that  the  risk  is  transferred

VOL.  n.  T


782  Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

liECT. out  being  consumed,  which  is  the  vulgar  or  erroneous  notion
the  distinction  between  things  fungible  and  not  fungible

The  distinction  of  the  Boman  Lawyers  between  species
genus,  or  between  things  determined  individually  and
determined  by  their  kinds,  he  expresses  thus :  *  things  vali
individually  and  things  valued  in  mass/

In  our  conveyances,  we  make  up  for  the  indefiniteness
the  general  description,  by  attaching  to  the  term  which  ought
convey  the  whole  meaning,  a  list  of  as  many  of  the  parts  wlii(
fall  under  it  as  we  can  think  of ;  a  sort  of  drag  net,  to  com]
hend  everything  which  happened  to  be  omitted  out  of  the
prehension  of  the  one  general  nama This  would  be  avoided
the  exact  import  of  those  single  names  were  specially  detei
by  the  legislator.


Notes.

QuantUas  qum  pandere  aiU  mensurd  constat :  a  determinate  qi
(determined,  that  is,  by  weight  or  measure)  of  an  inorganic  subsl

Quantitas  qum  rum  constat ; — a  determined  quantity  (determined,!
is,  by  the  number  of  individuals)  of  organic  individuals. Any
quantity  is  individuum  vaffum. An  assigned  quantity  of  the  sort
species,

A  quantity  of  the  first  sort  may  be  resolvable  into  organic  ii
viduak,  but  organic  individuals  which,  for  the  purposes  of  commc
are  never considered in that  character; as,  e.g,  grains of  coi
NumeniSf  on  the  contrary,  is  made  up  of  individuals,  which,  for
purposes  of  commerce,  are  considered  as  such :  ie,  are  counted;  e^
Sheep. — Marginal  Note  in  Hugo,  Enc.  p.  324.


*  Thing '  and  *  Produce '  are  clearly  relative  terms.  That  whid
is  produce  with  reference  to  some  given  subject  (as,  for  instance
growing  fruit  with  reference  to  the  tree  upon  which  it  grows  (becoma
a  substantial  or  independent  thing  so  soon  as  that  relation  ceases  {e.$
by  severance).  Earth  made  into  bricks,  or  fruit  taken  from  a  tree
cease  to  be  produce  or  integrant  parts  of  land,  and  pass  into  the  oka
chattels.  And  again  (as  the  bricks,  for  instance)  may,  by  compod
tion,  become  integrant  parts  of  another  subject. — Marginal  Note  m
Blackstone,  vol.  iii  cL  14.


Inquirenda:  How  to  define  the  subject  of  a  Kight,  or,  men
briefly,  a  Thing  1 — What  is  comprised  in  the  subject  itself  1  Wluri
is  to  be  understood  by  its  appurtenances  1  What  is  to  be  understooc
by  its  produce  or  profits )  What  is  to  be  understood  by  the  uses  oi
services  to  be  derived  from  it  ?  By  produce  or  profits  are  we  to
understand  periodical  accretions — substances  which,  though  removec


Jura  in  Rem. — Distinctions  between  Things.

om  the  subject^  are  reproduced  in  g&Mxe  ?  If  so,  how  can  minerals
B  profits  or  produce  1  and  why  are  trees  part  of  the  inheritance  1
ft  the  case  of  land,  etc.  every  such  object,  perhaps,  is  comprised  in
lie  subject^  as  it  has  an  indefinite  duration  and  cannot  be  removed
Eom  it  wiUiout  severance. — Marginal  Note  in  Blackstone,  vol.  iL  ch.  1.


A  university f  or  collection  of  Things,  what  ?  Must  be  distinguished
^om  a  nniversity  of  Rights  or  Obligations,  A  university  of  Things  is
bi  the  subject  of  universum  jus.  It  is  a  collection  of  physical  things
nether  the  individual  things  be  simple  or  composite) ;  is  itself  a
kal  individuum  ;  and  is,  therefore,  not  the  seat  of  an  universitas  juris.


t  *  Magna  autem  differentia  est  mancipi  rerum  et  nee  mancipi.
fam  res  nee  mancipi  nuda  traditione  abalienari  possunt,  si  modo
orporales  sunt  et  ob  id  recipiunt  traditionem.

'  Mancipi  vero  res  sunt  qu88  per  mancipationem  ad  alium  trans-
nrentur,'  etc — Oaius,  lib.  ii  §  19.

The  difference  assigned  by  Gains  is  a  difference  of  properties  or

Lents :  that  is,  a  difference  between  the  modes  in  which  things  of
sorts  were  respectively  aliened  or  conveyed. That  difference

reen  the  two  classes  which  was  the  cause  or  source,  is  not  even
id  to. — Marginal  Note  and  Table  in  Gaius,

Res.


Mancipi.


Nee  mancipi.


Qoaedam
corporales


Servitutes

praediorum

rusticorum.


Qusedam
corporales.


Incorporales
exceptis  eervi-
tutibua  p.  r.


783


Lbct.
XLVI


LECTURE  XLVII.

ON  THE  FIBST  GREAT  DIVISION  OF  JURA  IN  REM,  OR  THE
DISTINCTION  BETWEEN  DOMINIUM  AND  SERVITUS,

Living  indicated  the  leading  divisions  which  I  give  to  the  lect.

iaw  of  Things  (or  to  the  Law  minus  the  Law  of  Persons),  I  ^L^I^^

low  proceed to  the  first  department  of  the  latter:  namely,  Priinary

Primary  rights,  with  primary  relative  duties.'  jjfth^'ri-

Of  the  duties  which  I  style  dbsolutc  (or  of  the  duties  which  mary  rela-

ave  no  corresponding  rights),  many  are  primary  or  principal,  ^^^^^^^^


784

Lect.
XLVII

^— > '

Postpone-
ment of
primary
absolute
duties.


Distribu-
tion of
primary
nghts
under  four
sub-de-
partments.


This  divi-
sion, why
preferable
to  that  of
the  Roman
Lawyers.


Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

or  are  not  effects  or  consequences  of  delicts  or  .injuries.  C(
sequently,  they  ought,  in  logical  strictness,  to  be  placed  in  t
first  department  of  the  Law  of  Things.  But  for  reasons  whi
I  hint  at  in  my  Outline,^  and  which  I  shall  produce  in  a  si
sequent  Lecture,  I  think  it  commodious  to  place  absolute  dut
in  that  department  of  the  Law  of  Things  which  is  concen
with  the  rights  and  duties  that  I  style  sanctioning  or  secoi
ary:  namely,  in  that  siLb-department  of  that  second  departme
which  I  give  to  the  consideration  of  crimes  and  their  varic
consequences.

In  treating  of  primary  rights,  with  their  correspond)
primary  duties,  I  shall  distribute  them  under  four  sub-depa
ments :  the  ground  or  rationale  of  which  distribution  may
found  in  the  following  considerations :

It  will  be  found  on  examination  (as  I  stated  in  my  eari
Lectures),  that  every  right,  simple  or  complex,  is  jus  in  rem
a  right  against  persons  generally),  jus  in  personam  (or  a  lij
against  a  person  or  persons  specifically  or  individually  determine
or  a  combination  or  compound,  more  or  less  complex,  of  jm
rem  and  jus  in  persoTiam.

Accordingly,  I  divide  primary  rights  (including  their  c
responding  primary  duties),  into  the  four  following  sub-dep
ments.  1.  Eights  in  rem  as  existing  simply,  or  as  not  combii
with  rights  in  personam.  2.  Eights  in  personam  as  exist
simply,  or  as  not  combined  with  rights  in  rem.  3.  Such  c(
binations  of  jus  in  rem  and  in  personam  as  are  less  compl
4;  Such  more  complex  aggregates  oi  jura  in  rem  and  in  person
as  are  styled  by  modem  Civilians  universitates  juris,  or  iiniversi
of  rights  and  duties.

This  order  is  somewhat  different  from  that  of  the  institutic
treatises  of  the  Eoman  Lawyers,  and  from  that  of  those  mod
Civilians  who  have  followed  the  method  of  those  treatises,
them,  the  matter  of  the  law  of  things  is  divided  into  domi
(in  the  largest  sense  of  that  term)  or  jura  in  rem,  and  obligate
or  jura  in  personam. And  dominia  in  the  largest  sense  of
term  are  again  divided  into  dominium  rei  singuke,  jura  it
aliend,  and  universitates  juris. The  first  of  these  three  o
prebends  rights  of  property,  strictly  so  called;  the  other
include  all  other  jura  in  rem. Obligationes  are  divided  i
obligationes  ex  contractu,  quasi  ex  contractu,  and  ex  delicto.

Thi^  division  appears  to  me  very  incorrect.  A  man's
heritance or  patrimony,  for  instance  (which  is a  univers

^  See  p.  66,  vol.  i  ante.


Jura  in  Rem.  785

juis),  includes  both  jura  in  rem  and  jura  in  personam^  because  Lect.
i^ts  of  both  sorts  devolve  on  universal  successors.  It  is  much  ^  ^  .
more  correct,  therefore,  as  well  as  more  convenient,  to  distinguish
pnmary  rights  into  jura  in  rem,  jura  in  persoTiam,  and  aggregates
more  or  less  complex  of  rights  of  both  kinds.  And  according
to  the  arrangement  of  the  Boman  Lawyers,  many  rights  which
tie  truly  combinations  of  rights  in  rem  and  rights  in  personam,
•le  scattered  through  the  corpus  jwris  under  those  various  heads.

For  example,  the  right  conferred  by  a  mortgage,  is  a  com-
bination of  rights  in  rem  and  rights  in  persoTiam,  So  is  the
n^t  conferred  by  a  sale,  completed  by  delivery,  at  least  under
some  circumstances.  If  accompanied  by  a  warranty,  express  or
kdt,  of  the  soundness  of  the  title,  it  does  not  confer  jus  in  rem
simply,  or  jus  in  personam  simply.  The  sale  completed  by
delivery,  passes  a  right  in  the  thing  sold,  which  avails  against
the  world  in  general,  but,  by  the  warranty,  there  also  accrues  to
die  buyer,  a  right  availing  against  the  seller  determinately  or
exclusively.

Even  by  my  own  method  the  distinction  between  the  classes
of  rights  is  not  complete,  and  they  cannot  by  any  method  be
kept  quite  separata  Under  the  head  of  universitates  juris,  we
cannot  avoid  referring  forward  to  obligations  arising  from  injuries:
bt  many  rights  arising  from  injuries  often  devolve  from  Testators,
Intestates  or  Insolvents,  to  those  who  take  per  universitatem.

And  here  I  will  advert  to  a  difficulty  which  arises  out  of  An  objec-
in  observation  of  mine  in  a  former  Lecture. I  said  that  all  ^^^  *
duties  are  such  as  answer  either  to  rights  in  rem  or  to  rights  in  position
personam :  and  I  added  that  the  duties  answering  to  rights  in  ®''*™^"®  •
rem  are  always  negative,  or  are  duties  to  forbear. To  this  it
has  been  objected  by  one  of  my  hearers,  that  there  are  positive
duties  lying  on  persons  generally :  e.g.  A  duty,  incumbent  on  Positive
the  community  generally,  to  pay  a  tax  imposed  by  the  sovereign  ^^S^J^Jq
government:  Or  a  duty  incumbent  generally  on  persons  of  a  ort>erform)
certaiD  age  to  render  military  service. But  in  all  these  cases,  u™^^®.
the  duty,  assuming  that  it  lies  on  persons  generally,  is  absolute,  sonsgener-
There  is  no  determinate  person,  physical  or  complex,  towards  fn/etCT-
whom  the  duty  is  to  be  observed :  or  the  only  person,  physical  minately.
or  complex,  towards  whom  the  duty  is  to  be  observed,  is  the
wvereign  government  of  the  given  community. And,  for  reasons
which  I  have  produced  in  my  published  Lectures,  we  cannot
say  with  propriety  of  a  sovereign  government,  that  it  has  legal
rights  against  its own  subjects. The division which I was
Ending  to  when  I  made  the  observation  in  question,  was  a


786


Lect.
XLVII


Rights  in
rem  as  ex-
isting ver
ae,  with
reference
to  differ-
ences be-
tween their
subjects.


Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

division  of  relative  duties  merely,  that  is  of  duties  answering  to
rights  residing  in  determinate  persons ;  and  every  relative  duty
does  answer  either  to  a  ^  in  rem  or  to  a  jtis  in  personam.

And  here  I  may  remark,  that  relative  duties  are  the  only
duties  which  are  noticed  in  the  Institutional  writings  of  the
Eoman  lawyers :  the  reason  of  which  is,  that  they  are  a  treatise
on  private  law :  i,e,  excluding  political  status,  and  criminal  law,
under  the  name  o{  public  law.

Now  absolute  duties  would  naturally  (according  to  this
arrangement)  come  within  the  province  of  public  law.  The
duties  imposed  by  the  Government,  and  to  be  performed  towards
the  Government,  would  fall  under  the  law  of  political  staiw:
the  purely  absolute  duties  to  be  performed  towards  no  deter-
minate persons  whatever,  would  fall  under  criminal  law,  to
which  they  would  either  be  prefixed  by  way  of  preface,  which
would  in  my  opinion  be  the  preferable  order,  or  would  he
described  impKcitly,  in  the  description  of  crimes  and  of  their
corresponding  punishments.

In  treating  of  rights  in  rem  as  existing  simply  (or  as  not
combined  with  rights  in  personam),  I  will  first  touch  upon  them
briefly,  with  reference  to  differences  between  their  subjeds,  w
between  the  aspects  of  the  forbearances  which  may  be  styled
their  objects.

In  relation  to  rights  of  the  class  as  considered  fix)ni  this
aspect,  I  have  said  in  my  Outline  \^

*The  expression  in  rem,  when  annexed  to  the  term  r^W,
does  not  denote  that  the  right  in  question,  is  a  right  over  a  thing.
Instead  of  indicating  the  nature  of  the  subject,  it  points  at  the
compass  of  the  correlating  duty.  It  denotes  that  the  relative
duty  Kes  upon  persons  generally,  and  is  not  exclusively  incumbent
upon  a  person  or  persons  determinate.  In  other  words,  it  denotes
that  the  right  in  question  avails  against  the  world  a^  large.

'Accordingly,  some  rights  in  rem  are  rights  over  ttinjs:
others  are  rights  over  persons :  whilst  others  have  no  subjects
(persons  or  things)  over  or  to  which  we  can  say  they  exist,  or
in  which  we  can  say  they  inhere. — ^For  example :  Property  in  a
horse,  property  in  a  quantity  of  com,  or  property  in,  or  a  right
of  way  through  a  field,  is  a  right  in  rem  over  or  to  a  things  a
right  in  rem  inhering  in  a  thing,  or  a  right  in  rem  whereof  the
subject  is  a  thing, — The  right  of  the  master,  against  third  parties,

^  See  pp.  46,  47,  vol.  i.  ante.


Dominium  and  Servitus.  7^7

to  his  slave,  servant,  or  apprentice,  is  a  right  in  rem  over  or  to  Jf^-,
hfenon.  It  is  a  right  residing  in  one  person,  and  inhering  in  ^  ^  ^
tnother  person  as  its  subject. — The  right  styled  a  monopoly,  is
a  right  in  rem  which  has  no  subject.  There  is  no  specific  subject
(person  or  thing)  over  or  to  which  the  right  exists,  or  in  which
Ae  right  inheres.  The  officium  or  common  duty  to  which  the
Bgfat  corresponds,  is  a  duty  lying  on  the  world  at  large,  to  for-
bear from  selling  commodities  of  a  given  description  or  class :
bat  it  is  not  a  duty  lying  on  the  world  at  large,  to  forbear  from
acts  r^rding  determinately  a  specifically  determined  subject
A  man's  right  or  interest  in  his  reputation  or  good  name,  with  a
multitude  of  rights  which  I  am  compelled  to  pass  in  silence,
would  also  be  found,  on  analysis,  to  avail  against  the  world  at
kige,  and  yet  to  be  wanting  in  persons  and  things  which  it  were
possible  to  style  their  subjects.

*  I  shall  therefore  distinguish  rights  in  rem  (their  answering
ftlative  duties  being  impKed)  with  reference  to  differences
between  their  subjects,  or  between  the  aspects  of  the  forbearances
tkich  may  be  styled  their  objects.  As  distinguished  with
leference  to  those  difierences,  they  will  fall  (as  I  have  intimated
iheady)  into  three  classes. — 1.  Eights  in  rem  of  which  the
•ubjects  are  things,  or  of  which  the  objects  are  such  forbearances
»8  determinately  regard  specifically  determined  things.  2.
iights  in  rem  of  which  the  subjects  are  persons,  or  of  which  the
bjects  are  such  forbearances  as  determinately  regard  specifically
etermined  persons.  3.  Eights  in  rem  without  specific  subjects,
t  of  which  the  objects  are  such  forbearances  as  have  no  specific
^ard  to  specific  things  or  persons.*

In  explaining,  in  my  earlier  Lectures,  the  nature  of  the
listinction  between  jus  in  rem  and  in  personam,  I  cited  numerous
examples  of  rights  in  the  former  class  which  have  no  specific
subjects  (persons  or  things).  And  it,  therefore,  will  not  be
liecessary  to  adduce  examples  here.

With  regard  to  jura  in  rem,  which  are  rights  ovei  persons,
I  would  observe  that  all  (or  nearly  all  of  them)  are  matter  for
the  Law  of  Persons  and  the  Law  of  Status.  Such,  for  example,
i»  the  case  with  the  right  of  the  master  to  the  slave ;  the  right
of  the  master  in  the  servant ;  the  right  or  interest  of  the  parent
or  husband  in  the  child  or  wife ;  and  the  right  or  interest  of
the  child  or  wife  in  the  parent  or  husband.  In  these,  and
various  other  cases,  the  right  is  jus  in  rem  (or  a  right  availing
against  the  world  at  large)  of  which  the  subject  is  a  person.


788  Law:  Purposes  and  Subjects.

Lbct. But  in  each  of  these  cases,  the  right  is  a  constitaeiit  deau

XLVII

a  statvA  or  condition,  and  therefore  is  appropriate  matter  fo
appendix  or  supplement  which  is  styled  the  Law  of  Penoi

The  only  right  in  or  over  a  person  which  seems  appn
matter  for  the  Law  of  Things,  is  what  may  be  called  a
right  in  his  own  person  or  body :  that  is  to  say,  a  man'i
to  enjoy  and  dispose  of  (free  from  hindrance  by  others)  his
organs  and  powers,  in  so  far  as  such  enjoyment  and  disp
consist  with  the  rights  of  others,  or  (generally)  with  any
duties  incumbent  on  himself.

This  right  (which,  as  I  shall  shew  hereafter,  may  be  1
to  property  or  dominion  in  a  thing,  strictly  so  called)  is  p
matter  for  the  Law  of  Things,  or  for  tlit  Law  exclusive
law  of  status.  Instead  of  being  parcel  of  a  status  or  coi
it  resides  in  every  person  (who  has  any  rights  at  all)
mere  fact  of  his  living  under  the  State,  or  within  the  pre
which  it  yields  to  those  who  are  living  under  its  jurisdic

And  here  I  will  make  an  observation  upon  Blackstone's<
of  those  rights  which  are  commonly  called  ruitural  or
and  by  him  absolute  rights.  He  divides  them  into  the  i
personal  security  (including  the  right  to  the  enjoyment
limbs,  bodily  health,  and  reputation),  the  right  of  persoruu
(that  is,  a  man's  right  to  move  his  body  from  place  to  ]
his  pleasure,  as  far  as  he  can  do  so  consistently  with  h:
obligations) ;  and,  lastly,  the  right  of  private  property,  w
in  truth  no  right,  but  a  collective  name  for  aHl  the  ligh
which  his  Commentaries  are  conversant.^  He  should  (I
have  included  right  of  personal  liberty,  in  the  sense  ii
he  understands  it,  under  the  head  of  right  of  personal  s
or  right  in  a  man's  own  person.  For  it  is  merely  the  p(
disposing  of  one's  person  consistently  with  the  rights  of
and  with  duties  lying  on  one's  self.  And,  on  the  othei
the  right  to  reputation,  which  seems  to  have  no  immedis
nection  with  a  man's  own  person  or  body,  ought  not  t
been  included  in  the  right  of  personal  security,  but  oi
have  been  co-ordinated  with  it.

Inborn  or  natural  rights  (or  rights  residing  in  oK  wit

special  title),  would  therefore  fall  into  two  kinds :  namel

to  personal  security,  or  right  in  one's  own  body,  and  th

to  one's  reputation  or  good  name.

?%^*  to  Perhaps,  however,  by  the  right  to  liberty  he  does  no

what?' the  mere  right  to  the  enjoyment  and  disposition  of  one's

»  See  Table  VIIL  post.


Dcmiinium  and  Servitus.  789

ody,  but  every  right  to  do  or  forbear  which  is  not  compre- JfS;,
led  by  other  specified  rights.  s^T^

Political  or  civil  liberty  is  properly  the  mere  liberty  from
I  obligation  left  by  a  Government  to  its  own  subjects,  which
rty  the  Qovemment  may  or  may  not  couple  with  a  legal
b  to  it  When  it  does  so  couple  it,  the  liberty  may  or  may
be  part  of  some  specified  right :  if  it  be,  it  falls  within  the
ription  of  that  right  If  not,  then  the  right  to  liberty  is
light  to  do  or  forbear,  which  is  not  comprehended  by  any
or  specified  right  whatever.  For  example,  the  right  to
lish  one's  opinions  freely  is  not  specified  anywhere  as  a
icolar  right,  and  therefore  falls  under  the  vague  term  right
iberty.  There  are  a  multitude  of  rights  in  that  predicament ;
r  must  necessarily  be  left  under  the  vague  general  description
ights  to  liberty.  The  only  way  to  determine  what  the  right
8  by  determining  what  act  would  be  a  violation  of  it  If
know  what  act  would  be  an  infringement  of  your  right  of
rty,  you  know  to  that  extent  what  the  Government  has
jn  you  liberty  to  do.  As  against  the  Government  itself  you
have  no  legal  right ;  as  has  already  been  sufiBciently  shewn.

In  treating  of  rights  in  rem  as  existing  simply  (or  as  not  Rights  in
ibined  with  rights  in  personam),  the  only  rights  which  I  ^^,^^the
Q  consider  directly  are,  rights over  things,  in the  strict  onlynchts
sptation  of  the  term :  that  is  to  say,  such  permanent  external  ^^  ^^^t
3Cts  as  are  not  persons. Eights  in  rem  in  or  over  persons,  directly.
\  rights  in  rem  which  have  no  subjects,  I  shall  touch  inci-
tally  (in  so  far  as  I  may  find  it  necessary  to  advert  to  them),
[  treat  of  rights  of  the  class  in  or  over  things.
Of  the  various  distinctions  between  rights  in  rem  over  things,  Distinc-
first  to  which  I  address  myself,  is  the  distinction  which  I  ^^^^  '
5t  mark,  for  the  present,  by  the  ambiguous  and  inadequate  perty  or
les  of  dominium  and  servitiis,  or  property  and  easem^ent.  and  ease--

I  have  stated  in  my  Outline,  the  nature  of  the  distinction  ment  or
¥hich  I  am  now  adverting.^ In  my  next  Lecture  I  shall
mpt  to  explain  it,  as  accurately  as  my  time  will  allow. And
mpting  to  explain  that  distinction,  I  shall  proceed  in  the
mer  marked  out  in  my  Outline.^^

Before  I  close  the  present  Lecture,  I  will  make  a  few  re-  Various
ks  upon  the  various  meanings  of  the  very  ambiguous  word  ^^^
)perty '  or  '  Dominion.'  ?domiii^-'

*  See  Outline,  p.  47,  voL  i.  ante.  "  See  Outline,  p.  49,  vol  i.  ante. ion,'  etc.


790  Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

Lect.  1,  Taken  with  its  strict  sense,  it  denotes  a  right — ^indefinite

XT  VII

in  point  of  user — unrestricted  in  point  of  disposition — and
unlimited  in  point  of  duration — over  a  detenninate  thing.  In
this  sense,  it  does  not  include  seroitus,  nor- any  right  of  limited
duration.  Sometimes  it  is  taken  in  a  loose  and  vulgar  accepta-
tion, to  denote  not  the  right  of  property  or  dominion,  but  the
subject  of  such  a  right ;  as  when  a  horse  or  piece  of  land  is  called
my  property.

2.  Sometimes  it  is  applied  to  a  right  indefinite  in  point  of
user,  but  limited  in  duration :  for  instance,  in  common  parlance^
a  life  interest  in  an  immovable  is  a  property.

3.  Sometimes  the  term  '  right  of  property '  or  '  dominion '  is
opposed  to  a  right  of  possession  (which  will  be  analysed  here-
after) ;  that  is,  to  a  right  over  and  in  a  determinate  thing,  which
arises  from  the  fact  of  an  adverse  possession.  As  opposed  to
this,  the  term  '  right  of  property '  almost  comprises  servitn;^ ;  for
it  means,  not  a  right  distinguished  by  indefiniteness  of  user,  bat
a  right  (either  property  or  servitude)  which  is  not  a  right  of
possession :  a  complete  right  as  against  the  world,  as  distinguished
from  a  right  against  all  the  world  except  a  determinate  person  or
party  who  has  properly  the  right  in  the  subject;  as  when  we

if  say,  that  the  right  of  possession  ripens  by  prsescription  into

dominium  or  property:  and  we  say  so  even  when  the  right
acquired  is  a  sermtvs,

4c.  In  the  language  of  the  classical  Boman  jurists,  the  tern
proprietas,  or  in  re  potestas  or  dominium,  has  two  prindpd  |
meanings.  It  is  either  a  right  indefinite  in  point  of  user,  over  |
a  determinate  thing:  or,  generally,  jus  in  rem.  In  the  first  -
sense,  it  is  opposed  to  servitus  ;  and  these  form  the  two  divisions  j^
of  rights  availing  generally  against  the  world.  In  the  second  ■
or  larger  and  vaguer  sense,  it  includes  all  to  which  in  the  first  -
sense  it  is  opposed  ;  all  rights  not  coming  within  the  description  J
of  obligatio,

5.  I  think  in  English  law,  imless  used  vaguely  and  popularly,
the  term  property  is  not  applied  to  rights  in  immovables.  We
talk  of  property  in  a  movable  thing.  By  absolute  property  in
a  movable  thing  we  mean  what  the  Boman  lawyers  called
dominium  or  praprietas,  they  having  no  distinction  between  real
and  personal  property.  But,  in  strict  law  language,  the  term  is
not  applied  to  a  right  or  interest  in  immovables.  An  estate  in  fee
simple,  an  estate  in  tail,  an  estate  for  life  and  so  on,  but  never  a
property,  speaking  strictly.  An  estate  in  fee-simple  corresponds
as  nearly  as  may  be  to  absolute  property  in  a  personal  chattel


Different  Meanings  of  'Property'  79 1

6.  Another  strange  caprice  of  language  is  the  following. y^;»
tenn  property  is  applied  to  some  rights  in  rem  over  or  in

ODs  but  not  to  others.  For  example,  the  right  of  the  master
18  slave  is  called  dominium  in  the  Eoman  law  and  property
le  EnglisL  The  former  word  seems  to  have  originally  been
led  exclusively  to  that  right;  to  have  been  co-extensive
domintis,  and  to  have  extended  only  by  analogy  to  things
ly  so  called  But  in  neither  the  Boman  nor  the  English
is  the  analogous  right  of  the  father  in  his  son  included
r  the  same  name.  So  a  man's  right  in  his  own  person ;  it
«eii  called  a  right  of  personal  security,  but  never  a  property
9  own  person.  This  is  analogous  to  the  capricious  applica-
of  the  term  thing.  A  slave  in  the  Roman  law  was  styled
Ing,  because  he  was  the  subject  of  a  right  residing  in  his
er  and  availing  against  third  parties,  and  was  so  far  in  a
ion  analogous  to  that  of  a  thing  strictly  so  called.  But
Soman  lawyers  did  not  call  a  son  (though  also  in  the  power
s  father  and  almost  as  completely  subject  to  him  as  a  slave)
ng :  nor  did  they  call  the  action  by  which  the  father  might
recovered  the  son  a  vindication;  which  is  the  name
liarly  applicable  to  cases  in  which  a  right  of  property  or
niMm  has  been  violated.

7.  Another  meaning  of  the  word  property  is  the  aggregate
man's  faculties,  rights,  or  means ;  called  in  the  Eoman  law
tn's  patrimony :  at  least  that  name  is  given  to  such  part  of
iggregate,  as  descends  to  his  general  representatives  on  his
ise,  or  is  applicable  to  the  discharge  of  his  obligations  if  he
isolvent  It  is  tantamount  to  the  term  estate  ami  effe<:tSy  or
ape  to  the  term  a^ssets.  In  this  sense  it  implies  rights  in
nam,  or  obligations  as  well  as  rights  of  every  other  class.

evident  that  a  man's  rights  as  against  determinate  persons
ust  as  much  applicable  to  the  discharge  of  his  debts,  and
Ive  just  as  much  to  his  general  representatives  as  his  jif^ra

5.  A  still  more  remarkable  acceptation  is  the  following.
le  largest  possible  meaning,  property  means  legal  rights  or
ties  of  any  kind ;  as  when  we  talk  of  the  institution  of
erty ;  or  of  security  to  property  as  arising  from  such  and
a  form  of  Government  or  the  like.  It  is  commonly  said
Government  exists  or  should  exist  to  institute  and  protect
erty.  I  have  demonstrated  in  a  note  to  my  published
axes,  the absurdity  of  this doctrine.^^ But  the  property

^  See  note,  p.  292,  vol.  i.  anU.


792  Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

Lbct. here  spoken  of  must  mean  legal  rights  in  the  largest  sense.
V ^ > cannot  be  meant  that  Government  exists  or  ought  to  exist
the  purpose  of  creating  and  protecting  rights  of  dominion  in
narrower  sense,  else  it  would  be  implied  that  it  ought  not
exist  for  the  purpose  of  protecting  rights  arising  from  cont
and  g'lta^-contracts.

When  we  speak  of  a  man  of  property,  meaning  a  we
man,  we  seem  chiefly  to  contemplate  the  value  of  his  rights
external  things,  or  of  the  debts  due  to  him;  the  most
spicuous  portion  of  his  rights.  Blackstone  uses  the  term  in  tin
vague,  vulgar,  and  unscientific  sense,  in  the  part  of  his  wd
where  he  announces  the  arrangement  of  his  second  book.  B
there  says  that  the  law  of  things  is  conversant  about  rights «
property  or  dominium  which  he  explains  to  mean  the  ri^
which  a  man  may  acquire  in  and  to  such  external  things  as  ai
connected  with  his  person.  He  here  manifestly  means
property  and  dominium,  not  property  and  dominium  in
strict,  nor  in  any  of  their  narrow  senses,  but  in  this
sense.  For,  lower  down,  he  includes  in  the  law  of  things^
the  law  of  property  or  dominium,  not  only  property  in
absolute  and  qualified,  or  absolute  and  qualified  property  dii
of  possession  by  wrong,  but  also  whole  classes  of  rights
directly  from  contracts  or  quasi-contracts,  which  are  not
over  things  at  all,  but  rights  to  acts  and  forbearances  to  be
and  observed  by  determinate  persons.  Thus  if  you  contncfci
sell  me  a  determinate  quantity  of  com,  I  have  no  property
dominion  in  the  thing,  but  a  right  to  force  you  to  deliver  ^
according  to  the  terms  of  the  contract.  If  you  have  disposed  •
the  subject  of  the  right  in  the  meanwhile  to  a  third  party,  tN
property  vests  in  the  buyer,  not  in  me.  If  the  property  vests  ii
me  before  delivery,  the  transaction  is  not  a  contract,  but  cow
pounded  of  a  conveyance  and  a  contract  Blackstone,  therefirt
must  here  use  the  word  in  a  totally  difiTerent  sense  from  tiati
which  he  employs  it  afterwards.  In  fact,  he  here  means  by  it^
man's  legal  rights  generally,  or  his  faculties  generally.

The  same  may  be  said  of  what,  under  the  head  of  the  ri^
which  he  styles  absolute  rights,  he  terms  the  right  of  privsl
property.  What  this  might  be,  I  could  not  for  a  long  tiB
make  out :  but  by  comparing  it  with  a  corresponding  passij
in  his  third  volume,  it  was  cleared  up.  I  could  not  persnai
myself  that  it  meant  nothing.  I  now  find  that  it  doea  It
merely  a  collective  name  for  all  those  various  rights  whid
either  as  property  in  the  strict  sense,  or  as  rights  derived  fto:


Dominium  and  Servitus.  793

\  contracts  or  quasi-contracts,  are  the  subject  of  his  whole  Com- Lect.


I,  and  does  not  stand  for  a  particular  right  at  alL
These  are  only  some  of  the  meanings  of  this  most  ambiguous
word. It  is  most  difficult  to  get  on  with  it  intelligibly  and
endless  circumlocution. For  the  present  I  mean  by
[^voperty  or  dominion,  every  right  in  and  over  a  thing,  which  is
lefinite  in  user,  as  distinguished  &om  servitus. The  various
les  of  dominium  or  property  as thus understood,  I  shall
$w  as  I  proceed.


LECTURE XLVIII.

DOMINIUM AND SERVITUS.

my  last  Lecture,  I  proceeded  to  the  first  of  the  two  capital Lect.
lents  under  which  I  arrange  or  distribute-  the  matter  of .^^^^^l
Law  of  Things  (or  the  matter  of  the  bulk  or  mass  of  the  Recapitu-
system) :  namely,  primary  rights,  with  their  corresponding ***°°'
duties.
Adverting  to  primary  rights  (or  to  rights  which  are  not
[uences  of  delicts  or  injuries),  I  proceeded,  in  the  first
ice,  to  rights  in  rem  (or  rights  availing  against  the  world
large)  as  existing  per  se  or  simply :  that  is  to  say,  as  not
ibined  with  rights  in  persoTiam,  or  rights  availing  exclusively
•gainst  specifically  determined  persons.

Adverting  to  rights  in  rem,  as  existing  per  se  or  simply,  I
ftst  considered  them  with  reference  to  differences  between  their
lespective  subjects:  or  (changing  the  expression)  with  reference
to  differences  between  the  aspects  of  the  forbearances  which
nay  be  styled  their  objects.  I  touched  upon  the  rights  of  the
dass  of  which  the  subjects  are  things,  or  of  which  the  objects
iie  such  forbearances  as  determinately  regard  specifically  de-
termined things.  I  noticed  the  rights  of  the  class  of  which  the
mibjects  are  persons,  or  of  which  the  objects  are  such  forbear-
ances as  determinately  r^ard  specifically  determined  persons.
And  I  adverted  to  the  rights  of  the  class  which  have  no  specific
subjects,  or  of  which  the  objects  are  such  forbearances  as  have
no  specific  regard  to  specific  things  or  persons.

Dismissing  the  rights  of  the  class  of  which  the  subjects  are
fersoTis,  and  also  the  rights  of  the  class  which  have  no  specific
subjects,  I  proceeded  to  such  distinctions  between  rights  of  the
class  over  things  as are  founded  on  differences  between  the


794

Lect.
XLVIII


Distinc-
tion be-
tween do-
minion or
property
SLuaaervi'
tu8  or  ease-
ment.


Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

degrees  wherein  the  entitled  persons  may  use  or  deal  with
subjects.

I  adverted  generally  to  that  leading  distinction  of  the
which  may  be  marked  with  the  oppos^  expressions,  dmmk
property,  or  ovmership,  and  servUvde  or  easement. And  to  o\
viate  some  of  the  difl&culties  which  arise  from  the  ambiguiti
of  the  expression,  I  stated  some  eight  or  ten  of  the  many
disparate  meanings,  which,  in  popular  language,  and  even
the  writings  of  lawyers,  are  annexed  to  the  term  property
the  term  dominion.


Pursuing  my examination of  the  distinction,  which,  fi
want  of  better  names,  I  marked  with  the  opposed  expressii
to  which  I  have  now  adverted,  I  would  remark  that  I  mean
property  (as  opposed  to  se>*vitits  or  easement)  any  right  wi
gives  to  the  entitled  party  an  indefinite  power  or  liberty
using  or  disposing  of  the  subject:  or  (in  other  words)
gives  to  the  entitled  party  such  a  power  or  liberty  of  using
disposing  of  the  subject  as  is  not  capable  of  exact  circumsc:
tion ;  as  is  merely  limited  generally  by  the  rights  of  all
persons,  and  by  the  duties  (relative  or  absolute)  incumbent
himself.

And by  servUus  or  easement (sis opposed to  property
dominion)  I  mean  any  right  which  gives  to  the  entitled
such  a  power  or  liberty  of  using  or  disposing  of  the  subject
is  defined  or  circumscribed  exactly.

An  estate  in  fee  simple  in  land,  absolute  property  in
personal  chattel,  or  an  estate  or  interest  for  life  or  years  ift
land  or  a  personal  chattel,  are  all  of  them  cases  of  property  (d
dominion  (taking  the  expression  in  the  sense  which  I  am  noW
giving  it).

A  right  of  way  through  land  belonging  to  another,  a  ri^
of  common  (or  of  feeding  one's  cattle  on  land  belonging  to
another),  or  a  right  to  tithe  (or  to  a  definite  share  in  tta
produce  of  land  belonging  to  another),  are  all  of  them  cases  d
servitus  or  easement  (as  I  now  understand  the  expression).

Whoever  has  a  right  of  property  may  apply  the  subject
of  his  right  to  any  purpose  or  use  which  does  not  amount  to  a
violation  of  any  right  in  another,  or  to  a  breach  of  any  duty
lying  on  himself.  And  it  is  only  in  that  negative  manner  that
the  extent  of  the  power  of  user  imported  by  the  right  can
possibly  be  determined.

But  in  the  case  of  a  right  of  servitude,  the  purposes  or


Dominium  and  Servitus.  795

38  to  which  the  person  mvested  with  the  right  may  apply  the Lect.
bject,  are  not  only  limited  generally  by  the  duties  incumbent ^  >

on  him,  but  are  determined  or  may  be determined  by  a
sitive  and  comprehensive  description.

In  a  word,  urvitvA  or  easement  gives  to  the  entitled  party,
power  or  liberty  of  applying  the  subject  to  exactly  determined
jposes.  Property  or  dominion  gives  to  the  entitled  party,
e  power  or  liberty  of  applying  it  to  all  purposes,  save  such
rposes  as  are  not  consistent  with  his  relative  or  absolute
ities.

I  would  briefly  remark  (before  I  proceed)  that  in  treating
the  distinction  now  in  question,  I  suppose  that  the  right  of
le  party  is  present  or  vested,  and  is  also  accompanied  with  a
ght  to  the  present  enjoyment  of  the  right,  or  to  the  present
cercise  of  it.  To  the  nature  of  contingent  rights,  and  of  such
ssted  rights  as  are  not  coupled  with  a  right  to  present
ijoyment  or  exercise,  I  shall  advert  hereafter.

Property  or  dominion  (used  with  the  meaning  which  I  am  Property
ow  annexing  to  the  term)  is  applicable  to  any  right  which  jbi^J*^^
ives  to  the  entitled  party  an  indefinite  power  or  liberty  of  various
sing  or dealing  with the subject. But property  (as thus
ndeistood)  is  susceptible  of  various  modes :  that  is  to  say,  the
nutations  or  restrictions  to  that  power  or  liberty,  which  spring
pom  the  rights  of  others  and  from  the  duties  incumbent  on
imself ,  may  vary  to  infinity.

For  example :  A  right  of  unlimited  duration  (as  an  estate
tt  fee-simple  in  land,  or  absolute  property  in  a  personal  chattel)
nd  a  right  of  limited  duration  (as  an  estate  for  life  or  years  in
and  or  a  personal  chattel)  are  equally  property  (in  the  present
ense  of  the  expression) :  for,  in  either  case,  the  power  or  liberty
i  user  which  resides  in  the  entitled  party,  is  not  susceptible  of
)OBitive  and  exact  circumscription.

But  the  limitations  or  restrictions  to  that  indefinite  right  of
tter,  are,  in  the  diflferent  cases,  widely  different.

In  the  case  of  the  estate  in  fee,  or  the  absolute  property  in
ike  personal  chattel,  the  owner  may  waste  or  destroy  the  sub-
set^ in  so  far  as  such  waste  or  destruction  may  not  be  injurious
0  other  persons  considered  generally.

In  the  case  of  the  estate  for  life,  or  of  the  estate  for  years,
iis  power  or  liberty  is  restrained,  not  only  by  the  rights  of
hers  considered  generally,  but  by  the  rights  in  the  same  sub-


796


Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.


Lect.
XLVIII


ject  of  those  in  remainder  or  reversion :  that  is  to  say,  wlio
have  rights  in  the  same  subject,  subsequent  to  the  rights  of  the
owner  for  life  or  the  owner  for  years,  Fdr  if  the  owner  for  life,
or  the  owner  for  years  (I  know  how  uncouth  this  phrase  soxmds
to  an  English  lawyer,  but  I  have  given  my  reason  for  selecting
it),  had  the  same  power  of  user  which  resides  in  the  absolute
owner,  it  is  clear  that  the  rights  of  those  who  are  in  remainda
or  reversion  would  be  merely  illusory.  In  respect  of  tt«r
rights,  he,  at  least,  must  be  subject  to  the  duty  of  not  destroying
the  subject,  or  of  so  dealing  with  it  as  would  render  it  absolutdy
worthless.^^

But  the  restrictions  to  the  right  of  the  limited  owner,  which
arise  from  the  rights  of  the  remainderman  or  reversioner,  may
also  be  fixed  differently  by  the  absolute  dispositions  of  the  law,
or  by  private  dispositions  which  the  law  allows  and  protecta
We  may  suppose,  for  example,  that  the  owner  for  life  of  land
may  be  empowered  to  divest  it  completely  of  timber  and
buildings,  and  to  leave  nothing  to  his  followers  but  the  bare
soil;  Or  that  his  power  of  tsJdng  timber,  and  demolishing
buildings,  may  be  more  or  less  restricted.

In  our  own  law,  in  the  Homan  and  French  law,  and  (no
doubt)  in  every  other  system,  the  power  over  a  thing  residing
in  a  person  having  in  it  an  interest  limited  in  point  of  time  ii
not  only  restricted  in  duration,  but  in  regard  of  the  interests  of
the  following  takers,  is  restricted  in  a  great  variety  of  wayi
For  instance,  the  right  of  a  tenant  by  the  courtesy,  and  that  of
a  tenant  in  dower  in  the  English  law,  are  different  An  estate
for  life,  again,  may  be  given  subject  to  waste  generally,  or  free
from  the  restrictions  which  the  Courts  of  Equity  have  annexed
even  to  grants  without  impeachment  of  waste :  for  instance,  the
restriction  of  not  cutting  down  ornamental  trees  and  the  like,
for  I  take  this  provision  of  equity  to  be  only  dispositive,  that  ifl^
intended  to  take  effect  only  if  the  parties  should  not  otherwise
provide.


3


1


Property
pre-emi-
nently 80
called:
viz.  which
is  accom-
panied
with  the
largest
power  of


But  though  the  possible  modes  of  property  are  infinite,  and
though  the  indefinite  power  of  user  is  always  restricted  more  or
less,  there  is  in  every  system  of  law,  some  one  mode  of  property
in  which  the  restrictions  to  the  power  of  user  are  fewer  than  ia
others :  Or  (changing  the  expression)  there  is  some  one  mode  or
property  in  which  the  power  or  liberty  of  indefinite  user  i
more  extensive  than  in  others. And  to  this  mode  of  propeity»

»  Blackstone,  voL  ii.  pp.  122,  280,  881,  397  ;  voL  iii.  pp.  228,  etc


successors.


Dominium  and  Servitus.  797

tenn  dominion,  property,  or  ownership  is  pre-eminently  and L^
hafcicaUy  appUed.  CjlIL

Sach,  for  example,  in  the  Boman  law,  is  clominion  (in  the  ^^^*  and
t  sense) :  such,  in  the  French  law,  is  proprUU  (in  the  same  with  a
3) :  such,  in  our  own  law,  is  absolute  property  in  a  movable,  ppwer  of
I,  too,  in  our  own  law,  is  an  estate  in  fee-simple  in  land :  from  con-
pv^hich  (although  it  is  closely  analogous  to  absolute  property  Jj^^'^^al
movable)  is  not  commonly  called  property  or  ownership.
rhe  right  of  property  pre-eminently  so  called  (or  the  mode
e  right  of  property  which  is  coupled  with  the  largest  power
«r)  is  (for  the  reasons  to  which  I  have  just  adverted)  a  right
ilimited  duration :  that  is  to  say,  there  is  no  person  having
interest  in  the  subject  subsequent  to  his  own,  from  whom
owner  may  not  divert  it  by  a  total  or  partial  alienation.
the  contingent  successors  be  who  they  may  (whether  they
Bed  by  private  and  particular  dispositions,  or  by  general  dis-
aons  of  the  law  taking  effect  in  default  of  particular  disposi-
1),  they  have  no  such  right  in  the  subject  as  the  owner  may
defeat,  and  as^  sets  a  restriction  or  limitation  to  his  power
sing  the  subject.

This  I  apprehend  (speaking  generaUy)  is  the  notion  of
lerty  unlimited  in  duration,  and  therefore  the  most  extensive
tny  in  respect  of  the  power  of  user.  In  strictness,  it  is  not
ght  of  unlimited  duration :  for  no  right  can  endure  longer
I  the  life  of  the  party  entitled.  But  it  implies^*  a  power  of
tting  the  right  itself,  from  the  successors  who  would  take  it
particular  disposition,  or  by  the  general  disposition  of  the
)  in  case  the  owner  died  without  alienation.  To  this  I  shall
BTt  particularly,  when  I  come  to  consider  rights  in  regard  to
r  respective  durations.

Even  the  right  of  property  pre-eminently  so-called  (or  the  Property
it  of  property  whose  duration  is  unlimited)  is  not  unlimited  ^^*®i^^^
espect  of  the  power  of  user  which  resides  in  the  proprietor,  called,  is
!  right  of  user  (with  the  implied  or  corresponding  right  of  limited
luding  others  from  user)  is  restricted  to  such  a  user,  as  shall  respect  of
consistent  with  the  rights  of  others  generally,  and  with  the  of  umiT^'^
ies  incumbent  on  the  owner.

For  example :  I  may  exclude  others  generally  from  my  own
i  or  house :  but  I  cannot  exclude  ofl&cers  of  justice,  who,
horised  by  a  warrant  or  other  due  authority,  come  to  my

I  incline  to  think  that  the  power  of  tion^  not  by  any  necessary  sequence,  but

mUon  from  those  who  would  other-  only  through  certain caprices  of the

focoeed  to  the  enjoyment,  is  con-  English  law. See  Lecture  LI.  post,  and

ed  with  the  idea  of  urdimiied  dura-  notes  there. — R.  C.

roL.  n.  u


so


m


798


Lect.
XLVIII


Property
pre-emi-
nently so
called,  or
any  of  its
modes,
cannot  be


Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

house  to  search  for  stolen  goods. If  I  am  the  absolute
of  my  house,  I  may  destroy  it  if  I  wilL But  I  must  not  d
it  iu  such  a  manner  as  would  amount  to  an  injury  to  any
my  neighbours. If,  for  example,  I  live  in  a  town,  I  may
destroy  it  by  fire,  or  blow  it  up  by  gunpowder.

I  have  a  right  in  my  own  person  which  is  analogous  to
right  of  property  in  a  determinate  thing. And,  as  a  conseqi
of  that  right,  I  may  (generally  speaking)  move  from  place
place. But  this  my  liberty  and  right  of  locomotion,  does
empower  me  to  enter  the  land  or  house  of  another,  unless  I
specially  authorised  by  the  owner's  license,  by  a  right  of
through  his  house or  land,  or  by  some  other  cause
empowering  me  to  enter  it

And  the  power  of  user  which  is  implied  by  the  right
property,  may  also  be  limited  by  duties  which  are  incum
on  the  owner  specially  and  accidentally.

For  example :  The  power  of  user  may  be  restricted  by  d
or  incapacities  which  attach  upon  the  owner  in  consequence
his  occupying  some  staius  or  condition. We  may  conceive^
example,  that  an  infant  proprietor  is  restricted  (by  reason  of
infancy)  in  respect  of  the  power  of  using,  as  well  as  the
of  aliening.

Or  the  power  of  user  may  be  restricted  by  reason  of  a
current  right  of  property  residing  in  another over  the
subject. I  mean  by  one  which  is  coupled  with  a  present
of  possession,  and  therefore properly  coTiciLrrent,  not
upon  the  termination  of  the  other  right  of  property. Hus
called condominium,  in the Eoman law;  joint property
property  in  common  in  our  own.

Or  the  power  of  user  may  be  restricted  by  virtue  of  a
of  servitude  residing  concurrently  over  the  same  subject
another  person.  For  example:  I  have  (speaking  generally)
right  of  excluding  others  from  my  own  field.  But  I  have
a,  right  of  excluding  you  (exercising  your  servitude  or  easemenl)j
if  you  have  a  right  of  way  (by  grant  or  praescription)  over  tM
subject  of  my  right  of  property.  I  have  (speaking  generally)  •
right  to  the  produce  of  the  field :  but  that  right  is  limited  by  •
right  in  the  parson  to  a  tithe,  imless  my  land  be  tithe  free.

It  follows  from  what  has  preceded,  that  neither  that  ri^
of  property  which  imports  the  largest  power  of  user,  nor  any  J
the  rights  of  property  which  are  modes  or  modifications  of  tW
can  be  defined  exactly.  For  property  or  dominion,  ex  vi  terminii
is  jus  in  rem  importing  an  indefinite  power  of  user :  i,e.  such  i


Omission  by  Institutional  Writers  to  define  Property.  799

)ower  of  using  or  of  dealing  with  the  subject  as  is  limited  by Lbct.
lothing  but  the  duties  incumbent  on  the  owner ;  or  a  power  of  ^

ipplying  the  subject  to  any  purpose  whatever  which  does  not  defined  (in
»nflict  with  any  duty  to  which  the  owner  is  subject. This  Jh^^Ur
indefiniteness  is  of  the  very  essence  of  the  right ;  and  implies  °^  ^^)
diat  the  right  (in  so  far  as  concerns  the  power  of  user)  cannot
be  determined  by  exact  and  positive  circumscription. Such  an
application  of  the  subject  as  consists  with  every  of  his  duties,
the  owner  has  a  right  to  make  :  And  any  act,  by  another,  pre-
venting or  hindering  any  application  of  the  kind,  is  an  offence
against  his  right

The  definition,  therefore,  of  the  right  of  property  lies  through-
out the  corpus  juris,  and  imports  a  definition  of  every  right  or
duty  which  the  corpvs  juris  contsdns.

But  though  neither  absolute  property,  nor  any  of  its  modes.  The  modes
18  capable  of  exact  circumscription,  the  various  modes  are  dis-  aJj^^^^]^
tinguishable  from  one  another  by  precise  lines  of  demarcation. guishable

For  example:  The  right  of  owner  for  Ufe.  or  of  owner  for  ^^^Cby
years,  may  be  distinguished  from  the  right  of  the  absolute  precise
owner,  by  an  enumeration  of  the  powers  of  user  (belonging  to  mwcation.
the  absolute  owner)  from  which  the  owner  for  life  or  years  is
excluded.

And  this  (I  apprehend)  is  the  way  in  which  these  modes
rf  absolute  property  are  distinguished  from  absolute  property
iteelf  and  from  one  another.  Such  or  such  a  use,  for  example, .
which  the  absolute  owner  may  lawfully  derive  from  the  subject,
would  be  in  the  owner  for  life  or  the  owner  for  years,  an  injury
to  the  remainderman  or  reversioner.

What  I  have  said  with  regard  to  the  definition  of  absolute  The  defini-
poperty  quadrates  with  the  practice  of  law  writers  or  makers  jefim-^''^^

tf  codes.  tions)  of

In  the  Institutes  of  Gains  and  Justinian,  the  right  of .  pro-  fn^^i^
Perty  or  dominion  is  not  defined  at  all. Things  are  described ;  codes  or

♦k  JO  ••  , ' ^1  iMj  • systematic

Hie  modes  of  acquinng  property  in  them  are  descnbed ;  servi-  treatises.
tildes  are  described ;  but  of  the  right  of  property  or  dominion
^0  direct  description  is  given.  The  nature  of  the  right  (in
"Aspect  of  the  power  of  user)  left  to  be  inferred  from  the  treatise
(tenerally.  In  the  codes  or  treatises  which  attempt  a  definition
f  it,  merely  a  few  of  its  properties  or  qualities  are  given ;  and
hose  properties  or  qualities  are  given  with  restrictions  which
ie  throughout  the  body  of  the  law.  Thus,  in  the  544th  article
f  the  French  Code,  property  is  declared  to  be  the  absolute  right


8oo  Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

Lect.  of  using  or  dealing  with  a  thing  as  we  will,  provided  we  do  not
.  use  it  in  any  manner  which  is  prohibited  by  laws  or  rigkmens,

Bentham  appears  to  have  seen  the  same  difficulty,  and  tc
have  got  over  it  in  much  the  same  manner.  Speaking  of  droik
int^graux  as  opposed  to  droits,  he  says :  '  De  tous  ces  droits
dans  un  systfeme  fond^  sur  Futility,  il  n'en  est  aucun  qui  w
doive  avoir  des  limites.  Le  premier  (droit  d'occupation)  sen
limits  par  Tobligation  de  ne  faire  de  la  chose  aucun  usage
nuisible  k  autrui  Le  second  (droit  de  donner  exclusion  J
autrui),  par  Tobligation  de  permettre  Tusage  de  la  chose,  i  pro-
pos  de  besoin  urgent  pour  Tavantage  d'autrui,  etc. — Ces  excep-
tions d^duites,  ce  qui  reste  fait  la  quantity  intigraU  du  droit'

Blackstone  attempts  to  define  property  in  a  personal  chattel
The  owner,  he  says,  hath  solely  and  exclusively  the  right  and
also  the  occupation  of  a  movable  chattel,  so  that  it  cannot  be
taken  from  him  without  his  act  and  default  This  is  evidently
so  vague,  that  it  amounts  to  nothing,  and  must  be  taken  with
all  the  restrictions  resulting  from  the  whole  body  of  the  law
generally.  There  is  no  attempt,  either  by  Blackstone  or  by  Si
Matthew  Hale,  whom  he  followed,  to  define  an  estate  in  fee-
simple,  in  respect  of  the  power  of  user.

Such  maxims  of  law  as  these,  Sic  lUere  Uw  tU  alienum  nm
loedas ;  Qui  jure  sno  utitur  neminem  kcdit,  and  the  like,  arise
from  this  impossibility  of  exactly  defining  and  circumscribing
the  right  of  ownership  or  property,  and  are  really  almost  identical
propositions.

The  distinction  between  legal  and  equitable  property  (oi
dominium  ex  jure  quiritium  and  dominium  honitarium)  is  a  mere
accident,  arising  from  the  existence  of  the  accidental  distinction
between  law  and  equity,  or  jus  civile  and  ju^  prcetoriuiti,^


Inquirenda :  1**  How  to  ascertain  (if  that  be  possible)  the  serrioes
or  uses  which  may  be  exacted  or  derived  from  the  subject :  2°  How
to  ascertain  the  services  or  uses  which  may  not  be  derived  from  tbe
subject,  out  of  regard  for  rights  residing  in  others,  or  absolute  obli-
gations upon  self.

The  extent  of  the  right  in  respect  of  services  seems  not  to  be
definable ;  although  an  enumeration  of  them  may  be  made  co-ex-
tensively  with  (1°)  the  acts  which  have  been  held  to  be  unlawful
obstructions  or  withholdings  of  such  services ;  (2*)  with  the  acts

"  For  dominium  ex  jure  quiritium vigny*s  Recht  des  Besitxes,  pp.  86,  Wi
and  dominium  honitarium,  see  Hugo's 176. Gaii  Comm,  ii  40.
OesehichU,  pp.  167,  478,  501,  844. Sa-


Modes  of  Property, — Fragments.  8  o  i

which  have  been  held  to  be  a  lawful  dealing  with  the  subject,  or Lect.
kwfol  perception  of  such  services. — (See  Bldcksione,  voL  iii  p.  1 20). XLVIII^

The  exceptions  out  of  the  indefinite  services  over  which  (as
aboTe)  the  right  extends,  consist  in  such  uses  of  the  subject  as
would  amount  to  violations  of  a  similar  or  another  right  in  others,
or  of  absolute  obligations  on  one's  self.  In  defining  a  right,  care
most  therefore  be  taken  not  to  make  it  inconsistent  with  a  right  in-
tended to  be  given  to  another,  etc. (Use  of  interpretation  here.)

Property,  as  here  considered,  is  property  existing  in  its  widest
extent ;  unlimited  in  respect  of  services,  by  any  right  to  or  over  the
same  subject  in  another ;  and  limited  only  by  rights  of  others  over
or  to  other  subjects,  or  by  absolute  obligations  on  self.

A  right  limited  by  rights  of  others  over  the  same  subject  (as
dffimium  affected  by  serviivs;  condominiumy  whether  in  property  or
urvUus),  though  involving  fewer  services  and  subject  perhaps  to
fewer  violations,  is,  nevertheless,  more  difficult  to  explain.

The  cUtempts  to  solve  these  difficulties,  which  one  meets  with  in
ordinary  law  books,  are  merely  identical  propositions  and  amount  to
nothing :  e.g.  *  Qui  jure  suo  utitur  neminem  loediV  If  by  loedU  be
meant  damage  or  evil,  it  is  false  (and  inconsistent  with  what  inmiedi-
ately  precedes) ;  since  the  exercise  of  a  right  is  often  accompanied
with  the  infliction  of  positive  evil  in  another ;  and  where  others  are
[  exdnded  from  the  subject,  supposes  a  pain  of  privation  inflicted  on
others.  If  by  Icedit  be  meant  injury,  the  proposition  amounts  to
this ;  that  the  exercise  of  a  right  cannot  amount  to  a  wrong  :  which
is  purely  identical  and  teUs  us  nothing ;  since  the  thing  we  want
to  know  is,  *  what  is  right  1  (or  what  is  that  which  I  may  do  with-
out wrong  1) ;  and  what  is  wrong  1  (what  is  that  which  would  not
he  an  exercise  of  my  own  right,  inasmuch  as  it  would  amount  to
&  violation  of  a  right  in  another  ?)'

The  same  observations  are  applicable  to  '  sic  utere  tuo  vi  alienum
^nkedas.'

The  definition  of  those  rights  which  are  definite  in  respect  of
services,  and  exist  over  the  same  subject,  is  one  means  of  limiting  or
defining  those  rights  which  are  indefinite :  Since  acts  (of  user,  ex-
clusion, etc.)  inconsistent  with  the  former  set  of  rights,  are  all  of
them  knowable ;  and  are,  therefore,  so  many  knowable  uses  to  which
^e  indefinite  rights  do  not  extend. But  accurately  to  assign  that
*imt  to  these  last  which  is  presented  by  the  rights  of  others  over
other  subjects  or  by  the  absolute  obligations  of  the  owner  (where
fUch  rights  or  obligations  are  themselves  indefinite),  seems  to  be
Impossible ;  And  even  if  all  the  rights  and  obligations  which  limit
^ere  themselves  defined,  a complete statement  of  the  definition
^ould  involve  a  repetition  of  the  whole  code.


Wahres  Eigenthum  ist  nur  moglich  an  korperlichen  SacheiL
Allein  im  Romischen  Eechte  ist  der  Begriff  von  Eigenthum  auch
ausgedehnt  auf  jura  in  re  insofern  sie  uns  als  eigene  Rechte  an  einer
fremden  Sache  zustehen :  daher,  dominium,  tmtsfructus  et  servitus, Im


8o2  Law :  Purposes  and  Sudfects.  '

Lect. weitesten  Sinne,  begreifb  Eigentham  dUes  was  zu  unserm  Vermgm
XLVIII gehort,  also  auch  Forderungen. — Mackeldey,  Lehrbuch  des  heuL ffijm.  i
^""^^  EecfUs,  vol.  il  p.  36.

Community  of  Ooods,

Community  of  goods  is  nothing  bat  property  in  common ;  t.^  a
right  in  the  whole  over  the  subject,  with  a  right  in  each  to  a  certain  \
share  in  the  produce;  A  right  which  must  depend  upon  certain  \
conditions;  as,  e.g.  contributing  to  the  product  by  a  due  portion  \
of  exertion.

Or  supposing  the  right  absolute,  then  the  labour  must  be  enforced
by  punishment.

The  necessity  of  this  is  derived  from  two  considerations;  Id,
that  good  things  can  only  be  procured  by  labour.  2ndly,  that  tk
product  of  them  is  limited  in  amount.  At  the  best^  there  is  not
enough  for  all ;  Le,  enough  to  satisfy  all  the  desires  of  alL

From  either  of  these  the  necessity  of  one  of  the  schemes  I  have
mentioned  arises.

But  even  supposing  that  by  training  and  by  the  advantages  of
combination,  the  labour  might  be  lessened,  the  amount  increased,
and  the  desires  limited,  this  can  never  be  carried  so  far  as  to  render
all  law  unnecessary.

But  the  whole  is  a  speculation.


latioiL


LECTUEE  XLIX.

SERVITUS,  OR  EASEMENT.


Lect. In  my  last  Lecture  I  considered  particularly  property  or  dominioi^
^ (as  opposed  to  servitus  or  easement). In  my  present  Lectnxe,


I  shall  consider  particularly  servitus  or  easement  (as  opposed
to  property  or  dominion).
Recapitu-  As  I  stated  in  my  last Lecture,  I  mean  by  property  &

dominion  (taken  with  the  sense  wherein  I  use  the  term,  for  the
present)  any  such  right  in  rem  (of  limited  or  unlimited  duration)
as  gives  to  the  party  in  whom  it  resides  an  indefinite  power  or
liberty  of  using  or  dealing  with  the  subject :  A  power  or  Uberty
of  using  or  dealing  with  the  subject  which  is  not  capable  of
exact  circumscription  or  definition;  which  is  merely  limited,
generally  and  indefinitely,  by  the  sum  of  the  duties  (rcdative  and
absolute)  incumbent  on  the  owner  or  proprietor.

As  I  also  stated  in  my  last  Lecture,  property  or  dominion
(as  thus  understood)  is  susceptible  of  various  modes:  or  (iB
other  words)  the  indefinite  power  of  user,  which  is  of  the  essence
of  all  property,  is  susceptible  of  various  degrees  of  restriction.


Naiure  ^t/"  Servitus,  or  Easement.  803

[^  whatever  be  the  extent  of  the  power  of  user  (and  of  the Leot.
Ifter  of  exdnsion  which  the  power  of  user  implies),  it  is  not .
pable  of  exact  circumscription,  or  of  any  more  exact  circum-
aption  than  that  which  I  now  have  indicated.
By  servUus  or  easement  (taken  with  the  sense  which  I  give

E""'  B  expression)  I  mean  any  such  right  in  rem  (or  any  such
availing  against  the  world  at  large)  as  gives  to  the  party
om  it  resides  a  power  of  using  the  subject  which  is  definite
■well  as  limited.  The  power  of  using  the  subject  (like  that
Ifich  is  imported  by  the  right  of  property)  is  limited  by  the
of  the  duties  which  are  incumbent  on  the  party.  But,
the  power  of  user  which  is  imported  by  the  right  of
\  it  is  not  Tnerely  circumscribed  by  the  simi  of  his  duties.
uses  which  he  may  derive  from  the  subject,  or  ^the  purposes
hrtiich  he  may  apply  it,  are  defined  positively,  or  are  suscep-
He  of  positive  description.

In  short,  the  difference  between  property  (in  any  of  its
1)  and  of  servitus  (whatever  be  its  class)  would  seem  to  be
-The  party  invested  with  a  right  of  servitus,  may  turn  or
jply  the  subject  to  a  given  purpose  or  purposes.  The  party
rrested  with  a  right  of  property,  may  turn  or  apply  the  subject
\  all  purposes  whatsoever,  save  such  purposes  as  are  not  con-
stent  with  any  of  his  duties  (relative  or  absolute).

As  I  remarked  in  my  last  Lecture,  it  is  by  reason  of  his
%defin,iU  power  of  user,  that  the  subject  of  the  owner's  right  is
byled  his  own,  or  res  propria :  that  his  right  is  styled  property,
murship,  or  dominion:  that  he  is  said  to  be  the  ovmer  or
nprietar  of  the  subject,  or  is  styled  its  lord  or  master.  For
IB  I  then  remarked)  there  is  no  mode  of  property  (not  even
hat  which  is  pre-eminently  so  called),  and  which  implies  the
iigest  power  of  user  and  exclusion)  which  gives  a  power  of
laer  completely  unlimited,  and  a  consequent  power  of  exclusion
ihich  is  completely  without  restrictions.

Before  I  consider  particularly  the  nature  and  kinds  of
lervitudes,  I  must  interpose  the  following  brief  remarks.

Ist.  Speaking  generally,  the  subject  of  a  right  of  servitude  Speaking
B  also  at  the  same  time  the  subject  of  property  residing  in  f^righfof
toother  or  others. For  example,  if  I  have  a  right  of  way  over  servitnde
.  field,  the  field  is  yours  solely,  or  is  yours  jointly  or  in  common  ^^,*  ^^^
rith  others,  or  is  yours  for  life  or  years  (solely  or  jointly  with  right  of
thers)  with  rights of  property  in others expectant  on  the  ?JS§ing  in
etennination  of  that  your  limited  interest.  another  or


8  04


Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.


Lect.
XLIX

^ — , — '

others.
But  a  right
of  servi-
tude may
exist  over
a  subject
which  has
not  an
owner  pro-
perly so
called.


Primary
rights,  etc.
Rights,  in
rem,persc»


For  this  reason,^  rights  of  servitude  are  styled  by  the
Roman  lawyers  jura  in  re  aiiend :  that  is  to  say,  rights  over
subjects  of  which  the  property  or  dominion  resides  in  another  or
others.  Though  (as  I  shall  shew  at  the  close  of  my  Lecture)  rights
of  servitude  are  not  the  only  rights  to  which  the  expression^
m  re  aiiend  (or  briefly,  jus  in  re)  is  aptly  or  actually  appUed.

For  the  same  reason,  a  right  of  servitude  is  styled  by  Mr.
Bentham  a  fractional  right :  ^^  that  is  to  say,  a  definite  right  of
user,  subtracted  or  broken  off  from  the  indefinite  right  of  user
which  resides  in  him  or  them  who  bear  the  dominion  of  the
subject.  For  the  same  reason,  a  right  of  servitude  is  styled  by
Savigny  ^®  (in  his  matchless  treatise  on  the  Eight  of  Possession)
a  single  or  particular  exception  (accruing  to  the  benefit  of  die
party  in  whom  the  right  resides)  from  the  power  of  user  and
exclusion  which  resides  in  the  owner  of  the  thing.

For  the  same  reason,  rights  of  servitude  are  styled  bj
French  writers,^®  '  dimerribremens  du  droit  de  propri^t^ :  *  that  is
to  say,  detached  bits  or  fractions  of  the  indefinite  right  of  user
which  resides  in  him  or  them  who  own  the  subject  of  the
servitude.  But  (as  I  shall  shew  at  the  close  of  my  Lecture)
we  may  conceive  a  right  of  servitude  existing  over  a  thing,
which,  speaking  with  precision,  has  no  owner.  We  may  con-
ceive, for  example,  that  the  Sovereign  or  Stat€  reserves  to  itsdf
a  portion  of  the  national  territory ;  but  that  it  grants  to  one  of
its  subjects,  over  a  portion  of  the  territory  so  reserved,  a  right
which  quadrates  exactly  with  the  notion  of  a  right  of  servitude:
that  is  to  say,  a  right  to  use  or  apply  the  subject  in  a  definite
manner.

Now,  in  the  case  imagined,  there  is  not,  properly  speaking,
any  right  of  property  in  the  thing  which  is  subjected  to  the
servitude.  For,  it  is  only  by  analogy  that  we  can  ascribe  to
the  Sovereign  a  legal  right.  Strictly  speaking,  the  party  has  a
right  of  servitude,  while  the  indefinite  power  of  using  the  thing
has  been  reserved  by  the  Sovereign  or  State  to  itself.

But  since  most  rights  of  servitude  imply  rights  of  owlle^
ship,  and  cannot  be  explained  without  reference  to  those  iight»
of  ownership,  I  shall  assume  for  the  present,  that  every  right
of  servitude  is  jus  in  re  aiiend :  is  a  definite  fraction,  or  i^
merribreTnent,  of  property  or  dominion  in  the  given  subject,
which  resides  in  another  or  others.

**  SavigEH^,  Recht  des  BesUzes^  pp.  97,  ^  Recht  des  Besitzes,  pp.  525,_5Si

166. See  Table  II.  Note  4,  post, Mac-  ^  Code civil expUqu^  by

keldey,  vol.  ii.  p.  6.  vol.  i.  p.  241.

^  Trait^s  de  Legislation,  vol.  i.  p.  251.


Difficulty  in  Defining  Property  and  Easement.  805

2ndly.  I  shewed  in  my  last  Lecture,  that  the  modes  of Lect.
property  (as  /  \mderstand  the  expression)  are  infinite :  and  that v ^ .
to  some  of  those  modes  we  cannot  apply  the  expression,  without  Difficulties
a  departure  from  established  usage. For  example :  A  right  ing  the
unlimited  in  respect  of  user,  and  also  unlimited  in  respect  of  ten^|  pro-
duration,  is  styled  property  or  dominion: and,  indeed,  is  th^  ^servitus,'
right  to  which  the  name  is  pre-eminently  given. In  our  own  ^g^^?*^"
kw  language,  a  right  indefinite  in  point  of  user,  though  limited
in  point  of  duration,  is  also  esteemed  and  called  property,  pro-
Tided  the  limited  duration  be  not  exactly  defined. Thus :  we
Aonld  call  the  right  of  tenant  for  life  in  an  immovable  thing,
froperty,  or  a  right  of  'property. But  a  right  indefinite  in  point
of  user,  is  not,  in  our  own  law  language,  styled  property,  in  case
the  right  be  of  limited  duration,  and  the  duration  be  exactly
defined. Thus :  The  right  of  tenant  for  years,  under  a  lease  of
a  house  or  farm,  is  not  called  property,  although  his  right  is
jw  in  rem,  and  gives  him  an  indefinite  power  of  using  or
dealing  with  the  subject. We  should  say  of  a  life  interest  in
in  immovable, or  a  personal chattel,  that  the  party  has  an
tttate  (or  a  right  oi  property)  with  remainder  or  reversion  over
to  another  or  others. We  should  also  say  of  the  interest  of  a
feasee  for  years,  that  he  has  an  estate  for  years,  with  reversion
>ver  to  another.

But  we  should  not  style  his  interest  property  or  mvnership,
Ithough  his  power  of  user  were  not  more  limited  than  that  of
tenant  for  life,  and  though  the  duration  of  his  interest  were
^comparably  longer  than  that  of  tenant  for  his  own  or  for  the
le  of  another.  [Perhaps  the  interest  of  tenant  for  years  (like
Ixat  of  the  Eoman  conductor,^  etc.)  was  not  originally  jus  in
cm,  but  merely  gave  him  a  right  to  the  enjoyment  against  the
issor.]

Various  other  difficulties,  which  encumber  the  term  *  pro-
•erty,'  I  stated  in  the  Lecture  before  the  last. — I  will  merely
dd,  at  present,  that  I  mean  by  the  term  property  (as  contra-

•  The  analogy  is  remarkable. By  the  possession,  specific  restitution  to  his  term

«•  civile  the  eanductar  could  only  pro-  in  the  land. The  first  instance  occurred

^  his  right  by  a  personalis  actio  against  in  the  reign  of  Edward  IV. ,  and  the  quasi

is  lessor. But  the  legislation  of  the  in  rem  cLctio  thus  given  to  the  lessee,  as

Vetera  extended  to  him,  for  his  inter-  it  availed  against  aU  who  could  not  shew

It,  the  benefit  of  the  various  Interdicts,  a  better  title  than  his  lessor,  became  con-

iid  thus  gave  him  what  was  called  a  venient  for  trying  Questions  of  right,  and

won  in  rem  actio. The  extension  by  is  the  original  of  the  modem  ejectment,

be  Pnetor  of  these  remedies  in  favour  See  Blackstone,  vol.  iii.  p.  200. d.  Vat.

f  the  conductor  was  precisely  equiva-  Frag.  44,  and  Dig.  xliii.  18  (De  Superfi-

nit  to  the  introduction  of  the  rule  by  ciebus),  1.  i.  §  1,  and  the  preceding  title

'hich  our  Courts  of  Common  Law  cave  (Uti  possidetis). — R.  C.
!ie  lessee,  who  had  been  ousted  from


8o6  Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects,

Lect.

XLIX distinguished  to  servittcs)  any  right  in  rem  (of  any  duration
'  whatever)  which  gives  to  the  entitled  party  an  indefinite  power  of

vser.  For  I  am  not  considering  rights  with  reference  to  their
various  durations,  but  with  reference  to  the  power  of  user  which
they  variously  import.  Though  (as  I  shewed  in  my  last  Lectae)
the  power  of  user  (in  cases  of  property)  is  so  modified  by  the
extent  of  duration,  that  it  is  impossible  to  consider  rights  of
property  from  the  former  of  the  two  aspects,  without  consider-
ing them,  to  some  degree,  fix)m  the  latter  also.

The  term  servitus  is  not  less  encimibered  with  difficulties
than  the  term  property.  For  there  are  many  rights  (as  I  shall
shew  presently)  which,  in  the*  language  of  the  Boman  law  and
of  the  modem  systems  derived  from  it,  are  styled  servUufUs:
but  which,  in  the  language  of  the  English,  woidd  be  styled
rights  of  property.  And,  justly:  for  they  are  rights  importing
an  indefinite  power  of  user,  although  they  are  not  rights  of  un-
limited duration ;  and  although  they  do  not  empower  the  party  '
to  alien  the  subject  from  those  who  vxnUd  succeed  to  him  in
default  of  such  alienation.

To  these  improper  servitudes I  shall  advert  more  fully
hereafter. And  I  now  merely  add,  that  I  mean,  for  the  present^
by  a  right  of  servitvde  (as  opposed  to  a  right  of  property)  any
such  right  in  a  subject  owned  by  another  or  others  as  givei  ;
to  the  party  a  definite  power  of  using  it.

The  term  easement  is  not  less  objectionable  tlian  the  tern
servitus.  For  though  it  is  never  extended  to  any  such  rights  tii
rem  as  fall  properly  within  the  category  of  property,  it  is  im<
applied  to  certain  rights  in  rem  which  fall  properly  within  the
category  of  servitudes.  For  example:  A  right  of  way  over
another's  field  is  styled  an  easement.  A  right  of  common  is
also  styled  an  easement.  But  a  right  to  predial  tithes  (or  to  a
definite  portion  in  the  produce  of  another's  land)  is  never  (I
think)  styled  an  easement :  although  it  is  called  a  servitude  (or
by  a  name  of  similar  import)  in  the  language  of  the  l^al  systems
which  have  borrowed  largely  from  the  Boman.

But  whatever  may  be  the  usual  import  of  the  term  easement
(and  it  has  not,  I  think,  any  settled  import),  I  venture  to  use  it
with  the  sense  in  which  I  employ  the  term  servitttde  ;  as  mean-
ing  any  right  (definite  in  point  of  user)  over  a  subject  which  is
res  aliena.
Quaere,  3rdly.  For  the  sake  of  simplicity,  I  have  assumed  in  my

neg^w  *  Outline,  and  also  in  my  last  and  present  Lectures,  that  eveiy
right  of  servitude  is  a  right  of  using  a  subject  owned  by  another


Mjtnde


Servitudes.  807

others. But,  as  I  shall  shew  immediately,  there  are  certain Lect.
rvitudes,  which,  in  the  language  of  modem  Civilians, are


Ued  negative :  and  which  in  the  language  of  the  Eoman  lawyers,  ^^  *  ^g^*
e  said  to  consist  non  faciendo ;  that  is  to  say,  not  to  consist  of  the  sab-
ri^t  to  use  positively  the  given  subject,  but  in  a  right  to  a  •'®?*L^f
rbearance  (on  the  part  of  the  owner)  from  putting  the  given  be  not
ibject  to  a  given  use.  ?J^^?^y

Now,  whether  a  negative  servitude  be  really  a  right  of  user,  jTcrsonam
'  whether  it  be  a  servitude  at  all  (and  be  not  rather  a  mere  ^^^  o*
ght  in  personam),  are  questions  which,  I  frankly  confess,  I  have  occupant  ?
ot  been  able  to  solve  to  my  own  satisfaction — I  shall,  however,
iacoss  the  subject  immediately :  And  I  merely  advert  to  it,  in
lis  preliminary  manner,  in  order  that  I  may  prepare  you  for  a
isciepancy  between  the  definition  of  a  servitude  which  I  have
itherto  given,  and  that  analysis  of  servitudes  to  which  I  now
loceed.

Attempting  to  analyse  the  nature  of  servitudes,  and  to  mark  Order
he  chief  kinds  into  which  they  are  divisible,  I  shaU  address  my-  Th'eTatoe
df  to  the  following  principal  (and  to  various  subordinate)  topics,  and  kinds

let  The  distinction  between  the  servitudes  which  are  styled  tudes^will
y  modem  Civilians  affirmative  or  positive,  and  the  servitudes  ^  consi-
liiich  are  styled  by  the  same  Civilians  negative ;  that  is  to  say,
bose  which  consist  in  a  right  to  use  in  a  given  manner  the
iven  subject,  and  those  which  consist  in  a  right  to  a  forbearance
m  the  part  of  the  owner)  from  putting  the  given  subject  to  a
iven  use.

2ndly.  I  shall  then  examine  the  celebrated  position,  that  no
ght  of  servitude  is  a  right  to  an  ac<  on  the  part  of  the  owner :
lat  every  right  of  servitude  is  a  right  to  use  the  subject  or  a  right
)  ^  f (abearance  (on  the  part  of  the  owner)  from  using  the  subject.

3rdly.  I  shall  examine  the  distinction  between  real  servitudes
id  personal  servitudes :  or  (adopting  to  a  certain  extent  the
Dgoage  of  the  English  law)  between  servitudes  appurtenant
id  servitudes  in  gross.

4thly.  I  shall  examine  the  rights  of  property  or  dominion
leaning  by  property  or  dominion  any  right  in  rem  importing  an
definite  power  of  user)  which,  in  the  Eoman  Law,  are  ranked
tproperly  (as  I  conceive)  with  rights  of  servitude. — It  is  of  no
lall  importance,  that  this  confusion  of  disparate  objects  should
I  pointed  out  and  cleared  up.  Without  such  a  previous  ex-
anation,  a  great  portion  of  the  Boman  Law,  and  of  the  modern
stems  which  have  borrowed  its  terms  and  classifications,  are


8o8  Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

Lect.  to  an  English  lawyer  inexpressibly  perplexing.  Usmfrudm,
.^  /  ^  icsus,  habitatio,  superficies,  emphyteusiSy  and,  perhaps,  other  rights,
which,  in  the  language  of  the  Roman  Law  are  frequently  styled
servitudes,  would  be  deemed  (and  I  think  justly)  by  English
lawyers,  rights  of  property  for  the  life  of  the  owner,  or  rights  of
property  nearly  approaching  (in  principle)  to  an  estate  in  fee-
simple  or  absolute  property  in  a  personal  chattel

In  pursuance  of  the  order  which  I  have  now  indicated,  I
begin  with  the  established  division  of  rights  of  servitude  into
positive  or  affirmative  servitudes,  and  negative  servitudes.
Distinc.  As  I  remarked  in  my  last  Lecture,  the  right  of  property  or

tween dominion  (in  so  far  as  the  right  of  user  is  concerned)  is  resolvable
^^^^?^  into  two  elements :  1st,  the  power  of  using  indefinitely  the  subject
and  neffa-  *  of  the  right,  or  of  applying  the  subject  of  the  right  to  uses  or
iiwservi- purposes  which  are  not  positively  and  exactly  circumscribed:
2ndly,  a  power  of  excluding others  (a  power  which  is  abo
indefinite) from using the same subject. For a power  of  |
indefinite  user  would  be  utterly  nugatory,  unless  it  were  coupled
with  a  corresponding  power  of  excluding  others  generally  from
any  participation  in  the  use.  -

The  power  of  user  and  the  power  of  exclusion  are  equally
rights  to  forbearances  on  the  part  of  other  persons  generally.
By  virtue  of  the  right  or  power  of  indefinitely  using  the  subject  ;
other  persons  generally  are  bound  to  forbear  from  disturbing  the
owner  in  acts  of  user. By  virtue  of  the  right  or  power  of  ex-  *
eluding  other  persons  generally,  other  persons  generally  are  bound
to  forbear  from  using  or  meddling  with  the  subject. The  ri^ts
of  user  and  exclusion  are  so  blended,  that  an  offence  against  the
one  is  commonly  an  offence  against  the  other. I  can  haidly
prevent  you  from  ploughing  your  field,  or  from  raising  a  building
upon  it,  without  committing,  at  the  same  time,  a  trespass. And
an  attempt  on  my  part  to  use  the  subject  (as  an  attempt,  fa
example,  to  fish  in  your  pond)  is  an  interference  with  your  right
of  user  as  well  as  with  your  right  of  exclusion. But  an  offence
against  one  of  these  rights  is  not  of  necessity  an  offence  against
the  other. If,  for  example,  I  walk  across  your  field,  in  order  to
shorten  my  way  to  a  given  point,  I  may  not  in  the  least  injure
you  in  respect  of  your  right  of  user,  although  I  violate  your  ri^t
of  exclusion. Violations  of  the  right  of  exclusion  (when  perfectly
harmless  in  themselves)  are  treated  as  injuries  or  offences  by
reason  of  their  probable  effect  on  the  rights  of  user  and  exclusion.
A  harmless  violation  of  the  right  of  exclusion,  if  it  passed  with
perfect  impunity,  might  lead,  by  the  force  of  example,  to  such


Servitudes — Positive  and  Negative.  809

nerous  violations  of  the  right  as  would  render  both  rights Lect.

J  ^*  XLIX

itly  nugatory.  . ^ >

The  rights  of  user  and  exclusion  (let  them  be  never  so  exten-
e)  are  never  absolute  or  complete ;  that  is  to  say,  they  are
rays  restricted  (more  or  less)  by  rights  residing  in  others
i  by  duties  incumbent  on  the  owner.  They  are  always
tricted  generally  by  the  rights  of  others  generally,  and
the  duties  to  which  the  proprietor  is  generally  subject.  Fre-
ently,  they  are  restricted  by  rights  over  the  same  subject,
iding  specially  in  determinate  parties :  as  by  the  rights  of  a
at  or  co-proprietor,  or  by  the  rights  of  a  remainderman,  or
rersioner,  having  also  a  right  of  property  in  the  subject.

Where  a  determinate  party  has  a  right  (as  against  the  owner
d  the  rest  of  the  world)  to  put  the  thing  to  uses  of  a  definite
188,  the  party  has  a  right  over  the  thing,  which  is  commonly
tied  a  servUvde.  Where  a  determinate  party  has  a  right  (as
ainst  the  owner  and  the  rest  of  the  world)  to  a  forbearance
ft  the  part  of  the  owner)  from  putting  the  thing  to  uses  of  a
finite  class,  that  party  has  also  a  right  over  the  thing  which
K)  is  styled  a  servitude.

It  is  necessary  (I  apprehend)  in  order  to  the  existence  of  a  Everv  ser-
rWtude,  that  the  right  of  the  party  should  be  jtis  in  rem,  or  a  T^^^^^J^
)it  i^ainst  the  world  at  large.  If  it  merely  availed  against
5  owner  (or  against  the  other  occupant  for  the  time  being)  it
mid  come  under  the  predicament  of  fus  in  personam.  And  it
for  this  reason  (as  I  shall  shew  immediately)  that  no  right  of
Titude  is  a  right  to  an  act.  For  if  it  were  a  right  to  an  act,
be  done  by  the  owner  (or  other  occupant),  it  would  merely
111  against  that  determinate  party,  and  would  be  a  right  arising
on  a  contract,  or  from  a  ^j^o^i-contract

It  is  also  necessary  (I  apprehend)  in  order  to  the  existence  A  servi-
a  servitude,  that  the  party  should  have  a  right  (of  limited  or  ^  richt  to  ^
limited  duration)  to  put  the  subject  generally  to  uses  of  a  specifically
finite  class :  or  to  a  forbearance  generally  (on  the  part  of  the  mined
Tier)  from  putting  the  subject  to  uses  of  a  definite  class. For  uses,  or  to

si)€cific£illii

ample,  if  I  have  a  right  (for  life  or  years)  of  passing  at  all  hours  ai^ter-

er  your  field,  or  of  passing  at  certain  hours  over  your  field,  I  mined  for-

ve  a  right  of  way :  an  easement  or  servitude. For  I  have  a  on  the

ht  of  putting  your  field  generally  to  uses  of  a  definite  descrip-  P*^  °^

n. But  if  you  give  me  leave  to  shoot  over  your  farm,  once,  other  occu-

ice,  or  any  other  definite  number  of  times,  my  right  derived  ^^^^'
m  the  license  would  hardly  (I  think)  be  deemed  an  easement.
wonld  merely  be  a  right  against  you,  and  perhaps  against  other


8io


Lect.
XLIX


Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

persons  generally  (derived  from  your  particular  license),  to  deri?i
from  your  farm  certain  uses  determined  individually  as  well  ai
by  class  or  description.


Positive  or
aifirmative
servitudes
{qua  in
paiieiido
conais-
tunt)f  and
negative
servitudes
{qucn  in
nan  foci-
endo  con-
siatuiU).


As  I  said  in  my  last  Lecture,  where  the  party  entitled
the  servitude  has  a  right  to  iLse  the  subject,  his  right  is  styl
by  modem  Civilians, '  a  positive  or  afl&rmative  servituda'
he  has  a  right  to  a  forbearance  (on  the  part  of  the  owner
occupant)  from  using  the  subject,  the  right  is  styled  by  the
Civilians,  a  negative  servitude.

By  the  Roman  Lawyers,  a  positive  servitude  (in  respect
the  owner)  is  said  to  consist  inpatiendo :  i,e.  in  his  duty  to  fori
from  molesting  the  other  in  the  given  user  of  the  subject
negative  servitude  (in  respect  of  the  owner)  is  said  to  consist
non  fadendo :  i.e.  in  his  duty  to  forbear  from  using  the  subjj
in  the  given  manner  or  mode. In  either  case,  the  right  (it
manifest)  is  a  right  to  a,  forbearance  on  the  part  of  the  o)
a  forbearance  from  molesting  the  other  in  the  given  use,  or  a
bearance  from  using  in  a  given  mode.

As against  the owner  (or  other occupant),  every  right
servitude  is  therefore  negative:  i.e.  does  not  impose  upon  himi
duty  to  do  or  perform. In  respect  of  the  party  entitled  to
servitude,  a  so|- called  positive  or  aflSrmative  servitude  is,  in
certain  sense,  positive  as  well  as  negative;  i.e.  it  gives  him
right  to  do  acts  over  the  given  subject,  as  well  as  a  right  tot
forbearance  on  the  part  of  the  owner  or  occupant  from  mole
him  in  the  performance  of  those  acts. But  a  negative  serrioe  U
Tncrely  negative :  i.e.  it  merely  gives  him  a  right  to  a  fori
on  the  part  of  the  owner.

A  so-called  negative  servitude  merely  restricts  the  ownert
right  of  user ;  that  is  to  say,  by  reason  of  the  existence  of  tta
servitude  the  owner  has  not  a  right  to  turn  the  subject  to  soirt
use  implied  generally  in  his  right  of  property,  and  to  whick
but  for  the  servitude  he  would  be  at  liberty  to  apply  it — ^A  »•
called  positive  servitude  restricts  his  right  of  exclusion  and  fail
right  of  user.  If  I  have  a  right  to  deal  in  a  given  manner  wi4
the  subject,  for  example,  to  pass  over  it  by  a  right  of  way,  my
right  sets  a  limit  to  his  power  of  exclusion,  jmd  hence  to  hii
power  of  user ;  for  he  cannot  turn  the  subject  to  any  purpose
which  would  impede  my  right  of  user :  as  by  ploughing  it  up,
or  erecting  an  obstruction  across  the  way.

Cases  of  positive  servitudes  are  rights  of  way  or  of  common
These  are  rights  of  dealing  positively  with  the  subject ;  of  putting


Servitudes — Positive  and  Negative.  8 1 1

fche  subject  to  certain  positive  uses.  Cases  of  negative  servitude  Lect.
aie  the  servitus  cUtius  non  tollendi,  and  the  servitus  ne  Ivrniiniius
and  M  prospectui  offidatur.  Generally  speaking,  the  owner  has
I  right  of  building  on  any  part  of  his  own  land ;  cujvs  est  solum
^  est  usque  ad  ccdwm.  But,  by  a  right  of  servitude  residing  in
mother  person,  I  may  be  prevented  from  building  so  as  to  pre-
Fent  his  looking  over  my  land  from  his  house ;  I  may  be  pre-
sented from  building  so  as  to  obstruct  his  ancient  lights,  or  to
ptevent  him  from  a  look  out  which  he  had  acquired  by  a  special
dtle.  Another  example  is  the  servitus  stilliddii  recipieTidi ;  a
right  to  compel  your  neighbour  to  receive  the  water  which  drops
fcom  your  roof.  An  analogous  right  which  often  leads  to  contest
b  cities,  the  right  of  compelling  your  neighbour  to  receive  through
his  house  the  drainage  running  from  your  own,  would  also  be
deemed  a  negative  servitude.  It  is  not  a  right  of  putting  his
Ittd  or  house  to  any  positive  use,  but  a  right  to  prevent  him
bom  dealing  with  his  land  or  house  in  certain  ways,  in  which
^  for  your  right,  he  would  be  at  liberty  to  deal  with  it.

I  have  gone  on  stating  this  distinction,  because  it  is  found  Doubtful
1  the  Eoman  law  and  other  legal  systems ;  but  I  doubt  whether  ^^e  h
iere  is  anything  in  it. It  seems  to  turn  on  the  extent  you  give  any  scien-
>  the  word  user. In  a  right  of  way  or  of  common  you  are  said  dation^for
»  use  the  thing  which  is  the  subject  of  your  right  of  servitude,  this  dis-
Qt  in  case  of  a  duty  to  receive  the  drainage  from  your  house,
>u  may  also  be  said  with  propriety  to  put  the  subject  to  certain
lea. Whether  this  would  apply  to  the  case  of  a  right  to  a  look
It,  it  is  more  diflScult  to  decide ;  and  I  am  inclined  to  think
lat  this  single  case  suggested  the  distinction.

When  I  have  a  right  not  to  have  my  ancient  windows  blocked
p,  it  is  not  necessary  that  I  should  do  anjrthing  for  the  existence
:  my  right ;  it  is  a  right  only  to  a  forbearance.

In  the  servitudes  which  are  deemed  negative,  it  is  generally
3cessary  that  I  should  do  something.  If  the  drain  wants
pairing,  and  the  water  will  not  flow,  it  is  incumbent  on  me  to
pair  the  drain ;  or  if  it  is  incumbent  on  the  owner  to  do  so,  it
evolves  on  him  by  some  special  tittUus,  totally  distinct  from  the
rvUus  itself.  I  doubt,  therefore,  if  the  distinction  of  which  so
ach  is  said  in  the  books,  has  any  meaning  at  all.

No  right  of  servitude  can  consist  in  faciendo  ;*^  i,e,  can  consist  No  right  of
a  right  to  an  a>ct  or  acts  on  the  part  of  the  owner  or  other  ^^^^jgt
xnipant This  follows  from  the  very  nature  of  a  servitude,  to  in/ad'
hich  it  is  essential  that  it  should  be  jus  in  rem,  or  a  right  avail- ^'

**  Mackeldey,  vol.  ii  pp.  78,  88. Thibaut,  Fersuche,  voL  i.  p,  27.


8 1 2  Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects,

Lect. ing  against  persons  generally ;  for  if  it  consisted  in  a  right  to  an
V  ^ . ac^  to  be  done  by  the  owner  or  other  occupant^  it  were  merely


remt


jus  in  personam  against  that  determinate  party.

In  the  case  of  a  servitude,  the  jus  in  rem  may  happen  to  be
combined  with  jus  in  personam  against  the  owner :  and  so,  may
happen  to  be  combined  with  a  right  to  an  axA,  against  the  owner:
e.g,  a  right  to  have  a  way  repaired  by  the  owner.

Quaere,  Whether  every  servitus  be  not  jus  in  personam  against

the  owner  or  other  occupant,  and  jus  in  rem  against  the  rest  of
the  world  ?*2

Quaere,  Whether  a  negative  servitude  be  jtis  in  rem  f

Whether  a  An  affirmative  servitude  may  clearly  avail  against  any,  and

seiritude  ^^7  ^®  violated  by  any.  E.g.  A  stranger  to  the  soil  may  violate
b«yw5*»  a  right  of  common,  by  putting  his  cattle  on  the  conunonable
land  ?^^  And  in  the  case  of  a  negative  servitude,  it  is  possible
for  a  stranger  {e.g,  a  trespasser)  to  do  the  act  which  would  pre-
vent the  enjoyment  of  the  servitude :  e.g,  to  build  up,  or  otW
wise  obstruct,  ancient  lights.  In  the  case,  however,  of  a  nega-
tive servitude,  it  is  less  likely  that  a  stranger  should  disturb;
because  the  disturbance  woidd  not  be  an  act  of  user.

I  apprehend  that  a  negative  servitude  is  usually  brought
within  the  category  of  jura  in  rem  thus:  it  avails  adverm
qicemcumque  possessorem ;  i.e,  with  or  without  title  from  the
actual  or  preceding  owner.  Now  as  against  an  occupant  with-
out title,  it  could  not  be  the  result  of  a  contract ;  for  he  is  not
privy  to  any  contract  of  the  present  or  any  preceding  owner.
Still,  however,  it  might  arise  from  a  quasi-contract:  ie.  ftom
the  mere  fact  of  his  occupancy.  It  would  seem  that  a  duty  to
do  (which  must  correlate  with  jus  in  personam)  may  attach  upon
the  occupant  by  praescription.**

Though  the  occupancy,  without  title  from  the  owner,  may
be  an  injury  against  the  owner,  it  may  not  be  per  se  an  injury
against  the  party  having  the  right  of  servitude.  Consequently,
though  the  adverse  possession  might  be  wrongful  (and  therefore
could  not  be  a  quasi-contract)  in  regard  to  the  owner,  it  might
be  a  quasi-contract  in  regard  to  the  party  having  the  right  of
servitude.

An  affirmative  as  well  as  a  negative  servitude  avails  diredlif

^  Blackstone,  vol.  ii  p.  36  (Note  16). «  Ibid.  vol.  u,  p.  86  (Note  15). S«
See  Table  II.  Note  3,  6,  a  h,po8i  Notes  1  and  2,  p.  46,  ante.

^  IHd,  vol.  iii.  p.  237.  J


Servitude. — Absolute  Duties  regarding  Property.  813

Inst  the  owner  or  other  occupant  of  the  subject. For  an Lbot.
tmative,  as  well  as  a  negative  servitude  is  a  definite  excep-  ^

I  (accruing  to  the  party  having  the  servitude)  from  the  in-
inite  powers  of  user  and  exclusion  which  the  property  in  the
(ject  comprises.  Consequently,  an  affirmative  as  well  as  a
rative  servitude  (considered  exclusively  with  relation  to  the
ner  or  occupant)  might  be  deemed  jus  in  'personam.  But
ce  a  right  of  servitude,  positive  or  negative,  may  be  violated
third  parties,  it  implies  a  duty  to  forbear  from  disturbing,
ich  lies  upon  third  parties  generally  as  well  as  on  the  owner
other  occupant  of  the  thing,  and  therefore  is  jus  in  rem,
d  such  disturbance  by  third  parties  would  not  affect  the  right
sequently  through  a  violation  of  right  residing  in  another.

If,  therefore,  a  negative  servitude  be  jus  in  rem,  it  is  so,
aiuse  by  possibility  any  may  violate  it,  though  none  but  the
ner  or  occupant  is  likely  to  do  so.

The  distinction  between  an  occupant  without  title,  and  a
are  trespasser  or  other  stranger  is,  that  the  former  is  exer-
ing  over  the  subject  a  right  of  property  residing  in  another ;
lile  the  latter  does  not  affect  to  exercise  any  such  right.  To
plain  this,  we  must  analyse  the  right  of  possession.

The  subject  of  the  servitude  is  said  itself  to  serve :  res  Res  servU,
vit ;  which  merely  means,  that  the  right  of  servitude  avails
ith  or  without  limit  in  respect  of  duration)  against  every
rson  whatever  who  has  a  right  of  property  in  the  subject,  or
10,  as  adverse  possessor,  may  exercise  any  right  of  property
erit«

If  the  servitude  be  properly  so  called,  it  also  avails  against
6  rest  of  the  world,  or  is  jus  in  rem.

If  it  be  a  servitude  improperly  so  called,  it  is  merely  jus  in
rwnam,  ex  contractu,  or  qiuisi  ex  contractu,  against  every  pro-
netor  of  the  subject,  or  against  any  adverse  possessor  exercising
g^ts  of  property  over  it.

If  it  consists  in  faciendo  (or  in  a  duty  on  the  owner  or
Dcapant  to  do  or  perform)  it  is  necessarily  in  this  plight.
Old  it  may  be  in  this  plight,  although  it  consist  in  paiiendo  or
»  non  faciendo :  i.e.  in  a  duty  on  the  owner  or  occupant,  not
D  hinder  the  given  use,  or  not  to  use  in  the  given  mode.  At
Bart,  the  right  to  the  forbearance  may  be,  as  against  the  owner
f  occupant,  jus  in  personam,  although  it  avail  (at  the  same
5ie)  against  the  owner  or  occupant  together  with  the  rest  of

*•  Mackeldey,  voL  ii  pp.  76,  76.

VOL.  n.  x


8 1 4  Law  :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

LscT. the  world. {E.g.  In  case  of  a  covenant  added  to  a  grant  or
^^ praescription.)

I  must  here  notice  an  absurd  remark  of  Bogron. He  says:

'  Les  principes  g^n^raux  des  servitudes  s'appliquent  k  Tusafrait,
k  I'usage,  et  a  Thabitation ;  et  surtout  ce  principe  fondamental,  qne
e'est  la  chose  qui  doit  les  services,  et  non  la  personne.  Pradium  wn
persona  serviL  D'od  on  conclut  que  le  propri^taire  est  tenu  de  sooffinr,
et  de  laisser  faire,  et  jamais  de  fairs ;  car  le  fonds  seul  Hani  oUi^  il
ne  pent  Tdtre  que  passivement*^

The  true  reason  why  a  servitude  cannot  consist  in  faciendo
is,  that,  if  it  did,  it  could  not  be  jus  in  rem.  A  duty  to  do
(when  not  an  absolute  duty,  or  when  corresponding  to  a  righi)
being  of  a  necessity  an  obligatio,  or  a  duty  lying  exclusively  on
a  specifically  determined  party  or  parties.
NuUirea  Inasmuch  as  every  servitude  is  a  definite  subtraction  or

sua  tervUn  exception  (accruing  to  the  party  having  the  right  of  servitude)
from  the  indefinite  rights  of  user  or  exclusion  which  reside  in
the  proprietor  of  the  thing,  it  follows  that  no  man  has  a  ri^t
of  servitude  in  a  thing  of  which  he  is  the  owner :  Ntdli  res  flw
servit.  For  if  he  had,  he  would  have  a  right  in  the  thing
against  himself:  which  is  absurd  Consequently,  if  the  party
having  a  right  of  servitude  acquire  the  property  of  the  thing,
the  right  of  servitude  is  lost  in  the  more  extensive  right,  or  at
least  is  suspended,  so  long  as  his  right  of  property  resides  in
himself.
*  Sermtus  *  The  term  *  Servitus  *  has  two  meanings. It  means,  originally,

aimsoTthe  *^®  metaphorical  servitude  or  duty  of  the  thiug :  i,e.  the  duty
jusinre,^  really  incumbent  on  any  proprietor  of  the  thing,  or  on  any
occupant of  the thing exercising  rights  of  property  over  il
But  it  means  also  the  jus  servitutis,  or  the  right  which  corre-
sponds to  that  duty :  the  jus  in  re  aliend.
A  ri^ht  of  It  is  clear  that  a  right  of  servitude  (of  any  extent  in  respect

may  W-* of  duration)  may  co-exist  with  any  mode  of  property  in  the
exiat  with same  subject,  or  with  the  right  of  an  adverse  possessor  exer-
of  pro- cising  rights  of  property  over  it. Whether  the  thing  be  in
perty,  etc lease  or  subject  to  property  for  life,  or  owned  jointly  or  in
common,  or  owned  severally,  or  subject  to  any  number  of  modes
of  property  at  one  and  the  same  time,  the  right  of  the  party
entitled  to  the  servitude  avails  equally.

For  his  right  is  a  subtraction  from  the  property  of  the  thing,
let  tliat  property  be  divided  as  it  may,  or  let  it  be  exercised

*•  Rogron,  Code  civil  expliquS,  voL  i  livre  ii.  titre  3.
*^  Mackeldey,  vol.  ii.  p.  76.


Real  and  Personal  Servitudes.  8 1  s

with  a  perfect  title,  or  only  by  virtue  of  a  possession  acquired Lbct.
adversely.  .  ^^^^^

In  short,  the  right  of  servitude  is  a  subtraction  from  the
fig^t  of  property  (considered  in  respect  of  the  powers  of  user
and  exclusion  which  the  right  of  property  naturally  imports).
-And  it  therefore  may  be  concurrent  with  any  right  of  property
in  the  same  subject  (be  its  duration  and  title  what  they  may).

And  as  a  servitude  is  a  definite  subtraction  from  the  right
of  property,  it  would  seem  that  the  extent  of  the  user  has  no
dependence  on  the  extent  of  the  duration.

AlUer  in  cases  of  property.

A  servitude  must  arise  from  a  peculiar  relation  with  the  Absolute
party  in  whom  the  correlating  right  resides,  and  must  not  be  f^^yeor
imposed  with  reference  to  the  interests  of  persons  generally,  negative)
There  are  certain  duties  incumbent  on  proprietors  which  are  propfrty**^
confounded  with  servitudes,  but  which  are  not  properly  such.  '"^^^
X^,  Duty  not  to  let  my  house  (being  situate  in  a  town)  go  to
nin  so  as  to  endanger  persons  passing  in  the  street  (an  absolute
amative  duty). Duty  to  keep  a  certain  public  road  in  repair
{in  absolute  positive  duty).


servitades.


LECTURE  L.

REAL AND PERSONAL SERVITUDES.

In  pursuance  of  the  order  wherein,  in  my  last  Lecture,  I  pro- Lect.  L
posed  considering  the  nature  and  the  chief  kinds  of  servitudes, »
I  now  proceed  from  the  distinction  between  positive  and  nega-
tive servitudes,  to the  distinction  between  personal and  real
servitudes.

A  real  servitude  (or  a  real  right  of  servitude)  resides  in  the  Diatinc-
party  having  the  servitude,  as  being  the  owner  or  other  occu-  ^}^^  ^* -

o,  .  1/.!^  y ' 1  tween  real

pint  of  a  determinate  parcel  of  land  :  or  as  being  the  owner  or  and  ;Hjr-

other  occupant  of  a  determinate  building  with  the  land  whereon  J^'®2^*

it  is  erected. And  it  is  a  right,  against  every  owner  or  occupant

of  another  parcel  of  land  or  building,  to  a  power  of  using  the

latter  in  some  definite  mode,  or  to  a  forbearance  (on  the  part  of

4e  owner  or  occupant  of  the  latter)  from  using  the  latter  in

•oine  definite  mode. As  I  shall  remark  immediately,  it  hardly

«  Mackeldej,  vol  iL  pp.  79,  80,  86. Table  IL  Note  5,  §  4,  posL


8 1 6  Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

Lect.  L could  be  a  right  against  the  owner  or  occupant  of  a  movable
' thing.

A  real  servitude,  therefore,  supposes  the  existence  of  two
distinct  parcels  of  land  to  each  of  which  it  relates.  For  it  is  a
right  in  a  given  person,  as  being  the  owner  or  occupant  of  a
determinate  parcel  of  land,  against  another  given  person,  as
being  the  owner  or  occupant  of  another  determinate  parcel  of
land.  I  use  the  term  land  as  including  land  merely,  or  as  in-
cluding land  with  a  building  erected  upon  it.  And  hence  it
follows,  that  a  real  right  of  servitude  is  said  to  be  annexed  to
the  parcel  of  land  the  owner  or  occupant  whereof  hath  the  right
of  servitude.  Or,  in  the  language  of  the  English  law,  it  is  said
to  be  appurtenant  to  the  land  or  messuage  the  owner  or  occu-
pier whereof  hath  the  right  of  easement.  The  meaning  of  wMdi
expressions  is  merely  this :  that  the  right  resides  in  the  ownor
or  occupant,  as  being  such  owner  or  occupant,  and  passes  success-
ively to  every  such  owner  or  occupant  for  the  time  being,  from
every  owner  or  occupant  immediately  foregoing.

And  hence  it  also  follows,  that  a  real  servitude  (as  meaning
the  ontcs  or  duty,  and  not  the  fas  servitutis)  is  said  to  be
imposed  upon  one  of  the  two  parcels  of  land  for  the  use  or
advantage  of  the  other :  or  that  the  servitude  (as  meaning  the
onus  or  duty,  and  not  the  jus  servitutis)  is  said  to  be  due  to  one
of  the  two  parcels  of  land  from  the  other.  That  is  to  say,  tiie
duty  is  imposed  upon  every  owner  or  occupant  of  the  one  (as
being  such  owner  or  occupant)  for  the  use  or  advantage  of  eveij
owner  or  occupant  of  the  other  (as  being  such  owner  or  occupant).
Or  the  duty  is  due  from  every  owner  or  occupant  of  the  one  (as
being  such  owner  or  occupant)  to  every  owner  or  occupant  of
the  other  (as  being  such  owner  or  occupant).

And  hence  we  may  derive  the  origin  of  the  metaphorical
expressions  by  which,  in  the  language  of  the  Boman  law,  the
two  parcels  of  land  (or  the  two  prcedia)  are  contradistinguished

I  have  remarked  above,  that,  in  every  case  of  a  right  of
servitude,  the  thing  which  is  the  subject  of  the  right,  and  not  the
owner  or  other  possessor  of  the  thing,  is  said  to  be  burthened
with  the  servitude  (considered  as  an  ornis  or  duty) :  're^servit;*
or  *  res,  non  persona,  servit.*  Meaning,  that  the  right  of  servitude
avails  against  every  person  whomsoever,  who  may  happen,  for
the  time  being,  to  have  property  in  the  thing,  or,  as  advert
possessor,  to  exercise  a  right  of  dominion  over  it.

And,  in  the  case  of  a  real  servitude,  the  parcel  of  land,  the
owner  or  occupier  whereof  hath  the  right  of  servitude,  is  s^^


Real  and  Personal  Servitudes.  " 817

to  dominate  over  the  land,  from  the  owner  or  occupier  whereof  Lbct.  L
the  corresponding  duty  is  owed.  The  former  parcel  of  land  is
styled  prcedium  dominans;  the  latter  parcel  of  land  is  styled
pmdivm  serviens:  being  merely  a  case  of  the  more  general
metaphor,  by  which  any  thing,  happening  to  be  the  subject  of
^y  servitude,  is  said  to  be  in  a  state  of  servitude.

The  only  difference,  in  this  respect,  between  real  and  personal
servitudes,  consists  herein :  that  in  the  case  of  a  personal  servi-
tude (or  a  servitude  due  to  a  person  not  as  being  the  owner  or
oocapant  of  a  given  parcel  of  land),  the  thing,  which  is  the
tabject  of  the  servitude,  is  said  to  serve  the  person  in  whom  the  •
ji»  mrvitviis  resides.  But  in  the  case  of  a  real  servitude,  it  is
ttid  to  serve,  not  the  owner  or  occupant  of  the  related  and
^)I^)osed  subject,  but  the  subject  itself.

The  import  of  the  related  terms  'prcedium  domin/ins'  and
*frmdium  serviens*  I  have  explained  in  another  place,  with  more
deamess  and  conciseness  than  in  the  hurry  of  preparing  a  lecture
I  can  often  attain  to.  As  the  passage  is  very  short,  I  will  now
lead  it

The  servitudes  of  the  Roman  Law  are  of  two  kinds :  1*,
Ptaedial  or  real  servitudes  ('  servitutes  prsediorum  sive  rerum  *) :
2'.  Personal  servitudes  (*  servitutes  personarum  sive  hominum ').

Now  *re€U*  and  ^personai,'  as  distinguishing  the  kinds  of
servitudes,  must  not  be  confounded  with  '  real '  and  'personal,*
a«  synonjrmous  or  equivalent  expressions  for  *  in  rem '  and  '  in
personanL*  In  a  certain  sense,  all  servitudes  are  real.  For  all
servitudes  are  rights  in  rem,  and  belong  to  that  genus  of  rights
«i  rem  which  subsist  in  re  aliend.

And,  in  a  certain  sense,  all  servitudes  are  personal.  For
servitudes,  like  other  rights,  reside  in  persons,  or  are  enjoyed  or
exercised  by  persons.

The  distinction  between  'real*  and  'personal*  as  applied
^d  restricted  to  servitudes,  is  this :  A  real  servitude  resides  in
a  given  person,  as  the  owner  or  occupier,  for  the  time  being,  of
s  given  prcedium :  i,e.  a  given  field,  or  other  parcel  of  land ;  or
s  given  building,  with  the  land  whereon  it  is  erected.  K  personal
servitude  resides  in  a  given  person;  without  respect  to  the
ownership  or  occupation  of  a  jyra^ium.  To  borrow  the  technical
language  of  the  English  Law,  real  servitudes  are  appurtenant  to
knds  or  messuages :  personal  servitudes  are  servitudes  in  gross,
or  are  annexed  to  the  persons  of  the  parties  in  whom  they  reside.
Every  real  servitude  (like  every  imaginable  right)  resides  in  a


8 1 8  Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

Lect.  L person  or  persons. But  since  it  resides  in  the  person  as  occupier
of  the  given  proediumy  and  devolves  upon  every  person  who
successively  occupies  the  same,  the  right  is  ascribed  (by  a  natuial
and  convenient  ellipsis)  to  the  prcedium  itself. Vesting  in  every
person  veho  happens  to  occupy  the  prcedium,  and  vesting  in
ever}'  occupier  as  the  occupier  thereof,  the  right  is  spoken  of  as
if  it  resided  in  the  prcedium,  and  as  if  it  existed  for  the  advan-
tage of  that  senseless,  or  inanimate  subject. The  prcedium  is
erected  into  a  legal  or  fictitious  person,  and  is  styled  '  prsedium
dominans* On the  other  hand,  the  prcedium  against  whose
occupiers  the  right  is  enjoyed  or  exercised,  is  spoken  of  (by  a
like  ellipsis)  as  if  it  were  subject  to  a  duty. The  duty  attaching
upon  the  successive  occupiers  of  the  prcedium,  is  ascribed  to  the
prcedium  itself ;  which,  like  the  related  prcedium,  is  erected  into
a  person,  and  contradistinguished  from  the  other  by  the  name  of

*  prsedium  serviens,* Hence  the  use  of  the  expressions  '  real  *  and

*  personal,'  for  the  purpose  of  distinguishing  servitudes.
The  rights  of servitude  which are  inseparable  from  the

occupation  of  prcedia,  are  said  to  reside  in  those  given  or  d^e^
minate  things,  and  not  in  the  physical  persons  who  successively
occupy  or  enjoy  them.  And,  by  virtue  of  this  ellipsis  and  of
the  fiction  which  grows  out  of  it,  servitudes  of  the  kind  are
styled  *servitutes  rerum*  or  *servitutes  realcs;*  t.e.  rights  of
servitude  annexed  or  belonging  to  things.

The  rights  of  servitude  which  are  not  conjoined  with  such
occupation,  cannot  be  spoken  of  as  if  they  resided  in  things^
And  since  it  is  necessary  to  distinguish  them  from  real  or  prcedial
servitudes,  they  are  styled  *  servitutes  person/irum  *  or  '  servitutes
personates:*  i.e.  rights  of  servitude  annexed  or  belonging  to
persons. See  Table  II.  Note  5,  Section  4,  post.

A  personal  servitude  (or  a  personal  right  of  servitude)  resides
in  a  given  or  determinate  person,  n/)t  as  being  the  owner  or
occupier  of  a  given  parcel  of  land.

The  expression  '  personal  *  (as  here  used)  is,  like  a  multitude
of  other  expressions  wearing  a  positive  form,  a  merely  negative
term.  It  means  that  the  servitude  to  which  it  is  applied,  is  not
a  real  servitude  (in  the  sense  which  I  have  just  explained) :  that
it  does  not  reside  in  the  party  entitled  to  it,  as  being  the  owner
or  occupier  of  a  given  or  determinate  thing  other  than  the  deter-
minate thing  over  which  the  right  exists.  For  (it  is  manifest)
every  servitude  (personal  or  real)  is,  in  some  senses  of  the  term
'  personal,*  a  personal  servitude :  i.e.  it  resides,  as  a  right,  in  ff


1


m  Heal  and  Personal  Servitudes.  819

m  penm,  and  is  due,  as  a  duty,  from  a  person :  although  it  may  Lbct.  L
I  nedde  in  the  party  entitled  as  standing  in  a  given  relation  to  a
I  given  thing,  or  as  considered  without  relation  to  a  given  thing.
And  (as  is  equally  manifest)  every  servitude,  personal  or
mal,  is,  in  some  senses  of  the  term  '  red,'  a  real  servitude.  For,
irfidher  it  reside  in  the  party  entitled,  as  being  related  to .  a
given  thing,  or  it  reside  in  the  party  entitled  independently  of
•Qch  relation,  it  is  a  right  over  a  thing  of  which  the  burthened
piity  is  the  owner  or  possessor,  or  (what  is  the  same  in  effect)
over  a  person  (occupying  a  position  analogous  to  that  of  a  thing)
of  whom  the  burthened  party  is  owner  or  possessor.  (Kg. :
'We  may  conceive  that  the  subject  of  the  servitude  is  a  dave  of
irtiich  the  burthened  party  is  either  dominies  or  adverse  possessor.)
■  .And  whatever  may  be  the  character  wherein  the  party  having
tbe  servitude  hath  the  same,  his  right  of  servitude  is  also  real,
as  being  jus  in  rem :  for,  as  I  have  shewn  in  former  Lectures
and  also  elsewhere,  the  real  and  personal  rights  of  the  modem
Chilians  (as  well  as  their  jura  in  re  and  jiira  ad  rem)  are,
in  their  largest  meanings,  equivalent  to  the  jura  in  rem  and  jura
M  perxmam  of  the  same  Civilians,  and  to  the  dominia  and
Migaiiones  of  the  Soman  lawyers  themselves. — Unless  a  servitude
le  real  as  meaning  jus  in  rem,  it  is  not  a  servitude  properly  so
cdled :  but  it  is  merely  a  right  availing  exclusively  against  a
I  ^fetemiinate  person  or  persons,  and  arising  ex  contractu  or  quasi
I m  tontra^ctu.

,  This  negative  import  of  personal,  as  applied  to  a  servitude,

:  ought  to  be  marked  particularly.  For,  in  consequence  of  writers
\  not  having  noted  or  remembered  it,  they  have  frequently  missed
I  the  essence  of  the  distinction  between  real  and  personal  servi-
j  tades,  and  have  regarded  mere  accidents  as  being  essential  to  it.
[  For  example :  We  are  told  by  M.  Eogron  **  (the  annotator

on  the  French  Code  whom  I  have  already  mentioned)  that  a
wd  servitude  is  reaJ,  because  it  is  due  not  to  a  person,  but  to
a  thing :  M.  Rogi-on  meaning  thereby  (if,  indeed,  we  can  impute
a  meaning  to  him)  that  it  is  due  to  a  person  as  being  related  to
a  thing  by  his  ownership  or  adverse  possession  thereof.  And  he
Wis  us,  conversely,  that  a  personal  servitude  is  a  personal
'r  lervitude,  because  it  is  due,  not  to  a  thing,  but  to  a  person :  He
t  iiieaning  thereby  (in  so  far  as  meaning  he  hath),  that  it  is  due
\  to  a  person,  independently  of  his  ownership  or  adverse  possession
' of  any  determinate  thing.

And,  in  like  manner,  a  right  of  common  in  gross  (which  is

*•  Code  civil  expliqn^  voL  i  p.  241.


r


820  Law  :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

Lect.  L of  a  species  of  personal  servitudes)  is  said,  in  the  language  of
the  English  law,  '  to  be  annexed  to  the  person  of  the  party  in
whom  it  resides :'  an  expression  which  obscures  and  perplexes
the  true  nature  of  the  right ;  inasmuch  as  any  right  whatever,
not  less  than  any  other  right  whatever,  is  annexed  to,  or  inheres
in,  the  person  of  the  party  entitled. The  English  lawyers,
however,  unlike  M.  Eogron,  do  not  mistake  the  import  of  the
distinction,  although  they  use  expressions  which  tend  to  obscuie
it. For,  in  the  same  breath,  wherein  they  tell  ua  that  a  right
of  common  in  gross  is  annexed  to  the  party's  person,  they  tdl
us  that  it  is  such  a  right  of  common  as  is  Tiot  appurtenant  to  a
land or  messuage,^  thus  hitting  off  accurately  the  negative
character  which  distinguishes  a  personal  from  a  real  servituda

Again:  we  are  told  by  modem  expositors  of  the  Bomaa
Law,  that  a  personal  servitude  is  created  for  the  advantage  ol
the  given  person  in  whom  it  resides,  is  inseparable  fipom  hi
persouy  and  necessarily  ceases  at  his  death :"  In  other  words,
that  a  personal  servitude  is  necessarily  an  interest  for  the  life
only  of  the  party  entitled,  and  is  by  the  party  unalienabla

But,  first :  A  personal  servitude,  though  no  more  than  a  life
interest,  if  the  extent  of  the  interest  be  not  declared  at  the
creation,  may  be  given,  by  express  words,  to  the  party  and  his
heirs.  And,  admitting  that  the  Soman  Law  determined  othe^
wise,  the  limitation  of  the  interest  to  the  life  of  the  party,  were
merely  an  accidental  consequence  of  an  accidental  provision  of  the
Eoman  Law.  For  what  is  there  in  the  essence  of  a  personal  servi-
tude, that  necessarily  limits  its  duration  to  the  life  of  the  party?

With  regard  to  its  alleged  unalienability,  it  was  not  aUeuaUe
completely :  that  is  to  say,  the  party  might  cut  out  of  it,  aod
pass  to  another,  any  interest  of  limited  duration  short  of  his
whole  estate.  But  he  could  not  so  alien  it,  as  not  to  leave  »
reversion  in  himself,  and  as  to  cast  on  the  alienee  the  whole
right  of  servitude.

But  admitting  that  it  was  unalienable,  its  unalienability  was
a  mere  accident,  and  not  a  property  inseparable  from  its  v«y
nature.  There  is  no  reason  why  a  right  of  common  in  gross
should  not  be  just  as  alienable  as  any  right  of  property  in  the
same  subject.

The  modem  expositors  of  the  Roman  Law  have,  therefore,
characterised  a  personal  servitude,  not  by  its  true  essence,  but
by  certain  of  its  mere  accidents :  misstating,  by  the  bye  be  it
mentioned,  those  very  accidents.

"  Blackstone,  vol  ii.  p.  33.  ^  Mackeldey,  voL  iL  pp.  79,  80.


Real  and  Personal  Servitudes,  821

And  they  probably  were  led  into  this  error,  by  their  not  remark-  Litor.  L
iig  that  merely  negative  meaning  of  the  epithet  jt?erso7iaZ  to  which  '
r  have  adverted.  Seeing  that  the  servitude  is  styled  personal,
iiey  supposed  that  it  must  have  some  special  connection  with  the
tenon  of  the  party :  that  it  was,  in  its  very  nature,  inseparable
torn  his  person,  or  inseparably  connected  with  his  person  :  that
j  therefore  expired  necessarily  with  his  person,  or  could  not  endure
ejond  his  life,  and  was  also  unalienable  to  any  other  party.**

It  is  remarkable  that  unalienability  (which  they  suppose  to
B  of  the  essence  of  a  persorud  servitude)  is  truly,  in  a  certain
suae,  of  the  essence  of  a  real.  For  since  it  is  annexed  to  a
iven  prcsdium  (or  resides  exclusively  in  the  owners  or  occupiers
lereof),  it  cannot  be  aliened  or  detached  from  the  prcedium  itself
r  cannot  be  aliened  without  the  prcedium),  without  changing  it
txm  a  real  to  a  personal  servitude.  Insomuch  that  a  necessary
loperty  of  recti  servitudes  has  been  mistaken  for  a  characteristic
lark  of  servitudes  of  the  opposed  class.

[v.  V.  Senible,  that  a  real  servitude  can  hardly  exist  over  a
lovable. (Suggest  reason.)

In  fact  and  practice,  all  the  real  servitudes  of  the  Soman
AW  are  servitudes  over  immovables.  It  is  essential  to  the
ring  of  a  real  servitude  that  there  should  be  a  *  prcedium  serviens,'
od  a  'prcedium  dominans'

V.  V.  Semble,  that  a  personal  servitude,  if  a  genuine  servi-
ide,  and  not  one  of  the  modes  of  property  improperly  called
srvitudes,  can  hardly  exist  over  a  movable. (State  reason.)]

The  division  of  servitudes  into  affirmative  and  negative  and
ito  real  and  personal,  are  manifestly  cross  divisions.  A  right
I  way  and  a  right  of  common  are  both  of  them  affirmative
BTvitudes,  being  rights  to  use  or  deal  positively  with  the  subject :
nd  they  may  be  either  appurteTiant  or  in  gross ;  that  is,  either
eal  or  personal

Negative  servitudes,  perhaps,  are  nearly  universally  real
ley  generally  avail  only  to  the  advantage  of  the  owner  or
iccapant  of  the  one  prcedium,  as  being  such  owner  or  occupant,
igainst  the  owner  or  occupant  of  an  adjoining  prcedium.

There  is  a  distinction  of  real  servitudes  into  servitutes
^tiBdiorum  urbanoruvi,  and  servitvies  prcediorum  rusticorum,
8nt  as  the  distinction  is  peculiar  to  the  Roman  Law,  and  has
^0  scientific  precision,  I  pass  it  over  as  not  belonging  to  my
'Ourse. I  merely  mention  it  for  the  sake  of  the  terms.

^  Mackeldey,  vol.  ii.  p.  88.


82  2  Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.


*- ^


Lbot.  L  An  urban  servitude  has  no  necessary  connection  with  a  dty

or  town. A  rmtic  servitude  has  no  necessary  connection  with
the  country.

An  urban  servitude  is  a  real  servitude  appurtenant  to  a
building  (including  the  land  whereon  it  is  erected).  A  rustic
servitude  is  a  real  servitude  appurtenant  to  land  (without
reference  to  any  building  that  may  happen  to  be  erected
upon  it).

The  principal  scope  of  an  urban  servitude,  is,  speaking
generally,  the  commodious  enjoyment  of  a  dwelling-house  to
which  it  is  annexed.  The  priijcipal  scope  of  a  rustic  servitude,
is,  speaking  generally,  the  commodious  cultivation  of  a  parcel  of
land  to  which  the  servitude  is  appurtenant.  Consequently,
urban  servitudes  occur  most  frequently  in  a  city  or  town :  rustic^
servitudes  occur  most  frequently  in  the  country.  And  hence
the  respective  names  of  the  two  classes  of  servitudes :  Though
an  urban  servitude  may  be  annexed  to  a  building  situate  in  thft
country,  as  a  rustic  servitude  may  be  appurtenant  to  land  wiUun
the  boundary  of  a  city  or  town.

Examples :  A  right  to  a  forbearance  from  an  obstruction  to
one's  ancient  lights,  is  an  urban  servitude :  i.e.  annexed  to  i ^
building :  A  right  to  pasture  one's  oxen  on  land  belonging  to  >
another,  is,  speaking  generally,  a  rustic  servitude :  i.c.  annexed  ;-
to  a  farm,  and  not  to  any  of  the  farm  buildings.

By  modern  Civilians,  and  in  the  language  of  the  modem
systems  of  law  which  are  mainly  formed  on  the  Boman,  reel
and  personal  servitudes  are  marked  and  distinguished  by  those  -
epithets.^^  In  the  language  of  the  Roman  lawyers,  they  are
also  marked  and  distinguished  by  those  epithets,  but  are  more
commonly  called  servitutes  prcediorum  dve  rerum,  and  serviivUi
persanarum  sive  hominum.  It  is  worthy  of  remark,  that  real
servitudes,  in  the  language  of  the  Eoman  lawyers,  are  frequently  \
styled  servitutes  simply :  or  that  the  name  servitutes  is  frequently
restricted  to  real  servitudes,  whilst  personal  servitudes  pass  under
the  generic  name  of  jura  in  re  aliend :  which,  as  I  shall  shew
hereafter,  comprises  many  rights  not  esteemed  servitudes,  and
others  which  though  sometimes  included  among  servitudes,  are
improperly  so  included.

In  the  language  also  of  the  French  Code,  the  term '  servi'
tudc '  is  limited  exclusively  to  real  or  prsedial  servitudes,  or
services  fonciers :  personal  servitudes  not  being  marked  by  any
common  epithet,  but  being  designated  exclusively  by  the  namee

**  Rogron,  vol.  i.  p.  268.


RecU  and  Personal  Servitudes.  823

their several  species : As  '  vsufruit,  usage,  habitation^  and L>ot.  L


-*


on.**

In  the  English  Law,  we  have  no  adequate  names  to  mark
3  distinction  between  real  and  personal  servitudes,  any  more
■n  we  have  an  adequate  name  for  servitudes.  The  names
iproaching  to  the  Soman,  would  be,  easements  appendant  and
ipurtenant,  and  easements  in  gross.

Having  explained  these  two  classes  of  servitudes  in  general  Examples
ims,  I  shall  advert  to  some  examples  of  each  kind.  r«^i5°^

A  right  of  way  appurtenant  is  an  obvious  example  of  a  real  servitudes.
rvitude ;  and  a  right  of  way  in  gross,  of  a  personal  servitude.

Common  appendant  and  appurtenant,  as  opposed  to  common

I  gross,  are  an  equally  familiar  example  of  a  real  servitude.  I
Kert  to  it  in  order  to  observe  that  what  is  called  appendance

I I  may  be  permitted  to  coin  an  abstract  name  corresponding
» the  concrete  appendant)  is  merely  a  species  or  modification  of
fpurtenanee.  The  distinction,  as  drawn  by  Coke  and  Black-
bone,  is  merely,  that  into  common  appendant  there  enters  the
olion  of  the  feudal  relation  constituted  by  tenure  :  the  right  is

right  enjoyed  by  each  person  having  a  house  or  land  within
be  manor,  against  the  lord  who  is  the  owner  or  against  other
Irties  within  the  manor :  while  in  the  case  of  common  appur-
BDant,  the  same  right  exists  without  any  relation  arising  from
Bmiie.

Another  instance  of  a  servitude  is  a  right  to  a  pew  in  church.
U  some  cases,  there  is  a  right  to  a  pew  by  prsescription  as
iputenant  to  a  messuage ;  in  other  cases,  a  pew  is  granted  to
i  person  by  the  ordinary ;  in  that  case,  it  is  an  easement  in
[BOSSL  It  is  clearly  an  easement ;  being  a  right  to  go  into  and
Me  a  particular  part  of  the  church  as  against  the  parson  in
$hom  the  freehold  of  the  church  resides.

From  the  distinction  between  real  and  personal  servitudes,  I  The  modes

Keed  to  certain  rights,  which,  in  the  language  of  the  Eoman  ^^^^^*

,  and  of  the  modem  systems  which  borrow  its  terms  and  the  lan-

dmifications,  are  improperly  (as  I  conceive)  styled  servitudes,  ^^^^lan

lor,  in  all  these  cases,  the  party  entitled  to  the  so-caUed  servitude  Law,  and

Im  an  indefinite  power  or  liberty  of  using  or  dealing  with  the  modern

^■lijecL The  right,  therefore,  is  not  a  definite  subtraction  from  systems

"^indefinite  power  of  user  or  exclusion  residing  in  the  owner  of  its  terms

•  "^  [**•  v.] Origin  of  the  names  real  and  personal  servitudes. See  Table  II.  Note


824


Law :  Purposes  and  Stibjecis.


Lbct.  L

and  classi-
fications,
are  impro-
perly
styled
'servi-
tudes.'


the  subject It  is  not  a  servitude  properly  so  called,  but  a  mode
of  property  or  dominion.

The  party  has  candominium  (or  joint  property,  or  property  in
common)  with,  or  concurrently  with,  another  owner ;  or  some  right
of  property  of  limited  duration  (as  an  estate  for  life  or  yean)
upon  which  the  right  of  property  in  the  other  owner  is  expectant
in  remainder  or  reversion.

Unless,  at  least,  these  so-called  servitudes  be  modes  rf
property,  I  cannot  perceive  that  there  is  any  intelligible  dis--
tinction  between  dominia  and  servitiiUs,  or  account  for  the  te:
wherein  the  latter  are  commonly  distinguished  from  the  fo
All  the  rights  in  question  are,  it  seems  to  me,  rights  of  pro
for  life.

1.  The  first  is  vsusfTuctus  ;  a  right  of  completely  enjoying
whole  subject  for  life  merely  under  certain  restrictions,
entitled  party  cannot  cede  his  usufruct  so  as  to  put  the  alii
in  his  own  place,  though  he  may  let  it  out,  reserving  a  rev(
to  himself. We  should  call  this  right,  I  think  very  justly,
estate  for  life.  \

2.  The  next  is  lisus :  which  in  practice  is  a  mere  mode  cB
usufruct,  that  is,  the  same  right  with  some  additional  limitati0d||
in  point  of  user.  \

3.  The  next  is  haJntatio :  also  a  mode  of  usufruct.  This  isti
right  of  residing  in  the  house  which  is  the  subject  of  the  right;;i
and  a  power  of  dealing  with  it,  not  positively  defined  or  ciicuB-j
scribed,  but  still  more  restricted  than  in  the  case  of  ttsus,  Tm
party  must  use  it  for  his  own  habitation ;  he  cannot  alienate  ftS
but  still  his  power  of  user  is  indefinite :  it  is  an  estate  for  liii
restricted  in  point  of  user.

4.  The  next  is  operce  servorum :  a  so-called  servitude  over  i
person  ;  not  however  a  servitude,  but  a  letting  of  a  slave,  for  tM
life  either  of  the  slave  or  of  the  party  to  whom  he  is  let,  with  i
reversion  to  the  party  who  lets.  This,  therefore,  is  a  life  inteitfl
in  the  slave  amounting  to  a  mode  of  property.  A  servitude  in
the  proper  sense  can  hardly  exist  over  a  person.  The  master  ol
a  slave  would  not  be  likely  to  let  him  out  for  some  one  specific
use,  as  (for  example)  for  cleaning  shoes.

All  these  various  rights  of  tisicsfructvs,  vsils,  and  habitat.
would  be  deemed  (I  think)  by  English  lawyers,  rights  of  propertj
(for  the  life  of  the  owner)  variously  restricted  in  respect  of  fl*
power  of  user.^^  In  our  own  law,  we  have  various  modes  d
property,  variously  distinguished  from  one  another  by  similaifr

"B  See  note  on  this  subject  at  the  end  of  this  Lecture. — R.  C


Real  and  Personal  Servitudes.  825

^g  limitations  to  the  power  of  user :  some  of  such  restric-  ^*^-  ^
l8  being  set  by  the  dispositions  of  the  authors  of  the  interests ;
i  others^  by  dispositions  of  the  law  in  default  of  such  private
visions.  For  example :  tenancy  for  life,  with  or  without  im-
kchment  of  waste,  tenancy  by  the  curtesy,  tenancy  in  dowry,
. :  In  each  of  which  cases,  the  indefinite  power  of  user  is
tricted  somewhat  differently.

A  remarkable  thing  is,  that  these  miscalled  servitudes  are  the
ly  servitudes  which  are  styled  formally  and  usually,  personal
vUudes :  Although  it  is  manifest  that  a  servitude  properly  so
lied,  or  importing  a  power  of  using  which  is  defined  or  circum-
ibed  exactly,  may  not  only  be  a  personal  servitude,  but  is  the
ly  personal  servitude  that  is  entitled  to  the  name.

It  is,  indeed,  admitted,  by  the  Eoman  Lawyers  and  their
[lowers,  that  if  a  servitude  (which  commonly  is  prsedial  or  real)

I  not  annexed  to  a  prcedium  (but  to  the  person  of  the  party
ifeitled)  it  becomes,  for  that  reason,  a  personal  servitude,  and
nsequently  is  a  species  of  v^susfructus  or  usus}^ For  example  :

right  of  way  in  gross,  or  not  appurtenant  to  a  land  or  mes-
lage,  is  a  personal  servitude,  according  to  this  admission.

Here,  however,  is  a  mistake.  For  though  it  would  be  a
sreonal  servitude,  it  would  not  be  ususfructus:  v^susfructxis
iparting  to  the  party  entitled  an  indefinite  power  of  user,^^  and
dog  in  effect  a  mode  of  property.

And  admitting  that  these  improper  servitudes  are  servitudes,
hy  should  all  of  them  be  placed  in  the  category  of  personal
avitudes  ?  For  it  is  conceivable  (though  not  likely)  that  the
nifruct  or  use  of  one  thing  may  be  appurtenant  or  annexed  to
be  property  or  occupation  of  another.  And  admitting  that  these
mproper  servitudes  are  servitudes,  it  is  inconsistent  to  exclude
he  superficies  and  emphyteusis  from  the  same  category.  For  the
mproper  servitudes,  like  these,  import  a  power  of  indefinite  user,
nd,  like  these,  may  be  rights  of  indefinite  duration :  i.e.  reside

II  the  party  and  his  heirs.

"  Hackeldey,  vol.  i.  p.  87.  unvarying. In  the  titles  to  the  Digest

'  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  the  right  on  the  various  interdicts,  there  are  many

tfthe/rvc^tian'uf  to  the  use  and  fruits  indications  as  to  the  extent  of  interest

■v  of  a  nature  more  circumscribed  than  belonging  to  the  domiuus  and  fructu-

tti  lathor  seems  to  allow,  and  that  the  arius  respectively. The  title  '  Quod  vi

>ilf  dilBculty  in  a.scertaining  the  precise  aut  clam'  (D. xliii. 24) is  especially

he  of  demarcation  between  the  rights  instructive. This  interdict  was  compe-

tftlieyVu«t«ari««  and  the  (2a7/iini^  arises  tent  only  on  the  ground  of  injury  to

^  tiie  fact  that  it  was  so  fixed  by  cus-  the  solum  (the  property  of  the  d(ymintL8\

^  18  seldom  to  occasion  a  nuestion  of  but  the  fructuarius  could  resort  to  it  to

l^te. With  regard  to  rignts  over  a  protect  his  own  interest  so  far  as  affected

Wm^  at  least,  this  is  what  we  should  by  the  injury  in  question. — See  note  at

^{leet,  where  modes  of  cultivation  were  the  end  of  the  Lecture. — R.  C.


:1


826  Law  :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

Lkct.  L  It  seems  indeed  to  have  been  perceived  (though  not  ver

'  tinctly),  that  these  improper  servitudes  were  not  truly
For  (first)  although  they  are  styled  servitudes  in  various  pai
of  the  Pandects,  they  are  not  styled  servitudes  in  the  Insti
but  are  marked  sericUim  by  the  names  of  their  respective  sp
Describing  things  incorporeal  (or  rights)  Justinian,  in  his  Insti
says,  '  Eodem  numero  sunt  jura  praediorum,  urbanorum  et
corum,  qucp  etiam  serviitUes  vocantur!  And  having  treat
[  servitutes  (limiting  the  term  to  prsedial  or  real  servitudes

having  treated  seriatim  of  usufruct,  use,  and  habitation,  he
*  Haec  de  sermtutibus,  et  ugiifnjLctu,  et  usu,  et  habUatiane  d
/  sufficiat.' "

So  that  in  the  Institutes,  the  term  servitus  is  limited  t
servitudes ;  %bsusfructuSy  tbsus,  et  Juibitatio,  are  not  deemed
tudes  ;  and  personal  servitudes,  properly  so  called,  are  passe(
without  notice.
I  Precisely  the  same  method  is  followed  in  the  French

i  In  the  second  title  of  the  second  book,  property  or  domin

■  treated  of. In the third title usufruit,  usage,  and hah

\  (which  are  not  called  servitudes),  are  handled  seriatim,

the  fourth  title  is  devoted  to  Servitudes  or  Services  fonder
real  or  praedial  servitudes.  So  that  in  the  French  Code,  a
€is  in  the  Institutes,  personal  servitudes  properly  so  calle
not  formally  mentioned.

Secondly,  by  Savigny,  in  his  Treatise  on  Possession
remarked,  that  the  possession  of  a  right  of  usufruct,  or  of  £
of  use,  resembles  the  possession  of  a  thing,  by  the  proprie:
by  an  adverse  possessor  exercising  rights  of  property  ov<
thing.  And  that  a  disturbance  of  the  one  possession  rese
a  disturbance  of  the  other.^*

Now  this  must  happen  for  the  reason  I  have  already  s
namely,  that  the  right  of  usufruct  or  user,  like  that  of  pro
is  indefinite  in  point  of  user.  For  what  is  possession  (m(
legal  possession,  not  mere  physical  handling  of  the  subjec
the  exercise  of  a  right  ?

This  leads  to  the  distinction  between  -possession  and


I *  Institutes,  ii.  5,  §  6.  *  Das  Recht  dieser  Semtuten

I *  *  Die  TXTson lichen  Scrvituten  haben  eino bestimmte Person  geband^

das  Eigeutniimliche,  dass  die  Ausiibung  glich  unveransserlich,  folglich  ha

j derselben iinmor  mit  dein natiirlichen  die  Verausserung  derselben  (dnn

, Besitz  der  Sacho  selbat  verbunden  ist'  .  kauf,  Schenkuiig,  etc. )  im  Wesca

I ....  keiue  andere Wirkung  als  eine

; *Erworben  also  wird diese Art  dcs  Verpachtung.*

Besitzes  durch dassclbe Handeln, wie  Savigny,  Recht  de$  Btaitiet,  5*

der  Besitz  der  Sache  selbst,'  etc.  ...  §  45.


Ususfructus  and  Lije  Estates. — Note.  827

um. Each  is  a  mode  of  possession,  and  each  (considered L>ot-  I«

il,  not  physical  possession)  consists  in  the  exercise  of  the ^

ponding  right Now  possession  properly  so  called  is  the

^  of  the  right  of  property,  either  by  the  proprietor  or  by

ody  holding  adversely  to  the  proprietor,  who  on  that  adverse

sion  may  by  prsescription  found  a  right  as  against  the  pro-

r  himself. Qiuisi-possession  again  is  the  exercise  not  of  a

of  property,  but  of  a  right  of  servitude :  distinguished  from

ision  of  a  right  of  property  in  this,  that  as  in  the  one  right

ses  are  indefinite  in  number,  and  in  the  other  exactly

dy  possession  is  indefinite  user,  and  quasi-possession  is  definite

>f  the  subject Since,  therefore,  Savigny  assimilates  posses-

►f  a  right  of  usufruct  or  use  to  the  former  and  not  to  the

,  the  true  nature  of  these  improper  servitudes  must  have

perceived  by  him,  though  not  distinctly  stated. For  he

quasi-possession  of  usus  and  ususfructus  is  not  like  quasi  pos-

of  a  real  servitude,  but  like  possessio  of  a  right  of  property.


4e, — On  the  difference  between  uiusfrudus,  etc.  and  the  life  estates
I  to  the  English  law.

;hink  that  in  the  above  Lecture  the  author  has  assumed  a  closer  ana-
lan  really  exists  between  the  ususfmu^tiis^  etc.  of  the  Roman  and  the
!;ate8  kno¥m  to  the  English  law.  I  believe  that  the  difference  is  an
tant  one.

)r  the  sake  of  simplicity  I  will  consider  the  largest  of  the  estates  in
^n  known  to  the  Roman  law,  namely,  usuBfruciuSy  and  shew  how  it
from  the  life  estate  of  freehold  known  to  the  English  law.
gutfructiUy  according  to  its  original  conception,  was  a  right  which
id  in  the  person  of  the  fruciuarius,  and  by  the  old  jus  civile  it  was
td  intransmissible  and  indivisible.  By  the  same  Jii5  civile  it  could  not
J  subject  of  a  tenancy  in  common,  although  it  might  belong  to  two  or
persons  as  jaiiU  tenants^  with  jiis  accrescendi  to  the  survivor.  The
formal  mode  of  constituting  such  joint  tenancy  in  usufruct  was
nfnictum  do,  lego,  Sempronio  et  separatim  Titio.'  Ususifructus  fundi^
h  constituted  ('deductus')  by  mancipatiOy  was  (in  the  law  before
lian)  itself  a  res  nee  Ttiancipi.  It  was  lost,  like  any  other  servitude,
Uendo,  except  in  the  so-called  timisfruclus  pecunice,  which  was  not
rly  ususfructus  at  all,  for  the  dominium  was  there  deemed  to  be  with
•uctnarius  (Vat.  Frag.  45,  47  ;  75-77).

y  the  jus  civile  the  fructuarius  did  not  possess  the  fundus — a  convenient
ne,  which  had  the  advantage  of  rendering  the  right  of  usufruct  con-
t  with  a  positive  prescrijition  of  very  short  period.  He  had,  how-
quasi-possession  of  the  usufruct  and  naturalis  poasessio  of  the  subject,
I  enabled  him  to  use  the  various  interdicts  to  protect  his  interest —
Hg.  xliii.  26  (De  precario),  1.  6,  §  2  ;  and  cf.  Dig.  xliii.  17  (Uti  possi-
,  L  4  ;  and  Dig.  xliii.  24  (Quod  vi  aut  clam),  1.  16  ;  and  Savigny,
;  des  Besitzes,  §  7  Civilis  et  naturalis  possessio.
at  the  difference  between  the  Roman  itsiisfructus  and  the  English  life


828  Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

JjKfr.  h estate  of  freehold  is  not  one  depending  merely  on  the  mles  of  the  jui  avik
^ y -^ or  on  the  modes  by  which  usufruct  was  constituted  and  lost

The  substantive  rights  of  the  dominus  and  the  fruetuaritu  respectively
are  shortly  expressed  by  saying  that  the  right  to  the  solum  is  in  the  domiitiii^
that  to  the  fructiut  is  in  the  fructuarius.  In  subjects  capable  of  use  and  en*
joyment,  such  as  a  house  and  pleasure-grounds,  the  usufruct  gave  a  ri^t  to
the  amotiiitaSy  which  both  the  dominus  and  all  others  can  be  restrained  frna
infringing.  Subject,  however,  to  the  right  of  ih^  frudvarius  to  the  froiti
and  to  the  amamitd^^  the  dominus  had  a  present  right  in  the  sclum^  indudiog
all  things  of  a  permanent  nature  adhering  thereto  or  growing  thereon.  Oon-
se({uently,  such  trees  as  were  neither  fruitful,  nor  conduced  to  the  amanim^
were  absolutely  at  his  disposal,  and  the  fructuarius  was  neither  interested  in
them  nor  responsible  for  the  care  of  them.  There  was  an  exception  in  ftlei
ccsdua^  which,  when  cut  at  maturity,  generally  went  to  the  profit  of  the
fructuarius. Dig.  xliii.  24  (Quod  vi  aut  clam,  etc.),  1.  16,  18.

It  necessarily  follows,  and  I  think  it  is  assumed  throughout  the  pasBagei
in  the  Digest  bearing  on  these  rights,  that  the  dominus  had,  notwithstanding
the  usufnict  in  the  other,  a  right  of  entry  upon  the  premises,  provided  only
he  abstained  from  interfering  with  the  complete  and  ample  enjoyment  by
the  other  uf  the  rights  which  the  usufruct  conferred. The  extent  to  which
the  dominus  might  avail  himself  of  his  right  of  entry  must,  no  doubt,  hivn
depended  on  the  nature  of  the  subject In  the  case  of  a  house  and  pleason-
grounds,  of  course  the  entry  by  the  dominus  was  practically  suspended,
except  so  far  as  might  be  necessary  for  the  sole  purpose  of  protecting  Idi
reversionary  interest ;  but  in  the  case  of  b.  fundus  consisting  of  rural  sabject^
the  domintis  might  have  many  rights  in  the  solum  which  could  be  exextiaeil
without  interference  with  the  frudus  or  the  amanitas. The  substantliv
right  in  the  dominus  being  clear,  his  right  of  entry  is  generally,  by  tbi
Roman  jurists,  tacitly  assumed. But  there  is  one  passage  that  plaeeithii
right  beyond  doubt It  is  explicitly  stated  by  Ulpian  that  the  drnninmhi
the  right  to  use,  without  obstruction  from  the  fmctvarius  of  his  own  Cui^
a  servitude  road  belonging  to  this  farm  over  that  of  a  neighbour. Dif^  xln.
19  (De  itinere,  etc.),  1.  3,  §  6. It  follows,  by  necessary  implication,  that  k
had  a  right  of  entry  upon  the  ground  of  his  own  farm  itself.

In  Scotch  law,  the  right  of  liferent  is  in  most  of  its  incidents,  as  well  ai
in  its  conception,  modelled  upon  the  usufruct  of  the  Roman  law,  and  is  bj
Stair  and  Erskine  classed  with  personal  servitudes.

Like  the  usufruct  of  the  o\di  jus  civile^  liferent  is  personal  to  the  liferents,
and  although  the  liferenter  be  infeft^  he  cannot  so  transmit  his  right  ai  to
infeft  his  assignee.  The  assignee  of  a  liferent  cannot  consequently  aoqoirei
complete  real  right,  although  he  may  get  what  is  practically  equivalent  tl
it,  either  by  insisting  on  actual  possession,  or  by  giving  notice  of  his  rij^
to  the  tenants  of  the  lands.

Speaking  generally,  and  in  the  absence  of  special  provision  to  the  contiaiyt
a  right  of  liferent  excepts  coal,  lime,  quarries,  minerals,  etc.,  although  thM
are  by  the  law  of  Scotland  considered  to  be  part  or  parcel  of  the  land  ;  uH
the  fiar  (i,e.  dominus  or  reversioner)  may  enter  and  work  them,  paying  «B^
face  damage,  provided  he  do  no  novel  injury  to  the  am/eniiy  of  the  liferentert
possessioiL  The  fiai*  may  also  cut  and  sell  the  timber,  so  as  not  to  inJQi*
the  amenity.

From  what  is  said  above,  it  is  evident  that  there  is  room  for  a  cktf
distinction  between  such  rights  as  ususfnictus  and  liferent  in  the  BoDfB
and  Scotch  law  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  various  life  estates  known  to  tbe


Rights  in  Rem  distinguished  by  their  Duration,  829

logjiiBh  law  on  the  other.  It  foUows  that  those  who  class  the  former  rights  Lect.  L
liA  servitudes  are  not  more  unphilosophical  than  those  who  class  them  ^  y  '
irith'iights  of  property.  The  distinction  between  property  and  servitude  is,
indeed,  arbitrsoy,  as  the  author  seems  to  admit ;  and  it  may  be  questioned
irbether  any  intelligible  ground  of  distinction  exists,  imless  we  say  that
jioperty  is  the  residuary  right  under  burden  of  the  servitude.  And  this
i%  I  believe,  the  roiva  of  the  distinction  as  understood  by  the  Roman  lawyers,
^odiape  it  may  be  added  that  to  constitute  dominium  as  opposed  to  seriHtus,
the  residuary  right  must  be  of  a  description  to  which  some  present  enjoyment
h  generally  incident — R.  C.


LECTUEE  LI.

*

RIGHTS  IN  REM  DISTINGUISHED  IN  RESPECT  OF  DURATION.

I  HAVE  considered  such  distinctions  between  primary  jura  in Lect.  Ll
rm  as  are  founded  on  differences  between  the  degrees  wherein ^"^
the  entitled  persons  may  use  or  deal  with  the  subjects.

But  primary  rights  of  the  class  are  also  distinguishable  by  Primary
dilEsrences  between  the  quantities  of  time  during  which  they  ^^^ '
Oe  calculated  to  last And  whatever  be  the  quantity  of  time  Rights  in
Aoiiig  which  it  is  calculated  to  last,  or  whatever  be  the  extent  ^^^P^^^^-
tf  its  duration,  a  primary  right  of  the  class  may  be  present  or
hbae ;  or,  in  other  words,  may  be  vested  or  contingent. And
^it  be  present  or  vested,  it  may  be  coupled  with  a  right  in  the
Jarty  to  present  enjoyment  or  exercise,  or  the  right  of  the  party
h)  enjoy  or  exercise  may  be  presently  suspended  or  postponed.
^e person,  for  example,  may  have  an estate for  life  with
^mainder  in  fee  to  another ;  in  which  case,  the  latter  has  a
K^esent  or  vested  right,  but  has  no  right  to  present  enjojrment,
is  right  to  the  enjojrment  of  the  subject  being  suspended  by
ke  pendency  of  the  right  in  the  first  taker.

From  distinctions  founded  on  differences  between  the  extents
F  user,  I  shall  proceed  to  the  distinctions  which  I  have  now
Qggested :  namely,  the  distinctions  which  are  founded  on
ifferences  between  the  durations  of  rights ;  between  present  or
ested  rights,  and  future  or  contingent  rights ;  and  between  such
lesent  rights  as  are  coupled  with  a  right  to  present  enjoyment,
ad  such  present  rights  as  are  coupled  with  a  right  to  enjojrment
>  commence  at  a  future  time.

In  treating  of  rights  in  respect  of  their  different  durations,  of  such
shall  follow  the  method  which  I  observed  when  treating  of  ^}^^-

•  1 •  I* ^ fn*  fl  • t tionsbe-

tghts  m  respect  of  the  different  powers  of  user  respectively  tween

onexed  to  tiiem :  that  is  to  say,  /  shall  assume  that  they  are  ^^ll^^

resent  or  vested.  ed  on  dif •
VOL.  n. Y


830


Lect.  LI

^ . '

ferencea
between
their  dura-
tions.

Such  dis-
tinctions
insepar-
ably

implicated
with
modes  of
acquisi-
tion, or
Titles.


Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

Before  I  proceed  to  the  distinctions  between  rights  whi
founded  on  diflferences  between  their  durations,  I  must  r
that  these  distinctions  are  inseparably  connected  with  i
which  I  shall  discuss  in  future  lectures:  namely,  the  "s
modes  or  titles  by  which  jura  in  rem  are  respectively  ac
and  lost ;  or  the  various  facts  or  events  (or  the  various
whereon  rights  of  the  class  respectively  begin  and  end.
example :  before  we  can  understand  exactly  what  is  m«
a  right  of  unlimited  duration,  we  must  know  the  nati
descent  or  of  succession  ah  intestato.  And  before  we  can
the  nature  of  absolute  property  (or  of  property  unlimi
duration,  and  alienable  from  those  who  without  alienation
succeed  on  the  death  of  the  owner),  we  must  know  the  \
modes  by  which  the  right  is  alienable,  either  voluntai
involuntarily :  that  is  to  say,  with  the  free  consent  of  the
(as  in  the  case  of  a  sale  or  gift),  or  in  the  owner's  despite
the  case  of  his  bankruptcy,  or  of  forfeiture  for  a  crime
apprehend  that  any  event  of  whatever  nature  is  called  an
ation,  which  carries  the  right  over  to  another  person  thi
owner  or  the  persons  who  are  appointed  by  the  law  to  s
in  case  no  alienation  takes  place :  If  the  alienation  take
by  the  free  consent  of  the  owner,  it  may  be  called  vol
alienation ;  if  in  the  owner's  despite,  involuntary.)

The  connection  between  the  consideration  of  rights  in  i
of  their  duration,  and  the  consideration  of  the  titles  or  me
which  they  are  acquired,  is  so  intimate,  that  it  has  been  pr
by  some  writers  to  consider  the  duration  of  rights  und
several  modes  by  which  they  are  acquired.  Among  tl
Mr.  Humphreys,  in  his  Outline  of  a  plan  for  codifying  tl
of  real  property.

Much  of  what  I  shall  utter,  in  regard  to  the  distil
between  rights  which  are  founded  on  their  various  dur
wiU  therefore  refer  to  the  modes  or  titles  by  which  righ
respectively  acquired  and  lost.  And  such  is  the  intimat
nection  between  the  various  departments  of  every  legal  s;
that  such  reference  forward  to  matter  yet  unexplained,
inconvenience  which  cannot  be  avoided  by  any  expositor  <
although  by  long  and  assiduous  reflection  it  might  be  consid
reduced.


%


Rights  Of such distinctions  between rights as are foimdi

'A A

in"resp?ct  diflferences between  their  respective  durations,  the  leadi

of  duration  principal  one  is  this :  that  some  are  rights  of  unlimited  dui


Righis  in  Rem  distinguished  by  their  Duration.  8  3 1

ilst  others  are  rights  of  limited  duration ;  a  right  of  limited Lect^I
ration  being  either  of  a  duration  definite  as  well  as  limited,  ^re,  Of
being  of  a  duration  which,  though  limited,  is  not  susceptible  Hmited
exact  circumscription. For  example :  An  estate  in  fee-simple,  of  dura- '
absolute  property  in  a  personal  chattel,  is  a  right  of  unlimited  J?°^.  ^
nation. Property  for  the  life  of  the  owner,  or  for  the  life  of  but  not
fither,  is  a  right  of  limited  but  indefinite  duration. Property  o^^fj^fi.
t  a  given  number  of  years  is  a  right  of  a  duration  limited  and  nite  dura-
fined.  ^^°-

It  is  obvious  to  remark,  that,  in  respect  of  the  party  who
toally  bears  the  right,  a  right  cannot  be  a  right  of  unlimited
nation.  In  r^ard  to  the  party  who  actually  bears  the  right,
IB  right  must  cease  on  his  death,  if  it  cease  not  sooner.

By  a  right  of  unlimited  duration,  we  must  therefore  mean.  Right  of
flight  which  may  devolve  from  the  party  entitled  through  a  ^u^^^^
of  successors  of  a  given  character  or  characters,^  which
possibly  last  for  ever :  meaning  by  a  series  of  successors
may  possibly  last  for  ever,  a  series  of  successors  to  the
luance  of  which  there  is  no  certain  and  assignable  limit.
the  extinction  of  the  series  of  successors,  by  the  annihilation
the subject  of  the  right,  or  by  various  other  intervening
^encies,  the  right  may  cease. But  there  is  no  certain  and
ible  event  (or  no  certain  and  assignable  event  imported  by
right  itself)  on  which  the  right  must  necessarily  determine.
For  example :  An  estate  in  fee  simple,  or  an  estate  in  fee
may  devolve from  the  actual  owner,  or  from  the  party
ly  bearing  the  right,  through  a  series  of  heirs  which  may
dbly  last  for  ever :  that  is  to  say,  through  a  series  of  heirs  to
continuance  of  which  there  is no known  and assignable
idary.

As  I  have  already  remarked,  the  nature  of  a  right  of  un-
duration  cannot  be  imderstood  completely,  without  a
idaiowledge  of  the  nature  of  descent  or  of  succession  db  intestato.
I  order  to  the  existence  of  a  right  of  unlimited  duration,  it
tiM  be  capable  of  devolving  ai  intestato  from  the  party  actually
ttitled,  through  an  infinite  series  of  successors,  each  of  whom
••y  take  by  descent ;  the  first  taking  by  descent  from  the  party
sbially  entitled ;  the  second  taking  by  descent  from  the  first ;
id  so  on  in  injinitum.

••  More  accurately,  I  think,  a  series  titled. E.g. A  is  entitled  for  life,  re-

•neceaaors,  which  may  possibly  last  for  mainder  to  the  heirs  of  his  testator. I

*>%  pointed  out  by  a  gefiercU  description  understand  the  author  to  call  A's  right

^^Bmrng  by  way  of  descent  (explanation  a  *  right  of  limited  duration. ' — R.  C.
this  tenn  postponed)  to  (he  party  en-


832  Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

Lect.  LI  I  say  it  must  be  capable  of  devolving  in  the  manner  whid

'  '  I  have  now  described  through  a  series  of  successors  which  maj
endure  for  ever.  For  assuming  that  the  right  be  alienable  fion
that  series  of  possible  successors,  either  by  the  party  actuallj
bearing  it,  or  by  everj^  of  any  in  that  series  of  possible  succes8(n^
the  right  itself  would  cease  on  an  actual  alienation,  and  a  nei
right  over  the  subject  would  begin  in  the  alienee.

I  think,  then,  that  a  right  of  unlimited  duration  may  bi
defined  in  the  following  manner :  It  is  a  right  for  the  life  of  thi
party  actually  entitled,  and  capable  of  devolving  ab  int/MtM
through  a  series  of  successors  which  may  continue  infinitdyi
meaning  by  infinite,  infinitely,  and  infinitude,  all  that  we  cav
ever  mean  by  those  expressions :  namely,  the  absence  or  n^atifli
of  any  end  or  limit  which  it  is  possible  to  assign.

The  idea  of  a  right  of  unlimited  duration  is  therefore  m
inseparably  connected  with  the  notion  of  descent  (or  with  tin
notion  of  succession  or  devolution  ab  itUestato),  that  it  is  scaro^
possible  to  explain  the  former  without  explaining  the  latter.

Sir William Blackstone*s notion  of  a right  of  unlimitrf
duration accords  with that  which  I  have now  stated. (SeB
vol.  ii.  chap,  vii.)
Right  of  By  a  right  of  lunited  duration,  I  mean  a  rijOfht  which  caimoti

duration, continue  beyond  the  happening  of  a  certain  and  assignable  fad,
whether  the  duration  of  the  right  be  definite  or  indefinite.

In  the  case  of  a  right  of  unlimited  duration,  there  is  i»
certain  and  assignable  limit  beyond  which  it  cannot  endure.  Ii
the  case  of  a  right  of  limited  duration,  there  is  a  certain  aal
assignable  limit  beyond  which  it  cannot  endure :  although  thi
precise  time  at  which  the  event  which  constitutes  that  assignaUa
limit  may  happen  may  not  be  capable  of  determination.

In  the  case,  for  example,  of  a  right  for  a  given  number  rf
years,  the  right  cannot  endure  beyond  the  lapse  of  the  givfli
period. And  in  the  case  of  property  for  the  life  of  the  actd
owner,  or  for  the  life  of  another  person,  it  must  determine  oa
the  death  of  the  owner,  or  on  the  death  of  the  other  person,
though  the  time  of  that  death  is  not  of  itself  certain.
A  right  of A  right  of  unlimited  duratioa(as  I  understand  the  expression)
unlimited fg  ^ot  of  necessity  alienable  by  the  party  actually  bearing  %
does  not from  the  possible  series  of  successors  ah  intestato. For  example-
iiecessanly  According  to  the  older  English  Law,  the  tenant  in  fee  simpte ,
alien- could  not  alien  (even  with  the  consent  of  his  feudal  superior)
the  party '^^'i^^out  the  Consent  of  the  party  who  was  then  his  apparent  or  j
actually presumptive  heir. And  the  case  seems  to  have  been  the  saiae  !


Rights  in  Rem  distinguished  by  their  Duration.  833

the  legal  systems  which  obtained  through  diflferent  parts Lect.  LI
rope  under  the  general  name  of  the  feudal  system. It  is  bearine
take  to  suppose  that  by  the  feudal  law  the  restrictions  on  the  right
tion  were  designed  for  the  advantage  of  the  feudal  superior
They  appear,  from  the  fact  I  have  just  stated,  to  have

•  had  in  view  also  the  advantage  of  the  person  appointed
ce&L  Analogously,  in  the  Soman  Law,  domestic  heirs,  as
vere  termed,  had  a  right  against  the  actually  entitled  party,
lould  not  alien  from  them,  or  could  do  so  only  in  a  certain
BT.  The  children  were  said  for  this  reason  to  be  quodamvwdo
i,  vivo  quoque  parenti  (I  mean  by  the  old  Eoman  Law,  as
sam  from  Gains,  and  from  the  Pandects).  And  in  the
:  versions  of  the  Eoman  law  books,  the  heirs  who  were
d  »ui  et  necessarii,  went  by  the  name  of  avrokXrjpovo^oi.
seem  to  have  taken  not  merely  by  descent  from  the  party
ally  entitled,  he  having  a  complete  power  of  diverting  the
from  them,  but  rather  as  being  in  a  manner  themselves
id  jointly  with  him. And,  in  English  law,  until  tenants

were  able  to  alien  from  the  heirs  in  tail  by  fine  or  recovery,
tate  tail  was  not  alienable  from  any  of  the  series  of  possible
sors  on  whom  by  the  creator  of  the  estate  it  was  destined
olve.

have  made  these  remarks  because  property  of  unlimited
on,  and  absolute  property  (or  property  with  a  power  of
ig  from  the  future  successors  ab  intestato)  seem  to  be  often
inded.  Many  writers  on  law  suppose  this  power  to  be  of
sence  of  a  right  of  unlimited  duration.  But  I  conceive
t  is  not  so,  although  it  is  of  the  essence  of  dominium  in
urrowest  sense,  or  of  property  pre-eminently  so  called,
s  I  shall  endeavour  to  shew  immediately,  absolute  property
ays  accompanied  with  such  a  power  of  aliening.  But  pro-
of unlimited  duration  (as  an  estate  in  fee  simple  or  an
in  tail)  is  not  of  necessity  absolute.

ut  whenever  a  right  of  unlimited  duration  is  not  alienable
B  party  at  present  entitled  from  the  series  of  possible  suc-
s  ah  intestato,  the  right  of  the  party  actually  entitled  is  in
an  estate  for  life,
or  example:  If  a  tenant  in  tail  had  never  acquired  the

•  of  aliening,  by  the  introduction  of  fines  and  recoveries,
state  of  a  tenant  in  tail  would  in  fact  liave  been  nothing

than  an  estate  for  life.  Each  of  the  series  of  successors
I  have  taken  only  an  estate  for  life.  (By  the  introduction
les  and  recoveries,  an  estate tail  has  become,  to every


834


Lbct.  LI


Nor  is
alienabil-
ity con-
fined  to
rights  of
unlimited
duration.


Restric-
tions on
alienation
when
allowed  in
practice.


Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

practical  intent  or  purpose,  tantamount  to  an  estate  in  fee.  The
only  difiference  is,  that  the  tenant  cannot  alien  except  by  thoge
peculiar  modes.)

In  confirmation  of  this  view  of  the  matter,  it  may  be  observed
that  the  power  of  aliening  from  those  who  in  default  of  such
alienation  would  take,  is  not  peculiarly  attached  to  rights  of
unlimited  duration  :  it  may  reside  in  the  party  invested  with  t
right  of  limited  duration,  in  a  tenant  'per  avJtre  vie,  or  even  t
tenant  for  years.  The  party  entitled  may  die  before  the  expia-
tion of  his  estate :  the  residue  of  the  estate  must  then  in  defank
of  alienation  go  over  to  his  own  successors  as  appointed  by  the
law ;  consequently  he  may  have  a  power  of  aliening  it  fran
those  successors.  The  power  of  aliening,  therefore,  will  not
serve  to  distinguish  rights  of  unlimited  from  rights  of  limited
duration.^^

But  though  alienability  from  the  successors  ab  intestate  is
not  rigorously  of  the  essence  of  a  right  of  unlimited  duration,  it
is  scarcely  possible  to  conceive  that,  in  any  society,  all  or  most
rights  in  rem  should  be  unalienable.  If  most  rights  of  property
were  unalienable,  all  commerce  would  be  at  an  end.  In  &et
and  practice,  therefore,  in  every  system  it  is  only  in  compan-
tively  few  cases  that  such  rights  are  unalienable ;  and  evea
where  such  restrictions  on  alienation  are  permitted,  the  power
of  tying  up,  as  it  is  called,  is  generally  confined  within  vay
narrow  limits.

These  cases  are  of  two  kinds :

1st.  Those  in  which  he  is  prohibited  from  aliening  the  veiy
right,  or  the  res  singula,  which  is  the  subject  of  the  right:  tJj.
The  English  tenant  in  fee,  according  to  the  old  law.^


*^  But  I  must  observe  that  in  English
law,  in  rights  of  (so-called)  limited  aura-
tion,  the  party  entitled  cannot  alienate
so  as  to  defeat  the  reversioners  or  substi-
tiUes.  And  although  it  is  possible  to
conceive  a  system  in  which  this  should
be  otherwise,  it  is  not  likely  to  be  the
case  in  any ;  because  if  the  person  en-
titled coula  alienate  from  the  substitutes,
lawyers  would  probably  find  means
whereby  he  could  convey  to  himself  and
his  own  heirs  for  ever.  He  would,  there-
fore, have  an  estate  of  unlimited  dura-
tion, contra  hypothesin.  — R.  C.

^  Or  the  heir  in  possession  of  a
Scotch  estate,  held  under  the  fetters
of  a  strict  entail  dated  before  1848.
I  may  here  observe  that  the  form  of
a  Scotch  strict  entail  is  very  instructive
as  to  the  real  nature  of  the  restraints
upon  alienability  which,  permitted  to  a


modified  degree  in  English  law,  are,  bf
a  curious  caprice  of  that  law,  conceiTw
to  be  bound  up  with  estates  of  (i^
called)  limited  duration.

The  theory  of  the  Scotch  law  is  Am:
All  rights  of  property  in  heritable  sab*
jects  (which  are  commonly  immovaWieA
are  generally  transmissible  aocordin^  to
an  order  of  succession,  either  detennnua
by  private  disposition,  or  by  the  geneiu
law  of  inheritance  :  and  it  is  of  the  •■
sence  of  property  that  the  peison  pi**
sently  entitled  may  dispone  (grant  awij)
the  property,  not  oidyfrom  kimtdf,  W
from  cul  the  mccessors  according  to  6*
existing  destination,  in  favour  of  tl|
person  and  any  order  of  sncceasors  te
pleases,  whether  described  by  way  otdt
scent  from  the  last  taker  (heirs -geMR^
heirs  of  the  body,  etc.),  or  by  sabititB*
tion  of  new  persons  and  series.


Rights  in  Rem  distinguished  by  their  Duration.  835

2nd.  Cases  in  which  he  is  prevented  from  aliening  from  his Leot.  LI
snccessoTS  the  universma,  or  some  portion  of  the  universum,  of
tlie  transmissible  rights  which  may  happen  to  reside  in  him  at
lus  death* E,g,  The  older  Boman  law;  the  Boman  law  as
modified  by  the  legUima  portio  ;  the  French  law  of  succession.^

Where  he  is  prohibited  from  aliening  from  his  successors
the  universum  of  the  rights  which  may  happen  to  reside  in  him
it  his  death,  he  is  permitted  to  alien  any  of  the  single  rights  of
which  that  complex  and  fluctuating  whole,  constituting  the  uni-
mnum  of  his  rights,  may  happen  at  any  time  to  consist  The
wb/Ae  or  any  part  of  them  is  also  liable  for  his  debts.  And  it
is  only  with  reference  to  his  rights  as  considered  singly  or  par-
tumlarly,  that  he  can  be  said  to  have  a  right  of  absolute  property.

LimitaiioTis  to  right  of  alienation  to  prevent  fravd  on  sue-
^tuors.

The  party  may  destroy,  spend,  or  consume,  etc. :  But  may
iot  give,  except  subject  to  certain  limitations.  Or  if  the  gift
ht  fraudulent,  it  is  prohibited.

In  what  sense  property  in  a  personal  chattel  is  a  right  of  un-
limited duration.

It  may  devolve  aib  intestato  through  a  series  of  administrators
Jspresenting  the  owner.

But  it  is  not  likely  that  it  should :  Because  it  forms  a  part
rf  the  university  of  his  rights,  and  is  therefore  likely  to  be
diened  for  debts,  etc.

Besides,  the  universum  being  divisible  amongst  next  of  kin,
10  one  right  is  likely  to  continue  in  the  same  line  of  takers.

It  would  seem  that  the  property  is  rather  absolute  (i.c.  alien-
ble  from  all  possible  successors)  than  of  unlimited  duration.

I  shall  now  attempt  to  explain  the  notion  of  absolute  pro-  Absolute
•erty,  or  dominium  pre-eminently  so  called.  ^^fi^!i^

According  to  the  definition  of  the  Boman  lawyers,  of  the
^rench  Code,  of  Blackstone,  and  others,  in  fact  by  most  writers,
t  means  a  right  indefinite  in  user,  unlimited  in  duration  (that

But  by  a  set  of  conditions,  ingeniously  contingency,  and  consequently  the  fetters
fffind,  and  by  the  aid  of  a  declaratory  of  a  Scotch  deed  of  tailzie  very  compend-
litate  (1685),  c.  22,  proprietors  were  iously  express  most  of  the  real  points
nabled  to  taihie  their  lanas,  that  is,  to  of  difference  between  the  modes  of  pro-
like a  destination  of  their  estates  so  as  perty  distinguished  in  the  law  of  Eng-
fccUuJly  to  fetter  the  power  of  aliena-  land  by  the  terms  '  estate  for  life '  and
ion  of  future  proprietors.  The  general  'estate  of  inheritance.* — R.  C.
■inciple  of  the  law  being  that  the  right  "  And  the  Scotch  law  of  succession
f  property  includes  power  of  alienation,  in  moveables  (that  is,  administrable  pro-
h»  fetters  are  most  ingjeniously  devised  perty)  where  the  rights  of  the  wife  and
o  defeat  this  principle  in  every  possible  children  have  not  b^n  renounced. — R.C.


836


Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.


Lect.  LI


Power  of
alienation
from  every
possible
successor  is
of  the
essence  of
absolate
property.


Absolute
property
in  land
distin-
Led


trom  our
estate  in
fee  simple.


And  from
the  Roman
etnphy-
teum's.


<^


is,  capable  of  going  over  to  a  series  of  successors  ab  intestaio
which  may  possibly  last  for  ever),  and  alienable  by  the  actual
owner  from  every  successor  who  in  default  of  alienation  by  him
might  take  the  right.

It  is  certain  that  the  power  of  alienation  is  of  the  essence
of  the  Roman  property  or  dominium.  It  is  also  of  the  essence
of  absolute  property  as  conceived  by  Sir  William  Blackstone.^

I  say  that  property  pre-eminently  so  called  is  alienable  by
the  actual  owner  from  every  successor  who  in  default  of  such
alienation  might  take  the  subject.  It  therefore  implies  moie
than  the  power  of  aliening  from  his  own  successors  ab  intestato.
For  even  where  a  right  is  a  right  of  unlimited  duration,  another
right  may  be  expectant  upon  it.  This,  for  example,  is  the  case
wherever  a  mesne  lord  of  the  fee  is  interposed  between  the
tenant  in  fee  and  the  king ;  the  estate  of  the  tenant  in  fee  might
devolve  on  his  heirs  general  ad  infinitum^  but  he  could  not,  by  any
alienation  from  his  own  heirs,  aflfect  the  interest  of  the  lord  of
the  fee.

Consequently,  in  English  law,  there  is  no  property  m  land
which  comes  up  to  the  idea  of  absolute  property.

We  may  conceive  generally  that,  although  the  right  of  the
present  owner  be  a  right  of  unlimited  duration,  any  number  of
rights  of  limited  or  unlimited  duration  may  intervene  between
it  and  the  sovereign  or  state  as  lUtimus  Jueres,  or  the  party  who
may  occupy  the  right  on  failure  of  all  entitled  parties  as  bemg
res  nulliics.  For,  in  dififerent  systems  of  law,  the  provisions  as
to  the  party  who  is  to  take  on  the  expiring  of  all  preceding
rights,  may  of  course  differ.  It  is  generally  the  sovereign  or
state  (the  fisc),  and  in  England,  the  king,  who  for  these  purposes
may  be  considered  as  representing  the  state.  But,  instead  of
itself  as^iming  the  right,  the  state  might  allow  it  to  go  to  the
first  person  who  might  choose  to  occupy  it

Prpj^rly  speaking,  then,  there  is  not  in  the  law  of  England
any  absolute  property  in  land,  in  case  there  be  any  mesne  lord
interposed  between  the  tenant  and  the  king.  For,  there  is  a
reversion  in  the  mesne  lord,  which  the  tenant  cannot  defeat,
though  he  may  alien  from  his  own  heirs.

And  this  explains  what  for  a  long  time  puzzled  me :  the
nature  of  the  Eoman  emphyteusis.  Our  tenant  in  fee,  where
there  is  a  mesne  lord  interposed  between  the  tenant  and  the
king,  has  an  interest  precisely  like  that  of  the  tenant  of  the
emphyteusis^  that  is,  a  lease  to  a  man  and  his  heirs  general,  with

^  Blackstone,  vol.  ii.  447.


Rights  of  Limited  Duration,  837

'"^^Tsion  to  the  lessor  in  case  those  heirs  should  fail,  or  the Lect.  LI

^t  reserved  should  not  be  paid :  namely,  not  only  in  case  of

^ure  of  the  heirs  of  the  party  himself,  but  of  failure  of  the

sirs  of  any  party  to  whom  he  might  assign  the  emphyteiLsis.

t  the  same  manner,  an  estate  in  fee  simple  reverts  to  the  lord

the  fee,  on  failure  of  heirs  to  any  assignee  of  the  estate. The

0  rights  are  exactly  similar.  Neither  of  them,  therefore,  is
K)Iate  property  in  the  strict  sense.  Neither  imports  a  right
the  party  entitled  of  aliening  absolutely  from  all  those  who
y  possibly  take  the  right.  And  hence  it  must  have  been
t  the  right  of  a  party  in  an  emphyteusis  was  ranked  by  the
nan  lawyers  among  the  Jura  in  re  aliend :  because  there  is
larty  having  a  right  which  the  emphyteuta  cannot  possibly
eat  or  touch,  and  out  of  which  his  own  right  is,  as  it  were,
ired-

In  the  case  of  property  in  a  personal  chattel,  the  above
»)ning  does  not  apply.  There  is  no  party  interposed  be-
en the  owner  and  the  vltimus  hceres,  whoever  that  may  be.

I have  hitherto assimied that  to constitute  property  or  Unlimited

liniuvi  pre-eminently  so  called,  the  right  of  the  party  actually  ^hou^h"'

itled  must  be  a  right  of  unlimited  duration,  and  in  all  estab-  coupled

ed  systems  of  law,  that  is  actually  the  case. If  the  party  i^^^^'

not  alien,  the  right  would  go  over  to  a  series  of  successors  pertyinall

ini€8tato,  which  might  possibly  endure  for  ever. But  it  is  ushedsys-

sible  to  conceive,  that  the  state  might  grant  out  property  in  tems,  is

d  for  life  or  years,  with  immediate  return  to  the  state  itself,  ^^ly  jn/

1  might  grant  to  the  party  to  whom  it  gave  this  right  of  volved  in
ited  duration,  a  power  of  user,  as  unlimited  as  is  possessed

the  owner  of  personal  chattels. We  might  then  say  that
party  had  property  or  absolute  dominion  in  the^^ubject,
withstanding  the  limited  duration  of  his  right. ^4^^  ^  \


RigMs  of  Limited  Duration,


V  A  right  which  cannot  continue  beyond  a  given  event
It  will  certainly  happen,  although  the  duration  of  the  right
ly  not  itself  be  susceptible  of  exact  circumscription.

2°  A  right  to  last  through  a  period  which  must  cease  on
I  happening  of  a  certain  event,  although  the  time  at  which
it  event  may  happen  cannot  be  determined.

Rights  of  limited  duration,  are  rights  of  measured  or  exactly

fined  duration,  or  rights  of  unmeasured  duration : meaning

measured,  measured  according  to  the  legal  measure  of  time.


838  Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

Lect.  LI let  it  be  what  it  may :  t,g,  so  many  revolutions  of  the  earf^
round  the  sun,  or  of  the  earth  on  its  own  axis,  etc

[Cannot  go  into  metaphysical  difficulties  about  time,  l^  BecanB6
in  different  systems  of  law,  that  which  constitutes  the  commc^
measure  of  time  (or  rather,  perhaps,  that  which  constitutes  time  ifc-
self),  is  determined  very  diffierently ;  2*.  Because  I  have  scarcely  %
tincture  of  mathematical  or  physical  science.]

\E.g.  An  estate  for  life :  an  estate  for  years.]

In  case  of  a  right  of  limited  duration,  succession  is  just  as
possible  as  in  a  right  of  unlimited  duration :  e.g. :  in  case  of
estate  for  years,  or  per  autre  via  But  here,  it  cannot  endure
beyond  the  limited  period.

Alienability  is  not  less  incident  to  rights  of  limited,  than
to  rights  of  unlimited  duration.

In  case  the  right  be  a  right  of  property,  power  of  user  is
also  indefinite.  But  it  never  can  extend  to  the  destruction  of
the  subject,  or  (what  is  the  same  thing)  to  depriving  it  of  aD
the  properties  which  make  it  a  fit  subject  for  human  enjoyment
or  use.  For  the  expectant  on  the  rights  of  limited  duration,
there  is  necessary  (or  almost  necessary)  a  right  of  [conservation]*
or  (what  comes  to  the  same  thing)  a  right  qtuisi  in  the  sovereign
or  state.  But  where  there  is  merely  a  reverter  to  the  state,  the
power  of  user  may  extend  to  destruction.


Note. — I  confess  that  I  have  had  some  difficulty  in  comprehending  tie
nature  and  purport  of  the  distinction  laid  down  by  the  author  in  the  abo«
Lecture,  but  having,  as  I  think,  after  some  trouble,  discovered  the  nUioMk
of  it,  I  will  state  what  appears  to  me  the  reason  of  the  author's  taking  60
much  pains  to  examine  a  distinction  whose  net  consequences  appear  ao
limited.

In  English  law,  the  distinction  between  rights  of  property  conceived  as
limited  in  point  of  duration,  and  those  conceived  as  unlimited  in  point  01
duration,  is  of  great  practical  importance.  The  right  of  (so-called)  unlimited
duration  carries  with  it  the  right  of  alienation  by  the  person  entitled,  not
only  from  heirs  (whether  general  or  of  a  particular  class),  but  also  fipom  ill
persons  having  any  kind  of  spes  successionis  by  way  of  remainder  or  snWi-
tution  ;  whereas  the  person  entitled  to  an  estate  of  (so-caUed)  limitod
duration,  can  alienate  only  from  himself  and  those  who  would  be  entitiw
by  descent  from  him,  and  not  from  those  entitled  by  way  of  remainder  of
substitution.  A  further  consequence  of  the  distinction  arises  by  wiy «
corollary  to  the  other,  namely,  that  in  rights  of  the  first  class  the  power  d
user  by  the  person  entitled  is  more  extensive  than  that  in  rights  of  the  la^t
class,  inasmuch  as,  in  the  last  case,  the  proprietor  having  it  in  hia  power


•*  ; or, prevention of waste. See Blackstone  uses  the  expression,  *pi«teB-
Blackstone,  voL iii. chap. xiv. The tive  redress.*— A  ^.
word  is  illegible  in  the  original  MS.


Jus  in  Re  Aliend.  839

liaqipoint  altogether  the  hopes  of  successors,  cannot  be  supposed  to Lect.  LI
ire  them  by  wcuU  (or  partial  destruction  of  the  subject).
In  consequence  of  its  importance  in  English  law,  the  author  is  led  to
and  examine  this  distinction. The  net  result  is  this:  1.  The  dis-
ion  (such  as  it  is)  is  neither  adequately  nor  appropriately  described
le  expressions  *  rights  of  unlimited  duration '  and  *  rights  of  limited
ion.' The  distinction  (such  as  it  is)  really  being,  between  rights
!€  of  devolving  hy  way  of  descent  (a  term  of  which  the  full  definition
be  reserved  for  the  subject  J  of  succession  cU>  intestato)  to  a  series  of  ,
ors  which  may  last  indefinitely,  and  rights  not  capable  of  transmission
cent  to  such  a  series. 2.  The  power  of  alienation  from  substitutes,
le  consequent  large  right  of  user  which,  in  English  law,  are  incident
bts  of  (so-called)  unlimited  duration,  are  neither  of  them  necessary
nts  of  that  right.

le  distinction  therefore,  &om  its  grave  consequences  in  the  English
iquires  notice.  But,  in  the  view  of  general  jurisprudence,  it  is  not
mportant. — It  C.


LECTUEE  LII.

ON  THE  JURA  IN  RE  ALIENA  OF  THE  KOMAN  LAW.

y last Lecture,  I considered such  distinctions between  Lect.  LII

xy  jura  in  rem  as  are  founded  on  diflferences  between  their ^'^^' '

jtive  durations :  or,  in  other  words,  between  the  quantities

le  during  which  they  are  respectively  calculated  to  last.

Lccording  to  the  purpose  which  I  then  announced,  I  should

proceed  to  the  distinction  between  present  or  vested  rights,

uture  or  contingent  rights;  including  the  distinction  be-

i  such  present  rights  as  are  coupled  with  a  right  to  present

ment  or  exercise,  and  such  present  rights  as  are  not  coupled

a  right  to  present  enjoyment  or  exercise.

^ut  before  I  proceed  to  the  distinction  between  vested  and  The  dis-

ngent  rights,  I will  endeavour to explain  a  distinction,  ^"J^g^

1,  I  think,  may  be  considered  conveniently  at  the  present  Jus  in  re

of  my  Course :  namely,  the  distinction  made  by  the  Eoman  ^^^  in

jrs,  and  by  the  modem  expositors  of  the  Eoman  Law,  be-  r^  aiiend  :

1  dominion  strictly  so  called  {property  pre-eminently  so  ^{^re^^^^

I,  in  re  potestas,  or  jiis  in  re  proprid),  and  that  class  of  rights  aiiend.

1  they  oppose  to  dominion  strictly  so  called  (or  to  jus  in  re

id)  by  the  name  of  jura  in  re  aiiend,  jura  in  re,  or  (more

y  and  elliptically  still),  jura.^

]  advert  to  this  distinction  between  jics  in  re  proprid  and

n  re  aiiend,  for  two  reasons. 1st.  The  explanation  of  this

action  may  tend  to  illustrate  the  two  capital  and  insepar-

••  Thibaut,  Versuche^  vol.  ii.  pp.  84,  91. Tables  I.  II.,  post.


840  Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

Lect.  LII ably  connected  distinctions  with  which  my  recent  Lectures  have

^"'""' been particularly occupied : namely,  the distinction  between

rights  which  import  an  indefinite,  and  rights  which  import  a

definite  power  of  user  or  exclusion ;  and  the  distinction  between

rights  of  unlimited  duration  and  rights  of  limited  duration.

2ndly.  Without  an  idea  of  the  distinction  between  jim  i*
re  proprid  and  jus  in  re  aliend,  as  understood  by  the  Eoman
lawyers  and  the  modem  expositors  of  the  Soman  Law,  their
writings,  to  an  English  lawyer,  are  extremely  perplexing.

For  many  of  the  rights  in  rem  which  they  rank  with  /»w
in  re,  or  with  jura  in  re  aliend,  would  rather  be  esteemed  by  an
English  lawyer  modes  of  property  or  ownership  tiian  mere  frac-
tional rights  subtracted  from  property  in  another.  Such  (for
example)  is  the  case  (as  I  shall  shew  presently)  with  the
emphyteusis :  a  right  closely  analogous  to  an  estate  in  fee  simple,
and  from  which  (it  is  supposed  by  some),  the  various  systems  of
law,  commonly  styled  feudal,  took  their  origin.  Such  is  also
the  case  with  certain  rights,  which,  in  the  language  of  the  Eoman
law,  are  styled  serv^Uiuies :  but  which,  as  I  shewed  in  a  preced-
ing Lecture,  would  rather  be  deemed  by  us,  modes  of  property.
Such  is  also  the  case  with  the  right  in  rem  of  the  pledgee  or
mortgagee,  or  the  creditor  whose  right  in  persona^n  is  secured
by  a  pignus  or  hypotheca.

By  the  Roman  lawyers,  he  is  deemed  to  have  jus  in  n

aliend,  although the pledgor or mortgagor  was dominm  (ff

absolute proprietor  of  the  thing  pledged  or  mortgaged. But

according  to  the  law  of  England  (or,  at  least,  of  its  strict  lav,

as  contradistinguished  from  its  equity),  his  right  in  the  subject

of  the  pledge  or  mortgage  would  rather  fall  under  the  cat^oiy

of  property  or  ownership,  than  under  that  of  rights  over  subjects

owned  by  others.

Property  In  order  to  an  explanation  of  the  distinction  between  jus  »

nentlTso ^^  proprid  and  jv^  in  re  aliend,  I  must  briefly  revert  to  the

called,  ab- nature  (which  I  referred  to  in  my  last  Lecture) of  domiiuon

T^rty,  rfo^ strictly  so  called,  ipTO]^eTtj  pre-eminently  so  coiled,  absolute  domimc®

minium or  property,  or  the  dominion  (property  or  ownership)  which  is

jtcs  in  re the  least  restricted  or  limited. For  every  jus  in  re  aJiend  is  a

proprid.^^ fraction  or  constituent  portion  (residing  in  one  party)  of  absolute

dominion  or  property  residing  in  another  party.
lUspub-  And  in  order  that  I  may  explain  the  nature  of  absolute

thTlanrest  dominion  or  ownership,  or  of  jus  in  re  proprid,  I  must  briefly
sense  of advert  to  the  nature  of  res  pMicm,  or  of  that  right  (or  rather  01  ^

the  expres-
sion). ^  Thibaut,  Fersuche,  vol.  iL  p.  85  e<  seq.


Res  Publicae  et  Privatae.  841

bat  power)  which  the  state  possesses  over  all  things  within  its  Lect.  lii
ffitritoiy  or  jurisdiction.  ' ' '

It  is  manifest  that  the  state  (or  sovereign  government)  is  not
istiained  by  positive  law  from  dealing  with  all  things  within
3  territory  at  its  own  pleasure  or  discretion.  If  it  were,  it
ould  not  be  a  sovereign  government,  but  a  government  in  a
ate  of  subjection  to  a  government  truly  supreme.

Now  since  it  is  not  restrained  by  positive  law  from  dealing
its  own  pleasure  with  all  things  within  its  territory,  we  may
y  (for  the  sake  of  brevity,  and  because  established  language
mishes  us  with  no  better  expressions),  that  the  state  has  a
^TU  to  all  things  within  its  territory,  or  is  absolutely  or
Lthout  restriction  the  proprietor  or  dominies  thereof.  Strictly
leaking,  it  has  no  legal  right  to  any  thing,  or  is  not  the  legal
mer  or  proprietor  of  any  thing :  for  if  it  were,  its  own  subjects
Duld  be  subject  to  a  sovereign  which  conferred  that  legal  right,
id  imposed  upon  others  the  correlative  legal  duty.  When,
serefore,  I  say  that  it  has  a  right  to  all  things  within  its
iritory  (or  is  the  absolute  owner  of  all  things  within  its
rritory),  I  merely  mean  that  it  is  not  restrained  by  positive
w  from  using  or  dealing  with  them  as  it  may  please.

Consequently,  if  we  take  the  expression  res  ptMicce  with  the
rgest  meaning  which  it  will  bear,  all  things  within  the  territory
:  the  state  are  res  publiccc,  or  belong  to  the  state  (in  the  sense
X)ve  mentioned).

But  of  the  things  which  belong  to  the  state,  there  are  some  Bespuh-
hich  it  reserves  to  itself,  and  some  the  enjoyment  or  use  of  ^_^.
iiich  it  leaves  or  concedes  to  determinate  private  persons. To  rower
loee  which  it  reserves  to  itself,  the  term  res  puhlicce  is  commonly  an^f*
onfined : those,  the  enjoyment  or  use  of  which  it  leaves  or  2>rivatcc.
oncedes  to  determinate  private  persons,  are  commonly  called
«  privatae.

Of  res  pvblicce (taking  the  expression  with  the  narrower  classes  of
ense  to  which  I  have  now  adverted),  various  distinctions  might  'r^^ry^^icm

'  ° (m  the

)6  made.  narrower

For  there  are  some,  which,  without  leaving  or  conceding  the  senseo^the
ise  of  them  to  determinate  private  persons,  it  nevertheless
permits  its  subject  generally  to  use  or  deal  with  in  certain
limited  and  temporary  modes.  Such,  for  example,  are  public
■'ays,  public  rivers,  the  shores  of  the  sea  (in  so  far  as  they  are
oot  appropriated  by  private  persons),  the  sea  itself  (in  so  far  as
itfonns  a  part  of  the  territory  of  the  state),  and  so  on. Bes

^  Miihlenbruch,  vol.  i  p.  163.


842  Law:  Purposes  and  Subjects.

Lect.  LII  pvilicWy  the  use  of  which  the  state  thus  permits  to  all  its  subjects,

' ^"^ are  commonly  styled  res  communes :  though  the  term  is  sometimes

confined  to  certain  things,  of  which  the  subjects  generally  are

supposed  to  have  the  use  by  a  title  anterior  to  any  that  the  state

can  impart

This  last  notion  is  derived  from  the  confused  notions  of  a
certain  natural  law  and  jus  gentium,  which  gave  rights  inde-
pendently of  the  state,  and  superior  to  any  which  the  state  cotdd
impart.  It  is  obvious  that  in  so  far  as  these  rights  are  Ugd
rights,  they  must  emanate  from  the  state.  And  the  Boman
lawyers,  occasionally  speaking  more  precisely,  say  that  ra
communes  are  quodammodo  res  pvMicce.

Again :  Of  res  publicw  (or  of  the  things  which  the  state
reserves  to  itself),  there  are  some  which  it  reserves  to  itself  in  a
more  especial  manner,  and  some  which  it  concedes  to  public
persons  (individual  or  complex),  as  trustees  for  itself.  The
former  are  sometimes  styled  *  the  patrimony  of  the  state,*  or  the
'  domain  of  the  state,'  or  are  said  to  belong  to  the  Jisc.  Such,
for  example,  is  the  money  which  it  raises  by  taxes  on  its  subjects,
the  land  which  it  reserves  especially  for  its  own  peculiar  use,  or
the  res  privatce  which  revert  to  it  by  forfeiture  or  escheat  as
being  the  ultimate  hoeres  of  all  its  subjects.  Those  which  it
concedes  to  public  persons  as  trustees  for  itself,  are  styled  l)y
the  Roman  lawyers  res  universitatis :  things  being  in  the  patri-
mony of  corporate  bodies.  And,  they  were  so  called  (I  presume),
because  the  public  persons  to  whom  they  were  conceded,  were
commonly  complex  or  collegiate,  rather  than  individual  persons:
as,  for  example,  the  corporate  governments  of  cities.  But  the
term  res  universitatis  is  manifestly  inapplicable.  For  we  may
conceive  that  a  res  jfnMica  resides  in  a  public  person  who  is
individual  or  single.  And  every  corporate  body  is  not  public
Corporate  bodies  may  exist  for  purposes  not  public,  and  then  a
thing  belonging  to  them  is  resprivcUa  not  respublica.  In  giving,
therefore,  to  this  class  of  res  pvhlic(e  the  name  of  res  universU^u,
the  Boman  lawyers  took  the  name  of  one  species  and  extended
it  to  the  whole  genus.

It  is  manifest  that  the  distinctions  to  which  I  now  have
adverted,  blend  at  various  points.  For  example:  Of  the  res
publiccc  which  are  in  the  patrimony  of  the  state,  or  which  it
reserves  to  itself  in  a  more  especial  manner,  it  may  concede
some  to  private  persons  for  periods  of  shorter  or  longer  duration:
It  may  let,  for  instance,  a  part  of  its  domain  to  a  private  person
in  farm. And  in  these  cases,  the  things  would  seem  to  become,


/

Res  Publicae  et  Privatse.  843

luring  those  limited  periods,  res  privatce. In  these  cases,  how-  Lect.  LII
jver,  the  things  are  granted  out  to  private  persons,  rather  for ^"■^^ '
he  benefit  of  its  own  peculiar  patrimony,  than  for  the  advantage
f  the  private  grantees. Whereas  in  the  case  of  res  privatce,  the
lings  are  left  or  conceded  to  the  determinate  private  persons,
ther  for  their  own  advantage  than  for  that  of  the  state.

And  of  res  nmversitatis,  or  things  which  it  concedes  to  public
political  persons,  in  trust  for  itself,  some  will  naturally  fall
ier  the  species  of  res  puilicce,  which  are  styled  res  communes,
ib,  for  example,  is  the  case  with  a  road  or  river,  the  property
iirhich  resides  in  a  public  corporation,  but  which  it  holds  in
}t  to  permit  all  the  subjects  of  the  state  to  pass  and  repass  it.

One  class  of  things  which  occurs  in  the  Eoman  Law,  and
here  distinguished  from  res  publicce,  I  will  also  briefly  advert

namely,  res  divini  juris.  But  res  divini  juris  are  merely  a
18  of  res  puMicce.  They  are  things  specially  reserved  by  the
e  or  granted  in  trust  to  public  persons,  and  destined  to
;aiii  uses. The  opposing  them  to  res  pvhlicce  proceeds  from

logical  error  so  frequent  in  the  writings  of  lawyers :  namely,

co-ordinating  as  parts  or  members  of  one  homogeneous
tern,  various  classes  of  objects  which  are  derived  from  cross
isions.

Having  given  a  brief  statement  of  the  leading  distinctions
;ween  res  pvhlicce  (as  opposed  to  res  privatce),  1  now  return  to
privaice:  that  is  to  say,  things  of  which  the  state  is  the
dmate  owner,  but  the  use  or  enjoyment  of  which  it  leaves  or
Qcedes  to  determinate  private  persons,  rather  for  their  own
vantage,  than  for  the  immediate  benefit  of  its  own  patrimony.

With  regard  to  res  privatce  (as  thus  imderstood),  they  may
t  left  or  granted  to  private  persons  with  various  restrictions :
ith  various  restrictions  in  respect  of  user,  and  with  various
strictions  in  respect  of  time.

In  respect  of  user,  the  right  (or  series  of  rights),  which  is
"anted  by  the  state,  may  amoimt  to  a  mere  servitude  (or  a  right
>  use  the  thing  in  a  definite  manner),  or  to  property  (in  any  of
8  various  modes).  In  which  last  case,  the  property  may  be
arthened  with  a  servitude  (or  with  a  something  analogous  to  a
jrvitude)  reserved  by  the  state  to  itself.^

For  example :  we  may  conceive  that  the  state  may  grant  to  Quasi-ser-

Vitus  over
•  Communia  may  be  considered  as subjects  which  the  government  concedes
ibjects  reserved  by  the  sovereign,  but to  others  with  a  nght  of  total  exemp-
'er  which  he  permits  others  to  exercise tion  :  e.g,  :  taxation. — Hugo,  Enc.  lib.
rttin  strvUutes, Res  singularurrij  &c. ; ii.  p.  298. Marginal  note.


844


Lect.  LI  I

^ r '

a  thing,
reserved
by  the
state  to  it-
self.


Vitus  re-
served by
the  state
over  a  res
privcUa,


Absolute
property,
dominium
(s.  s.),  or
jus  in  re
proprid.


Lazu:  Purposes  and  Swbf^cU.

a  private  person  a  right  of  way,  or  a  right  of  common,  overland
in  its  own  patrimony.  On  which  supposition,  the  grantee  would
have  a  right  analogous  to  a  servitude  over  the  given  subject.  I
say  'analogous  to  a  servitude:'  for  a  servitude,  properly  so
called,  is  a  burthen  on  the  property  of  another ;  and  property
properiy  so  called,  or  legal  property  properly  so  called,  the  state
has  not,  and  cannot  have.

Or,  assuming  that  the  right  granted  by  the  state  amount  to
a  right  of  property,  we  may  suppose  that  the  state  reserves  to
itself  a  something  analogous  to  a  right  of  servitude  Fa
example :  we  may  suppose  that  it  reserves  to  itself  (in  case  the
subject  of  the  property  be  land)  all  the  minerals  under  the  land,
with  the  right  or  power  of  working  for  them.  In  most  or  many
countries,  all  land  owned  by  private  persons  is  held  subject  to  t
special  reserv^ation  like  that  which  I  have  now  mentioned.  And,
in  our  own  country,  the  King  (who,  for  the  present  purpose,  may
be  deemed  to  represent  the  State)  is  also  commonly  entitled  to
any  of  the  more  precious  minerals  which  may  be  found  undff
land  belonging  to  any  of  the  subjects,^^

With  regard  to  time,  the  thing  may  be  subject  to  a  right  of
limited  or  unlimited  duration,  or  to  a  series  or  succession  of  any
number  of  rights,  each  being  a  right  of  limited  or  unUmited
duration.  For,  as  I  remarked  in  my  last  Lecture,  a  thing  which
is  subject  to  one  right  of  unlimited  duration,  may  also  be  subject
to  another  right  of  the  same  unlimited  duration.  This,  for  ex-
ample, is  the  case  with  freehold  land  (according  to  the  Lav
of  England),  where  the  tenant  in  fee  simple  is  properly  a  rm
vassal,  and  the  interest  or  estate  of  the  mesne  lord  is  also  an
estate  in  fee  simple.  And  if  we  suppose  that  the  mesne  lord
held  of  a  mesne  lord  interposed  between  him  and  the  king,  and
that  the  estate  of  either  lord  were  an  estate  in  fee  simple,  here
would  be  three  estates  (each  of  unlimited  duration)  each  of
which  must  expire  before  the  land  could  revert  to  the  king  as
representing  the  sovereign  or  state.

And  cases  may  be  imagined,  in  which  the  thing  would  be
subjected  to  a  much  longer  series  of  rights  of  unlimited  duration,
each  to  take  effect  in  enjoyment  on  the  expiration  of  the  right
preceding.

But  whatever  may  be  the  right  (or  the  series  of  successive
rights)  to  which  the  thing  is  subject,  presently  or  contingently,
that  right,  or  that  series  of  rights,  must  be  liable  to  end.  If
the  right  be  of  limited  duration  (or  each  of  the  series  be  of

^*  Blackstone,  vol.  i.  chap.  8.


I[  Res  Publicae  et  Privatse.  845

limitod  duration),  it  must  end  on  the  lapse  of  the  time  fixed  for  Lbct.  lii
its  duration. If  it  be  a  right  (or  a  series  of  rights)  of  unlimited '
duration,  it  must  also  be  liable  to  end  on  the  failure  of  persons
;  who  by  the  constitution  of  the  right  are  entitled  to  take  it.

Now  on  the  expiration  of  the  right,  or  of  the  series  of  rights,
::  to  which  the  thing  is  subject,  presently  or  contingently,  the  thing
\  leTerts,  as  of  course,  to  the  sovereign  or  state :  for  since  the  state
i  (speaking  by  analogy)  is  the  ultimate  owner  of  the  subject,  it
pCplso  (speaking  by  a  similar  analogy)  is  the  ultimus  hceres.  On
[Tthe  expiration  of  all  the  rights  over  the  thing,  which  merely
Skmbsist  over  the  thing  by  its  own  pleasure,  it  naturally  retakes
^Lfhe  thing  into  its  own  possession.

But,  in  different  countries,  the  practice  in  this  respect  is
ierent In  some,  the  thing  (generally  speaking)  is  actually
^leeumed  by  the  state  as  ultimus  hceres. In  others,  the  state  does
exercise  its  right  or  power  of  resumption,  but  leaves  the
•'tiling  to  the  first  occupant:  who,  by  virtue  of  his  occupancy,
:es  from  the  state  a  fresh  right,  which  is  also  liable  to  end  like
preceding  right,  on  the  extinction  of  which  he  stepped  into
i^poesession.^^

1.  But,  in  this  case  of  acquisition  by  occupancy,  the  occupant
^^Qttj  be  considered  as  merely  representing  the  sovereign :  or,
•'^^ther,  the  thing  in  effect  reverts  to  the  sovereign,  and  the
^Hjcupant  acquires  from  the  sovereign  a  new  right.

Where,  in  our  own  country,  the  thing  is  resumed  by  the
•uvereign,  and  is  not conceded  by  the sovereign to  the  firat
^Hscupant,  it  reverts  to  the  king. But  the  king,  although  he  may
^^  deemed  to  take  by  a  legal  right  conferred  by  the  sovereign
^:^y  of  which  he  is  only  a  member,  may,  perhaps,  more  properly
^^  deemed,  for  this  purpose,  as  merely  representing  the  sovereign.
^*or,  according  to  the  old  and  irregular  constitution,  in  which  the
]^rogative in  question arose,  the  king was  sovereign ; and,
instead  of  sharing  the  sovereign  powers  with  his  parliament,  great
^Council,  or  what  not,  merely  received  from  them  suggestions  and
^vice  for  the  guidance  of  his  conduct. There  is  much,  at  least,
^  our  legal language, of  our established forms of  judicial
jTOcedure,  and  even  of  the  forms  observed  by  our  present  parlia-
ment, which  cannot  be  explained  on  any  other  supposition. And
1  observe  that  Mr.  Palgrave  (in  those  parts  of  his  Commonwealth
^England  which  I  have  had  time  to  examine)  appears  to  lean
^  the  supposition  that  the  king  was  originally  the  sovereign.^^

^  Miihlenbruch,  vol.  i.  lib.  ii.  §  91.
7S  Commonwealth  (ed.  1832),  pp.  283,  647.

VOL.  n.  z


846  Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

Lect.  LII  Now  since  the  occupant  takes  in  the  place  of  the  sovereign,

' and  since  the  king  takes  as  representing  the  sovereign,  I  shall

assume  that  the  thing,  on  the  expiration  of  every  right  to  which

it is actually subject, invariably reverts to the sovereign

government,  in  every  country  v^hatever.

[r.  V.  Interpose  a  remark  on  the  king's  title  to  personal  chattel
without  owner. (Blackstone,  vol.  L  pp.  295,  298.)

V,  V,  In  the  Eoman  law,  the  same  rule  prevailed  in  case  of  den*
liction  ;  which,  if  the  party  relinquishing  be  absolute  owner  or  domm^
is,  as  I  shall  shew  immediately,  tantamount  to  the  expiration  of  eveq^
right  in  the  subject.]

With  what  I  have  premised,  I  can  now  (I  believe)  determine
the  nature  of  absolute  property :  of  dominion  strictly  so  called;
or  oi  jus  in  re  proprid.

It  is  not  only  a  right  of  unlimited  duration,  and  imparting
to  the  owner  a  power  of  indefinite  user,  but  it  also  gives  him  t
power  of  aliening  the  subject  from  all  who,  by  virtue  of  any
right  existing  over  the  subject,  might,  in  default  of  such  aliena-
tion, succeed  to  it.

It  therefore  implies  more  than  a  power  of  aliening  the  subjeet
from  those  who  might  succeed  by  descent  to  the  unlimited  rigbfe-j
It  implies  a  power  of  aliening  from  all  those  possible  successonj
and  also  from  all  other  successors,  who,  by  virtue  of  any  ri^^
existing  over  the  subject,  are  interposed  between  the  possibb
successors  to  his  own  unlimited  right,  and  the  sovereign  \
vltimus  hccres.

The  mesne  lord  has  not  absolute  property.  He  has  merely
nicda  proprietas  (or  proprietas  simply) :  i.e.  absolute  property
subject  to  a  right  of  indefinite  user  (as  well  as  of  unlimited
duration)  residing  in  the  tenant.  In  the  language  of  the  English
law,  he  has  merely  a  reversion  expectant  on  the  determinatiai
of  the  tenant's  usufruct :  a  usufruct  unlimited  in  point  of
duration.  And  hence  it  follows,  as  I  remarked  in  my  last
Lecture,  that,  according  to  the  English  Law,  there  is  no  absol-
ute property  in  land :  or,  at  least,  there  is  no  perfect  dominion
in  land,  where  there  is  a  mesne  lord  between  the  tenant  in  fee
simple  and  the  king  as  suzerain.

For  there  is  a  reversion  in  the  mesne  lord  which  the  tenwt
in  fee  cannot  defeat  by  his  own  alienation :  though  by  his  own
alienation  he  can  divert  the  land  from  his  own  heirs  general,  or
from  the  series  of  possible  successors  to  his  own  right  of  unlimited
duration. If  he  were  absolute  owner,  he  would  stand  to  the


Jura  in  Re  Alienl  847

>rd  in  the  relation  in  which  tenant  in  tail  stands  to  those  Lkot.  LII
inder  or  reversion  expectant  on  his  own  estate  taU,  and
ight,  as  well  as  that  of  the  heir  in  tail,  he  could  defeat
and  recovery."

term  property,  as,  in  a  preceding  Lecture,  I  opposed  it
us,  includes  many  rights  which  are  not  rights  of  absolute
' :  that  is  to  say,  every  right  of  limited,  or  of  unlimited
,  which  imparts  to  the  person  entitled  an  indefinite
f  user,  although  it  is  not  coupled  with  the  power  of

from  every  possible  successor  between  the  party  and
nus  hceres!^^

'vag  endeavoured  to determine  the  notion  of  absolute  Jwra  in  re

\  of  dominion  strictly  so  called,  or  jus  in  re  propridy  I

'  explain  the  nature  oijura  in  re  aliend.

ry  jus  in  re  aliend  is  a  fraction  or  particle  (residing  in

ty)  of  dominion,  strictly  so  called,  residing  in  another

late  party.

jura  in  re  aliend  have  no  other  common  property  than  Difforent

ich  I  have  now  stated. Dififerent  rights  of  the  class  are  a^J^^are

id  of  different  fractions  of  that  right  of  absolute  property  different

lich  they  are  respectively  detached. Some  are  mainly  of^jj^

subtractions  from  the  right  of  user  and  exclusion  residing  various

rurnts

>wner. Others  are  indefinite  subtractions  from  his  power  ^hich  con-
and  exclusion  for  a  limited  time  :  and  so  on.  stitute  the

dominiUTth

.jura  in  re  aliend,  which  commonly  are  marked  by  modem  from
)rs  of  the  Eoman  law,  are  servitus,  emphyteusis,  superficies^  which  they
5  jus  in  rem  which  is  taken  by  a  creditor  under  a  pledge  tively  de-
tgage.'^* And, to shew the nature of the distinction  ^^^®^*

•  The  clftsscs

I  jus  in  re  proprid  and  jus  in  re  aliend,  I  will  briefly  oijura  in
to  each  of  the  four  in  the  order  wherein  I  have  stated  redlunA

winch  are
noted  by

Qust  first  observe,  that  the  Eoman  lawyers  confined  the  expositors
minium  to  dominium  rci  singula),  or  dominium  (or  absolute  Roman
v)  over  a  single  thing ;  and  this  together  with  jura  in  re  ^^^^^

ly  the  modem  disentailing  as-  Dominium  ro  Jus  in  re  aliena.

vhich  corresponds  to  that  pro-  Is  not,  in  fact,  the  latter  the  only  phi-

-R.  C.  losophical  distinction  ;  andarenotaerri-

:rting  to  my  former  observation  tides  merely  a  certain  set  of  jura  in  re

icU,  ante)  with  regard  to  the  aliend  arbitrarily  distinguished  by  the

whether usufruct may not  Roman  lawyers, and classed by  them

be classed ^ith servitudes,  under  the  common  name  ? — R.  C.

Whether  there  be  room  in  a  phi-  "^^  Thibaut, Versuche^  vol. ii. p.  85.

I  sjTStem  for  the  two  disparate  System,  vol.  ii.  p.  8.

▼iz.  ^'  Mackeldey,  vol.  n.  p.  6.
imn  r\^  Servitos.


Emphy-

teusiSy

Super-

JieieSf  and

Jus

pigiwris

hypothecs.


Servitus.


Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

aliend  they  opposed  to  the  dominium  which  heirs  and  otha
universal  successors  take  in  the  aggregate  of  the  rights  to  whiA
they  succeed.  This  last  dominium  is  of  so  peculiar  a  character,
that  it  might  be  considered  apart.  I  shall,  therefore,  for  tta
present,  understand  dominium  in  the  sense  of  the  Roman  lawyen,
namely,  absolute  property  over  some  determinate  thing.

Servitudes  properly  so  called  (whether  affirmative  or  negative^
real  or  personal)  were  esteemed  Jura  in  re  aliend,  because  Haji
gave  a  right  of  definite  user  over  a  subject  owned  by  another, «
of  subtracting  a  definite  fraction  from  the  owner's  right  of  xasi
or  exclusion.

Servitudes  improperly  so  called  (usufructtis,  usiis,  and  hM
tatio)  were  property  for  life  limited  to  life  of  owner,  though
limitation  for  life  was  not  essentiaL

When  property  for  life,  they  were  jus  in  re  aliend,
they  were subtracted from  the dominion of the author
grantor,  and  on  their  expiration  reverted  to  the  grantor  or
representatives.^


Emphy-
teusis,


Eviphyteusis  under  the  Eoman  law,  meant  originally  land
which  some  corporate  body  (as  for  instance  a  municipium)
the  absolute  property  and  which  was  let  out  to  a  person  and
heirs  (that  is,  for  an  unlimited  duration)  in  consideration  that
would  cultivate  it  (and  hence  the  origin  of  the  term  which
analogous  to  the  original  meaning  of  the  word  colonists),
would  bring  to  the  owner  a  given  rent Now  this  was  pts  in
aliend,  because,  although  of  unlimited  duration,  accompanied
power  in  the  emphyteiita  of  unlimited  user,  and  though  ali(
from  his  own  heirs,  it  was  nevertheless  a  right  or  estate
out  of  another  estate,  or  having  a  reversion  expectant  upon  it
reverted  to  the  author  or  grantor  or  his  representatives. It
not  absolute  property,  because  there  was  no  power  of  aliening
all  future  succession.'^^

The  relation  of  the  emphyteuta  to  the  dominus  emphyUta^\
was  the  same  as  that  of  our  tenant  in  fee  to  the  mesne  lord.  Ea4|
has  an  estat^  of  unlimited  duration  with  an  estate  in  leveisifli-
expectant,  which  neither  part  can  defeat  Emphyteusis  answeii
almost  exactly  to  our  copyhold  tenure,  1

Wliere  an  estate  in  fee  simple  of  freehold  tenure  is  subject  to  j
a  quit  rent,  there  would  seem  to  be  a  servitus  in  the  lord,  as  tori  ^
of  the  fee.


"^  Mackeldey,  voL  i.  cap.  4,  p.  108.


»  Gaii  Cowm.  iii  §  145.


Jura  in  Re  AHen4.  849

So  in  case  of  copyhold.  Lbot.  LII

So  in  case  of  emph)rt€usis.^

Or  perhaps  an  obligation  qicasi  ex  contractu.  Or  a  servittis
d  an  obligation  combined.®^

[Usufruct  unlimited  in  duration,  etc.,  would  have  resembled
iphjteusis.

And  this  is  another  inconsistency  about  those  improper
•vitudes  mentioned  in  a  former  Lecture.  If  usufruct  be  a
•vitude,  so  ought  emphyteusis  to  be  deemed  one ;  for  a  usu-
^t,  or  any  other  personal  servitude,  may  be  granted  to  a  party
i  his  heirs.]

And  here  I  will  remark  that  the  feudal  system  is  supposed
Mr.  Palgrave,  for  whose  opinion  I  have  a  great  respect,  to
re  originated  iu  their  Boman  institution.  He  supposes  emphy-
sis  to  have  been  the  origin  of  beneficium  or  fend.  In  this,
wever,  I  am  not  inclined  to  agree.  Emphyteusis  seems  to  me
thing  more  than  a  common  case  of  a  municipium  first,  and  a
vate  proprietor  afterwards,  letting  his  land  to  a  man  and  his
ITS  for  a  rent  It  is  true  that,  in  later  times,  and  during  the
rasions  of  the  barbarians,  the  emperors  not  uncommonly  granted
t  rights  analogous  to  emphyteuses  on  condition  of  military  service;
1  it  is  not  impossible  that  this  may  have  suggested  the  prin-
>le  of  feuds ;  but  it  is  not  likely ;  because  a  feud  was  origin-
y  a  heneficium,  or  a  grant  to  a  party  for  life.

The  feudal  system  is  an  expression  often  used  with  most

iplexing  vagueness ;  and  the  word  feud  is  often  extended  to

ly  right,  of  limited  or  unlimited  duration,  granted  on  condition

military  service  by  the  grantee. If  the  term  be  used  in  this

use,  the  feudal  system  has  probably  existed  in  every  part  of  the

**  Blackstone,  vol.  ilL  chap.  15.  CTound  for  building  purposes. In  Eng-

*  This  was  certainly  the  case  with  the  land,  there  is  now  no  exact  parallel  Xo

mkifteusis  of the later  Roman  law,  emphyteusis. The  nearest  analogy  is  to

a  probably  also  with  the  ager  vectiga-  be  found,  not  in  the  tenure  of  the  copy-

rof  the  chbBsical  period. Emphyteusis  holders  of  a  manor,  which  depends  on

d  not  merely  imply  a  jus  in  re  aliend  the  custom  of  the  particular  manor,  but

tiiToar  of  the  emphyteuta :  it  was  also  in  the  tenure  of  the  libere  terientes  under

ooDtract  inferring  a  personal  obliga-  a  mesne  lord,  which  originated  in  con-

m  by  which  the  emphyteuta  and  his  tract But  the  statute  *  Quia  Emptores,'

in  were  bound,  notwithstanding  any  18  Edw. I.  prevented  any  new  subin-

■oont  of  depreciation  in  the  value  of  feudations,  and  the  statute  12  Car.  II.

«  subject. — Gaii Comm. iiL § 145.  c.  24  swept  away  most  of  the  peculiar

at  iiL  24,  §  3. Nov.  viL  3,  §  2.  incidents  of  the  various  tenures  of  free

Tht  ^eu-amtmcl  familiar  in  Scotland  tenants. There  is  now,  in  the  case  of

■entudly  the  same  with  the/eu-charterf  free  tenants,  never  any  fresh  investiture

ily  containing  the  personal  obligation  of  the  heirs  or  assignees,  and  in  these

a  more  convenient  form)  will  furnish  tenures  all  vestiges  of  a  personal  obli-

e  best  analogy. The  feu-contract  is  gation  on  the  tenant  {i.e.  other  than  as

the  nature  of  a  perpetual  lease,  and  a  charge  on  the  land)  have  long  ago  dis-

in  Scotland  the  usual  mode  of  letting  appeared.  — R.  C.


8 so  Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

Lect.  LII  world. It  existed  in  India ;  in  the  Boman  empire ;  it  exists  in
' • ' Turkey.

But  when  we  use  the  word  feud  in  a  more  specific  sense,  we  ]
mean  something  incomparably  more  definite ; we  always  con-  ,
template  a  feud  when  it  ceased  to  be  heruficium,  and  became
hereditary,  and  accompanied  with  the  incidents  of  homage,  fealty,
&c. In  these  peculiarities  the  feudal  system,  considered  as  a
system,  stands  perfectly  distinct. The  word  feud,  etymologically  \
speaking,  is  probably  derived,  not  as  Mr.  Palgrave  supposes,  from
emphyteusis,  but  simply  from  the  Latin  fddis ;  and  did  not  orig-
inate until  feuds  changed  their  character  and  became  hereditaiy.*^
Like  a  thousand  other  notions  which  have  been  supposed  to  be
universal  and  of  the  essence  of  law,  feuds  and  the  feudal  system
are  really  an  exceedingly  specific  and  purely  historical  notion,
not  to  be  got  at  by  scientific  speculation,  but  by  diligent  reading
of  the  history  of  the  middle  ages.

I  may  here  advert  to  an  obscure  point  which  has  been  finely
explained  by  Thibaut  with  his  usual  combination  of  logic  and
profound  learning:  I  mean  the  distinction  between  domnim
directum  and  dominium  utile.  The  vassal  himself  was  said  to
have  dominium  utile,  but  the  lord  only  to  have  dominvm  ^
directum :  now,  why  the  tenant  should  be  said  to  have  donmiM
utile  more  than  any  one  who  has  the  usufruct  or  power  of  using
the  thing  which  he  has,  I  cannot  possibly  conceive.  It  is  meiefy
the  obvious  case  of  a  right  in  one  person  with  a  reversion  in
another.  But  the  reason  is  obvious  when  we  look  to  the  lustoiy
of  emphyteusis.  Actions  were  distinguished  into  actiones  direeta
and  actiones  utiles,  that  is,  into  actions  given  jure  civiii,  or  by  the
original  Boman  law,  and  actions  given  by  the  praetor,  uti,  or  \fj
way  of  analogy,  like  our  actions  on  the  case  in  the  largest  sense,
which  were  actions  in  consimili  casu.  When  none  of  the  old
forms  of  action  would  apply  to  the  case,  new  actions  were  given
by  analogy  to  the  established  ones ;  and  these  in  Boman  law  were
called  utiles,  from  uti  or  qu/isi.  Now  emphyteusis  was  originally
merely  a  praetorian  right ;  it  was,  consequently,  clothed  not  with
an  action  given  Jure  civiii,  or  an  actio  directa,  but  a  lUilis  adio.

And  as  a  right  of  emphyteusis,  though  not  property,  was  so
analogous  to  property,  a  right  of  vindication  was  given  for  it^  as
for  property,  and  thus  again  it  was  analogous.  The  Italian  glos-
sators, seeing  these  terms  actiones  directoe  and  actiones  i^^tJes  applied
to  the  cases  of  emphyteusis  and  absolute  property,  extended  the

^^  See  my  note  on  the  land  contracts word /eu<2um,  at  the  end  of  thuLeetm
of  the  middle  ages,  and  the  origin  of  the — R.  C.


F


Jura  in  Re  Aliena.  851

terms  fipom  the  remedies  to  the  rights  themselves  to  which  those  Lbct.  LII
remedies  were  attached.  They  styled  the  absolute  property  in  '
the  dominus  emphyteuseos,  dominium  directum,  and  the  jus  in  re
of  the  emphytefida  himself  dominium  utile,  because  the  former
was  clothed  with  an  cictio  directa,  the  other  (as  being  like  property)
with  an  actio  viilis.  It  was  a  mere  misconception  and  misap-
• : plication  of  terms.

-  The  next  case  of  jus  in  re  aliend  is  the  right  styled  superf/yies.  Super-

•■  Whatever  was  the  precise  nature  of  the  services  implied  in  this  ^^'
?  li^it,  it  gave  to  a  party,  not  an  entire  right  of  disposing  of  the
I  subject,  but  merely  a  right  of  detaching  certain  parts  of  the  sub-
f:  jedj  such  as  a  right  to  the  vesture.  In  English  law  it  has  been  held
y  tliiat  one  person  may  have  a  freehold  in  the  soil  and  another  in
the  vesture :  in  the  right  of  cutting  grass,  for  instance,  on  the
land,  and  that  each  had  a  freehold,  and  could  maintain  a  trespass.
The  right  to  the  superficies  concurring  with  the  right  in  the
tooprietor  is  one  of  the  many  cases  of  condominium  or  joint  owner-
ship, and  cannot  with  any  propriety  be  deemed  jus  in  re  aliend.
And  here  I  may  remark  the  inconsistency  of  those  who  include
improper  servitudes  with  servitudes  proper,  without  including
Mperficies  among  them.  For  an  improper  servitude,  like  super-
Cdes,  gives  a  right  of  indefinite  user,  and  may  be  a  right  of
'imlimited  duration.

The  last  of  these  rights  is  the  right  of  a  creditor  by  virtue  The  jus  in
of  a  pledge  or  mortgage. The  creditor  has  a  double  right :  he  has  lZ^i\l
,jU8  in  personam  in  respect  of  the  rights  secured  to  him  by  the  a  thing
pledge ;  jus  in  rem  in  the  subject  pledged  or  mortgaged  as  a  moi^  ^^
Becnrity. For  against  any  possible  possessor,  whether  by  alien-  gaged.
ation  from  the  pledger  or  mortgagor,  or  as  adverse  possessor,  the
pledgee  or  mortgagee  may  make  his  right  over  the  subject  good
<Mr  available. Hence  pignus  or  hypotheca  in  Eoman  law  is  often
called  oUigatio  rei  ;  the  thing  itself  is  said  to  be  obliged. This
means  that  the  right  follows  the  thing  into  the  hands  of  any
party  who  by  any  means  whatever  may  take  it. The  name
answers  to  lien. And  here  the  matter  thickens :  for  the  obliged
thing  may  itself  be  jus  in  re  aliend :  as,  for  example,  a  personal
servitude  granted  out  of  the  dominion  of  another  may  itself  be
the  subject  of  a  mortgage,  and  thus  the  jus  in  rem  of  the  mort-
gagee would  be  ji^  in  re  aliend  over  a  subject  which  is  itself /m^
in  re  aliend.

There  is  a  considerable  difference  between  the  right  of  the
pledgee  and  mortgagee  in  English  and  in  Soman  law. In  Soman


852  Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

Lkct.  lii  law,  the  right  of  the  pledgee  or  mortgagee  is  merely  a  right  to
'  '  '  alien  the  obliged  thing  in  case  his  debt  is  not  duly  satisfied,  and
to  repay  from  the  proceeds  of  the  sale  his  debt  with  the  interest
and  all  incidental  costs.  In  English  law  the  pledge  or  mortgage
gives  a  property  to  the  creditor  in  the  pledged  thing  if  the  debt
is  not  paid  at  the  appointed  time.  But  in  English  equity  as
opposed  to  law,  the  pledged  thing  is  still  considered  the  property
of  the  pledger ;  he  has  an  equity  of  redemption.  The  pledge  is
considered  much  as  it  is  by  the  Roman  law — as  a  mere  hen.
But  there  is  this  difference :  in  English  law  the  creditor  by  fore-
closure may  completely  acquire  a  property  in  the  mortgaged  thing:
in  the  Roman  law  he  could  not ;  he  could  only  alien  the  thing
repay  liimself,  and  hand  over  the  residue  of  the  proceeds  to  the
mortgager.  The  right  of  the  pledgee  or  mortgagee  was  much  like
the  right  which  would  be  acquired  in  our  own  law  by  a  mort-
gage with  a  power  of  sale,  provided  the  mortgage  could  not
foreclose.®^  In  the  Roman  law  the  creditor  could  not  acquire
property  in  the  subject.
Remarks  Before  I  conclude  I  will  remark,  that  jura  in  re  aliend  are

on  the sometimes  called  yz^ra  in  re,  and  sometimes  jura  simply. As  I
in  re  have  stated  in  my  tables,  the  phrase  jura  in  re  is  often  used  by

cUiendj modern  Civilians  as  synonymous  with  jura  in  rem  or  domim

sometimes  j j  *f

called  >ura  in  the  largest  acceptation  ;  that  is,  rights  which  avail  against  the
jwm '  ^^ world  at  large. But  that  is  a  misconception  of  the  meaning  of

the  term  as  used  by  the  Roman  lawyers.

'  Droits  r4els '  is  ambiguous,  as  sometimes  denoting  jura  «i

rem,  and  sometimes  jura  in  re  (sensu  stricto). This  arises  from

the  extension  of  jus  in  re  to dominia,  and  of  jus  ad  rem  to

obligationes  or  jura  in  personam.

Difficulty :  Where  a  thing  is  subject  to  a  series  of  rights,
— is  subject  to  a  series  of  vested  rights  (descendible  perhaps
from  present  vestees),  or  to  contingent  rights  to  determinaU
parties,  existing  or  not.

But  the  right  of  the  occupant  is  not  even  inchoate. There

* is  no  specifically  determinate  party  (existing  or  not)  to  take  the

right. It  is  nothing  but  a  right  that  may  accrue  to  everybody

capable  of  taking,  who  may  occupy.

Rights  of  There  are  certain  rights  whose  class  it  is  not  very  easy  to

difficult* to determine,  such,  for  instance,  as  an  advowson. It  is  a  right  not

^^®  82  Such  is  now  the  position  in  England  the  statute  27  &  28  Vict  c.  112,  ex-

of  a  judgment  creditor  who  has  sued  cept  that  he  still  requires  the  anthoritr

out  a  writ  of  elegit,  which  has  been  re-  of  the  Court  of  Chancery  before  actoallf

turned  and  registered  in  pursuance  of  selling. — R.  C.


Jura  in  Re  Alienl  853

uporting  any  right  of  user,  but  only  of  designating  or  naming  Lbct.  LII
le  party  who  shall  enjoy  or  exercise  a  certain  right. But  still '
18  a  jus  in  rem  ;  for  it  may  be  disturbed  by  persons  generally,
id  might  be  asserted  by  an  action.^ It  is  like  many  rights  to
iisonal  franchises.

Quaere.  Right  of  disposition  without  right  of  user.

Power  of  appointing  without  power  of  enjoying.  See  Blackstone,
L  iiL  p.  243.

If  coupled  with  a  right  to  enjoy  the  subject,  a  power  of  appoint-
snt  is  in  reality  tantamount  to  a  power  of  aliening,  generally  or
rtiaUy.  If  of  appointing  to  any  object  whatever  absolutely,  it
iders  the  limited  interest  to  which  it  is  attached  absolute  property.

[Observe  that  a  right  of  disposition  does  not  necessarily  suppose
right  of  user :  And  that  an  unlimited  right  of  user  by  way  of  con-
mption,  supposes  no  right  of  disposition.

A  limitation  of  user,  as  well  as  of  disposition,  is,  however,  neces-
nly  supposed,  wherever  there  is  a  vested  right  in  another  j  since  the
It  would  otherwise  be  nugatory]. — Marcfinal  Note,

A  right  to  personal  tithes,  is  not  a  servitude.  So  far  as  it  amounts
jus  in  rem,  it  is  a  right  without  a  specific  subject :  analogous  to  a
^t  in  a  monopoly ;  a  right  in  an  office ;  a  right  to  a  toll ;  a  right
jurisdiction,  etc.  The  right  in  each  particular  case  to  exact  the
iie,  is  jus  in  personam  arising  from  a  quasi-contract ;  like  right  to
iBsessiou  against  a  possessor  honAfide.

[Tithe  is  a  Servitus  combined  with  an  obligation  (s.  s.)  on  the
eapant :  A  right  to  a  part  of  the  produce  of  the  subject  adversus
emcunqve,  with  an  obligation  on  the  actual  occupant  to  set  out,
c — Marginal  Note, Blackstone,  vol.  iii.  p.  89.]

Analogous  also  to  the  case  of  right  in  a  servant ; — my  right
lainst  him  is  jiis  in  personam  ;  but  my  right  against  the  rest  of  the
arid,  in  rem.

Qusere.  Whether  prsedial  tithe  be  a  servitude  1  And,  if  so,
bether  real  or  personal  1 It  is  attached  to  an  office.^


NOTE.

OS  THE  LAND  CONTRACTS  OF  THE  MIDDLE  AGES,  AND  THE  ORIGIN  OF

THE  WORD  FEDDUM.

The  tenure  which,  in  the  Latin  of  the  eleventh  century,  assumed  the
une  of  Feudwm,  was  modelled  in  part  upon  the  tenure  Precario  (so  called

^  E.g.  Against the ordinary, and  authorities  amongst  servitudes. Another

punst  any  person  who  may  have  been  right  in  the  law  of  Scotland,  invariably

i^Qited  to  the  benefice  in  derogation  of  classed  amongst  servitudes,  is  that  of

I*  rights  of the  patron. — Bishop  of  thirlage^  or  the  obligation  upon  all  the

•xeter  et  aL  v.  Marshall,  March  3,  1868,  tenants  of  lands  within  the  thirl (or

*>  R.  3  Hoose  of  Lords  App.  17. — R.C.  servient  district)  to  bring  their  grain  to

^  Teind  (or tithe in Scotland) is  be  ground  at  the  dominant  mill. — R.  C.
^Akcd  by  Stair  and  other  Scotch  legal


8 54  Law:  Purposes  and  Subjects.

LsoT.  UI from  ffreco  because  the  grant  was  made  on  the  petition  of  the  tenant),  and
^ y "" in  part  upon  the  Emphyteims  of  the  later  Roman  law.

In  the  eighth  and  ninth  centuries,  and  poasiblj  still  earlier  (ifarcu^
Formulas^  apud  Baluze),  precarium  found  favour  with  the  lords  (probably  :
lay  as  well  as  churchmen,  although  we  know  most  about  the  latter  owing  ,
to  the  more  careful  preservation  of  their  documents),  doubtless  because  H
gave  the  tenant  possession  availing  against  all  except  the  grantor  (Dig.  xliiL  |
26,  *  De  precario '),  and  gave  a  disseisor  of  the  grantee  no  title  at  all Bat
it  gave  the  heir  of  the  grantee  not  even  a  possessory  title. (Dig.  *De
precario,'  2.  12,  §  1.  cf.  /.  4,  §  1.)

Possibly  for  this  last  reason,  certainly  in  fact,  the  contract  of  Emph^em
became  commonly  grafted  upon  the  Precarium  (Muratori,  Antiq.  Med,  JEvif
diss,  xxxvi.). Emphyteusis  had,  moreover,  the  advantage,  looking  fron
the  part  of  the  lord,  of  imparting  to  the  persoTial  obligation  annexed  to  the
grant  a  character  of  greater  legal  weight  than  the  mere  promise  or  oiier
contained  in  the  prayer  for  the  possession  precario. It  was  also  conveniently  ]
elastic. *  Talis  contractus  quia  inter  veteres  dubitabatur,  et  a  quibuBdui  ]
locatio,  a  quibusdam  venditio  existimabatur,  lex  Zenoniana  lata  est,  qns  '
emphyteuseos  contractus  propriam  statuit  naturam,  neque  ad  locationem
neque  ad  venditionem  inclinantem,  sed  suis  pa^ctionibus  fulciendamj (Iiut
iii.  24,  §  3.)

Combining  with  the  precarium  the  elastic  form  of  the  emphyteutisj  it  i
easy  to  conceive  how  the  contract  so  moulded  was  ready  to  incorpoiate
whatever  amongst  local  usages  and  tenures,  German,  French,  or  OA^
would  be  likely  to  bring  money  into  the  exchequer  of  the  lordly  clients  of
the  conveyancers  who  adopted  the  model.  So  far  the  explanation  is  simpk
Although  we  should  not  imagine  that  these  feudal  lawyers  had  muA
originality  of  invention,  they  may  be  credited  with  a  certain  combinaticn
of  subtlety  and  learning,  including  some  acquaintance  with  the  Institotei
and  Imperial  Constitutions  of  Justinian.

But  the  appearance  of  the  word  feudum  is  more  difficult  to  account  for.
Muratori  (Antiq,  Med.  JEvi,  vol  i.  p.  575),  with  a  critical  judgment  n»
in  his  time  (1734),  denies  that  it  occurs  in  any  genuine  document  earlier
than  the  eleventh  century,  and  challenges  proof  to  the  contrary.  Proof
does  not  appear  to  have  been  forthcoming,  and  Robertson  (Hid.  of  Charla  V-,
Proofs,  p.  269)  mentions  that  a  charter  of  King  Robert  of  France  (a.d.
1008)  is  the  earliest  deed  in  which  he  has  met  with  the  word  feudum.  ft
must,  therefore,  be  latinised  vernacular  and  not  corrupted  Latin.

Much  ingenuity  has  been  spent  upon  accoimting  for  this  word.  Several
have  hit  upon  the  idea  of  connecting  it  with  some  root  of  which  f(c^
pecunia,  &c.,  are  the  Latin  derivatives  (Spelman,  Oloss.  voce  *  Feudum;'
Robertson,  Hist,  of  Charles  F.,  Proofs,  p.  269  ;  Jamieson's  Scottish  Dictum/^
voce  *  feu  ;*  Guizot,  Hist,  of  Civilisation).  But  they  have  attempted  the
coimection  through  Anglo-Saxon  or  German  roots,  which  have  to  encounttf
the  difficulties,  1st,  of  the  late  introduction  of  feus  into  England;  and,
2ndly  (the  objection  of  Palgrave),  that  the  German  name  for  land  of  fendil
tenure  is  not  any  word  akin  to  feu,  &c.  but  Das  Lehen.

While  looking  for  light  upon  the  subject,  a  friend  has  drawn  my  attention
to  the  article,  voce  *Fio,*  in  the  Etymological  Dictionary  of  Ronaance
Languages  by  Diez.  (Worterbuch  der  romanischen  Sprachen,  von  Friedrich
Diez  :  Bonn,  1853;  and  transL  and  ed.  by  Donkin.  London:  Williantf
and  Norgate,  1864.) I  here  give  an  abstract : —

*  Fio,  Ital. ;  Proven9al,  old  Catalan,  feu  (hence  old  Portug.  F«u) :  French


Origin  of  the  Word  Feudum.  855

u  (from  the  old  fieu),  [Qerman  translation,  Lehngut,  Lehnzins] :  verb, Leot.  LII

endi  FIXFFER  (from  the  old  piever),  Proven9al  affeuar  [zu  Lehen ^ y ""

ben]. The  Romance  words  immediately  accord  with  the  Lombardian  Fiu

FADKRFin-H  [vaterliches  Gut],  the  old  High  German  fihu,  fehu  [Vieh],

5  Gothic  faihu  [Vermogen],  the  old  Friesland  fia  in  both  senses  [Vieh

d  Yennogen. Here  Donkin  suggests  pectin,  and  I  may  add  pecunia].

te  H  was  dropped,  the  short  e  in  fehu  became  the  diphthong  ie  (as  the

Dvenfal  mien  from  the  Latin  meiis)^  and  the  Proven9al  u  sharpened  into

i  French  f  (as  the  French  juif  from  Provencal  judeu),  which  F  also

ODgly  asserts  itself  in  fibffer  (comp.  ensuifer  and  ensuiver). In  the

a,  FBGU  (as  usual)  substitutes  g  for  H. From  fiu,  feu,  came  an  import-

f  word  of  middle-age  Latin,  which  appeared  about  the  ninth  century  in

i  form  FEUDUH,  FEODUM,  the  D  being  inserted  for  euphony,  as  in  ladico

LAIOO,  &C.'

This  seems  conclusive.  It  avoids  the  objection  of  Palgrave,  and,  more-
sr,  it  accords  with  certain  historical  indications  of  the  system  having  been
tared  amongst  Longobard  lawyers.  (Spelman,  ut  supra  ;  Erskine,  Insti-
t  of  the  Law  of  Scotland,  b.  ii.  tit.  iii.  §  6.)  It  also  accounts  for  all  the
of  words,  Fief,  Feoflfment,  Feu,  Infeft,  and  Fee.

There  remains,  however,  still  a  word  to  say  about  Emphyteusis,  The
i  of  its  identity  with  /eu,  fio,  &c,  is  not  merely  the  invention  of  our  own
.  It  belongs  to  the  period  of  transformation  itself,  and  possibly  tended
lome  measure  to  aid  the  assimilating  power  of  the  contract  so  moulded
these  mediaeval  lawyers.

I  will  cite  a  curious  example  from  the  collection  of  Muratori,  to  which
aye  referred.  (Antiq,  Med,  JEvi,  vol.  i.  p.  15.)  The  descriptive  heading
en  by  him  is  '  Charta  permutationis  inter  Ingonem  Episcopum  Mutinen-
1  et  Bonifacium  Ducem  et  Marchionem  Tuscise  atque  Rechildam  ejus
nem  in  qua  conjuges  Episcopo  donant  Castra  et  Curtes  Bajoarise  et
sati  Regis,  Episcopus  vero  eis  concedit  in  emphiteusim  Castra  et  Curtes
gnani  et  Saviniana.  Anno  1033.'  The  conveyance  on  the  part  of  the
tiop  after  mentioning  the  parcels,  and  the  destination  to  the  duke  and
e  and  the  survivor  and  the  heirs  of  their  bodies,  proceeds  as  follows  : —
ibendum  tradidi  precaria  atque  enfiotheoaria  nomine  .  .  .  .'

The  witnesses  to  the  bishop's  signature  are  two  lawyers,  one  described
legem  viventis  Longohardorum,  and  the  other  as  legem  viventis  Romana,
ubtless  these  lawyei's  had  settled  the  draft,  and  between  them  coined,  or
Towed  fix>m  others  of  their  craft,  the  strange  word  enfiotheoaria.  The
rd  speaks  for  itself  of  the  association  in  the  minds  of  the  authors.

It  only  remained  to  systematise  the  consequences  of  this  threefold  com-
lation  :  viz.  the  precarium,  the  emphyteusis,  and  the  various  incorporated
iQre&  This  was  a  task  exactly  suited  to  the  capacities  of  these  mediaeval
^ers,  Longobard  and  others,  and  by  the  time  of  the  appearance  of  the
ifeudorum — (whether  in  the  twelfth  century  or  later) — that  had  been
dy  accomplished.  The  traces  of  all  three  sources  long  remained  in  the
idal  law.  The  necessity  of  new  investiture  of  the  heir  was  a  consequence
the  preeariumy  the  forfeiture  ob  non  solutum  canonem,  of  the  emphyteusis,
:  fealty,  homage,  &c,  of  the  particular  usages  of  the  various  societies  who
>pted  the  contract. — R.  C.


856  Law :  Purposes  and  Streets.


LECTURE  LIII.

ON  PRESENT  OR  VESTED,  AND  FUTURE  OR  CONTINGENT  RIGHTS.

LsoT.LIlI  In this evening's discourse, I shall consider the  distinction

A  present between  vested  and  contingent  rights.

or  vested  In  Older  to  the existence  of  a right,  the  two  following

JJInt!  (amongst  other)  essentials  must  concur: — 1st.  A determinate

person  or  persons,  presently  existing,  in  whom  the  right  resida
2ndly.  That  the  title,  mode  of  acquisition,  or  investitive  fact,  to
which  the  law  annexes  the  right,  be  presently  consummate  or
complete.

Hence  it  follows,  that  the  epithet  '  present '  or  '  vested,'  as
applied  to  a  right,  is  superfluous  or  tautological  Every  right,
properly  so  called,  is  of  necessity  present  or  vested :  that  is  to
say,  it  presently  resides  in,  or  is  presently  vested  in,  a  present
and  determinate  party,  through  the  title,  or  investitive  fact,  to
which  the  law  annexes  it  as  a  legal  consequence  or  effect.

When  we  oppose  a  vested  or  present,  to  a  future  or  contingent
right,  we  are  not,  I  apprehend,  opposing  a  rigkt  of  one  cl^^ss  to  a
rigid  of  another  class,  but  we  are  rather  opposing  a  right  to  the
clmnce  or  possibility  of  a  right.  Accordingly,  the  contingent  right
of  the  apparent  or  presumptive  heir  to  rights  which  the  party
presently  entitled  may  alien  from  him,  is  frequently  styled,  not
a  right,  but  spes  sticcessionis :  that  is  to  say,  the  chance  or  possi-
bility that  the  heir,  who  has  not  presently  a  right,  may  hereaftei
acquire  one.  And,  generally,  a  contingent  right  is  frequently
styled  'spes;  spes  incerta  ;  Hoffaungsrecht '  or  hope-right :  a  present
chance,  or  a  present  possibility,  that  a  right  may  hereafter  arise
and  may  vest  in  a  person  in  being,  or  hereafter  to  be.  When
then,  in  compliance  with  custom,  I  use  the  expressions  '  vest^^
and  contingent  rights,'  I  am  not  opposing  rights  of  a  class  to  rigU
of  another  class,  but  rights  to  chances  or  possibilities  of  rights.

And  here  I  would  advert  to  a  meaning,  frequently  annexef
to  the  expression ;  vested  rights^  which  is  mentioned  in  Mr.  Lewis's
treatise  *  On  the  Use  and  Abuse  of  Politicjtl  Terms.'

When  it  is  said  that  the  legislature  ought  not  to  deprive
parties  of  their  'vested  rights,'  all  that  is  meant  is  this:  tha
the  rights  styled  '  vested  '  are  sacred  or  inviolable,  or  are  such  a'
the  parties  ought  not  to  be  deprived  of  by  the  legislature.  lik^
a  thousand  other  propositions,  which  sound  speciously  to  the  ear

®'  Since  Sir  George  ComewaU  Lewis. He  was  a  member  of  Mr.  Aostiii's  cl«*-


\ Rights:  vested  and  contingent.  857

it  is  either  purely  identical  and  tells  us  nothing,  or  begs  the  Lbct.LIII
question  in  issue.

K  it  mean  that  there  are  no  cases  in  which  the  rights  of  parties
are  not  to  yield  to  considerations  of  expediency,  the  proposition
is  manifestly  false,  and  conflicts  with  the  practice  of  every
legislature  on  earth.  In  every  case,  for  example,  in  which  a
road  or  canal  is  nm  by  authority  of  parliament  through  the  lands
erf  private  persons,  the  rights,  or  vested  rights,  of  the  private  owners
aie  partially  abolished  by  the  legislature.  They  are  compelled
to  yield  up  a  portion  of  their  rights  of  exclusion,  and  to  receive
compensation  agreeably  to  the  provisions  of  the  Act.

When  the  expression  '  vested  right '  is  used  on  such  occasions,
it  means  one  or  another  of  two  things  : — 1st,  That  the  right  in
question  ought  not  to  be  interfered  with  by  the  legislature ;
^hich  (as  I  have  remarked  already)  begs  the  question  at  issue ;
cr,  2ndly,  That,  in  interfering  with  rights,  the  legislature  ought
to  tread  with  the  greatest  possible  caution,  and  ought  not  to
•bohsh  them  without  a  great  and  manifest  preponderance  of
general  utility.  And,  it*  may  be  added,  the  proposition,  as  thus
imderstood,  is  just  as  applicable  to  coviingent  rights,  or  to  chances
or  possibilities  of  rights,  as  to  vested  rights,  or  rights  properly
•0"  called.  To  deprive  a  man  of  an  expectancy,  without  a  mani-
fest preponderance  of  general  utility,  were  just  as  pernicious  as
to  deprive  him  of  a  right  without  the  same  reason  to  justify  the
measure.

Mr.  Lewis  has  suggested  that  this  use  of  the  expression
'vested  rights '  might  be  borrowed  from  the  cases  in  which,  under
certain  rights,  considerable  capital  has  been  invested  or  embarked
by  parties,  and  the  privation  of  the  right  would  be  followed  by
great  disappointment.  And  this  phrase,  I  think,  is  usually
employed  emphatically  to  cases  in  which  the  abolition  of  the  right
would  be  followed  by  an  extraordinary  degree  of  disappointment
Before  I  proceed  to  contingent  rights,  or  to  chances  or  possi-
bilities of  rights,  I  must  remark  that  vested  rights  or  rights
properly  so  called,  are  divisible  into  two  classes : — 1st.  Present
or  vested  rights  which  are  coupled  with  a  present  right  to  enjoy-
inent  or  exercise  :  2ndly.  Present  or  vested  rights  which  are  not
coupled  with  a  right  to  present  enjoyment  or  exercise.

For  example :  If  I  am  absolute  owner  of  land  or  a  movable,
JW)t  subject  to  a  right  in  another  of  limited  duration,  I  have  not
only  a  present  right  to  or  in  the  subject,  but  also  a  right  to  the
present  possession  of  it :  that  is  to  say,  a  present  right  to  enjoy
or  exercise  my  present  right  of  ownership.


8  s  8  Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

Lbot.  LIII But  if  the  subject  be  let  to  another,  I  have  a  present  right
of  ownership  without  a  present  right  to  exercise  my  right  of
ownership :  I  have  merely  a  reversion,  expectant  on  the  determin-
ation of  the  lease,  and  which,  till  the  lease  determine,  cannot  take
effect  in  possession.

Or  if  a  legacy  be  given  to  an  infant,  but  with  a  direction
in  the  will  that  the  legacy  shall  not  be  paid  to  him  till  he  come
of  age,  he  has  a  present  or  perfect  right  to  the  legacy,  althon^
he  cannot  touch  it  before  he  shall  become  adult.  For  if  he
should  die  before  he  come  of  age,  the  legacy  would  not  lapse  (ot
the  gift  would  not  be  inoperative),  but  the  legacy  would  pass  to
the  successors  of  the  legatee,  and  not  to  those  of  the  testatoL
It  is  not  a  gift  conditioned  to  take  effect  in  case  the  infant  shall
come  of  age,  but  an  absolute  gift  with  a  direction  suspending
the  payment  to  him  until  he  shall  come  of  age.  If  he  should  die
before  he  come  of  age  his  successors  would  be  entitled  to  present
payment  as  well  as  to  a  present  right  in  the  subject  of  the  bequest"

A  right,  therefore,  may  be  present  or  vested,  although  the
right  to  enjoy  it,  or  exercise  it,  be  contingent  or  uncertain.  Or,
in  other  words,  a  present  and  certain  right  to  possession  is  not
of  the  essence  of  a  present  and  certain  right

For  example :  In  the  case  of  the  legacy,  to  which  I  hate
just  adverted,  it  is  presently  uncertain  whether  the  infant  will
ever  be  entitled  to  the  payment :  but  still  he  has  a  present  right
to  the  subject  of  the  bequest,  inasmuch  as  the  right  would  pass
to  his  successors  though  he  himself  were  to  die  before  the  period
fixed  for  payment.

Again :  In  every  case  of  a  vested  right,  expectant  on  tiie
determination  of  a  preceding  right,  the  right  of  the  expectant  to
possession  or  enjoyment  is  necessarily  uncertain.  For,  though
he  has  a  present  or  perfect  right,  to  take  effect  in  possession  on
the  determination  of  the  preceding  right,  he  may  die  himself  (or
even  die  without  representatives  capable  of  enjoying  the  expect-
ancy), before  the  preceding  right  shall  come  to  an  end.  Of  this
sort  is  every  vested  remainder  for  life,  or  in  tail.  The  ^emainde^
man  for  life  may  die,  or  the  remainder-man  in  tail  may  die
without  issue  in  tail,®^  before  the  remainder  has  taken  efifect  in
possession.

The  distinction  which  I  have  tried  to  explain  ought  to  be
carefully  marked. For  it  is  often  supposed,  even  by  writers  who

^  Blackstone,  vol.  ii.  p.  513.  a  disentailing  deed  (or,  according  to  the

*^  And  it  should,  perhaps,  be  added,  old  forms, of  suffering  a  rccoveiy).—

without  having  (by  attaining  twenty-  R.  C.

one)  acquired  tne  capacity  of  executing


Contingent  Rights.  859

ounonly  perceive  the  distinction  between  vested  and  contingent  liKor.  LIII
;hte,  that  a  right  to  present  enjoyment  is  of  the  essence  of  a '
isent  right :  or,  what  comes  to  the  same  thing,  that  a  right  of
ich  the  enjoyment  or  exercise  is  uncertain  is  necessarily  an
artain  or  contingent  right.

[Examples : — Blackstone,  vol.  iL  p.  163.  *  Of  estates  \n  possession
leby  a  present  interest  passes  to  and  resides  in  the  tenant,  not
snding  on  any  subsequent  circumstance  or  contingency,  &c.'  as  if
l^t  not  in  possession  might  not  be  coupled  with  a  present  interest]

I  have  said  already,  that  in  order  to  the  existence  of  b,  present  A  future
it,  or  in  order  to  the  existence  of  a  right  properly  so  called,  gent^St
two  following  (amongst  other)  essentials,  must  concur : — 1st.  what,
leterminate  person  or  persons,  presently  existing,  in  whom

right  resides,  or  in  whom  it  is  vested.  2ndly.  That  the
5,  mode  of  acquisition,  or  catcsay  to  which  the  right  is  annexed
a  l^al  consequence  or  effect,  be  presently  consummate  or
iplete.

Hence  it  follows,  that  a  right  is  contingent  in  either  of  the
3wing  cases : —

Ist.  The  right  is  contingent,  if  the  person  to  whom  it  is
aned  or  determined  (or  in  whom  it  is  to  reside  or  vest),  be

presently  existing.  In  this  case  it  is  supposed  that  the
Qts  constituting  the  title  whereon  the  right  is  to  arise  have
tady  happened  wholly  or  in  part :  but  that  though  the  title
presently  consummate,  the  right  nevertheless  is  presently
tingent,  inasmuch  as  the  person  to  whom  it  is  determined
f  never  exist  to  take  it

2ndly.  The  right  is  contingent,  if  the  person  to  whom  it  is
ermined  be  presently  existing,  but  the  title,  or  mode  of
msition,  whereon  it  is  to  vest  in  that  person,  be  not  presently
summate,  and  never  may  be.

In  this  last  case,  it  is  necessarily  supposed  that  the  title  is
aplex  (or  consists  of  two  or  more  successive  events) :  that  one
more  of  those  events  has  already  happened :  but  that  one  or
re  of  those  events  has  not  yet  happened,  and  may  never
)pen.

For  example :  If  land  be  now  given  by  deed  or  will  to  A
Iris  life,  and  after  A's  death  to  the  eldest  son  (now  unborn)
B,  in  tail  or  in  fee,  the  right  which  is  determined  by  the  gift
the  unborn  son  of  B  is  contingent  By  the  gift  itself  the
e  is  presently  complete :  for  if  B  had  now  a  son,  the  estate
tail  or  in  fee  would  now  be  vested  in  him,  although  his  right


86o  Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

Lbct.  LIII  to  possession,  or  to  the  enjoyment  or  exercise  of  his  right,  would
not  begin  till  a,fter  the  determination  of  A's  estate  for  Ufa  But
though  the  title  is  presently  consummate,  the  right  nevertheless
is  presently  contingent :  for  it  is  presently  uncertain  whether  B
will  have  a  son,  and  whether  the  person  to  whom  the  right  is
determined  will  ever  exist

Again :  If  land  be  given  to  A  for  his  life,  and,  in  case  B
(a  person  now  existing)  shall  survive  A,  to  B  in  fee,  the  right
which  is  determined  by  the  gift  to  B  and  his  heirs  general,  is
presently  a  contingent  right  For  though  the  person  to  whom
it  is  determined  is  now  in  existence  and  capable  of  taking  %
the  title,  or  mode  of  acquisition,  wheron  the  right  is  to  arise,  is
presently  inchoate  only,  and  perhaps  will  never  be  consummate.
By  the  gift  to  B,  in  case  he  shall  survive  A,  a  part  only  of  the
complex  title  has  presently  happened.  Before  it  can  be  con-
summate, and  the  right  determined  to  B  can  vest  or  come  into
existence,  A  must  die,  leaving  B  surviving  him :  which  evenly
forming  a  part  of  the  entire  complex  title,  has  not  yet  occurred:
and  possibly  may  never  occur.^

Wherever,  therefore,  the  person  to  whom  the  right  is
determined  is  not  presently  in  being,  or  wherever  the  title  i«
presently  inchoate,  and  its  consummation  is  presently  uncertain,
the  right  is  contingent :  that  is  to  say,  there  is  not  property  fl
right  (residing,  as  a  right  must  do,  in  a  present  person  or  persons),
but  a  present  chance  or  possibility  that  a  right  may  arise  here-
after, and  may  reside  in  the  person  or  persons,  existing  or  to
exist,  to  whom  it  is  determined  or  destined.

The  two  grounds  of  uncertainty  to  which  I  now  have
adverted  may  happen  to  exist  together  in  one  and  the  same
case :  that  is  to  say,  the  person  to  whom  the  right  is  determined
may  not  be  yet  in  being,  and  the  title  determining  the  right  to
the  person  may  yet  be  merely  inchoate,  and  its  consummation
contingent.  Insomuch  that  the  right  woidd  be  presently  con-
tingent, although  the  party  were  presently  existing.

For  example :  If  an  estate  were  given  to  the  eldest  son  of
B  (B  having  presently  no  son),  on  condition  of  B  or  his  son
doing  some  given  act,  the  right  would  be  contingent  in  two
ways.  For  it  is  imcertain  whether  the  person  to  whom  the
right  is  determined  will  ever  exist  And  though  the  person
presently  existed,  the  deed  or  performance,  which  is  a  part  of
the  entire  title,  would  be  contingent.  Until  B  have  a  son,  and
B  or  his  son  do  the  given  act,  there  is  no  right  properly  so

^  Blackstone,  vol.  ii.  pp.  169,  170.


Contingent  Rights.  86 1

ed,  but  a  meie  chance  or  possibility  that  a  right  may  arise  Lect.  liii
L  vest  in  a  given  party.  '

As  a  farther  example  of  contingent  rights,  I  may  mention
\  tpes  successianis  which  resides  in  the  presumptive  or  apparent
ir:  meaning,  for  the  present,  by  the  heir,  the  person  who
ces  from  the  dominus,  or  absolute  owner,  in  the  way  of  suc-
Bion  ai  intestato,^

m

Strictly  speaking,  the  apparent  or  presumptive  heir  is  not
ir.  For  nemo  est  fuseres  viventis.  In  order  to  the  existence  of
IB  relation  between  the  predecessor  and  the  successor,  the
ndecessor,  in  the  case  of  heirship,  must  have  died :  that  is  to
y,  must  have  died  physically,  or  must  have  died  civilly.  By
le  appainent  heir,  we  mean  the  person  who  would  be  heir
nsently  if  the  party,  to  whom  he  is  heir  apparent,  presently
ed  intestate.  By  the  presumptive  heir,  we  mean  the  person
ho  would  be  heir  presently,  if  the  party  presently  died  intestate,
d  no  person  entitled  to  take  as  heir  in  preference  to  the  pre-
mptive  heir  came  into  existence  before  the  decease.

Now  it  is  manifest  that  the  right  of  the  apparent  heir  is  a
Dtingent  or  uncertain  right  Before  he  can  acquire  as  heir
operly  so  called,  he  must  not  only  survive  the  party  to  whom
I  is  heir  apparent,  but  that  party  must  die  intestate ;  and,  in
Be  the  subject  of  the  uncertain  succession  be  some  single  right,
d  not  the  university  or  aggregate  of  the  party's  rights,  that
rty  must  also  die  without  having  aliened  the  right  in  his
etime.

The  right  of  the  presumptive  heir  is  more  uncertain  still.
IT  before  he  can  acquire  as  heir  properly  so  called,  the  party
whom  he  is  heir  presumptive^  must  die  in  his  own  lifetime  ;
e  party  also  must  die  intestate,  or  intestate  and  without  having
iened  the  right  by  act  inter  vivos ;  and  no  party  entitled  to
e  heritage  in  preference  to  the  presumptive  heir  must  come  into
ing,  between  the  time  present  and  the  happening  of  all  those
her  contingencies.

Such  is  the  influence  of  words  over  the  understanding,  that
thought,  at  first,  the  right  in  question  was  not  a  contingent
B^t :  that  it  was  a  present  or  vested  right  liable  to  end  on
stain  contingencies ;  that  is  to  say,  the  death  of  the  so-called
or  before  the  decease  of  the  party  to  whom  he  is  presently
fir  (apparent  or  presumptive) ;  alienation  by  the  party  in  the
iy  of  will  or  otherwise ;  and  so  on.

But  this  difficulty  arose  from  the  name  which  is  improperly

BkekstoDe,  toI.  iii  p.  224. Mackeldey,  voL  L  p.  217. MiihL  voL  i.  p.  146.

VOL  IL  2  A  ^


862  Laav:  Purposes  and  Subjects.

Lbct.  UII  giTen  to  the  appaient  or  piesmnptiTe  heic  In  tnitfa  he  is  sot
hnr :  for  ntmo  est  haeres  viveniis.  He  is  merely  the  pencm  who
will  be  heir  in  case  certain  contingencies  shall  ocmspiie  to  cast
the  heritage  upon  hiuL  He  has  not  a  present  or  perfect  xi^t;
but  he  has  merely  an  inchoate  right  which  mojf  become  ooor
sommate,  in  case  certain  facts  necessary  to  the  completi<»i  of
his  rights  shaU  arise  hereafter  in  his  favonr.  AnH^  accordin^^,
his  so-called  right  is  commonly  called  qxs  sueeeaUmis :  that  ii
to  say,  not  a  right,  but  a  chance  or  possibility  that  he  mij
acquire  a  right

The  test,  then,  of  a  vested  right  (or  of  a  right  as  opposed  ti
a  contingent  right,  or  to  the  chance  or  possibility  of  a  right)  is,  I
apprehend,  this : —

If  the  right  be  perfectly  acquired,  or  if  the  whole  series  d
facts  necessary  to  its  existence  have  already  happened,  the  n^  !
is  present  or  vested,  or  (in  other  words)  is  a  right.

If  the  right  be  not  perfectly  acquired,  or  if  that  vhok
series  of  facts  be  presently  incomplete  and  may  never  beooni
consummate,  the  right  is  contingent  or  uncertain,  or  is  rather  I
chance  or  possibility  that  a  right  may  hereafter  arise.

And  in  order  to  the  perfect  acquisition  of  the  rights  or  tl
the  completion  of  the  series  of  facts  whereon  the  right  anaei^
two  things  must  conspire.

1st.  The  title  to  which  it  is  annexed  must  be  oonsummala:
that  is  to  say,  the  fact  (or  the  whole  series  of  facts),  constitatiiig
the  title,  must  have  happened  already.

2ndly.  The  person  to  whom  it  is  determined  by  the  titb
must  have  come  into  existence,  and  must  actually  be  entitled
to  the  right,  or  (if  he  have  died^  and  the  right  be  transmissible)
must  have  transmitted  it  to  his  own  successors.

If  the  title  be  not  consummate,  or  if  part  of  it  consist  of  t
contingency  or  of  a  fact  which  may  never  happen,  the  right  i
presently  contingent  And  though  the  title  be  oonsuxnmate
the  right  also  is  presently  contingent,  in  case  the  title  determiiM
it  to  a  person  who  is  not  yet  in  existenca  For,  to  the  being  o
a  perfect  right,  the  existence  of  a  person  in  whom  it  resides  i
not  less  requisite,  than  the  consummation  of  the  title  by  whid
the  right  is  vested  in  him.

I  apprehend  that  a  right  is  contingent,  in  case  the  title  be
incomplete  and  may  never  become  consummate,  although  U»
completion  of  the  title  depend  upon  the  will  of  a  present  paitf
to  whom  the  title  determines  the  right  This,  for  exam|Je,  i»
the  case,  in  the  Soman  Law,  where  a  party  dies  intestate^  but


Contingent  Rights.  863

^iieiitage  is  not  cast  on  the  apparent  or  presumptive  heir  Lect.LIII
^jwn:  that  is  to  say,  where  the  heir,  in  order  to  the  com-
WOQ  of  his  title,  or  in  order  that  he  may  become  hdr  perfectly
id  truly,  must  adirt  hcereditatem,  or  accept  the  heritage.

Until  he  accept  the  heritage,  he  has  a  right  deferred  or
nffeied  by  the  law  (jus  delcUum),  but  he  has  not  a  right  fully
pdied  (fu8  acqwisitum) :  so  that  if  he  repudiate  the  inheritance,
passes  over  to  a  party  who  takes  as  heir  to  the  intestate,  and
\  through  the  party  to  whom  the  heirship  has  been  merely
iffered.  In  this  case,  the  party  who  has  jus  ddatvm  has
lely  a  contingent  right,  although  the  happening  of  the  con-
gency  necessary  to  the  consummation  of  his  title,  depends
m  his  own  wilL

The  same  may  be  said  of  the  right  of  the  heir  (according  to
\  law  of  England),  who  has  not  completed  his  title,  upon  the
ith  of  the  ancestor,  by  doing  some  act  which  amounts  to
in:  that  is  to  say,  taking  possession  (physically  or  con-
■ctively)  of  the  land  which  has  descended  from  the  ancestor.
d  ancestor  being  dead,  intestate  and  without  otherwise  aliening,
I  heir  has  jvs  delatum  (to  borrow  the  language  of  the  Soman
ir),  which  he  may  turn  into  jits  acquisitum  by  an  £tct  of  his
Q ;  that  is  to  say,  by  taking  seisin  or  possession  of  the  subject,
t^  until  he  fully  acquire  by  seisin  or  possession,  he  has  not  a
■ent  or  vested,  but  merely  a  contingent,  right.  Insomuch
t  if  he  die  before  seisin,  the  land  will  not  descend  through
Q,  but  will  descend  to  some  party  who  acquires  as  immediate
ioessor  to  the  predeceased  ancestor.^

The  same  may  be  said  of  parties  who  are  entitled  to  probate
to  take  out  letters  of  administration.  By  virtue  of  the  will,
of  the  relation  wherein  they  stand  to  the  deceased,  they  have

delatum:  which,  by  proving  the  will,  or  by  taking  out
minstration,  they  may  convert  into  jvs  acquisitum.  But  they
J  not  ipso  jure  representatives  of  the  deceased ;  and  must  do
ecmtingent  act,  depending  on  their  own  will,  before  their
ihoate  right  can  become  consummate.

If,  then,  a  right  be  determined  to  a  party  who  may  never
one  into  existence,  or  if  the  title  be  incomplete,  and  may
?er  be  consummate,  the  right  is  contingent :  that  is  to  say,
18  presently  imcertain  whether  the  right  will  ever  arise. And

•  Under  the  rules  of  saccession  now ance  ;  the  descent  being  traced  from  the
iiimng  (under  the  Acts  S  &  4  Will, last  purchaser  (or  person  who  acquired

•  e.  106,  &nd  22  k  28  Yict.  c.  85,  §  19, right  otherwise  than  by  title  of  descent).

•  the  question  who  was  'the  person — R.  C.
'  has  become  of  no  import-


864  Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

Lect.  LIII  this  is  the  only  mark  of  a  contingent  right  which  I  have  \f^
^  able  to  discover.

Mr.  Feame,  in  his  beautiful  essay  'On  Contingent  1
mainders  and  Executory  Devises/  lays  down  the  following
the  invariable  test  by  which  a  vested  remainder  is  distinguis!
from  a  contingent  one.  'It  is  not  Uie  uncertainty  of  €
taking  effect  in  possession,  that  makes  a  remainder  conting
The  present  capacity  of  taking  effect  in  possession,  if
possession  were  now  to  become  vacant,  and  not  the  certai
that  the  possession  will  become  vacant  before  the  estate  Urn
in  remainder  determines,  universally  distinguishes  a  vested
mainder  from  one  that  is  contingent'*^

Now  I  cannot  help  thinking  that  this  test  of  a  ve
remainder  is  fallacious.

For  we  may  imagine  a  contingent  remainder  which  is
sently  capable  of  taking  effect  in  possession,  in  case  the  pre
ing  estate  were  presently  to  end.

For  example :  If  land  be  given  to  A  for  life,  and,  in  cas
survive  A,  to  B  in  fee,  B  has  a  contingent  remainder :  For  i
uncertain  whether  B  will  survive  A.  And  yet  the  estat
B,  so  long  as  B  lives,  is  presently  capable  of  taking  effed
possession,  in  case  A's  estate  presently  determined.^  For  i
were  now  to  die,  leaving  B  him  surviving,  B's  estate  would
only  become  vested  by  the  happening  of  the  given  contingei
but  by  the  happening  of  the  same  event  would  also  take  el
in  possession :  that  is  to  say,  B  would  become  entitled  t
present  or  perfect  right  coupled  with  a  right  to  present  en
ment  or  exercise.

The  present  capacity  of  taking  effect  in  possession,  if
possession  were  now  to  become  vacant,  will  not  then  distingi
a  vested  from  a  contingent  remainder:  inasmuch  as  there
contingent  as  well  as  vested  remainders  to  which  that  si
capacity  is  incident.

But  whether  Mr.  Fearne*s  test  be  or  be  not  a  test  c
vested  remainder,  it  certainly  will  not  distinguish  vested  rij
generally  from  contingent  rights  generally.  For,  by  our  (
law,  and  other  systems  of  law,  there  are  numberless  pres

^^  Feame,  p.  216.  known  to  English  law)  holds  gow

^  Only  if  A's  estate  determined  by  this  instance. I  have  little  doubt

death. Bat  if  A's  estate  determined  by  the  author,  could  he  have  revised

forfeiture  in  his  lifetime,  B  also  living,  lecture,  would  have  restricted  hii  c

B's  estate  could  not  immediately  take  cism  of  Mr.  Feame  to  Uie  obaerrs)

effect  in  possession,  because  the  contin-  that  his  rule  iipplies  only  to  the  teel

gency  would  not  have  determined. So  calities  of  Engli^  law,  and  expranai

that  Mr.  Feame's  mle  (which,  of  course,  principle  applicable  to  genenl  jnniV

is  meant  to  apply  only  to  the  estates  dence. — B.  C.


\


N.


Contingent  Remainders  in  English  Law.  865

^(its,  and  numberless  contingeiit  or  uncertain  rights,  which  axe  Lect.  LIII
^  vested  or  contingent  remainders,  and  have  little  or  no '
Cwmblance  to  them.

In  the  case,  for  example,  of  a  specific  legacy  given  to  an
llfimt  absolutely,  but  with  a  direction  that  the  payment  shaU
fl  deferred  till  the  infant  come  of  age,  the  test  can  have  no
Ifplication.  There,  the  right  of  the  legatee  is  a  present  right,
^  cannot  take  effect  in  possession  till  he  come  of  age.  But
hare  can  be  no  question  about  its  present  capacity  of  taking
Ibct  in  possession.  For  there  is  no  preceding  interest  on
lliich  it  is  expectant,  and  on  the  determination  of  which  the
Djoyment  is  to  commence.  The  absolute  ownership  is  now  in
he  infant,  and  yet  the  infant  cannot  enjoy  until  the  arrival  of
be  period  fixed  by  the  will.

The  only  marks  of  a  contingent  right  which  I  have  been
Ue  to  discover  are  those  which  I  have  endeavoured  to  explain.

1st.  Although  the  facts  constituting  the  title  have  all  of
hem  happened  (or,  more  briefly,  although  the  title  be  consum-
Mte),  the  right  is  a  contingent  or  uncertain  right,  if  it  be  deter-
nned  to  a  party  who  may  never  come  into  existence.

2ndly.  Although  that  party  be  in  existence,  the  right  never-
bdess  is  a  contingent  right,  if  the  title  be  not  consummate,
nd  may  never  be  completed.

And  here  I  would  remark,  that  a  contingent  right,  or  a
hance  or  a  possibility  of  a  right,  may  be  transmissible  to  the
leiiB  or  representatives  of  the  party  to  whom  the  right  is  deter-
Bined.  It  may,  indeed,  happen  that  the  existence  of  the  party,
it  a  given  time,  may  be  the  very  contingency,  or  parcel  of  the
feiy  contingency,  on  which  the  right  is  to  arise.  And,  on  that
upposition,  if  the  party  die  before  the  given  time,  the  contingent
fght  can  never  vest,  and  there  is  no  possibility  transmissible  to
08  representatives.

For  example :  If  land  be  given  to  A  for  life,  and  in  case  B
mrvive  A,  to  B  and  his  heirs,  if  B  die  before  A,  the  contingent
!%ht  can  never  vest

But  if  the  existence  of  the  party  at  a  given  time  be  not
parcel  of  the  contingency,  the  contingent  right  (if  it  be  calcu-
lated to  endure  beyond  the  party's  life)  may  devolve  to  his
Rpiesentatives.

For  example :  If  land  be  given  to  A  for  life,  and,  in  case  C
•arvive  A,  to  B  and  his  heirs,  B  has  a  contingent  right  trans-
i&iasible  to  his  representatives.  The  contingency  on  which  the
'^t  is  to  arise  is  the  death  of  A,  leaving  C  surviving. And  if


866  Lasj  :  Purposes  and  Sulyects.

LscT.Lm  B  die  befc»e  the  contiiigeiicy  happass,  the  chance  oir  possibility
' still  exists,  and  may  pass  from  B  himaelf  to  the  hdis  or  repie-
sentatives  of  R

5o  ri^ts  I  thought  at  first  that  there  were  cases  in  which  a  right  is

^ fatnre  and  jet  not  contingent,  but  in  aU  those  cases  the  light


is  present,  and  onlv  the  time  of  enjoyment  is  future.  Far
^^^'  example,  by  what  is  falsely  called  an  execotoiy  devise,  an  estate
is  given  tn  futuro  on  the  happening  of  an  event  which  is  ceitaia
A  party  devises  land  to  trustees  for  a  given  number  of  years  for
certain  purposes,  and  from  and  after  (say)  twenty  years  to  A
and  his  heir&  The  right  which  is  to  take  efiect  in  possession
after  twenty  years  is  not  contingent,  for  the  twenty  yeais  will
certainly  expire,  and  the  right  will  certainly  go  to  A  and  Ub
heirs  after  that  period.  Or  if  I  devise  land  to  A  and  his  bein
after  twenty  years,  leaving  it  to  my  own  representatives  tiD
that  time,  the  right  of  A  and  his  heirs  has  nothing  of  tlie
properties  of  a  contingent  right,  except  that  it  is  to  ti^e  effect
in  future.  It  is  a  present  right,  of  which  the  enjoyment  ii
presently  postponed.  It  is  something  analogous  to  a  vested
remainder.  When  an  estate  is  granted  to  one  person  for  lifs
or  years,  with  remaiuder  to  another,  the  remainder  is  a  vested
remainder,  though  the  enjoyment  is  postponed  to  the  lapse  of  th
period.  It  is  not  a  right  to  come  into  existence  at  the  end  of  the
period,  but  a  present  right,  then  to  take  effect  in  possession.

There  are  two  senses  wherein  a  right  may  be  styled  cff^
tingerU:  one  of  which  senses  is  large  and  vague;  the  other,
more  strict  and  definite.

In  the  large  and  vague  sense,  any  right  to  which  any  body
(now  in  being  or  hereafter  to  be)  may  any  how  become  entitled,
is  a  contingent  right  It  is  possible,  for  example,  that  I  or
you,  or  any  body  now  in  being  or  hereafter  to  be,  may  become
owner  or  proprietor  of  A's  house,  or,  more  generally  still,  of  any
house  whatever.

But  when  we  oppose  a  contingent  right  to  a  present  or  vedd
right,  we  commonly  mean  by  a  '  contingent  right '  a  specifically
determined  right :  and  we  commonly  mean  moreover  that  the
right  is  inchoate,  although  the  right  is  not  consummate,  and
although  its  consummation  be  uncertain.  A  contingent  li^t
is  a  determinate  right  of  which  the  title  is  inchoate,  or  aa
indeterminate  right  of  which  the  title  is  not  even  inchoate
(unless  in  so  far  as  capacity  to  take  be  a  commencement).


Rights  vested  and  contingent.  867

Hie  contingent  rights  which  are  subjects  of  legal  ruleSi  are  Lect.  LIII
me  which  are  inchoate: t.«.  the  title  to  which  has  begun, • '
ttoagh  (being  a  complex  title,  or  consisting  of  several  incidents)
18  not  consummate,  and  never  may  be :  ijt.  some  of  the  inci-
its  necessary  to  complete  it  have  not  happened.

The  right  also  must  be  determinate :  t.e.  the  inchoate  titie
at  not  consist  in  a  mere  general  capacity  to  take  rights,  or
Ills  of  a  given  class:  t.g.  The  right  of  the  presumptive  or
Mient  heir  is  a  contingent  right  determinate  and  inchoate.

The  mere  capacity  of  taking  an  estate  in  fee  simple  is  not  a
e  to  any  determinate  right.

The  mere  capacity  of  husband  is  also  distinguishable  from
%  of  heir.  It  is  a  capacity  to  take  his  share  of  any  rights  to
ich  the  wife  may  become  entitled.  But  that  of  the  heir  is
inchoate  and  determinate  right :  Lt.  the  party  stands  in  a
liion  to  the  deceased  which  forms  part  of  the  titie,  and  the
lit  itself  is  a  right  to  a  given  res  mvgvla  or  to  a  given

Sometimes,  however,  we  speak  of  contingent  rights  in  the
^  and  vaguer  meaning.  For  example :  The  contingent  rights
braced  by  the  9pe&  sttccessionis,  are  any  contingent  rights  to
ich  the  heir  will  become  entitled  on  the  death  of  the  prede-
sor.  Again,  there  is  a  provision  in  the  Boman  Law  by  which
arty  may  mortgage  all  his  future  acquisitions ;  all  of  which

in  i?uU  case  treated  as  contingent  rights,  though  of  course
Dy  of  them  are  not  specifically  determined  to  him  at  the
te  of  the  mortgage.

In  considering  the  distinction  between  present  and  con-
gent  rights,  I  have  considered  it  as  abstracted  from  all  the
mliarities  of  the  English  Law.  To  expound  the  distinction
concrete  in  those  peculiarities,  with  vested  remainders,  con-
^t  remainders,  executory  devises,  conditional  limitations,
.,  and  all  these  implicated  with  distinctions  between  law  and
lity,  and  real  and  personal  property,  would  take  volumes.

Many  of  these  distinctions  are  perfectly  arbitrary,  being
indent  on  peculiarities  of  tenure  now  exploded ;  on  feofi&nent,
example,  and  livery  of  seisin.  There  is  no  part  of  the  field
law  where  the  possibility  of  pruning  it  down  within  a  much
lUer  compass  may  be  more  triumphantiy  shewn.  There  is
case  in  which  so  little  is  accomplished  by  such  complex
&hinery.

In  treating  of  vested  and  contingent  rights,  I  have  confined  my


868


Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.


Rights
sabject  to
a  contin-
gency, or
condition
resolutive.


Lect.  LIII  remarks  Uyjura  in  rem,  or  to  rights  which  avail  against  the  wodd
at  large. But  distinctions  resembling  those  to  which  1  haitl
just  adverted  also  obtain  between  rights  of  the  opposite  dasa.

Every  jus  in  personam,  or  which  avails  exdusivdy
a  person  or  persons  determinate,  is  a  right  to  an  act  or  fof
ance. But  the  act  to  be  done,  or  the  forbearance  to  be  observi
may  be  to  be  done,  or  to  be  observed,  either  certainly,  or
the happening  of  a  given  contingency. If  it  be  to  be
certainly,  the  right  may  be  deemed  vested. K  it  be  to  be  di
on  a  condition,  or  on  the  happening  of  a  contingency,  the
may  be  deemed  contingent

And  if  it  be  to  be  done  certainly,  it  may  be  to  be  dean
presently  (or  on  the  demand  of  the  obligee),  or  it  may  be  to  ta
done  at  a  determinate  future  time.  In  the  first  of  which  casei^
the  right  may  be  deemed  a  present  right,  coupled  with  a  rig^
to  immediate  fulfilment.  And  in  the  last  of  which  cases,  thi
right  may  be  deemed  a  present  right,  of  which  the  fulfilment  n^
presently  postponed.

A  right  (vested  or  contingent)  may  be  liable  to  end  befort
the  lapse  of  its  possible  duration.  '

First,  as  to  vested  rights.

(a.  1.)  Where  the  right  is  a  right  of  limited  and  defined
possible  duration,  it  may  be  made  liable  to  end,  on  happening
of  a  given  contingent  event,  before  the  lapse  of  the  defined
period  for  which  it  is  calculated  to  endure.  (See  Blackstone,
vol.  iL  p.  143.)

(a.  2.)  Where  the  right  is  a  right  of  limited  but  indefinite '
possible  duration,  it  may  be  made  to  end,  on  happening  of »
given  contingent  event,  before  happening  of  certain  facts  up  to
which  it  is  calculated  to  endure. (See  Blackstone,  vol.  ii.  p.  121)

(b.)  Where  the  right  is  a  right  of  unlimited  duration,  it
also  may  be  made  to  end,  on  the  happening  of  a  contingent
event,  before  the  lapse  of  its  possible  duration :  i.e.  to  end  (»
another  given  contingency  before  the  contingent  failure  of  the
line  of  successors  to  whom  it  is  capable  of  devolving,  etc.  (See
Blackstone,  vol.  ii.  p.  154.)

Secondly,  as  to  contingent  rights.

What  has  been  said  of  a  vested,  is  applicable  (with  a  fe^
modifications)  to  a  contingent  right.  For  it  may  be  made
liable  to  end  {if  it  shmcld  ever  vest)  on  a  given  contingency  before
the  lapse  of  its  possible  duration.^^


93  Blackstone,  vol.  ii.  ch.  10,  152. Muhlenbruch,  vol.  i.  p.  209. Mackeldej.
voL  ii.  p.  463.


Rights  vested  and  contingent, — Resolutive  Conditions.  869

I  shall  here  remark  on  the  meaning  of  the  term  condition.  Lbct.  LIII
Ttten  as  it  is  generaUy  used,  it  is  nearly  synonymous  with  ^^
contingency.  It  is  any  uncertain  event  or  contingency  on
trhich  a  right  is  to  commence  or  to  cease.  More  especially  it
means  some  act  or  forbearance  depending  on  the  will  of  a  given
jarty,  and  to  be  done  or  forborne  by  him  as  a  means  of  acquiring
a  given  right  I  am  entitled  in  a  condition,  if  I  shall  become
entitled  on  my  doing  or  forbearing  something  which  depends  on
f:  my  own  pleasure.  This  is  a  very  common  use  of  the  term  in
^Ardinaiy  language,  but  I  do  not  find  it  thus  restricted  in  any
law  book,  imless  the  expression  to  fulJU  a  condition  be  an
exception.

In  the  older  Boman  law  there  is  scarcely  anything  to  be
met  with  about  contingent  rights.  There  is  scarcely  any
Instance  of  a  disposition  suspending  the  exercise  of  any  right,  or
\  which  a  right  is  carried  over  on  a  contingency,  or  is  to
commence  on  a  contingency.  Every  disposition  on  which
depends  a  right  to  take  eflfect  at  a  future  time,  seems  to  have
Ijsen  forbidden  absolutely.  It  was  the  praetorian  law  which
^rwards  introduced  substitutions  or  entails.


Notes.

The  fidei-commissa  and  trust-substitutions  of  Roman  Lawyers  are
placed  with  inheritances  :  for,  with  them,  contingent  interests  were
5^eated  by  will.  Even,  therefore,  where  the  subject  was  a  res  singula,
^t  was  considered  after  testaments.

Contingent  interests  not  allowable  by  strict  Roman  Law.®*

DisposUions  suspending  vesting,  and  preventing  alienation.

In  the  case  of  rmis,  etc.,  there  was  no  remainder  over  to  a  third
Ptarty  (still  less  an  uncertain  party  on  an  uncertain  event),  but  a  mere
Aversion  in  the  grantor  descendible  to  his  heirs.
[Gaii  Camm.  ii.  §  179  to  §  274.]

Conditional  fees  and  estates  tail  to  be  ranked  with  substitutions,
Qdei-commissa,  etc.  To  rank  them  with  inheritances  (i.e.  with  rights
^hich  devolve  agreeably  to  law  in  default  of  a  disposition),  leads  to
Nothing  but  confusion.  Such  an  inheritance  or  fee  ought  to  be  con-
^dered  as  a  series  of  life-interests.  The  language  resembles  that  of
Wie  Roman  Fidei-commissa. (See  Mackeldey.)

Various  means  of  limiting  inalienability:  In  the  Roman  Law,
^iirectly:  In  the  English,  by  fictions. (Blackstone,  vol.  ii.  p.  110.)

•*  See  p.  59,  vol.  L  ante.


870  Law :  Purposes  and  Subiects.


LECTUEE UV.

ON TITLES, MODES OF ACQUISITION, OR JNVESTmVE  AND

DIVESTITIVE FACTS.

Lbct.  LIV  I  HAVE  considered  primary  rights  in  rem,  as  existing  per  se,  01

Recapitu- as  not  combined  with  rights  in  personam,  from  various  aspects.

}^^^'  I  first  considered  the  rights  in  question  as  distinguished  bjr

Righ^ diflferences  between their respective  subjects,  or  between  tie

etc.  Rights  aspects  of  the  forbearances  which  are  respectively  their  djtuii

per  86, ' Addressing  myself  particularly  to  such  of  the  rights  in  question

as  are  rights  in  or  over  specifically  determined  things,  I  then

considered  the  rights  in  question  as  distinguished  by  diffeienoes

between  the  degrees  wherein  the  entitled  persons  may  use  or

deal with the subjects. In  other words, I considered  the

distinction  between  property  or  dominion  (meaning  by  property

or  dominion,  any  right  of  the  class  in  question  which  gives  to

the  party  entitled  an  indefinite  power  of  using  or  dealing  wilJi

the  subject),  and  servitus  or  easement

I  next  considered  the  rights  in  question  as  distinguished  by
diflferences  between  their  durations  or  between  the  quantities  of
time  during  which  they  are  calculated  to  last

Having  considered  the  rights  in  question  as  distingtdshed
by  diflferences  between  the  degrees  wherein  the  entitled  persons
may  use  or  deal  with  the  subjects,  and  having  considered  the
rights  in  question  as  distinguished  by  diflferences  between  iheir
durations,  I  next  adverted  to  a  distinction  which  I  found  it
impossible  to  explain,  until  I  had  treated  of  the  two  distinctions
to  which  I  have  now  adverted :  namely,  the  distinction  between
jvs  in  re  proprid,  absolvie  property,  property  pre-eminently  so
called,  or  dominion  sensu  strido,  and  those  various  fractions  of
absolute  property  which  are  comprised  by  the  generic  expresaioB
jus  in  re  aliend, — ^As  I  endeavoured  to  shew,  the  distinction
between  jvs  in  re  proprid,  or  absolute  property,  and  jus  in  n
aliend,  does  not  quadrate  with  the  two  distinctions  to  which  I
have  now  adverted :  namely,  the  distinction  between  rights «
rem  in  respect  of  diflferences  between  the  powers  of  user  severafly
annexed  to  them,  and  the  distinction  between  rights  in  rem  in
respect  of  diflferences  between  their  several  durations:  fof
though  absolute  property  is  a  right  of  unlimited  duration  and
a  right  accompanied  by  a  power  of  indefinite  user,  certain
rights  in  re  aliend  (as  that,  for  example,  of  the  emphytevAa,  or


Of  Titles.  871

t  of  the  tenant  in  fee  simple),  are  also  rights  of  unlimited  Lect.  LIV

ation,  and  are  accompanied  with  a  power  of  user  which  is '

susceptible  of  exact  circumscription.

I  lastly  considered  the  rights  in  question  in  so  far  as  they

distinguishable  into  vested  and  contingent :  that  is  to  say,

rights  and  chances  or  possibilities  of  rights.

And  considering  the  rights  in  question  as  being  vested  or

w^,  as  being  perfectly  acquired,  or  as  being  rights,  I  dis-

liahed  such  as  are  vested  and  are  accompanied  with  a  right

resent  enjoyment  or  exercise,  from  such  as  are  also  vested

are  not  accompanied  with  a  right  to  present  enjoyment  or


Having  considered  the  rights  in  question  from  the  various  Introduc-
cts  now  enumerated,  I  proceed  to  consider  them  in  respect  conddera-*
heir  titles :  meaning  by  their  titles,  the  facts  or  events  of  ^J^  ^^
ii  they  are  legal  consequences  (or  on  which,  by  the  disposi-  invesiuive
I  of  the  law,  they  arise  or  come  into  being),  and  also  the  f??*^^**"
\  or  events  on  which,  by  the  dispositions  of  the  law,  they  Facts.
linate  or  are  extinguished.

In  considering  titles,  or  investitive  and  divestitive  facts,  I
1  address  myself  particularly  to  titles  as  engendering  or
Qgoishing  rights  in  rem  considered  per  se :  that  is  to  say,  as
combined  with  rights  in  personam.

Titles  as  engendering  or  extinguishing  rights  in  personam,
as  engendering  combinations  (simple  or  complex)  of  rights
rem  and  rights  in  personam, I  shall  discuss  particularly
safter.

Title  by  succession  ah  intestato,  and  by  succession  ex
imenio,  I  shall  also  pass  over  for  the  present;  even  in
»ect  of  the  cases  (as,  for  example,  a  specific  legacy)  wherein
Dgenders  a  singular  or  particular  right  availing  against  the
Id  at  large.  For  the  acquisition  of  a  particular  right  (or  of
»  singula)  by  descent  or  testament,  cannot  be  explained
leniently,  imless  acquisition  by  descent  or  testament  of  the
rersity  or  aggregate  of  the  intestate's  or  testator's  rights  be
explained  at  the  same  time.

Being  engaged  with  the  consideration  of  the  Law  of  Things,
lall  also  for  the  present  postpone  the  consideration  of  titles,
10  £Btr  as  they  engender  or  extinguish  status  or  conditions,
in  so  far  as  they  are  in  any  way  implicated  with  status  or
cUtions.
Being  engaged  with  the  consideration  of  primary  rights  and


872  Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

Lect.  LIV  duties,  I  shall  also  postpone  delicts  considered  as  tides,  withJ]
the  titles  which  arise  from  delicts  in  the  way  of  consequences,
till  I  come  to  treat  of  the  rights  and  duties  which  I  style
sanctioning  or  secondary.

But  though,  in  considering  titles,  I  shall  address  myself
particularly,  for  the  present,  to  titles  as  engendering  and  ex-
tinguishing rights  in  rem  considered  'per  se,  I  shall  preface  my
remarks  on  titles,  as  engendering  and  extinguishing  the  rights
in  question,  by  certain  remarks  which  apply  to  titles  generally.

From  these  remarks,  applicable  to  titles  generally,  I  shall
proceed  to  the  leading  distinctions  between  titles  as  engendensg
or  extinguishing  rights  of  the  class  in  question:  though,  in
considering  those  leading  distinctions,  and,  indeed,  tiuroughoat
the  course  of  my  present  disquisition,  I  shall  often  be  oUiged
to  advert  to  titles  as  engendering  rights  of  other  classes.

Having  made  certain  remarks  applicable  to  titles  generally,
and  on  the  leading  distinctions  between  titles  as  engendering
and  extinguishing  the  rights  particularly  in  question,  I  shall
consider  seriatim  certain  titles  (as  engendering  and  extinguish-
ing (that  is)  the  rights  particularly  in  question),  which,  in  somfi
shape  or  other,  are  found  in  every  system,  and  are  therefore
appropriate  matter  for  Greneral  Jurisprudence.  The  titles  which
are  peculiar  to  particular  systems  or  such  modifications  of  the
titles  common  to  all  systems  as  are  peculiar  to  particuhr
systems,  are  foreign  to  the  subject  and  scope  of  my  Course:
And  when  I  mention  them,  I  shall  merely  advert  to  them  for
the  purpose  of  illustration.

Of  the  titles  which  I  shall  thus  consider  simply  and
seriatim,  the  following  are  the  principal :

1st.  The  acquisition  of  jus  in  rem  by  occupancy :  Le,  by  the
apprehension  or  occupation  of  a  thing  which  has  no  owner,  with
the  purpose  of  acquiring  it  as  one's  own.  (We  might  takes
thing  having  already  an  owner,  with  the  purpose  of  acquiring  it
as  our  own.  But  in  that  case  the  right  which  we  acquire  is  a
different  right ;  that  which  is  called  a  right  of  possession,  a  right
availing  against  all  the  world  except  the  owner  of  the  subject)

2ndly.  The  acquisition  of  jus  in  rem  by  labour:  i.«.  ty
labour  expended  on  a  subject  which  has  no  previous  owner,  or
even  on  a  subject  which  has.  For  there  are  various  cases  in
which  a  party  acquires  a  right  in  a  thing  belonging  to  another,
by  labour  employed  upon  it ;  for  instance,  in  the  Boman  Lav
by  specification,  that  is,  by  giving  it  a  new  form.


Titles.  873

3rdly.  The  acquisition  of  jus  in  rem  by  accession :  that  is  to  Lbct.  LIV
,  through  the  medium  of  a  thing  of  which  one  is  owner ^
sady ;  as  in  the  case  of  a  thing  attaching  to  another,  as  land
jhed  away  and  joined  to  one's  own  land,  or  the  fruits  arising
a  one's  own  land.

4thly.  The  acquisition  of  jt«  in  rem  by  occupancy  or  labour
ibined  with  accession.

Sthly.  The  various  modes  of  acquiring  jus  in  rem  which  fall
er  the  generic  name  of  title  by  alienation;  meaning  by
nation,  the  intentional  and  voluntary  transfer  of  a  right  (or
firaction  of  a  right)  by  the  party  in  whom  the  right  resides,
nother  party.

6thly.  The  acquisition  of  jus  in  rem  by  prcescription :  the
dderation  of  which  title  will  involve  a  previous  consideration
be  so-called  right  of  possession.

7tJily  and  lastly.  Such  modes  of  losing  rights  as  are  not
Ived  by  implication  in  Tnodes  of  acquiring  them.  For  as
Y  mode  of  acquisition  is  not  derived  from  a  pre-existing
•,  so  may  a  title  end  without  engendering  another.  Occu-
;y,  for  example,  is  not  a  title  derived  from  a  previous  title :
title  by  occupancy,  strictly  and  pre-eminently  so  called,  is  a
t  consisting  in  the  apprehension  of  what  was  previously  no
I's,  with  an  intent  to  make  it  one's  own.  And  so,  where
>late  property  terminates  by  the  annihilation  of  its  subject,
mode  by  which  the  owner  loses  his  right  is  not  at  the  same
3  a  title  to  a  right  in  another.  Although,  then,  there  are
ly  cases  in  which  a  party  in  acquiring  a  right  deprives
flier  party  of  a  right,  there  are  also  many  cases  in  which
right  begins  when  no  other  right  ends,  or  ends  when  no
jr  right  begins.

In  considering  the  titles  to  which  I  have  now  adverted,  I
11  commonly  assume  that  the  right  which  is  the  subject  of
acquisition  or  loss,  is  absolute  property,  or  dominion  strictly
called,  over  a  singular  or  particular  thing  in  the  proper
^ptation  of  the  name :  noting  from  time  to  time,  as  I  may
occasion,  the  effect  of  the  title  in  question  in  engendering  or
ngniahiTig  rights  which  are  not  rights  of  that  class  or
niption.

The  above  is,  I  think,  the  way  in  which  titles  are  commonly
ted.  It  would  be  possible  to  arrange  rights  and  titles  in  a
it  variety  of  ways.  The  basis  of  the  arrangement  might
a  be  the  titles,  or  investitive  events  themselves,  and  rights
ht  be  arranged  imder  them. This  arrangement  has  been


874  Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

Lbct.  lit  suggested  by  Mr.  Humphreys.  But  generally  the  differences  d
the  kinds  of  rights  are  assumed  as  the  basis  of  the  arrangem^
and  the  titles  are  treated  incidentally.  The  Boman  lawyers,  ioi
example,  first  treat  of  dominiwnt  and  then  of  jfwra  in  re  diatL]
They  refer  briefly  again  to  these  modes  of  acquisition  or  ]sm',
which  they  had  before  treated  more  amply  under  dominium,
inserting  any  peculiarities  arising  from  the  nature  of  the  frae-j
tional  right  engendered  or  lost  And  I  am  inclined  to
that  this  would  be  found  on  trial  to  be  incomparably  the
mode  of  arranging  the  subject.


LECTUEE LV.

THE SUBJECT OF TITLES CONTINUED.

Lect  LV.  Agreeably  to  the  method  or  order  which  I  announced  in  my'
Titles  con-  ^^^  Lecture,  I  shall  oflFer  a  few  remarks  applicable  to  titles  ii-
ddered  general,  before  I  especially  discuss  them  as  engendering  cr
^°® ^' extinguishing  the  rights  to  which  I  have  now  adverted.

Considered with reference to the modes wherein  th^j
respectively  begin,  or  wherein  the  entitled  persons  are  respect
ively  invested  with  them.  Rights,  it  appears to me,  may  h
divided  into  two  kinds.

1°.  Some  are  conferred  by  the  law,  upon  the  person!
invested  with  them,  through  intervening  facts  to  which  ft
annexes  them  as  consequences.

2*".  Others  are  conferred  by  the  law  upon  the  persons
invested  with  them,  immediately  or  directly ;  that  is  to  say,  noi
through  the  medium  of  any  fact  distinguishable  from  the  law  a
command  which  confers  or  imparts  the  right

Taking  the  term  'title'  in  a  large  and  loose  significatioii
(and  also  as  meaning  a  fact  investing  a  person  with  a  right),
a  right  of  either  kind  may  be  said  to  begin  in  a  titla  fOt
taking  the  term  '  title '  with  that  large  and  loose  signification,  ft
is  applicable  to  any  fact  by  which  a  person  is  invested  with  a
right :  it  is  applicable  to  a  law  or  command  which  confers  i
right  immedicUely,  as  well  as  to  an  intervening  fact  through
which  a  law  or  command  confers  a  right  mediately.

For,  though,  to  some  purposes,  we  oppose  law  and  factt »
law  or  other  command  is  of  itself  a  fact :  And  where  a  bw
confers  a  right  immediately,  the  law  is  the  only  fact  whereon
the  right  arises,  and  is  therefore  the  title  (in  the  laige  and  loose


Titles.  875

ication  of  that  expression)  by  which  the  person  is  invested  I'^sot  LV.
the  light  For  example :  By  a  special  act  of  parliament,
lopoly,  or  a  right  of  vending  exclusively  commodities  of  a
class,  might  be  granted  to  a  given  person,  for  his  own  life,
r  a  term  of  years.  Now,  in  this  case,  the  privilege
Ted  by  the  special  act  of  parliament  might  be  strictly
ia2 :  that  is  to  say,  limited  exclusively  to  the  specifically
nined  grantee,  and  not  transmissible  to  the  heirs  or  assigns
I  grantee,  or  to  any  persons  of  a  given  generic  description,
nd  if  it  were  strictly  personal,  it  might  be  conferred  by
%  immediately  or  directly ;  that  is  to  say,  it  might  not  be
:ed  by  the  act  to  any  fact  distinguishable  from  the  act
And  in  this  case,  the  act  would  be  styled  the  titU  (in
oose  signification  of  the  term)  from  which  the  grantee
jd  the  privilege.

;ut,  taking  the  term  '  title '  with  a  narrower  and  stricter
ication,  it  is  not  applicable  to  laws  which  confer  rights
iiaUly,  but  is  applicable  only  to  the  mediate  or  intervening
through  which  rights  are  conferred  by  laws.  In  respect  of
larrower  and  stricter  signification,  the  rights  of  the  two
which  I  am  now  considering  may  be  distinguished  by  the
ing  expressions :  A  right  which  is  annexed  by  a  law  to  a
1»  or  intervening  fact,  may  be  said  to  originate  in  a  title :
ht  which  is  conferred  by  a  law  without  the  intervention  of
b  distinct  from  the  law  that  confers  it,  may  be  said  to
&om  the  law  directly  or  immediately ;  to  arise  ipso  jwre  ;
Be  by  operation  of  law,  or  by  mere  operation  of  law.
EUghts  ex  lege  immediate,'  'rights  arising  ipso  jure,'  or
3  arising  by  operation  of  law,'  are  terms  (as  I  shall  shew
Eter)  which  are  often  misapplied.  They  are  often  applied
hts  (as  I  shall  shew  hereafter)  which  are  annexed  by  the
X)  mediate  or  intervening  facts.  And  the  terms  as  thus
K^  or  as  thus  misapplied,  denote,  not  that  the  rights  in
ion  arise  from  the  law  immediately,  but  that  the  facts  to
I  they  are  annexed  are  not  facts  of  certain  classes,  or  that
are annexed to  certain  facts  unaccompanied  by  certain

3.

•"or  example :  where  a  title  has  not  acquired  a  brief  generic
,  the  right  is  said  to  arise  ex  lege  immediate  ;  that  is  to  say,
rom  any  of  certain  titles  which  have  acquired  such  names,
rem  a  title  which  is  opposed  to  the  others  by  that  nusex-
ive  phrase.
Ind  when  heirs  of  certain  classes  are  said  in  the  language


876  Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

Lect  LV.  of  the  Bom&n  law  to  acquire  the  heritage  ipso  jute,  it  is  not
^  '  '  intended  that  they  acquire  the  heritage  without  the  interventioij
of  a  title,  but  that  the  title  through  which  they  acquire  '
not  comprise  a  certain  fact  which,  in  the  case  of  heirs  of  01
classes,  is  parcel  of  the  mode  of  acquisition:  namely,  ad\A
hereditatis,  or  acceptance  of  the  heritage.

But  when  I  speak  of  a  right  arising  from  the  law  immfr
diately,  arising  ipso  jure,  or  arising  by  operation  of  law,  or  la
operation  of  law,  I  use  the  phrase  with  its  obvious  and  pro]
signification.  I  mean  a  right  conferred  by  a  law  without
intervention  of  a  fact  distinguishable  from  the  law  that  confeii
it.  And  I  oppose  it  to  a  right  conferred  by  a  law  through  ■
title,  or  through  the  intervention  of  a  fact  which  is  distinguiw
able  from  the  law,  and  to  which  the  law  annexes  the  right  as  i^
consequence  or  effect  i

Having  tried  to  suggest  the  distinction  between  ri^
arising  from  titles,  and  rights  arising  from  laws  immediatdii  0
directly,  I  will  advert  briefly  to  the  following  topics.

I  will  first  advert  to  the  nature  of  the  few,  and  compa*
tively  unimportant  rights,  which  arise  from  the  law  immediatJIli
(in  the  proper  signification  of  the  phrase) :  that  is  to  say,  si
through  a  fact  distinguishable  from  the  law  by  which  the  rijjit
is  conferred.

I  will  then  advert  to  the  functions  of  titles :  or,  in  othei
words,  to  the  reasons  for  which  rights  are  commonly  confeiwi
by  laws  through  titles ;  and  for  which  facts  of  certain  deaciip^
tions  are  selected  to  serve  as  titles,  in  preference  to  facts  i
other  descriptions.
Rights  ea;  The  only  rights  which  arise  from  laws  immediately  are,  I

diail!^^ think,  of  the  class  of  rights  which  are  strictly  personal  privUega,

And  here  I  must  remark,  that  every  privilege  properly  »j
called  is  a  strictly  personal  privilege:  that  is  to  say,  an  anomaloni^
right  (or  an  anomalous  immunity  from  duty)  which  is  conferred
by  a  law  (also  called  a  privilege)  on  a  specifically  determinel
person  (individual  or  complex),  as  being  that  very  person.  For
example :  A  monopoly  granted  to  Styles,  as  being  the  individual
Styles,  is  a  strictly  personal  privilege :  It  is  given  to  the  very
individual,  as  being  the  very  individual,  and  therefore  is  not
assignable  or  transmissible  to  his  representatives.  A  monopoly
granted  to  a  corporate  body,  as  being  that  very  body,  is  also  i
personal  privilege.  For  it  is  not  exercisable  by  any  but  the
complex  person  to  whom  it  is  granted  specifically.


Titles. — Rights  ex  lege  immediate,  877

Bat  though  every  privilege,  properly  so  called, is, as it L«ot.  LV
ems  to  me,  a  strictly  personal  privilege,  the  term  is  extended '"""^
certain  anomalous  rights  (or  to  certain  anomalous  immuni-
B from duty or obligation) which are not conferred on
Bcifically  determined  persons  as  being  those  very  persons.

For  example :  Certain  so-caUed  privileges  are  privilegia  rei,
privil^es  conferred  on  prcedia:  meaning  by  a  jprivilegium
i  or  a  privUegium  conferred  on  a  prcedium,  a  privilege  con-
led  on  its  successive  owners  or  occupants  as  being  such
ners  or  occupants.

And  o{  personal  privileges  (or  of  privileges  conferred  upon
nous  as  not  being  owners  or  occupants  of  specifically  deter-
ned  prcedia)  some  are  transmissible  and  assignable  to  the
X8  and  alienees  of  the  grantees,  and  are  not  exclusively
srcisable  by  the  very  grantees  themselves.

But,  strictly  speaking,  a  privUegium  rei  (or  a  privilege
nted  to  the  occupants  of  a  given  prcedium)  is  not  a  privilege.
is  not  granted  to  the  parties  as  being  those  very  parties,  but

being  persons  of  a  given  class,  or  as  being  persons  who
iwer  to  a  given  generic  description ; — as  being  owners  or
mpants  of  the  prcedium  or  parcel  of  land,  whereon,  by  an
ipsis,  the  privilege  is  said  to  be  conferred.

Though  the  class  of  persons  entitled  in  succession  is  compara-
bly narrow,  the  right  may  be  likened  to  those  anomalous  rights
dch  are  occasionally  granted  to  extensive  classes  of  persons :
for  example,  to  soldiers,  to  infants,  or  to  married  women.  And
these  cases  although  the  right,  as  being  anomalous,  is  styled
iffular,  and  the  law  conferring  the  right  is  also  styled  singular,
ither  the  anomalous  right,  nor  the  anomalous  law  conferring  it,
deemed  or  styled  a  privilege.

For  though  the  law  and  the  right  are  'exorbitant'  or  'eccentric,'
though  the  law  and  the  right  are  '  singular '  or  '  inelegant,*  or
Siough  they  are  not  in  keeping  or  harmony  with  the  general
Hor  or  spirit  of  the  legal  system,  the  right  is  conferred  on  the
Ktties  as  answering  to  a  generic  description ;  or  the  right  is
iiferred  on  the  parties  as  belonging  to  a  class  of  persons,  and
not  conferred  on  specifically  determined  persons  as  bearing
eir  individual  or  specific  characters.
A  so-called  personal  privilege  transmissible  to  heirs  or  assigns,

in  so  far  as  it  is  so  transmissible,  in  the  same  predicament
tth  a  privUegium  rei.  In  respect  of  the  person  to  whom  it  is
8t  granted,  it  may  be  deemed  a  privilege.  For,  in  respect  of
ut  person^  it  is  granted  to  a  party  specifically  determined  as

VOL.  n.  2  b


878  Law  :  Purposes  and  Stdjects.

Lbct.  LY  bearing  his  individual  or  specific  character.  But,  in  respect  o{
'  the  heirs  of  that  person,  or  in  respect  of  the  persons  to  whom  be
may  assign  it,  it  is  not  a  privil^e  properly  so  called.  The  law
confers  it  upon  them,  not  as  being  specifically  determined  personi
but  as  being  persons  of  generic  descriptions  or  classes :  that  is
say,  as  being  the  persons  who  answer  to  the  description  of
heirs,  or  as  being  persons  within  the  description  of  his  aliens
And,  accordingly,  although  the  first  grantee  may  acquire  by
law  directly,  it  is  utterly  impossible  (as  I  shall  shew  immediai
that  his  heirs  or  alienees  should  take  from  the  law  without
intervention  of  a  title.

Every  privilege  properly  so  called  is,  therefore,  as  it  seems
me,  a  strictly  personal  privily :  an  anomalous  or  eccentric
(or  an  anomalous  or  eccentric  immunity  from  duty  or  ob
which  is  conferred  on  a  person  specifically  determined  as
that  very  person. Whether  the  person  be  physical  or  individi
or  fictitious  and  complex  (or  composed  of  many  individuals)!
irrelative  to  the  matter  in  hand. The  essence  of  a  pii
properly  so  called,  is,  it  appears  to  me,  this :  that  the
or  anomalous  right  is  conferred  on  a  specific  person,  not
belonging  to  a  class  of  persons,  but  as  bemng  the  specific
acter  peculiar  to  him  or  it.

Now  a  privilege  properly  so  called,  or  a  strictly
privilege,  may  be  conferred  by  the  privilege  (as  meaning  the
which  confers  it)  immediately  or  directly :  that  is  to  say,  wii
the  intervention  of  a  fact  distinguishable  from  the  law  i
All  that  is  necessary  to  the  creation  of  the  right,  is  the  desi
of  the  specific  person  by  his  specific  character  or  marks,  and
declaration  or  intimation  that  the  right  shall  reside  in  that
fied  party.

I  say  that  the  privilege  may  be  conferred  by  the  law  imm^
ately  or  directly.  For  even  in  the  case  of  a  strictly
privilege,  the  law  may  confer  the  right  through  a  iillt,
example :  It  may  grant  a  privilege  to  a  person  now  an  in&nt
case,  he  shall  come  of  age.  On  which  supposition,  the  pri
will  not  rest  imless  the  infant  come  of  age ;  and  the  fact  of  bi
coming  of  age,  is  therefore  a  title,  or  investitive  fact,  necessary  t»
the  consummation  of  the  right.

But  though  a  strictly  personal  privilege  majy  be  conferred  kfj
the  law  through  a  title,  a  title,  or  investitive  fact,  is  not  absolute^  I
necessary  to  the  being  of  the  eccentric  right  All  that  is  abt^-  j
lutely  necessary  to  the  existence  of  a  right  of  the  class,  is  a  mert j
designation  in  the  law  of  the  person  on  whom  it  is  confeirei  \


Titles.  879

npled  with  some  declaration  or  intimation  that  that  person  shall Lect.  LV
keitu

But  where  a  right  is  not  properly  a  privilege  (or  is  not  con-
led  on  a  specific  person  «ts  being  that  specific  person),  the  right
Bes  of  necessity  through  a  title :  through  a  fact  distinguishable
m  the  law  conferring  the  right,  and  to  which  the  law  annexes
!  right  as  a  consequence  or  efiect.

For  example :  If  you  acquire  by  occupancy,  or  by  alienation,
by  praescription,  you  do  not  acquire  as  being  the  individual
;  but  because  you  have  occupied  the  subject,  or  have  received
rom  the  alienor,  or  have  enjoyed  it  adversely  for  a  given  time,
deably  to  the  provision  of  the  rule  of  law  which  annexes  the
It  to  a  fact  of  that  description.

And  the  same  may  be  said  of  the  privileges  improperly  so
ed,  which  are  either  privilegia  rei  (or  privileges  annexed  to
«2«a),  or  are  so-styled  personal  privileges  passing  to  heirs  or
nees.  It  is  as  being  the  occupant  of  the  thing,  and  not  as
ig  the  very  person  who  then  happens  to  occupy  it,  that  the
apant  of  the  thing  acquires  the  so-called  privilege.  And  it
a  being  the  heir  or  the  alienee  of  the  first  grantee,  and  not
)emg  the  very  person  who  is  heir  or  alienee,  that  the  heir
alienee  of  the  first  grantee  takes  the  privilege  mis -styled
sonal.

In  short,  wherever  the  law  confers  a  right,  not  on  a  specific
son  as  being  such,  the  law  of  necessity  confers  the  right  through

intervention  of  a  title.  For,  by  the  supposition,  the  person
itled  is  not  determined  by  the  law  through  any  mark  speci-
Ily  peculiar  to  himself.  And  if  the  right  were  not  annexed
I  title,  it  follows  that  the  person  designed  to  take  it  could  not
determined  by  the  law  at  all.

Instead,  therefore,  of  determining  directly,  that  the  right  shall
t  or  reside  in  a  specifically  determined  person,  as  being  such,

law  determines  that  the  right  shall  reside  in  any  person
itever  who  shall  stand  in  some  given  relation  to  a  fact  of  some
sn  dasa

It  is  manifest  that  duties,  as  well  as  rights,  may  arise  from
law  immediaU,  or  may  arise  from  the  law  through  the  inter-
iion  of  facts  to  which  the  law  annexes  them.
Where  the  duty  is  relative,  it  arises  from  the  very  fact  which
enders  the  corresponding  right.  Consequently,  if  the  right  be
dvil^e  properly  so  caUed,  the  relative  duty,  as  well  as  the
It,  may  arise  firom  the  law  immediately. If  the  right  arise


Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

from  a  title,  the  relative  duty  as  well  as  the  right  must  arise  from
a  title  also.

In  the  case  of  absolute  duties,  the  duty  may  either  be  imposed
on  a  specified  person  as  such,  or  may  be  imposed  on  a  person
through  an  intervening  fact.  In  the  first  of  those  cases,  the  duty
may  be  imposed  by  the  law  immediately  or  directly.  In  the
latter  of  those  cases,  the  fact  through  which  the  law  imposes  the
duty,  may  also  be  styled  a  title.  For,  for  the  reasons  which  I
shall  assign  hereafter,  I  apply  the  term  tiile  to  every  fact  what-
ever, through  which  the  law  confers  or  extinguishes  a  right,  or
imposes  or  exonerates  from  a  duty.

And  what  I  have  said  of  rights  and  duties  in  respect  of  their
commencement,  will  apply  to  rights  and  duties  in  respect  of  their
termination.  For  a  right  or  a  duty  may  terminate  by  a  spedSc
provision  of  the  law  exclusively  applicable  to  the  specific  instance:
On  which  supposition,  it  may  terminate  by  the  law  without  the
intervention  of  a  fact  distinct  from  the  law  which  extinguishes
it ;  and  it  therefore  may  be  said  to  terminate  by  the  mere  ope^
ation  of  law.  Or  the  right  or  the  duty  may  terminate  throng
or  in  consequence  of,  a  fact  to  which  the  law  has  imparted  thit
extinctive  effect.  On  which  supposition,  the  right  or  duty  nuif
be  said  to  terminate  through,  or  in  consequence  of,  a  titk.

Functions  I  will  now  briefly  advert  to  the  functions  of  Titles :  or,  in

^*  other  words,  to  the  reasons  for  which  rights  and  duties  are  com-
monly conferred  and  imposed  through  titles,  and  for  which  facta
of  some  kinds  are  selected  to  serve  as  titles,  in  preference  to  facts
of  other  kinds.

It  is  I  believe  impossible,  that  every  right  and  duty  should
be  conferred  and  imposed  by  the  law  immediately.  For,  on  that
supposition,  all  the  rights  and  duties  of  every  member  of  the
community,  would  be  conferred  and  imposed  on  every  membef
of  the  community  by  a  system  or  body  of  law  specially  constructed
for  his  peculiar  guidance :  since  every  right  or  duty  conferred  or
imposed  by  the  law  immediately,  is  conferred  or  imposed  on  a
person  determined  by  the  law  specifically.

It  is  only  in  comparatively  few,  and  comparatively  unim-
portant cases  that  rights  or  duties  can  be  created  or  extinguished
by  the  mere  operation  of  the  law.  Generally  speaking,  rights
must  be  conferred  and  extinguished,  and  duties  imposed  or  with-
drawn, through  titles.

Independently,  therefore,  of  every  other  consideration,  titles
are  necessary  as  marks  or  signs  to  determine  the  commencem^^


\


Titles.  88 1

ights  or  duties,  and  to  determine  their  end. In  other  words, Lbct.  LV
s  determine  the  several  rights,  and  the  several  duties,  which "
actively  reside  in,  or  are  respectively  incumbent  upon,  the
ral  members  of  the  community.

Titles  are  necessary,  because  the  law,  in  conferring  and  im-
ig  rights  and  duties,  and  in  divesting  them,  necessarily  pro-
3  on  general  principles  or  maxims.  It  confers  and  imposes
\t  divests  from,  persons,  not  as  being  specifically  determined,
IS  belonging  to  certain  classes.  And  the  title  determines  the
>]i  to  the  class.

But  though  the  facts  which  serve  as  titles  mark  the  begin-
3 and endings  of  rights  and  duties,  it  is  not (generally
king)  for  that  reason  only  that  the  law  imparts  to  those
their  creative  and  extinctive  effects.

[ndependently  of  a  given  title  serving  as  such  a  mark,
5  is  generally  another  reason  why  it  is  selected  as  a  title :
Bason  foimded  on  utility,  partial  or  general,  well  or  ill
tistood  It  is  deemed  expedient  that  the  given  fact  should
>nn  the  functions  of  a  title,  in  preference  to  other  facts,
h,  as  mere  marks,  might  perhaps  perform  the  functions
lly  well.  For  example :  Considering  a  title  as  a  mere
c  determining  the  commencement  of  a  right,  it  would  be
•ly  indifferent  whether  a  man's  lands  and  goods  passed  on
lecease  to  his  children  or  to  his  remoter  relations.
But  for  certain  reasons,  founded  on  obvious  utility,  his
3  and  goods  generally  pass  to  his  children  in  preference  to
lemoter  relations.

rhis  reminds  me  of  Sir  William  Blackstone's  reason  for  the
ision  of  the  half-blood.  He  says  it  is  a  matter  of  indifference,
use  every  right  is  the  creature  of  law,  which  is  as  much  as
iy  that,  because  all  legal  rights  are  created  by  the  law,  it
era  not  one  rush  what  rights  the  law  creates.
[  conceive  that  all  which  can  be  said  about  titles  in  general
etty  nearly  comprised  in  what  I  have  now  said.  They  are
3sary  as  marks  or  signs  of  the  beginning  and  ending  of  rights
ities.  Why,  in  this  or  that  case,  this  or  that  fact  is  annexed
particular  right  or  duty  in  the  capacity  of  a  title  (which  is
inch  as  to  say,  why  the  right  is  given  to  this  or  that  person
JT  than  to  another  person,  or  a  duty  imposed  upon  one
>n  rather  than  another),  must  depend  on  considerations  of
!y  belonging  to  the  particular  case,  or  must  be  determined
le  particular  case  by  the  particular  views  of  utility  taken  by
legislator. I  cannot  see  that  anything  can  be  said  in  general


882  Law:  Purposes  and  Subjects.

LicT.  LV  on  the  matter,  but  only  that  the  reason  for  selecting  facta  to
serve  as  titles  ought  to  be  founded  on  utility.  There  are,  I
apprehend,  no  common  reasons  applying  to  all  titles  alike.  The
reasons  why  property  is  conferred  by  occupancy  are  not  the
same  as  the  reasons  why  it  is  conferred  by  alienation,  by  succes-
sion ah  intestato,  by  heirs  of  certain  classes,  and  so  on.  The
reasons  of  utility  are  always  peculiar  to  the  given  case.

I  shaU  now  add  one  or  two  remarks  on  the  term  title  u
used  by  English  lawyers.
Bentham's  Bentham,  in  the  Trails  de  Legislation,  objects  to  the  woid

S^^r^ title,  that  though  it  denotes  the  facts  to  which  the  law  annexes
word  tUU, rights,  it  does  not  commonly  denote  the  facts  through  which  tie
law  determines  or  puts  an  end  to  rights. Where  the  fact  whkk
terminates  one  right  does  not  give  conmiencement  to  anot]ieri
the  term  title  does  not  apply  to  it. Where  the  same  fact  does
extinguish  an  old  and  give  birth  to  a  new  right,  as  is  the  case,
for  instance,  with  alienation,  and  all  the  titles  styled  derivative,
the  term  is  of  course  as  applicable  to  the  fact  determining  tiie
one  right  as  to  that  commencing  the  other. But  where  the  ftct
determining  the  right  establishes  no  new  right,  as  where  the
right  is  determined  by  the  destruction  of  the  subject,  the  term
title  is  not  applicable  to  it,  and  it  has  no  generic  nfimoie  whatevei.
Another  objection  to  the  word  title  is,  that  it  is  not  aj^-
cable  to  facts  considered  as  engendering  or  extinguishing  dntiee,
relative  or  absolute. Where  the  duty  is  relative,  perhaps  a  tern
is  scarcely  necessary,  as  the  relative  duty  arises  necessarily  firom
the  fact  which  engenders  the  corresponding  right. But  where  the
duty  is  absolute  there  is  need  of  some  generic  expression  for  facts
which  engender  or  extinguish  duties. The  word  title  does  not  senre
the  purpose :  we  hardly  speak  of  a  title  to  a  burthen  or  duty.

The  same  objections  apply  to  the  term  modvs  a^c^irendi  or
mode  of  acquisition  which  is  employed  by  the  modem  civilians,
and  by  all  the  legal  systems,  which  are  mainly  derivatives  of
the  Roman  law. We  cannot  talk  of  acquiring  a  duty.

Bentham,  to  obviate  the  inconvenience  of  this  defective
nomenclature,  suggests  the  following  terms.  He  proposes  to
call  every  fact  whatever,  by  which  a  right  or  a  duty  is  engen-
dered or  extinguished,  a  dispositive  fact.  These  dispositive  fadi
he  divides  into  investitive  and  divestitive,  meaning  by  investitive,
facts  which  give  commencement  to  rights  and  duties ;  by  divest-
itive, facts  which  put  an  end  to  rights  or  duties.  Investitive
facts,  again,  he  divides  into  collative  and  impositive,  coUative
being  such  investitive  facts  as  confer  or  give  beginning  to  or


Titles.  883

se  dtUies, Divestitive  facts  he  distingaishes  into  destructive Lsot.  LY
ivaiive,  and  exonerative,  meaning  by  the  former,  facts  which '
in  end  to  rights ;  by  the  latter,  those  which  extinguish  or
re  from  duties.

[ confess,  however,  that  I  doubt  whether  this  multitude  of  Proposed
issions  is  of  much  use,  and  there  are  some  objections  even  JJ^th  ex-
ese  terms. An  investitive  fact  is  hardly  a  general  expres-  tended
for  any  fact  which  confers  rights  or  which  imposes  duties.
word  to  invest,  in  common  usage,  is  confined  to  a  right :  a
»n  is  not  said  to  be  invested  with  a  duty. The  same  objec-
applies  to  the  word  divestiture :  a  person  can  hardly  be  said
J  divested  of  a  duty. The  words  destrtictive  and  privative,
)plied  to  rights,  imply  that  all  rights  are  beneficial,  and  that
)  are  no  rights  which  are  purely  onerous. Now  the  rights
iistees  of  all  classes  are  as  purely  onerous  as  any  duties
t»ver. These  words,  however,  clearly  denote  that  the  party
loses  the  right,  is  deprived  of  an  advantage.
It  appears  to  me  most  commodious  to  use  the  common  term
in  the  large  sense  which  I  have  annexed  to  it,  as  meaning
fact,  by  the  intervention  of  which  the  law  invests  or  divests
;ht,  or  imposes  or  withdraws  a  duty.

It  is  remarkable  that  the  Boman  lawyers  have  scarcely  any
led  generic  name  for  investitive  or  divestitive  facts.  They
srally  employ  some  kind  of  circumlocution.  Even  the  phrase
us  ac^irendi  was  not  theirs,  but  devised  by  the  modem
lians.  The  Boman  lawyers  themselves  talk  of  the  acquisition
ights ;  the  way  in  which  rights  are  taken  away,  or  in  which
ies  are  exonerated  from  obligations;  the  soltUion  or  the
mption  of  obligations,  and  they  have  a  vast  variety  of  other
QS  to  express  these  various  ideas,  but  no  systematic  language
iirhich  they  attempt  to  divide  titles  into  classes.  The  incon-
ience  would,  I  think,  be  substantially  removed,  by  using  titk
he  wide  sense  which  I  have  proposed  to  annex  to  it
Sir  William  Blackstone  himself  often  seems  to  use  title  to
gnate  a  fact  which  ends  a  right  as  well  as  one  which  begins  it,
hat  the  large  import  which  I  think  it  commodious  to  give  to
term  would  not  to  a  great  extent  shock  established  usage.
As  I  remarked  in  my  tables,  the  word  titvius  in  Boman
,  is  not  at  all  equivalent  to  title  in  the  English.  It  is  not
ode  of  acquisition,  but  a  part  only  of  a  complex  mode  of
idsition ;  and  even  in  that  narrower  sense  it  is  only  applied
I  few  cases,  namely  certain  cases  in  which  rights  are  acquired
tradition  and  by  prsescription.


884  Law  :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

Lbct.  LV  a  title  may  often  be  separated  into  two  distinct  facts  or

"  sets  of  facts — an  antecedent  and  a  consequent ;  and  then  tittUus
is  the  name  given  to  the  antecedent  part,  modus  acguirendi  to
the  residue  or  consequent  part  of  the  mode  of  acquisition.  The
word  titre  in  the  French  law  is  always  understood  in  the  same
sense. It  never  means,  as  with  us,  mode  of  acquisiiiofL


Notes.

Meanings  of  (he  word  Prwilege  in  English  Law,

Privilege  never  denotes,  as  it  did  in  the  Roman  Law,  a  law:  B
sometimes  seems  to  denote  a  righi  enjoyed  by  a  peculiar  class :  lo
this  sense  it  belongs  to  the  Law  of  Persons :  Sometimes  it  seems  (o
denote  rights  enjoyed  by  the  subject  against  the  Sovereign. Qngfo
of  this  meaning.

[See  arUe^  'Liberty;'  *  Limitation  of  sovereign  power.' Mono-
polies.* AnUy  *  Jus  in  re  et  ad  rem''\


Remarks  on  Terms,
Objection  to  the  term  *  Title,*  as  used  by  the  English  Lawyers,

Though  it  denotes  the  facts  to  which  the  law  annexes  rights,  it
does  not  denote  completely  the  facts  through  which  it  detennina
rights.

Where  the  fact  which  determines  a  right  does  not  at  the  same
time  give  commencement  to  another,  the  term  *  title  *  does  not  apply
to  it.  Further,  it  is  not  applicable  to  facts  as  engendering  or  extan-
guishing  duties,  be  they  relative  or  be  they  absolute.

For  another  use  of  the  word  'title,'  by  English  Lawyers,  see
Table  II.  post.]

The  same  objections  apply  to  *  mode  of  acquisition.' We  cannot

talk  of  acquiring  a  duty. Nor  will  acquisition  apply  to  the  termini-

tion  of  a  right  or  duty. [Bentham's suggestions, TraiUs,  vol.  i

p.  280.t]

*  Bentham,  Princ  pp.  229-292.  gi^ue  s'arrete  an  premier  pts.  PoiBt
t  *  Bentham's  suggestions '  are  in  d'esp^es  de  titres/  etc  The  terms  sag-
favour  of  '  une  s^rie  de  mots  qui  se  cor-  gested  by  Bentham  are  arranged  in  tbi
respondent ;  ou  un  nom  pour  le  genre  following  tabular  form,  in  the  margin  of
et  des  tennes  sp^cifiques  subordonn^s.  the  book.
Prenez  le  mot  tUre,  la  ramification  lo-

Dispositive.


Investitive  Divestitive

I  I


Collative. Impositive.  Destitutive. EzoneratiTe.

Privative.
Mr.  Austin's  objection  to  these  terms  will  be  found  further  on. — S,A,


Notes.  885

I  use  ^XU  in  the  large  sense  which  I  have  already  annexed  Lbot.  LV

m :  t.«.  as  denoting  any  fact  through  which  the  law  invests  * ^
a  right,  or  imposes  or  withdraws  a  duty.


s^  by  Blackstone,  denotes  divestitive  as  well  as  investitive

iuLus,

iration  of  right  (including  certainty  or  continuity  of  ter-

).

>nimencement,  whether of  right  or enjoyment  (and  then

ition  of  preceding  rights).

verally  and  commonly.

ctent  of  right  in  respect  of  power  of  using,  deriving  services

dealing  with  the  subject.

e. Whether  power  of  aliening  (which  as  against  successors

of  annihilation)  belong  to  this,  or  to  duration  ?

^,  or  subjects  of  rights  also  considered  under  this  last  head.

yjoX  Note  in  Blackstoney  vol.  ii.  chap.  23,  p.  381.


Terminology,

11  use  indifferently,  '  mode  of  acquisition,  title,  cause,  investi-
t,'  etc. :  unless  I  attach  specially  a  more  special  meaning.^
»us  circumlocutions,  after  the  manner  of  the  Roman  Lawyers,
be  used. They  have  no  settled  generic  terms,
um  amissionis  causae.' *Solutio,  extinctio,  etc.  etc.'®*
ettled  name,  in  the  Roman  law,  for  facts  determining  rights

58.

oman  Lawyers,  and  in  the  language  of  the  derivative  systems,

ver  means  a  title  in  the  sense  of  mode  of  acquisition.

lames  of  Tituli  ought  to  be  the  names  of  the  incidents  which

to  rights  and  obligations,  and  not  of  the  rights  and  obliga-
mselves,  or  of  their  subjects.

lus  *  is  applicable  to  the  incidents  which  give  rise  to  Jura  ad
v^ell  as  to  those  which  beget  Jura  in  Re ;  But  is  not  appli-
incidents  as  begetting  obligations,  whether  they  be  absolute
re,  or  whether  they  correspond  with  Jus  in  Re  or  Jus  ad
or  is  it  applicable  to  incidents  which  put  an  end  to,  or  to

as  putting  an  end  to,  either  rights  or  obligations.  '  Modes
obligatufjis  are  extinguished  or  removed^  seems  to  be  the  only
n  in  the  Roman  law  for  this  purpose ;  and  tJuit  only  applies
:ions,  stricto  sensu.^

ar  remark  made  before,  about  capacities  and  faculties.
ions  to  the  term  Title  in  the  sense  of  the  English  Lawyers : —
lat  though  it  denotes  the  incident  which  gives  beginning  to

jldey,  vol.  ii  p.  40.  ^  Hugo,  Oesch,  pp.  249,  676.

^  Ibid.  p.  263. Blondeau,  vi.


886  Law:  Purposes  and SmijecU.

Lbct.  LT  a  rig^ty  it  does  noi  denote  the  inadent  wfakh  puto  an  end  to  it,  or
'  only  by  implication ;  (oonnotes  but  not  ^^noCes :)

2.  That  it  only  eonnotes  the  incident  as  giring  origin  to  the
corresponding  obligation,  and  as  patting  an  fsoA  to  it.

There  is  the  same  objection  to  '  Acqcisition,'  or  Mcdui  aeqwrefA
In  the  sense  in  which  the  term  ^  TUmIus  '  is  nsed  by  the  Ronum
Lawyers,  it  denotes,  not  a  mode  of  acquisition,  bat  a  condiyoo
necessary  to  the  efficacy  of  a  mode  of  acqaisition :  riz.  tradition  (or
rather  the  incident  of  which  tradition  is  the  eridence).  '  Causa  n-
fwAu/r :  Consid^atiom.^ (See  Table  IL  pc^.)

Another  objection  to  *  tUh '  (and  periu^  to  '  mode  of  oequisUiM)
is, — that  it  is  partial,  even  with  r^ard  to  the  incidents  which  girv
beginning  to  rights.  It  is  not  applicable  to  the  incidents  which  gift
beginning  to  Jura  ad  Rem, {Sed  Queere.)

The  Eoman  Lawyers  seem  to  extend  '  acqaisition '  to  ri^ts  a
amtradu  and  quasi  tx  cofdrachL,  and  eren  to  rights  ex  delicto.

Objection  to  '  inrestiiite  and  ditestititt  incidents  ; '  that  in  commoB
language  '  vest,'  '  invest,'  etc  only  apply  to  vested  rights.

'  Mode*  (or  Incidents)  in  uhich  Bights  and  Obligaticns  begin  and  adl
avoid  all  these  inconveniences;  extending  even  to  the  obligitioDS
which  begin  in  crimes.

Mode,  like  title  or  incident^  denotes,  properly,  the  fiEu^t  stripped  of
its  evidentiary  and  other  conditional  matter.


LECTUEELVT,

THE  SUBJECT  OP  TITLES  CONTINUED.

Lect.  LVI  Continuing  the  disquisition  concerning  titles  in  general,  which
'  I  began  in  my  last  Lecture,  I  would  remark  that,  titles  (or  the

facts through  which  the law confers and  divests  rights,  or,
through  which  the law  imposes and withdraws duties)  art
divisible  into  simple  and  complex.
Titles  dU-  A  title may  consist  of  a fact  which  is  deemed  one  and

iSo^shn-  indivisible,  and  is  said  to  be  simple.  Or  a  title  may  consist  of
pie  and  a  fact  which  is  not  deemed  one  and  indivisible,  but  is  esteemed
Bnt  r4liy  a  number  of  single  and  indivisible  facts  compacted  into  a  col-
always lective  whole,  and  may  then  be  called  complex.**

complex.  '  >/  r

And  here  it  is  obvious  to  remark,  that  every  title  is  really
complex.  In  the  case,  for  example,  of  acquisition  by  occu-
pancy (which  perhaps  is  the  least  complex  of  all  titles),  the
title,  though  deemed  simple,  consists,  at  the  leasts  of  three
distinguishable  facts:  namely,  the  negative  fact  that  the
subject  occupied  has  no  previous  owner;  the  positive  fact  of

^  Bentham,  Traitds,  voL  i.  p.  278.


i


Titles,  887

e  occupation,  or  of  the  apprehension  or  taking  possession  of  Lect.  LVI
e  subject ;  and  the  positive  fact  of  the  intention,  on  the  part '
the  occupant,  of  appropriating  the  subject  to  himself : — animvs
n  sQn  habendi.

Nay,  each  of  the  simpler  facts  into  which  a  title  deemed
nple  is  immediately  resolvable,  may  itself  be  resolved  into
ita  which  are  still  more  simple  or  elementary.  The  negative
3t,  for  example,  that  the  thing  acquired  by  occupancy  is  res
Jlitts,  is  the  absence  or  negation  of  that  multitude  of  facts
rich  are  imported  by  the  positive  fact  of  a  thing  being  owned
ready.  And  the  fact  of  the  apprehension  or  taking  possession,
the  animus  or  intention,  on  the  part  of  the  occupant,  rem  sibi
iendi,  is  also  resolvable  into  a  number  of  facts  which  it  would
ke  a  long  treatise  to  distinguish  and  describe.

Consequently,  a  so-called  simple  title  is  a  title  consisting  of
Its,  which,  for  the  purpose  contemplated  by  the  speaker,  it  is
i  necessary  to  distinguish :  whilst  a  so-called  complex  title  is
title  consisting  of  parts,  which,  for  the  same  purpose,  it  is
oessary  to  consider  separately.  The  terms  simple  and  complex,
applied  to  titles,  are  merely  relative  expressions.  For  one
id  the  same  title  «ts  viewed  from  dififerent  aspects,  or  one  and
e  same  title  as  considered  for  different  purposes,  may  be  simple
irf  complex.

If  the  distinction  of  titles  into  simple  and  complex  have
ly  other  meaning  than  the  one  which  I  have  now  mentioned,
lat  other  meaning  is  founded  on  a  difiference  of  degrees. —
hough  all  titles  are  complex,  some  are  more  complex  than
iiers.  And  such  as  are  more,  and  such  as  are  less  complex,
lay  be  divided  loosely  into  complex  and  simple,  and  dis-
ngoished  by  these  epithets.

According  to Bentham,  in  his  '  Vue  g4n&rale  dlun Corps  Com-
t  Droits  the  distinguishable  facts  which  constitute  a  complex  elements
itle,  are  divisible,  in  some  cases,  into  'principal '  and  '  accessory.'  of  a  com-
ooking  at  the  rationale  of  the  distinction  which  he  seems  to  principal
ave  in view  (and  which  is a  distinction  of great  practical  andacces-
lament),  I  should  think  that  essential  or  intmnsic,  and  accidental
r  adventitious,  would  be  more  significant  than  principal  and
Mjessory.

The  rationale  of  the  distinction  appears  to  be  this :

As  I  remarked  in  my  last  Lecture,  titles  serve  as  signs  or
larks,  to  denote  that  such  or  such  rights  have  vested  in  such  or
nch  persons ;  that  such  or  such  duties  are  incumbent  on  such
r  such  persons ;  that  such  or  such  rights  have  ceased  or  been


888  Law:  Purposes  and  Subjects.

Jmtt.  LVI  divested,  or  that  such  or  such  duties  have  been  withdrawn  or
removed.  In  other  words,  it  is  through  the  medium  of  titk$
(except  in  the  comparatively  few,  and  comparatively  unimportant,
cases,  wherein  rights  and  duties  are  conferred  and  imposed  by
the  law  imnudiaU,  or  are  divested  and  withdrawn  by  the  law
immediaU),  that  the  respective  rights  and  duties  of  the  seven!
members  of  the  community  are  distributed  or  assigned.  Setting
aside  those  comparatively  few,  and  comparatively  unimportant
cases,  persons  are  invested  and  burthened  with  rights  and  dntia
or  are  divested  and  discharged  of  rights  and  duties,  not  as  being
determined  by  their  specific  or  peculiar  characters,  but  as  belong-
ing to  classes  of  persons.  And  it  is  through  the  medium  of  the
various  titles,  that  they  are  determined  respectively  to  those
various  classes.

But,  as  I  also  remarked  in  my  last  Lecture,  it  is  seldom
that  a  right  or  duty  is  annexed  to  a  title,  or  that  a  right  or
duty  is  divested  or  withdrawn  by  a  title,  merely  because  the
title  serves  as  such  a  mark.  For,  if  the  title  merely  served  as
a  mark  to  fix  the  commencement  or  determination  of  the  ri^t
or  duty,  almost  any  fact  might  serve  the  turn  as  well  as  the
fact  which  is  the  title.  There  are  generally  certain  reasons,
derived  fix)m  the  nature  of  the  fact  which  serves  as  a  title,  "Aj
such  or  such  a  right  should  be  annexed  to  that  fact  rather  tbn
another,  why  such  or  such  a  duty  should  be  annexed  to  that
fact  rather  than  another,  or  why  that  fact  rather  than  another
should  divest  such  or  such  a  right  or  duty.

In  short,  a  title  serves  to  mark,  that  this  or  that  person  has
been  invested  or  burthened  with  this  or  that  right  or  this  or
that  duty :  or  a  title  serves  to  mark,  that  this  or  that  perscm
has  been  divested  of,  or  exonerated  from,  this  or  that  right «
this  or  that  duty.  But,  independently  of  its  use  in  serving  as
such  a  mark,  there  are  generally  or  always  reasons,  derived  from
the  nature  of  the  fact  which  is  the  title,  why  the  given  pers<Mi
should  be  so  invested  or  burthened  (or  should  be  so  divested  (ff
exonerated),  through,  or  in  consequence  of,  that  very  fact

Now  it  may  happen,  that,  looking  at  the  reasons  or  purposes
for  which  a  given  right  is  annexed  to  a  given  title,  all  the  facts
of  which  the  title  is  constituted  are  of  its  very  essence  In
other  words,  the  right  could  not  arise  (consistently  with
those  reasons  or  purposes)  through  or  in  consequence  of  the
title,  if  any  of  the  simpler  facts  into  which  the  title  is  resolvable
were  not  an  ingredient  or  an  integrant  part  of  it

But  it  may  also  happen,  that,  looking  at  the  reasons  or


Titles.  889

poses  for  which  a  given  right  is  annexed  to  a  given  title,  Lkct.  LVI

or  more  of  the  facts  of  which  the  title  is  constituted  are
of  its  very  essence.  In  other  words,  the  right  nught  arise
Asistently  with  those  reasons  or  purposes)  through  or  in
sequence  of  the  title,  though  one  or  more  of  the  facts  of
ich  the  title  is  compounded  were  fwt  constituent  parts  of  it.

For  example :  Looking  at  the  reasons  for  which  a  con-
ition  is  made  legally  obligatory,  or  for  which  legal  rights  and
ies  are  conferred  and  imposed  on  the  parties  to  the  agree-
Qty  a  promise  by  the  one  party,  and  an  acceptance  of  the
mise  by  the  other  party,  are  of  the  essence  of  the  title.

But  in  certain  cases,  a  convention  is  not  legally  binding,
[ess  the  promise  be  reduced  to  writing,  and  the  writing  be
Qed  by  the  promissor :  or  unless  the  promise  be  couched  in  a
iting  of  a  given  form :  or  (generally)  unless  the  contracting
ties  observe  some  solemnity  which  has  no  necessary  con-
cion  with  the  promise  and  acceptance.

Now,  though  the  given  solemnity,  let  it  be  what  it  may,  is,
all  such  cases,  a  constituent  part  of  the  title,  it  is  not  of  the
ence  of  the  title.  For,  looking  at  the  general  reasons  for
ich  conventions  generally  are  made  obligatory,  or  at  the
rticular  reasons  for  which  rights  and  duties  are  annexed
conventions  of  a  particular  class,  the  right  and  duty  might
se  (consistently  with  those  reasons),  although  the  solemnity
sre  no  portion  of  the  title.  The  solemnity  may  be  convenient
idence  of  that  which  is  essential  to  the  title,  but,  though  it  is
part  of  the  title,  it  is  not  necessarily  such.

Now  where  the  right  might  arise  (consistently  with  the
Bisons  for  which  it  is  annexed  to  the  title),  though  some  of
e  facts  constituting  the  title  were  not  component  parts  of  it,
e  several  facts  into  which  the  title  is  resolvable  may  be
?ided  into  essential  and  accidental,  intrinsic  and  adventitious,

(in  the  language  of  Bentham)  principal  and  accessory.  The
iX&  which  are  essential  or  principal  are  parts  of  the  title,
cause  they  are  absolutely  necessary  to  the  accomplishment  of
e  purposes  for  which  the  right  is  annexed  to  the  title  by  the
prgiver.  But  the  facts  which  are  accidental  or  accessory,  are
Dstituent  parts  of  the  title,  not  because  they  are  necessary  to
e  accomplishment  of  those  purposes,  but  for  some  reason
reign  to  those  purposes,  or  merely  to  render  their  accomplish-
ent  more  sure  or  commodious.

The  distinction  between  essential  or  principal,  and  accidental
t  accessory  facts,  may  hold  in  the  case  of  a  title  which  merely


890  Law  :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

Lect.  LVI  imposes  a  duty,  or  which  divests  or  withdraws  a  right  or  duty,
'  as  well  as  in  the  case  of  a  title  which  invests  with  a  right But»

for  the  sake  of  simplifying  my  language  as  much  as  I  can,  I
confine  myself  to  titles  considered  as  investing  with  rights.

Where  some  of  the  elements  of  a  title  are  accidental  or  acces-
sory, they  (generally  speaking)  are  merely  subservient  to  die
essential  or  principal  parts  of  it.  For  example :  They  serve  at
evidence^  preappointed  by  the  law,  that  that  which  is  substantiafly
the  title  has  happened.  This  is  the  case,  wherever  tradition  or
delivery  of  the  subject,  or  a  writing  with  or  without  seal,  or  ai
entry  or  minute  of  the  fact  in  a  register,  or  any  other  solemnity
of  the  like  nature,  is  a  constituent  part  of  a  valid  alienation  of
a  thing  of  a  given  class.

The  essentials  of  the  alienation,  as  between  the  alienor  and
alienee,  are  a  free  will  and  intention  on  the  part  of  the  former
to  divest  himself  of  the  right,  and  to  invest  the  other  with  it;
an  acceptance  of  the  proffered  right  by  the  alienee ;  and  some  1
fact,  or  another,  evincing  or  signifying  such  intention  and  \
acceptance.  The  tradition,  the  writing,  the  entry  in  the  roister,
or  the  other  solemnity,  is  merely  evidence,  required  or  preap-
pointed by  the  law,  of  that  which  is  essentially  the  title.

Some  evidence  of  the  intention  and  acceptance  is  indeed
absolutely  necessary.  But  evidence  other  than  the  solemnity
which  is  a  constituent  part  of  the  title  (as,  for  example,  a  verbal
declaration),  might  also  serve  as  evidence  of  the  intention  and
acceptance.  The  case  of  a  writing,  or  other  solemnity,  which
is  merely  preappointed  evidence  of  the  facts  that  are  essentially
the  title,  but  which  nevertheless  is  a  constituent  part  of  the
title,  shows  clearly  the  nature  of  the  distinction  between  the
essential  or  principal,  and  the  accidental  or  accessory  parts  of
a  title.

The  evidentiary  fact  is  made  a  part  of  the  title,  or  is
rendered  necessary  to  the  validity  of  the  title,  in  order  that
that  evidence  of  the  substance  of  the  title,  which  the  lawgivCT
exacts,  may  be  provided  by  the  party  or  parties  with  whom  the
title  originates.

The  invalidity  or  nullity  of  the  title,  in  case  the  evidentiary
fact  be  not  a  constituent  part  of  it,  is  the  sanctum  of  the  rule  of
law  by  which  the  evidence  is  required.  But  it  is  clear  that
the  rule  of  law  might  be  sanctioned  otherwise :  and  that,  if  it
were  sanctioned  otherwise,  the  pre-appointed  evidence,  though
stUl  requisite,  would  be  no  part  of  the  title.

For  example :  The  absence  of  the  given  solemnity,  instead


Titles.  891

f  nullifying  the  title  (or  being  made  a  presumption,  juris  et  de  Ij^ct.  LVI
we,  that  the  title  had  not  accrued),  might  be  made  a  presump-  '
on  primd  facie :  that  is  to  say,  a  presumption  which  the  party
isisting  on  the  title  might  be  at  liberty  to  rebut,  by  explaining
le  reason  why  the  prescribed  solemnity  had  not  been  observed,
id  by  producing  evidence,  otfier  than  the  pre-appointed  solemnity,
At  the  title  had  accrued.

Or  the  absence  of  the  given  solenmity  might  be  visited  on
6  party  bound  to  observe  it,  not  by  nullifying  his  title,  but  by
mishing  him  with  a  pecuniary  fine.

And,  on  either  of  these  suppositions,  the  prescribed  solemnity,
toogh  still  prescribed  or  exacted,  would  not  be  indispensable
ridence  of  the  svisiance  of  the  title,  or  (what  is  the  same
ling)  would  not  be  a  canstitiLent  part  of  the  whole  title.  For
is  manifest,  that,  wherever  an  evidentiary  fact  is  indispensable
ddence  of  a  given  title,  that  evidentiary  fact  is  a  component
trt  of  the  title,  although  it  is  not  an  essential  part,  but  is
erely  an  accidental  or  adventitious  one.

I  have  said  above,  that  where  some  of  the  elements  of  a
le  are  non-essential,  they  (generally  speaking)  are  merely
bservient  to  the  essential  parts  of  it  In  other  words,  though
ey  are  not  absolutely  necessary  to  the  accomplishment  of  the
nposes  for  which  the  law  annexes  the  right  to  the  title,  they
nd  to  render  the  accomplishment  of  those  purposes  more
rtain  or  commodious.  This,  for  example,  is  the  case,  where  a
lemnity  which  is  merely  evidentiary  of  the  title,  is  made  in
Feet  a  part  of  the  title,  inasmuch  as  the  title  is  not  complete
r  valid,  in  case  the  solemnity  be  not  observed  by  the  parties.

But  it  not  unfrequently  happens,  that  the  accidental  parts
t  a  title  are  in  no  respect  subservient  to  its  essential  or  principal
irta  In  other  words,  they  are  completely  foreign  to  the  reasons
r  purposes  for  which  the  right  in  question  is  annexed  by  the
nr  to  the  title.

This,  for  example,  is  the  case,  wherever  a  deed  or  other
'liting  is  indispensable  evidence  of  the  title,  and  where  more-
ircr  the  writing  is  not  admissible  evidence,  in  case  a  stamp  was
ot  affixed  to  it  when  the  alleged  title  arose.  In  this  instance,
le  stamp  is  made  a  part  of  the  title,  not  because  it  has  any
nmection  with  the  essentials  or  substance  of  the  title,  but  to
cure  the  due  payment  of  a  given  tax.

And  here,  again,  the  distinction  between  the  essentials  and
e  accidentals  of  the  title  is  glaring  and  manifest

The  nullity  or  invalidity  of  the  title,  in  case  the  stamp  be


892  Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

LicT.  LYI  not  affixed  when  the  alleged  title  arises,  is  the  saiktHom,  of  the
law  which  imposes  the  tax.  Bat  it  is  clear  that  the  law
imposing  the  tax  might  be  sanctioned  otherwise:  As,  for
example,  by  a  fine  on  the  party,  whose  duty  it  was,  when  tl
allied  title  arose,  to  pay  the  tax,  and  to  procure  the  fixation
of  the  stamp  to  the  evidentiary  instrument

In  practice,  the  law  imposing  the  tax  is  often  sanctioned
in  the  manner  which  I  am  now  suggesting. — ^Although  tJie
duty  ought  to  have  been  paid,  and  the  stamp  affixed  to  Ik
evidentiary  instrument,  when,  or  immediately  after,  the  all^
title  arose,  still  the  instrument  is  admissible  evidence  of  tiie
title,  if  a  tax  and  penalty  be  paid,  and  a  stamp  be  affixed  to
the  instrument,  subsequently  to  the  time  prescribed  for  those
purposes.  And,  in  this  case,  the  payment  of  the  tax,  thou^
still  requisite,  is  no  part  of  the  title.

Before  I  quit  the  topic  now  under  consideration,  I  would
remark  that,  in  many  cases,  it  is  not  easy  to  distinguish  the
essential  or  principal,  from  the  accidental  or  accessory  elementB
of  a  title.

This,  for  example,  is  the  case,  where  an  accidental  element
is  made  a  part  of  the  title,  because  it  is  deemed  commodiou
evidence  of  the  substance  or  essence  of  the  tide.  Here,  the
evidentiary  fact  is  an  a/xidental  part  of  the  title,  not  absolutdfi
but  only  in  a  qualified  manner.  For  some  evidence  of  the  tide
is  indispensable  or  necessary,  inasmuch  as  the  title  could  not  be
sustained  (in  case  it  should  be  impugned),  if  some  evidence  of
it  be  not  forthcoming  or  producible.

The  pre-appointed  evidence  is  therefore  an  accidental  or
accessory  part  of  the  title,  not  because  evidence  is  not  essen-
tial to  the  validity  of  the  title,  but  because  evidence  of  the  da»
or  description  which  the  law  preappoints  or  prescribes,  is  not  the
only  evidence  by  which  the  title  might  be  sustained.  The  law
might  leave  the  parties  to  provide  what  evidence  they  pleased
of  the  title ;  and  might  empower  the  tribunals  to  admit  the
evidence  provided  by  the  parties,  if  they  deemed  it  satisfactory.
By  determining  therefore  that  evidence  of  a  sort  shall  be  indis-
pensable, the  law  adjects  to  the  title  an  element  which  is  properly
accidental  or  accessory.

And  the  same  may  be  said  of  every  case,  in  which  a  fact  of
a  given  genus  is  inseparable  from  the  title,  but  in  which  the  law
determines  the  species  or  sort.

For  example :  Assuming  that  acceptance  by  the  heir  is  a
necessary  part  of  his  title  to  the  heritage,  but  that  the  law


Titles.  893

scribes,  under  pain  of  nullity,  the  form  or  manner  of  the  Lkct.  LVI
3ptance,  it  is clear  that  the prescribed  acceptance  is  an
idental  part  of  the  title,  in  so  far  only  as  the  law  determines
vMLuntT  of  the  acceptance,  instead  of  leaving  him  to  accept
1  any  manner  whatever.

I  assume,  merely  for  the  sake  of  example,  that  the  assent
icceptance  of  the  heir  is  a  necessary  ingredient  in  every  title
i  heritage.  In  truth,  it  is  not  For,  in  the  earlier  Boman
?,  there  were  certain  heirs,  styled  heredes  necessarii,  upon
>m  the  heirship,  with  the  acquittal  of  the  deceased's  obliga-
18,  was  imposed  as  a  duty.  Though,  afterwards,  they  were
bled,  by  taking  certain  steps,  to  repudiate  the  heirship :  or,  at
it,  were  only  bound  to  acquit  the  obligations  of  the  deceased,
BO  far  as  the  faculties  or  means  devolving  from  him  would
See  for  that  purpose.

It  is  doubtful  how  far  acceptance  is  necessary  in  our  own
' :  it  clearly  is  so  in  case  of  the  executor  or  administrator.
he  do  not  take  out  probate  or  letters  of  administration,  the
ite  and  effects  of  the  deceased  do  not  devolve  on  him.  But
icceptance  necessary  in  case  of  the  heir  ?  I  think  yes :  for
hout  seisin  (a  voluntary  act)  he  is  not  completely  heir :  seisina
\i  stipitem.^  If  the  successor  does  not  seise,  and  dies,  the
ite  passes  not  to  his  heir  but  to  the  heir  of  the  immediate
tester. Moreover,  seisin  was  originally  the  feudal  investiture,

acceptance  of  the  heritage  from  the  lord.  Before  fees  became
editary,  it  was  necessary  to  take  a  re-grant  from  the  lord  of

fee:  for  this  re -grant  seisin  was  afterwards  substituted.
w  this  must  necessarily  have  been  a  merely  voluntary  act.

At  all  events,  he  is  not  answerable  beyond  assets.

I  have  insisted  on  the  distinction  between  the  essential  and
I  accidental  parts  of  a  title,  because  they  are  often  confounded,
is  is  particularly  the  case,  as  I  shall  shew  hereafter,  where
I  accidental  parts  are  merely  evidence,  predetermined  by  the
r,  of  that  which  is  substantially  the  title  itself.

I  said,  in  my  last  Lecture,  that  wherever  a  right  or  duty  is
iferred  or  imposed  by  a  law  through  an  intervening  or  mediate
f,  or  wherever  a  right  or  duty  is  divested  or  withdrawn  by  a
'  through  an  intervening  or  mediate  fact,  the  right  or  duty
Y  be  said  to  be  conferred  or  imposed,  or  may  be  said  to  be

This  rule  is  no  loneer  applicable  to  person  last  entitled. (3  &  4  Will.  IV.

ments  in  England,  ue  law  of  intest-  c.  106,  and  22  &  23  Vict.  c.  35,  ss.  19,

mccession  being  now,  in  all  heredi-  20. ) In  Scotch  law,  acceptance  by  the

mtB,  regulated  by  descent  from  the  heir  is  voluntary. Lord  Adv.  v.  Steven -

purehaaer,  or  (in  certain  cases)  the  son. H.  of  Lords,  Feb.  25,  1869. — R.C.

^OL.  n.  2  0


894  Zaz£/ ;  Purposes  and  Subjects.

Lect.  LVI  divested  or  withdrawn,  through,  or  in  consequence  of,  a  iykk  :
^"^^' meaning  by  a  title,  such  intervening  or  mediate  fact

I  also  said,  that  wherever  a  right  or  duty  is  conferred  or
imposed  by  a  law  loitlunU  the  intervention  of  a  fad  distinU  frm
the  law  itself  or  wherever  a  right  or  duty  is  divested  or  \rith-j
drawn  by  a  law  without  the  intervention  of  a  fact  distinct  from
the  law  itself,  the  right  or  duty  may  be  said  to  be  conferred  or
imposed,  or  to  be  divested  or  withdrawn,  by  the  law,  inunediatdy
or  directly :  or  the  right  or  duty  may  be  said  to  be  conferred  or
imposed,  or  divested  or  withdrawn,  ijyso  Jure ; by  the  act  or
operation  of  the  law ;  or  by  the  mere  act  or  operation  of  the  laf.
And  this,  I  apprehend,  is  the  correct,  as  it  is  the  obviom
meaning  of all such expressions as the  following: namely,
'  rights  and  duties  ea;  lege ;'  '  rights  and  duties  ex  lege  immediaU;{
*  rights  and  duties  which are  divested and extinguished  J^:
immediate ;'  'rights  and  duties  which  arise,  or  are  divested  or;
extinguished  ipso  jure ;'  or  'which  are  created,  or  divested  a;
extinguislied,  by  act  or  operation  of  law.'
Improper  But  in  the  language  of  our  own  law,  and  of  other  particulir

tionso?  the  systems  of  positive  law,  these  and  the  like  expressions  are  not
expres- used  with  the  meaning,  or  not  used  exclusively  with  the  meaar
leg^imme- i°o>  which  is  obviously  the  proper  one. In  the  language  i
tiiau,  &c. our  own,  and  of  other  particular  systems,  they  are  always  al
commonly  applied  improperly :  in  cases,  that  is  to  say,  in  whick
the  right  or  duty  is  not  created  or  divested  by  a  law  vnthoui  ik
intervention  of  a  fact  distinct  from  the  law  itself ;  but  is  reallyi
created  or  divested  by  a  law  through  a  mediatal  or  inttrcemi
fact :  that  is  to  say,  through  a  title.

These  improper  applications  of  the  expressions  which  I  ha^

just  enumerated,  and  of  various  other  expressions  of  the  saiM

purport,  may  be  reduced,  I  think,  to  two.

1st.  Their  First,  in  some  cases  of  title,  the  title,  or  one  or  more  of  the

iise  to several  facts  constituting  the  title,  is  some  a^i  done  by  the  persoi

whether  or  who  is  invested  with  the  right,  who  is  divested  of  the  rigK  ^

"f  fif^  ^^^ whom  the  duty  is  imposed,  or  who  is  exonerated  from  the  du^.

party  en- But  in  other  cases  of  title,  neither  the  title,  nor  any  of  the  several

part^orthe  ^^^^  constituting  the  title,  is  an  act  done  by  that  person. "^

title.  will  of  the  person  (with  reference  to  all  the  facts  which  constitnt*

the  title)  is  perfectly  quiescent :  or  if  his  will  be  active,  it  i

merely  active  in  tlie  way  of  forbearance  from  some  given  act

Now  where  the  title  is  in  this  latter  predicament,  the  right  o

duty  is  said  to  arise,  or  to  be  divested  or  withdrawn, '  Ugt  i«

medioM  ;*  *  ipso  Jure ;'  by  act  or  operation  of  law;'  hjvicresn


Titles.  895

r  operation  of  law ;'  and  so  on :  These  and  the  like  expressions  Lect.  LVI
»lly  denoting  (no^  that  the  right  or  duty  is  invested  or  divested  '

ithout  the  intervention  of  any  title,  but)  that  the  title,  by
^Mch  the  right  or  duty  is  invested  or  divested,  is  not  any  act
r  the  invested  or  divested  person,  and  does  not  comprise  any
3t  of  that  same  person.

For  example :  according  to  the  Roman  law,  heirs  of  certain
Bsses,  whether  they  be  heirs  ex  testamento,  or  heirs  ab  intestato,
re  not  heirs  completely,  unless  they  accept  the  heritage.  And,
scordingly,  such  heirs  are  styled  voluntary,  or  are  said  to  acquire
J  their  own  act.  But  on  heirs  of  other  classes,  the  inheritance
evolves,  whether  they  wish  it  or  not,  on  the  decease  of  the
tttator  or  intestate,  without  an  act  of  their  own.  And,  accord-
igly,  such  heirs  are  styled  ne^^essary  (or  heirs  necessitated  or
bliged  to  take),  and  are  said  t©  take  the  heritage  ipso  jure,  or,
3  we  should  say,  by  mere  operation  of  law.

Again  Blackstone  says,^  that  purchase  or  perquisitio  is
istinguished  from  acquisition  by  right  of  blood,  and  is  made  to
idude  all  modes  of  acquisition  except  inheritance ;  because  in
lis  last  case  the  title  is  vested  in  the  party,  not  by  his  own  act
r  agreement,  but  by  simple  operation  of  law.  This  is  clearly
mistake :  it  vests  in  him  by  descent,  but  not  by  simple  opera-
on  of  law ;  for  if  he  did  no  act  amounting  to  seisin  it  would
ot  vest  in  him,  analogously  to  those  heirs  by  the  Eoman  law,
^ho  were  said  not  to  take,  ipso  jure,  but  by  their  own  act.

Again :  Where,  according  to  our  own  law,  a  man  grants  a
articular  estate  (as  an  estate  for  years  or  life)  to  one,  with  a
emainder  over  to  another,  the  remainder  is  said  to  be  created
y  his  own  act.  But  where  he  grants  a  particular  estate,  and
bes  not  part  with  the  remnant  of  his  own  estate,  that  remnant
8  styled  a  reversion,  and  is  said  to  arise  by  the  act  or  operation
i  law.  For  though  by  the  grant  of  the  particular  estate  he
bes  an  act,  he  does  no  act  in  respect  of  the  remnant,  but  the
emnant  continues  in  him,  or,  if  you  will,  reverts  to  him,  through
lis  mere  omission  or  forbearance  from  granting  it  away :  though
y  the  figment  of  seisin  the  whole  estate  is  said  to  pass  out  of
im  by  the  grant,  and  the  remnant  of  course  must  be  said  to
rvert  to  him  when  the  particular  estate  has  expired.  The
Uionale  of  the  matter  is  that  he  grants  away  the  particular

'  'By  inheritance  the  title  is  vested  was  a  necessary  link  in  the  chain  of

a  person,  not  by  his  own  act  or  agree-  title  :  The  English  heir  (it  is  presumed)

mt^  but  by  the  single  operation  of  is  obliged  to  repudiate ;  and  qusere,  the

w.' — Blackstone,  vol.  ii  p.  241.  manner  of  this  at Common  Law?  —

Differing  in  this  from  the  Roman  heir,  Marginal  Note,
lote  (xdUio  (or  some  equivalent  act)


896


Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.


Lect.  LVI  estate,  but  does  not  grant  away  the  remnant,  which  therefore
' continues  in  him. But  assuming  that  the  whole  estate  goes
out  of  him,  and  that  a  new  estate  is  created,  which  is  called  a
reversion,  and  which  returns  to  the  grantor,  this  estate  is  said  to
come  to  him  by  mere  operation  of  law. Speaking  rationally  no
new  estate  is  created.

Again :  According  to  the  later  Eoman  law,  the  absolute
property  rci  singtdce  cannot  be  acquired  commonly  without  an
apprehension  or  a  taking  possession  of  the  thing  by  the  acquirer  :
by  an  apprehension  consequent  on  tradition,  in  case  the  thing
be  acquired  through  an  alienation,  or  by  an  apprehension  with-
out tradition,  in  case  the  thing  be  acquired  otherwise  than  througi
an  alienation.  But,  in  some  cases,  property  vests  in  the  acquirer
without  an  act  of  apprehension.  And  in  these  cases,  the  passing
or  vesting  of  the  property  is  styled  by  modem  civilians  '  transUus
legalis  ;*^  that  is  to  say,  it  passes  by  the  law  to  the  acquirer,  with-
out an  act  of  his  own,  or,  at  least,  without  an  apprehension  by
him ;  without  that  act  of  apprehension  by  him,  which,  in  the
other  cases  to  which  the  cases  in  question  are  opposed,  that
particular  act  on  his  part  is  requisite.

2ndly.  Another  improper  application  of  the  expressions  in
question  seems  to  be  this  :

Certain  classes  of  titles,  or  of  modes  of  acquisition,  have
concise  names :  as,  for  example,  '  occupancy,'  '  alienation,'  *  pra-
scription,'  and  so  on.

But  other  classes  having  no  concise  names,  and  not  being
expressible  without  long  circumlocutions,  they  are  commonly
lumped  up  together,  and  opposed  to  the  classes  which  have  such
names,  by  the  expression  ' ex  lege'  ' ex  lege  simplicUer,'  ' ex  lege
immediaU*  etc.  This,  at  least,  appears  to  be  one  of  the  meanings
which  are  annexed  by  the  Eoman  lawyers  and  the  modem
Civilians  to  such  expressions  as  '  rights  and  duties  ex  legej  *  (X
lege  simpliciter,*  and  so  on.  The  writers  enumerated  titk  b^
tradition,  title  by  occupancy,  title  by  prccscription,  and  then  having
exhausted  the  titles  which  had  obtained  concise  names,  they
came  to  other  titles  which  they  lumped  together  under  the  name
of  title  ex  lege.  At  least  this  is  one  of  the  meanings  sometimes
annexed  to  the  term  by  the  Roman  lawyers  and  by  modem
Civilians.  It  answers  to  the  use  of  the  phrase  ^uo^t-contractSw
Eights  and  duties  which  are  said  to  be  qtuisi  ex  contractu,  are  in
truth  rights  and  duties  of  various  classes,  which  have  no  concise
generic  name  at  all,  and  are  opposed,  under  the  above  expression,

'  Thibaut,  System,  vol.  iL  p.  32.


2ndly.  To
distin-
goish  cer-
tain well
known
titles.


Titles.  897

»  rights  and  duties  arising  from  contracts  and  from  delicts.  Lkot.  LVI
^Tarious  classes  of  modes  of  acquisition,  having  no  concise  general '
Mimes,  are  lumped  up  under  that  name,  and  are  opposed  under
it  to  those  which  have  obtained  such  names.

There  is,  perhaps,  a  third  improper  application  of  the  above
ftxpressions;  but  I  do  not  feel  quite  certain  on  the  subject,
fheie  are  cases  in  which  the  law  annexes  to  alienations,  con-
tiacts,  and  other  dispositions,  certain  consequences  at  the  option
Df  the  parties,  and  other  cases  in  which  it  annexes  certain  con-
sequences, whether  the  parties  will  them  or  no.  In  the  latter
sase,  these  consequences  are  said  to  be  pvilici  juris :  meaning
ibat  they  are  so  connected  with  the  transactions  that  the  parties
iannot  avoid  them  if  they  will.  This  is  what  is  meant  by  the
luudm  to  which  I  have  formerly  alluded,  that  jvs  publicum  is
lot  defeasible  pdctis  privatis.

Now,  where  a  consequence  is  annexed  to  a  title,  whether  it
5  expected  by  the  parties  or  not,  or  is  made  inseparable  from
he  title,  whether  they  wish  it  or  not,  those  consequences  may
«  said  to  arise  by  mere  act  of  the  law,  as  opposed  to  those
rhich  arise  from  the  dispositions  of  the  parties.  There  are
everal  cases  of  this  sort.  In  Equity  (for  example),  the  vendor
las  a  lien  on  the  estate,  for  the  security  of  the  purchase  money,
lough  the  parties  should  make  no  provision  to  that  effect,  by
he  terms  of  the  contract,  the  law  itself  would  annex  that  con-
lition  to  the  purchase.

The  vendor  might  of  course  expressly  relinquish  his  lien,  but
f  nothing  is  said  to  the  contrary,  he  has  a  lien.  I  am  not  sure
whether  he  would  be  said  to  have  it  by  mere  operation  of  law.

In  the  Roman  and  in  the  French  law,  there  is  something
malogous.  In  a  marriage,  whether  it  be  so  provided  in  the
ontract  or  not,  the  wife  has  a  hypotJUqice  ligale  on  the  goods  of
he  husband  for  the  security  of  her  dower.

It  is  G83lQ6.hypot}Uque  Ugale  in  opposition  to  any  h5rpoth^que  or
ien  which  she  might  acquire  by  special  contract.  It  is  sometimes
Iso  called  a  tacit  as  distinguished  from  an  express  h)^othfeque.

There  may  be  other  meanings  of  the  phrases  in  question,  but
do  not  recollect  them.

These  improper  applications  mostly  arise  from  not  considering
at  every  right  and  duty  must  arise  and  be  determined  by  law.
ley  are  all  consequences  of  law ;  but  some  arise  or  are  divested
rough  a  title,  others  without  the  intervention  of  any  title,  and
ese  last  can  alone  be  said  with  correctness  to  arise  from  the
w  immediately.


898  Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.


LECTURE  LVII.

TITLES VARIOUSLY CLASSIFIED.

Lect,  [The  following  Lecture  is  the  last  given  by  Mr.  Austin  at  the

LVII. London  University. It  was  delivered  on  the  26th  of  June,  1832,
'  after  which,  he  was  compelled  by  ill  health  to  terminate  his  course

abruptly,  and  go  abroad.

He  had  begun  to  write  the  Lecture,  but  could  get  no  further  than
these  notes,  which,  as  the  reader  will  see,  are  but  suggestions  for  his
spoken  discourse.

There  remains  a  mass  of  papers  containing  heads  of  the  subjects
which  he  had  treated,  or  which  he  intended  to  treat  It  has  not  been
thought  expedient  to  print  them.  I  have,  however,  made  an  excep-
tion in  the  case  of  the  Notes  'on  Contracts  and  Quasi-Contracts,'
which  evidently  were  intended  to  form  the  groundwork  of  the  next
Lecture. They  are  referred  to  at  p.  901,  'post — S,  A.]

In  my  last  two  Lectures,  agreeably  to  the  order  which  I  announced

in  the  Lecture  preceding  them,  I  submitted  to  your  attention

certain  remarks  applicable  to  titles  in  general

Titles  by  I  now  proceed  to  certain  leading  divisions  of  the  titles  which

rights  in Properly  belong  to  the  department  of  the  Law  of  Things,  through

ran  are which  I  am  now  travelling :  namely,  the  titles  by  which  rights

f^t "*  °^  '^^^  ^'^^>  considered  as  existing  per  se,  are  acquired  or  lost,  or

invested  and  divested.

But  even  in  considering  these  titles,  I  shall  be  obliged  to
advert  occasionally  to  titles  of  other  classes.
Various  These  various  divisions  are  disparate  and  cross. They  are

af  cla^m-  various  attempts  to  find  a  basis  for  a  classification  or  arrange-
cation.  ment  of  the  various  genera  and  species  of  titles.  I  am  not
whether  Certain  that  any  such  is  practicable  or  useful : — ^whether  it  be
any  sue- not  better  to  select  the  principal  titles,  and  then  to  add  a  mis-

cessful.  ,,  ,

cellany — ex  lege.

This  is  the  case  in  Blackstone,  *  the  French  Code,*  Ulpian,
Bentham.  In  none  of  these  is  there  any  attempt  to  reduce  in
the  first  instance  the  whole  mass  of  titles  into  two,  three,  or  some
small  number,  of  very  extensive  genera,  and  then  refer  the  various
subordinate  genera  and  species  to  them.  They  begin  by  placing
on  a  line  a  considerable  number  of  genera  which  are  compara-
tively narrow :  and  perhaps  eke  out  these  by  a  misceUaneons
head.

The  great  difficulty  is  the  mixed  character  of  most  of  the
titles  which  in  every  system  occur.


f


Titles  vartotisly  classified.  899

Lbct.
Titles  ex  Jure  Gentium  and  ex  Jure  Civili,  LVll


Modes  of  acquisition  ex  jure  civili  are  many  of  them  not
peculiar,  but  are  merely  peculiar  modes  of  modes  which  may  be
i  deemed  universal :  modes  accompanied  by  peculiar  formalities.

jf (HeinecciuSy  lib.  ii  tit  i.-vi.)

[ Inconvenience  of  the  division  into  titles  ex  jure  gentium  and
^^jure  civUi  as  a  basis  for  classification.

The arrangement of titles  in  Gains  and  the Institutes,
:  mainly  founded  on  this  division.

(See  Gaius,  lib.  ii  Inst.  lib.  ii.)

Absurd  mode  in  the  Institutes  of  placing  servitudes  between
•  tbese  two  sorts  of  titles ;  servitudes  being  ex  jure  civili.

Acquisitions  per  universUatem  are  not  included  under  either
department

But  the  distinction  between  praetorian  and  civil  law  does  not
Quadrate  with  the  distinction  in  question.

The  only  practical  consequence  of  the  distinction  (as  I  have
^'emarked  already)  applies  to  crimes  juris  gentium  and  crimes
e  civili.


Original  and  Derivative  Titles.

Import  of  the  distinction.  Its  inconvenience  as  a  basis  for
a  classification  of  titles.  Would  separate  modes  of  acquisition
which  it  is  convenient  to  consider  together :  as,  e.g.  occupation
of  a  subject  nullius — or  by  dereliction.

Succession  not  co-extensive  with  derivation.  As,  e.g. :  in
tiie  case  of  constitutive  alienation.  So  in  the  case  of  commixtion,
specification,  etc.

Succession  sometimes  means  succession  to  the  dead,  ex  testa-
nunto  or  ab  intestato.

Investitive  events  are  original  or  derivative :  i.e.  acquired
from  the  State  directly,  as  in  cases  of  occupancy ;  or  from  or
through  a  person  in  whom  a  right  or  its  subject  formerly  resided.

The  distinction  appears  to  be  confined  by  some  to  rights  ex
jure  gentium :

By  others,  to  acquisitions  of  dominium  or  property,  pre-
eminently so  called,  and  other  jura  in  rem :  But  is  just  as
applicable  to  jus  in  personam  :  e.g.  Assignee  of  a  contract :
Succession  by  heir  to  rights  in  personam  of  deceased.

The  distinction  appears  to  be  useless,  except  for  this  purpose  :


900  Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects,

Lect. that  in  many  cases  of  derivative  titles,  the  party  is  subject  to  i


LVII


duties  passing  from  the  party  from  whom  his  right  is  derived.

Attempts  at  Classification.

Title  hy  descent  and  title  by  purchase.

A  convenient  division  in  the  Law  of  English  real  property,
for  reasons  given  by  Christian  and  Blackstone.*  But  a  division
only  of  one  class  of  rights  :  rights  in  rebus  singtdis  falling  under
the  law  of  real  property.

It  would  not  be  a  convenient  basis  for  a  general  division:
And,  accordingly,  modes  of  acquiring  personal  property  are  not
divided  in  that  manner.

It  is  not  complete,  even  with  reference  to  real  property.


Having  suggested  certain  of  the  leading  divisions  of  the  titles
by  which  Jura  in  rem  per  se  are  invested  and  divested,  I  shall
now  proceed  ta  donsider  seriatim  certain  of  their  classes.

These  classes  are,  in  every  system,  extremely  numerous:
So  numerous,  that  only  some,  and  perhaps  a  comparatively  few,
have  gotten  concise  names.  Whence,  as  I  remarked  before,  the
expression,  *  ex  lege;* — analogous  to  'variis  causarum  fi^iiris' vi
cases  of  obligations.

I  shall  only  consider  such  as,  in  some  form  or  other,  occur
in  all  or  most  systems ;  and  of  these,  only  the  more  important

I  shall  consider  them,  principally,  as  they  regard  absolute
property.

In  treating  them,  I  shall  abide  as  far  as  possible  by  Thibaut's
division; i.e.  shall  consider  first,  the  one-sided  titles  (or  not*
alienations  sensit  stricto). For  these  I  shall  compare  Muhlenbruch,
Mackeldey,  Thibaut,  Blackstone,  Bentham,  and  others.

One-sided  Modes  of  Acquisition,  and  Two-sided}

This  seems  to  be  substantially  a  division  into  alienation
(strictly  so  called),  and  all  other  modes  of  acquisition.

It  does  not  quadrate  with  original  and  derivative,  or  jm
civile  and  jv^  gentium,

Muhlenbruch's  division  (MS.  see  Table,  in  vol.  ii  p.  245)^

»  Blackstone,  vol.  ii.  pp.  200,  241-3.  in  the  text,  will  be  found  at  the  endof

*  Thibaut,  System,  vol.  iL  p.  82,  etc.  this  Lecture. The  matter  of  which  it  is

'  A  copy  of  this  Table,  taken  from  the  a  condensation  extends  over  seventeen

margin  of  the  page  in  Miihlenbruch  cited  pages. — S,  A.


Titles.  90 1

med  on  the  division  of  titles  into  such  as  are  e^  iwrt l^ox.
id.  such  as  are  not.  -

Occupancy.

3upancy  is  only  a  species  of  appropriation  :  {Sed  qu\) —
!  of  the  acquisition  of  a  servitude,  etc.,  praescription  must
e  i^th  appropriation.

cupancy,  what.  Occupancy  of  res  nvUitcs,  and  adverse
Dcy  of  res  alicujus. Physical  and  legal  possession.

be  examined  particularly  under  '£ight  of  Possession.')

stinguish  between  physical  occupancy  (or  putting  a  thing
of  the  uses  of  which  it  is  susceptible),  and  legal  occupancy.
tmark  on  the  talk  about  occupancy  being  the  origin  of
ty,  etc.

ackstone,  vol.  ii  chap.  L  p.  9.]

"hy  it  ought  to  give  a  right.

3ntham,  voL  ii  p.  110.]

liere  society  and  law  are  established,  the  original  reasons
reat  measure  cease.  It  is  then  little  more  than  a  mark,
his  is  a  reason  for  carrying  over  to  the  fisc,  or  to  private
IS  determined  in  the  way  of  devolution.

Alieruttion.

ssentials of an alienation. — Voluntary transference. —
tance  of  transfer": — Causa  or  inducement  being  implied,
oluntary  alienation  opposed  to  involuntary,  as  meaning
tion  compelled  by  law. The  latter  would  come  under  the
)f '  adjudication.'
le  various  modes  of  alienation,  are  merely  evidentiary.

Solemnities  adjected  to  Alienaiions :

jt  For  the  protection  of  the  parties  to  the  alienation :  A
le  including  the  doctrine  of  Evidentiary  Instruments,  and
»ctrine  of  Considerations.

idly.  For  the  protection  of  strangers  to  the  alienation :  A
le  including  that  of  Registration. See  pod,  *  Contracts,*
inations  of  jus  in  rem  and  i?i  personam^  '  evidence.'
mits  to  the  application  of  registration  and  of  other  pre-
lary  solemnities,  arising  from  the  nature  of  the  subject


902  Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

Lect.  Many  remarks  touching  solemnities  adjected  to  alienations

> ftpply*  i^utatis  mtUandis,  to  solemnities  adjected  to  other  titles.

Where  Jus  in  Re  passes  by  tradition  or  delivery,  the  tUuin
or  investitive  incident  consists :  Firsts  in  an  intention  on  the
part  of  the  alienor  to  alien ;  secondly,  in  such  a  catcsa,  consideia-
tion,  inducement,  or  motive  to  or  for  the  alienation,  as  the  lav
holds  to  be  just  or  sufficient

The  tradition  is  merely  preappointed  evidence  of  the  titvlm;
though  in  consequence  of  its  being  esteemed  necessary  evidence,
it  is  often  treated  as  part  of  that  titultis  (or  as  a  mode  of  acqui-
sition superinduced  upon  it),  and  is  sometimes  (for  that  reason)
feigned  to  have  taken  place.

Instances  in  which  property  passes  by  force  of  the  tUtdm,
evidenced  through  some  declaration  of  intention  other  tlm
tradition,  actual  or  symbolical.

The  Causa  or  consideration  may  be  insufficient  to  sustain  the
disposition  as  against  the  alienor  himself  {e.g. :  fear  of  violence;  ]
fraud ;  which  last  may  vitiate  a  consideration  otherwise  good); "
Or,  as  against  third  parties  (e.g. :  a  gift,  as  against  creditors).

Tradition seems to have been confounded with  Modu  ■

I

acquirendiy  on  account  of  its  having  been  preappointed  and  G»r
elusive  evidence  of  titulus  ;  until  (with  the  advance  of  civilisati(ffl)
the  real  nature  of  the  transaction  came  to  be  scrutinised.

Same  virtue  attributed  to  the  English  feoffm&fU  and  Uverf
(Blackstone,  vol.  ii.)

Absurdity  of  presuming,  not  the  titulus,  but  the  tradition  t«
be  the  evidence.

Evidentiary  Instruments  and  other  forms.  Interpretation
of,  etc.

Preappointed  evidence,  actions,  etc. ;  general  notions  of,  as
preliminary  to  dispositions.


Begistration.

(To  be  postponed  to  the  end  of  prsescription.)
Limits  to  the  application  of  registration,  arising  out  of  the
nature  of  the  subject.

Disposition.

'  Disposition '  may  be  conveniently  used  as  a  generic  expres-
sion for  any  act  by  which  a  person  assumes  to  transfer,  or
^  promises  to  transfer,  his  real  or  assumed  Eight,  or  any  part  of


Titles.  903

to  another. The  species  will  be  Voluntary  Alienation  and Lbot.

Dispositions  of  which  the  consequences  are  predetennined
the  law)  absolutely :  and  those  of  which  the  consequences
Igect  to  restrictions)  are  left  to  the  will  of  the  parties.  In
di  last  case,  consequences  (to  take  eJBect  in  default  of
ressed  intention  by  the  parties)  are  marked  out  by  the  law
lot.

Dispositions  are  valid  or  invalid : — If  valid,  the  consequences
predetermined  by  the  law,  or  they  are  left  to  the  appoint-
it  of  the  parties : — If  left  to  the  appointment  of  the  parties,
visional  dispositions  (dispositions  to  take  effect  in  default
Buch  appointment)  are  laid  down,  or  not.  If  there  be  no
lointment  by  the  parties,  where  there  are  such  provisional
positions,  these  take  effect — 1st:  Either  because  they  may
presumed  to  have  been  intended ;  or,  2ndly :  Because  they
I  the  best — generally  speaking — that  the  parties  could  have
de ;  or,  3rdly :  Because  it  must  be  presumed  that  they  did
\  intend  nothing,  and  here  is  a  something  which  they  might
re  meant.  On  the  first  and  third  suppositions,  these  provi-
nal  dispositions  are  indeed  nothing  more  than  dispositions  of
\  parties  (tacitly  referring  to  consequences  which  they  meant
adopt,  and)  which,  by  reason  of  known  rules  of  law,  it  is  not
Dessary  to  express. If  there  be  no  intelligible  appointment

them,  nor  any  in  their  default,  the  transaction  is  without
act

By  reason  of  the  invalidity  of  certain  dispositions,  and  of
5  necessity  of  making  provisional  dispositions,  a  large  space  is
every  Law  occupied  with  them. See  *  Combinations  of  Jm
Re*  etc.

Termination  of  Eights,

The  modes  in  which  jura  in  rem  terminate,  are  not  described
the  Institutes  of  Gains  or  those  of  Justinian.

It  is  necessary  to  describe  the  end  explicitly  and  apart,  only
those  cases  in  which  the  end  is  not  involved  in  a  mode  of
quisition.

[Dereliction,  See  Blackstone,  vol.  i.  p.  9  ;  Muhlenb.  vol.  i.  p.  236  ;
ago  G,  p.  238 ;  Mackeldey,  vol  i.  §  186 ;  vol.  iv.  cap.  ii.  §  272.]

Jura  in  Re  are  further  divisible  into —

'See  list  of  alienations,  contracts,  and  combinations  of  both, in  Bentham,
f»H&,  etc,  voL  L  p.  390.


904  Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

Lkot.  1st.  Such  as  are  available  against  all  the  world  (or  ag?


LVII


men  indefinitely  and  without  exception) ;

2ndly.  Such  as  are  available  against  all  the  world  '
certain  definite  exceptions.  The  first  of  these  is  also  a
Property :  The  second,  Possession  (must  be  distinguished  1
possession,  titvlui) ;  and  is  to  property  in  the  last  sense,  \
property  saddled  with  a  servilus  is  to  jus  in  re  unsaddled  wi
scrvitus.  Under  this,  therefore,  may  be  included  the  jm  i
acquired  by  a  purchaser  in  Equity,  as  against  all  subseqi
purchasers  ivith  notice ;  or  rather  as  against  all  mankind  ex
a  purchaser  witJiaiU  notice,  etc.


List  of  Authorities  referred  to  in  this  Lecture,

Blackstone.  Heineccius.

French  Code.  Gaius.

Mackeldey.  Institutes.

Muhlenbruch.  Table  IL  (post),

Hugo.  Falck.

Bentham.  Savigny.
Thibaut.


Table.


905


0


00

a


o


00


o

•s


Lect.
LVII


.r
I


SB

H

o


K
H

00

se;

c


00

D

■<


so

:i
o

a

■B

X


00

^ j3 ^ j3


»^  s  <:  s


o


o
_S


00

a

>


00


EO


00

o


o


73


^


>

•-a


0)


(-1


03

s

00

>


o

3

"IT?


a

.a

o


(I4


S

00
H


^


00 O


I .p^


1>

PQ


s

5

"->

!-■

itan

0

fl
s

s

0)

•«->

3

zfl o


a
2

o
o

a

.  S3

•a
a

o

J

8


~a


•  cu-
ss

O


>


OD

•«^

•a

3

o

(14


5

"a

3


s

•4J
00


9o6  Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.


FEOM  'LOOSE  PAPERS/
Containing  Heads  of  Lectures  or  Sections}

Contracts.

In  the  proper  sense  of  the  word,  a  Contract  is  a  promisi,
begets  only  jus  ad  rem  against  the  promisor :  ix.  a  right  to
act,  an  endurance,  or  a  forbearance  on  his  part.

(Gaii  Comnu  lib.  ii.  §  85. Trait^  etc.  272,  voL  ii.  p.  165. Tt
II.,  post,  last  note.)

Confusion  of  incidents  which  are  not  promises,  or  not  purdf
so,  with  Contracts.

Consequences  expressed  by  parties,  and  consequences  annexed
by  law  in  default  of  such  expression.

Consequences  of  Contracts  upon  third  persons.

In  the  language  of  the  English  Law,  *  Contract '  is  ofta
limited  to  mutrml  promises ;  Bond  and  Covenant  being  the  namfli
applied  to  unilateral  contracts.

(Bentham,  Traitds,  etc.  vol.  i.  289,  and  Fragment  on  Government)

Covenant,  in  the  Roman  Law,  a  generic  expression;  in  tin
English,  the  name  of  a  species.

(Hobbes,  Leviathan^  chap,  xiv.)

Bond,  which  etymologically  is  equivalent  to  obligation,  is  the
name  of  a  species  of  unilateral  contracts,  or  rather,  perhaps,  of  •
formality  necessary  to  the  validity  of  it.

Nominate  and  innominate  Contracts.

Most  nominate  contracts  appear  to  be  improper  contracts:
i,e.  not  to  be  productive  of  Jus  ad  rem  purely.

Pollicitation.

Why  a  jyromisc  is  binding  (abstraction  made  of  the  interests
of  third  parties).  It  binds,  on  account  of  the  expectation  excited
in  the  promisee.  For  which  reason  a  mere  pollicitation  (that  is,
a  promise  made  but  not  accepted)  is  not  binding ;  for  a  promise
not  accepted  could  excite  no  expectation.  So  of  a  promise
obviously  made  in  jest.

In  enforcing  contracts,  the  expectations  of  both  parties  must
be  looked  to. Where  the  terms  are  expressed  in  writing,  their

^  See  p.  898,  ante.


Fragments. — On  Contracts.  907

Linon  agreement,  contemplatioii,  expectation  (i.e.  of  the  burthen
ertaken  by  one,  and  the  advantage  expected  by  the  other),
o  be  collected  from  that.

In  the  Stipulation,  the  sense  in  which  each  party  contracted
5  expressed  apart,  in  order  to  render  a  doubt  impossible.

Where  language  is  not  employed,  the  common  meaning  of
\  parties  is  collected  from  the  peculiar  facts  of  the  case,  and
m  the  consequences  attached  by  the  law  (or  usage)  to  contracts

the  sort  Which  consequences  are  either  positive  or  dis-
sitive  :  i.e.  to  take  efifect  whether  the  parties  wish  them  or  not,
in  default  of  their  making  other  provisions  of  their  own. And

either  case  they  must  be  understood  to  contemplate  these
nsequences.

Solemnities  annexed  to  Contracts,

Their  ends,  as  regards  the  parties,  are  two.  1.  To  provide
idence  of  the  existence  and  purport  of  the  contract,  in  case  of
ntroversy. 2.  To  prevent  inconsiderate  engagements.

Many  of  these  solemnities  answer  (and  were  intended  to
iswer)  both  purposes,  such  as  Bond,  Covenant,  Stipulation,  etc.
^hers  answer  (or  were  only  intended  to  answer)  one.  Such  as
e  writing  required  by  the  Statute  of  Frauds.

Distinction  between  such  solemnities  as  are  merely  evidence
a  contract ;  and  such  as  are  evidence  of  a  contract  and  of  its

Earnest,  for  instance,  is  merely  evidence  that  a  contract  was
ide ;  its  subject,  its  terms,  etc.  must  be  established  by  evidence
iunde :  A  bond,  etc.  perpetuates  these  last.  So  a  Stipulation
IS  evidence  of  the  promise  and  of  the  terms.

In  UnUateral  Contracts,  inconsiderateness  is  prevented  by
e  unusual  solemnity  of  the  evidentiary  incident  annexed : —
jr.  the  sealing  of  a  bond  or  covenant,  the  interrogation  and
iswer  in  a  Stipulation.

In  Bilateral  Contracts  (by  the  Eomans  termed  '  consensual/
r  the  English  '  parol '),  it  is  supposed  to  be  prevented  by  the
Qtuality :  each  party  contracting  for  his  own  pecuniary  advan-
fgd\  contemplating  a  quid  pro  quo;  and  therefore,  being  in
lat  circumspective  frame  of  mind  which  a  man  who  is  only
unking  of  such  advantage  naturally  assumes.  This  solution
ill  not  indeed  apply  where  the  Consideration  is  past,  or  of  small
mount ;  but  that  this  is  only  an  inconsistent  application  of  the
octrine,  and  that  it  arose  out  of  the  principle  suggested,  is  clear,
om  the  considerations  afterwards  suggested.


9o8  Law :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

By  conseTisiml  is  meant,  resting  upon  consent  withoi
solemnity;  by  parol,  contracts  which  are  not  evidenced  b
writings  in  a  certain  shape  and  accompanied  by  certai
solemnities.

In  consistency  with  the  prirwiple,  the  doctrine  of  l/m
Mansfield  and  Wilmot  (in  3d  Burrows,  1665)  is  the  just  om
The  contrary  opinion,  however,  is  consistent  with  the  actual  k
To  require  quid  pro  quo  where  a  solemnity  analogous  to  that
a  bond  intervenes,  seems  to  be  absurd.

The  doctrine  of  Lord  EUenborough,  that  *  there  must
only  be  a  consideration,  but  that  it  must  be  stated  in
evidentiary  instrument,*®  is  pushing  the  deviation  from
principle  still  further. {Sed  Qu^.)

Quaere :  Whether,  in  cases  of  pure  contract,  the  solemni
in  question  are  ever  intended  for,  or  are applicable  to,
protection  of  third  persons  ?

In  cases  of  mortgage,  etc.  Registration  is  applicable
applied ;  but  only  in  respect  of  the  subject  over  which  the
in  re  is  given.

Since  a  contract  gives  no  jus  in  re^  registration,  as
the  subject,  could  be  of  no  use ;  for  as  the  party  who  cont
to  dispose  of  that  subject  may,  if  the  transaction  be  really
contract,  aliene  to  another  before  completion,  and  that  other
retain  (even  with  notice),  registration  would  be  nugatory.  It
only  where  the  other  could  not  retain  as  against  the  fomwi
party,  that  registration  is  of  use.  By  declaring  that  he  shall
retain  (if  there  be  no  registry  or  notice  in  some  other  way),  yoa
make  the  right  of  the  first  acquirer  conditional.  But  in  the  ca*
of  contract,  he  has  no  right,  conditional  or  unconditional,  as
against  third  persons ;  and  therefore,  third  persons  need  not  any
such  precaution.

Contracts  in  Equity,  which  give  jtis  in  re  as  against  all  who
have  real  or  constructive  notice,  aue,  as  against  all  such  persona,
alienations ;  though  only  contracts  as  against  others.  So  fai;
therefore,  as  regards  contracts,  registration  could  be  of  no  use,
but  in  respect  of  the  person  of  the  contracting  party.  By
knowing  the  nature  of  a  man*s  engagements  with  others,  I  may
make  a  guess  at  his  ability  to  fulfil  such  as  I  may  think  d
entering  into  with  him. His,  in  case  of  partnership,  has  taken

'  Wain  V,  Walters,  6  East,  10.  expression,  he  may  very  well,  in  the*

•  With  regard  to  the  meaning  of  jus  notes  for  his  own  use  adopt  it  as  short

in  re,  see  p.  960,  post. Although  the  for  the  expression  ^jus  in  rem  over  *

author  there  objects  to  this  use  of  the  specific  thing.' — R.  C.


Fragments. — On  Contracts.  909

to  a  certain  extent.  But  it  seems  to  be  of  limited
nation.

%«  db^efMit  or  presence  of  ConsidercUion,  how  it  affects  third
%s  (as  creditors  or  other  claimants  against  the  general  means
e  obligor).

ts  absence  as  affecting  third  persons  need  not  be  considered
e  the  contract  is  unilateral,  and  is  not  accompanied  by

solemnities  as  are  necessary  to  make  unilateral  contracts
ng  on  the  promisor. Not  being  binding  on  him,  it  is  of
e,  and  A  fortiori,  not  binding  on  those  who  acquire  rights
him.
Jut  unilateral  contracts,  which  would  bind  the  promisor,  are

void  as  against  third  persons,  because  they  are  without
deration ;  i,e.  without  valuable  consideration ;  for,  as  we
often  observed,  tw  promise  or  act  is  without  a  consideration,
'.ement,  or  motive  of  some  sort.

tncUyse  the  different  motives  ;  and  shew  why  a  promise  made
;her  than  a  valuable  consideration  is  not,  and  ought  not  to
x)d  against  those  who  have  acquired  rights  out  of  trans-
is  foxmded  on  such  consideration.
yifference  between  the  intensity  of  the  expectations,
>anger  of  fraud.  Danger  of  what  would  have  the  same
.,  if  rights  acquired  for  valuable  consideration  could  be
ted  wholly  or  partially  by  inconsiderate  engagements.
X)nement  of  the  claims  of  the  industrious  to  those  of  the

Difference  between  vicious  consideration  and  want  of  consider-

iVhere  the  consideration  is  vicious,  the  contract  begets  no
ation.  Where  there  is  a  want  of  consideration,  tliere  is
bligation  against  the  contracting  party,  provided  certain
inities  are  observed.  '  Want  of  consideration  '  is  an  elliptical
bridged  expression  for  '  want  of  valuable  consideration/
Why  a  contract  {stHctly  so  called)  gives  tw  right  in  re  05
ist  third  persons,  whether  of  property  or  right  of  possession,
rhe  principle  seems  to  be  this :  that  for  want  of  sufficient
icity  (or  what  is  deemed  sufficient),  the  right  of  the  obligor
the  subject,  and  consequently  his  power  of  disposition,  are
rently  unaltered:  the  contract  is  not  generally  known.
i  parties,  therefore,  afterwards  acquiring  by  alienation  (to
h  more  publicity  is,  or  ought  to  be,  attached),  would  be
)pointed  in  their  weU-founded  expectations,  if  their  right
i  be  defeated  by  a  right  arising  out  of  a  transaction  of  which
)L.  n.  2d


910  Law  :  Purposes  and  Subjects.

(as  is  assumed)  they  had  no,  or  very  inferior,  means  (tf  aso
ing  the  existenca

Upon  this  principle,  a  transaction  accompanied  bj
evidentiary  solemnities  that  at  law  it  would  be  merely  a  co
is,  in  equity,  an  alienation  (i.e.  gives  a  jm  in  re  which  r
classed  with  rights  of  possession),  against  all  who  do  not
wards  acquire  by  a  conveyance  without  notice  of  the  co
Equity  looks  at  the  purpose  of  the  solemnity  which  is  attac
a  conveyance.  That  such  solemnity  imparts  a  knowledge
disposition  to  third  persons,  is  merely  a  presumption ;  t
the  absence  of  it  no  such  knowledge  is  imparted,  is  also  t
presumption ;  and  since  this  limited  presumption  will  nc
if  there  be  evidence  aliunde  (t.e.  either  actual  evideu
presumptio  juris  of  another  sort — constructive  evidence]
such  knowledge  was  had,  Equity,  in  these  cases  (whether  ui
or  not,  is  a  question),  overrules  the  presumption,  and  giv
subject  to  the  obligee,  as  against  all  who  are  proved  to  ha'
that  notice  which  (for  want  of  a  conveyance)  it  is  only  pn
that  they  had  not.

Cases  in  which  Equity  does  not  give  jus  in  re  against  aa
with  notice,  hut  defeats  an  existing  jus  in  re  tn  favour  of  act
without  n4)tice. This  is  also  resolvable  into  principles  of  evi

Where  the  contract  is  accompanied  by  some  incident
is  presumed  to  give  general  notice  of  the  disposition,  it  cl
its  character  and  becomes  an  alienation,  e.g.  a  sale  with  de
actual  or  symbolical.

In  these  cases  there  is  jus  in  re  given  to  the  obligee
power  of  making  a  valid  disposition,  and  of  retaining  as  a
the  obligor  or  subsequent  acquirers  from  him),  though  for
purposes  (such  as  that  of  rescinding  the  disposition  and  reco
the  equivalent — charging  the  obligor  with  the  loss  of  the  si
etc.),  the  contract  is  still  in  fieri,  as  between  obligor  and  o
Stoppage  in  transitu  is  a  good  illustration.  The  disposit
an  alienation  being  incomplete,^^  the  seller,  by  preventi
completion,  prevents  the  right  of  the  creditors  from  attach

Wherever  a  disposition  given  jus  in  re  {i.e.  a  right  c
part  of  the  vendee  or  those  who  take  from  him,  against  acq
from  the  vendor),  the  disposition  is  manifestly  an  alienatio
it  be  not,  there  are  no  means  of  distinguishing  the  one  fro
other. The  ambiguity  in  truth  arises  from  a  very  gross  mi

^^  But,  according  to  English  law,  if  tract  of  sale.  Therefore  in  Engli
the  subject  be  specific,  the  alienation  is  stopper  in  transitu  is  an  anomalj
looked  upon  as  completed  by  the  con- note,  p.  874,  voL  i.  anie. — R  C


^^^S^^^Xts.^-Qtiosi'Contracts  and  Qimsi' Delicts.  91 1

X  confounding  evidentiary  incidents  with  dispositions.  Because
crtain  incidents  at  law  give  no  jus  in  re  (and  therefore  are
otracts),  ergo,  the  dispositions  clothed  with  these  incidents  are
iD  contracts,  though  in  Equity  they  have  a  different  efifect.


QUASI-CONTRACTS AND QuASI-DeLICTS.

BCTLT,  Quasi-Contracts  are  acts  done  by  one  man  to  his  own  Quasi-Con-
mnvenience  for  the  advantage  of  another,  but  without  the  ^P^^,
diority  of  the  other,  and  consequently,  without  any  promise  what  ?
I  the  part  of  the  other  to  indemnify  him  or  reward  him  for
■  trouble.

Instances :  Negotiorum  gestio,  in  the  Roman  Law :  Salvage,
ttlie  English.

An  obligation  arises,  such  as  wovid  have  arisen  had  the  one

jriy  contracted  to  do  the  act,  and  the  other  to  indemnify  or

ward. Hence  the  incident  is  called  a  '  quasi-contract ;'  i.e.  an

cident,  in  consequence  of  which  one  person  is  obliged  to  another,

t^  a  contract  had  been  made  between  them.

The  basis  is,  to  incite  to  certain  useful  actions.  If  the
mdple  were  not  admitted  at  all,  such  actions  would  not  be
■formed  so  often  as  they  are.  If  pushed  to  a  certain  extent,
would  lead  to  inconvenient  and  impertinent  intermeddling,
Ui  the  view  of  catching  reward.  Whether  it  shall  be  admitted,
not,  depends  upon  the  nature  of  the  act : — i.e.  its  general
ifcore ;  since,  without  a  general  rule,  the  inducement  would  not
lorBte,  nor  would  the  limitation  to  the  principle  be  understood.
Bts  which  come  not  within  the  rule,  however  useful  in  the
Blicular  instance,  must  be  left  to  benevolence  incited  by  the
her  sanctions.

(See  '  Sanctions,'  post.)

But  quasi-contract  seems  to  have  a  larger  import ; — denoting
ly  incident  by  which  one  party  obtains  an  advantage  he  ought
%  to  retain,  because  the  retention  would  damage  another ;  or
r  reason  of  which,  he  ought  to  indemnify  the  other.  The
xnninent  idea  in  quasi-contract  seems  to  be  an  undue  advantage
bich  would  be  acquired  by  the  obligor,  if  he  were  not  compelled
>  relinquish  it  or  to  indemnify.

Quasi-delict : — an  incident  by  which  damage  is  done  to  the
Higee  (though  without  the  negligence  or  intention  of  the  obligor),
id  for  which  damage  the  obligor  is  bound  to  make  satisfaction.


912  Law  I  Purpasa  omd  Subjects,

It  is  DOC  %  delict,  because  intention  or  ne^t^enoe  is  of  the
essence  of  %  delkt :  it  beii^  usekss  to  apply  a  sanction  where
the  will  is  pasare.

Tbe  distinction  between  qnasi-ocmtzact  and  quasi-delict,
seems  to  be  useless.  In  neither  case  is  there  either  contract  or
delict.  Ther  are  meielT  arranged  under  these  heads,  because
there  is  an  obligation  {strido  <nu«),  as  there  would  have  been
if  there  had  been  a  contract  or  a  delicL

Th^efore  ome  jictiom  sttJUei :  and  the  rational  way  of  cod-
sidering  the  matter  is,  to  lock  at  the  ineidemi  as  begetting  an
obligation ;  and  to  treat  the  refusal  to  make  satisfieu^tion,  or  to
withhold  the  advantage,  as  a  delict ;  i>.  as  a  breach  of  that
obligation.

The  terms  are  merely  a  sink  into  which  such  obligatoij
incidents  as  are  not  contracts,  or  not  delicts,  but  beget  an  obliga-
tion as  if,  etc.  are  thrown  without  discrimination.  And  this  is
the  rational  view  which  Grains  has  taken  of  the  subject,  in  i
work  firom  which  an  excerpt  is  contained  in  the  Pandects."

Sott. — Many  incidents  which  are  treated  as  quasi-contractt
or  quasi-delicts  are,  in  truth,  contracts  or  delicts ;  or  need  not  be
thrown  into  this  common  receiver,  because  they  may  be  tieatei
of  conveniently  elsewhere.  Examples:  1°.  The  refusal  to  paj
money  received  under  a  mistake,  appears  to  be,  not  a  quasi-con-
tract, nor  a  quasi-delict,  but  a  delict ;  there  being  intentionalitj.
2'.  Erlctio,  which  is  a  tacit  contract  3°.  The  obligation  of  the
hwres  to  pay  legacies ;  which  it  is  absurd  to  refer  to  a  quasi-
contract,  and  not  to  the  will,  etc

In  the  English  Law  the  above  terms  do  not  occur;  theie
the  obligation  is  said  to  arise  out  of  a  contract  or  promise  which
the  law  implies. But  the  fiction  is  the  same.

Demand  necessary  to  support  an  action  on  jus  in  re.

If  there  be  no  delict  without  intention  or  n^ligence,  quasi-
delicts  (like  quasi-contracts)  are  merely  sources  of  obligations^
the  refusal  to  fxdfil  which  is  properly  the  cause  of  action.  Thus,
the  fact  of  my  ha\ing  received  money  through  a  mistake,  is  not
a  delict ;  but  begets  an  obligation  to  repay  that  money  or  an
equivalent.  And  the  refusal  (express  or  indicated  by  conduct)
to  repay,  is  the  immediate  cause  of  action :  t.e.  is  a  delict

{Qil\  Or  the  action  may  be  considered  a  vindication.)


^


"  It  is  remarkable  that  Lord  Stair,  obligations '—duties  to  which,  nameh,

who  ma^  well  be  called  the  Gains  of  we  are  bound  by  the  will  of  God  wiiioat

Scotch  jurisprudence,  adopts  a  similar  our  own engagement  or  consent,  aad

arrangement, and classes both under  which  include  uie  primary  duties  arisQ^

one  head,  which  he  names  '  Obediential  itom  the  domestic  conditions. 'R>  C


Fragments. — Quasi-contracts  and  Qtcasi- Delicts.  9  ^  3

In  those  cases  in  whicli  a  consideration  has  failed,  there  is

beach  of  accessory  contract.
So,  if  I  refuse  to  make  compensation  for  damage  done  by  my
it  (without  intention  or  negligence  on  my  part)  there  is  a
Voiict ;  but,  before  refusal,  an  obligation  to  make  such  compensa-
lioD. (Qu\  Whether  demand  be  necessary  to  sustain  the  action?)

It  would  appear,  therefore,  that  every  Eight  of  Action  arises
mt  of  a  delict:  i.e.  a  violation  of  some  positive  or  negative
lUigation :  And  all  such  obligatory  incidents,  as  amount  to  a
tase  of  action  without  demand  and  refusal,  are  not  quasi-
feODtracts  or  quasi-delicts,  but  breaches  of  contract  or  violation
if  JUS  in  re.

In  quasi-contract,  the  prominent  idea  seems  to  be  the
klfantage  derived  by  the  obligor  (though  inconvenience  must,
if  course,  have  been  sustained  by  the  obligee).

In  quasi-delict,  the  prominent  idea  is  the  damage  suffered
Ijr  the  obligee ;  any  advantage  which  may  have  accrued  to  the
oUigor  being  accidental  to  the  cause  of  obligation.  But  in  many
iMes  the  advantage  and  damage  so  suppose  one  another  that  it
b  difficult  to  determine  the  class.  As  solutio  indebiti.  Hence,
'«  variis  causarum  figuris'

If  the  terms  are  to  be  retained,  it  would  be  better,  perhaps.
Id  limit  'quasi-contract*  to  incidents  in  which  a  service  has
been  rendered  by  the  obligee,  and  on  which,  therefore,  it  may
ke  presumed  that  the  obligor  (if  conscious  and  capable  of  con-
iau^g)  would  have  purchased  the  service  by  a  promise  to
leqnite,  etc. And  to  call  aU  other  incidents  '  quasi-delicts.*

Note, — Wherever  there  is  a  promise,  expressed  or  implied
{te.  to  be  inferred  from  the  words,  or  from  the  position,  or  con-
duct of  the  obligor,  previous  to  the  completion  of  the  obligatory
incident),  that  incident  is  not  a  quasi-contract,  but  a  genuine
•ontract. And  wherever  there  has  been  negligence  or  intention,
Qomediate  or  remote,  on  the  part  of  the  obligor,  there  is  a  genuine
Wict It  would  seem,  therefore, that  damage  done by  the
Utention  or  negligence  of  servants,  by  vicious  cattle,  etc.  of  the
<*Bgor,  ought  to  be  rather  ranked  with  delicts :  for  there  is  a
i^gree  of  negligence  in  employing  such  servants,  or  in  keeping
•Och  cattle,  etc. In  short,  where  the  damage  is  not  the  con-
^uence  of  some  incident  which  prudence  could  not  prevent,
^re  is  always  room  for  applying  a  motive  to  the  will ;  and,
fcerefore,  the  incident  may  be  classed  with  delicts.

(See  *  Sorts  of  Civil  Injuries,*  post)


914  Law:  Purposes  and  Subjects,

Tjfnirifig  quasi -coDtnct  to  serdoes  withoat  instance  and
prcHnise,  and  qoasi-detict  to  damage  without  intention  or  negli-
gence, immediate  or  r«note, — there  seems  no  reason  for  the  use
of  the  two  terms;  either  being  alike  applicable  by  the  same
analogy :  ix.  an  analogy  not  <^  obligatory  incidents,  but  of
conseqaent  rights  and  obligations^  Neither  a  quasi-contract  nor
a  quasi-delict  is  like  either  a  contract  or  a  delict;  but  the
ofrntequtntt*  of  exthtr  of  the  former,  are  like  the  consequence  A
eiiker  of  the  latter ;  ve.  in  begetting  ^ro  ad  rem.

Blondeau  seems  to  mistake  the  meaning  of  quasi-delict
The  cases  which  he  has  cited  as  quasi-delicts  are  delicts :  for
there  is  intention  or  negligence  Quasi-delicts,  in  truth,  are  not
vioiaiions  of  rights  at  all ;  but  sources  of  Jura  ad  rem,  the  refiisal
or  omission  to  satisfy  which,  is  a  delicL

If  an  incident  b^et  direeUy  an  action,  it  should  clearly  be
ranged  with  delicts,  and  not  with  quasi-contracts  or  quasi-delicta

Perhaps  all  incidents  not  contracts,  which  imply  neither
n^ligence  nor  intention  on  the  part  of  the  obligor,  but  whid
yet  beget  an  action  without  refusal  or  omission  to  satisfy,  eta
should  be  called  quasi-delicts,  being  like  delicts  in  dindbi
b^etting  an  action,  but  unlike  them  in  respect  of  the  absence
of  n^ligence  and  intention.

And  aU  incidents  not  contracts,  which  imply  neither  negli-
gence, etc.  but  which  only  b^et  an  obligation,  the  refusal  or
omission  to  satisfy  which,  is  the  direct  cause  of  action,  should
be  called  quasi-contracts :  they  being  like  contracts  (rather  than
delicts),  inasmuch  as  they  engender  an  obligation  which  in  itself
supposes  no  right  of  action,  but  only  b^ets  an  action  on  hrta^

If  this  be  so,  quasi-delicts  should  be  classed  with  '  Sanction-
ative  Rights  and  Obligations/

Gains  makes  no  distinction  between  delicts  and  quasi-delicts,
though  he  adverts  to  quasi-contracts.

Quasi-contracts  and  quasi-delicts,  are  not  the  only  cases  in
which  the  name  of  one  incident  is  extended  to  another,  by  reason
of  a  resemblance  between  the  rights  and  obligations  which  they
respectively  engender.  Another  instance,  is  the  extension  of  the
term  '  purchasers  for  valuable  consideration,'  to  certain  parties
who  are  entitled  under  marriage  settlements.

The  confusion  entirely  proceeds  from  the  want  of  a  generic
expression  by  which  these  incidents  can  be  bundled  up  together.

And  note ;  the  same  want,  instead  of  leading  to  the  extension


k


Fragments.-^Quasi-Delicts.  9  \  5

V  a  narrower,  sometimes  leads  to  the  limitation  of  a  wider :
kiin  the  instance,  Rights  arising  by  operation  of  Law  ;  as  if  all
%htB  did  not  so  arise,  and  as  if  it  were  possible  to  distinguish
lb  narrower  class  of  rights  by  a  term  which  is  common  to  all.

Tendeney  to  confound  tacit  contracts  with  qtmsi-contracts,
(Give  instances:) This  confusion  is  more likely  to  arise
nongst  English  lawyers  than  others,  on  account  of  their  wanting
generic  name  (which,  bad  as  it  is,  the  Bomans  have)  for
larking  this  sort  of  obligatory  incidents.

Orgin  of  the  classification  of  spontaneous  services,  and  of  damage
Uhout  intention,  etc,  with  contracts  and  delicts,

IbL  The  want  of  generic  names.

2nd.  The  extension  to  the  former  of  the  remedies  previously
mexed  to  the  latter.


Ida
'A


Law:  Purposes  and  Svbjtcts.


SI


K i


lis
?5i


3^1 flSS ^


=1


■ry  i  J  ^


'IsJii'


?H|1


-It!:


M


S  litlilHI

ajllf.llll'


i

I

I-
1!

fl

15


JURISPB  UBENCE.


TABLES AND NOTES.


b  the  Preface  (p.  24,  vol.  i.  aidi)  to  this  work,  I  mentioned  the
Ibbles  which  Mr.  Austin  drew  out  and  distributed  to  the  members  of
Ui  class.  I  also  gave,  in  his  own  words,  his  account  of  them,  and  of
Ui  parpose  in  constructing  them.  I  added,  that  they  were  lament-
■Uj^  incomplete,  but  that  I  was  not  without  a  faint  hope  that  some
if  the  materials  destined  for  the  construction  of  the  missing  Tables
■i^t  be  found  among  his  papers.  I  have  clung  to  this  hope  with  a
■nacity  which  there  was  little  to  justify  ;  but  after  the  most  minute
■euch  and  anxious  inquiry,  I  am  compelled  to  relinquish  it.

Notwithstanding  the  incontestable  value  of  the  following  Tables

flttd  Notes,  it  is  not  without  infinite  pain  that  I  submit  them  to  the

ynbUc  in  their  actual  state  ;  especially  since  I  have  the  full  persuasion

tilt  some  at  least  of  those  which  are  wanting  were  either  prepared

«r  in  course  of  preparation. As  I  always  corrected  the  press  with

Inn,  I  ought  to  be  able  to  recollect  exactly  what  were  printed,  but

•wreral  circumstances,  which,  for  his  justification,  it  may  not be

^pertinent  to  mention,  tended  to  efface  any  distinct  memory  of  them

iwn  my  mind. After  the  close  of  his  Lectures  in  1832,  he  was  in  such

*rtate  of  suffering  and  depression  that  my  only  solicitude  was  to

«p  everything  out  of  his  way  that  could  remind  him  of  his  abortive

Fojects  and  frustrated  hopes  \  and  I  carefully  avoided  all  mention  of

v  Lectures. The  copies  of  the  Tables,  excepting  the  few  he  had

wibated,  were  left  in  the  hands  of  the  printer,  and  remained  there

ffl  very  recently.

In  the  Preface  I  have  mentioned  the  several  occupations  in  which
*r.  Austin  engaged.  To  these  successively  he  devoted  all  the  time
lod  thought  of  which  incessant  attacks  of  illness  left  him  master ;
*od  after  eight  years  passed  in  a  fruitless  and  exhausting  struggle,  he
^  compelled  to  abandon  it^  and  to  seek  some  mitigation  of  his
(offerings  abroad.

Thus  there  never  was  a  time  at  which  he  could  have  been  urged
to  complete  this  laborious  work  with  the  smallest  chance  of  success.
Nor  was  it  ever  alluded  to,  till  within  the  last  few  years,  when  he
xmid  talk  with  calmness  of  his  failures  and  disappointments. He


9 1 8  yurtsprudence.

one  day  said  to  me, '  I  have  been  looking  over  those  Tables  of  mine,
and  I  may  say  to  you  that  I  am  really  surprised  at  my  own  work'
And  he  went  on  to  describe  what  had  excited  in  him  the  rare  emotion
of  self- applause.  Thus  encouraged,  I  did  venture  to  express  my
ardent  desire  that  he  would  finish  them,  and  return  to  the  work  in
which  he  acknowledged  his  own  mastery.  But  he  only  replied,  *  It
is  too  late — ^At  that  time  I  had  it  all  before  me.  The  time  is  oTer.
Besides,  who  would  care  for  them  V

This  was  the  last,  I  believe  it  was  the  only  time,  we  ever  spoke  of
them,  and  it  was  decisive.

And  thus,  after  the  lapse  of  thirty  troubled  years,  I  can  do  nothing
but  either  suppress  what  competent  judges  deem  so  conclusive  i
proof  of  his  ability  and  learning  (and  what,  above  all,  he  himself
thought  admirable),  or  give  the  fragments  which  exist  of  the  complete
structure  he  had  planned.

It  appears  clear  from  the  numerous  references  to  them  which  will
be  found  in  the  following  pages,  that  the  missing  Tables  were  in
existence.  Whether  any  manuscript  was  lefb  in  the  printer's  hands,
and,  in  so  long  a  lapse  of  time,  destroyed,  or  whether  he  himself^
dissatisfied,  as  he  was  so  apt  to  be,  with  what  he  had  done,  destroyed
it,  it  is  impossible  for  me  to  conjecture.  I  have  carefully  examined
every  portion  of  the  manuscripts.  I  find  a  great  number  of  notes
which  were  probably  intended  to  be  used  in  the  completion  of  this
work,  but  nothing  that  can  be  applied  to  that  purpose  by  any  hind
but  his. — S.  A,


920


Jurisprudence.


TABI


The  Arrangement  which  seems  to  have  been  i

Jus  (law)  Publicum  :

( '  Quod  ad  SlxU.u,m  Rei  Romance — ad  publioe  ntilia — speciat  :
Quod  in  sacris,  in  sacerdotibus,  in  magistratibos  consistit/)


I

Jus  (law)  quod  ad  Personas  Jus  (law)  quod  ad  Res

pertinet :  (otherwise,  De  Pbrsonis — De  Jure  pertin^t :  (otherwise  De

Peraonarum  —  Divisio Personarum: ^  tup  Rebus.) [^ote  5.]

rpoauxufy  dtaLpeirts — De  Ck)NDiciONB  Homi-  The  subjects,  or  matter,  of  which  <

num — De  Statu  Hominum — De  Peraonarum  part ment  appear  to  be  the  folio vii

Statu.) [ftote  4.]  viz,—


I
DoMiKiUM  (in  the  large  signification) :

A  class  of  Rights  (their  corresponding  duties  being

implied)  which  contains  the  following  genera^  viz. — ■


I

Dominium  rei  singulse :  (or
Dominium^  in  the  strict  ac-
ceptation. Otherwise  styled
Proprietas  ;  otherwise,
In  Re  Potestas.)


Jura,  sire  Jura  in
Re  alien& :  velut
ServUuSf  Jus  Pigno*
ris,  etc.


Dominium Renm  /»

universitatem  aeq*
sUarum :  vdut  H«nA
tatUy  DotiSf  Pecuia,  elt


Jus  Possessionis


Juris  in  re  alienft
Quasi  Possessio.


[For  the  ^ote0  to  this  Table,  see  the  next  page.  ]


Tables  and  Notes.  92 1


the  Boman  InstitutumcU  Writers. j^Ot0  1-

Jus  (law)  Privatum  :

ad  tingulorum  ntilitatem — ad  privcUim  utilia — spectat.') [^te  2.]

Containing —


I
Jus  (law)  quod  ad  AcnONKS

pertinet :  (otherwise  De  Ac-
TIONIBU&)  [^ote  3.]
A  department  exclusively  conversant  (according
to  the  intended  arrangement)  about  Civil  Procedure  ;
but  (as  it  is  given  by  Oaius,  and  also  by  his  imita-
tor Justinian)  including  the  description  of  a  few
rights  and  obligations  which  properly  are  substantive.


Obligatio  (in  the  correct  signification) : [^ote  6.  ]
A  class  of  Rights  and  Obligations  which  contains  the  follow-
ing genera,  viz. : —


S8  ex  Contractu  Obuqationes  ex  Oblioationrs r^4,  7  1

r  Contractu :  Delicto :  quasi  ex  Delicto,  1^^^'' *  1

rtment  relates  to Which  department

tions  arising  im-  relates  to

Dm  contracts  and 1.  Delicts^  in  the  strict  sig-

cts  ( — Primary  nitication of  the term: i.e.

—Obligations  no/  Damage intentional or by negligence (*dolo aut

injuries,  delicts,  culpd^)^  to  abftolute  rights — to  jura  in  rem  (in  the

largest  import  of  the  phrase) — to  jura  quce  valent  in

es consisting  in  personas  oeneratim  (as  opposed  to  jura  quae  valent  in

■formance,  or  in  personas  determinatas). (See  Table  II.  note  8.) —

performance, of  As  examples  of  Delicts,  in  the  strict  signification  of  the

ary obligations  :  term,  may  be  mentioned,  Assaults,  and  other  offences

against  the  body  ;  Lil>els  and  other  offences  against

tions  arising  im-  reputation  ;  Thefts  considered  as  civil  injuries  ;  For-

om  those  injuries,  cible  dispossession ;  Detention  malAJide,  from  the  domi-

iiatcly  from the  nvs, or  proprietor of  the  subject ; Trespass upon

igations  of  which  another's  land  ; Wounding,  or  otherwise  damaging,

es  are  violations  :  his  slaves,  cattle,  or  other  movables.
\i*s  on  an  Action 2.  The  Obligations,  incumbent  upon  the  injuring

li,  with the  cor-  parties  to  restore,  satisfy,  etc. ;  with  the  corresponding

Right  of  Action  Rights  of  Action,  etc.  which  reside  in  the  injured

Q the injured  parties.

Whether  the  Law  of  Crimes,  of  Punishments,  and  of
Criminal  Procedure,  fell  within  the  plan  of  the  Roman
Institutional  writers,  seems  to  be  doubtful, [fixitt  8.]


922  Jurisprudence.

Notes  to  Table  I.

Table  I.  [j^Ot0  1.] See  Gau  Institviionum  Commentarii  iv;  Ulpiani

? '  ; Libri  Regvlarum  Singidaris  Fragmenta  ;  JUSTINIANI  InstiitUiones

('  ex  omnibus  antiquorum  Institutionibus,  et  praecipue  ex  Com-

mentaiiis  Gau  tarn  Institutiomcm  quam  Berum  Quotidianamm,

aliisque  multis  Commentariis,  compositae ').

The  Arrangement  of  Justinian's  Institutes  (or,  rather,  of  the
earlier  Institutes  from  which  they  were  copied  or  compiled),  is
a  systematic,  or  scientific  one :  that  is  to  say,  derived  from  dis-
tinctions lying  in  the  matter  of  the  treatise.  Thus,  the  Eoman
Law  (the  matter  of  the  Institutes)  is  divided,  in  respect  of  its
sources,  into  Written  and  Unwritten,  etc. :  in  respect  of  its  subjecU,
into  Law  of  Persons  (t.e.  special  or  particviar  law).  Law  of  Things
{i.e.  the  general  law  of  substantive  rights  and  obligations).  Law  of
Procedure,  etc.  But  the  arrangement  (if  such  it  can  be  called)
of  his  Code  and  Digests,  is  an  historical  one.  Instead  of  being
founded  upon  distinctions  lying  in  the  matter  of  the  compilations,
it  was  taken  from  a  circumstance  purely  extraneous  and  acci-
dental :  namely,  the  order  or  series  (consecrated  by  reverence  for
antiquity),  in  which  the  various  branches  of  the  Eoman  Lav
had  been  modified,  as  occasion  prompted,  by  the  Edict  of  the
Praetors.  See  the  Constitution  'De  Conceptione  Digestonim,'
in  which  the  Emperor  instructs  Tribonian  '  in  libros  et  titulos
materiam  digcrere,  tam  secimdiim  Nostri  constitutionem  Codicis,
quam  Edicti  perpetui  imitalionem.'  It  is  scarcely  necessaiy  to
add,  that  each  of  these  clumsy  compilations  is  the  merest  chaos.

In  the  Table  here  submitted  to  the  reader  (which  has  been
abstracted  from  the  three  treatises  mentioned  above,  and  also
from  the  corresponding  portions  of  the  Digests  or  Pandects),  the
terms  of  the  Classical  Jurists  are  given  exactly.  With  a  view
to  the  study  of  these  admirable  writers  (who  are  incomparably
the  best  teachers  of  the  Roman  Law),  this  is  a  matter  of  the
highest  importance.  Such  a  multitude  of  new,  and,  in  some
respects,  preferable  expressions,  has  been  imported  into  the
system  by  the  later  Civilians,  that  those  who  have  only  studied
it  in  the  writings  of  these  last,  scarcely  know  it  again  when  they
mount  to  the  original  sources.

[j^OtC  2.]  For  the  distinction  between  Jvs  publicum  and
Jus  privatum,  see  Inst.  lib.  i.  tit.  i  §  4 ;  Dig.  ib.  i.  tit  L  Tit  i.
/.  1.  §  2. — And  see  below,  Note  8.  It  seems  that  the  Elementary
writera commonly confined themselves to the latter. For


Tables  and  Notes.  923

stinian's  Institutes  briefly  indicate  the  distinction,  and  then Tablb  I.
imediatelj  subjoin  '  Dicendum  est  igitur  de  jure  privato/  ^

[0OU  3.]  The  Arrangement  of  Private  Law  exhibited  in
le  Table  above  is  formally  announced  by  Gains  (i.  §  8.  '  De
nis  Divisione '),  and  also  by  Justinian  (Inst.  i.  2.  §  12) :  And,
I  Bpite  of  the  opinion  now  prevalent  in  Germany  (see  Tab.  III.),
^aeems  to  be  the  arrangement  which  they  intended  and  actually
bflerved.  Their  adherence  to  it  may  be  traced  in  the  Institutes
I  Gains,  and  is  obvious  in  those  of  Justinian.

Compare  the  following  places  of  the  latter:  Inst,  i  2.  §  12.
r4L  1.  in  princip. — ii  2.  §  2. — iL  5.  §  6. — ^iii.  12,  *De  Obli-
jttionibus,'  in  princip. — ^iv.  6,  '  De  Actionibus,*  in  princip.

For  the  scope  or  purpose  of  this  Arrangement,  see  Table  II.
IDle  2.

I [j^OtC  4.]  These  various  expressions  for  the  Law  of  Persons
be  found  in  the  following  places : — Gaii  Conim.  i.  §§  8,  9. —
L  2.  §  1 2  :  t  3.  in  pr. — Dig.  i  5. ('  De  Statu  Hominum ')
2. — Theophilus  4.  6.  pr.


O^OtC  5.]  Gaii  Comm.  ii.  §  1. — Inst.  ii.  1.  in  principio.

In  the  language  of  the  Eoman  Lawyers,  the  term  '  Res '  has
httious  meanings;  and  of  these,  the  two  following  demand
Rtieular  notice.  It  means,  first,  Things,  Persons,  Acts  (or
lurbearances),  as  subjects  or  objects  of  rights  and  obligations : —
Alateria  juri  subjecta^ — *in  qu§.  jus  versatur* — 'ea  quse  jure
lOBtro  affijcivmiur^ — 'quae  tanquam  materia  ei  simt  proposita.*
h  it  means,  secondly,  Rights  and  Obligations  themselves : — *  res
teorporales* — '  ea  quae  injure  consistunt:'  velut  *  jus  hereditatis,'
iUs  utendi  fruendi,'  '  servitutes,'  '  ohligationes  quoquo  modo
antractae.'

See  Inst  ii.  2.  §  2. — If  this  passage  had  been  well  considered,
ioee  differences  about  the  arrangement  of  the  Institutes,  which
He  referred  to  in  Note  3,  would  scarcely  have  arisen.  See
able  IIL

For  the  import  of  the  expression  *  Jus  quod  ad  Res  pertinet,'
5e  Table  IL  note  2.

[jptOtC  6.]  Dominium  (in  the  large  signification)  and  OUigaiio
iH  the  correct  signification)  are  synonymous  with  the  Jus  in
fern  and  Jus  in  Personam  (deierminatam)  of  numerous  modem


924  y  urisprudence.

Tablb  I. writers  upon  the  Boman  Law. For  the  import  of  which  dis-
^""^  ^' tinction,  see  Table  11.  note  3.

By  the  Classical  Jurists,  '  Obligation  *  is  never  employed  in
that  large  generic  sense  which  it  has  acquired  in  subsequent
times.  In  the  language  of  these  writers,  it  has  commonly  the
foUowing  meanings.

l"".  It  signifies  the  ObligcUian  which  answers  to  a  Kigbtti
personam.

2°.  Inasmuch  as  they  had  no  name  specificaUy  belonging  to
this  last  (rights  of  every  class  being  embraced  by  the  worijut),
they  used  the  term  'Obligation'  to  denote  that  Bight  (in personam)
with  which  the  Oblicmtion  correlates.

3°.  It  signifies  the  Bight  (in  personam)  which  resides  in  the
party  entitled,  vnth  the  Obligation  which  is  incumbent  upon  the
opposite  party :  *  Vinculum  inter  utrumqua*

It  is  remarkable  that  a  similar  ambiguity  (with  a  swam  of
others)  sticks  to  the  term  Jus.  Thus,  '  in  omne  Jvs  defunct!
succedere,'  is  to  succeed  to  the  obligations  as  well  as  to  the  righb
of  the  deceased.  So  of  the  German  word  Bech^t ;  in  the  l^,tf
well  as  in  the  popular,  language  of  the  Middle  Ages.  And  so,
in  our  own  country,  when  a  man  is  obliged  to  do  a  thing,  it  is
not  unfrequently  said  '  that  he  has  a  right  to  do  it ' — an  expres-
sion at  which  we  laugh,  but  which,  beyond  a  doubt,  is  good  &»ffl
English.

As  the  Eoman  Lawyers  had  no  specific  expression  for  Eight*
against  determinate  persons,  so  had  they  no  term  appropriated  to
those  general  Obligations  which  correspond  to  rights  in  rm
A  Eoman  Law}^er,  speaking  of  such  an  obligation,  would  have
used  the  generic  term  Necessitas ;  or,  less  correctly,  Offijdum\
— the  former  signifying  obligations  which  are  imposed  and
sanctioned  by  law  ;  the  latter  denoting,  properly,  those  rdigim
and  moral  obligations,  which,  as  wanting  that  cogent  sanction,
are  frequently  styled  '  imperfect*

Consequently,  the  language  of  the  Eoman  Lawyers  stood
(nearly)  thus :

1°.  For  rights  (universally,)  they  had  *  t/^M5 :'  for  rights  «n  rrw
(generally), '  Dominium  *  (in  its  loose  signification)  :  for  rights  in
personam,  *  ObligatioJ

T,  For  obligations  or  duties  (universally)  they  had  *  Officium'
and  *  Necessitas  :*  for  the  special  obligations  which  answer  to  rights
in  personam,  *  OUigatio! — For  the  general  duties  or  obligations
which  answer  to  rights  in  rem,  they  had  no  specific  expression.
But  since  obligations  of  this  class  were  never  denoted  by  *  0W«-


Tables  and  Notes.  925

10,*  and  since  obligations  of  the  other  class  were  always  denoted "^^^  ^*
it,  *  Officium '  or  *Necessitas,'  when  opposed  to  'Obligatio*  supplied ^ ^ '>
)  defect. — For  a  closer  examination  of  the  matter,  see  Table
.  note  3.

[What  follows,  to  the  end  of  the  Note,  was  found  among  '  Loose
kpers.'  It  is  marked  *  Note  6,  to  Table  I./  and  is  the  only  fragment
which  a  place  is  distinctly  assigned. — S.  A.]

[The  Latin  Jus  (not  synonymous  with  Law)  sometimes  means
i(^t  as  opposed  to  Obligation.  Sometimes,  however,  it  is  used
Hectiyely,  and  denotes  right  and  obligation,  or  obligation  alone.
ht/ceedere  in  omne  Jus  defuncti^  is  to  succeed  to  his  obligations
I  well  as  to  his  rights.

The  word  '  Obligation '  (stricto  sensu)  has  also  a  double  mean-
ly Sometimes  it  means  the  obligation  which  corresponds  with
Hi  ad  Bern  ;  sometimes  it  means  the  right  of  the  one  party,  as  well
I  the  obligation  of  the  other.  Thus  the  party  who  gains  a  right
r*  contract  is  said  to  acquire  an  obligation ;  i,e.  a  right  against
10  party  who  is  bound  by  the  obligation.  Thus,  also,  the  theory
r  the  Sights  and  Obligations  which  arise  out  of  contracts,  and
r  the  rights  and  obligations  which  resemble  these,  though  they
djginate  in  other  incidents,  are  treated  in  the  Institutes,  Gains,
ie  under  the  title  of  Obligations :  an  expression  which  denotes
le  rights  of  the  parties  entitled,  as  well  as  the  obligations  of
le  parties  who  are  bound.

The  French  word  '  Engagernent'  which,  though  it  properly
lean  not  an  obligation,  but  an  obligatory  incident  of  a  certain
ind  (e.g.  a  contract),  also  means  obligation,  and  is  used  by
ertain  French  writers  as  a  collective  expression  for  rights  and
bligations.

In  the  German,  Rechtsverhaltniss  (a  relation  arising  out  of
iw)  is  also  a  generic  name  for  right  and  obligation.  Sometimes
',  denotes  right  or  obligation ;  but  then  it  always  denotes  the
i^t  or  obligation  as  related  to  the  obligation  or  right.  It
enotes  the  one  and  connotes  the  other.

An  objection  to  these  uses  of  Jus,  Obligatio,  and  Bngagement
I,  that  the  words  thus  used  are  ambiguous,  and  that  when  we
'ant  to  discriminate  between  right  and  obligation,  we  must
instantly  annex  to  the  term  a  declaration  of  the  sense  in  which
'6  mean  to  use  it.

But  there  is  another  objection  of  a  more  general  nature :  an
bjection  which  applies  equally  to  Rechtsverhaltniss:  namely,
bat  each  of  these  terms  (used  collectively)  supposes  that  every
VOL.  n.  2  E


926  yurisprvdence.

Table  I.  right  supposes  an  obligation ; — that  every  obligation  as  well  as
Note  6.  gygjy  right  is  relative ;  that  as  the  existence  of  a  party  invested
with  a  right  supposes  the  existence  of  one  or  more  subjected  to
a  corresponding  obligation,  so  the  existence  of  a  party  subjected
to  an  obligation  must  suppose  that  some  other  party  is  clothed
with  a  corresponding  right  This,  however,  as  we  have  alreadj
shown,  is  not  true.  There  are  absolute  obligations,  althougli
there  are  no  absolute  rights.

The  English  language  has  this  advantage,  that  though  its
vocabulary  of  leading  terms  is  scanty,  they  are  precise  and  nih
ambiguous  ; — Law — Eight — Obligation.

*  Befugniss '  and  '  Pflicht '  seem  to  denote  right  and  obligatioi
in  abstract,  but  sometimes  the  same  in  concrete;  *  Redd' vA

*  Verbindlichkeit*  the  converse ;  i.e,  more  commonly  in  concrete^
but  sometimes  in  abstract.

'  Forderung '  (which  corresponds  with  the  Latin  Bdntum  ii
its  largest  sense)  denotes  that  which  is  to  be  done,  positively  or
negatively,  in  consequence  of  the  obligation ;  which  last  is  ratte
the  *  vinculum,*

*  Offidum '  is  moral  duty  or  obligation  in  the  largest  sense.

*  Necesdtas '  (which  rarely  occurs)  is  legal  duty  or  obligation
also  in  the  most  extensive  meaning  of  the  word  obligation.

'  Obligatio*  is  a  species  of  '  NecessUas:*  i,e.  Obligation  limitoi
to  a  determinate  person  or  persons.  A  specific  name  for  tta
'  Necesdtds  *  which  corresponds  with  Jus  in  rem  is  not  to  be  found.

In  German  there  are  single  names  for  the  party  having »
right,  and  for  the*  party  subjected  to  an  obligation.  In  otltf
languages,  circumlocution  must  be  resorted  to. The  EngliA

*  entitled '  applies  only  to  the  first,  and  only  denotes  it  in  ai
indirect  manner.

Eight,  Obligation,  Duty  (Devoir,  Offidum), —  with  their
corresponding  expressions,  *  it  is,  or  is  not  rigJU  to  do  such  w
act,*  *  such  an  act  ought,  or  ought  not  to  be  done ;'  '  such  an  aet
is  right,*  *  such  an  act  is  a  duty,'  etc. — are  perfectly  equivalent
expressions ;  as  denoting  conformity  with  a  rule  (or  rather
performance  or  observation  of  the  obligation  which  the  rule
prescribes).

Sometimes  they  simply  denote  approbation  of  some  rule  of
conduct  or  of  some  act ;  as,  '  Law  as  it  ought  to  be.'

Sometimes  '  ought '  (and  devoir,  the  verb)  denote,  like  Law,
conformity  with  any  established  order  of  incidents :  as  '  such  an
event  ought  to  (or  should,  or  must)  have  happened,  on  such  and
such  suppositions.'


Tables  and  Notes.  927

The  metaphorical  sense  in  this  case  diflfers  from  that  in  the  JJ^"  J*
3  of  Law  only  to  this  extent :  that  whereas  the  metaphorical
m '  denotes  the  customary  order,  *  ought '  denotes  the  meta-
rical  obligation  which  that  law  is  feigned  to  have  imposed.
nrvance  of  a  law,  or  of  the  obligation  which  that  law  imposes,
equivalent  expressions ;  each  being  causes  of  the  uniformity
jch  it  is  intended  to  indicate.]

\S^tAt  7.]  The  distinction  between  Obligations  ex  Delicto,

Obligations  QuMsi  ex  Delicto,  seems  to  be  superfluous  and
^caL Obligations  Qwisi  ex  Delicto  arise  from  two  causes :

1®.  Damage  to  the  right  of  another  by  one's  own  negligcTice
pd,  imprvdentid,  imperitid)  :

2**.  Damage  to  the  right  of  another  by  some  third  person
whose  delicts  one  is  liable  (e,g.  *  filius  in  potestate,'  '  servus,'
quis  eorum  quorum  operd  exercitor  navis  aut  stabuli  navem

stabulum  exercet').  Cases  of  the  former  sort  fall  within
notion  of  Delict ;  and  many  such  cases  are  actually  ranked
li  Delicts  in  the  Lex  AquUia  (one  of  the  principal  sources  of

Boman  Law  for  that  department  of  it).  In  cases  of  the
er  sort,  the  class  of  the  obligation  varies  with  the  nature  of
ground  upon  which  the  liability  is  founded.  If  the  mischief
caused,  though  remotely,  by  the  negligence  of  the  party  obliged

*  si  aliquatenus  culpae  reus  sit,  quod  operd  malorum  hominum
rtur  *),  the  case,  as  before,  falls  within  the  notion  of  Delict.
1  supposing that  the  party  obliged  is  clear of intention

negligence,  his  obligation  should  be  referred  to  that  miscel-
»ns  class,  which  are  said,  by  analogy,  to  arise  from  (qtuisi)
tracts.

{0tJtt  8.]  The  Institutes  close  with  a  short  Title '  De  Publicis
iciis/  which  only  includes  a  species  of  Criminal  Procedure,
jther  with  the  Crimes  and  Punishments  to  which  that  species
appropriate.

See  the  Title  in  question,  and  also  the  following  places  in
Digests  :  xlvii.  1, '  De  Privatis  Delictis,'  I.  L  3. — tit.  2.  /.  94.
it  10.  /.  45. — tit.  11, 'De  Uxtraordinariis  Criminibus.* — tit.
/.  1,  2. — tit.  23,  'De  Popularibus  Actionibus.' — xlviiL  1,
J  Publicis  Judiciis,*  to  tit.  3,  inclusive. — tit.  16,  to  the  end
he  Book,  and  especially  tit.  19,  'De  Posnis,*  I.  1.  §  3.
It  would  seem  that  this  Title  in  the  Institutes  is  not  a
nber  or  constituent  part  of  the  work,  but  rather  a  hasty  and
)ngruous  appendix  added  on  as  an  after-thought.  ^  For,  first.


928  yurisprudence.

Table  L  instead  of  expounding  the  subject  in  a  systematic  manner,  it
merely  touches  (*  per  indicem  *)  a  fragment  of  the  subject
Secondly,  It  appears  that  Criminal  Law  was  looked  upon  by  the
Boman  Jurists  as  properly  forming  a  department  of  Jus  Publicum:
And  this,  it  is  most  probable,  was  not  included  in  the  Treatises
from  which  Justinian's  Institutes  were  copied  or  compiled.

See  above,  Notes  1  and  2. — ^Whether  a  similar  Title  was
appended  to  the  Institutes  of  Gains  is  uncertain ;  the  concludii]g
portion  of  the  Manuscript  being  lost  or  illegible.

In  order  to  determine  the  phice  which  should  be  assigned  to
Criminal  Law  (or,  rather,  in  order  to  determine  the  arrangemud
which  should  be  given  to  the  wJiole  Aggregate  of  Law — *  Omu
Corpus  Juris '),  it  would  be  necessary  to  settle  the  import  of  aa
extremely  perplexing  distinction:  namely,  the  distinction  betweei
Pvilic  Law  and  Private  (or  Civil)  Law. — ^According  to  the  large
and  vague  meaning  which  is  often  attached  to  it,  '  Public  lav'
comprises  not  only  the  whole  of  Criminal  Law,  but  also  muck,
if  not  the  whole,  of  the  Law  which,  commonly,  is  denominatfld
'  Private'  And  if  the  term  be  taken  in  this  its  loose  signification,
a  distinct  and  intelligible  arrangement  of  the  Corpus  Juris  ii
simply  impossible.  According  to  the  strict  and  detenninata
meaning  which  seems  to  have  been  annexed  to  it  by  some;
'  Pvilic  Law '  is  included  in  the  Law  of  Persons :  that  is  to  saj,
it  is  merely  a  subordinate  member  of  that  great  Aggregate  a
Whole,  which,  under the absurd name of  *  Private  Law,'  is

ft

frequently  opposed  to  it.  If  '  Public  Law '  be  taken  in  this  it«
definite  import,  there  is  only  a  small,  though  weighty,  portion  of
Criminal,  that  can  possibly  be  referred  to  it  with  propriety.—
See  Table  III.  sui  fine.


\


929


g


;: 9


I

C


g


n4


00

U


1  I

8 S

2  S


i

.s


..  <^

So

oo


3


O O


00

o


I


5

o


I


•S  2

OpO

:$»  .

a  o
c8  a


^-1


930


•s


00


8 ^


O O

Ph

O

A  00


1

I


•5  o


0)


4^


-a

o
is  -^

S ^


a
S

0)
Cm

o

o

«

d

Q)

o

F3 — I


i^


s  a

•^ p

go

9 o


a


£8


o
•J


-  J5  j,^ L^

O o  D  "^

^ CTJ  o
ee  ei  O  £1


-2

OQ

•-a

3  •• —


^^  ^
00  o  bS


00

0


a..

*^  *■*

O


Q


o

a


»3

ea
Q


o  ft

•>N o

-< S


t


4*

M

e
C

o


!


m


c


c


Tables  and  Notes.  93 1*


Notes  to  Table  II.

I^OtC  1.] This  arrangement  coincides  exactly  with  that Table  II.
which  I  have  given  in  Table  I. But  in  lieu  of  the  terms  which .^ '  .
Mcar  in  the  Institutes  of  Justinian,  in  the  Excerpts  from  the
CJlasaical  Jurists of  which  his Digests are composed,  in the
Institutes  of  Gains,  etc.,  I  have  here  substituted  terms  which

1  originated  in  the  Middle  Ages,  or  in  times  still  more  recent.

fS<or  the  following,  amongst  other  reasons,  these  terms  demand

attention.

1.  Expositors  of  the  Eoman  Law  often  introduce  them  into
fheir  writings  without  sufficient  explanation;  without  opposing
them  to  the  corresponding  expressions  which  were  employed  by
the  authors  of  the  system.

2.  Writers  upon  Universal  Jurisprudence,  upon  the  so-called
Xaw  of  Nations,  and  even  upon  Morals  generally,  have  often

\  ^iiawn  largely  from  that  justly  celebrated  system ;  and,  in  their
^^ress  or  tacit  references  to  it,  have  commonly  adopted  the
*cmi8  devised  by  modem  Civilians,  or  by  Commentators  of  the
-Middle  Ages.

3.  These  terms  have  been  imported  into  the  technical
-■^nguage  of  the  systems  which  are  mainly  derived  from  the
-^man :  e.g.  the  French  Law,  the  Prussian  Law,  the  Common  or
^Seneral  Law  of  Germany.

4.  Some  of  these  terms  are  better  constructed  than  the
TJorresponding  expressions  of  the  Ancients ;  and  are,  indeed,  the
^ndy  ones,  authorised  by  general  use,  which  denote  the  intended
leaning  without  the  most  perplexing  ambiguity.

Trace  the  Arrangement,  which  is  given  in  the  Table  above,
through  the  following  places  of  Heineccius,  the  most  celebrated
teacher  of  the  Eoman  Law  in  the  eighteenth  century : —
'Elementa  Juris  Civilis  secundum  Ordinem  Institutionum';
together  with  his  admirable,  though  less  known  '  Redtationes  in
Elementa,  etc. :' — Lib.  i.  tit.  1.  §§  30,  31. — tit.  2.  §  74— ii  tit.
1.  §  310  in  princip.  §§  331  to  334.  §  335  in  princip.— tit.  3.
§392.— tit  10.  §  484.— iii.  tit.  14.  §§  767,  768,  771,  772,  774,
778. — tit.  28. — iv.  tit  1. — tit  5. — tit  6. — tit  18.  And  see
the  corresponding  places  of  his  '  Antiquitates,'  in  which  the
Arrangement  of  the  Institutes  is  also  observed.

[j^OtC  2.]  'Jvs  Eerum:*  i.e.  Law  regarding  Eights  and
Obligations  in  general,  together  with  the  Things  which  are  their


932  Jurisprudence.

m

TablbII.  subjects  or  objects.  It  stands  opposed,  on  the  one  side,  to  Jw
Note 2,8, A.  ^ctjqjjum  :  i.e.  Law  not  regarding  svhstantive  rights  and  obliga-
tions, but  the  means  by  which  they  are  enforced  when  a  resort '
to  the  tribunals  is  necessary.  (See  Tables  V.  VL  note  2.)  ft
stands  opposed,  on  the  other  side,  to  Jtts  Pkrsonarum  :  i.€,  law
regarding  the  distinctive  rights  and  obligations,  which  arise  from
(or,  rather  compose)  the  various  conditions  of  persons.  (See
below,  note  3,  C.  b. :  And  see  Table  IV.  sec.  2.)

It  was  probably  styled  Jus  Rerum,  or  Jus  quod  ad  Bb
pertinet,  for  one  of  the  following  reasons : —

1.  Inasmuch  as  the  term  Ees  included  rights  and  obliga-
tions, the  general  law  or  doctrine  of  rights  and  obligations  migh
be  styled  Jus  Eerum,  without  a  solecism. (See  Table  I.  note  5.)

2.  The  description  of  the  Res,  which  are  subjects  of  rights
and  obligations,  is  placed,  in  the  Institutes,  at  the  heginniingi
the  Jus  Eerum  :  and  hence,  a  name,  strictly  belonging  to  i
section  was  naturally  extended  to  the  whole  department  of  which
that  particular  section  was  the  prominent  and  most  obvious
feature.  So  the  third  department  embraces  the  law  of  Frocedure ;
but  as  Actions  (strictly  so  called)  occupy  the  foremost  place,  the
wJiole  is  denoted  by  the  partial  and  inadequate  name  of  eAtf

ACTIONU>L

The  arrangement  of  the  Eoman  Lawyers  is  liable  to  objection
in  the  detail,  but  is  manifestly  just  in  the  main ;  though  certain
modern  writers  have  involved  it  in  thick  obscurity,  by  grossly
misconceiving  the  purpose,  and  grievously  distorting  the  ex-
pressions.

[i^Ote  3.]  (A.)  'Jus  IN  Be — Jus  in  Eem — Jus  REALK—
Dominium  senm  latiore  :*

These  expressions  are  synonymous.  Taken  in  the  largest
signification  of  which  they  are  susceptible,  they  denote  a  class
of  rights  which  may  be  defined  thus  : — Eights  of  persons  againd
ALL  otJur  persons,  or,  at  least,  against  other  persons  generally:
— *  Facultas  homini  competens  sine  respectu  ad  cebt JlM. persofuim'
Or  these  rights  may  be  defined  as  foUows: — Such  rights  of
persons  as  answer  to  obligations  incumbent  upon  all  M<r
persons,  or,  at  least,  upon  other  persons  generally.

'  Jm  AD  Eem — Jus  in  Personam — Jus  person  ale — Obli-

GATIO  :*

Taken  in  the  largest  signification  of  which  they  are  suscept-


Tables  and  Notes.  933

lile,  these  synonymous  expressions  denote  a  class  of  rights  to Table  II.
iuch  the  ensuing  definitions  will  apply : — Eights  of  persons ^g  '^ '
^nd  DETERMINATE  persons : — Rights  answering  to  obligations ^ r ^
leombent  upon  determinate  persons : — '  Facultas  homini  com-
etens  in  certam personam'

Sights  of  the  first  class,  and  rights  of  the  second  class,  are,
leiefore,  distinguishable  by  this: — The  obligations  correlating
nth  these,  are  limited  to  determinate  persons:  the  duties  (or
Uigations)  correlating  with  those,  attach  universally  or  generally.

But  though  this  is  the  essence  of  the  distinction,  they  are
Drther  distinguishable  thus.  The  duties  or  obligations  which
iiBwer  to  rights  of  the  first  class,  are,  all  of  them,  negative :  that
B  to  say,  obligations  to  forbear  or  abstain.  Of  those  obligations
rluch  answer  to  rights  of  the  second  class,  some  are  negative,
KQt  some  (and  most)  are  positive :  that  is  to  say,  obligations  to
b  or  perform,

(B.)  The  full  exposition  of  this  all-pervading  distinction,  is
lecessarily  reserved  for  the  Course  of  Lectures  to  which  these
["ables.are  intended  to  serve  as  helps.  But,  perhaps,  the  foUow-
Qg  examples  will  give  the  clue  to  its  import

(a.)  Ownership  or  Property  (equivalent  to  Dominion,  taken  in
a  limited  senses),  is  a  term  of  such  complex  and  various  mean-
ig,  that  it  were  hardly  possible  to  force  a  just  explanation  of  it
ito  the  narrow  compass  of  a  note.  But  in  order  to  illustrate
le  distinction  here  in  question,  Ownership  may  be  described,
jcurately  enough,  thus : — The  Eight  to  use  ov  deal  with  some
ven  subject,  in  a  manner,  or  to  an  extent,  which,  though  it  is
>t  unlimited,  is  indefinite.  In  which  description  is  necessarily
aplied,  that  the  Law  will  protect  or  relieve  the  owner  against
rery  disturbance  of  his  right  on  the  part  of  any  other  person.
0  change  the  expression,  all  other  persons  are  bound  to  forbear
om  acts  inconsistent  with  the  scope  of  his  right.  But,  here,
16  obligations  which  correlate  with  that  very  right,  terminate.
Ivery  positive  obligation  which  may  regard  or  concern  that  right,
J  nevertheless  foreign  or  extraneous  to  it,  and  flows  from  some
Qcident  specially  binding  the  party  upon  whom  the  obligation
alls :  for  instance,  from  a  contract  into  which  he  enters  with
he  owner  of  the  subject,  or  a  delict  which  he  commits  against
is  right  of  ownership. In  other  words,  every  such  positive


934  JurisprtuUnce.

Table  II.  obligation  is  confined  to  a  determinate  person,  and  is,  therefor^
^^%\^*  ^^  obligation  (in  the  sense  of  the  Roman  Lawyers).  And  even
an  obligation  which  is  negative  and  regards  the  right  of  owne^
ship,  will  not  correspond  to  that  very  right,  in  case  the  vinculm
be  special ;  that  is  to  say,  not  attaching  indefinitely  upon  d
mankind,  but  binding  some  certain  person  or  some  certm
persons,  and  arising  from  some  incident  which  particulai^
regards  the  obliged.

It  follows  that  Ownership  or  Property  is  Jus  in  Rem. For|
ownership  is  a  right  of  a  person,  over  or  to  a  person  or  thinj
against  ALL  otfier  persons: — a  right  implying  and  exclusiv^
resting  upon  obligations  which  are  at  once  universal  and  negdm.

In  case  the  subject  of  Jus  in  Rem  happen  to  be  a  person,  die
position  of  the  party  entitled  wears  a  double  aspect  He  tai
rights  {in  rem)  over  or  to  the  subject,  as  against  other  peraoM
generally.  He  has  also  rights  {in  personam)  against  the  suijtdt
or  lies  under  obligations  (in  the  narrower  meaning  of  the  tern)
towards  the  subject.

See  below,  in  the  present  note,  C.  b.

(b.)  Servitus  (for  which  the  English  '  easement '  is  hardly  an
adequate  expression)  is  a  right  to  use  or  enjoy,  in  a  given  or
definite  manner,  a  subject  owned  by  another.  Take,  for  instance,
a  Eight  of  Way  over  another's  land.

The  term  is  often  extended  to  certain  rights,  which,  properly,
are  rights  of  omnership  limited  in  point  of  duration :  e.g.  Usia-
fructus,  U's^cs,  HaMtatio.  It  has  also  been  applied  to  a  right
{Superficies),  which,  justly  considered,  is  a  species  of  Condominiuin :
i.e.  a  right  of  owiurship  over  some  given  subject,  but  limited  by
a  right,  similar  and  simultaneous,  which  resides  in  another
person.  But  as  servitudes  are  frequently  distinguished,  and  by
the  Eoman  Lawyers  themselves,  from  the  rights  which  I  have
just  mentioned,  I  think  that  authority  as  well  as  the  reason  of
the  thing,  justifies  the  description  above.

Now  according  to  that  description,  the  capital  diflTerence
between  Ownership  and  Servitus  lies  in  this :  that  the  right  of
dealing  ivith  the  subject,  which  resides  in  the  owner  or  proprietor,
is  larger,  and  indeed,  indefinite ;  whilst  that  which  resides  in
the  party  entitled  to  the  servitude,  is  narrower  and  determinate.
In  respect  of  the  grand  distinction  which  here  is  directly  in
question,  Ownership  and  Servitus  are  equivalent  Servitus,  like
Ownership,  is  Jus  in  Rem.  For  it  avails  against  aU  mankind,
including  the  owner  of  the  subject. Or  (changing  the  expression)


Tables  and  Notes,  93  5

it  supposes  an  obligation  on  all  (the  owner  again  included)  to Table  II.
l/ffiear  from  every  act  which  would  prevent  or  hinder  the  enjoy- b.,  B.  c
ttent But  this  is  the  only  obligation  which  corresponds  to  the ^
IJus  Servitutis  : every  special obligation which happens to
Iftj/ard it, being nevertheless foreign or extraneous to it
for example, that the servitude is constituted (or
gvanted)  by  the  owner  or  proprietor  of  the  subject :  and  suppose
tliat  the  owner  or  proprietor  also  contracts  with  the  grantee,  not
to  molest  him  in  the  exercise  of  the  right. Now,  here,  the
^Ipantor  of  the  servitude  lies  under  two  obligations :  one  of  them
Using  from  the  grant,  and  answering  to  the  right  which  it
[catQates;  the  other  derived  from  the  contract  by  which  he  is
l^fmaUy  bound,  and  answering  to  the  right  (in  personam)  which
lilie  contract  vests  in  the  grantee. In  case  he  molest  the  grantee
in  the  exercise  of  the  servitude,  the  act  is  single,  but  the  injury
ii  doubla He  violates  an  Offidum  (or  duty)  which  he  shares
"•ith  the  rest  of  mankind,  and  he  also  breaks  an  Obligation  which
ftnses  from  his  peculiar  position.

(a)  Having  given  an  example  or  two  of  Rights  in  rem,  I
^rill  now  produce  examples  of  Rights  in  personam.

Rights  begotten  by  Contracts  (or,  ascending  to  a  larger  ex-
]iR88ion,  by  Facts  or  Conventions),  belong,  all  of  them,  to  this
last-mentioned  class :  although  there  are  certain  cases  (incapable
«f  explanation  here),  in  which  the  right  of  ownership,  and  others
rf  the  same  kind,  are  said  (by  a  solecism)  to  arise  from  contracts,
or  are  even  talked  of  (with  conspicuous  and  flagrant  absurdity)
as  if  they  arose  from  obligations  in  the  sense  of  the  Roman
hwyers.

Rights  which,  properly  speaking,  arise  from  contracts,  avail

against  the  parties  who  bind  themselves  by  contract,  and  also

•gainst  the  parties  who  are  said  to  represent  their  persons :  that

is  to  say,  who  succeed,  on  certain  events,  to  the  universitas  (or

bulk)  of  their  rights,  and,  therefore,  to  their  faculties  (or  means)

rf  fulfilling  or  liquidating  their  obligations. But  as against

persons  who  neither  oblige  themselves  by  contract,  nor  succeed

per  universitatem  to  the  means  of  performing  obligations,  rights

which,  properly  speaking,  arise  from Contracts,  are nothing.

Suppose,  for  example,  that  you  contract  with  me  to  deliver  me

some  movable  (a  slave,  a  horse,  a  garment,  or  what  not) ; but,

instead  of  delivering  it  to  me,  in  pursuance  of  the  contract,  that

you  sell  and  deliver  it  to  another. Now,  here,  the  rights  which

I  acquire  by  virtue  of  the  Contract  or  Agreement  are  the  foUow-


93^  Jurisprudence.

Table  II. ing. I  have  a  right  to  the  movable  in  question^  as  against  you
c!  fi/d.  '  specially :  jus  ad  rem  (acquirendam). So  long  as  the  ownership
and  the  possession  continue  to  reside  in  you,  I  can  force  you  tx>
deliver  me  the  thing  in  specific  performance  of  your  agreement,
or,  at  least,  to  make  me  satisfeu^tion,  in  case  you  detain  it.
After  the  delivery  to  the  buyer,  I  can  compel  you  to  make  me
satisfaction  for  your  breach  of  the  contract  with  fne. But  here
my  rights  end. As  against  strangers  to  that  contract,  I  have
no  right  whatever  to  the  movable  in  question. And,  by  conse-
quence, I  can  neither  compel  the  buyer  to  yield  it  to  tne,  nor
force  him  to  make  me  satisfaction  as  detaining  a  thing  of  mm.
For  '  ohligationum  substantia  non  in  eo  consistit  ut  aliquod  nos-
trum faciat,  sed  ut  alium  nobis  dbstringat  ad  dandum  aliquid,
vel  faciendum,  vel  praestandum.' (See  the  admirable  Title  in
the  Digests,  '  De  Obligationibus  et  Actionibus,'  xliv.  7.) But  if
you  deliver  the  movable,  in  pursuance  of  your  agreement  with
me,  my  position  towards  other  persons  generally  assumes  a  dif-
ferent  aspect In consequence  of the  Delivery  by  you  and
the  concurring  Apprehension  by  m^,  the  thing  becomes  mine:
for  the  Delivery  and  Apprehension  are  a  Modus  Acquisitions,
and  not,  like  the  Contract  of  which  they  are  a  consequence,  a
Titulus  AD  ACQUIRENDUM. I  have  now  jvs  in  rem : — a  right  to
the  thing  delivered,  as  against  all  mankind :  a  right  answering
to  obligations  negative  and  universal. And,  by  consequence,  I
can  compel  the  restitution  of  the  subject  from  any  who  may  take
and  detain  it,  or  can  force  him  to  make  me  satisfaction  as  for  an
injury  to  my  right  of  ownership. — Ubi  rem  meam  invenio,  ibi
eam  vindico ;  sive  cum  ed  persona  negotium  mihi  fuerit,  sive  non
fuerit. Contra,  si  a  bibliopola  librum  emi,  isque  eum  nondum
mihi  traditum  vendiderit  iterum  Sempronio,  ego sane contra
Sempronium  agere  nequeo; quia  cum  EG  nullum  mihi  unquam
intercessit  negotium  :  sed  agere  debeo  adversiis  bibliopolam  a  quo
emi ; quia  ago  ex  coniradu, i.e,  ex  jura  AD  rem,^ — Heineccii
Eecitationes,  lib.  ii.  tit.  I.  §  331.

(d.)  Bights  of  Action,  with  all  other  rights  founded  upon
injuries,  are  also  jura  in  personam.  For  they  answer  to  obUga-
tions  attacliing  upon  the  determinate  persons,  from  whom  the
injuries  have  proceeded,  or  from  whom  they  are  apprehended.

It  is  true  that  difficulties  have  arisen  about  the  nature  of
Actions  in  rem ;  i.e,  those  Actions  (or,  rather,  those  Rights  of
Action)  of  which  the  ground  is  an  offence  against  a  right  in  rem,
and  of  which  the  intention  (scope,  or  purpose)  is  the  restitution


Tables  and  Notes.  937

of  the  injured  paxty  to  the  exercise' of  the  violated  right But  Table  II.

• tiiese  and other  diflBculties  besetting  the  Theory  of  Actions, ^  q'^'

appear  to  have  sprung  from  this :  that  the  nature  of  the  right

which  is  afifected  by  the  injury,  and  the  nature  of  the  remedy

which  is  the  purpose  of  the  action,  are  frequently  blended  and

compounded  by  expositors  of  the  Eoman  Law. Which  confusion

of  ideas  absolutely  disparate  and  distinct,  seems  to  have  arisen

fiom  the  abridged  shape  of  the  expressions  by  which  rights  of

action  are  commonly  denoted. By  an  ellipsis  commodious  and

inviting,  but  leading  to  confusion  and  obscurity,  a  name  or  phrase

appUcable  to  the  violated  right,  is  often  extended  improperly  to

the  remedy. Thus,  the  phrase  '  in  rem '  is  extended  to  certain

ctetions,  which,  though they are necessarily  directed against

determinate  persons, are  grounded upon  violations of  rights

availing  against  all  mankind. And,  thus,  certain  actions  are

styled  '  ex  contractu,'  although  they  properly  arise  from  the  non-

jper/ormance  of  contracts,  and  are  only  remote  and incidental

consequences  of  the  contracts  themselves.

To  pursue  this  subject  further  were  inconsistent  with  my
present  purpose.  But  before  I  dismiss  it,  I  will  advert  to  an
important  remark  made  (I  think)  by  Leibnitz — ^Every  right  to
restitiUion  is  a  right  in  personam.  In  case  the  party  against
whom  it  avails  be  unconscious  of  the  right,  the  right,  with  the
icorresponding  obligation,  is  (qtmsi)  ex  contractu.  For,  since  he
is  perfectly  clear  of  intention  and  negligence,  he  is  also  innocent
of  wrong.  But  so  soon  as  he  is  apprised  of  the  right,  either  by
demand  or  otherwise,  it  passes  from  the  department  (quasi)  ex
anUra4:tu  to  the  class  of  rights  and  obligations  which  properly
are  founded  upon  injuries.

(C.)  Hitherto  I  have  tried  to  illustrate  the  distinction  which
is  the  subject  of  the  present  note,  by  apt  eocamples.  A  brief
examination  of  the  terms  by  which  it  is  usually  expressed,  may
cast  a  stronger  light  upon  the  import  of  that  distinction,  and
upon  the  importance  of  seizing  its  import  in  a  precise  and
comprehensive  manner.

(a.)  Jus  in  re — Jus  in  rem — Jus  reale — Dominium  (in  the
large  signification),  will,  none  of  them,  indicate  the  distinction,
considered  in  its  whole  extent,  without  a  degree  of  ambiguity.
For  though  they  denote  (when  taken  in  the  largest  meaning  of
which  they  are  susceptible)  every  right  availing  universally  or
generally,  they  are  commonly  used  by  the  Eoman  Lawyers,  or
by  succeeding  Civilians,  for  the  purpose  of  signifying  rights  over


938  yurisprudence.

Table II. or  to  Things :  that  is  to  sa.j,' Things  in  the  narrower  acceptation:

a!*  C.'b. p^fn>anent  objects  which  are  not  persons:  things  which,  on  the

' — » — ^ one  hand,  are  opposed  to  persons  themselves  ;  and  which,  on  the

other,  are  distinguished  from  the  acts  of  persons,  and  from  the

rest  of  the  transient  objects  denominated  fa^^s  or  events.

But  of  jwra  qxue  valent  in  alios  GENERATIM — of  rights  which
avail  or  obtain  against  other  persons  generally — of  rights  which
answer  to  obligations  general  and  negative,  some  are  rights  over
or  to  persons,  and  some  have  tw  subject  (person  or  thing).

The  terms  now  under  consideration  are,  therefore,  of  varying
extension.  They  are  generic  and  specific.  They  sometimes
denote  universally  the  department  of  rights  in  question,  but  are
commonly  used  in  a  narrower  signification,  and  restricted  to  i
subordinate  class.  Consequently,  there  is  no  concise  expression,
authorised  by  established  use,  which  denotes  the  whole  of  these
rights  adequately  and  unambiguously.

(b.)  Of  rights  existing  over  or  to  persons,  and  availing  against
other  persons  generally,  take  the  following  examples : — The  right
of  the  father  to  the  custody  and  education  of  the  child — tie
right  of  the  guardian  to  the  custody  and  education  of  the  ward
— the  right  of  the  master  to  the  services  of  the  slave  or  servant

Against  the  child  or  ward,  and  against  the  slave  or  servant;
these  rights  are  rights  in  personam:  that  is  to  say,  rights
answering  to  obligations  upon  those  determinate  individuals.  In
case  the  child  or  ward  desert  the  father  or  guardian,  or  refuse
the  lessons  of  the  teacher  whom  the  father  or  guardian  has
appointed,  the  father  or  guardian  may  compel  him  to  return,  and
may  punish  him  with  due  moderation  for  his  laziness  or  perverse-
ness.  If  the  slave  run  from  his  work,  the  master  may  force  him
back,  and  drive  him  to  his  work  by  chastisement.  If  the  servant
abandon  his  service  before  its  due  expiration,  the  master  may
sue  him  for  breach  of  the  contract  of  hiring,  or  for  breach  of  an
obligation  (qiutsi  ex  contractu)  implied  in  the  status  of  servant

Considered  under  another  aspect,  these  rights  are  of  another
character,  and  belong  to  another  class.  Considered  under  that
aspect,  they  avail  or  obtain  against  other  persons  generally,  and
the  obligations  (or,  rather,  the  officio)  to  which  they  correspond,
are  invariably  negative.  As  against  other  persons  generally,  they
are  not  so  much  rights  to  the  custody  and  educaiion  of  the  child,
to  the  custody  and  education  of  the  ward,  and  to  the  services  of
the  slave  or  servant,  as  rights  to  the  exercise  of  such  rights  tinth-
out  molestation  by  strangers. As  against  strangers^  their  substance


Tables  and  Notes.  939

consists  of  duties,  incmnbent  upon  strangers,  to  forbear  or  abstain Table  II.

fiom  acts  inconsistent  with  their  scope  or  purpose. In  case  the ZZ^Li^'

ehfld  (or  ward)  be  detained  from  the  father  (or  guardian),  the

latter  can  recover  him  from  the  stranger  by  a  procefeding  in  a

Court  of  Justice,  which,  let  it  be  named  as  it  may,  is  substantially

an  action  in  rem  : that  is  to  say,  an  action  grounded  on an

injury  to  a  right  which  avails  generally,  and  seeking  the  restitu-

tm  of  the  injured  party  to  the  exercise  of  that  violated  right.

In  case  the  child  be  beaten  or  otherwise  harmed  injuriously,  the

lather  has  an  action  against  the  wrongdoer  for  the  wrong  to  his

iUerest  in  the  child. In  case  the  slave  be  detained  from  his

master's  service,  the  master  can  recover  him  in  specie  (or  his

Talue  in  the  shape  of  damages)  from  the  stranger  who  wrongfully

detains  him. In  case  the  slave  be  harmed  and  rendered  \mfit

fcr  his  work,  the  master  is  entitled  to  satisfaction  for  the  injury

to  his  right  of  ownership. If  the  servant  be  seduced  from  his

service,  the  master  can  sue  the  servant  for  breach  of  contract ;

and  also  the  instigator  of  the  desertion,  for  the  wrong  to  his

kUrest  in  the  servant. In  case  the  servant  be  harmed  and

disabled  from  rendering  his  service,  the  harm  is  an  injury  to  the

Blaster's  interest  in  the  servant,  as  well  as  to  the  person  of  the

latter.

The  correlating  conditions  or  status  of  husband  and  wife,
will  also  illustrate  that  capital  distinction  which  it  is  the  purpose
of  the  present  note  to  explain  or  suggest.

Between  themselves,  they  have  mutual  rights  in  personam,
and  are  subject  to  corresponding  obligations.  Moreover,  each
has  rights  to  the  other  availing  against  the  rest  of  the  world,
and  answering  to  duties,  which,  invariably,  are  negative.  Adultery
hy  the  wife  violates  a  right  of  the  first  class,  and  entitles  the
husband,  against  the  wife,  to  a  divorce  a  nunsd  et  thoro.  Adultery
with  the  wife  violates  a  right  of  the  second  class,  and  gives  him
an  action  for  damages,  against  the  adulterer,

A  right  or  interest  to  or  in  a  person,  and  a  right  or  interest
io  OT  in  a.  thing,  differ  in  this :  that  the  subject  of  the  former
belongs  to  the  class  of  persons,  whilst  that  of  the  latter  is  a
%ing,  in  the  narrower  acceptation  of  the  term.  (See  above,  in
lie  present  note,  C.  a.)  With  reference  to  the  capital  distinction
nrhich  is  the  matter  of  the  present  note,  these  rights  are  precisely
iquivalent.  Each  is  a  right  availing  universally  or  generally,  and
jnplying  or  composed  of  obligations,  incumbent  upon  the  world
it  large,  to  forbear  from  such  positive  acts  as  would  defeat  or


940  Jurisprudence.

Table  II. thwart  its  purpose. The  rights  (in  personam  determiTUitam)  Ski

^ /  '-'  the  obligations  (stricto  sensu),  which  invariably  concur  with  thi

former,  are  nevertheless  distinct  from  it ;  just  as  a  like  obligation,

which  may  concern  or  regard  the  latter,  is  nevertheless  extraneous

to  it. (See  above,  in  the  present  note,  B.  a.  b.)

But  though  these  rights  are  thus  equivalent  or  identical,
certain  writers  have  marked  and  distinguished  the  former  by  a
peculiar  name.

A  right  or  interest  to  or  in  a  person,  has  been  styled,  in
German,  *  dinglich-'pevsoniiches  Eecht  :*  '  personliches  Recht  mf
dingliche  Art ;'  '  personliches  Eecht  von  dinglicher  Beschaffcniuii'!
'  Recht  auf  eine  Person  als  auf  eine  Sache  ;*  In  modern  Ladn,
*  jus  realiter  personale.'  Each  of  which  expressions  may  be
rendered  into  English  by  this :  '  A  right  or  interest  to  or  in  a
person  as  if  that  person  were  a  thing.*

The  author  of  this  innovation  upon  the  established  language
of  the  science  was  Kant.  See  his  '  Metaphysische  Anfangsgriinde
der  Rechtslehre ' — '  Metaphysical  Principles  of  the  Science  d
Law  :'  A  treatise  darkened  by  a  philosophy  which,  I  own,  is  mj
aversion,  but  abounding,  I  must  needs  admit,  with  traces  of  ia«
sagacity.  He  has  seized  a  number  of  notions,  complex  anc
ditficult  in  the  extreme,  with  a  distinctness  and  precision  whid
are  marvellous,  considering  the  scantiness  of  his  means.  For
of  positive  systems  of  law  he  had  scarcely  the  slightest  tincture
aftid  the  knowledge  of  the  principles  of  jurisprudence  which  h
borrowed  from  other  writers,  was  drawn,  for  the  most  part,  fton
the  muddiest  sources :  from  books  about  the  fustian  which  i
styled  the  Law  of  Nature.

But  though  this  novelty  comes  from  an  imposing  quartei
and  has  even  been  adopted  by  lawyers  of  consummate  acutenes
and  learning,  I  venture  to  pronounce  it  needless,  and  pregnan
with  perplexity  and  error^

'  In  Bern '  ( — a  phrase  purely  classical,  barbarous  and  ud
couth  as  it  may  look)  would  obviate  the  fancied  necessity  fo
these  newfangled  expressions,  supposing  it  were  used  in
manner  which  analogy  justifies  or  commands.  The  phrase  i
nowhere  employed  by  the  Roman  Lawyers  themselves,  for  th
purpose  of  signifying  briefly,  and  withal  adequately  and  unam
biguously,  the  entire  class  of  rights  which  avail  against  th
world  at  large.  But  if  it  were  applied  hy  us  to  this  mos
important  purpose,  in  a  manner  analogous  to  the  modes  ii
which  it  was  applied  by  them,  it  .would  accomplish  the  pur-
pose perfectly. Thus  applied,  it  would  denote  the  compass  of


Tables  and  Notes.  94  ^

a  right,  and  not  the  TuUure  of  its  subject.  It  would  indicate  Table  II.
that  the  right  in  question  availed  against  other  persons  generally ,  °  '  '  *
without  denoting  also  that  its  subject  was  a  tiling.  It  would
apply  to  rights  over  persons,  as  well  as  to  rights  over  things,
without  the  shadow  of  a  solecism.  [See  below,  in  the  present
note,  C.  d.  8.]  Consequently,  the  newfangled  expression,  '  jus
Tediter  personale/  with  others  of  the  like  intention,  are  needless.
'Jus  in  rem'  taken  in  the  large  signification  which  analogy
:  justifies,  would  point  with  perfect  precision  at  the  generic  pro-
perty of  the  right  And  in  case  it  were  necessary  to  indicate
*  that  its  svhject  was  a  person'  this,  its  specific  property,  might  be
V  Ejected  briefly  and  easily,  by  a  slight  qualification  of  the  term :
■ JEy.  *  jus  in  rem  over  (or  to)  a  person.'

Nor  are  these  ungainly  expressions  merely  needless. Those
^jnongst  them  which  are  not  some  yard  in  length,  and  which
^je  properly  names  rather  than  definitions  or  descriptions,  are
"  ,  ^siinbiguous  as  well  as  needless. According  to  the  intention  of
"Uieir  author,  and  of  those  who  have  adopted  them,  they  should
. Suggest  to  the  hearer  or  reader,  the  extensive  compass  of  the  rights
'^hich  they  are  used  to  denote. They  ought  to  indicate  that
%hese  rights  are  not  of  the  class  which  avail  against  determinate
J^ersons: that though  their subjects are  persons,  they avail
^igainst  the  world  at  large  as  if  they  were  rights  over  things.
^Wow, according  to established usage the  term  personale (or
Jpersonlich^) intimates the reverse: jus personxde commonly
^^ignifying  rights  which  obtain  against  persons  certain. Conse-
quently, the  expressions  now  in  question  defeat  their  own  end,
"fcy  suggesting  the  very  notion  which it  is  their  purpose  to
^^zclude. Nor  is  this  inconvenience  obviated by  the  adverb
^rtalUer  (or  dinglich),  which  is  adjected  to  the  term  personale  for
"the  purpose  of  qualifying  its  import. To  a  mind  exclusively
conversant  with  the  established  language, '  jus  realiter  personale  *
(or  *  rftTi^ZtcA-personliches Eecht') would probably  suggest a
tpecies  oi  jvs  personaley  though  not  the  entire  class. Instead  of
suggesting,  as  it  should,  jus  in  rem  over  a  person,  it  would  prob-
ably seem  to  indicate  that  sort  of  jus  in  personam  which  is
usually  denoted  by  the  expression  jus  ad  rem  (acquirendam),  and
to  which  that  significant  expression  ought  to  be  confined. In
other  words,  it  would  probably  seem  to  indicate  those  rights  in
personam,  which  imply  and  consist  of  obligations  '  ad  dandum
aliquid :'  that  is  to  say,  obligations  to  deliver  a  thing  (or  to  pass
a  light  in  rem)  at  the  instance  and  appointment  of  the  obligee.
[See  above,  in  the  present  note,  B.  c. ;  and  below,  note  4.]

VOL.  II.  2  F


942  Jurisprtuience.

Table  II.  Before  I  pass  from  the  subject  directly  under  consideration,

Note8,C.b.  J  ,^^  ^jjg^  ^  £^^  remarks  which  it  naturally  suggests ;  and  for

which  the  present  place  is  the  least  inconyenient  that  I  can  find,
though  they  are  rather  digressive  from  the  general  subject  of  the
Note.

Eights  or  Interests  over  or  in  Persons,  vrith  the  general
and  special  obligations  which  those  rights  or  interests  imply,
fall  under  the  department  of  Law  denominated  Jus  Personarum,
They  Jlow  from  those  Differences  of  persons  (styled  Conditions  or
Statics),  which  are  the  basis  of  the  Division  of  persons,  or  of  the
Distribviion  of  persons  into  classes.  Or  (speaking  more  accur-
ately) these  rights  and  obligations  are  ingredients  or  constitueni
parts  entering  into  the  composition  of  those  differences.

For  the  various  conditions  (or  statiis)  of  various  persons;
are  not  the  sources  of  differences  in  their  rights,  obligations  and
capacities  ( — '  qualitates  quarum  ratione  diverso  jure  utuntur')
but  are  constituted  or  formed  of  those  very  differences.

A  given  person  bears  a  given  condition  (or,  changing  tic
expression,  belongs  to  a  given  class),  by  virtue  of  distindm
rights,  capacities,  and  duties — by  a  vxint  of  certain  rights,  anl
of  capacities  to  take  those  rights — or  by  exemptions  from  certai
obligations.  In  other  words,  these  rights,  capacities,  and  datifl;
or  these  incapacities  and  exemptions,  are  considered  as  fonning
or  composing  a  single  though  complex  being,  and  are  bound  into
that  complex  One  by  the  collective  name  '  condition-'

His  condition  is  not  the  source  of  his  distinctive  rights  and
obligations,  for  these  are  his  condition,  or,  at  least,  constitueitf
parts  of  it.  Their  source  ( — *  id  cujus  ratione  diverso  jure  utituiT
is  the  fact,  event,  or  incident,  which  invests  him  with  the  condi-
tion ;  that  is  to  say,  gives  him  the  rights  and  capacities,  and
subjects  him  to  the  duties  and  incapacities,  of  which  the  Qf^
dition  is  composed,  or  for  which  that  word  is  a  name.  T*
example,  the  barrister  or  the  attorney  is  distinguished  from  other
men,  by  peculiar  obligations  which  are  imposed  upon  him,  ao^
by  peculiar  rights  which  he  enjoys.  These  peculiar  obligations,
with  these  peculiar  rights,  compose  or  are  the  Condition  rf
Barrister  or  Attorney.  The  source  or  cause  of  his  conditioA,  <*
of  his  distinctive  obligations  and  rights,  is  his  Call  to  the  Bar,
or  his  Admission  as  an  Attorney.

The  notion  of  status  or  condition  (as  understood  by  tie
Roman  Lawyers),  has  been  covered  with  thick  darkness  by  tb
vague  talk  of  their  successors,  and  is  not  entirely  free  frM^
difficulty  and  doubt. But  I  think  that  the  plain  account  d


\


Tables  and  Notes,  943

it,  which  I  have  given  above,  will  be  found  to  tally  with  the Table  II.
tnith,  or  to  approach  it  pretty  closely,  by  those  who  will  take .°^^'  ^
the  trouble  (trouble  too  seldom  taken)  of  seeking,  inspecting,
and  collating  the  original  and  proper  authorities.

See  and  compare  the  following  places : — Gaii  Coram  i.  §S  8,
9,  13,  67,  80,  81,  128,  159,  1&2.— Inst,  i  3,  §  4.— i  5,  §  3.
— L  16,  §  4.— L  22,  §  4.— ii  11,  §  5.— ii.  17,  §§  1,  4,  6.—
Dig,  i  5  (De  statu  hominum),  L  5,  pr.  II,  9,  21,  26,  sub  fine. —
i  9.  (De  Senatoribus),  /.  10. — iv.  5  (De  capite  minutis),  /.  3,
§1,/.  11.

To  fix  the  notion  of  Status  with  perfect  exactness,  seems
to  be  impossible.  For  there  are  certain  sets  or  series  of  rights
and  obligations,  which  would  probably  be  considered  by  one
nan  as  forming  or  composing  Stattis,  though  another  would
lather  refer  them  to  the  Jvs  Berum :  i.e.  the  Law  (or  Doctrine)
of  Rights  and  Obligations  in  general,  or  of  Eights  and  Obligations
iiixtracted  or  apart  from  conditions,  [See  above,  note  2  :  and
aho  Table  IV.  Sec.  2.]

The  matter  is  full  of  embarrassment,  and  I  presume  to  touch
ft  with  no  small  hesitation.  But  still  I  will  venture  to  suggest,
Hiafc  the  following  properties  or  marks  are,  perhaps,  the  test
rf  a  Condition:  that  is,  may  serve  to  distinguish  Conditions
pioperly  so  called,  from  Eights,  Obligations,  and  Capacities  to
^hich  the  name  is  inapplicable.

1.  The  duties  or  obUgations,  which  are  constituent  parts  of
conditions,  or  which  correspond  to  rights  entering  into  the  com-
position of  conditions,  are  general  or  indeterminate :  that  is  to
8ay,  obligations  to  acts  or  forbearances  indefinite  in  respect
of  number.

For  example,  If  you  hire  another  as  your  servant,  two  con-
diiions  (those  of  master  and  servant),  are  created  by  the  contract,
i'or  each  incurs  obligations  and  each  requires  rights,  of  which
the  objects  are  not  determined  individually,  although  their  ki7ids
iiiay  be  fixed.  You  are  obliged  to  feed  him,  etc.,  so  long  as
the  contract  shall  continue ;  and  he  is  obliged  to  render  a  series
of  services,  which  are  equally  indefinite  as  to  number.

But  if  you  hire  another  to  do  some  single  service  (as  to  go  on
a  given  errand),  the  conditions  of  master  and  servant  are  not
Created  by  the  contract :  nor,  even  in  popular  and  vague  language,
^ould  he  be  called  your  servant,  or  you  his  master.  And  a
like  remark  will  apply  to  every  legal  relation,  which  consists
of  a  right,  or  an  obligation,  to  a  determinate  act  or  forbearance.
^0  one  ascribes  a  status  to  Buyer  or  Seller,  etc.


944  yurisprudence.

Table  II.  The  duties or  obligations,  which are  constituent  parts c

Note8,C.b.  conditions,  or  which  correspond  to  rights  entering  into  the  CO122-
position  of  conditions,  are  also  indeterminate  in  this :  that  the
acts  or  forbearances  which  are  their  objects,  are  indefinite  with
respect  to  kind.

If  you  hire  another  as  your  servant,  the  kinds  of  services
which  he  undertakes  to  render,  are  just  as  undetermined  as  the
single  or  individual  services  to  which  the  contract  binds  him.
Consequently,  you  are  master,  and  he  is  servant ;  or  you  and
he  are  severally  clothed  with  the  conditions  which  are  denoted
by  those  names.

But  if  you  engaged  another  to  render  services  of  a  dm
(as  to  supply  your  family  with  bread,  to  shoe  your  horses,  or
the  like),  you  and  he  would  hardly  be  clothed  with  conditim
by  virtue  of  that  contract  And  the  same  remark  will  applj
to  the  relation  of  Landlord  and  Tenant,  of  Principal  and  Factor,
of  Grantor  and  Grantee  of  an  Annuity,  etc.  For  in  all  these
cases,  the  services  to  be  rendered  by  the  parties,  are  fixed  «
circumscribed  as  to  kind,  although  the  acts  or  forbearances  to
which  they  are  bound  are  not  determined  as  to  number.

In  short.  Eights,  Duties,  Capacities,  or  Incapacities,  can
hardly  be  said  to  constitute  a  Statics  or  Condition,  unless  they
impart  to  the  person  a  conspicuous  character :  unless  they  run
through  his  position  in  a  continued  vein  or  stratum :  unless
they  tinge  the  whole  of  his  legal  being  with  a  distinctive  and
obvious  colour. — All  which  talk  is  certainly  a  tissue  of  metaphors,
and  therefore  little  better  than  sheer  trumpery.  But  such  are
the  difficulties  sticking  to  the  matter  in  question,  that  I  am
tempted  at  every  instant  to  flee  from  the  •toilsome  analysis,  and
take  to  the  ready  refuge  of  ignorant  or  perplexed  interpreters.

For  instance :  Whether  the  circumstances  which  I  have
mentioned  as  the  second  mark  of  a  condition,  be  indeed  such  a
mark,  seems  to  admit  of  doubt.

There  certainly  are  many  Status  in  which  it  occurs,  and  of
which  it  is  a  prominent  and  striking  feature:  eg,  those  of
Husband  and  Wife,  Parent  and  Child,  Guardian  and  Ward,
Master  and  Slave,  Alien,  Insolvent,  Magistrate,  etc.  In  all
which  cases,  the  distinctive  duties  of  the  parties,  or  the  duties
which  correspond  to  their  distinctive  rights,  oblige  to  acts  and
forbearances  indefinite  in  respect  of  kind.  Instead  of  being
confined  or  circumscribed  by  a  well-determined  description,
these  acts  and  forbearances  run  indistinctly  through  numerous
and  disparate  classes.


Tables  and  Notes.  •  945

But  I  think  I  might  talk,  without  impropriety,  of  the  C(m-  Table  II.
(W  of  an  Agricultural  Servant:  And  yet  the  rights  and  ^^^  *  '/
!es  of  the  master  and  servant  are,  here,  of  a  definite  character.
The  Eight,  Interest,  or  Estate,  which  a  man  may  have  in  a
xity,  presents  a  similar  difficulty.  The  scope  or  purpose  of
right  is  to  bear  a  Title  of  Honour ;  and  to  get  therewith
Bwiiniration  or  deference  which  that  distinctive  and  honorary
c  may  extract  from  the  rest  of  the  world.  Consequently,
duties  which  correspond  to  the  right,  are  simply  and  ex-
r  circumscribed.  They  are  merely  obligations,  incumbent
I  other  persons  generally,  to  abstain  from  all  such  acts  as
it  cast  a  slur  upon  the  right :  E.g.  disputing  the  title  of
party  to  wear  the  honorary  badge;  or  treating  the  badge
f  irreverently,  to  the  possible  damage  of  the  worth  which
jrives  from  current  opinion.

But  yet  I  imagine,  that  a  person  invested  with  a  Dignity,
Iso  invested,  by  virtue  of  the  Dignity,  with  a  Status  or
lition :  and  that  in  an  Arrangement  of  Law  founded  upon
principles,  this  his  distinctive  right,  together  with  the  corre-
ding  duties,  would  be  detached  from  General  Law  (or  Jus
vni)y  and  inserted  in  Special  Law  (or  Jus  P&i^souarum),  [See
e,  note  2,  and  also  Table  IV.  Sec.  2.]
It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  remark,  that  I  have  here  been
king  of  a  Dignity  considered  simply  or  by  himself.  The
55  or  conditions  constituted  by  rights  of  the  sort,  are  ab-
:ely  distinct  from  the  political  or  public  statiis,  which  not
equently  concur  with  them  in  the  same  individuals.  The
ical  powers  of  an  English  Peer,  might  be  precisely  what  they

although  he  were  not  distinguished  by  a  single  honorary
And a  right  to  a  Dignity  (as  to  that  of  Baronet,  for
ince),  is  frequently  unconnected  with  a  political  or  public
acter.

3.  Certain  Conditions  are  purely  or  mostly  onerous. — Such
e  Condition  of  the  Slave :  to  whom  the  Law  refuses  rights,
gals  them  with  a  niggard  hand. AccoKling  to  the  Eoman

(down  to  the  age  of  the  Antonines),  the  slave  had  '  nullum
i ; '  was  'res:*  that  is  to  say,  he  was  the  sicbject  of  rights
ling  in  his  master ;  lay  under  oUigations  towards  his  master
others ;  but  enjoyed  not  a  particle  of  right  against  a  single
ture.  As  the  subject  of  another's  rights,  he  was  susceptible
image  ;  but  he  was  not  susceptible  of  injury, — According  to
lame  system  (in  its  earlier  and  ruder  state),  the  Son  inpotestate,
the  Wife  in  tnanu,  were  also  '  rcsj  in  respect  of  the  Father


946  yurisprudence.

Table II. and  Husband ;  although  they  had  ' caput*  or  were  invested  with

Note  S.C.b. •  V  J. •  i. p  xi-  •  J

- rights,  m  respect  of  third  persons.

Now  to  talk  of  a  right  or  interest  in  a  purely  anerotts  condi-
tion, were  to  talk  absurdly. But  so  far  as  a  condition  is  lucra-
tive, or  consists  of  rights  and  advantages,  we  may  imagine  aa
interest in  the  condition,  considered  as  a  complex  whole :  con-
sidered as  'juris  universitas : '  considered  without  reference  to
the  single  and  separate  rights,  which  are  component  or  con-
stituent parts  of  it. And  this,  I  incline  to  think,  is  a  mark
of  every  statvs  not  purely  onerous :  although  there  are  certain
aggregates,  or  universities  of  rights,  to  which  the  name  of  status
is  inapplicable. In  other  words,  though  every  Juris  universitas
is  not  a  condition,  every  condition,  so  far  as  it  consists  of  rights,
is  juris  universitas.

Accordingly,  the  party  has  a  right  in  his  condition,  analogous
to  ownership  in  a  single  or  individual  thing :  jus  in  rem  :  a  right
or  interest,  which  avails  against  the  world  at  large  (althougi
the  several  rights,  which  are  ingredients  in  his  condition,  be
rights  in  personam  merely).

Consequently,  wrongs  against  this  right  are  analogous  to  wrongs
against  ownership :  And,  according  to  the  practice  of  the  Eoman
Law,  wrongs  of  both  classes  are  redressed  by  analogous  remedies.

Where  the  individual  thing  is  unlawfully  detained  from  the
owner,  he  vindicates  or  recovers  the  thing  by  an  action  in  rem.
Where  the  right  in  the  condition  is  wrongfully  disputed,  the
party  asserts  his  rights  by  a  peculiar  and  appropriate  action,
'  quae  i7i  rem  esse  videtur*

According  to  the  practice  of  the  English  Law,  controversies
touching  conditions,  and  other  juris  universitates,  are  commonly
decided  or  tried  in  an  indirect  or  incidental  manner.  Some
particular  right,  parcel  of  the  complex  whole,  is  the  immediate
object  of  the  proceeding;  and  the  more  comprehensive  question
is  handled  in  the  course  of  this  proceeding,  obliquely,  or  by  way
of  episode.  For  example.  The  interest  of  the  Assignees  in  the
Estate  and  Effects  of  the  Bankrupt  (or,  changing  the  expression,
in  the  aggregate  or  university  of  his  rights),  is  frequently  im-
pugned and  asserted  in  an  action  of  assumpsit  or  trover.  And,
thus,  a  question  of  legitimacy  (precisely  a  question  de  statu),  is
not  uncommonly  agitated  in  an  action  of  efectm^ent  or  trespass.

For  these  reasons,  juris  universitates,  or  rights  in  aggr^tes
of  rights,  stand  out  sharply  in  the  Eoman  law,  and  are  marked
with  comparative  indistinctness  in  the  English.  But  rights  of
the  sort  are  not  the  less  known  to  the  latter. They  are,  in  truth,


Tables  and  Notes.  947

essential  or  necessary  parts  in  every  possible  system  of  rights  Table  II.
and  obligations.  And,  if  I  were  not  limited  with  respect  to  ^°  '  '/
space  and  time,  I  could  mention  certcdn  proceedings,  before  cer-
ttin  of  the  English  Courts,  wherein  rights  of  the  sort  are  brought
directly  in  question :  wherein  the  complex  whole,  abstracted  from
ite  component  parts,  is  the  immediate  object  of  the  controversy.
The  wrongs,  against  rights  in  conditions,  to  which  I  have
jost  adverted,  are  analogous  to  dispossession  or  detention,  in  the
eise  of  dominion  or  ownership.  But  a  right  in  a  condition,  like
(nmeiship  in  an  individual  thing,  is  also  obnoxious  to  offences
▼hich  differ  from  dispossession :  by  which  the  enjoyment  of  the
i^ht  is  not  usurped ;  by  which  the  title  of  the  party  is  not  im-
pugned ;  but  by  which  the  right  is  nevertheless  annihilated,  or
its  value  diminished  or  endangered.  E,g,  To  wound  or  beat  the
Qiild,  is  an  offence  against  the  Covdition  of  the  Father.  For
die  mass  of  the  rights  and  advantages  which  accrue  to  the  father
6om  his  fatherhood,  is  thereby  put  in  jeopardy,  or  positively
lessened  in  worth. — To  slay  the  Husband  and  Father,  is  not
only  a  crime  punishable  on  the  part  of  the  community,  but  is
also  a  civil  injury  to  the  Conditions  of  the  Wife  and  Child.
Ibr  the  sum  of  the  rights  and  advantages  arising  from  their
lotion  to  the  deceased,  is  annihilated  or  diminished  by  the  act.
According  to  the  notions  and  the  practice  which  have  obtained
II  modem  times,  the  civil  injury  merges  in  the  crime.  But  still
t  is  easy  to  imagine,  that  the  Law  might  impose  upon  the  criminal
twofold  obligation :  an  obligation  to  suffer  punishment,  on  the
art  of  the  community  at  large;  and  a  farther  obligation  to
itisfy  the  parties,  whose  interest  in  the  deceased  he  has  de-
at)yed.  Before  the  abolition  of  Appeals,  this  was  nearly  the
ise  in  the  Law  of  England.  The  murderer  was  obnoxious  to
unishment,  properly  so  called ;  and,  in  case  that  punishment
eie  not  inflicted,  the  wife  and  the  heir  of  the  slain  were  entitled
\  vindictive  satisfaction,  which  they  exacted  or  remitted  at  their
Leasure. — If  I  slander  your  servant,  and  you  turn  him  off  in
>nsequence,  I  wrong  your  servant  in  his  condition.  I  debar  him
x)in  that  aggregate  of  contingent  advantages,  which  his  stay  in
our  service  might  have  given  him. — To  slander  the  skill  of  a
lugeon,  or  to  question  without  cause  the  solvency  of  a  trader,
re  wrongs  of  the  same  sort.  They  are  not  violations  of  rights
3  individual  subjects  or  objects,  but  are  offences  against  condi-
ions.  They  tend  to  abridge  the  sum  of  those  future  and  inde-
erminate  advantages,  which  the  surgeon  may  derive  from  his
sailing,  or  the  trader  from  his  trade.


94  8  yurisprudence.

Table  II.  In  short,  of  the  several  properties  or  marks  which  ma^  ^

.  ^  '  '/  found  in  every  stahtSy  the  following  would  seem  to  be  one  :—
Every  statiis,  so  far  as  it  consists  of  rights,  is  'juris  universi/m'
Therefore,  as  an  aggregate  of  rights,  and  abstracted  from  its  com-
ponent parts,  it  is  the  subject  of  a  right  in  rem  which  is  analo-
gous to  the  right  of  ownership.  Therefore,  each  of  these  righa
is  obnoxious  to  wrongs,  which  are  also  analogous.  Therefore;
whatever  may  be  the  practice  of  this  or  that  system,  offencei
against  ownership,  and  offences  against  rights  in  condition3»
admit  of  analogous  remedies.

In  conditions  which  are  purely  onerous,  or  consist  of  obligar
tions  only,  this  mark  is  not  to  be  found.  But  conditions  of  that
sort  commonly  correlate  with  others  in  which  the  mark  occur
The  condition  of  slave,  for  instance,  is  implied  in  the  conditioi
of  master :  and  when  I  consider  the  latter,  I  necessarily  consider  ]
the  former.  Consequently,  if  the  mark  in  question  belongs  to
lucrative  conditions,  it  is  also  indirectly,  a  mark  of  onerous
conditions.

4.  Single  persons,  or  persons  determined  singly,  may  be
marked  or  distinguished  by  peculiar  rights  and  capacities,  w
peculiar  duties  and  incapacities.  For  example.  The  Legislatnie
may  grant  to  an  individual,  or  to  a  corporate  body,  the  monopoly
of  some  commodity :  laying  on  that  individual,  or  on  that  arti-
ficial person,  peculiar  obligations  with  respect  to  the  manufacture
or  import.

By  the  Eoman  Lawyers,  and  by  modem  expositors  of  the
system,  rights  and  obligations  of  the  sort  are  often  denominated
singular :  oftener,  and  less  and  ambiguously,  privUe^fia,

Now  certain  of  these  pHvUegia  have  many  of  the  marks  of
conditions,  but  yet  are  distinguished  from  conditions.  They
are  not  styled  conditions,  nor  are  they  inserted  in  '  The  Law  of
Persons:'  the  department  of  the  Corpus  Juris  which  is  occupied
with  the  description  of  conditions ;  and  which  would  be  named
more  appositely,  if  it  were  called  '  The  Law  of  Status'

Nor  is  this  exclusion  capricious.  All  privileges  are  peculiar
or  distinctive ;  and  some  of  them  have  other  marks,  which  are
also  found  in  conditions.  But  though  conditions  are  peculiar,
still  they  are  common  or  general,  as  contra-distinguished  from
singular :  Privileges  are  peculiar  and  singular.  Conditions  dis-
tinguish persons,  considered  as  members  of  Classes :  Pri\Tleges
distinguish  persons  considered  singly  or  individually.  The  dis-
tinctive rights  and  duties  of  Fathers,  Wives,  and  Infants,
constitute  conditions : Distinctive  rights  or  duties  limited  to


Tables  and  Notes.  949

Sempionius  or  Styles,  axe  not  a  condition. At  least,  they  are Table  ii.
not  a  condition  fit  for  the  Law  of  Persons.  .^ '  '/

For  the  Law  of  Persons  or  Status  (and  the  Corpus  Juris  in
general),  ought  to  be  occupied  with  matters  of  wide  and  lasting
concern.  It  should  no  more  stoop  to  the  description  of  these
singularities  or  anomalies,  than  the  Law  or  Doctrine  of  Contracts
«hould  attempt  to  anticipate  the  peculiarities  which  distinguish
contracts  individually.

Privileges  are  matter  for  a  peculiar  department  belonging  to
Jus  Berum.  For,  in  this  peculiar  department,  they  should  not
be  described  singly,  but  considered  generally.  It  should  merely
determine  the  principles  which  regulate  privileges  as  a  class.

In  truth,  the  Statutes,  or  Customs,  which  create  or  establish
privileges,  can  hardly  be  ranked  with  Laws.  They  are  mere
anomalies:  exorbitant  or  irregular  commands  proceeding  from
tihe  Legislature ;  or,  what  in  effect  is  exactly  the  same  thing,
eccentric  customs  tacitly  sanctioned  by  the  Legislature.  They
are  not  so  much  analogous  to  laws  or  rules  of  law,  as  to  titles,
or  investitive  events.  And,  accordingly,  most  of  them  must  be
proved  by  the  parties  who  are  interested  in  sustaining  them,
before  the  Courts  of  Justice  can  know  or  notice  their  existence.

Consequently,  one  mark  of  Conditions  is  this :  A  Condition
or  Status  is  common  to  persons  of  a  class,  and  is  not  restricted  to
persons  singly  or  individually  determined.

But  this,  like  most  propositions,  must  be  qualified.  There
are  certain  powers  or  rights  and  also  certain  duties,  which  are
properly  ranked  with  conditions  and  inserted  in  the  Law  of
Persons,  although  they  are  limited  to  single  men  or  to  single
bodies  of  men.  The  principle  which  suggests  the  exclusion  of
singular  rights  and  obligations,  points  at  the  propriety  of  admit-
ting them  in  these  excepted  cases.  For  the  powers  and  duties
in  question  are  of  wide  and  lasting  concern :  And  if  they  were
not  inserted  in  the  Corpus  Juris,  this  would  be  little  better  than
a  fragment  and  a  riddle.  Such  are  the  powers  of  the  Sovereign,
where  the  Sovereign  is  One.  And  such  are  the  rights  and  duties
of  certain  magistrates  or  companies,  who  though  they  are  single
persons,  natural  or  artificial,  are  clothed  with  functions  which
deeply  concern  the  general,  and  run  in  a  continued  vein  through
the  mass  or  aggregate  of  the  law.

5.  It  appears  from  the  last  section,  that  a  Condition  or
Status  is  common  to  persons  of  a  class.  To  which  I  will  add
(superfluous  as  the  addition  may  seem),  that  no  Condition  or
Status  extends  to  persons  indiscriminately. The  rights  or  duties


950  Jurisprtulence.

Table  II. which  constiitUe  a  Condition,  reside  exclusively  in  persons  of  a
Note8,C.b.  giygj^  description ;  though  many  of  the  duties  or  rights  to  which
they  correspond,  may  reside  in  persons  generally,  or  even  in  all
persons.

This  is  a  truism.  But,  like  all  other  truisms,  it  is  prone  to
slip  from  the  memory.  If  the  excellent  Sir  Matthew  Hale  had
looked  to  it  steadily,  and  had  stayed  to  ask  the  meaning  of '  Jm
Personarum*  it  is  certain  that  he  would  not  have  fallen  into  an
extremely  gross  error  which  deforms  his  Analysis  of  the  Law.
(See  post,  in  Tables  VII.  and  VIII.,  the  Arrangement  proposed
by  Hale,  and  adopted  by  Blackstona)  Under  the  title  *  The
Eights  of  Persons '  (meaning  '  The  Law  of  Persons '),  they  have
placed  the  right  to  liberty ;  the  right  to  bodily  security :  the
right  to  reputation ;  with  the  rest  of  certain  rights  which  they
are  pleased  to  style  absolvie :  Eights  which,  nevertheless,  bdoi^
pre-eminently  and  conspicuously  to  *  The  Law  of  Things :'  which
of  all  imaginable  rights  are  precisely  the  most  general :  which,
in  every  region  on  earth,  reside  in  every  person  to  whom  the
Sovereign  or  State  extends  a  particle  of  protection.  Such,  at
least,  is  the  case  with  the  right  to  bodily  security,  and  also  with
the  right  to  liberty :  i,e,  the  right  of  exercising,  without  molesta-
tion from  others,  that  liberty  of  doing  or  forbearing  which  is  cod-
ceded  by  the  Law.  And  such  is  the  case,  nearly,  with  all  the
rest  of  the  rights,  which,  under  the  name  of  absolute,  they  have
foisted  into  the  Law  of  Persons.  All  of  them  are  rights  residing
in  all  persons,  or,  at  least,  in  persons  generally.

To  speak  plain  English,  they  either  forgot  to  ask,  or  they
considered  slightly  and  superficially,  the  following  obvious  ques-
tions : — What  is  a  Status  or  Condition  ?  What  are  the  fit
contents  of  that  department  of  the  Law  which  is  styled  by  the
Eoman  Lawyers,  or,  rather,  by  their  followers,  Jtis  Fersonarum  ?
The  terms  which  Hale  employs,  and  which  Blackstone  copies,
shew,  without  more,  that  such  was  the  fact  How  does  the  title
'  Eights  of  Persons '  apply  to  the  department  in  question  more
than  to  another  ?  The  Eights  and  Obligations  of  Persons  are
the  subjects  of  all  Law ;  and  all  the  various  departments  into
which  it  is  divided,  equally  concern  such  rights.  What  would
be  thought  of  a  treatise  on  the  various  races  of  mankind  which
should  distinguish  White  Men  or  Black  Men  by  the  simple
appellative  '  Men '  ?

Nor  can  we  impute  this  absurdity  to  the  Eoman  Lawyers,
and  suppose  that  Hale  and  Blackstone  were  blinded  by  their
example. For  they  nowhere  style  this  department '  The  Bights


Tables  and  Notes.  9  5 1

eisons.' In  two  or  three  passages  which  lie  at  the  threshold TablbII.

eir  Institutes,  and  in  which  a  stranger  to  their  system  natur- .^ '  '/

sticks  and  is  ensnared,  they  do,  indeed,  call  it '  The  Law  of

>ns,'  or  'The  Law  which  concerns  Persons/ And  here,  I

b,  they  have  fallen  into  nonsense  which  is  scarcely  less  gross

the  other. But  their  usual  names  for  the  department  are

: *  LHvisio  Personarum* — 'De Coiiditione  Hominum  ' —

Statu  Hominum' — 'De  Personarum  Staiu:'  Names  not

K)site,  and  intimating  clearly  enough  the  general  scope  of

Arrangement

Jor  is  tiie  opposite  department  styled  by  the  Eoman  Lawyers

Bights  of  Things :'  a  title  which,  taken  literally,  ascribes
8  to  rights,  and  to  things,  acts,  and  forbearances,  as  subjects
objects  of  rights.  Their  name  was  not  absurd,  although  it
wretchedly  obscure.  It  was  obscure  in  consequence  of  its
guity,  and  in  consequence  of  its  elliptical  shape.  For  as
in  one  of  its  senses,  signifies  things,  '  Jus  JRerum '  (or  *  Jus

ad  jRcs  pertinet ')  will  hardly  suggest  to  a  novice  surely
readily,  the  meaning  which  was  really  intended:  namely,
Law  of  Bights  and  Obligations  (abstracted  from  Conditions.)
though  the  term  *  res '  signifies  rights  and  obligations,  still
Uiptical  expression  *  Jus  Berurn '  drops  the  characteristic  of
lepartment  in  question :  namely,  that  it  relates  to  Eights
Obligations  abstracted  from  Conditions,  and  is  thereby  dis-
ished  from  '  Jics  Personarum^  or  the  department  which  treats
»nditions.

Jefore  I  conclude  this  digression,  which  has  run  to  uncon-
able  length,  I  will  yet  venture  a  remark, — The  contents  of
;reat  departments  'jus  personai*um  et  rei'um'  are  perfectly
ict  in  general,  but  cross  or  blend  occasionally.  The  line  of
rcation  by  which  the  departments  are  severed  has  never
observed,  nor  should  it  be  observed,  with  inflexible  rigour,
principles  or  groimds  of  Method  are  subordinate  to  the  ends
ethod.

'.  have  stated,  a  little  above,  that  certain  rights  and  obliga-
,  which,  strictly,  are  not  conditions,  should  yet  be  ranked
conditions,  and  placed  in  the  Law  of  Persons.  I  may  now
that  certain  rights  and  obligations  which,  properly,  constitute
tions,  are  placed  with  propriety  in  the  Law  of  Things.
ITiis  is  remarkably  the  case  with  the  rights  and  obligations
lose  who  are  styled  the  general  representatives  of  testators
itestates,  or  are  said  to  represent  their  persons :  that  is  to


952  Jurisprudence,

Table  II.  say,  who  succeed  'per  tmiversUatem  to  their  rights  and  duties,  or,
yote3,C.b.  ^^  least,  to  their  rights  or  duties  of  a  given  description  or  class.
Such  is  the  heir,  whether  testamentary  or  le^imate,  of  the  Eomaa
Law.  Such  are  the  executor  or  administratar  and  the  next  of  h%^
in  the  Law  of  England.  And  such  (I  may  add)  is  the  EngliA'
heir^  with  the  general  or  particular  devisee.  As  opposed  to  tb
executor,  etc.,  the  heir  or  devisee  has  been  esteemed  a  singvlff
successor.  But  it  were  perfectly  easy  to  demonstrate  that  he  k'
*  successor  universalis*  or  a  general  representative  of  the  deceasd
For  he  succeeds  universally  or  generally  to  rights  and  duties  i
a  class,  or,  at  least,  to  duties  of  a  class.

Now  I  think  you  would  hunt  in  vain  for  a  single  property  cr
mark,  whereby  the  rights  and  duties  of  such  imiversal  successoB
can  be  distinguished  from  the  purest  of  the  Conditions  which  aie
placed  in  the  Law  of  Persons.  And,  accordingly,  Sir  Matthef
Hale,  in  his  Analysis  of  the  Law,  has  posted  in  tihat  department
the  relation  of  Ancestor  and  Heir :  i,e.  the  status  or  condUmi
the  latter.

And  yet  these  rights  and  duties  have  never  been  styled  con-
ditions, and  are  placed  by  general  consent  in  the  Law  of  Things
The  reason  of  which  seeming  anomaly  I  take  to  be  this.

By  dividing  the  aggregate  of  the  law  into  'jus  jtxrsaMnti*
et  rerum*  two  important  ends  are  or  may  be  attained :  brevitj
and  distinctness.  Rights  and  duties  in  general  ( — all  that  can
be  said  about  them  apart  from  conditions),  are  severed  or
abstracted  from  the  distinctive  rights  and  duties  of  which  con-
ditions are  composed.  Hence  rights  and  duties  in  general  aie
described  once  for  all.  And,  hence,  the  march  of  these  general
descriptions  is  comparatively  clear  and  easy :  being  freed  firom
the  numerous  restrictions,  extensions,  and  explanations  with
which  we  must  take  these  descriptions,  when  we  look  at  the
matter  of  conditions. (See  Table  IV.  Sec.  2.)

But  in  case  the  rights  and  duties  of  these  general  represent-
atives or  successors  were  ranked  with  status  or  conditions,  the
two  important  ends,  which  are  attained  by  the  division,  woulJ
be  thwarted  rather  than  advanced.  For  the  special  matter  in
question  is  inseparably  connected  and  interlaced  with  the  general
scheme  or  system  of  rights  and  obligations.  In  order  to  the
explanation  of  the  last,  the  former  must  be  expounded  with  it
Consequently,  an  attempt  to  treat  the  former  apart  from  the
other,  would  lead  to  repetition  and  obscurity.  Such  is  the
intrinsic  connection  subsisting  between  the  two,  that  they  muM
be  considered  jointly  in  spite  of  the  attempt  to  sever  them. And


Tables  and  Notes.  953

itle  assigned  to  the  former  in  the  Law  of  Persons,  were, Table  II.
fore,  a  mere  excrescence  without  an  intelligible  purpose.  ^  q\  '

rhe  questions  which  I  have  laboured  to  elucidate  in  this
and  wearisome  digression,  are  probably  the  most  difficult
1  the  science  of  jurisprudence  presents. Beyond  a  doubt

rank  with  the  most  important.  For  every  attempt  to
t  the  aggregate  of  the  law,  or  to  compose  a  treatise  or
lentary  embracing  the  same  subject,  ought  to  be  preceded
perspicuous  notion  of  the  leading  distinctions  and  divisions.
he  degree  of  precision  and  justness  with  which  these  are
dved  and  predetermined  the  merit  and  success  of  the  attempt
mainly  depend.  Errors  or  defects  in  the  details  are  readily
ped  or  supplied.  Errors  in  the  general  design  infect  the
B  system,  and  are  absolutely  incurable.
3ut  of  all  distinctions  and  divisions,  the  most  comprehensive
hese : — The  distinction  between  Conditions,  and  the  Rights,
;ations,  and  Capacities  which  are  not  Conditions ; — The
Ion  of  Law  into  general  and  special,  or  Law  of  Things  and
of  Persons.

Co  fix  that  distinction  firmly,  and  to  draw  an  intelligible
between  those  two  departments,  were  to  cleanse  the  science

much  of  the  confusion  and  jargon  by  which  it  is  obscured
iisgraced.  And  if  the  few  desultory  remarks  which  I  have
ired  to  throw  out,  should  turn  the  attention  of  the  reflecting
lese  weighty  and  perplexing  problems,  I  shall  feel  myself

than  repaid  for  the  labour  which  they  have  cost  me,  crude
defective  as  they  are.

c.)  It  is  said  in  a  preceding  section  (C.  a.),  '  that  of  rights
h  avail  or  obtain  against  other  persons  generally,  some  are
s  over  or  to  persons,  and  some  have  no  subject  (person  or
;).'  Examples  of  the  former  have  been  given  in  the  last
)n  (C.  b.).  I  will  now  produce,  as  briefly  as  I  can,  a  few
nces  of  the  latter.

L.  The  right  to  r€j[nitation, — The  scope  or  end  of  this  right,
le  esteem  or  goodwill  of  the  public ;  of  that  indeterminate
ber  of  indeterminate  persons,  by  whom  the  person  in  ques-
may  happen  to  be  known.  And  here,  it  is  manifest,  there
3t  the  shadow  of  a  subject,  over  which  the  right  can  be
sised,  or  m  which  it  can  be  said  to  inhere  or  exist.  It  is
jly  a  right  to  that  mass  of  contingent  enjoyments,  which
person  may  chance  to  derive  from  general  approbation  and


954  Jurisprudence.


Table  II. sympathy. And  yet  this  is  a  right  which  avails  against  the
yote3,C.c.  ^Qpj^  ^i^  large :  every  false  imputation  thrown  npon  the  person

in question  being  a  delict  or  injury  affecting  or  committed

against  it.

2.  A  monopoly :  or  the  right  of  vending  exclusively  com-
modities of  a  given  class. — ^This  is  a  right  which  illustrates  in  a
striking  manner  the  nature  of  jus  in  rem.  Here,  the  generic
character  of  the  right  stands  alona  There  is  not  a  single
circumstance  to  draw  the  attention  from  it  There  is  no  deter-
minate subject  (person  or  thing),  over  which  the  right  is  exer-
cised, or  in"  which  it  can  be  said  to  exist  Nor  is  it  a  right  to
sell  commodities  of  the  class.  For  that  is  a  right  which  the
party  would  enjoy  without  the  monopoly.  The  right  consists  in
the  duty,  which  is  imposed  upon  other  persons  generally,  to
forbear  from  all  such  acts  as  would  defeat  or  thwart  its  purpose:
namely,  from  selling  commodities  of  the  class.

3.  Certain  of  those  rights  which  are  styled  in  the  English
Law  franchises :  as,  for  instance,  right  of  exercising  jurisdiction
in  a  given  territory,  or  a  right  of  levying  a  toll  at  a  bridge  ot
ferry. — In  each  of  these  cases  the  law  empowers  the  party  to  do
certain  acts,  and  lays  a  negative  obligation  upon  other  persons
generally  to  forbear  from  disturbing  the  exercise.  But  the  acta
are  not  exercised  over  a  determinate  subject  And  this  peculi-
arity distinguishes  the  interest  of  the  party  from  an  interest  in
a  person  or  thing;  as,  for  instance,  property  in  a  slave — the
interest  of  the  father  or  guardian  in  the  child  or  ward — owne^
ship  or  servitus  in  or  over  a  field.

It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  add,  that  the  rights  in  personam,
which  concur  with  the  rights  in  question,  are  perfectly  distinct
from  the  latter.  Those  who  reside  within  my  territory  are  bound
to  bring  their  plaints  into  my  court  Those  who  traverse  my
bridge  or  ferry  are  bound  to  pay  me  a  tolL  But  these  are  positive
obligations,  specially  attaching  upon  persons  who  stand  in  peculiar
positions.  They  are  broadly  distinguished  from  the  general  or
negative  duties,  of  which  my  right,  considered  as  jus  in  rem,  is
constituted  or  composed  :  e.g.  not  to  usurp  jurisdiction  within  the
limits  of  the  territory,  or  not  to  molest  passengers  crossing  the
bridge  or  ferry.

4.  Rights  or  interests  in  certain  conditions,  considered  as
juris  universitates. (See  above,  C.  b.)

In  many  cases,  the  right  of  interest  in  the  condition  concurs
with  a  right  or  interest  over  or  in  a  person.  For  example,  the
father  or  husband  has  an  interest  in  the  child  or  wife ;  the  child


k


Tables  and  Notes.  955

or  wife,  in  the  father  or  husband;  the  master,  in  the  slave  or  Table II.
servant.  Bnt,  in  other  cases,  there  is  no  determinate  subject  ^^c^d?
(person  or  thing)  to  which  the  right  in  the  condition  can  be  said
to  relate.  Such  are  rights  in  the  conditions  which  are  constituted
"by  callings  or  professions. (See  above,  C.  b.)

(d.)  One  of  the  great  desiderata  in  the  language  of  juris-
prudence is  this :  A  pair  of  opposed  expressions  denoting  briefly
and  unambiguously  the  two  classes  of  rights  which  are  the  subject
of  the  present  note:  namely.  Eights  availing  against  persons
generally  or  universally,  and  Bights  availing  against  persons
certain  or  determinate.

The  opposed  or  contrasted  expressions  commonly  employed
for  the  purpose,  are  the  following :  *  jus  in  re '  and  *  jus  ad  rem :'
'jus  in  rem'  and  *jus  in  personam:'  'jus  reale*  and  *jus  per-
soncde :'  ' dominium '  (sensu  latiore)  and  ' ohligatio'  But  these
are  liable  to  the  general  objection  which  I  have  explained  in  the
preceding  remarks.  (See  C.  a.  b.  c.)  Jus  in  re,  jus  in  rem,  jus
reode  and  dominium,  will  none  of  them  denote,  without  a  degree
of  ambiguity,  the  entire  class  of  rights  which  avail  against  the
world  at  large.  Although  they  are  often  employed  in  that
extensive  signification,  they  commonly  signify  such  of  those  rights
as  are  rights  to  determinate  things.

Besides  this  general  objection,  each  of  these  pairs  of  terms
18  liable  to  special  objections,  which  now  I  will  briefly  indicate.
In  the  course  of  this  review,  certain  terms,  synonymous  with  the
terms  in  question,  will  be  noticed  with  the  same  brevity.  At
the  dose,  I  will  shortly  state  my  reasons  for  giving  a  decided
preference  to  jus  in  rem  et  jvs  in  personam'

1.  *  Jus  in  re '  and  '  Jus  ad  rem.' — Jils  ad  rem  signifies  any
light  which  avails  against  a  person  certain.  Still  it  is  often
restricted  to  a  species  of  such  rights :  to  those  which  correlate
With  obligations  *  ad  dandum  aliquid.'  (See  above,  B.  c. :  C.  b. :
And  see  below,  note  4.) It  is,  therefore,  ambiguous.

2.  *  Jus  reale '  and  *  Jus  personale! — ^For  the  numerous  am-
l^iguities  which  stick  to  these  expressions,  see  below,  note  5.

3.  ' Dominium '  (sensu  latiore)  and  *  Obligatio' — Besides  the
general  objection  which  is  mentioned  above,  dominium  (as  opposed
to  obligatio)  differs  from  dominium  (in  the  strict  signification).
As  opposed  to  obligatio,  it  embraces  'jura  -in  re'  (in  the  sense


956  Jurisprudence.

Note^s^Cd  ^^  ^^  Classical  Jurists):  that  is  to  say,  'jura  in  re  aXioA:
' — r—^  rights  or  interests  in  subjects  which  are  owned  by  others.  Taken
in  the  strict  signification,  it  is  directly  apposed  to  these  rights:
being  synonymous  with  ' proprietas,^  with  'in  re  potestasi  orwitk
'  jus  in  re  proprid'  (See  Table  I. — For  the  numerous  ambiguitifli
which  beset  the  term  oUigatio,  see  Table  I.,  note  6.)

4.  *  Potestas  *  and  *  Obligation  —  It  has  been  proposed  to
substitute  these  in  the  place  of  dominium  and  obligatio,  jus  a
rem,  and  jus  in  personam,  etc.  But  this  were  a  change  to  tin
worse.  For,  first,  potestas,  as  synonymous  with  dominium,  ii
encumbered  with  all  the  ambiguities  which  stick  to  the  lattet
And,  secondly,  it  is  liable  to  an  objection  from  which  the  latter
is  free.  For  it  usually  signifies  certain  ^pedes  of  the  rights  whick
avail  against  persons  determinate:  namely,  the  rights  of  the
master  against  the  slave  ( — ^'potestas  dominorum  in  servos');
and  the  rights  of  the  paterfamilias  against  his  descendants  (—
*  patria  potestas,'  or  *  potestas  parentum  in  liberos ').

5.  *  Absolvie  rights'  and  *  Relaiive  rights.' — Rights  which
avail  against  persons  generally  or  universally,  and  rights  which
avail  against  persons  certain  or  determinate,  are  not  unfrequentb
opposed  by  the  names  of  absolute  and  relative.  But  these  expres-
sions, as  thus  applied,  are  flatly  absurd.  For  rights  of  both
classes  are  relative :  Or,  in  other  words,  rights  of  both  cla^ ,
correlate  taith  duties  or  obligations.  The  only  difference  is,  that
the  former  correlate  with  duties  which  are  incumbent  upon  the
world  at  large ;  the  latter  correlate  with  obligations  which  aie
limited  to  determined  individuals.

6.  '  Jura  quae  valent  in  personas  generatim*  and  '  Jura  qtiae
valent  in  personas  certas  sive  determinatas.* — ^These  expressions
are  sufficiently  clear  and  precise.  But  they  are  rather  definitioDS
than  names,  and  are  much  too  long  for  ordinary  use.  To  the
purposes  of  discourse,  brevity  is  just  as  necessary  as  distinctness
or  precision.

7.  *  Law  of  Property '  and  '  Law  of  Contract.' — These  expres-
sions, as  thus  opposed,  are  intended  to  express  the  distinction
which  is  the  subject  of  the  present  note.  But  they  do  the
business  wretchedly.  Of  the  numerous  objections  which  immedi-
ately present  themselves,  I  will  briefly  advert  to  the  following.
1°.  We  need  contracted  expressions  for  the  two  classes  of  rights.


Tables  and  Notes,  957

and  not  for  the  laws  or  rules  of  which  those  rights  are  the Table  II.

creatures. 2"*.  Property  is  liable  to  the  objection  which  applies /  '>'

to  dominiv/m. In  this  instance,  its  meaning  is  generic. It

signifies  rights  of  every  description  which  avail  against  the  worid

•t  large. But,  in  other  instances,  it  distinguishes  some  species  of

those  rights  from  some  other  species  of  the  same  rights. For

example :  It  signifies  oumership,  as  opposed  to  servitude  or  ease-

^'ient;  or  it  signifies  ownership  indefinite  in  point  of  •  duration,

•8  opposed  to  an  interest  for  a  definite  number  of  years. In

•hort,  if  I  travelled  through  all  its  meanings  and  attempted  to

fix  them  with  precision,  this  brief  notice  would  swell  to  a  long

dissertation. 3°. Contract  is  not  a  name  for  a  class  of  rights,

*^t  for  a  class  of  the  facts  or  titles  by  which  rights  are  generated.

4^  Eights  arising  from  contracts  are  only  a  portion  of  the  rights,

'^hich  the  expression  *  law  of  contract  *  is  intended  to  indicate.

■*or '  law  of  contract,'  as  opposed  to  *  law  of  property,*  denotes,

^  should denote,  rights  in  personam  certam : a  class  which

^xubraces  rights  not  arising  from  contracts,  as  well  as  the  species

^f  rights  which  emanate  from  those  sources.

8.  '  Jus  in  rem '  and  '  Jus  in  personam,* — Of  all  customary
Q^iessions  for  the  classes  of  rights  in  question,  these  are  incom-
parably the  best.  '  Jus  in  personam '  (certam  sive  determinatam),
^  expressive  and  free  from  ambiguity.  Cut  down  to  jm  in
personam,  it  is  also  sufficiently  concise.  Jus  in  rem,  standing
by  itself,  is  ambiguous  and  obscure.  But  when  it  is  contradis-
Hnffuished  from  jus  in  personam,  it  catches  a  borrowed  clearness
feom  the  expression  to  which  it  is  opposed.

Another  decisive  reason  in  favour  of  these  terms  will  be  foimd
in  the  following  remarks.

The  phrase  '  in  rem  *  is  an  expression  of  frequent  occurrence.
And  in  all  the  instances  in  which  it  occurs,  the  subject  to  which
it  is  applied  is  a  something  which  avails  generally :  *  quod^e?i€r-
tUini  in  causam  aliquam  valet/

Take  the  following  instance  from  the  language  of  the  English
Xaw.

The  Judgments  of  Courts  of  Justice  are  evidence  against
^parties  to  the  cause,  and  against  the  determinate  persons  (succeed-
ing or  representing  them)  who  are  styled  their  privies.  As
iftgainst  persons  who  are  neither  parties  nor  privies,  judgments,
ispeaking  generally,  are  not  evidence.  But  certain  judgments  are
excepted  from  the  general  principle,  and  are  evidence  against  all
persons,  or,  at  least,  against  the  world  at  large.  Accordingly,
VOL.  n.  2  G


9  5  S  yurisprudence.

Table  II. judgments  of  this  species  are  marked  by  a  peculiar  name :  And

NoteSjC.d


that  peculiar  name  is,  'judgments  in  reniJ

In  this  instance,  the  phrase  in  rem,  and  the  manner  of  apply-
ing it,  are  manifestly  borrowed  from  the  Eoman  Lawyers.  For
the  latter  is  analogous  to  the  manner  in  which  they  employ  the
phrase,  wherever  it  occurs  in  their  writings.  Whenever  they
use  the  phrase,  they  always  intend  a  something  which  avails
generally  or  universally:  in  favour  of  a  determined  person  against
persons  indeterminate ;  or  in  favour  of  indeterminate  persom
against  a  person  determined. — The  cases  to  which  they  apply  it,
I  omit.  For  they  could  hardly  be  made  intelligible,  unless  I
wearied  the  reader  with  long  and  unseasonable  explanations.

How  the  phrase  in  rem  came  to  acquire  this  meaning,  it  is
not  veiy  easy  to  perceive.  It  is  one  of  the  elliptical  expres-
sions with  which  language  abounds,  and  which  too  frequently
obscure  the  simplest  and  easiest  notions.  In  this  instance^
it  might  perhaps  be  possible  to  restore  the  links  which  are
dropped :  to  connect  '  res '  (as  signifying  a  thing)  with  'mrm
(as  signifying  generality).  But  I  have  neither  space  nor  time
for  merely  etymological  researches.

To  mark  the  important  purpose  to  which  the  phrase  may
be  turned,  is  matter  of  more  moment.

Although  it  is  applied  by  the  Roman  Lawyers  to  a  coa-
siderable  number  of  cases,  they  always  apply  it  partially.  They
nowhere  use  it  for  the  purpose  of  signifying  briefly  and  unanh
biguously, '  rights  of  every  description  which  avail  against  persons
generally'  The  large  generic  expression  '  Jus  in  rem'  is  not  to
be  found  in  their  writings.

This  expression  was  devised  by  the  Glossators,  or  by  the
Commentators  who  succeeded  them.  Seeing  that  the  phrase
'  in  rem '  always  imported  generality,  and  feeling  the  need  of  a
term  for  '  rights  which  avail  generally,^  they  applied  the  former
to  the  purpose  of  marking  the  latter,  and  talked  of  *  Juka  »
rem.'  And,  in  this  instance,  as  in  many  others,  they  evince
a  strength  of  discrimination,  and  a  compass  of  thought,  which
are  rarely  displayed  by  the  elegant  and  fastidious  scholars  who
scorn  them  as  scholastic  barbarians.  In  spite  of  the  ignoranec
to  which  their  position  condemned  them,  their  reason  was  shaip*
ened  and  invigorated  by  the  prevalent  study  of  their  age :  by
that  school  logic  which  the  shallow  and  the  flippant  despise,  but
which  all  who  examine  it  closely,  and  are  capable  of  seizing  its
purpose,  regard  with  intense  admiration.

Now  the  expression  jtis  in  rem,  in  this  its  analogical  mean-


Tables  and  Notes.  959

J,  perfectly  supplies  the  desideratum  which  is  stated  above. Table  II.
r  as  '  m  rtm  *  denotes  gefnercdity^  *  Jus  in  rem '  should  signify  j^^tg  4^  'j^
*/»  availing  against  persons  generally. Therefore,  it  should
nify  aU  rights  belonging  to  that  genvs,  let  their  specific  differ-
»8  be  what  they  may. And  that  is  the  thing  which  is  wanted.

If  it  were  possible  for  me  to  fix  the  meaning  of  words,  I
old  distinguish  the  two  classes  of  rights  and  obligations  in
\  following  manner.

1**.  Obligations  considered  universally,  I  would  style  *  Offices '
'Duties:

2**.  Rights  which  avail  against  persons  generally  or  uni-
^aUy,  I  would  style  '  Rights  in  rem!

3**.  Rights  which  avail  against  persons  certain  or  deter-
note,  I  would  style  *  Rights  in  personam!

4**.  Obligations  which  are  incumbent  upon  persons  generally
universally,  I  would  style/ O^fces'  or  'Duties!

5**.  To  those  which  are  incumbent  upon  persons  certain  or
erminate,  I  would  appropriate  the  term  *  Obligations!  (See
ble  I.  note  6.)

Without  introducing  a  single  new  term,  and  without  em-
ying  an  old  one  in  a  new  manner,  we  should  thus  be  pro-
.ed  with  language  passably  expressive  and  distinct:  which
old  enable  the  writer  or  speaker  to  move  onward,  without
ising  at  every  second  step  to  clear  his  path  of  ambiguities.
[  that  is  necessary  to  this  desirable  end,  is  to  use  established
oas  in  established  meanings,  taking  good  care  to  use  them
^rminately :  i.e.  to  restrict  each  term  to  its  appropriate  object.

l^Ott  4.]  '  Jus  IN  Be'  et  '  Jus  AD  Bem :'

(A.)  By  the  Classical  Jurists,  the  expression  jura  in  re  is
>osed  to,  or.  contradistinguished  from,  dominium,  p^oprietas,
in  re  potestas.  (See  Table  I.  and  Table  II.,  note  3.  C.  d.  3.)
p  example,  A  servitude  over  land  of  which  another  is  the
ner,  is  *  jus  in  re  (aliend)  :*  but  the  right  or  interest  of  the
ner,  is  'dominium!  'proprietas,*  or  *in  re  potestas!  The
erest  of  the  Pledgee  or  Mortgagee,  and  the  interest  of  the
edgor  or  Mortgagor,  are  also  respectively  'jus  in  re  (aliend) '
d  *  dominium '  (or  'proprietas '),  For,  in  the  Roman  Law,  as
English  Equity,  the  interest  of  the  Mortgagee  is  considered  in
e  rational  light  of  a  mere  lien :  a  security  for  the  performance

the  obligation  which  is  incumbent  upon  the  Mortgagor.


960  yurisprudence.

Table  II.  Consequently,  the  import  of  jus  in  re,  in  the  sense  of  the

B.  a.,B.  b!  Roman  Lawyers,  is  comparatively  narrow.  In  their  writings,
*  jura  in  td  re,'  *jura  in  rel  or  (more  concisely  still)  'jwra,'
are  the  apposite  of  '  dominion '  or  '  property/  They  are  merdj
abridged  expressions  for  'jura  in  re  aliend'  as  contradistiiir
guished  from  'jus  in  re  proprid'  They  are  restricted  to  «mI;
of  the  rights,  availing  against  the  world  at  large,  as  are  acquired]
over  property  or  dominion  residing  in  another  person.

By  the  successors  of  the  Roman  Lawyers,  the  meaning  ij
jibs  in  re  has  been  extended.  As  tficy  employ  it,  'jus  in  re'ii
synonymous  with  *jus  in  rem:'  sometimes  signifying  geiMTiM
rights  which  avail  against  the  world ;  sometimes  signifying  sm
of  those  rights  as  are  rights  to  determinate  things,  (See  Xoti
3.  C.  a.,  C.  d.)  But  thi^  extension  of  the  term  is  most  objee-!
tionable.  For,  first,  it  is  needless  and  gratuitous  :  'jus  in  rm*\
answering  the  purpose  completely.  (See  Note  3.  C.  d  8.)
And,  secondly,  it  darkens  the  technical  language  of  the  originilj
and  proper  authorities.  We  must  restore  the  term  to  illj
narrower  and  genuine  import,  before  we  can  follow  the  ex-
positions of  the  Roman  Lawyers  themselves.

(B.)  Jus  in  re  (in  this  its  extended  meaning)  is  opposed  to
jus  AD  rem :  an  expression  which  was  devised  in  the  Middk
Ages,  and  of  wliich  there  is  not  a  vestige  in  the  writings  of
the  Classical  Jurists.


(a.)  As  opposed  to  *  jus  in  re '  (in  the  modem  and  exten
meaning),  '  jus  ad  rem '  is  synonymous  with  *  jus  in  personal!
It  embraces  all  rights  which  avail  against  persons  certain
But  still  it  is  often  used  in  a  narrower  signification,  and  re-
stricted to  a  species  of  those  rights.


(b.)  Taken  in  this  its  restricted  meaning,  it  answers  to
obligation  '  ad  dandum  aliquid.*  It  is  the  right  to  the  aeqw»^
tion  of  a  thing ;  ^  jus  ad  rem  (acquirendam).'  Or  (speaking  m(3t
generally  and  more  adequately)  it  is  the  rigfU  of  compelling  the
party,  who  lies  under  the  corresponding  oUigaiion,  to  pa»  *
right  in  rem, (See  Note  3.  B.  c,  C.  b.,  C.  d.  1.)

Take  the  following  examples  :

1.  If  you  contract  with  me  to  deliver  me  a  specific  thing,  I
have  not  a  right  over  or  in  the  thing,  but  a  right  to  the  thing
as  against  you  specially,  I  have  not  jus  in  rem  (or  jus  in  re),
hxxtJTis  AD  rem :  a  right  of  compelling  you  to  give  me  jus  in  rm,


Tables  and  Notes.  961

of  doing  some  act,  in  the  way  of  grant  or  conveyance,  which  Table  II.

all  make  the  thing  mint,  b.°EL^'  c!

2.  K  you  owe  me  money  determined  in  point  of  quantity,  ^ v '
if  you  have  done  me  an  injury  and  are  bound  to  pay  me

mojgts^  I  have  also  a  right  to  the  acquisition  of  a  thing,  or,
her,  of  compelling  you  to  pass  me  a  right  in  rem.  I  have
ight  of  compelling  you  to  deliver  or  pay  me  moneys,  which
\  not  determined  in  specie,  and  as  yet  are  not  mine :  though
sy  ttnll  be  determined  in  spede,  and  will  become  min£,  by
J  act  of  delivery  or  payment.

3.  Suppose  that  you  enjoy  a  monopoly  by  virtue  of  a  patent,
i  that  the  patent  (as  generally  happens)  empowers  you  to
ign  the  monopoly:  and  suppose,  moreover,  that  you  enter
0  a  contrdct  with  me  to  transfer  your  exclusive  right  in  my
our.  Now  here,  also,  I  have  jus  ad  rem ;  but  still  I  have
;  a  right  to  a  determined  thing.  The  object  of  the  contract
neither  a  determined  thing,  nor  a  thing  that  can  be  deter-
aed.  (See  Note  3.  C.  c.  2.)  My  right  is  purely  this:  A
ht  of  compelling  you  to  transfer  a  right  in  rem  as  /  shall
Bct  or  appoint.  If  I  may  refine  upon  the  expression  which
tom  has  established,  I  have  not  so  properly  '  jus  ad  rem '  as
s  ad  (jus  in)  rem*

(c.)  It  is  manifest  that  the  expression  '  jus  ad  rem '  ought
-  to  be  substituted  for  'jus  in  personam'  It  is  merely  an
idged  expression  for  *  jus  ad  rem  acquirendam : '  and  it  pro-
ly  denotes  rights,  which  are  rights  to  the  acquisition  of  a
ag,  or  (speaking  more  generally  and  adequately)  to  the
uisition  of  a  right  in  rem.  But  many  of  the  rights  which
lil  against  persons  certain,  are  not  of  that  character:  They
re  not  the  acquisition  of  a  thing  (or,  rather,  of  a  right  in  rem)
their  purpose  or  scope. For  example :  If  you  contract  with

to  perform  work  and  labour,  or  if  you  contract  with  me  to
hear  from  some  given  act,  the  contract  gives  me  a  right  which
iperly  is  *jus  in  ^^ersoTwim,'  but  which  it  were  impossible
denominate  *jus  ad  rem  (acquirendam)*  without  a  glaring
)arture  from  the  appropriate  import  of  the  expression. —
is  ad  rem  *  should  clearly  be  restricted  to  a  species  of  rights
personam,

(C.)  With  a  view  to  the  study  of  the  Eoman  Law,  or  of
r  of  the  modem  systems  which  are  offsets  from  the  former,
is  highly  expedient  (or,  rather,  absolutely  necessary)  to  dis-


962  yurisprudence.

Table II. tinguish  'jus  ad  rem/  in  its  broad  and  improper  meaniiL^ ;$hj7
Note4,C.a. ,  j^g  ^  ^^,^  >  ^^^^  rather,  *  ad  rem  acquirendam '),  in  its  i^strietei^
and  correct  signification. The  neglect  of  this  simple  preeau-
tion  has  engendered  the  grossest  error :  has  darkened  the  fair  face
of  the  Roman  Law ;  and  covered  the  arrangement  of  the  Prussia
and  French  Codes  with  a  mist  which  is  scarcely  penetrable.

As  the  matter  is  intimately  connected  with  the  subject  i
the  present  note,  I  will  try  to  explain  briefly  the  flagrant  erwt
which  I  have  mentioned,  and  to  dispel  or  attenuate  the  obscuiilj:
of  which  that  error  is  the  source.

(a.)  The  acquisition  of  a  right  in  rem,  is  commonly  or  fie*
quently  j^^^^ed  hy  jvs  ad  rem  (in  its  restricted  and  coneei
signification).  This  is  generally  the  case,  whenever  the  ri^
in  rem  is  acquired  by  virtue  of  an  alienation :  e.g.  by  virtue  i
tradition  (or  delivery),  or  by  virtue  of  grant  or  conveyance  nd
accompanied  with  tradition.

The  cases  which  I  have  supposed  in  the  last  section  (R  k),
are  cases  of  the  sort  In  the  first  of  those  cases,  the  right  i*
rem  is  acquired  by  tradition  or  delivery,  or  by  conveyance  with-
out tradition:  and  the  acquisition  is  preceded  hy Jiis  AD  rm
arising  from  contract  or  agreement.  In  the  third  case,  4e
nature  of  the  acquisition  is  such  that  tradition  is  impossible^
The  mode  of  acquisition  is  conveyance  without  tradition ;  and
the  preceding  jus  ad  rem,  with  the  correlating  or  corresponding
obli{/ation,  arises,  as  before,  from  contract  In  the  second  case,
the  mode  of  acquisition  is  simple  tradition  or  payment;  and
the  preceding  fus  ad  rem,  with  the  correlating  or  corresponding
obligation,  arises  from  an  injury.  In  other  cases,  the  precedii^
jus  ad  rem,  with  the  correlating  or  corresponding  obUgation,
arises  from  g'l^si-contract

Observing  that  the  acquisition  of  jus  in  rem  is  preceded  in
certain  cases  by  jiis  AD  rem,  many  of  the  modem  CiviUans
generalised  hastily  and  rashly,  and  fell  into  the  following  errors.

1.  They  inferred  from  those  cases  (which  are  striking  by
their  frequency  and  importance),  that  everi/  acquisition  of;'^^
in  rem  is  preceded  by  jus  AD  rem  and  by  a  correlating  or  corre-
sponding obligation.  And  this  (as  they  supposed)  inmriaUf
antecedence,  they  denoted  in  the  following  manner.  To  the
fact  or  incident  imparting  jt(s  in  rem,  they  gave  the  name  of
' modus  acquirendi*  or  *  modus  acquis^Uionis'  To  the  preceding
incident  imparting  jus  ad  rem  (which  they  considered  as  a
step  or  Tiuans  to  the  acquisition  of  jus  in  rem),  they  gave  the


Tables  and  Notes.  963

name  of '  titulus  ad  acquirendum,'  or  (simply  and  briefly)  *  titvlus'  Table II.
For  example:  According  to  their  language,  a  contract  to  deliver  c.^^!  a  c!
a  thing  is  '  titvlus  ad  acquirendum  (jus  in  rem) ':  The  delivery  or
tradition  which  follows  it,  or  by  which  it  ought  to  be  followed,
iB'niodvs  (jus  in  rem)  acquirendi'  or  'modus  acquisitionis/

2.  From  this  first  error  they  fell  into  a  second. Haying
supposed  that  jvs  in  rem  is  invariably  preceded  by  jus  AD  rem,
they  supposed  that  the latter  has  no  independent  existence,
but  is  merely  a  forerunner  of  the  former. Or  (changing  the
expression)  they  supposed  that  the  acquisition  of  jus  in  rem
Js  altvays  the  scope  or  object  of  jus  ad  rem  and  of  the  obliga-
tion to  which  it  answers. Or  (changing  the  expression  again)
they  supposed  that  every  incident  which  imparts  jus  ad  rem  is
'titulus  ad  acquirendum  (jus  in  rem).* And  if  the  expression
Sus  AD  rem  be  taken  in  its  restricted  signification,  the  supposi-
tion is  just. But,  confounding  its  restricted  signification  vnth  its
^Toad  and  improper  meaning^  they  extended  the  supposition  to
^tsery  right  in  personam  and  to  every  possible  obligation. They
Supposed  that 'jus  ad  rem'  (as  synonymous  with  'jus  in  per-
sonam*) has  always  the  acquisition  of  jv^  in  rem  for  its  scope,
purpose,  or  object :  that  every  incident,  which  imparts  *  jus  in
personam,*  is  merely  '  titulus  ad  (jus  in  rem)  acquirendum,*  or
is merely  preparatory  to a  modus  acquisitionis. The falsity
of  which  supposition  is  gross  and  palpable. (See  above,  in  the
present  note,  B.  c.)

Briefly  stated  their  errors  were  these :

1.  They  supposed  that  'jus  in  rem*  (with  the  mean  by
\7hich  it  is  acquired)  is  always  preceded  by  'jus  in  personam*
(and  by  a  fact  or  incident  imparting  it).  2.  They  supposed
that  'jus  in  personam*  in  every  case  whatever,  is  the  fore-
runner of  '  jus  in  rem :  *  that  the  fact  or  incident,  which  gives
*  jus  in  personam*  is  always  a  title  to  the  acquisition  of  *  jus  in
rem*  or  is  always  preparatory  to  a  modus  a^quisitionis, — The
fcTjner  of  these  errors,  combined  with  the  varying  extension  of
'  jns  ad  rem,'  naturally  led  to  the  latter.

(b.)  The influence of the latter  upon the Prussian and

French Codes is most remarkable.  I therefore reserve the

further consideration of it for the  notes which I purpose
annexing  to  Tables  V.  and  VI.  ^*

(c.)  As  proofs  of  the  extent  to  which  the  former  obtained,

**  Some  remarks  on  the  Prussian  and  French  Codes  will  be  found  in  a  later
part  of  this  volume. — S,  A.


964  Jurisprudence.

Table  II. I extract the  following passage from Reirucdus: the mm
Note4,C.c. renowned,  and,  perhaps,  the  most  authoritative  of  the  CWHiam,
who  flourished  in  the  eighteenth  century.

The  passage  (which,  for  the  sake  of  facilitating  apprehension,
I  break  down  into  short  and  distinct  paragraphs)  is  taken  ffom
his  excellent  Recitations:  Lib.  ii.  tit.  1.  §  339.  (See  also  his
'  Elements  according  to  the  Institutes ' :  Lib,  ii  tit  1.  §  339.)

'Quod  adtinet  ad  quaestionem  quid  sit  modus  adquireniU
cavendum  est,  ante  omnia,  ne  confundamus  titulum  et  mohik
adquirendi :  quippe  qui  toto  coelo  differunt

'  Omne  enim  dmninium  duplicem  habet  caussam :  pnmm.^
per  quam  immediate  dominium  consequor ;  et  remotam,  per  quam
et  propter  quam  mediate  fio  dominus.  B.g, :  Si  rem  a  domino
emi,  et  hie  mihi  rem  emtam  tradit,  dominus  fio :  Et  tunc  traditio
est  caussa  dominii  proxima ;  emtio  autem,  caussa  remota.

'  Caussa  dominii  proxima  vocatur  modus  adquirendi ;  caussa
autem  remota,  titidiis.

'Et  hi  etiam  efifectu  differunt.  Nam  per  tituium  taatum
consequor  jus  ad  rem :  per  modum  adquirendi  jus  in  re,  Ei
titulo  ago  171  personam  ;  adversus  eum  quocum  mihi  negotimn
fuit :  ex  modo  adquirendi  ago  in  rem ;  adversus  quemcumque
possessorem.  E.g.  :  Liber  a  bibliopole  primum  mihi,  deinde
Titio  venditus  est :  posteriori  etiam  traditus.  Quaeritur,  an  e^
qui  prior  emi,  adversus  Titium  agere  et  librum  prius  emtum
vindicare  possim  ?  Negatur.  Nam  qui  emit,  jam  tum  titulw^
habet ;  nondum  autem  rem  adquisivit :  Adeoque  nee  in  rem  agit
adversus  quemcumque  possessorem  ;  quia  jus  in  re  nullum  habet
Ergo  agere  debeo  adversus  bibliopolam,  quocum  mihi  n^otium
fuit,  ad  implendum  contractum ;  vel,  si  adimplere  nequeat,  ad  id
quod  interest.

'  Notandum  itaque  hie  axioma :  titidus  nunquam  dat  jus  t«
re,  sed  debet  accedere  traditio.

'  Ergo  sive  emerim,  sive  res  mihi  legata,  donata,  pennutata
sit,  nondum  tamen  sum  dominus,  antequam  traditio  accedat:
quae  sola  transfert  dominium  vel  jus  in  re,  modo  prsecesserit
TiTULUS  ad  transferendum  dominium  habUis.

*  Ergo  nee  titulus  suflBcit  sine  traditione,  nee  traditio  sine
titulo : — Axioma  regnaus  per  universum  jus,  et  probe  infigendum
memoriae.*

If  you  examine  this  passage  closely,  and  take  its  parts  in
conjimction,  you  will  find  it  involving  the  following  assumptions:
1.  That  every  acquisition  of  dominium,  or  jus  in  rem,  consists  of


\


Tables  and  Notes.  9^5

**'0^^rees:  One  of  them  being  the  proximate ;  the  other,  the TablbIL
'^''Wfe  cause of  the right: One of them,  modus  acquirendi  *

I  (stricfly  so  called) ;  the  other,  titulus,  or  titultis  ad  acquirendum,
2.  That  the  tUvlus,  or  remote  cause  of  the  right,  always  consists
rfan  incident  imparting  jus  in  personam:  E.g.  a  contract. 3.

Hiat  the  m^odus  a^cquisUionis  or  proximaie  cause  of  the  right,  is

<dmyB  tradition  and  apprehension.

Now  each  of  these  assumptions  is  grossly  false :  and  truly

Wonderful  it  is,  that  the  learned  and  clear-sighted  jurist,  who

^te  the  passage  which  I  have  copied,  fell  into  the  strange

errors  with  which  it  abounds.

I  will  examine  these  assumptions  in  succession.

1.  It  is  not  true,  that  every  complete  acquisition  of  doviinium,
t  jus  in  rem,  is  divisible  into  a  modus  acquirendi  and  a  titvlus
d  acquirendum.

There  are  two  cases,  and  only  two,  in  which  Acquisition  is
iposed  to  Title  by  the  Roman  Lawyers :  namely,  the  case  of
udUion,  and  the  case  of  vMicapion.

According  to  their  system,  every  tradition  or  delivery,  which
ves  'jus  in  rem*  is  preceded  by  an  obligation  (or  by  *  jus  ad
m ').  Considered  with  reference  to  that  preceding  obligation,
e  tradition  or  delivery  is  denominated  modus  a^cquircndi,  or,
iefly,  acquisUio,  Considered  with  reference  to  the  following
Eulition,  the  contract,  or  other  incident,  which  creates  the  obli-
vion, is  styled  'Justus  titidus/  *  justum  initium* ' justa  caussa  *  :
.  the  legally  operative  inducement  to  the  subsequent  modus
quirendi, — *  Nunquam  enim  nuda  traditio  transfert  dominium  :
d  ita;  si  venditio  aut  alia  justa  caussa  prsecesserit,  propter
lam  traditio  sequeretur.*

The  effect  of  usucapio7i  (a  q)ecies  of  pra'scription)  is  this :  It
ires  the  fault  which  vitiates  tradition  or  delivery,  where  the
urty,  from  whom  the  delivery  proceeds,  has  not  the  right  iii  rem
hich  he  affects  to  transfer.  Here,  the  tradition,  by  itself,  is
loperative :  though,  coupled  with  subsequent  possession  on  the
irt  of  the  alienee,  it  may  give  him  the  right  in  rem,  after  a
irtain  interval.  But  in  order  that  the  alienee  may  benefit  by
is  subsequent  possession,  bona  fides  is  requisite.  His  subsequent
ossession  works  nothing,  or,  in  other  words,  there  is  no  usucapion,
nless  he  believes,  at  the  time  of  the  delivery,  that  the  person
SFecting  to  alien  is  competent  to  pass  the  right.  But  this  he
in  scarcely  believe,  unless  the  tradition  or  delivery  be  made  in


966  yurisprudence.

Table  II.  the  legal  manner :  unless  the  tradition  or  delivery  vxmld  transfer
v^  '  '^  the  right,  supposing  that  the  party  who  makes  it  had  the  right
to  transfer.  Consequently,  'Justus  tittUtLS,'  'justum  initium',
or  '  justa  catLssa*  is  a  condition  precedent  to  usucapion.  For  it
necessarily  precedes  the  tradition  by  which  the  possession  is
preceded,  and  upon  which  the  possession  operates.  The  contract
which  is  the  inducement  to  the  tradition,  is  the  titvlus  ad
acquirendum :  The  vicious  tradition,  and  the  possession  which
purges  it  of  the  vice,  constitute  the  modus  acqwirendi.

Now,  in  these  cases,  the  division  of  the  entire  acquisition
into  a  mode  of  acquisition,  and  a  title  to  acquire,  is  inteUigiUe.
But,  in  many  cases,  it  were  utterly  senseless.  Take,  for  example,
the  case  of  Occupation :  i.e,  acquisition,  by  apprehension  or  «*««,
of  a  subject  which  belongs  to  no  one  ( — res  nullius).  Here,  the
entire  acquisition  is  a  simple  and  indivisible  incident.  You  maj
call  that  simple  incident  a  mode  of  acquisition,  or  you  may  caD
it  a  title.  But  to  split  it  into  a  mode  of  acquisition  and  a  fore-
going title,  is  manifestly  impossible.

The  truth  is,  that  Heineccius  and  other  Civilians  arrived  at
their  general  inference  through  a  narrow  and  hasty  inductiou.
When  they  aflBrmed  generally,  '  that  a  m/>de  of  a^iquisition  sup-
poses a  foregoing  title,'  their  attention  was  directed  exclusively
to  tradition  preceded  by  contract.  This  is  the  only  example
adduced  in  the  passage  which  I  have  copied,  to  support  or
illustrate  the  proposition.  And,  in  cases  of  that  class  (and  also
of  some  other  classes),  the  proposition  holds  universally.  Or
(speaking  more  accurately)  the  proposition  holds  universally  Ib
cases  of  that  class,  if  we  look  exclusively  at  the  doctrine  of  the
Roman  Lawyers  with  regard  to  the  essentials  of  the  traditiofL

Their  doctrine  seems  to  be  this :

The  tradition  is  not  sufficient  to  pass  an  irrevocable  right,
unless  the  preceding  contract  bind  the  alienor,  and  therefoie
impart  to  the  alienee  jus  ad  rem.  In  other  words,  the  tradition
is  not  sufficient  to  pass  the  right  irrevocably,  unless  the  preceding
contract  amount  to  'Justus  titulus:'  '  titulus  ad  transferendum
dominium  liahilis!  Accordingly  every  acquisition  by  deUvery,
made  in  pursuance  of  a  contract,  is  divisible  into  two  degrees :  a
m4)d€  of  acquisition  and  a  title  to  a/^uire.

But,  according  to  other  systems  (as,  for  instance,  the  English),
acquisition  by  tradition  or  delivery,  made  in  pursuance  of  a
contract,  is  not  always  divisible  into  those  distinct  degrees.


Tables  and  Notes.  9^7

Take  the  following  example :  ^^^^i^'

You  sell  me  a  house  or  field.  The  contract,  however,  is  not
reduced  into  writing,  and  therefore  is  void  by  the  Statute  of
Frauds.  But  though  you  are  not  obliged  to  perform  the  contract,
you  convey  the  house  or  field,  agreeably  to  the  terms  of  the
contract,  by  livery  or  feofi&nent.

Now,  here,  I  acquire  the  subject  through  tradition  preceded
by  contract.  But  yet  it  were  impossible  to  split  the  entire
acquisition  into  a  mode  of  acquisition  and  a  title  to  acquire.  The
acquisition  in  this  instance,  like  that  by  occupation,  is  a  simple
and  indivisible  incident.  In  consequence  of  the  livery  and
feof&nent,  I  acquire  an  indefeasible  right  in  or  over  the  subject :
dominium,  or  jus  in  rem,  which  is  not  revocable  by  you.  But
my  right  commences  at  the  moment  of  the  acquisition.  Before  the
acquisition,  /  am  not  invested  with  jm  ad  rem,  nor  is  there  a
corresponding  obligation  incumbent  upon  you.  There  is  not  the
shadow  of  *  Justus  titulus '  from  the  beginning  to  the  close  of  the
transaction.

The  exceptions  which  I  have  mentioned  are  amply  sufficient
to  demonstrate,  that  every  acquisition  of  jus  in  rem  is  not  divisible
into  a  mode  of  acquisition  and  a  preceding  title  to  acquire.

There  is,  however,  a  class  of  cases,  which  will  also  serve
to  demonstrate  the  same  truth,  and  which  I  am  desirous  of
Doting  for  another  reason :  namely,  that  they  somewhat  obscure
that  strong  line  of  demarcation  by  which  *jus  in  rem'  is
separated  from  'jus  in  personam'  and  which  should  be  seized
iistinctly  by  every  st\(dent  of  law  who  aspires  to  master  its
principles.

Eights  in  rem  sometimes  arise  from  incidents  which  are
5tyled  contracts.  The  meaning  of  which  seeming  contradiction
is  this :  that  the  incidents  in  question  wear  a  double  aspect,  or
ire  followed  by  a  twofold  effect  To  one  purpose,  an  incident
^f  the  sort  gives  *  jus  in  personam',  and,  therefore,  is  a  contract :  to
another  purpose,  it  gives  'jus  in  rem'  and,  therefore,  is  a  convey-
ance. In  a  word,  the  incident  combines  the  properties  of  a
contract  and  a  conveyance ;  but,  by  one  of  those  ellipses  which
are  at  once  so  commodious  and  so  perplexing,  it  is  styled,  briefly,
*a  conira/:t.'

In  the  cases  which  I  have  now  mentioned,  the  incident
Combines  the  properties  of  a  contract  and  a  conveyance,  and  is
styled  a  contract  simply  for  the  sake  of  brevity.  In  other  cases,
:he  so-called  contract  is  a  pure  conveyance  or  transfer,  and  is


968  yurisprudence.

Table  II. styled  a  contract  by  a  mere  abuse  of  language,  and  through  a
ote4,  .c. (»Quf^giQn  Qf  ideas  which  are  utterly  disparate  and  distinct

Take  the  following  examples  of  these  several  cases:  m
the  cases  wherein  the  incident  is  styled  a  cojUract  by  an  ellipse;
and  the  cases  wherein  the  incident  is  styled  a  contract  by  a
solecism.

According  to  English  Equity  (i.e.  according  to  the  latp
which  certain  of  our  Courts  administer),  a  sale  and  purchase,
although  it  is  styled  a  contract,  imparts  to  the  buyer,  without
more,  dominion  or  *  jus  in  remJ  In  the  technical  language  of
the  system,  '  what  is  agreed  to  be  done  is  considered  as  done.'
The  subject  of  the  sale  is  liis,  as  against  the  seller  specially;
and  the  subject  is  also  his,  as  against  the  world  at  large.  The
only  interest  in  the  subject,  which  remains  to  the  seller,  is  a
right  '  in  re  aliend ;'  a  mortgage  or  lien  expressly  or  tacitly
created,  to  the  end  of  securing  the  equivalent  for  which  he  has
aliened.

But,  according  to  the  antagonist  system  which  is  styled  pre-
eminently Law,  a  sale  and  purchase,  without  more,  nicely
imparts  to  the  buyer  'jus  ad  rem*  The  seller  is  obliged  by  the
sale  to  transfer  the  subject  to  the  buyer,  and  in  case  he  break
his  obligation,  by  refusing  or  neglecting  to  transfer,  the  buyer
may  sue  him  on  the  breach,  and  recover  compensation  in
damages.  But  that  is  the  extent  of  the  right  which  the  sale
imparts.  The  property  or  dominion  of  the  subject  still  resides
in  the  seller,  and,  in  case  he  convey  the  subject  to  a  third
person,  the  property  or  dominion  passes  to  the  aUenee.

Now,  if  the  antagonist  Law  were  fairly  out  of  the  way,  tie
right  of  the  buyer,  according  to  Equity,  would  stand  thus.
Unless  the  seller  refused  to  deliver  the  subject,  and  the  buyer,
in  that  event,  were  satisfied  with  his  right  to  compensation,  the
sale  and  purchase,  though  styled  a  contraM,  would  give  him
completely  and  absolutely  dominion  or  *  jus  in  rem*  He  could
vindicate  or  recover  the  subject  as  against  the  seller  himself,  and
as  against  third  persons  who  might  happen  to  get  the  posses-
sion of  it.  The  so  styled  contract  woidd  amount  to  a  perfect
conveyance.

But,  by  reason  of  the  dominion  or  property  which  remains
to  the  seller  at  Law,  the  sale  and  purchase,  even  in  Equity,  is
still  imperfect  as  a  conveyance.  In  order  that  the  dominion  of
the  buyer  may  be  completed  in  every  direction,  something  most
yet  be  done  on  the  part  of  the  seller. He  must  pass  his  %«'


Tables  and  Notes.  969

eiest  in  legal  fonn.  He  must  convey  the  dominion  or  pro-  Table  II.
•ty,  which  still  resides  in  him  at  Law,  according  to  the  mode  <^  '  '>'
conveyance  which  Law,  in  its  wisdom,  exacts.

To  this  special  intent  or  purpose,  the  buyer,  even  in  Equity,
I  merely  '  jus  in  personam! Or  (borrowing  the  language  of

Soman  Lawyers)  the  subject  of  the  sale,  even  in  Equity,
ntinues  in  obligatione,*

Speaking  generally,  the  buyer,  in  contemplation  of  Equity,
I  dominion  or  '  jus  in  rem.'  And,  speaking  generally,  the  sale,
Equity,  is,  therefore,  a  conveyance.

But,  to  the  special  intent  or  purpose  which  is  mentioned
)ve,  the  buyer  has  '  jus  in  personam!  Or  (changing  the  shape
the  expression)  the  seller  remains  obliged.  This  right  in
wnam  certam,  and  this  corresponding  obligation.  Equity  will
iopce  in  specie.  And,  in  respect  of  this  right  in  personam,  and
this  corresponding  obligation,  the  sale,  even  in  Equity,  is,
)perly,  a  coiitra^t.

According  to  the  Roman  Law  dominium  or  jus  in  rem  is
)  transferred  by  tradition,  unless  it  be  preceded  by  contract,
by  other  titulus.  'Nunquam  enim  nuda  traditio  transfert
ninium :  sed  ita ;  si  venditio,  aut  alia  justa  caussa  praecesserit,
ipter  quam  traditio  sequeretur/

And,  conversely,  dominion  or  jus  in  rem  is  not  transferred
contract,  unless  it  be  followed  by  tradition.  *  Traditionibus
usucapionibus,  non  nudis  pactis,  dominia  rerum  transferuntur.*
This  rule  or  maxim  had  been  imported  from  the  Roman
D  the  French  Law:  And  it  formed  a  portion  of  the  latter
the  time  of  the  Revolution.  A  contract  to  deliver  a  thing
to  pass  a  right  in  rem),  imparted  to  the  obligee  *  jus  ad  rem,'
imposed  upon  the  obligor  an  obligation  to  transfer  or  convey,
t  dominion  or  *  jus  in  rem '  was  not  acquired  by  the  former,

the  contract  to  pass  the  right  was  completed  by  consequent
dition.

'  Dans  Tancienne  jurisprudence,  pour  qyHune  obligation  trans-
t  la  proprUtS,  elle  devait  etre  suivie  de  la  tradition.  Celui
i  achetait  une  maison,  par  exemple,  n'en  devenait  propri^taire
I  du  moment  oA  la  maison  lui  ^tait  livr^e :  si  elle  ^tait  livr^e
une  autre  personne,  c'^tait  cette  personne  qui  I'acqu^rait.
obligation  n'^tait  alors  qu'un  titre  pour  se  faire  donner  la
)pri^t^ ;  le  moyen  d'acquirir  cette  propri^t^  ^tait  la  tradition.'
See  '  Code  civil  expliqu^  par  ses  motifs  et  par  des  exemples,*
I  J.  A.  Rogron,  Avocat  aux  Conseils  du  Roi  et  k  la  Cour


970  Jurispnidence.

Table II. de  Cassation: Paris,  1826. (Note  by  M.  Rogron  to  Article

Note4,C.c. Yl  1  \

But,  according  to  the  Code  which  now  obtains  in  France,
the  dominion  of  a  subject,  belonging  to  the  class  of  imTrwvaUa,
passes  to  the  buyer  by  the  so-called  contract.  Or  (in  the
exquisitely  absurd  language  of  the  Code  and  its  CommentatoTs)
the  right  in  rein  passes  to  the  buyer  by  the  obligation  which  the
contract  creates.

*  La  propri^td  des  biens  s*acquiert  et  se  transmet  par  succes-
sion, par  donation  entre-vifs  ou  testamentaire,  et  par  Feffei  da
obligations.'  (Code  civil,  article  711.) — ^*  Aujourd*hui  on  pent
avoir  la  propriety,  c'est-ii-dire  le  droit  de  poss^er,  quoi  qu'on  ue
possMe  pas  r(5ellement.  Aussi  est-elle  transmise  par  la  sevk
force  de  Pohligation,  sans  qu'il  soit  n^cessaire  qu'il  y  ait  eu  tradi-
tion.* (Note  to  Article  711,  by  M.  Bogron.)

*  L'obligation  de  donner  emporte  celle  de  livrer  la  chose,'
etc. (Code  civil,  article  1136.)

'  L'obligation  de  livrer  la  chose  est  parfaite  par  le  seul  con-
sentement  des  parties  contractantes.  Elle  rend  le  cr^ancier  (i<u
the  obligee)  2>^opridtaire.*  (Code  civil,  article  1138.) — ^'Ainsi
Tobligation  donne  au  crdancier  le  droit  sur  la  chose  jus  in  n;
et,  par  suite,  Paction  rielle,  ou  revendication :  c'est-a-dire,  le  droit
de  forcer  tout  detenteur  de  la  chose  que  nous  appartient  k  nous
la  rendre.* (Note  to  Article  1138,  by  M.  Bogron.)

'  Les  efifets  de  Tobligation  de  donner  ou  de  livrer  wi  immeuik ■
sont  ix5gl^s  au  titre  de  la  vente  et  au  titre  des  privileges  et
hypoth^ques.' (Code  civil,  article  1140.)

'  La  vente  est  une  convention  par  laquelle  Tun  s*cblige  k  livrer
une  chose  et  Tautre  k  la  payer.' (Code  civil,  article  1582.)

*  La  vente  est  parfaite"*^  entre  les  parties,  et  la  propriiitd
acquise  de  droit  k  Tacheteur  k  Y&goxd  du  vendeurt  dfes  qu'on  est
convenu  de  la  chose  et  du  prix,  quoique  la  chose  n'ait  pas  encore
it6  livr^e  ni  le  prix  pay^.*  (Code  civil,  article  1583.)—*  '  Pa^'
faite.  Cette  disposition  est  la  consequence  de  Tarticle  711
portant  que  la  propriety  est  transferee  par  Tefifet  des  obligations;
c'est-i\-dire  sans  qu*il  soit,  comme  autrefois,  besoin  de  traditioa'
(Note  to  article  1583,  by  M.  Bogron.) — ^t  'A  Fdgard  du  vendm-
Mais  non  k  regard  des  tiers  qui  peuvent  avoir  sur  la  chose
vendue  des  droits  ant&i*ieiLrs  k  la  vente.  Par  exemple,  si  k
vendeur  n*etait  pas  veritable  proprietaire  de  la  chose,  ceto
auquel  elle  appartient  conserverait  le  droit  de  la  revendiquer.
(Note  to  Article  1583,  by  Jf.  Bogron,)

If,  then,  the  subject  of  the  sale  belong  to  the  class  of  imtf^


Tables  and  Notes.  97 1

oAfes,  dominion  or  'jus  in  rem'  passes  from  the  seller  to  the  Table  11.
hayer  independently  of  tradition.  But,  if  the  subject  be  movable,  ?^^^*^'5'
the  buyer,  without  tradition,  has  merely  '  jus  ad  rem/  He  has
BO  right  to  the  subject  against  a  third  person,  unless  the  third
person  be  in  m/dd  fide,  or  has  gotten  possession  of  the  subject
with  notice  of  the  buyer's  titvius.

'  Si  la  chose  qu'on  s'est  oblig^  de  donner  ou  de  livrer  A  devx

Ipenonnes  stuscessivement  est  purement  mobili^re  celle  des  deux

fui  en  a  its  mise  en  possession  rMle  est  pr^f^r^e,  et  en  demeure

pn>pri^taire,  encore  que  son  titre  soit  post^rieur  en  date ;  pourvu

'  toQtefois  que  la  possession soit  de  bonne  foi.' (Code civil,

aatide  1141.) — '  Je  vous  vends  ma  montre :  d'apr&s  le  principe

consacr^  dans  les  articles  711 et 1138,  vous  en  devenez  k

I  Finstant propri^taire,  bien que je  ne  vous Taie  pas livr^e.

Gependant  je  la  vends  demain  h,  Pierre,  et  je  la  lui  livre :  elle

.  doit  lui  rester,  car  il  a  4t^  mis  en  possession  r^elle. Ainsi,  en

:  mati^re  de  meubles,  la  tradition  est  encore  n^cessaire  pour  trans-

/irer  la  proprUti. Cette  exception au  principe g^n^ral est

I  htiaiie  sur  la  circulation  des  meubles,  qui  peuvent  passer,  dans  le

f  mime  jour,  dans  vingt  mains  difiKrentes,  et  sur  la  n^cessit^  de

pr^enir  les  circuits  d'actions  et  les  nombreux  proems  qui  en

i<^teraient.' (Note  to  Article  1141,  by  if.  Rogron,)

Now  according  to  the  Articles  of  the  Code  which  I  have
copied  and  collated  above,  the  actual  Law  of  France,  with  regard
to  the  matter  in  consideration,  would  seem  to  stand  thus.

K  the  subject  of  the  sale  be  movable,  the  sale,  when  unac-
companied by  tradition,  is  properly  a  contract.  The  buyer  has
'jxiB  ad  rem,'  but  not  'jus  in  rem.'  He  has  a  right  to  the
subject  of  the  sale  as  against  the  seller  specially,  but  he  has  no
light  to  the  subject  as  against  the  world  at  large.  There  is
loom  for  the  distinction  between  contract  and  conveyance :  between
^  to  acquire  and  m^ode  of  acquisition.

But,  in  case  the  subject  of  the  sale  belong  to  the  class  of
innwvahles,  the  sale,  though  unaccompanied  by  tradition,  is,
properly,  a  conveyance.  The  sale  imparts  to  the  buyer  doiainion
^fus  in  rem  ;  and  it,  therefore,  gives  him  a  right  to  vindicate
or  recover  the  subject  from  any  who  may  be  in  the  possession
0'  it  There  is  no  room  for  the  distinction  between  contract
sad  conveyance  ;  between  title  to  acquire  and  mx)de  of  acquisition.
There  is  no  room  for 'Justus  titulus:'  'justa  cau^ssa ;'  'justum
^^uium.'  For  this  supposes  an  acquisition  to  which  it  is  the
prelude :  And  the  buyer  acquires  the  subject,  by  the  sale  itseK,
^  completely  as  he  can  acquire  it. He  has  the  dominion  of


r


Jtirisprudence.

the  subject,  although  he  has  not  the  possession :  And,  by  ex-
orcisms^ a  right  of  action  annexed  to  his  dominion,  he  may  gel
the  possession  if  he  will.  \]

In  a  woi-J,  the  right  which  belongs  to  the  buyer,  according
to  tlie  French  Code,  is  the  right  wOiich  would  belong  to  him,
according  to  ILnglish  Equity,  if  the  system  were,  not  embarrassed
by  the  conflicting  provisions  of  Law,

To  style  the  sale  a  contract,  is  a  gross  solecism.  It  is»
however,  a  solecism  which  may  be  imputed  to  tlie  fionun
Lawyers ;  and  with  wliich  it  were  not  candid  to  reproach  tlitt
Authors  of  the  Code.

But  when  they  talk  of  oblvjations  as  imparting  dotuinum
or  property,  they  talk  with  absurdity  which  has  no  example^
and  which  no  example  could  extenuate.  If  they  had  unde^
stood  the  system  wliich  they  servilely  adored  and  copied,  they
would  have  known  that  obligation  excludes  the  idea  of  do-
minion :  that  it  imparts  to  the  obligee  *  jus  in  personam^  and
*jus  in  personam*  merely.  This  is  its  essential  difference:
Tliis  is  the  very  property  which  gives  it  its  being  and  iti
name.  '  OUigationum  enim  substantia  non  in  eo  consistit  trf
aliquod  nostrum,  faciat,  sed  ut  alium  nobis  obstringcU  ad  dandu
aliquid,  vel  faciendum,  vel  pra?standum.*

There  are,  indeed,  purposes,  as  to  which  the  sale  is  a  owi-
tract :  and,  in  respect  of  wliich,  it  is  justly  styled  a  contnct
For  example :  The  seller  is  obliged  by  the  sale  to  deliver  tlie
subject  to  the  buyer  agreeably  to  their  common  intention.  And,*
in  ca^e  it  be  not  delivered  agreeably  to  that  common  intendoD,
the  buyer  may  sue  the  seller  for  breach  of  the  obligation,  and
recover  compensation  in  damages.  (Code  Civil,  Article  1146
ct  scq.).  But  the  dortiinion  or  jus  in  rem  wliich  the  sale  im-
parts to  the  buyer  is  Twt  a  right  answering  to  an  obligatioa
specially  incumbent  upon  the  seller.  Considered  as  imp^iting
dominion,  the  sale  is  a  conveyance :  and  it  cannot  be  styled  a
contract,  without  an  impropriety  in  speech.

According  to  the  Soman  Law,  j-as  in  rent  is  not  transfened
by  contract,  unless  the  contract  be  followed  by  tradition  or
delivery.  But  to  this  general  principle  there  are  numeroiu
exceptions.  For  example :  An  hypotheca  or  mortgage  is  suffi-
ciently created  by  j)act,  although  the  subject  be  not  delivered,
but  remain  in  the  possession  of  the  mortgagor.  In  other  words,
the  intention  to  create  the  mortgage,  expressed  orally  or  in
writing,  imparts  to  the  mortgagee  jus  in  re  aitenA. The  ex-


'"'ion JJ
■-■^lent  :t^

kV  J'- - " "*


■  '^ «


■  ■ 1  * —


^


■■•T*r


Tories  and  Notes.  973

pression  of  this  intention  on  the  part  of  the  mortgagor  is  styled Table  II.
%  pact  or  convention. But,  though  it  is  adjected  to  a  conven-  ?^^^*^>'
tion,  it is  not  a  convention  of  itself. Imparting  to  the  mort-
JUS  in  rem,  it  is,  properly,  a  conveyance.


Tlie  confusion  of  contract  and  conveyuTice,  by  elliptical  or
expression,  is  one  of  the  greatest  obstacles  in  the
of  the  student  And,  labouring  to  clear  it  up  by  apt
tnd  peTspicuous  examples,  I  have  wandered  at  some  length
kom  the  subject  which  I  am  directly  considering.  I  now
evert to that subject, and dismiss it with the following


Wlierever  fits  in  rem  is  acquired  by  a  so-styled  contract,
acq^uisition  is  not  to  be  distinguished  into  tittUiis  and  modiis
That  which  might  be  tittUtis,  supposing  there  were
for  the  distinction,  transfers  the  jus  in  rem  as  completely
ts  it  can  be  transferred.

2. It  is  not  true  (as  Heinecdus  and  others  have  assumed),

ihat every  title  to  the  acquisition of  *  jus  in  rem '  consists  of

incident  imparting  *  jus  in  personam!  and,  therefore,  im-

an  obligation  upon  a  person  or  persons  determinate.

I  have  remarked  above,  there  are  two  cases,  and  only

o,  ^wherein title  to  a^cquire and  mode  of  acquisition  are  ex-

distingmshed  and  opposed  by  the  Roman  Lawyers  them-

:  viz. the  case  of  tradition  and  the  case  of  usucapion.

'  jus  in  rem '  is  acquired  by  tradition,  the  acquisition

B  divisible  into  titulus  and  modtts  acquirendi :  The  titulus  being

El*^vays  an  incident  imparting  'jus  in  personam*  and,  therefore,

imposing  an  oUigaiion. Where *jus in  rem 'is acquired  by

us^uccLpion,  the  acquisition  is  divisible  in  the  like  manner;  The

being  commonly  an incident,  or commonly supposing

incident,  of  the  like  quality  or  eflTect.

But  the difiference between title  to  acquire and mode  of

acquisition  is  not  confined  to  the  two  cases  wherein  the  Eoman

ers  have  expressly  taken  the  distinction.

"Whenever the acquisition is divisible into two distinct

,  we  may  find  it  necessary  to  distinguish  them,  and  to

mark  them  with  distinguishing  names. And,  in  every  case  of

the  kind,  we  may  mark  them,  if  we  will,  with  the  names  which

are now  in  question. We  may  style  the  fact  or  event  with

^^hich the  acquisition begins,  the title  to acquire. We may

style  the  fact  or  event  by  which  the  acquisition  is  completed,

voL..n.  2  H


974  yurisprvdence.

Table  II.  the  modt  of  acquisition.  We  may  say  that  the  latter  is  the
Note4,ac.  pjrQximate  cause  of  the  right,  or  is  that  through  which  the
latter  is  immediately  acquired.  We  may  say  that  the  former
is  the  remote  cause  of  the  right,  or  is  that  through  which  the
right  is  acquired  mediately.  We  may  style  the  former  the
titiduSy  initium,  or  caussa,  to  which  the  latter  is  indebted  for
its  investitive  operation  or  effect.

Now  the cases  wherein the acquisition  is divisible  into  ;
two  events,  and wherein  we  may  find it  necessaiy  to  distin-
guish those distinct  events,  are  numerous. And,  in  many  of
these  numerous  cases,  the  fact  or  event  with  which  the  acquisi-  ■
tion  begins,  is  not  a  fact  or  event  imparting  fus  in  personam.

I  will  try  to  illustrate  these  positions  by  simple  and  plain
examples.

The  cases  wherein  vsucapion  most  frequently  obtains,  are
those  which  I  have  mentioned  above:  viz.  cases  of  alienation
by  tradition  or  delivery,  without  right  on  the  part  of  the
alienor.  And,  in  these  cases,  the  titidus  consists  of  an  inci-
dent imparting  jus  in  personam.

But  usucapion  sometimes  obtains  without  an  incident  of  the
sort,  and  is  nevertheless  distinguished  by  the  Soman  Lawyeis
themselves  into  title  and  mode  of  acquisition.  For  instance,
In  case  I  occupy  a  subject  which  I  believe  to  be  res  nuUiui,
but  which,  in  truth,  belongs  to  another  person,  I  acquire  the
subject  (after  a  certain  interval)  by  continued  and  undisturbed
possession.  Now  here  the  acquisition  is  divisible  into  modt  of
acquisition  and  title,  and  yet  there  is  no  incident  creating  an
obligation.  My  continued  and  undisturbed  possession  con-
stitutes the  m^de  of  acquisition.  My  seisin  or  apprehension
of  the  subject  animo  mihi  habendi,  coupled  with  my  behef  at
the  time  that  the  subject  is  res  nullius,  constitutes  my  tHU  to
acquire.  Without  apprehension  or  seisin  accompanied  by  hoM
fides,  no  usucapion  obtains.  Consequently,  the  apprehension  W
Jide  is  the  remote  cause  of  the  right,  although  the  subsequent
possession  is  the  proximate  or  direct.

Restricting  the  distinction  in  question  as  the  Boman  Lawyers
have  restricted  it,  an  obligation  is  not  created  by  every  title  to
acquire. (Vide  Dig.  lib.  xli.  tit  3,  4,  5,  6,  7,  8,  9,  et  10.)

Succession  ah  intestato,  according  to  the  Eoman  Law,  is
governed  in  different  cases  by  different  principles.


Tables  and  Notes.  97  5

In  certain  cases,  the  heir  acquires  the  heritage  ipso  jure :  Table  II.
lat  is  to  say,  he  acquires  the  heritage,  without  an  act  of  his  .^^^*  .
fn,  at  the  moment  of  the  intestate's  decease.  To  borrow  an
pressive  phrase  from  the  old  French  Law,  *le  mort  misit
vif/  11  the  heir  survive  the  intestate  a  single  instant,
3  heritage  vests  in  the  former  and  devolves  to  his  own
)resentative.

In  other  cases,  the  acquisition  of  the  heritage  commences
the  death  of  the  intestate,  but  is  completed  by  the  accept-
ce  of  the  heir. At  the  moment  of  the  intestate's  decease,

has  jtis  hereditatem  adeundi :  But  he  actually  acquires  the
ritage  hereditatem  adsundo.  At  the  moment  of  the  intestate's
cease,  he  has  jvs  delatum :  But  until  he  signifies  his  accept-
ce  expressly  or  tacitly,  he  has  not  jus  acquisitum.  If  he
3  without  acceptance,  his  right  (generally  speaking)  is  not
msmitted  to  his  representative,  but  the  party  who  takes
e  heritage  takes  it  as  heir  to  the  intestate.  The  principle
'  which the transmission  is  here  determined, is analogous

a  principle  {'seisina  facit  stipitem*)  which  obtains  in  our
iw  of  Descents.

Now  where  the  acquisition  of  the  heritage  is  completed  by
e  acceptance  of  the  heir,  the  facts  or  events  which  constitute
e  acquisition  must  be  divided  into  two  parcels.  And  these
J  may  style,  if  we  will,  titulus  and  modus  acquirendi.  For,
we  understand  that  distinction  as  the  Roman  Lawyers  under-
)od  it,  it  will  hold  in  every  case  wherein  the  acquisition  is
idtuU,  provided  the  degrees  be  two,  and  be  perfectly  distinct
m  one  another.  In  the  widely  differing  cases  wherein  they
)k  the  distinction,  there  must  be  some  common  circumstance
which  the  distinction  may  be  referred  :  And  the  only  common
cumstance  which  I  am  able  to  discover,  is  the  divisibility
the  entire  acquisition  into  two  distinct  degrees.

Supposing  we  take  the  distinction  in  the  case  immediately
ore  us,  the  terms  will  apply  thus :

The  titulus  consists  of  the  facts  whereby  the  right  is  deferred :
Diely,  the  intestacy,  the  death  of  the  intestate,  the  survivorship
the  heir,  and  his  relation  to  the  deceased.  The  modus  acquir-
ii  consists  of  the  event  whereby  the  acquisition  is  completed :
mely  the  acceptance  of  the  right  which  is  deferred.

3.  It  follows  from  what  has  preceded,  that  apprehension  or
isin,  consequent  upon  tradition  or  delivery,  is  not  invariably
1  ingredient  in  the  acquisition  oijus  in  rem.


9/6  yurtsprudence.

Table  II.  In  various  cases  of  vsucapion,  and  also  in  the  case  of  occupa-

yote4,C.c. ^^^  ^jj^  subject  is  not  apprehended  in  consequence  of  tradition.

And  where  the  right  is  acquired  by  a  so -styled  contract,  the

possession  of  the  subject  frequently  continues  with  the  party  by

whom  the  right  is  conveyed.

The  acquisition  of  the  heritage  by  the  heir  is  equally  in
point.  Whether  he  acquire  by  testament  or  in  consequence  ol
intestacy,  ipso  Jure  or  hereditatem  adeundo,  he  acquires  without
tradition  and  without  apprehension.  So  completely  foreign  is
apprehension  to  the  acquisition  of  the  heritage  as  a  whole,  that,
though  that  general  acquisition  gives  him  the  right  of  vindicatm,
it  gives  him  none  of  the  remedies  which  are  founded  upon  the
right  of  possession.  By  the  acquisition  of  the  heritage  as  a  whole,
he  acquires  the  dominion  of  the  single  or  several  things  which
are  constituent  parts  of  the  heritage.  By  virtue  of  that  geneni
acquisition,  he  can  vindicate  any  of  those  things  against  anj
who  may  detain  it  from  him.  But  until  he  obtains  the  posses-
sion by  a  distinct  act  of  apprehension,  he  is  unable  to  recover  it
by  any  of  those  interdicts  which  are  purely  possessory  remedies.
Acquisition  by  man/yipation  is  commonly  in  the  same  pre-
dicament, if  the  subject  of  the  conveyance  be  immovable  (—
prcediuvi).  There  is  no  tradition  of  the  subject  on  the  part  ol
the  alienor,  no  apprehension  of  the  subject  on  the  part  of  tfe
alienee.  The  conveyance  imparts  to  the  latter  the  dominion  ol
the  absent  prmdium,  and  gives  him  that  right  of  vindicaiiot
which  dominion  or  property  supposes.  But  it  gives  him  nont
of  the  remedies  which  are  purely  possessory.  Before  he  car
exercise  these  in  reference  to  the  subject  of  the  mancipation,  h(
must  acquire  the  actual  possession,  with  the  consequent  ;*
possessionis,  by  a  distinct  act  of  apprehension.

Here  I  close  my  remarks  upon  *  titulus  et  modus  acquirendi
I  have  insisted  upon  this  celebrated  distinction  at  considerable
length,  for  the  purpose  of  dispelling  the  darkness  cast  upon  thf
Eoman  Law  by  the,  current  though  false  theory  which  I  have
stated  and  examined  above.  I  am  convinced  by  my  own  expen-
ence,  that  few  of  the  difficulties,  inherent  in  the  study  of  the
system,  equal  the  difficulties  induced  upon  it  by  that  groundless
and  absurd  conceit.

Before  I  proceed  to  the  matter  of  the  ensuing  note,  1  ^"^
briefly  interpose  a  remark  suggested  by  the  subject  of  the
present.


Tables  and  Notes.  977

By  English  Lawyers,  and  even  by  English  conveyancers,  Table  II.
'ttfe'  is  often  used  as  if  it  were  synonymous  with  'right*  But  Notefi^L
when  it  is  used  correctly,  it  signifies  the  fact,  simple  or  complex,
through  which  the  party  entitled  was  invested  with  a  right : — the
wans  by  which  he  acquired  it  In  a  word, '  title '  is  synonymous
with  'investitive  fact  or  event.'

Tradition  and  usucapion  are  the  only  cases  wherein  the
Eoman  Lawyers  employ  the  term  *  title  *  to  signify  an  investitive
bd.  And,  in  those  two  cases,  it  is  not,  properly  speaking,  the
name  of  an  investitive  fact,  but  it  denotes  a  constituent  part  of
a  complex  investitive  fact.'  It  denotes  the  fact  by  which  the
aqoisition  begins,  as  contradistinguished  from  the  fact  by  which
the  acquisition  is  completed.  And,  on  the  other  hand,  '  mode  of
leqnisition,'  as  used  in  those  cases,  loses  its  usual  import.  It  is
iK)t  synonymous  with  '  investitive  fact,*  but  it  denotes  a  constituent
part  of  a  complex  investitive  fact.  It  denotes  the  fact  by  which
the  acquisition  is  completed,  as  contradistinguished  from  the  fact
by  which  the  acquisition  begins.

The  entire  fact,  simple  or  complex,  through  which  the  party
entitled  was  invested  with  a  right,  is  styled,  in  the  language  of
the  Soman  Law,  'modus  sive  caussa  acquirendi,*  ' spedes  sive
91ms  acquisitionis,'  or  simply  and  briefly,  '  acquisition

Consequently,  the  '  title '  of  the  English,  and  the  '  modus  sive
(aussa  acquirendi  *  of  the  Eoman  Law,  are  synonjrmous  names.
Each  of  them  is  equivalent  to  'investitive  fact  or  event:* — the
term  which  has  been  suggested  by  Mr.  Bentham.

*  Title '  is  sometimes  used  by  the  English  Lawyers  in  a
meaning  which  is  somewhat  different.  Properly  speaking,  the
Vendor's  title  merely  consists  of  the  fact  by  which  his  right
was  acquired.  But  the  so-called  title  which  he  submits  to  the
inspection  of  the  Purchaser,  usually,  embraces  more :  viz.  all
such  other  titles  as  may  elucidate  the  quality  of  his  own,  or  may
ahow  the  extent  of  the  right  which  he  affects  to  transfer.  (See
Sngden's  Law  of  Vendors,  etc.  ch.  vii.)

UtOte  5.] — 'Jus  Eeale  sive  Jura  Eealia'  et  'Jus  Personale
sive  Jura  Personalia  :'

In  the  language  of  modem  Civilians,  and  in  the  language  of
the  various  systems  which  are  offsets  from  the  Eoman  Law,
fights  availing  against  persons  universally  or  generally,  and  rights
Availing  against  persons  certain  or  determinate^  are  not  unfre-
^uently  denoted  by  the  distinctive  names  of  'jus  reaie'  and  'jus


978  yurtsprudence.

Table  II.  personcUe  :*  The  adjective  reale  being  substituted  for  *  in  rem;
Noted,  1,2.  ^^^  ^j^^  adjective  personcUe  for  '  in  personam,*

These expressions are so ambiguous, that the following
cautions  may  be  useful  to  the  Student.

*  Jus  recUe*  and  *jus  personate'  which  signify  rights  in  rem
and  rights  in  personam,  must  not  be  confounded  with  *  jus  rerum
and  *  jus  personarum  ;*  i,e.  *  law  of  things  *  and  '  law  of  persons.'
(For  the  import  of  these  last-mentioned  expressions  see  above,
Note  2  :  The  Digression  in  Note  3,  at  C.  b. :  Table  III.  Note
3  :  and  Table  IV.  Section  2.)  The  lawot  things,  and  the  fa»
of  persons,  are,  both  of  them,  conversant  about  rigJUs,  real  and
personal.  ^

2.  The  distinction  of  the  Civilians  between  real  and  personal  '•
rights,  must  not  be  confounded  with  the  distinction  of  the  English
Lawyers  between  real  property  or  interests  and  personal  propertr
or  interests. Real  rights  (in  the  sense  of  the  English  Lawyers)
comprise  rights  which  are  personal  as  well  as  rights  which  are :
real  (in  the  sense  of  the  Civilians) :  And  personal  rights  (in  the -.
sense  of  the  former)  embrace  rights  which  are  real  as  well  as
rights  which  are  personal  (in  the  sense  of  the  latter). The
diflFerence  between  real  and  personal  (as  the  terms  are  understood
by  the  Civilians)  is  essential  or  necessary. It  runs  through  the
English  Law,  just  as  it  pervades  the  Eoman :  Although  it  is
obscured  in  the  English  by  that  crowd  of  gratuitous  distinctions
which  darken  and  disgrace  the system. But  the  diflference
'between  real  oxiA  personal  (in  the  sense  of  the  English  Lawyers),i3
accidental. In  the  Roman  Law,  there  is  not  the  faintest  trace  of  it

In  one  instance,  the  term  real,  as  used  by  the  English  Lawyers,
bears  the  import  which  is.usually  annexed  to  it  by  the  Civilians:

An  agreement  between  parson  and  landowner  discharging
land  from  tithes,  was  formerly  binding  upon  the  parson  and  also
upon  his  successors  in  the  cure,  if  made  with  the  consent  of  the
patron  and  with  the  concurrence  of  the  ordinary.  And  such
an  agreement  was  and  is  styled  ' a  composition  real'  Why ?
Because  it  availed  generally  against  incumbents  of  the  benefice,
and  was  not  simply  binding  upon  the  parson  who  entered  into
it.  Because,  in  short,  it  operated  in  rem,  and  not  in  perscman^
merely.

I  think  that  the  term  real,  as  used  by  the  English  Lawyers,
bears  the  last-mentioned  import  in  two  or  three  instances  more.
But,  at  this  moment,  I  am  unable  to  recollect  them. And.


Tables  and  Notes.  979

q>eaking  generally,  the  'real'  and  *  personal*  of  the  Civilians,  TiiBLElI.
and  the  -real^  and  *  personal*  of  the  English  Lawyers,  denote  ^4'  '
two  distinctions  which  are  completely  disparate.

3.  In  the  sense  of  the  Civilians, '  jus  personale '  signifies  any

light  which  avails  against  a  person  certain  or  against  persons

ttrtain. In  the  English  Law  'personal*  sometimes  signifies  a

9bH  or  species  of  such  rights :  viz.  those  rigMs  of  action,  which,

ia  the  language  of  the  Eoman  Lawyers,  '  nee  heredibus  nee  in

\Kndes  competunt:' which neither  pass  to  the  persons  who

ffiprtserU  the  injured  parties,  nor  avail  against  the  persons  who

nprnerU  the  injuring  parties. Being  limited  to  parties  who  are

directly  affected  by  wrong,  and  only  availing  against  parties  who

\  are  authors  of  wrong,  these  rights  of  action  are  styled  by  English
['  lawyers  * persov/il:*  Or  (more  properly)  they  are  said  to  expire
{^tohe  extinffuished)  with  the  persons  of  the  injured  or  injuring.
'  Actio  personalis  moritur  cum  persona,*  is  the  rule  or  maxim
applied  to  the  rights  in  question.  But,  like  a  thousand  phrases
d^inified  with  the  name  of  maxims,  this  wretched  saw  is  a  purely
identical  proposition.  For  a  personal  action  (as  a  term  is  here
understood)  means  a  right  of  action  which  expires  or  is  extin-
guished with  the  party.

4.  The  servitudes  of  the  Eoman  Law  are  of  two  kinds :  l*".
pnedial  or  reai  servitudes  ( — '  servitutes  praediorum  sive  rerum ') :
2**.  personal  servitudes  ( — '  servitutes  personarum  sive  hominum).

Now 'rcoZ' and  'personal*  as  distinguishing  the  kinds  of
servitudes,  must  not  be  confounded  with  'real*  and  'personal*
as  synonymous  or  equivalent  expressions  for  ' in  rem*  and  ' in
fmonam*

In  a  certain  sense,  all  servitudes  are  real.  For  all  servitudes
are  rights  in  rem,  and  belong  to  that  gcnics  of  rights  in  rem  which
subsist  in  re  aliend, (See  above,  Note  3,  B.  b. :  Note  4,  A.)

And,  in  a  certain  sense,  all  servitudes  are  personal.  For
servitudes,  like  other  rights,  reside  in  persons,  or  are  enjoyed  or
exercised  by  persons.

The  distinction  between  'real*  and  'personal,*  as  applied  and
restricted  to  servitudes,  is  this :

A  reai  servitude  resides  in  a  given  person,  as  the  owner  or
occupier,  for  the  time  being,  of  a  given  pra^dium :  i.e.  a  given
field,  or  other  parcel  of  land ;  or  a  given  building,  with  the  land
'Whereon  it  is  erected.  A  person^  servitude  resides  in  a  given
person,  without  respect  to  the  ownership  or  occupation  of  a


\o  Jurisprudence.

.BLE II. prcedium. To  borrow  the  technical  language  of  the  English  Law,
^  *  /  real  servitudes  are  appurtenant  to  lands  or  messuages '.  pennd
servitudes  are  servitudes  in  gross,  or  are  annexed  to  the  penm
of  the  parties  in  whom  they  reside.

Every  real  servitude  (like  every  imaginable  right)  resides  in  a
person  or  persons.  But  since  it  resides  in  the  person  as  occupier
of  the  given  prcediurriy  and  devolves  upon  every  person  who  sdc-
cessively  occupies  the  same,  the  right  is  ascribed  (by  a  natunl
and  convenient  ellipsis)  to  the  prcedium  itself.  Vesting  in  every
person  who  happens  to  occupy  the  prasdium,  and  vesting  in  eveiy
occupier  as  the  occupier  thereof,  the  right  is  spoken  of  as  if  it
resided  in  the  prcedium,  and  as  if  it  existed  for  the  advantage  of
that  senseless  or  inanimate  subject  The  prcedium  is  erected
into  a  legal  or  fictitious  person,  and  is  styled  '  prsedium  dontinoMt!

On  the  other  hand,  the  prcedium,  against  whose  occupieis  the
right  is  enjoyed  or  exercised,  is  spoken  of  (by  a  like  ellipsis)  as  if
it  were  subject  to  a  duty.  The  duty  attaching  upon  the  successive
occupiers  of  the  prcedium,  is  ascribed  to  the  prcedium  itself :  which,
like  the  related  prcedium,  is  erected  into  a  person,  and  contra-
distinguished from  the  other  by  the  name  of  *  praedium  servim!

Hence  the  use  of  the  expressions  *recd'  and  ' personal*  last
the  purpose  of  distinguishing  servitudes.

The  rights  of  servitudes  which  are  inseparable  firom  the
occupation  of  prcedia,  are  said  to  reside  in  those  given  or  deter-
minate things,  and  not  in  the  physical  persons  who  successively
occupy  or  enjoy  them.  And,  by  virtue  of  this  ellipsis  and  of
the  fiction  which  grows  out  of  it,  servitudes  of  the  kind  are
styled  'servitutes  rei*um'  or  'servitutes  reales:*  i,e.  rights  of
servitude  annexed  or  belonging  to  things.

The  rights  of  servitude  which  are  not  conjoined  with  such
occupation,  cannot  be  spoken  of  as  if  they  resided  in  things.
And,  since  it  is  necessary  to  distinguish  them  from  real  or
praedial  servitudes,  they  are  styled  'servitules  persanarum*  or
'  servitutes  personates :'  ix.  rights  of  servitudes  annexed  or  belong-
ing to  persons.

[i^Otf  6.]  *  Or,  more  generally,  ex  Conventione.'

(A.)  Promises  are  distinguished  by  the  Boman  Lawyers  into
conventions  and  pollicitations.  A  convention  is  defined  thus —
dv/)rum  vel  plurium  in  idem  placitum  consensus:  Or  thus — pro-
missio  ah  altero  dcUa  ah  altero  acceptala.  A  pollicitation  is  a
promise  not  accepted  by  the  promisee.


Tables  and  Notes.  981

Conventions  are  divisible  into  two  classes. Some  might  be  TablbII.
dbxced  by  action,  fuxording  to  the  mare  anderU  law. Others, - ^ >
scolding  to  that  law,  could  not  be  enforced  by  action. Con-
sations  of  the  fonner  class  are  styled  contracts :  conventions  of
le  latter  class,  po^

In  consequence  of  rules  introduced  by  the  Praetors,  or  in
xiaequence  of  laws  passed  by  the  supreme  legislature,  the  parties
iterested  in  certain  pacts  were  enabled  to  enforce  them  by  action.
n  other  words,  pacts  of  certain  species  passed  into  the  class  of
OitractB,  but  improperly  retained  the  name  which  formerly
pplied  to  them  with  propriety.  Pacts  of  other  species  were  not
tSscted  by  these  changes,  but  continued  in  their  primitive  state.

Pacts  which  the  interested  parties  are  enabled  to  enforce  by
ction,  are  distinguished  by  the  Soman  Lawyers  into  proetorian
nd  leffitimate :  that  is  to  say,  into  such  as  the  parties  can  enforce
7  virtue  of  the  Praetorian  edict,  and  such  as  the  parties  can
nforce  by  virtue  of  acts  of  legislature.

In  the  language  of  the  Modern  Civilians,  pacts  which  the
iterested  parties  are  unable  to  enforce  by  action,  are  styled
Mda :  i.e.  not  clothed  with  rights  of  action.  Pacts  which  the
Qterested  parties  are  enabled  to  enforce  by  action,  are  styled
yon  nvda  or  vestita :  i.e.  clothed  with  rights  of  action.

It  follows  from  the  preceding  analysis,  that  the  scheme  of
Uigatians  which  is  given  by  the  Compilers  of  the  Institutes
irants  an  important  member :  namely,  obligations  ex  pacto.  If
iejr  had  been  true  to  their  own  method,  they  would  not  have
apposed  directly  to  the  obligations  which  arise  from  delicts,  the
)bligations  which  arise  from  contracts.  According  to  that  method,
the  obligations  which  arise  from  delicts  should  be  opposed
ivncUy  to  the  obligations  which  arise  from  conventions.  And
these  should  be  divided  into  two  classes :  viz.  obligations  ex  con-
ifaetu  and  obligations  ex  pctcto.

(B.)  The  following  brief  remarks  upon  certain  terms,  may
5ave  the  student  much  perplexity.

(a.)  In  the  language  of  modem  jurisprudence,  '  contract '  is
rflen  synonjrmous  with  the  '  convention '  of  the  Eoman  Lawyers.

In  the  language  of  the  Eoman  Law,  *  contract*  denoted
'tiginally  a  convention  which  may  be  enforced  by  action  ;  but,  in
OQsequence  of  the  changes  to  which  I  have  adverted  above,  its
ttiport  was  somewhat  narrowed.  It  ceased  to  denote  generally
'  convention  which  may  be  enforced  by  action,  and  was  restricted
o  conventions  which  the  parties  might  enforce  by  virttie  of  tlie


982  Jurisprudence.

Table  II.  more,  ancierU  law.  For  the  pacts,  which,  in  consequence  of  those
a.  b?^',  d  changes,  were  clothed  with  the  rights  of  action,  were  not  styled
contracts,  although  they  were  contracts  in  effect  Consequently,
the  definition,  which,  in  earlier  times  applied  exclusively  to
contracts,  applied  indifferently,  at  a  later  period,  to  contracts,  and
obligatory  pa^cts.

In  the  language  of  the  English  Law,  '  contract '  is  a  term  of
uncertain  extension.  Used  loosely,  it  is  equivalent  to  '  eonvenr
tion  *  or  *  agreement!  Taken  in  the  largest  signification  whidi
can  be  given  to  it  correctly,  it  denotes  a  convention  or  agreement
which  the  Courts  of  Justice  will  enforce.  That  is  to  say,  it  bears
the  meaning  which  was  attached  to  it  originally  by  the  KomAn
Jurisconsults.

(b.)  In  the  language  of  the  Eoman  Law,  the  term  *  cmvmr
tion '  is  synonymous  with  the  term  '  a>ffreement'  and  comprises
the  term  '  contract,*

In  the  language  of  the  English  Law, '  convention '  or  *  covenant'
is  restricted  to  contracts,  and  to  contracts  of  a  suhordinate  speeUs:
namely,  to  a  species  of  that  species  of  contracts  which  are  evi-
denced by  writing  under  seal.

In  the  language  of  the  English  Law,  the  meaning  of  'bond'
is  not  less  narrow  and  anomalous  than  that  which  is  attached  to
'covenant.'  With  the  Soman  Jurists,  and  with  the  Modem
Civilians, '  vinculum,'  or  *  bojid '  (agreeably  to  its  obvious  meaning)
is  equivalent  to  ' ohligatio'  With  the  English  Lawyers,  it
denotes  a  unilateral  promise  evidenced  by  writing  under  seal
and  couched  in  a  peculiar  form.  Or,  perhaps,  it  rather  denotes
the  writing  by  which  the  promise  is  evidenced  than  the  promise
or  contract  itself.

(c.)  Although  'jHict'  is  usually  opposed  to  'contract,'  it  is
frequently  synonymous  with  '  convention/  And  when  it  is  used
in  this,  its  larger  or  generic  meaning,  it  is  not  opposed  to,  but
comprises  'contract*

In  the  language  of  the  Eoman  Jurists,  or  rather  of  the
Modern  Civilians,  every  pact  or  convention  which  cannot  be  en-
forced by  action  is  styled  nvde.  In  the  languj^e  of  the  English
Lawyers,  the  import  of  nudum  pactum  has  been  strangely
narrowed.  Instead  of  denoting  generally  agreements  which  can-
not be  enforced,  it  is  restricted  to  agreements  which  are  void  for
a  special  or  particular  reason:  namely,  for  want  of  sufiScient
consideration.

(C.)  From  conventions,  contracts,  and  pacts,  I  pass  to  obli-


V


Tables  and  Notes.  983

gations  'quad  ex  contractu/  or  (speaking  more  generally  and Table II.
adequately)  to  obligations  '  qtuisi  ex  conventione/  "  *^^^' *

(a.)  Obligations  qiiasi  ex  contractu  (or,  rather,  qiuisi  ex  conven-
tione)  arise  from  facts  which  are  not  conventions,  and  which  also
are  not  violations  of  existing  obligations  or  duties.  In  other
words,  they  are  not  begotten  by  conventions,  nor  are  they
begotten  by  wrongs.

The  facts  which  I  am  now  considering  are  not  wrongs,  and
are  sources  or  causes  of  obligation.  By  this  analogy,  and  by  this
analogy  only,  these  facts  are  allied  to  contracts  and  to  pacts
which  are  contracts  in  effect.  And  the  obligations  which  arise
from  these  facts  are  said,  by  reason  of  this  analogy,  to  arise
'quasi  ex  contractu,'  or  *  quasi  ex  conventione.'  For,  in  the
language  of  the  Eoman  Lawyers,  analogy  is  commonly  denoted  by
the  adverb  qtiasij  or  by  the  adverb  tUi  and  its  derivative  utilis,

I  will  try  to  illustrate,  by  a  plain  and  brief  example,  the
propositions  which  I  have  now  stated  in  general  or  abstract
terms.

Soluti  inddnti,  or  the  pajrment  and  receipt  of  money  errone-
ously supposed  to  be  due,  is  one  of  the  facts  which  I  am  now
considering.

The  erroneous  payment  and  receipt  is  a  source  or  cause  of
obligation,  although  the  transaction  is  not  a  convention,  and
although  there  is  nothing  in  the  fact  savouring  of  injury  or
wrong.  There  is  no  convention,  inasmuch  as  the  performance
of  an  obligation  is  the  only  design  of  the  pajrment.  There  is
no  wrong,  inasmuch  as  the  party  who  receives  the  money  be-
lieves that  the  money  is  due.  But  inasmuch  as  the  money  is
not  given,  an  obligation  to  return  it  attaches  upon  the  party  who
receives  it  from  the  moment  at  which  it  is  paid.

He  is  not  obliged  by  convention,  but  '  quasi  ex  conventione.*
He  is  bound  as  if  hy  convention,  or  he  is  bound  as  it  were  by
convention.  As  he  would  have  been  obliged  in  case  he  had
entered  into  a  contract,  so  is  he  actually  obliged  by  the  fact
which  has  actually  happened.

And  as  the  fact  which  begets  the  obligation  is  as  it  were  a
convention,  so  is  a  breach  of  the  obligation  analogous  to  a  breach
of  contract.

(b.)  The  species  of  quasi-contracts  have  nothing  in  common
but  this :  namely,  that  they  are  sources  or  causes  of  obligation ;
that  they  are  not  wrongs :  and  that  they  are  Twt  contracts  or
other  conventions.

Accordingly,  in  an excerpt in the Digests  from  the  Res


984  yunsprtidence.

TablbII.  Qtiotidiance  of  Gams,  obligations  are  divided  in  the  folio
^^^c.  Planner:  Ist,  obligations  ex  corUractu:  2ndl7,  obligatioB
' — <— ^  mcdejicio :  3rdly,  anomalous  obligations:  i.e.  obligations  ^
are  not  reducible  to  either  of  the  preceding  classes.  '  Ot
tiones  aut  ex  contractu  nascuntur,  aut  ex  maleficio,  aut  pr
quodam  jure  ex  variis  causarum  figuris!  Dig.  lib.  xliv.  tit.
1,  in  princip.

It  appears  from  other  excerpts,  that  anomalous  obliga
were  divided  in  the  lies  Qttotidiance  into  two  classes :  nai
obligations  quasi  ex  contractu  and  obligations  quusi  ex  m^iU
But  all  the  obligations  of  this  last-mentioned  class  which  I
anywhere  happened  to  meet  with,  are  either  obligations  ar
from  genuine  delicts,  or  are  not  distinguishable  from  the  ol
tions  which  are  styled  *  qu/zsi  ex  contractu,'  (See  Table  1.
7.)  Consequently, '  anomuUms  obligations '  and  '  obligations  *
ex  contractu '  may  be  considered  equivalent  expressions,
of  them  denotes  this,  and  this  only :  namely,  that  the  so
of  the  obligations  in  question  are  neither  delicts  nor  conveni
and  that  the  various  species  into  which  those  obligation:
divisible  have  nothing  in  common  excepting  that  negative
perty.

For  obligations  ex  delicto  or  ex  mal-eficio,  see  Table  I.

(c.)  The  consent  of  the  parties  is  of  the  essence  of  a  con
But  this  consent  may  be  manifested  in  different  ways.  It
be  manifested  by  words  written  or  spoken ;  or  by  signs
are  not  words.  When  it  is  manifested  by  words,  the  coni
styled  express.  When  it  is  manifested  by  conduct,  or  bj
which  are  not  words,  the  contract  is  styled  implied,  01
properly,  tacit.  In  either  case,  there  is  a  genuine  or
convention.

But  in  the  language  of  English  Jurisprudence,  quasi<
(i.e,  sources of obligation  which  are  neither  conventic
wrongs)  are  styled  '  implied  contracts,'  or  *  contracts  wl
law  implies.* That  is  to  say,  ^^wtm-contracts,  and  genuine
implied  contracts,  are  denoted  by  one  name,  or  by  name
are  nearly  alike. It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  add,  thi
contracts,  and  implied  or  tacit  contracts,  are  commonly]
quently  confounded  by  English  Lawyers. (See,  in
Sir  William  Blackstone's  Commentaries,  B.  ii  ch.  30,
iii.  cL  9.)


Tables  and  Notes.


9»5


IX.
1-6.


* .


\


Tables  and  Notes.  985


Notes  to  Table  IX.

[^Ot(  1.]  See  ^  TTaii&  de  legislation  civile  et  p&rude,  etc,  Table  IX.
M.  Benth/im,  publids  en  Fran9ois  par  M.  Dumont! And  see,  -

icularly,  the  *  Vue  gSnSrale  dUun  Corps  coniplet  de  Droit*  which
ipies  the  First  Volume  of  the  '  TraitSs,  etc'  from  page  141
the  end.  N.B.  The  edition  here  referred  to,  is  the  first
Paris,  An  X=  1802).

U^OtE  2.]  For  the  distinction  between  National  and  Inter-
ional  Law,  see  Vol.  I.  pp. 146, 147,  168,  328  to 331.
International  Law  in  particular,  see  pp.  328  to  331.

[^Ot(  3.]  For  the  distinction  between  Droit  politique  and
it  civil  (as  opposed  to  politique),  and  for  Droit  politique  in
icular,  see  Vol.  L  pp.  147,  148,  200,  308  to  327,  333,
)  et  seq.,  339  et  seq.,  346.

[jptOtC  4.]  For  the  distinction  between  Code  gSn^ral  and
es  particuliers,  see  Vol.  I.  pp.  150,  151,  299,  305,  333,
I:,  364:  Vol.  III.  p.  278.  It  may  be  inferred  from  those
5€S,  as  well  as  from  Vol.  I.  pp.  294  to  297  {Des  Etats
r€stiques  et  civUs),  and  from  Vol.  II.  pp.  175  to  236  {Des
ts  privis),  that  the  distinction,  intended  by  Mr.  Bentham,
Les  luarly  with  the  long-established  distinction  between  Jus
um  and  Jus  Personarum,  See  Tables  I.,  II.,  IV.,  Section  1,
:.,  VIII.,  X.

[^Ot€  5.]  For  the  distinction  between  Substantive  and
kctive  Law  (or  Law  s^itnplicitcr,  and  Procedure)  see  Vol.  I.

149,  150,  166.  For  Procedure  in  particular,  see  pp.  349
551.

[^OtC  6.]  For  the  distinction  between  Civil  Law  and  Penal
r,  see  Vol.  I.  pp.  155  et  seq.,  159  et  seq.,  170  ;  and  compare
b  those  places  the  second  paragraph  of  p.  298.  For  the
il  Code  in  particular,  see  pp.  225  to  307,  and  Vol.  II.  pp.
)  to  174.  For  the  Penal  Code  in  particular,  see  Vol.  I.  pp.
)  to  224 ;  Vol.  IL  p.  237  to  the  end ;  Vol.  IIL  p.  1  to  191.


986


yurispmdence.


TABLE
Exhibiting  the  Carpus  Juris  ('  Corps  complet  de  Droit ')  arranged

National,  Municipal,  or  Internal  Law  [i,e.  Jus  Ciyile,  in  one  of  its  noma-
0118  senses] :

Containing —


Droit  politique  [i.«.  Jus  Publicum]
Containing — •


Droit  constUutumnel :
Relating  to

1.  The  Powers  of  the  Sovereign,  in  the  large  and  correct  signification  :— '  Am'
mu8  Imperans  in  Hqntblicd,  sive  Is  Monarcha  sit,  sive  Optimates,  are  P^ypBloi.'
Or,  in  other  words,  the  Powers  of  the  One,  the  Few,  or  tne  Many,  in  whom  tk
Sovereignly — the  supreme,  unlimited,  and,  legaXly,  irresponsible  Command — reodn.

2.  The  DistrilnUian  of  the  Soyereign  powers,  where  they  are  not  nnited  in  i
single  person.

8.  The  i>t^ie9  of  the  Government  (subjects  or  citizens)  towards  the  SoTeragn.
A  large  portion  of  Constitutional  Law  is,  strictly,  a  branch  of  lioralt. See
'  TraiUa,  eU,*  vol.  L  pp.  167,  326.


Droit  civil  (as  opposed  to  Droit  p&naV)  \i.c  Law  re-
garding primary  Rights  and  Obligations] :
Relating  to—


Rights  IN  Rem,  with  their
corresponding  Duties :


Rights  IN  Personam,  or  Oblioatioss
strido  aensu :  Ifi^  *-l

In  which  Department  of  rights  and
obligations  are  comprised  the  following
genera:  viz. — ,


Obligations  arising  from  PacU
ou  Convention  {i.e.  ex  Con-
tractu) :


I

Obligations  arising  from  Begoin  supirUvr,
Service  anUrieur,  HesponmbiliU  fovr
une  personne  tierce,  etc.  {i.e.  Quisi  tf
Contractu).  [0oU  8.]


Tables  and  Notes.


987


the  Order  which  seems  to  have  been  conceived  by  Mr,  Seniham.

International,  or  External  Law  [i,e.  Jus  InUgrarum  Gen-
tium]:  [ftoU2.]

Relating  to  the  Rights  and  Obligations  of  Indq^enderU  Politics^
Societies  towards  one  another.

Thus  considered,  it  is,  strictly,  a  branch  of  Morals.  See  *  TraiUs,
etc*  vol.  i.  pp.  168,  828.  But,  as  enforced  in  any  given  Society
by  the  Sovereign,  or  Supreme  Power,  it  properly  constitutes  a
portion  of  (national  or  internal)  Law.


Droit  civil  (as  opposed  to  Droit  politiqiie)  [i.e.  Jus  Priyatuv]:
[fixsU  3]  Containing — ,


I

Law  regarding
he  Rights  and  Obligations  of  Per-
i  who  are  clothed  with  Political
^rs  in  subordination  to  the  Sove-
n.

ee  *  TraitiSy  etc.*  vol.  i.  pp.  385,
,  846,  etc. :  —  Organisation  judU
re.  Code  militairct  Code  de  Finance,
e  eeeUsiastiqtu,  etc.


I


»e  g^n^ral,  ou  Lois  o^n^rales
'..e.  Jus  Rerum]  :


Containing — 1


I

DIT  SUBSTANTIF  [or  T?ie  Law]
Containing —


I
Codes  particuliers,  ou  Becueils  de
Lois PARTicuLifcREs [i.e. Jus
Personarum]. [|^te  4.]


Droit  adjectif  [or  Law  of
Procedure] :  [^ote  5.]
Containing — .


Law  of  Civil  Procedure :


I

Law  of  Criminal
Procedure.


Droit  Penal  [i.c.  Law  regarding  inywrie.'? ;  with  the  Rights  and
Obligations  {secondary  or  sanctioning)  which  arise  m>m  in-
juries] : [|^te  6.]

Relating  to — 1


Uvil  Injuries;  \i'ith  the  RiglUs
ich  thence  accrue  to  the  injured
ties  or  their  representatives,
I  the  correlating  or  correspond -
;  Obligations  which  attach  upon
;  opposite  parties.


Crimes  and  Punishments;  together
with  the  Satisfaction  to  the  injured
parties  or  their  representatives,  which
(in  the  opinion  of  Mr.  Bentham)  it
would  be  expedient  to  exact  from  the
criminals, [^ote  9.]


[For  the  f^Q\t%  to  this  Table,  see  pp.  985,  988.]


9S8


[00ir  T.]  Hie  impxcaiit  dirsHMi  of  Eights  into  Jura  in
£gm  azkd  Jmrm  m  Perwmam  id€iermimaiam\  is  neither  fonnallT
fias&l  otDT  CGBsatemhr  poisaed,  in  the  *  Vue  g^n^raleJ  It  may,
hovevier,  lie  traced  from  (l  247  to  pu  293 ;  and  see  paiticiiIailT
PIL  271,  272,  290.  291,  292,  293.  In  the  Second  Vdnmeit
appears  wish  mace  dbcinctnesaL  See  (j^  110  to  155)  'Modes
of  Aci:iT2iring  Froferty*:  Le.  SerrUmdis,  with  other  Bights  n  n
^ymd,  as  veQ  as  Dominion  or  Propeftj  stiictlT  so  called :  And
see  also  ^pp.  156  to  163)*Modesofaeqmring  Bights  to  jSSfmeo':
Le,  Acts  to  be  done  or  forborne  hj  astignabU  or  dHumiMott
persons,  in  conseqnence  of  Migaiifms  (as  understood  bj  the
Soman  Lawyezsji  At  pu  167,  the  term '  Obligation '  is  emplojed
in  this  its  original  meaning.

[^Otr  8.]  For  OUigations  ex  amtrattu  and  quasi  OHxm-
traetu,  see  VoL  L  ppi  271,  272,  286  et  seq. ;  VoL  IL  ppi  156
to  168,  362  et  seq.

[0Otr  9.]  The  Law  of  Civfl  Injuries  (with  the  corresponding
Bemedies)  and  the  Law  of  Crimes  (with  the  correspondiD;
Punishments  and  Bemedies),  are  not  divided  into  two  ilid^
pendent  parcels,  but  are  classed  or  blended  together  under  tk
name  of '  Dnit  pinal!  See  YoL  L  pp.  155  et  seq.,  159  et  se^
170  to  224;  VoL  IL  p.  237  to  the  end  of  the  Volume;  Vol
IIL  p.  1  to  191.  Compulsory  Bestitution  and  Satisfiwdon
relate,  for  the  most  part,  to  Ci>-il  Injuries ;  Penal  Bemedies,  to
Crimes.  See  VoL  IL  pp.  308  to  379 ;  and  p.  380  to  the  end
of  the  Volume.


Interpretation.  989


ESSAYS  ON  INTERPRETATION  AND  ANALOGY.

Thb  following  Essays  or  Notes  are  referred  to  in  the  thirty-third
Xecture  (p.  577,  ardi)^  in  which  the  same  subjects  are  more  succinctly
liaiidled.  They  were  not  found  with  the  Lectures,  but  were  doubtless
intended  by  the  Author  to  be  incorporated  in  the  great  work  which
lie  meditated.

In  a  note  in  the  page  above-mentioned,  I  spoke  of  the  '  Essay  or
Interpretation '  as  complete.  This,  unfortunately,  is  a  mistake ;  nor
have  I  been  able  to  find  any  trace  of  the  conclusion.

The  original  of  the  '  Excursus  on  Analogy '  consists,  in  great  part,
of  unarranged  and  almost  illegible  fragments,  amongst  which  it  was
extremely  difficult  to  establish  anything  like  order  and  coherenca
I  hesitated  for  some  time  whether  to  submit  what  the  Author  left  in
so  imperfect  a  state  to  the  public  eye.  Nor  should  I  have  ventured
to  do  so,  had  I  not  been  encouraged  by  the  opinion  of  several  persons
of  high  authority  in  such  a  matter,  to  whom  it  has  been  submitted.
They  have  exhorted  me  by  no  means  to  suppress  this  essay ;  '  Since,'
to  use  the  words  of  one  of  those  most  qualified  to  decide,  '  though,
from  the  fragmentary  form  in  which  it  must  necessarily  appear,  its
excellences  will  probably  be  hidden  from  most  readers,  its  great
philosophical  value  will  be  apparent  to  those  who  study  it  with
attention.'

S.  A


NOTE  ON  INTERPRETATION.

(proper  and  improper).

In  my  thirty-third  Lecture  I  have  tried  to  contrast  Interpretation
(in  the  proper  acceptation  of  the  term)  and  the  induction  of  a
rule  of  law  from  a  judicial  decision.  In  (the  earlier  portion  of)
the  present  note,  I  shall  try  to  distinguish  Interpretation  (in
the  proper  acceptation  of  the  term)  from  the  various  modes  of
judicial  legislation  to  which  the  name  of  interpretation  is  not
unfirequently  misapplied.

The  discovery  of  the  law  which  the  lawgiver  intended  to
establish,  is  the  object  of  genuine  interpretation :  or  (changing
the  phrase),  its  object  is  the  discovery  of  the  intention  with
which  he  constructed  the  statute,  or  of  the  sense  which  he
attached  to  the  words  wherein  the  statute  is  expressed.  For  the
reasons  which  I  have  given  in  the  text,  the  literal  meaning  of
VOL.  n.  2  I


990  Interpretation.

the  words  wherein  the  statute  is  expressed,  is  the  primary  index
or  clue  to  the  intention  or  sense  of  its  author.

Now  the  literal  meaning  of  words  (or  the  granmiatical
meaning  of  words)  is  the  meaning  which  custom  has  annexed  to
them.  It  is  the  meaning  attached  to  them  commonly  by  all  or
most  of  the  persons  who  use  habitually  the  given  language :  Or,
if  the  words  be  technical,  it  is  the  meaning  attached  to  them
commonly  by  all  or  most  of  the  persons  who  are  specially  con-
versant or  occupied  with  the  given  art  (or  science).  Generally,
the  customary  meaning  of  the  words  wherein  the  statute  is  ex-
pressed, is  obvious  or  easily  assignable ;  and  generally,  therefore,
the  interpreter  assumes  it  tacitly,  and  without  hesitation  and
inquiry.  But,  occasionally,  the  customary  meaning  of  the  words
is  indeterminate  and  dubious.  What  is  the  meaning  which
custom  has  annexed  to  the  words,  is,  therefore,  an  inquiry  which
the  interpreter  may  be  called  upon  to  institute.  Consequently,
the  interpretation  of  a  statute  by  the  literal  meaning  of  the
words  may  possibly  consist  of  a  twofold  process :  namely,  an
inquiry  after  the  meaning  which  custom  has  annexed  to  the
words,  and  a  use  of  that  literal  meaning  as  a  clue  to  the  sense
of  the  legislature.  The  interpreter  seeking  the  meaning  annexed
to  the  words  by  custom,  may  not  be  able  to  determine  it ;  or
he  may  not  be  able  to  find  in  it,  when  he  has  determined  or
assumed  it,  any  determinate  sense  that  the  legislature  may  have
attached  to  them :  And,  on  either  of  these  suppositions,  he  may
seek  in  other  indicia,  the  intention  which  the  legislature  held.
Or,  when  he  has  determined  or  assumed  the  customary  meaning
of  the  words,  the  interpreter  may  be  able  to  discover  in  their
customary  or  literal  meaning,  a  determinate  or  definite  intention
that  the  legislature  may  have  entertained  :  And,  on  this  supposi-
tion, he  ought  to  presume  strongly  that  the  possible  intention
which  he  finds  is  the  very  intention  or  purpose  with  which  the
statute  was  made.

The  intention,  however,  of  the  legislature,  as  shewn  by  that
literal  meaning,  may  differ  from  the  intention  of  the  l^islatnre,
as  shewn  by  other  indicia  ;  and  the  presumption  in  favour  of
the  intention  which  that  literal  meaning  suggests,  may  be  fainter
than  the  evidence  for  the  intention  which  other  indicia  point
at.  On  which  supposition,  the  last  of  these  possible  intentions
ought  to  be  taken  by  the  interpreter,  m  and  for  the  intention
which  the  legislature  actually  held.  For  the  literal  meaning  oi
the  words,  though  it  offers  a  strong  presumption,  is  not  conclusive
of  the  purpose  with  which  the  statute  was  made.


Interpretation.  99 1

It  appears,  then,  from  what  has  foregone,  that  the  subjects
of  the  science  of  interpretation  are  principally  the  following;
namely,  the  natures  of  the  various  indices  to  the  customary
meaning  of  the  words  in  which  the  statute  is  expressed ;  the
natures  of  the  various  indices,  other  than  that  literal  mean-
ing, to  the  intention  or  sense  of  the  lawgiver ;  the  cases  wherein
the  intention  which  that  literal  meaning  may  suggest,  should
bend  and  yield  to  the  intention  which  other  indicia  may  point
at.

Having  stated  the  object  or  purpose  of  genuine  interpretation,
and  pointed  at  the  subjects  of  the  science  which  is  conversant
about  it,  we  will  touch  upon  the  interpretation,  ex  ratione  legis,
through  which  an  unequivocal  statute  is  extended  or  restricted.
It  may  happen  that  the  author  of  a  statute,  when  he  is  making
the  statute,  conceives  and  expresses  exactly  the  intention  with
which  he  is  making  it,  but  conceives  imperfectly  and  confusedly
the  end  which  determines  him  to  make  it.  Now,  since  he  con-
ceives its  scope  inadequately  and  indistinctly,  he  scarcely  pursues
its  scope  with  logical  completeness,  or  he  scarcely  adheres  to  its
scope  with  logical  consistency.  Consequently,  though  he  con-
ceives and  expresses  exactly  the  intention  with  which  he  is
making  it,  the  statute,  in  respect  of  its  reason,  is  defective  or
excessive.  Some  class  of  cases  which  the  reason  of  the  statute
embraces  is  not  embraced  by  the  statute  itself ;  or  the  statute
itself  embraces  some  class  of  cases  which  a  logical  adherence  to
its  reason  would  determine  its  author  to  exclude  from  it.

But,  in  pursuance  of  a  power  which  often  is  exercised  by
judges  (and,  where  they  are  subordinate  to  the  State,  with  its
express  or  tacit  authority),  the  judge  who  finds  that  a  statute  is
thus  defective  or  excessive,  usually  fills  the  chasm,  or  cuts  away
the  excrescence.  In  order  to  the  accomplishment  of  the  end  for
which  the  statute  was  established,  the  judge  completes  or  corrects
the  faulty  or  exorbitant  intention  with  which  it  actually  was
made.  He  enlarges  the  defective,  or  reduces  the  excessive  statute,
and  adjusts  it  to  the  reach  of  its  ground.  For  he  applies  it  to
a  case  of  a  class  which  it  surely  does  not  embrace,  but  to  which
its  reason  or  scope  should  have  made  the  lawgiver  extend  it;  or
he  withholds  it  from  a  case  of  a  class  which  it  embraces  indis-
putably, but  which  its  reason  or  scope  should  have  made  the
lawgiver  exclude  from  it.

Now,  according  to  a  notion  or  phrase  which  is  current  with
writers  on  law,  the  judge  who  thus  enlarges,  or  thus  reduces  the
statute,  '  interprets  the  statute  by  its  reason :'  or  his  extension


992  Interpretation.

or  restriction  of  the  defective  or  excessive  statute  is  '  extensive
or  restrictive  interpretation  ex  ratione  legis!  His  adjustment,
however,  of  the  statute  to  the  reach  or  extent  of  its  ground,  is  a
palpable  act  of  judicial  legislation,  and  is  not  interpretation  or
construction  (in  the  proper  acceptation  of  the  term).  The  dis-
covery of  the  intention  with  which  the  statute  was  made,  is  the
object  of  genuine  interpretation ;  and,  of  the  various  clues  to  the
actual  intention  of  the  lawgiver,  the  reason  of  the  statute  is  ona

But  where  a  statute  is  extended  or  restricted  in  the  manner
which  we  now  are  considering,  the  actual  intention  of  the  law-
giver is  not  doubted  by  the  judge.  Instead  of  unaffectedly
seeking  the  actual  intention  of  the  lawgiver,  and  using  the
reason  of  the  statute  as  one  of  the  various  clues  to  it,  the  judge
rejects  an  actual  (though  faulty  or  exorbitant)  intention  which
the  lawgiver  palpably  held.  Instead  of  interpreting  a  statute
obscurely  and  dubiously  worded,  the  judge  modifies  a  statute
clearly  and  precisely  expressed :  putting  in  the  place  of  the  law
which  the  lawgiver  indisputably  made,  the  law  which  the  reason
of  the  statute  should  have  determined  the  lawgiver  to  make.
Consequently,  where  the  judge  in  show  interprets  the  statute
restrictively,  he  abrogates  or  annuls  it  partially.  And  where
the  judge  in  show  interprets  the  statute  extensively,  he  makes
of  its  reason  a  judiciary  rule  by  which  its  defect  is  suppUed
He  makes  of  the  reason  of  the  statute  a  general  ground  of
decision  which  provides  for  the  class  of  cases  overlooked  and
omitted  by  the  lawgiver :  For,  as  a  ratio  decidendi,  though  not
as  a  ratio  legis,  the  reason  of  a  statute  may  perform  the  functions
of  a  law.

In  the  following  passages  from  the  Pandects  (Lib.  I.  tit  3,
11.  10,  11,  12,  13),  the  rationale  of  the  process  of  extension,
which  the  judge  performs  upon  the  statute,  is  stated  unaffectedly
and  frankly.  '  Neque  leges,  neque  senatusconsulta  ita  scribi
possunt,  ut  omnes  casus,  qui  quandoque  inciderint,  comprehend-
antur ;  et  ideo  de  his,  quae  prime  constituuntur,  interpretatione
(aut  constitutione  principis)  certius  statuendum  est'  '  Non  pos-
sunt omnes  articuU  singillatim  aut  legibus  aut  senatusconsultis
comprehendi;  sed  cum  in  aliqua  causS,  sententia  (sive  ratio)
eorum  manifesta  est,  is,  qui  jurisdictioni  praeest,  ad  similia  pro-
cedere,  atque  ita  jus  dicere  debet'  '  Quotiens  lege  aliquid  unum
vel  alterum  introductum  est,  bona  occasio  est,  cetera,  quae  tendunt
ad  eandem  utilitatem,  interpretatione,  vel  certe  jurisdictione
suppleri.'

There  is,  it  is  true,  an  extensive,  or  restrictive  interpretation


Interpretation.  993

which  is  properly  interpretation  or  construction.  For  the  literal
meaning  of  the  words  wherein  the  statute  is  expressed,  may  not
correspond  to  the  purpose  wherewith  it  was  actually  made ;  and
the  interpreter  of  the  statute,  guided  by  another  index  to  the
actual  purpose  of  the  statute,  may  abandon  the  meaning  which
custom  has  annexed  to  the  words,  for  the  meaning  which  the
lawgiver  attached  to  them.

Now,  if  the  meaning  annexed  to  the  words  by  custom  be
narrower  than  the  meaning  attached  to  the  words  by  the  law-
giver, the  interpreter  (it  is  commonly  said)  interprets  the  statute
extensively :  If  the  former  of  the  meanings  be  broader  than  the
latter,  the  interpreter  (it  is  commonly  said)  interprets  the  statute
restrictively.  But,  manifestly,  the  statute  itself  is  not  extended
or  restricted  by  the  process  which  we  now  are  considering.  The
very  law  which  actually  was  made  by  the  lawgiver,  is  also  the  very
law  which  is  sought  and  stuck  to  by  the  interpreter ;  who  merely
proportions  the  grammatical  meaning  of  the  words  to  the  broader
or  narrower  meaning  with  which  the  lawgiver  used  them.  The
interpreter  extends  or  restricts,  not  the  statute  itself,  but  the
literal  meaning  of  the  words  wherein  the  statute  is  expressed.

Having  tried  to  distinguish  genuine  mterpretation  from  the
modes  of  judicial  legislation  which  often  are  styled  interpretation,
we  proffer  a  few  remarks  on  some  of  the  leading  terms  which
are  connected  with  the  distinction  in  question.

Although  the  intention  with  which  a  statute  is  made  often
differs  from  the  end  which  moves  the  lawgiver  to  make  it,  the
reason  of  a  statute  and  the  actual  intention  of  the  lawgiver
oftener  coincide  or  tally.  Accordingly,  they  often  are  opposed
together,  or  contradistinguished  jointly,  to  the  literal  meaning  of
the  words  in  which  the  statute  is  expressed.  Now,  as  contra-
distinguished jointly  to  the  literal  meaning  of  the  words,  the
reason  of  a  statute  with  the  actual  intention  of  the  lawgiver  are
commonly  styled  by  the  moderns  '  the  spirit  of  the  law  \  by  the
Roman  jurists,  and  the  moderns  who  adopt  their  language,  *  the
sentence  of  the  law.'

According  to  most  of  the  writers  who  have  treated  of  inter-
pretation, it  is  either  grammatical  or  logical.  The  interpretation
of  a  statute  bears  the  name  of  grammatical  in  so  far  as  it  seeks
the  meaning  which  custom  has  annexed  to  the  words,  or  seeks
in  that  meaning  exclusively  the  actual  intention  of  the  lawgiver.
As  looking  for  other  indices  to  the  actual  intention  of  the  law-
giver, or  as  seeking  his actual  intention  through  such  other


994  Interpretation,

indicia^  the  interpretation  of  a  statute  assumes  the  name  of
logical.  But  as  every  process  of  interpretation  involves  a  logical
process,  the  contradistinguished  epithets  scarcely  suggest  the
distinction  which  they  are  employed  to  express.  The  extension
or  restriction,  ex  ratione  legis,  of  a  statute  unequivocally  worded,
is  not  interpretation  or  construction  (in  the  proper  acceptation
of  the  term).  According,  however,  to  most  of  the  writers  who
have  treated  of  interpretation,  this  process  of  extension  or  restric-
tion belongs  to  the  kind  of  interpretation  which  they  mark  with
the  name  of  logicaL


Of  the  numerous  equivocal  terms  which  the  language  of
jurisprudence  comprises,  equity  perhaps  is  the  most  equivocal
and  perplexing.^^  Now,  of  the  many  and  disparate  meanings
given  to  this  slippery  expression,  some  are  connected  inseparably
with  a  kind  of  spurious  interpretation:  namely,  with  the  so-called
extensive  interpretation,  ex  ratione  legis,  of  a  statute  unequivocally
worded.  Where  a  defective  statute  is  thus  adjusted  to  its  reason,
there  lies  an  eqiudity  or  cequity  (or  a  parity,  analogy,  or  likeness)
between  the  cases  which  the  statute  includes  and  the  cases  to
which  it  is  extended.  A  case  to  which  it  is  extended,  as  well
as  a  case  which  it  includes,  is  embraced  by  its  reason ;  and  the
two  cases,  therefore,  in  their  common  relation  to  its  reason,  are
equal,  analogous,  or  like.

Accordingly,  equity  or  cequity  signifies  the  objects  following
(besides  a  multitude  of  others) : — 1.  The  parity  between  a  case
to  which  the  statute  is  extended  and  a  case  which  the  statute
includes. — 2.  The  spurious  extensive  interpretation  ex  ratiaiu
legis :  that  is  to  say,  the  extension  of  the  statute  agreeably  to
the  parity  of  the  cases,  or  the  process  of  extending  the  statute
agreeably  to  the  parity  of  the  cases. —  3.  A  personified  abstract
name  which  is  moved  by  the  parity  of  the  cases  to  call  for  the
extension  of  the  statute.  (*  Quod  in  re  pari  valet  (says  Gcero)
valeat  in  hac  quse  par  est :  valeat  cequitas,  quae  paribus  in  causis
paria  jura  desiderat.') — 4.  The  reason  of  the  statute  to  which
the  extension  is  given,  or  the  reason  of  any  statute  which  needs
a  similiar  extension.  (It  often  is  said,  for  example,  of  such  or
such  a  case,  that  the  case  is  within  the  equity  of  such  or  such
a  statute,  though  the  case  is  not  included  by  the  statute  itself.)

The spurious extensive interpretation ex  ratione  kgis,  is

"  See  Lecture  XXXIII.  arUe,


Interpretation.  99  5

styled  analogy  as  well  as  equity.  And  it  is  said  of  aruilogy,  as
it  is  said  of  equity,  that  she  is  moved  by  the  parity  of  the  cases
to  call  for  the  extension  of  the  statute.  It  is  said  moreover  of
the  pretended  interpreter,  that  he  interprets  the  statute  ayta-
logically.  But  it  would  seem  that  the  term  aruilogy,  like  the
expression  equity y  signifies  most  properly  the  parity  between  the
cases.

['  Equity '  is  not  applicable  to  restrictive  interpretation  ex
rcUione  legis.]

The  extensive  or  restrictivQ  interpretation  ex  ratione  legis,  of
a  statute  unequivocally  worded,  are  not  the  only  modes  of
judicial  or  oblique  legislation  to  which  the  name  of  interpreta-
tion is  often  misapplied.  JS.g, :  Entire  or  partial  abrogation  of
a  statute  (with  or  without  substitution  of  a  new  rule),  without
reganl  even  to  the  reason  of  the  statute.  The  grounds  for
which  are,  the  judge's  own  views  of  utility,  or  of  that  consequence
and  analogy  (in  legislation)  to  which  we  shall  advert  hereafter.

(He  is  to  be  blamed  commonly,  not  for  innovation,  but  for  work-
ing it  under  false  pretences,  and  without  system.)

So,  also,  the  creation  of  judiciary  law  (independently  of  the
application  of  any  statute)  has  been  styled  interpretation.  Kg. :
The  law  devised  by  jyru^^^^^^t  ^^d  adopted  by  tribunals,  was
said  to  be  devised  by  interpreting  the  old  law :  such  interpreta-
tion consisting,  partly,  in  forming  new  rules,  by  consequence
and  analogy,  on  anterior  law  (statute  or  judiciary)  and  hence,
probably,  the  name  of  interpretation ;  and,  partly,  in  forming
new  rules,  without  regard  to  consequence  or  analogy,  according  to
general  utility,  or  any  other  standard  of  ethics  (or  legislation).^^

As  I  shall  shew  hereafter,  authentic  interpretation  is  also
genuine  or  spurious.  A  declaratory  law  being  truly  such,  or
introducing  the  new  law  under  the  guise  of  interpreting  the
purpose  with  which  the  old  was  made.^^


From  the  two  processes  ^^  which  I  have  endeavoured  to  con-
trast, I  pass  to  the  celebrated  phrase  which  is  closely  connected

^*  *  Interpretis  officium,  quod  proprie  eorum  scilicet,  quae  ad  leges  ex  earum

in  legis  scntentia  explicanda  versatiir,  per  rcUionCy  aut  ad  similia  protlu<:€ndas  aut

se ([uidem facile  uiscernitur  ab  eorum  restringendas  spectant.' — Miihleubruch,

munere,  quorum  est,  ad  causas  applicare  Voct.  Pand.  vol.  i.  lib.  i.  cap.  3.

leges  ;  unde  etiani  recte  de  utro([ue  ge-  ^^  Interpretation by  rtglement. See

Here  seorsim  niulta  pnecipiuntur. Est  French  Code  and Beuthani's  Judicial

ta  men  genus  quoddam  pneceptorum  velu t  Estahlishmcnis.

promiscuum atque  in  meoio  positum,  ^^  See  p.  632,  ante.


996  Interpretation.

with  them ;  though  it  regards  the  application  of  law  (and  also
the  creation  of  law)  rather  than  the  discovery  of  law  by  inter-
pretation or  induction. 'After  all  the  certainty  (says  Paley)
that  can  be  given  to  points  of  law,  either  by  the  interposition  of
the  legislature,  or  the  authority  of  precedents,  one principal
source  of  disputation,  and  into  which,  indeed,  the  greater  part
of  legal  controversies  may  be  resolved,  will  remain  still :  namelr,
'  the  competition  of  opposite  analogies.* The  nature  of  the  difB-
culties  denoted  by  this  celebrated  phrase  he  attempts  to  state
in  the  following  passage. *  When  a  point  of  law  has  once  been
adjudged,  neither  that  question,  nor  any  which  completely,  and
in  all  its  circumstances,  corresponds  with  that,  can  be  brought  a
second  time  into  dispute. But  questions  arise  which  resemble
that  only  indirectly,  and  in  part,  and  in  certain  views  and  cir-
cumstances, and  which  seem  to  bear  an  equal  or  greater  aflSnitj
to  other  adjudged  cases :  questions  which  can  be  brought  within
any  fixed  rule  only  by  analogy,  and  which  hold  an  analogy  by
relation  to  dififerent  rules. It  is  by  the  urging  of  the  different
analogies  that  the  contention  of  the  Bar  is  carried  on :  And  it  is
in  the  comparison,  adjustment,  and  reconciliation  of  them  with
one  another ;  and  in  the  discerning  of  such  distinctions,  and  the
framing  of  such  a  determination,  as  may  save  the  various  rules
alleged  in  the  cause,  or,  if  that  be  impossible,  as  may  give  np
the  weaker  analogy  to  the  stronger,  that  the  sagacity  and  wisdom
of  the  Court  are  seen  and  exercised.* Now,  like  all  or  most  of
the  phrases  into  which  *  analogy '  enters,  the  celebrated  phrase
'the  competition  of  opposite  analogies'  is  often  used  indeter-
minately. Accordingly,  it  has  darkened  the  nature  of  the  diffi-
culties which  it  was  contrived  to  express ;  and,  therewith,  it  has
obscured  that  pregnant  distinction  between  statute  and  judiciaiy
law  with  which  we  are  presently  occupied. It  needs,  therefore,
the  exact  examination  which  I  now  shall  bestow  upon  it

Two  distinct  diflSculties,  incident  respectively  to  two  distinct
processes,  are  denoted  by  the  phrase  as  it  is  usually  applied.  Of
these  distinct  difficulties,  one  is  incident  to  the  application  of
statute  or  judiciary  law  already  obtaining  or  existing :  the  other
is  incident  to  the  decision  of  a  specific  or  particular  case  for
which  the  existing  law  affords  no  applicable  rule.  The  former
may  perplex  the  judge  in  his  purely  judicial  character,  or  as
properly  exercising  his  properly  judicial  functions :  the  latter
may  embarrass  the  judge  in  his  quality  of  judicial  legislator,  or
as  virtually  making  a  rule  for  cases  of  a  new  description.  As
it  is  usually  applied,  the  phrase  is  confined to the  diflSculty


Interpretation.  997

which  is  incident  to  the  application  of  law,  with  the  diflBculty
which  is  incident  to  judicial  legislation.  But  a  diflBculty  re-
sembling these  is  incident  to  direct  legislation,  or  the  process  of
creating  a  statute.  And  this  diflBculty  may  be  styled,  as  pro-
perly as  the  two  others,  a  competition  of  opposite  analogies.

I  first  shall  consider  the  diflBculty  which  is  incident  to  the
application  of  law  already  obtaining  or  existing;  though  the
diflBculty  which  is  incident  to  judicial  legislation  is  probably  the
diflBculty  that  Paley  particularly  contemplated.  Having  con-
sidered the  difficulty  which  is  incident  to  the  application  of  law,
I  shall  proceed  to  consider  the  diflBculty  which  is  incident  to
judicial  legislation,  and  also  the  resembling  diflBculty  which  is
incident  to  the  creation  of  a  statute.

The  system  of  positive  law  obtaining  in  any  nation  (or  the
complexion  or  collective  whole  of  its  positive  law)  is  a  body  or
aggregate  (methodised  or  unmethodised)  of  various  but  connected
roles.  Now  every  rule  which  is  definite  or  precise  is  applicable
to  cases  of  a  class  (or  governs  cases  of  a  class)  which  also  is
definite  or  precise.  For  the  rule  is  shaped  exactly  to  the
essence  or  nature  of  the  class,  or  to  the  essentials,  positive  and
negative,  possessed  by  a  case  of  the  class:  meaning  by  the
positive  and  negative  essentials  of  the  case  the  properties  which
it  necessarily  has,  and  the  properties  which  it  necessarily  wants,
in  so  far  as  it  belongs  to  the  class,  and  in  so  far  as  the  rule  will
apply  to  it.  And  as  the  rule  is  shaped  exactly  to  the  essence
or  nature  of  the  class,  so  is  the  essence  of  the  class  exactly
marked  by  the  rule :  the  determinate  purpose  of  the  rule,  and
the  determinate  import  of  the  rule,  fixing  the  class  of  cases
which  its  author  intended  it  to  govern.  Consequently,  if  every
rule  in  a  system  of  law  were  perfectly  definite  or  precise,  every
specific  case  that  the  whole  of  the  system  embraced  would
belong  to  a  kind  or  sort  perfectly  definite  or  precise.

On  the  appearance  of  any  case  that  the  whole  of  the  system
embraced,  the  class  to  which  it  belonged,  and  the  rule  by  which
it  was  governed,  might  be  known  and  assigned  with  certainty ;
or  (at  the  least)  the  class  and  the  rule  might  be  known  and
assigned  with  certainty,  by  every  discerning  lawyer  who  had
mastered  the  system  thoroughly.  But  the  ideal  completeness
and  correctness  which  I  now  have  imagined  is  not  attainable  in
fact  More  or  fewer  of  the  rules  which  constitute  a  system  of
law,  and  more  or  fewer  of  the  cases  which  the  whole  of  the
system  extends  to,  are  inevitably  framed  and  classed  more  or
less  indefinitely. What  exactly  are  the  cases  which  a  given


998  Interpretation.

rule  applies  to,  or  what  exactly  is  the  rule  which  governs  a
given  case,  is  a  doubt  that  would  arise  occasionally,  and  would
not  be  soluble  always,  though  the  system  had  been  built  and
ordered  with  matchless  solicitude  and  skilL  And  hence  arises,
or  hence  arises  mainly,  the  difficulty  which  I  now  am  consider-
ing :  a  difficulty  'incident  to  the  application  of  law,  and  not  to
the  creation  of  law  by  judicial  or  direct  legislation.

In  order  to  an  analysis  of  the  difficulty  which  I  now  am
considering,  we  will  suppose  that  the  rule  A  is  not  perfectly
definite;  or  (what  is  the  same  thing  expressed  in  a  different
form)  that  the  essence  of  the  class  of  cases  which  A  was  intended
to  govern  is  not  marked  by  A  with  perfect  exactness.  Further,
we  will  suppose  that  the  rule  B,  with  the  essence  of  the  class
of  cases  which  B  was  intended  to  govern,  is  in  the  same  plight  of
uncertainty.  Moreover,  we  will  suppose  that  the  case  x  demands
judicial  decision :  that  x  in  certain  respects  bears  a  likeness  to
the  cases  which  seem  to  be  governed  by  A ;  but  that  x  in  oth»
respects  bears  a  likeness  to  the  cases  which  seem  to  be  governed
by  B.  Lastly,  I  will  suppose  that  the  judge,  distracted  by  the  two
likenesses,  doubts  whether  A  or  B  be  the  rule  applicable  to  a

Now,  the  difficulty  which  stays  the  judge  from  applying  the
law  to  the  fact,  may  be  called  (in  metaphorical  language) '  a
competition  of  opposite  analogies.'  For  the  likeness  of  jj  to  the
cases  which  seemingly  are  governed  by  A,  and  the  likeness  of
X  to  the  cases  which  seemingly  are  governed  by  B,  may  be
deemed  two  opposite  suitors  contending  for  the  preference  of  the
judge :  the  former  entreating  the  judge  to  decide  x  by  A,  and
the  latter  imploring  the  judge  to  resolve  x  by  B.

The  difficulty  arises,  however,  from  the  indefiniteness  of  the
two  rules.  For  if  the  rule  A  be  the  rule  applicable  to  x  (or  if
the  rule  B  be  the  rule  applicable  to  ^),  .r,  in  respect  of  A  (or  /,
in  respect  of  B),  is  in  the  following  double  predicament  It  has
cdl  the  positive  essentials  possessed  by  cases  of  the  class  which
the  rule  was  intended  to  govern :  And,  moreover,  it  has  <w
property  or  character  through  which  it  differs  from  those  cases
essentially  or  materially :  that  is  to  say,  through  which  it  differs
from  those  cases  in  such  wise  and  degree  as  render  a  common
rule  inapplicable  to  it  and  them.

Consequently,  if  the  rules  A  and  B  be  perfectly  definite,  and
the  classes  of  cases  which  they  govern  be  therefore  perfectly
definite,  the  judge  can  arrive  with  certainty  at  one  of  the  follow-
ing conclusions :  namely,  that  a;  is  in  that  predicament  in  respect
of  the  rule  A,  and  therefore  must  be  solved  by  A ;  or  that  x  is


Interpretation.  999

i  that  predicament  in  respect  of  the  rule  B,  and  therefore  must
B  solved  by  B ;  or  that  x  is  7U)t  in  that  predicament  in  respect
I  either  of  those  rules,  and  therefore  must  be  solved  by  a  third,
:  a  third  that  applies  may  be  found.  The  difficulty  arises,
berefore,  from  the  indefiniteness  of  the  two  rules ;  and  is  rather
competition  or  conflict  of  those  indefinite  rules  than  of  the
pposite  analogies  of  x  to  the  cases  of  the  indefinite  classes.

To  the  foregoing  analysis  of  the  difficulty  which  I  now  am
onsidering,  I  append  the  following  explanations : — To  render
ay  supposed  example  as  simple  as  possible,  I  have  imagined
bat  the  indefinite  rules  which  strive  for  the  preference  of  the
udge  are  only  two.  But,  though  a  greater  number  of  such
'miles  strive  for  the  preference  of  the  judge,  the  hindrance  to  the
application  of  the  law  is  substantially  the  one  which  I  have
Lualysed.  The  greater,  however,  is  the  number  of  the  indefinite
Lnd  conflicting  rules,  the  greater,  of  course,  is  his  difficulty.  The
greater,  of  course,  is  his  difficulty  in  subsuming  the  case  before
:uni  under  the  appropriate  nile ;  or  in  finding  that  the  case
iiefore  him  is  embraced  by  none  of  the  rules  of  which  the  law
-liat  he  administers  is  actually  composed.

Although  it  arises  more  frequently  from  a  conflict  of  indefinite
rules,  the  difficulty  which  I  now  am  considering  (or  a  difficulty
essentially  like  it)  may  arise,  without  such  a  conflict,  from  a
aingle  indefinite  rule.  For  it  probably  has  happened,  where  a
rule  or  principle  is  indefinite,  that  some  judges  have  applied  it
:»  certain  specific  cases,  whilst  others  have  withheld  it  from
sases  essentially  similar  to  the  former.  In  other  words,  the  rule
has  been  applied  to  some,  and  withheld  from  other  cases,  though
all  the  adjudged  cases  are  of  one  description  or  category.  Now
if  X,  a  case  in  controversy,  be  of  that  description  or  category,  it
bears  a  likeness  to  the  cases  to  which  the  rule  has  been  applied,
and  also  a  likeness  to  the  cases  from  which  the  rule  has  been
withheld.  And  though  the  likenesses  are  identical  in  relation
to  the  various  cases,  they  yet  are  opposed  and  contending  in
relation  to  the  indefinite  rule :  one  of  them  inviting  the  judge
to  apply  the  rule  to  x,  and  the  other  suggesting  to  the  judge
that  the  rule  is  inapplicable  to  it.

But  the  difficulty  which  stays  the  judge  springs  from  the
indefiniteness  of  the  rule.  Supposing  that  the  rule  is  judiciary,
the  difficulty  implies  that  the  existence  of  the  rule  is  question-
able ;  or,  at  least,  has  been  disputed  by  the  judges  who  have
refused  to  apply  it.  For  the  rule  itself  is  made  by  decisions  (if
it  exist  at  all). Supposing  that  the  rule  is  perfectly  definite,  the


1000  Interpretation.

judge  may  determine  certainly  (if  not  easily  and  quickly)  how
he  should  dispose  of  the  case  which  awaits  his  judicial  solution.
It  surely  is,  or  it  surely  is  not,  of  the  class  which  the  rule  wm
intended  to  govern.

We  have  assumed  tacitly,  up  to  the  present  point,  that  die
competition  of  opposite  analogies  which  is  incident  to  the  applica-
tion of  law  8irises  exclusively  from  the  indefiniteness  of  a  ruk
or  rules.  But  it  may  possibly  arise  from  a  somewhat  differait
cause  :  namely,  the  inconsistency  vnJUr  se  of  several  definite  luH
or  the  intrinsic  or  self-inconsistency  of  one  definite  rule.  Or
(what,  in  effect,  is  exactly  the  same  thing)  it  may  possibly  spriag
from  the  inconsistency  with  which  such  rules  or  rule  have  been
administered  or  applied.  Of  two  cases,  for  example,  whid
belong  to  one  category,  and  which  therefore  should  have  beet
adjudged  by  one  and  the  same  rule,  the  one  may  have  been
decided  by  a  definite  or  precise  rule  and  the  other  by  a  definite
rule  essentially  different  from  the  former.  Or,  supposing  a  sinj^
rule  which  is  perfectly  definite  or  precise,  it  may  have  been
applied  to  one  and  withheld  from  another  case,  though  the  two
adjudged  cases  are  of  one  description  or  class.

Now,  on  either  of  these  suppositions,  it  may  happen  that  a
case  in  controversy  is  essentially  similar  to  the  cases  which  have
been  resolved  inconsistently. But,  assimiing  that  a  case  in  con-
troversy is  essentially  similar  to  those  cases,  it  bears  a  likeness
to  one  of  them,  and  the  same  likeness  to  the  other;  which
respective  likenesses,  though  identical  in  relation  to  the  cases,
are  opposed  and  contending  analogies  in  relation  to  the  rules  or
rule.^^ Consequently  the  difficulty  may  spring  from  the  incon-
sistency of  several  definite  rules,  or  from  the  intrinsic  incon-
sistency of  a  single  definite  rule. But,  though  it  may  spring
from  inconsistency  which  is  not  an  effect  of  indefiniteness,  it
commonly  springs  from  inconsistency  of  which  indefiniteness  is
the  cause :  that  is  to  say,  it  commonly  springs  from  the  incon-
sistency of  several  indefinite  rules,  or  from  the  intrinsic  incon-
sistency of  a  single  indefinite  rule. For  the  inconsistency  in
rules  which  is  not  an  effect  of  their  indefiniteness,  is  generally
an  evil  that  is  easily  corrigible.

Generally,  therefore,  a  system  or  body  of  law  is  kept  pass-
ably free  from  it  by  direct  or  judicial  legislation.  But  the
inconsistency  in  rules  which  is  caused  by  their  want  of  precision,

^'  If  two  cases  essentially  different  case  in  controversy  be  essentially  amil*r

have  been  decided  by  a  common  rule,  a  to  either,  it  is  essentially  different  from

competition  of  opposite  analogies  cannot  the  other,  and  not  essentially  like  it
arise  from  the  inconsistency. For  if  a


Excursus  on  Analogy.  looi

18  often  an  invincible  malady,  or  a  malady  diflBcnlt  to  heaL^  It
often  inheres  in  the  purpose  of  a  rule,  and  therefore  is  simply
incurable.  And  where  it  is  susceptible  of  cure  (which  far  more
often  is  the  fact),  it  can  seldom  be  expelled  from  the  system
without  a  solicitude  and  skill  which  lawgivers,  direct  or  judicial,
have  rarely  felt  and  attained  to.

It  appears,  then,  from  the  foregoing  analysis,  that  the  com-
petition of  opposite  analogies  which  is  incident  to  the  application
of  law,  arises  from  this :  that  a  rule  in  the  system  of  law  which
the  judge  is  engaged  in  administering,  is  inconsistent  with  itself ;
or  that  two  or  more  of  the  rules  which  actually  compose  the
eystem,  are  inconsistent  with  one  another.  It  appears,  also,
from  the  same  analysis,  that  the  rule  or  rules  are  commonly
thus  inconsistent,  because,  inevitably  or  otherwise,  it  or  they  are
indefinite ;  but  that  the  rule  or  rules  are  occasionally  thus  incon-
aistent,  although  it  or  they  are  perfectly  precise.

From  the  competition  of  opposite  analogies  which  is  incident
to  the  application  of  law,  I  turn  to  the  similar  difficulty  which
18  incident  to  judical  legislation.

{The  rest  wanting.)


EXCURSUS  ON  ANALOGY.

ANAXOGICAL  REASONING  AND SYLLOGISM.

.VING  analysed  the  equivocal  phrase  of  which  we  have  treated
in  the  text,^^  we  wiU  here  review  the  meanings  (or  rather  the
J)rincipal  meanings)  of  the  equivocal  term  which  it  involves:
Xiamely,  the  term  Analogy.

1.  As  taken  with  the  largest,  and  perhaps  the  most  current
of  its  meanings,  the  term  analogy  is  coextensive  with  the  term
likeness :  In  other  words,  it  signifies  likeness  or  resemblance  of
cmy  nature  or  degree.  The  process,  for  example,  of  reasoning,
"which  we  shall  scrutinise  hereafter,  may  be  grounded  on  a  like-
ness or  resemblance  of  any  nature  or  degree ;  and  whatever  be

•*  Rules  involving  degrees :  e.g,  libel,  applicability  of  an  uncertain  or  inconsis-
lunacy,  prodigality,  reasonable  time,  tent  rule  or  rules  to  a  given  and  known
l^asonable  notice.  These  are  hotbeds  of  fact  They  are  hardly  questions  of  inter-
competing  analogies.  The  indefiniteness  pretation  or  induction,  for  though  the
is  incorrigible.  A  discretion  is  left  to  rule  were  explored  and  known  as  far  as
the  judge.  Questions  arising  on  them  possible,  doubt  would  remain.
^and  all  competitions  of  an^ogies)  are  ^  See  Lecture  XXXVII.  aiUe,
questions  of  kw :  e,g.  they  regard  the


I002  Excursus  on  Analogy.

the  nature  or  degree  of  the  given  likeness  or  resemblance,
reasoning  which  is  grounded  upon  it  is  styled  reasoning  1^
analogy.  Moreover,  the  term  analogy,  as  borrowed  by  the
Romans  from  the  Greeks,  often  signifies  a  reasoning  which  is
grounded  on  a  likeness  or  resemblance,  instead  of  the  likeness  or
resemblance  whereon  the  reasoning  is  grounded.  And  analogy,
as  meaning  such  reasoning  (or  the  consequent  yielded  by  sudi
reasoning)  receives  from  the  Eoman  Varro  (treating  of  its
etymon  and  value),  the  following  extensive  definition :  '  Veritas
et  ratio  quae  a  simUitvdine  oritur/

2.  Between  the  species  or  sorts  which  are  parts  of  a  g(rm
or  kind,  there  obtains  a  resemblance  or  likeness  whereon  the
geniLs  is  built ;  or  (changing  the  phrase)  between  individuals  of
any,  and  individuals  of  any  other  of  those  sorts,  there  obtains
a  resemblance  or  likeness  by  which  they  are  determined  to  the
kind.  Moreover,  between  individuals  or  singulars  as  parts  of
any  one  of  those  species,  there  obtains  another  resemblance,  which
is  the  ground  or  basis  of  the  sort.  For  example :  Between  the
various  species  which  are  parts  of  the  genxis  animal  (or  between
individuals  of  any,  and  individuals  of  any  other  of  those  s^i^
there  obtains  a  resemblance  or  likeness  which  determines  them
to  the  genus  animal  And  between  individual  men,  as  belongiiig
to  a  sort  of  animals,  there  obtains  another  resemblance  which
determines  them  to  the  species  man.

The  resemblance  between  the  species  which  are  parts  of  a
genus  or  kind  (or  between  individuals  of  any,  and  individuals
of  any  other  of  those  species)  is  styled,  in  the  language  of
logicians,  geiieric.  The  resemblance  between  individuals  as
parts  of  any  one  of  those  species  is  styled,  in  the  language  of
logicians,  specijic.

Now  the  likeness  between  any  of  the  sorts  which  are  parts
or members  of  a  kind (or  between individuals of  any,  and
individuals  of any  other  of those  sorts) is  conmionly  contra-
distinguished, under  the  name  of  analogy,  to  the  likeness  be-
tween  individuals as  parts  of  any  one of  those sorta F«
example :  The  likeness  of  a  man  to  any  of  the  lower  animals,
as distinguished from  the  likeness of a  man to any  of  the
human  species,  is  commonly  called  analogy. Again  :  The  tern
intellect,  when  it  is  used  emphatically,  denotes  the  human  in-
tellect. But  between  the  intellect  of  men  and  the  intellect
of  the lower animals there obtains a generic resemblance
Accordingly,  the  intellect  of  the  lower  animals  is  styled  an
*  ancdogon  intellectfts :  *  that  is  to  say,  a  something  which  re-


Excurstis  on  Analogy.  1003

sembles  generically  the  intellect  of  the  human  species,  or  the
peculiar  and  pre-eminent  intellect  which  is  called  intellect  em-
phatically. Again :  In  relation  to  the  several  titles  from  which
they  respectively  arise,  an  ol)ligation  ex  contractu  and  an  ob-
ligation q;iuisi  ex  contractu  are  obligations  of  different  species.
But  these  two  different  species  are  parts  of  a  common  genus :
namely,  the  genus  of  obligationes  (in  the  sense  of  the  Eoman
lawyers).  Accordingly,  an  obligation  gv^asi  ex  contractu  (as  the
adverb  giuisi  imports)  is  an  analogon  of  an  obligation  annexed
by  the  law  to  a  contract.

It  follows  from  what  has  preceded,  that  when  we  denote
by  the  term  analogy  a  generic  and  remoter  resemblance  between
individuals  or  singulars,  we  make  the  following  suppositions
concerning  the  compared  objects:  First:  That  one  or  some
of  those  objects  are  parcel  of  a  given  class,  which,  for  the  pur-
pose in  hand,  we  deem  a  species :  that  is  to  say,  a  class  con-
sisting exclusively  of  mere  individuals  or  singulars,  and  not
containing  or  comprising  lower  or  narrower  classes.  Secondly :
That  the  other  or  rest  of  those  objects  are  not  of  that  given
species.  Thirdly :  That  all  the  compared  objects  are  parcel  of
a  given  genus  by  which  that  species  is  embraced.

3.  Two  or  more  objects  may  bear  to  another  object  (or
they  may  bear  respectively  to  several  other  objects),  similar
though  several  relations.  Thus,  A  may  be  related  to  a;,  as  -B
is  related  to  a; ;  or  A  may  be  related  to  c  (or  to  c,  d,  and  e),  as
B  is  related  to  a;  (or  to  x,  y,  and  z).  Now  where  several
objects  are  thus  related  similarly,  they  bear  to  one  another  a
likeness  lying  in  a  likeness  of  their  relations.  And  this  resem-
blance of  objects  lying  in  a  resemblance  of  their  relations,  has
been  named  by  Greek  and  Latin,  and  also  by  modem  writers,
analogy :  by  Latin  writers,  translating  from  Greek,  proportio.

Where  objects  are  allied  by  a  likeness  lying  in  a  likeness
of  their  relations,  the  objects  may  be  connected,  or  the  objects
may  not  be  connected  by  a  likeness  of  a  different  nature.
On  either,  however,  of  these  suppositions,  the  objects  are  parts
of  an  actual,  or  a  possible  genus  or  species,  built  on  the  likeness
of  their  relations.  For  a  likeness  of  objects  which  lies  in  a
likeness  of  their  relations,  as  well  as  any  other  likeness  con-
necting the  objects  with  one  another,  may  form  a  reason  or
ground  for  putting  them  together  in  a  class.

Of  the  analogy  or  likeness  of  objects  which  lies  in  a  like-
ness of  their  relations,  the  following  examples  are  specimens.
- — ^The  fin  of  a  fish  and  the  wing  of  a  bird  are  analogous  objects:


I002  Excursus  on  Analogy.

the  nature  or  degree  of  the  given  likeness  or  resemblance,  th(
reasoning  which  is  grounded  upon  it  is  styled  reasoning  bj
analogy.  Moreover,  the  term  analogy,  as  borrowed  by  tb
Romans  from  the  Greeks,  often  signifies  a  reasoning  which  i
grounded  on  a  likeness  or  resemblance,  instead  of  the  likeness  o
resemblance  whereon  the  reasoning  is  grounded.  And  analogy
as  meaning  such  reasoning  (or  the  consequent  yielded  by  sucl
reasoning)  receives  from  the  Eoman  Varro  (treating  of  it
etymon  and  value),  the  following  extensive  definition :  *  Verita-
et  ratio  qme  a  simUitvdine  oritur.'

2.  Between  the  species  or  sorts  which  are  parts  of  a  geim
or  kind,  there  obtains  a  resemblance  or  likeness  whereon  tb(
genvs  is  built ;  or  (changing  the  phrase)  between individuals  ol
any,  and  individuals  of  any  other  of  those  sorts,  there  obtains
a  resemblance  or  likeness  by  which  they  are  determined  to  tbe
kind. Moreover,  between  individuals  or  singulars  as  parts  of
any  one  of  those  species,  there  obtains  another  resemblance,  whicl
is  the  ground  or  basis  of  the  sort. For  example  :  Between  the
various  species  which  are  parts  of  the  genus  animal  (or  between
individuals  of  any,  and  individuals  of  any  other  of  those  sp(cm)
there  obtains  a  resemblance  or  likeness  which  determines  them
to  the  genus  animal. And  between  individual  men,  as  belonging
to  a  sort  of  animals,  there  obtains  another  resemblance  whid
determines  them  to  the  species  man.

The  resemblance  between  the  species  which  are  parts  of  a
genus  or  kind  (or  between  individuals  of  any,  and  individuals
of  any  other  of  those  species)  is  styled,  in  the  language  of
logicians,  generic.  The  resemblance  between  individuals  as
parts  of  any  one  of  those  species  is  styled,  in  the  language  of
logicians,  specijic.

Now  the  likeness  between  any  of  the  sorts  which  are  parts
or  members  of  a  kind  (or  between  individuals  of  any,  and
individuals  of  any  other  of  those  sorts)  is  commonly  contta-
distinguished,  under  the  name  of  analogy,  to  the  likeness  be-
tween individuals  as  parts  of  any  one  of  those  sorts.  For
example :  The  likeness  of  a  man  to  any  of  the  lower  animals,
as  distinguished  from  the  likeness  of  a  man  to  any  of  the
human  species,  is  commonly  called  analogy.  Again  :  The  tern
intellect,  when  it  is  used  emphatically,  denotes  the  human  in-
tellect. But  between  the  intellect  of  men  and  the  intellect
of  the  lower  animals  there  obtains  a  generic  resemblance
Accordingly,  the  intellect  of  the  lower  animals  is  styled  an
*  ancdogon  intellectfts : '  that  is  to  say,  a  something  which  re-


Excursus  on  Analogy.  iO(

In  truth,  when  it  is  said  that  a  litigated  case  is  analogous
to  another  case,  one  of  the  following  meanings  is  conunonly
imported  by  the  phrase.  It  is  meant  that  the  litigated  case
bears  to  the  other  case  a  specific  and  proximate  resemblance ;
and  that  the  former  ought  to  be  decided  on  account  of  the
allied  resemblance,  by  a  given  statute  or  rule  in  which  the
latter  is  included.  Or  else  it  is  meant  that  the  litigated  bears
to  the  other  case  a  generic  and  remoter  resemblance;  and
that  the  former  should  be  brought  or  forced,  on  account  of
the  alleged  resemblance,  within  a  statute  or  rule  by  which  the
latter  is  comprised :  that  is  to  say,  that  a  new  rule  of  judiciary
law,  resembling  a  statute  or  rule  by  which  the  latter  is  com-
prised, ought  to  be  made  by  the  Court,  and  applied  to  the  case
in  controversy.

In  any  of  the  meanings  which  we  have  reviewed  above,  the
term  analogy  signifies  likeness :  namely,  likeness  or  resem-
blance of  any  nature  or  degree ;  generic  and  remoter  likeness,
as  opposed  to  specific  and  proximate ;  or  a  likeness  of  several
objects  lying  in  a  likeness  of  their  relations.  In  any  of  the
meanings  which  we  shall  review  below,  the  term  analogy  de-
notes an  intellectual  process:  a  process  which  is  caused  or
grounded  by  or  upon  an  analogy  (in  one  or  another  of  the
meanings  which  we  have  reviewed  above).

1.  Analogy  denotes  the  analogising  of  several  analogous
objects :  that  is  to  say,  the  considering  the  several  objects  as
connected  by  the  analogy  between  them.

2.  Analogy  denotes  an  inference,  or  a  reasoning  or  argu-
mentation, whereof  an  analogy  of  objects  is  mainly  the  cause
or  ground.

The  nature  of  the  inference,  or  reasoning,  may  be  stated
or  suggested  thus.  Two  or  more  individuals,  or  individual
or  singular  objects,  are  allied  by  a  given  analogy.  It  is  known
(or,  at  least,  is  assumed),  before  and  without  the  reasoning,
that  a  given  something  is  true  of  one  or  some  of  these  objects.
But  it  is  not  known,  before  and  without  the  reasoning,  that
the  given  something  is  true  of  the  other  or  rest  of  these  ob-
jects. From  the  given  analogy,  however,  which  connects  these
objects  with  one  another,  the  following  inference  is  drawn :
Namely,  that  the  given  something  which  is  true  of  one  or
8ome  of  these  objects,  is  true  of  the  other  or  rest  Or  the
nature of  the  inference  or  reasoning  may  be  stated  or  sug-  i

gested thus : — A is  x  and  y  and  z. An analogy  or  parity
VOL.  n.  2  k


1004  Excursus  on  Analogy.

the  fin  being  to  the  fish,  in  respect  of  its  movements  through
the  water,  as  the  wing  is  to  the  bird,  in  respect  of  its  move-
ments through  the  air.  There  also  obtains  an  analogy  betweai
an  egg  and  a  seed :  for  the  egg  is  related  to  the  mother,  and
to  the  incipient  bird,  as  the  seed  is  related  to  the  generating,
and  to  the  inchoate  plant.  Where  several  l^al  cases  are
included  by  a  law  or  principle,  their  similar  though  several
relations  to  the  law  or  principle  which  includes  them,  make
them  analogous  cases.  Thus,  the  several  specific  cases  actually
comprised  by  a  statute ;  or  the  several  specific  cases  oompnaed
by  a  judiciary  rule,  carry  a  mutual  analogy,  or  a  mutual  parity
or  sequity,  in  respect  of  their  like  relations  to  the  statute  or
rule  of  law.

Again :  We  may  suppose  that  the  author  of  a  statute,
when  he  is  making  the  statute,  omits  some  class  of  cases  falling
within  its  reason.  Now,  on  this  supposition,  a  case  which  is
thus  omitted  and  a  case  which  the  statute  includes  bear  to
the  reason  of  the  statute  similar  though  several  relations.  And
in  respect  of  their  similar  though  several  relations  to  the  reason,
the  omitted  and  included  cases  are  analogous,  sequal,  or  pares.

But  here,  to  prevent  misconception,  I  must  add  the  follow-
ing remarks: — The  several  specific  cases  which  are  actually
comprised  by  a  statute,  or  the  several  specific  cases  which  are
comprised  by  a  judiciary  rule,  are  therefore  analogous  or  para:
for  the  respective  relations  of  the  cases  to  the  statute  or  nik
which  includes  them  are  similar  though  several  relations.

But  when  it  is  said  of  a  litigated  case,  that  it  bears  an
analogy  or  parity  to  another  case  or  cases,  it  commonly  is  not
intended  that  the  doubtful  and  litigated  case  is  surely  and
indisputably  included  by  a  statute  or  rule  in  question.  It
commonly  is  meant  that  the  litigated  bears  to  the  other  case
a  specific  or  generic  likeness ;  and  that  the  former  ought  to
be  decided  on  account  of  the  alleged  resemblance,  by  a  statute
or  rule  in  question  on  account  of  the  resemblance  alleged.  Or
else  it  is  meant  that  the  litigated  bears  to  the  other  case  a
specific  or  generic  likeness ;  but  that  the  former  ought  nd  to
be  decided,  although  the  resemblance  is  admitted,  by  a  statute
or  rule  in  question,  notwithstanding  the  admitted  resemblance.
Consequently,  the  asserted  or  admitted  analogy  of  the  litigated
case  to  the  other  is  not  an  analogy  or  parity  lying  in  a  like-
ness of  their  relations ;  or,  at  the  least,  it  is  not  an  analogy  or
parity  lying  in  a  likeness  of  their  relations  to  a  given  statute
or  rule  indisputably  includiag  both.


Excursus  on  Analogy.  1005

In  truth,  when  it  is  said  that  a  litigated  case  is  analogous
to  another  case,  one  of  the  following  meanings  is  commonly
imported  by  the  phrase.  It  is  meant  that  the  litigated  case
bears  to  the  other  case  a  specific  and  proximate  resemblance ;
and  that  the  former  ought  to  be  decided  on  account  of  the
alleged  resemblance,  by  a  given  statute  or  rule  in  which  the
latter  is  included.  Or  else  it  is  meant  that  the  litigated  bears
to  the  other  case  a  generic  and  remoter  resemblance;  and
that  the  former  should  be  brought  or  forced,  on  account  of
the  alleged  resemblance,  within  a  statute  or  rule  by  which  the
latter  is  comprised :  that  is  to  say,  that  a  new  rule  of  judiciary
law,  resembling  a  statute  or  rule  by  which  the  latter  is  com-
prised, ought  to  be  made  by  the  Court,  and  applied  to  the  case
in  controversy.

In  any  of  the  meanings  which  we  have  reviewed  above,  the
term  analogy  signifies  likeness :  namely,  likeness  or  resem-
blance of  any  nature  or  degree;  generic  and  remoter  likeness,
as  opposed  to  specific  and  proximate ;  or  a  likeness  of  several
objects  lying  in  a  likeness  of  their  relations.  In  any  of  the
meanings  which  we  shall  review  below,  the  term  analogy  de-
notes an  intellectual  process :  a  process  which  is  caused  or
grounded  by  or  upon  an  analogy  (in  one  or  another  of  the
meanings  which  we  have  reviewed  above).

1.  Analogy  denotes  the  analogising  of  several  analogous
objects :  that  is  to  say,  the  considering  the  several  objects  as
connected  by  the  analogy  between  them.

2.  Analogy  denotes  an  inference,  or  a  reasoning  or  argu-
mentation, whereof  an  analogy  of  objects  is  mainly  the  cause
or  ground.

The  nature  of  the  inference,  or  reasoning,  may  be  stated
or  suggested  thus.  Two  or  more  individuals,  or  individual
or  singular  objects,  are  allied  by  a  given  analogy.  It  is  known
(or,  at  least,  is  assumed),  before  and  without  the  reasoning,
that  a  given  something  is  true  of  one  or  some  of  these  objects.
But  it  is  not  known,  before  and  without  the  reasoning,  that
the  given  something  is  true  of  the  other  or  rest  of  these  ob-
jects. From  the  given  analogy,  however,  which  connects  these
objects  with  one  another,  the  following  inference  is  drawn:
Namely,  that  the  given  something  which  is  true  of  one  or
some  of  these  objects,  is  true  of  the  other  or  rest  Or  the
nature  of  the  inference  or  reasoning  may  be  stated  or  sug-
gested thus : — A  is  x  and  y  and  z.  An  analogy  or  parity
VOL.  II.  2  K


ioo6  Excursns  on  Analogy.

obtains  between  A  and  B ;  for  B  as  well  as  ^  is  2;  and  y.
We  know  (or,  at  least,  we  assume),  before  and  without  the
reasoning,  that  A  is  also  a.  We  do  not,  however,  know,  before
and  without  the  reasoning,  that  B  is  also  z.  But,  since  B  as
well  as  ^  is  0?  and  ^,  and  we  know,  the  reasoning  apart,  that
A  is  also  2,  we  infer,  by  analogy,  or  parity,  that  B  is  also  z.
In  short,  from  two  antecedents  or  data  which  are  known  m-
dependently  of  the  reasoning,  we  argue  or  proceed  to  a  con-
sequent which  is  unknown  without  it  From  our  knowledge
that  several  objects  are  connected  by  a  given  analogy,  aod
our  knowledge  that  a  further  something  is  true  of  one  or  sooe,
we  infer  that  the  further  something  is  true  of  the  other  or
others.

From  the  following  passage  in  Quinctilian,  it  seems  tbit  tte
Eoman  writers,  as  borrowing  a  term  from  the  Greek,  styled  Ik
reasoning  in  question,  analogy;  and  that  the  Boman  wnters
styled  such  reasoning  proportio  (sometimes  also  campantiij,
when  they  turned  the  Greek  expression  into  its  nearest  Iith
equivalent  '  An/dogice,  quam  proxime  ex  Graaco  transfeiflBte  i
in  Latinum  proportionem  vocaverunt,  haec  vis  est :  Ut  id,  q&A
dubium  est,  ad  aliquid  simile,  de  quo  non  quseritur,  referat;  nt
incerta  certis  probet' — Inst  Orat  L  L  c.  6.  We  have  alreadj
quoted  the  definition  of  the  term,  given  by  the  etymologist
Varro :  agreeably  to  his  definition,  analogy  signifies  the  conse
quent  yielded  by  the  reasoning  in  question,  rather  than  the
reasoning  itself.

But  though  the  reasoning  in  question  is  styled  analogy  (^
proportion,  it  is  styled  more  commonly  reasoning  by  analogy  or
else  analogical  reasoning  :  ratiocinatio  per  analogiam  or  argumntr
tatio  analogica.  It  is  styled  also  reasoning  by  parity,  and  sina
eguality  or  cequitg  is  tantamount  to  analogy  or  parity,  it  mi^t
be  styled  moreover  reasoning  by  equality  or  sequity.

And  here  I  may  remark  that  the  homely  phrase  to  liken  <ff
to  liken  one  thing  to  another,  is  equivalent  to  the  finer  phrase  to
reason  by  analogy  or  parity.  We  know  that  several  objects  are
like  in  certain  respects :  We  know  that  a  something  is  true  of
some  of  these  objects,  although  we  do  n^t  know  that  the  saine
is  true  of  the  others :  From  our  knowledge  that  the  former  and
the  latter  are  like  in  certain  respects,  and  our  knowledge  that
the  given  something  may  be  truly  affirmed  of  the  former,  we
infer  that  the  given  something  may  be  truly  affirmed  of  the
latter.  Now  here  in  homespun  English,  we  liken  the  latter  to
the  former :  that  is  to  say,  we  argue  them  like  the  former  in  one


I


Excursus  on  Analogy.  1007

or  more  respects,  since  we  know  them,  the  inference  apart,  like
the  former  in  others.


In  a  case  of  analogical  reasoning,  the  analogy  of  the  com-
pared objects  may  lie  in  a  resemblance  of  their  relations,  or  in
another  resemblance.  On  either  of  the  two  suppositions,  the
resemblance  may  be  specific,  and  comparatively  close  or  strong,
or  the  resemblance  may  be  generic,  and  comparatively-  distant
or  faint  In  other  words  the  objects  from  which  we  infer,  and
the  objects  to  which  we  argue,  may  be  parts  of  one  species :  or
the  former  may  belong  to  a  species^  parcel  of  a  given  genriSy  and
the  latter  to  another  species,  parcel  of  the  same  genits.  Whatever
be  the  nature  of  the  likeness  on  which  the  reasoning  is  grounded,
or  whatever  be  the  degree  of  the  likeness  on  which  the  reason-
ing is  groimded,  the  reasoning  may  be  called  with  propriety,
as  it  commonly  is  called  in  practice,  reasoning  hy  analogy  or
parity.

But  such  analogical  arguments  as  are  grounded  on  specific
resemblance,  and  such  analogical  arguments  as  are  grounded  on
generic  resemblances,  are  not  imfrequently  distinguished  by  the
following  antithesis  of  phrases.  An  inference  from  singulars  of
a  sort  is  grounded,  it  is  said,  on  eocperlencc.  An  inference  from
singulars  of  a  sort  which  is  parcel  of  a  given  kind,  to  singulars
of  another  sort  which  is  parcel  of  the  same  kind,  is  grounded,  it
is  said,  on  analogy.

For  example :  It  is  said  that  a  physician  would  reason  from
experience,  in  case  he  reasoned  thus :  *  Some  men  have  died  or
have  suffered  some  other  harm,  on  taking  a  certain  drug ;  there-
fore, other  men  will  die,  or  will  sufifer  a  like  harm,  if  the  drug
be  taken  by  them.'  It  is  said  that  he  would  reason  from  analogy,
in  case  he  reasoned  thus :  '  Some  animals  of  one  of  the  lower
sorts  have  died  of  a  certain  drug ;  therefore  men  will  die  of  the
drug,  if  it  be  taken  by  them.'

But  such  analogical  arguments  as  are  grounded  on  specific
resemblances  and  such  analogical  arguments  as  are  grounded  on
generic  resemblances,  are  vaguely  divided  by  a  difference  wliich
is  merely  a  difference  of  degrees.  There  is  not  the  opposition
of  natures  between  the  two  classes  of  arguments,  which  seems  to
be  expressed  or  intimated  by  the  foregoing  antithesis  of  phrases.
For  whether  the  likeness  be  specific  or  generic,  an  argument
raised  on  a  likeness  rests  upon  two  antecedents :  first,  the  like-
ness between  the  objects  from  which  we  reason  or  infer,  and  the
objects  to  which  we  argue; secondly,  the  given  and  further


1 008  Excursus  on  Analogy.

something  which  we  know  or  assume  of  the  former,  and  which,
by  analogy  or  parity,  we  impute  or  ascribe  to  the  latter.

Now,  whether  the  likeness  be  specific  or  generic,  each
antecedent  is  known  to  us  (either  directly  or  mediately)  by  or
through  an  experience  which  has  occurred  to  ourselves  or  others.
Consequently,  whether  the  likeness  be  specific  or  generic,  the
reasoning  is  built  on  experience,  and  also  is  built  on  analogy.
In  respect  of  either  antecedent,  the  reasoning  is  built  on  experi-
ence. In  respect  of  that  antecedent  which  consists  in  the  like-
ness of  the  objects,  the  reasoning  is  built  on  analogy  with  which
experience  presents  us.  We  know,  indeed,  through  experieooe
(helped  by  analogical  reasoning)  that  such  analogical  arguments
as  rest  on  specific  resemblances,  are  commonly  worthier  of  trust
than  such  as  rest  on  generic.  But  this  extremely  vague,  Hiough
extremely  important  difference,  is  merely  a  diflference  of  degrees.
Although  an  analogical  ai^ument  raised  on  a  stronger  resemblance
may  be  surer  than  a  similar  argument  raised  on  a  weaker  resem-
blance, the  natures  of  the  several  arguments  are  essentially  alike
or  identical.

We  will  divide  analogical  reasoning  into  two  principal  kinds.

As  concerned  with  matter  of  a  nature  which  we  shall  ei-
deavour  to  explain,  analogical  argumentation  (supposing  it  justly
conducted)  is  only  contingently  true :  Or  (changing  the  phrase)
the  something  which  is  true  of  the  object  from  which  we  reason
or  infer,  is  only  probably  true,  or  only  contingently  true,  of  the
objects  to  which  we  argue.

As  concerned  with  matter  of  another  nature,  which  we  shaD
also  endeavour  to  explain,  analogical  argumentation  (supposing  it
justly  conducted)  is  necessarily  or  certainly  true :  Or  (changing
the  phrase)  the  something  which  is  true  of  the  objects  from
which  we  reason  or  infer,  is  certainly  or  necessarily  true  of  the
objects  to  which  we  argue.

Analogical  reasoniag  of  the  former  kind  we  will  call  ana-
logical reasoning  concerning  contingent  matter.  Analogical
reasoning  of  the  latter  kind  we  will  call  analogical  reasoning
concerning  7iecessa.ry  matter.  We  incline  to  believe  that  the
latter  is  not  commonly  called  analogical  reasoning,  and  it  certainly
differs  essentially  from  analogical  reasoning  concerning  contingent
matter.  Accordingly,  we  have  hitherto  assumed,  in  treating  of
reasoning  by  analogy,  that  all  analogical  reasoning  concerns  con-
tingent matter.

But  to  this  we  shall  return  below.


Excursus  on  Analogy.  1009

[Analyse  analogical  reasoning  of  the  first  kind,  and  compare  it
with  syllogism  and  perfect  induction,  and  with  analogical  reasoning
(if  such  it  can  be  called)  which  is  concerned  with  necessary  matter.]


I  must  now  endeavour  to  distinguish  Contingent  from
Necessary  Truth.

Contingent  Truth  is  truth  not  inseparable  from  a  notion  of
the  object :  Our  belief  resting,  not  on  a  necessary  connection  of
truth  with  the  object,  but  on  experience  and  observation  (one's
own  or  others*)  of  their  invaluable  or  customary  conjunction:  such
as  the  experience  of  pleasure  or  pain  as  connected  with  objects
of  a  given  class :  Our  belief  or  expectation  of  future  conjunction
being  (at  least  after  experience)  proportioned  to  the  degree  in
which,  in  times  past,  conjunction  has  approached  to  invariable-
ness.  E.g.  The  death  of  men  is  expected  with  perfect  confidence ;
but  the  effect  of  a  drug  on  the  human  body,  or  of  an  object  on
the  human  mind,  in  the  way  of  pleasure  or  pain,  is  expected
with  less  confidence.  The  nature  of  the  belief  or  expectation
derived  from  past  conjunctions,  is  not  within  the  province  of  the
logician,  who  takes  the  facts  from  the  philosophy  of  the  human
mind  The  belief  or  expectation  seems  to  be  confident  before
experience,  and  to  be  afterwards  reduced  to  experience  ;  widened
by  analogical  reasoning  founded  on  generic  resemblance.  It  will
be  admitted  by  all,  that  our  belief  ought  to  be  conmiensurate
with  the  experience ;  e.g.  with  the  proportion  borne  by  individual
instances  in  which  the  conjunction  has  been  experienced,  to
individual  instances  in  which  it  has  not  Whether  our  belief  is
first  absolute,  and  then  proportioned  to  experience,  or  is  first
hesitating  and  gradually  proportioned  to  experience,  is  not  a
question  falling  within  the  range  of  the  logician.

In  ordinary  language,  contingent  truths  are  certain  or  prob-
able. As  opposed  to  necessary,  all  are  contingent  in  the  sense
above  explained ;  but,  according  as  truth  is  accordant  with  all
past  experience,  or  only  accords  with  past  experience  generally,
it  is  certain  or  probable.

A  contingent  or  probable  truth  does  not  necessarily  belong
to  the  object,  although  in  fact  no  object  of  the  sort  has  been
known  without  it.

Necessary  Truth  is  that  which  is  true  of  all  objects,  like
the  objects  argued  from,  by  reason  of  their  having  that  wherein
they  are  analogous.  A  necessary  efflux  of  that;  a  something
without  which  the  object  cannot  be  conceived  as  having  that.


I  o  I  o  Excursus  on  A  nalogy.

\c,g.  Triangles,  as  sucL  (Hobbes.)  Law  case  of  a  class,  as
such :  i.c,  as  abstracted  from  its  individual  peculiarities.  L^
consequence  true  of  it,  etc.]

In  all  these  cases  the  truth  seems  to  be  propriwni  or  property,
strictly  so  called.  It  flows  necessarily  from  the  essence  of  the
object:  i,e,  from  the  properties  (positive  or  negative  or  both)
which  make  the  object  to  be  of  the  class  to  which  it  belongs:
Although  it  is  not  itself  of  the  essence :  e.g,  equality  of  the  three
angles  of  any  triangle,  etc.

Or,  legal  consequence  deducible  from  a  case.


Analogical  Rea^soning  concerning  Contingent  Matter,

In  pursuance  of  the  order  suggested  above  we  shall  proceed
to  analyse  analogical  reasoning  concerning  contingent  matter.

1°.  Induction  ;  i.e.  analogical  reasoning  extended  to  all  other
objects  (or  other  objects  generally  and  indeterminately),  haring
the  given  analogy  to  the  object  or  objects  argued  from.  (CaD
it,  at  present,  imperfect  induction,  or  induction  simply ;  being
totally  dififerent  in  nature  from  what  is  commonly  called  perfect
induction,  and  to  which  we  shall  advert  below  in  conjunction
with  syllogism.)

2°.  Analogical  argument  not  involving  any  such  univeisal
or  general  illation;  but  regarding  one  or  some  individually
determined  singulars,  having  the  given  analogy  to  the  objects
argued  from.

This  latter,  as  opposed  to  induction,  may  be  called  particular
reasoning;  and  may  be  drawn  without  adverting  to  others
generally.  But  in  so  far  as  it  will  hold,  it  supposes  that  the
truth  appHes  universally  or  generally,  and  indeterminately.

The  degree  of  assurance  with  which  the  particular  conclusion
may  be  embraced  is  proportioned  to  the  approach  to  universalitj'.
E.g, :  A  has  x  and  y.  A  has  also  s.  B  has  x  and  y.  Ergo,  B
has  z.  But  why  ?  Because  all  objects  having  x  and  y,  ^
objects  generally  having  x  and  y,  have  z :  insomuch,  that  B  is,
certainly  or  probably,  one  of  a  number  of  objects  having  2.

This  is  what  we  do  when  we  attempt  to  state  the  grounds
of  our  inferences.  Also,  when,  in  confuting  others,  we  suggest
a  contradictory  case  or  cases.  Immense  importance  of  the
habit :  Most  people  being  apt  to  assume  from  a  few  cases  uni-
versally, and  then  to syllogise. This leads  me to  compare


Excursus  on  A  nalogy.  i  o  1 1

syllogism  as  concerned  with  contingent  matter,  and  particular
analogical  reasoning  as  concerned  with  the  same.

[Distinguish  analogical  reasoning  which  is  concerned  with  con-
tingent matter,  from  syllogism  and  perfect  induction,  of  which  the
matter  is  also  contingent.

Analyse  analogical  reasoning  (induction  and  particular)  concerning
necessary  matter,  and  compare  it  with  induction  (necessarily  perfect)
and  syllogism  (necessarily  concluding  absolutely)  as  concerned  with
the  sama]

In  analogical  reasoning  as  concerned  with  contingent  truths,
the  truth  or  probability  of  the  inference  depends  on  two
causes:  namely,  the  truth  of  the  two  antecedents,  and  the
invariable  or  customary  connection  of  the  second  antecedents
with  other  singulars  like  those  from  which  we  argue.  If  the
antecedents  are  true  aiid  the  conjunction  invariable,  the  inference
is  certain :  i,e  has  the  certainty  which  alone  can  belong  to
contingent  truth  (as  explained  above).

If  the  antecedents  are  true  and  the  conjunction  tvot  invariable,
the  inference  recedes  from  certainty  in  proportion  to  the  recess
from  invariableness.

[Give  examples  of  both  cases.]

All  analogical  reasoning  proceeds  from  a  singular  to  a
singular,  or  singulars,  or  from  singulars  to  singulars,  or  a  sin-
gular.  But  when  we  infer  from  singulars  or  a  singular  to  one
or  some,  it  is  usually  called  '  reasoning,'  or '  particular  reasoning/
When  from  a  singular  or  singulars  to  the  rest  of  the  actual  or
possible  class,  '  induction.'

[Give  example.]

But  in  every  case,  the  process  is  essentially  the  same.  For
the  confidence  in  a  particular  conclusion  depends  upon  the
approach  to  invariableness  of  conjunction :  ie.  upon  the  pos-
sibility of  an  induction  approaching  to  truth.  Many  inductions
are  founded  directly  on  an  analogy :  e.g.  What  is  true  of  one
of  a  species,  is  true  of  other  individuals.  But  this  again  rests
ultimately  on  experience.

It  appears  from  what  has  preceded,  that  reasoning  by
analogy  or  likeness  (of  any  nature  or  degree)  is  grounded  on
two  antecedents:  first,  the  likeness  between  the  objects  from
which  we  reason  or  infer,  and  the  objects  to  which  we  argue ;


I  o  1 2  Excursus  on  Analogy.

secondly,  the  something,  which  (the  inference  apart)  we  know
to.  be  true  of  the  fonner,  and  which,  by  analogy  or  parity,  we
impute  or  ascribe  to  the  latter.  But  though  these  two  ante-
cedents are  immediately  the  ground  of  the  inference,  the  inference
reposes  also  on  a  further  or  ulterior  basis.  For  why  do  we
argue  from  the  likeness  between  the  compared  objects  and  the
something  which  we  know  to  be  true  of  one,  or  some,  of  the
objects,  that  the  something  is  true  moreover  of  the  other,  or
rest  of  the  objects  ?  The  nature  of  the  ulterior  basis  on  which
the  inference  reposes  is  determined  by  the  nature  of  the  matter
with  which  the  inference  is  concerned.

In  [some]  cases  of  reasoning  by  analogy  the  truth  of  the
analogical  inference  (supposing  it  deduced  justly)  is  contingent^
or  probable :  that  is  to  say,  the  something  that  is  true  of  the
objects  which  the  just  inference  is  brought  from,  is  contingently
true  of  the  objects  to  which  the  inference  is  carried.  In  other
cases  of  reasoning  by  analogy,  the  truth  of  the  analogical  inference
(supposing  it  deduced  justly)  is  necessary  or  certain  :  that  is  to
say,  the  something  that  is  true  of  the  objects  which  are  justly
argued  /rom,  is  necessarily  true  of  the  objects  which  are  justly
argued  to.

Analogical  Beasoning  as  concerned  with  contingent  Matter,  rfis-
tinguishcd  from  Syllogism  and  perfect  Induction  as  concerned
with  the  same.

Whatever  there  has  been  of  reasoning,  as  meaning  process
from  known  to  unknown,  has  been  performed  by  an  analogical
argument  (an  induction),  by  which  we  obtained  the  major
premiss.

[Give  example.]

And,  moreover,  in  contingent  matter,  syllogism  is  apt  to
mislead.  It  rarely  happens  that  the  major  premiss  can  be
universal,  conformably  with  material  truth,  though  the  formal
truth  of  the  conclusion  depends  on  assuming  such  material
universality.

[Give  example.]

Since  then  syllogism  can  give  us  no  new  truth,  and  since  it
may  mislead,  what  is  its  use  ?

I  incline  to  think  that  the  important  part  is  not  syllogism.
But  terms,  propositions,  definitions,  divisions (abstracted  from


Excursus  on  A  nalogy.  ^013

lU  particular  matter)  are  all-important  It  is  a  great  error  of
nost  logicians  to  consider  these  as  merely  subordinate  to
(yllogism,  which  is  the  most  futile  part.  From  my  friend  John
Hill,  who  is  a  metaphysician,  I  expect  that  these,  and  analogical
"easoning  and  induction,  abstracted  from  particular  matter  (which
je  the  really  practical  parts),  will  receive  that  light  which  none
>ut  a  philosopher  can  give.  For  though  logic  is  a  formal  science,
jid  takes  its  truth  from  others,  none  but  a  metaphysician  can
letermine  its  boimdaries  or  explicate  it  properly.

[Necessity  for  illustrations  from  numerous  sciences. — Many  of
he  methods  seemingly  peculiar,  would  be  found  universal  or
;eiieral.]

A  something  equivalent,  or  nearly  approaching,  to  syllogism,
Iways  happens  when  we  state  in  our  own  minds  the  grounds
or  a  conclusion  in  a  particular  reasoning:  e.g.:

A  is  X  and  y.  A  is  also  z,  B  ia  x  and  y.  B,  ergo,  is  also
;.  But  why  ?  Because  all  singulars  being  x  and  y  are  also  e,
iT  singulars  being  x  and  y  are  generally  and  indeterminately  z.
[n  other  words,  we  can  only  infer  from  -4  to  5,  on  the  supposi-
ion  that  A  is  the  representative  of  a  whole  class,  or  of  singulars
generally  contained  in  a  class.  The  argument,  therefore,  must
)e  put  thus :  All  singulars  being  x  and  y,  or  the  singulars
jeneraUy  which  are  x  and  y,  have  z.  The  singular  or  singulars
brming  the  subject  of  the  inquiry  are  z.  Therefore,  certainly
)r  probably,  B  is  z.  And  this  would  be  much  more  convenient
ian  the  ordinary  syllogism,  which  assumes  in  the  major  premiss
i  universality  commonly  false  in  fact,  and  which,  therefore,  must
>e  denied  again  in  the  conclusion.  For  the  conclusion,  in  fact
)r  materially,  cannot  be  absolute,  unless  the  universality  assumed
n  the  major  premiss  be  materially  true.

[Use  of  syllogism  (or  analogous  process),  in  leading  us  to  review
grounds:  In  confutation: — reminding  antagonist  that  he  has  as-
sumed something  not  tenable.]

But,  in  fact,  we  never  syllogise,  though  we  perform  an
analogous  process.  We  run  the  mental  eye  along  the  analogous
objects,  and  if  we  find  them  contradictory,  etc.,  we  conclude
probably,  or  reject,  unless  we  find  special  reason.  Hence  Locke's
sarcasm.^

In  all  particular  analogical  reasoning  which  is  concerned
^th  contingent  matter,  the  truth  of  the  inference  (considered

^  See  '  Essay  on  the  Human  Understanding,'  vol.  ii.  c  xvii.  §  4.


i


I  o  1 4  Excursus  on  Analogy.

as  such),  depends  on  the  truth  of  the  antecedents  (and  on
something  else).  And  what  I  have  said  of  syllogism,  as  to  the
dependence  on  terms  and  propositions,  applies  to  perfect  induc-
tion. As  in  syllogism,  true  of  all,  true  of  every,  so  in  inducdon,
true  of  every,  true  of  all :  Vi  materice,  vi  fomuB  [materially  or
formally].  It  follows  that  by  syllogism  we  can  arrive  at  no
new  truth,  the  conclusion  being  involved  in  the  major  premisa
We  merely  affirm  of  one  what  we  had  affirmed  of  all,  including
one.  Or  we  merely  affirm  that  the  subject  of  the  conclusion  is
one  of  the  all,  of  which,  in  the  major  premiss,  we  had  afiSnned
the  predicate  of  conclusion.


Analogical  Reasoning  {Induction  anci  Particular)  as  eonoermi
vnth  Necessary  Matter.  The  Induction  necessarily  perfid.
Syllogism  as  employed  about  the  same  Matter,

Now  here  we  merely  reason  from  a  singular  to  a  singular,
as  in  the  case  of  contingent  truths.  But  the  argument  carries
with  it  all  the  apodictic  certainty  which  belongs  to  a  syllogistic
inference.

For  -4  is  a  and  h.  A  i&  also  x :  and  A  has  x  in  such  wise
that  every  singular  like  it,  in  having  a  and  6,  must  have  x.  B
is  analogous  to  -4,  in  having  a  and  b.  Therefore  -B  is  of  neces-
sity X.

It  is  manifest  that  this  is  equivalent  to  the  following  syllo-
gism. Every  singular  which  is  a;  is  also  z,  5  is  a  singular
which  is  X, Therefore,  B  is  also  z.

But  still  there  is  this  difference,  that  though,  like  a  syllogism,
the  inference  follows  formaliter,  it  also  follows  maierialiter.  So
that  the  cogency  lies  in  the  truth  of  the  antecedent,  and  not  in
the  relation  and  disposition  of  the  terms.  And,  on  the  other
hand,  it  differs  from  an  analogical  argument  concerning  a  con-
tingent truth.  For  the  antecedent  necessarily  imports  the  con-
sequent. Analogical  reasoning  is  generally  considered  as  beii^
conversant  about  contingent  matter,  and  therefore  I  have  so
considered  it.

[Futility  of  syllogism  in  these  cases.]

Much  of  the  certainty  ascribed  to  mathematical  reasoning
lies  in  the  truths  with  which  it  deals  being  of  this  class.  Or
at  least,  in  approaching  so  near  them  that  the  deviations  may  be
thrown  aside,  and  afterwards  allowed  for  in  the  way  of  limitation


Excursus  on  Analogy.  lo

»  the  inference.  This  is  also  the  case  with  many  of  the  truths
ith  which  lawyers  have  to  do.  And  hence  Law  {teste  Zeilmitz)
Luch  like  mathematics.  In  either  case,  the  cogency  arises  from
le  natiire  of  the  premiss..

[Eulogy  on  Law,  from  being  connected,  on  the  one  hand,  with
thics  and  Religion,  and  on  the  other,  not  less  fitter  to  form  the  mind
»  habits  of  close  thinking  than  the  most  abstruse  of  the  mathematical
dences.  Also,  to  exercise  the  mind  in  evaluation  of  evidence  regard-
g  contingent  truths.]

For  example :  Interpretation  of  part  of  a  statute  by  another
irt:  interpretatio  secundum  ancdogiam  scripturce  (so  called  as
Dplied  to  a  statute,  or  to  any  other  written  document).  Inter-
retation  of  a  statute  by  a  statute  made  by  the  same  legislature
\  pari  materid:  interpretatio  secundum  analoffiam  scriptoris
:enuine  interpretation).^

.  .  .  The  last,  an  inference  resting  in  speculation.  But
ten,  a  practical  consequence  built  upon  a  perception  and  com-
irison  of  analogous  objects ;  e.g.  simUis  simiiium  declincUio.

The  extension  of  a  statute,  etc.  ex  ratione  legis,  is  an  example
analogical  interpretation  (genuine).

Lower  animals  reason, — how  ?  The  process  of  inference
hich  they  employ  ought  to  be  called  reasoning.  They  also
•mpare  and  abstract,  as  a  necessary  forerunner  to  inference.

Description  of  perfect  induction.

The  same  remarks  apply.  The  consequent  is  contained  in
e  premiss.

It  follows  not  from  the  form,  but  by  reason  of  the  matter.
)r  because  A  and  ^  are  a;  and  y,  and  A  is  always  z,  it  is  not
ae  that  B  is  also  z.  Whatever  truth  there  is,  therefore  lies,
>t  in  the  form  of  the  reasoning,  but  in  the  intrinsic  truth  of
e  antecedents:  i,e.  because  the  antecedents  are  intrinsically
ue,  we  infer  the  truth  of  the  consequent.

In  syllogism  and  perfect  induction,  that  is,  in  formal  argu-
entation,  the  conclusion  follows,  ra;tione  formce.

In  material  argumentation,  the  conclusion  follows  m  mcderice.


Syllogism.
Endeavouring  to suggest  an  answer  to  this  pregnant  and

For  the  Analogy  of  Grammarians,  see  Stewart,  249,  250. Johnson,  '  Analogy.*


I o  1 6  Excursus  on  Analogy.

difficult  question,^  we  begin  with  discriminating,  as  sharply  and
clearly  as  we  QKD.y  formal  and  material  reasoning.  By  ^formal
reasoning '  (the  propriety  of  which  expression  will  appear  here-
after), we  signify  the  process  of  syllogism,  with  the  process  of
formal  indibdion.  The  nature  of  these  processes  (to  which  we
shall  revert  below)  may  be  indicated  briefly  in  the  following
manner.  In  the  process  of  syllogism,  a  narrower  proposition  is
extracted,  by  a  formal  and  necessary  influence,  from  a  larger  and
universal  proposition  which  contains  the  narrower  impUdtly:
In  the  process  of  formal  induction,  a  universal  proposition  is
collected,  by  a  formal  and  necessary  influence,  from  all  the
singular  propositions  of  which  the  universal  is  the  sum.

By  '  material  reasoning '  (the  propriety  of  which  expreasicm
will  also  appear  hereafter),  we  denote  analogical  reasoning  in
each  of  its  principal  kinds :  namely,  the  reasoning  which  yields
a  consequent  that  is  either  singular  or  partial,  and  the  reasoning
which  yields  a  consequent  that  is  either  imiversal  or  general
Of  the  difference  between  these  processes  (to  which  we  shall
revert  below)  the  following  is  a  brief  description. — In  eveiy
reasoning  raised  on  a  likeness  or  analogy,  the  analogical  infer-
ence proceeds  from  an  assumed  singular  or  singulars  to  another
singular  or  singulars :  that  is  to  say,  it  proceeds  to  one  or  more
of  all  those  various  singulars  which  are  connected  by  the  given
analogy  with  the  singular  or  singulars  assumed.  But  where  it
yields  a  consequent  which  is  either  singular  or  partial,  it  proceeds
to  one  or  a  few  of  all  those  various  singulars.  Where  it  yields
a  consequent  which  is  either  universal  or  general,  it  proceeds,
without  exception,  to  all  those  various  singulars,  or  to  all  those
various  singulars  with  more  or  less  of  exception.

We  venture  to  name  the  inference  which  is  merely  singular
or  partial  (or  which  yields  a  conclusion  or  consequent  that  is
merely  singular  or  partial),  reasoning  by  example.  For  it  seems
identical  with  the  process  which  logicians  denominate  exemplumj
and  which  they  describe  usually  in  some  such  words  as  the
following : — '  Argumentatio  in  qua  unum  singulare  ex  alio  colli-
gitur/  The  universal  or  general  inference  is  called  emphatically
induction,  and  is  usually  described  by  logicians  in  some  such
words  as  the  following : — '  A  singulari  ad  universale  progressia'
To  distinguish  it  from  the  formal  induction  which  is  a  necessary
induction  or  inference,  we  style  it  material  induction.  And  here
we  must  remark,  that,  in  treating  of  argumentation  of  any  of


^  The  question  asked  by  one  of  the *  What,  then,  is  the  use  of  syllogism
class  (apparently  Mr.  J.  S.  Mill),  viz., — S,  A,


V


Excursus  on  A  nalogy.  1017

the  above-mentioned  sorts,  we  always  assume  (imless  we  express
the  contrary)  that  the  inference  which  we  are  considering  is
perfectly  good  or  legitimate :  that  is  to  say,  that  the  consequent
has  all  the  truth,  in  nature  or  in  degree,  which  the  natures  of
the  reasoning  and  the  case  will  allow  the  reasoner  to  reach.

With  this  remark,  we  pursue  our  attempted  discrimination
of  formal  and  material  reasoning :  of  the  process  of  syllogism
with  the  process  oi  formal  indicction,  and  the  process  of  reason-
ing hy  example,  with  the  process  of  material  induction.

In  any  legitimate  syllogism  of  any  figure  or  mode,  the  pro-
cess of  argumentation  is  virtually  this. In  the  major  proposi-
tion, or  major  premiss,  we  affirm  or  deny  a  something  of  all  the
individuals  or  singulars  which  constitute  a  given  class. In  the
minor  proposition,  or  minor  premiss,  we  assume  and  affirm  of  a
number  of  individuals,  that  they  are  some  of  the  individuals
which  constitute  the  given  class ;  or  we  assume  and  affirm  of  a
single  individual,  that  it  is  one  of  the  individuals  which  consti-
tute the  given  class. In  the  consequent  proposition,  or  conclu-
sion, we  affirm  or  deny  of  the  subject  of  the  minor,  what  we
afiirmed  or  denied  of  the  subject  of  the  major.

Or  the  process  of  aijirmation  or  negation  which  we  perform
in  the  conclusion,  may  be  stated  more  clearly  thus :  What,  in
the  major,  we  affirmed  or  denied  of  the  all,  we  affirm  or  deny  of
the  singulars  or  singular,  which,  by  the  assumption  in  the  minor,
are  some  or  OTie  of  the  all.  Where  a  syllogism  is  affirmative,
the  process  of  argumentation  runs  in  the  following  manner :

*  Every  A  (all  A*s  constituting  the  given  class)  is  x.  But
every  B  ia  bxi  A:  that  is  to  say,  all  the  singulars  of  the  narrower
class  constituted  by  all  ^s,  are  some  of  the  singulars  of  the
larger  class  constituted  by  all  -4's. Therefore,  every  B  is  x!

'  Every  A  is  x.  But  some  ^s  (of  which  the  quantity  or
number  is  nx)t  determined)  are  -4*s ;  or  some  -ff s  (of  which  the
quantity  or  number  is  determined,  but  which  are  not  determined
individually  or  singularly)  are  -4*s :  or  one  B  (not  determined
individually)  is  an  -4.  Therefore,  such  some,  or  such  one,  are,
or  is,  X*

'  Every  Aiax,  But  these  or  those  (individually  determined)
Bs  are  A*s ;  or  this  or  that  (individually  determined)  B  is  an  A.
Therefore,  these  or  those  Bs,  or  this  or  that  B,  are,  or  is,  x.*

Where  the  syllogism  is  negative,  the  process  of  argumenta-
tion pursues  the  following  course : — '  No  A  is  x.  But  every  B
is  an  A:  that  is  to  say,  all,  etc.  Therefore,  no  5  is  a:.'  ' No  A
is  X. But  some  ^s  (of  which,  etc.)  are  A's ;  or  some  Ba  (of


I  o  1 8  Excursus  on  A  nalogy.

which,  etc.,  but  which,  eta)  are  -4*8 ;  or  one  B  (not,  etc)  is  an
A. Therefore,  such  some,  or  such  one,  are  not,  or  is  not,  x.'

*  No  -4  is  a^  But  these  or  those  (individually,  etc.)  jB's  are
A'% ;  or  this  or  that  (individually,  eta)  5  is  an  A.  Therefore,
these  or  those  -Cs,  or  this  or  that  B,  are  not,  or  is  not,  a:.*

It  may  be  gathered  from  the  foregoing  exposition,  that  the
conclusion  of  every  syllogism  lies  impliciUy  in  the  premisses ;
or  that  what  is  asserted  by  that,  is  asserted  implicitly  by  these.  |
In  the  process,  therefore,  of  syllogising,  there  is  not  reaUy  an
illation  or  inference.  Inasmuch  as  the  truth  in  the  conclusion
is  parcel  of  the  truth  in  the  premisses,  there  is  not  a  progres-
sion to  a  consequent  really  distinct  from  the  antecedents.
Beally  (though  not  formally),  the  process  consists  exclusively
of  two  assertions :  first,  that  a  given  something  may  be  said
truly  of  every  of  a  given  all ;  secondly,  that  every  of  the  in-
dividual objects  which  form  the  subject  of  the  minor  (or  the
single  individual  object  which  forms  the  subject  of  the  minor)
is  one  of  the  given  aU.

It  also  may  be  gathered  from  the  foregoing  exposition,
that  the  consequent  or  concluding  proposition,  as  being  tkt
consequerU  of  the  premisses,  follows  from  the  premisses  hy  Tta-
son  of  their  form :  that  is  to  say,  independently  of  any  truth
which  the  premisses  themselves  may  contain,  and  even  of  any
of  the  meanings  which  their  subjects  and  predicates  may  im-
port. Though  each  of  the  premisses  asserts  a  falsity,  or  thon^  ■
its  subject  and  predicate  signify  anything  or  nothing,  the  con-
clusion or  consequent  proposition,  as  being  the  consequent  of
the  premisses,  is  deduced  or  deducible  from  these  by  a  formal
and  necessary  illation.  '  Conclusio  a  praemissis  colligitur,  per
necessariam  et  formalem  consequentiam,  propter  legitimam
prremissorum  in  mode  et  figura  dispositionem.'  That  the  con-
clusion follows  from  the  premisses,  independently  of  any  of
the  meanings  which  their  subjects  and  predicates  may  import,
is  shewn  by  the  foregoing  examples ;  wherein  A,  B,  and  x,
may  signify  anything  or  nothing.

That  the  conclusion  follows  from  the  premisses,  independ-
ently of  any  truth  which  the  premisses  themselves  may  con-
tain, is  shewn  by  the  examples  following.  '  Every  animal  is
a  stone.  But  every  man  is  an  animal.  Therefore,  every  man
is  a  stone.'  *  No  animal  is  sentient  But  every  stone  is  an
animal.  Therefore,  no  stone  is  sentient'  Now  in  each  of
these  syllogisms,  the  consequent  proposition,  as  being  the  con-
sequent  of its premisses, is necessarily true; or (speaking


k


Excursus  on  A  nalogy.  i  o  1 9

xiore  accurately),  it  follows  from  its  premisses  by  a  legitimate
uid  necessary  inference.  In  the  former  syllogism,  however,
iJie  major  premiss  is  false ;  and  the  conclusion  inferred  from
ihe  premisses,  as  not  being  such  conclusion,  is  false  also.  In
bhe  latter  syllogism,  each  of  the  premisses  is  false;  whilst
bhe  conclusion  inferred  from  the  premisses,  as  not  being  such
conclusion,  is  true ;  but  since  the  premisses  are  false,  the  truth
of  the  conclusion,  as  not  being  such  conclusion,  has  no  con-
nection with  its  truth  in  its  quality  of  a  true  consequent.

In  short,  the  rationale  of  the  process  of  syllogising  may
"be  expressed  by  the  following  formula: — ^'A  something  may
be  said  or  predicated  of  every  of  a  given  all:  Every  of  a
nnmber  of  individuals,  or  one  single  individual,  is  one  of  the
||;iYen  all:  What  may  be  said  or  predicated  of  every  of  the
^^i^eii  all,  may  be  said  of  the  subsumed  every,  or  of  the  sub-
sumed one,  which,  according  to  the  subsumption,  is  one  of  the
gifen  alL'  It  is  manifest  from  this  formtUa,  that  the  truth
or  falsity  of  either  of  the  premisses,  or  the  significance  or  in-
significance, of  the  subject  or  predicate  of  either,  neither  affect
the  consequence,  nor  the  consequent,  to  which-  it  leads.  The
validity  of  the  consequence  or  inference  depends  exclusively
upon  two  data :  first,  the  unlimited  universality  of  the  afl&rma-
tive  or  negative  proposition  which  constitutes  the  major  premiss ;
secondly,  the  assumption  that  the  singulars  or  singular  which
form  the  subject  of  the  minor,  are,  or  is,  of  the  singulars  which
form  the  subject  of  the  major.  These  being  granted,  the  con-
sequent, as  the  consequent,  follows  by  a  necessary  consequence.

Various  singular  objects  are  connected  by  a  common  re-
semblance which  shaU  be  called  z:  and  by  reason  of  this
common  resemblance  they  constitute,  or  might  constitute,  a
given  species  or  genm.  But  of  every  of  these  various  singu-
lars, when  considered  singly  and  severally,  and  also  without
respect  to  the  actual  or  possible  class,  a  given  something,
which  shall  be  called  x,  may  be  affirmed  or  denied.  Now
what  may  be  affirmed  or  denied  of  every  of  these  various  singu-
lars, when  considered  severally,  may  also  be  affirmed  or  denied
of  every  of  these  various  singulars  if  they  be  considered  col-
lectively, and  as  forming  or  constituting  the  class.

Major  premiss :  Various  singulars,  including  A  and  B,  are
connected  by  y.  But  A  is,  or  is  not,  a? ;  -B  is,  or  is  not,  x :
And  every  other  of  the  various  singulars,  as  considered  singly
and  severally,  is,  or  is  not,  x.


1020  Excursus  on  A  nalogy.

Minor  premiss:  All  these  various  objects,  as  considered
jointly  and  collectively,  constitute,  or  might  constitute,  the
species  or  genus  Z.

Conclusion:  Every  singular  constituent  of  the  actual  or
possible  class  is,  or  is  not,  y.

It  is  manifest  that  there  is  no  illation.  That  what  is  true
of  every  of  the  objects  as  considered  singly  and  severally,  is
true  of  every  of  the  same  as  considered  jointly  and  collec-
tively, and  as  being  the  constituent  parts  of  an  actual  or
possible  class.

It  is  manifest  that  it  follows  by  reason  of  the  form.  For
let  the  major  or  minor  be  what  it  may,  what  is  true  of  erej
when  the  objects  are  taken  severally,  must  equally  be  true  of
every  when  the  objects  are  taken  collectively,  and  consideied
as  bound  together  by  a  class  or  common  nama  Or  that  which
is  true  of  every  unit  of  twelve  when  not  considered  as  fonn-
ing  a  dozen,  is  true  of  every  of  twelve  considered  as  foiming
a  dozen.


Notes  on  Codification.  102 1


NOTES  ON  CODIFICATION.

r  was  not  my  intention  to  publish  the  following  Notes  on  Codi-
cation,  nor  the  notes  on  Criminal  Law  by  which  they  are  succeeded
'hey  are,  as  the  reader  will  perceive,  mere  memoranda,  and  ap-
eared  to  me  too  incomplete  and  fragmentary  to  be  submitted  to  the
ablic  eye.

But  the  earnest  representations  of  more  qualified  and  more  im-
artial  judges,  as  to  the  substantial  value  of  these  hints,  have  in-
aced  me  to  lay  aside  my  scruples.

I  have  been  reminded  also  by  members  of  his  profession,  that
16  publication  of  these  Notes  is  now  peculiarly  called  for ;  and  that
iren  these  slight  indications  of  Mr.  Austin's  opinions  will  be  received
ith  interest  and  respect  by  all  who  are  labouring  in  the  difficult
eld  which  he  explored.  Though  nothing  can  be  further  from  my
iioughts  than  to  seek  in  the  circumstances  of  the  times  a  factitious
nd  transient  popularity  for  anything  written  by  him,  I  believe  I
ave  no  right  to  withhold  even  these  imperfect  contributions  to  the
dvancement  of  the  great  work  which  he  had  so  much  at  heart.

The  original  MS.  consists  of  two  sets  or  packets  of  Notes,  one
f  which  is  written  in  pencil.  The  repetitions  have  been  omitted,
nd  the  whole  arranged  under  the  heads  marked  by  the  author.  No
ther  alteration  in  their  form  has  been  attempted.

Frequent  reference  is  made  to  Lecture  XXXIX.,  Vol.  11.,  in
rhich  the  subject  of  Codification  is  touched  upon. — S.  A.


By  the  fortunate  recovery  of  the  latter  part  of  Lecture  XXXIX.,
s  printed  in  this  edition  from  J.  S.  M.'s  notes,  much  of  the  ground
overed  by  the  following  notes  is  anticipated.  As  the  following
lotes,  however,  were  printed  from  the  author's  own  MS.,  I  have
bought  it  best  to  reprint  them  here  without  alteration. — R  C.


The  question  of  the  expediency  and  practicability  of  Codi-
ication  is  double :  general  or  abstract,  and  particular  or
loncrete.

Considered  in  abstract,  the  question  will  not  admit  of  a
loubt.  As  a  practical  question,  it  is  particular,  and  may  ad-
nit  of  a  doubt.

Objections,  however,  have  been  urged  which  apply  to  Codi-
ication  generally. These I shall endeavour  to answer,  and

VOL.  II.  2  L


1022  Notes  on  Codtficaiion.

shall  afterwards  advert  to  the  particular  objections  to  codifica-
tion in  England ;  the  difficulties  to  be  surmounted,  and  the
course  which,  in  my  opinion,  ought  to  be  pursued.


All  law  is  statute  or  judiciary.  Consequently  all  codification
(of  existing  law)  is  resolvable  into  two  parts  :

1°.  A  re-expression  and  arrangement  of  statute  law :

2°.  An  extraction  from  cases  of  rationed  decidendi,  and  the
stating  them  as  general  rules  and  arranging  them :

3°.  A  conflation  of  both.

[Sorts  of  law  in  posse,  authoritative  treatises,  etc.,  must  be
codified  also,  if  really  having  the  effect  of  law.  The  characteristic
differences  of  statute  and  judiciary  law  lie  (as  I  have  shewn  in
my  Lectures),^  mainly  in  the  form  in  which  they  are  respectivdy
expressed.

The  interpretation  of  statute  law  and  the  peculiar  process
of  abstraction  and  induction  will  be  treated  of  hereafter.]

Admitting  that  codification  is  expedient  as  considered  gene-
rally or  in  abstract,  it  follows  not  that  it  would  be  expedient
here  or  there.

Dismissing  the  expediency  of  codification  in  particular  with
a  brief  indication  of  the  considerations  on  which  it  turns,  I  shall
confine  myself  to  codification  generally.


Order  of  treating  the  general  question  of  Codification.

In  considering  codification  in  abstract,  I  shall  consider,

First,  its  practicability :

Secondly,  its  expediency  :

Thirdly,  the  objections  (or  the  leading  objections)  which
have  been  advanced  against  it.

The  arguments  to  prove  its  practicability  and  its  expediency,
lie  in  a  narrow  compass;  although,  in  my  opinion,  they  are
perfectly  conclusive.

The  demonstration  of  the  nothingness  of  the  objections  occu-
pies a  considerable  space.

The  objections  which  I  shall  consider,  go  to  codification
generally ;  although  the  objectors  commonly  advance  them  with
reference  to  codification  here  or  there.

^  See  Lecture  XXXVII.  anU,


Notes  on  Codification,  1023


Practicahility  {and  Advantages)  of  Codification  {considered

generally).

It  is  possible  to  extract  from  particular  decisions,  rationes
*cidendi  ;  and  leading  principles  and  decisions.  These,  if  stated
.  abstract  (and  exemplified)  would  be  clearer  than  when  lying
.  concrete :  And  would  also  be  more  general,  abstract,  and
lequate,  being  so  expressed  as  to  apply  to  all  cases  falling
ider  them,  and  not  limited  to  the  cases  (with  their  accidents)
f  which  they  were  established.

The  induction  (previous  to  the  application)  of  the  ratio  de-
dendi  of  a  decided  case,  is  Codification  pro  tanto.

The  practicability  of  codifying  the  statute  law  will  not
Imit  of  a  doubt.  If  it  be  practicable  to  establish  general  rules
n  an  abstract  form)  one  by  one  and  without  system,  it  is  prac-
cable  to  establish  a  system  of  such  rules.  Tlie  consolidation
•  the  statute  law  is  an  admission  of  this  pro  tanto  ;  and  nothing
in  be  more  inconsistent  than  the  objections  raised  to  codification
Y  the  friends  of  consolidation.  For  they  object  to  the  former,
le  impossibility  of  viewing  completely  the  field  of  law.


Practicabilitg  {with  difficulty)  of  Codification,

Practicability  of  codification :

With  reference  to  such  part  of  the  law  to  be  codified  as  is
atute ;

To  such  as  is  judiciary.

Its  difficulty.

Difficulty  of  rendering  it  complete ;  of  rendering  it  con-
stent,  and  of  duly  subordinating  the  less  general  under  the
lore  general :

Of  extracting  definitions  and  principles  from  judiciary  law.

Great  evil  done  to  the  cause  of  codification  by  representing
as  easy.

JSvpediency  of  Codification,

The  expediency  of  codification  follows  from  a  notion  of  the
•aw ;  from  a  statement  of  the  respective  natures  of  statute  and
idiciary  law ;  and  from  the  bulk  and  uncognoscibility  of  un-
yrstematised  law.

It  is  better  to  have  a  law  expressed  ia  generals,  systematic.


1024  Notes  on  Codification.

compact  and  accessible,  than  one  which  lies  dispersedly,  buried
in  a  heap  of  particulars,  bulky  and  inaccessible.

Its  expediency  is  admitted  practically  by  treatises,  redac-
tions, etc. ;  many  of  which  are,  in  effect,  codes :  those  who  talk
loudest  against  redactions,  availing  themselves  of  them  in  prac-
tice. But  redactions  by  private  hands  are  not  equivalent  to
codes.

Tlie  expediency  of  codification  (in  a  particular  case)  must
depend  on  a  variety  of  considerations  :  especially  on  the  quantity
and  degree  of  skill  which  it  may  be  possible  to  bring  to  the
enterprise.

The  great  difficulty  is,  the  impossibility  that  any  one  man
should  perform  the  whole.  But  if  done  by  several,  it  would  be
incoherent,  unless  all  were  imbued  with  the  same  principles,
and  all  versed  in  the  power  of  applying  them.  The  great  diffi-
culty, therefore,  is  to  get  a  suflficient  number  of  competent  men
versed  in  common  studies  and  modes  of  reasoning.  This  being
given,  codification  is  practicable  and  expedient.

Peculiarly  technical  and  partial  knowledge  of  English
lawyers.

No  English  lawyer  is  master  even  of  English  law,  and  has,
therefore,  no  notion  of  that  inter-dependency  of  parts  of  a  system
on  which  successful  codification  must  depend.

A  code  must  be  the  work  of  many  minds.^^  The  project
must  be  tlie  work  of  one :  and  revised  by  a  commission.  The
general  outline,  the  work  of  one,  might  be  filled  up  by  divers.

All-importance  in  codification  of  the  first  intention.  Till
minds  are  trained,  it  will  hardly  succeed.  How  the  difficulty
is  to  be  surmounted.  Necessity  for  men  versed  in  theory,  and
equally  versed  in  practice  ;^^  or  rather,  of  a  combination  of
theorists  and  practitioners.  Necessity  for  preliminary  digests;
or  for  waiting  till  successful  jurists  and  jurisprudence  are  formed
through  effectual  legal  education.

Evil  done  to  the  cause  by  exaggerating  the  extent  to  which
law  may  be  made  accessible  to  the  laity.

^  *  Manner,  welche  der  Gesetzgebung,  — ( Ucber  die  NothtcendigkeU  eines  allfi-

und  insbesondere  der  allgemeinen,  ab-  7neinen  burgerlichen  Eechts  fir  Deufxh-

stracten  Gesetzgebong,  gewachsen  sind,  land.)

fibt  es  sehr  wenig,  selbst  im  gelehrten  '^  *  Mit  einem  allgemeinen  Gesetzboch

tande. Diess  darf  auch  nicht  befrem-  waren  dbagegen  Theorie  und  Praiu  in

den.  .  ,  .  Denn  eine  gute  Gesetzgebung  die  onmittelbarste  Verbindung  gebnicht,

ist  das  schwerste  unter  alien  Geschaften  ;  und  die  gelehrten  academischen  Juristen

»  .  .  die  Krafte  vieler  der  Ersten  mussen  wiirden  unter  den  Practikem  ein  Wort

vereinigt  werden,  damit  durch  eine  grosse  mitreden  diirfen,  wahrend  sie  jetzt  iiberall

Wechselwirkunc  etwas  Gediegenes  und  mit  ihrem  gemeinen  Becht  in  der  Lnit

Geriindetes  vollbracht  werde.'— Thibaut  hangen. '— Thibaut,  No(h,  etc


K


Notes  on  Codification.  1025

How  far,  and  how,  law  may  be  made  knowable  to  the  bulk
'  the  community,^

If  law  were  more  cognoscible  (in  respect  of  its  principles
id  ends)  to  the  bulk  of  the  public,  the  public  would  call  more
5criminately,  as  well  as  more  decidedly,  for  legal  reforms :
ould  support  good  innovations  and  scout  bad  projects  of
norant  quacks.


Effect  of  Codification  on  the  Character  of  the  Legal  Profession,

Law  may  be  made  accessible  (in  its  whole  extent)  to  lawyers.

Advantages  that  would  thence  ensue:  by  discharging  law
'  mere  rubbish,  and  simplifying  it ;  and  so  leaving  more  leisure
r  the  study  of  law  itself  and  its  rationale;  and  so  inviting
inds  of  a  higher  order  into  the  profession :

By  shewing  the  subordination  of  detail  to  principles,  and
lations  of  parts  to  one  another ;  and  so  rendering  the  rationale
'  law  manifest,  and  law  a  rational  and  interesting  study :

By  making  lawyers  complete  masters  of  the  body  of  law,
id  so  rendering  good  advice  cheaper  and  more  accessible ;  and
aking  local  judicature  practicable.

Without  local  judicature,  preliminary  examination  of  parties,
c,  good  administration  of  justice  is  impossible.

But  the  possibility  of  local  judicature,  etc.,  depends  in  part
1  substantive  law.

With  a  local  bar,  there  could  not  be  the  same  division  of
bour  as  at  present :  therefore  each  man  must  be  a  complete
wyer ;  and  that  he  may  be,  the  bulk  and  complexity  of  law
ust  decrease.

Floating  jurisprudence  must  be  reduced  to  the  least  possible
lantity.

Such  a  reform  in  the  law  as  is  here  contemplated  would
aprove  the  character  of  tlie  legal  i)rofession.  Through  im-
rovement  of  their  character,  would  lead  to  still  further  advances
legislation,  and,  generally,  in  ethics.

Tlirough  the  improvement  of  the  legal  profession,  chicane
ould  be  less  frequent.  The  morality  of  the  bar  and  of
tomeys  would  improve.  From  compactness,  simplicity  and
»gnoscibility,  mistakes  in  conveyances,  contracts,  etc.,  and,
merally,  in  extra-judicial  conduct,  would  be  less  probable  and
equent.

28  Thibaut,  Civil  Abkandl.  p.  423.


1 026  Notes  on  Codification.

Codification  of  existing  law,  and  innoyation  upon  tlie  sub-
stance of  existing  law,  are  perfectly  distinct ;  although  a  code
may  happen  to  be  wholly  or  partially  new  in  matter  as  well  as
in  form.

The  codification  now  contemplated  is  merely  a  re-expression
of  existing  law :  the  reduction  of  judiciary  into  statute,  and  the
arrangement  of  both  into  apt  divisions  and  sub-divisions.

[This  must,  however,  be  understood  with  some  limitations.
In  order  to  attain  the  simplicity  which  is  the  end  of  codification,
it  may  be  expedient  to  abrogate  certain  inconsiderable  rights.
E.g.  In  order  to  get  rid  of  tenures,  you  must  destroy  the  re-
verter to  the  mesne  lord,  making  compensation.]

A  code,  as  meaning  a  body  of  law  expressed  in  general
formidcc  arranged  systematically,  and  complete,  is  a  modem  idea.

The  term  *  Code,'  as  expressing  such  a  body  of  law,  and  the
term  '  Codification,'  as  meaning  the  reduction  of  an  existing
body  of  law  into  such  a  code,  are  not  expressiva


Expediency  of  beginning  \cith  a  Digest.^

Xo  harm  done,  though  imperfect

If  arranged,  as  nearly  as  might  be,  according  to  the  future
code,  it  would  be  a  preparative,  and,  if  well  done,  a  proof  of
practicability.

It  would  form  a  school.

The  difficulty  (perhaps  an  insurmountable  one)  would  Ue  in
the  plan.  The  plan  being  formed  by  one,  and  revised  and
extended  by  a  commission,  unity  in  detail  might  be  presented
by  the  superintendence  of  such  commission,^  as  well  as  by  the
fact  of  separate  authors  working  upon  a  common  plan.  Several
plans  might  be  presented  to  the  commission.

It  would  less  alarm  the  profession  and  give  notice  to  them
of  an  impending  code.

Necessity  of  conciliating  lawyers,  and  injustice  of  certain
attacks  upon  them.

A  Digest  ought  to  be  a  conflation  of  statute  and  judiciair
law,  arranged  in  relation  to  subjects  (and  without  relation  to
different  systems  of  equity,  etc.).  This  would  rouse  men's
attention  to  the  vast  quantity  of  equivalent  and  passive  rules,

'-*  It  will be obvious  to the reader  Comyn's  Digest^  etc

that  Mr.  Austin  employs  this  word  in  a  **  Example  of  Suarez  and  the  Pros-

totally  (litrerent  sense  from  that  which  sian  Code,
it  bears  when  applied  to  such  works  as


Notes  on  Codification.  1027

and  would  suggest  the  possibility  of  the  conflation  of  Law,
Equity,  etc.

Whether  Common  Law  and  Equity,  etc.,  ought  to  be  kept
distinct.

There  might  be  two  distinct  Digests,  one  a  statement  of  law
according  to  subjects,  the  other  of  law  according  to  jurisdiction.
A  Digest  would  serve  as  a  guide  to  a  future  code ;  and  to
partial  legislation  in  interim.

•

[Eemark,  that  no  reform  considerably  abridging  the  Law,  could
be  effected  without  a  minute  and  complete  survey  and  statement
of  it.]  ^

It  would  be  a  better  index  to  existing  law  than  at  present
exists ;  and  a  better  institutional  book.  [The  latter  is  indeed
partly  the  purpose  of  Digests.]

A  Digest  cannot  be  supplied  by  separate  and  imauthorised
hands ;  for  no  proportions  would  be  observed  in  the  parts,  nor
would  the  parts  (not  being  constructed  on  a  common  plan)
obviously,  or  even  really,  harmonise.

The  length  of  such  a  Digest  would  be  of  no  great  moment :
because  abstracts  and  tabular  views  would  serve  as  guides.

For  the  use  of  students,  a  systematic  Digest  ought  to  be
accompanied  by  an  historical  one.  An  historico- dogmatical
would  not  be  convenient  for  reference.

In  the  historical  Digest,  the  divisions  woidd  be  the  same  as
in  the  systematical,  and  Law  on  each  head  would  be  brought
down  to  the  system.  It  should  not  be  a  merely  external,  but
an  internal  digest ;  an  exposition  of  different  doctrines.

For  the  use  of  students,  Institutes  ought  to  be  compiled :
being  not  merely  abstracts  of  the  Digests,  but  containing  exposi-
tions of  the  principles  of  general  jurisprudence,  etc.

The  historical  Institute  might  in  this  respect  be  rendered
extremely  instructive :

E,g,  By  giving  comparative  views,  historical  and  dogmatical,
of  English  and  Eoman  law.

A  Digest  should  be,  perhaps,  composed  in  the  manner  of
an  analytic  and  demonstrative  treatise :  i.e.  the  rules  and
principles  should  be  extracted  from  the  statutes  and  decisions ;
and  that  such  are  the  rules  and  principles  which  the  statutes
and  decisions  establish,  shoidd  be  shewn  by  examination  and
reasoning  (where  necessary).

This  would  lead  to  length ;  but  that  objection  is  answered
already.


I028  Notes  on  Codification.

It  would  be  the  business  of  the  general  commission  to
abridge  needless  argumentation.

A  mere  extract  of  rules  and  principles  (not  in  the  words  of
the  original  authorities)  would  not  inspire  confidence :  would  be
the  proper  form  of  a  code  intended  to  supersede  existing  law.

Mere  extracts  of  generalities  from  authorities  would  be
liable  to  the  objections  made  above,  as  lying  against  Codes
and  Digests.

The  general  rules  and  principles  should  be  carefully  detached
from  tlie  inductions,  so  as  to  shew  the  law  in  general  terms,  and
prepare  the  way  for  a  code.


Necessity  for  a  standing  Law  Comviission  to  siiperv^ise  Ugidcdm..

and  work  new  laws  into  the  Code :

To  be  aided  by  suggestions  from  judges  and  other  practical
lawyers :  thus  combining  due  deliberation  and  comprehensive-
ness with  knowledge  of  actual  exigencies.

Also,  by  suggestions  from  theorists.

The  evils  in  the  mode  of  making  Statute  Law  mentional
by  Park^^  are  imaginarJ^


It  is  impossible  to  prevent  the  growth  of  judiciary  law ;  but
it  may  be  kept  within  narrow  limits.

The  decisions  of  the  Court  on  the  Code  would  not  be  more
uncertain  than  other  decisions.

Immense  superiority  of  judiciary  law  formed  on  a  systematic
whole,  to  law  of  the  same  kind  formed  on  an  undigested  chao?.
It  would  itself  be  no  more  than  an  interpretation  of,  and  com-
plement to,  the  code.

The  projected  code  might  be  extended  to  Ireland,  Scotland,
etc. :  codifying,  in  each  instance,  the  particular  or  local  law.
which  would  be  applicable  in  preference  to  the  code.  This  was
done  in  Prussia. Codification  ought  to  be  universal.


Ohjedioiis  to  Codification  considered  generally,

Obj".  1°.  That  a  code  is  necessarily  incomplete ;  and  cannot
provide  for  all  future  cases.

Supposition  that  judiciary  law  provides  for  cases  in  s^n>,
and  therefore  is  not  finitum  (see  Pandects,  ignorantia  juris)  and
knowable. Counter-supposition  by  Park.

'^  *  Contre-Projet  to  the  Huraphreysian  Code.* By  John  James  Park. 182S.


Notes  on  Codification.  1029

[Savigny's  triangle  is  not  a  deduction  of  unknown  from
known,  but  a  mere  subsumption  of  individual  under  general,  or
of  less  under  more  general.]  ^^

Answer. — Though  it  is  not  possible,  by  a  Code  (or  any  law)  to
provide  for  all  future  cases,  a  Code  is  less  likely  to  be  very  defec-
tive than  judiciary  law;  which  is  necessarily  timid  and  inadequate.

And,  at  all  events,  existing  law,  by  a  Code,  is  given  pure
from  particulars ;  whilst  the  comparatively  small  body  of  judici-
ary law  formed  upon  it  is  formed  on  a  compact  and  perspicuous
whole,  and  may  easily  be  wrought  into  it.

2°.  That  every  case  is  decided  by  the  joint  application  of
several  rules.

Ansiver. — But  this  applies  to  judiciary  as  to  all  law;  no
judicial  decision  being  applicable  to  a  concrete  case.  As  put
by  Portalis,  the  objection  shews  that  law  is  impossible.  And
in  the  case  of  well-made  statute  law,  the  rule  is  given :  nothing
but  the  labour  of  applying  it  remaining.

3**.  That  a  Code  is  unalterable  (or,  at  least,  less  malleable
than  a  body  of  law  formed  by.  aggregation).  Hence,  a  Code,  if
made  in  an  incompetent  age,  saddles  a  more  competent  posterity
with  its  own  vices.  And,  hence,  codified  law  does  not  adapt
itself  to  the  successive  wants  of  successive  ages  so  easily  as  law
made  bit- wise  :  it  will  perpetuate  the  defective  ideas  of  that  age,
and  retard  the  progress  of  society.

Answer. — The  reverse  is  the  truth,  on  account  of  the  natural
tendency  of  judicial  legislators  to  legislate  by  analogy ;  and  so
to  perpetuate  the  ideas  of  past  ages,  so  far  as  is  consistent  with
inevitable  change.

4°. Superior  malleability  of  Common  Law.

Ansiver. — This  supposes,  if  true,  uncertainty,  from  perpetual
alteration.  Park  makes  the  same  objection  to  judiciary  law.
It  is  not  inherent  in  any  law.

The  historical  School  of  Jurisprudence,  so  far  as  they  are
right,  concur  with  everybody.  Their  peculiar  views  of  the
value  of  history,  exclusive  of  philosophy,  are  wrong.^^

^  The jMwsage alluded to by Mr.  Orundsatze nenneii. Diese  heraus  zii

Austin  appears  to  be  this : — *  In  jedem  fiihlen,  und  von  ihnen  ausgehend  den

Dreyeck  giebt  es  gewisse  Bestimniungen,  innern  Zusamnienhang  und  die  Art  der

ans deren Verbindung zugleich alle  Verwandschaft  aller  juristischen  Begriffe

iibrige mit Nothwendigkeit folgen  :  und  Satze  zu  crkennen,  gehiirt  eben  zu

durcTi  diese,  z.  B.  dnrch  zwei  Seiten  un<l  den  schwersten  Aufgaben  unsrer  Wissen-

den  zwischenliegenden  Winkel,  ist  das  schaft ;  ja,  es  ist  eigentlich  dasjenige,

Dreyeck  gegeben. Auf  ahnlicher  Weise  was  unsrer  Arbeit  den  wissenschaftlichen

hat  jeder  Theil unseres  Rechts  solche  Character  giebt.' — Vom  Bcrvf,  cap.  iii.

Stiicke, wodurch die iibrigen gegeben  p.  22.
sind  : wir kbunen sie die leitenden ^  See  note,  p.  1037,  post.


I030  Notes  on  Codification.

[GoTemment  and  Law  as  they  ought  to  be  in  advanced  sodeties,
are  not  to  be  learned  from  the  imperfect  Institutions  of  barbarians.
The  circumstances  in  which  they  were  placed  were  different  from  our
own ;  their  ability  to  form  a  judgment  upon  the  institutions  best
adapted  to  their  own  circumstances,  were  not  so  great  as  our  own.

But  although  Legislation  must  be  bottomed  in  general  principles
drawn  from  an  accurate  observation  of  human  nature,  and  not  in  the
imperfect  records  called  history,  there  are  cases  in  which  historical
knowledge  has  its  uses.  /.«..*  To  explain  the  origin  of  laws,  which
are  venerated  for  their  antiquity.^  To  explain  much  of  the  law,
which  now  exists ;  and  to  enable  us  to  separate  the  reason  of  modern
times  from  the  dross  of  antiquity.

All  systems  of  law  have  a  common  foundation  in  the  common
nature  of  mankind ;  but  the  principles  which  pervade  them  all,  ait
fashioned  and  obscured  in  each  by  its  individual  peculiarities.

The  good  sense  of  legislators  and  judges  in  modem  times  is
always  obscured  by,  and  often  forced  to  bend  to,  the  nonsense  <^
their  predecessors.^  To  understand  Mansfield  we  must  study  Coke:
Justinian  is  not  to  be  understood  without  a  knowledge  of  the  nide
institutes  of  the  earlier  Komans.]

Law  (as  it  ought  to  be)  is  not  deducible  firom  principles
knowable  d  priori,  but  from  principles  which  must  be  obtained
(through  induction)  from  experience.  No  experience  of  actual
institutions,  independently  of  the  principles  which  are  obtained
by  experience  of  Human  Nature,  can  be  of  any  value.

5°.  A  Code  is  more  liable  to  engender  competitions  of
opposite  analogies,  than  a  body  of  law  consisting  of  judiciary
rules,  or  of  judiciar}'  rules  patched  with  occasional  statutes.

Ansivcr, — But,  as  has  been  shewn,^®  the  competition  (inci-
dent to  the  application  of  law)  is  merely  a  consequence  of  the
inconsistency  of  rules :  an  inconsistency  arising  commonly  from
their  indefiniteness.

The  argument,  therefore,  is  no  substantive  objection  to  codi-
fication, but  is  merely  another  argument  (namely,  that  a  code  is
necessarily  less  definite  than  a  body  of  judiciary  rules)  put  in
another  form.

The  very  question,  or  at  least  the  main  question,  betweeJi
the  advocates  and  enemies  of  codes  is  this ;  whether  a  code  or
a  body  of  uncodified  law  be  essentially  most  productive  of  a
competition  of  opposite  analogies  :  ix,  be  essentially  least  definite,
and  generally  least  coherent.

[Explain  what  is  meant  by  *  competition  of  opposite  analogies'
See  p.  632,  ante.']

^  See  Bentham,  Defence  of  Usury. »  Thibaut,  Versuche,  Nothuxndigleii,  ^

^  See  p.  641,  ante.


Notes  on  Codification.  103 1

6^  Tendency  of  codification  to  disturb  rights  and  duties
"cated  by  codified  (and  anterior)  law.

7**.  That  no  determinate  leading  principles  will  be  followed
)nsistently  by  makers  of  the  Code,  and  the  provisions  of  the
ode  will  therefore  be  defective  and  incoherent.

Answer, — This  is  only  true  of  incompetent  makers.

Objectors  to  Codes  sometimes  suppose  that  a  Code  must
)n8ist  of  insidated  and  incoherent  propositions.  E  contra^  one
:*  its  chief  merits  would  be  an  exhibition  of  dependencies.

If  formed  by  induction  and  extraction  from  an  existing
rstem  of  law,  it  would  possess  the  internal  organic  consistency
;tributed  to  law  growing  by  aggregation ;  and  would  render
lat  consistency  more  visible,  by  detaching  the  rules  from  the
mcrete  matter,  and  arranging  them  systematically.

8^  That  private  expositions  of  the  law  by  competent  hands
arve  all  the  purposes  which  codifiers  aim  at

That  in  an  age  having  such  hands,  and  therefore  alone
tpable  of  successful  codification,  codification  is  therefore
3edless.

That,  accordingly,  no  demand  was  made  for  a  Code  during
le  time  of  the  classical  jurists.

9**.  That  a  code  will  not  be  fitted  to  the  customs,  prejudices,
ants,  etc.,  of  the  community ;  nor  to  experience.

It  will  not,  like  judiciary  law,  be  a  mere  expression  of  anterior
istom.

Anstver. — This,  besides  being  false,  is  applicable  to  all  law,
.ve  judiciary,  and  statute  law  founded  on  custom.

10**.  That  the  defects  of  a  Code  being  more  obvious  than
lose  of  uncodified  law,  a  Code  would  give  greater  opportunities
r  chicane.

For  answer,  see  Lecture  XXXIX.^^

Further  answer :  The  argument  is  suicidal ;  for,  if  defects
e  more  obvious,  a  Code  must  be  more  simple,  compact,  and
telligible,  than  an  uncodified  system.

Defects  therefore  were  more  curable,  and  also  more  evitable
11  cured.

11°.  If  the  Code  could  be  constructed  with  ease,  it  woidd  be
ntemptible :

Difficulty  is  good,  because  the  labour  of  surmounting  it  is
udable.

Answer, — Unhappily,  an  easy,  and  therefore  little-worthy-of-
aise.  Code  is  not  practicable.

^  See  p.  679,  ante.


1032  Notes  on  Codification.

\T,  Its  efifect  in  annulling  and  disturbing  existing  rights
and  duties.

Answer, — ^This  has  little  application  to  a  codification  of
existing  rules.

It  has,  however,  some :  because  the  forms  of  existing  rules
would  be  modified  (or  the  Code  would  be  of  no  use)  and  the
equivalence  of  rules  in  a  new  guise  to  rules  in  the  old,  might
often  be  doubtful.

Old  rules  would  remain  in  force  with  regard  to  rights  and
duties  which  had  grown  up  under  them.

13°.  A  Code  (in  order  to  approach  to  completeness)  must
consist  of  rules  so  minute  and  numerous  that  no  man  could  leam
or  retain  them.

Impossibility  of  providing  completely  for  future  particular
.  cases :

Bulk  and  complexity  which  woidd  result  from  the  attemp
to  provide  for  them.

Ansioer. — Codification  ought  not  to  be  a  specification  of  casa,
but  a  series  of  rules  applicable  to  cases.

14°.  Objection  by  Park,  from  the  alleged  infinitude  of  rules.

Answer, — If  this  were  true,  law  would  be  impossibla

Perhaps  he  means  that  the  future  exigencies  requiring  new
laws,  and  consequently  the  new  law  required,  are  infinite

But  who  ever  imagined  the  possibility  of  constructing  a  code
which  should  provide  completely  for  all  future  times  ?

But  it  were  more  possible  to  provide  for  future  cases  by  a
code  than  by  judiciary  law.  Praetorian  law  is  praised  by  the
Digests  for  this  very  reason.  Inconsistency  of  Hugo  and  otheis
in  this  respect.^®

By  Park  the  objection  is  thus  answered : —

'  Supposing  that  which  is  impossible,  viz.  that  all  lawyers  in  this
country  were  equally  learned,  there  would  be  little  or  no  litigation,
compared  with  the  immense  multiplicity  of  transactions ;  because
almost  every  point  is  so  far  settled  or  influenced  by  decision,  that  in
ninety-nine  cases  in  a  hundred  they  would  all  be  of  one  mind.'—
Park,  Contre-Projety  p.  195.

According  to  this,  existing  law  Juts  nearly  provided  for  all
possible  cases :  and  whatever  of  uncertainty  exists,  arises,  not
from  the  incompleteness  of  the  law,  but  from  ignorance  1?
lawyers  of  its  provisions.

Consequently  a  reduction  of  this  law  to  a  compact,  system-

^  Merits  and  Defects  of  Statute  and  Judiciary  Law. See Lecture  XXXIX-
ante,  pp.  665,  678.


Notes  on  Codification.  1033

atic,  and  more  accessible  form,  would  remove  the  present  ground
of  uncertainty,  by  rendering  the  law  more  generally  known  by
lawyers.

But,  in  truth,  his  assertion  is  false,  and  contradicted  by  him-
self elsewhere.^^

A  Code  or  systematic  exposition  (if  well  made)  would  possess
all  the  advantages  pointed  out  by  Savigny,^  and  would  therefore
tend  to  make  lawyers  better  lawyers  than  now.

It  would  shew  the  subordination  of  the  detail  to  the  leading
principles,  and  the  relations  of  these  principles  and  detail  to  one
another  :*^  would  render  the  rationale  manifest,  and  positive  law
interesting.

In  a  code  or  statute  (if  well  made)  the  law  is  given.  In
judiciary  law,  not

The  difficulty  of  applying  the  same,  whether  law  is  statute
or  judiciary.

A  case  often  (or  always)  consists  of  various  parts,  and  cannot
be  decided  by  any  one  single  rule.

But  this  is  just  as  applicable,  whether  law  be  statute  or
judiciary.

The  objection  seems  to  suppose  (contrary  to  the  objector's
own  assumptions)  that  precedents  are  exactly  in  point,  instead  of
merely  furnishing  rules.

The  difficulty  really  consists  in  determining  the  rule  (if  any)
within  which  a  given  case  falls,  or  whether  it  falls  or  not  within
a  given  rule ;  and  in  conceiving  distinctly  the  case,  the  law,  and
the  relation  of  the  case  to  the  law.

But  this  proves  merely  that  lawyers  should  know  the  law,
should  be  capable  of  clear  apprehension,  and  be  good  logicians.

Assuming  a  code  well  made,  their  knowledge  of  the  law
would  be  more  perfect.  The  law  would  then  be  (as  it  was  to
the  Eoman  Lawyers  and  Lord  Coke)  completely  present  to  their
minds,  and  suggested  by  a  particular  case.


Objections  derived  from  the  defectSy  errors,  and  alleged  ill-success

of  actual  Cod^.

Admitting  the  defects,  errors,  and  (to  some  extent)  ill-success
of  such  Codes :

»  See  pp.  49,  203,  206,  222.  See  also, Thibaut,  Nothioendiykeit,  etc,

« Vmn  Benify  cap.  6.  p.  48.  pp.  425  to  431.

*^  Thibaut,  Vcrsuch^,  vol.  i.  p.  175.


I034  Notes  on  Codification.

Such  defects,  errors,  and  ill-success  prove  nothing  against
codification  generally ;  or  against  codification  in  any  particular
country  (including  countries  in  which  the  codes  in  question  were
compiled  and  have  obtained  as  law) ;  unless  such  defects  and
errors,  with  the  other  causes  of  the  ill-success,  were  necessai)',
and  not  accidental  and  avoidable.

Accidental  and  avoidable  causes  have  rendered  the  French
and  Prussian  codes  unsuccessful  to  a  considerable  extent ;  thougb,
after  all,  the  failure  of  these  codes  has  been  much  exaggerated.


Bruf  review  of  J^cstiniarCs  Compilations^  and  of  the  Frewk  cad
Prussian  Codes,  for  the  purpose  of  shewing  thai  the  iejid^
errors,  and  Ul'Suxxess  of  those  particular  compilations  were  owiMg
to  causes  not  necessai^y.


Justinian's  Compilations.

In  Justinian's  Codex,  statutes  and  decrees  are  mixed  up;
nay,  privUegia  are  mixed  up  and  confounded  with  rules  and
principles  made  for  general  application.*^

The  compilers  had  some  notion  of  the  necessity  of  defining
terms  and  principles  in  order  to  cut  off  all  reference  to  an-
terior law.

As  a  further  means  of  attaining  this  end,  they  left  in  much
historical  matter.

The  Code  and  Pandects  form  properly  the  intended  body  of
law ;  a  body  intended  to  be  complete.

The  Institutes  (a  book  for  the  use  of  students,  though  also
law),  were  derogating  from  the  Code  and  Pandects,  or  supple-
mental to  them.

The  Novels  are  mere  correctives  of  previous  compilations.

Much  of  the  Code  and  Pandects  consists  of  judiciary  law;
and  of  judiciary  law  detached  from  particulars  necessaiy  to
make  them  intelligible.

These  compilations,  therefore,  are  not  a  Code,  sensu  hodiemo.
They  are  a  body  or  heap  (without  scientific  arrangement)  of
statute  and  judiciary  law :  the  latter  so  given  that  it  must  be
gathered  by  guess  from  mangled  documents.

It  is  remarkable  that  the  compilers  felt  the  necessity  of
definitions  and  expositions,  omitted  by  the  French  redactors.

*^  Thibaut,  Aiislegwng  ;  Spangenberg, hetUigen  romisehen  lUchts. (On  the  order
Einleitung  in  das  r'&misch-Justinianische of  the  Code  and  Pandects.)
Ocsctzbuch. Mackeldey,  Lehrbuch  des


Notes  on  Codification.  1035

Their  (imperfect)  contrivances  to  render  a  resort  to  the  old
law  needless.

French  Code.

The  French  Code  contains  no  definitions  of  technical  terms
(even  the  most  leading) ;  no  exposition  of  the  rationale  of  dis-
tinctions (even  the  most  leading) ;  no  exposition  of  the  broad
principles  and  rides  to  which  the  narrower  provisions  expressed
in  the  code  are  subordinate.

Hence  its  fallacious  brevity.

Brevity  is  of  no  importance  except  as  it  tends  to  perspicuity
and  accessibility.

In  consequence  of  the  want  of  such  definitions,  etc.  (and  of
purposed  incompleteness  hereinafter  mentioned)  old  law  (or  a
body  of  jurisprudence  formed  upon  old  law)  has  been  appended
to  the  code.

[Such  definitions  are  practicable  (or  no  law  is  possible),  though
difficult ;  as  I  have  endeavoured  to  shew  in  Lecture  XXXIX.,  Vol.  II.
The  imperative  part  of  every  law  containing  but  a  small  portion  of
it,  definitions  and  expositions  are  absolutely  necessary.]

Inattention  to  a  due  settling  of  those  all-pervading  principles
and  main  partitions  or  distinctions,  upon  a  precise  conception
of  which,  consistency  in  execution  of  detail  depends.

Success  in  codification  (as  I  shall  observe  hereafter)  must
mainly  depend  on  first  intention  :  on  aptness  of  plan.

Haste  with  which  the  Projet  was  compiled.  Faults  arising
from  ignorance  and  haste  could  not  be  corrected  by  the  Council
of  State,  who  were  more  ignorant  still;  and  who  merely  ex-
amined, bit  by  bit,  articles  of  the  projet,  instead  of  examining  the
projet  as  a  whole.

Original  conception  as  to  matter  and  arrangement,  defective  :
a  defect  not  to  be  cured  by  discussions  on  the  plan  conceived.

Ignorance  and  incapacity  of  the  compilers;  Ignorance  of,
combined  with  servile  respect  for,  Roman  law ; — the  main  basis
of  the  code.  They  knew  little  besides  the  Institutes,  and  have,
therefore,  blindly  followed  them,  with  all  their  lacunar.  They
were  ignorant  of  the  most  fundamental  distinctions  (e,(/.  dominium
and  ohligatio).  This  last  is  a  proof  of  their  carelessness,  as  well
as  incapacity.  No  care  has  been  had  to  amend  the  code,  or  to
work  in  subsequent  decisions  and  statutes.

Separation  of  the  Code  de  Commerce  from  the  Code  Civil,  and
general  misapprehension  of  the  nature  of  the  distinction  between
jus  personarum  et  reruvi.


1036  Notes  on  Codification.

It  was  not  the  purpose  of  the  compilers  to  form  a  complete
Code.

Bad  as  is  the  French  Code,  slight  alterations  in  the  text
would  supersede  the  interpretative  decisions.


I


Structure  of  the  Prussian  Code,

It  is  not  loaded  with  precedents,  but  with  declaratory  laws,
provoked  by  particular  cases.  Such  laws  differ  from  the  judicial
decisions  of  the  Court  of  Cassation.

Consequent  necessity  for  letting  in  the  old  Gemeines  Bechi  to
explain  it.

No  care  has  been  had  to  work  the  Novels  into  the  code.

The  Prussian  Code  was  not  intended  to  be  a  complete  body
of  law,  but  merely  a  digest  of  the  common  and  subsidiary  law
where  local  law  obtained.

The  prcejiidicia  are  of  no  authority.

There  are  no  adequate  definitions  or  expositions  of  leading
terms  and  principles.

Subsequent  legislation  is  not  wrought  into  the  coda

The  applicable  Oemeines  Recht  consisted  for  the  most  part  of
Eoman  and  Canon  law.

Notwithstanding  these  acknowledged  defects,  all  practical
men  in  Germany  are  codifiers.

Eeasons  for  the  hostility  of  a  portion  of  the  professors  in  the
Universities."*^


Conclusions  from  the  Review  of  Codes,

First ;  That  their  defects,  errors,  and  partial  ill-success  were
not  the  results  of  necessary  causes.

Second ;  That  in  spite  of  such  errors,  etc.,  those  codes  are
better  than  the  body  of  law  that  they  superseded.


^  *  Am  wonigstcn  lasse  man  sich  aber
dadurch  irre  machen,  dasse  die  ganzliche
Umandening  unsere  biirgerlichen  Rechts
unter  den  ei^ntlich  gelehrten  Rechts-
kennern  vielleiclit  die  mehrsten  Wider-
sacher  findet.  Das  wird  stets  so  bleiben ;
und  jetzt  ist  es  gar  nicht  andcrs  zu
erwarten  :  .  .  .  .  fiir  kraftige  Umwal-
zimgen  wird  die  Mehrzahl  der  eleganten
Juristen  nie  gestimmt  seyn.  Keiner  von
ihnen  libersieht  in  der  Kegel  das  ganez
Recht ;  wenigen  von  ihnen  werden  die


Bediirfnisse  des  Volks  durch  Beobach-
tung  klar ;  und  die  machtiffe  Triebfeder
des  Eigennutzes  wird  keinen  in  6«-
wegung  setzen  ;  vielmehr  wird  es  immer
vortheilhafter  fiir  sie  seyn*  die  miihsam
eminffenen  kritisch-historischen  Schstze
in  gehbriger  Sicherheit  zu  halten,  nod

fegen  besscmde  Einrichtigungen  n
ampfen,  damit  ihnen  nicht  die  Pflicht
werde,  den  neuen  Menschen  anzoiiebes.
— Thibaut,  NoOiwendigkeU  $U,


I


Notes  on  Codification.  1037


(krndusiuym  as  to  Savigmfs  ArguTnents  fov/nded  on  such  defects,  etc.

Great  respect  is  due  to  the  opinions  of  Herr  von  Savigny,
which  no  man  feels  more  strongly  than  myself.

All  the  objections  which  I  have  noted  and  answered  above
are  advanced  by  him.

His  book  is  directed  against  codification  in  a  particular
country,  and  even  against  a  particular  scheme  of  codification  for
that  particular  country ;  but,  nevertheless,  many  or  most  of  his
arguments  apply  to  codification  generally.

The  objections  peculiar  to  him  are  these : —

1.  That  in  an  age  capable  of  producing  a  good  code,  a  code
were  needless,  the  want  being  supplied  by  private  expositors.

2.  He  asserts  that  during  the  ages  of  the  classical  jurists
(who,  he  admits,  were  competent  to  the  task),  no  want  of  a  code
was  felt

3.  That  a  code  makes  the  defects  of  law  more  obvious,  and
therefore  emboldens  knaves.

4.  That  if  a  code  were  easily  to  be  constructed  it  would  be
good  for  nothing.

To  this  I  answer,  that  codes  have  no  tendency  to  simplify
the  science  of  jurisprudence,  or  to  abridge  the  studies  of  lawyers.
They  have  a  tendency  to  discharge  it  of  rubbish.

The  study  of  csises  (as  exemplars  for  the  difficult  art  of
applying  rules)  would  still  be  necessary  to  lawyers,  though  a
code  were  introduced.

He  assumes  that  no  determinate  leading  principles  will  be
followed  consistently  by  the  compilers  of  a  code.

He  is  not  however  opposed  absolutely  to  all  codification.

He  is  an  advocate  for  a  code  which  should  include  all  but
future  cases ;  and  he  has  proposed  a  digest.  He  has  himself
suggested  an  important  argument  to  shew  that  the  main  diffi-
culty in  the  way  of  codification  is  not  insurmountable.  But  he
would  wait  (for  improvement)  till  better  jurisprudence  and  jurists
are  formed.

His  proposal  of  a  digest  is  inconsistent  with  his  main  reason
to  shew  the  inexpediency  of  codification  in  Germany.

His  opposition  to  Codes  is  the  effect  of  gelehrter  prejudice  in
favour  of  Eoman  law,  and  of  national  antipathy.

Nullity  of  his  Treatise  as  an  argument  against  codification
generally,  and  even  sis  an  argument  against  it  in  Germany,  the
proper  and  special  object  of  his  attack.

VOL.  n.  2  m


1038  Notes  on  Codification.

Note, — As  the  great  controversy  on  the  expediency  of  constrocting
a  Code  of  Laws  for  the  whole  of  Germany  is  frequently  alluded  to  in
the  foregoing  notes,  and  constant  reference  made  to  the  works  of  the
two  great  leaders  of  the  conflicting  parties,  it  may  not  be  superfluous
to  say  a  few  words  concerning  them.

After  the  deliverance  of  the  country  from  the  French  yoke,  the
minds  of  patriotic  Grermans  were  anxiously  employed  in  inquiries  into
the  causes  of  the  feeble  and  divided  resistance  made  by  their  coontij,
and  in  projects  for  strengthening  the  bonds  which  might  unite  the
several  States  into  a  well-compacted  whole.

Among  them,  was  that  of  which  Thibaut  was  the  ardent  and
eloquent  advocate.  In  his  Essay  'On  the  Necessity  of  a  genenl
Municipal  (or  National)**  Law  for  Germany,'  he  treats  the  constnic-
tion  of  such  a  body  of  law, '  clear,  precise,  and  adapted  to  the  requiie-
ments  of  the  time,' — as  one  of  the  first  conditions  of  a  strong  and
efficient  Confederation.

Thibaut  was  a  Hanoverian  by  birth,  and  had  studied  at  Gottingen,
Konigsberg,  and  Kiel,  at  which  latter  place  he  took  his  degree,  and
was  appointed  professor.  In  1802  he  had  a  call  to  Jena,  and  in  1805
he  was  invited  to  assist  in  the  reorganisation  of  the  University  of
Heidelberg.

Thibaut's  works  are  numerous  and  of  high  authority.*®  His  style
is  homely  and  familiar,  but  has  great  force  and  animation.  He  pro-
posed that  a  Collegium  or  Commission  should  be  nominated  hy  the
several  States,  and  he  maintained  that  by  the  co-operation  of  the
ablest  theoretical  jurists  (Professors  in  the  different  Universities),
with  practising  lawyers,  such  a  Code  of  Laws  as  above  descrihed,
applicable  to  all  Germany,  might  be  constructed.

The  most  illustrious  opponent  of  this  scheme  was  Savigny,  the
leader  of  the  so-called  Historical  School  (founded  by  Hugo  and
Schlosser) ;  whose  great  learning  and  acuteness,  combined  with  a
consummate  talent  for  exposition,  rendered  him  a  formidable  an-
tagonist.

In  his  youth  he  had  the  rare  advantage  of  being  able  to  travel
throughout  Germany,  France,  and  Italy,  in  search  of  unknown  or
neglected  sources  of  Roman  Law,  and  returned  laden  with  spoils  to
Marburg,  where  he  had  studied,  and  was  now  appointed  Professor.
In  1803,  he  wrote  his  Treatise  on  the  Law  of  Possession.*^  On  the
creation  of  the  University  of  Berlin  in  1810,  Savigny  was  one  of  the
first  teachers  appointed.  His  lectures,  especially  those  on  the  Insti-
tutes, together  with  the  history  of  the  Roman  Law  and  the  Pandects,
drew  crowded  audiences,  not  only  by  the  copiousness  and  importance

**  The  word  in  the  original  is  *  biirg-  lungen '  (of  which  Essays  the  *  Nothwen-

erliches  * — civil ;  but  civil,  as  applied  to  digkeit  etc ,  so  often  referred  to,  is  one).

Law, has  a  totally different meaning  and  the  *  System  des  Pandecten  Rechts,'

with  us.  which  is  regarded  as  his  capital  work.

**  The  principal  are — *Theorie der *•  'Das  Recht  des  Besitzes.' Of  this

logischen  Ausle^ng,'  *  Kritik  der  Feuer-  book Mr. Austin always spoke  with

bach'schen  Revision  der  Grundbegriffe  enthusiastic  admiration. It  has  bc«n

des  Strafrechts/  '  Civiliatische  Abhand-  translated  by  Sir  Erakine  Peny.


\


Notes  on  Codification.  1039

of  the  matter,  but  by  the  extraordinary  clearness  and  beauty  of  the
form.

His  celebrated  work,  *  On  the  Vocation  of  our  Age  for  Legislation,'
is  known  to  the  English  public  through  Mr.  Hayward's  translation.

The  discussion  on  the  expediency  of  Codification  was  carried  on
with  great  asperity ;  its  partisans  complained  that  they  were  unfairly
represented  by  the  leaders  of  the  Historical  School,  as  advocating  the
introduction  (or  rather  the  imposition)  of  an  entirely  new  body  of
Laws  (which  they  never  contemplated) ;  while  their  adversaries  dis-
claimed the  opinion  imputed  to  them — that  Law  should  have  no
other  source  than  a  historical  one.

In  one  of  the  Essays  contained  in  the  volume  which  has  been
frequently  quoted,  *  On  the  Influence  of  Philosophy  on  the  Exposition
of  Positive  Law,'  Thibaut  concludes  with  the  following  discriminating
and  impartial  statement  of  the  claims  of  the  contending  parties  :^'^ —

'  Nothing  is  more  to  be  wished  than  that  the  philosophical  and
the  elegant***  jurists  should  soon  cease  to  regard  themselves  as  two
hostile  parties.  Each  side  must  abate  somewhat  of  its  pretensions,
and  reciprocally  take  what  is  good  from  the  other.  Without  philo-
sophy there  is  no  complete  history ;  without  history,  no  safe  applica-
tion of  philosophy.  Both  must  unite  as  aids  to  Interpretation,  and
must  exercise  a  continual  influence  on  each  other.  The  jurist  who
aspires  after  perfection  will  therefore  endeavour  to  combine  profound
historical  knowledge  with  philosophical  views ;  for  the  historical  part
of  Jurisprudence  can  never  be  separated  by  a  sharp  line  from  the
philosophical.  In  each  are  gaps,  which  can  only  be  filled  by  the  aid
of  the  other.' — S.  A.

^  'Einflass  der  Pbilosophie  auf  die **  See,  for  the  use  of  the  term  *ele-
Aasle^nff der positiven Gesetze.' — gantia  juris,' p.  535,  aTi^
Tranfiulated  by  Mr.  Lindley.


1 040  Notes  on  Criminal  Law.


I


NOTES  ON  CRIMINAL  LAW.

INCONVENIENCES  OF  THE  PRESENT  STATE  OF  THE

CRIMINAL  LAW.

Inconyenienoes  of  the  Present  Common  Law.

Insufficiency,  bulk,  dispersedness,  and  general  uncertainty  of
the  authorities  from  which  the  Law  must  be  gathered.

1**.  As  to  Reports :

2®.  As  to  Records :

3^  As  to  the  Treatises  which  are  commonly  deemed  more
or  less  authoritative.

These  various  authorities  are  extremely  numerous,  and  also
lie  dispersed ;  insomuch,  that  no  lawyer  has  a  complete  collection
of  reports  and  treatises.

Much  of  the  law  contained  in  these  reports  and  treatises
has  been  repealed  by  statute  or  overruled  by  decisions.  Great
research  is  therefore  requisite  to  distinguish  living  from  dead  law.

Hence,  uncertainty.
^1  Generally,  there  is  no  mark  or  test  by  which  authoritative
decisions  and  authoritative  opinions  of  text- writers  can  be  suflBi-
ciently  distinguished  from  the  unauthoritative.

Uncertainty  arising  from  the  higher  and  lower  authority
of  the  judge  or  writer;  nature  of  the  report;  circumstances
under  which  the  treatise  was  published ;  &c.

Remarkable, — that,  in  practice,  the  decisions  of  Quarter
Sessions  are  not  authoritative.

Same  as  to  Irish  decisions.

Yet,  in  theory,  these  decisions  (Quarter  Sessions  and  Irish)
are  authority :  and,  consequently,  decisions  of  the  kind,  conflicting
with  decisions  resorted  to  practically,  might  be  hunted  out  and
produced.

Although  the  authorities  from  which  the  law  must  be
gathered,  were  not  bulky,  dispersed,  insufficient,  and  uncertain,
still  the  law  itself  would  be  obscure  and  difficult  of  access,  by
reason  of  its  being  latent  in  judicial  decision  [and  opinions
analogous  to  them].

Difficulty  of  extracting  principles  firom  decided  cases :  especi-


Notes  on  Criminal  Law.  1 04 1

lly  where  the  grounds  of  decision  are  not  sufficiently  apparent
x)m  Eeport  and  Record.

Owing  to  this  difficulty,  principles  are  applied  by  judges
midly  and  capriciously.

It  often  happens,  that  a  principle  is  not  applied  to  a  case
[early  within  it,  because  the  decided  cases  establishing  the
rinciple  do  not  tally  with  the  pending  case  in  immaterial  facts
Qd  circumstances.

Hence,  doubts  thrown  upon  the  principles  themselves.

Immaterial  facts  are  not  unfrequently  rendered  part  of  the
round  of  decision.  Decided  cases  are  not  treated  as  mere
vdices  to  the  principles. (6"^.)

Difference  between  the  construction  and  application  of
tatute  Law,  and  the  extraction  and  application  of  rules  of  law
.tent  in  judicial  decisions. (G^.)

Criminal  Statutes  are  construed  strictly.  Hence  the  dis-
*epance  between  statute  and  common  law  is  more  striking  in
iminal  law.

The  shape  of  a  statute  differs  essentially  from  that  of  a
idiciary  rule.

As  a  whole,  a  judicial  decision  is  not  a  precedent,  or  has  not
le  effect  of  a  law.

Difference  between  Interpretation  and  Induction.

Judiciary  law  lies  in  concreto.  Difficulty  of  extracting  it.
icety  and  uncertainty  of  the  process.

The  ratio  decidendi  is  often  conceived  and  expressed  by  the
idge  too  narrowly  or  too  broadly.  Hence  the  law,  as  expressed
or  the  ratio  itself  ought  to  be  deemed  the  law,  independently
■  the  expression  of  it),  is  often  too  narrow  (inmiaterial  circum-
ances  being  expressed  as  part  of  the  reason),  and  sometimes
\o  broad.

Much  of  present  law  is  founded  on  antiquated  notions :

Kg,  With  regard  to  the  subjects  of  theft  Looking  at  the
fence  as  conceived  at  present,  there  is  no  reason  why  things
hich  are  parcel  of  the  soil  should  not  be  deemed  subjects  of
le  offence  (if  capable  of  a  clandestine  removal).

[Maraudage. Prussian  Code.]

The  same  remark  applies  to  the  rule  as  to  domestic  animals ;
I  to  choses  in  action ;  and  as  to  value  of  subject :  as  to  goods
'  which  there  is  no  apparent  owner  or  party  entitled  to  posses-
3n ;  and  to  the  absurd  reason  given  for  absolving  the  wife  from
iminal  liability.


1042  Notes  on  Criminal  Law.

Obscurity  arising  firom  partial  adherence  to,  and  partial
departure  from,  these  antiquated  notions.  Hence,  Law,  not  a
law  founded  on  uniform  principles,  but  a  patchwork  of  laws
formed  on  inconsistent  principles  :

E,g,  Common  Law  rule  as  to  choses  in  action  only  partially
abrogated  by  statutes  (and  decisions).

Eule  about  valiie  exchangeable  (or  intrinsic),  still  retained
as  to  certain  animals.  Generally  overruled,  but  yet  retained
capriciously  in  certain  cases.

Partial  and  capricious  extension  of  the  definition  of  Larceny
to  cases  of  swindling  and  embezzlement  Larceny,  if  the  thing
be  let  out  to  hire  and  stolen  by  the  hirer.  Not  Larceny,  if  the
property,  as  well  as  the  possession,  be  parted  with.

Partial  conversions  of  taking  of  things  afiGixed  to  freehold
into  thefts,  by  statutes.

Hence,  not  only  inconsistency  and  consequent  obscnrity,
but  needless  multiplication  of  rules.  A  principle,  admitted  to
be  irrational,  is  maintained  with  exceptions,  instead  of  substi-
tuting one  uniform  rule.

In  so  far  as  law  is  judiciary,  this  partial  abandonment  and
partial  retention  of  antiquated  notions  is  natural,  or  neariy
necessary.  From  the  position  wherein  he  is,  the  judicial  legis-
lator naturally  legislates  by  analogy  to  the  old  law,  in  so  far  as
the  preservation  of  the  old  law  is  consistent  with  inevitable
change.  And  hence,  antiquated  principles  are  perpetuated  in
laws  after  the  grounds  for  them  have  ceased.

Circuitous  and  obscuring  modes  by  which  rules  founded
on  antiquated  notions  have  been  often  abrogated,  wholly  or
partially.

By  distinctions  founded  on  immaterial  differences :

E,g.  The  interval  between  taking  and  severance  makes
taking  of  an  immovable,  theft.

Obscurity  arising  from  the  frequent  extension  of  definitions
(through  fictitious  assumptions)  to  cases  which  are  not  properly
within  them,  but  are  only  related  to  cases  within  them  by  close
or  remote  analogies :

Kg,  Swindlings,  breaches  of  trust,  and  other  offences  not
properly  thefts,  are  brought  within  the  category  of  thefts  by
the  fiction  of  a  constructive  possession.


Notes  on  Criminal  Law.  1043

Legislation  by  Extension  of  Old  Eulbs  to  Cases

not  within  them.

According  to  the  original  and  rational  notion  of  theft,  a
iking  possession,  witJumt  the  consent  of  the  injured  party  (from
le  possession  of  the  injured  party),  knowing,  etc.,  and  with
itent  to  deprive,  is  of  its  essence.

But  it  is  extended  to  cases  in  which  the  injurer  obtains
ossession  wUh  consent  of  the  injured,  but  with  consent  obtained
Y  fraud.

In  order  to  bring  this  last  offence  (properly  swindling,  or
louterie)  within  the  definition  of  theft,  a  possession  is  feigned
I  the  injured  party,  although  he  has  parted  with  it

It  is  also  extended  to  cases  in  which  the  injured  party  has
:ven  up  possession  with  consent  not  obtained  by  fraud.  .

Also,  to  cases  of  finding  and  misappropriation.

Also,  to  cases  of  embezzlement,  where  there  is  no  delivery
f  the  injured  party.

Inconsistency,  as  well  as  obscurity,  arising  from  the  cause
L  question.  Since,  if  the  definition  ought  to  be  extended  by
tason  of  some  analogies,  it  ought  to  be  extended  by  reason
■  others.  Insomuch,  that  any  offence  of  any  class  might  be
trust  with  propriety  into  any  other  class:  since  all  offences
•e  related  by  analogies  more  or  less  remote.

It  ought  to  be  remarked,  in  justice  to  the  authors  of  the
Qglish  Law,  that  this  inconvenience  is  almost  inseparable  from
law  formed  gradually  by  Courts  of  Justice,  etc.

The  same  obscurity,  from  the  same  cause,  in  the  Boman
aw. [Pandects,  Book  xlviLL  passim.]

Has  not  been  avoided  by  the  compilers  of  the  French  and
russian  Codes :  though  they,  as  formers  of  a  system  created  at
ice,  had  none  of  the  diflBculties  with  which  the  English  Courts
'  Justice  were  embarrassed. {Q^)

Origin  of  fictions. Necessity  of  observing  analogy.*^

Definitions  and  rules  (owing  to  preceding  and  other  causes)
e  not  imfrequently  conflicting,  or,  at  least,  indeterminate :

Kg,  Several  and  inconsistent  definitions  of  theft  or  larceny :

Uncertainty  as  to  what  shall  amount  to  special  ownership.

Uncertainty  as  to  the  nature  of  the  intention  which  is  of
e  essence  of  theft.  The  word  felonious  (like  imlawful  or
iminal)  does  not  define  it,  but  merely  indicates  that  it  is  of
e  essence  of  the  offence :

«  See  Lecture  XXXVIII.  ante.


1 044  Notes  on  Criminal  Law.

Nature  of  the  criminal  intention  (or  knowledge)  which  is
•  of  the  essence  of  theft.

[Felonious — Animus  furandi, MalUia,']

Materiality  or  immateriaUty  of  liLcri  causd.

What  motive  is  a  lucri  causd.

Indifference  of  motive.  Larceny  is  the  taking  without
consent,  knowing,  etc.  And  unless  this  definition  be  abided  by,
this  offence  cannot  be  distinguished  from  various  other  offences :
as  malicious  damage,  embezzlement,  etc.

Indifference  of  motive,  shewn  by  rule  as  to  ei^change,  etc.

Uncertainty  of  this  rule.

Theft  or  Larceny  is  properly  an  offence  against  right  of
possession.^ If  not,  an  owner  could  not  steal  his  own  goods.

Consequently,  any  right  of  possession  as  against  the  taker
ought  to  suffice ;  yet  there  are  doubts  as  to  whether  such  right
of  possession  resides  in  certain  custodees,  etc.  [or  whether,  id
the  language  of  the  law,  they  can  be  deemed  special  owners].

No  right  of  possession  in  owner  (as  against  thief)  where  the
goods  are  hired ;  though  there  is  when  they  are  bartered.

Inconsistency  of  holding  taking  goods  not  to  be  an  ofifenoe,
where  the  purpose  is  merely  to  apply  them  to  some  tempoiaij
use.

Same  confusion  of  inducement  and  criminal  intention  as
noted  above  in  case  of  Iv/yri  causd.

Uncertainty  of  rule  as  to  finding  and  misappropriation.

Inconsistency  of  holding  bailee  generally  not  answerable
criminally,  and  yet  custodee  answerable ;  and  of  holding  bailee
answerable  where  bailment  is  determined.

Principles  obscured  by  being  often  couched  in  Latin  terms  not
generally  understood  and  not  unfrequently  misapplied ;  E.g,  Lucri
causd. Larceny y  instead  of  the  familiar  and  more  precise  thtfl

Larceny,  or  latrodnium,  not  theft.

Inconveniences  of  the  Present  Statute  Law.

The  Statute  Law  is  not  of  itself  a  substantive  and  intelli-
gible whole,  but  a  mass  of  partial  supplements,  and  partial
correctives,  made,  pro  re  natd,  to  the  Common  Law.  (The
latter,  the  nucleus,)

Hence,  often  inconsistent.  It  lies  dispersedly  through  many
statutes  and  decisions  upon  them.

^  In  Scotland  the  style  of  Indictment as  *  the  property,  or  in  the  latqftii  jw-
for  Theft  explicitly  describes  the  goods session  of  C.  D.' — R.  C.


Notes  on  Criminal  Law.  1045

Hence,  bulk,  inaccessibility,  etc.

And,  generally,  it  is  productive  of  most  of  the  inconveniences
fore  pointed  out  in  the  Common  Law.

Wherever  the  ham  or  nudems  of  statute  law  is  a  judiciary
w,  the  former  is  irregular,  fragmentitious,  etc.


rCONVENIENCES FROM  THE  EXISTENCE  OF  TwO  DISTINCT BODIES

OF  Law;  one  Common  and  the  other  Statute.

As  the  Law  actually  stands,  the  law  relating  to  any  given
Fence  commonly  or  frequently  lies  through  many  dispersed
atutes  and  many  dispersed  reports  or  treatises.

Supposing  that  the  Common  and  Statute  Law  were  each
stematised  separately,  the  law  relating  to  any  given  offence
3uld  often  lie  in  two  bodies  of  law ;  instead  of  lying  in  one
apartment  of  one  body  of  law.

By  the  incorporation  of  the  two  statutes,  great  benefit  will
suit,  for  the  following  reasons : —

The  present  statute  law  consists  partly  of  definitions  of
fences,  with  their  punishments :  and  partly  of  the  punishments
offences,  leaving  the  definition  of  them  to  the  common  law :
id  it  were  expedient  either  that  it  should  not  be  necessary  to
ok  after  the  definition  of  an  offence  in  one  statute,  and  its
inishment  in  another ;  or  that  this  should  prevail  in  every  case,
id  not  in  one  only. The  like  observations  apply  to  process.

The  two  statutes  when  separate  must  be  often  obscure  and
rolix,  where  the  union  of  the  two  would  tend  to  brevity  and
teUigibility.

The  advantage  would  be  gained  of  treating  the  generalicb
f  law  or  procedure)  apart  from  those  portions  of  the  special
irt  to  which  they  are  applicable  indifferently :  E.g.  Misappre-
jnsion  of  right ;  accident ;  mistake ;  felonious  intent ;  principals
id  accessories.

Many  of  these  generalia  (in  existing  treatises)  are  either
nitted,  or  are  stated  under  some  head  devoted  to  some
irticular  class  of  offences  (thus  wearing  the  appearance  of
irticular  provisions). Kg.  Malice,  Negligence.

The  advantages  which  would  ensue  from  such  an  arrange-
lent  cannot  be  shewn  fully  without  a  scheme.  Such  scheme,
iirsued  considerably  into  detail  and  backed  by  reasons,  ought
►  precede  the  process  of  consolidating  and  combining.

As  remarked  above.  Codification,  and  Innovation  on  sub-
ance  or  effect,  are  distinct. The codification  here  recom-


1046  Notes  on  Criminal  Law.

mended  would  not  necessaxily  touch  substance  or  effect;  but
would  be  no  more  (necessarily)  than  a  re-expression  of  defini-
tions, and  an  arrangement  of  offences  under  apt  kinds  and
sorts,  etc.  But  though  the  refount  of  form,  now  recommended,
would  not  touch  necessarily  the  substance  or  effect,  still  it
might  not  perhaps  be  possible  to  render  it  altogether  so  good
as  desirable  without  small  changes  in  substance.  E.g.  Eeduc-
tion  of  rule  in  larceny  as  to  right  of  possession.

Advantages  of  combining  Common  and  Statute  Law

INTO  ONE  Statute  or  Code.

One  source  substituted  for  two.

Bules  stated  once  for  all,  instead  of  being  stated  partly  in
one  statute  and  partly  in  another.

Hence,  more  compendious.

If  common  law  were  reduced  into  one  statute,  and  statute
law  consolidated  in  another,  they  might  often  conflict  If
combined,  no  such  conflict.

If  common  and  statute  law  were  to  be  united  into  one
statute,  a  refount  of  the  present  form  of  the  law  would  be
expedient.

Necessity  of  considering  every  part  in  relation  to  the  lest,
and  not  as  detached.

Also,  of  defining  broad  principles,  subordinating  narrow
principles  under  them,  and  elucidating  by  examples.  The
actual  law  is  a  rich  mine  of  such  examples;  and  indeed,
generally,  is  more  objectionable  in  respect  of  its  form  than  ifl
respect  of  its  substance  and  effect.

If  the  two  statutes  were  incorporated,  or  even  if  they  were
kept  separate,  it  would  be  expedient  to  diminish  their  size,
and  at  the  same  time  to  render  their  contents  more  acces-
sible, by  redvAying  under  one  head  such  matters  as  are  con-
stantly recurring  and  are  separated  under  different  heads.

E.g,  Principal  and  accessory:  attempts  to  commit  of-
fences, etc.  etc.

If  the  two  statutes  were  incorporated,  or  even  if  they  wert
kept  distinct,  it  would  be  necessary  to  settle  with  great  atten-
tion the  arrangement  according  to  which  existing  statutes  and
existing  common  law  upon  particular  subjects  should  be  put
together.

E.g,  Whether,  in  the  general  statute  of  statute  law,  laroenj
should  come  next  to  forgery,  or  not  ? Whether  jury  process


Notes  on  Criminal  Law.  1 047

and  bail  should  be  near  each  other  ? What  the  statute  should
b^in  with,  what  end  with  ?

Inconveniences  of  the  Present  Law,  in  respect  to  the

Administration  of  Justice.

In  respect  to  the  administration  of  justice  by  the  judges
on  circuits,  etc.

Owing  to  causes  mentioned  in  preceding  paragraphs,  rules
aad  principles  are  applied  timidly  and  capriciously.

In  fact,  judges,  as  well  as  advocates,  are  guided  by  modem
and  unauthoritative  treatises.

Opinions  of  judges  on  doubtful  points  gotten  slowly.

In  respect  to  the  Administration  of  Justice  by  Justices

OF  the  Peace.

As  they  are  not  generally  professional  lawyers,  they  need
Jompendious  and  perspicuous  rules.  [Importance  of  pro-
ceedings prior  to  commitment]

They  are  necessarily  incompetent  to  the  delicate  task  of
extracting  principles  from  decided  cases.

DiflBculties  which  they  experience  from  the  multitude  and
iispersedness  of  statutory  provisions;  from  the  language  and
Norm  of  statutes;  from  the  obscurity  of  rules  of  construc-
ion,  etc.

Though  they  were  competent  to  the  administration  of  the
.aw,  they  have  not  access  to  the  host  of  statutes  and  autho-
rities through  which  it  lies.

In  fact,  therefore,  they  are  guided  by  modem  and  unau-
thoritative treatises.

Vast  extent  of  their  jurisdiction.

Tendency  of  the  present  age  to  administration  of  justice
by  local  or  district  courts.

Impossible  that  the  administration  of  justice  by  such  courts
should  be  passable,  imless  the  law  be  rendered  more  com-
pendious and  clear  than  it  is  at  present.

Inconveniences  of  the  Present  Law,  in  respect  to

Legislation.

Owing  to  the  bulk  and  dispersedness  of  statutes  and  autho-
ities,  innovations  on  existing  law  are  seldom  guided  at  present
yj  an  adequate  consideration  of  the  entire  legal  system. Hence,


1048  Notes  an  Criminal  Law.

for  the  sake  of  obviating  some  particular  evil,  greater  evil  is
often  done.

For  the  same  reason,  there  is  much  needless  legLslation.
For  it  often  happens  that  the  object  of  the  change  is  suffi-
ciently accomplished  by  actual  law  unknown  to  the  legisla-
ture :  or  might  be  accomplished  sufficiently  by  some  slig^
alteration  of  the  actual  law.

Inconveniences  of  the  Present  Law,  in  respect,  generally,
TO  THE  Community  who  are  bound  by  it.

If  the  foregoing  difficulties  are  experienced  by  the  Conits
and  Legislature,  A  fortiori^  by  the  community  at  large.

In  fact,  not  one  in  a  thousand  knows  the  law3  which  bmd
him.

U  such  are  the  difficulties  in  the  way  of  lawyers,  eta,  the
same  are  insurmountable  to  private  persons.

Accordingly,  scarce  any  but  professional  lawyers  have  any
knowledge  of  the  criminal  law,  although  of  necessity  they  must
be  bound  by  it.

PRAcncABiLrrY  of  reducing  Common  Law  into  Statute
Law,  and  of  consolidating  Statute  Law.

If  it  be  possible  to  extract  principles  pro  re  natdj  it  is
possible  to  extract  them  once  for  all,  and  to  put  them  in  the
form  of  rules.

The  difficulty  of  the  process  is  not  disputed.

The  practicability  of  consolidating  statute  law  is  admitted
in  practica  Indeed,  it  is  little  more  than  an  affair  of  ar-
rangement

Advantages  that  would  follow  such  Eeduction  and

Consolidation.

Advantage  of  having  the  law  relating  to  any  given  offence
collected  imder  one  or  two  heads,  from  numerous  sources,
through  which  it  now  lies  dispersed :

Of  having  it  in  a  cheap  (as  well  as  a  compendious)
volume.

Of  separating  living  from  dead  law.

Indeed,  a  mere  republication  of  actual  sources  (assigning
respective  weights)  marking  the  law  abolished,  would  be  <rf
itself  no  inconsiderable  good.


Notes  on  Criminal  Law.  1 049

No  desire  to  exaggerate  the  extent  to  which  Law  maj  be
made  generally  intelligibla  But  criminal  law,  for  the  most
part,  might  be  made  intelligible  to  any  man  of  average  capa-
city. And  this  is  the  most  important  advantage.

It  does  not  enter,  generally,  into  the  detail  of  rights :

(E,g,  Larceny;  which  is  properly  an  offence  against  the
right  of  possession.)

PossibiHty  of  defining  in  criminal  law  the  rights  and
duties  of  which  crimes  are  violations,  in  so  far  as  criminal
law  is  concerned  with  them,  without  going  into  any  such
detail:

E.g.  Without  going  into  any  detail  of  rights  of  property,
an  adequate  definition  of  the  right  of  possession  as  affected
by  theft  (which  is  properly  an  offence  against  the  right  of
possession),  malicious  mischief,  etc.,  might  perhaps  be  given.

Advantages  of  its  being  made  perfectly  intelligible  to
lawyers,  which  it  might  be.

As  being  more  accessible,  it  would  be  more  obvious  to  the
legislature;  and  therefore  much  crude  and  inconsistent  legis-
lation would  be  avoided.

Advantages  that  have  arisen  from  Peel's  Consolidations.

Such  Keduction  and  Consolidation  would,  at  least,

be  harmless.

Doubts  would  arise  on  application  of  law  thus  reduced
and  consolidated:  But  probably  fewer  than  on  application  of
the  present  law.

Pre-existing  law  would  furnish  ample  means  of  construc-
t^ion,  and  interpretative  decisions  might,  from  time  to  time,  be
incorporated  with  text.

[Eules  of  construction  to  be  framed,  and  to  be  xionsidered
as  peculiarly  applicable  to  the  Criminal  Code.]

By  submitting  the  statute  or  statutes  to  the  public  or  the
profession  before  they  were  passed  into  a  law,  many  of  the
causes  of  doubts  might  be  obviated.

Such  reduction,  etc.,  would  not  amount  to  a  change  in
the  substance  and  effect  of  the  existing  law,  but  would  simply
be  a  re-statement  of  the  existing  law,  in  an  orderly,  com-
pendious and  accessible  volume;  with  the  determination  of
points  confessedly  imcertain.

^  It  would  not,  necessarily,  have  any  retroactive  effect.

\  In fact,  it  would be a  substitution  of an authoritative


I050  Notes  on  Criminal  Law.

body  of  law,  for  the  unauthoritative  (and  often  defective)
treatises,  which  (as  we  have  already  remarked)  are  practically
the  guides  of  the  tribunals  in  the  great  majority  of  their
decisions.

Imperfections  of  these.

Though  never  so  perfect,  they  are  unauthoritative.
Expediency  of  Codification admitted practically  by  such
treatises,  etc.


Notes  on  Criminal  Law.  105 1


FRAGMENTS  OF  A  SCHEME  OF  A  CRIMINAL

CODE.


The Criminal [or Penal]  The Code [or Law] of

Code  [or  the  law  of  Crimes  and  Criminal  Process  [or  Procedure]
punishments].  and  Preventive  Police.


General  Part  [or  Part  I.]  : Particular  (or  Special)  Part,  or
Comprising the matters  Part  11.

[definitions, distinctions, rules,  Particularising  (or  specify-

principles, etc.) which apply  ing)  the  various  crimes  embraced
universally or generally: i.e.  by the intended Code; and
^hich have no exclusive or  assigning  respectively  to  those
ipecial  regard to crimes of  a  various  crimes,  their  respective
jiven  class,  but  regard  indififer-  punishments and other penal
^ntly  all  or  the  generality  of  consequences.
Jie crimes embraced by the
Lntended  Code  [or,  particularised
for  specified)  in  the  Particidar
[or  Special)  part],

[Each  part  to  be  divided  into  Chapters,  Sections,  Subsections,
etc. ;  or  into  Books,  Chapters,  Sections,  Subsections,  etc.]


Note.

*  Punishment  *  (and  *  penal ')  are  broader  expressions  than  *  crime  *
(and  *criminar).  Punishment  (or  pcena)  is  necessarily  annexed  to
an  injury  considered  as  a  crime  or  public  wrong :  i.e.  as  the  possible
ground  of  a  criminal  or  public  action ;  and  the  infliction  of  punish-
ment is  necessarily  the  scope  or  object  of  every  such  action  or  pursuit.

But  punishment,  moreover,  is  sometimes  annexed  to  an  injury
considered  as  a  civil  or  private  wrong:  i.e,  as  the  possible  ground
of  a  civil  or  private  action.  And  the  infliction  of  punishment  is
sometimes  the  scope  or  object  of  such  an  action  or  pm*suit.  Conse-
quently, the  nature  of  *  crime  *  (and  '  criminal ')  cannot  be  determined
sufficiently  by  merely  determining  the  nature  of  *  punishment  *  (and
•  penal ').


1052  Notes  on  Criminal  Law.


GENEEAL  PAET  OF  THE  CKIMTNTAL  CODE

CHAPTER  I.

The  definition  of  a  crime ;  with  distinctions  (or  divisions)  of
Crimes  into  certain  of  their  principal  classes.

CHAPTER  IL

Of  the  territory  embraced  by  the  intended  Code ;  and  of  the
persons  amenable  to,  and  the  crimes  cognisable  by>  the  Criminal
Tribunals  having  jurisdiction  therein.

Reference  to  the  subsequent  Chapter,  on  Punishments;  and
to  those  parts  of  the  Code  of  Procedure  which  determine  the
respective  jurisdictions  of  the  several  Criminal  Tribunals.

[This  distinction  or  division  can  hardly  serve  as  a  basis  for  die
Arrangement  of  Crimes.]

CHAPTER  IIL

Of  such  essentials  of  a  crime  (or  of  such  conditions  neces-
sary to  render  an  act  or  omission  a  crime)  as  may  be  treated
of  generally :  i.e.  without  restriction  to  a  crime  of  a  given  or
specified  class.

Here,  particularly,  of  those  universal  essentials  which  are
styled  emphatically  '  the  grounds  of  imputation.'

CHAPTER  IV.

Of  consummate  crimes  and  criminal  attempts.

CHAPTER  V.

Of  principals  and  accessories.

CHAPTER  VI.

Of  punishments  (including  the  penal  consequences  which
are  not  punishments  nominally,  but  which  are  punishments  in
effect).


Notes  on  Criminal  Law.  1053


THE  GEXEEAL  PAET  OF  THE  CEIMINAL  CODE.

CHAPTEE  I.

Containing  the  definition  of  a  Crime ;  with  distinctions  (or
divisions)  of  Crimes  into  certain  of  their  principal  classes.


1.  The  definition  of  a  Crime,  [or,  Crimes  distinguished  from
Civil  Injuries ;]  [or.  Public  Injuries  (or  Wrongs)  distinguished
from  Private.]

The  definition  of  a  Crime  implies  the  definition  of  Punish-
ment, and  also  the  distinction  between  Civil  and  Criminal
Actions.  But  the  complete  statement  of  this  distinction,  and
of  its  numerous  and  intricate  consequences,  belongs  to  the  Code
of  Criminal  Process.


2.  Of  such  distinctions  (or  divisions)  of  crimes  as  are
founded  on  differences  between  their  respective  punishments;
[between  the  criminal  tribunals  to  which  they  are  respectively
attributed ;  and  between  the  criminal  processes  by  which  they
are  respectively  pursuable.]

Note.

The  distinction  between  Crimes  in  respect  of  tribunals  and  pro-
cesses, supposes  a  reference  to  the  Code  of  Criminal  Process :  in
^which  the  competence  of  the  various  tribunals  must  of  course  be
determined;  and  in  which  the  regular  process,  with  the  processes
deviating  from  the  regular,  are  particularised  or  detailed.

The  distinction  between  Felonies  and  Misdemesnors  supposes  a
reference  to  the  Chapter  (contained  in  a  subsequent  portion  of  the
General  Part  of  the  Criminal  Code)  on  Punishments  and  other  Penal
CJonsequences.

Quaere.  The  use  of  retaining  the  distinction  between  Felonies
and  Misdemesnors  1  It  is  founded  on  differences  between  their  re-
spective punishments  and  other  penal  consequences.  And  to  every
crime  particularised  in  the  Particular  Part  of  the  Criminal  Code,  its
punislunent  (and  other  penal  consequence)  will  of  course  be  assigned.

The  distinction  in  the  French  Penal  Code  between  Crimes,
Delicts,  and  Contraventions,  is  perhaps  of  some  use.  For  offences  of
those  different  classes  are  attributed  systematically  and  exclusively  to
differently  constituted  tribunals  :  They  also  are  pursuable  respectively
by  different  processes.

VOL.  II.  2  N


I054  Notes  on  Criminal  Law.


Met?u)d  of  Arrangement  in  the  FrenA  Penal  Code.

Crimes attributed to the  Crimes attributed to  the

Courts  of  Assize,  and  pur-  Tribunals of Police, and

suable  by  a  process  which  pursuable by processes

is  more  solemn  (and  regu-  which  are  more  summary

lar) :  (and  irregular).
Called,  emphatically,
Crimes.


Pursuable  before  the  Tri-  Pursuable  before  the  Tri-

bunals of  Correctional  Po-  bunals  of  Simple  Police  (or

lice.  Tribunals  of  Police).

Called  Delicts.  Called Contraventions^  or

Crimea  of  Simple  Pdiet
[The  1st  and  2d  Books,  with  the  '  Preliminary  Dispositions,'  ooo-
stitute  the  General  Part :  The  3d  and  4th  books,  the  Particular  Pisi]


Cribies  Crimes

attributed  (generally^) to the  attributed  to  extraordinary  (oi

ordinary  (or  regular)  tribunals,^  *  exceptional)  tribunals,  and  por-

and  pursuable  (generally^*)  by  suable  by  extraordinary  (or  ex-

the ordinary  or regular pro-  ceptional)  processes.


cess.**


E.g.

Felonies.  Misdemesnors. Crimes pursuable summarily

before  Justices of the  Peace,


Distinguished  by  diflferences  be-  or before Coniniissioners  of

tween the punishments (and  the Excisa Crimes piusa-

the  other  penal  consequences)  able before the Ecclesiastical

which  are  respectively  annexed  Courts. Crimes by military

to  them.  persons  considered  as  such,  and

punishable  before  Courts  Ma^

[*  Not  universally : For  trea-  tial,  etc.  etc.

son  by  a  peer  (for  example)  is  ^Que Whether the term


now  be  deemed  an  ordinary  crim- templated  ? And whether
inal  tribimal  1]  there be any distinction  be-

*  Notes  2,  3,  4,  on  following  page.


Notes  on  Criminal  Law.  1055

2  E.g.  The  King's  Bench ;  the  tween  such  crimes,  or  any  of
mporary  tribunals  formed  by  them,  analogous  to  the  dis-
e ordinary commissions, etc. tinction  between  Felonies and

\  ^^ . „ xi- 1.  Misdemesnors  ?

3  Not  universally ;  though  cog-  m. • i c v • >
sable  by  the  regular  tribunals.  ^  ^he  simple '  police cnmes
g.  Peculiarities  of  process  in  case  of  the  French  Penal  Code  com-
treason.  prise  only  a  part  of  the  crimes
*  Indictment.  here  contemplated.]

Note.

Q®.  The  extent  of  the  intended  Ck)de  in  respect  of  the  Classes  of
imes  which  it  is  meant  to  embrace.

Is  it  to  embrace  all  crimes  (crimes  pursuable  before  the  extra-
dinary,  as  well  as  before  the  ordinary  tribunals)  %  Or  are  any,  and
iiich,  of  the  crimes  pursuable  before  the  extraordinary  tribunsJs,  to
I  excluded  from  it  ?  Difficulty  of  such  an  exclusion,  in  respect  of
ch  of  the  excluded  crimes  as  owe  their  creation  to  unwritten  law.
)e  the  last  article  of  the  French  Penal  Code,  which  shews  that  the
de  extends  only  to  a  part  of  the  field  embraced  by  the  Criminal  Law
)taining  in  France.

3.  Distinction  (or  division)  of  crimes  into  Public  Crimes
id  Private  Crimes  [or  Private  Crimes  and  Public  Crimes].

[The  arrangement  of  the  Particular  Part  of  the  Criminal  Code  is
unded  on  the  distinction  between  Private  and  PubHc  Crimes.  But
srhaps  the  nature  of  the  distinction  ought  to  be  stated  or  indicated
,  the  outset  of  the  General  Part.]


4.  Distinction  (or  division)  of  crimes  into  crimes  hy  commis-
an  and  crimes  by  amission  [or,  ^positive  crimes  and  negative  crimes :
—  crimes  fadcndo '  and  '  crimes  nonfadendo '].

Distinction  of  crimes  by  omission  into  crimes  hy  omission
xompanied  with  criminal  hio^oledge,  and  crimes  hy  omission  from
sgligence  (or  criminal  inattention). [Refer  to  Chapter  III.]

[Crimes  by  omission  accompanied  with  criminal  knowledge
light  be  styled  commodiously  criminal  forbearance  ;  crimes  by
mssion  from  negligence,  criminal  omissions  or  omissions  (simply).
-But  established  language  would  hardly  admit  of  this.]

Note.

Criminal  knowledge  and  negligence  are  often  styled  emphatically
ihe  grounds  of  imputation ;'  inasmuch  as  the  one  or  the  other  of
lem  is  of  the  essence  (or  e&rpii)  of  every  delict  (or  crime). Properly,


1056  Notes  on  Criminal  Law.

however,  ex^^j  essential  of  a  given  crime  (or  every  constituent  of  its
essence  or  corpus)  is  one  of  the  grounds  or  reasons  for  imputing  the
fact  to  the  party. (See  Table  IL  post)


I


CHAPTER  II.


Of  the  Territory  which  the  intended  Code  is  meant  to  embrace;
and  of  the  persons  amenable  to,  and  the  crimes  cognisable  by,
the  Criminal  Tribunals  or  Courts  having  jurisdiction  therein.


1.  Q^,  The  extent  of  the  intended  Code  in  respect  of  terri-
tory.

Is  it  to  extend  to  all  those  parts  of  the  United  Kingdom
and  its  Dependencies  in  which  the  Criminal  Law  of  England
now  obtains  ?

If  any  of  those  parts  are  not  to  be  embraced  by  it,  how  is
their  exclusion  to  be  marked  ?

In  respect  to  any  of  those  parts  embraced  by  it,  in  which
anomalies  or  singularities  now  obtain, — how  are  such  anomalies
to  be  treated  ?  Is  the  Code  to  supersede  them  ?  and,  if  so,  how
is  the  abrogation  of  them  to  be  accomplished  ?  If  the  Code  i?
not  to  supersede  them,  are  they  also  to  be  codified  or  sjrstem-
atised  ?  (Provincial  Law,  derogating  from  the  General  or  Com-
mon Law,  has  been  codified  or  systematised  in  Prussia  with
respect  to  one  of  the  Provinces.)


2.  Persons  amenable  to  the  Criminal  Tribunals  having
jurisdiction  within  the  intended  territory.

A  statement  of  the  general  rule,  or  general  principle.

Exceptions  from  the  general  rule :  e.g.  the  King,  corporate
bodies  in  their  corporate  capacity.  Ambassadors  from  foreign
States,  etc.  etc.

3.  Crimes  cognisable  by  such  tribunals.

A  statement  of  the  general  rule  or  principle.

Exceptions  from  the  general  rule :

E.g.  Crimes  committed  by  British  subjects  in  foreign  parts.


Notes  on  Criminal  Law.  1057

CHAPTEE  HI.

Of  such  essentials  of  a  crime  [or,  of  such  conditions  neces-
sary to  render  an  act  or  omission  a  crime]  as  may  be  treated  of
generally :  i,e,  without  restriction  to  a  crime  of  a  given  or  speci-
fied class.  Here,  particulariy,  of  those  universal  essentials  which
are  styled  emphatically  '  the  grounds  of  imputation.'

Principle  1.  An  act  or  omission  is  not  a  crime  (or  is  not
imputable  to  the  party),  unless  the  party  knew,  or,  with  due
attention,  might  have  known,  that,  under  the  circumstances  of
the  fact,  it  was  a  crime ;  [or,  an  act  or  omission  is  not  a  crime,
(or  is  not  imputable  to  the  party,)  unless  the  party  subsumed
the  fact,  or,  with  due  attention,  might  have  subsumed  the  fact,
under  the  law.]

Every  crime,  therefore,  supposes,  on  the  part  of  the  criminal,
criminal  knowledge  [criminal  consciousness]  or  negligence  [criminal
inattention,  criminal  inadvertence]. —  Vel  sdenier,  vel  negligenter.

Note.

Scheme  of  the  Roman  law-language  in  regard  to  the  grounds  of
imputation :  i.e.  Criminal  knowledge  and  Negligence.

DoltLS  or  dolus  malus,  when  used  as  the  name  of  a  genttSy  is  equi-
valent to  mali4:e  or  crimincU  design.  When  used  as  the  name  of  a
specieSf  it  is  restricted  to  criminal  design  consummated  or  attempted  by
fraud :  dolus  with  simiUatio,

Culpa  (which  generally,  though  not  always,  is  opposed  to  dolus)
has  three  significations,  l''.  Taken  with  its  large  signification,  ctUpa
is  equivalent  to  the  English  guilt,  2°.  Taken  with  its  narrower  signi-
fication, it  denotes  generally  the  ground  of  imputation :  ie.  criminal
knowledge  or  negligence.  It  therefore  includes  dolus.  3**.  Taken  with
its  narrowest  signification,  it  denotes  criminal  knowledge  short  of
criminal  design,  or  negligence.  It  therefore  excludes,  and  is  opposed
to,  dolus.

The  Roman  law-language  in  regard  to  the  grounds  of  imputation
may  therefore  be  presented  thus  :

Dolus,  or  dolus  malv^s,  as  signify- Culpa,  as  opposed  to  dolus  in  its
ing  generically  criminal  design, generic  signification.


Criminal  knowledge  short Negligence in any of its
of  criminal  design.  modes.


Criminal  knowledge  or  Negligence  or  criminal

consciousness.  inattention.

(See  Lect.  XX.,  Vol.  I.,  and  Tables  I.  and  IL  post.)


1058  Notes  on  Criminal  Law.

Inconveniences  of  '  malice '  as  a  name  for  criminal  design.

1 .  It  having  been  assumed  inconsiderately  that  malice  or  criminal
design  is  of  the  essence  of  enery  crime,  the  term  is  extended  abusively
to  negligence  (or  criminal  inattention),  and  to  criminal  knowledge
short  of  criminal  design.  E.g,  Murder  is  styled  malicious,  or  the  lav
(it  is  said)  implies  it  to  be  malicious,  although,  in  truth,  it  proceeded
from  negligence :  i.e.  from  negligence,  evincing,  on  the  part  of  the
criminal,  extraordinary  inhumanity.  Case  of  master  killing  appren-
tice, without  designing  his  death,  by  a  cruel  excess  of  punishment

2.  Malice  as  signifying  criminal  design  (and  as  used  with  its
technical  and  proper  import),  is  often  confounded  with  malice  as
denoting  malevolence ;  insomuch  that  malevolence  (though  the  motiTe
or  inducement  of  the  party  is  foreign  to  the  question  of  his  guilt  or
innocence)  is  supposed  to  be  essential  to  the  crime.  E,g,  The  law
(it  is  said)  implies  malice,  wherever  the  fact  was  premeditated;
although  the  crime  is  complete  by  virtue  of  the  criminal  design,  and
any  implication  is  superfluous. (Bellingham's  argument.)

Similar  ambiguity,  and  consequent  confusion,  in  regard  to  M}i&.

3.  Though  '  malice '  denotes  properly  criminal  design  or  intent,  it
sometimes  signifies  criminal  knowledge  short  of  criminal  design.  It
seems,  at  least,  that  'maliciously'  is  sometimes  equivalent  to  ^sci^nta:'
{Sed  J-.)


[(a)  Criminal  knowledge  [or  consciousness].


k


Criminal [unlawful, or evil]  Criminal  knowledge  short  c^

design  [intent,  or  purpose].  criminal  design.

[Equivalent  to  the  malice  of  [Sdentia, but without the

the  English  Law; to the dolus  ^voluntas  rwcendV Not  d4)lus,  al-

or  dolus  malus  (used  generically)  though  it  is  prope  dolum."]
of  the  Roman;  and  also  to  the
malum  'propositum^  the  malum  corir
silium,  and  the  voluntas  nocmdi  of
the  Roman.]

Where  the  production  of  the  Where  the  production  of  the

mischievous consequence which  mischievous consequence which

the  law  seeks  to  prevent,  is  an  the  law  seeks  to  prevent,  is  not

end  (or  object),  ultimate  or  medi-  an  end,  ultimate  or  mediate,  of

ate,  of  the  criminal ;  and  where,  the criminal ; but where he

therefore,  the  criminal  vnsfies  (or  knows  that  such  mischievous  con-

wUls)  the  production  of  it : E.g,  .  sequence (though he does not

Murder,  or arson,  out of  male-  tvish the production of  it)  will

volence ;  murdering  to  rob ;  theft,  follow, necessarily or probably,

In  each  of  these  cases,  the  pro-  his  act  or  omission. E.g.  Arson

duction  of  the  mischievous  con-  of  a house adjoining his own,

sequence  is  the  very  end  of  the  through  his  setting  fire  to  his  own,


Notes  on  Criminal  Law.  1059

criminal,  or,  at  least,  is  a  mean  to  with  intent  to  defraud  his  insurers,

its  attainment  The  destruction  of  his  neighbour's

[Where  an  act  or  omission  is  house  will  not  subserve  his  end ;

of  itself  a  crime  (or  is  a  crime  but  he  knows  that  the  destruction

without  respect  to  a  consequence),  of  his  neighbour's  house  will  follow,

such  act  or  omission  (supposing  necessarily  or  probably,  the  firing

that  the  omission  is  accompanied  of  his  own.
with  criminal  knowledge)  imports
necessarily  a  criminal  design.


[(^)  Negligence  [or,  criminal  inattention  or  inadvertence].


I  I

Negligence  Negligence

wow  fadendo.  in  faciendo.


Negligence  Imprudence:  which,

or  when  it  is  gross,  is

Heedlessness.  styled Temerity or

Rashness.

(See  Table  IL  jpost,  and  Lecture  XX.  ante.)

Negligence,  or  criminal  inattention,  may  be  divided  into
proxivuite  and  remote :  proximate,  where  it  accompanies  (or  is
the  immediate  cause  of)  the  criminal  omission  or  act;  remote,
where  it  has  caused  an  inability,  on  the  part  of  the  criminal,  to
do  or  forbear  as  he  ought.

Amount  (or  measure)  of  the  attention  which  the  criminal
law  exacts ;  with  the  various  degrees  of  negligence  (or  criminal
inattention).  Culpa  lata,  etc.  Impossible  to  fix  a  measure,  or
to  distinguish  degrees,  by  rules  binding  the  tribunals :  but
principles  (with  examples),  serving  as  guides  to  their  discretion,
may  be  stated  or  indicated  in  the  law.

(c)  Of  the  cases  in  which  a  party  committing  or  attempting
a  crime,  produces  casually  or  negligently  an  extrinsic  mischief.
Peculiarity  (andseeming  unreasonableness)  of  the  English  Criminal
Law  in  respect  of  extrinsic  mischief  produced  casually.

Culpa  dolo  determinata.  But,  properly,  the  original  crime
or  attempt  is  one  crime,  and  the  extrinsic  mischief  proceeding
from  the  negligence  of  the  party  is  another  and  distinct  crime.

(d)  Justifications  deducible  from  principle  1,  viz.
Ignorance (including mistake) in regard to matter of

fact.


1 060  Notes  on  Criminal  Law.

[Ignorance  of  law  is  neither  a  justification  nor  an  excuse,
as  considered  substantively  or  per  se;  although  it  is  implied
by  some  of  the  justifications  and  excuses  which  are  adverted
to  hereafter.  Why  a  knowledge  of  the  law,  on  the  part  of
the  accused,  is  and  must  be  presumed  juris  et  de  jurt.  Inas-
much as  the  presumption  in  question  often  conflicts  with  the
fact,  and  the  accused  might  be  ignorant  of  the  law  without  a
default  of  his  own,  the  presumption  is  seemingly  unreasonable,
and  demands  a  short  explanation.*^]

Infancy :  When  a  justification.  When,  and  in  what  de-
gree, an  excuse.

Insanity :  (in  its  various  modes  of  idiocy,  imbecility,  lunacy,
partial  madness,  &c.)

[Drunkenness :  Never  a  justification.  When,  and  in  what
degree,  an  excuse. — Ground  for  imputing  the  fact  to  the
drunken  party,  where  the  drunkenness  was  not  resorted  to
as  a  mean  of  accomplishing  or  concealing  a  criminal  design.]

Principle  2.  An  act  or  omission  is  not  a  crime,  if  it  be
purely  involuntary ;  i,e.  if  the  not  doing  the  act*^  done,  ot
the  doing  the  act  omitted,  did  not  depend  anywise  on  the
wishes  (or  will)  of  the  party.

Justifications  deducible  from  principle  2,  viz. :

Misfortime.  [Mishap,  chance,  accident,  casus,  damnum
fatale,  eta]

Compulsion  or  restraint  merely  physical :  ix.  not  applied
to  the  wishes  (or  will)  of  the  party.

Principle  3.  Generally,  an  act  or  omission  is  not  a  crime,
or  is  more  or  less  excusable,  if  it  proceeded  from  an  instant
and  well-grounded  fear  stronger  than  the  fear  naturaUy  in-
spired by  the  law.

(a)  Statement  and  explanation  of  principle  3.

(6)  Justifications  deducible  from  principle  3.

Fear  of  harm  not  impending  from  the  will  of  man.

Fear  of  (imlawful)  harm  impending  from  the  will  of  man.
U.r/.  Joining  a  foreign  enemy  through  fear  of  instant  death.
Wife  joining  in  a  crime  in  consequence  of  threats  from  hus-
band. [The  English  Criminal  Law  in  respect  of  coercion  of
wife  by  husband,  is  seemingly  full  of  inconsistencies.]

'^  See  Lecture  XXV.  ante,  passive,  it  cannot  be  said,  with  perfect

^  Iiiasmuch  as  the  party  is  mentally propriety,  that  he  acts.


Notes  on  Criminal  Law.  1 06 1

Noie. — Principles  1,  2,  and  3,  are  all  of  them  deducible  from  the
following  simple  truth.  Owing  to  the  plight  in  which  the  party
was,  fear  of  the  punishment  could  not  have  acted  upon  him ;  or,  if
fear  of  the  punishment  could  have  acted  upon  him,  it  could  not,  or
probably  would  not,  have  deterred  him  from  the  act  or  omission.
Ck>n8equently,  the  infliction  of  the  punishment  on  the  party  could
not  operate  as  an  example,  or  could  not  produce  the  eflect  of  deterring
others  from  crime.

Principle  4.  An  act  or  omission  pursuant  to  a  legal  duty
is  not  a  crime :

E.g,  Arrest  of  a  criminal. Execution  of  a  judgment.

Principle  5.  An  act  or  omission  pursuant  to  a  legal  right,
or  to  a  permission  or  licence  granted  or  authorised  by  the  law,
is  not  a  crime.

(a)  Of  self-defence,  with  its  various  grounds  and  limits.

Also,  generally,  of  self-assistance  (or  of  righting  one's  self
without  a  resort  to  justice). {Sed  q^,)

(6)  Of  the  cases  in  which  the  fact  concurs  with  the  wishes
of  the  party  who  is  immediately  its  object.

Where  the  party  acting  or  omitting  is  also  the  immediate
object  of  the  act  or  omission :  E.g.  Suicide.

Where  the  party  acting  or  omitting  is  not  the  immediate
object  of  the  act  or  omission.  '  Volenti  nan  fit  injuria.*
When  the  maxim  holds. When  it  does  not.

(c)  Of  the  cases  in  which  the  party  who  is  the  immediate
object  of  the  act  or  omission  is  '  out  of  the  protection  of  the
law.'

Q^.  Whether  there  be  any  such  case  according  to  the
erirainal  law  now  in  force  ?

Principle  6.  An  overt  act  (or  such  an  act,  other  than  a
confession  of  the  party,  as  indicates  his  criminal  knowledge)
is  of  the  essence  of  a  crime  by  commission ;  also  of  a  crime
by  omission  accompanied  with  criminal  knowledge.

[An  overt  act  is  an  act  indicating  criminal  knowledge,  and
is  not  any  act  indicatin/f  a  foregone  crime.  Consequently,  it
is  not  of  the  essence  of  a  crime  by  omission,  where  the  omis-
sion is  the  effect  of  negligence.  But  such  a  crime  by  omission
may  be  indicated  by  an  overt  act  as  meaning  any  act  indi-
cating a  foregone  crime.]

Why  criminal  knowledge  without  an  overt  act  (or  merely
disclosed  by  the  confession  of  the  party)  is  not  imputable.


io62  Notes  on  Criminal  Law.

Note, — Perhaps  the  term  '  overt  act '  is  restricted  to  sach  an  act  as
indicates  a  criminal  design ;  or  even  to  such  an  act  as  accomplishes
or  subserves  the  design.

Unless  the  act  were  a  mean  to  the  accomplishment  of  a  crnniiud
design  (or  were  an  effect  or  consequence  of  a  foregone  criminal  de-
sign) it  hardly  could  shew  the  existence  of  the  requisite  ground  of
imputation:  viz.  the  criminal  knowledge  of  the  party.  {Sei  f^.)
For  a  design  may  be  merely  criminal  in  respect  to  a  probable  conse-
quence not  wished  by  the  party.  And,  in  this  case,  an  act  indicatmg
his  knowledge  of  the  probable  mischievous  consequence  is  not  of
necessity  an  act  accomplishmg  or  subserving  the  design.

It  would  seem  that  the  overt  act  which  is  requisite  in  the  case  of
an  dttempty  is  necessarily  an  act  consequent  on  a  criminal  design,  or
serving  as  a  mean  or  step  to  the  accomplishment  of  a  ciiminsl
design. {Sed  q^.)

It  is  held  by  the  Court  of  Cassation,  in  cases  of  an  atfemplj
that  'overt  or  exterior  act'  and  'commencement  of  execution'
are  equivalent  expressions. — (See  Feuerbach  and  other  Gemum
Criminalists.)


CHAPTEE  IV.


Of  consummate  Crimes,  and  of  Crimes  consisting  in  at-
tempts to  commit  crimes  [or,  criminal  attempts].


1.  Generally,  an  attempt  to  commit  a  crime  is  of  itself  a
crime. (Exceptions  from  the  rule.)

2.  Essentials  of  a  criminal  attempt.

No  criminal  attempt  without  criminal  knowledga

[Or,  No  criminal  attempt  without  a  criminal  design :  te.
unless  the  consummation  of  a  crime  be  the  end  or  object  of
the  party,  or  be  a  mean  or  step  towards  his  end  or  object
(Sed  q^.)  For  though  a  design  be  innocent  independently  of
a  probable  mischief  not  wished  hy  the  party y  his  attempt  may
perhaps  be  criminal  if  he  be  conscious  of  the  danger.]

No  criminal  attempt  without  an  overt  act:  i.e.  an  act
(other  than  a  confession)  indicating  criminal  knowledga

[Or,  No  criminal  attempt  without  an  overt  act :  I'.e.  an  act
which  is  the  natural  -  efifect  of  a  foregone  criminal  design,  or
which  serves  as  a  mean  or  step  to  the  accomplishment  of  a
criminal  design. (Sed  q^.)  ] .

3.  Grounds  for  punishing  a  criminal  attempt  less  severely
than  the  corresponding  consummate  crime.


Notes  on  Criminal  Law.  1063

[In  some  cases,  the  consummation  of  the  crime  is  not  more  mis-
chievous than  the  attempt  to  commit  it.  E,g,  Theft  consummated
by  the  merest  amotion  of  the  subject  from  the  place  which  it  occu-
pied, is  not  a  whit  more  mischievous  than  an  abortive  attempt  to
amove  it.]

Expediency  of  leaving  to  the  party  a  loc^m  pcenitenticBy
wherever  the  consummation  of  the  crime  would  be  more  mis-
chievous than  the  attempt,  etc.  etc.

[Departures  from  this  principle  in  the  English  Criminal
law.  They  are  not  only  inexpedient,  but  are  out  of  analogy
or  harmony  with  the  body  of  the  system.  Coventry  Act,
Lord  Ellenborough's  Act,  etc. — ^Absurdity  of  the  Roman  and
French  Law  in  this  respect.]

4.  Distinction  between  a  remote  or  merely  incipient  attempt
[t.e.  where  the  acts  of  the  party  would  not  naturally  consum-
mate the  crime]  and  a  proximate  or  perfect  attempt  [i.e.  where
the  acts  of  the  party  would  naturally  consummate  the  crime,
but  the  consummation  is  prevented  by  the  intervention  of  an
extrinsic  cause.] (Q^-)

Note, — Case  of  an  omissu/ti  not  followed  by  the  probable  mischief
which  renders  it  criminal ;  but  where  the  omitting  party  intended
the  mischief,  or,  at  least,  was  conscious  of  the  danger.

Cannot  be  called  an  attempt:  for  an  attempt  imports  an  act
pursuant  to  a  criminal  design,  or,  at  leasts  indicating  criminal
knowledge.

Is  there  any  case  (in  the  English  Criminal  Law)  in  which  a  party
so  omitting  would  be  held  liable  as  far  an  attempt  f

[Note, — ^Would  it  be  expedient  to  define  generally  Corpus  delicti  :
t.«.  the  sum  (or  aggregate)  of  the  properties  (or  characters)  which
constitute  the  essence  (or  definition)  of  a  crime  of  a  given  class  ?
If  so,  the  general  definition  and  explanation  would  be  placed  appo-
sitely in  Chapter  III.  For  the  expression  *  corpus  delicti/  an  equiva-
lent English  expression  (such,  for  example,  as  *  essence  of  the  cnme ')
might  easily  be  devised.] (See  Table  II.  post.)

5.  Distinction  between  criminal  attempts  in  respect  of
differences  between  the  causes  which  prevent  their  consum-
mation.

Where  the  consummation  is  prevented  by  the  penitence  of
the  party.

Where  the  consummation  is  prevented,  not  by  the  peni-
tence of  the  party,  but  by  the  intervention of  an  extrinsic


cause.**


"  R.  r.  Taylor  1  F.  and  F.  6.


1 064  Notes  on  Criminal  Law.

6.  Incitements  to  crime. \StA  g^. Would  perhaps  be  placed
more  appositely  in  the  Chapter  on  Principals  and  Accessories.]


CHAPTER  V.

Of  Principals  and  Accessories.

[§"*.  Can  a  so-called  *  accessory  after  the  fact '  be  deemed
an  accessory :  i,e.  a  person  who  aided  the  given  crime,  and  who
therefore  must  have  been  party  to  it  before  its  conclusion?
Ought  not  the  offence  of  the  so-called  Accessory  to  be  placed  in
a  Chapter  of  the  Department  relating  to  Public  Crimes  ?]


CHAPTER  VI.


Of  Punishments  (including  those  consequences  of  crimes
which  are  not  punishments  nominally,  but  which  are  puniah-
ments  in  effect).

1.  Enumeration  and  description  of  the  punishments  (and
other  penal  consequences)  which  are  annexed  to  Crimes  by
the  English  Criminal  Law :  (or  by  the  portion  of  the  English
Criminal  Law  which  is  embraced  by  the  intended  Code.)

Kff.  DeatL

Transportation.

Imprisonment.

Fine,  etc.

Greneral  Forfeiture.

Corruption  of  blood  (with
Escheat).

Incapacity to give testi-
mony, etc.


Q^\  As  to  the  expediency
> of  these  sweeping  and  indk-
criminating  punishments.


2.  Rules  (or  Instructions)  for  the  application  of  Punishments.

(a)  Where  the  nature  of  the  punishment  is  not  determined
by  the  Law ;  or  where  the  degree  of  the  punishment  is  inde-
terminate altogether ;  or  where  the  degree  of  the  punishment,
though  not  indeterminate  altogether,  is  determined  imperfectly
or  proximately  by  the  assignment  of  a  rruiximum  and  minimvm'

Specimens  of  the  various  considerations  which  are  grounds
for  the  Rules  or  Instructions,  viz.


Notes  on  Criminal  Law.  1065

Magnitude  of  the  mischief  which  the  crime  has  a  tendency
>  produce.

DiflBculty  or  ease  with  which  it  may  usually  be  committed.

Consummation  or  Attempt ;  If  attempt,  nature  of  the  cause
liich  rendered  it  abortive.

Criminal  Knowledge  or  Negligence;  If  negligence,  the
jgree  of  it.

Motive  or  inducement  to  the  crime ;  which,  though  it  com-
only  is  foreign  to  the  question  of  guilt  or  innocence,  is  often  a
)od  reason  for  aggravating  or  mitigating  the  punishment.

Disposition  of  the  criminal,  as  evinced  by  the  fact  in  question,
'  by  extrinsic  testimony  to  his  general  character,  etc.  etc.

(b)  In  the  case  of  a  repetition  of  the  crime.

(c)  In  the  case  of  concurrent  crimes  (or,  rather,  concurrent
)nvictions).

3.  Extinction  of  liability  to  punishment  (or  to  a  criminal
jtion  or  pursuit).

By  sufferance  of  the  punishment.
By  Death.

By  Prescription,  or  limitation  of  time.
By  Pardon,  etc.  etc.


io66


o


P4

O
H


.9  c  5*  B  »

oil  sag


1^5


~g.2


3
;4


e«


OB

o


3S


>>-n:


CS _ 'B B] OB

.a  "2  .s  S  .2


«


i  « I  ^  -

^  a§*c

ggrC «^ i^ ^
gfl.2 « g5


*  p  2  ^
o  cQ  gr  rt

c« O ©
H  3  Ja  •■-*

•5  §^"2

O  2  -E  o


r—


S  S  es  »^_—  b


^1

©5  Osa  <«,."t2  5s©«'


?a


&


•^^S'S


>>fe


2i^


i^e


09

a
o

I
C  C  C  p  o  d


S © S r;j

©S  rt  ■**

fe'S  fl  p  S
•e  T3  *  »  B


\


Notes  on  Criminal  Law.  1 067


CODE  (OR  LAW)  OF  CRIMINAL  PROCEDURE
AND  PREVENTIVE  POLICE."

Criminal  Procedure.

[Search  for  and  pursuit  of  crimes  already  committed.
End,  prevention  of  crimes  through  the  infliction  of  punishment
on  past  crimes.]

1.  Ordinary  and Extraordinary  Tribunals,  with their  re-
spective competence,  and  jurisdiction.

2.  Ordinary  Procedure.

I


Up  to  accusation  (by  in-  After  accusation,

dictment  or  information).  [La  justice,]

[Police  judidaire,]

3.  Extraordinary  modes  of  Procedure  [marking  only  the
anomalies;  and  referring,  for  the  general  rules,  to  the  or-
dinary Procedure].

Preventive  Police^

[End,  prevention  of  crimes,  but  not  through  the  infliction  of
punishment  Embracing  such  means  of  preventing  crimes  as  are
not  comprised  in  criminal  process.]

Eules  for  regulation  of  prisons  (penal,  or  prisons  of  deten-
tion), of  transport  vessels,  etc. [Q^^-]

Generalia,

Distinction  between  civil  and  criminal  actions.

Where  they  concur.

Where  the  one  excludes  the  other.

Where  they  are  pursuable  jointly.

Where  they  are  pursuable  separately.
Eules  of  evidence  peculiar  to  criminal  cases.

**  Different meanings of the word  tered  by  inferior  tribunals. —  4. Laws

Police : —  which impose duties, regarding the

1.  Preventive  Police. — 2.  Laws  which  community  generally. A  mixture  of  all

prevent  mediately. — 3. Laws  adminis-  these.


io68


»


•£..2  a^  ST

•M  6  S  o  O  V

a  c  o  g^^


eg'2'sld'
;i.2"^-s*-  a  c


1


K  fl  ea  Q  ,^  00.

^  .2  *^  -^  ®


^-3


>'T  *-•  "t*  r^  GO  S  _a


fi fe c8
C « ap C B


00 O Q}

'C  too


I.


oo


...3

-i  ^^

^3  o  2


V MM


5  ^  a o  .
E  ®  © -5  s

B — _  .  ••


Ji.3


•S  ^1— I


oi:


go


' mm


.2  =

^  <^  9


*-  -J

0-—  9

z  c*-

S  3


k %m


ZZi  t


x>-

—  t.  -

^^ w

0m fc^-

^" W

•=cS

•^ •*

^:=s

>■*

c =

•«* ^  .z

.i;h

i?^

-ri

*-  c  -

c  *^j:

s  •«

•^•«»

c

c  ♦'  s

c^.2

eS «<

1- Zm

«J - -

S  c  =

^11

M #> £

w  j:  =

§^S

—  w-

C  £.5

<*k>«

•  e  -

s^*?  S

g.=  r

s -  =

1  -»-

c  2

&*.

1069


1

1

6


^  a
3.0


Sdcs


o  .^  5

II  ®  g  <=>


X?  2  «  «  fl  •  rt

<*,  a  g<g  «8  p  S


o .


O  JL «

o  ^

•••+3  fe««

a  fl  ®  o

- 1 -2J  ^ *-•

o  o  C  ti  B

W


G  cJ

go

»-^

**  o


CS

^  2


^ ^  .£3

^  SI  w

a  o  d


B  ^  o  o  0«s  o  a;  o


I • I <o •

^■^  -Q  ^^

00 ea ^^


.::  o


^^


to *-i  ••»*»

a  o  s  «^


IS

o  o


^^ «j  's!  -o  "^  is  a


e8 a


gs


-!  s I

^  a

^-  a

a  9


a  a

o  -

O  '-^

o  o


-2  ••'?  I

IJ§^2j1^iS

o


iZ • 1» « ?^
-'»-»'Tj ^ B 6C

*  •• 'C  a

4>  es  o  J?^ a

H3  E.-;3 .2 .2  -5


eS & O
S-B  -M


*  ea-^

CJ  o

a  ^-a

ed  SS  o


^  a

OS  ca

which  is
slied  (as

ot  per  se
easou  of
ef  neces-
tc.

cessarily
nied by
al  inten-

eS

1  s

B M^ ^ ^ g 3

1 g-^Ji? II7

•S  -«-»  a  T" S  h  B

s

'0

1^  ca  S  0  S  ea-^
1 0 ^

/


**-  a  s5

O  s

CS


W  a

»-«  eS

a  o

•2  o


2-^


ea

a


§3?' ®

>-  S  a


o  a
-  —  4*
a  « a

fe  «*?  S
® ?  a

3S  o  I  -^

-»,q3  a  >»

^  a


s  a

a  t:
g.-5


B^

o  ea

el <-*

B


B

o

a
a


ea

a


S  a*s
a  oa  B4
►-Ha*


c


I— I »-( ,,»J  .,-1 ^

B  s:s  2  ^y  >>o


5 W<*.i

Q.2  S^


Q


Jz;


2.^r:j
a  2"5


a  ^


VOL.  II.


1070


I


00


'H^ _


04
If

3
&


§g

CO 2


•3

a
2

o
on


cs


c^

I

l-H  >■
O

•

a,

o

s


CO C

o


CQ

a


9i


3  ®^


-C3  ^


2 . •  1 a

.5  -3  «  U*


1-2


5.  "r


O


>> ;  fl


?r.»o


CO


C O


Si'—'
«  p  i«


CL,'

• O


u^


o
2


c
o


ea

•rt *«


s>


cc c  I— t


2  c  1—1  =  CL.^


o  i_^
GQ


OQ


^


a  o


e9

^3


I S


ill

Is*


f c


«*
«


ae 3J


mm


On  tfie  Study  of  yurisprudence.  1071


ON  THE  USES  OF  THE  STUDY  OF
JURISPRUDENCR


The  matter  of  the  following  Essay  is  chiefly  taken  from  the  Open-
ing Lectures  of  the  two  several  Courses  delivered  hy  Mr.  Austin  at
the  London  University  and  at  the  Inner  Temple.  The  first  ten
lectures  of  the  former  and  longer  Course  were  published  (greatly
altered  and  expanded)  by  the  Author,  in  a  volume  bearing  the  title
of  *  The  Province  of  Jurisprudence  Determined ;'  which  has  been
republished  since  his  death.  The  form  and  character  which  he  gave
to  that  work  rendered  an  Introductory  Lecture  superfluous  and
inappropriate.  It  was  consequently  omitted  ;  nor  was  Inhere  any  use
or  place  assigned  to  it.

It  is  evident  that  a  discourse  of  the  kind  could  not,  with  any
fitness,  be  prefixed  to  the  subsequent  Lectures  of  that  Course,  as  now
published.

The  Second  Opening  Lecture  was  likewise  necessarily  excluded
by  the  Author's  arrangement ;  according  to  which  the  lectures  de-
livered at  the  Inner  Temple  were  (as  I  have  said  elsewhere)  incor-
porated with  the  previous  and  longer  Course.  Like  the  former,  this
therefore  remained  without  any  designated  place.

Such  however,  I  knew,  was  Mr.  Austin's  sense  of  the  importance
of  the  study  of  Jurisprudence,  that  if  he  had  completed  any  work
containing  the  full  expression  of  his  opinions,  idl  that  is  here
gathered  together  (and  probably  much  more)  would  doubtless  have
been  urged  in  favour  of  its  cultivation.  I  have  therefore  thought
it  right  to  preserve  and  to  consolidate  whatever  was  of  permanent
value  in  these  two  Introductory  Lectures,  and  have  incorporated
with  them  some  fragments  on  the  subject  of  which  they  treat.  In
this  instance,  and  in  this  alone,  I  have  presumed  to  make  some  slight
changes  in  the  form  of  what  he  wrote ;  I  have  united  the  two  dis-
courses, the  subject  and  purport  of  which  is  the  same,  into  one  con-
tinuous Essay  ;  omitting  inevitable  repetitions  and  supplying  a  few
links  from  other  sources.

The  table  at  the  end  does  not  belong  to  either  Lecture,  nor  to  any
part  of  the  matter  above  described.  I  found  it  among  loose  scraps,
with  no  mark  or  reference  as  to  its  destination.  Perhaps  it  belonged
to  a  few  notes  relating  to  the  work  *  On  the  Principles  and  Relations
of  Jurisprudence  and  Ethics,'  which  he  meditated.^  As  it  gives  a
brief  but  comprehensive  view  of  his  Idea  of  the  course  of  study
necessary  to  the  forming  of  an  accomplished  Lawyer  or  Statesman,
it  seemed  to  find  its  place  with  this  Essay  — S.  A.

**  See  Vol.  I.  preface,  p.  16,  atde.


1072  On  the  Study  of

»

Proper The  appropriate  subject  of  Jurisprudence,  in  any  of  its  different
Junspru- departments,  is  positive  law :  Meaning  by  positive  law  (or  law
ence. emphatically  so  called),  law  established  or  '  positum,'  in  an  in-
dependent political  community,  by  the  express  or  tacit  authority
of  its  sovereign  or  supreme  government

Considered  as  a  whole,  and  as  implicated  or  connected  with
one  anothei:,  the  positive  laws  and  rules  of  a  particular  or
specified  community,  are  a  system  or  body  of  law.  And  as
limited  to  any  one  of  such  systems,  or  to  any  of  its  component
parts,  jurisprudence  is  particular  or  national

Though  every  system  of  law  has  its  specific  and  characteristic
differences,  there  are  principles,  notions,  and  distinctions  common
to  various  systems,  and  forming  analogies  or  likenesses  by  which
such  systems  are  allied.

Many  of  these  common  principles  are  common  to  all  systems;
— to  the  scanty  and  crude  systems  of  rude  societies,  and  the
ampler  and  maturer  systems  of  refined  communities.  But  the
ampler  and  maturer  systems  of  refined  communities  are  allied  by
the  numerous  analogies  which  obtain  between  all  systems,  and  also
by  numerous  analogies  which  obtain  exclusively  between  them-
selves. Accordingly,  the  various  principles  common  to  maturer
systems  (or  the  various  analogies  obtaining  between  them),  are
the  subject  of  an  extensive  science :  which  science  (as  contra-
distinguished to  national  or  particular  jurisprudence  on  one  side,
and,  on  another,  to  the  science  of  legislation)  has  been  named
General  (or  comparative)  Jurisprudence,  or  the  philosophy  (or
general  principles)  of  positive  law.

As  principles  abstracted  from  positive  systems  are  the
subject  of  general  jurisprudence,  so  is  the  exposition  of  such
principles  its  exclusive  or  appropriate  object.  With  the  goodness
or  badness  of  laws,  as-  tried  by  the  test  of  utility  (or  by  any  of
the  various  tests  which  divide  the  opinions  of  mankind),  it  has
no  immediate  concern.  If,  in  regard  to  some  of  the  principles
which  form  its  appropriate  subject,  it  adverts  to  considerations
of  utility,  it  adverts  to  such  considerations  for  the  purpose  of
explaining  such  principles,  and  not  for  the  purpose  of  determin-
ing their  worth.  And  this  distinguishes  the  science  in  question
from  the  science  of  legislation :  which  affects  to  determine  the
test  or  standard  (together  with  the  principles  subordinate  or
consonant  to  such  test)  by  which  positive  law  ought  to  be  made,
or  to  which  positive  law  ought  to  be  adjusted.

If  the  possibility  of  such  a  science  appear  doubtful,  it  arises
from  this;  that  in  each  particular  system,  the  principles  and


jurisprudence.  1073

distinctions  which  it  has  in  common  with  others,  are  complicated
with  its  individual  peculiarities,  and  are  expressed  in  a  technical
language  peculiar  to  itself.

It  is  not  meant  to  be  aflSrmed  that  these  principles  and
distinctions  are  conceived  with  equal  exactness  and  adequacy  in
every  particular  system.  In  this  respect  different  systems  differ.
But,  in  all,  they  are  to  be  found  more  or  less  nearly  conceived ;
from  the  rude  conceptions  of  barbarians,  to  the  exact  conceptions
of  the  Eoman  lawyers  or  of  enlightened  modern  jurists.*^

I  mean,  then,  by  General  Jurisprudence,  the  science  concerned
with  the  exposition  of  the  principles,  notions,  and  distinctions
which  are  common  to  systems  of  law :  understanding  by  systems
of  law,  the  ampler  and  maturer  systems  which,  by  reason  of
their  amplitude  and  maturity,  are  pre-eminently  pregnant  with
instruction.

Of  the  principles,  notions,  and  distinctions  which  are  the
subjects  of  general  jurisprudence,  some  may  be  esteemed  neces-
sary. For  we  cannot  imagine  coherently  a  system  of  law  (or  a
system  of  law  as  evolved  in  a  refined  community),  without  con-
ceiving them  as  constituent  parts  of  it.

Of  these  necessary  principles,  notions,  and  distinctions,  I
will  suggest  briefly  a  few  examples.

V,  The  notions  of  Duty,  Eight,  Liberty,  Injury,  Punishment,
Redress  ;  with  their  various  relations  to  one  another,  and  to  Law,
Sovereignty,  and  Independent  Political  Society :

2**.  The  distinction  between  written  or  promulged,  and  un-
written or  unpromulged  law,  in  the  juridical  or  improper  senses
attributed  to  the  opposed  expressions ;  in  other  words,  between
law  proceeding  immediately  from  a  sovereign  or  supreme  maker,
and  law  proceeding  immediately  from  a  subject  or  subordinate
maker  (with  the  authority  of  a  sovereign  or  supreme) :

■•  Universal  Jurisprudence  is  the  aci-  superior  common  to  all  mankind. And

ence  of  the  Jus  Gentium  of  the  Roman  tliis (as  we shall  see hereafter)  ranks

Lawyers,  as  expounded  by  Gains.  international law with morals rather

Mr. Bentham is  of  opinion  that  it  than  with  law.
must be confined  within  very  narrow (2°)  As  is  observed  by  Mr.  Bentham,

bounds. This  is  true,  if  by  expository  the  provisions  of  diflcrent  systems  are

Universal Jurisprudence he intended,  never  precisely  alike  ;  the  only  parts  in

Jurisprudence  expository  of  that  which  which  they  agree  exactly,  being  those

obtains  universally  as  Law.  leading expressions  which denote the

For  (1*)  Assuming  that  the  systems  necessary  parts  of  every  system  of  law.
of  all  nations,  wholly  or  in  part,  exactly  E.g.  The  Rights  of  husbands,  wives,
resembled  each  other  {i.e.  that  all  or  etc.  ;  the  law  relatinjij  to  easements  here
many  of  the  provisions  to  be  found  in  and  servitudes  in  France,  resemble  or
those  several  systems  were  exactly  alike),  are  analogous  ;  but  arc  still  not  precisely
still  we  could  not  speak  of  them  with  alike  either  in  matter  or  form,  and  there-
propriety  as  forming  a  Universal  Law ;  fore  cannot  be  described  by  the  same
the  sanction  being  applied  by  the  govern-  form  of  words.
tnerU  of  each  community,  and  not  by  a


I074  On  the  Sttuly  of

3°.  The  distinction  of  Eights,  into  rights  availing  against
the  world  at  large  (as,  for  example,  property  or  dominion),  and
rights  availing  exclusively  against  persons  specifically  determined
(as,  for  example,  rights  from  contracts) :

4°.  The  distinction  of  rights  availing  against  the  world  at
large,  into  property  or  dominion,  and  the  variously  restricted
rights  which  are  carved  out  of  property  or  dominion :

5°.  The  distinction  of  Obligations  (or  of  duties  corresponding
to  rights  against  persons  specifically  determined)  into  obligations
which  arise  from  contracts,  obligations  which  arise  from  injuries,
and  obligations  which  arise  from  incidents  that  are  neither
contracts  nor  injuries,  but  which  are  styled  analogically  obliga-
tions '  quasi  ex  contractu  :'

6**.  The  distinction  of  Injuries  or  Delicts,  into  civil  injuries
(or  private  delicts)  and  crimes  (or  public  delicts)  ;  with  the
distinction  of  civil  injuries  (or  private  delicts)  into  torts,  or
delicts  (in  the  strict  acceptation  of  the  term),  and  breaches  of
obligations  from  contracts,  or  of  obligations  '  quasi  ex  contractu.*

It  will,  I  believe,  be  found,  on  a  little  examination  and
reflection,  that  every  system  of  law  (or  every  system  of  law
evolved  in  a  refined  conmiunity)  implies  the  notions  and  distinc-
tions which  I  now  have  cited  as  examples;  together  with  a
multitude  of  conclusions  imported  by  those  notions  and  distinc-
tions, and  drawn  from  them,  by  the  builders  of  the  system,
through  inferences  nearly  inevitable.

Of  the  principles,  notions,  and  distinctions  which  are  the
subjects  of  General  Jurisprudence,  others  are  not  necessary  (in
the  sense  which  I  have  given  to  the  expression).  We  may
imagine  coherently  an  expanded  system  of  law,  without  con-
ceiving them  as  constituent  parts  of  it  But  as  they  rest  upon
grounds  of  utility  which  extend  through  all  communities,  and
which  are  palpable  or  obvious  in  all  refined  communities,  they
in  fact  occur  very  generally  in  matured  systems  of  law  ;  and
therefore  may  be  ranked  properly  with  the  general  principles
which  are  the  subjects  of  general  jurisprudence.

Such,  for  example,  is  the  distinction  of  law  into  'jus  per-
sonarum*  and  'jus  rerum':  the  principle  of  the  scientific
arrangement  given  to  the  Eoman  Law  by  the  authors  of  the
elementary  or  institutional  treatises  from  which  Justinian's
Institutes  were  copied  and  compiled.  The  distinction,  I  believe,
is  an  arbitrarily  assumed  basis  for  a  scientific  arrangement  of  a
body  of  law.  But  being  a  commodious  basis  for  an  arrangement
of  a  body  of  law,  it  has  been  very  generally  adopted  by  those


Jurisprudence.  1075

who  have  attempted  such  arrangements  in  the  modem  European
nations.  It  has  been  very  generally  adopted  by  the  compilers
of  the  authoritative  Codes  which  obtain  in  some  of  those  nations,
and  by  private  authors  of  expository  treatises  on  entire  bodies
of  law.  Nay,  some  who  have  mistaken  the  import  of  it,  and
who  have  contemptuously  rejected  it,  as  denoted  by  the  obscure
antithesis  of  *jus  personarum  et  rerum,'  have  yet  assumed  it
under  other  (and  certainly  more  appropriate)  names,  as  the  basis
of  a  natural  arrangement.  Meaning,  I  presume,  by  a  natural
arrangement,  an  arrangement  so  commodious,  and  so  highly  and
obviously  commodious,  that  any  judicious  methodiser  of  a  body
of  law  would  naturally  (or  of  course)  adopt  it.

But  it  will  be  impossible,  or  useless,  to  attempt  an  exposition
of  these  principles,  notions  and  distinctions,  until  by  careful
analysis,  we  have  accurately  determined  the  meaning  of  certain
leading  terms  which  we  must  necessarily  employ ;  terms  which
recur  incessantly  in  every  department  of  the  science :  which,
whithersoever  we  turn  ourselves,  we  are  sure  to  encounter.
Such,  for  instance,  are  the  following:  Law,  Eight,  Obligation,
Injury,  Sanction :  Person,  Thing,  Act,  Forbearance.  Unless  the
import  of  these  are  determined  at  the  outset,  the  subsequent
speculations  will  be  a  tissue  of  uncertain  talk.

It  is  not  unusual  with  writers  who  call  and  think  themselves
'  instittUional '  to  take  for  granted,  that  they  know  the  meaning
of  these  terms,  and  that  the  meaning  must  be  known  by  those
to  whom  they  address  themselves.  Misled  by  a  fallacious  test,
they  fancy  that  the  meaning  is  simple  and  certain,  because  the
expressions  are  familiar.  Not  pausing  to  ask  their  import,  not
suspecting  that  their  import  can  need  inquiry,  they  cast  them
before  the  reader  without  an  attempt  at  explanation,  and  then
proceed  (without  ceremony)  to  talk  about  them.

These  terms,  nevertheless,  are  beset  with  numerous  ambigu-
ities :  their  meaning,  instead  of  being  simple,  is  extremely
complex :  and  every  discourse  which  embraces  Law  as  a  whole,
should  point  distinctly  at  those  ambiguities,  and  should  sever
that  complex  meaning  into  the  simpler  notions  which  compose  it.

Many  of  those  who  have  written  upon  Law,  have  defined
these  expressions.  But  most  of  their  definitions  are  so  constructed
that,  instead  of  shedding  light  upon  the  thing  defined,  they
involve  it  in  thicker  obscurity.  In  most  attempts  to  define  the
terms  in  question,  there  is  all  the  pedantry  without  the  reality
of  logic :  the  form  and  husk,  without  the  substance.  The
pretended  definitions  are  purely  circular :  turning  upon  the  very


10/6  On  the  Study  of

expressions  which  they  afifect  to  elucidate,  or  upon  expressions
which  are  exactly  equivalent.

In  truth,  some  of  these  terms  will  not  admit  of  definition
in  the  formal  or  regular  manner.  And  as  to  the  rest,  to  define
them  in  that  manner  is  utterly  useless.  For  the  terms  which
enter  into  the  abridged  and  concise  definition,  need  as  much
elucidation  as  the  very  expression  which  is  defined.

The  import  of  the  terms  in  question  is  extremely  complex.
They  are  short  marks  for  long  series  of  propositions.  And,  what
aggravates  the  diflBculty  of  explaining  their  meaning  clearly,  is
the  intimate  and  indissoluble  connection  which  subsists  between
them.  To  state  the  signification  of  each,  and  to  shew  the
relation  in  which  it  stands  to  the  others,  is  not  a  thing  to  be
accomplished  by  short  and  disjointed  definitions,  but  demands  a
dissertation,  long,  intricate  and  coherent.

For  example :  Of  Laws  or  Eules  there  are  various  classy
Now  these  classes  ought  to  be  carefully  distinguished.  For  the
confusion  of  them  under  a  common  name,  and  the  consequent
tendency  to  confound  Law  and  Morals,  is  one  most  prolific  source
of  jargon  darkness  and  perplexity.  By  a  careful  analysis  rf
leading  terms,  law  is  detached  from  morals,  and  the  attention  of
the  student  of  jurisprudence  is  confined  to  the  distinctions  and
divisions  which  relate  to  law  exclusively.

But  in  order  to  distinguish  the  various  classes  of  laws,  it  is
necessary  to  proceed  thus : — To  exhibit,  fii'st,  the  resemblance
between  them,  and,  then,  their  specific  differences :  to  state  w^q
they  are  ranked  under  a  common  expression,  and  then  to  explain
the  marks  hy  wJiich  they  are  distinguished.  Till  this  is  ac-
complished, the  appropriate  subject  of  Jurisprudence  is  not
discernible  precisely.  It  does  not  stand  out.  It  is  not  suf-
ficiently detached  from  the  resembling  or  analogous  objects  with
which  it  is  liable  to  be  confounded.

Thus,  for  example,  in  order  to  establish  the  distinction
between  Written  and  Unwritten  Law,  we  must  scrutinise  the
nature  of  the  latter :  a  question  which  is  full  of  difficulty ;  and
which  has  hardly  been  examined  with  the  requisite  exactness  by
most  of  the  writers  who  have  turned  their  attention  to  the  sub-
ject. I  find  it  much  vituperated,  and  I  find  it  as  much  extolled:
but  I  scarcely  find  an  endeavour  to  determine  wliat  it  is.  But
if  this  humbler  object  were  well  investigated,  most  of  the  con-
troversy about  its  merits  would  probably  subside.

To  compare  generally,  or  in  the  abstract,  the  merits  of  the
two  species,  would  be  found  useless :  and  the  expediency  of  the


fe


Jurisprudence.  1 07  7

process  which  has  been  styled  Codification,  would  resolve  itself
into  a  question  of  time,  place,  and  circumstance.

The  word  Jurisprudence  itself  is  not  free  from  ambiguity ;
it  has  been  used  to  denote —

The  knowledge  of  Law  as  a  science,  combined  with  the  art
or  practical  habit  or  skill  of  applying  it ;  or,  secondly,

Legislation  ; — the  science  of  what  ovjght  to  he  done,  towards
making  good  laws,  combined  with  the  art  of  doing  it.

Inasmuch  as  the  knowledge  of  what  ought  to  be,  supposes
a  knowledge  of  what  is,  legislation  supposes  jurisprudence,  but
jurisprudence  does  not  suppose  legislation.  What  laws  have
been  and  are,  may  be  known  without  a  knowledge  of  what  they
ought  to  be.  Inasmuch  as  a  knowledge  of  what  ought  to  be,  is
bottomed  on  a  knowledge  of  antecedents  cognato  genere,  legisla-
tion supposes  jurisprudence.

With  us,  Jurisprudence  is  the  science  of  what  is  essential  to
law,  combined  with  the  science  of  what  it  ought  to  be.^^  It  is
particular  or  universal.  Particular  Jurisprudence  is  the  science
of  any  actual  system  of  law,  or  of  any  portion  of  it.  The  only
practical  jurisprudence  is  particular.

The  proper  subject  of  General  or  Universal  Jurisprudence
(as  distinguished  from  Universal  Legislation)  is  a  description  of
such  subjects  and  ends  of  Law  as  are  common  to  all  systems ;
and  of  those  resemblances  between  different  systems  which  are
bottomed  in  the  common  nature  of  man,  or  correspond  to  the
resembling  points  in  their  several  positions.

And  these  resemblances  will  be  found  to  be  very  close,  and
to  cover  a  large  part  of  the  field.  They  are  necessarily  confined
to  the  resemblances  between  the  systems  of  a  few  nations ;  since
it  is  only  a  few  systems  with  which  it  is  possible  to  become
acquainted,  even  imperfectly.  From  these,  however,  the  rest
may  be  presumed.  And  it  is  only  the  systems  of  two  or  three
nations  which  deserve  attention : — the  writings  of  the  Eoman
Jurists ;  the  decisions  of  English  Judges  in  modem  times ;  the
provisions  of  French  and  Prussian  Codes  as  to  arrangement.
Though  the  points  are  also  few  in  which  the  laws  of  nations
ought  to  be  the  same  (i.e.  precisely  alike),  yet  there  is  much
room  for  universal  legislation  :  i.e.  the  circumstances  not  precisely
alike  may  be  treated  of  together,  in  respect  of  what  they  have
in  common ;  with  remarks  directed  to  their  differences.  Whether
the  principles  unfolded  deserve  the  name  of  Universal  or  not,  is

^^  For  its  meaning  iu  the  sense  of  the  French,  see  Blondeau,  Dupin,  and  others.


1078  On  the  Study  of

of  no  importance. Jurisprudence  may  be  universal  with  respect
to  its  subjects :  Not  less  so  than  legislation.


Inevitable
(and  some-
times in-
tentional)
implica-
tion of
Legisla-
tion with
Jurispni-
dence.


It  is  impossible  to  consider  Jurisprudence  quite  apart  from
Legislation ;  since  the  inducements  or  considerations  of  expedi-
ency which  lead  to  the  establishment  of  laws,  must  be  adverted
to  in  explaining  their  origin  and  mechanism.  If  the  causes  of
laws  and  of  the  rights  and  obligations  which  they  create  be  not
assigned,  the  laws  themselves  are  unintelligible.

Where  the  subject  is  the  same,  but  the  provisions  of  different
systems  with  respect  to  that  subject  are  different,  it  is  necessaiy
to  assign  the  causes  of  the  difference :  whether  they  consist  in  a
necessary  diversity  of  circumstances,  or  in  a  diversity  of  views
on  the  part  of  their  respective  authors  with  reference  to  the
ends  of  Law.  Thus,  the  rejection  or  limited  reception  of  entails
in  one  system,  and  their  extensive  reception  in  another,  are  partly
owing  to  the  different  circumstances  in  which  the  communiti^
are  placed ; — partly  to  the  different  views  of  the  aristocratic  and
democratic  legislators  by  whom  these  provisions  have  been
severally  made.

So  far  as  these  differences  are  inevitable — are  imposed  upon
different  countries — there  can  be  no  room  for  praise  or  blame
Where  they  are  the  effect  of  choice,  there  is  room  for  praise  or
blame ;  but  I  shall  treat  them  not  as  subjects  of  either,  but  aa
causes  explaining  the  existence  of  the  differences.  So  of  the
admission  or  prohibition  of  divorce — Marriages  within  certain
degrees,  etc.

Wherever  an  opinion  is  pronounced  upon  the  merits  and
demerits  of  Law,  an  impartial  statement  of  the  conflictii^
opinions  should  be  given.  The  teacher  of  Jurisprudence  may
have,  and  probably  has,  decided  opinions  of  his  own;  but  it
may  be  questioned  whether  earnestness  be  less  favourable  to
impartiality  than  indifference ;  and  he  ought  not  to  attempt  to
insinuate  his  opinion  of  merit  and  demerit  under  pretence  of
assigning  causes.  In  certain  cases  which  do  not  try  the  passions
(as  rescission  of  contract  for  inadequacy  of  consideration)  he
may,  with  advantage,  offer  opinions  upon  merits  and  demerits.
These  occasional  excursions  into  the  territory  of  Legislation,  may
serve  to  give  a  specimen  of  the  manner  in  which  such  questions
should  be  treated.  This  particularly  applies  to  Codification :  a
question  which  may  be  agitated  with  safety,  because  everybody
must  admit  that  Law  ought  to  be  known,  whatever  he  may
think  of  the  provisions  of  which  it  ought  to  consist.


yurtsprudence.  1079

Attempting  to  expound  the  principles  which  are  the  subject
of  the  science  of  Jurisprudence  (or  rather  to  expound  as  many
of  them  as  a  limited  Course  of  Lectures  will  embrace),  he  must
not  only  try  to  state  them  in  general  or  abstract  expressions,
but  must  also  endeavour  to  illustrate  them  by  examples  from
particular  systems :  especially  by  examples  from  the  Law  of
England,  and  from  the  Eoman  or  Civil  Law.

For  the  following  sufficient  reason  (to  which  many  others  Value  of
might  be  added),  the  Roman  or  Civil  Law  is,  of  all  particular  of  Roman
systems,  other  than  the  Law  of  England,  the  best  of  the  sources  Law.
from  which  such  illustrations  might  be  drawn.

In  some  of  the  nations  of  modem  Continental  Europe  (as,
for  example,  in  France),  the  actual  system  of  law  is  mainly  of
Soman  descent;  and  in  others  of  the  same  nations  (as,  for
example,  in  the  States  of  Germany),  the  actual  system  of  law,
though  not  descended  from  the  Eoman,  has  been  closely  assimi-
lated to  the  Eoman  by  large  importations  from  it.

Accordingly,  in  most  of  the  nations  of  modern  Continental
Europe,  much  of  the  substance  of  the  actual  system,  and  much
of  the  technical  language  in  which  it  is  clothed,  is  derived  from
the  Eoman  Law,  and  without  some  knowledge  of  the  EomQ,n
Law  the  technical  language  is  unintelligible;  whilst  the  order
or  arrangement  commonly  given  to  the  system,  imitates  the
exemplar  of  a  scientific  arrangement  which  is  presented  by  the
Institutes  of  Justinian.  Even  in  our  own  country,  a  large
portion  of  the  Ecclesiastical  and  Equity,  and  some  (though  a
smaller)  portion  of  the  Common  Law,  is  derived  immediately
from  the  Eoman  Law,  or  from  the  Eoman  through  the  Canon.

Nor  has  the  influence  of  the  Eoman  Law  been  limited  to
the  positive  law  of  the  modem  European  nations.  For  the
technical  language  of  this  all -reaching  system  has  deeply
tinctured  the  language  of  the  international  law  or  morality
which  those  nations  afltect  to  observe.  By  drawing,  then,  largely
for  examples  on  the  Eoman  or  Civil  Law,  an  expositor  of  General
Jurisprudence  (whilst  illustrating  his  appropriate  subject)  might
present  an  idea  of  a  system  which  is  a  key  to  the  international
morality,  the  diplomacy,  and  to  much  of  the  positive  law,  of
modern  civilised  communities.

It  is  much  to  be  regretted  that  the  study  of  the  Eoman
Law  is  neglected  in  this  country,  and  that  the  real  merits  of  its
founders  and  expositors  are  so  little  understood.

Much  has  been  talked  of  the  philosophy  of  the Eoman


io8o  On  the  Sttidy  of

Institutional  writers.  Of  familiarity  with  Grecian  pMosopliy
there  are  few  traces  in  their  writings,  and  the  little  that  thej
have  borrowed  from  that  source  is  the  veriest  foolishness :  for
example,  their  accoimt  of  c/us  naturaU,  in  which  they  confound
law  with  animal  instincts ;  law,  with  all  those  wants  and  neces-
sities of  mankind  which  are  causes  of  its  institution.

Nor  is  the  Eoman  law  to  be  resorted  to  as  a  magazine  of
legislative  wisdouL  The  great  Eoman  Lawyers  are,  in  truth,  11
expositors  of  a  positive  or  technical  systeuL  Not  Lord  Cob
himself  is  more  purely  technicaL  Their  real  merits  lie  in  thdr
thorough  mastery  of  that  system ;  in  their  command  of  its  prin-
ciples ;  in  the  readiness  with  which  they  recall,  and  the  facility
and  certainty  with  which  they  apply  theuL

In  support  of  my  own  opinion  of  these  great  writers  I  shaD
quote  the  authority  of  two  of  the  most  eminent  Jurists  of  modern
times.

*The  permanent  value  of  the  Corpus  Juris  Civilis,'  says
Falck,  *  does  not  lie  in  the  Decrees  of  the  Emperors,  but  in  tk
remains  of  juristical  literature  which  have  been  preserved  in  the
Pandects.  Nor  is  it  so  much  the  matter  of  these  juristical
writings,  as  the  scientific  method  employed  by  the  authors  in
explicating  the  notions  and  maxims  with  which  they  have  to
deal,  that  has  rendered  them  models  to  all  succeeding  ages,  and
pre-eminently  fitted  them  to  produce  and  to  develop  those
qualities  of  the  mind  which  are  requisite  to  form  a  Jurist^

And  Savigny  says,  *  It  has  been  shewn  above,  that,  in  our
science,  all  results  depend  on  the  possession  of  leading  principles;
and  it  is  exactly  this  possession  upon  which  the  greatness  of  the
Roman  Jurists  rests.  The  notions  and  maxims  of  their  science
do  not  appear  to  them  to  be  the  creatures  of  their  own  will;
they  are  actual  beings,  with  whose  existence  and  genealogy  they
have  become  familiar  from  long  and  intimate  intercourse.  Hence
their  whole  method  of  proceeding  has  a  certainty  which  is  found
nowhere  else  except  in  mathematics ;  and  it  may  be  said  without
exaggeration,  that  they  calculate  with  their  ideas.  If  they  have
a  case  to  decide,  they  begin  by  acquiring  the  most  vivid  and
distinct  perception  of  it,  and  we  see  before  our  eyes  the  rise  and
progress  of  the  whole  affair,  and  all  the  changes  it  undergoes.
It  is  as  if  this  particular  case  were  the  germ  whence  the  whole
science  was  to  be  developed.  Hence,  with  them,  theory  and
practice  are  not  in  fact  distinct ;  their  theory  is  so  thoroughly
worked  out  as  to  be  fit  for  immediate  application,  and  their

^  Jurist.  Encyc.  cap.  iL  §  109.


Jurisprudence.  i  o  8 1

practice  is  uniformly  ennobled  by  scientific  treatment.  In  every
principle  they  see  a  case  to  which  it  may  be  applied ;  in  every
case,  the  rule  by  which  it  is  determined ;  and,  in  the  facility
with  which  they  pass  from  the  'general  to  the  particular  and  the
particular  to  the  general,  their  mastery  is  indisputable/^^

In  consequence  of  this  mastery  of  principles,  of  their  perfect
consistency  ('elegantia'^),  and  of  the  clearness  of  the  method
in  which  they  are  arranged,  there  is  no  positive  system  of  law
which  it  is  so  easy  to  seize  as  a  whole.  The  smallness  of  its
volume  tends  to  the  same  end.

The  principles  themselves,  many  of  them  being  derived  from
barbarous  ages,  are  indeed  ill  fitted  to  the  ends  of  law ;  and  the
conclusions  at  which  they  arrive  being  logical  consequences  of
their  imperfect  principles,  necessarily  partake  of  the  same  defect.^^

A  subordinate  merit  of  the  Roman  lawyers  is  their  style,
always  simple  and  clear,  commonly  brief  and  nervous,  and
entirely  free  from  nitor.  Its  merits  are  appropriate  and  in
perfect  taste.  It  bears  the  same  relation  to  that  of  Blackstone
and  Gravina,  which  a  Grecian  statue  bears  to  a  milliner's  doll
in  the  finery  of  the  season.

I  by  no  means  mean  to  put  the  study  of  the  Eoman  Law  on
a  level  in  point  of  importance  with  that  of  the  Aristotelic  Logic
(for  the  Roman  Law  is  not  necessary) :  but  in  the  respect  now
under  consideration,  it  bears  the  same  relation  to  law  and  morals,
which  the  school  logic  bears  to  philosophy.

The  number  of  the  analogies  between  the  Roman  Law  and
many  of  the  Continental  systems,  and  between  the  Roman  and
English  Law,  is  not  indeed  to  be  wondered  at :  since  those
Continental  systems  and  also  our  own  system  of  Equity,  have
been  formed  more  or  less  extensively  on  the  Roman  Law ;  chiefly
on  the  Roman,  through  the  Canon.  But  the  English  Law,  like
the  Roman,  is,  for  the  most  part,  indigenous,  or  comparatively
little  has  been  imported  into  it  from  the  Roman.  The  coin-
cidences shew  how  numerous  are  the  principles  and  distinctions
which  all  systems  of  law  have  in  common.  The  extensive
coincidence  of  particular  systems  mjiy  be  ascertained  practically
by  comparing  two  expositions  of  any  two  bodies  of  law.  The
coincidence  is  pre-eminently  remarkable  in  the  Roman  Law  and
the  Common  Law  of  England.

•* Vom  Berufj  etc.  cap.  iv.  p.  80.  semper  probem,  quae  ssepe  ducuntur  ex

^  For  thia  application  of  the  word  quibusdam  veteris  persuasionis  apicibus

'elegantia,'  see  p.  635,  anU.  opiniono  consecratis.' — Leibnitz, Epist.

^  *  Quanuqam  non  ideo  conclusiones  cut  Kestnerum.


io82  On  the  Sttuly  of

Uses  of  the  Having  stated  generally  the  nature  of  the  science  of  Juris-

Jurispni- prudence,  and  also  the  manner  in  which  I  think  it  ought  to
dence. be  expounded,  I  proceed  to  indicate  briefly  a  few  of  its  possible
uses.  •

I  would  remark,  in  the  first  place,  that  a  well-grounded  study
of  the  principles  which  form  the  subject  of  the  science,  would  be
an  advantageous  preparative  for  the  study  of  English  Law.

To  the  student  who  begins  the  study  of  the  English  Law,
without  some  previous  knowledge  of  the  rcUionale  of  law  in
general,  it  naturally  appears  an  assemblage  of  arbitrary  and
imconnected  rules.  But  if  he  approached  it  with  a  well-grounded
knowledge  of  the  general  principles  of  jurisprudence,  and  with
the  map  of  a  body  of  law  distinctly  impressed  upon  his  mind,
he  might  obtain  a  clear  conception  of  it  (as  a  system  or  organic
whole)  with  comparative  ease  and  rapidity.

With  comparative  ease  and  rapidity,  he  might  perceive  the
various  relations  of  its  various  parts;  the  dependence  of  its
minuter  rules  on  its  general  principles ;  and  the  subordination
of  such  of  these  principles  as  are  less  general  or  extensive,  to
such  of  them  as  are  more  general,  and  run  through  the  whole
of  its  structure.

In  short,  the  preliminary  study  of  the  general  principles  of
jurisprudence,  and  the  mental  habits  which  the  study  of  them
tends  to  engender,  would  enable  him  to  acquire  the  principles  of
English  jurisprudence,  in  particular,  far  more  speedily  and
accurately  than  he  possibly  could  have  acquired  them,  in  case  he
had  begun  the  study  of  them  without  the  preparative  discipliua
There  is  (I  believe)  a  not  unprevalent  opinion,  that  the
study  of  the  science  whose  uses  I  am  endeavouring  to  demonstrate,
might  tend  to  disqualify  the  student  for  the  practice  of  the  law,
or  to  inspire  him  with  an  aversion  from  the  practice  of  it  That
some  who  have  studied  this  science  have  shewn  themselves
incapable  of  practice,  or  that  some  who  have  studied  this  science
have  conceived  a  disgust  of  practice,  is  not  improbably  a  fact
But  in  spite  of  this  seeming  experience  in  favour  of  the  opinion
in  question,  1  deny  that  the  study  itself  has  the  tendency  which
the  opinion  imputes  to  it.

A  well-grounded  knowledge  of  the  general  principles  of
jurispnidence  helps,  as  I  have  said,  to  a  well-grounded  knowledge
of  the  principles  of  English  jurisprudence ;  and  a  previous  well-
grounded  knowledge  of  the  principles  of  English  jurisprudence,
can  scarcely  incapacitate  the  student  for  the  acquisition  of
|k  practical  knowledge  in  the  chambers  of  a  conveyancer,  pleader,


yurisprudence,  1083

or  draftsman.  Armed  with  that  previous  knowledge,  he  seizes
the  ratioTiale  of  the  practice  which  he  there  witnesses  and
partakes  in,  with  comparative  ease  and  rapidity ;  and  his  acquisi-
tion of  practical  knowledge,  and  practical  dexterity  and  readiness,
is  much  less  irksome  than  it  would  be  in  case  it  were  merely
empirical.  Insomuch,  that  the  study  of  the  general  principles
of  jurisprudence,  instead  of  having  any  of  the  tendency  which
the  opinion  in  question  imputes  to  it,  has  a  tendency  (by  ultimate
consequence)  to  qualify  for  practice,  and  to  lessen  the  natural
repugnance  with  which  it  is  regarded  by  beginners.

The  advantage  of  the  study  of  common  principles  and  dis-  System
tinctions,  and  of  history  considered  as  a  preparative  for  the  study  Pi^LL  ^"
of  one's  own  particular  system,  is  fully  appreciated  in  Prussia :
a  country  whose  administrators,  for  practical  skill,  are  at  least
on  a  level  with  those  of  any  country  in  Europe.

In  the  Prussian  Universities,  little  or  no  attention  is  given
by  the  Law  Faculty  to  the  actual  law  of  the  country.  Their
studies  are  wholly  or  almost  entirely  confined  to  the  general
principles  of  Law ;  to  the  Eoman,  Canon,  and  Feudal  law,  as  the
sources  of  the  actual  system :  the  Government  trusting  that
those  who  are  acquainted  with  such  general  principles  and  with
the  historical  basis  of  the  actual  system,  will  acquire  that  actual
system  more  readily,  as  well  as  more  groundedly,  than  if  they
had  at  once  set  down  to  the  study  of  it,  or  tried  to  acquire  it
empirically.

*  In  the  Prussian  states,'  says  Savigny,  '  ever  since  the
establishment  of  the  Landrecht,  no  order  of  study  has  ever  been
prescribed ;  and  this  freedom  from  restraint,  sanctioned  by  the
former  experience  of  the  German  universities,  has  never  been
infringed  upon.  Even  the  number  of  professors,  formerly
required  on  account  of  the  Common  Law  {Gemeiiies  Recht),  has
not  been  reduced,  and  the  curators  of  the  universities  have  never
led  either  the  professors  or  the  students  to  believe,  that  a  part
of  the  lectures,  formerly  necessary,  were  likely  to  be  dispensed
with.  Originally  it  was  thought  advisable  that,  in  each  univer-
sity, one  chair  at  least  should  be  set  apart  for  the  Prussian  law,
and  a  considerable  prize  was  offered  for  the  best  manual.  But
even  this  was  subsequently  no  longer  required ;  and,  up  to  the
present  time,  the  Prussian  law  has  not  been  taught  at  the
university  of  Berlin.  The  established  examinations  are  formed
upon  the  same  principle ;  the  first,  on  the  entrance  into  real
matters  of  business,  turning  exclusively  on  the  common  law ;
the  next  period  is  set  apart  for  the  directly-practical  education


1084  On  the  Study  of

of  the  jurisconsults;  and  the  two  following  examinations  are
the  first  that  have  the  Landrecht  for  their  subject-matter;  at
the  same  time,  however,  without  excluding  the  common  law.
At  present,  therefore,  juridical  education  is  considered  to  consist
of  two  halves ;  the  first  half  (the  university)  including  only  the
learned  groimdwork ;  the  second,  on  the  other  hand,  having  for
its  object  the  knowledge  of  the  Landrecht,  the  knowledge  of  the
Prussian  procedure,  and  practical  skill.'*'

The  opinion  I  have  expressed  was  that  of  Hale,  Mansfield,®
and  others  (as  evinced  by  their  practice)  and  was  recommended
by  Sir  William  Blackstone,  some  eighty  years  ago.^

Backed  by  such  authority,  I  think  I  may  conclude  that  the
science  in  question,  if  taught  and  studied  skilfully  and  effectually,
and  with  the  requisite  detail,  would  be  no  inconsiderable  help  to
the  acquisition  of  English  law.

I  may  also  urge  the  utility  of  acquiring  the  talent  of  seizing
or  divining  readily  the  principles  and  provisions  (through  the
mist  of  a  strange  phraseology)  of  other  systems  of  law,  were  it
only  in  a  mere  practical  point  of  view  :

1**.  With  a  view  to  practice,  or  to  the  administration  of
justice  in  those  of  our  foreign  dependencies  wherein  foreign
systems  of  law  more  or  less  obtain.  2°.  With  a  view  to  the
systems  of  law  founded  on  the  Eoman  directly,  or  through  the
Canon  or  the  Roman,  which  even  at  home  have  an  application
to  certain  classes  of  objects.  3°.  With  a  ^dew  to  questions
arising  incidentally,  even  in  the  Courts  which  administer  indi-
genous law.  4**.  With  a  view  to  the  questions  in  the  way  of
appeal  coming  before  the  Privy  Council :  A  Court  which  is
bound  to  decide  questions  arising  out  of  numerous  systems,
without  the  possibility  of  judges  or  advocates  having  any  specific
knowledge  of  them :  an  evil  for  which  a  familiarity  with  the
general  principles  of  law  on  the  part  of  the  Court  and  advocates
is  the  only  conceivable  palliative.

For,  certainly,  a  man  familiar  with  such  principles,  as
detached  from  any  particular  systems,  and  accustomed  to  seize
analogies,  will  be  less  puzzled  with  Mahomedan  or  Hindoo
institutions  than  if  he  knew  them  only  in  coiicreto,  as they  are

•^  Savigny Vom Bcrufy etc. Hay-  so  little  studied  in  England. ' Barnet's

ward's  translation,  p.  165.  Xt/e,  p.  7.

^  *  Lord  Hale  often  said,  the  true •*  Blackstone  recommends  the  stndy

grounds  and  reasons  of  law  were  so  well  of  the  Law  of  Nature,  and  of  the  Romin

delivered  in  the  (Roman)  Digests,  that  Law,  in  connection  with  the  studv  of  the

a  man  could  never  understand  law  as  a  particular  grounds  of  our  own. Bv  Liw

science  so  well  as  by  seeking  it  there,  ofNature,  etc.,  he  seems  to  mean  the  verr

and  therefore  lamented  much  that  it  was  study  which  I  am  now  commending.


I


yurisprudence.  1085

in  his  own  system :  nor  would  he  be  quite  so  inclined  to  bend
every  Hindoo  institution  to  the  model  of  his  own.

And  (secondly)  without  some  familiarity  with  foreign  systems,
no  la-wyer  can  or  will  appreciate  accurately  the  defects  or  merits
of  his  own.

And  as  a  well-grounded  knowledge  of  the  science  whose
uses  I  am  endeavouring  to  demonstrate,  would  facilitate  to  the
student  the  acquisition  of  the  English  law,  so  would  it  enable
him  to  apprehend,  with  comparative  ease  and  rapidity,  almost
any  of  the  foreign  systems  to  which  he  might  direct  his  attention.
So  numerous,  as  I  have  said,  are  the  principles  common  to
systems  of  law,  that  a  lawyer  who  has  mastered  the  law  which
obtains  in  his  own  country,  has  mastered  implicitly  most  of  the
substance  of  the  law  which  obtains  in  any  other  community.
So  that  the  difficulty  with  which  a  lawyer,  versed  in  the  law  of
his  own  country,  apprehends  the  law  of  another,  is  rather  the
result  of  differences  between  the  terms  of  the  systems,  than  of
substantial  or  real  differences  between  their  maxims  and  rules.

Now  the  obstacle  to  the  apprehension  of  foreign  systems
which  is  opposed  by  their  technical  language,  might  in  part  be
obviated  or  lightened  to  the  student  of  General  Jurisprudence,
if  the  science  were  expounded  to  him  competently,  in  the  method
which  I  shfidl  endeavour  to  observe.  If  the  exposition  of  the
science  were  made  agreeably  to  that  method,  it  wbuld  explain
incidentally  the  leading  terms,  as  well  as  the  leading  principles,
of  the  Roman  or  Civil  Law.  And  if  the  student  were  possessed
of  those  terms,  and  were  also  grounded  thoroughly  in  the  law  of
his  own  country,  he  would  master  with  little  difficulty  the
substance  of  the  Eoman  system,  and  of  any  of  the  modern  systems
which  are  mainly  derivatives  from  the  Roman.

It  has,  I  perceive,  been  maintained  by  some  able  and  dis-
tinguished persons,  that  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Ecclesiastical
Courts  ought  to  be  extended,  in  order  that  the  ecclesiastical  bar
may  not  be  extinguished,  and  that  a  sufficient  supply  of  Civilians
may  be  secured  to  the  country.

The  importance  of  securing  the  existence  of  a  body  of
lawyers,  with  a  somewhat  extensive  knowledge  of  the  Civil  Law,
is  not  to  be  disputed.  Questions  arise  incidentally  in  all  our
tribunals,  on  systems  of  foreign  law,  which  are  mainly  founded
on  the  Civil.  The  law  obtaining  in  some  of  our  colonies  is
principally  derived  from  the  same  original  And  questions
arising  directly  out  of  colonial  law,  are  brought  before  the  Privy
Council  in  the  way  of  appeal.  In  order  that  these  [various
VOL.  n.  2  p


io86  On  the  Study  of

questions  may  be  justly  decided,  and  in  order  that  the  law  of
these  colonies  may  be  duly  administered,  the  existence  of  a
body  of  English  lawyers,  with  a  somewhat  extensive  knowledge
of  the  Civil  Law,  is  manifestly  requisite.

But  I  think  it  will  be  questioned  by  all  who  are  versed  in
the  Civil  Law,  whether  a  well-grounded  study  of  the  principles
of  the  Law  of  England,  of  the  rcUiancUe  of  law  in  general,  and
of  the  leading  principles  and  terms  of  the  Soman  system  itself,
be  not  a  surer  road  to  the  acquisition  of  this  knowledge,  than  the
study  of  Ecclesiastical  Law,  or  practice  at  the  ecclesiastical  bar.

Before  I  proceed  further,  it  will  be  proper  that  I  should
describe  what  is,  in  my  opinion, the  education necessary  to
form  a  Lawyer.
Training  ^^  order  to  the  formation  of  a  theoretico-practical  lawyer,

9^*  extensively  versed  in  law  as  a  science,  and  in the sciences

related  to  law — such  a  man  as  were  alone  capable  of  advancing
the  science,  and  of  conceiving  sound  legislative  reforms — he
must  begin  early  to  attend  to  these  studies,  and  must  be  satisfied
with  a  limited  attention  to  other  sciences.

The  languages  of  classical  antiquity  are  almost  indispensable
helps  to  all  sound  acquirements  in  Politics,  Jurisprudence,  or
any  of  the  Moral  Sciences.  They  are  also  requisite  for  the
formation  of  those  elevated  sentiments,  and  that  rectitude  of
judgment  and  taste,  which  are  inseparably  connected  with  them.
These  languages  may  be  acquired,  and  in  fact  are  acquired,  when
well  acquired,  in  early  youth.

But  with  regard  to  mathematics  (except  in  as  far  as  the
methods  of  investigation  and  proof  are  concerned,  and  which
would  form  a  branch  of  a  well  conceived  course  of  logic),  I  can-
not see  why  men  intended  for  law,  or  for  public  life,  should  study
them :  or  why  any  men  should  study  them,  who  have  not  a
particular  vocation  to  them,  or  to  some  science  or  art  in  which
they  are  extensively  applicable.  To  all  other  men,  the  advan-
tages derivable  from  them,  as  a  gymnastic  to  the  mind,  might
be  derived  (at  least  in  a  great  measure)  from  a  well  conceived
course  of  logic :  into  which,  indeed,  so  much  of  mathematics  as
would  sufi&ce  to  give  those  advantages,  would  naturally  enter.

Logic  is  a  necessary  preparation  to  the  study  of  the  moral
sciences,  where  the  ambiguity  of  the  terms  (especially  that  which
consists  in  their  varying  extension),  the  number  of  collective
names  (apt  to  be  confounded  with  existences),  and  the  elliptical
form  in  which  the  reasoning  is  expressed,  render  a  previous


yurisprudence.  1087

familiarity  with  the  nature  of  terms  and  the  process  of  reasoning
absolutely  necessary.  In  pure  mathematics,  and  in  the  sciences
to  which  these  are  largely  applied,  a  previous  acquaintance  with
the  nature  of  induction,  generalisation  and  reasoning  may  not
be  so  necessary ;  because  the  terms  are  definite,  the  premisses
few  and  formally  introduced,  and  the  consequences  deduced  at
length.  But  to  those  who  have  not  time  to  discipline  their
minds  by  this  most  perfect  exemplification  of  these  processes,  a
previous  acquaintance  with  logic  is  absolutely  necessary.  Indeed,
considering  the  sort  of  difl5culties  which  beset  moral  disquisitions,
logic  is  a  better  preparation  than  the  mathematics  or  the  physical
sciences ;  which  are  not  the  theory  of  these  mental  processes,
but  merely  exemplifications  of  them.

With  regard  to  lawyers  in  particular,  it  may  be  remarked,
that  the  study  of  the  ratwnale  of  law  is  as  well  (or  nearly  as
well)  fitted  as  that  of  mathematics,  to  exercise  the  mind  to  the
mere  process  of  deduction  from  given  hjrpotheses.  This  was  the
opinion  of  Leibnitz:  no  mean  judge  of  the  relative  values  of  the  two
sciences  in  this  respect.  Speaking  of  the  Eoman  Lawyers  he  says,
'Digestorum  opus(vel  potius  auctorum,unde  excerpta  sunt,  labores)
admiror :  nee  quidquam  vidi,  sive  rationum  acumen,  sive  dicendi
nervos  spectes,  quod  magis  accedat  ad  mathematicorum  laudem.
Mira  est  vis  consequentiarum,  certatque  ponderi  subtilitas.'^

And  with  regard  to  an  accurate  and  ready  perception  of
analogies,  and  the  process  of  inference  founded  on  analogy
('argumentatio  per  analogiam,'  or  'analogica') — the  basis  of  all
just  inferences  with  regard  to  mere  matter  of  fact  and  existence,
— the  study  of  law  (if  rationally  pursued)  is,  I  should  think,
better  than  that  of  mathematics,  or  of  any  of  the  physical
sciences  in  which  mathematics  are  extensively  applicable.  For
example,  the  process  of  analogical  inference  in  the  application
of  law :  the  process  of  analogical  consequence  from  existing  law,
by  which  much  of  law  is  built  out :  analogical  inferences  with
reference  to  the  consideration  of  expediency  on  which  it  is  built :
the  principles  of  judicial  evidence,  with  the  judgments  formed
upon  evidence  in  the  course  of  practice :  all  these  shew  that  no
study  can  so  form  the  mind  to  reason  justly  and  readily  from

^  Leibnitz, Epist. ad Keatnerum.  tigia  deprehendas. Et  ubi  ab  eo  reces-

And  again,  in  the  same  epistle  : *  Dixi  sum  est,  sive  ob  formularum  ductus,  sive

sjepius,  post  scripta  geometraruin,  niliil  ex  majorum  traditis,  sive  ob  leges  novas,

cxtare,  quod  vi  ac  subtilitate  cum  Ro-  ipsse consequentise ex nova njrpothesi

manorum  jurisconsultorum  scriptis  com-  aeternis  rectae  rationis  dictaminibus  ad-

parari  possit,  tantum  nervi  inest,  tautum  dita,  mirabili  ingenio,  *nec  minore  tirmi-

profunditatis. . . . Nee  uspiam  juris  tate  didncuntor. Nee  tarn  ssepe  a  ratione

naturalis  [ireeclare  exculti  uberiora  ves-  abitur  quam  vulgo  videtur.'


io88  On  i/ie  Study  of

analogy  as  that  of  law.  And,  accordingly,  it  is  matter  of  common
remark,  that  lawyers  are  the  best  judges  of  evidence  with  regard
to  matter  of  fact  or  existence.

And  even  admitting  that,  as  a  gymnastic,  mathematics  may
be  somewhat  superior  to  law,  still  it  is  better  that  lawyers,  and
young  men  destined  for  public  life,  should  not  affect  to  know  them
extensively ;  but  (having  acquired  the  classics,  and  gone  through
a  course  of  logic)  should,  as  early  as  possible,  bend  their  attention,
strenuously  and  almost  exclusively,  to  General  Jurisprudence,
Legislation,  and  all  the  sciences  related  to  these,  which  tend  more
directly  to  fit  them  for  their  profession,  or  for  practical  politics.

By  the  former,  they  are  merely  exercising  (with  reference  to
their  callings)  the  mental  powers.  By  the  latter,  they  are  at
once  exercising  the  mental  powers,  and  making  the  very  acquisi-
tions without  which  they  are  not  adequately  fitted  to  exercise
their  callings.  If  I  want  to  go  to  York  on  foot,  I  may  acquire
the  swiftness  and  endurance  which  would  help  me  to  my  goal,
by  preparatory  walks  on  the  road  to  Exeter.  But  by  setting
out  at  the  commencement  for  York,  I  am  at  once  acquiring
swiftness  and  endurance,  and  making  a  progress  (during  the
acquisition)  to  the  point  which  I  am  specially  aiming  to  reach

These  remarks  will  not  apply  to  men  who  are  gifted  with
such  velocity  and  such  reach  of  apprehension,  that  they  may
aim  safely  at  universality.  They  merely  apply  to  men  whose
acquisitions  are  got  by  laborious  attention :  the  only  way  in
which,  to  my  apprehension,  they  are  to  be  got.  These  must
content  themselves  with  moderate  acquisitions,  out  of  the  domain
of  the  sciences  bearing  directly  on  their  callings  (enough  to  pre-
vent bigotry),  and  must  begin  early  to  master  those  sciences.  I
am  sorry  it  is  so.  For  nothing  would  give  me  greater  pleasure
than  extensive  knowledge ;  especially  of  the  strict  sciences.  But
(speaking  generally)  he  who  would  know  anything  well,  must
resolve  to  be  ignorant  of  many  things.


Necessity
for  a  Law
Faculty.


And  here  I  must  add  that,  in  order  to  enable  young  men
preparing  for  the  profession,  to  lay  a  solid  basis  for  the
acquisition  (in  the  office  of  a  practitioner)  of  practical  skill,
and  for  subsequent  successful  practice,  an  institution  like  the
Law  Faculty  in  the  best  of  the  foreign  universities  seems  to
be  requisite :  an  institution  in  which  the  general  principles  of
jurisprudence  and  legislation  (the  two  including  ethics  gene-
rally), international  law,  the  history  of  the  English  law  (with
outlines  of  the  Eoman,  Canon,  and  Feudal,  as  its  three  principal


yurisprudence.  1089

sources),  and  the  actual  English  law  (as  divided  into  fit  compart-
ments), might  be  taught  by  competent  instructors.

In  such  a  school,  young  men,  not  intending  to  practise,  but
destined  for  public  life  ('ad  res  gerendas  nati'),  might  find
instruction  in  the  sciences  which  are  requisite  to  legislators.
Young  men  intended  for  administration  (other  than  that  of
justice)  would  attend  the  law  faculty ;  as,  on  the  other  hand,
the  men  intended  for  law  would  attend  the  courses  on  the
various  political  sciences,  such  as  political  economy,  etc.  For,
however  great  may  be  the  utility  of  the  study  of  General  Juris-
prudence to  lawyers  generally ;  however  absolute  its  necessity  to
lawyers  entrusted  with  the  business  of  Codification,  its  import-
ance to  men  who  are  destined  to  take  part  in  the  public  business
of  the  country  is  scarcely  inferior.

It  is  extremely  important  that  a  large  portion  of  the  aristo-
cracy, whose  station  and  talents  destine  them  to  the  patrician
profession  of  practical  politics,  should  at  least  be  imbued  with
the  gcneralia  of  law,  and  with  sound  views  of  legislation ;  should,
80  far  as  possible,  descend  into  the  detail,  and  even  pass  some
years  in  practice.

If  the  houses  of  parliament  abounded  with  laymen  thus
accomplished,  the  demand  for  legal  reform  would  be  more  dis-
criminating, and  also  more  imperative;  much  bad  and  crude
legislation  would  be  avoided ; — opposition  to  plausible  projects
not  coming  from  a  suspected  quarter.  This,  in  the  innovating
age  before  us,  is  no  small  matter.  And  though  lawyers,  fully
acquainted  with  system,  alone  are  good  legislators,  they  need
perhaps  a  check  on  professional  prejudices,  and  even  on  sinister
interests.

But  such  a  check  (and  such  an  encouragement  to  good
lawyers)  would  be  found  in  a  public  of  laymen  versed  in  prin-
ciples of  law,  and  not  in  men  ignorant  of  detail  and  practice.

It  appears  to  me  that  London  possesses  peculiar  advantages
for  such  a  Law  Faculty.  The  instructors,  even  if  not  practising
lawyers,  would  teach  under  the  eye  and  control  of  practitioners :
and  hence  would  avoid  many  of  the  errors  into  which  the
German  teachers  of  law,  excellent  as  they  are,  naturally  fall,  in
consequence  of  their  not  coming  sufficiently  into  collison  with
practical  men.  The  realities  with  which  such  men  have  to  deal,
are  the  best  correctives  of  any  tendency  to  antiquarian  trifling
or  wild  philosophy  to  which  men  of  science  might  be  prone.  In
England,  theory  would  be  moulded  to  practice.


L090  On  the  Study  of

Besides  the  direct  advantages  of  such  an  institution,  many
incidental  ones  would  arise.

In  the  first  place;  a  juridical  literature  worthy  of  the
English  bar.

Good  legal  treatises  (and  especially  the  most  important  of
any,  a  good  institutional  treatise,  philosophical,  historical,  and
dogmatical,  on  the  whole  of  the  English  law)  can  only  be  pro-
vided by  men,  or  by  combinations  of  men,  thoroughly  groimded
and  extensively  and  accurately  read.  Such  books  might  he
produced  by  a  body  of  men  conversant  (from  the  duties  of  their
ofl&ce)  with  the  subjects,  but  can  hardly  be  expected  from  the
men  who  now  usually  make  them :  viz.  not  lawyers  of  exten-
sive knowledge  (whose  practical  avocations  leave  them  no
leisure  for  the  purpose,  although  generally  they  are  the  only  mai
fit  for  the  task),  but  young  men,  seeking  notice,  and  who  often
want  the  knowledge  they  affect  to  impart.

Such  men  as  I  assume  a  law  faculty  to  consist  of,  being
accustomed  to  exposition,  would  also  produce  well-constructed
and  well-written  books,  as  well  as  books  containing  the  requisite
information.  Excellent  books  are  produced  by  German  Pro-
fessors, in  spite  of  their  secluded  habits ;  many  of  them  being
the  guides  of  practitioners,  or  in  great  esteem  with  them  (e-.g,  those
of  Professor  Thibaut).  In  England,  better  might  be  expected,  for
the  reason  already  assigned :  viz.  the  constant  view  to  practice
forced  upon  writers  by  constant  collision  with  practical  men.

Secondly;  Another  effect  of  the  establishment  of  a  Law
Faculty  would  be,  the  advancement  of  law  and  legislation  as
sciences,  by  a  body  of  men  specially  devoted  to  teaching  them
as  sciences ;  and  able  to  offer  useful  suggestions  for  the  improve-
ment (in  the  way  of  systematising  or  legislating)  of  actual  law.
For  though  enlightened  practical  lawyers  are  the  best  legislators,
they  are  not  perhaps  so  good  originators  (from  want  of  leisure
for  abstraction)  as  such  a  body  as  I  have  imagined.  And  the
exertions  of  such  men,  either  for  the  advancement  of  Juris-
prudence and  Legislation  as  sciences,  or  in  the  way  of  suggest-
ing reforms  in  the  existing  law,  might  be  expected  to  partake  of
the  good  sense  and  sobriety  to  which  the  presence  aiid  castiga-
tion  of  practitioners  would  naturally  form  them.

How  far  such  an  institution  were  practicable,  I  have  not
the  means  of  determining.

There  would  be  one  difficulty  (at  first) ;  that  of  getting  a

sufficient  number  of  teachers  competent  to  prove the  utility  of

.  learning  the  sciences  taught  by  them :  masters  of  their  respec-


Jurisprudence.  1 09 1

tive  sciences  (so  far  as  long  and  assiduous  study  could  make
them  so) ;  and,  moreover,  masters  in  the  difl&cult  art  of  perspic-
uous, discreet,  and  interesting  exposition :  an  art  very  different
from  that  of  oratory,  either  in  Parliament  or  at  the  Bar.  Perhaps
there  is  not  in  England  a  single  man  approaching  the  ideal  of  a
good  teacher  of  any  of  these  sciences.  But  this  difficulty  would
be  obviated,  in  a  few  years,  by  the  demand  for  such  teachers ;
as  it  has  been  in  countries  in  which  similar  institutions  have
been  founded  by  the  governments.

Another  difficulty  is,  the  general  indifference,  in  this  country,
about  such  institutions,  and  the  general  incredulity  as  to  their
utility.  But  this  indifference  and  incredulity  are  happily  giving
way  (however  slowly) ;  and  I  am  convinced  that  the  importance
of  such  institutions,  with  reference  to  the  influence  and  honour
of  the  legal  profession,  and  to  the  good  of  the  country  (so  much
depending  on  the  character  of  that  profession)  will,  before  many
years  are  over,  be  generally  felt  and  acknowledged.^

Encouraging  symptoms  have  already  appeared;  and  there
is  reason  to  hope  from  these  beginnings,  however  feeble,  that
the  government  of  the  country,  or  that  the  Inns  of  Court,  will
ultimately  provide  for  law  students,  and  for  young  men  destined
to  public  life,  the  requisite  means  of  an  education  fitting  them
for  their  high  and  important  vocations.

Having  tried  to  state  or  suggest  the  subjects  of  the  science
of  General  Jurisprudence,  with  tlie  manner  in  which  those  sub-
jects ought  to  be  expounded  and  exemplified ;  and  having  tried
to  demonstrate  the  uses  which  the  study  of  the  science  might
produce ;  I  would  briefly  remark,  that  those  uses  are  such  as
might  result  from  the  study,  if  the  science  were  acquired  by
students  of  law  (professional  or  intended  for  public  life)  with
the  requisite  fulness  and  precision.  But  from  mere  attendance
on  a  Course  of  Lectures  (however  completely  and  correctly  con-
ceived, and  however  clearly  expressed),  the  science  could  not  be
acquired  with  that  requisite  fulness  and  precision.  It  could
not  be  so  acquired,  though  the  lecturer  brought  to  the  task  the
extensive  and  exact  knowledge,  the  powers  of  adequate  and
orderly  conception,  and  the  rare  talent  of  clear  exposition  and
apt  illustration,  which  the  successful  performance  of  the  task
requires.  For  he  could  only  explain  adequately,  or  with  an
approach  to  adequacy,  some  certain  parts  in  the  whole  series ;
filling  up  the  gaps  with  mere  indications  of  the  necessary,  but
necessarily  omitted,  links.

««  Written  in  the  year  1834.


1092  Codificatio7i


CODIFICATION  AND  LAW  REFORM.

^Jj?^' .  Owing  to  the  growing  bulk  and  intricacy  of  the  English  Law
some  (a  bulk  and  intricacy  which  must  go  on  increasing)  it  is  most

^t^fSy?  probable,  nay  it  is  almost  certain,  that,  before  many  years  shall
cation.  have  elapsed,  attempts  will  be  made  to  systematise  it,  to  simplify
its  structure,  to  reduce  its  bulk,  and  so  to  render  it  more  acces-
sible. Partially,  such  attempts  have  already  been  made,  and
are  actually  in  project.  And  owing  to  the  rapidity  with  which
the  accumulation  of  law  goes  on,  to  the  incompatibility  of  many
of  its  provisions  with  the  changed  circumstances  of  society,  and
to  the  turn  for  legal  reform  which  public  opinion  is  taking,  it  is
most  probable,  nay  it  is  almost  certain,  that  the  necessity  for
such  changes  will  in  a  few  years  be  felt  or  imagined,  and  that
such  changes  will  be  attempted,  skilfully  or  unskilfully.  Of  the
expediency  or  inexpediency  of  such  changes  I  presume  not  to
give  an  opinion.  I  merely  affirm  that  changes  of  the  sort  are
in  progress,  and  that  greater  changes  of  the  same  sort  are  to  be
hoped  or  feared.

Now,  wliether  such  changes  shall  increase  or  diminish  the
evU,  will  depend  upon  the  quality  and  the  degree  of  the  skill
which  shall  be  brought  to  the  task.  It  will  depend  upon  the
number  of  competent  workmen  who  can  be  brought  to  it  1
shall  therefore  attempt  to  shew  what  are  the  attainments
requisite  for  such  an  undertaking.

Re-con-  First :  with  reference  to  the  technical  process  of  reconstnict-

struction  ■*■

must  bo  ing  the  law,  so  as  to  reduce  its  bulk  and  to  simplify  its  mechan-
plShed  if  ^^^^'  ^^  ^^  clear  that  none  but  lawyers  can  be  competent  to  it ;
at  all,  by  that  none  but  lawyers  intimately  acquainted  with  the  system  to
Lavn^^ers^ be  operated  upon,  can  ever  produce  it  with  effect.

But  a  mere  acquaintance  with  the  actual  detail  of  the
system,  however  extensive  and  accurate,  will  not  suffice.  It  is
necessary  that  those  who  are  called  to  the  task  should  possess
that  mastery  of  the  system  considered  as  an  organic  whole,
which  is  the  distinguishing  characteristic  of  the  consummate
lawyer.  It  is  pre-eminently  necessary  that  they  should  possess
clear  and  precise  and  ever-present  conceptions  of  the  fundamental


and  Law  Reform,  1093

principles  and  distinctions,  and  of  the  import  of  the  leading
expressions ;  That  they  should  have  constantly  before  their  mind
a  niap  of  the  law  as  a  whole  ;  enabling  it  to  subordinate  the  less
general  under  the  more  general ;  to  perceive  the  relations  of  the
parts  to  one  another ;  and  thus  to  travel  from  general  to  partic-
ular and  particular  to  general,  and  from  a  part  to  its  relations
to  other  parts,  with  readiness  and  ease :  to  subsume  the  particular
under  the  general,  and  to  analyse  and  translate  the  general  into
the  particulars  that  it  contains.

Nor  can  it  be  said  that  this  talent  is  a  mere  idea.  It  has
been  possessed  by  the  consummate  lawyers  of  every  age  and
nation.  It  was  possessed  by  the  Eoman  lawyers,  and  is  indeed
their  pre-eminent  merit.  Each  seems  to  be  possessed  of  the
whole  of  the  science;  each  seems  to  be  capable  of  applying  its
principles  with  equal  justness  and  certainty.  Insomuch  that
the  Eoman  law,  as  formed  by  them,  and  as  contained  in  the
excerpts  from  the  writings  of  which  the  Pandects  constitute  a
part,  though  formed  by  the  several  labours  of  several  men  through
a  long  series  of  ages,  has  all  the  coherence  which  commonly
belongs  to  the  work  of  one  master  mind.

It  was  possessed  by  Coke  and  Hale,  between  the  former
of  whom  and  the  Roman  lawyei's  the  resemblance  is  striking.
Though  a  chaos  in  form,  the  coherence  of  his  mastery  of  the
rules  is  complete.

Without  the  talent  which  I  have  endeavoured  to  describe,
every  attempt  to  systematise  the  law  must,  in  my  opinion,  be
abortive,  or,  at  least,  will  fall  short  of  the  intended  mark.  All
depends  upon  firm  intention;  upon  an  accurate  conception  of
the  leading  principles  and  distinctions,  of  the  subordination  of
the  detail  under  those  leading  principles,  and  of  the  relations  of
those  leading  principles  to  one  another.  If  these  be  accurately
conceived,  the  faults  in  detail  are  easily  corrected.  If  these  be
conceived  confusedly,  the  faults  are  incurable.®"^

It  is  moreover  requisite  that  a  considerable  number  of  men
qualified  as  I  have  described  should  exist.  For  a  Code  cannot
be  the  work  of  any  one  single  mind.  And  if  the  work  of  several
it  would  be  incoherent,  though  wrought  out  on  a  consistent  plan,
if  not  wrought  out  by  men,  each  master  of  the  system  as  an
organic  whole,  and  capable  of  working  it  out  in  detail  consecu-
tively. With  such men,  codification  would  doubtless be  not

^  '  Proderit  autem  hujus,  auod  Dunc  videant,  pliirima  sui  juris  loca  sine  hajus
molior,  consideratio'ad  demenuum  apud  ductu  inextricabilem  labyriiithum  fore.'
juri  deditos  contemtum  philosophue,  si — Leibnitz,  Episi.  ad  Keslnerum,


1 094  Codification

only  possible  but  expedient;  as  is  admitted  by  Von  Savigny
and  by  others  of  its  bitterest  opponents.  And  that  the  existence
of  such  a  number  is  not  impossible,  is  shewn  by  the  Pandects.

The  only  men  to  originate  and  accomplish,  or  to  guide  and
accomplish,  legislative  innovations,  are  enlightened  practical
lawyers ;  combining  all  that  philosophy  can  yield,  with  all
the  indispensable  supplements  of  philosophy  which  notlung
but  practice  can  impart  And  this  appears  to  be  the  mean-
ing of  Lord  Bacon,  though  he  mentions  'viri  civilea'®  With
the  practical  conclusion  which  he  deduces  from  the  truth,  I
cannot  agree.  He  seems  to  think  that  '  viri  civiles '  (meaning
apparently  public  men,  or  practical  politicians)  are  the  only  fit
legislators.  No  men  less  fit  And  it  is  evident  that  flw
talents  and  acquirements  which  he  supposes  in  such  men  (and
for  which  he  supposes  them  eminently  called  to  the  *  heroical
work '  of  legislation)  are  such  as  can  only  be  found  in  enlightr
ened  practical  lawyers :  men  who  combine  with  an  intimate
knowledge  of  the  existing  system  of  law,  a  power  and  a  Ubenl
readiness  to  appreciate  its  merits  and  defects.

With  regard to partial systematisation,  it is still  more

necessary  that  it  should  be  done  by  men  thus  qualified.

All  at-  Unless  projectors  are  insane,  every  process  of  Codificatkm

(>dFfica* ^3  wrought  out  on  a  preconceived  and  previously  stated  plan  of

tion  must the  whole  system  to  be  wrought  upon. Though,  therefore,  the

outonwie workers  are not qualified previously  in the manner I  have

precon- described,  the  authors  of  the  plan  itself  have,  by  the  preparation

plan.  of  it,  disciplined  themselves  to  the  task  in  some  degree. And

those  who  execute  the  plan  in  detail  have  something  of  a  gnide

in  the  plan  itself. But  in  the  case  of  bit-by -bit codification,

the  workmen  have  no  plan  before  them  of  the  whole  law. And

imless,  by  previous  discipline,  they  have  mastered  the  law  to  be

operated  upon  as  an  organic  whole,  they  are  working  on  a  part

inextricably connected with the rest of the whole, without

any  perception  of  its  relations  to  that  unexplored,  or  at  leaS

undetermined,  residue.

It  seems  to  me  that  codification  carried  on  in this  manner

^  '  Qui  (le  legibus  scripserunt,  omnes  ista  ad  viros  civiles  proprie  spectat ;  q^

vel tanquam jmilosophi, vel tanquam  optime  norant,  quid  rerat  societis  bn-

jurisconsulti,  argumentum illud  tracta-  maua,  quid  salus  iK>puli,  quid  «^ait»

verunt. Atque philosophi proponunl  naturalis,  quid  gentium  mores,  <^md  I^

multa,  dictu  pulchra,  sed  ab  usu  remota.  rumpublicarum  formse  divers®  :  ideoqn

Jurisconsulti  autem,  sune  quisque  patriae  possint de legibus, ex principiis  rt

legum,  vel  etiam  Romanorum,  aut  Pon-  pneceptis,  tarn  requitates  naturalis,  qo«o

tincaruin, placitis obnoxii et  addicti,  poUtices,  decemere.* — Bacon,  De  Avf

judicio  sincere  non  utuntur,  sed  tanquam  mentis  Scientiarum, Tttfact  to  the  Di

e  viuculis  sermocinantur. Certe  cognitio  ForUibus  Juris,  lib.  viiL  chap.  iiL


and  Law  Reform.  1095

(and  which,  I  know  not  why,  has  gotten  to  itself  the  honour-
able name  of  practical),  is  far  more  rash  than  any  conceivable
scheme  of  all-comprehensive  codification ;  and  is  much  more
likely  to  engender  the  confusion  which,  it  is  commonly  supposed,
all-comprehensive  codification  must  produce.

But  the  talents  and  knowledge  requisite  for  such  a  task
cannot  be  acquired  by  a  merely  empirical  study  of  our  own
particular  system,  and  by  the  mere  habit  of  applying  its  rules
to  particular  cases  in  the  course  of  practice.  It  can  only  be
acquired  by  scientific  study ;  and  the  study  which  I  am  trying
to  commend  is  of  all  others  the  best,  with  a  view  to  the
acquirement  of  it.

The  study  of  General  Jurisprudence  (as  shewn  above)  has
a  tendency  to  form  men  qualified  with  the  very  talent  which
is  most  requisite  for  systematisation  (or  simplification),  which
is  the  great  condition  '  sine  qua  non '  of  codification ;  and  the
want  of  which  (as  is  admitted  by  the  ablest  of  the  opponents  of
codification)  is  the  great  difficulty  in  the  way  of  it.  It  tends
to  fix  in  the  mind  a  map  of  the  law,  so  that  all  its  acquisitions
made  empirically  in  the  course  of  practice,  take  their  appropriate
places  in  a  well-conceived  system ;  instead  of  forming  a  chaotic
aggregate  of  several  unconnected  and  merely  arbitrary  rules.  It
tends  to  produce  the  faculty  of  perceiving  at  a  glance  the
dependencies  of  the  parts  of  his  system,  which,  as  I  have  said,
i&  the  peculiar  and  striking  characteristic  of  the  great  and  con-
summate lawyer.

Undoubtedly,  a  suflBciently  accurate  knowledge  of  detail
can  only  be  acquired  by  practice  founded  on  previous  study.
But  there  is  a  wide  difference  between  the  practical  tact  which
suffices  for  the  mere  application  of  rules  to  practice,  or  for  the
discovery  of  rules  applicable  to  the  given  case,  and  the  adequate
and  clear  perception  of  the  legal  system  as  a  whole,  and  of  the
relations  of  its  parts,  which  is  necessary  to  the  legislator;  to
him  who  is  concerned,  not  with  the  mere  application  of  rules,
but  with  the  reconstruction  of  such  rules,  their  expression  and
arrangement,  and  with  the  numerous  consequences  with  which
any  proposed  innovation  may  be  pregnant.

The  very  bulk  of  the  system  is  an  additional  reason  for  a
thoroughly  systematic  knowledge  of  it.  Not  only  is  an  intimate
acquaintance  necessary  with  its  rules  as  taken  severally,  but  a
perception  of  their  relations  to  one  another, — a  map  ever  present
to  the  mental  eye,  in  which  the  dependencies  of  the  parts,  the
apt place for every  particular, and the  consequence  of the


1 096  Codification

alteration  of  any  on any  of the  rest, may be traced  witk
certainty.

Mere  theorists  are  apt  to  stick  in  barren  generalities,  or  to
take  no  correct  measure  of  what  is  practicable  under  existing
circumstances.  Mere  practitioners  (however  able  as  such)  aie
not  capable  of  subordinating  details  to  generalities  and  of  pe^
ceiving  the  extent  of  such  generalities ;  and,  moreover,  aie
incapable  (from  want  of  any  standard  of  comparison)  of  appred-
ating  the  defects  of  their  own  system,  and  unwilling  to  amend
them.

Theory  and  Practice  are  generally  supposed  to  be  incom-
patible. Though  this  is  a  gross  error,  there  are  doubtless  sOTie
men  to  whom  theory  is  more  particularly  useful ;  while  there
are  others  who,  in  the  present  state  of  opinion,  would  do  wdl
to  avoid  it.  It  may  be  feared  that  those  who  are  not  accustomed
to  abstract,  may  form  hasty  and  ill-founded  theories ;  and  that
those  who  have  learned  the  principles  of  law  in  a  general  or
abstract  form,  may  only  be  perplexed  by  them  when  they  ochdc
to  the  details  of  a  positive  system.  Theory  is  a  systematic^
statement  of  rules  or  propositions.  Practice, — the  application
of  any  of  these  rules  or  propositions.  Theory  of  what  w,  an*
theory  of  what  (mghi  to  be,  are  perpetually  confounded.  Hence
it  is  customary  to  oppose  practice  to  all  theory ;  because,  in
many  cases,  theories  of  what  aught  to  be  are  erroneous ;  are  not
founded  upon  accurate  observation ;  upon  the  accurate  observa-
tions which  the  practitioner  has  the  opportunity  of  making.
Tidd*s  work  is  as  much  a  theory  of  what  is,  as  anything  that
ever  bore  the  name.

Legisla-  Secondly,  in  respect  of  Legislation.

tion  must  Innovations  on  the  substance  of  existing  law,  can  only  be

be  accom-  o  '  ^

plished  by  accomplished  by  lawyers, — whoever  may  conceive  and  suggest
Lawvera  ^h®^-  ^^^  every  innovation  on  substance  imports  an  innova-
tion on  form,  though  changes  in  the  form  are  not,  of  necessity,
changes  in  the  substance.  In  respect,  therefore,  of  changes  in
substance,  in  so  far  as  they  import  corresponding  changes  in
form  and  mechanism,  all  that  I  have  said  about  total  or  partial
codification  or  simplification  in  the  way  of  extirpation  and  sub-
stitution, is  fully  applicable.

With  a  view  even  to  changes  in  substance,  they  ought  to
originate  with  lawyers  intimately  acquainted  with  the  system
to  be  wrought  upon.  Or,  though  others  may  suggest  them,
they  ought  to  be  submitted  to  the  judgment  of  such  lawyers


t


and  Law  Reform,  1097

before  they  are  executed.  None  but  they  can  determine  how
far  such  changes  (though  consonant  to  sound  general  principles
of  legislation)  would  accord  with  the  actual  circumstances  in
which  the  country  is  placed.  Not  to  mention,  that  the  end  of
many  innovations  is,  in  truth,  often  accomplished  by  existing
law,  or  might  be  accomplished  by  some  slight  modification  of  it.^®
But  in  order  that  even  lawyers  may  be  fitted  for  guiding
legislation,  it  is  necessary  that  they  should  be  lawyers  who  not
only  possess  the  indispensable  requisite  of  familiar  acquaintance
with  the  actual  system,  and  with  the  actual  position  of  the
coimtry,  but  who  also  are  acquainted  with  the  science  of  legisla-
tion ;  therefore,  with  general  jurisprudence  (including  comparative
jurisprudence)  as  an  integral  portion  of  legislation ;  and  with
all  those  sciences  (such  as  political  economy)  from  which  the
science  of  legislation,  considered  as  the  science  of  law  as  it  should
be,  is  in  great  measure  derived.

Without  these  studies,  they  cannot  and  will  not  appreciate
impartially  and  justly,  the  merits  and  demerits  of  the  existing
law,  the  wants  of  the  country,  the  expediency  or  inexpediency
of  proposed  innovations.  Without  them,  they  will  evince  the
'morosa  morum  retentio.*  They  will  not  evince  the  candid
readiness  to  admit  the  faults  of  the  existing  system,  and  to  lend
their  aid  to  amend  them,  which  is  necessary  to  make  them
looked  up  to  by  the  public  as  the  guides  of  legislation :  a
position  which,  with  this  readiness  (so  indispensable  to  their
guidance  in  all  successful  legislation),  they  infallibly  would
attain :  a  position  most  honourable  to  the  profession,  and  lending
a  dignity  to  all  its  members :  a  position  which,  with  a  view  to
the  public  good,  it  is  necessary  they  should  attain.  It  is  not
in  the  power  of  the  profession  to  prevent  a  change,  but  it  is  in
their  power  to  take  the  lead  and  to  determine  the  course  of  the
evitable  movement :  to  discredit  and  crush  (with  the  weight  of
influence  founded  on  reason  and  public  spirit)  crude  and  mis-
chievous innovations  ;  to  suggest  useful  innovations,  and  to  carry
useful  innovations  suggested  by  others  into  successful  execution.
Sound  legislative  reforms  (or  sound  innovations  on  the  sub-
stance of  the  existing  law)  are  not  to  be  expected  from  the
undisciplined  sagacity  of  mere  laymen:  men  who  are  neither
acquainted,  on  the  one  hand,  with  the  detail  of  the  existing
system,  nor,  on  the  other,  with  the  general  principles  of  law,
with  the  science  of  legislation  and  with  the  sciences  related  to
it:  though  suggestions  from  such  men  may  be  valuable. Nor

*  Utility,  in  this  respect,  of  the  Court  of  Cassation.


1098  Codification

can  they  be  expected  either  from  men  who  have  acquired  by
mere  solitary  study  such  general  principles,  or  from  lawyers,
however  extensively  acquainted  with  their  own  system,  who  have
not  qualified  themselves  in  the  manner  described.

As  is  well  remarked  by  Lord  Bacon  with  regard  to  these  two
last-mentioned  classes  of  men,  in  the  passage  just  referred  to  in
the  *  De  Augmentis,'  mere  speculators  on  law,  however  good  thdr f
general  principles,  have  no  adequate  knowledge  of  the  actual
system,  or  of  the  circumstances  modifying  the  application  of 1
such  piinciples,  and  which  must  be  duly  appreciated  before  thej ^
can  be  applied  in  practice;  whilst  merely  practical lawyes,
though  never  so  accurately  acquainted  with  the  actual  system,
and  with  modifying  circumstances,  are  so  fettered  by  prejudices 1
in  favour  of  existing  institutions,  that  they  will  not  and  caniwt
perceive  and  admit  the  expediency  and  necessity  for  the  chan^
which  inevitable  changes  in  the  conditions  of  society  are  forcii^
upon  them.

Thus,  it  appears  clearly  from  the  history  of  the  English  Iaw
that  the  Equity  of  the  Chancellors  sprang,  chiefly,  from  the
illiberal  adherence  of  the  Common  Law  Courts  to  the  defects  rf
the  law  which  they  administered  and  of  the  procedure  by  whWi
they  enforced  it.  If  they  had  successively  adjusted  their  law
and  procedure  to  the  successive  demands  for  innovation  whidi
time  incessantly  engendered,  the  extraordinary  jurisdiction  of
the  Chancellors  would  have  had  no  plausible  ground ;  and  the
necessary  and  eternal  distinction  between  strict  Law  and  Equity
would  probably  have  been  unknown  to  the  law  of  the  English
nation,  as  well  as  to  most  of  the  systems  obtaining  in  oth»
communities.

Some  enterprising  judges  in  modem  times  have  endeavoured,
with  more  or  less  of  success,  to  get  to  their  own  tribunals
matters  which  Chancery  had  engrossed:  \E,g.  Lord  Mansfield,
and  even  that  stickler  for  things  ancient.  Lord  Kenyon.^  But
whether  it  were  expedient  to  alter  in  this  patchwork  manner,
now  that  the  arbitrary  line  has  been  drawn,  may  be  questioneii


I  conclude  by  summing  up  the  considerations  on  which  the

question  of  Codification  turns.

Ji^^^umi  of  Such  are  the  evils  of  judicial  legislation,  that  it  would  seem

tion  of that  the  expediency  of  a  Code  (or  of  a  complete  or  exclusive

codifica- body  of  statute  law)  will  hardly  admit  of  a  doubt. Nor  would

""  Read  v.  Brookmao,  3  Term  Rej^orts,  161.


and  Law  Reform,  1 099

it,  provided  that  the  chaos  of  judiciary  law,  and  of  the  statute
law  stuck  patchwise  on  the  judiciary,  could  be  superseded  by  a
good  Code.  For  when  we  contrast  the  chaos  with  a  positive
code,  we  must  not  contrast  it  with  the  very  best  of  possible  or
conceivable  codes,  but  with  the  code,  which,  under  the  given
circumstances  of  the  given  community,  would  probably  be  the
result  of  an  attempt  to  codify.

Whoever  has  considered  the  difficulty  of  making  a  good
statute,  will  not  think  lightly  of  the  difficulty  of  making  a  code.
To  conceive  distinctly  the  general  purpose  of  a  statute,  to
conceive  distinctly  the  subordinate  provisions  through  which  its
general  purpose  must  be  accomplished,  and  to  express  that
general  purpose  and  those  subordinate  provisions  in  perfectly
adequate  and  not  ambiguous  language,  is  a  business  of  extreme
delicacy  and  of  extreme  difficulty,  though  it  is  frequently  tossed
by  legislators  to  inferior  and  incompetent  workmen.  I  will
venture  to  affirm,  that  what  is  commonly  called  the  technical  part
of  legislation,  is  incomparably  more  difficult  than  what  may  be
styled  the  cthicaL  In  other  words,  it  is  far  easier  to  conceive
justly  what  would  be  useful  law,  than  so  to  construct  that  same
law  that  it  may  accomplish  the  design  of  the  lawgiver.

Accordingly,  statutes  made  with  great  deliberation,  and  by
learned  and  judicious  lawyers,  have  been  expressed  so  obscurely,
or  have  been  constructed  so  unaptly,  that  decisions  interpreting
the  sense  of  their  provisions,  or  supplying  and  correcting  their
provisions  ex  rationc  legis,  have  been  of  necessity  heaped  upon
them  by  the  Courts  of  Justice.  Such,  for  example,  is  the  case
with  the  Statute  of  Frauds ;  which  was  made  by  three  of  the
wisest  lawyers  in  the  reign  of  Charles  the  Second :  Sir  M.  Hale
(if  I  remember  aright)  being  one  of  them.

It  follows  from  what  I  have  premised,  and  will  appear  clearly
from  what  I  shall  say  hereafter,  that  the  question  of  Codification
is  a  question  of  time  and  place.  Speaking  in  abstract  (or
without  reference  to  the  circumstances  of  a  given  commimity)
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  a  complete  Code  is  better  than  a
body  of  judiciary  law :  or  is  better  than  a  body  of  law  partly
consisting  of  judiciary  law,  and  partly  of  statute  law  stuck
patchwise  on  a  body  of  judiciary.

But  taking  the  question  in  concrete  (or  with  a  view  to  the
expediency  of  codification  in  this  or  that  community)  a  doubt
may  arise.  For  here  we  must  contrast  the  existing  law  (not
with  the  leau  icUal  of  possible  codes,  but)  with  that  particular
code  which  an  attempt  to  codify  would  then  and  there  engender.


I  loo  Codification  and  Law  Reform.

And  that  particular  and  practical  question  (as  Heir  von  Savigny
has  rightly  judged)  will  turn  mainly  on  the  answer  that  must  be
given  to  another:  namely.  Are  there  men,  then  and  there,
competent  to  the  difficult  task  of  successful  codification?  rf
producing  a  code,  which,  on  the  whole,  would  more  than  compen-
sate the  evil  that  must  necessarily  attend  the  change  ?

The  vast  difficulty  of  successful  codification,  no  rational
advocate  of  codification  will  deny  or  doubt.  Its  impossibility
none  of  its  rational  opponents  will  venture  to  affirm.


IIOI


s

Q


CO
9


r-


8^


O
H

O


H

Ah

D


.a

w

to


TS
C


s


•^  o
^.23

o  j2

£.2


s
g


^


S3


0>

2

CO


a

o

G

O

1


s

^  a.

Phhs


o
o

a


•s

O


2


g


0

Ph»5


S


o
P-i

O


2


-^

.3

'3b

a


A  «  °  Q

G

o


tio

a


an

I

£


^8


-a


i

I
I

a

«

c«

I


'—a
a


I'?


S<o


II.


2  Q


INDEX.


N.B.— Pages  1  to  507  inclusive  are  in  Vol.  I. ;  the  rest  are  in  Vol.  II.


ABR


PAGE


ABROGATED, modes whereby
law  is 39

Absolute  and  relative  duty  . .  33,  65

—  duties  enumerated . 66,  401  et  8eq.

—  include  duties  towards  the  go-

vernment .... 786

—  rights,  nature  of  certain  rights

so  called  by  Blackstone  . 728,  788

—  property  defined . . . 835
distinguished  from  estate  in

fee-simple  of  English  law . 836

and  from  Roman  Emphyteusis ibid

Abstract  Science,  Law  the  subject  of 17
Abstract  of  Outline  to  the  lectures 74

in  a  tabular  form  ... 77

Acceptance by the heir,  whether

necessary  in  English  law  . . 893

voluntarj',  in  Scotch  law,  n.  . ibid

Accident,  a ground  of  exemption

from  liability .... 477
Acquisition  of  ownership. (See  Jus

in  ran)
Act,  one  of  the  leading  notions . 33

—  tendency of, how to be esti-

mated 114

—  is  the  sum  of  its  probable  con-

se(piences .... ibid

—  determined  by  intention  and  mo-

tive 161

—  meaning  of  the  term  . . 365,  366

—  the immediate consequence of

volition  .... 414,  415

—  en'oneously  used  to  include  con-

sequences of  act . . . 415

—  consequences  of,  are  not  willed  . 421

—  they  are  only  intended . . ibid

—  sometimes  not  even  intended . ibid

—  may  be  intended,  though  not  de-

sired ..... ibid

—  forbearances from act  are  not

willed  but  intended . . 424
Actio  in  reni^  of  the  Roman  lawyers 378

—  vXiliSf  meaning  of . . . 602
Action,  rights  of  (in  outline)  . . 64

—  right  of,  as  distinguished  from

mode  of  enforcing  it . . 765

—  Qu. Wliether every right of,

arises  from  an  injury  ? . . 766


ALI

PAGE

Action. It  is  always  so  assumed . 767

—  right  of,  is  tijus  in  personam . 936

—  apparent exception  of actions

styled  in  rem  .... ibid
Actions, ex contractu,  ex delicto,
necessary  qualification  of  the
distinction  as generally  con-
ceived 62

Actionum  Jus,  should  be  distributed
between  law  of  persons  and  law
of  things  . . 42,  726,  727

Acts  and  forbearances,  the  objects

of  rights  and  duties  46,  367,  395

—  are  never  insulated . . .161
Adjective  and  substantive  law,  ex-
planation of  the  terms . . 591

objections  to  the  terms . 762

defect  of  the  division  and  ar-
rangement adopted  by  Bentham
under  these  terms  . . . 765

Aditio,  in  Roman  law,  a  necessary

link  in  the  chain  of  title 391  n.,  895

Administrative and constitutional

law 71

Administrator,  a  universal  successor 57

—  properly  a  condition  or  status . 952

—  why  treated  of,  in  law  of  things ibid
JSquitas  sequitur  legem,  what,  if  fol-
lowed literally  ? . . .647

Agreement,  or  Convention  in  out-
line 54

Alienation  (or  Conveyance),  distin-
guished from  contract . . ibid

—  dispositions restraining, prohi-

bited by  Roman  law  liberd  re-
publicd 59

—  right  of,  not  necessarily  implied

in  right  of  unlimited  duration 832
nor  confined  to  rights  of  un-
limited duration . . . 834

was  of  the  essence  of  domi-

n  ium  or  property,  in  Roman  law 836

and  is  so  in  theory  in  Scotch

law,  n 834

—  nature of  solemnities  attached

to 901

Aliens,  condition  of ... 72

—  their  position  in  Rome . 553,  554


II04


Index.


\


ALT

PAGE

AUiua  non  toUendif  aermtus  . . 811
America, Constitution of United

Stotes  of .... 261

—  authority  of  certain  State  Legis-

latures not  respected  by  judges  656
American  tribunals influen(^ by

decisions  in  the  English  courts  668
Analogical  reasoning,  nature  of . 1007

—  is  (1)  contingently t  (2)  necessarily

true 1008

—  distinction between contingent

and  necessary  truth . . 1009

—  analysis of analogical reason-

ing, as  concerning  contingent
matter 1010

—  how this reasoning is distin-

guished from  syllogism  and
perfect  induction  concerning
the  same .... 1012

—  use  of  syllogism . . 1012,  1015

—  analysis  of  analogical  reasoning

as  concerning  necessary  matter 1014
Analogies,  competition  of  opposite,
according  to  Paley,  arises  on
the  application  of  law . . 632

—  as  well  written  as  unwritten  ibid

—  Romilly*s  mistake  as  to  Paley's

meaning .... ibid

—  Paley's  explanation  of  it  as  a

source  of  disputation . . 996

—  examination  of the difficulties

arising  from  this  source  .  .  ibid
Analog}*,  objects  improperly,  but  by

close  analogy,  styled  laws . 87

—  definition  of  the  term  as  used  in

common  parlance . . 167,  169

—  examination  of  the  various  mean-

ings of  the  term  .  .  .  1001
Analysis of  law  by  Sir  Matthew

Hale,  commended  and  quoted 42,  68

—  of  first  six  lectures . . .79,  85
Ancient  lights,  servitude  not  to  ob-
struct 811

Anger,  as  a  ground  of  exemption

from  liability .  .  .  496,  499
Animals,  in  what  sense  irrational,  n. 207

—  are  governed  by  instincts  . . ibid

—  not  by  laws .... ibid

—  Ulpiau's  error  on  this 209,  551,  552
Anti-social  motives,  not  necessarily

leading  to  evil  though  likely  to

do  so 161

Appeals  (outline)  .... 64

—  statute  abolishing, in criminal

cases .... 386,  947
Aristocracy,  every  supreme  govern-
ment which  is  not  a  monarchy
is  an 238

—  different  forms  of . . . 239

—  of those usually styled oli-

garchies  ibid

—  of  those  styled  aristocracies . ibid

—  in  the  specific  meaning  of  the

tenu ibid

—  of  those  styled  democracies . ibid


BEN


PAIS


787


Arrangement  of  Corpus  JuriSf  how

carried  out  in  law  treatises 725,  726

—  facilitated  by  division  between

law  of  persons  and  law  of
things 691

—  what  included  in  law  of  persons ibid

—  what,  in  law  of  things . . iUi

—  reasons  for  postponing  the  law

of  persons  to  the  law  of  things,
and  treating  the  last  moet  in
detail .... 727,780

—  Blackstone's  method  of  arrange-

ment 735

—  merits  of  his  method  .  ibid

—  method  adopted  by  Boman  law-

yers in  their  treatisea

—  method  adopted  by  Gains  . . 788

—  by  Justinian,  in  the  Institutes  740, 922

—  in  the  Code  and  Digest . . 922

—  arrangement adopted in the

French  codes . . . . 740

—  its  defects. . . . , Hid

—  Bentham's  method . . . 741

—  Falck's  method. . . . 742

—  Hugo's  method . . . . 748

—  great  difficulty  of,  owing  to  the

complication  of  each  bnnch
with  another  . . . 76S,  785

—  great  importance  of  adopting  a

clear  method  in  any  code  or

treatise  on  law  .  .  .  963
Arrets  r^Umentaires  of  the  French

parlements  .  .  .  .  522
Assythement,  a  ground  of  action  in

the  law  of  Scotland  . . 836

Attempts  to  commit  crimes,  nature

of 440

—  are  evidence  of  intention . . Hid

—  as  such,  are  called  overt  acta . 441

—  why  overt  act  required  to  render

party  criminally  liable  440,  441,  460
Autonomic  laws,  what  . . . 524

—  sometimes  opposed  to  pnblic  law 755


BACON,  Lord,  his  proposal  as  to
authentic  records  of  judicial
decisions . . . 528,  ^

Bailee,  nature  of  obligation  which  is

incurred  by . . . 472, 478

Bairns'  part,  in  Scotch  law,  anti-
quity of  the  principle  of  divi-
sion, n 617,  618

Benevolence,  how  to  be  estimated  as

a  motive . . . . 160

—  Hartley's  hypothesis  concerning

it 168

—  mistaken  views  regarding  Hart-

ley's hypothesis . . . W

—  refutation  of  the  hypothesis  as

so  distorted,  «. . . .164
Bentham, classes rewards among

sanctions . . . . 91

—  not  the  inventor  of  the  theory  of

utility,  n. . . . . 168


Index.


1105


BEN

PAOX

Bentham first  properly examined

and  stated  the  theory  of  utility 163

—  his  mistake  in  blaming  judges  for

legislating . . . .218

—  his  definition  of  sovereignty . 234

—  his  objection  to  judiciary  law . 642

—  his  inconsistency  in  represent-

ing codification  as a  simple
matter  ..... 654

—  belongs  to  the  historical  school

of  jurisprudence . . . 679

—  bis  division  of  general  and  spe-

cial codes .... 692

—  his  inconsistencies  on  the  subject

of  status . 690,  692,  699,  702

—  his  analysis  of  sUdus  . 699,  702

—  remarks  on  his  method  of  ar-

rangement . . 741,  765,  781

—  his  attempt  to  get  over  the  di£B-

culty  inherent  in  a  definition

of  property .... 800

—  his  criticism  on  the  word  *  title '  882
Besitzes,  Das  Recht  des,  by  Savigny  53
Blackstone,  his  fancy  that  custom

exists  as  positive  law . . 36

—  his  misapprehension  of  the  im-

port of  the  division  between  the

law  of  persons  and  things 42,  364

—  his  commentaries  over-estimated 69

—  his  erroneous  distinction  between

law  and  particular  command  . 95

—  his  error  in  supposing  that  human

laws  are  of  no  validity  if  con-
trary to  Divine  laws,  n.  . 214

—  his  error  in  saying  that  a  master

cannot  have  a  right  to  the  labour

of  bis  slave .... 216

—  his  definition  of  right . . 399

—  his  erroneous  distinction  of  civil

injuries  and  crimes . . . 404

—  his  account  of  promulgation  of

statutes 526

—  his  hypothesis  about  customary

law 538

—  his  admirable  historical  chapter

upon  the  Courts  of  Equity  of

this  country . . . .615

—  his  remark  about  the  decrda  of

the  Roman  Emperors . . 633

—  his  mixing  up  status  with  law  of

things .... 694,  725

—  his  chapter  on  aliens,  &c.  . . 718

—  inconsistency  of  the  system  of

division  adopted  by  him  . . 725

—  logical  inaccuracy  of  his  division

of  law  regarding  rights  and  law
regar<ling  wrongs . . . 726

—  practically adopted Sir M.

Hale's  order  in  putting  law
of  things  before  the  law  of
l>er8ons 727

—  nature  of  the  rights  called  by  him

'  absolute  rights ' . 728,  730,  788

—  his  method .... 735

—  in  a  tabular  form  (table  facing  p.) 984


CIV

PAOB

Blackstone,  in  what  points  his
method  is  superior  to  that  of
the  Roman  writers  . . 735,  769

—  he  correctly  places  law  of  politi-

cal conditions  under  law  of  per-
sons 750

—  errors  and  inconsistencies  of  his

method  .... 736,  737

—  his  reason  for  the  exclusion  of

the  half  blood  .  .  .881
Brown,  Dr.,  his  true  exposition  of

the  nature  of  the  human  will  . 412
Butler,  his  admission that  Chris-
tianity as  revealed  is  imperfect 143

—  the  ablest  advocate  of  hypothesis

of  the  existence  of  a  moral  sense 149

—  but  seems  rather  to  embrace  the

compound  hypothesis . . 153

CJSSAR,  his  purpose  of  codifica-
tion mentioned  by  Suetonius . 678
Canon  law, ranked by  Hale  and

Blackstone  as  partictUar . 535

—  but  it  is  properly  singular . ibid
Capacity,  meaning  of  the  term 710,  723
Capacities  (with  rights,  &c.),  con-
stitute a  status . 40,  684-690

Capitis  diminutio,  use  of  the  expres-
sion by  the  Roman  lawyers . 853

Caput,  how  it  differs  from  status  354,  716,

717

Carrier,  responsibility  of . 478,  479

Casus  (or  mishap),  a  ground  of  non-
imputation ... 33,  477

Cessio  honorum  in  insolvency,  a  suc-
cession per  universitatem . 59

Chancellors,  Equity  dispensed  by 39,  614

Child,  parent  and  (outline) . . 70

—  rights  of  father  over,  are  rights

in  personam . . . 384,  938

—  but  right  of  father  to  custody,

&c  of,  are  rights  in  rem 385,  939

—  difficulty  of  assigning  a  place  to

these  rights  in a  division of

law  into  public  and  private  747,  748
Cliildren,  afiection  for,  a  si)ecies  of

narrow  l^enevolence  .  .  160
Cicero,  his  perception  of  the  true

source  of  customar}'  law  . . 538

—  his  birth  dates  the  commence-

ment of  the  series  of  classical

jurists  ....  551,  562
Citizen, Roman, distinguished  by

more  numerous  rights  .  .  353
Civil,  various  uses  of  the  word  as

opposed  to  criminal,  military,

ecclesiastical,  &c.  .  .  .  753
Civil  laws,  use  of  the  expression  by

Hobbes 32

Civil injuries, how distinguished

from  crimes .  61,  62,  386,  404,  502

—  error of Blackstone's distinc-

tion 404

Civil  liberty 33

—  Paley's  erroneous  definition  of  . 216


I  io6


Index.


CIV


PAOE

273

356

64


Civil  liberty,  true  nature  of .

—  is  the  absence  of  legal  restraint .
Civil  procedure  (outline  of) .

—  nature  of  Roman . . 586,  588
Classes, jx^rsonH distinguished to,

by  certain  rights,  duties,  &c  . 39,

684,  690
ClajBsical Roman Jurists, fancy
custom to exist as positive
law 86,  540

—  their  ^M*  <7«i/tj/w ... 82

—  true  merits  of  their  writings . 217,

551,  1087

—  why  called  classical  . . . 563
Code,  order  adopted  in  Prussian . 42

—  nature  of  Justinian's . . . 605

—  arrangement adopted by him

purely  unscientiflc  . . 606,  922

—  enormous  fault  of  Justinian's,  if

witli  Pandects  considered  as  a

code .... 623  ei  seq,

—  ambiguity  of  term . . 649,  1023

—  great  difficulty  of  making  . . 660

—  expediency  of  consolidating  law

into,  a  question  of  time  and
place 662

—  in  the  abstract  is  clearly  expe-

dient .... 662,  1021

—  concerns  the  form  not  the  maUer

of  law 663

—  does  not  necessarily  involve  in-

novation upon  the  matter 663,  1026

—  objections  to,  in  the  abstract,  and

answers  .... 663,  664

—  objection  of  Portalis,  that  it  is

necessarily  incomplete . . 664

—  objection  of  Hugo . . . 665

—  alleged  ill-success  of  French . 666,

667,  1034

—  and  of  Prussian . . . iiid

—  estimate of  Savigny's treatise

stating  objections  to . . 1037

—  judiciary  law  superinduced  upon,

in  France  and  Prussia . 667,  675

—  inconsistency of Savigny in

urging  failure  of  French  and
Prussian .... 669

—  circumstances under which

French,  was  compiled . . ibid

—  its  deficiency  in  explanation  of

leading  terms  . . . 669,  1035

—  same  defect  in  Prussian . 671,  1036

—  such  exjilanations  attempted  by

Justinian .... 671

—  difficulty  of  supplying  such  ex-

planations in  a . . . ibid

—  but  not  imjK)ssible  to  do  so . 672

—  ill -success  of  French  and  Prus-

sian codes  exaggerated . ibidt  1034

—  French,  not  intended  to  8ui)er-

sede  all  law . . . .672

—  supplements  to,  contemplated  by

authors  of  French . . . ibid

—  ignorance  of  Roman  law  evinced

by  authors  of  French . . 673


of


COD

Code,  similar  blunder  in  Prussian  .

—  necessity for continual super-

vision  and  amendment  of a
code

—  Savigny's  objections  to  codifica-

tion examined  . 675-650,

—  advantages which would How

from  a  good ....

—  its  probable  effect  ou  the  legal

profession . . . ibidi

—  servile and hasty manner in

which  the  French,  was  compiled

—  practicability  of a, considered

generally ....

—  depends  on  the  degree  of  skill

which  can  be  brought  to  the
enterprise

—  must  be  planned  by  one  mind

—  all  importance  of  first  intention

—  qualifications  of  Ehiglish  lawyers

for  making  a  code  .

—  although  it  does  not  necessarily

involve  innovation,  yet  for  sini
plicitysome  innovation  requisite

—  the  idea  of  a  code  is  modem

—  exi)€diency  of  commencing  with

a  digest ....

—  or  digests ....

—  what  should  be  the  nature

these ....

—  new  laws  should  be  worked  into

—  superiority  of  judicial  decision

founded  on,  to  those  foundeil
on  ordinary  law .

—  a  code  is  as  convenient  for  api>li

cation  as  judiciary  law .

—  is  not  unalterable

—  or  less  malleable  than  judiciary

law ....

—  not  peculiarly  liable  to  pnxluce

com^ietition  of  opposite  analo'
gies ....

—  not  necessarily  incoherent .

—  not  rendered  unnecessarj'  by  pri

vate  treatises  .

—  not  unfitted  to  wants  of  commu

nity ....

—  objection  from  alleged  infinitude

of  rules  ....

—  objections  to,  derived  from  de

fects,  errors,  and  alleged ill
success  of  existing  codes

—  -  Justinian's  code

—  not  a  code  sensu  hodiemo  .

—  French  code

—  defects  of  it .

—  Prussian  code .

—  was  not  intended  to  be  complete

—  dispute  of  Savigny  and  Thibaut

on  codification

—  -  of  crimjnal  law. (See  Criminal

Law)

—  probability  that some  attempt

will  be  made  to  frame  a  code
in  this  country


PACK

674


6/3

1037
6S0

1025
75«

1021


1024
ibid
ibid


1026

iM
1027

ibid
102S


ibid

1029
iifld

Aid


1031
ibid

10S2


1033
1034

1035
ibid

10S6
ibid

1037


1092


Index.


1 107


COD

PAGE

Code,  it  must  be  accomplished,  if  at

all,  by  scientific  lawyers . . 1092

—  not  by  public  men . . . 1094

—  must  be  worked  out  on  a  precon-

ceive<l  plan .... ibid

—  necessity  that  persons  employed

in  constructing  it  should  be
versed  both  in  theory  and
practice. . . . 1092-95

—  Bacon's  opinion . . . 1094

—  general  statement  of  the  consi-

derations on  which  the  question

of  codification  turns . . 1098

Codification,  iMjssibility  and  condi-
tions of 17

-—  its  place  in the  outline. (See

Codt) 36

('o^n/^zo,  in  Roman  law . . . 589

Coke,  Lord,  his  mastery  of  English

law 1093

Combinations,  simple,  of  rights  in

rem  and  rights  in  personam 45,  54

Command,  every  law  is  a .  79,  88

—  but  every,  is  not  a  law .  92,  98

—  analysis  of  the  term  . .  88-91

—  is  a  signification  of  desire  . . 89

—  how  related  to  duty  and  sanction ibid

—  how distinguished from other

significations  of  desire . . ibid

—  not  by  violence  of  motive  to  com-

pliance 92

—  Paley's  error  in  that  respect . ibid

—  it  is  a  law  when  it  obliges  gene-

rally to  acts  of  a  class . . ibid

—  it  is  not  a  law  when  it  obliges

to  a  specific  act  or  forbear-
ance ..... 93

—  examples  of  each  kind . . ibid

—  distinction  does  not  depend  on

whether  it  binds  one  i)erson  or

more 95

—  error  of  Blackstone  and  others  in

this  respect .... ibid

—  divine  commands. (See  IHvine

Ijaw)

Onnmii  and  Omit,  distinction  be-
tween the  terms . . . 425

Common  Law  Procedure  Acts,  «.  467,  601

Common  Sense,  an  expi'ession
founded  on  hypothesis  as  to
the  index  of  Divine  commands 104

Commons, House of, possesses  a

portion  of  sovereignty . . 245

—  powers  of  members  are  delegated

absolutely  by  constituents . 246

—  but  subject  to  an  implied  trust . ibid

—  the  performance  of  that  trust  en-

forced by  moral  sanctions . 247

—  no  legal  sanction  for  the i)er-

formance thereof could be

created ihid

Compassing,  meaning  of  term .  440

Complexion,  moral,  of  an  act . .  162
Comjdication  of  each  branch  of  a

legal  system  with  another .  768


CON

PAGB

Composite  State,  nature  of . . 257
Compulsion  ( Via)  a  ground  of  non-

imputation ... 33,  498
Condition. (See  Stains)

—  or  Status^  constituted  by  rights,

&c 39,  684

—  different classes  of conditions
'  distinguished .... 67

—  professional  and  domestic  condi-
tions 756

Condominium  or  concurrent  right

in  rem 798

Conduct, human, is guided by

rules .... 115,117

—  and  by  authority . . .124

—  utility  is  not  the  test  of  it  . 156

—  but  only  the  index  to  Divine
commands .... ibid

—  the  antecedents  which  detenu  ine
it  . . . . . .161

Confederation of States, nature

of 233,257

—  differs  from  a  federal  govern-
ment ibid

Confirencts,  preliminary  to  French

Code 674

Consent  of  the  people,  in  what  sense

governments  exist  by . . 295

—  in  no  other  sense  than  all  law
obeyed  by ... . 296

—  in  what  sense  governments  origi-
nate by 298

Consideration,  absence  of,  ftrom
contracts,  how  it  affects  third
persons 909

—  difference  between  vicious,  and
want  of ibid

Consilium,  or  compassing,  meaning

of  term 440

Constitution,  theory  of  the  British . 245

Constitutional  jealousy,  its  in-
jurious effect  upon  the  form
of  law 613

Constitutional  Law,  meaning  of  the

term . . . . .267

Constitutional and administrative

law . . . . . 71

Constitutions  (Edictal)  of  the  Ro-
man Emi)erors,  made  in  their
legislative  character . 35,  517

—  (Decretal),  in  their  cai)acity  of
sovereign  judges . . 35,519

Construction  of  statute  law . . 64

—  differs  widely  from  induction  of
judiciary  law .... 621

Contingent remainders, Feame's

treatise  on ... . 864

—  how  distinguished  from  vested
remainders .... ibid

Contingent  right,  nature  of . . 859

—  not  definable  in  same  way  as  a
contingent  remainder . . 863

—  future  right  is  always . . 866
Contingent  rights  in  rem  opposed  to

vested 50


iiq8


Index.


CON

PAOB

Contingent  truth,  how  distinguished

from  necessary  truth . . 1009

Contract,  rights  inperwnam  arising

from 54

—  distinguished  from  conveyance  . 55
< —  false assumption, that  govern-
ment is  based  on . . . 298

—  rights  b^otten  by,  are  jura  in

personam .... 873

—  and conveyance  may  be  con-

tained in  the  same  instrument 376

—  not  distinguished  by  the  mere

consent  of  parties . . . 377
• —  to  sell, in  the department of
English law called Equity,
vests  jus  in  rem,  and  is  there-
fore a  conveyance . . . ibid

—  nature  of  obligee's  right  which

is  violated  by  a  person  who
prevents  fulfilment  of . . 391

—  intention  of  parties  to,  what  it

means 442

—  Paley's  definition  of  intention  of, ».  ibid

—  a  breach  of  contract  is  an  injury  473

—  why  a  promise  is  binding  . .  906

—  object  of  solemnities  attached  to

contracts .... 907

—  why solemnities not required

when  there  is  a  consideration  of 908

—  how  third  persons  are  affected  by

absence  of  solemnities . . 909

—  or  absence  of  consideration . ibid

—  difference  between  vicious  consi-

deration and  want  of  considera-
tion ibid

—  why  a  contract  strictly  so  called

gives  no  right  in  re  as  against

third  persons  .... ibid

—  ill  what  cases  it  becomes  an  alie-

nation 910

—  implied  contract  not  to  be  con-

founded with  quasi-contract . 913,

914,  984

—  confusion  of  contract  with  con-

veyance .... 967

—  importance  of  clearing  up  this

confusion .... 973

—  often  used  as  sjTionymous  with

convention . . . .981

—  meaning  of  the  term  in  Roman

law ibid

—  uncertain  meaning  of  the  term

in  English  law . . .  982
Contractu  J  actions  ex . . .  62
Convention  or  agreements  in  out-
line 54

—  definition  of  (Roman  lawj'ers) .  980

—  meaning  of  the  term . . .  982
Conveyance  (or  alienation)  distin-
guished from  contract . .  55

—  and  contract  may  be  contained

in  the  same  instrument  . . 376

—  are  not  distinguished  by  the  mere

consent  of  parties . . . 377

—  confusion  of,  with  contract . 967


CBI


PAGE


Conveyance,  importance  of  clearing

up  this  confiision . . . 973

Conveyancers, practice o^ not  a

source  of  law  .... 546

—  but  adopted  as  law  by  judges . 547

685,646
Corporation  distinguished  from  tmi-

rersitas  juris  .... 55
Corporeal  and  incorporeal,  division

of  things  into . . . 861,  lu
Corporeal  hereditaments  in  English

law ... . 862,  eS6
Corpus delicti, meaning of the

term 464

Corpus  juris,  cannot  be  arranged

with  logical  rigour  ... 65

—  arrangement  of,  founded  on  dis-

tinction between  law  of  persons
and  of  things  691,  695,  789,  922

—  other  possible  divisions  of. .692

—  inconsistency of the divisions

adopted  by  the  Roman  lawyers
and  by  Blackstone . . . 725

—  logical  defects  in  all  the  best  ar-

rangements yet  made . . 769
Covenant  for  title  (conveyance  with)
vests  jus  in  rem  and  jus  in  per-
sonam at  once ... 55

—  for  quiet  enjoyment,  same  re-

mark  applies  to . . .872
Crimes,  distinguished  from  civil  in-
juries . 60,  61,  886,  404, 502

—  duties  arising  fix>m ... 65

—  infringements of primary  and

absolute  duties  are ... 66

—  classed  with  reference  to  the  re-

spective rights  and  duties . ihid

—  error  of  Blackstone's  distinction 404

—  divided  into crimes7'ur»^<;n/iu9i,

and  crimes  jure  civili . . 572

—  meaning  of  this  division . . 57S

—  this  division tallies with the

division  into  mala  in  se  and
mala  prohibHa . . . 572

—  what  is  necessary  to  a  definition

of  crimes .... 1057

—  what  are  the  essentials  of  a  crime,

or  the  grounds  of  imputation  .  1057-

1062

—  (1)  every  act  or  omission  which

is  a  crime  supposes  criminal
knowledge  or  negligence  (tW
scienter,  vd  negligentcr)  . .1057

—  (2)  it  must  not  be  purely  invo-

luntary 1060

—  (3)  it  must  not  proceed  from  an

instant  and  well-grounded  fear
greater  than  the  fear  naturally
inspired  by  the  law . *. ibid

—  (4)  it  is  not  a  crime  if  done  in

pursuance  of  a  legal  duty . 1061

—  (5)  or  of  a  legal  right  or  permis-

sion granted  by  tiie  law  . . ibid

—  (6)  an  overt  act  is  necessary . ibid

—  scheme  of  the  Roman  law,  Ian-


Index.


1 1 09


CRI

guage  in  regard  to  the  groondB

of  imputation

Crimes  :  different  meanings  of  cfvXpa

and  dolui

—  of  malice  as  a  name  for  criminal

design ....

—  incomtiderate assumption that

malice  or  criminal  design  is  of
the  essence  of  every  crime

—  criminal  design

—  criminal  knowledge  short  of  cri

minal  design  .

—  criminal  negligence  .

—  ignorance  never,  per  se,  a  justifi

cation  of  crime

—  the nature of an overt act

which  is  of  the  essence  of  a
crime ....


—  attempts  to  commit  crimes

—  rules  for  the  application  of  pun

ishments

—  tabular  statement  of  the  different

kinds  of  crimes
Criminal  procedure

—  jurisdiction,  in  whom  it  resided

at  Rome
Criminal  Law,  why  generally  ex
eluded  from  Justinian's  Insti
tutes ....

—  very  small  portion  of,  therein

treated  ....

—  difficulty  of  determining  place

which  ought  to  be  assigned  to  it

—  necessary  first  to  determine  true

distinction  between  public  and
private  law ....

—  codification  of,  necessary 1040

—  inconveniences  arising  from  the

present  state  of  common  law  .

—  reports,  records,  and  treatises .

—  difference  between  interpretation

of  statute  and  common  law

—  much  of  present  law  founded  on

antiquated  notions

—  obscurity arising from partial

adherence  to antiquated no-
tious .....

—  obscurity  arising  from  extending

rules  to  cases  connected  by  re-
mote analogies

—  inconsistent  definitions  of  theft

—  inconveniences of the i)resent

statute  law ....

—  inconveniences of  having  two

bodies  of  law,  one  common  and
the  other  statute .

—  advantages  of  combining  these  .

—  method  of  arrangement  adopted

in  the  French  Penal  Code

—  indefinite  extent

—  what  crimes  ought  to  be  included

in  a  criminal  code  .

—  to  what  territory  it  should  apply
Cruelty  to  animals,  duty  to  abstain

from,  an  absolute  duty .


PAOX

1057

ibid

1058


ibid
ibid

ibid
1059

1060


1061
1062

1064

1066
66

585


752
927
928

ibid
et  seq.

1040
ibid

1041

ibid

1042


ibid
1043

1044


1045
1046

1054
1055

ibid
1056

65


DEL

PAOX

Cujvs  est  solum  efus  est  usque  ad

codum 811

Culpa 33

—  analysis  of . 432,  457,  1057,  1059

—  restricted application  of term

by  lawyers,  especially  criminal
lawyers 461

—  Feuerbach's  analysis  of  the  term ibid

—  Rosshirt's  analysis  of  the  term  . 462
Custom,  is  only  i)ositive  morality

until  it  receive  the  impress  of

the  judge  or  legislator . .  36

Customary  law,  general  and  local  .  37

—  true  nature  of  . . . 101,  199

—  Roman  notion  of . . .  527

—  is  a  part  of  positive  law . .  537

—  Cicero's account of  how  it  is

generated .... 538

—  is  not  founded  on  consensus  uten-

tium 539

—  Blackstone's  erroneous  descrip-

tion of  it . . . . 542

—  is  a  species  of  judiciary  law . 543


T)JS  noyjS,  statute  liberally  con-
strued


635
53
57


De  jure  possessionis^ treatise  by

Savigny  commended
Dead,  universitates  juris  devolving

from  the  dead  as  such .
Decisions,  process  of  extracting  law

from. (See  Judiciary  Law)
Declaratory  laws,  so  called,  are  often

imperative .... 98

—  are  not  laws  proper  . . .214

—  nature  of . . . . 637,  638
Decretes  of  the  Roman  Emperors

made  in  their  judicial  function 35,

519
Defence, persons whose  duty  is,

against  foreign  enemies  . . 70
Defences  (incidental)  conduct  of . 64
Definitions of leading terms in
jurisprudence,  aljsence  of,  in
French  and  Prussian  codes . 669,

671,  1035,  1036
•  —  imx)ortance  of  their  being  given

distinctly .... 1075

—  neglect  of  this  in  treatises  on

law ..... ibid
Delegation  of  sovereign  power  to

political  subordinates . . 244

—  to  representatives . . . 245

—  may  be  subject  to  a  trust,  or  may

be  absolute .... ibid

—  in  this  country  it  is  subject  to  a

trust ibid

—  how  the performance of that

trust  is  enforced . . 245,  246

—  cannot be enforced by legal

methods  . . . .247

Delict,  or  ipjury .... 33

—  extensive  meaning  of,  in  Roman

Law 62


I  no


Index.


DEL

PAGE

Delict,  actions  arising  out  of,  nearly
allied  to  actions  arising  out  of
contract  .... 473

—  nature  of  qxuiai  delicts . . 911

—  distinction *of  from  qua^  delicts,

is  illogical  and  superfluous  .  927
Delicto^  actions  ex  ... 62

Delicts  are  violations  of  rights  or

duties 43

—  included  in  consideration  of  sanc-

tioning rights  and  duties . 44

—  rights  in  personam  arising  from

delicts 53,  60

Demand,  peculiarity  of  English  law
in  not  requiring,  before  action
brought  . . . . 469

—  consistency  of  Roman  law  in  re-

quiring 474

—  without  it,  a  person  is  not  in

nwrA ibid

Democracy,  definition  of . .  239

—  sovereign  power  of  democracies  245

—  the  nature  of  popular  govern-

ment 277

—  Hobbes'  remarks  on  democratical

government  ....  279
Deontology,  science  of  legislation  a

department  of . . .  32,  83

—  the  science of, is Bentham's

name  for  ethics ... 83

—  tendency  to  confound  positive

morality  with  it.  (See  Positive
Morality) . . . .217

Descent,  notion  of,  involved  with
description  of  rights  as  limited
or  unlimited  in  respect  of  du-
ration . . .  831,  838,  n.

Desire  (or  Wish),  place  of,  amongst

the  leading  notions . . 33

—  explanation  of  the  supposed  con-

flict between,  and  will . . 447

—  cannot  be  directly  controlled  by

the  will 448

—  may  be  destroyed  by  the  will  in-

directly ibid

Despotic  government,  nature  of  .  276
Detention,  Raiionale  of  right  of  .  63
Detenniuate and indeterminate

bodies,  distinction  between  .  186
Detinue y  nature  of  action  formerly

properly,  and  still  in  common

legal  parlance,  so  called  .  .  378
Digest,  Roman,  materials  on  which

founded  .... 605

—  arrangement  of,  purely  unscien-

tific .... 606,  922

—  enormous  fault  in  code  and,  if

together  considered  as  a  code  .  623
Dignity,  whether  rights  belonging  to

a,  are  part  of  the  law  of  status 945
Direct  legislation . . .35,  36,  531
Divine  Law,  the  ultimate  test  of  posi-
tive law  and  positive  morality  . 72

—  analysis 79,  81

—  meaning  of  term ... 86


DUR


PACI


Divine  Law,  one  division  of  laws

proper ..... 86

—  identical  with  natural  law  pro-

perly so  called . , . iM

—  how  distinguished  from  human

law 104

—  is  partly  revealed  and  partly  un-

revealed  . . . . ibid

—  nature  of  index  to  anrevealed . 105

—  different  hypotheses  as  to  nature

of  that  index , . , . Qnd

—  hyx>othesis  of  a  moral  sense . ^

—  hypothesis  of  principle  of  utility l')6

—  \x\iQ  statement of  principle  of

utility i^

—  principle  of  utility  inferred  from

tendency  of human actions.
(See  Utility)  . . . . i^^^
Division,  main,  of  subject  of  the

lectures ^

—  of  law  with  reference  to  its  pur-

poses 41

—  between  law  of  persons  and  law

of  things  is  arbitrary . . ibid

its  use  and  history . . i^

not  i^rfectly  distinct . 42,  654

—  of  corpus  juris  . . . 692,  7^

—  inconsistency  of  that adopted

by  the  Roman  lawyers  and  by

Blackstone . . . . 726

Division  of  law  of  things . 760  d  s^-

Dolus,  meanings  of  the  term  . 431,  1057

Domestic,  law  of  domestic  growth  . 33

—  conditions  opposed to profes-

sional 67

Dominia — Obliyationes,  distinction
between,  by  Roman  lawyers,
answers  to  that  between  jus
in  rem — in  personam  of  the
modern  civilians ... 58

—  consequence  of  misunderstanding

of  these  terms  by  authors  of

French  code  .  .  .  .  673
Dominion, various meanings of.

{See  Property)  .  .  .  789
Dominium,  larger  meaning  of,  with

Roman  lawyers ... 45

—  but  they  expected  the  right  of  a

universal  successor  from . 847
Dominium — ServUus,  distinguished  48,794
Dominius,  possession  of,  not  an  ex-
ercise of  the  right  of  possession 52
Droits, intigraux, as opposed to

/>rot/*  (Bentham) ... 800
Drunkenness,  as  a  ground  of  exemp-
tion from  liability  . . 494,  496
Duration,  a  ground  of  distinction

between  rights  in  rem . 50,  829

—  Quasre,  Whether  this  distinction

is  of  importance  in  general
jurisprudence?  n.  . . .833

—  according  to  Bentham,  capacity

of  indefinite  duration  is  an
element  in  the  definition  of
political  society . . . 2S4


Index.


II 1 1


DUT

PAGE

DiitieR,  relative  and  absolute . .  33,  65

—  with right**, &c., constitute

status .... 40,  687

—  relative,  answering  to  rights  in

ran,  are  negative .  44,  370,  933

an  objection  to  this  position

answered .... 785

—  sanctioning  (in  outline) . . 60

—  arising  from  crimes ... 65

—  are  correlative  to  commands .  89,  91

—  are  relative  or  absolute . . 401

—  distinctions  of,  with  regard  to

the  objects  to  which  they  relate Hid

—  self-regarding .... 402

—  distinction  of  duties  analogous

to  distinction  between  jiis  pub-
licum and  jus  privatum  . . 404
— ^  distinction l)etween those  en-
forced  civilly  and those en-
forced criminally . . . ibid

—  those which are absolute are

enforced  criminally . . 406

—  certain  absolute  duties  belong  to

law  of  political  status . . 786
Duty,  one  of  the  leading  notions . 33

—  implied by command. (See


Command)


81


EASEMENT. (See  Servitude)
—  distinction between, and
property . . . 794,  802

—  meaning  of  the  term  . . 803

—  difficulties  which  encumber  the

term 805

—  not  quite  identical  with  servi-

tude in  sense  of  modem  civi-
lians 807

—  but  will  be  so  used  by  author . ibul

—  is  a  fragment  of  property  . 803,  814
Economical  conditions  opposed  to

professional . . . .756
E<lict  of  Pnetor,  general  and  special,

difference  between  . . .592

—  why  styled  peri>etual . . 593

—  change  made  under  Hadrian  re-

sjiecting  . . . . 603

Edictal constitutions of Roman
Emperors  made  in  their  legis-
lative character . .  35,  518
Ejectment,  is  what  Roman  lawyers

wouhl  call  (ictio  in  rem . . 378

-  its  origin,  n 805

Eldon,  Lord,  his  reluctance  to  ex-
tend a  rule . . . .647

—  and  to  generalise . . . 658
Elegantiay  meaning  of  the  term  as

applied  to  law . . 535,  655
Emjiei-ors, Roman, legislated di-
rectly by  constitutions . 35,  517

—  and  indirectly  or  judicially  by

(hereto  and  rescripta . 35,  519
EmphyteusiSy  right  of,  836,  848-851,  854,

855
Entails  of  English  law ... 51


EXE


PAGE


Equity,  various  meanings  of,  38,  576  et  seq.


378
557


560
588

614
ibid
615


619
17


791

800

836

16

32

182


—  contract  of  sale  in

—  origin  olP  the  term

—  meaning  of  term  as  applied  to

Jus  prcBtorium

—  meaning  of,  as  denoting  a  body

of  law .....

—  as  a  distinct  body  of  law,  is  not

universally  present  in  all  sys-
tems .....

—  is  nearly  confined  to  Roman  and

English  law ....

—  history  of  English  courts  of,  well

given  by  Blackstone

—  difference  between  Roman  and

English  .... 616,  620

—  error  of supposing Equity  in

England  to  depend  on  the  ar-

biirium  of  the  judge
Erie (Sir  WUliam), Mr. Austin's

letter  to ....
Error,  when  a  ground  of  exemption

from  liability  . . 479-487

Estate  and  effects,  the  totality  of

a  man's  means

—  in  fee  simple,  not  defined  either

by  Hale  or  Blackstone .

not  absolute  property  .

Ethics,  ambiguity  of  the  term

—  (or  deontolog}'),  science  of  legis-

lation a  department  of .

—  leading  principles  of,  may  be  at-

tained by  all  .

—  causes  of  present  imperfect  state

of  knowledge  of . . 133  <!^  seq,

—  importance  of  wide-spread  know-

ledge of  . . 133.  139,  140

—  might  be  made  to rank  with

sciences  capable  of  demonstra
tion ....

—  Locke's  opinion  to  that  effect

—  definition  of  science  of

—  consists  of  (1)  legislation, (2)

morals ....

—  field  of,  surveyeil  in  these  lee

tures,  circumscribed  by  an  un

definetl  boundary,  n.
Event,  one  of  the  leading  notions
Events, as causes of rights and

duties

—  how  distinguished  from  persons

and  things
Evidence,  rationale  of

—  of  an  act,  frequently  confused

with  the  act  itself  .
Ex contractu y ex delictOj rights

arising .

actions

Ex  delicto^  obligations,  nearly  allied

to obligations quasi ex  con

tractu. (See  Delict)
Execution  of  judgment  .
Executive  and  legislative,  distinc

tion  of  political  powers  into
Executor,  a  universal  successor


137
138
173

ibid


451
33

46

365
64

428

53
62


473
64

248
57


III2


—  w&  J  tr«flt«d  of,  in  Uw  of  tkiap 962

3S,991«M3


FACT,  ooe  of  tbe  IcadiB^
Fmeti  i^momniia,  m  gravnd  of

iM»'tmpatBtioB  . 33»  479  «tf  mf.
Facts  aad  cvcBti,  as  camw  of  r^U

aad  datka  .  ...  46
Facto,  1k>v  distiiigaiahed  froaa  pcr-

scttf  and  thinp  3^

—  lOTit^tinify, bat not alvBji,

ajnoo  jmooa  with  mm/*  iiu'

PocmUom permmet oompeltns  time

rtapeeiu  ad  eeriam  permmam . 45

in  certam  permmam  ibid

Facnltj,  eommonly  denotflt  a  li^t 710

—  bat also  depotea  capacitj  or

abtlitj  to  aoqoire  a  ri^  ibid

Falck,  his  EocjclopaMlia  69

—  remarks  on  his  method  of  ar-

• raogement .... 742

—  his  mistaken  criticism  on  Hale's

arrangement  ....  751
Father, rights  of^ over  child  are

rights  lis  perwnam  384

—  bat  rights  of,  to  cnstod  j,  ftc,  of

child,  aure  rijdits  tn  rras  .  384,  938
Feame,  his  treatise  on  Contingent

Remainders  ....  864
Federal  Govemment,  natnre  of 233,  257

—  how  it  differs  from  a  confedera-

tion of  states  . . . ibid

Felonies  and  misdemeanours,  qu.  the

ni*e  of  ret^ning  the  distinction 1054

—  how  distinguished . . . ibid
Feudal  institutions,  distinction  be-
tween real  and  personal  rights,

a  consequence  of . . . 58

—  origin  of  . . . . 850,  854
Feuerbach,  his  analysis  of  guilt . 462

—  his  agreement  with  the  author

upon  the  meaning  of  the  dis-
tinction between  dominium
and  oUigalio  as  understood  by
the  Romans .... 384

Fichte,  his  remark  about  the  func-
tions of  government . . 763

Fictions,  why  resorted  to  as  a  mode

of  altering  the  law . . 609,  610

Forbearance, one of the leading

notions  ..... 33

—  meaning  of  the  term  . . 866

—  is  not  willed  but  intended  . 424

—  how  distinguished  from  omission 425
Forbearances  (with  acts)  the  objects

of  rights  and  duties ' 46,  366,  395

—  only,  the  objects  of  ^w^  in  rem^  563,  933
Foreign,  law  of  foreign  original . 38

—  sovereigns  may  have  rights 289,  290
Foreigners,  subject  to  laws  of  coun-
try which  they  inhabit . . 332

—  their  peculiar  condition  in  an-
cient Rome .... 552


GOT

MB

fA,  m  Roman  pro-

. 587,588

or  aoorccs  of  law .  34,^

.  -  mfaaing  of  the  pfanae  510,  511

Franchise  is  a  ri^t  im  nem*  not  ex-
ercised orer  a  dctsminate  sub-
ject. (See  Jus  in  rem)  . 389,  954
Fraadt,  statute oi,  liberally  eon-

stmed ^

Frederic  of  Pnissia,  the  Great,  his

position  in  the  German  empire 253

—  hb  intention  in  framing  a  code  €67
Free  GorcmmeDt,  imtore  of  .  .273
French  Codes,  method  of  anango-

mcot  adc^yfeed  in .  .740

—  their  defects  .  ,  ibid
Froichlaw,  aaleof  aaiDunorahlein  377
Fungible  and  not  faagiUe,  diTiskm

of  things  into  . . 779

Fntore  rights,  in  rvm,  Of^poMd  to

50

859
866


opposed to contingent

ri^ts

—  rights  are  alwa3r8  contingcat


GAIUS,  how  delicts  considered  by 61
— title  de  amdiiicne  KaminuM 363

—  arrangement  of  his  treatise  on

law 738

Oemeinet  Recki  in  Germany  .  667

General  and  local  customary  laws,  37»  535
General  jurisprudence,  Austin's  pro-
posed larger  work  on . .16

—  distinguished from particular

jurisprudence  . . 32, 1073

—  preparative  to  the  study  of  the

science  of  legislation . . i^

General  Utility. (See  UtUUy)

General  and  special  codes . . 6^

Gentium.  {For Jus GentiuntjSee Jus)

Gentz,  F.  von,  his  mistaken  views

of  the  origin  of  government . 325

German  Empire,  States,  composing,

how  far  independent . 253, 262

German  Jurists,  their  misapplica-
tion of  Kant's  language  as  to
subject  and  oliject . . 285, 713

German Philosophers, their false

notion  of  government . . 324

Germany, Roman law obtaining

in 38,635

Gilbert,  C.B.,  his  historical  work  on

equity ..... 666

Godwin,  his  mistake  as  to  the  theory

of  utility,  n 163

—  that  theory  involved  in  his  prin-

ciples of  justice,  n.  . . ii>id

—  his  speculations  as  to  the  possi-

bility of  doing  without  a  gov-
ernment .... 768
Good  name  (right  to) . . 47,  7*8
Government,  Rant's  division  of  the

different  kinds  of  . 251,  339,  340

—  nature  of  free .... 278


Index.


1113


GOV


PAGE


Government,  popular,  may  be  in-
ferior to  monarchical  in  a  well-
instructed  community . . 283

—  not  so in  one  imperfectly  in-

structed .... ibid

—  does  not  exist by  consent  of

people .... 295,  298

—  false  hypothesis  of  original  con-

tract as  basis  of . . . 299

—  false  notions  of  German  philoso-

phers on the  subject. (See
Sovereign,  Sovereignty)  . . 324

—  Fichte's  remark  about  the  func-

tions of 763

Grotius,  his  definition  of  rights  in

rem,  in  personam . . 45,  370

—  his  confusion  of  positive  morality

with  what  morality  ought  to  be 216

—  his  definition  of  Sovereignty . 235
Guardian,  rights  of,  over  ward,  are

rights  in  personam  . 384,  938

—  but  rights  of^  to  custody,  &c.,  of

chUd,  are  rights  in  rem  . . 938

—  difficulty  of  assigning  place  to

these  rights  in  a  division  of
law  into  public  and  private . 748
Guilt,  analysis  of  . . . .457

—  restricted  application  of  term  by

lawyers, especiaUy criminal
lawyers 461

—  Feuerbach's  analysis  of  the  term 462

—  Rosshirt's  analysis  of  the  term  . ibid


flABITATIO, not properly a

-'-* servitude . . . 824,  827

Haeres  legitimus,  in  Roman  law,  a

universal  successor  . . 57

Hcereditas  jacens,  in  Roman  law,

what 354

Hale,  Sir  M.,  his  correct  notions  on

the  relative  onler  of  the  law  of

persons  and  the  law  of  things  42

—  and  in  rejecting  the  division  be-

tween public  and  private  law  . 68

—  his  error  as  to  extent  of  law  of

persons 364

—  his  mastery  of  English  law 777,  1093

—  his  share  in  drawing  the  Statute

of  Frauds .... 661

—  his  inconsistency  in  i)lacing  the

relation  of  ancestor  and  heir
in  law  of  persons,  but  executors
and  admin»trators  in  law  of
things 695

—  his  use  of  the  word  ability . 710

—  correctly  places  the  law  of  poli-

tical conilition  in  the  law  of
persons 751

—  -  hUi  correct  designation,  *  Pleas  of

the  Crown ' . . . . 753

—  his  use  of  the  word  economical  .  756
Half  sovereign  states,  nature  of  .  252
Hanover,  an  indei>eudent  sovereign

stete 255


ION


PAOE


Hartley,  Dr.,  his  hypothesis  as  to

the  nature  of  benevolence . 163

Heedlessness,  its  place  among  the

leading  notions ... 38

—  why  necessary  to  analyse  . . 410

—  how  it  differs  from  negligence . 427,

431,  459

—  how  from  intention  . . . 428

—  criminal  heedlessness  .  .  1059
Heineccius,  his  erroneous  notion  of

stains 697

—  his  division  of  status  into  those

qui  ex  ipsd  naturd  projiciscun'
tur  and  those  qui  ex  jure
civili  descendunt . . . 719

—  his  errors  respecting  acquisition

of  jus  in  rem  .  .  .  962,  968
Heir,  a  universal  successor . . 57

—  properly  a  condition  or  status . 952

—  why  treated  of  in  law  of  things  ibid
Historical  school  of  jurispnidence,

how  term  understood  by  Ger-
mans 679

Hobbes,  his  Leviathan  quoted . 32

—  his  definition  of  sovereignty . 234

—  his  proposition  that  *  no  law  can

be  unjust,'  M.  . . . 268

—  true  meaning  of  the  proposition ibid

—  the  main  design  of  his  writings

misunder8too4l,  n.  , . . 279

—  not intended as  a  defence  of

monarchy .... ibid

—  his  capital  errors,  n.  . 280,  281

—  priestly  origin  of  the  antipathy

with  which  he  is  regarded . 281

—  no vestige of atheism in his

writings,  n ibid

Honour,  laws  of,  are  rules  of  pa*ii-

tive  morality  ....  183
Hugo,  his  history  of  the  Roman  law 32

—  remarks  on  his  method  of  ar-

rangement .... 748

—  his  groundless objections  to  a

code .... 665,  678

—  his  inconsistency  in  this  respect  1032
Hume,  assumes  the  existence  of  a

moral  sense  as  well  as  principle
©futility .... 149
Husband,  rights  of,  which  are  in

personam .... 385

—  rights  of,  which  are  in  rem  .  ibid
Husband  and  wife  (outline)  .  .  70
Ilypotheca  .  .  .  .  55,  851
Hypothique  Ugale  in  French  law . 897


IGNORANCE considered under
grounds  of  now -imputation 33,  479
Ignorance  of  law,  not  generally  a
ground  of  exemption  from  lia-
bility 481

—  reasons  for  the  rule  . . . ibid

—  existence  of  this  ignorance  is  an

inevitable  consequence  of  judi-

ciar>'  law .... 652


1 1 14


Index,


IGN

PACK

Ignorance  of  law,  whence  this  arises 652

—  same evils  may  attend  statute

law  .  '.  .  .  .  664
Immovable,  sale  of,  in  French  law  .  377
Imperfect  laws,  nature  of  .  .  99
Imputability,  meaning  of  term  457,  458
Imputation, grounds of. (See

Crime)  ...  33,  1057,  1062
Incapacity,  meaning  of  the  tenu  710,  723
Inchoate  rights  in  rem  opposed  to

vested  .....  50
Incident  (with  fact  or  event)  one  of

the  leading  notions  . . 33

—  its  meaning . ... . 365
Incorporeal  and  coi'poreal,  division

of  things  into . . 361,  777
Independence, necessaiy  to sove-
reignty 220

Index  to  the  Divine  commands 81-83,

451  n.
Induction,  by  which  rules  are  ga-
thered from  judicial  decision  . 64,

621-628,  656

—  perfect,  how  distinguished  from

analogical  reasoning  .  .  1012
Infancy,  a  ground  of  n<w-imputa-

tion .... 33,  490

—  excuse  of,  founded  on  presumed

ignorance  of  law . . .  Und

—  Bentham's  explanation  erroneous  494

—  Blackstone's  also . . .  495
Infeftment,  meaning  of,  in  Scotch

law 381

Inferior,  superior,  &c.,  involved  in

the  notion  of  commaud  .  .  81
InMugemeuts  of  rights  in  revi,  in

personam  J  remedies  for  .  .  62
lujunctiou  ^or  interdict)  l^elougs  to

general  jurisprudence . . 63

—  analogous  to  Roman  interdict . 589
In  Jure  cessio,  a  proceeiling  in  Ro-
man law .... 590

Injuries  are  violations  of  rights  or

duties 45

—  included  in  consideration  of  sanc-

tioning rights  and  duties . 44

—  right  arising  fix>m . . .53,  60

—  is  always  a  right  in  personam . 378
Injury  (or  delict)  its  place  in  outline 33

—  meaning  of  the  term  . 458,  459

—  intention  or  inadvertence  is  of

the  essence  of  . . 468  f^  seq.

—  a  breach  of  contract  is  an  injury 476

—  every  right  of  action  founded  on

an  injury  .  .  .  765,  766
Injustice,  analysis  of  the  terai,  n.  .  268
In  rem,  meaning  of  the  expression.

(See  Jus  in  rem) . . . 957
III  rem,  in  personavi. (See  Rights)
Insanity,  a  ground  of  non-imputa-
tion .... 33,  490

—  the  excuse  founded  on  presumed

ignorance  of  law . . . ibid

—  Bentham's  explanation  erroneous 494

—  Blackstone's  also . . .495


IXT


PAGE


Insolvency,  succession  per  univer'
sitaiem  by,  treated  of  in  out*
line 59,  60

Instinctive,  meaning  of  the  term . 145

—  is  merely  negative . . . ibid

—  does  not  furnish  any  explanation

of  the  act  to  which  it  is  applied ibid

—  men  as  well  as  lower  animals

have  instincts . . . 209

—  Ulpian's  mistake  in  classing  in-

stincts of  animals  with  laws . 210,

551,  566
Institutes  of  Justinian,  method  of

arrangement  adopteil  in  . 740,  922

—  confined  almost  entirely  to  jus

privatum .... 922
Institutes  of  Gains,  method  of  ar-
rangement adopted  in . 738,  922
Instruction,  public  duties  of  thase

engaged  in  ....  70
Insulated,  acts  are  not  .  .  107,  160
Intention, its  place  amongst the

leading  notions ... 33

—  combines  with  motive  to  tix  the

quality  of  an  act . . . 161

—  often  confounded  with  motive . 345

—  (see Will, Acts, Forbearance),

why  necessary  to  analyse  mean-
ing of,  in  treatise  on  jurispru-
dence 410

—  how  confounded  with  wUl,  415,  421,  436

—  how  it  differs  finom  negligence,

rashness,  &c.  . . . 428

—  intention  to  do  future  act,  ana-

lysis of 435

distinguished  from  a  simple

desire  of  the  same  object  .  ibid
is  a  desire  of  an  object  with  a

belief  that  we  shall  do  acts  to

attain  it  .... 436

—  to  forbear  from  an  act,  analysis

of 43S

—  to  do  future  act  is  always  revo-

cable 439

—  meaning  of  the  term  intention,

when  employed  without  refer-
ence to  wrongs . . . 441

—  intention  of  legislator. (See  In-

terpretation 0/ Statute  Law)  441,  625

—  of  testator .... 442

—  of  parties  to  a  contract . . ibid

—  whether  in  any  case intention

alone  can  be  treated  as  a  wrong 460

—  intention  or  inadvertence  is  of  the

essence  of  the  injury . . 468

—  equally  so  in  breaches  of  con-

tract as  in  other  injuries  . 476

—  this  proved  by  grounds  of  ex-

emption from  liability  .  .  477
Interdict  or  injunction  belongs  to

general  jurisprudence  .  .  iSZ
Interdict,  procedure  on  .  .  .  5i»9
Intermediate hypothesis between

theory  of  utility  and  hypothesis

of  a  moral  sense . . 37,  153


Index.


HIS


IXT


PAGE


JUD


PAGE


luternational Law. (See  Positive
International  Morality)

luternational  inorality. (See  Posi-
tive Internatiowd  Morality)  .

Interpretation,  statutes  passed  for

purposes  of,  are  not  strictly  laws 98

Interpretation,  spurious  kind  of  in-

teri^>retation  called  extensive . 39,

578,  631,  994

—  of  statute  law ...  64,  624 i
<litfers  from  induction  of  judi-  i

ciary  law .... 628
Paley's  remarks  on  this  «Uffer-

ence ..... 632  >
Sir  Samuel  Romilly's  remarks

on  the  same .... ibid

—  what  is  the  tnie  and  proper  ob-

ject of  interj^retation . . 989

—  how  intention  of  legislator  dis-

covered ihid

—  from  literal  meaning  of  the  wonls ihid

—  sometimes  from  other  indicia. . 990

—  causes  which  have  led  to  extended

or  restricted  interpretation . 991

—  this  is  really  judicial  legislation 992

—  in  what  sense  iuterj)retation  pro-

j»er  may  be  restrictive  or  ex-
tensive ibid

—  grammatical, how oi>i>ose<l to

logical 993

—  misapplications  of  the  term 994,  995
Inter  vivos^  Alienee  by  transfer  inf^r

vivos,  a  singular  successor . 56
Intestaio,  succession  «6,  a  species  of

universal  succession . .  57,  60
Ittvoluntarj',  uncertain  meaning  of

the  tenn . . . .417
Issue,  represented  in  Roman  pro-
cedure by  thtformvla  . 587|  588


JUDEX  J  his  office  and  duty . 587
—  how  his  functions  <liffered
from  those  of  an  English  jury 588

Jadge-ma^le  law,  the  expression  used
by  Beutham.  (See  Judiciary
Law) 218

Judges,  their  legislative  power.  (See
Judiciary  />ii/')

—  functions  of  judges,  in  outline  .  64,  70
Judgment,  right  arising  from  .  65
Judgments,  their  place  in  the  outline  64
Judicial  le^slation. (See  Judicia  ry

Law)
Judicial  function  of  Roman  emperoi*s 35

—  notice  of  certain  customary  laws 37,

534

—  decision,  induction  of  nile  from,  64,  622

—  powers  may  be  reserved  by  sove-

reign to  itself  . . 250,  520

—  but  are  commonly  delegate<l . ibid
Judiciar>'  Law,  injudiciously  spoken

of  with  disrespect  by  Bentham 218
"*  —  when  on  new  jwint,  is  ex  post

/ado 487


Judiciary  Law,  nature  of,  explained 530,

531

the  tenn  introduced . . 533

considered  as  contrasted  with

statute  law . . . 620  et  seq.

the  form,  or  mode,  of  its  ex-

])ressiou  .... 622

is  extracte<l  from  decisioiLs . ibUi

mode  of  extraction . . ihid

—  —  difference  between  this  pro-
cess and  that  of  inter|)retation 624-

628

what  is  ratio  decidendi . 628

absurd fiction of its being

merely  declared  by  the  judges 634

process  by  which  it  is  fonnetl

by  the  judge  .... 638
Bentham 's  objection  to  it  an-
swered 642

Sir  J.  Romilly's  objection  to

it  answered .... ihid

another  current  objection  to

it  auswereil .... 644

influence  of  private  lawyers

ujjon  it 645

other  checks  upon  judges  in

construction  of  it . . . 646

why  it  is  so  called . . 648

tenable  objections  to  this  kind

of  law 649

first  tenable  objection  ;  it  lies

in  concreiOf  or  is  implicated
with  the  peculiarities  of  the
particular  case . . . ibid

second  tenable  objection  ;  it

Is  made  in  haste . . . 651

—  —  thin  I  tenable  objection  ;  it  is
exp(tstfac4o .... ibid

fourth  tenable  objection  ;  it  is

disperse<l,  bulky,  and  difficult

to  extract .... 652

an  evil  not  inherent  in  . 654

not  attested  by  authoritative

documents .... ibid

—  —  resides  in  the  memorj*  of  tlie
judges,  or  is  attested  by  the
dis])utable  records  of  private
reporters .... ibid

-■  —  this  the  effect  of  legislative

negligence .... ibid

there  miyht  be  authorise<l  re-

l>orters,  whose  rejwrts  might  l>e

ma<le  official  evidence . . ihid

tifth tenable objection  ; no

fixed  test  of  its  validity  . . 655

—  —  sixth  tenable  objection  ;  its
rules  are  wanting  in  compre-
hensiveness .... 657

seventh tenable objection  ;

the  statute  law  founded  on  it

is  necessarily  unsystematic . 659

evils  of  it  might  be  remedied

by  a  code .... 660

it  is  better  than  a  badly  ex-
pressed statute . . . 661


i


Iii6


Index.


JUD


PAOB


Judiciary  Law,  it  is  inferior  to  one

well  expressed . . . 661

Rules  of,  are  not  caau^  but

rcUumes  decidendi  . . . 666

Jura  realia  and  personalia,  distinc-
tion, by  modem  civilians . 58

Jure,  deJurepossessianiSf  by  Savigny 53

Jitris  IgnorantiAf  considered  with
reference  to  grounds  of  non'
imputation . . 33,  481  et  seq.

Juris  Universitaies ... 55

Jurisdiction,  contentious  and  volun-
tary 64

—  nature  of  the  latter  . . .766

—  strict  Roman meaning of  the

term 587

Jurisprudence,  its  relation  to  ethics 16

—  general  and  particular . . 82

—  equity  in  Roman  and  English . 89

—  positive  law  is  appropriate  mat-

ter of 86

—  is  the  science  of  positive  law . 172

—  absurd  definition  of  it  by  Ulpian

in  the  Digest  ... 217

—  use  of  the  word  jurisprudence  by

the  authors  of  the  French  and
Pnissian  codes . . 671,  673

—  what  is  meant  by  general  juris-

prudence .... 1073

—  of  the  principles,  notions,  and

distinctions in jurisprudence
which  are  necessary . . ibid

—  of  those  which  are  not  necessary

but  almost  universal . . 1074

—  importance  of  ascertaining  pre-

cisely tlie  meaning  of  the  lead-
ing terms  of  the  science  . . 1075

—  of  the  diflferent  subjects  to  which

the  term  *  jurisprudence'  has

been  applied  .... 1077

—  inevitable  and  sometimes  inten-

tional implication  of  it  with
legislation .... 1078

—  uses  of  the  study  of  jurisprudence 1082

—  does  not  render  student  less  fit

for  practice . . . 1082,  1083

Jury, how their functions diflFer

from  those  of  the  Roman  judex 588

JusActionuvij  should  be  distributed
between  law  of  persons  and  law
of  things . .  42,  726,  727

Jus  (See  D.iw\  different  senses  in
which  the  term  is  used  in  Ro-
man law . . .  285  n.,  924

Jus  ad  rem,  meaning  of  the  term . 375

an expression not used by

classical  jurists . . . 960

opposed  to  jus  in  rem  or  jus

in  re  (in  extended  meaning) . ibid

is  sometimes  used  as  equiva-
lent to  jus  in  personam  . . ibid

but  this  use  of  the  term  is

improi)er .... 961

it  is  only  a  kind  of  jus  in

personam .... 960


JUS


PAOI


Jus  ad  rem,  answers  to  the  obliga-
tion addandum  aliquid  or  ad
rem  aequirendam .  960

importance  of  distinguishing

the  broader  from  the  narrower
signification  of  the  term . 961,  962

confusion  created  by  not  dis-
tinguishing meanings  of .  962

distinction  between  tUtdusad

acquirendum  and  modus  aequt-
rendi 963

errors  of  Heineccius  respect-
ing them .... 964

Jus  civile,  division  of  law  into,  and
jus  gentium,  founded  on  hypo-
thesis of  moral  sense . . 154

—  —  original  meaning  of  term,  as

opposed  to /Kfyen/»«m  . . 559

later  meaning  of  term,  as  op-

po8ed.  Xo  jus  geniium . . 563

analogous  distinction  of  law

into  natural  and  positive  567

Jus  Oentium,  historieal  sketch  of 38,

550  H  seq.

of  earlier  Roman  lawyers  38,

552  et  seq,

of  classical  jurists,  88, 64,  562  et  seq.

origin  of  the  term . . 557

sometimes  identified  'wUkjus

prastorium . , . ,561

absorbed  into  the^ti^  civile  . ibid

later  Roman  notion  of  . ibid

as  meaning  positive  inter-
national morality . . . 566

Jus  in  personam,  denotes  the  com-
pass, not  the  subject,  of  a  right 369

that  it  avails  against  a  deter-
minate person  or  persons . 370

answers  to  term  *  obligatio  *

in  Roman  law . . . ibid

examination  of  the  meaning

of  the  term,  Z69etseq.  932  et  seq. 957

obligations  correlating  with,

may  be  positive,  but  are  gene-
rally negative . . 371, 933

illustrations  of  meaning of

term .... 373,  935

a  right  founded  on  contract

is 370,935

a  right  of  action  is . 878,  936

of  father  against  child  384,  933

of  master  against  servant . ibid

of  guardian  against  ward . ibid

of  husband  against  wife 385,  939

jus  ad  rem  sometimes  used  as

equivalent  to  it . . . 960

but  erroneously  so . .961

jus  ad  rem  is  only  a  species  of ibid

Jus  in  re  (in  the  modem  sense)  not
acquired  by  contract  {strieto
sensu) 909

in  what  cases  acquired  by  a

so-called  contract . . .910

in  Roman  law  =  jus  in  re

alienA 959


Index.


1117


JUS

PAGE

\u  in  re  among  mcKleni  civilians  =

jus  in  rein .... 960

in  the  latter  sense  opi)osed  to

jus  ad  rem .... ifeirf

\k8  in  rem  (outline) . . .  43,  45

avails  against  the  world  at

large .... 44,  369

imports  a  right,  the  duties

answering  to  which  ajren^gative^

i,e.  duties  to  forbear 44,  370,  933

an  objection  to  this  position,

answereil . . . .785

denotes  the  compass,  not  the

subject,  of  a  right  . . . 369

examination  of  the  meaning  of

the  tenn 369  ei  seq.,  932  et  seq.^  957

illiLstrations  of  the  meaning

of  tlie  t^nn . . . 371,  933

of  father  over  chihl . 385,  938

of  master  over  servant  . . ibid

of  guardian  over  ward  . . ibid

of  Imsband  over  wife . . 939

it  may  exist  without  deter-
minate subjects . 388,  938,  954

e.g.  rights  to  reputation,  mo-
nopoly, franclilse,  status  389,  954,  955

if  it  is  over  persons,  it  belongs

chiefly  to  law  of  status . . 787

over  a  thing,  tlie  only  kind

properly  belonging  to  the  law

of  things .... 789

is  either  indefinite  in  point  of

iLser  (i)roperty),  or  definite  {ser-
Vitus) . . .' . .790

may  be  limite<i  in  point  of

duration,  or  unlimited . 830,  831

ifunlimitedjthe  duration  may

l>e  definite  or  indefinite  . . ibid

nature of, if unlimited in

l>oint  of  duration . . . ^id

nature  of,  if  limited  in  dura-
tion 832

veste<l  and  contingent 856  et  seq.

uselessness  of  Kant's  modifi-
cations of  the  term  . . 940

the  term,  if  properly  used,

would  })&  a  most  convenient

one ; ibid

ami  Jus  in  personam  ^  the  best

expressions  for  two  great  classes

of  rights . . 955,  957  et  seq.

objections  to  other  pro-

pose<l  analogous  expressions,  955-9r)7

e.g.  jus  in  re^  jus  ad  rem  . 955

dominium  and  obligatio . ibid

jus  recUe  and  personate . ibid

pittestas  and  obligaiio . 956

absolute  and  relative  rights ibid

law  of  property  and  law  of

contract  .... ibid

theexpressionyM^i/ircffiin  its

large  generic  sense  not  used  by
Roman  lawyers . . . 958

this  use  of  the  term  originated

with  the  Glossators . . ibid

VOL.  II.


JUS


PAGE


Jvs  in  reMf  by  modem  civilians  jus
in  re  used  as  equivalent  to  jus

m  rem 960

how  it  may  be  acquired . 962

errors  respecting  this  . . ibid

propositions of Heineccius

examined  and  refuted . . 964
sometimes  arises  from  an  inci-
dent which  is  styled  a  contract 967

but  such  an  incident  is  really

a  conveyance  as  well  as  a  con-
tract ..... ibid

or  is  a  conveyance  simply . ibid

extent  to  which  property  said

to  be  transferred  by  contract  of

sale  in  English  law  . . 968

ditto  in  French  law . . 969

Jus moribus constitutum^ (See

Customary  Law) .
Jus naturale, ambiguity of the

term.  (See  Natural  Law)  .  565
Jus  personarum  et  rerum,  outline  of

the  division ....  39-43
true  meaning  of. (See  Per-
sons) . . . 363,  684  et  seq,

Thibaut's  essay  on . . 706

Rights  over  persons  and  the

correlating  obligations  belong
to  jus  personarum  . , . 942
Jus  prcetorium^  introduction  to . 38

history  of . . . 684  et  seq.

Jus  prudentibus  composiium  37,  543  et  seq.
Jus  piddicum  and  jus  privatum,  di-
vision of  law  into . 404,  744  et  seq.
Jus  reale  et  personate,  sometime^
substituted  iovjus  in  rem  et  in
personam , . . 955,  977

ambiguity  attaching  to  these

terms  ....  978, 979
Jus  receptum  .  .  .  38,  635
Jus  rerum,  origin  and  meaning  of

the  term. (See  Things) , , 931

employed  by  certain  German

civilians  to  mean  the  law  of
dominiaf  or  rights  in  rem , 773

this  not  the  meaning  of  the

expression  as  used  in  the  Insti-

tutes 774

peculiar  use  of  the  expression

in  the  Prussian  code  .  .  ibid
Just  and  Justice,  analysis  of  the

terms,  n 268

Justice,  functions  of  ministers  of . 65
Justices  of  the Peace,  difficulties
which  they  have  in  administer-
ing the  law .... 1047

—  growing  importance  of  their  func-

tions ibid

Justification  —  action, different

modes  of  asserting  rights  .  62
Justinian,  how  delicts  considered  in

his  Institutes .... 61

—  matter  of  his  code  and  Pandects 605

—  enormous  faults  in  these,  consi-

dered as  a  code  . 623  et  aeq,

2  B


iii8


Index.


JUS


PAGE


Justinian,  intention  of  .his  compila-
tions to  be  a  perpetual  code . 636

—  remarks on the arrangement

adopted  in  his  Institutes 740,  922

—  on that  adopted in  his  Code

and  Digest . . . .922


251


KANT,  his  definitions  of  govern-
ment,  n. . . . •

—  want  of  precision  in  his  notions

of 'right,'  n.  . . . .285

—  his  definition  of  political  liberty 339,

341

—  his  distinction  of subjectivity

and  objectivity . . . 713

—  misapplication  of  these  terms  by

German  jurists . . . ibid

—  they  nearly  tally  with  Locke's

ideas  gotten  by  reflection,  and

ideas  gotten  by  sensation . ihiA

—  his '  Metaphysische Anfangs-

grUnde  der  Rechtslehre' . . 940

—  uselessness  of  the  new  terms  for

jura  in  rem  introduced  by  him  ibid
Kenyon,  Lord,  his  decision  in  Read

V.  Brookman  .  .615,  658,  1098
King,  maxim  that  he  is  incapable

of  committing  wrong . . 272

—  is not sovereign or supreme.

(See  Sovereign)  .  .  .  ibid
Knowledge, importance of the

spread  of ... . 132

—  want  of,  makes  form  of  govern-

ment important,  n.  . . 283

—  contrary  opinion  of  (Economists ibid
Kramer,  Herr  von,  his  influence  in

framing  the  Prussian  code . 674

LARCENY, inconsistent defini-
tions of .... 1044

—  not  so  good  a  term  as  Th^fl . ibid
Law  (see  Jus)  the  subject  of^  an

abstract  science . . . 17

—  of  nations,  or  positive  interna-

tional law. (See  Positive  Inter-
national Morality)  . .  16,  72

—  of  nature,  as  employed  by  Hugo 32

—  positive,  essential  difference  of.

(See  Positive  Law) . . 34,  330

—  occasions of, sometimes con-

founded with  its  sources  . 36

—  fashioned by  judicial decision

upon  pre-existing  custom . 37

—  fashioned by  judicial decision

upon  opinions  of  private  lawyers ibid

—  of  foreign  original ... 38

—  and  equity,  the  distinction  not

based  upon  any  principle . ibid

—  fashioned by  judical decision

upon positive international
morality .... ibid

—  of  persons  =  Law  of  status  . 40

—  division  of,  with  reference  to  its

purposes ....  39-43


LAW


PAQt

3MS


Law,  of  things— of  persoiis .

—  of things, conyemnt about

rights  and  duties,  &c .  40

—  of  things,  outline  of  this  depart-

ment . . . . iZelteq.

—  public  and  private . . .  67-A

—  of  persons  in  outline  . .  67-72

—  of Scotland, meaning of the

words  '  real  *  and  '  personal '  in

n. (See  Scotland,  Law  of) . S80

—  proper  is  a  command  . . 79

—  proper, with improper laws,

divided  into  four  kinds ;  divine
law,  positive  law,  positive  mo-
rality, and  law  metaphorical  . iM

—  imperative  and  jiroper  essence  of 80, 51

—  marks  of  Divine  law  ... 81

—  marks of laws, consisting of

positive  moral  rules . . 84

—  marks  of  laws, metaphOTically

so  called .... 85

—  character  of  laws  positive  . . iWrf

—  what  properly  included under

the  term .... 86

—  as  set  by  Qod  to  men . . ik^

—  as  set  by  men  to  men . . t^

—  Divine law, meaning of the

term. (See  IHvine  Law) . ibid

—  as  set  by  political  superiors . 87

—  as  not  set  by  political  superiors iM

—  positive,  meaning  of  the  term . iM

—  positive  law  is  appropriate  mat-

ter of  jurisprudence . . tS«J

—  what  improperly  included  under

the  term  law  . , , , QM

—  laws  of  vegetation . . . «S

—  laws  of  motion , . , , ibid

—  every  law  is  a  command . . ^d

—  analysis  of  the  term  *  command  *  8S-92

—  is  a  signification  of  desire. (See

Command) . . . . 89

—  is  enforced  by  a  sanction  . . iM

—  analysis  of  the  term  '  sanction.'

(See  Sanctions) , . . ibid

—  when  a  command  is  not  a  law . 92

—  though  set  by  a  sovereign  . . 93

—  a law is a command which

obliges  a  person  or  i>ersons  to

a  course  of  conduct  . . 96

—  a  law  of  interpretation  is  not

properly  a  law ... 98

—  nature  of  imperfect  laws . . 99

—  nature  of  declaratory  laws,  98,  214, 637

—  nature  of  customary  laws. (See

Customary  Law) . . 101, 199

—  division  of  laws  into  natural  and

positive,  (See  Natural  Law)  154,  567

—  this division  founded  on  com-

pound hypothesis of moral
sense  and  principle  of  utility  . 153

—  division into  jus  genHum  and

jus  civUe  founded  on  same  hy-
pothesis . . , .154

—  nature  of  laws  which  are  analo-

gous to  laws  proper . . 167


Index.


II 19


LAW


PAGE


Law,  of  metaphorical  laws,  why  so

called .... 169,  209

—  two  uieaniugs  of  the  term  natu-

ral law 175

—  law  of  honour  w  founded  on

positive  morality . . .183

—  international law \s> not law

proper.  (See  Poaitive  Tntema-
tioiial  Morality) . . .185

—  Locke's  division  of  laws . . 200

—  Montesquieu^s  confused  descrip-

tion of  different  kinds  of  laws . 211

—  law  of  God,  Blackstone's  remark

that  human  laws  are  of  no  va-
lidity if  contrary  to,  criticised,  n. 214

—  law  and  fact,  absurdity  of  inquiry

whether  a  question  \n  one  of  law

or  fact 230

—  nature  of  constitutional  law . 267

—  meaning  of  Hobbes'  didum^  that

law  cannot  be  unjust,  n.  . 268

—  rights created by law  distin-

guished from  natural  and  moral
rights 343

—  law  of  j>er8ons,  true  meaning  of.

(See  Persons) . . 364,  684  et  seq.

—  law  of  things. (See  Things) . ibid

—  division  of  law  into  jus  in  rem

and  jifs  in  personam . . 367

—  meaning  of  the  terms. (See  Jus

in  rem  and  Jus  in  Personam)  . 370

—  ignorance  of  law  not  a  ground  of

exemption  from  liability  . 480

—  reasons  ior  the  rule. (See  Igno-

rance of  Law) . . . 481

—  di'itinction  between  written  and

unwritten  law.  (See  Written
Law) 509

—  sources  of  law  . . . 509  et  seq,

—  promulged  and  unpromulged . 526

—  canon  law .... 535

—  Praetorian  law  . . . 560  et  seq.

—  statute  and  jmliciary . 531-533,

620  et  seq,

—  nature of  the  distinctions  be-

tween jus  gentium  aiidjus  civile 559

—  the last two distinctions  are

analogous  to  the  distinction
between  law  natural  and  jwsi-
tive 569

—  uselessness of the division of

laws  into  natural  and  positive 570

—  order  in  which  law  is  generated,  635, 636

—  import of the distinction be-

tween law  of  persons  and  of.
things .... 684  et  seq.

—  uses of  the distinction. (See

Persons f  Things) . . . ibid

—  arrangements  adopted  in  various

systems  of,  and  treatises  on,
law. (See  Arrangement)

—  distinction  between  public  and

private  law . . . 744  et  seq,

—  passages  of  Roman  law  in  which

this  distinction  is  ezplaineil 922,  923


LIA

Law,  difficulty  of  settlingtrue  import
of  the  distinction .

—  necessary  to  do  so  in  order  to

determine  the  true  place  of
criminal  law  in  a  complete  code
or  treatise ....

—  advantage  of  the  study  of  law  as

a  gymnastic . . . .

—  opinion  of  Leibnitz  upon  this .

—  necessity  for  a  Faculty  of  Law .
Lawyers,  opinions  of,  not  a  source


PAGB


928


ibid

1087
ibid

1088


of  law


36,  543
645


58


—  their  influence  over  judiciary  law
Legacy, succession to  specific or

particular  legacy  is  succession
rei  singula:  ....
Legal  Education  should  commence
with  study  of  general  jurispni-
dence 1082

—  system  adopted  in  Piiissian  uni-

versities .... 1083

—  what  is  generally  necessary  to  a

legal  education . . . 1086

—  im])ortauce of the study of

logic .... 1081,  1086

—  value  of  the  study  of  the  rcUianale

of  law  as  a  gymnastic

—  opinion  of  Leibnitz  to  that  effect

—  necessity  for  a  Law  Faculty
Legatee,  of  a  specific  thing .
LegeSf  strictly  speaking,  only  in

eluded  those  laws  passed  by
populus ,

—  also  extended  to  pl^biscita
Legislation,  principles  of,  a  name

for  the  measure  or  test  of  posi
tive  law

—  science  of  legislation  not  the  sub

ject  of  general  jurisprudence

—  a  branch  of  the  science  of  ethics

—  tendency  to  confound  i>ositive  law

with  it. (See  Positii^  Law)  n,

—  inevitable,  and  sometimes  inten-

tional, implication  of  it  ^ith
jurisprudence.

Legislative  and  executive,  distinc-
tion of  i)olitical  powers  into .

Legislator,  what  is  meant  by  inten-
tion of . . . .441,  624

—  the  qualifications  necessary  for

the  office  of .

—  must  be  versed  in  both  theory

and  practice ....

Legitima  portio,  of  Roman  law,  its
antiquity ....

Ligitime  of  French  law  .

Leibnitz,  his  remark  u}ion  the  mas-
tery of  their  system  by  the
Roman  jurisconsults

—  his  opinion  in  favour  of  the  study

of  law 1087

Lessee  for  years,  not  considered  as

proprietor .... 805

—  had  not  originally /liS  in  rem , ibid
Liability,  grounds  of  exemption  firom 477


1087

ibid

1088

56


514
515


16,83

32
173

217


1078
248


1096

ibid

617
ibid


677


1 1 20


Index,


LIA

PAGE

Liability,  casvs  or  accident . . 477

ijnioraiice  or  error . . 479

iufaucy . . . 490,  494

druukennesH . . 494,  495

LiberA  liepHhUcA^  disjxwitiou  bus-
pending  the  vestiug  of  a  right
prohibited .... 59
Liberty,  i>olitical  or  civil .• . 33

—  en-oneouH  definition  of,  by  Paley 216

—  is  synonymous  with  right . . 356

—  true  nature  of  civil  or  |K)litical

li])erty*. . . 273,274,788

—  is  the  alwence  of  legal  restraint 274
~  Kant's  definition . . 339,  341

—  classed  by  Blackstone  with  his

so-called  absolute  rights .  .  788
Liens  made  by  judgments  .  .  64
Light,  servitude  not  to  obstruct  .  811
Living,  universiUUea  juris  <levolving

from 57

Livy,  his  expressions  uiwn  the  enor-
mous bulk  of  the  law . . 678
Locke,  his  opinion  that  science  of
ethics  might  approach  the  ex-
actness of  that  of  geometry . 138

—  his  division  of  laws . . . 200

—  tallies  with  that  of  Author . ibid

—  his  observations  on  virtue  and

\'ice 202

—  his  *  ideas  gotten  by  reflection,'

and  *  ideas  gotten  by  sensa-
tion,' are  the  same  as  Kant's
'subjective'  and  'objective'  ex-
istences 713

Logic,  ailvantage  to  lawyers  of  the

study  of  it . . . 1081,  1086

Ltiviinibus  ojiciatur,  servitus  ne . 811


MACKELDEY,  his  definition  of
'Recht' .... 399
i/o/a  in  se  and  malu  prohibita,  dis-
tinction of . . . 485,  572

—  tallies  with  distinction  of  crimes

into  those  jvris  gejitiurn,  and
those  jure  civil . . . 572
Malice,  use  of  the  wonl  to  denote

intention . . . .345

—  inconvenience  of  the  term  as  a

name  for  criminal  design . 1058

—  inconsiderate  assumption  that  it

is  of  the  essence  of  every  crime ibid
Mancipi  et  nee  mandpi^  res . . 783
Mansfield,  Lord,  his  decision  that
moral  obligation  is  a  good  legal
consideration  . . .218

—  his  statement  of the  superior

authority  of  common  to  statute

law 663

—  his  endeavours to get  to  his

court  jurisdiction  which  had
been  engrassed  by  the  Court
of  Chancery . . .615,  1098
Martens,  Von,  his  correct  views  on

international  law . . 173, 216


HOB

Martens,  Von,  his  definition  of  sove-
reign government .

Master  and  slave  (outline)

Master,  rights  of,  over  servant,  are
rights  in  personam  . 384,

— but  rights  of,  to  services,  are
rights  in  rem . .  . 385,

—  his  liability  to  a  servant,  n.

—  difficulty  of  assigning  place  to

these  rights  in a  division  of
law  into  public  and  private 747,
Mathematical  truths, taken u|X)n
trust .....

—  cannot  me^n  deductioniii  oipurdy

mathematical  reasoning,  n.
Metaphor,  the  term  as  use<l  in  com-
mon }>arlance  define<l
Metaphorical  laws  .  79,  167,

Method. (See  Arrangement)
Might  is  right,  meaning  of  proposi-
tion .....
Ministers  of  Justice,  functions  of .  65
Misdemeanors  and  felonies,  qu.  use
of  retaining  the  distinction  be-
tween them . . . . 1

—  how  distinguished . . ,1
Mishap  {casus)  a  ground  of  fion -im-
putation ... 33,

Mistake,  action  to  recover  money
paid  by,  should  be  precede<l  by
a  demand.  {Xote,  It  has  lately
been  so  ruled  in  the  Court  of
Exchequer,  by  Martin  anil
Bramwell,  B.R,  Freeman  r.
Jeffries,  May  6,  1869,  L.  R.,
4  Exch.  199,  200.— R.C.)

Modes,  law  considered  with  reference
to  the  mode  in  which  it  begins
and  ends .  34,  35,  525  el

—  whereby  law  is  abrogated  .
Modus  acquirendif  a  plirase  devised

by  the  modem  civilians  . . !

error  of  dividing  every  acqui-
sition of  jus  in  ran  into  titulus
ad  acquirendum  and .  . S

proix)sitions of Heineccius

respecting,  examined  and  re-
futed !

in  what  cases  distinguishable

from  tittdus  ad  acquirendum  . i

Monarch,  not  invested  with  a  status
(properly  so  called)

Monarchy,  nature  of . . . !

—  limited,  nature  of . . 240,  :

—  limited,  is  not  true  monarchy.

(See  Sovereign t  Sovcrcignt)/) . i
Monopoly,  a  right  in  rem  which  has
no  subject ....

—  right  of,  is  a  right  in  rem  . . !

—  is  a  right  to  forbearance  only . 1

—  is  a  right  in  rem  without  a  sub-'

jeci  .  .  •  .  •  <
Montesquieu,  his  confusion  of  laws

of  various  kinds  with  each  other  t
Mora,  meaning  of  the  term .


Index.


I  121


MOR


PAGE


Morality,"  or  morals, meaning of

term. (See  Positive.  Morality) 87

Moral rights clistingiiiHhed from

legal 343

Moral  sense,  intermediate  hypo-
thesis between,  and  theory  of
utility .... 37,  153

—  hypothesis  of  a  . .  82,  105

—  its  existence  must  be  assumed  to

be  the  index  of  Divine  com-
mands if  we  reject  the  prin-
•riple  of  utility . . . 144

—  true  nature  of  the  hypothesis . ibid

—  analogous  to  hypothesis  of  ani-

mal instinct . . . .145

—  Butler  its  ablest  advocate. . 149

—  compound  hyi^othesis  of  exist-

ence of  a  moral  sense  together

with  }>rincij)le  of  utility  . . 148

—  this  hy  jwthesis  adopted  by  Hume 1 49

—  and  ap]>arently  by  Butler  . . 153

—  is  the  foundation  of  division  of

law  into  natural  and  pa^itive  . 154

—  and into  jus  gentium  and  jus

civile ..... ibid

—  not  to  be  confounded  with  sym-

pathy, n 165

Morals,  or  ethics,  ambiguity  of  the

tenn 16

Mortgage,  or  Hypotheca,  vests  jns

in  rem  and  jiia  in  personwn  at

once .... 55,  784

—  of  all  future  rights  allowed  by

Roman  law .... 867
Mortgagee,  (lilference between  his
]K>8ition  in  English  and  Roman

law * 851

Mos,  is  i>ositive  morality . .  16,  17
Motive,  its  ])lace  amongst  the  lead-
ing notions  in  jurisprudence . 33

—  for  e^stablishment  of  law  some-

times confounded  with  its
sonrce.s 36

—  of  human  conduct  not  to  be  con-

founded with  principle  of  utility 156

—  go^Klni'Ss  and  baflness  of  motives 160

—  benevolent  and  selfish,  n.  . . 164

—  ori;,'in  of  motives  no  part  of  theory

of  utility . . . .166

—  often  confounded  with  intention 345

—  why  necessarj'  to analyse the

meaning  of  the  tenn  in  treatise

on  jurisj)rudence . . . 410

—  precedes  volition . . .416
Movable  and  immovable,  diWsion  of

things  into,  does  not  quadrate
witli  tlie  cli vision  into  real  and
personal  in  English  law  . . 57

division  of  things  into  . . 777

Murat, his description of  certain

American  legislatures . . 656


NATION,  meaning  of  tenn,  m. . 243
Nationality, in the sense of


OBL


PAGE


independent  political  society,
what  constitutes . . . 220
Natural  Law  as  understood  by  mo-
dem writers, two disparate
meanings ... 37f  175

—  (1)  law  of  God,  (2)  a  jwrtion  of

positive  law  and  positive  mo-
rality 176

—  Ulpian's  mistake  in  extending

the  term  to  instincts  of  ani-
mals . . . 209,  551,  569

—  distinction  of  natural  and  posi-

tive law . . 154,  567,  573

—  this  division  founded  on  com-

pound hy)>othe8is of moral
sense  and  }>rinciple  of  utility  . 154

—  uselessness  of  the  distinction . 570

—  disparate  meanings  attached  to

the  term  natural  law  .  .  573
Natural  rights  distinguished  from

legal 343

meaning  of  . . . . 573

—  and  positive. The  distinction  of

human  rules  into,  purposeless 38,  570

—  procedure,  approached  by  Roman

Kj'stem 589

Negative,  the  duties  answering  to

rights  in  rein  are  .  .  44,  871,  933
' an  objection  to  this  position

answered  ....  785
Negligence,  its  place  amongst  the

leading  notions ... 33

—  why  necessary  to  analyse  mean-

ing of,  in  treatise  on  jurispru-
dence 410

—  meaning  of . . . 426,  459

—  how  it  diflFers  from  heedlessness 427,

431,  459

—  how  from  intention  . . . 428

—  of  criminal  negligence  .  .  1059
Next  of  kin,  a  universal  successor  .  57
Newly  densetl  names,  objection  to  48,  49
A'o/i- imputation,  grounds  or  causes

of .  . .33,  477  et  seq.

Notions,  leading,  in  the  science  of

law . . .  32,  343-511

QBLIOA  TIO,  its  technical  mean-
ing in  the  Roman  law .  45,  58,  923

Obligation,  corresponding  to  right

in  personam .... 33

—  is  the  appropriate  name  for  the

relative  duty  answering  to  a

right  in  persotiam  . . .  45

—  implied  by  comman<l . .  81

—  laws  of  imperfect ...  99

—  is  positive  or  negative . .  346

—  is  relative  or  absolute . .  347

—  in  Roman  law  answers  to  jus  in

personam 370

—  may  be  8uperadde<l  to  right  of

property .... 373

—  is  obnoxious  to  a  sanction  . 444

—  how it is distinguished from

physical  restraint . . .453


I  122


Index,


OBL

PAOE

Obligation,  right  caunot  be  enforced

without  imposing . . . 575

—  how  it  arises  out  of  status  . 732

—  scheme  of  Roman  law  language

relating  to  (Table)  ... 916

—  in  what  sense  the  terra  is  used

by  classical  jurists  . . . 924

—  borrowed  from  them  by  the  au-

thors of  the  French  code  who
misunderstood  it . . . 673

—  how  it  arises  from  ^tio^'-contract 983
Occasions of  law  sometimes con-
founded with  its  sources  . 36

Occult  qualities,  absurdity  of  scho-
lastic notion  of . . . 697

Occupancy  does  not  found  the  right

of  possession  .... 51

—  nature  of  acquLsition  of  property

by 901

GSconomists,  their  political  system,  n,  282
Offences  are  violations  of  rights  or

duties 43

—  some,  are  made  thefts  by  a  fic-

tion 1042

—  law  relating  to  dispersed. (See

Crim^) 1045

Offices,  corresponding  to  rights  in

rem ..... 33

—  are  duties  answering  to  rights  in

rem .....  46

Oligarchy,  nature  of . . .  239

Omission,  one  of  tlie  leading  notions  33

—  and  Commission,  distinction  be-

tween acts  of . . . . 425

—  acts  of,  how  distinguished  from

forbearance .... ibid
Operce  servorunif  improi)erly  called
a  servitude  by  the  Roman  law-
yers 824

Opinion  of  private  lawyers,  influ-
ence of  . . .  36,  543,  645

—  so-called  law  set  by. (See  Posi-

tive Morality)  .  .  .79,  87
Original  contract,  false  lijrpothesis

of,  as  basis  of  government  .  300
Overt  acts,  are  attempts  which  are

evidence  of  intention . . 441

—  why  required  to  make  party  cii-

minally  liable  .  .  441,  460
— •  are  of  the  essence  of  every  crime  1061
Ownership  distinguished  from  servi-

tus 48

—  2LJ\LS  in  rem. (See  Property) . 371


PACT  (in  outline) ... 54
—  meaning  of  term . 981,  983
Paley,  Ins  erroneous  views  of  obli-
gation and  sanction . .  89,  90

—  character of his treatise on

Moral  and  Political  Philosophy 135

—  his  erroneous  definitions  of  civil

and  political  lil>erty . . 216

—  his  nile  for  the  interpretation  of

contracts . . . ,442


PER


PAGI


Paley,  his  statement  of  the  difficulty
arising  firom  the  com|>etition  of
opposite  analc^es  . . 632, 995

—  Romilly's  mistake  as  to  Paley 's

meaning .... 632
Pandects,  nature  of  materials  on

which  founded . . . 605

—  arrangement  of,  purely  unscien-

tific .... 606,922

—  enormous  fault  in,  if  (with  code)

intended as a  code in the
modem  sense  . . 623  d  leg.

Parent  and  child  (outline) . . 70
Parliament, its  powers are both
legislative  and  executive. (See
CmnwonSf  House  of) . . 250
Parliamentary  Elections  Act,  186S 25^
Particular jurisprudence distin-
guished from  general  jurispm-
deuce .... 32,  1072
Patria  potestas,  involved  with  suc-
cession ab  intestato  . . 60

in great measure 8in>plied

the  place  of  criminal  law  in
early  Roman  law . . 497, 74S
Penal,  a  wider  term  than  criminal  . 1051
Peregrinij  condition  of,  at  Rome . 552
Per  «P,  rights  in  rem  existing, a
sub -department of primary
rights .... 46,  7S4

—  rights  in  rem  existing  46,  786,  7?3

—  rights  in  personam  existing  .  53
Permission  by  the  sovereign  or  state  33
Permissive,  law  is  sometimes  .  355
Person,  one  of  the  leading  notions  . 33

—  (complex),  corporation  aggregate 55

—  meaning  of  the  term  . . 34S

—  amongst  modem  civilians  means

a  human  being  capable  of  rights ibi*^

—  a  slave,  therefore,  according  to

these,  is  not  a  person . . \h^^

—  Roman  notion  of, include<i  all

human  beings  . . . 349

—  sometimes  used  to  denote  condi-

tion or  st^Uus  . . 352, 357

—  but  used  by  author  as  equi\'aleut

to  *  man ' . . . . 353

—  how it is  distinguisheil from

thing 364

—  how  from  a  fact  or  event . . 365

—  considered as the subject of

rights .... 368,383

—  when  a  subject  of  a  right  may

be  styled  analogically  *  a  thing  * 8S5

—  rights  in  rem  over  a  .  .  .  938
Persona^ sometimes synonymous

with  stahis ...  40,  3r)2

—  more  frequently — homo  or  man ^jid

—  double  meaning  as  employed  by

Roman  lawyers,  the  source  of
confusion  with  modems  . 363

Personal  rights.  (See  Jus  in  per-
sonam)

Personal  ser\'itudes,  why  so  called 97?

Personal and real,  application  of


Index.


1123


PER


PAGE


380
977


33

39
66-70


the  terms  in  English  law,  a
source  of  much  confusion  and
obscurity . . .67, 68, 977
Personal  and  real,  meaning  of  these
words  in  the  law  of  Scotland  .

how  applied  by  the  civilians

Personam^  rights  in, (See  Jus)
Personarum,  Jus. (See  Jus)
Persons  as  subjects  of  rights  and
duties

—  determined  to  classes  by  certain

rights,  &c

—  Law  of,  in  outline
and  things,  import of the

distinction . . . 364,  684

the  distinction  is  merely

arbitrary . . . ,687

uses  of  the  distinction . 691

Thibaut's  essay  on  jus  per"

sonarum  et  rerum  . . . 706

how  related . . 717,  718

objections  to  division . 734

distinction  is  not  i>erfect 960

where  they  blend . . ibid

importance  of  the  distinc-
tion 962

is  the  law  of  stains . 696,  938

is  concerned  with  the  differ-
ence between  persons . . 707

should  follow  law  of  things  in

a  code  or  treatise . . 727,  730
the  expression  and  its  estab-
lished equivalents  are  insignifi-
cant

origin  of  Hale's  error  as  to

what  is  comprised  in  it  .
Personen-recht, how  employed in

Prussian  code
Petitions  of  right  ....
Philosophy  of  positive  law  an  ap-
pro])riate  name  for  the  subject
of  these  lectures

Pi{jnu8

Pleading,  rationale  of .

Plebiscitfii  equivalent  to  l^ges

PlehSf  its  legislative  power

Police,  part  of  criminal  procedure  66, 1054

Political  and  ci\il  liberty 33,  273,  275


734

960

774
288


32
861

64
615
ibid


-— true  nature  of

— Paley's  erroneous  defini

tion  of  .

Kant's  definition

is  the  absence  of  legal  re

straint ....
Political  conditions  opposed  to  pri

vate ....
Political society, distinguishing

marks  of  independent

when  it  is  not  independent

is  not  capable  of  a  precise

definition

origin  or  causes  of

—  <lifficulty  of  assigning  the  bound

ary  between  iK)Htical  and  pri

vate  conditions


273

216
339

356
67,71

220
226

ibid
290


747


P08

PAOB

Political subordinates, exercise

sovereign  powers . . . 243
Politics, importance of applying
principle  of  utility  to  questions

of 120,  121

Pollicitation  (in  outline)  .  .  64,  72
Poor,  relief  of  ....  70
Popular government, meaning  of

term 277

—  may  be  inferior  to  monarchical  in

a  well-instructed  community,  n. 282

—  not  so  in  one  imperfectly  in-

structed .... ibid

PopiUuSf  its  legislative  power  .  514
Portalis,  his  statement  as  to  the

necessary  imperfection  of  a  code 664

—  his  share  in  constructing the

French  code  ....  674
Positive  International  Morality,  law

fashioned  upon . . 38,  636
Positive International Morality
(commonlycalled  International
Law)  IB  a  branch  of  the  science
of  positive  morality . . 173

is  not  law  proper . 182,  183

its  rules  are  rules  of  jKwitive

morality .... 184

—  —  what  is  inienuUional  law  fre-

quently confounded  with  what

ought  to  be  .  .  .  .  216
Von  Martens  has  avoided  this

confusion  ....  ibifl
concerns  the  intercourse  of

independent  political  societies 226

sometimes  styled  fus  gentium 666

founded  on  jus  gentium  of

Roman  law  ....  669
narrower  than^u^  gentium  of

Romans  .... ibid

answers  to  jus /eciale . . ibid

why  considered  as  a  branch

of  natural  law  .  .  .575
ought  not  to  be  treated,  as  it

is  by  some  continental  jurists,

under  the  head of political

conditions  .  .  .  .764
Positive  Law . . .16,  17, 79

—  Philosophy  of, an  appropriate

name  for  the  subject  of  these
lectures 32

—  essential  difference  of . . 34

—  exists  as  such  by  the  pleasure  of

the  sovereign  .... 36

—  is  appropriate  matter  of  juris-

prudence . . .86,  87,  172

—  meaning  of  term . . 171, 830

—  division  of  law  into  natural  and

positive. (See  Natural  Law) 164,

567-678

—  every  positive  law  is  the  direct

or  circuitous  command of  a
monarch  or  sovereign  number 178

—  is  therefore  a  law  proper  . , 179

—  conflict  between,  and positive

morality .... 197


I  I  24


Index.


POS


PAGE


J'

182
197

214


ibid


Positive  Law,  tendency  to  confound,

with  the  science  of  legislation,  n, 214

—  tendency  to  confound,  with  posi-

tive morality,  and  both  with
legislation  and  deontology . ibid

—  is  a  creation  of  sovereign  authority 534

—  cannot  be  created  in  any  other

way ibid

Positive  Morality  . . .16,  17,  79

—  custom  nothing  more  than . 36

—  some  rules  of,  are  not  laws .  87,  98

—  meaning  of  the  term  . 87,  171

—  what  laws  are  embraced  by  the

term 170

—  what  is  included  in  the  science  of 172

—  international  law  (so  called)  is  a

branch  of.  (See  Positive  Inter-
nationcd  Morality)  . . ibid  -

—  different  kinds  of  rules  of,  which

are  laws  proper

—  different  kinds  of  rules  of,  which

are  not  laws  proper

—  conflict  between,and  positive  law

—  tendency  to  confound,  with  de-

ontology, n

—  tendency  to  confound,  with  posi-

tive law,  and  both  with  l^is-
lation  and  deontology .

Positive  and  natural,  the  distinction
between  rules  of  human  con-
duct  purposeless . . 88,  670

Possession,  right  of  (in  outline) .  51,  53

PossessioniSf de  jurCf treatise  by

Savigny  .... 53

Practice  of  private  lawyers,  influ-
ence of  ... . 36,  645

—  rules  of  our  laws  made  in  the

legislative  mode  by  subordinate
political  superiors  ... 36

—  inseparable  from  theory . . 115

—  but  all  men  are  often  not  capable

of  e<iual  proficiency  in  both . 1095

—  necessity  that  they  should  be  com-

bined for  pur{>08es  of  legislation

and  codification 1093,  1096,  1097

Prcccoffnoscenda,  more,  contained  in
the  law  of  things  than  in  the
law  of  persons .  43,  721,  728

Proe/ectits  Prcetorii,  his  function  in

drawing  up  decrcta  . . 651

Prcejudicia^  or  Precedents,  denied

authority  by  Prussian  code . 668

Prcescriptiot  postponed  to  analysis

of  right  of  possession . 51,  873

Praescription  as  a  mode  of  acqui-
sition ...  53,  873,  965

Praescription,  in  Scotch  law,  lx)th

]>ositive  and  negative,  n.  . 493

Prcctor,  legislated  directly . 35,  617

—  equity  dispensed  by  . . . 39

—  jurisdiction  of  . . . . 586

—  nature  of  civil  proceedings  before 587

—  nature  of  his  peri>etual  edict . 595

—  supposition  that  his  power  was

usurped  .... 608


PRO

tkCt

ProBtoT  Peregrinus,  origin  of  his  ap-
pointment .... 555
Prwtorian  Law,  origin  of . . 55S

—  sometimes identified with  jus

gentium  .... 559

—  is  founded  on  jus  gentium  . 560
Precarium^  combined  with  emphy-
teusis in  the  origin  of  feud/L,  853,  $55

Precedents, denied authority by

Prussian  code  . . . 66S

Presumptions,  unsnitablene^  of  the

term 491

—  different  kinds  of . . . ibid
Primary, division of rights into

primary  and  sanctioning  . 43

—  rights,  &c,  arranged  under  four

sub-departments ... 46

—  rights  with  primary  relative  duties ibid

—  rights  and  duties . . 760, 763
not  always  distinguished  from

secondary .... 768

how  to  be  divided  into  classes 7S4

Principes,  or  Princes,  the  propo*
designation  of  the  Roman  Em-
perors 35

Principle of l^islation, a  name

for  the  measure  of  positive  law 16
Private or unauthorised lawyers,
influence  of  their  opinions  and
practice  . .  36,  543,

—  opposed  to  political  conditions 67,
Private and public wrongs, dis-
tinction between

—  law  and  public,  distinction  be-

tween .... 744  et
Privilege,  its  meaning  in  Roman  law

—  and  in  common  English  i>arlance

—  is  the  only  kind  of  right  arising

immediately  from  laws .

—  is  always  strictly  personal

—  meaning  of,  in  English  law

—  not  part  of  law  of  status .
Procedure  civil  (outline  of) .

—  order  of,  before  the  Praetor

—  on  an  interdict .
Professional and domestic condi

tions ....  67,

Projet  of  the  French  code
Promise  (in  outline)

—  intention  of  party  to
Promulged  and  unpromulged  law  in

modem  treaties . .  35,

—  the  terms  misexpressive
Promulgation of a law, what it

1^ •  •  •  •  a  a

Proi)erly  legislative  opposed  to  judi-

ci(d  mode  of  legislation  . 35,
P*roperty,  distinguished  from  serritus

—  (see  Jus  in  rem\  institution  of,

depends  on  principles  of  utility

—  18  jus  in  rein . . . 371,

—  various  meanings  of  the  term,  789-

1.  strict  sense — indefinite  in
user,  power  of  alienation,
and  duration . . . 790


645
746


51S
519


S76
ihid
SS4
94S
53
.->?/
5S3

756

674

55

442

526
526

ibid

532
48

129
933
/92


Index,


1 125


PRO


PAGE

790


ihiil
ibid

ibid

791

ibid
729


794
795
ibid
797
798

799

805

ibid


2.  liinite<l  in  duration  only .

3.  a  right  distinguished  from
right  of  possession  merely .

4.  jus  in  rem  generally

5.  by  English  lawnot  applied
to  rights  of  tenure .

6.  ai)plied  capriciously tosome
sulyects  and  not  to  others .

7.  aggregate  of  a  man's  rights
or  means  ....

8.  legal  rights  in  general

788,  791,  792
Proj^rty,  employed  by  author  to
mean  any  right  in  rem  inde-
finite in  point  of  user . 794,  933

—  distinction between,  and ease-

ment or  ser\'itude .

—  different  modes  of .

—  never  without  restriction  .

—  even  in  its  most  absolute  form  .

—  but  incapable  of  exact  definition

—  (lifTerent  modes  of  projKJrty  al-

ways distinginshable

—  difficulties  with  which  the  term

is  encumWred

—  not  aj)plie<l  in  English  law  to

interest  of  lessee  for  years

—  right  of  pro}H?rty  may  Ije  resolve<l

into  right  of  user  and  right  of
exclusion . . . 808,  933

—  nature of absolute rights of

{Jt'Ji  in  re  propriA) . . 846,  933

—  nature  of  rights  of,  not  absolute

{jura  in  re  alietid) ,

—  why  a  contract  does  not  confer  .

—  obligations  which  correlate  to .

—  how  acqniretl ....

—  errors  resj)ecting  acquisition  of  .

—  titvlus  ad  acf/iii rendu m  and  mo-

dus acquitendi

—  jiropositions  of  Heineccius  ex-

amined and  refuted

—  sometimes  said  to  be  acquired  by

contract  ....

—  but  then  contracts  are  really  con-

veyances ....

—  extent  to  which  it  is  said  to  be

tnmsferred  by  contract  of  sale
in  English  law

—  ditto  in  French  law  .
/*rn,sj,rrfui  ojHciafury  servUus  ne
PruNsi.iii  code  adoj>ts  the  onler  re-

coniniende<l  by  Hale  (see  Code)
mistakes  in  conception  and

arrangement  of . . 674,  774
Prussian law  -  commission, their

function  in  sup])lementing  the

code . . 638,  651,  659,  668
Public  an<l  private  law  66-68,  744  et  seq.

—  instniction,  works,  &c. . . 70

—  an<l  private  >\Tongs,  distinction

Utween  .... 503

—  different  meanings  of  public  law,  744,754

—  law  ought  to  be  insertwl  in  law

of  i>ersons .... 748


847
909
933
962
ibul

963

965

966

ibid


967
969
811

42


REL

PAGE

Public  and  private  law,  the  terms

tend  to  generate  misconception 750

—  wrongs,  origin  of  this  expression

for  crimes .... 751

—  use  of  this  expression  by  Black-

stone 752

PufTendorf,  his  confusion  of  posi-
tive morality  with  what  moral-
ity ought  to  be . . . 216
Punishment  sometimes  annexed  to

injuries  which  are  not  crimes  . 1053

—  rules  for  the  application  of . 1064
Purposes,  law  considered  with  refer-
ence to  its . . . .  39-43


QUALITY  of  action  affected  by

^ motive ....  161

Qt/««- contracts,  rights  in  personam

arising  from .... 53

—  nature  of . . . . 911,  982

—  not  to  be  confounded  with  im-

plied contracts . 913, 914, 983

—  illustrated  by  solutio  indebiti . ibid

—  include  all  anomalous  obligations 984
Quc»i- delicts,  nature  of
distinction of, from  delicts

and  gi/a«'- contracts,  illogical
and  su|K>rtluous
Qui  jure  suo  utitur  neininem  lasdit .


911


927
800


33


410


RASHNESS,  its  place  among  the
leading  notions

—  why  necessarj'  to  analyse  mean-

ing of,  in  treatuse  on  jurispru-
dence .....

—  nature  of . . . . 427,  459

—  how  it  differs  from  heedlessness

and  n^ligence . 427,  431,  460

—  how  from  intention . . 430,  460

—  how  it  differs  from  hasty  inten-

tion 431

—  criminal  rashness . . . 1059
Jtatio  decidendi^  process  of  extract-
ing .. . 627,  628,  650

Real  and  i»ersonal,  application  of
the  terms,  ilistinction  of,  in
English  law,  a  source  of  much
confusion  and  obscurity,  57,  58,  978

how  applieil  in  Scotch  law . 380

and  by  the  civilians . . 978

—  in  a  few  cases  the  term  real  in

English  law  corresponds  to  in

rem  in  civil  law
Ileal  ser^'itudes,  why  so  railed
Real  Right,s. (See  Jus  in  rem)
Reasonable,  necessarj'  vagueness  of

this  and  similar  expressions
Receptum,  jus. (See  Jus)
Rechty  das,  des  Besitz^'s,  by  Savigny

—  ambiguity  of  the  wonl,  n.
Registration,  intention  of  the  author

to  treat  of . . .
Relative  and  absolute  duty .


ibid
979


230

53
285

53
33,  65


1 126


Index.


REL

PAOB

Relief,  persons  to  administer  .  .  70
Religious  Opinions,  as  a  ground  of

legal  incapacity  ...  72
Item.^  right  in,  meaning  of  the  phrase.

(See  Jui  in  rem)  ...  46
Reporters, whether authorised,

should be appointed in law

courts .... 528,  654

—  Lord  Bacon's  recommendation  .  ibid
Representation,  theory  of,  of  people

in  Parliament  .  .  .  244
^-  delegation  of  authority  may  be

absolute  or  subject  to  a  trust  . 245

—  in  this  country  it  is  subject  to  a

• trust 246

—  the  performance  of  the  trust  can

only  be  enforced  morally . ibid
-^  no  legal  sanction  for  the  per-
formance of  such  trust  could
be  created . . • . 247
Republic,  remarks  on  the  term,  n.  . 242
R^mblicdt in liberd, dispositions
suspending  the  right  of  vesting
where  prohibited ... 59
Reputation,  right  to . . 47,  788

—  love  of,  as  a  motive  . . .160

—  right  to,  is  a  rtght  in  rem  . 889,  788

is  a  right  to  forbearance  only 389

could  not  exist  in  a  savage

condition .... 574
Rerum  jus, (See  J\is)
Rerum  universitaUs ... 65
JieSf  different  meanings  of  term  in

Roman  T^aw  ....  923
Res  conununeSf  nature  of  .  .840
Res  nulliuSf  occu]>ancy  of,  does  not

give  right  of  possession . .  51,  52
Res  pubUccBf  nature  of  . . . 841
Residuary  Legatee,  a  universal  suc-
cessor 57

Responsa  prudentium,  not  generally

an  immediate  source  of  law . 543

—  yfhetlieT  jurisprudentes  had  ever

judicial  authority  at  Rome  .  546
Reus,  ambiguity  of  the  term  .  466-468
Revealed. (See  Divine  Law)

Revenue,  persons  who  collect .  70

Reward,  is  not  a  sanction . .  90
Right, legal, one of the leading

notions 33

—  implies  a  corresponding  duty .  ibid

—  in  revij  meaning  of  the  phrase.

(See  Jns  in  rem) ... 46

—  of  possession  (outline  of)  . .  51,  53

—  to  satisfaction  .... 63

—  ill  rem — inpersonam^  or  real  and

personal  rights. (See  Jus  in
rem;  Jus  in  personam) 33,  43,  45, 63,

369,  932

—  in  rem  as  existing  jper  se 46,  47,  784,

786  et  seq.

—  distinguished  with  reference  to

subjects  and  objects .  47,  787

—  distinguished  by  limitations  in

duration .... 50


ROM


rAOK

50


Right,  Vested  and  otherwise .

—  events  by  which  rights  aritse  and

are  extinguished . . . 51

—  arising  firom  civil  delicts . . 61

—  in  personam,  arising  from  civil

delicts. {SeeJusinperaonam) ibid

—  with  duties,  etc,  constitute  a

status 40

—  arising firom contracts, quasi-

contracts,  and  delicts . . 53
-.  arising  by  universal  succession  . 55

—  sanctioning  (outline  of) . .60

—  arising  from  civil  delicts,  which

are  infringements  of  rights  tn

rem ... . . 62

—  to  restoration,  may  be  exercised

extra-judicially . . . ibid

—  of  vindication  .... 63

—  of  action  ... . . 64

—  not  necessary  to  determine  exact

meaning  of,  in  order  to  deter-
mine province  of  jurisprudence 100

—  to  labour  of  a  slave,  Blackstone's

remark  upon,  n. . . .216

—  sovereign  has no legal rights

against  subjects . . . 284

—  meaning  of  position,  that  ri^t  is

might,  n. . . . . ^dd

—  different  meanings  of  the  term

right,  n 285

—  misuse  of  language  by  those  who

argued  that  the  British  Govern-
ment had  a  right  to  tax  the
colonists . . . . 2S7

—  legal  rights  distinguished  from

natural  and  moral  rights  . 343

—  everj'  right resides in a per-

son ... . . 367

—  and  is  a  right  against  a  person ibid

—  is  sometimes  over  a  person 368,  363

—  analysis  of  the  essence  of 393  et  seq.

—  abstract  meaning  of  the  term . 394

—  Blackstone's  definition  of  it . 399

—  no  general  definition  of,  in  classi-

cal jurists .... Hfid

—  Mackeldey's  definition . . tbid

—  Miihlenbruch^s  definition  . . ibid

—  Thibaut's  definition  ... 400

—  Blackstone's  absolute  rights 728,  788

—  of  way  and  of  common . . 810

—  of  limited  and  unlimited  dura-

tion .... 829  et  seq.

—  nature  of  vested  rights . . 856

—  of  contingent  rights  . . .859
Roman  Emperors,  or  Princes,  legis-
lated directly by constituH'

ones .... 35, 517

—  and  indirectly,  or  judicially,  by

decreta  or  rescripta  . 35, 519

Roman  Jurisprudence,  equity  as  ap-
plicable to . . .  39, 614

—  jurists,  peculiar  merits  of  their

works . . . .217,  1087

—  their  philosophy  contemptible . ibid

—  law,  obtaining  in  Germany 38,  635


Index.


1 127


ROM


PAGE


Roman  Law,  superior  for  clearness

to  law  of  England  ... 58

liherA reptMicd, prohibited

dispositions  restraining  power

of  alienation  .... 59

equity  in  Roman  system  con-
trasted with  that  in  English
system .... 616-620

value  of  the  study  of  it . 1079

in  what  its  value  really  con-
sists .... 58,  1080

Roman  lawyers,  inconsistency  of
the  principles  of  division  of
the  subject  adopted  by  them  . 725

Romans,  their  relations  with  fo-
reigners 552

Romilly,  Sir  Samuel,  his  remarks

on  interpretation . . 632,  640

—  he  applies  the  epithet  'judicial  *

to  indirect  legislation . . 648

—  his  objections  to  judicial  legisla-

tion . . . 642,  657,  676
Rosshirt,  his  analysis  of  culpa,  or

guilt 462

Rules  of  practice  of  the  English
Courts,  made  in  the  legislative
mode  by  subordinate  political
superiors .... 36

are  not  tcritten  law  in  the

juridical  sense . . . 522


SACHEN-RECHT,  its  use  in  the
Pnissian  code . . . 774

Sale  of  an  immovable  in  French
law  is  a  conveyance  as  well  as
a  contract .... 377

the  same  in  English  Equity  . ibid

Sale  and  delivery  (with  warranty)
vests  jus  in  rem  and  }u8  per-
sonam  at  once . . 55,  785

Sauctiou,  every  law  is  enforced  by  a 89

—  analysis  of  the  term 89,  92,  443  et  seq.

—  Paley's  erroneous  definition  of  . 90

—  a  reward  is  not  a  sanction  . ibid

—  how  it  is  related  to  command

and  duty . . . .  91,  92

—  obligation  is  obnoxiousness  to  a

sanction  .... 444

—  0})erates  on  the  desires,  not  on

the  will 445

—  how  distinguished  from  physical

compulsion .... 453

—  the  ultimate  sanction  is  always

suffering .... 456

—  not  always  physical  compulsion

or  re^raint .... 457

—  civil  and  criminal . . . 501

—  various  meanings  of  the  word . 507
Sanctioning,  <livision  of  rights  into

sanctioning  and  primary  43, 7Q0etseq.

—  rights  with  sanctioning  duties . 60
Sand,  German entliusiast of  that

name 161

Satisfaction,  Rationale  of . . 63


SER

PAGB

Satisfaction  in  lieu  of  specific  per-
formance .... 63

Saviffny,  Herr  Von :  his  treatise.
Das  Recht  det  Besitzes,  eulo-
gised ..... 53

—  his  description  of  two  elements

in  law  by  the  expressions  *  poli-
tical '  and  '  technical '  element 646

—  his  treatise  on  the  call  for  a  code

in  Germany .... 666

—  faults in  his  criticism of  the

French  and  Prussian  codes 669,  670

—  his  objections  to  codification  ex-

amined .... 675-681

—  his  controversy  with  Thibaut  on

the  subject .... 1038

Science  of  legislation,  not  the  sub-
ject of  general  jurisprudence . 32

Schuldner,  ambiguity  of  the  term  466-468

Scotland,  law  of,  illustrations  drawn

from  (notes  by  Ed.),  380,  386,  391,
480,  493,  497,  590,  617,  828,  834,
835,  849,  853,  893,  912,  1044

Security,  right  to,  classed  by  Black-
stone  with  his  so-called  abso-
lute rights . . . 728,  788

Seisin,  the  origin  of  many  peculiar-
ities in  English  law

Seisina  facU  stipitrm,  irai>ortant
rule  of  succession  before  Ist
Jan.,  1834 ....

Selfish  System,  not  to  be  confounded
with  theory  of  utility .

—  —  the  theory  so-called  is  a  dis-

tortion of  Hartley's  hypothesis

as  to  the  nature  of  benevolence

absurdity  of  the  system,  n.

Senatus-consulta,  their  binding  an

thority  ....
Servant,  master  and servant  (out

line) ....

—  rights  of  master  over,  are  rights

in  personam . . . 384,  938

—  but  right  of  master  to  services

of,  are  rights  in  rem . 385,  938
Servitude,  is  &jus  in  ran 372,  809,  934

—  may  also  give  rise  to  a  jus  in

personam .... 373

—  distinction between, and pro-

I)erty . . . 794,  802,  934

—  meaning  of  term 794,  802,  814,  934

—  is  hanily  expressed  by  easement 934

—  is  a  fragment  of  proi)erty  . 802,  814

—  difilculties  which  encumber  the

term .....

—  sometimes answers  to  what  is

calleti  a  right  of  i>roj>erty

—  distinction between affirmative

or  i)ositive,  and  negative  ser-
vitudes . . .

—  is  a  right  to  uses  or  forbearances

generally  of  a  class

—  positive  ami  negative  servitudes
-^  examples  of  i>o$itive,  rights  of

way  or  common . . . ibid


867


893
163


ibid
164

516

70


805


ibid


807

810
ibid


II28


Index.


8ER

PAOR

Servitude, examples of negative,

ancient  lights  &c.  . . .811

—  questionable  whether there Is

any  ground  for  the  distinction
of  servitude  into  |K)sitive  and
negative  .... ibid

—  cannot  consist  in  faciendo  . Hid

—  whether,  if  negative,  it  is  a  jus

in  rein 812

—  meaning  of  phrase  res  servU . 813

—  meaning  of  phrase  ntdli  res  sua

servU 814

—  not  to  be  confounded  with  abso-

lute duties,  as  in  French  code 815

—  may  co -exist  with  any  mode  of

property .... ibid

—  distinction  between  real  and  per-

sonal servitudes . . 815,  817

—  meaning  of  terms  servierU  and

dominant . . . .817

—  in  what  sense ever)'  servitude

|>ersonal  .... ibid

—  distinction  between  urban  and

prtedial  servitudes  . . . 822

—  in Frencli code *  servitude  * is

only  applieil  to  real  servitudes ibid

—  examples  of  real  and  personal

servitudes .... 823

—  what modes of property  im-

properly  included under  the

term .... 823,  934

—  why  so  called .... 979
ServiluSf  distinguished  from  domi-
nium. (See  Servitude) . . 49

Severus,  Alexander,  dates  the  con-
clusion of  the  series  of  Classical
Jurists .... 551,  562

—  cdtius  non  toUendi . . .811

—  ne  luminibus  officiaiur . . ibid

—  stiilicidii ibid

Sic  utere  tuo  ut  alienum  non  Icedas  768, 800
Singular  successors ... 56
Skill,  want  of,  as  a  ground  of  lia-
bility 497

Slave,  master  and  (outline) . . 70

—  a *  j)erson ' in language of

Roman  jurists . . 349,  387

—  not  a  *  person '  in  language  of

modem  civilians . . .348

—  meaning  of  saying  that  he  is  a

thing  or  chattel . 352,  388,  390
Society,  independent  political,  dis-
tinguishing marks  of . . 220

—  natural,  nature  of . . . 225

—  political,  but  sulwrdinate,  nature

of 226

—  not  capable  of  a  precise  defini-

tion ibid

—  number  necessary  to  constitute

political  society . . .231

—  origin  or  cause  of  society  . . 290
Solemnities, adjected to convey-
ances by  judgments . . 64

—  attached  to  alienation . . 901

—  annexed  to  contracts . . 907


80V

Sources  of  law . 34,  35,  509  d  seq.

occasions  or  motives  some-
times confounded  with . . 36

different  meanings  improperly

assigned  to . . . 533-550

opinions  of  lawyers  are  not

mediately  sources  of  law . 544

—  but  frequently  are  adopted  by

judges ..... 545
Sovereign,  law  set  immediately  by 34,  35

—  not  invested  with  a  status  . 70

—  various  meanings  of  the  term,  n. 242

—  powers,  maybe  exercised  through

political  subordinates . . 244

—  powers,  &C.,  must  be  so,  in  most

instances ....  %Hd

—  delegation  of  sovereign  powers  .  245

—  by  commons  to  representatives  .  V)id

—  distinction  of  them  into  It^isla-

tive  and  executive  powers . 24  S

—  cannot  be  accurately  so  distin-

guished  249

—  sovereign  powers,  limits  of . 26-3

—  meaning  of  the  term  unconstitu-

tional 265

—  all persons  exercising  ix>rtions

of sovereign power may be
legally  bound  . . . 269

—  including  the  king . . . 270

—  sovereign power, incapable of

legal  limitation . . 263, 273

—  origin  of  doubt  as  to  this  . 278,  279

—  admitted  by  Sidney  . . . 278

—  an<l  by  Hobbes  . . . 279

—  has  no  legal  rights  against  sub-

jects 2S1

—  sovereign  may  be  pureued  before

his  own  tribunals . . . 2SS

—  but  rights  against  him  are  only

quasi  legal  rights .  . . QAd

—  this  does  not  apply,  nece-ssarily,

to  king  of  England,  who  is  not
sovereign .... ihid

—  but  applies,  owing  to  an  acci-

dental circumstance  of  liis  con-
stitutional position  . . ^d

—  nature  of  rights  of,  over  res  pri-

vatoi ..... ^43
Sovereignty,  analysis  of  the  term . 220

—  implies  habit  of  obedience  t^

a  common  determinate  supe-
rior ... . 220,221

—  and  indej>endence  on  the  part

of  the  monarch,  or  sovereign
number ..... ibid

—  it  implies  an  independent  politi-

cal society .... 220

—  not  capable  of  a  precise  defini-

tion .... 228,230

—  definition  of  it  by  Bentham ,  234

—  by  Hobbes ....  ihid

—  by  Grotius ....  235

—  by  Von  Martens . . .  236

—  forms  of  it . . . .  237

—  monarchy ....  ibid


Index,


1 129


sov

PAGE

Sovereignty,  aristocracy  . 237-239

—  limited  monarchies . . . 240

—  includes  the  judicial  power . 620
Specie  J  things  existing  in,  how  they

differ  from  things  in  genere  ,  778
Specific  legacy,  succession  to  speci-
fic legacy  is  succession  rei  sin'
ynlm  .....  68
Specific  iMjrformance.  The  right
to  comjHil  specific  performance
belongs  to  general  jurispru-
dence 64

—  delivery,  in  English  Equity,  not

generally  enforced  unless  the
subject  be  land . . . 780
Spes  SiKxe^shnis  . . . 838,  867
State,  meaning  of  the  term,  n. . 242
Status  (or  condition)  composes!  of

rights,  &c 40

—  the  notion  of  staii/s  is  the  basis

of  tlie  <livision  between  *  Law
of  Tilings'  and  *Law  of  Per-
sons ' . . . 41, 684,  686

—  IS  juris  vniversiiatis  . . . 51

—  sometimes  confusetl  with  capvt . 364

—  meaning  of  the  term,  350,  686,  719,  942

—  great  difticulty  of  fixing  mean-

ing .... 351,  943

—  rajn/t  is  not  identical  with  it  351,  717

—  right  of,  or  in,  is  a  right  in  rem 389

—  is  a  right  to  a  forbearance  only ibid

—  not  susceptible  of  strict  defini-

tion 687

—  erroneous  notions  of  . . 697

—  error  of  Heineccius,  that  it  is  a

quality ibid

—  similar  error  of  Bentham  . . 699

—  Bentham's  analysis  fails  to  dis-

tinguish status . . . 702

—  distinguishing  marks  which  have

been  assigned  to  it,  apply
equally  to  universitat^s  juris  . ibid

705,  706,  946

—  or  to  other  groups  of  rights , 703

—  not  to  be  distinguished  by  the

fact  that  the  party  bearing  it
hofijus  ill  rem  in  its  constituent
rights 706

—  Thibaut's  definition  of,  criticised ibid

—  Middenbnich's  error  in  supixxs-

ing  that  it  is  a  capacity  or
faculty 714

—  wherein  it  consists . 733,  942-953

—  how  obligations  arise  out  of  it  731

—  may  1^  purely  onerous . . 945

—  the  right  in,  or  to,  is  analogous

to  oMMiership  .... 946

—  privilegia  do  not  belong  to  law

of  status ....  948
Statute,  difficulty  of  ex|)ressing,  so

as  to  l>e  intelligible . . .  660
Statute  de  Danis  and Statute  of

Frauds  liberally  construe<l .  635

Statute  law,  constniction  of . .  64

—  meaning  of  term . . .  620


TAG

PAGE

Statute  law,  distinction  of,  and  judi-
ciary law .... 621

—  interpretation  of. (See  Interpre-

tation) 624

StUlicidii  servitus . . . .811
Suarez : Reasons of the onler
adopte<l  by,  in  compiling  the
Prussian  code ... 42

—  overruled  by  authority  of  Von

Kramer  in  the  arrangement  of
contracts .... 674

Subject  of  a  right,  person,  or  thing 33

is  often  a  person  . . . 362

means  the  thing  over,  in,  or

to  which  a  right  exists . . 712

not  the  person  who  has  the

right ibid

the  latter  is  the  meaning  of

the  German  jurists  . . 718

this  is  a  misapplication  of  the

language  of  Kant . . . ibid

Subjects  :  Law  considered  with  re-
ference to,  about  which  it  is
conversant . . . . 34

—  rights  distinguished  with  refer-

I  ence  to  their  . . . 47,  787

I  Subordinate  laws,  set  immediately  by

subordinate  political  superiors  34,  35

—  political  superiors,  authors  of
rules  of  practice ... 36

Substantive  and  adjective  law,  ex-
planation of  the  terms . . 591

objections  to  them . . 762

defects  of  Bentham's  division

and  arrangement  of  law  under
these  heads .... 765

Succession,  universal,  right  arising  by 55

—  m  singulce .... 58

—  laws  relating  to,  occurring  at  a
death,  belong  properly  to  law
of  status .... 951

—  why  asserted  in  law  of  things . 952
Suetonius, his  remarks  upon  the

vast  bulk  of  the  law  .  .  678
Sulpicius Servius, the friend of

Cicero  and  first  of  the  classical

jurists .... 561,  562

Superjicies 861

Sujierior,  involved  in  the  notion  of

command  ....  81
Superiority,  analysis  of  the  term . 96

—  implied  by  the  term  command  . 97
Syllogism,  how  distinguished  firom

analogical  reasoning . . 1012

—  use  of ... . ibid,  1015
Sympathy,  confusion  of,  with  moral

sense,  n. . . . .165

—  assumed  by  theory  of  utility,  n. 166

—  origin  of,  not  connected  with
theory  of  utility . . . ibid


TACITUS,  his  Oermania . . 232
—  his  remarks  on  the  vast
bulk  of  the  law . . . 678


II30


Index.


TAN


PAOB


Tangible  and  intangible,  use  of
these  terniH  in  philosophy  of
Epicureans  and  Stoics . 361,  685

Temerity,  its  place  among  the  lead-
ing notions. (See  Eashness)  . 33

Tenure,  rights  which  are  subjects
of,  do  not  quadrate  with  rights
styled  retU  in  English  law . 57

Test  of  positive  law  and  morality  . 16

Testamentary  power,  legislation  of

the  Praetors  regarding . . 617

Testamento,  succession  ex^  a  species

of  universal  succession . .  57,  60

Testator,  what  is  meant  by  inten-
tion of 441

Theft,  inconsistent  definitions  of . 1043

—  better  term  than  larceny '. . 1044
Theophilus translates  jus  person-

arum — ii  rC»  irpwnjnnap  dtai-

p€<rtf 363

Theory  and  practice  inseparable . 115

but  men  are  often  not  capable

of  equal  proficiency  in  both . 1095

necessity  that  both  should  be

combined  for  purposes  of  legis-
lation and  codification 1093,  1095,

1096

both were  possessed in  an

eminent  degree  by  the  Roman
lawyers  and  by  Coke  and  Hale 1093

Thibaut 72

—  his  Pandekten  Rechts . . ibid

—  his  understanding  of  the  distinc-

tion between  dominium  and  ob-
ligatio  as  the  terms  are  used
by  the  Roman  lawyers . . 383

—  his  definition  of  right . . 400

—  his  definition  of  status  criticised 706

—  places  patria  potestas  and  tutda

under  public  law . . . 748

—  his  writings  in  favour  of  codifi-

cation 1037

Thing,  one  of  the  leading  notions . 33
Things,  law  of,  outline  of  this  de-
partment .... 43

—  proiK)sed  distribution  into  classes

of,  as  subjects  of  rights  and
duties 46

—  meaning  of . . . 358,  774

—  are  pennanent  external  objects  , 358

—  how  distinguished  from  persons

ifrkj,  864

—  how  distinguished  from  facts  or

events 365

—  term  extended  by  Roman  lawyers

to  acts  and  forbearances  . 860

—  and also  to  rights  and  obliga-

tions 362

—  true  notion  of  *  Law  of  Things  *

as distinguished from 'Law

of  Persons ' . . 364,  683  et  seq.

—  persons  may  be considered as

things,  where  they  are  subjects

of  rights .... 385

—  distinction  of  *  Law  of  Things  *


TRU


Pifli


and  '  Law  of  Persona '  merely
arbitrary . . . . 687
Things,  uses  of  the  distinction . 691

—  Thibaut's  essay  on  law  of  per-

sons and  of  things  . . . 706

—  the  relation  of  these  two  depart-

ments of  law  to  each  other . 713

—  law  of,  confused with Law  of

persons  by  Roman  lawyers . 725

—  law  of,  should  precede  law  of

persons  ..... 7S0
requires  most  detail . . ibid

—  objections  to  the  terms,  *  Law  of

Persons '  and  *  Law  of  Things ' 734

—  61ackstone*s  misapprehension  as

to  *  rights  of  things  * . . 736

—  misapprehension  of  Roman  law-

yers cognate  to  this . . 737

—  grand  divisions  of  law  of  things 760

d  9(q.

—  mancipi  et  nee  mancipi . . 7S3

—  difference  in  meaning  of  *  fw '

and *  thing ' in Roman and
English  law . . .774

—  divisions  of  things . . . 775

—  corporeal  and  incorporeal  . 361,  777

—  movable  and  immovable . . ibid

—  specific  and  generic  . . . 77S

—  fangible  and  not  fungible  . .779

—  res singiUcs and universUales

rerum ..... 7S0

—  origin  and  meaning  of  the  term

jus  rerum .... 931
Title,  in  its  strict  sense,  applicable
to  facts  through  which  rights
are  conferred  . . . .874

—  meaning  of  it  as  used  by  English

lawyers ..... SS4

—  the  facts  which  constitute  it  are

essential  or  accidental . . 976

—  not  to  be  confounded  with  right . 977

—  the  *  investitive  fact  or  event ' . ibid
TUvlus  ad  acquirendum^  meaning  of SS4
error  in  dividing  every  acqui-
sition of  jus  in  rem  into,  and
modus  aequirendi  . . . 963

propositions of Heineccius

respecting,  examined  and  re-
futed 964

in  what  cases  distinguishable

from  modus  aequirendi . . 973

Traders,  insolvency  of,  distinguished
according  to  EngUsh  law.
(This,  of  course,  was  before  the
Bankrupt  Act,  1861.  Although
a  trader  may  now  be  made  a
bankrupt,  there  is  still  (June
1869)  a  distinction  between
traders  and  non -traders  under
the  English  Bankrupt  law. —
R.  C.) 60

Trespass, nature  of right arising

out  of 372

Trusts,  in  Roman  law . . 51,  59,  618

—  belong  to  all  systems  of  law . 618


Index.


1131


TRU


PAGE


Truth, necessary  and continent,

difference  between  . . . 1009

TuldOj  placed  by  Thibaut  and  other

Germans  under  pablic  law . 748

Tyrannicide,  the  result  of  misguided  .

benevolence . . . .161


ULPIA.N,  his  mistaken  notion  of
jua  nalurale . . 209,  651,  666

—  lost  of  the  classical  jurists . 662
Unauthorisetl  lawyers,  influence  of

their  opinions  .  .  36,  646
Unconstitutional meaning, of  the

term 267

United  States,  government  of,  is  a

supreme  federal  government  .  261
Universal  succession,  rights  arising

by 46,56

Universitates  Juris  ... 56

—  onlinary  definitions  do  not  dis-

tinguish them  from  status . 702,

705,  706

—  how  distinguished  from  status  . 946

—  why  not  so  prominent  in  Eng-

lish OS  in  Roman  Law  .  .  ibid
Universitates rerum  distinguished

from  res  singiihe  .  .  .  780
Universities of  rights  and duties

arising  by  universal  succession

(a  sub-department  of  primary

rights,  &c.)  ....  46,  65
Unjust,  analysis  of  the  term,  n.  .  268
Un]>romulged  and  promulged  law

in  moiiem  treatises  .  85,  626
Unwritten  law. (See  Written  Law) 512

et  seq.
User, extent to  be  given to the

meaning  of  the  word  .  .  811
Usucapion,  a  mode  of  acquisition

in  Roman  law ... 53

—  as  a mode of  acquisition,  ex-

amined ..... 965
Usus^  not  properly  a  servitude . 824
UsusfrvctuSf  not  proi>erly  a  servi-
tude ibid

—  Etlitor's  note  on . . 827-829
67  j7i5  ac/ JO,  meaning  of . . . 601
Utility,  on  theory  of,  the  distinc-
tion between  natural  and  jwsi-

tive  rules  is  purposeless  . . 38

—  theory  of,  referred  to  in  preli-

niinar}'  analysis . . .  82,  83

—  brief  summary  of  the  theory  of. 106

—  infers  Divine  laws  from  tendency

of  human  actions . . . ibid

—  true  tendency  of  human  actions 107

—  true  test  of  that  tendency . . ibid

—  first  objection  as  to  application

of  theory  that it  were dan-
gerous 110

—  first  answer  to  this  objection . 112

—  second  answer  to  this  objection . 113

—  principle  of  utility  wlmits  the

play  of  moral sentiments  as


UTI


PAGE


the  immediate  motives  of  ac-
tion 116

Utility  accords  with  Divine  rules

as  the  ultimate  standard  . 117

—  importance of applying this

principle  to  political  questions 121

—  second  objection  as  to  applica-

bility of  theory,  that  it  were
difficult 123

—  answer  to  that  objection 124  et  seq,

—  this objection  common  to all

hypotheses .... 124

—  cannot  be  completely  removed  . ibid^

126,  127

—  leading  principles  of  theory  may

be  discovered . . . 124,  127

—  example  from  institution  of  pro-

perty ..%.*. 129

—  difficulty  of  applying  principles

of  the  theory  can  only  be  re-
moved by  diffusion  of  know-
le<lge 132

—  principle  of  utility  is  the  true

key  to  ethical  knowledge tbidf  133

—  admitted  to  be  an  imperfect  index

of  Divine  commands,  which  are

the  test  of  human  conduct . 142

—  not  inconsistent  with  our  notions

of  Deity  that  it  should  be  so  . ibid

—  Christianity as revealed, ad-

mitted by  Butler  to  be  imper-
fect 143

—  if  utility  not  the  true  index,  we

must  assume  a  'moral  sense'  . 144

—  true  nature  of  this  hy})othesi8 . ibid

—  is analogous  to  hy]X>the8is of

animal  instinct . . .145

—  Hume  assumes  the  existence  of

moral  sense  as  well  as  prin-
ciple of  utility . . . 149

—  Butler  the ablest aiivocate of

the  hjrjwthesis . . . ibid

—  if  it  exists,  it  is  a  jierfect  index

to  the  Divine  commands; . 150.

—  no  evidence  that  such  a  sense

exists ibid

—  moral  sentiments  are  not  prompt

and  inevitable . . . 151

—  nor  are  the  moral  sentiments  of

all  men  precisely  alike . . ibid

—  Butler  i)robably  assumes  the  ex-

istence of  principle  of  utility

as  well  as  moral  sense . . 153

—  division  of  law  into  jifs  cicile

and  jus  gentium^  founded  on

the  compound  hyjwthesis . 154

—  as  also  the  division  of  law  into

natural  and  positive . . ibid

—  acconling  to  true  theory,  utility

is  not  test  of  human  conduct  . 156

—  is  only  the  index  to  the  Divine

commaniLs . . .  ibid

—  as  index  to  the  test  of  human

conduct,  not  to  be  confoun<le<l

with  motives  . . . .160


II32


Index.


UTI

PAGE

Utility,  theory  of,  not  to  be  con-
founded with  the  wlfish  system 162

—  that  system  in  an  h}ix>the«Ls  as

to  the  origin  of  benevolence . 163

—  Htutement of Hartley's hyiv>.

thesis  as  to  benevolence  . . ibid

—  theory  of  utility  not  invented  by

Benthani,  n ibid

—  but  first  proiHjrly  examined  and

stated  by  him  . . . ihid

—  it  assumes  s)nui»athy,  w. . . 166

—  is  indei>endent  of  any  hyiwthesis

concerning  origin  of  motives . 160


VAGUENESS,  inevitable  in  cer-
tain expressions . . . 230
Vanity,  how  estimated  as  a  motive 160
Vested rights  in  rem  opi)Osed  to

contingent,  &c. , . . 50
what  w  meant  by,  as  distin-

guishcil  from  contingent . . 856
Vicarious  punishments  as  styled  by

Bentham .... 506
use  of the  expression sug-
gested by  Sir  G.  C.  Lewis . 856
Vindication,  right  of . . 63,  791
Virtue  and  vice,  Locke's  obser\'a-

tions  on  .... 202

Tm,  or  compulsion,  a  ground  of

non-imputation ... 83
Volition,  its  antecedent  motive  and

intention .... 161

—  the  antecedent  desire  which  pre-

cedes act . . . .412

—  Dr.  Brown's  tlieory  of . . ibid

—  nature  of  volitions . . . 414
Voluntary'  and  contentious  jurisdic-
tion 64

nature  of  the  first . . 766

Voluntary,  ambiguity  of  the  U^nu  . 417


I


I


I


WRO

WARD,  rights  of  guaniian  over,
are  rights  in  prrsoudhi  384,

—  but  rights  of  guartlian  to  cu.sto<ly,

&c.,  of,  are  rights  in  mu
Wife,  rights  of,  which  are  in  jtt^r-
snnam .....

—  rights  of,  whidi  are  ///  rem
Will,  its  place  among  the fun«la-

meutal  notions

—  why  necessary  to  analyse  iiuuin-

ing  of  term  in  treatise  on  juris-
prudence ....

—  analysis  of  tenn

—  value of  Dr.  Brown's analvsis

\/l •  •  •  •  •  •

—  does  not  <liffer  from  a  wish  or

ilesire .....

—  sometimes  confoun«led  with  in-

tention. . . .  41.5,

—  Locke's  near  ajjproach to true

notion  of  it .

—  produces  acts  only,  not  cou-ie-

quences  of  acts

—  distinguished  from  intention

—  explanation  of  supposed  coutlict

of,  with  ilesire

—  cannot  directly  control  <lesires .

—  may  destroy  desires  imlirectly .
Works,  Public,  j>ersons  engaged  in
Written  and  unvvTitten  law,  distinc-
tion ))etween {^'iensu- modem
ci\ilians) ....

distinction  between  512  rf  ^v/.

how  understoo<i by Komau

lawyers  .....

how,  by  modem  civilians,  512,

how,  by  Hale  and  Black-
stone .....

use  of  the terms by Glan-

ville,  n.  .

Wrong,  analysis  of


THE END.


Printed  by  R.  &  R.  Clark,  Edinburgh
