Lectures on Jurisprudence, Vol. III: Notes and Fragments (John Austin, 1863)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1863 edition, vol. III (https://archive.org/details/dli.bengal.10689.16850).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

liECTURES


u


ox

JURISPRUDENCE.


11IB TO


THE PROVINCE OF JURTSPRTTHENCE DETERMINED.”


lo WHKH >nr Aiir»FT>

NOTES AND FRAGMENTS


i^ofn firat publiisbeti fcotn tfie ®dgtnal ^anttscrfpte.


TITIC TjATK

JOHN AUSTIN,, Esq.,

or Tnr ixxm tumpip, -nvEtoi^ii r-^t-iavt


VOD. ITT.


LONDON:

JOHN MWRAY, ALBEMARLE -STREET.

1863 .


l-ttlSITKI^ SV

jonN Ko'WiwRn -rAYL.on, i<ixxl.e av3ERi« mxkbrx,
L.lIifCOI*1>f*S INN irTJRi:.7>A«


CONTENTS OF VOLUME III.

VAGB

Lectubes XLVIII. to LVII. ... .1

Notes on Cohtbacts ahj> Quasi-Contbacts. 127

TabiiBS and Notts. 141

Note on Intbepubtation . .... . . 229

ISbcdhstth on Analoo^ . . ...... 217

Notes on Codification . . ^. ... . 273

Notes on Cbiuinal Law. 299

On tut I^sbs of the Study or Jubisfbudence. 346

GenebaTj Index . .... . . 389


LECTURES ON JURISPRUDENCE.


iJEcrruE xi-viii.

In my last lecture, I j)rocce(lc(l to the first of the two capital
(lepartineiits under which 1 arrange or distribute the matter
of the Law of Things, (or th(‘ inalbT of the bulk or nia.ss of
tlic legal system): namely, primary rights, w itli their cor¬
responding primary duties.

Adverting to primary rights, (or to rights which are not
conscqiK'iices of delicts or injuries,) T proceeded, in the first
instance, to rights in rent (or rights availing against the
world at large) ns existing per se or simply : that is to say,
as not combined with rights in pernonam, or rights availing
exelusivily against specifically determined persons.

Adverting to rights iv rem, as existing per se or simply,
I first considei'cd them with reference to dift(*rcnces be¬
tween tlieir respective nubjecls: or (changing the expression)
with reference to differences between the aspects of the for¬
bearances which may bo st^ded their objects. 1 touched
upon the rights of the class of which the subjects are things,
or of which the objects are such forbearances os regard de-
terminatcly specifically determined things. I noticed the
rights of the class of which the subjects arc persons, or of
which the objects ift'c such forbearances,as regard detcriui-
nately, specifically determined f)crsons. And I adverted to

VOIi, III.


2 ^^ECTURES 0^^

yr

the rights of the which have no specific subjects, or of
which the objects are such forbearances as have no specific
regard to specific things or persons.

Dismissing the rights of the class of w hich the subjects
are persons, and also the rights of the class which have no
specific subjects, I proceeded to such distinctions between
rights of the class over thim/s as are founded on differences
between the degrees wherein the entitled persons may use
or deal with the subjects.

I adverted generally to that leading distinction of the
class which may be marked with the opposed expressions
dominion, property or ownership, end servitmie or easement.
And to obviate some of the difficulties which arise from the
ambiguities of the expression, I stated some eight or ten
of the many and disparate meanings, which, in popular
language, and even in the writings of lawyers, are annexed
to the term property and the term dominion.

DistincUcm Pursuing my examination of the distinction,
duniininn or which, for want of better names, I marked with
the opposed expressions to wdiich I have now
etuemoQt. advcrtcd, I would remark that I mean hy property
(as opposed to seroi/ns or easement) any right which gives to
the entitled party an indefinite power or liberty of using
or disposing of the subject; or (in other words) which gives
to the entitled party such a power or liberty of using or
disposing of the subject as is not capable of exact circum¬
scription ; as is merely limited generally by the rights of all
other persons, and by the duties (relative or absolute) in¬
cumbent on himself.

And by sernitus or easement (as opposed to property or
dominion) I mean any right which gives to the entitled
party such a power or liberty of using or disposing of the
subject as is defined or circumscribed exactly.

An estate in fe§ simple in land, absolute property in a
peiaonal chattel, or an estate or interest for life or years in


JURISPRUDKNCIj:.


3


land or a personal chattel, are all of them cases of property
or dominion (taking the expression in the sense which 1 am
now giving to it).

A right of way through land belonging to another, a right
of common (or of feeding one’s cattle on land belonging to
another,) or a right to tithe (or to a definite share in the
produce of land belonging to another,) arc all of them cases
of servittts or easement (as I now understand the expres¬
sion).

In the former cases, the party may apply the subject to
any purpose or use which does not amount to a violation
of any right in another, or to a breach of any duty lying
on himself. And it is only in that negative manner that
the purposes to which he may apply it can be determined.

In the latter cases, the party may apply it to purposes,
or may derive from it uses, which are not only limited ge¬
nerally by the duties incumbent upon him, but which are
determined (or capable of determination) by a positive and
complete description.

Ill a word, servitus or easement gives* to the entitled
party, a power or liberty of applying the subject to exactly
determined purposes. Property or dominion gives to the
entitled party, the power or liberty of applying it to all
purposes, save such purposes as are not consistent with his
relative or absolute duties.

I would briefly remark (before I proceed) that in treating
of the distinction now in question, I suppose that the right of
the party is present or vested, and is also accompanied with
a right to the present enjoyment of the right, or to the pre¬
sent exercise of it. To the nature of contingent rights, and
of such vested rights as are not coupled with a right to
present enjoyment or exercise, I shall advert hereafter.

Property or dominion (used with the meaning

• . .1 i \ • 1 * ofvariouB

which I am now annexing to the term) is appli- modes,

B 2


4


LECTURES ON


cable to any right which gives to the entitled party an in¬
definite power or liberty of using or dealing with the sub¬
ject. But property (as thus understood) is susceptible of
various modes: that is to sav, tlie limitations or restrictions
to that powder or liberty, which spring from the rights of
others and from the duties incumbent on himself, may vary
to infinity.

For example: A right of unlimited duration (as an estate
in fee-simple in land, or absolute lU'operty in a personal
chattel) and a right of limited duration (as an estate for
life or years in land or a personal chattel) are equally pro-
perty (in the present sense of the expression): for, in either
case, the power or liberty of user which resides in the en¬
titled party, is not susceptible of positive and exact circum¬
scription.

But the liiiiitations or restrictions to that indefinite right
of user, are, in the different cases, widely different.

In the case of the estate in fee, or the absolute property
in the personal chattel, the owner may waste or destroy the
subject, in so. far as such waste or destruction may not be
injurious to other persons considered generally.

In the case of the estate for life, or of the estate for
years, this power or liberty is restrained, not only by the
rights of others considered generally, but by the rights in
the same subject of those in remainder or reversion: that is
to say, who have rights in the same subject, subsequent
to the rights of the owner for life or the owner for years.
For if the owner for life, or the owner for years, had the
same power of user which resides in the absolute owner,
it is clear that the rights of those who are in remainder or
reversion would be merely illusory. In respect of Iheir
rights, he, at least, must be subject to the duty of not de¬
stroying the subject, or of so dealing with it as would render .
it absolutely worthless. ,

But the restrictions to the right of the limited owner,

* Blackstone, vol. ii. pp. 122, 280, 881, 897 ; vol. iii. pp. 228, 243.


jurisprudenck;


5


which arise from the rights of the remainderman or rever¬
sioner, may also be fixed differently by the absolute dispo¬
sitions of the law, or by private dispositions which the law
allows and protects. We may suppose, for example, that the
owner for life of land may be empowered to divest it com¬
pletely of timber and buildings, and to leave nothing to his
followers biit the bare soil: Or that his power of taking
timber, and demolishing buildings, may be more or less re¬
stricted.

In our own law, in the Roman and French law, and (no
doubt) in every other system, the power of user which is
annexed to limited interests, is restricted (in regard to the
interests of the following takers) in a great variety of ways.

Rut though the possible modes of property are Propertvpro.
infinite, and though the indefinite power of user SSliTTiii.'”
is always restricted more or less, there is in eveiy* J-eSipInied
system of law, some one mode of property in
which the restrictions to the power of user are
fewer than in others: Or (changing the expres-
sion) there is some one mode of property in frovcontm-
which tlic power or liberty of indefinite user is so™-
more extensive than in others. And to this mode of pro-
jjcrty, the term dominion, property, or ownership is pre¬
eminently applied.

Such, for example, in the Roman law% is dominion (in
the strict sense); such, in the French law% is propriofe (in
the same sense): such, in our owm law, is absolute property
in a moveable. Such, too, in our own law, is an estate in
fcc-simplo in land: but which (although it is closely ana¬
logous to absolute property in a moveable) is not commonly
called property or ownership.

The right of property pre-eminently so called (or the
mode of the right of property which is coupled with the
largest power o^ user) is (for the reasons to which I have
just adverted) a right of unlimited duration .* that is to say,


(5


• LECTURES ON


there is no person having any interest in the subject sub¬
sequent to his own, from whom the owner may not divert
it by a total or partial alienation. Let the contingent suc¬
cessors be who they may, (whether they succeed by private
and particular dispositions, or by general dispositions of the
law taking effect in default of particular dispositions,) they
have no such right in the subject as the owner may not de¬
feat, and as sets a restriction or limitation to his power of
using the subject.

This I apprehend (speaking generally) is the notion of
property unlimited in duration, and therefore the most ex¬
tensive of any in respect of the power of user. In strict¬
ness, it is not a right of unlimited duration: for no right
can endure longer than the life of the party entitled. But
it implies a power of aliening the right itself, from the
successors who would take it (by particular disposition, or
by the general disposition of the law) in case tlie owner
died without alienation.

To this 1 shall advert particularly, when I come to con¬
sider rights in regard to their respective durations,
rroportypre. Evcn the right of property pre-eminently so-
rXITis not called (or the right of property whose duration
roBpSfthe unlimited) is not unlimited in respect of the
power of user, power of uscr wliicli residcs in the proprietor.
The right of user (with the implied or jcorrcsponding
right of excluding others from user) is restricted to such
a user, as shall be consistent with the rights of others gene¬
rally, and w'ith the duties incumbent on the owner.

Yor example: I may exclude others generally from my
own land or house: but I cannot exclude officers of justice,
who, authorized by a warrant or other due authority, come
to my bouse to search for stolen goods. If 1 am the abso¬
lute owner of my house, I may destroy it if I will. But I
must not destroy it in such a manner as would amount to
an injury to any of my neighbours. If, for example, I live
in a town, 1 may not destroy it by fire, or blow it up by
gunpowder.


JUllISPRUDENCE.


7


I liave a right m my own person which is analogous to
the right of property in a determinate thing. And, as a
consequence of that right, I may (generally speaking) move
from place to place. But this my liberty and right of lo¬
comotion, does not empower me to enter the land or house
of another, unless I am specially authorized by the owner’s
license, by a right of way through his house or land, or by
some other cause specially empowering me to enter it.

And the power of user which is implied by the right of
property, may also be limited by duties which are incum¬
bent on the owner specially and accidentally.

For example: The power of user may be restricted by
duties or incapacities which attach upon the owner in con¬
sequence of his occupying some stahis or condition. We
may conceive, for example, that an infant proprietor is re¬
stricted (by reason of his infancy) in respect of the power
of using, as welFas the power of aliening.

Or the power of user may be restricted by reason of a
concurrent right of property residing in another over the
same subject. \CoHdomimim—Miteigenthum —Joint pro¬
perty—or property in common.]

Or the power of user may be restricted by virtue of a
right of servitude residing concurrently over the same sub¬
ject in another person. For example: I have (speaking
generally) a right of excluding others from my own field.
But I have not a right of excluding you (exercising your
servitude or easement), if you have a right of way (by
grant or prescription) over the subject of my right of pro¬
perty. I have (speaking generally) a right to the produce
of the field: but that right is limited by a right in the par¬
son to a tithe, unless my land be tithe free.

It follows from what has preceded, that neither
that right of property which imports the largest
power of user, nor any of the rights of property
which are modes dl* modifications of that, can be ,

defined exactly. For property or dominion, ex


LECTURES ON


«

vi termini, is jus in rem imjx)r(ilng an indefinite power of
user; i. e. such a power of using or of dealing with the
subject as is limited by nothing but the duties incumbent
on the owner: or a power of applying the subject to any
purpose whatever which does not conflict with any duty to
which the owner is subject. This indeflniteness is of the
very essence of the right; and implies that the right (in so
far as concerns the power of user) cannot be determined
by exact and positive circumscription. Such an application
of the subject as consists with every of his duties, the owner
has a right to make: And any act, by another, prevent¬
ing or hindering any application of the kind, is an offence
against his right.

The definition therefore of the right lies throughout the
corpus juris, and imports a definition of every right or duty
which the corpm juris contains.

Tho modes of But tliough absolutc property, or any of its

propGrty QJTO 1* A 111* A* "a*

distniKuish- modcs, 18 iiot capablc of exact circumscription,

fililo fjToin fittc 4 1 • 1 i*j* *111^

another by the vaHous mofJes urc uistinguisliaole from ouc
another by precise lines of demarcation,
tion. example: The right of owner for life, or

of owner for years, may be distinguished from the right of
the absolute owner, by an enumeration of the powers of
user (belonging to the absolutc owner) from wdiich the
owner for life or years is excluded.

, And this (I apprehend) is the wray in which these modes
of absoflite property are distinguished from absolute pro¬
perty itself and from one another. Such or such a use, for
example, which the absolute owner may lawfully derive from
the subject, wotfld be, in the owner for life or the owner for
years, an injury to the remainderman or reversioner.

^Vhat 1 have said with regard to the definition
definitionaiof of absoluto property quadrates with the pfactice
of law writers or makers of eddes.
wS?*******^ In the Institutes of Gaius and Justinian, the


JUlllSrUUUENClS.


9


right of property or dominion is not defined at all.* Things
are described; the modes of acquiring property in them
are described; servitudes are described; but of the right
of property or dominion no direct description is given. The
nature of the right (in respect of the power of user) is left
to be inferred from the treatise generally. In the codes
or treatises w'hich attempt a definition of it, merely a few'
of its properties or qualities are given ; and those properties
or qualities are given with restrictions w'hich lie throughout
the body of the law.

The distinction between legal and equitable property (or


dominium. e,r jure quiritinw and dominium bonUarinm\ is a
mere accident arising from the existence of the accidental


distinction between law and equity^ or ju4t civile and jus
pr(Btorium.\


Iiiqnircnda: 1® How to ascertain (if that be possible) the ser¬
vices or uses which ma\j be exacted or derived from the subject;
2® How to ascertain tbc services or uses which mav not be dc-
rived from the subject, out of regard for rights residing in others,
or absolute obligations upon self.

The extent of the right in respect of services seems not to be
definable; although an enumeration of them may be made co-
extcnsively with (1“) the acts which have been held to be un¬
lawful obstructions of withholdings of such services; (2“) with
the acts which have been held to be a lawful dealing with the
subject, or lawful perception of such services.—(See Blackstonct
vol. iii. p. 120.)

The exceptions out of the indefinite services over whioh (as
above) the right extends, consist in such uses of the subject
as would amount to violations of a similar or another right in
others, or of absolute obligations on one’s self. In defining a
right, care must therefore be taken nut to make it inconsistent

• Institutes, 22. a. Gaius, p. 91.

f [For dominium e^Jure quiritium and dominium bonilarium, see Hugo’s
History, pp. 167, 478, BOl, 844. Savigny’s Rechl den Benitzen, pp. 86,
96, 176. Gaius, p. 102.]


10


LECTURKS ON


with a right intended to be given to another, etc. (Use of in¬
terpretation here.)

Property, as here considered, is property existing in its widest
extent; unlimited in respect of services, by any right to or over
the same subject in another; and limited only by rights of
others over or to other subjects, or by absolute obligations on
self.

A right limited by righCs of others over the same subject,
(as dominium affected by sermtua; condominium^ whether in pro¬
perty or aerviiua), though involving fewer services and subject
perhaps to fewer violations, is, nevertheless more difficult to ex¬
plain.

The attempts to solve these difficullieSf which one meets with in
ordinary law books, are merely identical propositions and amount
to nothing : e. (f. Qui jure sm utitur neminem ladit.*** If by
ladit be meant damage or evil, it is false (and inconsistent with
what immediately precedes); since the exercise of a right is often
accompanied with the infliction of positive evil in another; and
where others are excluded from the subject, supposes a pain of pri¬
vation inflicted on others. If by lasdit be meant injury y the pro¬
position amounts to this; that the exercise of a right cannot
amount to a wrong: which is purely identical and tells us no¬
thing ; since the thing wc want to know is, “ what is right ? (or
what is that which I may do without wrong ?); and M'hat is
wrong ? (what is that which w'ould not be an exercise of my own
right, inasmuch as it would amount to a violation of a right iii
another?)”

The same observations arc applicable to ^*sic utere iuo ut
alienum non ladas.’*

The definition of those rights which are definite in respect of
services, and exist over the same subject, is one means of limiting
or deflning those rights which are indeflnitc: Since acts (of user,
exclusion, etc.) inconsistent with the former set of rights, are all
of them knowable; and are, therefore, so many knowablc uses to
which the indefinite rights do not extend. But accurately to
assign that limit to these last which is presented by the rights of
others over other subjects or by the absolute obligations of the
owner (where such rights or obligations are themselves indefi¬
nite) seems to be impossible: And even if a}l the rights and ob-


* Dig. cited by Mackeldey, vol. ii. p. 66.


JURISPRUDENCE.


11


ligations wliich limit were themselires defined^ a complete state¬
ment of the definition would involve a repetition of the whole
code.


Wahres Eigenthum ist nur mdglich an kurperlichcn Sachen.
Allcin im rdmischen Rechte ist der Begriff von Eigenthum auch
ausgcdehnt auf jura in re insofern sic uns als eigene Rechte an
cincr fremden Sachc zustchen : daher, dominium, umsfructus et
set'vitus. Im weitesten Sinne^ begreift Eigenthum alles was zu
nnserm Vermogen geluirt, also auch Forderungen.—IVlackcldcy,
Lehrbuch des heut. rom, Rechts, vol. ii. p. 36.


Community of Goods.

Community of goods is nothing but property in common;
i. e. a right in the whole over tlic subject, with a inght in each to
a certain share in the produce : A right which must depend upon
certain conditions; as, e.g. contributing to the product by a due
portion of exertion.

Or supposing the right absolute, then the labour must be en¬
forced by punishment.

Tlie necessity of this is derived from two considerations j 1 st,'
that good things can only be procured by labour. 2ndly, that
the product of them is limited in amount. At the best, there is
not enough for all; i. e. enough to satisfy all the desires of all.

From either of these the necessity of one of the schemes I
have mentioned arises.

But even supposing that by training and by the advantages of
combination, the labour might be lessened, the amount increased,
and the desires limited, this can never be carried so far as to
render all law unnecessary.

' But the whole is a speculation.

Bkekstone, vol. i. p. 138 ; vol. ii. p. 389. He doi'P not define an estate
in fee, in respect of power of user. That is to be collected from his whole
treatise.


LECTUttKS ON.


12


LECTURE XLIX.

In my last lecture, I considered particularly property or do¬
minion (as opposed to servitm or eoBcnmif'). In my present
lecture, I shall consider particularly aervitus or easement (as
opposed to property or dominion).

As I stated in my last lecture, I mean by property or
dominion (taken with the sense wherein I use the term, for
the present,) any such right in rent (of limited or unlimited
duration) as gives to the party in whom it resides an inde¬
finite power or liberty of using or dealing with the subject:
A power or liberty of using or dealing with the subject,
‘which is not capable of exact circumscription or definition;
which is merely limited, generally and indefinitely, by the
sum of the duties (relative and absolute) incumbent on the
owner or proprietor.

As I also stated in my last lecture, property or dominion
(as thus understood) is susceptible of various modea: or (in
other words) the indefinite power of user, which is of the
essence of all property, is susceptible of various degrees of
restriction. But whatever be the extent of the power of
user, (and of the power of exclusion, which the power of
user implies,) it is not capable of exact circumscription, or
of any more exact circumscription than that which I now
have indicated.

By servitHs or easement (taken with the sense which I
give to the expression) I mean any such right in rem (or
any such right availing against*the woAd at large) as gives
to the party in whom it resides a power of using the sub-


JURISPRUDENCE. 13

ject which is definite as well as limited. The power of using
the subject (like that which is imported by the right of
property) is limited by the sum of the duties which are in¬
cumbent on the party. But, unlike the power of user which
is imported by the right of property, it is not merely cir¬
cumscribed by the sum of hi^ duties. The uses which he
may derive from the subject, or the purppses to which he
may apply it, are defined positively, or are susceptible of
positive description.

In short, the difference between property (in any of its
modes) and of servitus (whatever be its class) would seem
to be this:—The party invested with a right of aervitue,
may turn or apply the subject to a given purpose or pur¬
poses. The party invested witli a right of property, may
turn or apply the subject to all purposes whatsoever, mve
such purposes as arc not consistent with any of his duties
(relative or absoluti;).

As I remarked in iny last lecture, it is by reason of his
indefinite jjower of user, that the subject of the owner’s
right is styled his own, or res propria: that his right is
styled property, ownership, or dominion: that he is said to
be the owner or proprietor of the subject, or is styled its
lord or master. For (as I then remarked) there is no mode
of property (not even that which is pre-eminently so called,
and whicli implies the largest power of user and exclusion)
which gives a power of user completely unlimited, and a
consequent power of exclusion which is completely without
restrictions.


Before I consider particularly the nature and kinds of
servitudes, I must interpose the following brief remarks.

1st. Speaking generally, the subject of a right
of servitude is also at the same time the subject of »«r-

. " Vltlldc ID tt

of property residing in another or others, hor ex- fraeiion of »
ample, if I have a richt of way over a field, the wrtyrpffliiiiii?

„ A .* 11. • • ■ ii aiiolher or

field IS yours solely, or is yours jointly or in com- „tiiors. Rut a


14


L£CTUU£8 ON


right of Bcrvi- mon witli othets, or is yours for life or years
istoveraHub- (solely or jointly with others) with rights of pro-
not an owner perty iu others expectant on the determination of
““ that your limited interest.

For this reason,* rights of servitude are styled by the Ro¬
man lawyers jura in re aiienfi: that is to say, rights over
subjects of which the property or dominion resides in an¬
other or others. Though (as 1 shall show at the close of
my lecture) rights of servitude are not the only rights to
which the expression jus in re aliend (or, briefly, jus in re)
is aptly or actually applied.

For the same reason, a right of servitude is styled by
Mr. Beutham a fractional right :t that is to say, a definite
right of user, subtracted or broken off from the indefinite
right of user which resides in him or them who bear the
dominion of the subject. For the same reason, a right of
servitude is styled by Von Savigny} (in his matchless trea¬
tise on the Right of Possession) a single or particular ex¬
ception (accruing to the benefit of the party in whom the
right resides) from the power of user and exclusion which
resides in the owner of the thing.

Primary For tlic Same reason, rights of servitude arc
styled by French writers, j| demembmuens du
rc/», per »e. proprieto: ” that is to say, detached bits

or fractions of the indefinite right of user which resides in
him or them who own the subject of the servitude. But
(as I shall show at the close of my lecture) we may con¬
ceive a right of servitude existing over a thing, which
speaking with precision, has no owner. We may conceive,
for example, tliat the sovereign or state reserves to itself
a portion of the national territory; but that it grants to

* Von Savigny, Becht des Besitzes, pp. 97, 166. See Table If.,
Note 4 {post). Mackeldey, vol. ii. p. 6.'

f Traites de L()gislation, vol. i. p. 351. •

X Becht des Besitzes, pp. 625, 534.

II Code Cifil expliqiic, by Bogron, vol. i. p. 241.


JUaiSPHUDENCfi.


15


one of its subjects, over a portion of the territory so re¬
served, a right which quadrates exactly with the notion of
H right of servitude: that is to say, a right to use or apply
the subject in a definite manner.

Now, in the case imagined, there is not, properly speak¬
ing, any right of property in the thing which is subjected
to the servitude. For, it is only by analogy, that we can
ascribe to the Sovereign a legal right. Strictly speaking,
the party has a right of servitude over a thing, the indefi¬
nite power of using which, the Sovereign or state has re¬
served to itself.

But since most rights of servitude imply rights of owner¬
ship, and cannot be explained without reference to those
rights of ownership, I shall assume for the present, that
every right of servitude is jm in re aliend: is a definite
fraction, or demembrement^ of property or dominion, in the
given subject, which resides in another or others.

2ndly. I showed, in my last lecture, that the

, •' oncumbenn^

modes of property (as I understand the ex pres- tii« tinnfi

, * * ^ * ** ppopertVi**

sion) arc infinite: and that to some of those “ Bt’rvitua,”

Clllll

modes, we cannot apply the expression, without ment.”
a departure from established usage. For example: A right
unlimited in respect of user, and also unlimited in respect
of duration, is styled property or dominion: and, indeed,
is the right to which the name is pre-eminently given. In
our own law language, a right indefinite in point of user,
though limited in point of duration, is also esteemed and
called property, provided the limited duration be not ex¬
actly defined. Thus: vre should call the right of tenant for
life in an iiriinoveable thing, property or a riyht of pro¬
perty. But a right indefinite in point of user, is not, in our
own law language, styled jn'operty^ in case the right be
of limited duration, and the duration be exactly defined.
Thus: The right of tenant for years, under a lease of a
house or farm, is not called property, although his right is
jue in rem, and gives him an indefinite power using or


16


LECTURES OX '


dealing with the subject. We should say of a life interest
in an immoveable, or a personal chattel, that the party has
an estate (or a right of property) with remainder or reversion
over to another or others. We should also say of the in¬
terest of a lessee for years, that he has an estate for years,
with reversion over to another.

But we should not style his intei'est property or owner-
ship, although his power of user were not more limited
than that of a tenant for life, and though the duration of
his interest were incomparably longer than that of tenant
for his own or for the life of another.

[Pcrliaps the interest of tenant for years (like that of the Ro¬
man conductor, etc.) was not originally jus in rem, but merely
gave liim a right to the enjoyment against the Lessor.]

Various other difficulties, which encumber the term “pro¬
perty,” I stated in the lecture before the last.—I will merely
add, at present, that I mean by the term property (as con¬
tradistinguished to servitf/s) any right in rem (of any dura¬
tion whatever) which gives to the entitled party an indefi¬
nite power of user. For I am not considering rights with
reference to their various durations, but w'ith reference to
the powers of user which they variously import. Though
(as I showed in my last lecture) the power of user (in cases
of property) is so modified by the extent of duration, that
it is impossible to consider rights of property "from the for¬
mer of the two aspects, without considering them, to some
degree, from the latter also.

The term servitus is not less encumbered with difficulties
than the term property.

For, first, there are many rights (as I shall show pre¬
sently) which, in the language of the Roman Law, and of
the modern systems principally derived from it, arc styled
servitudes: but which, in the languap of the English,
would be styled rights of property. And, justly; for .they
are rights importing an indefinite power of user, although


JUBISFRCDKNCE.


17


they are not rights of unlimited duration: that is to say^
empowering the party to alien the subject from those who
would succeed to him in default of such alienation. ■

To these improper servitudes I shall advert more fully
hereafter. And I now mer|ily add, that 1 mean, for the
present, by a ri^ht of servitude (as opposed to a right
of prqpertg) any such right in a subject owned by an¬
other or others as gives to the party a definite power of
using it.

I'he term easement is not less objectionable than the term
servitiis. For though it is never extended to any such
rights in rem as fall properly within the category of pro-
pertg, it is not applied to certain rights in rem which fall
properly within the category of servitudes. For example;
A right of way over another’s field is styled an casement.
A right of common is also styled an easement. But a right
to predial tithes (or to a definite portion in the produce of
another’s land) is never (I think) styled an casement: al¬
though it is called a servitude (or by a name of similar im¬
port) in the language of the legal systems which have bor¬
rowed largely from the Roman.

It may be a question, whether the terra casement is li¬
mited to casements appurtenant. I think not. But, what¬
ever may be the usual import of the term easement, (and
it has nut, I think, any settled import) I venture to use it
with the sense in which I employ the term servitude: as
meaning any right (definite in point of user) over a subject
which is res aliena.

Srdly. For the sake of simplicity, ! have as-
sumed in my Outline, and also in my last and
present lectures, that every right of servitude is
a right of using a subject owned by another or
others. But, as I shall show immediately, there merely
are certain servitudes, wliicli, in the language or agaioBj; the
modern civilians, ape called negative; and which, occupant?
in the language of the Roman Lawyers, are said ^ consist

VOIi. III. c


18


LECTUEKB ON


non faciendo: that is to say, not to consist of a right to
use positive^ the given subject, but in a right to a forbear¬
ance (on the part of the owner) from putting the given sub¬
ject to a given use.

Now, whether a negative servitude be really a right of
user, or whether it be a servitude at all (and be not rather
a mere right tn personam^ are questions, which, I frankly
confess, I* have not been able to solve to my own satisfac¬
tion.—I shall, however, discuss the subject immediately:
And I merely advert to it, in this preliminary manner, in
order that I may prepare you for a discrepancy between the
definition of a servitude which I have hitherto given, and
that analysis of servitudes to which 1 now proceed.

prefer where- Attempting to anolvse the nature of servitudes,

in the nature i-i i

and kinds of and to mark the chief kinds into which they ai*c
wfluStSi- divisible, I shall address myself to the following
“ ” principal (and to various subordinate) topics.

1 st, the distinction between the servitudes which are
styled by modem Civilians affinuatwe or posifivej and the
servitudes which are styled by the same Civilians negative:
that is to say, those which consist in a right to me in a
given manner the given subject, and those which consist in
a right to a forbearance (on the part of the owner) from
putting the given subject to a given use.

2 ndly. I shall then examine the celebrated position, that
no right of servitude is a right to an act on the part of the
owner: that every right of servitude is a right to use the
subject, or a right to a forbearance (on the part of the owner)
from using the subject.

Srdly. I shall examine the distinction between real ser¬
vitudes and personal servitudes: or (adopting to a certain
extent the language of the English law) between servitudes
appurtenant and servitudes in gross.

4thly. I shall examine the rights of property or dominion
(meaning hy,property or dominion^ any right in rent import-


JURISPRUDENCE.


19


ing an indefinite power of user) which, in the Roman Law,
are ranked improperly (as 1 conceive) with rights of servi¬
tude.—It is of no small importance, that this confusion of
disparate objects should be pointed out and cleared up.
Without such a previous explanation, a great portion of the
Roman Law, and of the modem systems which have bor¬
rowed its terms and classifications, are to an English law¬
yer inexpressibly perplexing. Ususfructus, us^ui; habitaUoy
superjidesy emphyteuids^ and, perhaps, other rights, which,
in the language of the Roman law, arc frequently styled
servitudes^ would be deemed (and 1 think justly) by English
lawyers, rights of property for the life of the owner, or rights
of property nearly approaching (in principle) to an estate in
fee-simple, or absolute property in a personal chattel.

In pursuance of the order which I have now DistincUra^^
indicated, I begin with the established division mative or^o-
of rights of servitude into positive or affirmative negative scr-
servitudes, and negative servitudes. 'm

As I remarked in my last lecture, the right of property
or dominion (in so far as the right of user is concerned) is
resolvable into two elements: 1st, the power of using inde¬
finitely the subject of the right, or of applying the subject
of the right to uses or purposes which arc not positively
and exactly circumscribed: 2ndly, a power of excluding
others (a power which is also indefinite) from using the
same suVyect. Eor a power of indefinite user would be ut¬
terly nugatory, unless it were coupled with a corresponding
power of excluding others generally from any participation
in the use.

The power of user and the power of exclusion are equally
rights to forbearances on the part of other persons gencr
rally. By virtue of the right or power of indefinitely using
the subject, other persons generally ar§ bound to forbear
from disturbing the owner in acts of user. By virtue of
the right or powhr of excluding other persons generally,
other persons generally are bound to forbear, from-using or


20


LECTVREB ON


meddling with the subject. The rights of user and exclu¬
sion are so blended, that an offence against the one is com¬
monly an offence against the other. I can hardly prevent you
from ploughing your field, or from raising a building upon
it, without committing, at the same time, a trespass. And
an attempt oti my part to use the subject (ns an attempt, for
example, to fish in your pond) is an interference with your
right of user as well as with your right of exclusion. But
an offence against one of these rights is not of necessity an
offence against the other. If, for exain[)le, I walk across
your field, in order to shorten my way to a given point,
I may not in the least injure you in respect of your right
of user, although I violate your right of exclusion. Viola¬
tions of the right of exclusion (when perfectly harmless in
themselves) are treated as injuries or offences by reason of
their probable effect on the rights of user and exclusion.
A harmless violation of the right of exclusion, if it passed
with perfect impunity, might lead, by the force of example,
to such numerous violations of the right as would render
both rights nearly nugatory.

The rights of user and exclusion (let them be never so
extensive) are never absolute or complete: that is to say,
they are always restricted (more or less) by rights residing
in others and by duties incumbent on the owner. They arc
always restricted generally by the rights of others generally,
and by the duties to which the proprietor is generally sub¬
ject. Frequently, they are restricted by rights, over the same
subject, residing specially in determinate parties: as by the
rights of a joint- or co-proprietor, or by the rights of a re¬
mainderman, or reversioner, having also a right of property
in the subject.

Where a determinate party has a right (as against the
owner and the resf of the world) to put the thing to uses
of a definite class, the party has a right over the thing,
which is cotramonly called a servitude. Where a determi¬
nate party has a right (as against the owner and the rest


JURISPRUDENCE.


21


of the world) to a forbearance (on the part of the owner)
from putting the thing to uses of a definite class, that party
has also a right over the thing which also is styled a servi¬
tude.

It is necessary (I apprehend) in order to the Every serri.
existence of a servitude, that the right of-the «»«.
party should be jm in rem^ or a right against the world at
large. If it merely availed against the owner (or against
the other occupant for the time being) it would come under
the predicamciit of jus in personam. And it is for this
reason (as 1 shall show immediately) that no right of servi¬
tude is a right to an act. For if it were a right to an act^
to be done by the owner (or other occupant,) it would
merely avail against that determinate party, and would be
a right arising from a contract, or from a §^/^«s^-contract.

It is also necessary (I apprehend) in order to a genitive i*

. , S , 111 arighttu

the existence ot a servitude, that the party should

have a right (of limited or unlimited duration) to uses, or to

put the subject generally to uses of a definite iix^rininc'd

I i r 1 II / i. forbi*arantV8

class: or to a lorbearance generaily (on the part ontuopartof
of the owner) from putting the subject to uses of
a definite class. For example, if I have a right
(for life or years) of passing at all hours over your field, or
of passing' at certain hours over your field, I have a right
of way : an easement or servitude. For I have a right of
putting your field generally to uses of a definite description.
But if you give me leave to shoot over your farm, once,
twice, or any other definite number of times, my right de¬
rived from the license would hardly (1 think) be deemed an
casement. It would merely be a right against you, and
perhaps against other persons generally, (derived from your
particular license) to derive from your farm certain uses
determined individually as well as by class or description.

[Perhaps it would be no right; but merely matter for justifi¬
cation, in case the owner or occupant brought trespass against
the party licensed.]


22


LECTURES ON


PitaitiTe or
aiHrmative
aervitudes
(vw« in paH-
mulo contism
tunt,) and ne>
gative aervi-


As I said in my last lecture, where the party
entitled to the servitude has a right to use the
subject, his right is styled, by modern civilians,
“ a positive or affirmative servitude.” Where he
noM^&eto* has a right to a forbearance (on the part of the
conaiafitni).* Qp occupant) from using the subject, the

right is styled by the same civilians, a negative servitude.

By the Roman Lawyers, a positive servitude (in respect
of the owner) is said to consist in patiendo: i.e. in his
duty to forbear from molesting the other in the given user
of the subject. A negative servitude (in respect of the
owner) is said to consist in non faciendo: i. e. in his duty
to forbear from using the subject in the given manner or
mode. In either case, the right (it is manifest) is a right
to a forbearance on the part of the owner: a forbearance
from molesting the other in the given use, or a forbear¬
ance from using in a given mode.

As against the owner (or other occupant), every right of
servitude is therefore negative: i. e. docs not impose upon
him a duty to do or perform. In respect of the party en¬
titled to the servitude, a so-called positive or affirmative
servitude, is, in a certain sense, positive as well as negative:
i. e. it gives him a right to do acts over the given subject.
But a negative service is merelg negative: i. c. it nicitily
gives him a right to a forbearance on the part of the owner.

A so-called negative servitude merely restricts the owner’s
right of user.

. A so-called positive servitude restricts his right of ex¬
clusion and his right of user.

An example of a positive servitude, is, a right of way, or
a right of common.

An example of a negative servitude, is, the “ servitus ne
luminibus ” and neprospectui ^ciatur^f A right to the


* Von Savigny, Bcclit des Besitzes, pp. ^4, 560.
f Mackeldey, vol. ii pp. 77, 92.


JURISPRUDENCE.


23


unmolested enjoyment of ancient lights, is also a negative
servitude.*

No right of servitude can consist in faciendo:^ No ri|rht of
f. e, can consist in a right to an act or acts on the
part of the owner or other occupant. For' if it
consisted in a right to an act to be done by the owner or
other occupant, it were merely in personam against that
determinate party.

In the case of a servitude, the jus in rem may happen to
be combined with jtis in personam against the owner: and
so, may happen to be combined with a right to an act^
against the owner: e.g. a right to have a way repaired by
the owner.

[Querc. Whether every servitus be not jus m personam against
the owner or other occupant, and jus in rem agmnst the rt^t of
the world ?J

Quere. Whether a negative servitude be juA in
rem vitude bc^'M

An affirmative servitude may clearly avail against ang,
and may be violated by ang, K g.: A stranger to the soil
may violate a right of common, by putting his cattle on-
the commonable laiid?^ And in the case of a negative
servitude, it is possible for a stranger {e.g. a trespasser)
to do the act which would prevent the enjoyment of the
servitude: e. g. to build up, or otherwise obstruct, ancient
lights. In the case, however, of a negative servitude, it is
less likely that a stranger should disturb; because the dis¬
turbance would not be an act of user.

Moreover, a negative service is jm in rem inasmuch aa
it avails adversus qucmcumque possessorem: i. e. with or

* Blackstone, vol. iii. pp. B, 217.

t Mackeldey, vol. ii. pp. 78, 88. Thibaut, Versuche, vol. i. p. 27.

} Blackstone, vol. ii. p. 36. Note 15. Hugo, Enc. p. 301. See Table
II., Note 3, B. a. h.^poaf).

I Blackstone, vol. iu. p. 827.


24 LECTURES ON

'without title from the actual or preceding owner. Now as
against an occupant without title, it could not be the result
of a contract: for he is not privy to any contract of the pre¬
sent or any preceding owner. Still, however, it might arise
from a quasi-contract: i. e. from the mere fact of his occu¬
pancy. It would seem that a duty to do (which must cor¬
relate with jus in personam) may attach upon the occupant
by prescription.*

Note 1. [Remark: Tliat though the occupancy, without title
from the owner, were an injury against the owner, it would
not be per se an injury against the party having the right
of servitude. Consequently, though the adverse possession might
he wrongful (and therefore could not be a quasi-contract) in re¬
gard to the owner, it might be a quasi-contract in regard to the
party having the right of servitude.]

Note 2. [An affirmative as well as a negative servitude avails
directly against the owner or other occupant of the subject.
For an affirmative, as well as a negative servitude is a definite
exception (accruing to the party having the servitude) from
the indefinite powers of user and exclusion whicluthc property
in the subject comprises. Consequently, au affirmative as well
as a negative servitude (considered exclusively with relation to
the owner or occupant) might be deemed jus in personam. But
since a right of servitude, positive or negative, may be violated
by third parties, it implies a duty to forbear from disturbing,
which lies upon third parties generally as well as on the owner
or other occupant of the thing, and therefore is jns in rern.

And such disturbance by third parties would not affect the
right consequently through a violation in a right residing in
another.]

If, therefore, a negative servitude be jus in rem^ it must
(I think) be so for the reason I gave before: namely, that
any person whatever might by possibility violate it, and
that it therefore supposes a duty attaching upon persons
generally. 1 said that a negative servitude might be jus in

* Blackstonc, vol. ii. p. 36. Note 15. See ^otes 1 and 2, pp. 47,
48, anU.


JURISPRUDENCE.


25


rcm^ if it were possible for any but the owner, or other occu¬
pant, to violate the right. But that remark was absurd. For
as Mr. Mill* very truly observed, it would prove that every
right in personam might be jus in rem. —If a negative ser¬
vice be jus in rem, it is so, because by possibility any may
violate it, though none but the owner or occupant is liktdy
to do so.

The distinction between an occupant without title, and a
mere trespasser or other stranger is, that the former is exer¬
cising over the subject a right of property residing in an¬
other ; while the latter docs not affect to exercise any such
right, t

Querc: Whether in every case of a negative
servitude, the party entitled to the servitude does i” *’sen u p is
not ?ese the subject of the right ?

In one sense be may be said to use it, inasmuch as a cer¬
tain state of the subject is essential to the enjoyment of his
right. (B.g. A look-out. A right to have one’s drainage
pass off over the land of another.) But in another sense he
do(;s not always use it: ^. e. he docs no act by which the
state of the thing is sensibly modified: (e.g. A look-out.)
Sometimes, however, he may: as, e.g. where he has a right
to receive water from his neighbour’s land. But here, there
is no immediate effect on the subject, produced by the
exercise of the jus serviluUs.

By negative servitude, seems to be meant any such ser¬
vitude as does not need (to the exercise of it) an entry by
the party on the subject. {E. g. Ancient lights.) For a riglit
to abate an obstruction to a negative servitude is not es¬
sential.];

N.B. In the case of servitutes the right whieh eorrelates with
the obligation upon ttw occupants of the preedium serviens, though

* John Stuart Mill, Eaq., author of ‘ Principles of Logic,' etc. etc., was
ouc of Mr. Austin’s class.

t 'lb explain this distinction, we must analyse the right of possession.

* Blackstonc, vol. iii. pp. 5, 217.


20


LECTURES ON


not a right against all, is a right against all ^rho may occupy
that pradium. Although, as against the actual occupant, it is
an obligation attaching upon an assigned individual, and so may
be considered as giving jus ad rem ; yet it is also capable of at¬
taching upon any of a number of unassigned persons (namely
upon any occppant of the prmdiumy independently of his succes¬
sion to or representation of the actual one,) [as e. g. it would
attach upon a possessor without title, and therefore, not me-
cesser nngularis'] and, in that respect, gives, or correlates with,
a corresponding jus in re .—It must also be observed that there
is an obligation upon all who are not occupants^ not to disturb.
(Sed quere; since any obstruction by a stranger would rather be
an injury (at least in many cases) to the owner.)

Abmiute A duty attaching on an owner of jus in rem may
five OT nega^ be an absolute duty ; e. g. Duty to scour ditches, etc.:
tive) annexed to keep a house ill such a state of repair, etc. that it
are not sorri* may not he generally dangerous. In these cases,
tudoB. there is no servitus: for there is no determinate per¬
son with a corresponding right.

By accident, a breach of the absolute .duty may amount to an
offence against a right in a determinate party. As e. g.: Neg¬
lect to repair a house may injure an individual. •

Quere. Whether some of the so-called “ servitudes” in the
French Code are not absolute duties?]

jBet$erme. Thc su))ject of the servitude is said itself to
serve; res sermt ; which merely means, that thc right of ser¬
vitude avails (with or without limit in respect of duration)
against every person whatever who has a right of property
in the subject, or who, as adverse possessor, may exercise
any right of property over it.*

If the servitude be properly so called, it also avails
against the rest of the world, or is jus in rem.

If it be a servitude improperly so called, it is merely
in personan^, ex contractu^ or guad ex contractu^ against
every proprietor of thc subject, or against any adverse pos¬
sessor exercising rights of property over it.

♦ Macl^eldcy, vol. ii. pp. 7B-A


JURISPEUOENCIL


27


If it consist in faciendo (or in a duty on the owner or
occupant to do or perform) it is necessarily in this plight.
And it may be in this plight, although it consist in paticndo
or in non faciendo: i. e. in a duty on the owner or occu¬
pant, not to hinder the given use, or not to use in the given
mode. At least, the right to the forbearance fnay be, as
against the owner or occupant, jus in personam^ although it
avail (at the same time) against the owner or occupant to¬
gether with the rest of the world. {E. p. In case of a cove¬
nant added to a grant or prescription.)

I must here notice an absurd remark*of Rogron. He
says;

** Lcs principes gencraux dcs servitudes s'appliqtient a Piisu-
fruit, ^ ?usage, ct ft Inhabitation; et surtout ce priucipe fonda-
mental, quo e'est la chose qui doit les services, et non la personne.
Pradium non persona servit. D*ou on conclut que le proprie-
taire est tenu dc soufFrir, ct de laisser faire, et jamais de faire;
carlefonds seal etant oblig^j il ne pent T^tre que passivement.^**

The true reason why a senutude cannot consist in faciendo^
is, that, if it did, it could not jus in rew. A duty to do
(when not an absolute duty, or when corresponding to a
right) being of necessity an obligation or a duty lying ex¬
clusively on a specifically determined party or parties.

Inasmuch as every servitude is a definite sub-
traction or exception (accruing to the party having
the right of servitude) from the indefinite rights of user or
exclusion which reside in the proprietor of the thing, it fol¬
lows, that no man- has a right of servitude in a thing of
which he is the owner: Nulii res sua servit. Ror if he had,
he would have a right in the thing against himself: which is
absurd. Consequently, if the party having a right of servi¬
tude acquire the property of the thing, the right of servitude
is lost in the more extensive right, or, at least is suspended,
fio long as his right of property resides in himself.

* Bogron, Code dvil expliquin vol. i. Livre ii. Titre 3.


28


LECTURES ON


mS^Sw * ** Servitas** has two meanings. It

ortho means, originally, the metaphorical servitude or
duty of the thing: i. e. the duty really incumbent
on any proprietor of the thing, or on any occupant of the
thing exercising rights of property over it. But it means
also the jus servitutis^ or the right which corresponds to
that duty; the jus in re aliend,

A right of It is clear that a right of servitude (of any ex-
co.cxi»t with - tent m respect of duration) may co-exist wdth any

any mode of ii» ••

properfy, etc. mode 01 property in the same subject, or with
the right of an adverse possessor exercising rights of pro¬


perty over it. Whether the thing be in lease or subject to
property for life, or owned jointly or in common, or owned
severally, or subject to any number of modes of property at
one and the same time, the right of the party entitled to
the servitude avails equally. For his right is a subtraction
from the property of the thing, let that property be divided
as it may, or let it bo exercised witii a perfect title, or only
by virtue of a possession acquired adversely.

In short the right of servitude is a subtraction from the
right of property (considered in respect of the powers of
user and exclusion which the right of property naturally
imports). And it therefore may be concurrent wdtli any
right of property in the same subject (be its duration and
title what they may).


In cancs of
Bcrvituclo,
gemhle that
the extent of


And as a servitude is a dpfmite subtraction
from the right of property, it would seem that


S thT^o^CT the extent of the user has no dependence on the
ofintcrdic extcnt of thc duration.

tion)luMiio

dependence Alifcr in cases of property.

on the extent * * ■'


of the dura*


tiun.


* Mackeldey, vol. ii. p. 76.


JURISPRUDENCE.


29


Note.

Wherever a man has a right to the services of another (whether
it be unlimited, as in the case of unqualified slavery; or limited,
as the right of the husband in the wife, the r^ht of the wife in
the husband, etc.) there is a combination of jus in re with jus
ad rem : jus in re as against other persons; jus ad rent as against
the person* who is obliged to perform tlm services. All such
rights belong to Jura Personarum: t. e. they suppose a Status.
Quere; as to the obligation to perform a service as the occupier
of a given subject; i. e. where the use is not derivable from the
subject itself.— Hugo^ Enc. p. 301. Marginal Note.


30


LECTURES ON


LECTURE L.

In pursuance of the order, wherein, in my last Lecture, I
purposed considering the nature and the chief kinds of
servitudes, I. now proceed from the djstinction between
positive and negative servitudes, to the distinction between
personal and real servitudes.

Distinction A real servitude (or a real right of servitude)

between rcaZ • i • . i • .1 *.1 1 •

and residcs iR the party having trie servitude, as being

semtudes* owner or other occupant of a determinate
parcel of land: or as being the owner or other occupant
of a determinate building with the land whereon it is erected.
And it is a right, against every owner or occupant of another
parcel of land or building, to a power of using the latter in
some definite mode, or to a forbearance (on the part of the
owner or occupant of the latter) from using the latter in
some definite mode. As 1 shall remark immediately, it
hardly could be a right against the owner or occupant of a
moveable thing.

A real servitude, therefore, supposes the existence of two
distinct parcels of land to each of which it relates. For it
is a right in a given person, as being the owner or occu¬
pant of a determinate parcel of land, against another given
person, as being the owner or occupant of another deter¬
minate parcel of land. 1 use the term land as including
land merely, or as including land with a building erected
upon it. And hence it follows, that a raal right of servitude

♦ Mackeldey, vol. ii. pp. 79, 60, 86. Table II. Note 5, 4


JURISPRUDENCE.


31


is said to be annexed to the parcel of land the owner or oc¬
cupant whereof hath the right of servitude. Or, in the lan¬
guage of the English law, it is said to be appurtenant to
the land or messuage the owner or occupier whereof hath
the right of easement. The meaning of which expressions
is merely this; that the right resides in the owner or occu¬
pant, as such owner or occupant, and passes succes¬
sively to every such owner or occupant for the time being,
from every owner or occupant immediately foregoing.

And hence it also follovfs, that a real servitude (as mean¬
ing the onus or duty, and not the jus servitutis) is said to be
imposed upon one of the two parcels of land for the use or
advantage of the other: or that the servitude (as meaning
the onus or duty, and not the jus servitutis) is said to be
due to one of the two parcels of land from the other. That
is to say, the duty is imposed upon every owner or occu¬
pant of the one (as being such owner or occupant) for the
use or advantage of every owner or occupi'int of the other
(as being such owner or occupant). Or the duty is due from
every owner or occupant of the one (as being such owner
or occupant) to every owner or occupant of the other (as
being such owner or occupant).

And hence wc injjy derive the origin of the metaphorical
expressions, by which in the language of the Roman law,
the two parcels of land (or the two pradia) are contradis¬
tinguished.

I have remarked above, that, in every case of a right of
servitude, the thing which is the subject of the right, and
not the owner or other possessor of the thing, is said to be
burthened with the servitude (considered as an' onus or
duty): **res servit;” or “re#, non persona, servit.'" Mean¬
ing, that the right of servitude avails against every person
whomsoever, who may happen, for the time being, to have
property in the thing, or, as adverse possessor, to exercise
a right of dominion over it.

And, in the case of a real servitude, the parcel of land.


32


LECTURES ON


the owner or occupier whereof hath the right of servitude,
is said to dominate over the land from the owner or occupier
whereof the corresponding duty is owed. The former parcel
of land is styled pradium dominans; the latter parcel of
land is styled pradium serviens: being merely a case of the
more general metaphor, by which any thing, happening to
be the subject of any servitude, is said to be in a state of
servitude.

The only difiPerence, in this respect, between real and
personal servitudes, consists herein: that in the case of a
personal servitude, (or a servitude due to a person not as
being the owner or occupant of a given parcel of land,) the
thing, which is the subject of the servitude, is said to serve
the person in whom the jns servitutis resides. But in the
case of a real servitude, it is said to serve, not the owner
or occupant of the related and opposed subject, but the
subject itself. ..

The import of the related terms **pradium dominant ”
and pradium sei'viens” I have explained with more clear¬
ness and conciseness in another place, than in the hurry of
preparing a lecture 1 can often attain to. As the passage
is very short, 1 will now read it.

4. " The servitudes of the Roman Law are of two kinds:
1®. Prsedial or real servitudes (“ servitutes prspdiorum sive re-
rum”) : 2". Personal servitudes (“servitutes personarum sive
homiuum ”).

Now “rcai” and “pmonal,” as distinguishing^ the kinds of
servitudes, must not be confounded with “ real ” and ** personal”
as synonymous or equivalent expressions for “ in rem ” and “ in
personam*.” In a certain sense, all servitudes are real. For all
servitudes are rights in rem, and belong to that genus of rights
in rem which subsist in re aliend.

And, in a certain sense, all servitudes are personal. For ser¬
vitudes, like other rights, reside in p&rsofu, or are enjoyed or ex¬
ercised by persons.

The distinction between **real” and **personal” as applied
and restricted to servitudes, is this: A real servitude resides in a


JUaiSPRUDENCE.


S3


given person, as the owner or occupier, for the time being, of a
given pradium: i. e. a given field, or other parcel of laud; or a
given building, with the land whereon it is erected. A personal
servitude resides in a given person; without respect to the owner¬
ship or occupation of a pradium. To borrow the technical lan¬
guage of the English Law, real servitudes are appurtenant to
lands or messuapes: personal servitudes are servitudes in gross,
or are annexed to the persons of the parties in whom they reside.
Every real servitude (like every imaginable right) resides in a
person or persons. But since it resides in the person as occupier
of the given pradium and devolves upon every person who suc¬
cessively occupies the same, the right is ascribed (by a natural
and convenient ellipsis) to the pradium itself. Vesting in every
person who happens to occupy the pradium, and vesting in every
occupier as the occupier thereof, the right is spoken of as if it
resided in the pradium, and as if it existed for the advantage of
that senseless, or inanimate subject. The pradium is erected
into a legal or fictitious person, and is styled ''prasdium dond-
nans.” On the othei' hand, the pradium, against w'hose occu¬
piers the right is enjoyed or exercised, is spoken of (by a like
ellipsis) as if it were subject to a duty. The duty attaching ujiou
the successive occupiers of the pradium, is ascribed to the pra¬
dium its(;lf: which, like the related pradium, is erected into a
person, and contradistinguished from the other by the name of
“ prsedium serviens** Hence the use of the exp^ssions “ real ”
and ‘‘personal,” for the purpose of distinguishing servitudes.

The rights of servitude which are inseparable from the occupa¬
tion of pradia, are said to reside in those given or determinate
things, and not in the physical persons who successively occupy
or enjoy them. And, by virtue of this ellipsis and of the fiction
which grows out of it, servitudes of the kind are styled “ servi-
tutes rerum ” or “ servitutes realesi. e. rights of servitude an¬
nexed or belonging to things.

The rights of servitude which are not conjoined wit£ such oc¬
cupation, cannot be spoken of as if they resided in things. And,
since it is necessary to distinguish them from real or prsedial ser¬
vitudes, they are styled “ servitutes j»ersona»’Mm ” or •* servitutes
personatesi. e. rights of servitude annexed *or belonging to
persons. See Tableau. Note 5 Paragraphs 7 and 8 (post).

A personal servitude (or a personal of servitude^
*voL. in.


S4


LECTURES ON


resides in a given or determinate person, not as being the
owner or occupier of a given parcel of land.

Tbe expression “ personal ” (as here used) is, like a multi¬
tude of other expressions wearing a positive form, a merely
negative term. It means that the servitude to which it is
applied, is not a real servitude (in the sense which 1 have
just explained): that it does not reside in the piu'ty entitled
to it, as being the owner or occupier of a given or determi¬
nate thing other than the determinate thing over which the
right exists. For (it is manifest) every servitude (personal
or real) is, in some senses of the term “ personal,” a personal
servitude: i. e. it resides, as a right, in a person, and is due,
as a duty, from a person: although it may reside in the
party entitled as standing in a given relation to a given
thing, or as considered without relation to a given thing.

And (as is equally manifest) every servitude, personal or
real, is, in some senses of the term “ real,” a real servitude.
For, whether it reside in the party entitled, as being related
to a given thing, or it reside in the party entitled indepen¬
dently of such relation, it is a right over a thlnp of which
the burtheneJ party is the owner or possessor, or (what is
the same in effect) over a person (occupying a position
analogous to that of a thing) of whom the burthened party
is owner or possessor. {Kg.: We may conceive that the
subject of the servitude is a slam of which the burthened
party is either dominns or adverse possessor.) And what¬
ever may be the character wherein the party having the
servitude hath the same, his right of servitude is also real,
as beiii^ jus in rem: for, as I have shown in former lec¬
tures and also elsewhere, the real and personal rights of
the modern civilians (as well as their jura in re and jura
ad rem) are, in their largest meanings, equivalent to the
jura in rem and jura in personam of the same civilians, and
to the dominia and ohligationes of the Roman lawyers them¬
selves.—Unless a servitude-be real as meaning in rem,
it is not a servitude properly so called: but it is merely a


JUfilSPRVDENCE.


85


right, availing exclusively against a determinate person or
persons, and arising ex contractu or quad ex contractu.

This negative import of personal^ as applied to a servi¬
tude, ought to be marked particularly. For, in consequence
of writers not having noted or remembered it, they have
frequently missed the essence of the distinction between
real and personal servitudes, aud have regarded mere acci¬
dents as being essential to it.

For example: We are told by M. Rogron* (the amio-
tator on the French Code whom I have already mentioned)
that a real servitude is rc<z/, because it is due, not to a per¬
son, but to a thing: M. Rogron meaning thereby, (if, in¬
deed, we can impute a meaning to him,) that it is due to a
person as being related to a thing by his ownership or ad¬
verse possession thereof. And he tells us, conversely, that
a personal servitude is a personal servitude, because it is
due, not to a thing, but to a person: He meaning thereby,
(in so far as meaning he hath,) that it is due to a person,
independently of his ownership or adverse possession of any
determinate thing.

And, in like manner, a right of common in gross (which
is of a species of personal servitudes) is said, in the lan¬
guage of the English law, “ to be annexed to the person of
the party in whom it resides an expression which obscures
and pei*plcxes the true nature of the right; inasmuch as
any right whatever, not less than any other right whatever,
is annexed to, or inhei^s in, the person of the party entitled.
The English Lawyers, however, unlike M. Rogron, do not
mistake the import ot the distinction, although they use
expressions which tend to obscure it. For, in the same
breath, wherein they tell us that a right of common in gross
is annexed to the party-s person, they tell us that it is such
a right of common as is not appurtenant to a land or mes¬
suage, f

* Code civil expUque, vol. i. p. 241.
t Blackstone, vol, ii, p. 33.

D 2


36


LKCTUUES ON


Again; we are told by modern expositors of the Roman
Law, that a personal servitude is created for the advantage
of the given person in whom it resides, is inseparable from
his person^ and necessarily ceases at his death :* In other
words, that a personal servitude is necessarily an interest
for the life only of the party entitled, and is by the party
unalienable.

But, first: A personal servitude, though no more than a
life interest, if the extent of the interest be not declared at
the creation, may be given, by express words, to the party
and his heirs. And, admitting that the Roman law deter¬
mined otherwise, the limitation of the interest to the life of
the party, were merely an accidental consequence of an acci¬
dental provision of the Roman law. For what is there in
the essence of a personal servitude, that necessarily limits
its duration to the life of the party?

With regard to its alleged unalienability, it was not alien¬
able completely: that is to say, the party might cut out of
it, and pass to another, any interest of limited duration
short of his whole estate. But he could not so alien it, as
not to leave a reversion in himself, and as to cast on the
alienee the whole right of servitude.

But admitting that it was unalienable, its unalienability
was a mere accident, and not a property inseparable from
its veiy nature. There is no reason, why a right of common
in gross should not be just as alienable as any right of
property in the same subject.

The modern expositors of the Roman Law have, there¬
fore, characterized a personal servitude, not by its true es¬
sence, but by certain of its mere accidents: mis-stating, by
the bye be it mentioned, those very accidents.

And they probably were led into this error, by their not
remarking that merely negative meaning of the epithet per¬
sonal to which 1 have adverted. Seeing that the servitude
is styled personal, they supposed that it must have some

* Mackddey, voL ii. pp. 79, 80.


JUllISPRUDKNCE.


37


special connection with the person of the party: that it was,
in its very nature, inseparable from his person, or insepa¬
rably connected with his person: that it therefore expired
necessarily with his person, or could not endure beyond his
life, and was also unalienable to any other party.^

It is remarkable that unalienability (which they suppose
to be of the essence of a personal seiwitude) is truly, in a
certain sense, of the essence of a real. For since it is an¬
nexed to a given pradium, (or resides exclusively in the
owners or occupiers thereof,) it cannot be aliened or de¬
tached from the preedium itself, (or cannot be aliened with¬
out i\\Q pnediuM^) without changing it. from a real to a per-
soiud servitude. Insomuch that a necessary property of
rtfal servitudes has been mistaken for a characteristic mark
of servitudes of the opposed class.

[v. V. Semble, that a real servitude can hardly exist over a
moveable. (Suggest reason.)

In fact and practice, all the real servitudes of the Roman Law
are servitudes over immoveables. It is essential to the being of
a real servitude that there should be a ‘‘pradium serviens/* and
a ‘^pradium dominans.**

V. V. Semble, that a personal servitude, if a genuine servitude,
and not one of the modes of property improperly called servi¬
tudes, can hardly exist over a moveable. (State reason.)

v.v. Negative and positive servitudes, and real and personal
servitudes, are cross divisions. E. g.: A right of way or a right of
common (both of which are affirmative servitudes) may either be
appurtenant or in gross.

Perhaps negative servitudes are universally, or nearly univer¬
sally, real.]

There is a distinction of real servitudes into eermtutes
preediorum urbanorumt and seroitnles pradiorum rusticorum.
But as the distinction is peculiar to the Roman Law', and
has no scientific precision, I pass it over as not belonging
to my Course. I merely mention it for the sake of the
terms. •


Mackeldey, vol. ii. p. 88.


88


LECTURES ON


An whan servitude has no necessary connection with a
city or town. ' A rmtic servitude has no necessary connec¬
tion with the country.

An urban servitude is a real servitude appurtenant to a
building (including the land whereon it is erected). A rustic
servitude is a real servitude appurtenant to land (without
reference to any building that may happen to be erected
upon it).

The principal scope of an urban service, is. speaking ge¬
nerally, the commodious enjoyment of a dwelling-house to
which it is annexed.

The principal scope of a rustic servitude, is, speaking ge¬
nerally, the commodious cultivation of a parcel of land to
which the servitude is appurtenant. Consequently, urban
servitudes occur most frequently in a city or town: rustic
servitudes occur most frequently in the country. And hence-
the respective names of the two classes of servitudes:
Though an urban servitude may be annexed to a building
situate in the country, as a rustic servitude may be ap¬
purtenant to land within the boundary of a city or town.

Examples: A right to a forbearance from an obstruction
to one’s ancient lights, is an urban servitude: i. e. annexed
to a building: A right to pasture one’s oxen on land be¬
longing to another, is, speaking generally, a mstie servi¬
tude : i. e, annexed to a farm, and not to any of the farm
buildings.

By modern Civilians, and in the language of the modern
systems of law ^hich are mainly formed on the Roman, real
and personal servitudes are marked and distinguished by
those epithets.* In the language of the Roman lawyers,
they are also marked .and distinguished by those epithets,
but are more commonly called aervitutespraediorum aive re¬
rum, and aervifutea peraonarum aive Jiominum, It is worthy
of remark, that real servitudes, in the language of the

• Bogron, vol. i. p. 268.


JURlSraUDKNCE.


39


Roman lawyers, are frequently styled aervitulea simply: or
that the name servitutea is frequently restricted to real
servitudes, whilst personal servitudes pass under the generic
name oi jura in re cdiend: which, as I shall shew hereafter,
comprises many rights not esteemed servitudes.

In the language also of the French Code, the term “ ser^
viiude is limited exclusively to real or prsedial servitudes,
ot'set^icea fanciers: personal servitudes not being marked
by any common epithet, but being designated exclusively
by the names of their several species; As “ mnfruit^ usage^
habitation f and so on.*

In the Knglish Law, we have no adequate names to mark
the distinction between real and personal servitudes, any
more than we have an adequate name for servitudes. The
names approaching to the Roman, would be, easements ap¬
pendant and appurtenant, and casements in gross.

[v.v. Having endeavoured to explain, in general expressions,
the distinction between real and personal servitudes, 1 will now
cite a few examples of each kind.

A right of way appurtenant, and a right of way in gross.f

Common appendant or appurtenant, as opposed to common in
groBs.|

Pews appurtenant to messuages and pews granted by the ordi¬
nary.]

From the distinction between real and personal
servitudes, I proceed to certain rights, which, in
the language of the Roman law, and of the mo- Koman
dern systems which borrow its terms and classifi- the^mod^^
cations, are imprpperly (as I conceive) styled ser- i^giu
vitudes. For, in all these cases, the party entitled ciSca.
to the so-called servitude has an indefiiiite power pSrfy
or liberty of using or dealing with the object.

* [v.v. Origin of the names real and personal servitudes. See Table
II., Note 6, 4, two last paragraphs (posf).

t Blockstone, vol. hi. p. 241.

t Blacicstone, vol. ii. pp. 82, 428.


40


LECTURES ON


The. right, therefore, is ijot a definite subtraction from the
indefinite power of user or exclusion residing in the owner
of the subject. It is not a servitude properly so called, but
a mode of property or dominion.

The party has condominium (or joint property, or property
in common) with, or concurrently with, another owner; or
some right of property of limited duration (as an estate for
life or years) upon which the right of property in the' other
owner is expectant in rcm^ider or reversion. *

Unless, at least, these so-called servitudes be modes of
property, I cannot perceive that there is any intelligible dis¬
tinction between dominia and serviiutes, or account for the
terms wherein the latter are commonly distinguished from
the former. ^11 the rights iu question are, it seems to me,
rights of property for life.

[v.v. Enumerate and shortly describe them.^

\%t. XJmnfructua. Quaai-ususfructns, [This latter is admitted
not to be servitus. Equivalent to an alienation.]

2ndly’. Usus.

Srdly. Hafiitatio.

4thly. Opera servomm. This is an instance of a so-called
servitude'over a person. As 1 have remarked alx>ve, a proper
servitude is not likely to exist over a person. Belongs to juts
p&'sonarum,

Usus, in Roman Law a species of usufruct: i. e. property for
life, etc.

Not the “ Use of the English Law, which is fideicornmissum.
In so much that a use might be created to use (in the English
sense): i. e. givdh in Prosit for another.

Usus (as used by Blackstone, Vol. II. p. 397.) is exactly equiva¬
lent to usus iu the law of England: being a life interest, with
reverter to the proprietor.]

All these various rights of usufrucius, usus, and haUlatio,
would be deemed (1 think) by English Lawyers, rights of
property (for the life of the owner) variously restricted iu

: • * Mackpldey, vol. ii. pp. 80 to sS.

t Hugo, Gesch. p. 463.


JURISPRUDENCE.


41


respect of the power of user. In our own law, we have
various modes of property vkriously distinguished from one
another by similarly varying limitations to the power of
user: some of such restrictions being set by the disposi-
tions of the authors of tjie interests ; and others, by dispo¬
sitions of the law, in default of such private provisions. For
example: tenancy for life, with or without impeachment of
*./aste, tenancy by the curtesy, tenancy in dower, etc.: In
each of which cases, the indefinite power of user is re¬
stricted somewhat differently.

A remarkable thing is, that these miscalled servitudes
are the only servitudes which arc styled formally and usually,
personal servitudes: Although it is manifest, that a servi¬
tude properly so called, or importing a power of using
wdiicli is defined or circumscribed exactly, may not only be
a personal servitude, but is the oiiily personal servitude that
is entitled to the name.

It is, indeed, admitted, by the Roman Lawyers and their
followers, that if a servitude (which commonly is pracdial or
real) be not annexed to s,prmdmm (but to the person of the
party entitled) it becomes, for that reason, a personal servi¬
tude, and consequently is a species of ususfructus or usm*
For example : A right of way in gross, or not appurtenant
to a land or messuage, is a personal servitude, according to
this admission. .

Here, however, is a mistake. For though it would be a
personal servitude, it would not be ususfructus: ususfructus
imparting to the party entitled an indehnite power of user,
and being in effect a mode of property:

And admitting that these improper servitudes are servi¬
tudes, why should all of them be placed in the category of
personal servitudes? For it is conceivable (though not
likely) that the usufruct or use of one thing may be appur¬
tenant or annexed to the property or occupation of another.
And admitting th&t these improper servitudes are servi-

* Wackeldey, vol. i. p. 87.


42 LECTURES ON

tildes, it is inconsistent to exclude the superficies and cm-
phpteims from the same category. For the improper ser¬
vitudes, like these, import a power of indefinite user, and,
like these, may be rights of indefinite duration: i. e. reside
in the party and his heirs.

It seems indeed to have been perceived (though not very
distinctly,) that these improper servitudes were not truly
such. For (first) although they are styled servitudes in vari¬
ous passages of the Pandects, they are not styled servitudes
in the Institutes, but are marked seriatim by the names of
their respective species.* Describing things incorporeal (or
rights) Justinian, in his Institutes, says, “Eodem numero
sunt jura praBdioriim, urbanorum et rusticorum, ^ua.etmm
servitates voermfur/* And having treated of servitutes^ (li¬
miting the term to praedial or real servitudes,) and having
treated seriatim of usufruct, use, and habitation, -he adds,
** Hmc de sermtatihus^ et usuJructUf et usu, et hahitatione
dixisse sufficiat.”

So that in the Institutes, the term servitus is limited to
real servitudes; musfructm^ nssm^ et habitation are not
deemed servitudes; and personal servitudes, properly so
called, are passed over without notice.

Precisely the same method is followed in the French
Code. In the second title of the second book, property or
dominion is treated of. In the third title, usHfruit, usapCy
and haUtaUorin (which are not called servitudes,) arc handled
seriatim. And the fourth title is devoted to Servitudes or
Services fonciers: i. e. real or prsedial servitudes. So that
in the French Code, as well as in the Institutes, personal
semtudes properly so called are not formally mentioned.

• Secondly, By Mr. Von Savigny, in his Treatise, on Pos¬
session, it is remarked, that the possession of a right of usu¬
fruct, or of a right of use, resembles the possession of a
thing, by the proprietor, or by an adverse possessor exer«
cising rights of property over the thing.* And that a dis-

* Institutes, pp. 28, 80.


JURISPRUDENCE. 43

turbance of the one possession resembles a disturbance of
the other.*

Now this must happen for the reason 1 have already
stated: namely, that the right of ususfruct or user, like that
of property, is indefinite in point of user.

For what is possession (meaning legal possession) but the
exerciae of a right ?

This, therefore, is another case, in which the true nature
of these improper servitudes has been perceived.

• “ Die personlichen Servituten haben das Eigcnlhumliche, doss die
Aiisiibunf^ derselben immer mit dein Batiirlichen Besitz der Sache selbst
verbuiiden ist.”.

“ Erworben also wird dicse Art des Besitzes durch dassclbe Handeln,
wic der Besitz der Sache selbstetc ..

“ Das Becht dicser Servituten ist an einc bestimmte Person gebunden,
folglich unveriiusserlieh, folglich hat selbst <lie Vcraiisserung derselben
(durch Verkauf, Schenkung, etc.) im Wescntlicbcn keine anderc Wirkung
als eine blosse Vcrpachtung.”

Saviffny, Jiechl dea Beailzea, 6***^ Abs. § 451, pp. 527, 631, 557.


44


LECTURES 014


LECTURE LI.

Pnmory I HAVE Considered such distinctions between

ICllFhtBa GtCa » • • ^11

Bights j^nmwry jura in rent as are loundcd on ditterences
rem,pera 0 . ^|jg (Jegrecs whcrcin the entitled persons

may use or deal with the subjects.

Eat primary rights of the cla^s arc also distinguishable
by differences between the quantities of time during which
they are calculated to last. And whatever be the quantity
of time during which it is calculated to last, or whatever be
the extent of its duration, a primary right of the class may
be present or future; or, in other words, may be vested or
contingent. And, if it be present or vested, it may be
coupled with a right in the party to present enjoyment or
exercise, or the right of the party to enjoy or exercise may
be presently suspended or postponed.

From distinctions founded on differences between the
extents of user, 1 shall proceed to the distinctions which
1 have now suggested : namely, the distinctions which are
founded on differences between the durations of rights; be¬
tween present or vested rights, and future or contingent
rights; and between such present rights as are coupled
with a right to present enjoyment, and such present rights
as are coupled with a right to enjoyment to commence at a
future time.

ofRi^dii. In treating of rights in respect of their differ-
ent durations, I shall follow the method which I
founded on observed when treating -of rights in respect of the
KSSeir different powers of user respectively annexed to
durntioiu. them t that is to say, I ahaU assume that they are
present or vested.


JUAI8PRUD£NC£.


45


Before I proceed to the distiitctions between Such diatinc*
rights which are founded on diflPerences between rSJimJE’

* • • CfttiCKl

their durations, I must remark that these distinc- moilcB of ac-'
tions are inseparably connected with matter which
I shall discuss in future lectures: namely, the various modes
or titles by which jura in rent are respectively acquired and
lost; or the various facts or events (or the various causes)
w’hereon rights of the class respectively begin and end. For
example: Before we can understand exactly what is meant
by a right of unlimited duration, we must know the nature
of descent or of succession ah intestato. And before we can
know the nature of absolute property, (or of property un¬
limited in duration, and alienable from those who without
alienation would succeed on the death of the owner) we
must know the various modes by which the right is alien¬
able, either voluntarily or involuntarily: that is to say, w’ith
the free consent of the owner (as in the case of a sale or
gift,) or in the owuicr’s despite (as in the case of his bank¬
ruptcy, or of forfeiture for a crime.)


[Implicatiou of rights in regard to their duration, with modes
of acquisition.

Almost any right of any duration, or of any extent in point
of user, may arise from one and the same title. Or one and the
same title may give rise to any right, etc.: e. g.: Deed or will:
By which may be created an estate for life, in tail, in fee.
Occupancy and prescription generally give rise to rights of un¬
limited duration. But title by descent does not of necessity
imply it: e. g.: Devolution of a term for years, to administra¬
tors of an estate per auter pie.]*


Much of what I shall utter, in regard to the distinctions
between rights which are founded on their various dura¬
tions, will therefore refer to the modes or titles by which
rights are respectively acquired and lost. And such is the
intimate connection between the various departments of
every legal system, that such reference forward to matter


* Blackstone, vol. ii. p. SOI.


40


LKCTVRES ON


yet unexplained, is an inconvenience which cannot be
avoided by any expositor of law, although by long and as¬
siduous reflection it might be considerably reduced.

•

Of such distinctions between rights as are founded on
differences between their respective durations, the leading
or principal one is this: that some are rights of unlimited
duration, whilst others are rights of limited duration: a
right of limited duration being of a duration definite as
well as limited, or being of a duration, which, though
limited, is not susceptible of exact circumscription. For
example: An estate in fee simple, or absolute property in
a personal chattel, is a right of unlimited duration. Pro¬
perty for the Kfe of the owner, or for the life of another, is
a right of limited but indefinite duration. Property for a
given number of years is a right of a duration limited and
defined.

It is obvious to remark,.that, in respect of the party who
actually bears the right, a right cannot be a right of un¬
limited duration. In regard to the party who actually bears
the right, the right must cease on his death, if it cease not
sooner.

xightofunii. By a right of unlimited duration, we must thcre-
Sn. fore mean, a right which may devolve from the
party entitled through a series of successors of a given cha¬
racter or characters, which may possibly last for ever; mean¬
ing by a series of successors which may possibly last for
ever, a series of successors to the continuance of which there
is no certain and assignable limit. By the extinction of the
series of successors, by the annihilation of the subject of
the right, or by various other intervening contingencies, the
right may cease. But there is no certain and assignable
event (or no certain and assignable event imported by the
right itself) on which the right must necessarily determine.

For example: An estate in fee simple, or an estate in fee
tail, may devolve from the actual owner, or from the party


JUEISPHUDJSNCE.


47


actually bearing the right, through a series of heirs which
may possibly last for ever: that is to say, through a series
of heirs to the continuance of which there is no known and
assignable boundary.

As 1 have already remarked, the nature of a right of un>
limited duration cannot be understood completely, without
a foreknowledge of the nature of descent or of succession
ah intcdato. In order to the existence of a light of un¬
limited duration, it must be capable of devolving ah intea-
talo from the party actually entitled, through an infinite
series of successors, each of whom may take by descent:
the first taking by descent from the party actually entitled;
the second taking by descent from tlie first; and so on in
infinitum.

I say it must be capable of devolving in the manner which
I have now described through a series of successors which
may endure for ever. For assuming that the right be alien¬
able from that scries of possible successors, cither by the
party actually bearing it, or by every or any in that series
of possible successors, the right itself would cease on an
actual alienation, and a new right over the subject would
begin in the alienee.

1 think, then, that a right of unlimited duration may be
defined in the following manner: It is a right for the life
of the party actually entitled, and capable of devolving ah
inteslato through a scries of successors which may continue
infinitely: meaning by infinite, infinitely, and infinitude, all
that wc can ever mean by those expressions: namely, the
absence or negation of any end or limit which it is possible
to assign.

The idea of a right of unlimited duration is therefore so
inseparably connected with the notion of descent, (or with
the notion of succession or devolution ah inteatato) that it is
scarcely possible to explain the former without explaining
the latter.* •

• Sir William Bluckstone’s notion of a right of unlimited duration ac¬
cords with that which I have now stated. See vol. ii. chap. viL


48


LECTURES ON


iSJddura. ® limited duration^ I mean a right

ti.m. which cannot continue beyond the happening of
a certain and assignable fact, whether the duration of the
right be definite or indefinite.

In the case of a right of unlimited duration, there is no
certain and assignable limit beyond which it cannot endiu'e.
In the case of a right of limited (luration, there is a certain
and assignable limit beyond which it cannot endure: nl-
thougirthe precise time at which the event which constitutes
that assignable limit may happen, may not be capable of
determination.

In the case, for example, of a right for a given number
of years, the right cannot endure beyond the lapse of the
given period. IS^nd in the case of property for the life of
the actual owner, or for the life of another person, it must
determine on the death of the owner, or on the death of
the other person, though the time of that death is not of
itself certain.

A right of unlimited duration (as I understand the ex¬
pression) is not of necessity alienable by the party actually
bearing it, from the possible series of successors ad inicstato.
For example: According to the older English Law, the te¬
nant in fee simple could not alien (even with the consent
of his feudal superior) without the consent of the party
who was then his apparent or presumptive heir. And until
tenants in tail were able to alien from the heirs in tail by
fine or recovery, the estate tail w'as not alienable from any
of the series of possible successors on whom by the creator
of the estate it was destined to devolve.

[ make this remark, because property of unlimited du¬
ration, and absolute property (or property with a .power of
aliening from the future successors ab intesiato) seem to be
often confounded.

As I shall endeavour to show immediately, absolute pro¬
perty is always accompanied with such% power of aliening.
.But property of unlimited duration (as an estate in fee sim¬
ple or an estate in tail) is tiot of necessity absolute*


JURISPRUDENCE.


49


[v.v. Where a right of unlimited duration is not alienable
from the future successors ab iniestato, the right of the party ac¬
tually entitled is in effect an estate for life.

Difference between a series of substituted heirs and an estate
tail.

In either case unalienable^ and therefore not^ liable for debts
of any actual tenant or actual hpir.]

The power of aliening from successors who, in default
of alienation, would take, docs not per se distinguish aright
of unlimited, from a right of limited duration. For this
same power may reside in a party whose interest is limited
e. g. tenant for life of another, or a party who has a right
for years.

Although alienability is not (rigorously speaking) of the
essence of the right of unlimited duration, it is scarcely possi¬
ble to conceive, that, in any society, all rights in rent could
be unalienable. If they were, commerce would be impossible.
And, by consequence, in every system of law, the power
of restricting alienation has been limited: in some, nearly
prohibited.

[Cases in which the party in whom aright of unlimited duration
actually resides, is prohibited from aliening from his successors.

These cases are of two kinds:

1 st. Those in which he is prohibited from aliening the very
right, or the res singula which is the subject of the right: e. g.
The English tenant in fee—according to the old law.

2ud. Cases in which he is prevented from aliening from his
successors, the universum or some portion of the universum of
his rights. JS.g. The older Roman law; the Roman law as
modified by the legitima portio; the French law of succession.

Where he is prohibited from aliening the universum of his
rights, he is permitted to alien any of the single rights of which
that complex and fluctuating whole may happen at any time to
consist. Any part of them is also liable for his debts. And
it is only with reference to his rights as considered singly or
particularly, that he can be said to have a right of absolute pro¬
perty.

• * Blackstone, vol. ii. chap, xix.

VOl. III. K


50


LECTURES ON


LimitatioDS to right of alienation to prevent fraud on Bucces-
eors.

The party may destroy, spend, or consume, etc.: But may not
give, except subject to certain limitations. Or if the gift be
fraudulent, it is prohibited.

In what sense property in a personal chattel is a right of un¬
limited duration.

It may devolve ab inteatato through a series of administrators
representing the owner.*

But it is not likely that it should: Because it forma a part of
the university of his rights, and is therefore likely to be aliened
for debts, etc.

Besides, the umvermni being divisible amongst next of kin, no
one right is likely to continue in the same line of takers.

It would seem that the property is rather absolute (i. e. alien¬
able from all possible successors) than of unlimited duration.]

The idea of absolute property, or of property pre-emi¬
nently so called, is: A right indcfiiiite in power of userj un¬
limited in power of duration, and alienable by the actual
owner from every successor who in default of alienation by
him might take the subject.

This appears to be the notion of property as understood
by the Roman Lawyers, in the French Code, by Mr. Bent-
ham,* Blackstone, etc.

I say that property pre-eminently so called is alienable
by the actual owner from every successor who in default of
such alienation might take the subject. It therefore im¬
plies more than the power of aliening from his own succes¬
sors ab inteatato. For even where a right is a right of un¬
limited duration, another right may be expectant upon it.
This, for example, is the case wherever a mesne lord of the
fee is interposed between the tenant in fee and the King.

Generally, although the right be a right of unlimited du¬
ration, any number of rights may intervene between it and
the State, as uUimm harea, or the party who may occupy
the subject as res nullius.

• Traites, etc., vol. i. p. 250. Blackstone, vol. ti. 446-7.


JURISPRUDENCE.


51


[v. V.] We may conceive that the subject on the expiry of all
the rights attached to it may go to the State or to the first occu¬
pant. In England, the King, for this purpose, represents the
State.

There is not properly (by the law of England) absolute
property in land, in case there be a mesne lord interposed
between the tenant and the crown: (supposing the crown to
represent the Sovereign or State.) There is a reversion in
the lord of the fee, which the tenant cannot defeat, although
he may alien his own unlimited right. There is an analogy
in this respect to the Homan emphyteusis: which though
an estate of unlimited duration, and alienable, was never¬
theless esteemed jm in re aliend.

But in personal chattels there may be absolute property:
i. e. a power of aliening from all successors between the
owner and the uUimm hares. Blackstone’s analogy between
fee simple and absolute property in a chattel is therefore
false.*

In order to constitute property ju’e-eminently so called,
or a power of aliening from all successors interposed between
the party and the State, it would not seem that unlimited
duration is essential. We may suppose an estate per auter
vie, or for years, with reversion to the sovereign, alienable.
[This is nearly the case with feuds in their inception.]

But, in this case, a power of user amounting to power of
destruction must be tacked to it in order to make it abso¬
lute property.

Mights of limited duration.

1® A right which cannot continue beyond a given event
that will certainly happen, although the duration of the right
may not itself be susceptible of exact circumscription.

2® A right to last through a period which must cease on
the happening of a certain event, although the time at which
that event may happdn cannot be determined.

9 Blackstone, vol. ii. pp. 243, 261, 256.

E 2


52


LECTURES ON


Rights of limited duration, are rights of measured or
exactly defined duration, or rights of unmeasured duration :
meaning by measured, measured according to the legal
measure of time, let it be what it may: e. g. so many revo¬
lutions of the earth round the sun, or of the earth on its own
axis, etc.

[Cannot go into metaphysical difficulties about time. Be¬
cause, in different systems of law, that which constitutes the
common measure of time (or rather, perhaps, that which consti¬
tutes time itself,) is determined very diScrcntly: 2** Because I
have scarcely a tincture of mathematical or physical science.

[E. g. An estate for life: an estate for years.]

In case of a right of limited duration, succession is just as
possible as in a right of unlimited duration : e. g.: in case of
estate for years, or per auter vie. But here, it cannot en -
dure beyond the limited period.

Alienability is not less incident to rights of limited, than
to rights of unlimited duration.

In case the right be a right of property, power of user is
also indefinite. But it never can extend to the destruction
of the subject, or (what is the same thing) to depriving it
of all the properties which make it a fit subject for human
enjoyment or use. Bor the expectant on the rights of
limited duration, there is necessary (or almost necessary) a
right of [conservation],* or (what comes to the same thing)
a right quasi in the sovereign or state. But where there
is merely a reverter to the state, the power of user may ex¬
tend to destruction.

* ; or, prevention of waste. See Blackstone, vol. iii. chap. xiv. The
word is illegible in the original MS. Blackstone, vol. iii. chap, xiv., “ pre¬
ventive redms.*’


JUBlSFliUDENCE.


58


LECTUEE LIT.


In my last Lecture, I considered such distinctions between
primary jura in rem as are founded on diflferences between
their respective durations : or, in other words, between the
quantities of time during which they are respectively calcu¬
lated to last.

According to the purpose which 1 then announced, 1
should now proceed to the distinction between present or
vested rights, and future or contingent rights \ including
the distinction between such present rights as are coupled
with a right to present enjoyment or exercise, and such pre¬
sent rights as arc not coupled with a right to present enjoy¬
ment or exercise.


But before I proceed to the distinction between The dutinc-
vested and contingent rights, I will endeavour fTwK in re
to explain a distinction, which, I think, may be j7firrT^
considered conveniently at the present point of
my Course: namely, the distinction made by the
Roman Lawyers, and by the modern expositors of the Ro¬
man Law, between dominion strictly so called {^property pre¬
eminently so called, in re potedas, or ju« in re propria^
Bnd that class of rights which they oppose to dominion
strictly so called, (or to jus in re propria^ by the name of
jura in re aliend, jura in re, or (more briefly and elliptically
still,) jura*

I advert to this distinction between jus in re propria and


• Thibaut, ‘ Versuche,’ vol. ii. pp. 84, 91. Tables, I.


LECTURES ON


ju8 in re aliend^ for two reasons. 1st. The explanation of
this distinction may tend to illustrate the two capital and
inseparably connected distinctions with which my recent
lectures have been particularly occupied: namely, the dis¬
tinction between rights which import an indefinite, and
rights which import a definite power of user or exclusion;
and the distinction between rights of unlimited duration
and rights of limited duration.

2ndly. Without an idea of the distinction between jus in
re propria jus in re as understood by the Roman

Lawyers and the modern expositors of the Roman law,
their writings, to an English Lawyer, arc extremely per¬
plexing.

For many of the rights in rein which they rank withy«m
in re, or with jura in re aliend, ivould rather be esteemed
by an English lawyer modes of property or ownership, than
mere fnictional lights subtracted from property in another.
Such (for example) is the case (as I shall show presently,)
with the emphyteusis: a right closely analogous to an estate
in fee simple, and from which (it is supposed by some,) the
various systems of law, commonly styled feudal, took their
origin. Such is also the case with certain rights, which, in
the language of the Roman law, are styled servitudes: but
which, as 1 showed in a preceding lecture, would rather be
deemed by us, modes of property. Such is also the case
with the right in ran of the pledgee or mortgagee, or the
creditor whose right in personam is secured by a pipnus or
hppotheca.

By the Roman lawyers, he is deemed to have jus in re
aliend, although the pledgor or mortgagor was dominus or
absolute proprietor of the thing ^edged or mortgaged. But
according to the law of England (or, at least, of its strict
law, as contradistinguished from its equity,) his right in the
subject of the pledge or mortgage would rather fall under
the category of property or ownership* than under that of
rights over subjects owned by others.


JURISFBUDENCE.


55


In .order to an explanation of the distinction Propertj,
between jus tn re propna and jus tn re ahena^ I ly bo caned,
must briefly revert Jo the nature (which I referred
to in my last lecture,) of dominion strictly so called^
property so called^ absolute dominion *

or property, or the dominion (property or ownership,) which
is the least restricted or limited. For every in re aliend
is a fraction or constituent portion (residing in one party,)
of absolute dominion or property residing in another party.

And in order that I may explain the nature of Beapubtiea>
absolute dominion or ownership, or of jus in re ISleofTiw**
propria, I must briefly advert to the nature of )

res puhliciB, or of that right (or rather of that power,) which
the State possesses over all things within its territory or
jurisdiction.

It is manifest that the State (or sovereign government,)
is not restrained by positive law from dealipg with all things
w'ithiii its territory at its own pleasure or discretion. If it
were, it would not be a sovereign government, but a go¬
vernment in a state of subjection to a government truly


supreme.

Now since it is not restrained by positive law from deal¬
ing at its own pleasure with all things within its territory,
we may say, (for the sake of brevity, and because established
language furnishes us with no better expressions,) that the
state has a right to aU things within its territory, or is ab¬
solutely or* without restriction the proprietor or dominus
thereof. Strictly speaking, it has no legal right to any
thing, or is not the legal owner or proprietor of any thing;
for if it were, its own subjects would be subject to a
sovereign conferring its legal ownership upon it. When,
therefore, I say that it has a right to all things within its
territory, (or is the absolute owner of all things within its
territory,) I merely mean that it is not restrained by positive
law from using or dealing with them as it may please.


• Thibaut, ' Versuche,’ vol. ii. p. 86 et aeq.


56


LECTURES ON


Consequently, if we take the expression res publica with
the largest meaning which it will bear, all things within the
territory of the state are res puhlica, or hclonp to the state
(in the sense above mentioned).

things which belong to the state,
roww MMe), there are some which it reserves to itself, and
private. some thc enjoyment or use of which it leaves or
concedes to determinate private persons. To those which
it reserves to itself, the term res puhlicre is commonly con¬
fined ; those, the enjoyment or use of which it leaves or
concedes to determinate private persons, are commonly
called res primtds.

Of res publica (taking thc expression with the
the narrow e narrower sense to which I have now adverted.)

Bcnaeofthe . ■ i - i i

term).* vaHous distiHctions might be made.

For there are some, which, without leaving or conceding
the use of then^^ determinate private persons, it never¬
theless permits us subject generally to use or deal with in
certain limited and temporary modes. Such, for example,
are public ways, public rivers, the shores of the sea (in so
far as they are not appropriated by private persons,) thc sea
itself (in so far as it forms a part of the territory of thc state,)
and so on. Bes publica^ the use of which the state thus
permits to all its subjects, arc commonly styled res com¬
munes : though the term is sometimes confined to certain
things, of which the subjects generally are supposed to have
thc use by a title anterior to any that the state can impart.

[v.v. The limitation of the term commums arose from the
erroneous notions about the law of nature to which I have ad¬
verted in former lectures.]

Again: Of res publics (or of the things which thc state
reserves to itself,) there are some which it reserves to itself in
a more especial manner, and some which it concedes to public
persons (individual or complex,) as trustees for itself. The
former are sometimes styled “ the patrimony of the state,”

* Muhlenhruch, vol. i. p. 168.


JURISPRUDENCB.


67


or are said to belong to the fisc. Such, for example, is the
money which it raises by taxes on its subjects, the land which
it reserves especially for its own peculiar use, or the res
privala which revert to it by forfeiture or escheat as being
the ultimate hares of all its subjects. Those which it con¬
cedes to public persons as trustees for itself, are styled by
the Roman lawyers res unwersitatis: things being in the
patrimony of corporate bodies. And, they were so called,
(I presume,) because the public persons to whom they were
conceded, were commonly complex or collegiate, rather than
individual persons: as, for example, the corporate govern¬
ments of cities. But the term res universitatis is manifestly
inapplicable. For we may conceive that a respuhlica resides
in a public person who is individual or single. And every
corporate body is not i)ublic. ,

It is manifest that the distinctions.to which I now have
adverted, blend at various points. F(M^hcamj)le: Of the
res puhlica which are in the patrimony of tlie state, or which
it reserves to itself in a more especial manner, it may con¬
cede some to private persons for periods of shorter or longer
duration: It may let, for instance, a pait of its domain to
a private person in farm. And in these cases, the things
would seem to become, during those limited periods, res
privata. In these cases, however, the things are granted
out to private persons, rather for the benefit of its own i)e-
culiar patrimony, than .for the advantage of the private
grantees. Whereas in the case of res privata, the things
are left or conceded to the determinate private persons,
rather for their own advantage, than for that of the state.

And of res universitatis, or things which it concedes to
public or political persons, some will naturally fall under
the species of res puhlica which are styled res communes.
Such, for example, is the case with a road or river, the pro¬
perty of which resides in a public corporation, but which
it holds in trust to permit all the subjects of the state to
pass and repass it.


58


LECTURES ON


One class of things which occurs in the Roman Law, and
is there distinguished from res publican 1 will also briefly
advert to: namely, res dimni juris. But res divini juris are
merely a class of res publica. They are things specially
reserved by the state or granted in trust to public persons,
and destined to certain uses. The opposing them to res
publica proceeds from the logical error so frequent in the
writings of lawyers: namely, the co-ordinating as parts or
members of one homogeneous system, various classes of
objects which are derived from cross divisions.

Having given a brief statement of the leading distinc¬
tions between res publicm (as opposed to res privafa,) I
now return to res primtm: that is to say, things of which
the state is the ultimate owner, but the use or enjoyment of
which it leaves or concedes to determinate private persons,
rather for their -own advantage, than for the immediate
benefit of its own patrimony.

With regard to res privaia (as thus understood), they
may be left or granted to private persons with various re¬
strictions : with various restrictions in respect of user, and
with various restrictions in respect of time.

In respect of user, the right (or series of rights,) which
is granted by the state, may amount to a mere servitude,
(or a right to use the thing in a definite manner) or to pro¬
perty (in any of'its various modes). In which last case, the
property may be burthened with a servitude (or with a
something ^alogous to a servitude) reserved by the state
to itself.*

Qncui^r. For example; we may conceive that the state
* may grant to a private person a right of way, or
a right of common, over land in its own patKmony.

* Commmia may be considered as subjects reserved by the Sovereign,
but over which he permits others to exercise certain aervUuiea. lies sin-
gularumy etc.; subjects which the government concedes to others with a
right of total exemption: e. g.: taxation.— Enc. lib. ii. p. 298.


JURISPRUDENCE.


5i)


On which supposition, the grantee would have a right analo¬
gous to a servitude over the given subject. I say “ analogous
to a servitudefor a servitude, properly so called, is a bur¬
then on the property of another; and property properly so
called, or legal property properly so called, the state has not,
and cannot have.

Or, assuming that the right granted by the state
amount to a right of property, we tnay suppose
that the state reserves to itself a something analo- pnmta.
gous to a right of servitude. For example: we may suppose
that it reserves to itself (in case the subject of the property
be land,) all the minerals under the land, with the right or
power of working for them. In most or many countries,
all land owned by private persons is held subject to a special
reservation like that which I have now mentioned. And,
in our own country, the King (who, for the present purpose,
may be deemed to represent the State,) is also coniinonly
entitled to any of the more precious minerals which may be
found under land belonging to any of the subjects.*

With regard to time, the thing may be subject
to a right of limited or unlimited duration, or to »«««(8 B).or
a scries or succession of any number of rights, t
each being a right of limited or unlimited duration. For,
as 1 remarked in my last lecture, a thing which is sub¬
ject to one right of unlimited duration, may also be subject
to another right of the same unlimited duration. This,
for example, is the case with freehold land, (according to
the Law of England,) where the tenant ini*fee simple is
properly a rere vassal, and the interest or estate of the mesne
lord is also an estate in fee simple. And if we suppose
that the mesne lord held of a mesne lord interposed between
him and the king, and that the estate of cither lord werg an
estate in fee simple, here would be three estates (each of
unlimited duration), each of which must expire before the


• Blackstone, vol. i. chap. 8.


60


LECTUEES ON


land could revert to the king as representing the sovereign
or state.

And cases may be imagined, in which the thing would be
subjected to a much longer scries of rights of unlimited
duration, each to take effect in enjoyment on the expiration
of the right preceding.

But whatever may be the right (or the series of successive
rights) to which the thing is subject, presently or contin¬
gently, that right, or that series of rights, must be liable to
end. If the right be of limited duration, (or each of the
series be of limited duration) it must end on the lapse of
the time fixed for its duration. If it be a right (or a series
of rights) of unlimited duration, it must also be liable to
end on the failure of persons who by the constitution of the
right arc entitled to take it.

Now on the expiration of the right, or of the scries of
rights, to which the thing is subject, j)rescntly or contin¬
gently, the thing reverts, as of course, to the sovereign or
state: for since the state (speaking by analogy) is the ulti¬
mate owner of the subject, it also (speaking by a similar
analogy) is the idiimus hares. On the expiration of all the
rights over the thing, which merely subsist over the thing
by its own pleasure, it naturally retakes the thing into its
own possession.

But in different countries, the practice in this respect is
. different. In some, the thing (generally speaking) is actually
resumed by the state as ultimus hares. In others, the state
does not exercise its right or power of resumption, but leaves
the thing to the first occupant: who, by virtue of his occu¬
pancy, takes from the state a fresh right, which is also liable
to end like the preceding right, on the extinction of which
h^stepped into possession.*

But, in this case of acquisition by occupancy, the occupant
may be considered as merely representing the sovereign: or,

• Miihleiibruch, vol. i. lib. ii. § 91.


JURISPRUDENCE. 61

rather, the thing in effect reverts to the sovereign, and the
occupant acquires from the sovereign a new right.

Where, in our own country, the thing is resumed by tlie
sovereign, and is not conceded by the sovereign to the first
occupant, it reverts to the king. But the king may be
deemed, for this purpose, as merely representing the so¬
vereign. For, according to the old and irregular constitu¬
tion) in which the prerogative in question arose, the king
was sovereign; and, instead of sharing the soccrcign powers
with his parliament, great council, or what not, merely re¬
ceived from them suggestions and advice for the guidance
of his conduct. There is much, at least, of our legal lan¬
guage, of our established forms of judicial procedure, and
even of the forms observed by our present parliament, which
cannot be explained on any other supposition. And I ob¬
serve tliat Mr. Palgravc (in those parts of his Commonwealth
of England which I have had time to examine) appears to
lean to the supposition that the king was originally the
sovereign.

Now since the occupant takes in the place of the sovereign,
and since the king takes as representing the sovereign, I shall
assume that the thing, on the expiration of every right to
which it is actually subject, invariably reverts to the sovereign
government, in every country whatever.

[v. V. Interpose a remark on the king’s title to personal chattel
without owner. (Blackstone, vol. i. pp. 295, 298.)

V. V. In the Roman law, the same rule prevailed in case of de¬
reliction : which, if the party relinquishing be absolute owner or
dominus, is, as I shall show immediately, tantamount to the ex¬
piration of every right in the subject.]

With what I have premised, I can now (I believe) deter¬
mine the nature of absolute property: of dominion strictly
so called; or of jm in re propria.

It is not only a right of unlimited duration, and imparting
to the owner a power of indefinite user, but it also gives him


62


LECTURES ON


a power of aliening the subject from all, who, by virtue of
any right existing over the subject, might, in defaillt of such
alienation, succeed to it.

It therefore implies more than a power of aliening the
subject from those who might succeed by descent to his own
unlimited right. It implies a power of aliening from all
those possible successors, and aim from all other successors,
who, by virtue of any right existing over the subject, are
interposed between the possible successors to his own un¬
limited right, and the sovereigar as tdlimus hares.

The mesne lord has not absolute property. He has
mQTQly mda proprietas {ox proprietas simply): i. e. absolute
property subject to a right of indefinite user (as well as of
unlimited duration) residing in the tenant. In the language
of the English Law, he has merely a reversion expectant on
the determination of the tenant s usufruct: a usufruct un¬
limited in point of duration. And hence it follows, as I
remarked in my last lecture, that, according to the English
Law, there is no absolute property in laud: or, at least,
there is no perfect dominion in land, where there is a mesne
lord between the tenant in fee simple and the king as suzerain.

For there is a reversion in the mesne lord which the tenant
in fee cannot defeat by his own alienation : though by his
own alienation, he can divert the land from his own heirs
general, or from the scries of possible successors to his own
right of unlimited duration. If he were absolute owner, he
would stand to the mesne lord in the relation in which tenant
in tail stands to those in remainder or reversion expectant
on his own estate tail.

[Explain.]

The term property, as, in a preceding lecture, I opposed
it to serviiusy includes many rights which are not rights of
ahmlute property: that is to say, every right of limited, or
of unlimited duration, which imparts to* the person entitled
an indefinite power of user, although it is not coupled with


JUKISFRUDBNCE. 63

the power of aliening from every possible successor between
the party and the uUimus hares.

Having endeavoured to determine the notion
of absolute property, of dominion strictly so called,
ox jm in re propria, I can now explain the nature of jura in
re aliend.

Every in re aliend is a fraction or particle (residing in
one party) of dominion, strictly so called, residing in another
determinate party.

But hira in re aliend have no other common

J ^ jura tH re

property than that which I have now stated.

Different ridits of the class are composed of tions of tho

, ", All vanousnghts

different fractions of that right of absolute pro- whicUconsti-
perty from which they are respectively detached. dominium
Some are mainly definite subtractions from the they ore
right of user and exclusion residing in the owner.

Others are indefinite subtractions from his power of user
and exclusion for a limited time; and so on.

The iura in re aliend which commonly are
marked by modern expositors of the Roman law,

J tr ^ ' are noted by

arc, servifm, emphyleusk, mperfides, and the jus
in rem which is taken by a creditor under a pledge
or mortgage.+ And,’to show the nature of the
distinction between jm in re proprid and jus in
re aliend, I will briefly advert to each of the four
in the order wherein I have stated them.

[Preliminary remark.

V. V. Jura in re opposed to dominium rei singula, and both
to the dominion acquired by the heir in the university. (See
Table 1., post.) 1 am now conflniiig myself to dominium rei
singula,

* Thibaut, Vers^che, vol. ii. p. 85. System, vol. ii. p. 8.
f Mackcldey, vol. ii. p. 6.


64


LECTURES ON


[From this point the manuscript of this Lecture consists of
loose notes.— S. A.]


ServitiM.

Servitudes properly so called (whether affirmative or negative,
real or personal) were esteemed jura m re aliend, because they
gave a right of definite user over a subject owned by another, or
of subtracting a definite fraction from the owner’s right of user
or exclusion.

Servitudes improperly so called [usuafructus, usua, and habita-
Ho) were property for life limited to life of owner, though the
limitation for life was not essential.

When property for life, they were Jita in re aliend^ because
they were subtracted from the dominion of the author or grantor,
and on their expiration reverted to the grantor or his represen¬
tatives.*

Emphyteuaia.

Though of unlimited duration, accompanied with power in the
emphyteutor of unlimited user, and though alienable from his
own heirs, emphyteusis was nevertheless yua in re alimd; because
it was a right or estate carved out of another estate, or having a
reversion expectant upon it. It reverted to the author or gran¬
tor or his representatives. It was not absolute property, because
there was no power of aliening from all future succession.f

[It was analogous to a fee-simple where the land is held of a
mesne lord. Or analogous to an esia.te in fee of copyhold tenure.]

Where an estate in fee simple of freehold tenure is subject to
a quit rent, there would seem to be a aerviiua in the lord, as
lord of the fee. So in case of copyhold. So in case of emphy-
teusis.:^ perhaps an obligation quaai ex contractu. Or a
aervitua and an obligation combined.

[Rarity of jua in re uncombined with Jua in peraonam.

Usufruct unlimited in duration, etc., would have resembled
emphyteusis.

And this is another inconsistency about those improper servi-

* Mackcldey, vol. i. cap. 4, p. J.03.

f Gains, lib. iii. § 145.

X Blackstoue, vol. iii. chap. 15.


JURISPRUDENCE.


65


tudes mentioned in a former lecture. If usufruct be a servitude,
so ought emphyteusis to be deemed one; for a usufruct or any
other personal servitude may be granted to a party and his heirs.]
The feudal system has been supposed to originate in emphy-
tcusis, which, being granted for military service, is analogous to
a feud in its origin, and may have suggested the idea. (Fal-
grave.) But it seems doubtful.

llcmark on the generality sometimes given to the term feud.
It is extended to any property in land (of limited or unlimited
duration) granted on condition of military service. But this is
too general to characterize what is called peculiarly a feud. The
latter is an historical idea.

Vominiam directum et utile : Origin of the expression. Ex¬
tension of it to any case in which a mere reversion remained in
the lord, on the expiration of a feud of indefinite duration: be¬
cause here it is analogous to emphyteusis.


Superficies


Is clearly not a servitus.

And inasmuch as it exists concurrently with another right of
property over the same subject, it u'ould seem to fall under the
notion of condominium {i. e. joint property or property in com¬
mon), rather than property which is jus in re aliend; i. e. which
is carved out of property in another, and is to revert to the
grantor.

Inconsistency of including improper servitudes with servitudes,
and not including superficies. For an improper servitude, like
superficies, gives a right of indefinite user, and may be a right of
unlimited duration.


Jus pignoris et hypothecs.

The right of the creditor by virtue of a pledge or mortgage.
Why jus in re aliend, ? It imparted a mere jpower of disposition.

The obliged thing (or the subject of the mortgage) may
be itself jus in re cUiei^d: for example, a personal servitude, a
usufruct, an emphyteusis. So that here is jus in re aliend over
a subject which is also jus in re aliend.

VOL. m.


66


LECTURES ON


The right of the creditor ia double; jus in personam, in respect
of the debt secured: jtarin rem, in respect of the subject which is
pledged or mortgaged on a security. For, as against every pos¬
sible possessor of the subject, whether taking by succession ah
intestato, or alienor from mortgagor, or possessing adversely, his
right to the thing for securing his debts endures.

Hence the thing is • said to be obliged:—to be subject to
a lien.

[Another instance of combination of jus in ran et in personam.
1 consider these separately as far as possible. Boman Lawyers
do not.]


Difference between the right of the mortgagee in English

law and Roman.

In the Boman law. It is a mere right of the creditor to
alien the obliged thing in case the debt is not duly satisfied, and
to reimburse himself; debt, interest, and incidental costs.

In the English law. It gives a property to the creditor in the
pledged thing, which becomes at law complete on non-payment
of the debt. In Equity, however, the mortgagor ia still the
owner; and the creditor has merely a lien for satisfaction of his
debt. But there is this difference between Roman and English
Law. In the English, the creditor may foreclose, and acquire the
thing. In the Boman, he can only sell. His right is iJiat of
mortgagee with power to sell, provided that power also excluded
foreclosure. In the Boman Law, the creditor could not acquire
property in the subject.


Remarks on the term “jura in re aliend:** sometimes called

jura in re,.or jura.

“ Droits rSels ** is ambiguous, as sometimes denoting jura in
rem, and sometimes jura in re (s. s.). This arises from the ex¬
tension of^ in re to dominia, and of jus ad rem to obligationes
or jura in personam.

. DifficuUy: "Where a thing is SRbject to a series of rights,—^is
subject to a series of vested rights (descendible perhaps from


JURISPRUDENCE. 67

present vestccs), or to contingent rights to determinate parties,
existing or not.

Blit the right of the occupant is not even inchoate. There
is no specifically determinate party (existing or not) to take the
right. It is nothing but a right that may accrue to everybody
capable of taking, who may occupy.


Rights of which it is diffcalt to fix the class.

Qc. Bight of disposition without right of user.

Power of appointing without power of enjoying. See Black-
stone, vol. iii. p. 243. ,

If coupled with a right to enjoy the subject, a power of appoint¬
ment is in reality tantamount to a power of aliening, generally or
partially. If of appointing to any object whatever absolutely,
it renders tlie limited interest to which it is attached absolute
property.

[Observe that a right of disposition does not necessarily suppose
a right of user: And that an unlimited right of user by way
of consumption, supposes no right of disposition.

A limitation of user, as well as of disposition, is, however, ne¬
cessarily supposed, wherever there is a vested right in another;
since ^hc last would otherwise be nugatory.]— Marginal Note.

A right to personal tithes, is not a servitude. So’ far as it
amounts to jus in rem^ it is a right without a specific subject:
analogous to a right in a monopoly; a right in an office; a right
to a toll ; a right to jurisdiction, etc. The right in cacli par¬
ticular case to exact the tithe, is jus in personam arising from
a quasi-contract; like right to possession against a possessor
bond fide,

[Tithe is a Servitus combined with an obligation (s. s.) on the
occupant: A right to a part of the produce of the subject
adv&rsus qiLemcunque, with an obligation on the actual occu¬
pant to set out, etc.— Marginal Note. Blackstone, vol. iii.
p. 89.]

Analogous also to the case of nght in a servant;—^my right
against him is jus in personam ; but my right against the rest
of the world, in rem,

¥ 2


68 LKOTURUS ON

Qe. whether prsedial tithe he a servitude ? And^ if so, whether
real or personal ? It is attached to an office.


Mackeldey, vol. ii. cap. 3, p. 80. Id. from p. 105 lo 112.
lllackstoiic, vol. ii. p. 104.

Thibaut, System, vol. ii. cliap. 2.

Savi^ny, llecbt des llesitzcs, p. 5.57.

Mackeldey, vol. ii. pp. 127-S,

Table IL, note 4 {jmC). You Savigny, lleclit des Besiizes. Tlubaut,
Verauclic, vol. ii. pp. 85, 91.

Blackstone, vol. hi. p. 24.3.

Blackstone, vol. hi. p. 89.


JU*ISPBtJDENCE.


69


LECTURE LIII.

In this evening’s discourse, I shall consider the
distinction between vested and contingent rights.

In order to the existence of a right, the two following
(amongst other) essentials must concur:—1st. A determi¬
nate person or persons, pmsently existing, in whom the
right resides. 2ndly. That the title, inode of acquisition,
or investitive fact, to which the law annexes the right, be
presently consummate or complete.

Hence it follows, that the epithet present” or “ vested,”
as applied to a right, is superfluous or tautological. Every
right, properly so called, is of necessity present or vested:
that is to say, it presently resides in, or is presently vested
in, a present and determinate party, through the title, or
investitive fact, to which the law annexes it as a legal con¬
sequence or eftect.

IVhcn we oppose a vested or present, to a future or con¬
tingent right, we are not, I apprehend, opposing a right of
one class to a right of another class, but we are rather op¬
posing a right to the chance or possibilitg of a right. Ac¬
cordingly, the contingent right of the apparent or presump¬
tive heir to rights which the party presently entitled may
alien from him, is frequently styled, not a right, but spes
auccesaionis: that is to say, the chance or possibility, that
the heir, who has not presently a right, may hereafter acquire
one. And, generally, a contingent right is frequently styled
" spes ; apes incerta ; hoffnungsrecht ” or hope-right: a pre¬
sent chance, or a present possibUitg, that a right may hereafter


70


LECTURES ON


arise, and may vest in a pei*son in being, or hereafter to be.
When, then, in conipliancc with custom, I use the expres¬
sions vested and contingent rights,” I am not opposing
rights of a class to rights of 'another class, but rights to
chances or possibilities of rights.

And here I would advert to a meaning, frequently an¬
nexed to the expi’essions “ vested rights^ which is mentioned
in Mr. Lewis’s* treatise “ On the Use and Abuse of Poli¬
tical Terms.”

When it is said that the legislature ought not to deprive
parties of their “ vested rights,” all that is mearit is this:
that the rights styled “ vested” are sacred or inviolable^ or
are such ns the parties ought not to be deprived of by the
legislature. Like a thousand other propositions, which
sound speciously to the ear, it is cither purely identical and
tells us nothing, or begs the question in issue.

If it mean that there arc no cases in which the rights of
parties arc not to yield to considerations of expediency, the
proposition is manifestly false, and conflicts with the practice
of every legislature on earth. In every case, for example,
in which a road or canal is run by authority of parliament
through the lands of private persons, the rights, or vested
rights, of the private owners are partially abolished by the
legislature. They are compelled to yield up a portion of
their rights of exclusion, and to receive compensation agree¬
ably to the provisions of the Act.

' When the expression “ vested right” is used on such
occasions, it means one or another of two things:—1st.
That the right in question ought not to be interfered with
by the legislature; which (as I have remarked already) begs
the question at issue; or, 2ndly, that, in interfering with
rights, the legislature ought to tread with the greatest pos¬
sible caution, and ought not to abolish them without a great
and manifest preponderance of general utility. And, it may

• Now Sir George Comewall Lewis. He was a mcml}er of Mr.
Austin’s class.


JURISPRUDENCE.


71


be added, the proposition, as thus understood, is just as
applicable to contingent rights, or to chances or possibilities
of rights, as to vested rights, or rights properly so called.
To deprive a man of an expectancy, without a manifest pre¬
ponderance of general utility, were just as pernicious as to
deprive him of a right without the same reason to justify the
measure.

Before I proceed to contingent rights, or to chances or
possibilities of rights, I must remark that vested rights, or
rights properly so called, arc divisible into two classes:—
1st. Present or vested rights which are coupled with a
present right to enjoyment or exercise: 2ndly. Present or
vested rights which arc not coupled with a right to present
enjoyment or exercise.

Por example; If I am absolute owner of land or a move-
able, not subject to a right in another of limited duration,
I have not only u present right to or in the subject, but
also a right to the present possession of it: that is to say,
a present right to enjoy or exercise my present right of
ownership.

But if the subject be let to another, I have a present right
of ownership without a present right to exercise my right
of ownership: I have merely a reversion, expectant on the
determination of the lease, and which, till the lease deter¬
mine, cannot take effect in possession.

Or if a legacy be given to an infant, but with a direction
in the will that the legacy shall not be paid to him till he
come of age, he has a present or perfect right to the legacy,
although he cannot touch, it before he shall become adult.
For if he should die before he come of age, the legacy
would not lapse, (or the gift would not be inoperative), but
the legacy would pass to the successors of the legatee, and
not to those of the testator. It is not a gift conditioned to
take effect in case the infant shall come of age, but an ab¬
solute gift with a disection suspending the payment to him
until he shall come of age. If he should die before he come


72


LECTURES ON


of age, his successors would be entitled to present payment,
as well as to a present right in the subject of the bequest.*

A right, therefore, may be present or vested, although the
right to enjoy it or exercise it, be contingent or uncertain.
Or, in other words, a present and certain right to posses¬
sion is not of the essence of a present and certain right.

For cxRraple; In the case of the legacy, to which 1 have
just adverted, it is presently uncertain whether the infant
will ever be entitled to the payment; but still he has a'
present right to the subject of the bequest, inasmuch as
the right would pass to his successors though he himself
were to die before the period fixed for payment.

Again: In every case of a vested right, expectant on the
determination of a preceding right, the right of the ex¬
pectant to possession or enjoyment is necessarily uncertain.
For, though he has a present or perfect right, to take effect
in possession on the determination of the preceding right,
he may die himself (or even die without representatives
capable of enjoying the expectancy), before the preceding
right shall come to an end.

The distinction which I have tried to explain ought to be
carefully marked. For it is often supposed, even by writers
who commonly perceive the distinction between vested and
contingent rights, that a right to present enjoyment is of
the essence of a present right: or, what comes to the same
thing, that a right of which the enjoyment or exercise is
uncertain is necessarily an uncertain or contingent right.

[Examples:—Blackstone, vol. ii. p. 163. ** Of estates in

po8ae$rion whereby a present interest passes to and resides in
the tenant, not depending on any sabsequent circumstance or
contingency, etc.as if a right not in possession might not be
coupled with a present interest.]

I have said already, that in order to the existence
right, what, of a present right, or in order to the existence of a
right properly so called, the two following (amongst other)

• Blackstone, vol. ii. p. 513 .


73


JURISPaUDENX'E.

essentials, must concur;—1st. A determinate person or
persons, presently existing, in whom the right resides, or
in whom it is vested. 2ndly. That the title, mode of ac¬
quisition, or cauaa^ to which the right is annexed as a legal
consequence or effect, be presently consummate or complete.

Hence it follows, that a right is contingent in either of
the following cases:—

1st. The right is pontingent, if the person to whom it is
destined or determined, (or in whom it is to reside or vest,)
be not presently existing. In this case it is supposed that
the events constituting the title whereon the right is to
arise have already happened wholly or in part: but that
though the title be presently consummate, the right never¬
theless is presently contingent, inasmuch as the person to
whom it is determined may never exist to take it.

2ndly. The right is contingent, if the person to whom it
is determined be presently existing, but the title, or mode
of acfjuisition, whereon it is to vest in that person, be not
presently consummate, and never may be.

In this last case, it is necessarily supposed that the title
is complex (or consists of two or more successive events):
that one or moi’e of those events has already happened ; but
that one or more of those events has not yet happened, and
may never happen.

i'or example: If land be now given by deed or will to
A for his life, and after A’s death to the eldest son (now
unborn) of B, in tail or in fee, the right which is deter*
mined by the gift to the unborn son of B is contingent.
By the gift itself the title is presently complete: for if B
had now a son, the estate in tail or in fee would now be
vested in him, although his right to possession, or to the
enjoyment or exercise of his right, would not begin till after
the determination of A’s estate for life. But though the
title is presently consummate, the right nevertheless is pre¬
sently contingent: fer it is presently uncertain whether B
will have a son, and whether the person to whom the right
is determined will ever exist.


74 LECTURES ON

Again: If land be given to A for his life, and, in case B
(a person now existing) shall survive A» tp B in fee, the
right which is determined by the gift t6 B and his heii’s
general is presently a contingent right. For though the
person to whom it is determined is now^in existence and
capable of taking it, the title, or mode of acquisition, whereon
the right is to arise, is presently inchoate only, and perhaps
will never be consummate. By the gift to B^ in case he
shall survive A, a part only of the complex title has pre¬
sently happened. Before it can be consummate, and the
right determined to B can vest or come into existence, A
must die, leaving B surviving him: which event, forming
a part of the entire complex title, has not yet occurred,
and possibly may never oci^r.*

Wherever, therefore, the person to whom the right is
determined is ndt presently in being, or wherever the title
is presently inchoate, and its consummation is presently un¬
certain, the right is contingent: that is to say, there is not
properly a rights (residing, as a right must do, in a present
person or persons), but a present chance or pomihilitg that
a right may arise hereafter, and may reside in the person
or persons, existing or to exist, to whom it is determined
or destined.

The two grounds of uncertainty to which I now have
adverted may happen to exist together in one and the same
case: that is to say, the person to whom the right is de¬
termined may not be yet in being, and the title determining
the right to the person may yet be merely inchoate, and
its consummation contingent. Insomuch that the right would
be presently contingent, although the party were presently
existing.

For example: If an estate were given to the eldest son
of B, (B having presently no son,) on'condition of B or
his son doing some given act, the right would be contin¬
gent in two ways. For it is uncertain whether the person
* Blackstonc, vol. ii. pp. 169, 170.


JURlSPEUDfiNCE.


75


to whom the right is determined will ever exist. And,
though the pfQrson presently existed, the deed or perform¬
ance which is a part of the entire title, would be contingent.
Until B have a sou, and B or his son do the given act, there
is no right properly so called, but a mere chance or possi¬
bility that a right may arise and vest in a given party.

As a further example of contingent rights, I may mention
the spm succeasionis which resides in the presumptive or
apparent heir: meaning, for the present, by the heir, the
person who takes from the dominm^ or absolute owner, in
the way of succession ah intestato.*

Strictly speaking, the apparent or presumptive heir is
not heir. For nemo cst haercs vicentis. In order to the
existence of the relation betireen the predecessor and the
successor, the predecessor, in the case of heirship, must
have died: that is to say, must have 'died physically, or
must have died civilly. By the apparent heir, we mean
the person who would be heir presently, if the party, to
whom he is heir apparent, presently died intestate. By
the presumptive heir, we mean the person who would be
heir presently, if the party presently died intestate, and no
person entitled to take as heir in j)refcrence to the pre¬
sumptive heir came into existence before the decease.

Now it is manifest that the right of the apparent heir is
a contingent or uncertain right. Before he can accpiire as
heir properly so called, he must not only survive the party
to whomphe is heir apparent, but that party must die in¬
testate ; and, in case the subject of the uncertain succc.ssion
be some single right, and not the university or aggregate of
the party’s rights, that party must also die without having
aliened the right in his lifetime.

The right of the presumptive heir is more uncertain still.
For before he can acquire as heir properly so called, the
party to whom he is heir presumptive must die in his own

* Blackstonc, vol. iii. p. 224. Mackcldey, vol. i. p. 217. MiihJ. vol. i.
p. 140.


70


LECTURES ON


lifetime; the party also must die intestate, or intestate and
without having aliened the right by act inter vivos; and no
party entitled to the heritage in preference to the presump¬
tive heir, must come into being, between the time present
and the happening of all those other contingencies.

Such is the influence of words over the understanding,
that I thought, at first, the right in question was not a con¬
tingent right: that it was a present or vested right liable to
end on certain contingencies; that is to say, the death of
the so-called heir before the decease of the party to whom
he is presently heir (apparent or presumptive); alienation
by the party in the way of will or otherwise; and so on.

But this difficulty arose from the name which is impro¬
perly given to the apparent or presumptive heir. In truth
he is not heir: for nemo est hares viventis. He is merely
the person who will be heir in case certain contingencies
shall conspire to cast the heritage upon him. He has not
a present or perfect right: but he has merely an inchoate
right which may become consummate, in case certain facts
necessary to the completion of his rights shall arise hereafter
in his favour. And, accordingly, his so-called right is com¬
monly called spes succcssionis: that is to say, not a riyhfy
but a chance or possibility that he may acquire a right.

The test, then, of a vested right (or of a right as opposed
to a contingent right or to the chance or possibility of a
right) is, I apprehend, this *.—

If the right be perfectly acquired, or if the whble series
of facts necessary to its existence have already happened,
the right is present or vested^ or (in other words) is a right.

If the right be not perfectly acquired, or if that whole
series of facts be presently incomplete and may never become
consummate, the right is contingent or uncertain^ or is rather
a chance or possibility that a right may hereafter arise.

And in order to the perfect acquisition of the right, or
to the completion of the series of facts Vhereon the right
arises, two things must conspire.


JURISPRUDENCE. 77

1st. The title to which it is annexed must be consum¬
mate : that is to -say, the fact (or the whole series of facts),
constituting the title, must liave happened already.

2ndly. The person to whom it is determined by the title
must have come into existence, and must actually be en¬
titled to the right, or (if he have died, and the right be trans¬
missible), must have transmitted it to his own successors.

If the title be not consumnmtc, or if part of it consist of
a contingency or of a fact which may never happen, the
right is presently contingent. And though the title be
consummate, the right also is presently contingent, in case
the title determine it to a person who is not yet in exist¬
ence. For, to the being of a perfect right, the existence of
a person in whom it resides is not less requisite, than the
consummation of the title by which the right is vested in him.

I apprehend that a right is contingent, in case the title
be incomplete and may never become consummate, although
the completion of the title depend upon the will of a present
party to whom the title determines the right. This, for
example, is the case, in the Roman Law, where a party dies
intestate, but the heritage is not cast on the apparent or
presumptive heir ipso jure: that is to say, where the heir,
in order to the completion of his title, or in order that he
may become heir perfectly and truly, must adire hareditatem,
or accept the heritage.

Until he accept the heritage, he has a right deferred or
proffered''by the law {jus delatmu), but he has not a right
fully acquired (^jus acquisitum ): so that if he repudiate the
inheritance, it passes over to a party who takes as heir to
the intestate, and not through the party to whom the heirship
has been merely proffered. In this case, the party who has
jus delatum has merely a contingent right, although the
happening of the contingency necessary to the consumma¬
tion of his title, depends upon his own will.

The same may He said of the right of the heir (according
to the law of England), who has not completed his title.


78


LKCTUllKS ON


upon the death of the ancestor, by doing some act which
amounts to seisin: that is to say, taking possession (physi¬
cally or constructively), of the land which has descended
from the ancestor. The ancestor being dead, intestate and
without otherwise aliening, the heir has jtts delatum (to
borrow the language of the Roman Law), which he may
turn into jiis acquisUtim by an act of his own; that is to
say, by taking seisin dr possession of the subject. But,
until he fully acquire by seisin or possession, he has not a
present or vested, but merely a contingent right. Insomuch
that if he die before seisin^ the land will not descend through
him, but will descend to some party who acquires as imme¬
diate successor to the predeceased ancestor.

The same may be said of parties who arc entitled to
probate or to take out letters of administration. By virtue
of the will, or of the relation wherein they stand to the de¬
ceased, they have jus delatum: which, by proving the will,
or by taking out administration, they may convert into jus
acquisitum. But they are not ipso jure representatives of
the deceased; and must do a contingent act, depending on
their own will, before their inchoate right can become con¬
summate.

If, then, a right be determined to a party who may never
come into existence, or if the title be incomplete, and may
never be consummate, the right is contingent: that is to say,
it is presently uncertain whether the right will ever arise.
And this is the only mark of a contingent right which I
have been able to discover.

Mr. Feame, in his beautiful essay on Contingent Re¬
mainders and Executory Devises,” lays down the following,
as the invariable test by which a vested remainder is dis¬
tinguished from a contingent one. ** It is not the uncer¬
tainty of ever taking effect in possession, that makes a re¬
mainder contingent. The present capacity of taking effect
in possession, if the possession \i^re now to become vacant,
and not the certainty that the possession will become va-


JURISPRUDENCE. 79

cant before the estate limited in remainder determines,
universally distinguishes a vested remainder from one that
is contingent.”*

Now 1 cannot help thinking that this test of a vested
remainder is fallacious.

For we may imagine a contingent remainder which is
presently capable of taking effect in possession, in case the
preceding estate were presently to end.

For example: If land be given to A for life, and, in case
B survive A, to B in fee, B has a contingent remainder:
For it is uncertain whether B will survive A. And yet the
estate of B, so long as B lives, is presently capable of taking
effect in possession, in case A*s estate presently determined.
For if A w’^ere now to die, leaving B him surviving, B’s
estate would not only become vested by the happening of
the given contingency, but, by the happening of the same
event, would also take effect in possession: that is to say,
B would become entitled to a present or perfect right coupled
with a right to present enjoyment or exercise.

Tlie present capacity of taking effect in possession, if the
possession were now to become vacant, will not then dis¬
tinguish a vested from a contingent remainder: inasmuch
as there are contingent as well as vested remainders to which
that same capacity is incident.

But whether Mr. Fearne’s test be or be not a test of a
vested remaindery it certainly will not distinguish vested
rights generallg from contingent rights generally. For, by
our own law, and other systems of law, there arc numberless
present rights, and numberless contingent or uncertain
rights, which are not vested or contingent remainders, and
have little or no resemblance to them.

In the case, for example, of a specific legacy given to an
infant absolutely, but with a direction that the payment shall
be deferred till the infant come of age, the test can have
no application. TBere, tlft right of the legatee is a pre-

* Fearae, p. S16.


so


LKCTUKKB ON


sent right, and cannot take effect in possession till he come
of age. But there can be no question about its present ca¬
pacity of taking effect in possession. For there is no pre¬
ceding interest on which it is expectant, and on the deter¬
mination of which the enjoyment is to commence. The
absolute ownership is now in the infant, and yet the infant
cannot enjoy until the arrival of the period fixed by the
will.

The only marks of a contingent right which I have been
able to discover arc those which 1 have endeavoured to
explain.

1st. Although the facts constituting the titic have all of
them happened, (or, more briefly, although the title be con¬
summate,) the right is a contingent or uncertain right, if it
be determined to a party who may never come into exist¬
ence.

2ndly. Although that party be in existence, the right
nevertheless is a contingent right, if the title be not con-
suuiinate, and may never be completed.

And here I would remark, that a contingent right, or a
chance or a possibility of a right, may be transmissible to
the heirs or representatives of the party to whom the right
is determined. It may, indeed, happen, that the existence
of the party, at a given time, may be the very contingency,
or parcel of the very contingency, on which the right is to
arise. And, on that supposition, if the party die before the
given time, the contingent right can never vest, and there
is no possibility transmmible to his representatives.

For example; If land be given to A for life, and in
case B survive A, to B and liis licirn, if B die before A, the
contingent right can never vest.

But if the existence of the party at a given time be not
parcel of the contingency, the contingent right (if it be
calculated to endure beyond the party’s life,) may devolve
to his representatives. *

For example: If land be given to A for life, and, in case C


JURISPRUDENCE.


81


survive A, to B and bis heirs, B has a contingent right trans¬
missible to his representatives. The contingency on which
the right is to arise is the death of A, leaving O surviving.
And if B die before the contingency happens, the chance
or possibility still exists, and may pass from B himself to
the heirs or representatives of B.

[Query. Whether jus in retn may be future without being con¬
tingent?

In all these cases there seems to be a present or perfectly ac¬
quired right, of which the enjoyment is postponed to a future
but certain period.]

There are two senses wherein a right may be styled con-
iingent: one of which senses is large and vague; the other,
more strict and definite.

In the large and vague sense, any right to which any
body (now in being or hereafter to be,) may any how be¬
come entitled, is a contingent right. It is possible, for ex¬
ample, that I or you, or iiny body now in being or hereafter
to. be, may become owner or proprietor of A*s house, or,
more generally still, of any house whatever.

But when we oppose a continyetd right to a present or
vested right, we commonly mean by a “ contingent right”
a specitically determined right: and we commonly mean
moreover that the right is inchoate, although the right is
not consummate, and although its consummation be uncer¬
tain. A contingent right is a determinate right of which
the title is inchoate, or an indeterminate right of which the
title is not even inchoate, (unless in so far as capacity to
take be a commencement.)

The contingent rights which are subjects of legal rules,
are those which are inchoate: i.e. the title to which has
begun, although (being a complex title, or consisting of
several incidents) it is not consmnniate, and never may be:
i.e. some of the incidents necessary to complete it,.have
not happened.

VOL. III. 0


82


LECTURES ON


The right also must be determinate: i. e. the inchoate
title must not consist in a mere general capacity to take
rights, or rights of a given class: e. g. The right of the pre¬
sumptive or apparent heir is a contingent right determinate
and inchoate.

The mere capacity of taking an estate in fee simple is
not a title to any determinate right.

The mere capacity of husband is also distingmshable
from that of heir. It is a capacity to take Ms share of
any rights to which the wife may become entitled. But
that of the heir is an inchoate and determinate right: i. e.
the party stands in a relation to the deceased which fomis
part of the title, and the right itself is a right to a given res
eingtda or to a given imiverdtas.

• Sometimes, however, we speak of contingent rights in the
larger and vaguer meaning. .. For example; The contingent
right? embraced by the s/j^ mccemoms, are any contin¬
gent rights to which the heir will b(;come entitled on the
death of the predecessor. So, again, a mortgage of all a
man’s future rights.

In considering the distinction between present and con¬
tingent rights, 1 have considered it as abstracted from all
the peculiarities of the English Law. To expound the dis¬
tinction as concrete in those peculiarities, with vested re¬
mainders, contingent remainders, executory devises, condi¬
tional limitations, etc., and all these implicated with dis¬
tinctions between law and equity, anfl real and permanent
property, would take volumes.

These spring mainly from seisin.

In treating of vested and contingent rights, I have con¬
fined my remarks to jnra in m;i, or to rights which avail
against the world at large. But distinctions resembling
those to which 1 have just adverted also obtain between
rights of the opposite class. *

Every in personam^ or which avails exclusively against


JURISPRUDENCE.


83


a person or persons determinate, is a right to an act or for>
bearance. But the act to be done, or the forbearance to be
observed, may be to be done, or to be observed, either cer¬
tainly, or on the happening of a given contingency, Tf it
be to be done certainly, the right may be deemed veded.
If it be to be done on a condition, or on the happening of
a contingency, the right may be deemed contingent.

And if it b^ to be done certainly, it may be to be done
presently, (or on the demand of the obligee,) or it may be
to be done at a determinate future- time. In the first of
which cases, the right may be deemed a present right,
coupled with a right to immediate fulfilment. And in the
last of which cases, the right may be deemed a present right,
of which the fulfilment is presently postponed.


A right Chested or contirgent) y ichich is liable io end be¬
fore the lapse of its possible deration.

First, as to vested rights.

(a. 1.) Where the right is a right of limited and defined
possible duration, it may be made liable to end, on happen¬
ing of a given contingent event, before the lapse of the de¬
fined period for which it is calculated to endure. (See
Blackstonc, vol. ii. p. 143.)

(a. 2.) Where the right is a right of limited but indefi- •
nite possible duration, it may be made to end, on happen¬
ing of a given contingent, event, before happening of certain
facts up to which it is calculated to endure. (See Black-
stone, vol. ii. p. 121.)

(b.) Where the right is a right of unlimited duration, it
also may be made to end, on the happening of a contingent
event, before the lapse of its possible duration : i. e. to end
on another given contingency before the contingent failure
of the line of successor# to whom it is capable of devolving,
etc. (See Blackstone, vol. ii. p. 154.)

a 2


84


LECTURES ON


Secondly, as to contingent rights.

What has been said of a vested, is applicable (with a few
modifications,) to a contingent right. For it may be made
liable to end {j,f it should ever vest^) on a given contingency
before the lapse of its possible duration.*


Notes.

The fidei-commiasa and trust-substitutions of Roman Lawyers
are jilaccd with inheritances ; for, with them, contingent interests
were created by will. Even, therefore, where the subject was a
res singultty it was considered after testaments.

* Contingent interests not allowable by strict Roman Law.f


Dupoaitlona suspending vesting, and preventing alienation.

In the case of usus, etc., there was no remainder over to a third
party (still less an uncertain party on an uncertain event,) but a
mere revereion in the grantor descendible to his heirs.

(Gains, Lib. ii.; from § 179 to § 274.)

Conditional fees and estates tail to be ranked with substitu¬
tions, fidei-commissa, etc. To rank them with inheritances,
(i.e. with rights which devolve agreeably to law in default of a
disposition,) leads to nothing but confusion. Such an inheritance
or fee ought to be considered as a scries of life-interests. The
language resembles that of the Roman Fidei-commissa. (See
Mackeldey.)

Various means of limiting inalienability: In the Roman Law,
directly : In the English, by fictions. (Blackstone, vol. ii. p. 110.)

* Blackstone, vol. ii. ch. 10, 162. Muhlenbruch, vol. i. p. 209. Mac-
kcldfy, vol. ii. p. 463.

f See “ Outline,” Vol. II., under Uuiversitas j p. xci.


JURISPRUDSNCU.


85


r I^CTURE LIV.

I HAVE considered primary rights in rm, as Pnmory
existing 2 )er ae, or as not combined with rights Blghto*»r«»,
in person mu y from various aspects. perae.

1 first considered the rights in question as distinguished
by differences between their respective subjeciSf or between
the as{)ects of the forbearances which arc respectively their
objects. Addressing myself particularly to such of the rights
in question as arc rights in or over specifically determined
things, I then considered the rights in question as distin¬
guished by differences between the degrees wherein the en¬
titled persons may use or deal with the subjects. In other
words, I considered the distinction between property or do¬
minion (meaning by property or dominion, any right of the
class in question which gives to the party entitled an inde¬
finite power of using or dealing with the subject), and ser-
vitus or casement.

I next considered the rights in question as distinguished
by differences between their durations or between the quan¬
tities of time during which they are calculated to last.

Having considered the rights in question as distinguished
by differences between the degrees wherein the entitled
persons may use or deal wdth the subjects, and having con¬
sidered the rights in question as distinguished by differences
between their durations, I next adverted to a distinction
which T found it impossible to explain, until I had treated
of the two distinctions to which I have now adverted:
namely, the distinction between jus in re propridy absolute


86


LECTURKS ON


propertyi property pre-eminently so called, or dominion
sensu stricto, and those various fractions of absolute pro¬
perty'which are comprised by the generic expression jus in
r& alitmd. —As I endeavoured to show, the distinction be¬
tween jus in re propria^ or absolute property, and jus in re
aliendf does not quadrate with tlic two distinctions to which
I have now adverted: namely, the distinction between
rights in rent in respect of dificrcnces between the powers
of user severally annexed to them, and the distinction be¬
tween rights in rem in rcs[)ect of differences between their
several durations. "For though absolute property is a right
of unlimited duration and a right accompanied by a power
of indciinitc user, certain rights in re aliend (ns that, for
example, of the emphjieuta, or of tenant in fee simple) arc
also rights of unlimited duration, and are accompanied with
a power of user which is not susceptible of exact circum¬
scription.

I lastly considered the rights in question in so far as they
arc distinguishable into vested and contingent: that is to
say, into rights and chances or possibilities of rights.

And considering the rights in question as being nested
or present, as being acquired, or as being rights, I

distinguished such as arc vested and arc accompanied with
a right to present enjoyment or exercise, from such as arc
also vested but arc not accompanied with a right to present
enjoyment or exercise.

Having considered the rights in question from
^ration tiic vanous aspccts now enumerated, I proceed to
iHvuiitiw consider them in respect of their titles: meaning
tiw Facia. by their titles, the facts or events of which they
are legal consequences, (or on which, by the dispositions of
the law, they arise or come into being,) and also the facts
or events on which, by the dispositions of the law, they ter¬
minate or are extinguished.

In considering titles, or investitive and divestitive facta.


. JURISPRUDENCE.


•87


I shall address myself particularly to titles as engendering
or extinguishing rights in rcm considered per se: that is to
say, as not combined with rights in personam.

Titles as engendering or extinguishing rights in personam,
and as engendering combinations (simple or complex) of
rights in rem and rights in personam, I shall discuss parti¬
cularly hereafter.

Title by succession ah intestato, and by succession em les~
iamenio, I shall also pass over for the present \ even in re¬
spect of the cases, (as, for example, a specific legacy) wherein
it engenders a singular or particular right availing against
the world at large. For the acquisition of a particular right
(or of a res singula) by descent or testament, cannot be
explained conveniently, unless dcquisitioii by descent or tes¬
tament of the university or aggregate of the intestate’s or
testator’s rights be also explained at the satne time.

Being engaged with the consideration cJf the Law of
Things, I shall also for the present jwstporie the considera¬
tion of titles, in so far as they engender or extinguish siaius
or conditions, and in so far as they are any way implicated
wdth status or conditions.

Being engaged with the consideration of primary rights
and duties, I shall also postpone delicts considered as titles,
with the titles which arise from delicts in the way of conse¬
quence, till I come to treat of the rights and duties which I
style sanctioning or secondary.

But though, in considering titles, I shall address myself
particularly, for the present, to titles as engendering and ex¬
tinguishing rights in rem considered per se, I shall preface
my remai'ks on titles, as engendering and extinguishing the
rights in question, by certain remarks which apply to titles
generally.

From these remarks, applicable to titles generally, I shall
proceed to the leadfng distinctions between titles as en¬
gendering or extinguishing rights of the class in (jucstion:


88 ’ “LEGTlJllKe ON ^

•

though, in ccms^^ng .those leading distinctions, and, in*
deed, througho^ ibe course of my present disquisition, I
shall often bq/obliged to advert to titles as engendering
rights of othei-classcs.

. Having ^adc certain remarks applicable to titles ge¬
nerally, and on the leading distinctions between titles as
engendering and extinguishing the rights particularly in
question, I shall consider seriatim certain titles, (as engen¬
dering and extinguishing (that is) the rights particularly in
question,) which,- in some shape or other, are found in every
system, and are therefore appropriate matter for General Ju¬
risprudence. The titles which arC; peculiar to particular
systems, or such modifications of the titles common to all
systems as are i)eculiar to particular systems, arc foreign to
the subject and scope of my Course; And when I mention
them, I shall raerdy advert to them for the purpose of il¬
lustration.

Of the titles which I shall thus consider singly and seria¬
tim, the following are the principal: ,

1st. The acquisition of jusi^k rent by occupancy: i. e. by
the apprehension or. occupation of »a thing which has no
owner, with the purpose of acquiring it ns one’s own.

2ndly. The acquisition jus in rem by labour: i. e. by
labour expended on a Subject which has na previous owner,
or even on a subject which has.

3rdly. Tlic acquisition of jus in rem by accession : that
is to say, through the medium of a thing of which one is
owner already.

4thly. The acquisition ol jus in rem by occupancy or
labour combined with accession.

5thly. The various modes of acquiring jus in rem which
fall under the generic name of tiife by alienation: meaning
by alienation, the intentional and voluntary transfer of a
right (or of a fraction of a right) by the party in whom the
right resides, to another party. •

Othly. The acquisition of in rem by prmciiplion: the


JURISPRUDEKClC. 89

consideration of which title will inyohre -9 previous consider¬
ation of the so-called right of possession:

7thly and lastly. Such inodes of rights as are not
involved by implication in modes of scquiring them. For as
ev&ry mode of acquisition is not derived fxouLE pre-existing
title/so may a title end without engenderitig another. Oc¬
cupancy, for example, is not a title derived from a previiMis
title: for title by occupancy, strictly and pre-eminently so
called, is a title consisting in the apprehension of what was
previously no man’s, with an intent to make it one’s own.
And so, where absolute property terminates by the annihi¬
lation of its subject, the mode by which the owner loses
his right is not at the same time a title to a right in
another.

In considering the titles to which I have now adverted,
1 shall commonly assume that the right w'hich is the subject
of the acquisition or loss, is absolute property, or dominion
strictly so called, over a singular or particular thing in the
proper acceptation of the name: noting from time to time,
as I may see occasion, the-*^ect of the title in question in
engendering or extinguishing rights which are not rights of
that class or description.


90


LECTURES ON


LECTURE LV.

Agreeablt to tlic method or order which I announced in
my last Lecture, 1 shall offer a few remarks applicable to
titles in general, before I especially discuss them as engen¬
dering or extinguishing the rights to which I have now
adverted.

Considered with reference to the modes wherein they re¬
spectively begin, or wherein the entitled persons are respec¬
tively invested with them. Rights, it appears to me, may be
divided into two kinds.

1®. Some are conferred by the law, upon the persons in¬
vested with them, through iutertening facts to which it an¬
nexes them as consequences.

2®. Others are conferred by the law, upon the persons
invested with them, immediately or directly: that is to say,
not through the medium of any fact distinguishable from
the law or command which confers or imparts the right.

Taking the term title ” in a large and loose signification,
(and also as meaning a fact investing a person v^ith a right,)
a right of cither kind may be said to begin in a title. For,
taking the term “ title,” with that large and loose significa¬
tion, it is applicable to any fact by which a person is invested
with a right: it is applicable to a law or command which
confers a right immediately, as well as to an intervening fact
through which a law or command confers a right mediately.

For, though, to some purposes, vre oppose law and fact,
a law or other command is of itself ar fact: And where a
law confers a right immediately, the law is the only fact


JURISPRUDENCE.


91


whereon the right arises, and is therefore the title (in the
large and loose signification of that expression) by which
the person is invested with the right. For example: By a
special act of parliament, a monopoly, or a right of vending
exclusively commodities of a given class, might be granted
to a given person, for his own life, or for a term of years.
Now, in this case, the privilege conferred by the special act
of parliament might be strictly personal: that is to say,
limited exclusively to the specifically determined grantee,
and not transmissible to the heirs or assigns of the grantee,
or to any persons of a given generic description.

And if it were strictly personal, it might be conferred by
the.act immediately or directly: that is to say, it might not
be annexed by the act to any fact distinguishable from the
act itself. And in this case, the act would be styled the
title (in the loose signification of the term) from which tlie
grantee derived the privilege.

But, taking the term " title” with a narrower and stricter
signification, it is not applicable to laws which confer rights
immedintelj/^ but is applicable only to the mediate or mtei'-
venwff facts through which rights are conferred by laws. In
respect of this narrower and stricter signification, the rights
of the two kinds wMiich I am now considering may be dis¬
tinguished by the following expressions: A right which is
annexed by a law to a mediate or intervening fact, may be
said to originate in a title: A right which is conferred by a
law without the intervention of a fact distinct from the law
that confers it, may be said to arise from the law directly
or immediately; to arise ipso j^re; to arise by operation of
laWy or by were operation of law.

“ Rights ex lege immediate f rights arising ipso juref
or “rights arising by operation of law,” are terms (as I
shall show hereafter) which are often misapplied. They are
often applied to rights (os I shall show hereafter) which are
annexed by the law to mediate or intervening facts. And
the terms as thus applied, or as thus misapplied, denote, not


1)2


LECTURES ON


that the rights in question arise from tlie law immediately^
but that the facts to which they arc annexed are not facts
of certain classes, or that they are annexed to certain facts
unaccompanied by certain others.

For example; where a title has not acquired a brief generic
name, the right is said to arise ex lege immediate ; that is
to say, not from any of certain titles which have acquired
such names, but from a title which is opposed to the others
by that misexpressive phrase.

And when heirs of certain classes are said in the language
of the Roman law to acquire the heritage ipso jurCy it is not
intended that they acquire the heritage without the inter¬
vention of n title, but that the title through which they
acquire does not comprise a certain fact which, in the case
of heirs of other classes, is parcel of the mode of acquisi¬
tion : namely, aditio lierediiatisy or acceptance of the lieritugo.

But when I speak of a right arising from the law imme¬
diately, arising ipso yurOy or arising by operation of law, or
mere operation of law, I use the phrase with its obvious
and proper signification. I mean a right conferred by a
law without the intervention of a fact distinguishable from
the law that confers it. And I oppose it to a right conferred
by a law through a titte^ or through the intervention of a
fact which is distinguishable from the law, and to which
the law annexes the right as a consequence or effect.

Having tried to suggest the distinction between rights
arising from titleSy and rights arising from laws immediately
or directlyy I will advert briefly to the following topics.

I will first advert to the nature of the few, and compara¬
tively unimportant, rights, which arise from the law imme¬
diately (in the proper signification of the phrase): that is
to say, not through a fact distinguishable from the law by
' which the right is conferred.

I will then advert to the functions ot titles: or, in other
wordsi to the reasons for which rights are comnionly con-


JURI8TUUD14NCE.


93


fcrre.1 by laws through titles; and for which facts of certain
descriptions are selected to servo as titles, in preference to
facts of oilier descriptions.

•Bhe only rights which arise from laws immediately, are,
I think, of the class of rights which are strictly .personal
privileges.

And here I must remark, that every privilege properly so
called is a strictly personal privilege: that is to say, an ano¬
malous right (or an anomalous immunity from duty) which
is conferred by a law (also called a privilege) on a specifi¬
cally determined person (individual or complex), as being
that very person. Tor example: A monopoly granted to
Styles, as being the individual Styles, is a strictly personal
privilege: It is given to the very individual, as being the
very individual, and therefore is not assignable or trans¬
missible to his representatives. A monopoly granted to a
corporate body, as being that very body, is also a personal
privilege, for it is not exercisable by any but the complex
person to whom it is granted specifically.

But though every privilege, properly so called, is, as it
seems to me, a strictly personal privilege, the term is ex¬
tended to certain anomalous lights (or to certain anoma¬
lous immunities from duty or obligation) which are not
conferred on specifically determined persons as being those
very persons.

for example : Certain so-called privileges are privilegia
rei, or privileges conferred on preedia : meaning by a privi-
legium reij or a privilegium conferred on a prasdium^ a pri¬
vilege conferred on its successive owners or occupants as
being such owners or occupants.

And of personal privileges (or of privileges conferred upon
persons as not being owners or occupants of specifically
determined pradia) some are transmissible and assignable
to the heirs and alienees of the grantees, and are not ex¬
clusively exercisable by the very grantees themselves.

, But, strictly speaking, a privilegium ret (or a privilege


94


LBCTUREB ON


granted to the occupants of a given pradtum) is not a pri¬
vilege. It is not granted to the parties as being those very
parties, but as being persons of a given class, or as being
persona who answer to a given generic description ;-*-as
being owners or occupants of tlic pradium or parcel of land,
whereon, by an ellipsis, the privilege is said to be conferred.

Though the class of persons entitled in succession is com¬
paratively narrow, the right may be likened to those ano¬
malous rights which are occasionally granted to extensive
classes of persons: as, for example, to soldiers, to infants, or
to married women. And in these cases although the right,
as being anomalous, is styled dnffulary and the law confer¬
ring the right is also styled singular^ neither the anomalous
right, nor the anomalous law conferring it, is deemed or
styled a privilege.

For though the law and the right are “ exorbitant ’* or
“ eccentric,” although the law and the right are “singular” or
“ inelegant,” or although they arc not in keeping or harmony
with the general tenor or spiiit of the legal system, the
right is conferred on the parties as answering to a generic
description; or the right is conferred on the parties as be¬
longing to a class of persons, and is not coiiferred on speci¬
fically determined persons as bearing their individual or
specific characters. *

A so-called personal privilege transmissible to heirs or
assigns, is, in so far as it is so transmissible, in the
same predicament with a privilegium ret. In respect of
the person to whom it is first granted,* it may be deemed
a privilege. For, in respect of that person, it is granted
to a party specifically determined as bearing his indivi¬
dual or specific character. But, in respect of the heirs of
that person, or in respect of the persons to whom he may
assign it, it is not a privilege properly so called. The law
confers it upon them, not as being specifically determined
persons, but as being persons of generic descriptions or
classes: that is to say, as being the persons who answer to


JURISPRUDENCE.


95


the description of his heirs, or as being persons within the
description of his alienees. And, accordingly, although
the first grantee may acquire by the law directly, it is
utterly impossible (as I shall show immediately) that his
heirs or alienees should take from the law without the in¬
tervention of a title.

Every privilege properly so called, is, therefore, as it seems
to me, a strictly personal privilege: an anomalous or eccen¬
tric right (or an anomalous or eccentric immunity from duty
or obligation) which is conferred on a person specifically
determined as being that very person. Whether the per¬
son be physical or individual, or fictitious and complex (or
composed of many individuals,) is irrelative to the matter
in hand. The essence of a privilege properly so called, is,
it appears to me, this: that the eccentric or anomalous right
is conferred on a specific person, not as belonging to a class
of persons, but as bearing the specific character peculiar to
him or it.

Now a privilege propmdy so called, or a strictly personal
privilege, may be conferred by the privilege (as meaning
the law which confers it) immediately or directly: that is
to say, without the intervention of a fact distinguishable
from the law itself. All that is necessary to the creation
«f the right, is the designation of the specific person by his
specific character or marks, and a declaration or intimation
that the right shall reside in that specified party.

I say that the privilege may be conferred by the law
immediately or directly. For even in the case of a strictly
personal privilege, the law may confer the right through a
tille. For example: It may grant a privilege to a person
now an infant in case he shall come of age. On which
supposition, the privilege will not rest unless the infant
come of age; and the fact of his coming of age, is therefore
a title, or investitive fact, necessary to the consummation of
the right.

But though a strictly personal privilege may be conferred


96


LFXTUBKS ON


by the law through a title^ a title, or iuvestitivc fact, is not
absolutely necessary to the* being of the eccentric right. All
that is absolutely necessary to the existence of a right of the
class, is a mere designation in the law of the person on whom
it is conferred, coupled with sonic declaration or intimation
that that person shall take it.

But where a right is not properly a privilege, (or is not
conferred on a specific person as being that specific person,)
the right arises of necessity through a tiile: through a fact
distinguishable from the law conferring the right, and to
which the law annexes the right as a consequence or efibet.

For example: If you acquire by occupancy, or by alien¬
ation, or by praescription, you do not acquire as being the
individual you^ but because you have occupied the subject,
or have received it from the alienor, or have enjoyed it ad¬
versely for a given time, agreeably to the provision of the
rule of lawovhich annexes the right to a fact of that de¬
scription.

And the same may be said of tlie privileges improperly
so called, which are either rei (or privileges an¬

nexed to preedia), or are so-styled personal privileges i)assing
to heirs or alienees. It is ns being the occupant of the thing,
and not as being the very person who then happens to oc-
ciqiy it, that the occupant of the thing acquires the so called
privilege. And it is as being the heir or the alienee of the
first grantee, and not as being the very person who is heir
or alienee, that the heir or alienee of the first grantee takes
the privilege mis*styled personal.

In short, wherever the law confers a right, 7iot on a spe¬
cific person os being such, the law of necessity confers the
right through the intervention of a title. For, by the sup¬
position, the person entitled is not determined by the law
through any mark specifically peculiar to himself. And if
the right were not annexed to a title, it follows that the
person designed to take it could liot be determined by the
' law at all.


JURISPRUDENCE.


97


Instead, therefore, of determining directly, that the right
shall vest or reside in a specifically determined person, as
being such, the law determines that the right shall reside
in any person whatever who shall stand in some given re¬
lation to a fact of some given class.

It is manifest that duties, as well as rights, may arise
from the law immediate^ or may arise from the law through
the intervention of facts to which the law annexes them.

Where the duty is relative, it arises from the very fact
which engenders the corresponding right. Consequently,
If the right be a privilege properly so cfdlcd, the relative
duty, as well as the right, may arise from the law immedi¬
ately. If the right arise from a title, the relative duty as
well as the right must arise from a title also.

In the case of absolute duties, the duty may either be
imposed on a specified person as such, or may be imposed
on a person through an intervening fact. In the first of
those cases, the duty may be imposed by the law immedi¬
ately or directly. In the latter of those cases, the fact
through which the law imposes the duty, may also be styled
a title. For, for the reasons which I shall assign hereafter,
I apply the term title to every fact whatever, through which
the law confers or extinguishes a right, or imposes, or ex¬
onerates from a duty.

And what I have said of rights and duties in respect of
their commencement, will apply to rights and duties in re¬
spect of their termination: For a right or a duty may ter¬
minate by a specific provision of the law exclusively appli¬
cable to the specific instance; On which supposition, it
may terminate by the law' without the intervention of a fact
distinct from the law which extinguishes it; and it there¬
fore may be said to terminate by the mere operation of law.
Or the right or the duty may terminate through, or in con¬
sequence of, a fact to which the law has imparted that
extinctive effect. On which supposition, the right or duty

VOL. HI. H


98


liECTURES ON


may be said to terminate through, or in consequence of, a

tiUe.

I win now briefly advert to the functions of Titles; or, in
other words, to the reasons for which rights and duties are
commonly conferred and imposed through titles, and for
which facts of some kinds are selected to serve as titles, in
preference to facts of other kinds.

It is I believe impossible, that every right and duty
should be conferred and imposed by the law immediately.
For, on that supposition, all tlie rights and duties of every
member of the community, would be conferred and imposed
on every member of the commuiiity by a system or body of
law specially constructed for his peculiar guidance: since
every right or duty conferred or imposed by the law imme¬
diately, is conferred or imposed on a person determined by
the law specifically.

It is only in comparatively few, and comparatively unim¬
portant cases, that rights or duties can be created or extin¬
guished by the mere operation of the law. Generally speak¬
ing, rights must be conferred and extinguished, and duties
imposed or withdrawn, through titles.

Independently, therefore, of every other consideration,
titles are necessary as marks or signs to detcririine the com¬
mencement of rights or duties, and to determine their end.
In other words, titles determine the several rights, and the
several duties, which respectively reside in, or are respec¬
tively incumbent upon, the several members of the com¬
munity.

'Pities are necessary, because the law, in conferring and
imposing rights and duties, and in divesting them, necessa¬
rily proceeds on general principles or maxims. It confers
and imposes on, or divests from, persons, not as being spe¬
cifically determined, but as belonging to certain classes.
And the title determines the person to the class.

But though the facts which serve as titles mark the be-


JURl^PBUDKNCE.


99


giiinings nnd endings of rights and duties, it is not (gene¬
rally speaking) for that reason only that the law imparts to
those facts their creative and extinctive effects.

Independently of a given title serving as such a mark,
there is generally another reason why it is selected as a title;
A reason founded on utility, partial or general, well or ill
understood. It is deemed expedient that the given fact should
perform the functions of a tille, in preference to other facts,
which, as mere marks, might perhaps perform the functions
erpially well. For example: Considering a title as a mere
mark determining the commencement of a right, it would
be utterly indifferent whether a man’s lands and goods passed
on his decease to his children or to his remoter relations.

Blit for certain reasons founded on obvious utility, his
hinds nnd goods generally pass to his children in preference
to his remoter relations.


100


LECTURES jON


NOTES.

Meanings of the word Privilege in English Law.
Privil^e never denotes, as it did in tbe Roman Law, a law ;
It sometimes seems to denote a right enjoyed by a peculiar class;
In this sense it belongs to the Law of Persons: Sometimes it
seems to denote rights enjoyed by tlic subject against the Sove¬
reign. Origin of this meaning.

[See a»/e, “Liberty;” “Limitation of sovereign power.”
Monopolies.* ArUe, “ Jus in re et ad rem.”]


Remarks on Terms.

Objection to the term “ Titleas used by the English Lawyers.

Though it denotes the facts to which the l^w annexes rights,
it docs not denote completely the facts through which 4t deter¬
mines rights.

Where the fact which determines a right does not at the same
time give commenccnient to another, the terra “ title” docs not
apply to it. Further, it is not applicable to facts as engender¬
ing or extinguishing duties, be they relative or be they absolute.

[For another use of the word “ title,” by English Lawyers, see
Table II.

The same objections apply to “ mode of acquisition.” We can¬
not talk of acquiring a duty. Nor will acquisition apply to the
termination of a right or duty. [Mr. Bentham's suggestions;
Traites, vol. i. p. 280.tj

* Bcnthain, Princ.: pp. 229-292.

f “ Mr. Bi'niham’s suggestions ” are iivfavour of “ unc scrie de mots qui
se correspondent; ou \in nom pour le yenre, et des tcniics sp6eiiique8 sub-
ordoniu’s. Prenez Ic mot Utre, la ramitiration logique s’arretc au premier
pas. Point d'especcs de titres,” etc. The terms suggested by Mr. Bcntimm
are arranged in the following tabular form, in the niaigin of the book.

Bispositive

t

1 ' 1

Investitive Divestitive


Coliative. Impositive. ' Bestitutive. Exonerative.

Privative.

Mr. Austin’s objection to these terms will be found further on.— 8. A.


JURISPRUDENCE.


101


I shall use iitU in the large sense which I have already an¬
nexed to the term; ». c. as denoting any fact through which the
law invests or divests a rights or imposes or withdraws a duty.


THuhtSf by Blackstone^ denotes divestitive as well as investitive
events.

1. Titulus.

2. Duration of right (including certainty or continuity of ter¬
mination).

3. Commencement, whether of right or enjoyment, (and then
determination of preceding rights.)

4. Severally and commonly.

5. Extent of right in respect of power of using, deriving ser¬
vices from, or dealing with the subject.

Quaere. Whether power of aliening (which as against succes¬
sors is a sort of annihilation) belong to this, or to duration ?

Things^ or subjects of rights also considered under this last
head.— Margiml Note in Blackstme, vol. ii. chap. 23, p. 381.


Terminology.

I shall use indifferently, “ mode of acquisition, title, cause, in¬
vestitive event,^* etc.: uidcss 1 attach specially a more special
meaning.*

Various circumlocutions, after the manner of the Roman Law¬
yers, may also be used. They have no settled generic terms.

''Jurium amissionis causje.” ' " Solutio, cxtinctio, etc. etc.'^f

No settled name, in the Roman law, for facts determining rights
and duties.

By Roman Lawyers, and in the language of'the derivative
systems, titulua never means a title in the sense of mode of ac¬
quisition.

The names of Tituli ought to be the names of the incidents
which give rise to rights and obligations, and not of the rights
and obligations themselves, or of their subjects.

" Titvlua ” is applicable to the incidents which give rise to Jura
ad Rem^ as well as to those which beget Jura in Re: But is not

• Mackeldey, vol. ii. p. 40. f Hugo, Gesch. pp. 2t9, 676.


102


LECTURES ON


applicable to incidents as begetting obligations, whether th^ be
absolute or relative, or whether they correspond with Jus in Re
or Jus ad Rjem. Nor is it applicable to incidents which put an
end to, or to incidents as putting an end to, either rights or
obligations. ** Modes in which obligations are extinguished or
removed/* seems to be the only expression in the Roman law for
this purpose; and that only applies to obligations, stricto sensu.*

Similar remark made before, about capacities and faculties.

Objections to the term Title in the seme of the English Law¬
yers ;—

1. That though it denotes the incident which gives begin¬
ning to a right, it does not denote the incident which puts an
end to it, or only by implication; (connotes but not <fciiotes);

2. That it only connotes the incident as giving origin to the
corresponding obligation, and as putting an end to it.

There is the same objection to Acquisition,'^ or Modus ac-
quirendi. In the sense in which the term “ TUulus ** is used
by the Roman Lawyers, it denotes, not a mode of acquisition, but
a condition necessary to the efficacy of a mode of acquisition:
viz. tradition (or rather the incident of which tradition is the evi¬
dence). " Causa remotior: Consideration.** (See Table II., post.)

Another objection to “ title ** (and perhaps to “ mode of acqui¬
sition**) is,—that it is partial, even with regard to the incidents
which give beginning to rights. It is not applicable to the inci¬
dents which give beginning to Jura ad Rem. {Sed Qe.)

The Roman Lawyers seem to extend " acquisition" to rights
ex contractu and quasi ex contractu, and even to rights ex delicto.

Objection to ** investitive and divestitive incidents**; that in
common language “ vest,” invest,” etc., only apply to vested
rights.

“Modes (or Incidents) in which Rights, and Obligatiom, begin,
and end,**' avoid all these inconveniences ; extending even to the
obligations wbich begin in crimes.

Mode, like title or incident, denotes, properly, the fact stripped
of its evidentiary and other conditional matter.

* Hugo, Gescli. p. 263. Bloiideuu, vi.


JUttl8PUUDJfiNCJE.


103


LECTURE LVI.

Continuing the disquisition concerning Titles in general,
which I began in my last Lecture, I would remark, that
titles (or the facts through which the law confers and divests
lights, or, through which the law imposes and withdraws
duties) are divisible into simple and complex.

A title may consist of a fact which is deemed one and
indivisible: Or a title may consist of a fact which is not
deemed one and indivisible, but is esteemed a number of
single and indivisible facts compacted into a collective
whole.*

And here it is obvious to remark, that every title is really
complex. In the case, for example, of acquisition by occu¬
pancy, (which perhaps is the least complex of all titles,) the
title, though deemed simple, consists, at the least, of three
distinguishable facts: namely, the negative fact that the
subject occupied has no previous owner; the positive fact
of the occupation, or of the apprehension or taking posses¬
sion of the subject; and the positive fact of the intention,
on the part of the occupant, of appropriating the subject to
himself:— animus rent sibi habendi.

Nay, each of the simpler facts into which a title deemed
simple is immediately resolvable, may itself be resolved into
facts which are still more simple or elementary. The nega¬
tive fact, for example, that the thing acquired by occupancy
is res nullius^ is the absence or negation of that multitude
of facta which are imported by the positive fact of a thing
• Bcriihom, Trail^s, vol. i. p. 273.


104


LECTURES ON


being owned already. And the fact of the apprehension or
taking possession, or the animus or intention, on the part
of the occupant, rem. sibi habeudi^ is also resolvable into a
number of facts which it would take a long treatise to dis¬
tinguish and describe.

Consequently, a so-called simple title is a title consisting
of parts, which, for the purpose contemplated by the speaker,
it is not necessary to distinguish: whilst a so-called com¬
plex title is a title consisting of parts, which, for the same
purpose, it is necessary to consider separately. The terms
simple and complex, as applied to titles, are merely relative
expressions. For one and the same title as viewed from
different aspects, or one and the same title as considered to
different purposes, may be simple and complex.

If the distinction of titles into simple and complex have
any other meaning than the one which 1 have now men¬
tioned, that other meaning is founded on a difference of de¬
grees.—Though all titles are complex, some arc more com¬
plex than others. And such as arc more, and such as arc
less complex, may he divided loosely into complex and sim¬
ple, and distinguished by those epithets.

According to Mr. Beiitham, in his "^Vue genhalc d*uti
Corps de Droit,"' the distinguishable facts which constitute
a complex title, are divisible, in some cases, into principal"
and accessoTi'y" Looking at the rationale of the distinc¬
tion which he seems to have in view, (and which is a dis¬
tinction of great practical moment,) 1 should think that es¬
sential or intrinsic, and accidental or advefititious, would be
more significant than principal and accessory.

The rationale of the distinction appears to be this:

As I remarked in my last lecture, titles serve as signs
or marks, to denote that such or such rights have vested in
such oT such persons ; that such or such duties are incum-
beot on such or such persons; that such or such rights have
ceased or been divested, or that such or such duties have
been withdrawn or removed. In other words, it is through


JURISPRUDENCE.


105


the medium of titlest (except in the comparatively few, and
comparatively unimportant, cases, wherein rights and duties
ai’e conferred and imposed by the law immediate, or are di¬
vested and withdrawn by the law immediate^ that the re¬
spective rights and duties of the several members of the
community arc distributed or assigned. Setting aside those
comparatively few, and comparatively unimportant cases,
persona arc invested and burthened with rights and duties,
or arc divested and discharged of rights and duties, not as
being determined by their specific or peculiar characters,
but as belonging to classes of persons. And it is tlirough
the medium of the various titles, that they are determined
respectively to those various classes.

Hut, as I also remarked in my last lecture, it is seldom
that a right or duty is annexed to a title, or that a right or
duty is divested or withdrawn by a title, merely because
the title serves as such a mark. For, if the title merely
served as a mark to fix the commencement or determination

a

of the right or duty, almost any fact might serve the turn
as well as the fact which is the title. There arc generally
certain reasons, derived from the natiirc of the fact which
serves as a title, why such or such a right should be an¬
nexed to that fact rather than another, why such or such a
duty should be annexed to that fact rather than another,
or why that fact rather than another should divest such or

m

such a right or duty.

In short, a title serves to mark, that this or that person
has been invested or burthened with this or that right or
this or that duty: or a title serves to mark, that this or that
person has been divested of, or exonerated from, this or
that right or this or that duty. But, independently of its
use in serving as such a mark, there are generally or always
reasons, derived from the nature of the fact which is the
title, why the given person should be so invested or biir-
thened, (or should be so divested or exonerated,) through,
or in consequence of, that very fact.


106


LECTURES ON


Now it may happen, that, looking at the reasons or pur¬
poses for which a given right is annexed to a given title, all
the facts of which the title is constituted are of its very es¬
sence. In other words, the right could not arise (consist¬
ently with those reasons or purposes) through or in conse¬
quence of the title, if any of the simpler facts into which
the title is resolvable were not an ingredient or an inte¬
grant part of it.

But it may also happen, that, looking at the reasons or
purposes for which a given right Hi annexed to a given title,
one or more of the facts of which the title is constituted are
not of its very essence. In other words, the right might arise
(consistently with those reasons or purposes) through or in
consequence of the title, though one or more of the facts of
which the title is compounded were not constituent parts
of it.

For example: Looking at the reasons for which a con¬
vention is made legally obligatory, or for which legal rights
and duties arc conferred and imposed on the parties to the
agreement, a promise by the one party, and an acceptance
of the promise by the other party, are of the essence of the
title.

But, in certain cases, a convention is not legally binding,
unless the promise be reduced to writing, and the writing
be signed by the promisor: or unless the promise be couched
in' a writing of a given form; or (generally) unless the con¬
tracting parties observe some solemnity which has no ne¬
cessary connexion with the promise and acceptance.

Now, though the given solemnity, let it be what it may,
is, in all such cases, a constituent part of the title, it is not
of the essence of the title. For, looking at the general rea¬
sons for which, conventions generally are' made obligatory,
or at the particular reasons for which rights and duties are
aniiexed to conventions of a particular class, the right and
duty might arise, (consistently with those reasons,) although
the solemnity were no portion of the title. The solemnity


JUKI8PEUDENCE.


107


may be convenient evidence of that which is essential to the
title, but, though it is a part of the title, it is not necessa¬
rily such.

Now where the right might arise, (consistently with the
reasons for which it is annexed to the title,) though some
of the facts constituting the title were not component parts
of it, the several facts into which the title is resolvable may
be divided into essential and accidental^ intrinsic and adven-
titious, or (in the language of Mr. Benthain) principal and
accessory. The facts which are essential or principal are
parts of the title, because they are absolutely necessary to
the accomplishment of the purposes for which the right is
annexed to the title by the lawgiver. But the facts which
are accidental or accessory, arc constituent parts of the title,
not because they are necessary to the accomplishment of
those purposes, but for some reason foreign to those pur¬
poses, or merely to render their accomplishment more sure
or commodious.

The distinction between essential or principal, and acci¬
dental or accessory facts, may hold in the case of a title
which merely imposes a duty, or which divests or with¬
draws a right or duty, as well as in the case of a title which
invests with a right. Butj for the sake of simplifying my
language as much as I can, I confine myself to titles con¬
sidered as investing with rights.

Where some of the elements of a title are accidental oj*
accessory, they (generally speaking) are merely subservient
to the essential or principal parts of it. For example: They
serve as enidenccy preappointed by the law, that that which
is substantially the title has happened. This is the case,
wherever tradition or delivery of the subject, or a writing
with or without seal, or an entiy or minute of the fact in
a register, or any other solemnity of the like nature, is a
constituent part of a valid alienation of a thing of a given
class.

The essentials of the alicuation, as between the alienor


108


LECTURES OR


and alienee, are a free will and intention on the part of the
former to divest himself of the right, and to invest the other
with it; an acceptance of the proffered right by the alienee;
and some fact, or another, evincing or signifying such in¬
tention and acceptance. The tradition, the writing, the
entry in the register, or the other solemnity, is merely evi¬
dence, required or preappointed by the law, of that which is
essentially the title.

Some evidence of the intention and acceptance is indeed
absolutely necessary. But evidence other than the solem¬
nity which is a constituent part of the title, (as, for example,
a verbal declaration,) might also serve as evidence of the
intention and acceptance. The case of a writing, or other
solemnity, which is merely preappointed evidence of the
facts that arc essentially the title, but which nevertheless is
a constituent part of the title, shows clearly the nature of
the distinction between the essential or principal, and the
accidental or accessory parts of a title.

The evidentiary fact is made a part of the title, or is ren¬
dered necessary to the validity of the title, in order that
that evidence of the substance of the title, which the law¬
giver exacts, may be provided by the party or parties with
whom the title originates.

The invalidity or nullity of the title, in case the eviden¬
tiary fact be not a constituent part of it, is the sanction of
the rule of law by which the evidence is required. But it is
clear that the rule of law might be sanctioned otherwise:
and that, if it were sanctioned otherwise, the preappointed
evidence, though still requisite, would be no part of the
title.

For example; The absence o? the given solemnity, in¬
stead of nullifying the title, (or being made a presumption,
juris et de jure^ that the title had not accrued,) might be made
a presumption primd facie: that is to say, a presumption
which the pai'ty insisting on the title might be at liberty to
rebut, by explaining the reason why the prescribed solein-


JURISPRUDENCE.


109


nity had not been observed, and by producing evidence,
other than the pre-appointed solemnity, that the title had
accrued.

Or the absence of the given solemnity might be visited
on the party bound to observe it, not by nullifying his title,
but by punishing him with a pecuniary fine.

And, on either of these suppositions, the prescribed so¬
lemnity, though still prescribed or exacted, would not be
indispensable evidence of the substance of the title, or (what
is the same thing) w'ould not be a constituent part of the
whole title. For, it is manifest, that, wherever an eviden¬
tiary fact is indispensable evidence of a given title, that
evidentiary fact is a component part of the title, although
it is not an essential part, but is merely an accidental or
adventitious one.

I have said above, that where some of the elements of a
title arc non-essential, they (generally speaking) are merely
subservient to the essential parts of it. In other words,
though they are not absolutely necessary to the accomplish¬
ment of the purposes for which the law annexes the right
to the title, they tend to render the accomplishment of those
purposes more certain or commodious. This, for example,
is the case, where a solemnity which is merely evidentiary
of the title, is made in effect a part of the title, inasmuch
as the title is not complete or valid, in case the solemnity
be not observed by the parties.

But it not unfrequently happens, that the accidental parts
of a title are in no respect subservient to its essential or
principal parts. In other words, they are completely foreign
to the reasons or purposes for which the right in question
is annexed by the law to the title.

This, for example, is the case, wherever a deed or other
writing is indispensable evidence of the title, and where
moreover the writing is not admissible evidence, in case a
shimp was not affixed to it when the alleged title arose. In
this instance, the stamp is made a part of the title, not be-


110


liECTURES ON


cause it. has any connexion with the essentials or substance
of the title, but to secure the due payment of a given tax.

And here, again, the distinction between the essentials
and the accidentals of the title is glaring and manifest.

The nullity or invalidity of the title, in case the stamp be
not affixed when the alleged title arises, is the mnetion of
the law which imposes the tax. But it is clear that the law
imposing the tax might be sanctioned otherwise: As, for
example, by a fine on the party, whose duty it was, when
the alleged title arose, to pay the tax, and to procure the
fixation of the stamp to the evidentiary instrument.

In practice, the law imposing the tax is often sanctioned
in the manner which I am now suggesting.—Although the
duty ought to have been paid, and the stamp affixed to the
evidentiary instrument, when, or immediately after, the al¬
leged title arose, still the instrument is admissible evidence
of the title, if a double tax be paid, and a stamp be affixed
to the instrument, subsequenfJy to the time prescribed for
those purposes. And, in this case, the payment of the tax,
though still requisite, is no part of the title.

Before 1 quit the topic now under consideration, I would
remark, that, in many cases, it is not easy to distinguish the
essential or principal, from the accidental or accessory ele¬
ments of a title.

This, for example, is the case, where an accidental element
is made a part of the title, because it is deemed commodious
evidence of the substance or essence of the title. Here, the
evidentiary fact is an accidental part of the title, not abso¬
lutely, but only in a qualified manner. For %onie evidence
of the title is indispensable or necessary, inasmuch as the
title could* not be sustained, (in case it should be impugned,)
if some evidence of it be not forthcoming or producible.

The preappointed evidence is therefore an accidental or
accessory part of the title, not because evidence is not essen¬
tial to the validity of the title, but because evidence of the
dam or description which the law preappoints or prescribes,


JURISPRUDENCE.


Ill


is not the only evidence by which the title might be sus¬
tained. The law might leave the parties to provide what
evidence they pleased of the title; and might empower the
tribunals to admit the evidence provided by the parties, if
they deemed it satisfactory. By determining therefore that
evidence of a sort shall be indispensable, the law adjects to
the title an element which is properly accidental or accessory.

And the same may be said of every case, in which a fact
of a given genus is inseparable from the title, but in which
the law detqpnines the species or sort.

For example: Assuming that acceptance by the heir is a
necessary part of his title to the heritage, but that the law
prescribes, under pain of nullity, the form or manner of the
acceptance, it is clear that the prescribed acceptance is an
accidental part of the title, in so far only as the law deter¬
mines the manner of the acceptance, instead of leaving him
to accept it in any manner whatever.

I assume, merely for the sake of example, that the assent
or acceptance of the heir is a necessary ingredient in every
title to a heritage. In truth, it is not. For, in the earlier
Roman Law, there were certain heirs, styled heredes neces-
sariit upon whom tlie heirship, with the acquittal of the
deceased’s obligations, was imposed as a duty. Though,
afterwards, they were enabled, by taking certain steps, to
repudiate the heirship: or, at least, were only bound to ac¬
quit tlie obligations of the deceased, in so far as the faculties
or means devolving from him would sufhcc for that purpose.

[v. V. Qe. Whether acceptance by the heir, be, in the English
law, necessary ?

I should think it is, because, without seisin, which is a volun¬
tary act, he is not heir.

Originally, the seisin was the feudal investiture: the accep¬
tance from the lord of the fee. And to this the heir could not
have been constrained.

At all events, he is not answerable beyond assets.]^

• “ By inheritaoce the title is vested in a person, not by his own act


112


LECTURES ON


1 have insisted on the distinction between the essential
and the accidental parts of a title, because they arc often
confounded. This is particularly the case, as I shall show
hereafter, where the accidental parts are merely evidence,
predetermined by the law, of that which is substantially the
title itself.

I said, in my last lecture, that wherever a right or duty
is conferred or imposed by a law through an intervening or
mediate fact^ or wlicrevcr a right or duty is divested or
withdrawn by a law through an intervening or ii#ediate fact,
the right or duty may be said to be conferred or imposed,
or may be said to^be divested or withdrawn, through, or in
consequence of, a title .* meaning by a title, such intervening
or mediate fact.

I also said, that wherever a right or duty is conferred or
imposed by a law without the intervention of a fact distinct
from the law itself or vrherever a right or duty is divested
or withdrawn by a law without the intervention of a fact
distinct from the law itself, the right or duty may be said
to be conferred or imposed, or to be divested or Avithdrawn,
by the law, immediately or directly: or the right or duty
may be said to be conferred or imposed, or divested or
withdrawn, ipso jure; by the act or operation of the law;
or by the were act or operation of the law.

And this, 1 apprehend, is the correct, as it is the obvious,
meaning, of all such expressions as the following: namely,
“ rights and duties e,v legef ** rights and duties ex lege im¬
mediate/’ “ rights and duties which are divested and extin¬
guished immediate;’ ** rights and duties which arise,
or are divested or extinguished ipso jure;” or “which are

or agreement, but by the single operation of law.” Blackstonc, vol. ii.
p. 241.

UifToring in this from the Homan heir, whose adilio (or some equivalent
act) was a necessaiy link in the chain of title: The English heir (it is pre¬
sumed) is obliged to repudiate; and qumre; the manner of this at Common
Law ?—Marginal Note.


JURISPRUDENCE. 118

created, or divested or extin^ished, by act or operation of
law.”

But in the language of our own law, and of other par-
ticular systems of positive law, these and the like expres¬
sions are not used with the meaning, or hot used exclusively
with the meaning, which is obviously the proper one. In
the language of our own, and of other particular systems,
they are always or commonly applied improperly: in cases,
that is to say, in which the right or duty is not created or
divested by a law without the intervention of a fact distinct
front the law itself; but is really created or divested by a
law through a mediate or intervening fact: that is to say,
through a title.

These improper applications of the expressions which I
have just enumerated, and of various other expressions of
the same purport, may be reduced, I think, to two.

First, in some cases of title, the title, or one or more of the
several facts constituting the title, is some act done by the
I)crson who is invested with the right, who is divested of the
right, on whom the duty is imposed, or who is exonerated
from the duty. But in other cases%f title, neither the title,
nor any of the several facts constituting the title, is an act
done by that person. The will of the person (with reference
to all the facts which constitute the title) is perfectly quiescent:
or if his will be active, it is merely active in the way of for¬
bearance from some given act. Now where the title is in
this latter predicament, the right or duty is said to arise, or
to be divested or withdrawn, *Hege immediate^*; “ipso jure**;
“ by act or operation of law”; “by m&re act or operation of
law”; and so on: These and the like expressions really de¬
noting, {pot that the right or duty is invested or divested
without the intervention of any title, but) that the title, by
which the right or duty is invested or divested, is not any
act of the invested or divested person, and does not com¬
prise any act of that same person.

For example; According to the Roman law, heirs of cer-
voL. m. I


114


LECTURES ON


tain classes^ whether they be heirs ex festamentOf or heirs
ab intestato, are not heirs completely, unless they accept the
heritage. And, accordingly, such heirs are styled volaniary^
or arc said to acquire by their own act. But on heirs of
other classes, the inheritance devolves, whether they wish it
or not, on the decease of the testator or intestate, without
an act of their own. And, accordingly, such heirs are styled
neceesary, (or heirs necessitated or obliged to take,) and arc
said to take the lieritage ipao jure, or, as we should say, by
mere operation of law.

Again : Where, according to our own law, a man grants
a particular estate (as an estate for years or life) to one,
with a remainder over to another, the remainder is said to
be created by his own act. But where he grants a par¬
ticular estate, and docs not part with the remnant of his
own estate, that remnant is styled a reversion, and is said
to arise by the act or operation of law. For though by the
grant of the particular estate he does an net, he does no act
in respect of the remnant, but the remnant continues in
him, or, if you will, revci'ts to him, through his mere omis¬
sion or forbearance from granting it away.

Again: According to the later Roman law, the absolute
property rei ainyula cannot be acquired commonly without
an apprehension or a taking possession of the thing by the
acquirer: by an apprehension consequent on tradition, in
case the thing be acquired thi*ongh an alienation, or by an
apprehension without tradition, in case the thing be ab-
quired otherwise than through an alienation. But, in some
cases, property vests in the acquirer without an act of ap¬
prehension. And in these eases, the passing or vesting of
the property is styled by modem civilians “ tranaitua leya-
lia that is to say, it passes by the law to 'the acquirer,
without an act of his own, or, at least, without an appre-
liensiop by him: without that act of apprehension by him.


* Tliibaut, System, vol. ii. p. 32.


JUBISPBUDSNCE. 116

which, in the other cases to which the cases in. question are
opposed, that particular act on his part is requisite.

2dly. Another improper application of the expressions in
question seems to be this :

Certain classes of titles, or of modes of acquisitiQn, have
condae names: as, for example, “occupancy,” “alienation,”
“ praescription,” and so on.

But other classes, having no concise names, and not being
expressible without long circumlocutions, they are com¬
monly lumped up together, and opposed to the classes which
have such names, by the expression “ cse lege^* “ ex lege
aimplicitery “ ex lege hmiediatey etc. This, at least, ap¬
pears to be one of the meanings which are annexed by the
Roman lawyers and the modern Civilians to such expres¬
sions as “ rights and duties ex lege^ “ ex lege aimplicitery
and so on.

8dly. There is perhaps a third improper meaning of the
expressions which I am now examining.*

“ Operation of lawy in some cases is a merely negative
expression: denoting that the party acquires without an
act of his own. But where parties contemplate and embrace
consequences preappointed, these can hardly be said to arise
without an act of their own.

• Bcnilmm, Traits, vol. i. p. 287.


1 2


116


LECTURES OR


LECTURE LVII.

[The following Lecture is the last given by Mr. Austin at the
Loudon University. It was delivered on the 26th of June,
1832, after which he was compelled by ill health to terminate his
course abruptly, and go abroad.

He ’ had begun to write the lecture, but could get no further
than these notes, which, as the reader will see, arc but sugges¬
tions for his spoken discourse.

There remains a mass of papers containing heads of the sub¬
jects which he had treated, or which he intended to treat. It
has not been thought expedient to print them. I have, however,
made an exception in the case of the Notes ''on Contracts
and Quasi-Contracts,” which evidently were intended to form
the groundwork of the next Lecture. They are referred to at
p. 121.— S. A."]

In my two last Lectures, agreeably to the order which I
announced in the Lecture preceding them, I submitted to
your attention certain remarks applicable to titles in ge¬
neral.

I now proceed to certain leading divisions of the titles
which properly belong to the department of the .Law of
Things, through which I am now travelling: namely, the
titles by which rights in rent, considered as existing per ae,
are acquired or lost, or invested and divested.

But even in considering these titles, 1 shall be obliged
to advert occasionally to titles of other classes.

These various divisions are disparate and cross. They
are variouEi attempts to find a basis for a classification or
arraugement of the various genera and species of titles. I


JURISFBUDENCE.


117


am not certain that any such is practicable or useful:-—
whether it be not bet^r to select the principal titles, and •
then to add a miscellany— ex lege.

This is the case in Blackstone, * (be French Code,’ Ulpian,
Bentham. In none of these is there any attempt to reduce
in the first instance the whole mass of titles into two, three,
or some small number, of very extensive genera, and then
refer the various subordinate genera and species to them.
They begin by placing on a line a considerable number of
genera which are comparatively narrow: and perhaps eke
out these by a miscellaneous head.

The great difficulty is the mixed character of most of
the titles which in every system occur.

Titles ex Jure Gentium and ex Jure CivUi.

Modes of acquisition ex jure civili are many of them not
peculiar, but are merely peculiar modes of modes which
may be deemed universal: modes accompanied by peculiar
formalities.

(HeinecduB, lib. ii. tit. i.-vi.)

Inconvenience of the division into titles ex jure gentium
and ex jure civili as a basis for a classification.

The arrangement of titles in Gaius and the Institutes,
mainly founded on this division.

(See Gains, lib. ii. Inst. lib. ii.)

Absurd mode in the Institutes of placing servitudes be¬
tween these two sorts of titles; servitudes being ex jure
civili.

Acquisitions per miversitatem are not included under
either department.

But the distinction between praetorian and civil law does
not quadrate with the distinction in question.

The only practical consequence of the distinction (as I
have remarked already,) applies to crimes juris gentium
and crimes jure civili.


118


LECTURES ON


Original and Derivative Titles,

Import of the distinction. Its inconvenience as a basis
for a classification of titles. Would separate modes of
acquisition which it is convenient to consider together; as,
e,g,: occupation of a subject nvllim —or by dereliction.

Succession not co-extensive with derivation. As, e,g.: in
the case of constitutive alienation. So in the case of com-
mixtion, specification, etc.

Succession sometimes means succession to the dead, ess
testamento or ah intestato.

Investitive events are original or derivative: i. ^. acquired
from the State directly, as in cases of occupancy; or from or
through a person in whom a right or its subject formerly re¬
sided.

The distinction appears to be confine by some to rights
ex jure gentium:

By othei*a, to acquisitions of dominium or property, pre¬
eminently so called, and other in xem. But is just as
applipable Xjojus in personam .* e.g.: Assignee of a contract:
Succession by heir to rights in personam of deceased.

The distinction appears to be useless, except for this pur¬
pose : that in many cases of derivative titles, the party is
subject to duties passing from the party from whom his
right is derived.

■* Attempts at Classification,

Title hg descent and title hy purchase.

A convenient division in the Law of English real property,
foE reasons given by Christian and Blackstonc.* But a divi-
' sion only of one class of rights: rights in rebus singulis fall¬
ing under ihe law of real property.

It would not be a convenient basis for a general division :


* Blackstone, voL ii. pp. 200, 241-3.


JURISPRUDENCE. IID

And, accordingly, modes of acquiring personal property are
not divided in that manner.

It is not complete, even with reference to real property.


Having suggested certain of the leading divisions of the
titles by which jura in rem per se arc invested and divested,
I shall now proceed to consider seriatim certain of their
classes.

These classes are, in every system, extremely numerous:
So numerous, that only some, and perhaps a comparatively
few, have gotten concise names. Whence, as I remarked
before, the expression “ ea? —analogous to “uanVa

causarum fguris ” in cases of obligations.

I shall only consider such, as, in some form or other, oc¬
cur in all or most systems; and of these, only the more
important.

I shall consider them, principally, as they regard absolute
property.

In treating them, I shall abide as far as possible by Thi-
baut’s division; i. e. shall consider first, the one-sided titles
(or not alienations sensu stricto). For these I shall compare
Miihlenbruch, Mackcldey, Thibaut, Blackstone, Bentham,
and others.

One-sided Modes of Acqimiiion^ and Two-sided*

This seems to be substantially a division into alienation
(strictly so called), and all other modes of acquisition.

It does not quadrate with original and derivative, or jus
civile andyW gentium,

Muhlenbruch’s division MS. (see Table, in Vol. II. p.
245)* is bottomed on the division of titles inter such as are
ex jure civili and such as are not.


* Thibaut, System, toI. ii. p. 82, etc.


120


LECTURES ON


Occv^ancy.

Occupancy is only a species of appropriation: {Bed qe )—
In case of the acquisition of a servitude, etc., prescription
must combine with appropriation.

Occupancy, what. Occupant^ of res nuUius, and ad¬
verse occupancy of res alicujm. Physical and legal pos¬
session.

(To be examined particularly under " Hight of posseBsion.’^)

Distinguish between physical occupancy, (or putting a
thing to any of the uses of which it is susceptible,) and legal
occupancy.

Remark on the talk about occupancy being the origin of
property, etc.

(Blackstone, vol. ii. chap. i. p. 9.)

Why it ought to give a right.

(Bentliam, vol. ii. p. 110.)

Where society and law are established, the original rea¬
sons in a great measure cease. It is then little more than
a mark. And this is a reason for carrying over to the fisc,
or to private persons determined in the way of devolution.


Essentials of an alienation.—Voluntary transference.—
Acceptance of transfer :—Causa or inducement being im¬
plied.

Voluntary alienation opposed to involuntary, as meaning
alienation compelled by law. The latter would come under
the head of “ adjudication.**

The various modes of alienation, are merely evidentiary.

* A copy of tbis Table, taken from tbe margin of tbe page in Miiblen-
brnch cited in tbe text, will be found at the end of tbis Lecture. Tbe
matter of which it is a condensation extends over seventeen pages.—

a.j.


JURlSFliUDENCK.


121


Solemnitm adjected to alienalions:

1st. For the protection of the parties to the alienation:
A doctrine including the doctrine ^of evidentiary instru¬
ments, and the doctrine of Considerations.

2ndly. For the protection of strangers to the alienation:
A doctrine including that of Registration. See post, ** Con¬
tracts,” “combinations of jm in rem and in personam/*
“ evidence.”

Limits to the application of registration and of other
precautionary solemnities, arising from the nature of the
subject.

Many remarks touching solemnities adjected to aliena¬
tions apply, mutatis mutandis^ to solemnities adjected to
other titles.

Where Jus in 'Re passes by tradition or delivery, the
titulus or investitive incident consists: First, in an intention
on the part of the alienor to alien; secondly, in such a causa,
consideration, inducement, or motive to or for the alienation,
as the law holds to be just or sufficient.

The tradition is merely preappointed evidence of the
titulus; though in consequence of its being esteemed ne¬
cessary evidence, it is often treated as part of that titulus
(or as a mode of acquisition superinduced upon it,) and is
sometimes (for that reason), feigned to have taken place.

Instances in which property passes by force of the titulus,
evidenced through some declaration of intention other than
tradition, actual or symbolical.

The Cattsa or consideration may be insufficient to sustain
the disposition as against the alienor himself (c. g. fear of
violence; fraud; which last may vitiate a consideration
otherwise good): Or as against third parties {e.g. .* a gift, as
against creditors).

Tradition seems to have been confounded with Modus
acquirendi, on account of its having been preappointed and
conclusive evidence of titulus; until (with the advance of


122


LECTURES ON


civilization,) the real natiue of the transaction came to be
scrutinized.

Same virtue attributed to the English feoffment and
Uverfi. (Blackstone, vol. ii.)

Absurdity of presuming, not the titidust but the tradi¬
tion to be the evidence.

Evidentiary Instruments and other forms. Interpretation
of, etc.

Preappointed evidence; actions, etc.; general notions of,
as preliminary to dispositions.


(To be postponed to the end of prescription.)

Limits to the application of registration, arising out of
the nature of the subject.


i’-'

“ Disposition ** may be conveniently used as a generic ex¬
pression for any act by which a person assumes to transfer,
or promises to transfer, his real or asstiincd Right, or any
part of it, to another. The species will be Voluntary
Alienation and Contract.*

Dispositions of which the consequences are predetermined
(by the law) absolutely; and those of which the consequences
(subject to restrictions,) are left to the will of the parties.
In which last case, consequences (to take effect in default
of expressed intention by the parties,) are marked out by
the law or not.

Dispositions are valid or invalid :—If valid, the consc^
quences are predetermined by the law, or they are left to
the appointment of the parties:—If left to the appointment
of the parties, provisional dispositions (dispositions to take
effect in default of such appointment) are laid down, or not.

* See list of alienations, contracts, and combinations of both, in Ben-
tbam. Traits, etc., vol. i. p. 390.


JURISPRUDENCE.


123


If there be no appointment by the parties, where there are
such provisional dispositions, these take effect—1st: Either
because they may be presumed to have been intended; or,
2nd ; Because they are the best—generally speaking—^that
the parties could have made; or, 3rd: Because it must be
presumed that they did not intend nothing, and here is a
something which they might have meant. On the first and
third suppositions, these provisional dispositions are indeed
nothing more than dispositions of the parties (tacitly re¬
ferring to consequences which they mean to adopt, and)
which, by reason of known rules of law, it is not necessary
to express. If there be no intelligible appointment by them,
nor any in their default, the transaction is without effect.

By reason of the invalidity of certain dispositions, and of
the necessity of making provisional dispositions, a large space
is in every Law occupied with them. See “ Combinations
of Jus in lie** etc.

Termination of Uights,

The modes in which jura in row terminate, arc not de¬
scribed in the Institutes of Gains or those of Justinian.

It is necessary to describe the end explicitly and apart,
only in those cases in whicli the end is not involved in a
mode of acquisition.

{Dereliction. See Blackstone, vol. i. p. 9 j Miihlenb. vol. i. p.
236; Hugo, G. p. 238; Mackeldey, vol. i. § 186; vol. iv. cap. ii.
§272.)

Jura in Re are further divisible into—

1st. Such as arc available against all the world (or
against men indefinitely and without exception) ;

2. Such as are available against all the world with cer¬
tain definite exceptions. The first of these is also called
Property: The second, Possession (must be distinguished
from possession, titulus) \ and is to property in the last
sense, what property saddled with a scrviius is to jus in, re
unsaddled with a sermius. Under this, therefore, may be


124


LECTURES ON JURISPRUDENCE.


included the in re acquired by a purchaser in Equity,
as against all subsequent purchasers toith notice; or rather
as against ali mankind except a purchaser wiihout notice,
etc.


lAat of Authorities

Blackstone.

French Code.

Mackeldcy.

Miihlenbruch.

Hugo.

Bentham.

Thibaut.


referred to in this Lecture.

Heineccius.

Gains.

Institutes.

Table II. {post^
Falck.

Sayigny.


125


Pecunia accluirentis: Legatum. etc. : Societas omaium bonorum: Pcen® nomine, etc,


l^ECTURES ON JURISPRUOENCB.


127


FROM "LOOSE PAPERS,”
containing Heads of Lectures or Sections*

Contracts.

In the proper sense of the word, a Contract is a promise,
and begets only jus ad rem against the promisor: i. e. a
right to an act, an endurance, or a forbearance on his part.

(Gains, lib. ii. § 85. Traites, etc., 272, vol. ii. p. 165. Table
II., post, last note.)

Confusion of incidents which arc not promises, or not
purely so, with Contracts.

Consequences expressed by parties, and consequences
annexed by law in default of such expression.

Consequences of Contracts upon third persons.

In the language of the English law, “ Contract ” is often
limited to mutual promises; Bond and Covenant being the
names applied to unilateral contracts.

(Bentham, Traites, etc., vol. i. p. 289, and Fragment on
Government.)

Covenant, in the Roman Law, a generic expression; in
the English, the name of a species.

(Hobbes, Leviathan, chap, xiv.)

Bond, which etymologically is equivalent to obligation,
is the name of a species of unilateral contracts, or rather
perhaps, of a formality necessaiy to the validity of it.


• See p. 116.


128


MOTES ON


Nominate and innominate Contracts,

Most nominate contracts appear to be improper contracts:
f. e, not to be productive of Jus ad rem purely.

Pollicitation,

Why a promise is hindiny (abstraction made of the inter¬
ests of third parties). It binds,- on account of the expecta¬
tion excited in the promisee. For which reason a mere pol¬
licitation (that is, a promise made but not accepted) is not
binding; for a promise not accepted could excite no expec¬
tation. So of a promise obviously made in jest.

In enforcing cont|acts, the expectations of both parties
must be looked to. Where the terms are expressed in
writing, their common agreement, contemplation, expecta¬
tion (e. e, of the burthen undertaken by one, and the ad¬
vantage expected by the other,) is to be collected from that.

In the Stipulation, the sense in which each [)arty con¬
tracted was expressed apart, in order to render a doubt
impossible.

Where language is not employed, the common meaning
of the parties is collected from the peculiar facts of the case,
and from the consequences attached by the law (or usage)
to contracts of the sort. Which consequences arc either
positive or dispositive; i, e, to take effect whether the par¬
ties wish them or not, or in default of their making other
provisions of their own. And in either case they must be
understood to contemplate these consequences.

Solemnities annexed to Contracts,

Their ends, as regards the parties, are two. 1. To pro¬
vide evidence of the existence and purport of the contract,
in case of controversy. 2. To prevent inconsiderate engage¬
ments.

Many of these solemnities answer (and were intended to
answer) both purposes, such as Bond, Covenant, Stipulation,
etc. Others answer (or were only intended to answer) one.
Such as the writing required by the Statute of Frauds.


JUEISPRUDKNCE.


129


Distinction between such solemnities as are merely evi¬
dence of a contract j and such as are evidence of a contract
and of its terms.

Earnest, for instance, is merely evidence that a contract
was made; its subject, its terms, etc., must be established by
evidence aliunde. A bond, etc., perpetuates these last. So a
Stipulation was evidence of the promise and of the terms.

In Unilateral Contracts^ inconsiderateness is prevented
by the unusual solemnity of the evidentiary incident an¬
nexed :— E. ff. the sealing of a bond or covenant, the inter¬
rogation, and answer in a Stipulation.

In Bilateral Contracts (by the Romans termed “con¬
sensual,*’ by the English “ parol ”), it is supposed to be
prevented by the mutuality: caeh party contracting for his
own pecuniaiy advantage; contemplating a quid pro quo;
and therefore, being in that circumspective frame of mind
which a man who is only thinking of such advantage natu¬
rally assumes. This solution will not indeed apply where
the Consideration is past, or of small amount; but that this
is only an inconsistent application of the doctrine, and that
it arose out of the principle suggested, is clear, from the
considerations afterwards suggested.

By consensual is meant, resting upon consent without so¬
lemnity ; by paroly contracts which are not evidenced by
writings in a certain shape and accompanied by certain so¬
lemnities.

In consistency with the prindple, the doctrine of Lord
Mansfield and Wilmot (in 3d Burrows, 1(365,) is the just
one. The contrary opinion, however, is consistent with the
actual law. To require quid pro quo, where a solemnity
analogous to that of a bond intervenes, seems to be absurd.

The doctrine of Lord Ellcnborough, that “ there must
not only be a consideration, but that it must be stated in
the evidentiary instrument,”* is pushing the deviation from
the principle still further. {Sed qt^.)

* Wain V. Walters, 6 East 10.


VOL. III.


K


180


NOTES ON


Qusere : Whether, in cases of pure contract, the solem¬
nities in question are ever intended for, or are applicable
to, the protection of third persona ?

, In cases of mortgage, etc.. Registration is applicable and
applied; but only in respect of the subject over which the
jua in re is given.

Since a contract gives no jus in re^ registration, as re¬
gards the subject, could be of no use; for as the party who
contracts to dispose of that subject may, if the transaction
be really a contract, aliene to another before comidetioii,
and that other can retain (even with notice), registration
would be nugatory. It is only where the other could not
retain as’ against the former party, that registration is of
use. By declaring that he shall retain, (if there be no regis¬
try or notice in some other way,) you make the right of
the first acquirer conditional. But in the case of contract,
he has no right, conditional or unconditional, as against
third persons; and therefore, third persons need not any
such precaution.

Contracts in Equity, which give jus in re as against all
who have real or constructive notice, arc, as against all such
persons, alienations; though only contracts as against others.
So far, therefore, as regards contracts, registration could
be of no use, but -in respect of the person of the contracting
party. By knowing the nature of a man’s engagements
with others, 1 may make a guess at his ability to fulfil such
as I may think of entering into with him. This, in case of
partnership, has taken place to a certain extent. But it
seems to be of limited application.

The absence or presence of Consideration, hmo it 'affects
third persons (as creditors or other claimants against the
general means of the obligor).

Its absence as affecting third persons need not be con¬
sidered where the contract is unilateral, and is not accom¬
panied by such solemnities as are necessary to make uni¬
lateral contracts binding on iha promisor* Not being bind-


JURISPRUDENCE. 131

ing on Mm, it is of course, and a fortiori, not binding on
those who acquire rights from him.

But unilateral contracts, which would bind the promisor,
are often void as against third persons, because they are
without consideration; i. e, without valuable consideration;
for, as we have often observed, no promise or act is without
a consideration, inducement, or motive of some sort.

Jnal^se the different motives; and show why a promise
made for other than a valuable consideration, is not, and
ought not to be, good against those who have acquired
rights out of transactions founded on such consideration.

Difference between the intensity of the efepectations.

Danger of fraud. Danger of what would have the same
effect, if rights acquired for valuable consideration could be
defeated wholly or partially by inconsiderate engagements.
Postponement of the claims of the industrious to those of
the idle.

Difference between vidotis consideration and want of con¬
sideration.

Where the consideration is vicious, the contract begets
no obligation. Where there is a want of consideration,
there is an obligation against the contracting party, pro¬
vided certain solemnities are observed. "Want of consi¬
deration ” is an elliptical or abridged expression for “ want
of valuable consideration.”

Why a contract Cstrictly so called) gives no right in re as
against thirdpersons,whether of property or right ofpossession.

The principle seems to be this: that for want of sufficient
publicity (or what is deemed sufficient), the right of the
obligor over the subject, and consequently his power of dis¬
position, are, apparently, unaltered: the contract is not gene¬
rally known. Third parties, therefore, afterwards acquiring
by alienation (to whict more publicity is, or ought to be,
attached), would be disappointed in their well-founded
expectations, if their right could be defeated by a right
arising out of a transaction of which (as is assumed) they

K 2


1S2


NOTES ON


had no, or very inferior, means of ascertaining the exist¬
ence.

Upon this principle, a transaction accompanied by such
evidentiary solemnities that at law it would be merely
a contract, is, in equity, an alienation («. e. gives ay«# in re
which may be classed with rights of possession,) against all
who do not afterwards acquire by a conveyance without no¬
tice of the contract. Equity looks at the purpose of the
solemnity which is attache4 to a conveyance. That such
solemnity imparts a knowledge of the disposition to third
persons, is merely a presumption \ that in the absence of it
no such knowledge is imparted, is also a mere presumption;
and since this limited presumption will not hold if there be
evidence aliunde (i. e. either actual evidence, or presuniptio
juris of another sort—constructive evidence), that such know¬
ledge was had, Equity, in these cases, (whether usefully or
not, is a question,) overrules the presumption, and gives
the subject to the obligee, as against all who are proved to
have had that notice which (for want of a conveyance) it is
ovUy presumed that they had not.

Cases in which HJquity does not give jus in re against ac¬
quirers with noticet but defeats an existing jus in re in favour
of acquirers without notice. Tins is also resolvable into prin¬
ciples of evidence.

Where the contract is accompanied by some incident
which is presumed to give general notice of the disposition,
it changes its character and becomes an alienation, e.g. a
sale with delivery, actual or symbolical.

In these cases, there isjf/s in re given to the obligee (e. e. a
power of making a valid disposition, and of retaining as
against the obligor or subsequent acquirers from him), though
for many purposes (such as that of rescinding the disposition
and recovering the equivalent—chargmg the obligor with the
loss of the subject, etc.), the contract is still in fierit as be¬
tween obligor and obligee. Stoppage in transitu is a good
illustration. The disposition as an alienation being incom-


JURISPRUDENCE. 133

plete, the seller, by preventing its completion, prevents the
right of the creditors from attaching..

Wherever a disposition gives jus in re (^.e. a right on
the part of the vendee or those who take from him, against
acquirers from the vendor) the disposition is mamfes% an
alienation. If it be not, there are no means of distinguishing
the one from the other. The ambiguity in truth arises
from a very gross mistake, viz. *. confounding evidentiary
incidents loith dispositions. Because certain incidents at law
give no jus in re, (and therefore are contracts), ergOy the
dispositions clothed with these incidents are still contracts,
though ill Equity they have a different effect.


Qdast-Contracts and Quasi-Delicts.

Strictly, Quasi-Contracts are acts done by one QuaBi-Cem-
man to his own inconvenience for the advantage
of another, but without the authority of the
other, and, consequently, without any promise on the part
of the other to indemnify him or reward him for his
trouble.

Instances: Negoliorum gestio^ in the Roman Law: Sal¬
vage, in the English.

An obligation arises, such as would have arisen, had the
one party contracted to do the act, and the other to indem¬
nify or reward. Hence the incident is called a “ quasi-con-
tract;** i.e. an incident, in consequence of which one per¬
son is obliged to another, as if n contract had been made
between them.

I7te basis is, to incite to certain useful actions. If the
principle were not admitted at all, such actions would not
be performed so often ns they are. If pushed to a certain
extent, it would lead to inconvenient and impertinent in¬
termeddling, with the view of catching reward. Whether


1B4


LECTURES ON


it shall be admitted, or not, depends upon the nature of
the act:— i,e. its general nature; since without a general
rule, the inducement would hot operate, nor would the li¬
mitation to the principle be understood. Acts^^hich come
not within the rule, however useful in the particular in¬
stance, must be left to benevolence incited by the other
sanctions.

(See “ Sanctions,'^ post.)

But quasi-contract seems to have a larger import j—de¬
noting any incident by which one party obtains an advan-
tage he ought not to retain, because the retention would
damage (mother; or by reason of which, he ought to indem¬
nify the other. The prominent idea in quasi-contract
seems to be an nndtte advantage which would be acquired
by the obligor, if he were not compelled to relinquish it or
to indemnify.

Quad^delict :—an incident by which damage is done to
the obligee (though without the negligence or intention of
the obligor), and for which damage the obligor is bound to
make satisfaction.

It is not a delict, because intention or negligence is of
the essence of a delict: it being useless to apply a sanction
where the will is passive.

The distinction between quasi-contract and quasi-delict,
seems to be useless. In neither case is there either con¬
tract or delict. They are merely arranged under these heads,
because there is an obligation {stricto sensu), as there
would have been if there had been a contract or a delict.

Therefore one fiction suffices; and the rational way of
considering the matter is^ to look at the incident as beget¬
ting an .obligation; and to treat the refusal to make satis¬
faction, or to withhold the advantage, as a delict: i. e. as a
breach of that obligation.

’ The> terms are merely a sink into which such obligatory
incidents as are not contracts, or not delicts, but beget an


JURISPRUDENCE. 135

obligation etc.^ arc thrown without discrimination. And
.this is the rational view which Gaius has taken of tlic sub¬
ject, in a work from which an excerpt is contained in the
Pandects. *

Note .—Many incidents which are treated as. quasi-con¬
tracts or quasi-dclicts, are, in truth, contracts or delicts; or
need not be thrown into this common receiver, because
they may be treated of conveniently elsewhere. Examples:

. 1”. The refusal to pay money received under a mistake, ap¬
pears to be, not a quasi-contract, nor a quasi-dclict, but a
delict; there being iptentionality. 2®. Evicth, which is a tacit
contract. 3®. The obligation of the Iioires to pay legacies;
which it is absurd to refer to a quasi-contract, and not to
the will, etc.

In the English Law the above terms do not occur; there
the obligation is said to arise out of a contract or promise
which the law implies. But the fiction is the same.

Demand necemary io support an action on jus in re.

If there be no delict without intention or negligence,
(juasi-delicts (like quasi-contracts) are merely sources of
obligations, the refusal to fulfil which is properly the cause
of action, l^hus, the fact of my having received money
through a mistake, is not a delict; but begets an obligation
to repay that money or an equivalent. And the refusal (ex¬
press or indicated by conduct) to repay, is the immediate
cause of action: i. e. is a delict.

((2«*. Or the action may be considered a vindication.)

In those cases in which a consideration has failed^ there is
a breach of accessory contract.

So, if 1 refuse to make compensation for damage done
by my servant (without intention or negligence on my part)
there is a delict: but, before refusal, an obligation to make
such compensation. (Qu®. Whether demand be necesSary
to sustain the action P)

It would appear, therefore, that every Right of Action
arises out of a delict: i.e.d, violation of sonic positive or


136


LECTURES ON


negative obligation: And all such obligatory incidents, as
amount to a cause of action without demand and refusal,,
are not quasi-contracts or quasi-delicts, but breaches of
contract or violations oi jits in re.

. In quasi-contract, the prominent idea seems to be the ad¬
vantage derived by the obligor (though inconvenience must,
of course, have been sustained by the obligee).

: In quasi-delict, the prominent idea is the damage suffered
by the obligee; any advantage which may have accrued to
the obligor being accidental to the cause of obligation.
But in many cases the advantage and damage so suppose
one another, that it is difficult to determine the class. As
soluiio indebiti. Hence ** ex variia cansarmn jigurisy

If the terms arc to be retained, it would be better, per¬
haps,'to limit “quasi-contract** to incidents in which a ser¬
vice has been rendered by the obligee, and on which, there¬
fore, it may be presumed that the obligor (if conscious and
capable of contracting) would have purchased the service by
a promise to requite, etc. And to call all other incidents
“ quasi-delicts.*’

Nofe. —Wherever there is a promise, express or implied
(i e.: to be inferred from the words, or from the position, or
conduct of the obligor, previous to the completion of the ob¬
ligatory incident), that incident is not a quasi-contract, but
a genuine contract. And wherever there has been negli¬
gence or intention, immediate or remote, on the part of the
obligor there is a genuine delict. It would seem, there¬
fore, that damage done by the intention or negligence of
servants, by vicious cattle, etc. of the obligor, ought to be
rather ranked with delicts: for there is a degree of negli¬
gence in employing such servants, or in keeping such cattle,
etc. In short, where the damage is not the consequence of
some incident which prudence could not prevent, there is
always room for applying a motive to the will; and, there¬
fore, the incident may be classed with delicts.

(See “ Sorts of Civil lujurics,”


JURISFBUDENCE.


137


Limiting quasi-contract to services without instance and
promise, and quasi-delict to damage without intention or
negligence, immediate or remote,—there seems no reason
for the use of the two terms; either being alike applicable
by the same analogy: z.;.an analogy not of obligatory
incidents, but of consequent nghts and obligations. Nei¬
ther a quasi-contract nor a quasi-dclict is like either a con¬
tract or a delict; but the conseqnences of either of the
former, are like the consequences of either of the latter; i. e.
in begetting jura ad rem.

Blondeau seems to mistake the meaning of quasi¬
delict. The cases which he has cited as quasi-delicts are
delicts: for there is intention or negligence. Quasi-de¬
licts, in truth, are not violations of rights at all; but sources
of jura ad rem^ the refusal or omission to satisfy which is
a delict.

If an incident beget directly an action, it should clearly
be ranged with delicts, and not with quasi-contracts or quasi¬
delicts.

Perhaps all incidents not contracts, which imply neither
negligence nor intention on the part of the obligor, but
which yet beget an action without refusal or omission to
satisfy, etc., should be called quasi-delicts, being like deliets
in directly begetting an action, but unlike them in respect
of the absence of negligence and intention.

And all incidents not contracts, which imply neither
negligence, etc., but which only beget an obligation, the
refusal or omission to satisfy which is the direct cause of
action, should be called quasi-contracts: they being like
contracts (rather than delicts), inasmuch as they engender
an obligation which in itself supposes no right of action,
but only begets an action on breach.

If this be so, quasi-delicts should be classed with
“ Sanctionative -Rights and Obligations.”

(See “ Delicts,” post^


138 . LEtrruRifis on juuisimujdenck.

Gaius makes no distinction between delicts and quasi¬
delicts, though he adverts to quasi-contracts.*

Quasi-contracts and quasi-delicts, are not the only cases
in which the name of one incident is extended to another,,
by reason of a resemblance between the rights and obligations
which they respectively engender. Another instance, is the
extension of the term “purchasers for valuable considera¬
tion/’ to certain parties who are entitled under marriage
settlements.

The confusion entirely proceeds from the want of a ge¬
neric expression by wtich these incidents can be bundled
up together.

And note; the same want, instead of leading to the ex¬
tension of a narrower, sometimes leads to the limitation of
a wider: as in the instance, JRi^hia arising by operation of
Law; as if all rights did not so arise, and as if it were
possible to distinguish this narrower class of rights by a
term which is common to all.

Tmidency to coitfoimd tacit contracts with qvasi-contracts.

(Give instances:) This confusion is more likely to arise
amongst English lawyers than others, on account of their
wanting a generic name (which, bad as it is, the Romans
have) for marking this sort of obligatory incidents.

Origin of the classification spontaneous services^ and of
damage without intention, etc., toith contracts and delicts.

1st. The want of generic names.

2nd. The extension .to the former of the remedies pre-
. viously annexed to the latter.


(Gaius, lib. IH. § 8^5, j». 2S4,

Obugationes (see ante^ p. 127). Copied from the IViargin.)


* +-


.d


TABLES AND NOTES.


TABIiKS AND NOTES.


143


In the Preface to Vol. I. (p. xxxiv) of this work I mentioned
the Tables which Mr. Austin drew out and distributed to the
members of his class. 1 also gave, in his own words, his account
of them, and of his purpose in constructing them. I added, that
they were lamentably incomplete, but that 1 was not without a
faint hope that some of the materials destined for the construc¬
tion of the missing Tables might be found among his papers. I
have clung to this hope with a tenacity which there was little to
justify ; but after the most minute search and anxious inquiry, 1
am compelled to relinquish it.

Notwithstanding the incontestable value of the following Tables
and Notes, it is not without infinite pain that I submit them
to the public in their actual state; especially since 1 have the
full persuasion that some at least of those which are wanting were
either prepared or in course of preparation. As 1 always cor¬
rected the press with him, I ought to be able to recollect exactly
what were printed. But several circumstances, which, for his
justification, it may not bv impertinent to mention, tended to
cfiace any distinct memory of them from my mind. After
the close of his Lectures in 1832, he was in such a state of suf¬
fering and depression that my only solicitude was to keep every¬
thing out of his way that could remind him of his, abortive pro¬
jects and frustrated hopes; and I carefully avoided all mention
of his Lectures. The copies of the Tables, excepting the few
he had distributed, were left in the hands of the printer, and
remained there till very recently.

In the Preface to Vol. I., I have mentioned the several occupa¬
tions in which Mr. Austin engaged. To these successively he
devoted all the time and thought of which incessant attacks of
illness left him master; and after eight years passed in a fruitless
and exhausting struggle, he was compelled to abandon it, and to
seek some mitigation of his sufferings abroad.

Thus, there never' was a time at which he could have been
urged to complete this laborious work with the smallest chance


144


TA.BLES AND NOTES.


of success.' , Nor .was it ever alluded to, till within the last few
jTfcars, when he could talk with calmness of his failures and dis-
ap^intoents. He one day said to xne, have been looking
over those (Tables of mine, and I may say to you that I am really
surprised at my own work.” And be went .on to describe what
had exoited in him the rare emotion of self-applause. Thus
encouraged, 1 did venture to express my ardent desire that he
wpuld finish them, and return to the work in which he acknow¬
ledged hjs own mastery. But he only replied, “ It is too late—
At that time 1 had it ^1 before me. The time is over. Besides,
who would care for them?”

This was the last, 1 believe it was the only time, we ever spoke
of them, and it was decisive. “

And thus, after the lapse of thirty troubled years, I can do
nothing but cither suppress what competent judges deem so
conclusive a proof of his ability and learning, (and what, above
all, he himself thought admirable,) or give the fragments which
exist of the complete structure he had planned.

It appears clear, from the numerous references to them which
wUl be found in the following pages, that the missing Tables
were in existence. Whether any maiiuscnpt was left in the
printer's hands, and, in so long a lapse of time, destroyed, or
whether he himself, dissatisfied, as he was so apt to be, w'ith what
he had done, destroyed it, it is impossible for me to conjecture.
I have carefully examined every portion of the manuscripts. I
find a great number of notes which were probably intended to
be used in the completion of this work, but nothing that can be
applied to that purpose by any hand but his.— S. A.


TABLES AND NOTES.


145


Notes to Table I.

——

[Nolt 1.] See Gaii Instituiionum Conimentarii iv; Ul-
viAiHi Lifjri Meffidarum'Sin^ularis ¥ragmenta ; Justin iani
Inktitutiones (*‘ ex omnibus antiquorum Institutionibus, et
praecipiie ex Commentariis Gaii tarn Instituiionum quam
Rerum Quotidianarum^ aliisque multis Commentariis, com-
posit®**).

, The Arrangement of Justinian’s Institutes (or, rather, of
the earlier Institutes from which they were copied or com¬
piled), is a systematic^ or scientific, one : that is to say, de¬
rived from distinctions lying in the matter of the treatise.
Thus, the Roman Law (the matter of the Institutes) is di¬
vided, in respect of its sources, into Written and Unwritten,
etc.: in respect of its subjects, into Law of Persons (i. c.
special or particular law). Law of Things (i. e. the general
law of substantive rights and obligations), Law of Procedure,
etc. But the Arrangement (if such it can be called) of his
Code and Digests, is an historieaJ one. Instead of being
founded upon distinctions lying in the matter of the compi¬
lations, it was taken from a circumstance purely extraneous
and accidental: namely, the order or series (consecrated by
#revetencc for antiquity), in which the various branches of
the Roman Law had been modified, as occasion prompted,
by the Edict of the. Pr®tors. See the Constitution “ De
Con^eptione Digestdrum,” in which the Emperor instructs
Tribonian *‘in libros et titulos materiam digercre, tarn se¬
cundum Nostri constitutioncm Codicis, quam Edicti fer<»
PETUi iwitalionem.** It is scarcely necessary to add, that
each of these clumsy compilations is the merest chaos.

In the Table here submitted to the reader (which has
been abstracted from the three treatises mentioned above,

VOL. III. * ' L


146


TABLES A*ND NOTES.


and also from the corresponding portions of the Digests or
Pandects), the terms of the Classical Jurists are given
exactly. With a view to the study of these admirable
writers (who are incomparably the best teachers of the Ro¬
man Law), this is a matter of the highest importance. Such
a multitude of new, and, in some respects, preferable ex¬
pressions, has been imported into the system by the later
Civilians, that those who have only studied it in the writings
of these last, scarcely know it again when they mount to
the original sources.

[Note 2.] For the distinction between Jus puhlicum
and Jus ^irivatmn, see Inst. Lib. i.—Tit. i. § 4.—Dig.,
Lib. i.—^Tit. i. frag. 1. § 2.—And see below. Note 8. It
seems that the Elementary writers commonly confined them¬
selves to the latter. For Justinian’s Institutes briefly indi¬
cate the distinction, and then immediately subjoin Dicen-
dum est iffitar de'jure privato.”

[Note 3.] The Arrangement of Private Law exhibited in
the Table above, ,is formally announced by Gains (Lib. i.

^ 8. "De Juris Divisioiie”), and also by Justinian (Inst.
Lib. i. t. 2. ^ 12): And, in spite of the opinion now pre¬
valent in Germany (see Tab. III.), it seems to be the ar¬
rangement which they intended and actually observed.
Their, adherence to it may be traced in the Institutes of
Gains, and is obvious in those of Justinian.

Compare the following places of the latter:—L. i. t. 2.
^ 12.—L. ii. 1.1. in princip.—L. ii. t. 2. ^ 2.—-L. ii. t. 5.
§ C.—L. iii. t. 12, " De ObligationibuB,*' in princip.~Lib.
iv. t. 6, ‘f De Actionibus,” in princip.

, For the scope or purpose of this AiTangemcnt, see Table
II. note 2.

»

[Note 4.] These various expressions for the Law of Per¬
sons may be found in the following places ;—Gains, L. i.


TABLES AND NOTES. 147

§ 8, 9.—Inst. L. i. t. 2. $ 12 : t. 3. in pr.—^Dig. L. i. t. 6.
frag. 2.—^Theopbilus 4. 6. pr.

[Note 5.] See Gains, L. ii. § 1.—Inst. L. ii. t. 1. in
princip.

In the language of the Roman Lawyers, the term
has various meanings; and of these, the two following de¬
mand particular notice. It means, first. Things, Persons,
Acts (or Forbearances), as subjects or objects of rights and
obligations:—“ materia juri subjccta *! —“ in qua jus versa-
fur*' —“ca quae jure nostro aj^ciuntur** —“quae taiiquain
materia ei sunt proposita!* Or it means, secondly. Rights
and Obligations themselves“ res incorporates" —“ ca quae
in jure consistuntvelut “jus hereditatis,” “jus utendi
frueijdi,” “ servitutes,” “ obligationcs quoquo modo coii-
tractae.”

See Inst. L. ii. t. 2. § 2.—If this passage had been well
considered, those difierences about the arrangement of the
Institutes, which are referred to in Note 3, would scarcely
have arisen. Sec Table III.

For the import of the expression “ Jus .quod ad Res per-
tinet,’* sec Table II. Note 2.

[Note 6.] Dominium (in the large signification) and Obli-
gatio (in the correct signification), are synonymous wdth the
Jus in Rem and Jus in Personam {determinatam) of nu¬
merous modern writers upon the Roman Law. For the
import of which distinction, see Table II. note 3.

By the Classical Jurists, “ Obligation’* is never employed
in that large generic sense which it has acquired in subse¬
quent times. In the language of these writers, it has com¬
monly the following meanings.

1°. It signifies the Obligation which answers to a Right
in personam.

2**. Inasmuch as they had no name ^ecificallg belonging

L 2


148


TABLES AND NOTES.


to this last (rights of every class being embraced by the
word jus), they used the term “ Obligation to denote that
Ri^hl {in personam) with which the Obligation correlates.

3®. It signifies the Hiffht {in personam) which resides in
the party entitled, with the Obligation which is incumbent
upon the opposite party: “ Vinculum inter utrumque.”

It is remarkable, that a similar ambiguity (with a swarm
of others) sticks to the term Jus. Thus, “ in omne Jus de-
functi succedere,” is to succeed to the obligations as well as
to the rights of the deceased. So of the Gemian word
Recht; in the legal, as well as in the popular language of
the middle ages. And so, in our own country, when a man
is obliged to do a thing, it is not unfrccjucntly said “ that he
has a nght to do it —an expression at which we laugh,
but which, beyond a doubt, is good Saxon English.

As the Homan Lawyers had no specife expression for
Rights against determinate persons, so had they no term
appropriated to tiSvo^ogeneral Obligations which correspond
to rights in rent. A Roman Lawyer, speaking of such an
obligation, would have used the generic term Necessitasj
or, less correctly, Officium ;—the former signifying obliga¬
tions which are imposed and sanctioned by law; the latter
denoting, properly, those religious and moral obligations,
\vhich, as wanting that cogent sanction, are frequently
styled “imperfect.**

Consequently, the language of the Roman Lawyers stood
{nearlg) thus:

1®. Eor rights (universally), they had *Jus:** for rights
in ran (generally), **Dominium*^ (in its loose signification):
for rights in personam, ** Obligatio.^*

2®. For obligations or duties (universally) they had
dum** and Necessitas for the special obligations which
answer to rights in personam, ** Obligation* —For the general
duties or obligations which answer to rights in rent, they
had no specific expression. But since obligations of this
class were neoer denoted by ** Obligatio,** and since obliga-


TABLES AI]D NOTES.


149


tions of the other class were always denoted by it, “ Offlcium"
or “ NecessitaSf* when opposed to “ Ohliyaiio,*' supplied the
defect.—For a closer examination of the matter, see Table
II. note 3.

[What follows, to the end of the Note, was found among
Loose Papers.” It is marked “ Note 6, to Table I.,^^ and is
the only fragment to which a place is distinctly assigned.— S. AJ]

[The Latin Jus (not synonymous with Law) sometimes
means Right as opposed to Obligation. Sometimes, how¬
ever, it is used collectively, and denotes right and obligation,
or obligation alone. “ Succedere in omne Jm def unciit* is to
succeed to his obligations as well as to his rights.

The word “ Obligation ** {siricto sensu) has also a double
meaning. Sometimes it means the obligation which corre¬
sponds with Jus ad Hem ; sometimes it means the right of
the one party, as well as the obligation of the other. Thus
the party wdio gains a right by a contract is said to ac¬
quire an obligation; i. e. a right against the party who is
bound by the obligation. Thus also, the theory of the
Rights and Obligations which arise out of contracts, and
of the rights and obligations which resemble these, though
they originate in other incidents, arc treated in the Insti¬
tutes, Gains, etc. under the title of Obligations : an expres¬
sion which denotes the rights of the parties entitled, as well
as the obligations of the parties who are bound.

The French word “ Hngagementl* which, though it pro¬
perly mean, not an obligation, but an obligatory incident of
a certain kind {e.g, a contract), also means obligation, and is
used by certain French writers as a collective expression for
rights and obligations.

In the German, Hechisverhaltniss (a relation arising out of
law) is also a generic name for right and obligation. Some¬
times it denotes right or obligation; but then it always
denotes the right or obligation as related to-the obligation
or right. It denotes the one and connotes the other.


150


TABLES AND NOTES.


An objection to these uses of Jus, Ohligatio, and JSngage^
ment is, that the words thus used are ambiguous, and that
when we want to discriminate between right and obligation,
we must constantly annex to the term a declaration of the
sense in which we mean to use it.

But there is another objection of a more general nature:
an objection which applies equally to llechtmerhaltnus:
namely, that each of 4;hese terms (used collectively) supposes
that every right supposes an obligationthat every obliga¬
tion as well as every right is relative; that, as the existence of
a party invested with a right supposes the existence of one or
more subjected to a corresponding obligation, so the exist¬
ence of a party subjected to an obligation must suppose
that some other party is clothed with a corresponding right.
This, however, as we have already shown, is not true.
There arc absolute obligations, although there arc no abso¬
lute rights.

The English language has this advantage, that, though its
vocabulary of leading terms is scanty, they are precise and
unambiguous ; —Law—Right—Obligation.

** Befiigniss ** and **Pjlicht ” seem to denote right and ob¬
ligation in abstract, but sometimes the same in coiicrefe;
^ RecJtt** and “Verhindlichkeiti* the converse: 2 . e. more
commonly in concrete, but sometimes in abstract.

“ Forderungy (which corresponds with the Latin JDehitnm
in its largest sense) denotes that which is to be done, po¬
sitively or negatively, in consequence of the obligation;
which last is rather the “ vinculum**

“ Officium** is moral duty or obligation in the largest
sense.

** Neccssitas* (which rarely occurs) is legal duty or obli¬
gation, also in the most extensive meaning of the word
obligation.

** Obligatio** is a species of Necessitas ** i. e. Obliga¬
tion limited to a determinate person or persons. A specific
name, for the “ Neccssitas** which corresponds with Jus in
rem is not to be found.


• TABLES AND NOTES.


151


In German there are single names for the party having
a right, and for the party subjected to an obligation. In
other languages, circumlocution must be resorted to. The
English “ entitled^' applies only to the first, and only de¬
notes it in an indirect manner.

Right, Obligation, Duty {Devoir, Offidum), —with their
corresponding expressions, “ it is, or is not right to do such
an act,” ** such an act ought, or oiigjit not to be done
“ such an act is right;” “ such an act is a duty,” etc.—are
perfectly equivalent expressions; as denoting conformity
with a rulg (or rather performance or observance of the ob¬
ligation which the rule prescribes).

Sometimes they simply denote approbation of some rule
of conduct or of some act: as, “ Law as it ought to be.”

Sometimes “ ought ” (and devoir, the verb) denote, like
Law, conformity with any established order of incidents:
as, “ such an event ought to (or should, or must) have hap-
j)ened, on such and such su]>po8itions'.”

The metaphorical sense in this case differs from that in
the case of Law, only to this extent; that whereas the meta¬
phorical “Law” denotes thecustomaiy order, “ ought” de¬
notes the metaphorical obligation which that law is feigned
to have imposed. Observance of a law, or of the obligation
which that law imposes, arc equivalent expressions; each
being causes of the uniformity which it is intended to in¬
dicate.]

[Note 7.] The distinction between Obligations ex De¬
licto, and Obligations Quasi ex Delicto; seems to be super¬
fluous and illogical. Obligations Quasi ex Delicto arise
from two causes:—

1®. Damage'to the right of another by one's' own neg-
ligence {culpa, imprudentid, iwperitid );

2®. Damage to the right of another by some third person
for whose delicts one is liable {e.g. “filiusin potestate,”
“ servus,” “ aliquis eorum quorum opera exercitor navis aut


* TABLES AND NOTES.

stabuli navem aut stabulum oxercet”). Cases of the former
sort fall within the no'tion of Delicti and many such cases
are actually ranked with Delicts in the Lex Aquilia (one of
the principal so\ixces of the Roman Law for that depart¬
ment of it). In cases of the latter sort, the class of the
obligation-varies with the nature of the ground upon which
the liability is founded. If the mischief be caused, though
remotely, by the negligence of the party obliged (e. g. “ si ali-
quatenuB culjim reus sit, quod opera maloruvi hominum ute-
retur ”), the case, as before, falls within the notion of De¬
lict. And supposing that the party obliged is clear of in¬
tention and negligence, his obligation should be referred to
that liiiscellaneous class, which arc said, by analogy, to arise
from {quasi) Contracts.

[^iTotJ 8.] The Institutes close with a short Title "De
Publicis Judiciis,” which only includes a species of Criminal
Procedure, together With the Crimes and Punishments to
which that species was appropriate.

See the Title in question, and also the following places
in tile Digests; Lib. xlvii. t. 1, “De Privatis Dclictis,”
frag. i. 3.—t. 2. fr. 94.—t. 10. fr. 45.—1.11, “De Extra-
ordinariis Criminibus.”—t. 20.*fr. 1. 2.—t. 23, “De Popu-
laribus Actionibus.**—Lib. xlviii. t. 1, “De Publicis Judi-
ciis,” to t. 3, inclusive.—1.16, to the end of the Book, and
especially t. 19, “ DeP®«i>,” frag. 1. § 3.

It would seem that this Title in the Institutes is not a
member or constituent part of the work, but rather a hasty
and incongruous appendix added on an after thought. For,
first, instead of expounding the subject in a systematic
manner, it merely touches (“ per indicem”) a fragment of the
subject. Secondly, It appears that Criminal Law was
looked upon by the Roman Jurists as properly forming a
department of Jus Publicum: And tbis, it is most probable,
was not included in the Treatises from which Justinian's
Institutes were copied or compiled.


TABLES AND NOTES. 153

See above. Notes 1 and • 2 .—^Whether a similar Title
vi^as appended to the Institutes of G'ams,.iai^ncertain; the
concluding portion of the Manuscript bmng lost' dl* illegible.

In order to determine the place which should be assigned
to Criminal Law (or, rather, in order to determine ’the ar~
ranpement which should be given to the whole Aggregate
of Law—Omne Corpus Juris’*), it would be necessary to.
settle the import of an extremely perplexing distinction:
namely, the distinction between Public Law and Private
(or Civil) Law.—According to the large and vague mean¬
ing which is often attached to it, **Public Law** comprises,
not only the whole of Criminal Law, but also much, if not
the whole, of the Law, w^hich, commonly, is denominated
** Private'* And if the term be taken in this its loose sig¬
nification, a distinct and intelligible arrangement of the
Corpus Juris is simply impossible. According to the strict
and determinate meaning which seems to' have been an¬
nexed to it by some, “ Public Late** is included in the Law
of Persons: that is to say, it is merely a subordinate mem¬
ber of that great Aggregate or Whole, which, under the ab¬
surd name of Private Law,** is frequently opposed to it.
If “ Public Law ** be taken in this its definite import, there
is only a small, though weighty, portion of Criminal, that
can possibly be referred to it wdth propriety.—See Table
III. sub fine.


TABLES AND NOTAS.


155


Notes to Table IL


[^Ote 1.] This arrangemcmt ^Soiiicidcs exactly with that
which I have given in Table I. But in lieu of the terms
which occur in the Institutes of Justinian, in the Excerpts
from the Classical Jurists of which his Digests are com¬
posed, in the Institutes of Gains, etc., I have here substi¬
tuted terms which originated in the Middle Ages, or in.
times still more recent. For the following, amongst other
reasons, these terms demand attention.

1. £x])ositofS' of the Roman Law often introduce them
into their writings without sufficient explanation; without
opposing them to the corrcsj)onding exjn’essions which were
employed by the Authors of the system.

2. Writers u))on Universal Jurisprudence, upon the so-
called Law of Nations, and even upon Morals generally,
have often drawn largely from that justly celebrated system;
and, in their express or tacit references to it, have com¬
monly adopted the terms devised by modern Civilians, or
by Conimentutors of the Middle Ages.

3. These terms have been imjiorted into the technical
language of the systems which are mainly derived from
the Roman : c. g. the French Law, the Prussian Law, the
Common or General Law of Germany.

4. Some of these terms are better constructed than the
corresponding expressions of the Ancients ; and are, indeed,
the oi^g ones, authorized by general use, which denote the in¬
tended meaning without the most perplexing ambiguity.

Trace the Arrangement, which is given in the Table
above, through the following places of Heineccius, the most
celebrated teacher of the Roman Law in the eighteenth
Century :—Elementa Juris Civilis secundum Ordinem


156


TABLES ATfD NOTES.


InstitutioDum; ** together vrith his admirable, though less
known, ** Becitationes in Eleinenta, etc.:’*—Lib. 1. tit. 1.
H 30, Sl.—tit. 2. i 74.—Lib. II. tit. 1. § 310 in princip.
H 331 to. 334. ^ 335 in princip.—tit. 3. ^ 392.—tit. 10.
^ 484.—Lib. III. tit. 14. H 767, 708, 771, 772, 774,
778.—tit. 28.—Lib. IIII. tit. 1.—tit. 5.—tit. 6.—tit. 18.
And see the corresponding places of his “ Antiquitates,”
in which the Arrangement of the Institutes is also observed.

[jiote 3.] **Jus Rerum i.e. Law regarding Rights
and Obligations in general^ together with the Things which
are their subjects or objects. It stands opposed, on the one
side, to Jus Actionum : i. e. Law not regarding substantive
rights and obligations, but the weans by which they are
enforced when a resort to the tribunals is necessary. (Sec
Tables V. VI.* note 2.) It stands opposed, on the cither
side, to Jas Personarum ; i. e. Law regarding the distinc¬
tive rights and obligations, which arise from (or, rather,
compose) the various conditions of persons. (See below,
note 3. C. b.: And see Table IV. sec. 2.)

It was probably styled Jus Rerum, or Jus quod ad Res
vertinetf for one of the following reasons.

1. Inasmuch as the term Res included rights and obli¬
gations, the general law or doctrine of rights and obliga¬
tions^ might be styled Jus Rerum, without a solecism.
(See Table I. note 5.)

2. The description of the Res, which are subjects of rights
and obligations, is placed, in the Institutes, at the beginning
of the Jus Rerum : and hence, a name, strictly belonging to a
section^ was naturally extended to the whole department of
which that particular section was the prominent and most
obvious feature. So the third department embraces the
law of Procedure ; but as Actions (strictly so called) occupy
the foremost place, the lohole is denoted by the partial and
inadequate name of Jus Actionum.


TABLRS AND NOTES.


137


The arrangement of the Roman Lawyers is liable to ob¬
jection in the detail, but is 'manifestly just in the main;
though certain modern writers have involved it in thick
obscurity, by grossly misconceiving the purpose, and grie¬
vously distorting the expressions.

#

[i&OtE 3.] (A.) “ Ju8 IN Be — Ju8 in Rem — Jus eeale—
Dominium sensu laiiore

These expressions are synonymous. Taken in the largest
signification of which they arc susceptible, they denote a
class of rights which may be defined thus:—Rights of
persons against all other persons, or, at least, against
other persons generally : —“Facultas homini competens
sine respedu ad ceetam personam^ Or these rights may
be defined as follows:—Such rights of persons as answer
to obligations incumbent upon all other persons, or, at
least, upon other persons generally.

** Jus Ai) Bern—-Jus in Personam —Jus person ale —
Obligatk)

Taken in the largest signification of which they are sus¬
ceptible, these synonymous expressions denote a class of
rights to which the ensuing definitions will apply;—^Rights
^ persons against determinate persons:—Rights answer¬
ing to obligations incumbent upon determinate persons :—
“Facultas homini competens in certam personam**

Rights of the first class, and rights of the second class,
are, therefore, distinguishable by this:—^The obligations
correlating with these, are limited to determinate persons :
the duties (or obligations) correlating with those, attach
universally or generally.

But though this is the essence of the distinction, they
are further distinguishable thus. The duties or obligations
which answer to rights of the first class, are, all of them,
negative: that is to say, obligations to forbear or abstain.


158


TABLES AND NOTES.


Of those obligations which answer to rights of the second
class, some are negative, but some (and most) are positive:
that is to say, obligations to do or perform,

(B.) The full exposition of this all-pervading distinction,
is necessarily reserved for the Course of Lectures to which
these Tables are intended to serve as helps. But, perhaps,
the following examples will give the clue to its import.

(a.) Oumership or Property (equivalent to Dominion,
taken in its limited senses), is a term of such complex and
various meaning, that it were hardly possible to force a
just explanation of it into the narrow compass of a note.
But in order to illustrate the distinction here in question.
Ownership may be described, accurately enough, thus:—
The Right to use or deed with some given subject, in a
manner, or to an extent, which, though it is not unlimited,
is indefinite. In which description is necessarily implied,
that the Law will protect or relieve the owner against every
disturbance of his right on the part of any other person.
To change the expression, all other‘persons are bound
to forbear from acts inconsistent with the scope of his
right. But, here, the obligations, which correlate with that
very right, terminate. Every obligation which «aay

regard of concern that right, is nevertheless foreign or
extraneous to it, and flows from some incident specially
binding the party upon whom the obligation falls; for instance,
irom a contract into which he enters with the owner of the
subject, or a delict which he commits against his right of
ownership. In other words, every such positive obligation
is conflned to a determinate person, and is, therefore, an
obligation (in the sense of the Roman Lawyers). And even
an obligation which is negative and regards the right of
ownership, will not correspond to that very right, in case the
vinbtdum be fecial: that is to say, not attaching indefinitely
upon all mankind, but binding some certain .person or


TABLES AND NOTES. 159

some certain persons, and arising from some incident which
particularly regards the obliged.

It follows that Ownership or Property is Jub in 'Rem,
For ownership is a right of a person, over or to a person
or thing, against all other persons :—a right implying and
exclusively resting upon obligations which are at once uni¬
versal and negative.

In case the subject of Jus in Rem happen to be a person^
the position of the party entitled wears a double aspect.
He has rights {in rent) over or to the subject, as against
other persons generally. He has also rights {in personam)
against the subject, or lies under obligations (in the narrower
meaning of the term) towards the subject.

See below, in the present note, C. b.

(b.) Servitus (for which the English “casement” is
hardly an adequate expression) is a Right to use or enjoy,
in a given or definite manner, a subject ovmed by another.
Take, for instance, a Right of Way over another’s land.

The term is often extended to certain rights, which, pro¬
perly, are rights of ownership limited in point of duration:
e,g. Ususfrucius, Usus, JIabitaiio. It has also been applied
to a right {Superficies), which, justly considered, is a species
of Condominium: i. e. a right of ownership over some given
subject, but limited by a right, similar and simultaneous,
which resides in another person. But as servitudes are
frequently distinguished, and by the Roman lawyers them¬
selves, from the rights which I have just mentioned, I think
that authority, as well as the reason of the thing, justifies
the description above.

Now, according to that description, the capital difference
between Ownership and Servitus, lies in this: that the
right of dealing with- the subject, which resides in the
owner or proprietor, is larger, and, indeed, indefinite;
whilst that which resides in the party entitled to the
servitude, is narrower and determinate* In respect of the


100 TABLES ifND NOTES.

grand distinction which here is directly in question. Owner¬
ship and Sei'vitua are equivalent. Servitus, like Ownership,
is Jm in Mem. For it avails against M mankind, including
the owner of the subject. Or (changing the expression) it
supposes an obligation on all (the owner again included) to
forbear from every act which would prevent or hinder the
enjoyment. But this is the only obligation which cofrea-
ponda to the Jus Servitdtis ; every apecial obligation which
happens to regard it, being nevertheless foreign or extra¬
neous to it. Suppose, for example, that the servitude is
conaiituted (or grantedXiby the owner or proprietor of the
subject: and suppose that the owner or proprietor also
contracta with the grantee, not to molest him in the exer¬
cise of the right. Now, here, the grantor of the servitude
lies under two obligations: one of Ihera arising from the
grant, and answering 'Jlq the right which it creates; the
other derived from the contract by which Tie is apedallg
bound, and answering to the right {in peraonam) which the
contract vests in the grantee. In case he molest the grantee
in the exercise of the servitude, the act is single, but the
injury is double. He violates an Oficium (or duty) which
he shares with the rest of mankind, and he also breaks an
Obligation which arises from his peculiar position.

(c.) Having gijen an example or two of Rights in rm,
I will now produce examples of Rights in peraonam.

Rights begotten by Contracta (or, ascending to a larger
expression, by Pacta or Conventional belong, all of them,
to this last-mentioned class: although there are certain
cases (incapable of explanation here), in which the right of
ownership, and otherl of the same kind, are said (by a
solecism) to arise from contracta^ or .are even talked of
(with conspicuous and flagrant absurdity) as if they arose
from obligationa in the sense of the Roman Lawyers.

. Rights which, properly speaking, arise from contracta^
avail against the parties who bind themselves by contract,


TABLES AND NOTES.


161


and also against the parties who are said to represent their
persons: that is to say, who succeed, on certain events, to the.
universiias (or bulk) of their rights, and, therefore, to their
faculties (or means) of fulfilling or liquidating their obliga¬
tions. But.as against persons who neither oblige them¬
selves by contract, nor succeed per universitateni to the
means of performing obligations, rights which, .properly
speaking, arise from Contracts, are nothing. Suppose, for
example, that you contract with we to deliver me some
moveable (a slave, a horse, a garment, or what not); but,
instead of delivering it to met in pursuance of the contract,
that you sell and deliver it to another. Now, here, the
rights which I acquire by virtue of the Contract or Agree¬
ment, are the following. I have a right to the moveable in
question, as against you specially: jm ad rem (acquiren-
dam). So long as the ownership and the possession conti¬
nue to reside in you, I can force you to deliver me the thing in
specific performance of your agreement, or, at least, to make
me satisfaction, in case you detain it. After the delivery to
the duyer, I can compel you to make me satisfaction for your
breach of the contract with me. But here iny riglits end.
As against strangers to that contract, I have no right what¬
ever to the moveable in (picstioii. And, by consequence, I
can neither comped the buyer to yield it to me, nor force
him to make me satisfaction as detaining a thing of mine.
For “ obliyafionum substantia non in eo consistit ut aliquod
nostrum fadat, sed ut alium nobis obstrinyat ad dandum
aliquid, vel faciendum, vel praestandum.” (See the admi¬
rable Title in the Digests, " De Obligationibus, ef Actio-
nibus,” Lib. XLIV.) But if you deliycr the moveable,
in pursuance of your agreement with me, my position
towards other persons yenerally assumes a different aspect.
In consequence of the Delivery by you and the concurring
Apprehension by me, the thing becomes mine: for. the
Delivery and Apprehension are a Modus Acqdisitionis,
and not, like the Contract of which they are a consecjuence,
VOL. III. M


163


TABLES AND NOTES.


a Titulm ad acquirenddm. I hove now jm in. rent :—a
right to the thing delivered, as against dl mankind;—
a right answering to obligations negative and imiversal.
And, by consequence, I can compel the restitution of the
subject from ang who may take and detain it, or can force
him to make me satisfaction as for an injury to my right
of ownership.—" Ubi rem meam invenio, ibi earn vindico;
sive cum ed persona negotium mild fuerit, sive non fuerit.
Contra, si a bibliopola librum erai, isque cum nondum mild
traditum vendiderit iterum Sempronio, ego sane contra
Seropronium agerc nequeo; quia cum eo ntdlum mild un-
quani intercendt negotium: sed agerc debco adversus biblio-
polam a quo emi; quia ago ex contractu^ i. e,. ex jure ad
rem” Heineccii Becitaiiones, Lib. 11. tit. 1. § 331.

(d.) BighU of Action^ with all other rights founded upon
injuries, are also jura in personam. Por they answer to
obligations attaching upon the determinate persons, from
whom the injuries have proceeded, or from whom they arc
apprehended.

It is true that difficulties have arisen about the nature
of Actions in rem .* i. e. those Actions (or, rather, those
Rights of Action) of which the ground is an offence against
a right in rem, and of which the intention (scope, or pur¬
pose) is the restitution of the injured party to the exercise
of the violated right. But these and other difficulties
besetting the Theory, of Actions, appear to have sprung
from this: that the nature of the right which is affected
by the injury, and the nature of the remedy which is the.
purpose of the action, are frequently blended and con¬
founded by expositors of the Roman Law. Which confu¬
sion of ideas absolutely disparate and distinct, seems to
have arisen from the abridged shape of the expressions by
which rights of action are commonly denoted. By an
ellipds commodious and inviting, .but leading to confusion
.and obscurity, a name or phrase, applicable to the violated


TABLES AND NOTES.


163


right, is often extended improperly to the remedy. Thus,
the phrase “ in rent V is extended to certain actions^ which,
though they are necessarily directed against determinate
persons, are grounded upon violations of rights availing
against all mankind. And, thus, certain actions are styled
“ex contractu*' although they properly arise from the nm^
performance of contracts, and are only remote and incidental
consequences of the contracts themselves.

To pursue this subject further, were inconsistent,with my
present purpose. But before 1 dismiss it, I will advert to
an important remark made (I think) by Leibnitz—^Every
right to restitution is a right in personam. In case the
party against whom it avails, be unconscious of the right,
the right, with the corresponding obligation, is {qua^i) ex
contractu. For, since he is perfectly clear of ititention and
negligence, he is also innocent of wrong. But so soon as
he is apprised of the right, either by demand or otherwise,
it passes from the department CqrnsiJ ex contractu to the
class of rights and obligations which properly are founded
upon injuries.

(C.) Hitherto, I have tried to illustrate the distinction,
which is the subject of the present note, by apt examples.
A brief examination of the ienns by which it is usually
expressed, may cast a stronger light upon the import
of that distinction, and upon the importance of seizing its
import in a precise and comprehensive manner.

(a.) Jus in re—Jus in rem—Jus reale—Dominium (in
the large signification), will, none of them, indicate the dis¬
tinction, considered in its whole extent, without a degree of
ambiguity. For though they denote (when taken in the
largest meaning of which they are susceptible) eoery right
availing universally or generally, they are commonly used
by the Roman Lawyers, or by succeeding Civilians, for
the purpose of signifying Rights over or to Things: that
is to say. Things in the narrower acceptation: permanent

M 2


164


TABLES AND NOTES.


objects which are not persons: things which, on the one
hand, are opposed to persons themselves; and which, on the
other, are distingaished from the acts of persons, and from
the rest of the transient objects denominated facts or events.

But of jura qua valent in alios genekatim —of rights
which avail or obtain against other persons generallg —
of rights which answer to obligations general and negative,
some are rights over or to persons, and some have no subject
(person or thing).

The terms now under consideration, are, therefore, of
varying extension. They are generic and specific. They
sometimes denote universally the department of rights in
question, but arc commonly used in a narrower significa¬
tion, and restricted to a subordinate class. Consequently,
there is no concise expression, authorized by established
use, which denotes the whole of these rights adequately and
unambiguously.

(b.) Of rights existing over or to persons, and availing
against other persons generally, take the following exam¬
ples ;—The right of the father to the custody and education
of the child—the right of the guardian to the custody and
education of the ward-^the right of the master to the ser¬
vices of the slave or servant.

Against the child or ward, and against the slave or
servant, these rights are rights in personam .* that is to say,
rights answering to obligations upon those determinate
individuals. In case the child or ward desert the father or
guardian, or refuse the lessons of the teachers whom the
father or guardian has appointed, the father or guardian
may compel him to return, and may punish him with due
moderation for his laziness or perverseness. . If the slave
run from his work, the master may. force him back, and
drive him to his work by chastisement. If the servant
abandon his service before its due expiration, the inastei
may sue him for breach of the contract of hiring, or for


TABLES AND NOTES. 163

breach of an obligation {quasi ex contractu) implied in the
status of ser\'ant.

Considered under another aspect, these rights are of
another character, and belong to another class. Considered
under that aspect, they avail or obtain against other per¬
sons generally, and the obligations (or, rather, the qfficia)
to which they correspond, are invariably negative. As
against other persons generally, they are not so much
rights to the custody and education of the child, to the
custody and education of the ward, and to the services of
the slave or servant, as rights to the exercise of such rights
without molestation by strangers. As against strangers, their
substance consists of duties, incumbent upon strangers, to
forbear or abstain from acts inconsistent with their scope
or purpose. In case the child (or ward) be detained from
the father (or guardian), the latter can recover him from
the stranger by a proceeding in a Court of Justice, which,
let it be named as it may, is substantially an action in
rem: that is to say, an action grounded on an injury to a
right which avails generally, and seeking the restitution
of the injured party to the exercise of that violated right.
In case the child bo beaten or otherwise harmed injuri¬
ously, the father has an action against the wrongdoer for
the wrong to his interest in the child. In case the slave
be detained from his master’s service, the master can re¬
cover him in specie (or his value in the shape of damages)
from the stranger who wrongfully detains him. In case
the slave be harmed and rendered unfit for his work, the
master is entitled to satisfaction for the injury to his right
of ownership. If the servant be seduced from his service,
the master can sue the servant for breach of contract; and
also the instigator of the desertion, for the wrong to his
interest in the servant. In case the servant be harmed and
disabled from rendering his service, the harm is an injury
to the master’s interest in the servant, as well as to the per¬
son of the latter.


166


TABLES AND NOTES.


The correlating conditions or Mmb of husband and wife,
will also illustrate that capital distinction which it is the
purpose of the present note to explain or suggest.

Between themselves, they have mutual rights %npersonam^
and arc subject to corresponding obligations. Moreover,

. each has rights to the other availing against the rest of the
world, and answering to duties, w'hicli, invariably, are
negative. Adultery by the wife violates a right of the first
class, and entitles the husband, against the wife^ to a di¬
vorce a wemd cl thoro. Adultery mlh the wife violates a
right of the sccoud class, and gives him an action for da¬
mages, against ihG^adulierer,


A right or interest to or in a person, and a right or
interest to or in a thing, (lifter in this: that the subject of
the former belongs to tlie class of persons, whilst that of the
latter is a thing, in the narrower acceptation of the term.
(Sec above, in the present note,.C. a.) With reference to
the capital distinction which is the matter of the present
note, these rights are precisely equivalent. Each is a right
availing unincrsally or generally, and implying or composed
(7^ obligations, incumbenlunpon the world at large, to forbear
from such, positive acts as would defeat or thwart its pur¬
pose. The rights {in personam deterndnatam) and the ob¬
ligations {stricto sensu), which invariably concur with the
former, arc nevertheless distinct from it; just as a like obli¬
gation, which may concern or regard the latter,i8 nevertheless
extraneous to it. (See above, in the present note, B. a. b.)

But though these rights are thus equivalent or identical,
certain writers have marked and distinguished the former
by a pcculiar name.

A right br interest to. or in a person, has been, styled, in
German,**df>^/fc/<-persdnlickesRecht:” “personliches Recht
a»f dingliche Art “ personlichcs Recht von dingliclter Be-
schaffenhdt “ Recht auf cine Person ads auf dm 8ache:*l


TABLES AMD MOTES.


167


In modern Latin, “jus realiter personale.” Eacli of which
expressions may be rendered into English by this: “ A right
or interest to or in a person ^that person were a thing

The author of this innovation upon the established lan¬
guage of the science, was KmL See his “ Metaphysische
Anfangsgriinde der Rechtslehre”—“Metaphysical Prin¬
ciples of the Science of Law ” A treatise darkened by a
philosophy, w’hich, I own, is my aversion, but abounding,
I must needs admit, with traces of rare sagacity. He has
seized a number of notions, complex and difficult in the ex¬
treme, with distinctness And ])Tecision which are marvellous,
considering the scantiness of his means* For,, of positive
systems of law he had scarcely the slightest tincture; and
the knowledge of the principles of jurisprudence wdiich he
borrowed from other writers, w'as drawn, for the most part,
from the muddiest sources: from books about the fustian
which is styled the Law of Nature.

But though this novelty comes from an imposing quarter,
and has even been adopted by lawyers of consummate acute¬
ness and learning, I venture to pronounce it needless, and
pregnant with perplexity and error.

“ In Hern (—a phrase purely classical, barbarous and
uncouth as it may look) would ob^j^ate the fancied necessity
for these new fangled expressions, supposing it were used
in a manner which analogy justifies or commands. The
phrase is nowhere employed by the Roman Lawyers them¬
selves, for the purpose of signifying briefly, and withal ade¬
quately and unambiguously, the entire class of rights which
avail against the world at large. But if it were applied by
us to this most important purpose, in a manner analogous
to the modes in which it was applied by thenit it would ac¬
complish the purpose perfectly. Thus applied, it would de¬
note the compass of a right, and not the nature of its subject'.
It would indicate that the right in question availed against
other persons generally^ without denoting also that its suh^
ject was a thing. It would apply to rights over persons, as


16^ * TABL1S8 AND NOTES,

• •k • ^

V«U as to rfgbts over things, without the shadow of a sole-
cisDK below, in the present note, C. d. 8.] Conse-
qil^tly, tl»e new fanglcd expression “ jus realiter personale,”
with others of the Kke intention, are needless. “Jus in renal'
token in the large signification which analogy justifies, would
point with perfect precision at the generic j)roperty of the
right. And in case it were necessary to indicate “ that its
subject was a/;mow,” this^^ its specific property, might be ad¬
jected briefly and easily, by a slight qualification of the term:
E. g. “jus in T4mi oyer (or to) a pefsonl"

Nor arc these ungainly expressions iiicrcly needless. Those
amongst them which arc not some yard in length, and which
jire properly names rather than definitions or descriptions,
are ambiguous as well as needless. According to the in¬
tention of their author, and of those who have adopted them,

slmdd suggest to the hearer or reader, the extcnmve
compass of the rights which they arc used to denote. They
ouglil to indicate, that tliese rights arc not of the class which
avail against determinate persons: that though their subjects
exQ persons t they avail against the world at large as j/'they
were rights ever things. Now according to established
usage, the term personate (or persondches) intimates the re¬
verse : jus personate con|,monIy signifying rights which ob¬
tain agmnst persona certain. Consequently, the expressions
now in question defeat their own end, by suggesting the
veYy notion which it is their purpose to exclude. Nor is
this inconvenience obviated by the adverb rea/eVer (or ding-
lieh)t which is adjected to the term personate for the pur¬
pose of qualifying its import. To a mind exclusively con¬
versant with the established language, “jus reatiter per-
sonale ” (or “ e/e/tyAc^-personliches Recht ”) would probably
suggest a species oijus personate, though not the entire class,
•Instead of suggesting, as it should, yV# in rmn over a person,
it WQuld> probably seem to indicate that sort of jus in per¬
sonam, which is usually denoted by the expression jus ad
rem (acquirendamj, and to which that significant expression


TABLKS AND NOTES.


169


ought to be confined. In other words, it wodd probnbljr^.
seem to indicate those rights in personam^ which imply and
consist of obligations ** ad dandum aliquid :** that is to sqy, >
obligations to deliver a thing (or to pass a right in rm) at
the instance and appointment of the obligee. [See above, in
‘ the present note, B. c.; and below, note 4.]'

Before I pass trom the subject directly under.considera¬
tion, I will offer a few Temarks which it naturally suggests;
and for which the present place is the least inconvenient that
I can find, although they are rather digressive from the
general subject of the Note.

Rights or Interests over or in Persons, with the general
and special obligations which those rights or interests imply,
fall under the department of Law denominated Jm Person-
arum. They floto from those Differences of persons (styled
Conditions or Status)., which are the basis of the Division of
persons, or of the Distribution of perions into classes. Or
(speaking more accurately) these rights and obligations are
ingredients or constituent parts entering into the composition
of those differences. .

Por the various conditions (or status) of various persons,
are not the sources of differences in their rights, obligations
and capacities (—“qualitates quaruni raiione diverse jure
utuntur,”) but are constituted ox those very differ¬

ences.

A given person bears a given condition (or, changing the
expression, belongs to a given class), by virtue of distinctive
rights, capacities, and duties—by a want of certain rights,
and of capacities to take those rights*~:or by exemptions
from certain obligations. In other words, these rights, ca¬
pacities, and duties, or these incapacities and exemptions,
are considered as forming or composing a single though com¬
plex being, and are bound into that complex One by the col¬
lective name “ condition.”

His condition is not the source of his distinctive rights


170 TABLES AND NOTES.

and obligations, for these are his condition, or, at least, con>
stituent parte of it. Their source (—“ id cujus ratime diverso
jure utitur ”) is the fact, event, or incident, which invests
him with the condition: that is to say, gives him the rights
and capacities, add subjects him to the duties and incapa¬
cities, of which the condition is composed, or for which that
word is a name. For example, the barrister or the attorney
is distinguished from other men, by peculiar obligations
which arc imposed upon him, and by peculiar rights
which he enjoys. These peculiar obligations, with these
peculiar rights, compose or are the Condition of Barrister or
Attorney. The source or came of his condition^ or of his
distinctive obligations and rights, is his Call to the Bar, or
his Admission as an Attorney.

The notion of stntm or condition (as understood by the
Homan Lawyers), has been covered with thick darkness by
the vague talk of their successors, and is not entirely free
from difficulty and doubt. But I think that the plain, ac¬
count of it, which I. have given above, will be found to tally
with the truth, or to approach it pretty closely, by those who
will take the trouble (trouble too seldom taken) of scekiiig,
inspecting, and collating the original and proper authorities.

See and compare the following places;— Gaim^ Lib.

I. H 8, 9,13,67, 80, 81,128, 159, 102.—/»«/. Lib. 1. tit.
8. ^ 4.—^tit. 5. ^ 3.—tit. 16. § 4.—tit. 22. ^ 4. Lib. II. tit.

II. S 5.—tit. 17. SS *1,4, Q.—Dip. Lib. I. tit. 5. frag. 5, in
pr., frag. 9, frag. 21, frag. 26, sub fine. —tit. 9. frag. 10, sub
jine. Lib. IV. tit. 5. frag. 3, sub fne^ frag. 11. Lib. V. tit.
13. frag. 5. ^ 1, 2, 3.

To fix the notion of Status with perfect exactness, seems
to be impossible. For there arc certain sets or series of
righto and obligations, which would probably be considered
by one mad as forming or composing Status, though another
would rather refer them to the Jm Rerum: i, e. the Law
(or Doctrine) of Rights and Obligations in general, or of
Rights and Obligations abstracted or apart from conditions,
[See above, note 2; and also Table IV. See. 2.]


TABLES AND NOTES.


171


The matter is full of embarrassment, and I presume to
touch it with no small hesitation. But still 1 will venture
to suggest^ thait the following properties or marks are, per¬
haps, the te,8t of a Condition: that is, may serve to distin--
guish Conditions- properly so called, from Rights, Obliga¬
tions, and Capacities to which the name is inapplicable.

1. The duties or obligations, which are constituent parts
of conditions, or which correspond to rights entering into
the composition of conditions, are general or indeterminate:
that is to say, obligations to acts or forbearances indefinite
in respect of number.

For example, If you hire another as your servant, two
conditions (those of master and servant) are created by the
contract. For each incurs obligations and each acquires
rights, of which the objects are not determined individually,
although their kinds may be fixed. You arc obliged to feed
him, etc., so long as the contract shall continue; and he is
obliged to render a scries of services, which arc equally in¬
definite as to number.

But if you hire another to do some single service (ns to go
on a given errand), the conditions of master and servant are
not created by the contract; nor, even in popular and vague
language, would he be called your servant, or you bis mas¬
ter. And a like remark will apply to every legal relation,
which consists of a right, or an obligation, to a detenninate
act or forbearance. No one ascribes a status to Buyer or
Seller, etc.

2. The duties or obligations, which are constituent parts
of conditions, or which correspond to rights entering into
the composition of conditions, are also indeterminate in this:
that the acts or forbearances which are their objects, are in¬
definite with respect to hind.

If you hire another as your servant, the hinds bf services,
which he undertakes to render, are just as undetermined as
the single or individual services to which the contract binds
him. Consequently, you are luaster, and he is servant; or


172


TABLES AND NOTES.


you and he are severally clothed with the condiiiom which
are denoted by those names.

But if you engaged another to render services of a class
(as to supply your family with bread, to shoe your horses,
or the like), you and he would hardly be clothed with coa-
ditions by virtue of that contract. And the same remark
w’ill apply to the relation of Landlord and Tenant, of Prin¬
cipal and Factor, of Grantor and Grantee of an Annuity,
etc. For in all these cases, the services to be rendered by
the parties, are fixed or circumscribed as to kind; although
the acts or forbearances to which they arc bound, are not
determined as to nunjber.

In short. Rights, Duties, Capacities, or Incapacities, can
hardly be said to constitute a Status or Condition, unless
they impart to the person a conspicuous character: unless
they run through his position in a continued vein or stratum:
unless they tinge the whole of his legal being with a dis¬
tinctive and obvious colour.—All which talk is certainly a
tissue of metaphors, and therefore little better than sheer
trumpery. But such arc the difficulties sticking to the
matter in question, thcTt I am tempted at every instant to
fiee from the toilsome analysis, and take to the ready refuge
of ignorant or perplexed interpreters.

For instance: Whether the circumstance which I have
mentioned as the second mark of a condition, be indeed
such a mark, seems to admit of doubt.

There certainly are many Status in which it occurs, and
of which it is a prominent and striking feature: c.g. those
of Husband and Wife, Parent and Child, Guardian and
Ward, Master and Slave, Alien, Insolvent, Magistrate, etc.
In all which cases, the distinctive duties of the parties, or
the duties which correspond to their distinctive rights, oblige
to acts and forbearances indefinite in respect of kind. In¬
stead of being confined or circumscribed by a well deter¬
mined description, these acts and. forbearances run indis¬
tinctly through numerous and disparate classes.


TABLES AND NOTES. ] 73

Bat' I think I might talk, without impropriety, of the
Condition of an Agricidiural Servant: And yet the rights
and duties of the master and servant, are, here, of a dcdiiite
character.

The Right, Interest, or Estate, which a man may have
in a Dignityy presents a. similar difficulty. The scope or
purpose of the right, is to bear a Title oL Honour; and
to get therewith the admiration or deference, which that
distinctive and honorary mark may extract from the rest of
the world. Consequently, the duties which correspond to
the right, are simple and exactly circumscribed. They are
merely obligations, incumbent upon other persons generally,
to abstain from all such acts as might cast a slur upon the
right: B. g. disputing the title of the party to wear the
honorary badge; or treating the badge itself irreverently,
to the possible damage of the worth which it derives from
current opinion.

But yet I imagine, that a person invested with a Dignity,
is also invested, by virtue of the Dignity, with a Status or
Conditionand that in an Arrangement of Law founded
upon just principles, this his distinctive right, together with
the corresponding duties, would be detached from General
Law (or Jus llerum)^ and inserted in Special Law (or Jus
Bersonarum). [See above, note 2, and also Table IV. Sec. 2.]

It is scarcely necessary to remark, that I have here been
speaking of a Dignity considered simply or by itself. The
status or conditions constituted by rights of the sort, are
absolutely distinct from the political or public statm, which
not unfrequently concur with them in the same individuals.
Tl^ political powers of an English Peer, might be precisely
what they are, although he were not distinguished by a
single honorary title. And a right to a Dignity (as to that
of Baronet, for instance,) is frequently unconnected with a
political or public character.

3. Certain Conditions are purely or mostly onerous .—
Such is the Condition of the Slave: to whom the Law rer


174


TABt«ES A^'D NOTKB.


fuses rights, or deals them with a niggard hand. Accord¬
ing to the Roman Law (down to the age of the Antonines),
the slave had “ nullum caput;** was “ res :** that is to say, he
was the subject of*right3 residing in his master; lay under
obligations towards his master and others; but enjoyed not
a particle of right against a single creature. As the subject
of another's rights, he was S4isceptible of damage ; but he
was not susceptible of injury. —According to the same sys¬
tem (in its earlier and ruder state), the Son in poiestate, and
the Wife in manut were also “ res** in respect of the Father
and Husband; although they had “ caput,* or were invested
with rights, in rcsj)ect of third persons.

Now to talk of a right or interest in a purely onerous con¬
dition, were to talk absurdly. But so far as a condition is
lucrative, or consists of rights and advantages, we may
imagine an interest in the condition, considered as a com¬
plex whole: considered as “juris miivcrsifas:** considered
without reference to the single and separate rights, which
are component or constituent parts of it. And this, 1 in¬
cline to think, is ajiiark of cveiy status not purely onerous:
although there are certain aggregates, or universities of
rights, to whicli the name of status is inapplicable. In other
words, though every juris universitas is not a condition, every
condition, so fhr as it consists of rights, vs^ juris universitas.

Accordingly, the party has a right in his condition, ana¬
logous to ownership in a single or individual thing .* jus in
rem: a right, or interest, which avails against the world at
large (although the several rights, which are ingredients in
his condition, be rights in personam merely).

Consequently, wrongs against this right, arc analogpus
to wrongs against ownership: And, according to the prac¬
tice of the Roman Law, wrongs of both classes are redressed
by analogous remedies.

Where the individual thing is unlawfully detained from
the owner, he vindicates or recovers ,the thing by an action
in rem. Where the right in the condition is wrongfully


TABLES AND NOTES. • 175

disputed, the party asserts his right by a peculiar and ap¬
propriate action, “ quae in rem esse videtur”

According to the practice of the English Law, contro¬
versies touching conditions, and other^»n> univeraitates,
are commonly decided or tried in an indirect or incidental
manner. Some pariiciUar right, parcel of the complex
whole, is .the immediate object of the proceeding; and the
more comprehensive question is handled in the course of
this proceeding, obliquely, or by way of episode. For ex¬
ample, The interest of the Assignees in the Estate and
Effects of the Bankrupt (or, changing the expression, in the
aggregate or mioemiy of his rights), is frequently impugned
and asserted in an action of amumjml or trover. And, thus,
a question of legitimacy (precisely a question de statu)y is
not uncommonly agitated in an action of ejectment or tres¬
pass.

For these reasons, juris universiiatesy or rights in aggre¬
gates of rights, stand out sharply in the Roman Law, and
are marked with comparative indistinctness in the English.
But rights of the sort are not the less known to the latter.
They are, in truth, essential or necessary parts in every pos¬
sible system of rights and obligations. And, if I were hot
limited with respect to space and time, 1 could mention
certain proceedings, before certain of the English Courts,
wherein rights of the sort arc brought directly to question:
wherein the complex whole, abstracted from its component
parts, is the immediate object of the controversy.

The wrongs, against rights in conditions, to which 1 have
just adverted, are analogous to dispossession or detention, in
the case of dominion or ownership. But a right in a con¬
dition, like ownership in an individual thing, is also ob¬
noxious to offences which differ from dispossession: by
which the enjoyment of the right is not usurped; by which
the title of the party is not impugned; but by which the right
is nevertheless annihilated, or its value diminished or en¬
dangered. U. y. To wound or beat the Child, is an offeiice


176 * TABliBS notes.

against the Condition of the father. For the mass of the
rights and advantages which i^ruc to the father from his
fatherhood, is thereby put in jeopardy^ or positively lessened
in worth.—^To slay^^he Husband and Father, is not only a
crime punishable on the part of the community, but is also
a civil injury to the Conditions Irf^he Wife and Child. For
the sum of the rights and advances arising from their re¬
lation to the deceased, is annihilated or diminished by the
act. According to the notions and the practice which have
obtained in modern times, the civil injury merges in the
crime. But still it is easy to imagine, that the Law might
impose upon the criminal, a twofold obligation: an obliga¬
tion to suffer punishment, on the part of the community at-
large ; and a ^irther obligation to satisfy the parties, whose
interest in the deceased he has destroyed. Before the abo¬
lition of Apficals, this was nearly the case in the Law of
England. The murderer was obnoxious to punishment,
properly so called; and, in case that punishment were not
inflicted, the wife and the heir of the slain were entitled to
vindictive satisfaction, which they exacted or remitted at
their pleasure.—If,l slander your servant, and you turn
him off in consequence, I wrong your servant in his condi¬
tion, I debar him from that aggregate of contingent ad¬
vantages, which his stay in your service might have given
him.—^To slander the skill of a surgeon, or to question with¬
out cause the solvency of a trader, are. wrongs of the same
sort. They are not violations of rights to individual sub¬
jects or objects, but are offences against conditions. They
umd to abridge the sum of those future and indeterminate
advantages, which the surgeon may derive from his calling,
or the trader from his trade.

In short, of the several properties or marks which may
be found in every status, the following wmuld seem to be
one.—Every status, so far as it consists of rights, is “juris
miversifas.” Therefore, as an aggi-egateof rights, and ab¬
stracted from its component* parts, it is the subject of a right


TikipWSS "AND tfOTlS. 177

in r6m which is ahalogotts to the light of ownership. Thcre-^
fore, each of these rights is obnoxious to wrongs, which are
also analogous.. .ThM^e^ whatever may be the practice
of this > or that system, offences agaifist ownership, and
offences against rights in ponditions, admit of analogous
remedies. •

In conditions which ai^ purely onerous, or consist of ob-
%ations only, this mark is not to be found. But condi¬
tions of that sort commonly correlate with others in which
the mark occurs. The condition of slave, for instance, is
implied in the condition of master; and when I consider
the latter, I necessarily consider the former. Consequently,
if the mark'in question belongs to lucrative conditions, it
is also, jndirec/tly, a mark of onerous conditions.

4. Single persons, or persons determined singly, may be
marked or distinguished by peculiar rights and capacities,
or peculiar duties and incapacities, hlor example. The legis¬
lature may grant to an individual, or to a corporate body,
the-monopoly of some commodity: laying on that individual,
or on that artificial person, peculiar obligations with respect
to the manufacture or import. ^

By the Roman Lawyers, and by modern expositors of
the system, rights and obligations of the sort are often de¬
nominated singular: oftener, and less ambiguously,
legia.

Now certain of these privilegia have many of the marks
of conditions, but yet arc distinguished from conditions.
They are not styled conditions, nor are they inserted in
“ The Law of Personsthe department of the Corpm Juris
which is occupied with the description of conditions ; and
which would be named more appositely, if it were called
“ The Law of Stains^

Nor is this exclusion capricious. All privileges are pe¬
culiar or distinctive; and some of them have other marks,
which are also found in conditions. But though conditions
are peculiar, still they are common or general, as contra-

VOL. III. N


178


TABLES ABD N0TK8.


distinguished from nngdar: Privileges are peculiar and
singular. Conditions distinguish persons, considered as
members of classes: Privileges distinguish persons, con>
sidered singly or individually. The distinctive rights and
duties of Fathers, Wives, and Infants, constitute conditions:
Distinctive rights or duties limited to Sempronius or Styles,
are not a condition. At least, they are not a condition fit
for the Law of Persons. ^

For the Law of Persons or Biattus (and the Corpus Juris
in general), ought to be occupied with matters of wide and
lasting concern. It should no more stoop to the descrip¬
tion of these singularities or anomalies, than the Law or
Doctrine of Contracts should attempt to anticipate the pe¬
culiarities which distinguish contracts individually.

Privileges arc matter for a peculiar department belonging
to Jus llerum. For, in this peculiar department, they should
not be described singly, but considered generally. It should
merely determine the principles, v^hich regulate privileges
as a dass.

In truth, thfi l^|ri;utes, or Customs, which create or esta¬
blish priviief|j^, can hardly be ranked with Laws. They
arc mere ano mili^s : exorbitant or irregular commands pro¬
ceeding from the Legislature ; or, what in effect is exactly
the same thing, eccentric customs tacitly sanctioned by the
Legyi^Uffe. They arc not so much analogous to laws or
rules^oflawt as to iHles, or investitive events. And, accord¬
ingly, moat of them must be proved by the parties who are
interested in sustaining them, before the Courts of Justice
can know or notice their existence.

Consequently, one mark of Conditions is tins: A Condition
or Status is common to peraons of a dass^ and is not re¬
stricted to pcrsqns singlg or individuallg determined.

But this, like most propositions, must be qualified. There
are certain powers or rights and also certain duties, which
arc properly ranked with conditions and inserted in the
Law of Persons, although they arc limited to single men or


TABLES AND NOTES.


17 ^

to single bodies of men. The principle which suggests the
exclusion of singular rights and obligations, points at the
propriety of admitting them in these excepted cases. For
the powers and duties in question, are* of wide and lasting
concern: And if they were not inserted in the Corpus Juris,
this would be little better than a fragment aiul a riddle.
Such are the powers of the Sovereifh, where the Sovereign is
One. And such are the rights and duties of certain magis-
tratib or companies, who, though they are single persons,
natural or artificial, are clothed with functions which deeply
concern the general, and run in a continued vein through the
mass or aggregate of the law.

. 5. It appears from the last section, that a Condition or
Status is comnwn to persons of a class. To which I will
add (superfluous as the addition may seem'), that no Con¬
dition or Status extends to persons indiscriminately. The
rights or duties which constitute a Condition, reside exclu¬
sively in persons of a given description: though many of
the duties or rights to which they correspond, may reside
in persons generally, or even in all per^s;

This is a truism. But, like all other tlaiisjuf^ it is prone to
slip from the memory. If .the excellent Sir Matthew Hale
had looked to it steadily, and had stayed to ask the mean¬
ing of “ Jus Fersonarum,** it is certain that he would not
have fallen into an extremely gross error which defuy^s his
Analysis of the Law. (See, post, in Tables VII. aw VIII.,
the Arrangement proposed hj Hale, and adopted by Black-
stone.^ Under “ The Rights of Persons” (meaning “ The
Law of Persons”), they have placed the right to liberty;
the right to bodily security; the right to reputation; with
the rest of certain rights Which they are pleased to style
absolute: Rights which, nevertheless; belqjng pre-eminently
and conspicuously to “ The Law of Things:” which of all
imaginable rights are precisely the most general: which, in
every region on earth, reside in everg person, to whom the
Sovereign or State extends a particle of ^protection. Such^

N 2


180


TABLES AND NOTES.


at Isast, is the case with the right to bodily security, and
also with the right to liberty: i. e. the right of exercising,
without molestation from others, that liberty, of doing or
forbearing which is conceded by the Law. And such is
the case, nearly, with all the rest of the rights, which,
under the name of adsolitUt they have foisted into the Law
of Persons. All of them are rights residing in all persons,
or, at least, in persons generally.

To speak plain -English, they either forgot to ask, ori;hcy
considered slightly and superficially, the following obvidus
questions:—What is a StaitM or Condition ? What arc
the fit contents of that department'of the Law, which is
styled by the Roman Lawyers, or, rather, by their followers,
Jus Fersomrum ?

The terms which Hale employs, and which Blackstone
copies, sliow, without more, that such was the fact. How
does the title ** Rights of Persons” apply to the depart¬
ment in question more than-to another?. The Rights and
Obligations of Persons, arc the subjects of all Law: and all
the various departments into which it is divided, equally
concern such rights. What would be thought of a trea¬
tise on the various races of mankind, which should dislin-
guisU White Men or Black Men by the simple appellative
■ <‘Men”?

Nor can we impute this absurdity to the Roman Law¬
yers, and suppose that Hale aud Blackstone were blinded
by their example. For they nowhere style this department
“ The Rights of Persons.” In two or three passages^which
lie at the threshold of their Institutes, and in which a
stranger to their sgstem naturally sticks and is ensnared,
they do, indeed, call it “ The JSSfea of Persons,” or ** The
Loud which concerns Persons.” And here, I admit, they
iiave fallen into nonsense w'hich is scarcely less gross than
the other. But their usual names for the department are
these: ** Dwisio Personarum”—“Do Conditione Homi-

A

pum ”—;**J)e<®te^Hominum ”—“ De P^sonarum Statu


TABLES AND NOTES.


ISI

Names not inapposite, and intimating clearly enough the
general scope of their Arrangement.

Nor is the opposite department styled by the Roman
Lawyers “The.i2(^^/« of Things:’* a title, which, taken
literally, ascribes rights to rigUtaj and to thiiigSt acU^ and
forhearnneea^ as subjects and objects of rights. Tlieir name ‘
was not absurd, although it was wretchedly obscure. It
was obscure in consequence of its ambiguity, and in conse¬
quence of its elliptical shape. For as “ rew,” in one of its
senses, signifies fJimga, ** Jus Rerum ” (or “ Jus quod ad
Rea pertinct ”) will hardly suggest to a novice, surely and
readily, the meaning which was really intended: namely,
The Law of Rights and Ohligationa (abstracted from Con-
ditionsy. And though the term “res” signifies rights and
obligations, still the elliptical expression “Jus Rerum**
drops the characteristic of the department in question:
namely, that it relates to. Rights and Obligations abstracted
from Conditions^ and is thereby distinguished from
Rersonarmn** or the department which treats of Conditions.


Before I conclude this digression, which has run to un¬
conscionable length, I will yet venture a remark.—The
contents of the great departments “jus personarum et
rcrunt** arc perfectly distinct in general;but cross or blctid
occasionally. The line of demarcation by which the de¬
partments arc severed has never been observed, nor should
it be observed, with inflexible rigour. The principles or
grounds of Method are subordinate to the ends of Method.

I have stated, a little a|)ove, that certain rights and obli¬
gations, which, strictly, not conditions, should yet be
ranked with conditions, and placed in the Law of Persons.
I may now add, that certain rights and obligations which,
properly, constitute conditions, are placed with propriety in
the Law of Things.

This is remarkably the case with the rights and oblige-


182


TABLES AND NOTES.


tions of those who are styled the general representatives of
testators or intestates, or are said to represent their
that is to say, who succeed universitatem to their rights
and duties, or, at least, to their rights or duties of a given
description or class. Such is the heir, whether tehtamen-
targ or legitimate, of the Roman Law. Such are the ease-
cutor or administrator, and. also the next of kin, in the Law
of England. And such (I may add) is the English heir,
with the general or particular devisee. As opposed to the
executor, etc., the heir or devisee has been esteemed a sin^
gular successor. But it were perfectly easy to .demonstrate
that he is successor universalis f or a general representa¬
tive of the deceased. For he succeeds universally or gene¬
rally to rights and duties of a class, or, at least, to duties of
a class.

Now I think you would hunt in vain for a single pro¬
perty or maik, whereby the rights and duties of such uni¬
versal successors can be distinguished from the purest of
the Conditions which are placed i|| the Law of Persons.
And, accordingly,^ir Matthew Hde, in his Analysis of the
Law, has posted in that department the relation of Ancestor
and fieir: i. e. the status, or condition of the latter.

And* yet these rights and duties have never been styled
conditions, and are placed by general consent in the Law
of Things. The reason of which seeming anomaly I take
to be this. «

By dividing the aggregate of the law into persona-
rum et rerum f two important ends are or may be attained:
brevity and distinctness. Rights and duties in general
^ (—all that can be said about them apart from conditions),
‘"'are severed or abstracted from'the distinctive rights and
duties of which conditions are composed. Hence rights and
duties in general arc described once for all. And, hence, the
march of these general description^ is comparatively clear
and easy: being freed from the numerous restrictions, ex¬
tensions, and explanations with which we must take these


TABLES AND NOTES. 183

descriptions, when we look at the matter of conditions.
(See Table IV. sec. 2.)

But in case the rights and duties of these general repre¬
sentatives or successors were ranked with status or condi¬
tions, the two important ends, which are attained by the
division, would be thwarted rather than advanced. For the
special matter in question is inseparably connected and in¬
terlaced with the general scheme or system of rights and
obligations: In order to the explanation of the last, the
former must be expounded with it. Consequently, an
attempt to treat the former apart from the other, would
lead to repetition and obscurity. Such is the intriiisic con¬
nexion subsisting between the two, that they must be con¬
sidered jointly in spite of the attempt to sever them. And
the. title assigned to the former in the Law of Persons,
were, therefore, a mere excrescence without an intelligible
pur|)ose.

The questions which 1 have laboured to elucidate in this
long and wearisome digression, are probably the most diffi¬
cult which the science of jurisprudence presents. Beyond
a doubt they rank with the most important. For every
attempt to digest the aggregate of the law, or to compose
a treatise or commentary embracing the same subject, ought
to be preceded by a perspicuous notion of the leading dis¬
tinctions and divisions. On the degree of precision and
justness with which these are conceived and predetermined
the merit and success of the attempt will mainly depend.
Errors or defects in the detail, arc readily ektirped or sup¬
plied. Errors in the general design infect the entire system,
and are absolutely incurable. ■

But of all distinctions and divisions, the most compre¬
hensive ai’e these:—The distinction between Conditions^
and the Rights, Obligations, and Capacities, which are not
ConditionsThe division of Law into general and special^
or Law of Things and Law of Persons.


184 TABLK6 AND NOTES.

To.fix that distinction firmly, and to draw an intelligible
line between those two departments, were to cleanse the
scie^ from much of the confusion and jargon by which it
is** mcured arid disgraced. And if the few desultory re¬
marks which ! have here ventured to throw out, should
turn the attention of the reflecting to these weighty and
perplexing problems, I shall feel myself more than repaid
for the labour which they have cost me, crude and defective
as they are.

(c.) It is said in a preceding section (C. a.), “ that of
rights which avail or obtain against other persons j^cnerally,
some are rights over or to pvrsonft, and some have no sub¬
ject (person or thing).” Examples of the former have been
given in the last section (C. b.). I will now produce, as
briefly os I can, -a few instances of the latter.

1. The right to reputation .—^Tlie scope or end of this
right, is the esteem and goodwill of the public: of that in¬
determinate number of indeterminate persons, by whom the
person in question may happen to be known. And here,
it is manifest, there is not the shadow of a subject, over
which the right can be exercised, or in which it can be said
to inhere or exist. It is merely a right to that mass of
contingent enjoyments, which the person may chance to
derive from general approbation and sympathy. And yet
this is a right which avails against the world at large:
every false imputation, thrown upon the person in question,
being a delict or injury affecting or committed against it.

2. A wompoljf: or the right of vending exclusively com-
nioditics of a given efass.—This is a right which illustrates *
in a striking manner the nature of jus in rein. Here, the
generic character of the right stands alone. There is not a
single circumstance to draw the attention from it. There
is no determinate subject (person or thing),;(wer which the
right is exercised, or in which it can be said to exist. Nor
is it^ right to sell commodities of the class. For that is a


TABLES AND NOTES.


185


right which the party would enjoy without the monopoly.
The right consists in the duty, which is imposed upon
other persons generally, to forbear from all such act| as
would defeat or thwart its purpose: namely, from s€mii%
commodities of the class.

3. Certain of those rights which are styled in the En¬
glish Law franchisee: as, for instance, a right of exercising
jurisdiction in a given territory, or a right of levying a toll
'at a bridge or ferry.—In each of these cases, the law em¬
powers the party to do certain acts, and lays a negative ob¬
ligation upon other persons generally to forbear from dis¬
turbing the exercise. But the acts are not exercised over a
determinate subject. And this peculiarity distinguishes
.tlie interest of the party from an interest in a person or
thing: as, for iiistancci property in a slave—the interest of
the father or guardian in the child or ward—ownership or’
servitus in or over a field.

It is scarcely necessary to add, that the rights in personam,
which concur with the rights in question, arc perfectly dis¬
tinct from the latter. Those who reside within my terri¬
tory, are bound to bring their plaints into my court. Those
who traverse ray bridge or ferry are bound to •pay me a
toll. But these arc positive obligations, specially attaching
upon persons who stand in peculiar positions. They are
broadly distinguished from the general and negative duties,
of which my right, considered jus in rem, is constituted
or composed: e.g. not to usurp jurisdiction within the limits
of the territory, or not to molest passengers crossing the
bridge or ferry.

4. Rights or interests in pertain emditions, considered as
^uris universitaies. (See above, C. b.)

In many cases, the right or interest in the condition con¬
curs with a right or interest over or in a person: For ex¬
ample, the father or husband has an intei’est in the child or
wife; the child or wife, in the father or husband; the
master, in the slave or servant. But,, in other cases, there


186


TABLES AND NOTES.


is no determinate subject (person or "thing) to which the
right in the condition can be said to relate. Such are rights
in the conditions which are constituted by callings or pro¬
fessions. (Sec above, C. b.)

(cf.) One of the great desiderata in the language of juris¬
prudence, is this: A pair of opposed expressions denoting
briefly and unambiguously the two classes of rights which
are the subject of the present note: namely, Rights avail¬
ing against persons genei'ally or mhersally^ and Rights
availing against persons certain or detemiinate.

The opposed or contrasted expressions commonly cm-
jdoyed for the purpose, arc the following: “ jus in re” and
"jus ad rein:” “jus in rem'* and “jus iu personam:*'
“jus rcale** and “jus personate:** '^dominium (sciisu la-
tiore) *’ and “ oblipaHo** But these arc liable to the gene¬
ral objection which 1 have explained in the preceding re¬
marks. (Sec C. a. b. c.) Jus in re^jus in rem, jus reale
and dominium^ will none of them denote, without a degree
of ambiguity, the entire class of rights which avail against
the world at large. Although they arc often employed in
that extcAsive signification, they commonly signify such of
those rights os arc rights to determinate things.

Besides this general objection, each of these pairs of
terms is, liable to special objections, which now 1 will
briefly indicate. In the eburse of this review, certain terms,
synonymous with the terms in question, will be noticed
with the same brevity. At the close, 1 will shortly state
my reasons for giving a decided preference to '^jtis in rem
e^jus in personam”

1, “Jus in re” and Jus ad Rem .”—Jus ad rem signifie#
ang right which avails against a person certain. Still it is
often restricted to a species of such rights: to those which
correlate with obligations “ad dandum. aliquid.” (See
above, B. c.: G. b.: And see below, note 4.) It is, there¬
fore, ambiguous.


TABLES AND NOTES.


isr

2. “Jus reale" and “Jus personate** —^.For thi^ nume¬
rous ambiguities which stick to these expressions, see bebw,
note 5.

3. ** Doniinium (sensu latiore)” and “ Obligaiio** —Be¬
sides the general objection which is mentioned above,
dominium (as opposed to obll^aiio) differs from dominium
(in the strict signification). As opposed to obligation it em¬
braces “jura in re” (in the sense of the Classical Jurists):
that is to say, “jura in vq aliend:** right^ or interests in
subjects which are owned by others. Taken in the strict
signification, it is directly opposed to these rights*, being
synonymous with proprietor” with “in re potesfas** or
with “jus in re propria** (SecTable 1.—For the nume¬
rous ambiguities which beset the term obligation sec Table I.
note G.)

4. “ Potestas** and “ Obligatio** —It has been proposed
to substitute these in the place of dominium and obligation
jus in rem, andy//« in personam, etc.* But this were a change
to the worse. For, l^rsin potestasn as synonymous with do¬
minium n is encumbered with all the ambiguities which stick
to the latter* And, secondly, it is liable to an objection
from which the latter is free. For it usually signifies cer¬
tain species of the rights which avail against persons deter¬
minate : namely, the rights of the master against the slave
(—“ potestas dominomm in servos”); and the rights of the
paterfamilias against his descendants (—“ patria potestas,*’
or “ potestas parentum liberos”).

5. ** Absolute rights” and Relative rights.”—Rights
^which avail against persons generally or universally, and

rights which avail against persons or determinate,

are not unfrequently opposed by the names of absolute and
relative. But these expressions, as thus applied, are flatly
absurd. For rights of both classes are relative: Or, in
other words, rights of both classes correlate with duties or


188 TABLES AND NOTES.

oUigatioM, The only difference is, that the former corre¬
late with duties which are incumbent upon the world at
large; the latter correlate with obligations which arc limited
to determined individuals.

0. “ Jara quae valent In personas generaiim!* and “ Jura
qusc'valent in personas certas sive detm'minatas **—^'fhese
expressions are sufficiently clear and precise. But they
arc rather defini^ons than names, and are much too long
for ordinary use. To the purposes of discourse, brevity is
just as necessary as distinctness or precision.

7. ** Law of Property^* and “ Law of Contract^ —These
expressions, as thus opposed, arc intended to express tlie
distinction which is the subject of the present note. But
they do the business wretchedly. Of the numerous objec¬
tions which immediately present themselves, I will briefly
advert to the following. T. We need contrasted expres¬
sions for the two classes of righh^ and not for the lawi or
rules of which those rights arc the creatures. 2°. Property
is liable to the objection which applies to dominium. In
this instance, its meaning is generic. It signifies rights
of every description which avail against the wpijd at large.
But, in other instances, it distinguishes some species of those
rights from some other species of the same rights. For
example: It signifies ownership^ as opposed to 'servitude or
easement; or it signifies ownership indefinite in point of dura¬
tion, ns opposed to an interest for a definite number of years.
In short, if I travelled through all its meanings and attempted
to fix them with precision, this brief notice would swell to
a long dissertation. Contract is not a name for a class
of rights^ but for a class of the facts or titles by which rights
are generafed. 4®. Rights arising from contracts are only
a portion Df the rights, which the expression law of con¬
tract” is intended to indicate. For ** law of contract,” as
opposed to “ law of property,” denotes, or should denote,
rights in personam certam: a class which embraces rights


TABLES AND NOTES. 189

not arising from contracts, as well as the species of rights
which emanate from those sources.

8. “Jus 4n rm” and “Jus in personam** —Of all cus¬
tomary expressions for the classes of rights in question,
these are incomparably the best. ** Jus in persopam” (cer-
tam sive determinatam), is expressive and free from ambi¬
guity. Cut down io jus in personam^ it is also sufficiently
concise. Jm in renif standing by itself, i% ambiguous and
obscure. But when it is contradistinguished from jus in
personam^ it catches a borrowed clearness from the expres¬
sion to which it is opposed.

Another decisive reason in favour of these terms will be
found in tlie following remarks.

The phrase “ in rem ** is an expression of frequent occur¬
rence. And in all the instances in which it occurs, the
subject to which it is applied is a something which avails
generally: “ quod yeneratim in causam aliquam valet.”

Take the following instance from the language of the
English Law'.

The Judymenls of Courta of Justice arc evidence against
parties to the cause, and against the determinate persons
(succeeding or representing them) who arc styled their
privies. As against persons who are neither parties nor
privies, judgments, speaking generally, arc not evidence.
But certain judgments arc excepted from the general prin¬
ciple, and arc evidence against all persons, or, at least,
against the world at large. Accordingly, judgments of this
species arc marked by a peculiar naine: And that peculiar
name is, “ judgments in rem.**

In this instance, the phrase in rem^ and the manner of
applying it, are manifestly borrowed from the Roman Law¬
yers. For the latter is analogous to the manner in which
they employ the phrase,'wherever it occurs in their writings.
Whenever they use tlie phrase, they always intend a some¬
thing which avails generally or universally: in favour of a


190


TABLES AND NOTES.'


determined person against persons indeterminate; or in
favour of indeterminate persons against a person determined.
—^The cases to which they apply it, I omit. For they could
hardly be made intelligible, unless I wearied the reader
with long and unseasonable explanations.

How the phrase in rent came to acquire this meaning, it
is not very easy to perceive. It is one of the elliptical ex¬
pressions with which language abounds, and which too fre¬
quently obscure the simplest and easiest notions. In this
instance, it might perhaps be possible to restore the links
which are dropped; to connect “ res** (as signifying a tkin^)
with ** in rem** (as signifying .^eneraliiy). But I have
neither space nor time for merely etymological researches.

To jnark the important purpose to which the phrase may
be-turned, is matter of more moment.

Although it is applied by the Roman Lawyers to a co!i-
siderable number of cases, they always apply it partially.
They nowhere use it for the purpose of signifying briefly
and unambiguously, “rights of ever^ description which
avail against persons generally.** The large generic expres¬
sion “Jus in^rem** is not to be found in their writings.

This expression was devised by the Glossators, or by the
Commentators who succeeded them. Seeing that the
phrase “ in rein** always imported generality^ and feeling the
need of a term for “ rights which avail generally!* they ap¬
plied the former to the purpose ^,of marking the latter, and
talked of “Jura %n rem. ^^nd, in this instance, as in
many others, they evince a strength of discrimination, and a
compass of thought, which are rarely displayed by the ele¬
gant and fastidious scholars who scorn them as scholastic
barbarians. In spite of the ignorance to which their posi¬
tion condemned them, their reason was sharpened and invi¬
gorated by the prevalent study of their age: by that school
logic which the shallow and the flippant despise, but which
all who exaniine it closely, and are xiapable of seizing its
purpose, regard with intense admiration.


.TABI^B AMD NOTES.


191


Now the expression jus in retn^ in this its analogical
meaning, perfectly supplies the desideratum which is stated
above. For us retti* denotes generality, “Jus in fern**
should signify riyhts availing against persons generally.
Therefore, it should signify all rights belonging to that
genus, let their specific differences be what they may. And
that is the thing which is wanted.

If it were possible for me to fix the meaning of words, I
would distinguish the two classes of rights and obligations
in the following manner.

1®. Obligations considered universally, I would style “(y-
fees ” or “ Duties^*

2". Rights which avail against persons generally or uni¬
versally, I would style “ Rights in renu*

3®. Rights which avail against persons certain or deter¬
minate, 1 would style “ Rights in personam^.

4®. Obligations which are incumbent upon persons gene¬
rally or universally, I would style “ Offices ” or "^Duties”

5°. To those which are incumbent upon persons certain
or determinate, I would appropriate the term “ Obligations!*
(See Table L note 0.)

Without introducing a single new term, and without
employing an old one in a new manner, we should thus be
provided with language passably expressive and distinct:
which would enable the writer or speaker to move onward,
without pausing at every, second step to clear his path of
ambiguities. All that is necessary to this desirable end, is
to use established terms in established meanings, taking
good care to use them determinately: i. e. to restrict each
term to its appropriate object.

[i&0t€ 4.] "Jus IN Bel* et "Jus ad Mpm :**

(A.) By the Classical Jurists, the expression jura in re
is opposed to, or contradistinguished from, dominium, pro-


192 TABLES AHD KOTES.

prieiast or in re pofeetae* (See, TaWe I. and Table II.,
Note 3. C. d. 3.) ' For exoiQj^Ie, AVrvitude-’over land of
\^hich another is 4he own^i; is “jus iii XG{pliend):* but
the right or interest of4he^own^er, is ** dominmn” “propri-
etas*' or “ in re poiedm^' , The interest of the Pledgee or
Mortgagee, and the interest of the Pledgor or Mortgagor,
are also respectively “jus in re {aliend)** and dominium ”
(or "^proprietm ”). Por, in the Roman Law, as in English
Equity, the interest of the Mortgagee is considered in the
rational light of a mere lien: a security for the performance
of the obligation which is incumbent upon the Mortgagor.

Consequently, the import oi jus in re, in the sense of the
Roman Lawyers, is eoraparatively narrow. In their wri¬
tings, “jura in cd re,” “jura in re'' or (more concisely still)
**jura''GVG the opposite “dominion” or “property.”
They arc merely abridged expressions for “jura in re
aliend'' as contradistinguished from “ jus in re propria."
They are restricted to such of the rights, availing against
the world at large, as are acquired over property or dominion
residing in another person. , “ ^

By-the successors of the Roman Lawyers, the meaning
of jus in re has been extended. As they employ it, “ jus
in re” is synonymous with “jus in rem" sometimes
signifying generally^ rights which avail against the world ;
sometimes signifying such of those rights as are rights to
determinate things. (See Note 3. C. a.: G. d.) But this
extension of the term is most oojectionable. For, first, it
is needless and gratuitous: “ jus in rem " answering the pur¬
pose completely. (See Note 3. C. d. 8.) And, secondly, it
darkens the technical language of the original and proper
authorities. We must restore the terra to its narrower
and genuine import, before we can follow the expositions of
the Roman Lawyers themselves..

(B.) Jus in re (ho this its extended meaning) is opposed
to jus AD rem: an expression which was devised in the


fTABLES AKD NOTES.


193


Middle Ages, and .which there is not a vestige in the
writings of the Classical Jurists.

A

(a.) As opposed to "jus in re” <in the modem and ex¬
tended meaning), “ jus ^ rem ” is Synonymous with “ jus
in personam.** It embraces afl rights which avail against
persons certain. But still it is often used in a narrower
signification, and restricted to a ^ecies of those rights.'

(b.) Taken in this its restricted meaning, it answers to
the obligation ** ad dandvm aliquid.” It is the right to the
acquisition of a thing ; “jus ad rem {arquirendam).** Or
(speaking more generally and more adequately) it is the
riphi of compelling the party, who lies under the corres¬
ponding obligation^ to pass a right in rem. (See Note 3. B.
C.: C. b.: C. d. 1.)

Take the following examples:

1. If you contract with me to deliver me a specific thing,
I have not a right oner or in the thing, but a right to
the thing as against you specially. I have not jm in rem
(or jits in rc\ but jus ad rem: a right of compelling you to
give me jus in rem, or of doing some act, in the way
of grant or conveyance, which shall make the thing mine.

2. If you owe me money determined in point of quantity,
or if you have done me an injury and are bound to pay me
damages, JL have also a right to the acquisition of a thing,
or, rather, of compelling you to pass m8 a right in tern. I
have a right of compelling you to deliver or pay me moneys,
which are not determined in specie, and as yet are not
mine: though they mil be determined in specie, and will
become mine, by the act of delivery or payment.

3. Suppose that you enjoy a monopoly by virtue of a
patent, and that the patent (as generally happens) empowers
you to assign the monopoly: and suppose, moreover, that
you enter into a contract with me to transfer your exclusive
right in my favour. Now here, also, I have jus ad rents

VOL. III. o


194


TABLES AND NOTES.


l)tit stUl I Have not a right to a dctermmed thing. The
object of the contract is neither a determined thing^ nor a
thing that can be determined. (See Note 3. C. c. 2.) My
right isjgurelg this; A right of compelling gou to transfer
a right in rem as I shall direct or appoint. If I may
refine upon the expression which custom has established, I
have not so properly “ jus ad rem as “jus ad {jus in) rem”

4 •

♦

-(c.) It is manifest that the expression “jus ad rem”
ought not to be substituted for jus in personam” If is
mer^y an abridged expression for “jus ad rem acquiren-
dam”: and it properly denotes rights,-which are rights to
the acquisition of a thing^ or (speaking more generally and
adequately) to the acquisition of aright in rem. Bi!t many
of the rights which avail .against persons certain^ are not of
that character: They have not tlie acquisition of a thing
(or, rather, of a right in rem) as their purpose or scope.
h"or example: If you contract with me to perform work and
labour t or if you contract ‘with me to forbear from some
given acty the contract gives me a right which properly is
“jus in personam f but which it were impossible to denomi¬
nate “jus ad rem^(acquirendam)f without a glaring de¬
parture from the appropriate import of the expression.—
“Jus ad rem ” should clearly be restricted to a spedes of
rights in personam.

*

. {C.f With a view to the study of the Roman Law^or of
any of the modern systems which are offsets from the
• former, it is highly expedient (or, rather, absolutely neces¬
sary) to distinguish “jus ad rem,’' in its broad and improper
meaning, from “jus dd rem” (or, rather, “ ad rem acqui-
rendam”), in its restricted and correct signification. The
neglect of this simple precaution, has engendered the
grossest error: has darkened the fair face, of the Roman
Law; and.covered the arrangement of the Prussian and
liVenoh Cddes with a mist which is scarcely penetrable.


TABLES AND NOTES.


195


As the matter is intimately connected with the subject
of the present note, I will try to explain briefly the flagrant
error which I have mentioned, and to dispeb or attenuate
the obscurity of which that error is the source.

(a.) The acquisition of a right in rm^ is commonly
or frequently preceded byyiw ad rem (in its restricted and
correct signification). *This is generally the case, whenever
the right in rem is acquired by virtue of an alienation ; e.p.
by virtue of tradition (or delivery), or by virtue of grant or
conveyance not accompanied with tradition. ' * ,

The cases .which I have supposed in tlie last section
(B. b.), are cases of the sort. In the first of those cases,
tlie rjght in rem is acquired by tradition or delivery, or by
conveyance without tradition: and the acquisition is pre¬
ceded by jus ad rem arising from contract or agreement.
In the third case, the nature of the acquisition is such that
tradition is impossible. The mode of acquisition is con¬
veyance without tradition ; and the preceding jus ad rem^
with the correlating or corresponding obligation, arises,
as before, from contract. In the second case, the mode of
acquisition is simple tradition or payment; and the pre¬
ceding jus AD rem, -with the correlating or corresponding
obligation, arises from an injury. In other casca» the pre¬
ceding jus AD rem, with the correlating or corresponding
obligation, arises from ^a52-contract.

Observing that the acquisition of jus in rem is preceded
in certain cases by jus ad rem, many of the modern Civi¬
lians generalized hastily and rashly, and fell ipto the follow¬
ing errors.

1. They inferred from those cases (which are striking
by their frequency and importance), that everg acquisition
of jus in rem is preceded by^ ad rem, and by a correlating
or corresponding obligation. And this (as they supposed)
invariable antecedence, they denoted in the following man¬
ner. To the fact or incident imparting jits in rem, they

o 2


196


TABLES AND NOTES.


gave the name of “modus acquirendit' or “modus acquu
aiHonia." To the preceding incident imparting ad rem
(which they considered as a step or means to the acquisition
of jus in rem)f they gave the name of “ titulus ad acquiren-
dum** or (simply and briefly) “ titulus!' For example,
According to their language, a contract to deliver a thing
is ** titulus ad acquirendum (jus in rem)’**:*The delivery
or tradition which follows it, or bj which it ought to be
followed, is “ modus (jus in rem) acquirendi " or “ modus ac-
quisitionis.”

2. From this first error they fell into a sec^d. Having
supposed that jus in rem is invariably preceded by jus ad
m/ 2 , they supposed that the latter has no independent
existence, but is merely a forerunner of the former.^ Or
(changing the expression) they supposed that the acquisition
of jus in rem is always the scope or object of jus ad rem and
of the obligation to wlpch it answers. Or (changing the
expression again) they supposed that *every incident which
imparts jus ad ‘Aim is ** titulus ad acquirendum (jus in
rem)/* And if the expression jtts ad rem be taken in its
restricted signification, the supposition is just. But, con^
founding its restricted signification with its broad and
improper mcamng^ they extended the supposition to every
right in personam and to every possible obligation. They
supposed that **jus ad rem (as synonymous with “jus in
personam ") has always the acquisition of jus in rem for its
scope, purpose, or object: that every incident, which im¬
parts “jus in personam!' is merely ** titulus ad (jus in
rem) acquirendum,’* or is merely preparatory to a modus
acquisiiionis. The falsity of which supposition is gross
and palpable. (See above, in the present note, B. c.)

Briefly stated, their errors were these:

1. They supposed that “jus in m/ 2 ”*(with the mean by
which it is acquired) is always preceded by “jus in per-
sonam " (and'by a fact or incident imparting it). 2. They
supposed that “jus in personam!' eveiy cose whatever.


TABLES AND NOTES.


197


is the forerunner of “jus in rem .•** that the fact or incident,
which gives “jus in personam^* is always a title to the
acquisition of “jus in rem” or is always preparatory to a
modus acquisitionis ,—^'fhe former of these errors, combined
w'ith the varying extension of “ jus ad rem,” naturally led
to the latter.

(b.) The influence of the latter upon the Prussian and
French Codes, is most remarkable. I therefore reserve the
further consideration of it for the notes which I purpose
annexing to Tables V. and VI.*

(c.) As proofs of the extent to which the former obtained,
I extract the following passage from Heineccius: the most
renowned, and, perhaps, the ifiost authoritative 6f the Ci¬
vilians, who flourished in the eighteenth century.

The passage (which, for the sake of facilitating appre¬
hension, I break do\^u into short and distinct p^agraphs)
is taken from his excellent Recitations: L. II. tit. 1. §
339. (See also his * Elements according to the Institutes*:
L. II. tit. r. § 339.)

“ Quod adtinct ad quaestionem quidmt modus adquirendi
cajtrcndum est, ante omnia, ne coufundamus titulum et modum
adquirendi: quippe qui toto codo differimt.

“ Omne emm dominium duplicem habet caussam : proxi-
manit per quam immediate dominium consequor; et remo-
tarn, per quam et propter quam mediate flo dominus. E. g.:
Si rem a domino emi, et hie mihi rem emtam tradit, domi¬
nus fio: Et tunc traditio est caussa dominii proxima; emtio

autem, caussa remota.

^ •

“Caussa dominii proxima vocatur modus adquirendi:
caussa autem remota, titulum.

“ Et hi etiam effcctu diflerunt. Nam per titulum^xAhm

* Some remarks on the Frnssian and French Codes will be found in a
later part of this, volume.— B. A.


198


TADLISS AND NOTES.


consequor jus. ad rem .* per modmi adquirendi, jus in re.
Ex titulo ago in p^mnam; advcrsus euoa quocum inihi
ncgdtium fttit: ex modo adquirendi ago in rent; advcrsus
quemi^mque possessorem. E. g.: Liber a bibliopola prinmm
mihi, delude Titio venditus est; posteriori etiam traditus.
Quaoritur, an ego, qui prior cnii, ad versus Titium agere et
librum prius'eintum vindicare possira ? Negatur. Nam
qui emit, jam turn iitulum h^ct; nondum autem rem
adquisivU: Adeoqucncc in rem agit ad versus quemcumquc
possessorem; quia^as hi re nullum habet. Ergo agere debeo
adversiis bibliopolam, (piocum milii negotium fuit, ad im-
plcndum coutrtictum; vcl, si ddimplcre nequeat, ad id quod
interest.

‘'Notandiim itaque hie axmma: nunquam dat^*^^

in rCf sed dpbet accedero traditio.

*^Ergo sivc emeriiu, sivc res mihi Icgata, donate, permu-
tatu sit, qondutn tamen sum cbminq|, antequam traditio
accedatquae mla transfert dominium vcl jus in re, modo
praecesserit Titulus ad tramferendum dominium kahilis.

“Ergo nec titulus sufficit sine traditione, nec traditio
sine titulo:—Axioma regnans per universura jus, et probe
iufigendum meuiorisc.” •

If you examine this pasi^e closely, and take its parts
in conjunction, you will find it involving the following
assumptions: I. That enery acquisition of dominium, or jus
in rem, consists of two degrees*. One of them being the proxi¬
mate ; the other, the remote cause of the right: One of them,
modus acquirendi (strictly so called) j the ,other, titulus, or
titulus ad acquirendum. 2. That the titulus, or remote caqse
of the right, always consists of an incident imparting jus in
personam: E.y. a contract. 3. That modus acquisitionis
or proximate cause of the right, is always tradition and ap-
/prehension.

Now each of tliesc assumptions is grossly false: and
truly wond^ful it is, that the learned and clear-sighted


TABLES AND NOTES.


199

jurist, who wrote the passage which I have copied, fell into
the strange errors with which it abounds.

I will examine these assumptions in succession.

1. It is 720^ true, that every complete acquisition of do¬
minium^ or jm in rem, is divisible into a modus acquirendi
and a titidu^ ad acquirendum.

There are two cases, and only two, in which Acquisition
is opposed to Title by the Roman Lawyers: namely, the
case of tradition, and the case of usucapion.

According to their systenn every tradition or delivery,
which gives “ jus in rem** is preceded by an ohliyation (or
by “ jus ad rem ”). £)onsidfered with reference to that pre¬
ceding obligation, the tradition or delivery is denominated
modus acquirendi, or, briefly, ^icquisiiio. Considered with
reference to the -following tradition, the contract, or other
incident, which cre&tcs the obligation, is styled “justus
titulus,** “ justum initiiiMy* “justa caussa ”r *. e. the legally
operative inducement to the subsequent modus acquirendi .—
**Nunquam eniiii nuda traditio transfert dominium: sed
ita; si venditio, aut alia jiista caussa prscccsserit, propter
quam traditio sequeretur.” *

The cfiect of usucapion (a species of prescription) is
this: It cures the fault which vitiates tradition or delivery,
where the party, from whom the delivery proceeds, has not
the right in rem which he affects to transfer. Here, the
tradition, by itself, is inoperative: though, coupled with
subsequent possession on the part of the alienee, it may give
him the right in rem, after a certain interval. But in order
that the alienee may benefit by his subsequent possession,
bona fides is^ requisite. His subsequent possession works
nothing, or, in other words, there is no usucapion, unless
he believes, at the time of the delivery,.that the person
affecting to alien is competent to pass the right. But tbH
he can scarcely believe, unless the tradition or delivery be


TABLIS AND NOTBS.


200

made in the Ipgal manner: unless thC' tradition or delivery
would transfer the ^ tight, supposing that the party who
makes it the right to transfer. Consequently, “Justus
tituluSt* “ justum initium,** or “ justa camsa** is a condition
precedent -to usucapion. For it necessarily precedes the
tradition by which the possession is preceded, and upon
which the possession operates. The contract which is the
inducement to the tradition, is the titulus ad acquirendum :
The vicious tradition, and the possession which purges it of
the vice, constitute the modus acquirendi.

Now, in these cases, the division of the entire acquisi¬
tion into a mode of acquisUiont and a title to acquire, is
intelligible. But, in many cases, it were utterly senseless.
Take, for example, the case of Occupation: i. e. acquisi¬
tion, by apprehen^n or seisin, of a subject which belongs
to no one (— res nultius). Here, the entire acquisition is a
simple and indivisible incident. You may call that simple
incident a mode of acquisi^on,. or Jrou may call it a title.
But to split it into a mode of acquisition and a foregoing
title, is manifestly impossible.

The truth is, that Hcineccius and other Civilians arrived
at their general inference through a narrow and hasty
induction. When they aftirmed generally, “ that a mode of
acquisition supposes a foregoing titled* their attention was
directed exclusively to tradition preceded by contract. This
is the only example adduced in .the p^sage which I have
copied, to support or illustrate the proposition. And, in
, cases of that class (and also of some other classes), the
proposition holds universally. Or (speaking more accu¬
rately) the proposition holds universally in cases of that
class, if wx look exclusively at the doctrine of the Boman
Lawyers with regard to the essentials of the tradition.

Their doctrine seems to be this:

The tradition is not sufficient to pass an irrevocable


TABLES ilND NOTES.


201


right, unless the preceding contract hind the alienor, and
therefore impart to the alienee jm ad rem. In other words,
the tradition is not sufi^cient to pass the right .irrevocably,
unless the preceding contract amount to ** jmtua titulus :

titulus ad transferendum dominium kahilis ” Accordingly,
every acquisition by delivery, made in pursuance of a con*
tract, is divisible into ^200 degrees: b. mode of acquisition md
a titte to acquire.

But, according to other systems (as, for instance, the
English), acquisition by tradition or delivery, made in 'pur¬
suance of a contract, is not always divisible into those dis¬
tinct degrees.

Take the following example :

You sell me a house or field. The contract, however,
is not .reduced into writing, and therefore is void by the
Statute of Frauds. But though you are not obliged to per¬
form the contract, you convey the house or field, agreeably
to the terms of the contract, by livery or feoffment.

Now, here, 1 acquire the subject through tradition pre¬
ceded by contract. But yet it were impossible to split the
entire acquisition into a mode of acquisition and a Utle to
acquire. The acquisition in this instance, like that by
occupation, is a simple and indivisible incident. In conse¬
quence of the livery and feofiPment, 1 acquire an indefeasible
right in or over the subject: dominium^ or jus in r&n,
which is not revocable by you. But my right commences
at the moment of the acquisition. . Before the acquisition,
J am not invested with jus ad rm, nor is there a corre¬
sponding ohligation incumbent upbn you. There is not the
shadow of **jtt8tus titulus from the beginning to the dose
of the transaction.


The exceptions which I have mentioned are amply suffi¬
cient to demonstrate, that ev&ry acquisition of jus in rem
is not divisible into a mode of acquisition and a preceding
tide to acquire.


202


TABLES and NOTES.


There is, however, a class of cases, which will also serve
to demonstrate the same truth, and which I am desirous of
noticing, for. another reason: namely, that they somewhat
obscure that strong line of demarcation, by which “ jus in
rent” is separated from “jus in personam” and which
should be seized distinctly by every student of law who
aspires to master its principles.

Rights in rem sometimes arise from incidents which are
styled contracts. The meaning of which seeming contra¬
diction, is this: that the incidents in question wear a double
aspect, or are followed by a twofold effect. To one pur¬
pose, an incident of the sort gives “jus in personam”
and, therefore, is a contract: to another purpose, it gives
“jus in rem” and, therefore, is a conveyance. In a word,
the incident combines the properties of a contract a^id a con¬
veyance ; but, by one of those ellipses which arc at once so
commodious and so perplexing, it is styled, briefly, “ a con¬
tract.”

In the cases which 1 have now' mentioned, the incident
combines the properties of a contract and a conveyance, and
is styled a contract simply for the sake of brevity. In otlicr
cases, the so-called contract is a pure conveyance or transfer,
and is styled a contract by a mere abuse of language, and
through a confusion of ideas which arc utterly disparate and
distinct.

Take the following examples of these several cases: viz.
the cases wherein the incident is styled a contract by an el¬
lipse ; and the cases wherein the incident is styled a contract
by a solecism.

According to English Equity (i. e. according to the Zaw .
which certain of our Courts administer), a sale and purchase,
although it is styled a contract^ imparts to the buyer, with¬
out more, dominion or “jus in rem” In the technical lan¬
guage of the system, “ what is agreed to be done is consi¬
dered as done.” The subject of the sale is his, as against


TABLES AND NOTES.


20 $


the seller specially; and the subject is also his, as against
the world at large. The only interest in the subject, which
remains to the seller, is a right “ in re aliened': a mortgage
or lien expressly or tacitly created, to the end of securing
the equivalent for which he has aliened.

But, according to the antagonist system which is styled
preeminently Law, a sale and purchase, without more,
merely imparts to the buyer “jus ad rem.” .The seller is
obliged by the sale to transfer the subject to the buyer, and,
in case he break his obligation by refusing or neglecting to
transfer, the buyer may sue him on the breach, and recover
compensation in damages. But that is the extent of the
right which the sale imparts. The property or dominion of
the subject still resides in the seller, and, in case he convey
the subject to a third person, the property or dominion
passes to the alienee.

Now, if the antagonist Law were fairly out of the way,
the right df the buyer, according to Equity, would stand
thus. Unless the seller refused to deliver the subject, and
the buyer, iu that event, were satisfied with his right to
compensation, the sale and purchase, though styled a con¬
tract, would give him completely and absolutely dominion
or “jus in rem** lie could vindicateav recover the subject
as against the seller himself, and as against third persons
who might happen to get the possession of it. The so-
styled contract would amount to a perfect conveyance.

But, by reason of the dominion or property which re¬
mains to the seller at Law, the sale and purchase^ even in
Equity, is still imperfect as a conveyance. In order that
the dominion of the buyer may be completed in every di¬
rection, something must yet be done on. the part of the
seller. He must pass his legal interest in legal form. He
must convey the dominion or property, which still resides
in him Law, according'to the mode of conveyance, which
Law, in its wisdom, exacts. -

To this special intent or purpose, the buyer, even in


204


TABLlfiB ABD NOTES.


Equity, lias merely ** jus in personam'* Or (borrowing the
language of the Homan Lawyers) the subject of the sale,
even in Equity, “continues in obliffatione**

Speaking gemraJly, the buyer, in contemplation of
Equity, has dominion or “jus in rem** And, speaking
generally, the sale, in Equity, is, therefore, a conveyance.

But, to the special intent or purpose which is mentioned
above, the buyer has “jus in personam.” Or (changing
the shape of the expression) the seller remains ohliycd.
This right in personam certain^ and this corresponding oblU
yation. Equity will enforce in specie. And, in respect of
this right in personam^ and of this corresponding obligation,
the sale, even in Equity, is, properly, a contract.


According to the Homan Law, dominium ox jus in ran is
not transferred by tradition, unless it be preceded by con¬
tract, or by other titulus. “ Nunquam enim nuda traditio
transfert dominium: sed ita; si venditio, aut alia justa
caussa prsecesserit, propter quam traditio sequerctur.”

And, conversely, dominion ox jus in rem is not transferred
by conU'act, unless it be followed by tradition. “ Tradi-
tionibua et usucapionibus, non nudis pactis, dominia rerum
transferuntur.”

This rule or maxim had been imported from the Roman,
into the French Law : And it formed a portion of the latter
to the time of the Revolution, ’A contract to deliver a thing
(or to'pii^ a right in rent), imparted to the obligee “jus ad
xpm” or imposed upon the obligor an obligation to transfer
dr convey. But dominion or “jus in ran* was not ac-
' quircd by the former, till the contract to pass, the right was
completed by consequent tradition.

“Dans Tancienne jurisprudence, piune obligation
transitJa propriety, elle devait etre suivie de la tradition.
Gelui qui achetait' une maison, par example, n’en devCnait
proprietoire que du moment ou la maison lui etait livree;


TABLES AND NOTES.


205


si elle etait livree a une autre personne, c’ctait cette per-
sonne qui Tacquerait L’obligation n’etait alors qu’un titre
pour se faire donner la propriete; le moyen ^acquerir cette
propriete etait la tradition.*’—(See “ Code Civil cxplique
par ses motifs et par des exemples,” par/. A, Bc^rofiy Avo-
cat aux Conseils du Roi et a la Cour de Cassation: Paris,
1826. Note by M. Moyron to Article 711.)

But, according to the Code which now obtains in France,
the dominion of a subject, belonging to the class of immove-
ableSt passes to the buyer by the so-called contract. Or (in
the exquisitely absurd language of the Code and its Com¬
mentators) the right in rent passes to the buyer by the
oUiyation which the contract cieates.

“La propficU des biens s’acquicrt et se transmet par
succession, par donation entrc-vifs ou testamentaire, et par
teffet dCs obliyations*\ (Code Civil, Article 711.)—“Au-
jourd’hui ou pent avoir la propriete, c*cst«a-dire le droit de
posseder, quoi qu’on ne possede pas recllemeut. Aussi est-
elle transmise par la seule force de Vobliyationt sans qu’il
soit necessaire qu*il y ait cu tradition.” . (Note to Article
t hy M.Boyron.)

“ L’obligation de donner ernporte celle de livrer la chose,**
etc. (Code Civil, Article 1166.)

“ L’obligation de liyref la chose est parfaite par le seul
consentement des parties contractantes. Elle rend le creau-
cier (^. e. the obligee) proprwtaire** (Code Civil, Article
1138.)—“ Ainsi Tobligaticq donne au creaucicr le droit sur
la chose, jws in re; et, par suite, Vaction reeUe, ou re^en.-
dication: c*est-a-dire, le droit de forcer tout detenteur de la
chose qui nous appartient a nous la rendre.’* (Note to
Article 1138, by M. Boyron.)

“ Les effets de Tobligation de donner ou de livrer m im-
meuble, sont regies au titre dc la vente ct au titre des pri¬
vileges et hypoth^ues.** (Code Civil, Article 1140.)

“ La vente est aene convention par laqueHe Tun sobliye
a livrer une chose, et Tautre a la payer.” (Code Civil,
Article 1582.)


200


1!ABL£S. A17D NOTES.


“ La vente est parfaite* entre les pai*tics, et la propriete
eat acquiae de droit a Tachetear a Tcgard du vendcurf des
qu’on est convenu de la chose et du prix, quoiqne la chose
n’ait pas encore ^te livr^ ni le prix payc.” (Code Civil,
Article 1583.)—* ** Parfaite. " Cette disposition est la con¬
sequence de Tarticle 711, portant que la propriete est trans¬
feree par Teffet des obligations; e’est-urdire sans qu’il soit,
comme autrefois, besom de tradition.” (Note to Article
1583, by M. Bopron.)—Vepard du vendeur. Mais
non a I’dgard des tiers qui peuvent avoir sur la chose
vendue des droits anteriema a la vente. Par exemple,.si Ic
vendeur n*etait pas veritable proprietaire de la chose, cclui
uuquel elle apparticut conserverait le droit de la revendi-
quer.” (Note to Article 1583, by M. Bopron.)

If, then, the subject of the sale belong to the class of itu-
Movealilea^ dominion or “ jus m rem,** passes from iSie seller
to the buyer independently of tradition. But, if the sub¬
ject be moveable^ the buyer, without tradition, has merely
“jus ad rem.” He has no right to the subject against a
third person, unless the third person be in maid fide, or has
gotten possession of the subject with notice of the buyer’s
titulua.

“ Si la chose qii’ou s’est oblige de donner on de livrer d
deU'X peraonuea aucceaaivement est purement mobilicrc, celle
des deux qtii eii a eta miae en poaacaaion reelle est preferee, et
cu demeure proprietaire, encore qiie sou Hire soit posterieur
cn date; pourvu toutefois que la possession soit de bonne
foi.*' (Code Civil, Article 1141.)—“Je vous vends ma
montre: d’aprus le princlpe consacre dans les articles 711
et 1138, vous en<devenez a I’instant proprietaire, bien que
je ne vous Taie pas livree. Cependant je la vends demain
■ a Piernf, et je la lui livre : elle doit lui Tester, car il a ete
mis en* possession redle. Ainsi, en matiere de meubles, la
tradition eat encore neceaaaire pour tranaferOr la propriete.
Cette exception ati principc general est«basee sur la circu¬
lation des meubles, qui peuvent passer, dans le meme jour.


i


TABLES AND NOTES.


207


dans vingt mains differentes-; et sur la nccessite dc preve-
nir les circuits d’actions et les nombreux proces qui en re-
sulteraient.” (Note to Article 1141, by M. Ro^ron.)

Now, according to tbe Articles of the Code which I have
copied and collated above, the actual Law of France, with
regard to the matter in consideration, would seem to stand
thus.

If the subject of the sale be moveable^ the sale, when
unaccompanied by tradition, is, properly, a contract. The
buyer has “jus adrem!' but not “jus in rent!* He has a
right to the subject of the sale as against the seller specially,
but he has no right to the subject as against the world at
large.' There is room for the distinction between contract
and conveyance: between title to acquire and mode of acqui¬
sition.

But, in case the subject of the sale belong to the class of
immoveablesy the sale, though unaccompanied by tradition,
is, properly, a conveyance. The sale imparts to the buyer
dominion or jus in rem ; and it, therefore, gives him a right
to vindicate or recover the subject from any who may be in
the possession of it. There is no room for the distinction
between contract and conveyance: between title to acquire
and mode of acqumtion. There is no room for “justus
titidmr “ justa “justum initium.” For this sup¬

poses an acqumtion to which it is the prelude: And the
buyer acquires the subject, by the sale itself, as completely
as he can acquire it. He has the dominion of the subject,
although he has not the possession: And, by exercising a
right of action annexed to his dominion, he may get the
possession if he will.

In a word, the right which belongs to the buyer, accord¬
ing to the French Code, is the right which would belong to
him, according to English Equity, if the system were, not
embarrassed by the conflicting provisions of Law.

To style the sale a contract, is a gross solecism. It is,
however, a solecism which may be imputed to the Roman


TABLl£8 AND NOTES.


,208

Lawyers; and with which it were not candid to reproach
the Authors of the Code.

But when they talk of oliigations as imparting dominion
or property, they talk with absurdity which has no example,
and which no example could extenuate. If they had un¬
derstood the system which they servilely adored and copied,
they would have known that obligation excludes the idea of
dominion: that it imparts to the obligee “ jus in personam!'
and "jus in personam" merely. This is its essential dif¬
ference : TItis is the very property which gives it its being
and its name. " OUigationum enim substantia non in eo coii-
sistit ut (diquod nostrum facial, sed ut alium nobis obsfrin-
gaf ad danduui aliquid, vel faciendum, vel pnestandum.’*

There are, indeed, puqioses, as to which the sale is a con¬
tract ; and, in respect of which, it is justly styled a contract.
For example: The seller is obliged by the sale to deliver
the subject to the buyer agreeably to their common inten*
tiou. And, in case it be not delivered agreeably to that
common intention, the buyer may sue the seller for breach
of the obligalion, and recover coinpeusation in damages
Code Civil, Article 1146 et seq. But the dominion or jus
in rent which the sale imparts to the buyer, is not a right
answering to an obligation speciaUg incumbent upon the
seller. Considered ast ynparting dominion, the sale is a
convegance; and it cannot; be styled a contract, without an
impropriety in speech. t


According to the Roman Law, jus in rem is not trans¬
ferred by contract, unless the contract be followed by tradi¬
tion or delivery. But to this general principle there are nu¬
merous exceptions. For example: An hgpotheca or mort-
gf^C is sufficiently created by pact, although the subject
be not delivered, but remain in the possession of the mort¬
gagor. In other words, the intention to create the mort¬
gage, expressed orally or in wnting, imparts to the mort-


TAB1.E8 AND NOTES.


209


gagee jt(3 in re aliend. The expression of this intention on
the part of the mortgagor, is styled a pact or convention.
But, though it is adjectech to a convention, it is not a con¬
vention of itself. Imparting to the mortgagee jus in rent
it is, properly, a conveyance.

The confusion of contract and conveyance^ by elliptical or
improper expression, is one of the greatest obstacles in the
way of the student. And, labouring to clear it up by apt
^.^and perspicuous examples, I have wandered at some length
from the subject which 1 am directly considering. I now
revert to that subject, and dismiss it with the following
remark:—

Wherever jus in rent is acquired by a so-stylcd coniracf,
the acquisition is not to be distinguished into tiiidus and
modus cccquirendi. That which might be titulus^ supposing
there were room for the distinction, transfers the jus in rem
as completely as it can be transferred.

2. It is not true (as Heincccius and others have assumed),
that every tittc to the acquisition of "jus in rem,'* consists
of some incident imparting "jus in personam^* and, therefore,
imposing an ohliyalion upon a person or persons determinate.
As I have remarked above, there are tWo cases, and only
two, wherein title do acquire and mode of acquimlion arc
expressly distinguished and opposed by the Roman Law¬
yers themselves : viz. the case of tradition and the case of
usucapion. Where “ jus in rent* is acquired by tradition,
the acquisition is divisible into titidus and modus acquirendi:
The titulus being always an incident imparting “jus in per-
sonant,** and, therefore, imposing an pbliyation. Where
"jus in rent* is acquired by the acquisition is

divisible in the like manner: The tiMus being commonly an
incident, or commonly supposing an incident, of the like
quality or effect. ''

But the difference between title to acquire and mode of
VOL. III. . p


210


TABLES AND NOTES.


acqumtian is liot c6Dfined to the two cases wherein the
Roman Lawyers have expressly taken the distinction.

Wherever the acquisition is divisible into two distinct
events, we may find it necessary to distinguish them, and
to mark them with distinguishing names. And, in every
case of the kind, wc may mark them, if we will, wkh the
names which are now in question. We may style the fact
or event w'ith which the acquisition begins,the title to acquire;
We tnay style the fact or event by which the acquisition is
completed, the mode of acquieitim. Wc may say that the
latter is the proximate cause of the right, or is that through
which the right is immediately acquired. We may say that
the former is the remote cause of the right, or is that
through which the right is acquired mediately. We may
style the former the tihduSt initium^ or caima^ to which the
latter is indebted for its investitive operation or cifect.

■j . .

Now the cases wherein the acquisition is divisible into
two events, and wherein wc may find it necessary to distin¬
guish those distinct events, arc numerous. And, in many
of these numerous cases, the fact or event with which the
acquisition begins, is not a fact or event imparting jus in
personam.

1 will try to illustrate these positions by simple and plain
examples.,

'The cases wherein usucapion most frequently obtains, are
those which 1 have mentioned above : viz. cases of aliena¬
tion by tradition or delivery, without right on the part of
the alienor. And, in these cases, the litulus consists of an
incident imparting

But usucapion sometimes obtains without an incident of
the sort, and is nevertheless distinguished by the Roman
Lawyers themselves into titte and mode of acquisition, Ror
instance. In case I occupy a subject which I believe to be
res nuUius, but which, in truth, belongs to another person.


TABLES AKD NOTES.


211


I acquire the subject (after a certain interval) by continued
and undisturbed possession. Now here the acquisition is
divisible into mode of acqumiion and title, and yet there
is no incident creating an obligation. My continued and
undisturbed possession constitutes the mode of acqumtion.
My seisin or apprehension of the subject animo mihi haben-
dit coupled with my belief at the time that the subject is
ree nuUim^ constitute my title to acquire. Without appre¬
hension or seisin accompanied by bona fidee, no usucapion
obtains. Consequently, the* apprehension homdfide is the re¬
mote cause of the right, although the subsequent possession
is the proximate or direct.

Resbicting the distinction in question as the Roman Law¬
yers have restricted it, an obligation is not created by every
title to acquire. (Vide Dig. lib. xli. tit. 3,4, 5, G, 7, 8, 9,
ct 10.)

Succession ah intedato^ according to the Roman Law, is
governed in different cases by different principles.

In certain cases, the heir acquires the heritage ipso jure .*
that is to say, he acquires the heritage, without an act of his
own, at the moment of the intestate’s decease. To borrow
an expressive phrase from the old Rrench Law, “ le mort
saisit le vif** If the heir survive the intestate- a single in¬
stant, the heritage vests in the former and devolves to .his
own representative.

• In other cases, the acquisition of the heritage commences
at the death of the intestate, but is completed by the ac¬
ceptance of the heir. At the moment of the intestate’s
decease, he has jus herediiatem adeundi: But he actually
acquires the heritage hereditaiem adeundo. At the moment
of the intestate’s decease, he has jtis delatum .* But until he
signifies his. acceptance expressly or tacitly,- he has not jus
acquisitum. If he die without acceptance, his right (gene¬
rally speaking) is not transmitted to his representative, but
the party who takes the heritage takes it as heir to the


212 TABLES AND NOTES.

intestate. The principle by which the transmission is here
determined, is analogous to a principle (“ aeisina fadt sti~
pitem ”) which obtains in our Law of Descents.

Now where the acquisition of the heritage is completed
by the acceptance of the heir, the facts or events which con¬
stitute the acquisition must be divided into two parcels.
And these we may style, if we will, titulus and modus ac-
quirendi. For, if we understand that distinction as the
Roman Lawyers understood-it, it will hold in every case
wherein the acquisition is pradudl^ provided the degrees be
two, and be perfectly distinct from one another. In the
widely differing' cases wherein they took the distinction,
there must be some common circumstance to which the dis¬
tinction may be referred: And the only common circum¬
stance which I am able to discover, is the divisibility of the
.entire acquisition into two distinct degrees.

Supposing we take the distinction in the case immediately
before us, the terms will apply thus:

The titulus consists of the facts whereby the right is de-
ferred: namely, the intestacy, the death of the intestate, the
survivorship of the heir, ^nd his relation to the deceased.
The modus acquirendi consists of the event whereby the ac¬
quisition is completed: namely, the acceptance of the right
which is deferred.

8. It follows from what has preceded, that apprehension
or seisin, consequent upon tradition or delivery, is not inva¬
riably an ingredient in the acquisition of jus in rent.

In various cases of usucapion^ and also in the case of oc-
cupation^ the subject is not apprehended in consequence of
tradition. And where the right is acquired by a so-styled
contract^ the possession of the subject frequently continues
with the party by wliom the right is conveyed.

The acquisition'of the heritage by the heir, is equally in
point. Whether he acquire by testament or in consequence
of intestacy, ipso jure or hereditaiem adeundo, he acquires


TABLES AND NOTES.


213


without tradition and without apprehension. So completely
foreign is apprehension to the acquisition of the heritage as
a wtiole, that, though that general acquisition gives him the
right of vindicatwn, it gives him none of the remedies which
are founded upon the n^ht of possesdon. By the acquisi¬
tion of the heritage as a whole, he acquires the dominion of
the single or several things which are constituent parts of
the heritage. By virtue of that general acquisition, he can
vindicate any of those things against any who may detain it
from him. But until he obtains the. possession by a distinct
act of apprehension, he is unable to recover it by any of
those infci'dicts which are purely possessory remedies.

Acquisition by mancipation is commonly in the same pre¬
dicament, if the subject of the conveyance be immovable
(— pradiani). There is no tradition of the subject on the
part of the alienor, no apprehension of the subject on the
part of the alienee. The conveyance imparts to the latter
the dominion of the absent pr^dium, and gives him that
right of idndication which dominion or property supposes.
But it gives him none of the remedies which are purely
possessory. Before he can exercise these in reference to the
subject of the mancipation, he must acquire the actual pos¬
session, \rith the consequent jm possessiunisy by a distinct
act of apprehension.

Here I close my remains upon “ titidm et modus acqui-
rendif 1 have insisted upon this celebrated distinction at
considerable length, for the purpose of dispelling the dark¬
ness cast upon the Roman Law by the current though false
theory which I have stated and examined above. I am con¬
vinced by my own experience, that' few of the difficulties,
inherent in the study of the system, equal the difficulties
induced upon it by that groundless and absurd conceit.

Before I proceed to the matter of the ensuing note, I
will briefly interpose a remark suggested, by the subject of
the present.


214


TABLES AND NOTES.'


By English Lawyers, and even by English Conveyancers,
“ iiUe ” is dften used as if it were synonymous with “ rigid''
But when it is used correctly, it signifies the fact, simple or
complex, through w'hich the party entitled was invested with
a right:—^the means by which he acquired it. In a word,
** title" is synonymous with ** investitive fact or event.”

Ti%tdition and usucapion arc the only cases wherein the
Homan Lawyers employ the term “ title " to signify an in¬
vestitive fact. And, in those two cases, it is not, properly
speaking, the name of an investitive fact, but it denotes a
constituent part of a complex investitive fact. It denotes
the fact by which the acquisition begins, as contradistin¬
guished from the fact by w'hich the acquisition is completed.
And, on the other hand, “ mode of acquisition,” as used in
those cases, loses its usual import. It is not synonymous
with investitive but it denotes a constituent part of
a complex investitive fact. It denotes the fact by which the
acquisition is completed, as contradistinguished from the
fact by which the acquisition begins.

The entire fact, simple or complex, through which the
party entitled was invested with a right, is styled in the
language of the Roman Law, **nwdu8 sive cattssa acqui-
rendi,” ** species sive genus acquisitionis,” or, simply and
briefly, ** acqumtio."

Consequently, the ** title " of the English, and the " modus
sive cattisa acquirendi ” of the Roman Law, are synonym¬
ous iltames. Each of them is equivalent to “ investitive fact
or event:”—the term which has been suggested by Mr.
Bentham.

“ Title " is sometimes used by the English Lawyers in a
meaning which is somewhat different. Properly speaking,
the Vendor’s title merely consists of the fact by which his
right was acquired.' But the so-pailed tide which he sub¬
mits to the inspection of the Purchaser, usually embraces
more: viz. all such other titles as may elucidate the quality
of his own, or may show the extent of the right which he


TABLES AND NOTES.


215


afTects to transfer. (See Sugden*s Law of Vendors, etc.,
ch. vii.)

[i&Ote 5.]— Reale sivc Jura Realia” et
Personale sive Jura Personalia

In the language of modern’Civilians, and in the language
of the various systems which are offsets from tlie Roman
Law, rights availing against persons univcrsalh/ or generally^
and rights availing against persons certain or detenmnate^
are not unfrcqucntly denoted by the distinctive names of
** jus reale"* and “jus personale The adjective reale being
substituted for “ in rem ;* and the adjocliivc personale for
“ in personam y

These expressions are so ambiguous, that the following
cautions may be useful to the Student.

1. “ Jus reaJe ** and “ jus personale^ which signify rights
in rem and rights in persotianif must not be confounded with
“jus rertmy and “jus personarum ” i.e. **law of things’’
and “ laio of persons.” (For the import of fhesc last-men¬
tioned expressions, see above. Note 2: The Digression in
Note 3, at C. b.; Table III. Note 3: and Table IV. Sec-

• tion 2.) The lato of things and the law of persons, arc,
both of them, conversant about righlst real and personal.

2. The distinction of the Civilians between re(4 and per-
sonal rights, must not be confounded with the distinction
of the English Lawyers between real property or interests
and personal property or interests. Meal rights (in the
sense of the English Lawyers) comprise rights which are
personal as well as rights which are real (in the sense of the
Civilians): And personal riglits (in the sense of the former)
embrace rights which are real as' well as rights which are
personal (in the sense of the latter). The difference between
real esA 'personal (as the terms are understood by the Civi-


216 TABLES AND NOTES. ^

lians) is essential or necessaiy. It rans through the En¬
glish Law, just as it pervades the Roman: Although it is
obscured in the English by that crowd of gratuitous dis¬
tinctions which darken and disgrace the system. But the
difference between real and permnal (in the sense of the
English Lawyers), is accidental. In the Roman Law, there
is not the faintest trace of it.

In one instance, the term reaU as used by the English
Lawyers, bears the import which is usually annexed to it
by the Civilians:

An agreement between parson and landowner discharg¬
ing land from tithes, was formerly binding upon the parson
and also upon his successors in the cure, if made with the
consent of the patron and with the concurrence of the ordi¬
nary. And such an agreement was and is styled “ a com¬
position Tcniy Why ? Because it availed gencralty against
incumbents of the benefice, and was not simply binding
upon the parson who entered into it. Because, in short, it
operated in rem, and not iit permnam merely.

I think that the term as used by the English Law¬
yers, bears th5 last-mentioned import in two or three in¬
stances more. But, at this moment, T am unable to re¬
collect them. And, speaking generally, the “real ” and *^per-
sonaV* of the Civilians, and the *^real** and permnal** of
the English Lawyers, denote two distinctions which are com¬
pletely disparate.

3. In the sense of the Civilians, *• \mpeTsonale ** signifies
any right which avails against a person certain or against
persons certain. In the English law, “personal** sometimes
signifies a sort or fpecies of such rights : viz, those riy/ttn
of action t which, in the language of the Roman Lawyers,
** nec heredibus nec in hcredes competunt which neither
pass to the persons who represent the injured parties, nor
avail against the persons who repi'esent the injuring parties.
Being limited to parties who are directly affected by wrong.


TABLES AND NOTES.


217


and only availing against parties who are authors of wrong,
these rights of action are styled by English Lawyers
ftonal” Or (more properly) they are said to expire (or to be
extinguished) with the persons of the injured or injuring.

“ Actio personalis moritur cum persona,” is the rule or
maxim applied to the rights in question. But, like a thou-^
sand phrases dignified with the name of maxims, this
wretched saw is a purely identical proposition. For a joct*-
sonal action (as the term is here understood) means a right
of action which expires or is extinguished with the party. ^

4. The servitudes of the Roman Law are of two kinds:
1®. pracdial or real servitudes (—“ servitutes prsadiorum sivc
rcrum ”) : 2®. personal servitudes (t-“ servitutes personarum
sive horainum ”).

Now *^reaV* and personal as distinguishing the kinds
of servitudes, must not be confounded with ^*real** and
**pei'somdy* as synonymous or equivalent expressions for
“ m rcm ” and “ in personam.**

In a certain sense, all servitudes arc real. For all servi¬
tudes are rights in rem^ and belong to that genus of rights
in rent which subsist in re aliend. (See above. Note 3, B. b.;
Note 4, A.)

And, in a certain, sense, all servitudes are personal. For
servitudes, like other rights, reside in persons, or are enjoyed
or exercised by persmts.

The distinction between real** and **personal** as ap¬
plied and restricted to servitudes, is this :

A red servitude resides in a given person, as the owner
or occupier, for the time being, of a given preedimn: i.e. a
* given field, or other parcel of land; or a given building,
with the land whereon it is erected. A persond servitude
resides in a given person, without respect to the ownership
or occupation of a prmdium'. To borrow the technical lan¬
guage of the English Law, red servitudes are appurtenant
to lands or messuages: persond servitudes arc servitudes in


218


TABLES AND NOTES.


grom^ or are annexed to the persons of the parties in whom
they reside.

Every real servitude (like every imaginable right) resides
in a person or persons. But since it resides in the person
as occupier of the given pradium, and devolves upon every
person who successively occupies the same, the right is as¬
cribed (by a natural and convenient ellipsis) to the presdium
itself. Vesting in every person who happens to occupy the
prasdiunty and vesting in every occupier as the occupier
thereof, the right is spoken of as if it resided in the pradiumy
and as if it existed for the advantage of that senseless or
inanimate subject. The pradium is erected into a legal or
fictitious persoHy and is styled prsedium dominansJ*

On the other hand, the pradiumy against whose occupiers
the right is enjoyed or exercised, is spoken of (by a like
ellipsis) as if it were subject to a duty. The duty attach¬
ing upon the Successive occupiers of the preediumy is ascribed
to the pradium itself: which, like the related pradiumy is
erected into a persouy and contradistinguished from the
other by the name of “ praediurn serviens.**

Hence the use of the expressions “ reaV^ and '^personal ”
for the purpose of distinguishing servitudes.

The rights of servitude which arc inseparable from the
occupation of preediuy are said to reside in those given or
determinate ihingsy and not in the physical persons who
successively occupy or enjoy them. And, by virtue of this
ellipsis and of the fiction which grows out of it, servitudes
of the kind are styled “ servitutes rermn ” or “ servitutes
reales i.e. rights of servitude annexed or belonging to
things.

The rights of servitude which are not conjoined with such '
occupation, cannot be spoken of as if they resided in things.
And, since it is necessary to distinguish them from real or
prsedial servitudes, they are styled **servitutespersonaruni”
or ** servitutes personatesi,e. rights of servitude annexed
or belonging to personsi


TABLES' AND NOTES.


219


[0Ote 6.] “ Or, more generally, ex Canventione.**

(A.) Promises are distinguished by the Roman Lawyers
into conventions and poUicitations, A convention is defined
thus— duorum vel plurium in idem pldcitmn consensus: Or
thus— promissio ah altero'dafa ab altcro acceptata. A polli¬
citation is a promise not accepted by the promisee.

Conventions are divisible into two classes. Some might
be enforced by action, according to the more ancient law.
Others, according to that law, could not be enforced by ac¬
tion. Conventions of the former class are styled contracts:
conventions of the latter class, pacts.

In consequence of rules introduced by the Prmtors, or in
consequence of laws passed by the supreme legislature, the
parties interested in certain pacts were enabled to enforce
them by action. In other words, pacts of certain species
passed into the class of contracts, but improperly retained
the name which formerly applied to them with propriety.
Pacts of other species were not affected by these changes,
but continued in their primitive state.

Pacts which the interested parties are enabled to enforce
by action, are distinguished by the Roman Lawyers into
preetorian and legitimate: that is to say, into such as the
parties can enforce by virtue of the Praetorian edict, and such
as .the parties can enforce by virtue of acts of the legislature.

In the language of the Modern Civilians, pacts which the
interested parties are unable to enforce by action, are styled
nudq: i.e. not clothed with rights of action. Pacts which
the interested parties are enabled to enforce by action, are
styled non nuda or vestita: i.e. clothed with rights of action.

It follows from the preceding analysis, that the scheme
of obligations which is given by the Compilers of the Insti¬
tutes wants an important member: namely, obligations ex
pacto. If they had been true to their own method, they
would not, have opposed directly to the obligations which


220


TABLRS AND NOTES.


arise from delicts, tlie obligations which arise from contracts.
According to that method, the obligations which arise from
delicts should be opposed directly to the obligations which
arise from conventions. And these should be divided into
two classes: viz. obligations ex contractu and obligations ex
pacto. .

• •

(B.) The following brief remarks upon certain terms,
may save the student much perplexity.

(a.) In the' language of modern jurisprudence, “ con~.
tract'* is often synonymous with the convention" of the
Roman Lawyers.

In the language of the Roman Law, **contract" denoted
originally a convention which way be enforced by action;
but, in consequence of the changes to which I have ad¬
verted above, its import was somewhat narrowed. It ceased
to denote generally a convention which way be enforced by
action, and was restricted to conventions which the parties
might enforce by virtue of the wore ancient law. For the pacts,
which, in consequence of those changes, were clothed with
rights of action, were not styled contracts, although they were
contracts in eflFect. Consequently, the definition, which,, in
earlier times, applied exclusively to contracts, applied in¬
differently, at a later period, to contracts and obligatory
pacts.

In the language of the English Law, “ contract" is a term
of uncertain extension. Used loosely, it is equivalent to
“ convention " or “ agreement'' Taken in the largest signi¬
fication which can be given to it correctly, it denotes a con¬
vention or agreement which the Courts of Justice will en¬
force. That is to say, it bears the meaning which was at¬
tached to it originally by the Roman Juris-consults.

(b.) In the language of the Roman law, the term ** con^
vention " is synonymous with thg term' ** agreeitient," and
comprises the term “ contract."

In the language of the English Law, “ contention " or


TABLES AMD MOTES.


221


covenant ” is restricted to contracts, arid to contracts of a
subordinate species: namely, to a species of that species of
contracts which arc evidenced by writing under seal.

In the language of the English Law, the meaning of
bond** i^not less narrow and anomalous than that which
is attached Ui**covenant** With the Roman Jiuists, and
with the Modern Civilians, “vinetdum** or “ bond** (agree¬
ably to its obvious meaning) is equivalent to “ obligatio**
With the English Lawyers, it denotes a unilateral promise
evidenced by writing under ^cal and couched in a peculiar
form. Or, perhaps, it rather denotes the writing by which
the promise is evidenced than the promise or contract itself.

(c.) Although **pact ** is usually opposed to “ contractf
it is frequently synonymous with ** convention.** And when
it is used in this, its larger or generic meaning, it is not
opposed to, but comprises “ contracty

In the language of the Roman Jurists, or rather of the
Modern Civilians, every pact or convention which cannot be
enforced by action is styled nude. In the language of the
English Lawyers, the import of nudum pactum has been
strangely narrowed. Instead of denoting generally agree¬
ments which cannot be enforced, it is restricted to agree¬
ments which arc void for a special or particular reason:
namely, for want of sufficient consideration.

(C.) From conventions, contracts, and pacts, I pass to
obligations. “ quasi ex contractu,” or (speaking more gene¬
rally and* adequately) to obligations ** quasi ex conven-
tione.”

(a.) Obligations quasi ens contractu (or, rather, qua^i ex
conventione) arise from facts which are not conventions, and
which also are not violations of existing obligations or duties.
In other, words, they are not begotten by conventions, nor
are they begotten by wrongs.

The facts which 1 am now considering are mt wrongs,
and are sources or causes of obligation. By this analogy.


222


TABLES AND NOTES.


and by this analogy only, these facts are allied to contracts
and to pacts which are contracts in effect. And the obli¬
gations which arise from these facts are said, by reason of
this analogy, to arise “ quad ex contractu,** or “ qumi ex
conventione.’* For, in the language of the Romao Lawyers,
analogy is commonly denoted by the adverb quasi^ or by the
adverb nti and its derivative tiiilk.

I will try to illustrate, by a plain and brief example, the
propositions which 1 have now stated in general or abstract
terms.

Solutio indeUHy or the payment and receipt of money
erroneously supposed to be due, is one of the facts which I
am now considering.

The erroneous payment arid receipt is a source or came
of obligation, although the transaction is not a convention,
and although there is nothing in the fact savouring of in¬
jury or wrong. There is no convention, inasmuch as the
performance of an obligation is the only design of the pay¬
ment. There is no wrong, inasmuch as the party who re¬
ceives the money believes that the money is due. But in¬
asmuch as the money is not given, an obligation to return
it attaches upon the party who receives it from the moment
at which it is paid.

He is not obliged by convention, but “ quajsi ex conven¬
tione.** He is bound a^ if by convention, or he is bound
as it were by convention. ^As he would have been obliged
in case be had entered into a contract, so is he actually
obliged by the fact which has actually happened. ’

And as the fact which begets the obligation is as it were
a convention, so is a breach of he obligation. analogous to
a breach of contract.

(b.) The ^ecies of quasi-contracts have nothing in com¬
mon. but this; namely, that they are sources or causes of
obligation; jthat they are ttot- wrongs ; and that they are
contracts or other conventions.

Accordingly, in an. excerpt in the Digests from the JSes


TABLES AND NOTES. 2^3

Quotidiana of GaitiSt obligations are divided in the follow¬
ing manner: 1st, obligations ew contractu: 2nd]y, obliga¬
tions ex mcdejicio: Srdly, anomalous obligations: i, e. obli¬
gations which are not reducible to either* of the preceding
classes. “ Obligationes aut ex contractu nascuntur, aut ex .
malcficio, miproprio qmdamjure ex variis causarumJipuris*'
Dig. lib. xliv. tit. 7, frag. 1, in princip.

It appears from other excerpts, that anomalous obligations
were ^vided in the Bes Quotidiana into two classes: namely,
obligations quasi ex contractu and obligations quasi ex male’’
ficio. But all the obligatiou^ of this last-mentioned class
which I have anywhere happened to meet with, are either
obligations arising from genuine delicts, or are not distin¬
guishable from the obligations which are styled “ quasi ex
contractul* (Sec Table I. note 7.) Consequently, “ ano^
malous obligations ** and “ obligations quasi ex contractu •*
may be considered equivalent expressions. Each of them
denotes this, and this only: namely, that the sources of the
obligations in question are neither delicts nor conventions,
and that the various species into which those obligations
are divisible have nothing in common excepting that nega¬
tive property.

For obligations ex delicto or ex mcdeficiOy see Table I.

(c.) The consent of the parties is of -the essence of a
contract. But this consent may be manifested in different
ways. It may be manifested by words, written or spoken;
or by signs which are not words. When it is manifested by
words, the contract is styled express. When it is manifested
by conduct, or by signs which are not words, the contract
is styled implied, or, more properly, iamt. In either case,
there is a genuine or' proper convention.

But, in the language of English Jurisprudmice, quasi-
contracts (z. e. sources of obligation which are neither con¬
ventions nor wrongs) are styled "implied contracts,** or
" contracts which the law implies.** That is to say, quasi-
contracts, and genuine though implied contracts, are denoted


TABLES AND NOTES.


Jby one name, or by names whicli are nearly alike. It is
i scarcely necessary to add, that ^z^a^'-contracts, and implied
•or tacit contracts, are commonly or frequently confounded
' oy English Lawyers. See, in particular. Sir William Black-
''^^atone’s Commentaries, B. ii. eh. 3Q, and B. iii. eh. 9.


TlBlfKS AND ^HpTiU.

4


'Notbs to Table IX.


I^Ote 1.] See Trattee dc LSgidatim Oivite et Penalet
etc,** par M, PenPham, pablies ca if'raD^ois par M, Dumont.
And see, partipnlaiiy, the ** VuepSttemle un Corps cqmplet
de Droit** which occupies the First Volume of ihe ** TraUes,
etc** from page 141 to the enl N.B. ThedBition here re¬
ferred to, is the first (A Paris, An X ^ 1802).

{0t^ 2.] For the distinction between National and In¬
ternational Law, see Vol. I. pp. 146,, 147« 168,628 to 33L
For International Law in particular, see pp. 328 to 331.

[®0tt 3.] For the distinction between Droit Politique
and Droit Civil (as opposed to Politique), and for Droil
Politique in particular, see Vol. 1. pp. 147, 148, 200, 308
to 327, 333, 335 et seq., 339 ct seq., 346.

[^Ot0 4.] For the distinction between Code General and
Co^s Pnrhcidiers, sec Yol. 1. pp. 150,151, 299, 305, 333,
334, 364; Vol. III. p. 278. It may be inferred/rom those
places, as well as fiH)m Vol. 1. pp. 294 to 297 {Des Ptats
Domestiques et CivUs)^ and from Vd. II. pp. IT'd^} 236
(^Des J^tats PHv^'U that the distinction, intended by Mr.
!Q|^bam^ tallies niSsirly with the long-established distinction
Mvreen Jus Derttm and Jus'Personarum, See Tables 1.,
if, IV. Section 1, ViL, VIII., X.

[^OtS 5.] Fgr the* distinction between Substantive and
Ad^twe Law (firJ^w simpUdter, and Procedure), see Vol.
1. pp. 149,150,146. For Procedure in particular, see pp.
849 to 351.

*

f^OtC 6.] Ebr the distinction between Civtl Law and

¥0L. 111. Q


226 TABLES AHD NOTES.

« .

Fend Law, see Vol. J. pp. 155 et seq., 159 et seq., 179 \
and compare with those places the second paragraph of p.
298. For the Civil Code in particular, see pp. 225 to 307,
and Vol. 11. pp. 110 to 174. For the Penal Code in par¬
ticular, see Vol. 1. pp. 170 to 224; Vol. 11. p. 287 to the
end; Vol. III. p. 1 to 19L

7-1 The important division of Rights into Jura in
Mem and Jura in Fermnam {detei'minaiatn), is neither for¬
mally stated, nor consistently pi^rsucd, in the “ Vue Gene-
rdey It may, however, be traced from p. 247 to p. 293;
and see particularly pp. 271, 272,290,291,292, 293. In
the Second Volume it appesrrs with more distinctness. See
(pp. 110 to 155) “ Modes of Acquiring Froperty”: i. e. Ser¬
vitudes, with other Rights in re diend, as well as Dominion
or Property strictly so called: And see also (pp. 156 to 168)
** Modes of acquiring Rights to Services**: i. e. Acts to
be done or forborne by assigmhle or determinate persons,
in consequence of obligations (as understood by the Roman
Lawyers). At p. 167, the term “ Obligation” is employed
ill this its original meaning. ,

[i&Ote 8.] For Obligations ex contractu and quasi ex con¬
tractu, see Vol. I. pp. 271, 272, 286 et seq.; Vol. Il.qip.
156 to 168, d62 et seq.

[0Ote 9.] The Law of Civil Injuries (with the correspond¬
ing Remedies) and the Law of Crimes (with the correspond¬
ing Punishments and Remedies), are not divided into two
independent parcels, but are classed or blended together
under the name of “ Froit Fend!* See Vol. I. pp. 156
et seq., 159 et seq., 170 to 224; Vol. IL p. 237 to the end
of the Volume; Vol. III. p. 1 to 191. Compulsory Resti¬
tution and Satisfaction relate, for the tn.ost part, to Civil
Injuries; Penal Remedies, to Crimes. See Vol. IL pp. 308
to 379; and p. 380 to the end of the Volume.


ESSAYS ON INTERPRETATION AND

ANALOGY.


NOTE ON INTERPRETATION.


The following Essays or Notes arc referred to in the thirty-third
liccture (Vol. II., p. 274) in which the same subjects arc more
succinctly handled. They were not found with the Lectures,
but were doubtless intended by the Author to be incorporated in
the great work which he meditated.

In a note in the page above-mentioned, 1 spoke of the “ Essay
oil Interpretation'' as complete. This, unfortunately, is a mis¬
take ; nor have I been able to find any trace of tbc conclusion.

The original of tbc '^Excursus on Analogy" consists, in great
part, of unarranged and almost illegible fragments, amongst which
it was extremely difficult to establish anything like order and co¬
herence. I hesitated for some time whether to submit what tlie
Author left in so imperfect a state, to the public eye. Nor should
I have ventured to do so, had I not Imjcii encouraged by the
opinion of several persons of high authority in sueh a mattei’,
to whom it has been submitted. They have exhorted me by no
means to suppress this essay; ** Since," to use the words of one
of those most qualified to decide, ** though, from the fragmentary
form in which it must necessarily appear, its excellencies will pro¬
bably be hidden from most readers, its great philosophical value
will be apparent to those who study it with attention."


S. A.


231


NOTE ON INTERPRETATION
(proper and improper).

In the text* I have tried to contrast Interpretation (in
the proper acceptation of the term) and the induction of a
rule of law from a judicial decision or decisions. In (the
earlier portion of) the present note, I shall try to distin¬
guish Interpretation (in the proper acceptation of the term)
from the various modes of judicial legislation to which the
name of interpretation is not unfreqiiently misapplied.

The discovery of the law which the lawgiver intended
to establish, is the object of genuine interpretation : or,
(changing the phrase,) its object is the discovery of the
intention with which he constructed the statute, or of the
sense which he attached to the words wherein the statute
is expressed. Eor the reasons which I have given in the
text, the literal meaning of the words wherein the statute
is expressed, is the primary index or clue to the int^tion
or sense of its author.

Now the literal meaning of words (or the grammatical
meaning of words) is the meaning which custom has
annexed to them. It is the meaning attached to them
commonly by all or most of the persons who use habi¬
tually the given language; Or, if the words be technical,
it is the meaning attached to them commonly by all or
most of the persons who are specially conversant or occu¬
pied with the given art (or science). Generally, the cus¬
tomary meaning of the words wherein the statute is ex¬
pressed, is obvious or easily assignable; and generally,
therefore, the interpreter assumes it tacitly, and without
* See Lecture XXXllI., Vol. II. p. 274.


282 INTEEPRETATION.

hesitation and inquiry. Bat, occasionally, the customary
meaning of the words is indeterminate and dubious. What
is the iiienning which custom has annexed to the words, is,
therefore, an^ inquiry which the interpreter may be called
upon to institute. Consequently, the interpretation of a
statute by the literal meaning of the words may possibly
consist of a twofold process: namely, an inquiry after the
meaning' which custom has annexed to the words, and
■a use of that literal meaning as a clue to the sense of the
legislature. The interpreter seeking the meaning annexed
to. the words by custom, may not be able to determine
it; or he may not be able to find in it, when he has deter¬
mined or assumed it, any determinate sense that the legis¬
lature may have attached to theln: And, on either of these
suppositions, he may seek in other mdicia^ the intention
which the legislature held. Or, when he has determined
or assumed the customary meaning of the words, the in¬
terpreter may be able to discover in their customary or
literal meaning, a determinate or definite intention that the
legislature may have entertained: And, on this supposition,
he ought to presume strongly that the possible intention
which he finds is the very intention or purpose with which
the ^atute was made.

The intention, however, of the legislature, as shown by
that literal meaning, may differ from the intention of the
legislature, as shown by other indicia; and the presump¬
tion in favour of the intention which that literal meaning
suggests, may be fainter than the evidence for the intention
which other indicia point at. On which supposition, the
last of these possible intentions ought to be taken by the
interpreter, as aud for the intention which the legislature
actually held. For the literal meaning of the words, though
it offers a strong presumption, is not conclusive of the pur¬
pose with which the statute was made.

It appears, then, from what has foregone, that the sub¬
jects of the science of interpretation are principally the


INTERPRETATION.


233


following: namely, the natures of the various indices to
the customary meaning of the words in which the statute
is expressed: the natures of tiie various indices, other than
that literal meaning, to the intention or sense of the law¬
giver:^ the cases wherein the intention which that literal
meaning may suggest, should bend and yield to, the inten¬
tion which other indicia may point at.

Having stated the object or purpose of genuine interpre¬
tation, and pointed at the subjects of the science which is
conversant about it, we will touch upon the interpretation,
ex ratione through which an unequivocal statute is
extended or restricted. It may happen that the author of
a statute, when he is making the statute, conceives and ex¬
presses exactly the intention with which he is making it,
but conceives imperfectly and confusedly the end which de¬
termines him to make it. Now, since he conceives its scope
inadequately and indistinctly, he scarcely pursues its scope
with logical completeness, or he scarcely adheres to its scope
with logical consistency. Consequently, though lie conceives
and expresses exactly the intention with which, he is making
it, the statute, in respect of its reason, is defective or exces¬
sive. Some class of cases which the reason of the statute
embraces is not embraced by the statute itself; or the M&tutc
itself embraces some class of cases which a logical adherence
to its reason would determine its author to exclude from it.

But, in pursuance of a power which often is exercised by
judges, (and, where they are Subordinate to the State, with
its express or tacit authority,) the judge who finds that a
statute is thus defective or excessive, usually fills the chasm,
or cuts away the excrescence. In order to the accomplish¬
ment of the end for which the statute was established, the
judge completes or corrects the faulty or exorbitant inten¬
tion with which it actually was made. He enlarges the
defective, or reduces the excessive statute, and adjusts it to
the reach of its ground. For he applies it to a case of a
class which it surely does not erabra'ce, but to which its


INTBEPRETATION.


reason or scope should have made the lawgiver extend it;
or he withholds it from a case of a class which it embraces
indisputably, but which its reason or scope should have
made the lawgiver exclude from it.

Now, according to a notion or phrase which is current
with writers on law, the judge who thus enlarges, or thus
reduces the statute, “ interprets the statute by its reason
or his extension or restriction of the defective or excessive
statute is “ extensive or restrictive interpretation ew ratione
le^is." His adjustment, however, of the statute to the reach
or extent of its ground, is a palpable act of judicial legisla¬
tion, and is not interpretation or construction (in the proper
acceptation of the term). The discovery of the intention
with which the statute was made, is the object of genuine
interpretation; and, of the various clues to the actual inten¬
tion of the lawgiver, the reason of the statute is one.

But where a statute is extended or restricted in the man¬
ner which we now are considering, the actual intention of
the lawgiver is not doubted by the judge. Instead of un¬
affectedly seeking the actual intention of the lawgiver, and
using the reason of the statute as one of the various clues to
it, the judge rejects an actual (though faulty or exorbitant)
intention which the lawgiver palpably held. Instead of inter¬
preting a statute obscurely and dubiously worded, the judge
modifies a statute clearly and precisely expressed: putting
in the place of the law which the lawgiver indisputably made,
the law which the reason of the statute should have deter¬
mined the lawgiver to make. Consequently, where the judge
in show interprets the statute restrictively, he abrogates or
annuls it partially. And where the judge in ishow interprets
the statute extensively, he makes of its reason a judiciary rule
by which its defect is supplied. He makes of the reason of
the statute a general ground of decision which provides for
the class of cases overlooked and omitted by the lawgiver:
For, as a raiio decidendi, though not as a ralio legia, the
reason of a statute may perform the functions of a law.


INTERPRETATION.


235


In the following passages from the Pandects (Lib. I. tit. 8,
frag. 10,11, 12,18), the rationale of the process of exten¬
sion, which the judge performs upon the statute, is stated
unaffectedly and frankly. “ Neque leges, neque senatus-
consulta ita scribi possunt, ut omnes casus, qui quandoque
inciderint, comprehendantur; ct ideo dc his, quse primo
constituuntur, interpretatione (aut constitutione principis)
certius statuendum est.” “Non possunt omnes articuli
singillatim aut legibns aut senatusconsultis comprehendi;
sed cum in aliquu causa sententia (sive ratio) eorum mani-
festa est, is, qui jurisdictioni prmest, ad similia procedere,
atqiie ita jus diccre debet.*’ “ Quotiens lege aliquid unum
vel alterum introductum est, bona occasio est, cetera, quae
tendunt ad eandem utilitatem, interpretatione, vcl certe ju-
risdictione* suppleri.” •

There is, it is true, an extensive, or restrictive interpreta¬
tion which is properly interpretation or construction. For
the literal meaning of the words wherein the statute is ex¬
pressed, may not correspond to the purjiose wherewith it was-
actually made; and the interpreter of the statute, guided
by another index to the actual purpose of the statute,
may abandon the meaning which custom has annexed to
the words, for the meaning which the lawgiver attached to
them.

Now, if the meaning annexed to the wflrds by custom be
narrower than the meaning attached to the words by the
lawgiver, the interpreter (it is commonly said) interprets the
statute extensively: If the former of the meanings be broader
than the latter, the interpreter (it is commonly said) interprets
the statute restrictively. But, manifestly, the statute itself is
not extended or restricted by the process which we now are
considering. The very law which actually was made by the
lawgiver, is also the very law which is sought and stuck to
by the interpreter; who merely proportions the grammatical
meaning of the words to the broader or narrower meaning
with which the lawgiver used them. The interpreter ex-


236


INTERPRETATION.


tends or restricts, not the statute itself, but the literal mean¬
ing of the words wherein the statute is expressed.

Having tried to distinguish genuine interpretation from
the modes of judicial legislation which often are styled in¬
terpretation, we protfer a few remarks on some of the lead¬
ing terms which are connected w'ith the distinction in
question.

Although the intention with which a statute is made
often differs from the end which moves the law’giver to
make it, the reason of a statute and the actual intention of
the lawgiver oftener coincide or tally. Accordingly, they
often are opposed together, or contradistinguished jointly,
to the literal meaning of the words in which the statute is
expressed. Now, as contradistinguisl>cd jointly to the literal
meaning of the words, the reason of a statute with the ac¬
tual intention of the lawgiver arc commonly styled by the
moderns “ the spirit of the lawby the Roman jurists,
and the moderns who adoj)t their language, “ the sentence
of the law.-’

According to most of the writers who have treated pf
interpretation, it is either f/rammalical or logical. The in¬
terpretation of, a statute bears the name of grammatical in
so far as it seeks the meaning which custom has annexed
to the words, or seeks in that meaning exclusively the actual
intention of the lawgiver. As looking for other indices to
the actual intention of the lawgiver, or as seeking his actual
intention through sucji other indicia, the interpretation of
a statute assumes the name of logical. But as every pro¬
cess of interpretation involves a logical proce£, the contra¬
distinguished epithets scarcely suggest the distinction which
they are employed to express. The extension or restriction,
ex ratione legis, of a statute unequivocally worded, is not
interpretation or construction (in the proper acceptation of
the term). According, however, to most of the writers who
have treated of interpretation, this process of extension or


INTEllPllKTATION. 287

restriction belongs to the kind of interpretation which they
mark with Ihe name of logical.


Of the-numerous equivocal terms which the language of
jurisprudence eoraprises, cquify perhaps is the most equi¬
vocal and perplexing.* Now, of the many and disparate
meanings given to this slippery expression, some are con¬
nected inseparably with a kind of spurious interpretation:
namely, with the so-called extensive interpretation, eos ratioiie
Icgky of a statute unequivocally worded. Where a defective
statute is thus adjusted to its reason, there lies an equality or
(equity (or a parity, analogy, or likeness) between the cases
which the statute includes and the cases to which it is ex¬
tended. A case to which it is extendeti, as well as a case
which it includes, is embraced by its reason ; and the two
cases, therefore, in their common relation to its reason, are
equals analogous, or like.

Accordingly, equity or (equity signifies the objects fol¬
lowing (besides a multitude of others):—1. The parity be¬
tween a case to which the statute is extended and a case
which the statute includes.—2. The spurious extensive in¬
terpretation e,v ratione leyis: that is to say, the extension of
the statute agreeably to the parity of the cases, or the pro¬
cess of extending the statute agreeably to the parity of the
cases.—8. A personified abstract name which is moved by
the parity of the cases to call for the extension of the sta¬
tute. (“ Quod in re pari valet, (says Cicero,) valcat in hac
qurn par est: valeat (squitAu, quas paribus in causis paria
jura desidcrat.**)—4. 'rhe reason of the statute to which
the extension is gjven, or the reason of any statute which
needs a sunilar extension. (It. often is said, for example,
of such or such a case, that the case is within the equity of
such or such a statute, though the case is not included by
he statute itself.)


* Sfc Yol. II. pp. 27.') and 312.


238


INTERPRETATION.


The spurious extensive interpretation ew ratione leffis, is
storied analogy as well as equity. And it is said of analogy^
as it is said of that she is moved by the parity of

the cases to call for the extension of the statute. It is said
moreover of the pretended interpreter, that he interprets
the statute analogically. But it would seem that the term
analogy, like the expression equity, signifies most properly
the parity between the cases.*

[" Equity ” is not applicable to restrictive interpretation
ex ratione legh^

The extensive or restrictive interpretation, ex ratione
legis, of a statute unequivocally worded, are not the only
modes of judieiul or oblique legislation to which' the name
of interpretation is often misapplied. JtJ. g.: Entire or par¬
tial abrogation of a statute (with or without substitution of
a new rule), without regard even to the reason of the sta¬
tute. The grounds for which are, the judge’s own views of
utility, or of that consequence and analogy (in legislation) to
which we shall advert hereafter.

(He is to be blamed commonly, not for innovation, but for
working it under false pretences, and without system.)

So, also, the creation of judiciary law (independently of
the application of any statute) has been styled interpreta¬
tion. B. g. i The law devised by prudentes, and adopted by
tribunals, was said to be devised by interpreting the old
law ; sueh interpretation consisting, partly, in forming new
rules, by consequence and analogy, on anterior law (statute
or judiciary) (and hence, probably, the name of interpreta¬
tion) ; .and, partly, in forming new rules, without regard to
consequence or analogy, according to general utility, or any
other standard of ethics (or legislation).^

. * See Note on Analogy, poni. •

t “ interpretis offiduin, quod proprie in legis »ententia ea^UcanSa ver-
satur, per se quidem facile discemitur ab eonim niunere, quorum est, ad
causas npplicam leges; unde etinm recte do utroque genere seorsim multa


INTKRPRKTATION.


239


As 1 shall show hereafter, authentic interpretation is also
genuine or spurious. A declaratory law being truly such,
or introducing the new law under the guise of interpreting
the purpose with which the old was made.*


From the two processesf which I have endeavoured to
contrast, I pass to the celebrated phrase which is closely
connected with them; though it regards the application of
law, Cand also the creation of law,) rather than the disco¬
very of law by interpretation or induction. “ After all the
certainty (says Paley) that can be given to points of law,
either by the interposition of the legislature, or the autho¬
rity of precedents, one principal so\irce of disputation, and
into which, indeed, the greater part of legal controversies
may be resolved, will remain still; namely, “ ihe competi¬
tion of oppomte analogies^ The nature of the difficulties
denoted by this celebrated phrase, he attempts to state in
the following passage. “When a point of law has once
been adjudged, neither that question, nor any which com¬
pletely, and ill all its circumstances, corresponds with tltat^
can be brought a second time into dispute. But questions
arise which resemble that only indirectly, and in part, and
in certain views and circumstances, and which seem to bear
an equal or a greater affinity to other adjudged cases:
questions which can be brought within any fixed rule only
by analogy, and which hold an analogy by relation to differ¬
ent rules. It is by the urging of the different analogies

praecdpiuntar. Est tamen genus quocldam prseceptorum velut promiscuum
atquc in medio positum, corum scilicet, qum ad leges ex earam rattone,
aut ad similia producendas aut restrinffcndas spectani.”—Muhlcnbrucli,
Doc. Pan. Vol. T. Lib. I. cap. 3.

* lutcrpretatiott by regiment. Sec French Code and Benthara’s Judi¬
cial Establishments.

t See Vol. 11. p. 336.


INTERPRETATION.


240

■mt'

that the contcntiou of the Bar is earried oh: And it is in
the compaiiaoD, adjustment, and reconcilU^on of them with
one another; and in the discerning of such distinotfcns, and
the framing of such'a determination, as may save the vari¬
ous rules alleged in the cause, or, if that be impossible, as
may give up the weaker analogy to the stronger, that the
sagacity arid wisdom of the Court are seen and exercised.”
Now, like all or most of the phrases into which “ analogy ”
enters, the celebrated phrase “ the competition^of opposite
analogies ” is often i^ed indeterminately. Accordingly, it
has darkened the nature of the difficulties which it was c 6 n-

^ r *■

trived to express; and, therewith, it has obscured that preg¬
nant distinction between statute and judiciary law with
which wo are presently occupied. It needs, therefore, the
cxact'cxamination which I now shallhestow upon it.

Two distinct difficulties, inchlent respectively to two dis¬
tinct processes, are denoted by the phrase as it is usually
applied. Of these distinqt difficulties, one is incident to
the application of statute or judiciary law already obtaining
or existing: the other is incident to the decision of a spe¬
cific or particular case for which the existing law affords no
applicable rule. The former may perplex the judge in his
.purely judicial character, or as pTroperly exercising his pro¬
perly judicial functions: the latter may embarrass the judge
in his quality of judicial legislator, or as virtually making a
rule for cases of a new description.* As it is usually applied,
the phrase is confined to the difficulty which is incident to
the application of law, with the difficulty which is incident
to judicial legislation. But a difficulty resembling these
is incident to direct legislation, or the process of creating
a statute. Arid this difficulty may be styled, as properly
08 the two others, a competition of opposite analogies.

• I first shall consider the difficulty which is incident to
the application of law already obtaining or existing; though
the difficulty which is incident to judicial legislation is pro¬
bably the difficulty that Paley particularly contemplated.


INTERPRETATIOJt. 241

Having considerecl- to- difficulty- which is incident to the
application i^f law, I ..Aall proceed to consider the diffi¬
culty whi(^ is mpident.to-judicial legislation, and also the
resembling difficulty which is incident to the creation of a
statute.

The system of positive kw obtaining in any nation (or
the complexion or collective whole of its positive law) is a
body or aggregate, (methodized or unmethodized) of Various
but connected rules. Now every rule which is definite or
precise, is applicable to cases of a class (or governs cases of
a class) which also is definite or precise. For the rule is
shaped exactly to the essence or nature of the class, or fo
the essentials, positive and negative, possessed by a case of
the class: meaning by the positive and negative essentials
of the case, the pro[)erties which it necessarily has, and the
properties which it necessarily wants, in so far as it belongs
to the class, and in so far as the rule will apply to it. And
as the rule js shaped exactly to the essence of nature of the
class, so is the essence of the class exactly marked by the
rule : the determinate purpose of the rule, and the determi¬
nate import of the rule, fixing the class of cases which its
adthor intended it to govern. Consequently, if every rule
in a system of law were perfectly definite or precise, every
specific case that the whole of the system embraced would
belong to a kind or sort perfectly definite or precise.

On the appearance of any case that tlic whole of the sys¬
tem embraced, the class to which it belonged, and the rule
by which it was governed, might be known and assigned
with certainty; or, (at the least,) the class and the rule
might be known and assigned with certainty, by every dis¬
cerning kwyer who had mastered the system thoroughly.
But the ideal completeness and correctness which I now
have imagined, is not attainable in fact. More or fewer of
the rules which constitute a system of law, and more or
fewer of the cases which the whole of the system extends
to, are inevitably framed and classed more or less indefi-

-^.* 111 . »


IJITERPRETATION.


242

nitely. What exactly are- the cases which a given rule ap¬
plies to, or what exactly is the rule which governs a given
case, is a doubt that would arise occasionally, and would
not be soluble always, though the system had been built
and ordered with matchless solicitude and skill. And hence
arises, or hence arises mainly, the difficulty which I now
am considering: a difficulty incident to the application of
law, and not to the creation of law by judicial or direct le¬
gislation.

In order to an analysis of the difficulty which I now am
considering, we will suppose that the rule A is not per¬
fectly definite; or, (what is the same thing expressed in
a different form,) that the essence of the class of cases
which A was intended to govern is not marked by A with
perfect exactness. Further, we will suppose that the mle
B, with the essence of the class of cases which B was in¬
tended to govern, is in the same plight of uncertainty.
Moreover, we will suppose that the case as demi^ds judicial
decision: that x in certain respects bears a likeness to the
cases which seem to be governed by A ; but that w in other
respects bears a likeness to the cases which seem to be
governed by B. Lastly, I will suppose that the judge, dis¬
tracted by the two likenesses, doubts whether A or B be
the rule applicable to x.

Now, the difficulty which stays the judge from applying
the law to the fact, may be called (in metaphorical language)
" a competition of opposite analogies.*' For the likeness of
X to the cases which seemingly are governed by A, and the
likeness of x to the cases*whicb seemingly are governed by
B, may be deemed two opposite Suitors contending for the
preference of the judge: the former entreating the judge to
decide x by A, and the latter Imploring the judge to resolve
arbyB.

The difficulty arises, however, from the indefiniteness of
the two rules. For if the rule A bfe the rule applicable to x,
(or if the rule B be the nde applicable to a?,) a?, in respect of


INTERPRETATION.


243


A, (or in respect of B,) is in the following double predica¬
ment. It has all the positive essentials possessed by cases , of
the class which the rule was intended to govern: And, more¬
over, it has no property or character through which it differs
from those cases essentially or materially: that is to say,
through which it differs from those cases in such wise and*
degree as render a common rule inapplicable to it and them.

Consequently, if the rules A and B be perfectly definite,
and the classes of cases which they govern be therefore per¬
fectly definite, the judge can arrive with certainty at one of
the following conclusions: namely, that x is in that predica¬
ment in respect of the rule A, and therefore must be solved
by A; or that a? is in that predicament in respect of the
rule B, and therefore must be solved by B ; or that a? is not
in that predicament in respect of either of those rules, and
therefore must be solved by a third, if a third that applies
may be found. The difficulty arises, therefore, from the
indefiniteiiess of the two rules ; and is rather a competition
or conflict of those indefinite rules, than of the opposite
analogies of x to the cases of the indefinite classes.

To the foregoing analysis of the difficulty which I now
am considering, I append the following explanations.—To
render my supposed example as simple as possible, 1 have
imagined that the indefinite rules which strive for the pre¬
ference of the judge are only two. But, though a greater
number of such rules strive for the preference of the judge,
the hindrance to the application of the law is substantially
the. one which I have analysed. The greater, however, is
the number of the indefinite «nd. conflicting rules, the
greater, of course, is his'difficulty. The greater, of course,
is his difficulty in subsuming the case before him under the
appropriate rule; or in finding that the case before him is
embraced by none of the rules of which the law that he ad¬
ministers is actually ■composed.

Although it arises more frequently from a conflict of
indefinite rules, the difficulty which* I now am consider-

R 2


244


INTERPRETATION-


ing (or a difficulty essentially like it) may arise, without
such a conflict, from a single indefinite rule. For it pro¬
bably has happened, where a rule or principle is indefinite,
that some judges have applied it to certain specific cases,
whilst others have withheld it from cases essentially si¬
milar to the former. In other words, the rule has been
applied to some, and withheld from other cases, though
all the adjudged cases are of one description or category.
Now if a?, a case in controversy, be of that description or
category^ it bears a likeness to the cases to which the rule
has been applied, and also a likeness to the cases from
which the rule has been withheld. And though the like¬
nesses are identical in relation to the various cases, they
yet arc opposed and contending in relation to the indefinite
rule: one of them inviting the judge to apply the rule to
and the other suggesting to the judge that the rule is in¬
applicable to it.

But the difficulty which stays the judge, springs from
the indefiniteness of the rule. Supposing that the rule is
judiciary, the difficulty implies that the existence of the rule
is (piestionablc j or, at least, has been disputed by the
judged who have refused to apply it. For the rule itself
is made by decisions (if it exist at all). Supposing that
the rule is perfectly definite, the judge may determine cer¬
tainly (if not easily and quickly,) how he- should dispose of
the case which awaits his judicial solution. It surely is,
or it surely is not, of the class which the rule was intended
to govern. ^ ' .

We have assumed tailtly, up to the present .point,
that the cuampetition of opposite analogies which is inci¬
dent to the application of law arises exclusively from the
indefiniteness of a rule or rules. But it may possibly
arise from a somewhat diflerent cause: namely, the incon¬
sistency inter se of several definite Tules, or the intrin¬
sic or self-inconsistency of one definite rule. Or, (what,
in effect, is exactly the same thing,) it may possibly spring


INTERPRETATION.


246


from the inconsistency with which such rules or rule have
been administered or applied. Of two cases, for example,
which belong to one category, and which therefore should
have been adjudged by one and the same rule, the one may
have been decided by a definite or precise rule ami the
other by a definite rule essentially different from tlie former.
Or, supposing a single rule which is perfectly definite or
precise, it may have been applied to one, and withheld from
another case,though the two adjudged cases are of one de¬
scription or class.

Now, on either of these suppositions, it may. happen
that a case in controver^sy is essentially similar to the cases
which have been resolved inconsistently. But, assuming
that a case in controversy is essentially similar to those
cases, it bears a likeness to one of them, Jind the same like¬
ness to the other; which respective likenesses, though iden¬
tical in relation to the cases, are opposed and contending
analogies in relation to the rules or rule.* Consequently
the difficulty may spring from the inconsistency of several
definite rules, or from the intrinsic inconsistency of a single'
definite rule. But, though it may spring from inconsis¬
tency which is not an effect of indefiniteness, it commonly
springs from inconsistency of which indefiuiteness is the
cause: that is to say, it commonly springs from the incon¬
sistency of several indefinite rules, or from the intrinsic
inconsistency of a single indefinite rule. For the inconsis-.
tency in rules which is not an effect of their iridefinitcncss,
is generally an evil that is easily corrigible.

Generally, therefore, a system or body of law is kept pass¬
ably free from it by direct or judicial legislatiQ|]^« But the
inconsistency in rules which is caused by their want of pre¬
cision, is often-an invincible malady, or a malady difficult to

* Tf two enses essenliully different have been decided by a common rule,
a competition of opposite analogies cannot arise from the inconsistency.
For if a case in controversy be essentially similar to either, it is essentially
different from the other, and not essentially like it.


246


INTERPRETATION .


heal.* It often inheres in the purpose of a rule, and there¬
fore is simply incurable. And where it is susceptible of
cure, (which far more often is the fact,) it can seldom be
expelled from the system without a solicitude and skill
which lawgivers, direct or judicial, have rarely felt and at¬
tained to.

It appears,then, from the foregoing analysis, that the com¬
petition of opposite analogies which is incident to the appli¬
cation of law, arises from this : that a rule iii*thc system of
law which the judge is engaged in administering, is incon¬
sistent with itself ; or that two or more of the rules which
actually compose the system, are inconsistent with one an¬
other. It appears, also, from the same analysis, that the rule
or rules are commonly thus inconsistent, because, inevitably
or otherwise, it or they are indefinite ; but that the rule or
rules arc occasionally thus inconsistent, although it or they
are perfectly precise.

From the competition of opposite analogies which is in¬
cident to the application of law, I turn to the similar diffi-
. culty which is incident to judicial legislation.

(27ie rest wanting,')

««««««««

• Eulcs iuTolving degrees: libel, lunaey, prodigality, reasonable

, time, reasonable notice. These are hotbeds of competing analogies. The
indchuiteness is incorrigible. A discretion is left to the judge. Ques¬
tions arising on them (and all competitions of auulogics) are questions
of law: e. g. they regard the applicability of an uncertain or incon¬
sistent rule or rules to a given and known fact. They are hardly ques¬
tions of interpretation or induction, for though the rule were explored and
known as far^s possible, doubt would remain.


EXCURSUS ON ANALOGr.


249


EXCURSUS ON ANALOGY.

H (Analogical Reasoning and Syllogism.)

Having analysed the equivocal phrase of which we have
treated in the text,* we will here review the meanings (or
rather the principal meanings) of the equivocal term which
it involves: namely, the term Analogy.

1. As taken with the largest, and perhaps the most
current of its meanings, the term analogy is coextensive
with the term likeness: In other words, it signifies likeness
or resemblance of any nature or degree. The process, for
example, of reasoning, which we shall scrutinize hereafter,
may bo grounded on a likeness or resemblance of any na¬
ture or degree; and whatever be the nature or degree
of the given likeness or resemblance, the reasoning which
is grounded upon it is styled reasoning by analogy. More¬
over, the terra analogy, as borrowed by the Romans from
the Greeks, often signifies a reasoning which is grounded
on a likeness or resemblance, instead of the likeness or
resemblance whereon the reasoning is grounded. And
analogy, as meaning such reasoning (or the consequent
yielded by such reasoning) receives from the Roman Varro,
(treating of its etymon and value,) the following extensive
definition : “ Veritas et ratio, quae a similitudine oritur.”

2. Between the species or sorts which are parts of a

or kind, there obtains a resemblance or likeness whereon
the ^enus is built; or (changing the phrase) between indi¬
viduals of any, and individuals of any other of those sorts,
there obtains a resemblance or likeness by which they are
» Sue Lecture XXXVII., Vol. 11. (ante).


250


EXCURSUS ON ANALOGY.


determined to the kind. Moreover, between individuals or
singulars as parts of any one of those species^ there obtains
another resemblance, which is the ground or basis of the
sort. For example : Between the various species which are
parts of the genus animal, (or between individuals of any,.
and individuals of any other of those species^ there obtains
a resemblance or likeness which determines them to the
gems animal. And between individual men, as belonging
to a sort of animals, there obtains another resemblance
which determines them to the species man. .

The resemblance between the species which are parts of
a genus or kind (or between individuals of any, and indi¬
viduals of any other of those specie^) is styled, in the
language of logicians, generic. The resemblance between
individuals as parts of any one of those species is styled, in
the language of logicians, specific.

Now the likeness between any of the sorts which are
parts or members of a kind (or between individuals of any,
and individuals of aiiy other of those sorts) is commonly
contradistinguished, under the name of analogy^ to the
likeness between individuals as parts of any one of those
sorts. For example: The likeness of a man to any of the lower
animals, as distinguished from the likeness of a man to any of
the human species, is commonly called analogy. Again: The
term intellect, when it is used emphatically, denotes the
human intellect. But between the intellect of men and
the intellect of the lower animals there obtains a generic re¬
semblance. Accordingly, the intellect of the lower animals
is styled an “ analogm intellectus that is to say, a some¬
thing which resembles generically the intellect of the human
species, or the fieculiar and preeminent intellect which is
ctdled intellect emphatically. Again: In relation to the
several titles from which they respectively arise, an obliga¬
tion ea contractu and an obligation quasi ex contractu are
obligations of different species. But these two different
species are parts of a common ; namely, the genus of od-


EXCURSUS ON ANALOGY.


251


liffationes iS^ tlie sense of the Roman lawyers). Accordingly,
an obligation quasi ex contractu (as the adverb quam im¬
ports) is an analogon of an obligation annexed by the law
to a contract.

It follows from what has preceded, that when we denote
by the term analogy a generic and remoter resemblance
between individuals or singulars, we make the following
suppositions concerning the compared objects. First: That
one or some of those objects are parcel of a given class,
which, for the purpose in hand, we deem a npedes: that is
to say, a class consisting exclusively of mere individuals or
singulars, and not containing or comprising Iowct or nar»
rower classes. Secondly : That the other or rest of those
objects are not of that given species. Thirdly: That all
the compared objects are parcel of a given genus by which
that species is embraced.

3. Two or more objects may bear to another object, (or
they may bear respectively to several other objects,) similar
though several relations. Thus, A may bo related to a?, as
li is related to x; or A may be related to c (or to c, el, and
e), as B is related to x (or to x, y, and s). Now where
several objects are thus related similarly, they bear to one
another a likeness lying in a likeness of their relations.
And this resemblance of objects, lying in a resemblance of
their relations, has been named by Greek and Latin, and
also by modern writers, analogy: by Latin writers, trans¬
lating from Greek, prqporiio.

Where objects are allied by a likeness lying in a likeness
of their relations, the objects may be connected, or the ob¬
jects njay not be connected by a likeness of a diiSerent
nature. On either, however, of these suppositions, the ob¬
jects are parts of an actual, or a possible genus or svecies,
built on the likeness of their relations. For a likeness of
objects which lies in a likeness of their relations, as well as
any other likeness connecting the objects with one another,
may fonu a reason or ground for putting them together in
a class.


252


EXCURSUS OR ANALOGY.


Of the analogy or likeness of objects which lies in a like¬
ness of their relations, the following examples are speci¬
mens.—^The fin of a fish and the wing of a bird are ana-
logom objects: the fin being to the fish, in respect of its
movements through the water, as the wing is to the bird,
in respect of its movements through the air. There also
obtains an analogy between an egg and a seed: for the egg
is related to the mother, and to the incipient bird, as the
seed is related to the generating, and to the inchoate plant.
Where several legal cases are incluclcd by a law or principle,
their similar though several relations to the law or principle
•which includes them, make them analogous cases. Thus,
the several specific cases actually comprised by a statute;
or the several specific cases comprised by a judiciary rule,
carry a mutual analogy^ qr a mutual parity or mquity, in
respect of their like relations to the statute or rule of law.

Again: We may suppose that the author of a statute,
when he is making the statute, omits some class of cases
fulling within its reason. Now, on this supposition, a case
which is thus omitted and a case which the statute includes,'
bear to the reason of the statute similar though several re¬
lations. And in respect of their similar though several re¬
lations' to the reason, the omitted and included cases are
analogousy aequal, qx pares.

But here, to prevent misconception, I must add the fol¬
lowing remarks.—The several specific cases which are ac¬
tually comprised by a statute, or the several specific cases
which are comprised by a judiciary, rule, are therefore ana¬
logous or pares: for the respective relations of the cases to
the statute or rule which includes them are similar though
several relations.

But when it is said of a litigated case, that it bears an
analogy or parity to another case or cases, it commonly is
not intended that the doubtful and litigated case is surely
and indisputably included by a statute or rule in question.
It commonly is meant that the litigated bears to the other


EXCURSUS ON ANALOGY.


253


case a specific or generic likeness; and that the former
ought to be decided on account of the alleged resemblai^e,
by a statute or rule in question on account of the resem¬
blance alleged. Or else it is meant that the litigated bears
to the other case a specific or generic likeness; but that
the former ought not to be decided, although the resem¬
blance is admitted, by a statute or rule in (|uestion, not¬
withstanding the admitted resemblance. Consequently, the
asserted or admitted analogy of the litigated case to the
other is not an analogy or parity lying in a likeness of their
relations; or, at the least, it is not an analogy or parity
lying in a likeness of their relations to a given statute or
rule indisputably including both.

In truth, when it is said that a litigated case is analogous
to another case, one of the following meanings is commonly
imported by the phrase. It is meant that the litigated case
bears to the other case, a specific and proximate resem¬
blance ; and that the former ought to be decided, on account
of the alleged resemblance, by a given statute or rule iu which
the latter is included. Or else it is meant that the litigated
bears to the other case a generic and remoter resemblance;
and that the former should be brought or forced, on aceount
of the alleged resemblance, within a statute or rule by which
the latter is comprised: that is to say, that a new rule of
judiciary law, resembling a statute or rule by which the
latter is comprised, ought to be made by the Court, and
applied to the case in controversy.


In any of the meanings which wo have reviewed above,
the term analogy signifies likeness: namely, likeness or re¬
semblance of any nature or degree; generic and remoter
likeness, as opposed to specific and proximate; or a like¬
ness of several objects, lying in a likeness of their relations.
In any of the meanings which we shall review below, the
term analogy denotes an intellectual process: a process


254 EXCURSUS ON ANALOGY.

which is caused or grounded by or upon an analogy (in one
or another of the meanings which wc have reviewed above).

1. Analogy denotes the analogizing of several analogous
objects: that is to say, the considering the several objects
as connected by the analogy between them.

2. Analogy denotes an inference, or a reasoning or argu¬
mentation, w Weof an analogy of objects is mainly the cause
or ground.

The nature of the inference, or reasoning, may be stated
or suggested thus. Two or more individuals, or individual
or singular objects, are allied by a given analogy. It is
known (or, at least, is' assumed,) before and without the
reasoning, that a given something is true of one or some of
these objects. But it is not known, before and without the
reasoning, that the given something is true of the other or
rest of these objects. From the given analogy, however,
which connects these objects w'ith one another, the follow¬
ing inference is drawn: Namely, that the given something
which is true of one or some of these objects, is true of the
other or rest. Or the nature of the inference or reasoning
may be stated or suggested thus :—A is and y and z. An
analogy or parity obtains between.^ and B; for B as well
8,3 A is w and y. We know, (or, at least, we assume,) be¬
fore and without the reasoning, that A is also z. We do
not, however, know, before and without the reasoning, that
B is also z. But, since B as well as is ^ and y, and we
know, the reasoning apart, that A is also Zy we infer, by
analogy or parity, that B is also z. In short, from two
antecedents or data which are known independently of the
reasoning, we argue or proceed to a consequent which is
unknown without it. From our knowledge that several
objects are connected by a given analogy, and our know¬
ledge that a further something is true of one or some, we
infer that the further something is true of the other or
others.

. From the following passage in Quinctilion, it seems that


EXCURSUS ON ANALOGY.


255


the Roman writers, as borrowing a term from the Greek,
styled the reasoning in question^ 'analogy j and that ^ the
Rootan writer styled such reasoning proportion (sometimes
also cmnparatio^ when they turned the Greek expression
into its nearest Latin equivalent. ** Analogieey quam proxime
ex Gkbco transferentes in Ijoimximproportionem vocaverunt,
hsec vis est: Ut id, quod dubium est, ad aliquid simile, de
quo non quaeritur, referat; ut incerta certis probet.”—Inst.
OV*at. L. I. c. 6. We have already quoted the definition of
the terra, given by the etymologist Varro; agreeably to his
definition, analogy signifies the consequent yielded by the
reasoning in question, rather than the reasoning itself.

But though the reasoning in question is styled analogy
Qit proportionn it is styled more commonly reasoning by ana¬
logy or else analogical reasoning : ratiocinatio per analogiam
or argumeiiiatio analogica. It is styled also reasoning by
parity; and since cqnalHy or erqnify is tantamount to ana¬
logy or parity, it might be styled moreover reasoning by
equality or aequity.

And here 1 may remark that the homely phrase to liken,
or to likm one thing to another, is equivalent to the finer
phrase to reason by analogy or parity. We know that
several objects are like in certain respects: We know that
a something is true of some of those objects, although we
do not know that the same is true of the others: From our
knowledge that the former and the latter are like in certain
respects, and our knowledge that the given something may
be truly affirmed of the former, we. infer that the given
something may be truly affirmed of the latter. Now here
in homespun English, we liken the latter to the former:
that is to say, we argue them like the former in one or
more respects, since we know them, the inference apart, like
the former in others.


256 EXCURSUS ON ANALOGT.

In a case of analogical reasoning, the analogy of the com¬
pared objects may lie in a resemblance of their relations, or
in another resemblance. On either of the two suppositions,
the reseinblance may be specific, and comparatively close
or strong, or the resemblance may be generic, and compa¬
ratively distant or faint. In other words, the objects from
which we infer, and the objedts to which wc argue, may be
parts of one species: or the former may belong to a sjiecies,
parcel of a given ffenmy and the latter to another si)eci'est
parcel of the same f/enua^ ' Whatever be the nature of the
likeness on which the reasoning is grounded, or whatever
be the degree of the likeness on which the reasoning is
grounded, the reasoning may be called with propriety, as
it commonly is called in practice, reasoning bg analogy or
parity,

such analogical arguments as arc grounded on spe¬
cific resemblances, and such analogical arguments as arc
grounded on generic resemblances, are not unfrequcntly
distinguished by the following antithesis of phrases. An
inference from singulars of a sort, is grounded, it is said,
on experience. An inference from singulars of a sort which
is parcel of a given kind, to singulars of another sort
which is parcel of the same kind, is grounded, it is said, on
analogy.

Fof' example: It is said that a physician would reason
from experience, in case he reasoned thus: “ Some men
have died, or have suffered some other harm, on taking a
certain drug; therefore, other men will die, or will sufier a
like harm, if the drug be taken by them.** It is said that
he would reason from analogy, in case he reasoned thus:
**jSomc animals of one of the lower sorts have died of
a certain drug; therefore men will die of the drug, if it be
taken by them.**

But such analogical arguments as are grounded on spe¬
cific resemblances, and such analogical argu];pents as are
grounded^ on generic resemblances, are vaguely* divided


EXCURSUS ON ANALOGY. 257

• •

by a difference which is meifely a difference of degrees.
There is not the opposition of natures between the two.
classes of arguments, which seems to be expressed or
intimated by the foregoing antithesis of phrases. For
whether the likeness be specific or generic, an argument
raised on a likeness rests upon two antecedents: first, the
likeness between the objects from which we reason or infer,
and the objects to which we argue; secondly, the given and
further something which we know or assume of the former,
and which, by analogy or parity, we impute or ascribe to
the latter.

Now, whether the likeness be specific or generic, each
antecedent is known to us (cither directly or mediately) by
or through an experience which has occurred to ourselves
or others. Consequently, whether the likeness be specific
or generic, the reasoning is built on experience, and’^lso
is built on analogy. In respect of either antecedent, the
reasoning is built on experience. In respect of that ante¬
cedent wliich consists in the likeness of the objects, the
reasoning is built on analogy with which experience pre¬
sents us. We know, indeed, through experience, ^lelped
by analogical reasoning,) that such analogical arguments as
rest on specific resemblances, are commonly worthier of
trust’than such as rest on generic. But this extremely
vague, though extremely important difference, is merely a
difference of degrees. Although an analogical argument,
raised on a stronger resemblance may be surer than a
similar argument raised on a weaker resemblance; the
natures of the several arguments are essentially like or
identical.


We will divide analogical reasoning into two principal
kinds.

As concerned with matter of a nature which we* shall
endeavour to explain, analogical argumentation (supposing


258


EXCURSUS ON ANALOGY.


it justly conducted) is only contingently true; Or (chang¬
ing the phrase) the something which is true of the object
from which we reason or infer, is only probably true, or
only contingently true, of the objeets to which we argue.

As concerned with matter of another nature, which we
shall also endeavour to explain, analogical argumentation
(supposing it justly conducted) is necessarily or certainly
true: Or (changing the phrase) the something which is true
of the objects from which we reason or infer, is certainly or
necessarily true of the objects to which we argue.

Analogical reasoning of the former kind wc will call ana¬
logical reasoning concerning contingent matter. Analogical
reasoning of the latter kind we will call analogical reason¬
ing concerning necesaarg matter. We incline to believe
that the latter is not commonly called analogical reasoning,
and" it certainly differs essentially from analogical reasoning
concerning contingent matter. Accordingly, we have hither¬
to assumed, in treating of reasoning by analogy, that all
analogical reasoning concerns contingent matter.

But to this we shall return below.

[Analyse analogical reasoning of the first kind, and compare it
with syllogism and perfect induction, and with analogical reason¬
ing (if such it can be called) which is concerned with necessary
matter.]


I must now endeavour to distinguish Contingent from
Necessary Truth.

Contingent Truth is truth not inseparable from a notion
of the object; Our belief resting, not on a necessary con¬
nection of truth with the object, but on experience and ob-
se^ation (end's own or others') of their invariable or cus¬
tomary conjunction: such as the experience of pleasure or
pain as connected with objects of a given class: Our belief
or expectation of future conjunction being* (at least after
experience) proportioned to the degree in which, in times


EXCURSUS ON ANALOGY.


269


past, conjunction has approached to invariableness. E.
The death of men is expected with perfect confidence; but
the effect of a drug on the human body, or of an object on the
human mind, in the way of pleasure or pain, is expected with
less confidence. The nature of the belief or expectation derived
from past conjunctions, is not wjthin the province of the lo¬
gician, who takes the facts from the philosophy of the human
mind. The belief or expectation seems to be confident be¬
fore experience, and to be afterwards reduced to experience;
widened by analogical reasoning founded on generic resem¬
blance. It will be admitted by all, that our belief ought to
be commensurate with the experience; e.ff. with the pro¬
portion borne by individual instances in which the conjunc¬
tion has been experienced, to individual instances in which
it has not. Whether our belief is first absolute and then
proportioned to experience, or is first hesitating and gra¬
dually proportioned to experience, is not a question falling
within the range of the logician.

In ordinary language, contingent truths arc certain or
jirobable. As opposed to necessary, all are contingent, in
the sense above explained; but according as truth is ac¬
cordant with all past experience, or only accords with past
experience generally^ it is certain or probable.

A contingent or probable truth docs not necessarily be¬
long to the object, although in fact no object of the sort
has been known without it.

Necessary Truth is that which is true of all objects, like
the objects argued from, by reason of their having that
wherein they arc analogous. A necessary efflux of that; a
something without which the object cannot be conceived as
having that. \e.g. Tnangles, as such. (Hobbes.) Law case
of a class, as such: i. e. as abstracted from its individual pe¬
culiarities. Legal consequence true of it, etc.]

In all these cases the truth seems to be proprium or
property, strictly so called. Jt flows necessarily from the

s 2


260 EXCURSUS ON ANALOGY.

essence of the object: i. e. from the properties (positive or
negative or both) which make the object to be of the class
to which it belongs: Although it is not itself of the essence;
e.^. equality of the three angles of any triangle, etc.

. Or, legal consequence deducible from a case.

» » « «.« « « *

m

Analogical Beaconing concerning Contingent Matter.

In pursuance of the order suggested above we shall pro¬
ceed to analyse analogical reasoning concerning contingent
matter.

!".• Induction; i.e. analogical reasoning extended to all
other objects, (or other objects generally and indetermi¬
nately,) having the given analogy to the object or objects
argued from. (Call it, at present, imperfect induction, or
induction simply; being totally ditFercnt in nature from
what is 'commonly called perfect induction, and to which
we shall advert below in conjunction with syllogism.)

2®. Analogical argument not involving any such universal
or general illation ; but regarding one or some individually
determined singulars, having the given analogy to the ob¬
jects argued from.

This latter,as opposed to induction,maybe called particular
reasoning; and may be drawn without adverting to others
generally. But in so far as it will hold, it supposes that the
truth applies universally or generally, and indeterminately..

The degree of assurance with which the particular con¬
clusion may be embraced is proportioned *to the approach
to universality. E. g.: A has a? and g. A has also z. B
has a' and y. Ergo, J^'has But why? Because all
objects having x and y, or objects generally having cs and
. yr, have z: insomuch, that B is, certainly, or probably, one
of a number of objects having z.

This is what we do when we attempt to state the grounds
of our inferences. Also, when, in confuting others, we
suggest a contradictoiy case or cases. Immense import¬
ance of the habit: Most people being apt to assume from


EXCURSUS ON ANAIiOGT.


261


a few cases universally, and then to syllogize. This leads
me to compare syllogism as concerned with contingent
matter, and particular analogical reasoning as concerned
with the same.

[Distinguish analogical reasoning which is concerned with
contingent matter, from syllogism and perfect induction, of which
the matter is also contingent.

Analyse analogical reasoning (induction and particular) con¬
cerning necessary matter, and compare it with induction (neces¬
sarily perfect) and syllogism (necessarily concluding absolutely)
as concerned with the same.]

•

In analogical reasoning as concerned with contingent
truths, the truth or probability of the inference, depends on
two causes : namely, the truth of the two antecedents, and
the invariable or customary'connection of the second an¬
tecedent with other singulars like those from which we
argue. If the antecedents arc true, and the conjunction
invariable, the inference is certain : i. e. has the certainty
which alone can belong to contingent truth (as explained
above).

If the antecedents -are true and the conjunction not in¬
variable, the inference recedes from certainty in proportion
to the recess from invariableness.

[Give examples of both cases.]

All analogical reasoning proceeds from a singular to a
singular, or singulars, or from singulars to singulars, or a
singular. But when we infer from singulars or a singular
to one or some, it is usually called “ reasoning,” or “ parti¬
cular reasoning.” a singular or singulars to

the rest of the actual or possible class, “ induction.”

[Give example.]

But in every case, the process is essentially the same.
For the confidence in a particular conclusion depends upon
the approach to invariableness of conjunction: i. e. upon the
possibility of an induction approaching to truth. Many
inductions arc founded directly on an analogy: e.g. What


26i


EXCURSUS ON ANALOGY.


is true of one of a species, is true of other individuals. But
this again rests ultimately on experience.

It appears from, what has preceded, that reasoning by
analogy or likeness (of any nature or degree) is grounded
on two antecedents; first, the likeness between the objects
from] which we reason or infer, and the objeets to which
we argue; secondly, the something, which, (the inference
apart,) we know to be tnie of the former, and which, by
analogy or parity, we impute or ascribe to the latter. But
though these two antecedents are immediately the ground
of the inference, the inference reposes also on a further or
ulterior basis. For why do we argue from the likeness be¬
tween the compared objects, and the something which we
know to be true of one, or some, of the objects, that the
something is true moreover of the other, or rest of the
objects ? Tlie nature of the ulterior basis on which the in¬
ference rcjwses is determined by the nature of the matter
with which the inference is concerned.

In [some] cases of reasoning by analogy the truth of. the
analogical inference (supposing it dcdjaced justly) is contin¬
gent or probable: that is to say, the something that is
true of the objects which the just inference is brought from,
is contingently true of the objects to which the inference is
carried. In other cases of reasoning by analogy, the truth
of the analogical inference (supposing it deduced justly) is
neeessai’y or eertain: that is to say, the something that is
true of the objects which are justly argued from, is necessarily
true of the objects which are justly argued to.


Analopcal Ucamning as concerned with contingent Matter,
distinguished from Syllogism and perfect Induction as
concerned with the same.

Whatever there has been of reasoning, as meaning pro¬
cess from known to unknown, has been performed by an


EXCURSUS ON ANALOGY. 2^3

analogical argument (an induction), by wbicb we obtained
the major premiss.

(Give example.)

And, moreover, in contingent matter, syllogism is apt
to mislead. It rarely happens that the major premiss can
be universal, conformably with material truth, though the
formal truth of the conclusion depends on assuming such
material universality.

(Give example.)

Since then syllogism can give us no new truth, and since
it may mislead, what is its use ?

I incline to think that the important part is not syllo¬
gism. But terms, propositions, definitions, divisions (ab¬
stracted from all particular matter) are all important. It is
a great error of most logicians to consider these as merely
subordinate, to syllogism, which is the most futile part.
From my friend John Mill, who is a metaphysician, I ex¬
pect that these, and analogical reasoning and induction, ab¬
stracted from particular matter ‘(which are the really prac¬
tical parts), will receive that light which none but a philo¬
sopher can give. For though logic is a formal science, and
takes its truth from others, none but a metaphysician can
determine its boundaries or explicate it properly.

[Necessity for illustrations from numerous sciences.—^Manyof
the methods seemingly peculiar, would be found universal or
general.]

A something equivalent, or nearly approaching, to syllo¬
gism, always happens when we state in our own minds the
grounds for a conclusion in a particular reasoning: e,g. :

A is Of and g. .^isalsojsr. ^is^and^. B, ergo, is also
z. But why ? Because all singulars being x and y are alio
Zt or singulars being a? and y are generally and indetermi¬
nately z. In other words, we can only infer from A to B,
on the supposition that A is the representative of a whole
class, or of singularis generally contained in a class. The
argument, therefore, must be put thus: All singulars being


264


EXCURSUS OV ANALOGY.


a? and y, or the singulars generally which are x and y, have
z. The singular or singulars forming the subject of the
inquiry are z. Therefore, certainly or probably, B \& z.
And this would be much more convenient than the ordi¬
nary syllogism, which assumes in the major premiss a uni¬
versality commonly false in feet, and wj^p h, therefore, must
be denied again in the conclusion. iW the conclusion, in
fact or materially, cannot be absolute, unless the universality
asBumed in the majoV'premiss be materially true.

[Use of syllogism (or analogous process), in leading us to
review grounds : In confutation :—reminding antagonist that he
has assumed something not tenable.]

Hut, in fact, •we never syllogize, though wc perform an
analogous process. We run the mental eye along the ana¬
logous objects, and if we find them contradictory, etc., wc
conclude probably, or reject, unless we fiiid special reason.
Hciicc Locke’s sarcasm.*

I

In all particular analogical reasoning which is concerned
with contingent matter, the truth of the inference (consi¬
dered as such), depends on the truth of the antecedents
(and on something else). And what I have said of syllo¬
gism, as to the dependence on terms and propositions, applies
to perfect induction. As in syllogism, true of all, true of
every, so in induction, true of every, true of all; Vi materies^
vi formal [materially or formally]. It follows that by syl¬
logism we can arrive at no new truth, the conclusion being
involved in the major prenfllis. We merely affirm of one
what we had affirmed of all, including one. Or wc merely
affirm that the subject of the conclusion is one of the all, of
which, in the major premiss, wc had affirmed the predicate
of conclusion.


• See * Essay ou the Hiunan Understanding,* vol. ii. 0 . xvii. $ 4.


KXCURftUS Ojft .ANAIiOOT. ^ 205

Analogical Beasoning fln^tim' and particularj as cpn^
cemed with Neeessarg Matter, The Induction necsssa^
rilg perfect, SyUogism ^s employed about the same,
mattefi .

“S

Now here we merely r^oii frcnxi a singular to a singular,
as in the case of co^i|hgent truths. * But the tp’gument car¬
ries with it all the apodictic certainty which belongs to a
syllogistic inference.

For Aha and 6. A is also x: and A has x in such
wise that every singular like it in having a and must
- have X. B is analogous to A^ in having a and b. There¬
fore B is of necessity x.

It is manifest that this is equivalent to the following syl¬
logism. Every singular which is x is also z, ^ is a sin¬
gular which, is X. Therefore, B is also z.

But still there.is this difference, that though, like a
syllogism, the inference follows formaliter, it also follows
materialiter. So that the cogency lies in the truth of the
antecedent, and not in the relation and disposition of the
terms. And, on the other hand, it differs from an analo¬
gical argun^ent concerning a contingent truth. For the
antecedent necessarily imports the consequent. Analogical
reasoning is generally considered as being conversant about
contingent matter, and therefore I have so considered it.
[Futility of syllogism in these cases.]

Much of the certainty ascribed to mathematical reason¬
ing lies in the truths with whic^it, deals being of this class.
Or at least, in approaching so near thnm that the deviations
may be thrown 9 side, and afterwards allowed for in the way
of limitation to the inference. This is also the case with
many of the truths with which lawyers have to do. And
hence Law {teste Leibnitz)^ much like mathematics.* In
either case, the cogency arises from the nature of the pre¬
miss.

* Leibnitz, Kpist. ad Kestnorum. See quotation, post.


266


EXCURSUS ON ANAliOGY.


[Eulogy on Law, from being connected, on the one hand,
with Ethics and Beligion, and on the other, not less fitted to
form the mind to habits of dose thinking than the most abstruse
of the mathematical sdences. Also, to exercise the mind in eva¬
luation of evidence regarding contingent truths.]

« » « m mt a * «

Eor example: Interpretation of part of a statute by an¬
other part; interpretatio secundum anadogiam scriptura (so
called as applied to a statute, or to any other written docu¬
ment). Interpretation of a statute % a statute made by
the same legislature in pari materia: interpretatio secundum
analogiam scriptoris (genuine interpretation).*

. . . The last, an inference resting in speculation. But
often, a practical consequence built upon a perception and
comparison of analogous objects; e.g. similis similium dc-
clinaiio.

The extension of a statute, etc., ex ratione legist is an ex¬
ample of analogical interpi-etation (genuine).

Lower animals reason,—how ? The process of inference
which they employ ought to be called reasoning. They
also compare and abstract, as a necessary forerunner to
inference.

Description of perfect induction.

The same remarks apply. The consequent is contained
in the premiss.

It follows not from the form, but by reason of the matter.
For because A and and y, and A is always it is

not true that B is also z. Whatever truth there is, there¬
fore lies, not in the form of the reasoning, but in the in-
trinsical truth of the antecedents: i. e. because the antece¬
dents .are intrinsically true, we infer the truth of the con¬
sequent.

In syllogism and perfect induction, that is, in formal ar¬
gumentation, the conclusion follows, ratione fortna.

• For the analogy of grammarians, see Stewart, 249-50. Johnson,
“ Analogy.”


EXCURSUS ON ANALOGY. 267

In material argumentation, the conclusion follows vi
materia.


Syllogism.

Endeavouring to suggest an answer to this pregnant
and difficult question,* we begin with discriminating, as
sharply and clearly as we can, formal and material reason¬
ing., By **formal reasoning,” (the propriety of which ex¬
pression will appear hereafter,) we signify the process of
mfllogimi^ with the process of formal induction. The na¬
tures of these processes (to which wp shall revert below)
may be indicated briefly in the following manner. In the
process of syllogism, a narrower proposition is extracted, by,
a formal and necessary inference, from .a larger and univer¬
sal proposition which contains the narrower implicitly: In
the process of formal induction, a universal proposition is
collected, by a formal and necessary inference, from all the
singular propositions of which the universal is the sum.

By“ material reasoning,” (the propriety of which expres¬
sion will also appear hereafter,) we denote analogical rea¬
soning in each of its principal kinds: namely, the reason¬
ing which yields a consequent that is either singular or
partial, and the reasoning which yields a consequent that
is either universal or general. Of the diflcrence between
these processes (to which we shall revert below) the follow¬
ing is a brief description.—In. every reasoning raised on a
likeness or analogy, the analogical inference proceeds from-
an assumed singular or singulars to another singular or
singulars: that is to say, it proceeds to one or more of all
those various singulars which arc connected by the given
analogy with the singular or singulars assumed. -But where
it yields a consequent which is either singular or partial,
it proceeds, to one or a few of all those various singulars.

* The question asked by one of the class; (apparently Mr. John Mill:)
via. “ What, tlien, is the use of syllogism?”— H. A,


268 EXCURSUS OR ARALOOT.

Where it yields a consequent which is eith^ universal or
general, it proceeds without exception, to all those various
singulars, or to all those various singulars, with more or less
of exception.

We venture to name the inference which is merely sin¬
gular or partial (or which yields a conclusion or consequent
that is merely singular or partial,) reasoning hy example.
For it seems identical with the process which logicians de¬
nominate exemplum, and which they describe usually in
some such words asPthe following;—“ Argumentatio in qua
unum singulare ex alio colligitur.*’ The universal or gene¬
ral inference is called* emphatically induction^ and is usually
described by logicians in some such words as the follow¬
ing :—** A singular! ad universale progressio.” To distin¬
guish it from the formal induction which is a necess^ in¬
duction or inference, we style it material induction. And
here we must remark, that in treating of argumentation of
any of the above-mentioned sorts, we always assume (unless
we express the contrary) that the inference which wc arc
considering is perfectly good or legitimate: that is to say,
that the consequent has all the truth, in nature or in de¬
gree, which the natures of the reasoning and the case will
allow the reasoner to reach.

With this remark, we pursue our attempted discrimina¬
tion of formal and material reasoning: of the process of
ayllogiam, with the process of formal induction^ and the pro¬
cess of reasoning by example^ with the process of material
induction.


In any legitimate syllogism of any figure or mode, the
process of argumentation is virtually this. In the major
^^position, or major premiss, we affirm or deny^ some¬
thing of all the individuals or singulars which constitute a
given class. In the minor proposition, or minor premiss, we
assume and affirm of a number of individuals, that they are
some of the individuals which constitute the given class ; or


EXCURSUS ON ANALOGY.


269


we assume and affirm of a single individual, that it is one
of the individuals which constitute the given class. In the
consequent proposition, or conclusion, we affirm or deny of
the subject of the minor, what we affirmed or denied of the
subject of the major.

Or the process of affirmation or negation which we per¬
form in the conclusion, may be stated more clearly thus:
What, in the major, we affirmed or denied of the a/f, wc
affirm or deny of the singulars or singular, which, bjr the
assumption in the minor, are some or one of the all. Where
a syllogism is affirmative, the process of argumentation runs
in the following manner:

" Every A (all constituting the given class) is as. But
every is an .* that is to say, all the singulars of the
narrower class constituted by all ^’s, are some of the sin¬
gulars of the larger class constituted by all A*%. Therefore,
cveiy B is as”

“Every A is as. But some (of which the quantity
or number is not determined) are A*bi or some B*& (of
which the quantity or number is determined, but which are
not determined individually or singularly) are A'b ; or one
B (not determined individually) is an A. Therefore, such
some, or such one, are, or is, asl*

“ Every A is as. But these or those (individually deter¬
mined) i?’s arc A\i or this or that (individually deter¬
mined) is an A. Therefore, these or those B^s, or this
or that B, are, or is, as.**

Where the syllogism is negative, the process of argumen¬
tation pursues the following course No A is a?. But
every B iaoxi A : that is to s&y, a//, etc. Therefore, no B
is a?.” *‘No^ is as. But some ^s (of which, etc.), are
^’s; OP some B*^ (of which, etc., but which, etc.) are A'si
or one B (not, etc.) is an A. Therefore, such some^ or such
one, are not, or is not, a?.”

“ No A is as. But these or those (individually, etc.), B*a
are A*s\ or this or that (individually, etc.) B is an A.


270


IIXCURSDS ON ' ANALOGT.


Therefore, these or those i5’s, or this or that B, are not, or
is not, a?.”

It may be gathered from the foregoing exposition, that
the conclusion of every syllogism lies implicitly in the pre¬
misses ; or that what is asserted by that, is asserted im¬
plicitly by these. In the process, therefore, of syllogizing,
there is not really an illation or inference. Inosmuch as
the truth in the conclusion is parcel of the truth in the pre-
missf s, there is not a progression to a consequent really dis¬
tinct from the antecedents. Really, (though not formally,)
the process consists exclusively of two assertions: first, that
a given something may be said truly of every of a given all;
secondly, that every of the individual objects which form
the subject of the minor, (or the single individual object
which forms the subject of the minor,) is one of the given all.

It also may be gathered from the foregoing exposition,
that the consequent or concluding proposition, as being ihe
consequent of the premisses^ follows from the premisses by
reason of their form: that is to say, independently of any
truth which the premisses themselves may contain, and even
of any of the meanings which theiir subjects and predicates
may import. Though each of the premisses assorts a falsity,
or though its subject and predicate signify anything or no¬
thing, the conclusion or consequent proposition, as being
the consequent of the premisses, is deduced or dcducible
from these by a formal and necessary illation. ** Concinsio
a prmmissis colligitur, per necessariam et formalem conse-
quentiam, propter legitimam prsemissarnm in modo et figura
dispositionem.” That the conclusion follows from the pre¬
misses, independently of any of the meanings which their
subjects and predicates may import, is shown by the fore¬
going examples; wherein A, and may signify any¬
thing or nothing.

That the conclusion follows from the premisses, indepen¬
dently of any truth which the premisses themselves may
contedn, is shown by the examples following. ** Every ani-


EXCURSUS ON ANALOGY.


271


rnal is a stone. But every man is an animal. Therefore^
every man is a stone.” “ No animal is sentient. But every
stone is an animal. Therefore, no stone is sentient.” Now
in each of these syllogisms, the consequent proposition, as
being the consequent of its premisses, is necessarily true;
or, (speaking more accurately,) it follows from its premisses
by a legitimate and necessary inference. In the former
syllogism, however, the mqjor premiss is false; and the con>
elusion inferred from the premisses, as not being such con-
’ elusion, is false also. In the lattet syllogism, each of the
premisses is false; whilst the conclusion inferred from the
premisses, as not being such conclusion, is true \ but since
the premisses are false, the truth of the conclusion, as not
being such conclusion, has no connection with its truth in
its quality of a true consequent.

In short, the rationale of the process o{ syllogizing may
be expressed by the folowing formula :—“A something may
be said or predicated of every of a given all: Every of a
number of individuals, or one single individual, is one of the
given all: What may be said or predicated of every of the
given all, may be said of the subsumed every, or of the sub¬
sumed one, which, according to the subsumption, is one of
the given all.” It is manifest from this formula^ that the
truth or falsity of either of the premisses, or the significance
or insignificance of the subject or predicate of either, neither
aflect the consequence, nor the consequent, to which it leads.
The validity of the consequence or inference depends ex¬
clusively upon two data: first, the unlimited universality
of the affirmative or negative proposition which constitutes
the major premiss ; secondly, the assumption that the sin¬
gulars or singular which form the subject of the minor, are,
or is, of the singulars wfaieh form the subject of the major.
These being granted, the consequent, as the consequent,
follows by a necessary consequence.

» * * * *

Various singular objects are connected by a common re-


272


EXCDRBUS ON ANALOGY.


semblance which shall be called z; and by reason of this
common resemblance they constitute, or might constitute,
a given species or genus. JBut of every of these various
singulars, when considered singly tfnd severally, and also
without respect to the actual or possible class, a given
something, which shall be called x, D)ay be affirmed or de¬
nied. Now what may be affirmed or denied of every of
these various singulars, when considered severally, may also
be affirmed or denied of every of these various singulars if
they be considered collectively and as forming or constitu¬
ting the cldSs.

Major premiss: Various singulars, including A and B,
are connected by y. But A is, or is not, a?. Bis, or is not,
w: And every other of the various singulars, as considered
singly and severally, is, or is not, x.

Minor premiss: All those i(;arious objects, as considered
jointly and collectively, constitute, or might constitute, the
species or genus Z.

Conclusion : Every singular constituent of the actual or
possible class is, or is not, y.

It is manifest that there is no illation. That what is true
of every of the objects as considered singly and severally,
is true of every of the same as considered jointly and col¬
lectively, and as being the constituent parts of an actual or
possible class.

It is manifest that it follows by reason of the form. For
let the major or minor be what it may, what is true of every
when the objects are taken severally, must equally be true
of every when the objects are taken collectively, and con¬
sidered as bound together by a class or common name. Or
that which is true pf every unit of twelve when not consi¬
dered as ,foming a dozen, is tme of every of twelve con-
eadereef as forming a dozen.


NOTES ON CODIFICATION.


VOf*. Ill.


It was wot my intention' to publish the following Notes on
Codification, nor the Notes on Criminal Law by which they are
succeeded. They are, as the reader will perceive, mere memo¬
randa, and appeared to me too incomplete and fragmlentary to
be submitted to the public eye.

But the earnest representations of more qualified and more
impartial judges, as to the substaptial value of these hints, have
induced me to lay aside my scruples.

I have been reminded ^so by members of his profession, that
the publication of these Notes is now peculiarly called for; and
that even these slight indications of Mr. Austin^s opinions will
be received with interest and respect by all who are labouring
in the difficult field which he explored. Though nothing can
be further from my thoughts than to seek in the circumstances
of the times a factitious and transient popularity for anything
written by him, I believe I have no right to withhold even these
imperfect contributions to the advancement of the great work
which he had so much at heart.

The original MS. consists of two sets or packets of Notes, one
of which is written in pencil. The repetitions have been omitted,
and the whole arranged under the heads marked by the Author.
No other alteration in their form has been attempted.

Frequent reference is made to Lecture XXXIX., Vol. IT., in
which the subject of Codification is touched upon.


S. A.


275


NOTES ON CODIFICATION.


- ^ - -

The question of the expeclicney and praeticability of Codi¬
fication is double; general or abstract, and particular or
concrete.

Considered in abstract, the question will not admit of
a doubt. As a practical question, it is particular, and may
admit of a doubt.

Objections however have been urged which apply to Co¬
dification generally. Tliese I shall endeavour to answer,
and shall afterwards advert to the particular objections to
codification in England ; the difficulties to be surmounted,
and the course which, in my opinion, ought to be pursued.


All law is statute or judiciary. Consequently all eodifi-
cation (of existing law) is resolvable into two parts ;

1®. A re-expression and arrangement of statute law :

2®. An extraction from cases of rationes decidendi^ and
the stating them as general rules and arranging them :

3®. A conflation of both.

[Sorts of law inposae^ authoritative treatises, ete. must be
codified also, if really having the effect of law. The cha¬
racteristic differences of statute and judiciary law lie (as I
have shown, in my Lectures^*) mainly in the form in which
they are respectively expressed.

The interpretation of statute law and the peculiar process
of abstraction and induction will be treated of hereafter.]

* See Lecture XXXVII., Vol. II. p. 321.

T 2


a/0 NOTES ON CODIFICATION.

Admitting tliat codification is expedient as considered
generally or in abstract, it follows not that it would be ex¬
pedient here or there.

' Dismissing the expediency of codification in particular
with a brief indication of the considerations on which it
turns, I shall confine myself to codification generally.


Order of treaiing the general question of Codification.

In considering codification in abstract, I shall consider.

First, its practicability:

Secondly, its expediency:

Thirdly, the objections (or the leading objections) which
have been advanced against it.

The arguments to prove its practicability and its expedi¬
ency, lie in a narrow compass; although, in my opinion,
they arc perfectly conclusive.

The demonstration of the nothingness of the objections
occupies a considerable space.

The objections which I shall consider, go to codification
generally; although the objectors commonly advance them
with reference to codification here or there.


Practicahilifg (and Adoantages) of Codification fconsidered

generallgj.

It is possible to extract from particular decisions, rationes
decidendi ^ and leading principles and decisions. These, if
stated in abstract (and exemplified) would be clearer than
when lying in concrete: And would also be more general,
abstract and adequate, being so expressed as to apply to
all cases falling under them, and not limited to the cases
(with their accidents) by which they were established.

The induction (previous to the application of the taiio
decidendi) t of a decided case, is Codification pro tanto.


NOTES ON CODIFICATION.


277


The practicability of codifying the statute law will not
admit of a doubt. If it be practicable to establish general
rules (in an abstract form) one by one and without system,
it is practicable to establish a system of such rules. The
consolidation of the statute law is* an admission of thisj!7;Y>
tanto; and nothing can be more inconsistent than the ob¬
jections raised to codifleation by the friends of consolida¬
tion. For th (7 object to the former, the impossibility of
viewing completely the field of law.


Praclicabilit^ (with difficultt/) of Codification.

Practicability of codification:

With reference to such part of the law to be codified as is
statute;

'J’o such ns is judiciary.

Its difficulty.

Difficulty of rendering it complete; of I’cndcring it con¬
sistent, and of duly subordinating the less general under
the more general;

Of extracting definitions and principles fi’om judiciary law.

Great evil done to the cause of codification by represent-,
ing it as easy.


Expediency of Codification,

The expediency of codification follows from a notion of
the Low; from a statement of the respective natures of sta¬
tute and judiciary law; and from the bulk and uncognosci¬
bility of unsystematized law.

It is better to have a law expressed in generals, systema¬
tic, compact and accessible, than one which lies dispersedly,
buried iu a heap of particulars, bulky, and inaccessible.

Its expediency is admitted practically by treatises, redac¬
tions, etc.; many of which are, in effect, codes; those who
talk loudest against redactions, availing themselves of them


278


NOTES ON CODIFICATION.


in practice. But redactions by private bands are not equi¬
valent to codes.

The exjpedicncy of codification (in a particular case) must
depend on a variety of considerations: especially on the
quantity and degree of skill which it may be possible to
bring to the enterprise.

The great difficulty is, the impossibility that any one
man should perform the whole. But if done by several, it
would be incoherent, unless all were imbued with the same
principles, and all versed in the power of applying them.
The great difficulty therefore is to get a sufficient number
of competent men versed in common studies and modes of
reasoning. This being given, codification is practicable and
expedient.

Peculiarly technical and partial knowledge of English
lawyers.

No English lawyer is master even of English law, and
has therefore no notion of that inter-de|)endency of parts
of a system on which successful codification must depend.

A code must be the work of many minds.* The project
must be the work of one; and revised by a commission. The
general outline, the work of one, might be filled up by divers.

All-importance in codification of the first intention. Till
minds are trained, it will hardly succeed. How the diffi¬
culty is to be surmounted. Necessity for men versed in
theory, and equally versed in practice ;t or rather, of a

* “ M&iiner, welche dcr Gesetzgebung, und insbesondere der allgemeinen,
abstracten Gesetzgebung, gewochseu sind, gibt es sehr wenig, selbst im
gelehrten Stande. Diess darf auch nicht bci'reinden. . . . Dunn eiiie gutc
Gresetzgubuug ist das suliwerstc unter alien Gescl^en; ... die Krafte
vieler dcr Ersten miissen vereinigi werden, damit durch cine grosse Weeh-
selwirkung etwas Gediegenes und Geriindetes vollbracht werde.”—
baut.<—(Ue6er die Nothwendi^keit eine» tdlgemeinm hurgerlicheiiL JRechte fUr
Jkutechland.)

f “Mit einem allgemeinen Gesctzbiich w^n dagegeu Theorie and Praxis
in die unmittclbarate Verbindung gebracht, und die gelelirten academiseben
Juristeii wiirden unter den Pnirtikem ein Wort initredvn durfeii, wahrund
file jetz liberall mit iliivm geiueincn Hecht in der Luft bongeu.’'— Thibaul,
Noth,, vie.


NOTES ON CODIFICATION.


279


combination of theorists and practitioners. Necessity for
preliminary digests; or for waiting till successful jurists
and jurisprudence arc. formed through effectual legal edu¬
cation.

Evil done to the cause by exaggerating the extent to
which law may be made accessible to the laity.

How far, and how, law may be made knowablc to the
bulk of the community.*

If law were more cognoscible (in respect of its principles
and ends) to the bulk of the public, the public would call
more discriniinately, as well as more decidedly, for legal re¬
forms : would support good innovations and scout bad pro¬
jects of ignorant quacks.


Effect of Codification on the character of the legalpt'ofession.

Law mag be made accessible (in its whole extent) to
lawyers.

Advantages that would thence ensue; by discharging law
of mere rubbish, and simplifying it; and so leaving more
leisure for the study of law itself and its rationale; and so
inviting minds of a higher order into the profession:

By showing the subordination of detail to principles, and
relations of parts to one another; and so rendering the. ra¬
tionale of law manifest, and law a rational and interesting
studv:

V

By making lawyers complete masters of the body of law,
and so rendering good advice cheaper and more accessible;
and making local judicature practicable.

Without local judicature, preliminary examination of
parties, ^tc., good administration of justice is impossible.

But the possibility of. local judicature, etc,, depends in
part on substantive law.

* Thibaut, Civil. Abhaiidl. p. 423.


280


NOTES ON CODIFICATION.


With a local bar, there could not be the same division
of labour as at present: therefore each man must be a
complete. lawyer ; and that he may be, the bulk and com¬
plexity of law must decrease.

floating jurisprudence must be reduced to the least pos¬
sible quantity. ' *


Such a reform in the law as is liere contemplated would
improve the character of the legal profession. Through
improvement of their character, would lead to still further
advances in legislation and, generally, in ethics.

Through thb improvement of the legal profession, chicane
would be leas frequent. The morality of the bar and of
attoriKjys would improve. From compactness, simplicity
and cognoscibility, mistakes in convtyances, contracts, etc.,
add, generally, in extra-judicial conduct, would be less pro¬
bable and frequent.


Codification of existing law, and innovation upon the
substance of existing law, are perfectly distinct; although
a code may ha|^en to be wholly or partially new in matter
as well as in form.

The codification now contemplated is merely a re-ex¬
pression of existing law: the reduction of judiciary into
statute, and the arrangement of both into apt divisions and
subdivisions.

[This must, however, be understood, with ^sorne limita¬
tions. In ordef to attain the simplicity whtch is the end
of codification, it may,be expedient to abrogate certain
inconsiderable rights. In oi;^er to get rid of tenures,
you must destroy the reverter to ther mesne lord, making
compensation.]

A code, as meaning a body of law expressed in general
formula arranged systematically, and complete, is a modern
idea.


NOTES ON CODIFICATION.


281


The term “ Code/’ as expressing such a body of law,
and the term “ Codification,” as meaning the reduction of
on existing body of law into such a code, are hot expres¬
sive.


Etvpediency of beginning wiiU a Digest*

No harm done, though imperfect.

If arranged, as nearly as might be, according to the future
code, it would be a preparative, and, if well done, a proof
of practicability.

It would form a school.

The difficulty (perhaps an insurmountable one) wojild lie
in the plan. The plan being formed by one, and revised
and extended by a commission, unity in detail might be
pr(3servcd by the superintendence of such coiiiraission,t as
well as by the fact of separate authors working upon a
common plan. Several plans might be presented to the
commission.

It w'ould less alarm the profession and. give notice to
them of an impending code. .

Necessity of conciliating lawyers, and injustice of certain
attacks upon them.

' A Digest ought to be a conflation of statute and judi¬
ciary law, arranged in relation to subjects (and without re¬
lation to different systems of equity, etc.). This would
rouse men’s attention to the vast quantity of equivalent
and passive rules, and would suggest the possibility of the
conflation of Law, Equity, etc.

---s^hether Common li^w and Equity, etc., ought to be
ke^distinct? *-

I#

* Tt will be obvious to the reader that Mr. Austin employs this word in
a totally different sense from that which it bears when applied to such
works as Comyns’ Digest, etc.

t Example of Suarez and the Prussian Code.


282


notes on codification.


There might be two distinct Digests, one a statement of
law according to subjects, the other of law according to
jurisdiction. A Digest would serve as a guide to a future
code; and to partial legislation in interim.

[Remark, that no reform considerably abridging the Law, could
be effected without a minute and.complete survey and statement
of it.]

It would be a better index to existing law than at pre¬
sent existsand a better institutional book. [The latter
is indeed partly the purpose of Digests.]

A Digest cannot be supplied by separate and unautho¬
rized hands • for no proportions would be observed in the
parts, nor would the parts (not being constructed on a
common ])lan) obviously, or even really, hannonize.

’The length of such a Digest would be of no great mo¬
ment : because abstracts and tabular views would serve as
guides.

For the use of students, a systematic Digest ought to be
accompanied by an historical one. An historico-dogma-
tical would not be convenient for reference.

In the historical Digest, the divisions would be the same
as in the systematical, and Law on each head would be
brought down to the system. > It should not be a merely
external, but an internal digest; an exposition of different
doctrines.

For the use of students. Institutes ought to be compiled :
being not merely abstracts of the Digests, but contain¬
ing expositions of the principles of general jurisprudence,
etc.

' The historical Institute might in this respect be rendered
extremely instructive:

e.ff. By giving comparative views, historical and dogma¬
tical, of English and Roman law.

A Digest should be, perhaps, composed in the manner
df an analytic and demonstrative treatise: Le. the rides


NOTES ON CODIFICATION.


283


and principles sliould be extracted from the statutes and
decisions; and that such are the rules and principles which
the statutes and decisions establish, should be shown by
examination and reasoning (where necessary).

This would lead to length j but that objection is answered
already.

It would be the business of the general commission to
abridge needless argumentation.

A mere extract of rules and principles (not in the words
of the original authorities) would noJ inspire ^ confidence:
would be the proper form of a code intended to supersede
existing law.

Mere extracts of generalities from authorities would be
liable to the objections made above, as lying against Codes
and Digests.

The general rules and principles should be carefully
detached from the inductions, so as to show the law in ge¬
neral terms and prepare the way for a code.


Nrcemify for a standing Law Commission to supervise
legislation^ and work new laws into the Code;

To be aided by suggestions from judges and other prac¬
tical lawyers: thus combining due deliberation and com¬
prehensiveness with knowledge of actual exigences.

Also by suggestions from theorists.

The evils in the mode of making Statute Law mentioned
by Park * are imaginary.


It is impossible to prevent the growth of judiciary law;
but it may be kept within narrow limits.

The decisions of the Courts on the Code would not be
more uncertain than otherwdecisions.

* Coutre-Projet to the Hum^reysian Code.” By John James Park*
1828.


284


NOTES ON CODIFICATION.


Immense superiority of judiciary law formed on a sys¬
tematic whole, to law of the same kind formed on an un¬
digested chaos. It would itself be no more than an inter¬
pretation of, and complement to, the code.

The projected code might be extended to Ireland, Scot¬
land, etc.; codifying, in each instance, the particular or
local law, which would be applicable in preference to the
code. This was done in Prussia. Codification ought to be
universal.

r.- _

Objections to Codification considered generally.

Obj". 1®. That a Code is necessarily incomplete; and
cannot provide for all future cases.

Supposition that judiciary law provides for cases in spe-
cie, and therefore is not finituni (sec Pandects, iynorantia
juris) and knowable. C()unter-suj)position by Park.*

[Von Savigny*8 triangle is not a deduction of unknown
from known, but a mere subsumption of individual under
general, or of less, under more general.]

Answer. —Though it is not possible, by a Code (or any
law) to provide for all future cases, a Code is less likely to
be very defective than judiciary law; which is necessarily
timid and inadequate.

And, at all events, existing law, by a Code, is given pure
from particulars; whilst the comparatively, small body of

* The passage alluded to by Mr. Austin appears to be this;—“ In jedem
l)«*.yeck giebt es gewisse Bestimiimngen, aus dcren Verbindung zugleich
allc ilbrige mit Notliwendigkeit folgen: duroh dicse, z. B. dui*ch zwei
Seiteu und den zwischeulicgeudeii Winkel, ist das Drcyeck gegeben. Auf
iihnliclier Wcisc liat jeder Tlteil unscrcs Bechts solche Stiicke, wodurcli
die iibrigen gegeben sind: wir koimen sie die Icitenden GruiidsUtze
neniien. Diese liernus zu fuhlen, und von ihnen ausgehend den iunem
Zusatnmenhang und die Art der Venn'andschaft olle juristischen Begriffe
und Satze zu crkcuiien, gehort eben zu den sebwersten Aufgaben unsrer
Wisaenschaft; ja, cs ist eigciitlich dasjetiige, was uusrer Arbeit den wissen-
schaftUchen Character giebt .”—Vom cap. iii. p. 22.


NOTKS ON CODIFICATION. 285

judiciary law formed upon it is formed on a compact and
perspicuous whole, and may easily be wrought into it.

2®. That every case is decided by the joint application
of several rules.

. Answer .—But this ap})liea to judiciary, as to all law; no
judicial decision being applicable to a concrete case. As
put by Portal is, the objection shows that law is impossible.
And in the case of well-made statute law, the hdc is given:
nothing but the labour of applying it remaining.

3®. That a Code is unalterable (or, at least, less mal¬
leable than a body of law formed by aggregation). Ilencc,
a Code, if made in an incompetent age, saddles a more
competent posterity with its own vices. And, hence, codi¬
fied hiw does not adapt itself to the successive w'ants of
successive ages so easily as law made bit-wise: it will peV-
petuate the defective ideas of that age, and retard the pro¬
gress of society.

Answer .—The reverse is the truth, on account of the na¬
tural tendency of judicial legislators to legislate by analogy;
and so to perpetuate the ideas of past uges, so far as is con¬
sistent with inevitable change.

4".—Superior malleability of Common Law.

Answer .—This supposes, if true, uncertainty, from per¬
petual alteration. Park makes the same objection to judi¬
ciary law. It is not inherent in any law.

The historical School of Jurisprudence, so far as they are
right, concur with everybody. Their peculiar views of the
value of history, exclusive of philosophy, are wrong.*

[Government and Law as they ought to be in advanced socie¬
ties, are not to be learned from the imperfect Institutions of
barbarians. The circumstances in which they were placed were
different from our own; their ability to form a judgment upon
the institutions best adapted to their own circumstances, were
not so great as our own.


♦ See Note, p. 297.


280 NOTES ON CODIFICATION.

But although Legislation must be bottomed in general prin¬
ciples drawn from an accurate observation of human nature,
and not in the imperfect records called history, there are cases
in which historical knowledge has its uses. t. e.: To explain the
origin of laws, which arc venerated for their antiquity.* To ex¬
plain much of the law, which now exists; and to enable us to
separate the reason of modern times from the dross of antiquity.

All systems of law have a common foundation in the common
nature of mankind; but the principles which pt^rvade them all,
are fashioned and obscured in each by its individual peculiarities.

The good sense of legislators and* judges in modern times is
always obscured by, and often forced to bend to, the nonsense of
their predecessors, f To understand Mansfield wc must study
Coke: J ustiuian is not to be understood without a knowledge of
the rude institutes of the earlier Homans.]

Law (as it ought to be) is not dcdncible from princi[)les
knowable a priori^ but from principles wljicb must be ob¬
tained (through induction) from experience. No experience
of actual institutions, independently of the princi))lcs which
are obtained by experience of Human Nature, can be of
any value.

5®. A Code is more liable to engender competitions of
opposite analogies, than‘a* Body of lavr consisting of judi¬
ciary rules, or of judiciary rules patched with .occasional
statutes.

Anmocr, —But, as has been shown,! the competition (in¬
cident to the application of law) is merely a consequence
of the inconsistency of niles: an inconsistency arising com¬
monly from their indefiniteness.

The argument, therefore is no substantive objection to
codification, but is merely another argument, (namely, that
a code is necessarily less definite than a body of judiciary
rules) put in another form.

The very question, or at least the main question, between

• See Benthnm, * Defence of Usury.*
f Thibailt, Venuche, Nothwend^keit^ etc.

X See Vol. II. p. 340.


NOTES OF CODIFICATION. 287

- •

the advocates and enemies of codes, is this: whether a code
or a body of uncodified law be essentially most productive
of a competition of opposite analogies; i. e. be essentially
least definite, and generally least coherent.

[Explain what is meant' by “competition of opposite
analogies.” See Vol. II. p. 836.]

C". Tendency of codification to disturb rights and duties
created by codified (and anterior) law.

7”. That no determinate fending principles will be fol¬
lowed consistently by makers of the CJode, and the pro¬
visions of the Code will therefore be defective and inco¬
herent.

j4nswer .—This is only true of incompetent makers.

Objectors to Codes sometimes suppose that a Code must
consist of insulated and incoherent propositions. E contra,
one of its chief merits would be an exhibition of depen¬
dencies.

If formed by induction and extraction from an existing
system of law, it would possess the internal organic consis¬
tency attributed to law growing by aggregation; and would
render that consistency more visible, by detaching the rules
from the concrete matter, and arranging them systema¬
tically.

8®. That private expositions of the law by competent
hands serve all the purposes which codifiers aim at:

That in an age having such hands, and therefore alone
capable of successful codification, codification is therefore
needless:

That, accordingly, no demand was made for a Code during
the time of the classical jurists.

9®. That a code will not be fitted to the customs, pre¬
judices, wants, etc., of the community; nor to experience:

It will not, like judiciaiy law, be a mere expression of
anterior custom.

Answer. —^This, besides being false, is applicable to all
law, save judiciary, and statute law founded on custom.


288


NOTES ON CODII'ICATION.

iO*. That the defects of a Code being more obvious than
tf^osc of uncodified law, 4 : Code would give greater oppor¬
tunities for chicane.

For i^swcr, see Lecture XXXVIL*

Further answer; The argument is suicidal; for, if de¬
fects are more obvious, a Code must be more simple, com¬
pact and intelligible than an uncodified system.

Defects therefore were more curable, and also more evi¬
table till cured.’ '

1 D. If the Code eould be constructed with ease, it would
be contemptible:

Difficulty is good, because the labour of surmounting it
is laudable.

Answer. —Unhappily, an easy, and therefore little-worthy-
of-praiso, Code is not practicable.

12 ^ Its effect in annulling and disturbing existing rights
and duties.

Answer .—^'riiis has littlp application to a codification of
existing rules.

It has, however, some: because the forms of existing
rules would be modified (or the Code would be of no use),
and the equivalence of lilies in a new guise to rules in the
old, might often be doubtful. " '

Old rules would remain in force with regard to rights

O O

and duties which had grown up under them.

13®. A Code (in order to approach to completeness) must
consist of rules so minute and numerous that no man could
learn or retain them :

Impossibility of providing completely for future particular
cases :

Bulk and complexity which would result from the at-
tempj; to provide for them.

Answer .—Codification ought not to be a specification of
cases, but a series of rules applicable to cases.

14®. Objection by Park, from the alleged infinitude of rules.

Answer .—If this were true, law would be impossible.

^ • Vol. II. p. 321.


NOTES ON CODIFICATION.


26f9

«

,Perhaps Jie means tlint the future exigencies requiring
new laws, and condfeqpeutly the new law loquired, are inti*
nitc.

But who ever itnagincd the possibility of constructing a
code which should provide completely for all future times ?

But it were more possible to provide for future cases by
a code than by judiciary law. Prsetorinn law is praised by
the Digests for this very reason. Inconsistency of Hugo
and others in this respect.*

By Park the objection is thus answered :—

“Supposing that nliioh is impossible, viz. that all lanyers in this
country nrre equally learned, theio would be liUle or no litigation, cnin-
puied with the imiiieuoe idu11i])1i( ity of transactions; because almost eveiy
point IS so far settled or iniluenced by d( eision, that in niuety-niiic ca^cs
ill a 111111(11*0(1 they would all be of one iniiid.”—Par/-, Coulre-Vtojel,^. 193

According to this, existing law has nearly provided for
all possible eases; and whatever of uncertainty exists, arises,
not from the incompleteness of the law, but from igno¬
rance by lawyers of its provisions.

Consequently, a reduction of this law to a compact, sys¬
tematic, and more accessible form, would remove the pre¬
sent ground of uncertainty, by rendering the law more gene¬
rally known by lawyers.

But, ill truth, his assertion is false, and contradicted by
himself elsewhere.f

A Code or systematic exposition (if well made) would
possess all the advantages pointed out by Von Savigny,}
and would therefore tend to make lawyers better lawyers
than now.

It would show the subordination of the detail to the*
lending principles, and the relations of these principles and

* Merits aud Defects of Statute and Judiciary Law. Sue Lecture
XXXVllL. Vol. 11.

t See pp. 60, 208, 212, 228.

% \om Beruf, cap. 6. p. 48.

VOL. III.


U


290 NOTKS ON CODIFICATION.

detail to one another :* would render the rationale manifest,
and positive law interesting^

In a code or statute (if well made) the law is given. In
judiciary law, not.

The difficulty of applying the same, whether law is sta¬
tute or judiciary.

A case often (or always) consists of various parts, and
cannot be decided by any one single rule.

Bnt this is just as applicable, w’hether law be statute or
judiciary.

The objection seems to suppose (contrary to the objec¬
tor’s own assumptions) that precedents are exactly in point,
'instead of merely furnishing rules.

The difficulty really consists in determining the rule (if
any) within which a given case falls, or whether it falls
or not within .a given rule; and in conceiving distinctly the
case, the law, and the relation of the case to the law.

But this proves merely that lawyers should know the
law, should be capable of clear apprehension, and be good
logicians.

Assuming a code w^ll made, their knowledge of the law
would be more iierfcct. The Ijaw would then be (as it was
to the Roman lawyers and Lord Coke) completely present
to their minds, and suggested by a particular case.


Objections derived from the defecUy errors^ and alleged ill-
success of actual Codes.

Admitting the defects, errors, and (to some extent) ill-
success of such Codes :

Such defects, errors, and ill-succesS prove nothing against
codification generally; or against codification in any parti¬
cular country (including countries in which the codes in
question were compiled and have obtained as law); unless

* Thibiiut, Tersuebe, vol. i. p. 175. See also, Thibaut, Notbwendigkeit,
etc., pp. 426 to 431.


NOTES ON CODIFICATION.


291


such defects and errors, with the other causes of the. ill-
succcss, were necessary, and not accidental and avoidable.

Accidental and avoidable causes have rendered the French
and Prussian codes unsuccessful to a considerable extent j
though, after all, the failure of these codes has been much
exaggerated.


Brief revieio of Jmtmians Cmupilations, and of the French
and Prussian Codes^ for the purpose of showing that the
defectSy errors^ and ill-success of those particular compi¬
lations was owing to catLses not necessary.

Justinian s Compilations.

In Justinian’s Codex, statutes and decrees are mixed up;
TitLy^privilegia are mixed up and confounded with rules and
principles, made for general application.*

The compilers had some notion of the necessity of de¬
fining terms and principles in order to cut off all reference
to anterior law. •

As a further means of attaining this end, they left in
much historical matter.

The Code and Pandects form properly the intended body
of law; a body intended to be complete.

The Institutes, (a book for the use of stddents, though
also law,) were derogating from the Code and Pafidects, or
supplemental to them.

The Novels are mere correctives of previous compila¬
tions.

Much of the Code and Pandects consists of judiciary
law; and of judiciary law detached from particulars neces¬
sary to make them intelligible.

These compilations (therefore) are not a Code, semu ho-

* Thibaut, Auslegnng; Spnngeuberg, Einlcitung in das llomisch-
Jastinianeische Gesetsbuch. Mackeldey, Lehrbuch des heutigen Bomiseben
Bechts. (On the Order of the Code and Pandects.)

U 2


292


NOTES ON CODIFICATION.


dicrno. They are a body or heap (without scientific arrange¬
ment) of statute and judiciary law; the latter, so given that
it must bo gathered by guess from mangled documents.

It is remarkable that the compilers felt the necessity of
definitions and expositions, omitted by the French redac¬
tors.

Their (imperfect) contrivances to render a resort to tlie
old law needless.


French Code.

The French Code contains no definitions of technical
tprms (even the most leading); no exposition of the ratio¬
nale of distinctions (even the most lending); no exposition
of the broad principles and rules to which the narrower
provisions expressed in t)ie code are subordinate.

Hence its fallacious brevity.

Brevity is of no importance except as it tends to perspi¬
cuity and accessibility.

In conscqueifte of the want of such definitions, etc. (and
of purposed incompleteness hereinafter mentioned), old law
(or a body of jurisprudence formed upon old law') has been
appended to the code.

[Such defii||i^s are practicable (or no law is possible), though
difficult; as I Mve endeavoured to show in Lecture XXXIX.,
Yol. 11. The imperative part of every law containing but a small
portion of it, definitions and expositions are absolutely necessary.]

Inattention to a due settling of those all-pervading prin¬
ciples and main partitions or distinctions, upon a precise
conception of which, consistency in execution of detail de¬
pends.

Success in codification (as I shall observe hereafter) must
mainly depend on first intention : on aptness of plan.

Haste with which the Projet was compiled. Faults
arising from ignorance and haste could not be corrected by
the Council of State, who w'ere more ignorant still; and who


NOTES ON CODIFICATION. 293

merely examined, bit by bit, articles of the projetj instead
of examining the projet as a whole.

Original conception as to matter and arrangement, defec¬
tive : a defect not to be cured by discussions on the plan
conceived.

Ignorance and incapacity of the compilers; Ignorance of,
combined with servile respect for, Roman law;—the main
basis of the code. They knew little besides the Institutes,
and have therefore blindly followed them, with all Uieir
lacuna:. They were ignorant of the most fundamental dis¬
tinctions (c. tf. dominium and obligatio). This last is a proof
of their carelessness, as well as incapacity. No care has been
held to amend the code, or to work in subsequent decisions
and statutes.

Separation of the Code de Commerce from the Code Civile
and general misapprehension of the nature of the distinc¬
tion between jus personaruni el rerum.

It was not the purpose of the compilers to form a com¬
plete Code.

Bad as is the French Code, slight alterations in the text
w’ould supersede the interpretative decisions.


Structure of the Prussian Code.

It is not loaded with precedents, but yiitb declaratory
laws, provoked by particular cases. Such taws differ from
the judicial decisions of the Court of Cassation.

Consequent necessity for letting in the old Gemeines
Recht to explain it.

No care has been had to work the Novels into the code.

The Prussian Code was not intended to be a complete
body of law, but merely a digest of the common and sub¬
sidiary law where local law obtained.

. 'J’he prajudicia are of no authority.

There are no adequate definitions or expositions of lead¬
ing terms and principles.


294


NOTES ON CODIVICATION.


Subsequent legislation is not wrought into the code.

The applicable Gemeines Becht consisted for the most
part of Roman and Canon law.

Notwithstanding these acknowledged defects, all prao*
tical men in Germany are codifiers.

Reasons for the hostility of a portion of the professors
in the Universities.*


Condmions from the Beview of Codes.

First; That their defects, errors, and partial ill-success
were not the results of necessary causes.

Second; That, in spite of such errors, etc., those codes
are better than the body of law that they superseded.


ConettisioHs as to Von Savignys Arguments founded on such

defects^ etc.

Gfeat respect is due to the opinions of Herr von Saviguy,
which no man feels more strongly than myself.

All the objections which I have noted and answered
above, are advanced by him.

His book is directed against codification in a particular
country, and ev^n against a particular scheme of codifica-

* “Am weni^^ lasse man aic^ aber dadurch irre machen, dass die
gauzUche Umaiidcrung nnsers -bilrgcrlicben Eechts unter den eigentlich
gelcUrten Eeebtskeunem vicllcicht die mehrsten Widcrsacher findet. Das
wird stets so bloibcn; und jetzt ist es gar uicUt anders zu erwarten: .. .
fur kraftige Umwiilzungen wird die Melirzahl der eleganten Juristen nie
gestimmt seyn. Keincr von ihuen iibersieht in der Begel das ganze Hecht;
wenigen von ilmen werden die Bediirfuisse dcs Volks durcb Beobachtung
klar; und die machtige Triebfeder des Eigemmtzes wird keinen in Bewe-
gung setzen; vielmehr .wird es immer Tortheilhafker fiir sic seyn, die
mubsam errungenen critisch-historischen Sch&tze in gehoriger Sich^eit
zu halten, und gegen bessernde Einrichtigungen zu kf^pfen, dammit ihnm
oicht die Pflicht.werde, den ueuen Menschfb anzusdehen .”—Thibautt No^
wendigheUt etc.


NOTES ON CODITICATION. 295

tion for that particular country; but, nevertheless, many or
most of his arguments apply to codification generally.

The objections peculiar to him are these:—

1. That in an age capable of producing a good code, a
code were needless: the want being supplied by private ex¬
positors.

2. He asserts, that during the ages of the classical jurists
(who, he admits, were competent to the task), no want of
a code was felt.

3. That a code makes the defects of law more obvious,
and therefore emboldens knaves.

4. That if a code were easily to be constructed it would
be good for nothing.

To this I answer, that codes have no tendency to simplify
the science of jurisprudence or to abridge the studies of
lawyers. They have a tendency to discharge it of rubbish.

The study of cases (as exemplars for the difficult art of
applying rules) would still be necessary to lawyers, though
a code were introduced.

He assumes that no determinate leading principles will
be followed consistently by the compilers of a code.

He is not however opposed absolutely to all codification.

He is an advocate for a code which should include alF-
but future cases; and he has proposed a digest. He has
himself suggested an important argument f^^ow that the
main difiSculty in the way of codification is not insurmount-
. able. But he would wait- (for improvement) till better juris¬
prudence and jurists are formed.

His proposd of a digest is inconsistent with his main
reason to show the inexpediency of codification in Ger¬
many.

His opposition to Codes is the effect dlgeleUrter prejudice
in favour of Roman law, and of national antipathy.

Kullity of his Treatise as an argument against codifica¬
tion generally, Sipd even .as an argument against it in Get-*
many, the proper and special object of his attack.


206


NOTES ON CODIFICATION.


Note .—As the great ^controversy on tlie expediency of con¬
structing a C^ode of Laws for the whole of Ocrinany is frequently
alluded to in the foregoing notes, and constant reference made to
the works of the two great leaders of the eoufiieting partic*, it
may not be snjierttuoiib to say a few words eoneerniiig them.

After the deliverance of the country from the French yoke,
the minds of patriotic Germans were anxiously employed in in¬
quiries into the causes of the feeble and divided resistance made
by their country, and in projects for strengthening the bonds
which might unite the several States into a well-compacted whole.

Among them, was that of which Thibant was the ardent and
ehupient advocate. In his Essay On the Necessity of a general
municipal (or national)* Law for Germany,” he treats the con¬
struction of such a body of law, “ clear, j»reeise, and adapted to
the requirements of the time,^’—as one of the first conditions of
a strong and efficient Confederation.

Thibaut was a Hanoverian by birth, and had s'tudicd at Got¬
tingen, Kouigsberg, and Kiel, at which latter place he took his
degree, and was appointed professor. In 1803 he had a call to
Jena, and in 1805 he was invited to assist in the rcorgauisatiou
of the University of Heidclbei^.

Thibaut’s works are numerous and of high authority.f His
style is homely aud familiar, but has great force and animation.
He proposed that a Collegium or Commission should be nomi¬
nated by the several States, and he maintained that by the co¬
operation <if the ablest theoretical jurists (Professora in the dif¬
ferent Universities), with practising lawyers, such a Code of

* The word in the original is " biirgerliolics ”—civil; but civil, as ap¬
plied tp Law, has a totally different meaning with us.

f The principal are, ‘ThcoTie der logischen Auslegung,* ‘Kritik der
Feuerbach*schen Revision der Gmndbegriffedes Strafrechts,’ ‘ Civilistische
Abhaiidluiigeu ’ (of which Kssnys the ‘ Nothwendigkeit,’ etc., so often re-
sferred to, is one), and the ‘ Syateui des Fandecten Rechts,’ which is re¬
garded as his capital work.


NOTES ON CODIFICATION. ■

Laws as above described, applicable to all Germany, be

constructed. *' ■

■■'4

The most illustrious opponent of this scheme was A^on Savigny,
the leader of the so-called Historical School (founded by Hi^o
and Schlosser); whose great learning and acuteness, combined
with a consummate talent for exposition, rendered him a formid¬
able antagonist.

In his youth he had the rare advantage of being able to travel
throughout Germany, France, and Italy, in search of unknown
or neglected sources of Boman l4kw, and returned laden with
spoils to Marburg, where he had studied, and was now appointed
Professor. In 1803, he wrote his Treatise on the Law of Pos¬
session.* On the creation of the University of BSilin in
1810, Savigny was one of the first teachers appointed. His
lectures, especially those on the Institutes, together with the
history of the Boman Law and the Pandects, drew crowded
audiences, -not only by the copiousness and importance of the
matter, but by the extraordinary clearucss and beauty of the form.

His celebrated work, ‘^On the Vocation of our Age for Legis¬
lation,” is known to the English public through Mr. Hayward’S
translation.

The discussion on the expediency of Codification was carried
on with great asperity: its partisans complained that they were
unfairly represented by the leaders of the Historical School,
as advocating the introduction (or rather the imposition) of an
entirely new body of Laws (which they never contemplated);
while their adversaries disclaimed the opinion imputed to them,.
—that Law should have no other source than a historical one.

In one of the Essays contained in the Volume which has been
frequently quoted, “ On the Influence of Phijosophy on the Ex¬
position of Positive Law,” Thibaut concludes with the following
discriminating and impartial statement of the claims of the con¬
tending partics.f

“ Nothing is more to be wished than that the philosophical
and the elegaiitj; jurists should’soon cease to regard themselves as

»

* ‘ Das Becht des Besitzes.’ Of this book Mr. Austin tilwnys spoke with
enthusiastic admiration. Jt has been translated by Sir Erskine Perry.

t ‘ Kinfluss der Fhilosophie auf der Ausleguiig der posiliven Geselze.’
Translated by Mr^ Liiidley,,

X See, for the use of the term “ elegantia juris,” Vol. II. p. 231.


298


NOTES ON CODIFICATION.


two hostile parties. Each side must abate somewhat of its preteD-
sionSj and reciprocally take what is good from the other. With¬
out philosophy there is no complete history; without history,
no safe application.of philosophy. Both must unite as aids €o
Interpretation, and must exercise a continual influence on each
other. The jurist who aspires after perfection will therefore en¬
deavour to combine profound historical knowledge with philoso¬
phical views; for the historical part of Jurisprudence can never be
separated by a sharp line from the philosophical. In each are
■ gaps, which can only be filled by the aid of the other.^'

S. A.


NOTES ON CRIMINAL LAW.


INCONVENIENCES OF THE PEESENT
STATE OE THE CRIMINAL LAW.


303


Inconveniences op the Present Common Law.

Insufficiency, bulk, dispersedness, and general uncer¬
tainty of the authorities from which the Law must be ga¬
thered.

1®, As to Reports :

2®. As to Records:

3®.* As to the Treatises which are commonly deemed, more
or less authoritative.

These various authorities are extremely numerous, and
also lie dispersed ; insomuch, that no lawyer has a complete
collection of reports and treatises.

Much of the law contained in these reports and treatises
has been repealed by statute or overruled by decisions.
Great research is therefore requisite to distinguish living
from dead law.

Hence, uncertainty.

Generally, there is no mark or tost by vrhich authoritative ,
decisions and authoritative opinions of text-writers can be
sufficiently distinguished from the unauthoritativew

Uncertainty arising from the higher or lower authority
of the judge or writer; nature of the report; circumstances
tinder which the treatise was .published; etc.

Remarkable,—that, in fn*actice,"the decisions of Quarter
Sessions are not authoritative.

Same as to Irish Decisions.

Yet, in theory, these decisions (Quarter Sessions and
Irish) are authority; and, consequently, decisions of the
kind, conflicting with decisions resorted to practically,
might be hunted out and produced.


304 MOTES ON CRIMINAL LAW.

Although the authorities from which the bw must be
gathered, were not bulky, dispersed, insufficient, and un¬
certain, still the.law itself, would be obscure and difficult of
access, by reason q| its being latent in judicial decisions
[and opinions anaio^is to them].

Difficulty of extracting principles from decided cases :
especially where the grounds of decision are not sufficiently
apparent from Report and Record.

Owing to this difficult^, principles arc applied by judges
timidly and capriciously.

It often happens, that a principle is not applied to a case
clearly within it, because the decided cases establishing tlj,e
principle do not tally with the pending case in immaterial
facts and circumstances.

Hence, doubts thrown upon the principles themselves.

Immaterial facts are not unfrequently rendered part of the
ground of decision. Decided cases are not treated as mere
indices to the principles. (Q®.)

Difference between the construction and application of
Statute Law, and the extraction and application of rules of
law latent in judicial decisions. (Q®.)

Criminal Statutes are construed strictly. Hence the dis¬
crepance between statute and common law is more striking
•in criminal law.

The shape of a statute differs essentially from that of a
judiciary rule. t

As a whole.^ a judicial decision Is not a precedent, or has
not the effect of a law.

Difference between Interpretation and Induction.

Judiciary law lies in concrcto. Difficulty of extracting it.
Nicety and.uncertainty of the process.

The ratio decidendi is often conceived and expressed by
the judge too narrowly or too broadly.* Hence the law, as
expressed^ (for the ratio itself ought to be deemed the law,
independently of the expression of it,) is often too narrow,
(immaterial circumstances being expressed as part of the
reason,) and sometimes too broad.


NOTES ON CRIMINAL LAW.


305


Mnch of present law is founded on antiquated notions:

B. g. With regard to the subjects of theft. Looking at
the offence as conceived at present, there is no reason why
things which are parcel of the soil should not be deemed sub¬
jects of the offence (if capable of a cldtiaestine removal).

[Marandage. Prussian Code.]

The same remark applies to the rule as to domestic ani¬
mals ; as to choses iii action; and as to value of subject;
as to goods of which there is no lappareut owner or party
entitled to possession; and to the absurd reason given'for
' absolving the wife from criminal liability.

Obscurity arising from partial adherence to, and partial
departure from, these antiquated notions. Hence, Law,
not a law founded on uniform principles, but a patchwork
of laws formed on inconsistent principles:

B. g. Common Law rule as to choses in action only par¬
tially abrogated by statutes (and decisions).

Rule about value exchangeable (or intrinsic), still retained
as to certain animals. Generally overruled, but yet re¬
tained capriciously in certain cases.

Partial and capricious extension of the definition of
Larceny to cases of swindling and embezzlement. Larceny,
if the thing be let out to hire and stolen by the hirer.
Not Larceny, if the property, as well as the possession, be
parted with.

Partial conversions of takings of things affixed to free¬
hold into thefts, by statutel.

Hence, not only inconsistency and consequent obscurity,
bflt needless multiplication of rules. A principle, admitted
to be irrational, is maintained with exceptions, instead of
substituting one uniform rule.

In so far as law is judiciary, this partial abandonment
and partial retention of antiquated notions is natural or
yearly necessary. From. the position wherein he is, the
judicial legislator naturally legislates by analogy to the old
law, in so far as the preservation of the old law is consistent

VOL. III. X


306


NOTES ON CRIMINAL LAW.


with inevitable change. And hence, antiquated principles
are perpetuated in laws after the grounds for thorn have
ceased.

Circuitous and obscuring modes by which rules founded
on antiquated notions have been often abrogated, wholly or
partially.

By distinctions founded on inimatcriai differences :

E. g. The interval between taking and severance makes
taking of an immoveable, l^ieft.

Obscurity arising from the frequent extension of defini¬
tions (through fictitiqps assumptions) to cases which arc
not pr6pcrly within them, but arc only related to cases
within them by close or remote analogies :

E. g. Swindlings, breaches of trust, and other offences
not properly thefts, are brought within the category of
thefts by the fiction of a constructive possession.

Legislation by Extension of Old Rules to Casks

. NOT WITHIN THEM.

According to the original and rational notion of theft, n
taking possession, mihoiit the consent of the injured party,
(from the possession of the injured party,) knowing, et^,
and with intent to deprive, is of its essence.

But it is extended to cases in which the injurcr obtains
possession wHh consent of the injured, but with consent
obtained by fraud. • ,

In order to bring this last o^cnce (properly swindling, or
Jilwdcriv) within, the definition of theft, a possession is
feigned in the injured party, although he has parted with it.

It is also extended to cases in which the injured party
has given up possession with consent not obtained by
fraud. *

Also, to cases of finding and misappropriation.

Also, to eCses of embezzlement, where there is no de¬
livery by the injured party.

Inconsistency, as well as obscurity, arisihg from the cause


NOTES ON CRIMINAL LAW.


807


in question. Since, if the definition ought to be extended by
reason of some analogies, it ought to be extended by reason
of others. Insomuch, that any offence of any class might
be thrust with propriety into any other class: since all
offences are related by analogies more’' or less remote.

It ought to be remarked, in justice to the authors of the
English Law, that this inconvenience is almost inseparable
from a law formed gradually by Courts of Justice, etc;

The same obscurity, from th(f same cau^e in the Roman
Law. [Pandects, Book xlviii.,

Has not been avoided by the cojppilers of the French
and Prussian Codes; though they, as formers of a'system
created at once, had none of the difficulties with which the
English Courts of Justice were embarrassed. (Q“.)

Origin of fictions. Necessity of observing andlogy.*

Definitions and rules (owing to preceding and other
causes) are not unfrcqucntly conflicting, or, at least, inde¬
terminate :

E. g. Several and inconsistent definitions of theft or lar¬
ceny ; •

Uncertainty as to what shall amount to special ownership.

Uncertainty as to the nature of the intention which is of'
the essence of theft. The word felonious (like unlawful pr
criminal) dogs not define it, but merely indicates that it is
of the essence of the offence:

Nature of the criminal intention (or knowledge) which' is
of the essence of theft. *

[Felonious— Animusfurandi. MaUtia.'\*

Materiality or immateriality of htcri egusd.

What motive is a lucri causa, . .

Indifference of motive. Larceny is the taking without
consent, knowing, etc. And unless this definition be abided
by, this offence cannot be distinguished from various other
offences: as malicious damage, embezzleipent, etc.

Indifference of motive, shown by rule as Jo exchange, etc.

• See Lecture XXXVIII., Vol. 11.

X. 2


308


NOTES ON CBIMINAL LAW.


Uncertainty of this rule.

Theft or Larceny is properly an offence against right
of possession. If not, an owner could not steal his own
goods.

Consequently, any right of possession as against the taker
ought to suffice;. yet, there are doubts as to whether such
right of possession resides in certain custodees, etc. [or
whether, in the language of the law, they can be deemed
special owners.]

No right of possession in owner (as against tliief) where
the goods are hired; though there is when they are bartered.

Inconsistency of holding taking goods not to be an
offence, where the purpose is merely to apply them to some
temporary purpose.

Same confusion of inducement and criminal intention as
noted above in case of caimt.

Uncertainty of rule as to finding and misappropriation.

Inconsistency of holding bailee generally not answerable
criminally, and yCt custodec answerable; and of holding
bailee answerable where bailment, is determined.

Principles obscured by being often couched in Latin
terms not generally understood, and not unfrequcntly mis¬
applied : E.ff. Lucri causa. Larceny^ instead of the familiar
and more precise theft.

Larceny, or latrocinium, not theft.

INCON.VENIENCES OP THE pRESENT STATUTE LaW.

The Statute Law is not of itself a substantive and intelli¬
gible whole, but a mass of partial supplements, and partial
correctives, made, pro re mtd^ to the Common Law. (The
latter, the nucleui.)

Hence, often inconsistent. It lies dispersicdly through
* many statutes and decisions upon them.

'Hence,, bulk, inaccessibility, etc. ■ .

.. 'And, generally, it is productive of most of the incon-
veniencel before .pointed out in the Common Law.


NOTES ON CRIMINAL LAW. 309

- Wherever the basis or nucleus of statute law is a judiciary
law, the former is irregular, fragmentitious, etc.

Inconveniences from the existence op two distinct
Bodies of Law; one Common and the other
Statute.

As the Law actually stands, the law relating to any
given offence commonly or frequently lies through many
dispersed statutes and many dispersed reports or treatises.-
Supposing that the Common and Statute Law were each
systcmatisied separately, the law relating to any given offence
would often lie in two bodies of law; instead of lying in
one department of one body of law.

By the incorporation of the two Statutes, great benefit
will result, for the following reasons.

The present statute law consists partly of definitions of
offences, with their punishments; and partly of the pun¬
ishments of offences, leaving the definition of them to the
common law: and it were expedient cither that *il should
not be necessary to look after the definition of an offence
in one statute, and its punishment in another; or that this
should prevail in every case, and not in one only. ' The
like observations apply to process.

The two statutes when separate must be often obscure
and prolix, where the union of the two would tend to'brevity
and intelligibility.

The advantage would be gained of treating the f^enera-
Ha (of law or procedure) apart from those portions of the
sflUcial part to which they are applicable indifferently: HJ.g.
Misapprehension of right; accident; mistake; fdonioUs
intent; principals and accessories.

Many of these gen&raUa (in existing treatises) are either
omitted, or are stated under some'head devoted to some
particular class of offences (thus wearing the appearance of
particular provisions).. E.g, Malice, Negligence*

The advantages which would ensue from such an arrange-


810


KOTEB ON CRIMINAL LAW.


ment cannot be shown fully without a scheme. Such scheme,
pursued considerably into detail and backed by reasons,
ought to precede the process of consolidating and com¬
bining.

As remarked above, Codification, and'Innovation on sub¬
stance or effect, .are distinct. The codification here recom¬
mended would not necessaiily touch substance or effect;
but would be no'^more (necessarily) than a re-expression of
definitions, and an arrangement of offences under apt kinds
and sorts, etc. But though the refount of form, now re¬
commended, would not touch necessarily the substance or
effect, still it might, not perhaps be possible to render it
altogether so good as desirable without small changes in
substance. E, g. Reduction of rule in larceny as to right
of possession.

I.

Advantages of combining Common and Statute Law
INTO ONE Statute or Code.,

One source substituted for two.

Rules stated once for all, instead of being stated partly
in one statute and partly in another.

Hence, more compendious.

. If common law were reduced into one statute, and sta¬
tute law consolidated in another, they might often conflict.
If conJbteejfl, no such conflict.

If coAnon and statute law were to be united into one

*

statute, a refount of the present form of the law would be
expedient.

Necessity of considerin|j^#ery part in relation to the rest,
idid not as. detached.

Also, of defining broad principles, subordinating narrow
principles under them, and elucidating by expaples. The
actual law is a rich mine of such examples ;^^nd indeed,
generally, is more objectionable in resp^lU; of ite form than
in respect of its substance and effect.

If the two statutes were incorporated or even if they were


NOTES ON CRIMINAL LAW. 311

kept separftte, it would be expedieut to diminish their size,
and at the same time to render their contents more accessi¬
ble, by reducing under one 'head such#matters as are con¬
stantly recurring and are separated under dlifercnt heads.

K g. Principal and accessory: attempts to commit of- «
fences, etc. etc.

If the two statutes were incorporated, or even if they were
kept distinct, it would be necessary to settle with great at¬
tention the arrangement according to which existing statutes
and existing common law upon particular subjects should
be put together.

E. g. Whether, in the general statute of statute law,
larceny should come next to forgery, or not ? Whether
jury process and bail should bo near, each other? What
the statute should begin with, what end with ?

Inconveniences of the Present Law, in respect to
THE Administration of Justice.

In respect to the administration of justice by the judges
on circuits, etc. .

Owing to causes mentioned in preceding paragraphs,
rules and principles are applied timidly and capriciously.

Li fact, judges, as well as advocates, are guided by modern
and unauthoritativc treatises.

Opinions of judges on doubtful points gotten ^i^ly.

’m

In respect to the Administration of Justice bt
Justices of the Peace.

^ As they are not generally pjj^essional lawyers, they need
compendious and perspicuous"^es. [Importance of pro-'
ceedings prior to commitment.^ ~

They aro necessarily incompetent to the delicate task of
extracting.;^inciples from decided'cases.

Difficidties wbjnh they experience from the multitude and
dispersedness of statutory provisions; from the language and
form of statutes; from the obscurity of rules of construc¬
tion, etc.


313 .


VOTES ON CRIMINAL LAW.


Though they were competeut to the administration of the
law, they have not access to thelAbst of statutes and. autho¬
rities through whicb it lies.

In fact, therefore, they are guided by modern and uilau-
thoritativc treatises.

Vast extent of their jurisdiction.

Tendency of the present administration of justice
by local or district courts.

Impossible that the administration of justice by such
courts should be passable, unless the law be rendered more
compendious and clear than it is at present.

Inconveniences of the Present Law, in respect to

Legislation.

Owing to the bulk and disperseduess of statutes and au¬
thorities, innovations on existing law are seldom guided at
present by an adequate consideration of the .entire legal
system. Hence, for the sake of obviating some particular
evil, greater evil is often done.

For the same reason, there is much needless legislation.
For it often happens that the object of the change is. suffici¬
ently accomplished by actual law' unknown to the legisla¬
ture : or might be accomplished sufficiently by some slight
alteration of the actual law.

ns

Inconveniences of the Present Law, in respect, ge¬
nerally, TO the Community who are bound by it.

If the foregoing difficulties are experienced by the Courts
and .|jcgisl|iture, a fortiori^\j the community at large, x..

In fact, not one in a ^usand knows the laws which
bind him. -W'

If such are the difficulties in the way of lawyers, etc., the
same are insurmountable to private persons.

Accordingly, scarce any but professional lawyers have
any knowledge of the criminal law, although of necessity
they must be bound by it.


NOTES ON CRIMINAL LAW.


. 313


PRACTICAVILITT OF REDUCING COHMON LaW INTO StAIIUTE
Law, and of consolidating Statute Law.

If it be possible io extract principles pro re natd^ it is
possible to extract them once for all, and to put them in the
form of niles. ,

The difficulty of the process is not disputed.

The practicability of coSlS^dating statute law is admitted
in practice. Indeed, it is little more than an affair of ar¬
rangement.

Advantages that would follow such Reduction
AND Consolidation.

Advantage of having the law relating to any given offence
collected under one or two heads, from numerous sources,
through which it now lies dispersed;

Of having it in a cheap (as well as a compendious)
volume:

Of separating living from dead law.

Indeed, a mere republication of actual sources (assigning
respective weights), marking the law abolished, would be of
itself no inconsiderable good.

No desire to exaggerate the extent to which Law may
be made generally intelligible. But criminal law, for the
most part, might be made intelligible to any man of average
capacity. And this is the most important advantage.

It does not enter, generally, into the detail of rights:

{E. g. Larceny; which is properly an offence against the
right of possession.) •

^ Possibility of defining in criminal law the rights and du¬
ties of which crimes are viola^ns, in so for as criminal laW"
is concerned with them, with w going into any such detail:

E. g. Without going into any detail of rights of property,
an adequate definition of the right of possession as af¬
fected by theft, (which is properly an ofience against the
right of possession,) malicious mischief, etc., might perhaps
be given.


314 ,


NOTES ON CRIMINAL LAW.


Advantages of its being made perfectly intelligible to
lawyers, which it might be.

As being more accessible, it would be more obvious to
the legislature; and therefore much crude and inconsistent
legislation would be avoided.

Advantages that have arisen from Peel’s Consolidations.

Such Reduction and Consolidation would, at
LEAST, BE harmless.

Doubts would arise on application of law thus reduced
and consolidated: But probably fewer than on application
of the present law.

Pre-existing law would furnish ample means of construc¬
tion, and interpretative decisions might, from time to time,
be incorporated with text.

[Rules of construction to be framed, and to be considered
as peculiarly applicable to the Criminal Code.]

By submitting the Statute or Statutes to the public or
the profession before they were passed into a law, many of
the causes of doubts might be obviated.

Such reduction, etc., would, not amount to a change in
the substance and effect of the "existing law, but would
simply be a re-statement of the existing law, in an orderly,
compendious and accessible volume; with the determination
of points confessedly uncertain.

it would not, necessarily, have any retroactive effect.

In fact, it would be a substitution of an authoritative
body of law for the unauthoritative (and often defective)
treatises, which (as we have already remarked) are practically
'the guides of the tribunals in the great majority of their de-
cisioi^. ^

Imperfections of these.

Though never so perfect, they are unauthoritative.

Expediency of Codiheation admitted practically by such
treatises, etc.


FRAGMENTS

OF A

SCHEME OF A CRIMINAL CODE.


317


FRAGMENTS OF A SCHEME OF A
CRIMINAL CODE.


NOTES ON CniMINAL LAW.

The Crimiaal [or Penal] The Code [or Law] of Cri-
Code [or the Law of Crimes minal Process [or Procedure]
and punishments]. and Preventive Police.

I _ ‘

General Part [or Part I.] : Particular (or Special) Part,

Comprising the matters or Part II.

(definitions, distinctfthis. Particularizing (or S])cci>

rules, principles, etc.) which fying) the various crimes
apply universally or gene- embraced by the intended
rally: i. e, which have no Code; and assigning rcspec-
exclusive or special regard tively to those various crimes,
to crimes of a given class, their respective punishments
but regard indificrcntly all and other penal conse-
oje the generality of the quences.
crimes embraced by the in¬
tended Code [or, particular¬
ized (or specified) in the Par¬
ticular (or Special) part].

[Each part to be divided into Chapters, Sections, Sub¬
sections, etc.; or into Books, Chapters, Sections, Subsec¬
tions, etc.]


818


NOTES ON CRIMINAL LAW.


• Note.

" Punishment** (and ** penal **) are broader expressions than
“crime** (and “criminal**). Punishment (pr poencC) is necessa*
rily annexed to an injury considered as a crime or public wrong:
i. e. as the possible ground of a criminal or public, action; and
the infliction of punishment is necessarily the scope or object of
every such Sbtion'or pursuit.

But punishment, moreover, is sometimes annexed to an injury
considered as a civil or private wrong: i. e. as the possible ground
of a civil or private action. And the infliction of punishment is
sometimes the scope pr object of such an action or pursuit.
Consequently^ the nature of “ cryne** (and “ criminal **) cannot
lie determined sufficiently by merely determining the nature of
“punishment** ^and “penql**).]


NATES ON CRIMINAL LAW.


319


GENERAL PART OE THE CRIMINAL CODE.


CHAPTER I.

The definition of a crirac; with distinctions (or divisions)
of crimes into certain of their principal classes.

CHAPTER II.

Of the territory embraced by the intended Code; and
of the persons amenable to, and the crimes cognizable by,
the criminal tribunals having jurisdiction therein.

Reference to the subsequent Chapter on Punishments;
and to those parts of the Code of Procedure which deter¬
mine the respective jurisdictions of the several criminal
Tribunals.

[This distinction or division can hardly serve as a basis for the
Arrangement of Crimes.]

CHAPTER III.

Of such essentials of a crime (or^of such conditions ne-
cessaiy to render an act or omission a crime) as may be
treated of generally : i. e. without restriction to a crime of
a given or specified class.

Here, particularly, of those universal essentials which arc
styled emphatically “ the grounds of imputation.’*

CHAPTER IV.

«Of consummate crimes and criminal attempts.

CHAPTER V.

Of principals and accessories.

CHAPTER VI.

Of punishments (including the penal consequences which
are npt punishments nominally, but which arc punishments
in effect).


320


THE

GENERAL PART OP THE CRIMINAL CODE.


CHAPTER 1.

Containing the definition of a Crime; with distinctions
(or divisions) of Crimes into certain of their principal classes.

1. The definition of a Crime, [or, Crimes distinguished
from Civil Injuries.], [or, Public Injuries (or Wrongs) dis¬
tinguished from Private.]

The definition of a Crime implies the definition of Punish¬
ment, and also the distinction between Civil and Criminal
Aetions. But the complete statement of this distinction,
and of its numerouS and intricate consequences, belongs to
the Code of Criminal Process.


2. Of such distinctions (or divisions) of crimes as arc
founded on differences "between their respective punish¬
ments ; [between the- criminal tribunals to which they are
respectively attributed; and between the criminal processes
by which they are respectively pursuable.]

Note.

The flistinction between Crimes in respect of tribunals and
processes, supposes a reference to the CodeoC Criminal Process:
in w^ch the competence of the various tribunals must of course
be 4|tOTmined; and in which the regular process, with the j)ro-
cesses deviating from the regiilhrj are particularized or detailed.


NOTES ON CRIMINAL LAW.


321


Tlie distinction between Felonies and Misdemesnors supposes
a reference to the Chapter (contained in a subsequent portion of
the General Part of the Criminal Code) on Punishments and
other Penal Consequences.

Quasre. The use of retaining the distinction between Feloi^s
and Misdemesnors ? It is founded on differences between their
respective punishments and other penal consequences. And to
every crime particularized in the Particular Part *01 the Criminal
Code, its punishment (and other penal consequence) will of course
be assigned.

The distinction in the French Penal Code between Crimes,
Delicts and Contraventions, is perhaps of spmc use. For
oflences of those different classes are attributed systematically
and exclusively to differently constituted tribunals: They also
arc pursuable respectively by different processes.


Method of arrangement in the French Penal "Code.


Crimes attributed to the
Courts of Assize, and pur¬
suable by a process which
is more solemn (and re¬
gular) ;

Called, emphatically.
Crimes.


Pursuable before the Tri
bunals of Correctional
Police.

I

Called Delicts,


Crimes attributed to the
Tribunals of Police, and
pursuable by processes
which are more summary
(and irregular).


I

Pursuable before the Tri¬
bunals of Simple Police
(or Tribunals of Police).

I

.l^alled CtmiraveniUmSi or
Crimes of Simple Police,


[The 1st and 2d Books, with the ** Preliminary Dispositions,’
constitute the General Part: The 3d and 4th books. The Parti-
cular Parti]


VOL. III.


S22


NOTES ON CRIMINAL LAW.


Crimes

attributed (generally’) to the
ordinary (or regular) tribu¬
nals,® and pursiiable (gene-
rnlly®) by the ordinary or re¬
gular process.*)

♦ •


I . ♦ I

Felonies. Misdemesnors.

V- - -

Distinguished by differences
between the punishments
(and the other penal conse¬
quences) which are respec¬
tively annexed to them.

[* Not universally; For trea¬
son by a peer (for example) is
cognizable by the House of
Lordsj although it is a felony.
[Q*. Whether the House of
Lords can now be deemed an
ordinary criminal tribunal?]

* E. g* The King’s Bench;
the temporary tribunals formed
by the ordinary cominissioutfj
etc. etc.

* Not universally; though,
cognizable by the j^egular tri¬
bunals. E.g* Peculiarities of
process in case of treason.

* Indictment.]


Crimes

attributed to extraordinary
(or exceptional) tribunals,
and pursuable by extraor¬
dinary (or exceptional) pro¬
cesses.

E.g.

Crimes pursuable summarily
before Justices of the Pence,
or before Commissioners of
the Excise. Crimes pursu-
ablc before the Ecclesiastical
Courts. Crimes by military
persons considered as such,
and punishable before Courts
Martid, etc. etc.*

[* 6*. Whether the term
misdemesnor is applicable to
any of the crimes here con¬
templated ? And whether
there be any distinction be¬
tween such crimes, or any of
them, analogous to the dis-
tion between Felonies and
Misdemesnors ?

The simple "police crimes”
of the French Penal Code
comprise only a part of the
crimes here contemplated.]


r Note.

Q*. The extent of the intended Code in respect of the Classes
of Crimes which it is meant to embrace.

Is it to embrace all crimes (crimes pursuable before the extra-


NOTES ON CRIMINAL LAW.


d2a


ordinary, as well as before the ordinary tribunals)*? Or are any, and
which, of the crimes pursuable before the extraordinary tribi^als,
to be excluded from it ? Difficulty of such an exclusion, in re¬
spect of such of the excluded crimes as owe their creation to un¬
written law. See the last article of the French Penal Code,
which shows that the code extends only to a part of the field
embraced by the Criminal Law obtaining iu France.


3. Distinction (or division) of crimes into Public Crimes
and Private Crimes [or Private Crimes and Public Crimes].

[The arrangement of the Particular Part o|rthe Criminal
Code is founded on the'distinction between Private and Public
Crimes. But perhaps the nature of the distinction ought to be
stated or indicated at the outset of the General Part.]


4. Distinction (or division) of crimes into crimes by com¬
mission and crimes by omission [or, posUive crimes and
neyaiive crimes :— crimes fadendo ” and “ crimes non fa-
ciendo ”].

Distinction of crimes by omission into crimes by omission
accompanied loith criminal hnowledye^ and crimes by omis¬
sion from neyligence (or criminal inatteniion), [Refer to
Chapter III.]

[Crimes by omission accompanied with criminal know¬
ledge might be styled coramodiously on«/^/^a^/ybr^oarffao^•^;
crimes by omission from negligence, criminal omissions^ or
omissions (simply).—But established language would hardly
admit of this.]

* ^

Note. . ,

Criminal knowledge and negligence are often styled em¬
phatically ''the grounds of imputation;” inasmuch as the
one or the other of them is of .the essence (or empu^ of every
delict (or crime). Properly, however, eiyery essential of a given
crime (or every constituent of its essence or corpu^ is one of
the grounds or reasons for imputing the fact to the party. (See
Table II., |>osf.)

Y 2


824


NOTBS ON CRIMINAL LAW.


CHAFrER 11.

Of the Ternlory which the intended Code is meant to
embrace; and of the persons amenable to, and the crimes
cognizable by, the Criminal Tribunals or Courts having
jurisdiction therein.


1. Q*. The extent of the intended Code in respect of
territory.

Is it to extend to all those parts of the United King¬
dom and its Dependencies in which the Crinniial Law of
England now obtains ?

If any of those parts arc not to be embraced by it, how
is their exclusion to be marked ?

In respect to any of those parts embraced by it, in which
anomalies or singularities now obtain,—how are such ano¬
malies to be treated ? Is the Code to supersede them ? and,
if so, how is the abrogation of them to be accomplished?
If the Code is not to supersede them, are they also to be
codified or systematized ? (Provincial Law, derogating from
the General or Common Law, has been codified or systema¬
tized in Prussia with respecl to one of the Provinces.)


2. Persons amcnabjp to the Criminal Tribunals having
^jurisdiction within the intended territory.

A statement of the general rule, or general principle.
Exceptions from the general rule: e.g. the King, corpo-


NOTES ON CRIMINAL LAW. 325

rate bodies in their corporate capacity. Ambassadors from
foreign States, etc. etc.*


3. Crimes’ cognizable by such tribunals.

A statement of the general rule or principle.

Exceptions from the general rule:

E.g. Crimes committed by British subjects in foreign
parts.


326


NOTES OK CRIMINAL LAW.


CHAFTER III.

Of such essentials of a Crime [or, of such conditions
necessary to render an act or omission a crime] as may be
treated of generally: i.e. without restriction to a crime of
a given or specified class. Here, particularly, of those uni¬
versal essentials which are styled emphatically “ the grounds
of imputation.” _

Principle 1. An act or omission is not a crime, (or is
not imputable to the party,) unless the party knew, or, with
due attention, might have known, that, under the circum¬
stances of the fact, it was a crime[or; an act or omission
is not a crime, (or is not imputable to the party,) unless
the party subsumed the fact, or, with due attention, might
have subsumed the fact, under the law.].

Every crime, therefore, supposes, on the part of the
criminal, criminal knowledge [criminal consciousness] or neg¬
ligence [criminal inattention, criminal inadvertence ].—Vel
scienter vel negligenter.

Note.

Scheme of the Roman law-language in regard to the grounds
of imputation : t. e. Criminal knowledge and Negligence.

Volua or dolus malusy when used as the name of a genus, is
equivalent to malice or criminal desigt^ When used as the name
of a sjpedes, it is restricted to criv^al design consummated on
attempted by fraud: dolus^yn^ simulatio.

Culpa (which generally, though not always, is opposed to dolus)
has three significations. Taken wil^ its laige signification,
culpa, is equivalent to thd English guilt. 2**. Taken with its nar¬
rower signification, it denotes generally the ground of imputation:
t. e, criminal knowled^ or ii^ligencc. It therefore includes
dohis, 8”. Taken with its narrowest signification, it denotes


MOTES ON CRIMINAL LAW. 827

criminal knowledge »hort of criminal design, or negligence.' It
therefore excludes, and is opposed to, dolus.

The Homan law.langnage in r^ard to the grounds of imputa¬
tion, may therefore be presented thus :—


2)o/u«,or£^o/u9iOTa/iM,assignify- Culpa, as opposed to ^lus
iug gencrically criminal design, in its generic signification.


Criminal knowledge short
of criminal design.

. I


Negligence in any of its
modes.


Criminal knowledge or Negligence or criminal

consciousness. inattention.

(Sec Lcct. XX., Vol. IT., and Tables I. and II., post,)


Inconveniences of malice** as a name for criminal design.

1. It having been assumed inconsiderately that malice or cri¬
minal design is of the essence of every crime, the term is ex¬
tended abusively to negligence (or criminal inattention), and to
criminal knowledge short of criminal design. E.g. Murder is
styled malicious, or the law (it is said) implies it to be malicious,
although, in truth, it proceeded from negligence: i. e. from neg¬
ligence evincing, on the part of the criminal, cxtraordinaiy in¬
humanity. Case of master killing apprentice, without designing
his death, by a cruel excess of punishment.

2. Malice as signifying criminal design, (and as used with its

technical and proper import,) is often confounded with malice as
denoting malevolence j insomuch that malevolence (though the
motive or inducement of the party is foreign to the question of
his guilt or innocence) is supposed to be essential to the crime.
E.g, The law (it is said) implies malice, wherever the fact was
premeditated; although the crime is complete by virtue of Uic
criminal design, and an^rimplication is superfluous. (Belling¬
ham’s argument.) ^

Similar ambiguity, and consequent confusion, in regard to
dolus.

3. Though “malice” denotes properly criminal design or in¬

tent, it sometimes signifies criminal knowledge short of criminal
des^n. It seems, at least, that “maliciously” is sometimes
equivalent to (Serf/.)


328


NOTES ON CRIMINAL LAW.


[(a) Criminal knowledge [or consciousness].


Criminal [unlawful, or evil]
design [intent, or purpose].

[Equivalent to the malice of
the English Law; to the dolus
or dolus malus (used generi-
cally) of the Boman; and also
to the malum propositUmy the
malum consiliumy and the vo~
luntas nocendi of the Boman.]

Where the production of the
mischievous conscqueucc which
the law seeks to prevent, is an
end (or object), ultimate or me>
diate, of the criminal; and
where, therefore, the Tsriminal
wishes (or wijU^) the production
of it: E. g. Murder, or arson,
out of malevolence; murdering
to rob; theft. In each of these
cases, the production of the
mischievous consequence'is the
very end of the criminal, or, at
least, is a mean to its attain¬
ment.

[Where an act or omission
is of itself a* crime, (or is a
crime without respect to a con¬
sequence,) such act or omission
(supposing that the omission
is accompanied with criminal
knowledge), imports necessarily
a criminal design.]


Criminal knowledge short of
criminal design.

[Scienlia, but without the
voluntas nocendi'^ Not
luSy although it is prope dolum.^


W'here the production of the
mischievous consequence which
the law seeks to prevent, is not
an end, ultimate or mediate, of
the criminal; but where he
knows that such mischievous
consequence (though he dues
not wish the production of it)
will follow, necessarily or pro¬
bably, his act or omission. E.g.
Arson of a house adjoining his
own, through his setting fire to
his own, with intent to defraud
his insurers. The destrucj:ion
of his neighbour’s house will
not kubserve his end; but he
kuow4«J^|ut the destruction of
his nc^pShour’s house will fol¬
low, necessarily or probably, the
firing of his own.*


NOTES ON CRIMINAL LAW.


329


[(^) Negligence, [or, criminal inattention or inadvertence.]


Negligence Negligence

non fu<A(mdo» infaciendo.


Negligence • Imprudence: which

or when it is gross, is

Ilcedlcssuess. styled Temerity or

Rashness.

(See Table II., post^ and Lecture XX., Vol. II.)

Negligence, or criminal inattention, may be divided into
pmcimate and remote: proximate^ where it accompanies (or
is the immediate cause of) the criminal omission or act; re-
mote, where it has caused an inability, on the part of the
criminal, to do or forbear as he ought.

Amount (or measure) of the attention which the criminal
law exacts j with the various degrees of negligence (or cri¬
minal inattention). Culpa lata, etc. Impossible to fix a
measure, or to distinguish degrees, by rules binding the tri¬
bunals : but principles (with examples), serving as guides to
their discretion, may be stated or indicated in the law.

(c) Of the cases in which a party committing or attempt-
irfg a crime, produces casually or negligently an extrinsic
mischief. Feculia^y (and seeming unreasonableness) of
the English Crimio^^aw in respect of extrinsic mischief,
produced casually.

Culpa dolp determinata. But, properly, the original crime
or attempt is one crime, and the extrinsic mischief proceed¬
ing from the negligence of the party is another and distinct
crime.


S30


MOTES OM CRIMINAL LAW.


(jd) Justifications deducible from principle 1, viz.

Ignorance (including mistake) in regard to matter of fact.

[Ignorance of law is neither a justification nor an excuse,
us considered substantively or jjer se ; although it is implied
by some of the justifications and excuses which are adverted
to hereafter. Why a knowledge of the law, on the part of
the accused, is and must be presumed juris et do jure. Inas¬
much as the presumption in question often conflicts with
the fact, and the accused might be ignorant of the law with¬
out a default of his own, the presumption is seemingly un¬
reasonable, and demands a short explanation.*]

Infancy: When a justification. When, and in what de¬
gree, an excuse. •

Insanity; (in its various modes of idiocy,imbecility, lunacy,
partial madness, etc.)

[Drunkenness; Never a justification. When, and in
what degree, an excuse.—Ground for imputing the fact to
the drunken party, where the drunkenness was not resorted
to as a means of accomplishing or concealing a criminal de¬
sign.]

Principle 2. An act or omission is not a crime, if it be
purely imoluntary ; i.e. if the not doing the actf done, or
the doing the act omitted, did not depend anywise on the
wishes (or will) of the party.

Justifications deducible from principle 2, viz.:

Misfortune. [Mishap, chance, accident, damnum
faiade, etc.]

Compulsion or restraint merely jihysical: i.e. not applied
to the wishes (or will) of the party. .

Principle 3. Generally, an act or omission is not a crime,
or is more or less excusable, if it proceeded from an instant

♦ See Lecture XXV., Vol. II.

f Inasmuch as the party is mentally passive, it cannot he said, withper-
feet propriety, that he acts.


Notes on criminal law.


331


and well-grouuded fear stronger than the fear naturally in-
s[)ired by the law.

{a) Statement and explanation of principle 3.

{S) Justifications deducible from principle 3.

Fear of harm not impending from the will of man.

Fear of (unlawful) barm impending from the will of man.
JS.ff. Joining a foreign enemy through fear of instant death.
Wife joining in a crime in consequence of threats from hus¬
band. [The English Criminal Law in respect of coercion
of wife by husband, is seemingly full of inconsistencies.]

*

Note .—^Principles 1.2. and 3. arc all of them deducible from the.
following simple truth. Owing to the plight in which the party
was, fear of the punishment could not have acte^ upbn him;
or, if fear of the punishment could have acted upon him, it
could not, or probably would nut, have deterred him from the
act or omission. Consequently, the infliction of the punishment
on the party could not operate as an example, or could not
produce the effect of deterring others from crime.

Principle 4. An act or omission pursuant to a legal duty

is not a crime:

♦

Arrest of a criminal. Execution of a judgment.

Principle 5. An act or omission, pursuant to a legal right,
or to a permission or licence granted or authorized by the
law, is not a crime.

(«) Of self-defence, with its various grounds and limits.

Also, generally, of self-assistance (or of righting one’s self
without a resort to justice.) {Sed tf.)

{b) Of the cases in which the fact concurs with the
wishes of the party who is immediately its object.

Where the party acting or omitting is also the imme¬
diate objfect of the act or omission: E. g. Suicide.

Where the party acting or omitting is not the immediate
object of the act or omission. “ Volenti non jit injaria.”
When the maxim holds. When it does not.


S32


NOTES ON CRIMINAL LAW.


(c) Of the cases in which the party who is the immediate
object of the act or omission is “ out of the protection of
the law.”

Q\ Whether there be any such case according to the
criminal law now in force ?

. Principle 6. An overt act (or such an act, other than a
confession of the party, as indicates his criminal knowledge)
is of the essence of a crime by commission; also of a crime
by omission accompanied with criminal knowledge.

[An overt act is an act indicating criminal knowledge^ and
is not any act indicating a foregone crime. Consequently,
it is not of the essence of a crime by omission, where tlic
omission is the effect of negligence. But such a crime by
omission may be indicated by an overt act as meaning any
act indicating a foregone crime.]

Why criminal knowledge without an overt act (or merely
disclosed by the confession of the party) is not imputable.

Note .—Perhaps the terra overt act ” is restricted to such an
act as indicates a criminal design; or,even to such an act as
accomplishes or subserves the design.

Unless the act were a mean to the accomplishment of a cri¬
minal design (or were an effect or consequence of a foregone cri¬
minal deijigii) it hardly could show the existence of the requisite
ground of imputation: viz. the criminal knowledge of the party.
{Bed f.) For a design may be merely criminal in respect of a
probable consequence not wuhed by the party. And, in this
case, an act indicating his knowledge of the probable mischievous
consequence is not of necessity an act accomplishing or subserv¬
ing the design.

It would seem that the overt act which is requisite in the case
of an uttemptf is necessarily an act consequent on a criminal
design, or serving as a mean or step to the accomplishment of a
criminal design. {Bed q‘.)

It is held by the Court of Cassation, in cases of an attemptf
that “ overt or exterior act ** and “ commencement of execution **
are equivalent expressions.—(Sec Feuerbach and other Germ'au
Criminalists.) , .


NOTES ON CRIMINAL LAW.


333


CHAPTER IV.

Of consummate Crimes, and of Crimes consisting in
attempts to commit crimes, [or, criminal attempts.]


• 1. Generally, an attempt to commit a crime is of itself
a crime. (Exceptions from the rule.)

2. Essentials of a criminal attempt.

No criminal attempt without criminal knowledge.

[Or, No criminal attempt 'without a criminal design : i. /?.
unless the consummation of a crime be the end or object of
the party, or be a mean or step towards his end or object.
{Sed For though a design be innocent independently
of a probable mischief not wished by the party, his attempt
may perhaps be criminal if he be conscious of the danger.]

No criminal attempt without an overt act: i. e. an act,
(other than a confession) indicating criminal knowledge.

[Or, No criminal attempt without an overt act; /. e. an
act which is the natural etfecfof a foregone criminal design,
or which serves as a mean or step to the accomplishment
of a criminal design. {Sed ^.)]

3. Grounds for punishing a criminal attempt less severely
than the corresponding consummate crime.

, [In some cases, the consummation of the crime is not more
mischievous than the attempt to commit it. E. g. Theft con¬
summated by the merest amotion of the subject from the place
which it occupied, is not a whit morc^ mischievous than an abor¬
tive attempt to amove it.]

Expediency of leaving to the party a locus pmnitentia^
wherever the consummation of the crime would be more
mischievous than the attempt, etc. etc.

[Departures from this principle in the English Criminal


334


VOTES ON CRIMINAL LAW.


law. They are not only inexpedient, but are out of ana¬
logy or harmony with the body of the system. Coventry
Act, Lord Ellcnborough’s Act, etc.—Absurdity of the Ro¬
man and IVcnch Law in this respect.]

4. Distinction between a rmote or merely incipient
attempt p. e. where the acts^ of the party would not natu¬
rally consummate the crime] and a proximate or perfect
attempt \i. e. where the acts of the party would naturally
consummate the crime, but the consummation is prevented
by the intervention of an extrinsic cause.] (§'.)

Note .—Case of an omission not followed by the probable mis¬
chief which renders it criminal; but where the omitting party
intended the mischief, or, at least, was .conscious of the danger.

Cannot be called an attempt : for an attempt imports an act
pursuant to a criminal design, or, at least, indicating criminal
knowledge.*

Is there any case (in the English Criminal law) in which a
party so omitting would be held liable as for an attempt ?

\Note ,—^Would it be expedient to define generally Oryrpus de-
licti: i. e, the sum (or aggregate) of the properties (or characters)
which constitute the essence (or definition) of a crime of a given
class ? If so, the general definition and explanation^ would be
placed appositely in Chapter III. For the expression **corpus
delicti,** an equivalent English expression (such, for example, as
** essence of the crime **) might ehsily be devised.] (See Table II.
post) '

5. Distinction between criminal attempts in respect of

differences between the causes which prevent their consum¬
mation. «

Where the consummation is prevented by the penitence
of the party.

Where the consummation is prevented, not by the peni¬
tence of the party, but by the* intervention of an extrinsic
cause.

6. Incitements to crime. [Sed Would.perhaps be

placed more appositely in the Chapter on Principals and
Accessories.]


NOTES ON CRIMINAL LAW.


S35


CHAPTER V.

Of Principals and Accessories.

[Q*. Can a so-called “accessory after the fact'* be
deemed an accessory: i. e. a person who aided the given
crime, and who therefore ranst have been party to it before
its conclusion? Ought not the offence of the so-called
Accessory to be placed in a Chapter of the Department re¬
lating to Public Crimes ?j


33G


NOTES ON CRIMINAL LAW.


CHAPTER VI.

Of Punishments (including those consequences of crimes
which are not punishments nominally, but which are pun¬
ishments in effect).


1. Enumeration and description of the punishments (and
other penal consequences) which are annexed to Crimes
by the English Criminal Law: (or by the portion of the
English Criminal Law which is embraced by the intended
.Code.)

K g. Death.

Transportjdiion.

Imprisonment.

Eine, etc.

General Forfeiture.

Corruption of blood (with
Escheat).

Incapacity to give testi¬
mony, etc.


Q*. As to the expediency
I of these sweeping and indis-
criminating punishments.


2. Rules (or Instructions) for the application of Punish¬
ments;

(a.) Where the nature of the punishment is not deter¬
mined by the Law; or where the degree of the punish¬
ment is indeterminate altogether; or where the degree of
the punishment, though not indeterminate altogether, is de¬
termined imperfectly or proximately by the assignment of
a mcKeimum and minimtm.


NOTES ON CBIMINAL LAW. 337

Specimens of the various considerations which are
grounds for the Rules or Instructions, viz.

Magnitude of the mischief which the crime has a ten¬
dency to produce.

Difficulty or ease with which it may usually be com¬
mitted.

Consummation or Attempt; If attempt, nature of the
cause which rendered it abortive.

Criminal Knowledge or Negligence: If negligence, the
degree of it.

Motive or inducement to the crime: which, though it
commonly is foreign to the question of guilt or innocence,
is often a good reason for aggravating or mitigating the
punishment.

Disposition of the criminal, as evinced by the fact in
que8tion,*or by extrinsic testimony to his general character,
etc. etc.

(b.) In the case of a repetition of the crime.

(c.) In the case of concurrent crimes (or, rather, con¬
current convictions).

3. Extinction of liability to punishment (or to a criminal
action or pursuit).

By sufferance of the punishment.

By Death.

By Prescription, or limitation of time.

By Pardon, etc. etc.


VOL. 111.


z


338 NOTES ON CRIBCINAIi XAW. j NOTES ON CRll^INAI. EAW. 339


to « •“ TS O

.a I s s ■ 5

IIH 1

si V 09 B S
a o O B
u d u O

Slla^s

• pw ^ o ^
.^§1

6C^S P I SJ
—.S^-S
"S « B* 3 Ji '

|S-§8s^

a « c o ^ o ’
09 ±‘'s-2

«‘S 5 5 2 p

|i2S-|a,

0.-5 S) 1


S ^ I

•3.5/. §«;!

2-3 2 H E,§ O
® 15 B

•TT S O I t*


£ 1‘S’s ®'

Mg. -D „


!.a s H

) jS ». *3
» flj cs 5
>.R a "


ou z <D O’"

goCe.^'tJ'Sd.S"

i B ® §“'5 «-a « p S


p^.3 2-2 ^


B § «;?.3
_.„b89c =
i':g.2><« I I 2

“tS ^ ^ ?P5 o lJ s 2

S'$^cc SA

l®n5P8S'^.§ -a

■v.« i-s B I t

^§^3s§b0-*^ g


® § 5P8 S'^.S

' 3 a s P I -R

‘ B B B3 ® ^ Q
>3 .a « 60 • ■

«> s Ps a ® js
Kn a s O -a ^'§


CO t «0 n d

t—s m . M


5 ClS;S


■ " s.

5 0^.3

02 C9 "r

If

1 |i-

3 * B
■r »,«

6 * EtS

2 go

^(2 o

Q® Js

S® 60


B a 2

OOP

■Sb’® “

i| g «

«Pi

•2 ^sg

cS A
60
a.S

.i°i


►'.g ^

5 '7? '®

eS ,0

■P d 09 09

/3d h p
n3 s
p --P.P
«5 .5 ■« B

>>09 ^ 2

SB g

I o o •" a

2 S 2 ”

- — g ^

6c'a g -
B.g s-S

* rt S fB
u 33 B *

cS O— S

p

« t, B B
O'S B

l.g^®^

oS,Sg


'S E E . B

B B 1—4 2 99
. 00 g o ^

O a 2 2-3
g ^ c.'S

*0* 55 ^ P

to (0 ^ Sd
o a t2 c9 .

S o 0*9 > g
•S S® 7B P 'C °

o o ® "3 "3 ®‘ •

O.Z '^aj's §?

I is^jil

“ « ® So

,P® g« S «
a >> B“.S

09 09 .a di S

o So-s^.a

I >5'y s B,

o l,g g*a.s


i i.g

-§s,|

r-^p'S s

£ .£.2 §
B d 09 g
■R B B S

0 13 O .fl
S CO O


g A 3
'P^S'S g

ja 1,1 J

•2 “ l-a

'te'O

M « o

® C»> 09 B
^ ^>_13 fl

asS-P

U 04 04 O


TS a £ ti

S.SP-5 §

®CO g ^

& w f£3 O

TJ ^

^ ^ iS 3

O 53 .44 *j

~5t3 "a •» *ts B
a .s * o Q,
OD

■3 g « 'S’ I*
f « g S
S 8
$1S .S

■R a o

r"\ P^rm ^ P

^ QC W GO 6S


•tt < ^ « A

o § g * :S ;S s

” 44 ffl « g O

2 B 2 a B*
tT^S .P 'B 9
&»o fe'P
J- o 04 Ms *•

B -gg^aoMhl

pJ3 g-Ss

8.9 § « 3 >

".* g-a >A §'.g
i-M «.S'" s-S 8
;:i..Ss s:s g g*

tt?

9 O ® s 5 B 99

g I g”" S B

e s-B i - 3 2 ®

i i 0S..O.2 ©1

I is o-| P'S I

]S}099i.0^i>^B«


Mfft O % 6!
O o «fi ***


O ••^ I
CO Qd ^

0-^3

fciS m

dOO-
0,0 0

g^g
3 ®5

-.g o t3
.B S B

^hB

*o ►§ ,a
So

w qb ,2
®

.Pl^

0.

0.2 S


4 J I •
0*0
a o 09
” 8 B

99 g O

a o

•" ^.g
ft,

M ,2

J 8 2

^ a,®'

oS F
S oj

c

i^g


s|

g.&-p


340


NOTES ON CRIMINAL LAW.


CODE (OR LAW) OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE
AND PREVENTIVE POLICE.*

Crimiml Procedure.

[Search for and pursuit of crimes already committed.

End, prevention of crimes through the infliction of punishment
on past crimes.]

1. Ordinary and Extraordinary Tribunals, with their
respective competence, and jurisdiction.

2. Ordinary Procedure.

Up to accusation (by in- ' After accusation.

dictmciit Or information). \La justice^

{Police juduAaire^

3. Extraordinary modes of Procedure [marking only the

anomalies; and referring, for the general rules, to the or¬
dinary Procedure]. _ •

Preventive Police.

[End, prevention of crimes, but not through the infliction of
punishment. Embracing such means of preventing crimes as
ai’e not comprised in criminal process.]

Rules for regulation of prisons (penal, or prisons of de¬
tention), of transport vess^^ etc. [^.]

Getfjf^alia.

Distinction between civil and criminal actions.

Where they concur.

Where the one excludes the other.

Where they are pursiiable jointly.

Where they are pursuable separately.

. Rules of evidence peculiar to criminal cases.

* Different meanings of the word Police;—

1. Preventive Police.— 2. Laws which prevent mediately.—3. Laws ad¬
ministered by inferior tribuntds.—4. Laws which impose duties, regarding
the community generally. A mixture of all these.


h:)

n


I I d

s s S

«-a -M

1^ I?

ll-s S

« bp


-A
O ^


CO

a»

-

•a


- s .

,js bpC*'«'

•«:§i3.|

f|j i;

e.|l

a-S'S


I


s


S-'B’I

a.s'^.g

a'«


VOL. III.


'2'gl^.S

•J-§ I g


2 a


• forfjcatance, or oniissioii, which is merely cnlpose (or not dolose), is not a crime or public delict;

*■ f.’ ground of & qrindnal or public action. It is merely a civil or private injury, or is merely the possible ground of

a mvil or private action. Hence, probably, the frequency of the assumption that ciiminfd intention is of the essence of a crime.


TABLE II.


__ __ ^ ) a preuKt act or forbearance,

or to a ne'(®s*ary or probable mischief consequent ou such act or forbearance.

In regard to the act or forbearance; which is al- In regard to the ne-

wa\a iiUeiided: i. e. known and wished (as an cessaiy or probable

enj or a mean). But which mav be , mischief,

I


Negligence (or Criininal
Inattention).


Non/aciendoj Omission. Infadendo.


Ciifflinal per le, or inde-
pendentl}'’ of a mis¬
chief necessarily or
probably consequent
upon it.

[Necessarily accompa-
I nied by a crinainal in¬
tention.]


Criminal not per le,
but by reason of a
mischief necessa¬
rily, etc.

[Not necessarily ac¬
companied by a
criminal inten¬
tion.]


Criminal Intention.


I

Criminal Inten¬
tion: i.e.
knowledge of
necessity or
probability of
the mischief,

• and wish of
the mischief
(as an end or
a mean).


I I

Preme- Unpre-
ditated. medi¬
tated.


Determinate,
in respect of
miscMef in-


Indetenni-
nate, in re¬
spect of
etc.


Criminal Rnowled^ short
of criminal intention: i.e.
knowledge of necessity
or probability of the mis-
' chief, but mfhout a,wi8h
of the mischief; the mis¬
chief not being an end of
act or forljearance, nor
subservient to the end.

[Called erroneously, “ob¬
lique intention,” or doks
indireeine.]


Heedlessness:

Or inattention to
necessity or pro¬
bability of the
mischief.


Advertenceto ne¬
cessity,etc.; false
supposition of a
preventive; and
inattention to
the grounds of
supposition.


Imprudence:
where the inatten¬
tion is not gross.


I

Temerity;
where the in¬
attention is
gross.


In case of fiitare act presently intended, misrUerom
nmseqnenec may be intended; or may be merely bnown:
and if merely Imown, may be known as conseqnence of
criminal or innocent intention.

Intention mny be determinate or indeterminate in re¬
gard to meaai, aa weS h to mischief.


Where the knowledge is accom¬
panied with a criminal inten¬
tion: I. c. of doing or forbear¬
ing ; where act or forbearance
is criminal per le; or of pro¬
ducing by an act or forbear¬
ance, criminal or innocent per
le, a mischief other than the
one in question.


Where the knowleJge is not so
accompanied: act or forbear¬
ance being innocent, indepen¬
dently of the mischief in
question.

[Criminal intention not of essence
of an attempt.]


TABLE III.

(Division, p. SOl-294. Bematks on the grounds of the division, p. 995.

I. Private Crimes. Public Crimes,

[pp. 203^ 4, 6, 240.] . :


1. Against
Person.

m

2. Against
Bepntation.
[244]

3. Against
Propertv.
[245]'

1

6. Against
Condition. 1

[253] :

1

4. Against Person

5. Against Person

1

* i

end Bepntation.

and Propertv.

*

[251]

[252] '

1


Poigets breaches of contract and quasi-contract.: unless eveiy
Migatio is to be deemed a candiim (p. 207); or unless every
obligation included mpropertg; or unless every breach of an
oiligatio is included in Crimes against Trust.


Characters of the Five Classes of Crimes, p. SOO.)

Y. Crimes by Falsehood
and

Crimes against (or by breach of) Trust.* [See
pp. 204-5,218.]

[A similar class (either complete, or forming
a mgatke member of a higher or larger class,)
might be built on any of the meant (being of
the essence of the crime) through which any
crime is consummated or attempt^. S. g. Fit,
conspiracy, effraction, etc.]

♦ Feuerbach, p. 323. Eosshirt, p. 198.


lY. Against and by public persons
in their public ehacactos.
[210-283]


[203-4]


Against the Public or Community,
as considered generally and inde¬
terminately.


Against the Sovereign.

[9]


Against political
subordinates.


Extra- III. Self-regarding [209-
regarding. Hi,etpoitpatti>ii].


IS

>

10


Against Exter- Against Against Pre-
nal Security. Justice, ventive Police.

(1.) (9.) (S.)


lY. Mlic
[210-283].


II. Semi-public [208-243,


Against Bene- Against Mill- Against the
I ficent Police, tary Force.

(5.) (4.)


i .1 I

Against Against the Agai
venue of the State. Population. National Wealth. Beligion.

( 6 ) ( 7 -) ( 8 .) ( 10 .)


Against the National Interests in general (11).

AU Ihefgurei m thit Table refer to Beniham'i Prineiplei of Morali and Legitlaim, ito edition 1789.—& A.


ON THE USES

or

THE STUDY OE JUEISPEUDENCE.


347


'rni!! matter of the following Essay is chiefly taken from the
Opening Lectures of the two several Courses delivered by Mr.
Austin at the Loudon University and at the Inner Temple. The
first ten lectures of the former and longer Course wpre published
(gi’catly altered and expanded) by the Author, in a volume bear*
ing tlic title of'The Province of Jurisprudence Determined;*
which has beei^ republished since his death. The form and
character which he gave to that work rendered an Introductory
Lecture superfluous and inappropriate. It was consequently
omitted; nor was there any use or place assigned to it.

It is evident that a discourse of the kind could not, with any
fitness, be prefixed to the subsequent Lectures of that Course,
now first published.

•the second Opening Lecture was likewise necessarily excluded .
by the Author’s arrangement; according to which the lectures
delivered at the Inner Temple were (as I have said elsewhere)
incorporated with the previous ‘and longer Course. Like the
former, this therefore remained without any designated place.

Such however, I knew, was Mr. Austin’s sense of the import¬
ance of the study of Jurisprudence, that if he had completed any
work containing the full expression of his opinions, all that is
here gathered together (and probably much more) would doubt¬
less have been urged in favour of its cultivation. I have there-
ibre thought it right to preserve and to consolidate whatever was
of permanent value in these two Introductory Lectures, and have
incorporated with them some fragments on the subject of which
they treat. In this instance, and in this alone, I have presumed
to make some slight changes in the form of what he wrote; I
have united the two discourses, the subject and purport of which


348


JUBISFBUDENCE.


u the Bamfij into one continuous Essay; omitting inevitable re¬
petitions and supplying a few links from other sources.

.' The Table at the end does not belong to either Lecture, nor
to any part oi the matter above described. T found it among
loose scraps, with no mark or reference as to its destination.
Perhaps it belonged to a few notes relating to the work ** On
the Principles and Belations of Jurisprudence and Ethics,'* which
he meditated.* As it gives a brief but comprehensive view of
his Idea of the course of study necessary to the forming of an
accomplished Lawyer or Statesman, it seemed to find its place
with this Essay.

* See Vol. I., Frcfuce, p. xriv.


349


- ON K

THE STUDY OF JURISPEUDENCE.


The appropriate Subject of Jurisprudence, in any of its
different departments, is positive law: Meaning by posi'
tive law (or law emphatically so called), law established or
“positura,” in an independent political community, by the
express or tacit authority of its sovereign or supreme go¬
vernment.

Considered as a whole, and as implicated or connected
with one another, the positive laws and rules of a particu¬
lar or specified community, arc a system or body of law.
And as limited to any one of such systems, or to any of its
component parts, jurisprudence is particular or national.

Though every system of law has its specific and charac¬
teristic differences, there are principles, notions, and dis¬
tinctions common to various systems, and forming analo¬
gies dr likenesses by which such systems are allied.

Many of these common principles are common to all
systems;—^to the scanty ailtt crude systems of rude societies,
and the ampler and maturer systems of refined communi¬
ties. But the ampler and maturer systems of refined com¬
munities are allied by the numerous analogies which obtain
between all systems, and also by numerous analogies which
obtain exclusively between themselves. Accordingly, the
various principles common to-matyrer systems (or the va¬
rious analogies obtaining between them), are the subject of
an extensive science: which science (as contradistinguished
to national or particular jurisprudence on one side, and.


350


ON THE 8TUDT OF


on another, to the science of legislation,) has been named
General (or comparative) Jurisprudence, or the philosophy
(or general principles) of positive law.

As principles abstracted from positive systems arc tlic
subject of general jurisprudence, so is the exposition of*such
principles its exclusive or appropriate object. With the
goodness or badness of laws, as tried by the test of utility
(or by any of the various tests which divide the opinions
of mankind), it has no immediate concern. If, in regard to
some of the principles which form its appropriate subject,
it adverts to considerations of utility, it adverts to such
considerations for the purpose of explaining such principles,
and not for the purpose of determining their worth. And
this distinguishes the science in question from the science
of legislation: which alfects to determine the test or stan¬
dard (together with the principles subordinate or consonant
to such test) by which positive law ought to be made, or
to which positive law ought to be adjusted.

If the possibility of such a science appear doubtful, it
arises from this; that in each particular system, the prin¬
ciples and distinctions which it has in common with others,
are complicated with its individual peculiarities, and are ex¬
pressed in a technical language peculiar to itself.

It is not meant to be affirmed that these principles and.
distinctions are conceived with equal exactness and ade¬
quacy in every particular system. In this respect, different
systems differ. But in aU, they are to be found more or
less nearly conceived; from the rude conceptions of barba¬
rians, to the exact conceptions of the Roman lawyers or of
enlightened modern junsts.*

■* Universal Jurisprudettcc is the science of the Jm Gentium of the
Boman Lawyers, as expounded by Gains.

Mr. Beiitham is of opinion that it must be confined within very narrow
bounds. This is true, if by expositoiy Universal Jurisprudence he in¬
tended, Jurisprudence expositoiy of that which obtains universally as Law.

For (1®) Assuming that the systems of all nations, wholly or in part,
exactly resembled each other (t. e. that all or many of the provisions to be


JURISPRUDENCE.


851


I mean, then, by General Jurisprudence, the science
concenicd with the exposition of the principles, notions,
and distinctions which are common to systems of law: un>
dcrstanding by systems of law, the ampler and maturer sys¬
tems which, by reason of their amplitude and maturity, arc
pre-eminently pregnant with instruction.

Of the principles, notions^ and distinctions which are the
subjects of general jurisprudence, some may be esteemed
necessary. For we cannot imagine coherently a system of
law (or a system of law as evolved in a refined community),
without conceiving them as constituent parts of it.

Of these necessary principles, notions, and distinctions, I
will suggest briefly a few examples.

1®. The notions of Duty, Right, Liberty, Injury, Punish¬
ment, Redress; with their various relations to one an¬
other, and to Law, Sovereignty, and Independent Political
Society:

2®. The distinction between written or ^romulged, and
unwritten or unpromulged law, in the jundical or improper
senses attributed to the opposed expressions; in other
words, between law proceeding immediately from a sove¬
reign or supreme maker, and law proceeding immediately
from a subject or subordinate maker (with the authority of
a sovereign or supreme):

3**. The distinction of Rights, into rights availing against


found in those several systems were exactly alike), still we could not speak
of them with propriety as forming a Universal Law; the sanction being
appped hjf the government of each commmitg, and not by a superior com¬
mon to all mankind. And this (as we shall sec hereafter) ranks inter¬
national law with morals rather than with law.

(2**) As is observed by Mr. Bentham, the provisions of different systems
are never precisely alike; the only parts in which they agree exactly, being
those leading expressions which denote the necessary ports of eveiy system
of law. E.g. The Bights of husbands, wives, etc.; the law relating to
easements here and eervitndu in France, resemble or arc analogous; but
are still not precisely alike cither in matter or form, and therefore cannot
be described by the same form of words.


352 ON THK STUDY OP

tKe world at large (as, for example, property or domiDion),
and rights availing exclusively against persons specifically
determined (as, for example, rights from contracts):

4°. The distinction of rights availing against the world
at large, into property or dominion, and the variously re¬
stricted rights which are carved out of property or dominion:

5®. The distinction of Obligations (or of duties correspond¬
ing to rights against persons specifically determined,) into
obligations which arise from contracts, obligations wliich
arise from injuries, and obligations which arise from inci¬
dents that are neither contracts nor injuries, but which are
styled analogically obligations “ quasi ex contractu

6®. The distinctions of Injuries or Delicts, into civil in¬
juries (or private delicts) and crimes (or public delicts); with
the distinction of civil injuries (or private delicts) into
torts, or delicts (in the strict acceptation of the term), and
breaches of obligations from contracts, or of obligations
** quasi ex contractu.”

It will, I believe, be found, on a little examination and
reflection, that every system of law (or every system of law
evolved in a refined community) implies the notions and
distinctions which I how have cited as examples; together
with a multitude of conclusions imported by those notions
and distinctions, and drawn from them, by the builders of
the system, through inferences nearly inevitable.

Of the principles, notions, and distinctions which are the
subjects of General Jurisprudence, others are not necessary
(in the sense which I have given to the expression). We
may imagine coherently an expanded system of law, withbut
conceiving them as constituent parts of it. But as they
rest upon grounds of utility which extend through all com¬
munities, and which are palpable or obvious in all refined
communities, they in fact occur very generally in matured
systems of law; and therefore may be ranked properly with
the general principles which are the subjects of general
jurisprudence.


JURISPRUDENCE.


353


Such, for example, is the distinction of law into “jus
personarum” and “jus rerum*’: the principle of the scientific
^angcment given to the Roman Law by the authors of
the elementary or institutional treatises from which Justi¬
nian’s. Institutes were copied and compiled. The distinc¬
tion, I believe, is an arbitrarily assumed basis for a scien¬
tific arrangement of a body of law. But being a com¬
modious basis for an arrangement of a body of law, it has
been very generally adopted by those who have attempted
such arrangements in the modern European nations. It
has been very generally adopted by the compilers of the
authoritative Codes which obtain in some of those nations,
and by private authors of expository treatises on entire
bodies of law. Nay, some who have mistaken the import
of it, and who have contemptuously rejected it, as denoted
by the obscure antithesis of “jus personarum et rerum,”
have yet assumed it under other (and, certainly more ap¬
propriate) names, as the basis of a natural arrangement.
Meaning, I presume, by a natural arrangement, an arrange¬
ment so commodious, and so highly and obviously commodi¬
ous, that any judicious methodizer of a body of law would
naturally (or of course) adopt it.

But it will be impossible, or useless to attempt an exposi¬
tion of these principles, notions and distinctions until, by
careful analysis, wc have accurately determined thew meaning
of certain leading terms w^ich we must necessarily em¬
ploy ; terms which recur incessantly in every department of
the science: which, whithersoever we turn ourselves, we are
sure to encounter. Such, for instance, 81*6 the following:
Law, Eight, Obligation, Injury, Sanction *. Person, Thing, ■
Act, Forbearance. Unless J^he import of these ore deter¬
mined at the outset, the subsequent speculations will bo a
tissue of uncertain tal]^.

It is not unusual with writers who call and think them¬
selves “ institutional^*" to take for granted, that they know
the meaning of these terms, and that the meaning must be


854


ON THE STUDY OF


known by those to whom they address themselves. Misled
by a fallacious test, they fancy that the meaning is simple
and certain, because the expressions are familiar. Not
pausing to ask their import, not suspecting that their im¬
port can need inquiry, they cast them before the reader with¬
out an attempt at explanation, and then proceed (without
ceremony) to talk abopt them and about them.

These terms, nevertheless, are beset with numerous
ambiguities ; their meaning, instead of being simple, is ex¬
tremely complex: and every discourse w'hich embraces Law
as a whole, should point distinctly at those ambiguities,
and should sever that complex meaning into the simpler
notions which compose it.

Many of those who have written upon Law, have defined
these expressions. But most of their definitions are so
constructed, that, instead of shedding light upon the thing
defined, they involve it in thicker obscurity. In most at¬
tempts to define the terms in question, there is all the
pedantry without the reality of logic: the form and husk,
without the substance. The pretended definitions are
puiely circular: turning upon the very expressions which
tliey afiect to elucidate, or upon expressions which are ex¬
actly equivalent.

In trutl^ some of these terms will not admit of definition
in the formal or regular manner. And as to the rest, to
define them in that manner,is utterly useless. For the
terms which enter into the abridged and concise definition,
need as much elucidation as the very expression which is
defined.

The import of the terms in question is extremely com¬
plex. Thej are short marks for long series of propositions.
And, what aggravates the difficulty of explaining their
meaning clearly, is the intimate audjndissoliible connection
which subsists between them. To state the'signification, of
each, and to show the relation in which it stands to the
others, is not a thing to be accomplished by short and


JURISPRUDENCE. 355

disjointed definitions, but demands a dissertation, long, in¬
tricate and coherent.

For example; Of Laws or Rules there are various
classes. Now these classes ought to be carefully dis¬
tinguished. For the confusion of them under a common
name, and the consequent tendency to confound Law and
Morals, is one most prolific source of jargon, darkness, and
perplexity. By a careful analysis of leading terms, law is
detached from morals, and the attention of the student of
jurisprudence is confined to the distinctions and divisions
which relate to law exclusively.

But in order to distinguish the various classes of laws,, it
is necessary to proceed thus:—To exhibit, first, the resem¬
blance between them, and, then, their specific diflPercnccs:
to state why they are ranked under a common expression,
and then to explain the marks hy whieji they are distin¬
guished. Till this is accomplished, the appropriate sub¬
ject of Jurispnidence is not discernible precisely. It does
not stand out. It is not sufficiently detached from the re¬
sembling or analogous objects with which it is liable to be
confounded.

Thus, for example, in order to establish the distinction
between Written and Unwritten Law, \ve must scrutinize
the nature of the latter; a question which is full of diffi¬
culty ; and w’hich has hardly been examined with the re¬
quisite exactness, by most of the writers who have turned
their attention to the subject. I find it much vituperated,
and I find it as much extolled; but I scarcely find an
endeavour to determine what it is. But if this humbler
object were well investigated, most of the controversy about
its merits would probably subside.

To compare generally, or in the abstract, the merits of
the two species, would be found useless: and the expedi¬
ency of the process which has been styled Codification,
would resolve itself into a question of time, place, and cir¬
cumstance.


356


ON THE STUDY OF


The word JurispradeDce itself is not free from ambigaity;
it has been used to denote—

The knowledge of Law as a science, combined with the
art or practical habit or skill of applying it; or, secondly.

Legislation;—the science of what ov^hl to he done to¬
wards making good laws; combined with the art of doing it.

Inasmuch as the knowledge of what ought to be, supposes
a knowledge of what is, legislation supposes jurisprudence,
but jurisprudence does not suppose legislation. What
laws have been and are, may be known without a knowledge
of what they ought to be. Inasmuch as a knowledge of what
ought to be, is bottomed on a knowledge of antecedents
copnato genefOt legislation supposes jurisprudence.

With us, Jurisprudence is the science 'of what is essen¬
tial to law, combined with the science of what it ought
to be.* It is particular or universal. Particular Juris¬
prudence is the science of any actual system of law, or of
any portion of it. The only practical jurisprudence is par¬
ticular.

The proper subject of General or Universal Jurisprudence
(as distinguished from Universal Legislation) is a descrip¬
tion of such subjects and ends of Law as are common to
all systems; and of those resemblances between different
systems which are bottomed in the common nature of man,
or correspond to the resembling points in theii* several
positions.

And these resemblances will be found to be very close,
and to cover a large part of the field. They are necessarily
confined to the resemblances between the systems of a few
nations; since it is only a few systetns with which it is pos¬
sible to become acquainted, even imperfectly. From these,
however, the rest may be presumed. ' And it is only the
systems of two or three nations which deserve attention;
—the writings of the Roman Jurists; the decisions of En-

* For its meaning in the sense of the French, see Blondeau, Bnpin, and
others.


JURISPRUDENCE.


357 ^


glish Judges in modern times ; the provisions of FreneJj and
Prussian Codes as to arrangement. Though the points are
also few in which the laws of nations ought to be the
same (t. e. precisely alike), yet there is much room for uni¬
versal legislation ; i. e. the circumstances not precisely alike
may be treated of together, in respect of what they have in
common ; with remarks directed to their ditferences. Whe¬
ther the principles unfolded deserve the name of Universal
or not, is of no importance. Juris])ru(ihBnce may be univer¬
sal with respect to its subjects: Not less so than legislation.


It IS irnimssible to consider Junspriidence quite inevitabio

. I : (and Koni«'-

apart from Jjcgislation ; since the inducements or times iinpn-
considerations of expediency which lead to the CIltilHl of
establishment of laws, must be adverted to in iffiuriJi
explaining their origin and mechanism. If the
causes of laws and of the rights and obligations which they
create, be not assigned, the laws themselves are unintel¬
ligible.

Where the subject is the same, but the provisions of dif¬
ferent systems with respect to that subject arc different, it
is necessary to assign the causes of the difference; whether
they consist in a necessary diversity of circumstances, or
ill a diversity of views on the part of their respective au¬
thors with reference to the ends of Law. Thus, the rejec¬
tion or limited reception of entails in one system, and their
extensive reception in another, arc partly owing to the dif¬
ferent circumstances in which the communities are placed;
—partly to the different views of the aristocratic and de¬
mocratic legislators by whom these provisions have been
severally made.

So far as these differences are inevitable—are imposed
upon different countries—there can be no room for praise
or blame. Where they are the effect of choice, there is
room for praise or blame; but 1 shall treat them not as
subjects of either, but as cattses explaining the existence of

VOL. III. 2 B


858


ON THE STUDY OF


the differences. So of the admission or prohibition of di¬
vorce—Marriages within certain degrees, etc.

Wherever an opinion is pronounced upon the merits and
demerits of Law, an impartial statement of the conflicting
opinions-should be given. The teacher of Jurisprudence
may have, and probably has, decided opinions of his own;
but it may be questioned whether earnestness be less fa¬
vourable to impartiality than indifference; and he ought not
to attempt to iusinwate his opinion of merit and demerit
under pretence of iwsigning causes. In eertain cases which
do not try-the passions (as rescission of contract for in¬
adequacy of consideration) he may, with advantage, offer opi¬
nions upon merits and demerits. These occasional excur¬
sions into the territory of Legislation, may serve to give a
specimen of the manner in which such questions should be
treated. This particularly applies to Codifleation : a ques¬
tion which may be agitated with safety, because everybody
must admit that Law ought to be known, whatever he may
think of the provisions of which it ought to consist.

Attempting to expound the principles which are the sub¬
ject of the science of Jurisprudence (or rather to expound
as many of them as a limited Course of Lectures will* em¬
brace), he must not only try to state them in general or
abstract expressions, but must also endeavour to illustrate
them by example^ from particular systems: especially by ex¬
amples from the Law of England, and from the Roman or
Civil Law. > *


vwue For the following sufficient reason (to which

man Law. mauy others might be added), the Roman or
Civil Law is, of dl particular systems, other fSin the Law
of England, the best of the sources from whiejii siich illus¬
trations might be drawn.

In some of the nations of modern Continental Europe
(as, for example, in France), the actual system of law
is mainly of Roman descent; and in.others of the same


JURISPRUDENCE.


359


nations (as, for example, in the States of Germany), the
actual system of law, though not descended from the Ro¬
man, has been closely assimilated to the Roman by large
importations from it.

Accordingly, in most of the nations of modern Conti¬
nental Europe, much of the substance of the actual system,
and much of the technical language in which it is clothed,
is derived from the Roman Law, and without some know¬
ledge of the Roman Law, the technical language is unintel¬
ligible; whilst the order or arrangement commonly given
to the system, imitates the exemplar of a scientific arrange¬
ment whieh is presented by the Institutes of Justinian.
Even in our own country, a large portion of the Eccle¬
siastical and Equity, and some (though a smaller) portion
of the Common, Law, is derived immediately from the Ro¬
man J^aw, or from the Roman through the Canon.

Nor has the influence of the Roman Law been limited to
the positive laykr of the modern European nations. For the
technical language of this all-reaching system has deeply
tinctured the language of the international law or mora¬
lity which those nations affect to observe. By drawing,
then, largely for examples on the Roman or Civil Law, an
expositor of General Jurisprudence (whilst illustrating his
appropriate subject) might present an idea of a system
which is a key to the international morality, the diplomacy,
and to much of the positive law, of modern civilized com¬
munities.

It is much to be regretted that the study of the Roman
I^aw is neglected in this, country, and that the real merits
of its founders and expositors are so little understood.

Much "been talked of the philosophy of the Roman
InStitutionu writers. Of. familiarity with Grecian philo¬
sophy there are few traces in their writings, and the little
that they have borrowed from that source is the veriest
foolishness: for example, their account of Jus naturak, in
which they confound law with animal instincts; law, with

2 B 2


360


ON THE STUDY OF


all those wants and necessities of mankind which are causes
of its institution.

Nor is the Roman law to be resorted to as a magazine
of legislative wisdom. The great Roman Lawyers are, in
truth, expositors of a positive or technical system.' Not
Lord Coke himself is more purely technical. Their real
merits lie in their thorough mastciy of that system; in their
command of its principles; in the readiness with which
they recall, and the facility and certainty with which they
apply them.

In support of my own opinion of these great w'ritcrs I
shall quote the authority of two of the most eminent Jurists
of modern times.

“The permanent value of the Corpus Juris Civilis/’ says
Mck, “ does not lie in the Decrees of the Emperors, but in
the remains of juiistical literature which have been pre¬
served in the Pandects. Nor is it so much the matter of
these juristical writings, as the scicntitic metjiod employed
by the authors in explicating the notions and maxims with
wdiich they have to deal, that has rendered them models to
all succeeding ages, and pre-eminently fitted them to pro¬
duce and to devclope those qualities of the mind which arc
requisite to form a Jurist.”*

And Savigny says, “ It has been showm above, that, in
our science, all results depend on the possession of leading
principles; and it is exactly this possession upon which the
greatness of the Roman jurists rests. The notions and
maxims of their science do not appear to them to be the
creatures of their own will; they are actual beings, with
whose existence and genealogy they have become familiar
from long and intimate intercourse. Hence their whole
method of proceeding has a certainty which is fottnd no¬
where else except in mathematics, and it may be said with¬
out exaggeration th{it they calculate with Ibeir ideas. If
they have a case to decide, they begin by acquiring the most

* Jurist. Encyc., cap. ii. $ lOP.


JUBISFRUOENCE.


861


vivid and distinct perception of it, and we see before pur
eyes the rise and progress of the whole affair, and all the
ciianges it undergoes. It is as if this particular case were
the germ whence the whole science was to be developed.
Hence, with them, thcoi-y and practice are not in fact dis¬
tinct ; their theory is so thoroughly worked out as to be
lit for immediate application, and their practice is uniformly
ennobled by scientific treatment. In every principle they
SCO a case to which it may be applied; in every ease, the
rule by which it is determined; and in the facility with
which they pass from the general to the particular and the
particular to the general, their mastery is indisputable.”*

In consequence of this mastery of principles, of their
perfect consistency (‘* elcgantia”t) and of the clearness of
the method in which they are arranged, there is no positive
system of law which it is so easy to seize as a whole. The
smallness of its volume tends to the same end.

The principles themselves, many of them being derived
from barbarous ages, are indeed ill fitted to the ends •of
law; and the conclusions at which they arrive being logical
consequences of their imperfect principles, necessarily par¬
take of the same defect. X

A siilmrdiiiarc merit of the Roman lawyers is their style,
always simple and clear, commonly brief and nervous, and
entirely free from nihr. Its merits are appropriate and in
perfect taste. It bears the same relation to that of Black-
stone and Gravina, which a Grecian statue bears to a milli¬
ner’s doll in the finery of the season.

I by no means mean to put the study of the Homan
Law on a level in point of importance with that of the Aris-


* ]4hir, etc., cap. iv. p. 30.

f l?or this application of the word “clegantia” see Vol. II. p. 231.
t “ Quan(|uam non idco couclusioncs semper probern, qiiu: smpc ducun-
tur ex quibusdam veteris persnasionis- apicibus, opiin'one conscerniis.”—
J^ibuitZy Epist. ad KzHiaerum. This is the couclusion of the sentence
quoted at p. 27.


862


ON THE STUDY OF


totelic Logic (for the Roman Law is not necessary ): but in
the respect now under consideration, it bears the same rela¬
tion to law and morals, which the school logic bears to phi¬
losophy.

The number of the analogies between the Roman Law
and many of the Continental systems, and between the
Roman and English Law, is not indeed to be wondered at:
since those Continental systems and also our own system of
Equity, have been formed more or less extensively on the
Roman law j chiefly on the Roman, through the Canon.
Rut the English law, like the Roman, is for the most part,
indigenous, or comparatively little has been imported into it
from the Roman. The coincidences show how numerous
.are the principles and distinctions which all systems of law
have in common. The extensive coincidence of particular
systems may be ascertained practically by comparing two
expositions of any two bodies of law. The coincidence is
pre-eminently remarkable in the Roman Law and the Com¬
mon Law of England.


Having stated generally the nature of the
risprudenoo. science of Jurisprudence, and also the manner in
which I think it ought to be expounded, I proceed to in¬
dicate briefly a few of its possible uses.

I w'ould remark, in the first place, that a well-grounded
study of the principles which form the subject of the science,
would be an advantageous preparative for the study:; of
English Law.

To the student who begins the study of the English law,
without some previous knowledge of the rationale ^ law
in general, it naturally appears an assemblage of arbitrary
and unconnected rules. But if he approached it with a
well-grounded knowledge of the general principles of juris¬
prudence, and with the map of a body of law distinctly im-


JURISPRUDENCE.


863


pressed upon his mind, he might obtain a clear conception
of it (as a system or organic whole) with comparative ease
and rapidity.

With comparative ease and rapidity, he might perceive
the various relations of its various parts; the dependence
of its minuter rules on its general principles; and the sub¬
ordination of such of these principles as are less general
or extensive, to siTch of them as arc more general, and run
through the whole of its structure.

In short, the preliminary study of the general principles
of jurisprudence, and the mental habits which the study of
them.tends to engender, would enable him.to acquire the
principles of English jurisprudence, in particular, far more
Sf)ecdily and accurately than he possibly could have acquired
them, in case he had begun the study of them without the
preparative discipline.

There is (1 believe) a not unprevalent opinion, that the
study of the science whose uses 1 am endeavouring to de-
nK)nstrate, might tend to disqualify the student for the
practice of the law, or. to inspire him with an aversion from
the practice of it. That some who have studied this science
have showm themselves incapable of practice, or that some
who have studied this science have conceived a di'sgust of
practice, is not improbably a fact. But in spite of this
seeming experience in favour of the opinion in question, I
deny that the study itself has the tendency which the opi¬
nion imputes to it.

A well-grounded knowledge of the general principles of
jmispmdence helps, as I have said, to a well-grounded know¬
ledge of the principles of English jurisprudence; and a pre¬
vious well-grounded knowledge of the principles of English
jurisprudence, can scarcely incapacitate the student for the
acquisition of practic^ knowledge, in the chambers of a
conveyancer, ple^ider, or draftsman. Armed with that previ¬
ous knov^ledge, he seizes the rationale of the practice which
he there witnesses and partakes in, with comparative ease


S64


ON THE STUDY OF


and rapidity; and his acquisition of practical knowledge,
and practical dexterity and reacHness, is much less irksome
than it would be in case it were merely empirical. Inso¬
much, that the study of the general principles of jurispru¬
dence, instead of haying any of the tendency which the
opinion in question imputes to it, has a tendency (by ulti¬
mate consequence) to qualify for practice, and to lessen the
natural repugnance with which it is regafded by beginners.

miotSiin advaiitiige of the study of common prin-

Priissia. ciplcs aiid distinctions, and of history considered
as a preparative for the study of one’s own particular sys¬
tem, is fully appreciated in Prussia; a country whose ad¬
ministrators, for practical skill, are at least on a level with
those of any country in Europe.

In the Prussian Universities, little or no attention is given
by the Law Paculty to the actual law of the comitry.
Their studies are wholly or almost entirely confined to the
general principles of Law; to the Roman, Canon, and
Feudal law, as the sources of the actual system ; the Go¬
vernment trusting that those who arc acquainted with such
general principles and with the historical basis of the actual
system, will acquire that actual system more readily, as well
as more groundedly, than if they had at once set dowm to
the study of it, or tried to acquire it empirically.

“ In the Prussian states,” says Von Savigny, 1.* ever since
the establishment of the Landrecht, no order of study has
ever been prescribed; and this freedom from restraint, sanc¬
tioned by the former experience of the German universities,
has never been infringed upon. Even the number of pro^s-
sors, formerly required on account of the Common Law
{Gemeines liccht), has not been reduced, and the curators
of the univei-sitics have never led either the professors or
the students to believe, that a part qf the lectures, formerly
necessary, were likely to be dispensed with. Originally it
was thought advisable, that, in each university, one chair
at least should be set apart for the Prussian law, and a


JUKISPRUDEXCE.


365


considerable prize was offered for the best manual. But
even this was subsequently no longer required; and up to
the present time the Prussian law has not been taught at
the university of Berlin. The established laminations are
formed upon the same principle ; the first, on the entrance
into real matters of business, turning exclusively on the
coimnon law : the next period is set apart for the directly-
practical education of the jurisconsults; and the two fol¬
lowing examinations arc the first that have the Landrccht
for their subject-matter; at the same time, however, with¬
out excluding the common law. At present, therefore,
juridical education is considered to consist of two halves;
the first half (the university) including only^ the learned
groundwork, the second, on the other hand, having for its
object the knowledge of the Landrccht, the knowledge of
the Prussian procedure, and practical skill.’**

The opinion I have expressed was that of IIalc,Mansfield,t
and others (as evinced by their practice), and was recom¬
mended by Sir William Blackstonc, some eighty years ago.|
Backed by such authority, I think I may conclude that
the science in question, if taught and studied skilfully and
effectually, and with the requisite detail, would be no incon¬
siderable help to the acquisition of English Law.

1 may also urge the utility of acquiring the talent of
seizing or divining readily the principles and provisions
(through the mist of a strange phraseology) of other sys¬
tems of law, were it only in a mere practical point of view :
P. With a view to practice, or to the administration of

•

• Von Savigny, Beruf, etc., Hayward’s Translation, p. 165,
f “ Lord Hale often said, the true grounds and reasons of law were so
well delivered in the (Koinan) Digests, tliut a man could never understand
law as a science so well as by seeking it there, and therefore lanientccl
much that it was so little stj^idied iu England.”— BnrnH'i Life, p. 7.

X Blackstoue recommends the study of tlie Law of Nature, and of the
lioman Law, in counection with the study of the particular grounds of
our own.' By liaw of Natiirc, etc , he seems to mean the very study whfdi
I am now commending.


366


ON THE STUDY OF


justice in those of our foreign dependencies wherein foreign
systems of law more or less obtain. 2®. With a view.to the
systems of law founded on the Roman directly, or through
the Canon or tl^e Roman, which even at home have an ap¬
plication to certain classes of objects. 3°. With a view to
questions arising incidentally,, even in the Courts which ad¬
minister indigenous law. 4°. With a view to the questions
in the way of appeal coming before the Privy Council; A
Court which is bound to decide questions arising out of
numerous system's, without the possibility of judges or ad¬
vocates having any specific knowledge of them : an evil for
which a familiarity with the general principles of law on
the part of the Court and advocates is the only conceivable
palliative.

For, certainly, a man familiar w^ith such principles, as
detached from any particular systems, avid accustomed to
seize analogies, will be less puzzled with Mahommedan or
Hindoo institutions, than if he knew them only in comrclo,
as they are in his own system; nor would he be quite so
inclined to bend every Hindoo institution to the model of
his own.

And (secondly) without some familiarity with foreign
systems, no lawyer can or will appreciate accurately the de¬
fects or merits of his own.

And as a well-grounded knowledge of the science whose
uses I am endeavouring to demonstrate, would facilitate to
the student the acquisition of the English Law, so would it
enable him to apprehend, with comparative ease and rapidity,
almost any of the foreign systems to which he might direct
his attention. So numerous, as I have said, are the prin¬
ciples common to systems of law, that a lawyer who has
mastered the Jaw which obtains in his ^wn country, has
mastered implicitly most of the substance of the law which
obtains in any other community. So that the difficulty with
which a lawyer, versed in the law of his- own country, appre¬
hends the law of another, is rather the result of differences


JUKI8PRUDENCB.. 367

between the termsiof the systems, than of substantial or
real differences between their maxims and rules.

Now the obstacle to the apprehension of foreign systems
which is opposed by their technical language, might in part
be obviated or lightened to the student of General Jurispn^
dence, if the science were expounded to him competently, in
the method which 1 shall endeavour to observe. If the ex-
position'of the science were made agreeably to that method,
it would explain incidentally the leading terms, as well as
the leading principles, of the Roman or Civil Law. And
if the student were possessed of those terms, and were also
grounded thoroughly in the law of his own country, he
would master with little difficulty the substance of the Ro¬
man system, and of any of the modern systems which are
miiinly derivatives from the Roman.

It has, I perceive, been maintained by some able and dis¬
tinguished persons, that the jurisdiction of the Ecclesiastical
Courts ought to be extended, in order that the ecclesiasticlfl
bar may not be extinguished, and that a sufficient supply
of Civilians may be secured to the country.

The importance of securing the existence of a body of
lawyers, with a somewhat extensive knowledge of the Civil
Law, is not to be disputed. Questions aiise incidentally
in all our tribunals, on systems of foreign law, which are
mainly founded on the Civil. The law*obtaining in some
of our colonies is principally derived from the same origi¬
nal. And questions arising directly out of colonial law, are
brought before the Privy Council' in the way of appeal.
In order that these vaVious questions may be justly decided,
and in order that the law of these colonics may be duly
administered, the existence of a body of English lawyers,
with a somewhat extensive knowledge of the Civil Law, is
manifestly requisite.

But 1 think it will be questioned by all who are versed
in the Civil Law, whether a well-grounded study of the
principles of the Law of England, of the rationale of law


368


ON THE STUDY OF


in general, and of the leading principles and terms of the
Homan system itself, be not a surer road to the acquisition
of this knowledge, than the study of Ecclesiastical Low, or
practice at the ecclesiastical bar.

s

Before I proceed further, it will be proper that I should
describe what is, in my opinion, the education necessary to
form a Lawyer.

Training of a In order to the formation of a thcoretico'prac-
Lawjcr. extciisivcly versed in law as a science,

and in the sciences related to law—such a.man as were alone
capable of advancing the science, and of conceiving sound
legislative reforms—he must begin early to attend to these
studies, and must be satisfied with a limited attention to
other sciences.

The languages of classical antiquity arc almost indispen¬
sable helps to all sound acquirements in Politics, Jurispru-
Jence, or any of the Moral Sciences. They are also re¬
quisite for the formation of those elevated sentiments, and
that rectitude of judgment and taste, which are inseparably
.connected with them. These languages may be acquired,
and in fact are acquired, when well acquired, in early youth.

But with regard to mathematics, (except in as far as the
methods of investigation and proof are concerned, and
which would form a branch of a w'ell-conccivcd course cf
logic,) I cannot see why men intended for law^or for
public life, should study them: or why any men should
study them, who have not a peculiar vocation to them, or
to some science or art in which they are extensively applib-
able. To all other men, the advantages derivable from them,
aa a gymnastic to the mind, might be derived (at least in
a great measure) from a well-conceived course of logic:
into which, indeed, so much of mathematics as would suf¬
fice to give those advantages, would naturally enter. ^

Logic is a necessary preparation to the study of the
niora^ sciences, where the ambiguity of the terms (especially


JURISPRUDENCE


369


that which consists in their varying extension), the number
of collective names (apt to be confounded with existences),
and the elliptical form in which the reasoning is expressed,
render a previous familiarity with the nature of terms and
the process of reasoning absolutely necessary. In pure ma¬
thematics, and in the sciences to which these arc largely
applied, a previous acquaintance with the nature of induc¬
tion, generalization and reasoning may not be so necessary;
because the terms are definite, the premisses few and for-
•inally introduced, and the consequences'deduced at length.
But to those who have not titnc to discipline their minds by
this most ])crfect exemplification of these processes, a pre¬
vious acqnnintancc with logic is absolutely necessary. In¬
deed, considering the sort of difficulties which beset moral
dis(]uisitions, logic is a better prcj)aration than the matlie-
inntics or the physical sciences; which are not the theory of
these mental processes, but merely exemplifications of them.

With regard to lawyers in particular, it may be remarked,
that the study of the rationale of Jaw is as well (or
nearly as well) fitted as that of mathematics, to exercise
the mind to the mere process of deduction from given' hjpo-
thescs. This was the opinion of Leibnitz : no mean judge
of the relative values of the two sciences, in this respect.
Speaking of the Roman Lawyers, he says, Digestoruni
opus (vel potius auctorum, unde excerpta sunt, labores) ad¬
mirer :nec quidquam vidi, sive rationiini acumen, sive di-
cendi nervos spcctes, quod magis accedat ad Mathemati-
corum laiidem. Mii^i est vis consequentiarum, ccrtatque-
ponderi subtilitjis.”*

* Leibnitz, Kpist. acl Kcstiierum. And in tlie some epistle; “Dixi
Bcepius, post scripta Gcouictrnniin, nihil c.\tare, quod vi ac snbtilitnte cum
Komanonnn jurisconsultoruiu seriptis compantri possit, tantum nen‘i inest,
tautum profunditatis,. . . Nec uspinm juris nuturalis prKidare exoulti ube-
riora vestigia deprehendns. £t ubi ab co I'e.cessuin cst, sive ob fonnulai'um
ductus, sive ex niajorum traditis, sive ob legtis novas, ipsa* coiiseciucutiPB ex
nova hypotliesi selernis racifle rationis dictaminibus addita, inirabili iiigcnio,
ncc minore iinnitnie diducuntur. N(*c tam SEcpc a rationt* abitur qiinm
vulgo videtur.”


S70


ON THE STUDY OP


And witli regard to an accurate and a ready perception of
analogies, and the process of inference founded on analogy
(" arguiuentatio per analogiam,’* or “ analogica*’)—the basis
of all just inferences with regard to mere matter of fact
and existence,—the study of law (if rationally pursued) is, I
should think, better than that of mathematics, or of any of
the physical sciences in which mathematics are extensively
applicable. For example, the process of analogical inference
in the application of law: the process of analogical conse¬
quence from existing law, by which much of law is built
out: analogical inferences with reference to the considera¬
tion of expediency on which it is built: the principles of
judicial evidence, with the judgments formed upon evidence
in the course of practice : all these show that no study can
so form the mind to reason justly and readily from analogy
as that of law. And, accordingly, it is matter of common
remark, that lawyers are the best judges of evidence with
regard to matter of fact or existence.

And even admitting that, as a gymnastic, mathematics
may be somewhat superior to law, still it is better that
lawyers, and young men destined for public lifer should not
affect to know them extensively ; but (having acquired the
classics, and gone through a course of logic,) should, as early
as possible, bend their attention, strenuously and almost
exclusively, to General Jurisprudence, Legislation, and all
the sciences related to these, which tend more directlv to
fit them for their profession, or for practical politick

By the former, they are merely exercising (with reference
to their callings) the mental powers. By the latter, they
arc at once exercising the mental powers, and -making the
very acquisitions without which they are not adequately
fitted to exercise their callings. If 1 w^ant to go to York
on foot, I may acquire the swiftness and endurance which
would help me to my goal, by preparatory walks on the
road to Exeter. But by setting out at the commencement
for York, I am at once acquiring swiftness add endurance.


JURISPRUDEirCE. ati

and making a progress (during the acquisition) to the point
which 1 am specially aiming to reach.

These remarks will not apply to men who are gifted with
such velocity and such reach of apprehension, that they
roayjiim safely at laniversality. They merely apply to men
whose acquisitions are got by laborious attention : the only
way in which, to my apprehension, they are to be got. These
roust content themselves with moderate acquisitions, out of
the domain of the sciences bearing directly on their callings
(enough to prevent bigotry), and must begin early to master
those sciences. .1 am sorry it is so. For nothing would
give me greater pleasure than extensive knou'ledge; espe>
cially of the strict sciences. But (speaking generally) he
who would know anything well, must resolve to be ignorant
of many things.

«

And here I ‘must add that, in order to enable NeeoMty

. « 1 • for a Law

young men prepanng for the profession, to lay Faculty,
a solid basis for the acquisition (in the office of a practi¬
tioner) of jiractical skill, and for subsequent successful
practice, an institution, like the Law Faculty in the best of
the foreign universities, seems to be requisite: an institu¬
tion in which the general principles of jurisprudence and
legislation (the two including ethics generally), international
law, the history of the English law (with outlines of the
Romam Canon, and Feudal, as its three principal sources),
and til actual English la^ (as divided into fit compart¬
ments), might be taught by competent instructors.

• In such a school, young men, not intending to practise,
but destined for public life, (* ad res gerendas nati,') might
find instruction in the sciences which are requisite to legis¬
lators. Young men intended for administration (other than
that of justice) would attend the law faculty; as, on the
other hand, the men intended for law would attend the
courses on the variSlis political sciences, such as political eco¬
nomy, etc. For however great may be the utility of the study


ON THE STUDY OP


of General Jurisprudenee to lawyers generally; however ab¬
solute its necessity to lawyers entrusted with the business
of Codification, its importance to men who are destined to
take a part in the public business of the country is scarcely
inferior.

It is extremely important that a large portion of the*
aristocracy, whose station and talents destine them to the
patrician profession of practical politics, should at least be
imbued with the generalia of law, and with sound views of
legislation ; should, so far as possible, descend into the de¬
tail, and even pass some years in practice.

If the bouses of parliament abounded with laymen thus
accomplished, the demand for legal reform would be more
discriminating, and also more imperative; much bad and
crude legislation would be avoided;—opposition to plausible
projects not coming from a suspected quarter. This, in the
innovating age before, us, is no small matter. And though
lawyers, fully acquainted with system, alone are good legis-.
lators, they need perhaps a check on professional prejudices,
and even on sinister interests.

But such a check (and such an encouragement to good
lawyers) would be found in a public of laymen versed in
principles of law, and not in men ignorant of detail and
practice.

It appears to me that London possesses peculiar advan¬
tages for such a' Law Faculty. ^Iie instructors, cve^Pif not
practising lawyers, would teach under the eye and control
of practitioners : and hence would avoid many of the errors
into which the German teachers of law, excellent as they
are, naturally fall, in conse({uence of their not coming sufii-
ciently into collision with practical men. The realities with
which such men have to deal are the best correctives of
any tendency to antiquarian trifling or wild philosophy, to
which men of science might be prone, fh England, theory
would be moulded to prm^tice.


t

Besidei the diieet advantages of such an institutiqii
many incidental ones would arise.

In the first place; A juridical Hterature worthy of the
English bar.

Go^d legal treatises (and especially the most important of
any, a goodinsritutional treatise,philosophical, historical, and
dogmatical, <00 the whple of the EngHsh law) can only be
provided by noen, or by combinations of men, thoroughly
grounded imd extanrively and accurately read. Such books
might be produced by a body of men conversant (from the
duties of their office) with the subjects, but can hardly be
expected from the men who now usually make them; viz.
not lawyers of extensive knowledge, (whose practical avoca¬
tions leave them no leisure for the purpdse, although gene-
rtilly they are the only men fit for the task,) but young men,
seeking notice, and who often want the knowledge they
affect to impart.

Snch men as I assume 8 law faculty to consist of,
being ascustomed to exposition, would also produce well-
constructed and well-written books, as well os books con¬
taining the requisite information. Excellent books ore
produced by German Professors, in spite of their secluded
habits; many of them being the guides of practitioners, or
in great esteem with them (e. g. those of Professor Thibaut).'
111 England, better might be cx|)ected, for the reason al¬
ready assigned: viz. the constant view to practice forced
upon wrArs by constant collision with practical men.

Secondly; Another effect of the establishment of a Law
Faculty would be, the advancement of law and legislation as
sciences, by a body of men specially devoted to teaching
them as sciences; and able to offer useful suggestions for
the improvement (in the way of systematizing or legislating)
of actual law. For though enlightened practical lawyers
are the best legislators, they are not perhaps so good ori¬
ginators (from want of leisure for abstraction) as suck a
body as 1 have imagined. And the exertions of such men,

VOL. III. 2 c


S74 ON HHB 8TDDY

either for the advancement of Jarispmdence and Legisla¬
tion as sciences, or in the way of suggesting reforms in the
existing law, might be expected to pai^ke of the good sense
and sobriety to which the presence and castigation of prac¬
titioners would naturally form them.

How far such an institution were practicable, I have not
the means of determining. •

There would be one difficulty (at first ); that of getting
a sufficient number of teachers competent to prove the
utility of learning the sciences taught by them; masters of
their respective sciences (so far as long assiduous study
could make them so); and, moreover, mSers in the diffi¬
cult art of perspicuous, discreet, and interesting exposition;
an art very difierent from that of oratory, either in Parlia¬
ment or at the Bar. Perhaps there is not in England a
single man approaching the ideal of a good teacher of any
of these sciences. But this difficulty would be obviated, in
a few years, by the demand for such teachers; as it has
been in countries in which similar institutions have been
founded by the governments.

Another difficulty is, the general indifference, in this
country, about such institutions, and the general incredu¬
lity as to their utility. But this indifference and incre¬
dulity are happily giving way (however slowly); and I am
convinced that the importance of such institutions, with
reference to the influence and honour of the legal profes¬
sion, and to the good of the country (so much depending
on the character of that profession) will, before many years
are over, be generally felt and acknowledged.*

Encouraging symptoms have already appeared; and there
is reason to hope from these beginnings, however feeble,
that the government of the country or that the Inns of Court
will ultimately provide for law students, and for.young men
destined to public life, the requisite means of an education
fitting them for their high and important vocations.

* Written in the year 1834.


ItiftlSPEUDXNCE. . 375

Having; tried to state or suggest tbe subjects of tbe sci¬
ence of Generd Jurisprudence, with the manner in which
those subjects ought to be expounded and exempUfied ; and
having tried to demonstrate the uses which the study of
the science might produce; I would briefly remark, that
those uses are smfli as might result from the study, if tbe
science were acquired by students of law, (professional or in¬
tended for pubHc life,) with tbe requisite fulness and preci¬
sion. But from mere attendance on a Course of Lectures,
(however completely and correctly conceived, and however
clearly expressed,) the science could not be acquired with
that re(iuisite fulness and precision. It could not be so
acquired, though the lecturer brought to the task the ex¬
tensive and exact knoa ledge, the {lowers of adequate and
orderly conception, and the rare talent of clear exposition
and apt illustration, which the successful performance of
the task requires. For he could only explain adequately,
or with an approach to adequacy, some certain parts in the
whole series; filling up the gaps with mere indications of
Jhe necessary, but necessarily omitted links.


2 c 2


CODIFICATION AND LAW REFORM.


probainbty Owing to the growing bulk and intricacy
attcmptBct of the Euglish Law (a bulk and uitiicacy which

Godificktuni . • .y.. i.i

must g<y on increasing) it is most probable, nny
it is almost certain, that before many years shall have
elapsed, attempts wUl be made to systematize it, to sim¬
plify Its structure, to reduce its bulk, and so to icndir
it more accessible. Partially, such attempts have already
been made, and are actually in project. And owing to
^ the rapidity with which the accumulation of law goes on^
to the incompatibihty of many of its provisions with the
changed circumstances of society, and to the turn for
legal reform which public opinion is taking, it is most pro¬
bable, nay it is almost certain, that the necessity for such
changes will m a few years be felt or imagined, and that
such changes will be attempted, skilfully or unskilfully. Of
the expediency or inexpediency of such changes 1 presuuic
not to give an opinion. I merely affirm that changes of the
sort are in progress, and that greater changes of the saunc
sort are to be hoped or feared.

Now whether such changes shall increase or diminish the
evil, win depend upon the quality mid the degree oi the
akill which shall be brought to the task. It will depend upon
the ndniber of competent workmen who con be brought to
it I shall therefore attempt to show what are the attain¬
ments mqukite for such an undertidung. ^


AKD LAW BBPOIUIL 877

wilh reference to the techmcnl process Bcuooiutnui-
of ^recQpstructing lew^ so as to reduce its coQinMluho^
balk Atid to simplj;^ its mechanism, it j$ clear
that rysne bpt^ lawyers can be competent to it,
that none but lawycre kitiinately acquainted with the s3^tem
tp be opeiinted upon, can ever produce it with effect.

But a mere acquaintance with the actual detail of the
system, however extensive and accurate, will not suffice.
It IS necessary that those who arc called to the task should
possess that masteiy of the system considered as an orga¬
nic whole, which is the distinguishing characteristic of the
consummate lawyer. It is pre-eminently necessaiy that
they should possess clear and precise and ever-present con¬
ceptions of the fundamental pnnciples and distinctions, and
of the import of the leading expressions: That they should
have constantly before their mind a map of the law as a
whole, enabling it to subordinate the loss general under
the more general, to pciceive the relations of the parts to
pne another, and thus to travel from general to paiticular
and particular to general, and from a part to its relations
to other parts, with readiness and case: to subsume the
particular under the general, and to analyse and translate
the general into the particulars that it contains.

Nor can it be said that this talent is a mere idea. It
has been possessed by the consummate lawyers of every age
and nation. It was possessed by the Roman lawyers, and
is indeed their pre-eminent merit Each seems to be pos¬
sessed of the whole of the science; each seems to be capable
of applying its principles with equal justness and certainty.
Insomuch, that the Roman law, as formed by them, and as
contained in the excerpts from the writings of which the
Pandects constitute a part, though formed by the several
labours of several men through a long series of ages, has
ail the coherence which commonly Iselongs ,to the work of
one master mind.

It was possessed by Coke and Hale, between the former


878 coDivicATib^ ,

whom and the Roman lawyers the resemblance is striking,
though a chaoi^ in forni, the coherence of his mastery of
the roles is complete.

Without the talent which I have endeavoured to describe,
every attempt to systematize the law must, in my opinion,
be abortive, or, at least, will fall short of the intended mark.
All depends upon firin intention ; upon an accurate con¬
ception of the leading principles and distinctions, of the
subordination of the detail under those leading principles,
and of the relations of those loading principles to one an^
other. If these be accurately conceived, the faults in detail
are easily corrected. If these be conceived confusedly, the
faults are incurable.'*

It is naoreover reqviisite that a considerable number of
men qualified as I have described should exist. For a
Code cannot be the work of any one single mind. And
if the work of several, it would be incoherent, though
wrought out on a consistent plan, if not wrought out by
men, each master of the system as an organic whole, and
capable of working it out in detail consecutively. With
such men, codification would doubtless be not only possible,
but expedient; as is admitted by Von Savigny and by others
of its bitterest opponents. And that the existence of such
ii number is not impossible, is.shown by the Pandects!

The only men -to originate and accomplish, or to guide
and accomplish, legislative innovations, are enjightened prac¬
tical lawyers: combining all that philosophy can yield,
with all the indispensable supplements of philosophy
which nothing but^practice can impart. . And this appears
to be the meaning of Lord Bacon, though he mentions
•*viri civiles.”t With the practical conclusion which he

* ** Prodeiit oatem hiyus, quod nunc molior, consideiafioad demendum
apad Jiui deditos eontemtnq^'philoaophie, si videant, plariioa sui juris
kxca sine 'hiijas doctu inextricaibilem labyrinihum fere.**—
ad KesiK^M.

t ** Qat de lei^bas scripserunt, omnes, vel tainqiiam i^ilosofdii, vel tan>
^quam juriscousiUtir argumentnm illud traotsmuiit... Aique pbijbsophji*.


AND LAW llEFORM;


' 879


•deduces from this truth, 1 cannot agree. He seems to think
that “viri civiles” (meaning apparently public meii,
practical politicians) are the only fit legislators. No
less fit. And it is evident that the talents atn^ acquirements
which he supposes' in such men (and fur Which he supposes
them eminently called to the “ h^oical work” of lei^slation)
are such as can only be found in enlightened practical law¬
yers : men who combine whh an intimate* knowledge of the
existing system of law, a power and d liberal readiness to
appreciate its merit's and d^ects.

With regard to partial systematization, it.is ffeSS-**
still more necessary that it should be done by

men thus qualified. • “ncSed ’

Unless projectors are insane, every process of pi***-
Codification is wrought out on a preconceived and pre¬
viously stated plan of the whole system to be wrought upon.
Though, therefore, the workers be iiot.qiialified previously in
the manner 1 have described, the authors of the plan itself
have, by the preparation of it, disciplined themselves to the
. task in some degree. And those who execute the plan in de¬
tail have someting of a guide in the plan itself. But in the
case of bit-by-bit codification, the workmen have no plan
before them of tlie whole law. And, unless by previous
discipline, they have mastered the law to be operated upon
as an organic whole, they are working on a part inextric¬
ably connected with the rest of the whole, without any per¬
ceptions of its relations to that unexplored, or at least un¬
determined, residue.


proponaiit malta, dictii pulcbra, sed ab usu remota. Jui'iscousulti autem,
suas quisque patiise legnm, vd etiam Bomanarom, aut Pontificiaruin, pla-
oitis' obnoxii et addicti, jadicio diicero non utuntur, sed tanquam e vincu-
lis scrinocinantar. CerteoDgnitio isto ad viros dviles proprie spectnt; qui
optime norunt, quid ferat societas bumana, quid salus -populi, quid aequitas
naturaiis, quid gentium mores, quid rerumpublicarum fonnse diversse:
ideoque possint de legibus, ex principiis (it prebceptis, tam (equitatis natu-
ralU, quani politicos, decernere.”—Bacon, Ik AitgtuenHa ScieHtiarumt Pre¬
face U>\lhe Ik Eonti^m /uric, lib. vlh. chap. iii.


360


COD^flCATlON


It seems to me that codificatioii carried on in this man¬
ner, (and which, I know not why, has gotten to itself the
hwurable name of practical,) is far more rash Jthan any
conceivable scheme of a!l-compre|i,enaivc codification; and
is much more likely to engender the confusion which, it is
commonly supposed, all-comprehcusivo codification must
produce.

But the talents and knowledge requisite for such a task
cannot be acquired by a merely empirical study of our own
particular system, and by the mere habit of applying its
rules to particular cases in the course of practice. It can
only be acquired by scientific study; and the study which
I am trying to cbnimend, is of nil otiicis the best, with n
view to the acquirement of it.

The study of General Jurispmdcnce (as shown above)
has a tendency to form men qualified with the very talent
which is most requisite for systematization (or simplification),
which is the great condition “ sine quA, non ’’ of codification;
and the want of which (as is admitted by the ablest of the
opponents of codification) is tlio great difficulty in the w^iiy*
of It. It tends to fix in the mind a map of the law; so
that all its acquisitions made cui])iricaliy in the course of
practice, take their appropriate placed in a well-conceived
system; instead of forming a cliuotic aggregate of several
nncoimcctcd and merely arbitrary rules. It tends to pro¬
duce the faculty of perceiving at a glance the dependencies
of the parts of lus system, which, as I have said, is the pe¬
culiar and striking characteristic of the great and consupi-
mate lawyer.

Undoubtedly, a sufficiently accurate knowledge of detail
can only be acquired by practice founded on previous study.
But there is a wide difference between the practical tact which
suffices for the mere application of rules to practice, or for
the discovery of rules applicable to the given case, and the
adequate and clear perception of the legal system as a whole,
and of the relations of its parts, which is necessary to the


AKD LAW REFORM.


381


le^sliitor: to bim who is concerned, not with the mere a[)-
]}licBtion of niles, but with the reconstruction of such rules,
their expression and arrangement, and with the numerous
consequences with which any proposed innovation may be
pri'gnant.

The very bulk of the system is an additional reason for a
thoroughly systematic knowledge of it. Not only is an in¬
timate acquaintance necessary with its rules as taken seve¬
rally, but a perception of their relations to one another,—a
limp ever present to the mental eye, in which the depen¬
dencies of the parts, the apt place for every particular, and
the consequence of the alteration of any on any of the rest,
may be traced with certainty.

Alcrc theorists are ojit to stick in barren generalities, or
to take no correct nK*asui*e of what is practicable under ex¬
isting circumstances. Mere practitionei’s (however able as
such) ore not capable of subordinating details to generalities
and of perceiving the extent of such generalities; and more¬
over, arc incapable (from want of any standard of compari¬
son) of ajipreciating the defects of their own system, and
unwilling to amend them.

Theory and Practice arc generally supposed to be incom-
jmtible. Though this is a gross error, there are doubtless
some men to whom theory is more particularly useful;
while there are others who, in the present state of opinion,
w'onld do well to avoid it. It may be feared that those
who are not accustomed to abstract, may form hasty and
ill-founded theories ; and that those who have learned
the principles of law in a general or abstract form,' may
only bo perplexed by them w'hen they come to the details
of a positive system. Theory is a systematical statement
of rules or propositions. Pnictice,—the application of any
of these rules or propositions. Theory of what ts, and
theory of what to be, are perpetually confounded.

Hence it is customary to oppose practice to all theory; be¬
cause in many cases, theories of what on^M to are erro-


3d2


. iieoiis. j^are not founded upbu ^cc^te oltservation; upon
observai^ons tlie practitioner l^s the

op^rtiinity of Doaking. Tidd’s' woKrk is as much a theory
of mhat u, as anything that ever bore the name.


m3S*bfiS" Secondly,’ip respect of Legislation.
b?“£tenSfio Innovations, on the substance of existing law,
Lawyew. can Only be accomplished by lawyers,—whoever
may conceive and suggest them. For every innovation on
substance imports an innovation on form, though changes
in the form are not, of necessity, changes in the substance.
In respect, therefore, of changes in substance, in so far ns
they import corresponding changes in form and mechanism,
all that 1 have said about total or partifd codification or
simplification, in the way of extirpation and substitution, is
fully applicable.

With a view even to changes in substance, they ought to
originate with lawyers intimately acquainted with the sys¬
tem to be wrought upon. Or, though others may suggest
them, they ought to be submitted to the judgment of such
lawyers before they are executed. None but they can de¬
termine. how far such changes (though consonant to sound
general principles of legislation) would accord with the ac¬
tual circumstances in which the country is placed. Not to
mention, that the end of many innovations is, in truth, eften
aecom{)lished by existing law, or might be accomplished by
some slight modihcatioii of it.*

But in oi^der that even lawyers may be fitted for guiding
legislation, it is necessary that they should be lawyers who
not only possess the indispensable requisite of familiar ac-
quaitktance with the actual system, and with the actual po-
jBitibn of the country, but who also are acquainted with the
sciende of legislation; therefore, with general jurisprudence
;(induding oomparative jurisprudence) as ah integral pxtf*
tion of Icgiitiatiqn; and with ail those sc^ee^ {siibh-as
' * Utility, ia tUis respect, of the Court of Casmfion;


AXD LAW AISFORM.


883


political eootiomy) from which the science of legislation,
considered as the science of law as it should be, is in great
measure derived.

AYithout these studies, they cannot and will not appre¬
ciate impartially and justly, the merits and demerits of the
existing law, the wants of the country, the expediency or in¬
expediency of proposed innovations. Without them, they
n ill evince the “ iiiorosa morum retentio.” They will not
evince the candid readiness to admit the faults of the e\-
i.stiiig system, and to lend their aid to amend them, a Inch
is necessary to make them looked up to by the public as
the guides of legislation : a position which, with tliis readi¬
ness, (so indispensable to their guidance in all successful
U'gislution,) they infallibly would attain: a position most
honourable to the profession, and lending a dignity to all
its in'cmbers: a position which, with a view to the public
good, it is necessary they should attain. It is not in the
pow er of the profession to prevent a change, but it is in
their power to take the lead and to determine the course of
the inevitable movement: to disci’edit and crush ith the
weight of influence founded on reason and public spirit)
crude and mischievous innovations; to suggest useful inno¬
vations, and to carry useful innovations suggested by others
into successful execution.

Sound legislative reforms (or sound innovations on the
substance of the existing law) are not to be expected
from the undisciplined sagacity of mere laymen: men who
arc neither acquainted, on the one hand, with the detail of
the existing .system, nor, on the other, with the general
principles of law, with the science of legislation and witli
the sciences related to it: though suggestions from such
men may be valuable. Nor can they be expected either
from men who have acquired by mere solitary study such
general principles, or from lawyers, however extensively
acquainted with their own system, who have not qualified
themselves in the manner described.


384 ' coDiiriCAT^ON .

As is wdll i^mdrkod by Lord Bacon with regard to these
two last-mentioned classes of men, in the passage just re¬
ferred to in the *' De Augmkitis/’ mere speculators on law,
however good theii^ geneitil principles, have no.adequate
knowledge of the actual system, or of the circumstances
modifying the application of such principles, and which
must be duly appreciated before they can be applied in
practice; whilst merely practical lawyers, though never so
accurately acquainted with the actual system, and with mo¬
difying circumstances, are so fettered by prejudices in fa¬
vour of existing institutions, that they will not and cannot
perceive and admit the expediency and necessity for the
changes, which inevitable changes in the conditions of so¬
ciety are forcing upon them.

Thus, it appears clearly from the history of the English
Law that the Eejuity of the Chancellors sprang, chiefly,
from the illiberal adherence of the Common Law Courts
to the defects of the law w'hich they administered and of
the procedure by which they enforced it. If they had suc¬
cessively adjusted their law and procedure to the successive
demands for innovation which time incessantly eDgendercd,
the extraordinary jurisdiction of the Chancellors would have
had no plausible ground; and the necessary and eternal
distinction between strict Law and Equity would probably
have been unknown to the law of the English nation, as well
as to most of the systems obtaining in other communities.

Some enterprising judges in modern times have enden-
vonred, with more or less of success, to get to their own
tribunals matters which Chancery had engrossed: \B, y.,
Loixl Mansfield, and even that stickler for things ancient,
Lord Kenyon.*] But whether it were expedient to alter
in this patchwork manner, now that the nrbitraiy lino has
been drawn, may be questioned.


* Bead o. Btootman; 3 Term Beports. 151.


AXD LAW RBVOaV. 385

9

I conclude by summing up the considerations on which
the question of Codification turns.*

Such are the evils of judicial legislation,
that it would seem that the expediency of a Code of cXieo^
(or of a complete or exclusive body of statute
law) will hardly admit of a doubt. Nor would it, provided
that the chaos of judiciary law; and of the statute law stuck
patch wise on the judiciary, could be superseded by a ^ood
Code. For when we contrast the chaos with a positive code,
we must not contrast it with the very best of possible or
conceivable codes, but with the code, which, under the given
circumstances of the given coininunity, would probably be
tlie result of an attempt to codify.

Whoever has considered the diflSculty of making a good
statute, will not think lightly of the difficulty of making a
code. To conceive distinctly the general purpose of a statute,
to conc(‘ivc distinctly the subordinate provisions through
which its general purpose must be accomplished, and to ex¬
press that general purpose and those subordinate provisions
in perfectly adequate and not ambiguous language, is a bu¬
siness of extreme delicacy, and of extreme difficulty, though
it is fi'cciuently tossed by legislators to inferior and incom¬
petent workmen. I will venture to affirm, that w'hat is
commonly called the technical part of legislation, is incom¬
parably more difficult than what may be styled the ethical.
In other words, it is far easier to conceive justly what would
be useful law, than so to construct that same law that it
may accomplish the design of the lawgiver.

• Accordingly, statutes made with great deliberation, and
by learned and judicious lawyers, have been expressed so
obscurely, or have been constnicted so unaptly, that deci¬
sions interpreting the sense of their provisions, or supplying
and correcting their provisions cjs ratione Ic^k, have been
of necessity heaped upon them by the Courts of Justice.

* Whnt follows is extraett'd from Lecture XXX^X., Vol II. of Lec¬
tures on Jorispiiulence.


380


CODIFICATHm


Such, for oxaiuple, is the case witli the Statute of Frauds;
which was made by three of the wisest lawyers iu the reign
of Cliarlcs the Second ; Sir M. Halo (if I remember aright)
being one of them.

It follows from what I have premised, and will appear
clearly from what I shall say hereafter, that the question of
Codification is a question of time and place. Speaking in
abstract (or without reference to the circumstances of a given
community) there can be no doubt that a complete Code is
belter than a body of judiciary law; or is better than a body
of law partly consisting of judiciary law, and partly of sta¬
tute law stuck patchwise on a body of judiciary.

But taking the question in concrete (or with a view to
the expediency of codification in this or that comm unity) a
doubt may arise. For here wc must contrast the existing
law (not with the heau ideal of possible codes, but) with
that particular code which an attempt to codify would then
and there engender. And that particular and practical
question (as Herr von Savigny bos rightly judged) will turn
mainly on the answer that must be given to another; namely,
Are there men, then and there, competent to the difficult
task of successful codification ? of producing a code, which,
on the whole, would more than compensate the evil that
must necessarily attend the change?

The vast difficulty of successful codification, no ra¬
tional advocate of codification will deny or doubt. Its im¬
possibility, none of its rational opponents will venture to
affirm.


IDEA OE A COMPLETE LEGAL EDUCATION.


aud law eeform.


887


■s

I


v> o

■crS.
W -o


e:*

o


bo

" a

'5c5

g


s

ji


we


s

I

w

1


(S


8

1

61


BO

e

I


a


V

'S


e-


■c

9


'E.l?

S:§

S '3

12 u

W -S


M

I

t; -

pk ^

■si

O 'tS _
«5 E""

*3 w*

'S ‘C


8

S

'a

E

•I

_i

o

»4

O


S'


» 0
2 o

1'''^

§ S

•d


R

w

_>R _

'on

c

W


. u.

A

0


I s I

^ S3 A
C Ti te

W E 0

•o

V 0 13
0 0

^ '0 .S
•s s -3
<5 s =*

® Is te

In It


^ V t3 It

,2=5 1J


o 2 ■" «
A c ;5_.2

•TS 4 ) •; 4 »

1 S ^WTS

- rS

'«•> SP”

U ^ 0 ^

’£ ^

■S ^-2 i>c
.S S U 0

fflA.SW


I

•E3

i

r

§

z>


^2

-W

■'1.1

wi£


o


<1

CQ


I


0

O

-S

s

o

o


• dS*

8 H

JS

I s 5 2

g-S

s'^’S S

p:; §1^*1


I bare not been able to discover to what these letters refer.


INDEX.

- 4 —


AcciT»i?ifT,whcn a "round of exemp¬
tion from liability, ii. Ififi.

Acquisition of ownership. (See Jm

in rcm.)

Act, tciulcncy of, how to be osti-
mnlccl, i. ^12, 41; is tbc sum of |
il« probable iH»nspqnonce», id.%
meaning; of the term, ii, 28; the
iranieciiatc coiiseqiicnco of voli¬
tion, 8o ; erroneously used to in¬
clude consequences of act, 85 ;
consequences of, arc not wilh;d,
94; they arc only intended, id. ;
sometimes not even intended^{*5;
may be intended though not de-

• sired, 95, 118; forbearances from
at^t arc not willed but intended,
98.

jirtio utilis, meaning of, ii. 303.

Action, right of, as disUnguislicd
from mode of enforcing it, ii. 455;
qii. whether evei^, arises from j
an injury, id. ; it is always so as- j
sumed, id. ; is o-jun in peivonam,
iii. 162; apparent exception of
actions styled in rem, id.

Adjcc‘tiyc and substantive law, ob¬
jections to the terms, ii. 451.

Aaministrator, properly a condition
or*status, iii. 182; why treated of
in law of things, id.

Alienation, nature of Bolemnities
attached to. iii. 121.

Aliens,their position inBomc,ii.242.

America, constitution of United
Slates of, i. 222.

Analogical reasoning, nature of, iii.
260 ; is (1) contingently, (2) ncces'
sarilg true, 257; distinction be¬
tween contingent and necessary
truth, 258; analysis of analogical

'VOL. III.


reasoning, ns concerning contin¬
gent matter, 260; how this rea¬
soning is distinguished from
syllogism and perfect induction

■ concerning the snnie, 202 ; use of
syllogism, 203, 267; aiiaiysis of
analogical reasoning as concern¬
ing necessary matter, 205.

Analogies, competition of opposite,
according to Paley arises on the
appliratiun of law, ii. 330; as well
written as nmvritten, id .; llo-
milly’s niTstalceas toPaley’s mean¬
ing, id .; Puley’s explanation of it
as a source "of disjuitation, iii.
239; examination of the dilBculties
arising from this source, 240.

Analogy, examination of the various
meanings of the term, iii. 249.

Anger, as a ground of exemption
from liability, ii. 186.

Animals, are not irrational, i. 158;
are governed by instincts, id .;
not by laws, id .; Illpian’s error
on tliis, i. 101, ii. 240, 207.

Aristocracy, every supreme govern¬
ment which is not a monarchy is
an, i. 191; diflevent forms of, 193;
of those usually styled oligarchies,
194 ; of those styled aristocracies
(in the speeiho meaning of the
term), id .; of those styled demo¬
cracies, id.

Arrangement of Corpus Juris is
founded on distinction of law of
Iversons and things, ii. 382, 434,
lii. 145; how carried out in law
treatises, ii. 419; what included
in law of persons, id .; what, in
law of things, 420; reasons for
postponing the law of persons to


390


INDEX.


the law of things, and treating the
last most in detail, 421; Black-
stone’s metliod of arrangement,
428; merits of his method, id. ;
method adopted by Homan law-'
yers in tlieir treatises, 431; me¬
thod adopted by Gains, 432; by
Justinian, in the Institutes, 434,
id. 145; in the Code and Digest,
iii. 145; arrangement adopted in
the French codes, ii. 481; its do-
• fects, 481; Benthatn’s method,
482; Falck’s method, 484; Hu¬
go’s method, id. ; great import¬
ance of adopting a clear method
in any cpde’or treatise on law, iii.
183.

Attempts to commit crimes, nature
of, ii. 120; are evidence of inten¬
tion, id. ; as such, are called overt
acts, id. ; why overt act required
to render party criminally liable,
121,146.

Bailee, nature of obligation which
is incurred by, ii. 161.

Benevolence, Hartley’s hypothesis
conoorning it, i. 103; the princi¬
ples of the selfish system, lO'l;
refutation of it, lOi n.

Bentham, not the inventor of the
theory of utility, i. 103 n. ; but
he first properly examined and
stated it, id.-, his definition of
sovereignty, 186; his objection
to judiciary law, ii. 348; his ana¬
lysis of status, 386, *389; remarks
on his method of arrangement,
481.

Blackstone, his error in supposing
that human laws are of no vali¬
dity if contrary to Divine laws, i.
234 ; his definition of right,

ii. 64; his erroneous distinction
of civil iniuries and crimes, 71;

- merits of his method of arrange¬
ment, 428 (spe Introd. pp. Ixiii.
and cix.); his misapprehension as
to meaning of jura remm, 429
(see Introduction, uhi »upra).

Brown, Dr., his true exposition of
the nature of the human will, ii.
82.

Butler, his admission* that Chris¬
tianity as revealed is imperfect, i.
78; the ablest advocate of hypo¬


thesis of the existence of a moral
sense, 87; but sometimes admits
the existence of a principle of
utility, 92.

Canon Law, ranked by Hale and
Blackstone as particular 1 4i. 230;
but is properly singular, 231.

Capacity, meaning of the term, ii.
401, 417.

Caput, how it differs from status, ii.
410.

Child, rights of father over, are
rights in personam, li. 47; iii.
164; but rightof father to custody,
ctd., of, are rights in rem, ii. 48;
iii. 164.

Civil injuries,howdistinguishedfrom
crimes, ii. 71,190; error of Black-
stone’s distinction, 71.

Civil'liberty, Paley’s erroneous de¬
finition of, i. 235 n .; true nature
of, 2tl; is the absence of legal
rcKtraini, ii. 154

Civil procedure, nature of Boman,
ii. 286.

Code, ambiguity of term, ii. 359;
great ditfieulty of making, 370;
nature of Justinian’s, 308; ar¬
rangement adopted by him purely
unscientific, ii. 310, lii. 145; ex¬
pediency of consolidating law into,
a question of time ana place, ii.
372, iii. 275; in the abstract is
clearly expedient, ii. 373; con¬
cerns the form not the matter of
law, ii. 374, iii. 289; objections to,
in the abstract, and answers, ii.
374; that it is necessarily incom¬
plete, ii. 374, iii. 284; objection of
Portalis, ii. 375; objection of
Hugo, 377 ; its practicability con¬
sidered generally,iii.275; its diffi¬
culty, 277; depends on the degree
of skill which can be brought to
the enterprise, 278; must be
planned by one mind, id .; all-im-
i^rtanco of first intention,qua¬
lifications of English lawyers for
making a code, id.\ effect of it on
the legal profession, 279; may be
kept entirely distinct from all in¬
novation, 2^; but for simplicity
some innovation- requisite, id.;
the idea of a code is modem, id.;
expediency of oqmmencing with a


INDEX.


391


digest, 281; or digests, 282; 'ndiat
should be the nature of these, id .;
new laws should be u orked into,
283 ; superiority of judicial de¬
cisions founded on, to those
founded on ordinary law, 284;
a code is as convenient for appli¬
cation us judiciary law, 285;
is not unalterable, ic^.; or less
malleable than jiiclieiary law, id.;
not peculiarly liable to produce
competition of op]»ositc analogies,
286; not necessarily incoherent,
287; not rendered unnecessary
by private treatises, id.; not un¬
fitted to wants of community, id.;
objection from alleged infinitude
of rules, 288; objections derived
from defects, errors, and alleged
ill-success of existing codes, 290;
Justinian’s code, 2Ul; not a code
/trnxH hodifrno, id .; Frcncb code,
292; defects of it, id .; Pnissiuii
code, 293; was not intended to
be com])lete, 291; Von Savigny’s
objectiona to codification, 294 ;
dis]mic of Snvigny and Tliibuut
on this subject, 296; codification
of criminal law (see Ctuuiinal
Law) ; probability that some at-
tcn)])t VI ill be made to frame a
code in this eountry, 376; it must
be accomplished, if at all,by scien¬
tific lawyers, 377 ; not by public
men, 378 ; must be worked out on
a preconceived plan, 379; neces¬
sity that persons employed in con¬
structing it should be versed
both in theory and pnu’tii'e, 378,
380; Bacon’s opinion, 379; gene¬
ral statement oi the oonsidera lions
on which the question of codifica¬
tion turns, 384.

Coke, Lord, his mastery of English
laft", iii. 377.

Command, every law is a, i. 4; but
every, is not a law, 10, 17; ana¬
lysis of the term, 5, 9; is a signi-
ncation of desire, 5; how distin¬
guished from other significations
of desire, id.; not by violence of
motive to compliance, 7 *, Paley’s
error in that respect, id. ; how
related to duty and sanction, 9;
it is a law when it obliges gene¬
rally to acts of a class, 10; it is


not a law when it obliges to a
specific act or forbearance, id .;
examples of each kind, 11; dis¬
tinction does not depend on, whe¬
ther it binds one person or more,
13; error of Blackstonc and others
in this respect, id.

Commission and Omission, acts cf,
dislinctiou between, ii. 101.

Common Sense, an expression
founded on bypotbesis as to the
index of Divine commands, i. 80,
81.

Commons, House of, possesses a
portion of sov'ereignty, i. 202;
Jiowers of members are delegated
absolutely by constituents, id.;
but subject to an iuiplicd trust,
203; the performance of that trust
enforced by moral sanctions, 203,
20i; no legal sanction for the per-
foriuauce thereof could be created,
205.

Compassing, meaningof term, ii. 119.

Composite State, nature of, i. 217.

Conuition. (See Sfahis.)

Conduct, Human, is guided by rules,
i. 42, 44; uiul by authority, 55 ;
utility is not the tost of it, 90;
but only the index to Divine eoiii-
niands, id.

Confederation of States, nature of, i.
185, 217; difiers from a federal
government, id.

Consent of the ])co])le, in what sense
governments exist by, i. 272; in
no other sense than all law obeyed
by, id.; in what sense gov'crn-
menls originate by, 275.

Consideration, absence of, from con-
traets, bow it nfTccts third persons,
iii. 131; diflcrcncebetween vicious,
and want of, id.

Consilium or compassing, meaning
of term, ii. 119.

Constitution, theory of the British,
i. 201, 399.

Constitutional Law, meaning of the
term, i. 230.

Contingent remainders, Eearne’s
treatise on, ui. 78; how distin¬
guished from vested remainders,
id.

Contingent right, nature of, iii. 72;
not definable in same way as a
contingent remainder, 78.

2 D 2


892


INDEX.


Contingent truth, how dislingnislied
from necessary truth, iii. 1^8.

Contract, false asauinntlon that go¬
vernment is basea on, i. 276; i
rights begotten by, are jam in ]
personam, ii. 37 ; nature of obli- 1
gee’s right, which is violated by a
person who prevents fuliilmcnt of,
63; intention of parties to, what
it means, 122; diflers from the
sense of the promise, 123; J’aloy’s
definition of intention, id..; a
breach of contract is an injury,
162; wliy a promise is binding, iii.
128; objectof solemnities attached
to contracts, id.; why solemnities
not required when there is a con¬
sideration, 129; how third per¬
sons fere affected by absence of
solemnities, 130; or absence of
consideration, id. ; difference be¬
tween vicious consideration and
want of consideration, 131; why
a contract strictly so-caljed gives
no right in re as against tliird per¬
sons, id. : in what cas(‘S it becomes
an alicnatioii,133; implied contract
not to be confounded with quasi¬
contract, 136, 139,223; confusion
of contract and conveyance, 202;
importance of clearing u]) this con¬
fusion, 209; often used as synony¬
mous wiUr convention, 220; mean¬
ing of the term in Homan law, id. ;
uncertain meaning of the term in
English law, id.

Convention, essentials of, i. 207;
meaning of the term, iii. 219,221.

Conveyance^ confusion of, with con¬
tract, iii. 202; importance ofcleasr-
ing up this confusion, 209.

Conveyancers, practice of, not a
source of law, li. 235; but adopted
as law by judges, id.

Coimnrcul and incorporeal, division
of things into, ii. 23, 467.

Corpus Delicti, meaning of the
term, ii. 151. -

CorpmJuris, arrangement of, found¬
ed on distinction between law of
persons and of things, ii. 381,434,
lii. 145.

Crimes, how distinguished from civil
injuries, ii. 71, 190; error of
Elackst-one’s distinction, 71; di¬
vided into crimes am gentium,


and crimes jarc cwili, 264 ; mean¬
ing of this division, id.; tallies
with the division into mala in se,
and mala prohibita, id .; what is
necessary to a definition of crimes,
iii. 326; what are the essentials of
a crime, on the grounds of im-
pulation, 326-332; (1) every act
or omission which is a crime sup-

f loses criminal knowledge or neg-
igeiice (vcl srieiiter vcl ncgligrn-
ter), id. ; (2) it must not be purely
involuntary, 330; (3) it must not
])rocecd from an instant and well-
grounded fear greater than the
fear naturally inspired by the law,
id. ; (4) it is not a crime if done
in pursuance of a legal duty, 331;
(5) or of a legal right or permis¬
sion granted by the law, td. ; (6)
an overt act is necessary, 332;
Hcbenic of thcHoraan law-language
in regard to the grounds of impu¬
tation, 326 ; different meanings of
culpa and dolus, id. ; of lualicc as
a name for criminal d(‘sign, 327;
ineoiisiderate assumption that ma¬
lice or criminal design is of the
essence of every crime, id. ; of
criminal design, 328; of criminal
knowledge short of criminal de¬
sign, id .; of criminal negligence,
329; ignorance never per ac a jus¬
tification of crime, 330; of the
nature of an overt act w liich is of
the essence of a crime, 332; of
attempts to commit crimes, 333;
rules n>r the application of punish¬
ments, 336 ; tabular siatoment of
the different kinds of imblic crimes,
.339.

Criminal jurisdiction, in whom it re¬
sided at Home, ii. 284.

Criminal Law, w'hy generally ex¬
cluded from Justinian’s insti¬
tutes, ii. 421; very small portion
of, therein treated, iii. 162; diffi¬
culty of determining place of, 163;
necessary first to determine true
distinction between public and pri¬
vate law, id.

Criminal Law, Codification of, iii.
303; inconveniences arising from
the present state of common law
id.', as to reports, records, and
treatises, id.; difTerence between


INDEX,


393


interpretation of atatute and com- { representatives, 201; may be sub-

men law, 304; much of present ! jbet to a trust or may be absolute,

law founded on antiquat4‘dnotions, 202; in this c-ountry it is subject

305; obscurity arising from partial to a trust, 203; how the perform-

adherence to antiquated notions, nnec of that tnut is enforced, 203,

id. ; obscurity arising from extend- 204; cannot be enforced by legal

ing rules to eases connected by methods, 2(J5.
r(‘inote analogies, 306; inconsis- actions arising out of, nearly

tent doflnitioiis of theft, 307 ; in- allied to actions arising out of

convcniencesofthepresentstatute contract, ii. I6l; nature oiquasi

law', 308; inconvenicnecsofhaving delicts, iii. 134; distinction of,

two bodies of law’, one common from and ywflw/contracta,i8

and the other statute, 30U; ad- illogical and superfluous,iii. 161.
vantages of combining these, 310; Demand, peculiarity of English Law
practicahility of consolidating law in not requiring before action

into one statute, 313; advantages brought, ii. 157; consistency of

that w'oidd follow’ from it, id. ; me- liomau law in requiring, 162;

thod of arrangement adopted in w ithout it a person is not in mord,

the French IViial Code, 321; its 163.

indehnitc extent,what erimcH Democracy, definition of, i. 194;
ought to be included in a erimiiial sovereign power of democracies,

code, 322; to what territory it 201; Hobbes’s remarks on de-

should ap])ly, 324. moeratical government, 248 ; the

Cm! pa. analysis of, ii. lot), 142, iii. nature of popular government,
326, 329 ; restricted application 245.

of term by lawyers, esjieeially Deontology, the science of, is Bent-
eriiiiiiial lawyers, ii. 147; Feuer- ham's name for elliies, i. 115 ».
bach's analysis of the term, 148; Desire, explanation of the supposed
]{o.sshirt’s analysis of the term, conflict belween it and will, ii.
149. 129; eamnit be directly controlled

Customary law’, true nature of, i. by thcwill, 130; may be destroyed

22.1'14S; li<»rann notion of. ii. 203 ; by the will indirectly, id.

is a part of posilivo law, 222; Desjwtic government, nature of, i.
Cicero’s aoeonnt of how it is gene- 241.

rated, 223; is not founded on Determinate and indeteminate bo-
emmuisus ulcntiuni. id. ; Black- dies, distinction between, i. 131.
stone’s erroneous dcscrijUion of it. Digest, iloiiian, materials on n Inch
227; is a species of judiciaiy law’, founded, ii. 308, iii. 145; arrango-
229. ment of, purely unscientific, ii.

31t).

Decisions, process of extracting law’ Dignity, whether rights belonging
from. (See Judiciary Lair.) to a, are part of the law’ of status.

Declaratory laws,so (tailed, are often iii. 173.

imperative, i. 19; are not laws Divine I^^aw, moaning of term, i. -2;
proper, 167 ; nature of them, ii. one division of laws proper, id. ;
314. identical with natural law j)ro-

Dofinitionsoflcading terms in juris- perly so called, id.', how distiu-

])rudence, iniportamse of ascer- guisiied from human law. 28; is

taining them distinctly, iii. 353; partly revealed and partly unre-

ncglect of this in treatises on law, vcalcd, id. ; nature of index to

id. unrevealcd, 29; different hypo-

Dcmand, peculiarity of English law theses as to nature of that index,

in not requiring, before action, ii. id. ; hypothesis of a moral sense,

166. id‘\ hypothesis of principle of

Delegation of sovereign power to utility, 31; true statement of

poStical subordinates, i. 200; to principle of utility, 32; principle


394


INDEX.


of utility inferred from tendency
of human actions, id. (See Utilily.)

Dolus, meanings of the term, ii. 109,
iii. 3^.

Dominion, Tarious meanings of, ii.
477. (See Property.)

Drunkenness, as a ^und of ex¬
emption from liability, ii.l84, ISO.

Duration of rights, iii. M.

Duties, are correlative to commands,

i. 6, 9; are Tclativo or absolute,

ii. 67; distinctions of, with regard
to the objects to which they relate,

• 68; self-regarding duties, 69; dis¬

tinction of duties analogous to
distinction between Jus publicum
md JuspHvafum, 71; distinction
between those enforced civilly and
those enforced enniinally, id.;
those which arc absolute are en¬
forced criminally, 73.

Easement. (See Servitude.)

Easement, distinction between, and
jiropcrty, iii. 2, 13; meaning of
the term, 2,12; diiheulLies which
encumber the term, 17; not quite
identical with servitude in sense
of modern civilians, id. ; but will
be so used by author, id..-, is a
fragment of property, 13, 28.

Edict of Prajtor, general and special,
difference between, ii. 291; wdiy
styled 292; change

made under Hadrian respecting,
805.

Edict of Boman Emperors, its bind¬
ing authority, ii. 201.

Ekqantia, meaning of the term, as
applied to law, ii. 291.

Emphyteusis, right of, iii. 64.

Equity, meaning of term as applied
to jus prmlorimn, ii. 250, 251;
different meanings of the term,
273; meaning of, as denoting a
body of law, 282; os a body of
law, is not universally present
in all systems, 312; is nearly
contined to Boman aud English
law, 313.

Error, when a ground of exemption
from liability, ii. 168.

Ethics, leading principles of, may
be attained by all, i. 65; itniiort-
anco of wide-spread knowledge
of, 67, 74; causes of present im¬


perfect slate of knowledge of, 66,
sq ^,; might be made to rank
with sciences capable of demon¬
stration, 70; Locke’s opinion to
that effect, 72; definition of science
of, 115 n .; consists of (1) legisla¬
tion, (2) morals, id.

Events, how distinguished from per¬
sons and things, ii. 27.

Evidence of an act frequently con¬
fused with the act itself, ii. 106.

Ex delicto, actions, iiearl}’’ allied to
actions ex contractu, ii. 161. (See
Delict.)

Executive, and legislative distinction
of political powers into, i. 206.

Executor, properly a condition or
status, iii. 182; w'liy treated of in
law of things, id.

Facts, how distinguished from per-
son.s and things, ii. 27 ; some-
times, but not always synonymous
with events, id.

Faculty, commonly denotes a right,
ii. 401‘; but also denotes capacity
or ability to acijuire a right, id.

Falck, remarks on his method of
arrangement, ii. 481.

Father, rights of, over child arc
rights in personatn.W. 47, iii. 164;
but rights of, to custody, etc. of
child, arc rights in rem, n. 48, iii.
16k

Fearne, his treatise on contingent
remainders, iii. 78.

Federal Govcrninont, nature of, i.
185, 217; how it differs from a
confederation of states, id.

Felonies and misdemesnors, ^u. the
use of retaining the disLinetiori,iii.
321; how distinguislied, 322.

Fictions, why resorted to as a mode
of altering the law, ii. 315.

Forbearance, meaning of the term,
ii.2H; is not willed but intended,
08; how distinguished from omis¬
sion, 101.

Foreigners, subject to law's of coun¬
try which they inhabit, i. 318;
their peculiar condition in ancient
Borne, ii. 241.

Formula, nature of, ii. 286.

Franchise, is a right in rem, not ex¬
ercised over a determinate sub¬
ject, iii. 184. (See Jus in rem.)


IffDKX.


395


Free Gorernmont, nature of, i. 241.

French Codes, method of arrange-
mciit adopted in, ii. 481; its de¬
fects, id.

Fungible and not fungible, division
of things into, ii. 469.

Giiius,' arrangement of his treatise
on law, ii. 132.

Gent/., F. von, his mistaken views
of the origin of government, i. 310.

German Empire, States composing,
how far independent, i. 212, 224.

German J urists, their misapplication
of Xanl's language as to subject
and object, ii. 404.

German Philosophers, their false
notion of government, i. 309.

Government, Kant’s division of the
dillerent hinds of, i. 2')9, 329,
331; nature of five, i. 2ll;
poptilar government may be in¬
ferior to monarchical in a well-
instructed community, 254 >/.;
not so in one imperfectly instruct¬
ed, id. ; does not exist by con¬
sent of people, 272; nor originate
in consent of peo])Ie, 275 ; false
hypothesis of uripinttl ronfract as
basis of, 276; false notions of
German iihilosophers on the sub¬
ject, 305). (See Som-r&gn, Sore-
rvigni^y.)

Grotius, his definition of sovereignly,
i. 188.

Guardian, rights of, over ward, are
rights in personam, ii. 47, iii. 104;
but rights of, to custoily, etc., of
child, are rights in rem, ii. 48,
iii. 1154.

Guilt, analysis of, ii. 142; restricted
application of term by lawyers,
especially criminal lawyers, 147;
Feuerbach’s analysis of the term,
148: llosshirt’s analysis of the
term, 140.

Hahitatio, not properly a servitude,
iii. 40.

Hale, Lord, his correct notionson the
Jaw of persons and things, and on
public and private law (see Intro¬
duction, pp. Ixxiii., cviii.); his
error as to extent of law of per¬
sons, iii. 179; his mastery of En¬
glish law, 377.


Half Sovereign Stales, nature of, i.
210; States composing German
Empire, independence of, 212.

Hanover, an independent Sovereign
State, i. 21S.

Hartley, Dr., his hypothesis os to
the nature of benevolence, i. 103.

Heodlcssness, how' it differs from
negligence, ii. 102, 108,145; how
from intention, 104; criminal
heedlessness, iii. 329.

Hciucccins, his erroneous notion of
stains, ii. 383 ; (ps errors respect-

* ing acquisition of jus in rem, iii.
197.

Heir, properly a condition or sta¬
tus, iii. 182; why treated of in
law of things, id.

Hobbes, hisdefiiiitionof sovereignty,
i. 187; his propo.‘»ition that “no
law can be unjust,” 232 ».; true
meaning of the proposition, id .;
the main design of his writings
misunderstood, 249 n. ; not in-
iemh'd as a defence of monarchy,
id. ; hiscapital errors,250; priestly
origin of the antipathy with whicn
ho is regarded, 251 ; no vestige of
atheism in his writings, 252.

Honour, laws of, are rules of posi¬
tive morality, i. 127.

Hugo, roinnrks on his method of ar¬
rangement, ii. 484.

Ilium*, assumes the existence of a
moral sense as well as principle
of utility, i. 86.

nnsband, rights of, which arc in
personam, ii. 46; rights of, which
are in rem, id.

Ilgpotlivea, iii. 65.

Ignorance of law, not generally a

f ground of exemption from liabi-
ity. ii. 1G8, 170; reasons for the
rule, 170; existence of this igno¬
rance is an inevitable consequence
of judiciary law, 362; wbeuco this
arises, id. ; same evils may attend
statute law, 364.

Im])erfect laws, nature of, i. 19.
Iinputability, meaning of tlic term,
ii. 142.

Imputation, grounds of, 326. (See
Crime ^

Incapacity, meaning of the tenn, ii.
401, 417.


396


INDEX


Tnoo^oreal and corporeal, division
of thingB into, ii. 23, 407.

Independence, necessary to sove-
reignly, i. 170.

Induction (perfect) .how distmguisli*
ed from analogical reasoning, iii.
202 .

Infancy, as a ground of exemption
from liability, ii. 179; founded on
excused ignorance of law, id .;
Bontham’s explanation erroneous,
184; Blackstone’s also, 185.

Injury, meaning of tlie term, ii. 142,
160; intention or inadvertence is
of the essence of, 155; a breach
of contract is an injury, 164; every
right of of'tion founded on a sup¬
posed injury, 455.

Injustice, analysis of tho term, i.
232 n.

In rem, meaning of the expression,
iii. 189. (See Jus in rem.)

Insanity, as a ground of exemption
from liability, ii. 179; founded
on excused ignorance of law,
id.; Bentliam’s explanation erro¬
neous, 184; Bluckstoue’s also,
185.

Instinctive, meaning of the term, i.
8; is merely negative, id. ; does
not furnish any explanation of
the act to which it is apjdied, id .;
men as well as lower animals have
instincts, IGl; UI plan’s mistaken
view of tho instiucls of animals, i.
161,ii. 24X), 267.

Institutes of Justinian, method of
arrangement adopted in, ii. 434,
iii. 145; condned almost entirely
to Jus pnvalum, iii. I'lG.

lustitiiU'S of Grains, method of ar¬
rangement adopted in, ii. 432,
iii. 146.

Intention (see Will, Acts, Forbear-
anre), why necessary to analyse
meaning of, in treatise on juris,
prudence, ii. 80; how confounded
with will,86,94,115; how ildiffers
from negligence, rashness, «tc.,
104; intention to do future aiit,
analysis of, 114; distinguished
from a simple desire of the same
object, id. ; is only a belief that
we sh^l do it, 115; intention to
forbear, analysis of, 117; to do
future act is always revocable.


118; meaning of the term inten¬
tion, when employed without re¬
ference to wrongs, 121; intention
of legislator, id. ; of testator,
122; of parties to a contract, id.^
how toBe discovered from written
documents (sec Interpretation );
whether in any ease intention
alone can be treated as a wron^,
146 ; intention or inadvertence is
of the essence of the ibjury, 155;
equally so in breaches of contract
OB in other injuries, li64; this
proved by grounds of exemption
from liability, 165.

International Law, is a branch of
theseieuec of positive morality, i.
114 n.; is not law proper, 127,
128; its rules are rules of positive
morality, id. ; is concerned in the
intercourse of independent politi¬
cal societies, 176; what is mter-
natioual law frequently confound¬
ed witli what ought to be, 235 n.;
Yon Martens has avoided this
confusion, id. ; modern intema-
tioiinl law founded on y?/* aenlium
of Boman law, ii. 259; but has
a much narrower meaning, 260;
answers toy//«_/?;ciffZc, 260 ; why
considered os a branch of natural
law, 20J),

Interpretation, statutes passed for
puriioses of, are not strictly laws,
I. 19 ; promises, liow’ iuterjjrcted,
ii. 122 ; e(iuitable iiit(‘r])retatiun,
what is meant by, 274,334; uncer¬
tain meaning of the term, iii. 237 ;
isreally not interpretation, ii. 275,
334; interj)rctation of judiciaiy
law, 323 ; of statute law, 326; dif¬
ference of the last two processes,
id. ; Paley’s remarks on this dif-
fiTciice, 336; Sir Samuel Bo-
milly’s rcnioi'ks on the same, V//.;
what is the true and pi’oper ob-

i ’ect of interpretation, iii. 231;
low intention of legislator dis¬
covered, id. ; from literal mean¬
ing of the words, id. ; sometmies
from other indicia, 232; causes
which have led to extended or
restricted interpretation, 233; this
is really judicial legislation, 234;
in what sense interpretation pro¬
per may berestrictive or extensive.


INDEX.


397


235 ; grammatical, Low opposed
to logical, 236.

Involttiitary, uncertain meaning of
the term, ii. 88.

JudaXf his office and duty, li. 287.

Judge-made law. (See Jvdidarif

LatS.)

Judgcn, their legislative power. (See
Judiciary Law.)

Judiciary law, how it difiers from
statute law, ii. 321; tlie form or
mode of its expression, 323; is
extracted from decisions, id .;
mode of extraction, id. ; difler-
once between this process and
that of interpretation, 325 ; what
is ratio dvetdetuU, 329; process
by which it is formed by the
judge, 338 ; Btjntham’s obj(‘(ition
to it answered, 348; Sir J. Ko-
milly's objection to it, answered,
349; another current objection
to it answered, 331; influence
of yjrivate la.wy«>rs upon it, 3.33 ;
other checks upon judges in con¬
struction of it, 361; why il is
HO called, 3.38; meiuiing of the
tenn, 35‘.t; tenable objections to
this kind of law, id. ; it lies in con-
creio, id. ; it is made in haste, 361 ;
it is c.c poxt facto, id. ; it is dis-
jierscd, bulky, and difliciilt to ex¬
tract, 3(52 ; imiterfeet records of it,
3(53 ; this evil might be avi»i<led,
id. ; there should bo authorized
reporters, id. ; there is no lixed
test of its validity, id. ; its rules
arewanting in coinprehensivenesH,
3(57 ; the statute law founded on
it exhibits similar defects, 3(59 ;
evils of it might be remedied by
a code, 370; it is better than a
badly cxpr<‘ased statute, 372; it is
inferior to one well expressed, id.

Jurisdictio]!, strict Uoinaii meaning
of the term, ii. 287.

Jurisprudence, positive law is ap¬
propriate nialbu* of, i. 1, 2 ; is the
science of positive law, 114 n .;
wbat is meant by general juris¬
prudence, iii. 351; of the princi¬
ples, notions, and distinctions in
jurisprudence which are neces¬
sary, 351; of those which are not
necessary but almost universal,


352; importance of ascertaining
precisely the meaning of. the leaci-
ing terms of the science, 353; of
the different sabieots to which the
tenn “jurisprudence" has been
applied, 356; inevitable and soiue-
timea intentional implication of it
with legislation, 357; uses of the
study of iurisprudeuce, 362; does
not Tcnuer student less fit for
practice, 363.

Jofs (see Law), diflerent senses in
which the tt^rm is used in Boman
law, iii. 148.

Jus ad rem, moaning of the term,
ii. 39; au expression not used by
classical jurists, iii. 192 ; opposed
to jus in rem or jus in re (iu ex¬
tended meaning), id. ; is some¬
times used as eipiivalent to jus in
personam, 193; but this use of
the leriu is improper, 194; it is
only a kind of jus in personam,
id. ; answers to the obligation ad
daudum aliquid or ad rem «e-

S nirendam, 193; imporiaiice of
istiiiguisbing the broader from
the narrower signification of the
term, 195; eonfuKiou created by
not doing so, id. ; distinction he-
tween tifu/us ad aegnirendum and
modus acr/itircndi, 197 ; errors of
lleineecius respect ing them, id.
Ju.s cirife, division of law into, and
j ns gentium, founded on hypothe¬
sis of moral sense, i. 93 ; original
meaning of term, as opposed to
jus gentium, later mean¬

ing of term as opposed \ojusgen-
iiinn, 255; analogous distinction
of law' into natural and pusilioc,

257.

Jus gentium, division of law into,
and jus cirile{»cc Jus Geulium),
early Homan notion of, ii. 24<1,
249; sometimes identified with
jus prcctorium, 251; absorbed
into the./M4' civile, 252; later Ho¬
man notion of, 253.

Jus iu personam, denotes the com¬
pass, not the Bubji'ct of a right,
li. 33; that it avails against a de¬
terminate person or persons, id .;
answers to term “ obfigutio " in
Boman law, id. ; examination of
the meaning of the term, iii. 164;


808


INDEX.


illnstrations of meanm^ of term,

ii. 87, Hi. 160 f of father af^ainst

. child, ii. 47, Hi. 165; of inaster

against servant, id. ; of guardian
against ward, ii. 48, Hi. 165; of
husband against wife, id.; a
right of action is a. jus in per-
sonam, Hi. 162; jus ad rem some*
times used as equivalent 11> it,
193; but erroneously so, 104; a
jus ad rem is only a species of
jus in personam, M.

Jus in re (in the modem sense) not
^■quired by contract («<r*e<o«twjnO»

iii. 181; m what cases acquired
by a so-called contract, 133; in
Ivoman law =jus in re alien A,
192; among modem civilians

' — jus in rem, id. ; in the latter
sense opposed to^/w* ad rem, id.

Jus in rem, a term invented by mo¬
dern civilians, ii. 32, Hi. 190; de¬
notes the compass, not the sub¬
ject of a right, id. ; that it avails
against the w’orld at large, id. ; ex¬
amination of the meaning of the
term, iii. 163,1K9; illustrations of
the meaning of tlie term, ii. 35, iii.
168; of father over child, n. 48;
of master over servant, id.; of
guardian over ward, id.; of hus¬
band over wife, ui.; it may exist
without determinate subjects, 61;
it is then a right to a forocarance,
id. ; e. g. rights to reputation, or
of monopoly, or of, or in status, 61,
62; if it is over persons it belongs
chiefly to law' of status, 475 ; dif¬
ferent kinds of jura in rem, over
things, 477; is either indefinite
in jioint of user (property), or de¬
finite (servitus), 475 sqq. ; it may
be limited in point of duration, or
unlimited, iii. 4-6; if unlimited, it
may bo definite or indefinite, id. ;
nature of it, if unlimited in point
of duration, id.-, nature of it,
if limited, 48; difi'ercncc between
jura in rem which are vested
and those w'hich are contingent,
69; examples of jura in rem, 168;
the term, if projierly used, would
be a most convenient one, 167;
uselessness of Xaut’s modifica¬
tions of it, id. ; ujus in rem may

■ bave no subject, either person or


thing, 184; e.g. right to reputa¬
tion, id.; right to monopoly, id .;
franchises, 186; rights arising out
of trades or professions, id .; jus
in rem and Jus in personam, the
best expressions for the tw'o grand
divisions of law, iii. 186,189; ob¬
jections to other proposed analo¬
gous expressions, 186; e.^.jus in
re and jus ad rem, id .; dominium
and oiligatio, 187; potestas and
obligatin, id.; absolute and re¬
lative rights, id. ; law of pro¬
perty and law of contract, 188 ;
the expression jus in rem in its
large generic sense not used by
Homan law'yers, 19f>; tliis use of
the term originated with the Glos¬
sators, id.; by modern civilians
jus in re used as equivalent to
jus in rem, 192; how a jus in rem
may be acquired, 131, 195; errors
respecting this, id. ; propositions
of llcineccius examined and re¬
futed, 197; distiuclion between
titulus ad aeq^uirendum and modus
acquirendi, 197; a jus in rem
sometimes ai'ises from an incident
w hich is styled a contract, 202;
but such an incident is really a
conveyance as well as a contract,
id.; or is a conveyance simply,
id. ; extent to which })roperty said
to bo transferred by contract of
sale in English law, id. ; ditto in
French lawr, 204.

Jus Katurale. (See Natural Law.)

Jus Personarum. (See Pei'sons,
Law of.)

Jus publicum and jus privatum, di¬
vision of IttW' into, ii. 71.

Jus reale el persondlc, sometimes
substituted for jus in rem et in
personam, iii. 214; ambiguity at¬
taching to iliesc terms, id.

Jus rerum, origin and meaning of
the term, iii. 166. (See Things,
Law if.)

Just and Justice, analysis of the
tems, i. 232 n.

Justices of the Peace, difficulties
.which they have in administering
the law', ill. 311; growing import
ance of their functions, 314.

' Justinian, remarks on the arrange¬
ment adopted in the Institutes of,


IKDKX.


399


iii. 145; on ilial adopted in the
Code and Digest, id.

£ant, his definitions of government,
i. 209; want of precitiion in his
. notions of “ right,” 257; his dtsfi-
nitipn of political liberty, 329,
331; his distinction of subjectivity
and objectivity, ii. 404; misap¬
plication of these terms by Ger¬
man jbrists, id. ; nearly tally with
* liocke’s ideas gotten by rejection
and ideas gotten by sensation,
406; his ‘Metapbysische Anfangs-
griinde der Eechtslehre,’ iii. 167;
uselessness of the new terms for
Jura hi ram introduced by him, id.

King, maxim that he is incapable of
committing wrong, i. 239; is not
sovereign or supreme, *(/. (see
Sawreign).

Know ledge,importanceof the spread
of, i. 64; want of, makes form of
government important, 25 4; con¬
trary ojtiuion ot fEconomists, 254.

Larceny, inconsistent definitions of,
iii. 3<>7; not so good a term as
Thtfl, 308.

Law (see Jus) ; what properly in¬
cluded under the term, i. 1; as
set by God to men, id. ; as set by
men lo men, id. ; os set by poli¬
tical sU])eriors, 2; as not set by

f iolitical superiors, id. ; positive
aw, meaning of the term, id. ;
positive law is appropriate matter
of jurisprudence, id. (see Positive
Law) ; Divine law, meaning of
the term, id. (see Divine Law) ;
w'hat improperly included under
the term law, 3; laws of vegeta¬
tion, 4; laws of motion, id. ; every
law is a command, id. ; an.ilysis of
• the term “ command,” 6, i); is a
signification of desire, 5 (see Com-
mandy, is enforced by a sanction,
6; ana]}'8is of the term “sanc¬
tion," id. (see Sauctionfi ); when a
command is ngt a law, 10; though
set by a sovereign, 11; a law is a
command which obliges a person
or persons to a course of conduct,
16; a law of interpretation, is not
. properly a law, 19; nature of im¬
perfect laws, id. ; nature of de¬


claratory laws, i. 19,167, ii. 344;
nature of customary, laws, i. 22,
148; division of laws into «a-
tur^ and podtive, i. 92, ii. 267;
this division founded on com¬
pound hypothesis of moral sense
and principle of utility, i. 92; di¬
vision into jus gentium and jus
cwile founded on same hypothesis,
id. ; nature of this distinction, ii.
250; the last two distinctions are
analogous, 257; uselessness of the
division of laws into natural and
positive, 260; nature of law'S
which are analogous to laws pro¬
per, i. 110; of metaphorical laws,
why so called, 110, 156; two
meanings of the term natural
law, 117 (see Natural Law) ; in¬
ternational law is not law proper,
127,128 (see Internalionat Let us );
law of honour is founded on po-
sitis'o morality, 127; Locke’s di-
visionoflaws, 128; Montesquieu’s
confused description of din’erent
kinds of laws, 163; nature of
constitutional law, 230; meaning
of Hobhos’s dirfum that law can¬
not be unjust, 232 it. ; rights
created bylaw distinguished from
natural and moral rights, ii. 1;
dmsion of law into_7<t« in rein aud
jus in personam, 29; .meaning of
t he terms, 33 (see Jus in Hem and
Jus in Personam) ; ignorunc^^ of
law not a graund of exemption
from liability, 170; reasons for the
rule, id. (see Ignoranec of Law) ;
distinction between written and
unwritten law, 195 (see Wntten
Law) ; sources of law, 213; canon
law,230; Praitorian edict, 249 (see
Preetorian Law) ; import of the
distinction between law of per¬
sons and of things, 381; uses of
the distinction, id. (sec Persons,
Things) ; arrangements adopted
in various systems of, and treatises
on law (see Arrangement); dis¬
tinction between public and pri¬
vate law, 435; ^lassagcs of Ito-
raan law in which this distinc¬
tion is explained, iii. b46; dif¬
ficulty of settling true import of
the distinction, 153; necessary to
do so in order to determine the


400


INDEX.


true place of criramal law in a
complete code or treatise, id. ; ad¬
vantage of the study of law as a
gy^muastic, 369; opinion of Leib¬
nitz to that effect, id. ; necessity
for a Faculty of Law, 371.

Lawyers, their influence over jwdi-
ciaiy law,' ii.353; opinions of, not
a source of law, 232. *

Legal Education, should commence
with study of general jurispru¬
dence, iii. 362; system adopted
in Prussian universities, 364; not
necessary to study existing law,
id. ; what is generally necesspy
to a legal education, 368 ; im¬
portance of the stutly of logic,
362, 368; value of the study of
the rationale of law as a gymnas¬
tic, 369; opinion of Loibnitz to
that effect, id.; necessity for a
Law Faculty, 371.

Lerjes, strictly speaking only in¬
cluded those laws passed byy»opa-
lus, ii. 197; also extended to pie-
hiscita, 198.

Legislation, a branch of the science
of ethics, i. 115 n. ; inevitable, and
sometimes intentional,implication
of it with jurisprudence, iii. 367.

Lcgislntivearidexecutive,di8tinction
of political powers into, i. 206.

Legislator, what is meant by inten¬
tion of, ii. 121; the cpialiflcations
necessary for tlie office of, iii. 382;
must be versed in both theory and
prac-tice, id.

Tjtnbnitz, his opinion in favour of
the study of law, iii. 369.

Lessee, for years, not considered as
proprietor, iii. 16.; had not origi¬
nally J«4r in rem, 16.

Liability, grounds of exemption
from, ii. 165; eaeus or accident,
id. ; ignorance or error, 168;
di-unkenncss, 184, 186; infancy,
179, 184.

Liberty, is the absence of legal re-
•straint, ii. 15n. (see Civil Lihvrty );
is synonymous with right, 16;
true nature of civil liberty, i. 241;
truenature of political liberty,/rf.;
Paley’s erroneous definition, 235
».; Kant's definition, 329, 331;
nature of right to liberty, 477.

Lucke, his opinion that science of


ethics might approach the exact¬
ness of that of geometry, i. 70;
his division of laws, 149; tallies
with that of author, id. ; his ob¬
servations on virtue and vice, 162.

Logie, advantage to lawyers of the
study of it, hi. 362, 368.

Maekeldey, his definition of right,

ii. 65.

Mala in se and mala prohihita, dis¬
tinction of, ii. 263; tallies with
distinction of crimes into those
juris gentium, and those Jure ci-
mli, &4.

Malice, inconvenience of the terra
as a name for criminal design,

iii. 327 ; inconsiderate assumption
that it is of the essence of eveiy

' crime, id.

Mancipi et nee maneipi, res, ii. 472.

Martens, Von, his definition of so¬
vereign government, i. 189; his
correotviews on international law,
235 n.

Master, rights of, over ser\’ant, are
rights in personam, ii. 47, iii. 164;
but rights of, to services,arc rights
in rem, ii. 4'8, iii. 164.

Metaphorical laws, i. 110, 156.

Method. Arrangement.)

Might is right, meaning of proposi¬
tion, i. 256.

Misdemesnors and felonies, qn. use
of retaining the distinction be¬
tween them, iii. 321; how' distin¬
guished, 322.

Mistake, aetiou to reeover money
paid by,properly ex delicto, ii, 161.

Modus acquirendi, error of dividing
every acquisition of jus in rem
into iiiulus ad aequirendum and
•mod. arq., 196; ])ropositions of
lieincccius res])ccting, examined
and refuted, 197; in wdiat cases
tit. ad: acq. and mod. oeg. distin¬
guishable, 210.

Monarchy, nature of, i. 191;'limitod,
nature of, 195; limited, is not
true monarchy, 196. (See Sove¬
reign, Sovereigntg.)

Monopoly, right of, is a right in
rem, ii. 52; is a right to forbear¬
ance only, id. ; is a right in rem
without a subject, iii. 184.

Montesq uicu, h is confusion of J aws of
various kind w'itheach other,!. 163.


INDEX.


401


3fora, meaning of the term, ii. 1G3.

Morality or morals, meaning of
term,i. 3. {%6e PositiveMoredity.)

Moral rights distinguished from
legal, ii. 1.

Mor^ sense, hypothesis of a, i. 29;
its/'xistence must be assumed to
be the index of Divine commands-
if we reject the principle of utility,
80; true nature of tiie hypothe¬
sis, 81; analogous to hypothesis
of animal instinct, 82; Butler its
ablest advocate, 87; compound
hypothesis of existence of a moral
sense together with principle of
utili^,80; thishypothesisadopted
by ifiime, id. ; and apparently by
Butler, 92; is the ibundatiou of
division of law into natural and
jiositive, 93; and into^'/w tfentium
and jus chile, 93; moral sense
not to be confounded with sym¬
pathy, IOC n.

Mortgagee, differenco between his
position in ]i)nglish and Roman
law, iii. Ofi.

IMotives of human conduct not 1o be
confounded with princi])lc of uti¬
lity, i. 96; goodness and Ijadncss
of, 99 105; origin of motives

no .part of theory of utility, 107;
M’hy necessary to analyse the
•meaning of the term in treatise
on jurisprudence, ii. 80; motive
precedes volition, 86.

Movable and immovable, division
of things into, ii. 4A)7.

Nation, meaning of term, i. 199 ».

Nationality, in the sense of inde¬
pendent ]H)litical society, what
constitutes, i. 170, 199.

Natural Law, two meanings of, i.

117; (1) law of God, (2) a portion
* of positive law and positive mora¬
lity, id. i Ulpian’s mistaUe in ex¬
tending the term to instincts of
animals, i.lCl,ii.24D,2C7; distinc¬
tion of natural and positive law,
257, 265; uselessness of the dis¬
tinction, 260; disparate meanings
attached to tiro term natural law,
266.

Natural rights, distinguished from
legal, ii. 1; meaning of, 267.

Negligence, why necessary to ana¬


lyse moaning of, in treatise on
jurisprudence, ii. 80; meaning of,
102, 146; how it differs from
heodlessness, 102, 108,145; how
from intention, 104; of criminal
negligence, iii. 329.

Obligation, laws of imperfect, i. 19;
is* positive or negative, ii. 4; -is
relative or absolute, 6; in Roman
law it answers iojm in personam,
33; is obnoxioruiness to a sanc¬
tion, 125; how it is distinguished
from physical restraint, 136; a
right cannot be enforced without
imposing an obligation, 270; how
it arises out of status, 423;
scheme of Roman law language
relating to, iii. 138 (Tab.); in
what sense the term is used by
classical jurists, 147; how it
arises from y«a«i-contrnct, iii. 221.

Occult qualities, absurdity of scho¬
lastic notion of, ii. 382.

Occupancy, nature of acejuisitiun of
projierty by, iii. 120.

(Economists, their political system,
i. 253 n.

Oligarchy, nature of, i. 193.

Omission and Commission, distinc¬
tion of acts of, ii. 101; acta of
omission how distinguished from
forbearance, id.

Original contract, false hypothesis
of, as basis of government, i. 270.

Overt acts, arc attempts which are
evidence of intention, ii. 121;
why required to make party cri¬
minally liable, 121,146; are of the
essence of every crime, iii. 332.

Ownership, a jus in rem, ii. 35 (see
Property).

Pact, meaning of term, iii. 219,221.

Paley, character of his treatise on.
Moral and Political Philosophy,

i. 68; his erroneous definitions of
civil and political liberty, 235 ».;
his rule for the interjirctiition of
contracts, ii. 123; his statement
of the difficulty arising from the
competition of op 2 )ositc analogies,

ii. 336, iii. 239; Romilly's mis¬
take as to Paley's meaning, ii.
336.

Pandects, nature of materials on


402


INDEX.


■which founded, ii. 308; arrange¬
ment of, purely unscientific, 310.

Parliament, its powers arc both lo-
gisTative and executive, i. 209.
(See Commont, House o/!)

Penal, a wider term than criminal,
iii. 320.

Pereqrini, condition of, at Pome, ii.
241.

Personal, difference between the
meaning of the term in English
and Poman law, in. 216. 210;
meaning of the division of pro
perty into real and personal, 210;
personal servitudes, so called,
21i^.

Personal liights. (See Jus in per¬
sonam.)

Person, meaning of the term, ii. 0;
amongst modern civilians moans
a human being capable of rights,
7; a slave, therefore, according lo
these, is not a person, id. ; Koman
notion of it included all human
beings, H; somctinioH synonymous
with status in classical jurists, 11;
lised by author as equivalent to
* man,’ 13; meaning of the term
legal or fictitious person, 18; how^
it is distinguished from thing, 27 ;
how from a fact or event, id. ; of
a person considered as the sub¬
ject of rights, 31,47; when a sub¬
ject of a right is a thing, 4i); of
rights in rem over persons,iii. 164.

Per8ons,law of, import of the distinc¬
tion between it and law' of things,
ii. 381; uses of the distinction,
id. ; the distinction is merely arbi¬
trary, id. ; Thibaut’s essay oxxjus
personarum et rerum, 396 ; its re¬
lation to law of things, 412; is the
' law of status, ii. 381, iii. 164; is
concerned with tbd difference be¬
tween persons, ii. 396 ; should fol-
lowr law of things in a code or
treatise, 420, 42L ; objections to
division of law into law of per¬
sons and things, 427; various ex¬
pressions for law of persons, iii.
146; origin of Hale’s error as to
what is comprised in it, 179; dis¬
tinction between law of persons
and of things is not perfect, 181;
where they blend, id.; importance
of the distinction, 183.


Petitions of Eight, i. 262.

Pignus, iii. 65.

PUhucita, equivalent to leges, ii.


198.


Plehs, its legislative power, ii. 197.

Political liberty, true nature of, i.
241; Paley’s erroneous deffnition
of it, 236 n.; Kant’s definition of
it, 329, 331 ; is the absence of
legal restraint, ii. 15 n.

Political society, independent, dis¬
tinguishing marks of, i. 170; wlien
it is not independent, 177 ; is not
capable of a precise dcffnitioii,
179; origin or causes of political
society, 264.

Political subordinates, exercise sove¬
reign powers, i. 2(X).

Politics, importance of applying
principle of utility to questions
of, i. 50.


Popular Government, meaning of
term, i. 246 ; may bo inferior to
monarchical in a well-instructed
community, 254 n .; not so in one
imperfectly instructed, id.

Populus, its legislative jiowor, ii.
197.


Positive Law, meaning of term, i.
2,132,316; is apjiropriato matter
of jurisprudence, 1, 2, 114 n .;
division of law' into natural and


positive, i. 92, ii. 257, 265; 'this
division founded on compound
hypothesis of moral s'ense and
principle of utility, i. 92 ; useless¬
ness of the division, ii. 260; every
positive law is the direct or cir¬
cuitous command of a monarch
or sovereign number, i. 121; is
therefore, a law proper, id .; con¬
flict between positive law and
positive morality, 145 ; is a crea¬
tion of sovereign authority, ii.
221; cannot be created in any
other w^av, id.

Positive Morality, some rules of,
are not law s, i. 3, 17; are closely
analogous to laws, 17; some rules
of, ore laws, 18; meaning of the
term, 3, 113 n.; what laws are
embraced by the term, 112 n.;
what is included in the science of
positive mordity, 114 n.; inter¬
national law' is a branch of it, id .;
different kinds of rules of it which


INDEX.


403


are lavrs proper, 121; different
kinds of rules of it whicb are not
laws proper, 126; conflict between
it and positive law, 146.

Practice, inseparable from tbeoiy, i.
42.; but all meu ore often not
capable of equal proficiency in
both, iii. 380; necessity tliat they
should be combined for purposes
of legislation and codification,
378, 381, 382.

Preetor, jurisdiction of, ii. 285; na¬
ture of civil proceedings before,
286; nature of his perpetual
edict, 296; supposition tliat his
power was usuqied, 314.

Prtetor PeregrinuH, origin of his ap¬
pointment, ii. 245.

Prectorian Law, origin of, ii. 249;
sometimes identified witli^*ua, 9 r»-
tium, 250; is founded on jus yen-
Hum, 251.

Prescription, as a mode of acquisi¬
tion, examined, iii. 199.

Presumptions, unsuitnblcncss of the
term, li. 181; diflerent kinds of, id.

Primary rights and duties, ii. 450,
454; not always distinguisliod
from secondary, 457; how to bo
divided into cl^.ses, 474.

Private and public wrongs, distinc¬
tion between, ii. 192.

Private law and public, distinction
between, ii. 435.

Privileges, lioman notion of, ii. 201;
are all strictly personal, iii. 93;
ore rights arising immediately
from laws, id. ; meaning of, in
English law, 100; not part of
law of status, 177.

Promulgation of a law', what it is, ii.
203.

Property (see Jus in rem), insti¬
tution of, depends on principles
•of utility, i. 61; a. jus tn rem, ii.
35, iii. 158; various meanings of
the terra, ii. 477; taken by author
to mean any right in rem indefi¬
nite in point of user, ii. 480, iii.
158; distinction between, and
easement or servitude, iii. 2;
diflerent modes of it, 4; never
without restriction, id. ; even in
its most absolute form, 6; but in¬
capable of. exact definition, 7 ;
diflerent modes of property al¬


ways distinguishable, 8 ; diffi¬
culties with which the term is
encumbered, 15; not applied in
English law to interest of lessee
for years, id. ; right of property
may be resolved into right of user,
and right of exclusion, 19, 158 ;
nature of absolute nghts of pro¬
perty {Jus in reproprid), 61,158;
nature of rights of property not
absolute {jura in re attend), 63 ;
obligations which correlate to it,
158; how acquired, 195 ; errors
respecting acquisition of, id .; ti-
tutus ad aoqutrendum and modus
acquirendi, 197; propositions of
Hcineocius examined and refuted,
id. ; sometimes said t o be acquircil
by contract, 131, 202; but then
contracts arc really conveyances,

• id. ; extent to which it is said to
be transferred by contract of sale
in English law, id. ; ditto in
French law, 204.

Public and private Avrongs, distinc¬
tion bctw'cen, ii. 192.

Public law and private, distinction
between, ii. 435; is an inconve¬
nient distinction, 414; diflerent
moHiiings of public law', 435; is to
bo inserted in law of persons, 439.

Punishment, sometimes annexed to
injuries wliich are not crimes, iii.
320; rules for the application of,
336.

Quasi-eoutracts, nat ure of, iii. 133,
221 ; not to be confounded with
implied contracts, 136,139, 223 ;
illustrated by sotulio iudehiti, id.',
includes all anomalous obliga¬
tions, 223.

Qaast-dclicis, nature of, iii. 134r;
distinction of, from delicts and
-contracts illogical and su-
.perfluous, 151.

Baslmess, wh^ necessary to analyse
meaning of, in treatise on juris¬
prudence, ii. 80; nature of, 103,
145; how' it differs from beedlcss-
ness and negligence, 103, 108,
145 ; how from intention, 104;
how it differs from hasty inten¬
tion, 108; criminal rashness, iii.
329.


404


INDEX.


Ratio dedUtendi, proreas of extract¬
ing, ii. 325, 320, 350.

Real, diflereiice betw een the mean¬
ing of the term in English and
Bomnn law, iii. 215 ; meaning
of the distinction real and per¬
sonal property, id. ; in a few
eases the terra real in English
Jaw corresponds to in rem in civil
law', 216; real serviludcs, why so
called, 217.

Eeal Eights. (Sec Jus in rnu.)
llcportcrs, whetlier authorized,
should be appointed, in law
coTirts, ii. 365; I,ord JJacon’s
recommendation, id.
Bi'presentution, theory of, of peo- ^

{ )lo in J’arliamenl, i. 200; de-
egation of authority may be ab¬
solute or subject to a trust, 202 ;
in this country it is subject to a
trust, 203; the nerfonnaneo of
the trust can only be enforced
morally, 203, 205.

Eepublie, remarks on the term, i.
198.

lleputation, right to, is a riglit in
rem, ii. 52, iii. 164 ; is a right to
• forbearance only, ii. 52.

Res, different meanings of term in
Boman Law, iii.l47. (SeeTkinys.)
Res communes, nature of, iii. 56.
RespuhlictB, nature of, iii. 56.
Responsa prudentnm, not generally
an immediate source of law, ii.
232 ; V'betberjuri^rudenles had
ever judicial^ authority at Borne,
236.

Reus, ambiguity of the term, ii. 154.
Beward, is not a sanction, i. 8.

Bight, not necessary to determine
exact meaning of, in order to
determine province of jurispru¬
dence, i. 22; meaning of pro¬
position that might is right, 256 ;
different meanings of the term
right, i. ^7, ii. 69; a right is
worth nothing in itself, i. 260;
only valuable so far as it is ex¬
pedient to exercise it, id. ; ori¬
gin of rights, 271; meaning of
natural rights, 267 ; no rights
can be enforced without impo¬
sing obligation, 270; legal rignts
distinguished from natural and
moral rights, ii. 1; every right


resides in a person, 30; and is a
right against a person, id.; is
ROTnetimes over a person, 31, 47 ;
rights in rem and rights in per¬
sonam, or real and personal rights
(see Jus in rem. Jus in personam );
abstract meaning of the term, 68;
Blackstone's de^ition :;f it, 64;
no definition of it in classical
Jurists, 64; Mackcldey’s defini¬
tion, 65 ; Muhlenbruch’s defi¬
nition, id. ; Thibaiit 's definition,
id.-, nature of vested rights, iii. 69;
of contingent rights, 72.

Boman Law',-value of the study of it,
iii. 358; in what its value really
consists, 359; is not absolutely
necessary to a lawyer, 361.

Boraans, tlieir relations with fo¬
reigners, ii. 2^2.

Borailly, Sir Samuel, bis remarks
on interpretation, ii. 336, 3h);
his obj(>ction3 to judiciary law',
349, 307.

Sanction, every law’ is enforced by
a, i. 6: analysis of tbe term, i. 6,
ii. 124; l^aloy's erroneous defini¬
tion of it, i. 7 ; a reward is not a
sanction, 8; huw' it is related to
command and duty, 9; obligation
is obnoxiousness to a sanction,
ii. 125; it operates on ibe desires,
not on tbe will, 126; bow' dis¬
tinguished from iibysical compul¬
sion, 136; the ultimate sanction is
always suffering, 139 ; not always
physical compulsion or restraint,
140; different kinds of sanctions,
189.

Savigny, Von, his objections to co¬
dification, iii. 294; his controversy
with Thibaut on tbe subject, 296.

Schuldncr, ambiguity of the term,
ii. 162.

Selfish System, not lobe confounded
with tueory of utility, i. 102; ab¬
surdity of the system, 104.

Senatus-consuUa, their binding au¬
thority, ii. 199.

Servant, rights of master over, are
rights in personam, ii. 47, iii. 164;
but right of master to services of,
ore rights in rem, ii. 48, iii. 164.

Servitude, is a jue in rem, ii. 36, iii.
21,169; may also give rise to a


INDEX.


405


jus in personam, ii. 37; distinction
between it and prcmerty, iii. 2,
18,159; meaning or term, 2,12,
28, 159; is hardly expressed by
easement, 159; is a fragment
of property, 13, 28; difficulties
which encumber the term, 16;
sometimes answers to what is
called a right of property, id. ; is
a right to uses or forbearances
generally of a class, 21; eannot
consist in faciendo, 23 ; why, if
negative, it is a jus in rem, 24;
when a duty annexed to the right
of property is not a servitude, ^;
meaning of phrase res servil, id .;
meaning of phrase nuUi res sua
servit, 27 ; may coexist with any
of property, 28; distinction
between real and personal servi¬
tudes, 30, 32; why so called, 217;
meaning of terms servient and
dominant, 32; in n hat sense every
servitude personal, 32,33; distinc¬
tion between urban and pnvdial
servitudes, 38; in French law all
are real {servicesfanciers), what
modes of property improperly iu-
cludMunaerthetcrm,40,l59; dis¬
tinction between affirmative or po¬
sitive, and negative servitudes, 19.
Skill, want of, as a ground of lia¬
bility, ii. 187.

Slave, ‘a “person" in language of
liomon jurists, ii. 8, 51; not a
“ person " in language of modem
civilians, 7; meamng of saying
that he is a chattel, 61.

Society, independent political, dis¬
tinguishing marks of, i. 170; na¬
tural, nature of, 176 ; political,
but subordinate, nature of, 177;
not capable of a precise definition,
179; number necessary tocousti-
tdto political society, 182; origin
or cause of society, 264.
Solemnities attached to alienation,
iii. 121; annexed to contracts,
128.

Sources of law, ii. 213 ; difierent
meanings assigned to, 213, 237;
opinions of lawyers are not im¬
mediately 80,236: but frequently
are adopted by judges, id.
Sovereign, various meanings of
the term, i. 198 n.; sovereign

VOL. lit.


lowers, may be exercised through
lolitical subordinates, 2U0; must
)e so, in most instances, id .; de-
egation of sovereign powers,
2U2; by commons to represen¬
tatives, id. ; distinction of them
into 'legislative and executive
powers, 206 ; cannot be accu¬
rately so distinguished, 207; so¬
vereign powers, limits of, 225;
meaning of the term unconstitu¬
tional, 228; all persons exercising
ortions of sovereign power may
e legally bound, 233; including
the king, 237; sovereign may be
pursued before his own tribunals,
261; but rights against him are
only guasiAo^sl rights, 262; this
does not apply, necessarily, to
king of England who is not sove¬
reign, id. ; sovereign power, inca¬
pable of legal limitation,225,247;
origin of doubt as to this, 247;
admitted by Sidney, id. ; and by
llodibes, 2-18; nature of rights of,
over res privattB, iii. 58.

Sovereignty, analysis of the term,
i. 170; implies nabit of obedience
to a common determinate supe¬
rior, 170, 171,199 ; and indepen¬
dence on the part of the monarch
or sovereign number, ; it implies

. an independent politick society,
170; not capable of a precise do-
dinition, 179; definition of it by
Bcntbam, 186; by Uobbes, 187;
by Grotius, 188; by Von Martens,
189 ; forms of it, 190; monarchy.
191; aristocracy, 192,199; limited
monarchies, 195.

Specie, things existing in, how they
difier from things in geuere, ii.
468.

State, meaning of the term, i. 199 m.

Status, meaning of the term, ii. 10,
382, 386 »., 412, iii. 171; great
difficulty of fixing meaning, iii.
171; right of or m, is a right in
rem, ii. 52; is a right to a forbear¬
ance only, id. ; erroneous notions
of it, 383; error of lleiucccius, that
it is a quality, id. ; similar error
of Bentham, 386 ; how distin¬
guished from universUates juris,
389, 393, 395, iii. 174; and from
other collections of rights, ii. 391;

2 E


406


INDEX.


Bentbam's analysis also fails in
ibis respect, 389; atatus, not to
be distinguisbed by the fact that
the party bearing it has Jua in
rent in its constituent rights, 394;
Mublcnbruch's error in supposing
that it is a capacity or faculty,
400, 405; ca;pvbt is not idontical
with it, 410 ; wherein it consists,
ii. 41^, hi. 169,171; in what sense
the idea of atatua is neceaaaty, h.
410; how obligations arise out of
it, 423; of a atatua that is purely
onerous, hi. 173 ; the right in or
to it, is analogous to ownership,
id .; privilegia do not belong to
law of atatua, 177.

Statute, difficulty of expressing, so
as to be intelligible, ii. 370.

Statute law, meaning of term, h.
321; distinction of, and judiciary
law, id.\ interpretation of, 325

. (see Inierpretatton).

Subject of a right means the thing
over, in, or to which a'right
cxiste, h. 404; not the person who
lias the right, 403; the latter is
tho meaning of the Grorman ju*
rists, 404; tnis is a misapplication
of the language of Kant, 404.

Substantive and adjective law, ob¬
jection to the term, ii. 451.

Succession, laws relating to, oc¬
curring at a death, belong pro-
])er1y to law of atatua, hi. 182;
u hy inserted in law of things, id.

Superj^eiea, iii. 65.

Superiority, analysis of the term,
i. 15; implied by tho term com¬
mand, 16.

Syllogism, how distinguished from
antdngical reasoning, iii. 262 ;''use
of, 2^, 267.

Sympatliy, confusion of, with moral
sense,!. 106 n. ; assumed by theory
of utility, 107 n.; origin of, not
connected with theory of utility,
id.

Testator, what is meant by inten¬
tion of, h. 121.

Theft, inconsistent dohnitiona of, iii.
307 i better term than larceny,
308.

Theory, inseparable from practice,
i. 42; but men arc often not ca-


. pable of equal proficiency in both,
lii. 380; necessity that both should
bo combined for purposes of legis¬
lation and oodiucation, 378, 381,
382.

Thibaut, his definition of right, ii.
65 ; his essay on law of'persons
and law of things, 396; hre wrij^
ings in favour of codification, iii.
296.

Things, meaning of the tem, ii.
19, 464; meaning of rea in Ho¬
man law, iii. 147; are permanent
external objects, ii. 19 ; how dis¬
tinguished from persons, 19, 27;
bow distinguished from facts or
events, id. ; term extended by
Homan lawyers to ads and for¬
bearances, 22; and also tfi rights
and obligations, 24; persons may
be considered as things, where
they are subjects of rights, 49; im-

f iort of the distinction between
aw of things and of persons, 381;
uses of the distinction, id. ; it is
a distinction which is merely or-
bitra^, id. ; Thibaufs essay on
law of persons and of things, 395;
the relation of these two depart¬
ments of law to each other, 412;
how the division between them is
to be observed, 419; law of things
should precede law of pcr80itliV4^,
421; should bo trea^d most iu
detail, 421; objections to division
of law into law of persons and law
of things, 427; Black stone’s mis¬
apprehension asto rightsof things,
429 ; misapprehension of Boman
lawyers as to the same,430; grand
divisions of law of things, 450;
difierence in meaning of term in
'Homan and English law, 464;
divisions of things, 466; corpo¬
real and incorporeal, 23, 467 ;
movable and immovable, 467 ;
specific and generic, 468; fungi¬
ble and not flingililc, 469; man-
ripi et nee mancipi, 4tI2 ; origin
and meaning of the term jua
rerum, iii. 156.

Title, in its strict sense, applicable to
facts through which rights are con¬
ferred, iii. 91; meaning of it as
used by English lawyers, 100;
tho facts which constitute it are


INDRX.


407


etseniial or accidental^ 104; not-
to be confounded with right, 214;
is the investitive fact or. event,
id.

Titulm ad acquirendumt error in
dividing every acquisition of jus
in rent into, and modus at^i-
re»({t,iii.l96; propositions of Hei-
nocciuB respecting, examined and
refuted, 197; in what cases tit. ad
ac^.and mod.acq. distinguishable,
210 .

Truth, necessary and. contingent,
difference between, iii. 258.

Ulpian, his mistaken notion of jus
natwrale, i. 161, ii. 240,267.

Unconstitutional, meaning of the
term, i. 230.

United States, government of, is a
supreme federal government, i.
222 .

Unjust, analysis of the term, i.
232«.,

Universitates juris, how distin>
guished from status, ii. 384,- 393,
395, iii. 174; why not so promi¬
nent in English as in Koman law,
iii. 175.

Unwritten law. {\ioe. Written Idno.)

Usucapion, as a mode of acquisition,
examined, iii. 199.

V9tts, not properly a servitude, iii.
40.

Ususfnudus, not properly a servi¬
tude, iii. 40.

Utilis actio, meaning of, ii. 303.

Utility, true statement of the theory
of, 1 . 32; infers divine laws from
tendency of human actions, id .;
true tendency of human actions,
id. ; true test of that tendency,
id. ; first objeclion as to applica¬
bility of Uieory that it were dan-
^gcrous, 36; first answer to this ob¬
jection, 39: second answer to this
objection, 40; principles of utility
accord with moral sentiments,
41i; and w'ith Divine rules, 45;
importance of applying this prin¬
ciple to political questions, 60 ;
second objection as to applicabi¬
lity of theory that it were dif¬
ficult, 53; first answer to that ob¬
jection, 64; this objection com¬
mon to all hypotheses, 55; can¬


not be completely removed, 55,
57, 58; leading principles of
theory may be discovered, 65,59;
example from institution of pro¬
perty, 01; difficulty of applying '
riuciples of tlio .theory can only
e removed by diffusion of know¬
ledge, 64; principle of utility is
the true key to ethical know¬
ledge, 65, 07 ; admitted to be
an imperfect index of Divine
commands, which are the test
of human conduct, 76; not incon¬
sistent with our notions of Deity
that it should be so, 78; Chris¬
tianity as revealed, admitted
by Butler to be imperfect, id. ; if
utility not the true index, we
must assume a ‘ moral sense,' 80;
true nature of this hypothesis, 81;
is analogous to hypothesis of ani¬
mal instinct, 82; llumc assumes
the existence of moral sense as
AYcll as principle of utility, 86;
Butler the ablest advocate of this
hypothesis, 87 ; if it exists, it is
n ])erfect index to the Divine com¬
mands, id. ; no evidence that such
a sense exists, id. ; moral senti¬
ments are not prompt and inevit¬
able, 89; nor are the moral sen-
t iinents of all men precisely alike,
90; Butler ]>robably assumes the
c.\istence of principle of utility as
well us inorai sense, 92; division
of law into jus rivile and jus gen¬
tium, founded oh* the compound
hypothesis, 93 ; as also is the di-
A’lBion of law into natitral'nm\
positice, id. ; according to true
theory utility is not test of human
conduct, 96; is only the index to
the Divine commands; id. ; as
index to the test of human con¬
duct not to be confounded with
motives, 90, 105; theory of it.
not to be confounded with the
setjish system, 102; that syslem
is an hypothesis as to the origin
of benevolence, 103; Hartley’s
statement of the hypothesis, 103;
theory of utility not invented by
Bentham, 103 n. ; but first pro¬
perly examined and stated by
him, id. ; it assumes sympathy,
107 n. ; is independent of any hy-


408


INDEX.


potheeit concerning origin of mo>
tires, 107.

Vested right, what is meant by,
tM distinguished from contingent,
iii. 69.

Virtue and rice, Lockb's ohserra-
tions on, i. 162.

Volition, the jfntecedentdesirewhich
precedes will, ii. 81; will is not
a power as shown by Dr. Brown,
82; nature of volitions, 84; acts
are consequences of them, 85 ;
they are desires which consum*
mate themselves, id.

Voluntaiy, uncertain meaning of
the term, 88.

Ward, rights of guardian over, are
rights in personam, ii..47, iii.
164; but rights of guau'dian to
custody, etc., of, are rights in
rem, ii. 48, iii. 164.

Wife, rights of, w'bich ore in per¬


sonam, ii. 46; rights of, which
are in rem, id.

Will, .wiy necessary to analyse
meaning of term in treatise on
jurisprudence, ii. 80; analysis of
term, 81; is not a ]) 0 «'er as shown
by I)r. Brown, 82; how- con¬
founded with intention, 86, 04;
does not difier from a wish or de¬
sire, 82; Locke’s near approach
to true notion of it, 87 ; produces
acts only,not conseipicncesof acts,
94: confusion of will with inten¬
tion, 115; explanation of supposed
conflict of will with desire, 129;
cannot directly control desires,
130; may destroy desires indi¬
rectly, id.

Writteu and mwritten law, distln-
tion between, ii. 195 ; how un¬
derstood by Komau lawyers, 196 ;
how, by modem civilians, 202;
how by Hale and Blackstouc, 206.

Wrong, analysis of, iit 142.


THE END.
